Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003441/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In memory of the revered Gurudev Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj Coordinator and Chief
Editor Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ghad Samavayangasutra. * (Original-
Translation-Commentary-Notes-Appendix-Included)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sva. pUjya gurudeva zrI jorAvaramala jI mahArAja kI smRti meM Ayojita saMyojaka
evaM pradhAna sampAdaka yuvAcArya zrI madhukara muni ghaDa samavAyAMgasUtra. * (
mUla-anuvAda-vivecana-TippaNa-pariziSTa-yukta )

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Acharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji Maharaj Sa. Jamamantra || Namo Arihantaanam, Namo
Siddhaanam, Namo Aariyaanam, Namo Uvvajjaayaanam, Namo Loesavva Saahuunam, Eso
Panch Namoakkaroo' Savvapaavapanasaano || Mangalaanam Cha Savvesim, Padham Havai
Mangalam ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAcArya zrI madhukara munIjIma.sA. jmhaamNtr|| Namo arihaMtANaM, Namo
sidhdANaM, Namo AyariyANaM, Namo uvajjhAyANaM, Namo loesavva sAhUNaM, eso paMca
NamokkAro' savvapAvapaNAsaNo || maMgalANaM ca savvesiM, paDhama havai maMgalaM
//

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank - 8 Om Aham [ In the auspicious memory of the
most revered Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj ] Pancham Ganadhar Bhagavat
Sudharma - Swami-Praneet Chaturth Ang Samavayanga Sutra [ Original Text, Hindi
Translation, Discussion, Appendix Included ] Inspiration (Sw.) Up-Pravartak
Shasansevi Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj Aady Sanayojak Tatha Pradhan Sampadak
Shri Vardhaman Stha. Jain Shraman Sangh ke Yuvacharya (Sw.) Yuvacharya Shri
Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Anuvadak-Vivechak-Sampadak Pan. Hiralalji Shastri
Prakashk Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar ( Rajasthan )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka - 8 OM aha~ [ paramazraddheya gurudeva pUjya
zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja kI puNyasmRti meM Ayojita ] paMcama gaNadhara
bhagavatsudharma - svAmi-praNIta caturtha aMga samavAyAMgasUtra [ mUla pATha,
hindI anuvAda, vivecana, pariziSTa yukta ] preraNA (sva.) upapravartaka
zAsanasevI svAmI zrI brajalAlajI mahArAja Adya saMyojaka tathA pradhAna
sampAdaka zrI vardhamAna sthA. jaina zramaNasaMgha ke yuvAcArya (sva.) yuvAcArya
zrI mizrImalajI mahArAja 'madhukara' anuvAdaka-vivecaka-sampAdaka paM.
hIrAlAlajI zAstrI prakAzaka zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara ( rAjasthAna )

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank-8 Nirdéshan Mahasati Sadhvi Shri Umravkunvar Ji
M.Sa. 'Archana' Sampadak Mandal Anuyogpravartak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalal Ji 'Kamal'
Acharya Shri Devendramuni Shastri Shri Ratnamuni Samp्रेरक Muni Shri Vinaykumar
'Bhim' Sanshodhan Devkumar Jain Tritiya Sanskaran: Veer Nirvan San. 2526, Vi.
San. 2057 April 2000 E. Prakashan Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Braj Madhukar
Smriti Bhavan Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar (Rajasthan)- 305 901 Durbhash: 50087
Mudrak Shrimati Vimlesh Jain Ajantā Paper Converters Lakshmi Chauk, Ajmer-305
001 Computerized Type Setting Arushi Marketing 5, S.S. Market, Kacheri Road,
Ajmer-305 001 Muly: 85/- Rupees 0

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka-8 nirdezana mahAsatI sAdhvI zrI
umarAvakuMvara jI ma.sA. 'arcanA' sampAdaka maNDala anuyogapravartaka muni zrI
kanhaiyAlAla jI 'kamala' AcArya zrI devendramuni zAstrI zrI ratanamuni
sampreraka muni zrI vinayakumAra 'bhIma' saMzodhana devakumAra jaina tRtIya
saMskaraNa : vIra nirvANa saM. 2526, vi0 saM0 2057 apraila 2000 I0 prakAzaka zrI
AgamaprakAzana samiti braja madhukara smRti bhavana pIpaliyA bAjAra, byAvara
(rAjasthAna)- 305 901 dUrabhASa : 50087 mudraka zrImatI vimaleza jaina ajantA
pepara kanvarTarsa lakSmI cauka, ajamera-305 001 kampyUTarAijDa TAipa saiTiMga
AruSi mArkeTiMga 5, esa.esa. mArkeTa, kacaharI roDa, ajamera-305 001 mUlya :
85/- rupaye 0

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published at the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj Fifth Ganadhara Sudharma Swami Compiled Fourth Anga SAMAVAYANGA SUT
[Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes Annotations and Appendices etc.) Proximity
(Late) Up-pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. Swami Sri Brijlalji Maharaj Convener &
Founder Editor (Late) Shri Vardhamana Sthanakvasi Jain Sramana Sanghiya
Yuvacharya Sri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator & Annotator-Editor Pt.
Hiralalji Shastri Publishers SHRI AGAM PRAKASHA SAMITI Beawar (Raj)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Published at the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj Fifth Ganadhara Sudharma Swami Compiled Fourth Anga SAMAVAYANGA SUT
[Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes Annotations and Appendices etc.) Proximity
(Late) Up-pravartaka Shasansevi Rev. Swami Sri Brijlalji Maharaj Convener &
Founder Editor (Late) Shri Vardhamana Sthanakvasi Jain Sramana Sanghiya
Yuvacharya Sri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator & Annotator-Editor Pt.
Hiralalji Shastri Publishers SHRI AGAM PRAKASHA SAMITI Beawar (Raj)

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 8 Direction Mahasati Sadhwi Shri Umrav
Kunwarji "Archana" Board of Editors Anuyoga-Pravartaka Muni Sri Kanhaiyalal ji
“Kamal” Acharya Sri Devendramuni Shastri Sri Ratan Muni. Promotor Muni Sri
Vinayakumar "Bhima" Corrections and Supervision Dev Kumar Jain Third Edition
Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2526 Vikram Samvat 2057 April 2000 Publishers Sri Agam
Prakashan Samiti Brij-Madhukar Smriti-Bhawan, Piplia Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) - 305
901 Ph. : 50087 Printers Smt. Vimlesh Jain Ajanta Paper Converters Laxmi Chowk,
Ajmer - 305 001 Laser Type Setting by : Aarushi Marketing 5, S.S. Market
Kutchery Road, Ajmer - 305 001 Price: Rs. 85/

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 8 Direction Mahasati Sadhwi Shri Umrav
Kunwarji "Archana" Board of Editors Anuyoga-Pravartaka Muni Sri Kanhaiyalal ji
"Kamal" Acharya Sri Devendramuni Shastri Sri Ratan Muni. Promotor Muni Sri
Vinayakumar "Bhima" Corrections ans Supervision Dev Kumar Jain Third Edition
Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2526 Vikram Samvat 2057 April 2000 Publishers Sri Agam
Prakashan Samiti Brij-Madhukar Smriti-Bhawan, Piplia Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) - 305
901 Ph. : 50087 Printers Smt. Vimlesh Jain Ajanta Paper Converters Laxmi Chowk,
Ajmer - 305 001 Laser Type Setting by : Aarushi Marketing 5, S.S. Market
Kutchery Road, Ajmer - 305 001 Price: Rs. 85/

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dedication**  To the venerable Shraman Sangh's Marudhara Mantri, the most
revered elder Guru-brother, the inspiring Muni Shri Hazarimallji Maharaj, whose
indescribable peaceful facial expression conveyed the message of supreme peace
and liberation to the noble beings, whose disciplined life was imbued with
unparalleled simplicity, sattvika, gentleness, humility, and selflessness, who
were equally respected, revered, and esteemed by Jain and non-Jain devotees due
to their supreme benevolent nature and unparalleled affection for all beings,
whose indirect blessings have resulted in the rapid completion of this arduous
task of Agam Prakashan, who have played a significant role in my personality
development, whose boundless kindness I am eternally indebted to, I humbly
dedicate this work at their lotus feet.  - Madhukar Muni (From the first
edition)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samarpaNa jinakI anirvacanIya zAnta mukha-mudrA hI bhavya jIvoM ko parama zAnti
aura nizreyas kA saMdeza saMbhalAtI thI, jinake saMyama-jIvana meM anupama
saralatA, sAtvikatA, saumyatA, nirahaMkAratA aura vinamratA otaprota ho cukI
thI, jo apanI paramodAra vRtti evaM prANImAtra ke prati ananya vatsalatA ke.
phalasvarUpa jaina-jainetara dharmapremI janatA meM samAna rUpa se samAdaraNIya,
zraddheya aura mahanIya the, jinake parokSa zubhAzIrvAda ke phalasvarUpa
AgamaprakAzana kA yaha bhagIratha anaSThAna satvara gati se sampanna ho rahA
hai, jinakA mere vyaktitva-nirmANa meM mahattvapUrNa yogadAna rahA hai, jinake
asIma upakAroM kA maiM sadaiva RNI hUM, una zramaNasaMgha ke marudharAmaMtrI
paramapajya jyeSTha gurubhrAtA pravartakavaramuni zrI hajArImalajI mahArAja ke
kara-kamaloM meM sAdara smrpit| -madhukara muni (prathama saMskaraNa se)

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Samavayanga Sutra** is a treasure trove of Jain principles. It provides
ordinary people with an understanding of Jainism. Researchers find it essential
to study, contemplate, and ponder this Agam text as it provides useful clues for
their desired topics.  The **Samavayanga Sutra** has a unique style of
presentation. After discussing substances with a fixed number from one to one
hundred places, it includes the statement of **Anekootarik Vriddhi Samavay**
along with an introduction to the **Dwadashanga Ganipitaka** and various
subjects.  The **Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti** began the work of publishing Agams
keeping in mind a memorable objective. With the inspiration of the revered late
**Swamiji Shri Brajlalji Maharaj** and the guidance of the late **Yuvacharya
Shri Madhukaramuniji Maharaj Saheb**, and the cooperation of other learned Muni
Rajas and scholars, the committee has been progressing towards its goal day by
day. Due to the increasing number of readers, the second editions of many
published books have become unavailable. Therefore, it has been decided to
publish the third editions of the books due to the increasing demand from
readers.  So far, the second editions of **Acharanga Sutra Part-1, 2, and
Jnatadharmakathanga, Upasakadasanga, Antahkrid Dasanga, Anuttaroppapatik Satta**
have become unavailable and have been reprinted. This is the third edition of
the **Samavayanga Sutra**. The third editions of the remaining books will also
be published in due course. This will enable all 32 Agam texts to be collected
in libraries and other repositories, so that self-study enthusiasts can benefit.
Although the cost of production has increased, the price of the books has been
increased slightly. However, this price increase is still less than the cost.
Finally, we express our heartfelt gratitude and thanks to all our collaborators
for their contribution to the Agam publication work.  **Sagarmala Baitala
Ratanchand Modi** President  **G. Sayarmala Chouradia Gyanchand Binaykia**
Working President  **Maha Mantri** Minister  **Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti,
Byawar (Rajasthan)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya samavAyAMgasUtra jaina siddhAnta kA koSa-grantha hai| sAmAnya janoM
ko jainadharma se sambandhita viSayoM kA bodha prApta hotA hai| zodhArthiyoM ko
apane apekSita viSayoM ke lie upayogI Avazyaka saMketa upalabdha hone se isa
Agama grantha kA adhyayana, cintana, manana anivArya hai| samavAyAMgasUtra kI
pratipAdana zailI anUThI hai| isameM pratiniyata saMkhyA vAle padArthoM kA eka
se lekara sau sthAna paryanta vivecana karane ke bAda anekottarika vRddhi
samavAya kA kathana karane ke sAtha dvAdazAMga gaNipiTaka evaM vividha viSayoM
ke paricaya kA samAveza kiyA gayA hai| zrI Agama prakAzana samiti ne smaraNIya
uddezya ko dhyAna meM rakhakara AgamoM ke prakAzana kA kArya prArambha kiyA
thaa| pUjya sva. svAmIjI zrI brajalAlajI ma. kI preraNA aura sva. yuvAcArya zrI
madhukaramunijI ma.sA. ke dizA-nirdeza evaM anyAnya vidvadvarya munirAjoM,
vidvAnoM ke sahayoga se samiti dinAnudina apane lakSya kI ora pragati karatI
rahI hai| pAThakoM kI saMkhyA meM vRddhi hotI jAne se abhI kAzita aneka granthoM
ke dvitIya saMskaraNa bhI aprApya jaise ho gye| ataH pAThakoM kI uttarottara
mAMga bar3hate jAne se granthoM ke tRtIya saMskaraNa prakAzita karane kA nizcaya
kiyA gayA hai| abhI taka AcArAMgasUtra bhAga-1, 2 va jJAtAdharmakathAMga,
upAsakadazAMga, anta:kRddazAMga, anuttaropapAtika satra ke dvitIya saMskaraNaM
aprApya ho jAne se panarmadraNa ho cakA hai aura samavAyAMgasatra kA yaha tarta
saMskaraNa hai| zeSa granthoM kA bhI samayAnusAra tRtIya saMskaraNa prakAzita
kiyA jaayegaa| jisase pUrI Agama battIsI sabhI grantha bhaMDAroM Adi meM
saMkalita ho sake evaM svAdhyAyapremI sajjana lAbha le skeN| yadyapi lAgata
vyaya meM vRddhi hone se granthoM kA mUlya kucha bar3hAnA par3A hai, parantu
yaha mUlyavRddhi bhI lAgata se kama aura na kucha jaisI hai| anta meM
AgamaprakAzana kArya ke lie apane sabhI sahayogiyoM kA sadhanyavAda AbhAra
mAnate haiN| tIya sAgaramala baitAlA ratanacaMda modI jI.sAyaramala caurar3iyA
jJAnacaMda binAyakiyA adhyakSa kAryAdhyakSa mahAmaMtrI maMtrI zrI AgamaprakAzana
samiti, byAvara (rAjasthAna)

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Bayar (Executive Committee) President: Shri
Sagarmalji Baitala Indore Working President: Shri Ratanchandji Modi Bayar Vice
Presidents: Bayar Shri Dhanrajji Vinayakiya Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi Shri
Hukmichandji Parkh Shri Dulichandji Chordia Shri Jasrajji Parkh Madras Jodhpur
Madras Durg General Secretary: Shri G. Sayarmalji Chordia Madras Secretary: Shri
Gyanchandji Vinayakiya Shri Gyanrajji Mootha Bayar Pali Joint Secretary: Shri
Prakashchandji Chopra Bayar Treasurer: Bayar Shri Janvarilalji Shishodia Shri R.
Prasannachandji Chordia Madras Advisors: Jodhpur Shri Manakchandji Sancheti Shri
Tejarajji Bhandari Jodhpur Members: Madras Nagaur Madras Bayar Shri S.
Sayarmalji Chordia Shri Mulchandji Surana Shri Motichandji Chordia Shri
Amarchandji Modi Shri Kishnalalji Baitala Shri Jatanrajji Mehta Shri Devrajji
Chordia Shri Gautamchandji Chordia Shri Sumermalji Medtiya Shri Asulalji Bohra
Shri Buddharajji Bafna Madras Medta City Madras Madras Jodhpur Jodhpur Bayar (8)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara (kAryakAriNI samiti) adhyakSa : zrI
sAgaramalajI baitAlA indaura kAryAdhyakSa zrI ratanacandajI modI byAvara
upAdhyakSa byAvara zrI dhanarAjajI vinAyakiyA zrI bhaMvaralAlajI goThI zrI
hukmIcandajI pArakha zrI dulIcandajI coraDiyA zrI jasarAjajI pArakha madrAsa
jodhapura madrAsa durga mahAmantrI zrI jI. sAyaramalajI coraDiyA madrAsa mantrI
zrI jJAnacandajI vinAyakiyA zrI jJAnarAjajI mUthA byAvara pAlI sahamantrI zrI
prakAzacandajI caupar3A byAvara koSAdhyakSa byAvara zrI jaMvarIlAlajI zizodiyA
zrI Ara. prasannacandajI coraDiyA madrAsa parAmarzadAtA jodhapura zrI
mANakacandajI saMcetI zrI tejarAjajI bhaNDArI jodhapura sadasya madrAsa nAgaura
madrAsa byAvara zrI esa. sAyaramalajI coraDiyA zrI mUlacandajI surANA zrI
motIcandajI coraDiyA zrI amaracandajI modI zrI kizanalAlajI baitAlA zrI.
jatanarAjajI mehatA zrI devarAjajI coraDiyA zrI gautamacandajI coraDiyA zrI
sumeramalajI mer3atiyA zrI AsUlAlajI boharA zrI buddharAjajI bAphaNA madrAsa
mer3atA siTI madrAsa madrAsa jodhapura jodhapura byAvara (8)

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Samvayanga Sutra: The first edition, Despite being a small village in the
Timvari Marudhara region, with its unique contribution to meaning, it holds
significance in the Jain world. This is the village where the current young
Acharya of the All India Shraman Sangh, the distinguished luminary of the Jain
Sangh, Vidvadratna Muni Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj, was born. This is the same
village whose fame is enhanced by the Shri Shrimal family. The original
foundation of Shri Shrimalji is 'Shri Ravatamal Hanutmal'. This vast family has
made Durg (Madhya Pradesh) its karmabhoomi. Late Shri Ravatamalji Sa. had three
sons - Shri Hanutmalji, Shri Deepchandji and Shri Premrajji. Today, out of this
trio, Seth Premrajji is present amongst us by the good fortune of society. Late
Hanutmalji Sa. had a son, Shri Bhanwarlalji Sa., who also had three sons -
Pravinkumarji, Pradeepkumarji and Prafullakumarji. Late Shri Deepchandji Sa. had
a son, Shri Nemichandji, who had two sons, Suresh Kumarji and Ramesh Kumarji.
Shriman Premrajji Sa. has three sons, Shri Mohanlalji, Shri Shayarmalji and Shri
Tarachandji. Out of these, Shri Mohanlalji has sons Madanlalji, Rajendrakumarji,
Anil Kumarji and Sunil Kumarji. Shri Tarachandji also has four sons, Pannalalji,
Shri Palji, Harish Kumarji and Anand Kumarji. Thus, Seth Premrajji Sahab has a
large and complete family. The Shri Shrimal family is not only vast in terms of
numbers but also in terms of fame, glory and reputation. Every member of the
family has a complete influence in their respective fields in the religious,
educational, social and political trends of Durg city. It has a great reputation
in the city. No field of public service is untouched by the support of this
family. The elderly, devout and devout Shriman Premrajji Sa. is always eager to
enhance religious activities. You are the owner of many trusts and the patron of
various institutions. Shriman Bhanwarlalji Sa. is the president of the Shri V.
Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh and the trustee and active key worker of many
institutions in the city. You have been the vice-president of the Shri Agam
Prakashan Samiti. He is the main trustee of the 'Ram-Prasanna-Gyanprasar
Kendra'. - A point that draws special attention to the generosity of the Shri
Shrimal family is that while there are nine business establishments related to
this family, there are also nine public institutions running. Establishments

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAGgasUtra : prathama saMskaraNa ke viziSTa arthasahayogI tiMvarI
marudharA kA choTA-sA grAma hone para bhI jainajagat meM apanA eka mahattva
rakhatA hai| yahI vaha grAma hai jahA~ kI puNyabhUmi meM a.bhA. zramaNasaMgha ke
vartamAna yuvAcArya, jaina saMgha kI viziSTa vibhUti vidvadratna muni zrI
mizrImalajI mahArAja kA janma huA aura yahI vaha grAma hai jisakI khyAti meM
zrIzrImAlaparivAra cAra cAMda lagA rahA hai| zrIzrImAlajI kA mUla pratiSThAna
'zrI rAvatamala hanutamala' hai| isa vizAla parivAra ne durga | (madhyapradeza)
ko apanI karmabhUmi banAyA hai| sva. zrI rAvatamalajI sA. ke tIna suputra the-
zrI hanutamalajI, zrI dIpacaMdajI aura zrI premraajjii| Aja isa tripuTI meM se
zrImAn seTha premarAjajI samAja ke sadbhAgya se hamAre bIca vidyamAna haiN| sva.
hanutamalajI sA. ke suputra zrI bhaMvaralAlajI sA. haiM aura unake bhI tIna
suputra-pravINakumArajI, pradIpakumArajI aura praphullakumArajI haiN| sva. zrI
dIpacaMdajI sA. ke suputra zrI nemicaMdajI ke do putra surezakumArajI aura
ramezakumArajI zrImAn premarAjajI sA. ke tIna suputra zrI mohanalAlajI, zrI
zAyaramalajI aura zrI tArAcaMdajI haiN| inameM se zrI mohanalAlajI ke suputra
madanalAlajI, rAjendrakumArajI, anilakumArajI aura sunIlakumArajI haiN| zrI
tArAcaMdajI ke bhI pannAlAlajI, zrIpAlajI, harIzakumArajI aura AnandakumArajI,
ye cAra suputra haiN| isa prakAra seTha premarAjajI sAhaba kA bharA-pUrA vizAla
parivAra hai| zrIzrImAla-parivAra kevala saMkhyA kI dRSTi se nahIM, yaza-kIrti
evaM pratiSThA kI dRSTi se bhI virATa hai| durga nagara kI dhArmika, zaikSaNika,
sAmAjika aura rAjanItika pravRttiyoM meM parivAra kA pratyeka sadasya apane
apane kSetra meM pUrNa prabhAva rakhane vAlA hai| nagara meM isakI bar3I
pratiSThA hai| sArvajanika sevA kA | koI bhI kSetra isa parivAra ke sahayoga se
achUtA nahIM hai| vayovRddha dharmaniSTha suzrAvaka zrImAn premarAjajI sA.
sadaiva dhArmika kAryoM kI abhivRddhi hetu tatpara rahate haiN| Apa aneka
TrasToM ke svAmI haiM aura vibhinna saMsthAoM ke saMrakSaka haiN| zrImAn
bhaMvaralAlajI sA. zrI va. sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvakasaMgha ke adhyakSa evaM
nagara kI aneka saMsthAoM ke TrasTI tathA sakriya pramukha kAryakartA haiN| Apa
zrI Agama-prakAzanasamiti ke upAdhyakSa pada para AsIna raha cuke haiN| 'rAma-
prasanna-jJAnaprasAra kendra' ke mukhya TrasTI haiN| - zrIzrImAla parivAra kI
udAratA kI ora vizeSa dhyAna AkRSTa karane vAlI bAta yaha hai ki isa parivAra se
saMbaMdhita nau vyApArika pratiSThAna haiM to nau hI sArvajanika saMsthAe~ bhI
cala rahI haiN| pratiSThAna

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And the institutions are as follows: Business establishments Institutions
operating in the fort: 1. Prem & Company 1. Shri Premjayamala Trust,
(Registered) 2. Prakash & Company 2. Shri Prem Punyarth Fund 3. Pradeep &
Company 3. Shri Ayambil Ekasana Trust 4. Hulas & Company 4. Shri Ayambil
Anniversary Fund Trust 5. Ramesh & Company 5. Shri Neevitpanidhi Trust 6. Jay
Jewelers 6. Shri Premjayamala Gyambhavan 7. Jay Traders 7. Shri Premjayamala
Homeopathic Dispensary (Raj.) 8. Saheli Vastraalay 8. Shri Acharya Shrijayamal
Jain Reading Room and Library 9. M/s. Shayarmal Jain 9. Shri Sarvajanik Pyaau,
Ram Mandir Durg, Along with establishing these institutions in your karmabhoomi
Durg, you have not forgotten your birthplace. In Tiwari too, many philanthropic
works are being carried out in a planned and permanent manner with your
financial assistance and inspiration. Seth Premrajji Sa. and his entire family
possess the inherent virtues of extreme humility, simplicity, sattvika and
sociability. Thus, the Shri Shrimal family is an ideal family, the pride of
society. The family's unwavering devotion and deep faith in Yuvacharya Shri
Madhukar Muniji M.Sa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aura saMsthAeM isa prakAra haiMvyApArika pratiSThAna durga meM saMcAlita
saMsthAe~ 1. prema eNDa kampanI 1. zrI premajayamAlA TrasTa, (rajisTarDa) 2.
prakAza eNDa kampanI 2. zrI prema puNyArtha phaMDa 3. pradIpa eNDa kampanI 3.
zrI AyaMbila ekAsanA TrasTa 4. hulAsa eNDa kampanI 4. zrI AyaMbila
varSagAMThanidhi TrasTa 5. rameza eNDa kampanI 5. zrI nIvItapanidhi TrasTa 6.
jaya jvelarsa 6. zrI premajayamAlA jJAnabhavana 7. jaya TreDarsa 7. zrI
premajayamAlA homyopaithika auSadhAlaya (rAja.) 8. sahelI vastrAlaya 8. zrI
AcArya zrIjayamala jaina vAcanAlaya evaM granthAlaya 9. me. zAyaramala jaina 9.
zrI sArvajanika pyAU, rAmamaMdira durga, apanI karmabhUmi durga meM ina
saMsthAoM kI sthApanA karane ke sAtha hI Apane ApakI janmabhUmi ko bhulAyA nahIM
hai| tivarI meM bhI Apake Arthika anudAna aura satpreraNA se aneka pAramarthika
kArya yojanAbaddha sthAyI rUpa se cala rahe haiN| seTha premarAjajI sA. evaM
unake samagra parivAra meM atyanta vinamratA, saralatA, sAtvikatA aura
milanasArI ke sahaja sadguNa vidyamAna haiN| isa prakAra zrIzrImAla-parivAra eka
Adarza parivAra hai, samAja kA gaurava hai| yuvAcArya zrI madhukara munijI
ma.sA. ke prati parivAra kI ananya niSThA aura gaharI zraddhA 000

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Primal Word (From the First Edition)  Among the world's philosophers and
visionaries/thinkers who have contemplated 'Self-Existence' or achieved self-
realization, they have also extensively pondered the means and methods of self-
development for the benefit of others. Their contemplation and discourse on the
soul and its related aspects are today known by various names like
Agam/Pitaka/Veda/Upanishad.  Jain philosophy holds that the afflictions of the
soul - attachment, aversion, etc. - can be overcome through spiritual practice.
When these afflictions are completely eradicated, the soul's powers of
knowledge, bliss, and energy are fully revealed and illuminated. The complete
illumination and development of these powers is called omniscience, and the
words/utterances/pronouncements of an omniscient/liberated being are known as
"Agam." Agam means the scripture/sutra/divine word that imparts true knowledge,
self-knowledge, and proper conduct.  Generally, the words/utterances of an
omniscient being are not compiled; they are like scattered flowers. However,
exceptional omniscient beings with extraordinary qualities, who establish the
path of Dharma, and who establish spiritual practice in the monastic life, are
called Dharma-founders/Arihants or Tirthankaras. The benevolent words of the
Tirthankara are compiled by their highly learned disciples, the Ganadharas, into
the form of "Agam" or scripture. In other words, when the free rain of words
like flowers of the Jinas is collected into a garland, it takes the form of
"Agam." This Agam, the words of the Jinas, is the primary source of self-
knowledge or liberation-knowledge for all of us.  In ancient times, "Agam" was
called "Ganipitaka." The entire body of scriptures in the form of the Arihants'
discourses is contained in the twelve-fold scripture (Dwadashanga), and from the
twelve-fold scripture/Acharanga-Sutrakritanga, etc., many subdivisions and sub-
subdivisions have developed. The study of the twelve-fold scripture is
considered essential and beneficial for every seeker. The twelfth part of the
twelve-fold scripture is considered a vast and comprehensive repository of
scriptural knowledge, and its study is only possible for seekers with
exceptional talent and scriptural knowledge. Therefore, the study of the eleven-
fold scripture is prescribed for seekers, and everyone's focus has been on this.
When there was no tradition of writing, and the means of writing were very
limited, the Agams/scriptures were preserved through memory or by memorizing
them through the Guru-parampara (lineage of teachers). Perhaps this is why Agam
knowledge is called Shruta-gyan (knowledge acquired through hearing), and why
meaningful words like Shruti (hearing) and Smriti (memory) are used. For a
thousand years after the Nirvana of Lord Mahavira, the knowledge of the Agams
was based solely on the Smriti/Shruti tradition. Later, due to the weakening of
memory, the breaking of the Guru-parampara, the effects of calamities, and other
reasons, Agam knowledge gradually disappeared. The water of the great lake dried
up, leaving only a puddle. This was a cause for concern for the seeker
Shramanas, but it was also a challenge to their thinking and awareness. They
became determined to preserve the treasure of Shruta-gyan. At that time, the
great Shruta-paragami (master of scriptures) Devarddhigani Kshamashraman called
a gathering of learned Shramanas, and to address the loss of knowledge due to
memory lapses,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Adi vacana (prathama saMskaraNa se) vizva ke jina dArzanikoM-dRSTAoM /
cintakoM, ne 'AtmasattA' para cintana kiyA hai, yA Atma-sAkSatkAra kiyA hai
unhoMne para-hitArtha Atma-vikAsa ke sAdhanoM tathA paddhatiyoM para bhI
paryApta cintana-manana kiyA hai| AtmA tathA tatsambandhita unakA cintana-
pravacana Aja Agama / piTaka / veda / upaniSad Adi vibhinna nAmoM se vizruta
jaina darzana kI yaha dhAraNA hai ki AtmA ke vikAroM-rAga dveSa Adi ko, sAdhanA
ke dvArA dUra kiyA jA sakatA hai, aura vikAra jaba pUrNataH nirasta ho jAte haiM
to AtmA kI zaktiyA~ jJAna / sukha / vIrya Adi sampUrNa rUpa meM udghATita
udbhAsita ho jAtI haiN| zaktiyoM kA sampUrNa prakAza-vikAsa hI sarvajJatA hai
aura sarvajJa / AptapuruSa kI vANI; vacana/kathana / prarUpaNA-"Agama" ke nAma
se abhihita hotI hai| Agama arthAt tattvajJAna, Atma-jJAna tathA AcAra-vyavahAra
kA samyak paribodha dene vAlA zAstra /sUtra / aaptvcn| sAmAnyataH sarvajJa ke
vacanoM  /  vANI kA saMkalana nahIM kiyA jAtA, vaha bikhare sumanoM kI taraha
hotI hai, kintu viziSTa atizayasampanna sarvajJa puruSa, jo dharma tIrtha kA
pravartana karate haiM, saMghIya jIvana paddhati meM dharmasAdhanA ko sthApita
karate haiM, ve dharma pravartaka/arihaMta yA tIrthaMkara kahalAte haiN|
tIrthaMkara deva kI janakalyAkAriNI vANI ko unhIM ke atizaya sampanna vidvAn
ziSya gaNadhara saMkalita kara "Agama" yA zAstra kA rUpa dete haiM arthAt jina-
vacanarUpa sumanoM kI mukta vRSTi jaba mAlArUpa meM grathita hotI hai to vaha
"Agama" kA rUpa dhAraNa karatI hai| vahI Agama arthAt jina-pavacana Aja hama
saba ke lie Atma-vidyA yA mokSa-vidyA kA mUla srota hai| "Agama" ko prAcInatama
kAla meM "gaNipiTaka" kahA jAtA thaa| arihaMtoM ke pravacanarUpa samagra
zAstradvAdazAMga meM samAhita hote haiM aura dvAdazAMga/AcArAMga-sUtrakRtAMga
Adi ke aMga-upAMga Adi aneka bhedopabheda vikasita hue haiN| usa dvAdazAMgI kA
adhyayana pratyeka mumukSu ke lie Avazyaka aura upAdeya mAnA gayA hai|
dvAdazAMgI meM bhI bArahavAM aMga vizAla evaM samagra zrutajJAna kA bhaNDAra
mAnA gayA hai, usakA adhyayana bahuta hI viziSTa pratibhA evaM zrutasampanna
sAdhaka kara pAte the| isalie sAmAnyataH ekAdazAMga kA adhyayana sAdhakoM ke lie
vihita huA tathA isI ora sabakI gati/mati rhii| _ jaba likhane kI paramparA
nahIM thI, likhane ke sAdhanoM kA vikAsa bhI alpatama thA, taba AgamoM/ zAstroM
/ko smRti ke AdhAra para yA guru-paramparA se kaMThastha karake surakSita rakhA
jAtA thaa| sambhavataH isalie Agama jJAna ko zrutajJAna kahA gayA aura isIlie
zruti / smRti jaise sArthaka zabdoM kA vyavahAra kiyA gyaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
parinirvANa ke eka hajAra varSa bAda taka AgamoM kA jJAna smRti/zruti paramparA
para hI AdhArita rhaa| pazcAt smRtidaurbalya guruparamparA kA viccheda, duSkAla-
prabhAva Adi aneka kAraNoM se dhIre-dhIre AgamajJAna lupta hotA calA gyaa|
mahAsarovara kA jala sUkhatA-sUkhatA goSpada mAtra raha gyaa| mumukSu zramaNoM
ke lie yaha jahA~ cintA kA viSaya thA, vahA~ cintana kI tatparatA evaM
jAgarUkatA ko cunautI bhI thii| ve tatpara hue zrutajJAna-nidhi ke saMrakSaNa
hetu| tabhI mahAn zrutapAragAmI devarddhigaNi kSamAzramaNa ne vidvAn zramaNoM kA
eka sammelana bulAyA aura smRti-doSa se lupta

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A call was made to preserve and safeguard the Agam knowledge. The Agams were
documented by consensus. This historic work of putting the Jinvani into writing
has truly proved to be an indescribable benefit for the entire knowledge-thirsty
populace of today. This endeavor to keep the ancient stream of knowledge of
culture, philosophy, religion, and self-knowledge flowing took place in the
ancient city of Vallabhi (Saurashtra) under the leadership of Acharya Shri
Devardigni Kshamasraman, 980 or 993 years after the Nirvan of the Tirthankaras.
This was the second and final recitation of the Jain Agams; however, it was the
first attempt to document them. The final form of the Jain Sutras that we have
today was completed in this recitation.  After being documented, the form of the
Agams was preserved in its original form, but due to the passage of time,
internal differences of opinion among the Shraman Sanghas, weakness of memory,
negligence, and the destruction of vast knowledge repositories due to foreign
invasions in the land of India, and many other reasons, the vast wealth of Agam
knowledge, the proper Guru-Parampara of understanding, gradually declined and
did not stop from becoming extinct. Many important verses, references, and their
esoteric meanings of the Agams became fragmented. Due to the lack of mature
language skills, the Agams that were written by hand were not pure in text, and
those who could give the correct meaning were rare. Thus, for many reasons, the
sacred stream of the Agams became constricted.  In the 16th century Vikram era,
Veer Lonkashah made a revolutionary effort in this direction. A bold initiative
to elucidate the pure and true meaning of the Agams was started again. But after
some time, obstacles arose in it as well. Communal hatred, theoretical conflict,
and the limited knowledge of the scribes became a major obstacle in the
attainment of the Agams and their correct understanding. It became difficult for
Agam scholars to obtain pure copies.  In the first phase of the 19th century,
when the tradition of printing the Agams began, educated readers got some
relief. Gradually, through scholarly efforts, the ancient Churnis, Niyuktis, and
Tikas of the Agams came to light, and based on them, the clear and easy
understanding of the Agams was published in simple language. This benefited the
Agam students and knowledge-seekers. As a result, the trend of reading and
studying the Agams has increased. My experience is that today, the trend of Agam
study has increased more than ever before, and there is a growing attraction and
interest in the Agams among the people. The influence and contribution of many
foreign Agam scholars and Indian non-Jain scholars in the service of Agam-Shruti
is also a factor in this awakening of interest, which we accept with pride.
This process of Agam editing and publication has been going on systematically
for almost a century. Many capable Shramans and hardworking scholars have
contributed to this great service to Shruti. Their services, like the bricks of
a foundation, may be invisible today, but they are by no means forgettable. In
the absence of clear and sufficient mentions, we are unable to mention them in
more detail, but we are humble and grateful. Nevertheless, I would like to
mention the names of some specific Agam Shruti-serving Munivar of the Jain
tradition.  About sixty years ago, Pujya Shri Amolkarishiji Maharaj started the
work of editing the 32 Sutras of the Jain Agams in Prakrit.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hote Agama jJAna ko surakSita evaM saMjokara rakhane kA AhvAna kiyaa| sarva-
sammati se AgoM ko lipi-baddha kiyA gyaa| jinavANI ko pustakArUDha karane kA
yaha aitihAsika kArya vastutaH Aja kI samagra jJAna-pipAsu prajA ke lie eka
avarNanIya upakAra siddha huaa| saMskRti, darzana, dharma tathA Atma-vijJAna kI
prAcInatama jJAnadhArA ko pravahamAna rakhane kA yaha upakrama vIranirvANa ke
980 yA 993 varSa pazcAt prAcIna nagarI valabhI (saurASTra) meM AcArya zrI
devarddhigaNi kSamAzramaNa ke netRtva meM sampanna huaa| vaise jaina AgamoM kI
yaha dUsarI antima vAcanA thI; para lipibaddha karane kA prathama prayAsa thaa|
Aja prApta jaina sUtroM kA antima svarUpa-saMskAra isI vAcanA meM sampanna kiyA
gayA thaa| pustakArUDha hone ke bAda AgamoM kA svarUpa mUla rUpa meM to
surakSita ho gayA, kintu kAla-doSa, zramaNasaMghoM ke Antarika matabheda, smRti
durbalatA, pramAda evaM bhAratabhUmi para bAharI AkramaNoM ke kAraNa vipula
jJAnabhaNDAroM kA vidhvaMsa Adi anekAneka kAraNoM se Agama jJAna kI vipula
sampatti, arthabodha kI samyak guru-paramparA dhIre-dhIre kSINa evaM vilupta
hone se nahI rukii| AgamoM ke aneka mahattvapUrNa pada, sandarbha tathA unake
gUDhArtha kA jJAna, chinna-vicchinna hote cale ge| paripakva bhASAjJAna ke
abhAva meM, jo Agama hAtha se likhe jAte the, ve bhI zuddha pATha vAle nahIM
hote, unakA samyak artha-jJAna dene vAle bhI virale hI milte| isa prakAra aneka
kAraNoM se Agama kI pAvana dhArA saMkucita hotI gyii| vikramIya solahavIM
zatAbdI meM vIra loMkAzAha ne isa dizA meM krAntikArI prayatna kiyaa| AgamoM ke
zuddha aura yathArtha arthajJAna ko nirUpita karane kA eka sAhasika upakrama
punaH cAlU huaa| kintu kucha kAla bAda usameM bhI vyavadhAna upasthita ho gye|
sAmpradAyika-vidveSa, saiddhAMtika vigraha, tathA lipikAroM kA atyalpa jJAna
AgamoM kI upalabdhi tathA usake samyak arthabodha meM bahuta bar3A vighna bana
gyaa| Agama-abhyAsasiyoM ko zaddha pratiyAM milanA bhI durlabha ho gyaa|
unnIsavIM zatAbdI ke prathama caraNa meM jaba Agama-mudraNa kI paramparA calI to
sudhI pAThakoM ko kucha suvidhA prApta huii| dhIre-dhIre vidvat-prayAsoM se
AgamoM kI prAcIna cUrNiyA~, niyuktiyA~, TIkAyeM Adi prakAza meM AIM aura unake
AdhAra para AgamoM kA spaSTa-sugama bhAvabodha sarala bhASA meM prakAzita huaa|
isase AgamasvAdhyAyI tathA jJAna-pipAsujanoM ko suvidhA huii| phalataH AgamoM ke
paThana-pAThana kI pravRtti bar3hI hai| merA anubhava hai, Aja pahale se kahIM
adhika Agama-svAdhyAya kI pravRtti bar3hI hai, janatA meM AgamoM ke prati
AkarSaNa va ruci jAgRta ho rahI hai| isa ruci-jAgaraNa meM aneka videzI AgamajJa
vidvAnoM tathA bhAratIya jainetara vidvAnoM kI Agama-zruta-sevA kA bhI prabhAva
va anudAna hai, ise hama sagaurava svIkArate haiN| Agama-sampAdana-prakAzana kA
yaha silasilA lagabhaga eka zatAbdI se vyavasthita cala rahA hai| isa mahanIya-
zruta-sevA meM aneka samartha zramaNoM, puruSArthI vidvAnoM kA yogadAna rahA
hai| unakI sevAyeM nIMva kI IMTa kI taraha Aja bhale hI adRzya hoM, para
vismaraNIya to kadApi nahIM, spaSTa va paryApta ullekhoM ke abhAva meM hama
adhika vistRta rUpa meM unakA ullekha karane meM asamartha haiM, para vinIta va
kRtajJa to haiM hii| phira bhI sthAna jaina paramparA ke kucha viziSTa-Agama
zruta-sevI-munivaroM kA nAmollekha avazya karanA caahuuNgaa| _ Aja se lagabhaga
sATha varSa pUrva pUjya zrI amolakaRSijI mahArAja ne jaina AgamoM-32 sUtroM kA
prAkRta [12]

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This was translated from the standing dialect. They single-handedly completed
the translation work of thirty-two Sutras in just 3 years and 15 days, an
amazing feat. Their unwavering dedication, courage, and seriousness about Agam
knowledge are evident from their work itself. These 32 Agams were also published
during this time. This made Agam reading very easy and widespread, and the
Sthanakwasi-Terapanthi community was particularly benefited. Gurudev Shri
Joravarmalji Maharaj's resolve When I was studying and practicing Agams in the
presence of the memorable Gurudev Swami Shri Joravarmalji M., some Agams were
available with the commentaries of Acharya Abhaydev and Sheelank published by
the Agamoday Committee. I used to study and read based on them. Gurudev Shri
experienced many times - although this edition is quite laborious and useful, it
is also mostly pure in the editions available so far, yet many places are
unclear, there are also inaccuracies and differences in the original texts and
the commentary. They are difficult for the common people. Since Gurudev Shri
himself was a profound scholar of Agams, he had received many profound meanings
of Agams from his Guru. His intellect was also derived and argumentative, so he
felt this deficiency and wanted a pure, all-purpose publication of Agams, from
which ordinary knowledgeable Shraman-Shramani and inquisitive people could
benefit. This longing of his mind was expressed many times. But due to some
circumstances, his dream-resolve could not be realized, yet it definitely
remained an inspiration in my mind. In the meantime, Acharya Shri Jawaharlalji
Maharaj, the first Acharya of the Shraman Sangh, Jain Dharma Diwakar Acharya
Shri Atmaramji M., Vidvadratna Shri Ghasilalji M. etc. wise Munivers have tried
to fill the gap by writing beautiful detailed commentaries on Agams in Hindi,
Sanskrit, Gujarati etc. or by having them written under their supervision. The
learned Shraman Parmashrutsevi late Muni Shri Punyavijayji, a scholar of the
Shwetambar Murtipujak Aamnay, had started a very systematic and high-quality
work in the direction of Agam editing. Scholars praised it very much. But after
his demise, there was an obstruction in it. Nevertheless, under the supervision
of Agamjna Muni Shri Jambhuvijayji etc., the beautiful and high-quality work of
Agam-editing is still going on today. Currently, the work of Agam-editing is
going on in the Terapanth sect under the leadership of Acharya Shri Tulsi and
Yuvacharya Mahaprajñaji, and scholars are happy to see the published Agams.
Although there is a lot of scope for disagreement in their text decisions.
Nevertheless, their labor is important. Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. "Kamal" is
trying to publish the statements of Agams by classifying them in Anuyogs. The
clarity and originality of his work style is evident in some of the Agams edited
by him. Senior scholars of Agam literature, Pt. Shri Bechardasji Doshy, renowned
wise Shri Dalsukh Bhai Malvaniya, such contemplative wise men are themselves
working in the direction of modern editing of Agams and are guiding many
scholars. This is a matter of happiness. [13]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 se khar3I bolI meM anuvAda kiyA thaa| unhoMne akele hI battIsa sUtroM kA
anuvAda kArya sirpha 3 varSa va 15 dina meM pUrNa kara eka adbhuta kArya kiyaa|
unakI dRr3ha laganazIlatA, sAhasa evaM Agama jJAna kI gambhIratA unake kArya se
hI svataH parilakSita hotI hai| ve 32 hI Agama isa samaya meM prakAzita bhI ho
gye| isase AgamapaThana bahuta sulabha va vyApaka ho gayA aura sthAnakavAsI-
terApaMthI samAja to vizeSa upakRta huaa| gurudeva zrI jorAvaramala jI mahArAja
kA saMkalpa maiM jaba prAtaH smaraNIya gurudeva svAmIjI zrI jorAvaramalajI ma.
ke sAnnidhya meM AgamoM kA adhyayanaanuzIlana karatA thA taba Agamodaya samiti
dvArA prakAzita AcArya abhayadeva va zIlAMka kI TIkAoM se yukta kucha Agama
upalabdha the| unhIM ke AdhAra para maiM adhyayana-vAcana karatA thaa|
gurudevazrI ne kaI bAra anubhava kiyA- yadyapi yaha saMskaraNa kAphI zramasAdhya
va upayogI haiM, aba taka upalabdha saMskaraNoM meM prAyaH zuddha bhI haiM,
phira bhI aneka sthala aspaSTa haiM, mUlapAThoM meM va vRtti meM kahIM-kahIM
azuddhatA va antara bhI hai| sAmAnya jana ke lie durUha to haiM hii| cUMki
gurudevazrI svayaM AgamoM ke prakANDa paNDita the, unheM AgamoM ke aneka
gUDhArtha gurugama se prApta the| unakI medhA bhI vyutpanna va tarka-pravaNa
thI, ata: ve isa kamI ko anubhava karate the aura cAhate the ki AgamoM kA
zuddha, sarvopayogI aisA prakAzana ho, jisase sAmAnya jJAnavAle zramaNa-zramaNI
evaM jijJAsujana lAbha uThA skeN| unake mana kI yaha tar3apa kaI bAra vyakta
hotI thii| para kucha paristhitiyoM ke kAraNa unakA yaha svapna-saMkalpa sAkAra
nahIM ho sakA, phira bhI mere mana meM preraNA banakara avazya raha gyaa| isI
antarAla meM AcArya zrI javAharalAla jI mahArajA, zramaNasaMgha ke prathama
AcArya jainadharma divAkara AcArya zrI AtmArAma jI ma., vidvadratna zrI
ghAsIlAlajI ma. Adi manISI munivaroM ne AgamoM kI hindI, saMskRta, gujarAtI Adi
meM sundara vistRta TIkAyeM likhakara yA apane tattvAvadhAna meM likhavA kara
kamI ko pUrA karane kA mahanIya prayatna kiyA hai| zvetAmbara mUrtipUjaka AmnAya
ke vidvAn zramaNa paramazrutasevI sva. muni zrI puNyavijayajI ne Agama sampAdana
kI dizA meM bahuta vyavasthita va uccakoTi kA kArya prArambha kiyA thaa|
vidvAnoM ne use bahuta hI sraahaa| kintu unake svargavAsa ke pazcAt usameM
vyavadhAna utpanna ho gyaa| tadapi AgamajJa muni zrI jambUvijayajI Adi ke
tattvAvadhAna meM Agama-sampAdana kA sundara va uccakoTi kA kArya Aja bhI cala
rahA hai| vartamAna meM terApaMtha sampradAya meM AcArya zrI tulasI evaM
yuvAcArya mahAprajJajI ke netRtva meM Agama-sampAdana kA kArya cala rahA hai
aura jo Agama prakAzita hue haiM unheM dekhakara vidvAnoM ko prasannatA hai|
yadyapi unake pAThanirNaya meM kAphI matabheda kI guMjAiza hai| tathApi unake
zrama kA mahattva hai| muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. "kamala" AgamoM kI vaktavyatA
ko anuyogoM meM vargIkRta karake prakAzita karAne kI dizA meM prayatnazIla haiN|
unake dvArA sampAdita kucha AgamoM meM unakI kAryazailI kI vizadatA evaM
maulikatA spaSTa hotI hai| Agama sAhitya ke vayovRddha vidvAn paM. zrI
becaradAsa jI dozI, vizruta-manISI zrI dalasukhabhAI mAlavaNiyA jaise
cintanazIla prajJApuruSa AgamoM ke Adhunika sampAdana kI dizA meM svayaM bhI
kArya kara rahe haiM tathA aneka vidvAnoM kA mArga-darzana kara rahe haiN| yaha
prasannatA kA viSaya hai| [13]

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
After a comprehensive overview of all these work styles, a resolve arose in my
mind. Today, the work styles of scholars are quite diverse. In some places, the
original text of the Agamas is being published, while in others, extensive
commentaries on the Agamas are being written. One is incomprehensible to a
reader, while the other is complex. It is essential to follow a middle path so
that the common reader can easily obtain knowledge of the Agamas. There should
be an edition of the Agamas that is simple, understandable, concise, and
authentic. My late Gurudev desired such an Agama edition. Keeping this sentiment
in mind, I started discussing this topic 5-6 years ago. After long
contemplation, on Vaishakh Shukla Dashami, 2036 VS, the day of Lord Mahavira's
Kaivalya, I declared this firm resolve and also began the editing and commentary
work of the Agamabattisi. In this bold decision, the inspiration/encouragement
and guidance of my Guru-brother, Shasanasevi Shri Brajlalji M., has been my
primary support. Along with this, I have received the devotional support of many
Munivar and Sadgrihasthi, whose names I cannot mention without my heart being
satisfied. Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. "Kamal", the editor of the Agama Anuyog
Shaili, the renowned writer Shri Devendramuni M. Shastri, Acharya Shri Atmaramji
M.'s disciple, Bhandari Shri Padamchandji M., and Pravachan Bhushan Shri
Amarmuniji, Vidvadratna Shri Gyanmuniji M.; the disciples of the late learned
Mahasati Shri Ujjvalkunwarji M., Mahasati Divyaprabhaji, M.A. Ph.D.; Mahasati
Muktiprabhaji and learned Mahasati Shri Umravkunwarji M. 'Archana', renowned
scholar Shri Dalsukh Bhai Malvaniya, well-known scholar Pandit Shri
Shobhachandji Bharill, late Pandit Shri Hiralalji Shastri, Dr. Chaganlalji
Shastri and Shri Chandji Sarana "Saras", etc. The support of these intellectuals
has made this arduous task of Agama editing easier. My heart is overwhelmed with
respect and gratitude towards all of them. Along with this, the companionship
and support of the service-minded disciples Muni Vinaykumar and Mahendra Muni,
the service spirit of Mahasati Shri Kanakunwarji, Mahasati Shri Jhanarkunwarji
has always been an inspiration. On this occasion, the memory of the inspiration
source of this work, late Shri Vak Chiman Singhji Lodha, late Shri Pukharajji
Sissodia also comes naturally, whose tireless efforts have made the Agama
Committee successful in its work so quickly. The printing of ten Agama texts and
the translation and editing of about 1520 Agamas in this short period of two
years is a testament to the deep dedication of all our collaborators. I have
strong faith that with the blessings of the most revered late Swami Shri
Hazarimlalji Maharaj and other Tapasvi souls, and with the goodwill and
cooperation of our Shraman Sangh's fortunate leader, Rashtra-Sant Acharya Shri
Anandrishiji M. and other Munijans, this planned editing and publication work of
Jinvani will be completed soon. With this auspicious wish, - Muni Mishrimal
'Madhukar' (Yuvacharya) [14]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isa saba kArya-zailI para vihaMgama avalokana karane ke pazcAt mere mana meM
eka saMkalpa utthaa| Aja prAyaH savidvAnoM kI kAryazailI kAphI bhinnatA lie hue
hai| kahIM AgamoM kA mUla pATha mAtra prakAzita kiyA jA rahA hai to kahIM AgamoM
kI vizAla vyAkhyAyeM kI jA rahI haiN| eka pAThaka ke lie durbodha hai to dUsarI
jttil| sAmAnya pAThaka ko saralatApUrvaka Agama jJAna prApta ho sake, etadartha
madhyama mArga kA anusaraNa Avazyaka hai| AgamoM kA eka aisA saMskaraNa honA
cAhie jo sarala ho, subodha ho, saMkSipta aura prAmANika ho| mere svargIya
gurudeva aisA hI Agama-saMskaraNa cAhate the| isI bhAvanA ko lakSNa meM
rakhakara maiMne 5-6 varSa pUrva isa viSaya kI carcA prArambha kI thI, sudIrgha
cintana ke pazcAt vi.saM. 2036 vaizAkha zuklA dazamI, bhagavAn mahAvIra
kaivalyadivasa ko yaha dRr3ha nizcaya ghoSita kara diyA aura AgamabattIsI kA
sampAdana-vivecana kArya prArambha bhii| isa sAhasika nirNaya meM gurubhrAtA
zAsanasevI zrI brajalAla jI ma. kI preraNA/protsAhana tathA mArgadarzana merA
pramukha sambala banA hai| sAtha hI aneka munivaroM tathA sadgRhasthI kA bhakti-
bhAva bharA sahayoga prApta huA hai, jinakA nAmollekha kiye binA mana santuSTa
nahIM hogaa| Agama anuyoga zailI ke sampAdaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma.
"kamala", prasiddha sAhityakAra zrI devendramunijI ma. zAstrI, AcArya zrI
AtmArAmajI ma. ke praziSya bhaMDArI zrI padamacandajI ma. evaM | pravacana
bhUSaNa zrI amaramunijI, vidvadratna zrI jJAnamunijI ma.; sva. viduSI mahAsatI
zrI ujjvalakuMvarajI ma. kI suziSyAeM mahAsatI divyaprabhAjI, ema.e. pI-eca.DI.;
mahAsatI muktiprabhAjI tathA viduSI mahAsatI zrI umarAvakuMvarajI ma. 'arcanA',
vizruta vidvAn zrI dalasukhabhAI mAlavaNiyA, sukhyAta vidvAn paM. zrI
zobhAcandra jI bhArilla, sva. paM. zrI hIrAlAlajI zAstrI, DaoN. chaganalAlajI
zAstrI evaM zrIcandajI sarANA "sarasa" Adi manISiyoM kA sahayoga AgamasampAdana
ke isa durUha kArya ko sarala banA sakA hai| ina sabhI ke prati mana Adara va
kRtajJa bhAvanA se abhibhUta hai| isI ke sAtha sevA-sahayoga kI dRSTi se
sevAbhAvI ziSya muni vinayakumAra evaM mahendra muni kA sAhacarya-sahayoga,
mahAsatI zrI kAnakuMvarajI, mahAsatI zrI jhaNakArakuMvarajI kA sevA bhAva sadA
preraNA detA rahA hai| isa prasaMga para isa kArya ke preraNA-srota sva. zrIvaka
cimanasiMhajI lor3hA, sva. zrI pukharAjajI sisodiyA kA smaraNa bhI sahajarUpa
meM ho AtA hai jinake athaka preraNA prayatnoM se Agama samiti apane kArya meM
itanI zIghra saphala ho rahI hai| do varSa ke isa alpakAla meM hI dasa Agama
granthoM kA mudraNa tathA karIba 1520 AgamoM kA anuvAda-sampAdana ho jAnA hamAre
saba sahayogiyoM kI gaharI lagana kA dyotaka hai| mujhe sudRr3ha vizvAsa hai ki
parama zraddheya svargIya svAmI zrI hajArImalajI mahArAja Adi tapopUta AtmAoM ke
zubhAzIrvAda se tathA hamAre zramaNasaMgha ke bhAgyazAlI netA rASTra-saMta
AcArya zrI AnandaRSijI ma. Adi munijanoM ke sadbhAva-sahakAra ke bala para yaha
saMkalpita jinavANI kA sampAdana-prakAzana kArya zIghra hI sampanna hogaa| isI
zubhAzA ke sAtha -muni mizrImala 'madhukara' (yuvAcArya) [14]

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
That which you consider as 'to be killed', that is indeed true of you. That
which you consider as 'to be taken', that is indeed true of you. That which you
consider as 'to be tormented', that is indeed true of you. That which you
consider as 'to be seized', that is indeed true of you. That which you consider
as 'to be frightened', that is indeed true of you. -Acaranga

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tumaMsi nAma sacceva jaM 'haMtavvaM' ti mannasi, tumaMsi nAma sacceva jaM
'ajjAveyavvaM' ti manasi, tumaMsi nAma sacceva jaM 'paritAveyavvaM' ti manasi,
tumaMsi nAma sacceva jaM 'parighetavvaM' ti manasi, tumaMsi nAma sacceva jaM
'uddaveyavvaM' ti mnsi| -AcArAGga

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
४४४४४ Tameva Saccam Nisankam Jam Jinehiṁ Paveiye. -3 of • maaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
That alone is truth, without doubt, which is declared by the Jinas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44444 tameva saccaM nIsaMkaM jaM jiNehiM pveie| -3 of * maaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction to the Samvayanga Sutra: A Critical Study (From the First
Edition) Name-Understanding  The compilation and assessment of the pure words of
Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira was first done by his chief disciples, the Ganadharas.
That compilation and assessment is known as the Ang Sutras. There are twelve
Angas - Ayar, Suyagad, Thaan, Samvay, Vivahapanatti, Mmakha, Uvasgadasa,
Antagadadsa, Anuttarovvaiyadsa, Panhavagaran, Vivagasuy and Dilva. Currently,
the twelfth Anga, Drishtivad, is unavailable. The remaining eleven Angas include
Samvay, which holds the fourth position. It has a unique place in the Agam
literature. It is an unparalleled treasure trove of important facts about
biology, atomic science, cosmology, spirituality, philosophy, and history.
Acharya Abhaydev has written - This Agam presents a detailed description or
classification of Jiva, Ajiv, and other substances. Therefore, this Agam is
named Samvay or Samvaao. Siddhantachkravarti Acharya Nemichandra has written
that it determines the similarities and commonalities of Jiva and other
substances. Therefore, it is named "Samvay".3  ## Subject Matter  Acharya
Devavachka has given the subject index of Samvayanga, which is as follows: (1)
Classification of Jiva, Ajiv, Lok, Alok, and Swasamay Parasamay. (2) Development
of numbers from one to one hundred. (3) Introduction to the Dvadasanga
Ganipitaka. The present Agam also provides a subject index of Samvay, which is
as follows: (1) Classification of Jiva, Ajiv, Lok, Alok, Swasamay and Parasamay.
(2) Development of subjects from one to one hundred numbers. (3) Description of
Dvadasangi Ganipitaka, (4) Ahar (5) Uchchvas (6) Leshya (7) Avas (8) Uppaat (9)
Chyavan (10) Avgaah (11) Vedana (12) Vidhan (13) Upayog (14) Yog (15) Indriya
(16) Kashay (17) Yoni (18) Kulkar (19) Tirthankar (20) Ganadhar (21) Chakravarti
(22) Baldev-Vasudeva.  Samvayanga, Dvadasangaadhikarya. 2.  Samiti-Samyak
Avetyaadhikyaena Ayanmayah-Paricchedho, Jivaa-
Jivaadivividhipaarthasarthasyasminnasau Samvayah, Samavayanti va-Samavasaranti
Sammilanti Nanaavidaa Atmaadayo Bhaava Abhidheyataya Yasminnasau Samvay iti!
-Samvayangavritti, Patra 1 San-Sangrahen Saadrsyasamaanyena Aveyante Jnaayante
Jivaadivadarthaa Dravyakshetrakaalabhavaanasritya Asminniti Samvayangam.
-Gommatasar Jeevakanda, Jeevaprabodhini Teeka, Ga. 356 se ki tam Samavae?
Samavae nan Jivaa Samaasijjanti, Ajivaa Samaasijjanti, Jivaaajiva Samaasijjanti.
Sasamae Samaasijjai, Parasamae Samaasijjai, Sasamayparasamae Samaasijjai. Loae
Samaasijjai Aloae Samaasijjai, Loyaalooae Samaasijjai. Samavae nan Egaaiyaanang
Eguuttariyaanang Thaanasayan Niddiyaanang Bhaavaanang Paroovanaa Aaghavijjai.
Duvaalasavihass Ya Ganipidgasss Pallaavagge Samaasijjai. -Nandi Sutra 83
Samvayanga, Prakirnak

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA samavAyAMgasUtra : eka samIkSAtmaka adhyayana (prathama saMskaraNa
se) nAma-bodha zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra kI vimala vANI kA saMkalana-Akalana
sarvaprathama unake pradhAna ziSya gaNadharoM ne kiyaa| vaha saMkalana-Akalana
aMga sUtroM ke rUpa meM vizruta hai| aMga bAraha haiM-AyAra, sUyagaDa, ThANa,
samavAya, vivAhapaNNatti, mmakahA, uvAsagadasA, aMtagaDadasA,
aNuttarovavAiyadasA, paNhAvAgaraNa, vivAgasuya aura dilvaa| vartamAna samaya meM
bArahavA~ aMga dRSTivAda anupalabdha hai| zeSa gyAraha aMgoM meM samavAya kA
caturtha sthAna hai| Agama sAhitya meM isakA anUThA sthAna hai| jIvavijJAna,
paramANuvijJAna, sRSTividyA, adhyAtmavidyA, tattvavidyA, itihAsa ke
mahattvapUrNa tathyoM kA yaha anupama koSa hai| AcArya abhayadeva ne likhA hai-
prastuta Agama meM jIva, ajIva prabhRti padArthoM kA pariccheda yA samavatAra
hai| ata: isa Agama kA nAma samavAya yA samavAo hai| siddhAntacakravartI AcArya
nemicandra ne likhA hai ki isa meM jIva Adi padArthoM kA sodRzya-sAmAnya se
nirNaya liyA gayA hai| ataH isa kA nAma "samavAya" hai|3 viSaya-vastu AcArya
devavAcaka ne samavAyAMga kI viSaya-sUcI dI hai, vaha isa prakAra hai(1) jIva,
ajIva, loka, aloka evaM svasamaya parasamaya kaa-smvtaar| (2) eka se lekara sau
taka kI saMkhyA kA vikaas| (3) dvAdazAMga gaNipiTaka kA pricy| prastuta Agama
meM samavAya kI bhI viSaya-sUcI dI gaI hai| vaha isa prakAra hai (1) jIva,
ajIva, loka, aloka, sva-samaya aura para-samaya kA samavatAra (2) eka se sau
saMkhyA taka ke viSayoM kA vikAsa (3) dvAdazAMgI gaNipiTaka kA varNana, (4)
AhAra (5) ucchvAsa (6) lezyA (7) AvAsa (8) upapAta (9) cyavana (10) avagAha (11)
vedanA (12) vidhAna (13) upayoga (14) yoga (15) indriya (16) kaSAya (17) yoni
(18) kulakara (19) tIrthakara (20) gaNadhara (21) cakravartI (22) baladeva-
vAsudeva  /  samavAyAMga, dvaadshaaNgaadhikaar| 2. samiti-samyak avetyAdhikyena
ayanamayaH-paricchedo, jIvA-jIvAdivividhipadArthasArthasya yasminnasau
samavAyaH, samavayanti vA-samavasaranti sammilanti nAnAvidhA AtmAdayo bhAvA
abhidheyatayA yasminnasau samavAya iti! -samavAyAMgavRtti, patra 1 saM-
saMgraheNa sAdRzyasAmAnyena aveyaMte jJAyante jIvAdipadArthA
dravyakSetrakAlabhAvAnAzritya asminniti smvaayaaNgm| -gommaTasAra jIvakANDa,
jIvaprabodhinI TIkA, gA. 356 se ki taM samavAe? samavAe NaM jIvA samAsijjaMti,
ajIvA samAsijjati, jIvAjIvA smaasijjti| sasamae samAsijjai, parasamae
samAsijjai, sasamayaparasamae smaasijji| loe samAsijjai aloe samAsijjai, loyAloe
smaasijji| samavAe NaM egAiyANaM eguttariyANaM ThANasayaM niDDhiyANaM bhAvANaM
parUvaNA aaghvijji| duvAlasavihassa ya gaNipiDagassa pallavagge smaasijji|
-nandIsUtra 83 samavAyAMga, prakIrNaka

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A deep study of the indexes found in both the Nandī Sūtra and the Samavāyāṅga
reveals that the list of Āgama topics in the Nandī Sūtra is very concise, while
the list in the Samavāyāṅga is very detailed. It is clearly indicated that there
is an increase of one hundred and one in both the Nandī and the Samavāyāṅga, but
there is no indication of an increase of many. In the Nandī Cūrṇi, Jinadāsagaṇi
Mahātara, in the Nandī Haribhadrīyā Vṛtti, Ācārya Haribhadra, and in the Vṛtti
of the Nandī, Ācārya Malayagiri, have not indicated any increase of many. Ācārya
Abhaydeva has mentioned an increase of many in the Samavāyāṅga Vṛtti. According
to Ācārya Abhaydeva, there is an increase of one hundred and one, and after
that, there is an increase of many. The opinion of the learned is that the
commentator has not mentioned this based on the description of the Samavāyāṅga,
but has described it based on the text found in the Samavāyāṅga.  It is natural
to wonder if the introduction of the Samavāyāṅga given in the Nandī Sūtra is
different from the Samavāyāṅga available today, or if the Samavāyāṅga that is
available today is not from the recitation of Devardvigani Kṣamāśramaṇa. If it
were, why would there be a difference in the two descriptions? The solution is
that the description of the Samavāyāṅga in the Nandī ends with the description
of the Dvādaśāṅgī. However, the Samavāyāṅga that is available today presents
many topics beyond the Dvādaśāṅgī. Therefore, it is different from the
description of the Samavāyāṅga in the Nandī in terms of its size. We have
clarified in the introduction to the Staānaṅga Sūtra that there were five
recitations of the Āgamas after Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra. Ācārya Abhaydeva has
mentioned the great recitation of the present Āgama in the Vṛtti of the present
Āgama. From this, it can be inferred that the introduction of the Samavāyāṅga
given by Devavācaka in the Nandī may have been given from the perspective of the
small recitation.  Regarding the expanded size of the Samavāyāṅga, some wise men
have made two inferences. It cannot be said for certain how far both these
inferences are based on truth and fact. In my view, if the Samavāyāṅga were from
a separate recitation, there would certainly be some echoes of it somewhere in
the ancient literature. But there is no such echo regarding the Samavāyāṅga. For
example, the Jyotiṣakaraṇḍa text is from the Māthurī recitation, but there is
nothing like that regarding the Samavāyāṅga. Therefore, the first inference of
the learned is only an inference. It lacks reality. Regarding the second
inference, it is humbly submitted that the Bhagavatī Sūtra indicates the need to
look at the last part of the Samavāyāṅga regarding the complete description of
the Kulkaras and Tīrthaṅkaras, etc. Similarly, the Staānaṅga also instructs to
look at the last part of the Samavāyāṅga for the complete description of Baldeva
and Vasudeva. This discussion makes it clear that the appendix section in the
Samavāyāṅga has been added to the Samavāyāṅga by Devardvigani Kṣamāśramaṇa.  It
is a matter of investigation for the researcher that if Devardvigani
Kṣamāśramaṇa is the compiler of both the Nandī and the Samavāyāṅga, then why did
he not maintain uniformity in the descriptions given in both the Āgamas? Why
were two types of descriptions given? The solution is that many recitations have
taken place from time to time. Due to many recitations, there are many different
texts, words, and relationships, and there is an increase of one hundred and
one, and then an increase of many. - Samavāyāṅga Vṛtti, page 105 7. Bhagavatī
Sūtra, Śataka 5, U. 5, page 826 - Part 2 Sailāna (M.P.) and where the
Samavāyāṅga is without any residue... - Staānaṅga 9, Sūtra 672, Muni
Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' [18]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 donoM AgamoM meM AyI huI viSaya-sUciyoM kA gaharAI se adhyayana karane para
yaha spaSTa parijJAta hotA ki nandIsUtra meM jo Agama-viSayoM kI sUcI AyI hai,
vaha bahuta hI saMkSipta hai aura samavAyAMga meM jo viSaya-sUcI hai, vaha
bahuta hI vistRta hai| nandI aura samavAyAMga meM sau taka ekottarikA vRddhi
hotI hai, aisA spaSTa saMketa kiyA gayA hai, kintu una meM anekottarikA vRddhi
kA nirdeza nahIM hai, nandIcUrNi meM jinadAsagaNi mahattara ne, nandI
haribhadrIyA vRtti meM acArya haribhadra ne, aura nandI kI vRtti meM, AcArya
malayagiri ne anekottarikA vRddhi kA koI bhI saMketa nahIM kiyA hai| AcArya
abhayadeva ne samavAyAMga vRtti meM anekottarikA vRddhi kA ullekha kiyA hai|
AcArya abhayadeva ke mata ke anusAra sau taka ekottarikA vRddhi hotI hai aura
usake pazcAt anekottarikA vRddhi hotI hai| vijJoM kA aisA abhimata hai ki
vRttikAra ne samavAyAMga ke vivaraNa ke AdhAra para yaha ullekha nahIM kiyA hai|
apitu samavAyAMga meM jo pATha prApta hai, usI ke AdhAra se unhoMne yaha varNana
kiyA hai| yaha sahaja hI jijJAsA ho sakatI hai ki nandIsUtra meM samavAyAMga kA
jo paricaya diyA gayA hai, kyA usa paricaya se vartamAna meM samupalabdha
samavAyAMga pRthak hai ? yA-jo vartamAna meM samavAyAMga hai, vaha devardvigaNi
kSamAzramaNa kI vAcanA kA nahIM hai| yadi hotA to donoM vivaraNoM meM antara
kyoM hotA ? samAdhAna hai-nandI meM samavAyAMga kA jo vivaraNa hai usameM antima
varNana dvAdazAMgI kA hai| parantu vartamAna meM jo samavAyAMga hai usameM
dvAdazAMgI se Age aneka viSayoM kA pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai| isalie nandIgata
samavAyAMga ke vivaraNa se vaha AkAra kI dRSTi se pRthak hai| hamane sthAnAMga
sUtra kI prastAvanA meM yaha spaSTa kiyA hai ki AgamoM kI zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke pazcAt pAMca vAcanAeM huyii| AcArya abhayadeva ne prastuta Agama kI
vRtti meM prastuta Agama kI bRhad vAcanA kA ullekha kiyA hai| isase yaha anumAna
kiyA jA sakatA hai ki nandI meM samavAya kA jo paricaya devavAcaka ne diyA hai
vaha laghuvAcanA kI dRSTi se diyA ho| samavAyAMga ke parivardhita AkAra ko
lekara kucha manISiyoM ne do anumAna kiye haiN| ve donoM anumAna kahA~ taka
satya-tathya para AdhRta haiM, yaha nizcita rUpa se nahIM kahA jA sktaa| merI
dRSTi se yadi samavAyAMga pRthak vAcanA kA hotA to isa sambandha meM prAcIna
sAhitya meM kahIM na kahIM kucha anuzrutiyAM avazya miltiiN| para samavAyAMga ke
sambandha meM koI bhI anuzruti nahIM hai| udAharaNa ke rUpa meM jyotiSakaraNDa
grantha mAthurI vAcanA kA hai, para samavAyAMga ke sambandha meM aisA kucha bhI
nahIM hai| ataH vijJoM kA prathama anumAna kevala anumAna hI hai| usake pIche
vAstavikatA kA abhAva hai| dUsare anumAna ke sambandha meM bhI yaha namra
nivedana hai ki bhagavatIsUtra meM kulakaroM aura tIrthaMkaroM Adi ke pUrNa
vivaraNa ke sambandha meM samavAyAMga ke antima bhAga kA avalokana karane kA
saMketa kiyA gayA hai| isI taraha sthAnAMga meM bhI baladeva aura vAsudeva ke
pUrNa vivaraNa ke lie samavAyAMga ke antima bhAga kA avalokana karane hetu
sUcana kiyA hai| isa vicAra-carcA meM yaha spaSTa hai ki samavAyAMga meM jo
pariziSTa vibhAga hai, vaha vibhAga devarddhigaNikSamAzramaNa ne samavAyAMga meM
jor3A hai| yaha zodhArthI ke lie anveSaNIya hai ki nandI aura samavAyAMga ina
donoM AgamoM ke saMkalanakartA devarddhigaNikSamAzramaNa haiM, to phira unhoMne
donoM AgamoM meM jo vivaraNa diyA hai, usameM ekarUpatA kyoM na rakhI ? do
prakAra ke vivaraNa kyoM diye ? samAdhAna hai ki aneka vAcanAeM samaya-samaya
para huyI haiN| aneka vAcanAeM hone se bahuvidha pATha ca zabdasya cAnyatra
sambandhAdekottarikA anekotarikA ca tatra zataM yAvadekottarikA
prto'nekottriketi| -samavAyAMga vRtti, patra 105 7. bhagavatIsUtra, zataka 5, u.
5, pR. 826 -bhAga 2 sailAnA (ma.pra.) evaM jahA samavAAe nirvsesN........|
-sthAnAGga 9, sUtra 672, muni kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala' [18]

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is possible that these variations in the text are due to the addition of
commentaries or appendices. Scholars have speculated that the latter part of the
Dvadasangi in the Samavayanga is its appendix section. The appendix section is
not mentioned in the list of the Nandī Sūtra. Therefore, the list of the
Samavayanga has become extensive. It is a matter of contemplation for those who
are well-versed in the essence of the Agamas as to why the summary of eleven
topics in the appendix section of the Samavayanga has been included in it.
**Pātāla**  The currently available text of the Samavayanga comprises 1667
verses. It introduces all the elements, starting from earth, sky, life in the
three worlds, etc., in terms of substance, space, time, and emotion, from one to
countless numbers. It also includes a collection of material related to
geography, astronomy, etc., along with descriptions related to spiritual
elements, Tīrthankaras, Gaṇadharas, Cakravartīs, and Vasudevas. Similar to the
Sthānāṅga, the Samavayanga also presents a description in numerical order. The
style of both Agamas is similar. Despite being similar, the Sthānāṅga presents a
description from one to ten, while the Samavayanga presents topics from one to
countless numbers. Like the Sthānāṅga, the number of chapters in the Samavayanga
is not fixed. This is why Ācārya Devavācak, while introducing the Samavayanga,
has indicated only one study. This treasury-style is very ancient. This style
has been very useful from the perspective of remembering. This style is also
visible in other Agamas. In the thirty-first study of the Uttarādhyayana Sūtra,
in the section on the method of conduct, the enumeration of objects from one to
thirty-three has been done. What are the unwise tendencies? How can one avoid
them and how can one develop wise tendencies, etc.  **Style**  The treasury-
style presented in the Sthānāṅga and Samavayanga is also found in the Buddhist
tradition and the Vedic tradition! Buddhist texts like the Anguttara Nikāya, the
Puggalapannatti, the Mahāvyutpatti, and the Dharmasangraha have collected
thoughts in a similar way.  In the 134th chapter of the Vana Parva of the
Mahābhārata, there is a dialogue between Nandī and Aṣṭāvakra. In it, both sides
enumerate objects from one to thirteen. In ancient times, writing materials were
scarce. Printing was completely absent. Therefore, a number-based style was
adopted for the ease of memory.  Despite being a treasury-style with a
collection of topics, the Samavayanga does not maintain uniformity from
beginning to end in many places. For example, in many places, the characters of
individuals have been included. Descriptions of mountains have been included, as
well as dialogues, etc. In the present Agama, at the end of the first sūtra,
which is a number, this statement has been made: How many beings will attain
liberation in one birth? After that, from two to thirty-three, this has been
stated. After that, there is no statement. This raises the question in the mind
of the seeker: Will those who have thirty-four births or more attain liberation?
There is no solution to this.  From our perspective, it seems that Ācārya
Devarddhigaṇi, while compiling the Agamas during the time of Kṣamāśramaṇa, may
not have paid attention, or some texts may have been forgotten, which he may not
have filled in for fear of the endless world not increasing.  We have already
mentioned that the topics in the present Agama have been presented from the
perspective of numbers. Therefore, it is not necessary that after that topic,
another topic should be in line with it. Each topic is from the perspective of
numbers. [19]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhI milate haiN| saMbhava hai ki ye vAcanAntara vyAkhyAMza athavA pariziSTa
milAne se huye hoN| vijJoM ne yaha kalpanA kI hai ki samavAyAMga meM dvAdazAMgI
kA jo uttaravartI bhAga hai, vaha bhAga usa kA pariziSTa vibhAga hai| pariziSTa
vibhAga kA vivaraNa nandIsUtra kI sUcI meM nahIM diyA gayA hai| isaliye
samavAyAMga kI sUcI vistRta ho gayI hai| samavAyAMga ke pariziSTa bhAga meM
gyAraha padoM kA jo saMkSepa hai, vaha kisa dRSTi se isameM saMlagna kiyA gayA
hai, yaha AgamamarmajJoM ke liye cintanIya hai| pAtAla, samavAyAMga kA vartamAna
meM upalabdha pATha 1667 zloka parimANa hai| isameM saMkhyA krama se pRthvI,
AkAza, tInoM lokoM ke jIvana Adi samasta tattvoM kA dravya, kSetra, kAla aura
bhAva kI dRSTi se eka se lekara koTAnukoTi saMkhyA kA paricaya pradAna kiyA gayA
hai| isa meM AdhyAtmika tattvoM, tIrthaMkara, gaNadhara cakravartI aura
vAsudevoM se sambandhita varNana ke sAtha bhUgola, khagola Adi kI sAmagrI kA
saMkalana bhI kiyA gayA hai| sthAnAMga ke samAna hI samavAyAMga meM bhI saMkhyA
ke krama se varNana hai| donoM AgamoM kI zailI samAna hai| samAna hone para bhI
sthAnAMga meM eka se lekara daza taka kI saMkhyA kA nirUpaNa hai jabaki
samavAyAMga meM eka se lekara koDAkoDI saMkhyA vAle viSayoM kA pratipAdana hai|
sthAnAMga kI taraha samavAyAMga kI prakaraNa saMkhyA nizcita nahIM hai| yahI
kAraNa hai ki AcArya devavAcaka ne samavAyAMga kA paricaya dete hue eka hI
adhyayana kA sUcana kiyA hai| yaha koSa -zailI atyanta prAcIna hai  /  smaraNa
karane kI dRSTi se yaha zailI atyanta upayogI rahI hai| yaha zailI anya AgamoM
meM bhI dRSTigocara hotI hai| uttarAdhyayana sUtra ke ikatIsaveM adhyayana meM
cAritra vidhi meM eka se lekara tetIsa taka kI saMkhyA meM vastuoM kI parigaNanA
kI gayI hai| avivekapUrvaka pravRttiyA~ kauna sI haiM ? unase kisa prakAra bacA
jA sakatA hai aura kisa prakAra vivekapUrvaka pravRtti kI jA sakatI hai, aadi|
zailI sthAnAMga aura samavAyAMga kI prastuta koSa -zailI bauddha paramparA meM
aura vaidika paramparA meM bhI prApta hai! bauddha grantha aMguttaranikAya,
puggalapaJJati, mahAvyutpatti evaM dharmasaMgraha meM isI taraha vicAroM kA
saMkalana kiyA gayA hai| mahAbhArata ke vanaparva ke 134veM adhyAya meM nandI
aura aSTAvakra kA saMvAda hai| usa meM donoM pakSa vAle eka se lekara teraha
taka vastuoM kI parigaNanA karate haiN| prAcIna yuga meM lekhana sAmagrI kI
durlabhatA thI  /  mudraNa kA to pUrNa abhAva hI thA  /  isaliye smRti kI
saralatA ke lie saMkhyApradhAna zailI apanAyI gayI thI  /  samavAyAMga meM
saMgrahapradhAna koSa -zailI hote hue bhI kaI sthAnoM para yaha zailI Adi se
anta taka ekarUpatA ko liye hue nahIM hai  /  udAharaNa ke rUpa meM aneka
sthAnoM para vyaktiyoM ke caritra A gaye haiN| parvatoM ke varNana A gaye haiM
tathA saMvAda Adi bhI  /  prastuta Agama meM eka saMkhyaka prathama sUtra ke
anta meM yaha kathana kiyA gayA hai| kitane hI jIva eka bhava meM siddhi ko
varaNa kreNge| usake pazcAt do se lekara tetIsa saMkhyA taka yaha pratipAdana
kiyA gayA hai  /  isake bAda koI kathana nahIM  /  jisase jijJAsu ke antarmAnasa
meM yaha prazna ubuddha hotA hai ki coMtIsa bhava yA usase adhika bhava vAle
siddhi prApta kareMge yA nahIM ? isakA koI samAdhAna nahIM hai| hamArI dRSTi se
AcArya devarddhigaNi kSamAzramaNa ke samaya AgamoM ke saMkalana karate hue
dhyAna na rahA ho, yA kucha pATha vismRta ho gaye hoM, jisakI pUrti unhoMne
ananta saMsAra na bar3ha jAye, isa bhaya se na kI ho| yaha bAta hama pUrva hI
batA cuke haiM ki saMkhyA kI dRSTi se prastuta Agama meM viSayoM kA pratipAdana
huA hai| isaliye yaha Avazyaka nahIM ki usa viSaya ke pazcAt dUsarA viSaya usI
ke anurUpa ho  /  pratyeka viSaya saMkhyA dRSTi [19]

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is complete in itself, yet Acharya Abhaydeva has attempted to establish a
connection between one topic and another in his commentary. In some places, he
has been completely successful, while in others, it appears that the commentator
has attempted to establish a connection on his own. In fact, it is not necessary
for one sutra to be connected to another in this style. Whatever topic came up
in terms of number was compiled in this Agam.  **Description from the
perspective of the fourfold**  In the Samavayanga, the जीव, पुद्गल, धर्म, अधर्म,
आकाश, etc. are described from the perspective of द्रव्य. From the perspective of
क्षेत्र, light is shed on लोक, अलोक, सिद्धशिला, etc. From the perspective of
काल, contemplation has been done on time, आवलिका, मुहूर्त, etc., up to पल्योपम,
सागरोपम, उत्सर्पिणी, अवसर्पिणी, and the state of the four गति of जीव, etc., as
well as पुद्गल-परावर्तन. From the perspective of भाव, there is a description of
the भाव of the जीव, such as ज्ञान, दर्शन, चारित्र, and वीर्य, and also a
description of the अजीव भाव, such as वर्ण, गन्ध, रस, संस्थान, स्पर्श, etc.
**First Samavay: Analysis**  In the first Samavay of the Samavayanga, while
expounding on the जीव, अजीव, etc. principles, आत्मा, अनात्मा, दण्ड, अदण्ड,
क्रिया, अक्रिया, लोक, अलोक, धर्मास्तिकाय, अधर्मास्तिकाय, पुण्य, पाप, बन्ध,
मोक्ष, आश्रव, संवर, वेदना, निर्जरा, etc. are explained one by one from the
perspective of संग्रहनय. After that, there is a mention of Jambudvipa, which is
one lakh yojanas in length and breadth, and the सर्वार्थसिद्ध विमान, etc. A
description is given of the नारक, देव, etc., which are in the state of one
ocean.  In the first Samavay, the scholar has very briefly expounded on the
fundamental principles of Jain philosophy. The most important question in Indian
philosophies has been that of the आत्मा. Other philosophers have also
contemplated on the आत्मा, but their contemplation was not profound. Different
philosophers had different opinions. Many philosophers consider the आत्मा to be
vast, while many others consider the आत्मा to be the size of a thumb or a grain
of rice. Jain philosophy has described the आत्मा from the perspective of
अनेकान्त. It considers the जीव to be परिणामी नित्य. From the perspective of
द्रव्य, the जीव is नित्य, while from the perspective of पर्याय, it is अनित्य.
Here, in the present एकस्थानक समवाय, even though the आत्मा is infinite, all
आत्मा are असख्यात प्रदेशी and are similar in terms of चेतनत्व. All आत्मा are
स्वदेहपरिमाण. Therefore, the आत्मा is said to be one here. Since knowledge of
the आत्मतत्त्व is essential first, both the स्थानांग and समवायांग Agams have
discussed the आत्मा first.  Along with knowing the आत्मा, it is also necessary
to know the अनात्मा. The अनात्मा is called अजीव. The आत्मा is corrupted in
relation to the अजीव. It undergoes विभाव परिणति. Therefore, knowledge of the
अजीव principle is also necessary. From the perspective of अचेतनत्व सामान्य, the
अजीव is one. धर्मास्तिकाय, अधर्मास्तिकाय, आकाशस्तिकाय, and काल, all these are
अजीव. They do not cause grace or harm to the आत्मा. The पुद्गल द्रव्य is the one
that harms the आत्मा. The body, mind, senses, breath, speech, etc. are पुद्गल.
They become चेतनायमान due to contact with the चेतन. All the substances in the
world that have form, taste, smell, and touch are all पौद्गलिक. Sound, light,
shadow, darkness, cold and heat are all states of the पुद्गल स्कन्ध and are the
same root center of attachment. Any nerve in the body... [२०]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 se apane Apa meM paripUrNa hai tathApi AcArya abhayadeva ne apanI vRtti meM eka
viSaya kA dUsare viSaya ke sAtha sambandha saMsthApita karane kA prayAsa kiyA
hai| kahIM-kahIM para unheM pUrNa saphalatA milI hai to kahIM-kahIM para aisA
pratIta hotA hai ki vRttikAra ne apanI ora se haThAt sambandha sthApita karane
kA prayAsa kiyA hai| vastutaH isa prakAra kI zailI meM eka sUtra kA dUsare sUtra
se sambandha ho, yaha Avazyaka nhiiN| saMkhyA kI dRSTi se jo bhI viSaya sAmane
AyA, usakA isa Agama meM saMkalana kiyA gyaa| catuSTaya kI dRSTi se varNana
samavAyAMga meM dravya kI dRSTi se jIva, pudgala dharma, adharma, AkAza Adi kA
nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| kSetra kI dRSTi se loka, aloka, siddhazilA Adi para
prakAza DAlA gayA hai| kAla kI dRSTi se samaya, AvalikA, muhUrta Adi se lekara
palyopama, sAgaropama, utsarpiNI, avasarpiNI aura pudgala-parAvartana evaM cAra
gati ke jIvoM kI sthiti Adi para cintana kiyA gayA hai| bhAva kI dRSTi se jJAna,
darzana cAritra evaM vIrya Adi jIva ke bhAvoM kA varNana hai aura varNa, gandha,
rasa, saMsthAna, sparza Adi ajIva bhAvoM kA varNana bhI kiyA gayA hai| prathama
samavAya : vizleSaNa samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya meM jIva, ajIva Adi
tattvoM kA pratipAdana karate huye AtmA, anAtmA, daNDa, adaNDa, kriyA, akriyA,
loka, aloka, dharmAstikAya adharmAstikAya, puNya, pApa, bandha, mokSa, Azrava,
saMvara, vedanA, nirjarA Adi ko saMgrahanaya kI dRSTi se eka-eka batAyA gayA
hai| usake pazcAt eka lAkha yojana kI lambAI-caur3AI vAle jambUdvIpa,
sarvArthasiddha vimAna Adi kA ullekha hai| eka sAgara kI sthiti vAle nAraka,
deva Adi kA vivaraNa diyA gayA hai| prathama samavAya meM bahuta hI saMkSepa meM
zAstrakAra ne jaina darzana ke mUlabhUta tattvoM kA pratipAdana kiyA hai|
bhAratIya darzanoM meM sabase mahattvapUrNa prazna AtmA kA rahA hai| anya
dArzanikoM ne bhI AtmA ke sambandha meM cintana kiyA kintu unakA cintana gaharAI
ko liye huye nahIM thaa| vibhinna dArzanikoM ke vibhinna mata the| kitane hI
dArzanika AtmA ko vyApaka mAnate haiM to kitane hI dArzanika AtmA ko
aMguSThapramANa yA taNDulapramANa mAnate haiN| jaina darzana ne anekAnta dRSTi
se AtmA kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai| vaha jIva ko pariNAmI nitya mAnatA hai| dravya kI
dRSTi se jIva nitya hai, to paryAya kI dRSTi se anitya hai| yahA~ para prastuta
ekasthAnaka samavAya meM, AtmA ananta hone para bhI sabhI AtmAe~ asakhyAta
pradezI hone se aura cetanatva kI apekSA se eka sadRza haiN| sabhI AtmAe~
svadehaparimANa haiN| ataeva yahA~ AtmA ko eka kahA hai| sarvaprathama
Atmatattva kA jJAna Avazyaka hone se sthAnAMga aura samavAyAMga donoM hI AgamoM
meM prathama AtmA kI carcA kI hai| AtmA ko jAnane ke sAtha hI anAtmA ko jAnanA
bhI Avazyaka hai| anAtmA ko hI ajIva kahA gayA hai| ajIva ke sambandha se hI
AtmA vikRta hotA hai| usameM vibhAva pariNati hotI hai| ataH ajIva tattva ke
jJAna kI bhI AvazyakatA hai| acetanatva sAmAnya kI apekSA se ajIva eka hai|
dharmAstikAya, adharmAstikAya, AkAzastikAya aura kAla, ye sabhI ajIva haiN| ina
se AtmA kA anugraha yA upaghAta nahIM hotaa| AtmA kA upaghAta karane vAlA
pudgala dravya hai| zarIra, mana, indriyA~, zvAsocchvAsa, vacana, Adi pudgala
haiN| ye cetana ke saMsarga se cetanAyamAna hote haiN| vizva meM rUpa, rasa,
gandha aura sparzavAle jitane bhI padArtha haiM, ve sabhI paudgalika haiN|
zabda, prakAza, chAyA, andhakAra, sardIgarmI sabhI pudgala skandhoM kI avasthAe~
haiM aura vahI eka Asakti kA mUla kendra hai| zarIra ke kisI bhI snAya [20]

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When an institution becomes corrupted, its knowledge development stops. However,
it is true that the soul has a completely independent existence. It is like a
light that is different from oil and a vessel. The power by which the body is
becoming conscious is different from the inner light. The soul, due to the
subtle karmic body, takes on another gross body when the gross body is
destroyed. Therefore, knowledge of the soul and non-soul is necessary for
spiritual practice. Similarly, the discussion of punishment, non-punishment,
action, inaction, etc. is also useful for those seeking liberation.  In Indian
thought, the concept of "lok" (world) has been discussed extensively. "Lok" is
the basis of all substances in the universe. Lokvad (theory of the world)
includes both infinite beings and non-beings. Lok is where dharma, adharma,
time, pudgala, and jiva reside. If we look at lok from a holistic perspective,
from the perspective of lineage, it is eternal and infinite. No substance can be
destroyed, and nothing can be created from non-existence. No one can increase
the number of substances even by a single atom. From the perspective of the
constantly changing material elements, lok is finite. From the perspective of
substance, lok is eternal. From the perspective of elements, it is impermanent.
Time is a simple cause in the creation of actions, which is present in the
result of every changing substance. It is also changing like other substances.
Lok is the space where all six substances are found. Beyond that, only space
exists, which is called "alok" (non-world). Because dharma and adharma
substances are simple causes in the movement and position of jiva and pudgala.
As long as there is harmony between dharma and adharma substances, the movement
and position of jiva and pudgala are possible. Therefore, the middle part of the
sky, which is shaped like a man, is called lok, which is equal to dharma and
adharma substances. Dharma, adharma, and lok are similar in terms of
measurement. Therefore, like lok, alok is also one.  The Jain Agam literature
has a clear description of jiva and ajiv, which is not found in Buddhist
literature. In the Buddhist text Anguttaranikaya, the question of whether lok is
infinite or finite is left unanswered by the Tathagata Buddha. He only said
about lok that it is composed of five material qualities: form, taste, etc. The
one who abandons these five material qualities wanders in the end of lok.  The
words "punya" (merit) and "papa" (sin) are very famous in Indian literature.
Good deeds are punya, and bad deeds are papa. Punya gives the soul the
experience of happiness, and papa gives the experience of suffering. There are
two types of punya and papa: substance and feeling. The karma that gives the
soul the experience of happiness is substance karma, and the good results of the
soul's compassion, kindness, charity, and feelings are feeling punya. Similarly,
the karma that gives the soul the experience of suffering is substance papa, and
the bad results of the soul's feelings are feeling papa. The Sankhyakarika also
mentions that punya leads to upward movement and papa leads to downward
movement. The Nainaacharyas have also said that the result of good intentions is
heaven, and the result of bad intentions is hell.  Like punya and papa, the
discussion of bandha (bondage) and moksha (liberation) is also found extensively
in Indian literature. The specific relationship between two substances is called
bandha. Thus, bandha is called one here. But it has two types: feeling bandha
and substance bandha. The feelings of attachment, hatred, and delusion, etc.,
which bind karma, are called feeling bandha. And the connection of karma-
pudgalas with the soul's regions is substance bandha. Substance bandha is the
connection between the soul and pudgala.  **References:**  *
Uttaraadhyayanasutra 28/9 * Uttaraadhyayanasutra, Sutra 28/7 * Sankhya-44 *
K-Pravachansara 1, 9, 11, 12, 13, 2, 81 * Kh-Samyatsara-155-161

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMsthAna ke vikRta hone para usakA jJAna-vikAsa ruka jAtA hai| tathApi yaha
satya hai ki AtmA kA sarvatantra-svatantra astitva hai| vaha taila va bastI se
bhinna jyoti kI taraha hai| jisa zakti se zarIra cinmaya ho rahA hai, vaha
anta:jyoti zarIra se bhinna hai| AtmA sUkSma kArmaNa zarIra ke kAraNa sthUla
zarIra ke naSTa ho jAne para dUsare sthUla zarIra ko dhAraNa karatA hai| isaliye
AtmA aura anAtmA kA jJAna sAdhanA ke lie Avazyaka hai| isI taraha daNDa, adaNDa,
kriyA, akriyA Adi kI carcA bhI mumukSuoM ke lie upayogI hai| bhAratIya cintana
meM lokavAda kI carcA bar3e vistAra ke sAtha huyI hai| vizva ke sabhI dravyoM kA
AdhAra "loka" hai| lokavAda meM ananta jIva bhI haiM to ajIva bhii| dharma,
adharma, kAla, pudgala aura jIva jahA~ rahate haiM, vaha loka hai| loka ko
samagra bhAva se, santati kI dRSTi se nihAreM to vaha anAdi ananta hai| na koI
dravya naSTa ho sakatA hai aura na koI asat se sat banatA hai| jo dravyasaMkhyA
hai, usameM eka paramANu kI bhI abhivRddhi koI nahIM kara sktaa| pratisamaya
vinaSTa hone vAle dravyagata paryAyoM kI dRSTi se loka sAnta hai| dravya dRSTi
se loka zAzvata hai| paryAya dRSTi se azAzvata hai| kAryoM kI utpatti meM kAla
eka sAdhAraNa nimitta hai, jo pratyeka pariNamanazIla dravya ke pariNAma meM
hai| vaha bhI apane Apa meM anya dravyoM kI bhAMti pariNamanazIla hai| AkAza ke
jitane hisse taka chahoM dravya pAye jAte haiM, vaha loka hai| aura usase pare
kevala AkAzamAtra aloka hai| kyoMki jIva aura pudgala kI gati aura sthiti meM
dharma aura adharma dravya sAdhAraNa nimitta hote haiN| jahA~ taka dharma aura
adharma dravya kA sadbhAva hai, vahA~ taka jIva aura pudgala kI gati aura
avasthiti sambhava hai| etadartha hI AkAza ke usa puruSAkAra madhyamabhAga ko
loka kahA hai jo dharma, adharma dravya ke barAbara hai| dharma, adharma, loka
ke mApadaNDa ke sadRza hai| isIliye loka kI taraha aloka bhI eka hai| jaina
Agama sAhitya meM jIva aura ajIva kA jaisA spaSTa varNana hai vaisA bauddha
sAhitya meM nahIM hai| bauddha grantha aMguttaranikAya meM loka ananta hai yA
sAnta hai? isa prazna ke uttara ko tathAgata buddha ne avyAkRta kahakara TAlane
kA prayAsa kiyA hai| unhoMne loka ke sambandha meM itanA hI kahA-rUpa, rasa Adi
pA~ca kAma guNa se yukta hai| jo mAnava ina pA~ca kAmaguNoM kA parityAga karatA
hai, vahI loka ke anta meM vicaraNa karatA hai| puNya aura pApa ye donoM zabda
bhAratIya sAhitya meM atyadhika vizruta haiN| zubha karma puNya haiM, azubha
karma pApa haiN| puNya se jIva ko sukha kA aura pApa se du:kha kA anubhava hotA
hai| puNya aura pApa ina donoM ke dravya aura bhAva ye do prakAra haiN| jisa
karma ke udaya se jIva ko sukhAnubhUti hotI hai vaha dravyakarma hai aura jIva
ke dayA, karuNA, dAna, bhAvanA Adi zubha pariNAma bhAvapuNya haiN| isI taraha
jisa karma ke udaya se jIva ko du:kha kA anubhava hotA hai, vaha dravyapApa hai
aura jIva ke azubha pariNAma bhAvapApa haiN| sAMkhyakArikA meM bhI puNya se
Urdhvagamana aura pApa se adhogamana batAyA hai| nainAcAryoM ne bhI zubha
adhyavasAya kA phala svarga aura azubha adhyavasAya kA phala naraka hai| kahA
hai| puNya aura pApa kI bhA~ti bandha aura mokSa kI carcA bhI bhAratIya sAhitya
meM vistAra ke sAtha milatI hai| do padArthoM kA viziSTa sambandha bandha
kahalAtA hai| yoM bandha ko yahA~ para eka kahA hai| para usake do prakAra haiN|
eka bhAvabandha aura dUsarA drvybndh| jina rAga, dveSa aura moha prabhRti vikArI
bhAvoM se karma kA bandha hotA hai ve bhAva bhAvabandha kahalAte haiN| aura
karma-pudagaloM kA AtmapradezoM se sambandha honA dravyabandha hai| dravyabandha
AtmA aura pudgala bhAyaNaM savvadavyANaM-uttarAdhyayana 28/9 uttarAdhyayana,
sUtra 28/7 10. dharmeNa gamanamUrdhvaM gamanamadhastAd bhvtydhrmenn| -sAMkhya-44
11. ka-pravacanasAra 1, 9, 11, 12, 13, 2, 81, kha-samayasAra-155-161 [21]

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is related to. It is absolutely true that two substances can come together
but not become one. Two can appear as one, but the essence of one cannot be
extinguished and the other remain. Acharya Umaswati12 has written that due to
yoga, subtle karma-pudgala become one-field-going with all the soul-regions.
That is, the karma-pudgala remain in the same region as the soul-regions and
become bound with the living being. This is called Pradeshbandha. There is no
chemical mixture of any kind between the soul and the karma-body other than one-
field-going. There is a chemical mixture of new karma-pudgala with ancient
karma-pudgala, but not with soul-regions. The soul-regions vibrate due to the
living being's passions. This attracts karma-worthy pudgala. From this yoga, a
nature, that is, a special kind of disposition, arises in those karma-vargana.
If those karma-pudgala are attracted by an action that obstructs knowledge, then
they will have the nature of covering knowledge. If they are attracted by
passions, then according to the intensity and mildness of the passions, a nature
of bearing fruit arises in that karma-pudgala. Pradeshbandha and Prakritibandha
happen due to yoga. And sthiti and anubhagabandh are due to passions.  Complete
liberation from karmabandha is moksha. The direct and simple meaning of moksha
is - to be released. The soul, which was bound by karmabandha from time
immemorial, becomes completely free when those bonds are broken. This is called
liberation. In the Buddhist tradition, the word "nirvana" is used in the sense
of moksha. They have assumed the extinction of the soul in the sense of the
extinction of afflictions, which has obscured the true nature of nirvana.
Destroying karma simply means that the karma-pudgala become separate from the
soul. Those karmas are not completely destroyed.13 The complete destruction of
any being does not happen in any of the three times. The change of state is
called destruction. The karma-pudgala, which were in contact with the soul and
were destroying the soul's qualities, were endowed with the karma-state. That
karma-state is destroyed. Just as the soul becomes pure after being liberated
from karmabandha, so too the karma-pudgala become free from the karma-state.
From the Jain perspective, the separation of the soul and karma-pudgala is
moksha.  After bondage and liberation, there is mention of one inflow and one
restraint. Falsehood, non-restraint, carelessness, passions, and yoga are the
inflows. The inflow of karma due to emotions is called bhavasrav, and the inflow
of karma-substance is called dravyasrav. In other words, the development of the
karma-state in pudgala is dravyasrav. Generally, there are two types of inflow -
one is sampraayik inflow, which is the cause of bondage due to yoga influenced
by passions and increases the world. The other is iryapatha inflow, which is
only due to yoga. In this, there is no passion, so there is no bondage in the
form of state and result. This inflow happens only to the liberated great souls.
Passion and yoga are present in every worldly soul. Due to this, there is a
continuous inflow of the seven karmas. In the previous life, the inflow of the
lifespan karma happens in the division of the present lifespan for the
attainment of the body etc., or it happens in the ninth part, or in the twenty-
seventh part, or when there is a remainder of the inner moment.4.  Name-
pronouncements are everywhere due to the special yoga, subtle one-field-going,
situated in all the soul-regions, infinite and infinite regions. -Tattvarth
Sutra 8/14 Analysis from the living being is difference, essence is not complete
destruction. -Aaptapariksha-115 Sovakkamauya Pun, Sesatibhage Ahava Navambhage.
Sattavīsīme vā, Antamuhuttaṃ Timvāvi. -Sangrahani Sutra, Ga. 302 [22]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kA sambandha hai| yaha pUrNa satya hai ki do dravyoM kA saMyoga ho sakatA hai
para tAdAtmya nhiiN| do milakara eka se pratIta ho sakate haiM para eka kI sattA
samApta hokara eka zeSa nahIM raha sktaa| . AcArya umAsvAti12 ne likhA hai ki
yoga ke kAraNa samasta AtmapradezoM ke sAtha sUkSma karma-pudgala eka
kSetrAvagAhI ho jAte haiN| arthAt jisa kSetra meM Atmapradeza haiM usI kSetra
meM rahe hue karma-pudgala jIva ke sAtha baddha ho jAte haiN| ise pradezabandha
kahate haiN| AtmA aura karmazarIra kA eka kSetrAvagAha ke atirikta anya kisI bhI
prakAra kA koI rAsAyanika-mizraNa nahIM hotaa| prAcIna karma-pudgaloM se navIna
karma-pudgaloM kA rAsAyanika mizraNa hotA hai, para AtmapradezoM se nhiiN| jIva
ke rAgAdi bhAvoM se AtmapradezoM meM eka prakampana hotA hai| usase karma-yogya
pudgala AkarSita hote haiN| isa yoga se una karma-vargaNAoM meM prakRti, yAni
eka vizeSa prakAra kA svabhAva utpanna hotA hai| yadi ve karmapudgala jJAna meM
vighna utpanna karane vAlI kriyA se AkarSita hote haiM to unameM jJAna ke
AcchAdana karane kA svabhAva pdd'egaa| yadi ve rAgAdi kaSAyoM se AkarSita kiye
jAyeMge to kaSAyoM kI tIvratA aura mandatA ke anusAra usa karmapudgala meM phala
dene kI prakRti utpanna hotI hai| pradezabandha aura prakRtibandha yoga se hotA
hai| aura sthiti aura anubhAgabandha kaSAya hotA hai| karmabandha se pUrNatayA
mukta honA mokSa hai| mokSa kA sIdhA aura sarala artha hai-chuuttnaa| anAdikAla
se jina karmabandhanoM se AtmA jakar3A huA thA, ve bandhana kaTa jAne se AtmA
pUrNasvatantra ho jAtA hai| use mukti kahate haiN| bauddha-paramparA meM mokSa
ke artha meM "nirvANa" zabda kA prayoga huA hai| unhoMne klezoM ke bujhane ke
artha meM AtmA kA bajhanA mAna liyA hai, jisase nirvANa kA sahI svarUpa ojhala
ho gayA hai| karmoM ko naSTa karane kA itanA hI artha hai ki karmapudgala AtmA
se pRthak ho jAte haiN| una karmoM kA atyanta vinAza nahIM hotaa|13 kisI bhI sat
kA atyanta vinAza tInoM-kAloM meM nahIM hotaa| paryAyAntara honA hI nAza kahA
gayA hai| jo karma-pudgala AtmA ke sAtha sampRkta hone se AtmaguNoM kA hanana
karate the, jisase ve karmatva paryAya se yukta the, vaha karmatva paryAya naSTa
ho jAtI hai| jaise karmabandhana se mukta hokara-AtmA zuddha svarUpa ko prApta
ho jAtA hai, vaise hI karma pudagala bhI karmatva-paryAya se mukta ho jAtA hai|
jaina dRSTi se AtmA aura karma pudgala kA sambandha chUTa jAnA hI mokSa hai|
bandha aura mokSa ke pazcAt eka Azrava aura eka saMvara kA ullekha kiyA hai|
mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura yoga ye Azrava haiN| jina bhAvoM se
karmoM kA Azrava hotA hai, vaha bhAvAzrava hai aura karma dravya kA AnA
dravyAzrava hai| dUsare zabdoM meM yoM kaha sakate haiM ki pudgaloM meM karmatva
paryAya kA vikasita honA dravyAzrava hai| sAmAnya rUpa se Azrava ke do prakAra
haiM-eka sAmparAyika Azrava, jo kaSAyAnurajita yoga se hone vAle bandha kA
kAraNa hokara saMsAra kI abhivRddhiM karatA hai| dUsarA IryApatha Azrava jo
kevala yoga se hone vAlA hai| isameM kaSAyAbhAva hone se sthiti evaM vipAka rUpa
bandhana nahIM hotaa| yaha Azrava vItarAma jIvanmukta mahAtmAoM ko hI hotA hai|
kaSAya aura yoga pratyeka saMsArI AtmA meM rahA huA hai| jisase sapta karmoM kA
pratisamaya Azrava hotA rahatA hai| parabhava meM zarIra Adi kI prApti ke liye
Ayu:karma kA Azrava vartamAna Ayu ke vibhAga meM hotA hai, athavA nauMve bhAga
meM hotA hai, yA sattAvIsaveM bhAga meM hotA hai athavA antarmaharta avazeSa
rahane pr|4|| nAmapratyayAH sarvato yogavizeSAt sUkSmaikakSetrAvagAhasthitAH
srvaatmprdeshessvnntaanntprdeshaaH| -tattvArthasUtra 8/14 jIvAd vizleSaNaM
bhedaH satto naatyntsNkssyH| -AptaparIkSA-115 sovakkamAuyA puNa, sesatibhAge
ahava nvmbhaage| sattAvIsaime vA, aMtamuhuttaM timvaavi| -saMgrahaNIsUtra, gA.
302 [22]

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sanvara is the opposite of Asrava. Sanvara is the restraint of the causes that
bind karma. It mainly happens due to Asrava Yoga. Therefore, the cessation of
Yoga is Sanvara.  The Tathagata Buddha has mentioned Sanvara. He has explained
it by dividing it as follows: (1) Sanvara controls the senses and when the
senses are controlled, they become secret senses, which prevents sensory Asrava.
(2) Pratisevna - If one does not eat, drink, wear clothes, take medicine, etc.,
the mind does not remain happy and if the mind does not remain happy, karma is
bound. Therefore, to keep the mind happy, these should be used, which will
prevent Asrava. It should be remembered here that if it is used from the point
of view of enjoyment, then it is the cause of Asrava. (3) Adhivasana - Some have
the ability to endure physical pain. He likes physical pain. Then he gets
Asrava-restraint from enduring pain. (4) Parivarjana - Cruel elephants, horses,
etc. animals, snakes scorpions etc. animals, pits thorns places; sinful friends,
all these are causes of suffering. By abandoning those causes of suffering,
Asrava is restrained. (5) Vinodana - If one does not break the binding thoughts
like violence, sinful thoughts, lustful thoughts, etc., then the Asrava arising
from them is restrained. (6) Bhavana - Asrava is restrained by good thoughts. If
good thoughts are not cultivated, then bad thoughts will arise. Therefore, good
thoughts are the cause of restraint of Asrava to restrain bad thoughts.
-Anguttara Nikaya 6/58  After Asrava and Sanvara, there is mention of Vedana and
Nirjara. To experience karma is 'Vedana'. It is of two types. To experience
Vedana at the time when the state of Abadikal is complete, and to bring forth
the karma that is eligible to arise in the future, the being brings it into the
Udayavali before the ripening of the state due to his special determination,
this is Udirana. To experience the karma brought forth by Udirana, this is the
second type. Buddhists have said that the cause of Asrava is Avidya. Restraining
Avidya is the same as restraining Asrava. They have divided Asrava into three
types: Kama Asrava, Bhaya Asrava and Avidya Asrava. -Anguttara Nikaya 3,58,6,63
After Vedana, there is mention of Nirjara. Nirjara means the destruction of
accumulated karma. The 24th Acharya Hemchandra has written that karma is the
seed of Bhava-bhramana. The separation of those karmas from the Atma-pradeshas
is "Nirjara". It is of two types - Sakamaniriara and Akamaniriara. The
destruction of karma by means of effort and knowledge, such as tapasya, etc., is
Sakamaniriara. In Sakamaniriara, there is discrimination between the soul and
liberation, due to which even the smallest Nirjara is capable of giving great
results. An ignorant being cannot exhaust as much karma in millions of years as
a wise person can exhaust in a single breath. Akamaniriara is that - when the
state of karma is complete, when the karma is experienced, their separation. Due
to dependence, the restraint of enjoyment and consumption also leads to
Akamaniriara. For example, a being in hell or in the animal realm endures
unbearable pain, terrible torture, piercing and cutting. And even in human life,
he endures suffering unwillingly due to compulsion. It is of two types.
-Rajavartika 7/14/40/17 -Dravyasangraha 36/150 -Bhavanashataka 67 -Yogashastra
4/86 -Mahapratyakhyana Prakirnak 101 -Pravachansara 4/38 [23] 15.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Azrava se viparIta saMvara hai| jina kAraNoM se karmoM kA bandha hotA hai,
unakA nirodha kara denA 'saMvara' hai| mukhya rUpa se Azrava yoga se hotA hai|
ataH yoga kI nivRtti hI saMvara hai| tathAgata buddha ne saMvara kA ullekha kiyA
hai| unhoMne vibhAga kara isa prakAra pratipAdana kiyA hai-(1) saMvara se
indriyoM para niyantraNa hotA hai aura indriyoM kA saMvara hone se vaha
guptendriya banatA hai, jisase indriyajanya Azrava nahIM hotaa| (2) pratisevanA-
bhojana, pAna, vastra, cikitsA, Adi na karane para mana prasanna nahIM rahatA
aura mana prasanna na rahane se karmabandha hotA hai| ata: mana ko prasanna
rakhane ke liye inakA upayoga karanA cAhiye jisase Azrava kA nirodha ho| yahAM
yaha smaraNa rakhanA cAhiye ki bhogopabhoga kI dRSTi se usakA upayoga kiyA jAye
to vaha Azrava kA kAraNa hai| (3) adhivAsanA-kisI meM zArIrika kaSTa sahana
karane kI kSamatA hai| use zArIrika kaSTa pasanda hai| to use kaSTa sahana se
Azrava-nirodha hotA hai| (4) parivarjana-krUra hAthI, ghor3A, Adi pazu, sarpa
bicchU Adi jantu, garta kaNTaka sthAna; pApa mitra ye sabhI du:kha ke kAraNa
haiN| una du:kha ke kAraNoM ko tyAgane se Azrava kA nirodha hotA hai| (5)
vinodanA-hiMsAvitarka, pApavitarka, kAmavitarka, Adi bandhaka vitarkoM kI
bhaMjanA na karane se tajjanya Azrava kA nirundhana hotA hai| (6) bhAvanA-zubha
bhAvanA se Azrava kA nirundhana hotA hai| yadi zubha bhAvanA na kI jAyegI to
azubha bhAvanAe~ udbuddha hoNgii| ataH azubha bhAvanA kA nirodha karane hetu
zubha bhAvanA Azrava ke nirundhana kA kAraNa hai| -aMguttara nikAya 6/58 Azrava
aura saMvara ke pazcAt-vedanA aura nirjarA kA ullekha hai| karmoM kA anubhava
karanA 'vedana' hai| vaha do prakAra kA hai| abAdhAkAla kI sthiti pUrNa hone
para yathAkAla vedana karanA aura kitane hI karma, jo kAlAntara meM udaya meM
Ane yogya haiM, unheM jIva apane adhyavasAya vizeSa se sthiti kA paripAka hone
ke pUrva hI udayAvali meM khIMca lAtA hai, yaha udIraNA hai| udIraNA ke dvArA
khIMca kara lAye huye karma kA vedana karanA yaha dUsarA prakAra hai| bauddhoM
ne Azrava kA kAraNa avidyA batAyA hai| avidyA kA nirodha karanA hI Azrava kA
nirodha karanA hai| unhoMne Azrava ke kAmAzrava aura bhayAzrava aura avidyAzrava
aise tIna bheda kiye haiN| -aMguttara nikAya 3,58,6,63 vedanA ke pazcAt nirjarA
kA ullekha hai| nirjarA kA artha hai saMcita karmoM kA nAza honaa|24 AcArya
hemacandra ne15 likhA hai ki bhavabhramaNa ke bIjabhUta karma haiN| una karmoM
kA Atma-pradezoM se pRthak ho jAnA "nirjarA" hai| vaha nirjarA do prakAra kI
hai-sakAmanirjarA aura akaamnirjraa| prayatna aura jJAnapUrvaka tapa Adi kriyAoM
ke dvArA karmoM kA naSTa honA sakAmanirjarA hai| sakAmanirjarA meM AtmA aura
mokSa kA viveka hotA hai, jisase aisI alpatama nirjarA bhI virAT phala pradAna
karane vAlI hotI hai|6 ajJAnI jIva jitane karmoM ko karor3oM varSoM meM nahIM
khapA sakatA, utane . karma jJAnI eka zvAsocchvAsa jitane alpa samaya meM khapA
detA hai| akAmanirjarA vaha hai-karma kI sthiti pUrNa hone para karma kA vedana
ho jAne para unakA pRthak ho jaanaa| paratantratA ke kAraNa bhoga upabhoga kA
nirodha hone se bhI akAmanirjarA hotI hai| jaise nArakI yA tiryaJca gatiyoM meM
jIva asahya vedanAe~, ghorAtighora yAtanAe~ chedana-bhedana ko sahana karatA
hai| aura mAnava jIvana meM bhI majabUrI se anicchApUrvaka kaSToM ko sahana
karatA hai| vaha do prakAra kI hai| 14. ka-rAjavArtika 7/14/40/17 kha-
dravyasaMgraha 36/150 ga-bhAvanAzataka 67 yogazAstra 4/86 ka-mahApratyAkhyAna
prakIrNaka 101 kha-pravacanasAra 4/38 [23] 15.

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A formal or non-fruitive shedding of karma is called **avipaak nirjara**, while
an informal or fruitive shedding of karma is called **savipaak nirjara**.
Forcing karma to arise through austerities, etc., and then shedding it without
experiencing its fruit is **avipaak nirjara**.  Naturally shedding karma by
experiencing its fruit at every moment is **savipaak nirjara**.  Every being
experiences **savipaak nirjara** every moment, every instant.  New karmas keep
taking the place of old karmas.  Burning away karmas before they bear fruit
through the fire of austerity is **aupakramik nirjara**.  The fruit of karma
cannot be avoided, "Karma that is not experienced does not decay even after
millions of kalpas" - this rule applies to the **pradeshodaya** but not to the
**vipaakodaya**.  The present statement applies to ordinary worldly souls who
are **pravahapatita**.  **Purusharthi** seekers burn all karmas in an instant in
the fire of meditation.  Thus, the first **samavaya** sheds light on the main
principles of Jainism - soul, non-soul, bondage, causes of bondage, liberation,
and causes of liberation.  The description of the non-soul along with the soul
is necessary because the soul is deviating from its own nature due to non-
living, **paudgalik** karmas.  From the perspective of collection, the author
has expressed profound secrets in this **samavaya**.  **Second Samavaya:
Analysis**  The second **samavaya** describes two types of punishment, two types
of bondage, two constellations - **Purvafalguni** and **Uttarafalguni**, two
stars in these constellations, two states of hellish beings and gods, two
metaphors of **palyopam** and **sagaropama**, and two types of existence for
**bhavasiddhik** beings who attain liberation.  First, it describes punishment.
**Artha-danda** and **anarth-danda** are the two types of punishment.  The act
of violence, etc., that is done for the protection of one's own body, for the
sustenance of family, society, country, and nation is **artha-danda**.  The
intention to begin is not the main thing in **artha-danda**.  It is undertaken
to achieve a purpose, motivated by duty.  **Anarth-danda** means to commit sin
without any purpose, uselessly.  The thermometer for measuring **artha-danda**
and **anarth-danda** is **viveka** (discernment).  Many actions are **artha**
due to specific circumstances.  When circumstances change, the same actions
become **anarth**.  Acharya Umaswati has defined the words **artha** and
**anarth** in such a way that what is consumed and enjoyed is **artha** for the
**shravak**, and what is different from that, in which there is no consumption
or enjoyment, is **anarth-danda**.  Acharya Abhaydeva has written that the
meaning of **artha** is "purpose".  A householder protects his field, house,
grain, wealth, or sustains his body, etc.  In all these activities, the
oppression of beings through initiation is **artha-danda**.  Punishment,
suppression, torture, and destruction are all synonymous.  In contrast to
**artha-danda**, only carelessness, foolishness, and unwise, purposeless,
useless destruction of beings is **anarth-danda**.  The seeker avoids **anarth-
danda**.  After **artha-danda** and **anarth-danda**, the statement of living
beings and non-living beings is made.  The commentator, Acharya Abhaydeva, has
indicated in his commentary that this topic should be understood from the
**Prajnapanasutra** along with its divisions and subdivisions.  Without going
into that much detail here, we will point out that place to the readers and
mention that there was a great deal of disagreement about the number of living
and non-living elements during the time of Lord Mahavira.  On the one hand, the
Upanishads believed that the entire universe is the result of a single element,
while on the other hand, according to the Sankhya, there are living beings and
non-living beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 eka aupakramika yA avipAka nirjarA, dUsarI anaupakramika yA svipaaknirjraa|
tapa Adi se karmoM ko balAt udaya meM lAkara binA phala diye jhar3A denA avipAka
nirjarA hai| svAbhAvika rUpa se pratisamaya karmoM kA phala dekara jhar3ate jAnA
savipAkanirjarA hai| pratipala-pratikSaNa pratyeka prANI ko savipAkanirjarA hotI
rahatI hai| purAne karmoM ke sthAna ko nUtana karma grahaNa karate rahate haiN|
tapa rUpI agni se-karmoM ko phala dene se pUrva hI bhasma kara denA aupakramika
nirjarA hai| karmoM kA vipAka-phala Tala nahIM sakatA "nAbhuktaM kSIyate karma
kalpakoTizatairapi" yaha niyama pradezodaya para to lAgU hotA hai para
vipAkodaya para nhiiN| prastuta kathana pravAhapatita sAdhAraNa sAMsArika AtmAoM
para lAgU hotA hai| puruSArthI sAdhaka dhyAna rUpI agni meM samasta karmoM ko
eka kSaNa meM bhasma kara dete haiN| isa prakAra prathama samavAya meM jaina-
darzana ke mukhya tattva AtmA, anAtmA, bandha, bandha ke kAraNa, mokSa aura
mokSa ke kAraNa Adi para prakAza DAlA hai| AtmA ke sAtha anAtmA kA jo nirUpaNa
kiyA gayA hai, vaha isaliye Avazyaka hai ki ajIva-paudgalika karmoM ke kAraNa
AtmA sva-svarUpa se cyuta ho rahA hai| saMgrahanaya kI apekSA se zAstrakAra ne
gurugambhIra-rahasyoM ko isameM vyakta kiyA dvitIya samavAya : vizleSaNa dUsare
samavAya meM do prakAra ke daNDa, do prakAra ke bandha, do rAzi, pUrvAphAlgunI
aura uttarAphAlgunI nakSatra ke do tAre, nArakI aura devoM kI do palyopama aura
do sAgaropama kI sthiti, do bhava karake mokSa jAne vAle bhavasiddhika jIvoM kA
varNana hai| isameM sarvaprathama daNDa kA varNana hai| arthadaNDa aura
anarthadaNDa, ye daNDa ke do prakAra haiN| svayaM ke zarIra kI rakSA ke liye,
kuTumba, parivAra, samAja, deza aura rASTra ke pAlana-poSaNa ke liye jo hiMsAdi
rUpa pApa pravRtti kI jAtI hai, vaha arthadaNDa hai| arthadaNDa meM AraMbha
karane kI bhAvanA mukhya nahIM hotii| karttavya se utprerita hokara prayojana ko
siddha karane ke lie Arambha kiyA jAtA hai| anarthadaNDa kA artha hai- binA kisI
prayojana ke-nirarthaka pApa krnaa| artha aura anartha daNDa ko nApane kA
tharmAmITara viveka hai| kitane hI kArya paristhiti-vizeSa se artha rUpa hote
haiN| paristhiti parivartana hone para ve hI kArya anartha rUpa bhI ho jAte
haiN| AcArya umAsvAti ne artha aura anartha zabda kI paribhASA isa prakAra kI
hai jisase upabhoga, paribhoga hotA hai vaha zrAvaka ke liye artha hai aura
usase bhinna jisameM upabhoga-paribhoga nahIM hotA hai, vaha anarthadaNDa hai|
AcArya abhayadeva8 ne likhA hai ki artha kA abhiprAya "prayojana" hai| gRhastha
apane kheta, ghara, dhAnya, dhana kI rakSA yA zarIra pAlana prabhRti pravRttiyA~
karatA hai| una sabhI pravRttiyoM meM Arambha ke dvArA prANiyoM kA upamardana
hotA hai, vaha arthadaNDa hai| daNDa, nigraha, yAtanA aura vinAza ye cAroM zabda
ekArthaka haiN| arthadaNDa ke viparIta kevala pramAda, katahala, aviveka pUrvaka
niSprayojana nirarthaka prANiyoM kA vighAta karanA anarthadaNDa hai| sAdhaka
anarthadaNDa se bacatA hai| arthadaNDa aura anarthadaNDa ke pazcAt jIvarAzi aura
ajIvarAzi kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| TIkAkAra AcArya abhayadeva9 ne TIkA meM
prastuta viSaya ko prajJApanAsUtra se usake bheda aura prabhedoM ko samajhane kA
sUcana kiyA hai| hama yahA~ para utane vistAra meM na jAkara pAThakoM ko vaha
sthala dekhane kA saMketa karate hue yaha batAnA cAheMge ki bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
samaya jIva aura ajIva tattvoM kI saMkhyA ke sambandha meM atyadhika matabheda
the| eka ora upaniSadoM kA abhimata thA ki sampUrNa-vizva eka hI tattva kA
pariNAma hai to dUsarI ora sAMkhya ke abhimata se jIva aura ajIva 17.
upabhogaparibhogau asyaa'gaarinno'rthH| tdvytirikto'nrthH| -tattvArthabhASya
7-16 upAsakadazAMga, 1-TIkA samavAyAMga sUtra 149, abhayadeva vRtti [24]

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is one. Buddhists believe that there are many minds and many forms. From
this perspective, the Jain view was necessary. Among other philosophies, only
Samkhya has a description. While the Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra has been contemplated
from many perspectives. Just as there is contemplation on beings, there is also
contemplation on the non-being. Here, only very briefly, information has been
given.20 Two types of bondage have been mentioned, Rāgabandha and Dveshabandha.
This bondage has been mentioned only with reference to the Moheeya Karma. Rāga
includes Māyā and Lobha, and Dvesha includes Krodha and Māna. In the Anguttara
Nikaya, three types of communities have been considered - from Lobha, Dvesha and
Moha. Among them, Moha is the most powerful.21 Thus, there is mention of two
quantities. This vast world is made up of two elements. This vast chariot of
creation is running on those two wheels. One element is conscious and the other
element is inert. Jiva and Ajīva are the two masterminds of this world drama. In
fact, their interaction is the world. On the day these two companions part ways,
the world ends. From the perspective of one being, there is a severance of
mutual relationship, but not from the perspective of all beings. Therefore, two
types of quantities have been mentioned. In the second place, there is
contemplation on the number two. Many of these sutras are found as they are in
the Stananga also. Third Samavāya: Analysis In the third place, there is a
description of three Danda, three Gupti, three Shalya, three Gaurav, three
Viradhana, Mrigashira Pushya, etc. three stars, hell, and three Palyopama and
three Sagaropama of the gods, and how many Bhavasiddhika beings will be
liberated after three Bhavas, etc. In the present Samavāya, there is mention of
three Danda. Mind, speech and body attached to evil tendencies, these are the
three Danda. They despise the wealth of character. The soul is punished.
Therefore, they are called Danda. Mind, speech and The tendency that is towards
the world is Danda. Establishing the tendency of mind, speech and body in its
path with Samyagdarshan, Samyagjnan is Gupti.22 There are three types of Gupti.
Manogupti, Vachanagupti and Kayagupti. The meaning of Manogupti is to stop the
mind that is active in the beginning, the middle and the end.23 In other words,
to withdraw the mind from Kshayas like Raga-Dvesha, etc. is Manogupti. To
refrain from false speech, etc. or to observe silence is Vachanagupti.24 False,
harsh, self-praising words harm the minds of others, therefore such words should
be restrained.25 Due to ignorance, many beings are killed by bodily actions.
Therefore, opposing unskillful bodily activities is Kayagupti.26 20. 21. Jain
Āgama Literature - Contemplation and Interpretation, Devendramuni Shastri, pp.
239 to 241 Anguttara Nikaya 3, 17 and 6/39 (a) Uttaradhyayana A. 24, Ga. 26 (b)
Samyagyognigraho Gupti: - Tattvarthamutra 9/4 (c) Jnanarnava 18/4 (d) Arhat
Darshan Deepika 5/642 (e) Gopanam Gupti: - Manas: Prabhriti Nanam Kushalanaam
Pravartanam Akushalanaam Cha Nivartanamiti. Ragadin Niyatti Manassa Janahhi Tam
Manogutti. - Mulaaradhana 6/1187 Yogashastra 1/42 Uttaradhyayana 24/24-25
Uttaradhyayana 24/25 [25] 24. 25.. 26.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 eka haiN| bauddhoM kA mantavya hai ki aneka citta aura aneka rUpa haiN| isa
dRSTi se jainadarzana kA mantavya Avazyaka thaa| anya darzanoM meM kevala
sAMkhya kA nirUpaNa hai| jaba ki prajJApanAsUtra meM aneka dRSTiyoM se cintana
kiyA gayA hai| jisa taraha se jIvoM para cintana hai, usI taraha se ajIva ke
sambandha meM bhI cintana hai| yahA~ to kevala ati saMkSepa meM sUcanA dI gaI
hai|20 bandha ke do prakAra batAye haiM, rAgabandha aura dvessbndh| yaha bandha
kevala mohanIya karma ko lakSya meM lekara ke batAyA gayA hai| rAga meM mAyA
aura lobha kA samAveza hai aura dveSa meM krodha aura mAna kA samAveza hai|
aMguttaranikAya meM tIna prakAra kA samudAya mAnA hai-lobha se, dveSa aura moha
se| una sabhI meM moha adhika prabala haiN|21 isa prakAra do rAzi kA ullekha
hai| yaha vizAla saMsAra do tattvoM se nirmita hai| sRSTi kA yaha vizAla ratha
unhIM do cakroM para cala rahA hai| eka tattva hai cetana aura dUsarA tattva hai
jdd'| jIva aura ajIva ye donoM saMsAra nATaka ke sUtradhAra haiN| vastutaH inakI
kriyA-pratikriyA hI saMsAra hai| jisa dina ye donoM sAthI bichur3a jAte haiM usa
dina saMsAra samApta ho jAtA hai| eka jIva kI dRSTi se paraspara sambandha kA
viccheda hotA hai para sabhI jIvoM kI apekSA se nhiiN| ataH rAzi ke do prakAra
batAye haiN| dvitIya sthAna meM do kI saMkhyA ko lekara cintana hai| isameM se
bahuta sAre sUtra jyoM ke tyoM sthAnAMga meM bhI prApta haiN| tRtIya samavAya :
vizleSaNa tRtIya sthAna meM tIna daNDa, tIna gupti, tIna zalya, tIna gaurava,
tIna virAdhanA, mRgazira puSya, Adi ke tIna tAre, naraka, aura devoM kI tIna
palyopama va tIna sAgaropama kI sthiti tathA kitane hI bhavasiddhika jIva tIna
bhava karake mukta hoMge, Adi kA nirUpaNa hai| prastuta samavAya meM tIna daNDa
kA ullekha hai| duSpravRtti meM saMlagna mana, vacana aura kAya, ye tIna daNDa
haiN| ina se cAritra rUpa aizvarya kA tiraskAra hotA hai| AtmA daNDita hotA hai|
isaliye inheM daNDa kahA hai| mana, vacana aura ne pravRtti jo saMsArAbhimukha
hai, vaha daNDa hai| samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna pUrvaka mana, vacana aura kAyA
kI pravRtti ko apane mArga meM sthApita karanA gupti hai  / 22 gupti ke tIna
prakAra haiN| manogupti, vacanagupti aura kaaygupti| manogupti kA artha
saMrambha samArambha aura Arambha meM pravRtta mana ko roknaa|23 apara zabdoM
meM kahA jAye to rAga-dveSa Adi kaSAyoM se mana ko nivRtta karanA manogupti hai|
asatya bhASaNa Adi se nivRtta honA yA mauna dhAraNa karanA, vacanagupti hai|24
asatya kaThora AtmazlAghI vacanoM se dUsaroM ke mana kA ghAta hotA hai ataH aise
vacana kA nirodha karanA caahie|25 ajJAnavaza zArIrika kriyAoM dvArA bahuta se
jIvoM kA ghAta hotA hai| ataH akuzala kAyika pravRttiyoM kA virodha karanA
kAyagupti hai|26 20. 21. jaina Agama sAhitya-manana aura mImAMsA, devendramuni
zAstrI, pR. 239 se 241 aMguttaranikAya 3, 17 tathA 6/39 (ka) uttarAdhyayana a.
24, gA. 26 (kha) samyagyoganigraho guptiH -tattvArthamUtra 9/4 (ga) jJAnArNava
18/4 (gha) Arhat darzana dIpikA 5/642 (Ga) gopanaM gupti:-mana:prabhRtInAM
kuzalAnAM pravartanamakuzalAnAM ca nivrtnmiti| rAgAdiNiyattI maNassa jANAhi taM
mnnogutti| - mUlArAdhanA 6/1187 yogazAstra 1/42 uttarAdhyayana 24/24-25
uttarAdhyayana 24/25 [25] 24. 25.. 26.

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1 Obstacles hinder the progress of sadhana. Obstacles cause suffering from
within. Similarly, Maya, Nidana and Mithyadarshan distort sadhana, and the
sadhak should avoid them. Pride and greed make the soul heavy and it considers
itself glorious, but it is a distorted state of the mind inflamed by pride. From
the perspective of sadhana, it is not glory but roarav, therefore the sadhak is
advised to avoid all three types of glory. Knowledge, Darshan and Charitra are
the three paths to liberation. They are also called Ratnatraya. Here, knowledge
refers to Samyaggyan, which is preceded by Samyagdarshan. Due to Mithyadarshan,
the jiva forgets its true nature and considers itself to be the material object.
All its actions are dependent on the body. It practices religion for worldly
fame, profit, etc. It does not have the discernment of self and other. But
through Samyagdarshan, the sadhak gains true knowledge of self and other. 27 He
overcomes the three defects of doubt, delusion and indecision and knows his true
nature. 28 Knowing the true nature of the self is Samyaggyan from the
perspective of certain vision. 29 Faith in the principles of Jiva, Ajeeva,
Asrava, Bandha, Samvara, Nirjara and Moksha is Samyagdarshan. Samyagdarshan
gives rise to the knowledge of what is real and what is unreal. Following the
vows of non-violence, truth, etc. to purify the consequences of passions like
raga, etc. is "Samyak Charitra". By contradicting these three, the sadhak
deviates from sadhana. Thus, in the third place, taking the number three, many
facts have been revealed. Fourth Samavay: Analysis The fourth place Samavay
mentions four kshayas, four dhyanas, four vikathas, four sanjnas, four types of
bandha, Anuradha, Purvashadha stars, four palyopama and sagaropama states of
naraki and devas, and describes how many jivas go to liberation after four
bhava. 1 What contaminates the consequences of the soul is kshaya. Kshaya
destroys the natural nature of the soul. Kshayas are thieves who steal the
wealth of the soul. They are the defects hidden in the soul. Anger, pride, Maya,
greed are the four types of kshayas. They are called Chandala Chaukdi.
Liberation from kshaya is true liberation. 'Kshayamukti: kil muktirev.' There
are many varieties of kshaya. Kshaya is a karmic and also a karmic vikaric
tendency. Abandoning that tendency and dwelling in the true nature of the self
is the goal of the sadhak. After kshaya, four dhyanas are mentioned. Dhyana
means - focusing the mind on a subject (20 It is very difficult to focus the
mind on a single point. It cannot remain focused for more than an antarmukhurta.
1 Acharya Shubhachandra has written that when the sadhak becomes absorbed in
dhyana, he does not have dual knowledge. He rises above all raga-dvesha and
becomes immersed in the true nature of the self. 22 In Tattvanushasan 23 it is
called Samarsi Bhava and in Gyanarnava 24 it is called Sayiry Dhyana. Three
things are mainly required for dhyana - dhyata, dhyeya and dhyana. 25 The one
who meditates is dhyata. What is meditated upon is dhyeya, and the dhyata's
becoming stable in the dhyeya is "dhyana". 25 For dhyana sadhana, it is
necessary to renounce possessions, control passions, observe vows and conquer
the senses. In Stananga 36, Bhagavati 37, Aavashyakaniyukti, etc., like
Samavayanga, there are four dhyanas - Aart, Raudra, Dharma and Shukla. 27. 28.
29. 30. 31. 32. 36. — Knowledge that is based on the previous half of the self
is evidence. Pramayaratnamala - 1 Therefore, practice the principles mentioned
by the Jinas, abandon doubt, delusion and delusion, and know yourself. -
Chahḍala 4/6 - Chahḍala 3 / 2 | a- Aavashyak Niyukti 1459 b- Dhyanashatak - 2 c-
Nav Padarth- p. 668 a- Dhyanashatak- 3 b- Tattvarthsutra 9/28 c- Yogapradip 15 /
33 Yogapradip 138 33. Tattvanushasan 60-61 34. Gyanarnava Chapter 28 35.
Yogashastra 7 / 1 Tattvanushasan 67 Stananga 4/247 37. Bhagavati Sh. 25 Ud. 7
38. Aavashyakaniyukti, 1458 [26]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 sAdhanA kI pragati meM zalya bAdhaka hai| zalya andara hI andara kaSTa detA
hai| vaise hI mAyA, nidAna aura mithyAdarzana ye sAdhanA ko vikRta karate haiM
sAdhaka ko inase bacanA caahiye| abhimAna aura lobha se AtmA bhArI banatA hai
aura apane Apa ko gauravazAlI mAnatA hai para vaha abhimAna se uttapta hue citta
kI eka vikRta sthiti hai| sAdhanA kI dRSTi se vaha gaurava nahIM, raurava hai
isaliye sAdhaka ko tInoM prakAra ke gaurava se bacane kA saMketa kiyA hai|
jJAna, darzana aura cAritra ye tInoM mokSa mArga haiN| inheM ratnatraya bhI kahA
gayA hai| yahAM para jJAna se samyagjJAna ko liyA gayA hai jo samyagdarzana
pUrvaka hotA hai| jIva mithyAjJAna ke kAraNa apane svarUpa ko vismRta kara, para
dravya meM Atmabuddhi karatA hai| usa kA samasta kriyAkalApa zarIrAzrita hotA
hai| laukika yaza, lAbha Adi kI dRSTi se vaha dharma kA AcaraNa karatA hai|
usameM sva aura para kA viveka nahIM hotA hai| kintu samyagdarzana dvArA sAdhaka
ko sva aura para kA yathArtha parijJAna ho jAtA hai| 27 vaha saMzaya, viparyaya
aura anadhyavasAya ina tIna doSoM ko dUra kara Atma svarUpa ko jAnatA hai  /  28
AtmasvarUpa ko jAnanA hI nizcaya dRSTi se samyagjJAna hai  /  29 jIva, ajIva,
Azrava, bandha, saMvara, nirjarA tathA mokSa tattva ke prati zraddhA
samyagdarzana hai| samyagdarzana se yathArtha, ayathArtha kA bodha utpanna hotA
hai rAgAdi kaSAya pariNAmoM ke parimArjana ke liye ahiMsA, satya, Adi vratoM kA
pAlana " samyak cAritra" hai| ina tInoM kI virAdhanA karane se sAdhaka sAdhanA
se cyuta hotA hai| isa prakAra tRtIya sthAna meM tIna saMkhyA ko lekara aneka
tathya udghATita kiye gaye haiN| caturtha samavAya: vizleSaNa caturtha sthAnaka
samavAya meM cAra kaSAya, cAra dhyAna, cAra vikathAeM, cAra saMjJAeM, cAra
prakAra ke bandha, anurAdhA, pUrvASAr3hA ke tAroM, nArakI va devoM kI cAra
palyopama va sAgaropama sthiti kA ullekha karate hue kitane hI jIvoM ke cAra
bhava kara mokSa jAne kA varNana hai| 1 AtmA ke pariNAmoM ko jo kaluSita karatA
hai, vaha kaSAya hai| kaSAya se AtmA kA svAbhAvika svarUpa naSTa hotA hai|
kaSAya Atmadhana ko lUTane vAle taskara haiM ve AtmA meM chipe hue doSa haiM
krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha ye kaSAya ke cAra prakAra haiN| inheM caNDAla caukar3I
kahA jAtA hai| kaSAya se mukta honA hI saccI mukti hai| 'kaSAyamuktiH kila
muktireva  /  ' kaSAya ke aneka bheda-prabheda haiN| kaSAya karmajanita aura
sAtha hI karmajanaka vaikArika pravRtti hai| usa pravRtti kA parityAga kara
AtmasvarUpa meM ramaNa karanA, yaha sAdhaka kA lakSya honA caahie| kaSAya ke
pazcAt cAra dhyAna kA ullekha hai| dhyAna kA artha hai - citta ko kisI viSaya
para kendrita karanA (20 citta ko kisI eka bindu para kendrita karanA atyanta
kaThina hai vaha antarmuhUrta se adhika ekAgra nahIM raha sktaa| 1 AcArya
zubhacandra ne likhA hai jaba sAdhaka dhyAna meM tanmaya ho jAtA hai taba usa
meM dvaitajJAna nahIM rhtaa| vaha samasta rAga-dveSa se Upara uThakara
AtmasvarUpa meM hI nimagna ho jAtA hai| 22 use tattvAnuzAsana 23 meM samarasI
bhAva aura jJAnArNava 24 meM sayIrya dhyAna kahA hai| dhyAna ke lie mukhya rUpa
se tIna bAteM apekSita hai- dhyAtA, dhyeya aura dhyAna  /  25 dhyAna karane vAlA
dhyAtA hai| jisakA dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai, vaha dhyeya hai aura dhyAtA kA dhyeya
meM sthira ho jAnA "dhyAna" hai|25 dhyAna-sAdhanA ke lie parigraha kA tyAga,
kaSAyoM kA nigraha, vratoM kA dhAraNa aura indriya-vijaya karanA Avazyaka hai|
sthAnAMga 36, bhagavatI 37 Avazyakaniyukti Adi meM samavAyAMga kI taraha hI
Arta, raudra, dharma aura zukla ye dhyAna 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 36. --
svApUrvArdhavyavasAyAtmakaM jJAnaM pramANam  /  prameyaratnamAlA - 1 tAteM
jinavara kathita tatva abhyAsa karoje saMzaya vibhrama moha tyAga Apo lakha lIje
//  - chahaDhAlA 4/6 - chahaDhAlA 3 / 2 | ka- Avazyaka niryukti 1459 kha-
dhyAnazataka - 2 ga-nava padArtha- pR. 668 ka-dhyAnazataka- 3 kha-
tattvArthasUtra 9/28 ga-yogapradIpa 15 / 33 yogapradIpa 138 33. tattvAnuzAsana
60-61 34. jJAnArNava adhyAya 28 35. yogazAstra 7 / 1 tattvAnuzAsana 67 sthAnAMga
4/247 37. bhagavatI za. 25 ude. 7 38. Avazyakaniyukti, 1458 [26]

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Four types of meditation have been expounded. The first two are considered
unrefined, while the last two are refined. Yoga texts discuss various types of
meditation from different perspectives. However, we will not delve into those
here, but will briefly contemplate the four types of meditation mentioned in the
Agamas.   Arta-dhyana is the meditation that arises from dukkha or suffering. It
is caused by the separation from desirable objects and the association with
undesirable objects. This meditation is characterized by a state of agitation in
the mind due to attachment. As a result, the living being experiences suffering
when it does not obtain the desired object and obtains the undesired object. The
four types of Arta-dhyana are: undesirable association, separation from the
desired, illness, and worry or illness and enjoyment. This meditation leads the
living being to the state of Tiryancha. The mind of such a meditator is detached
from the soul and focused on worldly objects.  Roudra-dhyana is the meditation
in which the living being is naturally inclined to commit all kinds of sins. A
cruel or harsh being is called Rudra. He becomes merciless and commits cruel
acts. Therefore, it is called Roudra-dhyana. This meditation involves
contemplation of violence, lying, stealing, protecting wealth, and piercing and
breaking. The four types of this meditation are: delight in violence, delight in
killing, delight in stealing, delight in protection, and delight in piercing and
breaking. Therefore, both these meditations are considered despicable and
inauspicious.  Dharma-dhyana is the first step in self-development. In this
meditation, the practitioner engages in self-reflection. In the Jnanasar, it is
stated that contemplation of the meaning of scriptures, Dharma-marganas, vows,
secrecy, samiti, etc., is Dharma-dhyana. This meditation requires knowledge,
perception, character, and detachment. These naturally stabilize the mind.
Acharya Shubhachandra emphasized the contemplation of the four emotions of
Maitri, Pramoda, Karuna, and Madhyastha for the attainment of Dharma-dhyana.
Jinabhadragani Kshamashraman has clarified that the proper practice of Dharma-
dhyana can be done in a secluded and peaceful place. The posture for meditation
should be comfortable, so that the meditation can be sustained. This meditation
can be done sitting in Padmasana, standing, or lying down. Due to mental
restlessness, sometimes the practitioner's mind does not remain stable in
meditation. Therefore, the scriptures have mentioned four supports for Dharma-
dhyana:  1. **Agyavichay:** The words of the omniscient are free from any error.
Therefore, taking the support of the words of the wise. Here, the word "vichay"
means "contemplation." 2. **Apayavichay:** Contemplation for the destruction of
karma and the attainment of the true nature of the soul. 3. **Vipaakavichay:**
Contemplation on the auspicious and inauspicious fruits of karma, or
contemplation on the processes that arise every moment due to the influence of
karma. 4. **Sansthanavichay:** This world is characterized by creation,
destruction, and permanence. From the perspective of substance, it is eternal,
and from the perspective of modification, it undergoes creation and destruction.
Contemplation on the eternal and non-eternal nature of the world strengthens the
feeling of detachment, which leads to...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ke cAra bheda pratipAdita kiye gaye haiN| inameM prArambha ke do dhyAna
aprazasta haiM, aura antima do prazasta haiN| yogagranthoM meM anya dRSTiyoM se
dhyAna ke bheda-prabhedoM kI carcA hai| para hama yahA~ una bheda-prabhedoM kI
carcA na kara Agama meM Aye hue cAra dhyAnoM para hI saMkSepa meM cintana
kreNge| Arti nAma du:kha yA pIr3A kA hai usameM se jo utpanna ho vaha Arta hai
arthAt duHkha ke nimitta se yA duHkha meM hone vAlA dhyAna ArttadhyAna hai|39
yaha dhyAna manojJa vastu ke viyoga aura amanojJa vastu ke saMyoga se hotA hai|
rAga bhAva se mana meM eka unmattatA utpanna hotI hai| phalataH avAMchanIya
vastu kI upalabdhi aura vAMchanIya kI anupalabdhi hone para jIva du:khI hotA
hai| aniSTa saMyoga, iSTa-viyoga, roga cintA yA rogAta aura bhogAta ye cAra
ArttadhyAna ke bheda0 haiN| isa dhyAna se jIva tiryaJca gati ko prApta hotA hai|
aise dhyAnI kA mana AtmA se haTakara sAMsArika vastuoM meM kendrita hotA hai|
raudradhyAna vaha hai jisameM jIva svabhAva se sabhI prakAra ke pApAcAra karane
meM samudyata hotA hai| krUra athavA kaThora bhAvavAle prANI ko rudra kahate
haiN| vaha nirdayI banakara krUra kAryoM kA kartA banatA hai| isalie use raudra
dhyAna kahA hai| isa dhyAna meM hiMsA, jhUTha corI, dhana rakSA va chedana-
bhedana Adi duSTa kA cintana hotA hai| isa dhyAna ke hiMsAnanda, maSAnanda,
cauryAnanda, saMrakSAnanda, ye cAra prakAra haiN| isalie ina donoM dhyAnoM ko
heya aura azubha mAnA gayA hai| dharmadhyAna-AtmavikAsa kA prathama caraNa hai|
isa dhyAna meM sAdhaka Atmacintana meM pravRtta hotA hai| jJAnasAra2 meM batAyA
gayA hai ki zAstravAkyoM ke artha, dharmamArgaNAe~, vrata, gupti, samiti, Adi kI
bhAvanAoM kA-cintana karanA dharmadhyAna hai| isa dhyAna ke lie jJAna, darzana,
cAritra aura vairAgya3 apekSita haiN| inase sahaja rUpa se mana sthira ho jAtA
hai| AcArya zubhacandra ne dharmadhyAna kI siddhi ke lie maitrI, pramoda,
kAruNya aura mAdhyasthya ina cAra bhAvanAoM ke cintana para bhI bala diyA hai|
jinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa45 ne spaSTa kiyA hai ki dharmadhyAna kA samyag
ArAdhana ekAnta-zAnta sthAna meM ho sakatA hai| dhyAna kA Asana sukhakAraka ho,
jisase dhyAna kI maryAdA sthira raha ske| yaha dhyAna padmAsana se baiThakara,
khar3e hokara yA leTa kara bhI kiyA jA sakatA hai| mAnasika caMcalatA ke kAraNa
kabhI-kabhI sAdhaka kA mana dhyAna meM sthira nahIM hotaa| isalie zAstra meM
dharmadhyAna ke cAra Alambana batAye haiN|46 -(1) AjJAvicaya-sarvajJa ke vacanoM
meM kisI bhI prakAra kI truTi nahIM hai| isalie Apta vacanoM kA Alambana lenaa|
yahA~ "vicaya" zabda kA artha "cintana" hai| (2) apAyavicaya-karma naSTa karane
ke lie aura Atma tattva kI upalabdhi ke lie cintana krnaa| (3) vipAkavicaya-
karmoM ke zubha-azubha phala ke sambandha meM cintana karanA athavA karma ke
prabhAva se pratikSaNa udita hone vAlI prakriyAoM ke sambandha meM vicAra karanA
/  (4) saMsthAnavicayayaha jagat utpAda vyaya aura dhrauvya yukta hai| dravya kI
dRSTi se nitya hai aura paryAya kI apekSA se usameM utpAda aura vyaya hotA hai|
saMsAra ke nitya-anitya svarUpa kA cintana hone se vairAgya bhAvanA sudRr3ha
hotI hai, jisase 39. 40. sthAnAMga 4/247 ka-sthAnAMga 4/247 kha-Avazyaka
adhyayana-4 ka-tattvArthasUtra 9/36 kha-jJAnArNava 24/3 jJAnasAra, 16
dhyAnazataka 30-34 catasro bhAvanA dhanyAH, puraannpurussaashritaaH|
maitryAdayazciraM citte vidheyA dhrmsiddhye|| -jJAnArNava 25/4 dhyAnazataka,
zloka 38, 39 ka-sthAnAGga, kha-yogazAstra 10/7, ga-jJAnArNava 30/5, gha-
tattvAnuzAsana 9/8 . yogazAstra 10-8, 9; kha-jJAnArNava-38 [27] 45. 46.

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The seeker strives to experience the self-nature. Acharya Hemchandra, 48
Yogiindudev 49 Amitagati, 50 Acharya Haribhadra 51 Upadhyaya Yathovijaya etc.
have described four objectives of Dharma Dhyana. They are: - (1) Pindastha (2)
Padastha (3) Roopastha and (4) Roopateet. Pindastha Dhyana means to focus the
mind on different parts of the body. Through the five Dharanas of Parthivee,
Agneeyi, Maruti, Varuni and Tattvavati, the seeker gradually becomes absorbed in
the center of the self. Practicing Pindastha Dhyana with four types of Dharanas
stabilizes the mind. This helps to see the relationship between the body and
karma differently. It involves contemplating the pure self-nature by destroying
karma. The second, Padastha Dhyana, is the meditation done by taking recourse to
mantras and letters according to one's liking. This meditation mainly involves
sound as an object. Acharya Shubhachandra 52 has also called it Varnamaatrika
Dhyana due to focusing on letters. In this meditation, the beautiful imagination
of the navel lotus, heart lotus and mouth lotus is done. In the navel lotus,
sixteen vowels are meditated upon on a lotus with sixteen petals. In the heart
lotus, a lotus with twenty-four petals, including the stigma and petals, is
imagined and the twenty-five classes of letters, starting with 'ka', 'kha',
etc., are meditated upon. Similarly, eight letters are meditated upon on the
mouth lotus. The best meditation among mantras and letters is considered to be
'Arhan', which is the king of mantras, containing the letter 'reph', the 'kala'
and the 'bindu', along with the Anahata. 13 This king of mantras is meditated
upon. Apart from these, many methods are described in detail in the texts like
Yogashastra and Gyanarnava. In this meditation, the seeker tries to free himself
from the lust of the senses and make the mind more pure and focused. The third
meditation is "Roopastha". In this, the meditation is done on the omniscient
Tirthankara Prabhu, who is free from the vices like attachment and aversion, and
is endowed with all virtues. In this meditation, the practice of meditation is
done by taking recourse to the nature of 'Ahanta'. 55 The fourth type of
meditation is "Roopateet" Dhyana. Roopateet Dhyana means to remember the
knowledge-filled, blissful form, which is beyond form and color, unstained and
formless. 55 In this meditation, there is no difference between the meditator
and the object of meditation. Therefore, Acharya Hemchandra has called this
particular state 'Samarsi Bhaav'. 56 In these four types of Dharma Dhyana, the
contemplation of the body, letters, omniscient and unstained Siddha is done
respectively. It progresses from gross to subtle. Not all beings can do this
meditation. Only the seeker is entitled to this meditation. When the mind
becomes stable and pure through Dharma Dhyana, that seeker can become entitled
to Shukla Dhyana in the future.  The fourth type of meditation is "Shukla"
Dhyana. This is the most pure state of the soul. Based on the Shruta, the
ultimate stability of the mind and the cessation of yoga is Shukla Dhyana. This
meditation happens when the passions are pacified. Only that seeker can do this
meditation who is absorbed in equanimity 57 and who is like Vajra-
Rishabhanaraacha-Samhanan. 58 48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58.
Yogashastra 7/8 Yogasara- 98 Yogasara Prabhrit Yogashataka Gyanarnava - 35-1,2
Gyanarnava-35/7-8 Ahanto Roopamalamvya Dhyanam Roopasthamuchyate Yogashastra 9/7
a- Gyanarnava 37 16 b- Yogashastra 10/1 Yogashastra 10/3, 4 Yogashataka 90
Yogashastra 11/2 [28]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAdhaka Atma-svarUpa kA anubhava karane kA prayatna karatA hai| AcArya
hemacandra, 48 yogIndudeva 49 amitagati, 50 AcArya haribhadra 51 upAdhyAya
yathovijaya Adi ne dharmadhyAna ke cAra dhyeya batAye haiN| ve ye haiM: - (1)
piNDastha (2) padastha (3) rUpastha aura (4) rUpAtIta  /  piNDastha dhyAna kA
artha zarIra ke vibhinna bhAgoM para mana ko kendrita karanA  /  pArthivI,
AgneyI, mAruti, vAruNI aura tattvavatI, ina pA~ca dhAraNAoM ke mAdhyama se
sAdhaka uttarottara Atma- kendra meM dhyAnastha hotA hai| caturvidha dhAraNAoM
se yukta piNDastha dhyAna kA abhyAsa karane se mana sthira hotA hai| jisase
zarIra aura karma ke sambandha ko bhinna rUpa se dekhA jAtA hai| karma naSTa
kara zuddha AtmasvarUpa kA cintana isameM hotA hai| dUsarA padastha dhyAna
arthAt apanI ruci ke anusAra mantrAkSara padoM kA avalambana lekara kiyA jAne
vAlA dhyAna hai| isa dhyAna meM mukhya rUpa se zabda Alambana hotA hai| akSara
para dhyAna karane se AcArya zubhacandra 52 ne ise varNamAtrikA dhyAna bhI kahA
hai| isa dhyAna meM nAbhikamala, hRdayakamala aura mukhakamala kI kamanIya
kalpanA kI jAtI hai| nAbhikamala meM solaha patroM vAle kamala para solaha
svaroM kA dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai| hRdayakamala meM karNikA va patroM sahita
caubIsa dala vAle kamala kI kalpanA kara usa para ka, kha, Adi paccIsa vargoM kA
dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai| usI taraha mukhakamala para ATha varNoM kA dhyAna kiyA
jAtA hai mantroM aura varNoM meM zreSTha dhyAna 'arhan' kA mAnA gayA hai, jo
repha se yuktakalA va bindu se AkrAnta anAhata sahita mantrarAja hai 13 isa
mantrarAja para dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai| inake atirikta aneka vidhiyoM kA nirUpaNa
yogazAstra va jJAnArNava Adi granthoM meM vistAra ke sAtha hai| isa dhyAna meM
sAdhaka indriya- lolupatA se mukta hokara mana ko adhika vizuddha evaM ekAgra
banAne kA prayatna karatA hai| tIsarA dhyAna "rUpastha" hai isameM rAga-dveSa
Adi vikAroM se rahita, samasta sadguNoM se yukta, sarvajJa tIrthaMkara prabhu kA
dhyAna kiyA jAtA hai| isa dhyAna meM ahaMta ke svarUpa kA avalambana lekara
dhyAna kA abhyAsa kiyA jAtA hai|55 dhyAna kA cauthA prakAra "rUpAtIta" dhyAna
hai| rUpAtIta dhyAna kA artha hai rUpa, raMga se atIta, niraJjana - nirAkAra
jJAnamaya Ananda svarUpa kA smaraNa karanA  /  55 isa dhyAna meM dhyAtA aura
dhyeya meM koI antara nahIM rhtaa| isaliye isa avasthA vizeSa ko AcArya
hemacandra ne samarasI bhAva kahA hai  / 56 ina cAroM dharmadhyAna ke prakAroM
meM kramazaH zarIra, akSara, sarvajJa va niraJjana siddha kA cintana kiyA jAtA
hai| sthUla se sUkSma kI ora bar3hA jAtA hai| yaha dhyAna sabhI prANI nahIM kara
skte| sAdhaka hI isa dhyAna ke adhikArI haiN| dharmadhyAna se mana meM sthairya,
pavitratA A jAne se vaha sAdhaka Age calakara zukladhyAna kA bhI adhikArI bana
sakatA hai| I dhyAna kA cauthA prakAra "zukla" dhyAna hai| yaha AtmA kI atyanta
vizuddha avasthA hai| zruta ke AdhAra se mana kI Atyantika sthiratA aura yoga kA
nirodha zukladhyAna hai| yaha dhyAna kaSAyoM ke upazAnta hone para hotA hai|
yaha dhyAna vahI sAdhaka kara sakatA hai jo samatAbhAva meM lIna hoM57 aura
vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhanana vAlA ho  /  58 48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55. 56.
57. 58. yogazAstra 7/8 yogasAra- 98 yogasAra prAbhRta yogazataka jJAnArNava -
35-1,2 jJAnArNava-35/7-8 ahaMto rUpamAlamvya dhyAnaM rUpasthamucyate yogazAstra
9/7 ka- jJAnArNava 37 16 kha- yogazAstra 10/1 yogazAstra 10/3, 4 yogazataka 90
yogazAstra 11/2 [28]

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text describes four types of Shukla Dhyana (meditation) in Jainism,
outlining their increasing intensity from the perspective of Yoga:  (1)
**Pṛthaktva-śruta-savicāra:** This meditation involves contemplation of the
various aspects (paryāya) of a single substance (dravya) based on scriptural
knowledge (śruta). The meditator shifts their focus between the meaning (artha),
the word (śabda), and the physical postures (yoga), making it a "savicāra" (with
thought) meditation.  (2) **Ekatva-śruta-avicāra:** This meditation, also based
on scriptural knowledge, focuses on a single aspect (paryāya) without shifting
between meaning, word, or posture. It is a "avicāra" (without thought)
meditation. This type of meditation leads to the cessation of all passions
(kaṣāya) and the destruction of the veils of knowledge (jñānāvaraṇa), perception
(darśanāvaraṇa), delusion (mohaniya), and obstacles (antarāya), ultimately
leading to the attainment of perfect knowledge (kevalajñāna) and perfect
perception (kevaladarśana).  (3) **Sūkṣma-kriyā-pratipatti:** This meditation
occurs when an Arhat (liberated soul) has only a very short lifespan remaining
(less than a moment). To equalize the remaining karmas (actions), a process of
"samudghāta" (equalization) takes place. This involves focusing on the subtle
physical postures (sūkṣma kāya yoga) while suppressing the grosser mental (bādar
mano yoga) and verbal (bādar vacana yoga) postures.  (4) **Utsanna-kriyā-
pratipatti:** This meditation marks the cessation of even the subtle physical
actions (sūkṣma kriyā) that remained in the previous stage. The Kevali
(liberated soul) attains the state of "śaileśī" (supreme liberation) within the
time it takes to pronounce five short vowels. They are completely liberated from
all karmas.  After discussing the four types of meditation, the text mentions
four types of "vikathā" (idle talk) that hinder spiritual progress. These are
considered "āśrava" (influx) because they lead to the accumulation of karmas.
Practitioners of "bhāṣāsamiti" (the practice of mindful speech) should avoid
these types of talk.  The text also mentions that the Buddhist tradition also
considers "vikathā" as "tiracchāna kathā" (unwholesome talk) and categorizes it
into various types.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zukladhyAna ke (1) pRthaktva-zruta-savicAra (2) ekatva zruta avicAra (3) sUkSma
kriyApratipatti (4) utpanna kriyApratipatti, ina prakAroM meM yoga kI dRSTi se
ekAgratA kI taratamatA batalAI gayI hai|59 mana, vacana, aura kAyA kA nirundhana
eka sAtha nahIM kiyA jaataa| prathama do prakAra chadmastha sAdhakoM ke lie haiM
aura zeSa do prakAra kevalajJAnI ke liye 60 inakA svarUpa isa prakAra hai (1)
pRthaktvazruta savicAra-isa dhyAna meM kisI eka dravya meM utpAda vyaya aura
dhrauvya Adi paryAyoM kA cintana zruta ko AdhAra banAkara kiyA jAtA hai| dhyAtA
kabhI artha kA cintana karatA hai, kabhI zabda kA i cana aura kAya ke yogoM meM
saMkramaNa karatA rahatA hai| eka zabda se dUsare zabda para, eka yoga se dUsare
yoga para jAne ke kAraNa hI vaha dhyAna "savicAra" kahalAtA hai|61 (2)
ekatvazruta avicAra-zruta ke AdhAra se artha, vyaJjana, yoga ke saMkramaNa se
rahita eka paryAya viSayaka dhyaan| pahale dhyAna kI taraha isameM Alambana kA
parivartana nahIM hotaa| eka hI paryAya ko dhyeya banAyA jAtA hai| isameM
samasta kaSAya zAnta ho jAte haiM aura AtmA jJAnAvaraNa, darzanAvaraNa, mohanIya
aura antarAya ko naSTa kara kevalajJAna, kevaladarzana ko prApta kara letA
hai|62 (3) sUkSmakriyApratipAtti-terahaveM guNasthAnavartI-arihanta kI Ayu yadi
kevala antarmuhUrta avaziSTa rahatI hai aura nAma, gotra, vedanIya ina tIna
karmoM kI sthiti Ayukarma se adhika hotI hai, taba unheM samasthitika karane ke
lie samudghAta hotA hai| usase Ayukarma kI sthiti ke barAbara sabhI karmoM kI
sthiti ho jAtI hai| usake pazcAt bAdara kAyayoga kA Alambana lekara bAdara
manoyoga evaM bAdara vacanayoga kA nirodha kiyA jAtA hai| usake pazcAt sUkSma
kAyayoga kA avalambana lekara bAdara kAyayoga kA nirodha kiyA jAtA hai| usake
bAda sUkSmakAyayoga kA avalambana aura sUkSmavacanayoga kA nirodha kiyA jAtA
hai| isa avasthA meM jo dhyAna prakriyA hotI hai, vaha zukladhyAna kahalAtA
hai|63 isa dhyAna meM manoyoga aura vacanayoga kA pUrNa rUpa se nirodha ho jAne
para bhI sUkSma kAyayoga kI zvAsocchvAsa Adi kriyA hI avazeSa rahatI hai| (4)
utsanna kriyApratipAtti-isa dhyAna meM jo sUkSma kriyAeM avaziSTa thIM, vaha bhI
nivRtta ho jAtI haiN| pA~ca hrasva svaroM ke uccAraNa karane meM jitanA samaya
lagatA hai, utane samaya meM kevalI bhagavAn zailezI avasthA ko prApta hote
haiN| aghAtiyA karmoM ko naSTa kara pUrNa rUpa se mukta ho jAte haiN|64 dhyAna
ke pazcAt cAra vikathAoM kA ullekha hai| saMyama bAdhaka vArtAlApa vikathA hai|
dharmakathA se nirjarA hotI hai to vikathA se karmabandha  /  isaliye use Azrava
meM sthAna diyA gayA hai| bhASAsamiti ke sAdhaka ko vikathA kA varjana karanA
caahie|65 jaina paramparA meM hI nahIM, bauddha paramparA meM bhI vikathA ko
tiracchAna kathA kahA hai aura usake aneka bheda batAye haiM -rAjakathA,
corakathA, mahAmAtyakathA, senAkathA, bhayakathA, yuddhakathA, annakathA,
pAnakathA, sthAnAMgasUtra sthA. 4 60. jJAnArNava-42-15-16 ka-yogazataka 11/5
kha-dhyAnazataka 7/7/78 62. ka-yogazAstra 11/12 kha-jJAnArNava 39-26 ka-
yogazAstra 11-53 se 55 jJAnArNava 39-47, 49  /  ka-uttarAdhyayana,a. 34 gA. 9
kha-AvazyakasUtra a. 4 61. 63. 64. 65. [29]

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vastrakatha, Shayanakatha, Malakatha, Gandhakatha, Jnathikatha, Yanakatha,
Gramakatha, Nigamakatha, Nagarakatha, Janapadakatha, Streekatha etc. The present
Samavaya mentions four Vikathas. In the Stananga, four types of each Vikatha are
also mentioned. And in the seventh place, seven Vikathas are also mentioned.
After the Vikathas, four Sanjnas are mentioned. Generally, Abhilasha is called
Sanjna. In other words, Asakti is Sanjna. Here, four types of Sanjna are
described. In the Stanangasutra, four causes of the occurrence of each Sanjna
are also mentioned. In the tenth place, ten types of Sanjna are also mentioned.
We have already written about the four types of Bandha. In this way, the fourth
Samavaya contains a wealth of material on Chintan. The fifth Samavaya: An
Analysis The fifth Samavaya mentions five Kriyas, five Mahavratas, five
Kamagunas, five Ashravadwaras, five Sanvardwaras, five Nirjarasthanas, five
Samitis, five Astikayas, five stars each of Rohini, Punarvasu, Hasta, Visakha,
Dhanishtha constellations, five Palyopamas and five Sagaropama of Narakas and
Devas, and five Bhavasiddhikas who know Bhava and Moksha. First of all, Kriyas
are mentioned. The meaning of Kriya is "Karan" and "Vyapaar". The "Kriyas" are
the efforts that become the cause of Karmabandha. In other words, it can be said
that the evil activities of mind, speech and body are called Kriya. Kriya is the
root of Karmabandha. It is the mother of worldly birth and death. The tendency
that causes the inflow of Karma is called Kriya. In the Stanangasutra, there is
also a discussion of the types of Kriya, namely Jiva-Kriya, Ajeeva Kriya and
then Jiva-Ajeeva Kriya. Here, mainly five Kriyas are mentioned. In the
Prajnapanasutra, there is also a description of twenty-five Kriyas. The
inquisitive should see those chapters. To be free from Kriyas, Mahavratas are
described. Mahavratas are the foundation of Shramanachar. The Agam literature
has analyzed Mahavratas in detail. In the Agamas, three traditions of Mahavratas
are found. In the Acharanga, three Mahavratas are mentioned, namely Ahimsa,
Satya, Bahirdadan. In the Stananga, Uttaradhyayayana and Digha Nikaya, four
Yamas are described. They are: Ahimsa, Satya, Achaurya and Bahirdadan. In
Buddhist literature, Chaturyam is mentioned in many places. In the Sanvar
Prakaran of the Prashnavyakaran, there is a discussion of Mahavratas. In the
Dashavaikalikasutra, each Mahavrat is analyzed in detail.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vastrakathA, zayanakathA, mAlAkathA, gandhakathA, jJAtikathA, yAnakathA,
grAmakathA, nigamakathA, nagarakathA, janapadakathA, strIkathA aadi|66 prastuta
samavAya meM cAra vikathAoM kA ullekha hai| sthAnAMga meM eka eka vikathA ke
cAra-cAra prakAra bhI batAye haiN| aura sAtaveM sthAna meM68 sAta vikathAoM kA
bhI ullekha prApta hotA hai| vikathAoM ke pazcAt cAra saMjJAoM kA ullekha hai|
sAmAnyataH abhilASA ko saMjJA kahate haiN| dUsare zabdoM meM Asakti saMjJA hai|
yahA~ para saMjJA ke cAra bhedoM kA nirUpaNa hai| sthAnAMgasUtra meM eka-eka
saMjJA ke utpanna hone ke cAra-cAra kAraNa bhI batAye haiN| dazaveM sthAna66 meM
saMjJA ke daza prakAra bhI batAye haiN| bandha ke cAra prakAroM ke sambandha meM
hama pUrva meM likha hI cuke haiN| isa taraha caturtha samavAya meM cintana kI
vipula sAmagrI vidyamAna hai| pAMcavA~ samavAya : eka vizleSaNa _ pAMcaveM
samavAya meM pAMca kriyA, pA~ca mahAvrata, pAMca kAmaguNa, pAMca AzravadvAra,
pAMca saMvaradvAra, pAMca nirjarAsthAna, pAMca samiti, pAMca astikAya, rohiNI,
punarvasu, hasta, vizAkhA, dhaniSThA nakSatroM ke pAMca-pAMca tAre, nArakoM aura
devoM kI pAMca palyopama aura pAMca sAgaropama kI sthiti tathA pAMca bhava kara
mokSa jAne vAle bhavasiddhika jIvoM kA ullekha hai| sarvaprathama kriyAoM kA
ullekha hai| kriyA kA artha "karaNa" aura "vyApAra" hai| karmabandha meM kAraNa
banane vAlI ceSTAeM"kriyA" haiN| dUsare zabdoM meM yoM kaha sakate haiM ki mana,
vacana aura kAyA ke duSTa vyApAra-vizeSa ko kriyA kahate haiN| kriyA karma-
bandha kI mUla hai| vaha saMsAra-janmamaraNa kI jananI hai| jisase karma kA
Azrava hotA hai, aisI pravRtti kriyA kahalAtI hai| sthAnAMgasUtra meM bhI kriyA
ke jIva-kriyA, ajIva kriyA aura phira jIva-ajIva kriyA ke bheda-prabhedoM kI
carcA hai| yahAM para mukhya rUpa se pA~ca kriyAoM kA ullekha hai|
prajJApanAsUtra meM paccIsa kriyAoM kA bhI varNana milatA hai| jijJAsu ko ve
prakaraNa dekhane caahie| kriyAoM se mukta hone ke lie mahAvratoM kA nirUpaNa
hai| mahAvrata zramaNAcAra ke mUla haiN| Agama sAhitya meM mahAvratoM ke
sambandha meM vistAra se vizleSaNa kiyA gayA hai| AgamoM meM mahAvratoM kI tIna
paramparAe~ milatI haiN| AcArAMga72 meM ahiMsA, satya, bahiddhAdAna ina tIna
mahAvratoM kA ullekha prApta hotA hai| sthAnAMga73, uttarAdhyayana aura
dIghanikAya5 meM cAra yAma kA varNana hai| ve ye haiM - ahiMsA, satya, acaurya
aura bhiddhaadaan| bauddha sAhitya meM aneka sthaloM para cAturyAma kA ullekha
huA hai| praznavyAkaraNa ke saMvara prakaraNa meM mahAvratoM kI carcA hai|
dazavaikAlikasUtra77 meM pratyeka mahAvrata kA vistRta vizleSaNa kiyA gayA hai|
66. 67. 68. 69. 70. aMguttaranikAya 10-69 sthAnAMgasUtra, caturtha sthAna, sUtra
282 sthAnAMga, sthA. 4, sUtra 569 sthAnAMga, sthA. 10, sUtra-751
sthAnAMgasUtra-21, 52 prajJApanAsUtra-22 AcArAMga 8/15 sthAnAGga 266
uttarAdhyayana 23/23 dIghanikAya praznavyAkaraNasUtra-6/10 daMzavaikAlikasUtra,
a. 4 72. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. [30]

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
To explain the nature of the Mahavrata, the Tattvarthasutra 79 and its nature
are highlighted. What is called Mahavrata in Jain literature is called Dasha
Kushala Dharma in Buddhist literature. They have included the Dasha Kushala
Dharmas as follows:  Kushala Dharma (1) Abstinence from Pranatipat and (9)
Vyapada (4) Mrishavaad (5) Pishunavachan (6) Parushavachan (7) Abstinence from
Sampralaap (2) Abstinence from Adattadaan (3) Abstinence from Mithyachar in Kama
(8) Abstinence from Amithya.  In the Bhagavati Sutra, in the commentary on
Pratyakhyan, the Mahavrata are also mentioned:  Mahavrata (1) Ahimsa (2) Satya
(3) Achaurya (4) Brahmacharya (5) Aparigraha  Ahimsa, Satya, Achaurya,
Brahmacharya and Aparigraha, these five Mahavrata, by stopping the source of
Asanaya, open the door to Sanaya. The sins of violence etc. are renounced for
life in the three Karana and three Yoga. In the Mahavrata, the Savadya Yogas are
completely renounced. Following the Mahavrata is like walking on the edge of a
sharp sword. The one who is restrained avoids the sensual pleasures of the
senses. He tries to destroy the karmas by stopping the Ashrava doors and through
Samvara and Nirjara.  After this, the Shastrakar has mentioned five Samitis.
Samyak Pravritti is called Samiti. 81 The desire of the Mumukhus is in the
auspicious Yogas. It is also called Samiti. 82 The five, Iryasamiti etc., are
called Samiti for this reason. After that, the Pancha Astikaya is described.
Pancha Astikaya is the contribution of Jain philosophy. No other philosophy
considers different substances as the medium of motion and rest. Vaisheshika
philosophy has considered Utksepan etc. as Karma, not as substance. Jain
philosophy has considered Dharma Astikaya as an independent substance for motion
and Adharma Astikaya for rest. The Jain philosophy's belief about Akash is also
special compared to other philosophies. Other philosophies have accepted
Lokakash but not Alokakash. The belief in Alokakash is a special feature of Jain
philosophy. The belief in Pudgal substance is also unique. Vaisheshika etc.
philosophies believe in separate atomic species of earth etc. substances. But
Jain philosophy includes earth etc. in one Pudgal substance. Each Pudgal atom
has touch, taste, smell and form. Similarly, there are not separate species of
these, but only one species. The atom of earth can change into the form of water
and the atom of water can transform into fire. Similarly, Jain philosophy has
also considered sound as Pudgalik.  Jain philosophy also has its own special
belief regarding the Jiva. It considers the worldly soul as Swadehapariman.
Apart from Jain philosophy, no other philosophy considers the soul as
Swadehapariman.  In this way, the fifth Samavay reflects on various aspects
related to Jain philosophy.  78. 79. 80. 81. 82. Bhagavati Sutra, Shatak 7,
Udde. 2, p. 175 Tattvarthasutra - A. 7 Majjhimanikaya - Sammadiṭṭho Suttanta 1.
9 Uttaradhyayanasutra 24 / Gatha - 26. Sthananga Sta. 8, Sutra 603 commentary
[31]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svarUpa ko batAne ke lie mahAvratoM kA ullekha hai  /  tattvArthasUtra 79 aura
usake svarUpa para prakAza DAlA gayA hai| jise jaina sAhitya meM mahAvrata kahA
hai use hI bauddha sAhitya meM daza kuzaladharma kahA hai| unhoMne daza
kuzaladharmoM kA samAveza isa prakAra kiyA hai kuzaladharma (1) prANAtipAta evaM
(9) vyApAda se virati (4) mRSAvAda (5) pizunavacana (6) paruSavacana (7)
saMpralApa se virati (2) adattAdAna se virati (3) kAma meM mithyAcAra se virati
(8) amithyA virati  /  bhagavatI sUtra meM pratyAkhyAna ke vyAkhyAsAhitya meM
bhI mahAvratoM ke mahAvrata (1) ahiMsA (2) satya (3) acaurya (4) brahmacarya (5)
aparigraha ahiMsA, satya, acaurya, brahmacarya aura aparigraha ye pA~ca
mahAvrata asaMyama ke srota ko rokakara saMyama ke dvAra ko udghATita karate
haiN| hiMsAdi pApoM kA jIvana bhara ke liye tIna karaNa aura tIna yoga meM tyAga
kiyA jAtA hai| mahAvratoM meM sAvadya yogoM kA pUrNa rUpa se tyAga hotA hai|
mahAvratoM kA pAlana karanA tIkSNa talavAra kI dhAra para calane ke sadRza hai|
jo saMyamI hotA hai vaha indriyoM ke kAmaguNoM se bacatA hai| AzravadvAroM kA
nirodha kara saMvara aura nirjarA se karmoM ko naSTa karane kA prayatna karatA
hai| isake pazcAt zAstrakAra ne pAMca samitiyoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| samyak
pravRtti ko samiti kahA gayA hai  / 81 mumukSuoM kI zubha yogoM meM pravRtti
hotI hai| use bhI samiti kahA hai|82 IryAsamiti Adi pAMca ko isIlie samiti sajJA
dI hai| usake pazcAt paMca astikAya kA nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| paMcAstikAya
jaina darzana kI apanI dena hai| kisI bhI darzana ne gati aura sthiti ke
mAdhyama ke rUpa meM bhinna dravya nahIM mAnatA haiN| vaizeSika darzana ne
utkSepaNa Adi ko dravya na mAnakara karma mAnA hai| jainadarzana ne gati ke lie
dharmAstikAya aura sthiti ke lie adharmAstikAya svatantra dravya mAne haiN|
jainadarzana kI AkAza viSayaka mAnyatA bhI anya darzanoM se vizeSatA liye hue
hai| anya darzanoM ne lokAkAza ko avazya mAnA hai para alokAkAza ko nahIM
maanaa| alokAkAza kI mAnyatA jainadarzana kI apanI vizeSatA hai| pudgala dravya
kI mAnyatA bhI vilakSaNatA liye hue hai| vaizeSika Adi darzana pRthvI Adi
dravyoM ke pRthakpRthak jAtIya paramANu mAnate haiN| kintu jainadarzana pRthvI
Adi kA eka pudgala dravya meM hI samAveza karatA hai| pratyeka pudgala paramANu
meM sparza, rasa, gandha aura rUpa rahate haiN| isI prakAra inakI pRthak-pRthak
jAtiyAM nahIM, apitu eka hI jAti hai| pRthvI kA paramANu pAnI ke rUpa meM badala
sakatA hai aura pAnI kA paramaNu agni meM pariNata ho sakatA hai| sAtha hI
jainadarzana ne zabda ko bhI paudgalika mAnA hai| jIva ke sambandha meM bhI
jainadarzana kI apanI vizeSa mAnyatA  /  vaha saMsArI AtmA ko svadehaparimANa
mAnatA hai| jainadarzana ke atirikta anya kisI bhI darzana ne AtmA ko
svadehaparimANa nahIM mAnA hai  /  isa taraha pAMcaveM samavAya meM jainadarzana
sambandhI vividha pahaluoM para cintana kiyA gayA hai| 78. 79. 80. 81. 82.
bhagavatIsUtra, zataka 7, udde. 2, pR. 175 tatvArthasUtra - a. 7 majjhimanikAya
- sammAdiTTho suttanta 1  /  9 uttarAdhyayana 24 / gAthA - 26  /  sthAnAMga
sthA. 8, sUtra 603 kI TIkA [31]

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sixth Samvaya: An Analysis  The Sixth Samvaya describes the six Leshyas,
six Jivanikayas, six external austerities, six internal austerities, six
Chadyasthika Samudghatas, six Arthaavagrahas, six stars each in the Kritika and
Ashlesha constellations, six Palyopama and six Sagaropama conditions of Narakas
and Devas, and how many beings will attain liberation after experiencing six
Bhavas.  This Samvaya first mentions Leshyas.  Stanaanga 83, Uttaraadhyaayana 4,
and Prajnaapana 85 elaborate on Leshyas.  After the Aagamyuga, the literature of
the Darshanik Yuga also extensively discussed Leshyas.  Modern-day scientists
are also contemplating them as Aabhamandalas.  Generally, a being generates a
specific environment due to the influence of mental states like yoga and, more
specifically, due to the influence of Kashayas.  This environment is called
Leshya.  Uttaraadhyaayana uses the term "Purva Karma" for Leshya, meaning Karma-
Shleshya.  The cause of Karma-bandha is the Karma-Leshya of emotions like Raga,
etc.  Thus, Leshyas are of two types: Bhaava and Dravya.  Many Acharyas call the
tendency towards Kashayas-influenced yoga as Leshya.  From this perspective,
Leshya can only be present in a person with a false identity, but Shukla Leshya
is also present in a Kevali who is in the 13th Gunasthana and is a Sayogi.
Therefore, some call the tendency towards yoga as Leshya.  Kashayas infuse
intensity, etc., into it.  Acharya Jinadas Ganimahattar clearly stated that
Leshyas cause the attachment of Karmas to the soul.  There have been different
opinions among thinkers regarding Dravya Leshya.  According to many
knowledgeable people, Dravya Leshya is made up of Karma-Paramanus.  However, it
is different from the eight Karma-Anus.  According to others, Dravya Leshya is
in the form of a bound Karma flow.  According to a third opinion, it is an
independent Dravya.  This Samvaya also mentions six external austerities and six
internal austerities.  The first external austerity is Anashan Tapa, which is
more severe than other austerities.  Anashan purifies the body and mind.  Like
Agni-snaan, it removes Karma-mal and makes the soul, which is like gold, shine.
The second external austerity is Unodari.  It is also called Avamoudarya.  In
Dravya Unodari, the amount of food is reduced, and in Bhaava Unodari, the amount
of Kashayas is reduced.  Dravya Unodari keeps the body healthy, and Bhaava
Unodari develops internal qualities.  Searching for food by acquiring various
things is called Bhikshachari.  There are many sub-categories of Bhikshachari.
A Bhikshu has to avoid many faults while accepting alms.  The taste that makes
one feel happy about food is called Rasa.  Sweet, etc., Rasas make food
delicious.  Rasas are stimulating.  A Sadhak takes food according to his needs,
but not for taste!  Sucking and chewing food for taste is a fault.  Avoiding
these faults of Rasa is called Rasaparityaag.  Causing pain to the body is
called Kayaklesh.  A Sadhak considers the soul and body as separate.  Acharya
Bhadrabahu  83. 84. 85. 86. 87. 88.  Stanaangasutra - Su. 132, 151, 221, 319,
504 Uttaraadhyaayanasutra - A. 34 Prajnaapanasutra - Pad 17 Leshyaabhiraatmani
Karmaani Sanshlishyanti Aavashyakachurni K - Uttaraadhyaayana 30/25 Kh -
Stanaanga - 6 K - Pindaniryukti - 92 to 96 Kh - Uttaraadhyaayana 24/12 - [32]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA samavAya: eka vizleSaNa chaThe samavAya meM chaha lezyA, SaT jIvanikAya,
chaha bAhya tapa, chaha Abhyantara tapa, chaha chAdyAsthika samudghAta, chaha
arthAvagraha, kRtikA aura AzleSA nakSatroM ke chaha-chaha tAre, nAraka va devoM
kI chaha palyopama tathA chaha sAgaropama kI sthiti kA varNana kiyA gayA hai
aura kitane hI jIva chaha bhava grahaNa karake mukta hoMge, yaha batalAyA gayA
hai| isa samavAya meM sarvaprathama lezyA kA ullekha hai  /  sthAnAMga 83,
uttarAdhyayana4 aura prajJApanA 85 meM lezyA ke sambandha meM vistAra se
nirUpaNa hai| Agamayuga ke pazcAt dArzanika yuga ke sAhitya meM bhI lezyA ke
sambandha meM vyApaka rUpa se cintana kiyA gayA hai| Adhunika yuga ke vaijJAnika
bhI AbhAmaNDala ke rUpa meM isa para cintana kara rahe haiM  /  sAmAnya rUpa se
mana Adi yogoM se anuraJjita tathA vizeSa rUpa se kaSAyAnurajjita Atma-pariNAmoM
se jIva eka viziSTa paryAvaraNa samutpanna karatA hai vaha paryAvaraNa hI lezyA
hai| uttarAdhyayana meM lezyA ke pUrva karma zabda kA prayoga huA hai| arthAt
karma zlezyA  /  karmabandha ke hetu rAgAdibhAva karmalezyA hai| yoM lezyAeM
bhAva aura dravya ke rUpa se do prakAra kI haiN| kitane hI AcArya
kaSAyAnurajjita yoga pravRtti ko lezyA kahate haiN| isa dRSTi se lezyA
chadmastha vyakti ko hI ho sakatI hai para zukla lezyA terahaveM guNasthAnavartI
sayogI kevalI meM bhI hotI hai| ataH koI-koI yoga kI pravRtti ko lezyA kahate
haiN| kaSAya se usameM tIvratA Adi kA sanniveza hotA hai| AcArya jinadAsa gaNi
mahattara ne spaSTa kahA hai ki lezyAoM ke dvArA AtmA para karmoM kA saMzleSa
hotA hai  /  dravyalezyA ke sambandha meM cintakoM ke vibhinna mata rahe haiN|
kitane hI vijJoM ke mata se lezyA dravya karma-paramANu se banA huA hai| para
vaha ATha karma aNuoM se bhinna hai| dUsare vijJoM ke mata se lezyA dravya
badhyamAna karma pravAha rUpa hai| tIsare abhimata ke anusAra vaha svatantra
dravya hai| prastuta samavAya meM chaha bAhya tapa aura chaha Abhyantara tapoM
kA bhI ullekha hai| prathama bAhyatapa anazana tapa hai, jo anya tarSo se adhika
kaThora hai| anazana se zArIrika, mAnasika vizuddhi hotI hai| yaha agnisnAna kI
taraha karma - mala ko dUra kara AtmA rUpI svarNa ko camakAtA hai| dUsarA
bAhyatapa UnodarI hai| use avamaudarya bhI kahA hai| dravya UnodarI meM AhAra kI
mAtrA kama kI jAtI hai aura bhAva UnodarI meM kaSAya kI mAtrA kama kI jAtI haiN|
dravya UnodarI se zarIra svastha rahatA hai aura bhAva UnodarI se Antarika guNoM
kA vikAsa hotA hai| vividha prakAra ke abhigraha karake AhAra kI gaveSaNA
karanA. bhikSAcarI hai| bhikSAcarI ke aneka bheda-prabhedoM kA ullekha hai|87
bhikSu ko aneka doSoM ko TAla kara bhikSA grahaNa karanI hotI hai| 88 jisase
bhojana meM prIti utpanna hotI ho, vaha rasa hai  /  madhura Adi rasoM se
bhojana meM sarasatA AtI hai| rasa uttejanA utpanna karane vAle hote haiN|
sAdhaka AvazyakatAnusAra AhAra grahaNa karatA hai kintu svAda ke lie nahIM!
svAda ke lie AhAra ko cUsanA, cabAnA doSa hai| una rasa ke doSoM se bacanA
rasaparityAga hai  /  zarIra ko kaSTa denA kAyakleza hai| sAdhaka AtmA aura
zarIra ko pRthak mAnatA hai| AcArya bhadrabAhU 83. 84. 85. 86. 87. 88.
sthAnAMgasUtra- sU. 132, 151, 221, 319, 504 uttarAdhyayanasUtra-a. 34
prajJApanAsUtra - pada 17 lezyAbhirAtmani karmANi saMzliSyanta AvazyakacUrNi ka-
uttarAdhyayana 30/25 kha- sthAnAMga-6 ka - piNDaniryukti - 92 se 96 kha-
uttarAdhyayana 24/12 - [32]

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It has been said that this body is different, the soul is different. The seeker,
with this kind of knowledge of the elements, renounces the attachment to the
body which gives rise to sorrow and distress. 81 In the **Stanaanga**, it is
said that **Kayotsarga**, meditation with intense concentration, holding an
image, etc., are many types of bodily austerities. 10 Thus, there are fourteen
types of bodily austerities. 61 The process of making the soul, which is
immersed in the external, immersed in its own nature, is called **Prati-
sanleena**. In the **Bhaagvati**, 62 it is said that there are four types of
**Prati-sanleena**: **Indriya-prati-sanleena**, **Kashaya-prati-sanleena**,
**Yoga-prati-sanleena**, and **Vivikta-shayana-asana-sevana**. There are six
external austerities. 93 44 There are six internal austerities. The first is
**Prayashchitta**. According to Acharya Akalanka, the word "**Praya**" means
offense, and "**Chitta**" means purification. The action that purifies the
offense is **Prayashchitta**. 14 **Prayashchitta** cuts off sin. It removes sin.
95 There is a difference between **Prayashchitta** and punishment.
**Prayashchitta** is undertaken voluntarily. Punishment is not taken with
remorse for the sin, it is taken out of compulsion. In the **Stanaanga**, ten
types of **Prayashchitta** are mentioned. **Vinaya** is the second internal
austerity. It is a spiritual quality. The word **Vinaya** encompasses three
meanings: discipline, self-control, good conduct, and humility. **Vinaya**
removes the eight karmas. In the **Pravachana-sara-uddhar**, it is written that
**Vinaya** is that which removes the eight karmas, which are the enemies that
give rise to distress. 96 In the **Bhaagvati**, 97 the **Stanaanga**, 18 the
**Aupapatik**, 19 seven types of **Vinaya** are mentioned: **Jnana-vinaya**,
**Darshan-vinaya**, **Charitra-vinaya**, **Mano-vinaya**, **Vachan-vinaya**,
**Kaya-vinaya**, and **Lokopachara-vinaya**. **Vinaya** is not flattery, it is
natural respect for good qualities. **Vyayavritta** austerity is to serve those
things that lead to the practice of Dharma. In the **Bhaagvati**, 100 ten types
of **Vyayavritta** are mentioned. The study of the scriptures with proper
methods is **Swadhyaya** austerity. 101 Self-reflection and contemplation are
also **Swadhyaya**. Just as food is necessary for the body, so too is study
necessary for the development of the intellect. The Vedic sages 102 also said,
"**Tapo hi Swadhyaya**," and they gave the inspiration that one should never be
negligent in **Swadhyaya**. 103 Acharya Patanjali says that through
**Swadhyaya**, one begins to see the Ishta Devata directly. Five types of
**Swadhyaya** are mentioned: **Vachana**, **Pricchana**, **Parivartana**,
**Anupreksha**, and **Dharmakatha**. 104 The state of concentration of the mind
89. 90. 91. 92. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97. 98. 99. 100. 101. 102. 103. 104. Necessary
clarification, 1547 **Stanaanga Sutra**, Sta. 7, Su-554 **Ukvai Sutra**,
**Samavasaran Adhikar**, **Bhaagvati** 25/7 **Uttaraadhyaayana Sutra**, A. 30
**Tattvarth Rajavarttika** 9/22/1 **Panchashak Satiik Varnan** 26/3 **Pravachana
Sara Uddhar Vritti** **Bhaagvati** 25/7 **Stanaanga**, Sta. 7 **Aupapatik** -
**Tapa Varnan** a. **Bhaagvati Sutra** - 35/7 b. **Stanaanga** - 10 **Stanaanga
Abhaydev Vritti** 5-3-465 **Taittiriya Aranyak** 2/14 **Taittiriya Upanishad** -
1-11-1 a. **Bhaagvati** 25/7 b. **Stanaanga** 5 [33]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ne kahA hai ki yaha zarIra anya hai, AtmA anya hai| sAdhaka isa prakAra kI
tattvabuddhi se duHkha aura kleza ko dene vAlI zarIra kI mamatA kA tyAga karatA
hai 81 sthAnAMga meM kAyotsarga karanA, utkaTuka AsAna se dhyAna karanA, pratimA
dhAraNa karanA Adi kAyakleza ke aneka prakAra batAye haiN| 10 yoM kAyakleza ke
prakArAntara se caudaha bheda bhI batAye haiN|61 parabhAva meM lIna AtmA ko
svabhAva meM lIna banAne kI prakriyA pratisaMlInatA hai| bhagavatI meM62 isake
indriyapratisaMlInatA, kaSAyapratisaMlInatA yogapratisaMlInatA aura
viviktazayanAsanasevanA, ye cAra bheda kiye haiN| chaha bAhyatapa haiM  /  93 44
chaha Abhyantara tapoM meM prathama prAyazcita hai| AcArya akalaMka ke anusAra
aparAdha kA nAma "prAya:" hai| aura "citta" kA artha zodhana hai| jisa kriyA se
aparAdha kI zuddhi ho, vaha prAyazcitta hai 14 prAyazcitta" se pApa kA chedana
hotA hai| vaha pApa ko dUra karatA hai  /  95 prAyazcitta aura daNDa meM antara
hai| prAyazcitta svecchA se grahaNa kiyA jatA hai  /  daNDa meM pApa ke prati
glAni nahIM hotI, vaha vivazatA se liyA jAtA hai| sthAnAMga meM prAyazcitta ke
daza prakAra batAye haiN| vinaya dUsarA Abhyantara tapa hai| yaha Atmika guNa
hai  /  vinaya zabda tIna arthoM ko apane meM sameTe hue haiM  /  anuzAsana,
AtmasaMyama- sadAcAra, namratA vinaya se aSTa karma dUra hote haiN|
pravacanasAroddhAra meM likhA hai ki kleza samutpanna karane vAle aSTakarma -
zatru ko jo dUra karatA hai, vaha vinaya hai  /  96 bhagavatI 97 sthAnAMge 18
aupapAtika 19 meM vinaya ke jJAnavinaya, darzanavinaya, cAritravinaya,
manovinaya, vacanavinaya, kAyavinaya, lokopacAravinaya, ye sAta prakAra batAye
haiN| vinaya cApalUsI nahIM, sadguNoM ke prati sahaja sammAna hai| vaiyAvRttya
tapa dharmasAdhanA meM pravRtti karane vAlI vastuoM se sevA karanA hai  /
bhagavatI 100 meM vaiyAvRttya ke daza prakAra batAye haiN| sat zAstroM kA vidhi
sahita adhyayana karanA svAdhyAya tapa hai  / 101 Atmacintana, manana bhI
svAdhyAya hai  /  zarIra ke lie bhojana Avazyaka hai, usI prakAra buddhi ke
vikAsa ke lie adhyayana Avazyaka hai| vaidika maharSiyoM ne 102 bhI "tapo hi
svAdhyAya:" kahA hai aura yaha preraNA dI hai ki svAdhyAya meM kabhI pramAda
mata kro| 103 AcArya pataMjali kahate haiM- svAdhyAya se iSTa devatA kA
sAkSAtkAra hone lagatA hai| svAdhyAya ke vAcanA, pRcchanA, parivartanA,
anuprekSA aura dharmakathA, ye pA~ca prakAra batAye haiM  /  104 mana kI ekAgra
avasthA 89. 90. 91. 92. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97. 98. 99. 100. 101. 102. 103. 104.
Avazyaka niryukti, 1547 sthAnAMgasUtra, sthA. 7, sU-554 ukvAIsUtra samavasaraNa
adhikAra bhagavatI 25/7 uttarAdhyayanasUtra, a. 30 tattvArtharAjavArttika 9/22/1
paMcAzaka saTIka vivaraNa 26/3 pravacanasAroddhAravRtti bhagavatI 25/7 sthAnAMga
sthA. 7 aupapAtika- tapavarNana ka. bhagavatI sUtra - 35 / 7 kha sthAnAMga - 10
sthAnAMga abhayadevavRtti 5-3-465 taittirIya AraNyaka 2/14 taitirIya
upaniSad-1-11-1 ka. bhagavatI 25/7 kha sthAnAMga 5 [33]

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Meditation**  Meditation is the state of the soul being absorbed in its own
nature, detached from external objects. **Vyuutsarga** is a specific type of
**utsarga**. Acharya Akalank'05 defines **vyuutsarga** as the state of being
free from attachment, non-attachment, fearlessness, and the abandonment of the
desire for life. **Vyuutsarga** is the method of surrendering oneself to self-
realization. There are four types of **vyuutsarga**: **ganavyuutsarga**,
**sharirvayuutsarga**, **upadhivyuutsarga**, and **bhaktapanavyuutsarga**. 06
**Sharirvayuutsarga** is also known as **kayoutsarga**. Bhagwan Mahavira called
the seeker "**abhikkhanam kaoussagkari**" - one who repeatedly performs
**kayoutsarga**. The seeker who becomes proficient in **kayoutsarga** becomes
proficient in all **vyuutsarga** austerities. The scriptures have highlighted
the nature of Jain austerities through external and internal austerities. Thus,
the sixth **samavay** discusses various topics.  **Seventh Samavay: An
Analysis**  The seventh **samavay** discusses seven types of fear, seven types
of **samudghat**, Bhagwan Mahavira's seven-hand-high body, seven **vardhadhar**
mountains in Jambudvipa, seven islands, seven karmas causing pain in the twelfth
**gunasthan**, seven stars and constellations of Magha, Krittika, etc. It
mentions seven **palyopam** and seven **sagaropama** states of narakas and
devas. It first describes seven fears: **ihlokabhay**, **paralokabhay**,
**adanabhay**, **akasmatbhay**, **ajivicabhay**, **maranabhay**, and
**ashlokabhay**. In the past, fear of heterodox beings was greater. But today,
scientific villains have instilled so much fear in the human mind that even
great national leaders' hearts are pounding with fear of when the atomic bomb,
hydrogen bomb will explode, or when World War III will break out! Just as the
Jain Agam literature mentions **bhayasthan**, Buddhist literature also mentions
**bhayasthan**. 07 There, they describe various types of fear: fear of caste-
birth, old age, disease, death, fire, water, king, thief, **atmanuvaad** - the
thought of one's own misconduct, **paranuvaadabhay** - the fear that others will
call me a wrongdoer, etc. Thus, the seventh **samavay** describes this.
**Eighth Samavay: An Analysis**  The eighth **samavay** discusses eight
**madasthan**, eight **pravachanamata**, eight **yojan** high **chaitavriksh**
of **vanavyantar** devas, etc., eight times of **kevali samudghat**, eight
**ganadhar** of Bhagwan Parshva, eight constellations of the moon, eight
**palyopam** and **sagaropama** states of narakas and devas, and those who
attain liberation through eight **bhav**.  First, it describes **jatimand**,
**kulmand**, etc. **mad**. Like **samayavang**, **sthanaang**108 also mentions
eight **mad**. **Aavashyakasutra** advises the seeker to be free from these
eight **mad**. **Sutrakritang**09 clearly instructs that ego makes a person
disrespect others, causing him to wander in the world. Bhagwan Mahavira's soul
had **jati** and **kul** **mad** in the **marichi** **bhav**, resulting in his
birth in the womb of Devananda. Therefore, one should avoid **madasthan**.
**Anguttaranikaya**110 mentions three types of **mad**.105.
**Tattvarthrajavartika**, 9/26/10 106. **Bhagavati** 25/7 107.
**Anguttaranikaya** 4/119/5-7 108. **Sthanaang** sth. 8 109.
**Sutrakritang**-1/2/1-2 110. **Anguttaranikaya**-3/39 [34]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhyAna hai| dhyAna meM AtmA paravastu se haTakara sva-svarUpa meM lIna hotA
hai| vyutsarga-viziSTa utsarga vyutsarga hai| AcArya akalaMka'05 ne vyutsarga kI
paribhASA karate hue likhA hai-ni:saMgatA, anAsakti, nirbhayatA aura jIvana kI
lAlasA kA tyAga, vyutsarga hai| AtmasAdhanA ke lie apane Apa ko utsarga karane
kI vidhi vyutsarga hai| vyutsarga ke gaNavyutsarga, zarIravyutsarga
upadhivyutsarga aura bhaktapAnavyutsarga ye cAra bheda haiN|06 zarIravyutsarga
kA nAma hI kAyotsarga hai| bhagavAn mahAvIra ne sAdhaka ko "abhikkhaNaM
kAussaggakArI" abhIkSaNa-puna:punaH kAyotsarga karane vAlA kahA hai| jo sAdhaka
kAyotsarga meM siddha ho jAtA hai, vaha sampUrNa vyutsarga tapa meM siddha ho
jAtA hai| bAhya aura Abhyantara tapa ke dvArA zAstrakAra ne jainadharma ke tapa
ke svarUpa ko ujAgara kiyA hai| isa prakAra chaThe samavAya meM vividha viSayoM
kA nirUpaNa hai| sAtavAM samavAya : eka vizleSaNa sAtaveM sthAna meM sAta
prakAra ke bhaya, sAta prakAra ke samudghAta, bhagavAn mahAvIra kA sAta hAtha
U~cA zarIra, jambUdvIpa meM sAta varSadhara parvata, sAta dvIpa, bArahaveM
guNasthAna meM sAta karmoM kA vedana, maghA, kRtikA, nakSatroM ke sAta-sAta tAre
va nakSatra batAye haiN| nArakoM aura devoM kI sAta palyopama tathA sAta
sAgaropama sthiti kA ullekha hai| isameM sarvaprathama sAta bhaya kA varNana
hai| ihalokabhaya, paralokabhaya, AdAnabhaya, akasmAtbhaya, AjIvikAbhAya,
maraNabhaya aura ashlokbhy| atItakAla meM vijAtIya jIvoM kA bhaya adhika thaa|
para Aja vaijJAnika khalanAyakoM ne mAnava ke antarmAnasa meM itanA adhika bhaya
kA saMcAra kara diyA hai ki bar3e-bar3e rASTranAyakoM ke hRdaya bhI dhar3aka
rahe haiM ki kaba aNubama, udjana bama kA visphoTa ho jAye, yA tRtIya
vizvayuddha ho jAye! jaina Agama sAhitya meM jisa taraha bhayasthAna kA ullekha
huA hai, usI taraha bauddha sAhitya meM bhayasthAnoM kA ullekha hai|07 vahA~
jAti-janma, jarA, vyAdhi, maraNa, agni, udaka, rAja, cora, AtmAnuvAda-svayaM ke
durAcAra kA vicAra, parAnuvAdabhaya-dUsare mujhe durAcArI kaheMge, Adi vividha
bhayoM ke bheda batAye haiN| isa taraha sAtaveM sthAna meM varNana hai| AThavAM
samavAya : eka vizleSaNa AThaveM samavAya meM ATha madasthAna, ATha
pravacanamAtA, vANavyantara devoM ke ATha yojana UMce caityavRkSa Adi, kevalI
samudghAta ke ATha samaya, bhagavAn pArzva ke ATha gaNadhara, candramA ke ATha
nakSatra, nArakoM aura devoM kI ATha palyopama va sAgaropama kI sthiti ATha
bhava karake mokSa jAne vAloM kA varNana hai| sarvaprathama isameM jAtimada,
kulamada Adi madoM kA varNana hai| samayAvAMga kI taraha sthAnAMga108 meM bhI
ATha madoM kA ullekha AyA hai| AvazyakasUtra meM sAdhaka ko yaha saMketa kiyA
gayA hai ki ATha mada se vaha nivRtta hove| sUtrakRtAMga09 meM spaSTa nirdeza
hai ki ahaMkAra se vyakti dUsaroM kI avajJA karatA hai, jisase use saMsAra meM
paribhramaNa karanA par3atA hai| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke jIva ne marIci ke bhava
meM jAti aura kula mada kiyA thA phalasvarUpa unheM devAnandA kI kukSi meM AnA
pdd'aa| ataH madasthAnoM se bacanA caahie| aMguttaranikAya meM110 meM tIna
prakAra ke mada batAye haiM105. tattvArtharAjavArtika, 9/26/10 106. bhagavatI
25/7 107. aMguttaranikAya 4/119/5-7 108. sthAnAMga sthA. 8 109.
sUtrakRtAMga-1/2/1-2 110. aMguttaranikAya-3/39 [34]

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Youth, health and vitality. After the praise, the description of the eight
Pravachanmatas is given. The twenty-fourth study of Uttaradhyayanasutra is
famous by the name of Pravachanmata. They are also called Pravachanmata in
Bhagavati Sutra 11 and Stananga 112. All twelve angas are included in these
eight Pravachanmatas.213 These Pravachanmatas are in the form of character.
Without character, there is no knowledge, no vision.214 The twelve angas contain
a detailed description of knowledge, vision and character. Therefore, the twelve
angas are the vast form of Pravachanmata. The dignity of a mother is
unparalleled in worldly life. Similarly, these eight Pravachanmatas are the
Jagadamba of the spiritual world.15 The benefit of these eight Pravachanmatas in
spiritual life is infinite times greater than the benefit of a mother in worldly
life. By following them properly, the seeker becomes free from karma. Modern
historians consider Lord Parshva to be a historical figure.16 The names of the
eight main disciples of Lord Parshva are also mentioned in it. In this way, the
eighth Samavay contains a collection of thought-provoking material. Ninth
Samavay: An Analysis The ninth Samavay describes the nine secrets of celibacy,
the study of nine celibacies, Lord Parshva was nine hands high, the Abhijit
constellation, etc., the Sudharma assembly of Ratnaprabha, Vanavyantar Devas is
nine yojanas high, the nine natures of Darshanavaran karma, the nine palyopama
and nine sagaropama of Narakas and Devas, and the nine bhava karmas of those who
go to moksha. First of all, the nine secrets of celibacy are mentioned in this
Samavay. The means and methods that the Lord has called samadhi and mukti for
the protection of celibacy are called bad in the vernacular. Just as a gardener
builds a fence of thorns to protect the plants in his garden, similarly, a fence
is absolutely necessary in the field of sadhana to protect the celibacy plant.
The glory and dignity of celibacy is unparalleled. "Tam Bham Bhagavanta"117 Just
as the Tirthankaras are the best among all the Shramans, similarly, celibacy is
the greatest among all the vows. The seeker who has fully worshipped one
celibacy has worshipped all the vows. A scholar has written
"Bastiindriyamansamupashmo Brahmacharyam". Celibacy is called the peace of the
generative organ, the group of senses and the mind. The word Brahma has three
main meanings - semen, soul and knowledge. The word Charya also has three
meanings - Charya, protection and Raman! In this way, there are three meanings
of celibacy. Celibacy purifies the soul. Acharya Patanjali has written -
Brahmacharyapratisthayan Atmalabha:118 By fully practicing celibacy, one gets
unparalleled mental power and physical strength. According to Atharvaveda 19,
celibacy leads to the attainment of brilliance, patience, courage and knowledge.
In this way, celibacy leads to the development of all three types of spiritual,
mental and physical. A beautiful description of the samadhisthan and
asamadhisthan of celibacy is found in Uttaradhyayanasutra 12° and also in
Buddhist texts. 111. 112. 113. 114. 115. 116. 117. 118. 119. 120. Bhagavati
Sutra-256 || p. 72 Stananga Sutra-Sta. 8 Uttaradhyayanasutra-A. 24 || 3
Uttaradhyayanasutra-A. 28.29 Nandi Sutra Staviravali Gatha-1 Lord Parshva-A
Critical Study, Author-Shri Devendramuni Shastri Prashnavyakaran Sutra-
Sanvardwar Patanjali Yogadarshan-2-38 Atharvaveda-15. 5. 17
Uttaradhyayanasutra-A. 16 [35]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yauvana, Arogya aura jiivitmd| mada ke pazcAt aSTa pravacanamAtAoM kA varNana
hai| uttarAdhyayana kA caubIsavAM adhyayana, pravacanamAtA ke nAma se hI vizruta
hai| bhagavatIsUtra 11 aura sthAnAMga112 meM bhI inheM pravacanamAtA kahA hai|
ina aSTa pravacanamAtAoM meM sampUrNa dvAdazAMgI samAviSTa hai|213 ye
pravacanamAtAeM cAritrarUpA haiN| cAritra binA jJAna, darzana ke nahIM hotaa|214
dvAdazAMgI meM jJAna, darzana aura cAritra kA hI vistRta varNana hai| ataH
dvAdazAMgI pravacana mAtA kA virAT rUpa hai| laukika jIvana meM mAtA kI garimA
apUrva hai| vaise hI yaha aSTa pravacanamAtAeM adhyAtma jagat kI jagadambA
haiN|15 laukika jIvana meM mAtA kA jitanA upakAra hai usase bhI ananta guNita
upakAra AdhyAtmika jIvana meM ina aSTa pravacanamAtAoM kA hai| inakA savidhi
pAlana kara sAdhaka karmoM se mukta hotA hai| Adhunika itihAsakAra bhagavAna
pArzva ko eka aitihAsika puruSa mAnate haiN|16 bhagavAn pArzva ke ATha pramukha
ziSyoM ke nAmoM kA bhI isameM ullekha huA hai| isa taraha AThaveM samavAya meM
cintanapradhAna sAmagrI kA saMkalana huA hai| nauvAM samavAya : eka vizleSaNa
nauveM samavAya meM nava brahmacarya gupti, nava brahmacarya adhyayana, bhagavAn
pArzva nava hAtha UMce the, abhijita nakSatra Adi, ratnaprabhA, vANavyantara
devoM kI saudharma sabhA nau yojana kI UMcI, darzanAvaraNIya karma kI nau
prakRtiyA~, nAraka va devoM kI nau palyopama aura nau sAgaropama kI sthiti,
tathA nau bhava kara ke mokSa jAne vAloM kA varNana hai| prastuta samavAya meM
sarvaprathama brahmacarya kI nau guptiyoM kA ullekha hai| brahmacarya kI rakSA
ke lie jina upAyoM aura sAdhanoM ko bhagavAn ne samAdhi aura mukti kahA hai,
lokabhASA meM unhIM ko bADa kahA hai| bAgavAna apane bAga meM paudhoM kI rakSA
ke lie kAMToM kI bADa banAtA hai vaise hI sAdhanA ke kSetra meM brahmacarya rUpa
paudhe kI rakSA ke lie bADa kI nitAnta Avazyaka hai| brahmacarya kI mahimA aura
garimA apUrva hai| "taM baMbhaM bhagavanta"117 jaise sabhI zramaNoM meM
tIrthaMkara zreSTha haiM, vaise hI sabhI vratoM meM brahmacarya mahAn hai| jisa
sAdhaka ne eka brahmacarya kI pUrNa ArAdhanA kara lI, usane sabhI vratoM kI
ArAdhanA kara lii| eka vidvAn ne "bastIndriyamanasAmupazamo brahmacaryam" likhA
hai| jananendriya, indriyasamUha aura mana kI zAnti ko brahmacarya kahA jAtA
hai| brahma zabda ke tIna mukhya artha haiM-vIrya, AtmA aura vidyaa| carya zabda
ke bhI tIna artha haiM-caryA, rakSaNa aura ramaNa! isa taraha brahmacarya ke
tIna artha haiN| brahmacarya se Atmazuddhi hotI hai| AcArya paMtajali ne likhA
hai-brahmacaryapratiSThAyAM AtmalAbha:118 brahmacarya kI pUrNa sAdhanA karane se
apUrva mAnasika zakti aura zarIrabala prApta hotA hai| atharvaveda 19 ke anusAra
brahmacarya se teja, dhRti, sAhasa aura vidyA kI prApti hotI hai| isa taraha
Atmika, mAnasika aura zArIrika tInoM prakAra ke vikAsa brahmacarya se hote haiN|
brahmacarya ke samAdhisthAna aura asamAdhisthAna kA sundara varNana
uttarAdhyayana12degmeM hai aura bauddha granthoM meM bhI isa se 111. 112. 113.
114. 115. 116. 117. 118. 119. 120. bhagavatI sUtra-256  //  pR. 72 sthAnAMga
sUtra-sthA. 8 uttarAdhyayana-a. 24 // 3 uttarAdhyayana-a. 28 / 29 nandIsUtra
sthavirAvalI gAthA-1 bhagavAn pArzva-eka samIkSAtmaka adhyayana, lekhaka-zrI
devendramuni zAstrI praznavyAkaraNasUtra-saMvaradvAra pAtaMjala yogadarzana-2-38
athrvved-15| 5 /  17 uttarAdhyayana-a. 16 [35]

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The description is similar to 121. This description is very useful for the
ascetics who practice celibacy. Lord Parshva's body was nine hands tall. This
historical description is also important. In this way, the subjects are
presented in the ninth Samvaya.  The Tenth Samvaya: An Analysis  The tenth
Samvaya mentions the ten virtues of an ascetic, the ten stages of citta-samadhi,
Mount Sumeru's base being ten thousand yojanas in diameter, Lord Arishtanemi,
Krishna Vasudeva, Baldeva being ten bows tall, the ten knowledge-enhancing
stars, the ten Kalpa trees, the ten thousand Narakas and Devas, the state of ten
Palya-upamas and ten Sagara-upamas, and the statement of beings who take ten
births and attain liberation.  The first mention in this Samvaya is of the
virtues of an ascetic. One does not become an ascetic merely by changing
clothes. One becomes an ascetic by adopting virtues. Here, the scholar has
mentioned the real life of an ascetic. The life of an ascetic should be fragrant
with these ten virtues. The ascetic who adopts these virtues can attain citta-
samadhi. Here, ten types of citta-samadhi are mentioned. In Dasashrutaskandha
122, the state of samadhi is also mentioned. Samadhi is that which gives a
feeling of mental well-being, and asamadhi is that which gives a feeling of
distress in the mind. Here, ten states of samadhi are mentioned, while in Dasha
Vaikalika 123, four states of samadhi are mentioned - Vinaya samadhi, Shruta
samadhi, Tapa samadhi and Achar samadhi. The ten types of samadhi mentioned here
can be included in Achar samadhi. In the study of Samadhi in Sutra Kritanga
Sutra 124, the commentator Bhadrabahu 125 has briefly mentioned Darshan, Gyan,
Tapa and Charitra as samadhi. The word samadhi has been used many times in the
Buddhist tradition as well. There, the meaning of samadhi is the concentration
of "citta", i.e. establishing the citta in one object. 126 Samadhi is the eighth
path in Buddha's Eightfold Path 127. The texts of the Yoga tradition have
elaborated on samadhi. Acharya Patanjali 128 has mentioned samadhi along with
dhyana and dharana in the third Vibhutipada. Samadhi is the last in Ashtanga
Yoga 129. Tapa, Swadhyaya, Ishwarpranidhan are included in Kriya Yoga. Kriya
Yoga suppresses the senses. Through continuous practice of Abhyasa and Vairagya,
the ascetic attains Samadhi Yoga. Samadhi Shataka is an important work of
Acharya Pujyapada 130. It contains methods of recognizing the self through
meditation and samadhi. In this way, the tenth Samvaya contains a collection of
important material.  121. Anguttara Nikaya - 7.47 122. Dasashrutaskandha - A. 5
123. Dasha Vaikalika - A. 9 Udde. 4 124. Sutra Kritanga Sutra - 1.10 125. a -
Sutra Kritanga Nirukti Gatha - 106 b - Uttaradhyayana Nirukti Gatha 384
Vishuddhimarg 3.2-3 126. Vishuddhi Marg - Part - 2, Chapter 16 p. 121 127.
Patanjali Yogadarshan - Vibhutipada 128. Patanjali Yogadarshan - 2 - 29 This
book has been published from many places in Hindi, English and Marathi
languages. There are also many commentaries on it. [ 36 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 milatA-julatA varNana 121 hai  /  yaha varNana brahmacarya kI sAdhanA karane
vAle sAdhakoM ke lie atyanta upayogI hai| bhagavAn pArzva kA zarIra nau hAtha
U~cA thA  /  yaha aitihAsika varNana bhI mahattvapUrNa hai| isa taraha navameM
samavAya meM viSayoM kA nirUpaNa hai| dazavAM samavAya: eka vizleSaNa dazaveM
samavAya meM zramaNa ke dazadharma, cittasamAdhi ke daza sthAna, sumeru parvata
mUla meM daza hajAra yojana viSkaMbha vAlA hai, bhagavAn ariSTanemi, kRSNa
vAsudeva, baladeva daza dhanuSa UMce the, daza jJAnavRddhikAraka nakSatra, daza
kalpavRkSa, nArakoM va devoM kI daza hajAra, daza palyopama va daza sAgaropama
kI sthiti aura daza bhava grahaNa kara mokSa jAne vAle jIvoM kA kathana hai|
prastuta samavAya meM sarvaprathama zramaNadharma kA ullekha hai| kevala veza
parivartana se koI zramaNa nahIM banatA  /  zramaNa banatA hai sadguNoM ko
dhAraNa karane se  /  yahA~ zAstrakAra ne zramaNa ke vAstavika jIvana kA ullekha
kiyA hai| zramaNa kA jIvana ina dazavidha sadguNoM kI suvAsa se suvAsita honA
caahie| jo sAdhaka ina dharmoM ko dhAraNa karatA hai usI kA citta samAdhi ko
prApta ho sakatA hai| yahA~ para daza prakAra kI citta-samAdhi kA ullekha huA
hai  /  dazAzrutaskandha meM122 bhI samAdhisthAna kA ullekha huA hai| jisase
mAnasika svasthatA kA anubhava ho, vaha samAdhi hai aura jisase mana meM
khinnatA kA anubhava ho, vaha asamAdhi hai  /  yahA~ daza samAdhisthAna batAye
haiM to dazavaikAlika 123 meM cAra samAdhisthAna kahe gaye haiM - vinayasamAdhi,
zrutasamAdhi, tapaH samAdhi aura AcArasamAdhi  /  yahA~ jo samAdhi ke daza bheda
haiM unakA samAveza AcArasamAdhi meM ho sakatA hai  /  sUtrakRtAMgasUtra 124 ke
samAdhi nAmaka adhyayana meM niyuktikAra bhadrabAhu 125 ne saMkSepa meM darzana,
jJAna, tapa aura cAritra, ye samAdhi batAyI hai| samAdhi zabda bauddha paramparA
meM bhI aneka bAra vyavahRta huA hai| vahA~ samAdhi kA artha "citta" kI ekAgratA
arthAt citta ko eka Alambana meM sthApita karanA hai| 126 buddha ke aSTAMga
mArga meM samAdhi AThavAM mArga127 hai| yoga- paramparA ke granthoM meM samAdhi
kA vistAra se nirUpaNa huA hai| AcArya pataMjali 128 ne tRtIya vibhUtipAda meM
dhyAna, dhAraNA ke sAtha samAdhi kA ullekha kiyA hai| aSTAMga yoga 129 meM
samAdhi antima hai  /  tapa, svAdhyAya, IzvarapraNidhAna ko kriyAyoga meM liyA
hai| kriyAyoga se indriyoM kA damana hotA hai  /  abhyAsa aura vairAgya ke satat
abhyAsa se sAdhaka samAdhiyoga ko prApta karatA hai| samAdhizataka AcArya
pUjyapAda 130 kI eka mahattvapUrNa kRti hai  /  usameM dhyAna aura samAdhi ke
dvArA Atmatattva ko pahacAnane ke upAya haiN| isa taraha dazaveM samavAya meM
mahattvapUrNa sAmagrI kA saMkalana hai| 121. aMguttara nikAya - 7 / 47 122. 123.
124. 125. 126. 127. 128. 129. 130. dazAzrutaskandha-a. 5 dazavaikAlika - a. 9
udde. 4 sUtrakRtAMgasUtra - 1  /  10 ka- sUtrakRtAMga niryukti gAthA - 106 kha -
uttarAdhyayana niryukti gAthA 384 vizuddhimArga 3 / 2-3 vizuddhi mArga - bhAga -
2, pariccheda 16 pR. 121 pAtaMjala yogadarzana-vibhUtipAda pAtaMjala
yogadarzana- 2 - 29 yaha grantha hindI, aMgrejI aura marAThI bhASA meM aneka
sthaloM se prakAzita hai, isa para aneka vRttiyAM bhI haiN| [ 36 ]

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eleventh Samvaya: An Analysis  The Eleventh Samvaya describes eleven
Upasaka Pratimas, eleven Ganadharas of Bhagwan Mahavira, eleven stars of the
Mula Nakshatra, eleven Palyopama and Sagaropama states of Graveyaka, Naraka and
Devas, and eleven Bhava states leading to Moksha.  This Samvaya first mentions
the Shravaka Pratimas. Pratimas refer to specific vows, specific observances,
specific austerities, and specific acquisitions. After accepting the twelve
vows, a Shravaka adopts the Pratimas. There are slight differences in the
number, order, and names of Pratimas in the Svetambara and Digambara texts, but
these differences are negligible. Their names are found in Upasakadashaanga,
Dasha Shruta Skandha, and Samvayanga. They are: 1. Darshan, 2. Vrat, 3. Samayik,
4. Paushdhopavas, 5. Niyam, 6. Brahmacharya, 7. Sachittatyaga, 8. Aarambh Tyaga,
9. Preshya Parityaag, 10. Uddishta Tyaga, and 11. Shramanabhoot. Acharya
Haribhadra mentions 'Sthan' instead of 'Niyam' as the fifth Pratima. Digambara
texts like Vasunandi Shravakaachar, etc., mention eleven Pratimas: Darshan,
Vrat, Samayik, Paushd, Sachittatyaga, Ratribhuktittyaga, Brahmacharya, Aarambh
Tyaga, Parigraha Tyaga, Anumati Tyaga, and Uddishta Tyaga.
Swamikartikeyaanupreksha mentions twelve Pratimas, including Samyagdristi. Both
traditions agree on the first four Pratimas. Sachittatyaga is the fifth Pratima
in the Digambara tradition, while it is the seventh in the Svetambara tradition.
The Digambara tradition considers Ratribhuktittyaga as a separate Pratima, while
the Svetambara tradition includes it in the fifth Pratima, Niyam. The Digambara
tradition mentions Anumati Tyaga as the tenth Pratima, while the Svetambara
tradition includes it in Uddishta Tyaga. This is because in this Pratima, the
Shravaka does not accept Uddishta Bhakti and also does not support other
Aarambhas. The Shramanabhoot Pratima in the Svetambara tradition is called
Uddishta Tyaga Pratima in the Digambara tradition because it involves a
Shravaka.  It is noteworthy that Acharya Umaswati has described Vrat and its
transgressions in Tattvarth Sutra. However, he has not mentioned anything about
Pratimas. All Svetambara and Digambara commentators of Tattvarth Sutra have not
mentioned anything about Pratimas. Similarly, Pujyapada, Ankalank, Vidyānandin,
etc., of the Digambara tradition have not mentioned anything about Pratimas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM samavAya : eka vizleSaNa gyArahaveM samavAya meM gyAraha upAsaka
pratimAeM, bhagavAn mahAvIra ke gyAraha gaNadhara, mUla nakSatra ke gyAraha
tAre, graiveyaka tathA nArakoM va devoM kI gyAraha palyopama va gyAraha
sAgaropama kI sthiti tathA gyAraha bhava kara mokSa meM jAne vAloM kA varNana
hai| prastuta samavAya meM sarvaprathama zrAvaka-pratimAoM kA ullekha hai|
pratimA kA artha hai pratijJA-vizeSa, vrata-vizeSa, tapa-vizeSa aura abhigraha-
vizeSa31  /  zrAvaka dvAdaza vratoM ko grahaNa karane ke pazcAt pratimAoM ko
dhAraNa karatA hai| pratimAoM kI saMkhyA, krama va nAmoM ke sambandha meM
zvetAmbara aura digambara granthoM meM svalpa antara dikhAI detA hai| para vaha
antara nagaNya hai| samavAyAMga kI taraha upAsakadazAMga 132 va
dazAzrutaskandha133 meM bhI inake nAma milate haiN| ve isa prakAra haiM-1.
darzana, 2. vrata, 3. sAmAyika, 4. pauSadhopavAsa 5. niyama, 6. brahmacarya, 7.
sacittatyAga, 8. Arambha tyAga, 9. preSyaparityAga, 10. uddiSTatyAga aura 11
zramaNabhUta! AcArya haribhadra'34 ne pA~cavI pratimA kA niyama ke sthAna para
kevala 'sthAna' kA ullekha kiyA hai| digambara paramparA ke vasunandI
zrAvakAcAra prabhRti granthoM meM darzana, vrata, sAmAyika, pauSadha,
sacittatyAga, rAtribhuktityAga, brahmacarya, ArambhatyAga, parigrahatyAga,
anumatityAga evaM uddiSTatyAga ina gyAraha varNana hai|
svAmikArtikeyAnuprekSA135 meM samyagdRSTi nAmaka eka aura pratimA milAkara
bAraha pratimAoM kA ullekha hai| donoM hI paramparAoM meM prathama cAra
pratimAoM ke nAma eka sadRza haiN| sacittatyAga kA krama digambara paramparA meM
pA~cavAM hai, jabaki zvetAmbara paramparA meM sAtavA~ hai| digambara paramparA
meM rAtribhuktityAga ko eka svatantra pratimA ginA hai, jabaki zvetAmbara
paramparA meM pA~cavIM pratimA-niyama meM usakA samAveza ho jAtA hai| digambara
paramparA meM anumatityAga kA dazavI pratimA ke rUpa meM ullekha hai, zvetAmbara
paramparA meM uddiSTatyAga meM isakA samAveza ho jAtA hai| kyoMki isa pratimA
meM zrAvaka udiSTa bhakta grahaNa na karane ke sAtha anya Arambha kA bhI
samarthana nahIM krtaa| zvetAmbara paramparA meM jo zramaNabhUta pratimA hai,
use digambara paramparA meM udiSTatyAgapratimA kahA hai| kyoMki isameM zrAvakA
hotA hai| cintanIya hai ki AcArya umAsvAti ne tattvArthasUtra meM vrata aura
usake aticAroM kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai| para unhoMne pratimAoM ke sambandha meM
kucha bhI nahIM likhA hai| tattvArthasUtra ke sabhI zvetAmbara aura digambara
TIkAkAroM ne kA koI ullekha nahIM kiyA hai| isI taraha digambara paramparA ke
pUjyapAda136 aMkalaMka 37 vidyAnandI138 131. ka. pratimA pratipatti : pratijJeti
yAvat-sthAnAGgavRtti patra 61 kha. pratimA-pratijJA abhigraha:-vahI patra 184
ga. jaina Agama sAhitya : manana aura mImAMsA-pR. 152 zrI devendramuni zAstrI
132. upAsakadazAMga a. 1 dazAzrutaskandha 6-7 134. viNshtiviNshikaa-10|1 135.
svAmikArtikeyAnuprekSA-305-306 136. tattvArthasUtra-sarvArthasiddhi 137.
tattvArtharAjavArtika 138. tattvArthasUtra zlokavArtika [37]

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
2 Shivakoti139, Ravishena140, Jatasimhanandi141, Jinasena142, Padmanandi143,
Devasena144, Amritachandra145 and others have certainly written about the vows
of the Shravaks, but they have remained silent about the images. The other
tradition is of such Acharyas who not only mentioned the images but also
discussed their form in detail. Among them, the names of Acharya
Samantabhadra146, Somdeva147, Amitagati148, Vasunandi149, Pandit Ashadhara150,
Medhavi151, Sakalkirti152 and others can be taken.  The Shravak who has a good
knowledge of the nine principles can adopt the image. Without the knowledge of
the nine principles, the proper observance of the images is not possible. Some
thinkers are of the opinion that in the first image, one should observe a fast
for one day and take the Parana on the next day, in the second image, take the
Parana in small portions, and in this way, up to the eleventh image, one should
observe penance and take the Parana. But the statement of these thinkers is not
substantiated by any Agama and later texts. In the Upasakadashanga Sutra, the
Shravaks like Ananda etc. had certainly observed penance at the time of
worshipping the images. But there is no clear instruction that only this much
penance should be done.  Some thinkers also believe that in the present time, no
Shravak can worship the images. Just as the Bhikshus have given up the images,
the Shravaks have also given up the images. The view of these thinkers is worth
considering. Perhaps the compulsory condition of fasting penance along with the
images is the basis of this view. According to the Digambara tradition, the
observance of Shravak-images is for life, while in the Shvetambara tradition,
their time limit is fixed at one, two up to eleven months. Even today, there are
Shravaks who observe the images in the Digambara tradition.  In this way,
various subjects have been presented in the eleventh Samvaya. Twelfth Samvaya:
An Analysis - In the twelfth Samvaya, twelve Bhikshu images, twelve Sambhoga,
twelve cycles of Kritikarm, the dimension of Vijaya capital as twelve lakh
Yojana Vishkambha have been described. The age of Maryada-Purushottama Rama has
been stated as twelve hundred years. It has been said that the Ratrimana and
Sarvarthasiddha Vimana are twelve Yojana above the Ishatpragbhara earth, and the
Naraka and Devas have twelve Palya-upama and twelve...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2 zivakoTi139 raviSeNa140 jaTAsiMhanandI141 jinasena'42 padmanandI143
devasena144 amRtacandra145 Adi ne zrAvakoM ke vratoM ke sambandha meM avazya
likhA hai, para pratimAoM ke sambandha meM ye mauna rahe haiN| dUsarI paramparA
aise AcAryoM kI hai jinhoMne kevala pratimAoM kA ullekha hI nahIM kiyA hai kintu
unake svarUpa kA vistAra se vivecana bhI kiyA hai| unameM AcArya samantabhadra
146 somadeva'47 amitagati148 vasunandI149 paNDita AzAdhara 50 medhAvI51
sakalakIrti152 Adi ke nAma lie jA sakate haiN| jisa zrAvaka ko navatattva kI
acchI taraha se jAnakArI ho, vaha pratimA dhAraNa kara sakatA hai| navatattva kI
binA jAnakArI ke pratimAoM kA sahI pAlana nahIM ho sktaa| kitane hI vicArakoM kA
yaha abhimata hai ki prathama pratimA meM eka dina upavAsa aura dUsare dina
pAraNA, dvitIya pratimA meM bele-bele pAraNA isI taraha tele-tele, cole-cole se
lekara gyAraha taka tapa kara pAraNA kiyA jaaye| para una vicArakoM kA kathana
kisI Agama aura paravartI granthoM se pramANita nahIM hai| upAsakadazAMga sUtra
meM Ananda Adi zrAvakoM ne pratimAoM ke ArAdhana ke samaya tapa avazya kiyA
thaa| para itanA hI tapa karanA cAhie, isakA spaSTa nirdeza nahIM hai| kitane hI
vicAraka yaha bhI mAnate haiM ki vartamAna meM koI bhI zrAvaka pratimAoM kI
ArAdhanA nahIM kara sktaa| jaise bhikSu pratimAoM kA viccheda ho gayA vaise hI
zrAvaka pratimAoM kA viccheda ho gayA hai| una vicArakoM kI bAta cintanIya hai|
pratimAoM ke sAtha anazana tapa kI anivArya zarta hI sambhavataH isa vicAra kA
AdhAra ho| digambara paramparA ke anusAra zrAvaka-pratimAoM kA pAlana
yAvajjIvana kiyA jAtA hai, zvetAmbara paramparA meM unakI kAlamaryAdA eka, do
yAvat gyAraha mAsa kI niyata hai| digambara paramparA meM Aja bhI pratimAdhArI
zrAvaka haiN| isa taraha gyArahaveM samavAya meM vividha-viSayoM para vicAra
prastuta kie gaye haiN| . bArahavAM samavAya : eka vizleSaNa - bArahaveM
samavAya meM bAraha bhikSu pratimAe~, bAraha saMbhoga, kRtikarma ke bAraha
Avarta, vijayA rAjadhAnI kA bAraha lAkha yojana kA AyAma viSkambha batAyA gayA
hai| maryAdApuruSottama rAma kI umra bAraha sau varSa kI batAyI hai| rAtrimAna
tathA sarvArthasiddha vimAna se bAraha yojana Upara ISatprAgbhArapRthvI tathA
nArako aura devoM kI bAraha palyopama va bAraha 139. ratnamAlA 140. padmacarita
141. varAMgacarita 142. harivazaMpurANa 143. paMcaviMzatikA 144. bhAvasaMgraha
(prAkRta) 145. puruSArthasiddhayupAya ratnakaraNDa zrAvakAcAra 147.
upAsakAdhyayana 148. zrAvakAcAra 149. zrAvakAcAra 150. sAgAradharmAmRta 151.
dharmasaMgraha zrAvakAcAra 152. praznottara zrAvakAcAra [38] 146.

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This text discusses the state of Sagaropama and the twelve Bhavas that lead to
liberation, mentioning the twelve types of Bhikshu Pratimas.  The text first
mentions the twelve Bhikshu Pratimas, which are described in detail in the
Sthananga Sutra 53. These include Samadhi Pratimas (divided into Shruta Samadhi
and Charitra Samadhi) and Upadhana Pratimas, which include the twelve Bhikshu
Pratimas. The text also mentions Vivek Pratimas, Vyutsarga Pratimas, Bhadra,
Subhadra, Maha Bhadra, and Sarvato Bhadra Pratimas, each with their own
variations. However, the twelve Bhikshu Pratimas mentioned here can only be
attained by Bhikshus who possess specific Sanhanan and Shruta.  The term
"Samyoga" is used here in a technical sense, referring to the practice of living
together with other Shramans who share similar views, following the rules of
Vinaya and Vyavavritti in terms of food, clothing, utensils, exchange,
initiation, and Paryaya. The two verses on Samyoga in this text are found in the
Nisitha Bhashya 54, where they are discussed in detail.  The twelve types of
Samyoga are:  1. **Upadhi:** This refers to the acceptance of clothing and
utensils. As long as these are accepted purely, the Samyoga with other Shramans
can continue. If a Bhikshu accepts them with defects and repents upon being
told, he remains Samyogarha. He can be forgiven three times. If he accepts them
for the fourth time, he should be separated from the community, even if he
repents. Similarly, a Pasvastha or Sanayati who is separated from the community
can be forgiven three times for seeking pure or impure Upadhi. After that, he is
considered Visamyogarha. The same principle applies to the use and consumption
of Upadhi.  2. **Shruta:** This refers to the transmission of knowledge. A
Shraman who has been initiated from the same or another Gachcha can receive
Shruta according to the proper procedure. If a Shraman transmits Shruta
improperly to a Samyogic, initiated, or uninitiated person, he can be forgiven
three times. After that, even if he repents, he is considered Visamyogarha.  3.
**Bhaktapan:** As long as a Shraman follows the rules of accepting food and
drink, he remains Samyogic. The same principle applies here as with Upadhi.  4.
**Anjali Pragraha:** It is appropriate to greet Samyogic and Asamyogic Shramans
with folded hands, but not Pasvasthas. A Bhikshu who does this can be forgiven
three times.  The text further explains other types of Samyoga, including Dan,
Nikachana, Abhyutthan, Kritikarma, Vyavavrittikaran, Samavasaran, and Sanishidya
Kathaprabandha. The editor has provided a good explanation of these terms.
Therefore, refer to the original text for further details.  The text then
mentions the twelve cycles of Kritikarma. However, the explanation in the text
is not as clear as it should be. The same topic is discussed in the Aavashyak
Niyukti 57, where it is explained in detail. The text states that if someone
performs the Vandana with the twenty-five Aavashyakas, they attain Parinirvana
or become a Vimana Vasi Deva.  The text concludes with a verse on the Vandana of
the Sadguru: "I wish to forgive the Shramans, I will bow down to them, I will
follow their teachings, I will accept their guidance, I will follow their path,
I will be free from all impurities, I will be blessed with many virtues, I will
have a good day."  **References:**  * Sthananga Sutra - Sutras 84, 151, 237,
352, etc. * Nisitha Bhashya - Uddesa 5, Gatha 49, 50 * Vyavahar Bhashya - Uddesa
5, Gatha 47 * Aavashyak Niyukti - Gatha 1202

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAgaropama kI sthiti va bAraha bhava karake mokSa jAne vAle jIvoM kA ullekha
hai| prastuta samavAya meM sarvaprathama bAraha bhikSupratimAoM kA ullekha hai|
yoM sthAnAMgasUtra53 meM aneka dRSTiyoM se pratimAoM ke ullekha hue haiM- jaise
samAdhipratimA, updhaanprtimaa| samAdhipratimA ke bhI do bheda kiye haiM -
zrutasamAdhi aura caaritrsmaadhi| upadhAnapratimA meM bhikSu kI bAraha pratimAoM
kA ullekha kiyA hai| isI taraha vivekapratimA aura vyutsargapratimA kA bhI
ullekha huA hai| bhadrA, subhadrA, pratimAoM kA bhI varNana hai| mahAbhadrA,
sarvatobhadrA vividha pratimAoM ke ullekha haiM aura unake vividha bheda-
prabheda haiN| parantu yahA~ para bhikSu kI jo bAraha pratimAeM batAyI haiM,
unheM viziSTa saMhanana evaM zruta ke dhArI bhikSu hI dhAraNa kara sakate haiN|
saMbhoga zabda kA prayoga yahA~ pAribhASika artha meM samAna samAcArIvAle
zramaNoM kA sAtha milakara ke khAnapAna, vastra-pAtra, AdAna-pradAna, dIkSA-
paryAya ke anusAra vinaya-vaiyAvRttya karanA saMbhoga hai| prastuta samavAya meM
saMbhoga sambandhI jo do gAthAe~ dI gayI haiM ve nizIthabhASya'54 meM prApta
hotI haiN| unakA vahA~ para vistAra se vivecana kiyA gayA hai| saMbhoga ke
bAraha prakAroM meM prathama prakAra hai- upadhi! vastra-pAtra rUpa upadhi jaba
taka vizuddha rUpa se lI jAtI hai, vahA~ taka sAMbhogika-zramaNoM ke sAtha usakA
sAMbhogika sambandha raha sakatA hai| yadi vaha doSayukta grahaNa karatA hai
aura kahane para usakA prAyazcitta letA hai, to saMbhogAha hai| tIna bAra bhUla
karane taka vaha saMbhogArha rahatA hai| yadi caturtha bAra grahaNa karatA hai
to use samudAya se pRthak karanA cAhie, bhale hI usane prAyazcitta liyA ho| usI
prakAra samudAya se jo pRthak ho, aise visaMbhogika pAzvastha yA saMyati ke
sAtha zuddha yA azuddha upadhi kI eSaNA karane vAle ko tIna bAra-use prAyazcitta
diyA jA sakatA hai, isase Age use visaMbhogArha ginnaa| isI prakAra upadhi ke
grahaNa kI taraha upadhi ke parikarma aura paribhoga ke sambandha meM bhI
sAMbhogika aura visAMbhogika vyavasthA samajhanI caahie| dUsarA saMbhoga zruta
hai| sAMbhogika yA dUsare gaccha se upasaMpanna hue zramaNa ko vidhipUrvaka jo
vAcanA dI jAye, usakI parigaNanA zuddha meM hotI hai| jo zruta kI vAcanA
avidhipUrvaka sAmbhogika yA upasaMpanna yA anupasaMpanna Adi ko detA ho to tIna
bAra use kSamA dI jA sakatI hai| usake pazcAt yadi vaha prAyazcitta bhI letA hai
to bhI use visaMbhogArha hI samajhanA caahie| jaba taka zramaNa nirdoSa
bhaktapAna grahaNa karane kI maryAdA kA pAlana karatA hai, taba taka vaha
sAMbhogika hai| upadhi kI bhA~ti hI isakI bhI vyavasthA hai| upadhi meM
parikarma aura paribhoga hai to yahA~ para bhojana aura dAna hai| caturtha
saMbhoga kA nAma aMjalipragraha hai| sAMbhogika aura saMvigna asaMbhogiyoM ke
sAtha hAtha jor3a kara namaskAra karanA ucita hai para pArzastha ko isa pAkara
karanA vihita nahIM hai| isa prakAra karane vAle ko tIna bAra kSamA kiyA jA
sakatA hai| dAna, nikAcanA, abhyutthAna, kRtikarma, vaiyAvRtyakaraNa,
samavasaraNa, saMniSadyA kathAprabandha Adi anya saMbhoga zabdoM kI vyAkhyA
vivecana meM sampAdaka ne acchI kI hai| ataH mUla sUtra kA avalokana kreN| isa
ke Age kRtikarma ke bAraha Avarta batAye gaye haiN| kintu vivecana meM jaisA
cAhie vaisA viSaya ko spaSTa nahIM kiyA jA sakA hai| prastuta gAthA
Avazyakaniyukti57 meM isI prakAra AyI hai, niyukti meM viSaya ko pUrNa rUpa se
spaSTa kiyA gayA hai aura kahA gayA hai ki paccIsa Avazyaka se parizuddha yadi
vandanA kI jAye to vandanakartA parinirvANa ko prApta hotA hai yA vimAnavAsI
deva hotA hai| sadguru kI vandanA 'icchAmi khamAsamaNo' vaMdiU jAvaNijAe
nisIhiyAe aNujANaha, me miuggahaM nisIhi ahokAyaM kAyasaMphAsaM khamaNijjo bhe
kilAmo appakilaMtANaM bahasubheNaM bhe divso| 153. sthAnAMgasUtra-sU. 84, 151,
237, 352 Adi 154. ka-nizIthabhASya-udde. 5, gAthA 49, 50 kha-vyavahArabhASya-
udde. 5 gAthA-47 157. Avazyakaniyukti gAthA-1202 [39]

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"What is it? Is it a bow, or is it a salutation?" This question is asked twice
in the text. The meaning of the text from "I wish to bow to you, free from sin"
to "My humble obeisance" is - I wish to bow to you, free from sin. Therefore,
please grant me space, or permission to enter. This text indicates the act of
requesting permission to enter. In the present text, one must bow their body
halfway until the word "Anujanaha". This is one bow. And when one bows again as
before, that is the second bow. Thus, there are two salutations in the ritual
act. When a child receives initiation or is born, they have this posture - they
hold both hands on their head. This is called "Yathajat". The posture should be
"Yathajat" while bowing. Upon receiving permission to enter the space, sit in
the "Ubhradak" posture, extend both hands towards the Guru, and touch the Guru's
feet with both hands. In the text "Ahokayam", the letter "A" should be
pronounced softly. From there, take the hands and touch the middle part of the
head while pronouncing the letter "Ho" loudly. Thus, one cycle is completed in
the pronunciation of the word "Aho". Similarly, one cycle should be completed in
the pronunciation of the word "Kayam". In the same way, one cycle should be
completed in the pronunciation of "Kayasamphasan" while pronouncing "Kay". Thus,
these are three cycles. After that, in "Jatta Bhe", the letter "J" should be
pronounced softly and the Guru's feet should be touched with the hand. And while
pronouncing "Tta" with a medium voice, the hands should be removed from the
Guru's feet and placed on the "Adhar". And while pronouncing the letter "Bhe"
loudly, the middle part of the head should be touched with the hand. This is one
cycle. Similarly, while pronouncing the letters "J", "V", "Ni", and while
pronouncing the letters "Jn", "Ch", "Bhe", the third cycle should be completed.
Thus, there are six cycles in total in one salutation. There are also six cycles
in the second salutation. Thus, there are twelve cycles in the ritual act. After
entering the space, during the "Kshamna", both the disciple and the Acharya
perform two "Shironaman" together, and similarly, two "Shironaman" are performed
during the second salutation. Thus, there are four "Shironaman". When the
disciple bows, the mind, speech, and body should be controlled. These are the
three "Gupti". During the first salutation, one enters the "Avgrahayachana", and
similarly, during the second salutation as well. Thus, these are two entrances.
After performing the first salutation with the necessary actions, exiting from
the space is called "Nishkraman". This is only one. In the second salutation,
one does not exit but remains at the Guru's feet and completes the sutra. These
are the twenty-five essentials of the salutation. Thus, in this present
"Samavay", like the previous "Samavays", there is a beautiful collection of
knowledge-enhancing material. The thirteenth and fourteenth "Samavays": An
analysis In the thirteenth "Samavay", there are thirteen places of action,
"Soudharm", thirteen "Viman" in "Ishankalp", thirteen "Vastu" named "Pranayu" in
the twelfth "Purva", thirteen types of "Yog" in "Garbhaj Tiryanch",
"Panchendriya", thirteen "Palyopama" and thirteen "Sagaropama" positions of the
Sun's sphere, Narakas, and Devas. The details regarding action, etc., have been
written extensively on the previous pages. In the fourteenth "Samavay", there
are fourteen "Bhootgram", fourteen "Purva", fourteen thousand "Shraman" of
Bhagwan Mahavira, fourteen "Jivasthan", fourteen "Ratna" of the "Chakravarti",
fourteen great rivers, fourteen "Palyopama" and fourteen "Sagaropama" positions
of Narakas and Devas, along with a description of the fourteen "Bhav" through
which beings go to liberation. Here, first of all, fourteen "Bhootgram" are
mentioned. "Bhoot" means beings and "Gram" means group, i.e., 158. "Sthananga-
Samavayanga", pp. 810-812 - Pt. Dalsukh Malvaniya [40]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaikkato? jattA bhe, javaNijjaM ca bhe?" ke pATha se do bAra kI jAtI hai|
"icchAmi khamAsamaNo" se "me miuggahaM" taka ke pATha kA artha hai-maiM pApa se
mukta hokara Apako vandana karanA cAhatA huuN| ataH Apa parimita-avagraha yAnI
sthAna diijie| yaha pATha avagraha kI yAcanA kI kriyA kA sUcaka hai| prastuta
pATha meM "aNujANaha" isa pada taka eka bAra apane zarIra ko ardha avanata
karanA hotA hai| yaha eka avanata hai aura pUrvavat punaH vandana kiyA jAye taba
dUsarA avanata hotA hai| isa prakAra kRtikarma meM do namaskAra hote haiN| dIkSA
grahaNa karate samaya yA janma grahaNa karate samaya bAlaka kI aisI mudrA hotI
hai-vaha donoM hAtha sira para rakhe huA hotA hai| use yathAjAta kahate haiN|
vandana karate samaya bhI yathAjAta mudrA honI caahiye| avagraha meM praveza
karane kI anujJA prApta hone para ubhar3aka Asana se baiThakara donoM hAtha guru
kI dizA meM lambe kara ke donoM hAthoM se guru. ke caraNoM kA sparza kre|
"ahokAyaM" isa pATha meM "a" akSara manda svara meM khe| vahA~ se hAtha lekara
punaH apane mastiSka ke madhyabhAga ko sparza karatA huA "ho" akSara kA ucca
svara se uccAraNa krnaa| isa prakAra "aho" zabda ke uccAraNa karane meM eka
Avarta huaa| usI prakAra -"kAyaM" zabdoccAra meM bhI eka Avarta krnaa| usI
taraha "kAyasaMphAsaM" meM kAya ke uccAraNa meM eka Avartana krnaa| isa prakAra
ye tIna Avartana hue| usake pazcAt "jattA bhe" meM "ja" akSara kA mandoccAra
kara guru ke caraNa ko kara se sparza karanA caahiye| aura "ttA" kA madhyama
uccAraNa karate samaya gurucaraNa se donoM hAtha haTAkara-'adhara' meM rakhanA
caahiye| aura 'bhe' akSara ucca stara se bolate hue mastiSka ke madhyabhAga ko
hAtha se sparza karanA caahiye| yaha eka Avarta huaa| isI prakAra "ja" "va" "Ni"
ina tIna akSaroM kA uccAraNa karate samaya aura "jaM" "ca" "bhe" ina tIna
akSaroM ko bolate huye tIsarA Avartana krnaa| isa prakAra eka vandana karane meM
sabhI Avarta milakara chaha Avartta hote haiN| dvitIya bAra vandana meM bhI
chaha Avarta hote haiN| isa taraha kRtikarma ke bAraha Avarta hote haiN|
avagraha meM praveza karane ke pazcAt kSAmaNA karate samaya ziSya aura AcArya
donoM ke milakara do zironamana hote haiM aura isI prakAra dUsarI vandanA ke
prasaMga para do zironamana hote haiN| isa taraha cAra zironamana hue| ziSya
jaba vandanA karatA hai taba mana, vacana aura kAyA ko saMyama meM rakhanA
caahiye| ye tIna gupti haiN| prathama vaMdana ke samaya avagrahayAcanA para
praveza karanA aura isI prakAra dvitIya vandana ke samaya bhii| isI taraha ye do
praveza hote haiN| AvazyakIya kara ke avagraha se prathama vandana karane ke
pazcAt bAhara jAnA yaha niSkramaNa hai| yaha eka hI hai| dUsare vandana meM
bAhara na jAkara guru ke caraNAravindoM meM rahakara ke hI sUtra samApti karanI
hotI hai| ye vandana ke paccIsa Avazyaka haiN|158 isa taraha prastuta samavAya
meM bhI pUrva samavAyoM kI taraha jJAnavardhaka sAmagrI kA sundara saMkalana
hai| terahavAM va caudahavAM samavAya : eka vizleSaNa terahaveM samavAya meM
teraha kriyA-sthAna, saudharma, IzAnakalpa meM teraha vimAna prastaTa, prANAyu
nAmaka bArahaveM pUrva meM teraha vastu nAmaka adhikAra, garbhaja tiryaMca,
paMcendriya meM teraha prakAra ke yoga, sUryamaNDala tathA nArakoM va devoM kI
teraha palyopama va teraha sAgaropama sthiti kA nirUpaNa hai| kriyA Adi ke
sambandha meM pUrva pRSThoM para vistAra ke sAtha likhA jA cukA hai| caudahaveM
samavAya meM caudaha bhUtagrAma, caudaha pUrva, caudaha hajAra bhagavAn mahAvIra
ke zramaNa, caudaha jIvasthAna, cakravartI ke caudaha ratna, caudaha mahAnadiyAM
nAraka va devoM kI caudaha palyopama va caudaha sAgaropama kI sthiti ke sAtha
caudaha bhava kara mokSa jAne vAle jIvoM kA varNana hai| yahAM para
sarvaprathama caudaha bhUtagrAma kA ullekha huA hai| bhUta arthAt jIva aura
grAma kA artha hai samUha, arthAt 158. sthAnAMga-samavAyAMga, pR. 810 se
812-paM. dalasukha mAlavaNiyA [40]

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A group of living beings is called a Bhutgram. Like Samavayanga, these
distinctions are also mentioned in Bhagavati Sutra 159. Among these, seven are
insufficient and seven are sufficient. Food, body, senses, breathing, language,
and mind are the six sufficient things. In earth etc. one-sense beings, there
are four sufficient things. In two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, non-cognizant
five-sense, and cognizant human beings, there are five sufficient things. In
cognizant Tiryanch, human, hell, and god, there are six sufficient things. The
state of a being is insufficient until it has fulfilled all the sufficient
things possible for it, and it is sufficient when it has fulfilled them. In this
way, fourteen types have been made by combining sufficient and insufficient.
After this, there is a mention of fourteen Purvas. Purva Shruta is an infinite
storehouse of knowledge. It is extremely unfortunate that this storehouse was
destroyed after the death of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira due to a terrible twelve-
year famine and due to memory weakness etc. After that, there is a mention of
fourteen Jeevasthanas. Jeevasthan is called 'Gunasthan' in Samyasar 160, Prakrit
Panchasangrah 161, and Karmagranth 162. Acharya Nemichandra 163 has called
living beings as Gunas. The fourteen Jeevasthanas are born from the states of
arising, subsidence, destruction, destruction-subsidence, etc. of karmas. By
treating the result and the resultant as inseparable, Jeevasthan is called
Gunasthan. In Gommatasar 164, Gunasthan is called Jeeva-Samas. The qualities
that arise from the arising of karma are Audayik. The qualities that arise from
the subsidence of karma are Aupashimik. The qualities that arise from the
destruction-subsidence of karma are Kshayopaashimik. The qualities that arise
from the destruction of karma are Kshayik. The qualities that are found
naturally without the arising, subsidence, destruction, destruction-subsidence
of karma are Parinaamik. Due to these qualities, the living being is also called
a Guna. Jeevasthan is called Gunasthan in the literature after Samavayanga.
Acharya Nemichandra 166 has considered Sanksepa and Ogha as two synonyms of
Gunasthan. Those who are described as fourteen Jeevasthanas in Karmagranth 167
are called fourteen Bhutgrams in Samavay. Those who are called Gunasthan in
Karmagranth are called Jeevasthan in Samavay. Thus, there is a difference in
name between Karmagranth and Samavay, but not in meaning. In Samavayanga, the
basis of the creation of Jeevasthanas is described as karma-purity. Acharya
Abhaydev 168 has described Gunasthanas as arising from the purity of Mohaniya
karmas. Nemichandra 169 has written - the first four Gunasthanas are due to the
arising etc. of Darshanmoha, and the next eight Gunasthanas are born from the
destruction-subsidence etc. of Charitramoha. The remaining two are due to the
presence and absence of Yoga. Here, the nature of Gunasthanas has been
highlighted in brief. In this way, the fourteenth Samavay is a combination of
very useful material. The fifteenth and sixteenth Samavay: An Analysis The
fifteenth Samavay describes fifteen supremely unrighteous gods, the height of
Nami Arhat's fifteen bows, the two types of Rahu, Bhagavati Sutra-Shatak 25
Uddeshya-1, p. 350 160. Samyasar Gatha 55 161. Prakrit Panchasangrah 1/3-5 162.
Karmagranth 4/1 163. Gommatasar Gatha 7 164. Gommatasar Gatha 10 165.
Padkhandagam Dhavalavritti, Pratham Khand 2-16-61 Gommatasar Gatha 3 167.
Karmagranth 4-2 168. Samavayanga Vritti Patra-26 169. Gommatasar Gatha 12, 13
[41] 159. 166.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jIvoM ke samUha ko bhUtagrAma kahate haiN| samavAyAMga kI taraha
bhavagatIsUtra159 meM bhI ina bhedoM kA ullekha huA hai| ina meM sAta aparyApta
haiM aura sAta paryApta haiN| AhAra, zarIra, indriya, zvAsocchvAsa, bhASA aura
mana ye chaha paryAptiyA~ haiN| pRthvI Adi ekendriya jIvoM meM cAra paryAptiyA~
hotI haiN| bendriya, trIndriya, caturindriya, asaMjJI paMcendriya aura
saMmUchima manuSya meM pAMca paryAptiyA~ hotI haiN| saMjJI tiryaJca manuSya
nAraka aura deva meM chaha paryAptiyA~ hotI haiN| jisa jIva meM jitanI
paryAptiyA~ sambhava haiM, unheM jaba taba pUrNa na kara le taba taka vaha jIva
kI aparyApta avasthA hai aura unheM pUrNa kara lenA paryApta avasthA hai| isa
taraha paryApta aura aparyApta ke milAkara caudaha prakAra kiye gaye haiN| isa
ke bAda caudaha pUrvo kA ullekha hai| pUrva zruta, vijJAna kA asIma koSa hai|
para. atyanta paritApa hai ki vaha koSa zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pazcAta
bhayaMkara dvAdaza varSIya duSkAla ke kAraNa tathA smRti daurbalya Adi ke kAraNa
naSTa ho gyaa| usake pazcAt cauhada jIvasthAnoM kA ullekha hai| jIvasthAna ko hI
samayasAra160 meM, prAkRta paMcasaMgraha 161 va karmagrantha 162 meM
'guNasthAna' kahA hai| AcArya nemicandra163 ne jIvoM ko guNa kahA hai| caudaha
jIvasthAna karmoM ke udaya, upazama, kSaya, kSayopazama, Adi bhAvAbhAvajanita
avasthAoM se niSpanna hote haiN| pariNAma aura pariNAmI kA abhedopacAra karane
se jIvasthAna ko guNasthAna kahA hai| gommaTasAra'64 meM guNasthAna ko jIva-
samAsa kahate haiN| karma ke udaya se jo guNa utpanna hote haiN| vaha audayika
haiN| karma ke upazama se jo guNa utpanna hote haiM, vaha aupazamika haiN| karma
ke kSayopazama se jo guNa utpanna hote haiM, vaha kSAyopazamika haiN| karma ke
kSaya se utpanna hone vAle guNa kSAyika haiM  /  karma ke udaya, upazama, kSaya,
kSayopazama ke binA jo guNa svabhAvataH pAye jAte haiM, ve pAriNAmika haiN| ina
guNoM ke kAraNa jIva ko bhI guNa kahA gayA hai| jIvasthAna ko samavAyAMga ke
bAda ke sAhitya meM guNasthAna kahA gayA hai| AcArya nemicandra166 ne saMkSepa
aura ogha ye do guNasthAna ke paryAyavAcI mAne haiN| karmagrantha67 meM jinheM
caudaha jIvasthAna batAyA hai, unheM samavAya meM caudaha bhUtagrAma kI saMjJA
dI gaI hai| jinheM karmagrantha meM guNasthAna kahA hai, unheM samavAya meM
jIvasthAna kahA hai| isa prakAra karmagraMtha aura samavAya meM saMjJA bheda
hai, arthabheda nahIM hai| samavAyAMga meM jIvasthAnoM kI racanA kA AdhAra
karma-vizuddhi batAyA hai| AcArya abhayadeva168 ne guNasthAnoM ko mohanIya
karmoM kI vizuddhi se niSpanna batAyA hai| nemicandra 69 ne likhA hai-prathama
cAra guNasthAna darzanamoha ke udaya Adi se hote haiM aura Age ke ATha
guNasthAna cAritramoha ke kSayopazama Adi se niSpanna hote haiN| zeSa do yoga ke
bhAvAbhAva ke kaarnn| yahA~ para saMkSepa meM guNasthAnoM kA svarUpa ujAgara huA
hai| isa taraha caudahaveM samavAya meM bahuta hI upayogI sAmagrI kA saMyojana
hai| pandrahavAM va solahavAM samavAyaH eka vizleSaNa pandrahaveM samavAya meM
pandraha parama adhArmika deva, nami arhata kI pandraha dhanuSa kI U~cAI, rAhU
ke do prakAra, bhagavatI sUtra-zataka 25 uddeza-1, pR. 350 160. samayasAra gAthA
55 161. prAkRtapaMcasaMgraha 1/3-5 162. karmagrantha 4/1 163. gommaTasAra gAthA
7 164. gommaTasAra gAthA 10 165. paDkhaNDAgama dhavalAvRtti, prathama khaNDa
2-16-61 gommaTasAra gAthA 3 167. karmagrantha 4-2 168. samavAyAMga vRtti
patra-26 169. gommaTasAra gAthA 12, 13 [41] 159. 166.

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The description of the stay of six constellations with the moon for fifteen
Muhurtas, the day and night being fifteen Muhurtas each in the months of Chaitra
and Ashwin, fifteen Arthaadhikars before Vidyaanuvaad, fifteen types of uses of
humans, and the condition of fifteen Palyopama and Sagaropama of Narakas and
Devas. In the sixteenth Samavay, sixteen studies of the first Shruta Skandha of
the Sutra Kritanga Sutra have been said. Sixteen Kashayas are Anantanu bandhi
etc. Sixteen names of Mount Meru, sixteen thousand Shramans of Bhagwan Parshva,
sixteen Adhikars before Atma Pravaad, sixteen thousand Yojanas of the dimension
of the capital of Chamarchancha and Balichancha, sixteen Palyopama and sixteen
Sagaropama of Narakas and Devas, and the description of sixteen Bhavas and the
beings going to Moksha. In the present Samavay, information about the studies of
the second Anga Sutra Kritanga has been given. Sutra Kritanga has a glorious
place from the point of view of the philosophical Agam. In which the refutation
of Paramat and the adornment of Swamat has been done. Sutra Kritanga can be
compared to the Abhidhamma Pitaka of the Buddhist tradition, in which Buddha
refuted sixty-two opinions prevalent in his time and established his own
opinion. In the present Samavay, sixteen thousand Shramans of Bhagwan Parshva
have been mentioned from a historical point of view. In this way, the present
Samavay has a separate importance. Seventeenth and Eighteenth Samavay: An
Analysis In the seventeenth Samavay, seventeen types of Sanjam and Asanjam, the
height of the Manushottar mountain etc., seventeen types of death, the bondage
of seventeen Karma Prakritis in the tenth Sukshma Samparaya Gunasthan, and the
description of seventeen Bhavas and the beings going to Moksha by describing the
condition of seventeen Palyopama and Sagaropama of Narakas and Devas. First of
all, there is a discussion of Sanjam and Asanjam. Sanjam and Asanjam have been
discussed in many places in Agam literature. In Stananga Sutra 170, the
differences between Sanjam and Asanjam have been propounded at various places.
In fact, doing something with effort, not doing anything without effort, or
abstaining from doing anything, and controlling one's senses and mind is called
Sanjam. Four types of Sanjam - Man, Vachan, Kay and Upakaran Sanjam. There are
also five, seven, eight, ten types of Sanjam. Similarly, there are types of
Asanjam. From the point of view of the types of Sanjam, there are two types of
Sanjam - Sarag Sanjam and Vitrag Sanjam. All those types of Sanjam have been
described from different perspectives. Sanjam is the lifeblood of Sadhana.
Sanjam is such a melodious music whose melodious sound waves make the life of
the Sadhak attain supreme bliss. In the present Samavay, seventeen types of
death have been told. The being who takes birth, he must surely embrace death.
The fruit that has blossomed must surely wither. It is a burning truth that
death is inevitable. All the great philosophers have thought about death. In
Stananga 171, three types of death - Balamaran, Panditamaran and Balapanditmaran
have been made and three sub-types of each have been made. In Bhagwati 172, five
types - Avichmmaran, Avadhimmaran, Atyantikmaran, Balamaran, Panditamaran have
been told. In Uttaradhyayanasutra 173, there is a description of Akam and Sakam
death. Here, seventeen types of death have been told. In which all types of
death are included. In this way, various topics have been described in the
seventeenth Samavay. 170. Stananga Sutra-429, 368, 521; 614, 715, 430: 72, 310,
428, 517, 647, 709 etc. 171. Stanangasutra-Sutra 222 172. Bhagvatisutra-
Shatak-13, Udde. 7, Su. 496 173. Uttaradhyayanasutra A-5 [42]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 candra ke sAtha pandraha muhUrta taka chaha nakSatroM kA rahanA, caitra aura
Azvina mAha meM pandraha-pandraha muhUrta ke dina va rAtri honA, vidyAnuvAda
pUrva ke pandraha arthAdhikAra, mAnava ke pandraha prakAra ke prayoga tathA
nArakoM va devoM kI pandraha palyopama va sAgaropama kI sthiti kA varNana hai|
solahaveM samavAya meM sUtrakRtAMga sUtra ke prathama zrutaskandha ke solaha
adhyayana kahe haiN| anantAnubandhI Adi solaha kaSAya haiN| meruparvata ke
solaha nAma, bhagavAn pArzva ke solaha hajAra zramaNa, AtmapravAda pUrva ke
solaha adhikAra, camaracaMcA aura balIcaMcA rAjadhAnI kA solaha hajAra yojana kA
AyAma viSkambha, nArakoM va devoM kI solaha palyopama tathA solaha sAgaropama kI
sthiti aura solaha bhava kara mokSa jAnevAle jIvoM kA varNana hai| prastuta
samavAya meM dvitIya aMga sUtrakRtAMga ke adhyayanoM kI jAnakArI dI gaI hai|
sUtrakRtAMga kA dArzanika Agama kI dRSTi se gauravapUrNa sthAna hai| jisameM
paramata kA khaNDana aura svamata kA maNDana kiyA gayA hai| sUtrakRtAMga kI
tulanA bauddhaparamparA ke abhidhammapiTaka se kI jA sakatI hai, jisameM buddha
ne apane yuga meM pracalita bAsaTha matoM kA khaNDana kara svamata kI
saMsthApanA kI hai| prastuta samavAya meM aitihAsika dRSTi se bhagavAn pArzva ke
solaha hajAra zramaNoM kA ullekha huA hai| isa taraha prastuta samavAya kA
alaga-thalaga mahattva hai| sattarahavAM va aThArahavAM samavAya : eka vizleSaNa
sattarahaveM samavAya meM sattaraha prakAra kA saMyama aura asaMyama,
mAnuSottara parvata kI UMcAI Adi, sattaraha prakAra ke maraNa, dazaveM
sUkSmasaMparAya guNasthAna meM sattaraha karmaprakRtiyoM kA bandha tathA nArakoM
aura devoM ko sasaraha palyopama va sAgaropama kI sthiti kA varNana kara
sattaraha bhava karake mokSa meM jAne vAle jIvoM kA varNana hai|| sarvaprathama
saMyama aura asaMyama kI carcA hai| Agama-sAhitya meM aneka sthaloM para saMyama
aura asaMyama kI carcA huI hai| sthAnAMgasUtra170 meM vibhinna sthAnoM para
saMyama asaMyama ke bheda pratipAdita kiye haiN| vastutaH yatanApUrvaka pravRtti
karanA, ayatanApUrvaka koI bhI pravRtti nahIM karanA athavA pravRttimAtra se
nivRtta honA tathA apanI indriyoM evaM mana para niyaMtraNa karanA saMyama
kahalAtA hai| saMyama ke cAra prakAra-mana, vacana, kAya aura upakaraNa sNym|
saMyama ke pA~ca, sAta, ATha, daza prakAra bhI haiN| usI taraha asaMyama ke bhI
prakAra haiN| saMyama ke prakArAntara se sarAga saMyama aura vItarAga saMyama,
ye do bheda bhI haiN| una sabhI prakAra ke saMyamoM kA vibhinna dRSTiyoM se
nirUpaNa huA hai| saMyama sAdhanA kA prANa hai| saMyama aisA surIlA saMgIta hai
jisakI surIlI svara-lahariyoM se sAdhaka kA jIvana paramAnanda ko prApta karatA
hai| prastuta samavAya meM maraNa ke sattaraha bheda batAye haiN| jo jIva janma
letA hai, vaha avazya hI mutya ko varaNa karatA hai| jo phala khilA hai vaha
avazya murajhAtA hai| yaha eka jvalaMta satya hai ki mRtyu avazyaMbhAvI hai|
sabhI mahAn dArzanikoM ne mRtyu ke sambaMdha meM cintana kiyA hai| sthAnAMga171
meM-maraNa ke bAlamaraNa, paNDitamaraNa aura bAlapaNDita maraNa ye tIna bheda
kiye haiM aura tInoM ke bhI tIna-tIna avAntara bheda kiye haiN| bhagavatI172 meM
AvIcimaraNa, avadhimaraNa, AtyantikamaraNa, bAlamaraNa, paNDitamaraNa ye pA~ca
prakAra batAye haiN| uttarAdhyayana173 sUtra meM akAma aura sakAma maraNa kA
varNana hai| yahA~ para maraNa ke sattaraha prakAra batAye haiN| jisameM sabhI
prakAra ke maraNoM kA samAveza ho gayA hai| isa taraha sattarahaveM samavAya meM
vividha viSayoM kA nirUpaNa huA hai| 170. sthAnAMga sUtra-429, 368, 521; 614,
715, 430 : 72, 310, 428, 517, 647, 709 Adi 171. sthAnAMgasUtra-sUtra 222 172.
bhagavatIsUtra-zataka-13, udde. 7, sU. 496 173. uttarAdhyayana sUtra a-5 [42]

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The eighteenth Samavaya describes eighteen types of Brahmacharya, eighteen
thousand Shramanas of Arhant Arishtanemi, eighteen places of Sakshudrak Vyakt
Shramanas, eighteen thousand verses of Acharang Sutra in eighteen types of
Brahmi script, eighteen Adhikaras of Asti-Nast-Pravad-Purva, eighteen Muhurta in
Paush and Ashadh months, day and night, the state of Narakas and Devas in
eighteen Palyopama and Sagaropama, and the description of eighteen Bhavas and
the beings who go to Moksha. The description of Brahmacharya etc. in this
Samavaya has been discussed in the previous pages. It describes different types
of bodies in relation to Audarik etc. The mention of eighteen thousand Shramanas
of Bhagwan Arishtanemi is historically significant. 74 Karmayogi Shri Krishna
has been considered a historical figure by historians. Therefore, there is no
obstacle in considering Bhagwan Arishtanemi, who lived in that era, as a
historical figure. See the introduction of Jnatasutra for Brahmi script. 275
This is how the material is compiled in the eighteenth Samavaya. Nineteenth and
Twentieth Samavaya: An Analysis The nineteenth Samavaya describes nineteen
studies of the first Shruta Skandha of Jnatasutra, the Sun of Jambudweep heats
the area of nineteen hundred Yojanas. Shakra sets with nineteen Nakshatras.
Nineteen Tirthankaras were initiated. Nineteen Palyopama and Sagaropama states
of Narakas and Devas. In the Stananga Sutra 176, Vasupujya, Malli, Arishtanemi,
Parsva and Mahavira took initiation in their childhood. Acharya Abhaydev has
interpreted Kumaravas as those who did not rule. This Sutra also interprets
"Agaravasamjhe Vasitta" as taking initiation after ruling for a long time. From
the perspective of the Digambar tradition, Kumaravas means "bachelor". And they
consider all five as Balbrahmacharis. The remaining nineteen Tirthankaras were
crowned. Out of them, three Tirthankaras were also Chakravartis. Niyuktikar 77
has also indicated that five Tirthankaras took Pravrajya in their first age and
nineteen Tirthankaras in their middle age. According to Kalpasutra 178 and other
Shwetambar texts, Bhagwan Mahavira was married. Therefore, the Necessary
Niyuktikar, the second Bhadrabahu, considers Bhagwan Mahavira to be married.
This is the description in the nineteenth Samavaya. The twentieth Samavaya
describes twenty Asamadhi Sthanas, twenty Dhanush height of Muni Suvrat Arhat,
twenty thousand Yojanas thickness of Ghanodadhi Vatavalaya, twenty thousand
Samanik Devas of Pranat Devendra, twenty Artha Adhikaras of Pratyakhyan Purva
and twenty Kotakoti Sagaropama as Kalchakra. It describes the state of some
Narakas and Devas in twenty Palyopama and Sagaropama. Those actions that cause
distress in one's own mind or in the minds of others are Asamadhi Sthanas. We
have already shed light on Samadhi. Twenty-first and Twenty-second Samavaya: An
Analysis The twenty-first Samavaya describes twenty-one Shabal Doshas, seven
types of Kshatak Niyatti-Vadar Guna, Mohaniya Karma in  174. 175. 176. 177. 178.
Bhagwan Arishtanemi and Karmayogi Shri Krishna - An Exploration Introduction of
Jnatasutra, pages 22 to 24 Stananga Sutra, Sutra 471 Necessary Niyukti-Gatha
243, 248, 445, 458 Kalpasutra [43]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahaveM samavAya meM brahmacarya ke aThAraha prakAra, arhanta ariSTanemi ke
aThAraha hajAra zramaNa tathA sakSudraka vyakta zramaNoM ke aThAraha sthAna,
AcArAMga sUtra ke aThAraha hajAra pada brAhmIlipi ke aThAraha prakAra,
astinAstipravAda pUrva ke aThAraha adhikAra, pauSa va ASAr3ha mAsa meM aThAraha
muhUrta ke rAta aura dina, nArakoM va devoM kI aThAraha palyopama va sAgaropama
kI sthiti kA varNana aura aThAraha bhava kara mokSa meM jAne vAle jIvoM kA
varNana hai| prastuta samavAya meM brahmacarya Adi kA jo nirUpaNa hai, usake
sambandha meM hama - pRSThoM meM cintana kara cuke haiN| isameM audArika Adi
zarIroM kI apekSA se usake vibhinna prakAra batAye haiN| bhagavAn ariSTanemi ke
aThAraha hajAra zramaNoM kA ullekha aitihAsika dRSTi se mahattvapUrNa hai|74
karmayogI zrIkRSNa ko itihAsakAroM ne aitihAsika puruSa mAnA hai| isalie usa
yuga meM hue bhagavAn araSTinemi ko bhI aitihAsika puruSa mAnane meM koI bAdhA
nahIM hai| brAhmIlipi ke lie jJAtAsUtra kI prastAvanA dekhie  / 275 isa prakAra
aThArahaveM samavAya meM sAmagrI kA saMkalana huA hai| unnIsavAM aura bIsavAM
samavAya : eka vizleSaNa unnIsaveM samavAya meM batalAyA hai- jJAtAsUtra ke
prathama zrutaskandha ke unnIsa adhyayana, jambUdvIpa kA sUrya unnIsa sau yojana
ke kSetra ko saMtapta karatA hai| zakra. unnIsa nakSatroM ke sAtha asta hotA
hai| unnIsa tIrthaMkara 3 dIkSita hue| nArakoM va devoM kI unnIsa palyopama va
sAgaropama kI sthiti| sthAnAMga sUtra176 meM vAsupUjya, mallI, ariSTanemi pArzva
aura mahAvIra ne kumArAvasthA meM dIkSA grahaNa kii| AcArya abhayadeva ne
kumAravAsa kA artha kiyA haijinhoMne rAjya nahIM kiyaa| prastuta sUtra meM bhI
"agAravAsamajhe vasittA" kA artha cirakAla taka rAjya karane ke pazcAt dIkSA
grahaNa kI, aisA kiyA hai| digambara paramparA kI dRSTi se kumAravAsa kA artha
"ku~vArA'' hai| aura ve pA~coM ko bAlabrahmacArI mAnate haiN| zeSa unnIsa
tIrthaMkaroM kA rAjyAbhiSeka huA una meM se tIna tIrthaMkara to cakravartI bhI
hue| niyuktikAra'77 ne yaha bhI sUcana kiyA hai ki pAMca tIrthaMkaroM ne
prathama vaya meM pravrajyA grahaNa kI thI aura unnIsa tIrthaMkaroM ne madhyama
vaya meN| kalpasUtra 178 Adi zvetAmbara granthoM ke anusAra bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
vivAha kiyA thaa| isalie AvazyakaniyuktikAra dvitIya bhadrabAhu bhagavAn
mahAvIra ko vivAhita mAnate haiN| isa taraha unnIsaveM samavAya meM varNana hai|
bIsaveM samavAya meM bIsa asamAdhisthAna, munisuvrata arhat kI bIsa dhanuSa
UMcAI, ghanodadhi vAtavalaya bIsa hajAra yojana moTe, prANata devendra ke bIsa
hajAra sAmAnika deva, pratyAkhyAna pUrva ke bIsa arthAdhikAra evaM bIsa koTAkoTi
sAgaropama kA kAlacakra kahA hai| kinhIM nArakoM va devoM kI sthiti bIsa
palyopama va sAgaropama kI batAI hai| jina kAryoM ko karane se svayaM ke yA
dUsaroM ko citta meM saMkleza utpanna hotA hai, ve asamAdhi sthAna haiN| samAdhi
ke sambandha meM hama pahale prakAza DAla cuke haiN| ikkIsavAM va bAvIsavAM
samavAya : eka vizleSaNa ikkIsaveM samavAya meM ikkIsa zabala doSa, sAta
prakRtiyoM ke kSapaka niyaTTi-vAdara guNa. meM mohanIya karma kI 174. 175. 176.
177. 178. bhagavAn ariSTanemi aura karmayogI zrIkRSNa-eka anuzIlana jJAtAsUtra
kI prastAvanA, pRSTha-22 se 24 taka sthAnAMga sUtra, sUtra 471 Avazyakaniyukti-
gAthA 243, 248, 445, 458 kalpasUtra [43]

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The twenty-first nature is said to be the essence. The fifth, sixth, seventh and
eighth periods of the descending cycle and the first and second periods of the
ascending cycle are each twenty-one thousand years long. The twenty-one Palyopam
and Sagropam states of the Narakas and Devas are described. Here, "Shabal" means
corrupted, stained or deformed by blemishes, which actions defile the character,
they are Shabal. These defects are also described in the Dasha Shruta Skandha.
Thus, the twenty-first Samavay hints at avoiding defects and also contains some
historical material.  The twenty-second Samavay describes twenty-two Parishahs,
twenty-two Sutras of Dristivad, twenty-two types of Pudgal, and the twenty-two
Palyopam and twenty-two Sagropam states of the Narakas and Devas.  This Samavay
describes twenty-two types of Parishahs. The Bhagavati Sutra 179 and the
Uttaradhyayanasutra 180 describe Parishahs in detail. Parishah is a test. For a
seed to germinate, it needs not only water but also scorching sunlight.
Similarly, the heat of Parishah is also necessary to refine the practice. When
Parishah comes, the practitioner does not panic. Instead, he thinks that he has
got a golden opportunity to test himself. According to Uttaradhyayanasutra 81,
the Parishahs are quoted from the seventeenth Prabhrit of the Karma Pravad,
which is part of the study. The Tattvarth Sutra 182 also describes the
Parishahs.  The twenty-third and twenty-fourth Samavays: An Analysis  The
twenty-third Samavay describes twenty-three studies of the Sutra Kritanga, the
twenty-three Tirthankaras of Jambudvipa attaining Kevalgyan at sunrise, except
for Bhagwan Rishabhdev, who knew the eleven Angas in his previous birth.
Rishabh's Jiva knew the fourteen previous births. The twenty-three Tirthankaras
were Mandalik Rajas in their previous births. Rishabh was a Chakravarti. The
twenty-three Palyopam and Sagropam states of the Narakas and Devas are
described. Here, the sixteen studies of the first Shruta Skandha and the seven
studies of the second Shruta Skandha of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra are combined to
make a total of twenty-three studies. This Samavay states that the twenty-three
Tirthankaras attained Kevalgyan at sunrise. In the Aavashyak Niyukti 183, the
first twenty-three Tirthankaras attained Kevalgyan in the morning and Mahavira
in the afternoon. There is a difference of opinion in the Digambar texts about
when each Tirthankara attained Kevalgyan. According to the Aavashyak Niyukti,
Bhagwan Rishabhdev's Jiva knew the twelve Angas, 184 which is a clear
indication. The Digambar tradition believes that Rishabh's Jiva knew the eleven
Angas and the fourteen previous births. Thus, the material has been selected in
the twenty-third Samavay.  The twenty-fourth Samavay describes twenty-four
Tirthankaras, the Jivas of the small Himalayas and the Shikhari mountain,
twenty-four Ahmindras, the twenty-four-fingered masculine shadow of the sun in
the Uttarayana, the twenty-four-kos extent of the source of the Ganga and Sindhu
rivers, and the twenty-four Palyopam and Sagropam states of the Narakas and
Devas. 179. Bhagavati Sutra-Shatak 80, Udde. 8, p. 161 180. Uttaradhyayanasutra,
A. 2 181. a-Uttaradhyayanasutra Niyukti Gatha 69 b-Uttaradhyayanasutra Churni p.
7 182. Tattvarth Sutra A. 8 Su 9 to 17 183. Aavashyak Niyukti Gatha 275 184.
Aavashyak Niyukti Gatha 258 [44]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ikkIsa prakRtiyoM kA sattva kahA hai| avasarpiNI ke pAMcaveM, chaThe, Are tathA
utsarpiNI ke prathama aura dvitIya Are ikkIsa-ikkIsa hajAra varSa ke haiM aura
nArakoM va devoM kI ikkIsa palyopama va sAgaropama kI sthiti batAyI hai| yahA~
para zabala kA artha hai-karburita, malIna yA dhabboM se vikRta jo kArya cAritra
ko malIna banAte hoM, ve zabala haiN| dazAzrutaskandha meM bhI ina doSoM kA
nirUpaNa hai| isa prakAra ikIsaveM samavAya meM doSoM se bacane kA saMketa hai
aura kucha aitihAsika sAmagrI bhI hai| bAIsaveM samavAya meM bAIsa parISaha,
dRSTivAda ke bAIsa sUtra, pudagala ke bAIsa prakAra tathA nArakoM va devoM kI
bAIsa palyopama va bAIsa sAgaropama sthiti kA varNana hai| prastuta samavAya meM
parISaha ke bAIsa prakAra batAye haiN| bhagavatI sUtra179 aura uttarAdhyayana
sUtra180 meM parISaha kA vistAra se nirUpaNa hai| parISaha eka kasauTI hai| bIja
ko aMkurita hone meM jala ke sAtha cilacilAtI dhUpa kI bhI AvazyakatA hotI hai|
isI taraha sAdhanA meM nikhAra lAne ke liye parISaha kI uSNatA bhI Avazyaka hai|
parISaha Ane para sAdhaka ghabarAtA nahIM hai| para vaha socatA hai ki apane Apa
ko parakhane kA mujhe sunaharA avasara milA hai| uttarAdhyayananiyukti81 ke
anusAra parISaha adhyayana, karmapravAda pUrva ke sattarahaveM prAbhRta se
uddhRta haiN| tattvArthasUtra 182 meM bhI parISahoM kA nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai|
teIsavAM aura caubIsavAM samavAya : eka vizleSaNa teIsaveM samavAya meM nirUpita
hai-teIsa sUtrakRtAMga ke adhyayana, jambUdvIpa ke teIsa tIrthaMkaro ko
sUryodaya ke samaya kevalajJAna samutpanna honA, bhagavAn RSabhadeva ko
chor3akara teIsa tIrthaMkara pUrvabhava meM gyAraha aMga ke jJAtA the| RSabha kA
jIva caturdaza pUrva kA jJAtA thaa| teIsa tIrthaMkara pUrvabhava meM mANDalika
rAjA the| RSabha cakravartI the| nArakoM va devoM kI teIsa palyopama sAgaropama
kI sthiti batAI gaI hai| yahA~ para sUtrakRtAMga sUtra ke prathama zrutaskandha
ke solaha aura dvitIya zrutaskandha ke sAta adhyayana milAkara kula teIsa
adhyayanoM kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai| prastuta samavAya meM teIsa tIrthaMkaroM ko
sUryodaya ke samaya kevalajJAna utpanna hone kI bAta kahI hai|
Avazyakaniyukti183 meM prathama teIsa tIrthaMkaroM ko pUrvAhna meM aura mahAvIra
ko pazcimAhna meM kevalajJAna huaa| digambara granthoM meM kisa samaya kisa ko
kevalajJAna huA, isa sambandha meM matabheda hai| Avazyakaniyukti ke anusAra
bhagavAn RSabhadeva ke jIva ko bAraha aMgoM kA jJAna thA,184 yaha spaSTa saMketa
hai| digambara paramparA kA abhimata hai ki RSabha ke jIva ko gyAraha aMga aura
caudaha pUrva kA jJAna thaa| isa taraha teisaveM samavAya meM sAmagrI kA cayana
huA hai| caubIsaveM samavAya meM nirUpita hai-caubIsa tIrthaMkara, kSullaka
himavanta aura zikharIparvata kI jIvAe~, caubIsa ahamindra, caubIsa aMgula vAlI
uttarAyaNagata sUrya kI pauruSI chAyA, gaGgA sindhu mahAnadiyoM ke udgama sthala
para caubIsa kosa kA vistAra, nArakoM va devoM kI caubIsa palyopama va
sAgaropama kI sthiti| 179. bhagavatI sUtra-zataka 80, udde. 8, pR. 161 180.
uttarAdhyayana sUtra, a. 2 181. ka-uttarAdhyayana niyukti gAthA 69 kha-
uttarAdhyayana cUrNi pR. 7 182. tattvArthasUtra a. 8 sU 9 se 17 183.
Avazyakaniyukti gAthA 275 184. Avazyakaniyukti gAthA 258 [44]

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Fifth Samavaya: An Analysis  The Twenty-Fifth Samavaya mentions
twenty-five reflections on the five great vows (Panchayama) of the first and
last Tirthankaras. Malli Bhagwati was twenty-five Dhanush high. The Vaitalya
mountain is twenty-five Yojan high and twenty-five Kos deep in the earth. There
are twenty-five lakh Naraka-avas in the second Naraka. There are twenty-five
studies of the Acharanga Sutra. Twenty-five Uttar-Prakritis of the Aparyapta
Mithyadrishti Vikalendriya Karma bind. There are twenty-five Arthaadhikars of
the Lokabindu Saar. There are twenty-five Palyopama and Sagaropama states of
Narakas and Devas. Here, first of all, twenty-five reflections on the five great
vows are mentioned.  Reflection is essential for Sadhana. It has immense power
and unlimited strength. By the power of reflection, even the impossible becomes
possible. Reflection is the mental state that is affected or influenced by
efforts and resolutions. Acharya Patanjali considered reflection and chanting to
be inseparable. Bhagwan Mahavira clearly stated that one whose reflection is
pure is like a boat in water. He reaches the shore and is freed from all
sorrows. There can be many types of reflection - knowledge, perception, and
character, devotion, etc.! All the best efforts that affect the soul are
reflections. However, there are many classifications of reflection. There are
twenty-five reflections on the five great vows, which are for the stability of
the great vows. Each great vow has five reflections. The names of the
reflections mentioned in the Agam literature, Acharanga and Prashnavyakaran, are
slightly different in the Samavayanga. In Acharanga, the five reflections of the
Ahimsa Mahavrat are: (1) I-Samiti (2) Manparijna (3) Vachanparijna (4)
Adananiksepan Samiti (5) Alokita Panabhojan. In Prashnavyakaran, the five
reflections of the Ahimsa Mahavrat are: (1) Iryasamiti (2) Apapaman (3)
Apapavchan (4) Eshanasamiti (5) Adan Niksepan Samiti. While in the present
Samavaya, the five reflections of the Ahimsa Mahavrat are: (1) Iryasamiti (2)
Manogupti (3) Vachan gupti (4) Alok Bhajan Bhojan (5) Adan-Bhandamaatra-Niksepan
Samiti. Acharya Kundakunda has also mentioned the reflections of the Ahimsa
Mahavrat in the same way. In the Tattvarthaadhigama Bhashya, the five
reflections are: (1) Iryasamiti (2) Manogupti (3) Eshanasamiti (4) Adananiksepan
Samiti (5) Alokita Panabhojan Samiti. In the Tattvartha Rajavartika and
Sarvarthasiddhi, Vakgupti is mentioned in place of Eshanasamiti. Similarly, the
five reflections of the Satya Mahavrat in Acharanga are: (1) Anuvechibhashan (2)
Krodhpratyakhyan (3) Lobhpratyakhyan (4) Bhaypratyakhyan (5) Hasya pratyakhyan.
The same names are found in Prashnavyakaran. In Samavayanga, the five
reflections are: (1) Anuvechibhashan (2) Krodhvivek (3) Lobhvivek (4) Bhayvivek
and (5) Hasya vivek. In Acharanga and Prashnavyakaran, the rejection of anger,
etc., is mentioned. While in Samavayanga, the word Vivek is mentioned. Vivek
means the avoidance of anger, etc. Acharya Kundakunda has mentioned the five
reflections of the Satya Mahavrat as follows: (1) Akrodh (2) Abhay (3) Ahaasya
(4) Alobh (5) Amoh. He has mentioned the rejection of anger, etc., in the
Shwetamber.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paccIsavAM samavAya : eka vizleSaNa paccIsaveM samavAya meM prathama aura
antima tIrthaMkaroM ke paMcayAma yAnI pAMca mahAvratoM kI paccIsa bhAvanAe~
kahIM gaI haiN| mallI bhagavatI paccIsa dhanuSa UMcI thii| vaitADhya parvata
paccIsa yojana U~cA hai aura paccIsa kosa bhUmi meM gaharA hai| dUsare naraka ke
paccIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa haiN| AcArAMga sUtra ke paccIsa adhyayana haiN|
aparyAptaka mithyAdRSTi vikalendriya nAmakarma kI paccIsa uttara prakRtiyA~
bAMdhate haiN| lokabindusAra pUrva ke paccIsa arthAdhikAra haiN| nArakoM aura
devoM kI paccIsa palyopama va sAgaropama kI sthiti hai| yahA~ para sarvaprathama
pA~ca mahAvratoM kI paccIsa bhAvanAe~ batAyI haiN| bhAvanA sAdhanA ke lie
Avazyaka hai| usameM apAra bala aura asImita zakti hotI hai| bhAvanA ke bala se
asAdhya bhI sAdhya ho jAtA hai| jina ceSTAoM aura saMkalpoM se mAnasika vicAroM
ko bhAvita yA vAsita kiyA jAye, vaha bhAvanA hai|85 AcArya pataMjali ne bhAvanA
aura japa meM abheda mAnA hai|86 bhagavAn mahAvIra ne spaSTa kahA hai187 ki
jisakI bhAvanA zuddha hai, vaha jala meM naukA ke sadRza hai| vaha taTa ko
prApta kara saba duHkhoM se mukta ho jAtA hai| bhAvanA ke aneka prakAra ho
sakate haiM - jJAna, darzana aura cAritra, bhakti prabhRti! jitanI bhI zreSTha
ceSTAoM se AtmA ko bhAvita kiyA jAye ve sabhI bhAvanAe~ haiN| tathApi bhAvanA ke
aneka vargIkaraNa milate haiN| pAMca mahAvratoM kI paccIsa bhAvanAe~ haiM  / 288
jo mahAvratoM kI sthiratA ke lie haiM  / 289 pratyeka mahAvrata kI pAMca-pAMca
bhAvanAe~ haiN| Agama sAhitya AcArAMga tathA praznavyAkaraNa meM bhAvanAoM ke jo
nAma Aye haiM, ve nAma samavAyAMga meM kucha pRthaktA liye huye haiN|
AcArAMga'90 meM (1) I-samiti (2) manaparijJA (3) vacanaparijJA (4)
AdAnanikSepaNasamiti (5) alokita pAnabhojana, ye ahiMsA mahAvrata kI pAMca
bhAvanAe~ haiN| praznavyAkaraNa111 meM ahiMsA mahAvrata kI (1) IryAsamiti (2)
apApamana (3) apApavacana (4) eSaNAsamiti (5) AdAna nikSepaNa smiti| jaba ki
prastuta samavAya meM ahiMsA mahAvrata kI pA~ca bhAvanAe~ isa prakAra AyI haiM -
(1) IryAsamiti (2) manogupti (3) vacanagupti (4) Aloka bhAjana bhojana, (5)
aadaan-bhaannddmaatr-nikssepnnsmiti| AcArya kundakunda192 ne ahiMsA mahAvrata kI
bhAvanAe~ isI prakAra batAyI haiN| tattvArthAdhigamabhASya meM bhI (1)
IryAsamiti (2) manogupti (3) eSaNAsamiti (4) AdAnanikSepaNasamiti (5) Alokita
paanbhojnsmiti| tattvArtha rAjavArtika 93 aura sarvArthasiddhi meM194
eSaNAsamiti ke sthAna para vAk gupti batAyI hai| isI taraha satyamahAvrata kI
pAMca bhAvanAe~ AcArAMga195 meM isa prakAra haiM - (1) anuvIcibhASaNa (2)
krodhapratyAkhyAna (3) lobhapratyAkhyAna (4) bhayapratyAkhyAna (5)
haasyprtyaakhyaan| praznavyAkaraNa meM ye hI nAma milate haiN| samavAyAMga meM
(1) anuvIcibhASaNa (2) krodhaviveka (3) lobhaviveka (4) bhayaviveka aura (5)
hAsyaviveka hai| AcArAMga196 aura praznavyAkaraNa197 meM krodha Adi kA
pratyAkhyAna batAyA hai| jabaki samavAyAMga meM viveka zabda kA ullekha hai|
viveka se tAtparya krodha Adi ke parihAra se hI hai| AcArya kundakunda198 ne
satya mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAe~ isa prakAra batAyI haiM (1) akrodha (2)
abhaya (3) ahAsya (4) alobha (5) amoh| unhoMne zvetAmbara 185. pAsanAhacariyaM
pRSTha 460 186. tajjapastadarthabhAvanam-pAtaMjalayogasUtram 1/28 187.
sUtrakRtAMga 1/15/5 188. uttarAdhyayana, a. 31 gA. 17 189. tattvArthasUtra 7/3
190. AcArAMga sUtra 2/3/15/402 191. praznavyAkaraNasaMvaradvAra 192.
paTaprAbhRta meM cAritraprAbhRta gA. 31 tattvArtharAjavArtika 7/4-5, 537 194.
sarvArthasiddhi-7/4 pR. 345 195. AcArAMga 1/3/15/402 196. vahI 197.
praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra 198. cAritraprAbhRta 32 [45] 193. tatvA

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Instead of mentioning *anuveechibhasan* (anuveechibhasan) in the tradition,
*amoh* (amoh) feeling has been mentioned. In the commentary of Charitrapraabhrut
99, the meaning of *amoh* (amoh) has been given as *anuveechibhasan*
(anuveechibhasan) skill. *Anuveechibhasan* (anuveechibhasan) means that the
language is *anuveechibhasan* (anuveechibhasan) according to the *Vichin*
(Vichin) *Vaglehari* (Vaglehari) *Tamnukruty* (Tamnukruty) or language,
according to the *Sanuveechibhasajinsutra* (Sanuveechibhasajinsutra). The
meaning is that the language is *anuveechibhasan* (anuveechibhasan) according to
the *Purvaacharya* (Purvaacharya) sutra tradition, violating the *Purvaacharya*
(Purvaacharya) sutra tradition. In the Shwetambar tradition, the meaning of
*anuveechibhasan* (anuveechibhasan) is "speaking after thinking, i.e., speaking
after thinking". Both meanings have been accepted in *Tattvarthrajwartik*
(Tattvarthrajwartik) 200. The five feelings of the *Achaury* (Achaury) great vow
are as follows: (1) *Anuveechimitaavgrah* (Anuveechimitaavgrah) *yaachan*
(yaachan) (2) *Anugyaapit* (Anugyaapit) *paan-bhojan* (paan-bhojan) (3) *Avgrah*
(Avgrah) *ka* (ka) *avdharan* (avdharan) (4) *Abhikshanavgrahyaachan*
(Abhikshanavgrahyaachan) (5) *Sadharmic* (Sadharmic) *se* (se) *avgrah* (avgrah)
*yaachan* (yaachan). In *Prashnavyakaran* (Prashnavyakaran), (1) *Vivikt*
(Vivikt) *vasavasati* (vasavasati) (2) *Abhikshan* (Abhikshan) *avgrah* (avgrah)
*yaachan* (yaachan) (3) *Shayya* (Shayya) *samiti* (samiti) (4) *Sadharan*
(Sadharan) *pindmaatra* (pindmaatra) *laabh* (laabh) (5) *Vinay* (Vinay)
*prayog* (prayog). In *Samavaayang* (Samavaayang) sutra, these names are: (1)
*Avgrahanugyaapana* (Avgrahanugyaapana) (2) *Avgrah* (Avgrah) *seemaparijnaan*
(seemaparijnaan) (3) *Swayam* (Swayam) *hee* (hee) *avgrah* (avgrah)
*anugrahantata* (anugrahantata) (4) *Sadharmic* (Sadharmic) *avgrah* (avgrah)
*anugyaapanata* (anugyaapanata) (5) *Sadharan* (Sadharan) *bhaktpaan*
(bhaktpaan) *anugyaapy* (anugyaapy) *paribhunjanata* (paribhunjanata). Acharya
Kundkund has given the five feelings of the *Archaary* (Archaary) great vow as
follows: (1) *Shunyaagaarnivas* (Shunyaagaarnivas) (2) *Vimochitaavas*
(Vimochitaavas) (3) *Paruprodh* (Paruprodh) *na* (na) *karna* (karna) (4)
*Eshanashuddhi* (Eshanashuddhi) (5) *Sadharmic* (Sadharmic) *avisanvaad*
(avisanvaad). The five feelings of the *Achaury* (Achaury) great vow are
different in the Digambar tradition's texts from the Shwetambar Agam texts. Just
as Acharya Kundkund has described the feelings, they have also been described in
*Sarvarth Siddhi* (Sarvarth Siddhi). In *Achaarang* (Achaarang), the five
feelings of the *Brahmacharya* (Brahmacharya) great vow are as follows: (1)
*Streekathavarjan* (Streekathavarjan) (2) *Stree* (Stree) *ke* (ke) *ang* (ang)
*pratyang* (pratyang) *avlokan* (avlokan) *ka* (ka) *varjan* (varjan) (3)
*Purvabhuukt* (Purvabhuukt) *bhog* (bhog) *smriti* (smriti) *ka* (ka) *varjan*
(varjan) (4) *Atimaatra* (Atimaatra) *aur* (aur) *pranit* (pranit) *paan* (paan)
*bhojan* (bhojan) *ka* (ka) *parivarjan* (parivarjan) (5) *Stree* (Stree) *aady*
(aady) *se* (se) *sansakt* (sansakt) *shayanasan* (shayanasan) *ka* (ka) *vajan*
(vajan). In *Prashnavyakaran* (Prashnavyakaran), (1) *Asansakt* (Asansakt)
*vaas* (vaas) *vasati* (vasati), (2) *Streejan* (Streejan) *katha* (katha)
*varjan* (varjan) (3) *Stree* (Stree) *ke* (ke) *ang* (ang) *pratyangon*
(pratyangon) *aur* (aur) *cheshtaon* (cheshtaon) *ke* (ke) *avlokan* (avlokan)
*ka* (ka) *varjan* (varjan) (4) *Purv* (Purv) *bhuukt* (bhuukt) *aur* (aur)
*purv* (purv) *kridit* (kridit) *ka* (ka) *asmaran* (as

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paramparA meM Aye hue anuvIcibhASaNa ke sthAna para amoha bhAvanA kA ullekha
kiyA hai| cAritraprAbhRta kI TIkA 99 meM amoha kA artha anuvIcibhASaNa kuzalatA
kiyA hai| anuvIcibhASaNatA se tAtparya hai ki vIci vAglaharI tAmanukRtya yA
bhASA vartate sAnuvIcibhASajinasUtrAnusAriNI bhASA anuvIcibhASA
pUrvAcAryasUtraparipATImanullaMghya bhaassnniiymityrthH| zvetAmbara paramparA
meM anuvIcibhASaNa kA artha "anuviciMtya bhASaNam arthAt cintanapUrvaka bolanA"
kiyA hai| tattvArtharAjavArtika200 meM donoM hI arthoM ko grahaNa kiyA hai|
acaurya mahAvrata kI pA~ca bhAvanAe~ isa prakAra haiM-(1) anuvIcimitAvagraha
yAcana (2) anujJApita pAna-bhojana (3) avagraha kA avadhAraNa (4)
abhIkSaNaavagrahayAcana (5) sAdharmika se avagraha yaacn| praznavyAkaraNa meM
(1) vivikta vAsavasati (2) abhIkSNa avagraha yAcana (3) zayyA samiti (4)
sAdhAraNa piNDamAtra lAbha (5) vinaya pryog| samavAyAMga sUtra meM ye nAma
haiM-(1)avagrahAnujJApanA (2) avagraha sImAparijJAna (3) svayaM hI avagraha
anugrahaNatA (4) sAdharmika avagraha anujJApanatA (5) sAdhAraNa bhaktapAna
anujJApya pribhunyjntaa| AcArya kundakunda ne arcArya mahAvrata kI pA~ca
bhAvanAe~ isa prakAra dI haiM-(1) zUnyAgAranivAsa (2) vimocitAvAsa (3)
parauparodha na karanA (4) eSaNAzuddhi (5) saadhrmik-avisNvaad| acaurya
mahAvrata kI pAMcoM bhAvanAe~ digambara paramparA ke granthoM meM zvetAmbara
Agama granthoM se bhinna hai| jisa prakAra AcArya kundakunda ne bhAvanAoM kA
nirUpaNa kiyA hai vaisI hI sarvArthasiddhi meM bhI batAyI gayI haiN| _ AcArAMga
meM brahmacarya mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAe~ isa prakAra haiM - (1)
strIkathAvarjana (2) strI ke aMga-pratyaMga avalokana kA varjana (3) pUrvabhukta
bhogasmRti kA varjana (4) atimAtra aura praNIta pAna-bhojana kA parivarjana (5)
strI Adi se saMsakta zayanAsana kA vjn| praznavyAkaraNa meM (1) asaMsakta vAsa
vasati, (2) strIjana kathA-varjana (3) strI ke aMga pratyaMgoM aura ceSTAoM ke
avalokana kA varjana (4) pUrva bhukta aura pUrva krIDita kA asmaraNa (5) praNIta
AhAra kA vivrjn| AcArya kundakunda201 ne brahmacarya mahAvrata kI pAMca
bhAvanAyeM ye batAI haiM-(1) mahilA avalokana virati (2) pUrvabhukta kA smaraNa
na karanA (3) saMsaskta vasati virati (4)strI rAgakathA-virati, (5) pauSTika
rsvirti| AcArya umAsvAti202 ne aura sarvArthasiddhi meM brahmacarya kI bhAvanAeM
isa prakAra haiM(1)strIrAgakathAvarjana (2) manohara aMga nirIkSaNa virati (3)
pUrvaratAnusmaraNaparityAga (4) vRSyeSTarasa-parityAga (5)
svshriirsNskaarprityaag| aparigraha mahAvrata kI bhAvanAeM AcArAMga meM isa
prakAra haiM-(1) manojJa aura amanojJa zabda meM samabhAva (2) manojJa aura
amanojJa rUpa meM smbhaav| (2) manojJa aura amanojJa gandha meM smbhaav| (4)
manojJa aura anamojJa rasa meM smbhaav| (5) manojJa aura amanojJa sparza meM
samabhAva aura yahI nAma praznavyAkaraNa meM jyoM ke tyoM milate haiN|
samavAyAMga meM isa prakAra hai-(1) zrotrendriya rAgoparati (2)
cakSurindriyarAgoparati (3) ghrANendriyarAgoparati (4) rasanendriyarAgoparati
aura (5) sprshendriyraagoprti| AcArya kundakunda ne aparigraha mahAvrata kI
bhAvanAoM meM AcArAMga aura praznavyAkaraNa kA hI anusaraNa kiyA hai| isa
prakAra paMca mahAvratoM kI bhAvanA ke sambandha meM vibhinna sthaloM para
nAmabheda va kramabheda prApta hotA hai; tathApi Agama aura Agametara sAhitya kA
hArda eka hI hai| yahAM para prathama aura antima tIrthaMkara ke pAMca
mahAvratoM ko lakSya meM rakhakara paccIsa bhAvanAe~ nirUpita kI gayI haiN|
dUsare tIrthaMkara se lekara teIsaveM tIrthaMkara 199. cAritraprAbhRta 22 kI
TIkA 200. tattvArtharAjavArtika 7/5 201. cAritraprAbhRta-gAthA 34 202.
tattvArthasUtra-7/7 [46)

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There were four yamas during the reign of Tak. Uttaraadhyayanasutra 203,
Bhagavati 204, etc. are evidence of this. In the present Samavay, the Vaithadya
mountain is said to be twenty-five yojanas high, but due to carelessness,
twenty-five dhanushas have been printed, which is not correct. Thus, the twenty-
fifth Samavay contains a collection of material. The twenty-sixth to twenty-
ninth Samavayas: An Analysis  The twenty-sixth Samavay mentions twenty-six
Uddeshan Kalas of the Dasashrutaskandha, Kalpasutra and Vyavaharsutra. It
describes the twenty-six natures of the mohaniya karma of the abhavya jivas, the
twenty-six palyopama and sagaropama states of the narakas and devas.  The
twenty-seventh Samavay describes the twenty-seven qualities of a Shraman, the
twenty-seven days of the nakshatra masa, the twenty-seven natures of the
mohaniya karma of a bandha-free jiva with vedak samyaktva, the twenty-seven
angula paurushi shadow on the seventh day of Shravan Sudi, and the twenty-seven
palyopama and sagaropama states of the narakas and devas.  The twenty-eighth
Samavay describes the twenty-eight types of Acharaprakalpa. It mentions the
twenty-eight natures of the mohaniya karma in the bhavasiddhika jivas. There are
twenty-eight types of Abhinibodhik knowledge. There are twenty-eight lakh
vimanas in the Ishana Kalpa. The name karma that binds the deva gati binds
twenty-eight natures, and the naraki jiva also binds twenty-eight natures. The
difference is between auspicious and inauspicious. It describes the twenty-eight
palyopama and sagaropama states of the narakas and devas.  Here, first of all,
the twenty-eight types of Acharaprakalpa are described. Acharya Sanghadas Ganii
205 considered the following as synonyms for Nishita's Achar, Agra, Prakalpa,
Chulika: Achar, Agra, Prakalpa, Chulika. The said scripture is related to Charan
Karananuyoga. Therefore, its name is "Achar". There are five Agras in
Acharangasutra - four Achar Chulas and Nishita. Therefore, Nishita is called
Agra. 206 Nishita is created from the ninth Purva Achar Prabhut, therefore its
name is Prakalpa. The second meaning of Prakalpa is also "to pierce". 207 In
Agam literature, Nishita is called "Ayara Kalpa". Agra and Chula are both words
with the same meaning. Twenty-eight types of Abhinibodhik knowledge have been
described. In Nandi Sutra 208, and also in Tattvarth Sutra 206, Tattvarth
Bhashya 210, Tattvarth Rajavartika 211, Visheshavashak Bhashya 212, etc.,
knowledge has been discussed in detail. 213 Here, only a hint has been given. In
this way, the twenty-eighth Samavay contains a collection of material.  203.
Uttaraadhyayanasutra-A. 22 204. Bhagavati Sutra 205. Nishita Bhashya-3 206.
Nishita Bhashya-57 207. Nishita Churni, p. 30 208. Nandi Sutra-Su. 59-Edited by
Shri Punyavijay Ji M. 209. Tattvarth Sutra-1/13,14 210. Tattvarth
Bhashya-1/13,14 211. Tattvarth Rajavartika-1/14/1/59 etc. 212. Visheshavashak
Bhashya-Vriti 100 213. Jain Darshan Swaroop and Analysis, Shri Devendra Muni
Shastri [47]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 taka ke zAsana meM cAra yAma the| uttarAdhyayana203, bhagavatI204 Adi isa bAta
ke sAkSya haiN| prastuta samavAya meM vaitADhya parvata ko paccIsa yojana U~cA
kahA hai, para asAvadhAnI se paccIsa dhanuSa chapA hai, jo sahI nahIM hai| isa
prakAra paccIsaveM samavAya meM sAmagrI kA saMkalana hai| chabbIsaveM se
unatIsavA~ samavAya : eka vizleSaNa chabbIsaveM samavAya meM dazAzrutaskandha,
kalpasUtra aura vyavahArasUtra ke chabbIsa uddezana kAla kahe haiN| abhavya
jIvoM ke mohanIya karma kI chabbIsa prakRtiyoM, nArakoM va devoM ke chabbIsa
palyopama aura sAgaropama kI sthiti kA varNana sattAIsaveM samavAya meM zramaNa
ke sattAIsa guNa, nakSatra mAsa ke sattAIsa dina, vedaka samyaktva ke bandha
rahita jIva ke mohanIya karma kI sattAIsa prakRtiyA~, zrAvaNa sudI saptamI ke
dina sattAIsa aMgula kI pauruSI chAyA aura nArakoM va devoM kI sattAIsa
palyopama evaM sAgaropama kI sthiti kA varNana hai| aTThAIsaveM samavAya meM
AcAraprakalpa ke aTThAIsa prakAra batAye haiN| bhavasiddhika jIvoM meM mohanIya
karma kI aTThAIsa prakRtiyA~ kahI gayI haiN| Abhinibodhika jJAna ke aTThAIsa
prakAra haiN| IzAna kalpa meM aTThAIsa lAkha vimAna haiN| deva gati bA~dhane
vAlA nAmakarma kI aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhatA hai, to nArakI jIva bhI
aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhatA hai| antara zubha va azubha kA hai| nArakoM va
devoM kI aTThAIsa palyopama aura sAgaropama kI sthiti kA varNana yahA~ para
sarvaprathama AcAraprakalpa ke aTThAIsa prakAra batAye heN| AcArya saMghadAsa
gaNi205 ne nizItha ke AcAra, agra, prakalpa, cUlikA, ye paryAyavAcI nAma mAne
haiN| ukta zAstra kA sambandha caraNakaraNAnuyoga se hai| ataH isakA nAma
"AcAra" hai| AcArAMgasUtra ke pAMca agra haiM -cAra AcAracUlAe~ aura nishiith|
isaliye nizItha kA nAma agra hai  / 206 nizItha kI navaveM pUrva AcAraprAbhUta
se racanA kI gayI hai, isaliye isakA nAma prakalpa hai| prakalpa kA dvitIya
artha "chedana" karane vAlA bhI hai|207 Agama sAhitya meM nizItha kA
"AyArakalpa" nAma milatA hai| agra aura cUlA ye donoM samAna artha vAle zabda
haiN| Abhinibodhika jJAna ke aTThAIsa prakAra batAye gaye haiN| nandIsUtra208
meM tathA tattvArthasUtra,206 tattvArthabhASya210 tattvArtha-rAjavArtika211,
vizeSAvazyakabhASya212 Adi meM bhI jJAna kI vistAra se carcA kI gayI hai|213
yahA~ para kevala sUcana mAtra kiyA gayA hai| isa taraha aTThAIsaveM samavAya
meM sAmagrI kA saMkalana huA 203. uttarAdhyayanasUtra-a. 22 204. bhagavatIsUtra
205. nizIthabhASya-3 206. nizIthabhASya-57 207. nizIthacUrNi, pR.30 208.
nandIsUtra-sU. 59-zrI puNyavijaya jI ma. dvArA sampAdita 209.
tattvArthasUtra-1/13,14 210. tattvArthabhASya-1/13,14 211.
tattvArtharAjavArtika-1/14/1/59 Adi 212. vizeSAvazyaka bhASya-vRtti 100 213.
jainadarzana svarUpa aura vizleSaNa, zrI devendramuni zAstrI [47]

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The twenty-ninth Samvaya discusses the concept of Papashruta (sinful scriptures)
and its connection to the twenty-nine nights and days of the Aashaadh month. It
also mentions the twenty-nine types of Namekarma (karmic actions) that bind a
Samyagdristi (rightly-seeing) Tirthankara (liberated soul) and their names. The
text further describes the twenty-nine Palyopam (comparisons to a hair) and
Sagaropama (comparisons to an ocean) states of Narakas (hells) and Devas (gods).
This Samvaya primarily focuses on the concept of Papashruta. While the Stananga
Sutra (214) mentions nine types of Papashruta, the Samvayanga Sutra expands this
to twenty-nine. The text emphasizes that even the worship of false scriptures
can lead to sin, hence the importance of understanding Papashruta. However, for
a Samyagdristi, even Papashruta can become Samyakshruta (rightly-seen
scriptures). Acharya Devavachka states, "Samm-ditthas samm-suyam, miccha-ditthis
miccha-suyam" (For the rightly-seeing, it is rightly-seen, for the wrongly-
seeing, it is wrongly-seen). A Samyagdristi analyzes these scriptures with
discernment, considering the context and purpose, thus negating their potential
for sin. Throughout Jain history, many influential Acharyas have used these
scriptures to spread the Dharma. Therefore, the twenty-ninth Samvaya serves as a
compilation of important knowledge.  **From the Thirtieth to the Thirty-fourth
Samvaya: An Analysis**  The thirtieth Samvaya discusses the thirty places where
Mohaniya Karma (karma that binds delusion) is generated. It also mentions the
thirty years of Shraman Paryaya (period of asceticism) of Manditputra Sthavir,
the thirty Muhurta (auspicious moments) in a day and night, the thirty Dhanush
(bows) height of the eighteenth Tirthankara named Ar, the thirty thousand
Samanik Devas (minor gods) of Sahasrar Devendra, the thirty years of Lord
Parshva and Lord Mahavira's stay in their respective households, the thirty lakh
Narakavas (hellish states) of Ratnapraba Earth, and the thirty Palyopam and
Sagaropama states of Narakas and Devas.  The thirty causes of Mohaniya Karma,
mentioned in the Samvayanga Sutra, are elaborated upon in the Dasha Shruta
Skandha (215) and briefly mentioned in the Aavashyak Sutra (216). Commentators
explain that the term "Mohaniya" generally refers to all eight types of karma,
but specifically refers to Mohaniya Karma. This Samvaya also contains valuable
historical information about Ar, Parshva, and Mahavira.  The thirty-first
Samvaya discusses the thirty qualities that manifest during the initial
attainment of Siddhatva Paryaya (liberation), the Mandar mountain, the
Abhivaddhit Maas (month with an extra day), the Suryamas (solar month), the
calculation of night and day, and the thirty Palyopam and Sagaropama states of
Narakas and Devas.  The thirty-second Samvaya discusses the thirty Yogasangraha
(collections of yoga), the thirty Devendras (chief gods), the thirty-two hundred
Kevalis (omniscient beings) of Kunthu Arhat, the thirty lakh Vimanas (flying
vehicles) in the Saudharma Kalpa (heavenly realm), the thirty-two stars of the
Revati Nakshatra (constellation), the thirty-two types of Natya-vidhi (dramatic
techniques), and the thirty-two Sagaropama and Palyopam states of Narakas and
Devas.  The term "Yoga" refers to the actions of mind, speech, and body. The
thirty-two Yogasangraha here focus on the virtuous actions of mind, speech, and
body. The Brihadvritti (extensive commentary) on the Aavashyak Sutra elaborates
on this topic.  The thirty-third Samvaya discusses the thirty Ashatanas
(desires), the thirty-storeyed palace in the Asura Indra's capital, and the
thirty Sagaropama and Palyopam states of Narakas and Devas.  It is important to
remember that the number of Sagaropama states mentioned for each Deva
corresponds to their specific level of spiritual development.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unatIsaveM samavAya meM pApazruta prasaMga, ASAr3ha mAsa Adi ke unatIsa rAta
dina, samyagdRSTi tIrthaMkara nAma sahita unatIsa nAmakarma ko prakRtiyoM ko
bA~dhatA hai| nArakoM devoM kI unatIsa palyopama va sAgaropama kI sthiti Adi kA
varNana hai| prastuta samavAya meM sarvaprathama pApazruta prasaMgoM kA varNana
kiyA hai| sthAnAMga214 meM nava pApazruta prasaMga batAye haiM to
samavAyAMgasUtra meM unatIsa prakAra batAye haiN| mithyA zAstra kI ArAdhanA bhI
pApa kA nimitta bana sakatI hai isaliye yahAM pApazruta ke prasaMga batAye haiN|
para saMyamI sAdhaka, jo samyagdRSTi hai, usake liye pApazruta bhI samyakzruta
bana jAtA hai| AcArya devavAcaka ne kahA hai ki "sammadiTThassa sammasuyaM,
micchAdiTThissa micchAsuyaM" samyagdRSTi asAdhAraNa saMyogoM meM yA amuka apekSA
kI dRSTi se vivekapUrvaka inakA adhyayana karatA hai, to ye pApazruta prasaMga
nahIM hai| jaina itihAsa meM aise anekoM prabhAvaka AcArya hue haiM, jinhoMne
ina vidyAoM ke dvArA dharma kI prabhAvanA bhI kI hai| isa taraha unatIsaveM
samavAya meM sAmagrI kA saMkalana hai| tIsaveM samavAya se cauMtIsavAM samavAya
: eka vizleSaNa tIsaveM samavAya meM mohanIya karma bA~dhane ke tIsa sthAna,
maNDitaputra sthavira kI tIsa varSa zramaNa paryAya, ahorAtra ke tIsa muhUrta,
aThArahaveM ara nAmaka tIrthaMkara kI tIsa dhanuSa kI U~cAI, sahasrAra devendra
ke tIsa hajAra sAmAnika deva, bhagavAn pArzva va prabhu mahAvIra kA tIsa varSa
taka gRhavAsa meM rahanA, ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke tIsa lAkha nArakavAsa, nArakoM
va devoM kI tIsa palyopama va sAgaropama kI sthiti kA varNana hai| mohanIya
karma ke tIsa nimitta jo samavAyAMga meM pratipAdita kiye gaye haiM, unakA
dazAzrutaskanta215 meM vistAra se nirUpaNa hai| AvazyakasUtra216 meM bhI
saMkSepa meM sUcana kiyA gayA hai| TIkAkAroM ne yaha batAyA hai ki mohanIya
zabda se sAmAnya rUpa se AThoM karma samajhane cAhiye aura vizeSa rUpa se
mohanIya karma! isa samavAya meM 'ara' pArzva aura mahAvIra ke sambandha meM bhI
aitihAsika dRSTi se mahattvapUrNa sAmagrI kA saMkalana huA hai| ikatIsaveM
samavAya meM siddhattva paryAya prApta karane ke prathama samaya meM hone vAle
ikatIsa guNa, mandara parvata, abhivarddhita mAsa, sUryamAsa, rAtri aura dina kI
parigaNanA aura nArakoM va devoM kI ikatIsa palyopama va sAgaropama kI sthiti kA
varNana hai| battIsaveM samavAya meM battIsa yogasaMgraha, battIsa devendra,
kunthu arhat ke battIsa sau battIsa kevalI, saudharma kalpa meM battIsa lAkha
vimAna, revatI nakSatra ke battIsa tAre, battIsa prakAra kI nATya-vidhi tathA
nArakoM va devoM kI battIsa sAgaropama va palyopama kI sthiti kA varNana hai|
mana, vacana aura kAyA kA vyApAra yoga kahalAtA hai| yahA~ para battIsa
yogasaMgraha meM mana, vacana aura kAyA ke prazasta vyApAra ko liyA gayA hai|
Avazyaka bRhadvRtti meM isa viSaya para cintana kiyA gayA hai| tetIsaveM
samavAya meM tetIsa AzAtanAe~, asurendra kI rAjadhAnI meM tetIsa maMjila ke
viziSTa bhavana tathA nArakoM va devoM kI tetIsa sAgaropama va palyopama kI
sthiti kA varNana hai| yahA~ para yaha bhI smaraNa rakhanA hogA ki jina devoM kI
jitane sAgaropama kI sthiti batalAyI gayI hai, ve 214. sthAnAMgasUtra sthA. 9,
sU. 6.78 215. dazAzrutaskandha-a.8 216. AvazyakasUtra-a. 4 [48]

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They breathe in and out on the same sides. And after a thousand years, they
desire to eat. In the present Samavaya, how should the behavior of the Laghu
Shramanas towards the Jyeshta Shramanas be respectful, and how should they
constantly avoid Ashatana, etc.? The action that causes a decline in knowledge,
vision, and character is Ashatana-Avagya. The thirty-three Ashatanas are
described in detail in Dasha Shruta Skandha 218.  In the thirty-fourth Samavaya,
the thirty-four Atishayas of the Tirthankaras, the thirty-four Vijayakshetras of
the Chakravarti, the thirty-four long Vaitaldhyas in Jambudvipa, the thirty-four
excellent Tirthankaras who can be born in Jambudvipa, and the thirty-four lakhs
of Asuraindras and the thirty-four lakhs of Narakavasa in the first, fifth,
sixth, and seventh Narakas are mentioned. The present Samavaya mentions the
Atishayas. Regarding the Atishayas, Acharya Hemchandra has pondered in the
Yogashastra 219 and Abhidhan Chintamani 220, etc. That contemplation is based on
the Brihad Vachana. Here, from the second Atishaya to the fifth Atishaya in the
thirty-four Atishayas are Janmapratyayik. From the twenty-first to the thirty-
fourth Atishaya and the twelfth Atishaya are due to the destruction of karma.
The remaining Atishayas are Devakrit.  The Digambar tradition also believes in
thirty-four Atishayas. But there is some difference in those Atishayas. They
believe in ten Janmapratyay, fourteen Devakrit, and ten Kevalgyan Krit.  Here,
it should be remembered that according to the commentator of Samavayanga,
Acharya Abhaydev, Ahar Nihar are invisible to the eye. These are Janmakrit
Atishayas. While according to the Digambar view, the absence of food is
considered an Atishaya, and it is not Janmakrit but Kevalgyan Krit. From the
Shwetamber perspective, the Bhagwan gives sermons in Ardhamagadhi, and that
sermon is transformed into the language of all beings. These two Atishayas are
considered Karmakshayakrit.  There is some difference in the division method in
the Atishaya descriptions of Acharya Abhaydev and Acharya Hemchandra. But both
Abhaydev and Hemchandra have the same opinion regarding language. According to
Acharya Hemchandra, nineteen Atishayas are Devakrit, while according to
Abhaydev, fifteen Atishayas are Devakrit. Acharya Hemchandra has written that
the Bhagwan's face is visible all around. That is a Devakrit Atishaya, while
according to the Digambar view, it is Kevalgyan Krit. The creation of the three
Kotas is also considered a Devakrit Atishaya. But it is not mentioned in the
thirty-four Atishayas in Samavayanga. There is a lack of strong arguments
regarding the division of the thirty-four Atishayas that the Acharyas have done,
as to why a particular Atishaya is given in a particular division? It should
also be remembered that there is no division of any kind in the original
Samavayangasutra. Like Samavayanga, the Anguttaranikaya (5.121) mentions five
Atishayas of the Tathagata Buddha - they are knowledgeable about meaning,
knowledgeable about Dharma, knowledgeable about limits, knowledgeable about
time, and knowledgeable about the assembly.  From the thirty-fifth Samavaya to
the hundredth Samavaya: An Analysis  The thirty-fifth Samavaya mentions the
thirty-five Atishayas of true words, Kunthu, Arhat, Datta Vasudev, Nandan
Baldev, these thirty-five bows.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 utane hI pakSoM meM ucchvAsa aura niHzvAsa lete haiN| aura utane hI hajAra
varSa ke bAda unheM AhAra grahaNa karane kI icchA hotI hai| prastuta samavAya
meM laghuzramaNoM kA jyeSThazramaNoM ke sAtha kisa prakAra kA vinayapUrvaka
vyavahAra rahanA cAhiye, AzAtanA Adi se nirantara bacanA caahiye| jisa kriyA ke
karane se jJAna, darzana aura cAritra kA hrAsa hotA hai vaha AzAtanA-avajJA hai|
tetIsa AzAtanAoM kA nirUpaNa dazAzrutaskandha218 meM vistAra se AyA hai|
cautIsaveM samavAya meM tIrthaMkaroM ke cautIsa atizaya, cakravartI ke cautIsa
vijayakSetra, jambUdvIpa meM cautIsa dIrgha vaitADhya, jambUdvIpa meM utkRSTa
cauMtIsa tIrthaMkara utpanna ho sakate haiM tathA asurendra ke cautIsa lAkha
tathA pahalI, pA~cavI, chaThI aura sAtavIM naraka meM cauMtIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa
kahe haiN| prastuta samavAya meM atizayoM kA ullekha hai| atizayoM ke sambandha
meM AcArya hemacandra ne yogazAstra219 aura abhidhAna cintAmaNi220 Adi granthoM
meM cintana kiyA hai| vaha cintana bRhad vAcanA ke AdhAra para hai| yahA~ para
cautIsa atizayoM meM se dUsare atizaya se pA~caveM atizaya taka janmapratyayika
haiN| ikkIsa se lekara cautIsa atizaya va bArahavA~ atizaya karma ke kSaya se
hotA hai| zeSa atizaya devakRta digambara paramparA bhI cautIsa atizaya mAnatI
haiN| para una atizayoM meM kucha bhinnatA hai| ve daza janma pratyaya, caudaha
devakRta aura daza kevalajJAna kRta mAnate haiN| yahA~ smaraNa rakhanA cAhiye ki
samavAyAMga ke TIkAkAra AcArya abhayadeva ke mata se AhAra nihAra, ye A~kha se
adRzya hote haiN| ye janmakRta atizaya haiN| jaba ki digambara matAnusAra AhAra
kA abhAva, yaha atizaya mAnA gayA hai aura vaha janmakRta nahIM kevalajJAnakRta
hai| zvetAmbara dRSTi se bhagavAn ardhamAgadhI meM upadeza pradAna karate haiM
aura vaha upadeza sabhI jIvoM kI bhASA ke rUpa meM pariNata hotA hai| ye do
atizaya karmakSayakRta mAne gaye haiN| AcArya abhayadeva aura AcArya hemacandra
ke atizayavarNana meM vibhAjana paddhati meM kucha antara hai| para bhASA ke
sambandha meM abhayadeva va hemacandra donoM kA eka hI mata hai| AcArya
hemacandra kI dRSTi se unnIsa atizaya devakRta haiM jaba ki abhayadeva kI dRSTi
se pandraha atizaya devakRta haiN| AcArya hemacandra ne likhA hai ki bhagavAn kA
cAroM ora mu~ha dikhAyI detA hai| vaha devakRta atizaya hai to digambara dRSTi
se kevalajJAna kRta hai| tIna koTa kI racanA ko bhI devakRta atizaya mAnA gayA
hai| para samavAyAMga meM cautIsa atizayoM meM usakA ullekha nahIM hai| cautIsa
atizayoM kA jo vibhAjana AcAryoM ne kiyA hai, usa ke sambandha meM sabala-tarka
kA abhAva hai ki amuka atizaya amuka vibhAga meM kyoM diyA gayA hai?
samavAyAMgasUtra ke mUla meM kisI bhI prakAra kA vibhAjana nahIM kiyA gayA hai,
yaha bhI smaraNa rakhanA caahiye| samavAyAMga kI bhAMti aMguttaranikAya (5 /
121) meM tathAgata buddha ke pAMca atizaya batAye haiM - ve arthajJa hote haiM,
dharmajJa hote haiM, maryAdA ke jJAtA hote haiM, kAlajJa hote haiM aura pariSad
ko jAnane vAle hote haiN| paiMtIsaveM samavAya se sauvAM samavAya : eka
vizleSaNa paiMtIsaveM samavAya meM paiMtIsa satya vacana ke atizaya, kunthu,
arhat, datta vAsudeva, nandana baladeva, ye paiMtIsa dhanuSa Avazyaka bRhad
vRtti-a 4, gA 73 se 77 218. dazAzrutaskandha-3 dazA (kha) tatra AyaH
samyagdarzanAdyavAptilakSaNastasya zAtanA khaNDanA niruktA aashaatnaa| 219.
yogazAstra pR. 130 220. (ka) abhidhAnacintAmaNi 56-63  /  (kha) sthAnAGga
samavAyAMga-paM. dalasukha mAlavaNiyA [49]

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Narka** (hell) is described as having 35 lakh (3.5 million) **Narka-
vasis** (inhabitants of hell) in the higher, second and fourth hells.  In the
36th **Samavay** (collection of teachings), the **Uttara-adhyayayan Sutra** (a
Jain scripture) describes 36 **Adhyayan** (chapters), the **Sudharma-sabha**
(assembly) of the **Asuras** (demons), the 36 yojanas (a unit of distance)
height of **Bhagwan Mahavir**, the 36,000 **Aryikas** (Jain nuns), and the 36
angul (a unit of length) **Paurushi** (masculine) etc.  In the 37th Samavay,
there are 37 **Ganadharas** (chief disciples) and 37 **Ganas** (groups of
disciples). In the 38th Samavay, there are 38,000 **Shramanis** (Jain nuns) of
**Bhagwan Parsva**. In the 39th Samavay, there are 3900 **Avadhigyani**
(clairvoyants) of **Bhagwan Neminath**. In the 40th Samavay, there are 40,000
**Shramanis** of **Bhagwan Arishtanemi**.  In the 41st Samavay, there are 41,000
**Shramanis** of **Bhagwan Naminath**. In the 42nd Samavay, there are 42 types
of **Namakarma** (karma related to name and form) and **Bhagwan Mahavir**
attained **Siddha** (liberation), **Buddha** (enlightened), and **Mukta**
(freed) after spending more than 42 years in the **Shraman** (ascetic) state. In
the 43rd Samavay, there are 43 **Adhyayan** of **Karmavipak** (karma and its
results). In the 44th Samavay, there are 44 **Adhyayan** of **Rishibhashit**
(words of the sages). In the 45th Samavay, the **Manav Kshetra** (human realm),
**Simantaka Narka-vasis** (inhabitants of the Simantaka hell), **Udu Vimana**
(flying vehicle), and **Siddhashila** (stone of liberation) are described as
having a 45 lakh yojanas (4.5 million yojanas) expanse. In the 46th Samavay,
there are 46 **Matrika-akshar** (letters of the alphabet) of the **Brahmi Lipi**
(Brahmi script). In the 47th Samavay, the **Sthavir Agnibhuti** (a sage) is
described as having lived in the household for 47 years. In the 48th Samavay,
there are 48 **Ganas** and 48 **Ganadharas** of **Bhagwan Dharmanath**. In the
49th Samavay, there are 49 **Ahoratra** (day and night) states of the
**Teindriya Jivas** (beings with three senses). In the 50th Samavay, there are
50,000 **Shramanis** of **Bhagwan Munisuvrat**.  In the 51st Samavay, there are
9 **Brahmacharya Adhyayan** (chapters on celibacy) and 51 **Uddeshanakal**
(periods of contemplation). In the 52nd Samavay, there are 52 names of
**Mohaniya Karma** (karma that causes delusion). In the 53rd Samavay, there is a
description of 53 **Sadhus** (Jain monks) of **Bhagwan Mahavir** going to the
**Anuttar Vimana** (highest flying vehicle) after one year of initiation. In the
54th Samavay, there are 54 **Uttama Purusha** (noble men) in **Bharat** (India)
and **Airavat** (a region) respectively. **Bhagwan Arishtanemi** remained in
**Chhadmastha** (disguise) for 54 nights. **Bhagwan Anantnath** had 54
**Ganadharas**. In the 55th Samavay, **Bhagavati Malli** attained **Siddha**
after completing 55,000 years of life. In the 56th Samavay, **Bhagwan Vimal**
had 56 **Ganas** and 56 **Ganadharas**. In the 57th Samavay, **Malli Bhagavati**
had 5700 **Manah-paryavagyani** (those who know the thoughts of others). In the
58th Samavay, there are 58 **Uttar Prakriti** (after-effects) of the five
**Karmas** (actions): **Jnana-avaran** (karma that obscures knowledge),
**Vedaniya** (karma that causes pain), **Ayu** (karma that determines lifespan),
**Nama** (karma that determines name and form), and **Antaray** (karma that
obstructs). In the 59th Samavay, one **Ritu** (season) of the
**Chandrasamvatsar** (lunar calendar) is 59 **Ahoratra** (day and night). In the
60th Samavay, the **Surya** (sun) is mentioned as staying in one **Mandala**
(circle) for 60 **Muhurta** (a unit of time).  In the 61st Samavay, there are 61
**Ritu Mas** (seasonal months) in one **Yuga** (eon). In the 62nd Samavay,
**Bhagwan Vasupujya** is described as having 62 **Ganas** and 62 **Ganadharas**.
In the 63rd Samavay, **Bhagwan Rishabhdev** is described as having ruled on the
**Rajya-Simhasan** (throne) for 63 lakh (6.3 million) **Purva** (previous
births) before taking **Diksha** (initiation). In the 64th Samavay, the
**Chakravarti** (universal monarch) is mentioned as having 64 **Har**
(necklaces) of great value. In the 65th Samavay, the **Ganadhar**
**Mauryaputra** took **Diksha** after living in the household for 65 years. In
the 66th Samavay, **Bhagwan Shreyans**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 U~ce the tathA dUsare aura cauthe naraka meM paiMtIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa haiM,
yaha nirUpaNa hai| _ chattIsaveM samavAya meM-uttarAdhyayana sUtra ke chattIsa
adhyayana, asurendra kI sudharmA-sabhA chattIsa yojana U~cI bhagavAn mahAvIra kI
chattIsa hajAra AryikAe~, aura caitra aura Asauja meM chattIsa aMgula pauruSI
Adi varNana hai| saiMtIsaveM samavAya meM saiMtIsa gaNadhara, saiMtIsa gaNa,
ar3atIsaveM samavAya meM bhagavAn pArzva kI ar3atIsa hajAra zramaNiyA~,
untAlIsaveM samavAya meM bhagavAn neminAtha ke untAlIsa sau avadhijJAnI,
cAlIsaveM samavAya meM bhagavAn ariSTanemi kI cAlIsa hajAra zramaNiyA~ thIM, Adi
kathana hai| ikatAlIsaveM samavAya meM bhagavAn naminAtha kI 41 hajAra
zramaNiyA~, bayAlIsaveM samavAya meM nAmakarma ke 42 bheda aura bhagavAn
mahAvIra 42 varSa se kucha adhika zramaNa paryAya pAlakara siddha, buddha, mukta
hue| tetAlIsaveM samavAya meM karmavipAka ke 43 adhyayana, cavAlIsaveM samavAya
meM RSibhASita ke 44 adhyayana, paiMtAlIsaveM samavAya meM mAnava kSetra,
sImaMtaka narakAvAsa, uDu vimAna aura siddhazilA, ina cAroM ko 45 lAkha yojana
vistAra vAlA batAyA hai| chiyAlIsaveM samavAya meM brAhmIlipi ke 46 mAtRkAkSara,
saiMtAlIsaveM samavAya meM sthavira agnibhUti ke 47 varSa taka gRhavAsa meM
rahane kA varNana hai| ar3atAlIsaveM samavAya meM bhagavAn dharmanAtha ke 48
gaNoM, 48 gaNadharoM kA, unacAsaveM samavAya meM teindriya jIvoM kI 49 ahorAtra
kI sthiti, pacAsaveM samavAya meM bhagavAn munisuvrata kI 50 hajAra zramaNiyA~
thIM, Adi varNana kiyA gayA hai| ikyAvanaveM samavAya meM 9 brahmacarya
adhyayana, 51 uddezanakAla aura bAvanaveM samavAya meM mohanIya karma ke 52 nAma
batAye haiN| trepanaveM samavAya meM bhagavAn mahAvIra ke 53 sAdhuoM ke eka
varSa kI dIkSA ke bAda anuttara vimAna meM jAne kA varNana hai| cauvanaveM
samavAya meM bhArata aura airavata kSetroM meM kramaza: 54-54 uttama puruSa hue
haiM aura bhagavAn ariSTanemi 54 rAtri taka chadmastha rhe| bhagavAn anantanAtha
ke 54 gaNadhara the| pacapanaveM samavAya meM bhagavatI-mallI 55 hajAra varSa kI
Ayu pUrNa kara siddha huiiN| chappanaveM samavAya meM bhagavAn vimala ke 56 gaNa
va 56 gaNadhara the| sattAvanaveM samavAya meM mallI bhagavatI ke 5700
manaHparyavajJAnI the| aTThAvanaveM samavAya meM jJAnAvaraNIya, vedanIya, Ayu,
nAma aura antarAya ina pAMca karmoM kI 58 uttara prakRtiyA~ batAI haiN|
unasaThaveM samavAya meM candrasaMvatsara kI eka Rtu 59 ahorAtri kI hotI hai|
sAThaveM samavAya meM sUrya kA 60 'muhUrta taka eka maMDala meM rahane kA
ullekha hai| _ ikasaThaveM samavAya meM eka yuga ke 61 Rtu mAsa batAye haiN|
bAsaThaveM samavAya meM bhagavAn vAsupUjya ke 62 gaNa aura 62 gaNadhara batAye
haiN| tresaThaveM samavAya meM bhagavAn RSabhadeva ke 63 lAkha pUrva taka
rAjyasiMhAsana para rahane ke pazcAt dIkSA lene kA varNana hai| causaThaveM
samavAya meM cakravartI ke bahumUlya 64 hAroM kA ullekha hai| paiMsaThaveM
samavAya meM gaNadhara mauryaputra ne 65 varSa taka gRhavAsa meM rahakara dIkSA
grahaNa kii| chiyAsaThaveM samavAya meM bhagavAn zreyAMsa ke 66 gaNa aura 66
gaNadhara the| matijJAna kI utkRSTa sthiti 66 sAgara batAI hai| sar3asaThaveM
samavAya meM eka yuga meM nakSatramAsa kI gaNanA se 67 mAsa batAye haiN| 68veM
samavAya meM dhAtakIkhaNDa dvIpa meM cakravartI kI 68 vijaya, 68 rAjadhAniyA~
aura utkRSTa 68 arihaMta hote haiM tathA bhagavAn vimala ke 68 hajAra zramaNa
the, yaha kahA gayA hai| unahattaraveM samavAya meM mAnavaloka meM meru ke
atirikta 69 varSa aura 69 varSadhara parvata batAye haiN| sattaraveM samavAya
meM eka mAsa aura 20 rAtri vyatIta hone para 70 rAtri avazeSa rahane para
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne varSAvAsa kiyA, isakA varNana hai| yahA~ para paramparA se
varSAvAsa kA artha saMvatsarI kiyA jAtA hai| ikahattaraveM samavAya meM bhagavAn
ajita, cakravartI sagara 71 lAkha pUrva taka gRhavAsa meM raha kara dIkSita
huye| 72veM samavAya meM bhagavAn mahAvIra aura unake gaNadhara acalabhrAtA kI
72 varSa kI Ayu batAyI hai| 72 kalAoM kA bhI ullekha hai| tihattaraveM samavAya
meM vijaya nAmaka baladeva, 73 lAkha varSa kI Ayu pUrNa kara siddha huye| 74veM
samavAya [50]

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ganadhar Agnibhuti attained Siddhi at the age of 74 years. In the 75th Samavay,
there were 7500 Kevalis of Bhagwan Suvidhi. Bhagwan Sheetal lived in the
household for 75,000 years before and Bhagwan Shanti lived in the household for
75,000 years. In the 76th Samavay, 76-76 lakh Bhavan of the Bhavanpati Devas
like Vidyutkumar are mentioned. In the 77th Samavay, Emperor Bharat remained in
his childhood for 77 lakh years. He took the path of Sanayam with 77 kings. In
the 78th Samavay, Ganadhar Akampit attained Siddhi at the age of 78 years. In
the 79th Samavay, the distance between the middle part of the sixth hell and the
end of the sixth Ghanodadhi is 79,000 yojan. In the 80th Samavay, Triprutha
Vasudev remained on the throne of Emperor for 80 lakh years. In the 81st
Samavay, there were 8100 Man:paryavgyani of Kumbh. In the 82nd Samavay, after 82
nights, the life of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira was taken away to another womb. In
the 83rd Samavay, Bhagwan Sheetal had 83 ganas and 83 Ganadhar. In the 84th
Samavay, Bhagwan Rishabhdev had a lifespan of 84 lakh years and Bhagwan Shreyans
had a lifespan of 84 lakh years. Bhagwan Rishabh had 84 ganas, 84 Ganadhar and
84,000 Shraman. In the 85th Samavay, 85 Uddeshanakal of Acharang are mentioned.
In the 86th Samavay, Bhagwan Suvidhi had 86 ganas and 86 Ganadhar. Bhagwan
Suparshva had 8600 Vadi. In the 87th Samavay, 87 Uttar-prakriti of the remaining
6 karmas are mentioned, excluding Gyaanavaran and Antaraya karma. In the 88th
Samavay, 88-88 Mahagrah of each Sun and Moon are mentioned. In the 89th Samavay,
there is a mention of Bhagwan Rishabhdev attaining Moksha when 89 paks of the
third Aare remained and Bhagwan Shantinath had 89,000 Shramanis. In the 90th
Samavay, both Tirthankar Bhagwan Ajit and Shanti had 90 ganas and Ganadhar. In
the 91st Samavay, Bhagwan Kunthu had 91,000 Avadhignyani Shraman. In the 92nd
Samavay, Ganadhar Indrabhuti attained liberation at the age of 92 years. In the
93rd Samavay, Bhagwan Chandraprab had 93 ganas and 93 Ganadhar. Bhagwan
Shantinath had 9300 Chaturdas Purvadhar. In the 94th Samavay, Bhagwan Ajit had
9400 Avadhignyani Shraman. In the 95th Samavay, Bhagwan Shri Parsva had 95 ganas
and 95 Ganadhar. Bhagwan Kunthu had a lifespan of 95,000 years. In the 96th
Samavay, each Chakravarti has 96 crore villages. In the 97th Samavay, there are
97 Uttar-prakriti of eight karmas. In the 98th Samavay, there are 98 stars of 19
constellations from Revati to Jyestha. In the 99th Samavay, Mount Meru is 99,000
yojan high from the earth. In the 100th Samavay, the age of Bhagwan Parsva and
Ganadhar Sudharma was one hundred years, this is the description. The above
collection of vast material from the 35th Samavay to the 100th Samavay. Much of
it is related to mythological subjects. There has been consideration from many
perspectives on subjects like geography and astronomy, heaven and hell, etc.
Modern science has not yet reached the vast geographical areas of Jainism. The
unknown is more than the known. Upon investigation, knowledge of many unknown
serious mysteries can be obtained. Many mysteries have been revealed in these
Samavays for modern investigators. It is the work of investigators to find those
mysteries in a modern perspective. Historically, it also contains vast material
about the twenty-four Tirthankars, Chakravarti, Vasudev, Baldev, Ganadhar,
Shraman, Shramani, Shravak, Shravika, etc. of the Tirthankars. Tirthankars are
the creators of Jain rule. They are the promoters of the code of conduct of the
spiritual world. Their life has been a constant guide for seekers. The original
seed of the vast life stories of the Tirthankars is in the presented Samavayang.
These seeds have been able to take a vast form in other Charit Granths. There is
vast material on the pre-historical and historical subjects of the Tirthankars
and it can also be contemplated in the light of the opinions of other scholars.
However, keeping in mind the limitations of the preface, I will definitely
inform the curious readers that they should read my book, "Bhagwan Rishabhdev: A
Scrutiny", "Bhagwan Parsva: A Critical Review". [51]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 meM gaNadhara agnibhUti 74 varSa kI Ayu pUrNa kara siddha huye| 75veM samavAya
meM bhagavAn suvidhi ke 75sau kevalI the| bhagavAn zItala 75 hajAra pUrva aura
bhagavAn zAnti 75 hajAra varSa gRhavAsa meM rahe  /  76veM samavAya meM
vidyutakumAra Adi bhavanapati devoM ke 76-76 lAkha bhavana batAye gaye haiN|
satahattaraveM samavAya meM samrAT bharata 77 lAkha pUrva taka kumArAvasthA meM
rhe| 77 rAjAoM ke sAtha unhoMne saMyamamArga grahaNa kiyaa| 78veM samavAya meM
gaNadhara akampita 78 varSa kI Ayu meM siddha huye| 79veM samavAya meM chaThe
naraka ke madhyabhAga se chaTe ghanodadhi ke nIce caramAnta taka 79 hajAra
yojana antara hai| 80veM samavAya meM tripRSTha vAsudeva 80 lAkha varSa taka
samrAT pada para rhe| 81veM samavAya meM kuMbha ke 81sau mana:paryavajJAnI the|
82veM samavAya meM 82 rAtriyA~ vyatIta hone para zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra kA
jIva garbhAntara meM saMharaNa kiyA gyaa| 83veM samavAya meM bhagavAn zItala ke
83 gaNa aura 83 gaNadhara the| 84veM samavAya meM bhagavAn RSabhadeva kI 84
lAkha pUrva kI aura bhagavAn zreyAMsa kI 84 lAkha varSa kI Ayu thii| bhagavAn
RSabha ke 84 gaNa, 84 gaNadhara aura 84 hajAra zramaNa the| 85veM samavAya meM
AcArAMga ke 85 uddezanakAla batAye haiN| 86veM samavAya meM bhagavAn suvidhi ke
86 gaNa aura 86 gaNadhara batAye haiN| bhagavAna supArzva ke 86sau vAdI the|
87veM samavAya meM jJAnAvaraNIya aura antarAya karma ko chor3a kara zeSa 6
karmoM kI 87 uttaraprakRtiyA~ batAyI haiN| 88veM samavAya meM pratyeka sUrya
aura candra ke 88-88 mahAgraha batAye haiN| 89veM samavAya meM tRtIya Are ke 89
pakSa avazeSa rahane para bhagavAn RSabhadeva ke mokSa padhArane kA ullekha hai
aura bhagavAn zAntinAtha ke 89 hajAra zramaNiyA~ thiiN| 90veM samavAya meM
bhagavAn ajita aura zAnti ina donoM tIrthaMkaroM ke 90 gaNa aura gaNadhara the|
91veM samavAya meM bhagavAn kunthu ke 91 hajAra avadhijJAnI zramaNa the| 92veM
samavAya meM gaNadhara indrabhUti 92 varSa kI Ayu pUrNa kara mukta huye| 93veM
samavAya meM bhagavAn candraprabha ke 93 gaNa aura 93 gaNadhara the| bhagavAn
zAntinAtha ke 93sau caturdaza pUrvadhara the|94veN samavAya meM bhagavAn ajita
ke 94sau avadhijJAnI zramaNa the| 95veM samavAya meM bhagavAn zrI pArzva ke 95
gaNa aura 95 gaNadhara the| bhagavAn kunthu kI 95 hajAra varSa kI Ayu thii|
96veM samavAya meM pratyeka cakravartI ke 96 karor3a gA~va hote haiN| 97veM
samavAya meM ATha karmoM kI 97 uttara-prakRtiyA~ haiM  /  98veM samavAya meM
revatI va jyeSThA paryanta ke 19 nakSatroM ke 98 tAre haiN| 99veM samavAya meM
meru parvata bhUmi se 99 hajAra yojana UMcA hai| 100veM samavAya meM bhagavAn
pArzva kI aura gaNadhara sudharmA kI Ayu sau varSa kI thI, yaha nirUpaNa hai|
uparyukta paiMtIsaveM samavAya se 100veM samavAya taka vipula sAmagrI kA
saMkalana huA hai| usameM se kitanI hI sAmagrI paurANika viSayoM se sambandhita
hai| bhUgola aura khagola, svarga aura naraka Adi viSayoM para aneka dRSTiyoM se
vicAra huA hai| Adhunika vijJAna kI pahu~ca jaina bhaugolika virAT kSetroM taka
abhI taka nahIM ho pAyI hai| jJAta se ajJAta adhika hai| anveSaNA karane para
aneka ajJAta gambhIra rahasyoM kA parijJAna ho sakatA hai| ina samavAyoM meM
aneka rahasya Adhunika anveSakoM ke liye udghATita huye haiN| una rahasyoM ko
Adhunika paripekSya meM khojanA anveSakoM kA kArya hai| aitihAsika dRSTi se
isameM caubIsa tIrthaMkara, cakravartI, vAsudeva, baladeva, gaNadhara,
tIrthaMkaroM ke zramaNa, zramaNI, zrAvaka, zrAvikA Adi ke sambandha meM bhI
vipula sAmagrI hai| tIrthaMkara jaina zAsana ke nirmAtA haiN| AdhyAtmika-jagat
ke AcArasaMhitA ke puraskartA haiN| unakA jIvana sAdhakoM ke liye satata
mArgadarzaka rahA hai| tIrthaMkaroM ke virATa jIvanacaritoM kA mUla bIja
prastuta samavAyAMga meM hai| ye hI bIja anya carita granthoM meM virATa rUpa le
sake haiN| tIrthaMkaroM ke prAg aitihAsika aura aitihAsika viSayoM para vipula
sAmagrI hai aura anya vijJoM ke abhimatoM ke Aloka meM bhI usa para cintana kiyA
jA sakatA hai| para prastAvanA kI pRSThamaryAdA ko dhyAna meM rakhate huye maiM
jijJAsu pAThakoM ko itanA sUcana avazya karUMgA ki ve mere dvArA likhita,
"bhagavAn RSabhadevaH eka parizIlana"."bhagavAna pArzva: eka samIkSAtmaka [51]

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please review the texts "Adhyayan", "Bhagwan Aristanemi", "Karm yogi Shri
Krishna: Ek Anushilan", and "Bhagwan Mahavir: Ek Anushilan". I have provided
many facts about the Tirthankaras in these texts. Similarly, I have discussed
the Ganadharas of Bhagwan Maha in the "Mahavir Anushilan" text.  **Script-
Thoughts**  The 46th Samavay states that the number of letters used in the
Brahmi script is 46. Acharya Abhaydev has clarified in the commentary of the
present Agam that the 46 letters should be from "Akar" to "Hakar" including
"Ksha". He has not counted "Rri Rri L L". The remaining letters have been taken.
The 18th Samavay mentions the names of the Brahmi script in relation to scripts.
Acharya Abhaydev has clearly written about these scripts that he has not
received any information about them, so he could not give a description of it.
After modern research, it can be said in this regard that the script used in
Ashoka's inscriptions is Brahmi script. The script of the Greeks is Yavani
script, which is now known as Arabic and Persian etc. The Kharoshti script was
prevalent in Gandhar country. This script was written from right to left. The
two inscriptions of Ashoka that have been found in the North-West Frontier
Province have used the present script. Kharoshti is made from the two words
"Khar" and "Oshta". Khar means donkey. It is possible that the turn of the
present script is like the lips of a donkey. Therefore, its name may have been
Kharoshti, Kharoshtika or Kharoshtrka. The name of the fifth script is
"Kharshraavita". The script whose pronunciation is ear-piercing like the sound
of a donkey, due to which its name may have been "Kharshraavita". The name of
the sixth script is "Pakaradhika". Its Prakrit form may be "Pahraiya". It is
possible that its name may have been "Pakaradhika" because of the abundance of
Pakar or because it starts with Pakar. The name of the eleventh script is
"Nihnvika". The word Nihnva has been very widely used in Jain tradition in the
sense of "hiding". The script that is secret or symbolic can be Nihnvika.
Currently, the use of sign language is as a very fast script. In ancient times,
there would have been a similar symbolic script, which would have been known as
Nihnvika. The name of the twelfth script is Ankalipi. The script made from
numbers should be Ankalipi. Acharya Kumudeendu has done the Utakana of the "Bhu-
Valaya" text in this script. This text was with Yallapa Shastri, who was a
resident of Visveswaram. I saw it in Delhi in 1954. It has a collection and
assessment of various subjects, and there was the use of many languages!
According to Yallapa Shastri, it has one crore shlokas and it has been called
"the greatest wonder of the world" by the President of India, Rajendra Babu. The
thirteenth script is "Ganitlip". Due to being modern based on the symbols
related to mathematics, the script may have been known as "Ganitlip". The name
of the fourteenth script is "Gandharva" script. This script was a special script
of the Gandharva caste. The name of the fifteenth script is "Bhutlip". It is
called Bhutlip because it was prevalent in Bhutan. Bhutan is currently called
Bhutan. Or it may have been the script prevalent in the Bhot or Bhotia, and the
Bhut caste. It is possible that the script of the Paishachi language is called
Bhutlip. Bhut and Pishach, both these words have been synonymous. Therefore, the
Paishachi script may have been called Bhutlip. The sixteenth script, which would
have been very beautiful and attractive, would have been famous at that time as
"Adarsh Lipi". Where this script was prevalent, script experts have not been
able to decide yet. The name of the seventeenth script is "Maheshwari" script.
Maheshwari is a caste in the Vaishya Varna. It is possible that the special
script of this caste was prevalent in ancient times. 221. Author-Shri
Devendramuni Shastri, Shri Tarakguru Jain Granthalaya, Shastri Circle, Udaipur
(Rajasthan) [52]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhyayana","bhagavAn ariSTanemi" "karmayogI zrI kRSNa : eka anuzIlana" aura
"bhagavAn mahAvIra : eka anuzIlana" granthoM221 kA avalokana kreN| maiMne
tIrthaMkaroM ke sambandha meM aneka tathya ina granthoM meM diye haiN| isI
taraha bhagavAn mahA ke gaNadharoM ke sambandha meM bhI "mahAvIra anuzIlana"
grantha meM cintana kiyA hai| lipi-vicAra 46veM samavAya meM brAhmIlipi ke
upayoga meM Ane vAle akSaroM kI saMkhyA 46 batAyI hai| AcArya abhayadeva ne
prastuta Agama kI vRtti meM yaha spaSTa kiyA hai ki 46 akSara "akAra" se lekara
kSa sahita hakAra taka hone caahiye| unhoMne RR la la nahIM gine haiN| zeSa
akSara liye haiN| aThArahaveM samavAya meM lipiyoM ke sambandha meM brAhmI lipi
ke nAma batAye haiN| AcArya abhayadeva ne ina lipiyoM ke sambandha meM yaha
spaSTa likhA hai ki unheM ina lipiyoM ke sambandha meM kisI bhI prakAra kA
vivaraNa prApta nahIM huA hai isaliye ve usa kA vivaraNa nahIM de sake haiN|
Adhunika anveSaNa ke pazcAt isa sambandha meM yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki azoka
ke zilAlekhoM meM jo lipi prayukta huI hai, vaha brAhmIlipi hai| yavanoM kI lipi
yAvanIlipi hai, jo Aja arabI aura phArasI Adi ke rUpa meM vizruta hai| kharoSTI
lipi gandhAra deza meM pracalita thii| yaha lipi dAhinI ora se prArambha hokara
bAIM ora likhI jAtI thii| uttara-pazcima sImAnta pradeza meM azoka ke jo do
zilAlekha prApta huye haiM, unameM prastuta lipi kA prayoga huA hai| khara aura
oSTa ina do zabdoM se kharoSTa banA hai| khara gadhe ko kahate haiN| sambhava
hai ki prastuta lipi kA mor3a gadhe ke hoTha kI taraha ho| isaliye isa kA nAma
kharoSTI, kharoSTikA athavA kharoSTrikA par3A ho| pA~cavI lipi kA nAma
"kharazrAvitA" hai| khara ke svara kI taraha jisa lipi kA uccAraNa karNakaTu ho,
jisa ke kAraNa saMbhavataH usa kA nAma "kharazrAvitA" par3A ho| chaTTI lipi kA
nAma "pakArAdikA" hai| jisa kA prAkRta rUpa "paharAiA" ho sakatA hai| saMbhava
hai ki pakAra bahula hone ke kAraNa yA pakAra se prArambha hone ke kAraNa isa kA
nAma "pakArAdikA" par3A ho| gyArahavIM lipi kA nAma "nihnavikA" hai| nihnava
zabda kA prayoga jaina paramparA meM "chipAne" ke artha meM bahuta vizruta rahA
hai| jo lipi gupta ho, yA sAMketika ho, vaha nihavikA ho sakatI hai| vartamAna
meM saMketa lipi kA pracalana atizIghra lipi ke rUpa meM hai| prAcIna yuga meM
isI taraha koI sAMketika lipi rahI hogI, jo nihnavikA ke nAma se vizruta ho|
bArahavIM lipi kA nAma aMkalipi hai| aMkoM se nirmita lipi aMkalipi honI
caahiye| AcArya kumudendu ne "bhU-valaya" grantha kA uTaeNkana isI lipi meM kiyA
hai| yaha grantha yalappA zAstrI ke pAsa thA, jo vizvezvaram ke rahane vAle the|
vaha maiMne dehalI meM san 1954 meM dekhA thaa| usa meM vividha-viSayoM kA
saMkalana-Akalana huA hai, aura aneka bhASAoM kA prayoga thA! yalappA zAstrI ke
kahane ke anusAra usa meM eka karor3a zloka haiM aura use bhArata ke rASTrapati
rAjendra bAbU ne "vizva kA mahAn Azcarya" kahA hai| terahavIM lipi "gaNitalipi"
hai| gaNitazAstra sambandhI saMketoM ke AdhAra para Adhuta hone se lipi
"gaNitalipi" ke rUpa meM vizruta rahI ho| caudahavIM lipi kA nAma "gAndharva"
lipi hai| yaha lipi gandharva jAti kI eka viziSTa lipi thii| pandrahavIM lipi kA
nAma "bhUtalipi" hai| bhUtAna deza meM pracalita hone ke kAraNa se yaha
bhUtalipi kahalAtI ho| bhUtAna ko hI vartamAna meM bhUTAna kahate haiN| athavA
bhoTa yA bhoTiyA, tathA bhUta jAti meM pracalita lipi rahI ho| saMbhava hai ki
paizAcIbhASA kI lipi bhUtalipi kahalAtI ho| bhUta aura pizAca, ye donoM zabda
ekArthaka se rahe haiN| isaliye paizAcIlipi ko bhUtalipi kahA gayA ho| jo lipi
bahuta hI sundara va AkarSaka rahI hogI, vaha solahavIM lipi "Adarza lipi" ke
rUpa meM usa samaya prasiddha rahI hogii| yaha lipi kahA~ para pracalita thI,
yaha abhI taka lipivizeSajJa nirNaya nahIM kara sake haiN| sattarahavIM lipi kA
nAma "mAhezvarI" lipi hai| mAhezvarI vaizyavarNa meM eka jAti hai| saMbhava hai
ki isa jAti kI viziSTa lipi prAcInakAla meM pracalita rahI ho, 221. lekhaka-zrI
devendramuni zAstrI, zrI tArakaguru jainagranthAlaya, zAstrI sarkala, udayapura
(rAjasthAna) [52]

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And it is called Maheswari script. The eighteenth script is Brahmi script. This
script would have been of the Dravidians. It is clear from the name that the
Pulinda script would have been related to the tribals. But all this is still
just speculation. More exploration is needed to determine their true nature. The
Buddhist text "Lalitavistara" mentions the names of sixty-four scripts. The
descriptions of the scripts that have come in Samvayanga can be compared with
those names. After the hundredth Samvaya, various topics with numbers ranging
from 150-200-250-300-350-400-450-500 to 1000 to 2000 to 10000 to one lakh, from
that 8 lakhs and crores have been compiled in these Samvayas. Here we are
presenting thoughts only in relation to some major topics. There is a
description of the sixth Pottil's bhav before the Tirthankara bhav of Bhagwan
Mahavira. In the necessary appointment 222, there is a detailed description of
the twenty-seven bhavs of Lord Mahavira. There, the Jiva of Nandan took
initiation from Pottil and there is no mention of Pottil in the previous bhavs
of Nandan, nor is this mention found anywhere in Aavashyakachurni, Aavashyak
Haribhadriya Vritti, Aavashyak Malayagiri Vritti and Mahavirachariyam etc.
Acharya Abhaydev has clarified in the Vritti of the presented Agam that there
was one bhav of a prince named Pottil, from there he became a Dev, the second
bhav. From there, he was expelled and became a prince named Nandan in
Kshatranagari, this is the third bhav. From there he went to Devalok, this is
the fourth bhav. From there he came to the womb of Devananda, this is the fifth
bhav and from there he was brought to the womb of Trishala Kshatriyani, this is
the sixth bhav! By calculating in this way, the sixth bhav of Pottil can happen.
The names of the mothers of the Tirthankaras that have come in Samvayangasutra
are written differently in the Digambar tradition, they are as follows -
Marudevi, Vijayaseena, Susena, Siddhartha, Mangala, Sushima, Prithvi Sena,
Lakshmana, Jayarama, (Rama) Sunanda, Nanda (Vishnu Shri) Jayavati (Patla)
Jayshyama (Sharma) Sharma (Revati) Suprabha (Suvrata) Aira, Shrikant (Shrimati)
Mitra Sena, Prajavati (Rakshita) Soma (Padmavati) Vapilla (Vapra) Shivadevi,
Vamadevi, Priyakarini Trishala223. Their names are also found in the necessary
appointment 224. The names of the Tirthankaras of the upcoming Utsarpini that
have come in Samvayanga are the same as those found in Pravachansar. But the
names that have come in Lokaprakash225 are different in terms of order. There is
a difference in the names mentioned in Jinaprabhasuri's 'Prakrit Diwali Kalp'
and their order. The names of the upcoming twenty-four in the Digambar tradition
are obtained as follows - (1) Shri Mahapadma (2) Suredev (3) Suparshva (4)
Swayamprabhu (5) Sarvatmabhu (6) Shridev (7) Kulputradev (8) Udankdev (9)
Prosthildeva, (10) Jayakirti (11) Munisuvrat (12) Araha (13) Nishapap (14)
Nishkashya (15) Vipul (16) Nirmal (17) Chitragupta (18) Samadhiyukt (19)
Swayambhu (20) Anivritt (21) Jayanath (22) Shrivimala (23) Devpal (24)
Anantvirya The names of the past twenty-four are also found in Digambar
texts.226 222. Necessary appointment-Gatha 448 223. See Uttarapurana and
Harivansh Purana _ Necessary appointment-Gatha 358, 386 Lokaprakash Sarg-38,
Shlok 296 226. Jain Siddhant Sangrah, p. 19 [53]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aura use mAhezvarI lipi kahA jAtA ho| aThArahavIM lipi brAhmIlipi hai| yaha
lipi drAvir3oM kI rahI hogii| nAma se spaSTa hai ki puliMdalipi kA sambandha
AdivAsI se rahA ho| magara abhI taka yaha saba anumAna hI hai| inakA sahI
svarUpa nizcita karane ke lie adhika anveSaNa apekSita hai| bauddha grantha
"lalitavistarA" meM cauMsaTha lipiyoM ke nAma Aye haiN| una nAmoM ke sAtha
samavAyAMga meM Aye hue lipiyoM ke varNana kI tulanA kI jA sakatI hai| sauve
samavAya ke bAda kramaza: 150-200-250-300-350-400-450-500 yAvat 1000 se 2000 se
10000 se eka lAkha, usa se 8 lAkha aura karor3a kI saMkhyA vAle vibhinna viSayoM
kA ina samavAyoM meM saMkalana kiyA gayA hai| yahA~ para hama kucha pramukha
viSayoM ke sambandha meM hI cintana prastuta kara rahe haiN| bhagavAn mahAvIra
ke tIrthaMkara bhava se pUrva chaThe poTTila ke bhava kA varNana hai| Avazyaka
niyukti 222 meM prabhu mahAvIra ke sattAIsa bhavoM kA suvistRta varNana hai|
vahA~ para nandana ke jIva ne poTTila ke pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kI aura nandana ke
pahale ke bhavoM meM poTTila kA ullekha nahIM hai aura na yaha ullekha
AvazyakacUrNi, Avazyaka haribhadrIyA vRtti, Avazyaka malayagiri vRtti aura
mahAvIracariyaM Adi meM kahIM AyA hai| AcArya abhayadeva ne prastuta Agama kI
vRtti meM yaha spaSTa kiyA hai ki poTTila nAmaka rAjakumAra kA eka bhava, vahA~
se deva hue, dvitIya bhv| vahA~ se cyuta hokara kSatrAnagarI meM nandana nAmaka
rAjaputra hue, yaha tRtIya bhv| vahA~ se devaloka gaye, yaha caturtha bhv| vahA~
se devAnandA ke garbha meM Aye, yaha pA~cavA~ bhava aura vahA~ se trizalA
kSatriyANI kI kukSi meM lAye gaye, yaha chaThA bhava! isa prakAra parigaNanA
karane se poTTila kA chaThA bhava ghaTita ho sakatA hai| samavAyAMgasUtra meM
Aye tIrthaMkaroM kI mAtAoM ke nAmoM se digambara paramparA meM una ke nAma kucha
pRthak rUpa se likhe haiM, ve isa prakAra haiM - marudevI, vijayasenA, susenA,
siddhArthA, maMgalA, susImA, pRthvIsenA, lakSmaNA, jayarAmA, (rAmA) sunandA,
nandA (viSNu zrI) jAyAvatI (pATalA) jayazyAmA (zarmA) zarmA (revatI) suprabhA
(suvratA) airA, zrIkAntA (zrImatI) mitrasenA, prajAvatI (rakSitA) somA
(padmAvatI) vapillA (vaprA) zivAdevI, vAmAdevI, priyakAriNI trizalA223  /
Avazyaka niyukti224 meM bhI una ke nAma prApta haiN| AgAmI utsarpiNI ke
tIrthaMkaroM ke nAma jo samavAyAMga meM Aye haiM, vahI nAma pravacanasAra meM
jyoM ke tyoM milate haiN| kintu lokaprakAza225 meM jo nAma Aye haiM, ve krama kI
dRSTi se pRthak haiN| jinaprabhasUri kRta 'prAkRta divAlI kalpa' meM ullikhita
nAmoM aura unake krama meM antara hai| digambara paramparA ke granthoM meM AgAmI
caubIsI ke nAma isa prakAra prApta hote haiM- . (1) zrI mahApadma (2) suradeva
(3) supArzva (4) svayaMprabhu (5) sarvAtmabhU (6) zrIdeva (7) kulaputradeva (8)
udaMkadeva (9) proSThiladeva, (10) jayakIrti (11) munisuvrata (12) araha (13)
niSpApa (14) niSkaSAya (15) vipula (16) nirmala (17) citragupta (18)
samAdhiyukta (19) svayaMbhU (20) anivRtta (21) jayanAtha (22) zrIvimala (23)
devapAla (24) anantavIrya digambara granthoM meM atIta caubIsI ke nAma bhI
milate haiN|226 222. Avazyaka niyukti-gAthA 448 223. uttarapurANa va harivaMza
purANa dekhiye _ Avazyaka niyukti-gAthA 358, 386 lokaprakAza sarga-38, zloka 296
226. jaina siddhAnta saMgraha, pR. 19 [53]

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This Samvayanga mentions the Kulkaras. While the Stanangasutra mentions the
names of ten Kulkaras of the past Utsarpini, the Samvayanga mentions seven
names, and there are differences in the names. Kulkaras were the administrators
of an era when humans were completely free from family, social, political, and
economic bonds. They had no worries about food or clothing. They obtained their
desired objects from trees. They lived independent lives. They were extremely
low in kshaya (passions) by nature. In that era, there were elephants, horses,
cows, bulls, and animals in the forests, but they did not use those animals.
Economically, there was neither a श्रेष्ठी (superior) nor an अनुचर (follower).
There was no fear of diseases like today. They remained free from desires
throughout their lives. In the twilight of their lives, they became husband and
wife, merging as brother and sister, and gave birth to a child as a couple of
one man and one woman. They nurtured them for 49 days and then died. Their death
also occurred without pain, just with a yawn and a sneeze. This was the life of
the Yauglik period. By the end of the third Ara, the Yauglik-Maryadas (rules)
gradually began to be destroyed in the third division. Cravings increased, and
the power of the Kalpa trees began to decline. At that time, some special
individuals were born who managed the system. They were called Kulkaras. The
first Kulkaras appeared when 1/8th of the third Ara remained. There have been
differences of opinion in various texts regarding the number of Kulkaras. The
227th and final Kulkar was "Rishabh", the son of Nabhi, who was also the first
Tirthankara. His son was Bharat Chakravarti. Tirthankara Rishabh established the
Dharmachakra, while Bharat Chakravarti established the Rajya-chakra. In the
fourth Ara, twenty-three Tirthankaras, eleven Chakravartis, nine Baldevs, nine
Vasudevas, and Prativa-sudevas, etc., were born.  Thus, we see that the
Samvayanga is a collection of many important facts for inquisitive seekers and
researchers. It is extremely important from the perspective of Vस्तु-विज्ञान
(science of objects), Jain principles, and Jain history. It contains over a
hundred topics. Modern thinkers argue that the Samvayanga was composed after
Lord Mahavira attained liberation, based on the 92-year lifespan of Ganadhar
Gautam and the 100-year lifespan of Ganadhar Sudharma mentioned in the
Samvayanga. In response to their argument, we would humbly request that the ages
of the Ganadharas, etc., were compiled by Devarddigni Kshamashraman. I have also
discussed this issue in detail in the introduction to the Stananga. It is a
complete historical truth that this Agam is Ganadhar-created.  This Agam is
primarily in prose, but there are also verses in between, related to names and
other details. It is also important from the perspective of commentary. There is
use of figures of speech in some places. There is also mention of Lord Parshva
and his fourteen predecessors, Avadhijnani, and special knowledgeable monks,
supported by numbers, which is important from a historical perspective.
Comparative Study  The Samvayanga Sutra contains a greater collection of various
topics than other Agams. The Bhagavati Sutra is rich in content and also vast in
size. The Samvayanga Sutra is very small in size. Just as Vishnu Muni measured
the vast universe with three steps, so is the situation of the Samvayanga. If we
compare the topics found in the Samvayanga Sutra with other Agam literature, it
will be easily known that the Vyavahar Sutra rightly states that the knower of
Stananga and Samvayanga is the Acharya and  227. Jambudvipaprajnapti, in the
second Vakshaskara, mentions fifteen Kulkaras, while the Digambar text
"Siddhant-Sangrah" mentions fourteen Kulkaras. [54]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastuta samavAyAMga meM kulakaroM kA ullekha huA hai  /  sthAnAMgasUtra meM
atIta utsarpiNI ke daza kulakaroM ke nAma Aye haiM to samavAyAMga meM sAta nAma
haiM aura nAmoM meM bheda bhI hai| kulakara usa yuga ke vyavasthApaka haiM, jaba
mAnava pArivArika, sAmAjika, rAjazAsana aura Arthika bandhanoM se pUrNatayA
mukta thaa| na use khAne kI cintA thI, na pahanane kI hI  /  vRkSoM se hI unheM
manovAJchita vastue~ upalabdha ho jAtI thiiN| ve svatantra jIvana jIne vAle the|
svabhAva kI dRSTi se atyanta alpkssaayii| usa yuga meM jaMgaloM meM hAthI,
ghor3e, gAya, baila, pazu the para una pazuoM kA ve upayoga nahIM karate the  /
Arthika dRSTi se na koI zreSThI thA, na koI anucara hii| Aja kI bhA~ti rogoM kA
trAsa nahIM thaa| jIvana bhara ve vAsanAoM se mukta rahate the| jIvana kI
sAndhyavelA meM ve bhAI-bahina miTakara pati-patnI ke rUpa meM ho jAte the aura
eka puruSa aura strI yugala ke rUpa meM santAna kI janma dete the  /  unakA ve
49 dina taka pAlana-poSaNa karate aura maraNa-zaraNa ho jAte the| unakI mRtyu
bhI ubAsI aura chIMka Ate hI binA kaSTa ke ho jaatii| isa taraha yaugalika kAla
kA jIvana thaa| tIsare Are ke anta taka tRtIya vibhAga meM yaugalika - maryAdAe~
dhIre-dhIre vinaSTa hone lagatI haiN| tRSNAe~ bar3hatI haiM aura kalpa vRkSoM kI
zakti kSINa hone lagatI hai| usa samaya vyavasthA karane vAle kucha viziSTa
vyakti paidA hote haiN| unheM kulakara kI saMjJA se abhihita kiyA jAtA hai|
prathama kulakara tRtIya ArA ke 1/8 palya jitanA bhAga avaziSTa rahane para hote
haiN| kulakaroM kI saMkhyA ke sambandha meM vibhinna granthoM meM matabheda rahe
haiM  /  227 antima kulakara nAbhi ke putra "RSabha" huye jo prathama
tIrthaMkara bhI the| unake putra bharata cakravartI hue  /  tIrthaMkara RSabha
ne dharmacakra kA pravartana kiyA to bharata cakravartI ne rAjya-cakra kA  /
caturtha Are meM tevIsa tIrthaMkara, gyAraha cakravartI, nau baladeva, nau
vAsudeva aura prativAsudeva Adi mahApuruSa utpanna hote haiM  /  isa prakAra
hama dekhate haiM ki samavAyAMga meM jijJAsu sAdhakoM ke lie aura anusaMdhitsuoM
ke lie aneka mahattvapUrNa tathyoM kA saMkalana hai| vastu-vijJAna, jaina
siddhAnta evaM jaina- itihAsa kI dRSTi se yaha Agama atyanta mahatvapUrNa haiN|
isameM zatAdhika viSaya haiN| Adhunika cintaka samavAyAMga meM Aye hue gaNadhara
gautama kI 92 varSa kI aNu aura gaNadhara sudharmA kI 100 varSa kI Ayu
par3hakara yaha tarka prastuta karate haiM ki samavAyAMga kI racanA bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke mokSa jAne ke pazcAt huI hai| hama unake tarka ke samAdhAna meM yaha
namra nivedana karanA cAheMge ki gaNadharoM kI umra Adi viSayoM kA devarddhigaNI
kSamAzramaNa ne isameM saMkalana kiyA hai| sthAnAGga kI prastAvanA meM maiMne
isa prazna para vistAra se cintana bhI kiyA hai| yaha pUrNa aitihAsika satya hai
ki yaha Agama gaNadharakRta hai| mukhya rUpa se yaha Agama gadya rUpa meM hai
para kahIM-kahIM bIca-bIca meM nAmAvalI va anya vivaraNa sambandhI gAthAe~ bhI
AI haiN| bhASya kI dRSTi se bhI yaha Agama mahattvapUrNa hai| kahIM-kahIM para
alaMkAroM kA prayoga huA hai 1 saMkhyAoM ke sahAre bhagavAn pArzva aura unake
pUrvavartI caudahapUrvI, avadhijJAnI, aura viziSTa jJAnI muniyoM kA bhI ullekha
hai, jo itihAsa kI dRSTi se mahattvapUrNa hai| tulanAtmaka adhyayana
samavAyAMgasUtra meM vibhinna viSayoM kA jitanA adhika saMkalana huA hai, utanA
viSayoM kI dRSTi se saMkalana anya AgamoM meM kama huA hai| bhagavatI sUtra
viSaya bahula hai to AkAra kI dRSTi se bhI virAT hai  /  samavAyAMga sUtra AkAra
kI dRSTi se bahuta hI choTA hai| jaise viSNu muni ne tIna paira se virATa vizva
ko nApa liyA thA, vaise hI samavAyAMga kI sthiti hai| yadi hama samavAyAMga
sUtra meM Aye huye viSayoM kI tulanA anya Agama sAhitya se kareM to sahaja hI
yaha jJAta hogA ki vyavahAra sUtra meM yathArtha hI kahA gayA hai ki sthAnAMga
aura samavAyAMga kA jJAtA hI AcArya aura 227. jambUdvIpaprajJapti, dvitIya
vakSaskAra meM pandraha kulakara, digambara grantha "siddhAnta-saMgraha " meM
caudaha kulakara kahe gae haiN| [ 54 ]

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Upadhyaya can hold such a glorious position because the *Sthananga* and
*Samavayanga* contain concise discussions of all the topics that are essential
for the Acharya and Upadhyaya positions. In short, it can be said that the vast
ocean of *Jinavani* has been filled into a pitcher called *Samavayanga*. This is
why its clear echo is heard in other *Agam* literature. Therefore, we are
comparing the topics of *Samavayanga* in the light of other *Agams* very briefly
here.  1. **Samavayanga and Acharanga**  *Acharanga* is of paramount importance
for those who are curious about *Jinavani*. It is the first *Anga* - from the
point of view of composition and also from the point of view of establishment.
*Acharanga* is amazing from the point of view of style of composition, style of
language and subject matter. It is important from both the point of view of
*Achar* and *Darshan*. We are briefly comparing *Samavayanga* with *Acharanga*.
The third sutra of the first *Samavay* of *Samavayanga* is - 'Ege Dande', this
is also mentioned in *Acharanga* 229. The second sutra of the fifth *Samavay* of
*Samavayanga* is 'Panch Mahvvyaya Pannatta...' then this is also explained in
*Acharanga* 230.  - The third sutra of the fifth *Samavay* of *Samavayanga* is -
'Panch Kamguna Pannatta...' then this is also explained in *Acharanga* 231.  The
sixth sutra of the fifth *Samavay* of *Samavayanga* is - 'Panch Nijarana
Pannatta...' then this description is also found in *Acharanga* 222.  The second
sutra of the sixth *Samavay* of *Samavayanga* is 'Chh Jiwanikaya Pannatta...'
then this is also explained in *Acharanga* 233.  The third sutra of the seventh
*Samavay* of *Samavayanga* is - 'Samane Bhagavan Mahavir Sattarayaniyo Uddham
Ucchatenam Hottha...' then this same description of Mahavira's *Avagahana* is
also found in *Acharanga* 234.  The third sutra of the ninth *Samavay* of
*Samavayanga* is - 'Nav Bhamcheara Pannatta...' then the description of
*Brahmacharya* is also found in *Acharanga* 235.  The first sutra of the twenty-
fifth *Samavay* of *Samavayanga* is - "Purim- Pacchimgaganam Titthagaranam
Panch-Jamass Panavinsam Bhavanao Pannattao........" then the mention of twenty-
five *Bhavana* of five *Mahavrat* is also found in *Acharanga* 236.  In the
thirtieth *Samavay* of *Samavayanga* it is said "Samane Bhagavan Mahavir Tisan
Vasai Aagaravasamjje Vasitta Agarao Apgaariyam Pavvaie.." then this same
description of Bhagavan Mahavira's initiation is also found in *Acharanga* 237.
228. *Than Samavayadhare Kappar Ayari Shattae Uvjjhayattae Ganavaccheiyattae
Uddisittae*. *Vyavaharsutra Uddeshak* 3  229. *Acharanga Shru. 1 A. 1 U. 4*
230. *Acharanga Shru. 3 Su. 179*  231. *Acharanga Shru. 1 A. 2 U. 1 Su. 65*
232. *Acharanga. 3 Su. 179*  233. *Acharanga. 1 A. 19 U. 1 to 7*  234.
*Acharanga Shru. 2 A. 15 U. 1 Su. 166*  235. *Acharanga. 1 A. 1 to 9*  236.
*Acharanga. 2 Chu. 3 Su. 179*  237. *Acharanga. 2 Chu. 3 Su. 179*  [55]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upAdhyAya jaise gauravapUrNa pada ko dhAraNa kara sakatA hai kyoMki sthAnAMga
aura samavayAMga meM una sabhI viSayoM kI saMkSepa meM carcAe~ A gayI haiM,
AcArya va upAdhyAya pada ke lie jinakA jAnanA atyadhika Avazyaka haiN| 228
saMkSepa meM yoM kahA jA sakatA hai ki jinavANI rUpI viraT sAgara ko samavAyAMga
rUpI gAgara meM bhara diyA gayA hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki anya Agama sAhitya meM
isa kI spaSTa pratidhvani sunAI detI hai ataH hama yahAM para bahuta hI saMkSepa
meM anya AgamoM ke Aloka meM samavAyAMgagata viSayoM kI tulanA kara rahe haiN| 1
samavAyAMga aura AcArAMga jinavANI ke jijJAsuoM ke lie AcArAMga kA sarvAdhika
mahattva hai| vaha sabase prathama aMga hai - racanA kI dRSTi se aura sthApanA
kI dRSTi se bhI  /  AcArAMga racanAzailI, bhASAzailI va viSayavastu kI dRSTi se
adbhuta hai  /  AcAra aura darzana donoM hI dRSTi se usakA mahattva hai| hama
samavAyAMga kI AcArAMga ke sAtha saMkSepa meM tulanA kara rahe haiN| samavAyAMga
ke prathama samavAya kA tRtIya sUtra hai- ege daNDe, AcArAMga 229 meM bhI isakA
ullekha hai| samavAyAMga ke pA~caveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra paMca mahavvayA
paNNattA.......' hai to AcArAMga 230 meM bhI yaha nirUpaNa hai| - samavAyAMga ke
pA~caveM samavAya kA tRtIya sUtra - 'paMca kAmaguNA paNNattA......' hai to
AcArAMga 231 meM bhI isakA pratipAdana huA hai 1 samavAyAMga ke pA~caveM
samavAya meM chaTTA sUtra - 'paMca nijarANA paNNattA.....' hai to AcArAMga 222
meM bhI yaha varNana prApta hai| samavAyAMga ke chuTTe samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra
cha jIvanikAya paNNattA....' hai to AcArAMga 233 meM bhI isakA nirUpaNa hai|
samavAyAMga ke sAtaveM samavAya kA tRtIya sUtra - 'samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
sattarayaNIo uDDhaM uccateNaM hotthA.....' hai to AcArAMga 234 meM bhI mahAvIra
kI avagAhanA kA yahI varNana hai  /  hai to samavAyAMga ke navama samavAya kA
tRtIya sUtra - 'nava baMbhacerA paNNattA... AcArAMga 235 meM bhI brahmacarya kA
varNana prApta hai| samavAyAMga ke paccIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra - "
purima- pacchimagANaM titthagarANaM paMca-jAmassa paNavIsaM bhAvaNAo
paNNattAo........" hai to AcArAMga 236 meM bhI pAMca mahAvratoM kI paccIsa
bhAvanAoM kA ullekha huA hai| samavAyAMga ke tIsaveM samavAya meM "samaNe
bhagavaM mahAvIre tIsaM vAsAI AgAravAsamajjhe vasittA AgArAo apagAriyaM
pavvaie.. " hai to AcArAMga 237 meM bhI bhagavAn mahAvIra kI dIkSA kA yahI
varNana hai| 228. ThANa samavAyadhare kappara AyariSattAe uvajjhAyattAe
gaNAvaccheiyattAe uddisittAe  /  vyavahArasUtra uddezaka 3 229. 231. 233. 235.
236. 237. AcArAMga zru. 1 a. 1 u. 4 AcArAMga zru. 1 a. 2 u. 1 sU. 65 AcArAMga
zru. 1 a. 19 u. 1 se 7 AcArAMga . 1 a. 1 se 9 AcArAMga . 2 cu. 3 sU. 179
AcArAMga . 2 cu. 3 sU. 179 230. AcArAMga zru. 3 sU. 179 232. AcArAMga . 3 sU.
179 234. AcArAMga zru. 2 a. 15 u. 1 sU. 166 [ 55 ]

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first sutra of the eleventh Samavaya of Samavayanga is "Munisuvvayass naṁ
arahao paṇṇāsaṁ ajjiyā sāhassiyo hotthā...................."  This is also
mentioned in Acharanga 238, describing the Aryikas of Munisuvrata. The second
sutra of the twenty-second Samavaya of Samavayanga is "Samaṇe bhagavaṁ Mahāvīre
bāsīe rāidīehiṁ vīikkantēhiṁ gabbhāo gabbhaṁ sāhariē239... .........."  This is
also mentioned in Acharanga 240, describing the change of womb of Bhagavan
Mahavira. The first sutra of the twenty-ninth Samavaya of Samavayanga is "Bāṇauī
padimao paṇṇattāo..  This is also mentioned in Acharanga 241, describing the
twenty-ninth images. The similarities between the topics of Samavayanga and
Acharanga are mentioned here. Samavayanga and Sutra-kritanga Sutra-kritanga is
the second Anga. While Acharanga mainly focuses on conduct, Sutra-kritanga
focuses on philosophy. It provides a clear glimpse into the philosophies of the
Mahavira era. Like Acharanga, it is unique in its language, style, and
expression. Here is a brief comparison of Sutra-kritanga with Samavayanga. The
ninth sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is "Ege dhamme"  This is also
mentioned in Sutra-kritanga 242. The tenth sutra of the first Samavaya of
Samavayanga is "Ege adhamme"  This is also mentioned in Sutra-kritanga 243. The
eleventh sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is "Ege puṇṇe"  This is also
mentioned in Sutra-kritanga 244, describing punya. The twelfth sutra of the
first Samavaya of Samavayanga is "Ege pāve"  This is also mentioned in Sutra-
kritanga 245, describing papa. The thirteenth sutra of the first Samavaya of
Samavayanga is "Ege bandhe"  This is also mentioned in Sutra-kritanga 246,
describing bandha. The fourteenth sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is
"Ege mokkhe"  This is also mentioned in Sutra-kritanga 247, describing moksha.
238. 239. 240. 241. 242. 243. The fifteenth sutra of the first Samavaya of
Samavayanga is "Ege āsāve"  This is also mentioned in Sutra-kritanga 248,
describing asrava. Acharanga-shru. 1 Acharanga-shru. 2 A. 24 Acharanga-shru. 2
A. 24 Acharanga-shru. 2 Sutra-kritanga-shru. 2 A. 5 Sutra-kritanga-shru. 2 A. 5
Sutra-kritanga-shru. 2 A. 5 Sutra-kritanga-shru. 2 A. 5 Sutra-kritanga-shru. 2
A. 5 Sutra-kritanga-shru. 2 A. 5 [56] 244. 245. 246. 248.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke ekAvanaveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra hai-"muNisuvvayassa NaM
arahao paNNAsaM ajjiyA sAhassIo hotthA...................." hai to AcArAMga238
meM bhI munisuvrata kI AryikAoM kA varNana hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke viyAsIveM
samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra hai "samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre bAsIe rAidiehiM
vIikkaMtehiM gabbhAo gabbhaM sAharie239... .........." to AcArAMga240 meM bhI
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke garbha-parivartana kA ullekha samavAyAMga ke bAnaveMve
samavAya kA prathama sUtra hai-'bANauI paDimAo paNNattAo.. to AcArAMga241 meM
bhI bAnaveM pratimAoM kA ullekha huA hai| samavAyAMga ke sUtroM ke sAtha
AcArAMgagata viSayoM kA jo sAmya hai, vaha yahAM para nirdiSTa kiyA gayA hai|
samavAyAMga aura sUtrakRtAMga sUtrakRtAMga dvitIya aMga hai| AcArAMga meM mukhya
rUpa se AcAra kI pradhAnatA rahI hai to sUtrakRtAMga meM darzana kI pradhAnatA
hai| mahAvIra yugIna darzanoM kI spaSTa jhAMkI isameM hai| AcArAMga kI taraha
yahabhI bhAva-bhASA aura zailI kI dRSTi se alaga-thalaga vilakSaNatA lie hue
hai| saMkSepa meM yahAM prastuta hai samavAyAMga ke sAtha sUtrakRtAMga kI
tulnaa| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA navama sUtra hai-"ege dhamme" to
sUtrakRtaMga242 meM bhI isa dharma kA ullekha samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya
kA dazavA~ sUtra hai-'ege adhamme' to sUtrakRtAMga243 meM bhI yahI varNana hai|
samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA gyArahavA~ sUtra hai- 'ege puNNe' to
sUtrakRtAMga244 meM bhI puNya kA varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya
kA bArahavA~ sUtra hai- 'ege pAve' to sUtrakRtAMga245 meM bhI pApa kA nirUpaNa
huA samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA terahavA~ sUtra hai 'ege baMdhe' to
sUtrakRtAMga246 meM bhI bandha kA varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya
kA caudahavA~ sUtra hai- 'ege mokkhe' to sUtrakRtAMga247 meM bhI mokSa kA
ullekha 238. 239. 240. 241. 242. 243. samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA
pandrahavAM sUtra hai- 'ege Asave' to sUtrakRtAMga248 meM bhI Azrava kA nirUpaNa
hai| AcArAMga-zru. 1 AcArAMga-zru. 2 a. 24 AcArAMga-zru. 2 a. 24 AcArAMga-zru. 2
sUtrakRtAMga-zru. 2 a. 5 sUtrakRtAMga-zru. 2 a.5 sUtrakRtAMga-zru. 2 a. 5
sUtrakRtAMga-zru. 2 a. 5 sUtrakRtAMga-zru. 2 a. 5 sUtrakRtAMga-zru. 2 a. 5
sUtrakRtAMga-zru. 2 a. 5 [56] 244. 245. 246. 248.

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixteenth sutra of the first samavaya of Samavayanga is "Ege Sanvare", and
the same concept of Sanvara is also described in Sutra-Kritanga 249. The
seventeenth sutra of the first samavaya of Samavayanga is "Ega Veyana", and the
same concept of Vedana is also described in Sutra-Kritanga 250. The eighteenth
sutra of the first samavaya of Samavayanga is "Ega Nijjara", and the same
concept of Nirjara is also described in Sutra-Kritanga 251. The first sutra of
the second samavaya of Samavayanga is "Do Danda Pannatta...", and the same
concept of Artha-Danda and Anartha-Danda is also described in Sutra-Kritanga
252. The first sutra of the twenty-second samavaya of Samavayanga is "Bavisan
Parisaha Pannatta", and the same concept of Parisahas is also described in
Sutra-Kritanga 254. The first sutra of the thirteenth samavaya of Samavayanga is
"Teras Kiriyathana Pannatta...", and the same concept of Kriyas is also
described in Sutra-Kritanga 253. In this way, there are many similarities
between Samavayanga and Sutra-Kritanga. Both the Agamas,  Sthananga and
Samavayanga, are constructed in the same style. Therefore, there is a lot of
similarity in the subject matter of both. The comparison of these two has
already been done in the introduction of Sthananga Sutra, therefore, we are not
repeating it here. The inquisitive person should look at that introduction.
Samavayanga and Bhagavati There is also similarity in the subject matter at many
places in both these Agamas, Samavayanga and Bhagavati. Therefore, here we are
giving a comparative study of the topics of Samavayanga with Bhagavati. The
first sutra of the first samavaya of Samavayanga is "Ege Aaya", and the same
concept of Atma being one in terms of Chaitanya Guna is also described in
Bhagavati 255. The second sutra of the first samavaya of Samavayanga is "Ege
Anaaya", and the same concept of Anatma being one in terms of the perspective of
the sutra is also described in Bhagavati 256. The fourth sutra of the first
samavaya of Samavayanga is "Ege Adande", and the same concept of Adanda, the
business of the form of inclination of the auspicious yogas, is also described
in Bhagavati 257.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA solahavAM sUtra 'ege saMvare" hai to
sUtrakRtAMga 249 meM bhI saMvara kI prarUpaNA huyI hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama
samavAya kA sattarahavAM sUtra - 'egA veyaNA' hai to sUtrakRtAMga 250 meM bhI
vedanA kA varNana samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA aThArahavAM sUtra hai -
'egA nijjarA' to sUtrakRtAMga 251 meM bhI nirjarA kA varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke
dvitIya samavAya kA prathama sUtra - 'do daNDA paNNattA .......' hai to
sUtrakRtAMga 252 meM bhI arthadaNDa aura anarthadaNDa kA varNana hai| .' hai to
sUtrakRtAMga 253 meM samavAyAMga ke bAvIsaveM samavAya ka prathama sUtra hai -
'bAvIsaM parIsahA paNNattA' to sUtrakRtAMga 254 meM bhI parISahoM kA varNana
hai| hai  /  samavAyAMga ke terahaveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra - 'terasa
kiriyAThANA paNNattA. bhI kriyAoM kA varNana hai  /  isa taraha samavAyAMga aura
sUtrakRtAMga meM aneka viSayoM kI samAnatA hai  /  sthAnAGga aura samavAyAMga ye
donoM Agama eka zailI meM nirmita haiN| ataH donoM meM atyadhika viSayasAmya
hai| ina donoM kI tulanA sthAnAGgasUtra kI prastAvanA meM kI jA cukI hai, ataeva
yahA~ use nahIM doharA rahe haiM  /  jijJAsujana usa prastAvanA kA avalokana
kreN| samavAyAMga aura bhagavatI samavAyAMga aura bhagavatI ina donoM AgamoM meM
bhI aneka sthaloM para viSaya meM sadRzatA hai| ataH yahAM samavAyAMgagata
viSayoM kA bhagavatI ke sAtha tulanAtmaka adhyayana de rahe haiN| samavAyAMga ke
prathama samavAya kA prathama sUtra hai - 'ege AyA' to bhagavatI 255 meM bhI
caitanya guNa kI dRSTi se AtmA eka svarUpa pratipAdita kiyA hai| samavAyAMga ke
prathama samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra hai - 'ege aNAyA' to bhagavatI 256 sUtra 1
samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA caturtha sUtra hai 'ege adaNDe' to bhagavatI
257 meM bhI prazasta yogoM kA pravRttirUpa vyApAra - adaNDa ko eka batAyA hai| |
kI dRSTi se anAtmA kA eka rUpa pratipAdita 249. 250. 251. 252. 253. 254. 255.
256. 257. sUtrakRtAMga - zru . 2 a. 5 sUtrakRtAMga- zru 2 a. 5 sUtrakRtAMga-
zru. 2 a. 5 sUtrakRtAMga - zru 2 a. 2 sUtrakRtAMga - zru . 2 a. 2 2 a 2
sUtrakRtAMga - zru bhagavatI - zataka 12 uddezaka 10 bhagavatI - zataka 1 u. 4
bhagavatI - zataka 11 u. 11 [57] meM bhI anupayoga lakSaNa

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Ega Kiriya', which is
also described in Bhagavati 258 as the activity of the Yogas. The sixth sutra of
the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Ega Akiriya', which is also described in
Bhagavati 259 as the inactivity of the Yogas. The seventh sutra of the first
Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Ege Loe', which is also described in Bhagavati 260
as the Lokakasha, the fundamental basis of Dharma, Astikaya, and other
substances. The eighth sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Ege Aloe',
which is also described in Bhagavati 260 as the Alokaakasha, the absence of
Dharma, Astikaya, and other substances. The twenty-sixth sutra of the first
Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Imise Nan Rayanppahae Pudhaviye.....
.........................', which is also described in Bhagavati 262 as the
situation of some Narakas on the earth named Ratnapraba, using a simile. The
twenty-seventh sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Imise
Nan................', which is also described in Bhagavati 263 as the excellent
situation of Ratnapraba Narakas, using a simile of the ocean. The twenty-ninth
sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Asurkumaraanam
Devaanam..............', which is also described in Bhagavati 264 as the
situation of Asura Kumaras, using a simile. The thirtieth sutra of the first
Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Asurkumaraanam................', which is also
described in Bhagavati 265 as the excellent situation, using a simile of the
ocean. The thirty-first sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is
'Asurkumariind.................', which is also described in Bhagavati 266 as
the situation of some Bhavanpati Devas, excluding Asura Kumarendra, using a
simile. The thirty-second sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is
'Asankhijjavasaauy..........', which is also described in Bhagavati 267 as the
situation of some Garbhaja Tiryanchas with an age of countless years, using a
simile. The thirty-third sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is
'Asankhijjavasaauy.........', which is also described in Bhagavati 268 as the
situation of some Garbhaja Manusyas with an age of countless years, using a
simile. 258. Bhagavati-Shat. 1 U.6 259. Bhagavati-Sh. 25 U.7 260. Bhagavati-Sh.
12 U.7 261. Bhagavati-Sh. 12 U. 7 Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 263. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1
264. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 265. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 266. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1
267. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 268. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 262. [58]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA pAMcavA~ sUtra hai-'egA kiriyA' to
bhagavatI258 meM bhI yogoM kI pravRtti rUpa kriyA eka hai| samavAyAMga ke
prathama samavAya kA chaThA sUtra hai 'egA akirayA' to bhagavatI259 meM bhI
yoganirodharUpa akriyA eka mAnI hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA sAtavA~
sUtra hai 'ege loe' to bhagavatI260 meM bhI dharmAstikAya Adi dravyoM kA
AdhArabhUta lokAkAza eka pratipAdita kiyA hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya
kA AThavA~ sUtra hai-'ege aloe' to bhagavatI260 meM bhI dharmAstikAya Adi
dravyoM ke abhAva rUpa alokAkAza kA varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama
samavAya kA chabbIsavA~ sUtra hai-'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe puDhavIe.....
......................... to bhagavatI262 meM bhI ratnaprabhA nAmaka pRthvI ke
kucha nArakoM kI sthiti eka palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke
prathama samavAya kA sattAIsavA~ sUtra hai-'imIse NaM................' to
bhagavatI263 meM bhI ratnaprabhA-nArakoM kI utkaSTa sthiti eka sAgaropama kI
kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA unatIsavA~ sUtra hai-
'asurakumArANaM devANaM..............' to bhagavatI264 meM bhI asurakumAra devoM
kI sthiti eka palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA tIsavA~
sUtra hai- 'asurakumArANaM................' to bhagavatI265 meM bhI utkRSTa
sthiti eka sAgaropama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA
ikatIsavA~ sUtra hai-'asurakumAriMda.................' to bhagavatI266 meM bhI
asurakumArendra ko chor3akara kucha bhavanapati devoM kI sthiti eka palyopama kI
kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA battIsavAM sUtra
hai-'asaMkhijjavAsAuya.......... to bhagavatI267 meM bhI asaMkhya varSa kI Ayu
vAle kucha garbhaja tiryaMcoM kI sthiti eka palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga
ke prathama samavAya kA tetIsavAM sUtra hai-'asaMkhijja vAsAuya.........' to
bhagavatI268 meM bhI asakhya varSoM kI AyuvAle kucha garbhaja manuSyoM kI sthiti
eka palyopama kI batAyI hai| 258. bhagavatI-zata. 1 u.6 259. bhagavatI-za. 25
u.7 260. bhagavatI-za. 12 u.7 261. bhagavatI-za. 12 u. 7 bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1
263. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 264. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 265. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1
266. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 267. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 268. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1
262. [58]

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The 34th Sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is - 'Vaanamantaranam
Devanam.......' So in Bhagavati 269, the excellent state of Vaanavyantar Devas
is also said to be one Palyopama. The 35th Sutra of the first Samavaya of
Samavayanga is 'Joisiyanam. The excellent state of is said to be one Palyopama
more than a lakh years. The 36th Sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga -
'Sohamme Kappe Devanam. The inferior state of the Devas of Saudharma Kalpa is
also said to be one Palyopama. The 37th Sutra of the first Samavaya of
Samavayanga is - 'Sohamme Kappe ..... The state of the Devas is said to be one
Sagaropama. The 38th Sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is – 'Isaane
Kappe Devanam. The inferior state of the Devas of Ishaan Kalpa is said to be
slightly more than one Palyopama. The 39th Sutra of the first Samavaya of
Samavayanga is - 'Isaane Kappe Deva........' In this Sutra also, the state of
some Devas of Ishaan Kalpa is said to be one Sagaropama. The 40th Sutra of the
first Samavaya of Samavayanga is - "Santegaiya Bhavasiddhia. This is also
described in Bhagavati - Sutra 271. The 14th Sutra of the third Samavaya of
Samavayanga is - 'Dochchae Nan Pudhavieae... The excellent state of the
Nairyaikas of Sharkaraprabha Prithvi is said to be three Sagaropama. The 15th
Sutra of the third Samavaya of Samavayanga is - 'Tacchae Nan Pudhavieae... The
inferior state of the Nairyaikas of Balukaprabha Prithvi is said to be three
Sagaropama. The 13th Sutra of the third Samavaya of Samavayanga is - "Imise Nan
Rayanppahaeae.......... ." So in Bhagavati 276, the state of some Nairyaikas of
Ratnapraba Prithvi is also said to be three Palyopama. The 16th Sutra of the
third Samavaya of Samavayanga +2 'Asurkumaranam Devanam......... .' Similarly,
in Bhagavati 279, the state of some Asurkumara Devas is also said to be three
Palyopama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA cautIsavAM sUtra hai - ' vANamaMtarANaM
devANaM....... to bhagavatI 269 meM bhI vANavyantara devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti eka
palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA paitIsavA~ sUtra hai
'joisiyANaM. kI utkRSTa sthiti eka palyopama adhika lAkha varSa kI kahI hai|
samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA chattIsavA~ sUtra - 'sohamme kappe devANa.
bhI saudharma kalpa ke devoM kI jaghanya sthiti eka palyopama kI kahI hai|
samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA saiMtIsavA~ sUtra hai - 'sohamme kappe .....
devoM kI sthiti eka sAgaropama kI kahI hai| ke kucha samavAyAMga ke prathama
samavAya kA ar3atIsavA~ sUtra hai - 'IsANe kappe devANaM. IzAna kalpa ke devoM
kI jaghanya sthiti kucha adhika eka palyopama kI kahI hai| .' to bhagavatI 270
meM bhI jyotiSka devoM samavAyAMga sUtra ke prathama samavAya kA unacAlIsavA~
sUtra hai - 'IsANe kappe devA........ sUtra meM bhI IzAna kalpa ke kucha devoM
kI sthiti eka sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA
tayAlIsavA~ sUtra hai - "saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA. bhI isa kA varNana hai  /  .'
hai to bhagavatI - sUtra 271 meM .' to bhagavatI 272 meM bhI saudharma kalpa
samavAyAMga ke tRtIya samavAya kA caudahava~ sUtra hai - 'doccAe NaM puDhavIe...
zarkarAprabhA pRthvI ke nairayikoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIna sAgaropama kI batAyI
hai| samavAyAMga ke tRtIya samavAya kA pandrahavA~ sUtra hai- 'taccAe NaM
puDhavIe... bAlukAprabhA pRthvI ke nairayikoM kI jaghanya sthiti tIna sAgaropama
kI batAyI hai  /  269. 270. 271. 272. 273. 274. 275. 276. 277. 278. 279.
bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI -
za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 6, 12,
u. 10, 2 bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1
bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 .' to bhagavatI 273 meM bhI samavAyAMga ke tRtIya
samavAya kA terahavA~ sUtra hai - "imIse NaM rayaNappahAe.......... ." hai to
bhagavatI 276 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti tIna
palyopama kI batAyI hai  /  [59] 11 .' to bhagavatI 274 to bhagavatI 275 meM
samavAyAMga ke tRtIya samavAya kA solahavA~ sUtra +2 'asurakumArANaM
devA......... .' isI taraha bhagavatI 279 meM bhI kucha asuMrakumAra devoM kI
sthiti tIna palyopama kI kahI hai| .' to bhagavatI 277 meM bhI .' to bhagavatI
278 meM bhI

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The seventeenth sutra of the third Samavaya of the Samavayanga Sutra is
'Asankhijjavaasaauy....', which is also mentioned in Bhagavati 280, describing
the excellent state of three Palya-upamas of Sanjnee Tiryanch Panchendriyas with
an age of countless years.  The eighteenth sutra of the third Samavaya of the
Samavayanga Sutra is 'Asankhijjavaasaauy.......', which is also mentioned in
Bhagavati 281, describing the excellent state of three Palya-upamas of Garbhaja
Manusyas with an age of countless years.  The nineteenth sutra of the third
Samavaya of the Samavayanga Sutra is 'Sohammisaanesu.........', which is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 282, describing the state of some Devas of the Saudharma
and Ishana Kalpas.  The twentieth sutra of the third Samavaya of the Samavayanga
Sutra is 'Sanankumara-Mahiindesu.......', which is also mentioned in Bhagavati
283, describing the state of some Devas of the Sanatkumara and Mahendra Kalpas
as three Sagara-upamas.  The twenty-first sutra of the third Samavaya of the
Samavayanga Sutra is 'Je Deva Abhankaram Pabhankaram', which is also mentioned
in Bhagavati 284, describing the excellent state of Abhankara Prabhankara Devas
as three Sagara-upamas.  The twenty-fourth sutra of the third Samavaya of the
Samavayanga Sutra is 'Santegaiya Bhavasiddhiya.......', which is also mentioned
in Bhagavati 285, describing some Jivas who will be liberated after three
Bhavas.  The tenth sutra of the fourth Samavaya of the Samavayanga Sutra is
"Imise Nan Rayanappahae......", which is also mentioned in Bhagavati 286,
describing the state of some Nairyikas of the Ratnapraba Prithvi as four Palya-
upamas.  The eleventh sutra of the fourth Samavaya of the Samavayanga Sutra is
'Tacchae Nan Pudhvie........', which is also mentioned in Bhagavati 287,
describing the state of some Nairyikas of the Baluka Prithvi as four Sagara-
upamas.  The twelfth sutra of the fourth Samavaya of the Samavayanga Sutra is
'Asurkumaraanam Devaanam.......', which is also mentioned in Bhagavati 288,
describing the state of Asurkumara Devas as four Palya-upamas.  The thirteenth
sutra of the fourth Samavaya of the Samavayanga Sutra is
'Sohammisaanesu.........', which is also mentioned in Bhagavati 289, describing
the state of some Devas of the Saudharma Ishana Kalpas as four Palya-upamas.
280. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 281. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 282. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1
283. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 284. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 285. Bhagavati-Sh. 6, 12 U.
10, 2 286. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 287. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 288. Bhagavati-Sh. 1
U. 1 289. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 [60]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga sUtra ke tRtIya samavAya kA sattarahavA~ sUtra
hai-'asaMkhijjavAsAuya....' to bhagavatI280 meM bhI asaMkhya varSa kI Ayu vAle
saMjJI tiryaJca paMcendriyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIna palyopama kI batAyI hai|
samavAyAMga sUtra ke tRtIya samavAya kA aThArahavAM
sUtra-'asaMkhijjavAsAuya.......' hai to bhagavatI281 meM bhI asakhya varSa kI
Ayu vAle garbhaja manuSyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIna palyopama kI batAyI hai|
samavAyAMga ke tRtIya samavAya kA unnIsavAM sUtra hai-'sohammIsANesu.........'
to bhagavatI282 meM bhI saudharma, aura IzAna kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti
yahI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke tRtIya samavAya kA bIsavA~ sUtra-'saNaMkumAra-
mAhiMdesu.......' hai to bhagavatI283 meM bhI sanatkumAra aura mAhendra kalpa ke
kucha devoM kI sthiti tIna sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke tRtIya
samavAya kA ikavIsavA~ sUtra hai-'je devA AbhaMkaraM pabhakaraM' hai to
bhagavatI284 meM AbhaMkara prabhaMkara devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIna sAgaropama
kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke tRtIya samavAya kA caubIsavA~ sUtra-'saMtegaiyA
bhavasiddhiyA.......' hai to bhagavatI285 meM bhI kucha jIva tIna bhava kara
mukta hoMge, aisA varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke caturtha samavAya kA dazavAM sUtra
-"imIse NaM rayaNappahAe......" hai to bhagavatI286 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI
ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti cAra palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke
caturtha samavAya kA gyArahavA~ sUtra - 'taccAe NaM puDhavIe........' hai to
bhagavatI287 meM bhI bAlukA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti cAra sAgaropama
kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke caturtha samavAya kA bArahavA~ sUtra-
'asurakumArANaM devANaM.......' hai to bhagavatI288 meM bhI asurakumAra devoM kI
cAra palyopama kI sthiti pratipAdita hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke caturtha samavAya
kA terahavA~ sUtra-'sohammIsANesu.........' hai to bhagavatI289 meM bhI
saudharma IzAna kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti cAra palyopama kI kahI hai| 280.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 281. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 282. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 283.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 284. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 285. bhagavatI-za. 6, 12 u. 10, 2
286. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 287. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 288. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1
289. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 [60]

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourteenth sutra of the fourth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Sanantkumar -
Mahindes... also mentions the state of some gods of Sanatkumar and Mahendra
Kumar in four Palyopama. The fifteenth sutra of the fourth Samavaya of
Samavayanga - 'Je Deva Kitthi Sukitthi... also mentions the excellent state of
Krishti, Sukrishti, etc. Vaimanik Devas in four Sagaropama. The sixth sutra of
the fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Panch Nijjarattaana Panatta' is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 292, where five places of Nirjara, Pranatipataviraati,
etc. are mentioned. The fourteenth sutra of the fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga -
'Imise Nan Rayanppahae... Ratnapraba mentions the state of some Nairyikas of the
earth in five Palyopama. The eighth sutra of the fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga -
'Panch Athikaya Panatta...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 293, where five
Astikayas like Dharmaastikaya are mentioned. The fifteenth sutra of the fifth
Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Tacchae Nan Pudhavie..... Balukaprabha mentions the
state of some Nairyikas of the earth in five Palyopama. The eighteenth sutra of
the fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Sanankumar - Mahindes... mentions the state
of some gods of Sanatkumar and Mahendra Kalpa in five Sagaropama. The sixteenth
sutra of the fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Asurkumaraanam Devaanam......' is
also mentioned in Bhagavati 296, where the state of Asurakumar Devas is
mentioned in five Palyopama. The seventeenth sutra of the fifth Samavaya of
Samavayanga - 'Souhammisaanesu.......' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 297, where
the state of some gods of Saudharma Ishana Kalpa is mentioned in five Palyopama.
The nineteenth sutra of the fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Je Deva Vayam
Suvayam......' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 299, where the excellent state of
Vatasuvat, etc. Vaimanik Devas is mentioned in five Sagaropama. The third sutra
of the sixth Samavaya of Samavayanga is - 'Chhavvihe Bahire Tavokamme
Panatte......' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 300, where six types of external
penance like Anashan are mentioned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke cauthe samavAya kA caudahavA~ sUtra - 'saNaMtakumAra -
mAhiMdesu.. bhI sanatkumAra aura mAhendra kumAra ke kucha devoM kI sthiti cAra
palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke caturtha samavAya kA pandrahavA~ sUtra -
'je devA kiTThi sukiTThi. meM bhI kRSTi, sukRSTi, Adi vaimAnika devoM kI utkRSTa
sthiti cAra sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke pA~caveM samavAya kA chaThA
sUtra - 'paMca nijjaraTThANA paNNattA' hai to - bhagavatI 292 meM bhI nirjarA ke
prANAtipAtavirati Adi pA~ca sthAna batAye haiN| samavAyAMga ke pA~caveM samavAya
kA caudahavA~ sUtra - 'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe.. ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha
nairayikoM kI sthiti pA~ca* palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke pAMcaveM
samavAya kA AThavA~ sUtra - 'paMca atthikAyA paNNattA ......' hai to bhagavatI
293 meM bhI dharmAstikAya Adi pA~ca astikAya batAye haiN| samavAyAMga ke
pA~caveM samavAya kA pandrahavA~ sUtra - 'taccAe NaM puDhavIe..... bAlukAprabhA
pRthvI ke kucha nairakiyoM kI sthiti pA~ca palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke
pA~caveM samavAya kA aThArahavA~ sUtra - 'saNaMkumAra - mAhiMdesu... sanatkumAra
aura mAhendra kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti pA~ca sAgaropama kI kahI hai| ' hai
to bhagavatI 290 meM samavAyAMga ke pA~caveM samavAya kA solahavA~ sUtra -
'asurakumArANaM devANaM......' hai to bhagavatI 296 meM bhI asurakumAra devoM kI
sthiti pA~ca palyopama kI kahI hai| ..' hai to bhagavatI 291 samavAyAMga ke
pA~caveM samavAya kA sattarahavA~ sUtra - 'sauhammIsANesu....... hai to
bhagavatI 297 meM bhI saudharma IzAna kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti pA~ca
palyopama kI batAyI hai  /  290. 291. 292. 293. 294. 295. 296. 297. 298. 299.
300. bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 7 u. 10
bhagavatI - za. 2 u. 10 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI
-za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 , ' hai to bhagavatI
294 meM bhI samavAyAMga ke pA~caveM samavAya kA unnIsavA~ sUtra - 'je devA vAyaM
suvAyaM......' hai to bhagavatI 299 meM bhI vAtasuvAta Adi vaimAnika devoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti pA~ca sAgara kI kahI hai| bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za.
1 u. 1 ' hai to bhagavatI 295 meM bhI samavAyAMga ke chaThe samavAya kA tRtIya
sUtra hai - 'chavvihe bAhire tavokamme paNNatte......' to bhagavatI 300 meM bhI
bAhyatapa ke anazana Adi chaH bheda batAye haiN| [61] 1 hai to bhagavatI 298 meM
bhI

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourteenth sutra of the fourth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Chhavihe
Abhitare Tavokamme Pannatte...' - is also described in Bhagavati 301 as six
internal austerities. The fifth sutra of the sixth Samavaya of the Samavayanga -
'Chh Chhaumathiya Samuraghaya...' - also describes six types of liberation of
the Chanasthikas in Bhagavati 302. The tenth sutra of the sixth Samavaya of the
Samavayanga - 'Tacchae Nam Pudhviaye...' - also describes the condition of some
Nairyakas of the Balukaprabha earth as six oceans in Bhagavati 303. The eleventh
sutra of the sixth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Asurkumaraanam...' - also
describes the condition of some Asurakumaras as six palya in Bhagavati 304. The
twelfth sutra of the sixth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Sohammisaanesu
Kappesu...' - also describes the condition of some gods of the Saudharma and
Ishana kalpas as six palya in Bhagavati 305. The thirteenth sutra of the sixth
Samavaya of the Samavayanga - "Sanankumaramahindesu..." - also describes the
condition of some gods of the Sanatkumar and Mahendra kalpas as six palya in
Bhagavati 206. The fourteenth sutra of the sixth Samavaya of the Samavayanga -
'Je Deva Sayambhuramnam...' - also describes the excellent condition of those
born in the Sayambhu Raman Vimana as six oceans in Bhagavati 307. The fifteenth
sutra of the sixth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - "Tenam Deva, Chhanham
Addhamasaanam..." - also describes the gods of the Sayambhu and other Viman as
breathing in six fortnights in Bhagavati 308. The sixteenth sutra of the sixth
Samavaya of the Samavayanga - "Tesim Nam Devaanam..." - also describes the
desire of the gods residing in the Sayambhu and other Viman to eat after six
thousand years in Bhagavati 309. The third sutra of the seventh Samavaya of the
Samavayanga Sutra - 'Samane Bhagavan...' - also describes the Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavira as seven hands tall in Bhagavati 310. The twelfth sutra of the seventh
Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Imise Nam Rayanppahaye Nam...' - also describes
the condition of some Nairyakas of the Ratnapraba earth as seven palya in
Bhagavati 311. 301. Bhagavati Sh. 25 U. 7 302. Bhagavati Sh. 13 U. 10 303.
Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 304. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 305. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 306.
Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 307. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 308. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 309.
Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 310. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 311. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 [62]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke cauthe samavAya kA caudahavA~ sUtra-'chavihe abhitare tavokamme
paNNatte........' hai to bhagavatI301 meM bhI chaH Abhyantara tapa kA varNana
hai| samavAyAMga ke chaThe samavAya kA pA~cavA~ sUtra-'cha chAumatthiyA
samuraghAyA........' hai to bhagavatI302 meM bhI chAnasthikoM ke chaH samudghAta
batAe haiN| samavAyAMga ke chaThe samavAya kA dasavA~ sUtra-'taccAe NaM
puDhavIe........' hai to bhagavatI 303 meM bhI bAlukAprabhA pRthvI ke kucha
nairayikoM kI sthiti chaH sAgaropama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke chaThe
samavAya kA gyArahavA~ sUtra- 'asurakumArANaM.......' hai to bhagavatI304 meM
bhI kucha asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti chaH palyopama kI pratipAdita hai|
samavAyAMga ke chaThe samavAya kA bArahavA~ sUtra-'sohammIsANesu
kappesu........' hai to bhagavatI305 meM bhI saudharma va IzAna kalpa ke kucha
devoM kI sthiti chaH palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke chaThe
samavAya kA terahavA~ sUtra-"saNaMkumAramAhiMdesu........" hai to bhagavatI206
meM bhI sanatkumAra aura mAhendra kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti chaH palyopama
kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke chaThe samavAya kA caudahavA~ sUtra- 'je devA
sayaMbhUramaNaM........' hai to bhagavatI307 meM bhI svayaMbhU ramaNa vimAna meM
utpanna hone vAloM kI utkRSTa sthiti cha: sAgara kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke
chaThe samavAya kA pandrahavA~ sUtra -"teNaM devA, chaNhaM addhamAsANaM
........" hai to bhagavatI308 meM bhI svayaMbhU Adi vimAnoM ke deva chaH pakSa
meM zvAsocchvAsa lete haiM, aisA varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke chaThe samavAya kA
solahavA~ sUtra-"tesiM NaM devANaM........' hai to bhagavatI309 meM bhI
svayaMbhU yAvat vimAnavAsI devoM kI icchA AhAra lene kI chaH hajAra varSa ke
bAda hotI hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke sAtaveM samavAya kA tRtIya sUtra-'samaNe
bhagavaM........' hai to bhagavatI310 meM bhI zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra sAta
hAtha ke U~ce kahe gae haiN| samavAyAMga ke sAtaveM samavAya kA bArahavA~
sUtra-'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe NaM.......' hai to bhagavatI311 meM bhI
ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti sAta palyopama kI pratipAdita
hai| 301. bhagavatI za. 25 u. 7 302. bhagavatI za. 13 u. 10 303. bhagavatI za. 1
u. 1 304. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 305. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 306. bhagavatI za. 1 u.
1 307. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 308. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 309. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1
310. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 311. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 [62]

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The thirteenth sutra of the seventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Taccae Na
Pudhaviye...' - is also described in Bhagavati 312, where the situation of some
Nairyikas of Balukaprabha is described as seven sagaropama. ... The fourteenth
sutra of the seventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Chauthie Na Puduviye...' -
is also described in Bhagavati 313, where the deplorable situation of the
Nairyikas of Pankaprabha is described as seven sagaropama. The fifteenth sutra
of the seventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Asurkumaraanam...' - is also
described in Bhagavati 314, where the situation of some Kumaras is described as
seven palyopama. The sixteenth sutra of the seventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga
- 'Sohammisaanesu Kappeesu...' - is also described in Bhagavati 315, where the
situation of the Saudharma Ishana Kalpa is described as seven palyopama. The
seventeenth sutra of the seventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Sanankumaare
Kappe Devaanam...' - is also described in Bhagavati 316, where the excellent
situation of the Sanatkumar Devas is described as seven sagaropama. The
eighteenth sutra of the seventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Mahinde Kappe
Devaanam...' - is also described in Bhagavati 317, where the excellent situation
of the Mahendra Kalpa Devas is described as slightly more than seven sagaropama.
The nineteenth sutra of the seventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Bhambhaloae
Kappe...' - is also described in Bhagavati 318, where the situation of the
Brahmaloka Devas is described as slightly more than seven sagaropama. The
twentieth sutra of the seventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Je Deva Saman
Sampapham...' - is also described in Bhagavati 319, where the excellent
situation of the Sama, Samaprabha, Mahaprabha, etc. Devas is described as seven
sagaropama. The twenty-first sutra of the seventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga -
'Te Na Deva Sattanha...' - is also described in Bhagavati 320, where it is
stated that the Devas born in the Sanatkumaraavatansaka Vimana breathe from
seven sides. The twenty-second sutra of the seventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga
- 'Tesin Na Devaanam...' - is also described in Bhagavati 321, where it is
stated that the Sanatkumaraavatansaka Devas have a desire to eat for seven
thousand years. The tenth sutra of the eighth Samavaya of the Samavayanga -
'Imise Na Rayanprabhae...' - is also described in Bhagavati 322, where the
situation of the Nairyikas of the Ratnapraba Earth is described as eight
palyopama. 312. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1. 313. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 Bhagavati Sh. 1
U. 1 315. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 316. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1
318. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 319. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 320. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1
321. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 322. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 314. [63]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke sAtaveM samavAya kA terahavA~ sUtra-'taccAe Na puDhavIe....' hai
to bhagavatI312 meM bhI bAlukAprabhA ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti sAta
sAgaropama kI varNita hai| .. samavAyAMga ke sAtaveM samavAya kA caudahavA~
sUtra-'cautthIe NaM puDhavIe.......' hai to bhagavatI313 meM bhI paMkaprabhA ke
nairayikoM kI jaghanya sthiti sAta sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke
sAtaveM samavAya kA pandrahavA~ sUtra-'asurakumArANaM......' hai to bhagavatI314
meM bhI kucha kumAroM kI sthiti sAta palyopama kI varNita hai| samavAyAMga ke
sAtaveM samavAya kA solahavA~ sUtra-'sohammIsANesu kappesu......' hai to
bhagavatI315 meM saudharma IzAna kalpa kI sthiti sAta palyopama kI batAyI hai|
samavAyAMga ke sAtaveM samavAya kA sattarahavAM sUtra- 'saNaMkumAre kappe
devANaM......' hai to bhagavatI316 meM bhI sanatkumAra devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti
sAta sAgaropama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke sAtaveM samavAya kA aThArahavA~
sUtra-'mAhiMde kappe devANaM........' hai to bhagavatI317 meM bhI mAhendra kalpa
ke devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti kucha adhika sAta sAgaropama kI batAyI hai|
samavAyAMga ke sAtaveM samavAya kA unnIsavA~ sUtra -'baMbhaloe kappe.......' hai
to bhagavatI318 meM bhI brahmaloka ke devoM kI sthiti kucha adhika sAta
sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke sAtaveM samavAya kA bIsavA~ sUtra-'je
devA samaM samappabhaM........' hai to bhagavatI319 meM bhI sama, samaprabha,
mahAprabha, Adi devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti sAta sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga
ke sAtaveM samavAya kA ikkIsavA~ sUtra-'te NaM devA sattaNhaM........' hai to
bhagavatI320 meM bhI sanatkumArAvataMsaka vimAna meM jo deva utpanna hote haiM,
ve sAta pakSa se zvAsocchvasa lete haiM, aisA kathana hai| samavAyAMga se
sAtaveM samavAya kA bAvIsavA~ sUtra- 'tesiM NaM devANaM.......' hai to
bhagavatI321 meM bhI sanatkumArAvataMsaka devoM ko AhAra lene kI icchA sAta
hajAra varSa se hotI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke AThaveM samavAya kA dazavA~
sUtra-'imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe....' hai to bhagavatI322 meM bhI ratnaprabhA
pRthvI ke nairayikoM kI sthiti ATha palyopama kI kahI hai| 312. bhagavatI za. 1
u. 1. 313. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI za. 1 u.1 315. bhagavatI za. 1 u.1
316. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI za.1 u.1 318. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 319.
bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 320. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 321. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 322.
bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 314. [63]

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The eleventh sutra of the eighth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Chautthiee
Pudhavee...' - describes the state of the Pankaprabha Nairyakas as being eight
sagaropama, which is also mentioned in Bhagavati 323.  The twelfth sutra of the
eighth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Asurkumaraanam Devaanam...' - describes
the state of the Asurakumara as being eight palyopama, which is also mentioned
in Bhagavati 324.  The thirteenth sutra of the eighth Samavaya of the
Samavayanga - 'Sohammisaanesu Kappeesu...' - describes the state of the gods of
the Saudharma and Ishan kalpas as being eight palyopama, which is also mentioned
in Bhagavati 325.  The fourteenth sutra of the eighth Samavaya of the
Samavayanga - 'Bhambhaloae Kappe...' - describes the state of the gods of the
Brahmaloka kalpa as being eight sagaropama, which is also mentioned in Bhagavati
326.  The fifteenth sutra of the eighth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Je Deva
Acchi...' - describes the exalted state of Archi, Archimali, etc. as being eight
sagara, which is also mentioned in Bhagavati 327.  The sixteenth sutra of the
eighth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Te Nan Deva Attanhan...' - describes the
Archi, etc. gods as breathing eight paks, which is also mentioned in Bhagavati
328.  The seventeenth sutra of the eighth Samavaya of the Samavayanga -
'Tesinnam Devaanam Attahin...' - describes the Archi, etc. gods as having a
desire to eat for eight thousand years, which is also mentioned in Bhagavati
329.  The eleventh sutra of the ninth Samavaya of the Samavayanga -
'Darshanavarranijjass...Kamass' - describes the nine types of Darshanavarniya
karma, including Nidra, Prachala, etc., which is also mentioned in Bhagavati
330.  The twelfth sutra of the ninth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Imise Nan
Rayanppahae...' - describes the state of some Nairyakas of the Ratnapraba earth
as being nine palyopama, which is also mentioned in Bhagavati 331.  The
thirteenth sutra of the ninth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Chautthiee
Pudhavee...' - describes the state of some Nairyakas of the Pankaprabha as being
nine sagara, which is also mentioned in Bhagavati 332.  The fourteenth sutra of
the ninth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Asurkumaraanam Devaanam...' - describes
the state of the Asurakumara gods as being nine palyopama, which is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 333.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke AThaveM samavAya kA gyArahavA~ sUtra-'cautthIe puDhavIe......'
hai to bhagavatI323 meM bhI paMkaprabhA nairayikoM kI sthiti ATha sAgaropama kI
hai| samavAyAMga ke AThaveM samavAya kA bArahavA~ sUtra-'asurakumArANaM
devANaM......' hai to bhagavatI324 meM bhI asurakumAroM kI sthiti ATha palyopama
kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke AThaveM samavAya kA terahavAM sUtra-'sohammIsANesu
kappesu.........' hai to bhagavatI325 meM bhI saudharma aura IzAna kalpa ke
devoM kI sthiti ATha palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke AThaveM samavAya kA
caudahavAM sUtra-'baMbhaloe kappe.......' hai to bhagavatI326 meM bhI brahmaloka
kalpa ke devoM kI sthiti ATha sAgaropama kI pratipAdita hai| samavAyAMga ke
AThaveM samavAya kA pandrahavA~ sUtra-'je devA acci.......' hai to bhagavatI327
meM bhI arci, arcimAlI Adi kI utkRSTa sthiti ATha sAgara kI kahI hai|
samavAyAMga ke AThaveM samavAya kA solahavA~ sUtra-'te NaM devA
aTThaNhaM.......' hai to bhagavatI328 meM bhI arci Adi deva ATha pakSa se
zvAsocchvAsa lete haiN| samavAyAMga ke AThaveM samavAya kA sattarahavAM
sUtra-'tesiMNaM devANaM aTThahiM........' hai to bhagavatI329 meM bhI arci, Adi
devoM ko AhAra lene kI icchA ATha hajAra varSa se hotI kahI hai| samavAyAMga
navameM samavAya kA gyArahavA~ sUtra- 'daMsaNAvararaNijjassa......kamassa' hai
to bhagavatI330 meM bhI nidrA, pracalA Adi darzanAvaraNIya karma kI nau
prakRtiyA~ kahI haiN| samavAyAMga se navameM samavAya kA bArahavA~ sUtra-'imIse
NaM rayaNappahAe.......' hai to bhagavatI331 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha
nairayikoM kI sthiti nau palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke navameM
samavAya kA terahavAM sUtra-'cautthIe puDhavIe.......' hai to bhagavatI332 meM
bhI paMkaprabhA ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti nau sAgara kI batAyI hai|
samavAyAMga ke navameM samavAya kA caudahavA~ sUtra-'asurakumArANaM
devANaM........' hai to bhagavatI333 meM bhI asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti nau
palyopama kI kahI hai| 323. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 324. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 325.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 326. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 328.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 329. bhagavatI-za. 1 u.1 330. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 331.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u.1 332. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 333. bhagavatI-za..1 u. 1 327.
[64]

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The 15th Sutra of the 9th Samavaya of Samavayanga - "Sohammisane su kappe
su......" is also mentioned in Bhagavati 334, where the state of some gods in
the Saudharma and Ishana Kalpas is described using nine Palyopama.  The 16th
Sutra of the 9th Samavaya of Samavayanga - "Bhambhaloae kappe........." is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 335, where the state of some gods in the Brahmaloka Kalpa
is described using nine Sagaropama.  The 17th Sutra of the 9th Samavaya of
Samavayanga - "Je deva pamham supmham......." is also mentioned in Bhagavati
336, where the excellent state of the Pakshma, Supakshma, Pakshmavart, etc. gods
is described using nine Sagaropama.  The 18th Sutra of the 9th Samavaya of
Samavayanga - 'Te nan deva navanham..........' is also mentioned in Bhagavati
337, where it is stated that the Pakshma, etc. gods breathe in nine Pakshmas.
The 19th Sutra of the 9th Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Tesin nan devaanm.......'
is also mentioned in Bhagavati 338, where it is stated that the Pakshma,
Supakshma, etc. gods have a desire to eat for nine thousand years.  The 9th
Sutra of the 10th Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imise nan rayanppahae..........' is
also mentioned in Bhagavati 339, where the inferior state of the Ratnapraba
Nairyikas is described as ten thousand years.  The 10th Sutra of the 10th
Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imise nan rayanppahae.........' is also mentioned in
Bhagavati 340, where the state of some Nairyikas of the Ratnapraba earth is
described using ten Palyopama.  The 11th Sutra of the 10th Samavaya of
Samavayanga - 'Chauthie puthvie.......' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 341,
where it is described that there are ten lakh Narakavasa in the Pankaprabha
earth.  The 12th Sutra of the 10th Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Chauthie
puthvie.......' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 342, where the excellent state of
the Nairyikas of the Pankaprabha earth is described using ten Sagaropama.  The
13th Sutra of the 10th Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Panchmie puthvie......' is
also mentioned in Bhagavati 343, where the inferior state of the Nairyikas of
the Dhumpapraba earth is described using ten Sagaropama.  The 14th Sutra of the
10th Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Asurkumaraanam devaanam.......' is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 344, where the inferior state of the Asurkumara gods is
described as ten thousand years.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke navama samavAya kA pandrahavA~ sUtra-"sohammIsANesu
kappesu......" hai to bhagavatI334 meM bhI saudharma va IzAna kalpa ke kucha
devoM kI sthiti nau palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke navama samavAya kA
solahavA~ sUtra -"baMbhaloe kappe........." hai to bhagavatI335 meM bhI
brahmaloka kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti nau sAgaropama kI kahI hai|
samavAyAMga ke navama samavAya kA sattarahavA~ sUtra-"je devA pamhaM
supamhaM......." hai to bhagavatI336 meM bhI pakSma, supakSma, pakSmAvarta Adi
devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti nau sAgaropama kI batAI hai| samavAyAMga ke navama
samavAya kA aThArahavA~ sUtra-'te NaM devA navaNhaM..........' hai to
bhagavatI337 meM bhI pakSma, Adi deva nau pakSa meM zvAsocchavAsa lete haiM aisA
kathana hai| samavAyAMga ke navama samavAya kA unnIsavA~ sUtra -'tesi NaM
devANaM.......' hai to bhagavatI338 meM bhI pakSma, supakSma Adi devoM ko AhAra
lene kI icchA nau hajAra varSa se hotI kahI hai| _samavAyAMga ke dazama samavAya
kA nauvAM sUtra - 'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe..........' hai to bhagavatI339 meM bhI
ratnaprabhA nairayikoM kI jaghanya sthiti daza hajAra varSa kI kahI gaI hai|
samavAyAMga ke dazama samavAya kA dazama sUtra-'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe.........'
hai to bhagavatI340 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti
daza palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke dazama samavAya kA gyArahavA~ sUtra
-'cautthIe puDhavIe.......' hai to bhagavatI341 meM bhI paMkaprabhA pRthvI meM
dasa lAkha nArakavAsa kahe haiM, aisA varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke dazaveM
samavAya kA bArahavA~ sUtra -'cautthIe puDhavIe.......' hai to bhagavatI342 meM
bhI paMkaprabhA pRthvI ke nairayikoM kI utkRSTa sthiti daza sAgaropama kI batAyI
hai| samavAyAMga ke dazaveM samavAya kA terahavA~ sUtra- 'paMcamIe
puDhavIe......' hai to bhagavatI343 meM bhI dhUmaprabhA pRthvI ke nairayikoM kI
jaghanya sthiti daza sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke dazaveM samavAya kA
caudahavA~ sUtra- 'asurakumArANaM devANaM.......' hai to bhagavatI344 meM bhI
asurakumAra devoM kI jaghanya sthiti daza hajAra varSa kI prarUpita hai| 334.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 335. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 336. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 337.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 338. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI-za. 1 u.1 340.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 341. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 343.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 344. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 [65] 342. bhagavatA-za. 1

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifteenth sutra of the tenth Samavaya of the Samavayanga -
'Asurindavjjaanam...' - states that, except for the Asura king, the remaining
Bhavanapati Devas have a lifespan of ten thousand years, as mentioned in
Bhagavati 345.  The sixteenth sutra of the tenth Samavaya of the Samavayanga -
'Asurkumaraanam Devaanam...' - describes the lifespan of the Asura Kumar Devas,
as mentioned in Bhagavati 346.  The seventeenth sutra of the tenth Samavaya of
the Samavayanga - 'Bayeravanassikaie...' - states that each plant has a lifespan
of ten thousand years, as mentioned in Bhagavati 347.  The eighteenth sutra of
the tenth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Vaanamantaraanam Devaanam...' - states
that the Vyantar Devas have a lifespan of ten thousand years, as mentioned in
Bhagavati 348.  The nineteenth sutra of the tenth Samavaya of the Samavayanga -
'Sohammisaaneenu Kappeesu...' - states that some Devas in the Saudharma and
Ishan Kalpas have a lifespan of ten Palyopama, as mentioned in Bhagavati 349.
The twentieth sutra of the tenth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Bhambhaloae
Kappe...' - states that the Brahma Lok Devas have a lifespan of ten Sagaropama,
as mentioned in Bhagavati 350.  The twenty-first sutra of the tenth Samavaya of
the Samavayanga - 'Lantae Kappe Devaanam...' - states that the Lantak Devas have
a lifespan of ten Sagara, as mentioned in Bhagavati 351.  The twenty-second
sutra of the tenth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Je Deva Ghosan Sughosan...' -
states that the Ghos, Sugho, and other Devas have a lifespan of ten Sagaropama,
as mentioned in Bhagavati 352.  The twenty-third sutra of the tenth Samavaya of
the Samavayanga - 'Te Nan Deva Nan Addhamaasaanam...' - states that the Devas
from Ghos to Brahma Lokavatasak Vimana breathe once every ten Paks, as mentioned
in Bhagavati 353.  The twenty-fourth sutra of the tenth Samavaya of the
Samavayanga - 'Tesin Nan Devaanam...' - states that the Devas from Ghos to
Brahma Lokavatasak have a desire to eat once every ten thousand years, as
mentioned in Bhagavati 354.  The eighth sutra of the eleventh Samavaya of the
Samavayanga - 'Imisae Nan Rayanappahae...' - states that some Nairyaikas on the
Ratnapraba earth have a lifespan of eleven Palyopama, as mentioned in Bhagavati
355.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke dazaveM samavAya kA pandrahavA~ sUtra-'asuriMdavajjANaM......'
hai to bhagavatI345 meM bhI asurendra ko chor3akara zeSa bhavanapati devoM kI
jaghanya sthiti daza hajAra varSa kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke dazaveM samavAya
kA solahavAM sUtra-'asurakumArANaM devANaM.......' hai to bhagavatI346 meM bhI
asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke dazaveM samavAya kA
sattarahavA~ sUtra-'bAyaravaNassaikAie......' hai to bhagavatI347 meM bhI
pratyeka vanaspati kI utkRSTa sthiti daza hajAra varSa kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga
ke dazaveM samavAya kA aThArahavA~ sUtra-'vANamaMtarANaM devANaM.......' hai to
bhagavatI348 meM bhI vyantaradevoM kI jaghanya sthiti dasa hajAra varSa kI
batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke dazaveM samavAya kA unnIsavA~ sUtra-'sohammIsANeNu
kappesu.......' hai to bhagavatI349 meM bhI saudharma aura IzAna kalpa ke kucha
devoM kI sthiti dazaH palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke dazaveM samavAya kA
bIsavA~ sUtra- 'baMbhaloe kappe.......' hai to bhagavatI350 meM bhI brahmaloka
devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti daza sAgaropama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke
dazaveM samavAya kA ikavIsavA~ sUtra -'laMtae kappe devANaM.....' hai to
bhagavatI351 meM bhI lAntaka devoM kI jaghanya sthiti daza sAgara kI batAyI hai|
samavAyAMga ke dazaveM samavAya kA bAvIsavA~ sUtra- 'je devA ghosaM
sughosaM.......' hai to bhagavatI352 meM bhI ghoSa, sughoSa Adi devoM kI utkRSTa
sthiti daza sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke dazaveM samavAya kA tevIsavA~
sUtra-'te NaM devA NaM addhamAsANaM.......' hai to bhagavatI353 meM bhI ghoSa
yAvat brahmalokAvataMsaka vimAna ke deva daza pakSa se zvAsocchvAsa lete kahe
haiN| samavAyAMga ke dazaveM samavAya kA caubIsavA~ sUtra-'tesiM NaM
devANaM........' hai to bhagavatI354 meM bhI ghoSa, yAvat brahmalokAvataMsaka ke
devoM kI AhAra lene kI icchA daza hajAra varSa meM kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke
gyArahaveM samavAya kA AThavA~ sUtra-'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe.........' hai to
bhagavatI355 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti gyAraha
palyopama kI kahI hai| 345. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 346. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 347.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u.1 348. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 349. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 350.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI-za. 1 u.1 352. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI-za.
1 u. 1 354. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 355. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 353. [66]

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The ninth sutra of the eleventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Panchamie
Pudhavie...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 356, where the state of some
Nairyikas of the Dhumra-prabha earth is described as being eleven Sagaropama.
The tenth sutra of the eleventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Asurkumaranam
Devanam..' describes the state of the Asura-kumaras as being eleven Palyopama.
The eleventh sutra of the eleventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Sohammisanesu
Kappeesu..' describes the state of some Devas of the Saudharma Ishana-kalpa as
being eleven Palyopama.  The twelfth sutra of the eleventh Samavaya of the
Samavayanga - 'Lantae Kappe..' describes the state of some Devas of the Lantaka-
kalpa as being eleven Sagaropama.  The thirteenth sutra of the eleventh Samavaya
of the Samavayanga - 'Je Deva Bambham Subambham...' describes the excellent
state of the Subrahma and other Devas as being eleven Sagaropama.  The
fourteenth sutra of the eleventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Te Nan Deva..'
describes the Brahmo-uttara-avtansaka Devas as breathing in and out every eleven
Paksas.  The state of the Asura-kumaras is described as being twelve Palyopama.
The fifteenth sutra of the eleventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Tesin
Devanam..' describes the desire of the Brahmo-uttara-avtansaka Devas to eat as
lasting for eleven thousand years.  The twelfth sutra of the twelfth Samavaya of
the Samavayanga - 'Imise Nan Rayanappahae..' describes the state of some
Nairyikas of the Ratna-prabha earth as being twelve Sagaropama.  The fourteenth
sutra of the twelfth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Asurkumaranam Devanam..'
356. 357. 358. 359. 360. 361. 362. 363. 364. . 365. 366. Bhagavati - Sh. 1 U. 1
Bhagavati - Sh. 1 U. 1 .' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 357, where some
Bhagavati - Sh. 1 U. 1 Bhagavati - Sh. 1 U. 1 Bhagavati - Sh. 1 U. 1 The
thirteenth sutra of the twelfth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Panchamie
Pudhavie...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 334, where the state of some
Nairyikas of the Dhumra-prabha earth is described as being twelve Sagaropama.
Bhagavati - Sh. 1 U. 1 Bhagavati - Sh. 1 U. 1 Bhagavati - Sh. 1 U. 1 Bhagavati -
Sh. 1 U. 1 Bhagavati - Sh. 1 U. 1 Bhagavati - Sh. 1 U. 1 .' is also mentioned in
Bhagavati 358, where .' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 359, where the Lantaka [
67 ] .' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 360, where Brahma, .' is also mentioned
in Bhagavati 361, where Brahma Yavat The fifteenth sutra of the twelfth Samavaya
of the Samavayanga - 'Sohammisanesu Kappe Su....' is also mentioned in Bhagavati
366, where the state of some Devas of the Saudharma Ishana-kalpa is described as
being twelve Palyopama. .' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 362, where Brahma 1 .'
is also mentioned in Bhagavati 363, where .' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 365,
where some

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke gyArahaveM samavAya kA navama sUtra - 'paMcamIe puDhavIe .....'
hai to bhagavatI356 meM bhI dhUmaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti
gyAraha sAgaropama kI batAyI hai  /  - samavAyAMga ke gyArahaveM samavAya kA
dazavAM sUtra - 'asurakumArANaM devANaM.. asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti gyAraha
palyopama kI batAyI hai| 1 samavAyAMga ke gyArahaveM samavAya kA gyArahavA~
sUtra - 'sohammIsANesu kappesu.. saudharma IzAnakalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti
gyAraha palyopama kI prarUpita hai| samavAyAMga ke gyArahaveM samavAya kA
bArahavA~ sUtra - 'laMtae kappe .. kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti gyAraha
sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke gyArahaveM samavAya kA terahavAM sUtra -
'je devA baMbhaM subaMbhaM ... subrahma Adi devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti gyAraha
sAgaropama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke gyArahaveM samavAya kA caudahavA~ sUtra
- 'te NaM devA. brahmottarAvataMsaka deva gyAraha pakSa se zvAsocchvAsa lete
kahe haiN| asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti bAraha palyopama kI batAyI hai|
samavAyAMga ke gyArahaveM samavAya kA pandrahavA~ sUtra - 'tesiM devANaM.
brahmottarAvataMsaka devoM kI AhAra lene kI icchA gyAraha hajAra varSa se hotI
batalAI hai| samavAyAMga ke bArahaveM samavAya kA bArahavA~ sUtra - imIse NaM
rayaNappahAe.. ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti bAraha
sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke bArahaveM samavAya kA caudahavAM sUtra -
'asurakumArANaM devANaM. 356. 357. 358. 359. 360. 361. 362. 363. 364. . 365.
366. bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 .' hai to bhagavatI 357 meM
bhI kucha bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1
samavAyAMga ke bArahaveM samavAya kA terahavA~ sUtra - paMcamIe puDhavIe
.......' hai to bhagavatI 334 meM bhI dhUmaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI
sthiti bAraha sAgaropama kI batAyI hai| bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1
u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1
bhagavatI - za. 1 u. 1 hai to bhagavatI 358 meM bhI .' hai to bhagavatI 359 meM
bhI lAMtaka [ 67 ] .' haiM to bhagavatI 360 meM bhI brahma, .' hai to bhagavatI
361 meM bhI brahma yAvat samavAyAMga ke bArahaveM samavAya kA pandrahavA~ sUtra
- 'sohammIsANesu kappe su.... 'hai to bhagavatI 366 meM bhI saudharma IzAna
kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti bAraha palyopama kI batAyI hai  /  .' hai to
bhagavatI 362 meM bhI brahma 1 hai to bhagavatI 363 meM bhI .' hai to bhagavatI
365 meM bhI kucha

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixteenth sutra of the twelfth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Lantāe Kappe
Atthagaiyāṇam...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 367, where the state of some
gods in the Lantāka Kalpa is described using twelve Palya-upamas.  The
seventeenth sutra of the twelfth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Je Devā Māhind...'
is also mentioned in Bhagavati 368, where the excellent state of Mahendra-dhvaja
and other gods is described using twelve Sagara-upamas.  The ninth sutra of the
thirteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imīse Naṁ Rayanappahāe...' is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 369, where the state of some Nairyikas on the Ratna-
prabha earth is described using thirteen Palya-upamas.  The tenth sutra of the
thirteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Pancamīe Puḍhavīe...' is also mentioned in
Bhagavati 370, where the state of some Nairyikas on the Dhuma-prabha earth is
described using thirteen Sagara-upamas.  The eleventh sutra of the thirteenth
Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Asur-kumāraṇaṁ Devāṇaṁ...' is also mentioned in
Bhagavati 371, where the state of some Asura-kumara gods is described using
thirteen Palya-upamas.  The twelfth sutra of the thirteenth Samavaya of
Samavayanga - 'Sohammīsāṇesu Kappeṣu...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 372,
where the state of some gods in the Saudharma and Iśāna Kalpas is described
using thirteen Palya-upamas.  The thirteenth sutra of the thirteenth Samavaya of
Samavayanga - 'Lantāe Kappe...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 373, where the
state of some gods in the Lantāka Kalpa is described using thirteen Sagara-
upamas.  The fourteenth sutra of the thirteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Je
Devā Vajjaṁ Suvajja...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 374, where the excellent
state of Vajra, Suvajra, and other gods is described using thirteen Sagara-
upamas.  The fifteenth sutra of the thirteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Te Naṁ
Devā...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 375, where it is said that Vajra and
other Lokāvatansaka gods breathe in and out through thirteen sides.  The first
sutra of the fourteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Cauddaṣa Bhūyaggāmā...' is
also mentioned in Bhagavati 376, where fourteen Bhatagrammas are described,
including Sūkṣma-aparyāpta, Paryāpta, etc.  The ninth sutra of the fourteenth
Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imīse Naṁ Rayanappahāe...' is also mentioned in
Bhagavati 377, where the state of some Nairyikas on the Ratna-prabha earth is
described using fourteen Palya-upamas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke bArahaveM samavAya kA solahavA~ sUtra-'laMtae kappe
atthegaiyANaM........' hai to bhagavatI367 meM bhI lAMtaka kalpa ke kucha devoM
kI sthiti bAraha palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke bArahaveM samavAya kA
sattarahavA~ sUtra- 'je devA mAhiMda.......' hai to bhagavatI368 meM bhI
mAhendradhvaja, Adi devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti bAraha sAgaropama kI kahI hai|
samavAyAMga ke terahaveM samavAya kA navamA sUtra-'imIse NaM
rayaNappahAe........' hai to bhagavatI369 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha
nairayikoM kI sthiti teraha palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke terahaveM
samavAya kA dazamA sUtra -'paMcamIe puDhavIe......' hai to bhagavatI370 meM bhI
dhUma-prabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti teraha sAgaropama pratipAdita
hai| samavAyAMga ke terahaveM samavAya kA gyArahavA~ sUtra- 'asurakumAraNaM
devANaM........' hai to bhagavatI371 meM bhI kucha asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti
teraha palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke terahaveM samavAya kA bArahavA~
sUtra- 'sohammIsANesu kappesu......' hai to bhagavatI372 meM bhI saudharma va
IzAna kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti teraha palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga
ke terahaveM samavAya kA terahavA~ sUtra -'laMtae kappe.......' hai to
bhagavatI373 meM bhI lAMtaka kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti teraha sAgaropama kI
kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke terahaveM samavAya kA caudahavA~ sUtra-'je devA vajjaM
suvajja........' hai to bhagavatI374 meM bhI vajra-suvajra Adi devoM kI utkRSTa
sthiti teraha sAgaropama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke terahaveM samavAya kA
pandrahavA~ sUtra-'te NaM devA......' hai to bhagavatI375 meM bhI vajra Adi
lokAvataMsaka deva teraha pakSa se zvAsocchvAsa lete kahe haiN| samavAyAMga ke
caudahaveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra-'cauddasa bhUyaggAmA......' hai to
bhagavatI376 meM bhI sUkSmaaparyApta paryApta Adi caudaha bhatagrAma batAye
haiN| samavAyAMga ke caudahaveM samavAya kA navamA sUtra-'imIse NaM
rayaNappahAe.....' hai to bhagavatI377 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha
nairayikoM kI sthiti caudaha palyopama kI kahI hai| 367. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1
368. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 369. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 370. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1
371. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 373. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 375. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 376. bhagavatI-za. 25 u. 1 377.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u.1. [68] 372. 374.

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The tenth sutra of the fourteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Panchamie
Pudhavie...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 378, where the situation of some
Nairyikas of the Dhumprabha earth is described as fourteen Sagaropama. The
eleventh sutra of the fourteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Asurkumaranam
Devanam...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 379, where the situation of
Asurakumar Devas is described as fourteen Palyopama. The twelfth sutra of the
fourteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Sohammisane...' is also mentioned in
Bhagavati 380, where the situation of some Devas of the Saudharma and Ishana
Kalpas is described as fourteen Palyopama. The thirteenth sutra of the
fourteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Lantae Kappe...' is also mentioned in
Bhagavati 381, where the excellent situation of the Devas of the Lantak Kalpa is
described as fourteen Sagaropama. The fourteenth sutra of the fourteenth
Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Mahasukke Kappe...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati
382, where the inferior situation of the Devas of the Mahashukra Kalpa is
described as fourteen Sagaropama. The fifteenth sutra of the fourteenth Samavaya
of Samavayanga - 'Je Deva...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 383, where the
situation of the Shrikant Devas is described as fourteen Sagara. The fifth sutra
of the fifteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Chettasoesu Nan Mase...' is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 384, where six Nakshatras along with Chandra form Yogas
for fifteen Muhurtas. The seventh sutra of the fifteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga
- 'Manusanam...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 385, where fifteen Yogas of
humans are described. The eighth sutra of the fifteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga
- 'Imise Nan Rayanppahae...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 386, where the
situation of the Nairyikas of the Ratnapraba earth is described as fifteen
Palyopama. The ninth sutra of the fifteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Panchamie
Pudhavie...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 387, where the situation of the
Nairyikas of the Dhumprabha earth is described as fifteen Sagaropama. The sutra
of the fifteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Asurkumaranam Devanam...' is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 388, where the situation of some Asurakumar Devas is
described as fifteen Palyopama. 378. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 379. Bhagavati-Sh. 1
U. 1 380. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 .381. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 382. Bhagavati-Sh. 1
U. 1 383. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 384. Bhagavati-Sh. 11 U. 11 385. Bhagavati-Sh. 1
U. 1 1186. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 187. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 158. Bhagavati-Sh. 1
U. 1 [69] SHI

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke caudahaveM samavAya kA dazavA~ sUtra- 'paMcamIe puDhavIe......'
hai to378 bhagavatI meM bhI dhUmaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti
caudaha sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke caudahaveM samavAya kA gyArahavA~
sUtra -'asurakumArANaM devANaM.....' hai to bhagavatI379 meM bhI asurakumAra
devoM kI sthiti caudaha palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke caudahaveM
samavAya kA bArahavA~ sUtra-'sohammIsANesu......' hai to bhagavatI380 meM bhI
saudharma aura IzAna kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti caudaha palyopama kI kahI
hai| samavAyAMga ke caudahaveM samavAya kA terahavA~ sUtra-'laMtae
kappe........' hai to bhagavatI381 meM bhI lAMtaka kalpa ke devoM kI utkRSTa
sthiti caudaha sAgaropama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke caudahaveM samavAya kA
caudahavA~ sUtra -'mahAsukke kappe.......' hai to bhagavatI382 meM bhI mahAzukra
kalpa ke devoM kI jaghanya sthiti caudaha sAgaropama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga
ke caudahaveM samavAya kA pandrahavA~ sUtra- 'je devA......' hai to bhagavatI383
meM bhI zrIkAnta devoM kI. caudaha sAgara kI sthiti kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke
pandrahaveM samavAya kA pA~cavA~ sUtra - 'cettAsoesu NaM mAsesu.....' hai to
bhagavatI384 meM bhI chaH nakSatra candra ke sAtha pandraha muhUrtaparyanta yoga
karate haiN| samavAyAMga ke pandrahaveM samavAya kA sAtavA~ sUtra-
'maNUsANaM.....' hai to bhagavatI385 meM bhI manuSya ke pandraha yoga kahe haiN|
samavAyAMga ke pandrahaveM samavAya kA AThavA~ sUtra - 'imIse NaM
rayaNappahAe.......' hai to bhagavatI386 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke
nairayikoM kI sthiti pandraha palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke
pandrahaveM samavAya kA navamA sUtra- 'paMcamIe puDhavIe......' hai to
bhagavatI387 meM bhI dhUmaprabhA pRthvI ke nairayikoM kI sthiti pandraha
sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke pandrahaveM samavAya kA sUtra
-'asurakumArANaM devANaM......' hai to bhagavatI388 meM bhI kucha asurakumAra
devoM kI sthiti pandraha palyopama kI kahI hai| 378. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 379.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 380. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 .381. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 382.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 383. bhagavatI-za.1 u.1 384. bhagavatI-za. 11 u. 11 385.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 1186. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 187. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 158.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 [69] SHI

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The eleventh sutra of the fifteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Sohammisane...
and the position of some gods of the Isan Kalpa is said to be fifteen Palyopama.
The twelfth sutra of the fifteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Mahasukke
Kappe...' then in Bhagavati 390, the position of some gods of the Mahashukra
Kalpa is also said to be fifteen Sagaropama. The eighth sutra of the sixteenth
Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imise Nan Ravanapahae...' then in Bhagavati 291, the
position of some Nairyikas of the Ratnaprabha earth is also said to be sixteen
Palyopama. The ninth sutra of the sixteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Panchamie
Pudhavie...' then in Bhagavati 392, the position of some Nairyikas of the
Dhumaprabha earth is also said to be sixteen Sagaropama. The sixth sutra of the
seventeenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imise Nan Ravanapahae...' then in
Bhagavati 393, the oblique movement of the Jangaacharan and Vidyaacharan munis
is said to be seventeen thousand yojanas high from the Samabhubhag of the
Ratnaprabha earth. The seventh sutra of the seventeenth Samavaya of Samavayanga
- 'Chamarassanan Asurindass...' then in Bhagavati 294, the height of the
Tigichchhkuta Utpata mountain of the Charam Asurendra is said to be seventeen
hundred and twenty-one yojanas. The eighth sutra of the seventeenth Samavaya of
Samavayanga - 'Sattarasavihe Marane Panatte...' then in Bhagavati 395, seventeen
types of death are also mentioned. The eleventh sutra of the seventeenth
Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imise Nan Rayanapahae...' then in Bhagavati 396, the
position of some Nairyikas of the Ratnaprabha earth is also said to be seventeen
Palyopama. The eighth sutra of the eighteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Posa A
Saadesu...' then in Bhagavati 397, it is also said that in the months of Paush
and Ashadh, one day is eighteen Muhurta and one night is eighteen Muhurta. The
ninth sutra of the eighteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imise Nan
Rayanapahae...' then in Bhagavati 398, the position of some Nairyikas of the
Ratnaprabha earth is also said to be eighteen Palyopama. 389. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U.
1 390. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 391. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 392. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1
393. Bhagavati Sh. 20 U. 9 394. 395. 396. 397. 398. Bhagavati Sh. 3 U. Bhagavati
Sh. 13 U. 7 Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 1 Bhagavati Sh. 11 U. 1 Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 [
70]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke pandrahaveM samavAya kA gyArahavA~ sUtra - 'sohammIsANesu.. aura
IzAna kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti pandraha palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga
ke pandrahaveM samavAya kA bArahavA~ sUtra - 'mahAsukke kappe ...' hai to
bhagavatI 390 meM bhI mahAzukra kalpa ke kucha devoM kI sthiti pandraha
sAgaropama kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke solahaveM samavAya kA AThavAM sUtra - imIse
NaM ravaNappahAe........' hai to bhagavatI 291 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke
kucha nairayikoM kI sthita solaha palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke
solahaveM samavAya kA navama sUtra - 'paMcamIe puDhavIe......' hai to bhagavatI
392 meM bhI dhUmaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti solaha sAgaropama
kI batAyI hai  /  samavAyAMga ke sattarahaveM samavAya kA chaTTA sUtra - imIse
NaM ravaNappahAe........ hai to bhagavatI 393 meM ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke
samabhUbhAga se kucha adhika sattaraha hajAra yojana kI U~cAI para jaMghAcAraNa
aura vidyAcAraNa muniyoM kI tirachI gati kahI hai .' hai to bhagavatI 389 meM
bhI saudharma samavAyAMga ke satarahaveM samavAya kA sAtavAM sUtra -
camarassaNaM asuriMdassa......' hai to bhagavatI 294 meM bhI carama asurendra ke
tigicchakUTa utpAta parvata kI U~cAI sattaraha sau ikkIsa yojana kI hai|
samavAyAMga ke sattarahaveM samavAya kA AThavAM sUtra - 'sattarasavihe maraNe
paNNatte.......' hai to bhagavatI 395 meM bhI maraNa ke sattaraha prakAra batAye
haiN| samavAyAMga ke sattarahaveM samavAya kA gyArahavAM sUtra - 'imIse NaM
rayaNappahAe........' hai to bhagavatI 396 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha
nairayikoM kI sthiti sattaraha palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke
aThArahaveM samavAya kA AThavAM sUtra - 'posA'' sADhesu.......' hai to bhagavatI
397 meM bhI pauSa aura ASAr3ha mAsa meM eka dina utkRSTa aThAraha muhUrta kA
hotA hai tathA eka rAtri aThAraha muhUrta kI hotI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke
aThArahaveM samavAya kA navamA sUtra - 'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe...... ' hai to
bhagavatI 398 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti aThAraha
palyopama kI kahI hai| 389. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 390. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 391.
bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 392. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 393. bhagavatI za. 20 u. 9 394.
395. 396. 397. 398. bhagavatI za. 3 u. bhagavatI za. 13 u. 7 bhagavatI za. 1 u.
1 1 bhagavatI za. 11 u. 1 bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 [ 70]

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The second sutra of the nineteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Jambuddive nam
dive.........' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 399, where it is said that the sun
reaches a height of nineteen hundred yojanas in Jambudvipa. - The sixth sutra of
the nineteenth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imise nam rayanppahae........' is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 400, where the position of some Nairyakas on the
Ratnapraba earth is described as nineteen palyopama. - The seventh sutra of the
twentieth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Ussappini Osappini.........' is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 01, where the time cycle of twenty koṭakoṭi sagaropama is
described as a combination of Utsarpini and Avasarpini. - The fifth sutra of the
twenty-first Samavaya of Samavayanga Sutra - 'Imise nam rayanppahae.....' is
also mentioned in Bhagavati 402, where the position of Nairyakas on the
Ratnapraba earth is described as twenty-one palyopama. - The first sutra of the
twenty-second Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Bavisan parishaha pannatta........' is
also mentioned in Bhagavati 403, where twenty-two parisahas are mentioned. - The
sixth sutra of the twenty-second Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Bavisivihe
poggalparinama....' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 404, where twenty-two
parinamas of Krishna, Neel, etc. pudgal are mentioned. - The seventh sutra of
the twenty-second Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imise nam rayanppahae
pudhaviye.......' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 405, where the position of
Nairyakas on the Ratnapraba earth is described as twenty-two palyopama. - The
sixth sutra of the twenty-third Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Ahe sattamae
pudhaviye.......' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 406, where the position of some
Nairyakas on the Tamasthma earth is described as twenty-three sagaropama. - The
seventh sutra of the twenty-third Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Asurkumaranam
devana.......' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 07, where the position of
Asurakumaras and Devas is described as twenty-three palyopama. - The first sutra
of the twenty-fourth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Chauvisan devahideva........' is
also mentioned in Bhagavati 408, where twenty-four devahidevas like Rishabha,
Ajita, Sambhava, etc. are mentioned. - The seventh sutra of the twenty-fourth
Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imise nam rayanppahae.......' is also mentioned in
Bhagavati 409, where the position of some Nairyakas on the Ratnapraba earth is
described as twenty-four palyopama. 399. Bhagavati Sh. 8 U. 8 400. Bhagavati Sh.
1 U. 1 401. Bhagavati Sh. 6 U. 7 402. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 403. Bhagavati Sh. 8
U. 8 404. Bhagavati Sh. 8 U. 10 405. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 406. • Bhagavati Sh. 1
U. 1 407. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U. 1 408. Bhagavati Sh. 2 U. 8 409. Bhagavati Sh. 1 U.
1 [71]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - samavAyAMga ke unnIsaveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra -'jaMbuddIve NaM
dIve.........' hai to bhagavatI399 meM bhI jambUdvIpa meM sUrya U~ce tathA nIce
unnIsa sau yojana taka tApa pahu~cAte kahe haiN| samavAyAMga ke unnIsaveM
samavAya kA chaThA sUtra-'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe........' hai to bhagavatI400
meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti unnIsa palyopama kI
batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke bIsaveM samavAya kA sAtavA~ sUtra-'ussappiNI
osappiNI.........' hai to bhagavatI 01 meM bhI utsarpiNI avasarpiNI milakara
bIsa koTAkoTi sAgaropama kA kAla-cakra kahA hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke ikkIsaveM
samavAya kA pA~cavA~ sUtra -'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe.....' hai to bhagavatI402
meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke nairayikoM kI sthiti ikkIsa palyopama kI batAyI
hai| samavAyAMga ke bAvIsaveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra-'bAvIsaM parIsahA
paNNattA........' hai to bhagavatI403 meM bhI bAvIsa parISahoM kA ullekha hai|
samavAyAMga ke bAvIsaveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra-'bAvIsavihe
poggalapariNAme....' hai to bhagavatI404 meM bhI kRSNa, nIla Adi pudgala ke
bAIsa pariNAma kahe haiN| samavAyAMga ke bAvIsaveM samavAya kA sAtavA~
sUtra-'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe puDhavIe.......' hai to bhagavatI405 meM bhI
ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke nairayikoM kI bAvIsa palyopama kI sthiti batAyI hai|
samavAyAMga ke tevIsaveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra-'ahe sattamAe puDhavIe.......'
hai to bhagavatI406 meM bhI tamastamA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti
tevIsa sAgaropama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke tevIsaveM samavAya kA sAtavA~
sUtra- 'asurakumArANaM devANaM........' hai to bhagavatI 07 meM bhI asurakumAra
devoM kI sthiti tevIsa palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke caubIsaveM
samavAya kA prathama sUtra -'cauvIsaM devAhideva........' hai to bhagavatI408
meM bhI RSabha, ajita, saMbhava, Adi ye caubIsa devAdhideva kahe haiN|
samavAyAMga ke caubIsaveM samavAya kA sAtavA~ sUtra-'imIse NaM
rayaNappahAe.......' hai to bhagavatI409 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha
nairayikoM kI sthiti caubIsa palyopama kI batAyI hai| 399. bhagavatI za. 8 u.8
400. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 401. bhagavatI za. 6 u. 7 402. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1
403. bhagavatI za.8 u.8 404. bhagavatI za. 8 u. 10 405. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1
406. * bhagavatI za. 1 u.1 407. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 408. bhagavatI za. 2 u. 8
409. bhagavatI za. 1 u. 1 [71]

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The tenth sutra of the twenty-fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imisena
Rayanppahae...' - is also mentioned in Bhagavati 10, where Ratnaprabha Earth's
Nairyaikas are described in twenty-five Palyopama.  The second sutra of the
twenty-sixth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Abhavasiiddhiya...' - is also mentioned
in Bhagavati 11, where the twenty-six types of Mohaniya Karma of Abhavasiiddhika
beings are described in the context of existence.  The third sutra of the
twenty-sixth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Imisena Rayanppahae...' - is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 412, where the state of Ratnaprabha Nairyaikas is
described in twenty-six Palyopama.  The third sutra of the twenty-eighth
Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Aabhinibhohiyanaane...' - is also mentioned in
Bhagavati 413, where twenty-eight types of Aabhinibodhika knowledge are
described.  The sixth sutra of the twenty-eighth Samavaya of Samavayanga -
'Imisena Rayanppahae Pudhaviye...' - is also mentioned in Bhagavati 414, where
the state of some Nairyaikas of Ratnaprabha Earth is described in twenty-eight
Palyopama.  The tenth sutra of the twenty-ninth Samavaya of Samavayanga -
'Imisena...' - is also mentioned in Bhagavati 15, where the state of some
Nairyaikas of Ratnaprabha Earth is described in twenty-nine Palyopama.  The
seventh sutra of the thirtieth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Samane Bhagavan
Mahavire...' - is also mentioned in Bhagavati 16, where it is said that Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavira spent thirty years in the household before becoming a monk.
The seventh sutra of the thirty-first Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Ahesattamae
Pudhaviye...' - is also mentioned in Bhagavati 17, where the state of some
Nairyaikas of Tamas Tama Earth is described in thirty-one Sagaropama.  The
second sutra of the thirty-second Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Battisam Devinda
Pannaatta...' - is also mentioned in Bhagavati 418, where twenty Bhavanpatis,
two Jyotishkas, and ten Vaimanikas are described as thirty-two Indras.  The
second sutra of the thirty-third Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Chamarasena
Asurindassa...' - is also mentioned in Bhagavati 19, where thirty-three Bhouma
Nagaras are described outside each gate of Chamarachancha, the capital of
Chamarendra.  The fifth sutra of the thirty-fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga -
'Sohamme Kappe Sabhaye...' - is also mentioned in Bhagavati 420.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke paccIsaveM samavAya kA dazavA sUtra-'imIse NaM
rayaNappahAe......' hai to bhagavatI 10 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha
nairayikoM kI sthiti paccIsa palyopama kI kahI hai| samavAyAMga ke chabbIsaveM
samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra-'abhavasiddhiyA......' hai to bhagavatI 11 meM bhI
abhavasiddhika jIvoM ke mohanIya karma kI chabbIsa prakRtiyA~ sattA meM kahI
haiN| samavAyAMga ke chabbIsaveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra -'imIse NaM
rayaNappahAe......' hai to bhagavatI412 meM bhI ratnaprabhA-nairayikoM kI sthiti
chabbIsa palyopama kI pratipAdita hai| . samavAyAMga ke aTThAIsaveM samavAya kA
tRtIya sUtra-'AbhiNibohiyanANe.......' hai to bhagavatI413 meM bhI Abhinibodhika
jJAna 28 prakAra kA batAyA hai| samavAyAMga ke aTThAIsaveM samavAya kA chaThA
sUtra-'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe puDhavIe.....' hai to bhagavatI414 meM bhI
ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti aTThAIsa palyopama kI batAyI
hai| samavAyAMga ke unatIsaveM samavAya kA dazavA~ sUtra-'imIse NaM....' hai to
bhagavatI 15 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti unanatIsa
palyopama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke tIsaveM samavAya kA sAtavA~
sUtra-'samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre......' hai to bhagavatI 16 meM bhI kahA . hai ki
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra tIsa varSa gRhavAsa meM rahakara pravrajita huye the|
samavAyAMga ke ikatIsaveM samavAya kA sAtavA~ sUtra-'ahesattamAe puDhavIe....'
hai to bhagavatI17 meM bhI tamastamA pRthvI ke kucha nairayikoM kI sthiti
ikatIsa sAgaropama kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke battIsaveM samavAya kA dvitIya
sUtra- 'battIsaM deviMdA paNNattA.....' hai to bhagavatI418 meM bhI
bhavanapatiyoM ke bIsa, jyotiSkoM ke do, vaimAnikoM ke daza, isa taraha battIsa
indra kahe haiN| samavAyAMga ke tetIsaveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra-'camarassa
NaM asuriMdassa.......' hai to bhagavatI 19 meM bhI camarendra kI camaracaMcA
rAjadhAnI ke pratyeka dvAra ke bAhara tetIsa-tetIsa bhauma nagara kahe haiN|
samavAyAMga ke paiMtIsaveM samavAya kA pAMcavA sUtra-'sohamme kappe sabhAe.....'
hai to bhagavatI420 meM bhI yahI varNana hai| 410. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 411.
bhagavatI-za. 1 u.1 bhagavatI-za. 1 u.1 bhagavatI-za. 8 u.2 bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1
415. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 416. bhagavatI-za. 15 417. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 418.
bhagavatI-za. 3 u.8 419. bhagavatI-za. 8 u. 2 420. bhagavatI-za. 1 u.1 [72] 412.
413. 14.

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second sutra of the thirty-sixth Samavayanga - 'Chamarass nan asurindass...'
is also mentioned in Bhagavati 421, where the Sudharma Sabha of Dharmendra is
described as being thirty-six yojanas high. The ninth sutra of the forty-second
Samavayanga - 'Egmegae Osappinie...' is also described in Bhagavati 422. The
second sutra of the forty-sixth Samavayanga - 'Bamhie nan Livie...' is also
mentioned in Bhagavati 423, where the forty matrikaksharas of the Brahmi script
are mentioned. The second sutra of the fifty-first Samavayanga - 'Chamarass nan
asurindass...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 424, where the Sudharma Sabha of
Chamendra is said to have fifty-one hundred pillars. The first sutra of the
fifty-second Samavayanga - 'Mohanijass kammass...' is also mentioned in
Bhagavati 425, where the fifty-two names of the mohaniya karma, such as anger,
wrath, etc., are mentioned. The sixth sutra of the sixty-sixth Samavayanga -
'Abhiinibohinaanasss...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 426, where the excellent
state of abhinibodhik knowledge is described as being sixty-six sagaropama. The
first sutra of the seventy-eighth Samavayanga - 'Sakkass nan Devindass...' is
also mentioned in Bhagavati 427, where it is said that Sakra Devendra obeys the
commands of Vaishramana, the commander-in-chief. The third sutra of the eighty-
first Samavayanga - 'Vivahpanniye ekasi...' is also mentioned in Bhagavati 428,
where the eighty-one mahayugama sataka of the present Agam are mentioned. In
this way, there is a concordance between many texts in the Bhagavati Sutra and
the Samavayanga. In many sutras, there is also repetition from a comparative
perspective regarding the state of narakas and devas, so we have not compared
them knowingly. Samavayanga and Prashnavyakarana Both Samavayanga and
Prashnavyakarana are Anga Sutras. There are many places in Samavayanga that can
be compared to Prashnavyakarana. The subject matter of Prashnavyakarana is the
five asravas and the five samvaras. Therefore, it is limited in terms of subject
matter. The third sutra of the second Samavayanga - 'Duvihe bandhane...' is also
echoed in Prashnavyakarana 29. 421. Bhagavati-Sh. 8 U. 2 422. Bhagavati-Sh, 3 U.
7 423. Bhagavati-Sh. 1 U. 1 424. Bhagavati-Sh. 13 U.6 Bhagavati-Sh. 12 U.5 426.
Bhagavati-Sh. 7 U. 2 Su. 110 427. Bhagavati-Sh. 3 U. 7 428. Bhagavati-Upasanshar
. Prashnavyakarana-5 Samvardvara [73] 19.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke chattIsaveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra -'camarassa NaM
asuriMdassa......' hai to bhagavatI421 meM bhI dhamarendra kI sudharmA sabhA
chattIsa yojana U~cI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke biyAlIsaveM samavAya kA navamA
sUtra- 'egamegAe osappiNIe......' hai to bhagavatI422 meM bhI yahI varNana hai|
samavAyAMga ke chiyAlIsaveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra-'baMbhIe NaM livIe.....'
hai to bhagavatI423 meM bhI brAhmI lipi ke chiyAlIsa mAtrikAkSara kahe haiM!
samavAyAMga ke ekAvanaveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra-'camarassa NaM
asuriMdassa......' hai to bhagavatI424 meM bhI camarendra kI sudharmA sabhA ke
ekAvana sau stambha kahe gaye haiN| _samavAyAMga ke bAvanaveM samavAya kA
prathama sUtra-''_'mohaNijassa kammassa......' hai to bhagavatI425 meM bhI
krodha, kopa, Adi mohanIya karma ke bAvana nAma haiN| samavAyAMga ke chAsaThaveM
samavAya kA chaThA sUtra-'AbhiNibohinANassa.......' hai to bhagavatI426 meM bhI
Abhinibodhika jJAna kI utkRSTa sthiti chAsaTha sAgaropama kahI hai| samavAyAMga
ke aThahattaraveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra -'sakkassa NaM deviMdassa.....' hai
to bhagavatI427 meM bhI kahA he ki zakra devendra ke vaizramaNa, senAnAyaka ke
rUpa meM AjJA kA pAlana karate haiN| samavAyAMga ke ikAsIveM samavAya kA tIsarA
sUtra -'vivAhapannIe ekAsIti......' hai to bhagavatI428 meM bhI prastuta Agama
ke ikyAsI mahAyugma zataka kahe gaye haiN| isa taraha bhagavatI sUtra meM aneka
pAThoM kA samavAyAMga ke sAtha samanvaya hai| kitane hI sUtroM meM nAraka va
devoM kI sthiti ke sambandha meM apekSA dRSTi se punarAvRtti bhI huyI hai ataH
hamane jAnakara usakI tulanA nahIM kI hai| samavAyAMga aura praznavyAkaraNa
samavAyAMga aura praznavyAkaraNa ye donoM hI aMga sUtra haiN| samavAyAMga meM
aise aneka sthala haiM jina kI tulanA praznavyAkaraNa ke sAtha kI jA sakatI hai|
praznavyAkaraNa kA pratipAdya viSaya pA~ca Azrava aura pA~ca saMvara hai|
isaliye viSaya kI dRSTi se yaha sImita hai| samavAyAMga ke dvitIya samavAya kA
tRtIya sUtra- 'duvihe baMdhaNe......' hai to isakI pratidhvani praznavyAkaraNa
29 meM bhI mukharita huyI hai| 421. bhagavatI-za. 8 u. 2 422. bhagavatI-za, 3 u.
7 423. bhagavatI-za. 1 u. 1 424. bhagavatI-za. 13 u.6 bhagavatI-za. 12 u.5 426.
bhagavatI-za. 7 u. 2 sU. 110 427. bhagavatI-za. 3 u. 7 428. bhagavatI-upasaMhAra
. praznavyAkaraNa-5 saMvaradvAra [73] 19.

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first sutra of the third Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Tao Danda Pannatta...'
is also mentioned in Prashnavyakaran 430 as three Danda. The second sutra of the
third Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Tao Guttio Pannatta...' is also mentioned in
Prashnavyakaran 31 as three Guppti. The third sutra of the third Samavaya of
Samavayanga - 'Tao Salla Pannatta...' is also mentioned in Prashnavyakaran 432
as three Shalya. The fourth sutra of the third Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Tao
Garava Pannata...' is also mentioned in Prashnavyakaran 33 as three types of
Garva. The fifth sutra of the third Samavaya of Samavayanga Sutra - 'Tao
Virahana Pannata...' is also mentioned in Prashnavyakaran 434 as three
Viradhana. The fourth sutra of the fourth Samavaya of Samavayanga Sutra -
'Chattari Sanna Pannatta...' is also mentioned in Prashnavyakaran 435 as four
Sanjna. The second sutra of the fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Panch Mahvvaaya
Pannatta...' is also mentioned in Prashnavyakaran 416 as five Mahavrat. The
fourth sutra of the fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Panch Asavedara
Pannatta...' is also mentioned in Prashnavyakaran 437 as five Ashravadwar. The
fifth sutra of the fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Panch Sanvardara
Pannatta...' is also mentioned in Prashnavyakaran 418 as five Sanvardwar. The
first sutra of the seventh Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Satt Bhaytthana
Pannatta...' is also mentioned in Prashnavyakaran 439 as seven Bhaysthan. The
first sutra of the eighth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Atth Maytthan Pannatta...'
is also mentioned in Prashnavyakaran 440 as eight Madasthan. The first sutra of
the ninth Samavaya of Samavayanga - 'Nav Bambhcherguttio Pannattao...' is also
mentioned in Prashnavyakaran 441 as nine Brahmacharyagupti. Prashnavyakaran 5
Sanvardwar Prashnavyakaran 5 Sanvardwar Prashnavyakaran 5 Sanvardwar
Prashnavyakaran 5 Sanvardwar 430. 431. 432. 433. 434. 435. 436. 437. 438. 439.
Prashnavyakaran 5 Sanvardwar 440. Prashnavyakaran 5 Sanvardwar 441.
Prashnavyakaran 5 Sanvardwar Prashnavyakaran 5 Sanvardwar Prashnavyakaran 5
Sanvardwar Prashnavyakaran 5 Sanvardwar Prashnavyakaran 5 Sanvardwar
Prashnavyakaran 5 Sanvardwar [ 74]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke tRtIya samavAya kA prathama sUtra - 'tao daMDA paNNattA..... '
hai to praznavyAkaraNa 430 meM bhI tIna daNDa kA ullekha hai| samavAyAMga ke
tRtIya samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra - 'tao guttIo paNNattA....' hai to
praznavyAkaraNa 31 meM bhI tIna guptiyoM kA ullekha huA hai| samavAyAMga ke
tRtIya samavAya kA tRtIya sUtra - 'tao sallA paNNattA......' hai to
praznavyAkaraNa 432 meM bhI tIna zalyoM kA varNana hai  /  samavAyAMga ke tRtIya
samavAya kA caturtha sUtra - 'tao gAravA paNNatA.......' hai to praznavyAkaraNa
33 meM bhI garva ke tIna bheda batAye haiM  /  samavAyAMga sUtra ke tRtIya
samavAya kA pAMcavA~ sUtra- 'tao virAhaNA paNNatA....... hai to praznavyAkaraNa
434 meM bhI tIna virAdhanAoM kA ullekha hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke caturtha
samavAya kA caturtha sUtra - ' cattAri saNNA paNNattA....' hai to
praznavyAkaraNa 435 meM bhI cAra saMjJAoM kA varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke
pAMcaveM samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra - paMca mahavvayA paNNattA.........' hai to
praznavyAkaraNa 416 meM bhI pAMca mahAvratoM kA varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke
pAMcaveM samavAya kA caturtha sUtra - 'paMca AsavedArA paNNattA ...... ' hai to
praznavyAkaraNa 437 meM bhI pAMca AzravadvAroM kA nirUpaNa huA hai| samavAyAMga
ke pAMcaveM samavAya kA pAMcavAM sUtra 'paMca saMvaradArA paNNattA.....' hai to
praznavyAkaraNa 418 meM bhI pAMca saMvaradvAroM kA vizleSaNa hai  /  samavAyAMga
ke sAtaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra - 'satta bhayaTThANA paNNattA........' hai
to praznavyAkaraNa439 meM bhI sAta bhayasthAna batAye haiN| samavAyAMga ke
AThaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra - 'aTTha mayaTThANa paNNattA......' hai to
praznavyAkaraNa 440 meM bhI ATha madasthAna bataye haiN| samavAyAMga ke nauveM
samavAya kA prathama sUtra - 'nava baMbhaceraguttIo paNNattAo......' hai to
praznavyAkaraNa 441 meM bhI nau brahmacaryaguptiyoM kA ullekha hai|
praznavyAkaraNa 5 saMvaradvAra praznavyAkaraNa 5 saMvaradvAra praznavyAkaraNa 5
saMvaradvAra praznavyAkaraNa 5 saMvaradvAra 430. 431. 432. 433. 434. 435. 436.
437. 438. 439. praznavyAkaraNa 5 saMvaradvAra 440. praznavyAkaraNa 5
saMvaradvAra 441. praznavyAkaraNa 5 saMvaradvAra praznavyAkaraNa 5 saMvaradvAra
praznavyAkaraNa 5 saMvaradvAra praznavyAkaraNa 5 saMvaradvAra praznavyAkaraNa 5
saMvaradvAra praznavyAkaraNa 5 saMvaradvAra [ 74]

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second sutra of the ninth Samavaya of the Samavayanga Sutra - 'Nav
Bंभचेर-Aguttiyo Pannattao' is also described in the Prashnavyakaran 42 as the
nine types of Brahmacharya. The first sutra of the tenth Samavaya of the
Samavayanga Sutra - 'Dasavihe Samanadhamme Pannatte' is also described in the
Prashnavyakaran 43 as the ten types of Shramanadharma. The first sutra of the
eleventh Samavaya of the Samavayanga Sutra - 'Ekkaras Uvasagpadimao Pannattao'
is also mentioned in the Prashnavyakaran 444 as the eleven types of Upasaka
pratima. The first sutra of the twelfth Samavaya of the Samavayanga Sutra -
'Baras. Bhikkhupdimao Pannattao' is also mentioned in the Prashnavyakaran 45 as
the twelve types of Bhikkhu pratima. The first sutra of the sixteenth Samavaya
of the Samavayanga - 'Solis Ya Gaahasolisga Pannatta' is also mentioned in the
Prashnavyakaran 46 as the name of the sixteenth study of the Sutra-krta-anga,
Gaatha-shodashak. The first sutra of the seventeenth Samavaya of the Samavayanga
- 'Sattarasavihe Asanjame Pannatte' is also mentioned in the Prashnavyakaran 47
as the seventeen types of Asanjam. The first sutra of the eighteenth Samavaya of
the Samavayanga Sutra - 'Attarhasavihe Bamhe Pannatte' is also mentioned in the
Prashnavyakaran 48 as the eighteen types of Brahmacharya. The first sutra of the
nineteenth Samavaya of the Samavayanga Sutra - 'Egooṇavīsan ṇāyajjhayanā
Pannattā' is also mentioned in the Prashnavyakaran 49 as the nineteen studies of
the Jnata-dharma-katha. The first sutra of the twenty-third Samavaya of the
Samavayanga - 'Tevisan Suyagajjhayanā Pannattā' is also mentioned in the
Prashnavyakaran 50 as the twenty-three studies of the Sutra-krta-anga. The first
sutra of the twenty-fifth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Purim-Pacchimgāṇam
Tiththagarāṇam Pancajāmass Paṇavīsan Bhāvanāo Pannattāo' is also mentioned in
the Prashnavyakaran 51 as the twenty-five types of Bhavana of the five Mahavrata
of the first and last Tirthankaras. The first sutra of the twenty-seventh
Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Sattavisan Anagaraguna Pannatta' is also
mentioned in the Prashnavyakaran 52 as the twenty-seven types of Shraman guna.
The first sutra of the twenty-eighth Samavaya of the Samavayanga - 'Attavisavihe
Ayarpakappe Pannatte' is also mentioned in the Prashnavyakaran 53 as the twenty-
eight types of Achar-prakalp.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga sUtra ke nauveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra-'nava baMbhacera-aguttIo
paNNattAo' hai to praznavyAkaraNa42 meM bhI nau brahmacarya kI aguptiyoM kA
varNana hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke dazaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra-'dasavihe
samaNadhamme paNNatte' hai to praznavyAkaraNa 43 meM bhI zramaNadharma ke dasa
prakAra batAye haiN| samavAyAMga sUtra ke gyArahaveM samavAya kA pahalA
sUtra-'ekkArasa uvAsagapaDimAo paMNNattAo' hai to praznavyAkaraNa444 meM bhI
upAsaka kI gyAraha pratimAoM kA ullekha hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke bArahaveM
samavAya kA pahalA sUtra- 'bArasa. bhikkhupaDimAo paNNattAo' hai to
praznavyAkaraNa 45 meM bhI bAraha prakAra kI bhikSupratimAoM kA ullekha huA hai|
samavAyAMga ke solahaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra-'solasa yA gAhAsolasagA
paNNattA' hai to praznavyAkaraNa 46 meM sUtrakRtAMga ke solahaveM adhyayana kA
nAma gAthASoDazaka batAyA hai| samavAyAMga ke sattarahaveM samavAya kA pahalA
sUtra-'sattarasavihe asaMjame paNNatte' hai to praznavyAkaraNa 47 meM bhI
sattaraha prakAra ke asaMyama kA pratipAdana hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke
aThArahaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra-'aTThArasavihe baMbhe paNNatte' hai to
praznavyAkaraNa 48 meM bhI brahmacarya ke aThAraha prakAra batAye haiN|
samavAyAMga sUtra ke unnIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra- 'egUNavIsaM
NAyajjhayaNA paNNattA' hai to praznavyAkaraNa49 meM bhI jJAtAdharmakathA ke
unnIsa adhyayana batAye haiN| samavAyAMga ke teIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA
sUtra-'tevIsaM sUyagaDajjhayaNA paNNattA' hai to praznavyAkaraNa50 meM bhI
sUtrakRtAMga ke teIsa adhyayanoM kA sUcana hai| samavAyAMga ke paccIsaveM
samavAya kA pahalA sUtra-'purima-pacchimagANaM titthagarANaM paMcajAmassa
paNavIsaM bhAvaNAo paNNattAo' hai to praznavyAkaraNa51 meM bhI prathama aura
antima tIrthaMkaroM ke pAMca mahAvratoM kI paccIsa bhAvanAeM batAI haiN|
samavAyAMga ke sattAvIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra-'sattAvIsaM aNagAraguNA
paNNattA' hai to praznavyAkaraNa 52 meM bhI zramaNoM ke sattAvIsa guNoM kA
pratipAdana kiyA hai| samavAyAMga ke aTThAIsaveM samavAya kA prathama
sUtra-'aTThAvIsavihe AyArapakappe paNNatte' hai to praznavyAkaraNa53 meM bhI
AcAraprakalpa ke aTThAvIsa prakAra bataye haiN| 442. praznavyAkaraNa AzravadvAra
4 443. praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra 5 444. praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra 5 445.
praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra 5 praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra 5 praznavyAkaraNa
saMvaradvAra 5 448. praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra 4 praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra
5 . 450. praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra 5 praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra 5 452.
praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra 5 453. praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra 5 [75] 447.

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first sutra of the 29th Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Egunatisavihe
Pavsuyapasannge', and the 54th Prashnavyakaran also mentions 29 instances of
Papashruta. The first sutra of the 30th Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Tisan
Mohaniyathana Pannatta', and the 55th Prashnavyakaran also mentions 30 places of
Mohaniya. The first sutra of the 31st Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Ekkatisan
Siddhaiguna Pannatta', and the 456th Prashnavyakaran also mentions 31 qualities
of Siddhas. The first sutra of the 33rd Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Tettisan
Asayanayo Pannattao.......', and the 57th Prashnavyakaran also mentions 33
Ashatana. In this way, many topics have been discussed in both Samavayanga and
Prashnavyakaran. Samavayanga and Aupapatik Upanga literature, the first Upanga
sutra is "Aupapatik". There are some topics in Samavayanga that can be easily
compared with Aupapatik. We are shedding light on them here. The sixth sutra of
the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Ega Akiriya', and its description is also
found in Aupapatik 58. The seventh sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is
'Ege Loe', and the nature of the Lok is also presented in Aupapatik 56. The
eighth sutra of the first Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Ege Aloe', and the
description of Alok is also found in Aupapatik 60. The eleventh sutra of the
first Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Ege Punne', and the thought about punya is
also found in Aupapatik 61. The twelfth sutra of the first Samavaya of
Samavayanga is 'Ege Pave', and the description of pap is also found in Aupapatik
62. The first Samavaya of Samavayanga mentions Bandha, Moksha, Asrava, Sanvara,
Vedana, Nirjara, and the same topics are also discussed in Aupapatik 63. The
second sutra of the fourth Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Chattari Jhna Pannatta',
and the description of these types of dhyana is also found in Aupapatik 64. 454.
455. 456. 457. 458. 459. 460.. 461. 462. 463. 464. Prashnavyakaran Sanvardwar
Prashnavyakaran Sanvardwar Prashnavyakaran Sanvardwar Prashnavyakaran Sanvardwar
Aupapatik 20 Aupapatik 56 Aupapatik 56 Aupapatik 34 Aupapatik 34 Aupapatik 34
Aupapatik 30 [76]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke untIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra- 'egUNatIsavihe
pAvasuyapasaMge' hai to praznavyAkaraNa54 meM bhI pApazruta ke untIsa prasaMga
batAye haiN| _ samavAyAMga ke tIsaveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra-'tIsaM
mohaNIyaThANA paNNattA' hai to praznavyAkaraNa55 meM bhI . mohanIya ke tIsa
sthAnoM kA ullekha hai| samavAyAMga ke ikatIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA
sUtra-'ekkatIsaM siddhAiguNA paNNattA' hai to praznavyAkaraNa456 meM bhI siddhoM
ke ekatIsa guNa kahe haiN| samavAyAMga ke tetIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA
sUtra-'tettIsaM AsAyaNAo paNNattAo.......' hai to praznavyAkaraNa 57 meM bhI
tetIsa AzAtanA kA ullekha hai| isa taraha samavAyAMga aura praznavyAkaraNa ke
aneka sthaloM para samAna viSayoM kA nirUpaNa huA hai| samavAyAMga aura
aupapAtika upAMga sAhitya meM prathama upAMga sUtra "aupapAtika" hai|
samavAyAMga meM kucha viSaya aise hote haiM jinakI sahaja rUpa se tulanA
aupapAtika ke sAtha kI jA sakatI hai| hama unhIM para yahA~ prakAza DAla rahe
haiN| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA chaThA sUtra -'egA akiriyA' hai to
aupapAtika 58 meM bhI isakA varNana prApta hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya
kA sAtavA~ sUtra -'ege loe' hai to aupapAtika 56 meM bhI loka ke svarUpa kA
pratipAdana hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA AThavA~ sUtra -'ege aloe'
hai to aupapAtika 60 meM bhI aloka kA varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama
samavAya kA gyArahavA~ sUtra - 'ege puNNe' hai to aupapAtika 61 meM bhI puNya ke
sambandha meM cintana kiyA gayA hai| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA
bArahavA~ sUtra -'ege pAve' hai to aupapAtika 62 meM bhI pApa kA varNana hai|
samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya meM bandha, mokSa, Asrava, saMvara, vedanA,
nirjarA kA kathana hai to aupapAtika 63 meM bhI ukta viSayoM kA nirUpaNa huA
hai| samavAyAMga ke caturtha samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra -'cattAri jhANA paNNattA'
hai to aupapAtika 64 meM bhI dhyAna ke ina prakAroM kA nirUpaNa huA hai| 454.
455. 456. 457. 458. 459. 460.. 461. 462. 463. 464. praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra
praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra praznavyAkaraNa saMvaradvAra praznavyAkaraNa
saMvaradvAra aupapAtika 20 aupapAtika 56 aupapAtika 56 aupapAtika 34 aupapAtika
34 aupapAtika 34 aupapAtika 30 [76]

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third sutra of the sixth Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Chhavihe Bahire
Tavokamme' and the fourth sutra is 'Chhavvihe Abhitare Tavokamme...'. So, in
Aupapatik 65, there is a mention of six external and six internal tapas. - The
third sutra of the seventh Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Samane Bhagavan Mahavir
Sat Rayaniyo Uddham Ucchatenam Hottha'. So, in Aupapatik 66, there is also a
description of Mahavira being seven hands tall. The seventh sutra of the eighth
Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Attasamalie Kevalisamuggaae...'. So, in Aupapatik
67, there is also a mention of Kevalisamudghāt. The tenth sutra of the twelfth
Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Savvatthassiddass Nam Mahavimaanas...'. And the
eleventh sutra is "Isipabbharaae Nam Pudhaviye". So, in Aupapatik 68, there is
also a description of Iṣatprāgbhārā earth and its twelve names are mentioned.
The first sutra of the thirty-fourth Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Chauttisam
Buddhaisesa Panṇattā'. So, in Aupapatik 69, thirty-four types of Buddhatisaya
are also mentioned. The first sutra of the thirty-fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga
is 'Panatisam Sacchavayanaisesa Panṇattā'. So, in Aupapatik 70, thirty-five
types of Satya-Vachanaatisaya are also mentioned. The fourth sutra of the forty-
fifth Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Isipabbharaa Nam Pudhavi Evam Chev'. So, in
Aupapatik 71, the dimension-diameter of 'Iṣatprāgbhārā' earth is also mentioned
as forty-five lakh yojanas. The first sutra of the forty-ninth Samavaya of
Samavayanga is 'Ekaṇauī Parveyaavacchakammapadhimaao Panṇattāo'. So, in
Aupapatik 72, the vows of doing Vaiavatya on the tenth day are also mentioned as
forty-nine. In this way, there is a similarity of subject matter in Samavayanga
and Aupapatik. Samavayanga and Jivabhigam Now we will compare some of the topics
mentioned in Samavayanga with the third Upanga Jivabhigam Sutra. The second
sutra of the second Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Dube Raasi Panṇattā'. So, in
Jivabhigam 73, there is also a mention of two constellations. The second sutra
of the sixth Samavaya of Samavayanga is 'Chh Jiv-Nikaya Panṇattā'. This is also
mentioned in Jivabhigam 74. The ninth sutra of the ninth Samavaya of Samavayanga
is 'Vijayass Nam Darass Egamegaae Bahaa Nav-Nav Bhoma Panṇattā'. So, in
Jivabhigam 75, there is also a mention of nine-nine Bhumnagar on each side of
the Vijayadwar. 465. Aupapatik Sutra 30 466. Aupapatik Sutra 10 467. Aupapatik
Sutra 42 468. Aupapatik Sutra 43 469. Aupapatik Sutra 10 470. Aupapatik Sutra 10
471. Aupapatik Sutra 43 472. Aupapatik Sutra 20 473. Jivabhigam Pr. 1, Sutra 1
474. Jivabhigam Pr. 5, Sutra 228 475. Jivabhigam Pr. 3, Sutra 132 [77]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke chaThe samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra-'chavihe bAhire tavokamme' hai
aura cauthA sUtra 'chavvihe abhitare tavokamme......' hai to aupapAtika 65 meM
chaha bAhya aura chaha AbhyaMtara tapoM kA ullekha hai| - samavAyAMga ke sAtaveM
samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra-'samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre satta rayaNIo uDDhaM
uccateNaM hotthA' hai to aupapAtika 66 meM bhI mahAvIra ke sAta hAtha UMce hone
kA varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke AThaveM samavAya kA sAtavAM sUtra-'aTThasAmaie
kevalisamugghAe......' hai to aupapAtika 67 meM bhI kevalIsamudghAta kA ullekha
hai| samavAyAMga ke bArahaveM samavAya kA dasavAM sUtra-'savvaTThasiddhassa NaM
mahAvimANassa.....' hai aura gyArahavAM sUtra "IsipabbhArAe NaM puDhavIe" hai to
aupapAtika 68 meM bhI ISatprAgbhArA pRthvI kA varNana hai aura usake bAraha nAma
batAye haiN| samavAyAMga ke cautIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra-'cauttIsaM
buddhAisesA paNNattA' hai to aupapAtika 69 meM bhI buddhAtizaya ke cautIsa bheda
batAye haiN| samavAyAMga ke paiMtIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra-'paNatIsaM
saccavayaNAisesA paNNattA' hai to aupapAtika 70 meM bhI satya-vacanAtizaya
paiMtIsa batAye haiN| samavAyAMga ke paiMtAlIsaveM samavAya kA caturtha
sUtra-'IsipabbhArA NaM puDhavI evaM ceva' hai to aupapAtika 71. meM bhI
'ISatprAgbhArA' pRthvI kA AyAma-viSkaMbha paiMtAlIsa lAkha yojana kA batAyA hai|
samavAyAMga sUtra ke ekkAnavevAM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra -'ekANauI
paraveyAvaccakammapaDimAo paNNattAo' hai to aupapItaka 72 meM bhI dasare kI
vaiyAvatya karane kI pratijJAeM ekkAnaveM batAI haiN| isa taraha samavAyAMga
aura aupapAtika meM viSayasAmya hai| samavAyAMga aura jIvAbhigama samavAyAMga
meM Aye hue kucha viSayoM kI tulanA aba hama tRtIya upAGga jIvAbhigama sUtra ke
sAtha kreNge| samavAyAMga ke dvitIya samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra- 'dube rAsI
paNNattA' hai to jIvAbhigama 73 meM bhI do rAziyoM kA ullekha hai| samavAyAMga
ke chaThe samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra-'cha jIva-nikAyA paNNattA' hai jo
jIvAbhigama 74 meM bhI yaha varNana hai| samavAyAMga ke nauveM samavAya kA
nauvAM sUtra-'vijayassa NaM dArassa egamegAe bAhAe nava-nava bhomA paNNattA' hai
to jIvAbhigama 75 meM bhI vijayadvAra ke pratyeka pArzvabhAga meM nau-nau bhauma
nagara haiM, aisA ullekha hai| 465. aupapAtika sUtra 30 466. aupapAtika sUtra 10
467. aupapAtika sUtra 42 468. aupapAtika sUtra 43 469. aupapAtika sUtra 10 470.
aupapAtika sUtra 10 471. aupapAtika sUtra 43 472. aupapAtika sUtra 20 473.
jIvAbhigama pra. 1, sUtra 1 474. jIvAbhigama pra. 5, sUtra 228 475. jIvAbhigama
pra. 3, sUtra 132 [77]

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The ninth *Samavāya* of the *Samavāyāṅga* mentions nine natures of
*darśanāvaraṇa*, while *Jīvābhigama* 76 also mentions nine natures of
*darśanāvaraṇa* karma.  The fourth sūtra of the twelfth *Samavāya* of the
*Samavāyāṅga* - ' *vijaya ṇam rāyahāṇī duvālasa...* ' - states that the extent
of *vijaya* capital is twelve lakh yojanas, which is also mentioned in
*Jīvābhigama* 77.  The fifth *sutra* of the thirteenth *Samavāya* of the
*Samavāyāṅga* - ' *jalayar-paṇcindīyatirikṣajoniāṇam...* ' - states that there
are thirteen and a half lakh *kulkoṭī* of aquatic *tiryanc* with five senses,
which is also mentioned in *Jīvābhigama* 478.  The third *sutra* of the
seventeenth *Samavāya* - ' *māṇusuttare ṇam pavvae sattaras...* ' - states that
the height of the *māṇusottara* mountain is seventeen hundred and twenty-one
yojanas, which is also mentioned in *Jīvābhigama* 79.  The fourth *sutra* of the
seventeenth *Samavāya* - ' *savvesī pi ṇam velandhar...* ' - states that the
height of the dwelling mountains of all *velandhar* and *aṇuvelandhar*
*nāgarāja* is seventeen hundred and twenty-one yojanas, which is also mentioned
in *Jīvābhigama* 80.  The fifth *sutra* of the seventeenth *Samavāya* - '
*lavaṇe ṇam samudde...* ' - states that the height of the surface of the
*lavaṇasamudra* from its bottom is seventeen thousand yojanas, which is also
mentioned in *Jīvābhigama* 81.  The seventh *sutra* of the eighteenth *Samavāya*
- ' *dhūmappahāe ṇam...* ' - states that the extent of the *dhūmaprabhā* earth
is one lakh eighteen yojanas, which is also mentioned in *Jīvābhigama* 82.  The
fourth *sutra* of the twenty-fifth *Samavāya* - ' *doccāe ṇam puḍhavīe...* ' -
states that there are twenty-five lakh *nārakavāsa* in the *śarkarāprabhā*
earth, which is also mentioned in *Jīvābhigama* 83.  The fourth *sutra* of the
twenty-seventh *Samavāya* - ' *paḍham-paṇcama...* ' - states that there are
thirty-four lakh *nārakavāsa* in the first, fifth, sixth, and seventh earths,
which is also mentioned in *Jīvābhigama* 85.  The sixth *sutra* of the thirty-
fifth *Samavāya* - ' *bitiya-cauṭṭhīsu...* ' - states that there are thirty-five
lakh *nārakavāsa* in the second and fourth earths, which is also mentioned in
*Jīvābhigama* 86.  The third *sutra* of the thirty-seventh *Samavāya* - '
*savvāsu ṇam vijaya...* ' - states that the height of the ramparts of all the
capitals *vijaya*, *vaijayanta*, and *aparaajitā* is thirty-seven yojanas, which
is also mentioned in *Jīvābhigama* 87.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke nauveM samavAya meM darzanAvaraNa kI nau prakRtiyA~ kahI haiM to
jIvAbhigama76 meM bhI darzanAvaraNa karma kI nau prakRtiyAM kahI hai|
samavAyAMga ke bArahaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra-'vijayA NaM rAyahANI
duvAlasa........' hai to jIvAbhigama77 meM bhI vijayA rAjadhAnI kA AyAma-
viSkambha bAraha lAkha yojana kA pratipAdana kiyA hai| samavAyAMga ke terahaveM
samavAya kA pAMcavAM satra-'jalayara-paMciMdiyatirikkhajoNiANaM......' hai to
jIvAbhigama478 meM bhI jalacara tiryaMca paMcendriya kI sADhe teraha lAkha
kulakoTiyAM kahI haiN| sattarahaveM samavAya kA tRtIya sUtra-'mANusuttare NaM
pavvae sattarasa...' hai to jIvAbhigama79 meM bhI mAnuSottara parvata kI UMcAI
sattaraha sau ikkIsa yojana kI kahI hai| . sattarahaveM samavAya kA cauthA
sUtra-'savvesi pi NaM velaMdhara.......' hai to jIvAbhigama80 meM bhI sarva
velaMdhara aura aNuvelaMdhara nAgarAjoM ke AvAsaparvatoM kI UMcAI sattaraha sau
ikkIsa yojana kI batAyI hai| samavAyAMga ke sattarahaveM samavAya kA pA~cavA~
sUtra-'lavaNe NaM samudde.....' hai to jIvAbhigama81 meM bhI lavaNasamudra ke
peMde se Upara kI sataha kI UMcAI sattaraha hajAra yojana kI batAI hai| _
aThArahaveM samavAya kA sAtavAM sUtra- 'dhUmappahAe NaM.....' hai to
jIvAbhigama82 meM bhI dhUmaprabhA pRthvI kA vistAra eka lAkha aThAraha yojana kA
batAyA hai| paccIsaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra-'doccAe NaM puDhavIe........'
hai to jIvAbhigama83 meM bhI zarkarAprabhA pRthvI meM paccIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa
batAye haiN| _ sattAvIsaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra-'paDhama-paMcama...' hai to
jIvAbhigama85 meM bhI pahalI, pAMcavIM, chaThI aura sAtavIM ina cAra pRthviyoM
meM cauMtIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa batAye haiN| paiMtIsaveM samavAya kA chaThA
sUtra-'bitiya-cautthIsu....' hai to jIvAbhigama86 meM bhI dUsarI aura cauthI ina
do pRthviyoM meM paiMtIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa batAye haiN| saiMtIsaveM samavAya kA
tIsarA sUtra- 'savvAsu NaM vijaya......' hai to jIvAbhigama87 meM bhI vijaya-
vaijayanta aura aparAjitA ina saba rAjadhAniyoM ke prAkAroM kI U~cAI saiMtIsa
yojana kI batAyI hai| 476. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 132 477. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3,
sU. 135 478. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 97 479. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 178 .480.
jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 159 481. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 173 482. jIvAbhigama-
pra. 3, sU. 68 483. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 70 484. jIvAbhigama-pra. 2, sU. 210
485. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 81 486. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 81 487.
jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 135 [78]

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourth sutra of the thirty-seventh Samavaya - 'Khuddiyae Nam Vimana...' is
also mentioned in Jivaabhigam 88, in the first category of the Ksudrika Vimana
division, as the thirty-seventh Uddeshan Kala. The third sutra of the forty-
fourth Samavaya - 'Doch-Chauth...' is also mentioned in Jivaabhigam 487, as
forty-four lakh Narakavasa in the second, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh of
these five Prithvis. The second sutra of the forty-first Samavaya - 'Chausu-
Pudhavisu...' is also mentioned in Jivaabhigam 90, as forty-one lakh Narakavasa
in the four Prithvis. The fourth sutra of the forty-second Samavaya - 'Kaloae
Nam Samudde...' is also mentioned in Jivaabhigam 69, as forty-two Chandras and
forty-two Suryas in the Kalod Samudra. The seventh sutra of the forty-second
Samavaya - 'Lavane Nam Samudde...' is also mentioned in Jivaabhigam 92, as
forty-two thousand Nagadevatas holding the inner Vela of the Lavanasamudra. The
second sutra of the forty-third Samavaya - 'Padham-Chauth...' is also mentioned
in Jivaabhigam 93, as forty-three lakh Narakavasa in the first, fourth and fifth
of these three Prithvis. The second sutra of the forty-fifth Samavaya -
'Simantae Nam Narae...' is also mentioned in Jivaabhigam 94, as the dimension-
diameter of the Simantaka Narakavasa being forty-five lakh Yojanas. The second
sutra of the fifty-fifth Samavaya - 'Mandarass Nam Pavvayass...' is also
mentioned in Jivaabhigam 95, as the immediate distance between the western
extremity of the Meru Parvat and the western extremity of the Vijay Dwar being
fifty-five thousand Yojanas. The second sutra of the sixtieth Samavaya -
'Lavanas Samuddas...' is also mentioned in Jivaabhigam 96, as sixty thousand
Nagadevatas holding the Agrodak of the Lavanasamudra. The fourth sutra of the
sixty-fourth Samavaya - 'Savve Vinam Dahimuha Pavvaya...' is also mentioned in
Jivaabhigam 97, as all the Dahiमुख Parvat are shaped like a garland. Therefore,
their diameter is the same everywhere, and their height is sixty-four thousand
Yojanas. The first sutra of the sixty-sixth Samavaya is - Dahiṇḍḍ-Māṇuss-
Khettāṇam, the second sutra is - Chāvattinṭh Sūriya Taviṁsu, the third sutra is
- Uttarḍḍ Māṇuss Khettāṇam..., the fourth sutra is - 'Chāvattḥ Sūriya Taviṁsu vā
3, is also mentioned in Jivaabhigam 981, as sixty-six Chandras and Suryas in the
Dakshinardh Manusya Kshetra. 448. Jivaabhigam-Pr. 3, Su. 137 489. Jivaabhigam-
Pr. 3, Su. 81 490. Jivaabhigam-Pr. 3, Su. 81 491. Jivaabhigam-Pr. 3, Su. 175
492. Jivaabhigam-Pr. 3 Su. 158 493. Jivaabhigam-Pr. 3, Su. 8 494. Jivaabhigam-
Pr. 3 495. Jivaabhigam-Pr. 3, Su. 129 496. Jivaabhigam-Pr. 3, Su. 158 497.
Jivaabhigam-Pr. 3, Su. 183 498. Jivaabhigam-Pr. 3, Su. 177 [79]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saitIsaveM samavAya kA caturtha sUtra -'khuDDiyAe NaM vimANaM......... hai to
jIvAbhigama88 meM bhI kSudrikA vimAna pravibhakti ke prathama varga meM saiMtIsa
uddezana kAla kahe haiN| unacAlIsaveM samavAya kA tRtIya sUtra- 'docca-
cauttha......' hai to jIvAbhigama487 meM bhI dUsarI, cauthI, pA~cavI, chaThI
aura sAtavIM ina pAMca pRthviyoM meM unacAlIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa batAye haiN| -
ikatAlIsaveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra-'causu-puDhavIsu......' hai to
jIvAbhigama 90 meM bhI cAra pRthviyoM meM ikatAlIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa batAye
haiN| _ bayAlIsaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra- 'kAloe NaM samudde......' hai to
jIvAbhigama 69 meM bhI kAloda samudra meM bayAlIsa candra aura bayAlIsa sarya
batAye haiN| bayAlIsaveM samavAya kA sAtavAM sUtra-'lavaNe NaM samudde......'
hai to jIvAbhigama92 meM bhI lavaNasamudra kI Abhyantara velA ko bayAlIsa hajAra
nAgadevatA dhAraNa karate batAye haiN| tayAlIsaveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra
-'paDhama-cauttha.........' hai to jIvAbhigama93 meM bhI pahalI, cauthI aura
pAMcavI ina tIna pRthviyoM meM tayAlIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa batAye haiN|
paiMtAlIsaveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra-'sImaMtae NaM narae.....' hai to
jIvAbhigama 94 meM bhI sImAntaka nArakAvAsa kA AyAma-viSkambha paiMtAlIsa lAkha
yojana kA batAyA hai| pacapanaveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra-'maMdarassa NaM
pavvayassa......' hai to jIvAbhigama95 meM bhI meru parvata ke pazcimI caramAnta
se vijaya dvAra ke pazcimI caramAnta kA avyavahita antara pacapana hajAra yojana
kA batAyA hai| _ sAThaveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra -'lavaNassa samuddassa.....'
hai to jIvAbhigama 96 meM bhI lavaNasamudra ke agrodaka ko sATha hajAra
nAgadevatA dhAraNa karate haiM aisA ullekha hai| causaThaveM samavAya kA cauthA
sUtra-'savve viNaM dahImuhA pavvayA......' hai to jIvAbhigama97 meM bhI sabhI
dadhimukha parvata mAlA ke AkAra vAle haiN| ata: una kA viSkambha sarvatra
samAna hai, una kI UMcAI causaTha hajAra yojana kI hai| chAsaThaveM samavAya kA
prathama sUtra hai- dAhiNaDDha-mANussa-khettANaM, dvitIya sUtra hai- chAvaTiMTha
sUriyA taviMsu, tRtIya sUtra hai-uttaraDDha mANussa khettANaM........., caturtha
sUtra hai-'chAvaTThi sUriyA taviMsu vA 3, to jIvAbhigama981 meM bhI dakSiNArdha
manuSya kSetra meM chAsaTha-chAsaTha candra aura sUrya batAye haiN| 448.
jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 137 489. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 81 490. jIvAbhigama-
pra. 3, sU. 81 491. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 175 492. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3 sU. 158
493. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 8 494. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3 495. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3,
sU. 129 496. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 158 497. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 183 498.
jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 177 [79]

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third sutra of the 64th Samavaya - 'Mandarassa nam pavvayassa...' - states
that the direct distance between the peak of Mount Meru and the eastern
extremity of Gautamdvipa is 64,000 yojanas, which is also mentioned in
Jivabhigam 99.  The first sutra of the 77th Samavaya - 'Samayakhitte nam
Mandaravjja...' - states that there are 77 years and years-long mountains in the
Samayakshetra, excluding Meru, such as 35 years, 30 years-long mountains, and 4
Ishukara mountains. This is also mentioned in Jivabhigam 500.  The second sutra
of the 72nd Samavaya - 'Bavattari Suknakumaraavasa...' - states that there are
72 lakh Suvarna Kumaraavasa, which is also mentioned in Jivabhigam 01.  The
fifth sutra of the 72nd Samavaya - 'Abhitarpukkharaddhe nam...' - states that
there are 72 Chandras and Suryas, which is also mentioned in Jivabhigam 502.
The first sutra of the 89th Samavaya - 'Valayamuhassa...', the second sutra -
'Evam Keussavi...', the third sutra - 'Chhatthie Pudhvie...', and the fourth
sutra - 'Jambuddvivas nam divas...' - state that the description of Vadvamukh
Patalkalash, Ketuk Yupaka, and other Patalkalash, from the middle of the sixth
earth to the sixth Ghanodadhi, and the direct distance of each door of
Jambudvipa is 89,000 yojanas, which is also mentioned in Jivabhigam 503.  The
fifth sutra of the 80th Samavaya - 'Jambuddvive nam dive...' - states that the
sunrise occurs in the inner mandala after traveling 180 yojanas in Jambudvipa,
which is also mentioned in Jivabhigam 504.  The first sutra of the 84th Samavaya
- 'Chaurasii niryaavasa...' - states that there are 84 lakh Narakaavasa, which
is also mentioned in Jivabhigam 505. The seventh sutra of the 84th Samavaya -
'Savvevi nam ajanagpavvaaya...' - states that the height of all Ajanag mountains
is 84,000 yojanas, which is also mentioned in Jivabhigam 506.  The eighth sutra
of the 84th Samavaya - 'Harivas-Ramyaavasiyaanam...' - states that the height of
all Ajanag mountains is 84,000 yojanas, which is also mentioned in Jivabhigam
507.  The tenth sutra of the 84th Samavaya - 'Vivahpannatie nam Bhagavatie...' -
states that there are 84,000 verses in the Vivahprajnapti, which is also
mentioned in Jivabhigam 08.  The second sutra of the 85th Samavaya -
'Dhayisandas nam Mandara...' - states that the Mount Meru in Dhaatki Khand is
85,000 yojanas high, which is also mentioned in Jivabhigam 509.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saDasaThaveM samavAya kA tRtIya sUtra-'maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa.......' hai to
jIvAbhigama99 meM bhI meruparvata ke caramAnta se gautamadvIpa ke pUrvI
caramAnta kA avyavahita antara sar3asaTha hajAra yojana kA kahA hai|
unahattaraveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra -'samayakhitte NaM maMdaravajjA.....'
hai to jIvAbhigama500 meM bhI likhA hai 'samayakSetra meM meru ko choDakara
unahattara varSa aura varSadhara parvata haiM, jaise-paiMtIsa varSa, tIsa
varSadhara parvata aura cAra iSukAra prvt|' _ bahattaraveM samavAya kA dUsarA
sUtra -'bAvattari suknakumArAvAsa......' hai to jIvAbhigama'01 meM bhI
suvarNakumArAvAsa bahattara lAkha batAye haiN| bahattaraveM samavAya kA pAMcavAM
sUtra-'abhitarapukkharaddhe NaM.......' hai to jIvAbhigama502 meM bhI bahattara
candra aura sUrya kA varNana prApta hai| unAsIveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra
-'valayAmuhassa......' dUsarA sUtra -'evaM keussavi.....' tRtIya sUtra -
'chaTThIe puDhavIe....' aura caturtha sUtra-'jambUddIvassa NaM dIvassa......'
hai to jIvAbhigama503 meM bhI vaDavAmukha pAtAlakalaza kA evaM ketuka yUpaka Adi
pAtAla kalazoM kA chaThI pRthvI ke madhyabhAga se chaThe ghanodadhi taka kA
varNana aura jambUdvIpa ke pratyeka dvAra kA avyavahita antara unnAsI hajAra
yojana kA hai, yaha varNana milatA hai| assIveM samavAya kA pAMcavAM sUtra
-'jambuddIve NaM dIve........' hai to jIvAbhigama504 meM bhI jambUdvIpa meM eka
sau assI yojana jAne para sarvaprathama AbhyaMtara maNDala meM sUryodaya hotA
hai, yaha varNana hai| caurAsIveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra-'caurAsIi
nirayAvAsa.......' hai to jIvAbhigama505 meM bhI nArakAvAsa caurAsI lAkha batAye
haiN| - caurAsIveM samavAya kA sAtavAM sUtra -'savvevi NaM ajaMNagapavvayA.....'
hai to jIvAbhigama506 meM bhI sarva ajaMnaga parvatoM kI UMcAI caurAsI-caurAsI
hajAra yojana kI hai| caurAsIveM samavAya kA AThavAM sUtra -'harivAsa-
ramyagvAsiyANaM.......' hai to jIvAbhigama507 meM bhI. 'sarva' aMjanagaparvatoM
kI UMcAI caurAsI hajAra yojana kI kahI hai| caurAsIveM samavAya kA dasavAM
sUtra-'vivAhapannatIe NaM bhagavatIe.....' hai to jIvAbhigama08 meM bhI
vivAhaprajJapti ke caurAsI hajAra pada haiN| pacAsIveM samavAya kA dUsarA
sUtra-'dhAyaisaMDassa NaM maMdarA..' hai to jIvAbhigama509 meM bhI dhAtakIkhaNDa
ke meruparvata pacAsI hajAra yojana UMce haiM, yaha varNana hai| 499.
jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sUtra 161 500. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sUtra 177 501.
jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, udde. 2, sUtra 176 502. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, udde. 2, sUtra
158 503. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, udde. 2, sUtra 156, udde. 1, sUtra 76, udde. 2,
sUtra 145 504. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, udde. 1, sUtra 72 505. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3,
udde. 1, sUtra 81 506. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, udde. 2 507. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3,
udde. 2, sUtra 183 508. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, udde. 1, sUtra 79 509. jIvAbhigama-
pra. 3 [80]

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third sutra of the 86th Samavaya - 'Doच्चाए णं पुढवीए......' - also states
in Jivaabhigam 510 that the immediate distance between the upper limit of the
second earth and the lower limit of the second Ghanodadhi is 86,000 yojanas.
The first sutra of the 88th Samavaya - 'एगमेगस्स णं चंदिमसूरियस्स' - states in
Jivaabhigam 11 that each Chandra Surya has a family of 88-88 planets.  The
second sutra of the 119th Samavaya - 'कालोए णं समुद्दे' - also states in
Jivaabhigam 512 that the circumference of the Kalod ocean is slightly more than
119 lakh yojanas.  The second sutra of the 59th Samavaya - 'जंबुद्दीवस्स णं
दीवस्स......' - also states in Jivaabhigam 513 that 59-59 thousand yojanas
inwards from the extremities of Jambudvipa in all four directions in the
Lavanasamudra are the four Mahapatala Kalash.  The eighth sutra of the 100th
Samavaya - 'सव्वेवि णं कंचणगपव्वया.....' - also states in Jivaabhigam 514 that
all Kanchanak mountains are 100-100 yojanas high, 100-100 koshas deep in the
earth, and their diameter is 100-100 yojanas.  The eighth sutra of the 500th
Samavaya - 'सोहम्मीसाणेसु कप्पेसु विमाणा.....' - also states in Jivaabhigam 515
that all Vimanas in the Saudharma and Ishanakalpa are 500-500 yojanas high.  The
first sutra of the 600th Samavaya - 'सणंकुमारमाहिंदेसु कप्पेसु......' - also
states in Jivaabhigam 516 that all Vimanas in the Sanatkumar and Mahendrakalpa
are 600 yojanas high.  The first sutra of the 700th Samavaya -
'बंभलंतयकप्पेसु.......' - also states in Jivaabhigam 517 that all Vimanas in the
Brahma and Lantak Kalpa are 700 yojanas high.  The first sutra of the 800th
Samavaya - 'महासुक्क-सहस्सारेसु.....' - also states the same in Jivaabhigam 518.
The first sutra of the 900th Samavaya - 'आणय-पाणय......', the first sutra of the
1000th Samavaya - 'सव्वे वि णं गेवेज.....', the first sutra of the 1100th
Samavaya - 'अणुत्तरोववाइयाणं देवाणं.....', and the first sutra of the 3000th
Samavaya - 'इमीसे णं रयणप्पहाए.....' - all have descriptions similar to those
found in Jivaabhigam 519.  The first sutra of the 7000th Samavaya of the
Samavayanga Sutra - 'इमीसे णं रयणप्पहाए पुढ़वीए.....' - also states in
Jivaabhigam 20 that the immediate distance between the upper limit of the
Ratnakantha of the Ratnapraba earth and the lower limit of the Pulaka Kantha is
7000 yojanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chiyAsIveM samavAya kA tRtIya sUtra-'doccAe NaM puDhavIe......' hai to
jIvAbhigama510 meM bhI dUsarI pRthvI ke madhyabhAga se dUsare ghanodadhi ke nIce
ke caramAnta kA avyavahita aMtara chiyAsI hajAra yojana kA kahA hai| aThAsIveM
samavAya kA pahalA sUtra- 'egamegassa NaM caMdimasUriyassa' hai to jIvAbhigama
11 meM pratyeka candra sUrya ka, aThAsI-aThAsI grahoM kA parivAra batAyA hai|
ikkAnaveMve samavAya kA dUsare sUtra- 'kAloe NaM samudde' hai to jIvAbhigama512
ke anusAra bhI kAloda samudra kI paridhi kucha adhika ikkAnaveM lAkha yojana kI
hai| paMcAnaveMve samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra--'jaMbuddIvassa NaM dIvassa......'
hai to jIvAbhigama513 meM bhI jambUdvIpa ke caramAnta se cAroM dizAoM meM
lavaNasamudra meM paMcAnaveM-paMcAnaveM hajAra yojana andara jAne para cAra
mahApAtAla kalaza kahe haiN| sauveM samavAya kA AThavAM sUtra-'savvevi NaM
kaMcaNagapavvayA.....' hai to 'jIvAbhigama514 meM bhI sarva kA~canaka parvata
sau-sau yojana UMce haiM, sau-sau koza pRthvI meM gahare haiM aura unake mala kA
viSkambha sau-sau yojana kA kahA pAMcasauveM samavAya kA AThavAM sUtra
-'sohammIsANesu kappesu vimANA.....' hai to jIvAbhigama515 meM saudharma aura
IzAnakalpa meM sabhI vimAna pAMca sau-pAMca sau yojana UMce kahe haiN|
chahasauveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra - 'saNaMkumAramAhiMdesu kappesu......' hai
to jIvAbhigama516 meM bhI sanatkumAra aura mAhendrakalpa meM sabhI vimAna chaha
sau yojana UMce kahe haiN| sAtasauveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra
-'baMbhalaMtayakappesu.......' hai to jIvAbhigama517 meM bhI brahma aura lAntaka
kalpa ke sabhI vimAna sAta sau yojana UMce batalAe haiN| AThasauveM samavAya kA
prathama sUtra - 'mahAsukka-sahassAresu.....' hai to jIvAbhigama518 meM bhI yahI
kahA hai| navasauveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra -'ANaya-pANaya......' hai,
hajAraveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra hai-'savve vi NaM geveja.....' gyAraha
sauveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra hai-'aNuttarovavAiyANaM devANaM.....tIna
hajAraveM-samavAya kA imIse NaM rayaNappahAe..... to ina sUtroM jaisA varNana
jIvAbhigama519 meM bhI prApta hai| samavAyAMga sUtra ke sAta hajAraveM samavAya
kA prathama sUtra- 'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe pur3havIe.....' hai to jIvAbhigama 20
meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke ratnakANDa ke Upara ke caramAnta se pulaka kANDa
ke nIca ke caramAnta kA avyavahita antara sAta hajAra yojana kA batAyA hai| 510.
jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 79 511. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, u. 2, sU. 194 jIvAbhigama-
pra. 3, u. 2, sU. 175 513. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, u. 2, sU. 156 514. jIvAbhigama-
pra. 3, u. 2, sU. 150 515. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, u. 1, sU. 211 516. jIvAbhigama-
pra. 3, u. 1, sU. 211 517. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, u. 1, sU. 211 518. jIvAbhigama-
pra. 3, u. 1, sU. 211 519. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, u. 1, sU. 211, 195 520.
jIvAbhigama-pra. 3 [81]

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first sutra of the two hundred thousandth Samavaya - 'Lavane nam
samudde.......' is also mentioned in Jivaabhigam 521, where the chakraval-
vishkambh of the Lavanasamudra is described as two hundred thousand yojanas. The
first sutra of the four hundred thousandth Samavaya - 'Dhayikhande nam
dive......' is also mentioned in Jivaabhigam 22, where the chakraval-vishkambh
of the Dhataki-khand is described as four hundred thousand yojanas. The first
sutra of the five hundred thousandth Samavaya - 'Lavanas nam samuddas......' is
also mentioned in Jivaabhigam 523, where the direct distance between the eastern
and western extremities of the Lavanasamudra is described as five hundred
thousand yojanas. In this way, the echoes of many topics found in the
Samavayanga can be clearly heard in the Jivaabhigam. Samavayanga and Prajnaapana
Prajnaapana is the fourth Upanga. The meaning of Prajnaapana is - the scripture
that describes the Jiva and Ajiva. Acharya Malayagiri considers Prajnaapana to
be an Upanga of the Samavaya. When the relationship between Prajnaapana and
Samavayanga was established is a subject of research. Shramaacharya himself
indicates that Prajnaapana is taken from the Drishtivad. But today, Drishtivad
is unavailable. Therefore, it cannot be said clearly how much material has been
taken from it. Drishtivad mainly describes the Drishti or Darshan. Samavayanga
also mainly describes the Jiva, Ajiva, and other elements. So, Prajnaapana also
has the same description. Therefore, there is no obstacle in considering
Prajnaapana as an Upanga of the Samavayanga. Therefore, the topics found in the
Samavayanga can be easily compared with Prajnaapana. The fifth sutra of the
first Samavaya is - 'Ega kiriya' and the description of Kriya is also found in
Prajnaapana 524. The twentieth sutra of the first Samavaya - 'Appitthane
nare......' and the dimension-vishkambh of the Apratishthan Naraka is also
described in Prajnaapana 125. The twenty-second sutra of the first Samavaya -
'Savvatthaside Mahavimaane......' and the dimension-vishkambh of the
Sarvarthaside Vimana is described as one hundred thousand yojanas in Prajnaapana
126. The twenty-sixth sutra of the first Samavaya - 'Imise nam rayanppahae
nam.....' and the situation of some Narakas of Ratnaprabha is described as one
Palyopama in Prajnaapana 127. The description from the twenty-seventh to the
fortieth sutra of the first Samavaya is found in the same way in the fourth pada
of Prajnaapana 28. 521. Jivaabhigam-Pra. 3, Su. 173. 522. Jivaabhigam Pra. 3. U.
2, Su. 174 523. Jivaabhigam - Pra. 3, U. 2, Su. 154 524. Prajnaapana- Pada 22
525. Prajnaapana- Pada 2 526. Prajnaapana- Pada 2 527. Prajnaapana- Pada 4, Su.
94 528. Prajnaapana- Pada 4, Sutra - 94, 95, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103 [82]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 do lAkhaveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra - 'lavaNe NaM samudde.......' hai to
jIvAbhigama 5 21 meM bhI lavaNasamudra kA cakravAla- viSkambha do lAkha yojana
kA batAyA hai| cAra lAkhaveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra dhAyaikhaMDe NaM
dIve......' hai to jIvAbhigama 22 meM bhI dhAtakIkhaNDa kA cakravAla- viSkambha
cAra lAkha yojana kA batAyA hai| pA~ca lAkhaveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra - '
lavaNassa NaM samuddassa....' hai to jIvAbhigama 523 meM bhI lavaNasamudra ke
pUrvI caramAnta se pazcimI caramAnta kA avyavahita antara pAMca lAkha yojana kA
batalAyA hai| isa taraha jIvAbhigama meM samavAyAMga meM Aye aneka viSayoM kI
pratidhvani spaSTa sunAI detI hai| samavAyAMga aura prajJApanA prajJApanA
caturtha upAMga hai| prajJApanA kA artha hai- jIva, ajIva kA nirUpaNa karane
vAlA zAstra  /  AcArya malayagiri prajJApanA ko samavAya kA upAMga mAnate haiN|
prajJApanA kA samavAyAMga ke sAtha kaba se sambandha sthApita huA, yaha
anusandhAna kA viSaya hai| svayaM zmAmAcArya prajJApanA ko dRSTivAda se liyA
sUcita karate haiN| kintu Aja dRSTivAda anupalabdha hai| isalie spaSTa nahIM
kahA jA sakatA ki dRSTivAda meM se kitanI sAmagrI isameM lI gaI hai| dRSTivAda
meM mukhya rUpa se dRSTi yAne darzana kA hI varNana hai| samavAyAMga meM bhI
mukhya rUpa se jIva ajIva Adi tattvoM kA pratipAdana hai| to prajJApanA meM bhI
vahI nirUpaNa hai| ataH prajJApanA ko samavAyAMga kA upAMga mAnane meM kisI
prakAra kI bAdhA nahIM hai| ataeva samavAyAMga meM Aye hue viSayoM kI tulanA
prajJApanA ke sAtha sahaja rUpa se kI jA sakatI hai| , prathama samavAya kA
pA~cavA~ sUtra hai- 'egA kiriyA' to prajJApanA 524 meM bhI kriyA kA nirUpaNa huA
hai| prathama samavAya kA bIsavAM sUtra - - 'appaiTThANe narae...... hai to
prajJApanA 125 meM bhI apratiSThAna naraka kA AyAma-viSkambha pratipAdita hai
prathama samavAya kA bAvIsavA~ sUtra savvaTThasiddhe mahAvimANe...
'savvaTThasiddhe mahAvimANe....... ' hai to prajJApanA 126 meM bhI
sarvArthasiddha vimAna kA AyAma - viSkambha eka lAkha yojana kA batAyA hai| -
prathama samavAya kA chabbIsavA~ sUtra - 'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe NaM.....' hai
to prajJApanA 127 meM bhI ratnaprabhA ke kucha nArakoM kI sthiti eka palyopama
kI batAyI hai| prathama samavAya ke sattAvIsaveM sUtra se lekara cAlIsaveM sUtra
taka jo varNana hai vaha prajJApanA 28 ke caturtha pada meM usI taraha se prApta
hotA hai| 521. jIvAbhigama-pra. 3, sU. 173. 522. jIvAbhigama pra. 3. u. 2, sU.
174 523. jIvAbhigama - pra. 3, u. 2, sU. 154 524. prajJApanA- pada 22 525.
prajJApanA- pada 2 526. prajJApanA- pada 2 527. prajJApanA- pada 4, sU. 94 528.
prajJApanA- pada 4, sUtra - 94, 95, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103 [82]

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The forty-first sutra of the first Samavaya, 'Te nan deva......', is also
mentioned in Prajnapana 529, where it is said that the gods who are born in the
Sagar and Lokahita Vimanas, breathe from one side. The forty-second sutra of the
first Samavaya, 'Tesin nan Devanam........', is also mentioned in Prajnapana
530, where it is said that these gods have a desire to eat for a thousand years.
The second sutra of the second Samavaya, 'Duviha rasi pannatta.......', is also
mentioned in Prajnapana 531, where two types of Rasis are mentioned. The
description from the eighth to the twenty-second sutra of the second Samavaya is
also found in Prajnapana 532. The description from the thirteenth to the twenty-
third sutra of the third Samavaya is also found in Prajnapana 533. The
description from the tenth to the seventeenth sutra of the fourth Samavaya is
also found in Prajnapana 534. The subject matter from the fourteenth to the
twenty-first sutra of the fifth Samavaya is also found in Prajnapana 535. The
first sutra of the sixth Samavaya, 'Chh lesao pannattao......', is also
mentioned in Prajnapana 536, where six types of Lesyas are described. The second
sutra of the sixth Samavaya, 'Chh jivanikaya pannatta......', is also mentioned
in Prajnapana 537, where that description is found. The fifth sutra of the sixth
Samavaya, 'Chh chhaumathiya samugghya pannatta......', is also mentioned in
Prajnapana 538, where six types of Chhadmasthik Samudghata are described. The
description from the tenth to the seventeenth sutra of the sixth Samavaya is
also found in Prajnapana 539. The second sutra of the seventh Samavaya, 'Satt
samugghya pannatta......', is also mentioned in Prajnapana 540, where seven
types of Samudghata are mentioned. 529. 530. . 531. 532. 533. 534. 535.
Prajnapana-pad 7, sutra 146 Prajnapana-pad 28, sutra 304 Prajnapana-pad 1, sutra
1 Prajnapana-pad 4, sutra 94, 95, 98, 99, 102, 103; pad 7, sutra 146; pad 28,
sutra 303 Prajnapana-pad 4, sutra 94, 95, 98, 99, 102; pad 7, sutra 146; pad 28,
sutra 306 Prajnapana-pad 4, sutra 94, 95, 98, 102; pad 7, sutra 146; pad 28,
sutra 306 Prajnapana-pad 4, sutra 94, 95, 102, pad 7, sutra 146; pad 28, sutra
306 Prajnapana-pad 17, sutra 214 Prajnapana-pad 1, sutra 12 Prajnapana-pad 36,
sutra 331 Prajnapana-pad 4, sutra 94, 102, 103; pad 7; sutra 146; pad 28, su.
306 Prajnapana-pad 36, sutra 331 536. 537.. 538. 539. 540. [83]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya kA ikatAlIsavAM sUtra-'te NaM devA......' hai
to prajJApanA529 meM bhI sAgara yAvat lokahitavimAnoM meM jo deva utpanna hote
haiM, ve eka pakSa se zvAsocchvAsa lete kahe haiN| prathama samavAya kA
bayAlIsavA~ sUtra-'tesi NaM devANaM........' hai to prajJApanA530 meM una devoM
kI AhAra lene kI icchA eka hajAra varSa se hotI hai| dUsare samavAya kA dUsarA
sUtra- 'duvihA rAsI paNNattA.......' hai to prajJApanA531 meM bhI do rAziyoM kA
ullekha dUsare samavAya ke AThaveM sUtra se lekara bAIsaveM sUtra taka kA
varNana prajJApanA532 meM bhI isI taraha prApta hai| tRtIya samavAya ke
terahaveM sUtra se tevIsaveM sUtra taka kA varNana prajJApanA533 meM bhI isI
taraha saMprApta hai| caturtha samavAya ke dazaveM sUtra se sattarahaveM sUtra
taka kA viSaya prajJApanA534 meM bhI isI taraha upalabdha hotA pA~caveM samavAya
ke caudahaveM sUtra se ikkIsaveM sUtra taka jisa viSaya kA pratipAdana huA hai
vaha prajJApanA535 meM bhI nihArA jA sakatA hai| chaThe samavAya kA pahalA sUtra
-'cha lesAo paNNattAo......' hai to prajJApanA536 meM bhI chaha lezyAoM kA
varNana prApta hai| chaThe samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra -'cha jIvanikAyA
paNNattA......' hai to prajJApanA537 meM bhI vaha varNana upalabdha hotA hai|
chaThe samavAya kA pAMcavAM sUtra -'cha chAumatthiyA samugghAyA paNNattA......'
hai to prajJApanA538 meM bhI chAdmasthika samudghAta ke chaha prakAra batAye
haiN| chaThe samavAya ke dazaveM sUtra se sattarahaveM sUtra taka kA varNana
prajJApanA539 meM bhI prApta hai| sAtaveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra -'satta
samugghAyA paNNattA......' hai to prajJApanA540 meM bhI sAta samudghAta kA
ullekha huaa| 529. 530. . 531. 532. 533. 534. 535. prajJApanA- pada 7, sUtra 146
prajJApanA-pada 28, sUtra 304 prajJApanA-pada 1, sUtra 1 prajJApanA-pada 4,
sUtra 94, 95, 98, 99, 102, 103; pada 7, sUtra 146; pada 28, sUtra 303
prajJApanA-pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 98, 99, 102; pada 7, sUtra 146; pada 28, sUtra
306 prajJApanA-pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 98, 102; pada 7, sUtra 146; pada 28, sUtra
306 prajJApanA-pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 102, pada 7, sUtra 146; pada 28, sUtra 306
prajJApanA-pada 17, sUtra 214 prajJApanA-pada 1, sUtra 12 prajJApanA-pada 36,
sUtra 331 prajJApanA-pada 4, sUtra 94, 102, 103; pada 7; sUtra 146; pada 28, sU.
306 prajJApanA-pada 36, sUtra 331 536. 537.. 538. 539. 540. [83]

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The topics mentioned in the 12th to 22nd sutras of the seventh Samavaya are also
found in the same way in Prajnapana 541. The seventh sutra of the eighth
Samavaya - 'Atthasamaie Kevalisamuggaae...' - also mentions the eight times of
Kevali Samudghat in Prajnapana 542. The topics discussed in the 10th to 17th
sutras of the eighth Samavaya are also presented in the same way in Prajnapana
543. The topics contemplated in the 11th to 19th sutras of the ninth Samavaya
can also be seen in Prajnapana 545. The topics discussed in the 9th to 24th
sutras of the tenth Samavaya are also discussed in Prajnapana. The sixth sutra
of the eleventh Samavaya - 'Hetthimgaevijjanaam...' - also mentions the one
hundred and eleven vimanas of the three lower Graiveyak Devas in Prajnapana 546.
The points of contemplation mentioned in the 8th to 15th sutras of the eleventh
Samavaya are also illuminated in Prajnapana 547. The topics discussed in the
12th to 19th sutras of the twelfth Samavaya are also contemplated in Prajnapana
548. The seventh sutra of the thirteenth Samavaya - 'Gabbanvakkanti Ya...' -
also mentions the thirteen yogas of the five-sense beings in Prajnapana 549. The
aspects discussed in the 9th to 16th sutras of the thirteenth Samavaya are also
prajnapit in Prajnapana 550. The topics highlighted in the 9th to 17th sutras of
the fourteenth Samavaya are also discussed in their own way in Prajnapana 551. -
541. 542. 543. 544. 545. 546. Prajnapana - Pada 4, Su. 94, 95, 102, 103; Pada 7,
Su. 146; Pada 28, Su. 306 Prajnapana - Pada 36, Su. 331 Prajnapana - Pada 4, Su.
94, 95, 102, 103; Pada 7, Su. 146; Pada 28, Su. 304 Prajnapana - Pada 23, Pada
4, Su. 94, 95, 102, 103; Pada 7, Su. 146; Pada 28, Su. 304 Prajnapana - Pada 4,
Su. 94, 95, 96, 100, 102; Pada 7, Su. 146; Pada 28, Su. 306 Prajnapana - Pada 2,
Su. 53 Prajnapana - Pada 4, Su. 94, 95, 102; Pada 7, Su. 146; Pada 28, Su. 306
Prajnapana - Pada 4, Su. 94, 95, 102, Pada 7, Su. 146; Pada 28, Su. 304
Prajnapana - Pada 16, Su. 202 Prajnapana - Pada 4, Su. 94, 95, 102, Pada 7, Su.
146; Pada 28, Su. 306 Prajnapana - Pada 4, Su. 94, 95, 102, Pada 7 Su. 146; Pada
28, Su. 304 547. 548. 549. 550. 551. [84]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtaveM samavAya ke bArahaveM sUtra se lekara bAvIsaveM sUtra taka jina viSayoM
kA ullekha huA hai, ve viSaya prajJApanA541 meM bhI usI taraha prApta haiN|
AThaveM samavAya kA sAtavAM sUtra-'aTThasAmaie kevalIsamugghAe........' hai to
prajJApanA542 meM bhI kevalI samudghAta ke ATha samaya batAye haiN| AThaveM
samavAya ke dazaveM sUtra se lekara sattarahaveM sUtra taka jina viSayoM kI
carcAeM huI haiM, ve prajJApanA543 meM bhI isI taraha pratipAdita haiN| -
navameM samavAya ke gyArahaveM sUtra se lekara unnIsaveM sUtra taka jina viSayoM
para cintana kiyA gayA hai ve, prajJApanA545 meM bhI nihAre jA sakate haiN|
dazaveM samavAya ke navama sUtra se lekara caubIsaveM sUtra taka jina-jina
viSayoM para vicAraNA huyI hai, ve prajJApanA meM bhI carcita haiN| gyArahaveM
samavAya kA chaThA sUtra- 'heTThimagevijjANaM......' hai to prajJApanA546 meM
bhI nIce ke tIna graiveyaka devoM ke eka sau gyAraha vimAna batAye haiN|
gyArahaveM samavAya ke AThaveM sUtra se lekara pandrahaveM sUtra taka jina
cintanabinduoM kA ullekha hai, prajJApanA547 meM bhI una sabhI para prakAza DAlA
gayA hai| bArahaveM samavAya ke bArahaveM sUtra se unnIsaveM sUtra taka jina
viSayoM ke sambandha meM vivecana huA hai, prajJApanA548 meM bhI una saba para
cintana huA hai| terahaveM samavAya kA sAtavA~ sUtra -'gabbhaMvakkaMti
ya.......' hai to prajJApanA549 meM bhI garbhajatiryaJca paMcendriya ke teraha
yoga pratipAdita haiN| terahaveM samavAya ke navameM sUtra se lekara solahaveM
sUtra taka jina pahaluoM para vicAra kiyA gayA hai, ve viSaya prajJApanA550 meM
bhI prajJApita haiN| caudahaveM samavAya ke navameM sUtra se lekara sattarahaveM
samavAya taka jina viSayoM ko ujAgara kiyA gayA hai, ve prajJApanA551 meM bhI
apane DhaMga se vivecita haye haiN| - 541. 542. 543. 544. 545. 546. prajJApanA-
pada 4, sU. 94, 95, 102, 103; pada 7, sU. 146; pada 28, sU. 306 prajJApanA-pada
36, sU. 331 prajJApanA-pada 4, sU. 94, 95, 102, 103; pada 7, sU. 146; pada 28,
sU. 304 prajJApanA-pada 23, pada 4, sU. 94, 95, 102, 103; pada 7,sU. 146; pada
28, sU. 304 prajJApanA-pada 4, sU. 94, 95, 96, 100, 102; pada 7, sU. 146; pada
28, sU. 306 prajJApanA-pada 2, sU. 53 prajJApanA-pada 4, sU. 94, 95, 102; pada
7, sU. 146; pada 28, sU. 306 prajJApanA-pada 4, sU. 94, 95, 102, pada 7, sU.
146; pada28, sU. 304 prajJApanA-pada 16, sU. 202 prajJApanA-pada 4, sU. 94, 95,
102, pada 7, sU. 146; pada 28, sU. 306 prajJApanA-pada 4, sU. 94, 95, 102, pada
7 sU. 146; pada 28, sU. 304 547. 548. 549. 550. 551. [84]

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The aspects that are highlighted from the eighth to the sixteenth sutra of the
fifteenth Samavaya are also in Prajnapana 52. The second sutra of the sixteenth
Samavaya - 'Solas Kasaya Pannatta...' is also discussed in Prajnapana 553, along
with the sixteen Kasayas, starting with Anantanubandhi. The matters that are
highlighted from the eighth to the fifteenth sutra of the sixteenth Samavaya are
also analyzed in Prajnapana 554. The topics that are contemplated from the
eleventh to the twentieth sutra of the seventeenth Samavaya are also highlighted
in Prajnapana 155. The fifth sutra of the eighteenth Samavaya - 'Bamhie Nan
Livie...' is also mentioned in Prajnapana 556, where it is stated that there are
eighteen types of writing in the Brahmi script. The topics that are highlighted
from the ninth to the seventeenth sutra of the eighteenth Samavaya are also
elaborated in Prajnapana 550. The topics that are discussed from the sixth to
the fourteenth sutra of the nineteenth Samavaya are also mentioned in Prajnapana
58. The fourth sutra of the twentieth Samavaya - 'Panayass Nan Devindass...' is
also mentioned in Prajnapana 559, where it is stated that there are twenty
thousand Samanik Devas in the Pranat Kalpendra. The description from the eighth
to the seventeenth sutra of the twentieth Samavaya is also found in Prajnapana
560. The topics that are discussed from the fifth to the fourteenth sutra of the
twenty-first Samavaya are also mentioned in Prajnapana 161. The topics that are
contemplated from the seventh to the sixteenth sutra of the twenty-second
Samavaya are also analyzed in Prajnapana 562. 552. 553. 554. 555. 556. 557. 558.
459. 560. 44. 562. Prajnapana - Pada 4, Sutra 94, 95, 102; Pada 7, Su. 146; Pada
28, Su. 304 Prajnapana - Pada 14, Sutra 188 Prajnapana - Pada 4, Sutra 94, 95,
102 Pada 7 Su. 146; Pada 29, Su. 304 Prajnapana - Pada 4, Sutra 94, 95, 102;
Pada Su. 146; Pada 28, Su. 304 Prajnapana - Pada 1, Sutra 37 Prajnapana - Pada
4, Sutra 94, 95, 102; Pada 7 Su. 146; Pada 28, Su. 304 Prajnapana - Pada 4,
Sutra 94, 95, 102; Pada 7 Su. 146; Pada 28, Su. 304 Prajnapana - Pada 5, Sutra
53 Prajnapana - Pada 4, Sutra 94, 95, 102 Prajnapana - Pada 4, Sutra 94, 95, 102
Prajnapana - Pada 4, Sutra 94, 95, 102 Pada 7 Su. Pada 7 Su. Pada 7 Su. 146;
Pada 28, Su. 304 146; Pada 28, Su. 304 146; Pada 29, Su. 304 [ 85]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ve pandrahaveM samavAya ke AThaveM sUtra se lekara solahaveM sUtra taka jina
pahaluoM para prakAza DAlA gayA hai, prajJApanA 52 meM bhI haiN| solahaveM
samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra - solasa kasAyA paNNattA.......' hai to prajJApanA 553
meM bhI anantAnubandhI Adi solaha kaSAya carcita huye haiM  /  solahaveM
samavAya ke AThaveM sUtra se lekara pandrahaveM sUtra taka jina bAtoM para
prakAza DAlA hai, ve prajJApanA554 meM bhI vizleSita haiN| sattarahaveM samavAya
ke gyArahaveM sUtra se lekara bIsaveM sUtra taka jina viSayoM para cintana-
manana kiyA gayA hai, una viSayoM para prajJApanA 155 meM bhI prakAza DAlA gayA
hai| aThArahaveM samavAya kA pAMcavAM sUtra - 'baMbhIe NaM livIe.......' hai to
prajJApanA 556 meM bhI brAhmI lipi kA lekhana aThAraha prakAra kA batAyA hai|
aThArahaveM samavAya ke nauveM sUtra se lekara sattarahaveM sUtra taka jina
viSayoM ko prakAzita kiyA gayA hai, ve viSaya prajJApanA 550 meM bhI vistAra se
nirUpita haiN| unnIsaveM samavAya ke chaThe sUtra se lekara caudahaveM sUtra
taka jina viSayoM kI carcA kI gaI hai, ve viSaya jJApanA 58 meM bhI Aye haiN|
bIsaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra - 'pANayassa NaM deviMdassa......' hai to
prajJApanA 559 meM bhI prANata kalpendra ke bIsa hajAra sAmAnika deva batAye
haiN| bIsaveM samavAya ke AThaveM sUtra se sattarahaveM sUtra taka jo varNana
hai vaha prajJApanA 560 meM bhI milatA hai  /  ikkIsaveM samavAya meM pAMcaveM
sUtra se lekara caudahaveM sUtra taka jina viSayoM kI carcA hai, ve prajJApanA
161 meM bhI carcita hue haiN| bAvIsaveM samavAya meM sAtaveM sUtra se lekara
solahaveM sUtra taka jina viSayoM para cintana huA hai, una viSayoM para
prajJApanA 562 meM bhI vizleSaNa huA hai| 552. 553. 554. 555. 556. 557. 558.
459. 560. 44. 562. prajJApanA- pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 102; pada 7, sU. 146; pada
28, sU. 304 prajJApanA- pada 14, sUtra 188 prajJApanA- pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 102
pada 7 sU. 146; pada 29, sU. 304 prajJApanA- pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 102; pada sU.
146; pada 28, sU. 304 prajJApanA- pada 1, sUtra 37 prajJApanA- pada 4, sUtra 94,
95, 102; pada 7 sU. 146; pada 28, sU. 304 prajJApanA- pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 102;
pada 7 sU. 146; pada 28, sU. 304 prajJApanA- pada 5, sUtra 53 prajJApanA- pada
4, sUtra 94, 95, 102 prajJApanA- pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 102 prajJApanA- pada 4,
sUtra 94, 95, 102 pada 7 sU. pada 7 sU. pada 7 sU. 146; pada 28, sU. 304 146;
pada 28, sU. 304 146; pada 29, sU. 304 [ 85]

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sentiments that have been formulated from the fifth to the twelfth sutra of
the twenty-third Samavaya are also formulated in the same way in Prajnapana 563.
The thoughts that have been interwoven from the seventh to the fourteenth sutra
of the twenty-fourth Samavaya are also expressed in the same form in Prajnapana
564. The description from the tenth to the seventeenth sutra of the twenty-fifth
Samavaya is also found in the same way in Prajnapana 565. The thought-sutras
from the second to the tenth sutra of the twenty-sixth Samavaya can also be seen
in Prajnapana 566. The thoughts that have been expounded from the seventh to the
fourteenth sutra of the twenty-seventh Samavaya are also found in the same way
in Prajnapana 567. The fourth sutra of the twenty-eighth Samavaya - 'Isaane nam
kappe attaavisaa vimaan-say-sahajssa pannatta' - states that there are twenty-
eight lakh vimanas in the Isana Kalpa, and this is also mentioned in Prajnapana
568. The topics that have been contemplated upon from the sixth to the
thirteenth sutra of the twenty-eighth Samavaya, from the tenth to the
seventeenth sutra of the twenty-ninth Samavaya, from the eighth to the fifteenth
sutra of the thirtieth Samavaya, from the sixth to the thirteenth sutra of the
thirty-first Samavaya, from the seventh to the thirteenth sutra of the thirty-
second Samavaya, and from the fifth to the thirteenth sutra of the thirty-third
Samavaya, are also well discussed in Prajnapana 569. The fifth sutra of the
thirty-fourth Samavaya - 'Camarassa nam asurindassa........' - states that there
are thirty-four lakh bhavanaavasa of Chamendra, and this is also mentioned in
Prajnapana 570. The fourth sutra of the thirty-ninth Samavaya -
'Naanavaranijjassa......' - states that there are thirty-nine Uttar Karma-
prakritis of the four main Karma-prakritis - Gnanavaraneya, Mohaniya, Gotra and
Aayu - and this is also mentioned in Prajnapana 571. The fourth sutra of the
fortieth Samavaya - 'Bhuyaanandassa nam naagakumaarassa naagaranno.....' -
states that there are forty lakh bhavanaavasa of Bhutananda Naagakumaarendra,
and this is also mentioned in Prajnapana 572. The eighth sutra of the fortieth
Samavaya - 'Mahasuukke kappe......' - states that there are forty thousand
vimanaavasa in the Mahashukra Kalpa, and this is also mentioned in Prajnapana
573. 563. Prajnapana-pad 4, sutra 94, 95, 102; pad 7, sutra 146; pad 28, sutra
306 564. Prajnapana-pad 4, sutra 94, 95, 102; pad 7, sutra 146; pad 28, sutra
306 565. Prajnapana-pad 4, sutra 94, 95, 102; pad 7, sutra 146; pad 28, sutra
306 566. Prajnapana-pad 4, sutra 94, 95, 102; pad 7, sutra 146; pad 28, sutra
306 567. Prajnapana-pad 4, sutra 94, .95, 102; pad 7, sutra 146; pad 28, sutra
306 568. Prajnapana-pad 2, sutra 53 .. 569. Prajnapana-pad 4, sutra 94, 95, 102,
pad 7, sutra 146; pad 28, sutra 306 570. Prajnapana-pad 2, sutra 46 571.
Prajnapana-pad 23, sutra 293 572. Prajnapana-pad 2, sutra 132 573. Prajnapana-
pad 2, sutra 132 [86]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 teIsaveM samavAya ke pAMcaveM sUtra se lekara bArahaveM sUtra taka jina bhAvoM
kI prarUpaNA huI hai ve bhAva prajJApanA563 meM bhI isI taraha prarUpita haiN|
caubIsaveM samavAya ke sAtaveM sUtra se lekara caudahaveM sUtra taka jina
vicAroM ko gumphita kiyA gayA hai, ve prajJApanA564 meM bhI usI rUpa meM vyakta
hue haiN| paccIsaveM samavAya ke dazaveM sUtra se lekara sattarahaveM sUtra taka
jo varNana hai vaha prajJApanA565 meM bhI usI taraha milatA hai| chabbIsaveM
samavAya ke dUsare sUtra se dazave sUtra taka jo vicArasUtra Aye haiM ve
prajJApanA566 meM bhI dekhe ja sakate haiN| sattAIsaveM samavAya ke sAtaveM
sUtra se lekara caudahaveM sUtra taka jina vicAroM ko nirUpita kiyA hai ve
prajJApanA567 meM bhI usI taraha milate haiN| aTThAIsaveM samavAya kA cauthA
sUtra-'IsANe NaM kappe aTThAvIsaM vimANa-saya-sahajssA paNNattA' hai to
prajJApanA568 meM bhI IzAna kalpa ke aThAvIsa lAkha vimAna batAye haiN|
aTThAIsaveM samavAya ke chaThe sUtra se lekara terahaveM sUtra taka, unatIsaveM
samavAya ke dasaveM sUtra se lekara sattarahaveM sUtra taka, tIsaveM samavAya ke
AThaveM sUtra se lekara pandrahaveM sUtra taka, ekatIsaveM samavAya ke chaThe
sUtra se lekara terahaveM sUtra taka, battIsaveM samavAya ke sAtaveM sUtra se
lekara terahaveM sUtra taka, tetIsaveM samavAya ke pAMcaveM sUtra se lekara
terahaveM sUtra taka jina viSayoM para cintana huA hai, ve viSaya prajJApanA569
meM bhI acchI taraha se carcita kiye gaye haiN| cautIsaveM samavAya kA pAMcavA~
sUtra-'camarassa NaM asuriMdassa........' hai to prajJApanA570 meM bhI
camarendra ke cautIsa lAkha bhavanAvAsa batAye haiN| unacAlIsaveM samavAya kA
cauthA sUtra - 'nANAvaraNijjassa......' hai to prajJApanA571 meM bhI
jJAnAvaraNIya, mohanIya, gotra aura Ayu-ina cAra mUla karma prakRtiyoM kI
unacAlIsa uttara karmaprakRtiyA~ batAI haiN| cAlIsaveM samavAya kA cauthA
sUtra-'bhUyANaMdassa NaM nAgakumArassa nAgaraNNo.....' hai to prajJApanA572 meM
bhI bhUtAnanda nAgakumArendra ke cAlIsa lAkha bhavanAvAsa batAye haiN| cAlIsaveM
samavAya kA AThavAM sUtra-'mahAsukke kappe......' hai to prajJApanA573 meM bhI
mahAzukra kalpa meM cAlIsa hajAra vimAnAvAsa kA varNana hai| 563. prajJApanA-
pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 102; pada 7, sUtra 146; pada 28, sUtra 306 564.
prajJApanA-pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 102; pada 7, sUtra 146; pada 28, sUtra 306 565.
prajJApanA-pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 102; pada 7, sUtra 146; pada 28, sUtra 306 566.
prajJApanA-pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 102; pada 7, sUtra 146; pada 28, sUtra 306 567.
prajJApanA-pada 4, sUtra 94, .95, 102; pada 7, sUtra 146; pada 28, sUtra 306
568. prajJApanA-pada 2, sUtra 53 .. 569. prajJApanA-pada 4, sUtra 94, 95, 102,
pada 7, sUtra 146; pada 28, sUtra 306 570. prajJApanA-pada 2, sUtra 46 571.
prajJApanA-pada23, sUtra 293 572. prajJApanA-pada 2, sUtra 132 573. prajJApanA-
pada 2, sUtra 132 [86]

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The 42nd Samavaya's fifth Sutra - 'Sammuchhim Bhuya Parisappanam...' is also
mentioned in Prajnapana 174, stating that the excellent state of Sammuchhim
Bhuya Parisarp lasts for 42,000 years.  The 42nd Samavaya's sixth Sutra -
'Namakamme Bayali Savihe Panatte...' is also mentioned in Prajnapana 175,
stating that there are 42 types of Namakarma.  The 45th Samavaya's fourth Sutra
- 'Isipdharanam Pudhvi Evam Chev...' is also mentioned in Prajnapana 576,
describing the dimensions and circumference of the Earth with a slight
inclination towards the east.  The 46th Samavaya's third Sutra - 'Pabhanjanassam
Naukumariendass...' is also mentioned in Prajnapana 577, stating that there are
46 lakh Bhavanavasa for Vayukumara Indra Prabhanjan.  The 50th Samavaya's third
Sutra - 'Teindiyanam Ukkosenam...' is also mentioned in Prajnapana 578, stating
that the excellent state of the three Indriyas lasts for 50 days and nights.
The 50th Samavaya's fifth Sutra - 'Lantae Kaspe Pannaasam...' is also mentioned
in Prajnapana 579, stating that there are 50,000 Vimanas in the Lantak Kalpa.
The 51st Samavaya's fifth Sutra - 'Dansanavaran Namaanam...' is also mentioned
in Prajnapana 580, stating the same. The 52nd Samavaya's fourth Sutra -
'Nanavaraninjass, Namass...' is also mentioned in Prajnapana 581, stating that
there are 52 Uttar Prakritis for the three main Prakritis of Gnanavaran, Nama
and Antaraya.  The 52nd Samavaya's fifth Sutra - 'Sohamm Sanakumar...' is also
mentioned in Prajnapana 82, stating that there are 52 lakh Vimanas in the three
Devalokas of Saudharma, Sanatkumar and Mahendra.  The 53rd Samavaya's fourth
Sutra - 'Sammuchhim Urparisappanam...' is also mentioned in Prajnapana 583,
stating that the excellent state of Sammuchhim Urparisarp lasts for 53,000
years.  The 55th Samavaya's fifth Sutra - 'Padam Vishvasu Dosu...' is also
mentioned in Prajnapana, stating that there are 55 lakh Narakovas in the first
and second Earths, 184.  The 55th Samavaya's sixth Sutra - 'Dansanavaranijja -
Namauyanam...' is also mentioned in Prajnapana 585, stating that there are 55
Uttar Prakritis for the three main Prakritis of Darshanavaran, Nama and Ayu.
574. Prajnapana - Pad 4. 575. Prajnapana - Pad 13, Sutra 293 576. Prajnapana -
Pad 2 577. Prajnapana - Pad 2, Sutra 132 578. Prajnapana - Pad 4 Sutra 97 579.
Prajnapana - Pad 2, Sutra 53 580. Prajnapana - Pad 23, Sutra 293 581. Prajnapana
- Pad 23, Sutra 293 582. Prajnapana - Pad 2, Sutra 43 Prajnapana - Pad 4, Sutra
17 583. 584. Prajnapana - Pad 2, Sutra 81 585. Prajnapana - Pad 23, Sutra 293
[87]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viyAlIsaveM samavAya kA pAMcavA~ sUtra - 'saMmucchima -
bhuyaparisappANaM......' hai to prajJApanA 174 meM bhI sammUrchima
bhujaparisarpa kI utkRSTa sthiti biyAlIsa hajAra varSa kI batAI hai| biyAlIsaveM
samavAya kA chaThA sUtra - 'nAmakamme bAyAlIsavihe paNNatte..... ' hai to
prajJApanA 175 meM bhI nAmakarma kI biyAlIsa prakRtiyAM batAI haiM  /  -
paiMtAlIsaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra 'IsipadhArA NaM puDhavI evaM ceva.....'
hai to prajJApanA576 meM bhI ISat - prAgbhArA pRthvI ke AyAma - viSkambha kA
varNana hai| chiyAlIsaveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra - 'pabhaMjaNassa NaM
vAukumAriMdassa..... ' hai to prajJApanA 577 meM bhI vAyukumArendra prabhaMjana
ke chiyAlIsa lAkha bhavanAvAsa batAye haiN| unapacAsaveM samavAya kA tRtIya
sUtra - 'teiMdiyANaM ukkoseNaM.....' hai to prajJApanA 578 meM bhI trIndriyoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti unapacAsa ahorAtri kI batAI hai| pacAsaveM samavAya kA pAMcavAM
sUtra - 'laMtae kaSpe pannAsaM....' hai to prajJApanA 579 meM bhI lAMtaka kalpa
meM pacAsa hajAra vimAna batAye haiN| ekAvanaveM samavAya kA pAMcavAM sUtra
'daMsaNAvaraNa nAmANaM.....' hai to prajJApanA 580 meM bhI aisA hI kathana hai|
bAvanaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra - 'nANAvaraNiNjassa, nAmassa.....' hai to
prajJApanA 581 meM bhI jJAnAvaraNIya, nAma aura antarAya ina tIna mUla
prakRtiyoM kI bAvana uttara prakRtiyA~ batAI haiN| 'bAvanaveM samavAya kA
pAMcavA~ sUtra sohamma saNakumAra....' hai to prajJApanA 82 meM bhI saudharma
sanatkumAra aura mAhendra ina tIna devalokoM meM bAvana lAkha vimAnAvAsa kahe
haiN| trepanaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra - sammucchima uraparisappANaM......'
hai to prajJApanA 583 meM bhI sammUrchima uraparisarpa kI utkRSTa sthiti trepana
hajAra varSa kI kahI hai| - pacapanaveM samavAya kA pAMcavAM sUtra - padama
vizvAsu dosu...... ' hai to prajJApanA meM bhI prathama aura dvitIya 184 ina do
pRthviyoM meM pacapana lAkha nArakovAsa batAye haiN| pacapanaveM samavAya kA
chaThA sUtra - 'daMsaNAvaraNijja - nAmAuyANaM.....' hai to prajJApanA 585 meM
bhI darzanAvaraNIya, nAma aura Ayu ina tIna mUla prakRtiyoM kI pacapana uttara
prakRtiyA~ haiN| 574. prajJApanA- pada 4. 575. prajJApanA- pada 13, sUtra 293
576. prajJApanA- pada 2 577. prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 132 578. prajJApanA- pada
4 sUtra 97 579. prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 53 580. prajJApanA- pada 23, sUtra 293
581. prajJApanA- pada 23, sUtra 293 582. prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 43
prajJApanA- pada 4, sUtra 17 583. 584. prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 81 585.
prajJApanA- pada 23, sUtra 293 [87]

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first sutra of the 48th Samavay - 'Padham-Dochch-Panchamasu...' - also
mentions in Prajnapana 586 that there are 48 lakh Naraka-vasas in the first,
second and fifth of these three earths.  The second sutra of the 48th Samavay -
'Nanavaranijjass Vevaniya...' - also mentions in Prajnapana that there are 48
Uttar-Prakritis of the five root Karma-Prakritis - Jnana-avaraneya, Vedaniya,
Ayu, Nama and Antaraya.  The fourth sutra of the 60th Samavay - 'Baliss Nan
Bairoyaniindass...' - also mentions in Prajnapana 588 that there are 60 thousand
Samanik Devas of Balindra.  The fifth sutra of the 60th Samavay - 'Bhambass Nan
Devindass...' - also mentions in Prajnapana 589 that there are 60 thousand
Samanik Devas of Brahma Devendra.  The sixth sutra of the 60th Samavay -
'Sohammisane Doss...' - also mentions in Prajnapana 590 that there are 6 lakh
Vimanas in the two Kalpas - Saudharma and Ishana.  The fourth sutra of the 62nd
Samavay - 'Sohammisane Kappe...' - also mentions in Prajnapana 591 that there
are 62 Vimanas in each direction and in the first Avali of the first Prastut of
the Saudharma and Ishana Kalpas.  The fifth sutra of the 62nd Samavay - 'Savve
Vemanianam Basatin...' - also mentions in Prajnapana 592 that there are 62
Vimanas in the Prastut of all Vaimanik Devas.  The second sutra of the 64th
Samavay - 'Chausatin Asurkumaranam...' - also mentions in Prajnapana 593 that
there are 64 lakh Asura-kumara-vasas.  The first sutra of the 72nd Samavay -
'Bavatari Suvanakumara-vasa...' - also mentions in Prajnapana 594 that there are
72 lakh Suvarna-kumara-vasas.  The eighth sutra of the 72nd Samavay -
'Sammuchhim-Khayahar...' - also mentions in Prajnapana 595 that the best state
of Samuchhim Khayahar Tiryanch Panchendriya is 72 thousand years.  The fourth
sutra of the 74th Samavay - 'Chauthavajjasu Chasu...' - also mentions in
Prajnapana 596 that there are 74 lakh Naraka-vasas in the six earths except the
fourth earth.  The first sutra of the 76th Samavay - 'Chhavattari Vijjukumara-
vasa...' - also mentions in Prajnapana 597 that there are 76 lakh Vidyut-kumara-
vasas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThAvanaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra-'paDhama-docca-paMcamAsu.....' hai to
prajJApanA586 meM bhI pahalI, dUsarI aura pAMcavIM ina tIna pRthviyoM meM
aThAvana lAkha nArakAvAsa batAe haiN| aThAvanaveM samavAya kA dUsarA
sUtra-'nANAvaraNiAjjassa veyaNiya......' hai to prajJApanA meM jJAnAvaraNIya,
vedanIya, Ayu, nAma aura antarAya ina pA~ca mUla karmaprakRtiyoM kI aThAvana
uttara prakRtiyAM kahI haiN| sAThaveM samavAya kA caturtha sUtra - 'balissa NaM
bairoyaNiMdassa.....' hai to prajJApanA588 meM bhI balIndra ke sATha hajAra
sAmAnika deva batAye haiN| sAThaveM samavAya kA pAMcavA~ sUtra - 'baMbhassa NaM
deviMdassa........' hai to prajJApanA589 meM bhI brahma devendra ke sATha hajAra
sAmAnika deva batAye haiN| sAThaveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra -'sohammIsANesu
dosu........' hai to prajJApanA590 meM bhI saudharma aura IzAna ina do kalpoM
meM sATha lAkha vimAnAvAsa kahe haiN| bAsaThaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra
-'sohammIsANesu kappesu......' hai to prajJApanA591 meM bhI saudharma aura IzAna
kalpa ke prathama prastaTa kI prathama AvalikA evaM pratyeka dizA meM bAsaTha-
bAsaTha vimAna haiN| bAsaThaveM samavAya kA pAMcavA~ sUtra-'savve vemANiyANaM
bAsaTiM....' hai to prajJApanA592 meM bhI sarva vaimAnika devoM ke bAsaTha
vimAna prastaTa kathita haiN| causaThaveM samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra-'causaTiMDha
asurakumArANaM.....' hai to prajJApanA593 meM bhI causaTha lAkha asurakumArAvAsa
batAye haiN| bahattaraveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra-'bAvatari
suvanakumArAvAsA.......' hai to prajJApamA594 meM bhI suvarNakumArAvAsa
bahattara lAkha batAye haiN| bahattaraveM samavAya kA AThavAM sUtra
-'sammucchima-khayahara......' hai to prajJApanA595 meM bhI samUcchima khecara
tiryaJca paMcendriya kI utkRSTa sthiti bahattara hajAra varSa kI batAyI hai|
cauhattaraveM samavAya kA caturtha sUtra-'cautthavajjAsu chasu.....' hai to
prajJApanA596 meM bhI cauthI pRthvI ko chor3akara zeSa chaha pRthviyoM meM
cauhattara lAkha nArakAvAsa kahe haiN| chihattaraveM samavAya kA pahalA
sUtra-'chAvattari vijjukumArAvAsa.....' hai to prajJApanA597 meM bhI vidyut
kumArAvAsa chihattara lAkha batAye haiN| 586. prajJApanA pada 2, sUtra 81 587.
prajJApanA pada 23, sUtra 81 588. prajJApanA pada 2, sUtra 31 589. prajJApanA
pada 2, sUtra 53 prajJApanA pada 2, sUtra 33 591. prajJApanA pada 2, sUtra 47
592. prajJApanA pada 2 593. prajJApanA pada 2, sUtra 47 594. prajJApanA pada 2,
sUtra 46 595. prajJApanA pada 4, sUtra 98 596. prajJApanA pada 2 597. prajJApanA
pada 2, sUtra 46 590. [88]

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second sutra of the seventy-seventh Samavaya and the Deeva-Disa Udheena...
is also mentioned in Prajnapana 598, where it is stated that there are seventy-
six lakh bhavanas of the Dvipakumares, Disakumares, etc. 1 The sixth sutra of
the eightieth Samavaya, 'Isaanas Devindas... ', is also mentioned in Prajnapana
199, where it is stated that there are eighty thousand Samanik Devas of Isan
Devendra. The sixth sutra of the eighty-fourth Samavaya, 'Savvevi Nam Bahiraya
Mandara... ', is also mentioned in Prajnapana 600, where the same description is
given. The twelfth sutra of the eighty-fourth Samavaya, 'Chouraasi Pai Nag... ',
is also mentioned in Prajnapana 601, where the same statement is given. The
second sutra of the ninety-sixth Samavaya, 'Vayukumaaranam Chhannau... ', is
also mentioned in Prajnapana 602, where it is stated that there are ninety-six
lakh bhavanas of the Vayukumares. The seventh sutra of the ninety-ninth
Samavaya, 'Dakkhiao Nam Katthao... ', is also mentioned in Prajnapana 103, where
it is stated that the distance between the upper charamanta of the bhoumey
viharas below the Anjanakanda of the Ratnapraba earth and the lower charamanta
is ninety-nine hundred yojanas. The second sutra of the one hundred and fiftieth
Samavaya, 'Arane Kappe... ', is also mentioned in Prajnapana 04, where it is
stated that there are one hundred and fifty vimanas in the Aran Kalpa. The
second sutra of the two hundred and fiftieth Samavaya, 'Asurkumaaranam... ', is
also mentioned in Prajnapana 605, where it is stated that the prasadas of the
Asurkumares are two hundred and fifty yojanas high. The fourth sutra of the four
hundredth Samavaya, 'Anayapanesu... ', is also mentioned in Prajnapana 606,
where it is stated that there are four hundred vimanas in the two kalpas of Anat
and Pranat. The second sutra of the eight hundredth Samavaya, 'Imise Nam
Rayanppahae... ', is also mentioned in Prajnapana 607, where it is stated that
the sun moves eight hundred yojanas above the extremely beautiful bhubhaga of
the Ratnapraba earth. The first sutra of the six thousandth Samavaya, 'Sahassare
Nam Kappe... ', is also mentioned in Prajnapana 108, where it is stated that
there are six thousand vimanas in the Sahasrar Kalpa. The first sutra of the
eight lakhth Samavaya, 'Mahinde Nam Kappe... ', is also mentioned in Prajnapana
609, where it is stated that there are eight lakh vimanas in the Mahendra Kalpa.
598. 599. 600. 601. 602. 603. 604. 605. 606. 607. 608. 609. Prajnapana- Pada 2,
Sutra 46 Prajnapana- Pada 2, Sutra 53 Prajnapana- Pada 2, Sutra 52 Prajnapana-
Pada 2, Sutra 46 Prajnapana- Pada 2, Sutra 37 Prajnapana- Pada 2, Sutra 28
Prajnapana- Pada 2, Sutra 53 Prajnapana- Pada 2, Sutra 28 Prajnapana- Pada 2,
Sutra 53 Prajnapana- Pada 2, Sutra 47 Prajnapana- Pada 2, Sutra 53 Prajnapana-
Pada 2, Sutra 53 [89] 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chihattarahaveM samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra evaM dIva - disA udahINaM..... hai to
prajJApanA598 meM bhI dvIpakumAra dizAkumAra Adi ke chihattara lAkha bhavana
batAye haiM  /  1 assIveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra 'IsANassa deviMdassa.......
hai to prajJApanA 199 meM bhI IzAna devendra ke assI hajAra sAmAnika deva batAye
haiM  /  caurAsIveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra - 'savvevi NaM bAhirayA maMdarA
....... ' hai to prajJApanA 600 meM bhI aisA hI varNana hai| caurAsIveM samavAya
kA bArahavA~ sUtra - 'corAsIi painnaga........ ' hai to prajJApanA 601 meM bhI
aisA hI kathana hai| chiyAnaveMve samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra - 'vAyukumArANaM
chaNNau ......' hai to prajJApanA 602 meM bhI vAyukumAra ke chiyAnaveM lAkha
bhavana batAye haiN| ninyAnaveMve samavAya kA sAtavAM sUtra - 'dakkhiAo NaM
kaTThAo......' hai to prajJApanA 103 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke aMjanakANDa
ke nIce ke caramAnta se vyantaroM ke bhaumeya vihAroM ke UparI caramAnta kA
avyavahita antara ninyAnave sau yojana kA hai| Der3ha sauveM samavAya kA dvitIya
sUtra - AraNe kappe ...... hai to prajJApanA04 meM bhI AraNa kalpa ke Der3ha sau
vimAna batAye haiM  /  DhAIsauveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra -
'asurakumArANaM....... ' hai to prajJApanA 605 meM bhI asurakumAroM ke prAsAda
DhAI sau yojana UMce batAye haiM  /  cArasauveM samavAya kA caturtha sUtra -
'ANayapANaesu..... ' hai to prajJApanA 606 meM bhI Anata aura prANata ina do
kalpoM meM cAra sau vimAna batAye haiN| AThasauveM samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra -
'imIse NaM rayaNappahAe.......' hai to prajJApanA 607 meM bhI ratnaprabhA pRthvI
ke ati sama ramaNIya bhUbhAga se ATha sau yojana ke Upara sUrya gati karatA kahA
gayA hai| chahahajAraveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra - 'sahassAre NaM
kappe.......' hai to prajJApanA 108 meM bhI sahasrAra kalpa meM chaha hajAra
vimAna batAye haiN| AThalAkhaveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra - 'mAhiMde NaM kappe
.......' hai to prajJApanA 609 meM bhI mAhendra kalpa meM ATha lAkha vimAna
batAye haiM  /  598. 599. 600. 601. 602. 603. 604. 605. 606. 607. 608. 609.
prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 46 prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 53 prajJApanA- pada 2,
sUtra 52 prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 46 prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 37 prajJApanA-
pada 2, sUtra 28 prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 53 prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 28
prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 53 prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 47 prajJApanA- pada 2,
sUtra 53 prajJApanA- pada 2, sUtra 53 [89] 1

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  In this way, many
subjects related to Samavayanga are expounded in the Pragyapana. Many sutras are
almost identical to the sutras of Samavayanga. The subjects that are indicated
in Samavayanga have been elaborated upon in detail by Shyamacharya in the
Pragyapana. Due to the high degree of similarity, it appears to be considered as
an upanga (subsidiary text) of Samavayanga. Samavayanga and Jambudvipaprajnapti
Jambudvipaprajnapti is an important Agama (canonical text) of ancient Jain
geography. In this Agama, the seeds of the Jain cosmology are scattered here and
there. The pre-historical life of Lord Rishabhadeva is also found in it.  Many
subjects can be easily compared with this present Agama.  The fourth sutra of
the eighth Samavaya is 'Jambu nam sudamsana attha....' and Jambudvipaprajnapti
610 also mentions the height of the Sudarshana tree of Jambudvipa as eight
yojanas.  The fifth sutra of the eighth Samavaya is 'Kudassa salamalissa
nam....' and Jambudvipaprajnapti 611 also states that the Garuda-abode
Kutashalmalika tree is eight yojanas high.  The sixth sutra of the eighth
Samavaya is 'Jambudvipaprajnapti nam......' and Jambudvipaprajnapti 612 also
states that the Jagati (platform) of Jambudvipa is eight yojanas high.  The
ninth sutra of the ninth Samavaya is 'Vijayassa nam darassa.....' and
Jambudvipaprajnapti 613 also mentions that there are nine Bhaumanagaras
(terrestrial cities) on each side of the Vijaya gate.  The third sutra of the
tenth Samavaya is 'Mandarena pavvate.......' and Jambudvipaprajnapti 614 also
states that the base diameter of Mount Meru is ten thousand yojanas.  The eighth
sutra of the tenth Samavaya is 'Akambhumianam.....' and Jambudvipaprajnapti 615
also describes the Kalpavrikshas (wish-fulfilling trees) for the use of the
Akarmabhumi (non-karmic) humans.  The second sutra of the eleventh Samavaya is
'Logantao ikkarasaehi......' and Jambudvipaprajnapti 616 also states that the
Jyotishkachakra (celestial sphere) begins at a distance of eleven hundred and
eleven yojanas from the end of the world.  The third sutra of the eleventh
Samavaya is 'Jambuvdive dive Mandarassa.....' and Jambudvipaprajnapti 617 also
states that the Jyotishkachakra (celestial sphere) begins at a distance of
eleven hundred and eleven yojanas from Mount Meru in Jambudvipa.  The seventh
sutra of the eleventh Samavaya is 'Mandarena pavvate.....' and
Jambudvipaprajnapti 618 also states that the diameter of the summit of Mount
Meru is eleven parts less than the diameter of its base.  The fourth sutra of
the twelfth Samavaya is 'Vijaya nam rayadhani......' and Jambudvipaprajnapti 619
also states that the dimension (diameter) of the capital city Vijaya is twelve
lakh yojanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isa taraha prajJApanA meM samavAyAMga ke aneka viSaya pratipAdita haiN| kitane
hI sUtra to samavAyAMgagata sUtroM se prAyaH milate haiN| samavAyAMga meM jina
viSayoM ke saMketa kiye gaye haiM, una viSayoM ko zyAmAcArya ne prajJApanA meM
vistAra se nirUpita kiyA hai| atyadhika sAmya hone ke kAraNa hI ise samavAyAMga
kA upAMga mAnA gayA lagatA hai| samavAyAMga aura jambUdvIpaprajJapti _
jambUdvIpaprajJapti prAcIna jaina bhUgola kA mahattvapUrNa Agama hai| isa Agama
meM jaina dRSTi se sRSTividyA ke bIja yatra-tatra bikhare par3e haiN| bhagavAn
RSabhadeva kA prAg aitihAsika jIvana bhI isameM milatA hai| prastuta Agama ke
sAtha aneka viSayoM kI tulanA sahaja rUpa se isake sAtha kI jA sakatI hai|
AThaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra-'jaMbU NaM sudaMsaNA aTTha.....' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti610 meM bhI jambUdvIpa ke sudarzana vRkSa kI ATha yojana kI
UMcAI kahI hai| AThaveM samavAya kA pAMcavA sUtra- 'kUDassa sAlamalissa NaM....'
hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti:11 meM bhI garuDAvAsa kUTazalmalI vRkSa ATha yojana
ke UMce batAye haiN| AThaveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra-jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti
NaM......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti612 meM bhI jambUdvIpa kI jagatI ATha
yojana U~cI batAyI hai| navameM samavAya kA navamA sUtra- 'vijayassa NaM
dArassa.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti613 meM bhI vijaya dvAra ke pratyeka
pArzva bhAga meM nau-nau bhauma nagara kahe haiN| dazaveM samavAya kA tRtIya
sUtra -'maMdare NaM pavvae.......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti614 meM bhI meru
parvata ke mUla kA viSkambha daza hajAra yojana kA batAyA hai| dazaveM samavAya
kA AThavA~ sUtra-'akambhUmiyANaM.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti615 meM bhI
akarmabhUmija manuSyoM ke upayoga ke lie kalpavRkSoM kA varNana hai| gyArahaveM
samavAya kA dvitIya sUtra-'logaMtAo ikkArasaehiM......' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti616 meM bhI lokAnta se avyabahita gyAraha sau gyAraha yojana
dUrI para jyotiSkacakra prArambha hotA hai| gyArahaveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra
-'jambuddIve dIve maMdarassa.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti617 meM bhI lokAnta
se avyavahita gyAraha sau gyAraha yojana dUrI para jyotiSkacakra prArambha hotA
hai| gyArahaveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra-'jambuddIve dIve maMdarassa......' hai
to jambadvIpaprajJapti617 meM bhI jambUdvIpa meM meru parvata se avyavahita
gyAraha sau gyAraha yojana kI dUrI para jyotiSkacakra prArambha hotA hai|
gyArahaveM samavAya kA sAtavAM sUtra-'maMdare NaM pavvae.....' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti618 meM bhI meru parvata ke pRthvItala ke viSkambha se
zikhara tala kA viSkambha U~cAI kI apekSA gyAraha bhAga hIna hai| bArahaveM
samavAya kA caturtha sUtra-'vijayA NaM rAyahANI......' hai to jambUdvIpa
prajJapti619 meM bhI vijayA rAjadhAnI kA AyAma-viSkambha bAraha lAkha yojana kA
batAyA hai| 610. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSaskAra 4, sU. 90 619.
jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSaskAra 1, sU. 8 jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSaskAra 4, sU.
100 612. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSaskAra 1, sU. 4 613. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-
vakSaskAra 1, sU. 4 614. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSaskAra 4, sU. 103 615.
jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSaskAra 2, sU. 130 616. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSaskAra 7,
sU. 164 617. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSaskAra 7, sU. 164 618. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-
vakSaskAra 1, sU. 103 [90]

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth sutra of the twelfth Samavaya - 'Mandarassa nam pavvayassa.....' -
also states in Jambudvipaprajnapti:20 that the diameter of the base of the Meru
mountain's peak is twelve yojanas. The seventh sutra of the twelfth Samavaya -
'Jambudīvassa nam dīvassa.....' - also states in Jambudvipaprajnapti:21 that the
diameter of the base of the Jambudvipa's vedika is twelve yojanas. The eighth
sutra of the thirteenth Samavaya - 'Sūramandalaṁ jojaneṇaṁ....' - also states in
Jambudvipaprajnapti:22 that the size of the sun's disc is thirteen parts less
than sixty-one parts of a yojana. The sixth sutra of the fourteenth Samavaya -
'Bharaheravayāo naṁ jīvāo.......' - also states in Jambudvipaprajnapti:23 that
the length of the jiva of Bharat and Airavata is fourteen thousand four hundred
seventy-seven, six parts out of nineteen parts of a yojana. The seventh sutra of
the fourteenth Samavaya - 'Egamegassa naṁ ranno......' - also states in
Jambudvipaprajnapti:24 that each Chakravarti has fourteen jewels. The eighth
sutra of the fourteenth Samavaya - 'Jambudīve naṁ dīve.......' - also states in
Jambudvipaprajnapti:25 that fourteen large rivers, including Ganga, Sindhu,
Rohita, Rohitaansha, etc., flow from east to west and meet the salt sea. The
third sutra of the sixteenth Samavaya - 'Mandarassa naṁ pavvayassa.....' - also
states in Jambudvipaprajnapti:26 that the Meru mountain has sixteen names. The
fifth sutra of the eighteenth Samavaya - 'Bamhiye naṁ livīe.....' - also states
in Jambudvipaprajnapti:27 that there are eighteen types of Brahmi script. The
second sutra of the nineteenth Samavaya - 'Jambudīve naṁ dīve sūriā.......' -
also states in Jambudvipaprajnapti:28 that the sun in Jambudvipa reaches a
height and depth of nineteen hundred yojanas. The seventh sutra of the twentieth
Samavaya - 'Ussappini-Osappinimandale......' - also states in
Jambudvipaprajnapti:29 that the Kalachakra is twenty koṭakoṭi sāgaropam. The
third sutra of the twenty-first Samavaya - 'Ekamekkāe naṁ Osappiniye......' -
also states in Jambudvipaprajnapti:30 that each Avasarpini has a fifth Dushama
and a sixth Dushama-Dushama of twenty-one thousand years each.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahaveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra-'maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa.....' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti:20 meM bhI meru parvata kI cUlikA ke mUla kA viSkambha
bAraha yojana batAyA hai| bArahaveM samavAya kA sAtavA~ sUtra-'jambUdIvassa NaM
dIvassa.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti:21 meM bhI jambUdvIpa kI vedikA ke mUla
kA viSkambha bAraha yojana kA batAyA hai| terahaveM samavAya kA AThavA~
sUtra-'sUramaMDalaM joyaNeNaM....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti622 meM bhI eka
yojana ke ikasaTha bhAgoM meM se teraha bhAga kama karane para jitanA rahe utanA
sUryamaMDala hai| caudahaveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra-bharaheravayAo NaM
jIvAo.......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti623 meM bhI bharata aura airavata kI
jIvA kA AyAma caudaha hajAra cAra sau ikahattara, eka yojana ke unnIsa bhAgoM
meM se chaha bhAga kA kahA hai| _ caudahaveM samavAya kA sAtavA~
sUtra-'egamegassa NaM ranno......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti:24 meM pratyeka
cakravartI ke caudaha ratna batAye haiN| caudahaveM samavAya kA AThavAM
sUtra-'jaMbuddIve NaM dIve.......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti625 meM bhI kahA
hai ki gaMgA, sindhu, rohitA, rohitAMzA Adi caudaha moTI nadiyAM pUrva pazcima
se lavaNasamudra meM milatI hai| solahaveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra- 'maMdarassa
NaM pavvayassa.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti626 meM bhI meru parvata ke
solaha nAma batAye haiN| aThArahaveM samavAya kA pAMcavAM sUtra 'baMbhIe NaM
livIe.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti527 meM bhI brAhmI lipi ke aThAraha
prakAra batAye haiN| unnIsaveM samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra- 'jambUddIve NaM dIve
sUriA.......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti628 meM 'jambUdvIpa meM sUrya UMce tathA
nIce unnIsa sau yojana tApa pahuMcAte haiN|' bIsaveM samavAya kA sAtavAM
sUtra-'ussappiNi-osappiNimaMDale......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti629 meM bhI
kAlacakra ko bIsa koTAkoTI sAgaropama kA batAyA hai| ikkIsaveM samavAya kA
tIsarA sUtra-'ekamekkAe NaM osappiNIe......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti630 meM
bhI pratyeka avasarpiNI kA pAMcavA~ duSamA aura chaThA duSama-duSamA ArA ikkIsa-
ikkIsa hajAra varSa kA kahA hai| 620. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 4, sUtra 106
621. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 4, sUtra 125 622. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 7,
sUtra 130 623. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 1, sUtra 16 624. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-
vakSa. 3, sUtra 68 625. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 6, sUtra 125 626.
jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 4, sUtra 109 627. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 2, sUtra
37 jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 7, sUtra 139 629. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 2,
sUtra 19 630. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 2, sUtra 35-36 [91] 628.

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourth sutra of the twenty-first Samavaya - 'Egmegae Nan Ussappinee...' -
states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 631, the first Dushama and the second
Dushama-Dushama of each Utsarpini are twenty-one thousand years each.  The
second sutra of the twenty-fourth Samavaya - 'Chullahimavant - Sihrianam...' -
states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 632, the extent of the lifespan of the
inhabitants of the Laghuhimavant and Shikhari Vardhadhara mountains is twenty-
four thousand nine hundred thirty-two yojanas and slightly more than one thirty-
eighth part of a yojana.  The third sutra of the twenty-fourth Samavaya -
'Chauveesam Devathana...' - states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 633, the twenty-
four abodes of the gods are said to be without Indra and his priest, meaning
without a leader and a guide.  The fifth sutra of the twenty-fourth Samavaya -
'Ganga-Sindhuon Nan Mahanadio...' - states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 634, the
flow of the great rivers Ganga and Sindhu is described as being slightly more
than twenty-four kos wide.  The sixth sutra of the twenty-fourth Samavaya -
'Rattarattavatio Nan...' - states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 635, the same
subject is described.  The third sutra of the twenty-fifth Samavaya - 'Savve Vi
Dihaveyaddhapavvaaya...' - states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 636, all the long
Vaitaldhya mountains are described in the same way.  The seventh sutra of the
twenty-fifth Samavaya - 'Gangasindhuon Nan Mahanadio...' - states that in
Jambudvipaprajnapti 637, it is described that the great rivers Ganga and Sindhu
have a wide flow of twenty-five kos, shaped like a garland of pearls, flowing
east-west from the Ghatamukha into their respective ponds.  The second sutra of
the thirty-first Samavaya - 'Mandare Pavvae...' - states that in
Jambudvipaprajnapti 638, it is written that the circumference of Mount Meru on
the surface of the earth is slightly less than thirty-one thousand six hundred
twenty-three yojanas.  The third sutra of the thirty-first Samavaya - 'Jaya Nan
Suriye...' - states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 639, the sighting of the sun is
described.  The third sutra of the thirtieth Samavaya - 'Mahavidehe Nan Vase...'
- states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 640, the diameter of Mahavideha is
described as being slightly more than thirty-three thousand yojanas.  631. 632.
633. 634. 635. 636. 637. 638. 639. 640. Jambudvipaprajnapti - Vaksh 2, Sutra 37
Jambudvipaprajnapti - Vaksh 4, Sutra 72 Jambudvipaprajnapti - Vaksh 5, Sutra 115
Jambudvipaprajnapti - Vaksh 5, Sutra 74 Jambudvipaprajnapti - Vaksh 4, Sutra 74
Jambudvipaprajnapti - Vaksh 1, Sutra 12 Jambudvipaprajnapti - Vaksh 4, Sutra 74
Jambudvipaprajnapti - Vaksh 4, Sutra 103 Jambudvipaprajnapti - Vaksh 7, Sutra
133 Jambudvipaprajnapti - Vaksh 4, Sutra 85 [12]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ikkIsaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra - egamegAe NaM ussappiNIe .......' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti 631 meM bhI pratyeka utsarpiNI kA pahalA duSamA aura dUsarA
duSama-duSamA ArA ikabIsa - ikabIsa hajAra varSa kA hai  /  caubIsaveM samavAya
kA dUsarA sUtra - 'cullahimavaMta - siharINaM......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti
632 meM laghuhimavaMta aura zikharI varSadhara parvatoM kI jIvA kA AyAma caubIsa
hajAra nau sau battIsa yojana tathA eka yojana ke ar3atIsaveM bhAga se kucha
adhika kahA hai| 'caubIsaveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra - 'cauvIsaM
devaThANA......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 633 meM bhI devatAoM ke caubIsa
sthAna indravAle zeSa ahamindra - arthAt indra aura purohita rahita kahe gae
haiN| caubIsaveM samavAya kA pAMcavA~ sUtra - 'gaMgA-siMdhUo NaM
mahANadIo....... .' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 634 meM bhI mahAnadI gaMgA aura
sindhu kA pravAha kucha adhika caubIsa koza kA caur3A batalAyA hai| caubIsaveM
samavAya kA chaThA sUtra - 'rattArattavatIo NaM.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti
635 meM bhI yahI viSaya varNita hai  /  paccIsaveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra -
savve vi dIhaveyaDDhapavvayA......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 636 meM bhI sarva
dIrgha vaitADhya parvata isI prakAra ke kahe haiM  /  - paccIsaveM samavAya kA
sAtavAM sUtra - 'gaMgAsiMdhUo NaM mahANadIo.... ' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 637
meM bhI varNana hai ki mahAnadI gaMgA - siMdhu kA muktAvalI hAra kI AkRtivAlA
paccIsa koza kA vistRta pravAha pUrva-pazcima dizA meM ghaTamukha se apane-apane
kuNDa meM giratA hai| ikatIsaveM samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra - 'maMdare
pavvae......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 638 meM bhI likhA hai "pRthvItala para
meru kI paridhi kucha kama ikatIsa hajAra chaha sau teIsa yojana kI hai|"
ikatIsaveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra - 'jayA NaM sUrie..... ' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJati 639 meM bhI sUryadarzana kA varNana  /  tIsaveM samavAya kA
tIsarA sUtra - 'mahAvidehe NaM vAse.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 640 meM
mahAvideha kA viSkambha kucha adhika tetIsa hajAra yojana kA batAyA hai| 631.
632. 633. 634. 635. 636. 637. 638. 639. 640. jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 2,
sUtra 37 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 4, sUtra 72 jambUdvIpaprajJasi - vakSa. 5,
sUtra 115 jambUdvIpaprajJati - vakSa. 5, sUtra 74 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa.
4, sUtra 74 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa. 1, sUtra 12 jambUdvIpaprajJapti -
vakSa. 4, sUtra 74 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa. 4, sUtra 103
jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 7, sUtra 133 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa. 4, sUtra 85
[12]

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourth sutra of the thirty-third Samavaya - 'Jayaṇam Suriye.....' - states
that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 641, the sun is visible from a distance of slightly
less than thirty-three thousand yojanas in Jambudvipa.  The second sutra of the
thirty-fourth Samavaya - 'Jambuddive ṇam dive.....' - states that in
Jambudvipaprajnapti 642, there are thirty-four Chakravarti Vijayas in
Jambudvipa.  The third sutra of the thirty-fourth Samavaya - 'Jambuddiṇe ṇam
dive cottīsan dīhaveyaḍḍhā......' - states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 643,
there are thirty-four Dirgha Vaithaḍya mountains in Jambudvipa.  The fourth
sutra of the thirty-fourth Samavaya - 'Jambuddive ṇam dive.....' - states that
in Jambudvipaprajnapti 44, there are thirty-four excellent Tirthankaras born in
Jambudvipa.  The second sutra of the thirty-seventh Samavaya - 'Hemavay-
herannavayāo ṇam.....' - describes the dimensions of the jiva of Hemavant and
Heranyavant, as mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 645.  The second sutra of the
thirty-eighth Samavaya - 'Hemavae-erannavaiमाणं......' - describes the
dimensions of the jiva of Hemavant and Heranyavant, as mentioned in
Jambudvipaprajnapti 646.  The second sutra of the forty-fourth Samavaya -
'Samayakhette egūṇacattālīsan.....' - states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 648,
there are forty-four Kula-parvata in the Samayakshetra.  The second sutra of the
fortieth Samavaya - 'Mandarcūliya ṇam......' - states that in
Jambudvipaprajnapti 649, the chulika of Meru is forty yojanas high.  The first
sutra of the forty-fifth Samavaya - 'Samayakhette ṇam paṇayālīsan......' -
states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 650, the dimensions of the Samayakshetra are
forty-five lakh yojanas.  The sixth sutra of the forty-fifth Samavaya -
'Mandarass ṇam pavvayass.......' - states that in Jambudvipaprajnapti 651, the
distance between Meru Parvata and the Lavanasamudra is forty-five thousand
yojanas in all four directions.  The first sutra of the forty-seventh Samavaya -
'Jaya ṇam sariye savvabhitara.......' - describes the visibility of the sun in
the same way as Jambudvipaprajnapti 652.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tetIsaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra -'jayANaM sUrie.....' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti641 meM jambUdvIpa meM kucha nyUna tetIsa hajAra yojana dUra
se sUrya-darzana hotA kahA hai| , cautIsaveM samavAya kA dUsarA
sUtra-'jaMbuddIve NaM dIve.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti642 meM bhI
jambadvIpa meM cautIsa cakravartIvijaya kahe haiN| cautIsaveM samavAya kA tIsarA
sUtra- 'jaMbuddINe NaM dIve cauttIsaM dIhaveyaDDhA......' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti meM bhI jambUdvIpa643 meM cautIsa dIrgha vaitADhya parvata
batalAe haiN| cautIsaveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra- 'jaMbuddIve NaM dIve.....'
hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti:44 meM bhI jambUdvIpa meM utkRSTa cautIsa tIrthaMkara
utpanna honA kahA hai| saiMtIsaveM samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra-'hemavaya-
heraNNavayAo NaM.....' hai jo jambUdvIpaprajJapti645 meM bhI hemavanta aura
heraNyavaMta kI jIvA ke AyAma kA varNana hai| aDatIsaveM samavAya kA dUsarA
sUtra - 'hemavae-eraNNavaImANaM......' hai to jambadvIpaprajJapti646 meM bhI
hemavanta aura heraNyavaMta kI jIvA ke AyAma kA varNana hai| unacAlIsaveM
samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra- 'samayakhette egUNacattAlIsaM.....' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti648 meM bhI samayakSetra meM unacAlIsa kula-parvata batAye
haiN| cAlIsaveM samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra- 'maMdaracUliyA NaM......' hai to
jambadvIpaprajJapti649 meM bhI varNana hai ki meru kI cUlikA cAlIsa yojana UMcI
hai| paiMtAlIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra -'samayakhette NaM paNayAlIsa......'
hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti650 meM bhI samayakSetra kA AyAma-viSkambha paiMtAlIsa
lAkha yojana kA batAyA hai| paiMtAlIsaveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra - 'maMdarassa
NaM pavvayassa.......' to jambUdvIpaprajJapti651 meM bhI meruparvata evaM
lavaNasamudra kA avyavahita antara cAroM dizAoM meM paiMtAlIsa-paiMtAlIsa hajAra
yojana kA batAyA hai| saiMtAlIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra -'jayA NaM sarie
savvabhitara.......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti652 meM bhI sUryadarzana kA isI
taraha varNana prApta hai| 641. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 7, sUtra 133 642.
jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 4, sUtra 95 jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 6, sUtra 125
644. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 4, sUtra 95 645. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 4,
sUtra 79 646. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 4, sUtra 111 647. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-
vakSa. 4, sUtra 108 648. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 6, sUtra 125
jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 4, sUtra 106 650. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 4, sUtra
177 651. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa. 4, sUtra 103 652. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa
7 sUtra 133 [93] 643. 649.

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first sutra of the forty-eighth Samavaya - 'Egmeass Nan Ranno.....' is also
mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 653, where it states that each Chakravarti has
forty-eight thousand Pattanas.  The third sutra of the forty-eighth Samavaya -
'Suramandale Nan Adyaalisan.....' is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 654,
where it states that the diameter of the Surya Vimana is forty-eight parts out
of sixty-one parts of a Yojana.  The second sutra of the fiftieth Samavaya -
'Devakuru - Uttarakuruessu Nan........' is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti
655, where it states that the people of Devakuru and Uttarakuru become young in
fifty days and nights.  The fourth sutra of the fiftieth Samavaya - 'Savvevi Nan
Dihaveyaddha Mule......' is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 656, where it
states that the diameter of the base of all the longest Vaitalya mountains is
fifty Yojanas.  The sixth sutra of the fiftieth Samavaya - 'Savvao Nan
Timissaguhao..' is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 657, where it states
that the dimension of the Timishra Guha and Khandaprapata Guhas is fifty Yojanas
each.  The first sutra of the thirty-third Samavaya - 'Devakuru-
Uttarakuruyaao..' is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 658, where it states
that the dimension of the chord of Uttarakuru is thirty-three thousand Yojanas.
The second sutra of the thirty-third Samavaya - 'Mahahaimavantaruppiinam.......'
is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 659, where it describes the dimension
of Mahahaimavant and Rukmi, etc.  The second sutra of the fifty-fifth Samavaya -
'Mandarass Nan Pavvayass..........' is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti
660, where it states that the uninterrupted distance between the western
extremity of Meru Parvat and the western extremity of Vijayadwar is fifty-five
thousand Yojanas.  The fifth sutra of the fifty-seventh Samavaya -
'Mahahaimavant - Ruppiinam......' is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 661,
where it describes the chord of Mahahaimavant, Jaur, Rukmi, and Varshadhar
mountains.  The first sutra of the sixtieth Samavaya - 'Egmege Nan Mandale.....'
is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 662, where it states that the Sun
completes sixty Muhurtas in each Mandala.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ar3atAlIsaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra - ' egamessa NaM ranno.....' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti 653 meM bhI pratyeka cakravartI ke ar3atAlIsa hajAra paTTaNa
batAye haiM  /  - ar3atAlIsaveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra - 'sUramaMDale NaM
aDayAlIsaM ..... .' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 654 meM bhI sUryavimAna kA
viSkambha eka yojana ke ikasaTha bhAgoM meM se ar3atAlIsa bhAga jitanA hai 1
unapacAsaveM samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra - 'devakuru - uttarakuruesu NaM........ '
hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 655 meM bhI devakuru aura uttarakuru ke manuSya
unapacAsa ahorAtri meM yuvA ho jAte kahe haiM  /  pacAsaveM samavAya kA cauthA
sUtra - 'savvevi NaM dIhaveyaDDhA mUle...... ' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 656
meM bhI sarva dIrgha vaitADhya parvatoM ke mUla kA viSkaMbha pacAsa yojana kA
hai| pacAsaveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra - 'savvAo NaM timissaguhAo.. timizra
guphA aura khaNDaprapAta guphAoM kA AyAma pacAsa pacAsa yojana kA hai|
trepanaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra -' -'devakuru-uttarakuruyAo.. uttarakuru kI
jIvA kA AyAma trepana hajAra yojana kA batAyA hai| trepanaveM samavAya kA dUsarA
sUtra - 'mahAhimavaMtaruppINaM.......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 659 meM bhI
mahAhimavaMta aura rukmI Adi ke AyAma kA varNana hai| pacapanaveM samavAya kA
dUsarA sUtra - 'mandarassa NaM pavvayassa.......... .' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti 660 meM bhI meruparvata ke pazcimI caramAnta se vijayadvAra
ke pazcimI caramAnta kA avyavahita antara pacapana hajAra yojana kA hai|
sattAvanaveM samavAya kA pA~cavA sUtra - 'mahAhimavaMta - ruppINaM......' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti 661 meM bhI mahAhimavaMta jaura rukmI varSadhara parvatoM kI
jIvA kA varNana hai| 653. 654. hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 657 meM bhI sarva
sAThaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra - ' egamege NaM maMDale.....' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti 662 meM bhI varNana hai ki pratyeka maNDala meM sUrya sATha-
sATha muhUrta pUre karatA hai  /  655. 656. 657. 658. 659. 660. 661. 662.
jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 3 sUtra 69 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 7 sUtra 130
.' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 658 meM bhI devakuru aura jambUdvIpaprajJapti -
vakSa 2 sUtra 25 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 1 sUtra 12 jambUdvIpaprajJapti -
vakSa 1 sUtra 12 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 4 sUtra 87 jambUdvIpaprajJapti -
vakSa 4 sUtra 79 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 1 sUtra 8 jambUdvIpaprajJapti -
vakSa 4 sUtra 79 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 6 sUtra 127 [ 94]

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixty-first Samavaya's third sutra - 'Chandamandelena egasatthi...' - states
that the Chandramandal is one sixty-first part of a yojana (45 parts) in
Jambudvipaprajnapti 663. The sixty-second Samavaya's third sutra -
'Sukkapakkhassa nan chande...' - states that the moon increases by sixty-two
parts each day during the Shukla Paksha and decreases by the same amount during
the Krishna Paksha in Jambudvipaprajnapti 64. The four sutras of the sixty-third
Samavaya are found verbatim in Jambudvipaprajnapti 665. The sixty-fourth
Samavaya's sixth sutra - 'Savvasa vi yan rano...' - states that all Chakravartis
have a pearl-studded necklace, which is very valuable and has sixty-four rows,
in Jambudvipaprajnapti 666. The sixty-fifth Samavaya's first sutra - 'Jambuddive
nan dive panasatin suramandala...' - states that there are sixty-five mandalas
of the sun in Jambudvipa in Jambudvipaprajnapti 667. The sixty-sixth Samavaya's
second sutra - 'Hemavayera navayao...' - states that the extent of the Hemvat
and Aranyavat is sixty-six hundred twenty-five yojanas and one-third of a yojana
in Jambudvipaprajnapti 668. The sixty-eighth Samavaya's second, third, and
fourth sutras - 'Ukkossapae adasatin arhanta.....' Chakkavatti baldeva.....
Pukkharavaradidde nan' - state that there are sixty-eight excellent
Tirthankaras, Chakravartis, Baldevas, and Vasudevas. The same is said to be true
in Pushkarardhadvipa in Jambudvipaprajnapti 669. The seventy-second Samavaya's
sixth sutra - 'Egamegassa nan ranno...' - states that each Chakravarti has
seventy-two thousand excellent cities in Jambudvipaprajnapti 670. The seventy-
second Samavaya's seventh sutra - 'Bavattari kalao pannattao...' - mentions
seventy-two arts in Jambudvipaprajnapti 671. The seventy-third Samavaya's first
sutra - 'Harivas-rammayavasayao...' - describes the extent of the jiva of
Harivarsha and Ramyakvarsha in Jambudvipaprajnapti. The seventy-fourth
Samavaya's second sutra - 'Nisahao nan vasahar...' - and the third sutra - 'Evam
sitavi...' - describe the Nishdha mountain and the Sitoda river in
Jambudvipaprajnapti 672. The seventy-fifth Samavaya's first sutra - 'Bharhe raya
chaurant-chakkavatti...' - states that Bharat in Jambudvipaprajnapti 673.
Jambudvipaprajnapti-Vaksha 7, Sutra 144-145 664. Jambudvipaprajnapti-Vaksha 7,
Sutra 134 665. Jambudvipaprajnapti-Vaksha 2, Sutra 3, Vaksha. 4, Su. 82, Vaksha
7, Su. 127 666. Jambudvipaprajnapti-Vaksha 3, Sutra 68 Jambudvipaprajnapti-
Vaksha 7, Sutra 127 668. Jambudvipaprajnapti-Vaksha 4, Sutra 76
Jambudvipaprajnapti-Vaksha 7 670. Jambudvipaprajnapti-Vaksha 3, Sutra 69 671.
Jambudvipaprajnapti-Vaksha 3, Sutra 30 672.  _ Jambudvipaprajnapti-Vaksha 4,
Sutra 82 673. Jambudvipaprajnapti-Vaksha 2, Sutra 70 [95]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ikasaThaveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra -'caMdamaMDaleNaM egasaTThi.......' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti663 meM bhI candramaNDala kA samAMza eka yojana ke ikasaTha
vibhAga karane para (45 samAMza) hotA hai| bAsaThaveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra-
'sukkapakkhassa NaM caMde.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti:64 meM zuklapakSa meM
candra bAsaTha bhAga pratidina bar3hatA hai aura kRSNa pakSa meM utanA hI
ghaTatA hai, yaha kathana hai| tresaThaveM samavAya ke cAroM sUtroM meM jo
varNana hai vaha jambUdvIpaprajJapti665 meM jyoM kA tyoM milatA hai| causaThaveM
samavAya kA chaThA sUtra-'savvassa vi ya NaM rano......' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti666 meM bhI varNana hai ki sabhI cakravartiyoM kA
muktAmaNimaya hAra mahAmUlyavAn evaM causaTha lar3iyoM vAlA hotA hai|
paiMsaThaveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra -'jaMbuddIve NaM dIve paNasaTiM
sUramaMDalA...' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti667 meM bhI jambUdvIpa meM sUrya ke
paiMsaTha maMDala batAye haiN| sar3asaThaveM samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra-
'hemavayaeranavayAo....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti668 meM bhI hemavata aura
eraNyavata kI bAhA kA AyAma sar3asaTha sau paMcAvana yojana tathA eka yojana ke
tIna bhAga jitanA hai| ar3asaThaveM samavAya ke dUsare, tIsare aura cauthe sUtra
- 'ukkosapae aDasaTiMDha arahaMtA.....' cakkavaTTI baladevA.....
pukkharavaradIvaDDhe NaM' varNana hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti669 meM bhI 'utkRSTa
ar3asaTha tIrthaMkara, cakravartI baladeva aura vAsudeva hote haiN| vaise hI
puSkarArdhadvIpa meM bhI hote kahe haiN|' bahattaraveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra
- egamegassa NaM ranno.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti670 meM bhI yaha varNana
hai ki pratyeka cakravartI ke bahattara hajAra zreSTha pura hote haiN|
bahattaraveM samavAya kA sAtavA~ sUtra - 'bAvattari kalAo paNNattAo......' hai
to jambUdvIpaprajJapti671 meM bhI bahattara kalAoM kA ullekha hai| .
tihattaraveM samavAya kA prathama sUtra-'harivAsa-rammayavAsayAo.....' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti meM bhI harivarSa aura ramyakvarSa kI jIvA ke AyAma kA
varNana hai| cauhattaraveM samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra -'nisahAo NaM vAsahara.....'
hai to tIsarA sUtra hai-'evaM sItAvi...' isI taraha jambUdvIpa prajJapti672 meM
bhI niSadha parvata aura sItodA mahAnadI kA varNana hai| satahattaraveM samavAya
kA pahalA sUtra - 'bharahe rAyA cAuraMta-cakkavaTTI.....' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti673 meM bhI bharata jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 7, sUtra
144-145 664. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 7, sUtra 134 665. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-
vakSa 2, sUtra 3, vakSa. 4, sU. 82, vakSa 7, sU. 127 666. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-
vakSa 3, sUtra 68 jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 7, sUtra 127 668.
jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 4, sUtra 76 jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 7 670.
jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 3, sUtra 69 671. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 3, sUtra 30
672. _ jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 4, sUtra 82 673. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 2,
sUtra 70 [95]

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Translation with Jain terms preserved:  After residing in the state of a prince
for seventy-two lakh pūrva, the Cakravartī attained the royal status.  The third
sūtra of the seventy-eighth Samavāya is 'Uttarāyaṇaniyaṭṭeṇaṃ sūriye....' and
the Jambūdvīpaprajñapti 674 states that the sun, while returning from the
Uttarāyaṇa, increases the day and night by sixty-one seventy-eighth parts of a
muhūrta, traversing from the first maṇḍala to the forty-ninth maṇḍala.  The
fourth sūtra of the eighty-ninth Samavāya is 'Jambūddīvassa ṇaṃ dīvassa....' and
the Jambūdvīpaprajñapti 675 also describes that the immediate distance between
each gate of Jambūdvīpa is eighty-nine thousand yojana.  The first sūtra of the
ninetieth Samavāya is 'Jambūddīve dīve bāsīyaṃ....' and the Jambūdvīpaprajñapti
676 states that in the one hundred and twenty-second solar maṇḍala of
Jambūdvīpa, the sun traverses twice.  The fourth sūtra of the ninety-third
Samavāya is 'Usabhe ṇaṃ arahā kosaliye....' and the Jambūdvīpaprajñapti 677 also
mentions that the Arhat Ṛṣabhadeva of Kauśalya, after residing in the household
for thirty lakh pūrva, became a muni.  The fifth sūtra of the ninety-third
Samavāya is 'Bharahe ṇaṃ rāyā cāuraṃtacakkavattī....' and the
Jambūdvīpaprajñapti 678 also describes that Bhārata Cakravartī, after residing
in the household for thirty lakh pūrva, attained the state of a Jina.  The
second sūtra of the eighty-fourth Samavāya is 'Usabhe ṇaṃ arahā kosaliye....'
and according to the Jambūdvīpaprajñapti 679, the Arhat Ṛṣabhadeva of Kauśalya,
after completing the lifespan of eighty-four lakh pūrva, attained the state of a
Siddha, becoming free from all sufferings.  The third sūtra of the eighty-fourth
Samavāya is 'Sijjaṃse ṇaṃ arahā caurasīī....' and the Jambūdvīpaprajñapti 680
also mentions that like Ṛṣabhadeva, Bāhubali, Brāhmī, and Sundarī also attained
the state of a Siddha.  The fifteenth sūtra of the eighty-fourth Samavāya is
'Usabhassa ṇaṃ arahao......' and the Jambūdvīpaprajñapti 681 mentions the
eighty-four gaṇas and eighty-four gaṇadhara of the Arhat Ṛṣabhadeva.  The third
sūtra of the eighty-eighth Samavāya is 'Mandarassa ṇaṃ pabbayassa....' and the
Jambūdvīpaprajñapti 682 also states that the immediate distance between the
eastern extremity of Mount Meru and the eastern extremity of the Goṣṭūpa
mountain range is eighty-eight thousand yojana.  The first sūtra of the ninety-
ninth Samavāya is 'Usabheṇaṃ arahā......' and the Jambūdvīpaprajñapti 683 also
mentions that the Arhat Ṛṣabhadeva of Kauśalya attained the Kāladharma in the
last part of the third Suṣamā-duṣamā period of this Avasarpiṇī, with only ninety
days remaining.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cakravartI satahattara lAkha pUrva taka kumAra pada meM rahane ke pazcAt
rAjapada ko prApta hue, yaha ullekha hai| aThahattaraveM samavAya kA tIsarA
sUtra- 'uttarAyaNaniyaTTeNaM sUrie....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti674 meM
uttarAyaNa se lauTatA huA sUrya prathama maMDala se unacAlIsaveM maMDala taka
eka muhUrta ke ikasaThie aThahattara bhAga pramANa dina tathA rAtri ko
bar3hAkara gati karatA kahA hai| unyAsIveM samavAya kA caturtha sUtra-
'jaMbuddIvassa NaM dIvassa.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti675 meM bhI varNana
hai ki jambUdvIpa ke pratyeka dvAra kA avyavahita antara unyAsI hajAra yojana kA
hai| biyAsIveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra-'jaMbUddIve dIve bAsIyaM.....' hai to
jambadvIpaprajJapti676 meM kahA haijambUdvIpa meM eka sau biyAsIveM sUryamaNDala
meM sUrya do bAra gati karatA hai| tiyAsIveM samavAya kA cauthA sUtra- 'usabhe
NaM arahA kosalie.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti677 meM bhI likhA hai arahaMta
kauzalika RSabhadeva tiyAsI lAkha pUrva gRhavAsa meM rahakara muMDita yAvat
pravrajita hue| tiyAsIveM samavAya kA pA~cavA~ sUtra - 'bhrarahe NaM rAyA
cAuraMtacakkavaTTI.....' hai to jambUdvIpa678 prajJapti meM bhI varNana hai ki
bharata cakravartI tiyAsI lAkha pUrva gRhavAsa meM rahakara jina hue| caurAsIveM
samavAya kA dUsarA sUtra- 'usabhe NaM arahA kosalie......' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti679 ke anusAra bhI arahaMta kauzalika RSabhadeva caurAsI
lAkha pUrva kA Ayu pUrNa karake siddha yAvat sarva du:khoM se mukta hue|
caurAsIveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra -'sijjaMse NaM arahA caurAsII....' hai to
jambUdvIpa680 prajJapti meM bhI ullekha hai ki RSabhadeva jI kI taraha bharata
bAhubalI brAhmI aura sundarI bhI siddha hue| . caurAsIveM samavAya kA
pandrahavA~ sUtra-'usabhassa NaM arahao......' hai to jambadvIpaprajJapti681 meM
arahaMta RSabhadeva ke caurAsI gaNa aura caurAsI gaNadharoM kA ullekha hai|
aThAsIveM samavAya kA tIsarA sUtra-'maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa....' hai to
jambUdvIpaprajJapti682 meM bhI meru parvata ke pUrvI caramAnta se gostupa AvAsa
parvata ke pUrvI caramAnta kA avyavahita antara aThAsI hajAra yojana kA batAyA
hai| navAsIveM samavAya kA pahalA sUtra-'usabheNaM arahA......' hai to
jambadvIpaprajJapti683 meM bhI arahaMta kauzalika RSabhadeva isa avasarpiNI ke
tRtIya suSama-duSamA kAla ke antima bhAga meM navAsI pakSa zeSa rahane para
kAladharma ko prApta hue| 674. 675. 676. 677. 678. 679. jambUdvIpaprajJapti-
vakSa 7, sUtra 131 jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 1, sUtra 9 jambUdvIpaprajJapti-
vakSa 7, sUtra 134 jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 2, sUtra 30, 31
jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 3, sUtra 70 jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 2, sUtra 33
jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 2, sUtra 33 jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 2, sUtra 18
jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 4, sUtra 103 jambUdvIpaprajJapti-vakSa 2, sUtra 31, 33
680. 681. 682. 683. [96]

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth sutra of the ninety-ninth Samvaya - 'Savveshi nan
vattuveyaddhapavvaayanam.....' - is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 684,
where it states that the distance between the top of all the Vrittavaitadhya
mountains and the bottom of the Saugandhika Kanda is ninety hundred yojanas.
The first sutra of the ninety-ninth Samvaya - 'Egmegass nan ranno chaurant
chakkavattiss....' - is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 685, where it
states that each Chakravarti has ninety-nine crore grams.  The description from
the first to the sixth sutra of the ninety-ninth Samvaya is also found in
Jambudvipaprajnapti 686.  The sixth sutra of the hundredth Samvaya - 'Savvevi
nan dihaveyaddhapavvaaya......' - is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti 687,
where it states that all the Dirghavaitadhya mountains are one hundred koshas
high.  The third sutra of the two hundredth Samvaya - 'Jambuddive nan dive do
kanchanpavvay-saya pannatta.....' - is also mentioned in Jambudvipaprajnapti
688, where it describes two hundred Kanchanaka mountains in Jambudvipa.  The
description from the first to the seventh sutra of the five hundredth Samvaya is
also found in Jambudvipaprajnapti 689.  The description from the second to the
sixth sutra of the thousandth Samvaya is also found in Jambudvipaprajnapti 690.
Thus, there is a similarity of subject matter in many places in the Samvayanga
and Jambudvipaprajnapti. Due to the fear of expansion, we have left out the
comparison of some sutras here.  Samvayanga and Suryaprajnapti  Suryaprajnapti
is the sixth Upanga. Dr. Winternitz considered Suryaprajnapti to be a scientific
text. Dr. Schubring, in his speech at the University of Hamburg in Germany, said
that "the logical and consistent principles presented by Jain thinkers are
invaluable and important even from the perspective of modern scientists. Along
with refined cosmographical ideas, there is a high standard of astronomy and
mathematics. Suryaprajnapti deeply discusses mathematics and astronomy,
therefore, without studying Suryaprajnapti, the history of Indian astronomy
cannot be understood correctly."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nabbeveM samavAya kA pA~cavA~ sUtra - 'savvesi NaM
vaTTaveyaDDhapavvayANaM.....' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti684 meM bhI sarva
vRttavaitADhya parvatoM ke zikhara ke Upara se saugaMdhika kANDa ke nIce ke
caramAnta kA avyavahita antara nabbe sau yojana kahA hai| chiyAnaveMve samavAya
kA pahalA sUtra - 'egamegassa NaM ranno cAuraMta cakkavaTTissa.... ' hai to
jambUdvIpa prajJapti 685 meM bhI pratyeka cakravartI ke chAnave chAnave karor3a
grAma batAye haiM  /  ninyAnaveMve samavAya ke pahale sUtra se lekara chaTThe
sUtra taka jo varNana hai vaha jambUdvIpaprajJapti 686 meM bhI jyoM kA tyoM
milatA hai  /  sauveM samavAya kA chaThA sUtra - 'savvevi NaM
dIhaveyaDDhapavvayA......' hai to jambUdvIpaprajJapti687 meM sarva
dIrghavaitADhya parvata sau-sau koza UMce prarUpita haiM  /  do sauveM samavAya
kA tIsarA sUtra - 'jaMbuddIve NaM dIve do kaMcaNapavvaya-sayA paNNattA.....' hai
to jambUdvIpaprajJapti 688 meM bhI jambUdvIpa meM do sau kAMcanaka parvatoM kA
varNana hai| pAMca sauveM samavAya meM prathama sUtra se lekara sAtaveM sUtra
taka jo varNana hai vaha jambUdvIpaprajJapti689 meM bhI isI taraha milatA hai|
hajAraveM samavAya meM dUsare sUtra se lekara chaThe sUtra taka jo varNana hai,
vaha jambUdvIpaprajJapti 690 meM bhI isI taraha dekhA jA sakatA hai| isa taraha
samavAyAMga aura jambUdvIpaprajJapti maM aneka sthaloM para viSayasAmya hai  /
vistArabhaya se kucha sUtroM kI tulanA jAnakara hamane yahA~ para chor3a dI hai|
samavAyAMga aura sUryaprajJapti sUryaprajJapti chaThA upAMga hai| DaoN.
vinTaranitja ne sUryaprajJati ko eka vaijJAnika grantha mAnA hai| DaoN. zuviMga
ne jarmanI kI hembarga yUnivarsiTI meM apane bhASaNa meM kahA thA ki "jaina
vicArakoM ne jina tarkasammata evaM susaMgata siddhAntoM ko prastuta kiyA hai ve
Adhunika vijJAnavettAoM kI dRSTi se bhI amUlya evaM mahattvapUrNa hai| vizva
racanA ke siddhAnta sAtha usameM uccakoTi kA gaNita evaM jyotiSavijJAna bhI
milatA hai| sUryaprajJapti meM gaNita aura jyotiSa para gaharAI se vicAra kiyA
gayA hai, ataH sUryaprajJapti ke adhyayana ke binA bhAratIya jyotiSa ke itihAsa
ko sahI rUpa se nahIM samajhA jA sakatA  /  691 684. 685. 686. 687. 688. 689.
690. 691. jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 4, sUtra 82 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 3,
sUtra 67 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 4, sUtra 103, 134 jambUdvIpaprajJapti -
vakSa 1, sUtra 12 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 6, sUtra 125 jambUdvIpaprajJapti -
vakSa 4, sUtra 125, 33, 70, 86, 91, 97, 75 jambUdvIpaprajJapti - vakSa 4, sUtra
88, 72 He who has thorough knowledge of the structure of the world cannot but
admire the inward logic and harmony of Jain Ideas. Hand in hand with refined
casmograhical ideas goes a high standard of Astronomy and Mathematics. A history
of Indian Astronomy is not conceivable without the famous "Surya Pragyapati "
-Dr. Schubring. [ 97]

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here, we will briefly compare the topics discussed in the Samavayanga with the
Surya Prajnapti.  The first Samavaya of the Samavayanga describes the Ardra,
Chitra, and Swati constellations in the 23rd, 24th, and 25th sutras,
respectively. This description is also found in the Surya Prajnapti 692.  The
second Samavaya, from the fourth to the seventh Samavaya, describes the stars of
Purva Phalguni, Uttara Phalguni, Purva Bhadrapada, and Uttara Bhadrapada. This
is also found in the Surya Prajnapti 693.  The third Samavaya, from the sixth to
the twelfth sutra, describes the constellations Mrigashira, Pushya, Jyeshta,
Abhijit, Shravana, Ashwini, Bharani, etc. This description is also found in the
Surya Prajnapti 694.  The fourth Samavaya, in the seventh, eighth, and ninth
sutras, describes the four stars of the Anuradha, Purva Ashadha, and Uttara
Ashadha constellations. The description of these stars is also found in the
Surya Prajnapti 695.  The fifth Samavaya, from the ninth to the thirteenth
sutras, describes the five stars of the Rohini, Punarvasu, Hasta, Visakha, and
Dhanishta constellations. This description is also found in the Surya Prajnapti
696.  The sixth Samavaya, in the seventh and eighth sutras, mentions the six
stars of the Krittika and Ashlesha constellations. This is also mentioned in the
Surya Prajnapti 697.  The seventh Samavaya, from the seventh to the eleventh
sutras, describes the stars and their gates of the Magha, Krittika, Anuradha,
and Dhanishta constellations. This is also found in the Surya Prajnapti 698.
The ninth sutra of the eighth Samavaya states "Atthanakkhatta Chandem..." and
the Surya Prajnapti 699 also describes the eight constellations of Krittika,
Rohini, Punarvasu, Magha, Chitra, Visakha, Anuradha, and Jyeshta that form the
Pramard Yoga with the Moon.  The fifth, sixth, and seventh sutras of the ninth
Samavaya describe the Abhijit constellation's conjunction with the Moon and
state that the Ratnaprabha is a star nine hundred yojanas above the Earth. This
description is also found in the Surya Prajnapti 700. The only difference
between the Samavayanga and the Surya Prajnapti is that the Samavayanga states
the conjunction time of Abhijit with the Moon as 9 muhurtas, while the Surya
Prajnapti 701 states it as 12 muhurtas.  The second, third, and fifth sutras of
the eleventh Samavaya describe the beginning of the Jyotish chakra and mention
the eleven stars of the Mula constellation. This description is also found in
the Surya Prajnapti 702.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hama yahAM para saMkSepa meM samavAyAMga meM Aye hue viSayoM ke sAtha
sUryaprajJapti kI tulanA kreNge| samavAyAMga ke prathama samavAya meM tevIsa,
caubIsa aura paccIsaveM sUtra meM jina ArdrA, citrA aura svAti nakSatroM kA
varNana hai, vaha varNana sUryaprajJapti692 meM bhI hai| dUsare samavAya ke
cauthe se sAtaveM samavAya taka pUrvAphAlgunI, uttarAphAlgunI, pUrvAbhAdrapadA,
uttarAbhAdrapada ke tAroM kA varNana hai| vaha sUryaprajJapti693 meM bhI prApta
hai| tIsare samavAya ke chaThe sUtra se lekara bArahaveM sUtra taka mRgazira,
puSya, jeSThA, abhijita, zravaNa, azvinI, bharaNI Adi nakSatroM kA varNana
sUryaprajJapti694 meM bhI milatA hai| cauthe samavAya ke sAtaveM, AThaveM aura
nauveM sUtra meM anurAdhA, pUrvASADhA aura uttarASADhA nakSatroM ke cAra tAroM
kA varNana hai, sUryaprajJapti695 meM bhI una tAroM kA varNana darzanIya hai|
pAMcaveM samavAya ke nauveM sUtra se lekara terahaveM sUtra taka rohiNI,
punarvasu, hasta, vizAkhA, dhaniSThA nakSatroM ke pAMca-pAMca tAroM kA varNana
hai, sUryaprajJapti696 meM bhI vaha varNana isI taraha milatA hai| chaThe
samavAya ke sAtaveM evaM AThaveM sUtra meM kRttikA, azleSA nakSatra ke chaha-
chaha tAre batAye haiM to sUryaprajJapti:97 meM bhI unakA ullekha hai| sAtaveM
samavAna ke sAtaveM sUtra se lekara gyArahaveM sUtra taka maghA, kRttikA,
anurAdhA aura dhaniSThA nakSatroM ke tAre tathA unake dvAroM kA varNana hai to
sUryaprajJapti698 meM bhI vaha milatA hai| AThaveM samavAya ke nauveM sUtra meM
"aTThanakkhattA caMdeNaM....." hai to sUryaprajJapti699 meM bhI candra ke sAtha
pramarda yoga karane vAle kRttikA, rohiNI, punarvasu, maghA, cittA, vizAkhA,
anurAdhA, jyeSThA ina ATha nakSatroM kA varNana hai| nauveM samavAya ke
pAMcaveM, chaThe aura sAtaveM sUtra meM abhijit nakSatra kA candra ke sAtha yoga
hone kA varNana hai tathA ratnaprabhA pRthvI se nau sau yojana UMce tArA haiM,
yaha varNana sUryaprajJapti700 meM bhI hai| samavAyAMga aura sUryaprajJapti meM
antara itanA hI hai ki samavAyAMga meM abhijit kA candra ke sAtha yogakAla 9
muhUrta kA batAyA hai to sUryaprajJapti 01 meM 12 muhUrta kA batAyA hai|
gyArahaveM samavAya ke dUsare, tIsare aura pAMcaveM sUtra meM jyotiSa cakra ke
prAraMbha kA varNana hai aura mUla nakSatra ke gyAraha tAre batAye haiM, yaha
varNana sUryaprajJapti702 meM bhI milatA hai| 692. sUryaprajJati-prAbhRta 10,
prA. 9 693. sUryaprajJati-prAbhRta 10, prA. 9 sUtra 42 694. sUryaprajJati-
prAbhRta 10, prA. 9 sUtra 42 695. sUryaprajJati-prAbhRta 10, prA. 9 sUtra 42
696. sUryaprajJati-prAbhRta 10, prA. 9 sUtra 42 sUryaprajJati-prAbhRta 10, prA.
9 sUtra 42 698. sUryaprajJati-prAbhRta 10, prA. 9 sUtra 42 99. sUryaprajJati-
prAbhRta 10, prA. 9 sUtra 42 700. sUryaprajJati-prAbhRta 10, prA. 11 sUtra 44
701. sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta 10, prA. 11, sUtra 44 702. sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta
18, sUtra 92 [98]

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The twelfth Samavaya's eighth and ninth sutras mention twelve Muhurtas for the
shortest night and day, which is also described in Surya-Prajnapti 703. The
fifteenth Samavaya's third and fourth sutras describe the covering and
uncovering of the moon by Dhruva-Rahu, which is also found in Surya-Prajnapti
04. The eighteenth Samavaya's eighth sutra states that in the months of Paush
and Ashadha, there is one day with eighteen Muhurtas and one night with eighteen
Muhurtas. This is also mentioned in Surya-Prajnapti 05. The nineteenth
Samavaya's second sutra states that the sun reaches a height and depth of
nineteen hundred yojanas in Jambudvipa. This is also found in Surya-Prajnapti
06. The twenty-fourth Samavaya's fourth sutra states that the sun, while in
Uttarayana, casts a shadow of twenty-four angulas in the first prahar and then
turns back. This is also mentioned in Surya-Prajnapti 707. The twenty-seventh
Samavaya's second and third sutras state that in Jambudvipa, there are twenty-
seven nakshatras, excluding Abhijit, and that a nakshatra month consists of
twenty-seven aharatras. This is also found in Surya-Prajnapti 08. The
description from the third to the seventh sutras of the twenty-ninth Samavaya is
also found in Surya-Prajnapti 709. The thirtieth Samavaya's third sutra lists
the names of thirty Muhurtas, which are also found in Surya-Prajnapti 10. The
thirty-first Samavaya's fourth and fifth sutras state that an adhik Maas is
slightly longer than thirty-one nights and that a Surya Maas is slightly shorter
than thirty-one aharatras. This is also found in Surya-Prajnapti 011. The
thirty-second Samavaya's fifth sutra mentions thirty-two stars in the Revati
nakshatra, which is also found in Surya-Prajnapti 12. The thirty-sixth
Samavaya's fourth sutra states that in the months of Chaitra and Ashwin, the
length of the paurusha shadow is thirty-six angulas on one day. This is also
found in Surya-Prajnapti 13. The thirty-seventh Samavaya's fifth sutra states
that on the seventh day of Kartik Krishna, the sun casts a paurusha shadow of
thirty-seven angulas and moves. This is found in Surya-Prajnapti 14. 703. Surya-
Prajnapti-Prabhrit 1, Pra. 1, Sutra 11 704. Surya-Prajnapti-Prabhrit 20, Pra. 3,
Pra. Sutra 105, Su. 35 705. Surya-Prajnapti-Prabhrit 1, Pra. 6, Sutra 18 706.
Surya-Prajnapti-Prabhrit 4, Pra. Sutra 25 707. Surya-Prajnapti-Prabhrit 10, Pra.
Sutra 46 708. Surya-Prajnapti-Prabhrit 10, 12 Pra. 1, Sutra 32, 72 709. Surya-
Prajnapti-Prabhrit 12, Sutra 72 710. Surya-Prajnapti-Prabhrit 10, Pra. 13, Sutra
47 711. Surya-Prajnapti-Prabhrit 12, Sutra 72 712. Surya-Prajnapti-Prabhrit Pra.
10, 9 Sutra 72 713. Surya-Prajnapti-Pra. 10, Pra. 2., Su. 43 714. Surya-
Prajnapti-Pra. 10, Su. 43 [99]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahaveM samavAya ke AThaveM aura nauveM sUtra meM jaghanya rAta aura dina
bAraha muhUrta ke batAye haiM to sUrya-prajJapti703 meM bhI usakA nirUpaNa huA
hai| paMdrahaveM samavAya ke tIsare aura cauthe sUtra meM dhruvarAhu kA candra
ko AvRta aura anAvRta karane kA varNana hai to sUryaprajJapti04 meM bhI vaha
varNana draSTavya hai| aThArahaveM samavAya ke AThaveM sUtra meM pauSa aura
ASAr3ha mAsa meM eka dina utkRSTa aThAraha muhUrta kA hotA hai tathA eka rAtri
aThAraha muhUrta kI hotI hai| sUryaprajJapti05 meM bhI yahI varNana upalabdha
hai| unnIsaveM samavAya ke dvitIya sUtra meM jambUdvIpa meM sUrya UMce aura nIce
unnIsa sau yojana tApa pahuMcAtA hai| yahI varNana sUryaprajJapti06 meM bhI hai|
caubIsaveM samavAya ke cauthe sUtra meM varNana hai- uttarAyaNa meM rahA huA
sUrya caubIsa aMgula pramANa prathama prahara kI chAyA karake pIche mur3atA hai|
yaha varNana sUryaprajJapti707 meM bhI hai| sattAvIsaveM samavAya ke dUsare aura
tIsare sUtra meM kramazaH yaha varNana hai ki jambUdvIpa meM abhijita ko
chor3akara sattAvIsa nakSatroM se vyavahAra hotA hai aura nakSatra mAsa
sattAvIsa ahorAtri kA hotA hai| yaha varNana sUryaprajJapti08 meM bhI hai|
unatIsaveM samavAya ke tIsare se sAtaveM taka jo varNana hai, vaha varNana
sUryaprajJapti709 meM bhI upalabdha hai| tIsaveM samavAya ke tIsare sUtra meM
tIsa muhUrtA ke nAma batAye haiM, ve nAma sUryaprajJapti 10 meM bhI milate haiN|
ikatIsaveM samavAya ke cauthe aura pAMcaveM sUtra meM kramazaH adhika mAsa kucha
adhika ikatIsa rAtri kA batAyA hai| aura sUryamAsa kucha nyUna ikatIsa ahorAtri
kA batAyA hai| sUryaprajJapti011 meM yahI hai| battIsaveM samavAya ke pAMcaveM
sUtra meM revatI nakSatra ke battIsa tAre batAye haiM to sUryaprajJapti12 meM
bhI yaha varNana chattIsaveM samavAya ke cauthe sUtra meM caitra aura Azvina
mAsa meM eka dina pauruSI chAyA kA pramANa chattIsa aMgula kA honA kahA hai to
sUryaprajJapti 13 meM bhI yahI varNana hai| saiMtIsaveM samavAya ke pAMcaveM
sUtra meM kArtika kRSNA saptamI ke dina sUrya saiMtIsa aMgulapramANa pauruSI
chAyA karake gati karatA hai| yaha varNana sUryaprajJapti 14 meM hai| 703.
sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta 1, prA. 1, sUtra 11 704. sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta 20,
prA. 3, prA. sUtra 105, sU. 35 705. sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta 1, prA. 6, sUtra 18
706. sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta 4, prA. sUtra 25 707. sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta 10,
prA. sUtra 46 708. sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta 10, 12 prA. 1, sUtra 32, 72 709.
sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta 12, sUtra 72 710. sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta 10, prA. 13,
sUtra 47 711. sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta 12, sUtra 72 712. sUryaprajJapti-prAbhRta
prA. 10, 9 sUtra 72 713. sUryaprajJapti-prA. 10, prA. 2., sU. 43 714.
sUryaprajJapti-prA. 10, sU. 43 [99]

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Karata**  The 6th Sutra of the 40th Samavaya states that on the Phalguna
Purnima, the Sun casts a shadow of 40 angulas in length. This description is
also found in the Surya Prajnapti 15.  The 7th Sutra of the 45th Samavaya states
that all the constellations with 1.5 regions combine with the Moon for 45
Muhurtas. This description is also found in the Surya Prajnapti 716.  The 1st
Sutra of the 56th Samavaya states that the 56 constellations in Jambudvipa
combine with the Moon. This description is also found in the Surya Prajnapti 17.
The 1st Sutra of the 62nd Samavaya states that there are 62 Purnimas and 62
Amavasyas in a Yuga of 5 years. This description is also found in the Sutra
Prajnapti 718.  The 1st Sutra of the 71st Samavaya states that after 71
Ahoratras of the Hemant Ritu of the 4th Chandra-Samvatsar, the Sun returns from
the Sarvabahy Mandala. This description is also found in the Surya Prajnapti 19.
The 5th Sutra of the 72nd Samavaya states that 72 Moons and Suns illuminate the
Pushkarardha Dvipa. This description is also found in the Surya Prajnapti 20.
The 1st Sutra of the 88th Samavaya states that each Moon, Sun, and 88 planets
have their own family. This description is also found in the Surya Prajnapti 21.
The descriptions from the 4th to the 7th Sutra of the 89th Samavaya are also
found in the Surya Prajnapti 22.  In this way, many Sutras of the Samavayanga
are found in the Surya Prajnapti.  **Samavayanga and Uttaradhyayana**
Uttaradhyayana holds the first place among the original Sutras. It is extremely
important from the perspective of Agam sentiment, language, and style. It
contains a beautiful analysis of Dharma, Darshan, Adhyatma, Yoga, etc. Here, we
will briefly compare the topics discussed in the Samavayanga with those
discussed in the Uttaradhyayana, which will naturally reveal the importance of
the Samavayanga.  The 3rd Sutra of the 2nd Samavaya mentions two types of
bondage: Raga and Dvesha. Uttaradhyayana 723 also describes them.
**References:**  715. Surya Prajnapti - Pra. 10, Su. 43 716. Surya Prajnapti -
Pra. 3, Su. 35 717. Surya Prajnapti - Pra. 10, Pra. 22, Su. 60 718. Surya
Prajnapti - Pra. 13, Su. 80 719. Surya Prajnapti - Pra. 11 720. Surya Prajnapti
- Pra. 19 721. Surya Prajnapti - Pra. 18, Su. 51 722. Surya Prajnapti - Pra. 1,
10, Pra. 9, Su. 42 723. Uttaradhyayana - A. 21  [100]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karatA cAlIsaveM samavAya ke chaThe sUtra meM phAlguna pUrNimA ke dina sUrya
cAlIsa aMgulapramANa pauruSI chAyA karake gati  /  yaha varNana sUryaprajJapti
15 meM bhI hai| paiMtAlIsaveM samavAya ke sAtaveM sUtra meM Der3ha kSetra vAle
sabhI nakSatra candra ke sAtha paiMtAlIsa muhUrta kA yoga karate haiN| yaha
varNana sUryajJasi716 meM bhI hai| chappanaveM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM
jambUdvIpa meM chappana nakSatroM ne candra ke sAtha yoga kiyA va karate haiM,
yahI varNana sUryaprajJapti17 meM bhI upalabdha hotA hai| bAsaThaveM samavAya ke
prathama sUtra meM varNana haiM ki pA~ca saMvatsara vAle yuga kI bAsaTha
pUrNimAe~ aura bAsaTha amAvasyAe~ hotI haiM, yaha varNana sUtraprajJapti 718 meM
bhI hai| ikahattaraveM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM varNana hai ki cauthe
candra-saMvatsara kI hemanta Rtu ke ikahattara ahorAtra vyatIta hone para
sarvabAhya maNDala se sUrya punarAvRtti karatA hai| yahI varNana sUryaprajJapti
19 meM prApta hai  /  bahattaraveM samavAya kA pA~cavAM sUtra hai, puSkarArdha
dvIpa meM bahattara candra va sUrya prakAza karate haiN| yahI varNana
sUryaprajJapti 20 meM bhI hai| aThAsIveM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM varNana
hai ki pratyeka candra, sUrya kA aThAsI aThAsI graha kA parivAra hai  /  yahI
varNana sUryaprajJapti 21 meM bhI prApta hotA hai| aThAnaveMve samavAya ke
caturtha sUtra se lekara sAtaveM sUtra taka jo varNana hai, vaha sUryaprajJapti
22 meM bhI isI taraha milatA hai| isa taraha sUryaprajJapti ke sAtha samavAyAMga
ke aneka sUtra milate haiM  /  samavAyAMga aura uttarAdhyayana mUla sUtroM meM
uttarAdhyayana kA prathama sthAna hai| yaha Agama bhAva-bhASA aura zailI kI
dRSTi se atyanta mahattvapUrNa hai| isameM dharma, darzana, adhyAtma, yoga Adi
kA sundara vizleSaNa huA hai| hama yahA~ para saMkSepa meM samavAyAMga meM Aye
hue viSayoM kA uttarAdhyayana Aye huye viSayoM ke sAtha digdarzana kareMge,
jisase samavAyAMga kI mahattA kA sahaja hI AbhAsa ho ske| dUsare samavAya ke
tIsare sUtra meM bandha ke rAga aura dveSa ye do prakAra batAye haiN| to
uttarAdhyayana 723 meM bhI unakA nirUpaNa hai  /  715. 716. 717. 718. 719. 720.
721. 722. 723. sUryaprajJapti - prA. 10, sU. 43 sUryaprajJapti - prA. 3, sU. 35
sUryaprajJapti - prA. 10, prA. 22, sU. 60 sUryaprajJapti - prA. 13, sU. 80
sUryaprajJapti - prA. 11 sUryaprajJapti - prA. 19 sUryaprajJapti - prA. 18, sU.
51 sUryaprajJapti - prA. 1, 10, prA. 9, sU. 42 uttarAdhyayana-a. 21 [100]

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first sutra of the third Samaya describes three dandas, which is also
mentioned in Uttaradhyayanasutra 24. The second sutra of the third Samaya
mentions three guptis, which is also found in Uttaradhyayanasutra 25.  The third
sutra of the third Samaya describes three salyas, which is also found in
Uttaradhyayanasutra 26.  The seventh sutra of the fifth Samaya gives the names
of five samitis. Uttaradhyayanasutra 27 elaborates on them.  The third and
fourth sutras of the sixth Samaya describe external and internal tapas. This is
also found in Uttaradhyayanasutra 28.  The first sutra of the seventh Samaya
describes the seven bhayasthanas. Uttaradhyayanasutra 29 also hints at them.
The first sutra of the eighth Samaya discusses the eight madasthanas.
Uttaradhyayanasutra 30 mentions them. The second sutra of the eighth Samaya
lists the names of the eight pravachanamatras. Uttaradhyayanasutra 31 also
describes them. The first sutra of the ninth Samaya describes the nine
brahmacharya-guptis. This topic is also discussed in Uttaradhyayanasutra 32.
The eleventh sutra of the ninth Samaya mentions the nine natures of
darshanavaraneya karma. Uttaradhyayanasutra 33 also states them.  The first
sutra of the tenth Samaya describes the ten dharmas of a Shraman.
Uttaradhyayanasutra 34 also hints at them.  The first sutra of the eleventh
Samaya describes the eleven pratima of an upasaka. Uttaradhyayanasutra 35 also
briefly mentions them.  724. 725. 726. 727. 728. 729. 730. 731. 732. 733. 734.
735.  Uttaradhyayanasutra-a. 31 Uttaradhyayanasutra-a. 24 Uttaradhyayanasutra-a.
31 Uttaradhyayanasutra-a. 24 Uttaradhyayanasutra-a. 30 Uttaradhyayanasutra-a. 31
Uttaradhyayanasutra-a. 31 Uttaradhyayanasutra-a. 24 Uttaradhyayanasutra-a. 36
Uttaradhyayanasutra-a. 33 Uttaradhyayanasutra-a. 31 Uttaradhyayanasutra-a. 41
[101]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tIsare samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM tIna daNDoM kA nirUpaNa hai-to
uttarAdhyayana024 meM bhI vaha varNana hai| tIsare samavAya ke dUsare sUtra meM
tIna guptiyoM kA ullekha hai to uttarAdhyayana 25 meM bhI guptiyoM kA varNana
prApta the tIsare samavAya ke tIsare sUtra meM tIna zalyoM kA varNana hai.to
uttarAdhyayana 26 meM bhI zalyoM kA varNana prApta the pAMcaveM samavAya ke
sAtaveM sUtra meM pAMca samiti ke nAma diye gaye haiN| uttarAdhyayana 27 meM una
para vistAra se nirUpaNa hai| chaThe samavAya kA tIsare aura cauthe sUtra meM
bAhya aura Abhyantara tapa kA varNana hai| uttarAdhyayana028 meM bhI vaha prApta
hai| sAtaveM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM sapta bhayasthAnoM kA nirUpaNa kiyA
gayA hai, uttarAdhyayana 29 meM bhI unake sambandha meM saMketa hai| AThaveM
samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM ATha madasthAnoM kI carcA hai to
uttarAdhyayana730 meM unakA sUcana hai| AThaveM samavAya ke dUsare sUtra meM
aSTa pravacanamAtAoM ke nAma haiM, uttarAdhyayana 31 meM bhI unakA nirUpaNa hai|
navameM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM nava brahmacarya-guptiyA~ nirUpita haiM
to uttarAdhyayana 32 meM bhI yaha viSaya carcita navameM samavAya ke gyArahaveM
sUtra meM darzanAvaraNIya karma kI nau prakRtiyA~ batAyI haiM to uttarAdhyayana
33 meM bhI unakA kathana hai| dazaveM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM zramaNa ke
daza dharmoM kA varNana hai, to uttarAdhyayana 34 meM bhI unakA saMketa
gyArahaveM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM upAsaka kI gyAraha pratimAoM kA
nirUpaNa hai to uttarAdhyayana735 meM bhI saMkSepa meM sUcana hai| 724. 725.
726. 727. 728. 729. 730. 731. 732. 733. 734. 735. uttarAdhyayana-a. 31
uttarAdhyayana-a. 24 uttarAdhyayana-a. 31 uttarAdhyayana-a. 24 uttarAdhyayana-a.
30 uttarAdhyayana-a. 31 uttarAdhyayana-a. 31 uttarAdhyayana-a. 24
uttarAdhyayana-a. 36 uttarAdhyayana-a. 33 uttarAdhyayana-a.31 uttarAdhyayana-a.
41 [101]

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first sutra of the twelfth Samavaya lists the twelve images of a monk, and
the Uttaraadhyayana 36 also briefly mentions them. The first sutra of the
sixteenth Samavaya lists the names of the sixteen chapters of the Sutra-
Kritanga, and the Uttaraadhyayana 37 also hints at them. The first sutra of the
seventeenth Samavaya lists seventeen types of asanaya, and the Uttaraadhyayana
38 also mentions them. The first sutra of the eighteenth Samavaya lists eighteen
types of Brahmacharya, and the Uttaraadhyayana 739 also mentions them. The first
sutra of the nineteenth Samavaya lists the names of the nineteen chapters of the
Jnata-Dharma-Katha, and the Uttaraadhyayana 40 also hints at them. The first
sutra of the twenty-second Samavaya lists the names of the twenty-two Parishahs,
and the Uttaraadhyayana 41 elaborates on them. The first sutra of the twenty-
third Samavaya lists the names of the twenty-three chapters of the Sutra-
Kritanga, and the Uttaraadhyayana 42 also hints at them. According to the fourth
sutra of the twenty-fourth Samavaya, the sun, while in Uttarayana, casts a
shadow of twenty-four angulas in the first prahar, and this description is also
found in the Uttaraadhyayana 43. The first sutra of the twenty-seventh Samavaya
lists the twenty-seven qualities of an Angar, and the Uttaraadhyayana 44 also
mentions them. The first sutra of the thirtieth Samavaya lists the thirty places
of Mohaniya, and the Uttaraadhyayana 45 also mentions them. The first sutra of
the thirty-first Samavaya lists the thirty-one qualities of Siddhas, and the
Uttaraadhyayana 46 also hints at them. The first sutra of the thirty-second
Samavaya lists the thirty-two types of Yoga-Sangraha, and the Uttaraadhyayana 47
also mentions them. 736. 737. 738. 739. 740. 741. 742. 743. Uttaraadhyayana-A.
31 Uttaraadhyayana-A. 31 Uttaraadhyayana-A. 31 Uttaraadhyayana-A. 31
Uttaraadhyayana-A. 31 Uttaraadhyayana-A. 2 Uttaraadhyayana-A. 31
Uttaraadhyayana-A. 26 Uttaraadhyayana-A. 31 Uttaraadhyayana-A. 31
Uttaraadhyayana-A. 31 Uttaraadhyayana-A. 31 744. 746. 747. [102]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahaveM samavAya ke pahale sUtra meM bhikSu kI bAraha pratimAeM ginAI haiM to
uttarAdhyayana36 meM bhI unakI saMkSepa meM sUcanA hai| solahaveM samavAya ke
pahale sUtra meM sUtrakRtAMga ke solaha adhyayanoM ke nAma nirdiSTa haiM to
uttarAdhyayana37 meM bhI unakA saMketa hai| sattarahaveM samavAya ke prathama
sUtra meM sattaraha prakAra ke asaMyama batAye haiM, unakA nirdeza
uttarAdhyayana38 meM bhI aThArahaveM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM brahmacarya
ke aThAraha prakAra batAye haiM, inakA saMketa uttarAdhyayana739 meM bhI prApta
hotA hai| unnIsaveM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM jJAtAdharmakathA ke unnIsa
adhyayanoM ke nAma Aye haiM to uttarAdhyayana 40 meM unakA saMketa hai|
bAvIsaveM samavAya ke prathama satra meM bAvIsa-parISahoM ke nAma nirdiSTa haiM
to uttarAdhyayana 41 meM unakA vistAra se nirUpaNa hai| tevIsaveM samavAya ke
prathama sUtra meM sUtrakRtAMga ke teIsa adhyayanoM ke nAma haiM, uttarAdhyayana
42 meM bhI unakA saMketa hai| caubIsaveM samavAya ke cauthe sUtra ke anusAra
uttarAyaNa meM rahA huA sUrya caubIsa aMgula pramANa prathama prahara kI chAyA
karatA huA pIche mur3atA hai, yaha varNana uttarAdhyayana 43 meM bhI hai|
sattAvIsaveM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM anagAra ke sattAvIsa guNa
pratipAdita haiM, to uttarAdhyayana 44 meM bhI unakA tIsaveM samavAya ke
prathama sUtra meM mohanIya ke tIsa sthAna batAye haiM, uttarAdhyayana 45 meM
bhI isakA nirdeza hai| ikatIsaveM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM siddhoM ke
ikatIsa guNa kahe haiM, to uttarAdhyayana 46 meM bhI inakA saMketa battIsaveM
samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM yogasaMgraha ke battIsa prakAra batAye haiM,
uttarAdhyayana 47 meM bhI unakI sUcanA hai| 736. 737. 738. 739. 740. 741. 742.
743. uttarAdhyayana-a. 31 uttarAdhyayana-a. 31 uttarAdhyayana-a. 31
uttarAdhyayana-a. 31 uttarAdhyayana-a. 31 uttarAdhyayana-a. 2 uttarAdhyayana-a.
31 uttarAdhyayana-a. 26 uttarAdhyayana-a. 31 uttarAdhyayana-a. 31
uttarAdhyayana-a. 31 uttarAdhyayana-a. 31 744. 746. 747. [102]

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first sutra of the thirty-third Samavayanga lists the names of thirty-three
Ashatanas, which are also mentioned in Uttaradhyayanasutra 48. The first sutra
of the thirty-sixth Samavayanga lists the names of the thirty-six chapters of
Uttaradhyayanasutra. The third sutra of the seventy-ninth Samavayanga lists the
seventy-nine Uttar Karma-Prakritis, excluding the Mohaniya Karma, which are the
remaining seven original Karma-Prakritis. This description is also found in
Uttaradhyayanasutra 50. According to the fourth sutra of the seventieth
Samavayanga, the state of Mohaniya Karma is said to be seventy Koti Koti
Sagaropama, excluding the seven thousand years of Abada Kala. This description
is found in Uttaradhyayanasutra 51. According to the fifth sutra of the eighty-
seventh Samavayanga, there are eighty-seven Uttar-Prakritis of the six original
Karma-Prakritis, excluding the first and last. This description is also found in
Uttaradhyayanasutra 752. According to the third sutra of the eighty-ninth
Samavayanga, there are eighty-nine Uttar Karma-Prakritis of the eight original
Karma-Prakritis. This description is found in Uttaradhyayanasutra 753. In this
way, there are many topics in Uttaradhyayanasutra that are discussed in
Samavayanga, sometimes briefly and sometimes in detail. Samavayanga and
Anuyogadwar Anuyogadwar is the fourth in the enumeration of the original sutras.
Anuyog means a special process of explaining or discussing words. Many topics
found in Samavayanga are also discussed in Anuyogadwar. The topics discussed in
the twenty-sixth to fortieth sutras of the first Samavayanga are also discussed
in Anuyogadwar 54. The topics discussed in the eighth to twentieth sutras of the
second Samavayanga are discussed in Anuyogadwar 55. The topics mentioned in the
thirteenth to twenty-first sutras of the third Samavayanga are also found in
Anuyogadwar 56. The topics discussed in the tenth to seventeenth sutras of the
fourth Samavayanga are also discussed in Anuyogadwar Sutra 757.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tetIsaveM samavAya ke prathama sUtra meM tetIsa AzAtanAoM kA nAma-nirdeza haiM
to uttarAdhyayana48 meM bhI inakA sUcana kiyA gayA hai| chattIsaveM samavAya ke
prathama sUtra meM uttarAdhyayana ke chattIsa adhyayanoM ke nAma Aye haiN|749
unahattaraveM samavAya ke tIsare sUtra meM mohanIya karma ko chor3akara zeSa
sAta mUla karma-prakRtiyoM ko unahattara uttara karma-prakRtiyA~ batAyI haiN|
yaha varNana uttarAdhyayana 50 meM bhI prApta hai| sattaraveM samavAya ke cauthe
sUtra ke anusAra mohanIya karma kI sthiti, abAdhAkAla sAta-hajAra varSa
chor3akara sattara koTAkoTi sAgaropama kI batAyI hai| uttarAdhyayana51 meM yahI
varNana milatA hai| sattAsIveM samavAya ke pA~caveM sUtra ke anusAra prathama
aura antima ko chor3akara chaha mUla karmaprakRtiyoM kI sattAsI uttaraprakRtiyA~
hotI haiM, yahI varNana uttarAdhyayana 752 meM bhI haiN| sattAnaveM samavAya ke
tIsare sUtra ke anusAra ATha mUla karma-prakRtiyoM kI sattAnave uttarakarma-
prakRtiyA~ haiM, yahI varNana uttarAdhyayana753 meM prApta hai| isa taraha
uttarAdhyayana meM samavAyAMgagata aise aneka viSaya haiM, jinakI uttarAdhyayana
meM kahIM saMkSepa meM aura kahIM vistAra se carcA milatI hai| samavAyAMga aura
anuyogadvAra mUla sUtroM kI parigaNanA meM anuyogadvAra kA caturtha sthAna hai|
anuyoga kA artha hai-zabdoM kI vyAkhyA yA vivecana karane kI prkriyaa-vishess|
samavAyAMga meM Aye hue aneka viSaya anuyogadvAra meM bhI pratipAdita huye haiN|
prathama samavAya ke chabbIsaveM sUtra se lekara cAlIsaveM sUtra taka jina
viSayoM kI carcA hai, ve viSaya anuyogadvAra 54 meM bhI carcita haiN| dUsare
samavAya ke AThaveM sUtra se lekara bIsaveM sUtra taka jina-jina viSayoM kI
carcA kI gayI hai, ve anuyogadvAra55 meM carcita huye haiN| tRtIya samavAya ke
terahaveM sUtra se lekara ikkIsaveM sUtra taka jina viSayoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA
hai ve viSaya anuyogadvAra 56 meM bhI Aye haiN| cauthe samavAya ke dasaveM sUtra
se lekara sattarahaveM sUtra taka ke viSayoM para anuyogadvArasUtra757 meM bhI
cintana kiyA gayA hai| 748. uttarAdhyayana-a. 31 749. uttarAdhyayana-a.1 se 36
taka uttarAdhyayana-a. 33 751. uttarAdhyayana-a. 33 gA. 31 752.
uttarAdhyayana-a.33 uttarAdhyayana-a. 33 754. anuyogadvAra -sUtra. 139
anuyogadvAra -sUtra. 139 756. anuyogadvAra -sUtra. 139, 140 757. anuyogadvAra
sUtra-sUtra 139 [103] 750. 753. 755.

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The ideas that are revealed from the fourteenth to the nineteenth sutras of the
fifth Samavaya are also to be seen in the Anuyogadvara. From the tenth to the
fifteenth sutras of the sixth Samavaya, and from the twelfth to the twentieth
sutras of the seventh Samavaya, from the tenth to the fourteenth sutras of the
eighth Samavaya, from the twelfth to the seventeenth sutras of the ninth
Samavaya, from the tenth to the twenty-second sutras of the tenth Samavaya, from
the eighth to the thirteenth sutras of the eleventh Samavaya, up to the twelfth
sutra of the twelfth Samavaya, from the ninth to the fourteenth sutras of the
thirteenth Samavaya, from the ninth to the fifteenth sutras of the fourteenth
Samavaya, from the eighth to the fourteenth sutras of the fifteenth Samavaya,
from the eighth to the thirteenth sutras of the sixteenth Samavaya, from the
eleventh to the eighteenth sutras of the seventeenth Samavaya, from the ninth to
the fifteenth sutras of the eighteenth Samavaya, from the sixth to the twelfth
sutras of the nineteenth Samavaya, from the eighth to the fourteenth sutras of
the twentieth Samavaya, from the fifth to the tenth sutras of the twenty-first
Samavaya, from the seventh to the twelfth sutras of the twenty-fourth Samavaya,
from the tenth to the fifteenth sutras of the twenty-fifth Samavaya, from the
second to the eighth sutras of the twenty-sixth Samavaya, from the seventh to
the twelfth sutras of the twenty-seventh Samavaya, from the sixth to the
eleventh sutras of the twenty-eighth Samavaya, from the tenth to the fifteenth
sutras of the twenty-ninth Samavaya, from the eighth to the thirteenth sutras of
the thirtieth Samavaya, from the sixth to the eleventh sutras of the thirty-
first Samavaya, from the seventh to the eleventh sutras of the thirty-second
Samavaya, from the fifth to the eleventh sutras of the thirty-third Samavaya,
all the topics that are mentioned are discussed in the Anuyogadvara, sometimes
briefly and sometimes in detail. _ In this way, the subject matter of the
Samavayanga is so vast that it has been discussed in many places in the Agamic
literature. In some places in the Agamas, the Sutra style has been used, while
in other places, the Vyasa style has also been used to explain to the
inquisitive. In the above lines, we have thought about the main topics of the
Samavayanga, which are found in the Agamas, with evidence. Thus, the topics of
Dasavaikalika, Nandi, Dasashrutaskandha and Kalpasutra also coincide with some
of the Samavayanga, but since their number is not large, we have not mentioned
them here, nor have we compared the topics with non-Agamic texts. The topics of
the Samavayanga can also be easily compared with the topics of Vedic and
Buddhist texts. Thus, they have been mentioned briefly in their respective
places. Today there is a need to study the Agamic literature comparatively with
other literature. If the attention of the great thinkers is focused on this,
then many doors of harmony and truth can be opened. Commentary Literature The
Samavayanga Sutra does not contain deep philosophical riddles, nor does it
contain profound discussions on spirituality. Whatever topics are presented are
simple, easy and understandable, which is why no commentaries have been written
on it, nor has any commentary been created, nor have any churnis been composed.
Acharya Abhaydeva, the first commentator of the Navangi, created a commentary on
it. This commentary is neither too short nor too long. At the beginning of the
commentary, the Acharya has saluted Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, because Bhagwan
Mahavira is the one who reveals the meaning of this present Agam. Acharya
Abhaydeva has written to the wise 758. Anuyogadvara Sutra - Sutra 139 [104]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pA~caveM samavAya ke caudahaveM sUtra se lekara unnIsaveM sUtra taka jo bhAva
prajJApita huye haiM, ve anuyogadvAra meM bhI draSTavya haiN| chaThe samavAya ke
dasaveM sUtra se lekara pandrahaveM sUtra taka, aura sAtaveM samavAya ke
bArahaveM sUtra se lekara bIsaveM sUtra taka, AThaveM samavAya ke dasaveM sUtra
se lekara caudahaveM sUtra taka, nauveM samavAya ke bArahaveM sUtra se lekara
sattarahaveM sUtra taka, dasaveM samavAya ke dasaveM sUtra se lekara bAvIsaveM
sUtra taka, gyArahaveM samavAya ke AThaveM sUtra se lekara terahaveM sUtra taka,
bArahaveM samavAya ke bArahaveM sUtra taka, terahaveM samavAya ke navameM sUtra
se lekara caudahaveM sUtra taka, caudahaveM samavAya ke navameM sUtra se lekara
pandrahaveM sUtra taka, pandrahaveM samavAya ke AThaveM sUtra se lekara
caudahaveM sUtra taka, solahaveM samavAya ke AThaveM sUtra se lekara terahaveM
sUtra taka, sattarahaveM samavAya ke gyArahaveM sUtra se lekara aThArahaveM
sUtra taka, aThArahaveM samavAya ke navama sUtra se lekara, pandrahaveM sUtra
taka, unnIsaveM samavAya ke chaThe sUtra se lekara bArahaveM sUtra taka, 5
AThaveM sUtra se lekara caudahaveM sUtra taka, ikkIsaveM samavAya ke pAMcaveM
sUtra se lekara dasaveM sUtra taka caubIsaveM samavAya ke sAtaveM sUtra se
lekara bArahaveM sUtra taka, paccIsaveM samavAya ke dazaveM satra se lekara
pandrahaveM satra taka, chabbIsaveM samavAya ke dUsare sUtra se lekara AThaveM
sUtra taka, sattAvIsaveM samavAya ke sAtaveM sUtra se lekara bArahaveM sUtra
taka, aThAvIsaveM samavAya ke chaThe sUtra se lekara gyArahaveM sUtra taka,
unatIsaveM samavAya ke dazaveM sUtra se lekara pandrahaveM sUtra taka, tIsaveM
samavAya ke AThaveM sUtra se lekara terahaveM sUtra taka, ikatIsaveM samavAya ke
chaThe sUtra se lekara gyArahaveM sUtra taka, battIsaveM samavAya ke sAtaveM
sUtra lekara gyArahaveM sUtra taka, tetIsaveM samavAya ke pAMcaveM sUtra se
lekara gyArahaveM sUtra taka, jina-jina viSayoM kA varNana AyA hai ve viSaya
anuyogadvAra758 meM kahIM saMkSepa meM to kahIM vistAra se carcita haiN| _ isa
taraha samavAyAMga kA viSaya-varNana itanA adhika vyApaka hai ki Agama sAhitya
meM aneka sthaloM para usa sambandha meM vicAracarcAe~ kI gaI haiN| AgamoM meM
kahIM para sUtra zailI kA upayoga huA hai to kahIM para jijJAsuoM ko samajhAne
ke lie vyAsazailI kA upayoga bhI huA hai| hamane uparyukta paMktiyoM meM mukhya
rUpa se samavAyAMgagata viSaya jina AgamoM meM aye haiM, una para sapramANa
cintana kiyA hai| yoM dazavaikAlika, nandI, dazAzrutaskandha va kalpasUtra ke
viSaya bhI kucha samavAyAMga ke sAtha milate haiM para unakI saMkhyA adhika na
hone se hamane unakA yahA~ para ullekha nahIM kiyA hai aura na Agametara
granthoM ke sAtha viSayoM kI tulanA kI hai| vaidika aura bauddha granthoM ke
viSayoM ke sAtha bhI samavAyAMgagata viSayoM kI tulanA sahajarUpa se kI jA
sakatI hai| yoM saMkSepa meM yathAsthAna unakA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| Aja
AvazyakatA hai Agama sAhitya kI anya sAhitya ke sAtha tulanAtmaka adhyayana
karane kii| mUrdhanya manISiyoM kA dhyAna isa ora kendrita ho to samanvaya aura
satya ke aneka dvAra udghATita ho sakate haiN| vyAkhyA-sAhitya samavAyAMga sUtra
meM na darzana sambandhI gahana gutthiyA~ haiM aura na adhyAtma sambandhI
gaMbhIra vivecana hI haiN| jo bhI viSaya nirUpita haiM ve sahaja, sugama aura
subodha haiM, jisake kAraNa isa para na niyuktiyAM likhI gaI haiM aura na bhASya
kA nirmANa hI kiyA gayA aura na cUrNiyAM hI racI giiN| sarvaprathama navAGgI-
TIkAkAra AcArya abhayadeva ne isa para vRtti kA nirmANa kiyaa| yaha vRtti na
atisaMkSipta hai aura na ativistRta hii| vRtti ke prArambha meM AcArya ne
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko namaskAra kiyA hai, kyoMki prastuta Agama ke artha-
prarUpaka bhagavAn mahAvIra haiN| AcArya abhayadeva ne vijJoM 758.
anuyogadvArasUtra-sUtra 139 [104]

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is requested that I lack the tradition of meaning that reveals the profound
secrets of the Agamas before me, therefore, if there is any opposite
interpretation of meaning anywhere, please do me the favor of refining it. In
the commentary, the Acharya has also explained the word "Samavaya". While
explaining, he has also mentioned the variations in the text at many places. 760
The Prajnapana Sutra and the commentary of Gandhasti are also mentioned. This
commentary was written in 1120 VS in Anahilapatan. Its volume is 3575 verses.
The revered Shri Ghasilalji M. is the one who wrote the second Sanskrit
commentary on this Agama. 61 He has created the commentary following Acharya
Abhaydev. This commentary is of its own kind. At some places, the commentator
has changed the text from his point of view for the consistency of meaning. For
example, the names of the Tirthankaras who will be in the future Utsarpini have
been changed. 62 In our view, there can be no objection to the author giving his
independent views in the commentary or discussion, but changing the original
texts makes their authenticity disappear. Therefore, it is not appropriate to
change the texts. Acharya Amolkarishiji M. was the first to translate
Samavayangasutra into Hindi. He has done great service to the scriptures by
translating thirty-two Agamas into Hindi. 63 Panditpravar Dalsukh Bhai Malvaniya
64 has done an important translation in Gujarati language. This translation is
not a translation but a unique creation. Malvaniya ji's scholarship is evident
everywhere. The notes he has given along with this translation are indicative of
his serious study. This edition is very useful for researchers. Panditpravar
Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji "Kamal" has published Samavayanga with Hindi
translation. The appendix section of the book is important. This edition is
beneficial for the inquisitive. 065 Acharya Abhaydev's commentary was first
published in 1880 by Rai Bahadur Dhanpatsinghji. After that, in 1919, a new
edition was published by the Agamoday Committee, Surat. In 138, Mafatlal
Jhaverchand printed an edition with commentary from Ahmedabad. In Vikram Samvat
1995, an edition with Gujarati translation was also published by the Jain Dharma
Pracharak Sabha, Bhavnagar. This Agama is also published along with other Anga
Agamas like "Suttagame" 766 Angasuttani 67, Angapavitthani 68, etc., only in the
form of the original text. 759. Samavayanga Vritti 1-2 760. Instead of
"Jambuddive Dive Egam Joyanasayasahassan Aayaayavikkhambhenam", the text
"Jambuddive Deve Egam Joyanasayasahassan Chakkavalavikkhambhenam" etc. is found.
"Navaram Jambuddive Iha Sutre" "Aayaayavikkhambhenam" ti Kwachit Paatho
Drishyate Kwachitu "Chakkavalavikbhenam ti.....॥" -Samavayanga Vritti-Ahmedabad
Edition, p. 5 761. Jain Shastrodwar Committee, Rajkot 1962 762. Shri Krishna's
Future Birth-A Contemplation. Author-Devendramuni Shastri 763. Lala Sukhdevsahay
Jwalaprasadji, Hyderabad VS 2446 764. Gujarat Vidyapeeth, Ahmedabad 1955 Agama
Anuyog Prakashan, Post Box No. 1141, Delhi 7 766. Dharmopadeṣṭā Phūlchandji M.
Edited, Gurgaon-Punjab 767. Muni Shri Nathmalji Edited, Jain Vishvabharati,
Ladnun 768. Jain Sanskriti Rakshak Sangh-Sailana (Madhya Pradesh) [105] 765.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 se yaha abhyarthanA kI hai ki mere sAmane Agama ke gurugaMbhIra rahasyoM ko
udghATita karane vAlI arthaparamparA kA abhAva hai, ata: kahIM para viparIta
arthaprarUpaNA ho gaI ho to vijJagaNa pariSkRta karane kA anugraha 59 kreN|
vRtti meM AcArya ne samavAya zabda kI vyAkhyA bhI kI hai| vyAkhyA karate hue
aneka sthaloM para pAThAntaroM ke ullekha bhI kiye haiN|760 prajJApanA sUtra
tathA gandhahastI ke bhASya kA bhI ullekha hai| yaha vRtti vi.saM. 1120 meM
aNahila pATaNa meM likhI gayI hai| isa kA granthamAna 3575 zloka-pramANa hai|
isa Agama para dUsarI saMskRta TIkA karane vAle pUjya zrI ghAsIlAlajI ma.
haiN|61 unhoMne AcArya abhayadeva kA anusaraNa karate hue TIkA kA nirmANa kiyA
hai| yaha TIkA apane DhaMga kI hai| kahIM-kahIM para TIkAkAra ne apanI dRSTi se
artha kI saMgati ke liye pATha meM bhI parivartana kara diyA hai| jaise AgAmI
kAla ke utsarpiNI meM hone vAle tIrthaMkaroM ke nAmoM meM parivartana huA hai|
62 hamArI dRSTi se, TIkA yA vivecana meM lekhaka apane svatantra vicAra deM, isa
meM kisI ko Apatti nahIM ho sakatI, kintu mUla pAThoM meM parivartana karane se
unakI prAmANikatA lupta ho jAtI hai| ataH pAThoM ko parivartita karanA ucita
nhiiN| samavAyAMgasUtra para sarvaprathama hindI anuvAda karane vAle AcArya
amolaka RSi jI ma. huye haiN| unhoMne battIsa AgamoM kA hindI meM anuvAda kara
mahAn zrutasevA kI hai| 63 gujarAtI bhASA meM paNDitapravara dalasukhabhAI
mAlavaNiyA 64 ne mahattvapUrNa anuvAda kiyA hai| yaha anuvAda anuvAda na hokara
eka viziSTa racanA ho gaI hai| sarvatra mAlavaNiyAjI kA pANDitya chalakatA hai|
unhoMne isa anuvAda ke sAtha jo TippaNa diye haiM ve unake gambhIra adhyayana ke
dyotaka haiN| anusandhAnakartAoM ke liye yaha saMskaraNa atyanta upayogI hai|
paNDitapravara muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI "kamala" ne hindI anuvAda ke sAtha
samavAyAMga kA prakAzana kiyA hai| grantha kA pariziSTa vibhAga mahattvapUrNa
hai| yaha saMskaraNa jijJAsuoM ke lie zreyaskara hai|065 AcArya abhayadeva vRtti
sahita sarvaprathama san 1880 meM rAyabahAdura dhanapatasiMha jI ne eka
saMskaraNa prakAzita kiyA aura usake pazcAt san 1919 meM Agamodaya samiti sUrata
se usakA abhinava saMskaraNa prakAzita huaa| usake 138 meM maphatalAla
jhaveracanda ne ahamadAbAda se vRtti sahita hI eka saMskaraNa mudrita kiyaa|
vikrama saMvat 1995 meM jainadharma pracAraka sabhA bhAvanagara se gujarAtI
anuvAda sahita saMskaraNa bhI prakAzita huA hai| kevala mUlapATha ke rUpa meM
"suttAgame"766 aMgasuttANi 67, aMgapaviTThANi 68 Adi anya aMga-AgamoM ke sAtha
yaha Agama bhI prakAzita hai| 759. samavAyAMga vRtti 1-2 760. "jaMbuddIve dIve
egaM joyaNasayasahassaM AyAyavikkhaMbheNaM" ke sthAna para "jaMbuddIve deve egaM
joyaNasayasahassaM cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM" Adi pATha milatA hai "navaraM
jaMbuddIve iha sUtre" "AyAyavikkhaMbheNaM" ti kvacit pATho dRzyate kvacitu
"cakkavAlavikbheNaM ti.....||" -samavAyAMga vRtti-ahamadAbAda saMskaraNa, pR. 5
761. jainazAstrodvAra samiti, rAjakoTa san 1962 762. zrIkRSNa ke AgAmI bhava-eka
anucintn| lekhaka-devendramuni zAstrI 763. lAlA sukhadevasahAya jvAlAprasAda jI,
haidarAbAda vI. saM. 2446 764. gujarAta vidyApITha, ahamadAbAda san 1955 Agama
anuyoga prakAzana, posTa baoNksa naM. 1141, dillI 7 766. dharmopadeSTA
phUlacandajI ma. sampAdita, gur3agAMva-paMjAba 767. muni zrI nathamalajI
sampAdita, jaina vizvabhAratI, lADanUM 768. jaina saMskRti rakSaka saMgha-
sailAnA (madhyapradeza) [105] 765.

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In addition to these editions, the enlightened Acharya Shri Dharmsingh Muni of
the Jain community of Sthanakvasi had written a commentary on Samvayanga,
clarifying the original meaning of the words, but it is still unpublished. This
edition In this way, editions of the Samvayanga Sutra are published from time to
time. The chief editor of this edition is Shraman Sangh's brilliant young
Acharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji M. Under your able leadership, the Agam-Prakashan-
Samiti is engaged in publishing magnificent editions of the Agams. Many Agams
have been published in a short period of time. Since the editor and commentator
of each Agam are different individuals, the uniformity that should have been in
the series of books has not been able to come. It cannot come either, because
each person has his own independent writing and editing style. However, the
young Acharya Shri has taken up this great task. In the conferences of the
Shraman Sangh and the Sthanakvasi Conference, efforts have been made for a long
time to have a new publication of Agam-Battissi. I am extremely delighted that
the young Acharya Shri, a classmate and affectionate associate of my most
revered Sadguru Shri Pushkar Muni Ji M., the Adhyatmayogi of Rajasthan, has
taken up this task with a firm resolve to complete it very soon. This is a
matter of pride. It is our duty to give him full cooperation and make this work
more and more original. The editor and commentator of Samvayanga is Pandit Shri
Hiralalji Shastri. Pandit Hiralalji Shastri was a well-known and respected
literary figure of the Digambar Jain tradition. He had edited many Digambar
texts and displayed his brilliance. In the twilight of his life, he edited the
great Agams Sthananga and Samvayanga of the Svetambar tradition. Sthananga has
been published earlier from this series of Agams. Now the Samvayanga Sutra
edited by him is being published. Due to old age, he could not work as much as
he wanted. And due to some differences in tradition, he could not explain the
subject completely. I have tried to fulfill all those topics in my introduction.
However, the original meaning-based translation and the brief commentary given
wherever necessary are clear indicators of his scholarship. The editing skills
of the pen-wielding Pandit Shobhachandji Bharill, who is a deep scholar of
Svetambar Agams, are easily seen here and there. In fact, the laborious work
that Bharillji is doing to make the Agams the most beautiful and authentic is a
sign of his devotion to the Agams. While writing the introduction of Samvayanga,
many obstacles arose. The biggest obstacle was the sudden demise of the revered
Matheshwari Sadhviratna Mahasati Shri Prabhavatiji, a gifted scholar of Agams
and philosophy, on January 27, 1982, along with Santhare. A mother's love is
unique. The kindness of parents cannot be forgotten. How can one forget the
great kindness of the Matheshwari who not only gave me birth but also inspired
me to walk on the path of sadhana? However, the living image of duty has this
heartfelt blessing: 'Vats! Do a lot of Shrutaseva!' With that strength, I have
written these lines of the introduction. I hope this Agam will be very popular
and this edition will be very useful for those who love to study. -Devendramuni
Shastri Jain Sthanak Mokalsar (Raj.) Dated February 26, 1982

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ina saMskaraNoM ke atirikta sthAnakavAsI jaina samAja ke prabuddha AcArya zrI
dharmasiMha muni ne samavAyAMga para mUlasparzI zabdArtha ko spaSTa karane vAlA
TabbA liA thA para vaha abhI taka aprakAzita hai| prastuta saMskaraNa isa taraha
samaya-samaya para samavAyAMga sUtra ke saMskaraNa prakAzita hote rahate haiN|
prastuta saMskaraNa ke pradhAna sampAdaka haiM - zramaNasaMgha ke tejasvI
yuvAcArya zrImadhukara muni jI m.| Apake kuzala netRtva meM Agama-prakAzana-
samiti AgamoM ke zAnadAra saMskaraNa prakAzita karane meM saMlagna hai|
svalpAvadhi meM aneka Agama prakAzita ho cuke haiN| pratyeka Agama ke sampAdaka
aura vivecaka pRthak-pRthak vyakti hone ke kAraNa granthamAlA meM jo ekarUpatA
AnI cAhiye thI vaha nahIM A sakI hai| vaha A bhI nahIM sakatI hai, kyoMki
pratyeka vyakti kI svatantra lekhana va sampAdana zailI hotI hai| tathApi
yuvAcAryazrI ne yaha mahAn bhAgIratha kArya uThAyA hai| zramaNasaMgha ke
sammelanoM meM tathA sthAnakavAsI kAnphreMsa dIrghakAla se yaha prayatna kara
rahI thI ki Agama-battIsI kA abhinava prakAzana ho| mujhe parama AhlAda hai ki
mere parama zraddheya sadguruvarya rAjasthAnakezarI adhyAtmayogI
upAdhyAyapravara zrI puSkaramuni jI ma. ke sahapAThI va snehI sahayogI
yuvAcAryapravara ne dattacitta hokara isa kArya ko atizIghra rUpa se sampanna
karane kA dRr3ha saMkalpa kiyA hai| yaha gaurava kI bAta hai| hama sabhI kA
kartavya hai ki unheM pUrNa sahayoga dekara isa kArya ko adhikAdhika maulika
rUpa meM pratiSThita kreN| samavAyAMga ke sampAdaka va vivecaka paNDitapravara
zrI hIrAlAlajI zAstrI haiN| paNDita hIrAlAlajI zAstrI digambara jaina paramparA
ke jAne-mAne pratiSThita sAhityakAra the| unhoMne aneka digambara-granthoM kA
sampAdana kara apanI pratibhA kA paricaya diyA thaa| jIvana kI sAndhyavelA meM
unhoMne zvetAmbara paramparA ke mahanIya Agama sthAnAMga aura samavAyAMga kA
sampAdana kiyaa| sthAnAMga isI AgamamAlA se pUrva prakAzita ho cukA hai| aba
unake dvArA sampAdita samavAyAMga sUtra prakAzita ho rahA hai| vRddhAvasthA ke
kAraNa jitanA cAhiye, utanA zrama ve nahIM kara sake haiN| tathA kahIM-kahIM
paramparAbheda hone ke kAraNa viSaya ko pUrNa spaSTa bhI nahIM kara sake haiN|
maiMne apanI prastAvanA meM una sabhI viSayoM kI pUrti karane kA prayAsa kiyA
hai| tathApi mUlasparzI bhAvAnuvAda aura jo yathAsthAna saMkSipta vivecana diyA
hai, vaha una ke pANDitya kA spaSTa paricAyaka hai| sampAdanakalAmarmajJa
kalamakalAdhara paNDita zobhAcandrajI bhArilla, jo zvetAmbara AgamoM ke
talasparzI vidvAna haiM, unakI sampAdanakalA kA yatra-tatra sahaja hI digdarzana
hotA hai| vastutaH bhArilla jI AgamoM ko sarvAdhika sundara va prAmANika banAne
ke liye jo zramasAdhya kArya kara rahe haiN| vaha unakI Agama-niSThA kA dyotaka
hai| samavAyAMga kI prastAvanA kA Alekhana karate samaya aneka vyavadhAna
upasthita huye| una meM sabase bar3A vyavadhAna prakRSTa pratibhA kI dhanI Agama
va darzana kI gambhIra jJAtA pUjya mAtezvarI sAdhvIratna mahAsatI zrI prabhAvatI
jI kA saMthAre ke sAtha akasmAt di. 27 janavarI 1982 ko svargavAsa ho jAnA rhaa|
mA~ kI mamatA nirAlI hotI hai| mAtA-pitA ke upakAroM ko bhulAyA nahIM jA sktaa|
jisa mAtezvarI ne mujhe janma hI nahIM diyA, apitu sAdhanA ke mahAmArga para
bar3hane ke liye utprerita kiyA, usake mahAn upakAra ko kaise bhulAyA jA sakatA
hai, tathApi kartavya kI jItI jAgatI pratimA kA yahI hArdika AzIrvAda ki 'vatsa!
khUba zrutasevA karo!' usI saMbala ko lekara maiM prastAvanA kI ye paMktiyA~
likha gayA huuN| AzA hai prastuta Agama atyadhika lokapriya hogA aura
svAdhyAyapremiyoM ke liye yaha saMskaraNa atyanta upayogI rhegaa| -devendramuni
zAstrI jaina sthAnaka mokalasara (rAja.) di. 26 pharavarI, 1982

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents  **One-Place Category** * **Ekasthanak Samavay**     * Soul
(Atma), Non-Soul (Anatma), Punishment (Dand), Non-Punishment (Adand), Action
(Kriya), Non-Action (Akriya), World (Lok), Non-World (Alok), Dharma, Adharma,
Puny, Pap, Bandha, Moksha, Asrava, Samvara, Vedana, Nirjara.     * Palak Yana
Vimana, Sarvarth Siddhi Vimana, Ardranakshastra, Chitra Nakshastra, Swati
Nakshastra, Position (Sthiti), Food (Ahar), Breathing (Shwasochchwas), Siddhi.
**Two-Place Category** * **Dwistahanak Samavay**     * Punishment (Dand),
Quantity (Rashi), Bondage (Bandhan), Purva Phalguni, Uttara Phalguni, Purva
Bhadrapada, Uttara Bhadrapada Nakshastra, Position (Sthiti), Breathing
(Shwasochchwas), Food (Ahar), Siddhi.  **Three-Place Category** * **Tristhanak
Samavay**     * Punishment (Dand), Guप्ति (Gupti), Shalya, Garav, Viradhana,
Mrigashira-Pushya-Jyestha-Abhijit-Shravana-Ashwini-Bharani Nakshastra, Position
(Sthiti), Breathing (Shwasochchwas), Food (Ahar), Siddhi.  **Four-Place
Category** * **Chatuhsthanak Samavay**     * Kashaya, Dhyan, Vikatha, Sanjna,
Bandha, Anuradha-Purva Ashadha-Uttara Ashadha Nakshastra, Position (Sthiti),
Breathing (Shwasochchwas), Siddhi.  **Five-Place Category** * **Panchasthanak
Samavay**     * Kriya, Mahavrata, Kamgun, Asrava Dwar, Samvara Dwar, Nirjara
Sthan, Samiti, Astikaya, Rohini, Punarvasu-Hast-Visakha-Dhanishtha Nakshastra,
Position (Sthiti), Breathing (Shwasochchwas), Food (Ahar), Siddhi.  **Six-Place
Category** * **Shatsthanak Samavay**     * Leshya, Jeevanikaya, Tap, Chadyasthik
Samudghat, Arthavagraha, Krittika-Ashlesha Nakshastra, Position (Sthiti),
Breathing (Shwasochchwas), Food (Ahar), Siddhi.  **Seven-Place Category** *
**Saptasthanak Samavay**     * Bhayasthan, Samudghat, B. Mahavir's Avgahana,
Varshadhar Parvat, Varsha, Karma Prakriti Vedana, Magha Nakshastra, East-South,
West-North Dwarik Nakshastra Nirupan, Position (Sthiti), Breathing
(Shwasochchwas), Food (Ahar), Siddhi.  **Eight-Place Category** * **Ashtastanak
Samavay**     * Madasthan, Pravachanamata, Vanavyantaron ke Chaityavriksh, Jambu
Sudarshan, Kutasalmalli, Jambudweep Jagati, Kevali Samudghat, Parshvanath ke
Gan-Gandhar Nakshastra, Position (Sthiti), Breathing (Shwasochchwas), Food
(Ahar), Siddhi.  **Nine-Place Category** * **Navasthanak Samavay**     * 22
Brahmacharya Guptiyan, Aguptiyan, Brahmacharya-Adhyayan, Parshvanath's Avgahana,
Nakshastra, Tara-Sanchar, Jambudweep mein Matsya Pravesh, Vijay Dwar, Van-
Vyantaron ko Sudharma Sabha, Darshanavaran ki Prakritiyan, Position (Sthiti),
Breathing (Shwasochchwas), Food (Ahar), Siddhi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayAnukramaNikA prastAvanA ekasthAnaka samavAya AtmA, anAtmA, daMDa, adaMDa,
kriyA, akriyA, loka, aloka, dharma, adharma, puNya, pApa, bandha, mokSa, Asrava,
saMvara, vedanA, nirjraa| pAlaka yAna vimAna, sarvArthasiddhavimAna,
ArdrAnakSatra, citrAnakSatra, svAtinakSatra, sthiti, AhAra, zvAsocchvAsa,
siddhi| dvisthAnaka samavAya daMDa, rAzi, bandhana, pUrvAphAlgunI,
uttarAphAlgunI, pUrvAbhAdrapadA, uttarAbhAdrapadA nakSatra, sthiti,
zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi| tristhAnaka samavAya daMDa, gupti, zalya, gArava,
virAdhanA, mRgazira-puSya-jyeSThA-abhijita-zravaNa-azvinI-bharaNI nakSatra,
sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi| catuHsthAnaka samavAya kaSAya, dhyAna,
vikathA, saMjJA, bandha, anurAdhA-pUrvASADhA-uttarASADhA nakSatra, sthiti,
zvAsocchvAsa siddhi| paMcasthAnaka samavAya kriyA, mahAvrata, kAmaguNa,
AsravadvAra, saMvaradvAra, nirjarAsthAna, samiti, astikAya, rohiNI punarvasu-
hasta-vizAkhA-dhaniSThA nakSatra, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi|
SaTsthAnaka samavAya lezyA, jIvanikAya, tapa, chAdyasthika samudghAta,
arthAvagraha, kRttikA-AzleSA nakSatra, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi|
saptasthAnaka-samavAya bhayasthAna, samudghAta, bha. mahAvIra kI avagAhanA,
varSadhara parvata, varSa, karmaprakRtivedana, maghAnakSatra, pUrva-dakSiNa,
pazcima-uttaradvArika nakSatra-nirUpaNa, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi|
aSTasthAnaka-samavAya madasthAna, pravacanamAtA, vANavyantaroM ke caityavRkSa,
jaMbU sudarzana, kUTazAlmalI, jambUdvIpajagatI, kevalisamudghAta, pArzvanAtha ke
gaNa-gaNadhara nakSatra, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi| navasthAnaka-
samavAya 22 brahmacaryaguptiyA~, aguptiyA~, brahmacarya-adhyayana, pArzvanAtha
kI avagAhanA, nakSatra, tArA-saMcAra, jambUdvIpa meM matsyapraveza, vijayadvAra,
vANa-vyantaroM ko sudharmA sabhA, darzanAvaraNa kI prakRtiyA~, sthiti,
zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi|

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dasasthanak - Samavay Shraman Dharma, Samadhi Sthan, Mandar Parvat,
Arishtanemi - Avgahana, Gyanavridhikari Nakshatra, Kalpvriksh, Sthiti,
Shwasochchwas, Aahar, Siddhi.  ## Ekadasasthanak - Samavay Upasak Pratima,
Jyotish Chakra, B. Mahavira ke Gandhar, Mool Nakshatra, Graiveyak, Mandar
Parvat, Sthiti, Shwasochchwas, Aahar, Siddhi.  ## Dwadashasthanak - Samavay
Bhikshu Pratima, Sambhog, Kritikarm, Vijaya Rajdhani, Ram Baldev, Mandar
Chulicka, Jambudweep Vedika, Jaghnya Ratri - Divas, Ishat Pragbhar Prithvi,
Sthiti, Shwasochchwas, Aahar, Siddhi.  ## Trayodashasthanak - Samavay Kriya
Sthan, Viman Prastat, Jalchar Panchendriya Jeevo ki Kulkoti, Pranayupurv ki
Vastu, Prayog, Suryamandal ka Vistara, Sthiti, Shwasochchwas, Aahar, Siddhi.  ##
Chaturdasasthanak - Samavay Bhootgram, Purv, Jeev Sthan, Bharat Airavat Jeeva,
Chakravarti Ratna, Mahandi, Sthiti, Shwasochchwas, Aahar, Siddhi.  ##
Panchdasasthanak Samavay Paramdharmic Dev, Nemi Arhat ki Avgahana, Dhruv Rahu,
Nakshatra, 15 Muhurt ke Din-Ratri, Vidyanuvaadpurv ke Vastu, Manushya Prayog,
Sthiti, Shwasochchwas, Aahar, Siddhi.  ## Shodasasthanak - Samavay Gatha
Shodashak, Kashay, Mandar - Naam, Parshav ki Shraman Sampada, Sthiti,
Shwasochchwas, Aahar, Siddhi.  ## Saptadasasthanak - Samavay Asanyam, Sanyam,
Manushottar Parvat, Aavas Parvat, Charan Gati, Chamar ka Utpat Parvat, Maran,
Karma Prakriti Vedana, Sthiti, Shwasochchwas, Aahar, Siddhi.  ##
Ashtadasasthanak - Samavay ## Vinshasthanak Samavay 25 Asamadhi Sthan,
Munisuvrat ki Avgahana, Ghanodadhi ka Bahalya, Pranatendra ke Samanik Dev, Karma
Sthiti, Pratyakhyanpurv ke Vastu, Kalchakra, Sthiti, Shwasochchwas, Aahar,
Siddhi. [108]  29 32 37 39 45 49 51 Brahmacharya, Arishtanemi ki Shraman
Sampada, Nirgranth Sthan, Acharang Pad, Brahmi Lipi ke Lekh Vidhan, Astinaasti
Pravad ke Vastu, Dhum Prabha Prithvi, Utkrishta Raat-Din, Sthiti, Shwasochchwas,
Aahar, Siddhi.  ## Ekonvinshasthanak Samavay 58 Jnata - Adhyayan, Jambudweep
mein Surya, Shukra Mahagrah, Jambudweep, Tirthankaro ka Agarvaas, Sthiti,
Shwasochchwas, Aahar, Siddhi.  56 60

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazasthAnaka - samavAya zramaNadharma, samAdhisthAna, mandara parvata,
ariSTanemi - avagAhanA, jJAnavRddhikArI nakSatra, kalpavRkSa, sthiti,
zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  ekAdazasthAnaka - samavAya upAsakapratimA,
jyotizcakra, bha. mahAvIra ke gaNadhara, mUlanakSatra, graiveyaka, maMdara
parvata, sthiti zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  dvAdazasthAnaka - samavAya
bhikSupratimA, saMbhoga, kRtikarma, vijayA rAjadhAnI, rAma baladeva, mandara
cUlikA, jambUdvIpavedikA, jaghanya rAtri - divasa, ISatprAgbhAra pRthvI, sthiti,
zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  trayodazasthAnaka - samavAya | kriyAsthAna,
vimAnaprastaTa, jalacarapaMcendriya jIvoM kI kulakoTi, prANAyupUrva kI vastu,
prayoga, sUryamaMDala kA vistAra, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa AhAra, siddhi  /
caturdazasthAnaka - samavAya bhUtagrAma, pUrva, jIvasthAna, bharata airavata
jIvA, cakravartIratna, mahAnadI, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa AhAra, siddhi 1
paJcadazasthAnaka samavAya paramadhArmika deva, nami arhat kI avagAhanA,
dhruvarAhu, nakSatra, 15 muhUrta ke dina-rAtri, vidyAnuvAdapUrva ke vastu,
manuSya prayoga, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  SoDazasthAnaka -
samavAya gAthASoDazaka, kaSAya, mandara- nAma, pArzva kI zramaNasaMpadA, sthiti,
zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  saptadazasthAnaka - samavAya asaMyama, saMyama,
mAnuSottara parvata, AvAsaparvata, cAraNagati, camara kA utpAtaparvata, maraNa,
karmaprakRtivedana, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  aSTAdazasthAnaka-
samavAya viMzatisthAnaka samavAya 25 asamAdhisthAna, munisuvrata kI avagAhanA,
ghanodadhi kA bAhalya, prANatendra ke sAmAnika deva, karmasthiti,
pratyAkhyAnapUrva ke vastu, kAlacakra, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /
[108] 29 32 37 39 45 49 51 brahmacarya, ariSTanemi kI zramaNasampadA,
nirgranthasthAna, AcArAMga pada, brAhmIlipi ke lekhavidhAna, astinAstipravAda ke
vastu, dhUmaprabhA pRthvI, utkRSTa rAta-dina, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra,
siddhi  /  ekonaviMzatisthAnaka samavAya 58 jJAtA - adhyayana, jambUdvIpa meM
sUrya, zukra mahAgraha, jambUdvIpa, tIrthaMkaroM kA agAravAsa, sthiti,
zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  56 60

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twenty-one-fold Samvaya Shabala Dosha, Karma-prakriti, the fifth and sixth
Aarak's time-proof, state, breath, food, Siddhi.  ## Twenty-two-fold Samvaya
Parishaha, Drishtivad, Pudgala Parinaam, state, breath, food, Siddhi.  ##
Twenty-three-fold Samvaya Study of Sutra-Kritanga, twenty-three Tirthankaras'
Kevalgyan at sunrise, eleven-fold in previous birth, state, breath, food,
Siddhi.  ## Twenty-four-fold Samvaya Devadhidev (Tirthankara), Chullahimavant -
Shikharjiva, S-Indra Devathan, Uttarayana Surya, Ganga-Sindhu Mahandi, Rakta-
Raktouda Mahandi, state, breath, food, Siddhi.  ## Twenty-five-fold Samvaya Five
Yamas' feelings, Malli Nath's Avagahana, Dirghavaitadhya Parvat, Narakavasa of
the second earth, study of Acharanga, Mithyadrishti-Vikalendriya's Karma-
prakriti bandh, Ganga-Sindhu, Rakta-Raktvati Mahandi, Lokavindusar's vastu,
state, breath, food, Siddhi.  ## Twenty-six-fold Samvaya Ten-Kalpa-Vyavahar's
Uddeshankal, Karma-prakriti satta, state, breath, food, Siddhi.  ## Twenty-
seven-fold Samvaya An-agar-guna, Vyavahar with stars, Nakshatra-mas, Soudharma -
Ishana Kalpa's earth's Bahalya, Karma-prakriti, Surya's four, state, breath,
food, Siddhi.  ## Twenty-eight-fold Samvaya Achar-prakalpa, Mohakarma's satta,
Abhinibodhikgyan, number of Vimanas in Ishana Kalpa, Karma-prakriti bandh,
state, breath, food, Siddhi.  ## Twenty-nine-fold Samvaya Papashruta-prasanga,
number of nights and days in Ashadha etc. months, birth in Devas, state, breath,
food, Siddhi.  ## Thirty-fold Samvaya Avagahana, Mohaniya-sthan, Manditputra's
Shraman-paryaya, thirty Muhurtas' thirty names, Ar Tirthankara's
Sahastrarendra's Samanik Dev, Parshvanath's Grihavas, Mahavira's Grihavas,
Ratnaprabha earth's Narakavasa, state, breath, food, Siddhi.  ## Thirty-one-fold
Samvaya Siddh's Adi-guna, Mandar Parvat, Surya's Sanchar, state, breath, food,
Siddhi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekaviMzatisthAnaka samavAya zabala doSa, karmaprakRti, paMcama SaSTha Araka kA
kAlapramANa, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  dvAviMzatisthAnaka samavAya
parISaha, dRSTivAda, pudgala pariNAma, sthiti, vsAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /
trayoviMzatisthAnaka samavAya sUtrakRtAMga ke adhyayana, teIsa tIrthaMkaroM ko
sUryodayakAla meM kevalajJAna, pUrvabhava meM ekAdazAMgI, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa,
AhAra, siddhi  /  caturviMzatisthAnaka samavAya devAdhideva (tIrthaMkara),
cullahimavaMta - zikharijIvA, sa-indra devasthAna, uttarAyaNasUrya, gaMgA-sindhu
mahAnadI, raktA - raktodA mahAnadI, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /
paMcaviMzatisthAnaka samavAya paMca yAmoM kI bhAvanAe~, mallinAtha kI avagAhanA,
dIrghavaitADhya parvata, dUsarI pRthvI ke nArakAvAsa, AcArAMga ke adhyayana,
mithyAdRSTi-vikalendriya kA karmaprakRtibaMdha, gaMgA-sindhu, raktAraktavatI
mahAnadI, lokavindusAra ke vastu, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /
SaDviMzatisthAnaka samavAya dazA-kalpa-vyavahAra ke uddezanakAla,
karmaprakRtisattA, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  saptaviMzatisthAnaka
samavAya anagAra-guNa, nakSatroM se vyavahAra, nakSatramAsa, saudharma - IzAna
kalpa kI pRthvI kA bAhalya, karma- prakRti, sUrya kA cAra, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa,
AhAra, siddhi  /  aSTAviMzatisthAnaka samavAya AcAraprakalpa, mohakarma kI
sattA, Abhinibodhika jJAna, IzAna kalpa meM vimAnoM kI saMkhyA,
karmaprakRtibandha, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  ekonatriMzatsthAnaka
samavAya pApazrutaprasaMga, ASAr3ha Adi mAsoM meM rAtri - divasa kI saMkhyA,
devoM meM utpatti, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  triMzatsthAnaka
samavAya avagAhanA, mohanIya- sthAna, maMDitaputra kI zramaNaparyAya, tIsa
muhUrtoM ke tIsa nAma, ara tIrthaMkara kI sahasrArendra ke sAmAnika deva,
pArzvanAtha kA gRhavAsa, mahAvIra kA gRhavAsa, ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke nArakAvAsa,
sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  ekatriMzatsthAnaka samavAya siddhoM ke
AdiguNa, maMdaraparvata, sUrya kA saMcAra, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi
/  [ 109] 62 65 67 68 70 75 77 79 83 85 92

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirty-two Stana (Categories) Samavaya * **Yoga Sangraha**, Devendra, Kunthu
Arhat's Kevali, Vimanas in Saudharma Kalpa, Revati Nakshatra's stars, types of
Natya, position, breathing, food, Siddhi.  ## Thirty-three Stana Samavaya *
Asatana, Chamarendra's Bhouma, position, breathing, food, Siddhi.  ## Thirty-
four Stana Samavaya * Tirthankaras' Atishaya, Chakravarti-Vijay, Chamarendra's
Bhavanavasa, Narakavasa.  ## Thirty-five Stana Samavaya * Uttaraadhyayana,
Chamarendra's Sudharma Sabha, Mahavira's Aryikas, Surya's Paurushi-Chhaya.  ##
Thirty-six Stana Samavaya * Satya Vachan's Atishaya, Kunthu Arhat's Avagahana,
Datta Vasudev's Avagahana, Nandan Baldev's Avagahana, Manavak Chaitya Stambh,
Narakavasa Sankhya.  ## Thirty-seven Stana Samavaya * Parshva Jin's Aryikas,
Haimavat Airanyavat's Jivas' Dhanu-Pruth, Meru's second Kand's height, Vimana
Vibhakti's Uddeshankal.  ## Thirty-eight Stana Samavaya * Nemi Jin's Avadhigyani
Muni, Narakavasa, Karma Prakritiya.  ## Thirty-nine Stana Samavaya *
Kunthunath's Ganadhar, Haimavat-Hairanyavat's Jivas, Vijay etc. Vimana types,
Kshudrika Vimana Vibhakti's Uddeshankal, Surya's Chhaya.  ## Forty Stana
Samavaya * Nemi Jin's Aryikas, Narakavasa, Maha Vimana Vibhakti's first varg's
Uddeshankal.  ## Forty-one Stana Samavaya * Mahavira's Shramanya Paryaya, Avasa
Parvat's Antar, Kalod Samudra's Chandra-Surya, Bhuja Parisarp's position, Nama
Karma's Prakritiya, Lavana Samudra's Vela, Vimana Vibhakti's second varg's
Uddeshankal, Pancham-Shashth Aar's Kal Parimaan.  ## Forty-two Stana Samavaya *
Arishtanemi's Aryikas, Mandar Chulika, Bhutanand's Bhavanavasa, Vimana
Vibhakti's third varg's Uddeshankal, Surya's Chhaya, Maha Shukra Kalpa's Vimana
Vasa.  ## Forty-three Stana Samavaya * Karma Vipak Adhyayan, Narakavasa, Dharma
Jin's Avagahana, Mandar Parvat's Antar, Nakshatra, Maha Vimana Vibhakti's fifth
varg's Uddeshankal.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAtriMzatsthAnaka samavAya yogasaMgraha, devendra, kunthu arhat ke kevalI,
saudharmakalpa meM vimAna, revatI nakSatra ke tAre, nATya ke prakAra, sthiti,
zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /  trayastriMzatsthAnaka samavAya AsAtanAe~,
camarendra ke bhauma, sthiti, zvAsocchvAsa, AhAra, siddhi  /
catustriMzatsthAnaka samavAya tIrthaMkaroM ke atizaya, cakravartI- vijaya,
camarendra ke bhavanAvAsa, nArakAvAsa  /  paMcatriMzatsthAnaka samavAya
SaTtriMzatsthAnaka samavAya uttarAdhyayana, camarendra kI sudharmA sabhA,
mahAvIra kI AryikAe~, sUrya kI pauruSI- chAyA  /  saptatriMzatsthAnaka samavAya
satyavacana ke atizaya, kunthu arhat kI avagAhanA, datta vAsudeva kI avagAhanA,
nandana baladeva kI avagAhanA, mANavaka caityastaMbha, nArakAvAsasaMkhyA  /
aSTatriMzatsthAnaka samavAya pArzva jina kI AryikAe~, haimavata airaNyavata kI
jIvAoM kA dhanuHpRSTha, meru ke dUsare kANDa kI U~cAI, vimAnavibhakti ke
uddezanakAla  /  ekonacatvAriMzatsthAnaka samavAya nami jina ke avadhijJAnI
muni, nArakAvAsa, karmaprakRtiyA~ | 106 kunthunAtha ke gaNadhara, haimavata -
hairaNyavata kI jIvA, vijayAdi vimAnoM ke prakAra, kSudrikA vimAnavibhakti ke
uddezanakAla, sUrya kI chAyA  /  catvAriMzatsthAnaka samavAya
ekacatvAriMzatsthAnaka samavAya nami jina kI AryikAe~, nArakAvAsa,
mahAvimAnavibhakti ke prathama varga ke uddezanakAla  /  dvicatvAriMzatsthAnaka
samavAya mahAvIra kI zrAmaNyaparyAya, AvAsaparvatoM kA antara, kAloda samudra
meM candra-sUrya, bhujaparisarpoM kI sthiti, nAmakarma kI prakRtiyA~,
lavaNasamudra kI velA, vimAnavibhakti ke dvitIya varga ke uddezanakAla, paMcama
- SaSTha AroM kA kAlaparimANa  /  93 tricatvAriMzatsthAnaka samavAya 96 101 104
[110] 106 109 ariSTanemi kI AryikAe~, maMdaracUlikA, bhUtAnanda ke bhavanAvAsa,
vimAnavibhakti ke tRtIya varga ke uddezanakAla, sUrya kI chAyA, mahAzukra kalpa
ke vimAnAvAsa  /  107 208 109 109 110 karmavipAka adhyayana, nArakAvAsa, dharma
jina kI avagAhanA, maMdara parvata kA antara, nakSatra, mahA vimAnavibhakti ke
paMcama varga ke uddezanakAla  /

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Forty-four **sthānakasamavāya**, forty-five **sthānakasamavāya**, forty-six
**sthānakasamavāya** The **mātṛkāpada** of **dṛṣṭivāda**, the **bhavanāvāsa** of
**Prabhanjane**ndra. Forty-seven **sthānakasamavāya** The **dṛṣṭigocara** of the
sun, the **gṛhavāsa** of **agnibhu**ti. Forty-eight **sthānakasamavāya** The
**paṭṭana** of the **cakravartī**, the **gaṇa** and **gaṇadhara** of the
**dharma jina**, the expanse of the **sūryamaṇḍala**. Forty-nine
**sthānakasamavāya** The **bhikṣu** image, the humans of **devakuru** and
**uttarakuru**, the excellent state of **trīndriya** beings. Fifty
**sthānakasamavāya** 114 **āryā**s of **Muni**suvrat **jina**, the **viṣkambha**
of **dīrghavaitāḍhya**s, the **vimānāvāsa** of the **lāntakakalpa**, the
**timişra** **khaṇḍaprapāta** caves' length, the expanse of the **kāñcanaka**
mountains. Fifty-one **sthānakasamavāya** 115 The time of **uddeśana** of the
**Ācārāṅga**-first **śruta**skandha, the **sudharmā** assembly of
**Cāmare**ndra, the lifespan of **Suprabha** **Balad**eva, the
**uttarakarma**-**prakrti**s. Fifty-two **sthānakasamavāya** The names of
**mohaniya** karma, the difference between **Gostūbha** etc. mountains,
**karma**-**prakrti**s, the **vimānāvāsa** of **Saudharm**a-**Sanatkumāra**
**Mahendra**. Fifty-three **sthānakasamavāya** 117 The beings of **devakuru**
etc., the birth of **Bhagavān** Mahāvīra's **śramaṇa**s in **anuttaravimāna**s,
the **sammūrchima** **urpariso**'s excellent state. Fifty-four
**sthānakasamavāya** 117 The birth of **mahāpuruṣa**s, the
**chhadmasthaparyāya** of **Ariṣṭanemi**, **Bhagavān** Mahāvīra's 54 lectures in
one day, the **gaṇa** and **gaṇadhara** of **ananta** **jina**. Fifty-five
**sthānakasamavāya** The lifespan of **Malli** **arhat**, the difference between
**Mandara** and **Vijaya** etc. doors, **Bhagavān** Mahāvīra's exposition of
**puṇya** **pāpa**-**vipaka**-**darśaka** studies, **nārka**-**vāsa**,
**karma**-**prakrti**s. Fifty-six **sthānakasamavāya** **Nakshatrayoga**, the
**gaṇa** and **gaṇadhara** of **Vimala** **jina**. Fifty-seven
**sthānakasamavāya** 119 The study of three **gaṇipitaka**s, the difference
between **Gostūbha** mountain and **mahāpātala**, **Malli** **jina**'s
**manaḥparyavajñānī**, the **dhanuḥ** **pṛṣṭha** of the beings of
**Mahāhimavant** and **Rukmi** mountains. [111] 118

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 catuzcatvAriMzatsthAnaka samavAya paJcacatvAriMzatsthAnaka samavAya
SaTcatvAriMzatsthAnaka samavAya dRSTivAda ke mAtRkApada, prabhaMjanendra ke
bhvnaavaas| saptacatvAriMzatsthAnaka samavAya sUrya kA dRSTigocara honA,
agnibhUti kA gRhvaas| aSTacatvAriMzaststhAnaka samavAya cakravartI ke paTTana,
dharma jina ke gaNa aura gaNadhara, sUryamaMDala kA vistaar|
ekonapaMcAzatsthAnaka samavAya bhikSupratimA, devakuru-uttarakuru ke manuSya,
trIndriya jIvoM kI utkRSTa sthiti| paMcAzatsthAnaka samavAya 114 munisuvrata
jina kI AryAe~, dIrghavaitADhyoM kA viSkaMbha, lAntakakalpa ke vimAnAvAsa,
timisra khaNDaprapAta guphAoM kI lambAI, kAMcanaka parvatoM kA vistaar|
ekapaMcAzatsthAnaka samavAya 115 AcArAMga-prathama zrutaskandha ke uddezanakAla,
camarendra kI sudharmA sabhA, suprabha baladeva kA AyuSya, uttara krm-
prkRtiyaaN| dvipaMcAzatsthAnaka samavAya mohanIya karma ke nAma, gostUbha Adi
parvatoM kA antara, karmaprakRtiyA~, saudharma-sanatkumAra mAhendra ke
vimaanaavaas| tripaMcAzatsthAnaka samavAya 117 devakuru Adi kI jIvAe~, bha.
mahAvIra ke zramaNoM kA anuttaravimAnoM meM janma, saMmUrchima . uraparisoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti| catuHpaMcAzatsthAnaka samavAya 117 mahApuruSoM kA janma,
ariSTanemi kI chadmasthaparyAya, bha. mahAvIra dvArA eka dina meM 54 vyAkhyAna,
ananta jina ke gaNa, gnndhr| paMcapaMcAzatsthAnaka samavAya mallI arhat kA
AyuSya, mandara aura vijayAdi dvAroM kA antara, bha. mahAvIra dvArA puNya
pApavipAkadarzaka adhyayanoM kA pratipAdana, nArakAvAsa, krmprkRtiyaaN|
SaTpaMcAzatsthAnaka samavAya nakSatrayoga, vimala jina ke gaNa aura gnndhr|
saptapaMcAzatsthAnaka samavAya 119 tIna gaNipiTaka ke adhyayana, gostUbha
parvata aura mahApAtala kA antara, mallI jina ke manaHparyavajJAnI,
mahAhimavanta aura rukmi parvatoM kI jIvA kA dhanuH pRSTha  /  [111] 118

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 122 **Aṣṭapancāśatsthānaka Samvāya** The difference between Narakavās, Karma-
prakr̥ti, Gostūbha and Vadvamukha Mahāpātāla, etc. **Ekonṣaṣṭisthānaka Samvāya**
Candra-saṁvatsara, the home of Sambhava Jina, the Avadhījñānī Muni of Malli
Jina. **Ṣaṣṭisthānaka Samvāya** The Mandala-pūrti of the Sun, the Agrodaka of
the Lavaṇa-samudra, the Avagāhana of Vimala Jina, the Sāmānika Devas of Balindra
and Brahma Devendra, the Vimānāvāsa of the Saudharma-Īśāna Kalpa.
**Ekaṣaṣṭisthānaka Samvāya** Ṛtu-māsa, the first Kāṇḍa of the Mandara Parvata,
the Candra-maṇḍala. **Dviṣaṣṭisthānaka Samvāya** The Pūrṇimā and Amāvāsyā in the
Pañcasāṁvatsarika Yuga, the Gaṇa and Gaṇadhara of Vāsupūjya Jina, the increase
and decrease of the Candra-kalā, the Vimānāvāsa of the Saudharma-Īśāna Kalpa,
the Vaimānika-vimānaprastaṭ. **Triṣaṣṭisthānaka Samvāya** ## 122 The Mahārāja-
kāla of Ṛṣabha Jina, the youth of the humans in Harivās-Ramyakavās, the sunrise
on the Niṣadha Nīlavant Parvata. **Catuḥṣaṣṭisthānaka Samvāya** ## 123 The
Aṣṭāṣṭamika Bhikṣu-pratimā, the Asura-kumārāvāsa, the Dadhi-mukha Parvata, the
Vimānāvāsa. **Pañcaṣaṣṭisthānaka Samvāya** ## 124 The Surya-maṇḍala in
Jambūdvīpa, the home of the Maurya-putra, the Bhavana in each direction of the
Saudharma-avatamsaka Vimāna. **Ṣaṣṭisthānaka Samvāya** ## 124 The Candra-Surya
in the Manuşya-kṣetra, the Gaṇa and Gaṇadhara of Śreyāṁs Jina, the excellent
state of Ābhinibodhika Jñāna. **Saptasaṣṭisthānaka Samvāya** ## 125 The
Nakṣatra-māsa, the arms of the Haimavat-Airayṇyavat, the Mandara Parvata, the
Sīmā Viṣkambha of the Nakṣatra. **Aṣṭasaṣṭisthānaka Samvāya** ## 126 The Vijay,
Rājadhānī, Tīrthaṁkara, Cakravartī, Baldeva, Vāsudeva, and Śramaṇa-sampadā of
Vimala Jina in the Dhātakīkhaṇḍa. **Ekonasaptatisthānaka Samvāya** The year and
the Varṣadhara Parvata in the Samaya-kṣetra, the difference between the Mandara
Parvata, the Karma-prakr̥ti. **Saptatisthānaka Samvāya** ## 128 The Varṣāvāsa of
Śramaṇa B. Mahāvīra, the Śramaṇa Paryāya of Pārśva Jina, the Avagāhana of
Vāsupūjya Jina, the state of Mohaniya Karma, the Sāmānika Devas of Mahendra
Devarāja. [112]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122 aSTapaMcAzatsthAnaka samavAya nArakAvAsa, karmaprakRtiyA~, gostUbha aura
vaDavAmukha mahApAtAla Adi kA antr| ekonaSaSThisthAnaka samavAya
candrasaMvatsara, saMbhava jina kA gRhavAsa, mallI jina ke avadhijJAnI muni
SaSTisthAnaka samavAya sUrya kI maNDalapUrti, lavaNasamudra kA agrodaka, vimala
jina kI avagAhanA, balIndra ke aura brahma devendra ke sAmAnika deva, saudharma-
IzAna kalpa ke vimaanaavaas| ekaSaSTisthAnaka samavAya RtumAsa, mandara parvata
kA prathama kANDa, cndrmnnddl| dviSaSTisthAnaka samavAya paMcasAMvatsarika yuga
meM pUrNimAe~-amAvasyAe~, vAsupUjya jina ke gaNa-gaNadhara, candra-kalAoM kI
vRddhi-hAni, saudharma-IzAna kalpa ke vimAnAvAsa, vaimaanik-vimaanprsttt|
triSaSTisthAnaka samavAya 122 RSabha jina kA mahArAja-kAla, harivAsa-ramyakavAsa
ke manuSyoM kA yauvana, niSadha nIlavanta parvata para suuryody|
catuHSaSTisthAnaka samavAya 123 aSTASTamikA bhikSupratimA, asurakumArAvAsa,
dadhimukha parvata, vimaanaavaas| paMcaSaSTisthAnaka samavAya 124 jambUdvIpa meM
sUryamaNDala, mauryaputra kA gRhavAsa, saudharmAvataMsaka vimAna kI eka-eka dizA
meM bhvn| SaTSaSTisthAnaka samavAya 124 manuSyakSetra meM candra-sUrya, zreyAMsa
jina ke gaNa aura gaNadhara, Abhinibodhika jJAna kI utkRSTa sthiti|
saptaSaSTisthAnaka samavAya 125 nakSatramAsa, haimavata-airaNyavata kI bhujAe~,
mandara parvata, nakSatroM kA sImA visskmbh| aSTaSaSTisthAnaka samavAya 126
dhAtakIkhaNDa meM vijaya, rAjadhAniyA~, tIrthaMkara, cakravartI, baladeva,
vAsudeva, vimala jina kI shrmnnsmpdaa| ekonasaptatisthAnaka samavAya
samayakSetra meM varSa aura varSadhara parvata, maMdara parvata kA antara, krm-
prkRtiyaaN| saptatisthAnaka samavAya 128 zramaNa bha. mahAvIra kA varSAvAsa,
pArzva jina kI zramaNa paryAya, vAsupUjya, jina kI avagAhanA, mohanIya karma kI
sthiti, mAhendra devarAja ke sAmAnika dev| [112]

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Ekasaptati Sthanak Samavay Moon's ayan - change, Veerapraavad purva's
prabhrut, Ajit Jin's Grihavasakal, Sagar Chakravarti's Grihavasakal and
Shramanya.  ## Dwisaptati Sthanak Samavay 129 Suparna Kumar's Aavas,
Lavanasamudra's vela's Dharan, Mahavira Jin's Aayushya, Abhyantar Pushkarardh
mein Chandra-Surya, Bahत्तर Kalaen, Khecharon ki Sthiti.  ## Trisaptati Sthanak
Samavay Harivas - Ramyakavas ki Jeevaen, Vijay Baldev ki Siddhi.  ##
Chatuhsaptati Sthanak Samavay Agnibhoti ki Aayu, Sitoda tatha Sita Mahandi,
Narakavas.  ## Panchasaptati Sthanak Samavay Suvidhi Jin ke Kevali, Sheetal and
Shanti Nath's Grihavas.  ## Shatsaptati Sthanak Samavay Vidhyut Kumar adi
Bhavanpatiyon ka Aavas.  ## Saptasaptati Sthanak Samavay Bharat Chakravarti,
Angvansh ke Rajao ki Pravrajya, Gardatoy Tusht Lokantikon ka Parivaar, Muhurt ka
Parimaan.  ## Ashta Saptati Sthanak Samavay Vaishravan Lokpal, Sthavir Akampit,
Surya-Sanchar se Din Raatri ke Vriddhi Hras ka Niyam.  ## Ekonashiti Sthanak
Samavay Ratna Prabha Prithvi se Valayamukh Paatal ka tatha Anya Paatalon ka
Antar, Chhathi Prithvi aur Ghanodadhi ka Antar, Jambudweep ke Ek Dwar se Dusre
Dwar ka Antar.  ## Ashiti Sthanak Samavay Shreyans Jin ki Avgahana, Triprishth
Vasudev ki Avgahana, Achal Baldev ki Avgahana, Triprishth Vasudev ka Rajakal,
App-Bahul Kand ki Motai, Ishaneendra ke Samanik Dev Jambudweep mein Pratham
Mandal mein Suryodaya.  ## Ekashiti Sthanak Samavay Bhikshu Pratima, Kunth Jin
ke Manah Paryavgyani, Vyakhya Pragyapti ke Maha Yugma Shat.  ## Dwi-Ashiti
Sthanak Samavay Surya - Sanchar, B. Mahavira ka Garbhapaharan, Mahahimavant evam
Rukmi Parvat ke Saugandhik Kand ka Antar.  129 [113] 133 133 - 134 134 134 135
136 137 137 138

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekasaptatisthAnaka samavAya candramA kA ayana - parivartana, vIryapravAda pUrva
ke prAbhRta, ajita jina kA gRhavAsakAla, sagara cakravartI kA gRhavAsakAla aura
zrAmaNya  /  dvisaptatisthAnaka samavAya 129 suparNakumAroM ke AvAsa,
lavaNasamudra kI velA kA dhAraNa, mahAvIra jina kA AyuSya, Abhyantara
puSkarArdha meM candra-sUrya, bahattara kalAe~, khecaroM kI sthiti  /
trisaptatisthAnaka samavAya harivAsa - ramyakavAsa kI jIvAe~, vijaya baladeva kI
siddhi  /  catuHsaptatisthAnaka samavAya agnibhUti kI Ayu, sItodA tathA sItA
mahAnadI, nArakAvAsa  /  paJcasaptatisthAnaka samavAya suvidhi jina ke kevalI,
zItala aura zAntinAtha kA gRhavAsa  /  SaTasaptatisthAnaka samavAya vidyutkumAra
Adi bhavanapatiyoM kA AvAsa  /  saptasaptatisthAnaka samavAya bharata
cakravartI, aMgavaMza ke rAjAoM kI pravrajyA, gardatoya tuSita lokAntikoM kA
parivAra, muhUrta kA parimANa  /  aSTasaptatisthAnaka samavAya vaizramaNa
lokapAla, sthavira akaMpita, sUrya-saMcAra se dina rAtri ke vRddhi hrAsa kA
niyama  /  ekonAzItisthAnaka samavAya ratnaprabhA pRthvI se valayAmukha pAtAla
kA tathA anya pAtAloM kA antara, chaThI pRthvI aura ghanodadhi kA antara,
jambUdvIpa ke eka dvAra se dUsare dvAra kA antara  /  azItisthAnaka samavAya
zreyAMsa jina kI avagAhanA, tripRSTha vAsudeva kI avagAhanA, acala baladeva kI
avagAhanA, tripRSTha vAsudeva kA rAjakAla, ap-bahula kANDa kI moTAI, IzAnendra
ke sAmAnika deva jambUdvIpa meM prathama maMDala meM sUryodaya  /
ekAzItisthAnaka samavAya bhikSupratimA, kunthu jina ke manaH paryavajJAnI,
vyAkhyAprajJapti ke mahAyugmazata  /  dvi-azItisthAnaka samavAya sUrya -
saMcAra, bha. mahAvIra kA garbhApaharaNa, mahAhimavanta evaM rukmi parvata ke
saugaMdhika kANDa kA antara  /  129 [113] 133 133 - 134 134 134 135 136 137 137
138

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tri-Ashitistanaka Samavaya * **B.** Mahavira's Garbhapahar. The gana and
ganadhar of Sheetal Jin, the lifespan of Manditputra, the Grihavasakala of
Rishabh, the Grihasthakala of Bharat Raja.  ## Chatur-Ashitistanaka Samavaya *
Narakavasa, the lifespan of Rishabh Jin, Bharat, Bahubali, Brahmi and Sundari,
the lifespan of Shreyans Jin, the birth of Triprutha Vasudeva in Naraka, the
Samanik Devas of Devendra Shakra, the height of the Mandaras and Anjanka
mountains outside Jambudvipa, the Dhanu:prushtha Parikshep of the Jivas of
Harivarsha and Ramyakavarsha, the difference between the Charamantas of the
Pankabahul Kanda, the Pada of Vyakhyaprajnapti, Nagakumaraavasa, Prakirnak,
Jivayonis, the multiplication of Purvadi numbers, the Shraman Sampada of Rishabh
Jin, Vimanaavasa.  ## Pancha-Ashitistanaka Samavaya * 142 The Uddeshankala of
Acharanga, the Mandara of Dhatki Khand, the height of the Mandalik mountains of
Ruchka Dvipa, Nandavan.  ## Shad-Ashitistanaka Samavaya * The gana and ganadhar
of Suvidhi Jin, the Vadi Sampada of Suparshva Jin, the difference between the
second earth and Dhanodadhi.  ## Sapta-Ashitistanaka Samavaya * 144 Mandara
mountain, Karma Prakriti, the difference between Mahahimalaya mountain and
Saugandhika Kutta.  ## Ashta-Ashitistanaka Samavaya * The Mahagrahas of Surya-
Chandra, the Sutras of Drishtivad, the difference between Mandara and Gostubha
mountains, the increase and decrease of the day-night region from Suryasanchar.
## Ekonanavatistanaka Samavaya * The Siddhikala of Rishabh Jin, the Nirvana Kala
of Mahavira Jin, the Rajakala of Harishena Chakravarti, the Aryas of Shanti Jin.
## Navatistanaka Samavaya * The Avagahana of Sheetalnath, the Vijayakala of
Swayambhu Vasudeva, the difference between Vaithadya mountain and Saugandhika
Kanda.  ## Ekanavatistanaka Samavaya * Parvaiyavrutya Karma, the circumference
of Kalod Samudra, the Avadhignaani Shraman of Kunthunath, Karma Prakritis.  ##
Dvinavatistanaka Samavaya * Pratima, the lifespan of Indrabhuti, the difference
between Mandara and Gostubha mountains.  ## Trinavatistanaka Samavaya * The gana
and ganadhar of Chandra Prabh Jin, the number of Chaturdasha Purvi Munis of
Shantinath, Suryasanchar. [114]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tri-azItisthAnaka samavAya bha. mahAvIra kA garbhApahAra. zItala jina ke gaNa
aura gaNadhara, sva. maMDitaputra kA AyuSya, RSabha kA gRhavAsakAla, bharata
rAjA kA gRhsthkaal| caturazItisthAnaka samavAya nArakAvAsa, RSabha jina kA
AyuSya, bharata, bAhubalI, brAhmI aura sundarI kA AyuSya, zreyAMsa jina kA Ayu,
tripRSTha vAsudeva kA naraka meM utpAda, devendra zakra ke sAmAnika deva,
jambUdvIpa ke bAhara ke maMdaroM aura aMjanaka parvatoM kI UMcAI, harivarSa evaM
ramyakavarSa kI jIvAoM ke dhanuH pRSTha kA parikSepa, paMkabahula kANDa ke
caramAntoM kA antara, vyAkhyAprajJapti ke pada, nAgakumArAvAsa, prakIrNaka,
jIvayoniyA~, pUrvAdi saMkhyAoM kA guNAkAra, RSabha jina kI zramaNasampadA,
vimaanaavaas| paJcAzItisthAnaka samavAya 142 AcArAMga ke uddezanakAla,
dhAtakIkhaMDa ke maMdara, rucakadvIpa ke mANDalika parvatoM kI . UMcAI, nndnvn|
SaDazItisthAnaka samavAya suvidhi jina ke gaNa aura gaNadhara, supArzva jina kI
vAdI-sampadA, dUsarI pRthvI se dhanodadhi kA antara saptAzItisthAnaka samavAya
144 mandara parvata, karmaprakRti, mahAhimavantaparvata eMva saugaMdhika kUTa kA
antr| aSTAzItisthAnaka samavAya sUrya-candra ke mahAgraha, dRSTivAda ke sUtra,
mandara eMva gostUbha parvata kA antara, sUryasaMcAra se divasa-rAtrikSetra kA
vRddhi-hraas| ekonanavatisthAnaka samavAya RSabha jina kA siddhikAla, mahAvIra
jina kA nirvANakAla, hariSeNa cakravartI kA rAjakAla, zAnti jina kI aaryaaeN|
navatisthAnaka samavAya zItalanAtha kI avagAhanA, svayaMbhU vAsudeva kA
vijayakAla, vaitADhya parvata aura saugaMdhika kANDa kA antr| ekanavatisthAnaka
samavAya paravaiyAvRtyakarma, kAloda samudra kI paridhi, kunthunAtha ke
avadhijJAnI zramaNa, karmaprakRtiyA~  /  dvinavatisthAnaka samavAya pratimA,
indrabhUti kA AyuSya, maMdara aura gostUbha parvata kA antr| trinavatisthAnaka
samavAya candraprabha jina ke gaNa aura gaNadhara, zAntinAtha ke caturdazapUrvI
muniyoM kI saMkhyA, suurysNcaar| [114]

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chaturnavati Sthanak Samavay The number of Avadhijnani Munis of Ajitanatha,
the living beings of the Nishadha-Neelavant mountains.  ## Panchanavati Sthanak
Samavay The number of Ganas and Ganadharas of Suparshvanatha, the four
Mahapatals, the depth and height of the sides of the Lavana Sea, the lifespan of
Kunthunatha, the lifespan of the Sthavir Mauryaputra.  ## Shannavati Sthanak
Samavay The size of a Chakravarti's village, the dwelling places of the
Vayukumars, the practical punishments, the measurement of the bow, the Nalika,
the Yuga, the axle and the pestle, the Surya Sanchar.  ## Saptanavati Sthanak
Samavay The distance between the Mandar and Gostubh mountains, the Uttar
Karmapratikrityas, the duration of Harishena Chakravarti's stay in his home.  ##
Astanavati Sthanak Samavay The distance between the Nandanvan and Pandukavan,
the distance between the Mandar and Gostubh mountains, the Dhanuprishtha of
Dakshin Bharat, the Surya Sanchar, the stars of the Revati and other
constellations.  ## Navanavati Sthanak Samavay The height of the Mandar
mountain, the distance between the eastern and western extremities of the
Nandanvan, the distance between the southern and northern extremities, the
dimension and diameter of the Surya Mandala, the distance between the dwelling
places of the Ratnapraba earth and the Vanavyantaras.  ## Shatasthanak Samavay
The Dashadashamika Bhikhu Pratima, the stars of the Shatabhishak constellation,
the Avagahana of Suvidhi-Pushpadanta, the lifespan of Parshva Jin, the height of
various mountains.  ## Anekootarikavrudhi Samavay Tirthankara - Devalok -
Tirthankara - Varshadhar Parvat - Kanchanak Parvat - Tirthankara - Dev -
Tirthankara - Dev - Mahavira - Jeevapradeshavagahana - Parshvanatha -
Tirthankara - Varshadhar Parvat - Vakshar Parvat - Devalok - Mahavira -
Tirthankara - Chakravarti - Vakshar Parvat - Varshadhar Parvat, Tirthankara -
Chakravarti Vakshar Parvat - Nandan - Kूट - Viman - Antar - Parshva - Kulkar -
Tirthankara - Viman - Mahavira Tirthankara - Antar - Viman - Bhaumey Vihar -
Mahavira - Surya - Tirthankara - Viman - Antar - Kulkaratararup - Antar - Viman
- Yamak Parvat - Chitra-Vichitrakut - Vritt Vaithadya - Hari - Harissahkूट -
Balakूट - Tirthankara - Parshva - Drah - Viman - Parshva - Drah - Antar - Drah -
Mandar - Parvat - Avas - Antar - Harivas - Ramyakavas - Jeeva - Mandar Parvat -
Jambudweep - Lavanasamudra - Parshva - Dhataki Khand - Antar - Chakravarti -
Antar - Avas - Tirthankara - Vasudev - Mahavira - Rishabh - Mahavira.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturnavatisthAnaka samavAya niSadha - nIlavanta parvatoM kI jIvAe~, ajitanAtha
ke avadhijJAnI muniyoM kI saMkhyA  /  paMcanavatisthAnaka samavAya 151
supArzvanAtha ke gaNa aura gaNadhara cAra mahApAtAla, lavaNa samudra ke pArzvoM
kI gaharAI aura UMcAI kunthunAtha kI Ayu, sthavira mauryaputra kI Ayu  /
SaNNavatisthAnaka samavAya cakravartI ke grAma, vAyukumAroM ke AvAsa,
vyAvahArika daMDa, dhanuSa, nAlikA, yuga, akSa aura mUsala kA mApa, sUryasaMcAra
/  saptanavatisthAnaka samavAya mandara aura gostUbha parvata kA antara, uttara
karmaprakRtiyA~, hariSeNa cakravartI kA gRhavAsakAla  /  aSTAnavatisthAnaka
samavAya nandanavana - pANDukavana kA antara mandara- gostUbha parvata kA
antara, dakSiNa bharata kA dhanupRSTha, sUryasaMcAra, revatI Adi nakSatroM ke
tAre  /  navanavatisthAnaka samavAya maMdara parvata kI U~cAI, nandana vana ke
pUrvI-pazcimI caramAnta kA tathA dakSiNa-uttarI caramAnta kA antara,
sUryamaMDala kA AyAma - viSkambha, ratnaprabhA pRthvI aura vAnavyantaroM ke
AvAsoM kA antara  /  zatasthAnaka samavAya dazadazamikA bhikSupratimA,
zatabhiSak nakSatra ke tAre, suvidhi - puSpadanta kI avagAhanA, pArzva jina kA
AyuSya, vibhinna parvatoM kI UMcAI | anekottarikAvRddhi - samavAya 150 [ 115]
152 153 153 155 156 158 tIrthaMkara - devaloka - tIrthaMkara - varSadharaparvata
- kAMcanaka parvata - tIrthaMkara - deva - tIrthaMkara - deva - mahAvIra -
jIvapradezAvagAhanA-pArzvanAtha - tIrthaMkara-varSadhara parvata - vakSAra-
parvata - devaloka - mahAvIra - tIrthaMkara - cakravartI - vakSAraparvata -
varSadhara parvata, tIrthaMkara - cakravartI vakSAraparvata - nandana - kUTa -
vimAna - antara - pArzva - kulakara - tIrthaMkara - vimAna - mahAvIra
tIrthaMkara - antara - vimAna - bhaumeyavihAra - mahAvIra - sUrya - tIrthaMkara
-vimAna- antara-kulakaratArArUpa - antara- - vimAna - yamakaparvata - citra-
vicitrakUTa - vRtta vaitADhya - hari - harissahakUTa - balakUTa - tIrthaMkara-
pArzva - draha - vimAna - pArzva - draha - antara - draha - mandara - parvata -
AvAsa - antara - harivAsa - ramyakavAsa - jIvA - mandara-parvata - jambUdvIpa -
lavaNasamudra - pArzva - dhAtakIkhaNDa - antara - cakravartI - antara - AvAsa -
tIrthaMkara - vAsudeva - mahAvIra - RSabha - mahAvIra  /

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dvadasanga Ganipitaka  **179** **180** **182** **183** **185** **188**
**Dvadasanga-nama**  **168** Upasakadasa Acharanga **168** Antakrid-dasa Sutra-
krita-anga **170** Anuttaraupapatikadasa Stananga **173** Prasnavyakarana
Samavayanga **174** Vipakasruta Vyakhyaprajnapti **175** Drsttivada
Jnatadharmakatha **176** Ganipitaka ki Viradhanaraadhana ka phal Ganipitaka ki
Nityata Vividhavishaya Niroopan  **Rashi-** Paryaptaaparyapta - Aavas-sthiiti-
Shareera-avadhi-vedana-leshya- Aahaaraayubandha-utpaada-udvartanaaviraha-
aakarsha-sanhanan-sansthan-veda-samavasaran-kulkaratithankara-chakravarti-
baladeva-vasudeva-airavatatithankara-bhaavi tithankara-bhaavi-chakravarti bhaavi
baladeva-vasudeva- airavata kshetra ke bhaavi tithankara - chakravarti baldeva-
vasudeva.  **194** **.194** **197**  **[116]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAGga gaNipiTaka 179 180 182 183 185 188 dvAdazAMga-nAma 168 upAsakadazA
AcArAMga 168 antakRddazA sUtrakRta-aMga 170 anuttaraupapAtikadazA sthAnAMga 173
praznavyAkaraNa samavAyAMga . 174 . vipAkazruta vyAkhyAprajJapti 175 dRSTivAda
jJAtAdharmakathA 176 gaNipiTaka kI virAdhanAArAdhanA kA phala gaNipiTaka kI
nityatA vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa rAzi- paryAptAparyApta - AvAsa-sthiti- zarIra-
avadhi-vedanA-lezyA- AhAraAyubandha-utpAda-udvartanAviraha-AkarSa-saMhanana-
saMsthAna-veda-samavasaraNa-kulakaratIrthaMkara-cakravartI-baladeva-vAsudeva-
airavatatIrthaMkara-bhAvI tIrthaMkara-bhAvI-cakravartI bhAvI baladeva-vAsudeva-
airavata kSetra ke bhAvI tIrthaMkara - cakravartI baldeva-vAsudeva  /  194 .194
197 [116]

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Panchamagana-Sri Suhrmaswami-virayam Chautham Angam Samavayanga Sutra
Panchamagana-Sri Sudharmaswami-virachitam Chaturtham Angam Samavayanga Sutra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcamagaNahara-sirisuhammasAmiviraiyaM cautthaM aMga samavAyAMgasuttaM
paJcamagaNadhara-zrIsudharmasvAmi-viracitaM caturtham aGgam samavAyAMgasUtram

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Shri Samavayanga Sutra states:
"Alas! I have heard this from that Bhagavan (Venerable One). [In this final
period of the present Avasarpini era, the Shramana Bhagavan Mahavira, who is the
Adi-kara (the originator) of the Shruta-dharma (the Canonical Scriptures), the
Tirthankara (the founder of the spiritual path), the Svayam-sambuddha (the self-
enlightened one), the Purushottama (the supreme among men), the Purusha-simha
(the lion among men), the Purushavara-pundarika (the supreme lotus among men),
the Purushavara-gandhahasti (the supreme elephant among men), the Lokoттama (the
supreme in the world), the Loka-natha (the lord of the world), the Loka-hita
(the benefactor of the world), the Loka-pradipa (the lamp of the world), the
Loka-prajyotikara (the illuminator of the world), the Abhaya-data (the giver of
fearlessness), the Chakshur-data (the giver of vision), the Marga-data (the
giver of the path), the Sharana-data (the giver of refuge), the Jivita-data (the
giver of life), the Bodhi-data (the giver of enlightenment), the Dharma-data
(the giver of the Dharma), the Dharma-desaka (the preacher of the Dharma), the
Dharma-nayaka (the leader of the Dharma), the Dharma-sarathi (the charioteer of
the Dharma), the Dharma-vara-chaturanta-chakravarti (the universal emperor of
the Dharma), the Apratihata-vara-nana-darsana-dhara (the bearer of the
unobstructed supreme knowledge and vision), the Vyavritta-chhadma (the one free
from all deception and pretense), the Jina (the conqueror), the Jivaka (the
life-giver), the Trina (the savior), the Taraka (the deliverer), the Buddha (the
enlightened one), the Bodhaka (the enlightener), the Mukta (the liberated one),
the Mochaka (the emancipator), the Sarvajña (the omniscient), the Sarvadarshi
(the all-seer), the Shivamaya (the embodiment of auspiciousness), the
Lamaruyamana (the eternal), the Anantamakshaya (the infinite and
indestructible), the Apunaravarti-siddhi-gati-namadheya (the one whose state is
the attainment of liberation without further rebirth) - has expounded the
Dvadashanga Gani-pitaka (the Twelve Angas of the Canonical Scriptures)."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrIsamavAyAGgasUtram 1-suyaM me AusaM! teNaM bhagavayA evamakkhAyaM-[iha khalu
samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM AigareNaM titthagareNaM sayaMsaMbuddheNaM
purisuttameNaM purisasIheNaM purisavarapuMDarIeNaM purisavaragaMdhahatthiNA
loguttameNaM loganAheNaM logahieNaM logapaIveNaM logapajjoagareNaM abhayadaeNaM
cakkhudaeNaM maggadaeNaM saraNadaeNaM jIvadaeNaM bohidaeNaM dhammadaeNaM
dhammadesaeNaM dhammanAyageNaM dhammasArihiNA dhammavaracAuraMta-cakkavaTTiNA
appaDihaya-vara-nANa-dasaNadhareNaM viyaTTachaumeNaM jiNeNaM jAvaeNaM tineNaM
tAraeNaM buddheNaM bohaeNaM mutteNaM moyageNaM savvannuNA savvadarisiNA
sivamayalamaruyamaNaMtamakkhayamavvAbAhamapuNarAvittisiddhigainAmadheyaM ThANaM
saMpAviukAmeNaM ime duvAlasaMge gaNipiDage pnntte|] taM jahA AyAre 1. sUyagaDe
2. ThANe 3. samavAe 4. vivAhapannatI 5. nAyAdhammakahAo 6. uvAsagadasAo 7.
aMtagaDadasAo 8. aNuttarovavAiyadasAo 9. paNhAvAgaraNaM 10. vivAgasuyaM 11.
diTThivAe 12 /  he AyuSman ! una bhagavAn ne aisA kahA hai, maiMne sunA hai|
[isa avasarpiNI kAla ke cauthe Are ke antima. samaya meM vidyamAna una zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne dvAdazAMga gaNipiTaka kahA hai| ve bhagavAn - AcAra Adi
zrutadharma ke Adikara haiM, (apane samaya meM dharma ke Adi praNetA haiN)|
tIrthaMkara haiM, (dharmarUpa tIrtha ke pravartaka haiM) svayaM samyak bodhi ko
prApta hue haiN| puruSoM meM rUpAtizaya Adi viziSTa guNoM ke dhAraka hone se,
evaM uttama vRtti vAle hone se puruSottama haiN| siMha ke samAna parAkramI hone
se puruSasiMha haiM, puruSoM meM uttama sahasra patra vAle zveta kamala ke
samAna zreSTha hone se puruSavara-puNDarIka haiN| puruSoM meM zreSTha
gandhahastI jaise haiM, jaise gandhahastI ke mada kI gandha se bar3e-bar3e hAthI
bhAga jAte haiM, usI prakAra Apake nAma kI gandhamAtra se bar3e-bar3e pravAdI
rUpI hAthI bhAga khar3e hote haiN| ve lokottama haiM, kyoMki jJAnAtizaya Adi
asAdhAraNa guNoM se yukta haiM aura tInoM lokoM ke svAmiyoM dvArA namaskRta
haiM, isalie tInoM lokoM ke nAtha haiM aura adhipa arthAt svAmI haiM kyoMki jo
prANiyoM ke yoga-kSema ko karatA hai, vahI nAtha aura svAmI kahA jAtA hai| loka
ke hita karane se-unakA uddhAra karane se-lokahitakara haiN| loka meM prakAza
aura udyota karane se loka-pradIpa aura loka-pradyotakara haiM  /  jIvamAtra ko
abhayadAna ke dAtA haiM, arthAt prANimAtra para abhayA (dayA aura karuNA) ke
dhAraka haiM, cakSu (netra) kA dAtA jaise mahAn upakArI hotA hai, usI prakAra
bhagavAn mahAvIra ajJAna rUpa andhakAra meM par3e prANiyoM ko sanmArga ke
prakAzaka hone se cakSu-dAtA haiM aura sanmArga para lagAne se mArgadAtA haiM,
binA kisI bhedabhAva ke prANimAtra ke zaraNadAtA haiM, janma-maraNa ke cakra se
chur3Ane ke kAraNa akSaya jIvana ke dAtA haiM, samyak bodhi pradAna karane vAle
haiM, durgatiyoM meM girate hue jIvoM ko bacAne ke kAraNa dharma-dAtA haiM,
saddharma ke upadezaka haiM, dharma ke nAyaka haiM, dharmarUpa ratha ke
saMcAlana karane se dharma ke sArathI haiN| dharmarUpa cakra ke caturdizAoM meM
aura cAroM gatiyoM meM pravartana karane se dharmavaracAturantacakravartI haiN|
pratighAta-rahita nirAvaraNa zreSTha kevalajJAna aura kevaladarzana ke dhAraka
haiN| chadma arthAt AvaraNa aura chala-prapaMca se sarvathA nivRtta hone ke
kAraNa vyAvRttachadma haiM -sarvathA nirdoSa haiN| viSaya

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Twelve Angas of Jainism  **4] The Samvayanga Sutra**  The Samvayanga
Sutra, one of the twelve Angas, is a Jain scripture that explains how to conquer
the passions (kṣayās) and become a Jina (conqueror). It also guides others on
the path to liberation from the passions and achieving victory over them. It
describes the path to liberation from the cycle of birth and death (samsara) and
how to guide others to liberation. It explains how to attain enlightenment
(bodhi) and how to guide others to enlightenment. It teaches how to be free from
karma and how to liberate others from karma. It describes the Jinas as
omniscient (sarvajña) and all-seeing (sarvadarśī) because they know everything
in the universe and see everything in all the worlds. They attain the supreme
state of liberation (siddhā-gati), which is characterized by being unshakeable,
free from sorrow, free from disease, infinite, imperishable, free from
obstacles, and free from rebirth.  **The Twelve Angas**  The twelve Angas, as
described by Lord Mahavira, are:  1. **Ācārāṅga:** This Anga discusses the five
types of conduct (ācāra) for the monks: knowledge, perception, conduct,
austerity, and effort. 2. **Sūtrakṛtāṅga:** This Anga discusses one's own views
(svamata), the views of others (paramata), and the views of both oneself and
others (svaparamata). It also explains the nine substances: living beings
(jīva), non-living beings (ajīva), merit (puṇya), demerit (pāpa), inflow
(āsrava), restraint (samvara), stoppage (nirjarā), bondage (bandha), and
liberation (mokṣa). 3. **Stānāṅga:** This Anga describes the different
categories of substances or entities, from one to ten, using the concept of
"places" (sthāna). 4. **Samvayāṅga:** This Anga describes the different
categories of substances or entities, from one to thousands, using the concept
of "groups" (samvāya). 5. **Vyākhyāprajñapti-aṅga:** This Anga contains the
36,000 questions asked by the Ganadharas (disciples) and the answers given by
Lord Mahavira. 6. **Jñātādharmkathāṅga:** This Anga discusses the stories of
virtuous individuals who have overcome the obstacles (pariṣaha-upasarga) and the
narratives of righteous individuals. 7. **Upāsakadāśāṅga:** This Anga describes
the ten great lay followers (mahāśrāvaka) who diligently followed the highest
principles of Jainism and practiced the ritual of Sanlekhanā (voluntary death)
at the end of their lives. 8. **Antakṛtdāśāṅga:** This Anga describes the great
ascetics (anagara) who endured severe obstacles (pariṣaha-upasarga) and attained
omniscience (kevala-jñāna), ending their karma within a very short time. 9.
**Anuttaraupapātika-daśāṅga:** This Anga describes the ascetics (anagara) who
endured severe obstacles (pariṣaha-upasarga) and attained liberation (mokṣa) by
dying in a state of meditation, being reborn in one of the five highest heavens
(anuttaramāhāvimāna). 10. **Praśnavyākaraṇāṅga:** This Anga discusses questions
related to one's own time (svakāla), the time of others (parakāla), and the time
of both oneself and others (svaparakāla). It also includes mantras (sacred
chants).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4] [samavAyAGgasUtra kaSAyoM ko jItane se svayaM jina haiM, aura dUsaroM ke bhI
viSaya-kaSAyoM ko chur3Ane se aura una para vijaya prApta karAne kA mArga batAne
se jJApaka haiM yA jaya-prApaka haiN| svayaM saMsAra-sAgara se uttIrNa haiM aura
dUsaroM ke uttAraka haiN| svayaM bodha ko prApta hone se buddha haiM aura
dUsaroM ko bodha dene se bodhaka haiN| svayaM karmoM se mukta haiM aura dUsaroM
ke bhI karmoM ke mocaka haiN| jo sarva jagat ke jAnane se sarvajJa aura
sarvaloka ke dekhane se sarvadarzI haiN| jo acala, aruja, (roga-rahita) ananta,
akSaya, avyAbAdha (bAdhAoM se rahita) aura punaH Agamana se rahita aisI siddha-
gati nAma ke anupama sthAna ko prApta karane vAle haiN| aise una bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne yaha dvAdazAGga rUpa gaNipiTaka kahA hai| vaha isa prakAra hai-
AcArAGga 1,sUtrakRtAGga 2,sthAnAGga 3,samavAyAGga 4, vyAkhyAprajJapti-aGga 5,
jJAtAdharmakathAGga 6, upAsakadazAGga 7, antakRtadazAGga 8,
anuttaraupapAtikadazAGga 9, praznavyAkaraNAMga 10, vipAkasUtrAMga 11 aura
dRSTivAdAMga 12 /  vivecana- zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne apanI dharmadezanA meM
jisa bAraha aMgarUpa gaNipiTaka kA upadeza diyA, usakA saMkSipta vivaraNa isa
prakAra hai 1. AcArAGga-meM sAdhujanoM ke jJAna, darzana, cAritra, tapa aura
vIrya, ina pAMca prakAra ke AcAradharma kA vivecana hai| 2. sUtrakRtAGga-meM
svamata, para-mata aura sva-para-mata kA vivecana kiyA gayA hai, tathA jIva,
ajIva, puNya, pApa, Asrava, saMvara, nirjarA, baMdha aura mokSa ina nau
padArthoM kA nirUpaNa hai| 3. sthAnAGga-meM eka se lekara daza sthAnoM ke dvArA
eka-eka, do-do Adi kI saMkhyA vAle padArthoM yA sthAnoM kA nirUpaNa hai| 4.
samavAyAGga-meM eka, do Adi saMkhyAvAle padArthoM se lekara sahasroM padArthoM
ke samudAya kA nirUpaNa hai| 5. vyAkhyAprajJapti-aMga-meM gaNadhara deva ke
dvArA pUche gaye 36 hajAra praznoM kA aura bhagavAn ke dvArA diye gaye uttaroM
kA saMkalana hai| 6.jJAtAdharmakathAGga-meM parISaha-upasarga-vijetA puruSoM ke
artha-garbhita dRSTAntoM evaM dhArmika puruSoM ke kathAnakoM kA vivecana hai| 7.
upAsakadazAGga-meM upAsakoM (zrAvakoM) ke parama dharma kA vidhivat pAlana
karane aura anta samaya meM saMlekhanA kI ArAdhanA karane vAle daza mahAzrAvakoM
ke caritroM kA varNana hai|| 8.aMtakRtdazAGga-meM mahAghora parISaha aura
upasarga sahana karate hue kevala-jJAnI ho antarmuhUrta ke bhItara hI karmoM kA
anta karane vAle mahAn anagAroM ke caritoM kA varNana hai| 9.
anuttaraupapAtikadazAGga-meM ghora-parISaha sahana kara aura anta meM samAdhi se
prANa tyAga kara paMca anuttara mahAvimAnoM meM utpanna hone vAle anagAroM kA
varNana hai| 10. praznavyAkaraNAGga-meM svasamaya, para-samaya, aura sva-
parasamaya-viSayaka praznoM kA, mantra

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **5. Ekasthanak-Samavay**  This chapter describes the
means of attaining knowledge and its excellences.  **11. Vipaksutraang**  This
chapter narrates the character of sinful individuals who commit great sins and
suffer terrible consequences, as well as the character of virtuous individuals
who accumulate great merit and enjoy worldly happiness as a result.  **12.
Drishtivadaang**  This chapter extensively discusses mathematics, 363 other
doctrines, fourteen Purvas, the biographies of great souls, and five Chulikaas
(water-born, sky-born, etc.) through the five great authorities: Parikaram,
Sutra, Purva, Anuyog, and Chulika. In fact, this Drishtivadaang is the largest
of the twelve angas.  The term "Ganipitaka" for the twelve angas signifies that
just as a merchant keeps his valuable goods safe in a pitari, peti, manjusha,
or, in today's terms, a box or a chest, similarly, this Ganipitaka, belonging to
the Acharya, the master of the Sangha (community of monks and nuns), serves as a
safe repository for the invaluable teachings of the Lord in the form of the
twelve angas.  **2. Tattha Nam Je Se Chautthe Ange Samavae Tti Ahite Tass Nam
Ayamdhe Panatte.**  This Samavayang is called the fourth anga in the Ganipitaka,
the twelve angas. Its meaning is as follows:  **Explanation:**  This anga is
aptly named "Samavay" because it helps in understanding the correct nature of
things through the knowledge of their specific number and characteristics.
**000**  **Ekasthanak-Samavay 3-Age Aya, Age Anaya. Age Dande, Age Adande. Ega
Kiriya, Ega Akiriya. Age Loe, Age Aloe. Age Dhamme, Age Adhamme. Age Punne, Age
Pave. Age Bandhe, Age Mokkhe. Age Asave, Age Sanvare. Ega Veyana, Ega Nijjara.**
_The soul is one, the non-soul is one, punishment is one, non-punishment is one,
action is one, inaction is one, the world is one, the non-world is one,
righteous conduct is one, unrighteous conduct is one, merit is one, sin is one,
bondage is one, liberation is one, inflow is one, restraint is one, pain is one,
and cessation is one._  **Explanation:**  Although there are many substances
like soul, non-soul, etc. (inanimate pudgala, etc.), their unity is stated in
these sutras with respect to their essence. This is because all living beings
are countless in number, but they are one in terms of the essence of life. Or,
they are one in terms of their conscious nature, which extends through all three
times. Similarly, inanimate substances like pots, pans, etc., which are
different from the soul and non-soul, are one in terms of their common
characteristic of being inanimate. Punishment, i.e., all kinds of sins like
violence, etc., are forms of wrong tendencies of mind, speech, and body.
Therefore, punishment is also one. Non-violence or righteous tendencies of mind,
speech, and body are also one.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 5 ekasthAnaka-samavAya] vidyA Adi ke sAdhane kA aura unake atizayoM kA varNana
hai| 11.vipAkasUtrAGga-meM mahApApa karane vAle aura usake phalasvarUpa ghora
duHkha pAne vAle pApI puruSoM kA tathA mahAn puNyopArjana karanevAle aura usake
phalasvarUpa sAMsArika sukhoM ko pAne vAle puNyAtmA janoM kA caritra-varNana
hai| 12. dRSTivAdAGga-meM parikarma, sUtra, pUrva, anuyoga aura cUlikA nAmaka
pAMca mahA adhikAroM ke dvArA gaNitazAstra kA, 363 anya matoM kA, caudaha pUrvo
kA, mahApuruSoM ke caritoM kA evaM jalagatA, AkAzagatA Adi pAMca cUlikAoM kA
bahuta vistRta vivecana kiyA gayA hai  /  vastutaH dvAdazAGga zruta meM yaha
dRSTivAda aMga hI sabase bar3A hai| isa dvAdazAMga zruta ko 'gaNipiTaka' kahane
kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jaise 'piTaka' piTArI, peTI, maMjUSA yA Aja ke zabdoM
meM sandUka yA baoNksa meM koI bhI vyApArI apanI mUlyavAn vastuoM ko surakSita
rakhatA hai, usI prakAra gaNI arthAt sAdhu-sAdhvI, saMgha ke svAmI AcArya kA
yaha bhagavAn ke dvAdazAMga zrutarUpa amUlya pravacanoM ko surakSita rakhane
vAlA piTaka yA piTArA hai| 2. tattha NaM je se cautthe aMge samavAe tti Ahite
tassa NaM ayamaDhe pnntte| taM jahA.. usa dvAdazAMga zrutarUpa gaNipiTaka meM
yaha samavAyAMga cauthA aMga kahA gayA hai, usakA yaha artha isa prakAra hai
vivecana-pratiniyata saMkhyA vAle padArthoM ke sam-samyak prakAra se avAya-
nizcaya yA parijJAna karAne se isa aMga kA 'samavAya' yaha sArthaka nAma hai|
000 ekasthAnaka-samavAya 3-ege AyA, ege annaayaa| ege daMDe, ege adNdde| egA
kiriyA, egA akiriyaa| ege loe, ege aloe| ege dhamme, ege adhmme| ege puNNe, ege
paave| ege baMdhe, ege mokkhe| ege Asave, ege sNvre| egA veyaNA, egA nnijjraa|
_AtmA eka hai, anAtmA eka hai, daMDa eka hai, adaMDa eka hai, kriyA eka hai,
akriyA eka hai, loka eka hai, aloka eka hai, dharmAstikAya eka hai,
adharmAstikAya eka hai, puNya eka hai, pApa eka hai, bandha eka hai, mokSa eka
hai, Asrava eka hai, saMvara eka hai, vedanA eka hai aura nirjarA eka hai|
vivecana-yadyapi AtmA-anAtmA Adi (acetana pudgalAdi) padArtha aneka haiM, kintu
dravyArthika-saMgrahanaya kI apekSA unakI ekatA ukta sUtroM meM pratipAdita kI
gaI hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki sabhI jIva pradezoM kI apekSA asaMkhyAta
pradezI hote hue bhI jIva dravya kI apekSA eka haiN| athavA trikAla anugAmI
cetanatva kI apekSA eka haiN| isI prakAra anAtmA-AtmA se bhinna ghaTa-paTAdi
acetana padArtha acetanatva sAmAnya kI apekSA eka haiN| daNDa arthAt hiMsAdi
sabhI prakAra ke pApa, mana, vacana, kAya kI khoTI pravRtti rUpa haiM ata: daNDa
bhI eka hai| ahiMsaka yA prazasta mana, vacana, kAya kI pravRttirUpa hone

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the Samvayanga Sutra, even Adanda is one. Similarly, one should know that
all these mutually opposite or relative substances, such as action-inaction,
world-non-world, righteous-unrighteous, merit-demerit, bondage-liberation,
inflow-restriction, pain and exhaustion, are all one due to having the same
dharma in terms of collection. In Jain philosophy, all statements are made in
relation to Nayas. In this first chapter of Samvayanga, all statements have been
made in one form in relation to collection. 4-The Jambudvipa island is said to
be one hundred thousand yojanas in length and breadth. The Palaka Vimana, a
vehicle of the Saudharma Indra, is said to be one hundred thousand yojanas in
length and breadth. The Sarvarthasiddha Maha Vimana is said to be one hundred
thousand yojanas in length and breadth. Jambudvipa, the first island, is said to
be one hundred thousand yojanas in length and breadth. The Palaka Vimana, a
vehicle of the Saudharma Indra, is said to be one hundred thousand yojanas in
length and breadth. The Sarvarthasiddha Maha Vimana is said to be one hundred
thousand yojanas in length and breadth. _ Meaning-Jambudvipa, Palaka Vimana and
Sarvarthasiddha Maha Vimana are all one hundred thousand yojanas in size. 5-The
Ardra constellation is said to have one star. The Chitra constellation is said
to have one star. The Swati constellation is said to have one star. 6-In this
Ratnapraba earth, the state of many Narakas is said to be one Palyopama. In this
Ratnapraba earth, the state of many Narakas is said to be one Sagaropama. In the
second Sharkara earth, the state of Narakas is said to be one Sagaropama. The
state of many Asurakumaras is said to be one Palyopama. The state of
Asurakumaras is said to be one Sagaropama, slightly more. The state of many
Bhavanavasi Devas, excluding the Asurakumaras, is said to be one Palyopama. The
state of many countless years-old, conscious, five-sensed, Tiryanch-yoni beings
is said to be one Palyopama. The state of many countless years-old, conscious,
Garbhopakrantik, human beings is said to be one Palyopama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [samavAyAGgasUtra se adaNDa bhI eka hai| isI prakAra kriyA-akriyA, loka-aloka,
dharmAstikAya-adharmAstikAya, puNyapApa, bandha-mokSa, Asrava-saMvara, vedanA
aura nirjarA ina sabhI paraspara pratipakSI yA sApekSa padArthoM ko bhI
saMgrahanaya kI apekSA samAna dharmavAle hone se eka-eka jAnanA caahie| jaina
siddhAnta meM sabhI kathana nayoM kI apekSA se kiyA jAtA hai| samavAyAGga ke isa
prathama sthAnaka meM sarvakathana saMgrahanaya kI apekSA se eka rUpa meM kiyA
gayA hai| 4-jaMbuddIve dIve egaM joyaNasayasahassaM AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM pnntte|
pAlae jANavimANe egaM joyaNasayasahassaM AyAma-vikkhaMbheNaM pnntte|
savvaTThasiddhe mahAvimANe egaM joyaNasayasahassaM AyAma-vikkhaMbheNaM pnntte|
jambUdvIpa nAmaka yaha prathama dvIpa AyAma (lambAI) aura viSkambha (caur3AI) kI
apekSA zatasahasra (eka lAkha) yojana vistIrNa kahA gayA hai| saudharmendra kA
pAlaka nAma kA yAna (yAtrA ke samaya upayoga meM Ane vAlA pAlaka nAma ke
Abhiyogya deva kI vikriyA se nirmita vimAna) eka lAkha yojana AyAma-viSkambha
vAlA kahA gayA hai| sarvArthasiddha nAmaka anuttara mahAvimAna eka lAkha yojana
AyAmaviSkambha vAlA kahA gayA hai| _ bhAvArtha-jambUdvIpa, pAlaka yAna-vimAna
aura sarvArthasiddha anuttara mahAvimAna eka-eka lAkha yojana rUpa samAna
vistAra vAle haiN| 5-addAnakkhatte egatAre pnntte| cittAnakkhatte egatAre
pnntte|saatinkhtte egatAre pnntte| ArdrA nakSatra eka tArA vAlA kahA gayA hai|
citrA nakSatra eka tArA vAlA kahA gayA hai| svAti nakSatra eka tArA vAlA kahA
gayA hai| 6-imIse NaM rayaNappahAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM egaM
paliovamaM ThiI pnntaa| imIse NaM rayaNappahAe puDhavIe neraiyANaM ukkoseNaM
egaM sAgarovamaM ThiI pnnttaa| doccAe puDhavIe neraiyANaM jahanneNaM egaM
sAgarovamaM ThiI pnntaa|asurkumaaraannN devANaM atthegaiyANaM egaM paliovamaM
ThiI pnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM ukkoseNaM egaM sAhiyaM sAgarovamaM ThiI
ptnttaa| asurakumAriMdavajjiyANaM bhomijjANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM egaM
paliovamaM ThiI pnnttaa| asaMkhijjavAsAuasanni-paMciMdiya-tirikkha-joNiyANaM
atthegaiyANaM egaM paliovamaM ThiI pnnttaa| asaMkhijjavAsAuya-
gabbhavakkaMtiyasanimaNuyANaM atthegaiyANaM egaM paliovamaM ThiI pnnttaa| isI
ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti eka palyopama kahI gaI hai|
isI ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI utkRSTa sthiti eka sAgaropama
kahI gaI hai| dUsarI zarkarA pRthivI meM nArakiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti eka
sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti eka palyopama kahI
gaI hai| asurakumAra devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti kucha adhika eka sAgaropama kahI
gaI hai| asurakumArendroM ko chor3a kara zeSa bhavanavAsI kitaneka devoM kI
sthiti eka palyopama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asaMkhyAta varSAyuSka saMjJI
paMcendriya tiryagyonika jIvoM kI sthiti eka palyopama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka
asaMkhyAta varSAyuSka garbhopakrAntika saMjJI manuyoM kI sthiti eka palyopama
kahI gaI hai|

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Two-Stanza Collection - Agreement  **7**  The highest state of the
*Vānavyantara* gods is said to be one *palyopama*. The highest state of the
*Jyotishka* gods is said to be one *palyopama* lasting for more than a hundred
thousand years. The lowest state of the gods in the *Saudharm* kalpa is said to
be one *palyopama*. The state of many gods in the *Saudharm* kalpa is said to be
one *sāgaropama*. The lowest state of the gods in the *Īśāna* kalpa is said to
be one *palyopama*, slightly more than the previous. The state of many gods in
the *Īśāna* kalpa is said to be one *sāgaropama*.  **8**  Those gods who are
born as gods in the specific celestial vehicles called *Sāgara*, *Susāgara*,
*Sāgarakānta*, *Bhava*, *Manu*, *Mānuṣottara*, and *Lokahita*, their highest
state is said to be one *sāgaropama*. These gods breathe in and out, or live and
die, once every half-month (fifteen days). Their desire for food arises once
every thousand years. There are many *bhavyasiddhika* beings who, by taking one
human birth, will become *siddhas*, *buddhas*, liberated from karma, attain
*parinirvāṇa*, and end all suffering.  **End of One-Stanza Collection -
Agreement**  **Two-Stanza Collection - Agreement**  **9**  Two *danda* are
mentioned, namely: *arthadanda* and *anarthadanda*. Two *rāśi* are mentioned,
namely: *jīvarāśi* and *ajīvarāśi*. Two types of *bandhana* are mentioned,
namely: *rāgabandhana* and *dosabandhana*.  **Explanation:**  The action of
harming and other sinful tendencies are called *danda*. The *danda* that is used
for the benefit of oneself and others, for a purpose, is called *arthadanda*.
But the *danda* that is done without any purpose, for no reason, is called
*anarthadanda*. The *bandhana* that binds karma is both in the form of *rāga*
and *dosa*. *Kṣayās* bind karma. Anger and pride are *kṣayās* in the form of
*dosa*, and delusion and greed are *kṣayās* in the form of...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvisthAnaka - samavAya ] [ 7 7 - vANamaMtarANaM devANaM ukkoseNaM egaM
paliovamaM ThiI pannattA  /  joisiyANaM devANaM ukkoseNaM egaM paliovamaM
vAsasayasahassamabbhahiyaM ThiI pannattA  /  sohamme kappe devANaM jahanneNaM.
egaM paliovamaM ThiI pannattA | sohamme kappe devANaM atthegaiyANaM egaM
sAgarovamaM ThiI pannattA  /  IsANe kappe devANaM jahanneNaM sAiregaM egaM
paliovamaM ThiI pannattA  /  IsANe kappe devANaM atthegaiyANaM egaM sAgarovamaM
ThiI pannattA  /  vAnavyantara devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti eka palyopama kahI gaI
hai| jyotiSka devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti eka lAkha varSa se adhika eka palyopama
kahI gaI hai| saudharmakalpa meM devoM kI jaghanya sthiti eka palyopama kahI gaI
hai| saudharmakalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti eka sAgaropama kahI gaI hai|
IzAnakalpa meM devoM kI jaghanya sthiti kucha adhika eka palyopama kahI gaI hai|
IzAnakalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti eka sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| 8 - je devA
sAgaraM susAgaraM sAgarakaMta bhavaM maNuM mANusottaraM logahiyaM vimANaM
devattAe uvavannA, tesiM NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM egaM sAgarovamaM ThiI pannattA  /
te NaM devA ekassa addhamAsassa ANamaMti vA pANamaMti vA ussasaMti vA nIsasaMti
vA  /  tesiM NaM devANaM egassa vAsasahassassa AhAraTThe samuppajjai  /
saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je egeNaM bhavaggahaNeNaM sijjhissaMti
bujjhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM karirassaMti  /
jo deva sAgara, susAgara, sAgarakAnta, bhava, manu, mAnuSottara aura lokahita
nAma ke viziSTa vimAnoM meM deva rUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa
sthiti eka sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva eka ardhamAsa meM (pandraha dina
meM) Ana-prANa athavA ucchvAsa- ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ke eka hajAra
varSa meM AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise
haiM jo eka manuSya bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se
mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA antara kreNge|
//  ekasthAnaka samavAya samApta  //  dvisthAnaka - samavAya 9 - do daMDA
pannattA, taM jahA - - aTThAdaMDe ceva, aNatthAdaMDe ceva  /  duve rAsI
paNNattA, taM jahA - - jIvarAsI ceva, ajIvarAsI ceva  /  duvihe baMdhaNe,
pannatte  /  taM jahA - rAgabaMdhaNe ceva, dosabaMdhaNe ceva  /  do daNDa kahe
gaye haiM, jaise- arthadaNDa aura anarthadaNDa  /  do rAzi kahI gaI haiM, jaise-
jIvarAzi aura ajiivraashi| do prakAra ke baMdhana kahe gaye haiM, jaise-
rAgabaMdhana aura dveSabaMdhana  /  vivecana - hiMsAdi pAparUpa pravRtti ko
daMDa kahate haiN| jo daMDa apane aura para ke upakAra ke lie prayojana-vaza
kiyA jAtA hai, use arthadaMDa kahate haiM  /  kintu jo pAparUpa daMDa binA kisI
prayojana ke nirarthaka kiyA jAtA hai, use anarthadaMDa kahate haiM  /  karmoM
kA bandha karAne vAle bandhana rAgarUpa bhI hote haiM aura dveSarUpa bhI hote
haiM  /  kaSAyoM se karmabandha hotA hai| krodha aura mAna kaSAya dveSa rUpa
haiM aura mAyA tathA

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
8] [Samvayanga Sutra states that greed is a kṣaya (negative karmic force) and is
of the form of attachment. 10- The constellation Purva Phalguni is said to have
two stars. The constellation Uttara Phalguni is said to have two stars. The
constellation Purva Bhadrapada is said to have two stars. The constellation
Uttara Bhadrapada is said to have two stars. 11- In this Ratnapraba earth, the
state of the narakas (hell beings) is said to be like two palya (a measure of
distance). In the other earth, the state of the narakas is said to be like two
sagara (oceans). 12- The state of the Asura Kumaras (sons of the Asuras) is said
to be like two palya. The state of the Bhavanavasi (heavenly beings) excluding
the Asura Kumaras is said to be slightly less than two palya. The state of the
countless beings with an infinite lifespan, five senses, and belonging to the
Tiryancha (animal) realm is said to be like two palya. The state of the
countless beings with an infinite lifespan, five senses, and belonging to the
human realm is said to be like two palya. 13- The state of the devas (gods) in
the Saudharma kalpa is said to be like two palya. The state of the devas in the
Ishana kalpa is said to be like two palya. The state of the devas in the
Saudharma kalpa is said to be slightly more than two sagara. The state of the
devas in the Ishana kalpa is said to be slightly more than two sagara. The state
of the devas in the Sanatkumara kalpa is said to be like two sagara. The state
of the devas in the Mahendra kalpa is said to be slightly more than two sagara.
14- The devas who have a beautiful form, beautiful body, beautiful clothes,
beautiful fragrance, beautiful ornaments, and beautiful light, and who reside in
the Saudharma Vimanas (heavenly palaces), their state is said to be slightly
more than two sagara. These devas live for two half-months, and they breathe in
and out. They have food and drink for two thousand years.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 8] [samavAyAGgasUtra lobhakaSAya rAgarUpa haiN| 10-puvvA phagguNI nakkhatte
dutAre pnntte| uttarAphagguNI nakkhatte dutAre pnntte| puvvAbhaddavayA nakkhatte
dutAre pnntte| uttarAbhaddavayA nakkhatte dutAre pnntte| pUrvAphAlgunI nakSatra
do tArA vAlA kahA gayA hai| uttarAphAlgunI nakSatra do tArA vAlA kahA gayA hai|
pUrvAbhAdrapadA nakSatra do tArA vAlA kahA gayA hai aura uttarAbhAdrapadA
nakSatra do tArA vAlA kahA gayA hai| 11-imIse NaM rayaNappahAe puDhavIe
atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM do paliovamAiM ThiI pnnttaa| duccAe puDhavIe
atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM do sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI
meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti do palyopama kahI gaI hai| dUsarI pRthivI meM
kitaneka nArakiyoM kI sthiti do sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| 12-asurakumArANaM
devANaM atthegaiyANaM do paliovamAiM ThiI pnnttaa| asurakumAriMdavajjiyANaM
bhomijjANaM devANaM ukkoseNaM desUNAI do paliovamAiM ThiI pnnttaa|
asaMkhinjavAsAuya-sannipaMciMdiyatirikkhajoNiyANaM atthegaiyANaM do paliovamAI
ThiI pnnttaa| asaMkhinjavAsauyagabbhavakkaMtiyasannipaMciMdiya-maNussANaM
atthegaiyANaM, do paliovamAiM ThiI pnnttaa| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti
do palyopama kahI gaI hai| asurakumArendroM ko chor3akara zeSa bhavanavAsI devoM
kI utkRSTa sthiti kucha kama do palyopama kahI gaI hai| asaMkhyAta varSAyuSka
saMjJA paMcendriya tiryagyonika kitane hI jIvoM kI sthiti do palyopama kahI gaI
hai| asaMkhyAta varSAyuSka garbhopakrAntika. paMcendriya saMjJI kitaneka
manuSyoM kI sthiti do palyopama kahI gaI hai| 13-sohamme kappe atthegaiyANaM
devANaM do paliovamAI ThiI pnnttaa| IsANe kappe atthe-gaiyANaM devANaM do
paliovamAiM ThiI pnnttaa| sohamme kappe atthegaiyANaM devANaM ukkoseNaM do
sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnttaa| IsANe kappe devANaM ukkoseNaM sAhiyAiM do sAgarovamAI
ThiI pnnttaa| saNaMkumAre kappe devANaM jahaNNeNaM do sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnttaa|
mAhiMde kappe devANaM jahaNNeNaM sAhiyAiM do sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnttaa| saudharma
kalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti do palyopama kahI gaI hai| IzAna kalpa meM
kitaneka devoM kI sthiti do palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma kalpa meM kitaneka
devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti do sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| IzAna kalpa meM devoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti kucha adhika do sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| sanatkumAra kalpa meM
devoM kI jaghanya sthiti do sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| mAhendrakalpa meM devoM kI
jaghanya sthiti kucha adhika do sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| 14-je devA subhaM
subhakaMtaM subhavaNNaM subhagaMdhaM subhalessaM subhaphAsaM sohammavaDiMsagaM
vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA, tesiM NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM do sAgarovamAiM ThiI
pnnttaa| te NaM devA doNhaM addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA,
nIsasaMti vaa| tesiMNaM devANaM dohiM vAsasahassehiM AhAraTTe smuppjji|

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Tri-Sthanak-Samavay] Those who are Bhava-Siddhi-Jiva, who will become Siddha,
Buddha, liberated from karma, attain Nirvana, and end all suffering by taking
two Bhava-grahana. Those Devas who are born in the Sudharma-Avatamsaka Vimanas,
which are distinguished by their auspiciousness, auspiciousness, auspiciousness,
auspiciousness, auspiciousness, and auspiciousness, are said to be in an
excellent state, like two oceans. These Devas take one breath or exhale in two
half-months (one month). They develop a desire for food in two thousand years.
How many Bhavyasiddhi-Jiva are there who will become Siddha, Buddha, liberated
from karma, attain Nirvana, and end all suffering by taking two Bhava-grahana?
|| Dvi-Sthanak Samavay Sampt. Tri-Sthanak-Samavay 15 - There are three Dandas,
namely - Man-Danda, Vachan-Danda, Kaya-Danda. There are three Gupptis, namely -
Man-Guppti, Vachan-Guppti, Kaya-Guppti. There are three Sallas, namely - Maya-
Sall, Niyan-Sall, Miccha-Dasan-Sall. There are three Garavas, namely - Iddi-
Garava, Ras-Garava, Saya-Garava. There are three Viradhanas, namely - Nan-
Viradhana, Dassan-Viradhana, Charitra-Viradhana. Explanation - That by which the
wealth of character is destroyed is called Danda. The character is destroyed by
the wrong tendencies of mind, speech, and body, hence there are three types of
Danda. Since the suppression of the evil tendencies of mind, speech, and body,
and the performance of good tendencies, is called Guppti, hence there are three
types of Guppti. Those who pierce the body, enter within, and cause pain in the
inner self, like arrows, are called Salyas. The Maya of the Maya-chari continues
to torment him, lest his Maya or deceit be revealed. The second Saly is Nidana.
Seeing the wealth and prosperity of Devas, etc., and desiring them as a result
of one's own penance, is called Nidana. The mind of the one who does Nidana is
always burning with the desire to obtain those pleasures, etc., hence Nidana is
also called Saly. The third Saly is Miccha-Darshan. Under its influence, the
Jiva is always restless with the desire to obtain external objects. To desire
external objects is Miccha-Darshan, hence it is called Saly. To make one's own
soul great or heavy by pride, greed, etc., is called Garava. To consider oneself
great by wealth and prosperity, etc., is called Iddi-Garava. To feel proud of
eating ghee, milk, sweets, etc., and to feel proud of obtaining them, is called
Ras-Garava. To declare one's own comfort, such as, "I cannot bear these trials
and tribulations, I cannot bear the cold and heat," or to feel proud of
obtaining wealth, is called Saya-Garava. Knowledge, vision

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tristhAnaka-samavAya] atthegaiyA bhavasiddhiyAjIvA je dohiM bhavaggahaNehiM
sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM
krissNti| jo deva zubha, zubhakAnta, zubhavarNa, zubhagandha, zubhalezya,
zubhasparza vAle saudharmAvataMsaka viziSTa vimAnoM meM deva rUpa se utpanna
hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti do sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva do
ardhamAsoM meM (eka mAsa meM) Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una
devoM ke do hajAra varSa meM AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka
bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo do bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha
hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM
kA anta kreNge| ||dvisthaank samavAya smaapt| tristhAnaka-samavAya 15-tao daMDA
paNNattA, taM jahA-maNadaMDe vayadaMDe kaaydNdde| tao guttIo pannattAo, taM
jahA-maNaguttI, vayaguttI, kaayguttii|to sallA pnntaa|tN jahA-mAyAsalleNaM
niyANasalle NaM micchAdasaNasalle nnN| tao gAravA pannattA, taM jahA-iddhIgArave
NaM rasagArave NaM sAyAgArave nnN| tao virAhaNA pannattA, taM jahA-nANavirAhaNA
daMsaNavirAhaNA crittviraahnnaa| tIna daMDa kahe gaye haiM, jaise-manadaMDa,
vacanadaMDa, kaaydNdd| tIna guptiyA~ kahI gaI haiM, jaisemanagapti. vacanagapti,
kaaygpti| tIna zalya kahI gaI haiM, jaise-mAyAzalya, nidAnazalya,
mithyaadrshnshly| tIna gaurava kahe gaye haiM, jaise-Rddhigaurava, rasagaurava,
saataagaurv| tIna virAdhanA kahI gaI haiM, jaisejJAnavirAdhanA,
darzanavirAdhanA, caaritrviraadhnaa| vivecana-jisake dvArA cAritra rUpa aizvarya
niHsAra kiyA jAve, use daMDa kahate haiN| mana, vacana, kAya kI khoTI pravRtti
ke dvArA caritra naSTa hotA hai, ata: daMDa ke tIna bheda kahe gaye haiN| yataH
mana vacana kAya kI azubha pravRtti ke rokane ko, evaM zubha pravRtti ke karane
ko gupti kahate haiM, ata: gupti ke bhI tIna bheda kahe gaye haiN| jo zarIra meM
cubhe hue-bhItara hI bhItara praviSTa vANa Adi ke samAna antaraMga meM duHkha kA
vedana karAveM unheM zalya kahate haiN| mAyAcArI kI mAyA use bhItara pIr3ita
karatI rahatI hai ki kahIM merI mAyA yA chala-chadma prakaTa na ho jaave| dUsarI
zalya nidAna hai| devAdika ke Rddhi-vaibhavAdi ko dekhakara apanI tapasyA ke
phalasvarUpa unakI kAmanA karane ko nidAna kahate haiN| nidAna karane vAle kA
citta sadA una sukhAdi ko pAne kI lAlasA se nirantara santapta rahatA hai,
isalie nidAna ko bhI zalya kahA hai| tIsarI zalya mithyAdarzana hai| isake
prabhAva se jIva sadA hI para-vastuoM ko prApta karane kI abhilASA se becaina
rahatA hai| para-vastu kI cAha karanA mithyAdarzana hai isIlie ise zalya kahA
gayA hai| abhimAna, lobha Adi ke dvArA apanI AtmA ko guru yA bhArI banAne ko
gaurava kahate haiN| Rddhi-vaibhavAdi ke dvArA apane ko gauravazAlI mAnanA
Rddhigaurava kahalAtA hai| ghI, dUdha, miSTa Adi rasoM ke khAye binA maiM nahIM
raha sakatA, ataH unake khAne-pIne meM gaurava kA anubhava karanA, unake prApta
hone se abhimAna karanA rasagaurava kahalAtA hai| mere se ye parISaha-upasargAdi
nahIM sahe jAte, maiM zIta-uSNa kI bAdhA nahIM saha sakatA, ityAdi prakAra se
apanI sukha-zIlatA ko prakaTa karanA yA sAtA prApta hone para ahaMkAra karanA
sAtAgaurava hai| jJAna, darzana

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 10  [Samvayanga Sutra]  The three paths to liberation are: Right
Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct.  Their violation leads to three types
of violation.  16 - The Mrigashira Nakshatra is said to have three stars. The
Pushya Nakshatra is said to have three stars. The Jyeshta Nakshatra is said to
have three stars. The Abhijit Nakshatra is said to have three stars. The
Shravana Nakshatra is said to have three stars. The Ashwini Nakshatra is said to
have three stars. The Bharani Nakshatra is said to have three stars.  17 - In
this Ratnapraba earth, the state of many hell beings is said to be like three
Palas. In the second Sharkara earth, the state of hell beings is said to be like
three Sagaras. In the third Valuka earth, the state of hell beings is said to be
like three Sagaras.  18 - The state of many Asura Kumaras and Devas is said to
be like three Palas. The state of countless years of life, five senses, and
Tiryanch beings is said to be like three Palas. The state of countless years of
life, five senses, and human beings is said to be like three Palas.  19 - In the
Sanatkumara-Maheendra Kalpa, the state of many Devas is said to be like three
Sagaras. Those Devas who are born in the specific Vimanas called Abhankara,
Prabhankara, Abhankara-Prabhankara, Chandra, Chandravart, Chandra Prabha,
Chandrakant, Chandravarna, Chandraleshya, Chandradhvaja, Chandrashringa,
Chandrasrishta, Chandrakut, and Chandrottava-Vatansak, their state is said to be
like three Sagaras. These Devas breathe in and out every three half-months. They
experience the desire for food every three thousand years.  Those beings who are
liberated from the cycle of birth and death, who understand, who are liberated,
who attain Nirvana, and who end all suffering, are said to be liberated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10] [ samavAyAGgasUtra aura cAritra ye tInoM mokSa ke mArga haiM, unakI
virAdhanA karane se virAdhanA ke bhI tIna bheda ho jAte haiN| 16 -
migasiranakkhatte titAre pannate  /  pussanakkhatte titAre pannatte  /
jeTThAnakkhatte titAre pannatte  /  abhIinakkhatte titAre pannatte  /
savaNanakkhatte titAre pannatte  /  assiNinakkhatte titAre pannatte  /
bharaNInakkhatte titAre pannatte  /  mRgazira nakSatra tIna tArAvAlA kahA gayA
hai| puSya nakSatra tIna tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai| jyeSThA nakSatra tIna tArAvAlA
kahA gayA hai| abhijit nakSatra tIna tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai| zravaNa nakSatra
tIna tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai| azvinI nakSatra tIna tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai|
bharaNI nakSatra tIna tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai| 17 - imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe
puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM NeraiyANaM tiNNi palio mAI ThiI pannattA  /  doccAe NaM
puDhavIe NeraiyANaM ukkoseNaM tiNNi sAgarovamAI ThiI pannattA  /  taccAe NaM
puDhavIe raiyANaM jahaNNeNaM tiNNi sAgarovamAI ThiI pannattA  /  isa ratnaprabhA
pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakiyoM kI sthiti tIna palyopama kahI gaI hai| dUsarI
zarkarA pRthivI meM nArakiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIna sAgaropama kahI gaI hai|
tIsarI vAlukA pRthivI meM nArakiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti tIna sAgaropama kahI gaI
hai| 18 - asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM tiNNi paliovamAI ThiI pannatA  /
asaMkhijjavAsAuyasannipaMciMdiyatirikkhajoNiyANaM ukkoseNaM tiNNi paliovAmahaM
ThiI pannattA  /  asaMkhijjavAsAuyasannigabbhavakkaMtiyamaNussANaM ukkoseNaM
tiNNi paliovamAI ThiI pannattA  /  kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti tIna
palyopama kahI gaI hai| asaMkhyAta varSAyuSka saMjJI* paMcendriya tiryagyonika
jIvoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIna palyopama kahI gaI hai| asaMkhyAta varSAyuSka
saMjJI garbhopakrAntika manuSyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIna palyopama kahI gaI hai|
19 - saNakumAra- mAhiMdesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM tiNNi sAgarovamAI ThiI pannattA
/  je devA AbhaMkaraM pabhaMkaraM AbhaMkara - pabhaMkaraM caMdaM caMdAvattaM
caMdappabhaM caMdakaMtaM caMdavaNNaM caMdalesaM caMdajjhayaM caMdasiMgaM
caMdasiddhaM caMdakUDaM caMduttaravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA, tesiM
NaM devAnaM ukkoseNaM tiNi sAgarovamAiM ThiI pannattA, te NaM devA tiNhaM
addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vA, tesiM NaM
devANaM tihiM vAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe samuppajjai  /  saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA
jIvA je tihiM bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti, bujjhissaMti, muccissaMti,
parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM karissaMti  /  sanatkumAra-mAhendrakalpoM
meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti tIna sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| jo deva AbhaMkara,
prabhaMkara, AbhaMkara - prabhaMkara, candra, candrAvarta, candraprabha,
candrakAnta, candravarNa, candralezya, candradhvaja, candrazRMga, candrasRSTa,
candrakUTa aura candrottarAvataMsaka nAma vAle viziSTa vimAnoM meM devarUpa se
utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIna sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve
deva tIna ardhamAsoM meM (Der3ha mAsa meM) AnaprANa arthAt ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa
lete haiM  /  una devoM ko tIna hajAra varSa meM AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI
hai|

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Four-Positional-Concordance] [11 How many liberated souls are there who
will attain liberation after experiencing three existences, become Buddhas, be
free from karmas, attain ultimate Nirvana and end all suffering. || Three-
Positional Concordance ends. Four-Positional Concordance 20 - Four passions are
stated, namely - anger passion, pride passion, deceit passion, greed passion.
Four meditations are stated, namely - distressed meditation, fierce meditation,
righteous meditation, pure meditation. Four stories are stated, namely - woman
story, devotee story, king story, country story. Four perceptions are stated,
namely - food perception, fear perception, sexual perception, attachment
perception. Four types of bondage are stated, namely - nature bondage, state
bondage, effect bondage, region bondage. Four koshas are stated as one yojana.
Four passions are mentioned - anger passion, pride passion, deceit passion,
greed passion. Four meditations are mentioned - distressed meditation, fierce
meditation, righteous meditation, pure meditation. Four stories are mentioned,
such as - woman story, devotee story, king story, country story. Four
perceptions are mentioned, such as - food perception, fear perception, sexual
perception, attachment perception. Four types of bondage are mentioned, such as
- nature bondage, state bondage, effect bondage, region bondage. Four koshas are
mentioned as one yojana. Discussion - Those emotions that bind the soul and
increase worldly attachments are called passions. Concentration of the mind is
called meditation. When this concentration is in the form of removing the pain
of separation from the desired and the association with the undesired, it is
called distressed meditation. When this concentration is in the act of
committing sins like violence, it is called fierce meditation. When this
concentration is in the propagation of the teachings of the Jinas, compassion,
charity, and altruism, it is called righteous meditation. And when this
concentration is free from all auspicious and inauspicious emotions and is
stable in the form of pure consciousness, it is called pure meditation. Pure
meditation is the direct cause of liberation and righteous meditation is the
traditional cause. Distressed meditation and fierce meditation are the causes of
worldly bondage. Meaningless stories that increase attachment and aversion are
called stories. The tendency of the senses towards objects is called perception.
The connection of the soul with karmas in the form of their nature, state,
fruit-giving, etc. is called bondage. In the present sutras, four divisions of
each of these are mentioned. Four koshas or gavyutis are called a yojana. 21 -
The Anuradha constellation is said to have four stars. The Purvashadha
constellation is said to have four stars. The Uttarashadha constellation is said
to have four stars. 22 - In this way, four comparisons are stated for the earth,
the abode of the living beings and the non-living beings, in terms of the
brilliance of the sun. In the same way, four comparisons are stated for the
earth, the abode of the living beings and the non-living beings, in terms of the
ocean. Four comparisons are stated for the Asura Kumaras, the gods, the living
beings and the non-living beings. In the Sohammisana kalpas, four comparisons
are stated for the living beings and the non-living beings, in terms of the
brilliance of the sun.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 catuHsthAnaka-samavAya] [11 kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise hai jo tIna bhava
grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa
prApta kareMge aura sarva du:khoM kA anta kreNge| ||tristhaank samavAya smaapt|
catuHsthAnaka-samavAya 20-cattAri kasAyA pannattA,taM jahA-kohakasAe mANakasAe
mAyAkasAe lobhksaae| cattAri jhANA pannattA, taM jahA-aTTajjhANe ruddajjhANe
dhammajjhANe sukkjjhaanne| cattAri vikahAo pannattAo, taM jahA-itthikahA
bhattakahA rAyakahA deskhaa| cattAri saNNA pannattA, taM jahAAhArasaNNA
bhayasaNNA mehuNasaNNA prigghsnnnnaa| cauvvihe baMdhe pannatte, taM jahA-
pagaibaMdhe ThiibaMdhe aNubhAvabaMdhe pesbNdhe| caugAue joyaNe pnntte| cAra
kaSAya kahe gaye haiM -krodhakaSAya, mAnakaSAya, mAyAkaSAya, lobhkssaay| cAra
dhyAna kahe gaye haiM - ArtadhyAna, raudradhyAna, dharmyadhyAna, shukldhyaan|
cAra vikathAeM kahI gaI haiM, jaise-strIkathA, bhaktakathA, rAjakathA,
deshkthaa| cAra saMjJAeM kahI gaI haiM, jaise-AhArasaMjJA, bhayasaMjJA,
maithunasaMjJA, prigrhsNjnyaa| cAra prakAra kA bandha kahA gayA hai, jaise-
prakRtibandha, sthitibandha, anubhAvabandha, pradezabandha  /  cAra gavyUti kA
eka yojana kahA gayA hai| vivecana-jo AtmA ko kase, aise saMsAra bar3hAne vAle
vikArI bhAvoM ko kaSAya kahate haiM  /  citta kI ekAgratA ko dhyAna kahate haiM
/  yaha ekAgratA jaba iSTa-viyoga, aniSTa-saMyogAdi ke hone para unake dUra
karane ke rUpa meM hotI hai, taba use ArtadhyAna kahate haiN| jaba vaha ekAgratA
hiMsAdi pApa karane meM hotI hai, taba use raudradhyAna kahate haiN| jaba vaha
ekAgratA jina-pravacana ke pracAra, dayA, dAna, paropakAra Adi karane meM hotI
hai, taba use dharmyadhyAna kahate haiM aura jaba yaha ekAgratA sarvazubha-
azubha bhAvoM se nivRtta hokara ekamAtra zuddha caitanya svarUpa meM sthiratA
rUpa hotI hai, taba use zukladhyAna kahate haiM  /  zukladhyAna mokSa kA sAkSAt
kAraNa hai aura dharmyadhyAna paramparA kAraNa hai| ArtadhyAna aura raudradhyAna
saMsAra-bandhana ke kAraNa haiN| rAga-dveSavardhaka nirarthaka kathAoM ko
vikathA kahate haiM  /  indriyoM kI viSaya-pravRtti ko saMjJA kahate haiN|
karmoM ke svabhAva, sthiti, phala-pradAnAdi rUpa se AtmA ke sAtha saMbaddha hone
ko baMdha kahate haiN| prastuta sUtroM meM inake cAra-cAra bhedoM ko ginAyA gayA
hai| cAra koza yA gavyUti ko yojana kahate haiN| 21-aNurAhAnakkhatte cauttAre
pannatte, puvvAsADhAnakhte cauttAre pnntte|uttraasaaddhaankkhtte cauttAre
pnntte| anurAdhA nakSatra cAra tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai| pUrvASADhA nakSatra cAra
tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai| uttarASADhA nakSatra cAra tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai|
22-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM cattAri paliovamAiM
ThiI pnnttaa| taccAe NaM puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM cattAri sAgarovamAI
ThiI pnnttaa|asurkumaaraannN devANaM atthegaiyANaM cattAri paliovamAiM ThiI
pnntaa| sohammIsANesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[12] The *Samvayanasutra* states that the condition of the gods is described in
four *palyopamas*. In the *Ratnaprabha* earth, the condition of many *narakas*
is described in four *palyopamas*. In the *Balukaprabha* earth, the condition of
many *narakas* is described in four *sagaropama*. The condition of many
*asurakumara* gods is described in four *palyopamas*. In the *Saudharm-Ishana*
kalpas, the condition of many gods is described in four *palyopamas*. [23-24] In
the *Sanatkumara-Mahendra* kalpas, the condition of many gods is described in
four *sagaropama*. Those gods who are born in the *vimanas* called *Krishti*,
*Sukrishti*, *Krishti-avarta*, *Krishtiprabha*, *Krishtiyukt*, *Krishtivarna*,
*Krishtileshya*, *Krishtidhvaja*, *Krishtishringa*, *Krishtisrishta*,
*Krishtikoota*, and *Krishti-uttaravatasak* are said to have a superior
condition, described in four *sagaropama*. These gods breathe in and out every
four half-months (two months). Their desire for food arises every four thousand
years. Many *bhavya-siddhika* beings will become *siddhas*, *buddhas*, free from
karma, attain *parinirvana*, and end all suffering after experiencing four
*bhavagrahana*. || *Chaturstanaka Samvay* ends. [25] The *Panchastanaka-Samvay*
states that there are five *kiriya* (actions), namely: *kayikiriya*,
*adikaranikiriya*, *praddveshikiriya*, *paritapanikiriya*, and
*pranatipatakiriya*. There are five *mahavrata* (great vows), namely: abstaining
from all *pranatipata*, abstaining from all *mrushavaada*, abstaining from all
*adattadaana*, abstaining from all *mehhuna*, and abstaining from all
*parigrah*. **Explanation:** * *Kiraya* refers to specific actions of the mind,
speech, and body. * *Kayikiriya* refers to actions performed by the body. *
*Adikaranikiriya* refers to actions related to the creation of weapons like
swords, spears, guns, etc., which are used for violence. * *Praddveshikiriya*
refers to actions motivated by hatred or envy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12] [samavAyAnasUtra devANaM cattAri paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| isa
ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti cAra palyopama kI kahI gaI
hai| tIsarI bAlukAprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti cAra sAgaropama
kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti cAra palyopama kI kahI gaI
hai| saudharma-IzAnakalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti cAra palyopama kI hai|
23-saNaMkumAra-mAhiMdesu kappesu atdhegaiyANaM devANaM cattAri sAgarovamAiM ThiI
pnnttaa| je devA kiDhei sukiTiMTha kiTThiyAvattaM kiTTippabhaM kiDiguttaM
kiTThivaNNaM kihilesaM kiTThijjhayaM kiTThisiMgaM kiTThisiTuM kiTThikUDaM
kiThuttaravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA tesiM NaM devANaM ukkoseNa
cattAri sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnttaa| te NaM devA caDaNhaM addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA
pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA nIsasaMti vaa| tesiM devANaM cauhiM vAsasahassehiM
AhAraTTe smuppjji| atthegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je cauhiM bhavaggahaNehi
sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM
krissNti| sanatkumAra-mAhendra kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti cAra
sAgaropama hai| ina kalpoM ke jo deva kRSTi, sukRSTi, kRSTi-Avarta, kRSTiprabha,
kRSTiyukta, kRSTivarNa, kRSTilezya, kRSTidhvaja, kRSTi zrRMga, kRSTisRSTa,
kRSTikUTa, aura kRSTi-uttarAvataMsaka nAma vAle viziSTa vimAnoM meM deva rUpa se
utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti cAra sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve
deva cAra ardhamAsoM (do mAsa) meM Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsaniHzvAsa lete haiN| una
devoM ke cAra hajAra varSa meM AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavya-
siddhika jIva aise haiM jo cAra bhavagrahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge,
karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta
kreNge|  //  catuHsthAnaka samavAya smaapt| paMcasthAnaka-samavAya 25-paMca
kiriyA pannattA, taM jahA-kAiyA ahigaraNiyA pAusiyA pAritAvaNiA
paannaaivaaykiriyaa| paMca mahavvayA pannattA, taM jahA-savvAo pANAivAyAo
veramaNaM, savvAo musAvAyAo veramaNaM, savvAo adinnAdANAo veramaNaM, savvAo
mehuNAo ramaNaM, savvAo pariggahAo vermnnN| kriyAeM pAMca kahI gaI haiM, jaise-
kAyikIkriyA, AdhikaraNikIkriyA, prAdveSikIkriyA, pAritApanikIkriyA,
praannaatipaatkriyaa| pAMca mahAvrata kahe gaye haiN| jaise-sarva prANAtipAta se
viramaNa, sarva mRSAvAda se viramaNa, sarva adattAdAna se viramaNa, sarva
maithuna se viramaNa, sarva parigraha se virmnn| vivecana-mana vacana kAya ke
vyApAra-vizeSa ko kriyA kahate haiN| zarIra se hone vAlI ceSTA ko kAyikI kriyA
kahate haiN| hiMsA ke adhikaraNa khaGga, bhAlA, bandUka Adi ke nirmANa Adi
karane kI kriyA ko AdhikaraNikI kriyA kahate haiN| pradveSa yA matsarabhAva vAlI
kriyA ko prAdveSikI kriyA kahate haiN|

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Five-Place-Aggregates] [13 The action of inflicting pain, suffering, etc. on
living beings is called paritaapanika karma. The action of killing living beings
is called praanaatipaatika karma. The renunciation of all kinds of violence is
the first great vow. The renunciation of all kinds of falsehood is the second
great vow. The renunciation of all kinds of taking what is not given, i.e., not
taking anything that has not been given, is the third great vow. The
renunciation of all kinds of sexual intercourse with gods, humans and animals is
the fourth great vow. The renunciation of all kinds of possessions (attachment)
is the fifth great vow. 26-The five sense objects are said to be, namely- sound,
form, taste, smell, touch. The five inlets of karmic influx are said to be,
namely- false belief, non-restraint, carelessness, passions, and attachment. The
five barriers to karmic influx are said to be, namely- right belief, restraint,
mindfulness, freedom from passions, and detachment. The five stages of karmic
exhaustion are said to be, namely- renunciation of violence, renunciation of
falsehood, renunciation of taking what is not given, renunciation of sexual
intercourse, renunciation of possessions. The five observances are said to be,
namely- observance in walking, observance in speech, observance in eating,
observance in taking and keeping things, observance in discarding excretions.
The five sense objects are said to be, namely- sound, form, taste, smell, touch.
The causes of karmic bondage are called inlets of karmic influx. They are five,
namely- false belief, non-restraint, carelessness, passions, and attachment. The
means of stopping the influx of karma are called barriers to karmic influx. They
are also five, namely- right belief, restraint, mindfulness, freedom from
passions, and detachment or the cessation of the tendency towards attachment.
The five places, causes or means of the exhaustion of accumulated karma are said
to be, namely- renunciation of violence, renunciation of falsehood, renunciation
of taking what is not given, renunciation of sexual intercourse, renunciation of
possessions. The practice of restraint or the effortful practice is called
observance. They are five, namely- observance in walking, observance in speech,
observance in eating, observance in taking and keeping things, observance in
discarding excretions. 27-The five substances are said to be, namely- dharma
substance, adharma substance, space substance, life substance, and pudgala
substance. Discussion- A substance that occupies many places is called a
substance. The substance that helps the living being and the pudgala to move is
called dharma substance. The substance that helps the living being and the
pudgala to stay is called adharma substance. The substance that provides space
within itself for all substances is called space substance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcasthAnaka-samavAya] [13 prANiyoM ko tAr3ana-paritApana Adi pahu~cAne vAlI
kriyA ko pAritApanikI kriyA kahate haiN| jIvoM ke prANa-ghAta karane vAlI kriyA
ko prANAtipAtikI kriyA kahate haiN| sarvaprakAra kI hiMsA kA tyAga karanA pahalA
mahAvrata hai| sarvaprakAra ke asatya bolane kA tyAga karanA dUsarA mahAvrata
hai| sarvaprakAra ke adatta kA tyAga karanA arthAt binA dI huI kisI bhI vastu kA
grahaNa nahIM karanA tIsarA mahAvrata hai| deva, manuSya aura pazu sambandhI
sarvaprakAra ke maithuna-sevana kA tyAga karanA cauthA mahAvrata hai| sabhI
prakAra ke parigraha (mamatva) kA tyAga karanA pAMcavAM mahAvrata hai| 26-paMca
kAmagaNA pannattA, taM jahA-saddA rUvA rasA gaMdhA phaasaa| paMca AsavadArA
pannattA.taM jahA-micchattaM avirarDa pamAyA kasAyA jogaa| paMca saMvaradArA
pannattA,taM jahA-sammattaM viraI appamattayA akasAyA ajogyaa|pNc NijjaraTThANA
pannattA,taM jahA-pANAivAyAo veramaNaM, musAvAyAo veramaNaM,
adinnAdANAoveramaNaM,mehuNAo veramaNaM, pariggahAo vermnnN| paMca samiIo
pannattAo, taM jahA-IriyAsamiI bhAsAsamiI esaNAsamiI AyANabhaMDamatta-
nikkhevaNAsamiI, uccAra paasvnn-khel-siNghaann-jllpaaritttthaavnniyaasmiii|
indriyoM ke viSayabhUta kAmaguNa pAMca kahe gaye haiM, jaise- zrotrendriya kA
viSaya za05, cakSurindriya kA viSaya rUpa, rasanendriya kA viSaya rasa,
ghrANendriya kA viSaya gandha aura sparzanendriya kA viSaya sprsh| karmabaMdha
ke kAraNoM ko AsravadvAra kahate haiN| ve pAMca haiM, jaise-mithyAtva, avirati,
pramAda, kaSAya aura yog| karmoM kA Asrava rokane ke upAyoM ko saMvaradvAra
kahate haiN| ve bhI pAMca kahe gaye haiM - samyaktva, virati, apramattatA,
akaSAyatA aura ayogatA yA yogoM kI pravRtti kA nirodh| saMcita karmoM kI nirjarA
ke sthAna, kAraNa yA upAya pAMca kahe gaye haiM, jaise- prANAtipAta-viramaNa,
mRSAvAda-viramaNa, adattAdAnaviramaNa, maithuna-viramaNa, parigraha-viramaNa  /
saMyama kI sAdhaka pravRtti yA yatanA pUrvaka kI jAne vAlI pravRtti ko samiti
kahate haiM  /  ve pAMca kahI gaI haiM gamanAgamana meM sAvadhAnI rakhanA
IryAsamiti hai| vacana -bolane meM sAvadhAnI rakhakara hita mita priya vacana
bolanA bhASAsamiti hai| gocarI meM sAvadhAnI rakhanA aura nirdoSa, anuddiSTa
bhikSA grahaNa karanA eSaNAsamiti hai| saMyama ke sAdhaka vastra, pAtra, zAstra
Adi ke grahaNa karane aura rakhane meM sAvadhAnI rakhanA
AdAnabhAMDamAtranikSepaNAsamiti hai| uccAra (mala). prasravaNa (matra). z
(kapha), siMghANa (nAsikAmala) aura jalla (zarIra kA maila) parityAga karane meM
sAvadhAnI rakhanA pAMcavIM pratiSThApanAsamiti hai| 27-paMca atthikAyA pannattA,
taM jahA-dhammatthikAe adhammatthikAe AgAsatthikAe jIvatthikAe poggltthikaae|
pAMca astikAya dravya kahe gaye haiM, jaise- dharmAstikAya, adharmAstikAya,
AkAzAstikAya, jIvAstikAya aura pudglaastikaay| vivecana-bahupradezI dravya ko
astikAya kahate haiM  /  svayaM gamana karate hue jIva aura pudgaloM ke gamana
karane meM sahakArI dravya ko dharmAstikAya kahate haiN| svayaM ThaharanevAle
jIva aura pudgaloM ke Thaharane meM sahakArI dravya ko adharmAstikAya kahate
haiN| sarva dravyoM ko apane bhItara avakAza pradAna karane vAle dravya

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **14]** The *Samvayanga Sutra* refers to space as *Akasha-
astikaya*. The substance with the quality of consciousness is called *Jiva-
astikaya*. The substance with the qualities of form, taste, smell, and touch is
called *Pudgala-astikaya*. The first two substances have countless regions.
Space is infinite. A single living being has countless regions. The *Pudgala*
substance has countable, countless, and infinite regions.  **28-** The *Rohini*
constellation is said to have five stars. The *Punarvasu* constellation is said
to have five stars. The *Hasta* constellation is said to have five stars. The
*Visakha* constellation is said to have five stars. The *Dhanishtha*
constellation is said to have five stars.  **29-** In this *Ratnaprabha* earth,
the state of countless hell beings is said to be like five *palya*. In the third
*Valukaprabha* earth, the state of countless hell beings is said to be like five
oceans. In the *Soudharma-Ishana* kalpas, the state of countless gods is said to
be like five *palya*.  **30-** In the *Sanatkumara-Mahiendra* kalpas, the state
of countless gods is said to be like five oceans. The gods who are born in the
specific celestial vehicles named *Vat*, *Suvat*, *Vataavart*, *Vatprabha*,
*Vatkanta*, *Vatvarna*, *Vatleshya*, *Vatdhvaja*, *Vatshringa*, *Vatsrishta*,
*Vatkuta*, *Vattottaraavatansaka*, *Sur*, *Susur*, *Suraavart*, *Surprabha*,
*Surkanta*, *Survarna*, *Surleshya*, *Surdhvaja*, *Surshringa*, *Sursrishta*,
*Sarakata*, and *Surottaraavatansaka* in the form of gods, their excellent state
is said to be like five oceans. These gods breathe in and out every five half-
months (two and a half months). They experience the desire for food every five
thousand years.  There are countless *Bhavya-siddhika* beings who will become
*siddhas*, *buddhas*, free from karma, attain *nirvana*, and end all suffering
by experiencing the five *bhava* (states of existence).  **|| Pancha-sthana-
samvay-samapt ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14] [samavAyAGgasUtra ko AkAzAstikAya kahate haiN| caitanya guNa vAle dravya ko
jIvAstikAya kahate haiN| rUpa, rasa, gandha aura sparza vAle dravya ko
pudgalAstikAya kahate haiN| inameM se prArambha ke do dravya asaMkhyAta pradeza
vAle haiN| AkAza anantapradezI hai| eka jIva ke pradeza asaMkhyAta haiN| pudgala
dravya ke saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta aura ananta pradeza hote haiN|
28-rohiNInakkhatte paMcatAre pnntte| puNavvasunakkhatte paMcatAre pnntte|
hatthanakkhatte paMcatAre pannatte, visAhAnakkhatte paMcatAre pannatte,
dhaNiTThAnakkhatte paMcatAre pnntte| rohiNI nakSatra pAMca tArAvAlA kahA gayA
hai| punarvasu nakSatra pAMca tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai  /  hasta nakSatra pAcaM
tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai| vizAkhA nakSatra pAMca tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai, dhaniSThA
nakSatra pAMca tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai| 29-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM paMca paliovamAiM ThiI pnnttaa| taccAe NaM puDhavIe
atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM paMca sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM
atthegaiyANaM paMca paliovamAiM ThiI pnnttaa| sohammIsANesu kappesu
atthegaiyANaM devANaM paMca paliovamAI ThiI pnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM
kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti pAMca palyopama kahI gaI hai| tIsarI vAlukAprabhA
pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti pAMca sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-
IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti pAMca palyopama kahI gaI hai|
30-saNaMkumAra-mAhiMdesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM devANaM paMca sAgarovamAiM ThiI
pnnttaa| je devA vAyaM suvAyaM vAyAvattaM vAyappabhaM vAyakaMtaM vAyavaNNaM
vAyalesaM vAyajjhayaM vAyasiMgaM vAyasiTiM vAyakUDaM vAuttaravaDiMsagaM sUraM
susUraM sUrAvattaM sUrappabhaM sUrakaMtaM sUravaNNaM sUralesaM sUrajjhayaM
sUrasiMga sUrasiThaM sUrakUDaM sUrUttaravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA
tesiM NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM paMca sAgarovamAI ThiI pnttaa| te NaM devA paMcaNhaM
addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA nIsasaMti vA, tesiMNaM
devANaM paMcahiM vAsasahassehiM AhAraThe smuppji| saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA
je paMcahi bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| sanatkumAra-mAhendra kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI
sthiti pAMca sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| jo deva vAta, suvAta, vAtAvarta,
vAtaprabha, vAtakAnta, vAtavarNa, vAtalezya, vAtadhvaja, vAtazRMga, vAtasRSTa,
vAtakUTa, vAtottarAvataMsaka, sUra, susUra, sUrAvarta, sUraprabha, sUrakAnta,
sUravarNa, sUralezya, sUradhvaja, sUrazrRMga, sUrasRSTa, sarakaTa aura
sarottarAvataMsaka nAma ke viziSTa vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM.
una devoM kI utkaSTa sthiti pAMca sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva pAMca
ardhamAsoM (DhAI mAsa) meM ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ko pAMca
hajAra varSa meM AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika aise
jIva haiM jo pAMca bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se
mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|
//  paMcasthAnaka samavAya smaapt|

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Six Categories of Existence (Shatsthānka-Samvāya)  **[15 Shatsthānka-Samvāya
- 31-Six Leshāo Paṇṇattāo, Tam Jahā-Kaṇhaleśā Nīlleśā Kauleśā Teuleśā Pamhaleśā
Sukkalesā. Chha Jīvanikāya Paṇṇattā, Tam Jahā-Puḍhavīkāye Āūkāye Teukāye Vāukāye
Vaṇass'aikāye Tasakāye. Chhavvihe Bāhire Tavokamme Paṇṇatte, Tam Jahā-Aṇasane
Ūṇoyariya Vittisankhevo Rasaparicchāo Kāyakileso Sanlīṇayā. Chhavvihe Abhintere
Tavokamme Paṇṇatte, Tam Jahā-Pāyachchittan Viṇo Veyāvaccan Sajjhāo Jhāṇan
Ussaggo.]**  Six Leshyās have been mentioned. For example: Krishna Leshya, Nila
Leshya, Kapota Leshya, Tejo Leshya, Padma Leshya, Shukla Leshya.
**Discussion:**  The culmination of the soul due to the arising of passions
(Kashāyas) in their intense and mild forms, in conjunction with the substances
like Krishna, etc., is called Leshya. When the passions arise very intensely,
the resulting extremely agitated and fierce states are called Krishna Leshya.
The agitated states that arise from a lesser intensity of passions are called
Nila Leshya. The states of sorrow and contemplation that arise from a further
decrease in the intensity of passions are called Kapota Leshya. When the
passions arise mildly, the auspicious results of giving charity, helping others,
etc., are called Tejo Leshya. When the passions arise even more mildly, the
awakening of discernment, calmness, and emotions are called Padma Leshya. When
the passions arise very mildly, the resulting purity is called Shukla Leshya.
Humans and animals experience changes in their Leshyās within the blink of an
eye. However, the Leshyās of gods and hell beings remain constant. Nevertheless,
they fluctuate within their limits. The color of the body is called Dravya
Leshya. It has no inseparable connection with Bhava Leshya.  **[Six Jīvanikāya
Paṇṇattā, Tam Jahā-Puḍhavīkāye Āūkāye Teukāye Vāukāye Vaṇass'aikāye Tasakāye.]**
Six categories of existence (Jīvanikāya) have been mentioned. For example:
Earth-bodied (Pṛthvīkāya), Water-bodied (Apakāya), Fire-bodied (Tejaskāya), Air-
bodied (Vāyukāya), Plant-bodied (Vaṇaspattikāya), and Animal-bodied (Trasakāya).
**[Chhavvihe Bāhire Tavokamme Paṇṇatte, Tam Jahā-Aṇasane Ūṇoyariya Vittisankhevo
Rasaparicchāo Kāyakileso Sanlīṇayā.]**  Six types of external austerities
(Tavokamme) have been mentioned. For example: Fasting (Aṇasane), Eating less
(Ūṇoyariya), Limiting one's activities (Vittisankhevo), Renouncing flavors
(Rasaparicchāo), Body-mortification (Kāyakileso), and Solitude (Sanlīṇayā).
**[Chhavvihe Abhintere Tavokamme Paṇṇatte, Tam Jahā-Pāyachchittan Viṇo
Veyāvaccan Sajjhāo Jhāṇan Ussaggo.]**  Six types of internal austerities have
been mentioned. For example: Atonement (Pāyachchittan), Humility (Viṇo), Self-
reflection (Veyāvaccan), Study (Sajjhāo), Meditation (Jhāṇan), and Renunciation
(Ussaggo).  **Discussion:**  Out of the six categories of existence, the first
five are stationary and single-sensed. The two-sensed, three-sensed, four-
sensed, five-sensed animals, as well as humans, gods, and hell beings are called
animal-bodied (Trasakāya).  Austerities that lead to the destruction of karma
through the depletion of the external body are called external austerities.
Renouncing all four types of food for life or a fixed period is called fasting
(Aṇasane). Eating less than one's hunger is called eating less (Ūṇoyariya).
Following the rules of conduct and accepting various types of possessions is
called limiting one's activities (Vittisankhevo). Renouncing all six flavors or
one, two, etc., flavors is called renouncing flavors (Rasaparicchāo). Enduring
cold, heat, and various types of postures to make the body thin is called body-
mortification (Kāyakileso). Living in solitude and restraining the senses is
called solitude (Sanlīṇayā).  Austerities that lead to the destruction of karma
through the restraint of internal mental tendencies are called internal
austerities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaTsthAnaka-samavAya] [15 SaTsthAnaka-samavAya - 31-cha lesAo paNNattAo, taM
jahA-kaNhalesA nIlalesA kAulesA teulesA pamhalesA sukklesaa| cha jIvanikAyA
paNNattA, taM jahA-puDhavIkAe AUkAe teukAe vAukAe vaNassaikAe tskaae| chavvihe
bAhire tavokamme paNNatte, taM jahA-aNasaNe UNoyariyA vittIsaMkhevo rasapariccAo
kAyakileso sNliinnyaa| chavvihe abhiMtare tavokamme paNNatte, taM jahA-
pAyacchittaM viNao veyAvaccaM sajjhAo jhANaM ussggo| chaha lezyAeM kahI gaI
haiN| jaise- kRSNalezyA, nIlalezyA, kApotalezyA, tejolezyA, padmalezyA,
shuklleshyaa| vivecana-tIvra-manda Adi rUpa kaSAyoM ke udaya se, kRSNa Adi
dravyoM ke sahakAra se AtmA kI pariNati ko lezyA kahate haiN| kaSAyoM ke atyanta
tIvra udaya hone para jo atisaMkleza rUpa raudra pariNAma hote haiM, unheM
kRSNalezyA kahate haiM  /  isase utarate hue saMklezarUpa jo raudra pariNAma
hote haiM, unheM nIlalezyA kahate haiM  /  isase bhI utarate hue ArtadhyAna rUpa
pariNAmoM ko kApotalezyA kahate haiN| kaSAyoM kA manda udaya hone para dAna dene
aura paropakAra Adi karane ke zubha pariNAmoM ko tejolezyA kahate haiN| kaSAyoM
kA aura bhI manda udaya hone para jo viveka, prazama bhAva, saMvega Adi jAgRta
hote haiM, una pariNAmoM ko padmalezyA kahate haiM  /  kaSAyoM kA sarvathA manda
udaya hone para jo nirmalatA AtI hai, use zuklalezyA kahate haiN| manuSya aura
tiryaMca jIvoM meM antarmuhUrta ke bhItara hI bhAvalezyAoM kA parivartana hotA
rahatA hai| kintu deva aura nAraka jIvoM kI lezyAeM avasthita rahatI haiN| phira
bhI ve apanI sImA ke bhItara utAra-car3hAva rUpa hotI rahatI hai| zarIra ke
varNa ko dravyalezyA kahate haiM  /  isakA bhAvalezyA se koI avinAbhAvI
sambandha nahIM hai| (saMsArI) jIvoM ke chaha nikAya (samudAya) kahe gaye haiN|
jaise- pRthivIkAya, apkAya, tejaskAya, vAyukAya, vanaspatikAya aura trskaay|
chaha prakAra ke bAhirI tapa:karma kahe gaye haiN| jaise-anazana, Unodarya,
vRttisaMkSepa, rasaparityAga, kAyakleza aura sNliintaa| chaha prakAra ke
Abhyantara tapa kahe gaye haiN| jaise- prAyazcitta, vinaya, vaiyAvRtya,
svAdhyAya, dhyAna aura vyutsrg| vivecana- chaha jIvanikAyoM meM se Adi ke pAMca
nikAya sthAvarakAya aura ekendriya jIva haiN| dvIndriya, trIndriya,
caturindriya, paMcendriya tiryaMca tathA manuSya aura devagati narakagati ke
jIva trasakAya kahe jAte haiN| jina tapoM se bAhya zarIra ke zoSaNa-dvArA karmo
kI nirjarA hotI hai, unheM bAhya tapa kahate haiN| yAvajjIvana yA niyatakAla ke
lie cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA tyAga karanA anazana tapa hai| bhUkha se kama
khAnA Unodarya tapa hai| gocarI ke niyama karanA aura vividha prakAra ke
abhigraha svIkAra karanA vRttisaMkSepa tapa hai| chaha prakAra ke rasoM kA yA
eka, do Adi rasoM kA tyAga karanA rasa-parityAga tapa hai| zIta, uSNatA kI bAdhA
sahanA, nAnA prakAra ke AsanoM se avasthita raha kara zarIra ko kRza karanA
kAyakleza tapa hai| ekAnta sthAna meM nivAsa kara apanI indriyoM kI pravRtti ko
rokanA saMlInatA tapa hai| bhItarI manovRtti ke nirodha dvArA jo karmoM kI
nirjarA kA sAdhana banatA hai, use Abhyantara tapa kahate

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 16:  **Penance Tapping**  [Samvayanga Sutra 1]  Penance tapping is
the act of performing penance or appropriate austerities for offenses committed
due to ignorance, carelessness, or the influence of passions.  **Humility
Tapping**  Humility tapping is the act of abandoning ego and pride and
maintaining a humble attitude.  **Reverence Tapping**  Reverence tapping is the
act of showing devotion to gurus, serving the sick, and alleviating their
suffering.  **Self-Study Tapping**  Self-study tapping is the act of reading,
studying, listening to, contemplating, and preaching scriptures.  **Meditation
Tapping**  Meditation is the act of focusing the mind on dharma and
spirituality, abandoning agitated and angry thoughts.  **Renunciation Tapping**
Renunciation tapping is the act of abandoning external things like the body and
internal passions like attachment.  **External tappings** are performed to
enhance internal tappings. **Internal tappings** are infinitely more beneficial
due to their ability to destroy karma.  **Six Types of Expansions**  [Samvayanga
Sutra 32]  Six types of expansions are mentioned:  * **Pain Expansion:**
Expansion due to pain. * **Passion Expansion:** Expansion due to intense
passions like anger. * **Death Expansion:** Expansion before death. * **Action
Expansion:** Expansion during the formation of a new body or during the
manifestation of powers like levitation and invisibility. * **Luminous
Expansion:** Expansion due to the use of luminous power. * **Food Expansion:**
Expansion of a hand-shaped effigy from the head of a great sage when they have a
deep doubt about a certain topic and there is no Kevali (omniscient being)
present in that area. This effigy travels to the Kevali, touches their feet, and
returns to the sage, resolving their doubt.  **Explanation:**  All beings are
called **"Chhadmastha"** (veiled) until they attain Kevalgyan (omniscience). The
expansion of Chhadmastha beings is called **"Chhadmasthik Samudghat"**.
**Samudghat** refers to the outward projection of certain parts of a being due
to some cause. There are seven types of Samudghat mentioned in the scriptures.
Except for Kevali Samudghat, the remaining six types occur in Chhadmastha
beings.  **Pain Expansion:** When a being is suffering from pain, certain parts
of their being project outwards.  **Passion Expansion:** When a being is
experiencing intense passions like anger, certain parts of their being project
outwards.  **Death Expansion:** Before death, certain parts of a being project
outwards.  **Action Expansion:** When a being is forming a new body or
manifesting powers like levitation and invisibility, certain parts of their
being expand.  **Luminous Expansion:** When a being uses luminous power, certain
parts of their being project outwards.  **Food Expansion:** When a great sage
has a deep doubt about a certain topic and there is no Kevali present in that
area, a hand-shaped effigy emerges from their head and travels to the Kevali.
This effigy touches the Kevali's feet and returns to the sage, resolving their
doubt.  **Note:**  The duration of all these expansions is only one
**"Antarmukhurta"** (a very short period of time). The parts that project
outwards during these expansions remain connected to the original body.  **Six
Types of Meaning Comprehension**  [Samvayanga Sutra 33]  Six types of meaning
comprehension are mentioned:  * **Auditory Meaning Comprehension:**
Comprehension through the ear. * **Visual Meaning Comprehension:** Comprehension
through the eye. * **Olfactory Meaning Comprehension:** Comprehension through
the nose. * **Gustatory Meaning Comprehension:** Comprehension through the
tongue. * **Tactile Meaning Comprehension:** Comprehension through the skin. *
**No-Indriyal Meaning Comprehension:** Comprehension through the mind.
**Explanation:**  When a being perceives an object, the initial, subtle
understanding that arises after the perception is called **"Vyanjanavagraha"**.
The subsequent understanding of the meaning or the general knowledge of the
object is called **"Arthavagraha"**. This Arthavagraha occurs through the five
senses (ear, eye, nose, tongue, skin) and the mind (No-Indriyal).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16] [ samavAyAGgasUtra 1 haiM  /  ajJAna, pramAda yA kaSAyAveza meM kiye hue,
aparAdhoM ke lie pazcAttApa yA yathAyogya tapazcaryA Adi karanA prAyazcitta tapa
hai| ahaMkAra aura abhimAna kA tyAga kara vinamra bhAva rakhanA vinaya tapa hai
/  gurujanoM kI bhakti karanA, rugNa hone para sevA Tahala karanA aura unake
duHkhoM ko dUra karanA vaiyAvRttya tapa hai| zAstroM kA vA~canA, par3hanA,
sunanA, usakA cintana karanA aura dharmopadeza karanA svAdhyAya tapa hai| Artta
aura raudra vicAroM ko chor3akara dharma-adhyAtma meM mana kI ekAgratA karane ko
dhyAna kahate haiN| bAhirI zarIrAdi ke aura bhItarI rAgAdi bhAvoM ke parityAga
ko vyutsarga tapa kahate haiN| bAhya tapa antaraMga tapoM kI vRddhi ke lie kie
jAte haiM aura bAhya tapoM kI apekSA antaraMga tapa asakhyAta guNI karma -
nirjarA ke kAraNa hote haiM  /  32-cha chAumatthiyA samugdhAyA paNNattA, taM
jahA - veyaNAsamugdhAe kasAyasamuggha mAraNaMtiasamugghAe veDavviyasamugdhAe
teyasamugdhAe AhArasamugdhAe  /  chaha chAdmasthika samudghAta kahe gaye haiM-
jaise vedanAsamudghAta, kaSAyasamudghAta, mAraNAntikasamudghAta,
vaikriyasamudghAta, taijasasamudghAta aura AhArakasamudghAta  /  vivecana -
kevalajJAna hone ke pUrva taka saba jIva chadmastha kahalAte haiM  /
chadmasthoM ke samudghAta ko chAdmasthika samudghAta kahA gayA hai| kisI nimitta
se jIva ke kucha pradezoM ke bAhira nikalane ko samudghAta kahate haiM  /
samudghAta ke sAta bheda Agama meM batAye gaye haiM  /  unameM kevali samudghAta
ko chor3akara zeSa chaha samudghAta chadmastha jIvoM ke hote | vedanA se pIr3ita
hone para jIva ke kucha pradezoM kA bAhara nikalanA vedanAsamudghAta hai  /
krodhAdi kaSAya kI tIvratA ke samaya kucha jIva- pradezoM kA bAhara nikalanA
samudghAta hai  /  maraNa hone se pUrva kucha jIvapradezoM kA bAhara nikalanA
mAraNAntika- samudghAta hai  /  devAdi ke dvArA uttara zarIra ke nirmANa ke
samaya yA aNimA-mahimAdi vikriyA ke samaya jIva pradezoM kA phailanA
vaikriyasamudghAta hai  /  tejolabdhi kA prayoga karate hue jIvapradezoM kA
bAhara nikAlanA taijasasamudghAta hai  /  caturdaza pUrvadhara mahAmuni ke mana
meM kisI gahana tattva ke viSaya meM zaMkA hone para aura usa kSetra meM kevalI
kA abhAva hone para kevalI bhagavAn ke samIpa jAne ke lie mastaka se jo eka
hAtha kA putalA nikalatA hai, use AhAraka - samudghAta kahate haiN| vaha putalA
kevalI ke caraNa-sparza kara una muni ke zarIra meM vApisa praviSTa ho jAtA hai
aura unakI zaMkA kA samAdhAna ho jAtA hai| - ukta sabhI samudghAtoM kA utkRSTa
kAla eka antarmuhUrta hI hai aura ukta samudghAtoM ke samaya bAhara nikale hue
pradezoM kA mUla zarIra se barAbara sambandha banA rahatA hai  /  33 - chavvihe
atthuggahe paNNatte, taM jahA - soiMdiyaatthuggahe cakkhuiMdiyaatthugga
ghANiMdiyaatthuggahe jibbhidiyaatthuggahe phAsiMdiyaatthuggahe
noiMdiyaatthuggahe  /  arthAvagraha chaha prakAra kA kahA gayA hai| jaise
zrotrendriya- arthAvagraha, cakSurindriya-arthAvagraha, ghrANendriya-
arthAvagraha, jihvendriya- arthAvagraha, sparzanendriya- arthAvagraha aura
noindriya- arthAvagraha | vivecana - kisI padArtha ko jAnane ke samaya
darzanopayoga ke pazcAt jo avyakta rUpa sAmAnya bodha hotA hai, vaha
vyaJjanAvagraha kahalAtA hai| usake tatkAla bAda jo artha kA grahaNa yA vastu kA
sAmAnya jJAna hotA hai, use arthAvagraha kahate haiM  /  yaha arthAvagraha
zrotra Adi pAMca indriyoM se aura noindriya arthAt

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Six Standpoints - Agreement  [17] Since it arises from the mind, it has six
divisions. But the understanding of the meaning is only of four types, because
it does not arise from the eye sense or the mind, because both of these are
incapable of grasping, they do not have contact with the object of perception.
Only after the understanding of the meaning, do knowledge like desire, aversion,
etc. arise.  [34] The Krittika constellation is said to have six stars. The
Ashlesha constellation is said to have six stars.  [35] In this Ratnaprabha
earth, the state of many hell beings is said to be six Palyopama. In the third
Balukaprabha earth, the state of many hell beings is said to be six Sagaropama.
The state of many Asura Kumaras is said to be six Palyopama. In the Saudharma -
Ishana kalpas, the state of many gods is said to be six Palyopama.  [36] In the
Sanatkumara and Maheindra kalpas, the state of many gods is said to be six
Sagaropama. Those gods who are born in the form of gods in the specific vimanas
called Swayambhu, Swayambhuraman, Ghosh, Sughoosh, Mahaghosh, Krishttighosh,
Veer, Suveer, Veergat, Veer-Shrenik, Viravart, Veerprabh, Veerkant, Veervarna,
Veerleshya, Veerdhwaj, Veershringa, Veersrisht, Veerkoot and Veerottaravatansak,
their excellent state is said to be six Sagaropama. Those gods breathe or exhale
after six half-months (three months). Their desire for food arises after six
thousand years.  Many Bhavyasiddhikas are such that they will become Siddhas,
Buddhas, liberated from karmas, attain Nirvana and end all suffering by taking
six births.  ## Six Standpoints - Agreement - End

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaTsthAnaka - samavAya ] [ 17 mana se utpanna hotA hai, ata: usake chaha bheda
ho jAte haiM  /  kintu vyaJjanAvagraha cAra prakAra kA hI hotA hai, kyoMki vaha
cakSurindriya aura mana se nahI hotA, kyoMki yaha donoM aprApyakArI haiM, inakA
grAhya padArtha ke sAtha saMyoga nahIM hotA hai  /  arthAvagraha ke pazcAt hI
IhA, avAya Adi jJAna utpanna hote haiM  /  34 - kattiyANakkhatte chattAre
paNNatte  /  asilesAnakhatte chattAre paNNatte  /  kRttikA nakSatra chaha tArA
vAlA kahA gayA hai| AzleSA nakSatra chaha tArA vAlA kahA gayA hai| 35 - imIse
NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM cha paliovamAI ThiI paNNattA
/  taccAe NaM puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM cha sAgarovamAiM ThiI paNNattA
/  asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM cha paliovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /
sohammIsANesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM devANaM cha paliovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  isa
ratnaprabhA pRthvI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti chaha palyopama kahI gaI hai|
tIsarI bAlukAprabhA pRthvI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti chaha sAgaropama kahI
gaI hai kitaneka asurakumAroM kI sthiti chaha palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma
- IzAna kalpoM meM kitane devoM kI sthiti chaha palyopama kahI gaI hai| 36 -
saNakumAra - mAhiMdesu [ kappesu ] atthegaiyANaM devANaM cha sAgarovamAiM ThiI
paNNattA  /  je. devA sayaMbhuM sayaMbhuramaNaM ghosaM sughosaM mahAghosaM
kiTThighosaM vIraM suvIraM vIragataM vIraseNiyaM vIrAktaM vIrappabhaM vIrakaMtaM
vIravaNNaM vIralesaM vIrajjhayaM vIrasiMgaM vIrasiTTaM vIrakUDaM
vIruttaravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA tesiM NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM cha
sAgarovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  te NaM devA chahaM addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA
pANasaMti vA, UsasaMti vA nIsasaMti vA, tesiM NaM devANaM chahiM vAsasahassehiM
AhAraTThe samuppajjai  /  saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je chahiM
bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujjhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM karissaMti  /  sanatkumAra aura mAhendra kalpoM meM kitaneka
devoM kI sthiti chaha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| unameM jo deva svayambhU,
svambhUramaNa, ghoSa, sughoSa, mahAghoSa, kRSTighoSa, vIra, suvIra, vIragata,
vIra - zreNika, vIrAvarta, vIraprabha, vIrakAMta, vIravarNa, vIralezya,
vIradhvaja, vIrazRMga, vIrasRSTa, vIrakUTa aura vIrottarAvataMsaka nAma ke
viziSTa vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti
chaha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva chaha ardhamAsoM (tIna mAsoM) ke bAda
Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa- ni:zvAsa lete haiM  /  una devoM ke chaha hajAra varSoM
ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai  /  kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise
haiM jo chaha bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta
hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //
SaTsthAnaka samavAya samApta  //

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 18:  **Seven Fearful Places (Bhayasthanas) are mentioned, such as:**
* **Ihalokabhay:** Fear arising from beings of the same species, like a human
fearing another human. * **Paralokabhay:** Fear arising from beings of different
species, like a human fearing an animal. * **Adanabhay:** Fear of losing
acquired wealth. * **Akasmatbhay:** Fear arising from one's own mental
fluctuations without any external cause. * **Aajivabhay:** Fear related to
livelihood. * **Maranabhay:** Fear of death. * **Ashlokabhay:** Fear of slander
or defamation.  **Seven Agitations (Samudghatas) are mentioned, such as:**  *
**Vedanasamudghata:** Agitation due to pain. * **Kasayasamudghata:** Agitation
due to passions. * **Marananthikasamudghata:** Agitation due to the proximity of
death. * **Vaikriyasamudghata:** Agitation due to mental fluctuations. *
**Tejasasamudghata:** Agitation due to energy. * **Aharakasamudghata:**
Agitation due to food. * **Kevalisamudghata:** Agitation due to the expansion of
the self-regions (Atma-pradeshas) in the form of punishment, barriers, churning,
and filling the world, to equalize the state of the Kevali Bhagavan's feelings,
name, and lineage karma with the remaining moment of the lifespan karma.
**36:** The Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, the great sage, was seven ratni-hath (a
measure of length) tall.  **39:** In this Jambudvipa island, seven year-long
mountains are mentioned, such as:  * **Chullahimvanta:** Small Himalayas. *
**Mahahimvanta:** Great Himalayas. * **Nishada:** Nishada mountain. *
**Nilavanta:** Blue mountain. * **Rukmi:** Shining mountain. * **Sikhari:** Peak
mountain. * **Mandara:** Mandara (Mount Sumeru).  **Also, in this Jambudvipa
island, seven regions are mentioned, such as:**  * **Bharat:** Bharat region. *
**Hemvata:** Hemvata region. * **Harivarsa:** Harivarsa region. *
**Mahavideha:** Mahavideha region. * **Ramya:** Ramya region. * **Airavavat:**
Airavavat region. * **Eravata:** Eravata region.  **40:** Those who have
attained the twelfth Gunasthan, Kshinamoha, free from passions, experience the
remaining seven karmas, except for the Mohaniya karma.  **41:** Seven stars are
mentioned in the Great Constellation (Mahanakhatta). Seven stars are mentioned
in the East (Puvvadari). Seven stars are mentioned in the South (Dahindarai).
Seven stars are mentioned in the West (Avaradari). Seven stars are mentioned in
the North (Uttardarai).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18] [ samavAyAGgasUtra saptasthAnaka - samavAya 37 - satta bhaTThANA paNNattA,
taM jahA - ihalogabhae paralogabhaeM AdANabhae akamhAbhae AjIvabhae maraNabhae
asilogabhae  /  satta samugdhAyA paNNattA, taM jahA - veyaNAsamugdhAe
kasAyasamugdhAe mAraNaMtiyasamugdhAe veDavviyasamugdhAe teyasamugdhAe
AhArasamugdhAe kevalisamugdhAe  /  sAta bhayasthAna kahe gaye haiM, jaise-
ihalokabhaya, paralokabhaya, AdAnabhaya, akasmAtbhaya, AjIvabhaya, maraNabhaya
aura azlokabhaya  /  sAta samudghAta kahe gaye haiM, jaise - vedanAsamudghAta,
kaSAyasamudghAta, mAraNAntikasamudghAta, vaikriyasamudghAta, tejasasamudaghAta,
AhArakasamudghAta aura kevalisamudghAta  /  vivecana - sajAtIya jIvoM se hone
vAle bhaya ko ihalokabhaya kahate haiM, jaise- manuSya ko manuSya se hone vAlA
bhaya  /  vijAtIya jIvoM se hone vAle bhaya ko paralokabhaya kahate haiN| jaise
- manuSya ko pazu se hone vAlA bhy| upArjita dhana kI surakSA kA bhaya
AdAnabhaya kahalAtA hai| binA kisI bAhya nimitta ke apane hI mAnasika vikalpa se
hone vAle bhaya ko akasmAt bhaya kahate  /  jIvikA sambandhI bhaya ko AjIvabhaya
kahate haiN| maraNa ke bhaya ko maraNabhaya kahate haiM azloka kA artha hai -
nindA yA apakIrtti  /  nindA yA apakIrtti ke bhaya ko azlokabhaya kahate haiN|
samudghAta ke chaha bhedoM kA svarUpa pahale kaha Aye haiM  /  kevalI bhagavAn
ke vedanIya, nAma aura gotrakarma kI sthiti ko Ayukarma kI zeSa rahI
antarmuhUrta pramANasthiti ke barAbara karane ke lie jo daMDa, kapATa, manthAna
aura lokapUraNa rUpa Atma-pradezoM kA vistAra hotA hai, use kevalisamudaghAta
kahate haiM 36 - samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre satta rayaNIo uDDhaM uccatteNa hotthA
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra sAta ratni-hAtha pramANa zarIra se UMce the  /  39 -
iheva jaMbuddIve dIve satta vAsaharapavvayA paNNattA, taM jahA - cullahimavaMte
mahAhimavaMte nisaDhe nIlavaMte ruppI siharI mandare  /  iheva jaMbuddIve dIve
satta vAsA paNNattA, taM jahA - bharahe hemavate harivAse mahAvidehe rammae
eraNNavae eravae  /  isa jambUdvIpa nAmaka dvIpa meM sAta varSadhara parvata
kahe gaye haiM, jaise - kSullaka himavaMta, mahAhimavaMta, niSadha, nIlavaMta,
rukmI, zikharI aura mandara (sumeru prvt)| isa jaMbUdvIpa nAmaka dvIpa meM sAta
kSetra kahe gaye haiM, jaise- bharata, haimavata, harivarSa, mahAvideha,
ramyaka, airaNyavata aura airavata  /  40 - khINamoheNaM bhagavayA
mohaNijjavajjAo satta kampapagaDIo vee (jja ) I  /  bArahaveM guNasthAnavartI
kSINamoha vItarAga mohanIya karma ko chor3akara zeSa sAta karmoM kA vedana
karate haiM  /  41 - mahAnakkhatte sattatAre paNNatte  /  kattiAiA
sattanakkhattA puvvadAriA paNNattA  /  [ pAThA0 - abhiyAiyA satta nakkhattA ] |
mahAjhyA satta nakkhattA dAhiNadAriA paNNattA  /  aNurAhAiA satta nakkhattA
avaradAriA paNNattA  /  dhaNiTThAiyA satta nakkhattA uttaradAriA

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Seven-Place-Collection] [19th Chapter] The constellation Magha is said to have
seven stars. Krittika and the other seven constellations are said to have doors
facing the east. According to another reading, Abhijit and the other seven
constellations are said to have doors facing the east. Magha and the other seven
constellations are said to have doors facing the south. Anuradha and the other
seven constellations are said to have doors facing the west. Dhanishtha and the
other seven constellations are said to have doors facing the north. 42- In this
Ratnaprabha earth, the state of many hell-beings is said to be seven palyopama.
In the third Valka-prabha earth, the excellent state of hell-beings is said to
be seven sagaropama. In the fourth Pank-prabha earth, the wretched state of
hell-beings is said to be seven sagaropama. The state of many Asura-kumaras and
Devas is said to be seven palyopama. In the Saudharma-Ishana kalpas, the state
of many Devas is said to be seven palyopama. In the Sanatkumara kalpa, the
excellent state of many Devas is said to be seven sagaropama. In the Maheindra
kalpa, the excellent state of Devas is said to be slightly more than seven
sagaropama. _ In this Ratnaprabha earth, the state of many hell-beings is said
to be seven palyopama. In the third Valka-prabha earth, the excellent state of
hell-beings is said to be seven sagaropama. In the fourth Pank-prabha earth, the
wretched state of hell-beings is said to be seven sagaropama. The state of many
Asura-kumaras and Devas is said to be seven palyopama. In the Saudharma-Ishana
kalpas, the state of many Devas is said to be seven palyopama. In the
Sanatkumara kalpa, the excellent state of many Devas is said to be seven
sagaropama. In the Maheindra kalpa, the excellent state of Devas is said to be
slightly more than seven sagaropama. 43- In the Brahmaloka kalpa, the state of
many Devas is said to be slightly more than seven sagaropama. Those Devas who
are born in the Sam, Sama-prabha, Maha-prabha, Pramaas, Bhaasura, Vimala,
Kanchana-kooda and Sanatkumara-avantasaka vimanas, their excellent state is said
to be seven sagaropama. Those Devas take breath, exhale, inhale and exhale after
seven half-months (three and a half months). Those Devas get the desire for food
after seven thousand years. Many bhavya-siddhika jivas are those who will become
Siddhas, Buddhas, liberated from karmas, attain supreme nirvana and end all
suffering by taking seven births. || Seven-Place-Collection ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptasthAnaka-samavAya] [19 pnnnnttaa| maghAnakSatra sAta tArAvAlA kahA gayA
hai| kRttikA Adi sAta nakSatra pUrva dizA kI ora dvAra vAle kahe gaye haiN|
pAThAntara ke anusAra- abhijit Adi sAta nakSatra pUrva dizA kI ora dvAra vAle
kahe gaye haiN| maghA Adi sAta nakSatra dakSiNa dizA kI ora dvAra vAle kahe gaye
haiN| anurAdhA Adi sAta nakSatra pazcima dizA kI ora dvAra vAle kahe gaye haiN|
dhaniSThA Adi sAta nakSatra uttara dizA kI ora dvAra vAle kahe gaye haiN|
42-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM satta paliovamAiM
ThiI pnnnnttaa| taccAe NaM puDhavIe neraiyANaM ukkoseNaM satta sAgarovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa| cautthIe NaM puDhavIe neraiyANaM jahaNaNeNaM satta sAgarovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM satta paliovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa| sohammIsANesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM devANaM satta paliovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa| saNaMkumAre kappe atthegaiyANaM devANaM ukkoseNaM satta sAgarovamAI
ThiI pnnnnttaa| mAhiMde kappe devANaM ukkoseNaM sAiregAiM satta sAgarovamAiM
ThiI pnnnnttaa| _ isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakiyoM kI sthiti sAta
palyopama kahI gaI hai| tIsarI vAlakAprabhA pRthivI meM nArakiyoM kI utkaSTa
sthiti sAta sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| cauthI paMkaprabhA pathivI meM nArakiyoM kI
jaghanya sthiti sAta sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI
sthiti sAta palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI
sthiti sAta palyopama kahI gaI hai| sanatkumAra kalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti sAta sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| mAhendra kalpa meM devoM kI utkRSTa
sthiti kucha adhika sAta sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| 43-baMbhaloe kappe
atthegaiyANaM devANaM satta sAhiyA sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA samaM
samappabhaM mahApabhaM pabhAsaM bhAsuraM vimalaM kaMcaNakUDaM
saNaMkumAravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA, tesiM NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM
satta sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devA sattaNhaM addhamAsANaM ANamaMti
vA, pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vA, tesiM NaM devANaM sattahiM
vAsasahassehiM AhAraTTe smuppjjdd'| saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIva jeNaM
sattahiMbhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujjhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| brahmaloka meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti kucha
adhika sAta sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| unameM jo deva sama, samaprabha,
mahAprabha, pramAsa, bhAsura, vimala, kAMcanakUTa aura sanatkumArAvaMtasaka nAma
ke viziSTa vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM ko utkRSTa
sthiti sAta sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva sAta ardhamAsoM (sAr3he tIna mAsoM)
ke bAda ANa-prANa-ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ko sAta hajAra varSoM
ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM
jo sAta bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge,
parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva du:khoM kA anta kreNge|  //
saptasthAnaka samavAya samApta  //

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 20  **44**  Eight *madastanas* (sources of pride) are mentioned, such
as: *jatimda* (pride in one's mother's lineage), *kulmada* (pride in one's
father's lineage), *balmada* (pride in one's strength), *rupmada* (pride in
one's beauty), *tapomda* (pride in one's austerities), *srutamada* (pride in
one's knowledge), *labhmada* (pride in one's wealth), and *aishwarymada* (pride
in one's power).  Eight *pravchan-matas* (mothers of the teachings) are
mentioned, such as: *iryasamiti* (the assembly of those who walk), *bhasasamiti*
(the assembly of those who speak), *eshanasamiti* (the assembly of those who
desire), *adana-bhanda-matra-nikshepanasamiti* (the assembly of those who
deposit only the necessary amount of food and other necessities), *uccara-
prastavana-khel-jall-singhana-parishthapanasamiti* (the assembly of those who
engage in play, laughter, singing, and dancing), *manogupti* (guarding the
mind), *vachanagupti* (guarding the speech), and *kayagupti* (guarding the
body).  **Explanation:**  The places or reasons from which a person develops
pride or arrogance are called *madastanas*. There are eight of them. Pride in
proficiency or skill in various arts should be understood as falling under
*srutamada*. The term *pravchan* refers to the twelve-fold *ganipitaka* and its
foundational assembly. Just as a mother protects her child, so too do the five
assemblies and three guardians protect the twelve-fold *pravchan* and the
assembly, which is the embodiment of restraint and Dharma. Therefore, they are
called *pravchan-matas*.  **45**  The *chaitya-vruksha* (sacred trees) of the
*vanavyantara* (intermediate gods) are said to be eight *yojanas* (leagues)
high. The *jambhu* tree, located in *uttarakuru* (northern Kuru), is said to be
eight *yojanas* high. The *kutasalmalli* tree, located in *devakuru* (divine
Kuru) and the abode of Garuda, is said to be eight *yojanas* high. The *jagati*
(boundary wall) of *jambudvipa* (the Jambudvipa continent) is said to be eight
*yojanas* high.  **46**  The *kevalisamudghata* (the complete liberation of the
soul) is said to have eight stages. In the first stage, the *kevali* (liberated
soul) performs the *danda-samudghata* (the liberation of the body from the
bondage of the senses). In the second stage, the *kevali* performs the *kapaata-
samudghata* (the liberation of the mind from the bondage of the senses). In the
third stage, the *kevali* performs the *manthana-samudghata* (the liberation of
the soul from the bondage of the senses). In the fourth stage, the *kevali*
fills the intervals of the *manthana-samudghata* (the liberation of the soul
from the bondage of the senses). In the fifth stage, the *kevali* contracts the
intervals of the *manthana-samudghata* (the liberation of the soul from the
bondage of the senses). In the sixth stage, the *kevali* contracts the
*manthana-samudghata* (the liberation of the soul from the bondage of the
senses). In the seventh stage, the *kevali* contracts the *kapaata-samudghata*
(the liberation of the mind from the bondage of the senses). In the eighth
stage, the *kevali* contracts the *danda-samudghata* (the liberation of the body
from the bondage of the senses). After this, the soul becomes as small as a
body.  **47**  The *arhat* (liberated soul) who is a *purishadaani* (a human
being) has eight *ganas* (groups) and eight *ganaharas* (leaders of the groups).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 20] [samavAyAGgasUtra aSTasthAnaka-samavAya 44-aTThamayaTThANA paNNattA, taM
jahA-jAtimae kulamae balamae rUvamae tavamae suyamae lAbhamae issriyme| aTTa
pavayaNamAyAo paNNattAo, taM jahA-IriyAsamiI bhAsAsamiI esaNAsamiI
AyANabhaMDamattaNikkhevaNAsamiI uccAra-pAsavaNa-khela-jalla-
siMghANapAriTThAvaNiyAsamiI maNaguttI vayaguttI kaayguttii| ATha madasthAna kahe
gaye haiM, jaise-jAtimada (mAtA ke pakSa kI zreSThatA kA ahaMkAra), kulamada
(pitA ke vaMza kI zreSThatA kA ahaMkAra), balamada, rUpamada, tapomada,
zrutamada (vidyA kA ahaMkAra) lAbhamada aura aizvaryamada (prabhutA kA abhimAna)
|aatth pravacana-mAtAeM kahI gaI haiM, jaise-IryAsamiti, bhASAsamiti,
eSaNAsamiti, AdAna-bhAMDa-mAtra nikSepaNAsamiti, uccAra-prastravaNa-khela jalla
siMghANa-pariSThApanAsamiti, manogupti, vacanagupti aura kaaygupti| vivecana-
manuSya jina sthAnoM yA kAraNoM se ahaMkAra yA abhimAna karatA hai unako
madasthAna kahA jAtA hai| ve ATha haiM  /  vibhinna kalAoM kI pravINatA yA
kuzalatA kA mada bhI hotA hai, use zrutamada ke antargata jAnanA caahie|
pravacana kA artha dvAdazAGga gaNipiTaka aura usakA AdhArabhUta saMgha hai|
jaise mAtA bAlaka kI rakSA karatI hai, usI prakAra pAMca samitiyAM aura tIna
guptiyAM dvAdazAGga pravacana kI aura saMgha kI, saMgha ke saMyamarUpa dharma kI
rakSA karatI haiM, isalie unako pravacanamAtA kahA jAtA hai| 45-vANamaMtarANaM
devANaM ceiyarukkhA aTTa joyaNAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| jaMbU NaM
sudaMsaNA aTTha joyaNAI uDDha uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| kUDasAmalI NaM garulAvAse
aTTha joyaNAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM pnnnntte| jaMbuddIvassa NaM jagaI aTTha joyaNAiM
uDDhe uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| vAnavyantara devoM ke caityavRkSa ATha yojana UMce
kahe gaye haiN| (uttarakuru meM sthita (pArthiva) jaMbU nAmaka sudarzana vRkSa
ATha yojana UMcA kahA gayA hai| (devakuru meM sthita) garuDa kA AvAsabhUta
pArthiva kUTazAlmalI vRkSa OMu yojana UMcA kahA gayA hai| jambUdvIpa kI jagatI
(prAkAra ke samAna pAlI) ATha yojana UMcI kahI gaI hai| 46 -aTThasAmaie
kevalisamugghAe paNNatte, taM jahA-paDhame samae daMDaM karei, bIe samae kavADaM
karei, taiyasamae maMthaM karei, cautthe samae maMthaMtarAiM pUrei, paMcame
samae maMthaMtarAI paDisAharai, chaThe samae maMthaM pddisaahri| sattame samae
kavADaM paDisAharai, aTThame samae daMDaM pddisaahri| tato pacchA sarIratthe
bhvi| kevalisamudghAta ATha samaya vAlA kahA gayA hai| jaise- kevalI bhagavAn
prathama samaya meM daMDa samudghAta karate haiM, dUsare masaya meM kapATa
samudghAta karate haiM, tIsare samaya meM meM manthAna samudghAta karate haiM,
cauthe samaya meM manthAna ke antarAloM ko pUrate haiM, arthAt lokapUraNa
samudghAta karate haiM, pAMcaveM samaya meM manthAna ke antarAla se AtmapradezoM
kA pratisaMhAra (saMkoca) karate haiM. chaThe samaya meM manthAna pratisaMhAra
karate haiM, sAtaveM samaya meM kapATa samudghAta kA pratisaMhAra karate haiM
aura AThaveM samaya meM daMDasamudghAta kA pratisaMhAra karate haiN| tatpazcAt
unake Atmapradeza zarIrapramANa ho jAte haiN| 47-pAsassa NaM arahao
purisAdANiassa aTTha gaNA aTTha gaNaharA hotthA, taM jahA

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eight-Place Agreement] [21 Shubha, Shubhaghosha, Vasishtha, Brahmachari, Soma,
Shridhara, Veerabhadra and Yas. ||1||] These are the eight ganas and eight
ganadharas of Parshvanath Tirthankara Deva, whose names are still remembered
with reverence and respect by humans. For example, Shubha, Shubhaghosha,
Vasishtha, Brahmachari, Soma, Shridhara, Veerabhadra and Yas. ||1|| 48-Eight
nakshatras perform the Pramard Yoga along with the moon, such as- Krittika 1,
Rohini 2, Punarvasu 3, Magha 4, Chitra 5, Visakha 6, Anuradha 7 and Jyestha 8.
Eight nakshatras perform the Pramard Yoga along with the moon, such as- Krittika
1, Rohini 2, Punarvasu 3, Magha 4, Chitra 5, Visakha 6, Anuradha 7 and Jyestha
8. Discussion- When the moon travels through these eight nakshatras, the
conjunction of the moon with them from its north and south sides is called
Pramard Yoga. 49- In this Ratnapraba earth, the state of many narakas is said to
be eight Palyopama. In the fourth Pankaprabha earth, the state of many narakas
is said to be eight Sagaropama. The state of many Asura Kumaras is said to be
eight Palyopama. In the Saudharma-Ishana kalpas, the state of many gods is said
to be eight Palyopama. In this Ratnapraba earth, the state of many narakas is
said to be eight Palyopama. In the fourth Pankaprabha earth, the state of many
narakas is said to be eight Sagaropama. The state of many Asura Kumaras is said
to be eight Palyopama. In the Saudharma-Ishana kalpas, the state of many gods is
said to be eight Palyopama. 50- In the Brahmaloka kalpa, the state of many gods
is said to be eight Sagaropama. The gods who are born in the vimanas named Archi
1, Archimali 2, Vairochana 3, Prabhankara 4, Chandraabha 5, Suraabha 6,
Supratishthabha 7, Agni-Abha 8, Rishtabha 9, Arunabha 10 and Anuttaravatansaka
11, their excellent state is said to be eight Sagaropama. These gods breathe or
exhale after eight half-months (fortnights). These gods feel the desire for food
after eight thousand years. Many bhavya-siddhika jivas will become siddhas,
buddhas, free from karmas, attain nirvana and end all suffering by taking eight
bhava-grahanas. Many bhavya-siddhika jivas will become siddhas, buddhas, free
from karmas, attain nirvana and end all suffering by taking eight bhava-
grahanas. || Eight-Place Agreement Ends.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTasthAnaka-samavAya] [21 subhe ya subhaghose ya vasiDhe baMbhayAri ya  /
some siridhare ceva vIrabhadde jase iya  // 1 //  puruSAdAnIya arthAt puruSoM ke
dvArA jinakA nAma Aja bhI zraddhA aura AdAra-pUrvaka smaraNa kiyA jAtA hai, aise
pArzvanAtha tIrthaMkara deva ke ATha gaNa aura ATha gaNadhara the| jaise- zubha,
zubhaghoSa, vaziSTha, brahmacArI, soma, zrIdhara, vIrabhadra aura yaza  //  1
//  48-aTTha nakkhattA caMdeNaM saddhiM pamaI jogaM joeMti, taM jahA-kattiyA 1,
rohaNI 2, puNavvasU 3, mahA 4, cittA 5, visAhA 6, aNurAhA 7, jeTThA 8 /  /  ATha
nakSatra candramA ke sAtha pramarda yoga karate haiM, jaise- kRttikA 1, rohiNI
2, punarvasu 3, maghA 4, citrA 5, vizAkhA 6, anurAdhA, 7 aura jyeSThA 8 /
vivecana-jisa samaya candramA ukta ATha nakSatroM ke madhya se gamana karatA
hai, usa samaya usake uttara aura dakSiNa pArzva se unakA candramA ke sAtha jo
saMyoga hotA hai, vaha pramardayoga kahalAtA hai| 49-imIse NaM rayaNappahAe
puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM aTTha paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| cautthIe
puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM aTTha sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa|
asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM aTTha paliovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa|
sohammIsANesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM devANaM aTTha paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|
isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti ATha palyopama kahI gaI
hai| cauthI paMkaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti ATha sAgaropama
kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti ATha palyopama kahI hai|
saudharma-IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti ATha palyopama kahI gaI hai|
50-baMbhaloe kappe atthegaiyANaM devANaM aTTha sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| je
devA acci 1, accimAliM 2, bairoyaNaM 3, pabhaMkaraM 4, caMdAbhaM 5, sUrAbhaM 6,
supaiTThAbhaM 7, aggiccAbhaM 8, riTThAbhaM 9, aruNAbhaM 10, aNuttaravaDiMsagaM
11, vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA tesiM NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM aTTha sAgarovamAiM
ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devA aTThaNhaM addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA pANamaMti vA,
UsasaMti vA nIsasaMti vaa| tesiM NaM devANaM aTThahiM vAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe
smuppjji| saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je aTThahiM bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti
bujjhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti|
brahmaloka kalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti ATha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai|
vahAM jo deva arci 1, arcimAlI 2, vairocana 3, prabhaMkara 4, candrAbha 5,
sUrAbha 6, supratiSThAbha 7, agni-aAbha 8, riSTAbha 9, aruNAbha 10 aura
anuttarAvataMsaka 11, nAma ke vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una
devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti ATha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai  /  ve deva ATha ardhamAsoM
(pakhavAr3oM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsaniHzvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ko ATha
hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI haiN| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika
jIva ATha bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta
hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //
aSTasthAnaka samavAya smaapt|

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 22] [ Samvayanga Sutra Navasthanak - Samvay 51 – Nine protectors of
Brahmacharya are stated, as follows: - Not to use beds and seats associated with
women, animals, and eunuchs 1, not to tell stories of women 2, not to be a
devotee of women 3, not to be a viewer and thinker of the beautiful senses and
charming limbs of women 4, not to eat food rich in prepared flavors 5, not to
eat food in excess 6, not to remember past sexual encounters and play with women
7, not to listen to stimulating sounds, not to see stimulating forms, not to
smell stimulating scents, not to taste stimulating flavors, not to touch
stimulating soft beds etc. 8, not to be attached to the pleasure obtained from
the arising of the seven senses 9. Brahmacharya's nine secrets (protectors) have
been said, such as - not using beds and seats associated with women, animals,
and eunuchs 1, not telling stories of women 2, not being a devotee of women 3,
not being a viewer and thinker of the beautiful senses and charming limbs of
women 4, not eating food rich in prepared flavors 5, not eating food in excess
6, not remembering past sexual encounters and play with women 7, not listening
to stimulating sounds, not seeing stimulating forms, not smelling stimulating
scents, not tasting stimulating flavors, not touching stimulating soft beds etc.
8, and not being attached to the pleasure obtained from the arising of the seven
senses 9. Discussion - Brahmachari men should not use the above nine types of
actions to protect their Brahmacharya, only then can their Brahmacharya be
protected. In the Agamas, these are also known as the nine fences of virtue.
Just as the fence of a field is its protector, in the same way, the above nine
fences are the protectors of Brahmacharya, therefore they are called
Brahmacharya - secrets. 52 - Nine destroyers of Brahmacharya are stated, as
follows: - To use beds and seats associated with women, animals, and eunuchs 1,
to tell stories of women - to talk about women 2, to be a devotee of women 3, to
see and think about the beautiful senses and charming limbs of women 4, to eat
heavy food rich in prepared flavors 5, to eat and drink in excess 6, to remember
past sexual encounters and play with women 7, to listen to stimulating sounds,
to see stimulating forms, to smell stimulating scents, to taste stimulating
flavors, to touch stimulating soft beds etc. 8, and to be attached to the
pleasure obtained from the arising of the seven senses 9. Brahmacharya's nine
non-secrets (destroyers) have been said, such as - using beds and seats
associated with women, animals, and eunuchs 1, telling stories of women -
talking about women 2, being a devotee of women 3, seeing and thinking about the
beautiful senses and charming limbs of women 4, eating heavy food rich in
prepared flavors 5, eating and drinking in excess 6, remembering past sexual
encounters and play with women 7, listening to stimulating sounds, seeing
stimulating forms, smelling stimulating scents, tasting stimulating flavors,
touching stimulating soft beds etc. 8, and being attached to the pleasure
obtained from the arising of the seven senses 9. Meaning - By using these above
nine types of actions, Brahmacharya is destroyed, therefore these are called

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22] [ samavAyAGgasUtra navasthAnaka - samavAya 51 - nava baMbhaceraguttIo
paNNattAo, taM jahA - no itthi - pasu -paMDagasaMsattANi sijjAsaNANi sevittA
bhavai 1, no itthINaM kahaM kahittA bhavai 2, no itthINaM gaNAI sevittA bhavai
3, no itthINaM iMdiyANi maNoharAI maNoramAiM AloittA nijjhAittA bhavai 4, no
paNIyarasabhoI bhavai 5, no pANabhoyaNassa aimAyAyAe AhAraittA bhavai 6, no
itthINaM puvvarayAI puvvakIliAI samaraittA bhavai 7, no saddANuvAI, no
rUvANuvAI, no gaMdhANuvAI, no rasANuvAI, no phAsANuvAI, no silogANuvAI bhavai 8,
no sAyAsokkhapaDibaddhe yAvi bhavai 9  /  brahmacarya kI nau guptiyAM
(saMrakSikAeM ) kahI gaI haiM, jaise- strI, pazu aura napuMsaka se saMsakta
zayyA aura Asana kA sevana nahIM karanA 1, striyoM kI kathAoM ko nahIM kahanA 2,
strIgaNoM kA upAsaka nahIM honA 3, striyoM kI manohara indriyoM aura ramaNIya
aMgoM kA draSTA aura dhyAtA nahIM honA 4, praNIta-rasabahula bhojana kA nahIM
karanA 5, adhika mAtrA meM khAna-pAna yA AhAra nahIM karanA 6, striyoM ke sAtha
kI gaI pUrva rati aura pUrva krIr3AoM kA smaraNa nahIM karanA 7, kAmoddIpaka
zabdoM ko nahIM sunanA, kAmoddIpaka rUpoM ko nahIM dekhanA, kAmoddIpaka gandhoM
ko nahIM sUMghanA, kAmoddIpaka rasoM kA svAda nahIM lenA, kAmoddIpaka komala
mRduzayyAdi kA sparza nahIM karanA 8, aura sAtAvedanIya ke udaya se prApta sukha
meM pratibaddha (Asakta ) nahIM honA 9  /  vivecana - brahmacArI puruSoM ko
apane brahmacarya kI rakSA ke lie ukta nau prakAra ke kAryoM kA sevana nahIM
karanA cAhie, tabhI unake brahmacarya kI rakSA ho sakatI hai  /  Agama meM ye
zIla kI nau vAr3oM ke nAma se bhI prasiddha haiN| jisa prakAra kheta kI bAr3a
usakI rakSaka hotI hai, usI prakAra ukta nau vAr3eM brahmacarya . kI rakSaka
haiM, ataeva inheM brahmacarya - guptiyAM kahA gayA hai| 52 - nava baMbhecara -
aguttIo paNNattAo, taM jahA - itthI - pasu-paMDagasaMsattANaM sijjAsaNANaM
sevittA bhavai 1, itthINaM kahaM kahittA bhavai 2, itthINaM gaNAI sevittA bhavai
3, itthINaM iMdiyANaM maNoharAI maNoramAiM AloittA nijjhAittA bhavai 4,
paNIyarasabhoI bhavati 5, pANa-bhoyaNassa aimAyAe AhAraittA bhavai 6, itthINaM
puvvarayAiM puvvakeliAiM samaraittA bhavai 7, saddANuvAI rUvANuvAI gaMdhANuvAI
rasANuvAI phAsANuvAI silogANuvAI bhavai 8, sAyAsukkhapaDibaddhe yAvi bhavai 9  /
brahmacarya kI nau aguptiyA~ (vinAzikAeM ) kahI gaI haiM, jaise- strI, pazu aura
napuMsaka se saMsakta zayyA aura Asana kA sevana karanA 1 striyoM kI kathAoM ko
kahanA - striyoM sambandhI bAteM karanA 2, strIgaNoM kA upAsaka honA 3, striyoM
kI manohara indriyoM aura manorama aMgoM ko dekhanA aura unakA cintana karanA 4,
praNIta-rasa-bahula gariSTha bhojana karanA 5, adhika mAtrA meM AhArapAna karanA
6, striyoM ke sAtha kaI pUrva rati aura pUrva krIr3AoM kA smaraNa karanA 7,
kAmoddIpaka zabdoM ko sunanA, kAmoddIpaka rUpoM ko dekhanA, kAmoddIpaka gandhoM
ko sUMghanA, kAmoddIpaka rasoM kA svAda lenA, kAmoddIpaka komala mRduzayyAdi kA
sparza karanA 8, aura sAtAvedanIya ke udaya se prApta sukha meM pratibaddha
(Asakta) honA 9  /  bhAvArtha - ina uparyukta navoM prakAra ke kAryoM ke sevana
se brahmacarya naSTa hotA hai, isalie inako

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nine-Place-Aggregates] [23. The nine aspects of celibacy are said to be: 53.
The nine aspects of celibacy are said to be: Sastraparijna 1, Lokavijaya 2,
Sitooshniya 3, Samyaktva 4, Aavanti 5, Dhut 6, Vimoh 7, Upadhanashrut 8 and
Mahaparijna 9. Explanation: Skillful or praiseworthy conduct is also called
celibacy. The studies that expound it are also called celibacy. In the first
Shruta Skandha of Acharanga, the names of these nine studies that expound such
skillful practices are mentioned in the above verse. The implication is that
there are nine studies in the first Shruta Skandha of Acharanga Sutra. 54. The
nine gems (hands) of the Arhat Purusha were high. The nine gems (hands) of the
Tirthankara Parsvanath were high. 55. The Abhijit constellation joins with the
moon for nine Muhurtas. The nine constellations starting with Abhijit join with
the moon from the north. They are: Abhijit, Revati, Uttarabhadrapada, Shravana,
Dhanishtha, Shatabhishak, Purvabhadrapada, Ashwini, and Bharani. Explanation:
The time for which a constellation stays with the moon is called its conjunction
with the moon. The nine constellations starting with Abhijit that experience
conjunction with the moon while staying in the north are as follows: Abhijit,
Revati, Uttarabhadrapada, Shravana, Dhanishtha, Shatabhishak, Purvabhadrapada,
Ashwini, and Bharani. 56. From the multi-beautiful land of this Ratnapraba
earth, stars move in the upper part, nine hundred yojanas above, in the form of
a chariot. In the island called Jambudvipa, fish of nine yojanas enter the river
mouths, have entered, or will enter. On each arm (side) of the Vijay gate of
Jambudvipa, nine-nine Bhom (specific places or cities) are said to be. 57. The
assemblies of the Vanavyantar Devas called Sudharma are said to be nine yojanas
high.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navasthAnaka-samavAya] [23 brahmacarya kI agupti kahA gayA hai| 53- nava
baMbhecarA paNNattA, taM jahA satthapariNNA' logavijayo2 sIosaNijja3 sammatta  /
AvaMti' dhuta vimohA [yaNaM ] uvahANasuyaM mahApariNNA  // 1 //  nau brahmacarya
adhyayana kahe gaye haiM, jaise zastraparijJA 1, lokavijaya 2, zItoSNIya 3,
samyaktva 4, AvantI 5, dhUta 6, vimoha 7, upadhAnazruta 8 aura mahAparijJA 9 /
vivecana-kuzala yA prazasta AcaraNa karane ko bhI brahmacarya kahate haiM  /
usake pratipAdaka adhyayana bhI brahmacarya kahalAte haiM  /  AcArAMga ke
prathama zrutaskandha meM aise kuzala anuSThAnoM ke pratipAdaka nau adhyayanoM
kA ukta gAthAsUtra meM nAmollekha kiyA gayA hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki
AcArAMgasUtra ke prathama zrutaskaMdha meM nau adhyayana haiN| 54-pAse NaM arahA
purisAdANIe nava rayaNIo uDDhe uccatteNaM hotthaa| puruSAdAnIya pArzvanAtha
tIrthaMkara deva nau ratni (hAtha) U~ce the| 55-abhIjInakkhatte sAirege nava
muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM jogaM joei| abhIjiyAiyA nava nakkhattA caMdassa
uttareNaM jogaM joeMti, taM jahA-abhIjIsavaNo jAva bhrnnii| abhijit nakSatra
kucha adhika nau muhUrta taka candramA ke sAtha yoga karatA hai| abhijit Adi nau
nakSatra candramA kA uttara dizA kI ora se yoga karate haiN| ve nau nakSatra
abhijit se lagAkara bharaNI taka jAnanA caahie| vivecana-jo nakSatra jitane
samaya taka candra ke sAtha rahatA hai, vaha usakA candra ke sAtha yoga kahalAtA
hai| abhijit Adi jo nau nakSatra uttara kI ora rahate hue candra ke sAtha yoga
kA anubhava karate haiM, unake nAma isa prakAra haiM - abhijit, revatI,
uttarabhAdrapadA, zravaNa, dhaniSThA, zatabhiSak, pUrvAbhAdrapadA, azvinI,
bhrnnii| 56-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe bahusamaramaNijjAo bhUmibhAgAo nava
joyaNasae uddhaM abAhAe uvarille tArArUve cAraM cri| jambuddIve NaM dIve
navajoyaNiyA macchA pavisiMsu vA pavisaMti vA pavisissaMti vaa| vijayassa NaM
dArassa egamegAe bAhAe nava nava bhomA pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke
bahusama ramaNIya bhUmibhAga se nau sau yojana Upara antara karake uparitana
bhAga meM tArAeM saMcAra karatI haiN| jambUdvIpa nAAmaka dvIpa meM nau yojana
vAle matsya bhUtakAla meM nadImukhoM se praveza karate the, vartamAna meM
praveza karate haiM aura bhaviSya meM praveza kreNge| jambUdvIpa ke vijaya
nAmaka pUrva dvAra kI eka-eka bAhu (bhujA) para nau-nau bhauma (viziSTa sthAna
yA nagara) kahe gaye haiN| 57-vANamaMtarANaM devANaM sabhAo suhammAo nava
joyaNAI uddhaM uccatteNaM pnnnnttaao| vAnavyantara devoM kI sudharma nAma kI
sabhAeM nau yojana UMcI kahI gaI haiN|

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samvayanga Sutra 24  **58** - Nine Uttar-Pragatis of Darshanavaraniya Karma
are described as follows: Nidra, Prachala, Niddanidra, Prachalaprachala,
Sthyanardhi, Chakshudarshanavarana, Achakshudarshanavarana, Avhidarshanavarana,
and Kevaldarshanavarana.  **59** - In the Ratnaprabha Earth, the state of
countless Narakas is described as nine Palyopama. In the Chauthi Pankprabha
Earth, the state of countless Narakas is described as nine Sagaropama. The state
of countless Asurakumara Devas is described as nine Palyopama.  **60** - In the
Saudharma-Ishana Kalpa, the state of countless Devas is described as nine
Palyopama. In the Brahmaloka Kalpa, the state of countless Devas is described as
nine Sagaropama. Those Devas who are born in the Vimanas named Pakshma,
Supakshma, Pakshmavartta, Pakshmaprabha, Pakshmakant, Pakshmavarna,
Pakshmaleshya, Pakshmadhwaja, Pakshmabhringa, Pakshmasrishta, Pakshmakoota,
Pakshmottaravatansaka, Surya, Susurya, Suryavartta, Suryaprabha, Suryakant,
Suryavarna, Suryaleshya, Suryadhwaja, Suryabhringa, Suryasrishta, Suryakoota,
Suryottaravatansaka, [Ruchira] Ruchiravartta, Ruchiraprabha, Ruchirakant,
Ruchiravarna, Ruchiraleshya, Ruchiradhwaja, Ruchirashringa, Ruchirasrishta,
Ruchirakoota, and Ruchirottaravatansaka as Devas, their state is described as
nine Sagaropama. These Devas take in breath and exhale after nine half-months
(four and a half months). They experience the desire for food after nine
thousand years.  Countless Bhavyasiddhika Jivas are those who will become
Siddhas, Buddhas, liberated from Karma, attain Parinirvana, and end all
suffering after experiencing nine Bhavagrahana.  **|| Navasthanaka Samvaya Sampt
||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ samavAyAGgasUtra 24] 58 - daMsaNAvaraNijjassa NaM kammassa nava uttarapagaDIo
paNNattAo, taM jahA - niddA payalA niddAniddA payalApayalA thINaddhI
cakkhudaMsaNAvaraNe acakkhudaMsaNAvaraNe ohiMdaMsaNAvaraNe kevaladaMsaNAvaraNe
/  darzanAvaraNIya karma kI nau uttara prakRtiyAM kahI gaI haiM, jaise- nidrA,
pracalA, nidvAnidrA, pracalApracalA, styAnarddhi, cakSudarzanAvaraNa,
acakSudarzanAvaraNa, avadhidarzanAvaraNa aura kevldrshnaavrnn| 59 - imIse NaM
rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM nava palio mAI ThiI paNNattA  /
cautthIe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM nava sAgarovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /
asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM nava paliovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  isa
ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti nau palyopama  /  cauthI
paMkaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti nau sAgarApama hai| kitaneka
asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti nau palyopama hai| 60 - sohammIsANesu kappesu
atthegaiyANaM devANaM nava paliovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  baMbhaloe kappe
atthegaiyANaM devANaM nava sAgarovamAiM ThiI paNNattA  /  je devA pamhaM
supamhaM pamhAvattaM pamhappabhaM pamhakaMtaM pamhavaNNaM pamhalesaM
pamhajjhayaM pamhasiMgaM pamhasiddhaM pamhakUDaM pamhuttaravaDiMsagaM, sujjaM
susujjaM sujjAvattaM sujjapabhaM sujjakaMtaM sujjavaNNaM sujjalesaM sujjajjhayaM
sujjhasiMgaM sujjasi sujjakUDaM sujjuttaravaDiMsagaM, [ ruillaM ] ruillAvattaM
ruillappabhaM ruillakaMtaM ruillavaNNaM ruillalesaM ruillajjhayaM ruillasiMgaM
ruillasiddhaM ruillakUDaM ruilluttaravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA, tesiM
NaM devANaM nava sAgarovamAiM ThiI paNNattA, te NaM devA navahaM addhamAsANaM
ANamaMti vA pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA nIsasaMti vA  /  tesiM NaM devANaM navahiM
vAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe samuppajjai  /  saMgaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je navahiM
bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujjhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM karissaMti  /  saudharma - IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM
kI sthiti nau palyopama hai  /  brahmaloka kalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti
nau sAgarAopama hai| vahAM jo deva pakSma, supakSma, pakSmAvartta, pakSmaprabha,
pakSmakAnta, pakSmavarNa, pakSmalezya, pakSmadhvaja, pakSmabhRMga, pakSmasRSTa,
pakSmakUTa, pakSmottarAvataMsaka tathA sUrya, susUrya, sUryAvartta, sUryaprabha,
sUryakAnta, sUryavarNa, sUryalezya, sUryadhvaja, sUryabhRMga, sUryasRSTa,
sUryakUTa sUryottarAvataMsaka, [rucira] rucirAvarta, ruciraprabha, rucirakAnta
ruciravarNa, ruciralezya, ruciradhvaja, rucirazRMga, rucirasRSTa, rucirakUTa
aura rucirottarAvataMsaka nAma vAle vimAnoM meM deva rUpa se utpanna hote haiM,
una devoM kI sthiti nau sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva nau ardhamAsoM (sAr3he
cAra mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa, ucchvAsa - ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ko nau
hajAra varSa ke bAda AhAra kI icchA hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise
haiM jo nau bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta
hoMge, parama nirvANa prApta kareMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //
navasthAnaka samavAya samApta  //

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Ten-Place Aggregates] [25 Ten-Place Aggregates 61. Ten Saman Dharma (Ascetic
Virtues) are stated, such as- Patience 1, Liberation 2, Uprightness 3,
Gentleness 4, Lightness 5, Truthfulness 6, Restraint 7, Austerity 8,
Renunciation 9, Brahmacharya 10. Ascetic virtues are said to be of ten kinds,
such as- Patience 1, Liberation 2, Uprightness 3, Gentleness 4, Lightness 5,
Truthfulness 6, Restraint 7, Austerity 8, Renunciation 9, Brahmacharya 10.
Explanation- Those who renounce the beginning-acquisition and home-door and take
up restraint and continuously strive for its flawless observance are called
"Ascetics". They are advised to observe the ten virtues of patience etc. to
conquer their passions. The most prominent passion is anger. To conquer it, it
is essential to cultivate patience, tolerance or forgiveness. The lifelong
restraint-practice of great ascetics like Dwipayana was destroyed by a moment of
anger and they attained downfall. The second powerful passion is greed, to
renounce it, it is necessary to observe the virtue of liberation, i.e., non-
greed. Similarly, to conquer the passion of delusion, the virtue of uprightness
is prescribed and to conquer the passion of pride, the virtue of gentleness is
prescribed. By conquering the passion of pride, the virtue of lightness
automatically manifests. And by conquering the passion of delusion, the virtue
of truthfulness also manifests. To restrain the tendency of the five senses
towards their objects, the observance of the four virtues of restraint,
austerity, renunciation and Brahmacharya is advised. Here, renunciation refers
to the renunciation of all kinds of attachments (acquisition), both internal and
external. Giving is also called renunciation. Therefore, the giving of alms from
the alms received by the sincere and pleasing ascetics is also considered to be
the duty of the ascetics. The complete observance of the ascetic virtues is
possible only by residing with the great ascetics who are the upholders of
Brahmacharya, therefore, it is given the last place. 62- Ten states of mind-
absorption are stated, such as- The arising of the thought of Dharma, which had
not arisen before, knowing all Dharma, is the first state of the arising of
mind-absorption or peace (1).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazasthAnaka-samavAya] [25 dazasthAnaka-samavAya 61. dasavihe samaNadhamme
paNNatte, taM jahA-khaMtI 1, muttI 2, ajjave 3, maddave 4, lAghave 5, sacce 6,
saMjame 7, tave 8, ciyAe 9, baMbhaceravAse 10 /  zramaNadharma dasa prakAra kA
kahA gayA hai, jaise-kSAnti 1, mukti 2, Arjava 3, mArdava 4, lAghava 5, satya 6,
saMyama 7, tapa 8, tyAga 9, brahmacaryavAsa 10  /  vivecana- jo Arambha-
parigraha evaM ghara-dvAra kA parityAga kara aura saMyama dhAraNa kara usakA
nirdoSa pAlana karane ke liye nirantara zrama karate rahate haiM, unheM
"zramaNa" kahate haiM  /  unako apane viSayakaSAyoM ko jItane ke lie kSAnti Adi
daza dharmoM ke paripAlana kA upadeza diyA gayA hai| kaSAyoM meM sabase pradhAna
kaSAya krodha hai| usake jItane ke lie kSAnti, sahanazIlatA yA kSamA kA dhAraNa
karanA atyAvazyaka hai| dvIpAyana jaise parama tapasviyoM ke jIvana bhara kI
saMyama-sAdhanA kSaNa bhara ke krodha se samApta ho gaI aura ve adhogati ko
prApta hue| dUsarI prabala kaSAya lobha hai, usake tyAga ke lie mukti arthAt
nirlobhatA dharma kA pAlana karanA Avazyaka hai| isI prakAra mAyA kaSAya ko
jItane ke lie Arjavadharma kA aura mAna kaSAya ko jItane ke lie mArdava dharma
ko pAlane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| mAna kaSAya ko jItane se lAghava dharma
svataH prakaTa ho jAtA hai| tathA mAyA kaSAya ko jItane se satyadharma bhI
prakaTa ho jAtA hai| pAMcoM indriyoM ke viSayoM kI pravRtti ko rokane ke liye
saMyama, tapa, tyAga aura brahmacaryavAsa ina cAra dharmoM ke pAlane kA upadeza
diyA gayA hai| yahA~ tyAga dharma se abhiprAya antaraMga-bahiraMga sabhI prakAra
ke saMga (parigraha) ke tyAga se hai  /  dAna ko bhI tyAga kahate haiM  /  ata:
saMvigna manojJa sAdhuoM ko prApta bhikSA meM se dAna kA vidhAna bhI sAdhuoM kA
kartavya mAnA gayA hai| brahmacarya ke dhAraka parama tapasviyoM ke sAtha nivAsa
karane para hI zramaNadharma kA pUrNa rUpa se pAlana sambhava hai, ata: sabase
anta meM use sthAna diyA gayA hai| 62-dasa cittasamAhiTThANA paNNattA, taM jahA-
dhammaciMtA vA se asamuppaNNapuvvA samuppajijA savvaM dhammaM jANittae 1,
sumiNadaMsaNe vA se asamuppaNNe puvve samupajjijjA ahAtavcaM sumiNaM pAsittae 2,
saNNiNANe vA se asamuppaNNapuvve samuppajjijA puvvabhave sumarittae 3,
devadaMsaNe vA se asamuppaNNapuvve samuppajijA divvaM deviddhiM divvaM devajuiM
divvaM devANubhAvaM pAsittae 4, ohinANe vA se asamuppaNNapuvve samuppajjijjA
ohiNA logaM jANittae 5, ohidaMsaNe vA se asamuppaNNapuvve samuppajijjA ohiNA
logaM pAsittae 6, maNapajjavanANe vA se asamuppaNNapuvve samuppajijjA
jAva[addhataIadIvasamuddesu saNNINaM paMciMdiyANaM pajjattagANaM] maNogae bhAve
jANittae 7, kevalanANe vA se asamuppaNNapuvve samuppajijjA kevalaM logaMjANittae
8, kevaladaMsaNe vA se asamuppaNNapuvve samuppaMjijjA kevalaM logaM pAsittae 9,
kevalimaraNaM vA marinjA savvadukkhappahINAe 10 /  citta-samAdhi ke daza sthAna
kahe gaye haiM, jaise-jo pUrva kAla meM kabhI utpanna nahIM huI, aisI sarvajJa-
bhASita zruta aura cAritrarUpa dharma ko jAnane kI cintA kA utpanna honA yaha
citta kI samAdhi yA zAnti ke utpanna hone kA pahalA sthAna hai (1) /

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[26] The **Samvayanga Sutra** states that **Dharma-Chinta** (reflection on
Dharma) is the first stage of **Chitta-Samadhi** (mental absorption) because it
is only through this that knowledge and practice of Dharma become possible.  The
second stage of **Chitta-Samadhi** is to see a **Yatharthya** (realistic) dream,
which is like nothing seen before, and which will bear fruit in the future (2).
The third stage of **Chitta-Samadhi** is to have **Sanjijnana** (knowledge of
birth) which remembers a previous life, something that has never happened
before. Remembering a previous life awakens a state of supreme peace in the
mind, along with emotions of detachment and dispassion (3).  The fourth stage of
**Chitta-Samadhi** is to see the **Devas** (divine beings), their divine
splendor, their families, their powers, their divine radiance (of their bodies
and ornaments), and their divine influence (the effects of their superior
actions). This is because seeing the Devas inspires firm faith in Dharma (4).
The fifth stage of **Chitta-Samadhi** is to develop **Avadhijnana**
(clairvoyance), which directly perceives the **Lokas** (material objects),
something that has never happened before. When **Avadhijnana** arises, an
unprecedented peace and joy manifest in the mind (5).  The sixth stage of
**Chitta-Samadhi** is to develop **Avadhidarshan** (clairvoyance), which
directly sees the **Lokas**, something that has never happened before (6).  The
seventh stage of **Chitta-Samadhi** is to develop **Manahparyayajnana**
(knowledge of the minds of others), which knows the mental states of all beings
within the **Ardha-dvipa-samudravarti** (half-continent-ocean-surrounded) realm,
who have five senses and are capable of experiencing the world, something that
has never happened before (7).  The eighth stage of **Chitta-Samadhi** is to
develop **Kevalajnana** (omniscience), which directly knows the entire **Lokas**
(universe) with all its **Trikalavartis** (past, present, and future) aspects,
something that has never happened before (8).  The ninth stage of **Chitta-
Samadhi** is to develop **Kevaladarshan** (omniscient vision), which sees the
entire **Lokas** (universe) of all mobile and immobile beings, something that
has never happened before (9).  The tenth stage of **Chitta-Samadhi** is to die
a **Kevalimaran** (omniscient death), which destroys all suffering. This is the
final stage of **Chitta-Samadhi** (10).  Upon reaching this stage, the soul is
liberated from all worldly suffering, becomes a **Siddh** (liberated being), and
attains infinite bliss.  63-The **Mandara** (Mount Meru) is said to have a
diameter of ten thousand **Yojanas** at its base.  64-The **Arishthanemi**
Tirthankara was ten **dhanus** (bows) tall. **Krishna Vasudeva** was ten
**dhanus** tall. **Rama Balarama** was ten **dhanus** tall.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26] [samavAyAGgasUtra dharma-cintA ko citta-samAdhi kA prathama sthAna kahane
kA kAraNa yaha hai ki isake hone para hI dharma kA parijJAna aura ArAdhana
sambhava hai| jaisA pahale kabhI nahIM dekhA, aise yAthAtathya (bhaviSya meM
yathArtha phala ko dene vAle) svapna kA dekhanA citta-samAdhi kA dUsarA sthAna
hai (2) /  jaisA pahale kabhI utpanna nahIM huA, aisA pUrva bhava kA smaraNa
karane vAlA saMjJijJAna (jAtismaraNa) honA yaha citta-samAdhi kA tIsarA sthAna
hai| pUrva bhava kA smaraNa hone para saMvega aura nirveda ke sAtha citta meM
parama prazamabhAva jAgRta hotA hai (3) /  jaisA pahale kabhI nahIM huA, aisA
deva-darzana honA, devoM kI divya vaibhava-parivAra AdirUpa Rddhi ko dekhanA,
devoM kI divya dyuti (zarIra aura AbhUSaNAdi kI dIpti) kA dekhanA aura divya
devAnubhAva (uttama vikriyAdi ke prabhAva) ko dekhanA yaha citta-samAdhi kA
cauthA sthAna hai, kyoMki aisA deva-darzana hone para dharma meM dRr3ha zraddhA
utpanna hotI hai (4) /  /  jo pahale kabhI utpanna nahIM huA, aisA loka (mUrta
padArthoM ko) pratyakSa jAnane vAlA avadhijJAna utpanna honA yaha citta-samAdhi
kA pAMcavA sthAna hai| avadhijJAna ke utpanna hone para mana meM eka apUrva
zAnti aura prasannatA prakaTa hotI hai (5) /  jo pahale kabhI utpanna nahIM huA,
aisA loka ko pratyakSa dekhane vAlA avadhidarzana utpanna honA yaha citta-
samAdhi kA chaThA sthAna hai (6) /  jo pahale kabhI utpanna nahIM huA, aisA
[ar3hAI dvIpa-samudravartI saMjJI, paMcendriya paryAptaka] jIvoM. ke manogata
bhAvoM ko jAnane vAlA manaHparyayajJAna utpanna honA yaha citta-samAdhi kA
sAtavAM sthAna hai (7) /  jo pahale kabhI utpanna nahIM huA, aisA sampUrNa loka
ko pratyakSa [trikAlavartI paryAyoM ke sAtha] jAnanevAlA kevalajJAna utpanna
honA yaha citta-samAdhi kA AThavAM sthAna hai (8) /  jo pahale kabhI utpanna
nahIM huA, aisA [sarva carAcara] loka ko dekhane vAlA kevala-darzana utpanna
honA, yaha citta-samAdhi kA nauvAM sthAna hai (9) /  sarva duHkhoM ke vinAzaka
kevalimaraNa se maranA yaha citta-samAdhi kA dazavAM sthAna hai (10) /  isake
hone para yaha AtmA sarva sAMsArika duHkhoM se mukta ho siddha buddha hokara
ananta sukha ko prApta ho jAtA hai| 63-maMdare NaM pavvae mUle dasa
joyaNasahassAI vikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte| mandara (sumeru) parvata mUla meM daza
hajAra yojana viSkamma (vistAra) vAlA kahA gayA hai| 64-arihA NaM ariTTanemi
dasa dhaNUI uddhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa| kaNhe NaM vAsudeve dasa dhaNUI uDDUM
uccatteNaM hotthaa| rAme NaM baladeve dasa dhaNUI uddhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa|
ariSTanemi tIrthaMkara daza dhanuSa UMce the| kRSNa vAsudeva daza dhanuSa UMce
the| rAma balarAma daza dhanuSa

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Dasasthanaka-Samavaya] [27 They were high. 65-Ten Nakshatra Nanabuddhikara
Pannatta, that is Migasira Adda Pusso Tinni Ya Puvva Ya Mulamasesa. Hattho
Chitto Ya Taha Das Buddhikarai Nanassa ||1|| Ten Nakshatras are said to increase
knowledge, such as - Mrigashira, Ardra, Pushya, all three Purvas (Purva
Phalguni, Purvashadha, Purva Bhadrapada), Mula, Ashlesha, Hasta and Chitra,
these ten Nakshatras increase knowledge. That is, starting to read in these
Nakshatras, knowledge is acquired quickly and in large quantities.
66-Akammabhumiaanam Manuaanam Dasaviha Rukkha Uvabhogattaae Uvatthiya Pannatta,
Tam Jaha Mattangaya Ya Bhinnga, Tudiaanga Diiv Joi Chittanga. Chittarasa
Manianga, Gehaagara Anigina Ya ||2|| Ten types of trees (Kalpavriksha) are
present for the enjoyment of Akarmabhumij humans. Like. Madyang, Bhang, Turyang,
Dipaang, Jyotirang, Chitranga, Chittarasa, Manyang, Gehaakar and Anagnaang (1).
Discussion-Where humans born do not have to do any kind of livelihood-related
work like Asi Masi, agriculture etc., but whose all needs are fulfilled by
trees, such land is called Akarmabhum or Bhogbhumi and the trees from which
their needs are fulfilled, are called Kalpavriksha. From the trees of the
Madyang species, the humans of Akarmabhum get sweet liquor. From the trees of
the Bhang species, they get utensils. From the trees of the Turyang species,
they get musical instruments. From the trees of the Dipaang species, they get
lamp-light. From Jyotirang trees, they get light like fire. From Chitranga
trees, they get various types of flowers. From the trees of the Chittarasa
species, they get many delicious foods. From the trees of the Manyang species,
they get ornaments. From Gehaakar trees, they get their dwelling place and from
Anagna trees, they get their clothes. 67-Imise Nam Rayanppabhaae Pudhavieae
Atthagaiyaanam Neraiyaanam Jahanneanam Das Vasasahasain Thii Pannatta. Imise Nam
Rayanppabhaae Pudhavieae Atthagaiyaanam Neraiyaanam Das Paliovamai Thii
Pannatta. Chauthieae Pudhavieae Das Niryaavasaasayasahasain Pannattaai.
Chatutthae Pudhavieae Atthagaiyaanam Neraiyaanam Das Sagarovamai Thii Pannatta.
Panchmie Pudhavieae Atthagaiyaanam Neraiyaanam Jaheenneanam Das Sagarovamai Thii
Pannatta. How many Narakas of this Ratnaprabha earth have a despicable state of
ten thousand years. How many Narakas of this Ratnaprabha earth are said to be in
the state of ten Palyopama. There are ten lakh Narakavasa in the fourth Narak
earth. How many Narakas in the fourth earth are in the state of ten Sagaropama.
In the fifth earth, the despicable state of some Narakas is said to be ten
Sagaropama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazasthAnaka-samavAya] [27 UMce the| 65-dasa nakkhattA nANabuDDhikarA paNNattA,
taM jahA migasira addA pusso tiNNi ya puvvA ya muulmssesaa| hattho citto ya tahA
dasa buDDikarAI nANassa  // 1 //  daza nakSatra jJAna kI vRddhi karane vAle kahe
gaye haiM yathA-mRgazira, ArdrA, puSya, tInoM pUrvAeM (pUrvA phAlgunI,
pUrvASADhA, pUrvA bhAdrapadA) mUla, AzleSA, hasta aura citrA, ye daza nakSatra
jJAna kI vRddhi karate haiN| arthAt ina nakSatroM meM par3hanA prArambha karane
para jJAna zIghra aura vipula parimANa meM prApta hotA hai| 66-akammabhUmiyANaM
maNuANaM dasavihA rukkhA uvabhogattAe uvatthiyA paNNattA, taM jahA mattaMgayA ya
bhiMgA, tuDiaMgA dIva joi cittNgaa| cittarasA maNiaMgA, gehAgArA anigiNA y||2||
akarmabhUmija manuSyoM ke upabhoga ke lie daza prakAra ke vRkSa (kalpavRkSa)
upasthita rahate haiN| jaise. madyAMga, bhaMga, tUryAMga, dIpAMga, jyotiraMga,
citrAMga, cittarasa, maNyaMga, gehAkAra aura anagnAMga (1) /  vivecana-jahA~
para utpanna hone vAle manuSyoM ko asi maSi, kRSi adi kisI bhI prakAra kA
AjIvikA-sambandhI kArya nahIM karanA par3atA hai, kintu jinakI sabhI
AvazyakatAe~ vRkSoM se pUrNa ho jAtI haiM, aisI bhUmi ko akarmabhUmi yA
bhogabhUmi kahate haiM aura jina vRkSoM se unakI AvazyakatAeM pUrI hotI haiM,
unheM kalpavRkSa kahA jAtA hai| madyAMga jAti ke vRkSoM se akarmabhUmi ke
manuSyoM ko madhura madirA prApta hotI hai| bhaMga jAti ke vRkSoM se unheM
bhAjana-pAtra prApta hote haiN| tUryAMga jAti ke vRkSoM se unheM vAditra prApta
hote haiN| dIpAMga jAti ke vRkSoM se dIpa-prakAza milatA hai| jyotiraMga vRkSoM
se agni ke sadRza prakAza prApta hotA hai| citrAMga vRkSoM se nAnA prakAra ke
puSpa prApta hote haiN| citrarasa jAti ke vRkSoM se aneka rasavAlA bhojana
prApta hotA hai| maNyaMga jAti ke vRkSoM se AbhUSaNa prApta hote haiN| gehAkara
vRkSoM se unako nivAsasthAna prApta hotA hai aura anagna vRkSoM se unheM vastra
prApta hote haiN| 67-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM
jahaNNeNaM dasa vAsasahassAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM dasa paliovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| cautthIe puDhavIe dasa
nirayAvAsasayasahassAiM pnnnnttaaii| catutthIe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM
dasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| paMcamIe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM
jaheNNeNaM dasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke kitaneka
nArakoM kI jaghanya sthiti dasa hajAra varSa kI hai| isa ratnaprabhA pRthvI ke
kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti dasa palyopama kI kahI gaI hai| cauthI naraka pRthvI
meM dasa lAkha nArakAvAsa haiN| cauthI pRthvI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti
dasa sAgaropama kI hotI hai| pAMcavIM pRthvI meM kinhIM-kinhIM nArakoM kI
jaghanya sthiti dasa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai|

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samvayanga Sutra 68-70:  **68** - The lifespan of many Asurakumara Devas in
their lowest state is said to be ten thousand years.  Except for the
Asuraindras, the lifespan of many remaining Bhavanavasi Devas in their lowest
state is said to be ten thousand years. The lifespan of many Asurakumara Devas
in their middle state is said to be ten Palyopama. The lifespan of the Vairvana
plant-bodied beings in their highest state is said to be ten thousand years. The
lifespan of many Vanavyantara Devas in their lowest state is said to be ten
thousand years.  **69** - The lifespan of many Devas in their middle state in
the Saudharma and Isana Kalpas is said to be ten Palyopama. The lifespan of
Devas in their highest state in the Brahmaloka Kalpa is said to be ten
Sagaropama.  **70** - The lifespan of many Devas in their lowest state in the
Lantaka Kalpa is said to be ten Sagaropama. Those Devas who are born in the
Devaloka in the Vimanas called Ghosha, Sughosha, Mahaghosha, Nandighosha,
Susvara, Manorama, Ramya, Ramyaka, Ramanijja, Mangalavarta, and
Brahmalokavartansaka, their lifespan in their highest state is said to be ten
Sagaropama. These Devas breathe or exhale only after ten half-months (five
months). Their desire for food arises after ten thousand years.  There are many
Bhavyasiddhika Jivas who will attain Siddhi, become Buddhas, be liberated from
karma, attain Nirvana, and end all suffering after experiencing ten Bhava-
grahanas.  **|| Dasasthanaka Samvaya Sampt ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ samavAyAGgasUtra 68 - asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM jahaNaNeNaM dasa
vAsasahassAiM ThiI paNNattA  /  asuriMda- vajjANaM bhomijjANaM devANaM
atthegaiyANaM jahaNNeNaM dasa vAsasahassAiM ThiI paNNattA  /  asurakumArANaM
devANaM atthegaiyANaM dasa paliovamAiM ThiI paNNattA  /  vAyaravaNassaikAyANaM
ukkoseNaM dasa vAsasahassAiM ThiI pannattA  /  vANamaMtarANaM devANaM
atthegaiyANaM jahaNNeNa dasa vAsasahassAiM ThiI paNNattA  /  28] kitaneka
asurakumAra devoM kI jaghanyasthiti daza hajAra varSa kI kahI gaI hai|
asurendroM ko chor3akara kitaneka zeSa bhavanavAsI devoM kI jaghanya sthiti daza
hajAra varSa kI kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti daza
palyopama kahI gaI hai| bAdara vanaspatikAyikI jIvoM kI utkRSTa sthiti daza
hajAra varSa kI kahI gaI hai| kitaneka vAnavyantara devoM kI jaghanya sthiti
daza hajAra varSa kI kahI gaI hai  /  69 - sohammIsANesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM
devANaM dasa paliovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  baMbhaloe kappe devANaM ukkoseNaM dasa
sAgarovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  saudharma - IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI
sthiti daza palyopama kahI gaI hai| brahmaloka kalpa meM devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti
daza sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| 70 - laMtae kappe devANaM atthegaiyANaM jahaNNeNaM
dasa sAgarovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  je devA ghosaM sughosaM mahAghosaM
naMdighosaM susaraM maNoramaM rammaM rammagaM ramaNijjaM maMgalAvattaM
baMbhalogavaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA tesiM NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM dasa
sAgarovamAiM ThiI paNNattA, te NaM devA dasahaM addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA,
pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vA, tesiM NaM devANaM dasahiM
vAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe samuppajjai  /  saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je
dasahiM bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhisaMti bujjhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM karissaMti  /  lAntakakalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI jaghanya
sthiti daza sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| vahAM jo deva ghoSa, sughoSa, mahAghoSa,
nandighoSa, susvara, manorama, ramya, ramyaka, ramaNIya, magalAvarta aura
brahmalokAvataMsaka nAma ke vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM
kI utkRSTa sthiti daza sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva daza ardhamAsoM (pAMca
mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa- ni:zvAsa lete haiM, una devoM ke daza
hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai  /  kitaneka
bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM, jo daza bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha
hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa prApta kareMge aura sarva duHkhoM
kA anta kreNge|  //  dazasthAnaka samavAya samApta  //

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleven Stages - Samvaya  **71 - The eleven stages of the Upasaka (lay
devotee) are as follows:**  1. **Darshan Shravak:** One who has attained pure
and unblemished right faith, free from doubts and other vices. 2.
**Kritavratkarma:** One who practices the five Anuvratas (minor vows) and the
three Gunavratas (major vows) for their protection. 3. **Samayik Krit:** One who
performs Samayik (a period of self-reflection and meditation) twice daily. 4.
**Poshohavvasanirat:** One who observes fasts on auspicious days like Ashtami
(eighth day of the lunar fortnight) and Chaturdashi (fourteenth day of the lunar
fortnight). 5. **Diya Bhambhayari Rattim Parimankade:** One who observes
celibacy during the day and limits sexual activity at night. 6. **Diya Vi Rao Vi
Bhambhayari Asinai Viyadbhoji Molikkade:** One who observes celibacy both day
and night, refrains from bathing, avoids food at night, and eats only in well-
lit places during the day. 7. **Sachittparinnae:** One who avoids food and drink
that is prepared with intention. 8. **Aarambparinnae:** One who avoids starting
any new ventures, including farming and business. 9. **Pesparinnae:** One who
avoids initiating any action through servants or others. 10.
**Uddibhattparinnae:** One who avoids any action that is motivated by desire or
attachment. 11. **Samanabhue:** One who has become a Shraman (ascetic) and has
renounced all worldly possessions and attachments.  **This is how the Shraman
(ascetic) becomes a Shramanausho (one who has attained the highest state of
spiritual liberation)!**  **Explanation:**  Those who worship the Shramans
(ascetics) are called Shramanopasakas or Upasakas. Their specific practices and
vows are called pratima (stages). The eleven stages of the Upasaka are as
follows:  1. **Darshan Pratima:** The Upasaka must possess pure and unblemished
right faith, free from doubts and other vices, as it is the foundation of all
virtues. Only with right faith can one practice vows and other virtues. 2.
**Vrat Pratima:** The Upasaka must practice the five Anuvratas and the three
Gunavratas for their protection. 3. **Samayik Pratima:** The Upasaka must
perform Samayik twice daily. 4. **Poshohavvas Pratima:** The Upasaka must
observe fasts on auspicious days like Ashtami and Chaturdashi. 5. **Fifth
Pratima:** The Upasaka observes celibacy during the day and limits sexual
activity at night. 6. **Sixth Pratima:** The Upasaka observes celibacy both day
and night, refrains from bathing, avoids food at night, and eats only in well-
lit places during the day. 7. **Seventh Pratima:** The Upasaka avoids food and
drink that is prepared with intention. 8. **Eighth Pratima:** The Upasaka avoids
starting any new ventures, including farming and business. 9. **Ninth Pratima:**
The Upasaka avoids initiating any action through servants or others. 10. **Tenth
Pratima:** The Upasaka avoids any action that is motivated by desire or
attachment. 11. **Eleventh Pratima:** The Upasaka has become a Shraman and has
renounced all worldly possessions and attachments.  **Note:** Each stage
requires the Upasaka to practice the virtues of the previous stages.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazasthAnaka - samavAya ] ekAdazasthAnaka - samavAya 71 - ekkArasa
uvAsagapaDimAo paNNattAo, taM jahA - daMsaNasAvara 1, kayavvayakamme 2,
sAmAiyakaDe 3, posahovavAsanirae 4, diyA baMbhayArI rattiM parimANakaDe 5, diA
vi rAo vi baMbhayArI asiNAI viyaDabhojI molikaDe 6, sacittapariNNAe 7,
AraMbhapariNNAe 8, pesapariNNAe 9, uddibhattapariNNAe 10, samaNabhUe 11, Avi
bhavai samaNAuso ! [ 29 he AyuSmAn zramaNI ! upAsakoM zrAvakoM kI gyAraha
pratimAeM kahI gaI haiM  /  jaise - darzana zrAvaka 1, kRtavratakarmA 2,
sAmAyikakRta 3, pauSadhopavAsa- nirata 4, divA brahmacArI, rAtri - parimANakRta
5, divA brahmacArI bhI rAtri - brahmacArI bhI, asnAyI vikaTa - bhojI aura
maulikRta 6, sacittaparijJAta 7, ArambhaparijJAta 8. preSyaparijJAta 9,
uddiSTaparijJAta 10, aura zramaNabhUta 11  /  vivecana - jo zramaNoM -
sAdhujanoM kI upAsanA karate haiM, unheM zramaNopAsaka yA upAsaka kahate haiM  /
unake abhigraharUpa vizeSa anuSThAna yA pratijJA ko pratimA kahA jAtA hai|
upAsaka yA zrAvaka kI gyAraha pratimAoM kA svarUpa isa prakAra hai 1 1.
darzanapratimA - meM upAsaka ko zaMkAdi doSoM se rahita nirmala samyagdarzana ko
dhAraNa karanA Avazyaka hai, kyoMki yaha sarva dharmoM kA mUla hai, isake hone
para hI vratAdi kA paripAlana ho sakatA hai, anyathA nahIM  /  yahAM yaha
jJAtavya hai ki uttara- uttara pratimAdhAriyoM ko pUrva-pUrva pratimAoM ke AcAra
kA paripAlana karanA Avazyaka hai  /  2. vratapratimA - meM niraticAra pAMca
aNuvratoM aura unakI rakSArtha tIna guNavratoM kA paripAlana karanA cAhie  /  3.
sAmAyika pratimA meM niyata kAla ke lie pratidina do bArakA parityAga kara
sAmAyika karanA Avazyaka hai| - -prAta: sAyaMkAla sarva sAvadyayoga 4.
pauSadhopavAsapratimA - meM aSTamI, caturdazI Adi parvoM ke dina sarva prakAra
ke AhAra kA tyAga kara upavAsa ke sAtha dharmadhyAna meM samaya bitAnA Avazyaka
hai  /  5. pAMcavIM pratimA kA dhAraka upAsaka dina ko pUrNa brahmacarya kA
pAlana karatA hai aura rAtri meM bhI strI athavA bhoga kA parimANa karatA hai
aura dhotI kI kAMcha (lAMga) nahIM lagAtA hai  /  6. chaThI pratimA kA dhAraka
dina aura rAtri meM brahmacarya kA pAlana karatA hai, arthAt strI-sevana kA
tyAga kara detA hai, yaha snAna bhI nahIM karatA, rAtri - bhojana kA tyAga kara
detA hai aura dina meM bhI prakAzayukta sthAna meM bhojana karatA hai| 7.
sAtavIM pratimA kA dhAraka sacitta vastuoM ke khAna-pAna kA tyAga kara detA hai
/  8. AThavIM pratimA kA dhAraka khetI, vyApAra Adi sarvaprakAra ke Arambha kA
tyAga kara detA hai  /  9. navamI pratimA kA dhAraka sevaka- parijanAdi se bhI
Arambha kArya karAne kA tyAga kara detA hai|

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **30]** [Samavayanga Sutra 10. The holder of the tenth
pratima, for his own benefit, abandons the use of cooked food and drinks. He
does not eat food prepared by others and shaves his head with a razor. **11.**
The holder of the eleventh pratima, abandoning his home, adopts the garb of a
Shraman-Sadhu, stays near the Sadhus, practices the Sadhu Dharma, follows the
rules of Iryasamiti, etc., and when going for alms, says, "Give alms to the
Shraman-Upasak, the holder of the eleventh Shraman-Bhut pratima." He may also
shave his head and may also have his hair cut.  The Sanskrit commentator,
mentioning a different opinion, has designated the abandonment of the beginning
as the ninth, the abandonment of the beginning of the messenger as the tenth,
and the Shraman-Bhut who abandons the designated food as the eleventh pratima.
And in the fifth pratima, it is said to observe the one-night pratima-yoga on
the day of the festival.  In the Digambar scriptures, the abandonment of
attachment is called the fifth pratima and the abandonment of the enjoyment of
women and the adoption of celibacy is called the seventh pratima. And the ninth
pratima is called the abandonment of possessions and the tenth pratima is called
the abandonment of permitted things. In the Svetambar sect, the tradition of
observing the pratima has been discontinued. But in the Digambar sect, it is
still prevalent. The duration of these Shravak pratima is one, two, three, etc.,
months. That is, the duration of the first pratima is one month, the second is
two months, the third is three months, the fourth is four, and so on, the
eleventh is eleven months. According to the Digambar tradition, these are
observed for life.  **72**- The Jyotishchakra is said to be situated at a
distance of eleven hundred and eleven yojanas from the Lokanta. In the island
called Jambudvipa, the Jyotishchakra travels at a distance of eleven hundred and
twenty-one (1121) yojanas from the Mandar mountain.  **73**- The Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavira had eleven Ganadharas - Indrabhuti, Agnibhuti, Vayubhuti,
Vyakt, Sudharma, Mandit, Mauryaputra, Akampit, Achalbhrata, Metary and Prabhas.
**74**- The Mula Nakshatra is said to have eleven stars. The Vimanas of the
Adhastana Graiveyak-Devas are said to be one hundred and eleven (111). The
Mandar mountain is said to be eleven parts less than the height from the earth
to the peak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30] [samavAyAGgasUtra 10. dazavI pratimA kA dhAraka apane nimitta se bane hue
bhakta-pAna ke upayoga kA tyAga karatA hai| AdhAkarmika bhojana nahIM khAtA aura
kSurA se zira muMDAtA hai| 11.gyArahavIM pratimA kA dhAraka upAsaka ghara kA
tyAgakara, zramaNa-sAdhu jaisA veSa dhAraNa kara sAdhuoM ke samIpa rahatA huA
sAdhudharma pAlane kA abhyAsa karatA hai, IryAsamiti Adi kA pAlana karatA hai
aura gocarI ke lie jAne para "gyArahavIM zramaNabhUta pratimA-dhAraka
zramaNopAsaka ke lie bhikSA do" aisA kaha kara bhikSA kI yAcanA karatA hai| yaha
kadAcit zira bhI muMDAtA hai aura kadAcit kezaloMca bhI karatA hai| saMskRta
TIkAkAra ne matAntara kA ullekha karate hue ArambhaparityAga ko navamI,
preSyArambhaparityAga ko dazamI aura uddiSTabhaktatyAgI zramaNabhUta ko
gyArahavIM pratimA kA nirdeza kiyA hai tathA pAMcavI pratimA meM parva ke dina
ekarAtrika pratimA-yoga kA dhAraNa karanA kahA hai| digambara zAstroM meM
sacittatyAga ko pAMcavIM aura strIbhoga tyAga kara brahmacarya dhAraNa karane ko
sAtavIM pratimA kahA gayA hai| tathA navamI pratimA kA nAma parigrahatyAga aura
dazamI pratimA kA nAma anumatityAga pratimA kahA gayA hai| zvetAmbara sampradAya
meM pratimAoM ke dhAraNa-pAlana kI paramparA vicchinna ho gaI hai| kintu di.
sampradAya meM vaha Aja bhI pracalita hai| ina zrAvaka pratimAoM kA kAla eka,
do, tIna Adi mAsoM kA hai| arthAt pahalI pratimA kA kAla eka mAsa, dUsarI kA do
mAsa, tIsarI kA tIna mAsa, cauthI kA cAra yAvat gyArahavIM kA gyAraha mAsa kA
kAla hai| digambara paramparA ke anusAra ina kA pAlana AjIvana kiyA jAtA hai|
_72-logaMtAo ikkArasaehiM ekkArehiM abAhAe joisaMte pnnnntte|jNbuddiive dIve
maMdarassa pavvayassa ekkArasaehiM ekkavIsehiM joyaNasaehiM joise cAraM cri|
lokAnta se gyAraha sau gyAraha yojana ke antarAla para jyotizcakra avasthita
kahA gayA hai| jambUdvIpa nAmaka dvIpa meM mandara parvata se gyAraha sau ikkIsa
(1121) yojana ke antarAla para jyotizcakra saMcAra karatA hai| 73-samaNassa NaM
bhagavao mahAvIrassa ekkArassa gaNaharA hotthA, taM jahA-iMdabhUI aggibhUI
vAyubhUI viatte sohamme maMDie moriyaputte akaMpie ayalabhAe meajje pbhaase|
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke gyAraha gaNadhara the-indrabhUti, agnibhUti,
vAyubhUti, vyakta, sudharma, maMDita, mauryaputra, akampita, acalabhrAtA,
metArya aura prbhaas| 74-mUle nakkhatte ekkArasa tAre pnnnntte|
heTThimagevijjayANaM devANaM ekkArasamuttaraM gevijavimANasataM bhavaitti
mkkhaayN|mNdrennN pavvae dharaNitalAo siharatale ekkArasa bhAgaparihINe
uccatteNaM pnnnntte| mUla nakSatra gyAraha tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai| adhastana
graiveyaka-devoM ke vimAna eka sau gyAraha (111) kahe gaye haiN| mandara parvata
dharaNI-tala se zikhara tala para UMcAI kI apekSA gyArahaveM bhAga se hIna

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eleventh Place Samavaya] [It is said to be 31 in extent. In the Vivechan-Mandar
Meru, which is one lakh yojanas high, one thousand yojanas are within the earth
in its original form, and it is ninety-nine (99) thousand yojanas high above the
earth, and it is ten thousand yojanas wide on the earth and one thousand yojanas
wide at the peak. Since 11 x 9 = 99, therefore, going up eleven yojanas from the
part of the earth which is ten thousand yojanas wide, its width decreases by one
yojana, according to this rule, going up ninety-nine thousand yojanas, the peak
of Mount Sumeru is proved to be one thousand yojanas wide. Keeping this rule in
mind, the width of the peak of Mount Mandar is said to be less than the eleventh
part of the width of its earth. 75-In this Ratnaprabha earth, the state of many
Narakas is said to be eleven Palyopama. In the fifth Dhumaprabha earth, the
state of many Narakas is said to be eleven Sagaropama. The state of many
Asurakumara Devas is said to be eleven Palyopama. In the Saudharma-Ishana
Kalpas, the state of many Devas is said to be eleven Palyopama. In this
Ratnaprabha earth, the state of many Narakas is said to be eleven Palyopama. In
the fifth Dhumaprabha earth, the state of many Narakas is said to be eleven
Sagaropama. The state of many Asurakumara Devas is said to be eleven Palyopama.
In the Saudharma-Ishana Kalpas, the state of many Devas is said to be eleven
Palyopama. 76-In the Lantaka Kalpa, the state of many Devas is said to be eleven
Sagaropama. Those Devas who are born as Devas in the Brahma, Subrahma,
Brahmavart, Brahmaprabha, Brahmakant, Brahmavarna, Brahmalesh, Brahmadhvaj,
Brahmasringa, Brahmasrista, Brahmakut and Brahmoत्तरवतंसक named Vimanas, their
state is said to be eleven Sagaropama. Those Devas inhale or exhale for eleven
half-months (five and a half months). They have a desire for food after eleven
thousand years. There are many Bhavyasiddhika Jivas who will become Siddhas,
Buddhas, liberated from karmas, attain Nirvana and end all suffering after
eleven births. || Eleventh Place Samavaya ends.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazasthAnaka-samavAya] [31 vistAra vAlA kahA gayA hai| vivecana-mandara meru
eka lAkha yojana UMcA haiM, usameM se eka hajAra yojana bhUmi ke bhItara mUla
rUpa meM aura bhUmitala se Upara ninyAnavai (99) hajAra yojana UMcA hai tathA
vaha dharaNItala para daza hajAra yojana vistRta hai aura zikhara para eka
hajAra yojana vistRta hai| yataH 11 x 9 = 99 ninyAnave hote haiM, ataH bhUmitala
ke daza hajAra yojana vistAra vAle bhAga se Upara gyAraha yojana jAne para usakA
vistAra eka yojana kama ho jAtA hai, isa niyama ke anusAra ninyAnavai hajAra
yojana Upara jAne para sumeru parvata kA zikharatala eka hajAra yojana vistRta
siddha ho jAtA hai| isI niyama ko dhyAna meM rakhakara mandara parvata ke
dharaNItala ke vistAra se zikharatala kA vistAra gyArahaveM bhAga se hIna kahA
gayA hai| 75-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM ekkArasa
paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| paMcamIe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM ekkArasa
sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM ekkArasa
paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| sohammIsANesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM devANaM ekkArasa
paliovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI
sthiti gyAraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| pAMcavIM dhUmaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka
nArakoM kI sthiti gyAraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI
sthiti gyAraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM
kI sthiti gyAraha palyopama kahI gaI 76-laMtae kappe atthegaiyANaM devANaM
ekArasa sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA baMbhaM subaMbhaM baMbhAvattaM
baMbhappabhaM baMbhakaMtaM baMbhavaNNaM baMbhalesaM baMbhajjhayaM baMbhasiMgaM
baMbhasiTuM baMbhakUDaM baMbhuttaravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA tesiMNaM
devANaM ekkArasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devA ekkArasaNhaM
addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA nIsasaMti vaa| tesiM NaM
devANaM ekkArasaNhaM vAsasahassANaM AhAraTTe smuppjji| saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA
jIvA je ekkArasahiM bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti
parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| _ lAntaka kalpa meM kitaneka
devoM kI sthiti gyAraha sAgaropama hai| vahA~ para jo deva brahma, subrahma,
brahmAvarta, brahmaprabha, brahmakAnta, brahmavarNa, brahmalezya, brahmadhvaja,
brahmazrRMga, brahmasRSTa, brahmakUTa aura brahmottarAvataMsaka nAma ke vimAnoM
meM deva rUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI sthiti gyAraha sAgaropama kahI
gaI hai| ve deva gyAraha ardhamAsoM (sAr3he pAMca mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA
ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ko gyAraha hajAra varSa ke bAda AhAra kI
icchA hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo gyAraha bhava karake
siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta
hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //  ekAdazasthAnaka samavAya smaapt|

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 32] **Twelve Stations - Samvaya**  77 - Twelve types of Bhikkhu-pratima have
been stated, such as - Ekmaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima, Domaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima,
Trimaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima, Chaumaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima, Panchmaasiki Bhikkhu-
pratima, Chhamaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima, Satmaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima, Prathama
Saptaatraindya Bhikkhu-pratima, Dvitiya Saptaatraindya Bhikkhu-pratima, Tartiya
Saptaatraindya Bhikkhu-pratima, Ahoratraika Bhikkhu-pratima, and Ekaratraika
Bhikkhu-pratima.  [Samvayanga Sutra Twelve Bhikkhu-pratima have been stated,
such as - Ekmaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima, Domaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima, Trimaasiki
Bhikkhu-pratima, Chaumaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima, Panchmaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima,
Chhamaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima, Satmaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima, Prathama Saptaatraindya
Bhikkhu-pratima, Dvitiya Saptaatraindya Bhikkhu-pratima, Tartiya Saptaatraindya
Bhikkhu-pratima, Ahoratraika Bhikkhu-pratima, and Ekaratraika Bhikkhu-pratima.
Discussion - Sadhus who receive food by begging are called Bhikkhus. Among the
general Bhikkhus, those who are special in their concentration and knowledge of
scriptures, who accept specific restrictions to practice specific austerities,
are called Bhikkhu-pratima. This Sutra mentions that there are twelve of them.
The Sanskrit commentator has not shed much light on them, therefore, according
to the seventh Dasha of Dasha-Shruta-Skandha, their description is given
briefly. - Ekmaasiki Bhikkhu-pratima - The Bhikkhu who follows this pratima has
to endure all the insults from Devas, humans, and animals for one month, giving
up attachment to the body. He takes only one Datti of pure, faultless food and
drink for one month. One Datti is the food or water given in one continuous
offering. He does not accept food or drink from the hands of pregnant women,
women with young children, women breastfeeding, or sick women. He goes out for
begging only in the first part of the day and returns after begging in Peda,
Ardha-Peda, etc. He does not stay anywhere for more than one or two nights.
While traveling, wherever the sun sets, he stays there for the night, under a
tree, or in a garden, house, fort, or mountain, on even or uneven ground, in a
cave or valley, whichever is available nearby. If a thorn pricks his foot, or
something gets into his eye, or a weapon enters his body, he does not remove it
with his hand. He does not sleep deeply at night, but spends the night sitting,
taking short naps through sleep-induced trance, contemplating himself, and sets
out in the morning. He does not wash his hands, feet, face, teeth, eyes, or
other parts of his body with cold or hot water. While traveling, if a lion,
cheetah, tiger, or any other ferocious animal, or an elephant, horse, buffalo,
or any other mad animal comes in front of him, he does not take a single step
back, but stands there. When those animals leave, he continues his journey. If
the sun shines brightly where he is sitting, he does not get up and go to a
place with cool shade. Similarly, he does not get up from a cold place and go to
a warm place.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32] dvAdazasthAnaka - samavAya 77 - bArasa bhikkhupaDimAo paNNattAo, taM jahA -
mAsiA bhikkhupaDimA do mAsiA, bhikkhupaDimA, timAsiA bhikkhupaDimA caumAsiA
bhikkhupaDimA paMcamAsiA bhikkhupaDimA chamAsiA bhikkhupaDimA sattamAsiA
bhikkhupaDimA paDhamA sattarAiMdiyA bhikkhupaDimA doccA sattarAiMdiyA
bhikkhupaDimA taccA sattarAiMdiyA bhikkhupaDimA ahorAiyA bhikkhupaDimA, egarAiyA
bhikkhupaDimA | " [ samavAyAGgasUtra bAraha bhikSu - pratimAeM kahI gaI haiM,
jaise- ekamIsakI bhikSu pratimA, do mAsikI bhikSupratimA, tIna mAsikI
bhikSupratimA, cAra mAsikI bhikSupratimA, pAMca mAsikI bhikSupratimA, chaha
mAsikI bhikSupratimA, sAta mAsikI bhikSupratimA, prathama saptarAtraMdivA
bhikSupratimA, dvitIya saptarAtraMdivA pratimA, tRtIya saptarAtraMdivA pratimA,
ahorAAtrika bhikSupratimA aura ekarAtrika bhikSupratimA  /  vivecana -
bhikSAvRtti se gocarI grahaNa karane vAle sAdhuoM ko bhikSu kahA jAtA hai  /
sAmAnya bhikSujanoM meM jo viziSTa saMhanana aura zrutadhara sAdhu hote haiM, ve
saMyama - vizeSa kI sAdhanA karane ke lie jina viziSTa abhigrahoM ko svIkAra
karate haiM, unheM bhikSupratimA kahA jAtA hai  /  prastuta sUtra meM unake
bAraha hone kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| saMskRta TIkAkAra ne unake Upara koI khAsa
prakAza nahIM DAlA hai, ataH dazAzrutaskandha kI sAtavIM dazA ke anusAra unakA
saMkSepa meM varNana kiyA jAtA hai - ekamAAsikI bhikSupratimA - isa pratimA ke
dhArI bhikSu ko kAya se mamatva chor3akara eka mAsa taka AnevAle sabhI deva,
manuSya aura tiryaMca - kRta upasargoM ko sahanA hotA hai| vaha eka mAsa taka
zuddha nirdoSa bhojana aura pAna kI eka-eka datti grahaNa karatA hai| eka vAra
meM akhaMDa dhAra se diye gaye bhojana yA pAnI ko ekadatti kahate haiM  /  vaha
garbhiNI, alpavayaska bacce vAlI, bacce ko dUdha pilAne vAlI, rogiNI Adi striyoM
ke hAtha se bhakta pAna ko grahaNa nahIM krtaa| vaha dina ke prathama bhAga meM
hI gocarI ko nikalatA hai aura peDA- ardhapeDA Adi gocara-caryA karake vApisa A
jAtA hai| vaha kahIM bhI eka yA do rAta se adhika nahIM rahatA  /  vihAra karate
hue jahAM bhI sUrya asta ho jAtA hai, vahIM kisI vRkSa ke nIce, yA udyAna - gRha
meM yA durga meM yA parvata para, sama yA viSama bhUmi para, parvata kI guphA yA
upatyakA Adi jo bhI samIpa upalabdha ho, vahIM Thahara kara rAtri vyatIta karatA
hai| mArga meM calate hue paira meM kAMTA laga jAya yA AMkha meM kirakirI calI
jAya, yA zarIra meM koI astra-vANa Adi praveza kara jAya, to vaha apane hAtha se
nahIM nikAlatA hai| vaha rAtri meM gaharI nIMda nahIM sotA hai, kintu baiThe-
baiThe hI nidrA pracalA dvArA alpakAlika jhapAI lete hue aura Atma-cintana
karate hue rAtri vyatIta karatA hai aura prAtaHkAla hote hI Age cala detA hai|
vaha ThaMDe yA garma jala se apane hAtha paira mukha, dAMta AMkha Adi zarIra ke
aMgoM ko nahIM dhotA hai, vihAra karate hue yadi sAmane se koI zera, cItA,
vyAghra Adi hiMsaka prANI, yA hAthI, ghor3A, bhaiMsA Adi koI unmatta prANI A
jAtA hai to vaha eka paira bhI pIche nahIM haTatA, kintu vahIM khar3A raha jAtA
hai| jaba ve prANI nikala jAte haiM, taba Age vihAra karatA hai| vaha jahAM
baiThA ho vahAM yadi teja dhUpa A jAye to uThakara zItala chAyA vAle sthAna meM
nahIM jaataa| isI prakAra teja ThaMDa vAle sthAna se uThakara garma sthAna para
nahIM jAtA hai  /

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twelve-Place-Samvaya] [33] Thus, he abides by the prescribed limits of the
Agamas. From the second to the seventh-monthly Bhikshu-pratima, all the monks
who hold these pratima must also abide by all the duties of the first-monthly
pratima holder. The difference is that the one who holds the second Bhikshu-
pratima takes two portions of food and drink daily for two months. Similarly,
increasing one portion at a time, the one who holds the seventh-monthly Bhikshu-
pratima takes seven portions of food and drink daily for seven months. The monk
who holds the first seven-night-day Bhikshu-pratima, observes the rule of the
fourth bhakta, standing or sitting outside the village. The one who holds the
second seven-night-day Bhikshu-pratima, observes the rule of the sixth bhakta,
remaining in a posture like utkut (squatting) etc. The one who holds the third
seven-night-day pratima, observes the rule of the eighth bhakta, remaining in a
posture like godohan or virasana etc. for seven days and nights. The one who
holds the day-and-night pratima, observes the rule of the sixth bhakta,
remaining outside the village etc. for 24 hours, with kayotsarga. The one who
holds the one-night Bhikshu-pratima, observes the rule of the eighth bhakta,
remaining with kayotsarga, with pratima yoga, with unblinking eyes. 78 There are
twelve types of sambhoga, as follows: 1. Upadhi-vishayaka sambhoga, 2. Shruta-
vishayaka sambhoga, 3. Bhakta-pana-vishayaka sambhoga, 4. Anjali-pragraha
sambhoga, 5. Dana-vishayaka sambhoga, 6. Nikachana-vishayaka sambhoga, 7.
Abhyutthana-vishayaka sambhoga, 8. Kritikarma-karana sambhoga, 9. Vaiyaavrutya-
karana sambhoga, 10. Samavasarana-sambhoga, 11. Sanni-shidya sambhoga, and 12.
Katha-prabhandhana sambhoga. ||1-2|| Explanation - Sharing food and drink,
exchanging clothes, utensils etc., and observing vinaya, vaiyaavrutya etc.
according to the diksha-paryaya, is called sambhoga. It is said to be of twelve
types, according to the difference in upadhi etc. The monk is ordained to accept
un-assigned and faultless clothes, utensils, food and drink etc. If a monk
accepts impure or faulty upadhi (clothes, utensils etc.) once, twice or thrice,
he remains sambhogik by performing pratyachitta. On the fourth occasion of
accepting impure clothes, utensils etc., even after performing pratyachitta, he
becomes eligible for visambhoga. That is, other monks stop sharing food and
drink with him and separate him from their group. Such a monk is called
visambhogik. (1) As long as a monk abides by the limits of upadhi (clothes,
utensils etc.), then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazasthAnaka-samavAya] [33 isa prakAra vaha Agamokta maryAdA se apanI
pratimA kA pAlana karatA hai| dUsarI se lekara saptamAsikI bhikSupratimA taka ke
dhArI sAdhuoM ko bhI pahalI mAsikI pratimAdhArI ke sabhI kartavyoM kA pAlana
karanA par3atA hai| antara yaha hai ki dUsarI bhikSupratimA vAlA do mAsa taka
pratidina bhakta-pAna kI do-do dattiyAM grahaNa karatA hai| isI prakAra eka-eka
datti bar3hAte hue saptamAsikI bhikSupratimA vAlA sAta mAsa taka bhakta-pAna kI
sAta-sAta dattiyoM ko grahaNa karatA hai| prathama saptarAtriMdivA
bhikSupratimAvAlA sAdhu caturtha bhakta kA niyama lekara grAma ke bAhara khar3e
yA baiThe hue hI samaya vyatIta karatA hai| dUsarI saptarAtriMdivA
bhikSupratimAvAlA SaSThabhakta kA niyama lekara utkuTa (ukaDU) Adi Asana se
avasthita rahatA hai| tIsarI saptarAtrika pratimAvAlA aSTama-bhakta kA niyama
lekara sAta dina-rAta taka godohana yA vIrAsanAdi se avasthita rahatA hai|
ahorAtrika pratimA vAlA apAnaka SaSTha bhakta kA niyama lekara 24 ghaMTe
kAyotsarga se grAmAdi ke bAhara avasthita rahatA hai| ekarAtrika bhikSu
pratimAvAlA apAnaka aSTama bhakta kA niyama lekara animiSa netroM se pratimAyoga
dhAraNa kara kAyotsarga se avasthita rahatA hai| 78 duvAlasavihe sambhoge
paNNatte, taM jahAuvahI sua bhatta pANe aMjalI paggahe tti y| dAyaNe ya nikAe a
abbhuTThANe ti Avare  // 1 //  kiikammassa ya karaNe veyAvaccakaraNe i a|
samosaraNaM saMnisijjA ya kahAe a pabaMdhaNe  // 2 //  sambhoga bAraha prakAra
kahA gayA hai, yathA 1. upadhi-viSayaka sambhoga, 2. zruta-viSayaka sambhoga, 3.
bhakta-pAna-viSayaka sambhoga, 4. aMjalI-pragraha sambhoga, 5. dAna-viSayaka
sambhoga, 6.nikAcana-viSayaka sambhoga,7. abhyutthAna-viSayaka sambhoga, 8.
kRtikarma-karaNa sambhoga,9. vaiyAvRttya-karaNa sambhoga, 10.samavasaraNa-
sambhoga, 11. saMniSadyA sambhoga aura 12. kathA-prabandhana sambhoga  // 1-2 //
vivecana-samAna samAcArI vAle sAdhuoM ke sAtha khAna-pAna karane, vastra-pAtrAdi
kA AdAnapradAna karane aura dIkSA-paryAya ke anusAra vinaya, vaiyAvRttya Adi
karane ko sambhoga kahate haiN| vaha upadhi Adi ke bheda se bAraha prakAra kA
kahA gayA hai| sAdhu ko anuddiSTa evaM nirdoSa vastra-pAtra-tathA bhaktapAnAdi
ke grahaNa karane kA vidhAna hai| yadi koI sAdhu azuddha yA sadoSa upadhi
(vastra-pAtrAdi) ko eka, do yA tIna bAra taka grahaNa karatA hai, taba taka to
vaha prAyazcitta lekara sAmbhogika banA rahatA hai| cauthI bAra azuddha vastra-
pAtrAdi ke grahaNa karane para vaha prAyazcitta lene para bhI visambhoga ke
yogya ho jAtA hai| arthAt anya sAdhu usake sAtha khAna-pAna banda kara dete haiM
aura use apanI maMDalI se pRthak kara dete haiN| aise sAdhu ko visambhogika kahA
jAtA hai| (1) jaba taka koI sAdhu upadhi (vastra-pAtrAdi) viSayaka maryAdA kA
pAlana karatA hai, taba taka

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  34]  **(1)** A *Samvāyik* is considered *Sambhogik* as long as they abide by
the aforementioned rules. If they violate these rules, they become *Visambhogik*
in the manner described earlier. This is *Upadhi*-related *Sambhog-Visambhog*.
**(2)** A *Samvāyik* is considered *Sambhogik* as long as they give
*Śruta*-related teachings, such as reciting scriptures, to another *Sambhogik*
*Samvāyik* in a blameless manner. If they violate this rule and give
*Śruta*-related teachings to a *Pārśvastha* or other *Samvāyik* more than three
times, they become *Visambhogik* as before. This is *Śruta*-related *Sambhog-
Visambhog*.  **(3)** A *Samvāyik* is considered *Sambhogik* as long as they
follow the blameless rules regarding *Bhakta-Pāna* (food and drink). If they
violate these rules, they become eligible for *Visambhog*. This is *Bhakta-
Pāna*-related *Sambhog-Visambhog*.  **(4)** *Samvāyik*s are required to greet
each other with *Vandana* (salutation) and join their hands in *Namaskāra*
(bowing) according to their *Dīkṣā-Paryāya* (stage of initiation). A *Samvāyik*
is considered *Sambhogik* as long as they do not violate this rule and perform
*Vandana* to *Pārśvastha* and other *Samvāyik*s. If they violate this rule, they
become *Visambhogik*. This is *Anjali-Pragraha*-related *Sambhog-Visambhog*.
**(5)** A *Samvāyik* is considered *Sambhogik* as long as they give or offer
their clothes, utensils, etc. to another *Sambhogik* *Samvāyik*. If they violate
this rule and give their clothes, utensils, etc. to a *Visambhogik* or a
*Pārśvastha* or other *Samvāyik*, they become eligible for *Visambhog* in the
manner described earlier. This is *Dāna*-related *Sambhog-Visambhog*.  **(6)**
*Nikācana* means invitation. A *Samvāyik* is considered *Sambhogik* as long as
they invite another *Sambhogik* *Samvāyik* to receive pure clothes, utensils,
*Bhakta-Pāna*, etc. in a proper manner. If they violate this rule and invite a
*Visambhogik* or a *Pārśvastha* or other *Samvāyik* to receive clothes, etc.,
they become eligible for *Visambhog* as before. This is *Nikācana*-related
*Sambhog-Visambhog*.  **(7)** A *Samvāyik* should rise from their seat and
properly greet their *Guru* (spiritual teacher) or a *Samvāyik* with a higher
*Dīkṣā-Paryāya* when they arrive. If a *Samvāyik* violates this rule or rises
for a *Pārśvastha* or other *Samvāyik*, they become eligible for *Visambhog* as
mentioned earlier. This is *Abhyutthāna*-related *Sambhog-Visambhog*.  **(8)** A
*Samvāyik* remains *Sambhogik* as long as they perform *Kṛtika-Karma* (ritual
duties), *Vandana*, etc. in a proper manner. If they violate this rule, they
become eligible for *Visambhog*.  **(9)** *Vaiyāvṛttya-karaṇa* - A *Samvāyik* is
considered *Sambhogik* as long as they properly perform *Vaiyāvṛttya* (attending
to the needs of) elderly, children, sick, etc. *Samvāyik*s. If they violate this
rule, they become eligible for *Visambhog*.  **(10)** *Pravacana-Bhavana* - A
*Samvāyik* is considered *Sambhogik* as long as they properly perform
*Vaiyāvṛttya* (attending to the needs of) elderly, children, sick, etc.
*Samvāyik*s. If they violate this rule, they become eligible for *Visambhog*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34] [samavAyAGgasUtra vaha sAmbhogika hai aura uparyukta maryAdA kA ullaMghana
karane para vaha pUrvokta rIti se visambhogika ho jAtA hai| yaha upadhi-viSayaka
sambhoga-visambhoga hai| (2) jaba taka koI sAdhu anya sambhogika sAdhu ko zruta-
viSayaka vAcanAdi nirdoSa vidhi se detA hai, taba taka vaha sAmbhogika hai aura
yadi vaha ukta maryAdA kA ullaMghana kara pArzvastha Adi sAdhuoM ko tIna bAra se
adhika zruta kI vAcanAdi detA hai, to vaha pUrvavat visAmbhogika ho jAtA hai|
yaha zrutaviSayaka sambhoga-visambhoga hai| (3) jaba taka koI sAdhu bhakta-pAna
viSayaka nirdoSa maryAdA kA pAlana karatA hai, taba taka vaha sAmbhogika aura
pUrvavat maryAdA kA ullaMghana karane para visambhoga ke yogya ho jAtA hai| yaha
bhakta-pAnaviSayaka sambhoga-visambhoga hai| (4) sAdhuoM ko dIkSA-paryAya ke
anusAra paraspara meM vandanA karane aura hAthoM kI aMjali jor3akara namaskArAdi
karane kA vidhAna hai| jaba koI sAdhu isakA ullaMghana nahIM karatA hai, yA
pArzvastha Adi sAdhuoM kI vandanAdi nahIM karatA hai, taba taka vaha sAmbhogika
hai aura ukta maryAdA kA ullaMghana karane para vaha visambhogika kara diyA jAtA
hai| yaha aMjalipragraha-viSayaka sambhoga-visambhoga hai| (5) sAdhu apane pAsa
ke vastra, pAtrAdi ko anya sAmbhogika sAdhu ke lie de sakatA hai, yA detA hai,
taba taka vaha sAmbhogika hai| kintu jaba vaha apane vastra-pAtrAdi upakaraNa
ukta maryAdA kA ullaMghana kara anya visambhogika yA pArzvastha Adi sAdhu ko
detA hai to vaha pUrvokta rIti se visambhoga ke yogya ho jAtA hai| yaha dAna-
viSayaka sambhoga-visambhoga hai| (6) nikAcana kA artha nimaMtraNa denA hai|
jaba koI sAdhu yathAvidhi anya sAmbhogika sAdhu ko zuddha vastra, pAtra yA
bhakta-pAnAdi dene ke lie nimaMtraNa detA hai, taba taka vaha sAmbhogika hai|
jaba vaha maryAdA kA ullaMghana kara anya visambhogika yA pArzvastha Adi sAdhu
ko vastrAdi dene ke lie nimaMtraNa detA hai to vaha pUrvavat visambhoga ke yogya
ho jAtA hai| yaha nikAcana-viSayaka sambhoga-visambhoga hai| (7) sAdhu ko
gurujana yA adhika dIkSAparyAyavAle sAdhu ke Ane para apane Asana se uThakara
usakA yathocita abhivAdana karanA caahiye| jaba koI sAdhu isa maryAdA kA
ullaMghana karatA hai, athavA pArzvastha Adi sAdhu ke lie abhyutthAnAdi karatA
hai, taba vaha pahale kahe anusAra visambhoga ke yogya ho jAtA hai| yaha
abhyutthAna-viSayaka sambhoga-visambhoga hai| (8) kRtikarma vandanAdi yathAvidhi
karane para sAdhu sAmbhogika rahatA hai aura usakI maryAdA kA ullaMghana karane
para vaha visambhoga ke yogya ho jAtA hai| (9) vaiyAvRttyakaraNa-jaba taka sAdhu
vRddha, bAla, rogI Adi sAdhuoM kI yathAvidhi vaiyAvRttya karatA hai taba taka
vaha sAmbhogika hai| usakI maryAdA kA ullaMghana karanepara vaha visambhoga ke
yogya ho jAtA hai| (10) pravacana-bhavana Adi jisa sthAna para aneka sAdhu eka
sAtha milate aura uThate-baiThate haiM,

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelve Positions - Samvaya  [35] The place where the Samvaya takes place
is called Samvasarana.  The act of rising and sitting with the Samvogi Sadhus in
a dignified manner is Samvasarana-related Samvoga.  However, if one sits with
Asambhogi or Parsvastadi Sadhus in that place and violates the rules of conduct,
then they become eligible for Visambhoga as before.  (11)  Rising from one's
seat to ask questions from the Gurus, and rising from the seat to answer when
asked by them, is Sanniṣadya-related Samvoga.  If a Sadhu asks a question from
the Gurus while sitting on their seat, or does not rise from their seat to
answer when asked by them, this violation of conduct makes them eligible for
Visambhoga as before.  (12)  Following the rules of debate and discourse during
discussions of Tattva or Dharmakatha with the Guru is Katha-Prabhandhana-related
Samvoga.  When a Sadhu violates the rules of Katha-Prabhandhana, they become
eligible for Visambhoga.  This is Katha-Prabhandhana-related Samvoga.  In
essence, as long as a Sadhu follows the rules of conduct of their Sangha, they
remain Samvogi, and upon violating them, they become eligible for Visambhoga.
79 - Duvalasavatte Kitikamme Panṇatte, Tam Jaha - Duoyaṇayam Jahajāyam Kitikammṁ
Bārasāvayṁ. Cāusiram Tiguttṁ Ca Dupavesṁ Eganikkhamaṇṁ. ||1||  It has been said
that there are twelve cycles in Kritikarma, such as: In Kritikarma, there are
two Avanta (prostrations), Yathajat form, twelve cycles, four Shironati (bowing
of the head), three Gupti (covering), two Pravesa (entry), and one Niskraman
(exit). ||1||  **Explanation:** The etymology of Kritikarma is - 'Kṛtyate
Chidyate Karma Yena Tat Kritikarma', meaning that the action which cuts or
severs the eight Karmas of Jnanavarana etc. through pure mental action, verbal
action in the form of chanting, and physical action in the form of prostration,
is called Kritikarma.  Therefore, even through the worship of Devas and Gurus,
the destruction of Papkarma takes place, hence worship is called Kritikarma.
This verse in the text is a witness to the fact that there are twelve cycles in
Kritikarma.  Regarding the meaning of cycle, the Sanskrit commentator has only
written this much - 'Dvādaśāvartāḥ Sūtrābhidhānagarbhāḥ Kāyavyāpāraviśeṣāḥ
Yatijanaprasiddhaḥ', meaning - the specific actions of the body, known to the
Sadhu community, which are mentioned in the Sutras, are called cycles.  However,
this does not clarify what this specific action of the body is, which is called
a cycle.  In the Di. tradition, the act of joining both hands and rotating them
from right to left is called a cycle.  These cycles are considered symbolic of
the reflection of the action of the body and speech, which are part of Samayik
Dandak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazasthAnaka - samavAya ] [ 35 usa sthAna ko samavasaraNa kahate haiN| vahAM
para maryAdApUrvaka sAmbhogika sAdhuoM ke sAtha uThanA-baiThanA samavasaraNa-
viSayaka sambhoga hai  /  tathA vahA~ asambhogika yA pArzvasthAdi sAdhuoM ke
sAtha baiThaka kara maryAdA kA ullaMghana karatA hai to vaha pUrvavat visambhoga
ke yogya ho jAtA hai  /  (11) apane Asana se uThakara gurujanoM se prazna
pUchanA, unake dvArA pUche jAne para Asana uThakara uttara denA saMniSadyA-
viSayaka sambhoga hai| yadi koI sAdhu gurujanoM se koI prazna apane Asana para
baiThe-baiThe hI pUchatA hai yA unake dvArA kucha pUche jAne para Asana se na
uThakara baiThe-baiThe hI uttara detA hai, yaha maryAdA kA ullaMghana karane se
pUrvavat visaMbhoga ke yogya ho jAtA hai| to (12) guru ke sAtha tattva - carcA
yA dharmakathA ke samaya vAda - kathA sambandhI niyamoM kA pAlana karanA kathA-
prabandhana- sambhoga hai  /  jaba koI sAdhu kathA - prabandha ke niyamoM kA
ullaMghana karatA hai, taba vaha visambhoga ke yogya ho jAtA hai| yaha kathA -
prabandha - viSayaka saMbhoga hai| kahane kA sArAMza yaha hai ki sAdhu jaba taka
apane saMgha kI maryAdA kA pAlana karatA hai, taba taka sAmbhogika rahatA hai
aura usake ullaMghana karane para visambhoga ke yogya ho jAtA hai  /  79 -
duvAlasAvatte kitikamme paNNatte, taM jahA - duoNayaM jahAjAyaM kitikammaM
bArasAvayaM  /  causiraM tiguttaM ca dupavesaM eganikkhamaNaM  // 1 //
kRtikarma bAraha Avarta vAtA kahA gayA hai, jaise kRtikarma meM do avanata
(namaskAra), yathAjAta rUpa kA dhAraNa, bAraha Avarta, cAra zironati, tIna
gupti, do praveza aura eka niSkramaNa hotA hai  // 1  //  vivecana - kRtikarma
kI nirukti hai - 'kRtyate chidyate karma yena tat kRtikarma' arthAt pariNAmoM kI
jisa vizuddha rUpa mAnasika kriyA se zabdoccAraNa rUpa vAcanika kriyA se aura
namaskAra rUpa kAyika kriyA se jJAnAvaraNAdi ATha karmoM kA karttana yA chedana
kiyA jAye, use kRtikarma kahate haiM  /  ataH deva aura guru kI vandanA ke dvArA
bhI pApakarmoM kI nirjarA hotI hai, ataH vaMdanA ko kRtikarma kahA gayA hai|
prakRta meM yaha gAthA isa bAta kI sAkSI meM dI gaI hai ki kRtikarma meM bAraha
Avarta kiye jAte haiM  /  Avarta kA kyA artha hai, isake viSaya meM
saMskRtaTIkAkAra ne kevala itanA hI likhA hai - 'dvAdazAvartA:
sUtrAbhidhAnagarbhA : kAyavyApAravizeSAH yatijanaprasiddhAH ' arthAt - sAdhujana
prasiddha, sUtrakathita AzayavAle zarIra ke vyApAra - vizeSa ko Avarta kahate
haiN| para isase yaha spaSTa nahIM hotA ki zarIra kA yaha vyApAravizeSa kyA hai,
jise ki Avarta kahate haiM  /  di. paramparA meM donoM hAthoM ko mukulita kara
dAhinI ora se bAyIM ora ghumAne ko Avartta kahA gayA hai  /  yaha Avartamana
vacana kAya kI kriyA ke parAvartana ke pratIka mAne jAte haiM, jo sAmAyika
daMDaka

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[36] The Samvayanga Sutra and the Chaturvinshati stava have twelve beginnings
and endings in total. The special secret of the cycle and the karma should be
known from the tradition-prevalent method. The above verse is also found in the
Mulachara with slight variations in the text. 80-The Vijay Rajdhani of the lord
Vijay, the ruler of the Vijay Dwar in the east of Jambudweep, is said to be
twelve lakh yojanas in length and breadth (from here an uncountable number of
yojanas away). The Baldev named Ram attained divinity after living a full life
of twelve hundred (1200) years. The base of the peak of the Mandar mountain is
twelve yojanas in diameter. The base of the platform of the Jambudweep island is
twelve yojanas in diameter. 81-The shortest night (Sarvajghanya Ratri) is twelve
muhurtas long. Similarly, the shortest day should also be known to be twelve
muhurtas long. 82-Twelve yojanas above the upper stupa (chulika) of the
Sarvarthasiddha Maha-Vimana, a land called Ishatpraagbaar is said to exist. The
Ishatpraagbaar earth is said to have twelve names, such as- Ishat Prithvi, Ishat
Praagbaar Prithvi, Tanu Prithvi, Tanutari Prithvi, Siddhi Prithvi, Siddhalaya,
Mukti, Muktalaya, Brahma, Brahmavatansak, Lokapratipoorna and Lokagrachulika.
83-Twelve palis are said to be the lifespan of the beings living on the earth
with the radiance of the sun. Twelve sagaras are said to be the lifespan of the
beings living on the fifth earth. Twelve palis are said to be the lifespan of
the Asura Kumaras and the Devas. Twelve palis are said to be the lifespan of the
Devas in the Sohammisana Kappas. 1. The twelve cycles of the body, speech and
mind are mentioned. The characteristics of the repetition of the stava,
samayaika, etc. are as follows. || 13 || After rotating both hands three times,
read it again. After reading the Samayaika, rotate both hands, and do the same
in the stava. || 14 || (Action)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36] [samavAyAGgasUtra aura caturviMzatistava ke Adi aura anta meM kiye jAte
haiM jo saba milakara bAraha ho jAte haiN| Avarta aura kRtikarma kA vizeSa
rahasya sampradAya-pracalita paddhati se jAnanA caahie| ukta gAthA svalpa pATha-
bheda ke sAtha di. mUlAcAra meM bhI pAI jAtI hai| 80-vijayA NaM rAyahANI
duvAlasajoyaNasayasahassAiM AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnnttaa| rAme NaM baladeve
duvAlasavAsasayAiM savvAuyaM pAlittA devattaM ge| maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa
cUliyA mUle duvAlasajoyaNAI vikkhaMbheNaM pnnnnttaa| jaMbUdIvassa NaM dIvassa
veiyA mUle duvAlasajoyaNAI vikkhaMbheNaM pnnnnttaa| jambUdvIpa ke pUrvadizAvartI
vijayadvAra ke svAmI vijaya nAmaka deva kI vijayA rAjadhAnI (yahAM se asakhyAta
yojana dUrI para) bAraha lAkha yojana AyAma-viSkambha vAlI kahI gaI hai| rAma
nAma ke baladeva bAraha sau (1200) varSa kI pUrNa Ayu kA pAlana kara devatva ko
prApta hue| mandara parvata kI cUlikA mUla meM bAraha yojana vistAra vAlI hai|
jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa dvIpa kI vedikA mUla meM bAraha yojana vistAra vAlI hai|
81-savvajahaNNiyA rAI duvAlasamuhuttiA pnnnnttaa| evaM divasovi naayvvo|
sarvajaghanya rAtri (saba se choTI rAta) bAraha muhUrta kI hotI hai| isI prakAra
sabase choTA dina bhI bAraha muhUrta kA jAnanA caahie| 82-savvaTThasiddhassa NaM
mahAvimANassa uvarillAo thubhiaggAo duvAlasa joyaNAI uDDhe uppaiyA IsipabbhAra
nAma puDhavI pnnnnttaa| IsipabbhArAe NaM puDhavIe duvAlasa nAmadhejjA paNNattA,
taM jahA-Isi tti vA, IsipabbhArA ti vA, taNU i vA, taNuyatari tti vA, siddhi tti
vA, siddhAlae tti vA, muttI tti vA, muttAlae tti vA, baMbhe tti vA
baMbhavaDiMsae ti vA, lokapaDipUraNe ti vA logaggacUliAI vaa| _ sarvArthasiddha
mahAvimAna kI uparima stUpikA (cUlikA) se bAraha yojana Upara ISatprAgbhAra
nAmaka pRthivI kahI gaI hai| ISatprAgbhAra pRthivI ke bAraha nAma kahe gaye
haiM, jaise-ISat pRthivI, ISat prAgbhAra pRthivI, tanu pRthivI, tanutarI
pRthivI, siddhi pRthivI, siddhAlaya, mukti, muktAlaya, brahma, brahmAvataMsaka,
lokapratipUraNA aura lokaagrcuulikaa| 83-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM bArasa paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| paMcamIe puDhavIe
atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM bArasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM
devANaM atthegaiyANaM bArasa paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| sohammIsANesu kappesu
atthegaiyANaM devANaM bArasa paliovamAI ThiI paNNttA  /  1. kathitA dvAdazAvartA
vpurvcncetsaam| stava-sAmAyikAdyantaraparAvartana lkssnnaaH|| 13  //
tri:sampuTIkRtau hastau bhrAmayitvA ptthetpunH| sAmyaM paThitvA bhrAmayettau
stave'pyetadAcaret  //  14 //  (kriyAkalApa)

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Thirteen-Place Samavaya] [37 In this Ratnaprabha earth, the state of how many
Narakas has been said to be twelve Palyopama. In the fifth Dhumaprabha earth,
the state of how many Narakas has been said to be twelve Sagaropama. The state
of how many Asurakumara Devas has been said to be twelve Palyopama. In the
Saudharma-Ishana Kalpas, the state of how many Devas has been said to be twelve
Palyopama. 84-In the Lantaka Kalpa, the state of how many Devas has been said to
be twelve Sagaropama. Those Devas who are born in the Mahendra, Mahendradhvaj,
Kambu, Kambugreeva, Punkha, Supunkha, Mahapunkha, Punda, Supunda, Mahapuunda,
Narendra, Narendrakanta, and Narendrottaravatsanka named specific Vimanas as
Devas, their excellent state has been said to be twelve Sagaropama. Those Devas
take Aan-Praan or Ucchvas-Nishvas after twelve Ardhamasas (six months). The
desire for food arises for those Devas after twelve thousand years. How many
Bhavya Siddhika Jivas are there who will become Siddha, Buddha, free from
Karmas, attain Parinirvana, and end all sufferings by taking twelve Bhav
Grahanas. || Dwadashasthanaka Samavaya Sampt 12 || Thirteen-Place Samavaya
85-Thirteen Kriyaasthanas have been said, like- Artha Danda, Anartha Danda,
Hinsa Danda, Akasmada Danda, Drishti-Vipariyasa Danda, Mrushavadpratyaya Danda,
Adattadanpratyaya Danda, Adhyatmik Danda, Manpratyaya Danda, Mitradossavatyaya
Danda, Mayapratyaya Danda, Lobhapratyaya Danda, and Iryavahiye. Thirteen
Kriyaasthanas have been said. Like- Artha Danda, Anartha Danda, Hinsa Danda,
Akasmada Danda, Drishti-Vipariyasa Danda, Mrushavadpratyaya Danda,
Adattadanpratyaya Danda, Adhyatmik Danda, Manpratyaya Danda, Mitradossavatyaya
Danda, Mayapratyaya Danda, Lobhapratyaya Danda, and Iryavahiye. Discussion- The
effort that is the cause of Karma Bandha is called Kriya. Its thirteen places or
divisions have been said. The killing of a Jiva for the purpose of one's body,
family, etc. is called Artha Danda. Killing a Jiva without purpose is called
Anartha Danda. Killing a being with premeditation is called Hinsa Danda. Killing
a Jiva accidentally without use is called Akasmada Danda. Killing a Jiva due to
delusion of vision or intellect is called Drishti-Vipariyasa Danda, like killing
a friend thinking he is an enemy. Killing a Jiva due to speaking untruth is
called Mrushavadpratyaya Danda.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 trayodazasthAnaka-samavAya] [37 isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI
sthiti bAraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| pAMcavIM dhUmaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka
nArakoM kI sthiti bAraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI
sthiti bAraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM
kI sthiti bAraha palyopama kahI gaI 84-laMtae kappe atthegaiyANaM devANaM bArasa
sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA mahiMdaM mahiMdajjhayaM kaMbuM kaMbuggIyaM
puMkhaM supuMkhaM mahApuMkhaM puMDaM supuMDaM mahApuMDaM naridaM naridakaMtaM
nariMduttaravaDiMsagaM viMmANaM devattAe uvavaNNA, tesiM NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM
bArasa sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devA bArasaNhaM addhamAsANaM ANamaMti
vA pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA nIsasaMti vaa| tesiM NaM devANaM bArasahiM
vAsasahassehiM AhAraTTe smuppjji| saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je bArasahiM
bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| lAntaka kalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti bAraha
sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| vahAM jo deva mAhendra, mAhendradhvaja, kambu,
kambugrIva, puMkha, supuMkha mahApuMkha, puMDa, supuMDa, mahApuMDa narendra,
narendrakAnta aura narendrottarAvataMsaka nAma ke viziSTa vimAnoM meM devarUpa
se utpanna hote haiM, unakI utkRSTa sthiti bAraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve
deva bAraha ardhamAsoM (chaha mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa-niHzvAsa lete
haiN| una devoM ke bAraha hajAra varSa ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai|
kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo bAraha bhava grahaNa karake siddha
hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura
sarva du:khoM kA anta kreNge|  //  dvAdazasthAnaka samavAya samApta 12 //
trayodazasthAnaka-samavAya 85-terasa kiriyAThANA paNNattA, taM jahA-atthAdaMDe
aNatthAdaDe hiMsAdaNDe akamhAdaMDe diTThivipariAsiAdaMDe musAvAyavattie
adinnAdANavattie ajjhatthie mAnavattie mittadosavattie mAyAvattie lobhavattie
iriyAvahie nAmaM tersme| teraha kriyAsthAna kahe gaye haiN| jaise- arthadaMDa,
anarthadaMDa, hiMsAdaMDa, akasmAdaMDa, dRSTi-viparyAsadaMDa,
mRSAvAdapratyayadaMDa, adattAdAnapratyayadaMDa, AdhyAtmikadaMDa,
mAnapratyayadaMDa, mitradveSa-pratyayadaMDa, mAyApratyayadaMDa,
lobhapratyayadaMDa aura iiryaapthikdNdd| vivecana-karmabandha kI kAraNabhUta
ceSTA ko kriyA kahate haiN| usake teraha sthAna yA bheda kahe gaye haiN| apane
zarIra, kuTumba Adi ke prayojana se jIva-hisA hotI hai, vaha arthadaMDa kahalAtA
hai| binA prayojana jIva-=hiMsA karanA anarthadaMDa kahalAtA hai|
saMkalpapUrvaka kisI prANI ko mAranA hiMsAdaMDa hai| upayoga ke binA akasmAt
jIva-ghAta ho jAnA akasmAdaMDa hai| dRSTi yA baddhi ke vibhrama se jIva-ghAta ho
jAnA dRSTiviparyAsadaMDa hai, jaise mitra ko zatru samajha kara mAra denaa|
asatya bolane ke nimitta se hone vAlA jIva

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **38]** [Samvayanga Sutra] Ghat, Mrusha, Pratyayadanda
are the types of karmic bondage. The killing of a living being due to stealing
is called Adattadanapratyayadanda. Here, Adhyatma refers to the mind. The
suffering caused by the mind due to violence without any external cause or due
to sorrow is called Adhyatmikadanda. The killing of a living being due to pride
is called Manapratyayadanda. Giving excessive punishment to friends, parents,
etc., even for a small offense is called Mitradveshapratyayadanda. The karmic
bondage arising from deception is called Mayapratyayadanda. The karmic bondage
arising from greed is called Lobhapratyayadanda. The karmic bondage arising from
the path of Yoga in the absence of Kshaya is called Iryapathickadanda.  **1**
**86** - In the Saudharma and Isana Kalpas, thirteen Vimana-Prastutas (layers or
strata) are mentioned. The Saudharmavatansaka Vimana is said to be twelve and a
half lakh yojanas in length and breadth. Similarly, the Isanavatansaka Vimana
should also be understood. The total number of species of aquatic, five-sensed,
and Tiryanch-yonic beings is said to be twelve and a half lakh.  **87** - The
thirteen substances of the twelfth previous existence called Pranayu are
mentioned.  **88** - There are thirteen types of Yoga or practices in the
Garbha-j, five-sensed, Tiryanch-yonic beings. These are: Satyamana-prayoga,
Mrushamana-prayoga, Satyamrushamana-prayoga, Asatyamrushamana-prayoga,
Satyavachana-prayoga, Mrushavachana-prayoga, Satyamrushavachana-prayoga,
Asatyamrushavachana-prayoga, Audarikasharira-kayaprayoga, Audarikamishra-
sharira-kayaprayoga, Vaikriyasarira-kayaprayoga, Vaikriyamishra-sharira-
kayaprayoga, and Karman-sharira-kayaprayoga.  **89** - The Surya-mandala (Sun's
sphere) is said to be thirteen parts less than sixty-one parts of a yojana,
i.e., 48/61 yojanas in diameter.  **90** - The number of Neraikas (a type of
celestial being) on the Earth is said to be thirteen Pali-ma (a unit of
measurement) in the Rayan-Prabha (a type of celestial being). The number of
Neraikas on the fifth Earth is said to be thirteen Sagara-ma (a unit of
measurement). The number of Devas (celestial beings) in the Saudharma and Isana
Kalpas is said to be thirteen Pani-ma (a unit of measurement).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38 ] [ samavAyAGgasUtra ghAta mRSApratyayadaMDa hai| adatta vastu ke AdAna se--
corI ke nimitta se hone vAle jIva - ghAta ko adattAdAnapratyayadaMDa kahate haiM
/  adhyAtma kA artha yahAM mana hai| bAharI nimitta ke binA mana meM hiMsA kA
bhAvaM utpanna honA yA zokAdijanita pIr3A honA AdhyAtmikadaMDa hai| abhimAna ke
nimitta se hone vAlA jIvaghAta mAnapratyaya daMDa hai  /  mitrajana - mAtA pitA
Adi kA - alpa aparAdha hone para bhI adhika daMDa denA mitradveSapratyayadaMDa
hai  /  mAyAcAra karane se utpanna hone vAlA mAyApratyayadaMDa kahalAtA hai|
lobha ke nimitta se hone vAlA lobhapratyayadaNDa kahalAtA hai  /  kaSAya ke
abhAva meM kevala yoga ke nimitta se hone vAlA karmabandha IryApathika daMDa
kahalAtA hai| 1 86 - sohammIsANesu kappesu terasa vimANapatthaDA paNNattA  /
sohammavaDiMsage NaM vimANe addhate rasajo yaNasayasahassAiM AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM
paNNatte  /  evaM IsANavaDiM sage vi  /  jalayarapaMciMdiyatirikkhajoNiANaM
addhaterasa jAikula- koDIjoNIpamuhasayasahassAiM paNNattA  /  saudharma - IzAna
kalpoM meM teraha vimAna - prastaTa (prastAra, paTala yA pAthar3e) kahe gaye
haiN| saudharmAvataMsaka vimAna ardha-trayodaza arthAt sAr3he bAraha lAkha
yojana AyAma-viSkambha vAlA hai| isI prakAra IzAnAvataMsaka vimAna bhI jAnanA
cAhie  /  jalacara paMcendriya tiryaMcayonika jIvoM kI jAti kula-koTiyAM sAr3he
bAraha lAkha kahI gaI haiN| 87- pANAussa NaM puvvassa terasa vatthU paNNattA  /
prANAyu nAmaka bArahaveM pUrva ke teraha vastu nAmaka arthAdhikAra kahe gaye
haiM  /  88 - gabbhavakkaMtiapaMcidiyatirikkhajoNiANaM terasavihe paoge
paNNatte, taM jahA - saccamaNapaoge mosamaNapaoge saccAmosamaNapaoge
asaccAmosamaNapaoge saccavaipaoge mosavaipaoge saccAmosavaipaoge
asaccAmosavaipaoge orAliyasarIkAyapaoge orAliyamIsasarIrakAyapaoge
veDavviyasarIrakAyapaoge veDavviyamIsasarIrakAyapaoge kammaiyasarIrakAyapaoge  /
garbhaja paMcendriya tiryagyonika jIvoM meM teraha prakAra ke yoga yA prayoga
hote haiN| jaise - satyamanaHprayoga, mRSAmanaHprayoga, satyamRSAmanaH prayoga,
asatyAmRSAmanaH prayoga, satyavacanaprayoga, mRSAvacanaprayoga,
satyamRSAvacanaprayoga, asatyAmRSAvacanaprayoga, audArikazarIrakAyaprayoga,
audArikamizrazarIrakAyaMprayoga, vaikriyazarIrakAyaprayoga,
vaikriyamizrazarIrakAyaprayoga, aura kArmaNazarIrakAyaprayoga  /  89 -
sUramaMDalaM joyaNeNaM terasehiM egasadvibhAgehiM joyaNassa UNaM paNNatte  /
sUryamaMDala eka yojana ke ikasaTha bhAgoM meM se teraha bhAga 13 / 61 se nyUna
arthAt 48/61 yojana ke vistAra vAlA kahA gayA hai| 90-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe
puDhavIe atthegai ANaM neraiyANaM terasapalio mAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| paMcamIe
puDhavIe atthegaiANaM neraiyANaM terasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI paNNattA  /
sohammIsANesu kappe atthega ANaM devANaM terasa paniovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fourteen-Place Aggregates] [39 In this Ratnaprabha earth, the state of how many
Narakas has been said to be thirteen Palya-upam. In the fifth Dhumaprabha earth,
the state of how many Narakas has been said to be thirteen Sagara-upam. In the
Saudharma-Ishana Kalpas, the state of how many Devas has been said to be
thirteen Palya-upam. 91-In the Lantaka Kalpa, the state of how many Devas has
been said to be thirteen Sagara-upam. Those Devas who are born in the Vajra,
Suvajra, Vajraavarta [Vajra-Prabha], Vajrakant, Vajravarna, Vajraleshya,
Vajrarupa, Vajrashringa, Vajrasrishta, Vajrakoota, Vajrottaraavatansaka, Vaira,
Vairaavarta, Vaira-Prabha, Vairakant, Vairavarna, Vairaleshya, Vairarupa,
Vairashringa, Vairasrishta, Vairakoota, Vairottaraavatansaka; Loka, Lokaavarta,
Lokaprabha, Lokakant, Lokavarna, Lokaleshya, Lokarupa, Lokashringa, Lokasrishta,
Lokakoota and 'Lokoottaraavatansaka named Vimana as Devas, their excellent state
has been said to be thirteen Sagara-upam. They take in-breath and out-breath
after thirteen half-months (six and a half months). After thirteen thousand
years, the desire for food arises in them. _ How many Bhavya-Siddhika Jivas are
there who will become Siddha, Buddha, liberated from karmas, attain Parinirvana
and end all sufferings by taking thirteen Bhav-grahanas. In the Lantaka Kalpa,
the state of how many Devas has been said to be thirteen Sagara-upam. There,
those Devas who are born in the Vajra, Suvajra, Vajraavarta [Vajra-Prabha],
Vajrakant, Vajravarna, Vajraleshya, Vajrarupa, Vajrashringa, Vajrasrishta,
Vajrakoota, Vajrottaraavatansaka, Vaira, Vairaavarta, Vaira-Prabha, Vairakant,
Vairavarna, Vairaleshya, Vairarupa, Vairashringa, Vairasrishta, Vairakoota,
Vairottaraavatansaka; Loka, Lokaavarta, Lokaprabha, Lokakant, Lokavarna,
Lokaleshya, Lokarupa, Lokashringa, Lokasrishta, Lokakoota and
'Lokoottaraavatansaka named Vimana as Devas, their excellent state has been said
to be thirteen Sagara-upam. They take in-breath and out-breath after thirteen
half-months (six and a half months). After thirteen thousand years, the desire
for food arises in them. How many Bhavya-Siddhika Jivas are there who will
become Siddha, Buddha, liberated from karmas, attain Parinirvana and end all
sufferings by taking thirteen Bhav-grahanas. ॥Thirteen-Place Aggregates End॥
[Fourteen-Place Aggregates] 92-Fourteen Bhoogragamas (Jivasamas) have been said,
such as- Sukshma Apariaptka Ekeindriya, Sukshma Pariyaaptka Ekeindriya, Badara
Apariaptka Ekeindriya, Badara Pariyaaptka Ekeindriya, Dveindriya Apariaptka,
Dveindriya Pariyaaptka, Treindriya Apariaptka, Treindriya Pariyaaptka,
Chaturindriya Apariaptka, Chaturindriya Pariyaaptka, Panchendriya Asanjnji
Apariaptka, Panchendriya Asanjnji Pariyaaptka, Panchendriya Sanjnji Apariaptka
and Panchendriya Sanjnji Pariyaaptka. Fourteen Bhoogragamas (Jivasamas) have
been said, such as- Sukshma Apariaptka Ekeindriya, Sukshma Pariyaaptka
Ekeindriya, Badara Apariaptka Ekeindriya, Badara Pariyaaptka Ekeindriya,
Dveindriya Apariaptka, Dveindriya Pariyaaptka, Treindriya Apariaptka, Treindriya
Pariyaaptka, Chaturindriya Apariaptka, Chaturindriya Pariyaaptka, Panchendriya
Asanjnji Apariaptka, Panchendriya Asanjnji Pariyaaptka, Panchendriya Sanjnji
Apariaptka and Panchendriya Sanjnji Pariyaaptka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazasthAnaka-samavAya] [39 isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI
sthiti teraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| pAMcavI dhUmaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka
nArakoM kI sthiti teraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpoM meM
kitaneka devoM kI sthiti teraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| 91-laMtae kappe
atthegaiANaM devANaM terasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA vajjaM suvajaM
vajjAvattaM [vajjappabhaM] vajjakaMtaM vajjavaNNaM vanjalesaM vajarUvaM
vajjasiMgaM vajjasiDeM vanjakUDaM vajjuttaravaDiMsagaM varaM vairAvattaM
vairappabhaM vairakaMtaM vairavaNNaM vairalesaM vairarUvaM vairasiMgaM
vairasiThaM vairakUDaM vairuttaravaDiMsagaM logaM logAvattaM logappabhaM
logakaMtaM logavaNNaM logalesaM logarUvaM logasiMgaM logasiTuM logakUDaM
loguttaravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA tesiM NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM terasa
sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devA terasahiM addhamAsehiM ANamaMti vA
pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA nIsasaMti vA  /  tesiMNaM devANaM terasahiM
vAsasahassehiM AhAraTTe smuppjji| _ saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiA jIvA jeM terasahiM
bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| lAntaka kalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti teraha
sAgarApama kahI gaI hai| vahAM jo deva vajra, suvajra, vajrAvarta [vajraprabha]
vajrakAnta, vajravarNa, vajralezya, vajrarUpa, vajrazRMga, vajrasRSTa,
vajrakUTa, vajrottarAvataMsaka, vaira, vairAvarta, vairaprabha, vairakAnta,
vairavarNa, vairalezya vairarUpa, vairazRMga, vairasRSTa, vairakUTa,
vairottarAvataMsaka; loka, lokAvarta, lokaprabha, lokakAnta, lokavarNa,
lokalezya, lokarUpa, lokazRMga, lokasRSTa, lokakUTa aura 'lokottarAvataMsaka
nAma ke vimAnoM meM deva rUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthita
teraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve teraha ardhamAsoM (sAr3he chaha mAsoM) ke
bAda Ana-prANaucchavAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ke teraha hajAra varSa ke
bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo
teraha bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge,
parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva du:khoM kA anta kreNge|
||tryodshsthaank samavAya smaapt|| caturdazasthAnaka-samavAya 92-cauddasa
bhUaggAmA paNNattA, taM jahA-suhumA apajjattayA, suhumA pajjattayA, bAdarA
apajjattayA, bAdarA pajjattayA, beiMdiyA apajjattayA, beiMdiyA pajjattayA,
teiMdiyA apajjattayA, teiMdiyA pajjattayA, cauridiyA apajattayA, cauriMdiyA
pajjattayA, paMciMdiyA asanni-apajjattayA, paMciMdiyA asanni-pajjattayA,
paMciMdiyA sanni-apajattayA, paMciMdiyA snni-pjjttyaa| caudaha bhUtagrAma
(jIvasamAsa) kahe gaye haiN| jaise- sUkSma aparyAptaka ekendriya, sUkSma
paryAptaka ekendriya, bAdara aparyAptaka ekendriya, bAdara paryAptaka ekendriya,
dvIndriya aparyAptaka, dvIndriya paryAptaka, vIndriya aparyAptaka, trIndriya
paryAptaka, caturindriya aparyAptaka, caturindriya paryAptaka, paMcendriya
asaMjJI aparyAptaka, paMcendriya asaMjJI payAptika, paMcendriya saMjJI
aparyAptaka aura paMcendriya saMjJI pryaaptk|

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[40] **Samvayanga Sutra Discussion - The meaning of the word "Paryapti" is
completeness.** The completeness of the ability to take in the appropriate
pudgalas for food, body, senses, etc. and transform them into their respective
forms is called Paryapti. There are six of them - Ahar Paryapti, Sharira
Paryapti, Indriya Paryapti, Shwasochchwas Paryapti, Bhasha Paryapti and Manah
Paryapti. Those beings who have attained the completeness of all the Paryaptis
that are possible for them are called Paryapti. Those who have not attained that
completeness are called Aparayapti. The time for their fulfillment is
Antarmuhurt. 93-Fourteen Purva Pannatta, like Utpad-Purva, Agrayaniya-Purva,
Veerya Pravad-Purva, Asti-Nasthi Pravad-Purva, Nana Pravad-Purva, Sachcha
Pravad-Purva, Aaya Pravad-Purva, Karma Pravad-Purva, Pratyakhyan Pravad-Purva,
Vidya Anuvad-Purva, Abanjh-Purva, Pranavaay-Purva, Kriya Vishal-Purva and Lok
Bindu Sar-Purva. **Discussion -** The twelfth Anga, Drishtivad, has a section
called Purva. There are fourteen Purvas. Of these, Utpad-Purva describes the
forms of the Paryayas of substances by taking the support of Utpad. Agrayaniya-
Purva describes the substances by taking the support of their Agra-Pariman.
Veerya Pravad-Purva describes the Veerya-Shakti of the substances like Jiva.
Asti-Nasthi Pravad-Purva describes the existence of substances in relation to
their own substance, field, time and state, and the non-existence of substances
in relation to other substances, field, time and state. Nana Pravad-Purva
describes the nature of the different types of knowledge like Mati-Jnana.
Sachcha Pravad-Purva describes in detail the different types of Satya-Samyama,
Satya Vachan and their opposites, Asamyama, Asatya Vachan, etc. Atma Pravad-
Purva proves the existence of the Atma and discusses its different types from
many Nayas. Karma Pravad-Purva proves the existence of Karmas like Jnana
Avarana, etc. and describes in detail their different types and various states
like Uday, Udirana, etc. Pratyakhyan Purva discusses in detail the different
types of Yama-Niyamas, their transgressions and their atonement. Vidya Anuvad-
Purva describes the different types of Mantras and Tantras, the Mahavidyas like
Rohini, etc. and the methods of practicing the small Vidya like Angushth
Prashna, etc. Abanjh-Purva describes the Ati-shayas that never go in vain, the
miracles and the feelings of attachment that bind the beings of the Tirthankara
nature who do good to the beings. In the Di. tradition, this Purva is called
Kalyanavad. Pranayu or Pranavaay-Purva discusses in detail the eight limbs of
Ayurveda, the protector of the lives of beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 40] [samavAyAGgasUtra vivecana-paryApti zabda kA artha pUrNatA hai| AhAra,
zarIra, indriyAdi ke yogya pudgaloM ko grahaNa karake unheM tadrUpa pariNata
karane kI yogyatA kI pUrNatA paryApti kahalAtI hai| ve chaha haiM - AhAra
zarIra, indriya, zvAsocchvAsa, bhASA aura mnHpryaapti| jina jIvoM meM jitanI
paryAptiyAM saMbhava haiM, unakI pUrNatA jinhoMne prApta kara lI hai ve payApti
kahalAte haiN| jinheM vaha pUrNatA prApta nahIM huI ho unheM aparyApta kahate
haiN| inakI pUrti kA kAla antarmuhUrta hai| 93-cauddasa puvvA paNNattA, taM jahA
uppAyapuvvayaggeNiyaM ca taiyaM ca vIriyaM puvvaM  /  atthInatthipavAyaM tatto
nANappavAyaM ca  // 1 //  saccappavAsa puvvaM tatto AyappavAyapuvvaM ca  /  /
kammappavAyapuvvaM paccakkhANaM bhave navamaM  // 2 //  vijjAanuppavAyaM
abaMjhapANAu bArasaM puvvaM  /  tatto kiriyavisAlaM puvvaM taha biMdusAraM ca
// 3 //  caudaha pUrva kahe gaye haiM, jaise utpAda-pUrva, agrAyaNIya-pUrva,
vIryapravAda-pUrva,astinAsti pravAda-pUrva, jJAnapravAda-pUrva,
satyapravAdapUrva, AtmapravAda-pUrva, karmapravAda-pUrva, pratyAkhyAnapravAda-
pUrva, vidyAnuvAda-pUrva, abandhya-pUrva, prANAvAyapUrva, kriyAvizAla-pUrva
tathA lokbindusaar-puurv| vivecana-bArahaveM aMga dRSTivAda kA eka vibhAga pUrva
kahalAtA hai| pUrva caudaha haiN| unameM se utpAda-pUrva meM utpAda kA Azraya
lekara dravyoM ke paryAyoM kI prarUpaNA kI gaI hai| agrAyaNIya-pUrva meM dravyoM
ke agra-parimANa kA Azraya lekara unakA nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| vIryapravAda-
pUrva meM jIvAdi dravyoM ke vIrya-zakti kA nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai|
astinAstipravAda pUrva meM dravyoM ke svadravya-kSetra kAla-bhAva kI apekSA
astitva kA aura paradravya-kSetra-kAla-bhAva kI apekSA nAstitva dharma kA
prarUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| jJAnapravAdapUrva meM matijJAnAdi jJAnoM ke bheda-
prabhedoM kA sasvarUpa nirUpaNa kiyA hai| satyapravAdapUrva meM satya-saMyama,
satya vacana tathA unake bheda-prabhedoM kA aura unake pratipakSI asaMyama,
asatya vacanAdi kA vistRta nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| AtmapravAda-pUrva meM AtmA ke
astitva ko siddha kara usake bheda-prabhedoM kA aneka nayoM se vivecana kiyA
gayA hai| karmapravAda-pUrva meM jJAnAvaraNAdi karmoM kA astitva siddha kara
unake bheda-prabhedoM evaM udaya-udIraNAdi vividha dazAoM kA vistRta varNana
kiyA gayA hai| pratyAkhyAnapUrva meM aneka prakAra ke yama-niyamoM kA, unake
aticAroM aura prAyazcittoM kA vistRta vivecana kiyA gayA hai| vidyAnuvAdapUrva
meM aneka prakAra ke maMtra-taMtroM kA, rohiNI Adi mahAvidyAoM kA, tathA
aMguSThapraznAdi laghuvidyAoM kI vidhipUrvaka sAdhanA kA varNana kiyA gayA hai|
abandhyapUrva meM kabhI vyartha nahIM jAne vAle atizayoM kA, camatkAroM kA tathA
jIvoM kA kalyANa karane vAlI tIrthaMkara prakRti ke bAMdhane vAlI bhAvanAoM kA
varNana kiyA gayA hai| di. paramparA meM isa pUrva kA nAma kalyANavAda diyA gayA
hai| prANAyu yA prANAvAya-pUrva meM jIvoM ke prANoM ke rakSaka Ayurveda ke
aSTAMgoM kA vistRta vivecana kiyA gayA hai|

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fourteen Standpoints - Samavaya] [41 In the Kriyavishal-Purva, a detailed
description of various arts and mental, verbal, and physical actions has been
given. In the Lokabindu-sar, the nature of the world and the subtle analysis of
the three jewels of Dharma, which are the causes of liberation, has been done.
94 - The fourteen objects of the Aggrayaniya Purva have been stated. The
excellent Shraman-sampada of the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira was of fourteen
thousand Sadhus. 95 - Fourteen Jeeva-sthana have been stated in relation to the
means of investigating the purification (elimination) of karma, such as -
Mithyadrishti, Sasayan Samyagdristi, Samyagmithyadrishti, Avirat Samyagdristi,
Viratavirat, Pramattasanyat, Apramattasanyat, Nivrittibaddar, Anivrittibaddar,
Suhumasampray-Upasamaka and Kshapaka, Upashantamoha, Khinamoha, Sayogikevali,
and Ayogikevali. Discussion - The above fourteen Jeeva-sthana, as stated in the
Sutra, are known as Gunasthana. Their brief description is as follows: 1.
Mithyadrishti Gunasthana - From the beginningless time, the vision, interest,
perception, or faith of this Jeeva has been false or opposite due to the arising
of Mithyatvamohaniya karma. Although the intensity and mildness of the passions
of the Jeevas in this Gunasthana vary, their vision remains false or opposite.
They never have a true understanding of their own nature. And until the Jeeva
has a true understanding of himself (Samyagdarshan), he will remain in
Mithyadrishti. However, it has been given the name Gunasthana because the true
qualities of the Jeevas in this place have not been destroyed, but they are not
shining at present due to the covering of karma. 2. Sasadan or Sasvadan
Samyagdristi Gunasthana - When a Bhavy Jeeva becomes Samyagdristi by subduing
the Mithyatvamohaniya karma and the Anantanubandhi passions, he remains in that
state for a moment. Within that time, if the Anantanubandhi passion arises while
some time is left, then he falls according to the rule and enjoys the taste of
the Samyaktva that was vomited for a period of six Avali-kalas. This
intermediate state of falling is called Sasvadan Gunasthana, and this Jeeva has
fallen by enjoying (enjoying) the Samyaktva, therefore it is also called Sasadan
Samyagdristi. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazasthAnaka-samavAya] [41 kriyAvizAla-pUrva meM aneka prakAra kI kalAoM
kA tathA mAnasika, vAcanika aura kAyika kriyA kA sabheda vistRta nirUpaNa kiyA
gayA hai| lokabindusAra meM loka kA svarUpa tathA mokSa ke jAne ke kAraNabhUta
ratnatrayadharma kA sUkSma vivecana kiyA gayA hai| 94-aggeNiassa NaM puvvassa
cauddasa vatthU pnnnnttaa| samaNassaNaM bhagavao mahAvIrassa cauddasa
samaNasAhassIo ukkosiyA samaNasaMpayA hotthaa| agrAyaNIya pUrva ke vastu nAmaka
caudaha arthAdhikAra kahe gaye haiN| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra kI utkRSTa
zramaNa-sampadA caudaha hajAra sAdhuoM kI thii| 95 -kammavisohimaggaNaM paDucca
cauddasa jIvaTThANA paNNattA, taM jahA-micchAdiTThI, sAsAyaNasammadiTThI,
sammAmicchadiTThI, avirayasammadiTThI, virayAvirae, pamattasaMjaya,
appamattasaMjae, niaTTibAyare, aniaTTibAyare, suhumasaMparAe-uvasAmae vA khavae
vA, uvasaMtamohe, khINamohe, sajogI kevalI, ayogI kevlii| karmoM kI vizuddhi
(nirAkaraNa) kI gaveSaNA karane vAle upAyoM kI apekSA caudaha jIvasthAna kahe
gaye haiM, jaise-mithyAdRSTi sthAna, sAsAdana samyagdRSTi sthAna,
samyagmithyAdRSTi sthAna, avirata samyagdRSTi sthAna, viratAvirata sthAna,
pramattasaMyata sthAna, apramattasaMyata sthAna, nivRttibAdara sthAna,
anivRttibAdara sthAna, sUkSmasAmparAya upazAmaka aura kSapaka sthAna,
upazAntamoha sthAna, kSINamoha sthAna, sayogikevalI sthAna aura ayogikevalI
sthaan| vivecana-sUtra-pratipAdita ukta caudaha jIvasthAna guNasthAna ke nAma se
prasiddha haiN| unakA saMkSipta vivaraNa isa prakAra hai 1. mithyAdRSTi
guNasthAna- anAdikAla se isa jIva kI dRSTi, ruci, pratIti yA zraddhA
mithyAtvamohanIya karma ke udaya se mithyA yA viparIta calI A rahI hai| yadyapi
isa guNasthAna vAle jIvoM ke kaSAyoM kI tIvratA aura mandatA kI apekSA saMkleza
kI hInAdhikatA hotI rahatI hai, tathApi unakI dRSTi mithyA yA viparIta hI banI
rahatI hai| unheM AtmasvarUpa kA kabhI yathArtha bhAna nahIM hotaa| aura jaba
taka jIva ko apanA yathArtha bhAna (samyagdarzana) nahIM hogA, taba taka vaha
mithyAdRSTi hI banA rhegaa| phira bhI ise guNasthAna saMjJA dI gaI hai, isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki isa sthAna vAle jIvoM ke yathArtha guNoM kA vinAza nahIM huA
hai, kintu karmoM ke AvaraNa se unakA vartamAna meM prakAza nahIM ho rahA hai|
2.sAsAdana yA sAsvAdana samyagdRSTi guNasthAna-jaba koI bhavya jIva
mithyAtvamohanIya karma kA aura anantAnubaMdhI kaSAyoM kA upazama karake
samyagdRSTi banatA hai, taba vaha usa avasthA meM antarmuhUrta kAla hI rahatA
hai| usa kAla ke bhItara kucha samaya zeSa rahate hue yadi anantAnubandhI kaSAya
kA udaya A jAve, to vaha niyama se giratA hai aura eka samaya se lekara chaha
AvalI.kAla taka vamana kiye gaye samyaktva kA kucha AsvAda letA rahatA hai| isI
madhyavartI patanonmukha dazA kA nAma sAsvAdana guNasthAna hai tathA yaha jIva
samyaktva kI AsAdanA (virAdhanA) karake girA hai, isalie ise sAsAdana
samyagdRSTi bhI kahate haiN|

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **42]** [Samvayanga Sutra 3. The being, while attaining
the state of perfect knowledge (Samyaktv) through the suppression (Upasham) of
the first stage of the right and wrong view (Samyagmithyadristi Gunasthan),
divides the wrong conduct (Mithyatva Karma) into three categories: wrong
conduct, right and wrong view, and perfect knowledge. If the right and wrong
view nature arises immediately after the suppression of perfect knowledge, then
the being becomes one with the view of being half-perfect and half-wrong. This
is called the third stage of right and wrong view (Samyagmithyadristi
Gunasthan). Its duration is only a moment (Antarmuhurt). Therefore, if the
nature of perfect knowledge arises after that, then the being ascends and
becomes perfectly knowledgeable. And if the wrong conduct arises, then the being
falls down and enters the stage of wrong view.  **4.**  **The stage of
uninterrupted perfect view (Aviratsamyagdristi Gunasthan):**  The being becomes
perfectly knowledgeable by suppressing, destroying, or partially destroying the
knowledge-obscuring karma (Darshan Mohaniya Karma). The being attains the true
knowledge of the self, but due to the arising of the conduct-obscuring karma
(Charitra Mohaniya Karma), it becomes unable to walk on the path of truth. Even
though there is a desire to follow the vows and restraints, the being is unable
to even slightly follow them. Due to the lack of renunciation (Virati) or
abandonment, this stage is called the stage of uninterrupted perfect view. This
stage can be attained by the sentient five-sense beings (Panchendriya Paryaptak)
of all four realms.  **5.** **The stage of partially renounced and unrenowned
(Viratavirat Gunasthan):** When the suppression or partial destruction of the
non-rejectable passions (Apratyaakhyan Kashaya) occurs in the aforementioned
perfectly knowledgeable being, then it becomes renounced from the gross sins
like non-violence (Trasahinsa) etc., but remains unrenowned from the subtle sins
like non-violence towards stationary beings (Sthavarahinsa) etc. Such a being,
who is renounced from the country (Deshavirat) and follows the minor vows
(Anuvrat), is called the one who is in the stage of partially renounced and
unrenowned. This stage can only be attained by the perfectly knowledgeable
beings of the human and karma-realm (Karmabhumij) and some of the perfectly
knowledgeable beings of the animal realm (Tiryanch).  **6.** **The stage of
negligent restraint (Pramattasanyat Gunasthan):** When the suppression or
partial destruction of the rejection-covering passion (Pratyaakhyanavaran
Kashaya) occurs in the aforementioned perfectly knowledgeable being, then it
abandons all the gross and subtle sins like non-violence etc. and adopts the
great vows (Mahavrat) or complete restraint (Sakalasanyam). However, due to the
intense arising of the burning passions (Sanjwalan) and the subtle passions
(Nokashayas), some negligence remains. Such a restrained being with negligence
is called the one who is in the stage of negligent restraint.  **7.** **The
stage of non-negligent restraint (Apramattasanyat Gunasthan):** When the burning
passions and subtle passions arise mildly in the aforementioned being, then it
becomes free from all negligence like sensory objects, false speech, sleep etc.
and follows the restraint without negligence. Such a virtuous being is called
the one who is in the stage of non-negligent restraint.  - It is important to
note here that all the stages from the fifth onwards are only for humans, and
all the stages from the seventh onwards are for the beings who are destined for
liberation (Tadbhav Mokshagami) and possess the highest endurance (Uttam
Sanhanan). However, the near-liberated (Nikat Bhavya) can also ascend up to the
eleventh stage. But their fall is inevitable, and they can wander in the world
until the time of the half-cycle of the transformation of matter (Aparadh
Pudgalparavartan Kal).  - There are two categories above the seventh stage: the
suppression category (Upasham श्रेणी) and the destruction category (Kshapak
श्रेणी). The being who suppresses the conduct-obscuring karma ascends the
suppression category. The being who strives to destroy the conduct-obscuring
karma ascends the destruction category. The duration of both categories of
stages is a moment (Antarmuhurt).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42] [samavAyAGgasUtra 3. samyagmithyAdRSTi guNasthAna-prathama bAra upazama
samyaktva prApta karate hue jIva mithyAtva karma ke mithyAtva, samyagmithyAtva
aura samyaktva prakRtirUpa tIna vibhAga karatA hai| inameM se upazama samyaktva
kA antarmuhUrta kAla pUrNa hote hI yadi samyagmithyAtva prakRti kA udaya ho jAtA
hai, to vaha ardhasamyaktvI aura ardhamithyAtvI jaisI dRSTivAlA ho jAtA hai| ise
hI tIsarA samyagmithyAdRSTi guNasthAna kahate haiN| isakA kAla antarmuhUrta hI
hai| ataH usake pazcAt yadi samyaktvaprakRti kA udaya ho jAye to vaha Upara
car3hakara samyaktvI bana jAtA hai aura yadi mithyAtva karma kA udaya ho jAye,
to vaha nIce girakara mithyAdRSTi guNasthAna meM A jAtA hai| 4.
aviratasamyagdRSTi guNasthAna-darzana mohanIya karma kA upazama, kSaya yA
kSayopazama karake jIva samyagdRSTi banatA hai| use AtmasvarUpa kA yathArtha
bhAna ho jAtA hai, phira bhI caritramohanIya karma ke udaya se vaha satya mArga
para calane meM asamartha rahatA hai aura saMyamAdi ke pAlana karane kI bhAvanA
hone para bhI vrata,saMyamAdi kA leza mAtra bhI pAlana nahIM kara pAtA hai|
virati yA tyAga ke abhAva se ise avirata samyagdRSTi guNasthAna kahA jAtA hai|
isa guNasthAna ko cAroM gatiyoM ke saMjJI paMcendriya paryAptaka jIva prApta
kara sakate haiN| 5.viratAvirata guNasthAna-jaba ukta samyagdRSTi jIva ke
apratyAkhyAna kaSAya kA upazama yA kSayopazama hotA hai, taba vaha trasahiMsAdi
sthUla pApoM se virata hotA hai, kintu sthAvarahiMsAdi sUkSma pApoM se avirata
hI rahatA hai| aise dezavirata aNuvratI jIva ko viratAvirata guNasthAna vAlA
kahA jAtA hai| isa guNasthAna ko kevala manuSya aura karmabhUmija koI samyaktvI
tiryaMca prApta kara sakate haiN| 6. pramattasaMyata guNasthAna-jaba ukta
samyagdRSTi jIva ke pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa kaSAya kA upazama . yA kSayopazama hotA
hai, vaha sthUla aura sUkSma sabhI hiMsAdi pApoM kA tyAga kara mahAvratoM ko
arthAt sakalasaMyama ko dhAraNa karatA hai| phira bhI usake saMjvalana aura
nokaSAyoM ke tIvra udaya hone se kucha pramAda banA hI rahatA hai| aise
pramAdayukta saMyamI ko pramattasaMyata guNasthAnavAlA kahA jAtA hai| 7.
apramattasaMyata guNasthAna-jaba ukta jIva ke saMjvalana aura nokaSAyoM kA manda
udaya hotA hai, taba vaha indriya-viSaya, vikathA, nidrAdirUpa sarvapramAdoM se
rahita hokara pramAdahIna saMyama kA pAlana karatA hai| aise sAdhu ko
apramattasaMyata guNasthAna vAlA kahA jAtA hai| - yahAM yaha vizeSa jJAtavya hai
ki pAMcaveM se Upara ke sabhI guNasthAna kevala manuSyoM ke hI hote haiM aura
sAtaveM se Upara ke sabhI guNasthAna uttama saMhanana ke dhAraka tadbhava
mokSagAmI ko hote haiN| hAM, gyArahaveM taka nikaTa bhavya paruSa bhI caDha
sakatA hai| kinta usakA niyama se patana hotA hai aura apArdha
pudgalaparAvartana kAla taka vaha saMsAra meM paribhramaNa kara sakatA hai|
sAtaveM guNasthAna se Upara do zreNI hotI haiM - upazama zreNI aura kSapaka
shrennii| jo jIva cAritramohakarma kA upazama karatA hai, vaha upazama zreNI
car3hatA hai| jo jIva cAritramohakarma kA kSaya karane ke lie udyata hotA hai,
vaha kSapaka zreNI car3hatA hai| donoM zreNI vAle guNasthAnoM kA kAla
antarmuhUrta hai|

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fourteen Stages of Existence (Chaturdasasthanaka-Samavaya)  **8.
Nivrittibadar Gunasthan (Stage of Cessation with Variation):**  A being who has
subdued the seven natures (fourfold passions and the threefold delusion of
perception) reaches this eighth stage. Due to their unique purity, they prepare
to subdue the remaining 21 natures of the delusion of conduct. A being who has
destroyed these seven natures, a Kshayik Samyagdarshi (perfect seer), prepares
for the destruction of these natures. Therefore, the results of beings in this
stage vary, and the passions of the Badar (obstruction) category arise. Hence,
it is called the Nivrittibadar Gunasthan.  **9. Anivrittibadar Gunasthan (Stage
of Cessation without Variation):** All beings who reach this stage
simultaneously have the same results; there is no variation or cessation.
Therefore, it is called the Anivrittibadar Gunasthan. In this stage, a being in
the Upshama (subduing) category abandons all natures except subtle greed, while
a being in the Kshapaka (destroying) category destroys all of them and reaches
the tenth stage.  **10. Sukshmasampray Gunasthan (Stage of Subtle Passion):**
Both categories of beings who reach this stage experience the subtle passion of
greed. Therefore, it is called the Sukshmasampray Gunasthan. The name Sampray
refers to the passion. A being in the Upshama category subdues this subtle greed
and reaches the eleventh stage, while a being in the Kshapaka category destroys
it and reaches the twelfth stage. This difference between the two categories is
why this stage is called "Sukshmasampray Upshama Kshapaka."  **11. Upshantamoha
Gunasthan (Stage of Subdued Delusion):** A being in the Upshama category reaches
this stage after subduing subtle greed at the end of the tenth stage. They have
completely subdued all natures of the delusion karma, hence it is called the
Upshantamoha Gunasthan. This stage lasts for a short internal moment. Upon its
completion, the being falls back to the seventh stage. If their cycle of
existence continues, they may even reach the Mithyatva (false belief) stage.
**12. Kshinamaha Gunasthan (Stage of Diminished Delusion):** A being in the
Kshapaka category, having ascended to the tenth stage, destroys even subtle
greed at its end, becoming Kshinamaha (diminished delusion) and reaching the
twelfth stage. Since their delusion karma is completely diminished or destroyed,
this stage is aptly named "Kshinamaha." This stage also lasts for a short
internal moment. Within it, the being destroys countless times the essence of
the five natures of knowledge-obscuring karma, the nine natures of perception-
obscuring karma, and the five natures of obstruction karma, ultimately
destroying them all and attaining omniscience and perfect perception, reaching
the thirteenth stage.  **13. Sayogikevali Gunasthan (Stage of Omniscience with
Attachments):** In this stage, the Kevali (omniscient) being possesses
attachments. Therefore, it is called the Sayogikevali Gunasthan. These
Sayogijins (omniscient beings with attachments) continue to preach and wander.
When only an internal moment of life remains, they cease their attachments and
enter the fourteenth stage.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazasthAnaka-samavAya] [43 8.nivRttibAdara upazAmaka kSapaka guNasthAna-
anantAnubandhI kaSAyAcatuSka aura darzanamohatrika ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA
upazamana karane vAlA jIva isa AThaveM guNasthAna meM Akara apanI apUrva
vizuddhi ke dvArA cAritramoha kI zeSa rahI 21 prakRtiyoM ke upazamana kI tathA
ukta sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya karane vAlA kSAyika samyagdRSTi jIva ukta
prakRtiyoM ke kSapaNa kI Avazyaka taiyArI karatA hai| ata: isa guNasthAnavAle
samasamayavartI jIvoM ke pariNAmoM meM bhinnatA rahatI hai aura bAdara
saMjvalana kaSAyoM kA udaya rahatA hai, ataH ise nivRttibAdara guNasthAna kahate
haiN| 9. anivRttibAdara upazAmaka kSapaka guNasthAna- isa guNasthAna meM Ane
vAle eka samayavartI sabhI jIvoM ke pariNAma eka se hote haiM, unameM nivRtti yA
bhinnatA nahIM hotI, ataH ise anivRttibAdara guNasthAna kahA gayA hai| isa
guNasthAna meM upazama zreNIvAlA jIva sUkSma lobha ko chor3akara zeSa sabhI
prakatiyoM kA upazama aura kSaSaka zreNIvAlA jIva una sabhI kA kSaya kara DAlatA
hai aura dazaveM guNasthAna meM pahuMcatA hai| 10. sUkSmasAmparAya upazAmaka-
kSapaka guNasthAna- isa guNasthAna meM Ane vAle donoM zreNiyoM ke jIva
sUkSmalobhakaSAya kA vedana karate haiM, ataH ise sUkSmasAmparAya guNasthAna
kahate haiN| samparAya nAma kaSAya kA hai| upazama zreNIvAlA jIva usa
sUkSmalobha kA upazama karake gyArahaveM guNasthAna meM pahuMcatA hai aura
kSapaka zreNI vAlA usakA kSaya karake bArahaveM guNasthAna meM pahuMcatA hai|
donoM zreNiyoM ke isI bheda ko batalAne ke lie isa guNasthAna kA nAma
"sUkSmasAmparAya upazAmaka kSapaka' diyA gayA hai| 11. upazAntamoha guNasthAna-
upazama zreNIvAlA jIva dazaveM guNasthAna ke antima samaya meM sUkSma lobha kA
upazamana kara isa guNasthAna meM AtA hai aura mohakarma kI sabhI prakRtiyoM kA
pUrNa upazama kara dene se yaha upazAntamoha guNasthAna vAlA kahA jAtA hai| isa
guNasthAna kA kAla laghu antarmuhUrta pramANa hai| isake samApta hote hI vaha
nIce giratA huA sAtaveM guNasthAna ko prApta hotA hai| yadi usakA saMsAra-
paribhramaNa zeSa hai, to vaha mithyAtva guNasthAna taka bhI prApta ho jAtA hai|
12.kSINamoha guNasthAna-kSapaka zreNI para car3hA huA dazaveM guNasthAnavI jIva
usake antima samaya sUkSma lobha kA bhI kSaya karake kSINamohI hokara bArahaveM
guNasthAna meM pahuMcatA hai| yataH usakA mohanIyakarma sarvathA kSINa yA naSTa
ho cukA hai, ataH yaha guNasthAna "kSINamoha" isa sArthaka nAma se kahA jAtA
hai| isa guNasthAna kA kAla bhI laghu antarmuhUrta pramANa hai| usake bhItara
yaha jJAnAvaraNa karma kI pAMca, darzanAvaraNa karma kI nau aura antarAya karma
kI pAMca ina unnIsa prakRtiyoM ke sattva kI asaMkhyAta guNI pratisamaya nirjarA
karatA huA antima samaya meM sabakA sarvathA kSaya karake kevalajJAna-darzana ko
prApta kara terahaveM guNasthAna ko prApta hotA hai| 13. sayogikevalI
guNasthAna-isa guNasthAna meM kevalI bhagavAn ke yoga vidyamAna rahate haiM,
ataH isakA nAma sayogikevalI guNasthAna hai| ye sayogijina dharmadezanA karate
hue vihAra karate rahate haiN| jIvana ke antarmuhUrta mAtra zeSa rahane para ye
yogoM kA nirodha karake caudahaveM guNasthAna meM praveza karate haiN|

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[44] The time of this Gunasthan is equal to the time of pronunciation of the
five short vowels 'a, i, u, ṛ, ḷ'. Within this time, they destroy all the
natures residing in the beings of Vedaniya, Ayu, Nama and Gotrakarma, become
pure, Nirjan Siddhas, and reside in the Siddhalaya, becoming the enjoyers of
infinite self-generated happiness. 96-The Jivas of the Bharat and Airavata
regions are said to be fourteen thousand four hundred and one yojanas long, plus
six parts out of nineteen parts of a yojana. Explanation- The shape of the
Bharat and Airavata regions is like a bow with a string attached. The length of
the string is called the Jiva. It is said to be (144011) yojanas long in these
regions. 97-Each Chaturanta Chakravarti king has fourteen jewels, such as:
Striratna, Senapatiratna, Grihapatiratna, Purohitratna, Vardhakiratna,
Ashvaratna, Hastiratna, Ashiratna, Dandaratna, Chakratna, Chhatratna,
Charmaratna, Maniratna and Kakiniratna. Explanation- In animate or inanimate
objects, the object that is the best in its class is called a Ratna. The most
beautiful woman in the time of each Chakravarti becomes his queen and is called
Striratna. Similarly, the chief commander of the army is called Senapatiratna,
the chief storekeeper or treasurer is called Grihapatiratna, the priest who
performs peace ceremonies etc. is called Purohitratna, the carpenter who builds
chariots etc. is called Vardhakiratna, the best horse is called Ashvaratna and
the best elephant is called Hastiratna. These seven are animate Panchendriya
Ratnas. The remaining seven are one-sense body Ratnas. It is said that one
thousand gods serve each Ratna. This proves the excellence of these Ratnas.
98-In this island called Jambudvipa, fourteen great rivers flow from the east
and west into the Lavanasamudra. Such as: Ganga-Sindhu, Rohita-Rohitansha, Hari-
Harikanta, Sita-Sitoda, Narakanta-Narikanta, Suvarnakula-Rupyakuka, Rakta and
Raktavati. Explanation- Of the above seven pairs, the first named great river
flows from the east and the second named great river flows from the west into
the Lavanasamudra. Each pair of rivers flows through the Bharat etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44] [samavAyAGgasUtra 14. ayogikevalI guNasthAna-isa guNasthAna kA kAla 'a, i,
u, R, lu' ina pAMca hrasva akSaroM ke uccAraNakAla-pramANa hai| itane hI samaya
ke bhItara ve vedanIya, Ayu, nAma aura gotrakarma kI sabhI sattA meM sthita
prakRtiyoM kA kSaya karake zuddha niraMjana siddha hote hue siddhAlaya meM jA
virAjate haiM aura ananta svAtmottha sukha ke bhoktA bana jAte haiN|
96-bharaheravayAo NaM jIvAo cauddasa cauddasa joyaNasahassAiM cattAri a eguttare
joyaNasae chacca egUNavIse bhAge joyaNassa AyAmeNaM pnnnnttaao| bharata aura
airavata kSetra kI jIvAeM pratyeka caudaha hajAra cAra sau eka yojana aura eka
yojana ke unnIsa bhAgoM meM se chaha bhAga pramANa lambI kahI gaI haiN|
vivecana-DorI car3he hue dhanuSa ke samAna bharata aura airavata kSetra kA AkAra
hai| usameM DorI rUpa lambAI ko jIvA kahate haiM  /  vaha ukta kSetroM kI
(144011 ) yojana pramANa lambI hai| 97-egamegassa NaM ranno
cAuraMtacakkavaTTissa cauddasa rayaNA paNNattA, taM jahAitthIrayaNe,
seNAvairayaNe, gAhAvairayaNe, purohiyarayaNe, baGkairayaNe, AsarayaNe,
hatthirayaNe, asirayaNo, daNDarayaNe cakkarayaNe, chattarayaNe, cammarayaNe,
maNirayaNe, kaaginnirynne| pratyeka cAturanta cakravartI rAjA ke caudaha-caudaha
ratna hote haiM, jaise- strIratna, senApatiratna, gRhapatiratna, purohitaratna,
vardhakIratna, azvaratna, hastiratna, asiratna, daMDaratna, cakraratna,
chatraratna, carmaratna, maNiratna aura kaakinnirtn| vivecana-cetana yA acetana
vastuoM meM jo vastu apanI jAti meM sarvotkRSTa hotI hai, use rala kahA jAtA
hai| pratyeka cakravartI ke samaya meM jo sarvazreSTha sundara strI hotI hai,
vaha usakI paTTarAnI banatI hai aura use strIratna kahA jAtA hai| isI prakAra
pradhAna senA-nAyaka ko senApatiratna, pradhAna koThArI yA bhaMDArI ko
gRhapatiratna, zAntikarmAdi karAnevAle purohita ko purohitaratna, rathAdi ke
nirmANa karane vAle bar3haI ko vardhakiratna, sarvottama ghor3e ko azvaratna
aura sarvazreSTha hAthI ko hastiratna kahA jAtA hai| ye sAtoM cetana paMcendriya
ratna haiM  /  zeSa sAta ekendriya kAyavAle ratna haiN| kahA jAtA hai ki
pratyeka ratna kI eka-eka hajAra deva sevA karate haiN| isI se una ratnoM kI
sarvazreSThatA siddha hai| 98-jaMbuddIve NaM dIve cauddasa mahAnaIo puvvAvareNa
lavaNasamudaM samappaMti, taM jahAgaMgA, siMdhU, rohiA, rohiaMsA, harI,
harikaMtA, sIA, sIodA, narakaMtA, nArIkaMtA, suvaNNakUlA, ruppakUlA, rA, rttvii|
_ jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa dvIpa meM caudaha mahAnadiyAM pUrva aura pazcima dizA se
lavaNasamudra meM jAkara milatI haiN| jaise- gaMgA-sindhu, rohitA-rohitAMsA,
harI-harikAntA, sItA-sItodA, narakAntA-nArIkAntA, suvarNakUlA-rupyakUlA, raktA
aura rktvtii| vivecana- ukta sAta yugaloM meM se prathama nAma vAlI mahAnadI
pUrva kI ora se aura dUsare nAma vAlI mahAnadI pazcima kI ora se lavaNasamudra
meM praveza karatI hai| nadiyoM kA eka-eka yugala bharata Adi

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fifteen-Place Aggregates] are present in seven realms, respectively. - 99- In
this Ratnaprabha earth, the state of many hell beings is said to be fourteen
*palyopama*. In the fifth earth, the state of some hell beings is said to be
fourteen *sagaropama*. The state of some Asurakumara gods is said to be fourteen
*palyopama*. In the Saudharma and Ishana kalpas, the state of many gods is said
to be fourteen *palyopama*. In the Lantka kalpa, the state of many gods is said
to be fourteen *sagaropama*. - 100- In the Mahashukra kalpa, the state of many
gods is said to be fourteen *sagaropama*. Those gods who are born in the
*Srikanta*, *Srimahit*, *Srisoumanas*, *Lantka*, *Kapishta*, *Mahendra*,
*Mahendrakant*, and *Mahendrouttaravatansak* vimanas, their state is said to be
fourteen *sagaropama*. Those gods breathe or exhale every fourteen half-months
(seven months). They experience the desire for food every fourteen thousand
years. - Many *bhavya-siddhika* beings will attain *siddhi*, become Buddhas, be
liberated from karma, attain *parinirvana*, and end all suffering after
experiencing fourteen *bhava-grahana*. ||End of the Fourteen-Place Aggregates.
[Fifteen-Place Aggregates] 101- Fifteen *parama-hammiya* are present, as
follows: 1. *Ambe*, 2. *Ambarisi*, 3. *Same*, 4. *Sabale*, 5. *Ruddo*, 6.
*Viruddha*, 7. *Kale*, 8. *Mahakale*. 9. *Asipate*, 10. *Dhanu*, 11. *Kumbhe*,
12. *Value*, 13. *Aranni*, 14. *Kharassare*, 15. *Mahaghose*. These are the
fifteen *hammiya*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcadazasthAnaka-samavAya] sAta kSetroM meM kramazaH pravahamAna rahatA hai| -
99-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM cauddasa
paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| paMcamIe NaM puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM
cauddasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM
cauddasa paliovamAiM ThiI paNNttA  /  sohammIsANesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM
devANaM cauddasa paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|lNte kappe devANaM atthegaiyANaM
cauddasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka
nArakoM kI sthiti caudaha palyopama kahI gaI hai| pAMcavI pRthivI meM kinhIM-
kinhIM nArakoM kI sthiti caudaha sAgaropama kI hai| kinhIM-kinhIM asurakumAra
devoM kI sthiti caudaha palyopama kI hai| saudharma aura IzAna kalpoM meM
kitaneka devoM kI sthiti caudaha palyopama kahI gaI hai| lAntaka kalpa meM
kitaneka devoM kI sthiti caudaha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| 100-mahAsukke kappe
devANaM atthegaiyANaM jahaNNeNa cauddasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA
sirikaMtaM sirimahiaMsirisomanasaMlaMtayaMkAviTTha mahiMdaM mahiMdakaMtaM
mahiMduttaravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA tesiM NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM
cauddasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devA cauddasahiM addhamAsehiM
ANamaMti vA pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vaa| tesiM NaM devANaM
cauddasahiM vAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe smuppjji| saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je
cauddasahiM bhavaggahaNehiM sinjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti
parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| _ mahAzukra kalpa meM kitaneka
devoM kI jaghanya sthiti caudaha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| vahAM jo deva zrIkAnta
zrImahita, zrIsaumanasa, lAntaka, kApiSTha, mahendra mahendrakAnta aura
mahendrottarAvataMsaka nAma ke viziSTa vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote
haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti caudaha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva
caudaha ardhamAsoM (sAta mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete
haiN| una devoM ko caudaha hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI
hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo caudaha bhava grahaNa kara siddha
hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parinirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura
sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge| ||cturdshsthaank samavAya smaapt|
paJcadazasthAnaka-samavAya 101-pannarasa paramAhammiA paNNattA, taM jahA 1aMbe
2aMbarisI ceva 3sAme 4 sabaletti Avare  /  5ruddo virudda "kAle a "mahAkAletti
Avare  // 1 //  9asipatte 1degdhaNu 11kumbhe 12vAlue ve 13araNI ti a|
14kharassare 15mahAghose ete pannarasAhiA  // 2 //

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[46] [Samavayanga Sutra has described fifteen supremely unrighteous gods. Amba
1, Ambarishi 2, Shyam 3, Shabal 4, Rudra 5, Uparudra 6, Kal 7, Mahakal 8,
Asipata 9, Dhanu 10, Kumbha 11, Valuka 12, Vaitarani 13, Kharaswar 14, Mahaghosh
15 ||1-2|| Discussion- Although these Amba etc. fifteen are Asura Kumaras,
residents of the Bhavan, yet due to the karmic impressions of their previous
births, they are extremely cruel and cause great suffering. They derive pleasure
only from making the Narakas fight, clash and kill each other, hence they are
called supremely unrighteous. The one who drags the Narakas down from their
place and ties them up and leaves them in the open sky (Ambar) is called Amba.
Ambarishi Asura cuts the Narakas into pieces fit for cooking in a cauldron.
Shyam Asura beats the Narakas with whips and strikes with his hands. Shabal
Asura tears open the bodies of the Narakas and takes out their intestines, fat,
heart etc. Rudra and Uparudra Asura pierce them with spears and hang them up.
Kal Asura cooks the Narakas in a cauldron. Mahakal eats their cooked flesh in
pieces. Asipata Asura takes the form of a Semal tree and when the Narakas come
under its shade, he drops sharp leaves like the edge of a sword on them and
causes them pain. Dhanu Asura pierces the limbs of the Narakas with sharp-
pointed arrows shot from his bow. Kumbha cooks them in cauldrons. Valuka Asura,
by changing the form of his body to the size of a grain of sand, the size of a
Kadamba flower and the size of a thunderbolt, roasts the Narakas like chickpeas
in hot sand in a hot cauldron. Vaitarani Asura takes the form of a hot river
filled with pus, blood etc. and when the Narakas come to drink water due to
thirst, he causes them pain with his caustic hot water and makes them dive in
it. Kharaswar Asura repeatedly makes the Narakas climb and descend on a thorny
Semal tree made of thunderbolt. Mahaghosh Asura encircles the fleeing Narakas
with fences and gives them various kinds of torture. In this way, these cruel
gods go up to the third earth and inflict terrible suffering on the Narakas
there. 102- Nami Nam Arha Pannaaras Dhanui Uddhe Uccatte Nam Hotha. Nami Arhan
Pannaaras Dhanush Unche The. 103- Dhuraahu Nam Bahulapakkhasas Padivaye
Pannaarasbhagam Pannaaras Bhagena Nam Chandasalesam Avareta Nam Chittathi, Tam
Jaha-Padhamae Padham Bhagam, Biaae Dubhagam, Taiyaae Tibhagam, Chauthie
Chaubhagam, Panchmie Panchbhagam, Chatthie Chabhagam, Satamie Satbhagam, Athamie
Athbhagam, Navamie Navbhagam, Dasamie Dasbhagam, Ekkaraasie Ekkaraasbhagam,
Barasie Barasbhagam, Terasie Terasbhagam, Chauddasiye Chauddhasbhagam,
Pannarasesu Pannaarasbhagam, [Avareta Nam Chittathi] Tam Chev Sukkapakkhasas Ya
Uvadansemane Uvadansemane Chittathi, Tam Jaha-Padhamae Padhambhaganjav
Pannarasesu Pannaarasbhagam Uvadansemane Uvadansemane Chittathi. Dhuvrarahu,
from the first day of the dark fortnight, covers the fifteenth part of the
moon's light with fifteen parts of his own light.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46] [samavAyAGgasUtra pandraha parama adhArmika deva kahe gaye haiM amba 1,
ambariSI 2, zyAma 3, zabala 4, rudra 5, uparudra 6, kAla 7, mahAkAla 8, asipatra
9, dhanu 10, kumbha 11, vAlukA 12, vaitaraNI 13, kharasvara 14, mahAghoSa 15  //
1-2 //  vivecana-yadyapi ye amba Adi pandraha asurakumAra jAti ke bhavanavAsI
deva haiM, tathApi ye pUrva 'bhava ke saMskAra se atyanta krUra saMkleza
pariNAmI hote haiM aura inheM nArakoM ko lar3Ane-bhir3Ane aura mArakATa karane
meM hI Ananda AtA hai, isaliye ye parama-adhArmika kahalAte haiN| inameM jo
nArakoM ko khIMca kara unake sthAna se nIce girAtA hai aura bA~dhakara khule
ambara (AkAza) meM chor3a detA hai, use amba kahate haiN| ambariSI asura usa
nAraka ko gaMDAsoM se kATa-kATa kara bhAr3a meM pakAne ke yogya Tukar3e-Tukar3e
karate haiN| zyAma asura kor3oM se tathA hAtha ke prahAra Adi se nArakoM ko
mArate-pITate haiM  /  zabala asura cIra-phAr3a kara nArakiyoM ke zarIra se
AMte, carbI, hRdaya Adi nikAlate haiN| rudra aura uparudra asura bhAle barcha
Adi se cheda kara Upara laTakAte haiN| kAla asura nArakoM ko kaNDu Adi meM
pakAte haiN| mahAkAla unake pake mAMsa ko Tukar3e-Tukar3e karake khAte haiN|
asipatra asura semala vRkSa kA rUpa dhAraNa kara apane nIce chAyA ke nimitta se
Ane vAle nArakoM ko talavAra kI dhAra ke samAna tIkSNa patte girA kara unheM
kaSTa dete haiM  /  dhanu asura dhanuSa dvArA chor3e gaye tIkSNa noka vAle vANoM
se nArakiyoM ke aMgoM kA chedana-bhedana karate haiM  /  kuMbha unheM kuMbha Adi
meM pakAte haiM  /  vAlukA jAti ke asura vAlu ke AkAra kadampa puSpa ke AkAra
aura vajra ke AkAra rUpa se apane zarIra kI vikriyA karake uSNa vAlu meM garma
bhAr3a meM cane ke samAna nArakoM ko bhUnate haiN| vaitaraNI nAmaka asura pIva,
rakta Adi se bharI huI tapta jala vAlI nadI kA rUpa dhAraNa karake pyAsa se
pIr3ita hokara pAnI pIne ko Ane vAle nArakoM ko apane vikriyA vAle kSAra uSNa
jala se pIr3A pahu~cAte haiM aura unako usameM DubakiyA~ lagavAte haiN|
kharasvara vAle asura vajramaya kaMTakAkIrNa semala vRkSa para nArakoM ko bAra-
bAra car3hAte-utArate haiN| mahAghoSa asura bhaya se bhAgate hue nArakiyoM ko
bAr3oM meM ghera kara unheM nAnA prakAra kI yAtanAeM dete haiM  /  isa prakAra
ye kUra deva tIsarI pRthivI taka jA karake vahA~ ke nArakoM ko bhayAnaka kaSTa
dete haiN| 102-NamI NaM arahA pannarasa dhaNUI uDDhe uccatteNaM hotthaa| nami
arhan pandraha dhanuSa UMce the| 103-dhuvarAhU NaM bahulapakkhassa paDivae
pannarasabhAgaM pannarasa bhAgeNaM caMdassalesaM AvarettANa ciTThati, taM jahA-
paDhamAe paDhamaM bhAgaM, bIAe dubhAgaM, taiAe tibhAgaM, cautthIe caubhAga,
paMcamIe paMcabhAgaM, chaTThIe chabhAgaM, sattamIe sattabhAgaM, aTThamIe
aTThabhAgaM, navamIe navabhAga, dasamIe dasabhAgaM, ekkArasIe ekkArasabhAgaM,
bArasIe bArasabhAgaM, terasIe terasabhAgaM, cauddasIe cauddasabhAgaM,
pannarasesu panarasabhAgaM, [AvarettANa ciTThati ] taM ceva sukkapakkhassa ya
uvadaMsemANe uvadaMsemaNe ciTThati,taM jahA-paDhamAe paDhamabhAgaMjAva
pannarasesu panarasabhAgaM uvadaMsemANe uvadaMsemANe citttthti| dhuvrarAhu kRSNa
pakSa kI pratipadA ke dina se candra lezyA ke pandrahaveM-pandrahaveM dIptirUpa
bhAga ko

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fifteen-Place-Samvaya] [47 It keeps covering itself with its dark color. For
example, on the first day, it covers the first part, on the second day, the
second part, on the third day, the third part, on the fourth day, the fourth
part, on the fifth day, the fifth part, on the sixth day, the sixth part, on the
seventh day, the seventh part, on the eighth day, the eighth part, on the ninth
day, the ninth part, on the tenth day, the tenth part, on the eleventh day, the
eleventh part, on the twelfth day, the twelfth part, on the thirteenth day, the
thirteenth part, on the fourteenth day, the fourteenth part, and on the
fifteenth (Amavasya) day, it covers the fifteenth part. The same Dhruva Rahu
shows the fifteenth-fifteenth part of the moon in the bright fortnight. For
example, on the first day, it shows the fifteenth part, on the second day, it
shows the second fifteenth part. In this way, on the full moon day, it shows the
fifteenth part and illuminates the full moon. Discussion - Rahu has been
considered of two types - one Parva Rahu and the other Dhruva Rahu. Of these,
Parva Rahu covers the lunar vehicle after six months on the full moon day, and
Dhruva Rahu, moving four fingers below the lunar vehicle, covers one by one कला
of the moon in the dark fortnight and illuminates one by one कला in the bright
fortnight. The brilliance or light of the moon is called Chandraleshya. 104- Six
constellations are said to be associated with fifteen muhurtas of the moon, such
as - Shatabhishak, Bharani, Ardra, Ashlesha, Swati and Jyestha. These six
constellations remain associated with the moon for fifteen muhurtas. ||1|| 105-
In Chaitra and Asauj months, the day is of fifteen-fifteen muhurtas. Similarly,
in Chaitra and Asauj months, the night is also of fifteen-fifteen muhurtas. 106-
Fifteen arthaadhikars named Vastu have been mentioned for the previous part of
the Vidyaanuvaad. 107- Fifteen types of paths have been mentioned for humans,
such as - Satchamanpath (1), Mosamanpath (2), Satchamosamanpath (3),
Asatchamosamanpath (4), Satchavaipath (5), Mosavaipath (6), Satchamosavaipath
(7), Asatchamosavaipath (8), Oraliyasarirakaypath (9), Oraliyamissarirakaypath
(10), Veuvviyasarirakaypath (11), Veuvviyamissarirakaypath (12),
Aharayasarirakaypath (13), Aharayamissarirakaypath (14), Kammasarirakaypath
(15).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcadazasthAnaka-samavAya] [47 apane zyAmavarNa se AvaraNa karatA rahatA hai|
jaise- pratipadA ke dina prathama bhAga ko, dvitIyA ke dina dvitIya bhAga ko,
tRtIyA ke dina tIsare bhAga ko, caturthI ke dina cauthe bhAga ko, paMcamI ke
dina pAMcaveM bhAga ko, SaSThI ke dina chaThe bhAga ko, saptamI ke dina sAtaveM
bhAga ko, aSTamI ke dina AThaveM bhAga ko, navamI ke dina nauveM bhAga ko,
dazamI ke dina dazaveM bhAga ko, ekAdazI ke dina gyArahaveM bhAga ko, dvAdazI ke
dina bArahaveM bhAga ko, trayodazI ke dina terahaveM bhAga ko, caturdazI ke dina
caudahaveM bhAga ko aura pandraha (amAvasa) ke dina pandrahaveM bhAga ko AvaraNa
karake rahatA hai| vahI dhruvarAhU zukla pakSa meM candra ke pandrahaveM-
pandrahaveM bhAga ko upadarzana karAtA rahatA hai| jaise pratipadA ke dina
pandrahaveM bhAga ko prakaTa karatA hai, dvitIyA ke dina dUsare pandrahaveM
bhAga ko prakaTa karatA hai| isa prakAra pUrNamAsI ke dina pandrahaveM bhAga ko
prakaTa kara pUrNa caMndra ko prakAzita karatA hai| vivecana-rAhu do prakAra ke
mAne gaye haiM - eka parvarAhu aura dUsarA dhruvarAhU  /  inameM se parvarAhu to
pUrNimA ke dina chaha mAsa ke bAda candra-vimAna kA AvaraNa karatA hai aura
dhruvarAhu candravimAna se cAra aMgula nIce vicaratA huA candra kI eka-eka kalA
ko kRSNapakSa meM AvRtta karatA aura zuklapakSa meM ekaeka kalA ko prakAzita
karatA rahatA hai| candramA kI dIpti yA prakAza ko candralezyA kahA jAtA hai|
104- cha NakkhattA pannarasamuhattasaMjuttA, taM jahA satabhisaya bharaNi addA
asalesA sAI tahA jeTThA  /  ete chaNNakkhatA pannarasamuhuttasaMjuttA  // 1 //
chaha nakSatra pandraha muhUrta taka candra ke sAtha saMyoga karake rahane vAle
kahe gaye haiM, jaise- zatabhiSak, bharaNI, ArdrA, AzleSA, svAti aura
jyesstthaa| ye chaha nakSatra pandaha muhUrta taka candra se saMyukta rahate
haiM  // 1 //  105-cettAsoesu NaM mAsesu pannarasamuhutto divaso bhvti| evaM
cettAsoyamAsesu paNNarasamuhuttA rAI bhvti| caitra aura Asauja mAsa meM dina
pandraha-pandraha muhUrta kA hotA hai| isI prakAra caitra aura Asauja mAsa meM
rAtri bhI pandraha-pandraha muhUrta kI hotI hai| 106-vijjAaNuppavAyassa NaM
puvvassa panarasa vatthU pnnnnttaa| vidyAnuvAda pUrva ke vastu nAmaka pandraha
arthAdhikAra kahe gaye haiN| 107-maNUsANaM paNNarasavihe paoge paNNatte, taM
jahA-saccamaNapaoge (1), mosamaNapaoge (2), saccamosamaNapaoge (3),
asaccAmosamaNapaoge (4), saccavaipaoge (5), mosavaipaoge (6), saccamosavaipaoge
(7), asaccAmosavaipaoge (8), orAliasarIrakAyapaoge (9),orAliamIsasarIrakAyapaoge
(10), veubviyasarIrakAyapaoge (11), veuvviamIsasarIrakAyapaoge (12),
AhArayasarIrakAyappaoge (13), AhArayamIsasarIrakAyappaoge (14),
kammayasarIrakAyappaoge (15) /

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  48] - The Samvayanga Sutra mentions fifteen types of actions of humans, such
as: 1. Satyamana: action, 2. Mrishyamana: action, 3. Satyamrishyamana: action,
4. Asatyamrishyamana: action, 5. Satya-vachan: action, 6. Mrishya-vachan:
action, 7. Satyamrishya-vachan: action, 8. Asatyamrishya-vachan: action, 9.
Audarik-sharira-kaya: action, 10. Audarik-mishra-sharira-kaya: action, 11.
Vaikriya-sharira-kaya: action, 12. Vaikriya-mishra-sharira-kaya: action, 13.
Aharak-sharira-kaya: action, 14. Aharak-mishra-sharira-kaya: action, and 15.
Karman-sharira-kaya: action. Discussion - The action, result, or activity of the
soul is called action. Or, the action, result, or activity with which the soul
is intensely connected is called action. The action of thinking about the truth
is called Satyamana: action. Similarly, the action of thinking about falsehood
(untruth) is called Mrishyamana: action, the action of thinking about both truth
and falsehood is called Satyamrishyamana: action, and the action of thinking
about neither truth nor falsehood is called Asatyamrishyamana: action.
Similarly, one should understand the meaning of the four types of speech
actions: truth, falsehood, etc. The action of the body of the sufficient human
and animal is called Audarik-sharira-kaya: action, and the action of the body of
the insufficient human and animal is called Audarik-mishra-sharira-kaya: action.
Similarly, the action of the Vaikriya body of the sufficient gods and hell
beings is called Vaikriya-sharira-kaya: action, and the action of the body of
the insufficient gods and hell beings is called Vaikriya-mishra-sharira-kaya:
action. The action of taking on the Audarik body again while being an Aharak
body is called Aharak-mishra-sharira-kaya: action, and the action of the Aharak
body is called Aharak-sharira-kaya: action. The action of the soul in the state
of disintegration, while leaving one motion and going to another, is called
Karman-sharira-kaya: action. In the state of the Kevali Bhagwan's manifestation,
there is also Karman-sharira-kaya: action in the third, fourth, and fifth times.
- 108 - In this Ratnaprabha earth, the state of many hell beings is said to be
fifteen Palyopama. In the fifth Dhumra-prabha earth, the state of many hell
beings is said to be fifteen Sagaropama. The state of many Asura-kumar gods is
said to be fifteen Palyopama. In the Saudharma and Ishana kalpas, the state of
many gods is said to be fifteen Palyopama. 109 - In the Mahasukha kalpa, the
state of many gods is said to be fifteen Sagaropama. The gods who have the Nand,
Sunand, Nandavatta, Nandaprabha, Nandakanta, Nandavarna, Nandalesa, Nandajjhaya,
Nandasinga, Nandashittha, Nandakuda, and Nanduttarvadinsaga vimanas, their state
is said to be fifteen Sagaropama. These gods inhale, exhale, breathe in, and
breathe out for fifteen half-months. Their food is born from fifteen thousand
years of residence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 48 ] - [ samavAyAGgasUtra manuSyoM ke pandraha prakAra ke prayoga kahe gaye,
jaise- - 1. satyamana: prayoga, 2. mRSAmanaH prayoga, 3. satyamRSAmana:prayoga,
4. asatyAmRSAmana: prayoga, 5. satyavacanaprayoga, 6. mRSAvacanaprayoga, 7.
satyamRSAvacanaprayoga, 8. asatyAmRSAvacanaprayoga, 9.
audArikazarIrakAyaprayoga, 10. audArikamizrazarIrakAyaprayoga, 11.
vaikriyazarIrakAyaprayoga, 12. vaikriyamizrazarIrakAyaprayoga, 13.
AhArakazarIrakAya prayoga 14. AhArakamizrazarIrakAyaprayoga aura 15.
kArmaNazarIrakAyaprayoga  /  vivecana - AtmA ke parispanda kriyA pariNAma yA
vyApAra ko prayoga kahate haiM  /  athavA jisa kriyApariNAma rUpa yoga ke sAtha
AtmA prakarSa rUpa se sambandha ko prApta ho use prayoga kahate haiM  /  satya
artha ke cintana rUpa vyApAra ko satyamana: prayoga kahate  /  isI prakAra mRSA
(asatya) artha ke cintanarUpa vyApAra ko mRSAmana: prayoga, satya asatya rUpa
donoM prakAra ke mizrita artha-cintana rUpa vyApAra ko satyamRSAmanaHprayoga
tathA satya - mRSA se rahita anubhaya artha rUpa cintana ko asatyAmRSAmanaH
prayoga kahate haiM  /  isI prakAra se satya, mRSA Adi cAroM prakAra ke vacana-
prayogoM kA artha jAnanA caahie| audArikazarIra vAle paryAptaka manuSya-
tiryaMcoM ke zarIra - vyApAra ko audArikazarIrakAyaprayoga aura aparyAptaka
unhIM manuSyatiryaMcoM ke zarIra - vyApAra ko audArikamizrazarIrakAyaprayoga
kahate haiM  /  isI prakAra se paryAptaka deva nArakoM ke vaikriya zarIra ke
vyApAra ko vaikriyazarIrakAyaprayoga aura aparyAptaka unhIM deva- nArakoM ke
zarIravyApAra ko vaikriyamizrazarIrakAyaprayoga kahate haiN| AhArakazarIrI
hokara audArika zarIra punaH grahaNa karate samaya ke vyApAra ko AhArakami
zrazarIrakAyaprayoga aura AhArakazarIra ke vyApAra ke samaya
AhArakazarIrakAyaprayoga hotA hai| eka gati ko chor3akara anya gati ko jAte hue
vigrahagati meM jIva ke jo yoga hotA hai, use kArmaNazarIrakAyaprayoga kahate
haiM  /  kevalI bhagavAn ke samudghAta karane kI dazA meM tIsare, cauthe aura
pAMcaveM samaya meM bhI kArmaNazarIrakAyayoga hotA hai  /  - 108 - imIse NaM
rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiANaM neraiyANaM pannarasa paniovamAI ThiI
pnnnnttaa| paMcamIe puDhavIe atthegaiANaM neraiyANaM pannarasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI
paNNattA  /  asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiANaM pannarasa paliovamAiM ThiI
paNNattA  /  sohammIsANesu kappesu atthegaiANaM devANaM pannarasa paliovamAiM
ThiI paNNattA  /  isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti
pandraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| pAMcavI dhUmaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka
nArakoM kI sthiti pandraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM
kI sthiti pandraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka
devoM kI sthiti pandraha palyopama kahI gaI hai  /  109 - mahAsukke kappe
atthegaiANaM devANaM pannarasa sAgarovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  je devA NaMdaM
suNaMdaM NaMdAvattaM NaMdappabhaM NaMdakaMtaM NaMdavaNNaM NaMdalesaM
NaMdajjhayaM NaMdasiMgaM NaMdasiTTha NaMdakUDaM NaMduttaravaDiMsagaM vimANaM
devattAe uvavaNNA tesi NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM pannarasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI
paNNattA  /  te NaM devA paNNarasaNhaM addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA,
ussasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vA  /  tesi NaM devANa paNNarasahiM vAsasahassehiM
AhAraTThe samuppajjai  /

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixteen-Place-Assembly] [49. The Jiva who will become a Siddha, who will become
a Buddha, who will be liberated from karma, who will attain Nirvana, who will
end all suffering, will be born in the fifteen Bhava-grahana. In the Maha-Shukra
Kalpa, the state of many Devas is said to be like fifteen oceans. There, the
Devas who are born in the form of Devas in the special Vimanas called Nand,
Sunand, Nandavart, Nandprabha, Nandkant, Nandvarna, Nandleshya, Nanddhvaj,
Nandshrung, Nandsrusht, Nandkut and Nandottaravatsank, their excellent state is
said to be like fifteen oceans. Those Devas breathe in and out after fifteen
half-months (seven and a half months). Those Devas feel the desire for food
after fifteen thousand years. There are many Bhavyasiddhikas who will become
Siddhas by taking fifteen Bhava-grahana, who will become Buddhas, who will be
liberated from karma, who will attain Nirvana and who will end all suffering. ||
End of the Fifteen-Place-Assembly || Sixteen-Place-Assembly 110-Sixteen Gatha-
Sixteenth Chapter, as follows-1 Time, 2 Vaitaliya, 3 Upsarga Parijna, 4
Striparijna, 5 Narakvibhakti, 6 Mahavirastuti, 7 Kusilparibhasit, 8 Virya, 9
Dharma, 10 Samadhi, 11 Marg, 12 Samovasaran, 13 Yathathatya, 14 Granth, 15
Yamakiya and 16 Sixteenth Gatha. Sixteen Gathas-Sixteen Chapters have been
mentioned. For example-1 Time, 2 Vaitaliya, 3 Upsarga Parijna, 4 Striparijna, 5
Narakvibhakti, 6 Mahavirastuti, 7 Kusilparibhasit, 8 Virya, 9 Dharma, 10
Samadhi, 11 Marg, 12 Samovasaran, 13 Yathathatya, 14 Granth, 15 Yamakiya and 16
Sixteenth Gatha. Discussion-In the first Shruta-Skandha of the Sutra-Kritanga
Sutra, there are sixteen studies named 'Time' etc., hence they are famous as
'Gatha-Shodashak'. The first study deals with the times (principles or
doctrines) of the non-believers etc. The second study is composed in Vaitaliya
verses. Hence it is called Vaitaliya. Similarly, one should know the statement
of the remaining studies. In the Samovasaran study, three hundred and sixty-
three doctrines have been described collectively. The sixteenth study is called
Gatha because it sings the meaning of the aforementioned fifteen studies.
111-Sixteen Kasaya have been mentioned, as follows-Anantanubandhi Krodha,
Anantanubandhi Mana, Anantanubandhi Maya, Anantanubandhi Lobha;
Apratyakhyanakasaya Krodha, Apratyakhyanakasaya Mana, Apratyakhyanakasaya Maya,
Apratyakhyanakasaya Lobha; Pratyakhyanavaran Krodha, Pratyakhyanavaran Mana,
Pratyakhyanavaran Maya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SoDazasthAnaka-samavAya] [49 saMtegaiA bhavasiddhiA jIvA je paNNarasahiM
bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| mahAzukra kalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti
pandraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| vahA~ jo deva nanda, sunanda, nandAvarta,
nandaprabha, nandakAnta, nandavarNa, nandalezya, nandadhvaja, nandazRMga,
nandasRSTa, nandakUTa aura nandottarAvataMsaka nAma ke viziSTa vimAnoM meM deva
rUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti pandraha sAgaropama kahI
gaI hai| ve deva pandraha ardhamAsoM (sAr3he sAta mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa
ucchvAsani:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ko pandraha hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI
icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM, jo pandraha
bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge,
parinirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //
paMcadazasthAnaka samavAya smaapt|| SoDazasthAnaka-samavAya 110-solasa ya gAhA-
solasagA paNNattA,taM jahA-1samae 'veyAlie reuvasaggaparinnA 4itthIpariNNA
panirayavibhattI mahAvIrathuI "kusIlaparibhAsie vIrie dhamme samAhI 11magge 12
samosaraNe 13 AhAtahie 14 gaMthe 15jamaIe gAhAsolasame 16 solsge| solaha gAthA-
SoDazaka kahe gaye haiM  /  jaise-1 samaya, 2 vaitAlIya, 3 upasarga parijJA, 4
strIparijJA, 5 narakavibhakti, 6 mahAvIrastuti, 7 kuzIlaparibhASita, 8 vIrya, 9
dharma, 10 samAdhi, 11 mArga, 12 samavasaraNa, 13 yAthAtathya, 14 grantha, 15
yamakIya aura 16 solahavA~ gaathaa| vivecana-sUtrakRtAMga sUtra ke prathama
zrutaskandha meM 'samaya' Adi nAma vAle solaha adhyayana haiM, isalie ve 'gAthA-
SoDazaka' ke nAma se prasiddha haiN| pahale adhyayana meM nAstika Adi ke samayoM
(siddhAntoM yA matoM) kA pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai| dUsare adhyayana kI racanA
vaitAlIya chandoM meM gaI hai. ataH vaitAlIya kahate haiM  /  isI prakAra zeSa
adhyayanoM kA kathana jAna lenA caahie| samavasaraNa-adhyayana meM tIna sau
tiresaTha matoM kA samuccaya rUpa se varNana kiyA gayA hai| solahaveM adhyayana
ko pUrvokta pandraha adhyayanoM ke artha kA gAna karane se, gAthA nAma se kahA
gayA hai| 111-solasa kasAyA paNNattA, taM jahA-aNaMtANubaMdhI kohe,
aNaMtANubaMdhI mANe, aNaMtANubaMdhI mAyA, aNaMtANubaMdhI lobhe;
apaccakkhANakasAe kohe, apaccakkhANakasAe mANe apaccakkhANa-kasAe mAyA
apaccakkhANakasAe lobhe, paccakkhANAvaraNe kohe, paccakkhANAvaraNe mANe,
paccakkhANAvaraNA mAyA, paccakkhANAvaraNe lobhe; saMjalaNe kohe, saMjalaNe mANe,
saMjalaNA mAyA, saMjalaNe lobhe| _ kaSAya solaha kahe gaye haiM, jaise-
anantAnubandhI krodha, anantAnubandhI mAna, anantAnubandhI mAyA, anantAnubandhI
lobha; apratyAkhyAnakaSAya krodha, apratyAkhyAnakaSAya mAna, apratyAkhyAnakaSAya
mAyA, apratyAkhyAnakaSAya lobhaH pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodha pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa
mAna, pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyA.

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[50] [Samvayanga Sutra] Rejection-covering greed; burning anger, burning pride,
burning delusion and burning greed. 112-The sixteen names of Mount Mandara are
stated, such as 1 Mandara, 2 Meru, 3 Manorama, 4 Sudarsana, 5 Swayamprabha, 6
Giriraja, 7 Ratnoccaya, 8 Priyadarsana, 9 Lokamadhya, 10 Lokanabhi, 11 Artha, 12
Suryavarta, 13 Suryavarna, 14 Uttara, 15 Disadi and 16 Avatansa. [1-2] 113-The
excellent Shraman-sampada of the Parsva Arhat, the man of great gifts, was of
sixteen thousand Shramans. The sixteen objects of the Atmapravada, the former,
are stated. The extent of the two capitals, Chamarabali and Ovariyale, is stated
to be sixteen thousand yojanas in length and breadth. The rise and fall of the
salt sea is stated to be sixteen thousand yojanas. The excellent Shraman-sampada
of the Parsva Arhat, the man of great gifts, was of sixteen thousand Shramans.
The sixteen objects of the Atmapravada, the former, are stated. The extent of
the two capitals, Chamarabali and Ovariyale, is stated to be sixteen thousand
yojanas in length and breadth. The rise and fall of the salt sea is stated to be
sixteen thousand yojanas. 115-In this Ratnaprabha earth, the state of many
Narakas is stated to be sixteen Palyopama. In the fifth Dhumaprabha earth, the
state of many Narakas is stated to be sixteen Sagaropama. The state of many
Asurakumara Devas is stated to be sixteen Palyopama. In the Saudharma-Ishana
kalpas, the state of many Devas is stated to be sixteen Palyopama. In this
Ratnaprabha earth, the state of many Narakas is stated to be sixteen Palyopama.
In the fifth Dhumaprabha earth, the state of many Narakas is stated to be
sixteen Sagaropama. The state of many Asurakumara Devas is stated to be sixteen
Palyopama. In the Saudharma-Ishana kalpas, the state of many Devas is stated to
be sixteen Palyopama. 115-In the Mahasukha kalpa, the state of many Devas is
stated to be sixteen Sagaropama. Those Devas who have the Avatta, Vi-avatta,
Nandiavatta, Mahanandiavatta, Ankusha, Ankushapalamba, Bhada, Subhada,
Mahabhada, Savvaobhada, Bhadduttaravadinsaga vimanas, their state is stated to
be sixteen Sagaropama. Those Devas live for sixteen half-months, or they eat, or
they breathe, or they exhale. Their food is produced by sixteen thousand years
of their life.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 50] [samavAyAGgasUtra pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobha; saMjvalana krodha, saMjvalana
mAna, saMjvalana mAyA aura saMjvalana lobh| 112-maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa solasa
nAmadheyA paNNattA, taM jahA maMdara meru2 maNoraNa sudaMsaNa sayaMpa 5 ya
giriraayaa| rayaNuccaya piyadaMsaNa majjhe logassa nAbhI10 y||1|| atthe11 a
sUriAvatte12 sUriA13 varaNe tti a| uttare14 a disAI a15 vaDiMse16 ia solase  //
2 //  mandara parvata ke solaha nAma kahe gaye haiM, jaise 1 mandara, 2 meru, 3
manorama, 4 sudarzana 5 svayamprabha 6 girirAja, 7 ratnoccaya 8 priyadarzana, 9
lokamadhya, 10 lokanAbhi, 11 artha, 12 sUryAvarta, 13 sUryAvaraNa 14 uttara, 15
dizAdi aura 16 avataMsa  // 1-2 //  113-pAsassa NaM arahato purisAdANIyassa
solasa samaNasAhassIo ukkosiA samaNasaMpadA hotthaa| AyappavAyassa NaM puvvasa
solasa vatthU pnnnnttaa| camarabalINaM ovAriyAleNe solasa joyaNasahassAiM
AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte| lavaNe NaM samudde solasa joyaNasahassAI
ussehaparivuDDIe pnnnntte| puruSAdAnIya pArzva arhat kI utkRSTa zramaNa-sampadA
solaha hajAra zramaNoM kI thii| AtmapravAda pUrva ke vastu nAmaka solaha
arthAdhikAra kahe gaye haiN| camaracaMcA aura balIcaMcA nAmaka rAjadhAniyoM ke
madhya bhAga meM utAra-car3hAva rUpa avatArikAlayana vRttAkAra vAle hone se
solaha hajAra AyAma-viSkambha vAle kahe gaye haiN| lavaNasamudra ke madhya bhAga
meM jala ke utsedha kI vRddhi solaha hajAra yojana kahI gaI hai| 115-imIse NaM
rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM solasa paliovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa|pNcmiie puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM solasa sAgarovamA ThiI
pnnnnttaa|asurkumaaraannN atthegaiANaM solasa paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|
sohammIsANesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM devANaM solasa paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|
isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti solaha palyopama kahI gaI
hai| pA~cavIM dhUmaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakiyoM kI sthiti solaha
sAgaropama kI kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti solaha
palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti
solaha palyopama kahI gaI hai| 115-mahAsukke kappe devANaM atthegaiyANaM solasa
sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa|je devA AvattaM viAvattaM naMdiAvattaM
mahANaMdiAvattaM aMkusaM aMkusapalaMbaM bhadaM subhadaM mahAbhadaM savvaobhadaM
bhadduttaravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA tesi NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM
solasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devA solasaNhaM addhamAsANaM ANamaMti
vA pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vaa| tesi NaM devANaM
solasavAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe smuppjji|

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Seventeenth  **Sthanak** - **Samavay**  [51 **Santegaia** **Bhavasiddhia**
**Jiva** who are freed from sixteen **Bhavaggahana** will become **Siddh**,
**Buddh**, liberated from **Karma**, attain **Parinirvana** and end all
suffering.  In the **Maha-Shukra** Kalpa, the state of many Devas is described
as sixteen **Sagaropama**. The Devas who are born in the **Devarupa** in the
**Vimana** named **Aavarta**, **Vyaavarta**, **Nandyaavarta**, **Maha-
Nandyaavarta**, **Ankusha**, **Ankusha-Pralama**, **Bhadra**, **Subhadra**,
**Maha-Bhadra**, **Sarvato-Bhadra** and **Bhadra-Uttara-Avatamsaka** are said to
have an excellent state of sixteen **Sagaropama**. These Devas take **Aan-
Praan** or **Uchchvasa-Nishvasa** after sixteen **Ardha-Masa** (eight months).
They feel the desire for food after sixteen thousand years.  There are many
**Bhavyasiddhika** **Jiva** who will become **Siddh**, **Buddh**, liberated from
**Karma**, attain **Parinirvana** and end all suffering after sixteen
**Bhavas**.  || **Shodasha-Sthanak Samavay**  **Sampt** ||  ## Seventeenth
**Sthanak** - **Samavay** 116  Seventeen types of **Asanjayama** are described,
such as:  1. **Prithvikaaya-Asanjayama** 2. **Aap-kaaya-Asanjayama** 3. **Tejas-
kaaya-Asanjayama** 4. **Vayu-kaaya-Asanjayama** 5. **Vanaspati-kaaya-
Asanjayama** 6. **Dwi-Indriya-Asanjayama** 7. **Tri-Indriya-Asanjayama** 8.
**Chatur-Indriya-Asanjayama** 9. **Panch-Indriya-Asanjayama** 10. **Ajiva-kaaya-
Asanjayama** 11. **Preksha-Asanjayama** 12. **Upeksha-Asanjayama** 13.
**Avahatu-Asanjayama** 14. **App-Marjana-Asanjayama** 15. **Mana-Asanjayama**
16. **Vachana-Asanjayama** 17. **Kaaya-Asanjayama**  ## Seventeenth **Sthanak**
- **Samavay** 117  Seventeen types of **Sanjayama** are described, such as:  1.
**Prithvikaaya-Sanjayama** 2. **Aap-kaaya-Sanjayama** 3. **Tejas-kaaya-
Sanjayama** 4. **Vayu-kaaya-Sanjayama** 5. **Vanaspati-kaaya-Sanjayama** 6.
**Dwi-Indriya-Sanjayama** 7. **Tri-Indriya-Sanjayama** 8. **Chatur-Indriya-
Sanjayama** 9. **Panch-Indriya-Sanjayama** 10. **Ajiva-kaaya-Sanjayama** 11.
**Preksha-Sanjayama** 12. **Upeksha-Sanjayama** 13. **Avahatu-Sanjayama** 14.
**Pramarjana-Sanjayama** 15. **Mana-Sanjayama** 16. **Vachana-Sanjayama** 17.
**Kaaya-Sanjayama**  **Discussion:**  **Samiti** or careful observance of
**Yama-Niyamas** is called **Sanjayama**, and not observing **Sanjayama** is
called **Asanjayama**. Protecting **Eka-Indriya** **Prithvi-kaaya** etc.
**Jiva**, not causing them any harm, is **Prithvi-kaaya** etc. **Jiva** related
**Sanjayama**, and causing them harm is **Asanjayama**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazasthAnaka-samavAya] [51 saMtegaiA bhavasiddhiA jIvA je solasahiM
bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| mahAzukra kalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti
solaha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| vahAM jo deva Avarta, vyAvarta, nandyAvarta,
mahAnandyAvarta, aMkuza, aMkuzapralamba, bhadra, subhadra, mahAbhadra,
sarvatobhadra aura bhadrottarAvataMsaka nAma ke vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna
hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti solaha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva
solaha ardhamAsoM (ATha mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa niHzvAsa lete haiN|
una devoM ko solaha hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai|
kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo solaha bhava karake siddha hoMge,
buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parinirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva
duHkhoM kA anta kreNge| ||ssoddshsthaank samavAya smaapt|| saptadazasthAnaka-
samavAya 116 -sattarasavihe asaMjame paNNatte, taM jahA-puDhavikAyaasaMjame
AukAyaasaMjame teukAyaasaMjame vAukAyaasaMjame vaNassaikAyaasaMjame
beiMdiyaasaMjame teiMdiyaasaMjame cauriMdiyaasaMjame paMciMdiaasaMjame
ajIvakAyaasaMjame pehAasaMjame uvehAasaMjame avahaTuasaMjame appamajjaNAasaMjame
maNaaMsajame vaiasaMjame kaayasNjme| sattaraha prakAra kA asaMyama kahA gayA
hai, jaise- 1. pRthavIkAya-asaMyama, 2. apkAya-asaMyama, 3. tejaskAya-asaMyama,
4. vAyukAya-asaMyama,5. vanaspatikAya-asaMyama, 6.dvIndriya-asaMyama,7.
trIndriyaasayama,8.caturindriya-asaMyama, 9.paMcendriya-asaMyama,10.ajIvakAya-
asaMyama, 11. prekSA-asaMyama, 12. upekSA-asaMyama, 13. apahatya-asaMyama, 14.
apramArjanA-asaMyama, 15. mana:-asaMyama, 16. vacanaasaMyama, 17. kaay-asNym|
117-sattarasavihe saMjame paNNatte, taM jahA-puDhavikAyasaMjame AukAyasaMjame
teukAyasaMjame vAukAyasaMjame vaNassaikAyasaMjame beiMdiyasaMjame
teiMdiyasaMjame cauridiyasaMjame paMciMdiyasaMjame ajIvakAyasaMjame pehAsaMjame
uvehAsaMjame avahaTusaMjame pamajjaNAsaMjame maNasaMjame vaisaMjame kaaysNjme|
sattaraha prakAra kA saMyama kahA gayA hai| jaise-1. pRthivIkAya-saMyama, 2.
apkAya-saMyama, 3. tejaskAya-saMyama, 4. vAyukAya-saMyama, 5. vanaspatikAya-
saMyama, 6. dvIndriya-saMyama, 7. trIndriya-saMyama, 8. caturindriya-saMyama,9.
paMcendriya-saMyama, 10.ajIvakAya-saMyama, 11. prekSA-saMyama,12. upekSA
saMyama, 13. apahRtya-saMyama, 14. pramArjanA-saMyama, 15. manaH-saMyama, 16.
vacana-saMyama, 17. kaay-sNym| vivecana-samiti yA sAvadhAnIpUrvaka yama-niyamoM
ke pAlana karane ko saMyama kahate haiM aura saMyama kA pAlana nahIM karanA
asaMyama hai| ekendriya pRthviIkAya Adi jIvoM kI rakSA karanA, unako kisI
prakAra se bAdhA nahIM pahu~cAnA pRthivIkAyAdi jIvaviSayaka saMyama hai aura
unako bAdhAdi pahu~cAnA unakA

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 52] [Samvayanga Sutra] **Ajiva-Asanyama** is the lack of restraint regarding
non-living, material things. Restraint regarding non-living, material things is
**Ajiva-Samyama**, and not restraining oneself regarding them is **Ajiva-
Asanyama**.  **Preksha-Samyama** is the proper observation of place, tools,
clothes, vessels, etc. Not observing them, or observing them improperly, is
**Preksha-Asanyama**.  **Upeksha-Samyama** is not having attachment or aversion
towards enemies and friends, and towards desirable and undesirable things, but
maintaining equanimity towards them. Having attachment, aversion, etc. towards
them is **Upeksha-Asanyama**.  Neglecting the practices of restraint, or
engaging in the actions of unrestraint, is **Upeksha-Asanyama**.  **Apahritya-
Samyama** is the proper disposal of excrement, urine, etc. in a lifeless place,
keeping living beings away. Improper disposal is **Apahritya-Asanyama**.
**Pramardhana-Samyama** is the proper cleaning of vessels, etc. Cleaning them
improperly, or not cleaning them, is **A-pramardhana-Asanyama**.  **Samyama** of
mind, speech, and body is the proper conduct of these. Improper conduct is
**Asanyama** of these.  ## 118 The **Manushottara** mountain is said to be 1721
yojanas high. All the **Velandhara** and **Anuvelandhara** Nagaraj's dwelling
mountains are said to be 1721 yojanas high. The highest peak of the **Lavana**
sea is said to be 17,000 yojanas high.  ## 119 From the very beautiful and
desirable parts of this **Ratnaprabha** earth, a little higher than 17,000
yojanas, the **Tirthi** movement of the **Charana** (wandering) **Riddhi-dhari**
(possessing wealth) **Munis** begins, towards the islands of **Nandisvara**,
**Ruchka**, etc.  ## 120 The **Tiginchikuta** mountain, the place of the
**Asurindra** (king of Asuras) **Asuraraj** **Chamar**, is said to be 1721
yojanas high. The **Ruchikendra** mountain, the place of the **Asurindra**
**Bali**, is said to be 1721 yojanas high.  ## 121 There are 17 types of death,
such as: 1. **Avichimrana** 2. **Avidhimrana** 3. **Atyantikamrana** 4.
**Balamrana** 5. **Vashartamrana** 6. **Antahshalyamrana** 7. **Tadbhavamrana**
8. **Balamrana** 9. **Panditamrana** 10. **Balapanditamrana** 11. **Chhaumatt-
hamrana** 12. **Kevalimrana** 13. **Vehanasamrana** 14. **Giddhapitthamrana**
15. **Bhattapacchakkhanamrana** 16. **Inginimrana** 17. **Paovagamnamrana**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 52] [ samavAyAGgasUtra asaMyama hai| ajIva paudgalika vastuoM sambandhI saMyama
ajIva - saMyama hai aura unakI ayatanA karanA ajIva - asaMyama hai| sthAna,
upakaraNa, vastra - pAtrAdi kA vidhipUrvaka paryavekSaNa karanA prekSAsaMyama
hai aura unakA paryavekSaNa nahIM karanA, yA avidhipUrvaka karanA prekSA-
aMsayama hai| zatru-mitra meM aura iSTa-aniSTa vastuoM meM rAga-dveSa nahIM
karanA, kintu unameM madhyasthabhAva rakhanA upekSAsaMyama hai| unameM rAga-
dveSAdi karanA upekSA-asaMyama hai| saMyama ke yogoM kI upekSA karanA athavA
asaMyama ke kAryoM meM vyApAra karanA upekSAasaMyama hai| jIvoM ko dUra kara
nirjIva bhUmi meM vidhipUrvaka mala-mUtrAdi kA paraThanA apahRtya - saMyama hai
aura avidhi se paraThanA apahRtya - asaMyama hai| pAtrAdi kA vidhipUrvaka
pramArjana karanA pramArjanA saMyama hai aura avidhipUrvaka karanA yA na karanA
apramArjanA- asaMyama hai| mana, vacana, kAya kA prazasta vyApAra karanA unakA
saMyama hai aura aprazasta vyApAra karanA unakA asaMyama hai|  /  118 -
mANusuttare NaM pavvae sattarasa ekkIvIse joyaNasae uDDhaM uccatteNaM pnnnntte|
savvesiM piNaM velaMdhara- aNuvelaMdharaNAgarAINaM AvAsapavvayA
sattarasaekkavIsAiM joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM paNNattA  /  lavaNe NaM
samudde sattarasa joyaNasahassAiM savvaggeNaM paNNatte  /  mAnuSottara parvata
sattaraha sau ikkIsa ( 1721) yojana UMcA kahA gayA hai| sabhI velandhara aura
anuvelandhara nAgarAjoM ke AvAsa parvata sattaraha sau ikkIsa yojana UMce kahe
gaye haiM  /  lavaNasamudra kI sarvAgra zikhA sattaraha hajAra yojana UMcI kahI
gaI hai| 119 - imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe bahusamaramaNijjAo bhUmibhAgAo
sAtiregAI sattarasa joyaNasahassAiM uDDhaM uppatittA tato pacchA cAraNANaM tiriA
gatI pavattati  /  isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke bahusama ramaNIya bhUmi bhAga se
kucha adhika sattaraha hajAra yojana Upara jAkara (uTha kara ) tatpazcAt cAraNa
RddhidhArI muniyoM kI nandIzvara, rucaka Adi dvIpoM meM jAne ke lie tirdhI gati
hotI 1 120 - camarassa NaM asuriMdassa asuraraNNo tigiMchikUDe uppAyapavvae
sattarasa ekkavIsAI joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM paNNatte  /  balissa NaM
asuriMdassa ruagiMde uppAyapavvae sattarasa ekkavIsAiM joyaNasayAI uDDhaM
uccatteNaM paNNatte  /  asurendra asurarAja camara kA tigiMchikUTa nAmaka utpAta
parvata sattaraha sau ikkIsa ( 1721 ) yojana UMcA kahA gayA hai| asurendra bali
kA rucakendra nAmaka utpAta parvata sattaraha sau ikkIsa (1721) yojana UMcA kahA
gayA hai| 121 - sattarasavihe maraNe paNNatte  /  taM jahA - AvIImaraNe
ohimaraNe AyaMtiyamaraNe balAyamaraNe vasaTTamaraNe aMtosallamaraNe
tabbhavamaraNe bAlamaraNe paMDitamaraNe bAlapaMDitamaraNe chaumatthamaraNe
kevalimaraNe vehANasamaraNe giddhapiTThamaraNe bhattapaccakkhANamaraNe
iMgiNimaraNe pAovagamaNamaraNe  /  maraNa sattaraha prakAra kA kahA gayA hai,
jaise- 1. AvIcimaraNa, 2. avadhimaraNa, 3. AtyantikamaraNa, 4. valanmaraNa, 5.
vazArtamaraNa, 6. antaHzalyamaraNa, 7. tadbhavamaraNa, 8. bAlamaraNa, 9.
paMDitamaraNa,

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Seventeen Types of Death - Samvay] [53 10. Child Death, 11. False Death, 12.
Perfect Death, 13. Accidental Death, 14. Vulture-Touched or Vulture-Back Death,
15. Death by Rejection of Devotees, 16. Death by Ingini, 17. Death by
Approaching a Tree. Discussion-Description is as follows 1. Aavichimaran - The
wave or ripple of water is called Vichi. Just as one wave after another rises
and falls in water due to the influence of air, in the same way, the Dalikas or
Niṣeka of Ayukarma arise and fall or are destroyed at the time of their
manifestation. The falling of the Dalikas of Ayukarma is death. Therefore, this
death at the time of manifestation is called Aavichimaran. Or Vichi is also the
name of separation. The death in which there is no separation or interruption is
called Aavichimaran. The long vowel 'ā' is used in Prakrit in place of the short
vowel 'a'. 2. Avadhimaran - Avadhi means limit or boundary. The death that
occurs due to the limit is called Avadhimaran. If a being dies after
experiencing the present life's lifespan and binds the same lifespan for the
next life and will die after experiencing the same lifespan in the next life,
then the death of such a being in the present life is called Avadhimaran. The
meaning is that if a being dies after experiencing the Dalikas of lifespan and
will die again after experiencing the same Dalikas, then it is called
Avadhimaran. 3. Aatyantikmaran - The death of a being in the present life who
will die after experiencing the Dalikas of the present lifespan of Narakadi and
will not die after experiencing that lifespan in the future is called
Aatyantikmaran. 4. Valanmaran - The death of beings who die in an Avrata state
after being fallen or degraded from Dharma while observing restraint, vows,
rules, etc. is called Valanmaran. 5. Vashartmaran - The death of beings who die
under the control of the objects of the senses, i.e., suffering from them, is
called Vashartmaran. For example, moths die attracted to the light of a lamp at
night, in the same way, dying due to suffering from any object of the senses is
called Vashartmaran. 6. Antahshalyamaran - The death of a being who dies keeping
some kind of shalya in the mind is called Antahshalyamaran. For example, a
restrained man, while engaged in his vows, dies keeping the shalya of guilt,
pride, etc. in his mind without being criticized. 7. Tadbhavamaran - If a being
dies binding the lifespan suitable for the same life in which it is experiencing
the lifespan in the present life, then such death is called Tadbhavamaran. This
death occurs only in human or animal beings. It does not happen to gods or hell
beings, because it is a rule that gods or hell beings cannot become gods or hell
beings again after death. Their birth takes place only in human or animal beings
with five senses. 8. Balamaran - In the language of Agam, an Avirat or
Mithyadristi being is called 'Bal'. The death of Mithyadristi and unrestrained
beings is called Balamaran. The death of beings from the first Gunasthan to the
fourth is called Balamaran. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazasthAnaka-samavAya] [53 10. bAlapaMDitamaraNa, 11. chadmasthamaraNa,
12. kevalimaraNa, 13. vaihAyasamaraNa, 14. gRddhaspRSTa yA gRddhapRSThamaraNa,
15. bhaktapratyAkhyAnamaraNa, 16. iMginImaraNa, 17. paadpopgmnmrnn| vivecana-
vivaraNa isa prakAra hai 1. AvIcimaraNa-jala kI taraMga yA lahara ko vIci kahate
haiN| jaise jala meM vAyu ke nimitta se eka ke bAda dUsarI taraMga uThatI rahatI
hai, usI prakAra Ayukarma ke dalika yA niSeka pratisamaya udaya meM Ate hue
jhar3ate yA vinaSTa hote rahate haiN| Ayukarma ke dalikoM kA jhar3anA hI maraNa
hai| ataH pratisamaya ke isa maraNa ko avIcimaraNa kahate haiN| athavA vIci nAma
viccheda kA bhI hai| jisa maraNa meM koI viccheda yA vyavadhAna na ho, use
AvIcimaraNa kahate haiM  /  hrasva akAra ke sthAna para dIrgha AkAra prAkRta meM
ho jAtA hai| 2. avadhimaraNa-avadhi sImA yA maryAdA ko kahate haiN| maryAdA se
jo maraNa hotA hai, use avadhimaraNa kahate haiN| koI jIva vartamAna bhava kI
Ayu ko bhogatA huA AgAmI bhava kI bhI usI Ayu ko bA~dhakara mare aura AgAmI
bhava meM bhI usI Ayu ko bhogakara maregA, to aise jIva ke vartamAna bhava meM
maraNa ko avadhimaraNa kahA jAtA hai| tAtparya yaha ki jo jIva Ayu ke jina
dalikoM ko anubhava karake maratA hai, yadi punaH unhIM dalikoM kA anubhava
karake maregA, jo vaha avadhimaraNa kahalAtA hai| . 3. AtyantikamaraNa-jo jIva
nArakAdi ke vartamAna Ayukarma ke dalikoM ko bhogakara maregA aura mara kara
bhaviSya meM usa Ayu ko bhogakara nahIM maregA, aise jIva ke vartamAna bhava ke
maraNa ko AtyantikamaraNa kahate haiN| 4. valanmaraNa-saMyama, vrata, niyamAdi
dhAraNa kiye hue dharma se cyuta yA patita hote hue avratadazA meM marane vAle
jIvoM ke maraNa ko valanmaraNa kahate haiN| 5. vazArtamaraNa- indriyoM ke viSaya
ke vaza hokara arthAt unase pIr3ita hokara marane vAle jIvoM ke maraNa ko
vazArtamaraNa kahate haiN| jaise rAta meM pataMge dIpaka kI jyoti se AkRSTa
hokara marate haiM, usI prakAra kisI bhI indriyoM ke viSaya se pIr3ita hokara
maranA vazArtamaraNa kahalAtA hai| 6. antaHzalyamaraNa-mana ke bhItara kisI
prakAra ke zalya ko rakha kara marane vAle jIva ke maraNa ko antaHzalyamaraNa
kahate haiN| jaise koI saMyamI puruSa apane vratoM meM lage hue doSoM kI lajjA,
abhimAna Adi ke kAraNa AlocanA kiye binA doSa ke zalya ko mana meM rakhakara
mre| 7. tadbhavamaraNa-jo jIva vartamAna bhava meM jisa Ayu ko bhoga rahA hai,
usI bhava ke yogya Ayu | bA~dhakara yadi maratA hai, to aise maraNa ko
tadbhavamaraNa kahA jAtA hai| yaha maraNa manuSya yA tiryaMca gati jIvoM kA hI
hotA hai| deva yA nArakoM kA nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki deva yA nArakI mara kara
punaH deva yA nArakI nahIM ho sakatA, aisA niyama hai| unakA janma manuSya yA
tiryaMca paMcendriyoM meM hI hotA hai| 8.bAlamaraNa-Agama bhASA meM avirata yA
mithyAdRSTi jIva ko 'bAla' kahA jAtA hai| mithyAdRSTi aura asaMyamI jIvoM ke
maraNa ko bAlamaraNa kahate haiN| prathama guNasthAna se lekara cauthe taka ke
jIvoM kA maraNa bAlamaraNa kahalAtA hai|

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **54]**  **9. Panditamaran -** A being with right
faith, who is restrained and wise, is called a Pandit. His death is called
Panditamaran. Death from the sixth to the eleventh Gunasthan is called
Panditamaran.  **10. Balapanditamaran -** The death of a five-sense being,
whether human or animal, who is a Shravakvrati, a Desasanayami, and in the fifth
Gunasthan, is called Balapanditamaran.  **11. Chadmasthamaran -** Beings up to
the twelfth Gunasthan, before the attainment of Kevalgyan, are called
Chadmastha. Their death is called Chadmasthamaran.  **12. Kevalimaran -** The
death of an Ayogikevali, who possesses Kevalgyan and has ended all suffering, is
called Kevalimaran. A Sayogijin in the thirteenth Gunasthan is also a Kevali,
but there is no death in the thirteenth Gunasthan.  **13. Vaihayasamaran -**
Vaihayas refers to the sky. Death by hanging oneself from a tree or other object
is called Vaihayasamaran.  **14. Griddhasprushta or Griddhaprasthamaran -** The
Prakrit word "Giddhapitt" has two Sanskrit forms: Griddhasprushta and
Griddhaprastha. According to the first form, the death of a being whose flesh is
being eaten by vultures, eagles, or other birds is called Griddhasprushtamaran.
According to the second form, the death of a being who enters the body of a dead
elephant, camel, or other animal and allows their body to be eaten by vultures,
etc., is called Griddhaprasthamaran.  **15. Bhaktapratyakhyanamaran -** The
death of a human being who, due to an affliction, famine, incurable disease, or
a frail body, abandons the three or four types of food for life and adopts
Sanllekhana or Sannyasa, is called Bhaktapratyakhyanamaran. Such a person takes
care of their own needs and accepts help from others if offered.  **16.
Inginimaran -** The death of a Bhaktapratyakhyani who abandons the service
provided by others and, as long as they have the strength, continues to rise,
sit, and serve themselves in a designated place, is called Inginimaran.  **17.
Padupopagamanamaran -** Padap refers to a tree. Just as a tree uprooted by
strong wind falls to the ground and remains there, similarly, the death of a
great sage who abandons food for life, renounces self-service and service by
others, and peacefully departs while meditating in a posture like Kayotsarga,
Padmasana, or Mritakasana, is called Padupopagamanamaran.  **122 -** When the
sevenfold karma-particles are bound due to the presence of the sevenfold karma-
coverings, they are as follows:  * Abhinibodha-gyanavarana * Suygyanavarana *
Ohinagyanovarana * Manaprajavanagyanovarana * Kevalgyanovarana *
Chakkhudansanavarana * Achakkhudansanavarana * Ohidansanavarana *
Kevaldansanavarana

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54] [samavAyAGgasUtra 9. paMDitamaraNa-saMyama samyagdRSTi jIva ko paMDita kahA
jAtA hai| usake maraNa ko paMDitamaraNa kahate haiN| chaThe se lekara gyArahaveM
guNasthAna taka kA maraNa paMDitamaraNa kahalAtA hai| 10. bAlapaMDitamaraNa-
dezasaMyamI paMcama guNasthAnavartI zrAvakavratI manuSya yA tiryaMca paMcendriya
jIva ke maraNa ko bAla-paMDitamaraNa kahate haiN| 11. chadmasthamaraNa-
kevalajJAna utpanna hone ke pUrva bArahaveM guNasthAna taka ke jIva chadmastha
kahalAte haiN| chadmasthoM ke maraNa ko chadmasthamaraNa kahate haiN| 12.
kevalimaraNa-kevalajJAna ke dhAraka ayogikevalI ke sarva duHkhoM kA anta karane
vAle maraNa ko kevalimaraNa kahate haiN| terahaveM guNasthAnavartI sayogijina
bhI kevalI haiM, kintu terahaveM guNasthAna meM maraNa nahIM hotA hai| 13.
vaihAyasamaraNa-vihAyas nAma AkAza kA hai| gale meM phAMsI lagAkara kisI vRkSAdi
se adhara laTaka kara marane ko vaihAyasamaraNa kahate haiN| 14. gRddhaspRSTa yA
giddhapRSThamaraNa-'giddhapiTTha' isa prAkRta pada ke do saMskRta rUpa hote haiM
- gRddhaspRSTa aura gRddhapRSTha  /  prathama rUpa ke anusAra giddha, cIla Adi
pakSiyoM ke dvArA jisakA mAMsa noMcanoMca kara khAyA jA rahA ho, aise jIva ke
maraNa ko gRddhaspRSTamaraNa kahate haiN| dUsare rUpa ke anusAra mare hue hAthI
UMTa Adi ke zarIra meM praveza kara apane zarIra ko giddhoM Adi kA bhakSya
banAkara marane vAle jIvoM ke maraNa ko gRddhapRSThamaraNa kahate haiN| 15.
bhaktapratyAkhyAnamaraNa-upasarga Ane para, duSkAla par3ane para, asAdhya roga
ke ho jAne para yA jarA se jarjarita zarIra ke ho jAne para yAvajjIvana ke lie
trividha yA caturvidha AhAra kA yama niyama rUpa se tyAga kara saMllekhanA yA
saMnyAsa dhAraNa karake marane vAle manuSya ke maraNa ko
bhaktapratyAkhyAnamaraNa kahate haiM  /  isa maraNa se marane vAlA apane Apa bhI
apanI vaiyAvRttya (sevA-Tahala) karatA hai aura yadi dUsarA vyakti kare to use
bhI svIkAra kara letA hai| 16.iMginImaraNa-jo bhaktapratyAkhyAnI dUsaroM ke
dvArA kI jAne vAlI vaiyAvRttya kA tyAga kara detA hai aura jaba taka sAmarthya
rahatI hai, taba taka svayaM hI pratiniyata deza meM uThatA-baiThatA aura apanI
sevA-Tahala karatA hai, aise sAdhu ke maraNa ko iMginImaraNa kahate haiN| 17.
pAdapopagamanamaraNa-pAdapa nAma vRkSa kA hai, jaise vRkSa vAyu Adi ke prabala
vega se jar3a se ukhar3a kara bhUmi para jaisA par3a jAtA hai, usI prakAra par3A
rahatA hai, isI prakAra jo mahAsAdhu bhaktapAna kA yAvajjIvana parityAga kara
aura sva-para kI vaiyAvRttya kA bhI tyAga kara, kAyotsarga, padmAsana yA
mRtakAsana Adi kisI Asana se Atma-cintana karate hue tadavastha rahakara prANa
tyAga karatA hai, usake maraNa ko pAdapopagamanamaraNa kahate haiN|
122-suhamasaMparAe NaM bhagavaM suhamasaMparAyabhAve vaTTamANe sattarasa
kammapagaDIo NibaMdhati, taM jahA-AbhiNibohiyaNANAvaraNe suyaNANAvaraNe
ohiNANAvaraNe maNapajjavaNANAvaraNe kevalaNANAvaraNe cakkhudaMsaNAvaraNe
acakkhudaMsaNAvaraNe ohidaMsaNAvaraNe kevaladaMsaNAvaraNe

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Seventeen-Place Aggregates] The seventeen karmic aggregates that bind the
liberated being are: 1. Knowledge-obscuring karma of initial ignorance, 2.
Knowledge-obscuring karma of scriptural knowledge, 3. Knowledge-obscuring karma
of clairvoyance, 4. Knowledge-obscuring karma of mental perception, 5.
Knowledge-obscuring karma of omniscience, 6. Sight-obscuring karma of sight, 7.
Sight-obscuring karma of non-sight, 8. Sight-obscuring karma of clairvoyance, 9.
Sight-obscuring karma of omniscience, 10. Karma of the five senses, 11. Karma of
fame and renown, 12. Karma of high birth, 13. Karma of hindrance to giving, 14.
Karma of hindrance to receiving, 15. Karma of hindrance to enjoyment, 16. Karma
of hindrance to consumption, and 17. Karma of hindrance to effort.  In the fifth
earth, Dharma-Prabha, the excellent state of many hell beings is said to be
seventeen oceans. In the sixth earth, Tama-Prabha, the inferior state of some
hell beings is said to be seventeen oceans. The state of many Asura-Kumaras and
gods is said to be seventeen palya. In the Saudharma and Ishana kalpas, the
state of many gods is said to be seventeen palya. In the Maha-Shukra kalpa, the
excellent state of gods is said to be seventeen oceans.  In the Sahasrar kalpa,
the inferior state of gods is said to be seventeen oceans. Those gods who are
born in the divine forms of the following types of vimanas: Saman, Su-Saman,
Maha-Saman, Padma, Maha-Padma, Kumuda, Maha-Kumuda, Nalina, Maha-Nalina,
Paundarika, Maha-Paundarika, Shukra, Maha-Shukra, Simha, Simha-Kanta, Simha-
bija, and Bhavit, their excellent state is said to be seventeen oceans. These
gods breathe or exhale after seventeen half-months (eight and a half months).
Their desire for food arises after seventeen thousand years.  There are many
bhavya-siddhi souls who will become siddhas, buddhas, liberated from karma,
attain nirvana, and end all suffering after experiencing seventeen births.
||End of the Seventeen-Place Aggregates||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazasthAnaka-samavAya] sAyAveyaNijjaM jasokittinAmaM uccAgoyaM
dANaMtarAyaM lAbhaMtarAyaM bhogaMtarAyaM uvabhogaMtarAyaM viiriaaNtraayN|
samasAmparAya bhAva meM vartamAna samasAmparAya bhagavAna kevala sattaraha
karma-prakatiyoM ko bA~dhate haiM, jaise-1. AbhinibodhikajJAnAvaraNa, 2.
zrutajJAnAvaraNa, 3. avadhijJAnAvaraNa, 4. manaHparyayajJAnAvaraNa, 5.
kevalajJAnAvaraNa, 6. cakSurdarzanAvaraNa,7. acakSurdarzanAvaraNa,
8.avadhidarzanAvaraNa,9. kevaladarzanAvaraNa, 10. sAtAvedanIya, 11.
yazaskIrtinAmakarma, 12. uccagotra, 13. dAnAntarAya, 14. lAbhAntarAya, 15.
bhogAntarAya, 16. upabhogAntarAya aura 17. viiryaantraay| 123paMcamIe puDhavIe
atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM ukkoseNaM sattarasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|
chaTThIe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM jahaNaNeNaM sattarasa sAgarovamAiM
ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM sattarasa paliovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa| sohammIsANesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM devANaM sattarasa paliovamAiM
ThiI pnnnnttaa| mahAsukke kappe devANaM ukkoseNaM sattarasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa| pAMcavIM dhamaprabhA pathivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI utkaSTa sthiti
sattaraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| chaThI pRthvI tamaHprabhA meM kinhIM-kinhIM
nArakoM kI jaghanya sthiti sattaraha sAgaropama hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM
kI sthiti sattaraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAnakalpoM meM kitaneka
devoM kI sthiti sattaraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| mahAzukra kalpa meM devoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti sattaraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| 124-sahassAre kappe devANaM
jahaNNeNaM sattarasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA sAmANaM susAmANaM
mahAsAmANaM paumaM mahApaumaM kumudaM mahAkumudaM naliNaM mahAnaliNaM poMDarIaM
mahApoMDarIaM sakkaM mahAsakkaM sIhaM sIhakaMtaM sIhavIaMbhAviaMvimANaM devattAe
uvavaNNA.tesi NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM sattarasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te
NaM devA sattarasahiM addhamAsehiM ANamaMti vA pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA
nIsasaMti vaa| tesi NaM devANaM sattarasahiM vAsasahassehiM AhAraTe smuppjji|
saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je sattarasahiM bhavaggahaNehi sijjhissaMti
bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| sahasrAra
kalpa meM devoM kI jaghanya sthiti sattaraha sAgaropama hai| vahAM jo deva,
sAmAna, susAmAna, mahAsAmAna, padma, mahApadma, kumuda, mahAkumuda, nalina,
mahAnalina, pauNDarIka, mahApauNDarIka, zukra, mahAzukra, siMha. siMhakAnta.
siMhabIja. aura bhAvita nAma ke viziSTa vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote
haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti sattaraha sAgaropama kI hotI hai| ve deva
sattaraha ardhamAsoM (sAr3he ATha mAsoM) ke bAda AnaprANa yA ucchvAsa-niHzvAsa
lete haiN| una devoM ke sattaraha hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna
hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo sattaraha bhava grahaNa
karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parinirvANa ko prApta
hoMge aura sarvaduHkhoM kA anta kreNge| ||sptdshsthaank samavAya samApta  //

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[56] Eighteen types of Brahmacharya have been stated, such as: - One does not
indulge in worldly pleasures (of human and animal beings) with the mind, nor
does one make others indulge in them with the mind, nor does one approve of
others indulging in them with the mind (3). - One does not indulge in worldly
pleasures with speech, nor does one make others indulge in them with speech, nor
does one approve of others indulging in them with speech (6). - One does not
indulge in worldly pleasures with the body, nor does one make others indulge in
them with the body, nor does one approve of others indulging in them with the
body (9). - One does not indulge in divine pleasures (of gods and goddesses)
with the mind, nor does one make others indulge in them with the mind, nor does
one approve of others indulging in them with the mind (12). - One does not
indulge in divine pleasures with speech, nor does one make others indulge in
them with speech, nor does one approve of others indulging in them with speech
(15). - One does not indulge in divine pleasures with the body, nor does one
make others indulge in them with the body, nor does one approve of others
indulging in them with the body (18).  [126] The Arhat Arishta-nemi had the
excellent Shraman-sampada of eighteen thousand monks. The Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavira has stated eighteen places for all the Shraman Nirgranthas, who are
free from the subtle and gross, such as: - Vrat-shatk (six vows) 6, Kay-shatk
(six bodily actions) 12, Akalp (non-attachment) 13, Grihi-bhajan (household
possessions) 14, Pariyank (bed) 15, Nisidya (sitting with a woman on the same
seat) 16, Snana (bathing) 17, and Sobha-tyaga (renunciation of bodily beauty)
18.  Commentary: There are two types of monks: those who are unmanifest and
immature due to their vows (diksha-paryaya) and knowledge (shruta), and those
who are manifest and mature due to both vows and knowledge. The unmanifest monk
is called a Ksudraka or...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 56] [samavAyAGgasUtra aSTAdazasthAnaka-samavAya 125-aTThArasavihe baMbhe
paNNatte, taM jahA-orAlie kAmabhoge Neva sayaM maNeNaM sevai 1,novi aNNaM
maNeNaM sevAvei 2, maNeNaM sevaMtaM pi aNNaM na samaNujANAi 3, orAlie kAmabhoge
Neva sayaM vAyAe sevai 4, novi aNNaM vAyAe sevAvei 5, vAyAe sevaMtaM piaNNaM na
samaNujANAi 6|oraalie kAmabhoge Neva sayaM kAeNaM sevai 7, Novi ya aNNaM kAeNaM
sevAvei 8, kAeNaM sevaMtaM pi aNNaM na samaNujANAi 9 /  divve kAmabhoge Neva
sayaM maNeNaM sevai 10, Novi aNNaM maNeNaM sevAvei 11, maNeNaM sevaMtaM pi aNNaM
na samaNujANAi 12 /  divve kAmabhoge Neva sayaM vAyAe sevai 13,Novi aNNaM vAyAe
sevAvei 14, vAyAe sevaMtaM pi aNNaM na samaNujANAi 15 /  divve kAmabhoge Neva
sayaM kAeNaM sevai 16, Novi aNNaM kAeNaM sevAvei 17, kAeNaM sevaMtaM pi aNNaM na
samaNujANAi 18 /  brahmacarya aThAraha prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaise-audArika
(zarIra vAle manuSya-tiryaMcoM ke) kAma-bhogoM ko na hI mana se svayaM sevana
karatA hai, na hI anya ko mana se sevana karAtA hai aura na mana se sevana
karate hue anya kI anumodanA karatA hai 3 /  audArika-kAmabhogoM ko na hI vacana
se svayaM sevana karatA hai, na hI anya ko vacana se sevana karAtA hai aura na
hI sevana karate hue anya kI vacana se anumodanA karatA hai 6 /  audArika-
kAmabhogoM ko na hI svayaM kAya se sevana karatA hai, na hI anya ko kAya se
sevana karAtA hai aura na hI kAya se sevana karate hue anya kI anumodanA karatA
hai 9  /  divya (deva-devI sambandhI) kAma-bhogoM ko na hI svayaM mana se sevana
karatA hai, na hI anya ko mana se sevana karAtA hai aura na hI mana se sevana
karate hae anya kI anamodanA karatA hai 12 divya-kAma bhogoM ko na hI svayaM
vacana se sevana karatA hai, na hI anya ko vacana se sevana karAtA hai aura na
hI sevana karate hue anya kI vacana se anumodanA karatA hai 15  /  divya-
kAmabhogoM ko na hI svayaM kAsa se sevana karatA hai, na hI anya ko kAya se
sevana karAtA hai aura na hI kAya se sevana karate hue anya kI anumodanA karatA
hai 18  /  126-arahato NaM ariTThanemissa aTThArasa samaNasAhassIo ukkosiyA
samaNasaMpayA hotthaa| samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM samaNANaM NiggaMthANaM
sakhuDDayaviattANaM aTThArasa ThANA paNNattA, taM jahA vayachakkaM 6 kAyachakkaM
12 akappo 13 gihibhAyaNaM 14  /  paliyaMka 15 nisijjA 16 ya siNANaM 17
sobhavajjaNaM 18  // 1 //  ariSTanemi arhat kI utkRSNa zramaNa-sampadA aThAraha
hajAra sAdhuoM kI thii| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne sakSudraka-vyakta-sabhI
zramaNa nirgranthoM ke liye aThAraha sthAna kahe haiM, jaise-vrataSaTka 6,
kAyaSaT 12, akalpa 13, (vastra, pAtra, bhakta-pAnAdi) gRhi-bhAjana 14, paryaGka
(palaMga Adi) 15, niSadyA (strI ke sAtha eka Asana para baiThanA) 16, snAna 17
aura zarIra-zobhA kA tyAga 18 /  vivecana-sAdhu do prakAra ke hote haiM - vaya
(dIkSA paryAya) se aura zruta (zAstrajJAna) se avyakta-aparipakva aura vaya
tathA zruta donoM se vyakta- pripkv| inameM avyakta sAdhu ko kSudraka yA

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighteen Standpoints - Samvaya  [57]  These are also called Ksullaka. The
eighteen restraints of these Ksullaka and individual Sadhus have been stated by
Bhagwan Mahavira. The complete renunciation of the five sins, including
violence, and of night-time meals for the entire life is the Vrat Shatka. The
protection of the beings of the six realms, starting with earth, is the Kaya
Shatka Varjan. The renunciation of unimaginable food and drink, the non-use of
vessels belonging to householders, not sleeping on a bed, not sitting on a seat
touched by a woman, not bathing, and not adorning the body with ornaments, etc.
- these eighteen standpoints protect the restraint of the Sadhus.  127 - The
eighteen thousand verses of the Bhagavad Acharaanga Sutra, including the
Chulika, have been stated by the word-evidence of the Chulika-containing
Bhagavad Acharaanga Sutra.  128 - Eighteen types of writing systems have been
stated in the Brahmi script, such as: 1. Brahmi script, 2. Yavani script, 3.
Dosha-Uparika script, 4. Kharoshti script, 5. Khar-Shavi script, 6. Praharatika
script, 7. Uchchattarika script, 8. Aksharaprushthika script, 9. Bhogavatika
script, 10. Vainakya script, 11. Nihnvika script, 12. Ankalipi, 13. Ganitalipi,
14. Gandharvalipi [Bhutalipi], 15. Adarshalipi, 16. Maheswarilipi, 17. Damilipi,
18. Polindilipi.  Discussion - The Sanskrit commentator has written that the
form of these scripts is not visible. Nevertheless, many scripts currently in
use are known, such as: Yavani script (Arabic-Persian), Odia script, Dravidian
script, etc. Differences in the names of scripts are also seen in the Agam
texts.  129 - The eighteen objects called Arthaadhikars of the Asti-Nastipravad
Purva have been stated.  130 - The thickness of the fifth earth, called
Dhumpaprabha, has been stated as one lakh eighteen thousand yojanas. In the
months of Pausha and Ashadha, the longest night and day occur once,
respectively, for eighteen muhurtas.  Discussion - It is a common statement that
the longest night of the year is eighteen muhurtas long in the month of Pausha,
and the longest day is eighteen muhurtas long in the month of Ashadha. According
to Hindu astrological calculations, the longest day occurs on the solstice in
Ashadha, and the longest night occurs on the solstice in Pausha. According to
English astrology, the longest night occurs on December 23rd and the longest day
occurs on June 21st, both lasting eighteen muhurtas. One muhurta is equal to 48
minutes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTAdazasthAnaka - samavAya ] [ 57 kSullaka bhI kahate haiM  /  aise kSudraka
aura vyakta sAdhuoM ke 18 saMyamasthAna bhagavAn mahAvIra ne kahe haiN| hiMsAdi
pAMcoM pApoM kA aura rAtribhojana kA yAvajjIvana ke lie sarvathA tyAga karanA
vrataSaTka hai  /  pRthivI Adi chaha kAyA ke jIvoM kI rakSA karanA
kAyaSaTkavarjana hai| akalpanIya bhakta-pAna kA tyAga, gRhastha ke pAtra kA
upayoga nahIM karanA, palaMgAdi para nahIM sonA, strI-saMsakta Asana para nahIM
baiThanA, snAna nahIM karanA aura zarIra kI zobhA - zRMgArAdi nahIM karanA  /
ina aThAraha sthAnoM se sAdhuoM ke saMyama kI rakSA hotI hai| 127 - AyArassa NaM
bhagavato sacUliyAgassa aTThArasa payasahassAiM payaggeNaM paNNattA  /  cUlikA -
sahita bhagavad- AcArAGga sUtra ke pada- pramANa se aThAraha hajAra pada kahe
gaye haiM  /  1 128 - baMbhIe NaM livIe aTThArasavihe lekhavihANe paNNatte, taM
jahA - baMbhI 1, javaNAliyA 2, dosaUriyA 3, kharoTTiyA 4, kharasAviA 5,
pahArAiyA 6, uccattariA 7 akkharapuTThiyA 8, bhogavatA 9, veNatiyA 10, NiNhaiyA
11, aMkalivI 12, gaNialivI 13, gaMdhavvalivI [ bhUyalivI ] 14, AdaMsalivI 15,
mAhesarIlivI 16, dAmilivI 17, voliMdalivI 18  /  brAhmIlipi ke lekha-vidhAna
aThAraha prakAra ke kahe gaye haiM, jaise- 1. brAhmIlipi, 2. yAvanIlipi, 3.
doSauparikAlipi, 4. kharoSTrikAlipi, 5. khara- zAvikAlipi, 6. prahArAtikAlipi,
7. uccattarikAlipi, 8. akSarapRSThikAlipi, 9. bhogavatikAlipi, 10.
vaiNakiyAlipi, 11. nihnavikAlipi, 12. aMkalipi, 13. gaNitalipi, 14.
gandharvalipi, [ bhUtalipi ] 15. Adarzalipi, 16. mAhezvarIlipi, 17. dAmilipi,
18. polindI lipi  /  vivecana - saMskRta TIkAkAra ne likhA hai ki ina lipiyoM kA
svarUpa dRSTigocara nahIM hotA hai| phira bhI vartamAna meM pracalita aneka
lipiyoM kA bodha hotA hai  /  jaise - yAvanIlipi arbI-phArasI, ur3iyAlipi,
drAvir3Ilipi Adi  /  Agama-granthoM meM bhI lipiyoM ke nAmoM meM bhinnatA
dRSTigocara hotI hai| 129 - atthinatthippavAyassa NaM puvvassa aTThArasa vatthU
pnnnnttaa| astinAstipravAda pUrva ke aThAraha vastu nAmaka arthAdhikAra kahe
gaye haiM  /  130 - dhUmappabhA NaM puDhavI aTThArasuttaraM joyaNasayasahassaM
bAhalleNaM paNNattA  /  posAsADhesu NaM mAsesu sai ukkoseNaM aTThArasamuhutte
divase bhavai, sai ukkoseNaM aTThArasamuhuttA rAtI bhavai  /  dhUmaprabhA nAmaka
pAMcavIM pRthivI kI moTAI eka lAkha aThAraha hajAra yojana kahI gaI hai| pauSa
aura ASAr3ha mAsa meM eka bAra utkRSTa rAta aura dina kramazaH aThAraha muhUrta
ke hote haiN| vivecana - pauSa mAsa sabase bar3I rAta aThAraha muhUrta kI hotI
hai aura ASAr3ha mAsa meM sabase bar3A dina aThAraha muhUrta kA hotA hai, yaha
sAmAnya kathana hai  /  hindU jyotiSa gaNita ke anusAra ASAr3ha meM karka
saMkrAnti ko sabase bar3A dina aura makara saMkrAnti ke dina pauSa meM sabase
bar3I rAta hotI hai  /  aMgrejI jyotiSa ke anusAra 23 disambara ko sabase bar3I
rAta aura 21 jUna ko sabase bar3A dina aThAraha muhUrta kA hotA hai| eka muhUrta
meM 48 miniTa hote haiM  /

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[58] In the Ratnaprabha earth, the excellent condition of many hell beings is
said to be eighteen palyopama. The condition of many Asura Kumaras (demigods) is
said to be eighteen palyopama. In the Saudharma-Ishana kalpas, the condition of
many gods is said to be eighteen palyopama. In the Sahasrar kalpa, the excellent
condition of gods is said to be eighteen sagaropama. [132] In the Anata kalpa,
the inferior condition of many gods is said to be eighteen sagaropama. Those
gods who are born in the specific vimanas called Kal, Sukal, Mahakal, Anjan,
Risht, Sal, Saman, Drum, Mahadrum, Vishal, Sushal, Padm, Padmagulm, Kumud,
Kumudgulm, Nalin, Nalingulm, Pundarik, Pundarikagulm, and Sahasraravatansak,
their condition is said to be eighteen sagaropama. Those gods breathe in and out
after eighteen half-months (nine months). Their desire for food arises after
eighteen thousand years. There are many bhavya-siddhika jivas who will become
Siddhas, Buddhas, liberated from karmas, attain Nirvana, and end all suffering
after experiencing eighteen bhava-grahanas. || Ashtadashasthanak Samavay Sampt
|| Ekonavinshasthanak-Samavay [133] There are nineteen nayajjhanas, as follows:
1. Ukkhitthana, 2. Sanghade, 3. Ande, 4. Kumme, 5. Sele, 6. Patumbe, 7. Rohini,
8. Malli, 9. Mangdi, 10. Chandimata. 11. Davaddave, 12. Udagana, 13. Mandukke,
14. Tetali, 15. Nandiphale, 16. Avarakanka, 17. Ainne, 18. Susuma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58] [samavAyAGgasUtra 131 -imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM
neraiyANaM aTThArasa paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM
atthegaiyANaM aTThArasa paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| sohammIsANesu kappesu
atthegaiyANaM aTThArasa paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| sahassAre kappe devANaM
ukkoseNaM aTThArasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM
kitaneka nArakoM kI utkRSTa sthiti aThAraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka
asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti aThAraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna
kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti aThAraha palyopama kahI gaI hai| sahasrAra
kalpa meM devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti aThAraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| 132-ANae
kappe devANaM atthegaiyANaM jahaNNeNaM aTThArasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| je
devA kAlaM sukAlaM mahAkAlaM aMjaNaM riThaM sAlaM samANaM dumaM mahAdumaM
visAlaM susAlaM paumaM paumagummaM kumudaM kumudagummaM naliNaM naliNagummaM
puMDarIaM puMDarIyagummaM sahassAravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA tesi NaM
devANaM aTThArasa sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devANaM aTThArasahiM
addhamAsehiM ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vaa| tesi NaM
devANaM aTThArasa vAsasahassehiM AhAraTTe smuppjji| saMtegaiA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA
je aTThArasahiM bhavaggahaNehiM sinjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti
parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| Anata kalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI
jaghanya sthiti aThAraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| vahAM jo deva kAla, sukAla,
mahAkAla, aMjana, riSTa, sAla, samAna, druma, mahAdruma, vizAla, suzAla, padma,
padmagulma, kumuda, kumudagulma, nalina, nalinagulma, puNDarIka, puNDarIkagulma
aura sahasrArAvataMsaka nAma ke viziSTa vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote
haiM, una devoM kI sthiti aThAraha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva aThAraha
ardhamAsoM (nau mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una
devoM ke aThAraha hajAra varSa ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka
bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo aThAraha bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge,
buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva
duHkhoM kA anta kreNge| ||assttaadshsthaank samavAya samApta  //
ekonaviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya 133-egUNavIsaM NAyajjhayaNA paNNattA, taM jahA
1ukkhittaNAe, 'saMghADe, 3aMDe, kumme a, "selae  /  patuMbe, a, rohiNI, "mallI,
'mAMgadI, 1degcaMdimAti a  // 1 //  11dAvaddave, 12udagaNAe, 13maMDukke,
14tetalI i a  /  15naMdiphale, 16avarakaMkA, 17AiNNe, 18suMsumA i a  // 2 //

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteen Standpoints - Samvaya  **Nineteen Standpoints**  The nineteen
standpoints are explained in the **Jnatadharmakathanga Sutra** (the first Shruta
Skandha). These are: 1. Utshiptanjat, 2. Saghat, 3. Anda, 4. Kurma, 5. Shailak,
6. Tumb, 7. Rohini, 8. Malli, 9. Makandi, 10. Chandrima, 11. Dakjnata, 12.
Maduka, 13. Tetala, 14. Nandiphal, 15. Aparkaka, 16. Akirna, 17. Susuma, and 18.
Pundarikajnata.  ||1-2||  **The Sun's Height**  In Jambudvipa, the sun rises and
sets at a height of nineteen hundred yojanas.  **Explanation:** The sun is
situated eight hundred yojanas above the earth's surface. Below the earth's
surface, there is a salt ocean that is one thousand yojanas deep. Therefore, the
sun's heat reaches one hundred yojanas above the earth's surface, where the
celestial sphere is located, and eighteen hundred yojanas below the earth's
surface, reaching the bottom of the salt ocean. This makes a total of nineteen
hundred (1900) yojanas.  **Venus's Movement**  Venus, the great planet, rises in
the west and sets in the west, moving along with nineteen constellations.
**Jambudvipa's Divisions**  Jambudvipa is divided into nineteen parts (Kulas).
**Explanation:** Jambudvipa is one hundred thousand yojanas wide. Within it,
there are six mountain ranges and seven regions. These are twice as wide as
Bharatavarsha, extending to Mount Meru. From Meru to Airavata, they are half as
wide. The sum of all these (1+2+4+8+16+32+16+8+4+2+1=190) is one hundred and
ninety. Dividing one hundred thousand by this (190) gives 526. After canceling
out the zeros, we are left with 6/19. This is the nineteen parts mentioned in
the original text. Multiplying the number of divisions in each region or
mountain range by the number of yojanas in that region or mountain range gives
the total width of that region or mountain range.  **The Nineteen Tirthankaras**
Nineteen Tirthankaras lived in houses before becoming monks.  **Explanation:**
Vasupujya, Malli, Arishtanemi, Parshvanath, and Mahavira, these five
Tirthankaras became monks while still young. The remaining nineteen Tirthankaras
renounced their homes and became monks.  **The Nineteen Paliovamans**  In this
world, there are nineteen Paliovamans, who are the followers of the path of
liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekonaviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya] avare a, 19poNDarIe NAe eguunnviisime|
jJAtAdharmakathAMga sUtra ke (prathama zrutaskandha ke) unnIsa adhyayana kahe
gaye haiM, jaise- 1. utkSiptajJAta, 2.saghATa, 3. aMDa, 4. kUrma, 5. zailaka,6.
tumba,7.rohiNI,8. mallI ,9. mAkaMdI, 10. candrimA.11. dakajJAta, 13. maDUka,14.
tetalA,15. nandiphala, 16. aparakakA,17. AkIrNa, 18 suMsumA aura 19.
puNDarIkajJAta  // 1-2 //  134-jaMbUdIve NaM dIve sUriA ukkoseNaM egUNavIsaM
joyaNasayAiM uDDamaho tvyNti| jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa dvIpa meM sUrya utkRSTa rUpa
se eka hajAra nau sau yojana Upara aura nIce tapate haiN| vivecana-ratnaprabhA
pRthivI ke uparima bhUmibhAga se Upara ATha sau yojana para sUrya avasthita hai
aura ukta bhUmibhAga se eka hajAra yojana gaharA lavaNasamudra hai| isalie sUrya
apane uSNa prakAza se Upara sau yojana taka-jahAM taka ki jyotizcakra avasthita
hai, tathA nIce aThAraha sau yaujana arthAt lavaNasamudra ke adhastana tala taka
isa prakAra sarva milAkara unnIsa sau (1900) yojana ke kSetra ko saMtapta karatA
hai| 135-sukke NaM mahaggahe avareNaM udie samANe egUNavIsaM NakkhattAI samaM
cAraM carittA avareNaM asthamaNaM uvaagcchi| -- zukra mahAgraha pazcima dizA se
udita hokara unnIsa nakSatroM ke sAtha sahagamana karatA huA pazcima dizA meM
astaMgata hotA hai| 136-jaMbuddIvassa NaM dIvassa kalAo egUNavIsaM cheaNAo
pnnnnttaao| jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa dvIpa kI kalAeM unnIsa chedanaka (bhAgarUpa)
kahI gaI haiN| vivecana-jambUdvIpa kA vistAra eka lAkha yojana hai| usake
bhItara jo chaha varSadhara parvata aura sAta kSetra haiM, ve bhAratavarSa se
meru parvata taka dUne-dUne vistAra vAle haiM aura meru se Age airavata varSa
taka Adhe-Adhe vistAra vAle hai| ina sabakA yoga (1+2+4+8+16+32+16+8+4+2+1=190)
eka sau navve hotA hai| isa (190) kA bhAga eka lAkha meM dene para 526 AtA hai|
Upara ke zUnya kA nIce ke zUnya ke sAtha apavartana kara dene para 6/19 raha
jAtA hai| prakRta sUtra meM isI unnIsa bhAgarUpa kalAoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA
hai, kyoMki 190 bhAgoM meM jisa kSetra yA kulAcala (varSadhara) kI jitanI
zalAkAeM haiM, unase ise guNita karane para usa vivakSita kSetra yA kulAcala kA
vistAra nikala AtA hai| 137-egUNavIsaM titthayarA agAravAsamajhe vasittA muMDe
bhavittA NaM agArAo aNagAriaM pvviaa| unnIsa tIrthaMkara agAra-vAsa meM raha
kara phira muMDita hokara agAra se anagAra pravrajyA ko prApta hue-gRhavAsa
tyAga kara dIkSita hue| vivecana-vAsupUjya, mallI, ariSTanemi, pArzvanAtha aura
mahAvIra, ye pA~ca tIrthaMkara kumAra avasthA meM hI pravajita hue| zeSa unnIsa
tIrthaMkaroM ne gRhavAsa chor3a kara pravrajyA grahaNa kii| 138-imIse NaM
rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiANaM neraiyANaM egUNavIsapaliovamAiM

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[60] [Samvayanga Sutra] The state of the hell beings is said to be nineteen
palyopama. The state of the Asura Kumaras is said to be nineteen palyopama. The
state of the gods in the Saudharma and Ishana kalpas is said to be nineteen
palyopama. The state of the gods in the Anata kalpa is said to be nineteen
sagaropama. In the Pranata kalpa, the state of the gods is said to be nineteen
sagaropama. The gods who are born in the Anata, Pranata, Nata, Vinata, Ghana,
Sushira, Indra, Indrakant and Indrottaravatansaka vimanas, their state is said
to be nineteen sagaropama. These gods breathe after nineteen half-months. Their
desire for food arises after nineteen thousand years. There are many bhavya-
siddhika jivas who will become siddhas, buddhas, liberated from karma, attain
nirvana and end all suffering after nineteen bhava-grahanas. || Ekonavinshati-
sthana-samvay-samapt || Vinshati-sthana-samvay [140] Twenty asamadhi-sthana are
said to be: 1. Dav-dav-chari, 2. Apamjjiya-chari, 3. Duppamjjiya-chari, 4.
Atiritta-sejjana-niye, 5. Ratiniya-paribhasi, 6. Thero-vaghaiye, 7. Bhuo-
vaghaiye, 8. Sanjalane, 9. Kohane, 10. Pittthimans-iye, 11. Abhikkanam
abhikkanam ohara-itta bhava-i, 12. Nava-nam adhikarana-nam anuppanna-nam uppatta
bhava-i, 13. Porana-nam adhikarana-nam khami-a vi-usavi-ana-nam puno-dire-tta
bhava-i, 14. Sasarakkha-panipa-ye, 15. Akala-sajjhaya-kare, 16. Kalaha-kare, 17.
Sad-dakare, 18. Jhanjha-kare, 19. Sura-ppamana-bhoi, 20. Esana-asami-te. Twenty
asamadhi-sthana are said to be: 1. Dav-dav or dhap-dhap, 2. Apamjjiya-chari, 3.
Duppamjjiya-chari, 4. Atiritta-sejjana-niye, 5. Ratiniya-paribhasi, 6. Thero-
vaghaiye, 7. Bhuo-vaghaiye, 8. Sanjalane, 9. Kohane, 10. Pittthimans-iye, 11.
Abhikkanam abhikkanam ohara-itta bhava-i, 12. Nava-nam adhikarana-nam anuppanna-
nam uppatta bhava-i, 13. Porana-nam adhikarana-nam khami-a vi-usavi-ana-nam
puno-dire-tta bhava-i, 14. Sasarakkha-panipa-ye, 15. Akala-sajjhaya-kare, 16.
Kalaha-kare, 17. Sad-dakare, 18. Jhanjha-kare, 19. Sura-ppamana-bhoi, 20. Esana-
asami-te.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60] [ samavAyAGgasUtra ThiI paNNattA  /  asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM
egUNavIsapaliovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  sohammIsANesu kappesu atthegaiyANaM
devANaM egUNavIsapaliovamAiM ThiI paNNattA  /  ANayakappe atthegaiyANaM devANaM
ukkoseNaM egUNavIsasAgarovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM
kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti unnIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra
devoM kI sthiti unnIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma - IzAna kalpoM meM
kitaneka devoM kI sthiti unnIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| Anata kalpa meM kitaneka
devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti unnIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| 139 - pANae kappe
atthegaiyANaM devANaM jahaNaNeNaM egUNavIsasAgarovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  je devA
ANataM pANataM NataM viNataM ghaNaM susiraM iMdaM iMdokaMtaM iMduttaravaDiMsagaM
vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA tesi NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM egUNavIsasAgarovamAI ThiI
paNNattA  /  te NaM devA egUNavIsAe addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA,
ussasaMti vA nIsasaMti vA tesi NaM devANaM egUNavIsAe vAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe
samuppajjai  /  saMtegaiA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je egUNavIsAe bhavaggahaNehiM
sijjhissaMti bujjhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM
karissaMti  /  prANata kalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI jaghanya sthiti unnIsa
sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| vahAM jo deva Anata, prANata, nata, vinata, ghana,
suSira, indra, indrakAnta aura indrottarAvataMsaka nAma ke vimAnoM meM devarUpa
se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti unnIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI
hai| ve deva unnIsa ardhamAsoM (sAr3he nau mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa
- ni:zvAsa lete haiM  /  una devoM ke unnIsa hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI
icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo unnIsa bhava
grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa
ko prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //  ekonaviMzatisthAnaka
samavAya samApta  //  viMzatisthAnaka - samavAya 140 - vIsaM asamAhiThANA
paNattA, taM jahA - davadavacAri yAvi bhavai 1, apamajjiyacAri yAvi bhavai 2,
duppamajjiyacAri yAvi bhavai 3, atirittasejjANie 4, rAtiNiyaparibhAsI 5,
therovaghAie 6, bhUovaghAie 7, saMjalaNe 8, kohaNe 9, piTThimaMsie 10,
abhikkhaNaM abhikkhaNaM ohAraittA bhavai 11, NavANaM adhikaraNAnaM aNuppaNNANaM
uppAttA bhavai 12, porANANaM adhikaraNANaM khAmia viusaviANaM puNodIrettA bhavai
13, sasarakkhapANipAe 14, akAlasajjhAyakArae yAvi bhavai 15, kalahakare 16,
saddakare 17, jhaMjhakare 16, sUrappamANabhoI 19, esaNA'samite Avi bhavai 20  /
bIsa asamAdhisthAna kahe gaye haiN| jaise - 1. dava- dava yA dhapa-dhapa karate
hue jaldI-jaldI

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twenty Stands of Unsteadiness] 1. Walking, 2. Being of unpurified conduct, 3.
Being of impure conduct, 4. Keeping extra bedding and seats, 5. Overcoming
night-time ascetics, 6. Blaming and harming or insulting senior ascetics, 7.
Unnecessarily harming the one-sensed beings, 8. Always being prone to anger, 9.
Being excessively angry, 10. Speaking ill of others behind their backs, 11.
Constantly and always negating the virtues of others, calling a person who is
not a slave or a thief as a slave or a thief, etc., 12. Constantly creating new
disputes (quarrels or conflicts), 13. Reawakening settled or pacified disputes
(fights), 14. Being unclean (having hands and feet covered with conscious dust,
etc., accepting alms from a person with unclean hands, and walking on unclean
ground, sitting on unclean seats, etc.), 15. Studying during the wrong time and
not studying during the right time, 16. Quarrelling, 17. Studying and conversing
in a loud voice at night, 18. Speaking words that create division in the
assembly or the community, 19. Eating and drinking from sunrise to sunset, and
20. Not following the rules of the Aeshana Samiti and consuming non-prescribed
food.  Discussion: Those actions that cause distress in one's own mind or the
minds of others are called Unsteadiness Stands. All the actions mentioned in the
sutras cause distress and suffering to others, and also to those who perform
them. For example, walking without looking or searching, and stumbling and
falling, or being bitten by a snake or scorpion, causes great distress and
suffering. Keeping more bedding and seats than is allowed by the ascetic code,
overcoming others, insulting gurus and others, and constantly creating new
quarrels and disputes, cause disturbance in the community. Being expelled from
the community and suffering from illness due to eating all day also cause great
suffering to oneself. Therefore, all these twenty actions are called
Unsteadiness Stands.  141 - Munisuvrat Arhat was twenty Dhanus tall. All the
Ghonodadhivatavalaya are said to be twenty thousand yojanas thick. The Devagana
of the Devendra, the king of the Pranas, are said to be twenty thousand in
number. The karma of the Napumsakavedaniya, in comparison to the new karma-
bandha, is said to be twenty koda-kodi sagaropama in its [superior] state. The
Pratyakhyana, the previous, is said to be twenty Vathu, meaning the number of
chapters. The Utsarpini and Avasarpini Mandal (R-cycle) are said to be twenty
koda-kodi sagaropama in time. The meaning is that the Utsarpini time is ten
koda-kodi sagaropama and the Avasarpini time is ten koda-kodi sagaropama,
together they make up one time cycle of twenty koda-kodi sagaropama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viMzatisthAnaka-samavAya] [61 calanA, 2. apramArjitacArI honA, 3.
duSpramArjitacArI honA, 4. atirikta zayyA-Asana rakhanA 5. rAtnika sAdhaoM kA
parAbhava karanA, 6.sthavira sAdhaoM ko doSa lagAkara unakA upaghAta yA apamAna
karanA. 7. bhatoM (ekendriya jIvoM) kA vyartha upaghAta karanA. 8.sadA roSayakta
pravatti karanA. 9. atikrodha karanA 10. pITha pIche dUsare kA avarNavAda
karanA, 11. nirantara-sadA hI dUsaroM ke guNoM kA vilopa karanA, jo vyakti dAsa
yA cora nahIM hai, use dAsa yA cora Adi kahanA, 12. nitya naye adhikaraNoM
(kalaha athavA dakoM) ko utpanna karanA, 13.kSamA kiye hue yA upazAnta hue
adhikaraNoM (lar3AI-jhagar3oM) ko punaH punaH jAgRta karanA, 14. sarajaska
(sacetana dhUli Adi se yukta hAtha-paira rakhanA, sarajaska hAtha vAle vyakti se
bhikSA grahaNa karanA aura sarajaska sthaMDila Adi para calanA,sarajaska AsanAdi
para baiThanA, 15. akAla meM svAdhyAya karanA aura kAla meM svAdhyAya nahIM
karanA, 16.kalaha karanA, 17. rAtri meM ucca svara se svAdhyAya aura vArtAlApa
karanA, 18. gaNa yA saMgha meM phUTa DAlane vAle vacana bolanA, 19. sUryodaya se
lekara sUryAsta hone taka khAte-pIte rahanA tathA 20. eSaNAsamiti kA pAlana
nahIM karanA aura aneSaNIya bhakta pAna ko grahaNa krnaa| vivecana-jina kAryoM
ke karane se apane yA dUsare vyaktiyoM ke citta meM saMkleza utpanna ho unako
asamAdhisthAna kahate haiN| sUtra-pratipAdita sabhI kAryoM se dUsaroM ko to
saMkleza aura du:kha hotA hI hai, sAtha hI ukta kAryoM ke karane vAloM ko bhI
binA dekhe, zodhe dhapa dhapa karate hue calane para Thokara Adi lagane se,
tathA sA~pa, bicchU Adi ke dvArA kATa lie jAne para mahAn saMkleza aura du:kha
utpanna hotA hai| sAdhu maryAdA se adhika zayyA AsanAdi ke rakhane para, dUsaroM
kA parAbhava karane para, gurujanAdikoM kA apamAna karane para aura nitya naye
jhagar3e-TaMTe uThAne para saMgha meM vikSobha utpanna hotA hai aura saMgha
dvArA bahiSkAra kara diye jAne para tathA dina bhara khAne se rogAdi ho jAne
para svayaM ko bhI bhArI du:kha paidA hotA hai| isalie ukta sabhI bIsoM kAryoM
ko asamAdhisthAna kahA gayA hai| 141 -muNisuvvae NaM arahA vIsaM dhaNUiM uDDe
uccatteNaM hotthaa| savvevi a ghaNodahI vIsaM joyaNasahassAiM bAhalleNaM
pnnnnttaa| pANayassa NaM deviMdassa devagaNo vIsaM sAmANiasAhassIo
pnnnnttaao|nnpuNsyveynnijss NaM kammassa vIsaM sAgarovamakoDAkoDIo baMdhao
baMdhaThiI pnnnnttaa| paccAkkhANassa NaM puvvassa vIsaM vatthU pnnnnttaa|
ussappiNiosappiNimaMDale vIsaM sAgarovamakoDAkoDIo kAlo pnnnntto| _munisuvrata
arhat bIsa dhanuSa UMce the| sabhI ghanodadhivAtavalaya bIsa hajAra yojana moTe
kahe gaye haiN| prANata devarAja devendra ke sAmAnika deva bIsa hajAra kahe gaye
haiN| napuMsaka vedanIya karma kI, navIna karmabandha kI apekSA [utkRSTa] sthiti
bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| pratyAkhyAna pUrva ke bIsa vastu nAmaka
arthAdhikAra kahe gaye haiN| utsarpiNI aura avasarpiNI maMDala (Ara-cakra) bIsa
kor3A-kor3I sAgaropama kAla parimita kahA gayA hai| abhiprAya yaha hai ki dasa
kor3AkoDI sAgaropama kA utsarpiNI kAla aura dasa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kA
avasarpiNIkAla mila kara bIsa kor3Akor3I sAgaropama kA eka kAlacakra kahalAtA
hai|

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[62] In the Ratnaprabha earth, the state of twenty types of hell beings is said
to be twenty *palyopamas*. In the sixth, the *Tamasprabha* earth, the state of
twenty types of hell beings is said to be twenty *sayropamas*. The state of
twenty types of *asurakumara* gods is said to be twenty *palyopamas*. In the
*Soudharma-Ishana* kalpas, the state of twenty types of gods is said to be
twenty *palyopamas*. In the *Pranat* kalpa, the excellent state of gods is said
to be twenty *sayropamas*.  [143] In the *Aran* kalpa, the inferior state of
gods is said to be twenty *sayropamas*. Those gods who are born in the *sapt*,
*visat*, *suvisat*, *siddhath*, *utpal*, *bhittil*, *tigichch*, *disasouvastik*,
*palamb*, *ruchir*, *pushp*, *supushp*, *puspavart*, *pushpaprabh*,
*pushpakant*, *pushpavarna*, *pushpalessya*, *pushpadhvaj*, *pushpasring*,
*pushpasiddha* (or *pushpasrisht*), and *pushpottaravatansak* types of *vimanas*
as gods, their excellent state is said to be twenty *sayropamas*. Those gods
breathe in and out after twenty half-months (ten months). They feel the desire
for food after twenty thousand years.  There are many *bhavya-siddhika* beings
who will become *siddhas*, *buddhas*, free from karmas, attain *parinirvana*,
and end all suffering after twenty *bhav* births.  || *Vimsati-Sthanak Samavay*
is complete ||  [144] *Ekavimsati-Sthanak Samavay* - Twenty-one strengths are
described, as follows: 1. Strength in performing manual labor. 2. Strength in
serving a lover. 3. Strength in enjoying royal food. 4. Strength in enjoying
food prepared by oneself. 5. Strength in enjoying food offered by a *sagariya*.
6. Strength in enjoying food offered by a *uddesiya* who gives a *kiya* and
*ahatu*. 7. Strength in enjoying food offered by a *padiyaikkhetta*. 8. Strength
in counting and calculating for six months. 9. Strength in performing *dagaleve*
for a month. 10. Strength in serving a *maithaana* for a month.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62] [samavAyAGgasUtra 142-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM
neraiyANaM vIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| chaTThIe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM
NeraiyANaM vIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa|asurkumaaraannN devANaM
atthogaiyANaM vIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| sohammIsANesu kappesu
atthegaiyANaM devANaM vIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| pANate kappe devANaM
ukkoseNaM vIsa sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| - isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM
kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti bIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| chaThI tamaHprabhA
pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti bIsa sAyaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka
asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti bIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpoM
meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti bIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| prANata kalpa meM
devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti bIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| 143 -AraNe kappe devANaM
jahaNNeNaM vIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA sAyaM visAyaM suvisAyaM
siddhatthaM uppalaM bhittilaM, tigicchaM disAsovatthiyaM palaMbaM ruilaM puSpaM
supuSpaM puSpAvattaM puSphapabhaM puSphakaMtaM puSphavaNNaM puSphalesaM
puSpajjhayaM puSphasiMgaM puSphasiddhaM pupphattaravaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe
uvavaNNA tesi NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM vIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM
devA vIsAe addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vA,
tesiM Na devANaM vIsAe vAsasahassehiM AhAraThe smuppjji|| saMtegaiA bhavasiddhiA
jIvA je vIsAe bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti
parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| AraNa kalpa meM devoM kI jaghanya
sthiti bIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| vahA~ jo deva sAta, visAta, suvisAta,
siddhArtha, utpala, bhittila, tigiMcha, dizAsauvastika, pralamba, rucira, puSpa,
supuSpa, puSpAvarta, puSpaprabha puSpakAnta, puSpavarNa, puSpalezya,
puSpadhvaja, puSpazRMga, puSpasiddha (puSpasRSTa) aura puSpottarAvataMsaka nAma
ke viziSTa vimAnoM meM deva rUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa
sthiti bIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva bIsa ardhamAsoM (dazamAsoM) ke bAda
Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ko bIsa hajAra varSoM ke
bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| . kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM
jo bIsa bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge,
paramanirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|
||viNshtisthaank samavAya samApta  //  ekaviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya 144-ekkavIsaM
sabalA paNNattA, taM jahA-hatthakammaM karemANe sabale 1, mehuNaM paDisevamANe
sabale 2, rAibhoaNaM bhuMjamANe sabale 3, AhAkammaM bhuMjamANe sabale 4,
sAgAriyaM piMDaM bhuMjamANe sabale 5, uddesiyaM kIyaM AhaTu dinjamANaM
bhuMjamANe sabale 6, abhikkhaNaM paDiyAikkhettA NaM bhuMjamANe sabale 7 aMto
chaNhaM mAsANaM gaNAo gaNaM saMkamamANe sabale 8 aMto mAsassa tao dagaleve
karemANe sabale 9, aMto mAsassa tao mAIThANe sevamANe sabale 10,

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twenty-One Shabala (Defilements)  **[Ekavimsati Sthanaka - Samavaya]**
**[63]**  1. Shabala who consumes Rajapinda (food offered to a king). 2. Shabala
who intentionally kills earth and other living beings. 3. Shabala who
intentionally speaks untruth. 4. Shabala who intentionally takes something
without being given. 5. Shabala who intentionally sits or lies down on the
earth, knowing it is inhabited by living beings. 6. Shabala who intentionally
sits or lies down on stone, wood, or other places inhabited by living beings. 7.
Shabala who intentionally sits or lies down on places inhabited by living
beings, such as those with plants, trees, insects, or water. 8. Shabala who
intentionally consumes root, tuber, bark, seaweed, flower, fruit, or green
vegetables. 9. Shabala who bathes in water ten times in a year. 10. Shabala who
consumes Maya-Sthan (a place of illusion) ten times in a year. 11. Shabala who
consumes food or drink with hands wet with cold water.  **These twenty-one
Shabala are considered defilements that weaken one's character and lead to
karmic bondage.**  **[145]**  **These twenty-one Shabala are further categorized
into four types of karma:**  1. **Appa-chakkhana-ka-sae** (Karma that obscures
the knowledge of the soul):     * **Krodha** (Anger)     * **Mana** (Pride)
* **Maya** (Illusion)     * **Lobha** (Greed) 2. **Paccha-kkhana-avaranaka-sae**
(Karma that covers the soul and prevents it from seeing the truth):     *
**Krodha** (Anger)     * **Mana** (Pride)     * **Maya** (Illusion)     *
**Lobha** (Greed)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekaviMzatisthAnaka - samavAya ] [ 63 rAyapiMDaM bhuMjamANe sabale 11, AuTTiAe
pANAivAyaM karemANe sabale 12, AuTTiAe musAvAyaM vadamANe sabale 13, AuTTiyAe
AdiNNAdANaM giNhamANe sabale 14, AuTTiyAe aNaMtarahiAe puDhavIe ThANaM vA
nisIhiyaM vA cetemANe sabale 15, evaM AuTTiA cittamaMtAe puDhavIe, evaM AuTTi
cittamaMtAe silAe kolAvAsaMsi vA dArue aNNayare vA tahappagAre ThANaM vA sijjaM
vA nisIhiyaM vA cetemANe sabale 16, jIvapaiTThie sapANe sabIe saharie sauttiMge
paNaga- daga-maTTImakkaDAsaMtANae tahappagAre ThANaM vA sijjaM vA nisIhiyaM vA
cetemANe sabale 17, AuTTiAe mUlabhoyaNaM vA kaMdabhoyaNaM vA tayAbhoyaNaM vA,
pavAlabhoyaNaM vA pupphabhoyaNaM vA phalabhoyaNaM vA hariyabhoyaNaM vA
bhuMjamANe sabale 18, aMto saMvaccharassa dasa dagaleve karemANe sabale 19, aMto
saMvaccha rassa dasa mAiThANAI sevamANe sabale 20, abhikkhaNaM abhikkhaNaM
sItodayaviyaDavagghAriyapANiNA asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA
paDigAhittA bhuMjamANe sabale 21  /  ikkIsa zabala kahe gaye haiM (jo doSarupa
kriyA-vizeSoM ke dvArA apane cAritra ko zabala karburita, malina yA dhabboM se
dUSita karate haiM) jaise- - 1. hasta maithuna karane vAlA zabala, 2. strI Adi
ke sAtha maithuna sevana karane vAlA zabala, 3. rAta meM bhojana karane vAlA
zabala, 4. AdhA-karmika bhojana ko sevana karane vAlA zabala, 5. sAgArika (
zayyAtara sthAna - dAtA) kA bhojana-piMDa grahaNa karane vAlA zabala, 6.
auddezika, bAjAra se krIta aura anyatra se lAkara diye gaye (abhyAhata) bhojana
ko khAne vAlA zabala, 7. bAra-bAra pratyAkhyAna (tyAga) kara puna: usI vastu ko
sevana karane vAlA zabala, 8. chaha mAsa ke bhItara eka gaNa se dUsare gaNa meM
jAne vAlA zabala, 9. eka mAsa ke bhItara tIna vAra nAbhi pramANa jala meM
avagAhana yA praveza karane vAlA zabala, 10. eka mAsa ke bhItara tIna bAra
mAyAsthAna ko sevana karane vAlA zabala, 11. rAjapiNDa khAne vAlA zabala, 12.
jAna-bUjha kara pRthavI Adi jIvoM kA ghAta karane vAlA zabala, 13. jAna-bUjha
kara asatya vacana bolane vAlA zabala, 14. jAna-bUjhakara binA dI ( huI) vastu
ko grahaNa karane vAlA zabala, 15. jAna-bUjhakara anantarhita (sacitta) pRthivI
para sthAna, Asana, kAyotsarga Adi karane vAlA zabala, 16. isI prakAra jAna-
bUjha kara sacetana pRthivI para, sacetana zilA para aura kolAvAsa (ghuna vAlI)
lakar3I Adi para sthAna, zayana Asana Adi karane vAlA zabala, 17. jIva-
pratiSThita, prANa- yukta, sabIja, harita - sahita, kIr3e-makor3e vAle, panaka,
udaka, mRttikA kIr3InagarA vAle evaM isI prakAra ke anya sthAna para avasthAna,
zayana, AsanAdi karane vAlA zabala, 18. jAna-bUjha kara mUla- bhojana,
kandabhojana, tvak- bhojana, prabAla- bhojana, puSpa - bhojana, phala- bhojana
aura harita - bhojana karane vAlA zabala, 19. eka varSa ke bhItara daza vAra
jalAvagAhana yA jala meM praveza karane vAlA zabala, 20. eka varSa ke bhItara
daza vAra mAyAsthAnoM kA sevana karane vAlA zabala aura 21. vAra-vAra zItala
jala se vyApta hAthoM se azana, pAna, khAdima aura svAdima vastuoM ko grahaNa
kara khAne vAlA zabala  /  145 - NiaTTibAdarassa NaM khavittasattayassa
mohaNijjassa kammassa ekkavIsaM kammaMsA saMtakammA paNNattA, taM jahA -
appaccakkhANakasAe kohe, appaccakkhANakasAe mANe, appaccakkhANakasAe mAyA,
appaccakkhANakasAe lobhe, paccakkhANAvaraNakasAe kohe, paccakkhANAvaraNakasAe
mANe paccakkhANAvaraNakasAe mAyA paccakkhANAvaraNakasAe lohe,

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[64] [Samvayanga Sutra [Sanjalanakasae Kohe, Sanjalanakasae Mane, Sanjalanakasae
Maya, Sanjalanakasae Lohe] Itthivede Pumvede Napumvede Hase Arati-rati-bhaya-
soga-duguncha. The twenty-one states of being of the mohaniya karma of the
liberated, restrained, and tranquil, who have destroyed the seven natures,
namely the four anantanubandhi and the three darshanamohatrika (mithyatva,
misra, and samyaktva mohaniya), are said to be as follows: 1. Apratyakhyana
krodhakashaya, 2. Apratyakhyana manakashaya, 3. Apratyakhyana mayakashaya, 4.
Apratyakhyana lobhakashaya, 5. Pratyakhyanavaran krodhakashaya, 6.
Pratyakhyanavaran manakashaya, 7. Pratyakhyanavaran mayakashaya, 8.
Pratyakhyanavaran lobhakashaya, [9. Sanjwalan krodhakashaya, 10. Sanjwalan
manakashaya, 11. Sanjwalan mayakashaya, 12. Sanjwalan lobhakashaya], 13.
Striveda, 14. Purushaveda, 15. Napumsakveda, 16. Hasya, 17. Arati, 18. Rati, 19.
Bhaya, 20. Shoka, and 21. Duguncha (jugupsa). 146-Ekka-mekkae nan osappini ae
panchama-chhatthao samao ekka-visan ekka-visan vasasahssain kalena panattao, tan
jaha-dusama, dusama-dusama, egamegae nan ussappini ae padhama-vitiao samao ekka-
visan ekka-visan vasasahssain kalena panattao, tan jaha-dusama-dusamae, dusamae
ya. The fifth and sixth aras of each avasarpinī are said to be twenty-one
thousand years each, such as dushama and dushama-dushama. The first and second
aras of each utsarpinī are said to be twenty-one thousand years each, such as
dushama-dushama and dushama. 147-Imise nan rayan-prabhae pudhavi ae
atthagaiyanan neraiyanan ekka-visan paliyovamai thii panatta. Chhatthie pudhavi
ae atthagaiyanan neraiyanan ekka-visan sagarovamain thii panatta. Asura-
kumaranan devanan atthagaiyanan ekka-visan paliyovamai thii panatta. In this
Ratna-prabha earth, the state of being of many narakas is said to be twenty-one
palyopama. In the sixth Tamah-prabha earth, the state of being of many narakas
is said to be twenty-one sagaropama. The state of being of many Asura-kumaras
and devas is said to be twenty-one palyopama. 148-Soham-misane-sukappe-su
atthagaiyanan devanan ekka-visan paliyovamain thii panatta. Aranae kappe devanan
ukkosenan ekka-visan sagarovamain thii panatta. In the Saudharma-Ishana kalpas,
the state of being of many devas is said to be twenty-one palyopama. In the
Aranakalpa, the excellent state of being of devas is said to be twenty-one
sagaropama. 149-Accute kappe devanan jahananenan ekka-visan sagarovamai thii
panatta. Je deva sirivassan siridamakandam mallam kitam chavonnatam arannava-
dimsagam vimanan devattae uvavanna, tesi nan devanan ekka-visan sagarovamai thii
panatta. Te nan deva ekka-visae addhamasanan anamati va, panamati va, ussansati
va, nissansati va. Tesi nan devanan ekka-visae vasasahssehi aharattae
samuppjjai. In the Accutakalpa, the state of being of devas is said to be
twenty-one sagaropama. Those devas who have a sirivassana, siridamakanda, malla,
kita, chavonnata, arannava-dimsaga, and vimana as their devatta, their state of
being is said to be twenty-one sagaropama. Those devas inhale, exhale, eat, and
drink for twenty-one half-months. Their food arises from twenty-one thousand
years.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64] [samavAyAGgasUtra [saMjalaNakasAe kohe,saMjalaNakasAe mANe,saMjalaNakasAe
mAyA,saMjalaNakasAe lohe ] itthivede puMvede NapuMvede hAse arti-rti-bhy-sog-
duguNchaa| jisane anantAnubandhI catuSka aura darzanamohatrika (mithyAtva, mizra
evaM samyaktvamohanIya) ina sAta prakRtiyoM kA kSaya kara diyA hai aise kSAyika
samyagdRSTi aSTama guNasthAnavartI nivRtti bAdara saMyata ke mohanIya karma kI
ikkIsa prakRtiyoM kA sattva kahA gayA hai| jaise- 1. apratyAkhyAna krodhakaSAya,
2. apratyAkhyAna mAnakaSAya,3. apratyAkhyAna mAyAkaSAya, 4. apratyAkhyAna
lobhakaSAya,5.pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa krodhakaSAya, 6. pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAnakaSAya,
7. pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa mAyAkaSAya, 8. pratyAkhyAnAvaraNa lobhakaSAya, [9.
saMjvalana krodhakaSAya, 10. sajvalana mAnakaSAya, 11. sajvalana mAyAkaSAya
saMjvalana lobhakaSAya] 13. strIveda, 14. puruSaveda, 15. napuMsakaveda, 16.
hAsya, 17. arati, 18. rati, 19. bhaya, 20. zoka aura 21. duguMchA (jugupsA)
146-ekkamekkAe NaM osappiNIe paMcama-chaTThAo samAo ekkavIsaM ekkavIsaM
vAsasahassAiM kAleNaM paNNattAo, taM jahA-dUsamA, dUsamadUsamA, egamegAe NaM
ussappiNIe paDhama-vitiAo samAo ekkavIsaM ekkavIsaM vAsasahassAI kAleNa
paNNattAo, taM jahAdUsamadUsamAe, dUsamAe y| pratyeka avasarpiNI ke pAMcaveM
aura chaThe Are ikkIsa-ikkIsa hajAra varSa ke kAla vAle kahe gaye haiM jaise-
duHSamA aura duHssm-duHssmaa| pratyeka utsarpiNI ke prathama aura dvitIya Are
ikkIsa-ikkIsa hajAra varSa ke kAla vAle kahe gaye haiN| jaise-du.Sama-duHSamA
aura duHssmaa| 147-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM
ekkavIsaM paliovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| chaTThIe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM
ekkavIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM
egavIsapaliovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM
kI sthiti ikkIsa palyopama kI kahI gaI hai| chaThI tamaHprabhA pRthivI meM
kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti ikkIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra
devoM kI sthiti ikkIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| 148-sohammIsANesukappesu
atthegaiyANaM devANaM ekkavIsaMpaliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| AraNe kappe devANaM
ukkoseNaM ekkavIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| _ saudharma-IzAna kalpoM meM
kitaneka devoM kI sthiti ikkIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| AraNakalpa meM devoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti ikkIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| 149 - accute kappe devANaM
jahaNaNeNaM ekkavIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA sirivacchaM
siridAmakaMDaM mallaM kiTaM cAvoNNataM araNNavaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe
uvavaNNA, tesi NaM devANaM ekkavIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devA
ekkavIsAe addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vaa|
tesi NaM devANaM ekkavIsAe vAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe smuppjji|

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twenty-Second Stana-Samvaya  **[65]  **There are many Bhavyasiddhi Jivas who
will attain Siddhi, become Buddhas, be liberated from karmas, attain Nirvana,
and end all suffering after experiencing twenty-one Bhava-grahanas.  **[Achyut
Kalpa]** In the Achyut Kalpa, the lowest state of Devas is described as twenty-
one Sagaropama. The Devas who are born in the Vimanas called Srivatsa,
Sridamakanḍa, Malla, Kṛṣṭa, Chaponnata, and Aranavataska are said to be in the
state of twenty-one Sagaropama. These Devas take their breath (Anpraṇ or
Ucchvāsa-Niḥśvāsa) after twenty-one Ardhamasas (ten and a half months). Their
desire for food arises after twenty-one thousand years.  **[Ekavimsati-Stana-
Samvaya Samāpta]**  **[Twenty-Second Stana-Samvaya]**  **[150]** There are
twenty-two Pariṣahas, namely: 1. Digincchā Pariṣaha, 2. Pipāsā Pariṣaha, 3. Sīta
Pariṣaha, 4. Uṣṇa Pariṣaha, 5. Daṃśa-Maśaka Pariṣaha, 6. Acela Pariṣaha, 7.
Arati Pariṣaha, 8. Itthī Pariṣaha, 9. Cariyā Pariṣaha, 10. Niṣidhyā Pariṣaha,
11. Sijjā Pariṣaha, 12. Akkosa Pariṣaha, 13. Vaha Pariṣaha, 14. Jāyaṇā Pariṣaha,
15. Alābha Pariṣaha, 16. Roga Pariṣaha, 17. Taṇaphāsa Pariṣaha, 18. Jalla
Pariṣaha, 19. Saccāra-Puraskāra Pariṣaha, 20. Prajñā Pariṣaha, 21. Aṇṇāṇa
Pariṣaha, and 22. Adarśana Pariṣaha.  **[Explanation]** Pariṣaha refers to the
hardships or difficulties that are willingly endured with the intention of not
falling from the path of liberation and exhausting the accumulated karmas. These
are twenty-two in number, as mentioned above.  **[151]** In the twelfth Anga,
called Dṛṣṭivāyassa, there are twenty-two Sutras which are Chinn-Chhedanayika
according to the Svayam-Samaya-Sutra-Paripaṭī. These twenty-two Sutras are
Acchinn-Chhedanayika according to the Ajīvika-Sutra-Paripaṭī. These twenty-two
Sutras are Nayatrikasambandhi according to the Trairāśika-Sutra-Paripaṭī. These
twenty-two Sutras are Chatuṣkanayika, meaning they are explained from the
perspective of four Nayas.  **[Explanation]** The Nay that accepts the Chinn
Sutra with Chheda or Bheda, i.e., with distinction from other Ślokas, etc., is
called...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya] [65 saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiA jIvA je ekkabIsAe
bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujjhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| acyuta kalpa meM devoM kI jaghanya sthiti ikkIsa
sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| vahA~ jo deva zrIvatsa, zrIdAmakANDa, malla, kRSTa,
cAponnata aura AraNAvataMsaka nAma ke vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM,
una devoM kI sthiti ikkIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva ikkIsa ardhamAsoM
(sADhe daza mAsoM) ke bAda AnaprANa yA ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ke
ikkIsa hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka
bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo ikkIsa bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge,
buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge, aura sarva
duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //  ekaviMzatisthAnaka samavAya samApta  //
dvAviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya 150 vAvIsaM parIsahA paNNattA, taM jahA-
digiMchAparIsahe 1, pivAsAparIsahe 2, sItaparIsahe 3, usiNaparIsahe 4,
daMsamasagaparIsahe 5, acelaparIsahe 6, araiparIsahe 7, itthIparIsahe 8,
cariAparIsahe 9, nisIhiAparIsahe 10, sijjAparIsahe 11, akkosaparIsahe 12,
vahaparIsahe 13 jAyaNAparIsahe 14 alAbhaparIsahe 15, rogaparIsahe 16,
taNaphAsaparIsahe 17, jallaparIsahe 18, sakkArapurakkAraparIsahe 19,
paNNAparIsahe 20, aNNANaparIsahe 21, adaMsaNaparIsahe 22 /  bAIsa parISaha kahe
gaye haiN| jaise-1. digiMchA (bubhukSA) parISaha, 2. pipAsAparISaha,3.
zItaparISaha, 4. uSNaparISaha, 5 . daMzamazakaparISaha, 3. acelaparISaha, 7.
aratiparISaha, 8. strIparISaha, 8. caryAparISaha, 10. niSadyAparISaha, 11
zayyAparISaha,12. AkrozaparISaha, 13. vadhaparISaha, 14. yAcanAparISaha, 15.
alAbhaparISaha, 16. rogaparISaha, 17. tRNasparzaparISaha, 18. jallaparISaha, 19.
satkAra-puraskAraparISaha, 20. prajJAparISaha, 21. ajJAnaparISaha aura 22.
adrshnpriissh| vivecana - mokSamArga se patana na ho aura pUrva saMcita karmoM
kI nirjarA ho, isa bhAvanA se bhUkha, pyAsa, zIta, uSNa, DAMsa-macchara Adi kI
jo bAdhA yA kaSTa svayaM sambhAvapUrvaka sahana kiye jAte haiM, unheM parISaha
kahA jAtA hai| ve bAIsa haiM, jinake nAma Upara ginAye gaye haiN|
151-diTThivAyassa NaM vAvIsaM suttAI chinnacheyaNaiyAiM sasamayasuttaparivADIe,
vAvIsaM suttAI acchinnacheyaNaiyAI AjIviyasuttaparivADIe, vAvIsaM suttAiM
tikaNaiyAiM terAsiyasuttaparivADIe, vAvIsaM suttAiM caukkaNaiyAiM
smysuttprivaaddiie| dRSTivAda nAmaka bArahaveM aMga meM bAIsa sUtra
svasamayasUtraparipATI se chinna-chedanayika haiN| bAIsa sUtra
AjIvikasUtraparipATI se acchinna-chedanayika haiN| bAIsa sUtra
trairAzikasUtraparipATI se nayatrikasambandhI haiN| bAIsa sUtra catuSkanayika
haiM jo cAra nayoM kI apekSA se kahe gaye haiN| vivecana-jo naya chinna sUtra ko
cheda yA bheda se svIkAra karatA hai, arthAt dUsare zlokAdi kI

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **66]** [Samvayanga Sutra does not depend on others, it
is called Chhedanayasthit. Just like the verse 'Dhammo Mangalamuktim' etc. does
not depend on other verses to reveal its meaning. Similarly, the Sutras which
are Chhinna Chhedanaya are called Chhinna Chhedanayik. There are twenty-two such
Sutras in the Drishtivad Anga which are explained according to the practice or
method of Jainism. The Nay which depends on the Chhed of the Achhinna (Abhinna)
Sutra is called Achhinna Chhedanak, i.e., it depends on the second and
subsequent verses. Twenty-two such Sutras are spoken according to the practice
of Ajivika Goshalak's opinion. The Sutras which are spoken with the dependence
of the three Nays - Dravyastik, Paryayastik and Ubayastik - are called
Trikanayik or Trairasik according to the practice of their opinion. The Sutras
which are spoken with the dependence of the four Nays - Sangrah, Vyavahar,
Rijusutra and Shabdaditrik - are called Chatushkanayik. They are related to
their own time.  **152-Twenty-two types of Pudgala Parinam (Dharma) are
mentioned, such as:** 1. Krishnavarna Parinam, 2. Neelavarna Parinam, 3.
Lohitavarna Parinam, 4. Haridravana Parinam, 5. Shuklavarna Parinam, 6.
Surabhigandha Parinam, 7. Durabhigandha Parinam, 8. Tiktarasa Parinam, 9.
Katukaras Parinam, 10. Kshayarasa Parinam, 11. Amla Rasa Parinam, 12. Madhura
Rasa Parinam, 13. Karkasha Sparsha Parinam, 14. Mrdu Sparsha Parinam, 15. Guru
Sparsha Parinam, 16. Laghu Sparsha Parinam, 17. Shita Sparsha Parinam, 18. Ushna
Sparsha Parinam, 19. Snigdha Sparsha Parinam, 20. Rooksha Sparsha Parinam, 21.
Agurulaghu Sparsha Parinam and 22. Gurulaghu Sparsha Parinam.  **153-In this
Ratnapraba Earth, the state of many Narakas is said to be twenty-two Palyopama.
In the sixth Tamaspraba Earth, the excellent state of Narakas is said to be
twenty-two Sagaropama. In the lowest seventh Tamasthma Earth, the state of many
Narakas is said to be twenty-two Sagaropama. The state of many Asurakumaras and
Devas is said to be twenty-two Palyopama. In the Saudharma-Ishana Kalpas, the
state of many Devas is said to be twenty-two Palyopama.**  **154-In the Aachuta
Kalpa, the state of Devas [excellent] is said to be twenty-two Sagaropama. The
lower...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66] [samavAyAGgasUtra apekSA nahIM rakhatA hai, vaha chedanayasthita kahalAtA
hai| jaise 'dhammo maMgalamukTiM' ityAdi zloka apane artha ko prakaTa karane ke
lie anya zloka kI apekSA nahIM rkhtaa| isI prakAra jo sUtra chinnachedanaya vAle
hote haiM unheM chinnachedanayika kahA jAtA hai| dRSTivAda aMga meM aise bAIsa
sUtra haiM jo jinamata kI paripATI yA paddhati se nirUpaNa kiye haiN| jo naya
acchinna (abhinna) sUtra kI cheda se apekSA rakhatA hai, vaha acchinnachedanaka
kahalAtA hai arthAt dvitIya Adi zlokoM kI apekSA rakhatA hai| aise bAIsa sUtra
AjIvika gozAlaka ke mata kI paripATI se kahe gaye haiN| jo sUtra dravyAstika,
paryAyAstika aura ubhayAstika ina tIna nayoM kI apekSA se kahe gaye haiM, ve
trikanayika yA trairAzika mata kI paripATI se kahe gaye haiN| jo sUtra saMgraha,
vyavahAra, RjusUtra aura zabdAditrika, ina cAra nayoM kI apekSA se kahe gaye
haiM ve catuSkanayika kahe jAte haiN| ve svasamaya se sambaddha haiN|
152-vAvIsavihe poggalapariNAme paNNatte, taM jahA-kAlavaNNapariNAme,
nIlavaNNapariNAme, lohiyavaNNapariNAme, haliddavaNNapariName,
sukkillavaNNapariNAme, subbhigaMdhapariNAme, dubbhigaMdhapariNAme,
tittarasapariNAme, kaDayarasapariNAme, kasAyarasapariNAme, aMvilarasapariNAme,
mahurarasapariNAme, kakkhaDaphAsapariNAme, mauyaphAsapariNAme,
guruphAsapariNAme, lahuphAsapariNAme, sItaphAsapariNAme, usiNaphAsapariNAme,
NiddhaphAsapariNAme, lukkhaphAsapariNAme, agurulahuphAsapariNAme,
gurulhuphaasprinnaame| pudgala ke pariNAma (dharma) bAIsa prakAra ke kahe gaye
haiM jaise- 1. kRSNavarNapariNAma 2. nIlavarNapariNAma, 3.lohitavarNapariNAma,
4. hAridravarNapariNAma, 5. zuklavarNapariNAma, 6. surabhigandhapariNAma, 7.
durabhigandhapariNAma, 8. tiktarasapariNAma, 9. kaTukarasapariNAma, 10.
kaSAyarasapariNAma, 11.. AmlarasapariNAma, 12. madhurarasapariNAma, 13.
karkazasparzapariNAma, 14. mRdusparzapariNAma, 15. gurusparzapariNAma, 16.
laghusparzapariNAma, 17. zItasparzapariNAma, 18. uSNasparzapariNAma, 19.
snigdhasparzapariNAma 20. rUkSasparzapariNAma, 21. agurulaghusparzapariNAma aura
22. gurulghusprshprinnaam| 153-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM
neraiyANaM vAvIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| chaTThIe puDhavIe ukkoseNaM
vAvIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| ahesattamAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM
neraiyANaM jahaNaNeNaM vAvIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM
devANaM atthegaiyANaM vAvIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| sohammIsANesu kappesu
atthegaiyANaM devANaM vAvIsa paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| _ isa ratnaprabhA
pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakiyoM kI sthiti bAIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| chaThI
tamaHprabhA pRthivI meM nArakiyoM kI utkRSTa sthiti bAIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI
hai| adhastana sAtavIM tamastamA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakiyoM kI jaghanya
sthiti bAIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti bAIsa
palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti
bAIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| 154-accute kappe devANaM [ ukkoseNaM] vAvIsaM
sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| heTThima

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ Twenty-third Stānaka - Samvāya ] [ 67 The inferior state of the Graiveyakas is
said to be twenty-two Sagaropama. The superior state of the Devas who are born
in the Vimāna called Mahit, Visūhit, Vimala, Prabhāsa, Vanamāla, and
Acyutavadinsaka, is said to be twenty-two Sagaropama. These Devas [ breathe in
and out or take in and give out breath for twenty-two half-months (eleven
months). ] They experience the desire for food after twenty-two thousand years.
The Bhavisiddhika Jīvas who will attain Siddhi, become Buddhas, be liberated
from karmas, attain Parinirvāṇa, and end all suffering, will do so after taking
twenty-two Bhavagrahana. ॥ Twenty-second Stānaka Samvāya ends ॥ [ Twenty-third
Stānaka - Samvāya ] 155 - Twenty-three Sūyagada-jja-yaṇā are said to be: - 1.
Samaya, 2. Vetālika, 3. Uvasagga-parijñā, 4. Thī-parijñā, 5. Naraka-vibhatti, 6.
Mahāvīra-thūi, 7. Kusīla-paribhāsie, 8. Virie, 9. Dhamme, 10. Samāhi, 11. Magge,
12. Samosaraṇe, 13. Āhatta-hie, 14. Ganthe, 15. Jamaiye, 16. Gāthā, 17.
Puṇḍarie, 18. Kiriyā-ṭhāṇa, 19. Āhāra-parijñā, 20. Apacchakkhāṇa-kiriyā, 21.
Anagāra-suyam, 22. Adda-ijjam, 23. Nālanda-ijjam. In the Sūtrakṛtāṅga, twenty-
three studies are mentioned. Such as: 1. Time, 2. Vetālika, 3. Knowledge of the
Uvasagga, 4. Knowledge of Women, 5. Division of Hell, 6. Praise of Mahāvīra, 7.
Definition of Kusīla, 8. Effort, 9. Dharma, 10. Samadhi, 11. Path, 12.
Samvāsaraṇa, 13. Truthfulness (Ākhyāta-hit), 14. Text, 15. Yama-tīta, 16. Gāthā,
17. Puṇḍarīka, 18. Place of Action, 19. Knowledge of Food, 20. Action that is
not to be rejected, 21. The Shruta of the Ascetic, 22. Ārdriya, 23. Nālandiya.
156 - In this Jambudvīpa, in this Bhāratavarsa, in this Avasarpini, twenty-three
Jinas attained Kevala-vara-jñāna and Kevala-vara-darśana at the time of sunrise.
In this Jambudvīpa, in this Avasarpini, these twenty-three Tīrthankaras were
holders of eleven Anga-śruta in their previous births. Such as: Ajita, Sambhava,
Abhinandan, Sumati, up to Pārśvanātha, Mahāvīra. The Arhat Ṛṣabha, the
Kauśalika, was the fourteenth Pūrvī.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 trayoviMzatisthAnaka - samavAya ] [ 67 heTThima-gevejjagANaM devANaM
jahaNaNeNaM vAvIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI paNNattA  /  je devA mahiyaM visUhiyaM
vimalaM pabhAsaM vaNamAlaM accutavaDiMsagaM vimANaM devattAe uvavaNNA, tesiM NaM
devANaM ukkoseNaM vAvIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI paNNattA  /  te NaM devA [ vAvIsaM
addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA nIsasaMti vA  /  ] tesiM NaM
devANaM vAvIsavAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe samuppajjai  /  saMtegaiyA bhavisiddhiyA
jIvA je vAvIsaM bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujjhissaMti muccissaMti
parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM karissaMti  /  acyuta kalpa meM devoM kI [
utkRSTa] sthiti bAIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| adhastana - adhastana graiveyaka
devoM kI jaghanya sthiti bAIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| vahAM jo deva mahita,
visUhita ( vizruta), vimala, prabhAsa, vanamAla aura acyutAvataMsaka nAma ke
vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti bAIsa
sAgarApama kahI gaI hai| ve deva bAIsa ardhamAsoM (gyAraha mAsoM ) ke bAda Ana-
prANa yA ucchvAsa- ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ke bAIsa hajAra varSoM ke bAda
AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai  /  kitaneka bhavasiddhika jIva bAIsa bhava
grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa
ko prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //  dvAviMzatisthAnaka
samavAya samApta  //  trayoviMzatisthAnaka - samavAya 155 - tevIsaM
sUyagaDajjhayaNA paNNattA, taM jahA - samae 1, vetAlie 2, uvasaggapariNNA 3,
thIpariNNA 4, narayavibhattI 5 mahAvIrathuI 6, kusIlaparibhAsie 7, virie 8,
dhamme 9, samAhI 10, magge 11, samosaraNe 12, Ahattahie 13, gaMthe 14, jamaIe
15, gAthA 16, puNDarIe 17, kiriyAThANa 18, AhArapariNNA 19, apaccakkhANakiriA
20, aNagArasuyaM 21, addaijjaM 22, NAlaMdaijjaM 23  /  sUtrakRtAGga meM teIsa
adhyayana kahe gaye haiN| jaise - 1. samaya, 2. vaitAlika, 3. upasargaparijJA, 3
. strIparijJA, 5. narakavibhakti, 6. mahAvIrastuti, 7. kuzolaparibhASita, 8.
vIrya, 9. dharma, 10. samAdhi, 11. mArga 12. samavasaraNa, 13. yAthAtathya (
AkhyAtahita ) 14. grantha 15. yamatIta, 16. gAthA, 17. puNDarIka, 18.
kriyAsthAna, 19. AhAraparijJA, 20. apratyAkhyAnakriyA, 21. anagArazruta, 22.
ArdrIya, 23. nAlandIya  /  156 - jambuddIve NaM dIve bhArahe vAse imINe NaM
osappiNIe tevIsAe jiNANaM sUruggamaNamuhuttaMsi kevalavaranANa- daMsaNe
samuppaNNe  /  jaMbuddIve NaM dIve imIse NaM osappiNIe tevIsaM titthakarA
puvvabhave ekkArasaMgiNI hotthA  /  taM jahA - ajita - sambhava - abhiNaMdaNa -
sumaI jAva pAso vaddhamANo ya  /  usabhe NaM arahA kosalie coddasapuvvI hotthA
/  jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa dvIpa meM, isI bhAratavarSa meM, isI avasarpiNI meM
teIsa tIrthakara jinoM ko sUryodaya muhUrtta meM kevala - vara - jJAna aura
kevala - vara - darzana utpanna hue  /  jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa dvIpa meM isa
avasarpiNIkAla ke teIsa tIrthaMkara pUrvabhava meM gyAraha aMgazruta ke dhArI
the| jaise- ajita, saMbhava, abhinandana, sumati yAvat pArzvanAtha, mahAvIra  /
kauzalika RSabha arhat caturdazapUrvI the  /

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[68] In the Jambudvipa island, twenty-three Tirthankaras of this Avasarpini were
Mandalik Rajas in their previous births. For example, Ajit, Sambhav, Abhinandan,
up to Parshvanath and Vardhaman. The Arhat Rishabhdev, in his previous birth,
was a Chakravarti. [158] In this Ratnapraba earth, the state of many Narakas is
said to be twenty-three Palyopama. In the seventh earth below, the state of many
Narakas is said to be twenty-three Sagaropama. The state of many Asurakumara
Devas is said to be twenty-three Palyopama. The state of many Saudharma Devas is
said to be twenty-three Palyopama. [159] The state of the lowest-middle-
Graiveyak Devas is said to be twenty-three Sagaropama. The Devas who are born in
the lowest Graiveyak Vimanas, their highest state is said to be twenty-three
Sagaropama. These Devas take breath or exhale after twenty-three half-months
(11.5 months). Their desire for food arises after twenty-three thousand years.
Many Bhavyasiddhik Jivas are there who will attain Siddhi, become Buddhas, be
liberated from karmas, attain Nirvana, and end all sufferings after taking
twenty-three births. || Twenty-third Samvaya of the Samvayanga Sutra is complete
|| Twenty-fourth Samvaya of the Samvayanga Sutra [160] Twenty-four Devas are
said to be Devas. For example, Rishabh, Ajit, Sambhav, Abhinandan, Sumai,
Pathama, Supaas, Chandappa, Suvidhi, Siyal, Sijjans, Vasupujj, Vimala, Anant,
Dhamma, Santi, Kunthuar, Malli, Munisuvvay, Nami, Nemi, Parshva, and Vardhaman.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 68] [samavAyAGgasUtra 157-jambuddIveNaM dIve imIse osappiNIe tevIsaM
titthaMkarA putvabhave maMDaliyarAyANo hotthaa|tN jahA-ajita-sambhava-
abhiNaMdaNa jAva pAso vaddhamANe y| usabheNa arahA kosalie puvvabhave cakkavaTTI
hotthaa| jambUdvIpa nAmaka dvIpa meM isa avasarpiNI kAla ke teIsa tIrthaMkara
pUrvabhava meM mAMDalika rAjA the| jaise-ajita, saMbhava, abhinandana yAvat
pArzvanAtha tathA vrdhmaan| kauzalika RSabha arhat pUrvabhava meM cakravartI
the| - 158-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM tevIsaM
paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| ahe sattamAe NaM puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM
tevIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM
tevIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| sohammIsANANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM tevIsaM
paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakiyoM kI
sthiti teIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| adhastana sAtavIM pRthivI meM kitaneka
nArakiyoM kI sthiti teIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI
sthi iteIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma IzAna kalpa meM kitaneka devoM kI
sthiti teIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| 159 - heTThimamajjhimagevijjANaM devANaM
jahaNNeNaM tevIsaM sAgarAvemAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA
heTThimagevejjayavimANesu devattAe uvavaNNA tesi NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM tevIsaM
sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devA tevIsAe addhamAsANaM ANamaMti vA,
pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vaa| tesi NaM devANaM tevIsAe
vAsasahassehiM AhAraTTe smuppjjii| saMtegaiA bhavasiddhiA jIvA je tevIsAe
bhavaggahaNehiM sinjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| adhastana-madhyamagraiveyaka ke devoM kI jaghanya
sthiti teIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| jo deva adhastana graiveyaka vimAnoM meM
devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti teIsa sAgaropama kahI
gaI hai| ve deva teIsa ardhamAsoM (sAr3he gyAraha mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA
ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ke teIsa hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI
icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM, jo teIsa bhava
grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa
ko prApta hoMge aura sarva du:khoM kA anta kreNge|  //  trayoviMzatisthAnaka
samavAya samApta  //  caturviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya 160-cauvvIsaMdevAhidevA
pnnnnttaa|tN jhaa-usbh-ajit-sNbhv-abhinnNdnn-sumiptthmpph-supaas-cNdpph-suvidhi-
siial-sijjNs-vaasupujj-viml-annNt-dhmm-sNti-kuNthuar-mllii-munnisuvvy-nmi-nemii-
paas-vddhmaannaa|

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twenty-four Stanak Samavaya] [69 Twenty-four Devadideva have been mentioned,
such as- Rishabha, Ajita, Sambhava, Abhinandan, Sumati, Padma Prabha, Suparshva,
Chandra Prabha, Suvidhi (Pushpadanta) Sheetal, Shreyans, Vasupujya, Vimala,
Ananta, Dharma, Shanti, Kunthu, Ara, Malli, Munisuvrat, Nami, Nemi, Parshvanath
and Vardhaman. 161-Chullahimavant and Siharin's Vasaharapvavva's Jiwao are said
to be twenty-four thousand nine hundred thirty-two yojanas and one thirty-eighth
part of a yojana, slightly more in length. 162-Twenty-four Devathanas are said
to be with Indra. The rest are without Indra, without Purohita and the Devas
there are called Ahmindra. Discussion- The twenty-four Devathanas which are said
to be with Indra are as follows- Ten places of the ten types of Bhavanvasi
Devas, eight places of the eight types of Vyantar Devas, five places of the five
types of Jyotishka Devas and one place of the Kalpvasi Devas like Saudharma.
Thus, all these together (10+8+5+1=24) are twenty-four. In all these places,
there is a system like king, subjects etc., therefore, their rulers are called
Indra. But in nine Graiveyak and five Anuttar Vimanas, there is no concept of
king, subjects etc., but all the Devas there are of equal wealth and glory, they
all experience themselves as 'Aham Indra:' I am Indra, therefore, they are
called 'Ahmindra' and for this reason, those fourteen places are called Anindra
(without Indra) and Apurohita (without Purohita). This word Apurohita is a sign,
therefore, where there is Indra, there are also Samanik, Trayastrinash,
Atmarakshak, Purohita and Lokpal etc. But where there is no concept of Indra,
those Devathanas are called by words like 'Anindra, Apurohita' etc. 163-When the
Sun is in Uttarayana, it is said that it becomes twenty-four angula-long Purushi
shadow and then it turns back. Ganga-Sindhu, the great rivers, are said to be
twenty-four kos wide at their source. [Similarly] Rakta-Raktavati, the great
rivers, are said to be twenty-four kos wide at their source. 164-In this way,
the earth is said to be twenty-four palas in length, width and height, for the
sake of those who are interested in the light of gems. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya] [69 caubIsa devAdhideva kahe gaye haiM, jaise-
RSabha, ajita, saMbhava, abhinandana, sumati, padmaprabha, supArzva,
candraprabha, suvidhi (puSpadanta) zItala, zreyAnsa, vAsupUjya, vimala, ananta,
dharma, zAnti, kunthu, ara, mallI, munisuvrata, nami, nemi, pArzvanAtha aura
vardhamAna  /  161-cullahimavaMta siharINaM vAsaharapavvayANaM jIvAo cauvvIsaM
cauvvIsaM joyaNasahassAiM Nava-vattIse joyaNasae egaM aTThattIsai bhAgaM
joyaNassa kiMci visesAhiyAo AyAmeNaM pnnnnttaa| kSullaka himavanta aura zikharI
varSadhara parvatoM kI jIvAeM caubIsa-caubIsa hajAra nau sau battIsa yojana aura
eka yojana ke ar3atIsa bhAgoM meM se eka bhAga se kucha adhika lambI kahI gaI
haiN| 162-cauvIsaM devaTThANA saiMdayA paNNattA, sesA ahamiMda aniMdA apurohiaa|
caubIsa devasthAna indra-sahita kahe gaye haiN| zeSa devasthAna indra-rahita,
purohita-rahita haiM aura vahA~ ke deva ahamindra kahe jAte haiN| vivecana-jo
caubIsa devasthAna indra sahita kahe gaye haiM, ve isa prakAra haiM-daza jAti ke
bhavanavAsI devoM ke daza sthAna, ATha jAti ke vyantara devoM ke ATha sthana,
pAMca prakAra ke jyotiSka devoM ke pA~ca sthAna aura saudharmAdi kalpavAsI devoM
kA eka sthaan| isa prakAra ye saba milakara (10+8+5+1=24) caubIsa hote haiN| ina
sabhI sthAnoM meM rAjA prajA Adi jaisI vyavasthA hai, ataH unake adhipatiyoM ko
indra kahA jAtA hai| kintu nau graiveyaka aura pA~ca anuttara vimAnoM meM rAjA
prajA Adi kI kalpanA nahIM hai, kintu vahA~ ke sabhI deva samAna aizvarya evaM
vaibhava vAle haiM, ve sabhI apane ko 'aham indra :' maiM indra hU~ isa prakAra
anubhava karate haiM, isaliye ve 'ahamindra' kahalAte haiM aura isI kAraNa una
caudaha hI sthAnoM ko anindra (indra-rahita) aura apurohita (purohita-rahita)
kahA gayA hai| yaha apurohita zabda upalakSaNa hai, ata: jahA~ indra hotA hai,
vahA~ usake sAtha sAmAnika, trAyastriMza, AtmarakSaka, purohita aura lokapAlAdi
bhI hote haiN| kintu jahA~ indra kI kalpanA nahIM hai, una devasthAnoM ko
'anindra, apurohitta' Adi zabdoM se kahA gayA hai| 163-uttarAyaNagate NaM sUrie
cauvIsaMgulie porisichAyaM NivvattaittA NaM nniatttttti| gaMgA-siMdhUo NaM
mahANadIo pavAhe sAtiregeNaM cauvIsaM kose vitthAreNaM pnnnntte|rtt-rttvtiio NaM
mahANadIo pavAhe sAtiregeNaM cauvIsaM kose vitthAreNaM pnnnntte| uttarAyaNa-gata
sUrya caubIsa aMgulavAlI pauruSI chAyA ko karake karka saMkrAnti ke dina
sarvAbhyantara maMDala se nivRtta hotA hai, arthAt dUsare maMDala para AtA hai|
gaMgA-sindhu mahAnadiyA~ pravAha (udgama)-sthAna para kucha adhika caubIsa-
caubIsa koza vistAra vAlI kahI gaI haiN| [isI prakAra] raktA-raktavatI
mahAnadiyA~ pravAha-sthAna para kucha adhika caubIsa-caubIsa koza vistAravAlI
kahI gaI haiN| 164-imINe NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiANaM neraiyANaM ThiI
cauvIsaM paliovamAiM

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[70] In the Ratnapraba earth, the state of many hell beings is said to be like
twenty-four palya-upamas. In the seventh earth below, the state of many hell
beings is said to be like twenty-four sagara-upamas. The state of many Asura-
kumaras (demigods) is said to be like twenty-four palya-upamas. In the
Saudharma-Isana kalpa, the state of many gods is said to be like twenty-four
palya-upamas. [165] The state of the lowest and highest Praiveyak gods is said
to be like twenty-four sagara-upamas. The gods who are born in the lowest and
middle Praiveyak vimanas, their state is said to be like twenty-four sagara-
upamas. These gods breathe in and out every twenty-four half-months (twelve
months). They feel the need for food after twenty-four thousand years. Many
Bhavasiddhika jivas will become Siddhas, Buddhas, liberated from karma, attain
Nirvana, and end all suffering after experiencing twenty-four bhava-grahanas. ||
Twenty-four Sthanaka Samavaya ends || Twenty-five Sthanaka Samavaya [166] The
twenty-five bhavanas of the five-fold path (Panchayama) taught by the first and
last Tirthankaras are as follows: - Five bhavanas related to the five senses:
Iriya-samii, Mana-gutti, Vaya-gutti, Aloya-pan-bhoyan, Adana-bhanda-mattanik-
khevan-asii. - Five bhavanas related to the five passions: Anuvita-bhasanaya,
Krodha-vivege, Lobha-vivege, Bhaya-vivege, Hasa-vivege. - Five bhavanas related
to the five senses: Uggha-anunnavanaya, Uggha-sima-jananaya, Sayameva-uggaha-
anugginhanaya, Sahammiya-uggaha-anunnaviya-paribhujanaya, Saharan-bhatta-pan-
anunnaviya-padi-bhujanaya. - Five bhavanas related to the five senses: Itthi-
pasu-pandaga-samsatta-sayana-san-vajjana, Itthi-kaha-vivajjanaya, Itthinam-
indiyanam-aloyan-vajjana, Puvva-raya-puvva-kiliyanam-ananusaranaya, Panita-
ahara-vivajjanaya. - Five bhavanas related to the five senses: Soi-ndriya-rago-
varai, Chakkhi-ndriya-rago-varai, Ghani-ndriya-rago-varai, Jibi-ndriya-rago-
varai, Phasi-ndriya-rago-varai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 70] [samavAyAGgasUtra pnnnnttaa|ahesttmaae puDhavIe atthegaiANaM neraiyANaM
cauvIsaMsAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|asurkumaaraannN devANaM atthegaiyANaM
cauvIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| sohammIsANe NaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM
cauvIsaM paliovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakiyoM
kI sthiti caubIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| adhastana sAtavIM pRthivI meM kitaneka
nArakiyoM kI sthiti caubIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM
kI sthiti caubIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpa meM kitaneka
devoM kI sthiti caubIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| 165-heTThima-uvarimagevejjANaM
devANaM jahaNNeNaM cauvIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA
heTThimamajjhimagevenjaya vimANesu devattAe uvavaNNA, tesi NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM
cauvIsaM sAgarAvamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| teNaM devA cauvIsAe addhamAsANaM ANamaMti
vA, pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA NIsasaMti vaa| tesi NaM devANaM cauvIsAe
vAsasahassehiM AhAraTTe smuppjji| saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je cauvIsAe
bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujjhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| adhastana-uparima praiveyaka devoM kI jaghanya
sthiti caubIsa sAgarepama kahI gaI hai| jo deva adhastanamadhyama graiveyaka
vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti caubIsa
sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva caubIsa ardhamAsoM (bAraha mAsoM ke bAda Ana-
prANa yA ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ko caubIsa hajAra varSoM ke bAda
AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo
caubIsa bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge,
parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //
caturviMzatisthAnaka samavAya smaapt|| paMcaviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya 166-purima-
pacchimagANaM titthagarANaM paMcajAmassa paNavIsaM bhAvaNAo paNNattAo, taM jahA-
IriAsamiI maNaguttI vayaguttI AloyapANabhoyaNaM AdANa-bhaMDa-mattaNikkhevaNAsiI
5, aNuvItibhAsaNayA kohavivege lobhavivege bhayavivege hAsavivege 5,
uggahaaNuNNavaNayA uggahasImajANaNayA sayameva uggahaM aNugiNaNhaNayA sAhammiya
uggahaM aNuNNaviya paribhuMjaNayA sAhAraNabhattapANaM aNuNNaviya paDibhuMjaNayA
5, itthI-pasu-paMDagasaMsattagasayaNAsaNavajjaNayA itthIkahavivajaNayA itthINaM
iMdiyANamAloyaNavajjaNayA puvvaraya-puvva-kIliANaM aNaNusaraNayA
paNItAhAravivajaNayA 5, soiMdiyarAgovaraI cakkhidiyarAgovaraI
ghANiMdiyarAgovaraI jibhidiyarAgovaraI phAsiMdiyarAgovaraI 5 /  prathama aura
antima tIrthaMkaroM ke (dvArA upadiSTa) paMcayAma kI paccIsa bhAvanAeM kahI gaI
haiM,

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[71 Panchavimshtisthanaka-Samavaya]  Such as- [Five reflections of the Mahavrat
of Pranatipat-viramana or Ahimsa-] 1. Iryasamiiti, 2. Manogupti, 3.
Vachanagupti, 4. Alokitapaan-bhojan, 5. Aadanbhaand-maatranikshepanasamiiti.
[Five reflections of the Mahavrat of Mrushaavaad-viramana or Satya-] 1.
Anuveechibhashan, 2. Krodh-viveka, 3. Lobh-viveka, 4. Bhay-viveka, 5. Haasy-
viveka. [Five reflections of the Mahavrat of Adattadaan-viramana or Achaurya-]
1. Avgrah-anujnaapanata, 2. Avgrahseem-jnaapanata, 3. Swayamev Avgrah-
anugrahanaata, 4. Saadharmic Avgrah-anujnaapanata, 5. Saadharan bhaktapaan-
anujnaapy pari/janata, [Five reflections of the Mahavrat of Maithun-viramana or
Brahmacharya-] 1. Stree-pashu-napumsak-sanskta shayan-aasan varjanata 2.
Streekathavivarjanata, 3. Stree indriya-[manoharang] aalokanavarjanata, 4.
Poorvarat-poorvakreeda-ananusmaranata, 5. Pranit-ahaar-vivarjanata. [Five
reflections of the Mahavrat of Parigrah-veraman-] 1. Shrotrendriya-ragopaarti,
2. Chakshurindriya-ragopaarti, 3. Ghranendriya-ragopaarti, 4. Jihvendriya-
ragopaarti and 5. Sparshanendriya-ragopaarti. In the reign of the twenty-two
Tirthankaras in the middle of the cycle, Chaturyaam Dharma was prevalent in
place of the Panchmahavrat, therefore, the first and the last Tirthankaras are
taken here. The first Tirthankara Bhagwan Rishabhdev and the last Tirthankara
Vardhaman Swami, who preached the Panchyaam Vrats and for their protection, also
laid down the law of contemplation, meditation and practice of five reflections
of each Vrat. The Mahavrat of Ahimsa, accepted for life, can only be protected
when walking on the ground, keeping an eye on the living beings, keeping control
over the fickleness of the mind, speaking words of benefit, moderation, and
love, while keeping control while speaking, eating and drinking after seeing and
searching properly in a place illuminated by the sun, and taking care while
picking up and keeping clothes, utensils, etc. These are the five reflections of
the first Mahavrat. To protect the Mahavrat of Satya, it is necessary to speak
after thinking carefully, to give up anger, to give up greed, to give up fear,
and to give up laughter and ridicule. Speaking without thinking can lead to
false words coming out of the mouth, false words often come out of the mouth in
the heat of anger, people often lie out of greed, a person also speaks falsely
out of fear, and even in laughter, it is often seen that people speak falsely to
humiliate or make fun of others. Therefore, to fully protect the Mahavrat of
Satya, it is necessary to abandon Anuveechibhashan and anger, greed, fear, and
laughter. To protect the Mahavrat of Achaurya, it is necessary to obtain
permission or consent from the owner of any object before accepting it, to
accept the object only after knowing one's own limits or boundaries, to accept
the object by begging oneself, to invite one's own Sadharmiks for food and water
and then eat and drink, and to offer the food and drink brought by begging to
the Gurus and eat after obtaining their permission. The Sanskrit commentator,
while explaining Parijanata, has also given the meaning of residence, which
means that the residence should be made only after obtaining permission from the
owner of the place, the Sthanak or the Upashraya, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [71 paMcaviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya] jaise- [prANatipAta-viramaNa yA ahiMsA
mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAeM-] 1. IryAsamiti, 2. manogupti, 3. vacanagupti, 4.
AlokitapAna-bhojana, 5. aadaanbhaaNdd-maatrnikssepnnaasmiti| [mRSAvAda-viramaNa
yA satya mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAeM-] 1. anuvIcibhASaNa, 2. krodha-viveka, 3.
lobha-viveka, 4. bhaya-viveka, 5. haasy-vivek| [adattAdAna-viramaNa yA acaurya
mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAeM-] 1. avagraha-anujJApanatA, 2. avagrahasIma-
jJApanatA, 3. svayameva avagraha-anugrahaNatA, 4. sAdharmika avagraha-
anujJApanatA, 5. sAdhAraNa bhaktapAna-anujJApya pari/janatA, [maithuna-viramaNa
yA brahmacarya mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAeM-] 1.strI-pazu-napuMsaka-saMsakta
zayana-Asana varjanatA 2.strIkathAvivarjanatA, 3. strI indriya-[manoharAGga]
AlokanavarjanatA, 4. pUrvarata-pUrvakrIDA-ananusmaraNatA, 5. prnniit-aahaar-
vivrjntaa| [parigraha-veramaNa mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAeM-] 1. zrotrendriya-
rAgoparati, 2. cakSurindriya-rAgoparati, 3. ghrANendriyarAgoparati, 4.
jihvendriya-rAgoparati aura 5. sprshnendriy-raagoprti| vivecana-madhya ke bAIsa
tIrthaMkaroM ke zAsana meM paMcamahAvrata ke sthAna para cAturyAma dharma
pracalita thA, ataeva yahA~ prathama aura carama tIrthaMkara kA grahaNa kiyA
gayA hai| AditIrthaMkara bhagavAn RSabhadeva aura carama tIrthaMkara vardhamAna
svAmI ne jina paMcayAma vratoM kA upadeza diyA tathA unakI rakSA ke lie pratyeka
vrata kI pAMca-pAMca bhAvanAoM ke cintana, manana aura AcaraNa karane kA bhI
vidhAna kiyA hai| yAvajjIvana ke lie svIkRta ahiMsA mahAvrata tabhI surakSita
raha sakatA hai jabaki bhUmi para dRSTi rakha kara jIvoM kI rakSA karate hue
gamana kiyA jAe, mana kI caMcalatA para niyantraNa rakhA jAe, bolate samaya
niyantraNa rakhate hue hita, mita, priya, vacana bole jAeM, sUrya se prakAzita
sthAna para bhalI-bhAMti dekha-zodha kara khAna-pAna kiyA jAe aura vastra-pAtra
Adi ko uThAte aura rakhate samaya sAvadhAnI rakhI jaaye| ye hI prathama
mahAvrata kI pAMca bhAvanAeM haiN| satya mahAvrata kI rakSA ke lie Avazyaka hai
ki khUba soca-vicAra karake bolA jAe, krodha kA tyAga kiya jAe, lobha kA tyAga
kiyA jAe. bhaya kA tyAga kiyA jAe aura hAsa-parihAsa kA tyAga kiyA jaae| vicAra
kiye binA bolane se asatya vacana kA mukha se nikalanA sambhava hai, krodha ke
Aveza meM bhI prAyaH asatya vacana mukha se nikala jAte haiM, lobha se to
manuSya prAyaH jhaTha bolate hI haiM, bhaya se bhI vyakti asatya bola jAtA hai
aura haMsI meM bhI dasare ko apamAnita karane yA usakA majAka uDAne ke lie
asatya bolanA prAya: dekhA jAtA hai| ataH satya mahAvrata kI pUrNa rakSA ke lie
anuvIcibhASaNa aura krodha, lobha, bhaya aura hAsya kA parityAga Avazyaka hai|
acaurya mahAvrata kI rakSA ke lie Avazyaka hai ki kisI bhI vastu ko grahaNa
karane se pahale usake svAmI se anujJA yA svIkRti prApta kara lI jAe, apanI sImA
yA maryAdA ke jJAnapUrvaka hI vastu grahaNa kI jAya, svayaM yAcanA karake vastu
grahaNa kI jAe, apane sAdharmikoM ko AhAra-pAnI ke lie AmantraNa dekara khAna-
pAna kiyA jAe aura yAcanA karake lAye hue bhakta-pAnAdi ko gurujanoM ke Age
nivedana kara aura unakI anujJA prApta kara AhAra kiyA jaay| saMskRtaTIkAkAra ne
pari janatA kI vyAkhyA karate hue athavA kaha kara usakA nivAsa artha bhI kiyA
hai, jisakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jisa sthAnaka yA upAzraya Adi meM nivAsa kiyA
jAe, usake svAmI se svIkRti prApta karake hI nivAsa kiyA jaaye|

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[72] To protect the **Brahmacharya** (celibacy) **mahavrat** (great vow), one
should avoid sleeping or sitting in places frequented by women, animals,
eunuchs, and immoral people. One should avoid listening to stories that arouse
desire in women and looking at their attractive features. One should not recall
past sexual experiences and pleasures. One should also avoid rich, nourishing,
and flavorful food and drink.  To protect the **Parigraha-tyaga** (non-
attachment) **mahavrat**, it is essential to renounce attachment to the objects
of the five senses and aversion to undesirable objects. Only by cultivating
these attitudes can the aforementioned **mahavrats** be stable and firm.
Therefore, one should constantly contemplate these attitudes.  The **Tattvartha
Sutra** also mentions 25 attitudes for these vows, but there are some
differences in the attitudes for the third **Achaurya** (non-stealing)
**mahavrat** in the **Shwet.** and **Di.** versions. Due to their relevance to
the topic and their importance, they are mentioned here:  According to the
**Shwet. Tattvadhigam Bhashya**:  1. **Nirdosha Avgraha** - Accepting and
requesting what is free from faults like **avgraha** (taking), **yachana**
(requesting), **himsa** (violence), etc. 2. **Abhikshanavgrahayachana** -
Continuously accepting and requesting in the same way. 3.
**Etavadityavgrahavadharana** - Accepting only as much as is necessary, saying,
"This is enough for me." 4. **Samaandharmikebhya Avgrahayachana** - Requesting
from and accepting things from those who are of the same faith. 5. **Anujnapita
Pan-Bhojan** - Eating and drinking only with permission.  According to the **Di.
Tattvartha Sutra**:  1. **Shunyagar-Avasa** - Residing in empty houses,
monasteries, etc., that have no owner and are declared open for everyone. 2.
**Vimochita Avasa** - Residing in houses whose owners have been expelled by the
king or others and declared open for everyone. 3. **Paroparodhakarana** - Not
refusing to accommodate a fellow practitioner if they come to stay at the same
place. 4. **Bhaikhya Shuddhi** - Accepting alms after avoiding all faults and
obstacles related to begging. 5. **Sadharmavinsavad** - Avoiding discord or
conflict with fellow practitioners.  **167- Malli N. Arha Panavinsam Dhanuim
Uddham Uchchattena Hotha.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72] [samavAyAGgasUtra brahmacarya mahAvrata kI rakSA ke lie strI, pazu,
napuMsaka durAcArI manuSyoM ke samparka vAle sthAna para sone yA baiThane kA
tyAga kiyA jAe, striyoM kI rAga-vardhaka kathAoM kA aura unake manohara
aMgoMpAMgoM ko dekhane kA tyAga kiyA jAe, pUrvakAla meM strI ke sAtha bhoge hue
bhogoM ko aura kAma-krIr3AoM ko yAda na kiyA jAe tathA pauSTika gariSTha aura
rasa-bahula AhAra-pAna kA tyAga kiyA jaae| parigraha-tyAga mahAvrata kI rakSA ke
lie pAMcoM indriyoM ke zabdAdi iSTa viSayoM meM rAga kA aura aniSTa viSayoM meM
dveSa kA tyAga Avazyaka hai| . ina bhAvanAoM ke karane para hI ukta mahAvrata
sthira aura dRr3ha raha sakate haiM, anyathA nhiiN| ataH ukta bhAvanAoM kA
nirantara cintana karanA caahie| tattvArthasUtra meM bhI ukta vratoM kI 25
bhAvanAeM kahI gaI haiM, kintu zve. aura di. sammata pAThoM meM tIsare acaurya
mahAvrata kI bhAvanAoM meM kucha antara hai, prakaraNa-saMgata hone evaM kucha
mahattvapUrNa hone se unakA yahA~ nirdeza diyA jAtA hai - zve. tattvAdhigama
bhASya ke anusAra -avagraha-yAcana-hiMsAdi doSoM se rahita nirdoSa avagraha kA
grahaNa karanA aura usI kI yAcanA krnaa| 2. abhIkSNAvagrahayAcana-nirantara usI
prakAra se grahaNa aura yAcana krnaa| 3. etAvadityavagrahAvadhAraNa mere lie
itanA hI paryApta hai, aisA kaha kara utanI hI vastu ko aura bhakta-pAna ko
grahaNa krnaa| 4. samAnadhArmikoM se avagraha-yAcana- apane hI samAna samAcArI
vAloM se yAcanA karanA aura unhIM ke padArthoM ko grahaNa krnaa| 5. anujJApita
pAna-bhojana anujJA yA svIkRti milane para bhojana-pAna krnaa| di.
tattvArthasUtra ke anusAra 1. zUnyAgAra-AvAsa-jinakA koI svAmI nahIM rahA hai
aura jo sarvasAdhAraNa logoM ke Thaharane ke lie ghoSita kara diye gaye haiM,
aise sUne ghara, maTha Adi meM nivAsa krnaa| . 2. vimocitAvAsa-jina gharoM ke
svAmiyoM ko rAjA Adi ne nikAla kara deza se bAhara kara diyA aura unheM
sarvasAdhAraNa ke rahane yA Thaharane ke lie ghoSita kara diyA aise gharoM meM
nivAsa krnaa| 3. paroparodhAkaraNa-jahAM svayaM nivAsa kara rahe hoM, usa sthAna
para yadi koI sAdharmI Thaharane ko Ave to use manA nahIM krnaa| 4.
bhaikSyazuddhi-bhikSA-sambandhI sarva doSoM aura antarAyoM ko TAla bhikSA
grahaNa krnaa| 5. sadharmAvisaMvAda - sAdharmI janoM se visaMvAda yA kalaha
nahIM krnaa| 167-mallI NaM arahA paNavIsaM dhaNuiM uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa|

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twenty-five Stand-Points] [73. All the *Vidyadhara* peaks are said to be
twenty-five *yojanas* high. Twenty-five *yojanas* are said to be the depth of
the earth. Twenty-five million *naraka* abodes are said to be in the second
earth. *Mallinārāyaṇa* *Arhat* is said to be twenty-five *dhanuṣ* high. All the
*Vidyadhara* peaks are said to be twenty-five *yojanas* high and they are said
to be twenty-five *kośa* deep in the earth. Twenty-five million *naraka* abodes
are said to be in the second earth. 168. The *Bhagavan* has indicated twenty-
five *adhyayana* of the *Bhavagad-Ācārāṅga* sūtra, including the *Cūlikā*, such
as: 1. *Śastraparijñā*, 2. *Lokavijaya*, 3. *Śītoṣṇīya*, 4. *Samyaktva*, 5.
*Āvantī*, 6. *Dhūta*, 7. *Vimoha*, 8. *Upadhānaśruta*, 9. *Mahāparijñā*, 10.
*Piṇḍaiṣaṇā*, 11. *Śayyā*, 12. *Īryā*, 13. *Bhāṣā-adhyayana*, 14. *Vastraiṣaṇā*,
15. *Pātraiṣaṇā*, 16. *Avagraha-pratimā*, 17-23. *Saptaika* (17. *sthāna*, 18.
*niṣīdhikā*, 19. *uccāra-prasravaṇa*, 20. *śabda*, 21. *rūpa*, 22. *parakriyā*,
23. *anyonyakriyā*), 24. *Bhāvanā-adhyayana*, and 25. *Vimukti-adhyayana*.
||1-2|| The last *Vimukti-adhyayana* is the twenty-fifth, including the
*Niśītha-adhyayana*. 169. The twenty-five *uttaraprakrti* of the *nāma* karma,
which is *saṅklīṣṭa-pariṇāma* and *aparyāpta* *mithyādṛṣṭi* *vikaleṇdriya* (two-
sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed) *jīva*, are bound, such as: 1.
*Tiryaggatināma*, 2. *Vikaleṇdriya-jātīnāma*, 3. *Audārika-śarīranāma*, 4.
*Taijasa-śarīranāma*, 5. *Karmmaṇa-śarīranāma*, 6. *Huṇḍaka-saṁsthānānāma*, 7.
*Audārika-śarīrāṅgopaṅgānāma*, 8. *Sevārtasaṁhanānāma*, 9. *Varṇanāma*, 10.
*Gandhanāma*, 11. *Rasānāma*, 12. *Sparśanāma*,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcaviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya] [73 savve vidIhaveyaDDapavvayA paNavIsaM
joyaNANi uDDhaM uccatteNaM pnnnnaattaa|pnnviisN paNavIsaM gAuANi uvviddheNaM
pnnnnttaa| doccAe NaM puDhavIe paNavIsaM NirayAvAsasayasahassA pnnttaa| mallI
arhan paccIsa dhanuSa UMce the| sabhI dIrgha vaitADhya parvata paccIsa yojana
UMce kahe gaye haiM tathA ve paccIsa koza bhUmi meM gahare kahe gaye haiN|
dUsarI pRthivI meM paccIsa lAkha nArakavAsa kahe gaye haiN| 168-AyArassa NaM
bhagavao sUcaliAyassa paNavIsaM ajjhayaNA paNNattA, taM jahA satthapariNNA'
logavijao sIosaNIa3 sammattaM  /  AvaMti5 dhuya vimoha uvahANa suyaM mahapariNNA
// 1 //  piMDesaNa10 sijjiri11 A12 bhAsajjhayaNA13 ya vattha14 paaesaa15|
uggahapaDimA16 sattikkasattayA17-23 bhAvaNa24 vimuttI25  // 2 //
NisIhajjhayaNaM pnnuviisimN| cUlikA-sahita bhavagad-AcArAGga sUtra ke paccIsa
adhyayana kahe gaye haiM, jaise- 1. zastraparijJA, 2. lokavijaya, 3. zItoSNIya,
4. samyaktva, 5. AvantI, 6. dhUta, 7. vimoha, 8. upadhAnazruta, 9. mahAparijJA,
10. piNDaiSaNA, 11. zayyA, 12. IryA, 13. bhASAdhyayana, 14. vastraiSaNA, 15.
pAtraiSaNA, 16. avagrahapratimA, 17-23 saptaikaka (17. sthAna, 18. niSIdhikA,
19. uccAraprasravaNa, 20.zabda, 21.rUpa, 22. parakriyA, 23. anyonya kriyA) 24.
bhAvanA adhyayana aura 25. vimukti adhyayana  // 1-2 //  antima vimukti
adhyayana nizItha adhyayana sahita paccIsavAM hai| 169-micchAdiTTivigaliMdie NaM
apajjattae NaM saMkiliTThapariNAme NAmassa kammassa paNavIsaM uttarapayaDIo
NibaMdhati-tiriyagatinAmaM 1,vigaliMdiyajAtinAmaM 2.orAliyasarIraNAmaM, 3
teagasarINAmaM 4, kammaNasarIranAmaM5, huMDagasaMThANanAmaM
6,orAliasarIraMgovaMgaNAmaM 7, chevaTThasaMghayaNanAmaM 8, vaNNanAmaM 9,
gaMdhanAmaM 10, rasanAmaM 11, phAsanAmaM 12, tiriANupugvinAmaM 13,
agurulahunAmaM 14, uvadhAyanAmaM 15, tasanAmaM 16, bAdaranAmaM 17.
apajjattayanAmaM 18, patteyasarIranAmaM 19, athiranAmaM 20, asubhanAmaM 21,
dubhaganAmaM 22, aNAdejjanAmaM 23, ajasokittinAmaM 24, nimmANanAmaM 25 /
saMkliSTa pariNAma vAle aparyAptaka mithyAdRSTi vikalendriya (dvIndriya,
trIndriya, caturindriya) jIva nAmakarma kI paccIsa uttara prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhate
haiM, jaise- 1. tiryaggatinAma, 2. vikalendriya jAtinAma, 3. audArikazarIra
nAma, 4. taijasazarIra nAma, 5. kArmaNazarIra nAma, 6. huMDakasaMsthAnanAma, 7.
audArikazarIrAGgopAGganAma, 8. sevArtasaMhananAma, 9. varNanAma, 10. gandhanAma,
11. rasanAma, 12. sparzanAma,

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[74] [Samvayanga Sutra 13. Tiryanchanupurvinam, 14. Agurulaghunam, 15.
Upghanatam, 16. Trasanam, 17. Badaranam, 18. Apariaptkanam, 19.
Pratekshariranam, 20. Asthiranam, 21. Ashubhanam, 22. Durbhaganam, 23.
Anadeyanam, 24. Ayashaskirtinam and 25, Nirmananam. Discussion- Mithyadristi,
which is filled with extreme karmic consequences, binds the aforementioned 25
types of karma to the Vikalendriya Jiva. It is important to note here that
Vikalendriya Jivas are of three types, based on the number of senses they
possess: Dvi-indriya, Tri-indriya, and Chatur-indriya. Therefore, when a Jiva
binds the aforementioned types of karma suitable for a Dvi-indriya-Apariaptka,
it will bind Dvi-indriya jati karma instead of Vikalendriya jati karma.
Similarly, a Jiva binding karma suitable for a Tri-indriya or Chatur-indriya
jati will bind Tri-indriya or Chatur-indriya jati karma. This is because there
is no Vikalendriya jati category within the 5 types of jati karma. The term
'Vikalendriya' is used in this Sutra due to the requirement of mentioning 25
types of karma each, and to avoid the repetition of mentioning these types three
times for each of the three types of Vikalendriya. 170- Ganga-Sindhu and the
other great rivers fall into 25 kosha wide, thick, pot-shaped mouths, and then
flow out through a channel resembling the tongue of a crocodile's mouth, forming
a pearl necklace-like waterfall. Similarly, the Rakta-Raktavati great rivers
also fall into 25 kosha wide, thick, pot-shaped mouths, and then flow out
through a channel resembling the tongue of a crocodile's mouth, forming a pearl
necklace-like waterfall. Discussion- The Ganga Mahadhi flows out from the
eastern entrance of the Padma-draha, located on top of the small Himvant
Kulachal or Varshadhar Parvat, and the Sindhu Mahadhi flows out from the western
entrance. Similarly, the Rakta Mahadhi flows out from the eastern entrance of
the Pandarika-draha, located on top of the Shikhari Kulachal, and the Raktavati
Mahadhi flows out from the western entrance. All four of these great rivers flow
for 500 yojanas on top of the mountains before flowing down. After that, the
Ganga-Sindhu flow south towards the Bharat Kshetra, and the Rakta-Raktavati flow
north towards the Airvat Kshetra, and fall into their respective waterfalls,
such as the Ganga-kut, located on the ground. At the point where they fall from
the mountain, there is a large, vajra-made channel for them to flow through. The
mouth of this channel is round, like the mouth of a pot, facing the mountain,
and long and tongue-like, like the tongue of a crocodile, facing the Bharat and
other Kshetras. The water flowing down from the mountain appears like a necklace
of thousands of pearls. This water flow is 25 kosha, or 1.25 yojanas, wide. 171-
Lokabindusar, the fourteenth of the previous 25 Arthaadhikars, is called Vastu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74] [samavAyAGgasUtra 13. tiryaMcAnupUrvInAma, 14. agurulaghunAma, 15.
upaghAtanAma, 16. trasanAma, 17. bAdaranAma, 18. aparyAptakanAma, 19.
pratyekazarIranAma, 20. asthiranAma, 21.azubhanAma, 22. durbhaganAma, 23.
anAdeyanAma, 24. ayazaskIrtinAma aura 25, nirmaannnaam| vivecana-atyanta
saMkleza pariNAmoM se yukta mithyAdRSTi aparyAptaka vikalendriya jIva nAmakarma
kI ukta 25 prakRtiyoM ko bA~dhatA hai| yahA~ yaha vizeSa jJAtavya hai ki
vikalendriya jIva dvIndriya, trIndriya aura caturindriya ke bheda se tIna pakAra
ke hote haiN| ata: jaba koI jIva dvIndriya-aparyAptaka ke yogya ukta prakRtiyoM
kA bandha karegA, taba vaha vikalendriyajAtinAma ke sthAna para dvIndriyajAti
nAmakarma kA bandha kregaa| isI prakAra trIndriya yA caturindriya jAti ke yogya
prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhane vAlA trIndriya caturindriya jAtinAmakarma kA bandha
kregaa| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki jAtinAma karma ke 5 bhedoM meM vikalendriya
jAti nAma kA koI bheda nahIM hai| prastuta sUtra meM paccIsa-paccIsa saMkhyA ke
anurodha se aura dvIndriyAdi tIna vikalendriyoM ke tIna vAra ukta prakRtiyoM ke
kathana ke vistAra ke bhaya se 'vikalendriya' pada kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai|
170-gaMgA-siMdhUo NaM mahAnadIo paNavIsaM gAuyANiM puhutteNaM duhao
ghaDamuhapavittieNaM muttAvalihArasaMThieNaM pavAteNa pddNti|rttaa-rttaaviio NaM
mahANadIo paNavIsaMgAuyANi puhatteNaM makaramuhapavittieNaM
muttAvalihArasaMThieNaM pavAteNa pddNti| gaMgA-sindhu mahAnadiyA~ paccIsa koza
pRthula (moTI) ghar3e ke mukha-samAna mukha meM praveza kara aura makara
(magara) ke mukha kI jihvA ke samAna panAle se nikala kara muktAvalI hAra ke
AkAra se prapAtadraha meM giratI haiN| isI prakAra rakta-raktavatI mahAnadiyA~
bhI paccIsa koza pRthula ghar3e ke mukha-samAna mukha meM praveza kara aura
makara ke mukha kI jihvA ke samAna panAle se nikalakara muktAvalI-hAra ke AkAra
se prapAtadraha meM giratI hai| vivecana-kSullaka himavaMta kulAcala yA
varSadharaparvata ke Upara sthita padmadraha ke pUrvI toraNa dvAra se gaMgA
mahAnadI aura pazcimI toraNadvAra se sindhumahAnadI nikalatI hai| isI prakAra
zikharI kulAcala ke Upara sthita paMDarIkadraha ke parvI toraNadvAra se
raktAmahAnadI aura pazcimI toraNadvAra se raktavatI mahAnadI nikalatI hai| ye
cAroM hI mahAnadiyA~ drahoM se nikala kara pahale pAMca-pAMca sau yojana parvata
ke Upara hI bahatI haiN| tatpazcAt gaMgA-sindhu bharatakSetra kI ora
dakSiNabhimukha hokara aura raktA-raktavatI airavatakSetra kI ora uttarAbhimukha
hokara bhUmi para avasthita apane-apane nAma vAle gaMgAkUTa Adi prapAtakUToM meM
giratI haiN| parvata se girane ke sthAna para unake nikalane ke lie eka bar3A
vajramayI panAlA banA huA hai usakA mukha parvata kI ora ghar3e ke mukha samAna
gola hai aura bharatAdi kSetroM kI ora makara ke mukha kI lambI jIbha ke samAna
hai tathA parvata se nIce bhUmi para giratI huI jaladhArA motiyoM ke sahasroM
lar3IvAle hAra ke samAna pratIta hotI hai| yaha jaladhArA paccIsa koza yA savA
chaha yojana caur3I hotI hai| 171-logabiMdusArassa NaM puvvassa paNavIsaM vatthU
paNNttA  /  lokabindusAra nAmaka caudahaveM pUrva ke vastu nAmaka paccIsa
arthAdhikAra kahe gaye haiN|

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twenty-sixth Place-Samavaya] [75 172-In this Ratnaprabha earth, the state of
many Narakas is said to be twenty-five Palyopama. In the seventh Maha-tam:prabha
earth below, the state of many Narakas is said to be twenty-five Sagaropama. The
state of many Asura-kumaras is said to be twenty-five Palyopama. In the
Saudharma-Isana Kalpa, the state of many Devas is said to be twenty-five
Palyopama. 173-The state of the Madhyama-Adhastana-Praiveyaka Devas is said to
be twenty-five Sagaropama. The Devas who are born in the Adhastana-Uvarima-
Praiveyaka Vimanas, their state is said to be twenty-five Sagaropama. These
Devas take in breath or exhale after twenty-five half-months (six and a half
months). Their desire for food arises after twenty-five thousand years. Many
Bhavasiddhika Jivas are those who will become Siddhas, Buddhas, liberated from
karmas, attain Nirvana, and end all suffering after twenty-five Bhava-grahanas.
|| Twenty-fifth Place Samavaya Ends || Twenty-sixth Place-Samavaya 174-Twenty-
six Uddesana-kalas are said for the ten Kalpas, ten Dasas, six Kalpas, and ten
Vavaharas. The Dasasutra (Dasasruta-skandha), Kalpasutra, and Vyavaharasutra
have twenty-six Uddesana-kalas, such as ten for the Dasasutra, six for the
Kalpasutra, and ten for the Vyavaharasutra. - Explanation-The time of giving a
lecture of the Agama or scripture is called Uddesana-kala. The number of
Uddesana-kalas or occasions is equal to the number of studies or Uddesakas in a
particular Sruta-skandha or study. 175-Twenty-six Karma-sankramas are said for
the Mochanija Karma of the Bhavasiddhika Jivas, such as-Micchatta-mochanija,
sixteen Kasas, Itthivede, Purisavede, Napunsakavede, Hasam, Arati.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaDviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya] [75 172-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM paNavIsaM paliovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| ahesattamAe
puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM paNavIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|
asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM paNavIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa|sohmmiisaanne NaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM paNavIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhApRthivI meM kitaneka nArakiyoM kI sthiti paccIsa
palyopama kahI gaI hai| adhastana sAtavIM mahAtama:prabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka
nArakoM kI sthiti paccIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI
sthiti paccIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpa meM kitaneka devoM
kI sthiti paccIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| 173-majjhimaheTThimagevejANaM devANaM
jahaNNeNaM paNavIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|je devA
heTThimauvarimagevejagavimANesu devattAe uvavaNNA, tesi NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM
paNavIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|te NaM devA paNavIsAe addhamAsehiM
ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA, nissasaMti vaa| tesi NaM devANaM
paNavIsaM vAsasahassehiM AhAraTTe smuppji| saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je
paNavIsAe bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti|| madhyama-adhastanapraiveyaka devoM kI jaghanya
sthiti paccIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| jo deva adhastanauparimauveyaka vimAnoM
meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti paccIsa sAgaropama
kahI gaI hai| ve deva paccIsa ardhamAsoM (sAr3he bAraha mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa
yA zvAsocchvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ke paccIsa hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI
icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo paccIsa bhava
grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa
ko prApta hoMge aura sarva du:khoM kA anta kreNge|  //  paMcaviMzatisthAnaka
samavAya smaapt|| SaDviMzatisthAnaka-samavAya 174-chavvIsaM dasakappavavahArANaM
uddesaNakAlA paNNattA, taM jahA-dasa dasANaM, cha kappassa, dasa vvhaarss|
dazAsUtra (dazAzrutaskandha) kalpasUtra aura vyavahArasUtra ke chabbIsa
uddezanakAla kahe gaye haiM, jaise-dazAsUtra ke daza, kalpasUtra ke chaha aura
vyavahArasUtra ke dsh| - vivecana-Agama yA zAstra kI vAcanA dene ke kAla ko
uddezana-kAla kahate haiN| jisa zrutaskandha athavA adhyayana meM jitane
adhyayana yA uddezaka hote haiM, unake uddezanakAla yA avasara bhI utane hI hote
175 - abhavasiddhiyANaM jIvANaM mohaNijjassa kammassa chavvIsaM kammaMsA
saMtakammA paNNattA, taM jahA-micchattamohaNijaM, solasa kasAsA, itthIvede
purisavede napuMsakavede hAsaM arati

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 76] Rati, bhaya, shoka, jugupsa.  [Samavayanga Sutra] The twenty-six karma-
ansh (natures) of karma, which are mohaniya (delusive) for the abhavya (non-
liberated) beings, are mentioned in the text as follows: 1. Mithyatva mohaniya,
17. Sixteen kshaya, 18. Strived, 19. Purushaved, 20. Napunsakaved, 21. Hasya,
22. Arati, 23. Rati, 24. Bhaya, 25. Shoka, and 26. Jugupsa.  **Discussion:**
When a being first mitigates darshan moha (delusion of perception) and attains
samyag darshan (right perception), they then divide the darshan mohaniya karma
into three parts, which have been ongoing since time immemorial. At that point,
they possess twenty-eight natures, including the aforementioned twenty-five
divisions of charitra moha (delusion of conduct). However, abhavya beings never
attain samyag darshan, and therefore they are unable to divide the three parts
of anadi mithyatva (innate false belief). As a result, they always have twenty-
six natures of mohaniya karma. The natures of misra (mixed) and samyaktva
mohaniya (delusion of right conduct) do not exist in them.  1 176 - In this
Ratnaprabha earth, the state of how many narakas (hells) is said to be twenty-
six palyopama (comparisons). In the Adhastana seventh Mahatamah Prabha earth,
the state of how many narakas is said to be twenty-six sagaropama (comparisons).
The state of how many Asura Kumaras (demigods) is said to be twenty-six
palyopama. In the Saudharma - Ishana kalpa, the state of how many devas (gods)
is said to be twenty-six palyopama.  177 - The state of the jghannya (inferior)
of the Madhyama-Madhyama Graiveyak devas is said to be twenty-six sagaropama.
The state of the utkrisht (superior) of the devas who are born in the Madhyama-
Adhastana Graiveyak vimanas (planes) is said to be twenty-six sagaropama. These
devas take in breath or exhale after twenty-six ardhamasa (thirteen months). The
desire for food arises for them after twenty-six thousand years.  There are many
bhavasiddhik jivas (beings who will attain liberation) who will become siddhas
(liberated), buddhas (enlightened), free from karma, attain parinirvana (final
liberation), and end all suffering after twenty-six bhava (births).  ||
Sadvimshati Sthanak Samavay Sampt ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 76 ] rati bhayaM sogaM duguMchA  /  [ samavAyAGgasUtra abhavyasiddhika jIvoM ke
mohanIya, karma ke chabbIsa karmAMza ( prakRtiyA~) sattA meM kahe gaye haiM,
jaise - 1. . mithyAtva mohanIya, 17. solaha kaSAya, 18. strIveda, 19.
puruSaveda, 20. napuMsakaveda, 21. hAsya, 22. arati, 23. rati, 24. bhaya, 25.
zoka aura 26. jugupsA  /  vivecana - darzanamoha kA jaba koI jIva sarvaprathama
upazamana karake samyagdarzana prApta karatA hai, taba vaha anAdikAla se cale A
rahe darzanamohanIya karma ke tIna vibhAga karatA hai| taba vaha cAritramoha ke
ukta paccIsa bhedoM ke sAtha aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM kI sattAvAlA hotA hai  /
parantu abhavya jIva kabhI samyagdarzana ko prApta hI nahIM karate, ataH anAdi
mithyAtva ke ve tIna vibhAga bhI nahIM kara pAte haiM  /  isase unake sadA hI
mohanIya karma kI chabbIsa prakRtiyA~ hI sattA meM rahatI haiN| mizra ora
samyaktvamohanIya kI sattA unameM nahIM hotI  /  1 176 - imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe
puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM chavvIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|
ahesattamAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM chavvIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI
paNNattA  /  asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM chavvIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI
paNNattA  /  sohammIsANe NaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM chavvIsaM paliovamAI ThiI
paNNattA  /  isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti chabbIsa
palyopama kahI gaI hai| adhastana sAtavIM mahAtamaH prabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka
nArakoM kI sthiti chabbIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumara devoM
kI sthiti chabbIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma - IzAna kalpa meM rahane
vAle kitaneka devoM kI sthiti chabbIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| 177 -
majjhimamajjhimagevejjayANaM devANaM jahaNNeNaM chavvIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI
paNNattA  /  je devA majjhimaTThimagevejjayavimANesu devattAe uvavaNNA tesi NaM
devANaM ukkoseNaM chavvIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  te NaM devA chavvIsAe
addhamAsehiM ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vaa| tesi NaM
devANaM chavvIsaM vAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe samuppajjai  /  saMtegaiyA
bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je chavvIsehiM bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujjhisaMti
muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM karissaMti  /  madhyama-
madhyama graiveyaka devoM kI jaghanya sthiti chabbIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai|
jo deva madhyamaadhastanagraiveyaka vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM,
una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti chabbIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva chabbIsa
ardhamAsoM (teraha mAsoM ) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa - ni:zvAsa lete haiM  /
una devoM ke chabbIsa hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai  /
kitaneka bhavasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo chabbIsa bhava karake siddha hoMge,
buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parinirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura
sarvaduHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //  SaDviMzatisthAnaka samavAya samApta  //

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Seven Qualities of the Ascetic  [77 Twenty-Seven Qualities -
Samvaya 179 - The twenty-seven qualities of the Ascetic are as follows: 1. Non-
violence (Prāṇātipāta - Viramaṇa), 2. Truthfulness (Mṛṣāvāda - Viramaṇa), 3.
Non-stealing (Adattādāna - Viramaṇa), 4. Celibacy (Maithuna - Viramaṇa), 5. Non-
possession (Parigraha - Viramaṇa), 6. Restraint of the Ear (Śrotrendriya -
Nigraha), 7. Restraint of the Eye (Cakṣurindriya - Nigraha), 8. Restraint of the
Nose (Ghrāṇendriya - Nigraha), 9. Restraint of the Tongue (Jihvendriya -
Nigraha), 10. Restraint of the Touch (Sparśendriya - Nigraha), 11. Discernment
of Anger (Krodhaviveka), 12. Discernment of Pride (Mānaviveka), 13. Discernment
of Deceit (Māyāviveka), 14. Discernment of Greed (Lobhaviveka), 15. Truth of
Feeling (Bhāvasatya), 16. Truth of Action (Karaṇasatya), 17. Truth of Conduct
(Yogasatya), 18. Forgiveness (Kṣamā), 19. Detachment (Virāgatā), 20.
Concentration of Mind (Manassamāharaṇatā), 21. Concentration of Speech
(Vacaṇasamāharaṇatā), 22. Concentration of Body (Kāyasamāharaṇatā), 23.
Knowledge (Jñānasampannatā), 24. Vision (Darśanasampannatā), 25. Conduct
(Carittasampannatā), 26. Endurance of Pain (Vedana Atiśahana), 27. Endurance of
Death (Māraṇāntika Atiśahana).  Explanation - The five great vows (Mahavratas)
of non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-possession are
the fundamental qualities of the Ascetic. The remaining twenty-two are the
secondary qualities. These include the restraint of the five senses, meaning
controlling their unruly tendencies, and the discernment of the four passions
(anger, pride, deceit, and greed), meaning their abandonment. The purification
of the inner self is called the truth of feeling (Bhāvasatya). The complete and
careful transcription of things like clothes is called the truth of action
(Karaṇasatya). Keeping the mind, speech, and body in proper conduct, meaning the
purity of the three yogas, is called the truth of conduct (Yogasatya). Not
harboring anger in the mind, not allowing hatred and pride to arise is the
quality of forgiveness (Kṣamā). Not being attached to any object is the quality
of detachment (Virāgatā). Opposing the evil tendencies of the mind, speech, and
body is called their concentration. Being endowed with right vision, knowledge,
and conduct is essential for the Ascetic. Enduring pain like cold, heat, etc. is
called endurance of pain (Vedana Atiśahana). Enduring all kinds of trials and
tribulations at the time of death, and even while enduring the mortal suffering
inflicted by someone, maintaining the mind of a benevolent friend is called
endurance of death (Māraṇāntika Atiśahana).  It is important to note that in the
Digambara tradition, there are 28 qualities of the Ascetic. The five great vows
and the restraint of the five senses, totaling ten qualities, are the same as
mentioned above. The remaining eighteen qualities are: observance of the five
assemblies, observance of the three secrets, performing the six essentials
(Samayika Vandana, etc.), remaining naked (Acela), eating once a day, shaving
the head (Keśaluñca), and abandoning bathing, brushing teeth, etc.  The
fundamental difference between the two is only in remaining naked (Acela). The
other qualities are essentially included within each other.  179 - In the island
of Jambudvipa, the twenty-seven qualities are practiced together in the
community. Each one... ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptaviMzatisthAnaka - samavAya ] [ 77 saptaviMzatisthAnaka - samavAya 179 -
sattAvIsaM aNagAraguNA paNNattA, taM jahA - pANAivAyAo veramaNaM 1, musAvAyAo
veramaNaM 2, adinnAdANAo veramaNaM 3, mehuNAo veramaNaM 4, pariggahAo veramaNaM
5, soiMdiyaniggahe 6, cakkhidiyaniggahe 7, ghANiMdiyaNiggahe 8,
jibbhidiyaNiggahe 9, phAsiMdiyaniggahe 10, kohavivege 11, mANavivege 12,
mAyAvivege 13, lobhavivege 14, bhAvasacce 15, karaNasacce 16, jogasacce 17,
khamA 18, virAgayA 19, maNasamAharaNayA 20, vayasamAharaNayA 21,
kAyasamAharaNayA 22, NANasaMpaNNayA 23, daMsaNasaMpaNNayA 24, carittasaMpaNNayA
25, veyaNa ahiyAsaNayA 26, mAraNaMtiya ahiyAsaNayA 27  /  anagAra-nirgrantha
sAdhuoM ke sattAIsa guNa haiM, jaise- 1. prANAtipAta - viramaNa, 2
mRSAvAdaviramaNa, 3 adattAdAna - viramaNa, 4. maithuna - viramaNa, 5 parigraha -
viramaNa, 6 zrotrendriya - nigraha, 7 cakSurindriyanigraha, 8 ghrANendriya-
nigraha, 9 jihvendriya - nigraha, 10 sparzanendriya - nigraha, 11 krodhaviveka,
12 mAnaviveka, 13 mAyAviveka, 14 lobhaviveka, 15 bhAvasatya, 16 karaNasatya, 17
yogasatya, 18 kSamA, 19 virAgatA, 20 manaH samAharaNatA, 21 vacanasamAharaNatA,
22 kAyasamAharaNatA, 23 jJAnasampannatA, 24 darzanasampannatA, 25
cAritrasampannatA, 26 vedanAtisahanatA aura 27 mAraNAntikAtisahanatA  /
vivecana - anagAra zramaNoM ke prANAtipAta viramaNa Adi pA~ca mahAvrata mUlaguNa
haiN| zeSa bAIsa uttaraguNa haiN| jinameM pAMcoM indriyoM ke viSayoM kA nigraha
karanA, arthAt unakI ucchRMkhala pravRtti ko rokanA aura krodhAdi cAroM kaSAyoM
kA viveka arthAt parityAga karanA Avazyaka hai  /  antarAtmA kI zuddhi ko
bhAvasatya kahate haiM  /  vastrAdi kA yathAvidhi pratilekhana karate pUrNa
sAvadhAnI rakhanA karaNasatya hai  /  mana vacana kAya kI pravRtti samIcIna
rakhanA arthAt tInoM yogoM kI zuddhi yA pavitratA rakhanA yogasatya hai  /  mana
meM bhI krodha bhAva na lAnA, dveSa aura abhimAna kA bhAva jAgRta na hone denA
kSamA guNa hai  /  kisI bhI vastu meM Asakti nahIM rakhanA virAgatA guNa  /
mana, vacana aura kAya kI azubha pravRtti kA virodha karanA unakI samAharaNatA
kahalAtI hai| samyagdarzana, jJAna aura cAritra se sampannatA to sAdhuoM ke honA
hI cAhie  /  zIta - uSNa Adi vedanAoM ko sahanA vedanAtisahanatA hai  /  maraNa
ke samaya sarva prakAra ke parISahoM aura upasargoM ko sahanA tathA kisI vyakti
ke dvArA hone vAle mAraNAntika kaSTa ko sahate hue bhI usa para kalyANakArI
mitra kI buddhi rakhanA mAraNAntikAtisahanatA hai  /  yahA~ yaha vizeSa jJAtavya
hai ki digambara- paramparA meM sAdhuoM ke 28 guNa kahe gaye haiM  /  unameM
pA~ca mahAvrata aura pA~coM indriyoM kA nirodha rUpa 10 guNa to uparyukta hI
haiN| zeSa 18 guNa isa prakAra haiM - pAMca samitiyoM kA paripAlana, tIna
guptiyoM kA pAlana, sAmAyika vandanAdi chaha Avazyaka karanA, acela rahanA, eka
bAra bhojana karanA, kezaluMca karanA aura snAna - dantadhAvanAdi kA tyAga
karanA  /  donoM meM eka acela yA nagna rahane kA hI maulika antara hai| zeSa
guNoM kA paraspara eka-dUsare guNoM meM antarbhAva ho jAtA hai  /  179 -
jaMbuddIve dIve abhiivajjehiM sattAvIsAe ekkhattehiM saMvavahAre vaTTati  /
egamege NaM

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[78] In the Jambudvipa, the month and other things are governed by the
constellations except for the Abhijit constellation. (The Abhijit constellation
enters the fourth quarter of the Uttaraashada constellation.) The constellation
month is said to be dominated by twenty-seven days and nights. That is, there
are 27 days in a constellation month. In the Saudharma-Ishan kalpas, the earth
of their vimanas is said to be twenty-seven hundred (2700) yojanas thick. [180]
It is said that there are twenty-seven types of mohaniya karma for the beings
who are free from the bondage of vedak samyaktva. On the seventh day of the
bright half of Shraavana, the sun casts a shadow of twenty-seven angulas and
moves towards the divasakshetra (sky illuminated by the sun) while the
rajanikhetra (darkness increasing) moves in the opposite direction. [181] In
this ratnaprabha earth, the state of many narakas is said to be twenty-seven
palyopama. In the adhastana saptama mahatamahprabha earth, the state of many
narakas is said to be twenty-seven sagaropama. The state of many asurakumara
devas is said to be twenty-seven palyopama. In the Saudharma-Ishan kalpas, the
state of many devas is said to be twenty-seven palyopama. [182] The lowest state
of the madhyama-uvarim graiveyak devas is said to be twenty-seven sagaropama.
The devas who are born in the madhyama graiveyak vimanas, their highest state is
said to be twenty-seven sagaropama. These devas take breath (aan-praan) after
twenty-seven half-months (thirteen and a half months). They experience the
desire for food after twenty-seven thousand years. . There are many bhavya-
siddhika beings who will become siddhas, buddhas, liberated from karma, attain
nirvana, and end all suffering after taking twenty-seven births.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 78] [samavAyAnasUtra NakkhattamAse sattAvIsAhiM rAiMdiyAhiM rAiMdiyaggeNaM
pnnnntte|sohmmiisaannesukppesu vimANapuDhavI sattAvIsaM joyaNasayAI bAhalleNaM
pnnnnttaa| jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa dvIpa meM abhijit nakSatra ko chor3akara zeSa
nakSatroM ke dvArA mAsa Adi kA vyavahAra pravartatA hai| (abhijit nakSatra kA
uttarASADhA nakSatra ke caturtha caraNa meM praveza ho jAtA hai|) nakSatra mAsa
sattAIsa dina-rAta kI pradhAnatA vAlA kahA gayA hai| arthAt nakSatra mAsa meM 27
dina hote haiN| saudharmaIzAna kalpoM meM unake vimAnoM kI pRthivI sattAIsa sau
(2700) yojana moTI kahI gaI hai| 180-veyagasammattabaMdhovarayassa NaM
mohaNijassa kammassa sattAvIsaM uttarapagaDIo saMtakammaMsA pnnnnttaa|
sAvaNasuddhasattamIsu NaM sUrie sattAvIsaMguliyaM porisicchAyaM NivvattaittA NaM
divasakhettaM niyaTTamANe rayaNikhettaM abhiNivaTTamANe cAraM cri|
vedakasamyaktva ke bandha rahita jIva ke mohanIya karma kI sattAIsa prakRtiyoM
kI sattA kahI gaI hai| zrAvaNa sudI saptamI ke dina sUrya sattAIsa aMgula kI
pauruSI chAyA karake divasa kSetra (sUrya se prakAzita AkAza) kI ora lauTatA huA
aura rajanI kSetra (prakAza kI hAni karatA aura andhakAra ko bar3hatA huA
saMcAra karatA hai| 181-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM
neraiyANaM sattAvIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| ahesattamAe puDhavIe
atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM sattAvIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM
devANaM atthegaiyANaM sattAvIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|sohmmiisaannesu
kappesu atthegaiyANaM devANaM sattAvIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| isa
ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti sattAIsa palyopama kI hai|
adhastana saptama mahAtamaHprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakiyoM kI sthiti
sattAIsa sAgaropama kI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti sattAIsa
palyopama kI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti sattAIsa
palyopama kI hai| 182-majjhima-uvarimagevejayANaM devANaM jahaNNeNaM
sattAvIsaMsAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA majjhimagevejayavimANesu devattAe
uvavaNNA, tesi NaM devANaM ukkoseNa sattAvIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te
NaM devA sattAvIsAe addhamAsehiM ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA,
nIsasaMti vaa| tesi NaM devANaM sattAvIsaM vAsasahassehiM AhAraTe smuppji|
_saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je sattAvIsAe bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti
bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| madhyama-
uparima graiveyaka devoM kI jaghanya sthiti sattAIsa sAgaropama kI hai| jo deva
madhyama graiveyaka vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI
utkRSTa sthiti sattAIsa sAgaropama kI hai| ye deva sattAIsa ardhamAsoM (sAr3he
teraha mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa arthAt ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ko
. sattAIsa hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| . kitaneka
bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo sattAIsa bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge,
buddha hoMge, karmoM se

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twenty-eighth Stānaka - Samvāya  They will be liberated, attain Parinirvāṇa
and end all suffering. || Twenty-seventh Stānaka Samvāya ends || [ 79 Twenty-
eighth Stānaka - Samvāya 183 - The Ācāra-prakalpa has been stated as twenty-
eight types, such as - 1 Māsika Āropaṇa, 2 Sapamcaraī Māsika Āropaṇa, 3
Sadasarai Māsika Āropaṇa, [ 4 Sapamcara-sarai Māsika Āropaṇa, 5 Savīsaīrai
Māsika Āropaṇa, 6 Sapamca-vīsa-sarai Māsika Āropaṇa ] and so on, 6 Dvimāsika
Āropaṇa, 6 Tri-māsika Āropaṇa, 6 Catur-māsika Āropaṇa, 6 Upghātika Āropaṇa, 25
Anupghātika Āropaṇa, 26 Kṛtsnā Āropaṇa, 27 Akṛtsnā Āropaṇa, 28. These twenty-
eight types are the Ācāra-prakalpa. This is to be practiced (until the
purification of the committed offense). **Explanation** - 'Ācāra' is the first
part of the name. Its specific study is called prakalpa. Its other name is
'Niśītha'. It prescribes penance for the purification of offenses committed by
monks and nuns due to ignorance, carelessness or passion. The reason for calling
it Ācāra-prakalpa is that by performing penance, monks and nuns are re-
established in their knowledge, vision and character-based conduct. Twenty-eight
types of this Ācāra-prakalpa or penance are mentioned in the original text,
their description is as follows: If a monk commits an offense, he is given
penance of fasting for a certain number of days for his purification. If, before
the completion of that penance, he commits a greater offense, the purification
of which is possible by fasting for a month, then he is given a penance of
fasting for a month, which is added to the previous penance. This is called
Māsika Āropaṇa. || 1 || If someone commits an offense, the purification of which
is possible by fasting for a month along with five days and nights, then such an
offender is given a penance of fasting for a month along with five days and
nights, which is added to the previous penance. This is called Sapamcaraī Māsika
Āropaṇa. || 1 || Similarly, if a greater offense is committed, the penance for
which is purification by fasting for a month along with ten days and nights,
then giving such penance is called Sadasarai Māsika Āropaṇa. || 3 || Similarly,
if a penance of fasting for a month along with fifteen, twenty and twenty-five
days and nights is added to the monthly penance, then it is called...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTAviMzatisthAnaka - samavAya ] mukta hoMge, parinirvANa ko prApta hoMge ora
sarvaduHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //  saptaviMzatisthAnaka samavAya samApta  //  [
79 aSTAviMzatisthAnaka - samavAya 183 - aTThAvIsavihe AyArapakappe paNNatte, taM
jahA - mAsiA ArovaNA 1, sapaMcarAI mAsiA ArovaNA 2, sadasaraImAsiyA ArovaNA 3  /
[ sapaNNarasarAi - mAsiA ArovaNA 4, savIsairAImAsiA ArovaNA 5, sapaMcavIsarAi -
mAsiA ArovaNA 6 ] evaM ceva do mAsiA ArovaNA sapaMcarAI do mAsiyA ArovaNA 06  /
evaM timAsiyA ArovaNA 6, caumAsiyA ArovaNA 6, uvaghAiyA ArovaNA 25, aNuvaghAiyA
ArovaNA 26, kasiNA ArAvaNA 27, akasiNA ArovaNA 28  /  etAvatA AyArapakappe etAva
tAva Ayariyavve  /  AcAraprakalpa aTThAIsa prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaise- 1
mAsikI AropaNA, 2 sapaMcarAtrimAsikI AropaNA, 3 sadazarAtrimAsikI AropaNA, 4
sapaMcadazarAtrimAsikI AropaNA, saviMzatirAtrimAsikI AropaNA, 5
sapaMcaviMzatirAtrimAsikI AropaNA 6 isI prakAra dvimAsikI AropaNA, 6 trimAsikI
AropaNA, 6 caturmAsikI AropaNA, 6 upaghAtikA AropaNA, 25 anupaghAtikA AropaNA,
26 kRtsnA AropaNA, 27 akRtsnA AropaNA, 28 yaha aTThAIsa prakAra kA AcAraprakalpa
hai| yaha taba taka AcaraNIya hai  /  (jaba taka ki Acarita doSa kI zuddhi na ho
jAve  / ) vivecana - 'AcAra' nAma kA prathama aMga hai| usake adhyayana-vizeSa
ko prakalpa kahate haiM  /  usakA dUsarA nAma 'nizItha ' bhI hai| usameM ajJAna,
pramAda yA Aveza Adi se sAdhu-sAdhvI dvArA kiye gaye aparAdhoM kI zuddhi ke lie
prAyazcitta kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| isako AcAraprakalpa kahane kA kAraNa yaha
hai ki prAyazcitta dekara sAdhu-sAdhvI ko unake jJAna, darzana aura cAritrarUpa
AcAra meM punaH sthApita kiyA jAtA hai| isa AcAraprakalpa yA prAyazcitta ke
prakRta sUtra meM aTThAIsa bheda kahe gaye haiM, unakA vivaraNa isa prakAra haiM
kisI anAcAra kA sevana karane para sAdhu ko usakI zuddhi ke lie kucha dinoM taka
tapa karane kA prAyazcitta diyA gyaa| usa prAyazcitta kI avadhi pUrNa hone ke
pahale hI usane pUrva se bhI bar3A koI aparAdha kara DAlA, jisakI zuddhi eka
mAsa ke tapa se honA sambhava ho, taba use usI pUrva pradatta prAyazcitta meM
eka mAsa ke vahana-yogya jo mAsa bhara kA prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai, use mAsikI
AropaNA kahate haiM  // 1 //  koI aisA aparAdha kare jisakI zuddhi pA~ca dina-
rAtra ke tapa ke sAtha eka mAsa ke tapa se ho, to aise doSI ko usI pUrvadatta
prAyazcitta meM pAMca dina-rAta sahita eka mAsa ke prAyazcitta ko pUrvadatta
prAyazcitta meM sammilita karane ko 'sapaMcarAtrimAsikI AropaNA' kahate haiM  //
1  //  isI prakAra pUrva se bhI kucha bar3A aparAdha hone para daza dina-rAtri
sahita eka mAsa ke tapa dvArA zuddhi yogya prayAzcitta dene ko sadazarAtrimAsikI
AropaNA kahate haiM ||3 | isI prakAra mAsa sahita pandraha, bIsa aura paccIsa
dina rAtri ke vahana yogya prAyazcitta mAsika prAyazcitta meM AropaNa karane
para kramazaH

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samvayanga Sutra 80  **Chapter 80:  Aropaṇa (Attribution)**  **Monthly
Aropaṇa:**  * Fifteen-night monthly Aropaṇa: 4 * Twenty-night monthly Aropaṇa: 5
* Twenty-five-night monthly Aropaṇa: 6  As explained above, there are six types
of monthly Aropaṇa. Similarly, there are six types of bi-monthly Aropaṇa, six
types of tri-monthly Aropaṇa, and six types of quadri-monthly Aropaṇa. Thus,
there are a total of 24 types of Aropaṇa for all four types of monthly periods.
**Lesser Monthly Aropaṇa:**  * The atonement for 27 days and nights is called
Lesser Monthly Atonement. * The atonement for one and a half months is called
Lesser Bi-monthly Atonement. * Similarly, Lesser Tri-monthly and Lesser Quadri-
monthly Atonements are called **Upghātika Aropaṇa**. This is the 25th Aropaṇa.
It is also called **Udghātika Aropaṇa**.  **Greater Monthly Aropaṇa:**  * The
atonement for the entire month is called Greater Monthly Atonement. * The
attribution of atonement for half a fortnight, a fortnight, etc., along with the
Greater Monthly Atonement is called **Nupghātika Aropaṇa**. This is also called
**Anudghātika Māsika Prāyaścitta**. This is the 26th Aropaṇa.  **Akṛtsna
Aropaṇa:**  * For a Sadhu who has committed many offenses, the atonement for six
months, including all other smaller atonements, is called **Akṛtsna Aropaṇa**.
This is the 28th Aropaṇa. It includes all small and large atonements.  **Kritsna
Aropaṇa:**  * The atonement for all the offenses committed by a Sadhu is called
**Kritsna Aropaṇa**. This is the 27th Aropaṇa.  **Limit of Atonement:**  * No
matter how great the offense, the atonement cannot exceed six months.
**Mohaṇīya Karma (Karma of Delusion):**  * There are 28 types of **Satā**
(categories) for the **Mohaṇīya Karma** of **Bhavyasiddhika Jīvas** (those
destined for liberation), namely:     * **Samyaktva Vedaniya** (Karma that leads
to Right Faith)     * **Mithyātvavedaniya** (Karma that leads to Wrong Faith)
* **Samyagmithyātvavedaniya** (Karma that leads to both Right and Wrong Faith)
* **16 Kṣayās** (16 types of passions)     * **9 Nokṣayās** (9 types of non-
passions)  **Ābhinibohika Jñāna (Knowledge of Liberation):**  * There are 28
types of **Ābhinibohika Jñāna**, namely:     * 1. **Śrotrendriya-arthāvaggraha**
(Understanding through the ear)     * 2. **Cakṣendriya-arthāvaggraha**
(Understanding through the eye)     * 3. **Ghāṇendriya-arthāvaggraha**
(Understanding through the nose)     * 4. **Jibhendriya-arthāvaggraha**
(Understanding through the tongue)     * 5. **Phāsindriya-arthāvaggraha**
(Understanding through the skin)     * 6. **Noindriya-arthāvaggraha**
(Understanding through the mind)     * 7. **Śrotrendriya-vañjanovaggraha**
(Understanding through the ear by means of external objects)     * 8.
**Ghāṇendriya-vañjanovaggraha** (Understanding through the nose by means of
external objects)     * 9. **Jibhendriya-vañjanovaggraha** (Understanding
through the tongue by means of external objects)     * 10. **Phāsindriya-
vañjanovaggraha** (Understanding through the skin by means of external objects)
* 11. **Śrotrendriya-īhā** (Desire for sounds)     * 12. **Cakṣendriya-īhā**
(Desire for sights)     * 13. **Ghāṇendriya-īhā** (Desire for smells)     * 14.
**Jibhendriya-īhā** (Desire for tastes)     * 15. **Phāsindriya-īhā** (Desire
for touches)     * 16. **Noindriya-īhā** (Desire for mental objects)     * 17.
**Śrotrendriya-āvāya** (Attachment to sounds)     * 18. **Cakṣendriya-āvāya**
(Attachment to sights)     * 19. **Ghāṇendriya-āvāya** (Attachment to smells)
* 20. **Jibhendriya-āvāya** (Attachment to tastes)     * 21. **Phāsindriya-
āvāya** (Attachment to touches)     * 22. **Noindriya-āvāya** (Attachment to
mental objects)     * 23. **Śrotrendriya-dhāraṇā** (Retention of sounds)     *
24. **Cakṣendriya-dhāraṇā** (Retention of sights)     * 25. **Ghāṇendriya-
dhāraṇā** (Retention of smells)     * 26. **Jibhendriya-dhāraṇā** (Retention of
tastes)     * 27. **Phāsindriya-dhāraṇā** (Retention of touches)     * 28.
**Noindriya-dhāraṇā** (Retention of mental objects)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ samavAyAGgasUtra 80 ] paMcadazarAtramAsikI AropaNA 4, viMzatirAtra mAsikI
AropaNA 5 aura paMcaviMzatirAtramAsikI 6, AropaNA hotI hai| jaise mAsikI AropaNA
ke chaha bheda Upara batalAye gaye haiM, usI prakAra dvimAsikI AropaNA ke 6
bheda, trimAsikI AropaNA ke 6 bheda aura caturmAsikI AropaNA ke 6 bheda jAnanA
caahie| isa prakAra cAroM mAsikI AropaNA ke 24 bheda ho jAte haiM  /  27 dina-
rAta ke diye gaye prAyazcittoM ko laghumAsika prAyazcitta kahate haiN| aise
Der3ha mAsa ke prAyazcitta ko laghu dvimAsika prAyazcitta kahate haiN| aise
laghu trimAsika, laghu caturmAsika prAyazcittoM ko upaghAtika AropaNA kahate
haiM  /  yahI paccIsavIM AropaNA hai| ise udghAtika AroSaNA bhI kahate haiM  /
pUre mAsa bhara ke prAyazcitta ko gurumAsika kahA jAtA hai| isake sAtha
ardhapakSa, pakSa Adi ke prAyazcittoM ke AropaNa karane ko nupaghAtika AropaNa
kahate haiN| ise anudghAtika mAsika prAyazcitta bhI kahA jAtA hai  /  yaha
chabbIsavIM AropaNA hai  /  ko kRtsnA AropaNA bahuta adhika aparAdha karanevAle
sAdhu ko bhI prAyazcittoM ko sammilita karake chaha mAsa ke tapaprAyazcitta ko
akRtsnA AropaNA kahate haiM  /  yaha aTThAIsavIM AropaNA hai| isameM sabhI
choTe-moTe prAyazcitta sammilita ho jAte haiN| sAdhu ne jitane aparAdha kiye
haiM, una saba ke prAyazcittoM ko eka sAtha kahate haiM  /  yaha sattAIsavIM
AropaNA hai  /  kitanA hI bar3A aparAdha kiyA ho, para chaha mAsa se adhika tapa
kA vidhAna nahIM hai  /  184 - bhavasiddhiyANaM jIvANaM atthegaiyANaM
mohaNijjassa kammassa aTThAvIsaM kammaMsA saMtakammA paNNattA, taM jahA -
sammattaveyaNijjaM micchattaveyaNijjaM sammAmicchattaveyaNijjaM, solasa kasAya,
Nava NokasAyA  /  kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIvoM ke mohanIya karma kI aTThAIsa
prakRtiyoM kI satA kahI gaI hai, jaise - samyaktvavedanIya, mithyAtvavedanIya,
samyagmithyAtvavedanIya, solaha kaSAya aura nau nokaSAya  /  185 -
AbhiNibohiyaNANe aTThAvIsavihe paNNatte taM jahA- soiMdiyaatthAvaggahe 1,
cakkhiMdiyaatthAvaggahe 2, ghANiMdiyaatthAvaggahe 3, jibbhidiyaatthAvaggahe 4,
phAsiMdiyaatthAvaggahe 5, NoiMdiyaatthAvaggahe 6, soiMdiyavaMjaNovaggahe 7,
ghANiMdiyavaMjaNovaggahe 8, jibbhidiyavaMjaNovaggahe 9, phAsiMdiyavaMjaNovaggahe
10, sotiMdiyaIhA 11, cakkhidiyaIhA 12, ghANidiyaIhA 13, jibbhidiyaIhA 14,
phAsiMdiyaIhA 15 NoiMdiyaIhA 16, sotiMdiyAvAe 17, cakkhidiyAvAe 18
ghANiMdiyAvAe, 19. jibbhidiyAvAe 20, phAsiMdiyAvAe 21, NoiMdiyAvAe 22  /
soiMdiyadhAraNA 23, cakkhidiyadhAraNA 24, ghANiMdiyadhAraNA 25,
jibbhidiyadhAraNA 26, phAsiMdiyadhAraNA 27, NoiMdiyadhAraNA 28  /
AbhinibodhikajJAna aTThAIsa prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaise- 1. zrotrendriya -
arthAvagraha, 2

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twenty-Eight Standpoints - Samvaya  [81] 1.  Eye-sense-Arthaavgraha, 3. Nose-
sense-Arthaavgraha, 4. Tongue-sense-Arthaavgraha, 5. Touch-sense-Arthaavgraha,
6. No-sense-Arthaavgraha, 7. Ear-sense-Vyanjanavgraha, 8. Nose-sense-
Vyanjanavgraha, 9. Tongue-sense-Vyanjanavgraha, 10. Touch-sense-Vyanjanavgraha,
11. Ear-sense-Iha, 12. Eye-sense-Iha, 13. Nose-sense-Iha, 14. Tongue-sense-Iha,
15. Touch-sense-Iha, 16. No-sense-Iha, 17. Ear-sense-Avaya, 18. Eye-sense-Avaya,
19. Nose-sense-Avaya, 20. Tongue-sense-Avaya, 21. Touch-sense-Avaya, 22. No-
sense-Avaya, 23. Ear-sense-Dharana, 24. Eye-sense-Dharana, 25. Nose-sense-
Dharana, 26. Tongue-sense-Dharana, 27. Touch-sense-Dharana, and 28. No-sense-
Dharana.  **Discussion:** Before knowing any object, there is an indistinct
perception of "something is there", this is called Darshan. Immediately after
that, there is a clear but unmanifest perception, this is called Vyanjanavgraha.
After that, there is a general understanding or knowledge like "this is a human
being", this is called Arthaavgraha. Subsequently, there is a desire to know
whether this human being is Bengali or Madrasi? This curiosity is called Iha.
Again, by hearing his speech etc., it is ascertained that he is not Bengali but
Madrasi, this kind of conclusive knowledge is called Avaya. When this knowledge
becomes firm, it is called Dharana. In due course, it becomes the cause of
remembrance. Remembrance itself is also a part of Dharana.  Vyanjanavgraha does
not occur through the mind and the eye-sense because the object seen or thought
about by them is manifest, but Vyanjanavgraha knowledge is unmanifest or
indistinct. The four knowledges of Arthaavgraha, Iha, Avaya, and Dharana occur
through the five senses and the sixth mind. Therefore, multiplying four by six
(4 x 6 = 24), twenty-four distinctions are related to Arthaavgraha. And
Vyanjanavgraha occurs through the remaining four senses except the mind and the
eye, therefore, adding four distinctions to the above twenty-four distinctions
(24 + 4 = 28), there are twenty-eight distinctions of Abhinibodhik knowledge.
This is called Matijnana. The mind is called "No-sense" because it is not
visible outside. But everyone knows its existence through thinking and
contemplation.  =  186 - In the Isana Kalpa, twenty-eight lakh Vimanasavas have
been mentioned.  187 - When a Jiva is bound in the Devagati, it binds twenty-
eight Uttarapragatis of the Nama Karma, they are as follows - 1. Devagatinam, 2.
Panchendriyajatinam, 3. Vaikriyasarinam, 4. Taijasarinam, 5. Karmanasharinam, 6.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTAviMzatisthAnaka - samavAya ] [ 81 cakSurindriya- arthAvagraha, 3
ghrANendriya-arthAvagraha, 4 jihvendriya-arthAvagraha, 5 sparzanendriya-
arthAvagraha 6. noindriya- arthAvagraha, 7 zrotrendriya-vyaMjanAvagraha, 8
ghrANendriya-vyaMjanAvagraha, 9 jihvendriya-vyaMjanAvagraha, 10 sparzanendriya-
vyaMjanAvagraha, 11 zrotrendriya-IhA, 12 cakSurindriya-IhA, 13. ghrANendriya -
IhA, 14 jihvendriyaIhA, 15. sparzanendriya - IhA, 16. noindriya-IhA, 17
zrotrendriya- avAya, 18 cakSurindriya- avAya, 19 ghrANendriya- avAya, 20
jihvendriya- avAya, 21 sparzanendriya- avAya, 22 noindriya- avAya, 23
zrotrendriyadhAraNA, 24 cakSurindriya-dhAraNA, 25 ghrANendriya-dhAraNa, 26
jihvendriya- dhAraNA, 27 sparzanendriya- dhAraNA ora 28 noindriya- dhAraNA  /
vivecana - kisI bhI padArtha ke jAnane ke pUrva ' kucha hai' isa prakAra kA
aspaSTa AbhAsa hotA hai, use darzana kahate haiN| usake tatkAla bAda hI kucha
spaSTa kintu avyakta bodha hotA hai, use vyaMjanAvagraha kahate haiN| usake bAda
'yaha manuSya hai' aisA jo sAmAnya bodha yA jJAna hotA hai, use arthAvagraha
kahate haiN| tatpazcAt yaha jAnane kI icchA hotI hai ki yaha manuSya baMgAlI hai
yA madrAsI ? isa jijJAsA ko IhA kahate haiN| punaH usakI bolI Adi sunakara
nizcaya ho jAtA hai ki yaha baMgAlI nahIM kintu madrAsI hai, isa prakAra ke
nizcayAtmaka jJAna ko avAya kahate haiM  /  yahI jJAna jaba dRDha ho jAtA hai,
taba dhAraNA kahalAtA hai| kAlAntara meM vaha smaraNa kA kAraNa banatA hai  /
smaraNa svayaM bhI dhAraNA kA eka aMga hai| inameM vyaMjanAvagraha mana aura
cakSurindriya se nahIM hotA kyoMki inase dekhI yA socI- vicArI gaI vastu vyakta
hI hotI hai, kintu vyaMjanAvagraha jJAna avyakta yA aspaSTa hotA hai|
arthAvagraha, IhA, avAya aura dhAraNA ke cAroM jJAna pAMcoM indriyoM aura chaThe
mana se hote haiM  /  ataH cAra ko chaha se guNita karane para (4 x 6 24)
caubIsa bheda arthAvagraha sambandhI hote haiN| aura vyaMjanAvagraha mana aura
cakSu ke sivAya zeSa cAra indriyoM se hotA hai ataH cAra bhedoM ko Upara ke
caubIsa bhedoM meM jor3a dene para (24+4= 28) aTThAIsa bheda Abhinibodhika jJAna
ke hote haiM  /  isako hI matijJAna kahate haiM  /  mana ko 'noindriya' kahA
jAtA hai, kyoMki vaha bAhara dikhAI nahIM detA  /  para soca-vicAra se usake
astitva kA sabhI ko parijJAna avazya hotA hai  /  = 186 - IsANe NaM kappe
aTThAvIsaM vimANAvAsasayasahassA paNNattA  /  IzAna kalpa meM aTThAIsa lAkha
vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiM  /  - 187 - jIve NaM devagaimmi baMdhamANe nAmassa
kammassa aTThAvIsaM uttarapagaDIo baMdhati, taM jahA - devagatinAmaM 1,
paMciMdiyajAtinAmaM 2, veDavviyasarIranAmaM 3, teyagasarIranAmaM 4,
kammaNasarIranAmaM 5, samacauraMsasaMThANanAmaM 6, veDavviyasarIragovaMgaNAmaM
7, vaNNanAmaM 8, gaMdhanAmaM 9, rasanAmaM 10, phAsanAmaM 11, devANupuvvinAmaM
12, agurulahunAmaM 13, uvaghAyanAmaM 14, parAghAyanAmaM 15, ussAsanAmaM 16,
pasatthavihAyogainAmaM 17, tasanAmaM 18, bAyaranAmaM 19, pajjattanAmaM 20,
patteyasarIranAmaM 21, thirAthirANaM subhAsubhANaM AejjANAjjANaM donhaM
aNNayaraM ega nAmaM 24, nibaMdhai  /  [ subhaganAmaM 25, sussaranAmaM 26 ],
jasokittinAmaM 27, nimmANanAmaM 28  /  devagati ko bAMdhane vAlA jIva nAmakarma
kI aTThAIsa uttaraprakRtiyoM ko bAMdhatA hai, ve isa prakAra haiM - 1
devagatinAma, 2 paMcendriyajAtinAma, 3 vaikriyazarIranAma, 4 taijasazarIranAma,
5 kArmaNazarIranAma, 6

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[82] The twenty-eight categories of *karma* bind the soul: [1]
*Samavāyāṅgasūtra* (the name of the category of *karma* that determines the
soul's physical form), [2] *Samacaturasrasanstḥānanama* (the name of the
category of *karma* that determines the soul's shape), [3]
*Vaikriyakaśarīrāṅgopāṅganāma* (the name of the category of *karma* that
determines the soul's organs and limbs), [4] *Varṇanāma* (the name of the
category of *karma* that determines the soul's color), [5] *Gandhanāma* (the
name of the category of *karma* that determines the soul's smell), [6]
*Rasānāma* (the name of the category of *karma* that determines the soul's
taste), [7] *Sparśanāma* (the name of the category of *karma* that determines
the soul's touch), [8] *Devānupūrvīnāma* (the name of the category of *karma*
that determines the soul's previous births as a deity), [9] *Agurulaghunāma*
(the name of the category of *karma* that determines the soul's weight), [10]
*Upghātanāma* (the name of the category of *karma* that determines the soul's
internal injuries), [11] *Parāghātanāma* (the name of the category of *karma*
that determines the soul's external injuries), [12] *Ucchvāsanāma* (the name of
the category of *karma* that determines the soul's breathing), [13] *Praśasta
Vihāyogatināma* (the name of the category of *karma* that determines the soul's
good rebirth), [14] *Trasanāma* (the name of the category of *karma* that
determines the soul's trembling), [15] *Bādarānāma* (the name of the category of
*karma* that determines the soul's foolishness), [16] *Paryāptanāma* (the name
of the category of *karma* that determines the soul's sufficiency), [17]
*Pratiyekaśarīranāma* (the name of the category of *karma* that determines the
soul's individual body), [18] *Sthita-Asthiranāma* (the name of the category of
*karma* that determines the soul's stability or instability), [19] *Śubha-
Aśubhanāma* (the name of the category of *karma* that determines the soul's
auspiciousness or inauspiciousness), [20] *Ādeya-Anādeyanāma* (the name of the
category of *karma* that determines the soul's ability to receive or not
receive), [21] *Subhaganāma* (the name of the category of *karma* that
determines the soul's beauty), [22] *Susvaranāma* (the name of the category of
*karma* that determines the soul's good voice), [23] *Yaśaskīrtināma* (the name
of the category of *karma* that determines the soul's fame), and [24]
*Nirmāṇanāma* (the name of the category of *karma* that determines the soul's
creation).  188 - Similarly, the soul bound to hell also binds the twenty-eight
categories of *karma*, but instead of binding the auspicious categories, it
binds the inauspicious categories. For example, it binds the categories of
*karma* that determine the soul's inauspicious rebirth, ugly form, instability,
misfortune, inauspiciousness, bad voice, inability to receive, infamy, and
creation. This is the only difference.  187 - In the Ratnaprabhā earth, the
condition of many hell-bound beings is described as twenty-eight *palyopamas*
(comparisons). In the seventh earth below, the condition of many hell-bound
beings is described as twenty-eight *sāgaropamas* (comparisons). The condition
of many Asura-Kumaras is described as twenty-eight *palyopamas* (comparisons).
In the Saudharma and Iśāna kalpas, the condition of many deities is described as
twenty-eight *palyopamas* (comparisons).  190 - The condition of the deities who
reside in the lower and upper *graiveyaka* vimānas is described as twenty-eight
*sāgaropamas* (comparisons). The condition of the deities who are born in the
middle and upper *graiveyaka* vimānas is described as twenty-eight *sāgaropamas*
(comparisons). These deities breathe, eat, and sleep every twenty-eight half-
months (fourteen months). They experience the desire for food every twenty-eight
thousand years.  Many *bhavya-siddhika* souls will become *siddhas*, *buddhas*,
liberated from *karma*, attain *parinirvāṇa*, and end all suffering after
experiencing twenty-eight births.  || End of the Twenty-Eight Categories of
*Karma* ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 82] [samavAyAGgasUtra samacaturasrasaMsthAnanAma,7
vaikriyakazarIrAGgopAGganAma, 8 varNanAma, 9 gandhanAma, 10 rasanAma, 11
sparzanAma, 12 devAnupUrvInAma, 13 agurulaghunAma, 14 upaghAtanAma, 15
parAghAtanAma, 16 ucchvAsanAma, 17 prazasta vihAyogatinAma, 18 trasanAma, 19
bAdaranAma, 20 paryAptanAma, 21 pratyekazarIranAma, 22 sthita-asthira nAmoM meM
se koI eka, 23 zubha-azubha nAmoM meM se koI eka, 24 Adeya-anAdeya nAmoM meM se
koI eka, [25 subhaganAma, 26 susvaranAma) 27 yazaskIrtinAma aura 28 nirmANanAma,
ina aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM ko bAMdhatA hai|] 188-evaM ceva neraiyA vi, NANattaM-
appasatthavihAyogainAma huMDagasaMThANaNAmaM athiraNAmaM dubbhagaNAmaM
asubhaNAmaM dussaraNAmaM aNAdijjaNAmaM ajasokittiNAmaM nimmaannnnaam| isI
prakAra narakagati ko bAMdhanevAlA jIva bhI nAmakarma kI aTThAIsa prakRtiyoM ko
bAMdhatA hai| kintu vaha prazasta prakRtiyoM ke sthAna para aprazasta prakRtiyoM
ko bAMdhatA hai| jaise-aprazasta vihAyogatinAma, huMDakasaMsthAnanAma,
asthiranAma, durbhaganAma, azubhanAma, duHsvaranAma, anAdeyanAma,
ayazaskIrtinAma aura nirmaannnaam| itanI mAtra hI bhinnatA hai| 187-imIse NaM
rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM aTThAvIsaM paliovamAI ThiI
pnnnnttaa| ahe sattamAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM aTThAvIsaM
sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM aTThAvIsaM
paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|sohmmiisaannesukppesu devANaM atthegaiyANaM
aTThAvIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka
nArakoM kI sthiti aTThAIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| adhastana sAtavIM pRthivI meM
kitaneka nArakiyoM kI sthiti aTThAIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka
asurakumAroM kI sthiti aTThAIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpoM
meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti aTrAIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai|
190-uvarimaheTThimagevejjayANaM devANaM jahaNNeNaM aTThAvIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa| je devA majjhimauvarimagevejjaesu vimANesu devattAe uvavaNNA
tesiNaMdevANaM ukkoseNaM aTThAvIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devA
aTThAvIsAe addhamAsehiM ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vaa|
tesi NaM devANaM aTThAvIsAe vAsasahassehiM AhAraTTe smuppji| saMtegaiyA
bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je aTThAvIsAe bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti
muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| uparima-adhastana
graiveyaka vimAnavAsI devoM kI jaghanya sthiti aTThAIsa sAgaropama kI hai| jo
deva madhyama-uparima graiveyaka vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una
devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti aTThAIsa sAgaropama hotI hai| ve deva aTThAIsa
ardhamAsoM (caudaha mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsaniHzvAsa lete haiN| una
devoM ko aTThAIsa hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai|
kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo aTThAIsa bhava grahaNa karake siddha
hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parinirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura
sarvaduHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //  aSTAviMzatisthAnaka samavAya smaapt||

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirty-Nine Standpoints of Samvaya  The thirty-nine standpoints of Samvaya
are explained in detail in the 191st chapter of the Aguna-Tisa-Vihe. These
standpoints are:  1. **Bhoom-Shruta:** This refers to the scriptures that
explain the consequences of earth-related phenomena like earthquakes. 2.
**Utpaat-Shruta:** This refers to the scriptures that explain the consequences
of celestial events like meteor showers. 3. **Swapna-Shruta:** This refers to
the scriptures that explain the consequences of dreams. 4. **Antar-Likkh-
Shruta:** This refers to the scriptures that explain the consequences of
celestial events like eclipses and planetary conjunctions. 5. **Ang-Shruta:**
This refers to the scriptures that explain the consequences of physical
characteristics and bodily sensations. 6. **Swar-Shruta:** This refers to the
scriptures that explain the consequences of sounds heard from humans, animals,
and inanimate objects. 7. **Vajan-Shruta:** This refers to the scriptures that
explain the consequences of physical marks and blemishes on the body. 8.
**Lakkhan-Shruta:** This refers to the scriptures that explain the consequences
of birthmarks and other physical signs.  **Bhoom-Shruta** is further divided
into three categories:  1. **Sutra:** This refers to the concise and precise
formulation of the principles of Bhoom-Shruta. 2. **Vritti:** This refers to the
detailed explanation of the Sutras. 3. **Vaartik:** This refers to the further
elaboration and commentary on the Vritti.  Similarly, the other seven types of
Shruta are also divided into these three categories, resulting in a total of 24
(8 x 3) categories.  **Ang-Shruta** is also divided into three categories:  1.
**Sutra:** This refers to the concise and precise formulation of the principles
of Ang-Shruta. 2. **Vritti:** This refers to the detailed explanation of the
Sutras. 3. **Vaartik:** This refers to the further elaboration and commentary on
the Vritti.  The remaining standpoints of Samvaya are:  25. **Vikhaan-Ujog-
Shruta:** This refers to the scriptures that explain the principles of various
arts and sciences like cooking, economics, and love. 26. **Vidyaan-Ujog-
Shruta:** This refers to the scriptures that explain the principles of various
knowledge systems like astrology, logic, and martial arts.  These thirty-nine
standpoints of Samvaya provide a comprehensive framework for understanding the
principles of Jain philosophy and practice.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekonatriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [83 ekonatriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya
191-egUNatIsaivihe pAvasuyapasaMgeNaM paNNatte,taM jahA-bhome uppAe sumiNe
aMtalikkhe aMge sare vaMjaNe lakkhaNe 8 /  bhome tivihe pnnnntte| taM jahA-sutte
vittI vattie 3 /  evaM ekkekkaM tivihaM 24 /  vikahANujoge 25, vijjANujoge 26,
maMtANujoge 27, jogANujoge 28, aNNatithiyapavattANujoge 29 /  /
pApazrutaprasaMga-pApoM ke upArjana karanevAle zAstroM kA zravaNa-sevana unatIsa
prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaise 1. bhaumazruta-bhUmi ke vikAra, bhUkampa Adi kA
phala-varNana karanevAlA nimitt-shaastr| 2. utpAtazruta-akasmAt rakta-varSA Adi
utpAtoM kA phala batAnevAlA nimittshaastr| 3. svapnazruta-zubha-azubha svapnoM
kA phala varNana karanevAlA shrut| 4. antarikSazruta-AkAza meM vicaranevAle
grahoM ke yuddhAdi hone, tArAoM ke TUTane aura sUryAdi ke grahaNa, grahoparAga
Adi kA phala batAnevAlA shrut| 5. aMgazruta-zarIra ke vibhinna aMgoM ke
hInAdhika hone aura netra, bhujA Adi ke phar3akane kA phala batAnevAlA shrut| 6.
svarazruta- manuSyoM, pazu-pakSiyoM evaM akasmAt kASTha-pASANAdi-janita svaroM
(zabdoM) ko sunakara unake phala ko batAnevAlA shrut|| 7. vyaMjanazruta-zarIra
meM utpanna hue tila, maSA Adi kA phala batAnevAlA shrut| 8. lakSaNazruta-zarIra
meM utpanna cakra, khaGga, zaMkhAdi cihnoM kA phala batAnevAlA shrut|
bhaumazruta tIna prakAra kA hai, jaise-sUtra, vRtti aura vaarttik| 1. aMgazruta
ke sivAya anya matoM kI sahasra pada-pramANa racanA ko sUtra kahate haiN| 2.
unhIM sUtroM kI lakSa-pada-pramANa vyAkhyA ko vRtti kahate haiN| 3. usa vRtti kI
koTi-pada pramANa vyAkhyA ko vArtika kahate haiN| ina sUtra, vRtti aura vArtika
ke bheda se uparyukta bhauma, utpAda Adi AThoM prakAra ke zruta ke (84 3 = 24)
caubIsa bheda ho jAte haiN| aMgazruta kI lakSa-pada-pramANa racanA ko sUtra,
koTi-pada pramANa vyAkhyA ko vRtti aura aparimita pada-pramANa vyAkhyA ko
vArtika kahA jAtA hai| 24. vikathAnuyogazruta-strI, bhojana-pAna Adi kI kathA
karanevAle tathA artha-kAma Adi kI prarUpaNA karanevAle pAkazAstra, arthazAstra,
kAmazAstra aadi| 26. vidyAnuyogazruta-rohiNI, prajJapti, aMguSThaprasenAdi
vidyAoM ko sAdhane ke upAya aura unakA upayoga batAnevAle shaastr|

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samvayanga Sutra 27: Mantra-anuyoga-shruta - A treatise on mantra-shastra,
which describes the means of various mantras that are effective for worldly
purposes.  ## Samvayanga Sutra 28: Yoga-anuyoga-shruta - A treatise that
describes the use of collyrium, pills, etc., to subdue women, men, and others.
## Samvayanga Sutra 29: Anyatirthika-pravritta-anuyoga - Treatises composed by
followers of other religions like Kapila, Buddha, etc.  Reading and listening to
such scriptures attracts the mind of humans towards sensory objects.  And,
reading and listening to scriptures that predict the future, dreams, etc., can
lead a seeker astray from their spiritual practice. Therefore, all such
scriptures are considered **papasruta** (sinful scriptures) for those seeking
liberation.  ## Samvayanga Sutra 192: The month of Ashadha is said to have 29
nights and days, considering the calculation of night and day. [Similarly] the
months of Bhadrapada, Kartik, Pausha, Phalguna, and Vaisakha are also said to
have 29 nights and days each. The lunar day is said to have 29 muhurtas,
considering the calculation of muhurtas.  ## Samvayanga Sutra 193: A
**samyagdristi** (rightly-seeing) **bhavya** (destined for liberation) being,
with **prashasta adhyavasana** (excellent outcome), is born as a deva (god) in
the **vaimanika** (celestial) realm, having bound 29 **uttarapgadi** (types of
name-karma) along with the name of the Tirthankara, according to the rules.  ##
Samvayanga Sutra 194: In this **ratna-prabha** (jewel-shining) earth, the state
of many narakas (hells) is said to be **29 palyopama** (comparisons to a palya).
In the seventh earth below, the state of many narakas is said to be **29
sagaropama** (comparisons to an ocean). The state of many **asura-kumara**
(demi-gods) is said to be **29 palyopama**. In the **soudharma-ishana** kalpas
(epochs), the state of many devas is said to be **29 palyopama**.  ## Samvayanga
Sutra 195: The state of devas in the **uvarima-majjhima-gevejaya** (upper-
middle-victorious) realms is said to be **29 sagaropama**. The devas who are
born as devas in the **uvarima-hetthima-gevejaya-vaimana** (upper-lower-
victorious-celestial) realms, their state is said to be **29 sagaropama** due to
their **ukkose** (elevation). These devas live for **29 half-months**, and they
breathe in, breathe out, eat, and drink. They experience **29 thousand years**
of **aahara-ratti** (food-time).  **Santegaiya bhavasiiddhiya** (those who have
attained the state of being) beings, who are **29 bhavaga-ghana** (bound by 29
types of karma), will be **sijjhisanti** (purified), **bujjhisanti**
(understand), and **mucchisanti** (liberated).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [samavAyAGgasUtra 27. maMtrAnuyogazruta-laukika prayojanoM ke sAdhaka aneka
prakAra ke maMtroM kA sAdhana batAne vAlA mNtrshaastr| 28. yogAnuyogazruta-strI-
puruSAdi ko vaza meM karanevAle aMjana, guTikA Adi ke nirUpaka shaastr| 29.
anyatIrthikapravRttAnuyoga-kapila, bauddha Adi matAvalambiyoM ke dvArA racitta
shaastr| ukta prakAra ke zAstroM ke par3hane aura sunane se manuSyoM kA mana
indriya-viSayoM kI ora AkRSTa hotA hai aura bhauma, svapna Adi kA phalAdi
batAnevAle zAstroM ke paThana-zravaNa se mumukSu sAdhaka apanI sAdhanA se
bhaTaka sakatA hai, ataH mokSAbhilASI janoM ke lie ukta sabhI prakAra ke zAstroM
ko pApazruta kahA gayA hai| 192-AsADhe NaM mAse egUNatIsarAiMdiAiM
rAiMdiyaggeNaM pnnnnttaa|[evN ceva] bhaddavae NaM mAse, kattie NaM mAse, pose
NaM mAse, phagguNe NaM mAse, vaisAhe NaM maase| caMdadiNe NaM egUNatIsaM muhutte
sAtirege muhuttaggeNaM pnnnntte| ASAr3ha mAsa rAtri-dina kI gaNanA kI apekSA
unatIsa rAta-dina kA kahA gayA hai| [isI prakAra] bhAdrapadamAsa, kArtikamAsa,
pauSamAsa, phAlguNamAsa aura vaizAkhamAsa bhI unatIsa-unatIsa rAta-dina ke kahe
gaye haiN| candra dina muhUrtagaNanA kI apekSA kucha adhika unatIsa muhUrta kA
kahA gayA hai| 193-jIve NaM pasatthajjhavasANajutte bhavie sammadiTThI
titthakaranAmasahiAo NAmassa NiyamA egUNatIsaM uttarapagaDIo NibaMdhittA
vemANiesu devesu devattAe uvvjji| prazasta adhyavasAna (pariNAma) se yukta
samyagdRSTi bhavya jIva tIrthaMkaranAma-sahita nAmakarma kI unatIsa prakRtiyoM
ko bAMdhakara niyama se vaimAnika devoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hotA hai|
194-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM egUNatIsaM
paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|ahe sattamAe puDhavIe atyaMgaiyANaM neraiyANaM
egUNatIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM
egUNatIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|sohmmiisaannesu kappesu devANaM
atthegaiyANaM egUNatIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM
kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti unatIsa palyopama kI hai| adhastana sAtavIM pRthivI
meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti unatIsa sAgaropama kI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra
devoM kI sthiti unatIsa palyopama kI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka
devoM kI sthiti unatIsa palyopama kI hotI hai| 195-uvarimamajjhimagevejayANaM
devANaM jahaNaNeNaM egUNatIsaMsAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| je devA
uvarimaheTThimagevejayavimANesu devattAe uvavaNNA tesi NaM devANaM ukkoseNa
egUNatIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te NaM devA egUNatIsAe addhamAsehi
ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA, UsasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vaa| tesi NaM devANaM
egUNatIsaM vAsasahassehiM AhAraTTe smuppjji| saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je
egUNatIsabhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Thirty-Stana-Samavaya] [85 They will attain Nirvana, they will end all
suffering. The inferior state of the gods of the upper, middle, and lower
Graiveyak is said to be like twenty-nine oceans. The gods who are born in the
form of gods in the upper, lower, and middle Graiveyak planes, their superior
state is said to be like twenty-nine oceans. These gods breathe in and out or
exhale and inhale after twenty-nine half-months (fourteen and a half months).
After twenty-nine thousand years, these gods develop a desire for food. How many
glorious Siddhik Jivas are there who will attain Siddhi, become Buddhas, be free
from karma, attain ultimate Nirvana, and end all suffering? || Thirty-one Stana
Samavaya is complete. 196 Thirty-Stana-Samavaya, thirty deceptive states are
described, just as a ship is lost in the water. By rising, karma destroys great
delusion. ||1|| Whoever is bound by the head, is bound immediately. By the
association of great evil, he destroys great delusion. ||2|| He who covers his
hands with his hands, and covers his hands with his hands. He destroys great
delusion by the sound of the teeth. ||3|| From birth, many people have begun. He
destroys great delusion by the sound of smoke. ||4|| Whoever wears it on the
head, on the best body. He destroys great delusion by dividing the head into
parts. ||5|| Again and again, he is punished by the people who are ridiculed. He
destroys great delusion by the fruit, by the punishment. ||6|| He who is hidden,
is hidden by illusion, by the shadow of illusion. He destroys great delusion by
being false. ||7|| He who is destroyed by the past, by his own actions. He
destroys great delusion by saying, "What is yours?" ||8|| Knowing the truth, he
speaks falsely. He destroys great delusion by being silent. ||9|| The path of
the non-returner is lost in the door itself. He destroys great delusion by being
scattered. ||10|| Even after understanding, he falls into the opposite
direction. He destroys delusion by being deluded by enjoyment. ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 triMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [85 parinivvAissaMti savvadakkhANamaMtaM krissNti|
uparima-madhyama graiveyaka devoM kI jaghanya sthiti unatIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI
hai| jo deva uparimaadhastana graiveyaka vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna hote
haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti unatIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ye deva
unatIsa ardhamAsoM (sAr3he caudaha mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa
lete haiN| una devoM ke unatIsa hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna
hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo unatIsa bhava grahaNa karake
siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta
hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge| ||ekontriNshtsthaank samavAya smaapt|
196 triMzatsthAnaka-samavAya tIsaM mohaNIyaThANA paNNattA, taM jahAje yAvi tase
pANe vArimajhe vigaahiaa| udaeNa kkamma mArei mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 1 //
sIsAveDheNa je keI AveDhei abhikkhaNaM  /  tivvAsubhasamAyAre mahAmohaM pakuvvai
// 2 //  pANiNA saMpihittANaM soyamAvariya pANiNaM  /  /  aMtonadaMtaM mArei
mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 3 //  jAyateyaM samArabbha bahuM AraMbhiyA jaNaM  /
aMtodhUmeNa mAreI mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 4 //  sissammi [ sIsammi] je pahaNai
uttamaMgammi ceyasA  /  vibhajja matthayaM phAle mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 5 //
puNo puNo paNidhie haNittA uvahase jaNaM  /  phaleNaM aduvA daMDeNaM mahAmohaM
pakuvvai  // 6 //  gUDhAyArI nigUhijjA mAyaM mAyAe chaaye| asaccavAI NiNhAI
mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 7 //  ghaMsei jo abhUeNaM akammaM attakammuNA  /  aduvA
tuma kAsi tti mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 8 //  jANamANo parisao saccAmosANi bhAsai
/  akkhINajhaMjhe purise mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 9 //  aNAgayassa nayavaM dAre
tasseva dhaMsiyA  /  viulaM vikkhobhaittANaM kiccA NaM paDibAhiraM  // 10 //
uvagasaMta pi jhaMpittA paDilomAiM vagguhiM  /  bhogabhoge viyAreI mohamohaM
pakuvvai  // 11 //

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[86] [Samvayanga Sutra] Those who are not Kumaras, but are called Kumaras, are
deluded by great delusion, like vultures dwelling in a place. ||12|| Those who
are not Brahmanas, but are called Brahmanas, are deluded by great delusion, like
a donkey wandering among cows, not knowing the right path. ||13|| Those who are
attached to their own possessions, and are deluded by Maya, are deluded by great
delusion, like a person who is attached to worldly things. ||14||12|| Those who
are greedy for wealth, and are attached to it, are deluded by great delusion,
like a person who is attracted to a beautiful object. ||15||13|| Those who are
proud of their wealth, and are arrogant, are deluded by great delusion, like a
person who is proud of his wealth. ||16|| Those who are filled with anger and
hatred, and are cruel, are deluded by great delusion, like a person who is
filled with anger and hatred. ||17||14|| Those who kill a living being, like a
bird killing its own egg, are deluded by great delusion, like a person who kills
a living being. ||18||15|| Those who kill a leader, a teacher, or a member of a
religious community, are deluded by great delusion, like a person who kills a
leader, a teacher, or a member of a religious community. ||19||16|| Those who
kill a person who is a friend to many, a protector of the poor, and a benefactor
of the world, are deluded by great delusion, like a person who kills a person
who is a friend to many, a protector of the poor, and a benefactor of the world.
||20||17|| Those who destroy the teachings of the Jinas, the Tirthankaras, and
the great sages, are deluded by great delusion, like a person who destroys the
teachings of the Jinas, the Tirthankaras, and the great sages. ||21||18|| Those
who are attached to worldly things, and are deluded by Maya, are deluded by
great delusion, like a person who is attached to worldly things. ||22||19||
Those who are attached to the wrong path, and are deluded by Maya, are deluded
by great delusion, like a person who is attached to the wrong path. ||23||20||
Those who are attached to their own body, and are deluded by Maya, are deluded
by great delusion, like a person who is attached to their own body. ||24||29
Those who are attached to their own body, and are deluded by Maya, are deluded
by great delusion, like a person who is attached to their own body. ||25||22||
Those who are attached to their own body, and are deluded by Maya, are deluded
by great delusion, like a person who is attached to their own body. ||26||23||
Those who are attached to their own body, and are deluded by Maya, are deluded
by great delusion, like a person who is attached to their own body. ||27||24||
Those who are attached to their own body, and are deluded by Maya, are deluded
by great delusion, like a person who is attached to their own body. ||28|| Those
who are attached to their own body, and are deluded by Maya, are deluded by
great delusion, like a person who is attached to their own body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86] [samavAyAGgasUtra akumArabhUe je keI kumArabhUe tti haM vae  /  itthIhiM
gidde vasae mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 12 //  ababhaMyArI je keI baMbhayAri tti haM
vae  /  gadahe vva gavAM majhe vissaraM nayaI nadaM  // 13 //  appaNo ahie bAle
mAyAmosaM baha bhase  /  itthIvisayagehIe mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 14 // 12 //
jaM nissie uvvahai jasasAhigameNa vA  /  tassa lubbhai vittammi mahAmohaM
pakuvvai  // 15 // 13 //  IsareNa aduvA gAmeNaM aNisare IsarIkae  /  tassa
saMpayahINassa sirI atulamAgayA  // 16 //  iMsAdoseNa AviTThe kalusAvilaceyase
/  je aMtarAyaM ceei mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 17 // 14 //  sappI jahA aMDauDaM
bhattAraM jo vihiMsai  /  seNAvaiM pasatthAraM mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 18 // 15
//  je nAyagaM ca raTThassa neyAraM nigamassa vA  /  seTiMTha bahuravaM haMtA
mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 19 // 16 //  bahujaNassa NeyAraM dIvaM tANaM ca pANiNaM
/  eyArisaM naraM haMtA mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 20 // 17 //  uvaTThiyaM
paDivirayaM saMjayaM sutavassiyaM  /  bukkamma dhammAo bhaMsei mahAmohaM
pakuvvai  // 21 // 18 //  tahevANataNANINaM jiNANaM varadaMsiNaM  /  tesiM
avaNNavaM bAle mahAmohaM pakuvvaI  // 22 // 19 //  neyAuassa maggassa duDhe
avayaraI bahuM  /  taM tippayaMto bhAvai mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 23 // 20 //
Ayariya-uvajjhAehiM suyaM viNayaM ca gAhie  /  te ceva khiMsaI bAle mahAmohaM
pakuvvai  // 24 // 29 Ayariya-uvajjhAyANaM sammaM no paDitappai  /  appaDipUyae
thadhe mahAmohaM pakuvai  // 25 // 22 //  abahussue ya je keI sueNaM pavikatthaI
/  sajjhAyavAyaM vayai mahAmohaM pakuvvaDa  // 26 // 23 //  atavassIe ya je keI
taveNa pavikatthai  /  savvaloyapare teNe mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 27 // 24 //
sAhAraNaTThA je keI gilANammi uvaTThie  /  pabhU NaM kuNaI kiccaM majhaM pi se
na kuvvai  // 28 //  saDhe niyaDIpaNNANe kalusAulaceyase  /

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Thirty-Stana-Samavaya] [87] He who kills a living being by drowning it in water
and pressing its feet down, he binds the Mahamohaniya karma. [29][25] He who
repeatedly engages in the act of killing, he binds the Mahamohaniya karma.
[30][26] He who repeatedly engages in the act of killing with a weapon, he binds
the Mahamohaniya karma. [31][27] He who is not a human being and is not a
resident of the other world, he binds the Mahamohaniya karma. [32][28] He who
desires wealth, fame, beauty, strength, and power, he binds the Mahamohaniya
karma. [33][29] He who sees the gods, yakshas, and gandharvas as different from
himself, he binds the Mahamohaniya karma. [34][30]  The thirty stanas, which are
the causes of the binding of the mohaniya karma, are as follows: (1) He who
kills a living being by drowning it in water and pressing its feet down, he
binds the Mahamohaniya karma. This is the first mohaniya stana. (2) He who
covers the head of a human being with wet leather and continuously performs evil
deeds, he binds the Mahamohaniya karma. This is the second mohaniya stana. (3)
He who covers the mouth of a living being with his hand, strangles it, and kills
it, he binds the Mahamohaniya karma. This is the third mohaniya stana. (4) He
who burns a living being in fire or sets fire to a large fire and burns a human
being or animal in it, or enters a place filled with smoke and suffocates it
with smoke, he binds the Mahamohaniya karma. This is the fourth mohaniya stana.
(5) He who strikes the head of a living being with a hammer or other weapon, or
cuts off its head with a sword or other weapon with a very troubled mind, he
binds the Mahamohaniya karma. This is the fifth mohaniya stana. (6) He who kills
a human being by deceit and laughs with joy, or feeds him a poisoned fruit or
beats him with a stick, he binds the Mahamohaniya karma. This is the sixth
mohaniya stana. (7) He who hides his deceit with magic, speaks falsely, and
talks about the meaning of the sutras, he binds the Mahamohaniya karma. This is
the seventh mohaniya stana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 triMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [87 appaNo ya abohI ya mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 29 //
25 //  je kahAhigaraNAiM saMpauMje puNo puNo  /  savvatitthANa bheyANaM
mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 30 // 26 //  je ya Ahammie joe saMpauMje puNo puNo  /
sahAheuM sahIheDaM mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 31 // 27 //  je a mANussae bhoe aduvA
pAraloie  /  te'tippayaMto Asayai mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 32 // 28 //  iDDI juI
jaso vaNNo devANaM bala-vIriyaM  /  tesiM avaNNavaM bAle mahAmohaM pakuvvai  //
33 // 29 //  apassamANo passAmi deve jakkhe ya gjhge| aNNANI jiNapUyaTTI
mahAmohaM pakuvvai  // 34 // 30 //  mohanIya karma baMdhane ke kAraNabhUta tIsa
sthAna kahe gaye haiM, jaise (1) jo koI vyakti strI-pazu Adi trasa-prANiyoM ko
jala ke bhItara praviSTa kara aura pairoM ko nIce dabA kara jala ke dvArA unheM
mAratA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA baMdha karatA hai| yaha pahalA mohanIya
sthAna hai| (2) jo vyakti kisI manuSya Adi ke zira ko gIle carma se veSTita
karatA hai tathA nirantara tIvra azubha pApamaya kAryoM ko karatA rahatA hai,
vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA baMdha karatA hai| yaha dUsarA mohanIya sthAna hai|
(3) jo koI kisI prANI ke mukha ko hAtha se banda kara usakA galA dabAkara
ghuraghurAte hue use mAratA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai|
vaha tIsarA mohanIya sthAna hai| (4) jo koI agni ko jalA kara yA agni kA mahAn
Arambha kara kisI manuSya-pazu Adi ko usameM jalAtA hai yA atyanta dhUmayukta
agnisthAna meM praviSTa kara dhueM se usakA dama ghoMTatA hai, vaha mahAmonIya
karma kA bandha karatA hai| yaha cauthA mohanIya sthAna hai| (5) jo kisI prANI
ke uttamAGga-zira para mudgara Adi se prahAra karatA hai athavA ati saMkleza
yukta citta se usake mAthe ko pharasA Adi se kATakara mAra DAlatA hai, vaha
mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai| vaha pA~cavAM mohanIya sthAna hai|
(6)jo kapaTa karake kisI manuSya kA ghAta karatA hai aura Ananda se haMsatA hai,
kisI maMtrita phala ko khilA kara athavA DaMDe se mAratA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya
karma kA baMdha karatA hai| yaha chaThA mohanIya sthAna hai| (7) jo gUDha
(gupta) pApAcaraNa karane vAlA mAyAcAra se apanI mAyA ko chipAtA hai, asatya
bolatA hai aura sUtrArtha kA apalApa karatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA
bandha karatA hai| yaha sAtavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai|

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 88]  (8) One who burdens another with their own heinous deeds, such as
*rishi-ghata* (killing a sage), or falsely accuses another of wrongdoing, binds
the *maha-mohaniya* karma. This is the eighth *mohaniya* place.  (9) One who,
knowing it to be false, speaks *satyamr̥ṣā* (a statement with more falsehood
than truth) in an assembly and constantly quarrels with others, binds the *maha-
mohaniya* karma. This is the ninth *mohaniya* place.  (10) A minister or an
official who, by destroying the king's treasury or the gates of wealth, and by
disturbing many vassals, makes the king powerless and seizes control of the
kingdom, the queens, or the gates of wealth, binds the *maha-mohaniya* karma.
This is the tenth *mohaniya* place.  (11) One whose entire wealth has been
stolen, who approaches someone with gifts and humble words to win their favor,
and then speaks harshly to destroy their means of enjoyment, binds the *maha-
mohaniya* karma. This is the eleventh *mohaniya* place.  (12) A man who, though
married, claims to be unmarried and lusts after women, remaining under their
control, binds the *maha-mohaniya* karma. One who, though not a celibate, claims
to be a *brahmacārī* (celibate), makes a discordant sound like a donkey among
oxen, and binds the *maha-mohaniya* karma. Similarly, an ignorant man who speaks
many false and deceitful words that harm himself and remains attached to women,
binds the *maha-mohaniya* karma. This is the twelfth *mohaniya* place.  (13) One
who earns a living by the reputation of a king or a minister, claiming to be
their relative, or who dedicates himself to the service of a king and then
becomes greedy for their wealth, binds the *maha-mohaniya* karma. This is the
thirteenth *mohaniya* place.  (14) If a powerless man is made powerful by a
wealthy person or a group of people, and then, out of envy and hatred, with a
polluted mind, he seeks to obstruct or destroy the enjoyment of that benefactor
or group, he binds the *maha-mohaniya* karma. This is the fourteenth *mohaniya*
place.  (15) Just as a serpent devours its own eggs, so too, a man who destroys
his own benefactor, his commander, or his religious teacher, binds the *maha-
mohaniya* karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 88] [samavAyAGgasUtra (8) jo apane kiye RSighAta Adi ghora duSkarma ko dUsare
para lAdatA hai, athavA anya vyakti ke dvArA kiye gaye duSkarma ko kisI dUsare
para Aropita karatA hai ki tumane yaha duSkarma kiyA hai, vaha mahAmonIya karma
kA bandha karatA hai| yaha AThavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai| (9) yaha bAta asatya
hai' aisA jAnatA huA bhI jo sabhA meM satyAmRSA (jisameM satyAMza kama hai ora
asatyAzaM adhika hai aisI) bhASA bolatA hai aura logoM se sadA kalaha karatA
rahatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai| yaha nauvAM mohanIya
sthAna hai| (10) rAjA kA jo maMtrI-amAtya-apane hI rAjA kI dArAoM (striyoM) ko,
athavA dhana Ane ke dvAroM kA vidhvaMsa karake aura aneka sAmanta Adi ko
vikSubdha karake rAjA ko anadhikArI karake rAjya para, rAniyoM para yA rAjya ke
dhana-Agamana ke dvAroM para svayaM adhikAra jamA letA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya
karma kA bandha karatA hai| yaha dazavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai| (11) jisakA
sarvasva haraNa kara liyA hai, vaha vyakti bheMTa Adi lekara aura dIna vacana
bolakara anukUla banAne ke liye yadi kisI ke samIpa AtA hai, aise puruSa ke lie
jo pratikUla vacana bolakara usake bhoga-upabhoga ke sAdhanoM ko vinaSTa karatA
hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai| yaha gyArahavA~ mohanIya
sthAna hai| (12) jo puruSa svayaM akumAra (vivAhita) hote hue bhI "maiM kumAra-
avivAhita hU~", aisA kahatA hai aura striyoM meM gRddha (Asakta) aura unake
adhIna rahatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai| jo koI paraMpa
svayaM abrahmacArI hote hae bhI 'maiM brahmacArI haiN| aisA bolatA hai. vaha
bailoM ke madhya meM gadhe ke samAna visvara (besurA) nAda (zabda) karatA-
reMkatA huA-mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai| tathA ukta prakAra se jo
ajJAnI puruSa apanA hI ahita karanevAle mAyAcAra-yukta bahuta adhika asatya
vacana bolatA hai aura striyoM ke viSayoM meM Asakta rahatA hai, vaha
mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai| yaha bArahavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai|
(13) jo rAjA Adi kI khyAti se arthAt 'yaha usa rAjA kA yA maMtrI Adi kA sagA
sambandhI hai' aisI prasiddhi se apanA nirvAha karatA ho athavA AjIvikA ke lie
jisa rAjA ke Azraya meM apane ko samarpita karatA hai arthAt usakI sevA karatA
hai aura phira usI ke dhana meM lubdha hotA hai, vaha puruSa mahAmohanIya karma
kA bandhaM karatA hai  // 15 //  yaha terahavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai| (14) kisI
aizvaryazAlI puruSa ke dvArA athavA jana-samUha ke dvArA koI anIzvara (aizvarya
rahita nirdhana) puruSa aizvaryazAlI banA diyA gayA, taba usa sampatti-vihIna
puruSa ke atula (apAra) lakSmI ho gii| yadi vaha IrSyA dveSa se prerita hokara,
kaluSatA-yukta citta se usa upakArI puruSa ke yA jana-samUha ke bhoga-upabhogAdi
meM antarAya yA vyavaccheda DAlane kA vicAra karatA hai, to vaha mahA-mohanIya
karma kA bandha karatA hai  // 16-17 //  yaha caudahavA~ mahAmohanIya sthAna
hai| (15) jaise sarpiNI (nAgina) apane hI aMDoM ko khA jAtI hai, usI prakAra jo
puruSa apanA hI bhalA karane vAle svAmI kA, senApati kA athavA dharmapAThaka kA
vinAza karatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Thirty-Stana-Samavaya] [89 binds karma. ||18|| This is the fifteenth mohaniya
stana. (16) One who kills the leader of a nation, or the leader of a nigama
(large city), or a very wealthy merchant, binds mahamohaniya karma. ||19|| This
is the sixteenth mohaniya stana. (17) One who kills the leader of many people,
their guide like a lamp, and similarly, a benefactor of many people, binds
mahamohaniya karma. ||20|| This is the seventeenth mohaniya stana. (18) One who,
in many ways, incites a person who is ready to take diksha, a person who is
detached from worldly pleasures, a restrained person, or a great ascetic, and
corrupts them from the path of dharma, binds mahamohaniya karma. ||21|| This is
the eighteenth mohaniya stana. (19) An ignorant person who speaks ill of the
infinite-knowing, infinite-seeing Jinas, binds mahamohaniya karma. ||22|| This
is the nineteenth mohaniya stana. (20) A wicked person who harms the righteous
path of liberation, and causes many people to deviate from it, and while
denigrating the path of liberation, delights in it, that is, becomes attached to
those wicked thoughts, binds mahamohaniya karma. ||22|| This is the twentieth
mohaniya stana. (21) An ignorant person who denigrates the Acharyas and
Upadhyayas from whom they have received the Shruta and Vinaya dharma, saying,
"They know nothing," "They are themselves corrupt in character," etc., binds
mahamohaniya karma. ||24|| This is the twenty-first mohaniya stana. (22) One who
does not properly satisfy the Acharya, Upadhyaya, and their benefactors, that
is, does not properly serve them, worship and honor them, but instead is
arrogant, binds mahamohaniya karma. ||25|| This is the twenty-second mohaniya
stana. (23) A person who is abahushruta (possessor of little knowledge) and
claims to be a great scholar, a student of the scriptures, and a reader of
scriptures, binds mahamohaniya karma. ||26|| This is the twenty-third mohaniya
stana. (24) One who is an a-tapasvi (without austerity) and yet calls himself a
great ascetic, is the greatest thief (because he steals the essence of things),
and binds mahamohaniya karma. ||27|| This is the twenty-fourth mohaniya stana.
(25) When a sick person, Acharya, or Sadhu comes for help (service and care),
even though one is capable, they do not serve them, etc., saying, "This is not
my work," and do not fulfill their duty, this cunning person, being deceitful
and with a polluted mind, becomes the cause of their own abodhi (non-attainment
of the three jewels of dharma) in the next life, and binds mahamohaniya karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 triMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [89 kA bandha karatA hai  // 18 //  vaha pandrahavAM
mohanIya sthAna hai| (16)jo rASTra ke nAyaka kA yA nigama (vizAla nagara) ke
netA kA athavA, mahAyazasvI seTha kA ghAta karatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma
kA bandha karatA hai  // 19  /  /  yaha solahavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai| (17) jo
bahuta janoM ke netA kA, dIpaka se samAna unake mArga-darzaka kA aura isI
prakAra ke aneka janoM ke upakArI puruSa kA ghAta karatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya
karma kA bandha karatA hai||20|| yaha sattarahavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai| (18) jo
dIkSA lene ke lie upasthita yA udyata puruSa ko, bhogoM se virakta jana ko,
saMyamI manuSya ko yA parama tapasvI vyakti ko aneka prakAroM se bhar3akA kara
dharma se bhraSTa karatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai  //
21 //  yaha aThArahavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai| (19)jo ajJAnI puruSa anantajJAnI
anantadarzI jinendroM kA avarNavAda karatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA
bandha karatA hai  // 22  //  yaha unnIsavAM mohanIya sthAna hai| (20) jo duSTa
puruSa nyAya-yukta mokSamArga kA apakAra karatA hai aura bahuta janoM ko usase
cyuta karatA hai, tathA mokSamArga kI nindA karatA huA apane Apako usase bhAvita
karatA hai, arthAt una duSTa vicAroM se lipta karatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya
karma kA bandha karatA hai  // 22 //  yaha bIsavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai| (21) jo
ajJAnI puruSa, jina-jina AcAryoM aura upAdhyAyoM se zruta aura vinaya dharma ko
prApta karatA hai, unhIM kI yadi nindA karatA hai, arthAt ye kucha nahIM jAnate,
ye svayaM cAritra se bhraSTa haiM, ityAdi rUpa se unakI badanAmI karatA hai, to
vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai ||24||yh ikkIsavA~ mohanIya sthAna
hai| (22) jo AcArya, upAdhyAya evaM apane upakAraka janoM ko samyak prakAra se
santRpta nahIM karatA hai arthAt samyak prakAra se unakI sevA nahIM karatA hai,
pUjA aura sanmAna nahIM karatA hai, pratyuta abhimAna karatA hai, vaha
mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai  // 25 //  yaha bAIsavA~ mohanIya sthAna
hai| (23) abahuzruta (alpa zruta kA dhAraka) jo puruSa apane ko bar3A
zAstrajJAnI kahatA hai, svAdhyAyavAdI aura zAstra-pAThaka batalAtA hai, vaha
mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai  // 26 //  yaha teIsavAM mohanIya sthAna
hai| (24)jo atapasvI (tapasyA-rahita) hokara ke bhI apane ko mahAtapasvI kahatA
hai, vaha saba se mahA cora (bhAva-cora hone ke kAraNa) mahAmohanIya karma kA
bandha karatA hai  // 27 //  yaha caubIsavAM mohanIya sthAna hai| (25) upakAra
(sevA-zuzrUSA) ke lie kisI rogI, AcArya yA sAdhu ke Ane para svayaM samartha
hote hue bhI jo 'yaha merA kucha bhI kArya nahIM karatA hai', isa abhiprAya se
usakI sevA Adi na kara apane kartavya kA pAlana nahIM karatA hai, isa mAyAcAra
meM paTu, vaha zaTha (dhUrta) kaluSitacitta hokara (bhavAntara meM) apanI abodhi
(ratnatrayadharma kI aprApti) kA kAraNa banatA huA mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha
karatA

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **[90]** **||28-29||** This is the twenty-fifth
Mahamohaniya (greatly deluding) place.  **(26)** One who repeatedly engages in
frivolous talks like women, food, etc., and uses mantras, yantras, etc., or
quarrels, and tends to break all the Tirthas (sacred places) like Samyagdarshana
(right faith), etc., which lead to liberation from the cycle of birth and death,
binds the Mahamohaniya karma. **||30||** This is the twenty-sixth Mohaniya
(deluding) place.  **(27)** One who repeatedly uses unethical yogas, i.e.,
practices like Vashikaran (hypnotism), etc., for the sake of his own praise and
for the benefit of his friends, binds the Mahamohaniya karma. **||31||** This is
the twenty-seventh Mohaniya place.  **(28)** One who is not satisfied with the
enjoyments related to human beings or the celestial beings of the next world and
repeatedly desires them, binds the Mahamohaniya karma. **||32||** This is the
twenty-eighth Mohaniya place.  **(29)** One who ignorantly describes the Riddhi
(wealth like Vimanas, etc.), Dyuti (radiance of the body and ornaments), Yash
(fame), and Varna (beauty) of the Devas (celestial beings), and their strength
and power, binds the Mahamohaniya karma. **||33||** This is the twenty-ninth
Mohaniya place.  **(30)** One who does not see the Devas, Yakshas (nature
spirits), and Guhyakas (inner beings), but still says, "I see them," is an
ignorant person who desires to be worshipped like the Jinadeva (Jain
Tirthankara) and binds the Mahamohaniya karma. **||34||** This is the thirtieth
Mohaniya place.  **197** - Theran Manditputte, having observed the Shraman-
paryaya (path of a monk) for thirty years, became a Siddha (liberated soul), a
Buddha (enlightened one), and free from all suffering.  **198** - Each day and
night is said to have thirty Muhurtas (auspicious time periods). These thirty
Muhurtas have thirty names, such as: 1. Raudra, 2. Shakt, 3. Mitra, 4. Vayu, 5.
Supita, 6. Abhichandra, 7. Maheindra, 8. Pralaamba, 9. Brahma, 10. Satya, 11.
Anand, 12. Vijay, 13. Shivsen, 14. Prajapati, 15. Upshama, 16. Ishana, 17.
Tasta, 18. Bhavitatma, 19. Vaishramana, 20. Varuna, 21. Shatrishbha, 22.
Gandharva, 23. Agnivaishyan, 24. Atap, 25. Avarta, 26. Tastaavan, 27. Bhuma
(great), 28. Rishabha, 29. Sarvarth Siddha, and 30. Rakshasa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 90 ] hai  // 28-29  //  yaha paccIsavA~ mahAmohanIya sthAna hai| [
samavAyAGgasUtra (26) jo puna: puna: (vAra-vAra) strI-kathA, bhojana- kathA Adi
vikathAeM karake maMtra-yaMtrAdi prayoga karatA hai yA kalaha karatA hai aura
saMsAra se pAra utArane vAle samyagdarzanAdi sabhI tIrthoM ke bhedana karane ke
lie pravRtti karatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai  //  30
//  yaha chabbIsavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai| *. (27) jo apanI prazaMsA ke lie
mitroM ke nimitta adhArmika yogoM kA arthAt vazIkaraNAdi prayogoM kA vAra-vAra
upayoga karatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai  //  31  //
yaha sattAIsavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai| ( 28 ) jo manuSya-sambandhI athavA
pAralaukika devabhava sambandhI bhogoM meM tRpta nahIM hotA huA vAra - vAra
unakI abhilASA karatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai  //  32
//  yaha aTThAIsavAM mohanIya sthAna hai| 1 (29) jo ajJAnI devoM kI Rddhi
(vimAnAdi sampatti), dyuti ( zarIra aura AbhUSaNoM kA kAnti), yaza aura varNa
(zobhA) kA, tathA unake bala-vIrya kA avarNavAda karatA hai, vaha mahAmohanIya
karma kA bandha karatA hai  // 33  //  yaha unatIsavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai| ( 30
) jo devoM, yakSoM aura guhyakoM (vyantaroM) ko nahIM dekhatA huA bhI "maiM
unako dekhatA hU~" aisA kahatA hai, vaha jinadeva ke samAna apanI pUjA kA
abhilASI ajJAnI puruSa mahAmohanIya karma kA bandha karatA hai  //  34  //  yaha
tIsavA~ mohanIya sthAna hai| 197 - there NaM maMDiyaputte tIsaM vAsAiM
sAmaNNapariyAyaM pAuNittA siddhe buddhe jAva savvadukkhappahINe  /  sthavira
maMDitaputra tIsa varSa zramaNa-paryAya kA pAlana karake siddha, buddha hue,
yAvat sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue  /  198 - egamege NaM ahoratte tIsamuhutte
muhuttaggeNaM paNNatte  /  eesiM NaM tIsAe muhuttANaM tasaM nAmajjA paNNattA,
taM jahA - rodde satte mitte vAU supIe 5, abhicaMde mAhiMde palaMbe baMbhe sacce
10, ANaMde vijae vissaseNe pAyAvacce uvasame 15, IsANe taTThe bhAviappA vesaNe
varuNe 20, satarisabhe gaMdhavve aggivesAyaNe Atave Avate 25, taTThave bhUmahe
risabhe savvaTThasiddhe rakkhase 30  /  eka-eka ahorAtra (dina-rAta ) muhUrtta -
gaNanA kI apekSA tIsa muhUrtta kA kahA gayA hai| ina tIsa muhUrtoM ke tIsa nAma
haiM, jaise- 1. raudra, 2 zakta, 3 mitra, 4 vAyu, 5 supIta, 6 abhicandra, 7
mAhendra, 8 pralamba, 9 brahmA, 10 satya, 11 Ananda, 12 vijaya, 13 zivasena, 14
prAjApatya, 15 upazama, 16 IzAna, 17 taSTa, 18 bhAvitAtmA, 19 vaizramaNa, 20
varuNa, 21 zataRSabha, 22 gandharva, 23 agnivaizAyana, 24 Atapa, 25 Avarta, 26
taSTavAna, 27 bhUmaha (mahAna), 28 RSabha 29 sarvArthasiddha aura 30 raaksss|

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Thirty Stana - Samavaya] [91 Discussion - These Muhurta are counted from
sunrise onwards. The six Muhurta in between are sometimes included in the day
and sometimes in the night. The reason for this is that when there are eighteen
Muhurta in the day during the summer season, they are counted in the day, and
when there are eighteen Muhurta in the night during the winter season, they are
counted in the night. 199 - Are Nan Arha Tisan Dhanuin Uddham Uccattenam Hottha.
- The eighteenth Arha Arhan was thirty Dhanus tall. 200 - Sahasarasas Nan
Devindasas Devaranno Tisan Samaniyasahaasiao Pannattao. There are thirty
thousand Samanik Devas in the Sahasrar Devendra, the king of the Devas. - 201 -
Pase Nan Arha Tisan Vasain Agaraavasamjhe Vasitta Agarao Anagariyam Pavvaie.
Samane Nan Bhagavan Mahavir Tisan Vasai Agaraavasamjhe Vasitta Agarao Anagariyam
Pavvaie. Parsva Arhan lived in a house for thirty years and then renounced the
household life and became an Anagari. Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir lived in a house
for thirty years and then renounced the household life and became an Anagari.
202 - Rayanppabhae Nan Pudhaviye Tisan Nirayavaasasayasahassa Pannatta. Imise
Nan Rayanppabhae Pudhaviye Atthagaiyanam Neraiyanam Tisan Paliovamain Thii
Pannatta. Ahesattamae Pudhaviye Atthagaiyanam Neraiyanam Tisan Sagarovamain Thii
Pannatta. Asurkumaranam Devanam Atthagaiyanam Tisan Paliovamain Thii Pannatta.
There are thirty lakh Naraka-vasas in the Ratnapraba earth. In this Ratnapraba
earth, the condition of many Narakas is said to be thirty Palyopama. In the
seventh earth below, the condition of many Narakas is said to be thirty
Sagaropama. The condition of many Asura-kumar Devas is said to be thirty
Palyopama. 203 - Uvarim-uvarimgevejjiyanam Devanam Jahannena Tisan Sagarovamain
Thii Pannatta. Je Deva Uvarimmajhimagevejjiyesu Vimanesu Devattaa Uvavanna Tesin
Nan Devanam Ukkose Na Tisan Sagarovamain Thii Pannatta. Te Nan Deva Tisane
Addhamasehin Anamanti Va, Panamanti Va, Ussasanthi Va, Nisasanti Va. Tesin Nan
Devanam Tisane Vasasahassehin Aharatte Samuppjjai. Santegaiya Bhavasiddhiya
Jivaa Je Tisane Bhavaggahanehin Sijjhissanti Bujjhissanti Muccissanti
Parinivvaissanti Savvadukkhanamtam Karissanti. The lowest condition of the
upper-upper Graiveyak Devas is said to be thirty Sagaropama. The Devas who are
born as Devas in the upper-middle Graiveyak Vimanas, their excellent condition
is said to be thirty Sagaropama. Those Devas take in-breath and out-breath after
thirty half-months (fifteen months). After thirty thousand years, the desire for
food arises in those Devas. The Bhavasiddhiya Jivas who are born in the world,
who will be liberated, will be enlightened, will be freed, will attain Nirvana,
will end all suffering, after thirty Bhavaggahana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 triMzatsthAnaka - samavAya ] [ 91 vivecana - ina muhUrtoM kI gaNanA sUryodaya
kAla se lekara krama se kI jAtI hai| inake madhyavartI chaha muhUrta kabhI dina
meM antarbhUta hote haiM aura kabhI rAtri meM hote haiN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai
ki jaba grISma Rtu meM aThAraha muhUrta kA dina hotA hai, taba ve dina meM gine
jAte haiM aura jaba zIta kAla meM rAtri aThAraha muhUrta kI hotI hai, taba ve
rAtri meM gine jAte haiM  /  199 - are NaM arahA tIsaM dhaNUiM uDDhaM uccatteNaM
hotthA  /  - aThArahaveM ara arhan tIsa dhanuSa UMce the I 200 - sahassArassa
NaM deviMdassa devaraNNo tIsaM sAmANiyasAhassIo paNNattAo  /  sahasrAra devendra
devarAja ke tIsa hajAra sAmAnika deva kahe gaye haiM  /  - 201 - pAse NaM arahA
tIsaM vAsAiM agAravAsamajhe vasittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pavvaie  /  samaNe NaM
bhagavaM mahAvIre tIsaM vAsAI agAravAsamajhe vasittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pavvaie
/  pArzva arhan tIsa varSa taka gRha-vAsa meM rahakara agAra se anagAritA meM
pravrajita hue  /  zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra tIsa varSa taka gRha-vAsa meM
rahakara agAra se anagAritA meM pravrajita hue  /  202 - rayaNappabhAe NaM
puDhavIe tIsaM nirayAvAsasayasahassA paNNattA  /  imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe
puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM tIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI paNNattA  /
ahesattamAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM tIsa sAgarovamAiM ThiI paNNattA  /
asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM tIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI paNNattA  /
ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM tIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa haiM  /  isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI
meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti tIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| adhastana sAtavIM
pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakiyoM kI sthiti tIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka
asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti tIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| 203 -
uvarimauvarimagevejjayANaM devANaM jahaNNeNaM tIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI paNNattA
/  je devA uvarimamajjhimagevejjaesu vimANesu devattAe uvavaNNA tesi NaM devANaM
ukkoseNa tIsa sAgarovamAiM ThiI paNNattA  /  te NaM devA tIsAe addhamAsehiM
ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vA  /  tesi NaM devANaM tIsAe
vAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe samuppajjai  /  saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je tIsAe
bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujjhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM karissaMti  /  uparima- uparima graiveyaka devoM kI jaghanya
sthiti tIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| jo deva uparimamadhyama graiveyaka vimAnoM
meM deva rUpa se utpanna hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tIsa sAgaropama
kahI gaI hai| ve deva tIsa ardhamAsoM (pandraha mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa aura
ucchvAsa - ni:zvAsa lete haiM  /  una devoM ke tIsa hajAra varSa ke bAda AhAra
kI icchA utpanna hotI hai  /

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[92] According to the Samavayanga Sutra, there are many Bhavyasiddhi Jivas who
will attain Siddhatva after experiencing thirty births, become Buddhas, be
liberated from karmas, attain Nirvana, and end all suffering. || Thirty-Stana
Samavay Ends ||  One-Thirty-One Stana Samavay 205 - Thirty-one Siddhi Guna are
described as follows: 1. Kshina Abhinibodhik Jnanavarana, 2. Kshina Shruta
Jnanavarana, 3. Kshina Avadhi Jnanavarana, 4. Kshina Manahparyav Jnanavarana, 5.
Kshina Kevala Jnanavarana, 6. Kshina Chakshudarsana Varana, 7. Kshina
Achakshudarsana Varana, 8. Kshina Avhidarsana Varana, 9. Kshina Kevaladarsana
Varana, 10. Kshina Nidra, 11. Kshina Nidranidra, 12. Kshina Prayala, 13. Kshina
Prayalaprayala, 14. Kshina Sthyanardhi, 15. Kshina Satavedaniya, 16. Kshina
Asatavedaniya, 17. Kshina Darsanamohaniya, 18. Kshina Charitramohaniya, 19.
Kshina Narakayu, 20. Kshina Tiryankaayu, 21. Kshina Manushayau, 22. Kshina
Devayau, 23. Kshina Ucchagotra, 24. Kshina Nichagotra, 25. Kshina Shubhanam, 26.
Kshina Ashubhanam, 27. Kshina Danantara, 28. Kshina Labhanantara, 29. Kshina
Bhoganantara, 30. Kshina Upbhoganantara, and 31. Kshina Viriyanantara.  206 -
The Mandar Parvat is said to be thirty-one thousand six hundred twenty-three
yojanas in circumference, slightly less than the circumference of the earth.
When the sun travels in the outermost circle, it appears to a human being in
Bharat Kshetra as thirty yojanas out of sixty parts of a yojana (3183130) from a
distance of thirty-one thousand eight hundred thirty-one yojanas. The increase
in the month is described as thirty-one Satiregas, according to the Raindhiya
Raindhiagga. The decrease in the month is described as thirty-one Raindhiyas,
slightly less, according to the Raindhiagga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 92] [samavAyAGgasUtra kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo tIsa bhava
grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parinirvANa ko
prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge|  //  triMzatsthAnaka samavAya
smaapt|| ekatriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya 205-ekattIsaM siddhAiguNA paNNattA taM
jahA-khINe AbhinibohiyaNANAvaraNe 1, khINe suyaNANAvaraNe 2, khINe ohiNANAvaraNe
3, khINe maNapajjavaNANAvaraNe 4, khINe kevalaNANAvaraNe 5, khINe
cakkhudaMsaNAvaraNe 6, khINe acakkhudaMsaNAvaraNe 7, khINe ohidasaNAvaraNe
8,khINe kevaladasaNAvaraNe 9,khINe NiddA 10,khINe NihANiddA 11, khINe payalA 12,
khINe payalApayalA 13, khINe thINaddhI 14, khINe sAyAveyaNijje 15, khINe
asAyAveyaNijje 16,khINe daMsaNamohaNije 17,khINe carittamohaNijje 18,khINe
neraiAue 29, khINe tiriAue 20, khINe maNussAue 21, khINe devAue 22, khINe
uccAgoe 23, khINe nIyAgoe 24, khINe subhaNAme 25, khINe asubhaNAme 26, khINe
dANaMtarAe 27, khINe lAbhaMtarAe 28, khINe bhogaMtarAe 29, khINe uvabhogaMtarAe
30, khINe vIriaMtarAe 31 /  /  siddhoM ke Adi guNa arthAt siddhatva paryAya
prApta karane ke prathama samaya meM hone vAle guNa ikatIsa kahe gaye haiM,
jaise-1 kSINa AbhinibodhikajJAnAvaraNa, 2 kSINa zrutajJAnAvaraNa, 3 kSINa
avadhijJAnAvaraNa, 4 kSINa manaHparyavajJAnAvaraNa, 5 kSINa kevalajJAnAvaraNa, 6
kSINa cakSudarzanAvaraNa,7 kSINa acakSudarzanAvaraNa, 8 kSINa
avadhidarzanAvaraNa, 9 kSINa kevaladarzanAvaraNa, 10 kSINa nidrA, 11 kSINa
nidrAnidrA, 12. kSINa pracalA, 13 kSINa pracalApracalA, 14 kSINa styAnarddhi, 15
kSINa sAtAvedanIya, 16 kSINa asAtAvedanIya, 17 kSINa darzanamohanIya, 18 kSINa
cAritramohanIya, 19 kSINa narakAyu, 20 kSINa tiryagAyu, 21 kSINa manuSyAyu, 22
kSINa devAyu, 23 kSINa uccagotra, 24 kSINa nIcagotra, 25 kSINa zubhanAma, 26
kSINa azubhanAma, 27 kSINa dAnAntarAya, 28 kSINa lAbhAntarAya, 29 kSINa
bhogAntarAya, 30 kSINa upabhogAntarAya aura 31 kSINa viiryaantraay| 206-maMdare
NaM pavvae dharaNitale ekkattIsaM joyaNasahassAI chacceva tevIse joyaNasae kiMci
desUNe parikkheveNaM pnnnntte| jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiriyaM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM Dahagayassa maNassassa ekkattIsAe
joyaNasahassehiM ahi aekattIsehiM joyaNasaehiM tIsAe saTThibhAge joyaNassa sUrie
cakkhupphAsaM hvvmaagcchi| abhivaDDie NaM mAse ekkattIsaM sAtiregAiM
rAiMdiyAIrAiMdiyaggeNaM pnnnntte|aaicce NaM mAse ekkattIsaM rAiMdiyAiM kiMci
visesUNAI rAiMdiyaggeNaM pnnnntte| mandara parvata dharatI-tala para parikSepa
(paridhi) kI apekSA kucha kama ikatIsa hajAra chaha sau teIsa yojana kahA gayA
hai| jaba sUrya saba se bAharI maMDala meM jAkara saMcAra karatA hai, taba isa
bharata-kSetra-gata manuSya ko ikatIsa hajAra ATha sau ikatIsa aura eka yojana
ke sATha bhAgoM meM se tIsa bhAga (3183130)

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sun is visible from a distance of thirty-two **sthānaka-samvāya**.  Thirty-
one nights and days have been mentioned in the calculation of the
**abhivardhita** month. Thirty-one nights and days have been mentioned in the
calculation of the **sūryamāsa** month, but slightly less. 207- In this
**ratnaprabhā** earth, the state of many **naraka** is **ekattiśa**
**palyopam**. In the seventh earth below, the state of many **naraka** is
**ekattiśa** **sāgaropam**. The state of many **asurakumāra** gods is
**ekattiśa** **palyopam**. In the **saudharma** and **īśāna** kalpas, the state
of many gods is **ekattiśa** **palyopam**. 208- The state of the **vijaya**,
**vaijayanta**, **jayanta**, and **aparaajita** gods is **ekattiśa**
**sāgaropam**. The gods who are born in the **graiveyaka** vimānas above, their
state is **ekattiśa** **sāgaropam**. These gods breathe in and out every
**ekattiśa** half-months. Their desire for food arises after **ekattiśa**
thousand years. Many **bhavyasiddhika** beings will become **siddha**,
**buddha**, free from karma, attain **parinirvāṇa**, and end all suffering after
experiencing **ekattiśa** **bhavagrahana**. || **Ekattriṃśatsthānaka Samvāya
Samāpta** || 209 The **dvātriṃśatsthānaka-samvāya** has thirty-two **joga-
saṃgaha** mentioned. They are: 1. **Āloayana** 1, **Niravalāve** 2, **Āvaīsu
Daḍhadhammaya** 3, **Aṇiśśiovahaṇe** 4, **Sikkha** 5, **Nippadīkammaya** 6.
||1|| 2. **Aṇṇāyaya** 7, **Alobe** 8, **Titikkha** 9, **Ajjava** 10, **Suī** 11,
**Sammādiṭṭhī** 12, **Samāhī** 13, **Āyare** 14, **Viṇoavae** 15. ||2||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAtriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] kI dUrI se vaha sUrya dRSTigocara hotA hai|
abhivardhita mAsa meM rAtri-divasa kI gaNanA se kucha adhika ikatIsa rAta-dina
kahe gaye haiN| sUryamAsa rAtri-divasa kI gaNanA se kucha vizeSa hIna ikatIsa
rAta-dina kA kahA gayA hai| 207-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM
neraiyANaM ekattIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|ahe sattamAe puDhavIe
atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM ekkattIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM
devANaM atthegaiyANaM ekkattIsaMpaliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|sohmmiisaannesu
kappesu atthegaiyANaM devANaM ekkattIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| isa
ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti ikatIsa palyopama hai|
adhastana sAtavIM pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti ikatIsa sAgaropama kI
hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti ikatIsa palyopama kI hai| saudharma-
IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti ikatIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai|
208-vijaya-vejayaMta-jayaMta-aparAjiANaM devANaM jahaNNeNaM ekattIsaM
sAgarovamAiM ThiI pttaa| je devA uvarima-uvarimagevejjayavimANesu devattAe
uvavaNNA, tesi NaM devANaM ukkoseNaM ekattIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| te
NaM devA ekkattIsAe addhamAsehiM ANamaMti vA, pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA,
nissasaMti vaa|tesi NaM devANaM ekkattIsaM vAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe smusspji|
saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je ekkattIsehiM bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti
bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| vijaya,
vaijayanta, jayanta aura aparAjita devoM kI jaghanya sthiti ikatIsa sAgaropama
kahI gaI hai| jo deva uparima-uparima graiveyaka vimAnoM meM devarUpa se utpanna
hote haiM, una devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti ikatIsa. sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva
ikatIsa ardhamAsoM (sAr3he pandraha mAsoM) ke bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa
niHzvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ke ikatIsa hajAra varSa ke bAda AhAra kI icchA
utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva aise haiM jo ikatIsa bhava
grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parinirvANa ko
prApta hoMge aura sarva du:khoM kA anta kreNge|  //  ekatriMzatsthAnaka samavAya
samApta  //  209 dvAtriMzatasthAnaka-samavAya battIsaM jogasaMgahA pnnnnttaa|
taM jahAAloyaNa 1 niravalAve 2, AvaIsu daDhadhammayA 3 /  aNissiovahANe 4.ya,
sikkhA 5, nippaDikammayA 6  // 1 //  aNNAyayA alobhe 8, ya, titikkhA 9, ajjave
10, suI 11  /  sammadiTThI 12, samAhI 13,ya, AyAre 14, viNaovae 15  // 2 //

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 94] [Samavayanga Sutra Dhiimayi 16, Ya, Sanvegae 17 Panihi 18, Suvidhi 19,
Sanvare 20. Attadoosovasanhare 21, Savvakamavirattaya 22 ||3|| Pacchakkhane
23-24, Viussagge 25, Appamade 26 Lavaavave 27. Jhanasanvarajoge 28, Ya, Udae
Maranantiae 29 ||4|| Sanganam Cha Parinaaya 30, Payacchittkarane Vi Ya 31.
Araahana Ya Maranante 32, Battisam Jogasangha ||5||  Thirty-two Yoga-Sangraha
(liberation-facilitating mind, speech, and body's virtuous activities) have been
mentioned. Through these, the practice of liberation is smoothly accomplished.
These Yogas are as follows:  1. **Aalocana-Vrat-Shuddhi:** For the purification
of vows, the disciple should criticize their own faults in front of the Guru. 2.
**Nirapalapa:** The Acharya should not speak about the disciple's mentioned
faults to anyone else. 3. **Apatsu-Drudha-Dharmata:** When faced with
difficulties, the practitioner should remain steadfast in their Dharma. 4.
**Anishrito-Upadhana:** The practitioner should not rely on others for support
and should practice austerities independently. 5. **Shiksha:** The practitioner
should study and practice the Sutras and their meanings. 6. **Nishpratikarmta:**
The practitioner should not adorn their body with ornaments or engage in
beautification. 7. **Agnata:** The practitioner should not reveal their
austerities for fame, recognition, or praise, but keep them hidden. 8.
**Alobatha:** The practitioner should be free from greed for food, drink,
clothes, utensils, etc. 9. **Titiksha:** The practitioner should endure hunger,
thirst, and other hardships. 10. **Arjava:** The practitioner should maintain
their conduct as pure and simple. 11. **Shuchi:** The practitioner should
maintain purity in speaking truth and following restraint. 12.
**Samyagdrishti:** The practitioner should keep their right vision pure, free
from doubts and desires. 13. **Samadhi:** The practitioner should keep their
mind calm and free from thoughts and desires. 14. **Acharopagata:** The
practitioner should maintain their conduct free from deceit. 15.
**Vinayopagata:** The practitioner should be humble and avoid arrogance. 16.
**Dhriti-mati:** The practitioner should have patience in their intellect and
avoid being disheartened. 17. **Sanveg:** The practitioner should be fearful of
the world and constantly desire liberation. 18. **Pranidhi:** The practitioner
should not harbor any attachment in their heart. 19. **Suvidhi:** The
practitioner should practice their conduct according to the rules, i.e., follow
the right path. 20. **Sanvar:** The practitioner should restrain the doors
(causes) through which karmas enter. 21. **Atmadooshopasanhar:** The
practitioner should restrain their own faults and not allow them to arise. 22.
**Sarvakamaviratta:** The practitioner should be detached from all worldly
desires. 23. **Moolguna-Pratyakhyan:** The practitioner should renounce the
fundamental virtues like non-violence. 24. **Uttaraguna-Pratyakhyan:** The
practitioner should renounce the higher virtues like restraint of senses. 25.
**Vyutsarga:** The practitioner should renounce external attachments like
clothes, utensils, and internal attachments like fainting.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 94] [samavAyAGgasUtra dhiimaI 16, ya, saMvege 17 paNihI 18, suvihi 19, saMvare
20  /  attadosovasaMhAre 21, savvakAmavirattayA 22  // 3 //  paccakkhANe 23-24,
viussagge 25, appamAde 26 lavAvave 27  /  jhANasaMvarajoge 28, ya, udae
mAraNaMtie 29  // 4 //  saMgANaM ca pariNAyA 30, pAyacchittakaraNe vi ya 31  /
ArAhaNA ya maraNaMte 32, battIsaM jogasaMgahA  // 5 //  battIsa yoga-saMgraha
(mokSa-sAdhaka mana, vacana, kAya ke prazasta vyApAra) kahe gaye haiN| inake
dvArA mokSa kI sAdhanA sucAru rUpa se sampanna hotI hai| ve yoga isa prakAra
haiM 1. AlocanA-vrata-zuddhi ke lie ziSya apane doSoM kI guru ke Age AlocanA
kre| 2. nirapalApa-ziSya-kathita doSoM ko AcArya kisI ke Age na khe| 3.
ApatsudRDhadharmatA-ApattiyoM ke Ane para sAdhaka apane dharma meM dRDha rhe| 4.
anizritopadhAna-dUsare ke Azraya kI apekSA na karake tapazcaraNa kre| 5. zikSA-
sUtra aura artha kA paThana-pAThana evaM abhyAsa kre| 6.niSpratikarmatA-zarIra
kI sajAvaTa-zRMgArAdi na kre| 7. ajJAtatA-yaza, khyAti, pUjAdi ke lie apane tapa
ko prakaTa na kare, ajJAta rkhe| 8. alobhatA- bhakta-pAna evaM vastra, pAtra Adi
meM nirlobha pravRtti rkhe| 9. titikSA- bhUkha, pyAsa Adi parISahoM ko sahana
kre| 10. Arjava- apane vyavahAra ko nizchala aura sarala rkhe| 11. zuci-satya
bolane aura saMyama-pAlana meM zuddhi rkhe| 12. samyagdRSTi - samyagdarzana ko
zaMkA-kAMkSAdi doSoM ko dUra karate hue zuddha rkhe| 13. samAdhi-citta ko
saMkalpa-vikalpoM se rahita zAnta rkhe| 14. AcAropagata-apane AcaraNa ko
mAyAcAra rahita rkhe| 15. vinayopagata-vinaya-yukta rahe. abhimAna na kre| 16.
dhRtimati-apanI buddhi meM dhairya rakhe, dInatA na kre| 17. saMvega-saMsAra se
bhayabhIta rahe aura nirantara mokSa kI abhilASA rkhe| 18. praNidhi-hRdaya meM
mAyA zalya na rkhe| 19. suvidhi-apane cAritra kA vidhi-pUrvaka sat-anuSThAna
arthAt samyak paripAlana kre| 20. saMvara-karmoM ke Ane ke dvAroM (kAraNoM) kA
saMvaraNa arthAt nirodha kre| 21. AtmadoSopasaMhAra-apane doSoM kA nirodha kare-
doSa na lagane de| 22. sarvakAmaviraktatA-sarva viSayoM se virakta rhe| 23.
mUlaguNa-pratyAkhyAna- ahiMsAdi mUlaguNa-viSayaka pratyAkhyAna kre| 24.
uttaraguNa-pratyAkhyAna- indriya-nirodha Adi uttara guNa-viSayaka pratyAkhyAna
kre| 25. vyutsarga-vastra-pAtra Adi bAharI upadhi aura mUrchA Adi Abhyantara
upadhi kA parityAga

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirty-two Standpoints - Samavaya  [95]  26. **Aapramad:** Do not be
negligent in fulfilling your daily and nightly necessities.  27. **Lavalav:** Be
vigilant in upholding your conduct at every moment.  28. **Dhyan-Sanvarayog:**
Control the inflow of karmas (Asrava) to attain Dharma and Shakl Dhyan
(meditation).  29. **Maranantik:** Even if the Maranantik karma arises, do not
be disturbed, maintain peace of mind.  30. **Sang-Parigya:** Understand the
nature of Sang (attachment) and renounce it.  31. **Prayaschitt Karan:** Perform
daily atonement for your faults.  32. **Maranantik-Aradhana:** At the time of
death, perform specific worship of knowledge, vision, conduct, and penance, with
Sanlekhana (fasting).  **210:** Thirty-two Devindras (Indras) are mentioned,
such as: 1. Chamar, 2. Bali, 3. Dharan, 4. Bhutanand, 5. Venudeva, 6. Venudali,
7. Harikant, 8. Harissah, 9. Agnishikh, 10. Agnimaanav, 11. Poorna, 12.
Vashishth, 13. Jalakant, 14. Jalaprabh, 15. Amitgati, 16. Amitvahan, 17. Velamb,
18. Prabhanjan, 19. Ghosh, 20. Mahaghosh, 21. Chandra, 22. Surya, 23. Shakra,
24. Ishana, 25. Sanatkumar, 26. Mahendra, 27. Brahma, 28. Lantk, 29. Shukra, 30.
Sahasrar, 31. Pranat, 32. Achyut.  **Explanation:** There are ten categories of
Bhavanvasi Devas (heavenly beings residing in mansions), and each category has
two Indras. Therefore, from Chamar and Bali to Ghosh and Mahaghosh, twenty
Indras belong to the Bhavanvasi Devas. Chandra and Surya are the two Indras of
the Jyotishk Devas (celestial beings). The remaining ten Indras, starting with
Shakra, belong to the Vaimanik Devas (heavenly beings residing in aerial
vehicles). The sixteen Indras of the eight categories of Vyantar Devas
(intermediate beings) are not mentioned here because they have less wealth.
**211:** There were 3232 Kevali Jinas (perfect beings) in the Kunthussa era,
including the 32 Arhats (enlightened beings).  **212:** In the Sohammi Kalpa, 32
million Vaimana-Avas (aerial mansions) are mentioned. The Revati constellation
is said to have 32 stars. Thirty-two types of dances are mentioned.  **216:** In
this era, on Earth, 32 comparisons are made for the height of the tallest beings
and the depth of the deepest beings. In the seventh era, on Earth, 32
comparisons are made for the height of the tallest beings and the depth of the
deepest beings, using the ocean as a reference. Thirty-two comparisons are made
for the height of the tallest Asura Kumaras (demigods) and Devas (gods). In the
Sohammi and Ishana Kalpas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAtriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [95 kre| 26. apramAda-apane daivasika aura rAtrika
AvazyakoM ke pAlana Adi meM pramAda na kre| 27. lavAlava-pratikSaNa apanI
sAmAcArI ke paripAlana meM sAvadhAna rhe| 28. dhyAna-saMvarayoga-dharma aura
zakla dhyAna kI prApti ke lie Asrava-dvAroM kA saMvara kre| 29. mAraNAntika
karmodaya ke hone para bhI kSobha na kare, mana meM zAnti rkhe| 30. saMga-
parijJA-saMga (parigraha) kI parijJA kare arthAt usake svarUpa ko jAna kara
tyAga kre| 31. prAyazcittakaraNa-apane doSoM kI zuddhi ke lie nitya prAyazcitta
kre| 32. mAraNAntika-ArAdhanA-marane ke samaya saMlekhanA-pUrvaka jJAna-darzana,
cAritra aura tapa kI viziSTa ArAdhanA kre| 210-battIsaM deviMdA paNNattA taM
jahA-camare balI dharaNe bhUANaMde jAva ghose mahAghose, caMde sUre sakke IsANe
saNaMkumAre jAva pANae accue| battIsa devendra kahe gaye haiM, jaise- 1. camara,
2. balI, 3. dharaNa, 4. bhUtAnanda, yAvat (5. veNudeva, 6 veNudAlI,7. harikAnta,
8. harissaha,9. agnizikha, 10. agnimANava, 11. pUrNa, 12. vaziSTha, 13.
jalakanta, 14. jalaprabha, 15. amitagati,16. amitavAhana, 17. velamba, 18.
prabhaMjana) 19. ghoSa, 20. mahAghoSa, 21. candra, 22. sUrya, 23 zakra, 24.
IzAna, 25. sanatkumAra, yAvat (26. mAhendra, 27. brahma, 28. lAntaka, 29. zukra,
30. sahasrAra) 31. prANata, 32. acyut| vivecana- bhavanavAsI devoM ke daza
nikAya haiM aura pratyeka nikAya ke do do indra hote haiM, ataH camara aura balI
se lekara ghoSa aura mahAghoSa taka ke bIsa indra bhavanavAsI devoM ke haiN|
jyotiSka devoM ke candra aura sUrya ye do indra haiN| zeSa zakra Adi daza indra
vaimAnika-devoM ke haiN| vyantara devoM ke AThoM nikAyoM ke solaha indroM kI
alpa RddhivAle hone se yahA~ vivakSA nahIM kI gaI hai| 211.-kuMthussa NaM arahAo
battIsasahiA battIsaM jiNasayA hotthaa| kunthu arhat ke battIsa adhika battIsa
sau (3232) kevali jina the| 212-sohamme kappe battIsaM vimANAvAsasayasahassA
pnnnnttaa| revaiNakkhatte battIsaitAre pnnnntte| battIsativihe NaDhe pnnnntte|
saudharma kalpa meM battIsa lAkha vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| revatI nakSatra
battIsa tArAvAlA kahA gayA hai| battIsa prakAra ke nRtya kahe gaye haiN|
216-imIse NaM gyaNappabhAe puDhavIe atyaMgaiyANaM neraiyANaM battIsaM
paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| ahe sattamAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM neraiyANaM
battIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| asurakumArANaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM
battIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| sohammIsANesu kappesu

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[96] In the Ratnapraba earth, the state of many Narakas is said to be like
thirty-two Palya. In the seventh earth below, the state of many Narakas is said
to be like thirty-two Sagara. The state of many Asura Kumaras is said to be like
thirty-two Palya. In the Saudharma-Ishana Kalpas, the state of many Devas is
said to be like thirty-two Palya. 214-The Devas who are born in the Vijay,
Vejayant, Jayant and Aparajit Vimanas, the state of many of these Devas is said
to be like thirty-two Sagara. These Devas take breath or exhale after thirty-two
half-months (sixteen months). The desire for food arises after thirty-two
thousand years for these Devas. Many Bhavyasiddhi Jivas will become Siddhas,
Buddhas, liberated from karmas, attain Nirvana and end all sufferings after
taking thirty-two births. ||Dvatrimshat Sthanak Samavay Sampt. Trayastrimshat
Sthanak Samavay 215-Thirty-three Asayan are said to be, as follows: 1. The
Asayana of one thousand is said to be near the Rayani. 2. The Asayana of one
thousand is said to be beyond the Rayani. 3. The Asayana of one thousand is said
to be with the Rayani. 4. The Asayana of one thousand is said to be near the
Rayani. 5. The Asayana of one thousand is said to be before the Rayani. 6. The
Asayana of one thousand is said to be with the Rayani. 7. The Asayana of one
thousand is said to be near the Rayani. 8. The Asayana of one thousand is said
to be before the Rayani. 9. The Asayana of one thousand is said to be with the
Rayani. 10. The Asayana of one thousand is said to be with the Rayani. After the
Rayani, the Asayana of one thousand. 11. The Asayana of one thousand is said to
be with the Rayani.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 96] [samavAyAGgasUtra devANaM atthegaiyANaM battIsaM paliovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti battIsa
palyopama kahI gaI hai| adhastana sAtavIM pRthivI meM kitaneka nArakiyoM kI
sthiti battIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti
battIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| saudharma-IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI
sthiti battIsa palyopama kahI gaI hai| 214-je devA vijaya-vejayaMta-jayaMta-
avarAjiyavimANesu devattAe uvavaNNA tesi NaM devANaM atthegaiyANaM battIsaM
sAgarovamAiMThiI pnnnnttaa|te NaM devA battIsAe addhamAsehiM ANamaMti vA,
pANamaMti vA, ussasaMti vA, nIsasaMti vaa| tesi NaM devANaM
battIsavAsasahassehiM AhAraTThe smuppjji| saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je
battIsAe bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM krissNti| jo deva vijaya, vaijayanta, jayanta aura aparAjita
vimAnoM meM deva rUpa se utpanna hote haiM, unameM se kitaneka devoM kI sthiti
battIsa sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| ve deva battIsa ardhamAsoM (solaha mAsoM) ke
bAda Ana-prANa yA ucchvAsa-ni:zvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ke battIsa hajAra
varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI icchA utpanna hotI hai| kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva
aise haiM jo battIsa bhava grahaNa karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se
mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa ko prApta hoMge aura sarva karmoM kA anta kreNge|
||dvaatriNshtsthaank samavAya smaapt| trayastrizatsthAnaka-samavAya 215-tettIsaM
AsAyaNAo paNNattAo, taM jahA1. sehe rAiNiyassa AsannaM gaMtA bhavai AsAyaNA
sehss| 2. sehe rAiNiyassa parao gaMtA bhavai AsAyaNA sehss| 3. sehe rAiNiyassa
sapakkhaM gaMtA bhavai AsAyaNA sehss| 4. sehe rAiNiyassa AsannaM ThiccA bhavai
AsAyaNA sehassa jaav| sehe rAyaNiyassa purao ThiccA bhavai, AsAyaNA sehss| sehe
rAyaNiyassa sapakkhaM ThiccA bhavai, AsAyaNA sehss| 7. sehe rAyaNiyassa AsanaM
nisIittA bhavai, AsAyaNA sehss| 8. sehe rAyaNiyassa purao nisIittA bhavai,
AsAyaNA sehss| 9. sehe rAyaNiyassa saddhiM sapakkhaM nisIittA bhavai, AsAyaNA
sehss| 10. sehe rAyaNiyassa saddhiM bahiyA viyArabhUmiM nikkhaMte samANe
putvAmeva sehatarAe AyAmei pacchA rayaNie, AsAyaNA sehss| 11. sehe rAyaNie
saddhiM bahiyA vihArabhUmi vA viyArabhUmiM vA nikkhaMte samANe tattha

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Thirty-two Standpoints - Samavaya] [97. If a person, having previously
experienced the feeling of attachment, later experiences the feeling of
detachment, it is called *Aasayana* (a state of non-attachment). 12. If a
person, while walking or running, is asked, "Are you asleep?" or "Are you
awake?", and the person is awake, it is called *Aasayana*. 13. If a person,
having previously experienced a feeling of attachment, later experiences the
feeling of detachment, it is called *Aasayana*. If a person, having previously
experienced the feeling of attachment, later experiences the feeling of
detachment, it is called *Aasayana*. 15. If a person, having previously
experienced the feeling of attachment, later experiences the feeling of
detachment, it is called *Aasayana*. 16. If a person, having previously
experienced the feeling of attachment, later experiences the feeling of
detachment, it is called *Aasayana*. 17. If a person, while sharing food, drink,
or other things with another person, gives half of it to the other person
without being asked, it is called *Aasayana*. 18. If a person, while sharing
food, drink, or other things with another person, gives half of it to the other
person, and also gives half of the taste, half of the smell, half of the touch,
half of the color, half of the shape, half of the weight, half of the lightness,
and half of the quality, it is called *Aasayana*. 19. If a person, while walking
or running, is not aware of their surroundings, it is called *Aasayana*. 20. If
a person, while walking or running, is asked, "What?" and they do not respond,
it is called *Aasayana*. 21. If a person, while walking or running, is asked,
"What?" and they respond, it is called *Aasayana*. 22. If a person, while
walking or running, is asked, "Who are you?" and they do not respond, it is
called *Aasayana*. 23. If a person, while walking or running, is asked, "Who are
you?" and they respond, it is called *Aasayana*. 24. If a person, while walking
or running, is asked, "How are you?" and they do not respond, it is called
*Aasayana*. 25. If a person, while walking or running, is asked, "How are you?"
and they respond, "I am fine," it is called *Aasayana*. 26. If a person, while
walking or running, is asked, "How are you?" and they respond in a way that is
not appropriate, it is called *Aasayana*. 27. If a person, while walking or
running, is asked, "How are you?" and they respond in a way that is appropriate,
it is called *Aasayana*. 28. If a person, while walking or running, is asked,
"How are you?" and they respond in a way that is appropriate, and their response
is not interrupted, not broken, not confused, and not repeated, it is called
*Aasayana*. 29. If a person, while walking or running, adjusts their clothing,
and then continues walking, it is called *Aasayana*. 30. If a person, while
walking or running, stands, sits, or lies down, it is called *Aasayana*. 31. If
a person, while walking or running, stands, sits, or lies down on a high
platform, it is called *Aasayana*. 32. If a person, while walking or running,
stands, sits, or lies down on a low platform, it is called *Aasayana*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 trayastriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [97 puvvAmeva sehatarAe Aloeti paccchA rAyaNie,
AsAyaNA sehss|| 12. sehe rAyaNiyassa rAto vA viyAle vA vAharamANassa ajjo! ke
sutte! ke jAgare! tattha sehe jAgaramANe rAyaNiyassa apaDisuNettA bhavati,
AsAyaNA sehss| 13. kei rAyaNiyassa puvvaM saMlavittae siyA, taM sehe
puvvatarAgaM Alaveti pacchA rAyaNie, AyAsayaNA sehss| sehe asaNaM vA pANaM vA
khAimaM vA sAimaM vA paDigAhettA taM puvvameva sehatarAgassa Aloei, pacchA
rAyaNiyassa, AsAyaNA sehss| 15. sehe asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA
paDigAhettA taM puvvameva sehatarAgassa uvadaMseti, pacchA rAyaNiyassa, AsAyaNA
sehss| 16. sehe asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA paDigAhettA taM
puvvAmeva sehatarAgaM uvaNimaMteDa. pacchA rAyaNiyaM, AsAyaNA sehss| 17. sehe
rAyaNieNaM saddhiM asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA paDigAhettA taM
rAyaNiyaM aNApucchittA jassa-jassa icchai tassa-tassa khaddhaM-khaddhaMdalayai,
AsAyaNA sehss| 18. sehe asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA paDigAhettA
rAyaNieNaM saddhiM AharemANe tattha sehe khaddhaM-khaddhaM DAyaM-DAyaM UsaDhaM-
UsaDhaM rasitaM-rasitaM maNuNNaM-maNuNNaM maNAma maNAmaM niddhaM-niddhaM
lukkhaM-lukkhaM AharettA bhavai, AsAyaNA sehss| 19. sehe rAyaNiyassa
vAharamANassa apaDisuNettA bhavai, AsAyaNA sehss| 20. sehe rAyaNiyassa khaddhaM-
khaddhaM vattA bhavai, AsAyaNA sehss| 21. sehe rAyaNiyassa 'kiM' ti vaittA
bhavai, AsAyaNA sehss| 22. sehe rAyaNiyaM 'tumaM' ti vaittA bhavai, AsAyaNA
sehss| 23. sehe rAyaNiyaM tajjAeNa-tajjAeNa paDibhaNittA bhavai, AsAyaNA sehss|
24. sehe rAyaNiyassa kahaM kahemANassa'iti evaM' ti vattA na bhavati, AsAyaNA
sehss| 25. sehe rAyaNiyassa kahaM kahemANassa'no tumaratI'ti vattA na bhavati,
AsAyaNA sehss| 26. sehe rAyaNiyassa kahaM kahemANassa kahaM acchidittA bhavati,
AsAyaNA sehss| 27. sehe rAyaNiyassa kahaM kahemANassa parisaM bhettA bhavai,
AsAyaNA sehss| 28. sehe rAyaNiyassa kahaM kahemANassa tIse parisAe aNuTThitAe
abhinnAe avucchinnAe avvogaDAe doccaM pi tameva kahaM kahittA bhavati, AsAyaNA
sehss| 29. sehe rAyaNiyassa sejjA-saMthAragaM pAeNaM saMghaTTittA, hattheNaM
aNaNuNNavittA gacchati, AsAyaNA sehss| 30. sehe rAyaNiyassa sejjA-saMthArae
ciTThittA vA nisIitA vA tuyaTTittA vA bhavai, AsAyaNA sehss| 31. sehe
rAyaNiyassa uccAsaNe ciTThittA vA nisIittA vA tuyaTTittA vA bhavati, AsAyaNA
sehss| 32. sehe rAyaNiyassa samAsaNe ciTThittA vA nisIittA vA tuyaTTittA vA
bhavati, AsAyaNA sehss|

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 98] [Samavayanga Sutra 33. When a Saeksha (newly initiated or one with less
vows) is in the presence of a Ratnik (one with more vows) and the Tathagata, he
should be mindful of the following 33 Ashatanas (acts that hinder the path of
Dharma):  1. A Saeksha should not walk too close to a Ratnik. This is the first
Ashatana for a Saeksha. 2. A Saeksha should not walk ahead of a Ratnik. This is
the second Ashatana for a Saeksha. 3. A Saeksha should not walk alongside a
Ratnik. This is the third Ashatana for a Saeksha. 4. A Saeksha should not stand
in front of a Ratnik. This is the fourth Ashatana for a Saeksha. 5. A Saeksha
should not stand alongside a Ratnik. This is the fifth Ashatana for a Saeksha.
6. A Saeksha should not stand too close to a Ratnik. This is the sixth Ashatana
for a Saeksha. 7. A Saeksha should not sit in front of a Ratnik. This is the
seventh Ashatana for a Saeksha. 8. A Saeksha should not sit alongside a Ratnik.
This is the eighth Ashatana for a Saeksha. 9. A Saeksha should not sit too close
to a Ratnik. This is the ninth Ashatana for a Saeksha. 10. If a Saeksha performs
Achaman (purification) before a Ratnik while going out to the place of
contemplation, this is the tenth Ashatana for a Saeksha. 11. If a Saeksha
criticizes before a Ratnik and the Ratnik criticizes later while going out to
the place of contemplation or the place of walking, this is the eleventh
Ashatana for a Saeksha. 12. If a Saeksha speaks before a Ratnik while the Ratnik
is already talking to someone, this is the twelfth Ashatana for a Saeksha. 13.
If a Ratnik asks a Saeksha at night or in the evening, "Arya! Who is sleeping
and who is awake?", and the Saeksha ignores the question and does not answer,
this is the thirteenth Ashatana for a Saeksha. 14. If a Saeksha brings food,
drink, or something to eat or drink and offers it to another Saeksha first, and
then to a Ratnik, this is the fourteenth Ashatana for a Saeksha. 15. If a
Saeksha brings food, drink, or something to eat or drink and shows it to another
Saeksha first, and then to a Ratnik, this is the fifteenth Ashatana for a
Saeksha. 16. If a Saeksha brings food, drink, or something to eat or drink and
invites another Saeksha to eat first, and then invites a Ratnik, this is the
sixteenth Ashatana for a Saeksha. 17. If a Saeksha brings food, drink, or
something to eat or drink and gives it to someone without asking the Ratnik,
this is the seventeenth Ashatana for a Saeksha. 18. If a Saeksha eats food,
drink, or something to eat or drink with a Ratnik and eats the best food quickly
in large bites, this is the eighteenth Ashatana for a Saeksha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 98] [samavAyAGgasUtra 33. sehe rAyaNiyassa AlavamANassa tatthagae ceva
paDisuNittA bhavai AsAyaNA sehss| samyagdarzanAdi dharma kI virAdhanArUpa
AzAtanAeM tetIsa kahI gaI haiM, jaise1. zaikSa (navadIkSita yA alpa dIkSA-
paryAyavAlA) sAdhu rAnika (adhika dIkSA paryAya vAle) sAdhu ke ati nikaTa hokara
gamana kre| yaha zaikSa kI pahalI AzAtanA hai| 2. zaikSa sAdhu rAtnika sAdhu se
Age gamana kre| yaha zaikSa kI dUsarI AzAtanA hai| 3. zaikSa sAdhu rAnika sAdhu
ke sAtha barAbarI se cle| yaha zaikSa kI tIsarI AzAtanA hai| 4. zaikSa sAdhu
rAnika sAdhu ke Age khar3A ho, yaha zaikSa kI cauthI AzAtanA hai| 5. zaikSa
sAdhu rAnika sAdhu ke sAtha barAbarI se khar3A ho| yaha zaikSa kI pAMcavIM
AzAtanA hai| 6. zaikSa sAdhu rAnika sAdhu ke atinikaTa khar3A ho| yaha zaikSa kI
chaThI AzAtanA hai| 7. zaikSa sAdhu rAtnika sAdhu ke Age baitthe| yaha zaikSa kI
sAtavIM AzAtanA hai| 8. zaikSa sAdhu rAtnika sAdhu ke sAtha barAbarI se baitthe|
yaha zaikSa kI AThavIM AzAtanA hai| 9. zaikSa sAdhu rAnika sAdhu ke ati samIpa
baitthe| yaha zaikSa kI navI AzAtanA hai| 10. zaikSa sAdhu rAtnika sAdhu ke
sAtha bAhara vicArabhUmi ko nikalatA huA yadi zaikSa rAnika sAdhu se pahale
Acamana (zauca-zuddhi) kare to yaha zaikSa kI dasavIM AzAtanA hai| 11. zaikSa
sAdhu rAnika sAdhu ke sAtha bAhara vicArabhUmi ko yA vihArabhUmi ko nikalatA huA
yadi zaikSa rAnika sAdhu se pahale AlocanA kare aura rAtnika pIche kare to yaha
zaikSa kI gyArahavIM AzAtanA hai| 12. koI sAdhu rAnika sAdhu ke sAtha pahale se
bAta kara rahA ho, taba zaikSa sAdhu rAnika sAdhu se pahile hI bole aura rAnika
sAdhu pIche bola paave| yaha zaikSa kI bArahavIM AzAtanA hai| 13. rAtnika sAdhu
rAtri meM yA vikAla meM zaikSa se pUche ki Arya! kauna so rahe haiM aura kauna
jAga rahe haiM? yaha sunakara bhI yadi zaikSa anasunI karake koI uttara na de,
to yaha zaikSa kI terahavIM AzAtanA hai| 14. zaikSa sAdhu azana, pAna, khAdima
yA svAdima lAkara pahile kisI anya zaikSa ke sAmane AlocanA kare pIche rAtnika
sAdhu ke sAmane, to yaha zaikSa kI caudahavIM AzAtanA hai| 15. zaikSa sAdhu
azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima ko lAkara pahale kisI anya zaikSa ko dikhalAve,
pIche rAnika sAdhu ko dikhAve, to yaha zaikSa kI pandrahavIM AzAtanA hai| 16.
zaikSa sAdhu azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima-AhAra lAkara pahale kisI anya
zaikSa ko bhojana ke lie nimaMtraNa de aura pIche rAlika sAdhu ko nimaMtraNa de,
to yaha zaikSa kI solahavIM AzAtanA hai| 17. zaikSa sAdhu rAnika sAdhu ke sAtha
azana, pAna, khAdima, svAdima AhAra ko lAkara rAnika sAdhu se binA pUche jisa
kisI ko de, to yaha zaikSa kI sattarahavIM AzAtanA hai| 18. zaikSa sAdhu azana,
pAna, khAdima, svAdima AhAra lAkara rAnika sAdhu ke sAtha bhojana karatA huA
yadi uttama bhojya padArthoM ko jaldI-jaldI bar3e-bar3e kavaloM se khAtA hai, to
yaha zaikSa

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Thirty-three Ashatanas of a Shishya]  [99. The eighteenth Ashatana of a Shishya
is to be inattentive to the Ratnik Sadhu. 19. If a Shishya ignores the Ratnik
Sadhu when he speaks, it is the nineteenth Ashatana of the Shishya. 20. If a
Shishya sits in his place and listens to the Ratnik Sadhu, it is the twentieth
Ashatana of the Shishya. 21. If a Shishya asks "What was said?" when the Ratnik
Sadhu speaks, it is the twenty-first Ashatana of the Shishya. 22. If a Shishya
addresses the Ratnik Sadhu with "you" (using a disrespectful word), it is the
twenty-second Ashatana of the Shishya. 23. If a Shishya speaks rudely to the
Ratnik Sadhu with a clap of the hands, it is the twenty-third Ashatana of the
Shishya. 24. If a Shishya does not acknowledge the Ratnik Sadhu's words with
"yes" or similar words, it is the twenty-fourth Ashatana of the Shishya. 25. If
a Shishya says "You don't remember" while the Ratnik Sadhu is delivering a
Dharmakatha, it is the twenty-fifth Ashatana of the Shishya. 26. If a Shishya
says "Stop" or similar words while the Ratnik Sadhu is delivering a Dharmakatha,
it is the twenty-sixth Ashatana of the Shishya. 27. If a Shishya creates
division in the assembly while the Ratnik Sadhu is delivering a Dharmakatha, it
is the twenty-seventh Ashatana of the Shishya. 28. If a Shishya, when the Ratnik
Sadhu is delivering a Dharmakatha, repeats the story for the second or third
time because the assembly does not get up, it is the twenty-eighth Ashatana of
the Shishya. 29. If a Shishya interrupts the Ratnik Sadhu while he is delivering
a Dharmakatha, it is the twenty-ninth Ashatana of the Shishya. 29. If a Shishya
kicks the Ratnik Sadhu's bed-cover, it is the twenty-ninth Ashatana of the
Shishya. 30. If a Shishya stands, sits, or sleeps on the Ratnik Sadhu's bed or
seat, it is the thirtieth Ashatana of the Shishya. 31-32. If a Shishya sits on a
seat higher than or equal to the Ratnik Sadhu, it is the Ashatana of the
Shishya. 33. If a Shishya sits on his seat and answers when the Ratnik Sadhu
speaks, it is the thirty-third Ashatana of the Shishya. Discussion - It is the
duty of a newly initiated Shishya to always be attentive to his Acharya,
Upadhyaya, and the senior Sadhu in his Dikshaparaya, and to answer their
questions when they ask, while walking, standing, sitting, or when they are
going somewhere.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 trayastriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [99 kI aThArahavIM AzAtanA hai| 19. rAnika
sAdhu ke dvArA kucha kahe jAne para yadi zaikSa use anasunI karatA hai, to yaha
zaikSa kI unnIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 20. rAtnika sAdhu ke dvArA kucha kahe jAne para
yadi zaikSa apane sthAna para hI baiThe hue sunatA hai to yaha zaikSa kI bIsavIM
AzAtanA hai| 21. rAnika sAdhu ke dvArA kucha kahe jAne para kyA kahA?' isa
prakAra se yadi zaikSa kahe to yaha zaikSa kI ikkIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 22. zaikSa
rAnika sAdhu ko 'tuma' kaha kara (tuccha zabda se) bole to yaha zaikSa kI
bAIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 23. zaikSa rAnika sAdhu se yadi capa-capa karatA huA
udaMDatA se bole to yaha zaikSa kI teIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 24. zaikSa, rAlika
sAdhu ke kathA karate hue kI 'jI hA~' Adi zabdoM se anumodanA na kare to yaha
zaikSa kI caubIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 25. zaikSa, rAtnika ke dvArA dharmakathA
kahate samaya 'tumheM smaraNa nahIM' isa prakAra se bole to yaha . zaikSa kI
paccIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 26. zaikSa rAtnika ke dvArA dharmakathA kahate samaya
'basa karo' ityAdi kahe to yaha zaikSa kI chabbIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 27. zaikSa,
rAlika ke dvArA dharmakathA kahate samaya yadi pariSad ko bhedana kare to yaha
zaikSa kI sattAIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 28. zaikSa, rAnika sAdhu ke dharmakathA
kahate hue usa sabhA ke nahIM uThane para dUsarI yA tIsarI bAra  /  usA kathA ko
kahe to yaha zaikSa kI aTThAIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 29. zaikSa, rAtnika sAdhu ke
dharmakathA kahate hue yadi kathA kI kATa kare to yaha zaikSa kI unatIsavIM
AzAtanA hai| 29. zaikSa yadi rAnika sAdhu ke zayyA-saMstAraka ko paira se
ThukarAve to yaha zaikSa kI unatIsavIM AzAtanA hai| 30. zaikSa yadi rAlika sAdhu
ke zayyA yA Asana para khar3A hotA, baiThatA-sotA hai, to yaha zaikSa kI tIsavIM
AzAtanA hai| 31-32. zaikSa yadi rAtnika sAdhu se UMce yA samAna Asana para
baiThatA hai to yaha zaikSa kI AzAtanA hai| 33. rAnika ke kucha kahane para
zaikSa apane Asana para baiThA-baiThA uttara de, yaha zaikSa kI tetIsavIM
AzAtanA hai| vivecana-navIna dIkSita sAdhu kA karttavya hai ki vaha apane
AcArya, upAdhyAya aura dIkSAparyAya meM jyeSTha sAdhu kA calate, uThate,
baiThate samaya unake dvArA kucha pUchane para, gocarI karate samaya sadA hI
unake

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 100] [Samvayanga Sutra]  Pay attention to the respect of Vinaya. If one fails
in this duty, they cultivate Ashatana and break their means of liberation.
Keeping this in mind, these thirty-three Ashatanas are mentioned. The original
Sutra instructs on four Ashatanas and the rest are indicated by the word
"Yavat". Their nature is described according to Dasashruta.  216 - In the city
of Chamarachancha, the capital of the Asura king Chamaras, there are thirty-
three Bhoumas (specific locations with the size of a city) outside each gate.
The Mahavideha region (area) is said to be thirty-three thousand yojanas in
extent. When the sun, moving inwards from the outermost circle, reaches the
third circle, it becomes visible to a human being in this Bharat region from a
distance of slightly less than thirty-three thousand yojanas.  217 - The state
of many Narakas on this Ratnapraba earth is said to be thirty-three Palyopamas.
The state of Narakas in the seven lower earths, namely Kal, Mahakal, Rouruk, and
Maharouruk, is said to be thirty-three Sagaropama. The state of Narakas in the
Apratishthan Naraka of the same seventh earth is said to be thirty-three
Sagaropama, devoid of any distinction between the inferior and superior. The
state of many Asura Kumaras and Devas is said to be thirty-three Palyopamas. The
state of many Devas in the Saudharma and Ishana kalpas is said to be thirty-
three Palyopamas.  218 - The state of Devas in the four Uttara Vimanas, namely
Vijay, Vaijayanta, Jayanta, and Aparajita, is said to be thirty-three
Sagaropama. The state of those Devas who are endowed with the divine qualities
in the Mahavimanas, which are completely perfect, is said to be thirty-three
Sagaropama, devoid of any distinction between the inferior and superior. These
Devas eat, drink, breathe in, and breathe out every thirty-three half-months.
Their food and drink arises every thirty-three thousand years.  Those beings who
are destined for liberation, who are born in the thirty-three Bhavagahanas, will
be born, will understand, will be liberated, will attain Nirvana, and will end
all suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100] [ samavAyAGgasUtra vinaya-sammAna kA dhyAna rkhe| yadi vaha apane isa
karttavya meM cUkatA hai, to unakI AzAtanA karatA hai aura apane mokSa ke
sAdhanoM ko khaMDita karatA hai  /  isI bAta ko dhyAna meM rakha kara ye tetIsa
AzAtanAeM kahI gaI haiM  /  prakRta sUtra meM cAra AzAtanAoM kA nirdeza kara
zeSa kI yAvat pada se sUcanA kI gaI hai| unakA dazAzruta ke anusAra svarUpa -
nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| 216 - camarassa saM asuriMdassa NaM asuraraNNo
camaracaMcAe rAyahANIe ekkamekkadArAe tettIsaM-tettIsaM bhomA paNNattA  /
mahAvidehe NaM vAse tettIsaM joyaNasahassAiM sAiregAiM vikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte|
jayA NaM sUrie bAhirANaMtaraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA NaM cAraM carai tayA
NaM ihagayassa purisassa tettIsAe joyaNasahassehiM kiMci visesUNehiM
cakkhupphAsaM havvamAgacchai  /  asurendra asurarAja camara kI rAjadhAnI
camaracaMcA nagarI meM pratyeka dvAra ke bAhara tetIsa - tetIsa bhauma (nagara
ke AkAra vAle viziSTa sthAna) kahe gaye haiN| mahAvideha varSa (kSetra) kucha
adhika tetIsa hajAra yojana vistAra vAlA hai| jaba sUrya sarvabAhya maMDala se
bhItara kI ora tIsare maMDala para Akara saMcAra karatA hai, taba vaha isa
bharata kSetra - gata manuSya ke kucha vizeSa kama tetIsa hajAra yojana kI dUrI
se dRSTigocara hotA hai  /  217 - imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe atthegaiyANaM
neraiyANaM tettIsaM paliovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| ahesattamAe puDhavIe kAla-
mahAkAla-roruya - mahAroruesu neraiyANaM ukkoseNaM tettIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI
pnnnnttaa| appaiTThANanarae neraiyANaM ajahaNNamaNukkoseNaM tettIsaM sAgarovamAI
ThiI paNNattA  /  asurakumArANaM atthegaiyANaM devANaM tettIsaM paliovamAI ThiI
paNNattA  /  sohammIsANesu atthegaiyANaM devANaM tettIsaM paliovamAI ThiI
paNNattA  /  isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke kitaneka nArakoM kI sthiti tetIsa
palyopama kahI gaI hai| adhastana sAtavIM pRthivI ke kAla, mahAkAla, rauruka
aura mahArauruka nArakAvAsoM ke nArakoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tetIsa sAgaropama kahI
gaI hai  /  usI sAtavIM pRthivI ke apratiSThAna naraka meM nArakoM kI ajaghanya
- anutkRSTa (jaghanya aura utkRSTa ke bheda se rahita pUrI) tetIsa sAgaropama
sthiti kahI gaI hai| kitaneka asurakumAra devoM kI sthiti tetIsa palyopama kahI
gaI hai| saudharma - IzAna kalpoM meM kitaneka devoM kI sthiti tetIsa palyopama
kahI gaI hai  /  218 - vijaya - vejayaMta- jayaMta aparAjiesu vimANesu ukkoseNaM
tettIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI paNNattA  /  je devA savvaTThasiddhe mahAvimANe
devattAe uvavaNNA, tesi NaM devANaM ajahaNNamaNukkoseNaM tettIsaM sAgarovamAiM
ThiI paNNattA  /  te NaM devA tettIsAe addhamAsehiM ANamaMti pANamaMti vA, ,
ussasaMti vA, nissasaMti vA  /  tesi NaM devANaM tettIsAe vAsasahassehiM
AhAraTTe vA, samuppajjai  /  saMtegaiyA bhavasiddhiyA jIvA je tettIsaM
bhavaggahaNehiM sijjhissaMti bujjhissaMti muccissaMti parinivvAissaMti
savvadukkhANamaMtaM karissaMti  /  vijaya, vaijayanta, jayanta aura aparAjita
ina cAra anuttara vimAnoM meM devoM kI utkRSTa sthiti tetIsa

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 34: The Thirty-Four Samavaya  **The Thirty-Four Samavaya**  **219 -
Thirty-Four Buddha-Isesas are described, as follows:**  1. **No hair, flesh, or
hair on the body.** 2. **Free from disease, free from blemishes, and with a body
like a polished gem.** 3. **With a body like the color of cow's milk and ghee.**
4. **With the fragrance of lotus and jasmine in their breath.** 5. **With a body
that does not need food or drink, and with eyes that see everything.** 6. **With
a wheel that travels through the sky.** 7. **With a canopy that travels through
the sky.** 8. **With celestial fans and garments that travel through the sky.**
9. **With a celestial throne made of gold and adorned with precious stones.**
10. **With thousands of celestial chariots surrounding them, led by Indra.** 11.
**Wherever the Arhat Bhagavan stands or sits, there celestial beings gather,
adorned with flowers, leaves, canopies, garlands, and fragrant perfumes.** 12.
**A celestial halo appears above their head, illuminating the ten directions
even in darkness.** 13. **The ground beneath them is adorned with many
auspicious symbols.** 14. **Their hair is like the finest silk.** 15. **Their
skin is soft and smooth, like the petals of a lotus.** 16. **A fragrant breeze,
carrying the scent of sandalwood, spreads for a yojana around them.** 17.
**Their body is adorned with celestial flowers, the size of a knee, in ten
different colors.** 18. **They are free from all sounds, tastes, forms, and
smells that are unpleasant.** 19. **They experience only pleasant sounds,
tastes, forms, and smells.** 20. **They have a celestial lake, filled with
nectar, that is always pleasing to the heart.** 21. **The Bhagavan preaches the
Dharma in a language that is understood by all beings.** 22. **This language,
understood by all beings, is also understood by all Ariya-Manaraya, including
the birds, animals, and insects.** 23. **All celestial beings, including Devas,
Asuras, Nagas, Suvarna, Yakshas, Rakshasas, Kinnaras, Kimpurisas, Garudas,
Gandharvas, and Mahoragas, are filled with joy and devotion when they hear the
Dharma preached by the Arhat.** 24. **All beings who are born in other realms
come to pay their respects to the Arhat.** 25. **All beings who come to pay
their respects to the Arhat are free from all suffering.** 26. **Wherever the
Arhat Bhagavan resides, there is no fear, no death, no wheel of karma, no
external wheel of karma, no birth, no rebirth, no famine.**  **|| The Thirty-
Three Samavaya is complete ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 101 catustriMzatsthAnaka - samavAya ] sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| jo deva
sarvArthasiddha nAmaka pA~caveM anuttara mahAvimAna meM devarUpa se utpanna hote
haiM, una devoM kI ajaghanya-anutkRSTa sthiti pUre tetIsa sAgarApama kahI gaI
hai| ve deva tetIsa ardhamAsoM (sAr3he solaha mAsoM ) ke bAda Ana-prANa athavA
ucchvAsa- niHzvAsa lete haiN| una devoM ke tetIsa hajAra varSoM ke bAda AhAra kI
icchA utpanna hotI hai| 1 kitaneka bhavyasiddhika jIva tetIsa bhava grahaNa
karake siddha hoMge, buddha hoMge, karmoM se mukta hoMge, parama nirvANa ko
prApta hoMge aura sarva duHkhoM kA anta kreNge| yahA~ itanA vizeSa jJAtavya hai
ki sarvArthasiddha mahAvimAna ke deva to niyama se eka bhava grahaNa karake
mukta hote haiM aura vijayAdi zeSa cAra vimAnoM ke devoM meM se koI eka bhava
grahaNa karake mukta hotA hai aura koI do manuSyabhava grahaNa karake mukta hotA
hai|  //  trayastriMzatsthAnaka samavAya samApta  //  catustriMzatsthAnaka- -
samavAya 219 -cottIsaM buddhAisesA paNNattA, taM jahA - avaTThie kesa-maMsu-roma
- nahe 1, nirAmayA niruvalevA gAyalaTThI 2, gokkhIrapaMDure maMsasoeiNa 3,
paumuppalagaMdhie ussAsanissAse 4, pacchanne AhAra- nIhAre adisse maMsacakkhuNA
5, AgAsagayaM cakkaM 6, AgAsagayaM chattaM 7, AgAsagayAo seyavaracAmarAo 8,
AgAsaphAliAmayaM sapAyapIDhaM sIhAsaNaM 9, AgAsagao
kuDabhIsahassaparimaMDiAbhirAo iMdajjhao purao gacchai 10, jattha jattha vi ya
NaM arahaMtA bhagavaMto ciTTheti vA nisIyaMti vA tattha tattha vi ya NaM jakkhA
devA saMchannapatta - puppha-pallavasamAulo sacchatto sajjhao saghaMTo sapaDAgo
asogavarapAyavo abhisaMjAyai 11, IsiM piTTao mauDaThANaMmi teyamaMDalaM
abhisaMjAi, aMdhakAre vi ya NaM dasa disAo pabhAsei 12, bahusamaramaNijje
bhUmibhAge 13, ahosirA kaMTayA bhavaMti 14, uuvivarIyA suhaphAsA bhavaMti 15,
sIyaleNaM suhaphAseNaM surabhiNA mArueNaM joyaNaparimaMDala savvao samaMtA-
saMpamajjijjai 16, juttaphusieNaM meheNa ya nihayarayareNUyaM kijjai 17, jala-
thalabhAsurapabhUteNaM viMTaTThAiNA dasaddhavaNNeNaM kusumeNaM
jANussehappamANamit pupphovayAre kijja 18, amaNuNNANaM sadda-pharisa - rasa-
rUva-gaMdhANaM avakariso bhavai 19, maNuNNANaM sadda-pharisa - rasa- rUva-
gaMdhANaM pAubbhAvo bhavai 20, paccAharao vi ya NaM hiyayagamaNIo joyanIhArI
saro 21, bhagavaM ca NaM addhamAgahIe bhAsAe dhammamAikkhai 22, sA vi ya NaM
arddhamAgahI bhAsA bhAsijjamANI tesiM savvesiM AriyamaNAriyANaM duppaya-
cauppaya-miya-pasupakkhi - sarIsivANaM appaNo hiya-siva - suhaya - bhAsattAe
pariNamai 23, puvvabaddhaverA vi ya NaM devAsura-nagA-suvaNNa-jakkha- rakkhasa -
kiMnara - kiMpurisa - garula- gaMdhavva-mahoragA arahao pAyamUle
pasaMtacittamANasA dhammaM nisAmaMta 24, aNNautthiyapAvayiNiyA vi ya NaM AgayA
vaMdati 25, AgayA samANA arahao pAyamUle nippalivayaNA havaMti 26, jao jao vi ya
NaM arahaMto bhagavaMto viharaMti tao tao vi ya NaM joyaNapaNavIsAeNaM ItI na
bhavai 27, mArI na bhavai 28, sacakkaM na bhavai 29, paracakkaM na bhavai 30,
aivuTThI na bhavai 31, aNAvuTThI na bhavai 32, dubbhikkhaM na bhavai

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[102] [Samvayanga Sutra 33, Puvvappanna vi ya naṁ uppaaiyā vāhīo khippameva
uvasamaṁti 34. Thirty-four atiśaya (superlative qualities) of the Buddhas, i.e.,
the Tirthankara Bhagavants, have been mentioned, such as: 1. Having hair, beard,
body hair, and nails that remain constant, i.e., they do not grow. 2. Having a
body that is free from disease, impurities, and blemishes. 3. Having blood and
flesh that are white like cow's milk. 4. Having fragrant breath, both inhalation
and exhalation, like that of a lotus flower. 5. Having invisible and subtle food
and nectar that is absorbed through the flesh-eyes. 6. The Dharmachakra (Wheel
of Law) revolving in the sky. 7. Three umbrellas revolving in the sky. 8.
Excellent white chamaras (fly whisks) being carried in the sky. 9. Having a
throne made of crystal, as clear as the sky, with a footrest. 10. An Indra flag
with a thousand small flags, moving ahead wherever the Arhant Bhagavant goes.
11. Wherever the Tirthankara Bhagavants stay or sit, a magnificent Ashoka tree,
adorned with leaves, flowers, buds, umbrellas, flags, bells, and banners, being
created by the Yaksha Devas. 12. Having a halo (Bhamandala) behind the head,
which illuminates all ten directions even in darkness (at night). 13. The land
where the Tirthankaras walk being very level (bahusama) and beautiful. 14.
Thorns in the walking area turning downwards. 15. All seasons being pleasant and
comfortable for the body. 16. Wherever the Tirthankaras reside, a one-yojana
area being cleansed by a cool, pleasant, and fragrant breeze. 17. The land being
dust-free due to gentle, fragrant water droplets falling from the clouds. 18.
The land being covered with flowers of five colors, blooming in water and on
land, up to the height of the knees. 19. Absence of unpleasant sounds, touch,
taste, form, and smell. 20. Presence of pleasant sounds, touch, taste, form, and
smell. 21. Having a voice that is pleasing to the heart and spreads for one
yojana during the time of Dharmadesha (preaching of the Dharma). 22. Delivering
the Dharmadesha in the Ardhamagadhi language. 23. The Ardhamagadhi language
being understood by all Aryan and non-Aryan men, as well as by bipedal birds,
quadrupedal deer, animals, and creatures that crawl on their bellies, such as
snakes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 102] [samavAyAGgasUtra 33, puvvuppaNNA vi ya NaM uppAiyA vAhIo khippameva
uvasamaMti 34 /  buddhoM ke arthAt tIrthaMkara bhagavantoM ke cautIsa atizaya
kahe gaye haiM, jaise1. avasthita keza, zmazru, roma, nakha honA, arthAt nakha
aura keza Adi kA nahIM bddh'naa| 2. nirAmaya-rogAdi se rahita, nirupalepa-mala
rahita nirmala deha-latA honaa| 3. rakta aura mAMsa kA gAya ke dUdha ke samAna
zveta varNa honaa| 4. padma-kamala ke samAna sugandhita ucchvAsa niHzvAsa honaa|
5. mAMsa-cakSu se adRzya pracchanna AhAra aura nIhAra honaa| 6. AkAza meM
dharmacakra kA clnaa| 7. AkAza meM tIna chatroM kA ghUmate hue rhnaa| 8. AkAza
meM uttama zveta cAmaroM kA DholA jaanaa| 9. AkAza ke samAna nirmala
sphaTikamaya pAdapIThayukta siMhAsana kA honaa| 10. AkAza meM hajAra laghu
patAkAoM se yukta indradhvaja kA Age-Age clnaa| 11. jahA~-jahA~ bhI arahanta
bhagavanta Thaharate yA baiThate haiM, vahA~-vahA~ yakSa devoM ke dvArA patra,
puSpa, pallavoM se vyApta, chatra, dhvajA, ghaMTA aura patAkA se yukta zreSTha
azoka vRkSa kA nirmita honaa| 12. mastaka ke kucha pIche tejamaMDala
(bhAmaMDala) kA honA, jo andhakAra meM bhI (rAtri ke samaya bhI) dazoM dizAoM ko
prakAzita karatA hai| . 13. jahA~ bhI tIrthaMkaroM kA vihAra ho, usa bhUmibhAga
kA bahusama (ekadama samatala) aura ramaNIya honaa| 14. vihAra-sthala ke kAMToM
kA adhomukha ho jaanaa| 15. sabhI RtuoM ko zarIra ke anukUla sukhada sparza vAlI
honaa| 16. jahA~ tIrthaMkara virAjate haiM, vahA~ kI eka yojana bhUmi kA zItala,
sukhasparzayukta sugandhita pavana se sarva ora saMpramArjana honaa|| 17. manda,
sugandhita jala-biMduoM se megha ke dvArA bhUmi kA dhUli-rahita honaa| 18. jala
aura sthala meM khilane vAle pAMca varNa ke puSpoM se ghuTane pramANa bhUmibhAga
kA puSpopacAra honA, arthAt AcchAdita kiyA jaanaa| 19. amanojJa (apriya) zabda,
sparza, rasa, rUpa aura gandha kA abhAva honaa| 20. manojJa (priya) zabda,
sparza, rasa, rUpa aura gandha kA prAdurbhAva honaa| dharmopadeza ke samaya
hRdaya ko priya laganevAlA aura eka yojana taka phailanevAlA svara honaa| 22.
ardhamAgadhI bhASA meM bhagavAn kA dharmopadeza denaa| 23. vaha ardhamagadhI
bhASA bolI jAtI huI sabhI Arya anArya puruSoM ke lie tathA dvipada pakSI aura
catuSpada mRga, pazu Adi jAnavaroM ke lie aura peTa ke bala reMgane vAle sarpAdi
ke lie

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirty-Four Stations of Samvaya  **[Thirty-Four Stations of Samvaya]**  It is
transformed into a language that is beneficial, auspicious, and pleasant for
each one.  24. Even those who have previous enmity (humans) - gods, asuras,
nagas, suparnas, yakshas, rakshasas, kinnaras, kimpurushas, garudas, gandharvas,
and mahoragas - all become peaceful in mind and listen to the Dharma with joy at
the feet of the Arhats (forgetting their mutual enmity).  25. Otherworldly
(pasmata-avlambhi) preachers (vyakhyanadata) also come and pay homage to the
Bhagavan.  26. Those who argue also become speechless (niruttar) at the feet of
the Arhat.  27. Wherever the Arhat Bhagavan resides, there is no fear of death
(iti-bhiti) for twenty-five yojanas.  28. There is no disease that kills humans
(mari - cholera, plague, etc.).  29. There is no fear of one's own army
(svachakra).  30. There is no fear of the enemy's army (parachakra).  31. There
is no excessive rainfall (ativrushti).  32. There is no lack of rain
(anavrushti), meaning no drought.  33. There is no famine (durbhiksha).  34.
Diseases that arose before the Bhagavan's residence also subside quickly, and
there are no calamities like blood rain.  **Discussion:**  Of the above thirty-
four atishyas, the second to the fourth atishyas occur from the birth of the
Tirthankaras. The sixth, from the celestial chakra, to the twentieth atishyas
occur when the four karmas are destroyed. The remaining atishyas should be
understood as being created by the gods. In the Digambara tradition, these
atishyas are generally found with some variations in the text. There, ten
atishyas are said to be born with the birth, ten atishyas are said to be born
with the knowledge of omniscience, and fourteen atishyas are said to be created
by the gods.  **[Jambudvipa Chapter]**  220. In this island called Jambudvipa,
thirty-four victory fields of the Chakravartis are said to be established. For
example, in Mahavideha, thirty-two, in Bharat Kshetra one, and in Airāvata
Kshetra one. [Similarly] in this island called Jambudvipa, thirty-four long
Vaitalya are said to be established. In the island called Jambudvipa, thirty-
four Tirthankaras are born in an excellent way [simultaneously].  221. The Asura
king Chamaras has thirty-four lakh Bhavanavasa. In the first, fifth, sixth, and
seventh, these four earths, thirty-four lakh (30+3+ five less than one lakh and
5 = 34) Narakavasa are said to be established.  **[End of Thirty-Four Stations
of Samvaya]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 catustriMzatsthAnaka - samavAya ] apanI-apanI hitakara, zivakara sukhada
bhASArUpa se pariNata ho jAtI hai| 24. pUrvabaddha vaira vAle bhI (manuSya)
deva, asura, nAga, suparNa, yakSa, rAkSasa, kinnara, kimpuruSa, garuDa,
gandharva aura mahoraga bhI arahantoM ke pAdamUla me ( paraspara vaira
bhUlakara) prazAnta citta hokara harSita mana se dharma zravaNa karate haiM  /
25. anyatIrthika (pasmatAvalambI) prAvacanika (vyAkhyAnadAtA) puruSa bhI Akara
bhagavAn kI vandanA karate haiN| 26. ve vAdI loga bhI arahanta ke pAdamUla meM
vacana - rahita (niruttara) ho jAte haiN| 27. jahA~-jahA~ bhI arahanta
bhagavanta vihAra karate haiM, vahA~-vahA~ paccIsa yojana taka Iti-bhIti nahIM
hotI hai| 28. manuSyoM ko mArane vAlI mArI (haijA - plega Adi bhayaMkara bImArI
) nahIM hotI hai| 29. svacakra (apane rAjya kI senA ) kA bhaya nahIM hotA  /  [
103 30. paracakra (zatru kI senA) kA bhaya nahIM hotA  /  31. ativRSTi (bhArI
jalavarSA) nahIM hotI  /  32. anAvRSTi nahIM hotI, arthAt sUkhA nahIM par3atA  /
33. durbhikSa (duSkAla) nahIM hotA  /  34. bhagavAn ke vihAra se pUrva utpanna
huI vyAdhiyA~ bhI zIghra hI zAnta ho jAtI haiM aura raktavarSA Adi utpAta nahIM
hote haiM  /  vivecana - uparyukta cautIsa atizayoM meM se dvitIya Adi cAra
atizaya tIrthaMkaroM ke janma se hI hote haiN| chaThe AkAza-gata cakra se lekara
bIsa taka ke atizaya ghAtikarmacatuSka ke kSaya hone para hote haiM aura zeSa
devakRta atizaya jAnanA caahie| digambara paramparA meM prAyaH ye hI atizaya
kucha pATha-bheda se milate haiM, vahA~ janma-jAta dasa atizaya, kevalajJAna-
janita daza atizaya aura devakRta caudaha atizaya kahe gaye haiM 1 220 -
jambuddIve NaM dIve cauttIsaM cakkavaTTivijayA paNNattA  /  taM jahA - battIsaM
mahAvidehe, do bharahe eravae  /  jambuddIve NaM dIve cottIsaM dIhaveyaDDA
paNNattA  /  jaMbuddIve NaM dIve ukkosapara cottIsa titthaMkarA samuppajjaMti  /
jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa dvIpa meM cakravartI ke vijayakSetra cautIsa kahe gaye
haiM  /  jaise - mahAvideha meM battIsa, bharata kSetra eka aura airavata kSetra
eka  /  [isI prakAra ] jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa dvIpa meM cautIsa dIrgha vaitADhya
kahe gaye haiN| jambUdvIpa nAmaka dvIpa meM utkRSTa rUpa se cautIsa tIrthaMkara
[ eka sAtha ] utpanna hote haiN| 221 - camarassa NaM asuriMdassa asuraraNNo
cottIsaM bhavaNAvAsasayasahassA paNNattA  /  paDhama- paMcama - chaTThI-
sattamAsu causu puDhavIsu cottIsaM nirayAvAsasayasahassA paNNattA  /  asurendra
asurarAja camara ke cautIsa lAkha bhavanAvAsa kahe gaye haiM  /  pahilI,
pA~cavIM, chaThI aura sAtavIM, ina cAra pRthiviyoM meM cautIsa lAkha (30+3+
pA~ca kama eka lAkha aura 5 = 34) nArakAvAsa kahe gaye haiM  /   //
catustriMzatsthAnaka samavAya samApta  //

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 104] [Samavayanga Sutra, Chapter 35, Section 222 - 35 Saccvayanaisesa
Pannatta. Thirty-five excellences of truthful speech have been stated.
Discussion - The original Sutra does not mention the names of these thirty-five
excellences of speech, and Sanskrit commentators write that they are not found
anywhere in the Agamas. They have mentioned thirty-five qualities of speech
found in other texts, which are as follows: 1. Sanskaravattva - Speech being
adorned with grammatical correctness. 2. Udatattva - Being full of high pitch.
3. Upacaropetattva - Being free from vulgarity. 4. Gambhirasabdatva - Being
adorned with deep sounds like thunder. 5. Anunaditva - Being full of the correct
pronunciation of each word. 6. Dakshinatva - Speech being easy to understand. 7.
Upanitaragatva - Being adorned with appropriate melody and rhythm. These seven
excellences should be understood in relation to the beauty of speech. The
excellences mentioned further are related to the weightiness of meaning. 8.
Maharthatva - Speech having great meaning. 9. Avyahtapurvaparyatva - Having
sentences that are not contradictory to each other. 10. Shishtatva - Indicating
the refinement of the speaker. 11. Asandigdhatva - Being a clear and definite
statement without any doubt. 12. Apahritanayottaratva - Being able to remove the
criticisms of others. 13. Hridayagrahitva - Being a pleasing speech that
captures the heart of the listener. 14. Desha-kalavyayitatva - Being a speech
that is appropriate to the occasion, place, and time. 15. Tattvanurupattva -
Being a speech that is in accordance with the nature of the intended object. 16.
Aprakirnaprasrutatva - Being a well-connected speech without unnecessary
elaboration. 17. Anyonyapragrihit - Being composed of words and sentences that
are mutually dependent. 18. Abhijattva - Indicating the nobility and refinement
of the speaker. 19. Atisnigdhamadhuratva - Being extremely sweet and full of
affection. 20. Aparamarmatavedhitva - Not being hurtful to the feelings of
others. 21. Arthatharmabhyasanapetattva - Being in accordance with meaning and
Dharma. 22. Udaraatva - Being free from triviality and full of generosity. 23.
Paranindatmotkarshaviprayuktattva - Being free from criticizing others and
praising oneself. 24. Upagatashlangatva - Being a speech that is praised by
those who hear it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104] [samavAyAGgasUtra paJcatriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya 222-paNatIsaM
saccavayaNAisesA pnnnnttaa| paiMtIsa satyavacana ke atizaya kahe gaye haiN|
vivecana-mUla sUtra meM ina paiMtIsa vacanAtizayoM ke nAmoM kA ullekha nahIM hai
aura saMskRta TIkAkAra likhate haiM ki ye Agama meM kahIM dRSTigocara nahIM hue
haiN| unhoMne granthAntaroM meM pratipAdita vacana ke paiMtIsa guNoM kA ullekha
kiyA hai, jo isa prakAra haiM 1. saMskAravattva-vacanoM kA vyAkaraNa-saMskAra se
yukta honaa| 2. udAttattva-ucca svara se paripUrNa honaa| 3. upacAropetatva-
grAmINatA se rahita honaa| 4. gambhIrazabdatva-megha ke samAna gambhIra zabdoM
se yukta honaa| 5. anunAditva-pratyeka zabda ke yathArtha uccAraNa se yukta
honaa| 6. dakSiNatva-vacanoM kA saralatA-yukta honaa| 7. upanItarAgatva-
yathocita rAga-rAgiNI se yukta honaa| ye sAta atizaya zabda-saundarya kI apekSA
se jAnanA caahie| Age kahe jAne vAle atizaya artha-gaurava kI apekSA rakhate
haiN| 8. mahArthatva-vacanoM kA mahAn arthavAlA honaa| 9.
avyAhatapaurvAparyatva- pUrvApara avirodhI vAkya vAlA honaa| 10. ziSTatva-vaktA
kI ziSTatA kA sUcaka honaa| 11. asandigdhatva-sandeha-rahita nizcita artha ke
pratipAdaka honaa| 12. apahRtAnyottaratva-anya puruSa ke dUSaNoM ko dUra karane
vAlA honaa| 13. hRdayagrAhitva-zrotA ke hRdaya-grAhI-manohara vacana honaa| 14.
deza-kAlAvyayItatva-deza-kAla ke anukUla avasarocita vacana honaa| 15.
tattvAnurUpatva-vivakSita vastusvarUpa ke anurUpa vacana honaa| 16.
aprakIrNaprasRtatva-nirarthaka vistAra se rahita susambaddha vacana honaa| 17.
anyonyapragRhIta- paraspara apekSA rakhane vAle padoM aura vAkyoM se yukta
honaa| 18. abhijAtatva-vaktA kI kulInatA aura zAlInatA ke sUcaka honaa| 19.
atisnigdhamadhuratva- atyanta sneha se bhare hue madhuratA-miSTatA yukta honaa|
20. aparamarmAvedhitva-dUsare ke marma-vedhI na honaa| 21.
arthadharmAbhyAsAnapetatva- artha aura dharma ke anukUla honaa| 22. udAratva-
tucchatA-rahita aura udAratA-yukta honaa| 23. paranindAtmotkarSaviprayuktatva-
parAI-nindA aura apanI prazaMsA se rahita honaa| 24. upagatazlAghatva-jinheM
suna kara loga prazaMsA kareM, aise vacana honaa|

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Thirty-five Qualities of Speech] [105 25. Being free from grammatical errors
such as incorrect pronoun usage, case, gender, etc. 26. Being captivating and
generating continuous curiosity in the listeners. 27. Being wondrous and
showcasing amazing novelty. 28. Being fluent and free from excessive delay. 29.
Being free from mental distractions, agitation, anger, fear, etc. 30. Being
diverse and describing the subject matter in various ways. 31. Being specific
and having a unique quality compared to general statements. 32. Being concrete
and having distinct letters, words, and sentences. 33. Being courageous and
filled with confidence. 34. Being free from sorrow and sadness. 35. Being
coherent and effectively conveying the intended meaning. • Spoken words should
possess these thirty-five qualities. 223-Kunthu Arhan (Kunthu the Arhat) could
shoot thirty-five arrows with his bow. Datta Vasudeva could shoot thirty-five
arrows with his bow. Nandana Baldeva could shoot thirty-five arrows with his
bow. 224-In the Saudharma Kalpa, in the Sudharma Sabha, in the Manavaka Chaitya-
stambha, leaving twelve and a half yojanas below and above, in the middle
thirty-five yojanas, in vajra-maya (diamond-like), round, circular enclosures,
the bones of the Jinas (the Tirthankaras who attained liberation in the human
realm) are kept. 225-In the second and fourth earths (combined), thirty-five
lakh (3.5 million) Naraka-avasas (hells) are mentioned. || End of the Thirty-
five Qualities of Speech.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcatriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [105 25. anapanItva-kAla, kAraka, liMga-vyatyaya
Adi vyAkaraNa ke doSoM se rahita honaa| 26. utpAditAcchinna kautUhalatva-apane
viSaya meM zrotAjanoM ko lAgatAra kautUhala utpanna karane vAle honaa| 27.
adbhutatva-AzcaryakAraka adbhuta navInatA-pradarzaka vacana honaa| 28.
anativilambitva-ativilamba se rahita dhArApravAhI bolnaa| 29. vibhrama, vikSepa-
kilikiJcitAdi vimuktatva-mana kI bhrAnti, vikSepa aura roSa, bhayAdi se rahita
honaa| 30. aneka jAtisaMzrayAdvicitratva- aneka prakAra se varNanIya vastu-
svarUpa ke varNana karane vAle vacana honaa| 31. AhitavizeSatva-sAmAnya vacanoM
se kucha vizeSatA-yukta vacana honaa| 32. sAkAratva-pRthak-pRthak varNa, pada,
vAkya ke AkAra se yukta vacana honaa| 33. satvaparigRhItatva-sAhasa se paripUrNa
vacana honaa| 34. aparikheditva-kheda-khinnatA se rahita vacana honaa| 35.
avyuccheditva-vivakSita artha kI samyak siddhi karane vAle vacana honaa| * bole
jAne vAle vacana ukta paiMtIsa guNoM se yukta hone caahie| 223-kuMthU NaM arahA
paNatIsaM dhaNUI uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa| datte NaM vAsudeve paNatIsaM dhaNuiM
uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa| naMdaNe NaM baladeve paNatIsaM dhaNUI uDDhaM
uccatteNaM hotthaa| kunthu arhan paiMtIsa dhanuSa UMce the| datta vAsudeva
paiMtIsa dhanuSa UMce the| nandana baladeva paiMtIsa dhanuSa UMce the|
224-sohamme kappe suhammAe sabhAe mANavae ceiyakkhaMbhe heTThA uvariM ca
addhaterasa joyaNANi vajettA majjhe paNNatIsaM joyaNesu vairAmaesu
golavaTTasamuggaesu jiNasakahAo pnnnnttaao| saudharma kalpa meM sudharmA sabhA
ke mANavaka caityastambha meM nIce aura Upara sAr3he bAraha-sAr3he bAraha yojana
chor3a kara madhyavartI paiMtIsa yojanoM meM, vajramaya, gola vartulAkAra
peTiyoM meM jinoM kI (manuSya-loka meM mukta hue tIrthaMkaroM kI) asthiyAM rakhI
huI haiN| 225-bitiya-cautthIsu dosu puDhavIe paNatIsaM nirayAvAsasayasahassA
pnnnnttaa| dUsarI aura cauthI pRthiviyoM meM (donoM ke milA kara) paiMtIsa
(25+10=35) lAkha nArakAvAsa kahe gaye haiN|  //  paMcatriMzatsthAnaka samavAya
smaapt|

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[106] The Uttaradhyayanasutra has thirty-six studies, such as: 1. Vinayashruta
study, 2. Parisha study, 3. Chaturangiya study, 4. Asanskruta study, 5.
AkammaranIya study, 6. Purusha Vidya study (Ksullaka Nirgranthiya study), 7.
Aurabhriya study, 8. Kapiliya study, 9. Nimi Pravrajya study, 10. Dram Patraka
study, 11. Bahushruta Puja study, 12. Harikeshiya study, 13. Chitta Sambhatiya
study, 14. Ishukari study, 15. Sabhikshu study, 16. Samadhi Sthan study, 17.
Papashramaniya study, 18. Sanayatiya study, 19. Mrgaputriya study, 20. Anath
Pravrajya study, 21. Samudra Pali study, 22. Rathnemiya study, 23. Gautamkeshiya
study, 24. Samiti study, 25. Yagniya study, 26. Samachari study, 27. Khalunkiya
study, 28. Mokshamarg Gati study, 29. Apramad study (Samyaktva Parakram), 30.
Tapo Marg study, 31. Charan Vidhi study, 32. Pramad Sthan study, 33. Karma
Prakriti study, 34. Leshya study, 35. Anugara Marg study, and 36. Jivajiv
Vibhakti study. [227] The assembly of the Asura king, the Asura Indra, is
thirty-six yojanas high. [228] The assembly of the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira had
thirty-six thousand Aryikas. [229] In the months of Chaitra and Ashoj, the sun
casts a shadow of thirty-six angulas. [End of Shattrinshat Sthanak Samavay]
[230] The Kunthu Arhan had thirty-seven ganas and thirty-seven ganadharas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106] [samavAyAGgasUtra SaTtriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya 226-chattIsaM uttarajjhayaNA
paNNattA, taM jahA-viNayasuyaM 1, parIsaho 2, cAuraMginja 3, asaMkhayaM 4,
akAmamaraNijja 5, purisavijjA 6, urabbhijjaM 7, kAviliyaM 8, namipavvajjA 9,
dumapattayaM 10, bahusuyapUjA 11, hariesijjaM 12, cittasaMbhUyaM 13, usuyArijjaM
14, sabhikkhugaM 15, sAmAhiThANAI 16, pAvasamaNijjaM 17, saMjaijjaM 18,
miyacAriyA 19, aNAhapavvajA 20, samuddapAlijjaM 21, rahanemijaM 22, goyama-
kesijjaM 23, samitIo 24, janatijaM 25, sAmAyArI 26, khaluMkijjaM 27,
mokkhamaggagaI 28, appamAo 29, tavomaggo 30, caraNavihI 31, pamAyaThANaiM 32,
kammapayaDI 33, lesajjhayaNaM 34, aNagAramagge 35, jIvAjIvavibhattI ya 36 /
uttarAdhyayanasUtra ke chattIsa adhyayana haiM, jaise-1. vinayazruta adhyayana
2. parISaha adhyayana, 3. cAturaGgIya adhyayana, 4. asaMskRta
adhyayana,5.akAmamaraNIya adhyayana, 6. puruSa vidyA adhyayana (kSullaka
nirgranthIya adhyayana) 7. aurabhrIya adhyayana, 8. kApilIya adhyayana, 9.
namipravrajyA adhyayana, 10. dramapatraka adhyayana, 11. bahazratapUjA
adhyayana, 12. harikezIya adhyayana. 13. cittasaMbhatIya adhyayana. 14.
iSukArIya adhyayana, 15. sabhikSu adhyayana, 16.samAdhisthAna adhyayana, 17.
pApazramaNIya adhyayana, 18.saMyatIya adhyayana, 19. mRgAputrIya adhyayana,
20.anAtha pravrajyA adhyayana,21. samudrapAlIya adhyayana, 22. rathanemIya
adhyayana, 23. gautamakezIya adhyayana, 24. samiti adhyayana, 25. yajJIya
adhyayana, 26. sAmAcArI adhyayana, 27. khaluMkIya adhyayana, 28.mokSamArgagati
adhyayana, 29.apramAda adhyayana, (samyaktva parAkrama) 30. tapomArga adhyayana,
31. caraNavidhi adhyayana, 32. pramAdasthAna adhyayana, 33. karmaprakRti
adhyayana, 34. lezyA adhyayana, 35. anagAramArga adhyayana aura 36.
jIvAjIvavibhakti adhyyn| 227-camarassaNaM asuriMdassa asuraraNNo sabhA suhammA
chattIsaMjoyaNANi uDDhe uccatteNaM hotthaa| asurendra asurarAja camara kI
sudharmA sabhA chattIsa yojana UMcI hai| 228-samaNassa NaM bhagavao mahAvIrassa
chattIsaM ajjANaM sAhassIo hotthaa| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke saMgha meM
chattIsa hajAra AryikAeM thiiN| 221-cettAsoesu NaM mAsesu sai chattIsaMguliyaM
sUrie porisIchAyaM nivvtti| caitra aura Asoja mAsa meM sUrya eka bAra chattIsa
aMgula kI pauruSI chAyA karatA hai| ||sstttriNshtsthaank samavAya smaapt||
saptatriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya 230-kuMthussa NaM arahao sattatIsaM gaNA,
sattatIsaM gaNaharA hotthaa| kunthu arhan ke saiMtIsa gaNa aura saiMtIsa
gaNadhara the|

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirty-Eight Stations of the Jain Cosmology  **[Thirty-Eight Stations of the
Samvaya]**  **107.231** - The **Jivas** (living beings) of the **Hemvat** and
**Herannavat** regions are said to be thirty-seven thousand six hundred seventy-
four yojanas long, minus nineteen parts of a yojana, and sixteen parts of a
yojana. In all the **Vijay**, **Vaijayant**, **Jayant**, and **Aparijay**
**Rayahani** (regions), the **Pagara** (residence) is thirty-seven yojanas high.
**232** - In the first section of the **Ksudrika Vimana-Pravibhakti** (a text on
the classification of celestial vehicles), thirty-seven **Uddesana-Kala**
(periods of time) are mentioned.  **233** - On the seventh day of the dark
fortnight of **Kartik** (October-November), the **Surya** (Sun) travels with a
**Porisi-Chhaya** (shadow) of thirty-seven **Anguli** (fingerbreadths).  **[End
of Thirty-Seven Stations of the Samvaya]**  **[Thirty-Eight Stations of the
Samvaya]**  **234** - The **Arhat** (liberated soul) of the **Purusha-Daniya**
(a type of celestial being) had a **Sampaya** (collection) of thirty-eight
thousand **Aryika** (female ascetics).  **235** - The **Jivas** of the
**Hemvat** and **Herannavat** regions have a **Dhanu-Pidha** (back) that is
thirty-eight thousand seven hundred forty yojanas long, minus ten parts of a
yojana, and nineteen parts of a yojana. The second **Kanda** (section) of the
**Meru** (mountain) where the **Surya** sets is thirty-eight thousand yojanas
high.  **236** - In the second section of the **Ksudrika Vimana-Pravibhakti**,
thirty-eight **Uddesana-Kala** are mentioned.  **[End of Thirty-Eight Stations
of the Samvaya]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTatriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [107 231 -hemavaya-heraNNavaiyAo NaM jIvAo
sattatIsaM joyaNasahassAI chacca causattare joyaNasae solasayaegUNavIsaibhAe
joyaNassa kiMcivisesUNAo AyAmeNaM pnnnnttaao|svvaasu NaM vijaya-vaijayaMta-
jayaMta-aparijayAsu rAyahANIsu pAgArA sattatIsaM sattatIsaM joyaNAI uDDhaM
uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| haimavata aura hairaNyavata kSetra kI jIvAeM saiMtIsa
hajAra chaha sau cauhattara yojana aura eka yojana ke unnIsa bhAgoM meM se kucha
kama solaha bhAga lambI kahI gaI haiN| 232-khuDDiyAe vimANapavibhattIe paDhame
vagge sattatIsaM uddesaNakAlA pnnnnttaa| kSudrikA vimAnapravibhakti nAmaka
kAlika zruta ke prathama varga meM saiMtIsa uddezana kAla kahe gaye haiN| 233
-kattiyabahulasattamIe NaM sUrie sattatIsaMguliyaM porisIchAyaM nivvattaittA NaM
cAraM cri| kArtika kRSNA saptamI ke dina sUrya saiMtIsa aMgula kI pauruSI chAyA
karatA huA saMcAra karatA hai|  //  saptatriMzatsthAnaka samavAya smaapt||
aSTatriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya 234-pAsassa NaM arahao purisAdANIyassa aTThattIsaM
ajjiAsAhassIo ukkosiyA ajjiyAsaMpayA hotthaa| puruSAdAnIya pArzva arhat ke
saMgha meM ar3atIsa hajAra AryikAoM kI utkRSTa AryikA-sampadA thii|
235-hemavaya-eraNNavaiyANaM jIvANaM dhaNupiDhe aTThattIsaMjoyaNasahassAiM satta
ya cattAle joyaNasae dasaegUNavIsaibhAge joyaNassa kiMci visesUNA parikkheveNaM
pnnnntte| atthassa NaM pavvayaraNNA bitie kaMDe aTThattIsaM joyaNasahassAI
uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa| haimavata aura airaNyavata kSetroM kI jIvAoM kA
dhanuHpRSTha ar3atIsa hajAra sAta sau cAlIsa yojana aura eka yojana ke unnIsa
bhAgoM meM se daza bhAga se kucha kama parikSepa vAlA kahA gayA hai| jahA~ sUrya
asta hotA hai, usa parvatarAja meru kA dUsarA kAMDa ar3atIsa hajAra yojana UMcA
hai| 236-khuDDiyAe NaM vimANapavibhattIe bitie vagge aTThattIsaM uddesaNakAlA
pnnnnttaa| kSudrikA vimAnapravibhakti nAmaka kAlika zruta ke dvitIya varga meM
ar3atIsa uddezana kAla kahe gaye ||asstttriNshtsthaank samavAya smaapt|

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 108:  [Samvayanga Sutra, Forty-First Chapter, 237] Nimi, the Arhat,
was an Avadhi Jnani who knew the thirty-nine hundred (3900) definite (limited)
regions. In the time-field (two and a half islands), thirty-nine Kulparvata are
said to exist, such as: thirty Varshadhara, five Mandara (Meru), and four
Ishukara mountains. In the second, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh earths,
thirty-nine (25+10+3+five less than one lakh and 5-39) lakh Narakavasa are said
to exist.  [238] The thirty-nine (5+28+2+4=39) Uttarapragati of the four karmas:
Jnanavaraniya, Mohaniya, Gotra, and Ayukarma are said to exist.  || Forty-First
Chapter, Samvayanga Sutra, Ends ||  ## Chapter 40:  [Forty-First Chapter,
Samvayanga Sutra, 239] There were forty thousand Aryikas in the Sangha of Arhat
Arishta Nemi.  [240] The Mandara Chulika are said to be forty yojanas high.
Shanti Arhat was forty dhanus high.  [241] The Nagakumara, the Nagaraja
Bhutananda, is said to have forty lakh Bhavanavasa. In the third category of the
Ksudrika Vimana-Vibhakti, forty Uddeshanakala are said to exist.  [242] On the
Phalguna Purnima, the Sun travels with a shadow of forty angulas. Similarly, on
the Kartiki Purnima, the Sun travels with a shadow of forty angulas.  [243] In
the Mahashukra Kalpa, forty thousand Vimanaavasa are said to exist.  || Forty-
First Chapter, Samvayanga Sutra, Ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 108] [samavAyAGgasUtra ekonacatvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya 237-namissa NaM arahao
egUNacattAlIsaM AhohiyasayA hotthaa| samayakhette egUNacattAlIsaM kulapavvayA
paNNattA, taM jahA-tIsaM vAsaharA, paMca maMdara, cattAri uskaaraa| docca-
cauttha-paMcama-chaTra-sattamAsa NaM paMcasa puDhavIsa egaNacattAlIsaM
nirayAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| nami arhat ke unatAlIsa sau (3900) niyata
(parimita) kSetra ko jAnane vAle avadhijJAnI muni the| samaya kSetra (ar3hAI
dvIpa) meM unatAlIsa kulaparvata kahe gaye haiM, jaise-tIsa varSadhara parvata,
pAMca mandara (meru) aura cAra iSukAra prvt| dUsarI, cauthI, pAMcavIM, chaThI
aura sAtavIM, ina pAMca pRthiviyoM meM unatAlIsa (25+10+3+pAMca kama eka lAkha
aura 5-39) lAkha nArakAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| 238-nANAvaraNijassa mohaNijjassa
gottassa Auyassa eyAsi NaM cauNhaM kammapagaDINaM egUNacattAlIsaM uttarapagaDIo
pnnnnttaao| jJAnAvaraNIya, mohanIya, gotra aura Ayukarma, ina cAroM karmoM kI
unatAlIsa (5+28+2+4=39) uttaraprakRtiyAM kahI gaI haiN| ||ekonctvaariNshtsthaank
samavAya smaapt|| catvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya 239-arahao NaM ariTThanemissa
cattAlIsaM ajjiyA sAhassIo hotthaa| ariSTanemi arhan ke saMgha meM cAlIsa hajAra
AryikAeM thiiN| 240-maMdaracUliyA NaM cattAlIsaM joyaNAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM
pnnnnttaa| saMtI arahA cattAlIsaM dhaNUI uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa| mandara
cUlikAeM cAlIsa yojana UMcI kahI gaI haiN| zAnti arhan cAlIsa dhanuSa UMce the|
241-bhUyANaMdassaNaM nAgakumArassa nAgaranno cattAlIsaMbhavaNAvAsasayasahassA
pnnnnttaa| khuDDiyAe NaM vimANapavibhattIe taie vagge cattAlIsaM uddesaNakAlA
pttaa| nAgakumAra, nAgarAja bhUtAnanda ke cAlIsa lAkha bhavanAvAsa kahe gaye
haiN| kSudrikA vimAna-pravibhakti ke tIsare varga meM cAlIsa uddezana kAla kahe
gaye haiN| 242-phagguNapuNNimAsiNIe NaM sUrie cattAlIsaMguliyaM porisIchAyaM
nivvaTTaittA NaM cAraM cri| evaM kattiyAe vi punnnnimaae| phAlguNa pUrNamAsI ke
dina sUrya cAlIsa aMgula kI pauruSI chAyA karake saMcAra karatA hai| isI prakAra
kArtikI pUrNimA ko bhI cAlIsa aMgula kI pauruSI chAyA karake saMcAra karatA hai|
243 -mahAsukke kappe cattAlIsaM vimANAvAsasahassA pnnnnttaa| mahAzukra kalpa meM
cAlIsa hajAra vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| ||ctvaariNshtsthaank samavAya smaapt|

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Forty-two Stana Samvaya  [109 Forty-one Stana Samvaya] [244-Nami Arhat was a
forty-one thousand Aryika-sahaasi. There were forty-one thousand Aryikas in the
Sangha of Nami Arhat. 245-In the four Prithvis, forty-one lakh Narakavasas are
mentioned, like- in Ratnapraba 30 lakh, in Pankapraba 10 lakh, in Tamahpraba 5
less than one lakh and in Maha Tamahpraba 5. 246-In the Mahali (Mahatti) Vimana
Vibhakti, in the first class, forty-one Uddeshanakalas are mentioned. || Forty-
one Stana Samvaya Sampt || Forty-two Stana Samvaya. 247-Samana Bhagavan
Mahavira, after practicing the Samana Paryaya for a little more than forty-two
years, became Siddha, Buddha, and free from all suffering. 248-From the
easternmost part of the outer circumference of the Jambudvipa, to the
westernmost part of the Goastabha, the abode of Velandhar Nagaraj, the distance
is said to be forty-two thousand yojanas without any obstacle or interruption.
Similarly, in all four directions, the distance of Udakbhas, Shankha, and
Dayaseema should be known. 249-In the Kalod Ocean, forty-two moons have risen,
are rising, and will rise. Similarly, forty-two suns have shone, are shining,
and will shine. 250-The height of the Sammuchhim Bhujparisappa is said to be
forty-two thousand years.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvicatvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [109 ekacatvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya
244-namissa NaM arahao ekacattAlIsaM ajjiyAsAhassIo hotthaa| nami arhat ke
saMgha meM ikatAlIsa hajAra AryikAeM thiiN| 245-causu puDhavIsu ekkacattAlIsaM
nirayAvAsasayasahassA paNNattA, taM jahArayaNappabhAe paMkappabhAe tamAe
tmtmaae| cAra pRthiviyoM meM ikatAlIsa lAkha nArakavAsa kahe gaye haiM, jaise-
ratnaprabhA meM 30 lAkha, paMkaprabhA meM 10 lAkha, tamaHprabhA meM 5 kama eka
lAkha aura mahAtama:prabhA meM 5 /  246-mahAliyAe NaM vimANapavibhattIe paDhame
vagge ekkacattAlIsaM uddesaNakAlA pnnnnttaa| mahAlikA (mahattI)
vimAnapravibhakti ke prathama varga meM ikatAlIsa uddezanakAla kahe gaye haiN|
//  ekacatvAriMzatsthAnaka samavAya smaapt|| dvicatvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya .
247-samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre vAyAlIsaM vAsAiM sAhiyAiM sAmaNNapariyAgaM pAuNittA
siddhe jAva svvdukkhpphiinne| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra kucha adhika bayAlIsa
varSa zramaNa paryAya pAlakara siddha, buddha, yAvat (karma-mukta, parinirvANa
ko prApta aura) sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue| 248-jaMbuddIvassa NaM dIvassa
puracchimillAo caramaMtAo gothUbhassa NaM AvAsapavvayassa paccacchimille
caramaMte esa NaM vAyAlIsaM joyaNasahassAiM abAhAto aMtaraM pnnttN| evaM
cauddisiM pi daobhAse, saMkhe, dayasIme y| jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa dvIpa kI jagatI
kI bAharI paridhi ke pUrvI caramAnta bhAga se lekara velandhara nAgarAja ke
gostabha nAmaka AvAsa parvata ke pazcimI caramAnta bhAga taka madhyavartI kSetra
kA binA kisI bAdhA yA vyavadhAna ke antara bayAlIsa hajAra yojana kahA gayA hai|
isI prakAra cAroM dizAoM meM bhI udakabhAsa, zaMkha aura udakasIma kA antara
jAnanA caahie| 249-kAloeNaM samudde vAyAlIsaM caMdA joiMsuvA, joiMti vA,
joissaMti vaa|vaayaaliisN sUriyA pabhAsiMsu vA, pabhAsaMti vA, pabhAsissaMti
vaa| kAloda samudra meM bayAlIsa candra udyota karate the, udyota karate haiM
aura udyota kreNge| isI prakAra bayAlIsa sUrya prakAza karate the, prakAza
karate haiM aura prakAza kreNge| 250-sammucchimabhuyaparisappANaM ukkoseNaM
vAyAlIsaM vAsasahassAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| sammUcchima bhujaparisaoNM kI utkRSTa
sthiti bayAlIsa hajAra varSa kahI gaI hai|

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[110] There are forty-two types of Name Karma, as follows: 1. Gati-nama, 2.
Jati-nama, 3. Sarira-nama, 4. Sarira-angopaanga-nama, 5. Sarira-bandhana-nama,
6. Sarira-sanghatana-nama, 7. Sanhana-nama, 8. Sansthana-nama, 9. Varna-nama,
10. Gandha-nama, 11. Rasa-nama, 12. Sparsha-nama, 13. Aguru-laghu-nama, 14.
Upghata-nama, 15. Paraghata-nama, 16. Anupurvi-nama, 17. Ucchvasa-nama, 18.
Atapa-nama, 19. Udyota-nama, 20. Vihayoga-gati-nama, 21. Vasana-nama, 22.
Thavara-nama, 23. Sukshma-nama, 24. Badara-nama, 25. Paryapta-nama, 26.
Aparyapta-nama, 27. Sadharana-sarira-nama, 28. Pratyeka-sarira-nama, 29. Sthira-
nama, 30. Asthira-nama, 31. Shubha-nama, 32. Ashubha-nama, 33. Subhaga-nama, 34.
Durbhaga-nama, 35. Susvara-nama, 36. Dusvara-nama, 37. Aadeya-nama, 38.
Anaadeya-nama, 39. Yasho-kirti-nama, 40. Ayasho-kirti-nama, 41. Nirmmana-nama,
and 42. Tirthankara-nama.  [252] Forty-two thousand Nagas hold the creeper in
the salt ocean.  [253] Forty-two Uddesana-kala are mentioned in the second
category of the Mahalikas, in the division of the Vimanas.  [254] The fifth and
sixth Aaras of each Avasarpini Kala are said to be forty-two thousand years
long. The first and second Aaras of each Utsarpini Kala are said to be forty-two
thousand years long.  [End of the Twenty-Fourth Chapter of the Samavaya]  [255]
Forty-three divisions of Karma-vivag-jjanana are mentioned in the Karma-vipaka
Sutra (the study that explains the good and bad results of Karma).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110] [samavAyAGgasUtra 251-nAmakamme vAyAlIsavihe paNNatte, taM jahA-gainAme 1,
jAinAme 2, sarIranAme 3, sarIraMgovaMgA nAme 4, sarIrabaMdhaNanAme 5,
sarIrasaMghAyaNanAme 6, saMghayaNanAme 7, saMThANanAme 8, vaNNanAme 9,
gaMdhanAme 10, rasanAme 11, phAsanAme 12, agurulahuyanAme 13, uvaghAyanAme 14,
parAghAyanAme 15, ANupuvvInAme 16, ussAsanAme 17, AyavanAme 18, ujjoyanAme 19,
vihagagainAme 20, tasanAme 21, thAvaranAme 22, sahamanAme 23, bAyaranAme 24,
pajjattaname 25. apajjattanAme 26, sAhAraNasarIranAme 27, patteyasarIranAme 28,
thiranAme 29, athiranAme 30, subhanAme 31, asubhanAme 32, subhaganAme 33,
dubbhaganAme 34, sussaranAme 35. dussaranAme 36, AejjanAme 37, aNAejjanAme 38,
jasokittinAme 39, ajasokittinAme 40, nimmANanAme 41, titthakaranAme 42 /  /
nAmakarma bayAlIsa prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaise-1. gatinAma, 2. jAtinAma, 3.
zarIranAma, 4. zarIrAGgopAGganAma,5.zarIrabandhananAma,
6.zarIrasaMghAtananAma,7.saMhanananAma,8.saMsthAnanAma,9. varNanAma,
10.gandhanAma, 11. rasanAma, 12.sparzanAma,13. agurulaghunAma, 14. upaghAtanAma,
15. parAghAtanAma,16. AnupUrvInAma, 17. ucchvAsanAma, 18. AtapanAma, 19.
udyotanAma, 20.vihAyogatinAma, 21. vasanAma, 22. sthAvaranAAma, 23.sUkSmanAma,
24. bAdaranAma, 25. paryAptanAma, 26.aparyAptanAma, 27.sAdhAraNazarIranAma, 28.
pratyekazarIranAma, 29. sthiranAma, 30. asthiranAma, 31. zubhanAma, 32.
azubhanAma, 33. subhaganAma, 34. durbhaganAma, 35. susvaranAma, 36.
duHsvaranAma, 37. AdeyanAma, 38. anAdeyanAma, 39. yazaskIrttinAma, 40.
ayazaskIrtinAma, 41. nirmANanAma aura 42. tiirthNkrnaam| 252-lavaNe NaM samudde
vAyAlIsaM nAgasAhassIo abhitariyaM velaM dhaarNti| lavaNasamudra kI bhItarI velA
ko bayAlIsa hajAra nAga dhAraNa karate haiN| . 253-mahAliyAe NaM
vimANapavibhattIe vitie vagge vAyAlIsaM uddesaNakAlA pnnnnttaa| mahAlikA
vimAnapravibhakti ke dUsare varga meM bayAlIsa uddezana kAla kahe gaye haiN|
254-egamegAe osappiNIe paMcama-chaTThao samAo vAyAlIsaM vAsasahassAiM kAleNaM
pnnnnttaao| egamegAe ussappiNIe paDhama-bIyAo samAo vAyAlIsaM vAsasahassAI
kAleNaM pnnnnttaao| pratyeka avasarpiNI kAla kA pA~cavA chaThA ArA (donoM mila
kara) bayAlIsa hajAra varSa kA kahA gayA hai| pratyeka utsarpiNI kAla kA pahilA-
dUsarA ArA bayAlIsa hajAra varSa kA kahA gayA hai|  //  dvicatvAriMzatsthAnaka
samavAya samApta  //  tricatvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya 255-teyAlIsaM
kammavivAgajjhayaNA pnnnnttaa| karmavipAka sUtra (karmoM kA zubhAzubha phala
batalAnevAle adhyayana) ke teyAlIsa adhyayana kahe gaye

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Forty-five **sthānakas**  **256** - In the first, fourth, and fifth
**pṛthvī**, forty-three lakh **nāraka-āvāsa** are said to exist. From the
eastern **jagatī** of the **jambūdvīpa** to the western end of the **goṣṭhūbha**
**āvāsa** mountain, without any obstacle or interruption, forty-three thousand
**yojana** are said to be the distance. Similarly, it should be known in all
four directions. Notably, in the south is the **dakbhāsa**, in the west is the
**śaṅkha** **āvāsa** mountain, and in the north is the **dakśīma** **āvāsa**
mountain.  **257** - In the third category of the **mahālikā** **vimāna**
division, forty-three **uddeśana** times are said to exist.  **|| Tri-
catvāriṁśat-sthānakasamavāya samāpta ||**  ## Forty-six **sthānakas**  **258** -
Forty-four **ṛṣibhāṣita** **adhyayana** are said to exist, which have been
spoken by the **ṛṣis** who have fallen from the **devaloka**.  **259** - After
the **vimala** **arhat**, forty-four **puruṣayuga** (generations) have
successively attained **siddhā**hood, **buddha**hood, freedom from **karma**,
**parinirvāṇa**, and freedom from all suffering.  **260** - Forty lakh
**bhavanāvāsa** are said to exist for **dharaṇa**, the **nāgendra**, and the
**nāgarāja**.  **261** - In the fourth category of the **mahālikā** **vimāna**
division, forty-four **uddeśana** times are said to exist.  **|| Catuḥ-
catvāriṁśat-sthānakasamavāya samāpta ||**  ## Forty-seven **sthānakas**  **262**
- The **samayakṣetra** (two and a half **dvīpa**) is said to be forty-five lakh
**yojana** long and wide. Similarly, the **nara** on the border is said to be
forty-five lakh **yojana** long and wide. Similarly, in the **uḍu-vimāna**, the
**pṛthvī**, and so on. The **īśiprabhāra** is also the same.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcacatvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [111 256-paDhama-cauttha-paMcamAsu puDhavIsu
teyAlIsaM nirayAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| jaMbuddIvassa NaM dIvassa
puracchimillAo caramaMtAo gothUbhassa NaM AvAsapavvayassa paccacchimille
caramaMte esa NaM teyAlIsaM joyaNasahassAI abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| evaM
cauddisiM pi dagabhAse saMkhe dysiime| pahalI, cauthI aura pAMcavI pRthivI meM
teyAlIsa (30+10+3=43) lAkha nArakAvAsa kahe gaye haiM  /  jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa
dvIpa ke pUrva jagatI ke caramAnta se gostUbha AvAsa parvata kA pazcimI
caramAnta kA binA kisI bAdhA yA vyavadhAna ke teyAlIsa hajAra yojana antara kahA
gayA hai| isI prakAra cAroM hI dizAoM meM jAnanA caahie| vizeSatA yaha hai ki
dakSiNa meM dakabhAsa, pazcima dizA meM zaMkha avAsa parvata haiM aura uttara
dizA meM dakasIma AvAsa parvata haiN| 257-mahAliyAe NaM vimANapavibhattIe taie
vagge teyAlIsaM uddesaNakAlA pnnnnttaa| mahAlikA vimAnapravibhakti ke tIsare
varga meM teyAlIsa uddezana kAla kahe gaye haiN|  //  tricatvAriMzatsthAnaka
samavAya samApta  //  catuzcatvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya 258-coyAlIsaM ajjhayaNA
isibhAsiyA diyalogacuyA bhAsiyA pnnnnttaa| cavAlIsa RSibhAsita adhyayana kahe
gaye haiM, jinheM devaloka se cyuta hue RSiyoM ne kahA hai| 259-vimalassa NaM
arahao NaM cauAlIsaM purisajugAiM aNupiDhei siddhAiM jAva svvdukkhpphiinnaaii|
vimala arhat ke bAda cavAlIsa puruSayuga (pIDhI) anukrama se eka ke pIche eka
siddha, buddha, karmoM se mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta aura sarva du:khoM se
rahita hue| 260-dharaNassa NaM nAgiMdassa nAgaraNNo coyAlIsaM
bhavaNAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| nAgendra, nAgarAja dharaNa ke cavAlIsa lAkha
bhavanAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| 261-mahAliyAe NaM vimANapavibhattIe cautthe vagge
coyAlIsaM uddesaNakAlA pnnnnttaa| mahAlikA vimAnapravibhakti ke caturtha varga
meM cavAlIsa uddezana kAla kahe gaye haiN| ||ctushctvaariNshtsthaank samavAya
samApta  //  paJcacatvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya 262-samayakkhette NaM paNayAlIsaM
joyaNasayasahassAiM AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte| sImaMtae NaM narae paNayAlIsaM
joyaNasayasahassAiM AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte| evaM uDuvimANe vi| IsipabbhArA
NaM puDhavI evaM cev| samaya kSetra (ar3hAI dvIpa) paiMtAlIsa lAkha yojana
lambA-caur3A kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra Rtu

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Samvayanga Sutra (Uddhu)  **112]** The **Soudharma-Ishana Deva Lok** (the
first path in the Siddha-sthana) is known to be forty-five lakh yojanas wide.
The **Eshaspragbhara Prithvi** (the Siddha-sthana) is also forty-five lakh
yojanas wide.  **263** - The **Dharma Arhat** was forty-five dhanus high.
**264** - The **Mandara Parvata** is said to be forty-five thousand yojanas away
from the inner circumference of the **Lavana Samudra** in all four directions,
without any obstruction.  **Explanation:** Jambudvipa is one lakh yojanas wide.
The Mandara Parvata is ten thousand yojanas wide on the surface of the earth.
Subtracting ten thousand yojanas from one lakh leaves ninety thousand yojanas.
Half of that is forty-five thousand. Therefore, the **Lavana Samudra**'s
platform is found at a distance of forty-five thousand yojanas from the Mandara
Parvata in all four directions.  **265** - All **Dvyardha Kshetriya Nakshatras**
have, do, and will join with the moon for forty-five muhurtas.  **The three
Uttarai, Punarvasu, Rohini, and Visakha, these six Nakshatras are said to be in
conjunction with the moon for forty-five muhurtas.**  **Explanation:** The
moon's thirty muhurta-long area is called **Samakshetra**. Its double, forty-
five muhurta-long area, is called **Dvyardha Kshetriya**.  **266** - Forty-five
**Uddesanas** are mentioned in the fifth section of the **Mahalika Vimana
Pravibhakti Sutra**.  **Panchachatvarinshat Sthanak Samavay Sampt**
**Shatchatvarinshat Sthanak - Samavay**  **267** - Thirty-six **Matrukapada**
are mentioned in the twelfth **Drishtivayas Anga**. Thirty-six **Matru-Akshara**
are mentioned in the **Brahmi Lipi**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112] [ samavAyAGgasUtra (uDDu) (saudharma - IzAna deva loka meM prathama
pAthar3e meM cAra vimAnAvalikAoM ke madhyabhAga meM rahA huA gola vimAna) aura
ISatprAgbhArA pRthivI (siddhisthAna) bhI paiMtAlIsa - paiMtAlIsa lAkha yojana
vistRta jAnanA cAhie  /  263 - dhamme NaM arahA paNayAlIsaM dhaNUiM uDDhaM
uccatteNaM hotthaa| dharma arhat paiMtAlIsa dhanuSa UMce the| 264-madaMrassa NaM
pavvayassa cauddisiM pi paNayAlIsaM paNayAlIsaM joyaNasahassAI abAhAe aMtare
paNNatte  /  mandara parvata kI cAroM hI dizAoM meM lavaNasamudra kI bhItarI
paridhi kI apekSA paiMtAlIsa hajAra yojana antara binA kisI bAdhA ke kahA gayA
hai| vivecana - jambUdvIpa eka lAkha yojana vistRta hai  /  tathA mandara
parvata dharaNItala para daza hajAra yojana vistRta hai  /  eka lAkha meM se
daza hajAra yojana ghaTAne para nabbai hajAra yojana zeSa rahate haiN| usake
Adhe paiMtAlIsa hajAra hote haiM  /  ataH mandara parvata se cAroM hI dizAoM meM
lavaNasamudra kI vedikA paiMtAlIsa hajAra yojana ke antarAla para pAI jAtI hai
/  265 - savve vi NaM divaDDhakhettiyA nakkhattA paNayAlIsaM muhutte caMdeNa
saddhiM jogaM joiMsu vA, joiMti vA, joissaMti vA  /  tinneva uttarAI puNavvasU
rohiNI visAhA ya  /  ee cha nakkhattA paNayAlamuhuttasaMjogA  //  1  //  sabhI
dvyardha kSetrIya nakSatroM ne paiMtAlIsa muhUrta taka candramA ke sAtha yoga
kiyA hai, yoga karate haiM aura yoga kreNge| tInoM uttarA, punarvasu, rohiNI
aura vizAkhA ye chaha nakSatra paitAlIsa muhUrta taka candra ke sAtha saMyoga
vAle kahe gaye haiM  /  vivaraNa - candramA kA tIsa muhUrta bhogya kSetra
samakSetra kahalAtA hai| usake DyoDhe paiMtAlIsa muhUrta bhogya kSetra ko
dvyardhakSetrIya kahate haiM  /  266 - mahAliyAe vimANapavibhattIe paMcame vagge
paNayAlIsaM uddesaNakAlA paNNattA  /  mahAlikA vimAnapravibhakti sUtra ke
pA~caveM varga meM paiMtAlIsa uddezana kahe gaye haiM  /   //
paMcacatvAriMzatsthAnaka samavAya samApta  //  SaTcatvAriMzatsthAnaka - samavAya
267 - diTThivAyassa NaM chAyAlIsaM mAuyApayA paNNattA  /  baMbhIe NaM livIe
chAyAlIsaM mAuyakkharA paNNattA  /  bArahaveM dRSTivAda aMga ke chiyAlIsa
mAtRkApada kahe gaye haiM  /  brAhmI lipi ke chayAlIsa mAtR-akSara

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Forty-eight Stana-Samavaya] [113] It has been said. [Discussion] Out of sixteen
vowels, excluding ऋ, ऋल, लू, the remaining twelve vowels, twenty-five consonants
starting from क वर्ग, य, र, ल, व these four semi-vowels, श, ष, स, ह these four
aspirated sounds and ह, these forty-six letters are found in the Brahmi script.
[268] Forty-six lakh Bhavana-avasas of the Vayu-kumara-indra Prabhanjan have
been stated. || Forty-eight Stana Samavaya ends || [Forty-seven Stana-Samavaya]
[269] When the Sun traverses the innermost circle, then for a human being in
this Bharat-kshetra, the Sun becomes visible at a distance of forty-seven
thousand two hundred sixty-six yojanas and twenty-one parts of a yojana. [270]
The Agni-bhuta sthavira, having lived in a house for forty-seven years, became a
monk after getting his head shaved. || Forty-seven Stana Samavaya ends ||
[Forty-eight Stana-Samavaya] [271] Forty-eight thousand cities have been stated
for each Chatur-anta Chakravarti king. [272] There were forty-eight ganas and
forty-eight gana-dharas of the Dharma Arhat. [273] The Sun-mandala has been
stated to be forty-eight parts out of sixty-one parts of a yojana in diameter.
|| Forty-eight Stana Samavaya ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTacatvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [113 kahe gaye haiN| vivecana-solaha svaroM
meM se R Rla lU ina cAra ko chor3a kara zeSa bAraha svara, kavargAdi paccIsa
vyaMjana, ya ra la va ye cAra antaHstha, za, Sa, sa, ha ye cAra USma varNa aura
ha ye chiyAlIsa hI akSara brAhmI lipi meM hote haiN| 268-pabhaMjaNassa Na
vAukamAriMdassa chAyAlIsaM bhavaNAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| vAyukumArendra
prabhaMjana ke chiyAlIsa lAkha bhavanAvAsa kahe gaye haiN|
||ssttctvaariNshtsthaank samavAya samApta  //  saptacatvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya
269-jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhitaramaMDalaM uvasaMkamittA NaM cAraM carai tayA NaM
ihagayassa maNussassa sattacattAlIsaM joyaNasahassehiM dAhi ya tevaDhehiM
joyaNasaehiM ekkavIsAe yasaTThibhAgehiM joyaNassa sUrie cakkhuphAsaM
hvvmaagcchi| jaba sUrya sabase bhItarI maNDala meM Akara saMcAra karatA hai,
taba isa bharatakSetragata manuSya ko saiMtAlIsa hajAra do sau tiresaTha yojana
aura eka yojana ke sATha bhAgoM meM ikkIsa bhAga kI dUrI se sUrya dRSTigocara
hotA hai| _ 270-there NaM aggabhUI sattacattAlIsaM vAsAiM agAramajhe vasittA
muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvie| agnibhUti sthavira saiMtAlIsa varSa
gRhavAsa meM raha kara muMDita ho agAra se anagAritA meM pravrajita hue|
||sptctvaariNshtsthaank samavAya smaapt| aSTacatvAriMzatsthAnaka-samavAya
271-egemegassa NaM ranno cAuraMtacakkavaTTissa aDayAlIsaM paTTaNasahassA
pnnnnttaa| pratyeka cAturanta cakravartI rAjA ke ar3atAlIsa hajAra paTTaNa kahe
gaye haiN| 272-dhammassa NaM arahao aDayAlIsaM gaNA, aDayAlIsaM gaNaharA
hotthaa| dharma arhat ke ar3atAlIsa gaNa aura aDatAlIsa gaNadhara the| 273
-sUramaMDale Na aDayAlIsaM ekasaTThibhAge joyaNassa vikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte|
sUryamaNDala eka yojana ke ikasaTha bhAgoM meM se ar3atAlIsa bhAga-pramANa
vistAra vAlA kahA gayA ||assttctvaariNshtsthaank samavAya smaapt||

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[114] The **Sapta-Saptamika Bhikṣu-Pratima** is honored for seventy-seven days
with one hundred and ninety-six **Bhikṣās** according to the **Sūtra** and the
**Mārga** [according to the **Kalpa**, according to the **Tattva**, properly
with the body, touching, protecting, purifying, crossing, **Kīrban** making,
obeying the command, following]. _Explanation: The **Sapta-Saptamika Bhikṣu-
Pratima** is the special **Abhigṛha** that is honored for seven weeks of seven
days each. The method of its performance has been described by the Sanskrit
commentator in two ways. According to the first method, in the first week, there
are twenty-eight **Bhikṣās** with an increase of one **Bhikṣā** each day.
Similarly, in the second and subsequent weeks, there are one hundred and ninety-
six **Bhikṣās** with an increase of one **Bhikṣā** each day. Or, in the first
week, one **Bhikṣā** is taken each day. In the second week, two **Bhikṣās** are
taken each day. In this way, with an increase of one **Bhikṣā** each week, the
total number of **Bhikṣās** for all seven weeks becomes one hundred and ninety-
six (7+14+21+28+35+42+49=196)._ [275] In **Deva-Kuru** and **Uttara-Kuru**,
humans attain full youth in forty-nine days and nights. [276] The **Tridriya**
beings are said to have a lifespan of forty-nine days and nights. _End of the
**Ekonapancāśat-Sthānaka-Samvāya**._ [277] There were fifty thousand **Āryikās**
in the **Sangha** of **Muni-Suvrat** **Arhat**. **Ananta-Nātha** **Arhat** was
fifty **dhanus** tall. **Purusa-Uttama** **Vasudeva** was fifty **dhanus** tall.
[278] All the **Dīrgh-Vaidḍha** mountains are said to be fifty **yojanas** in
diameter at their base.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 114] [samavAyAGgasUtra ekonapaJcAzatsthAnaka-samavAya 274-satta-sattamiyAe NaM
bhikkhupaDimAe egUNapannAe rAiMdiehiM channauibhikkhAsaeNaM ahAsuttaM jAva [
ahAkappaM ahAtaccaM sammaM kAeNa phAsittA pAlittA sohittA tIrittA kiTTittA ANAe
aNupAlittA] ArAhiyA bhvi| _ sapta-saptamikA bhikSupratimA unacAsa rAtri-divasoM
se aura eka sau chiyAnavai bhikSAoM se yathAsUtra yathAmArga se [yathAkalpa se,
yathAtattva se, samyak prakAra kAya se sparza kara pAla kara, zodhana kara, pAra
kara, kIrbana kara AjJA se anupAlana kara] ArAdhita hotI hai| vivecana-sAta-sAta
dina ke sAta saptAha jisa abhigraha-vizeSa kI ArAdhanA meM lagate haiM, use
sapta-saptamikA bhikSu pratimA kahate haiM  /  usakI vidhi saMskRtaTIkAkAra ne
do prakAra se kahI hai| prathama prakAra ke anusAra prathama saptAha meM
pratidina eka-eka bhikSAdatti kI vRddhi se aTThAIsa bhikSAeM hotI haiN| isI
prakAra dvitIyAdi saptAha meM bhI pratidina eka-eka bhikSAdatti kI vRddhi se
saba eka sau chiyAnavai bhikSAeM hotI haiN| athavA prathama saptAha ke sAtoM
dinoM meM eka-eka bhikSAdatti grahaNa karate haiN| dUsare saptAha ke sAtoM dinoM
meM do-do bhikSAdatti grahaNa karate haiM  /  isa prakAra pratisaptAha eka-eka
bhikSAdatti ke bar3hane se sAtoM saptAhoM kI samasta bhikSAeM eka sau chiyAnavai
(7+14+21+28+35+42+49=196) ho jAtI haiN| 275-devakuru-uttarakuruesuNaM maNuyA
egUNapaNNAsa-rAiMdiehiM saMpannajovvaNA bhvNti| devakuru ora uttarakuru meM
manuSya unaMcAsa rAta-dinoM meM pUrNa yauvana se sampanna ho jAte haiN| 276 -
teiMdiyANaM ukkoseNaM egUNapaNNaM rAiMdiyA tthiii| trIndriya jIvoM kI utkRSTa
sthiti unacAsa rAta-dina kI kahI gaI hai|  //  ekonapaMcAzatsthAnaka samavAya
smaapt| paJcAzatsthAnaka-samavAya 277-muNisuvvayassa NaM arahao paMcAsaM
ajjiyAsAhassIo hotthaa| aNaMte NaM arahA pannAsaM dhaNUI ur3e uccatteNaM
hotthaa| purisuttame NaM vAsudeve pannAsaM dhaNUI ur3e uccatteNaM hotthaa|
munisuvrata arhat ke saMgha meM pacAsa hajAra AryikAeM thiiN| anantanAtha arhat
pacAsa dhanuSa UMce the| puruSottama vAsudeva pacAsa dhanuSa UMce the| 278-savve
vi NaM dIhaveyaDDA mUle pannAsaM pannAsaM joyaNANi vikkhaMbheNaM pnnnnttaa|
sabhI dIrgha vaitADhya parvata mUla meM pacAsa yojana vistAra vAle kahe gaye
haiN|

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifty-Second Stana - Samavaya [115 279 – In the Lantaka Kalpa, fifty thousand
Vimanas (aerial vehicles) and their abodes are said to exist. All the Timisra
caves and the Khanda-Prapaata caves are said to be fifty yojanas long. All the
Kanchana mountains are said to be fifty yojanas wide at their peak. || Fifty-
Second Stana Samavaya Ends ||  ## Fifty-First Stana - Samavaya 280 - The eleven
Brahmacharayas are said to have fifty-one periods of study. Explanation - The
study of weapons, knowledge of scriptures, etc., which are mentioned in the
first Shruta Skandha of the Acharanga, are known as Brahmacharayas. There are
fifty-one such studies, hence their periods of study are also said to be fifty-
one. 281 - The assembly of Sudharma, the king of the Asuras, Chamaras, is said
to be made up of fifty-one hundred (5100) pillars. Similarly, the assembly of
Bali should also be known. 282 - Su-Prabha, the Balideva, lived for fifty-one
thousand years, attained Siddhi, became a Buddha, attained liberation, attained
Nirvana, and was free from all suffering. 283 – The two karmas, Darshanavarana
and Nama karma, are said to have fifty-one Uttar Karma-Pragatis (9 + 42 = 51).
|| Fifty-First Stana Samavaya Ends ||  ## Fifty-Second Stana - Samavaya - 284 -
The karma of Mohaniya is said to have fifty-two types of names and forms. They
are as follows: - Anger, rage, hatred, malice, resentment, agitation, quarrel,
cruelty, dispute, marriage (10), pride, intoxication, arrogance, stubbornness,
self-conceit, arrogance, disrespect for others, disrespect for others (insult)
(20), pride, deceit, flattery, deceit, force, capture, deception, trickery,
hypocrisy (30), deceit, treachery, slander, slander, deception, cheating,
betrayal, conspiracy,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvipaJcAzatsthAnaka - samavAya ] [ 115 279 - laMtae kappe pannAsaM
vimANAvAsasahassA paNNattA  /  savvAo NaM timissaguhAkhaMDagappavAyaguhAo
pannAsaM pannAsaM joyaNAiM AyAmeNaM paNNattAo  /  savve vi NaM kaMcaNagapavvayA
siharatale pannAsaM pannAsaM joyaNAiM vikkhaMbheNaM paNNattA  /  lAntaka kalpa
meM pacAsa hajAra vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| sabhI timisra guphAeM aura khaNDa-
prapAta guphAeM pacAsa-pacAsa yojana lambI kahI gaI haiN| sabhI kAMcana parvata
zikharatala para pacAsa-pacAsa yojana vistAra vAle kahe gaye haiM  /   //
paJcAzatsthAnaka samavAya samApta  //  ekapaJcAzatsthAnaka - samavAya 280 -
navahaM baMbhacerANaM ekAvannaM uddesaNakAlA paNNattA  /  navoM brahmacaryoM ke
ikyAvana uddezana kAla kahe gaye haiM  /  vivecana - AcArAGga ke prathama
zrutaskandha ke zastraparijJA Adi adhyayana brahmacarya ke nAma se prakhyAta
haiM, unake adhyayana ikyAvana haiM, ataH unake uddezanakAla bhI ikyAvana hI
kahe gaye haiM  /  281 - camarassa NaM asuriMdassa asuraranno sabhA sudhammA
ekAvannakhaMbhasayasaMniviTThA paNNattA  /  evaM ceva balissa vi  /  asurendra
asurarAja camara kI sudharmA sabhA ikyAvana sau (5100) khambhoM se racita hai|
isI prakAra bali kI sabhA bhI jAnanA caahie| 282 - suppabhe NaM baladeve
ekAvannaM vAsasayasahassAiM paramAuM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva
svvdukkhpphiinne| suprabha baladeva ikyAvana hajAra varSa kI paramAyu kA pAlana
kara siddha, buddha, mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se rahita
hue  /  283-daMsaNAvaraNa-nAmANaM doNhaM kammANaM ekAvannaM uttarakammapagaDIo
pnnnnttaao| darzanAvaraNa aura nAma karma ina donoM karmoM kI (9 + 42 = 51 )
ikyAvana uttara karmaprakRtiyAM kahI gaI haiN|  //  ekapaJcAzatsthAnaka samavAya
samApta  //  dvipaJcAzatsthAnaka - samavAya - 284 - mohaNijjassa NaM kammassa
vAvannaM nAmadhejjA paNNattA  /  taM jahA - kohe kove rose dose akhamA saMjalaNe
kalahe caMDikke bhaMDaNe vivAe 10, mANe made dappe thaMbhe attakkose gavve
paraparivAra avakkose (paribhave ) unnae 20, unnAme mAyA uvahI niyaDI valae
gahaNe NUme kakke kurue daMbhe 30, kUDe jimhe kivvise aNAyaraNayA gRhaNayA
vaMcaNayA palikuMcaNayA sAtijoge

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [116] The fifty-two names of mohaniya karma are as follows: 1. Krodha, 2.
Kopa, 3. Rosha, 4. Dvesha, 5. Akshama, 6. Sanjwalan, 7. Kalha, 8. Chandikya, 9.
Bhandan, 10. Vivad, these ten are the names of krodha-kashaya. 11. Man, 12. Mad,
13. Darpa, 14. Stambh, 15. Atmotkarsha, 16. Garva, 17. Paraparivad, 18.
Apkarsha, [19. Paribhava] 20. Unnat, 21. Unnam; these eleven are the names of
man-kashaya. 22. Maya, 23. Upadhi, 24. Nikriti, 25. Valaya, 26. Gahan, 27.
Nyavam, 28. Kalk, 29. Kuruk, 30. Dambha, 31. Kutta, 32. Jimha, 33. Kilvish, 34.
Anacharanata, 35. Guhanata, 36. Vanchanata, 37. Palikunchnata, 38. Satiyog;
these seventeen are the names of maya-kashaya. 39. Lobha, 40. Iccha, 41.
Murchha, 42. Kanksha, 43. Gadhi, 44. Trishna, 45. Bhidhya, 46. Abhidhya, 47.
Kamasha, 48. Bhogasha, 49. Jivitasha, 50. Maranasha, 51. Nandi, 52. Raga; these
fourteen are the names of lobha-kashaya. In this way, the names of all four
kashyas combined [10+11+17+14=52] become the fifty-two names of mohaniya karma.
## [285] The distance between the easternmost end of the Gostubha Avasa Parvata
and the westernmost end of the Vadvamukh Mahapatala, without any obstruction, is
said to be fifty-two thousand yojanas. Similarly, the distance between the
Ketuk, the Shankha-shaped Jupka, and the Dakshima, the Ishvara, all located
within the Lavanasamudra, should also be known.  ## [286] The fifty-two
Uttaraprakritis of the three karma-prakritis, namely Jnanavaraneya, Nama, and
Antaraya, are as follows: [5+42+5=52].  ## [287] In the three kalpas, namely
Saudharma, Sanatkumara, and Mahendra, there are fifty-two lakh Vimana-avasa
[32+12+8=52].  ## Dwipanchashatasthanaka Samavaya Samapt.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 116] [samavAyAGgasUtra lobhe icchA 40; mucchA kaMkhA gehI tiNhA bhijjA abhijjA
kAmAsA bhogAsA jIviyAsA maraNAsA 50, nandI rAge 52 /  mohanIya karma ke bAvana
nAma kahe gaye haiM, jaise-1. krodha, 2. kopa, 3. roSa, 4. dveSa, 5. akSamA,
6.saMjvalana, 7. kalaha, 8. caMDikya, 9. bhaMDana, 10. vivAda, ye daza krodha-
kaSAya ke nAma haiM  /  11. mAna, 12. mada, 13. darpa, 14. stambha, 15.
AtmotkarSa, 16. garva, 17. paraparivAda, 18. apakarSa, [19. paribhava] 20.
unnata, 21. unnAma; ye gyAraha nAma mAna kaSAya ke haiM  /  22. mAyA, 23.
upAdhi, 24. nikRti, 25. valaya, 26. gahana, 27. nyavama, 28. kalka, 29. kuruka,
30. daMbha, 31. kUTa, 32. jimha 33. kilviSa, 34. anAcaraNatA, 35. gUhanatA, 36.
vaMcanatA, 37. palikuMcanatA, 38. sAtiyoga; ye sattaraha nAma mAyA-kaSAya ke
haiN| 39. lobha, 40. icchA, 41. mUrchA, 42. kAMkSA, 43. gaddhi, 44. tRSNA, 45.
bhidhyA, 45. abhidhyA, 47. kAmAzA, 48. bhogAzA, 49. jIvitAzA, 40. maraNAzA, 51.
nandI, 52. rAga; ye caudaha nAma lobha-kaSAya ke haiN| isI prakAra cAroM kaSAyoM
ke nAma mila kara [10+11+17+14-52] bAvana mohanIya karma ke nAma ho jAte haiN|
285-gothubhassa NaM AvAsapavvayassa puracchimillAo caramaMtAo valayAmuhassa
mahApAyAlassa paccacchille caramaMte, esa NaM vAvannaM joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe
aMtare pnnnntte| evaM dagabhAsassa NaM keugassa saMkhassa jUyagassa dagasImassa
iisrss| gostabha AvAsa parvata kepUrvI caramAnta bhAga se vaDavAmakha mahApAtAla
kA prazcimI caramAnta bAdhA ke binA bAvana hajAra yojana antara vAlA kahA gayA
hai| isI prakAra lavaNasamudra ke bhItara avasthita dakabhAsa ketuka kA zaMkha
nAmaka jUpaka kA aura dakasIma nAmaka Izvara kA, ina cAroM mahApAtala kalazoM kA
bhI antara jAnanA caahie| vivecana-lavaNasamudra do lAkha yojana vistRta hai|
usameM paMcAnavai hajAra yojana Age jAkara pUrvAdi cAroM dizAoM meM cAra
mahApAtAla kalaza haiM, unake nAma krama se var3avAmukha, ketuka, jUpaka aura
Izvara haiN| jambUdvIpa kI vedikA ke anta se bayAlIsa hajAra yojana bhItara
jAkara eka hajAra yojana ke vistAra vAle gostUbha Adi velandhara nAgarAjoM ke
cAra AvAsa parvata haiN| isalie paMcAnavai hajAra meM se bayAlIsa hajAra yojana
kama kara dene para unake bIca meM bAvana hajAra yojanoM kA antara raha jAtA
hai| yahI bAta isa sUtra meM kahI gaI hai| 286-nANAvaraNijassa nAmassa
aMtarAyassa etesi NaM tiNhaM kammapagaDINaM bAvannaM uttarapayaDIo pnnnnttaao|
jJAnAvaraNIya, nAma aura antarAya ina tInoM karmaprakRtiyoM kI uttaraprakRtiyAM
bAvana (5+42+5=52) kahI gaI haiN| 287-sohamma-saNaMkumAra-
mAhiMdesutisukappesuvAvannaM vimANAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| saudharma,
sanatkumAra aura mAhendra ina tIna kalpoM meM (32+12+8=52) bAvana lAkha
vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| dvipaJcAzatsthAnaka samavAya smaapt|

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ Forty-five Stana-Samavaya ] Thirty-five Stana-Samavaya 288 - The Jivas of
Devakuru and Uttar Kuru are said to be thirty-three thousand yojanas long. The
Jivas of Mahahimalaya and Rukmini Varshadhara mountains are said to be thirty-
three thousand nine hundred and thirty-one yojanas and six parts of nineteen
parts of a yojana long. [ 117 The Jivas of Devakuru and Uttar Kuru are said to
be thirty-three thousand yojanas long. The Jivas of Mahahimalaya and Rukmini
Varshadhara mountains are said to be thirty-three thousand nine hundred and
thirty-one yojanas and six parts of nineteen parts of a yojana long. 289 – The
Tirthankara Bhagavan Mahavira, after spending thirty-three years as an ascetic,
was born in the five Anuttara Mahavimanas, which are vast and extremely
comfortable, in the form of a deva. The Tirthankara Bhagavan Mahavira, after
spending thirty-three years as an ascetic, was born in the five Anuttara
Mahavimanas, which are vast and extremely comfortable, in the form of a deva.
290 - The Sammucchima Uraprasarpa Jivas are said to have a lifespan of thirty-
three thousand years. The Sammucchima Uraprasarpa Jivas are said to have a
lifespan of thirty-three thousand years. || Thirty-five Stana Samavaya ends ||
Forty-five Stana-Samavaya 291 – In the Bharat and Airavata Kshetras, in each
Utsarpini and Avasarpini Kalpa, fifty-four Uttama Purushas are born, are being
born, and will be born, such as - twenty-four Tirthankaras, twelve Chakravartis,
nine Baladevas, and nine Vasudevas (24+12+9+9=54). In the Bharat and Airavata
Kshetras, in each Utsarpini and Avasarpini Kalpa, fifty-four Uttama Purushas are
born, are being born, and will be born, such as - twenty-four Tirthankaras,
twelve Chakravartis, nine Baladevas, and nine Vasudevas (24+12+9+9=54). 292 –
The Arhat Arishthanemi, after spending fifty-four nights and days in the state
of a disguised ascetic, became a Kevali, Sarvagna, Sarvabhavadarsi, and a Jina.
The Arhat Arishthanemi, after spending fifty-four nights and days in the state
of a disguised ascetic, became a Kevali, Sarvagna, Sarvabhavadarsi, and a Jina.
The Tirthankara Bhagavan Mahavira, while sitting on one seat, gave discourses in
response to fifty-four questions in one day. The Tirthankara Bhagavan Mahavira,
while sitting on one seat, gave discourses in response to fifty-four questions
in one day. Ananta Arhat had fifty-four ganas and fifty-four ganadharas. Ananta
Arhat had fifty-four ganas and fifty-four ganadharas. || Forty-five Stana
Samavaya ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 catuHpaJcAzatsthAnaka-samavAya ] tripaJcAzatsthAnaka - samavAya 288 - devakuru-
uttarakuruyAo NaM jIvAo tevannaM tevannaM joyaNasahassAiM sAiregAiM AyAmeNaM
pnnnnttaao| mahAhimavaMta - ruppINaM vAsaharapavvayANaM jIvAo tevannaM tevannaM
joyaNasahassAiM nava ya egattIse joyaNasae chacca egUNavIsaIbhAge joyaNassa
AyAmeNaM pnnnnttaao| [ 117 devakuru aura uttarakuru kI jIvAeM tirepana -
tirepana hajAra yojana se kucha adhika lambI kahI gaI haiM  /  mahAhimavanta
aura rukmI varSadhara parvatoM kI jIvAyeM tirepana - tirepana hajAra nau sau
ikatIsa yojana aura eka yojana ke unnIsa bhAgoM meM se chaha bhAga pramANa lambI
kahI gaI haiN| 289 - samaNassa NaM bhagavao mahAvIrassa tevanaM aNagArA
saMvaccharapariyAyA paMcasu aNuttareNu mahaMimahAlaesu mahAvimANesu devattAe
uvavannA  /  zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke tirepana anagAra eka varSa
zramaNaparyAya pAlakara mahAn vistIrNa evaM atyanta sukhamaya pAMca anuttara
mahAvimAnoM meM devarUpa meM utpanna hue| 290 - saMmucchimauraparisappANaM
ukkoseNaM tevannaM vAsasahassA ThiI paNNattA  /  sammUcchima uraparisarpa jIvoM
kI utkRSTa sthiti tirepana hajAra varSa kahI gaI hai|  //  tripaJcAzatsthAnaka
samavAya samApta  //  catuHpaJcAzatsthAnaka - samavAya 291 - bharaheraMvaesu NaM
vAsesu egamegAe ussappiNIe osappiNIe cauvannaM cauvannaM uttamapurisA uppajiMsu
vA, upajjaMti vA, uppajjisaMti vA, taM jahA - cauvIsaM titthakarA, bArasa -
cakkavaTTI, nava baladevA, nava vAsudevA  /  bharata aura airavata kSetroM meM
eka eka utsarpiNI aura avasarpiNI kAla meM caupana caupana uttama puruSa utpanna
hue haiM, utpanna hote haiM aura utpanna hoMge, jaise-caubIsa tIrthaMkara,
bAraha cakravartI, nau baladeva aura nau vAsudeva (24+12+9+9=54) /  292 - arahA
NaM ariTThanemI cauvannaM rAiMdiyAI chaumatthapariyAyaM pAuNittA jiNe jAe kevalI
savannU savvabhAvadarisI  /  samaNe NaM bhagavaM mahAvIre egadivaseNaM
eganisijjAe cAuppannAiM vAgaraNAI vAgaritthA  /  anaMtassa NaM arahao caupannaM
[ gaNA caupannaM ] gaNaharA hotthA  /  ariSTanemi arhan caupana rAta-dina
chadmastha zramaNaparyAya pAla kara kevalI, sarvajJa, sarvabhAvadarzI jina hue
/  zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne eka dina meM eka Asana se baiThe hue caupana
praznoM ke uttararUpa vyAkhyAna diye the  /  ananta arhan ke caupana gaNa aura
caupana gaNadhara the  /   //  catuHpaJcAtsthAnaka samavAya samApta  //

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[118] [Samvayanga Sutra Panchapanchashat Sthanak Samvay 293] - Malli Arhan
[Malli is Arhan] lived for fifty-five thousand years, attained Siddha, Buddha,
free from karmas, attained Nirvana and free from all sufferings. [294] - The
distance between the western end of Mandar mountain and the western end of
Vijayadwar on the eastern side is said to be fifty-five thousand yojanas.
Similarly, the distance between the Vijay, Vaijayant, Jayant and Aparajit doors
in all four directions should be known. [295] - The Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, in
the last night, expounded fifty-five studies of the fruits of good deeds and
fifty-five studies of the fruits of bad deeds, attained Siddha, Buddha, free
from karmas, attained Nirvana and free from all sufferings. [296] - In the first
and second of these two earths, fifty-five lakh Narakavasas are said to be.
[297] - Darshanavaranij, Nama and Aayu, these three karma-prakritis are
collectively called fifty-five Uttar-prakritis (9+42+4=55). ||Panchapanchashat
Sthanak Samvay Sampt|| [Shatpanchashat Sthanak Samvay 298] - In this island
called Jambudvipa, fifty-six constellations, with two families of moons
(28+28-56), were, are and will be in conjunction with the moon. [299] - There
were fifty-six ganas and fifty-six ganadharas of the Arhan Vimala.
||Shatpanchashat Sthanak Samvay Sampt||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118] [samavAyAGgasUtra paJcapaJcAzatsthAnaka-samavAya 293-mallissaNaM arahao
[mallI NaM arahA] paNavaNNaM vAsasahassAiM paramAuM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva
svvdukkhphiinne| mallI arhan pacapana hajAra varSa kI paramAyu bhoga kara
siddha, buddha, karmoM se mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se
rahita hue| 294-maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa paJcathimillAo caramaMtAo vijayadArasa
paccasthimille caramaMte esa NaM paNavaNNaM joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare
pnnnntte| evaM cAuddisiM pi vijayavejayaMta-jayaMta-aparAjiyaM ti| mandara
parvata ke pazcima caramAnta bhAga se pUrvI vijayadvAra ke pazcimI caramAnta
bhAga kA antara pacapana hajAra yojana kA kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra cAroM hI
dizAoM meM vijaya, vaijayanta, jayanta aura aparAjita dvAroM kA antara jAnanA
caahie| 295. samaNe NaM bhagavaM mahAvIre aMtimarAiyaMsi paNavaNNaM
ajjhayaNAiMkallANaphalavivAgAI paNavaNNaM ajjhayaNAiM pAvaphalavivAgAiM
vAgarittA siddhe buddhe jAva svvdukkhpphiinne| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra antima
rAtri meM puNya-phala vipAkavAle pacapana aura pApa-phala vipAkavAle pacapana-
adhyayanoM kA pratipAdana karake siddha, buddha, karmoM se mukta, parinirvANa ko
prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue| 296. paDhama-biiyAsu dosu puDhavIsu
paNavaNNaM nirayAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| pahalI aura dUsarI ina do pRthiviyoM
meM pacapana (30+25=55) lAkha nArakavAsa kahe gaye haiN| 297.daMsaNAvaraNijja-
nAmAuyANaM tiNhaM kammapagaDINaM paNavaNNaM uttarapagaDIo pnnnnttaao|
darzanAvaraNIya, nAma aura Ayu ina tIna karmaprakRtiyoM kI milAkara pacapana
uttara prakRtiyAM (9+42+4=55) kahI gaI haiN| ||pnycpnycaashtsthaank samavAya
smaapt| SaTpaJcAzatsthAnaka-samavAya 298.jaMbuddIveNaM dIve chappannaM nakkhattA
caMdeNa saddhiM jogaM joiMsuvA, joiMti vA, joissaMti vaa| jambUdvIpa nAmaka isa
dvIpa meM do candramAoM ke parivAravAle (28+28-56) chappana nakSatra candra ke
sAtha yoga karate the, yoga karate haiM aura yoga kreNge| 299. vimalassa NaM
arahao chappanaM gaNA chappannaM gaNaharA hotthaa| vimala arhat ke chappana gaNa
aura chappana gaNadhara the| ||ssttpnycaashtsthaank samavAya samApta  //

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Eighty-Eight Stand-Points Concordance] [119 Seventy-Five Stand-Points
Concordance] 300.  Seventy-seven studies of the three Ganipitakas are said,
excluding the Acharachoolika, like the nine studies of the first ShrutaSkandha,
excluding the Acharachoolika, the fifteen studies of the second ShrutaSkandha,
the sixteen studies of the first ShrutaSkandha of the second SutraKritanga, the
seven studies of the second ShrutaSkandha, and the ten studies of the
Sthananga, thus a total of (9+15+16+7+10=57) seventy-seven studies are said.
301.  The distance from the eastern end of the Goosthoobha Aavaas Parvat to the
middle of the Bahu Madhyadeshabhaag of the Badvaamukh Mahapaatal is said to be
seventy-seven thousand yojanas without any obstacle. Similarly, the distance of
Dakbhaas and Ketuk, Sankha and Yoopka, and Dakseem and Eeshwar Mahapaatal should
be known. . Discussion - It has been explained earlier that the distance from
the Vedika of Jambudweep to the Goosthoobha Parvat is forty-eight thousand
yojanas. The extent of Goosthoobha is one thousand yojanas, and the distance
between Goosthoobha and Badvaamukh is fifty-two thousand yojanas, and the extent
of Badvaamukh is ten thousand yojanas. Adding half of its extent, five thousand
yojanas, to fifty-two thousand yojanas, the distance of seventy-seven thousand
yojanas from the eastern end of Goosthoobha to the middle of Badvaamukh is
established. Similarly, the distance of the remaining three Mahapaatal Kalashas
can also be calculated. 302.  There were seventy-seven hundred (5700)
Manahparyavagyani Munis in the Sangha of Malli Arhat. The Dhanuprustha of the
Jiwas of the Mahahimavant and Roopin Varshadhar Parvat is said to be seventy-
seven thousand two hundred thirteen yojanas and ten parts out of nineteen parts
of a yojana. || Seventy-Five Stand-Points Concordance Ends || [Eighty-Eight
Stand-Points Concordance] 303.  In the first, second, and fifth of these three
Prithvis, fifty-eight (30+25+3=58) lakh Narakaavaas are said.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTapaJcAzatsthAnaka-samavAya] [119 saptapaJcAzatsthAnaka-samavAya 300.tiNhaM
gaNipiDagANaM AyAracUliyAvajjANaM sattAvannaM ajjhayaNA paNNattA,taM jahAAyAre
sUyagaDe tthaanne| AcAracUlikA ko chor3a kara tIna gaNipiTakoM ke sattAvana
adhyayana kahe gaye haiM, jaise-AcArAGga ke antima nizItha adhyayana ko chor3a
kara prathama zrutaskandha ke nau, dvitIya zrutaskandha ke AcAracUlikA ko
chor3akara pandraha, dUsare sUtrakRtAGga ke prathama zrutaskandha ke solaha,
dvitIya zrutaskandha ke sAta aura sthAnAGga ke daza, isa prakAra sarva
(9+15+16+7+10-57) sattAvana adhyayana kahe gaye haiN| 301. gothUbhassa NaM
AvAsapavvayassa purathimillAo caramaMtAo valayAmuhassa mahApAyAlassa
bahumajjhadesabhAe esa NaM sattAvannaM joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte|
evaM dagabhAgassa keuyassa ya saMkhassa ya jUyassa ya dayasImassa Isarassa y|
gostUbha AvAsa parvata ke pUrvI caramAnta se bar3avAmukha mahApAtala ke bahu
madhya dezabhAga kA binA kisI bAdhA ke sattAvana hajAra yojana antara kahA hai|
isI prakAra dakabhAsa aura ketuka kA, saMkha aura yUpaka kA aura dakasIma tathA
Izvara nAmaka mahApAtAla kA antara jAnanA caahiye| . vivecana- pahale batalA Aye
haiM ki jambUdvIpa kI vedikA se gostUbha parvata kA antara ar3atAlIsa hajAra
yojana hai| gostUbha kA vistAra eka hajAra yojana hai tathA gostUbha aura
bar3avAmukha kA antara bAvana hajAra yojana hai aura bar3avAmukha kA vistAra
daza hajAra yojana hai, usake Adhe pA~ca hajAra yojana ko bAvana hajAra yojana
meM milA dene para sattAvana hajAra yojana kA antara gostUbha ke pUrvI caramAnta
se bar3avAmukha ke madhyabhAga taka kA siddha ho jAtA hai| isI prakAra se zeSa
tInoM mahApAtAla kalazoM kA bhI antara nikala AtA hai| 302. mallissa NaM arahao
sattAvannaM maNapajjavanANisayA hotthaa| mahAhimavaMta-ruppINaM
vAsaharapavvayANaMjIvANaMdhaNupiThaM sattAvannaM sattAvannaM joyaNasahassAiM
donni ya teNaue joyaNasae dasa ya egUNavIsaibhAe joyaNassa parikkheveNaM
pnnnnttN| malli arhat ke saMgha meM sattAvana sau (5700) manaHparyavajJAnI muni
the| mahAhimavanta aura rukmI varSadhara parvata kI jIvAoM kA dhanupRSTha
sattAvana hajAra do sau terAnavai yojana aura eka yojana ke unnIsa bhAgoM meM se
dazabhAga pramANa parikSepa (paridhi) rUpa se kahA gyaa|  //
saptapaJcAzatsthAnaka samavAya smaapt|| aSTapaJcAzatsthAnaka-samavAya 303.
paDhama-docca-paMcamAsu tisu puDhavIsu aTThAvannaM nirayAvAsasayasahassA
pnnnnttaa| pahalI, dUsarI aura pA~cavI ina tIna pRthiviyoM meM aTThAvana
(30+25+3=58) lAkha nArakAvAsa kahe gaye haiN|

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samvayanga Sutra  **304.** The five karma-prakritis (karma-categories) -
jnana-avaran, vedaniya, ayu, nama, and antaraya - have 58 uttaraprakritis
(consequences) as stated. (5+2+4+42+5=58)  **305.** The distance between the
westernmost end of the Gostubha Avasa-parvata (mountain) and the Bahumadhya
(middle) region of the Badvamukha Mahapatala (great hell) is stated to be 58,000
yojanas without any obstruction. Similarly, this should be understood in all
four directions.  **Discussion:** As stated above, the distance between the
Gostubha Avasa-parvata and the middle region of the Badvamukha Mahapatala is
57,000 yojanas. Adding another 1,000 yojanas to this, the total distance becomes
58,000 yojanas. Similarly, the distance of the other three Mahapatalas should be
understood.  **|| Ashtapachashasthana Samvay Sampt ||**  **Ekonashastasthana
Samvay**  **306.** The duration of one Chandra-samvatsara (lunar year) is stated
to be 59 ratri-dina (nights and days) according to the calculation of the
movement of the moon.  **307.** The Sambhava Arhan (the first Tirthankara) lived
in the middle of an agara (house) for 59 lakh purva-sayas (previous years)
before becoming a monk.  **308.** There were 5900 avadhijnani (omniscient) in
the sangha (community) of the Malli Arhan (the second Tirthankara).  **||
Ekonashastasthana Samvay Sampt ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ samavAyAGgasUtra 304. nANAvaraNijjassa- veyaNiya Auya - nAma - aMtarAiyassa
eesi NaM paMcahaM kammapagaDINaM aTThAvanna uttarapagaDIo paNNattao  /  120]
jJAnAvaraNIya, vedanIya, Ayu, nAma aura antarAya ina pAMca karmaprakRtiyoM kI
uttaraprakRtiyAM aTThAvana (5+2+4+42+5=58 ) kahI gaI haiM  /  305 - gothUbhassa
NaM AvAsapavvayassa paccatthimillAo caramaMtAo valayAmuhassa mahApAyAlassa
bahumajjhadesabhAe esa NaM aTThAvannaM joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare paNNatte  /
evaM cauddisaM pineyavvaM  /  gostUbha AvAsaparvata ke pazcimI caramAnta bhAga
se bar3avAmukha mahApAtAla ke bahumadhya dezabhAga kA antara aTThAvana hajAra
binA kisI bAdhA ke kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra cAroM hI dizAoM meM jAnanA caahie|
vivecana - Upara gostUbha AvAsaparvata se bar3avAmukha mahApAtAla ke madhya
bhAga kA sattAvana hajAra yojana antara jisa prakAra se batalAyA gayA hai usameM
eka hajAra yojana aura Age taka kA mApa milAne para aTThAvana hajAra yojana kA
siddha ho jAtA hai| isI prakAra zeSa tIna mahApAtAloM kA bhI antara jAnanA cAhie
/   //  aSTapaJcAzatsthAnaka samavAya samApta  //  ekonaSaSTisthAnaka - samavAya
306 - caMdassa NaM saMvaccharassa egamege uU egUNasaTThi rAiMdiyAiM
rAiMdiyaggeNaM paNNatte  /  candrasaMvatsara (candramA kI gati kI apekSA se mAne
jAne vAle saMvatsara) kI eka-eka Rtu rAtadina kI gaNanA se unasaTha rAtri-dina
kI kahI gaI hai| 307-saMbhave NaM arahA egUNasaTThi puvvasayasahassAiM
agAramajjhe vasittA muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pavvaie  /  sambhava arhan
unasaTha lAkha pUrva varSa agAra ke madhya (gRhasthAvasthA) meM rahakara muMDita
ho agAra tyAga kara anagAritA meM pravrajita hue  /  308-mallissa NaM arahao
egUNasaTThi ohinANisayA hotthA  /  malli arhan ke saMgha meM unasaTha sau (5900)
avadhijJAnI the  /   //  ekonaSaSTisthAnaka samavAya samApta  //

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixty-Six Places-Collection] [121 Sixty-Six Places-Collection 309-A single
circle is completed by the sun in sixty-sixty muhurtas. The sun completes one
circle in sixty-sixty muhurtas. Discussion-It takes sixty muhurtas or two days
and nights for the sun to complete one revolution around Mount Meru. Since there
are one hundred and eighty-four circles of the sun's movement, multiplying that
by two (18442-368) gives three hundred and sixty-eight days and nights. There
are the same number of days and nights in a solar year. 310-Sixty thousand Naga
kings hold the agrodak (water above the sixteen thousand high vela) of the salt
sea. 311-The pure Arhan was sixty bows high. 312-Sixty thousand Samanik Devas
are said to be in the realm of Bali Virochanendra. Sixty thousand Samanik Devas
are said to be in the realm of Brahma Devendradevaraj. 313-Sixty (32+28=60) lakh
Vimana-Avas are said to be in the two kalpas of Saudharma and Ishana. || Sixty-
Six Places Collection ends. Sixty-Six Places-Collection 314-Sixty-one Ritu-masas
are said to be in the five-year Yuga, counting from the Ritu-masas. 315-The
first kand of Mount Mandar is said to be sixty-one thousand yojanas high.
316-The Chandramandala Vimana is said to be equal in all parts when divided into
sixty-one parts of one yojana. Similarly, the sun is also said to be equal in
all parts when divided into sixty-one parts of one yojana. That is, the extent
of both of them is in the form of the even number 56 and 48, not in the form of
the odd number, and their extent is not in the form of any other part more or
less than one part. || Sixty-Six Places Collection ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekaSaSTisthAnaka-samavAya] [121 SaSTisthAnaka-samavAya 309-egamege NaM maMDale
sUrie saTThie saTThie muhuttehiM sNghaaei| sUrya eka eka maNDala ko sATha-sATha
muhUrtoM se pUrNa karatA hai| vivecana-sUrya ko sumeru kI eka vAra pradakSiNA
karane meM sATha muhUrta yA do dina-rAta lagate haiN| yataH sUrya ke ghUmane ke
maMDala eka sau caurAsI haiM, ataH usako do se guNita karane para (18442-368)
tIna sau ar3asaTha dina-rAta Ate haiN| sUrya saMvatsara meM itane hI dina-rAta
hote haiN| 310-lavaNassa NaM samuddassa sarTi nAgasAhassIo aggodayaM dhaarNti|
lavaNasamudra ke agrodaka (solaha hajAra UMcI velA ke Upara vAle jala) ko sATha
hajAra nAgarAja dhAraNa karate haiN| 311-vimale NaM arahA saTuiM dhaNUiM uDDhaM
uccatteNaM hotthaa| vimala arhan sATha dhanuSa UMce the| 312-balissa NaM
vairoyaNiMdassa sarTi sAmANiyasAhassIo pnnnnttaao| ba~bhassa NaM deviMdassa
devaranno saDhiM sAmANiyasAhassIo pnnnnttaao| bali vairocanendra ke sATha hajAra
sAmAnika deva kahe gaye haiN| brahma devendra devarAja ke sATha hajAra sAmAnika
deva kahe gaye haiN| 313-sohammIsANesu dosu kappesu saTuiM vimANAvAsasayasahassA
pnnnnttaa| saudharma aura IzAna ina do kalpoM meM sATha (32+28=60) lAkha
vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiN|  //  SaSTisthAnaka samavAya smaapt| ekaSaSTisthAnaka-
samavAya 314-paMcasaMvacchariyassa NaM jugassa riumAseNaM mijjamANassa igasaTThi
uumAsA pnnnnttaa| paMcasaMvatsara vAle yuga ke Rtu-mAsoM se ginane para ikasaTha
RtumAsa hote haiN| 315-maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa paDhame kaMDe
egasaTThijoyaNasahassAI uDDhe uccatteNaM pnnnntte| mandara parvata kA prathama
kANDa ikasaTha hajAra yojana UMcA kahA gayA hai| 316-caMdamaMDale NaM
egasaTThivibhAgavibhAie samaMse pnnnntte| evaM sUrassa vi| candramaMDala vimAna
eka yojana ke ikasaTha bhAgoM meM vibhAjita karane para pUre chappana bhAga
pramANa sama-aMza kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra sUrya bhI eka yojana ke ikasaTha
bhAgoM se vibhAjita karane para pUre ar3atAlIsa bhAga pramANa sama-aMza kahA
gayA hai| arthAt ina donoM ke vistAra kA pramANa 56 aura 48 isa sama saMkhyA
rUpa hI hai, viSama saMkhyA rUpa nahIM hai aura na eka bhAga ke bhI anya kucha
aMza adhika yA hIna bhAga pramANa hI unakA vistAra hai|  //  ekaSaSTisthAnaka
samavAya samApta  //

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  [122] **Samvayanga Sutra, Dvishastinathanaka-Samvay 317:** In
a five-year cycle (Panchasamvatsarik Yuga), there are said to be sixty-two full
moons (Purnima) and sixty-two new moons (Amavasya).  **Explanation:** According
to the lunar calendar, a five-year period is called a Yuga. In this Yuga, there
are two extra months. Therefore, there are two extra full moons and new moons.
Keeping this in mind, there are said to be sixty-two full moons and sixty-two
new moons in a Yuga.  **318:** Vasupujya Arhan is said to have sixty-two
disciples (Gan) and sixty-two disciple leaders (Ganadhar).  **319:** In the
waxing moon (Shukla Paksha), the moon increases by one-sixty-second part every
day. In the waning moon (Krishna Paksha), it decreases by the same amount every
day.  **320:** In the Saudharma and Ishana Kalpas, in the first Pratishta
(stage) of the first Avali (category), there are said to be sixty-two Vimanas
(celestial vehicles) in each direction. All the Vimanas in the Pratishta are
said to be sixty-two in number.  **|| Dvishastinathanaka Samvay Sampt ||**
**Trishastinathanaka-Samvay 321:** The Arhan Rishabha, a Koushalika, lived for
sixty-two lakh years in the palace of the king (Maharaja) before renouncing his
worldly life (Agara) and becoming an ascetic (Anugariya).  **322:** In the
Harivarsha and Ramyakvarsha, humans reach full maturity (Sampattajovvana) in
sixty-two days and nights. They no longer need to be cared for by their parents.
**323:** There are said to be sixty-two sunrises (Surya Udaya) on the Nishadha
mountain. Similarly, there are sixty-two sunrises on the Neelavanta mountain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122] [samavAyAGgasUtra dviSaSTisthAnaka-samavAya 317-paMca saMvaccharie NaM
juge vAsaddhiM punnimAo vAsa4i amAvasao pnnnnttaao| paMcasAMvatsarika yuga meM
bAsaTha pUrNimAeM aura bAsaTha amAvasyAeM kahI gaI haiN| vivecana-candramAsa ke
anusAra pA~ca varSa ke kAla ko yuga kahate haiN| isa eka yuga meM do mAsa adhika
hote haiN| isalie do pUrNimA aura amAvasyA bhI adhika hotI haiN| ise hI dhyAna
meM rakhakara eka yuga meM vAsaTha pUrNimAeM aura vAsaTha amAvasyAeM kahI gaI
haiN| 318-vAsupujassa NaM arahao vAsaTuiM gaNA, vAsaTuiM gaNaharA hotthaa|
vAsupUjya arhan ke vAsaTha gaNa aura vAsaTha gaNadhara kahe gaye haiN|
319-sukkapakkhassa NaM caMde vAsarTi bhAge divase divase privddddi| te ceva
bahulapakkhe divase-divase prihaayi| zuklapakSa meM candramA divasa-divasa
(pratidina) bAsaThaveM bhAga pramANa eka-eka kalA se bar3hatA aura kRSNa pakSa
meM pratidina itanA hI ghaTatA hai| 320-sohammIsANesu kappesu paDhame patthaDe
paDhamAvaliyAe egamegAe disAe vAsarTi vimANA pnnnnttaa| savve vemANiyANaM
vAsaTuiM vimANapatthaDA patthaDaggeNaM pnnnnttaa| saudharma aura IzAna ina do
kalpoM meM pahale prastaTa meM pahalI AvalikA (zreNI) meM eka-eka dizA meM
vAsaTha-vAsaTha vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| sabhI vaimAnika vimAna-prastaTa
prastaToM kI gaNanA se vAsaTha kahe gaye haiN|  //  dviSaSTisthAnaka samavAya
samApta  //  triSaSTisthAnaka-samavAya 321-usabhe NaM arahA kosalie tesaddhiM
puvvasayasahassAI mahArAyamajhe vasittA muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvie|
kauzalika RSabha arhan tiresaTha lAkha pUrva varSa taka mahArAja ke madhya meM
rahakara arthAt rAjA ke pada para AsIna rahakara phira muMDita ho agAra se
anagAritA meM pravrajita hue| _322-harivAsa-rammayavAsesu maNussA tevaTThie
rAiMdiehiM saMpattajovvaNA bhvNti| harivarSa aura ramyakvarSa meM manuSya
tiresaTha rAta-dinoM meM pUrNa yauvana ko prApta ho jAte haiM, arthAt unheM
mAtA-pitA dvArA pAlana kI apekSA nahIM rhtii| 323-nisaDhe NaM pavvae tevaDhei
sUrodayA pnnnnttaa| evaM nIlavaMte vi| niSadha parvata para tiresaTha sUryodaya
kahe gaye haiN| isI prakAra nIlavanta parvata para bhI tiresaTha sUryodaya kahe
gaye haiN|

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixty-four Stana-Samavaya] [123 Discussion-When the Sun is in Uttarayan, it
rises sixty-three times over the Nishdha mountain and there is day in the Bharat
region. Again, when it is in Dakshinayan, it rises over the Vedika of
Jambudvipa. After that, it rises over the Lavanasamudra. In this way, while
revolving, when it rises over the Neelavant mountain, there is day in the Airvat
region. There also, it rises sixty-three times over the Neelavant mountain, then
rises over the Vedika of Jambudvipa and finally rises over the Lavanasamudra.
Since one Sun completes one revolution of Meru in two days, therefore, it rises
sixty-three times from the Nishdha mountain and illuminates the Bharat region
and in the same way, it rises sixty-three times from the Neelavant mountain and
illuminates the Airvat region. ||Trishatistana Samavaya Sampt|| Sixty-four
Stana-Samavaya 324- The Ashtaashtamika Bhikshu-Pratima is worshipped in sixty-
four nights and days, with two hundred and eighty-eight Bhikshas, according to
the sutra, as it should be, with the body, by touching, protecting, purifying,
crossing, reciting, following the command, and worshipping. Discussion- The
particular Abhigraha whose worship takes eight days of eight days, is called
Ashtaashtamika Bhikshu-Pratima. While worshipping it, one Bhiksha is taken in
the first eight days. Again, two Bhikshas are taken in the next eight days. In
this way, one Bhiksha is increased in every eight days, and in the last eight
days, eight Bhikshas are taken every day. In this way, in sixty-four days, all
the Bhikshas become two hundred and eighty-eight (8+16+24+32+40+48+56+64=288).
325- Sixty-four lakh abodes (buildings) of Asura Kumaras are said to be there.
Sixty-four thousand Samanik Devas of Chamarrasana are said to be there. 326- All
the Dadhimukha mountains are situated in the shape of a drum (Dhol), with equal
width from bottom to top, and are sixty-four thousand yojanas high. 327- Sixty-
four thousand abodes of Vimanas are said to be there in the Sohammisana, in the
Brahma-loka, and in the Yati-Sukappa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 catuHSaSTisthAnaka-samavAya] [123 vivecana-sUrya jaba uttarAyaNa hotA hai, taba
usakA udaya tiresaTha vAra niSadhaparvata ke Upara se hotA hai aura bharata
kSetra meM dina hotA hai| pana: dakSiNAyaNa hote hae jambUdvIpa kI vedikA ke
Upara se udaya A hai| tatpazcAt usakA udaya lavaNasamudra ke Upara se hotA hai|
isI prakAra paribhramaNa karate hue jaba vaha nIlavanta parvata para se udita
hotA hai, taba airavata kSetra meM dina hotA hai| vahA~ bhI tiresaTha vAra
nIlavanta parvata ke Upara se udaya hotA hai, punaH jambUdvIpa kI vedikA ke
Upara se udaya hotA hai aura anta meM lavaNasamudra ke Upara se udaya hotA hai|
yataH eka sUrya do dina meM meru kI eka pradakSiNA karatA hai, ataH tiresaTha
vAra niSadhaparvata se udaya hokara bharata kSetra ko prakAzita karatA hai aura
isI prakAra nIlavanta parvata se tiresaTha vAra udaya hokara airavata kSetra ko
prakAzita karatA hai| ||trissssttisthaank samavAya smaapt|| catuHSaSTisthAnaka-
samavAya 324- aTThaTThamiyA NaM bhikkhupaDimA causaTThIe rAidiehiM dohi ya
aTThAsIehiM bhikkhAsaehiM-ahAsuttaM jAva [ahAkappaM ahAmaggaM ahAtaccaM sammaM
kAeNa phAsittA pAlittA sohittA tIrittA kiTTittA ArAhaittA ANAe aNupAlittA] bhvi|
aSTASTamikA bhikSupratimA causaTha rAta-dinoM meM, do sau aThAsI bhikSAoM se
sUtrAnusAra, yathA-tathya, samyak prakAra kAya se sparza kara, pAla kara,
zodhana kara, pAra kara, kIrtana kara, AjJA ke anusAra anupAlana kara ArAdhita
hotI hai| vivecana-jisa abhigraha-vizeSa kI ArAdhanA meM ATha ATha dina ke ATha
dinASTaka lagate haiM, use aSTASTamikA bhikSupratimA kahate haiM  /  isakI
ArAdhanA karate hue prathama ke ATha dinoM meM eka-eka bhikSA grahaNa kI jAtI
hai| punaH dUsare ATha dinoM meM do-do bhikSAeM grahaNa kI jAtI haiN| isI
prakAra tIsare Adi ATha-ATha dinoM meM eka-eka bhikSA bar3hAte hue antima ATha
dinoM meM pratidina ATha-ATha bhikSAeM grahaNa kI jAtI haiN| isa prakAra
causaTha dinoM meM sarva bhikSAeM do sau aThAsI (8+16+24+32+40+48 +56+64=288) ho
jAtI haiN| 325-causaTaii asurakumArAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| camarassaNaM
ranno causaTuiMsAmANiyasAhassIo pnnnnttaao| _ asurakumAra devoM ke causaTha
lAkha AvAsa (bhavana) kahe gaye haiN| camararAja ke causaTha hajAra sAmAnika
deva kahe gaye haiN| 326 -savve di dadhimuhA pavvayA pallAsaMThANasaMThiyA
savvattha samA vikkhaMbhamusseheNaM causaddhiM joyaNasahassAI pnnnnttaa| sabhI
dadhimukha parvata palya (Dhola) ke AkAra se avasthita haiM, nIce Upara sarvatra
samAna vistAra vAle haiM aura causaTha hajAra yojana UMce haiN|
327-sohammIsANesu baMbhaloe yatisukappesucausaTuiM vimANAvAsasayasahassA
pnnnnttaa|

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[124] [Samavayanga Sutra - In the Saudharma, Ishana and Brahmakalpa, there are
sixty-four (32+28+4=64) lakh Vimanas. 328- All the Chaturanta Chakravarti kings
are said to have a necklace of sixty-four strings of precious pearls. ||
Chatuhshashtisthanaka Samavay Sampt || Panchashatisthanaka-Samavay 329 - In the
Jambudvipa, there are sixty-five Suryamandala (paths of the sun's revolution).
330 - The elder Mauryaputra lived in an abode for sixty-five years, then became
a monk after shaving his head and leaving the abode. 331 - In the
Saudharmavatansaka Vimana, there are sixty-five mansions in each direction. ||
Panchashatisthanaka Samavay Sampt || Shatpashtisthanaka-Samavay 332 - Sixty-six
moons illuminated the southern hemisphere, illuminate it and will illuminate it.
Similarly, sixty-six suns shone, shine and will shine. Sixty-six moons
illuminated the northern hemisphere, illuminate it and will illuminate it.
Similarly, sixty-six suns shone, shine and will shine. Discussion - There are
two moons and two suns in Jambudvipa, four moons and four suns in the
Lavanasamudra, twelve moons and twelve suns in the Dhataki Khand, forty-two
moons and forty-two suns in the Kalodadhi Samudra, and seventy-two moons and
seventy-two suns in the Pushkarardha. The two seas and half of the Pushkarardha
are called two and a half islands.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 124] [samavAyAGgasUtra _ saudharma, IzAna aura brahmakalpa ina tInoM kalpoM meM
causaTha (32+28+4=64) lAkha vimAnAvAsa 328-savvassa vi ya NaM ranno
cAuraMtacakkavaTThissa causaTThilaTThIe mahagghe muttAmaNihAre pnnnntte| sabhI
cAturanta cakravartI rAjAoM ke causaTha lar3I vAlA bahumUlya muktA-maNiyoM kA
hAra kahA gayA  //  catuHSaSTisthAnaka samavAya smaapt|| paJcaSaSTisthAnaka-
samavAya 329 -jaMbuddIve NaM dIve paNasaddhiM sUramaMDalA pnnnnttaa| jambUdvIpa
nAmaka isa dvIpa meM paiMsaTha sUryamaNDala (sUrya ke paribhramaNa ke mArga)
kahe gaye haiN| 330-there NaM moriyaputte paNasaTThivAsAI agAramajhe vasittA
muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvie| sthavira mauryaputra paiMsaTha varSa
agAravAsa meM rahakara muMDita ho agAra tyAga kara anagAritA meM pravrajita hue|
331 -sohammavaDiMsiyassa NaM vimANassa egamegAe bAhAe paNasaTuiM paNasaDhi bhomA
pnnnnttaa| saudharmAvataMsaka vimAna kI eka-eka dizA meM paiMsaTha-paiMsaTha
bhavana kahe gaye haiN| ||pnycssssttisthaank samavAya smaapt| SaTpaSTisthAnaka-
samavAya 332-dAhiNaDDamANussakhettANaM chAvaDhei caMdA pabhAsiMsu vA, pabhAsaMti
vA, pabhAsissaMti vaa| chAvaTuiM sUriyA taviMsu vA, tavaMti vA, tavissaMti vaa|
uttaraDDhamANussakhettANaM chAvaTuiM caMdA pabhAsiMsuvA, pabhAsaMti vA,
pabhAsissaMti vA, chAvaTuiM sUriyA taviMsuvA, tavaMti vA, tavissaMti vaa|
dakSiNArdha mAnuSakSetra ko chiyAsaTha candra prakAzita karate the, prakAzita
karate haiM aura prakAzita kreNge| isI prakAra chiyAsaTha sUrya tapate the,
tapate haiM aura tpeNge| uttarArdha mAnuSakSetra ko chiyAsaTha candra prakAzita
karate the, prakAzita karate haiM aura prakAzita kreNge| isI prakAra chiyAsaTha
sUrya tapate the, tapate haiM aura tpeNge| vivecana-jambUdvIpa meM do candra, do
sUrya haiM, lavaNasamudra meM cAra-cAra candra aura cAra sUrya haiM,
dhAtakIkhaNDa meM bAraha candra aura bAraha sUrya haiM  /  kAlodadhisamudra meM
bayAlIsa candra aura bayAlIsa sUrya haiN| puSkarArdha meM bahattara candra aura
bahattara sUrya haiN| ukta do samudroM tathA Adhe puSkaradvIpa ko ar3hAI dvIpa
kahA

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Sapta-shat-sthanak Samvaya] [125] It is known that in the exact middle of
the Pushkaravardvipa, there is a circular, superhuman mountain, which divides
the island into two parts. The area up to the inner part of this island is
called the Manushya-kshetra, because the origin of humans is up to this point.
In this Pushkaravardvipa-ardha, there are two parts due to the presence of one
Ishukara mountain each in the east and west directions. Of these, the southern
part is called the Dakshinardha Manushya-kshetra and the northern part is called
the Uttarardha Manushya-kshetra. Since within the Manushya-kshetra, according to
the calculation mentioned above (2+4+12+42+72-132), there are a total of one
hundred and thirty-two Chandras and Suryas. Half of them, sixty-six Chandras and
Suryas, illuminate the Dakshinardha Manushya-kshetra, and sixty-six Chandras and
Suryas illuminate the Uttarardha Manushya-kshetra. When the Chandras and Suryas
of the northern row move towards the east during their rotation, the Chandras
and Suryas of the southern row start rotating towards the west. In this way,
sixty-six Chandras and Suryas illuminate their respective areas while rotating
in the southern Pushkarardha and sixty-six Chandras and Suryas in the northern
Pushkarardha. This arrangement is eternal, therefore, they have been
illuminating in the past, are illuminating in the present, and will continue to
illuminate in the future. 333-The number of Ganadharas of the Arhat is sixty-
six. The number of Ganadharas of the Shreyans Arhat was sixty-six. 334-The
excellent state of Abhinibodhik (mati) knowledge is said to be like sixty-six
oceans. (Which is attained by going to the Achyut heaven three times or to the
Vijayadi Anuttar Vimanas twice.) ||Shat-shat-sthanak Samvaya Sampt. Sapta-shat-
sthanak Samvaya 335-Sixty-seven Nakshatra-masas are said to be in the Pancha-
samvatsarik Yuga, counted by the Nakshatra-masas. 336-The sides of the Hemavat
and Eravata regions are said to be sixty-six, sixty-six hundred, fifty-five
Yojanas, and three parts of a Yojan in length. 337-The distance between the
easternmost point of the Mandar mountain and the easternmost point of the Gautam
island is said to be sixty-six thousand Yojanas without any obstruction.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptaSaSTisthAnaka-samavAya] [125 jAtA hai| kyoMki puSkaravaradvIpa ke ThIka
madhya bhAga meM golAkAra mAnuSottara parvata hai, jisase usa dvIpa ke do bhAga
ho jAte haiN| isa dvIpa ke bhItarI bhAga taka kA kSetra mAnuSakSetra kahalAtA
hai kyoMki manuSyoM kI utpatti yahIM taka hotI hai| isa puSkaradvIpArdha meM bhI
pUrva tathA pazcima dizA meM eka eka iSukAra parvata ke hone se do bhAga ho jAte
haiN| unameM se dakSiNI bhAga dakSiNArdha manuSyakSetra kahalAtA hai aura uttarI
bhAga uttarArdha manuSyakSetra kahA jAtA hai| yataH manuSyakSetra ke bhItara
Upara batAI gaI gaNanA ke anusAra (2+4+12+42+72-132) sarva candra aura sUrya eka
sau battIsa hote haiN| unake Adhe chiyAsaTha candra aura sUrya dakSiNArdha
manuSyakSetra meM prakAza karate haiM aura chiyAsaTha candra-sUrya uttarArdha
manuSyakSetra meM prakAza karate haiN| jaba uttara dizA kI paMkti ke candra-
sUrya paribhramaNa karate hue pUrva dizA meM jAte haiM, taba dakSiNa dizA kI
paMkti ke candra-sUrya pazcima dizA meM paribhramaNa karane lagate haiN| isa
prakAra chiyAsaTha candra-sUrya dakSiNI puSkarArdha meM tathA chiyAsaTha candra-
sUrya uttarI puSkarArdha meM paribhramaNa karate hue apane-apane kSetra ko
prakAzita karate rahate haiN| yaha vyavasthA sanAtana hai, ata: bhUtakAla meM ye
prakAza karate rahe haiM, vartamAnakAla meM prakAza kara rahe haiM aura
bhaviSyakAla meM bhI prakAza karate rheNge| 333-sejaMsassa NaM arahao chAvaDhei
gaNA chAvaTuiM gaNaharA hotthaa| zreyAMsa arhat ke chayAsaTha gaNa aura
chayAsaTha gaNadhara the| 334-AbhiNibohiyaNANassa NaM ukkoseNaM chAvaDhei
sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| Abhinibodhika (mati) jJAna kI utkRSTa sthiti
chayAsaTha sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| (jo tIna bAra acyuta svarga meM yA do bAra
vijayAdi anuttara vimAnoM meM jAne para prApta hotI hai|) ||ssttssssttisthaank
samavAya smaapt| saptaSaSTisthAnaka-samavAya 335-paMcasaMvacchariyassa NaM
jugassa nakkhattamAseNaM bhijamANassa sattasaSTuiM nakkhattamAsA pnnnnttaa|
paMcasAMvatsarika yuga meM nakSatra mAsa se ginane para sar3asaTha nakSatramAsa
kahe gaye haiN| 336 -hemavaya-eravayAo NaM bAhAo sattasaTuiM sattasaTuiM
joyaNasayAiM paNapannAiM tiNNi ya bhAgA joyaNassa AyAmeNaM pnnnnttaao| haimavata
aura eravata kSetra kI bhujAeM sar3asaTha-sar3asaTha sau pacapana yojana aura
eka yojana ke unnIsa bhAgoM meM se tIna bhAga pramANa kahI gaI haiN|
337-maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa puracchimillAo caramaMtAo goyamadIvassa
puracchimille caramaMte esa NaM sattasaTuiM joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare
pnnnntte| mandara parvata ke pUrvI caramAntabhAga se gautama dvIpa ke pUrvI
caramAntabhAga kA sar3asaTha hajAra yojana binA kisI vyavadhAna ke antara kahA
gayA hai|

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 126] [Samvayanga Sutra] **Discussion:** The western part of Jambudvipa is
55,000 yojanas away from the eastern part of Mount Meru. From there, Gautamdvipa
is located 12,000 yojanas westwards within the Lavanasamudra. Therefore, the
eastern part of Gautamdvipa is located (55 + 12 = 68) 68,000 yojanas away from
the eastern part of Meru, thus proving the said distance. **338:** All the
constellations are said to be equal in terms of their **sima-vikkhambha** [the
area that can be covered by the moon in a day and night] when divided into 68
parts. **|| Sapta-shat-sthanaka Samvay Sampt ||** **Ashta-shat-sthanaka:** **-**
**339:** In the Dhaataki-khand dvipa, 68 **chakravattis** are said to have 68
**vijayas** (regions) and 68 capitals. In terms of **ukkosapada**, 68
**arhanta** have been born, are being born, and will be born. Similarly,
**chakravatti**, **baladeva**, and **vasudeva** should also be known.
**-Samvay** In the Dhaataki-khand dvipa, 68 **chakravattis** are said to have 68
**vijayas** (regions) and 68 capitals. In terms of **ukkosapada**, 68
**arhanta** have been born, are being born, and will be born. Similarly,
**chakravatti**, **baladeva**, and **vasudeva** should also be known. **340:**
In the Pushkaravaradvipaardha, 68 **vijayas** and 68 capitals are said to be
there. There, 68 **arhanta** have been born, are being born, and will be born in
**ukkosapada**. Similarly, **chakravatti**, **baladeva**, and **vasudeva**
should also be known. **Discussion:** Since Mount Meru is located in the middle,
the Mahavideha region of Jambudvipa is divided into two parts - the eastern
Mahavideha and the western Mahavideha. Then, due to the flow of the Sita river
in the east and the Sitoda river in the west, they are further divided into two
parts each. Generally, one **tirthankara**, one **chakravatti**, one
**baladeva**, and one **vasudeva** are born in each of these four regions.
Therefore, at one time, there are four **tirthankara**, four **chakravatti**,
four **baladeva**, and four **vasudeva** born. When these four regions are
divided by three **antarnadis** and four mountains each, they become 32 regions.
These are conquered by the **chakravatti**. Therefore, they are called
**vijayadesha** and the **chakravatti** resides in them, hence they are called
capitals. Thus, there are a total of 32 **vijayakshetra** and capitals in the
Mahavideha of Jambudvipa. By combining the Bharat and Airavat regions, which are
two **vijayas** and two capitals, their number becomes 34. The number of
**vijayas** and capitals in Dhaataki-khand dvipa and Pushkaravaradvipaardha is
double that of Jambudvipa, therefore (34 x 2 = 68) their number becomes 68.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 126 ] [ samavAyAGgasUca vivecana - jambUdvIpa- sambandhI meruparvata ke pUrvI
bhAga se jambUdvIpa kA pazcimI bhAga pacapana hajAra yojana dUra hai| tathA
vahAM se bAraha hajAra yojana pazcima meM lavaNasamudra ke bhItara jAkara
gautama dvIpa avasthita haiM  /  ataH meru ke pUrvIbhAga se gautama dvIpa kA
pUrvI bhAga (55 +12=68) sar3asaTha hajAra yojana para avasthita hone se ukta
antara siddha hotA hai  /  338-savvesiM pi NaM NakkhattANaM sImAvikkhaMbheNaM
sattaTThi bhAgaM bhaie samaMse paNNatte  /  sabhI nakSatroM kA sImA - viSkambha
[ dina-rAta meM candra-dvArA bhogane yogya kSetra] sar3asaTha bhAgoM se
vibhAjita karane para sama aMzavAlA kahA gayA hai|  //  saptaSaSTisthAnaka
samavAya samApta  //  aSTaSaSTisthAnaka - - 339 - dhAyaisaMDe NaM dIve aDasaTThi
cakkavaTTivijayA, aDasaTThi rAyahANIo pnnnnttaao| ukkosapae aDasaTThi arahaMtA
samuppajjisu vA, samuppajjaMti vA, samuppajjissaMti vA  /  evaM cakkavaTTI
baladevA vAsudevA  /  -samavAya dhAtakIkhaNDa dvIpa meM ar3asaTha cakravarttiyoM
ke ar3asaTha vijaya (pradeza) aura ar3asaTha rAjadhAniyAM kahI gaI haiN| utkRSTa
pada kI apekSA dhAtakIkhaNDa meM ar3asaTha arahaMta utpanna hote rahate haiM,
utpanna hote haiM aura utpanna hoNge| isI prakAra cakravartI, baladeva aura
vAsudeva bhI jAnanA caahie| 340 - pukkharavaradIvaDDhe NaM aDasaTThi vijayA,
aDasaTThi rAyahANIo pnnnnttaao| ukkosapae aDasaTTiM arahaMtA samuppajjisu vA,
samuppajjaMti vA, samuppajjissaMti vA  /  evaM cakkavaTTI baladevA vaasudevaa|
puSkaravaradvIpArdha meM ar3asaTha vijaya aura ar3asaTha rAjadhAniyA~ kahI gaI
haiN| vahA~ utkRSTa rUpa se ar3asaTha arahanta utpanna hote rahe haiM, utpanna
hote haiM aura utpanna hoNge| isI prakAra cakravartI, baladeva aura vAsudeva bhI
jAnanA cAhie  /  vivecana - meruparvata madhya meM avasthita hone se jambUdvIpa
kA mahAvideha kSetra do bhAgoM meM ba~Ta jAtA hai - pUrvI mahAvideha aura
pazcimI mahAvideha  /  phira pUrva meM sItA nadI ke bahane se tathA pazcima meM
sItodA nadI ke bahane se unake bhI do-do bhAga ho jAte haiN| sAdhAraNa rUpa se
ukta cAroM kSetroM meM eka-eka tIrthaMkara, cakravartI, baladeva aura vAsudeva
utpanna hote haiM  /  ataH eka samaya meM cAra hI tIrthaMkara, cAra hI
cakravartI, cAra hI baladeva aura cAra hI vAsudeva utpanna hote haiM  /  ukta
cAroM khaNDoM ke tIna tIna antarnadiyoM aura cAra-cAra parvatoM se vibhAjita
hone para battIsa khaNDa ho jAte haiN| inako cakravartI vijaya karatA hai| ataH
ye vijayadeza kahalAte haiM aura unameM cakravartI rahatA hai, ataH unheM
rAjadhAnI kahate haiM  /  isa prakAra jambUdvIpa ke mahAvideha meM sarva milA
kara battIsa vijayakSetra aura rAjadhAniyA~ hotI haiM  /  bharata aura airavata
kSetra ye do vijaya aura do rAjadhAniyoM ke milAne se unakI saMkhyA cautIsa ho
jAtI haiN| jambUdvIpa se dUnI racanA dhAtakIkhaMDadvIpa meM aura
puSkaravaradvIpArdha meM hai, ata: (34 x 2 = 68) unakI saMkhyA ar3asaTha ho

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ekona-saptati-sthānak-samvāya  **[127 Categories]**  This sutra describes the
existence of 68 Vijayas, 68 Rajdhanis, 68 Tirthankaras, 68 Chakravartis, 68
Baladevas, and 68 Vasudevas, keeping in mind the 127 categories.  At least 20
Tirthankaras are born in each of the five Maha-videha regions, and at most 160
Tirthankaras can be born. They reside and travel within their respective
regions. The same applies to Chakravartis, etc.  By combining two Bharata and
two Airāvata regions associated with each of the five Merus (160+10=170), a
total of 170 Tirthankaras and others can be born simultaneously. This is a
crucial point to understand.  **341 -** The number of Shramanas with excellent
Shramanasampada in the Sangha of Vimalnath Arhan was 68,000.  **|| Ashta-shat-
shasti-sthānak-samvāya Samāpt ||**  **Ekona-saptati-sthānak-samvāya 342 -**
Excluding Mandar Parvat, there are 69 Varshas and Varshadhara Parvats in the
Samaya-kshetra (human region or 2.5 islands), such as 35 Varshas (regions), 30
Varshadharas (mountains), and 4 Ishukara Parvats.  **Discussion:** There are
seven regions associated with one Meru, including Bharata, etc. Therefore, there
are 35 regions associated with the five Merus in the 2.5 islands. Similarly,
there are six Varshadhara or Kulachal Parvats associated with each Meru,
including Himavant, etc. There are two Ishukara Parvats in the Dhataki-khand and
two in the Pushkaravardvipa-ardha, making a total of four. Combining all these
(35+30+4=69), there are 69 Varshas and Varshadharas.  **343 -** The distance
between the westernmost point of Mandar Parvat and the westernmost point of
Gautam Dvipa is said to be 69,000 yojanas without any interruption.  **344 -**
Excluding Mohaniya Karma, the remaining seven Karma-prakritis have 69 Uttar-
prakritis (5+9+2+4+42+2+5=69).  **|| Ekona-saptati-sthānak-samvāya Samāpt ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekonasaptatisthAnaka-samavAya] [127 jAtI hai| isI bAta ko dhyAna meM rakhakara
ukta sUtra meM ar3asaTha vijaya, ar3asaTha rAjadhAnI, ar3asaTha tIrthaMkara,
ar3asaTha cakravartI, ar3asaTha baladeva aura ar3asaTha vAsudevoM ke hone kA
nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| pA~coM mahAvideha kSetroM meM kama se kama bIsa
tIrthaMkara utpanna hote haiM aura adhika se adhika eka sau sATha taka
tIrthaMkara utpanna ho jAte haiN| ve apane apane kSetra meM hI vihAra karate
haiN| yahI bAta cakravartI Adi ke viSaya meM bhI jAnanA caahie| ukta saMkhyA meM
pAMcoM meru sambandhI do-do bharata aura do do airavata kSetroM ke milAne se
(160+10=170) eka sau sattara tIrthaMkarAdi eka sAtha utpanna ho sakate haiN|
yaha vizeSa jAnanA caahie| 341 -vimalassa NaM arahao aDasaddhiM samaNasAhassIo
ukkosiyA samaNasaMpayA hotthaa| vimalanAtha arhan ke saMgha meM zramaNoM kI
utkRSTa zramaNasampadA ar3asaTha hajAra thii| ||assttssssttisthaank samavAya
smaapt|| ekonasaptatisthAnaka-samavAya 342-samayakhitte NaM maMdaravajjA
egUNasattari vAsA vAsadharapavvayA paNNattA, taM jahApaNattIsaM vAsA, tIsaM
vAsaharA, cattAri usuyaaraa| samayakSetra (manuSya kSetra yA ar3hAI dvIpa) meM
mandara parvata ko chor3akara unahattara varSa aura varSadhara parvata kahe gaye
haiM, jaise- paiMtIsa varSa (kSetra), tIsa varSadhara (parvata) aura cAra
iSukAra prvt| vivecana-eka merusambandhI bharata Adi sAta kSetra hote haiN| ataH
aDhAI dvIpoM ke pA~coM meru sambandhI paiMtIsa kSetra ho jAte haiN| isI prakAra
eka merusambandhI himavanta Adi chaha-chaha varSadhara yA kulAcala parvata ho
jAte haiM tathA dhAtakIkhaNDa ke do aura puSkaravaradvIpArdha ke do isa prakAra
cAra iSukAra parvata haiN| ina sabako milAne para (35+30+4=69) unahattara varSa
aura varSadhara ho jAte haiN| 343-maMdarassa pavvayassa paccathimillAo
caramaMtAo goyamadIvassa paccathimille caramaMte esa NaM egUNasattari
joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| mandara parvata ke pazcimI caramAnta se
gautama dvIpa kA pazcima caramAnta bhAga unahattara hajAra yojana antaravAlA
binA kisI vyavadhAna ke kahA gayA hai| 344-mohaNijavajANaM sattaNhaM
kammapagaDINaM egUNasattari uttarapagaDIo pnnnnttaao| mohanIya karma ko choDa
kara zeSa sAtoM karmaprakRtiyoM kI uttara prakRtiyA~ unahattara (5+9+2+4
+42+2+5=69) kahI gaI haiN| ||ekonspttisthaank samavAya smaapt||

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[128] [Samvayanga Sutra, Sapttati Sthanak Samvay - 345] The Bhagwan Mahavira,
the great ascetic, used to observe the Vasa (rainy season retreat) for seventy
days after twenty days more than four months (fifty days) of the rainy season
had passed. [Commentary] - From the first day of the dark fortnight of Shravan
to the fifth day of the bright fortnight of Bhadrapad, fifty days pass. After
this, according to the rules of Vasa, the ascetic would establish himself in one
place. Before this, if there was no suitable place for dwelling, he would take
shelter in another place. [346] - The Arhat, the great man, the Parsva, after
observing the Shraman Paryaya for seventy years, became a Siddha, a Buddha, free
from karmas, attained Nirvana, and became free from all suffering. [347] - The
Arhat, the Vasupujya, was seventy Dhanu (bows) tall. [348] - The Mohaniya karma,
which is free from the period of obstruction, is said to be seventy Kodakodi
Sagaropama in its state and its karmanishek. [Commentary] - The binding of the
Mohaniya karma in its excellent state is like seventy Kodakodi Sagaropama. As
long as the bound karma does not come into existence and obstruct, it is called
the period of obstruction. The general rule for the period of obstruction is
that for a karma that binds in the state of one Kodakodi Sagaropama, the period
of obstruction is one hundred years. According to this rule, when the binding is
in the state of seventy Kodakodi Sagaropama, the period of obstruction is
seventy hundred, that is, seven thousand years. After this period of
obstruction, the remaining state becomes the karmanishek, which is fit for the
karman particles to bear fruit. The order is that after the period of
obstruction is complete, in the first time, many karman particles are nishekt,
in the second time, fewer than that, in the third time, fewer than that. In this
way, the number of karman particles that are nishekt decreases progressively,
and in the last time of the state, the fewest karman particles are nishekt.
These nishekt karman particles bear fruit in their own time and fall off. This
arrangement is according to the karmashastras. But some Aannaryas believe that
the period of obstruction for a karma is more than its bound state, so the
karman particles are nishekt during the entire time of the bound state. [349] -
The Devendra, the Devraj, the Mahendra, is said to have seventy thousand
Saamanik Devas. [End of Sapttati Sthanak Samvay]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 128] [samavAyAGgasUtra saptatisthAnaka-samavAya _345-samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
vAsANaM savIsarAIe mAse vaikkaMte sattariehi rAidiehiM sesehiM vAsAvAsaM
pjjosvei| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra cAturmAsa pramANa varSAkAla ke bIsa dina
adhika eka mAsa (pacAsa dina) vyatIta ho jAne para aura sattara dinoM ke zeSa
rahane para varSAvAsa karate the| vivecana-zrAvaNa kRSNA pratipadA se lekara
pacAsa dina bItane para bhAdrapada zuklA paMcamI ko varSAvAsa niyama se eka
sthAna para sthApita karate the| usake pUrva vasati Adi yogya AvAsa ke abhAva
meM dUsare sthAna kA bhI Azraya le lete the| 346 -pAse NaM arahA purisAdANIe
sattari vAsAiM bahupaDipunAiM sAmanapariyAgaM pAuNittA siddhe buddhe jAva
svvdukkhpphiinne| puruSAdAnIya pArzva arhat paripUrNa sattara varSa taka
zramaNa-paryAya kA pAlana karake siddha, buddha, karmoM se mukta, parinirvANa ko
prApta aura sarvaduHkhoM se rahita hue| 347-vAsupuje NaM arahA sattari dhaNUI
uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa| vAsupUjya arhat sattara dhanuSa UMce the|
348-mohaNijassa NaM kammassa sattari sAgarovamakoDAkoDIo abAhUNiyA kammaTTiI
kammanisege pnnnntte| mohanIya karma kI abAdhAkAla se rahita sattara kor3Akor3I
sAgaropama-pramANa karmasthiti aura karmaniSeka kahe gaye haiN| vivecana-
mohanIya karma kI utkRSTa sthiti kA bandha sattara koDAkor3I sAgaropamoM kA hotA
hai| jaba taka baMdhA huA karma udaya meM Akara bAdhA na deve, use abAdhAkAla
kahate haiN| abAdhAkAla kA sAmAnya niyama yaha hai ki eka kor3Akor3I sAgaropama
sthiti ke baMdhanevAle karma kA abAdhAkAla eka sau varSa kA hotA hai| isa niyama
ke anusAra sattara kor3Akor3I sAgaropama sthiti kA bandha hone para usakA
abAdhAkAla sattara sau arthAt sAta hajAra varSa kA hotA hai| itane abAdhAkAla ko
chor3a kara zeSa rahI sthiti karmaparamANuoM kI phala dene ke yogya niSeka-
racanA hotI hai| usakA krama yaha hai ki abAdhAkAla pUrNa hone ke anantara
prathama samaya meM bahuta karma-dalika niSikta hote haiM, dUsare samaya meM
usase kama, tIsare samaya meM usase kama niSikta hote haiN| isa prakAra se
uttarottara kama-kama hote hue sthiti ke antima samaya meM sabase kama karma-
dalika niSikta hote haiN| ye niSikta karma-dalika apanA-apanA samaya Ane para
phala dete hue jhar3a jAte haiN| yaha vyavasthA karmazAstroM ke anusAra hai|
kintu kucha AnnAryoM kA mata hai ki jisa karma kI jitanI sthiti baMdhatI hai,
usakA abAdhAkAla usase atirikta hotA hai, ataH baMdhI huI pUrI sthiti ke samayoM
meM karma-dalikoM kA niSeka hotA hai| 349-mAhiMdassa NaM deviMdassa devaranno
sattari sAmANiyasAhassIo pnnnnttaao| devendra devarAja mAhendra ke sAmAnika deva
sattara hajAra kahe gaye haiN| ||spttisthaank samavAya smaapt|

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Dvisaptati-Sthanak-Samavay] [129 Ekasaptati-Sthanak-Samavay] 350- In the fourth
Chandra Samvatsara of the Pancha Samvatsarik Yuga, the Sun rises from the
outermost Mandala (four regions) after the completion of seventy-one nights and
days of the Hemant season. This signifies the beginning of the transition from
Dakshinayana to Uttarayana. 351- The seventy-one Prabhrut (authorities) of the
Viriyapravad are mentioned in the past. 352- Ajita Arhan, seventy-one lakh years
ago, resided in an abode, got his head shaved, and then renounced the household
life. Similarly, King Sagara, the Chaturanta Chakravarti, also renounced the
household life after seventy-one lakh years of residing in an abode. ||
Ekasaptati-Sthanak Samavay Sampt || [Dvisaptati-Sthanak-Samavay] 353- Seventy-
two lakh abodes (buildings) of the Suvarna Kumaras are mentioned. Seventy-two
thousand Nagas hold the outer boundary of the Lavana Samudra. 354- Shraman
Bhagwan Mahavira, after living for seventy-two years, attained Siddha, Buddha,
free from karmas, and attained Parinirvana, becoming free from all suffering.
The Thera Achalbhrata, after living for seventy-two years, attained Siddha,
Buddha, and became free from all suffering. 355- In the Abhyantara Pushkarardha
Dweep, seventy-two Chandras were shining, are shining, and will shine in the
future. Similarly, seventy-two Suryas were shining, are shining, and will shine
in the future. Seventy-two Purvara Sahasris are mentioned for each of the
Chaturanta Chakravartis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvisaptatisthAnaka-samavAya] [129 ekasaptatisthAnaka-samavAya 350-cautthassa
NaM caMdasaMvaccharassa hemaMtANaM ekkasattarIe rAiMdiehiM vIikkaMtehiM
savvabAhirAo maMDalAo sUrie AuTTi krei| [paMca sAMvatsarika yuga ke] caturtha
candra saMvatsara kI hemanta Rtu ke ikahattara rAtri-dina vyatIta hone para
sUrya sabase bAharI maNDala (cAra kSetra) se AvRtti karatA hai| arthAt
dakSiNAyaNa se uttarAyaNa kI ora gamana karanA prArambha karatA hai|
351-vIriyappavAyassa NaM puvvassa ekkasattariM pAhuDA pnnnnttaa| vIryapravAda
pUrva ke ikahattara prAbhRta (adhikAra) kahe gaye haiN| 352-ajite NaM arahA
ekkasattariM puvvasayasahassAI agAramajhe vasittA muMDe bhavittA jAva pvvie|
evaM sagaro vi rAyA cAuraMtacakkavaTTI ekkasattariM puvva [ sayasahassAI ] jAva
[agAramajhe vasittA muMDe bhavittA] pvvie| ajita arhan ikahattara lAkha pUrva
varSa agAra-vAsa meM rahakara muMDita ho agAra se anagAritA meM pravrajita hue|
isI prakAra cAturanta cakravartI sagara rAjA bhI ikahattara lAkha pUrva varSa
agAravAsa meM raha kara muMDita ho agAra se anagAritA meM pravrajita hue|  //
ekasaptatisthAnaka samavAya smaapt|| dvisaptatisthAnaka-samavAya 353-vAvattari
suvannakumArAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| lavaNassa samudassa vAvattariM
nAgasAhassIo bAhiriyaM velaM dhaarNti| suparNakumAra devoM ke bahattara lAkha
AvAsa (bhavana) kahe gaye haiN| lavaNasamudra kI bAharI velA ko bahattara hajAra
nAga dhAraNa karate haiN| 354-samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre vAvattari vAsAiM
savvAuyaM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva svvdukkhpphiinne|there NaM ayalabhAyA
vAvattari vAsAuyaM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva svvdukkhpphiinne| zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra bahattara varSa kI sarva Ayu bhoga kara siddha, buddha, karmoM
se mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta ho kara sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue| sthavira
acalabhrAtA 72 varSa kI Ayu bhoga kara siddha, buddha, yAvat sarva duHkhoM se
rahita hue| 355-abhitarapukkharaddhe NaM vAvattariM caMdA pabhAsiMsu vA
pabhAsaMti vA, pabhAsissaMti vaa| [ evaM ] vAvattariM sUriyA taviMsu vA, tavaMti
vA, tavissaMti vaa| egamegassa NaM ranno cAuraMtacakkavaTTissa
vAvattaripuravarasAhassIo pnnnnttaao| Abhyantara puSkarArdha dvIpa meM bahattara
candra prakAza karate the, prakAza karate haiM aura Age prakAza kreNge|

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Samvayanga Sutra]  130] In the same way, seventy-two suns have shone, are
shining, and will shine in the future. Each Chaturanta Chakravarti Raja has been
said to have seventy-two thousand excellent cities (Pura).  356 - Seventy-two
arts have been described, such as:  1. Lekha (Writing) - The art of writing,
knowledge of writing in eighteen types of scripts like Brahmi, etc. 2. Ganita
(Mathematics) - Calculation, knowledge of addition, subtraction, etc. of
numbers. 3. Rupa (Drawing) - Knowledge of creating forms (pictures) on cloth,
walls, silver, gold plates, etc. 4. Natya (Drama) - Knowledge of dancing and
acting. 5. Gita (Singing) - Skill in singing. 6. Vady (Music) - The art of
playing various types of musical instruments. 7. Svargata (Melody) - The art of
producing sounds in various types of ragas and raginis. 8. Pushkaragata
(Pushkar) - Knowledge of a specific musical instrument called Pushkar. 9.
Samatal (Rhythm) - The art of playing with a uniform rhythm. 10. Dyuta
(Gambling) - The art of playing gambling games. 11. Janavada (Folklore) -
Knowledge of folk tales and legends. 12. Porekaccha (Specific) - Knowledge of a
specific musical instrument. 13. Ashtapadi (Chess) - The art of playing games
like chess, chausar, etc. 14. Dakamrittika (Clay Modeling) - The art of making
clay toys, etc. with the help of water. 15. Annavidhi (Cooking) - The art of
making various types of food. 16. Panavidhi (Drinks) - The art of making various
types of drinks. 17. Vaththavidhi (Clothing) - The art of making various types
of clothing. 18. Sayanavidhi (Beds) - The art of making various types of beds.
19. Aja (Unborn) - The art of predicting the future. 20. Paheliya (Riddle) - The
art of solving riddles. 21. Magahiya (Pathfinding) - The art of finding paths.
22. Gaha (House) - The art of building houses. 23. Siloga (Logic) - The art of
logical reasoning. 24. Gandhajutti (Perfume) - The art of making perfumes. 25.
Madhusittha (Sweet) - The art of making sweets. 26. Abharana Vidhi (Jewelry) -
The art of making jewelry. 27. Tarunipadikamma (Youthful) - The art of
understanding the characteristics of youth. 28. Itthilakkhana (Female) - The art
of understanding the characteristics of women. 29. Purisalakkhana (Male) - The
art of understanding the characteristics of men. 30. Hayalakkhana (Horse) - The
art of understanding the characteristics of horses. 31. Gayalakkhana (Elephant)
- The art of understanding the characteristics of elephants. 32. Gonalakkhana
(Cow) - The art of understanding the characteristics of cows. 33.
Kukkudalakkhana (Chicken) - The art of understanding the characteristics of
chickens. 34. Mindhayalakkhana (Monkey) - The art of understanding the
characteristics of monkeys. 35. Chakkalakkhana (Wheel) - The art of
understanding the characteristics of wheels. 36. Chhattalakkhana (Umbrella) -
The art of understanding the characteristics of umbrellas. 37. Dandalakkhana
(Stick) - The art of understanding the characteristics of sticks. 38.
Asalakkhana (Sword) - The art of understanding the characteristics of swords.
39. Manilakkhana (Gem) - The art of understanding the characteristics of gems.
40. Kaganilakkhana (Mirror) - The art of understanding the characteristics of
mirrors. 41. Chammalakkhana (Leather) - The art of understanding the
characteristics of leather. 42. Chandachariya (Moon) - The art of understanding
the movements of the moon. 43. Surachariya (Sun) - The art of understanding the
movements of the sun. 44. Rahuchariya (Rahu) - The art of understanding the
movements of Rahu. 45. Gahachariya (Planets) - The art of understanding the
movements of planets. 46. Sobhagakara (Auspicious) - The art of understanding
auspicious signs. 47. Dobhagakara (Inauspicious) - The art of understanding
inauspicious signs. 48. Vijjagaya (Knowledge) - The art of acquiring knowledge.
49. Mantragaya (Mantras) - The art of understanding mantras. 50. Rahasya
(Secrets) - The art of understanding secrets. 51. Sabhasam (Assembly) - The art
of conducting assemblies. 52. Char (Conduct) - The art of good conduct. 53.
Padichar (Service) - The art of serving others. 54. Buha (Building) - The art of
building structures. 55. Padibuha (Repairing) - The art of repairing structures.
56. Khandhavaraman (Measurement) - The art of measuring land. 57. Nagaraman
(City Measurement) - The art of measuring cities. 58. Vaththuman (Material
Measurement) - The art of measuring materials. 59. Khandhavaranivesa (Land
Settlement) - The art of settling land. 60. Vaththunivesa (Material Settlement)
- The art of settling materials. 61. Nagaranivesa (City Settlement) - The art of
settling cities. 62. Isattha (Desire) - The art of understanding desires. 63.
Charuppavaya (Sixteen) - The art of understanding the sixteen types of desires.
64. Asasikkha (Horse Training) - The art of training horses. 65. Hatthisikkha
(Elephant Training) - The art of training elephants. 66. Dhanuvveya (Archery) -
The art of archery. 67. Hirannapaga Suvannapaga Manipaga Dhatupaga (Gold,
Silver, Gem, Metal) - The art of working with gold, silver, gems, and metals.
68. Bahujuddha Dandajuddha Mutthijuddha Atthijuddha Juddha Nijuddha
Juddhaijuddha (Fighting) - The art of fighting with arms, sticks, fists, bones,
etc. 69. Suttakheda Naliyaakheda Vatttakheda Dhammakheda Chammkheda (Field)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130] [ samavAyAGgasUtra isI prakAra bahattara sUrya tapate the, tapate haiM
aura Age tpeNge| pratyeka cAturanta cakravartI rAjA ke bahattara hajAra uttama
pura (nagara) kahe gaye haiM  /  356 - vAvattariM kalAo paNNattAo, taM jahA -
lehaM 1, gaNiyaM 2, rUvaM, 3 naTaM 4, gIyaM 4, vAiyaM 6, saragayaM 7,
pukkharagayaM 8, samatAlaM 9, ,jUyaM 10, jaNavAyaM 11, porekaccaM 12, aTThAvayaM
13, dagamaTTiyaM 14, annavihI 15, pANavihI 16, vatthavihI 17, sayaNavihI 18,
ajaM 19, paheliyaM 20, mAgahiyaM 21, gAhaM 22, silogaM 23, gaMdhajuttiM 24,
madhusitthaM 25, AbharaNavihI 26, taruNIpaDikammaM 27, itthIlakkhaNaM 28,
purisalakkhaNaM 29, , hayalakkhaNaM 30, , gayalakkhaNaM 31, goNalakkhaNaM 32,
kukkuDalakkhaNaM 33, miMDhayalakkhaNaM 34, cakkalakkhaNaM 35, chattalakkhaNaM
36, daMDalakkhaNaM 37, asilakkhaNaM 38, maNilakkhaNaM 39, kAgaNilakkhaNaM 40,
cammalakkhaNaM 41, caMdacariyaM 42, sUracariyaM 43, rAhucariyaM 44, gahacariyaM
45, sobhAgakaraM 46, dobhAgakaraM 47, vijjAgayaM 48, maMtagayaM 49, rahassagayaM
50, sabhAsaM 51, cAraM 52, paDicAraM 53, bUhaM 54, paDibUhaM 55,
khaMdhAvAramANaM 56, nagaramANaM 57, vatthumANaM 58, khaMdhAvAranivesaM 59,
vatthunivesaM 60, nagaranivesa 61, IsatthaM 62, charuppavAyaM 63, AsasikkhaM 64,
hatthisikkhaM 65, dhaNuvveyaM 66, hiraNNapAgaM suvaNNapAgaM maNipAgaM dhAtupAgaM
67, bAhujuddhaM daMDajuddhaM muTThijuddhaM aTThijuddhaM juddhaM nijuddhaM
juddhAijuddhaM 68, suttakheDaM nAliyAkheDaM vaTTakheDaM dhammakheDaM cammakheDaM
69, , pattachejjaM kaDagacchejjaM 70, sajIvaM nijjIvaM 71, sauNiruyaM 72  /
bahattara kalAeM kahI gaI haiM, jaise 1. lekhakalA - likhane kI kalA, brAhmI Adi
aTThAraha prakAra kI lipiyoM ke likhane kA vijJAna | 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
gaNitakalA - gaNanA, saMkhyA jor3a bAkI Adi kA jJAna  /  -vastra, bhitti,
rajata, suvarNapaTTAdi para rUpa (citra) nirmANa kA jJAna  /  rUpakalAnATyakalA
- nAcane aura abhinaya karane kA jJAna  /  gItakalA - gAne kA cAturya  /
vAdyakalA - aneka prakAra ke bAje bajAne kI kalA  /  svaragatakalA aneka prakAra
ke rAga-rAginiyoM meM svara nikAlane kI kalA  /  puSkaragatakalA - puSkara
nAmaka vAdya-vizeSa kA jJAna  /  samatAlakalA - samAna tAla se bajAne kI kalA  /
- - 10. dyUtakalA - juA khelane kI kalA  /  11. janavAdakalA - janazruti aura
kiMvadantiyoM ko jAnanA  /  12. puSkaragatakalA - vAdya - vizeSa kA jJAna  /
13. aSTApadakalA - zataraMja, causara Adi khelane kI kalA  /  14.
dakamRttikAkalA - jala ke saMyoga se miTTI ke khilaune Adi banAne kI kalA  /
annavidhikalA - aneka prakAra ke bhojana banAne kI kalA  /  15.

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 3. Dvisaptati Sthanaka-Samavaya  1. **Panavidhi Kala:** The art of making
various types of beverages. 2. **Vastravidhi Kala:** The art of making various
types of clothes. 3. **Shayanavidhi:** The art of sleeping.     * **Or
Sadanavidhi:** The art of building houses.     * **Aryavidhi:** The art of
composing Arya verses.     * **Prahelika:** The art of knowing riddles. 4.
**Magadhika:** The art of Charan-Bhats who recite praises. 5. **Gathakala:** The
art of composing stories in Prakrit and other languages. 6. **Shlokakala:** The
art of composing verses in Sanskrit. 7. **Gandhyuti:** The art of making
fragrant substances by mixing various types of scents and materials. 8.
**Madhusikth:** The art of making Mahur, a paste applied to women's feet. 9.
**Abharanavidhi:** The art of making ornaments. 10. **Tarunipratikarma:** The
art of entertaining young women. 11. **Strilक्षण:** The art of knowing the
auspicious and inauspicious signs of women. 12. **Purushalक्षण:** The art of
knowing the auspicious and inauspicious signs of men. 13. **Hayalक्षण:** The art
of knowing the auspicious and inauspicious signs of horses. 14. **Gajalक्षण:**
The art of knowing the auspicious and inauspicious signs of elephants. 15.
**Gonlक्षण:** The art of knowing the auspicious and inauspicious signs of bulls.
16. **Kukkutalक्षण:** The art of knowing the auspicious and inauspicious signs
of roosters. 17. **Mendhalक्षण:** The art of knowing the auspicious and
inauspicious signs of rams and goats. 18. **Chakralक्षण:** The art of knowing
the auspicious and inauspicious signs of the Chakra weapon. 19. **Chatralक्षण:**
The art of knowing the auspicious and inauspicious signs of an umbrella. 20.
**Dandalक्षण:** The art of knowing the auspicious and inauspicious signs of a
staff, wood, etc., held in the hand. 21. **Asilक्षण:** The art of knowing the
auspicious and inauspicious signs of a sword, saber, etc. 22. **Manilक्षण:** The
art of knowing the auspicious and inauspicious signs of gems. 23.
**Kakaniलक्षण:** The art of knowing the auspicious and inauspicious signs of the
Kakani gem. 24. **Charmalक्षण:** The art of examining leather.     * **Or:** The
art of knowing the auspicious and inauspicious signs in leather gems. 25.
**Chandracharya:** The art of knowing the auspicious and inauspicious signs
based on the movement of the moon, its right angles, curved angles, and the
moon's rise due to its position. 26. **Janit Uprag:** The art of knowing the
auspicious and inauspicious results of eclipses. 27. **Rahu Charya:** The art of
knowing the effects of Rahu's movement and the eclipses of the moon and other
planets caused by it. 28. **Grahacharya:** The art of knowing the auspicious and
inauspicious results of the movement of planets. 29. **Saubhagyakar:** The art
of knowing the ways to increase good fortune.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 3 dvisaptatisthAnaka-samavAya] [131 16. pAnavidhikalA-aneka prakAra ke peya
padartha banAne kI klaa| 17. vastravidhikalA-aneka prakAra ke vastra-nirmANa kI
klaa| 18. zayanavidhi-sone kI klaa| athavA sadanavidhi-gRha-nirmANa kI klaa|
AryAvidhi-AryA chanda banAne kI klaa| prahelikA-paheliyoM ko jAnane kI klaa|
mAgadhikA-stuti-pATha karane vAle cAraNa-bhAToM kI klaa| 22. gAthAkalA-prAkRta
Adi bhASAoM meM gAthAeM racane kI klaa| zlokakalA-saMskRtabhASA meM zloka racane
kI klaa| 24. gandhayuti-aneka prakAra ke gandhoM aura dravyoM ko milAkara
sugandhitapadArtha banAne kI klaa| 25. madhusiktha-striyoM ke pairoM meM lagAyA
jAne vAlA mAhura banAne kI klaa| 26. AbharaNavidhi-AbhUSaNa banAne kI klaa| 27.
taruNIpratikarma-yuvatI striyoM ke anuraMjana kI klaa| 28. strIlakSaNa-striyoM
ke zubha-azubha lakSaNoM ko jAnane kI klaa| puruSalakSaNa-puruSoM ke zubha-
azubha lakSaNoM ko jAnane kI klaa| 30. hayalakSaNa-ghor3oM ke zubha-azubha
lakSaNoM ko jAnane kI klaa| gajalakSaNa-hAthiyoM ke zubha-azubha lakSaNoM ko
jaannaa| 32. goNalakSaNa-bailoM ke zubha-azubha lakSaNoM ko jaannaa|
kukkuTalakSaNa-murgoM ke zubha-azubha lakSaNoM ko jaannaa| 34. meMDhalakSaNa-
meSoM-meMr3hoM ke zubha-azubha lakSaNoM ko jaannaa| 35. cakralakSaNa-cakra
Ayudha ke zubha-azubha lakSaNoM ko jaannaa| 36.. chatralakSaNa-chatra ke zubha-
azubha lakSaNoM ko jaannaa| 37. daMDalakSaNa-hAtha meM lene ke daMDa, lakar3I
Adi ke zubha-azubha lakSaNoM ko jaannaa| 38. asilakSaNa-khaGga, talavAra, vIM
Adi ke zubha-azubha lakSaNoM ko jaannaa| maNilakSaNa-maNiyoM ke zubha-azubha
lakSaNoM ko jaannaa| 40. kAkaNIlakSaNa-kAkaNI nAmaka ratna ke zubha-azubha
lakSaNoM ko jaannaa| 41. carmalakSaNa-camar3e kI parIkSA karane kI klaa| athavA
carmaratna meM zubha-azubha lakSaNoM ko jaannaa| 42. candracaryA-candra ke
saMcAra aura samakoNa, vakrakoNa Adi se udaya hue candra ke nimitta se zubha-
azubha lakSaNoM ko jaannaa| janita uparAgoM ke zubha-azubha phala ko jaannaa|
44. rAhucaryA-rAhu kI gati aura usake dvArA candra Adi grahaNa kA phala jaannaa|
45. grahacaryA-grahoM ke saMcAra ke zubha-azubha phaloM ko jaannaa| 46.
saubhAgyakara-saubhAgya bar3hAne vAle upAyoM ko jaannaa|

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[132] 47. 48. 49. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. Daubhagyakar - Knowing the measures
that increase misfortune. Vidya gat - Knowing various types of mantra-vidya.
Mantra gat - Knowing various types of mantras. - Rahasya gat - Knowing various
types of secret mysteries. - 50. 51. Samas - Knowledge of the cycle of every
object. 52. Charakala - The art of espionage, spying. 53. 54. Praticharakala -
Knowledge of the movement of planets etc. Knowledge of service and care of the
sick etc. Vyuhakala - Knowledge of forming the army in the shape of Garuda etc.
in war. 55. Prativyuhakala - Knowledge of forming the army in opposition to the
enemy's army. Skandhavaraman - Knowing the evidence of the army's camp,
encampment etc. Nagaraman - Knowing the structure of the city. 56. 57. 68. [
Samvayanga Sutra Vastuman - Knowing the standards of houses. Skandhavaranivesh -
Knowledge of making the army ready for war or encampment. Vastunivesh - The art
of placing objects in their proper place. Nagaranivesh - The art of establishing
a city in the appropriate place. Ishvastrakala - The art of shooting arrows.
Chharupravad kala - Making the hilt of the sword etc. 64. Ashvashiksha -
Knowledge of training horses for chariots and fighting in war. Hastishksha -
Knowledge of training elephants. 65. 66. Dhanurveda - Having specialized
knowledge of Dhanurvidya, including Shabdavedhi etc. 67. Hiranyapaak -
Suvarnapaak, Manipaak, Dhatupaak - Knowing the method of melting, cooking and
making their ash etc. of metals like gold, gems and iron etc. Knowing various
types of wars like Bahuyuddha, Dandayuddha, Musti yuddha, Yasti yuddha, Samanya
yuddha, Niyuddha, Yuddhati yuddha etc. 69. Knowing various types of games like
Sutra khed, Nalika khed, Vartta khed, Dharma khed, Charma khed etc. - 70.
Patrachhedya, Katakchhedya - Knowing the art of cutting and piercing leaves and
wood. Sajiv-nirjiv - Making the living look like the non-living and the non-
living look like the living. 72. Shakunirut - Knowing the language of birds. 71.
There is a difference in the names and meanings of the 72 arts. This difference
was also before the commentator. Therefore, he has instructed to know from the
worldly scriptures. One art may also be included in another. There is no
uniformity everywhere. 357 - Samucchim - Khahyarpanchiditirikhjooniaan ukkosenam
vavattarin vasasahasain thii panatta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 132] 47. 48. 49. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. daurbhAgyakara - daurbhAgya bar3hAne
vAle upAyoM ko jAnanA  /  vidyAgata - aneka prakAra kI maMtra-vidyAoM ko jAnanA
/  mantragata - aneka prakAra ke mantroM ko jAnanA  /  - rahasyagata - aneka
prakAra ke gupta rahasyoM ko jAnanA  /  - 50. 51. samAsa - pratyeka vastu ke
vRta kA jJAna  /  52. cArakalA - guptacara, jAsUsI kI kalA  /  53. 54.
praticArakalA - graha Adi ke saMcAra kA jnyaan| rogI Adi kI sevA zuzrUSA kA
jJAna  /  vyUhakalA - yuddha meM senA kI garur3a Adi AkAra kI racanA karane kA
jJAna  /  55. prativyUhakalA - zatru kI senA ke pratipakSa rUpa meM senA kI
racanA karane kA jJAna  /  skandhAvAramAna - senA ke zivira, par3Ava Adi ke
pramANa kA jAnanA  /  nagaramAna - nagara kI racanA ko jAnanA  /  56. 57. 68. [
samavAyAGgasUtra vAstumAna - makAnoM ke mAna-pramANa kA jAnanA  /
skandhAvAraniveza - senA ko yuddha ke yogya khar3e karane yA par3Ava kA jJAna  /
vastuniveza - vastuoM ko yathocita sthAna para rakhane kI kalA  /  nagaraniveza
- nagara ko yathocita sthAna para basAne kI kalA  /  iSvastrakalA - bANa calAne
kI kalA  /  charuppravAda kalA - talavAra kI mUTha Adi banAnA  /  64. azvazikSA
- ghor3oM ke vAhanoM meM jotane aura yuddha meM lar3ane kI zikSA dene kA jJAna
/  hastizikSA - hAthiyoM ke saMcAlana karane kI zikSA dene kA jJAna  /  65. 66.
dhanurveda - zabdavedhI Adi dhanurvidyA kA viziSTa jJAna honA  /  67.
hiraNyapAka - suvarNapAka, maNipAka, dhAtupAka-- codI, sonA, maNi aura loha Adi
dhAtuoM ko galAne, pakAne aura unakI bhasma Adi banAne kI vidhi jAnanA  /
bAhuyuddha, daMDayuddha, muSTiyuddha, yaSTiyuddha, sAmAnya yuddha, niyuddha,
yuddhAtiyuddha Adi nAnA prakAra ke yuddhoM ko jAnanA  /  69. sUtrakheDa,
nAlikAkheDa, varttakheDa, dharmakheDa carmakheDa Adi aneka prakAra ke kheloM ko
jAnanA  /  - 70. patracchedya, kaTakachedya - patroM aura kASThoM ke chedana-
bhedana kI kalA jAnanA  /  sajIva-nirjIva- sajIva ko nirjIva aura nirjIva ko
sajIva jaisA dikhAnA  /  72. zakuniruta - pakSiyoM kI bolI jAnanA  /  71. 72
kalAoM ke nAmoM aura arthoM meM bhinnatA pAI jAtI hai| TIkAkAra ke samakSa bhI
yaha bhinnatA thI  /  ataeva unhoMne laukika zAstroM se jAna lene kA nirdeza
kiyA hai| kisI kalA meM kisI kA antarbhAva bhI ho jAtA hai  /  sarvatra
ekarUpatA nahIM hai  /  357 - saMmucchima - khahayarapaMcidiyatirikkhajoNiyANaM
ukkoseNaM vAvattariM vAsasahassAiM ThiI paNNattA  /

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Chatuhsaptaatisthanaka-Samavaya] [133 Sammurchhima Kshechara Panchendriya
Tiryanagyonika Jivas are said to have an excellent state of 72,000 years. ||
Dvisaptaatisthanaka Samavaya Sampt || Trisaptaatisthanaka-Samavaya.
358-Harivasa-Rammyavasa Jivas are said to be 72,000 yojanas long, 900 yojanas
and 17 and 1/2 yojanas. Harivarsha and Ramyakavarsha Jivas are said to be 72,000
yojanas long, 900 yojanas and 17 and 1/2 yojanas. 359-Vijay and Baldev lived for
72 lakh years, attained Siddha, Buddha, free from karma, attained Parinirvana
and free from all suffering. Vijay and Baldev lived for 72 lakh years, attained
Siddha, Buddha, free from karma, attained Parinirvana and free from all
suffering. || Trisaptaatisthanaka Samavaya Sampt. Chatuhsaptaatisthanaka-
Samavaya 360-There. Agnibhuti Ganadhara lived for 74 years, attained Siddha,
Buddha, free from karma, attained Parinirvana and free from all suffering.
Sthavira Agnibhuti Ganadhara lived for 74 years, attained Siddha, Buddha, free
from karma, attained Parinirvana and free from all suffering. 361-Nishadha
Varshadhara Parvat's Tiginch Dhra's Sitoda Mahandi flows 7400 yojanas
northwards, enters a large Ghatmukha, flows through a Vajramayi, 4 yojanas long
and 50 yojanas wide tongue, falls into a Kund with a Vajratala with a heavy
sound, with a flow like a Muktavalihar. Nishadha Varshadhara Parvat's Tiginch
Dhra's Sitoda Mahandi flows 7400 yojanas northwards, enters a large Ghatmukha,
flows through a Vajramayi, 4 yojanas long and 50 yojanas wide tongue, falls into
a Kund with a Vajratala with a heavy sound, with a flow like a Muktavalihar.
Similarly, Sita River also flows 7400 yojanas southwards from the Kesari Dhra of
the Neelavant Varshadhara Parvat, enters a large Ghatmukha, flows through a
Vajramayi, 4 yojanas long and 50 yojanas wide tongue, falls into a Kund with a
Vajratala with a heavy sound, with a flow like a Muktavalihar. Similarly, Sita
River also flows 7400 yojanas southwards from the Kesari Dhra of the Neelavant
Varshadhara Parvat, enters a large Ghatmukha, flows through a Vajramayi, 4
yojanas long and 50 yojanas wide tongue, falls into a Kund with a Vajratala with
a heavy sound, with a flow like a Muktavalihar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 catuHsaptatisthAnaka-samavAya] [133 sammUrchima khecara paMcendriya
tiryagyonika jIvoM kI utkRSTa sthiti bahattara hajAra varSa kI kahI gaI  //
dvisaptatisthAnaka samavAya smaapt|| trisaptatisthAnaka-samavAya. 358-harivAsa-
rammayavAsayAo NaM jIvAo tevattari tevattari joyaNasahassAiM nava ya eguttare
joyaNasae sattarasaya-egUNavIsaibhAge joyaNassa addhabhAgaM ca AyAmeNaM
pnnnnttaao| harivarSa aura ramyakavarSa kI jIvAeM tehattara-tehattara hajAra nau
sau eka yojana aura eka yojana ke unnIsa bhAgoM meM se sAr3he sattaraha bhAga
pramANa lambI kahI gaI haiN| 359-vijae NaM baladeve tevattariM vAsasayasahassAiM
savvAuyaM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva svvdukkhpphiinne| vijaya baladeva
tehattara lAkha varSa kI sarva Ayu bhoga kara siddha, buddha, karmoM se mukta,
parinirvANa ko prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue|  //  trisaptatisthAnaka
samavAya smaapt| catuHsaptatisthAnaka-samavAya 360-there. NaM agbhUiI gaNahare
covattari vAsAiM savvAuyaM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva svvdukkhpphiinne|
sthavira agnibhUti gaNadhara cauhattara varSa kI sarva Ayu bhogakara siddha,
buddha, karmoM se mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue|
361-nisahAo NaM vAsaharapavvayAo tigiJchidahAo sItoyA mahAnadI covattari
joyaNasayAiM sAhiyAI uttarAhimuhI pavahittA vairAmayAe jibbhiyAe caujoyaNAyAmAe
pannAsajoyaNavikkhaMbhAe vairatale kuMDe mahayA ghaDamuhapavattieNaM
muttAvalihArasaMThANasaMThieNaM pavAheNaM mahayA saddeNaM pvddi| evaM sItA vi
dakkhiNAhimuhI bhaanniyvvaa| niSadha varSadhara parvata ke tigiMcha draha se
sItodA mahAnadI kucha adhika cauhattara sau (7400) yojana uttarAbhimukhI baha
kara mahAn ghaTamukha se praveza kara vajramayI, cAra yojana lambI aura pacAsa
yojana caur3I jihvikA se nikala kara muktAvalihAra ke AkAravAle pravAha se bhArI
zabda ke sAtha vajratala vAle kuNDa meM giratI hai| isI prakAra sItA nadI bhI
nIlavanta varSadhara parvata ke kezarI draha se kucha adhika cauhattara sau
(7400) yojana dakSiNAbhimukhI baha kara mahAn ghaTamukha se praveza kara
vajramayI cAra yojana lambI pacAsa cojana caur3I jibikA se nikala kara
muktAvalihAra ke AkAravAle pravAha se bhArI zabda ke sAtha vajratala vAle kuNDa
meM giratI hai|

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[134] In the six earths excluding the fourth, seventy-four lakh
(30+25+15+3+1=74) Naraka-avasas are said to exist. ||Chatuhsapta-tisthanaka
Samavaya Samāpta|| Panchasapta-tisthanaka Samavaya 363- There were seventy-five
hundred (7500) Kevalijinas in the Sangha of Suvidhi Pushpadanta Arhan. Sital
Arhan, after residing in the Agara-vasa for seventy-five thousand previous
years, became a monk after getting his head shaved and left the Agara for the
An-agari-ta. Santi Arhan, after residing in the Agara-vasa for seventy-five
thousand years, became a monk after getting his head shaved and left the Agara
for the An-agari-ta. ||Panchasapta-tisthanaka Samavaya Samāpta|| Shatsapta-
tisthanaka Samavaya 364- Seventy-six lakh Avasas (abodes) are said to exist for
the Viddyut-kumara Devas. Similarly, for the Dvip-kumara, Disa-kumara, Udhi-
kumara, Viddyut-kumara, Stanit-kumara and Agni-kumara, these six Devas who have
both south and north Yuga-la, seventy-six lakh Avasas (abodes) are said to
exist. ||Shatsapta-tisthanaka Samavaya Samāpta|| Saptasapta-tisthanaka Samavaya
365- Bharat Raja, the Chatur-anta Chakravarti, after residing in the Kumara-avas
for seventy-seven lakh previous koti years, attained the position of Maharaj-a-
became a king. 366- Seventy-seven kings of the Anga-vamsa, after getting their
heads shaved and leaving the Agara for the An-agari-ta, became monks.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 134] [samavAyAGgasUtra 362-cautthavajjAsu chasu puDhavIsu covattari
nirayAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| cauthI ko chor3akara zeSa chaha pRthiviyoM meM
cauhattara (30+25+15+3+1=74) lAkha nArakAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| ||ctuHspttisthaank
samavAya smaapt|| paJcasaptatisthAnaka-samavAya 363-suvihissa NaM puSphadaMtassa
arahao pannattari jiNasayA hotthaa| sItale NaM arahA pannattaripuvvasahassAI
agAravAsamajhe vasittA muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvie| saMtI NaM arahA
pannattarivAsasahassAI agAravAsamajhe vasittA muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM
pvvie| suvidhi puSpadanta arhan ke saMgha meM pacahattara sau (7500) kevalijina
the| zItala arhan pacahattara hajAra pUrva varSa agAravAsa meM raha kara muMDita
ho agAra se anagAritA meM pravrajita hue| zAnti arhan pacahattara hajAra varSa
agAravAsa meM raha kara muMDita ho agAra se anagAritA meM pravrajita hue|
||pnycspttisthaank samavAya smaapt|| SaTsaptatisthAnaka-samavAya 364-chAvattari
vijjukumArAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa|evN dIva-disA-udahINaM vijjukumArida-
thaNiyamaggINaM, chaNhaM pi jugalayANaM chAvattari syshssaaii| vidyutkumAra
devoM ke chihattara lAkha AvAsa (bhavana) kahe gaye haiN| isI prakAra
dvIpakumAra, dizAkumAra, udadhikumAra, vidyutakumAra, stanitakumAra aura
agnikumAra, ina dakSiNa-uttara donoM yugalavAle chahoM devoM ke bhI chihattara
lAkha AvAsa (bhavana kahe gaye haiN|) ||ssttspttisthaank samavAya smaapt||
saptasaptatisthAnaka-samavAya 365-bharahe rAyA cAuraMtacakkavaTTI sattahattari
puvvasayasahassAI kumArAvAsamajhe vasittA mahArAyAbhiseyaM sNptte| cAturanta
cakravartI bharata rAjA satahattara lAkha pUrva koTi varSa kumAra avasthA meM
raha kara mahArAjapada ko prApta hue-rAjA hue| 366-aMgavaMsAo NaM sattahattari
rAyANo muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvviyaa|

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Collection of Seventy-Eight Stations] [Seventy-seven kings, born in the
lineage of 135 Anga-vamsa, renounced their homes and became ascetics, becoming
homeless. 367-The family of the gods of the Gardatoy and Tusita lokas is said to
have seventy-seven thousand (77,000) gods. 368-Seventy-seven lavas are said to
be in each muhurta, calculated by the number of lavas. Discussion-Lavas are a
specific measure of time. One pran is the inhalation and exhalation of a
healthy, strong, and free-from-affliction human being. Seven pranas make one
stoka. Seven stokas make one lava, and seventy-seven lavas make one muhurta.
Thus, there are three thousand seven hundred seventy-three (7 x 74 77 = 3773)
breaths or pranas in one muhurta. ||The Collection of Seventy-Seven Stations
Ends|| The Collection of Seventy-Eight Stations... 369-Sakra, the Devendra, the
Devraja, the fourth Lokapala, named Vaishramana, has the lordship, ownership,
possession, and sustenance of seventy-eight lakh (38+40=78) abodes (buildings)
of Suvarna Kumaras and Dvipa Kumaras, and he rules and protects them as a great
king, a commander-in-chief. (The abodes refer to the gods and goddesses who
reside in them. Vaishramana is the Lokapala of all of them.) 370-The elder
Akampita, having enjoyed a lifespan of seventy-eight years, became a Siddha, a
Buddha, free from karmas, attained Nirvana, and became free from all suffering.
371-Returning from Uttarayana, the sun travels from the first mandala to the
forty-first mandala, decreasing the day by seventy-eight parts of one sixty-
first part of a muhurta and increasing the Rajnikshetra (night). Similarly,
returning from Dakshinayana, it also travels, decreasing and increasing the
measure of night and day. ||The Collection of Seventy-Eight Stations Ends.||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTasaptatisthAnaka samavAya] [135 aMgavaMza kI paramparA meM utpanna hue
satahattara rAjA muMDita ho agAra se anagAritA meM pravrajita hue|
367-gaddatoya-tusiyANaM devANaM sattahattara devasahassaparivArA pnnnnttaa|
gardatoya aura tuSita lokAntika devoM kA parivAra satahattara hajAra (77000)
devoM vAlA kahA gayA 368-egamege NaM muhutte sattahattara lave lavaggeNaM
pnnnntte| pratyeka muhUrta meM lavoM kI gaNanA se satahattara lava kahe gaye
haiN| vivecana-kAla ke mAna-vizeSa ko lava kahate haiN| eka hRSTa-puSTa nIroga
aura saMkleza-rahita manuSya ke eka bAra zvAsa-ucchvAsa lene ko eka prANa kahate
haiN| sAta prANoM kA eka stoka hotA hai| sAta stokoM kA eka lava hotA hai aura
satahattara lavoM kA eka muhUrta hotA hai| isa prakAra eka muhUrta meM tIna
hajAra sAta sau tehattara (7 x 74 77 = 3773) zvAsocchvAsa yA prANa hote haiN|
||sptspttisthaank samavAya samApta  //  aSTasaptatisthAnaka-samavAya ..
369-sakkassa NaM deviMdassa devaranno vesamaNe mahArAyA aTThahattarIe
suvannakumArAdIvakumArA-vAsasayasahassANaM AhevaccaM porevaccaM sAmittaM
bhaTTitaM mahArAyattaM ANAIsara-seNAvaccaM kAremANe pAlemANe vihri| devendra
devarAja zakra kA vaizramaNa nAmaka cauthA lokapAla suvarNakumAroM aura
dvIpakumAroM ke (38+40=78) aThahattara lAkha AvAsoM (bhavanoM) kA Adhipatya,
agrasvAmitva, svAmitva, bhartRtva (poSakatva) mahArAjatva, senAnAyakatva karatA
aura unakA zAsana evaM pratipAlana karatA hai| (bhavanoM se abhiprAya unameM
rahane vAle deva-deviyoM se bhI hai| vaizramaNa una saba kA lokapAla hai|)
370-there NaM akaMpie aTThahattari vAsAI savvAuyaM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva
svvdukkhpphiinne| sthavira akampita aThahattara varSa kI sarva Ayu bhoga kara
siddha, buddha, karmoM se mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta ho sarva duHkhoM se
rahita hue| 371-uttarAyaNaniyaTTe NaM sUrie paDhamAo maMDalAo egUNacattAlIsaime
maMDale aTThahattara egasaTThibhAe divasakhettassa nivuDDhetA rayaNikhettassa
abhivuDDhettA NaM cAraM cri| evaM dakkhiNAyaNaniyaTTe vi| uttarAyaNa se lauTatA
huA sUrya prathama maMDala se unacAlIsaveM maNDala taka eka muhUrta ke
ikasaThiye aThahattara bhAga pramANa dina ko kama karake aura rajanIkSetra
(rAtri) ko bar3hA kara saMcAra karatA hai| isI prakAra dakSiNAyaNa se lauTatA
huA bhI rAtri aura dina ke pramANa ko ghaTAtA aura bar3hAtA huA saMcAra karatA
hai| ||assttspttisthaank samavAya smaapt|

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[136] The lowermost end of the Ratnaprabha earth is said to be eighty-nine
thousand yojanas away from the lowermost end of the Badvamukha Mahapatala
Kalasha. Similarly, the distance between the other Mahapatala Kalashas, Ketuk,
Yupaka, and Ishvara, should also be known.  **Explanation:** The Ratnaprabha
earth is one lakh eighty thousand yojanas thick. The Lavana Sea is one thousand
yojanas deep. The Badvamukha Patala Kalasha is one lakh yojanas deep from the
bottom of the Lavana Sea. The distance between the bottom of the Badvamukha
Patala Kalasha and the bottom of the Ratnaprabha earth is eighty-nine thousand
yojanas. This is because when one lakh one thousand yojanas (101000) are
subtracted from the total thickness of the Ratnaprabha earth (180000), the
difference is eighty-nine thousand yojanas (180000 - 101000 = 79000). Similarly,
the distance between the bottom of the other three Patala Kalashas and the
bottom of the Ratnaprabha earth should also be known as eighty-nine thousand
yojanas.  [373] The lowermost end of the sixth Ghanodadhivat is said to be
eighty-nine thousand yojanas away from the middle of the sixth earth,
Tamahprabha.  **Explanation:** The thickness of the sixth earth, Tamahprabha, is
one lakh sixteen thousand yojanas. If the Ghanodadhivat is considered to be
twenty-one thousand yojanas thick according to this text, then the distance
between the middle of the earth and the bottom of the Ghanodadhivat is eighty-
nine thousand yojanas (58000 + 21000 = 79000). However, according to other
texts, the thickness of the Ghanodadhivat below all the earths is said to be
twenty thousand yojanas. Therefore, according to them, the distance should be
known from the middle of the fifth earth to the bottom of the Ghanodadhivat
there. Because the fifth earth is one lakh eighteen thousand yojanas thick. The
middle of the earth is fifty-nine thousand yojanas, and the thickness of the
Ghanodadhivat is twenty thousand yojanas, which together make eighty-nine
thousand yojanas. The Sanskrit commentator has also expressed the possibility
that the word "bahu" should be taken to mean one thousand more, i.e., fifty-nine
thousand yojanas as the middle part.  [374] The distance between the two gates
of Jambudvipa is said to be slightly more than eighty-nine thousand yojanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136] [samavAyAGgasUtra ekonAzItisthAnaka-samavAya 372-valayAmuhassaNaM
pAyAlassa hiTThillAo caramaMtAo imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe heTThille
caramaMte esa NaM egUNAsIiM joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| evaM keussa
vi, jUyassa vi, Isarassa vi| bar3avAmukha nAmaka mahApAtAlakalaza ke adhastana
caramAnta bhAga se isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI kA nicalA caramAnta bhAga unyAsI
hajAra yojana antara vAlA kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra ketuka, yUpaka ora Izvara
nAmaka mahApAtaloM kA antara bhI jAnanA caahie| vivecana-ratnaprabhA pRthivI eka
lAkha assI hajAra yojana moTI hai| usameM lavaNasamudra eka hajAra yojana gaharA
hai| usa gaharAI se eka lAkha yojana gaharA bar3avAmukha pAtAla kalaza hai|
usake antima bhAga se ratnaprabhA pRthivI kA antima bhAga unyAsI hajAra yojana
hai| kyoMki ratnaprabhA pRthivI kI eka lAkha assI hajAra yojana moTAI meM se eka
lakha eka hajAra yojana ghaTAne para (180000.-101000-79000) unyAsI hajAra yojana
kA antara siddha ho jAtA hai| isI prakAra zeSa tInoM pAtAla kalazoM kA bhI
antara unake adhastana antima bhAga se ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke adhastana antima
bhAga kA unyAsI-unyAsI hajAra yojana jAnanA caahie| 373-chaTTIe puDhavIe
bahumajjhadesabhAyAo chaTThassa ghaNodahissa heTThille caramaMte esa NaM
egUNAsIti joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| chaThI pRthivI ke
bahumadhyadezabhAga se chaThe ghanodadhivAta kA adhastala caramAnta bhAga unyAsI
hajAra yojana ke antara-vyavadhAna vAlA kahA gayA hai| _ vivecana- chaThI
tamaHprabhA pRthivI kI moTAI eka lAkha solaha hajAra yojana hai| usake nIce
ghanodadhivAta ko yadi isa grantha ke mata se ikkIsa hajAra yojana moTA mAnA
jAve to ukta pRthivI kI madhyabhAga rUpa AdhI moTAI aThAvana hajAra aura
dhanodadhivAta kI moTAI ikkIsa hajAra ina donoM ko jor3ane para
(58000+21000=79000) unyAsI hajAra yojana kA antara siddha hotA hai| parantu anya
granthoM ke mata se sabhI pRthiviyoM ke nIce ke ghanodadhivAta kI moTAI bIsa-
bIsa hajAra yojana hI kahI gaI hai, ataH unake anusAra ukta antara pA~cavI
pRthivI ke madhyabhAga se vahA~ ke ghanodadhivAta ke anta taka kA jAnanA caahie|
kyoMki pA~cavI pRthavI eka lAkha aThAraha hajAra yojana moTI hai| usakA
madhyabhAga unasaTha hajAra aura ghanodadhi kI moTAI bIsa hajAra ye donoM mila
kara unyAsI hajAra yojana ho jAte haiN| saMskRtaTIkAkAra ne yaha bhI saMbhAvanA
vyakta kI hai ki 'bahu' zabda se eka hajAra adhika arthAt unasaTha hajAra yojana
pramANa madhyabhAga lenA caahie| 374-jaMbuddIvassa NaM dIvassa dArassa ya
dArassa ya esa NaM egUNAsIiM joyaNasahassAI sAiregaNAI abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte|
jambUdvIpa ke eka dvAra se dUsare dvAra kA antara kucha adhika unyAsI hajAra
yojana kahA gayA hai|

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eighty-one-stanza collection] [137 Discussion- Jambudvipa has four gates in the
east, south, west and north directions, named Vijay, Vaijayant, Jayant and
Aparajit. The circumference of Jambudvipa is 316227 yojanas, 3 kos, 128 dhanush
and 131/2 angul. The width of each gate is four yojanas. Subtracting the width
of all four gates, sixteen yojanas, from the said circumference and dividing the
remainder by four, the distance between one gate and another is found to be
slightly more than nineteen thousand yojanas. ||Eighty-one-stanza collection
ends|| [Eighty-stanza collection] 375- The Arhat was eighty dhanush tall. The
Triprishtha Vasudeva was eighty dhanush tall. The Achal Baldeva was eighty
dhanush tall. The Triprishtha Vasudeva reigned for eighty lakh years. 376- The
third Abbahul Kanda (part) of the Ratnapraba earth is said to be eighty thousand
yojanas wide. 377- The Devendra Devaraj Isan has eighty thousand Samanik Devas.
378- The sun rises in the north direction after entering eighty yojanas inside
Jambudvipa. Discussion- The total area of the sun's movement is five hundred and
ten yojanas. Out of this, three hundred and thirty yojanas are above the
Lavanasamudra and the remaining one hundred and eighty yojanas are inside
Jambudvipa, where it rises from the north direction. ||Eighty-stanza collection
ends|| [Eighty-one-stanza collection] 379- The Navanavmika named Bhikkhu pratima
is worshipped by four hundred and five Bhikkhadattas for eighty-one nights and
days, according to the sutra, according to the path, according to the truth,
touched, protected, adorned, purified, praised and worshipped.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAzItisthAnaka samavAya] [137 vivecana-jambUdvIpa kI pUrva Adi cAroM dizAoM
meM vijaya, vaijayanta, jayanta aura aparAjita nAma ke cAra dvAra haiM  /
jambUdvIpa kI paridhi 316227 yojana 3 koza 128 dhanuSa aura 131/2 aMgula pramANa
hai| pratyeka dvAra kI caur3AI cAra-cAra yojana hai| cAroM kI caur3AI solaha
yojanoM ko ukta paridhi ke pramANa meM se ghaTA dene aura zeSa meM cAra kA bhAga
dene para eka dvAra se dUsare dvAra kA antara kucha adhika unyAsI hajAra yojana
siddha ho jAtA hai| ||ekonaashiitisthaank samavAya samApta  //  azItisthAnaka-
samavAya 375-sejaMse NaM arahA asIiMdhaNUI uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa|tividdhe
NaM vAsudeve asII dhaNUI uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa|ayle NaM baladeve
asIiMdhaNUiM uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa|tividdhe NaM vAsudeve asIi
vAsasayasahassAiM mahArAyA hotthaa| zreyAnsa arhan assI dhanuSa UMce the|
tripRSTha vAsudeva assI dhanuSa UMce the| acala baladeva assI dhanuSa UMce the|
tripRSTha vAsudeva assI lAkha varSa mahArAja pada para AsIna rhe| 376 -Aubahule
NaM kaMDe asIi joyaNasahassAI bAhalleNaM pnnnntte| ratnaprabhA pRthivI kA tIsarA
abbahula kAMDa (bhAga) assI hajAra yojana moTA kahA gayA hai| 377-IsANassa
deviMdassa devaranno asIiM sAmANiyasAhassIo pnnnnttaa| devendra devarAja IzAna
ke assI hajAra sAmAnika deva kahe gaye haiN| 378-jaMbuddIve NaM dIve asIuttaraM
joyaNasayaM ogAhettA sUrie uttarakaTThovagae paDhamaM udayaM krei| jambUdvIpa ke
bhItara eka sau assI yojana bhItara praveza kara sUrya uttara dizA ko prApta ho
prathama bAra (prathama maMDala meM) udita hotA hai| vivecana-sUrya kA sarva
saMcArakSetra pAMca sau daza yojana hai  /  isameM se tIna sau tIsa yojana
lavaNasamudra ke Upara hai aura zeSa eka sau assI yojana jambUdvIpa ke bhItara
hai, vaha vahA~ uttara dizA kI ora se udita hotA hai| ||ashiitisthaank samavAya
smaapt|| ekAzItisthAnaka-samavAya 379-navanavamiyA bhikkhupaDimA ekkAsIiM
rAidiehiM cauhi ya paMcuttarehiM [bhikkhAsaehiM ] ahAsuttaM jAva ArAhiyA [bhavai
] /  navanavamikA nAmaka bhikSu pratimA ikyAsI rAta dinoM meM cAra sau pA~ca
bhikSAdattiyoM dvArA yathAsUtra, yathAmArga, yathAtattva spRSTa, pAlita,
zobhita, tIrita, kIrttita aura ArAdhita hotI hai|

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Samvayanga Sutra  **Chapter 81**  **Commentary:** This image of a monk
requires 81 days to complete.  The first nine days, one offering is received
each day.  The next nine days, two offerings are received each day.  This
continues, increasing the number of offerings by one each day, until the ninth
set of nine days, where nine offerings are received each day.  The total number
of offerings is 405 (9+18+27+36+45+54+63+72+81 = 405).  Except for the time of
the Gocharikal, the remaining time is spent in silent self-cultivation according
to the teachings of the Agamas.  **[138]**  **380:** There were 8100 (Ekkasi-ti
Man-pajjavana-nisaya) mind-knowers in the assembly of the Arhat.  The
Vyākhyāprajñapti states that there were 81 Maha-yugma-shat.  **Commentary:** The
word "shat" here should be understood as referring to study.  One should know
from the Agamas, through the study of the various quantities of the Krit-yugma,
Dvapara-yugma, etc., the form of the thought and the form of the internal study.
**|| Ekkasi-ti-sthānak Samvāya Samāpt ||**  **Chapter 82**  **381:** In this
Jambudvipa, or in any island, the sun traverses one hundred circles (mandala-
sayam) twice.  For example, once when it is leaving and once when it is
entering.  **Commentary:** There are 184 circles (mandala) through which the sun
travels.  Of these, it travels only once through the innermost circle of
Jambudvipa and the outermost circle of the Lavana-samudra.  It travels through
all the other circles twice - once when entering during the Uttarayana and once
when exiting during the Dakshinayana.  This sutra describes this in relation to
the 81st sthānak.  It should also be known that although there are only 65
circles above Jambudvipa, they are all referred to as "Jambudvipa" in this
sutra, in order to explain the Dhātaki-khaṇḍa, etc., and to describe the area of
the sun's travel in relation to this island.  **382:** The Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavira was conceived in the womb of Devānanda Brahmani and then transferred to
the womb of Shīla Kshatriyani after 81 nights and days.  **383:** The distance
between the top of the Mahahimalaya mountain and the bottom of the fragrant
mountain (Sogandhiya-kanda) is 100 yojanas.  The same applies to the Ruppi
mountain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ samavAyAGgasUtra vivecana- - isa bhikSupratimA ke pAlana karane meM nau-nau
dina ke nava-navaka arthAt ikyAsI dina lagate haiN| prathama nau dinoM meM
pratidina eka-eka bhikSAdatti grahaNa kI jAtI hai| dUsare nau dinoM meM
pratidina do-do bhikSAdattiyAM grahaNa kI jAtI haiN| isa prakAra pratyeka nau-
nau dinoM meM eka-eka bhikSAdatti ko bar3hAte hue nauveM nau dinoM meM pratidina
nau-nau bhikSAdattiyA~ grahaNa kI jAtI haiN| una saba kA yoga
(9+18+27+36+45+54+63+72+81 = 405) cAra sau pA~ca hotA hai| gocarIkAla ke sivAya
zeSa samaya maunapUrvaka Agama kI AjJAnusAra AtmArAdhana meM vyatIta kiyA jAtA
hai| 138] 380 - kuMthussa NaM arahao ekkAsItiM maNapajjavanANisayA hotthA  /
vivAhapannattIe ekAsIti mahAjummasayA paNNattA  /  kunthu arhat ke saMgha meM
ikyAsI sau (8100) mana:paryayajJAnI the  /  vyAkhyAprajJapti meM ikyAsI
mahAyugmazata kahe gaye haiM  /  vivecana - yahA~ ' zata' zabda se adhyayana kA
grahaNa karanA caahie| ve kRtayugma, dvAparayugma Adi aneka rAzi ke vicAra rUpa
antarAdhyayanarUpa Agama se jAnanA caahie|  //  ekAzItisthAnaka samavAya samApta
//  dvi-azItisthAnaka - samavAya 381 - jaMbuddIve [ NaM ] dIve vAsIyaM
maMDalasayaM jaM sUrie dukkhutto saMkamittA NaM cAraM carai  /  taM jahA -
nikkhamamANe ya pavisamANe ya  /  isa jambUdvIpa meM sUrya eka sau vyAsIveM
maMDala ko do bAra saMkramaNa kara saMcAra karatA hai| jaiseM-- eka bAra
nikalate samaya aura dUsarI bAra praveza karate samaya  /  - vivecana - sUrya ke
saMcAra karane ke maMDala (184) eka sau caurAsI haiN| inameM se sabase bhItara
jambUdvIpa vAle maMDala para aura sabase bAharI lavaNasamudra ke maMDala para to
vaha eka-eka bAra hI saMcAra karatA hai| zeSa sabhI maMDaloM para do-do bAra
saMcAra karatA hai - eka bAra uttarAyaNa ke samaya praveza karate hue aura
dUsarI bAra dakSiNAyaNa ke samaya niSkramaNa karate hue  /  isa sUtra meM
vyAsIveM sthAnaka kI apekSA isakA nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| dUsarI bAta yaha
jJAtavya hai ki yadyapi jambUdvIpa ke Upara sUrya ke kevala paiMsaTha hI maMDala
hote haiM, phira bhI yahA~ dhAtakIkhaMDa Adi ke nirAkaraNa karane ke lie tathA
isI dvIpa-sambandhI sUrya ke saMcAra kSetra kI vivakSA se una sabhI maMDaloM ko
'jambUdvIpa' pada se upalakSita kiyA gayA hai| 382 - samaNe NaM bhagavaM
mahAvIre vAsIe rAidiehiM vIikkaMtehiM gabbhAo gabdhaM sAharie  /  zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIraM vyAsI rAta-dina bItane ke pazcAt devAnandA brAhmaNI ke garbha
se zilA kSatriyANI ke garbha meM saMhRta kiye gaye  /  383 - mahAhimavaMtassa
NaM vAsaharapavvayassa uvarillAo caramaMtAo sogaMdhiyassa kaMDassa heTThille
caramaMte esa NaM vAsIiM joyaNasayAiM abAhAe aMtare paNNatte  /  evaM ruppissa
vi  /

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Tri-Ashitistanaka Samavaya] [The lowermost end of the Saugandhika Kanda is said
to be 8200 yojanas away from the uppermost end of the Mahahimalaya mountain.
Similarly, the distance of Rukmi should also be known. Vivechanaratnaprabha The
earth has three Kanda or divisions - Kharakanda, Pankakanda and Abbahul Kanda.
Of these, the Kharakanda has sixteen parts - 1. Ratnakanda, 2. Vajrakanda, 3.
Vaiduryakanda, 4. Lohitaksha Kanda, 5. Masaragalla, 6. Hasangarbha, 7. Pulaka,
8. Saugandhika, 9. Jyotirras, 10. Anjana, 11. Anjanapulaka, 12. Rajata, 13.
Jatarupa, 14. Anka, 15. Sphatika and 16. Rishtkanda. Each of these Kanda is one
thousand yojanas thick. In nature, the lowermost part of the eighth Saugandhika
Kanda is desired, which is eight thousand yojanas from the upper surface of the
Ratnaprabha earth. And the uppermost part of the Mahahimalaya mountain is two
hundred yojanas from the upper surface of the Ratnaprabha earth. Thus, adding
both (8000+200=8200), the distance of one hundred or eight thousand two hundred
yojanas from the upper part of the Mahahimalaya to the lowermost part of the
Saugandhika Kanda is proved. The Rukmi mountain is also two hundred yojanas
high, the lowermost part of the said Saugandhika Kanda is also 8200 yojanas away
from its upper part. ||Dvayashitistanaka Samavaya Samapt|| Tri-Ashitistanaka
Samavaya 384-Samane (Nam) Bhagavan Mahavira Vasii Raidihi Vii Kkanteihi
Teyasiime Raidiye Vattammane Gabbhao Gambham Saharie. . Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavira, after the passing of days and nights, on the thirty-third day and
night, was united from the womb of Devananda to the womb of Trishala.
385-Siyalasss Nam Arahao Tesii Gan, Tesii Ganhara Hottha. There Nam Mandiyaputte
Tesii Vasai Savvauyam Palaitta Sidde Budde Jav Savvadukkhapphiine. There were
thirty-three ganas and thirty-three ganadharas in the sangha of Shital Arhat.
The elder Mandiputra, after observing the entire lifespan of thirty-three years,
became a Siddha, Buddha, free from karma, attained Nirvana and became free from
all suffering. 386-Ushabhenam Araha Kosalie Tesii Puvvasayasahassaai Agaramzhe
Vasitta Munde Bhavitta Nam Agaraao Anagariyam Pavvaie. . Bharhe Nam Raya
Chaurantchakkavatti Tesii Puvvasayasahassaai Agaramzhe Vasitta Jine Jaae Kevali
Savvannu Savvabhavadarisi. Kaushalika Rishabha Arhat, after living in the house
for thirty-three lakhs of years in the past, became a monk and renounced the
household life. Bharat Raja, the Chaturanta Chakravarti, after living in the
house for thirty-three lakhs of years in the past, became a Kevali Jin,
omniscient, and all-knowing. ||Tryashitistanaka Samavaya Samapt||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tri-azItisthAnaka-samavAya] [139 mahAhimavanta varSadhara parvata ke UparI
caramAnta bhAga se saugandhika kAMDa kA adhastana caramAnta bhAga vyAsI sau
(8200) yojana ke antaravAlA kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra rukmI kA bhI antara
jAnanA caahie| vivecanaratnaprabhA pRthivI ke tIna kANDa yA vibhAga haiM
-kharakAMDa, paMkakAMDa aura abbahula kaanndd| inameM se kharakAMDa ke solaha
bhAga haiM -1. ratnakAMDa, 2. vajrakAMDa, 3 vaiDUryakAMDa, 4. lohitAkSa kAMDa,5.
masAragalla, 6. hasaMgarbha,7. pulaka,8. saugandhika, 9. jyotIrasa, 10. aMjana,
11. aMjanapulaka, 12. rajata, 13. jAtarUpa, 14. aMka, 15 sphaTika aura 16
rissttkaaNdd| ye pratyeka kAMDa eka eka hajAra yojana moTe haiN| prakRta meM
AThaveM saugandhika kAMDa kA adhastana talabhAga vivakSita hai, jo ratnaprabhA
pRthivI ke uparima tala se ATha hajAra yojana hai| tathA ratnaprabhApRthivI ke
uparimatala se mahAhimavanta varSadhara parvata kA uparimatala bhAga do sau
yojana hai| isa prakAra donoM ko milAkara (8000+2008200) vyAsI sau yA ATha
hajAra do sau yojana kA antara mahAhimavanta ke UparI bhAga se saugandhika kAMDa
ke adhastana talabhAga kA siddha ho jAtA hai| rukmI varSadhara parvata bhI do
sau yojana UMcA hai, usake UparI bhAga se ukta saugandhika kANDa kA adhastana
tala bhI vyAsI sau (8200) yojana ke antaravAlA hai| ||dvyshiitisthaank samavAya
samApta  //  tri-azItisthAnaka samavAya 384-samaNe (NaM) bhagavaM mahAvIraM
vAsIi rAidiehiM vIikkaMtehiM teyAsIime rAidie vaTTAmaNe gabbhAo gaMbbhaM
saahrie| . zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra vyAsI rAta-dinoM ke bIta jAne para
tiyAsIveM rAta-dina ke vartamAna hone para devAnandA ke garbha se trizalA ke
garbha meM saMhata hue| 385-sIyalassa NaM arahao tesIiM gaNA, tesIiM gaNaharA
hotthaa| there NaM maMDiyaputte tesIiM vAsAiM savvAuyaM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe
jAva svvdukkhpphiinne| zItala arhat ke saMgha meM tiyAsI gaNa aura tiyAsI
gaNadhara the| sthavira maMDitaputra tiyAsI varSa kI sarva Ayu kA pAlana kara
siddha, buddha, karmoM se mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta ho sarva duHkhoM se
rahita hue| 386-usabheNaM arahA kosalie tesIiM puvvasayasahassAiM agAramajhe
vasittA muMDe bhavittA NaM agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvie| . bharahe NaM rAyA
cAuraMtacakkavaTTI tesIiM puvvasayasahassAI agAramajhe vasittA jiNe jAe kevalI
savvannU svvbhaavdrisii| kauzalika RSabha arhat tiyAsI lAkha pUrva varSa
agAravAsa meM raha kara muMDita ho agAra se anagAritA meM pravrajita hue|
cAturanta cakravartI bharata rAjA tiyAsI lAkha pUrva varSa agAravAsa meM
rahakara sarvajJa, sarvabhAvadarzI kevalI jina hue| ||tryshiitisthaank samavAya
samApta  //

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samvayanga Sutra 140  **387** - Eighty-four lakhs of Naraka-vasas (hellish
abodes) are mentioned.  **388** -  The Arhat, the Kousali, the Rishabha, having
lived through eighty-four lakhs of previous years, attained Siddhahood,
Buddhahood, and liberation from karmas, becoming free from all suffering.
Similarly, Bharat, Bahubali, Brahmi, and Sundari, having lived through eighty-
four lakhs of previous years, attained Siddhahood, Buddhahood, and liberation
from karmas, becoming free from all suffering.  **389** - The Arhat, the
Shreyans, having lived through eighty-four lakhs of years, attained Siddhahood,
Buddhahood, and liberation from karmas, becoming free from all suffering.
**390** - The Triprith Vasudeva, having lived through eighty-four lakhs of
years, was born in the Naraka called Apratisthana, in the seventh earth, as a
Naraka.  **391** - The Devendra, the Devraja Shakra, has eighty-four thousand
Saamanika Devas.  **392** - All the Mandarachalas outside Jambudvipa are said to
be eighty-four thousand yojanas high. All the Anjanak Parvatas of
Nandishwaradvipa are said to be eighty-four thousand yojanas high.  **393** -
The Dhanupristha of the Jivas of Harivarsha and Ramyakavarsha is said to be
eighty-four thousand yojanas, sixteen yojanas, and four parts of a yojana in
circumference.  **394** - The distance between the upper charamanta and the
lower charamanta of the Pankabahula part is said to be eighty-four lakhs of
yojanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [samavAyAGgasUtra 140] caturazItisthAnaka-samavAya 387-caurAsIi
niryaavaassyshssaa| caurAsI lAkha nArakAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| 388-usabheNaM arahA
kosalie caurAsII puvvasayasahassAI savvAuyaM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva
svvdukkhpphiinne| evaM bharaho bAhubalI baMbhI suNdrii|| _ kauzalika RSabha
arhat caurAsI lAkha pUrva varSa kI sampUrNa Ayu bhoga kara siddha, buddha,
karmoM se mukta aura parinirvANa ko prApta hokara sarva du:khoM se rahita hue|
isI prakAra bharata, bAhubalI, brAhmI aura sundarI bhI caurAsI-caurAsI lAkha
pUrva varSa kI pUrI Ayu pAla kara siddha, buddha, karmamukta parinirvANa ko
prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue| _389-sijjaMse NaM arahA caurAsIiM
vAsasayasahassAiM savvAuyaM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva svvdukkhpphiinne|
zreyAnsa arhat caurAsI lAkha varSa kI Ayu bhoga kara siddha, buddha, karmamukta,
parinirvANa ko prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue| 390-tiviDhe NaM vAsudeve
caurAsIiM vAsasayasahassAiM savvAuyaM pAlaittA appaiTThANe narae neraiyattAe
uvvnne| tripRSTha vAsudeva caurAsI lAkha varSa kI sarva Ayu bhoga kara sAtavIM
pRthivI ke apratiSThAna nAmaka naraka meM nAraka rUpa se utpanna hue|
391-sakkassa NaM deviMdassa devaranno caurAsII sAmANiyasAhassIo pnnnnttaao|
devendra, devarAja zakra ke caurAsI hajAra sAmAnika deva haiN| 392-savve viNaM
bAhirayA maMdarA caurAsIiMcaurAsIiMjoyaNasahassAiM uDDhe uccatteNaM
pnnnnttaa|svve viNaM aMjaNagapavvayA caurAsIiM caurAsIiMjoyaNasahassAiM uDDhaM
uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| jambUdvIpa se bAhara ke sabhI (cAroM) mandarAcala caurAsI
caurAsI hajAra yojana UMce kahe gaye haiN| nandIzvara dvIpa ke sabhI (cAroM)
aMjanaka parvata caurAsI-caurAsI hajAra yojana UMce kahe gaye haiN|
393-harivAsa-rammayavAsiyANaM jIvANaM dhaNupiTThA caurAsIiM joyaNasahassAiM
solasa joyaNAiM cattAri ya bhAgA joyaNassa parikkheveNaM pnnnnttaa| harivarSa
aura ramyakavarSa kI jIvAoM ke dhanuHpRSTha kA parikSepa (paridhi) caurAsI
hajAra solaha yojana aura eka yojana ke unnIsa bhAgoM meM se cAra bhAga pramANa
hai| 394-paMkabahulassaNaM kaNDassa uvarillAo caramaMtAo heTThille caramaMte
esaNaM corAsIiM joyaNasayasahassAI abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| paMkabahula bhAga ke
UparI caramAnta bhAga se usI kA adhastana-nIce kA caramAnta bhAga caurAsI

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Chaturashitisthanaka-Samavaya] [It is said to be 141 million yojanas apart.
Meaning- The second pankbahul kand of the Ratnapraba earth is 84 million yojanas
thick. 395-Vivahpanattiye Nam Bhagavatiye Chaurasiin Payasahassa Padgagenam
Pannatta. According to the word count of the Bhagavati Sutra called
Vyakhyaprajnapti, 84,000 words (Avantaar study) are said. Discussion- The
Acharanga has 18,000 words and the next-next angas have twice as many words, so
the Bhagavati has 288,000 words according to different opinions. 396-Choraasiin
Nagakumaraavasaasayasahaassa Pannatta. Choraasiin Pannagasahassaain Pannatta.
Choraasiin Jonippamuhasayasahaassa Pannatta. There are 84 million abodes
(buildings) of the Nagakumara Devas. 84,000 scattered ones are said. 84 million
living beings are said. • Discussion- The place of origin of living beings is
called Yoni. This is also called the basis of birth. They are 84 million. Their
description is as follows (1) Earth, water, fire and air have seven lakh yonis
each (2800000) (2) Each and every ordinary plant has ten and fourteen lakh yonis
respectively (2400000) (3) Each of the two-sense, three-sense and four-sense
beings has two lakh yonis (600000) Devas have four lakh yonis (400000) (5)
Narakas have four lakh yonis (400000) (6) Tiryanch Panchendriyas have four lakh
yonis (400000) (7) Humans have fourteen lakh yonis (1400000) Sarvayog 8400000
Although the places of origin of living beings are countless, the yonis that
have the same qualities of color, smell, taste and touch are called one yoni
here for the sake of similarity. 397-Puvaaiyanam Sisapaheliyapajjavasaananam
Satthanatthanantaraanam Choraasiye Gunakare Pannatte. From the number of the
east to the last great number called the Shirshaprahelika, the self-location and
relocation are said to be multiples of 84 (lakh). ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturazItisthAnaka-samavAya] [141 lAkha yojana ke antara vAlA kahA gayA hai|
bhAvArtha-ratnaprabhA pRthivI kA dUsarA paMkabahula kAMDa caurAsI lAkha yojana
moTA hai| 395-vivAhapannattIe NaM bhagavatIe caurAsIiM payasahassA padaggeNaM
pnnnnttaa| vyAkhyAprajJapti nAmaka bhagavatIsUtra ke pada-gaNanA kI apekSA
caurAsI hajAra pada (avAntara adhyayana) kahe gaye haiN| vivecana-AcArAMga ke 18
hajAra pada haiM aura agale-agale aMgoM ke isase dugune pada hone se bhagavatI
ke do lAkha aThAsI hajAra pada matAntara se siddha hote haiN| 396-corAsIiM
nAgakumArAvAsasayahassA pnnnnttaa| corAsIiM pannagasahassAiM pnnnnttaa| corAsIiM
joNippamuhasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| nAgakumAra devoM ke caurAsI lAkha AvAsa
(bhavana) haiN| caurAsI hajAra prakIrNaka kahe gaye haiN| caurAsI lAkha jIva-
yoniyAM kahI gaI haiN| * vivecana-jIvoM ke utpatti-sthAna ko yoni kahate haiM  /
isI ko janma kA AdhAra kahA jAtA haiN| ve caurAsI lAkha hotI haiN| unakA
vivaraNa isa prakAra hai(1) pRthivI, jala, agni aura vAyu ina cAroM kI sAta-sAta
lAkha yoniyA~ (2800000) (2) pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa vanaspatikAya kI kramazaH
daza aura caudaha lAkha yoniyAM (2400000) (3) dvIndriya, trIndriya aura
caturindriyoM meM pratyeka kI do-do lAkha yoniyA~ (600000) devoM kI cAra lAkha
yoniyA~ (400000) (5) nArakoM kI cAra lAkha yoniyA~ (400000) (6) tiryaMca
paMcendriyoM kI cAra lAkha yoniyA~ (400000) (7) manuSyoM kI caudaha lAkha
yoniyA~ (1400000) sarvayoga 8400000 yadyapi jIvoM ke utpatti sthAna asaMkhyAta
prakAra ke hote haiM, tathApi jina yoniyoM ke varNa, gandha, rasa aura sparza
samAna guNavAle hote haiM, unako samAnatA kI vivakSA se yahA~ eka yoni kahA gayA
hai| 397-puvvAiyANaM sIsapaheliyApajjavasANANaM saTThANaTThANaMtarANaM corAsIe
guNakAre pnnnntte| pUrva kI saMkhyA se lekara zIrSaprahelikA nAma kI antima
mahAsaMkhyA taka svasthAna aura sthAnAntara caurAsI (lAkha) ke guNakAra vAle
kahe gaye haiN|

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  [142] According to Jain scriptures, the numerical places from
shat (hundred), sahasra (thousand), shatsahasra (lakh) etc. to the topmost
prahelika, the place where the multiplication by eighty-four starts for the
first time is called **svasthan** and the places beyond it are called
**sthanaantar**. For example, eighty-four lakh years is a **purvang**. This is
**svasthan** and the second place of the **purva** name obtained by multiplying
it by eighty-four lakh is **sthanaantar**. Similarly, the place obtained by
multiplying the **purva** number by eighty-four lakh is called **trutitang**
which is **svasthan** and the place obtained by multiplying it by eighty-four
lakh is called **trutit** which is **sthanaantar**. In this way, from **purva**
to the topmost **prahelika**, one should know fourteen **svasthan** and fourteen
**sthanaantar** with the multiplication of eighty-four lakh. 398- **Ushabhas**
had eighty-four **gana**, eighty-four **ganadhar** and eighty-four thousand
**shraman** (sadhu) in his time. 399- All the **vaimanik** gods have eighty-four
lakh, seventy-nine thousand and twenty-three **vimanas** as their
**vimanaavas**, as said by the Lord. **Sthanak Samavay** ends.
**Panchashtasthanak Samavay** 400- Eighty-five **uddeshan** times have been
mentioned for the **acharang** sutra including the **chulika**. **Vivechan**-
There are two **shruta skandha** of **acharang**. The first **shruta skandha**
has seven **uddeshan** in the first **adhyayan**, six in the second, four in the
third, four in the fourth, six in the fifth, five in the sixth, eight in the
seventh, four in the eighth and seven in the ninth **adhyayan**. The second
**shruta skandha** has five **adhikars** called **chulika**, out of which the
fifth **chulika** called **nishith** is a form of **prayashchit** and hence not
considered here. Out of the seven **adhyayan**, the first **chulika** of the
remaining four **chulika** has seven **adhyayan** with eleven, three, three,
two, two, two and two **uddeshan** respectively. The second **chulika** has
seven **uddeshan**. The third and fourth **chulika** have one **uddeshan** each.
The sum of all these (7+6+4+4+6+5+8+4+7+11+3+3+2+2+2+2+7+1+1=85) is eighty-five.
The reading and reciting time of one **uddeshan** is considered as one and one
reading and reciting time is called one **uddeshan** time. Thus, eighty-five
**uddeshan** times have been mentioned for the **acharang** sutra including the
**chulika**. 401- Eighty-five thousand **yojan** have been mentioned for the
**mandarachal** of **dhatkisand** from the underground **avgadh** base to the
topmost part (final height). Eighty-five thousand **yojan** have been mentioned
for the **mandaliy** **pavva** of **ruya**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 142] [samavAyAGgasUtra vivecana-jainazAstroM ke anusAra saMkhyA ke zata (sau)
sahasra (hajAra) zatasahasra (lAkha) Adi se lekara zIrSaprahelikA taka jo
saMkhyA-sthAna hote haiM, unameM jahA~ se prathama bAra caurAsI se guNAkAra
prArambha hotA hai, use svasthAna aura usase Age ke sthAna ko sthAnAntara kahA
gayA hai| jaise-caurAsI lAkha varSoM kA eka pUrvAGga hotA hai| yaha svasthAna
hai aura ise caurAsI lAkha se guNAkAra karane para jo pUrva nAma kA dUsarA
sthAna hotA hai, vaha sthAnAntara hai| isI prakAra Age pUrva kI saMkhyA ko
caurAsIlAkha se guNA karane ghara truTitAGga nAma kA jo sthAna prApta hotA hai,
vaha svasthAna hai aura use caurAsI lAkha se guNA karane para truTita nAma kA jo
sthAna AtA hai, vaha sthAnAntara hai| isa prakAra pUrva se lekara zIrSaprahelikA
taka caudaha svasthAna aura caudaha hI sthAnAntara caurAsI-caurAsI lAkha ke
guNAkAravAle jAnanA caahie| 398-usabhasva gaM arahao kosaliyassa caurAsIiM gaNA
caurAsIiM gaNaharA hotthaa| usabhassa gaM arahabho kosaliyassa caurAsIiM
samaNasAhassIo hotthaa| RSabha arhat ke saMdha meM caurAsI gaNa, caurAsI
gaNadhara aura caurAsI hajAra zramaNa (sAdhu) the| 399-savve vicaurAsII
vimANAvAsasayasahassA sattANauiMca sahassA tevIsaMca vimANA bhavaMtIti mkkhaayN|
sabhI baimAnika devoM ke vimAnAvAsa caurAsI lAkha, sattAnavai hajAra aura teIsa
vimAna hote haiM, aisA bhagavAn ne kahA hai| sthAnaka samavAya smaapt|
paJcAzItisthAnaka samavAya 400-AyArassa NaM bhagavao sacUliyAgassa paMcAsIiM
uddesaNakAlA pnnnnttaa| cUlikA sahita bhagavad AcArAGga sUtra ke pacAsI uddezana
kAla kahe gaye haiN| vivecana-AcArAGga ke do zrutaskandha haiN| unameM se
prathama zrutaskandha ke prathama adhyayana meM sAta, dUsare meM chaha, tIsare
meM cAra, cauthe meM cAra, pA~caveM meM chaha, chaThe meM pA~ca, sAtaveM meM
ATha, AThaveM meM cAra aura nauveM adhyayana meM sAta uddeza haiN| dUsare
zrutaskandha meM cUlikA nAmaka pA~ca adhikAra haiM, unameM pA~cabI nizItha nAma
kI cUlikA prAyazcitta rUpa hai, ata: usakA yahA~ grahaNa nahIM kiyA gayA hai|
sAta adhyayanoM meM se prathama meM zeSa cAra cUlikAoM meM se prathama cUlikA
meM sAta adhyayana haiM, unameM krama se gyAraha, tIna, tIna, do, do, do, aura
do uddeza haiN| dUsarI cUlikA meM sAta uddeza haiN| tIsarI aura cauthI cUlikA
meM eka-eka uddeza hai| ina sabakA yoga
(7+6+4+4+6+5+8+4+7+11+3+3+2+2+2+2+7+1+1=85) pacAsI hotA hai| eka uddeza kA
paThana-pAThana-kAla eka hI mAnA gayA hai aura eka paThana-pAThana-kAla ko eka
uddezana-kAla kahA jAtA hai| isa prakAra cUlikA sahita AcArAGgasUtra ke pacAsI
uddezana-kAla kahe gaye haiN| 401 -dhAyaisaNDassa NaM maMdarA paMcAsIiM
joyaNasahassAiM savvaggeNaM pnnnnttaa| ruyae NaM maMDaliyapavvae paMcAsIiM
joyaNasahassAiM savvaggeNaM pnnnntte| dhAtakIkhaMDa ke (donoM) mandarAcala
bhUmigata avagADha tala se lekara sarvAgra bhAga (aMtima UMcAI)

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixty-eight Stations-Collection] [Up to 143, eighty-five thousand yojanas have
been mentioned. [Similarly, both the Mandarachalas of the Pushkaravardvipaardha
should be known.] The inner circular Mandalik mountain of the thirteenth island,
Ruchak, has been said to be eighty-five thousand yojanas from the underground
Avaagadh base to the topmost part. That is, the height of all these mountains is
eighty-five thousand yojanas. 402-From the lowermost end of the Nandanaavana to
the lowermost end of the Saugandhika Kanda, it is said to be eighty-five hundred
(8500) yojanas apart. Discussion-The base of the Saugandhika Kanda is eight
thousand yojanas below the surface of Mount Meru, and the Nandanaavana is
located five hundred yojanas above the surface of Meru. Therefore, the distance
between the lowermost base of the Nandanaavana and the lowermost base of the
Saugandhika Kanda (8000+500-8500) is proven to be eighty-five hundred yojanas.
||Eighty-five Stations Collection Complete|| - Sixty-eight Stations-Collection
403-Suvidhi Pushpadanta Arhat had eighty-six ganas and eighty-six ganadharas.
Suparshva Arhat had eighty-six hundred (8600) vadi munis. 404-From the middle
part of the second earth to the lowermost end of the second Ghanodadhivat, it is
said to be eighty-six thousand yojanas apart. Discussion-The second Sharkara
earth is one lakh thirty-two thousand yojanas thick, half of which is sixty-six
thousand yojanas, and the Dhanodadhivat below that earth is twenty thousand
yojanas thick. Therefore, the distance from the exact middle part of the second
earth to the end of the second Ghanodadhivat (66+2086) is proven to be eighty-
six thousand yojanas. ||Sixty-eight Stations Collection Complete||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaDazItisthAnaka-samavAya] [143 taka pacAsI hajAra yojana kahe gaye haiN| [isI
prakAra puSkaravaradvIpArdha ke donoM mandarAcala bhI jAnanA caahie|] rucaka
nAmaka terahaveM dvIpa kA antarvartI golAkAra maMDalika parvata bhUmigata
avagAr3ha tala se lekara sarvAgra bhAga taka pacAsI hajAra yojana kahA gayA hai|
arthAt ina saba parvatoM kI UMcAI pacAsI hajAra yojana kI hai| .
402-naMdaNavaNassa NaM heTThillAo caramaMtAo sogaMdhiyassa kaMDassa heTThille
caramaMte esa NaM paMcAsIi joyaNasayAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| nandanavana ke
adhastana caramAnta bhAga se lekara saugandhika kANDa kA adhastana caramAnta
bhAga pacAsI sau (8500) yojana antaravAlA kahA gayA hai| vivecana-meru parvata
ke bhUmitala se nIce saugandhika kANDa kA talabhAga ATha hajAra yojana hai aura
nandanavana meru ke bhUmitala se pA~ca sau yojana kI UMcAI para avasthita hai|
ataH usake adhastana tala se saugandhika kANDa kA adhastana tala bhAga
(8000+500-8500) pacAsI sau yojana ke antaravAlA siddha ho jAtA hai|
||pnycaashiitisthaank samavAya smaapt|| - SaDazItisthAnaka-samavAya
403-suvihissa NaM puSpadaMtassa arahao chalasII gaNA chalasII gaNaharA hotthA
|supaasss NaM arahao chalasII vAisayA hotthaa| suvidhi puSpadanta arhat ke
chayAsI gaNa aura chayAsI gaNadhara the| supArzva arhat ke chayAsI sau (8600)
vAdI muni the| 404-doccAe NaM puDhavIe bahumajjhadesabhAgAo doccassa
ghaNodahissa heTThille caramaMte esa NaM chalasII joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare
pnnnntte| dUsarI pRthivI ke madhya bhAga se dUsare ghanodadhivAta kA adhastana
caramAnta bhAga chayAsI hajAra yojana ke antaravAlA kahA gayA hai| vivecana-
dUsarI zarkarA pRthivI eka lAkha battIsa hajAra yojana moTI hai, usakA AdhA
bhAga chayAsaTha hajAra yojana-pramANa hai tathA usI pRthivI ke nIce kA
dhanodadhivAta bIsa hajAra yojana moTA hai| isalie dUsarI pRthivI ke ThIka
madhya bhAga se dUsare ghanodadhivAta kA antima bhAga (66+2086) chayAsI hajAra
yojana ke antaravAlA siddha ho jAtA hai|  //  SaDazItisthAnaka samavAya smaapt||

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[144] The easternmost point of Mount Mandara is 78,000 yojanas away from the
westernmost point of the Goṣṭūpa Āvāsa mountain. The southernmost point of Mount
Mandara is 78,000 yojanas away from the northernmost point of the Dakbhaṣa Āvāsa
mountain. Similarly, the westernmost point of Mount Mandara is 78,000 yojanas
away from the easternmost point of the Śaṅkha Āvāsa mountain. And similarly, the
northernmost point of Mount Mandara is 78,000 yojanas away from the southernmost
point of the Dakṣīma Āvāsa mountain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 144] [samavAyAGgasUtra saptAzItisthAnaka-samavAya 405-maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa
purathimillAo caramaMtAo gothUbhassa AvAsapavvayassa paccatthimille caramaMte
esa NaM sattAsIiM joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| maMdarassa NaM
pavvayassa dakkhiNillAo caramaMtAo dagabhAsassa AvAsapavvayassa uttarille
caramaMte esa NaM sattAsIiM joyaNa-sahassAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| evaM
maMdarassa paccathimillAo caramaMtAo saMkhassAvAsapavvayassa purathimille
crmNte|evN ceva maMdarassa uttarillAo caramaMtAo dagasImassa AvAsapavvayassa
dAhiNille caramaMte esa NaM sattAsIiM joyaNasahassAhiM AbAhAe aMtare pnnnntte|
mandara parvata ke pUrvI caramAnta bhAga se gostUpa AvAsa parvata kA pazcimI
caramAnta bhAga sattAsI hajAra yojana ke antara vAlA hai| mandara parvata ke
dakSiNI caramAnta bhAga se dakabhAsa AvAsa parvata kA uttarI caramAnta satAsI
hajAra yojana ke antaravAlA hai| isI prakAra mandara parvata ke pazcimI
caramAnta se zaMkha AvAsa parvata kA dakSiNI caramAnta bhAga satAsI hajAra
yojana ke antara vAlA hai| aura isI prakAra mandara parvata ke uttarI caramAnta
se dakasIma AvAsa parvata kA dakSiNI caramAnta bhAga satAsI hajAra yojana ke
antaravAlA hai| vivecana-mandara parvata jambUdvIpa ke ThIka madhya bhAga meM
avasthita hai aura vaha bhUmitala para daza hajAra yojana vistAra vAlA hai| meru
yA mandara parvata ke isa vistAra ko jambUdvIpa ke eka lAkha yojana meM se ghaTA
dene para nabbai hajAra yojana zeSa rahate haiN| usake Adhe paiMtAlIsa hajAra
yojana para jambUdvIpa kA pUrvI bhAga, dakSiNI bhAga, pazcimI bhAga aura uttarI
bhAga prApta hotA hai| isase Age lavaNa samudra ke bhItara biyAlIsa hajAra
yojana kI dUrI para velandhara nAgarAja kA pUrva meM gostUpa AvAsa parvata
avasthita hai| isI prakAra jambUdvIpa ke dakSiNI bhAga se utanI hI dUrI para
dakabhAsa AvAsa parvata hai, pazcimI bhAga se utanI hI dUrI para zaMkha AvAsa
parvata hai aura uttarI bhAga se utanI hI dUrI para dakasIma nAma kA AvAsa
parvata avasthita hai| ataH mandara parvata ke pUrvI, pazcimI, dakSiNI aura
uttarI antima bhAga se uparyukta donoM dUriyoM ko jor3ane para (45+42-87) satAsI
hajAra yojana ke sUtrokta cAroM antara siddha ho jAte haiN| 406-chaNhaM
kammapagaDINaM Aima-uvarillavanjANaM sattAsII uttarapagaDIo pnnnnttaao| Adya
jJAnAvaraNa aura antima (antarAya) karma ko chor3a kara zeSa chahoM karma
prakRtiyoM kI uttara prakRtiyA~ (9+2+28+4+42+2=87) satAsI kahI gaI haiN|
407-mahAhimavaMta kUDassa NaM uvarimaMtAo sogaMdhissa kaMDassa heTThille
caramaMte esa NaM sattAsIiM joyaNasayAI abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| evaM
ruppikUDassa vi| mahAhimavanta kUTa ke uparima anta bhAga se saugandhika kAMDa
kA adhastana caramAnta bhAga satAsI sau (8700) yojana ke antaravAlA hai| isI
prakAra rukmI kUTa ke UparI bhAga se saugandhika kAMDa ke adhobhAga kA antara
bhI satAsI sau yojana hai| vivecana-pahale batAyA jA cukA hai ki ratnaprabhA ke
samatala bhAga se saugandhika kAMDa ATha hajAra yojana nIce hai| tathA
ratnaprabhA ke samatala se do sau yojana UMcA mahAhimavanta varSadhara parvata
hai, usake

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eighty-eighth Station-Samavaya] [145 Above the Mahahimalaya peak is the Kूट,
its height is five hundred yojanas. Adding these three (8000+200+500-8700) the
Sutrotka Satasi hundred yojanas difference is proven. Similarly, the Rukmi
Varshadhara mountain is two hundred yojanas high and the Rukmi Kूट above it is
five hundred yojanas high. Therefore, the difference of Satasi hundred yojanas
from the top of the Rukmi Kूट to the bottom of the Saugandhika Kanda is also
proven. ||Seventy-seventh Station Samavaya Complete|| Eighty-eighth Station-
Samavaya 408-In the family of the Moon and the Sun, there are eighty-eight
Mahagrahas. 409-In the Dristivaya, which is the twelfth Anga, there are eighty-
eight Sutras, such as the Ṛ, Parinata-Parinata Sutra, and so on. According to
the Nandi Sutra, there should be eighty-eight Sutras. (Their special description
is given in the 147th Station). 410-From the easternmost part of the Mandara
mountain to the easternmost part of the Gostup Avasa mountain, there is a
distance of eighty-eight thousand yojanas. Similarly, the distance of the Avasa
mountains in all four directions should be known. Discussion-In the Satasi
Station, the distance of the Avasa mountains from the Meru mountain is said to
be Satasi thousand yojanas. Adding the one thousand yojanas extension of each of
the four Avasa mountains, including the Gostup, the Sutrotka distance of eighty-
eight thousand yojanas is proven. 411-From the outer north to the south, the
Sun, while traveling in the first six months, reaches the forty-fourth Mandala,
and then, for sixty-one eighty-eighths of a Muhurta, it reduces the day-field
(day) and increases the night-field (night). [Similarly] From the south to the
north, the Sun, after completing the second six months, reaches the forty-fourth
Mandala, and then, for sixty-one eighty-eighths of a Muhurta, it reduces the
night-field (night) and increases the day-field (day).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTAzItisthAnaka-samavAya] [145 Upara mahAhimavanta kUTa hai, usakI UMcAI pA~ca
sau yojana hai| ina tInoM ko jor3ane para (8000+200+ 500-8700) sUtrokta satAsI
sau yojana kA antara siddha ho jAtA hai| isI prakAra rukmI varSadhara parvata do
sau yojana aura usake Upara kA rukmI kUTa pA~ca sau yojana UMce haiN| ataH rukmI
kUTa ke UparI bhAga se saugandhika kAMDa ke nIce taka kA satAsI sau yojana kA
antara bhI siddha hai| ||sptaashiitisthaank samavAya smaapt|| aSTAzItisthAnaka-
samavAya 408-egamegassa NaM caMdima-sUriyassa aTThAsIi aTThAsIi mahaggahA
parivAro pnnnntto| pratyeka candra aura sUrya ke parivAra meM aThAsI-aThAsI
mahAgraha kahe gaye haiN| 409-diTThivAyassa NaM aTThAsIiM suttAI paNNattAI, taM
jahA-ujjasuyaM pariNayApariNayaM evaM aTThAsIi suttANi bhANiyavyANi jahA nNdiie|
dRSTivAda nAmaka bArahaveM aMga ke sUtra nAmaka dUsare bheda meM aThAsI sUtra
kahe gaye haiN| jaise R , pariNatA-pariNata sUtra isa prakAra nandIsUtra ke
anusAra aThAsI sUtra kahanA caahie| (inakA vizeSa varNana Age 147 veM sthAnaka
meM kiyA gayA hai)| 410-maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa puracchimillAo caramaMtAo
gothubhassa AvAsapavvayassa puracchimille caramaMte esa NaM aTThAsIiM
joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| evaM causu vi disAsu nethvvN| mandara
parvata ke pUrvI caramAnta bhAga se gostUpa AvAsa parvata kA pUrvI caramAnta
bhAga aThAsI sau (8800) yojana antaravAlA kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra cAroM
dizAoM meM AvAsa parvatoM kA antara jAnanA caahie| vivecana-satAsIveM sthAnaka
meM AvAsa parvatoM kA meru parvata se satAsI hajAra yojana kA antara batAyA gayA
hai, usameM gostUpa Adi cAroM AvAsa parvatoM ke eka-eka hajAra yojana vistAra ko
jor3a dene para aThAsI hajAra yojana kA sUtrokta antara siddha ho jAtA hai|
411-bAhirAo uttarAo NaM kaTThAo sUrie paDhamaM chammAsaM ayamANe coyAlIsaime
maMDalagate aTThAsIti igasaTThibhAge muhuttassa divasakhettassa nivuDDhettA
rayaNikhettassa abhinivuDDattA sUrie cAraM cri| dakkhiNakaTThAo NaM sUrie doccaM
chammAssaM ayamANe coyAlIsatime maMDalagate aTThAsII igasaTThibhAge muhattassa
rayaNIkhettassa nivuDDattA divasakhettassa abhinivuDDittA NaM sUrie cAraM cri|
bAharI uttara dizA se dakSiNa dizA ko jAtA huA sUrya prathama chaha mAsa meM
cavAlIsaveM maNDala meM pahuMcane para muhUrta ke ikasaThiye aThAsI bhAga
divasakSetra (dina) ko ghaTAkara aura rajanIkSetra (rAta) ko bar3hA kara saMcAra
karatA hai| [isI prakAra] dakSiNa dizA se uttara dizA ko jAtA huA sUrya dUsare
chaha mAsa pUre karake cavAlIsaveM maNDala meM pahuMcane para muhUrta ke
ikasaThiye aThAsI bhAga rajanI kSetra (rAta) ke ghaTAkara

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[146] The *Samvayanga Sutra* and the *Divasakshetra* (day) communicate in an
expanded manner. Discussion - The sun remains in the *Dakshinayana* for six
months and in the *Uttarayana* for six months. When it returns from the
outermost circle of the northern direction and enters the *Dakshinayana*, it
reduces the measure of the day by two parts out of sixty-one parts of a
*muhurta* and increases the measure of the night by the same amount. Thus, when
it revolves in the forty-fourth circle, it reduces the day by eighty-eight parts
out of sixty-one parts of a *muhurta* and increases the night by the same
amount. Similarly, when it goes from *Dakshinayana* to *Uttarayana*, it revolves
in the forty-fourth circle, reducing the night by eighty-eight parts out of
sixty-one parts and increasing the day by the same amount. Thus, according to
the current minute and second, the sun reduces the day by 1 minute and 5120
seconds and increases the night by the same amount during its *Dakshinayana*
period. And it revolves, increasing the day by 1 minute and 5120 seconds and
reducing the night by the same amount during its *Uttarayana* period. According
to the above arrangement, when it revolves in the last circle of *Dakshinayana*,
the day is 12 *muhurtas* and the night is 18 *muhurtas*. And when it revolves in
the last circle of *Uttarayana*, the day is 18 *muhurtas* and the night is 12
*muhurtas*. || *Ashtaashitisthanak Samvay* ends || *Ekonanavatisthanak Samvay*
412 - *Usabha* the *Arhat* attained *kalagata* (passed away) in the third
*susamadushama* of this *avasarpini* in the western part, with eighty-nine half-
months (3 years 8 months 15 days) remaining, becoming a *siddha*, *buddha*, free
from karma, attaining *parinirvana* and being free from all suffering. The
*Shraman* *Bhagavan* *Mahavira* attained *kalagata* (passed away) in the fourth
*dushamasushama* of this *avasarpini* in the last part, with eighty-nine half-
months (3 years 8 months 15 days) remaining, becoming a *siddha*, *buddha*, free
from karma, attaining *parinirvana* and being free from all suffering. 413 -
*Harisena* the king, the *Chaturanta Chakravarti*, remained on the throne of the
great kingdom for eighty-nine hundred (8900) years. 414 - In the *sangha* of
*Shantinath* the *Arhat*, there was an excellent *Aryikasampada* of eighty-nine
thousand *Aryikas*. || *Ekonanavatisthanak Samvay* ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 146] [samavAyAGgasUtra aura divasakSetra (dina) ke bar3hA kara saMcAra karatA
hai| vivecana-sUrya chaha mAsa dakSiNAyaNa aura chaha mAsa uttarAyaNa rahatA
hai| jaba vaha uttara dizA ke sabase bAharI maMDala se lauTatA huA dakSiNAyaNa
hotA hai usa samaya vaha pratimaMDala para eka muhUrta ke ikasaTha bhAgoM se do
bhAga pramANa dina kA pramANa ghaTAtA huA aura itanA hI rAta kA pramANa bar3hAtA
huA paribhramaNa karatA hai| isa prakAra jaba vaha cavAlIsaveM maMDala para
paribhramaNa karatA hai, taba vaha muhUrta ke aThAsI ikasaTha bhAga pramANa dina
ko ghaTA detA hai aura rAta ko utanA hI bar3hA detA hai| isI prakAra dakSiNAyaNa
se uttarAyaNa jAne para cavAlIsaveM maMDala meM aThAsI ikasaTha bhAga rAta ko
ghaTA kara aura utanA hI dina ko bar3hAkara paribhramaNa karatA hai| isa prakAra
vartamAna minaTa saikaNDa ke anusAra sUrya apane dakSiNAyaNa kAla meM pratidina
1 minaTa 5 120 saikaNDa dina kI hAni aura rAta kI vRddhi karatA hai| tathA
uttarAyaNa kAla ke pratidina 1 mI.5 120 se. dina kI vRddhi aura rAta kI hAni
karatA huA paribhramaNa karatA hai| ukta vyavasthA ke anusAra dakSiNAyaNa ke
antima maMDala meM paribhraNa karane para dina 12 muhurta kA hotA hai aura rAta
18 muhUrta kI hotI hai| tathA uttarAyaNa ke antima maMDala meM paribhraNa karane
para dina 18 muhUrta kA hotA hai aura rAta 12 muhUrta kI hotI hai|
||assttaashiitisthaank samavAya smaapt|| ekonanavatisthAnaka-samavAya 412-usabhe
NaM arahA kosalie imIse osappiNIe tatiyAe susamadUsamAe pacchime bhAge
egUNaNauie addhamAsehiM [ sesehiM ] kAlagae jAva svvdukkhpphiinne|smnne NaM
bhagavaM mahAvIre imIse osappiNIe cautthAe dUsamasusamAe samAe pacchime bhAge
egaNanauie addhamAsehiM sesehiM kAlagae jAva svvdukkhpphiinne| kauzalika RSabha
arhat isI avasarpiNI ke tIsare suSamaduSamA Are ke pazcima bhAga meM navAsI
ardhamAsoM (3 varSa 8 mAsa 15dina) ke zeSa rahane para kAlagata hokara siddha,
buddha, karma-mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue| _
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra isI avasarpiNI ke cauthe duHSamasuSamA kAla ke antima
bhAga meM navAsI ardhamAsoM (3 varSa 8 mAsa 15 dina) ke zeSa rahane para
kAlagata hokara siddha, buddha, karmamukta, parinirvANa ko prApta aura
sarvaduHkhoM se rahita hue| 413-hariseNe NaM rAyA cAuraMtacakkavaTTI egaNanauI
vAsasayAhaM mahArAyA hotthaa| cAturanta cakravartI hariSeNarAjA navAsI sau
(8900) varSa mahAsAmrAjya pada para AsIna rhe| 414-saMtissaNaM arahao egUNanauI
ajjAsAhassIo ukkosiyA ajiyAsaMpayA hotthaa| zAntinAtha arhat ke saMgha meM
navAsI hajAra AryikAoM kI utkRSTa AryikAsampadA thii| ||ekonnvtisthaank samavAya
samApta  //

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Navati Sthanak - Samavay  **415** - The Arhat, Siyala, had ninety bows
(dhanu) and ninety bowmen (dhanu-uddh). The Arhat, Ajiya, had ninety ganas and
ninety ganadharas. Similarly, the Arhat, Shital, had ninety ganas and ninety
ganadharas.  **416** - Vasudeva, the son of Samyambhu, conquered the earth in
ninety years.  **417** - The distance between the topmost peak of all the
Vritta-Vaitadhya mountains and the lowermost end of the Saugandhika-kanda is
ninety thousand yojanas.  **Explanation:** The Saugandhika-kanda is eight
thousand yojanas from the flat surface of the earth, and all the Vritta-
Vaitadhya mountains are one thousand yojanas high. Therefore, the difference
between the two is ninety thousand yojanas (8000 + 1000 = 9000).  ## Ekanavati
Sthanak - Samavay  **418** - There are eighty-nine types of Vyayavrittyakarma
pratima.  **Explanation:** The term "pratima" here refers to the special type of
acceptance of devotion, service, and humility towards the sick sadhus, acharyas,
etc.  The eighty-nine types of Vyayavrittyakarma are as follows:  1. Honoring
those who are superior in qualities like darshan, jnana, charitra, etc. 2.
Standing up when they arrive. 3. Honoring them by giving them clothes, etc. 4.
Requesting them to sit down by bringing an asana when they are sitting. 5.
Offering an asana - taking their asana from one place to another. 6. Performing
Kritika karma. 7. Doing Anjali. 8. Welcoming the gurus by going forward when
they arrive. 9. Following them when they leave. 10. Sitting down when they sit
down. These ten types are Shushrusha-Vinaya.  And,  1. Tirthankara, 2. Kevali-
prajnapti dharma, 3. Acharya, 4. Vachak (Upadhyaya), 5. Stavira, 6. Kula, 7.
Gana, 8. Sangha, 9. Sambhogik, 10. Kriya (Achar) Vishist, 11. Vishist Matijnani,
12. Shrutajnani, 13. Avadhijnani, 14. Man: Paryavagyani, and 15. Kevaljnani.
These fifteen special individuals have:  1. Not having any desire for them, 2.
Devotion, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navatisthAnaka - samavAya ] navatisthAnaka - samavAya 415 - sIyale NaM arahA
nauI dhaNUiM uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthA  /  ajiyassa NaM arahao nauI gaNA nauI
gaNaharA hotthA  /  evaM saMtissa vi  /  zItala arhat navvai dhanuSa UMce the|
ajita arhat ke navvai gaNa aura navvai gaNadhara the| isI prakAra zAnti jina ke
navvai gaNa aura navvai gaNadhara the  /  416 - saMyaMbhussa NaM vAsudevassa
NauivAsAiM vijae hotthA  /  svayambhU vAsudeva ne navvai varSa meM pRthivI ko
vijaya kiyA thA  /  417-savvesiM NaM vaTTaveyaDDapavvayANaM uvarillAo
siharatalAo sogaMdhiyakaNDassa heTThille caramaMte esa NaM nauijoyaNasayAiM
abAhAe aMtare paNNatte  /  [ 147 sabhI vRtta vaitADhya parvatoM ke UparI zikhara
se saugandhikakANDa kA nIce kA caramAnta bhAga navvai sau (9000) yojana
antaravAlA hai| vivecana - ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke samatala se saugandhikakANDa
ATha hajAra yojana hai aura sabhI vRtta - vaitADhya parvata ekahajAra yojana
UMce haiN| ataH donoM kA antara navvai sau (8000 + 1000=9000) yojana siddha hai|
//  navatisthAnaka samavAya samApta  //  ekanavatisthAnaka - samavAya 418 -
ekANauI paraveyAvaccakammapaDimAo paNNattAo  /  paravaiyAvRttyakarma pratimAeM
ikyAnavai kahI gaI haiM  /  vivecana - dUsare rogI sAdhu aura AcArya Adi kA
bhakta - pAna, sevA-zuzrUSA evaM vinayAdi karane ke abhigraha vizeSa ko yahA~
pratimA pada se kahA gayA hai| vaiyAvRttya ke una ikkAnavai prakAroM kA vivaraNa
isa prakAra hai - 1. darzana, jJAna cAritrAdi se guNAdhika puruSoM kA satkAra
karanA, 2 . unake Ane para khar3A honA, 3. vastrAdi dekara sanmAna karanA, 4 .
unake baiThate hue Asana lAkara baiThane ke lie prArthanA karanA, 5 .
AsanAnupradAna karanA - unake Asana ko eka sthAna se dUsare sthAna para le jAnA,
6. kRtikarma karanA, 7.aMjalI karanA, 8. gurujanoM ke Ane para Age jAkara unakA
svAgata karanA, 9 gurujanoM ke gamana karane para unake pIche calanA, 10. una ke
baiThane para baiThanA  /  yaha daza prakAra kA zuzruSA - vinaya hai  /  tathA 1
tIrthaMkara, 2. kevaliprajJapta dharma, 3 AcArya, 4. vAcaka (upAdhyAya), 5.
sthavira, 6 . kula, 7. gaNa, 8. saMgha 9. sAmbhogika 10 kriyA (AcAra) viziSTa,
11. viziSTa matijJAnI, 12. zrutajJAnI, 13. avadhijJAnI, 14. mana: paryavajJAnI
aura 15. kevalajJAnI ina pandraha viziSTa puruSoM kI 1 AzatanA nahIM karanA, 2 .
bhakti

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[148] There are four duties: 1. Performing the Samvayanga Sutra, 2. Showing
respect, 3. Praising, and 4. Describing the four varnas (qualities). These four
duties, when performed by the fifteen mentioned above (1544-60), become sixty
different types. There are seven types of formal Vinaya: 1. Sitting near a
person worthy of Vyavritti (interaction) and learning from them, 2. Following
their instructions and acting according to their wishes, 3. Offering food and
other necessities with the feeling, "May the Acharya be pleased and give us the
Sutras and other teachings," 4. Performing Vinaya specifically for the learned
scriptures and practicing their meaning, 5. Investigating those suffering from
pain, 6. Knowing the time and place and acting accordingly, 7. Giving permission
according to the health of the sick. There are five types of Acharyas who guide
others in the five types of conduct. Besides them, there are fourteen types of
Vyavritti with the following: Upadhyaya, Tapasvi, Shaiksha, Glana, Gana, Kula,
Sangh, Sadhu, and Manojna. Thus, there are 91 types of Vinaya: 10 types of
Shushrusha Vinaya, 60 types of Anashasana etc. of Tirthankara etc., 7 types of
formal Vinaya, and 14 types of Vyavritti of Acharya etc. (10+60+7+14=91).
419-The Kalod ocean is said to be 91 lakh yojanas in circumference, slightly
more than the circumference of the earth. Discussion- Jambudvipa is one lakh
yojanas wide, the salt ocean is two lakh yojanas wide, the Dhataki Khand is four
lakh yojanas wide, and the Kalod ocean surrounding it is eight lakh yojanas
wide. The total diameter of all these is 29 lakh yojanas. According to the
calculations, the circumference of the Kalod ocean with such a diameter is
9177605 yojanas, 715 Dhanush, and slightly more than 87 angulas. In the Sutra,
it is roughly said to be slightly more than 91 lakh yojanas. 420-There were 9100
Arhats in the assembly of Kunthu, who were Avadhijnani (those who know the
limits of space). 421-The six karma-pragatis (types of karma) excluding Ayu and
Gotra karma are said to have 91 Uttar-pragatis (5+9+2+28+42+5=91). || Ekanavati
Sthanak Samvay Sampt ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 148] [samavAyAGgasUtra karanA, 3. bahumAna karanA aura 4 varNavAda (guNa-gAna)
karanA, ye cAra kartavya ukta pandraha padavAloM ke karane para (1544-60) sATha
bheda ho jAte haiN| sAta prakAra kA aupacArika vinaya kahA gayA hai-1.abhyAsana-
vaiyAvRtya ke yogya vyakti ke pAsa baiThanA, 2. chando'nuvartana-usake abhiprAya
ke anukUla kArya karanA, 3. kRtipratikRti-'prasanna hue AcArya hameM sUtrAdi
deMge' isa bhAva se unako AhArAdi denA, 4. kAritanimittakaraNa-par3he hue
zAstrapadoM kA vizeSa rUpa se vinaya karanA aura unake artha kA anuSThAna
karanA, 5. duHkha se pIr3ita kI gaveSaNA karanA, 6. deza-kAla ko jAna kara
tadanukUla vaiyAvRttya karanA, 7. rogI ke svAsthya ke anukUla anumati denaa|
pA~ca prakAra ke AcAroM ke AcaraNa karAne vAle AcArya pA~ca prakAra ke hote
haiN| unake sivAya upAdhyAya, tapasvI, zaikSa, glAna, gaNa, kula, saMgha, sAdhu
aura manojJa, inakI vaiyAvRtya karane se vaiyAvRtta ke 14 bheda hote haiN| isa
prakAra zuzrUSA vinaya ke 10 bheda, tIrthaMkarAdi ke anAzAtanAdi 60 bheda,
aupacArika vinaya ke 7 bheda aura AcArya Adi ke vaiyAvRttya ke 14 bheda milAne
para (10+60+7+14-91) ikyAnavai bheda ho jAte haiN| 419-kAloe NaM samudde ekANauI
joyaNasayasahassAiM sAhiyAiM parikkheveNaM pnnnntte| kAloda samudra parikSepa
(paridhi) kI apekSA kucha adhika ikyAnavai lAkha yojana kahA gayA hai| vivecana-
jambUdvIpa eka lAkha yojana vistRta hai, lavaNasamudra do lAkha yojana vistRta
hai, dhAtakIkhaNDa cAra lAkha yojana vistRta hai aura use sarva ora se gherane
vAlA kAloda samudra ATha lAkha yojana vistRta hai| ina sabakI viSkambha sUcI 29
lAkha yojana hotI hai| itanI viSkambha sUcI vAle kAloda samadra kI sakSama
paridhi karaNasatra ke anasAra 9177605 yojana,715 dhanuSa aura kucha adhika 87
aMgula siddha hotI hai| use sthUla rUpa se sUtra meM kucha adhika ikyAnavai
lAkha yojana kahA gayA hai| 420-kuMthussa NaM arahao ekANaiI AhohiyasayA
hotthaa| kunthu arhat ke saMgha meM ikkAnavai sau (9100) niyata kSetra ko viSaya
karane vAle avadhijJAnI the| 421-Auya-goyavajjANaM chaNhaM kammapagaDINaM
ekANauI uttarapayaDIo pnnnnttaao| Ayu aura gotra karma ko chor3a kara zeSa chaha
karmaprakRtiyoM kI uttara prakRtiyA~ (5+9+2+28+42+5=91) ikyAnavai kahI gaI haiN|
//  ekanavatisthAnaka samavAya smaapt||

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Ninety-two-Stana-Samavaya] [149 Nak-Samavaya 422- Banavay Padhimaao
Pannaattao. The images have been described. Discussion- The names of these
images are not mentioned in the original sutra, therefore, according to the
Dasha-Shruta-Skandha-Niyukti, some description of them is being done - In the
original, there are five images mentioned - Samadhi-Pratima, Upadhana-Pratima,
Vivek-Pratima, Prati-Sanlinata-Pratima and Ekaki-Vihar-Pratima. Among these,
Samadhi-Pratima is of two types - Shruta-Samadhi-Pratima and Charitra-Samadhi-
Pratima. Darshan-Pratima is not mentioned separately because it is included in
knowledge. Shruta-Samadhi-Pratima has sixty-two divisions - five from the first
Shruta-Skandha of Acharang, thirty-seven from the second Shruta-Skandha, sixteen
from the Stanaang Sutra and four from the Vyavahar Sutra. All these together
(5+37+16+4=62) are sixty-two. Although all these images are of the nature of
Charitra, however, they are only of specific Shruta-Shali, therefore, due to the
predominance of Shruta, they are called Shruta-Samadhi-Pratima. There are five
divisions of Charitra-Samadhi-Pratima in comparison to Samayik,
Chhedopasthapaniya, Parihar-Vishuddhi, Sukshma-Samparaya and Yatha-Khyat
Charitra. There are two divisions of Upadhana-Pratima - Bhikku-Pratima and
Upasak-Pratima. Among these, Bhikku-Pratima has twelve divisions like Maasi-ki-
Bhikku-Pratima, etc. and Upasak-Pratima has eleven divisions like Darshan-
Pratima, Vrat-Pratima, etc. Thus, Upadhana-Pratima has (12+11=23) twenty-three
divisions. Although many divisions of Vivek-Pratima are possible in comparison
to the internal vices like Krodha, etc. and external objects like Upadhi,
Bhakti-Pana, etc., Vivek-Pratima is said to be only one in comparison to the
general renunciation. Prati-Sanlinata-Pratima is also said to be only one,
because all three types of Sanlinata like Indriya-Sanlinata, etc. are included
in one. The fifth is Ekaki-Vihar-Pratima, but it is not counted separately
because it is included in Bhikku-Pratima. Thus, Shruta-Samadhi-Pratima sixty-
two, Charitra-Samadhi-Pratima five, Upadhana-Pratima twenty-three, Vivek-Pratima
one and Prati-Sanlinata-Pratima one, all these together make 62+5+23+1+1=92
Banavay divisions of Pratima. 423- There, Indrabhuti, having lived for Banavay
years, became a Siddha, Buddha, [free from karma, attained Parinirvana and free
from all suffering]. 424- The Mandar mountain, in the middle part of the
mountain, the abode of the Gothu, is said to be located at the end of the
mountain, at a distance of Banavay thousand yojanas. Similarly, four...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvinavatisthAnaka-samavAya] [149 naka-samavAya 422-bANauI paDimAo pnnnnttaao|
pratimAeM vAnavai kahI gaI haiN| vivecana-mUlasUtra meM ina pratimAoM ke nAma-
nirdeza nahIM hai, ataH dazAzrutaskandha-niyukti ke anusAra unakA kucha vivaraNa
kiyA jAtA hai - mUla meM pratimAe~ pA~ca kahI gaI hai-samAdhipratimA,
upadhAnapratimA, vivekapratimA, pratisaMlInatApratimA aura ekaakiivihaarprtimaa|
inameM samAdhipratimA do prakAra kI hai - zrutasamAdhipratimA aura
caaritrsmaadhiprtimaa| darzanapratimA ko bhinna nahIM kahA kyoMki usakA jJAna
meM antarbhAva ho jAtA hai| zrutasamAdhipratimA ke bAsaTha bheda haiM - AcArAGga
ke prathama zrutaskandha-gata pA~ca, dvitIya zrutaskandhagata saiMtIsa,
sthAnAGgasUtra-gata solahaaura vyavahArasUtra-gata caar| ye saba milakara
(5+37+16+4=62) vAsaTha haiN| yadyapi ye sabhI pratimAeM cAritrasvarUpAtmaka
haiM, tathApi ye viziSTa zrutazAliyoM ke hI hotI haiM, ataH zruta kI pradhAnatA
se inheM zrutasamAdhipratimA ke rUpa meM kahA gayA hai| sAmAyika,
chedopasthApanIya, parihAravizuddhi, sUkSmasAmparAya aura yathAkhyAta cAritra kI
apekSA cAritrasamAdhipratimA ke pA~ca bheda haiN| upadhAnapratimA ke do bheda
haiM - bhikSupratimA aura upaaskprtimaa| inameM bhikSupratimA ke mAsikI
bhikSupratimA Adi bAraha bheda haiM aura upAsakapratimA ke darzanapratimA,
vratapratimA Adi gyAraha bheda haiN| isa prakAra upadhAna pratimA ke (12+11=23)
teIsa bheda hote haiN| vivekapratimA ke krodhAdi bhItarI vikAroM aura upadhi,
bhakta-pAnAdi bAharI vastuoM ke tyAga kI apekSA aneka bheda saMbhava hone para
bhI tyAga sAmAnya kI apekSA vivekapratimA eka hI kahI gaI hai|
pratisaMlInatApratimA bhI eka hI kahI gaI hai, kyoMki indriyasaMlInatA Adi tInoM
prakAra kI saMlInatAoM kA eka hI meM samaveza ho jAtA hai| pA~cavI ekAkI vihAra
pratimA hai, kintu usakA bhikSupratimAoM meM antarbhAva ho jAne se use pRthak
nahIM ginA hai| isa prakAra zrutasamAdhipratimA bAsaTha, cAritrasamAdhipratimA
pA~ca, upadhAnapratimA teIsa, vivekapratimA eka aura pratisaMlInatApratimA eka,
ye saba milAkara pratimA ke 62+5+23+1+1-92 bAnavai bheda ho jAte 423-there NaM
iMdabhUtI vANaui vAsAiM savvAuyaM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe [jAva
svvdukkhpphiinne]| - sthavira indrabhUti bAnavai varSa kI sarva Ayu bhogakara
siddha, buddha, [karma-mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se
rahita] hue| 424-mandarassa NaM pavvayassa bahumajjhadesabhAgAo gothubhassa
AvAsapavvayassa paccasthimille caramaMte esa NaM vANauiM joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe
aMtare pnnnntte| evaM cauNhaM pi

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 150] [Samvayanga Sutra Avasa-Pavvayana. The Go-stupa Avasa-parvata is located
at a distance of one thousand yojanas from the westernmost part of the Mandara
mountain, which is in the middle of the Jambudvipa. Similarly, the distance
between all four Avasa-parvatas should be known. Discussion - The boundary of
Jambudvipa extends fifty thousand yojanas in all four directions from the middle
of Mount Meru. From there, the four Avasa-parvatas, including Go-stupa, are
located at a distance of forty-eight thousand yojanas within the Lavana-samudra
in all four directions. Therefore, the distance between each Avasa-parvata and
the middle of Mount Meru is proven to be one thousand yojanas. || Dvinavati-
sthana-samvay Sampt ||  ## 425] [Trinavati-sthana-samvay. The thirteenth Gan and
the thirteenth Ganadhara belonged to Chandra-prabha Arhat. There were thirteen
hundred (9300) fourteen- पूर्वी in the Sangha of Shanti Arhat. The sun, while
moving from Dakshinayana to Uttarayana or returning from Uttarayana to
Dakshinayana, makes the equal day and night unequal on the thirteenth mandala.
Discussion - There are 184 mandalas of the sun's movement. When the sun moves on
the innermost mandala above Jambudvipa, the day is eighteen muhurtas and the
night is twelve muhurtas. Similarly, when the sun moves on the outermost mandala
above the Lavana-samudra, the day is twelve muhurtas and the night is eighteen
muhurtas. Similarly, when the sun moves on the thirteenth mandala while going to
Uttarayana or returning to Dakshinayana, both day and night are equal, i.e.,
fifteen muhurtas each. If it moves further north, the day starts increasing and
the night starts decreasing. And if it moves south, the night starts increasing
and the day starts decreasing. Keeping this arrangement in mind, it is said that
the sun on the thirteenth mandala, while moving forward or returning, makes the
equal day and night unequal. || Trinavati-sthana-samvay Sampt ||  ## 427]
[Chaturnavati-sthana-samvay. The jivas of the Nishadha and Neelavanta
Varshadhara mountains are forty-nine thousand one hundred fifty-six yojanas and
one

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150] [samavAyAGgasUtra aavaas-pvvyaannN| mandara parvata ke bahumadhya deza
bhAga se gostUpa AvAsaparvata kA pazcimI caramAnta bhAga bAnavai hajAra yojana
ke antaravAlA hai| isI prakAra cAroM hI AvAsaparvatoM kA antara jAnanA caahiye|
vivecana-meru parvata ke madhya bhAga se cAroM hI dizAoM meM jambUdvIpa kI sImA
pacAsa hajAra yojana hai aura vahA~ se cAroM hI dizAoM meM lavaNasamudra ke
bhItara viyAlIsa hajAra yojana kI dUrI para gostUpa Adi cAroM avAsaparvata
avasthita haiM, ataH merumadhya se pratyeka AvAsaparvata kA antara bAnavai
hajAra yojana siddha ho jAtA hai|  //  dvinavatisthAnaka samavAya smaapt||
trinavatisthAnaka-samavAya 425-caMdappahassa NaM arahao teNauiMgaNA teNauiM
gaNaharA hotthaa| saMtissa NaM arahao teNauI cauddasapuvvasayA hotthaa|
candraprabha arhat ke terAnavai gaNa aura terAnavai gaNadhara the| zAnti arhat
ke saMgha meM terAnavai sau (9300) caturdazapUrvI the| 426-teNauI maMDalagate
NaM sUrie ativaTTamANe nivaTTamANe vA samaM ahorattaM visamaM krei| dakSiNAyaNa
se uttarAyaNa ko jAte hue athavA uttarAyANa se dakSiNAyaNa ko lauTate hue
terAnavai maNDala para paribhramaNa karatA huA sUrya sama ahorAtra ko viSama
karatA hai| vivecana-sUrya ke paribhramaNa ke saMcAramaNDala 184 haiN| inameM se
jaba sUrya jambUdvIpa ke Upara sabase bhItarI maNDala para saMcAra karatA hai,
taba dina aThAraha muhUrta kA hotA hai aura rAta bAraha muhUrta kI hotI hai| isI
prakAra jaba sarya lavaNasamadra ke Upara sabase bAharI maNDala para
paribhramaNa karatA hai, taba dina bAraha muhUrta kA hotA hai aura rAta aThAraha
muhUrta kI hotI hai| isI prakAra sUrya ke uttarAyaNa ko jAte yA dakSiNAyaNa ko
lauTate hue terAnavaiveM maNDala para paribhramaNa karate samaya dina aura rAta
donoM hI samAna arthAt pandraha-pandraha muhUrta ke hote haiN| isase Age yadi
vaha uttara kI ora saMcAra karatA hai to dina bar3hane lagatA hai aura rAta
ghaTane lagatI hai| aura yadi vaha dakSiNa kI ora saMcAra karatA hai to rAta
bar3hane lagatI hai aura dina ghaTane lagatA hai| isI vyavasthA ko dhyAna meM
rakha kara kahA gayA hai ki terAnavaiveM maNDalagata sUrya Age jAtA yA lauTatA
huA sama ahorAtra ko viSama karatA hai| ||trinvtisthaank samavAya smaapt|| .
caturnavatisthAnaka-samavAya 427-nisaha-nIlavaMtiyAoNaM jIvAo cauNauiMcauNauiM
joyaNasahassAiMekkaM chappannaM joyaNasayaM donni ya egUNavIsaibhAge joyaNassa
AyAmeNaM pnnnnttaao| niSadha aura nIlavanta varSadhara parvatoM kI jIvAeM
caurAnavai hajAra eka sau chappana yojana tathA eka

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[151 Panchanavati-Samavaya] It is said that the length of two parts out of
nineteen parts of a yojana. 428-Ajita Arhat's sangha had 9400 Avadhigyani. ||
Chaturnavati-Samavaya Sampt || Shwar. Panchanavati-Samavaya 429 -Suparshva Arhat
had 59 ganas and 59 ganadharas. 430-From the extreme end of Jambudvipa, in all
four directions, within the Lavanasamudra, there are four Mahapatala Kalashas,
which are 59,000 yojanas deep, such as- 1. Vadvamukha, 2. Ketuk, 3. Yupaka and
4. Ishwar. On both sides of the Lavanasamudra, there are 59,000 regions, which
are said to have udvedha (depth) and utsedha (height). - From the extreme end of
this Jambudvipa, in all four directions, within the Lavanasamudra, there are
four Mahapatala Kalashas, which are 59,000 yojanas deep, such as- 1. Vadvamukha,
2. Ketuk, 3. Yupaka and 4. Ishwar. On both sides of the Lavanasamudra, there are
59,000 regions, which are said to have udvedha (depth) and utsedha (height).
Discussion- In the middle of the Lavanasamudra, an area of 10,000 yojanas is
1,000 yojanas deep compared to the Samdharani-tal. After that, as you go towards
the Vedika of Jambudvipa, the depth decreases by one region for every 59
regions. As you go further, the depth decreases by one region for every 59
regions. According to this mathematical sequence, for every 59 hands you go, the
depth decreases by one hand, for every 59 yojanas you go, the depth decreases by
one yojana, and for every 59,000 yojanas you go, the depth decreases by 1,000
yojanas. That means, near the Vedika of Jambudvipa, the bottom of the
Lavanasamudra becomes level with the land. Thus, compared to the depth of 1,000
yojanas in the middle of the Lavanasamudra, the coastal part of the
Lavanasamudra is 1,000 yojanas high. When you look at this from the side of the
sea coast, it means that as you go 59 regions inside the Lavanasamudra from the
coast, the height of the water on the coast decreases by one region. As you go
further 59 regions, the height of the water on the coast decreases by one
region. According to this mathematics, for every 59 hands you go, the height of
the water on the coast decreases by one hand, for every 59 yojanas you go, the
height of the water on the coast decreases by one yojana, and for every 59,000
yojanas you go, the height of the water on the coast decreases by 1,000 yojanas.
Both statements mean the same thing- what is called udvedha or depth in the
middle of the sea is called utsedha or height compared to the coastal part of
the sea. Thus, it is concluded that as you go 59,000 yojanas ahead from the
coast of the Lavanasamudra,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [151 paJcanavatisthAnaka-samavAya] yojana ke unnIsa bhAgoM meM se do bhAga
pramANa lambI kahI gaI hai| 428-ajiyassa NaM arahao cauNauI ohinANisayA hotthaa|
ajita arhat ke saMgha meM caurAnavai sau (9400) avadhijJAnI the|  //
caturnavatisthAnaka samavAya samApta  //  shvr| paJcanavatisthAnaka-samavAya 429
-supAsassa NaM arahao paMcANauigaNA paMcANauiM gaNaharA hotthaa| supArzva arhat
ke paMcAnavai gaNa aura paMcAnavai gaNadhara the| 430-jaMbuddIvassa NaM dIvasasa
caramaMtAo cauddisiM lavaNasamudaM paMcANauI paMcANauI joyaNa-sahassAI ogAhittA
cattAri mahApAyAlakalasA paNNattA, taM jahA-valayAmuhe keUe jUyae iisre|
lavaNasamuddassa ubhao pAsaM pi paMcANauyaM paMcANauyaM padesAo
uvvehussehaparihANIe pnnnnttaa| - isa jambUdvIpa ke caramAnta bhAga se cAroM
dizAoM meM lavaNasamudra ke bhItara paMcAnavai-paMcAnavai hajAra yojana
avagAhana karane para cAra mahApAtAla kalaza haiM, jaise- 1. var3avAmukha, 2.
ketuka, 3. yUpaka aura 4. iishvr| lavaNasamudra ke ubhaya pArzva paMcAnavai-
paMcAnavai pradeza para udvedha (gaharAI) aura utsedha (u~cAI) vAle kahe gaye
haiN| vivecana-lavaNasamudra ke madhya meM daza hajAra yojana-pramANa kSetra
samadharaNItala kI apekSA eka hajAra yojana gaharA he| tadanantara jambUdvIpa kI
vedikA kI ora paMcAnavai pradeza Age Ane para gaharAI eka pradeza kama ho jAtI
hai| usase bhI Age paMcAnavai pradeza Ane para gaharAI aura bhI eka pradeza kama
ho jAtI hai| isa gaNitakrama ke anusAra paMcAnavai hAtha jAne para eka hAtha,
paMcAnavai yojana jAne para eka yojana aura paMcAnavai hajAra yojana jAne para
eka hajAra yojana gaharAI kama ho jAtI hai| arthAt jambUdvIpa kI vedikA ke
samIpa lavaNasamudra kA talabhAga bhUmi ke samAnatala vAlA ho jAtA hai| isa
prakAraM lavaNa samudra ke madhya bhAga ke eka hajAra yojana kI gaharAI kI
apekSA lavaNa samudra kA taTa bhAga eka hajAra yojana UMcA hai| jaba isI bAta ko
samudrataTa kI ora se dekhate haiM, taba yaha artha nikalatA hai ki taTa bhAga
se lavaNa samudra ke bhItara paMcAnavai pradeza jAne para taTa ke jala kI UMcAI
eka pradeza kama ho jAtI hai, Age paMcAnavai pradeza jAne para taTa ke jala kI
UMcAI eka pradeza aura kama ho jAtI hai| isI gaNita ke anusAra paMcAnavai hAtha
jAne para eka hAtha, paMcAnavai yojana jAne para eka yojana aura paMcAnavai
hajAra yojana Age jAne para eka hajAra yojana samudra taTavartI jala kI UMcAI
kama ho jAtI hai| donoM prakAra ke kathana kA artha eka hI hai-samudra ke madhya
bhAga kI apekSA jise udvedha yA gaharAI kahA gayA hai use hI samudra ke taTa
bhAga kI apekSA utsedha yA UMcAI kahA gayA hai| isa prakAra yaha niSkarSa nikalA
ki lavaNasamudra ke taTa se paMcAnavai hajAra yojana Age jAne

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Samvayanga Sutra - Chapters 152 & 61  **Chapter 152**  [The middle portion
of the Samvayanga Sutra, extending for ten thousand yojanas, is one thousand
yojanas deep everywhere. And the water portion before it, on all sides, is
progressively shallower towards the seashore.  **431** - Kunthu Arhat, having
enjoyed a lifespan of fifty-nine thousand years, attained the state of Siddha,
Buddha, liberated from karma, attained Nirvana, and became free from all
suffering. The elder Mauryaputra, having enjoyed a lifespan of fifty-nine
thousand years, attained the state of Siddha, Buddha, liberated from karma,
attained Nirvana, and became free from all suffering.  **|| End of the Fifty-
ninth Chapter of the Samvayanga Sutra ||**  **Chapter 61**  **432** - Each
Chaturanta Chakravarti Raja (king) had sixty-nine crore villages (in his
kingdom).  **433** - The Vayu Kumaras (celestial beings) are said to have sixty-
nine lakh abodes (buildings).  **434** - The practical danda (unit of
measurement) is sixty-nine angulas (inches) in length. Similarly, one should
know the measurements of the dhanu (bow), nalika (pipe), yuga (yoke), akkha
(axle), and musala (pestle).  **Discussion** - There are two types of angulas:
practical and impractical. The angula used for measuring hastas (hands), dhanus
(bows), gavyutis (a type of rope), etc., is called the practical angula. The
impractical angula varies in size depending on the individual's finger length.
It is not being discussed here. One hasta is twenty-four angulas, and one danda
is four hastas. Therefore, one danda is sixty-nine angulas (24 x 4 = 96).
Similarly, the dhanu, etc., are also sixty-nine angulas in length.  **435** -
The first muhurta (auspicious time) on the inner circle, when the sun is moving,
is said to have a shadow of sixty-nine angulas.  **|| End of the Sixty-first
Chapter of the Samvayanga Sutra ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152] [ samavAyAGgasUtra para daza hajAra yojana ke vistAra vAlA madhyavartI
bhAga sarvatra eka hajAra yojana gaharA hai  /  aura usake pahile sarva ora kA
jalabhAga samudrataTa taka utarottara hIna hai  /  431 - kuMthU NaM arahA
paMcANauI vAsasahassAiM paramAuyaM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva
savvadukkhappahINe  /  there NaM moriyaputte paMcANaur3avAsAiM savvAuyaM
pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva svvdukkhpphiinne| kunthu arhat paMcAnavai hajAra
varSa kI paramAyu bhoga kara siddha, buddha, karmamukta, parinirvANa ko prApta
aura sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue  /  sthavira mauryaputra paMcAnavai varSa kI
sarva Ayu bhoga kara siddha, buddha, karmamukta, parinirvANa ko prApta aura
sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue  /   //  paJcanavatisthAnaka samavAya samApta  //
SaNNavatisthAnaka - samavAya 432 - egamegassa NaM ranno cAuraMtacakkavaTTissa
chaNNauI chaNNauI gAmakoDIo hotthA  /  pratyeka cAturanta cakravartI rAjA ke (
rAjya meM ) chyAnavai chayAnave karor3a grAma the  /  433 - vAyukumArANaM
chaNNaudaM bhavaNAvAsasayasahassA paNNattA  /  vAyukumAra devoM ke chayAnave
lAkha AvAsa (bhavana) kahe gaye haiM  /  434 - vavahArie NaM daMDe chaNNauI
aMgulAI aMgulamANeNaM  /  evaM dhaNU nAliyA juge akkhe musale vihu  /
vyAvahArika daNDa aMgula ke mApa se chayAnave aMgula - pramANa hotA hai| isI
prakAra dhanuSa, nAlikA, yuga, akSa aura mUla bhI jAnanA cAhie  /  vivecana -
aMgula do prakAra kA hai - vyAvahArika aura avyAvahArika  /  jisase hasta,
dhanuSa, gavyUti Adi ke nApane kA vyavahAra kiyA jAtA hai, vaha vyAvahArika
aMgula kahA jAtA hai| avyAvahArika aMgula pratyeka manuSya ke aMgula - mAna kI
apekSA choTA-bar3A bhI hotA hai  /  usakI yahA~ vivakSA nahIM kI gaI hai|
caubIsa aMgula kA eka hAtha hotA hai aura cAra hAtha kA eka daNDa hotA hai  /
isa prakAra ( 24 x 4 = 96) eka daNDa chayAnavai aMgula pramANa hotA hai  /  isI
prakAra dhanuSa Adi bhI chayAnave - chayAnave aMgula pramANa hote haiN| 435 -
abbhitarao Aimuhutte chaNNaur3a aMgulacchAe paNNatte  /  Abhyantara maNDala para
sUrya ke saMcAra karate samaya Adi (prathama) muhUrta chayAnave aMgula kI chAyA
vAlA kahA gayA hai 1  //  SaNNavatisthAnaka samavAya samApta  //

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Seventy-Nine Stations-Concordance] [153 Seventy-Nine Stations-Concordance
436-From the westernmost extremity of Mount Mandara to the westernmost extremity
of the Gośtuva dwelling-mountain, the distance is said to be seventy-nine
thousand yojanas. Similarly, in all four directions. Discussion-From the western
part of Mount Meru to the eastern part of Jambudvipa, the distance is fifty-five
thousand yojanas, and from there to the western part of Mount Gośtuva, the
distance is forty-two thousand yojanas. Therefore, the distance of seventy-nine
thousand yojanas between the four dwelling-mountains, as stated in the
scriptures, is proven. 437-The eight karmas are said to have seventy-nine
(5+9+2+28+4+42+2+5=97) northern natures. 438-King Hariṣeṇa, the Cakravartin of
the four directions, after living in a house for a little less than seventy-nine
hundred (9700) years, became a monk, leaving the house for the homeless state.
|| The Seventy-Nine Stations Concordance is complete. [The Eighty-Nine Stations-
Concordance] 439-From the upper extremity of Nandana-vana to the lower extremity
of Paṇḍuka-vana, the distance is said to be eighty-nine thousand yojanas.
Discussion-Nandana-vana is situated five hundred yojanas above the level of the
earth, and its peaks, situated in all eight directions, are also five hundred
yojanas high. Therefore, the total height of Nandana-vana is one thousand
yojanas. The height of Meru is ninety-nine thousand yojanas from the level of
the earth, and subtracting the aforementioned one thousand yojanas from it, the
distance of eighty-nine thousand yojanas, as stated in the scriptures, is
proven. 440-From the westernmost extremity of Mount Mandara to the easternmost
extremity of the Gośtuva dwelling-mountain, the distance is said to be eighty-
nine thousand yojanas. Similarly, the distance between the dwelling-mountains
situated in all four directions should be known.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptanavatisthAnaka-samavAya] [153 saptanavatisthAnaka-samavAya
436-maMdarassaNaM pavvayassa paccacchimillAo caramaMtAo gothubhassaNaM
AvAsapavvayassa paccacchimille caramaMte esa NaM sattANauijoyaNasahassAiM abAhAe
aMtare pnnnntte| evaM caudisiM pi| mandara parvata ke pazcimI caramAnta bhAga se
gostubha AvAsa-parvata kA pazcimI caramAnta bhAga sattAnavai hajAra yojana
antara vAlA kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra cAroM hI dizAoM meM jAnanA caahiye|
vivecana-meru parvata ke pazcimI bhAga se jambUdvIpa kA pUrvI bhAga pacapana
hajAra yojana hai aura usase gostubha parvata kA pazcimI bhAga viyAlIsa hajAra
yojana dUra hai| ata: cAroM AvAsa parvatoM kA sUtrokta sattAnavai hajAra yojana
kA antara siddha ho jAtA hai| 437-aTuNDaM kammapagaDINaM sattANauI uttarapagaDIo
pnnnnttaao| AThoM karmoM kI uttara prakRtiyAM sattAnavai (5+9+2+28+4+42+2+5=97)
kahI gaI haiN| 438-hariseNe NaM rAyA cAuraMtacakkavaTTI desUNAI sattANauiM
vAsasayAI agAramajhe vasittA muMDe bhavittA NaM agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvie| .
cAturantacakravartI hariSeNa rAjA kucha kama sattAnavai sau (9700) varSa
agAravAsa meM rahakara muMDita ho agAra se anagAritA meM pravajita hue|  //
saptanavatisthAnaka samavAya smaapt| aSTAnavatisthAnaka-samavAya
439-naMdaNavaNassa NaM uvarillAo caramaMtAo, paMDuyavaNassa heTThille caramaMte
esa NaM aTThANauijoyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| naMndanavana ke UparI
caramAnta bhAga se pAMDuka vana ke nicale caramAnta bhAga kA antara aTThAnavai
hajAra yojana hai| vivecana-nandanavana samabhUmi tala se pAMca sau yojana UMcAI
para avasthita hai aura usakI AThoM dizAoM meM avasthita kUTa bhI pA~ca pA~ca
sau yojana UMce haiN| ataH donoM milakara eka hajAra yojana UMcAI nandanavana kI
ho jAtI hai| meru kI UMcAI samabhUmi bhAga se ninyAnavai hajAra yojana hai,
usameM se ukta eka hajAra ke ghaTA dene para sUtrokta aTThAnavai hajAra kA
antara siddha ho jAtA hai| 440-maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa paccacchimillAo
caramaMtAo gothubhassa AvAsapavvayassa puracchimille caramaMte esa NaM aTThANaui
joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| evaM caudisi pi| mandara parvata ke
pazcimI caramAntabhAga se gostubha AvAsa parvata kA pUrvI caramAnta bhAga
aTThAnavai hajAra yojana antaravAlA kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra cAroM hI dizAoM
meM avasthita AvAsa parvatoM kA antara jAnanA caahie|

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [154]  **[Samvayanga Sutra Commentary - The Sutra in the 79th place states
that the difference between the two is 98,000 yojanas. When the diameter of the
Gostubha Avasa-Parvata (mountain) of 1,000 yojanas is added to this difference,
the difference becomes 98,000 yojanas.]**  **441 - The Dhanu:Prstha (back of the
bow) of the Dakshin Bharat Kshetra (Southern Bharat region) is said to be
slightly less than 9800 yojanas in length.**  **442 - From the North, the Sun
moves towards the South for six months. When it reaches the 49th mandala
(circle), it moves for 61 muhurtas (a unit of time) out of 98, decreasing the
day-field (day) and increasing the night-field (night). Similarly, from the
South, the Sun moves towards the North for six months. When it reaches the 49th
mandala, it moves for 61 muhurtas out of 98, decreasing the night-field and
increasing the day-field.**  **Commentary - When the Sun moves through one
mandala, there is an increase of two parts of the day or a decrease of two parts
of the night out of 61 parts of a muhurta. Therefore, when the Sun moves through
the 49th mandala, there is an increase or decrease of 61 parts of a muhurta out
of 98. Whether the Sun moves from North to South or South to North, the increase
or decrease of day or night will remain the same when it revolves around the
49th mandala.**  **443 - The stars of the 19 nakshatras (constellations) from
Revati to Jyestha are 98 in number.**  **Commentary - According to astrology,
the Revati nakshatra has 32 stars, Ashwini has 3 stars, Bharani has 3 stars,
Krittika has 6 stars, Rohini has 5 stars, Mrigashira has 3 stars, Ardra has 1
star, Punarvasu has 5 stars, Pushya has 3 stars, Ashlesha has 6 stars, Magha has
7 stars, Purva Phalguni has 2 stars, Uttara Phalguni has 2 stars, Hasta has 5
stars, Chitra has 1 star, Swati has 1 star, Visakha has 5 stars, Anuradha has 4
stars, and Jyestha has 3 stars. Adding the stars of these 19 nakshatras
(32+3+3+6+5+3+1+5+3+6+7+2+2+5+1+1+5+4+3=97), according to other texts, the
number is 79. However, the present sutra states that the number of stars in the
19 nakshatras is 98. Therefore, the number of stars in one of the above
nakshatras must be one more. Only then will the number 98 mentioned in the sutra
be proven. This is the opinion of the commentator.**  **|| Ashta Navati Sthanaka
Samvay Sampt ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154] [samavAyAGgasUtra vivecana-sattAnavaiveM sthAna ke sUtra meM pratipAdita
antara meM gostubha AvAsa-parvata ke eka hajAra yojana viSkambha ko milA dene
para aTThAnavai hajAra yojana kA antara siddha ho jAtA hai| 441
-dAhiNabharahassaNaM dhaNupiDhe aTThANaui joyaNasayAI kiMcUNAI AyAmeNaM
pnnnntte| dakSiNa bharatakSetra kA dhanu:pRSTha kucha kama aTThAnavai sau (9800)
yojana AyAma (lambAI) kI apekSA kahA gayA hai| 442-uttarAo kaTThAo sUrie
paDhamaM chammAsaM ayamANe egaNapannAsatime maMDalagate aTThANaui ekasaTThibhAge
muhattassa divasaMkhettassa nivuDDhettA rayaNikhettassa abhinivuDDittA NaM sUrie
cAraM cri| dakkhiNao NaM kaTThAo sUrie doccaM chammAsaM ayamANe egUNapannAsaime
maMDalagate aTThANaui ekasaTThibhAe muhuttassa rayaNikhittassa nivuDDhettA
divasakhettassa abhinivuDDettA NaM sUrie cAraM cri| uttara dizA se sarya
prathama chaha mAsa dakSiNa kI ora AtA haA unapacAsaveM maMDala ke Upara Akara
muhUrta ke ikasaThiye aTThAnavai bhAga divasakSetra (dina) ke ghaTAkara aura
rajanIkSetra (rAta) ke bar3hAkara saMcAra karatA hai| isI prakAra dakSiNa dizA
se sUrya dUsare chaha mAsa uttara kI ora jAtA huA unapacAsaveM maMDala ke Upara
Akara muhUrta ke aTThAnavai ikasaTha bhAga rajanIkSetra (rAta) ke ghaTAkara aura
divasakSetra (dina) ke bar3hAkara saMcAra karatA hai| vivecana-sarya ke eka eka
maMDala meM saMcAra karane para maharta ke ikasaTha bhAgoM meM se do bhAga
pramANa dina kI vRddhi yA rAta kI hAni hotI hai| ataH unapacAsaveM maMDala meM
sUrya ke saMcAra karane para muhUrta ke aTThAnavai ikasaTha bhAga kI vRddhi aura
hAni siddha ho jAtI hai| sUrya cAhe uttara se dakSiNa kI ora saMcAra kare aura
cAhe dakSiNa se uttara dizA kI ora saMcAra kare, parantu unapacAsaveM maMDala
para paribhramaNa ke samaya dina yA rAta kI ukta vRddhi yA hAni hI rhegii|
443-revaI-paDhamajedrApajavasANANaM egaNavIsAe nakkhattANaM adrANauDa tArAo
tAraggeNaM pnnnnttaao| revatI se lekara jyeSThA taka ke unnIsa nakSatroM ke tAre
aTThAnavai haiN| vivecana- jyotiSazAstra ke anusAra revatI nakSatra battIsa
tArAvAlA hai, azvinI tIna tArA vAlA hai, bharaNI tIna tArAvAlA hai, kRttikA
chaha tArAvAlA hai, rohiNI pA~ca tArAvAlA hai, mRgazira tIna tArAvAlA hai, ArdrA
eka tArAvAlA hai, punarvasu pA~ca tArAvAlA hai, puSya tIna tArAvAlA hai, azleSA
chaha tArAvAlA hai, maghA sAta tArAvAlA hai, pUrvAphAlgunI do tArAvAlA hai,
uttarAphAlgunI do tArAvAlA hai, hasta pA~ca tArAvAlA hai, citrA eka tArAvAlA
hai, svAti eka tArAvAlA hai, vizAkhA eka tArAvAlA hai, anurAdhA cAra tArAvAlA
hai, aura jyeSThA nakSatra tIna tArAvAlA hai| ina unnIsoM nakSatroM ke tArAoM ko
jor3ane para (32+3+3+6+5+ 3+1+5+3+ 6+7+2+2+5+1+1+5+4+3=97) anya granthoM ke
anusAra sattAnavai saMkhyA hI hotI hai| kintu prastuta sUtra meM unnIsa
nakSatroM ke tArAoM kI saMkhyA aTThAnave (98) batAI gaI hai, ataH ukta nakSatroM
meM se kisI eka nakSatra ke tArAoM kI saMkhyA eka adhika honI caahie| tabhI
sUtrokta aTThAnavai saMkhyA siddha hogI, aisA TIkAkAra kA abhiprAya hai|  //
aSTAnavatisthAnaka samavAya samApta  /  /

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Ninety-Nine Stations-Samvaya] [155 Ninety-Nine Stations-Samvaya 444-Mandara is
said to be 99,000 yojanas high. The distance between the eastern and western
extremities of Nandana-vana is said to be 9900 yojanas. Similarly, the distance
between the southern and northern extremities of Nandana-vana is said to be 9900
yojanas. Discussion- Meru mountain is 10,000 yojanas wide on the earth and the
outer extent of Meru is 9940 yojanas and 6 parts out of 11 parts of a yojana at
the place of Nandana-vana which is situated at a height of 500 yojanas. And the
inner extent is 9940 yojanas and 6 parts out of 11 parts of a yojana. The width
of Nandana-vana is 500 yojanas. Thus, the inner extent of Meru and the extent of
500 yojanas of Nandana-vana on both sides, all together, almost become the
distance mentioned in the sutras. 445- The first solar circle in the north is
said to be 99,000 yojanas in diameter. The second solar circle is also said to
be 99,000 yojanas in diameter. The third solar circle is also said to be 99,000
yojanas in diameter. Discussion- The celestial path on which the sun revolves
around Meru is called the solar circle. When it revolves on the first circle in
the north, the length of that circle in the form of a sphere is 99,640 yojanas.
When the sun revolves on the second circle, its length is 99,645 yojanas and 35
parts out of 61 parts of a yojana. The reason for the increase of 5 yojanas and
35 parts out of 61 parts from the first circle to the second circle is that the
difference between one circle and another is 2 yojanas and the diameter of the
sun's plane is 48 parts out of 61 parts of a yojana. Doubling this gives an
increase of 5 yojanas and 35 parts out of 61 parts of a yojana from the first

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navanavatisthAnaka-samavAya] [155 navanavatisthAnaka-samavAya 444-maMdare NaM
pavvae NavaNauijoyaNasahassAiM uDDhaM uccatteNaM pnnnntte| naMdaNavaNassa NaM
puracchimillAo caramaMtAo paccacchimille caramaMte esa NaM navanauijoyaNasayAiM
abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| evaM dakkhiNillAo caramaMtAo uttarille caramaMte esa NaM
NavaNauijoyaNasayAI abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| mandara parvata ninyAnavai hajAra
yojana UMcA kahA gayA hai| nandanavana ke pUrvI caramAnta se pazcimI caramAnta
ninyAnavai sau (1900) yojana antaravAlA kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra nandanavana
ke dakSiNI caramAnta se uttarI caramAnta ninyAnavai sau (9900) yojana antara
vAlA hai| vivecana- meru parvata bhUtala para daza hajAra yojana vistAravAlA hai
aura pA~ca sau yojana kI UMcAI para avasthita nandanavana ke sthAna para nau
hajAra nau sau caupana yojana tathA eka yojana ke gyAraha bhAgoM meM se chaha
bhAga-pramANa meru kA bAhya vistAra hai| aura bhItarI vistAra unyAsI sau caupana
yojana aura eka yojana ke gyAraha bhAgoM meM se chaha bhAga-pramANa hai| pA~ca
sau yojana nandanavana kI caur3AI hai| isa prakAra meru kA Abhyantara vistAra
aura donoM ora ke nandanavana kA pA~ca pA~ca sau yojana kA vistAra ye saba
milakara prAyaH sUtrokta antara ho jAtA hai| 445 - uttare paDhame sUriyamaMDale
navanauijoyaNasahassAiM sAiregAiM AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte|docce
sUriyamaMDale navanauijoyaNasahassAiM sAhiyAiM AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte|
taiyasUriyamaMDale navanauijoyaNasahassAiM sAhiyAiM AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte|
uttara dizA meM sUrya kA prathama maMDala AyAma-viSkambha kI apekSA kucha adhika
ninyAnavai hajAra yojana kahA gayA hai| dUsarA sUrya-maMDala bhI AyAma-viSkambha
kI apekSA kucha adhika ninyAnavai hajAra yojana kahA gayA hai| tIsarA
sUryamaMDala bhI AyAma-viSkambha kI apekSA kucha adhika ninyAnavai hajAra yojana
kahA gayA hai| vivecana-sUrya jisa AkAza-mArga se meru ke cAroM ora paribhramaNa
karatA hai use sUrya-maMDala kahate haiN| jaba vaha uttara dizA ke sabase pahile
maMDala para paribhramaNa karatA hai, taba usa maMDala kI golAkAra rUpa meM
lambAI ninyAnavai hajAra chaha sau cAlIsa yojana (99640) hotI hai| jaba sUrya
dUsare maMDala para paribhramaNa karatA hai, taba usakI lambI ninyAnavai hajAra
chaha sau paiMtAlIsa yojana aura eka yojana ke ikasaTha bhAgoM meM se paiMtIsa
bhAga-pramANa hotI hai| prathama maMDala se isa dUsare maMDala kI pAMca yojana
aura paiMtIsa bhAga ikasaTha vRddhi kA kAraNa yaha hai ki eka maMDala se dUsare
maMDala kA antara do-do yojana kA hai tathA sUrya ke vimAna kA viSkambha eka
yojana ke ikasaTha bhAgoM meM se ar3atAlIsa bhAga-pramANa hai| ise dugunA kara
dene para pA~ca yojana aura eka yojana ke ikasaTha bhAgoM meM se paiMtIsa bhAga-
pramANa vRddhi prathama

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  [156] The second mandala of the Samavayanga Sutra is
established. Similarly, by adding 535 to the diameter of the second mandala
(99645 + 535 = 99651 - 9), the diameter of the third mandala is obtained as
ninety-nine thousand six hundred and fifty-one yojanas and nine parts out of
sixty-one parts of a yojana. The increase of 640 yojanas in the first mandala,
645 35/69 yojanas in the second mandala, and 6519 yojanas in the third mandala,
which is mentioned in the sutra as 'saatireka' and 'saadhik', means 'slightly
more than ninety-nine thousand yojanas'.  446 - From this, the upper limit of
the abodes of the Vana-vyantara Bhoumeyaka Devas is said to be ninety-nine
hundred yojanas away from the lower limit of the Anjana Kanda of the Ratnaprabha
earth.  Discussion - The Anjana Kanda is the tenth of the sixteen Kanda's of the
first Kharakanda of the Ratnaprabha earth. Its lower limit is ten thousand
yojanas away from here. The cities of the Vyanta Devas are located after the
first hundred yojanas of the first Ratna Kanda. Subtracting these hundred from
ten thousand (10,000 - 100 = 9900) gives the sutra-mentioned distance of ninety-
nine hundred (9900) yojanas.  || Navanavati Sthanaka Samavay Sampt ||
Shatasthanaka Samavay 447 - The Bhikshu Pratimas of the Dasadashamiya are
touched, nurtured, adorned, purified, praised, and worshipped by one hundred
day-nights and five hundred and fifty Bhikshadattis, as per the sutra, the path,
and the truth.  Discussion - The worship of this Bhikshu Pratimas is done
through ten-day periods, i.e., one hundred days. Similar to the previously
mentioned Bhikshu Pratimas, one Bhikshadatti is received each day from the first
ten days to the tenth ten-day period. Accordingly, the total number of
Bhikshadattis (10 + 20 + 30 + 40 + 50 + 60 + 70 + 80 + 90 + 100 = 550) becomes
five hundred and fifty. The remaining worship rituals should be understood as
similar to the previous Pratimas.  448 - The Shatabhishak Nakshatra has one
hundred stars.  449 - The Arhat, with a bow in his hand, is said to be very
high.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156] [samavAyAGgasUtra maMDala se dUsare maMDala kI siddha ho jAtI hai| isI
prakAra dUsare maMDala ke viSkambha meM 5 35 ke milA dene para (99645+5 35
=99651-9, ninyAnavai hajAra chaha sau ikAvana yojana aura eka yojana ke ikasaTha
bhAgoM meM se nau bhAga-pramANa viSkambha tIsare maMDala kA nikala AtA hai|
ninyAnavai hajAra meM Upara jo prathama maMDala meM 640 yojana kI, dUsare
maMDala meM 645 35/69 yojana kI aura tIsare maMDala meM 6519 yojana kI vRddhi
hotI hai, use sUtra meM 'sAtireka' aura 'sAdhika' pada se sUcita kiyA gayA hai,
jisakA artha ninyAnavai hajAra yojana se kucha adhika hotA hai| 446 -imIse NaM
rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe aMjaNassa kaMDassa heTThillAo caramaMtAo vANamaMtara-
bhomejavihArANaM uvarimaMte esa NaM navanaui joyaNasayAI abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte|
isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke aMjana kAMDa ke adhastana caramAnta bhAga se vAna-
vyantara bhaumeyaka devoM ke vihAroM (AvAsoM) kA uparima antabhAga ninyAnavai
sau (9900) yojana antaravAlA kahA gayA hai| vivecana-ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke
prathama kharakANDa ke solaha kAMDoM meM aMjanakAMDa dazavAM hai| usakA
adhastana bhAga yahAM se daza hajAra yojana dUra hai| prathama ratnakAMDa ke
prathama sau yojanoM ke (bAda) vyantara devoM ke nagara haiN| ina sau ko daza
hajAra meM se (10,000-100=9900) ghaTA dene para sUtrokta ninyAnavai sau (9900)
yojana kA antara siddha ho jAtA hai|  //  navanavatisthAnaka samavAya samApta
//  zatasthAnaka-samavAya 447-dasadasamiyA NaM bhikkhupaDimA egeNaM
rAiMdiyasateNaM addhachaThehiM bhikkhAsatehiM ahAsuttaM jAva ArAhiyA yAvi bhvi|
dazadazamikA bhikSupratimA eka sau rAta-dinoM meM aura sAr3he pA~ca sau bhikSA-
dattiyoM se yathAsUtra, yathAmArga, yathAtattva se spRSTa, pAlita, zobhita,
tIrita, kIrtita aura ArAdhita hotI hai| vivecana-isa bhikSupratimA kI ArAdhanA
daza-daza dina ke dinadazaka arthAt sau dinoM ke dvArA kI jAtI hai| pUrva
varNita bhikSupratimAoM ke samAna isameM bhI prathama daza dinoM se lekara
dazaveM dinadazaka taka pratidina eka-eka bhikSAdatti adhika grahaNa kI jAtI
hai| tadanusAra sarva bhikSAdattiyoM kI saMkhyA
(10+20+30+40+50+60+70+80+90+100-550) pA~casau pacAsa ho jAtI hai| zeSa
ArAdhanAvidhi pUrva pratimAoM ke samAna hI jAnanA caahie| 448-sayabhisayA
nakkhatte ekkasayatAre pnnnntte| zatabhiSak nakSatra ke eka sau tAre hote haiN|
449-suvihI puSpadaMte NaM arahA egaM dhaNusayaM u8 uccatteNaM hotthaa|

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[One Hundred Locations - Collection] [17] Now, the Arhat Purushadanis, having
lived for one hundred years, attained Siddha, Buddha, Karma-free, Nirvana, and
became free from all suffering. Similarly, the Thera Arya Sudharma also lived
for one hundred years, attained Siddha, Buddha, Karma-free, Nirvana, and became
free from all suffering. All the Dirgha Vaitalya mountains are said to be one
hundred Gavyutis (Kos) high. All the Kshullaka Himavant and Shikhari Varshadhara
mountains are one hundred Yojanas high. And all these Varshadhara mountains are
one hundred Gavyutis deep. All the Kanchanak mountains are said to be one
hundred Yojanas high. And they are one hundred Gavyutis deep and one hundred
Yojanas wide at the base. || One Hundred Locations - Collection - End.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zatasthAnaka-samavAya] [17 pAse NaM arahA purisAdANIe ekkaM vAsasayaM savvAuyaM
pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva svvdukkhpphiinne| evaM there vi ajjsuhmme| suvidhi
puSpadanta arhat sau dhanuSa UMce the| puruSAdAnIya pArzva arhat eka sau varSa
kI samagra Ayu bhoga kara siddha, buddha, karma-mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta ho
sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue| isI prakAra sthavira Arya sudharmA bhI sau varSa kI
sarva Ayu bhoga kara siddha, baddha, karma-mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta ho
sarvaduHkhoM se rahita hue| 450-savve vi NaM dIhaveyaDDhapavvayA egamegaM
gAuyasayaM urdU uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| savvevi NaMcullahimavaMta-
siharIvAsaharapavvayA egamegaMjoyaNasayaM ur3e uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| egamegaM
gAuyasayaM uvveheNaM pnnnnttaa| savve vi NaM kaMcaNagapavvayA egamegaM
joyaNasayaM uDDhaM uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| egamegaM gAuyasayaM uvveheNaM
pnnnnttaa| egamegaM joyaNasayaM mUle vikkhaMbheNaM pnnnnttaa| sabhI dIrgha
vaitADhya parvata eka-eka sau gavyUti (koza) UMce kahe gaye haiN| sabhI kSullaka
himavanta aura zikharI varSadhara parvata eka-eka sau yojana UMce haiN| tathA ye
sabhI varSadhara parvata sau-sau gavyUti udvedha (bhUmi meM avagAha) vAle haiN|
saMbhI kAMcanaka parvata eka-eka sau yojana UMce kahe gaye haiN| tathA ve sau-
sau gavyUti udvedha vAle aura mUla meM eka-eka sau yojana viSkambhavAle haiN|
||shtsthaank samavAya smaapt|

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Samvayanga Sutra - Anekoottarika - Vriddhi - Samvay - [Sardha Shat Se
Kotakoti Paryant]]  **451** - Chandraprabha Arhat was one hundred and fifty
Dhanush high. In Aranakalp, one hundred and fifty Vimana Avasas are mentioned.
Similarly, in Achyutkalp, one hundred and fifty (150) Vimana Avasas are
mentioned.  **452** - Suparshva Arhat was two hundred Dhanush high.  **453** -
All the Mahahimalaya and Rukmi Varshadhar Parvatas are two hundred Yojan high
and all of them are two hundred Gavyutis deep.  **454** - In this Jambudvipa,
two hundred Kanchanak Parvatas are mentioned (200).  **455** - Padmaprabha Arhat
was two hundred and fifty Dhanush high.  **456** - The Prasadavatansak of the
Asurakumar Devas are two hundred and fifty Yojan high (250).  **457** - Sumati
Arhat was three hundred Dhanush high. Arishta Nemin Arhat lived for three
hundred years in Kumaravas, then became a monk after getting his head shaved and
leaving his home.  **458** - The Vimana Prakaras (fortifications) of the
Vaimanik Devas are three hundred Yojan high.  **459** - The Bhagavan Mahavira,
the Saman, was three hundred and fourteen Purvis high. The final Saririk of the
Panchadhanush, the Siddha Gaya, had three Dhanush of Jivapade Sogahana (300).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 158 ] [ samavAyAGgasUtra anekottarikA - vRddhi - samavAya [ sArdhazata se
koTAkoTi paryanta ] - 451 - caMdappabhe NaM arahA divaDhaM dhaNussarva uDDhaM
uccatteNaM hotthaa| AraNakappe divaDhaM vimANAvAsasayaM paNNattaM  /  evaM accue
vi 150  /  candraprabha arhat Der3ha sau dhanuSa UMce the| AraNa kalpa meM
Der3ha sau vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| acyuta kalpa bhI Der3ha sau (150 )
vimAnAvAsa vAlA kahA gayA hai| 452 - supAse NaM arahA do dhaNusayA uDDhaM
uccatteNaM hotthA  /  supArzva arhat do sau dhanuSa UMce the| 453 - savve vi NaM
mahAhimavaMta - ruppIvAsaharapavvayA do do joyaNasayAiM uDDhaM uccatteNaM
paNNattA  /  do do gAuyasayAiM uvveheNaM paNNattA  /  sabhI mahAhimavanta aura
rukmI varSadhara parvata do-do sau yojana UMce haiM aura ve sabhI do-do gavyUti
udvedha vAle (gahare ) haiM  /  454 - jaMbUddIve NaM dIve do kaMcaNapavvayasayA
paNNattA 200  /  isa jambUdvIpa meM do sau kAMcanaka parvata kahe gaye haiM 200
/  455 - paumappabhe NaM arahA aDDAijjAI dhaNusayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthA  /
padmaprabha arhat ar3hAI sau dhanuSa UMce the 1 456 - asurakumArANaM devANaM
pAsAyavaDiMsagA aDDAijjAiM joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM paNNattA 250
asurakumAra devoM ke prAsAdAvataMsaka ar3hAI sau yojana UMce kahe gaye haiM 250
/  457- - sumaI NaM arahA tiNNi dhaNusayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthA  /
ariTThanemI NaM arahA tiNi vAsasayAI kumAravAsamajhe vasittA muMDe bhavittA
agArAo aNagAriyaM pavvaie  /  . sumati arhat tIna sau dhanuSa UMce the|
ariSTanemi arhan tIna sau varSa kumAravAsa meM raha kara muMDita ho agAra se
anagAritA meM pravrajita hue  /  458 - vemANiyANaM devANaM vimANapAgArA tiNNi
tiNNi joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM paNNattA  /  vaimAnika devoM ke vimAna -
prAkAra ( parakoTA) tIna-tIna sau yojana UMce haiN| 459 - samaNassa [ NaM ]
bhagavao mahAvIrassa tinni sayANi coddasapuvvINaM hotthA  /  paMcadhaNusaiyassa
NaM aMtimasArIriyassa siddhigayassa sAtiregANi tiNi-dhasA jIvappadesogAhaNA
paNNattA 300  /

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Anekottarika-vriddhi-samavaya] [159 There were three hundred and fourteen
पूर्वी (पूर्वी) monks in the assembly of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira. The जीव
प्रदेश (jīva-pradeśa) of the charmaśarīrī (charmaśarīrī) siddhas (siddhas) who
have attained the highest state of liberation, who have traversed five hundred
dhanuṣ (dhanuṣ) is slightly more than three hundred dhanuṣ. 460-The wealth of
the fourteen पूर्वी (पूर्वी) of the Puruṣādānīya (Puruṣādānīya) Arhan was three
hundred and fifty dhanuṣ. The height of the Abhinandan Arhan was three hundred
and fifty dhanuṣ. The Puruṣādānīya (Puruṣādānīya) Arhan had the wealth of three
hundred and fifty fourteen पूर्वी (पूर्वी). The Abhinandan Arhan was three
hundred and fifty dhanuṣ tall. 461-The height of the Sambhav Arhan was four
hundred dhanuṣ. The Sambhav Arhan was four hundred dhanuṣ tall. 462-All the
Niṣadha (Niṣadha) and Nīlavant (Nīlavant) Varṣadhara (Varṣadhara) mountains are
four hundred yojan (yojan) high and four hundred gavyu (gavyu) deep. All the
Vakṣāra (Vakṣāra) mountains are four hundred yojan (yojan) high and four hundred
gavyu (gavyu) deep, near the Niṣadha (Niṣadha) and Nīlavant (Nīlavant)
Varṣadhara (Varṣadhara) mountains. All the Niṣadha (Niṣadha) and Nīlavant
(Nīlavant) Varṣadhara (Varṣadhara) mountains are four hundred yojan (yojan) high
and four hundred gavyu (gavyu) deep. All the Vakṣāra (Vakṣāra) mountains are
four hundred yojan (yojan) high and four hundred gavyu (gavyu) deep, near the
Niṣadha (Niṣadha) and Nīlavant (Nīlavant) Varṣadhara (Varṣadhara) mountains.
463-In the two kalpas (kalpas) of Ānaya (Ānaya) and Pāṇa (Pāṇa), there are four
hundred vimāna (vimāna). In the two kalpas (kalpas) of Ānaya (Ānaya) and Pāṇa
(Pāṇa), there are four hundred vimāna (vimāna) in total. 464-Shraman Bhagwan
Mahavira had four hundred undefeated debaters, who were victorious in debates
with gods, humans, and asuras. Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira had four hundred
undefeated debaters, who were victorious in debates with gods, humans, and
asuras. 465-The height of the Ajita Arhan was four hundred and fifty dhanuṣ. The
height of the Chaturanta Chakravarti Sagra Raja was also four hundred and fifty
dhanuṣ. The Ajita Arhan was four hundred and fifty dhanuṣ tall. The Chaturanta
Chakravarti Sagra Raja was also four hundred and fifty dhanuṣ tall. 466-All the
Vakṣāra (Vakṣāra) mountains are five hundred yojan (yojan) high and five hundred
gavyu (gavyu) deep, near the Sītā (Sītā) and Sītodā (Sītodā) rivers and the
Mandara (Mandara) mountain. All the Vāṣahara (Vāṣahara) mountains are five
hundred yojan (yojan) high and five hundred yojan (yojan) in diameter. All the
Vakṣāra (Vakṣāra) mountains are five hundred yojan (yojan) high and five hundred
gavyu (gavyu) deep, near the Sītā (Sītā) and Sītodā (Sītodā) rivers and the
Mandara (Mandara) mountain. All the Vāṣahara (Vāṣahara) mountains are five
hundred yojan (yojan) high and five hundred yojan (yojan) in diameter.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anekottarikA-vRddhi- samavAya] [159 zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke saMgha meM
tIna sau caturdazapUrvI muni the| pA~ca sau dhanuSa kI avagAhanAvAle
caramazarIrI siddhi ko prApta puruSoM (siddhoM) ke jIva pradezoM kI avagAhanA
kucha adhika tIna sau dhanuSa kI hotI hai| 460-pAsassa NaM arahao
purisAdANIyassa adbhuTThasayAiM coddasapuvvINaM saMpayA hotyaa| abhinaMdaNe NaM
arahA achuTTAiMdhaNusayAI uDDhaM uccaseNaM hotthA 350 /  puruSAdAnIya pArzva
arhana ke sAr3he tIna sau caturdazapUrviyoM kI sampadA thii| abhinandana arhan
sAr3he tIna sau dhanuSa UMce the| 461-saMbhave NaM arahA cattAri dhaNusayAI
uDDhe uccatteNaM hotthaa| saMbhava arhat cAra sau dhanuSa UMce the| 462-savve vi
NaM nisaDhanIlavaMtA vAsaharapavvayA cattAri-cattAri joyaNasayAI uDDhaM
uccttennN| paNNattA ||casAri cattArigAuyasayAI uvveheNaM pnnnnttaa| savve viNaM
vakkhArapavvayA 'NisaDhanIlavaMtavAsaharapavyayaMteNaM cattAri cattAri
joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM  /  cattAri cattAri gAuyasayAiM uvyeheNaM
pnnnnttaa| sabhI niSadha aura nIlavanta varSadhara parvata cAra-cAra sau yojana
UMce tathA cAra-cAra sau gavyUti udvedha (gaharAI) vAle haiN| sabhI vakSAra
parvata niSadha aura nIlavanta varSadhara parvatoM ke samIpa cAra-cAra sau
yojana UMce aura cAra-cAra. sau gavyUti udvedha vAle kahe gaye haiN| 463-ANaya-
pANaesu dosu kappesu cattAri vimANasayA pnnnnttaa| Anata aura prANata ina do
kalpoM meM donoM ke milAkara cAra sau vimAna kahe gaye haiN| 464-samaNassaNaM
bhagavao mahAvIrassa cattAri sayA vAINaM sadeva-maNuyAsuraMmi logaMmi vAe
aparAjiyANaM ukkosiyA vAisaMpayA hotthA 400 /  zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke cAra
sau aparAjita vAdiyoM kI utkRSTa vAdisampadA thii| ve vAdI deva, manuSya aura
asuroM meM se bhI vAda meM parAjita hone vAle nahIM the| 465-ajite NaM arahA
addhapaMcamAiM dhaNusayAiM uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa| sagare NaM rAyA
cAuraMtacakkavaTTI addhapaMcamAi dhaNusayAiM uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthA 450 /
ajita arhat sAr3he cAra sau dhanuSa UMce the| cAturanta cakravartI sagara rAjA
bhI sAr3he cAra sau dhanuSa UMce the| 466-savve vi NaM vakkhArapavvayA sIA-sIoAo
mahAnaIo maMdarapavvayaMte NaM paMca paMca joyaNasayAI uDDaM uccatteNaM paMca
paMca gAuyasayAiM uvvaheNaM pnnnnttaao| savve vi NaM vAsaharakUDA paMca paMca
joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa| mUle paMca paMca joyaNasayAI
vikkhaMbheNaM pnnnnttaa| sabhI vakSAra parvata sItA-sItodA mahAnadiyoM ke aura
mandara parvata ke samIpa pA~ca-pA~ca sau yojana

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[160] The **Samvayanga Sutra** states that the **Vaksar** mountains are five
hundred **Gavyuti** high and five hundred **Gavyuti** wide. All **Varshadhar**
peaks are five hundred **Yojan** high and five hundred **Yojan** in diameter at
their base. [467] The **Arhat** **Kausalyaka** was five hundred **dhanus** tall.
The **Chakravarti** king **Bharata** was five hundred **dhanus** tall. [468] The
four **Vaksar** mountains, **Saumanas**, **Gandhamadana**, **Vidyupprabha**, and
**Malavanta**, are five hundred **Yojan** high and five hundred **Gavyuti**
wide, located near the **Mandara** mountain. All **Vaksar** peaks, except for
**Hari** and **Harissah**, are five hundred **Yojan** high and five hundred
**Yojan** in diameter at their base. All **Nandanavana** peaks, except for
**Balakuta**, are five hundred **Yojan** high and five hundred **Yojan** in
diameter at their base. [469] In the **Saudharma** and **Isana** **Kalpas**, all
**Vimana** are five hundred **Yojan** high. [470] In the **Sanatkumara** and
**Maheindra** **Kalpas**, all **Vimana** are six hundred **Yojan** high. The
distance between the top of the **Kshullaka Himavanta** peak and the base of the
**Kshullaka Himavanta Varshadhar** mountain is six hundred **Yojan**. The same
applies to the **Shikhari** peak. **Explanation:** The **Kshullaka Himavanta**
and **Shikhari** **Varshadhar** mountains are one hundred **Yojan** high from
the ground level, and their peaks are five hundred **Yojan** high. Therefore,
the distance between the top of these peaks and the ground level of the two
**Varshadhar** mountains is six hundred **Yojan**, as stated in the **Sutra**.
[471] The **Arhat** was six hundred **Vaina** tall and was invincible in the
world of **Devas**, **Manushyas**, and **Asuras**. **Abhichanda** was six
hundred **dhanus** tall. The **Arhat** **Vasupujya** became a **Shraman** from a
**Grihastha** with six hundred **Purusha** followers.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160] [samavAyAGgasUtra UMce aura pA~ca-pA~ca sau gavyUti udvedha vAle kahe gaye
haiN| sabhI varSadhara kUTa pA~ca-pA~ca sau yojana UMce aura mUla meM pA~ca-
pA~ca sau yojana viSkambha vAle kahe gaye haiN| 467-usabhe NaM arahA kosalie
paMca dhaNusayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa| bharahe NaM rAyA cAuraMtacakkavaTTI
paMcadhaNusayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM hotthaa| kauzalika RSabha arhat pA~ca sau
dhanuSa UMce the| cAturantacakravartI rAjA bharata pA~ca sau dhanuSa UMce the|
468-somaNasa-gaMdhamAdaNa-vijjuppabha-mAlavaMtANaM vakkhArapavvayANaM
maMdarapavvayaMteNaM paMca paMca joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM, paMca paMca
gAuyasayAiM uvveheNaM pnnnnttaa| savve viNaM vakkhArapavvayakUDA hari-
harissahakUDavajjA paMca paMca joyaNasayAI uDDhe uccatteNaM, mUle paMca paMca
joyaNasayAI AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnnttaa| savve vi NaM NaMdaNakUDA balakUDavajjA
paMca paMca joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM, mUle paMca paMca joyaNasayAiM
AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnnttaa| saumanasa, gandhamAdana, vidyutprabha aura
mAlavanta ye cAroM vakSAra parvata mandara parvata ke samIpa pA~capA~ca sau
yaujana UMce aura pA~ca-pA~ca sau gavyUti udvedha vAle haiN| hari aura harissaha
kUTa ko chor3a kara zeSa sabhI vakSAra parvatakUTa pA~ca-pA~ca sau yojana UMce
aura mUla meM pA~ca-pA~ca sau yojana AyAma-viSkambha vAle kahe gaye haiN|
balakUTa ko chor3a kara sabhI nandanavana ke kUTa pA~ca-pA~ca sau yojana UMce
aura mUla meM pA~capA~ca sau yojana AyAma-viSkambha vAle kahe gaye haiN|
469-sohammIsANesu kappesu vimANA paMca paMca joyaNasayAI uDDhe uccatteNaM
pnnnnttaa| 500 /  saudharma aura IzAna ina donoM kalpoM meM sabhI vimAna pA~ca-
pA~ca sau yojana UMce kahe gaye haiN| 470-saNaMkumAra-mAhidesu kappesu vimANA
chajoyaNasayAI uDDhe uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| cullahimavaMtakUDassa uvarillAo
caramaMtAo cullahimavaMtassavAsaharapavvayassa samadharaNitale esa NaM
chajoyaNasayAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| evaM siharIkUDassa vi| sanatkumAra aura
mAhendra kalpoM meM vimAna chaha sau yojana UMce kahe gaye haiN| kSullaka
himavanta kUTa ke uparima caramAnta se kSullaka himavanta varSadhara parvata kA
samadharaNItala chaha sau yojana antara vAlA hai| isI prakAra zikharI kaTa kA
bhI antara jAnanA caahie| vivecana-samabhUmi tala se kSullaka himavanta aura
zikharI varSadhara parvata sau-sau yojana UMce haiM aura unake himakUTa aura
zikharI kUTa pA~ca-pA~ca sau yojana UMce haiM, ata: ukta kUToM ke UparI bhAga se
ukta donoM hI varSadhara parvatoM ke samabhUmi kA sUtrokta chaha-chaha sau
yojana kA antara siddha ho jAtA hai| 471 -pAsassa NaM arahao chasayA vAINaM
sadevamaNuyAsure loe vAe aparAjiANaM ukkosiyA vAisaMpayA hotthaa|abhicNde NaM
kulagare chadhaNusayAI uDDhe uccatteNaM hotthaa|vaasupujje NaM arihA chahiM
purisasaehiM saddhiM muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvie| 600 /

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Anekottarika-vriddhi-samavaya] [161 Parsva Arhat had six hundred undefeated
debaters, whose excellent knowledge of the scriptures was such that they could
not be defeated in debate by anyone, be it a god, a human, or an asura.
Abhichandra Kulkar was six hundred bows tall. Vasupujya Arhat, along with six
hundred men, had renounced the household and entered the homeless state of
monasticism. 600. 472-In the Brahma and Lantaka kalpas, the vimanas are said to
be seven hundred yojanas high. 473-In the sangha of the Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavira, there were seven hundred Kevalis. In the sangha of the Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavira, there were seven hundred sadhus who had attained the Vaikriya
Labdhi. Arishta-nemi Arhat, after remaining in the Kevali-paryaya for seven
hundred years (minus 54 days), attained the state of Siddha, Buddha, karma-
mukta, parinirvana, and became free from all suffering. 474-From the upper, most
extreme part of the Mahahimanvat-kood, to the samdharani-tal of the Mahahimanvat
Varshadhar mountain, the distance is said to be seven hundred yojanas.
Similarly, the distance of the Rukmi-kood should also be known. Discussion-From
the sam-bhoomi-tal, the Mahahimanvat and Rukmi Varshadhar mountains are two
hundred yojanas high, and their Mahahimanvat-kood and Rukmi-kood are five
hundred yojanas high. Therefore, from the upper part of the said koods, the
distance to the sam-bhoomi-tal of the said two Varshadhar mountains is proven to
be seven hundred yojanas. 475-In the Maha-shukra and Sahasrar kalpas, the
vimanas are said to be eight hundred yojanas high. 476-In the first kand of this
Ratnaprabha earth, in the middle eight hundred yojanas, the viharas of the
Vanavyantar-bhomeyaka devas are said to be located. Discussion-The vyantaras are
called 'van' because they are born on trees and other things in the forests. And
their viharas, cities, or dwelling places are made of earth, so they are called
'bhomeyaka'. The upper part of the tenth Anjanakand is nine hundred yojanas
below the sam-bhoomi-tal. After subtracting one hundred yojanas from it, the
dwelling places of the Vanavyantaras are found in the middle eight hundred
yojanas up to the upper part of the Anjanakand. 477-In the sangha of the Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavira, there were eight hundred Anuttaro-vaivaiya devas,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anekottarikA-vRddhi- samavAya] [161 pArzva arhat ke chaha sau aparAjita vAdiyoM
kI utkRSTa kAdisampadA thI jo deva, manuSya aura asuroM meM se kisI se bhI vAda
meM parAjita hone vAle nahIM the| abhicandra kulakara chaha sau dhanuSa UMce
the| vAsupUjya arhat chaha sau puruSoM ke sAtha muMDita hokara agAra se
anagAritA meM pravrajita hue the| 600 /  472-baMbha-laMtaesu (dosu) kappesu
vimANA satta satta joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| brahma aura lAntaka
ina do kalpoM meM vimAna sAta-sAta sau yojana UMce kahe gaye haiN| 473-samaNassa
NaM bhagavao mahAvIrassa satta jiNasayA hotthaa| samaNassa NaM bhagavao
mahAvIrassa satta veuvviyasayA hotthaa| ariTThaNemI NaM arahA satta vAsasayAI
desUNAI kevalapariyAgaM pAuNittA siddhe buddhe jAva svvdukkhpphiinne| zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke saMgha meM sAta sau kevalI the| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra
ke saMgha meM sAta sau vaikriyalabdhidhArI sAdhu the| ariSTanemi arhat kucha (54
dina) kama sAta sau varSa kevaliparyAya meM raha kara siddha, buddha, karma-
mukta, parinirvANa ko prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue|
474-mahAhimavaMtakUDassa NaM uvarillAo caramaMtAo mahAhimavaMtassa
vAsaharapavvayassa samadharaNitale esa NaM satta joyaNasayAI abAhAe aMtare
pnnnntte| evaM ruppikUDassa vi 700 /  mahAhimavanta kUTa ke UparI caramAnta
bhAga se mahAhimavanta varSadhara parvata kA samadharaNItala sAta sau yojana
antara vAlA kahA gayA hai| isI prakAra rukmI kUTa kA bhI antara jAnanA caahie|
vivecana-samabhUmi tala se mahAhimavanta aura rukmI varSadhara parvata do-do sau
yojana UMce haiM aura unake mahAhimavantakUTa aura rukmIkUTa pA~ca-pA~ca sau
yojana UMce haiN| ata: ukta kUToM ke UparI bhAga se ukta donoM hI varSadhara
parvatoM ke samabhUmi kA antara sAta-sAta sau yojana kA siddha ho jAtA hai|
475-mahAsukka-sahassAresu dosu kappesu vimANA aTThajoyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM
pnnnnttaa| mahAzukra aura sahasrAra ina do kalpoM meM vimAna ATha sau yojana
UMce kahe gaye haiN| 476 - imIse NaM rayaNappamAe [ puDhavIe] paDhame kaMDe
aTThasu joyaNasaesu vANamaMtarabhomejjavihArA pnnnnttaa| isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI
ke prathama kAMDa ke madhyavartI ATha sau yojanoM meM vAnavyantara bhaumeyaka
devoM ke vihAra kahe gaye haiN| vivecana-vanoM meM vRkSAdi para utpanna hone se
vyantaroM ko 'vAna' kahA jAtA hai| tathA unake vihAra, nagara yA AvAsasthAna
bhUminirmita haiM isalie unako 'bhaumeyaka' kahA jAtA hai| dazaveM aMjanakAMDa
kA uparima bhAga samabhUmi bhAga se nau sau yojana nIce hai| usameM se prathama
ratnakAMDa ke sau yojana kama kara dene para vAnavyantaroM ke AvAsa aMjanakAMDa
ke uparima bhAga taka madhyavartI ATha sau yojanoM meM pAye jAte haiN|
477-samaNassa NaM bhagavao mahAvIrassa aTThasayA aNuttarovavAiyANaM devANaM

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[162] The excellent wealth of the Anuttaropapatik Shramanas, who have attained
the auspicious motion and position, and who will attain liberation in the
future, was eight hundred according to the Samavayanga Sutra. [478] The Sun
revolves at a height of eight hundred yojanas from the very beautiful land of
the Ratnapraba earth. [479] The excellent wealth of the undefeated debaters of
the Arhat Arishta-nemi was eight hundred, who were not defeated in debate by
anyone among the gods, humans, and Asuras. 800. [480] In the four kalpas, Anata,
Pranata, Aran, and Achyuta, the vimanas are nine hundred yojanas high. The upper
peak of the Nishadha Kooda is nine hundred yojanas away from the level ground of
the Nishadha Varshadhara mountain. Similarly, the distance of the Neelavanta
Kooda should be known. Discussion: The Nishadha and Neelavanta Varshadhara
mountains are four hundred yojanas high from the level ground, and their
Nishadha Kooda and Neelavanta Kooda are five hundred yojanas high. Therefore,
the distance of nine hundred yojanas between the upper part of the Koodas and
the level ground of both the Varshadhara mountains is proved by the Sutra. [481]
The Vimala Vahana Kulgara was nine hundred Dhanush high. The star-mandala
revolves at the highest height of nine hundred yojanas from the very beautiful
land of the Ratnapraba earth. [482] The upper peak of the Nishadha Varshadhara
mountain is nine hundred yojanas away from the middle of the first section of
the Ratnapraba earth. Similarly, the distance of the Neelavanta should be known.
900.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162] [samavAyAGgasUtra gaikallANANaM ThiikallANANaM AgamesibhadANaM ukkosiA
aNuttarovavAiyasaMpayA hotthaa| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke kalyANamaya gati
aura sthiti vAle tathA bhaviSya meM mukti prApta karane vAle anuttaraupapAtika
muniyoM kI utkRSTa sampadA ATha sau thii| 478-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
bahusamaramaNijjAo bhUmibhAgAo aTThahiM joyaNasaehiM sUrie cAraM crti| isa
ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke bahusama ramaNIya bhUmibhAga se ATha sau yojana kI UMcAI
para sUrya paribhramaNa karatA hai| 479-arahao NaM ariTThanemissa aTThasayAI
vAINaM sadevamaNuyAsuraMmi logaMmi vAe aparAjiANaM ukkosiyA vAIsaMpayA hotthaa|
800 /  ariSTanemi arhat ke aparAjita vAdiyoM kI utkRSTavAdi sampadA ATha sau
thI, jo deva, manuSya aura asuroM meM se kisI se bhI vAda meM parAjita hone vAle
nahIM the| 480-ANaya-pANaya-AraNa-accuesu kappesu vimANA nava-nava joyaNasayAI
uDDhe . uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| nisaDhakUDassa NaM uvarillAo siharatalAo
NisaDhassa vAsaharapavvayassa same dharaNitale esa NaM nava joyaNasayAiM abAhAe
aMtare paNNatte  /  evaM NIlavaMtakUDassa vi| Anata, prANata, AraNa aura acyuta
ina cAra kalpoM meM vimAna nau-nau sau yojana UMce haiN| niSadha kUTa ke uparima
zikharatala se niSadha varSadhara parvata kA samadharaNItala nau sau yojana
aMntaravAlA hai| isI prakAra nIlavanta kUTa kA bhI antara jAnanA caahie|
vivecana-samabhUmitala se niSadha aura nIlavanta varSadhara parvata cAra-cAra
sau yojana UMce haiM aura unake niSadha kUTa aura nIlavanta kUTa pA~ca-pA~ca sau
yojana UMce haiN| ataH ukta kUToM ke UparI bhAga se donoM hI varSadhara parvatoM
ke samabhUmi kA sUtrokta nau-nau sau yojana kA antara siddha ho jAtA hai|
481-vimalavAhaNe NaM kulagare NaM nava dhaNusayAI uDDhe uccatteNaM hotthaa|
imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe bahusamaramaNijjAo bhUmibhAgAo navahiM joyaNasaehiM
savvuvarime tArArUve cAraM cri| vimalavAhana kulakara nau sau dhanuSa UMce the|
isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke bahusamaramaNIya bhUmibhAga se nau sau yojana kI
sabase UparI UMcAI para tArA-maMDala saMcAra karatA hai| 482-nisaDhassa NaM
vAsaharapavvayassa uvarillAo siharatalAo imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
paDhamassa kaMDassa bahumajjhadesabhAe esa NaM nava joyaNasayAI abAhAe aMtare
pnnnntte| evaM nIlavaMtassa vi| 900 /

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Anekottarika - Vridhi - Samavaya  [163] The distance between the peak of the
Nishadha mountain and the middle of the first continent of this Ratnapraba earth
is nine hundred yojanas. Similarly, the distance of the Neelavant mountain
should also be understood as nine hundred yojanas. Nishadha mountain is the
third and Neelavant mountain is the fourth among the Varshadhara mountains. The
distance between both is the same.  483 - All Graiveyak Vimanas are said to be
ten hundred (1000) yojanas high. All Yamak mountains are said to be ten hundred
yojanas high. They are also said to be ten hundred gavyutis (1000 koshas) deep.
They are ten hundred yojanas in diameter at the base. Similarly, the Chitra-
vichitra Kutas should also be considered.  **Explanation:** There are two
mountains named Yamak on both sides of the Sita Mahanadi river in Uttar Kuru,
north of the Neelavant and Varshadhara mountains. Similarly, there are two
mountains named Chitra-vichitra on both sides of the Sitoda river in Devakuru,
south of the Nishadha mountain. Therefore, there are five Sita and Sitoda rivers
in the Ardha-dvipa, hence the reference to ten Yamak Kutas in this sutra. They
are all one thousand yojanas high, one thousand koshas deep in the earth, and
circular in shape, making them one thousand yojanas in diameter.  484 - All
Vatta-veitaadhya mountains are ten hundred yojanas high. Their depth is ten
hundred gavyutis. They are ten hundred yojanas in diameter at the base. Their
shape is round like a drum (palyanka) from top to bottom.  485 - All Hari and
Harissah Kutas, except for the Vakshara Kuta, are ten hundred yojanas high and
ten hundred yojanas in diameter at the base. Similarly, all Balakutas, except
for the Nandana Kuta, should be understood to be ten hundred yojanas in
diameter.  486 - The Arhat, Arhitthnemi, protected all beings for ten thousand
years, being a Siddha and Buddha, until all suffering ceased. The Arhat who
comes after him will be a Jina for ten thousand years. The Arhat who comes after
him will be a...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anekottarikA - vRddhi- samavAya ] [ 163 niSadha varSadhara parvata ke uparima
zikharatala se isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke prathama kAMDa ke bahumadhya deza
bhAga kA antara nau sau yojana hai| isI prakAra nIlavanta parvata kA bhI antara
nau sau yojana kA samajhanA caahie| varSadhara parvatoM meM niSadha parvata
tIsarA ora nIlavanta parvata cauthA hai| donoM kA antara samAna hai  /  483 -
savve vi NaM gevejjavimANe dasa-dasa joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM paNNatte  /
savve vi NaM jamagapavvayA dasa-dasa joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM paNNattA  /
dasa-dasa gAuyasayAI uvveNaM pnnnnttaa| mUle dasa-dasa joyaNasayAiM
AyAmavikkhabheNaM paNNattA  /  evaM cittavicitta - kUDA vi bhANiyavvA  /  -
sabhI graiveyaka vimAna daza daza sau (1000) yojana UMce kahe gaye haiM  /
sabhI yamaka parvata daza daza sau yojana UMce kahe gaye haiN| tathA daza daza
sau gavyUti (1000 koza) udvedha vAle kahe gaye haiM  /  ve mUla meM daza - daza
sau yojana AyAma - viSkambha vAle haiN| isI prakAra citra-vicitra kUTa bhI
kahanA cAhie  /  vivecana - nIlavanta varSadhara parvata ke uttara meM sItA
mahAnadI ke donoM kinAroM para uttara kuru meM yamakaM nAma ke do parvata haiN|
isI prakAra devakuru meM sItodA nadI ke donoM kinAroM para niSadha parvata ke
dakSiNa meM citra-vicitra nAma ke do parvata haiN| ataH ar3hAI dvIpa meM pA~ca-
pA~ca sItA aura sItodA nadiyA~ haiM, ataH unake daza-daza yamaka kUToM kA
nirdeza prastuta sUtra meM kiyA gayA hai| ve sabhI eka-eka hajAra yojana UMce,
eka-eka hajAra koza bhUmi meM gahare aura golAkAra hone se sarvatra eka-eka
hajAra yojana AyAma-viSkambha vAle arthAt caur3e haiN| 484-savve vi NaM
vaTTaveyaDDhapavvayA dasa-dasa joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM pnnnnttaa| dasa-
dasa gAuyasayAiM uvveheNaM paNNattA  /  mUle dasa-dasa joyaNasayAiM
vikkhaMbheNaM paNNattA  /  sacvattha samA pallagasaMThANasaMThiyA paNNattA  /
sabhI vRtta vaitADhya parvata daza daza sau yojana UMce haiN| unakA udvedha daza
daza sau gavyUti hai  /  ve mUla daza daza sau yojana viSkambha vAle haiN| unakA
AkAra Upara-nIce sarvatra palyaMka (Dhola) ke samAna gola hai  /  485 - savve
viNaM hari-harissahakUDA vakkhArakUDavajjA dasa-dasa joyaNasayAI uDDha
uccatteNaM paNNattA  /  mUle dasa joyaNasayAI vikkhaMbheNaM (paNNattA )  /  evaM
balakUDa vi naMdaNakUDavajjA  /  vakSAra kUTa ko chor3a kara sabhI hari aura
harissaha kUTa daza daza sau yojana UMce haiM aura mUla meM daza sau yojana
viSkambha vAle haiN| isI prakAra nandana - kUTa ko chor3a kara sabhI balakUTa
bhI daza sau yojana vistAra vAle jAnanA cAhie  /  486 - arahA NaM ariTThanemI
dasa vAsasayAiM savvAuyaM pAlaittA siddhe buddhe jAva savvadukkhappahI  /
pAsassa NaM arahao dasa sayAiM jiNANaM hotthA  /  pAsassa NaM arahao dasa

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[164] [Samvayanga Sutra] Arishtanemi Arhat, having enjoyed a total lifespan of
ten hundred (1000) years, attained Siddha, Buddha, Karma-free, Nirvana and
became free from all suffering. The ten hundred (1000) Antavasi (disciples) of
Parsva Arhat, having passed away, attained Siddha, Buddha, Karma-free, Nirvana
and became free from all suffering. 487-Padmadrah and Pundarikadrah are said to
be ten-ten hundred (1000) yojanas long. 1000. 488-The vimanas of the
Anuttaroupapatik Devas are said to be eleven hundred (1100) yojanas high.
489-There were eleven hundred (1100) sadhus in Parsva Arhat's sangha who were
accomplished in Vaikriya Labdhi. 1100. 490-Mahapadma and Maha Pundarikadrah are
two-two thousand yojanas long. 2000. 491-From the upper charamanta of the
Vajrakanda of this Ratnapraba earth to the lower charamanta of the
Lohitakshakanda, there is a distance of three thousand yojanas. 3000.
Explanation-Since the Vajrakanda is the second and the Lohitakshakanda is the
fourth, and each kanda is one thousand yojanas thick, it is self-evident that
the distance between the upper part of the second kanda and the lower part of
the fourth kanda is three thousand yojanas. 492-The Tiginch and Kesari drah are
four-four thousand yojanas long. 4000. 493-On the surface of the earth, the
Mandar mountain, with its Ruchaknabi in the very middle, extends five-five
thousand yojanas in all four directions. 5000. Explanation-On the level ground,
the Mandar mountain, which is ten thousand yojanas wide, has eight Ruchak
regions in its very middle. From these, the boundary of the Mandar mountain
extends five-five thousand yojanas in all directions. This is mentioned in the
present sutra. 494-In a sahasra, there are six thousand manavasa sahasras. 6000.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 164] [samavAyAGgasUtra aMtevAsIsayAiM kAlagayAiM jAva svvdukkhpphiinnaaNii|
ariSTanemi arhat daza sau varSa (1000) kI samagra Ayu bhoga kara siddha, buddha,
karma-mukta parinirvANa ko prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue| pArzva arhat
ke daza sau antevAsI (ziSya) kAlagata hokara siddha, buddha, karma-mukta,
parinirvANa ko prApta aura sarva duHkhoM se rahita hue| 487-paumaddaha-
puMDarIyaddahA ya dasa dasa joyaNasayAI AyAmeNaM pnnnnttaa| 1000 /  padmadraha
aura puNDarIkadraha daza-daza sau (1000) yojana lambe kahe gaye haiN|
488-aNuttarovavAiyANaM devANaM vimANA ekkArasa joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM
pnnnnttaa| anuttaraupapAtika devoM ke vimAna gyAraha sau (1100) yojana UMce kahe
gaye haiN| 489-pAsassa NaM arahao ikkArasa sayAI veuvviyANaM hotthaa|1100|
pArzva arhat ke saMgha meM gyAraha sau (1100) vaikriyalabdhi se sampanna sAdhu
the| 490 -mahApauma-mahApuMDarIyadahANaM do-do joyaNasahassAiM AyAmeNaM
pnnnnttaa|2000| mahApadma aura mahApuMDarIkadraha do-do hajAra yojana lambe
haiN| 491-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe vairakaMDassa uvarillAo caramaMtAo
lohiyakkhakaMDassa heTThille caramaMte esa NaM tini joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe
aMtare pnnnntte| 3000 /  isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke vajrakAMDa ke UparI
caramAnta bhAga se lohitAkSakAMDa kA nicalA cAnta bhAga tIna hajAra yojana ke
antaravAlA hai| vivecana-kyoMki vajrakAMDa dUsarA aura lohitAkSa kAMDa cauthA
hai, aura pratyeka kAMDa eka-eka hajAra yojana moTA hai, ata: dUsare kAMDa ke
uparima bhAga se cauthe kAMDa kA adhastana bhAga tIna hajAra yojana ke
antaravAlA svayaM siddha hai| 492-tigiMcha-kesaridahA NaM cattAri-cattAri
joyaNasahassAiM AyAmeNaM pnnnnttaa| 4000 /  tigiMcha aura kezarI draha cAra-cAra
hajAra yojana lambe haiN| 493-dharaNitale maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa
bahumagjhadesabhAe sacananAbhIo caudisiM paMcapaMca joyaNasahassAI abAhAe aMtare
maMdarapavvae paNNatte  /  5000 /  dharaNItala para mandara parvata ke ThIka
bIcoM bIca rucakanAbhi se cAroM hI dizAoM meM mandara parvata pA~ca-pA~ca hajAra
yojana ke antaravAlA hai| 5000  /  vivecana-samabhUmibhAga para daza hajAra
yojana ke vistAra vAle mandara parvata ke ThIka madhya bhAga meM ATha rucaka
pradeza avasthita haiN| unase cAroM ora pA~ca-pA~ca hajAra yojana taka mandara
parvata kI sImA hai| usI kA prastuta sUtra meM ullekha kiyA gayA hai|
494-sahassAre NaM kappe chavimANAvAsasahassA pnnnnttaa| 6000 /

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Anekottarika-vriddhi-samavaya] [In 165 sahasrarkalpas, six thousand vimānavāsa
have been said. 495-From this, in Ratnaprabha, the upper limit of the Ratnakaṇḍa
of the earth and the lower limit of the Pulakaṇḍa are said to be seven thousand
yojanas apart. 7000. Ratnaprabha is the first kaṇḍa of the earth and Pulakaṇḍa
is the seventh. Each kaṇḍa is one thousand yojanas thick. Therefore, the upper
part of the first kaṇḍa and the lower part of the seventh kaṇḍa are seven
thousand yojanas apart. 496-Harivaṣa and Ramyakavarsa are said to be eight
thousand yojanas wide. 8000. 497-The jīva of the southern half of the
Bharatakṣetra, which touches the ocean on the east and west, is said to be nine
thousand yojanas long. 9000. [In the sangha of Ajita Arhat, there were nine
thousand avadhījñānīs.] 498-The Mandara mountain is said to be ten thousand
yojanas wide on the surface of the earth. 10000. 499-The Jambudvīpa is said to
be one hundred thousand yojanas in length and width. 100000. 500-The
Lavaṇasamuudra is said to be two hundred thousand yojanas wide in the cakravāla
viṣkambha. 200000. Just as the width of the rim of a chariot wheel is the same
all around, except for the middle part, so also the Jambudvīpa is like the
middle part of a wheel, being situated in the middle of the Lavaṇasamuudra. The
Lavaṇasamuudra is two hundred thousand yojanas wide on all sides, therefore it
is called the cakravāla viṣkambha. 501-The sangha of Pārśva Arhat had three
hundred and twenty-seven thousand śrāvikās. 327000. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anekottarikA-vRddhi-samavAya] [165 sahasrArakalpa meM chaha hajAra vimAnAvAsa
kahe gaye haiN| 495-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe rayaNassa kaMDassa
uvarillAo caramaMtAo pulagassa kaMDassa heTThile caramaMte esa NaM satta
joyaNasahassAiM abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| 7000 /  ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke
ratnakAMDa ke UparI caramAnta bhAga se pulakakAMDa kA nicalA caramAnta bhAga
sAta hajAra yojana ke antaravAlA hai| vivecana-ratnaprabhA pRthivI kA ratnakAMDa
pahalA hai aura pulakakAMDa sAtavA~ hai| pratyeka kAMDa eka-eka hajAra yojana
moTA hai| ata: prathama kAMDa ke UparI bhAga se sAtaveM kAMDa kA adhobhAga sAta
hajAra yojana ke antara para siddha ho jAtA hai| 496-harivAsa-rammayA NaM vAsA
aTTha joyaNasahassAiM sAiregAiM vitthareNaM pnnnnttaa| 8000 /  harivarSa aura
ramyakavarSa kucha adhika ATha hajAra yojana vistAravAle haiN| 497-dAhiNaDDha
bharahassa NaM jIvA pAINa-paDINAyayA duhao samudaM puTThA nava joyaNasahassAiM
AyAmeNaM pnnnnttaa| 9000 /  [ajiyassa NaM arahao sAiregAiM nava ohinANasahassAI
hotthaa|] pUrva aura pazcima meM samudra ko sparza karane vAlI dakSiNArdha
bharatakSetra kI jIvA nau hajAra yojana lambI hai| [ajita arhat ke saMgha meM
kucha adhika nau hajAra avadhijJAnI the|] 498-maMdare NaM pavvae dharaNitale
dasa joyaNasahassAI vikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte| 10000 /  mandara parvata dharaNItala
para daza hajAra yojana vistAravAlA kahA gayA hai| 499-jambUdIveNaM dIve egaM
joyaNasayasahassaM AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte| 100000 /  jambUdvIpa eka lAkha
yojana AyAma-viSkambha vAlA kahA gayA hai| 500-lavaNe NaM samudde do
joyaNasayasahassAiMcakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte| 200000 /  lavaNasamudra
cakravAla viSkambha se do lAkha yojana caur3A kahA gayA hai| vivecana-jaise
ratha ke cakra ke madhya bhAga ko chor3akara usake AroM kI caur3AI cAroM ora eka
sI hotI hai, usI prakAra jambUdvIpa lavaNasamudra ke madhya bhAga meM avasthita
hone se cakra ke madhyabhAga jaisA hai| lavaNasamudra kI caur3AI sabhI ora do-do
lAkha yojana hai ata: use cakravAlaviSkambha kahA gayA hai| 501 -pAsassa arahao
NaM tinni sayasAhassIo sattAvIsaM ca sahassAiM ukkosiyA sAviyAsaMpayA hotthaa|
327000 /  pArzva arhat ke saMgha meM tIna lAkha sattAIsa hajAra zrAvikAoM kI
utkRSTa sampadA thii|

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[166] [Samvayanga Sutra 502- In the Dhaayikhanda island, the circumference of
the Cakravala is stated to be four hundred thousand yojanas. 400,000. The
Dhaataki island is said to be four hundred thousand yojanas wide in relation to
the circumference of the Cakravala. 503- The distance between the easternmost
point of the Lavanasamudra and the westernmost point is stated to be five
hundred thousand yojanas. 500,000. Explanation- Jambudvipa is one hundred
thousand yojanas wide. On all sides of it, the Lavanasamudra is two hundred
thousand yojanas wide. Therefore, the total distance (1+2+2=5) is five hundred
thousand yojanas, as stated in the sutra. 504- The king Bharata, the Chaturanta
Chakravarti, reigned for six hundred thousand years before becoming a monk,
renouncing his kingdom and becoming an Ascetic. 600,000. 505- The distance
between the easternmost point of the Jambudvipa and the westernmost point of the
Cakravala of the Dhaayikhanda island is stated to be seven hundred thousand
yojanas. 700,000. Explanation- The Jambudvipa is one hundred thousand yojanas
wide, the western Cakravala of the Lavanasamudra is two hundred thousand yojanas
wide, and the western Cakravala of the Dhaayikhanda island is four hundred
thousand yojanas wide. The total distance (1+2+4=7) is seven hundred thousand
yojanas, as stated in the sutra. 506- In the Maheendra Kalpa, there are eight
hundred thousand Vimanaavasa. 800,000. 507- In the Sangha of Ajita Arhan, there
were nine thousand Avyani. 9,000. 1. The Sanskrit commentator has expressed
surprise at this sutra, as it mentions a number in the thousands in the middle
of a description of numbers in the lakhs. He has also written that this could be
a mistake by the scribe. Or, due to the similarity of the word "sahasra", this
sutra may have been placed in the middle of the numbers in the "shatasahasra".
In fact, it should be placed in the number nine thousand. Therefore, the
original text and its translation have been given in square brackets [ ] there.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166] [samavAyAGgasUtra 502-dhAyaikhaMDe NaM dIve cattAri joyaNasayasahassAI
cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM pnnnntte| 400000 /  dhAtakIkhaNDa dvIpa
cakravAlaviSkambha kI apekSA cAra lAkha yojana caur3A kahA gayA hai|
503-lavaNassaNaM samuddassa puracchimillAo caramaMtAo paccacchimille caramaMte
esaNaM paMca joyaNasayasahassAI abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte|500000| lavaNasamudra ke
pUrvI caramAnta bhAga se pazcimI caramAnta bhAga kA antara pA~ca lAkha yojana
hai| vivecana-jambUdvIpa eka lAkha yojana vistRta hai| usake sabhI ora
lavaNasamudra do-do lAkha yojana vistRta hai| ata: jambUdvIpa kA eka lAkha tathA
pUrvI aura pazcimI lavaNasamudra kA vistAra do-do lAkha, ye saba milAkara
(1+2+2=5) pA~ca lAkha yojana kA sUtrokta antara siddha ho jAtA hai| 504-bharahe
NaM rAyA cAuraMtacakkavaTTI chapuvvasayasahassAiM rAyamajhe vasittA muMDe
bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvie| 600000 /  cAturantacakravartI bharata rAjA
chaha lAkha pUrva varSa rAjapada para AsIna raha kara muMDita ho agAra se
anagAritA meM pravrajita hue| 505-jaMbUdIvassa NaM dIvassa puracchimillAo
veiyaMtAo dhAyaikhaMDacakkavAlassa paccecchimille caramaMte satta
joyaNasayasahassAI abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| 700000 /  isa jambUdvIpa kI pUrvI
vedikA ke anta se dhAtakIkhaNDa ke cakravAla-viSkambha kA pazcimI caramAnta
bhAga sAta lAkha yojana ke antara vAlA hai| vivecana-jambUdvIpa kA eka lAkha
yojana, lavaNasamudra ke pazcimI cakravAla kA do lAkha yojana aura dhAtakIkhaNDa
ke pazcimI bhAga kA cakravAla viSkambha cAra lAkha yojana, ye saba milAkara
(1+2+4=7) sAta lAkha yojana kA sUtrokta antara siddha ho jAtA hai| 506-mAhiMde
NaM kappe aTTha vimANAvAsasayasahassAiM pnnnnttaaii| 800000 /  mAhendra kalpa
meM ATha lAkha vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| 507-ajiyassa NaM arahao sAiregAiM nava
ohinANisahassAI hotthaa| 9000 /  ajita arhan kesaMgha meM kucha adhika nau
hajAra avadhi jJAnI the| 1. saMskRta TIkAkAra ne isa sUtra para Azcarya prakaTa
kiyA hai ki lAkhoM kI saMkhyA-varNana ke madhya meM yaha sahasra saMkhyA vAlA
sUtra kaise A gayA ! unhoMne yaha bhI likhA hai ki yaha pratilekhaka kA bhI doSa
ho sakatA hai| athavA 'sahasra' zabda kI samAnatA se yaha sUtra 'zatasahastra'
saMkhyAoM ke madhya meM de diyA gayA ho| vastutaH isakA sthAna nau hajAra kI
saMkhyA meM honA caahie| ataeva vahA~ mUla pATha aura usake anuvAda ko [ ]
khar3e koSThaka ke bhItara de diyA

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ Anekottarika - Vriddhi - Samavaya ] [ 167 508 - Purisisihe nam Vasudeve dasa
vasasayasahasain savvauyam palaitta panchamae pudhaviye neraiesu neraiyattae
uvavanne. 1000000. Purisisiha Vasudeva, having enjoyed a total lifespan of ten
lakh years, was born in the fifth Naraka-prithvi in the form of a Naraka.
1000000. 509 - Samanenaṁ Bhagavan Mahavir titthagarbhavagghaṇāo chaṭṭhe
poṭṭilbhavagghaṇe egaṁ vāsakodīṁ sāmannapariyāgaṁ pāuṇittā sahasāre kappe
savvaṭṭhavimāne devattāe uvavanne. 10000000. Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, before
attaining the Tīrthankara-bhava, having enjoyed a Shraman-paryaya of one koti
years in the sixth poṭṭil-bhava, was born in the Sarvartha-vimāna of the
Sahasrar-kalpa in the form of a deva. 10000000. 510 - Usabhasirissa Bhagavo
charimassa ya Mahaviravaḍḍhamānasssa ega sāgarovamkodākoḍī abahāe antare
paṇṇatte. 100000000000000 sa. The difference between Bhagavan Shri Rishabhdeva
and the last Bhagavan Mahavira Vardhamana is said to be one kodākoḍī sāgaropam.
100000000000000 sa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anekottarikA - vRddhi- samavAya ] [ 167 508 - purisasIhe NaM vAsudeve dasa
vAsasayasahassAiM savvAuyaM pAlaittA paMcamAe puDhavIe neraiesu neraiyattAe
uvvnne| 1000000 /  puruSasiMha vAsudeva daza lAkha varSa kI kula Ayu ko bhoga
kara pA~cavIM narakapRthivI meM nAraka rUpa se utpanna hue  /  509 - samaNeNaM
bhagavaM mahAvIre titthagarabhavaggahaNAo chaTThe poTTilabhavaggahaNe egaM
vAsakoDiM sAmannapariyAgaM pAuNittA sahassAre kappe savvaTThavimANe devattAe
uvavanne  /  10000000 /  zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra tIrthaMkara bhava grahaNa
karane se pUrva chaThe poTTila ke bhava meM eka koTi varSa zramaNa-paryAya pAla
kara sahasrAra kalpa ke sarvArtha vimAna meM devarUpa se utpanna hue | 510 -
usabhasirissa bhagavao carimassa ya mahAvIravaddhamANassa egA sAgarovamakoDAkoDI
abAhAe aMtare paNNatte  /  100000000000000 sA.  /  bhagavAn zrI RSabhadeva kA
aura antima bhagavAn mahAvIra vardhamAna kA antara eka kor3Akor3I sAgaropama
kahA gayA hai  /  100000000000000 sA.  /

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [168] The twelve Angas of the Ganipitaka are described as follows: 1.
Acharanga, 2. Sutra-kritanga, 3.  Sthananga, 4. Samavayanga, 5.
Vyākhyāprajñapti, 6. Jñātādharmakathā, 7. Upāsakadaśā, 8. Antakṛtdaśā, 9.
Anuttaroppapātikadaśā, 10. Praśnavyākaraṇa, 11. Vipākasūtra, and 12. Dṛṣṭivāda.
An Acharya who holds the group or collection of virtues is called a Ganī. The
meaning of Pitaka is a casket, box, or chest. The casket of the all-encompassing
Shruta-ratnas of the Acharyas is called the Ganipitaka. Just as a human being
has eight limbs, similarly, the twelve limbs of the Shruta-rupa Parampurush are
called the Dvadashaanga Shruta.  ## [512] What is this Acharanga? What is
described in it?  The Acharanga describes the conduct, gochari, vinaya,
vainayika (vinaya-phal) sthana, gaman, chankraman, praman, yoga-yojan, language,
samiti, gupti, shayya, upadhi, bhakta, pan, udgam, utpadan, eshanavishuddhi,
shuddha-grahan, ashudha-grahan, vrata, niyam, and tapa upadhan of the Shraman
Nirgranthas in a well-established manner.  **Explanation:** Those who
continuously strive in the practice of Shruta and the observance of restraint,
free from all kinds of beginnings and acquisitions, are called Shraman
Nirgrantha sadhus. The Acharanga describes how their conduct should be, how they
should perform gochari, whose vinaya they should follow and how, how they should
stand, how they should walk, how they should move around within the shelter to
relieve bodily fatigue, what the proof of their upadhi should be, how they
should engage themselves and others in swadhyaya, pratilekhan, etc., what kind
of language they should speak, how they should follow the five samitis and three
guptis, how they should investigate the origins and productions of defects in
shayya, upadhi, food, drink, etc., how they should purify the defects found in
them, how they should observe the various vratas (mulguna), niyams (uttaraguna),
and tapa upadhan (twelve types of tapas), and all these duties are described in
the Acharanga in the best possible way.  ## [513] The Acharanga is described in
five ways: 1. Jnana-Acharanga, 2. Darshan-Acharanga, 3. Charitra-Acharanga, 4.
Tapa-Acharanga, and 5. Viriya-Acharanga.  The Acharanga has many parts: 1.
Vayanas, 2. Anuyogadaras, 3. Padivattis, 4. Vedhas, 5. Silogas, and 6.
Nijjuttis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 168] [samavAyAGgasUtra dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka 511-duvAlasaMge gaNipiDage
pnnnntte| taM jahA-AyAre sUyagaDe ThANe samavAe vivAhapanattI NAyAdhammakahAo
uvAsagadasAo aMtagaDadasAo aNuttarovavAiyadasAo paNhAvAgaraNAiM vivAgasue
ditttthivaae| gaNi-piTaka dvAdaza aMgasvarUpa kahA gayA hai, ve aMga isa prakAra
haiM-1 AcArAGga, 2.sUtrakRtAGga, 3. sthAnAGga, 4. samavAyAGga, 5.
vyAkhyAprajJapti, 6. jJAtAdharmakathA, 7. upAsakadazA, 8. antakRtdazA, 9.
anuttaropapAtikadazA, 10. praznavyAkaraNa, 11. vipAkasUtra aura 12. dRSTivAda
aNg| vivecana-guNoM ke gaNa yA samUha ke dhAraka AcArya ko gaNI kahate haiN|
piTaka kA artha maMjUSA, peTI yA piTArI hai| AcAryoM ke sarvasvarUpa zrutaratnoM
kI maMjUSA ko gaNi-piTaka kahA hai| jaise manuSya ke ATha aMga hote haiM, usI
prakAra zrutarUpa paramapuruSa ke bAraha aMga hote haiM, unheM hI dvAdazAGga
zruta kahA jAtA 512-se kiM taM AyAre? AyAreNaM samaNANaM NiggaMthANaM aayaar-
goyr-vinny-venniytthaann-gmnn-cNkmnn-pmaann-jogjuNjnn-bhaasaasmiti-guttii-sejjo-
vhi-bhtt-paann-uggmuppaaynn-esnnaavisohi-suddhaasuddhgghnn-vy-nniym-tvovhaann-
suppssthmaahijjaa| yaha AcArAGga kyA hai - isameM kyA varNana kiyA gayA hai?
AcArAGga meM zramaNa nirgranthoM ke AcAra, gocarI, vinaya, vainayika (vinaya-
phala) sthAna, gamana, caMkramaNa, pramANa, yoga-yojana, bhASA, samiti, gupti,
zayyA, upadhi, bhakta, pAna, udgama, utpAdana, eSaNAvizuddhi, zuddha-grahaNa,
azuddha-grahaNa, vrata, niyama aura tapa upadhAna, ina sabakA suprazasta rUpa se
kathana kiyA gayA vivecana-jo sarva prakAra ke Arambha aura parigraha se rahita
hokara nirantara zruta-abhyAsa aura saMyama-paripAlana karane meM zrama karate
haiM, aise zramaNa-nirgrantha sAdhuoM kA AcaraNa kaisA ho, gocarI kaisI kareM,
vinaya kisakA aura kisa prakAra kareM, kaise khar3e hoM, kaise gamana kareM,
kaise upAzraya ke bhItara zarIrazrama dUra karane ke lie idhara-udhara saMcaraNa
kareM, unakI upadhi kA kyA pramANa ho, svAdhyAya, pratilekhana Adi meM kisa
prakAra se apane ko tathA dUsaroM ko niyukta kareM, kisa prakAra kI bhASA boleM,
pAca samitiyoM aura tIna guptiyoM kA kisa prakAra se pAlana kareM, zayyA,
upadhi, bhojana, pAna Adi ke udgama aura utpAdana Adi doSoM kA parihAra karate
hue kisa prakAra se gaveSaNA kareM, usameM lage doSoM kI kisa prakAra se zuddhi
kareM, kauna-kauna se vratoM (mUlaguNa) niyamoM (uttaraguNa) aura tapa upadhAna
(bAraha prakAra ke tapa) kA kisa prakAra se pAlana kareM, ina saba kartavyoM kA
AcArAGga meM uttama prakAra se varNana kiyA gayA hai| 513 -se samAsao paMcavihe
paNNate, taM jahA-NANAyAre daMsaNAyAre carittAyAre tavAyAre viriyaayaare|
AyArassa NaM parittA vAyaNA, saMkhejjA aNuogadArA, saMkhejjAo paDivattIo,
saMkhenjA veDha, saMkhejjA silogA, saMkhejjAo nijjuttiio|

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelve Angas of the Ganipitaka: The Achar  **The Achar is the first Anga
in the Ganipitaka, and it is divided into five types:**  * **Jnanachar:** This
refers to eight types of conduct related to knowledge, such as:     *
Disciplining oneself in knowledge     * Studying and reciting scriptures during
the time dedicated to study     * Not concealing the name of one's Guru *
**Darshanachar:** This refers to eight types of conduct related to right faith,
such as:     * Not doubting the truths spoken by the Jinas     * Not desiring
worldly pleasures     * Not being doubtful * **Charitrachar:** This refers to
the flawless observance of the five great vows, the five samitis, and other
aspects of conduct. * **Tapachara:** This refers to the practice of both
external and internal austerities. * **Viryachara:** This refers to not
concealing one's strength in fulfilling one's duties and performing them to the
best of one's ability.  **The Achar is also a scripture that expounds upon these
five types of conduct.**  **The Acharang has a limited number of readings
(parit) that explain its sutras.** These readings are given only during the time
of the karmabhoomi (the realm of action) in the ascending and descending cycles
of time. They are not given during the akarmabhoomi (the realm of no action) or
the bhogabhoomi (the realm of enjoyment).  **The Acharang also has a limited
number of Anuyogadwaras, which are the means of understanding the nature of
reality.** These include:  * **Upkram:** The beginning or introduction *
**Nay:** The method or approach * **Nikeshep:** The deposit or conclusion *
**Anugam:** The following or continuation  **The Acharang also has a limited
number of:**  * **Pratipattis:** These are statements that explain the nature of
reality. * **Veshtkas:** These are specific types of verses or stanzas that
explain a particular topic. * **Shlokas:** These are verses in the Anushtup
meter, which have eight syllables in each line. * **Niyuktis:** These are
explanations of the concise meaning of the sutras, with etymological derivations
and logical arguments.  **The Acharang is a vast and complex scripture,
containing:**  * **Two Suyakhandas:** Chapters or sections * **Nineteen
Ajjhayanas:** Lessons or teachings * **Eighty-five Uddesanakalas:** Sections
dedicated to the purpose or goal * **Eighty-five Samuddesanakalas:** Sections
dedicated to the explanation of the purpose or goal * **Eighteen thousand
Padas:** Words or verses * **Countless Aksharas:** Letters * **Countless
Pazzavas:** Sentences * **Countless Thavaras:** Permanent or unchanging things *
**Countless Sasayas:** Living beings * **Countless Kadas:** Chapters or sections
* **Countless Nikaiyas:** Collections or groups * **Countless Jinpannattas:**
Statements made by the Jinas * **Countless Bhavas:** States of being  **The
Acharang is a treasure trove of knowledge and wisdom, and it is essential for
understanding the teachings of Jainism.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka] [169 _ AcAra saMkSepa se pA~ca prakAra kahA gayA hai,
jaise-jJAnAcAra, darzanAcAra cAritrAcAra, tapAcAra aura viiryaacaar| isa pA~ca
prakAra ke AcAra kA pratipAdana karanevAlA zAstra bhI AcAra kahalAtA hai|
AcArAMga kI parimita sUtrArthapradAna rUpa vAcanAeM haiM, saMkhyAta upakrama Adi
anuyogadvAra haiM, saMkhyAta pratipattiyA~ haiM, saMkhyAta veSTaka haiM,
saMkhyAta zloka haiM, aura saMkhyAta niyuktiyA~ haiN| vivecana-jJAna kA vinaya
karanA, svAdhyAya-kAla meM paThana-pAThana karanA, guru kA nAma nahIM chipAnA,
Adi ATha prakAra ke vyavahAra ko jJAnAcAra kahate haiN| jina-bhASita tattvoM meM
zaMkA nahIM karanA, sAMsArika sukhabhogoM kI AkAMkSA nahIM karanA, vicikitsA
nahIM karanA Adi ATha prakAra ke samyaktvI vyavahAra ke pAlana karane ko
darzanAcAra kahate haiN| pA~ca mahAvratoM kA, pA~ca samitiyoM Adi rUpa cAritra
kA nirdoSa pAlana karanA cAritrAcAra hai| bahiraMga aura antaraMga tapoM kA
sevana karanA tapAcAra hai| apane Avazyaka karttavyoM ke pAlana karane meM zakti
ko nahIM chipA kara yathAzakti unakA bhalI-bhAMti se pAlana karanA vIryAcAra
hai| ukta pA~ca prakAra ke AcAra kI vAcanAeM parIta (sImita) haiM  /  AcArya-
dvArA AgamasUtra aura sUtroM kA artha ziSya ko denA 'vAcanA' kahalAtI hai|
AcArAGa kI aisI vAcanAeM asaMkhyAta ra hotI haiM, kintu parigaNita hI hotI haiM,
ataH unheM 'parIta' kahA gayA hai| ye vAcanAeM utsarpiNI aura avasarpiNI kAla ke
karmabhUmi ke samaya meM hI dI jAtI haiM, akarmabhUmi yA bhogabhUmi ke yuga meM
nahIM dI jAtI upakrama, naya, nikSepa aura anugama ke dvArA vastu-svarUpa kA
pratipAdana kiyA jAtA hai, ataeva unheM anuyoga-dvAra kahate haiN| AcArAGga ke
ye anuyogadvAra bhI saMkhyAta hI haiN| vastu-svarUpa prajJApaka vacanoM ko
pratipatti kahate haiM  /  vibhinna mata vAloM ne padArthoM kA svarUpa bhinna-
bhinna prakAra se mAnA hai, aise matAntara bhI saMkhyAta hI hote haiN| vizeSa-
eka vizeSa prakAra ke chanda ko veDha yA veSTaka kahate haiM matAntara se eka
viSaya kA pratipAdana karane vAlI zabdasaMkalanA ko veDha (veSTaka) kahate haiN|
AcArAGga ke aise chando vizeSa bhI saMkhyAta hI haiN| jisa chanda ke eka caraNa
yA pAda meM ATha akSara nibaddha hoM, aise cAra caraNavAle anuSTapa chanda ko
zloka kahate haiN| AcArAGga meM AcAradharma ke pratipAdana karane vAle zloka bhI
saMkhyAta hI haiN| sUtra-pratipAdita saMkSipta artha ko zabda kI
vyutpattipUrvaka yukti ke sAtha pratipAdana karanA niyukti kahalAtI hai| aisI
niyuktiyA~ bhI AcArAGga kI saMkhyAta hI haiN| 514-se NaM aMgaThThayAe paDhame
aMge, do suyakkhaMdhA, paNavIsaM ajjhayaNA, paMcAsIiM uddesaNakAlA, paMcAsIiM
samuddesaNakAlA, aTThArasa padasahassAI, padaggeNaM, saMkhejjA akkharA, [aNaMtA
gamA] aNaMtA pajjavA, parittA tasA, aNaMtA, thAvarA sAsayA kaDA nibaddhA NikAiyA
jiNapaNNattA bhAvA AghavijaMti paNNavinaMti parUvijaMti daMsijjati nidaMsijjati
uvdNsijjti| se evaM NAyA, evaM viNNAyA, evaM caraNa-karaNaparUvaNayA AghavijaMti
paNNavijaMti parUvijaMti daMsijati nidaMsijjati uvdNsijti|settN aayaare|| gaNi-
piTaka ke dvAdazAGga meM aMga kI (sthApanA kI) apekSA 'AcAra' prathama aMga hai|
isameM do

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [170] The Samvayanga Sutra is a part of the Shruta Skandha, it has twenty-
five studies, eighty-five Uddeshan-kalas, and eighty-five Samuddeshan-kalas. In
terms of word count, it has eighteen thousand words, countless letters, and
infinite meanings. This is because every object has infinite qualities, and
therefore, the doors to knowing them, the forms of knowledge, are also infinite.
The synonyms are also infinite because the qualities of an object are infinite.
The number of Trasa Jivas is limited, while the number of Sthavar Jivas is
infinite. All substances are eternal (Nitya) from the perspective of Dravyarthic
Nay, and impermanent (Anitya) from the perspective of Paryayarthic Nay. All
substances are bound (Grathit) and unbound (Nikachit) in the Sutras, meaning
they are established through principles, collections, reasons, examples, etc. In
this Acharanga, the teachings (Prajnapta) of the Jina Dev are stated in a
general way, they are specifically explained, they are shown through reasons and
examples, they are specifically defined, and they are explained through Upanaya-
Nigama.  The study of Acharanga makes one knowledgeable about the true nature of
the soul and the principles of conduct, it makes one knowledgeable about the
specific qualities and their synonyms, and it also makes one knowledgeable about
other philosophies. In this way, the principles of conduct like Achar-Gochari,
etc., and the principles of purification like Pind-Shuddhi, etc., are explained
briefly, explained in detail, shown through reasons and examples, specifically
defined, and explained through Upanaya-Nigama. ||1||  ## 515- What is the
content of the Sutra? The Sutra describes the following: * Things that are
present in the current time (Swasamaya) * Things that are present in the past
time (Parasamaya) * Things that are present in both the current and past time
(Swasamaya-Parasamaya) * Jivas (living beings) * Ajivas (non-living beings) *
Both Jivas and Ajivas * The Lok (universe) * The Alok (non-universe) * Both Lok
and Alok  ## 516- The Sutra also describes all things, including Jivas, Ajivas,
Puny (merit), Pap (demerit), Asrava (influx), Samvara (restriction), Nirjara
(destruction), Bandha (bondage), and Moksha (liberation).   It describes the
state of those Shramans who have taken vows for a short period of time, whose
minds are confused by listening to false teachings or principles, whose hearts
are agitated by doubts arising from the truth, and who are suffering from the
effects of the four types of impurities (Pavakar, Malina, Mai, and Guna-
Visohan). It also describes the state of those who are engaged in eighty-four
types of non-virtuous actions, seventy-seven types of non-beneficial actions,
thirty-two types of harmful actions, and the three types of wrong views
(Tevatthi).   The Sutra also describes the state of those who are firmly
established in the right path, who have attained knowledge, faith, and conduct,
who have a clear vision, who are well-versed in various scriptures, who have
understood the ultimate nature of things, who are endowed with the qualities of
the Supreme Being, who are free from delusion, who are like lamps in the
darkness of ignorance, who are radiant, who have attained the highest state of
liberation, who are free from fear and trembling, and who are well-established
in the truth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170] [samavAyAGgasUtra zrutaskandha haiM, paccIsa adhyayana haiM, pacAsI
uddezana-kAla haiM, pacAsI samuddezana-kAla haiN| pada-gaNanA kI apekSA isameM
aTThAraha hajAra pada haiM, saMkhyAta akSara haiM, ananta gama haiM, arthAt
pratyeka vastu meM ananta dharma hote haiM, ataH unake jAnane rUpa jJAna ke
dvAra bhI ananta hI hote haiM, paryAya bhI ananta haiM, kyoMki vastu ke dharma
ananta haiN| trasa jIva parIta (sImita) haiN| sthAvara jIva ananta haiN| sabhI
padArtha dravyArthika naya kI apekSA zAzvata (nitya) haiM, paryAyArthika naya kI
apekSA kRta (anitya) haiM, sarva padArtha sUtroM meM nibaddha (grathita) haiM
aura nikAcita haiM arthAt niyukti, saMgrahaNI, hetu, udAharaNa Adi se
pratiSThita haiN| isa AcArAGga meM jinendra deva ke dvArA prajJapta (upadiSTa)
bhAva sAmAnya rUpa se kahe jAte haiM, vizeSa rUpa se prarUpaNa kiye jAte haiM,
hetu, dRSTAnta Adi ke dvArA darzAye jAte haiM, vizeSa rUpa se nirdiSTa kiye jAte
haiM, aura upanaya-nigama ke dvArA upadarzita kiye jAte haiN| _ AcArAGga ke
adhyayana se AtmA vastu-svarUpa kA evaM AcAra-dharma kA jJAtA hotA hai,
guNaparyAyoM kA viziSTa jJAtA hotA hai tathA anya matoM kA bhI vijJAtA hotA hai|
isa prakAra AcAra-gocarI Adi caraNadharmoM kI tathA piNDazuddhi Adi
karaNadharmoM kI prarUpaNA-isameM saMkSepa se kI jAtI hai, vistAra se kI jAtI
hai, hetu-dRSTAnta se use dikhAyA jAtA hai, vizeSa rUpa se nirdiSTa kiyA jAtA
hai aura upanaya-nigamana ke dvArA upadarzita kiyA jAtA hai  // 1 //  515-se kiM
taM sUagaDe? sUyagaDe NaM sasamayA sUijjati, parasamayA sUinjaMti,
sasamayaparasamayA sUinjaMti, jIvA sUijati, ajIvA sUijati, jIvAjIvA sUijaMti,
logo sUijati, alogo sUijati logAlogo suuijti| sUtrakRta kyA hai - usameM kyA
varNana hai? sUtrakRta ke dvArA svasamaya sUcita kiye jAte haiM, parasamaya
sUcita kiye jAte haiM, svasamaya aura parasamaya sUcita kiye jAte haiM, jIva
sUcita kiye jAte haiM, ajIva sUcita kiye jAte haiM, jIva aura ajIva sUcita kiye
jAte haiM, loka sUcita kiyA jAtA hai, aloka sUcita kiyA jAtA hai aura loka-aloka
sUcita kiyA jAtA hai| 516-sUyagaDe NaM jIvAjIva-puNNa-pAvAsava-saMvara-
ninjaraNa-baMdha-mokkhAvasANA payatthA suuijjti| samaNANaM acirakAlapavvaiyANaM
ku samayamoha-mohamai-mohiyANaM saMdehajAyasahajabuddhi pariNAmasaMsaiyANaM
pAvakara-malinamai-guNa-visohaNatthaM asIassa kiriyAvAiyasayassa,caurAsIe
akiriyavAINaM, sattaTThIe aNNANiyavAINaM, battIsAe veNaiyavAINaM tiNhaM
tevaTThINaM aNNadiTThiiyasayANaM bUhaM kiccA samamae tthaavijjti| NANAdihrata-
vayaNa-NissAraM suTTha darisayaMtA vivihavitthArANugama-
paramasabbhAvaguNivisiTThA mohapahoyAragA udArA aNNANatamaMdhakAraduggesu
dIvabhUA sovANA ceva siddhisugaigihuttamassa Nikkhobha-nippakaMpA sutttthaa|
sUtrakRta ke dvArA jIva, ajIva, puNya, pApa, Asrava, saMvara, nirjarA, bandha
aura mokSa taka ke sabhI padArtha sUcita kiye jAte haiN| jo zramaNa alpakAla se
hI pravrajita haiM, jinakI buddhi khoTe samayoM yA siddhAntoM ke sunane se
mohita hai, jinake hRdaya tattva ke viSaya meM sandeha ke utpanna hone se
Andolita ho

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twelve-Anga Ganipitaka] [There are 171 and the result of spontaneous
intelligence is attaining doubt, for the purification of their vices of the
defiled mind that earns sins, there are one hundred and eighty actionists,
eighty-four inactionists, sixty-seven ignorant ones and thirty-two submissive
ones, all these (180 + 84 + 67 + 32 = 363) three hundred and sixty-three other
disputants are defeated, i.e., negated, and self-time (Jain principle) is
established. By showing the essence of the words of other religions through
various kinds of illustrative and well-reasoned words, and by expanding the
elements of the soul, etc., through various Anuyoga doors, the ultimate good
qualities, the avatar of the path of liberation, the promoter of beings in right
faith, etc., free from all the defects related to the meaning of the entire
sutra, endowed with all virtues, generous, a lamp in the deep darkness, like a
step for the best house of siddhi and sugati, free from the agitation of the
disputants, the unshakable sutra and meaning are indicated. 517-The readings of
the Sutra-Kritanga are finite, the Anuyoga doors are countable, the
understandings are countable, the Vedhas are countable, the slokas are countable
and the appointments are countable. 518-This is the second anga in relation to
the angas. It has two Shruta-skandhas, twenty-three studies, thirty-three
Uddeshanakalas, thirty-three Samuddeshanakalas, thirty-six thousand verses in
terms of the quantity of words, countable letters, infinite gamas and infinite
paryayas. The finite tras and infinite stationary beings and the substances
formulated by the Jina Bhagwan, proved by direct statement in the eternal and
non-eternal sutras and by appointment, etc., are stated in general and specific
forms; they are made known by distinguishing them as name, establishment, etc.,
they are formulated by stating the nature of the name, etc., they are shown by
similes, they are directed by giving reasons, examples, etc., and they are shown
by upanayanigamana. _ By studying this anga, the student becomes a knower and a
knower. This anga states the charanas (basic qualities) and the karanas
(secondary qualities), it makes known and formulates them. Their demonstration
and demonstration are shown. This is the introduction to the Sutra-Kritanga
||2|| Discussion-The principle spoken by the Jinas is called self-time, the
principle formulated by the heretics is called other-time. And both these
principles are called self-time-other-time. The second Sutra-Kritanga

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka] [171 rahe haiM aura sahaja buddhi kA pariNamana saMzaya
ko prApta ho rahA hai, unakI pApa upArjana karane vAlI malina mati ke durguNoM
ke zodhana karane ke lie kriyAvAdiyoM ke eka sau assI, akriyAvAdiyoM ke caurAsI,
ajJAnavAdiyoM ke sar3asaTha aura vinayavAdiyoM ke battIsa, ina saba (180 + 84+
67 + 32 = 363) tIna sau tiresaTha anya vAdiyoM kA vyUha arthAt nirAkaraNa karake
sva-samaya (jaina siddhAnta) sthApita kiyA jAtA hai| nAnA prakAra ke
dRSTAntapUrNa yukti-yukta vacanoM ke dvArA para-mata ke vacanoM kI bhalI bhA~ti
niHsAratA dikhalAte hue, tathA satpada-prarUpaNA Adi aneka anuyoga dvAroM ke
dvArA jIvAdi tattvoM ko vividha prakAra se vistArAnugama kara parama
sadbhAvaguNa-viziSTa, mokSamArga ke avatAraka, samyagdarzanAdi meM prANiyoM ke
pravartaka, sakalasUtra-arthasambandhI doSoM se rahita, samasta sadguNoM se
sahita, udAra, pragADha andhakAramayI durgoM meM dIpakasvarUpa, siddhi aura
sugati rUpI uttama gRha ke lie sopAna ke samAna, pravAdiyoM ke vikSobha se
rahita niSprakampa sUtra aura artha sUcita kiye jAte haiN| 517-sUyagaDassa NaM
parittA vAyaNA, saMkhejjA aNuogadArA, saMkhejjAo paDivattIo, saMkhejjA veDhA,
saMkhejjA silogA, saMkhejjAo nijjuttiio| sUtrakRtAMga kI vAcanAe~ parimita haiM,
anuyogadvAra saMkhyAta haiM, pratipattiyAM saMkhyAta haiM, veDha saMkhyAta haiM,
zloka saMkhyAta haiM aura niyuktiyA~ saMkhyAta haiN| 518-se NaM aMgaTThAyAe
docce aMge, do suyakkhaMdhA, tevIsaM ajjhayaNA, tettIsaM uddesaNakAlA, tettIsaM
samuddesaNakAlA, chattIsaMpadasahassAiM payaggeNaM pnnnnttaaii|sNkhejjaa
akkharA, aNaMtA gamA, aNaMtA pajjavA, parittA tasA, aNaMtA thAvarA, sAsayA kaDA
NibaddhA NikAiyA jiNapaNNattA bhAvA AghavijaMti paNNavijaMti parUvijaMti
nidaMsirjati uvdNsijNti| se evaM AyA, evaM viNNAyA, evaM caraNa-karaNa-
parUvaNayA AghavijaMti paNNavinaMti parUvijaMti nidaMsijati uvdNsijti| se taM
suagaDe 2 /  aMgoM kI apekSA yaha dUsarA aMga hai| isake do zrutaskandha haiM,
teIsa adhyayana haiM, tetIsa uddezanakAla haiM, tetIsa samuddezanakAla haiM,
pada-parimANa se chattIsa hajAra pada haiM, saMkhyAta akSara, ananta gama aura
ananta paryAya haiN| parimita trasa aura ananta sthAvara jIvoM kA tathA nitya,
anitya sUtra meM sAkSAt kathita evaM niyukti Adi dvArA siddha jinendra bhagavAna
dvArA prarUpita padArthoM kA sAmAnya-vizeSa rUpa meM kathana kiyA gayA hai;
nAma, sthApanA Adi bheda karake prajJApana kiyA hai, nAmAdi ke svarUpa kA
kathana karake prarUpaNa kiyA gayA hai, upamAoM dvArA darzita kiyA gayA hai,
hetu dRSTAnta Adi dekara nirdezita kiyA gayA hai aura upanayanigamana dvArA
upadarzita kie gae haiN| _ isa aMga kA adhyayana karake adhyetA jJAtA aura
vijJAtA ho jAtA hai| isa aMga meM caraNa (mUla guNoM) tathA karaNa (uttara
guNoM) kA kathana kiyA gayA hai, prajJApanA aura prarUpaNA kI gaI hai| unakA
nidarzana aura upadarzana karAyA gayA hai| yaha sUtrakRtAMga kA paricaya hai  //
2 //  vivecana-jina-bhASita siddhAnta ko svasamaya kahate haiM, kutIrthiyoM ke
dvArA prarUpita siddhAnta ko parasamaya kahate haiN| aura donoM ke siddhAntoM ko
svasamaya-parasamaya kahA jAtA hai| dUsare sUtrakRtAMga

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [172] [Samvayanga Sutra]  This is elaborated in the Angas. It also discusses
in detail the nature of Jiva-Ajiva, Lok-Alok, punya-papa, etc. Although there
are countless different opinions about the nature of the Tattvas, based on their
own imaginations, they are broadly divided into four categories. They are: 1.
Kriyavadi, 2. Akriyavadi, 3. Agnanika, and 4. Vainayika. Their brief description
is as follows:  1. **Kriyavadi:** Those who believe in punya-papa, bandha-
moksha, and their causative actions, but hold onto a single side, are called
Kriyavadi. Their number is one hundred and eighty. It is as follows: Kriyavadi
believe in nine substances: Jiva, Ajiva, Asrava, Bandha, Samvara, Nirjara,
Punya, Papa, and Moksha. Again, some believe in each substance as being self-
existent (svatah), while others believe it to be dependent (paratah). Therefore,
there are eighteen divisions of the nine substances. Again, some believe in
these eighteen divisions as being eternal (nitya), while others believe them to
be non-eternal (anitya). Therefore, multiplying eighteen by two, there are
thirty-six divisions. Again, some believe these thirty-six divisions to be
caused by time (kalakruta), some by God (ishvarakruta), some by the self
(atmakruta), some by destiny (niyatikruta), and some by nature (svabhavakruta).
Thus, multiplying the said thirty-six divisions by these five beliefs (36 x 5 =
180), there are one hundred and eighty divisions of Kriyavadi.  2.
**Akriyavadi:** They do not believe in punya and papa, but only in the seven
substances, including Jiva, and some believe them to be self-existent (svatah),
while others believe them to be dependent (paratah). Therefore, multiplying
seven by these two divisions, there are fourteen divisions. Again, some believe
these fourteen divisions to be caused by time (kalakruta), some by God
(ishvarakruta), some by the self (atmakruta), some by destiny (niyatikruta),
some by nature (svabhavakruta), and some by chance (yadrichchhajanita). Thus,
multiplying the said fourteen substances by these six beliefs (14 x 6 = 84),
there are eighty-four divisions of Akriyavadi.  3. **Agnanika:** Their belief is
that who knows if there is a Jiva or not? Is there an Ajiva or not? And so on.
They put the Jiva and other substances in the confusion of ignorance. And
regarding the seven bhangas (categories) by which the Jina Dev has described
these nine substances: (1) Syadasti, (2) Syannaasti, (3) Syadasti-naasti, (4)
Syadavaktvy, (5) Syadasti-avaktvy, (6) Syannaasti-avaktvy, and (7) Syadasti-
naasti-avaktvy, they also express ignorance about them. Thus, due to the
ignorance of the said seven bhangas regarding the nine substances, there are
sixty-three divisions (9 x 7 = 63). And besides the nine substances, they also
express ignorance about the tenth, the origin, through the first four bhangas
out of the said seven. Thus, adding these four divisions to the said sixty-
three, there are sixty-seven divisions of Agnanika.  4. **Vainayika:** They
consider it a duty to be respectful to everyone. According to their belief, it
is a duty to be respectful in mind, speech, and body to: 1. Dev, 2. Nripati, 3.
Gnāti, 4. Yati, 5. Stavira (Elder), 6. Adhama, 7. Mata, and 8. Pita, and to give
them charity. Thus, multiplying the said eight by mind, speech, body, and
charity, there are thirty-two divisions (8 x 4 = 32) of Vainayika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 172] [ samavAyAGgasUtra aMga meM inakA vistAra se varNana kiyA gayA hai| tathA
jIva - ajIva, loka- aloka, puNya-pApa Adi padArthoM kA vizada vivecana kiyA hai
/  yadyapi apanI-apanI kalpanAoM ke anusAra tattvoM kA nirUpaNa karane vAle
mata-matAntara agaNita haiM, phira bhI sthUla rUpa se unako cAra vargoM meM
vibhAjita kiyA gayA hai  /  ve haiM - 1. kriyAvAdI, 2. akriyAvAdI, 3. ajJAnika
aura 4. vainayika  /  inakA saMkSipta vivaraNa isa prakAra hai puNya-pApa
bandha-mokSa ko tathA unakI sAdhaka kriyAoM ko mAnate hue bhI ekAnta pakSa ko
pakar3e hue haiM, ve kriyAvAdI kahalAte haiM  /  unakI saMkhyA eka sau assI hai
/  vaha isa prakAra haikriyAvAdI jIva, ajIva, Asrava, bandha, saMvara, nirjarA,
puNya, pApa aura mokSa ina nau padArthoM ko mAnate haiN| puna: pratyeka padArtha
ko koI svata: bhI mAnate haiM aura koI parata: bhI mAnate haiN| ataH nau
padArthoM ke aTThAraha bheda ho jAte haiN| puna: ina aTThArahoM hI bhedoM ko koI
nityarUpa mAnate haiM aura koI anitya rUpa mAnate haiM, ataH aTThAraha ko do se
guNita karane para chattIsa bheda ho jAte haiM  /  punaH ve ina chattIsoM bhedoM
ko koI kAlakRta mAnatA hai, koI IzvarakRta mAnatA hai, koI AtmakRta mAnatA hai,
koI niyatikRtaM mAnatA hai aura koI svabhAvakRta mAnatA hai| isa prakAra ina
pA~ca mAnyatAoM se ukta chattIsa bhedoM ko guNita karane para (36 180) eka sau
assI kriyAvAdiyoM ke bheda ho jAte haiM  /  x 5 = 1. jo 2. akriyAvAdI puNya aura
pApa ko nahIM mAnate haiM, kevala jIvAdi sAta padArthoM ko hI mAnate haiM aura
unheM koI svataH mAnatA hai aura koI parataH mAnatA hai  /  ata: sAta ko ina do
bhedoM se guNita karane para caudaha bheda ho jAte haiN| punaH ina caudaha
bhedoM ko koI kAlakRta mAnatA hai, koI IzvarakRta mAnatA hai, koI AtmakRta
mAnatA hai, koI niyatikRta mAnatA hai, koI svabhAvakRta mAnatA hai aura koI
yadRcchAjanita mAnatA hai  /  isa prakAra ukta caudaha - padArthoM ko ina chaha
mAnyatAoM se guNita karane para (14 x 6 =. bheda akriyAvAdiyoM ke ho jAte haiM
/  84) caurAsI 3. ajJAnavAdiyoM kI mAnyatA hai ki kauna jAnatA hai ki jIva hai,
yA nahIM? ajIva hai, yA nahIM? ityAdi prakAra se ye jIvAdi padArthoM ko ajJAna
ke jhamele meM DAlate haiM tathA jina deva ne ina nau padArthoM kA '(1)
syAdasti, (2) syAnnAsti, (3) syAdastinAsti, (4) syAdavaktavya, (5) syAdasti -
avaktavya, (6) syAnnAsti - avaktavya aura (7) syAdasti nAsti avaktavya' ina sAta
bhaMgoM ke dvArA nirUpaNa kiyA hai, unake viSaya meM bhI ajJAna ko prakaTa
karate haiM  /  isa prakAra jIvAdi nau padArthoM ke viSaya meM ukta sA bhaMga
rUpa ajJAnatA ke kAraNa (9x 7 = 63) tiresaTha bheda ho jAte haiM  /  tathA nau
padArthoM ke atirikta dazavIM utpatti ke viSaya meM bhI ukta sAta bhaMgoM meM se
Adi ke cAra bhaMgoM ke dvArA ajAnakArI prakaTa karate haiN| isa prakAra ukta 63
meM ina cAra bhedoM ko jor3a dene para 67 bheda ajJAnavAdiyoM ke ho jAte haiM  /
4. vinayavAdI sabakA vinaya karane ko hI dharma mAnate haiM  /  unake matAnusAra
1. deva, 2. nRpati, 3 . jJAti, 4. yati, 5. sthavira (vRddha), 6. adhama, 7. mAtA
aura 8. pitA ina AThoM kI mana se, vacana se aura kAya se vinaya karanA aura
inako dAna denA dharma hai| isa prakAra ukta ATha ko mana, vacana, kAya aura
dAna ina cAra se guNita karane para battIsa (8 x 4 = 32) bheda vinayavAdiyoM ke
ho jAte haiM 1

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelve Angas: The Ganipitaka  [173 The refutation of the three hundred
and sixty-two views of the four types of Ekantavādins, from the perspective of
Syādvāda, and the determination of the true nature of things, is done in this
second Sutra-created Anga. 519-What is the nature of the Sthānāṅga? It
establishes the existence of the self-time, the other-time, the self-time-other-
time, the living beings, the non-living beings, the living-non-living beings,
the world, the non-world, and the world-non-world. It describes the substance,
qualities, field, time, and permutations of living beings and other substances,
as well as the mountains, the great rivers like the Ganges, the oceans, the
suns, the buildings, the flying machines, the mines of gold and other metals,
the ordinary rivers, the treasures of the Chakravartis, the many races of men,
the different kinds of sounds, the lineages, and the movements of the celestial
deities. It also describes the existence of one, two, up to ten types of
substances. It describes the living beings, the pudgalas, and the substances
like Dharma-āstikāya and Adharma-āstikāya that exist in the world. ||1|| 420-The
readings of the Sthānāṅga are limited, the Anuyo-gadvāras are numbered, the
Pratīpattis are numbered, the Vedhas (special meters) are numbered, the Ślokas
are numbered, and the Sangrahanīs are numbered. 521-This Sthānāṅga is the third
Anga in relation to the Angas, it contains one Śruta-skandha, ten Adhyayanas,
twenty-one Uddesaṇakālas, [twenty-one Samuddesaṇakālas], seventy-two thousand
verses, and is established by the number of verses. The number of letters is
infinite, the permutations are infinite, the truths are limited, the eternal
beings are infinite, and the living beings are bound by the karmas. The Jina-
established teachings, the feelings, the actions, the perceptions, the examples,
and the explanations are presented. They are presented in this way, in this way,
in this way, and in this way, through the actions, the perceptions, and the
explanations. This is the nature of the Sthānāṅga. ||3|| ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka] [173 ukta cAroM prakAra ke ekAntavAdiyoM ke tIna sau
tiresaTha matoM kA syAdvAda kI dRSTi se nirAkaraNa kara yathArtha vastu-svarUpa
kA nirNaya isa dUsare sUtrakRta aMga meM kiyA gayA hai| 519-se kiM taM ThANe?
ThANeNaM sasamayA ThAvijaMti, parasamayA ThAvijaMti, sasamayaparasamayA
ThAvijaMti, jIvA ThAvinjaMti, ajIvA ThAvijaMti, jIvA-jIvA ThAvijjati, loge
ThAvijjati, aloge ThAvijjati, logAloge tthaaviti| ThANeNaM davva-guNa-khetta-
kAla-pajjava-payatthANaMselA salilA ya samuddA sUra-bhavaNa-vimANa-Agara-NadIo
/  Nihio purisajjayA sarA ya gottA ya joisaMcAlA  // 1 //  -ekkavihavattavvayaM
duvihavattavvayaM jAva dasavihavattavvayaM jIvANa poggalANa ya logaTThAiM ca NaM
paruvaNayA aaghvijjti| sthAnAGga kyA hai - isameM kyA varNana hai? jisameM
jIvAdi padArtha pratipAdya rUpa se sthAna prApta karate haiM, vaha sthAnAGga
hai| isake dvArA svasamaya sthApita-siddha kiye jAte haiM, parasamaya sthApita
kiye jAte haiM, svasamaya-parasamaya sthApita kiye jAte haiN| jIva sthApita kiye
jAte haiM, ajIva sthApita kiye jAte haiM, jIva-ajIva sthApita kiye jAte haiN|
loka sthApita kiyA jAtA hai, aloka sthApita kiyA jAtA hai, aura loka-aloka donoM
sthApita kiye jAte haiN| sthAnAGga meM jIva Adi padArthoM ke dravya, guNa,
kSetra kAla aura paryAyoM kA nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| tathA zailoM (parvatoM) kA,
gaMgA Adi mahAnadiyoM kA, samudroM, sUryoM, bhavanoM, vimAnoM, AkaroM (svarNa
Adi kI khAnoM) sAmAnya nadiyoM, cakravartI kI nidhiyoM evaM puruSoM kI aneka
jAtiyoM kA, svaroM ke bhedoM, gotroM aura jyotiSka devoM ke saMcAra kA varNana
kiyA gayA hai| tathA eka-eka prakAra ke padArthoM kA yAvat dazadaza prakAra ke
padArthoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| jIvoM kA, pudgaloM kA tathA loka meM
avasthita dharmAstikAya, adharmAstikAya Adi dravyoM kA bhI prarUpaNa kiyA gayA
hai||1|| 420-ThANassa NaM parittA vAyaNA, saMkhejA aNuogadArA, saMkhejjAo
paDivattIo, saMkhejjA veDhA, saMkhejA silogA, saMkhenjAo sNghnniio| sthAnAGga kI
vAcanAeM parIta (sImita) haiM, anuyogadvAra saMkhyAta haiM, pratipattiyA~
saMkhyAta haiM, veDha (chandovizeSa) saMkhyAta haiM, zloka saMkhyAta haiM aura
saMgrahaNiyA~ saMkhyAta haiN| 521 -se NaM aMgaTThayAe taie aMge, ege
suyakkhaMdhe, dasa ajjhayaNA, ekkavIsaM uddesaNakAlA,[ekkavIsaM samuddesaNakAlA]
vAvattari payasahassAiM payaggeNaM pnnnnttaaii|sNkhejjaa akkharA, aNaMtA [gamA,
aNaMtA] pajjavA, parittA tasA, aNaMtA thAvarA sAsayA kaDA NibaddhA NikAiyA
jiNapaNNattA bhAvA AghavinjaMti paNNavijaMti, parUvijaMti nidaMsijjati
uvdNsijNti| se evaM AyA, evaM NAyA evaM viNNAyA, evaM caraNa-karaNaparUvaNayA
aaghvijNti.| se taM ThANe 3 /  yaha sthAnAGgaM aMga kI apekSA tIsarA aMga hai,
isameM eka zrutaskandha hai, daza adhyayana haiM, ikkIsa

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Samvayanga Sutra: An Introduction  [174] The Samvayanga Sutra has twenty-one
objectives. It contains seventy-two thousand words, countless letters, infinite
types of knowledge, infinite synonyms, countless sorrows, and infinite
stationary beings. From the perspective of substance, all entities are eternal,
but from the perspective of modification, they are impermanent, bound,
solidified, and Jain-defined. All these entities are described, explained,
exemplified, demonstrated, and illustrated in this Anga. The student of this
Anga becomes a knower of the soul and a wise person. Thus, through the
description and explanation of the characteristics and causes, the nature of the
object is described, explained, exemplified, demonstrated, and illustrated. This
is an introduction to the third Sthananga. ||3||  522 - What is the Samvayanga?
What is described in it? The Samvayanga describes the present time, the past
time, and both the present and past time. It describes living beings, non-living
beings, and both living and non-living beings. It describes the world, the non-
world, and both the world and the non-world.  523 - The Samvayanga describes
one, two, three, and so on, up to hundreds, thousands, and kotis of objects, as
well as the leaves (number of modifications) of the twelve Anga Ganipitaka. It
summarizes the knowledge of the Lord, which is beneficial to the beings of the
world, in the form of twelve Angas, extending to one hundred places. This
Samvayanga describes various types of living and non-living beings, as well as
many other specific details, such as the food, breath, leshya, dwelling, number,
dimensions, birth, death, immersion, upadhi, pain, classification, use, yoga,
senses, passions, various types of living beings, the dimensions, height, and
circumference of mountains like Mandara, the specific classifications of
mountains like Mandara, the Kulkaras,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 174] [samavAyAGgasUtra uddezanakAla haiM, [ikkIsa samuddezanakAla haiN|] pada-
gaNanA kI apekSA isameM bahattara hajAra pada haiN| saMkhyAta akSara haiM,
ananta gama (jJAna-prakAra) haiM, ananta paryAya haiM, parIta trasa haiN| ananta
sthAvara haiN| dravya-dRSTi se sarva bhAva zAzvata haiM, paryAya-dRSTi se anitya
haiM, nibaddha haiM, nikAcita (dRr3ha kiye gaye) haiM, jina-prajJapta haiN| ina
saba bhAvoM kA isa aMga meM kathana kiyA jAtA hai, prajJApana kiyA jAtA hai,
prarUpaNa kiyA jAtA hai, nidarzana kiyA jAtA hai aura upadarzana kiyA jAtA hai|
isa aMga kA adhyetA AtmA jJAtA ho jAtA hai, vijJAtA ho jAtA hai| isa prakAra
caraNa aura karaNa prarUpaNA ke dvArA vastu ke svarUpa kA kathana, prajJApana,
parUpaNa, nidarzana aura upadarzana kiyA jAtA hai| yaha tIsare sthAnAGga kA
paricaya hai  // 3 //  522-se kiM taM samavAe? samavAe NaM sasamayA sUijjaMti,
parasamayA sUijjaMti, sasamayaparasamayA suuijjNti| jIvA sUijjaMta, ajIvA
sUijjaMti, jIvAjIvA sUijjaMti, loge sUijjati, aloge suijjati, logAloge suuijjti|
samavAyAGga kyA hai? isameM kyA varNana hai? samavAyAGga meM svasamaya sUcita
kiye jAte haiM, parasamaya sUcita kiye jAte haiM aura svasamaya-parasamaya
sUcita kiye jAte haiN| jIva sUcita kiye jAte haiM, ajIva sUcita kiye jAte haiM,
aura jIva-ajIva sUcita kiye jAte haiN| loka sUcita kiyA jAtA hai, aloka sUcita
kiyA jAtA hai aura loka aloka sUcita kiyA jAtA hai| 523 -samavAeNaM ekAiyANaM
egaTThANaM eguttariyaparivuDDhIe duvAlasaMgassa vi gaNipiDagassa pallavagge
samaNugAijjai, ThANagasayassa bArasavihavittharassa suyaNANassa jagajIvahiyassa
bhagavao samAseNaM samoyAre aahijjti| tattha ya NANAvihappagArA jIvAjIvA ya
vaNiyA, vitthareNa avare vi ya bahuvihA visesA naraga-tiriya-maNu-suragaNANaM
AhArussAsalesA-AvAsa-saMkha-AyayappamANa-uvavAya-cavaNa-uggahaNovahi-
veyaNavihANa-upaoga-jogaiMdiya-kasAyA vivihA ya jIvajoNI
vikkhaMbhussehaparirayappamANaM vihivisesA ya maMdarAdINaM mahIdharANaM
kulagara-titthagara-gaNaharANaM sammatta-bharahAhivANacakkINaM ceva cakkahara-
halaharANa ya vAsANa ya nigamA ya samAe ee aNNe ya evamAi ettha vitthareNaM
atthA smaahinjNti| samavAyAGga ke dvArA eka, do, tIna ko Adi lekara eka-eka
sthAna kI parivRddhi karate hue zata, sahasra aura koTAkoTI taka ke kitane hI
padArthoM kA aura dvAdazAGga gaNipiTaka ke pallavAnoM (paryAyoM ke pramANa) kA
kathana kiyA jAtA hai| sau taka ke sthAnoM kA, tathA bAraha aMgarUpa meM vistAra
ko prApta, jagat ke jIvoM ke hitakAraka bhagavAn zrutajJAna kA saMkSepa se
samavatAra kiyA jAtA hai| isa samavAyAGga meM nAnA prakAra ke bheda-prabheda
vAle jIva aura ajIva padArtha varNita haiN| tathA vistAra se anya bhI bahuta
prakAra ke vizeSa tattvoM kA, naraka, tiryaMca, manuSya aura deva gaNoM ke
AhAra, ucchvAsa,lezyA, AvAsa-saMkhyA, unake AyAmaviSkambha kA pramANa, upapAta
(janma) cyavana (maraNa) avagAhanA, upadhi, vedanA, vidhAna (bheda), upayoga,
yoga, indriya, kaSAya, nAnA prakAra kI jIva-yoniyA~, parvata-kUTa Adi ke
viSkambha (caur3AI) utsedha (UMcAI) pariraya (paridhi) ke pramANa, mandara Adi
mahIdharoM (parvatoM) ke vidhi-(bheda) vizeSa, kulakaroM,

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelve Angas: The Ganipitaka  [The Twelve Angas: The Ganipitaka]  This
Samvayanga details the 175 Tirthankaras, the Ganadharas, the Chakravartis who
ruled all of Bharat Kshetra, the Chakradhara-Vasudevas and the Haladharas
(Baladevas), the Kshetras, the Nirgamas (i.e., the expansion of the northern
regions from the eastern regions), and other such matters.  _524 - The
Samvayanga has Paritta Vayanas (limited readings), Sankhejjha Anuyogadaras
(enumerated Anuyogadaras), Sankhejjha Padivattis (enumerated Padivattis),
Sankhejjha Vedhas (enumerated Vedhas), Sankhejjha Silokas (enumerated Silokas),
and Sankhejjha Ninjuttis (enumerated Niyuttis).  The readings of the Samvayanga
are limited, the Anuyogadaras are enumerated, the Padivattis are enumerated, the
Vedhas are enumerated, the Silokas are enumerated, and the Niyuttis are
enumerated.  525 - This is the fourth Anga in relation to the Angas. It has one
Adhyayana (study), one Shruta Skandha (body of knowledge), one Uddeshanakal
(time of purpose), [one Samuddeshanakal (time of collective purpose)]. It has
one hundred and forty thousand padas (words) according to the pada-ganana (word
count). It has Sankhejjha Aksharas (enumerated letters), Ananta Gam (infinite
types of knowledge), Ananta Paryaya (infinite synonyms), Paritta Tras (limited
fears), Ananta Thavara (infinite immovable beings), Sasvaya (eternal), Krita
(impermanent), Nibaddha (bound), Nikachita (extracted), Jin-Prajnapta Bhava
(Jina-declared states). These are stated, declared, exemplified, instructed, and
demonstrated in this Anga. Through this Anga, the soul becomes the knower, the
discerner. Thus, through the exemplification of Charana (conduct) and Karana
(action), the nature of the object is stated, declared, exemplified, instructed,
and demonstrated. This is the fourth Samvayanga.  526 - What is the Vyavakhya
Prajnapti? What is described in it?  Through the Vyavakhya Prajnapti, the Sv-
samaya (own time) is explained, the Par-samaya (other's time) is explained, and
the Sv-samaya-Par-samaya (own time and other's time) is explained. The Jivas
(living beings) are explained, the Ajivas (non-living beings) are explained, and
the Jivas and Ajivas are explained. The Lok (world) is explained, the Alok (non-
world) is explained, and the Lok and Alok are explained.  527 - The Vyavakhya
Prajnapti is a detailed explanation by the Jina of the questions asked by
various Suras (deities), Naras (humans), Devas (gods), Risis (sages), and
various Sanseya (assemblies). It is a detailed explanation of the Dava
(substance), Guna (qualities), Kshetra (field), Kala (time), Paryaya (synonyms),
Padesa (location), Parinam (transformation), Jahatti Bhava (abandonment of
states), Anugamanik Ksheva (following the path), Nayapraman (principles of
logic), Suninuovakkama (well-spoken words), Viviha Prakars (various methods),
Pagadpayasia (those who strive for liberation), Logaloppayasia (those who strive
for the welfare of the world), Samsarasamudda-Runda-Uttaran-Samatthana (those
who are capable of crossing the vast ocean of Samsara), Suravai-Sampujia (those
who are worthy of praise and worship), Bhaviyajan-Pay-Hiyayabhinandia (those who
are delighted by the welfare of future beings), Tamarayavidvansana (those who
destroy the darkness of ignorance), Sutthidivabhuya-Iha-mati-Buddhi-Baddhana
(those who strengthen the intellect with the desire for liberation), and Chattis
Sahasamanuna (thirty-six thousand monks). It is a collection of their Vagarana
(words).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka] [175 tIrthaMkaroM, gaNadharoM, samasta bharatakSetra ke
svAmI cakravartiyoM kA, cakradhara-vAsudevoM aura haladharoM (baladevoM) kA,
kSetroM kA, nirgamoM kA arthAt pUrva-pUrva kSetroM se uttara ke (Age ke) kSetroM
ke adhika vistAra kA, tathA isI prakAra ke anya bhI padArthoM kA isa samavAyAGga
meM vistAra se varNana kiyA gayA hai| _524-samavAyassa NaM parittA vAyaNA,
saMkhejjA aNuogadArA, saMkhejjAo paDivattIo, saMkhejjA veDhA, saMkhejA silogA,
saMkhejjAo ninjuttiio| samavAyAGga kI vAcanAeM parIta haiM, anuyogadvAra
saMkhyAta haiM, pratipattiyA~ saMkhyAta haiM, veDha saMkhyAta haiM, zloka
saMkhyAta haiM aura niyuktiyAM saMkhyAta haiN| 525-se NaM aMgaTThayAe cautthe
aMge, ege ajjhayaNe, ege suyakkhaMdhe, ege uddesaNakAle (ege smuddesnnkaale)|
cauyAle padasayasahasse padaggeNaM pnnnntte|sNkhejaanni akkharANi, aMNatA gamA,
aNaMtA pajjavA, parittA tasA, aNaMtA thAvarA sAsayA kaDA nibaddhA nikAiyA
jiNapaNNattA bhAvA AghavijaMti paNNavinjati parUvijaMti nidaMsirjati uvdNsijNti|
se evaM AyA, evaM viNNAyA, evaM caraNa-karaNa parUvaNayA aaghvijjNti.| settaM
samavAe 4 /  aMga kI apekSA yaha cauthA aMga hai, isameM eka adhyayana hai, eka
zrutaskandha hai, eka uddezana kAla hai, [eka samuddezana-kAla hai,] pada-gaNanA
kI apekSA isake eka lAkha cavAlIsa hajAra pada haiN| isameM saMkhyAta akSara
haiM, ananta gama (jJAna-prakAra) haiM, ananta paryAya haiM, parIta trasa,
ananta sthAvara tathA zAzvata, kRta (anitya), nibaddha, nikAcita jina-prajJapta
bhAva isa aMga meM kahe jAte haiM, prajJApita kiye jAte haiM, prarUpita kiye
jAte haiM, nirdezita kiye jAte haiM aura upadarzita kiye jAte haiM  /  isa aMga
ke dvArA AtmA jJAtA hotA hai, vijJAtA hotA hai| isa prakAra caraNa aura karaNa
kI prarUpaNA ke dvArA vastu ke svarUpa kA kathana, prajJApana, prarUpaNa,
nidarzana aura upadarzana kiyA jAtA hai| yaha cauthA samavAyAGga haiM 4 /  526
-se kiM taM vivAhe? vivAheNa sasamayA viAhijjaMti, parasamayA viAhijjaMti,
sasamaya-parasamayA viAhijjaMti, jIvA viAhijaMti, ajIvA viAhijjati, jIvAjIvA
viAhijjaMti, loge viAhijjai, aloe viAhijjai, logAloge viaahijji|
vyAkhyAprajJapti kyA hai - isameM kyA varNana hai? vyAkhyAprajJapti ke dvArA
svasamaya kA vyAkhyAna kiyA jAtA hai, para-samaya kA vyAkhyAna kiyA jAtA hai,
tathA svasamaya-parasamaya kA vyAkhyAna kiyA jAtA hai| jIva vyAkhyAta kiye jAte
haiM ajIva vyAkhyAta kiye jAte haiM tathA jIva aura ajIva vyAkhyAta kiye jAte
haiN| loka vyAkhyAta kiyA jAtA hai, aloka vyAkhyAta kiyA jAtA hai| tathA loka
aura aloka vyAkhyAta kiye jAte haiN| 527-vivAhe NaM nANAvihasura-naradi-
rAyarisi-vivihasaMsaia-pucchiANaM jiNeNaM vitthareNa bhAsiyANaM davva-guNa-
khetta-kAla-pajjava-padesa-pariNAma-jahatthibhAva-aNugamanikkheva-NayappamANa-
suniuNovakkama-vivihappakAra-pagaDapayAsiyANaM logAlogapayAsiyANaM
saMsArasamudda-ruMda-uttaraNa-samatthANaM suravai-saMpUjiyANaM bhaviyajaNa-paya-
hiyayAbhinaMdiyANaM tamarayavidvaMsaNAANaM suTThidIvabhUya-IhAmati-buddhi-
baddhaNANaM chattIsasahassamaNUNayANaM vAgaraNANaM

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [176] The *Samvayanga Sutra* is a treasure trove of knowledge, containing a
multitude of teachings, virtues, and insights.   The *Vyākhyāprajñapti*
(Exposition of Knowledge) details the questions posed by various deities, kings,
royal sages, and individuals grappling with diverse doubts, along with the
answers delivered by the Jina (Victorious One). It illuminates the nature of
substance (dravya), qualities (guna), space (kṣetra), time (kāla), modifications
(paryāya), regions (pradeśa), dimensions (parimāṇa), inherent states
(yathāsthita bhāva), following (anugam), deposition (nikṣepa), viewpoints
(naya), proofs (pramāṇa), and various skillful approaches (sunipuṇa-upkrama).
This text, a beacon for the world and beyond, guides us across the vast ocean of
existence. It is revered by the gods, delights the hearts of the noble
(bhavyas), and dispels the darkness of ignorance. It is a radiant lamp,
illuminating the path of aspiration (īhā), wisdom (matti), and understanding
(buddhi).   The *Vyākhyāprajñapti* presents thirty-six thousand teachings
(answers to questions), making it a rich source of knowledge, a guide for
disciples, and a repository of profound virtues.  ## [528] The
*Vyākhyāprajñapti* is a collection of teachings, with a specific number of
*anuyogadvara* (gates to the paths), *pratipatti* (understandings), *veḍha*
(special meters), *śloka* (verses), and *niyukti* (applications).  ## [529] The
*Vyākhyāprajñapti* is the fifth *anga* (limb) of the Jain canon. It contains one
*śruta-skandha* (collection of teachings), over one hundred *adhyayana*
(studies), ten thousand *uddeśaka* (topics), ten thousand *samuddeśaka* (sub-
topics), and thirty-six thousand answers to questions. In terms of words, it
comprises eighty-four thousand *pada* (words).   It encompasses countless *gama*
(paths), *paryāya* (modifications), *trasa* (fears), and *sthāvara* (immobile
beings). All these, eternal, created, bound, and categorized, are described,
explained, illustrated, exemplified, and elaborated upon in this *anga*.
Through this *anga*, the soul gains knowledge and understanding. It reveals the
nature of reality through the description, explanation, illustration,
exemplification, and elaboration of the path (caraṇa) and the means (karaṇa).
This is a brief introduction to the fifth *anga*, the *Vyākhyāprajñapti*.  ##
[530] What is the *Nāyā-dharma-kathā* (Story of the Right Path)? The *Nāyā-
dharma-kathā* describes the cities, villages, forests, regions, and kings of the
right path. It also narrates the stories of righteous conduct, the stories of
parents, and the stories of the right path in this world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 176] [samavAyAGgasUtra daMsaNAo suyatthabahuvihappagArA sIsahiyatthA ya
gunnmhttthaa| vyAkhyAprajJapti meM nAnA prakAra ke devoM, narendroM, rAjarSiyoM
aura aneka prakAra ke saMzayoM meM par3e hue janoM ke dvArA pUche gaye praznoM
kA aura jinendra deva ke dvArA bhASita uttaroM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| tathA
dravya, guNa, kSetra, kAla, paryAya, pradeza-parimANa, yathAsthita bhAva,
anugama, nikSepa, naya, pramANa, sunipuNa-upakramoM ke vividha prakAroM ke dvArA
prakaTa rUpa se prakAzita karane vAle, lokAloka ke prakAzaka, vistRta
saMsArasamudra se pAra utArane meM samartha, indroM dvArA saMpUjita, bhavya jana
prajA ke athavA bhavya jana-padoM ke hRdayoM ko abhinandita karane vAle,
tamoraja kA vidhvaMsana karane vAle, sudRSTa (sunirNIta) dIpaka svarUpa, IhA,
matti aura buddhi ko bar3hAne vAle aise anyUna (pUre) chattIsa hajAra vyAkaraNoM
(praznoM ke uttaroM) ko dikhAne se yaha vyAkhyAprajJapti sUtrArtha ke aneka
prakAroM kA prakAzaka hai, ziSyoM kA hita-kAraka hai aura guNoM se mahAn artha
se paripUrNa hai| 528-viyAhassa NaM parittA vAyaNA, saMkhejjA aNuogadArA,
saMkhenjAo paDivattIo, saMkhenjA veDhA, saMkhejjA silogA, saMkhejjAo nijjuttiio|
vyAkhyAprajJati kI vAcanAeM parIta haiM, anuyogadvAra saMkhyAta haiM,
pratipattiyAM saMkhyAta haiM, veDha (chandovizeSa) saMkhyAta haiM, zloka
saMkhyAta haiM aura niyuktiyA~ saMkhyAta haiN| 529-se NaM aMgaTThayAe paMcame
aMge, ege suyakkhaMdhe, ege sAirege ajjhayaNasate, dasa uddesaga-sahassAiM, dasa
samuddesagasahassAI, chattIsaM vAgaraNasahassAiM caurAsIiM payasahassAiM
payaggeNaM pnnnnttaa| saMkhejjAiM akkharAiM, aNaMtA gamA, aNaMtA pajjavA,
parittA tasA, aNaMtA thAvarA, sAsayA kaDANibaddhA NikAiyA jiNapaNNattA bhAvA
AghavijaMti paNNavijaMti, parUvijaMti nidaMsinjaMti uvdNsinjNti|se evaM AyA, se
evaM NAyA, evaM viNNAyA evaM caraNa-karaNaparUvaNayA aaghvijjti| se taM viyAhe 5
/  yaha vyAkhyAprajJapti aMga rUpa se pA~cavA~ aMga hai| isameM eka zrutaskandha
hai, sau se kucha adhika adhyayana haiM, daza hajAra uddezaka haiM, daza hajAra
samuddezaka haiM, chattIsa hajAra praznoM ke uttara haiN| pada-gaNanA kI apekSA
caurAsI hajAra pada haiN| saMkhyAta akSara haiM, ananta gama haiM, ananta
paryAya haiM, parIta trasa haiM, ananta sthAvara haiN| ye saba zAzvata, kRta,
nibaddha, nikAcita, jina-prajJapta-bhAva isa aMga meM kahe jAte haiM, prajJApita
kiye jAte haiM, prarUpita kiye jAte haiM, nidarzita kiye jAte haiM aura
upadarzita kiye jAte haiN| isa aMga ke dvArA AtmA jJAtA hotA hai, vijJAtA hotA
hai| isa prakAra caraNa aura karaNa kI prarUpaNA ke dvArA vastu ke svarUpa kA
kathana, prajJApana. prarUpaNa, nidarzana ora upadarzana kiyA jAtA hai| yaha
pA~caveM vyAkhyAprajJapti aMga kA paricaya hai 5 /  vivecana-AcArAMga se lekara
samavAyAMga taka padoM kA parimANa dugunA-dugunA hai kintu vyAkhyAprajJapti ke
padoM meM dviguNatA kA Azraya nahIM liyA gayA hai| kintu yahA~ caurAsI hajAra
padoM kA ullekha spaSTa hai| 530-se kiM taM NAyAdhammakahAo ? NAyAdhammakahAsu
NaM NAyANaM NagarAI ujANAI ceiAI vaNakhaMDA rAyANo 5, ammA-piyaro samosaraNAiM
dhammAyariyA dhammakahAo ihaloiya

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Jain terms have been preserved in the translation:  The Jñātādharmakathā
describes the following about the ascetics who have taken vows:  1. Those whose
firmness (dhīti), intellect (mati), and effort (vyavasāya) are weak in upholding
the vow of restraint (saṃyama-pratijñā) in the excellent doctrine of the
Victorious Lord (jina-bhagavat's śāsana).  2. Those who are broken down by the
heavy burden of the fierce battle (raṇa) of observing the rules (niyama) and
practices (tapovahāna) of austerities.  3. Those who have been defeated by the
terrible parīṣahas (hardships), and have fallen from the pure path of mokṣa due
to the obstruction of the siddha-ālaya (abode of the perfected ones).  4. Those
who are infatuated by the worthless pleasures of the senses and afflicted by
passions.  5. Those who are devoid of the essence of the various qualities of
the ascetic life, such as character, knowledge, and perception.  6. Those who
are entangled in the endless cycle of transmigration and various miserable
states of existence.  7. The courageous ones who have conquered the armies of
passions, are firm in their restraint, and aspire for the pure path of
knowledge, perception, and conduct leading to liberation.  8. Having enjoyed the
incomparable divine pleasures of the celestial abodes, they eventually fall from
that state due to the natural course of time, and then attain the final rites
(antakriyā).  9. The scriptures provide guidance and instruction for the
ascetics, highlighting both their virtues and faults, so that the wise monks may
firmly establish themselves in the doctrine that destroys old age and death, and
attain the eternal, auspicious, and complete liberation from all suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka] [177 paraloiaiDDIvisesA 10, bhoyapariccAyA pavvajjAo
suyapariggahA tavovahANAiM pariyAgA 15, saMlehaNAo bhattapaccakkhANAI
pAovagamaNAI devalogagamaNAI sukulapaccAyAyAiM 20, puNabohilAbhA aMtakiriyAo 22
ya AghavinaMti parUvijjaMti daMsijati nidaMsijjaMti uvdNsijjNti|
jJAtAdharmakathA kyA hai - isameM kyA varNana hai? jJAtAdharmakathA meM jJAta
arthAt udAharaNarUpa meghakumAra Adi puruSoM ke 1 nagara, 2 udyAna, 3 caitya, 4
vanakhaNDa,5 rAjA, 6 mAtA-pitA,7 samavasaraNa,8 dharmAcArya, 9 dharmakathA, 10
ihalaukika-pAralaukika Rddhi-vizeSa, 11 bhoga-parityAga, 12 pravrajyA, 13
zrutaparigraha, 14 tapa-upadhAna, 15 dIkSAparyAya, 16 saMlekhanA, 17
bhaktapratyAkhyAna, 18 pAdapopagamana, 19 devaloga-gamana, 20 sukula meM
punarjanma, 21 punaH bodhilAbha aura 22 antakriyAeM kahI jAtI haiN| inakI
prarUpaNA kI gaI haiM, darzAyI gaI haiM, nirdezita kI gaI haiM aura upadarzita
kI gaI haiN| 531 - nAyAdhammakahAsu NaM pavvaiyANaM viNaya-karaNa-
jiNasAmisAsaNavare saMjamapaiNNapAlaNadhii-mai-vavasAyadubbalANaM 1, tavaniyama-
tavovahANa-raNa-duddhara-bhara-bhaggANisahaya-NisiTThANaM 2, ghora-parIsaha-
parAjiyANaM'sahapAraddha-ruddhasiddhAlaya-mahaggA-niggayANaM 3, visayasuha-
tuccha-AsAvasa-dosamucchiyANaM 4, virAhiya-caritta-nANa-daMsaNa-
aiguNavivihappayAra-nissArasunnayANaM5, saMsAra-apAra-dukkhaduggai-bhavaviviha-
paraMparApavaMcA 6.dhIrANa ya jiyaparisaha-kasAya-seNNa-dhii-dhaNiya-saMjama-
ucchAha-nicchiyANaM 7, ArAhiyanANa-daMsaNacarittajoga-nissalla-suddhasiddhAlaya-
maggamabhimuhANaM surabhavaNa-vimANasukkhAiM aNovamAiM bhuttUNa ciraM ca
bhogabhogANi tANi divvANi mhrihaanni| tato ya kAlakkamacuyANa jaha ya puNo
laddhasiddhimaggANaM aNtkiriyaa| caliyANa ya sadeva-mANussadhIra-karaNa-kAraNANi
bodhaNaaNusAsaNANi guNa-dosa drisnnaanni| diLeMte paccaye ya soUNa logamuNiNo
jaha ya ThiyAsAsaNammi jara-maraNa-nAsaNakare ArAhiasaMjamA ya
suralogapaDiniyattA oventi jaha sAsayaM sivaM savvadukkhamokkhaM, ee aNNe ya
evamAiatthA vitthareNa y| jJAtAdharmakathA meM pravrajita puruSoM ke vinaya-
karaNa-pradhAna, pravara jina-bhagavAn ke zAsana kI saMyama-pratijJA ke pAlana
karane meM jinakI dhRti (dhIratA), mati (buddhi) aura vyavasAya (puruSArtha)
durbala hai, tapazcaraNa kA niyama aura tapa kA paripAlana karane rUpa raNa
(yuddha) ke durdhara bhAra ko vahana karane se bhagna haiM - parAGmukha ho gaye
haiM, ataeva atyanta azakta hokara saMyama-pAlana karane kA saMkalpa chor3akara
baiTha gaye haiM, ghora parISahoM se parAjita ho cuke haiM isalie saMyama ke
sAtha prArambha kiye gaye mokSa-mArga ke avaruddha ho jAne se jo siddhAlaya ke
kAraNabhUta mahAmUlya jJAnAdi se patita haiM, jo indriyoM ke tuccha viSaya-
sukhoM kI AzA ke vaza hokara rAgAdi doSoM se mUrcchita ho rahe haiM, cAritra,
jJAna, darzana svarUpa yati-guNoM se aura unake vividha prakAroM ke abhAva se jo
sarvathA niHsAra aura zUnya haiM, jo saMsAra ke apAra duHkhoM kI aura naraka,
tiryaMcAdi nAnA durgatiyoM kI bhava-paramparA ke prapaMca meM par3e hue haiM,
aise patita puruSoM kI kathAeM haiN| tathA jo dhIra vIra haiM, parISahoM aura
kaSAyoM kI senA ko jItane vAle haiM, dhairya ke dhanI haiM,saMyama meM utsAha

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[178] This Anga narrates the stories of great souls who are firmly resolved to
uphold the Samvayanga Sutra and manifest strength and vigor, who are devoted to
the practice of knowledge, perception, conduct, and Samadhi Yoga, who are free
from the impurities of false views, illusion, and the afflictions of nidana, and
who are directed towards the path of the pure and flawless Siddhalaya. It also
tells the stories of those who, having practiced restraint and been born in the
celestial realm, enjoyed the unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and
celestial vehicles, as well as divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and
consumptions for a long time, and who, due to the passage of time, were
dislodged from there and again attained the path of liberation as per their
karmic merit, but who, due to the influence of karma, were distracted at the
time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also narrates the stories of those
who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the celestial realm, enjoyed the
unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and celestial vehicles, as well as
divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and consumptions for a long time, and
who, due to the passage of time, were dislodged from there and again attained
the path of liberation as per their karmic merit, but who, due to the influence
of karma, were distracted at the time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also
narrates the stories of those who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the
celestial realm, enjoyed the unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and
celestial vehicles, as well as divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and
consumptions for a long time, and who, due to the passage of time, were
dislodged from there and again attained the path of liberation as per their
karmic merit, but who, due to the influence of karma, were distracted at the
time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also narrates the stories of those
who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the celestial realm, enjoyed the
unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and celestial vehicles, as well as
divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and consumptions for a long time, and
who, due to the passage of time, were dislodged from there and again attained
the path of liberation as per their karmic merit, but who, due to the influence
of karma, were distracted at the time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also
narrates the stories of those who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the
celestial realm, enjoyed the unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and
celestial vehicles, as well as divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and
consumptions for a long time, and who, due to the passage of time, were
dislodged from there and again attained the path of liberation as per their
karmic merit, but who, due to the influence of karma, were distracted at the
time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also narrates the stories of those
who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the celestial realm, enjoyed the
unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and celestial vehicles, as well as
divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and consumptions for a long time, and
who, due to the passage of time, were dislodged from there and again attained
the path of liberation as per their karmic merit, but who, due to the influence
of karma, were distracted at the time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also
narrates the stories of those who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the
celestial realm, enjoyed the unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and
celestial vehicles, as well as divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and
consumptions for a long time, and who, due to the passage of time, were
dislodged from there and again attained the path of liberation as per their
karmic merit, but who, due to the influence of karma, were distracted at the
time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also narrates the stories of those
who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the celestial realm, enjoyed the
unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and celestial vehicles, as well as
divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and consumptions for a long time, and
who, due to the passage of time, were dislodged from there and again attained
the path of liberation as per their karmic merit, but who, due to the influence
of karma, were distracted at the time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also
narrates the stories of those who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the
celestial realm, enjoyed the unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and
celestial vehicles, as well as divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and
consumptions for a long time, and who, due to the passage of time, were
dislodged from there and again attained the path of liberation as per their
karmic merit, but who, due to the influence of karma, were distracted at the
time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also narrates the stories of those
who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the celestial realm, enjoyed the
unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and celestial vehicles, as well as
divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and consumptions for a long time, and
who, due to the passage of time, were dislodged from there and again attained
the path of liberation as per their karmic merit, but who, due to the influence
of karma, were distracted at the time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also
narrates the stories of those who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the
celestial realm, enjoyed the unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and
celestial vehicles, as well as divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and
consumptions for a long time, and who, due to the passage of time, were
dislodged from there and again attained the path of liberation as per their
karmic merit, but who, due to the influence of karma, were distracted at the
time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also narrates the stories of those
who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the celestial realm, enjoyed the
unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and celestial vehicles, as well as
divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and consumptions for a long time, and
who, due to the passage of time, were dislodged from there and again attained
the path of liberation as per their karmic merit, but who, due to the influence
of karma, were distracted at the time of their death in Samadhi. This Anga also
narrates the stories of those who, due to their karmic merit, were born in the
celestial realm, enjoyed the unparalleled pleasures of divine abodes and
celestial vehicles, as well as divine, invaluable, and supreme enjoyments and
consumptions for a long time, and who, due to the passage of time, were
dislodged from there and again attained the path of liberation as per their
karmic merit, but who, due to the influence of karma, were distracted at the
time of their death in Samadhi. This Ang

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 178] [samavAyAGgasUtra rakhane aura bala-vIrya ke prakaTa karane meM dRr3ha
nizcaya vAle haiM, jJAna, darzana, cAritra aura samAdhi-yoga kI jo ArAdhanA
karane vAle haiM, mithyAdarzana, mAyA aura nidAnAdi zalyoM se rahita hokara
zuddha nirdoSa siddhAlaya ke mArga kI ora abhimukha haiM, aise mahApuruSoM kI
kathAeM isa aMga meM kahI gaI haiN| tathA jo saMyamaparipAlana kara devaloka meM
utpanna ho deva-bhavanoM aura deva-vimAnoM ke anupama sukhoM ko aura divya,
mahAmUlya, uttama, bhoga-upabhogoM ko cira-kAla taka bhoga kara kAlakrama ke
anusAra vahA~ se cyuta ho punaH yathAyogya mukti ke mArga ko prApta kara
antakriyA se samAdhimaraNa ke samaya karma-vaza vicalita ho gaye haiM, unako
devoM aura manuSyoM ke dvArA dhairya dhAraNa karAne meM kAraNabhUta, saMbodhanoM
aura anuzAsanoM ko, saMyama ke guNa aura saMyama se patita hone ke doSa-darzaka
dRSTAntoM ko, tathA pratyayoM ko, arthAn bodhi ke kAraNabhUta ko sanakara
zakaparivrAjaka Adi laukika mani jana bhI jarA-maraNa kA nAza karane vAle
jinazAsana meM jisa prakAra se sthita hue, unhoMne jisa prakAra se saMyama kI
ArAdhanA kI, punaH devaloka meM utpanna hae, vahA~ se Akara manuSya ho jisa
prakAra zAzvata sakha ko aura sarvadaHkha-vimokSa ko prApta kiyA. unakI tathA
isI prakAra ke anya aneka mahApuruSoM kI kathAeM isa aMga meM vistAra se kahI
gaI haiN| 532-NAyAdhammakahAsu NaM parittA vAyaNA, saMkhejjA aNuogadArA,
saMkhenjAo paDivattIo, saMkhejjA veDhA, saMkhejjA silogA, saMkhejjAo ninjuttIo,
saMkhejjAo sNghnniio| jJAtAdharmakathA meM parIta vAcanAeM haiM, saMkhyAta
anuyogadvAra haiM, saMkhyAta pratipattiyA~ haiM, saMkhyAta veDha haiM, saMkhyAta
zloka haiM, saMkhyAta niyuktiyA~ haiM aura saMkhyAta saMgrahaNiyAM haiN| 533-se
NaM aMgaTThayAe chaThe aMge, do suakkhaMdhA, egUNavIsaM ajjhynnaa| te samAsao
duvihA pnnnnttaa| taM jahA-caritA ya kappiyA y| dasa dhammakahANaM vggaa| tattha
NaM egamegAe dhammakahAe paMca paMca akkhAiyAsayAI, egamegAe akkhAiyAe paMca
paMca uvakkhAiyAsayAiM, egamegAe uvakkhAiyAe paMca paMca akkhAiya-
uvakkhAiyAsayAI, evameva sappuvvAvareNaM achuTThAo akkhAiyAkoDIo bhavaMtIti
mkkhaayaao| yaha jJAtAdharmakathA aMgarUpa se chaThA aMga hai| isameM do
zrutaskandha haiM unameM se prathama zrutaskandha ( jJAta) ke unnIsa adhyayana
haiN| ve saMkSepa se do prakAra ke kahe gaye haiM - carita aura kalpita  /
(inameM se Adi ke dasa adhyayanoM meM AkhyAyikA AdirUpa avAntara bheda nahIM
hai| zeSa nau adhyayanoM meM se pratyeka meM 540 AkhyAyikAeM haiN| pratyeka
AkhyAyikA meM 500 upAkhyAyikAeM aura pratyeka upAkhyAyikA meM 500 AkhyAyikA
upAkhyAyikAeM haiN| ina kA kula joDa (540 x 500 x 500 x 9 = 1215000000) eka sau
ikkIsa karor3a pacAsa lAkha hotA hai| dharmakathAoM ke daza varga haiN| unameM
se eka-eka dharmakathA meM pAMca-pAMca sau AkhyAyikAeM haiM, eka-eka AkhyAyikA
meM pAMca-pAMca sau upAkhyAyikAeM haiM, eka-eka upAkhyAyikA meM pAMca-pAMca sau
AkhyAyikA-upAkhyAyikAeM haiM  /  isa prakAra ye saba pUrvApara se guNita hokara
[(500 x 500 x 500 = 125000000) bAraha karor3a, pacAsa lAkha hotI haiM  /
dharmakathA vibhAga ke daza varga kahe gaye haiN| ata: ukta rAzi ko daza se
guNita karane para (125000000 x 10 = 1250000000) eka sau paccIsa karor3a

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twelve Anga Ganipitaka] [There are 179 numbers. After subtracting the repeated
stories mentioned above (1215000000) which have the same characteristics, there
are 35 million (1250000000-1215000000 = 35000000) unrepeated stories.
534-Eguntisam Uddesanakala, Eguntisam Samuddesanakala, Sankhejjain Payasahssain
Payaggenam Pannatta. Sankhejjā Akkhara, Ananta Gama, Ananta Pajjava, Paritta
Tasa, Ananta Thavara, Sasaya Kada Nibaddha Nikaiya Jinpannatta Bhava Aghavijanti
Pannavinjanati Paruvijanti Nidansinjanti Uvadansinjanti. Se Evam Aaya, Se
Evamnaaya, Evam Vinnaaya, Evam Charan-Karanparuvanyaya Aghavijanti. Se Ttam
Naayadhammakhao 6. In Gnatadharmakatha, there are twenty-nine Uddesan Kala,
twenty-nine Samuddesan Kala, thousands of words in terms of word count,
countless letters, infinite Gamas, countless Pajjavas, countless Tassas, and
infinite Thavaras. All these eternal, created, bound, collected, Jina-prajnapta
Bhavas are mentioned in this Gnatadharmakatha, they are made known, they are
demonstrated, and they are explained. Through this Anga, the soul becomes the
knower, the knower. Thus, through the description of the steps and actions
(through the stories), the nature of things is stated, made known, described,
demonstrated, and explained. This is the introduction to the sixth
Gnatadharmakatha Anga 6. 535-Se Kim Tam Uvasagadasaao? Uvasagadasaasu
Uvasayaanam Nagarain Ujjaanaai Chaiiiai Vanakhanda. Raayaano Amma-Piyaro Samosar
Riya Dhammakhao Ihloiy-Parloiyiddhivisesa, Uvasayaanam Silvvay-Veraman-Gun-
Pacchakkhan-Posahovvaspadivajanayaao Superiggaha Tavovhaana Padimaao Uvasagga
Sanlehanaao Bhattapacchakkhanaain Paovagamanai Devaloggamanaai Sukulpacchayaai
Puno Bohilaabha Antakiriyaao Aghavijanti Paruvijanti Dansijanti Nidansinjati
Uvadansinjanti. What is Upasakadasha - what is described in it? In Upasakadasha,
there are 1 cities, 2 gardens, 3 Chaityas, 4 forest tracts, 5 kings, 6 parents,
7 Samavasaran, 8 Dharmacharyas, 9 Dharmakathaas, 10 worldly and otherworldly
powers, 11 Upasakas' virtuous conduct, avoidance of sins, qualities, rejection,
fasting and abstinence, 12- study and acceptance, 13 penance, 14 eleven images,
15 upsargas, 16 Sanlekhana, 17 rejection of food, 18 walking on foot, 19 going
to the heavenly world, 20 complete renunciation, 21 re-attainment of
enlightenment and 22 final action are mentioned. It is described, shown,
demonstrated, and explained. 536 -Uvasagadasaasu Nam Uvasayaanam Riddhivisesa
Parisa Vitthardhammasavanaani Bohilaabhaabhigam-Sammatavisuddhaya Thirattam
Mulgun-Uttaragunaaiyara Thiiviseasa Padimaabhigghahgahanapalana Uvasaggahiyasana
Niruvassagga Ya Tava Ya Vicitta Silvvay-Gun-Veraman-Pacchakkhanposahovvasa
Apchhimmaraantiyaay Sanlehana-Jhosanaahin Appaananjah Ya Bhavaitta Bahuni
Bhattaani Anasanaae Ya Cheaitta Uvavanna Kappavaravimanuttemesujah Anubhavanti
Suravar-Vimanavar-Pondariesu Sokkhaain Anovamaain Kamen Bhttun Uttamaain Tao
Aukkheanam Chuyā Samana Jah Jinamyamammi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka] [179 saMkhyA hotI hai| usameM samAna lakSaNavAlI Upara
kahI punarukta (1215000000) kathAoM ko ghaTA dene para (1250000000-1215000000 =
35000000) sAr3he tIna karor3a apunarukta kathAeM haiN| 534-egUNatIsaM
uddesaNakAlA, egUNatIsaM samuddesaNakAlA, saMkhejjAiM payasahassAiM payaggeNaM
pnnnnttaa|sNkhejjaa akkharA, aNaMtA gamA, aNaMtA pajjavA, parittA tasA, aNaMtA
thAvarA, sAsayA kaDA nibaddhA nikAiyA jiNapaNNattA bhAvA AghavijaMti
paNNavinjaMti parUvijaMti nidaMsijjaMti uvdNsijjNti|se evaM AyA,se evaMNAyA,
evaM viNNAyA, evaM caraNa-karaNaparUvaNayA aaghvijNti.| se ttaM NAyAdhammakahAo
6 /  jJAtAdharmakathA meM unatIsa uddezana kAla haiM, unatIsa samuddezana-kAla
haiM, pada-gaNanA kI apekSA saMkhyAta hajAra pada haiM, saMkhyAta akSara haiM,
anaMta gama haiM, parIta trasa haiM, ananta sthAvara haiN| ye saba zAzvata,
kRta, nibaddha, nikAcita, jina-prajJapta bhAva isa jJAtAdharmakathA meM kahe gae
haiM, prajJApita kiye gaye haiM, nidarzita kiye gaye haiM, aura upadarzita kiye
gaye haiN| isa aMga ke dvArA AtmA jJAtA hotA hai, vijJAtA hotA hai| isa prakAra
caraNa aura karaNa kI prarUpaNA ke dvArA (kathAoM ke mAdhyama se) vastu-svarUpa
kA kathana, prajJApana, prarUpaNa, nidarzana aura upadarzana kiyA gayA hai| yaha
chaThe jJAtAdharmakathA aMga kA paricaya hai 6 /  535-se kiM taM uvAsagadasAo?
uvAsagadasAsu uvAsayANaM NagarAiM ujjANAI caiIAI vaNakhaMDA  /  rAyANo ammA-
piyaro samosara riyA dhammakahAo ihaloiya-paraloiyaiDDivisesA, uvAsayANaM
sIlavvaya-veramaNa-guNa-paccakkhANa-posahovavAsapaDivajaNayAo supariggahA
tavovahANA paDimAo uvasaggA saMlehaNAo bhattapaccakkhANAiM pAovagamaNAI
devalogagamaNAI sukulapaccAyAI puNo bohilAbhA aMtakiriyAo AghavijaMti
parUvijaMti daMsijaMti nidaMsijati uvdNsijNti| upAsakadazA kyA hai - usameM kyA
varNana hai? upAsakadazA meM upAsakoM ke 1 nagara, 2 udyAna, 3 caitya, 4
vanakhaNDa,5 rAjA, 6 mAtA-pitA, 7 samavasaraNa. 8 dharmAcArya.9 dharmakathAeM.
10 ihalaukika-pAralaukika Rddhi-vizeSa. 11 upAsakoM ke zIlavrata, pApa-viramaNa,
guNa, pratyAkhyAna, pauSadhopavAsa-pratipatti, 12- zruta-parigraha, 13 tapa-
upadhAna, 14 gyAraha pratimA, 15 upasarga,16 saMlekhanA, 17 bhaktapratyAkhyAna,
18 pAdapopagamana, 19 devaloka gamana, 20 sakala-pratyAgamana.21 pana:
bodhilAbha aura 22 antakriyA kA kathana kiyA gayA hai. prarUpaNA kI gaI hai.
darzana, nidarzana aura upadarzana kiyA gayA hai| 536 -uvAsagadasAsu NaM
uvAsayANaM riddhivisesA parisA vittharadhammasavaNANi bohilAbhaabhigama-
sammattavisuddhayA thirattaM mUlaguNa-uttaraguNAiyArA ThiIvisesA
paDimAbhiggahaggahaNapAlaNA uvasaggAhiyAsaNA NiruvasaggA ya tavA ya vicittA
sIlavvaya-guNa-veramaNa-paccakkhANaposahovavAsA apacchimamAraNaMtiyA'ya
saMlehaNA-jhosaNAhiM appANaMjaha ya bhAvaittA bahUNi bhattANi aNasaNAe ya
cheaittA uvavaNNA kappavaravimANuttamesujaha aNubhavaMti suravara-vimANavara-
poMDarIesu sokkhAiM aNovamAiM kameNa bhuttUNa uttamAiM tao AukkhaeNaM cuyA
samANA jaha jiNamayammi

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ Samvayanga Sutra 180 ]  I do not say that the highest restraint, liberation
from the mass of darkness, is attained by those who are not free from all
suffering.  These others, who are like this, are described in detail. In the
Upasaka Dasanga, the special powers of the Upasakas (Shravakas), their community
(family), detailed Dharma-listening, attainment of knowledge, approaching the
Dharma Acharya, purity of right faith, stability of vows, possession of root and
auxiliary virtues, their transgressions, special situations (time-measure of the
Upasaka-paryaya), acceptance of images, their worship, endurance of obstacles,
or obstacle-free observance, various types of austerities, conduct, vows,
virtues, restraints, rejections, medicinal fasts and the final liberation of the
last death, by properly cultivating the soul through the practice of these, by
piercing many feasts (foods) with the austerity of fasting, by being born in the
best, highest divine planes, by experiencing the incomparable, highest joys in
those best planes, by enjoying them, and then by falling down (being born as
humans) when the lifespan is exhausted, and by attaining enlightenment in the
Jain faith and by possessing the highest restraint, they are liberated from the
mass of darkness (ignorance-darkness-like sin-dust), and they attain the
imperishable, auspicious happiness, free from all suffering.  All this and other
similar meanings are described in detail in this Upasaka Dasanga. 537 - In the
Upasaka Dasanga, there are many recitations, countless Anuyogadwaras, countless
Prathipattis, countless Vedhas, countless Shlokas, countless Niruktis, and
countless Sangrahanis. 538 - This is the seventh Anga, in relation to the
Upasaka Dasanga.  It has one Shruta Skandha, ten Adhyayanas, ten Uddeshanakalas,
ten Samuddeshanakalas.  In terms of word-count, there are countless lakhs of
words, countless letters, infinite Gamas, infinite Paryayas, many Tras, infinite
Sthavaras.  All this, eternal, non-eternal, bound, categorized, Jina-prajnapta,
is described in this Anga, made known, exemplified, demonstrated, and explained.
Through this Anga, the soul becomes the knower, the knower.  Thus, by the
exemplification of the feet and the actions, the nature of things is described,
made known, exemplified, demonstrated, and explained.  This is the description
of the seventh Upasaka Dasanga. 539 - What is the Antagad Dasanga?  In the
Antagad Dasanga, there are descriptions of the Antagadas, their cities, gardens,
parks, forests (forest-sections), kings, mothers and fathers, their assemblies,
Dharma-teachers, Dharma-stories, the special merits of this world and the next,
descriptions of enjoyments, renunciations, good acquisitions, paths of
liberation, various images,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ samavAyAGgasUtra 180 ] bohaM Na ya saMjamuttamaM tamarayoghavippamukkA uveMti
jaha akkhayaM savvadukkhamokkhaM  /  ete anne ya evamAiatthA vitthareNa ya  /
upAsakadazAMga meM upAsakoM (zrAvakoM) kI Rddhi-vizeSa, pariSad (parivAra),
vistRta dharma - zravaNa bodhilAbha, dharmAcArya ke samIpa abhigamana, samyaktva
kI vizuddhatA, vrata kI sthiratA, mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNoM kA dhAraNa, unake
aticAra, sthiti- vizeSa ( upAsaka-paryAya kA kAla - pramANa), pratimAoM kA
grahaNa, unakA pAlana, upasargoM kA sahana, yA nirupasarga-paripAlana, aneka
prakAra ke tapa, zIla, vrata, guNa, veramaNa, pratyAkhyAna, pauSadhopavAsa aura
apazcima mAraNAntika saMlekhanA joSamaNA (sevanA) se AtmA ko yathAvidhi bhAvita
kara, bahuta se bhaktoM (bhojanoM) ko anazana tapa se chedana kara, uttama
zreSTha deva - vimAnoM meM utpanna hokara, jisa prakAra una uttama vimAnoM meM
anupama uttama sukhoM kA anubhava karate haiM, unheM bhoga kara phira Ayu kA
kSaya hone para cyuta hokara (manuSyoM meM utpanna hokara) aura jinamata meM
bodhi ko prApta kara tathA uttama saMyama dhAraNa kara tamoraja ( ajJAna -
andhakAra rUpa pApa - dhUli) ke samUha se vipramukta hokara jisa prakAra akSaya
ziva-sukha ko prApta ho sarva duHkhoM se rahita hote haiM, ina sabakA aura isI
prakAra ke anya bhI arthoM kA isa upAsakadazA meM vistAra se varNana kiyA gayA
hai| 537-uvAsagadasAsu NaM parittA vAyaNA, saMkhejjA aNuogadArA, saMkhejjAo
paDivattIo, saMkhejjA veDhA, saMkhejjA silogA, saMkhejjAo nijjuttIo, saMkhejjAo
sNghnniio| upAsakadazA aMga meM parIta vAcanAeM haiM, saMkhyAta anuyogadvAra
haiM, saMkhyAMta pratipattiyAM haiM, saMkhyAta veDha haiM, saMkhyAta zloka haiM,
saMkhyAta niryuktiyAM haiM aura saMkhyAta saMgrahaNiyAM haiM  /  538 - se NaM
aMgaTTayAe sattame aMge, ege suyakkhaMdhe, dasa ajjhayaNA, dasa uddesaNakAlA,
dasa samuddesaNakAlA, saMkhejjAI payasayasahassAiM payaggeNaM paNNattAiM  /
saMkhejjAI akkharAI, anaMtA gamA, anaMtA pajjavA, parittA tasA, aNaMtA thAvarA,
sAsayA kaDA NibaddhA NikAiyA jiNapaNNattA bhAvA AghavijjaMti paNNavijjaMti,
parUvijjaMti, nidaMsijjaMti uvadaMsijjaMti  /  se evaM AyA se evaM yA evaM
viNNAyA, evaM caraNa-karaNa parUvaNayA AghavijjaMti0  /  se ttaM uvAsagadasAo 7
/  yaha upAsakadazA aMga kI apekSA sAtavAM aMga haiN| isameM eka zrutaskandha
hai, daza adhyayana haiM, dasa uddeza - - kAla haiM, daza samuddezana - kAla
haiN| pada-gaNanA kI apekSA saMkhyAta lAkha pada haiM, saMkhyAta akSara haiM,
ananta gama haiM, ananta paryAya haiM, parIta trasa haiM, ananta sthAvara haiN|
yaha saba zAzvata, azAzvata nibaddha nikAcita jinaprajJapta bhAva isa aMga meM
kahe gae haiM, prajJApita kiye gaye haiM, prarUpita kiye gaye haiM nidarzita
aura upadarzita kiye gae haiN| isa aMga ke dvArA AtmA jJAtA hotA hai, vijJAtA
hotA hai  /  isa prakAra caraNa aura karaNa kI prarUpaNA ke dvArA vastu-svarUpa
kA kathana, prajJApana, prarUpaNa, nidarzana ora upadarzana kiyA jAtA hai  /
yaha sAtaveM upAsakadazA aMga kA vivaraNa hai| 539-se kiM taM aMtagaDadasAo ?
aMtagaDadasAsu NaM aMtagaDANaM NagarAI ujjANAI ceiyAI vaNAI (vaNakhaNDA) rAyA
ammA- piyaro samosaraNA dhammAyariyA dhammakahA ihaloiaparaloia - iDDivisesA
bhogapariccAyA pavvajjAo suyapariggahA tavovahANAiM paDimAo bahuvihAo

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twelve Angas of the Ganipitaka] [181 Khama, Ajjava, Maddava, and Soa, along
with Saccha, are the seventeen types of Samyama. The highest form of
Brahmacharya, Akinchaniya, Tapa, Tyaga, Samiti, and Gupti are also described.
The two highest forms of liberation are Appamaya Yoga and Sajjaya-Jñana. The
highest form of Samyama, when attained, leads to the destruction of the four
types of Karmas. This is achieved through the attainment of Kevala Jnana, the
practice of Shraman-Paryaya and Kevali-Paryaya, the renunciation of all
possessions, and the liberation from the bondage of ignorance. This Anga
elaborates on these and many other concepts in detail.  What is Antakritdasha
and what does it describe? Antakritdasha describes the cities, gardens,
Chaityas, forests, kings, parents, Samavasaran, Dharmacharayas, Dharmakatha,
worldly and otherworldly powers, renunciation of worldly pleasures, Pravrajya,
Shruta-Parigraha, four types of Tapa, various types of statues, Khama, Ajjava,
Maddava, Satya, Shouch, seventeen types of Samyama, the highest form of
Brahmacharya, Akinchaniya, Tapa, Tyaga, Samiti, and Gupti. It also describes the
nature of the two highest forms of liberation, Appamaya Yoga and Sajjaya-Jñana.
It explains how the attainment of the highest form of Samyama leads to the
destruction of the four types of Karmas, resulting in the attainment of Kevala
Jnana. It describes the duration of Shraman-Paryaya and Kevali-Paryaya, the
renunciation of all possessions by the Munis, and the liberation from the
bondage of ignorance. This Anga elaborates on these and many other concepts in
detail.  540 - Antakritdasha contains numerous Parita recitations, numerous
Anuyogadwaras, numerous Prattipattis, numerous Vedhas and Shlokas, numerous
Niyuktis, and numerous Sangrahanis.  541 - This is the eighth Anga in relation
to the Angas. It contains one Shruta Skandha, ten Adhyayanas, seven Vargas, ten
Uddeshan Kalas, ten Samuddeshan Kalas, and thousands of words. It contains
countless Gam, countless Paryayas, countless Tras, countless Thavaras, and
countless eternal and non-eternal, bound and unbound, Jina-Prajnapta Bhavas.
These are described, explained, elaborated, exemplified, and illustrated in this
Anga. The student of this Anga becomes a knower of the self, a knower of the
truth, and a knower of the path.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka] [181 khamA ajjavaM maddavaM ca soaM ca saccasahiyaM
sattarasaviho ya saMjamo uttamaM ca baMbhaM AkiMcaNayA tavo ciyAo samiiguttIo
cev| taha appamAyajogo sajjhAyajjhANANa ya uttamANaM doNhaM pi lkkhnnaaii|
pattANa ya saMjamuttamaM jiyaparIsahANaM cauvvihakammakkhayammi jaha kevalassa
laMbho pariyAo jattio ya jaha pAlio muNihiM pAyovagayo ya, jo jahiM jattiyANi
bhattANi cheaittA aMtagaDo munivaro tamarayogha vippamukko mokkhasuhamaNuttaraM
pttaa| ee anne ya evamAiatthA vitthareNa pruuveii| antakRddazA kyA hai - isameM
kyA varNana hai? antakRtdazAoM meM karmoM kA anta karane vAle mahApuruSoM ke
nagara, udyAna, caitya, vanakhaNDa, rAjA, mAtA-pitA, samavasaraNa, dharmAcArya,
dharmakathA, ihalaukika-pAralaukika Rddhi-vizeSa, bhoga parityAga, pravrajyA,
zruta-parigraha, tapa-4padhAna, aneka prakAra kI pratimAeM, kSamA, Arjava,
mArdava, satya, zauca, sattaraha prakAra kA saMyama, uttama brahmacarya,
AkiMcanya, tapa, tyAga kA tathA samitiyoM aura guptiyoM kA varNana hai|
apramAda-yoga aura svAdhyAya-dhyAna yoga, ina donoM uttama mukti-sAdhanoM kA
svarUpa, uttama saMyama ko prApta karake parISahoM ko sahana karane vAloM ko
cAra prakAra ke ghAtikarmoM ke kSaya hone para jisa prakAra kevalajJAna kA lAbha
huA, jitane kAla taka zramaNa-paryAya aura kevali-paryAya kA pAlana kiyA, jina
muniyoM ne jahA~ pAdapopagamasaMnyAsa kiyA, jo jahA~ jitane bhaktoM kA chedana
kara antakRta munivara ajJAnAndhakAra rUpa raja ke puMja se vipramukta ho
anuttara mokSa-sukha ko prApta hue, unakA aura isI prakAra ke anya aneka arthoM
kA isa aMga meM vistAra se prarUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| 540-aMtagaDadasAsuNaM
parittA vAyaNA,saMkhejjA aNuogadArA,saMkhejjAo paDivattIo saMkhejjA veDhA,
saMkhejjA silogA, saMkhejjAo nijjuttIo, saMkhejjagAo sNghnniio| antakRtdazA meM
parIta vAcanAeM haiM, saMkhyAta anuyogadvAra haiM, saMkhyAta pratipattiyA~ haiM,
saMkhyAta veDha aura zloka haiM, saMkhyAta niyuktyiA~ haiM aura saMkhyAta
saMgrahaNiyA~ haiN| 541-se NaM aMgaTThayAe aTThame aMge, ege suyakkhaMdhe, dasa
ajjhayaNA, satta vaggA, dasa uddesaNakAlA, dasa samuddesaNakAlA,saMkhenjAiM
payasahassAiM payaggeNaM pnnnnttaaii|sNkhejjaa akkharA, aNaMtA gamA, aNaMtA
pajjavA, parittA tasA, aNaMtA thAvarA, sAsayA kaDA NibaddhA NikAiyA jaNapaNNattA
bhAvA ApavijaMti. paNNavijjati. parUvijaMti.nidaMsijjati. uvdNsijjNti| se evaM
AyA, se evaM NAyA, evaM viNNAyA, evaM caraNa-karaNaparUvaNayA aaghvijNti| se tta
aMtagaDadasAo 8 /  aMga kI apekSA yaha AThavA~ aMga hai| isameM eka zrutaskandha
hai  /  daza adhyayana haiM, sAta varga haiM, daza uddezana-kAla haiM, daza
samuddezana-kAla haiM, padagaNanA kI apekSA saMkhyAta hajAra pada haiN|
saMkhyAta akSara haiM, ananta gama haiM, ananta paryAya haiM, parIta trasa haiM,
ananta sthAvara haiN| ye sabhI zAzvata azAzvata nibaddha nikAcita jina-prajJapta
bhAva isa aMga ke dvArA kahe jAte haiM, prajJApita kiye jAte haiM, prarUpita
kiye jAte haiM, nidarzita kiye jAte haiM aura upadarzita kiye jAte haiN| isa
aMga kA adhyetA AtmA jJAtA ho jAtA hai, vijJAtA

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[182] The Samvayanga Sutra is thus established. In this way, the nature of the
object has been stated, explained, described, exemplified, and illustrated
through the description of the stages and actions. This is an introduction to
the eighth Antakritdasha Anga. _ 542- What is the Anuttaroppapatikadasha? What
is described in it? In the Anuttaroppapatikadasha, the cities, gardens,
chaityas, forest tracts, royal assemblies, mothers and fathers, Samavasarana,
Dharmacharayas, Dharmakatha, worldly and otherworldly special powers,
renunciation of enjoyments, pravrajya, acquisition of Shruta, practice of
austerities, Paryaya, pratima, Sanlekhana, rejection of food, walking on foot,
birth in Anuttar Vimana, then birth in Sukula, again attainment of Bodhi and
Antakriya are described, their description is given, their vision,
exemplification, and illustration are shown. 543- In the Anuttaroppapatikadasha,
the Samavasarana of the Tirthankaras, the supreme auspicious, world-benefactor
Tirthankaras, and many kinds of Jina-atishayas are described. And those who are
among the Shramanas, like the Varagandhahasti, are excellent, have steady fame,
are destroyers of the enemy force in the form of the army of Parihsa, are
radiant with austerities, have the essence of character, knowledge, and right
faith, are endowed with many kinds of vast, well-established qualities, such
Anugar Maharshis, their Anugar-gunas are described in the
Anuttaroppapatikadasha. They are extremely, endowed with the best special
austerities and special knowledge-yoga, who have the same supreme wonderful
powers as the world-benefactor Bhagavan Tirthankaras,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 182] [samavAyAGgasUtra ho jAtA hai| isa prakAra caraNa aura karaNa kI prarUpaNA
ke dvArA vastu-svarUpa kA kathana, prajJApana, prarUpaNa, nidarzana aura
upadarzana kiyA gayA hai| yaha AThaveM antakRtdazA aMga kA paricaya hai| _
542-se kiM taM aNuttarovavAiyadasAo ? aNuttarovavAiyadasAsu NaM
aNuttarovavAiyANaM nagarAiM ujjANAiM ceiyAiM vaNakhaMDA rAyANo ammA-piyaro
samosaraNAI dhammAyariyA dhammakahAo ihaloga-paraloga-iDDivisesA bhogapariccAyA
pavvajjAo suyapariggahA tavovahaNAiM pariyAgo paDimAo saMlehaNAo
bhattapANapaccakkhANAiM pAovagamaNAI aNuttarovavavAo sukulapaccAyAi, puNo
bohilAbho aMtakiriyAo ya AghavijaMti parUvijaMti daMsijaMti nidaMsijjaMti
uvdNsijti| anuttaropapAtikadazA kyA hai ? isameM kyA varNana hai ?
anuttaropapAtikadazA meM anuttara vimAnoM se utpanna hone vAle mahA anagAroM ke
nagara, udyAna caitya, vanakhaMDa, rAjagaNa, mAtA-pitA, samavasaraNa,
dharmAcArya, dharmakathAeM, ihalaukika pAralaukika viziSTa RddhiyAM, bhoga-
parityAga, pravrajyA, zruta kA parigrahaNa, tapa-upadhAna, paryAya, pratimA,
saMlekhanA, bhakta-pratyAkhyAna, pAdapopagamana, anuttara vimAnoM meM utpAda,
phira sukula meM janma, puna: bodhi-lAbha aura antakriyAeM kahI gaI haiM,unakI
prarUpaNA kI gaI hai, unakA darzana, nidarzana aura upadarzana karAyA gayA hai|
543- aNuttarovavAiyadasAsu NaM titthakarasamosaraNAiM paramamaMgalla-jagahiyANi
jiNAtisesA ya bahuvisesA jiNasIsANaM ceva samaNagaNa-pavara-gaMdhahatthINaM
thirajasANaM parIsahaseNNa-riubala-pamaddaNANaM tava ditta-caritta-NANa-sammatta
sAra-vivihappagAra-vittharapasatthaguNasaMjuyANaM aNagAramahariNINaM
aNagAraguNANa vaNNao, uttamavaratava-visiTThaNANajogajuttANaM,jaha ya jagahiyaM
bhagavao jArisA iDiTvisesA devAsura-mANusANaM parisANaM pAubbhAvA ya
jiNasamIvaM, jaha ya uvAsaMti, jiNavaraM jaha ya parikahaMti dhammaM logaguru
amara-nara-sura-gaNANaM soUNa ya tassa bhAsiyaM avasesakammavisayavirattA narA
jahA abbhuti dhammamurAlaM saMjamaM tavaM cAvi bahuvihappagAraM jaha bahUNi
vAsANi aNucarittA ArAhiyanANa daMsaNa-caritta-jogA jiNavayaNamaNugayamahiyaM
bhAsiyA jiNavarANa hiyayeNamaNuNNettA je ya jahiM jattiyANi bhattANi cheaittA
labhrUNa ya samAhimuttamajjhANajogajuttA uvavannA muNivarottamA jaha aNuttaresu
pAvaMti jaha aNuttaraM tatthaM visysokkhN| tao ya cuA kameNa kAhiMti saMjayA
jahA ya aMtakiriyaM ee anne ya evamAiatthA vitthrenn| anuttaropapAtikadazA meM
parama maMgalakArI, jagat-hitakArI tIrthaMkaroM ke samavasaraNa aura bahuta
prakAra ke jina-atizayoM kA varNana hai| tathA jo zramaNajanoM meM,
varagandhahastI ke samAna zreSTha haiM, sthira yazavAle haiM, parISaha-senA rUpI
zatru-bala ke mardana karane vAle haiM, tapa se dIpta haiM, jo cAritra, jJAna,
samyaktvarUpa sAravAle aneka prakAra ke vizAla prazasta guNoM se saMyukta haiM,
aise anagAra maharSiyoM ke anagAra-guNoM kA anuttaropapAtikadazA meM varNana
hai| atIva, zreSTha tapovizeSa se aura viziSTa jJAna-yoga se yukta haiM,
jinhoMne jagat hitakArI bhagavAn tIrthaMkaroM kI jaisI parama AzcaryakAriNI
RddhiyoM kI vizeSatAoM

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[183 Dvadaśāṅga Gaṇi-Piṭaka] Who else has seen the emergence of the assemblies
of gods, demons, and humans? Those great souls who, upon approaching the Jinas,
worship them in such a way, and the Jinas, the Lokagurus of the demons, humans,
and gods, who teach them Dharma in such a way. Those who are of diminished
karma, great souls, upon hearing the Dharma taught by them, become detached from
all their actions and enjoyments, and from the objects of the senses, and accept
the noble Dharma, and various forms of restraint and austerity, and who, by
practicing them for many years, cultivate knowledge, insight, and conduct, and,
following the Jina's words, teach the revered Dharma to other worthy beings, and
cause their disciples to study, and worship the Jinas with their hearts, and
who, by fasting, attain liberation, and, being endowed with supreme meditative
concentration, are born in the highest planes, and there enjoy incomparable
pleasures, all this is described in the Anuttaroppapātika-daśā. Thereafter, upon
falling from there, how they will practice restraint and engage in the final
act, and attain liberation, all this, and other meanings like this, are
described in detail in this Anga. 544 - Aṇuttarovvaiyadāsasu ṇam parittā vāyaṇā,
saṅkhejjā aṇuogadārā, saṅkhe paḍivattīo, saṅkhejjā veḍhā, saṅkhejjā silogā,
saṅkhejjāo nijjuttīo saṅkhejjāo saṅgahaṇīo. In the Anuttaroppapātika-daśā, there
are concise recitations, enumerated Anuyogadvāras, enumerated understandings,
enumerated Veḍhas, enumerated Ślokas, enumerated deployments, and enumerated
collections. 545 - Se ṇam aṅgaṭṭayāe navamae aṅge, ege suyakkhandhe, dasa
ajjhayaṇā, tinni vaggā, dasa uddeśaṇakālā, dasa samuddeśaṇakālā, saṅkhejjāiṁ
payasayasahassāiṁ payaggeṇam paṇṇattaiṁ. Saṅkhejjāṇi akkharāṇi, anantā gamā,
aṇantā pajjavā, parittā tasā, aṇantā thāvarā, sāsayā kaḍā nibaddha ṇikaīyā
jiṇappaṇṇattā bhāvā āghavijjanti paṇṇavijjanti parūvijjanti nidansījjanti
uvadansījjati. Se evaṁ āyā, se evaṁ ṇāyā evaṁ viṇṇāyā, evaṁ caraṇa-
karaṇaparūvaṇayā āghavijjantio. Se tam aṇuttarovvaiyadāsāo 9. This
Anuttaroppapātika-daśā is the ninth Anga in terms of its form. It contains one
Śrutaskandha, ten studies, three sections, ten times of setting forth the
subject, ten times of explaining the subject, and, in terms of word count, it is
said to contain a hundred thousand words. It contains a number of letters,
infinite paths, infinite categories, finite states, and infinite stationary
beings. All these eternal, created, bound, and categorized Jina-proclaimed
states are spoken of in this Anga, proclaimed, exemplified, illustrated, and
explained. By means of this Anga, the soul becomes the knower, the knower. In
this way, by means of the exemplification of conduct and action, the nature of
things is spoken of, proclaimed, exemplified, illustrated, and explained. This
is an introduction to the ninth Anuttaroppapātika-daśā Anga. 546 – Se kiṁ tam
paṇhāvāgaraṇāṇi? Paṇhāvāgaraṇesu aṭṭuttaraṁ pasaṇasayaṁ aṭṭuttaraṁ apasiṇasayaṁ
aṭṭuttaraṁ pasiṇāpasiṇasayaṁ vijjāisayā nāga - suvannehiṁ saddiṁ divvā saṁvāyā
āghavijjati. 1. The commentator says: A group of studies is called a section.
There are ten studies in a section, and the setting forth of the subject of one
section takes place at the same time. Therefore, there should only be three
times of setting forth the subject. The Nandī-sūtra also mentions only three.
But here, what is the meaning of saying ten times of setting forth the subject,
is not clear. - Editor.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 183 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka ] ko aura deva, asura, manuSyoM kI sabhAoM ke
prAdurbhAva ko dekhA hai, ve mahApuruSa jisa prakAra jinavara ke samIpa jAkara
unakI jisa prakAra se upAsanA karate haiM tathA asura, nara, suragaNoM ke
lokaguru ve jinavara jisa prakAra se unako dharma kA upadeza dete haiM ve
kSINakarmA mahApuruSa unake dvArA upadiSTa dharma ko sunakara ke apane samasta
kAma-bhogoM se aura indriyoM ke viSayoM se virakta hokara jisa prakAra se udAra
dharma ko aura vividha prakAra se saMyama aura tapa ko svIkAra karate haiM,
tathA jisa prakAra se bahuta varSoM taka unakA AcaraNa karake, jJAna, darzana,
cAritra yoga kI ArAdhanA kara jina-vacana ke anugata (anukUla) pUjita dharma kA
dUsare bhavya jIvoM ko udeza dekara aura apane ziSyoM ko adhyayana karavA tathA
jinavaroM kI hRdaya se ArAdhanA kara ve uttama munivara jahAM para jitane
bhaktoM kA anazana ke dvArA chedana kara, samAdhi ko prApta kara aura uttama
dhyAna yoga se yukta hote huye jisa prakAra se anuttara vimAnoM meM utpanna hote
haiM aura vahA~ jaise anupama viSaya - saukhya ko bhogate haiM, usa saba kA
anuttaropapAtikadazA meM varNana kiyA gayA hai  /  tatpazcAt vahA~ se cyuta
hokara ve jisa prakAra se saMyama ko dhAraNa kara antakriyA kareMge aura mokSa
ko prApta kareMge, ina saba kA tathA isI prakAra ke anya arthoM kA vistAra se
isa aMga meM varNana kiyA gayA hai| 544 - aNuttarovavAiyadasAsu NaM parittA
vAyaNA, saMkhejjA aNuogadArA, saMkhe paDivattIo, saMkhejjA veDhA, saMkhejjA
silogA, saMkhejjAo nijjuttIo saMkhejjAo sNghnniio| anuttaropapAtikadazA meM
parIta vAcanAeM haiM, saMkhyAta anuyogadvAra haiM, saMkhyAta pratipattiyAM haiM,
saMkhyAta veDha haiM, saMkhyAta zloka haiM, saMkhyAta niyuktiyAM haiM aura
saMkhyAta saMgrahaNiyAM haiM  /  545 - se NaM aMgaTTayAe navame aMge, ege
suyakkhaMdhe, dasa ajjhayaNA, tinni vaggA, dasa uddesaNakAlA, dasa
samuddesaNakAlA, saMkhejjAiM payasayasahassAiM payaggeNaM paNNattAiM  /
saMkhejjANi akkharANi, anaMtA gamA, aNaMtA pajjavA, parittA tasA, aNaMtA
thAvarA, sAsayA kaDA Nibaddha NikAiyA jiNapaNNattA bhAvA AghavijjaMti
paNNavijjaMti parUvijjaMti nidaMsijjaMti uvadaMsijrjjati  /  se evaM AyA, se
evaM NAyA evaM viNNAyA, evaM caraNa-karaNaparUvaNayA AghavijjaMti0  /  se taM
aNuttarovavAiyadasAo 9  /  yaha anuttaropapAtikadazA aMgarUpa se nauvAM aMga
hai| isameM eka zrutaskandha hai, daza adhyayana haiM, tIna varga haiM, daza
uddezana - kAla haiM, daza samuddezana - kAla haiM tathA pada-gaNanA kI apekSA
saMkhyAta lAkha pada kahe gaye haiN| isameM saMkhyAta akSara haiM, ananta gama
haiM, ananta paryAya haiM, parimita trasa haiM, ananta sthAvara haiN| ye saba
zAzvata, kRta, nibaddha nikAcita, jina-prajJapta bhAva isa aMga meM kahe jAte
haiM, prajJApita kiye jAte haiM, prarUpita kiye jAte haiM, nidarzita kiye jAte
haiM, aura upadarzita kiye jAte haiN| isa aMga ke dvArA AtmA jJAtA hotA hai,
vijJAtA hotA hai isa prakAra caraNa aura karaNa kI prarUpaNA ke dvArA vastu-
svarUpa kA kathana, prajJApana, prarUpaNa, nidarzana aura upadarzana kiyA jAtA
hai| yaha nauveM anuttaropapAtikadazA aMga kA paricaya hai  /  546 - se kiM taM
paNhAvAgaraNANi ? paNhAvAgaraNesu aTTuttaraM pasaNasayaM aTThattaraM
apasiNasayaM aTThattaraM pasiNApasiNasayaM vijjAisayA nAga - suvannehiM saddhiM
divvA saMvAyA Aghavijjati  /  1. TIkAkAra kA kathana hai-varga adhyayanoM kA
samUha kahalAtA hai| varga meM adhyayana dasa haiM aura eka varga kA uddezana
eka sAtha hotA hai  /  ataeva isake uddezanakAla tIna hI hone caahie| nandIsUtra
meM bhI tIna kA hI ullekha hai| kintu yahA~ daza uddezanakAla kahane kA
abhiprAya kyA , samajha meM nahIM aataa| - sampAdaka

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [184] **What is the *Prashnavyakaran* Anga? What does it describe?**  The
*Prashnavyakaran* Anga describes one hundred and eight questions, one hundred
and eight non-questions, and one hundred and eight question-questions, along
with the excellences of knowledge and divine dialogues with Nagas and Suparnas.
**Explanation:**  Mantras like *Angushthaprashna* etc. are called *Prashnas*.
The knowledge that reveals auspicious and inauspicious results when asked by the
seeker is called *Prashna-vidya*. The knowledge that reveals auspicious and
inauspicious results without being asked, through the practice of mantras, is
called *A-prashna-vidya*. And the knowledge that reveals auspicious and
inauspicious results by asking some questions and not asking others is called
*Prashna-prashna-vidya*. All three types of knowledge are described in the
*Prashnavyakaran* Anga.   *Sthambhan*, *Vashikaran*, *Uccatan* etc. are called
*Vidya-atishya*. And the divine conversation that the seeker has with Naga-
Kumaras, Suparna-Kumaras, and Yakshas etc. during the time of acquiring
knowledge is called *Divya-samvad*. All of this is described in this Anga.
**547 -** The *Prashnavyakaran* Anga describes in detail the words spoken by
various Buddhas, who are knowers of the present and past times, using languages
with diverse meanings. It also describes the various teachings of the Acharyas,
who expound on *Aamanshadhi* etc. excellences, knowledge, and other qualities,
and the state of *Upasham*. It describes the numerous, beneficial, and detailed
sayings of the great sages, who are the heroes of the world. It describes the
answers given by the *Vidya-Devatas* through the medium of *Angushtha*, *Bahhu*,
*Asi*, *Mani*, *Kshoum* (cloth), and *Surya* etc. (symbols).   Many *Maha-
prashna-vidyas* answer questions simply by being spoken. Many *vidyas* answer
questions that are thought of in the mind. Many *vidyas* reveal the qualities of
various *Adhisthata-Devatas* through their specific uses, and through their
dialogues, they illuminate various meanings. They amaze the people with their
true and double-effecting answers.   The miracles and true words of these
*vidyas* create a firm belief in the hearts of people that the *Jina-
Tirthankaras* who were the holders of *Dam* and *Sham* in the past, were
distinct from the teachers of other religions, and that they were truthful.
Otherwise, such true *Vidya-mantras* would not be possible. Thus, the
*Prashnavyakaran* Anga describes the various qualities and great meanings of the
questions that are difficult to understand and difficult to penetrate, that are
accepted by all the omniscient ones, that enlighten the ignorant, that are
directly perceived, and that are the answers given by the *Jina-varas*. These
answers are declared, shaped, exemplified, and shown.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 184] [samavAyAGgasUtra praznavyAkaraNa aMga kyA hai-isameM kyA varNana hai?
praznavyAkaraNa aMga meM eka sau ATha praznoM, eka sau ATha apraznoM aura eka
sau ATha praznApraznoM ko, vidyAoM ke atizayoM ko tathA nAgoM-suparNoM ke sAtha
divya saMvAdoM ko kahA gayA hai| vivecana-aMguSThaprazna Adi maMtravidyAeM
prazna kahalAtI haiM  /  jo vidyAeM jijJAsu ke dvArA pUche jAne para zubhAzubha
phala batalAtI haiM, ve prazna-vidyAeM kahalAtI haiN| jo vidyAeM maMtra-vidhi se
jApa kiye jAne para binA pUche hI zubhAzubha phala ko kahatI haiM, ve aprazna-
vidyAeM kahalAtI haiN| tathA jo vidyAeM kucha praznoM ke pUche jAne para aura
kucha ke nahIM pUche jAne para bhI zubhAzubha phala ko kahatI haiM, ve
praznAprazna vidyAeM kahalAtI haiN| ina tInoM prakAra kI vidyAoM kA
praznavyAkaraNa aMga meM varNana kiyA gayA hai| tathA staMbhana. vazIkaraNa.
uccATana Adi vidyAeM vidyAtizaya kahalAtI haiN| evaM vidyAoM ke sAdhanakAla meM
nAgakumAra, suparNakumAra tathA yakSAdikoM ke sAtha sAdhaka kA jo divya tAttvika
vArtAlApa hotA hai vaha divyasaMvAda kahA gayA hai| ina sabakA isa aMga meM
nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| 547-paNhAvAgaraNadasAsu NaM sasamaya-parasamaya
paNNavaya-patteabuddha-vivihatthabhAsAbhAsiyANaM aisayaguNa-uvasama-NANappagAra-
AyariyabhAsiyANaM vitthareNaM viramahesIhiM vivihavittharabhAsiyANaMca
jagahiyANaM adAgaMguTu-bAhu-asi-maNi-khoma-aicca bhAsiyANaM
vivihamahApasiNavijjA-maNapasiNa-vijjA-devayapayoga-pahANa-guNappagAsiyANaM
sabbhUyaduguNappabhAvanaragaNamaivimhayakarANaM aisayamaIyakAla-samaya-dama-
sama-titthakaruttamasma ThiikaraNakAraNANaM durahigama-duravagAhassa
savvasavvannusammaassa abuhajaNa-vibohaNakarassa paccakkhayapaccayakarANaM
paNhANaM vivihaguNamahatthA jiNavarappaNIyA aaghvinNti| praznavyAkaraNadazA meM
svasamaya-parasamaya ke prajJApaka pratyekabuddhoM ke vividha arthoM vAlI
bhASAoM dvArA kathita vacanoM kA, AmA~Sadhi Adi atizayoM, jJAnAdi guNoM aura
upazama bhAva ke pratipAdaka nAnA prakAra ke AcAryabhASitoM kA. vistAra se kahe
gaye vIra maharSiyoM ke jagata hitakArI aneka prakAra ke vistRta subhASitoM kA,
Adarza (darpaNa) aMguSTha, bAhu, asi, maNi, kSauma (vastra) aura sUrya Adi ke
Azraya se diye gaye vidyA-devatAoM ke uttaroM kA isa aMga meM varNana hai| aneka
mahApraznavidyAeM vacana se hI prazna karane para uttara detI haiM, aneka
vidyAeM mana se cintita praznoM kA uttara detI haiM, aneka vidyAeM aneka
adhiSThAtA devatAoM ke prayoga-vizeSa kI pradhAnatA se aneka arthoM ke saMvAdaka
guNoM ko prakAzita karatI haiM aura apane sadbhUta (vAstavika) dviguNa
prabhAvaka uttaroM ke dvArA jana samudAya ko vismita karatI haiN| una vidyAoM ke
camatkAroM aura satya vacanoM se logoM ke hRdayoM meM yaha dRr3ha vizvAsa
utpanna hotA hai ki atIta kAla ke samaya meM dama aura zama ke dhAraka, anya
matoM ke zAstAoM se viziSTa jina tIrthaMkara hue haiM aura ve yathArthavAdI the,
anyathA isa prakAra ke satya vidyAmaMtra saMbhava nahIM the, isa prakAra
saMzayazIla manuSyoM ke sthirIkaraNa ke kAraNabhUta durabhigama (gambhIra) aura
duravagAha (kaThinatA se avagAhana-karane ke yogya) sabhI sarvajJoM ke dvArA
sammata, abudha (ajJa) janoM ko prabodha karane vAle, pratyakSa pratIti-kAraka
praznoM ke vividha guNa aura mahAn artha vAle jinavara-praNIta uttara isa aMga
meM kahe jAte haiM, prajJApita kiye jAte haiM, prarUpita kiye jAte haiM,
nidarzita kiye jAte haiM aura upadarzita kiye jAte haiN|

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twelve-Anga Ganipitaka] [185 548-In the Panhavagaranas, there are Paritta
Vayanas, Sankhejjā Anuyogadārā, Sankhejjāo Padivattio, Sankhejjā Veḍhā,
Sankhejjā Silogā, Sankhejjāo Nijjuttio, Sankhejjāo Sangahaniyo. In the
Prashnavyakarana Anga, there are Paritta readings, numerical Anuyogadwaras,
numerical interpretations, numerical Veḍhas, numerical Shlokas, numerical
appointments, and numerical collections. 549-From this Anga, in the tenth Anga,
in one Shrutaskandha, there are forty-five Uddesanakalas, forty-five
Samuddesanakalas, and a number of lakhs of words. There are numerical letters,
infinite Gamas, infinite Paryayas, Paritta Trasas, infinite Thavaras, and
eternal, done, bound, and categorized Jina-Prajnapta Bhavas. They are declared,
manifested, exemplified, and explained. This Anga leads to the knowledge of the
self, and the knowledge of the self. Thus, through the manifestation of the
Charanas and Karanas, the nature of things is declared, manifested, exemplified,
and explained. This is the introduction to the tenth Prashnavyakarana Anga.
550-What is the Vivagasuya? In the Vivagasuya, the fruits of the Sukkhada-
Dukkadānam Karmas are declared. This is summarized in two ways: Duhvivage and
Suhavivage. There are ten Duhvivagas and ten Suhavivagas. What is the Vipaka
Sutra? What is described in it? In the Vipaka Sutra, the fruits of Sukrita
(merit) and Dushkrita (demerit) Karmas are described. This Vipaka is summarized
in two ways: Duhkha-Vipaka and Sukha-Vipaka. There are ten studies in Duhkha-
Vipaka and ten studies in Sukha-Vipaka. 551-What is the Duhvivagāni? In the
Duhvivagāni, the cities, gardens, Chaityas, forest tracts, kings, mothers and
fathers, Samavasaranas, Dharmacharayas, Dharmakathaas (for Gautama Swami's
alms), city journeys, and the suffering of the cycle of existence due to the
fruits of demerit are described. This is the Duhvivagāni. What is this Duhkha-
Vipaka? What is described in it? In the Duhkha-Vipaka, the suffering fruits of
Dushkritas are described, including the cities, gardens, Chaityas, forest
tracts, kings, mothers and fathers, Samavasaranas, Dharmacharayas, Dharmakathaas
(for Gautama Swami's alms), city journeys, and the suffering of the cycle of
existence due to the fruits of demerit. This is the Duhkha-Vipaka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka] [185 548-paNhAvAgaraNesu NaM parittA vAyaNA, saMkhejjA
aNuogadArA, saMkhenjAo paDivattIo, saMkhejjA veDhA, saMkhejjA silogA, saMkhenjAo
nijjuttIo, saMkhejjAo sNghnniio| praznavyAkaraNa aMga meM parIta vAcanAeM haiM,
saMkhyAta anuyogadvAra haiM, saMkhyAtta pratipattiyA~ haiM, saMkhyAta veDha
haiM, saMkhyAta zloka haiM, saMkhyAta niyuktiyAM haiM aura saMkhyAta
saMgrahaNiyAM haiN| 549-se NaM aMgaTThayAe dasame aMge, ege suyakkhaMdhe,
paNayAlIsaM uddesaNakAlA, paNayAlIsaM samuddesaNakAlA, saMkhenjANi
payasayasahassANi payaggeNaM pnnnnttaaii| saMkhejjA akkharA, aNaMtA gamA, aNaMtA
pajjavA, parittA tasA, aNaMtA thAvarA, sAsayA kaDA NibaddhA NikAiyA jiNapaNNattA
bhAvA AghavijaMti paNNavinjaMsi parUvijaMti nidaMsijaMti uvdNsijjNti| se evaM
AyA, se evaM NAyA, evaM viNNAyA, evaM caraNa-karaNaparUvaNayA aaghvijNti0| se
taM paNhAvAgaraNAI 10 /  /  praznavyAkaraNa aMgarUpa se dazavAM aMga hai, isameM
eka zrutaskandha hai, paiMtAlIsa uddezana-kAla haiM, paiMtAlIsa samuddezana-kAla
haiM  /  pada-gaNanA kI apekSA saMkhyAta lAkha pada kahe gaye haiN| isameM
saMkhyAta akSara haiM, ananta gama haiM, ananta paryAya haiM, parIta trasa haiM,
ananta sthAvara haiM, isameM zAzvata, kRta, nibaddha, nikAcita jina-prajJapta
bhAva kahe jAte haiM, prajJApita kiye jAte haiM, prarUpita kiye jAte haiM,
nidarzita kiye jAte haiM, aura upadirzata kiye jAte haiN| isa aMga ke dvArA AtmA
jJAtA hotA hai, vijJAtA hotA hai| isa prakAra caraNa aura karaNa kI prarUpaNA ke
dvArA vastu-svarUpa kA kathana, prajJApana, nidarzana aura upadarzana kiyA jAtA
hai| yaha dazaveM praznavyAkaraNa aMga kA paricaya hai 10 /  550-se kiM taM
vivAgasuyaM? vivAgasue NaM sukkaDa-dukkaDANaM kammANaM phalavivAge aaghvijjti|
se samAsao duvihe pnnnntte| taM jahA-duhavivAge ceva, suhavivAge ceva, tattha
NaM dasa duhavivAgANi, dasa suhvivaagaanni| viMpAkasUtra kyA hai - isameM kyA
varNana hai? vipAkasUtra meM sukRta (puNya) aura duSkRta (pApa) karmoM kA phala-
vipAka kahA gayA hai| yaha vipAka saMkSepa se do prakAra kA hai-duHkha-vipAka
aura sukh-vipaak| inameM duHkha-vipAka meM daza adhyayana haiM aura sukha-vipAka
meM bhI daza adhyayana haiN| 551-se kiM taM duhavivAgANi? duhavivAgesu NaM
duhavivAgANaM nagarAI ujjANAI ceiyAI vaNakhaMDA rAyANo ammA-piyaro samosaraNAI
dhammAyariyA dhammakahAo nagaragamaNAI saMsArapabaMdhe duhaparaMparAo ya
aaghvijNti| se taM duhvivaagaanni| yaha duHkhavipAka kyA hai - isameM kyA
varNana hai? duHkhavipAka meM duSkRtoM ke duHkharUpa phaloM ko bhoganevAloM ke
nagara, udyAna, caitya, vanakhaNDa, rAjA, mAtA-pitA, samavasaraNa, dharmAcArya,
dharmakathAeM (gautama svAmI kA bhikSA ke lie) nagaragamana, (pApa ke phala se)
saMsAra-prabandha meM par3a kara duHkha paramparAoM ko bhogane kA varNana kiyA
jAtA hai| yaha duHkhavipAka hai|

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[186] What is Sukhavipaga? What is described in it? Sukhavipaga describes the
happy results of good deeds, including cities, gardens, shrines, forests, kings,
parents, assemblies, Dharma teachers, Dharma stories, special powers in this
world and the next, renunciation of worldly possessions, ordination, study of
scriptures, practice of austerities, initiation, pilgrimages, images,
Sanlekhanas, rejection of food, walking on foot, going to heaven, returning to a
good family, regaining enlightenment, and their interactions.  [553]
Duḥkhavipaga describes the painful results of bad deeds, including violence,
false speech, theft, adultery, attachment, intense passions, indulgence in sense
pleasures, negligence, evil actions, and negative intentions. These bad deeds
lead to suffering in hell, animal realms, and various other forms of existence,
where one experiences countless hardships. Even after being reborn as a human,
the residue of past bad deeds continues to cause suffering, such as beatings,
castration, nose-cutting, ear-cutting, lip-piercing, finger-cutting, hand-
cutting, foot-cutting, nail-cutting, tongue-cutting, branding with hot iron,
burning on a bed of thorns, being crushed under an elephant's foot, being torn
apart with a sword, being hung from a tree, being pierced with a trident, being
beaten with a club, being broken with a stick, being burned with hot iron, being
poured with molten lead and oil, being cooked in a furnace, being drenched with
ice-cold water in winter, being tied up with ropes, being pierced with spears,
being skinned alive, being tortured with fire, and other terrible punishments.
These sufferings are endless and cannot be escaped due to the chain of bad
karma. There is no liberation for those who are bound by their passions.
Therefore, it is important to be mindful and avoid these actions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 186] [samavAyAGgasUtra 552-se kiM taM suhavivAgANi ? suhavivAgesu suhavivAgANaM
NagarAiM ujjANAI ceiyAI vaNakhaMDA rAyANo ammA-piyaro samosaraNAI dhammAyariyA
dhammakahAo ihaloiya-paraloiyaiDDivisesA bhogapariccAyA pavvajjAo suyapariggahA
tavovahANAiM pariyAgA paDimAo saMlehaNAo bhattapaccakkhANAiM pAovagamaNAI
devalogagamaNAI sukulapaccAyAI puNabohilAhA aMtakiriyAo ya aapvijNti|
sukhavipAka kyA hai - isameM kyA varNana hai ? sukhavipAka meM sukRtoM ke
sukharUpa phaloM ko bhoganevAloM ke nagara, udyAna, caitya, vanakhaNDa, rAjA,
mAtA-pitA, samavasaraNa, dharmAcArya, dharmakathAeM, ihalaukika-pAralaukika
RddhivizeSa, bhoga-parityAga, pravrajyA, zruta-parigraha, tapa-upadhAna, dIkSA
paryAya, pratimAeM, saMlekhanAeM, bhaktapratyAkhyAna, pAdapopagamana, devaloka-
gamana, sukula-pratyAgamana, puna: bodhilAbha aura unakI antakriyAeM kahI gaI
haiN| 553-duhavivAgesuNaM pANAivAya-aliyavayaNa-corikkaraNa-paradAramehuNa-
sasaMgayAe mahativvakasAya-iMdiyappamAya-pAvappaoya-asuhajjhavasANasaMciyANaM
kammANaM pAvagANaM pAva aNubhAgaphalavivAgA Nirayagati-tirikkhajoNi-
bahuvihavasaNa-saya-paraMparAbaddhANaM maNupatte vi AgayANaM jahA
pAvakammaseseNa pAvagA hoti phalavivAgA vaha-vasaNa-viNAsa-nAsA-
kannuTuMguTThakara-caraNa-nahaccheyaNa jibbha-ccheaNa-aMjaNakaDaggidAha-
gayacalaNa-malaNa-phalANa-ullaMvaNasUlalayA-lauDa-laTThi-bhaMjaNa-tausIsa-
gatattella-kalakala-ahisiMcaNa-kuMbhipAga-kaMpaNathirabaMdhaNa-veha-vajjha-
kattaNa-patibhaya-kara-karapalIvaNAdi-dAruNANi dukkhANi aNovamANi
bahuvivihaparaMparANubaddhA Na muccaMti paavkmmvlliie| aveyaittA hu Nasthi
mokkho taveNa dhiidhaNiyabaddhakaccheNa sohaNaM tassa vAvi hujjaa| duHkhavipAka
ke prANAtipAta, asatya vacana, steya, para-dAra-maithuna, sasaMgatA (parigraha-
saMcaya) mahAtIvra kaSAya, indriya-viSaya-sevana, pramAda, pApa-prayoga aura
azubha adhyavasAnoM (pariNAmoM) se saMcita pApakarmoM ke una pAparUpa anubhAga-
phala-vipAkoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai jinheM narakagati, aura tiryaga-yoni meM
bahata prakAra ke saikar3oM saMkaToM kI paramparA meM paDakara bhoganA paDatA
hai| vahA~ se nikala kara manuSya bhava meM Ane para bhI jIvoM ko pApa-karmoM ke
zeSa rahane se aneka pAparUpa azubha phalavipAka bhogane par3ate haiM, jaise-
vadha (daNDa Adi se tAr3ana) vRSaNa-vinAza (napuMsakIkaraNa), nAsA-kartana,
karNakartana, oSTha-chedana, aMguSTha-chedana, hasta-kartana, caraNa-chedana,
nakha-chedana, jihvA-chedana-aMjana-dAha (uSNa lohazalAkA se AMkhoM ko AMjanA-
phor3anA), kaTAgnidAha (vAMsa se banI caTAI se zarIra ko sarva ora se lapeTa
kara jalAnA), hAthI ke pairoM ke nIce DAlakara zarIra ko kucalavAnA, pharase Adi
se zarIra ko phAr3anA, rassiyoM se bA~dhakara vRkSoM para laTakAnA, trizUla-
latA, lakuTa (mUMTha vAlA DaMDA) aura lakar3I se zarIra ko bhagna karanA, tape
hue kar3akar3Ate rAMgA, sIsA evaM tela se zarIra kA abhisiMcana karanA, kumbhI
(loha-bhaTTI) meM pakAnA, zItakAla meM zarIra para kapakaMpI paidA karane vAlA
atizItala jala DAlanA, kASTha Adi meM paira phaMsAkara sthita (dRr3ha) bA~dhanA,
bhAle Adi zastroM se chedana-bhedana karanA, varddhakartana (zarIra kI khAla
udher3anA) ati bhaya-kAraka kara-pradIpana (vastra lepaTakara aura zarIra para
tela DAlakara donoM hAthoM meM

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twelve-Anga Ganipitaka] [187 Setting fire] etc. are extremely cruel, they have
to suffer incomparable pain. The sinful beings bound in many births and
traditions do not escape the fruits of the sinful karma-vine without suffering.
Because there is no escape from the fruits of karma without experiencing them.
Yes, those who have tightened their belts with the patience of citta-samadhi,
their tapasya purifies even those sinful karmas. 554-Those who are well-behaved
in the conduct of virtue, restraint, rules, qualities and tapasya, who are well-
established in their conduct, who use compassion in many ways, who have pure
intellect in all three times, i.e. who are happy thinking that they will give
food to the ascetics, who are happy while giving and after giving, who give food
and drink to them with a very careful mind, beneficial, pleasant, auspicious,
good results, pure in use (free from the defects of origin etc.), they earn
merit like humans, attain bodhi-laabh and abandon many transmigrations related
to human, hell, animal and heavenly realms (limited-less), and which is troubled
by the mountain of aversion, fear, wonder, sorrow and false belief (mountain),
which is full of deep ignorance-darkness-like mud, which is very difficult to
cross, whose chakraval (water-circle) is disturbed by the crocodiles of old age,
death and womb, which is very fierce because it is endless and full of sixteen
kshaya-like ferocious animals, they cross such endless, endless, this samsara-
ocean, and how they bind themselves to life in the deva-ganas, how they
experience the incomparable pleasures of the deva-ganas' vimanas, and then after
a long time, they fall from there and come to this human world, having a long
life, a perfect body, a beautiful form, born in a good family, endowed with
health, intelligence, special intelligence, rich in friends, relatives, wealth,
grain and wealth, and combined with a group of essential happiness, they enjoy
many kinds of pleasures born of desires.  The Bhagavan Jinavara has made the
description of the fruits of karma, both auspicious and inauspicious, in many
ways, in the form of a description of the fruits of karma. Others also describe
these in many ways in detail with the explanation of the meaning.  Now the
fruits of happiness are described which are engaged in the practice of virtue,
(brahmacharya or samadhi), restraint, rules (abhigraha-special), qualities (root
qualities and subsequent qualities) and tapasya (inner-outer), who follow their
conduct well, such virtuous people use compassion in many ways, they have pure
intellect in all three times, i.e. they are happy thinking that they will give
food to the ascetics, they are happy while giving and after giving, they give
them food and drink with a very careful mind, beneficial, pleasant, auspicious,
good results, pure in use (free from the defects of origin etc.), they earn
merit like humans, attain bodhi-laabh and abandon many transmigrations related
to human, hell, animal and heavenly realms (limited-less), and which is troubled
by the mountain of aversion, fear, wonder, sorrow and false belief (mountain),
which is full of deep ignorance-darkness-like mud, which is very difficult to
cross, whose chakraval (water-circle) is disturbed by the crocodiles of old age,
death and womb, which is very fierce because it is endless and full of sixteen
kshaya-like ferocious animals, they cross such endless, endless, this samsara-
ocean, and how they bind themselves to life in the deva-ganas, how they
experience the incomparable pleasures of the deva-ganas' vimanas, and then after
a long time, they fall from there and come to this human world, having a long
life, a perfect body, a beautiful form, born in a good family, endowed with
health, intelligence, special intelligence, rich in friends, relatives, wealth,
grain and wealth, and combined with a group of essential happiness, they enjoy
many kinds of pleasures born of desires.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka] [187 agni lagAnA) Adi ati dAruNa, anupama duHkha
bhogane par3ate haiN| aneka bhava-paramparA meM baMdhe hue pApI jIva pApa
karmarUpI vallI ke duHkha-rUpa phaloM ko bhoge binA nahIM chUTate haiN| kyoMki
karmoM ke phaloM ko bhoge binA unase chuTakArA nahIM miltaa| hA~, citta-
samAdhirUpa dhairya ke sAtha jinhoMne apanI kamara kasa lI hai unake tapa-dvArA
una pApa-karmoM kA bhI zodhana ho jAtA hai| 554-esto ya suhavivAgesuNaM sIla-
saMjama-niyama-guNa-tavovahANesu sAhUsusuvihiesu aNukaMpAsayappaoga-
tikAlamaivisuddha-bhatta-pANAiM payayamaNasA hiya-suha-nIsesa-tivvapariNAma-
nicchiya maI payacchiUNaM paogasuddhAiMjaha ya nivvattiMti u bohilAbhaMjaha ya
parittIkareMti nara-naraya-tiriya-suragamaNa-vipulapariyaTTa-arati-bhaya-visAya-
soga-micchattaselasaMkaDaM aNNANatamaMdhakAra-cikkhillasuduttAraM jara-maraNa-
joNisaMkhubhiyacakkavAlaM solasakasAyasAvaya-payaMDacaMDaM aNAiaM aNavadaggaM
saMsArasAgaramiNaM jaha ya NibaMdhaMti AugaM suragaNesu, jahaga aNubhavaMti
suragaNavimANasokkhANi annovmaanni|tto ya kAlaMtarecuANaM iheva
naralogamAgayANaM Au-vapu-puNNa-rUpa-jAti-kula-jamma-Arogga-buddhi-mehAvisesA
mitta-jaNa-sayaNa-dhaNadhaNNa-vibhava-samiddhasAra-samudayavisesA
bahuvihakAmabhogubbhavANa sokkhANa suhavivAgottamesu annuvry-prNpraannubddhaa|
asubhANaM subhANaMceva kammANaM bhAsiA bahuvihA vivAgA vivAgasuyammi bhagavayA
jiNavareNa saMvegakaraNasthA, annevi ya evamAiyA bahuvihA vitthareNaM
atthaparUvaNayA aaghvinNti| aba sukhavipAkoM kA varNana kiyA jAtA hai jo zIla,
(brahmacarya yA samAdhi) saMyama, niyama (abhigraha-vizeSa), guNa (mUla guNa
aura uttara guNa) aura tapa (antaraMga-bahiraMga) ke anuSThAna meM saMlagna
haiM, jo apane AcAra kA bhalI-bhAMti se pAlana karate haiM, aise sAdhujanoM meM
aneka prakAra kI anukampA kA prayoga karate haiM, unake prati tInoM hI kAloM meM
vizuddha buddhi rakhate haiM arthAt yatijanoM ko AhAra dUMgA, yaha vicAra karake
jo harSAnubhava karate haiM, dete samaya aura dene ke pazcAt bhI harSa mAnate
haiM, unako ati sAvadhAna mana se hitakAraka, sukhakAraka, niHzreyasakAraka
uttama zubha pariNAmoM se prayoga-zuddha (udgamAdi doSoM se rahita) bhakta-pAna
dete haiM, ve manuSya jisa prakAra puNya karma kA upArjana karate haiM, bodhi-
lAbha ko prApta hote haiM aura nara, nAraka, tiryaMca evaM devagati-gamana
sambandhI aneka parAvartanoM ko parIta (sImita-alpa) karate haiM tathA jo arati,
bhaya, vismaya, zoka aura mithyAtvarUpa zaila (parvata) se saMkaTa (saMkIrNa)
hai, gahana ajJAna-andhakAra rUpa kIcar3a se paripUrNa hone se jisakA pAra
utaranA ati kaThina hai, jisakA cakravAla (jala-parimaMDala) jarA, maraNa
yonirUpa magara-macchoM se kSobhita ho rahA hai, jo anantAnubandhI Adi solaha
kaSAyarUpa zvApadoM (khUkhAra hiMsaka-prANiyoM) se ati pracaNDa ataeva
bhayaMkara hai, aise anAdi ananta isa saMsAra-sAgara ko ve jisa prakAra pAra
karate haiM, aura jisa prakAra deva-gaNoM meM Ayu bAMdhate-devAyu kA baMdha
karate haiM tathA jisa prakAra sura-gaNoM ke anupama vimAnotpanna sukhoM kA
anubhava karate haiM, tatpazcAt kAlAntara meM vahA~ se cyuta hokara isI
manuSyaloka meM Akara dIrgha Ayu, paripUrNa zarIra, uttama rUpa, jAti kula meM
janma lekara Arogya, buddhi, medhA-vizeSa se sampanna hote haiM, mitrajana,
svajana, dhana, dhAnya aura vaibhava se samRddha evaM sArabhUta sukhasampadA ke
samUha se saMyukta hokara bahuta prakAra ke kAma-bhoga-janita, sukha

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[188] This chapter describes the blissful experiences of virtuous beings who are
constantly immersed in the uninterrupted stream of supreme happiness derived
from the ripening of their karmas. In this way, the Lord Jinendra Dev has
described the various types of results (fruits) of both unwholesome and
wholesome karmas in this Vipaka Sutra, to inspire the worldly beings. Similarly,
many other types of meanings have been explained in detail in this Anga. 555-
There are many recitations of the Vipaka Sutra, many Anuyoga doors, many
understandings, many explanations, many verses, many applications, and many
collections. 556- This Vipaka Sutra is the eleventh Anga. There are twenty
studies, twenty purposes, twenty objectives, and countless words in terms of
word count. There are countless letters, infinite paths, infinite synonyms, many
recitations, infinite permanent things. In this, eternal, done, bound, and
collected states are described, explained, illustrated, exemplified, and
demonstrated. Through this Anga, the soul becomes the knower, the discerner. In
this way, through the explanation of the steps and actions, the nature of things
is described, explained, exemplified, and demonstrated. This is the introduction
to the eleventh Vipaka Sutra Anga. 557- What is this Drishtivad Anga? What is
described in it? The Drishtivad Anga describes the nature of all things. It is
said to be of five types in summary, namely: 1. Perikarma, 2. Sutra, 3.
Purvagata, 4. Anuyoga, and 5. Chulicka. 558- What is Perikarma? Perikarma is
said to be of seven types, namely: 1. Siddhasreniya Perikarma, 2.
Manushyasreniya Perikarma, 3. Prushthasreniya Perikarma, 4. Avgahanasreniya
Perikarma, 5. Upasampadya Perikarma,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 188] [samavAyAGgasUtra vipAka se prApta uttama sukhoM kI anuparata (avicchinna)
paramparA se paripUrNa rahate hue sukhoM ko bhogate haiM, aise puNyazAlI jIvoM
kA isa sukhavipAka meM varNana kiyA gayA hai| isa prakAra azubha aura zubha
karmoM ke bahuta prakAra ke vipAka-(phala) isa vipAkasUtra meM bhagavAn jinendra
deva ne saMsArI janoM ko saMvega utpanna karane ke lie kahe haiN| isI prakAra se
anya bhI bahuta prakAra kI artha-prarUpaNA vistAra se isa aMga meM kI gaI hai|
555-vivAgasuyassaNaM parittA vAyaNA,saMkhejA aNuogadArA,saMkhejjAo paDivattIo,
saMkhenjA veDhA, saMkhejjA silogA, saMkhenjAo nijuttIo saMkhenjAo sNghnniio|
vipAkasUtra kI parIta vAcanAeM haiM, saMkhyAta anuyogadvAra haiM, saMkhyAta
pratipattiyA~ haiM, saMkhyAta veDha haiM, saMkhyAta zloka haiN| saMkhyAta
niyuktiyA~ haiM aura saMkhyAta saMgrahaNiyA~ haiN| 556-se NaM aMgaTThayAe
ekkArasame aMge, vIsaM ajjhayaNA, vIsaM uddesaNakAlA, vIsaM samuddesaNakAlA,
saMkhejjAiM payasayasahassAiM payaggeNaM pnnnnttaaii|sNkhenjaanni, akkharANi,
aNaMtA gamA, aNaMtA panjavA, parittA tasA,aNaMtA thAvarA,sAsayA kaDA NibaddhA
NikAiyA jiNapaNNattA bhAvA AghavijaMti, paNNavinjaMti parUvijaMti nidaMsijaMti
uvdNsijjNti|se evaM AyA, se evaM NAyA, evaM viNNAyA, evaM caraNa-
karaNaparUvaNayA aaghvinjNti.| se ttaM vivAgasue 11 /  yaha vipAka sUtra
aMgarUpa se gyArahavA~ aMga hai| bIsa adhyayana haiM, bIsa uddezana-kAla haiM,
bIsa samuddezana-kAla haiM, pada-gaNanA kI apekSA saMkhyAta lAkha pada haiN|
saMkhyAta akSara haiM, ananta gama haiM, ananta paryAya haiM parIta trasa haiM,
ananta sthAvara haiN| isameM zAzvata, kRta, nibaddha, nikAcita bhAva kahe jAte
haiM, prajJApita kiye jAte haiM, prarUpita kie jAte haiM, nidarzita kiye jAte
haiM aura upadarzita kiye jAte haiM  /  isa aMga ke dvArA AtmA jJAtA hotA hai,
vijJAtA hotA hai| isa prakAra caraNa aura karaNa kI prarUpaNA ke dvArA
vastusvarUpa kA kathana, prajJApana, nidarzana aura upadarzana kiyA jAtA hai|
yaha gyArahaveM vipAkasUtra aMga kA paricaya hai 11 /  557-se kiM taM diTThivAe?
diTThivAe NaM savvabhAvaparUvaNayA aaghvijjti|se samAsao paMcavihe paNNatte, taM
jahA-parikammaM suttAiM puvvagayaM.aNuogo cuuliyaa| yaha dRSTivAda aMga kyA hai
- isameM kyA varNana hai? dRSTivAda aMga meM sarva bhAvoM kI prarUpaNA kI jAtI
hai| vaha saMkSepa se pA~ca prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaise-1. parikarma, 2.
sUtra, 3. pUrvagata, 4. anuyoga aura 5. cuulikaa| 558-se kiM taM parikamme?
parikamme sattavihe paNNatte, taM jahA-siddhaseNiyAparikamme
maNussaseNiyAparikamme puTThaseNiyAparikamme ogAhaNaseNiyAparikamme
uvasaMpanjaseNiyAparikamme vippajahaseNiyAparikamme cuaacuasenniyaaprikmme|
parikarma kyA hai? parikarma sAta prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaise-1.
siddhazreNikA-parikarma, 2. manuSyazreNikA parikarma, 3 pRSThazreNikA parikarma,
4 avagAhanazreNikA parikarma,5 upasaMpadyazreNikA parikarma,

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twelve-Anga Ganita-Pitaka] 6 Viprajahta श्रेणिका Perikarma and 7 Chyutachyuta
श्रेणिका - Perikarma. 559 - What is the Siddhaseniya Perikarma? Siddhaseniya
Perikarma is said to be of fourteen types, such as - Matrukapada,
Ekartthakapada, Artha-pada, Path, Akasha-pada, Ketubhuta, Rasibaddha, Ekaguna,
Dviguna, Triguna, Ketubhuta-pratigraha, Samsara-pratigraha, Nandyaavarta, and
Siddhabaddha. This is the Siddhaseniya Perikarma. [189 What is the Siddha
श्रेणिका Perikarma? Siddha श्रेणिका Perikarma is said to be of fourteen types,
such as - 1 Matrukapada, 2 Ekartthakapada, 3 Artha-pada, 4 Path, 5 Akasha-pada,
6. Ketubhuta, 7 Rasibaddha, 8 Ekaguna, 9 Dviguna, 10 Triguna, 11 Ketubhuta-
pratigraha, 12 Samsara - pratigraha, 13 Nandyaavarta, and 14 Siddhabaddha. This
is all the Siddha श्रेणिका Perikarma. 560 - What is the Manusya श्रेणिका
Perikarma? Manusya श्रेणिका - Perikarma is said to be of fourteen types, such as
- Matrukapada to the aforementioned Nandyaavarta and Manusyabaddha. This is all
the Manusya श्रेणिका Perikarma. - 561 - The remaining Perikarma are said to be
of eleven types. The aforementioned seven Perikarma are according to the
Svasamayika (Jain) view, seven are according to the Ajivika view, six are
according to the Chatushkanaya view, and seven are according to the Trairasika
view. Thus, these seven Perikarma are eighty-three in number, considering the
differences in the past and present. This is all the Perikarma. Discussion -
Sanskrit commentators write that the Perikarma have become disconnected from the
sutras and their meaning. Of these seven Perikarma, the first six are
Svasamayika. And, according to the Ajivikapa-khandaka view, propagated by
Goshalak, there are seven types of Perikarma. According to the Digambara
tradition, the Perikarma describes the Karanasutras of mathematics. There are
five types of these - Chandra-prajnapti, Surya-prajnapti, Jambudvipa-prajnapti,
Dvipa-sagara-prajnapti, and Vyakhya-prajnapti. Chandra-prajnapti describes the
moon-related vimanas, lifespan, family, wealth, movement, loss-gain, full
eclipse, partial eclipse, quarter eclipse, etc. Surya-prajnapti describes the
sun-related lifespan, family, wealth-movement, eclipse, etc. Jambudvipa-
prajnapti describes the Meru, Kulachal, Maha-hrada, Kshetra, Kunda, Vedika,
forest, etc. related to Jambudvipa. Dvipa-sagara-prajnapti describes the nature
of countless islands and oceans, and the specific description of Nandishvara
Dvipa, etc. Vyakhya-prajnapti describes the differences, evidence,
characteristics, forms, formless, living-non-living substances, etc. of the
worthy and unworthy beings in detail.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka ] 6 viprajahata zreNikA parikarma aura 7
cyutAcyutazreNikA - parikarma  /  559 - se kiM taM siddhaseNiyAparikamme ?
siddhaseNiAparikamme coddasavihe paNNatte, taM jahA - mAuyApayANi
egaTThiyapayANi pADhoTThapayANi AgAsapayANi keubhUyaM rAsibaddhaM egaguNaM
duguNaM tiguNaM kebhUyapaDiggaho saMsArapaDiggaho naMdAvattaM siddhabaddhaM  /
se ttaM siddhaseNiyAparikamme  /  [ 189 siddhazreNikA parikarma kyA hai?
siddhazreNikA parikarma caudaha prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaise- 1 mAtRkApada, 2
ekArthakapada, 3 arthapada, 4 pATha, 5 AkAzapada, 6. ketubhUta, 7 rAzibaddha, 8
ekaguNa, 9 dviguNa, 10 triguNa, 11 ketubhUtapratigraha, 12 saMsAra - pratigraha,
13 nandyAvarta, aura 14 siddhabaddha  /  yaha saba siddhazreNikA parikarma hai
/  560 - se kiM taM maNussaseNiyAparikamme ? maNussaseNiyAparikamme coddasavihe
paNNatte  /  taM jahA - tAiM ceva mAuApayANi jAva naMdAvataM maNussabaddhaM  /
se ttaM maNussaseNiyAparikamme  /  manuSyazreNikA-parikarma kyA hai? manuSya
zreNikA - parikarma caudaha prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaisemAtRkApada se lekara
ve hI pUrvokta nandyAvarta taka aura manuSyabaddha  /  yaha saba manuSya zreNikA
parikarma hai| - 561 - avasesA parikammAI puTThAiyAI ekkArasavihAiM pnnttaaii|
icceyAiM satta parikammAI sasamaiyAI, satta AjIviyAI, cha caukkaNaiyAiM, satta
terAsiyAiM  /  evameva sapuvvAvareNaM satta parikammAI tesIti
bhavaMtItimakkhAyAiM  /  se ttaM parikammAI  /  pRSThazreNikA parikarma se
lekara zeSa parikarma gyAraha - gyAraha prakAra ke kahe gaye haiM  /  pUrvokta
sAtoM parikarma svasAmayika (jainamatAnusArI) haiM, sAta AjIvikamatAnusArI haiM,
chaha parikarma catuSkanaya vAloM ke matAnusArI haiM aura sAta trairAzika
matAnusArI haiM  /  isa prakAra ye sAtoM parikarma pUrvApara bhedoM kI apekSA
tirAsI hote haiM, yaha saba parikarma haiM  /  vivecana - saMskRta TIkAkAra
likhate haiM ki parikarma sUtra aura artha se vicchinna ho gaye haiM  /  ina
sAtoM parikarmoM meM se Adi ke chaha parikarma svasAmayika haiN| tathA gozAlaka
dvArA pravartita AjIvikApAkhaNDika mata ke sAtha parikarma meM sAta bheda kahe
jAte haiM  /  digambara-paramparA ke zAstroM ke anusAra parikarma meM gaNita ke
karaNasUtroM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| isake vahA~ pA~ca bheda batalAye gaye
haiM- candraprajJati, sUryaprajJapti, jambUdvIpaprajJapti, dvIpasAgaraprajJapti
aura vyaakhyaaprjnypti| candraprajJapti meM candramA - sambandhI vimAna, Ayu,
parivAra, Rddhi, gamana, hAni-vRddhi, pUrNa grahaNa, ardhagrahaNa, caturthAMza
grahaNa Adi kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| sUryaprajJapti meM sUrya-sambandhI Ayu,
parivAra, Rddhigamana, grahaNa Adi kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| jambUdvIpaprajJapti
meM jambUdvIpa- sambandhI meru, kulAcala, mahAhrada, kSetra, kuMDa, vedikA, vana
Adi kA varNana kiyA gayA hai  /  dvIpasAgaraprajJapti meM asaMkhyAta dvIpa aura
samudroM kA svarUpa, nandIzvara dvIpAdi kA viziSTa varNana kiyA gaya hai  /
vyAkhyAprajJapti meM bhavya, abhavya jIvoM ke bheda, pramANa, lakSaNa, rUpI,
arUpI, jIva- ajIva dravyAdikoM kI vistRta vyAkhyA kI gaI hai  /

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[190] What is the nature of the Sutra? It is said that there are eighty-eight
Sutras, such as: 1. Ṛjūk, 2. Pariṇatāpariṇat, 3. Bahubhangik, 4. Vijayacarcā, 5.
Anantara, 6. Parampara, 7. Samāna (Samānas), 8. Sanjūha-Samyūtha (Jūha), 9.
Sambhinna, 10. Ahāccaya, 11. Sauvastika, 12. Nandyaavarta, 13. Bahul, 14.
Pṛṣṭāpṛṣṭ, 15. Vyāvṛtta, 16. Evambhūta, 17. Dvyāavarta, 18. Vartamānātmaka, 19.
Samabhirūḍha, 20. Sarvatobhadra, 21. Paṇāma (Paṇṇāsa) and 22. Duṣpraṭigraha.
These twenty-two Sutras are Chinnacchedanayik according to the Svasamayasūtra
Paripāṭī. These same twenty-two Sutras are Acchinnacchedanayik according to the
Ājīvikasūtra Paripāṭī. These same twenty-two Sutras are Trikanayik according to
the Trairāśikasūtra Paripāṭī and these same twenty-two Sutras are Caturṣkanayik
according to the Svasamayasūtra Paripāṭī. Thus, all these, with their respective
differences, make up eighty-eight Sutras, it is said. This is the second
distinction of the name Sutra.  **Explanation:** The one who accepts the
Nayasutra with Chhinna, i.e., with distinction, is called Chinnacchedanayik. For
example, the verse Sutra "Dhammo Mangalamukkiḷam" etc., does not depend on any
other verse for the exposition of its meaning, in terms of both the verse and
its meaning. But the verse which depends on the verse before or after it for the
exposition of its meaning is called Acchinnacchedanayik. Gosālaka etc. accept
these three Nayas: Dravyārthika, Paryāyārthika and Ubhāyārthika, hence they are
called Trikanayik. But those who accept these four Nayas: Sangraha, Vyavahāra,
Ṛjusūtra and Śabda, are called Caturṣkanayik. Those who are Trikanayik, describe
all things in terms of Sat, Asat and Ubhāyātmaka. But those who are
Caturṣkanayik, describe all things with the help of the aforementioned four
Nayas.  [563] What is the Pūrvagaya? It is said that there are fourteen types of
Pūrvagaya, such as: 1. Utpādapūrv, 2. Agrayāṇīpūrv, 3. Vīryapravādapūrv, 4.
Astināstipravāda pūrv, 5. Jñānapravādapūrv, 6. Satyapravādapūrv, 7. Ātmapravāda
pūrv, 8. Karmapravāda pūrv, 9. Pratyākyānapravādapūrv, 10. Vidyānu pravāda pūrv,
11. Abandhyapūrv, 12. Prāṇāyupūrv, 13. Kriyāviśāla pūrv and 14. Lokabindu
sārapūrv.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 190] [samavAyAGgasUtra 562-se kiM taM suttAI? suttAiM aTThAsIti
bhvNtiitimkkhaayaaiN| taM jahA-ujugaM pariNayApariNayaM bahubhaMgiyaM
vippaccaiyaM [vina (ja) yacariyaM ] aNaMtaraM paraMparaM samANaM saMjUhaM
(mAsANaM) saMbhinnaM AhaccAyaM (ahavvAyaM) sovatthi (vatta)yaM NaMdAvattaM
bahulaM puTThApuDhe viyAvattaM evaMbhUyaM duAvattaM vattamANappayaM
samabhirUDhaM savvao bhaI paNAsaM (paNNAsaM) dupaDiggahaM icceyAI vAvIsaM suttAI
chiNNacheaNaiAI sasamaya-suttaparivADIe, icceAiMvAvIsaM suttAiM
achinnacheyanaiyAI AjIviyasuttaparivADIe, icceAI vAvIsaM suttAI tikaNaiyAI
terAsiyasuttaparivADIe, icceAI vAvIsaM suttAiM caukkaNaiyAI ssmysuttprivaaddiie|
evAmeva sapuvvAvareNa aTThAsIti suttAI bhvNtiitimkkhyaaii| se ttaM suttaaii|
sUtra kA svarUpa kyA hai? sUtra aThAsI hote haiM, aisA kahA gayA hai, jaise-1.
Rjuka, 2 pariNatApariNata 3 bahubhaMgika, 4 vijayacarcA, 5 anantara, 6
parampara, 7 samAna (samAnasa),8 saMjUha-saMyUtha (jUha),9 saMbhinna, 10
ahAccaya, 11 sauvastikaM, 12 nandyAvarta, 13 bahula, 14 pRSTApRSTa, 15 vyAvRtta,
16 evaMbhUta, 17 dvayAvartta, 18 vartamAnAtmaka, 19 samabhirUDha, 20
sarvatobhadra, 21 paNAma (paNNAsa) aura 22 dussprtigrh| ye bAIsa sUtra
svasamayasUtra paripATI se chinnacchedanayika haiN| ye hI bAIsa sUtra
AjIvikasUtraparipATI se acchinnachedanayika haiN| ye hI bAIsa sUtra
trairAzikasUtraparipATI se trikanayika haiM aura ye hI bAIsa sUtra svasamaya
sUtraparipATI se catuSkanayika haiN| isa prakAra ye saba pUrvApara bheda
milakara aThAsI sUtra hote haiM, aisA kahA gayA hai| yaha sUtra nAma kA dUsarA
bheda hai| vivecana-jo naya sUtra ko chinna arthAt bheda se svIkAra kare, vaha
chinnacchedanaya kahalAtA hai| jaise-'dhammo maMgalamukkiLaM' ityAdi zloka sUtra
aura artha kI apekSA apane artha ke pratipAdana karane meM kisI dUsare zloka kI
apekSA nahIM rakhatA hai| kintu jo zloka apane artha ke pratipAdana meM Age yA
pIche ke zloka kI apekSA rakhatA hai, vaha acchinnacchedanayika kahalAtA hai|
gozAlaka Adi dravyArthika, paryAyArthika aura ubhayArthika ina tIna nayoM ko
mAnate haiM, ataH unheM trikanayika kahA gayA hai| kintu jo saMgraha, vyavahAra,
RjusUtra aura zabda naya ina cAra nayoM ko mAnate haiM, unheM catuSkanayika
kahate haiN| trikanayika vAle sabhI padArthoM kA nirUpaNa sat, asat aura
ubhayAtmaka rUpa se karate haiN| kintu catuSkanayika vAle ukta cAra nayoM se
sarva padArthoM kA nirUpaNa karate haiN| 563-se kiM taM puvvagayaM ? puvvagayaM
cauddasavihaM pannattaM, taM jahA-uppAyapuvvaM aggeNIyaM vIriyaM
atthinatthippavAyaM nANappavAyaM saccappavAyaM AyappavAyaM kammappavAyaM
paccakkhANappavAyaM vijjANuppavAyaM abajhaM pANAU kiriyAvisAlaM logabindusAraM
14 /  yaha pUrvagata kyA hai-isameM kyA varNana hai? pUrvagata caudaha prakAra
ke kahe gaye haiN| jaise-1. utpAdapUrva, 2. agrAyaNIpUrva, 3. vIryapravAdapUrva,
4. astinAstipravAdapUrva, 5. jJAnapravAdapUrva, 6. satyapravAdapUrva, 7.
AtmapravAdapUrva, 8. karmapravAdapUrva, 9. pratyAkhyAnapravAdapUrva 10
vidyAnupravAdapUrva, 11. abandhyapUrva, 12. prANAyupUrva, 13. kriyAvizAla pUrva
aura 14 lokbindusaarpuurv|

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twelve-Anga Ganipitaka] [191 564 - The Uppayapuvva has ten Vathu (chapters) and
four Chulika Vathu. The Aggeniya has fourteen Vathu and twelve Chulika Vathu.
The Viriyappavaya has eight Vathu and eight Chulika Vathu. The Asthinathippavaya
has eighteen Vathu and ten Chulika Vathu. The Nanappavaya has twelve Vathu. The
Sacchappavaya has two Vathu. The Ayappavaya has sixteen Vathu. The
Kammappavayapuvva has thirty Vathu. The Pacchakkhana has twenty Vathu. The
Vijjanuspavaya has fifteen Vathu. The Abamjha has twelve Vathu. The Panau has
thirteen Vathu. The Kiriyavisala has thirty Vathu. The Logabindusara has twenty-
five Vathu. The Uppayapuvva has ten Vathu and four Chulika Vathu. The Aggeniya
has fourteen Vathu and twelve Chulika Vathu. The Viriyappavaya has eight Vathu
and eight Chulika Vathu. The Asthinathippavaya has eighteen Vathu and ten
Chulika Vathu. The Nanappavaya has twelve Vathu. The Sacchappavaya has two
Vathu. The Ayappavaya has sixteen Vathu. The Kammappavayapuvva has thirty Vathu.
The Pacchakkhana has twenty Vathu. The Vijjanuspavaya has fifteen Vathu. The
Abamjha has twelve Vathu. The Panau has thirteen Vathu. The Kiriyavisala has
thirty Vathu. The Logabindusara has twenty-five Vathu. 565 - Ten, fourteen,
eight, eighteen, twelve, two, sixteen, thirty, twenty, fifteen, twelve,
thirteen, thirty, and twenty-five Vathu. Sixteen, thirty, twenty, fifteen, in
the Anuppavaya. ||1|| Twelve, eleven, twelve, thirteen Vathu. Thirty, thirteen,
fourteen, twenty-five. ||2|| Four, twelve, eight, and ten Chulika Vathu. There
are no Chulika Vathu in the remaining four. ||3|| This is the previous
statement. The following are the verses that summarize the number of Vathu
mentioned above: The first has ten, the second has fourteen, the third has
eight, the fourth has eighteen, the fifth has twelve, the sixth has two, the
seventh has sixteen, the eighth has thirty, the ninth has twenty, the tenth
(Vidyanupravada) has fifteen, the eleventh has twelve, the twelfth has thirteen,
the thirteenth has thirty, and the fourteenth has twenty-five Vathu, which are
the Mahaadhikars. The first four have four, twelve, eight, and ten Chulika
Vathu, respectively. The remaining ten do not have Chulika Vathu. This is the
previous statement. Discussion - There is some difference in the number of Vathu
mentioned in the Digambara texts. It is as follows: The first has ten, the
second has fourteen, the third has eight, the fourth has eighteen, the fifth has
twelve, the sixth has twelve, the seventh has sixteen, the eighth has twenty,
the ninth has thirty, the tenth has fifteen, the eleventh has ten, the twelfth
has ten, the thirteenth has ten, and the fourteenth has ten Vathu, which are the
Mahaadhikars. In the Digambara texts, the first four have

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka] [191 564-uppAyapuvvassa NaM dasa vatthU pnnnnttaa|
cattAri cUliyAvatthU pnnnnttaa| aggeNiyassa NaM puvvassa coddasa vatthU, vArasa
cUliyAvatthU pnnnnttaa| vIriyappavAyassa NaM puvvassa aTTha vatthU aTTa
culiyAvatthU pnnnnttaa| asthiNatthippavAyassa NaM puvvassa aTThArasa vattha dasa
caliyAvattha pnnnnttaa| nANappavAyassa NaM puvvassa bArasa vatthU pnnnnttaa|
saccappavAyassa NaM puvvassa do vatthU pnnnnttaa| AyappavAyassa NaM puvvassa
solasa vatthU pnnnnttaa| kammappavAyapuvvassa NaM tIsaM vatthU pnnnnttaa|
paccakkhANassa NaM puvvassa vIsaM vatthU pnnnnttaa| vijjANuSpavAyassa NaM
puvvassa pannarasa vatthU pnnnnttaa| abaMjhassa NaM puvvassa bArasa vatthU
pnnnnttaa| pANAussa NaM puvvassa terasa vatthU pnnnnttaa| kiriyAvisAlassa NaM
puvvassa tIsaM vatthU pnnnnttaa| logabindusArassa NaM puvvassa paNavIsaM vatthU
pnnnnttaa| utpAdapUrva kI daza vastu (adhikAra) haiM aura cAra cUlikAvastu haiN|
agrAyaNIyapUrva kI caudaha vastu aura bAraha cUlikAvastu haiN| vIryapravAdapUrva
kI ATha vastu aura ATha cUlikAvastu haiN| astinAstipravAda pUrva kI aThAraha
vastu aura daza cUlikAvastu haiN| jJAnapravAdapUrva kI bAraha vastu haiN|
satyapravAdapUrva kI do vastu haiN| AtmapravAdapUrva kI solaha vastu haiN|
karmapravAdapUrva kI tIsa vastu haiN| pratyAkhyAnapUrva kI bIsa vastu haiM  /
vidyAnupravAdapUrva kI pandraha vastu haiM  /  abandhyapUrva kI bAraha vastu
haiN| prANAyupUrva kI teraha vastu haiN| kriyAvizAlapUrva kI tIsa vastu haiM  /
lokabindusArapUrva kI paccIsa vastu kahI gaI haiN| 565- dasa coddasa
aTThaTThArase va bArasa duve ya vatthUNi  /  /  solaha tIsA vIsA pannarasa
aNuppavAyayaMmi  // 1 //  bArasa ekkArasame bArasame teraseva vatthUNi  /  tIsA
puNa terasame caudasame pannavIsAo  // 2 //  cattAri duvAlasa aTTha ceva dasa
ceva cUlavatthUNi  /  AillANa cauNhaM sesANaM cUliyA Natthi  // 3 //  se ttaM
puvvgyN| uparyukta vastuoM kI saMkhyA-pratipAdaka saMgrahaNI gAthAeM isa prakAra
haiM - prathama pUrva meM daza, dUsare meM caudaha, tIsare meM ATha, cauthe meM
aThAraha, pA~caveM meM bAraha, chaThe meM do, sAtaveM meM solaha, AThaveM meM
tIsa, navaveM meM bIsa, dazaveM vidyAnupravAda meM pandraha, gyArahaveM meM
bAraha, bArahaveM meM teraha, terahaveM meM tIsa aura caudahaveM meM paccIsa
vastu nAma mahAdhikAra haiN| Adi ke cAra pUrva meM krama se cAra, bAraha, ATha
aura daza cUlikAvastu nAmaka adhikAra hai| zeSa daza pUrvo meM cUlikA nAmaka
adhikAra nahIM haiN| yaha pUrvagata hai| vivecana-digambara granthoM meM
pUrvagata vastuoM kI saMkhyA meM kucha antara hai| jo isa prakAra haiprathama
pUrva meM daza, dUsare meM caudaha, tIsare meM ATha, cauthe meM aThAraha,
pAMcaveM meM bAraha, chaThe meM bAraha, sAtaveM meM solaha, AThaveM meM bIsa,
navaveM meM tIsa, dazaveM ke pandraha, gyArahaveM meM daza, bArahaveM meM daza,
terahaveM meM daza aura caudahaveM pUrva meM daza vastu nAmaka adhikAra batAye
gaye haiN| di0zAstroM meM Adi ke cAra pUrvo kI

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[192] There is no mention of the Samvayanga Sutra Chulika. 566-What is that
Anuyoga? Anuyoga is said to be of two types. For example, Mulaprathamanuyoga and
Gandikanuyoga. What is that Mulaprathamanuyoga? In Mulaprathamanuyoga, the past
lives of Arhant Bhagavants, their journey to the celestial realms, their
celestial existence, their lifespan, their passing, their birth, their birth-
ceremony, their royal glory, their palanquin, their renunciation, their
austerities, their food, their attainment of omniscience, their caste, their
establishment of the Tirtha, their consolidation, their institution, their
physical height, their lifespan, their disciples, their ganas, their ganadharas,
their Aryas, their preachers, the extent of the fourfold sangha, the Kevali-
Jins, the Manahparyavgyani, the Avadhigyani, the Samyakmatigyani, the
Shrutagyani, the Vadi, the Sadhus born in the Anuttar Vimanas, the Siddhas, the
Padupopagata, those who, by destroying the faith of many devotees, became the
best Muni, who were freed from the group of Tamoraj, who attained the Anuttar
Siddhipath, the accounts of these great souls and other similar matters are
mentioned, described, declared, exemplified, directed and shown in
Mulaprathamanuyoga. This is Mulaprathamanuyoga. 567-What is that Gandikanuyoga?
[Gandikanuyoga] is said to be of many types, such as Kulkaragandika,
Tirthankaragandika, Ganadharagandika, Chakravartigandika, Dasaragandika,
Baldevagandika, Vasudeva Gandika, Harivansagandika, Bhadrabahugandika,
Tapahkarmagandika, Chitrantaragandika, Utsarpini Gandika, Avasarpini Gandika,
the journey to the celestial, human, animal and hell realms and the Anuyoga of
transformation into various species, etc. These Gandikas are mentioned in this
Gandikanuyoga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 192] [samavAyAGgasUtra cUlikAoM kA koI ullekha nahIM hai| 566-se kiM taM
aNuoge? aNuoge duvihe pnnnntte| taM jahA-mUlapaDhamANuoge ya gaMDiyANuoge y| se
kiM taM mUlapaDhamANuoge? ettha NaM arahaMtANaM bhagavaMtANaM puvvabhavA
devalogagamaNANi AuMcavaNANi jammaNANi a abhiseyA rAyavarasirIo sIyAo pavvajjAvo
tavA ya bhattA kevalaNANuppAyA a titthapavattaNANi asaMghayaNaM saMThANaM
uccattaM AuM vanavibhAgo sIsA gaNA gaNaharA ya ajjA pavattaNIo saMghassa
cauvvihassa jaM vAvi pariNAmaM jiNa-maNapajjavaohinANa-sammatta-suyanANiNo ya
vAI aNuttaragaI ya jattiyA siddhA pAovagaA ya je jahiM jattiyAI cheaittA
aMtagaDA muNivaruttamA tama-raoghavippamukkA siddhipahamaNuttaraM ca pattA, ee
anne ya evamAiyA bhAvA mUlapaDhamANuoge kahiA AghavijaMti paNNavijjati
parUvijjaMti nidaMsirjati uvdNsijti| se ttaM muulpddhmaannuoge| vaha anuyoga kyA
hai-usameM kyA varNana hai? anuyoga do prakAra kA kahA gayA hai| jaise-
mUlaprathamAnuyoga aura gNddikaanuyog| mUlaprathamAnuyoga meM kyA hai?
mUlaprathamAnuyoga meM arahanta bhagavantoM ke pUrvabhava, devaloka-gamana,
devabhava sambandhI Ayu, cyavana, janma, janmAbhiSeka, rAjyavarazrI, zivikA,
pravrajyA, tapa, bhakta (AhAra) kevalajJAnotpatti, varNa, tIrthapravartana,
saMhanana, saMsthAna, zarIra-uccatA, Ayu, ziSya, gaNa, gaNadhara, AryA,
pravartinI, caturvidha saMgha kA parimANa, kevali-jina, mana:paryavajJAnI,
avadhijJAnI samyak matijJAnI, zrutajJAnI, vAdI, anuttara vimAnoM meM utpanna
hone vAle sAdhu, siddha, pAdapopagata, jo jahA~ jitane bhaktoM kA chedana kara
uttama munivara antakRta hue, tamoraja-samUha se vipramukta hue, anuttara
siddhipatha ko prApta hue, ina mahApuruSoM kA tathA isI prakAra ke anya bhAva
malaprathamAnayoga meM kahe gaye haiM varNita kiye gaye haiM. prajJApita kiye
gaye haiM.prarUpita kiye gaye haiM, nirdezita kiye gaye haiM aura upadarzita
kiye gaye haiN| yaha mUlaprathamAnuyoga hai| 567-se kiM taM gaMDiyANuoge ?
[gaMDiyANuoge] aNegavihe paNNatte, taM jahAkulagara-gaMDiyAo titthagaragaMDiyAo
gaNaharagaMDiyAo cakkaharagaMDiyAo dasAragaMDiyAo baladevagaMDiyAo
vAsudevagaMDiyAo harivaMsagaMDiyAo bhaddabAhugaMDiyAo tavokammagaMDiyAo
cittaMtaragaMDiyAo ussappiNIgaMDiyAo osappiNIgaMDiyAo amara-nara-tiriya-
nirayagaigamaNavivihapariya-dRNANuoge, evamAiyAo gaMDiyAo AghavinjaMti
paNNavinjaMti parUvijaMti nidaMsirjati uvdNsijjNti|se ttaM gNddiyaannuoge|
gaMDikAnuyoga meM kyA hai? gaMDikAnuyoga aneka prakAra kA hai, jaise-
kulakaragaMDikA, tIrthaMkaragaMDikA, gaNadharagaMDikA, cakravartIgaMDikA,
dazAragaMDikA, baladevagaMDikA, vAsudevagaMDikA, harivaMzagaMDikA,
bhadrabAhugaMDikA, tapaHkarmagaMDikA, citrAntaragaMDikA, utsarpiNIgaMDikA,
avasarpiNI gaMDikA, deva, manuSya, tiryaMca aura naraka gatiyoM meM gamana tathA
vividha yoniyoM meM parivartanAnuyoga, ityAdi gaMDikAe~ isa gaMDikAnuyoga meM
kahI jAtI

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twelve-Anga Ganipitaka] [193 are, declared, formulated, directed and shown.
This is the Kanuyoga. 568 - What is the Chulika? The four earlier Purvas have
the authority called Chulika, the remaining ten Purvas do not have Chulika. This
is the Chulika. Discussion - In the Digambara scriptures, the fifth division of
Drishtivada is called Chulika and its five divisions are mentioned - Jalagata
Chulika, Sthalagata Chulika, Mayagata Chulika, Akashgata Chulika and Rupagata
Chulika. Jalagata describes mantras, tantras and austerities like water travel,
fire stopping, fire consumption, fire entry and sitting on fire. Sthalagata
describes mantras, tantras etc. for entering Meru, Kulachal, earth etc. Mayagata
describes mantras etc. related to magic. Akashgata describes mantras etc. that
are the cause of sky travel. Rupagata describes mantras etc. that are the cause
of creating many forms like lion etc. 569 - There are Pariita recitations of
Drishtivada, enumerated Anuyogadwaras, enumerated Prathipattis, enumerated
Niruktis, enumerated Shlokas and enumerated Sangrahanis. 570 - This Drishtivada
is the twelfth Anga in terms of Angarupa. It has one Shrutaskandha, fourteen
Purvas, enumerated objects, enumerated Chulika objects, enumerated Prabhrita,
enumerated Prabhrita-Prabhrita, enumerated Prabhritikas, enumerated Prabhrita-
Prabhritikas. In terms of word count, a lakh words are said to be enumerated.
There are enumerated letters. There are infinite Gamas, infinite Paryayas,
Pariita Tras, infinite Sthavaras. All these eternal, created, bound, classified
Jina-prajnapta Bhavas are mentioned in this Drishtivada, declared, formulated,
shown, demonstrated and shown. Through this Anga, the soul becomes the knower,
the knower

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka ] [ 193 haiM, prajJApita kI jAtI haiM, prarUpita kI jAtI
haiM, nirdezita kI jAtI haiM aura upadarzita kI jAtI haiN| yaha kAnuyoga hai  /
568 - se kiM taM cUliyAo ? jaNNaM AillANaM cauNhaM puvvANaM cUliyAo, sesAI
puvvAiM acUliyAI  /  se taM cUliyAo  /  yaha cUlikA kyA hai ? Adi ke cAra pUrvoM
meM cUlikA nAmaka adhikAra hai| zeSa daza pUrvoM meM cUlikAe~ nahIM haiM  /
yaha cUlikA hai| vivecana - di0 zAstroM meM dRSTivAda kA cUlikA nAmaka pA~cavAM
bheda kahA gayA hai aura usake pA~ca bheda batalAe gae haiM - jalagatA cUlikA,
sthalagatA cUlikA, mAyAgatA cUlikA, AkAzagatA cUlikA aura rUpagatA cUlikA  /
jalagatA meM jala-gamana, agnistambhana, agnibhakSaNa, agni praveza aura agni
para baiThane Adi ke mantra-tantra aura tapazcaraNa Adi kA varNana hai|
sthalagatA meM meru, kulAcala, bhUmi Adi meM praveza karane Adi ke mantra-
tantrAdi kA varNana hai  /  mAyAgatA meM indrajAla-sambandhI mantrAdi kA varNana
hai  /  AkAzagatA meM AkAza-gamana ke kAraNabhUta mantrAdi kA varNana hai|
rUpagatA meM siMha Adi ke aneka prakAra rUpAdi banAne ke kAraNabhUta mantrAdi kA
varNana hai| 569 - diTThivAyassa NaM parittA vAyaNA, saMkhejjA aNuogadArA
saMkhejjAo paDivattIo, saMkhejjAo nijjuttIo, saMkhejjA silogA, saMkhejjAo
saMgahaNIo  /  dRSTivAda kI parIta vAcanAe~ haiM, saMkhyAta anuyogadvAra haiM,
saMkhyAta pratipattiyAM haiM, saMkhyAta niryuktiyAM haiM, saMkhyAta zloka haiM
aura saMkhyAta saMgrahaNiyAM haiM  /  570 - se NaM aMgaTTayAe bArasame aMge, ege
suakkhaMdhe, cauddasa puvvAiM saMkhejjA vatthU, saMkhejjA cUlavatthU, saMkhejjA
pAhuDA, saMkhejjA pAhuDa - pAhuDA, saMkhejjAo pAhuDiyAo, saMkhejjAo
pAhuDapAhuDiyAo, saMkhejjANi payasayasahassANi payaggeNaM paNNattAiM  /
saMkhejjA akkharA, anaMtA gamA aNaMtA pajjavA, parittA tasA, aNaMtA thAvarA,
sAsayA kaDA NibaddhA NikAiyA jiNapaNNattA bhAvA AghavijjaMti paNNavijjaMti
parUvijjaMti daMsijjaMti nidaMsijjati uvadaMsijjati  /  se evaM AyA, evaM NAyA,
evaM viNNAyA, evaM caraNa-karaNaparUvaNayA AghavijjaMti  /  se taM dittttivaae|
se taM duvAlasaMge gaNipiDage  /  yaha dRSTivAda aMgarUpa se bArahavA~ aMga hai|
isameM eka zrutaskandha hai, caudaha pUrva haiM, saMkhyAta vastu haiM, saMkhyAta
cUlikA vastu haiM, saMkhyAta prAbhRta haiM, saMkhyAta prAbhRta- prAbhRta haiM,
saMkhyAta prAbhRtikAeM haiM, saMkhyAta prAbhRta-prAbhRtikAeM haiN| pada gaNanA
kI apekSA saMkhyAta lAkha pada kahe gaye haiM  /  saMkhyAta akSara haiM  /
ananta gama haiM, ananta paryAya haiM, parIta trasa haiM, ananta sthAvara haiN|
ye saba zAzvata, kRta, nibaddha, nikAcita jina-prajJapta bhAva isa dRSTivAda meM
kahe jAte haiM, prajJApita kiye jAte haiM, prarUpita kiye jAte haiM, darzita
kiye jAte haiM, nidarzita kiye jAte haiM aura upadarzita kiye jAte haiN| isa
aMga ke dvArA AtmA jJAtA hotA hai, vijJAtA hotA

Page #313 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[194] The Samvayanga Sutra, through the delineation of charana and karana,
describes, explains, demonstrates, and illustrates the nature of reality. This
is the twelfth drishtivada anga. This is the description of the Dvadasanga
Ganipitaka [12]. 571 - This Dvadasanga Ganipitaka, in the past, caused countless
jivas, devoid of knowledge, to wander in the wilderness of the four gatis. This
Dvadasanga Ganipitaka, in the present, causes limited jivas, devoid of
knowledge, to wander in the wilderness of the four gatis. This Dvadasanga
Ganipitaka, in the future, will cause countless jivas, devoid of knowledge, to
wander in the wilderness of the four gatis. Countless jivas, in the past,
wandered in the wilderness of the four gatis, having violated the injunctions of
this Dvadasanga Ganipitaka in its sutra form, its meaning, and its combined
form, i.e., by being under the influence of wrong views, by reciting the sutras
incorrectly, by explaining the meaning incorrectly, and by incorrectly
delineating the sutras and their meaning. Limited jivas, in the present, are
wandering in the wilderness of the four gatis, having violated the injunctions
of this Dvadasanga Ganipitaka in its sutra form, its meaning, and its combined
form. Countless jivas, in the future, will wander in the wilderness of the four
gatis, having violated the injunctions of this Dvadasanga Ganipitaka in its
sutra form, its meaning, and its combined form. 572 - This Dvadasanga
Ganipitaka, in the past, caused countless jivas, having attained knowledge, to
cross the wilderness of the four gatis. Similarly, in the present, limited
jivas, having attained knowledge, are crossing the wilderness of the four gatis.
Similarly, in the future, countless jivas, having attained knowledge, will cross
the wilderness of the four gatis. Countless jivas, in the past, crossed the
wilderness of the four gatis (attained liberation), having adhered to the
injunctions of this Dvadasanga Ganipitaka in its sutra form, its meaning, and
its combined form. Limited jivas, in the present, are crossing the wilderness of
the four gatis, having adhered to the injunctions of this Dvadasanga Ganipitaka
in its sutra form, its meaning, and its combined form. Countless jivas, in the
future, will cross the wilderness of the four gatis, having adhered to the
injunctions of this Dvadasanga Ganipitaka in its sutra form, its meaning, and
its combined form. 573 - This Dvadasanga Ganipitaka was never in the past, it is
not in the present, and it will never be in the future. However, it was in the
past, it is in the present, and it will be in the future. It is eternally
established, like the sun, the moon, the stars, the sky, and the earth. Just as
the five atthikas were never in the past, they are not in the present, and they
will never be in the future, but they were in the past, they are in the present,
and they will be in the future, eternally established like the sun, the moon,
the stars, the sky, and the earth. Similarly, this Dvadasanga Ganipitaka was
never in the past, it is not in the present, and it will never be in the future.
However, it was in the past, it is in the present, and it will be in the future,
eternally established.  Because this Dvadasanga Ganipitaka...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 194] [ samavAyAGgasUtra hai, isa prakAra caraNa aura karaNa kI prarUpaNA ke
dvArA vastu-svarUpa kA kathana, prajJApana, nidarzana aura upadarzana kiyA jAtA
hai  /  yaha bArahavA~ dRSTivAda aMga hai  /  yaha dvAdazAGga gaNi-piTaka kA
varNana hai 12  /  571 - icceiyaM duvAlasaMgaM gaNipiDagaM atItakAle aNaMtA jIvA
ANAe virAhittA cAuraMtasaMsArakaMtAraM aNupariyaTTisu  /  icceiyaM duvAlasaMgaM
gaNipiDagaM paDuppaNe kAle parittA jIvA ANAe virAhittA cAuraMtasaMsArakaMtAraM
aNupariyaTThati  /  icceiyaM duvAlasaMgaM gaNipiDagaM aNAgae kAle atA jIvA ANAe
virAhittA cAuraMtasaMsArakaMtAraM aNupariyaTTassaMti  /  isa dvAdazAGga
gaNipiTaka kI sUtrarUpa, artharUpa aura ubhaya rUpa AjJA kA virAdhana karake
arthAt durAgraha ke vazIbhUta hokara anyathA sUtrapATha karake, anyathA artha
kathana karake aura anyathA sUtrArtha - ubhaya kI prarUpaNA karake ananta jIvoM
ne bhUtakAla meM caturgatirUpa saMsAra - kAntAra (gahana vana) meM paribhramaNa
kiyA hai, isa dvAdazAGga gaNi-piTaka kI sUtra, artha aura ubhaya rUpa AjJA kA
virAdhana karake vartamAna kAla meM parIta (parimita) jIva caturgatirUpa
saMsAra- kAntAra meM paribhramaNa kara rahe haiM aura isI dvAdazAGga gaNipiTaka
kI sUtra, artha aura ubhayarUpa AjJA kA virAdhana kara bhaviSyakAla meM ananta
jIva caturgatirUpa saMsAra - kAntAra meM paribhramaNa kreNge| 572 - icceiyaM
duvAlasaMgaM gaNipiDagaM atItakAle aNaMtA jIvA ANAe ArAhit
cAuraMtasaMsArakaMtAraM vIIvaiMsu  /  evaM paDuppaNNe'vi [ parittA jIvA ANAe
ArAhittA cAuraMtasaMsArakaMtAraM vIIvaMti ] evaM aNAgae vi [ aNaMtA jIvA ANAe
ArAhittA cAuraMtasaMsArakaMtAraM vIIvaissaMti ] | isa dvAdazAGga gaNi-piTaka kI
sUtra, artha aura ubhayarUpa AjJA kA ArAdhana karake ananta jIvoM ne bhUtakAla
meM caturgati rUpa saMsAra - kAntAra ko pAra kiyA hai ( mukti ko prApta kiyA
hai)  /  vartamAna kAla meM bhI (parimita) jIva isa dvAdazAGga gaNi-piTaka kI
sUtra, artha aura ubhaya rUpa AjJA kA ArAdhana karake caturgatirUpa saMsAra-
kAntAra ko pAra kara rahe haiM aura bhaviSyakAla meM bhI ananta jIva isa
dvAdazAGga gaNipiTaka kI sUtra, artha aura ubhaya rUpa AjJA kA ArAdhana karake
caturgatirUpa saMsAra - kAntAra ko pAra kareMge  /  573 - duvAlasaMge NaM
gaNipiDage Na kayAi NAsI, Na kayAvi Natthi, Na kayAi bhvissi| bhuMvi ca, bhavati
ya, bhavissati ya  /  dhuve nitie sAsae akkhae avvae avaTThie Nicce  /  se jahA
NAmae paMca atthikAyA Na kayAi Na Asi, Na kayAi Natthi, Na kayAi Na bhavissaMti
/  bhuviMca, bhavati ya, bhavissaMti ya, dhuvA NitiyA sAsayA akkhayA avvayA
avaTThiyA NiccA  /  evAmeva duvAlasaMge gaNipiDage Na kayAi Na Asi, Na kayAi
Natthi, Na kayAi Na bhavissai  /  bhuvaM ca bhavati ya, bhavissai ya  /  dhuve
jAva avaTThie Nicce  /  yaha dvAdazAGga gaNipiTaka bhUtakAla meM kabhI nahIM
thA, aisA nahIM hai, vartamAna kAla meM kabhI nahIM hai, aisA nahIM hai aura
bhaviSyakAla meM kabhI nahIM rahegA, aisA bhI nahIM hai  /  kintu bhUtakAla meM
bhI yaha dvAdazAGga gaNi-piTaka thA, vartamAna kAla meM bhI hai aura
bhaviSyakAla meM bhI rhegaa| kyoMki yaha dvAdazAGga gaNipiTaka

Page #314 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelve Angas of the Ganipitaka  [The Twelve Angas of the Ganipitaka]
[195] The Meru mountain is like a pole, the Lokas are like a fixed point, time
is like the eternal, and the Twelve Angas are inexhaustible because they do not
diminish even with continuous recitation. They are imperishable like the flow of
the Ganga and Sindhu rivers, they are situated like Jambudvipa and the other
continents, and they are eternal like the sky. Just as the five Astikaya dravyas
were never not in the past, are never not in the present, and will never not be
in the future, so too, the Twelve Angas were never not in the past, are never
not in the present, and will never not be in the future. Therefore, they are a
pole, fixed, eternal, inexhaustible, imperishable, situated, and eternal.  [574]
In this Twelve Angas Ganipitaka, there are infinite Bhavas (real substances like
Jivas), infinite Abhavas (non-real substances like the absence of Jivas),
infinite Hetus (reasons), infinite Ahetus (non-reasons), infinite Karana
(causes), infinite Akarana (non-causes), infinite Jivas (living beings),
infinite Ajivas (non-living beings), infinite Bhavyasiddhikas (those capable of
liberation), infinite Abhavyasiddhikas (those incapable of liberation), infinite
Siddhas (liberated beings), and infinite Asiddhas (bound beings). They are
explained, described, illustrated, shown, demonstrated, and explained in detail.
Thus, the Twelve Angas Ganipitaka is described.  **Explanation:** In Jain
philosophy, just as there are infinite Dharmas (characteristics) in the form of
reality in every object, so too, there are infinite Abhavas (non-real
characteristics) in the form of non-reality. Therefore, the Sutra describes the
Bhavas (real characteristics) in terms of reality and the Abhavas (non-real
characteristics) in terms of non-reality. The arguments that prove the specific
Dharmas of a substance are called Hetus. The material and efficient causes of
substances are called Karana. Those who possess consciousness are called Jivas,
and those who do not possess consciousness are called Ajivas. Those who are
capable of attaining liberation are called Bhavyasiddhikas, and those who are
not capable of attaining liberation are called Abhavyasiddhikas. Liberated
beings who are free from karma are called Siddhas, and bound beings who are
still subject to karma are called Asiddhas. In this way, the Twelve Angas
Ganipitaka describes all the principles, realities, and substances that exist in
the world.  Thus, the description of the Twelve Angas Ganipitaka is complete.
**Conclusion:** The subject matter of the Twelve Angas Shrutajnana is vast.
Describing the glory of Shrutajnana...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazAMga gaNi-piTaka] [195 meru parvata ke samAna dhruva hai, loka ke samAna
niyata hai, kAla ke samAna zAzvata hai, nirantara vAcanA dene para bhI isakA
kSaya nahIM hone ke kAraNa akSaya hai, gaMgA-sindhu nadiyoM ke pravAha ke samAna
avyaya hai, jambUdvIpAdi ke samAna avasthita hai aura AkAza ke samAna nitya hai|
jisa prakAra pA~ca astikAya dravya bhUtakAla meM kabhI nahIM the aisA nahIM,
vartamAna kAla meM kabhI nahIM haiM, aisA bhI nahIM hai aura bhaviSya kAla meM
kabhI nahIM raheMge, aisA bhI nahIM hai| kintu ye pA~coM astikAya dravya
bhUtakAla meM bhI the, vartamAnakAla meM bhI haiM aura bhaviSyakAla meM bhI
rheNge| ataeva ye dhruva haiM, niyata haiM, zAzvata haiM, akSaya haiM, avyaya
haiM, avasthita haiM aura nitya haiN| isI prakAra yaha dvAdazAGga gaNipiTaka
bhUtakAla meM kabhI nahIM thA, aisA nahIM hai, vartamAna kAla meM kabhI nahIM
hai, aisA nahIM aura bhaviSyakAla meM kabhI nahIM rahegA, aisA bhI nahIM hai|
kintu bhUtakAla meM bhI yaha thA, vartamAna kAla meM bhI yaha hai aura
bhaviSyakAla meM bhI rhegaa| ataeva yaha dhruva hai, niyata hai, zAzvata hai,
akSaya hai, avyaya hai, avasthita hai aura nitya hai| 574-ettha NaM duvAlasaMge
gaNipiDage aNaMtA bhAvA, aNaMtA abhAvA, aNaMtA heU, aNaMtA aheU, aNaMtA kAraNA,
aNaMtA akAraNA aNaMtA jIvA, aNaMtA ajIvA, aNaMtA bhavasiddhiyA, aMNatA
abhavasiddhiyA, aMNatA siddhA, aNaMtA asiddhA aghAvinjaMti paNNavijjati
parUvijjati daMsijjati nidaMsirjati uvdNsijjti| evaM duvAlasaMgaM gaNipiDagaM
ti| isa dvAdazAGga gaNipiTaka meM ananta bhAva (jIvAdi svarUpa se sat padArtha)
aura ananta abhAva (pararUpa se asat jIvAdi vahI padArtha), ananta hetu, unake
pratipakSI ananta ahetu; isI prakAra ananta kAraNa, ananta akAraNa; ananta jIva,
ananta ajIva; ananta bhavyasiddhika, ananta abhavyasiddhika; ananta siddha tathA
ananta asiddha kahe jAte haiM, prajJApita kiye jAte haiM, prarUpita kiye jAte
haiM.darzita kiye jAte haiM, nidarzita kiye jAte haiM aura upadarzita kiye jAte
haiN| vivecana-jaina siddhAnta meM pratyeka vastu meM jisa prakAra ananta dharma
svarUpa kI apekSA sattArUpa meM pAye jAte haiM, usI prakAra pararUpa kI apekSA
ananta abhAvAtmaka dharma bhI pAye jAte haiN| isI kAraNa sUtra meM svarUpa kI
apekSA bhAvAtmaka dharmoM kA aura pararUpa kI apekSA abhAvAtmaka dharmoM kA
nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| padArtha ke dharma-vizeSoM ko siddha karane vAlI
yuktiyoM ko hetu kahate haiN| padArthoM ke upAdAna aura nimitta kAraNoM ko
kAraNa kahate haiN| jinameM cetanA pAI jAtI hai, ve jIva aura jinameM cetanA
nahIM pAI jAtI hai, ve ajIva kahalAte haiN| jinameM mukti jAne kI yogyatA hai ve
bhavyasiddhika aura jinameM vaha yogyatA nahIM pAI jAtI hai unheM
abhavyasiddhika kahate haiN| karma-mukta jIvoM ko siddha aura karma-baddha
saMsArI jIvoM ko asiddha kahate haiN| isa prakAra se yaha dvAdazAGga gaNi-piTaka
saMsAra meM vidyamAna sabhI tattvoM, bhAvoM aura padArthoM kA varNana karatA
hai| isa prakAra dvAdazAGga gaNipiTaka kA varNana samApta huaa| upasaMhAra-
dvAdazAGga zrutajJAna kA viSaya bahuta vizAla hai| zrutajJAna kI mahimA kA
varNana karate

Page #315 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[196] The Acharya's who have attained Samyak-Jnana have declared the importance
of Shruta-Jnana by saying "There is a difference between Shruta-Jnana and
Kevala-Jnana, which is direct and indirect."  Kevala-Jnana directly knows the
three realms, the three periods of time, the substances, their qualities and
their modifications, as if holding them in the hand. Shruta-Jnana knows all of
these indirectly. Therefore, no element of the world is outside of the twelve-
limbed Shruta. All elements are contained within this twelve-limbed Ganipitaka.
The eleven Angas, starting with Acharanga, primarily describe one subject each,
such as conduct. However, the twelfth Anga, Dristivad, describes all the
elements of the world. In its previous sections, it describes the nature of the
many previous things, such as the production, destruction, and impermanence of
the beginning of production. It describes the powers of the substance, starting
with the section on the seed, the many Dharma-like qualities, starting with the
section on existence and non-existence, the nature of the soul, starting with
the sections on knowledge and the soul, and the states of karma, starting with
the section on karma. It describes the many types of atonement, starting with
the section on rejection, the mantras and tantras, starting with the section on
Vidya-vad, the eight limbs of Ayurveda, starting with the section on Pranaprava,
the eight great causes, starting with the section on space, the earth, the
voice, dreams, signs, consonants, and the broken, and the secrets of astrology.
It describes the actions that are never fruitless and beneficial, starting with
the section on the unhindered. It describes actions, starting with the section
on the vastness of actions, the sixty-four arts of women and the seventy-two
arts of men, and poetry, meter, and figures of speech. It describes the
remaining wealth of Shruta, starting with the section on the essence of the
world. Thus, there is no subject that is useful for life and the soul that is
not described in these fourteen sections. The subjects of narrative,
mathematics, etc. are described in the remaining four sections of Dristivad.
Thus, the subject of the twelve-limbed Shruta is very vast.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 196] [samakyAgamUtra hue AcAryoM ne bhedaH sAkSAdasAkSAcca zruta-
kevalayormataH' kaha kara zrutajJAna kI mahattA prakaTa kI hai, arthAt
zrutajJAna aura kevalajJAna meM pratyakSa evaM parokSa kA bheda kahA hai| jahA~
kevalajJAna trailokya trikAlavartI, dravyoM, unake guNoM aura paryAyoM ko sAkSAt
hastAmalakavat pratyakSa jAnatA hai, vahAM zrutajJAna una sabako parokSa rUpa se
jAnatA hai| ataH saMsAra kA koI bhI tattva dvAdazAGga zruta se bAhara nahIM hai|
sabhI tattva isa dvAdazAGga gaNipiTaka meM samAhita haiN| AcArAGga Adi gyAraha
aMgoM meM AcAra Adi pradhAna rUpa se eka-eka viSaya kA varNana kiyA gayA hai,
kintu bArahaveM dRSTivAda aMga meM to saMsAra ke sabhI tattvoM kA varNana kiyA
gayA hai| usake pUrvagata bheda meM se jahA~ prArambha ke utpAdapUrva Adi aneka
pUrva vastu ke utpAda-vyayadhrauvyAtmaka svarUpa kA varNana karate haiM, vahA~
vIryapravAdapUrva dravya kI zaktiyoM kA, astinAsti-pravAdapUrva aneka
dharmAtmakatA kA, jJAnapravAda aura AtmapravAda pUrva AtmasvarUpa kA,
karmapravAda pUrva karmoM kI dazAoM kA nirUpaNa karate haiN| pratyAkhyAnapUrva
aneka prakAra ke prAyazcittoM kA, vidyAnavAdapUrva maMtra-taMtroM kA. prANA
parva Ayarveda ke aSTAGoM kA. antarikSa. bhauma aMga. svara. svapna. lakSaNa.
vyaMjana aura chinna ina ATha mahAnimittoM kA evaM jyotiSazAstra ke rahasyoM kA
varNana karatA hai| abandhyapUrva kabhI niSphala nahIM jAne vAlI kalyANakAriNI
kriyAoM kA varNana karatA hai| kriyAvizAlapUrva kriyAoM kA, striyoM kI causaTha
aura puruSoM kI bahattara kalAoM kA, tathA kAvya-racanA, chanda, alaMkAra Adi kA
varNana karatA hai| lokabindusArapUrva avaziSTa sarva zrutasampadA kA varNana
karatA hai  /  isa prakAra aisA koI bhI jIvanopayogI evaM AtmopayogI viSaya
nahIM hai, jisakA varNana ina caudaha pUrSoM meM na kiyA gayA ho| kathAnuyoga,
gaNita Adi viSayoM kA varNana dRSTivAda ke zeSa cAra bhedoM meM kiyA gayA hai|
isa prakAra dvAdazAGga zruta kA viSaya bahuta vizAla hai|

Page #316 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Diverse Subjects Explained 576 - Two categories are mentioned, namely - Jiva-
rasi and Ajivara-rasi. Ajivara-rasi is further divided into two categories,
namely - Ruvi Ajivara-rasi and Aruvi Ajivara-rasi.  ## 577 - What is Aruvi
Ajivara-rasi? Aruvi Ajivara-rasi is mentioned as having ten categories, namely -
Dhamma-stikaya, Dhamma-stikaya-desa, Dhamma-stikaya-padesa, Adhamma-stikaya,
Adhamma-stikaya-desa, Adhamma-stikaya-padesa, Aagasa-stikaya, Aagasa-stikaya-
desa, Aagasa-stikaya-padesa and Addha-samaya.  ## 578 - Ruvi Ajivara-rasi is
mentioned as having many categories... [What is Ruvi Ajivara-rasi?] Ruvi
Ajivara-rasi is mentioned as having many categories...  ## Explanation - The
description of Ruvi Ajivara-rasi and Jiva-rasi is not given here, only the word
"Jāv" is used to indicate that it should be understood according to the first
chapter of the Prajnapana Sutra, named "Prajnapana". The difference between the
two places is only one word. Where the word "Prajnapana" is used in the
Prajnapana Sutra, the word "Rasi" should be used in this place. The rest of the
statement is the same in both places. According to the commentary, the brief
statement is as follows:  Ruvi Ajivara-rupa, i.e., Pudgala-rasi, is of four
types - Skandha, Desa, Pradesh and Paramanu. The entire mass of infinite
Paramanus is called Skandha. The part of Skandha that is mixed with it is called
Desa, and the indivisible part that is attached to Skandha is called Pradesh.
The smallest indivisible part of Pudgala, which is separate, is called Paramanu.
Again, this Pudgala is of five types due to the difference in color, smell,
taste, touch and form. Again, form is also of many types due to the combination
of Pudgala-Paramanus. This Pudgala is also of many types due to the difference
in words, bondage, subtle, gross, difference, darkness (darkness), shadow, Udyot
(moonlight) and Atap (sunlight), etc.  ## 1. In Pancha-stikaya, the nature of
Desa and Pradesh is explained differently:  "Skhandham sayala-sammattham, tassa
ya a bhananti desotti. Tassa ya addha padesam jam avibhaghi viyan paramanu tti."
- Pancha-stikaya, Gatha 95.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSayanirUpaNa 576 -duve rAsI pannattA, taM jahA-jIvarAsI ajIvarAsI
y|ajiivraasii duvihA pnnttaa| taM jahA-rUvI ajIvarAsI arUvI ajIvarAsI y| do
rAziyAM kahI gaI haiM -jIvarAzi aura ajiivraashi| ajIvarAzi do prakAra kI kahI
gaI hai| rUpI ajIvarAzi aura arUpI ajiivraashi| 577-se kiM taM arUvI ajIvarAsI?
arUvI ajIvarAsI dasavihA pannattA, taM jahAdhammasthikAe
jAva[dhammatthikAyadesA, dhammatthikAyapadesA, adhammatthikAe,
adhammatthikAyadesA, adhammatthikAyapadesA, AgAsatthikAe, AgAsasthikAyadesA,
AgAsatthikAyapadesA ] addhaasme| arUpI ajIvarAzi kyA hai? arUpI ajIvarAzi dasa
prakAra kI kahI gaI hai, jaise-dharmAstikAya yAvat (dharmAstikAyadeza,
dharmAstikAyapradeza, adharmAstikAya, adharmAstikAyadeza, adharmAstikAyapradeza,
AkAzastikAya, AkAzastikAyadeza, AkAzAstikAyapradeza) aura addhaasmy| 578-rUvI
ajIvarAsI aNegavihA pannattA jAva....... [rUpI ajIvarAzi kyA hai?]] rUpI
ajIvarAzi aneka prakAra kI kahI gaI hai......yAvat vivecana-rUpI ajIvarAzi kA
tathA jIvarAzi kA vivaraNa yahA~ nahIM diyA gayA hai, kevala jAva zabda kA
prayoga karake yaha sUcita kara diyA gayA hai ki prajJApanAsUtra ke pahale
prajJApanA nAmaka pada ke anusAra isakA nirUpaNa samajha lenA caahie| donoM
sthaloM meM antara, mAtra eka zabda kA hai| prajJApanAsUtra meM jahA~
'prajJApanA' zabda kA prayoga hai, vahAM isa sthAna para rAzi zabda kA prayoga
karanA caahie| zeSa kathana donoM jagaha samAna hai| TIkA ke anusAra saMkSipta
kathana isa prakAra hai rUpI ajIvarUpa arthAt pudgala rAzi cAra prakAra kI hai-
skandha, deza, pradeza aura prmaannu| ananta paramANuoM ke sampUrNa piMDa ko
skandha kahate haiN| skandha ke usameM mile hue bhAga ko deza kahate haiM aura
skandha ke sAtha jur3e avibhAgI aMza ko pradeza kahate haiN| pudgala ke sabase
choTe avibhAgI aMza ko, jo pRthak hai, paramANu kahate haiN| punaH yaha pudgala
varNa, gandha, rasa, sparza aura saMsthAna ke bheda se pA~ca prakAra kA hai|
punaH saMsthAna bhI pudgala-paramANuoM ke saMyoga se aneka prakAra kA hotA hai|
yaha pudgala zabda, bandha, sUkSma, sthUla, bheda, tama, (andhakAra) chAyA,
udyota (candra-prakAza) aura Atapa (sUryaprakAza) Adi ke bheda se bhI aneka
prakAra kA hai| 1. paMcAstikAya meM deza aura pradeza kA svarUpa bhinna prakAra
se batalAyA gayA hai khaMdhaM sayalasamatthaM, tassa ya a bhaNaMti desotti  /
tassa ya addha padezaM jaM avibhAgI viyANa paramANu tti  /  -paMcAstikAya, gAthA
95

Page #317 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 198] [Samvayanga Sutra 579 - [Jiva-rasi is of two types. They are -
Samsarasamavannag (worldly beings) and Asamsarasamavannag (liberated beings).
Thus, the differences between these two types of beings should be known
according to the Prajnapanasutra, up to the Anuttaropapatik Sutra... ] What is
Jiva-rasi? [Jiva-rasi is said to be of two types - Samsarasamavannag (worldly
beings) and Asamsarasamavannag (liberated beings). Thus, the differences between
these two types of beings should be known according to the Prajnapanasutra, up
to the Anuttaropapatik Sutra. 580 - What are the Anuttaropapatik Devas?
Anuttaropapatik Devas are said to be of five types. They are - Vijay-
Anuttaropapatik, Vaijayant-Anuttaropapatik, Jayant-Anuttaropapatik, Aparajit-
Anuttaropapatik and Sarvarthasiddhik Anuttaropapatik. All these Anuttaropapatik
are Samsarasamavannag Jiva-rasi. These are all Panchendriya Samsarasamavannag
Jiva-rasi. 581 - Narak Jivas are of two types - Paryapt and Aparyapt. Here also
[according to the Prajnapanasutra], the Sutra-Dandak should be explained, i.e.,
the description should be understood, up to the Vaimanik Devas, i.e., Narak,
Asurakumar, Sthavarakaya, Dvindriya, etc., Manushya, Vyantar, Jyotishk and
Vaimanik. 582 - [Bhagavan] In this Ratnaprabha Prithvi, how much area is covered
and how many Narakavasa are said to be there? Gautam! In this Ratnaprabha
Prithvi, which is eighty thousand yojanas thick, one thousand yojanas above and
one thousand yojanas below are excluded, and in the remaining one lakh seventy-
eight thousand yojanas of Ratnaprabha Prithvi, there are thirty lakh Narakavasa.
These Narakavasa are round inside and square outside, as long as they are
Asuabha, and in those Narakas, there are Asuabha Vedanas. Similarly, the
description of all seven Prithvis should be given, as per their respective
characteristics.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 198] [samavAyAGgasUtra 579-[jIvarAsI duvihA pnnnnttaa| taM jahA-
saMsArasamAvannagA ya asaMsArasamAvannagA y| tattha asaMsArasamAvanagA duvihA
paNNattA....jAva......] jIva-rAzi kyA hai? [jIva-rAzi do prakAra kI kahI gaI
hai-saMsArasamApannaka (saMsArI jIva) aura asaMsArasamApanaka (mukta jIva)  /
isa prakAra donoM rAziyoM ke bheda-prabheda prajJApanAsUtra ke anusAra
anuttaropapAtika sUtra taka jAnanA caahie| 580-se kiM taM aNuttarovavAiyA?
aNuttarovavAiA paMcavihA pnntaa| taM jhaavijy-vejyNt-jyNt-apraajit-
svvtttthsiddhiaa|settN annuttrovvaaiyaa|settN pNciNdiysNsaarsmaavnnnn-
jiivraasii| ve anuttaropapAtika deva kyA haiM ? anuttaropapAtika deva pA~ca
prakAra ke kahe gaye haiN| jaise-vijaya-anuttaropapAtikaM,
vaijayantaanuttaropapAtika, jayanta-anuttaropapAtika, aparAjita-anuttaropapAtika
aura sarvArthasiddhika anuttroppaatik| ye saba anuttaropapAtika
saMsArasamApanaka jIvarAzi haiN| yaha saba paMcendriyasaMsArasamApana-jIvarAzi
hai| 581-duvihANeraiyA pnnnnttaa|tN jahA-pajjattA ya apajjattA y| evaMdaMDao
bhANiyavvo jAva vemANiya tti| nAraka jIva do prakAra ke haiM - paryApta aura
apryaapt| yahAM para bhI [prajJApanAsUtra ke anusAra] vaimAnika devoM taka
arthAt nAraka, asurakumAra, sthAvarakAya, dvIndriya Adi, manuSya, vyantara,
jyotiSka tathA vaimAnika kA sUtra-daMDaka kahanA cAhie arthAt varNana samajha
lenA caahie| 582-imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe kevaiyaM khettaM ogAhettA
kevaiyA NirayAvAsA paNNattA ? goyamA! imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
asIuttarajoyaNasayasahassa-bAhallAe uvari egaM joyaNasahassaM ogAhettA heTThA
cegaM joyaNasahassaM vajjettA majjhe aTThasattari joyaNasayasahasse ettha NaM
rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe NeraiyANaM tIsaM NirayAvAsasayasahassA
bhvNtiitimkkhaayaa| te NaM NirayAvAsA aMto vaTTA, bAhiM cauraMsA jAva asubhANa
rayA, asubhAo Niraesu veynnaao| evaM satta vi bhANiyavvAo jaM jAsu jujjai
[bhagavan] isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM kitanA kSetra avagAhana kara kitane
nArakavAsa kahe gaye haiM? gautama! eka lAkha assI hajAra yojana moTI isa
ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke Upara se eka hajAra yojana avagAhana kara, tathA sabase
nIce ke eka hajAra yojana kSetra ko chor3akara madhyavartI eka lAkha aThahattara
hajAra yojana vAle ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke bhAga meM tIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa haiM
/  ve nArakAvAsa bhItara kI ora gola aura bAhara kI ora caukora haiM yAvat ve
naraka azubha haiM aura una narakoM meM azubha vedanAeM haiN| isI prakAra sAtoM
hI pRthiviyoM kA varNana jinameM jo yukta ho, karanA caahie|

Page #318 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of Various Subjects  [199 Discussion - According to the following
verse number one, the second earth is one lakh thirty-two thousand yojanas
thick. Leaving one thousand yojanas above and one thousand yojanas below, in the
middle one lakh thirty thousand yojanas of land, there are twenty-five lakh
Narakas (hells). The third earth is one lakh twenty-eight thousand yojanas
thick. Leaving one thousand yojanas above and one thousand yojanas below, in the
middle one lakh twenty-six thousand yojanas of land, there are fifteen lakh
Narakas. The fourth earth is one lakh twenty thousand yojanas thick. Leaving one
thousand yojanas above and one thousand yojanas below, in the remaining one lakh
eighteen thousand yojanas of land, there are ten lakh Narakas. The fifth earth
is one lakh eighteen thousand yojanas thick. Leaving one thousand yojanas above
and one thousand yojanas below, in the remaining middle one lakh sixteen
thousand yojanas of land, there are three lakh Narakas. The sixth earth is one
lakh sixteen thousand yojanas thick. Leaving one thousand yojanas above and one
thousand yojanas below, in the remaining middle one lakh fourteen thousand
yojanas of land, there are five less than one lakh (99,995) Narakas. The seventh
earth is one lakh eight thousand yojanas thick. Leaving fifty-two and a half
thousand yojanas above and fifty-two and a half thousand yojanas below, there
are five Narakas in the middle. Among them, the Naraka called Apratisthan is
exactly in the middle of the four Narakas, and the remaining Kal, Mahakal,
Rauruk and Maharauruk Narakas are situated in its four directions.  In all the
earths, Narakas are of three types - Indrak, श्रेणीबद्ध (Avaliakapravisht) and
पुष्पप्रकीर्णक (Avaliakabahya). Indrak Naraka is in the middle of all, and
श्रेणीबद्ध Narakas are situated in its eight directions. पुष्पप्रकीर्णक or
आवलिकाबाह्य Narakas are situated in the middle of श्रेणीबद्ध Narakas. Indrak
Narakas are round, and the remaining Narakas are said to be of various shapes
like triangular, quadrilateral, etc., and all the Narakas are shaped like a
sickle (khurpa) towards the bottom. 583  Thirty-two, twenty-eight, twenty-five,
eighteen, sixteen, eighty-eight, and then Bahalla. ||1|| Thirty, nineteen,
fifteen, ten, one hundred thousand. Three, five, five, and then Anuttara
Naragas. ||2|| Sixty-four for Asuras, eighty-four for Nagas. Seventy-two for
Suvannas, sixty-nine for Vaikumara. ||3|| Six for Deeva, Disa, Udheena,
Vijjukumari, Thanimaggi, and six for Juvalaya. Sixty-six for one hundred
thousand. ||4|| Thirty-two, twenty, twelve, four, and one hundred thousand.
Nineteen, forty-four, six, and one hundred thousand. ||5|| Four hundred for
Aanya-Paanya Kappe, three for Aranachue. Seven for Vimana, one hundred thousand,
and four for these Kappe. ||6|| One hundred and eleven for the lower ones,
seventy-one for the middle ones, and one hundred and one for the upper ones.
Five for Anuttara Vimana. ||7||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa] [199 vivecana-Age dI gaI gAthA saMkhyA eka ke anusAra
dUsarI pRthivI eka lAkha battIsa hajAra yojana moTI hai| usake eka hajAra yojana
Upara kA aura eka hajAra yojana nIce kA bhAga chor3akara madhyavartI eka lAkha
tIsa hajAra yojana bhU-bhAga meM paccIsa lAkha nArakAvAsa haiN| tIsarI pRthivI
eka lAkha aTThAIsa hajAra yojana moTI hai| usake eka hajAra yojana Upara aura
eka hajAra yojana nIce kA bhAga chor3akara madhyavartI eka lAkha chabbIsa hajAra
yojana bhU-bhAga meM pandraha lAkha nArakAvAsa haiM  /  cauthI pRthivI eka lAkha
bIsa hajAra yojana moTI hai| usake Upara tathA nIce kI eka eka hajAra yojana
bhUmi ko chor3akara zeSa eka lAkha aThAraha hajAra yojana bhU-bhAga meM daza
lAkha nArakAvAsa haiN| pAMcavIM pRthivI eka lAkha aThAraha hajAra yojana moTI
hai| usake eka eka hajAra yojana UparI vA nIce kA bhAga choDakara zeSa
madhyavartI eka lAkha solaha hajAra yojana bhU-bhAga meM tIna lAkha nArakAvAsa
haiN| chaThI pRthivI eka lAkha solaha hajAra yojana moTI hai, usake eka-eka
hajAra yojana UparI aura nIce kA bhAga chor3akara madhyavartI eka lAkha caudaha
hajAra yojana bhU-bhAga meM pAMca kama eka lAkha (99995) nArakAvAsa haiM  /
sAtavIM pRthivI eka lAkha ATha hajAra yojana moTI hai| usake sADhe bAvana, sADhe
bAvana hajAra yojana UparI tathA nIce ke bhAga ko chor3akara madhya meM pAMca
nArakAvAsa haiN| usameM apratiSThAna nAma kA nArakavAsa ThIka cAroM nArakAvAsoM
ke madhya meM he aura zeSa kAla, mahAkAla, rauruka aura mahArauruka nArakavAsa
usakI cAroM dizAoM meM avasthita haiN| sabhI pRthiviyoM meM nArakAvAsa tIna
prakAra ke haiM - indraka, zreNIbaddha (AvalikApraviSTa) aura puSpaprakIrNaka
(aavlikaabaahy)| indraka nArakavAsa sabake bIca meM hotA hai aura zreNIbaddha
nArakavAsa usakI AThoM dizAoM meM avasthita haiN| puSpaprakIrNaka yA
AvalikAbAhya nArakAvAsa zreNibaddha nArakAvAsoM ke madhya meM avasthita haiN|
indraka nArakAvAsa gola hote haiM aura zeSa nArakAvAsa trikoNa catuSkoNa Adi
nAnA AkAra vAle kahe gaye haiM tathA nIce kI ora sabhI nArakavAsa kSurapra
(khurapA) ke AkAra vAle haiN| 583 AsIyaM battIsaM aTThAvIsaM taheva vIsaM ca  /
aTThArasa solasagaM aThuttarameva bAhallaM  // 1 //  tIsA ya paNNavIsA pannarasa
daseva sayasahassAI  /  tiNNegaM paMcUNaM paMceva aNuttarA naragA  // 2 //
causaTThI asurANaM caurAsIiM ca hoi nAgANaM  /  vAvattari suvannANaM vAukumArANa
chaNNauI  // 3 //  dIva-disA-udahINaM vijjukumArida-thaNiyamaggINaM  /  /
chaNhaM pi juvalayANaM chAvattarimo ya sayasahassA  // 4 //  battIsAvIsA vArasa
aDa cauro ya sayasahassA  /  paNNA cattAlIsA chacca sayA sahassAre  // 5 //
ANaya-pANayakappe cattAri sayA''raNaccue tini  /  satta vimANasayAI causu vi
eesu kappesu  // 6 //  ekkArasuttaraM heTThimesu sattuttaraM ca majjhimae  /
sayamegaM uvarimae paMceva aNuttara vimANA  // 7 //

Page #319 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[200]**  **[Samvayanga Sutra Ratnaprabha]**  The thickness
(outer layer) of the Earth **Ratnaprabha** is one lakh eighty thousand yojanas.
The thickness of the Earth **Sharkara** is one lakh thirty-two thousand yojanas.
The thickness of the Earth **Valuka** is one lakh twenty-eight thousand yojanas.
The thickness of the Earth **Panka-prabha** is one lakh twenty thousand yojanas.
The thickness of the Earth **Dhuma-prabha** is one lakh eighteen thousand
yojanas. The thickness of the Earth **Tama-prabha** is one lakh sixteen thousand
yojanas. And the thickness of the Earth **Maha-tama-prabha** is one lakh eight
thousand yojanas. ||1||  There are thirty lakh **Naraka-vasas** (hells) in the
Earth **Ratnaprabha**. There are twenty-five lakh **Naraka-vasas** in the Earth
**Sharkara**. There are fifteen lakh **Naraka-vasas** in the Earth **Valuka**.
There are ten lakh **Naraka-vasas** in the Earth **Panka-prabha**. There are
three lakh **Naraka-vasas** in the Earth **Dhuma-prabha**. There are five less
than one lakh **Naraka-vasas** in the Earth **Tama-prabha**. There are only five
**Anuttara Naraka-vasas** in the Earth **Maha-tama-prabha**. ||2||  There are
sixty-four lakh mansions of **Asura-kumars**. There are eighty-four lakh
mansions of **Naga-kumars**. There are seventy-two lakh mansions of **Suparna-
kumars**. There are ninety lakh mansions of **Vayu-kumars**. ||3||  There are
seventy-six lakh mansions of the six pairs of **Dvipa-kumars**, **Disa-kumars**,
**Udadhi-kumars**, **Vidhyut-kumars**, **Stanit-kumars**, and **Agni-kumars**.
||4||  There are thirty-two lakh **Vimanas** (celestial chariots) in the
**Saudharma-kalpa**. There are twenty-eight lakh **Vimanas** in the **Ishana-
kalpa**. There are twelve lakh **Vimanas** in the **Sanat-kumara-kalpa**. There
are eight lakh **Vimanas** in the **Mahendra-kalpa**. There are four lakh
**Vimanas** in the **Brahma-kalpa**. There are fifty thousand **Vimanas** in the
**Lantaka-kalpa**. There are forty thousand **Vimanas** in the **Maha-shukra-
kalpa**. There are six thousand **Vimanas** in the **Sahasra-kalpa**. ||5||
There are four hundred **Vimanas** in the **Anata** and **Pranata-kalpas**.
There are three hundred **Vimanas** in the **Arana** and **Achyuta-kalpas**.
Thus, the total number of **Vimanas** in these four **Kalpas** should be known
as seven hundred. ||6||  There are one hundred and eleven **Vimanas** in the
three **Adhastana** (lower) **Graveyakas**. There are one hundred and seven
**Vimanas** in the three **Madhyama** (middle) **Graveyakas**. There are one
hundred **Vimanas** in the three **Uparima** (upper) **Graveyakas**. There are
only five **Anuttara Vimanas**. ||7||  **584** - The number of **Naraka-vasas**
should be mentioned in the second Earth, the third Earth, the fourth Earth, the
fifth Earth, the sixth Earth, and the seventh Earth. [....]  Similarly,
according to the above verses, the number of mansions of the ten types of
**Bhavana-vasi** (dwelling) Devas, the number of **Vimanas** of the twelve
**Kalpa-vasi** Devas, and the number of **Vimanas** of the **Graveyaka** and
**Anuttara** Devas should also be known.  **585** - Question about the seventh
Earth. **Go-yama!** In the seventh Earth, above the thickness of eighty-eight
thousand yojanas, there are half a thousand yojanas of **Ogaha** (a type of
celestial region). Below, there are half a thousand yojanas less, and in the
middle, there are three thousand yojanas. In this seventh Earth, there are five
**Anuttara Maha-maha-laya Maha-niraya** (great hells).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200] [samavAyAGgasUtra ratnaprabhA pRthivI kA bAhalya (moTAI) eka lAkha assI
hajAra yojana hai| zarkarA pRthivI kA bAhalya eka lAkha battIsa hajAra yojana
hai| bAlukA pRthivI kA bAhalya eka lAkha aTThAIsa hajAra yojana hai| paMkaprabhA
pRthivI kA bAhalya eka lAkha vIsa hajAra yojana hai| dhUmaprabhA pRthivI kA
bAhalya eka lAkha aTThAraha hajAra yojana hai| tamaHprabhA pRthivI kA bAhalya
eka lAkha solaha hajAra yojana hai aura mahAtamaHprabhA pRthivI kA bAhalya eka
lAkha ATha hajAra yojana hai  // 1 //  ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM tIsa lAkha
nArakAvAsa haiN| zarkarA pRthivI meM paccIsa lAkha nArakavAsa haiN| vAlukA
pRthivI meM pandraha lAkha nArakAvAsa haiN| paMkaprabhA pRthivI meM daza lAkha
nArakAvAsa haiN| dhUmaprabhA pRthivI meM tIna lAkha nArakAvAsa haiN| tamaHprabhA
pRthivI meM pAMca kama eka lAkha nArakAvAsa haiN| mahAtamaH pRthivI meM (kevala)
pAMca anuttara nArakAvAsa haiM  // 2 //  asurakumAroM ke causaTha lAkha bhavana
haiN| nAgakumAroM ke caurAsI lAkha bhavana haiN| suparNakumAroM ke bahattara
lAkha bhavana haiN| vAyukumAroM ke jhyAnavai lAkha bhavana haiM  // 3 //
dvIpakumAra, dizakumAra, udadhikumAra, vidyutkumAra, stanitakuAmara, agnikumAra
ina chahoM yugaloM ke chiyattara (76) lAkha bhavana haiM  // 4 //
saudharmakalpa meM battIsa lAkha vimAna haiN| IzAnakalpa meM aTThAIsa lAkha
vimAna haiM  /  sanatkumArakalpa meM bAraha lAkha vimAna haiN| mAhendrakalpa meM
ATha lAkha vimAna haiN| brahmakalpa meM cAra lAkha vimAna haiN| lAntakakalpa meM
pacAsa hajAra vimAna haiN| mahAzukra vimAna meM cAlIsa hajAra vimAna haiN|
sahasrArakalpa meM chaha hajAra vimAna haiM  // 5 //  Anata, prANata kalpa meM
cAra sau vimAna haiN| AraNa aura acyuta kalpa meM tIna sau vimAna haiN| isa
prakAra ina cAroM hI kalpoM meM vimAnoM kI saMkhyA sAta sau jAnanA cAhie  // 6
//  adhastana-nIce ke tInoM hI graiveyakoM meM eka sau gyAraha vimAna haiN|
madhyama tInoM hI graiveyakoM meM eka sau sAta vimAna haiN| uparima tInoM hI
graiveyakoM meM eka sau vimAna haiN| anuttara vimAna pAMca hI haiM  / 7  //
584-doccAe NaM puDhavIe, taccAe NaM puDhavIe, cautthIe puDhavIe, paMcamIe
puDhavIe, chaTThIe puDhavIe, sattamIe puDhavIe gAhAhiM bhaanniyvvaa|[ ......]
isI prakAra Upara kI gAthAoM ke anusAra dUsarI pRthivI meM, tIsarI pRthivI meM,
cauthI pRthivI meM, pAMcavIM pRthivIM meM, chaThI pRthivI meM aura sAtavIM
pRthivI meM naraka biloM- nArakAvAsoM kI saMkhyA kahanA caahie| [isI prakAra
ukta gAthAoM ke anusAra dazoM prakAra ke bhavanavAsI devoM ke bhavanoM kI,
bAraha kalpavAsI devoM ke vimAnoM kI tathA graiveyaka aura anuttara devoM ke
vimAnoM kI bhI saMkhyA jAnanA caahie|] 585-sattamAe puDhavIe pucchaa| goyamA!
sattamAe puDhavIe aThuttarajoyaNasayasahassAI bAhallAe uvariM addhatevannaM
joyaNasahassAiM ogAhettA heTThA vi addhatevannaM joyaNasahassAiM vajjittA majhe
tisujoyaNasahassesu ettha NaM sattamAe puDhavIe neraiyANaM paMca aNuttarA
mahaimahAlayA mahAnirayA

Page #320 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Diverse Subject Elucidation] [201st Chapter, It is said that in the time of
Kal, Mahakal, Roruk, Maharoruk, and the fifth one called Apratisthan, these are
the names of the five great hells. These hells are circular (vatta) and
triangular (trayast). The Apratisthan hell in the middle is circular, and the
other four hells in the four directions are triangular. The bottom part of these
hells is shaped like a khurappa (a type of knife). These hells are inauspicious
and contain inauspicious torments. Seventh Earth: [O Bhagavan! How much area is
covered by the hells in the seventh earth?] Gautam! In the seventh earth, which
is one lakh eight thousand yojanas in extent, there are five great hells, called
Kal, Mahakal, Roruk, Maharoruk, and the fifth one called Apratisthan, located in
the middle three thousand yojanas after descending fifty-two thousand five
hundred yojanas from the top and leaving fifty-two thousand five hundred yojanas
from the bottom. 586- [O Bhagavan! How many abodes of the Asura Kumaras are
there?] Gautam! In this Ratnapraba earth, which is one lakh eighty thousand
yojanas in extent, after descending one thousand yojanas from the top and
leaving one thousand yojanas from the bottom, there are sixty-four lakh abodes
of the Asura Kumaras in the middle one lakh seventy-eight thousand yojanas.
These abodes are circular on the outside, square on the inside, and situated in
the shape of a lotus bud. They are surrounded by moats and ditches, which are
very deep. Between the moats and ditches, there are palis (walls) built. These
abodes are equipped with attalakas (upper stories), charikas (courtyards),
doors, gopuras (tower gateways), kapatas (doors), toranas (arches), prati dwaras
(gateways), and desha rupa bhagas (regions). They are equipped with yantras
(machines), musalas (pestles), bhusundhis (weapons), and shataghnis (weapons).
They are invincible against enemy armies. They are made up of forty-eight kothas
(rooms) and adorned with forty-eight vanamalas (garlands of trees). Their land
and walls are plastered with fine plaster and are smooth. They are decorated
with goshirshchandana (sandalwood) and 1. A moat is a ditch that has the same
width at the top and bottom, while a ditch is wider at the top and narrower at
the bottom.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa] [201 paNNattA, taM jahA-kAle mahAkAle rorue mahArorue
apaiTThANe nAmaM pNcme| te NaM nirayA vaTe ya taMsA y| ahe
khurappasaMThANasaMThiyA jAva asubhA naragA, asubhAo naraesu veynnaao| sAtavIM
pRthivI meM pRcchA- [bhagavan ! sAtavIM pRthivI meM kitanA kSetra avagAhana kara
kitane nArakAvAsa haiM?] gautama! eka lAkha ATha hajAra yojana bAhalyavAlI
sAtavIM pRthivI meM Upara se sAr3he bAvana hajAra yojana avagAhana kara aura
nIce bhI sAr3he bAvana hajAra yojana chor3akara madhyavartI tIna hajAra yojana
meM sAtavIM pathivI ke nArakiyoM ke pAMca anuttara, bahuta vizAla mahAnaraka
kahe gaye haiM, jaise-kAla, mahAkAla, roruka mahAroruka aura pAMcavAM
apratiSThAna nAma kA naraka hai| ye naraka vatta (gola) aura trayasta haiM.
arthAta madhyavartI apratiSThAna naraka gola AkAra vAlA hai aura zeSa cAroM
dizAvartI cAroM naraka trikoNa AkAra vAle haiN| nIce tala bhAga meM ve naraka
kSurapra (khurapA) ke AkAra vAle haiN|.....yaavt ye naraka azubha haiM aura ina
narakoM meM azubha vedanAe haiN| 586-kevaiyA NaM bhaMte! asurakumArAvAsA
paNNattA? goyamA! imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe asIuttara joyaNasayasahassa-
bAhallAe uvari egaM joyaNasahassaM ogAhettA heTThA cegaM joyaNa-sahassaM
vajjittA majjhe aTThahattari joyaNasayasahasse ettha NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
causaddhiM asurakumArAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| te NaM bhavaNA bAhiM vaTTA,
aMto cauraMsA, ahe pokkharakaNNiA-saMThANasaMThiyA ukkiNNaMtara viula-gaMbhIra-
khAya-phalihA aTTAlaya-cariSadAra-goura-kavADa-toraNa-paDiduvAra-desabhAgA
jaMta-musala-bhusaMDha-sayagghi-parivAriyA agjhA aDayAlakoTTharaiyA
aDayAlakayavaNamAlA lAulloiyamahiyA gosIsa-sarasa-rattacaMdaNa-
daddaradiNNapaMcaMgulitalA kAlAguru-pavarakuMdurukka turukkaDajhaMta-
dhUvamaghamaghetagaMdhuddhayAbhirAmA sugaMdhiyA gaMdhavaTTibhUyA acchA saNhA
laNhA ghaTThA maTThA nIrayA NimmalA vitimirA visuddhA sappabhA samarIyA saujjoyA
pAsAIyA darisaNijjA abhirUvA pddiruuvaa| evaM jaM jassa kamatI taM tassa, jaM
jaMgAhAhiM bhaNiyaM taha ceva vnnnno| bhagavan ! asurakumAroM ke AvAsa (bhavana)
kitane kahe gaye haiM? gautama! isa eka lAkha assI hajAra yojana bAhalyavAlI
ratnaprabhA pRthivI meM Upara se eka hajAra yojana avagAhana kara aura nIce eka
hajAra yojana chor3akara madhyavartI eka lAkha aThahattara hajAra yojana meM
ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke bhItara asurakumAroM ke causaTha lAkha bhavanAvAsa kahe
gaye haiN| ve bhavana bAhara gola haiM, bhItara caukoNa haiM aura nIce kamala kI
karNikA ke AkAra se sthita haiM  /  unake cAroM ora khAI aura parikhA khudI huI
haiM jo bahuta gaharI haiM  /  khAI aura parikhA ke madhya meM pAla baMdhI huI
hai| tathA ve bhavana aTTAlaka, carikA, dvAra, gopura, kapATa, toraNa,
pratidvAra, deza rUpa bhAga vAle haiM, yaMtra, mUsala, bhusuMDhI, zataghnI, ina
zastroM se saMyukta haiM  /  zatruoM kI senAoM se ajeya haiM  /  ar3atAlIsa
koThoM se racita,ar3atAlIsa vana-mAlAoM se zobhita haiN| unake bhUmibhAga aura
bhittiyA~ uttama lepoM se lipI aura cikanI haiM, gozIrSacandana aura 1. jo
Upara-nIce samAna vistAra vAlI ho vaha khAI, jo Upara caur3I aura nIce saMkar3I
ho vaha prikhaa|

Page #321 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [202] The walls of these mansions are marked with the imprint of a hand with
five fingers, made with a fragrant paste of red sandalwood. Similarly, the
staircases of these mansions are also marked with the imprint of a hand with
five fingers, made with a paste of sandalwood and red sandalwood. These mansions
are filled with the fragrance of burning incense, made with fragrant woods like
*kalaaguru*, *kundaru*, and *turushk* (loban). They are magnificent, fragrant,
and beautiful. Incense sticks are burning there. These mansions are as pure as
the sky, as radiant as crystal, extremely smooth, polished, free from dust,
clear, dark-free, pure, radiant, filled with rays, filled with cool light,
pleasing to the mind, worth seeing, beautiful, and charming.  Just as the
mansions of the Asura-Kumaras have been described, so too should the mansions of
the Naga-Kumaras and other celestial beings be described in a similar manner,
wherever appropriate. And the mansions described in the verses above should be
described in the same way.  ## 587 **Question:** How many abodes are there for
the earth-bodied beings, O Venerable One? **Answer:** There are countless abodes
for the earth-bodied beings, O Gautama! Similarly, one should know the abodes of
the water-bodied beings, up to and including humans.  **Explanation:** The
abodes of the womb-born humans are countable, but the abodes of the
*sammucchima* humans are not countable. However, it should be known that since
there is one being in each body, they are countless.  ## 588 **Question:** How
many abodes are there for the *vanavyantara* beings, O Venerable One?
**Answer:** O Gautama! On this earth, which is radiant with gems, there is a
gem-like *kanda* (core) that is a thousand yojanas thick. Above this *kanda*,
for a hundred yojanas, and below it, for a hundred yojanas, there are countless
millions of *bhoameyaka* cities, the abodes of the *vanavyantara* gods, in the
middle eight hundred yojanas. These *bhoameyaka* cities are round on the outside
and square on the inside. Just as the mansions of the *bhavana-vaasi* gods have
been described, so too should the mansions of the *vanavyantara* gods be
described. The only difference is that these mansions are adorned with flags and
garlands. They are beautiful, pleasing to the mind, worth seeing, beautiful, and
charming.  ## 589 **Question:** How many abodes are there for the *joisiya*
beings, O Venerable One? **Answer:** O Gautama!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 202] [ samavAyAGgasUtra lAlacandana ke sarasa sugandhita lepa se una bhavanoM
kI bhittiyoM para pAMcoM aMguliyoM yukta hastatala (hAtha) aMkita haiN| isI
prakAra bhavanoM kI sIr3hiyoM para bhI gozIrSacandana aura lAlacandana ke rasa
se pAMcoM aMguliyoM ke hastatala aMkita haiN| ve bhavana kAlAguru, pradhAna
kundaru aura turuSka (lobhAna) yukta dhUpa ke jalate rahane se maghamaghAyamAna,
sugandhita aura sundaratA se abhirAma ( manohara) haiN| vahAM sugandhita
agarabattiyAM jala rahI haiN| ve bhavana AkAza ke samAna svaccha haiM, sphaTika
ke samAna kAntiyukta haiM, atyanta cikane haiM, ghise hue haiM, paoNliza kiye
hue haiM, nIraja (raja - dhUli se rahita haiM) nirmala haiM, andhakAra - rahita
haiM, vizuddha (niSkalaMka) haiM, prabhA - yukta haiM, marIciyoM (kiraNoM se )
yukta haiM, udyota (zItala prakAza) se yukta haiM, mana ko prasanna karane vAle
haiM  /  darzanIya (dekhane ke yogya) haiM, abhirUpa (kAnta, sundara ) haiM aura
pratirUpa ( ramaNIya) haiN| jisa prakAra se asurakumAroM ke bhavanoM kA varNana
kiyA gayA hai, usI prakAra nAgakumAra Adi zeSa bhavanavAsI devoM ke bhavanoM kA
bhI varNana jahAM jaisA ghaTita aura upayukta ho, vaisA karanA caahie| tathA
Upara kahI gaI gAthAoM se jisake jitane bhavana batAye gaye haiM, unakA vaisA hI
varNana karanA caahie| 587 - kevaiyA NaM bhaMte! puDhavikAiyAvAsA paNNattA?
goyamA! asaMkhejjA puDhavikAiyA vAsA pnnnnttaa| evaM jAva maNussa tti  /
bhagavan! pRthivIkAyika jIvoM ke AvAsa kitane kahe gaye haiM? gautama!
pRthivIkAyika jIvoM ke asaMkhyAta AvAsa kahe gaye haiM  /  isI prakAra
jalakAyika jIvoM se lekara yAvat manuSyoM taka ke jAnanA caahie| vivecana -
garbhaja manuSyoM ke AvAsa to saMkhyAta hI hote haiM tathA sammUcchima manuSyoM
ke AvAsa nahIM hote haiM kintu pratyeka zarIra meM eka eka jIva hone se ve
asaMkhyAta haiM, itanA vizeSa jAnanA caahie| 588 - kevaiyA NaM bhaMte
vANamaMtarAvAsA paNNattA ? goyamA ! imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
rayaNAmayassa kaMDassa-joyaNasahassa - bAhallassa uvariM egaM joyaNasayaM
ogAhettA heTTha cegaM joyaNasayaM vajjettA majjhe aTThasu joyaNasaesa ettha NaM
vANamaMtarANaM devANaM tiriyamasaMkhejjA bhomejjA nagarAvAsasayasahassA paNNattA
/  te NaM bhomejjA nagarA bAhiM vaTTA aMto cauraMsA  /  evaM jahA bhavaNavAsINaM
taheva NeyavvA  /  NavaraM paDAgamAlAulA surammA pAsAIyA darisaNijjA abhiruvA
paDirUvA  /  bhagavan ! vAnavyantaroM ke AvAsa kitane kahe gaye haiM? gautama !
isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke eka hajAra yojana moTe ratnamaya kAMDa ke eka sau
yojana Upara se avagAhana kara aura eka sau yojana nIce ke bhAga ko chor3a kara
madhya ke ATha sau yojanoM meM vAnavyantara devoM ke tirache phaile hue
asaMkhyAta lAkha bhaumeyaka nagarAvAsa kahe gaye haiM  /  ve bhaumeyaka nagara
bAhara gola aura bhItara caukora haiM  /  isa prakAra jaisA bhavanavAsI devoM ke
bhavanoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai, vaisA hI varNana vAnavyantara devoM ke
bhavanoM kA jAnanA caahie| kevala itanI vizeSatA hai ki ye patAkA- mAlAoM se
vyApta haiM  /  yAvat suramya haiM, manaH ko prasanna karane vAle haiM,
darzanIya haiM, abhirUpa haiM aura pratirUpa haiN| 589 - kevaiyA NaM bhaMte!
joisiyANaM vimANAvAsA paNNattA ? goyamA ! imIse NaM

Page #322 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ Diverse Subjects Explained ] [ 203 In this Ratnaprabha earth, from the very
beautiful parts of the earth, going up seven hundred ninety yojanas, in the
oblique celestial region of one hundred ten yojanas in width, there are said to
be countless celestial mansions of the Jyotishka Devas. These celestial mansions
are bright with the effulgence emanating from them and spreading in all
directions, adorned with various kinds of gems and jewels, adorned with
victorious banners, victory banners, flags, and umbrellas, with high peaks
touching the sky, with gems embedded in their lattices. Just as a cage
(covering) immediately removes the object with its brilliance, so are they
brilliant. They are adorned with stupas of gems and gold, with expanded hundred-
petaled lotuses, with tilakas, with crescent-shaped images of gems, very smooth
inside and out, with sand-like layers of heated gold, with pleasant touch,
beautiful, pleasing to the mind, and worth seeing. Bhagavan! How many celestial
mansions of the Jyotishka Devas are said to be? Gautama! From this Ratnaprabha
earth, from the very beautiful parts of the earth, going up beyond the moon,
sun, planets, stars, and constellations, many yojanas, many hundreds of yojanas,
many thousands of yojanas [many hundreds of thousands of yojanas], many millions
of yojanas, many kotis of yojanas, and countless kotis of yojanas, far up in the
sky, in the Saudharma, Ishana, Sanatkumara, Mahendra, Brahma, Lantaka, Shukra,
Sahasrar, Anata, Pranata, Aran, Achyuta kalpas, in the Gaiveyakas and Anuttaras,
there are eighty-four lakhs, seventy-nine thousand, and twenty-three celestial
mansions of the Vaimanika Devas, it is said.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa ] [ 203 rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe bahusamaramaNijjAo
bhUmibhAgAo sattanauyAiM joyaNasayAI uDDhaM uppaittA ettha NaM
dasuttarajoyaNasayabAhalle tiriyaM joisavisae joisiyANaM devANaM asaMkhejjA
joisiyavimANAvAsA paNNattA  /  te NaM joisiyavimANAvAsA
abbhuggayabhUsiyapahasiyA vivihamaNirayaNabhatticittA vAuyavijaya - vejayaMtI-
paDAga - chattAichattakaliyA tuMgA gagaNa talamaNulihaMtasiharA jAlaMtara -
rayaNapaMjarummiliyavva maNikaNagathrubhiyAgA viyasiya sayapattapuNDarIya-tilaya
- rayaNaddhacaMdacittA aMto vAhiM ca saNhA tavaNijja-vAluA patthaDA suhaphAsA
sassirIyarUvA pasAiyA darisaNijjA  /  bhagavan ! jyotiSka devoM ke vimAnAvAsa
kitane kahe gaye haiM ? gautama! isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke bahusama ramaNIya
bhUmibhAga se sAta sau nabbai yojana Upara jAkara eka sau daza yojana bAhalya
vAle tirache jyotiSka-viSayaka AkAzabhAga meM jyotiSka devoM ke asaMkhyAta
vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiM  /  ve apane meM se nikalatI huI aura sarva dizAoM meM
phailatI huI prabhA se ujjvala haiM, aneka prakAra ke maNi aura ratnoM kI
citrakArI se yukta haiM, vAyu se ur3atI huI vijaya - vaijayantI patakAoM se aura
chatrAtichatroM se yukta haiM, gaganatala ko sparza karane vAle UMce zikhara
vAle haiM, unakI jAliyoM ke bhItara ratna lage hue haiN| jaise paMjara
(pracchAdana) se tatkAla nikAlI vastu sazrIka- camacamAtI hai baise hI ve
sazrIka  /  maNi aura suvarNa kI stUpikAoM se yukta haiM, vikasita zatapatroM
evaM puNDarIkoM (zveta kamaloM) se, tilakoM se, ratnoM ke ardhacandrAkAra citroM
se vyApta haiM, bhItara aura bAhara atyanta cikane haiM, tapAye hue suvarNa ke
samAna vAlukAmayI prastaToM yA prastAroM vAle haiM  /  sukhada sparza vAle haiM,
zobhAyukta haiM, mana ko prasanna karane vAle aura darzanIya haiN| 590 - kevaiyA
NaM bhaMte! vemANiyAvAsA paNNattA ? goyamA ! imIse NaM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
bahusamaramaNijjAo bhUmibhAgAo uDDhaM caMdima-sUriya-gahagaNa - nakkhatta-
tArArUvANaM vIivaittA bahUNi joyaNANi bahUNi joyaNasayANi bahUNi joyaNasahassANi
[ bahUNi joyaNasaMyasahassANi ] bahuio joyaNakoDIo bahuio joyaNakoDAkoDIa
asaMkhejjAo joyaNakoDAkoDIo uDDhaM dUraM vIivaittA ettha NaM vemANiyANaM devANaM
sohammIsANaMsaNaMkumAra- mAhiMda-baMbha-laMtaga-sukka sahassAra- ANaya- pANaya-
AraNa-accuesu gevejjamaNuttaresu ya caurAsIiM vimANAvAsasayasahassA sattANauI ca
sahassA tevIsaM ca vimANA bhvNtiitimkkhaayaa| bhagavan! vaimAnika devoM ke
kitane AvAsa kahe gaye haiM ? gautama ! isI ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke bahusama
ramaNIya bhUmibhAga se Upara, candra, sUrya, grahagaNa, nakSatra aura tArakAoM
ko ullaMghana kara, aneka yojana, aneka zata yojana, aneka sahasra yojana [
aneka zatasahasra yojana] aneka koTi yojana, aneka koTAkoTI yojana aura
asaMkhyAta koTA- koTI yojana Upara bahuta dUra taka AkAza kA ullaMghana kara
saudharma, IzAna, sanatkumAra, mAhendra, brahma, lAntaka, zukra, sahasrAra,
Anata, prANata, AraNa, acyuta kalpoM meM, gaiveyakoM meM aura anuttaroM meM
vaimAnika devoM ke caurAsI lakha sattAnavai hajAra aura teIsa vimAna haiM, aisA
kahA gayA hai|

Page #323 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[204] The Vimanas are radiant like the sun's rays, luminous like masses of
light, free from natural impurities (araja), free from acquired impurities
(niraja), pure, devoid of darkness, immaculate, filled with rays, radiant,
pleasing to the mind, visible, beautiful, and perfect.  [592] "O Venerable One!
How many Vimanas are said to be in the Saudharma Kalpa?" "Gautama! Thirty-two
million Vimanas are said to be in the Saudharma Kalpa. Similarly, in the
remaining Kalpas, starting with the Ishana Kalpa, the number of Vimanas
decreases progressively as follows: twenty-eight million, twelve million, eight
million, four million, fifty thousand, six hundred, four hundred in the Anata
Pranat Kalpa, and three hundred in the Aranam-Achyuta Kalpa. (The Vimanas of the
Graiveyakas and the Anuttara Devas should also be understood according to the
previous verse 7)."  [593] "O Venerable One! For how long are the Narakas said
to be in their state?" "Gautama! The lowest state is said to be for ten thousand
years, and the highest state is said to be for thirty-three Sagaropama." "O
Venerable One! For how long are the Aparjattaka Narakas said to be in their
state?" "Gautama! The lowest state is said to be for an Antarmuhurta, and the
highest state is also said to be for an Antarmuhurta." "The lowest state of the
Parjattaka Narakas is for ten thousand years minus an Antarmuhurta, and the
highest state is for thirty-three Sagaropama minus an Antarmuhurta. Similarly,
from this Ratnapraba Earth to the Mahatamahpraba Earth, the lowest and highest
states of the Aparjattaka Narakas are for an Antarmuhurta, and the state of the
Parjattaka Narakas is for the normal, lowest, and highest states of that
particular Earth minus an Antarmuhurta."  (Similarly, the duration of the states
of the Bhavanavasis, Vanavyantaras, Jyotishkas, Kalpavasis, and Graiveyakavasi
Devas should be understood...)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 204] [samavAyAGgasUtra 591 - te NaM vimANA accimAlippabhA bhAsarAsivaNNAbhA
arayA nirayA NimmalAvitimirA visuddhA savvarayaNAmayA acchA saNhA ghaTTA maTThA
NippaMkA NikkaMkaDacchAyA sappabhA samarIyA saujjoyA pAsAIyA darisaNijjA
abhirUvA pddiruuvaa| ve vimAna sUrya kI prabhA ke samAna prabhAvAle haiM,
prakAzoM kI rAziyoM (puMjoM) ke samAna bhAsura haiM, araja (svAbhAvika raja se
rahita) haiM, nIraja (Agantuka raja se vihIna) haiM, nirmala haiM,
andhakArarahita haiM, vizuddha haiM, marIci-yukta haiM, udyota-sahita haiM, mana
ko prasanna karane vAle haiM, darzanIya haiM, abhirUpa haiM aura pratirUpa haiN|
592-sohamme NaM bhaMte! kappe kevaiyA vimANAvAsA paNNattA ? goyamA! battIsaM
vimANAvAsasayasahassA pnnnnttaa| evaM IsANAisu aTThAvIsa vArasa aTTha
cattArieyAiMsayasahassAI paNNAsaM cattAlIsaM cha-eyAiMsahassAiM ANae pANae
cattAri AraNacyue tinni eyANi sayANi evaM gAhAhiM bhaanniyvvN| bhagavan !
saudharma kalpa meM kitane vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiM? gautama! saudharma kalpa
meM battIsa lAkha vimAnAvAsa kahe gaye haiN| isI prakAra IzAnAdi zeSa kalpoM meM
sahasrAra taka kramazaH pUrvokta gAthAoM ke anusAra aTThAIsa lAkha, bAraha
lAkha, ATha lAkha, cAra lAkha, pacAsa hajAra, chaha sau tathA Anata prANata
kalpa meM cAra sau aura AraNaM-acyuta kalpa meM tIna sau vimAna kahanA caahie|
[graiveyaka aura anuttara devoM ke vimAna bhI pUrvokta gAthAGka 7 ke anusAra
jAnanA caahie| 593-neraiyANaM bhaMte! kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI panattA ? goyamA!
jahanneNaM dasavAsasahassAI, ukkoseNaM tettIsaM sAgarovamAI ThiI pnnttaa|
apajjattagANaM neraiyANaM bhaMte! kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI patratA ? jahanneNaM
aMtomuhurA, ukkoseNaM vi aNtomuhuttN| pajjattagANaM jahanneNaM dasavAsasahassAI
aMtomuhuttUNAI, ukkoseNaM tettIsaM sAgarovamAiM aNtomuhuttuunnaaii| imIse NaM
rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe evaM jaav| bhagavan ! nArakoM kI sthiti kitane kAla kI
kahI gaI hai ? gautama! jaghanya sthiti daza hajAra varSa kI aura utkRSTa sthiti
tetIsa sAgaropama kI kahI gaI hai| bhagavana! aparyAptaka nArakoM kI kitane kAla
kI sthiti kahI gaI hai? [gautama!] jaghanya bhI antarmuhUrta kI aura utkRSTa bhI
sthiti antarmuhUrta kI kahI gaI hai| paryAptaka nArakiyoM kI jaghanya sthiti
antarmuhUrta kama daza hajAra varSa kI aura utkRSTa sthiti antarmuhUrta kama
tetIsa sAgaropama kI hai| isI prakAra isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI se lekara
mahAtamaHprabhA pRthivI taka aparyAptaka nArakiyoM kI jaghanya aura utkRSTa
sthiti antarmuhUrta kI tathA paryAptakoM kI sthiti vahA~ kI sAmAnya, jaghanya
aura utkRSTi sthiti se antarmuhUrta antarmuhUrta kama jAnanA caahie| [isI
prakAra bhavanavAsiyoM, vAnavyantaroM, jyotiSkoM, kalpavAsiyoM aura
graiveyakavAsI devoM kI

Page #324 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Various Subjects Explained] [205 According to the Prajnapti Sutra, one should
know the sufficient and insufficient time, future, inferior and superior
conditions.] 594 - How long is the duration of the gods of the Vijay, Vaijayant,
Jayant, and Aparajit vimanas? Gautama! The inferior condition is said to be
thirty-two sagaropama, and the superior condition is said to be thirty-three
sagaropama. All the gods in the Anuttara vimanas, which are called
Sarvarthasiddha, are said to have a duration of thirty-three sagaropama, without
any distinction between inferior and superior. - Discussion - In the five
Anuttara vimanas, one should know the duration of the gods who are less than an
antarmuhurta in the inferior and superior conditions. And one should know the
inferior and superior conditions of all the gods in terms of insufficient time,
which is an antarmuhurta. 595 - How many bodies are there, Bhagavan? Gautama!
There are five bodies, namely - Audarik, Vaikriya, Aharak, Taijas, and Karman.
596 - How many types of Audarik bodies are there, Bhagavan? Gautama! There are
five types. For example, one-sense Audarik body, up to five-sense Audarik body,
which is the human body born from the womb. 597 - What is the extent of the
body-absorption of the Audarik body, Bhagavan? Gautama! The inferior body-
absorption is said to be an infinitesimal part of an angula, and the superior
body-absorption is said to be a thousand yojanas, which is slightly more than
the body-absorption of the Badar plant.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa] [205 paryAptaka-aparyAptaka kAla-bhAvI jaghanya aura
utkRSTa sthiti prajJApanAsUtra ke anusAra jAnanA caahie|] 594-vijaya-vejayaMta-
jayaMta-aparAjiyANaM devANaM kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI pannattA? goyamA! jahanneNaM
battIsaM sAgarovamAiM, ukkoseNaM tettIsaM saagrovmaaiN| savvaDhe
ajahaNNamaNukkoseNaM tettIsaM sAgarovamAiM ThiI pnnttaa| bhagavan ! vijaya,
vaijayanta, jayanta, aparAjita vimAnavAsI devoM kI sthiti kitane kAla kI kahI
gaI hai? gautama! jaghanya sthiti battIsa sAgaropama aura utkRSTa sthiti tetIsa
sAgaropama kahI gaI hai| sarvArthasiddha nAmaka anuttara vimAnoM meM ajaghanya-
anutkRSTa (utkRSTa aura jaghanya ke bheda se rahita) saba devoM kI tetIsa
sAgaropama kI sthiti kahI gaI haiN| - vivecana- pA~coM anuttara vimAnoM meM bhI
vahA~ kI jaghanya-utkRSTa sthiti meM se antarmuhUrta kama paryAptaka devoM kI
sthiti jAnanA caahie| tathA sabhI devoM kI aparyApta kAla sambandhI jaghanya
aura utkRSTa sthiti antarmuhUrta jAnanI caahie| 595 -kati NaM bhaMte! sarIrA
pannattA? goyamA! paMca sarIrA pannattA, taM jahA-orAlie veuvvie AhArae teyae
kmme| bhagavan ! zarIra kitane kahe gaye haiM? gautama! zarIra pAMca kahe gaye
haiM - audArika zarIra, vaikriya zarIra, AhAraka zarIra, taijasa zarIra aura
kArmaNa shriir| 596 -orAliyasarIre NaM bhaMte! kaivihe pannatte ? goyamA!
paMcavihe pnntte| taM jahAegiMdiya-orAliyasarIre jAva gabbhavakkaMtiya maNussa-
paMcidiya-orAliyasarIre y| bhagavan ! audArika zarIra kitane prakAra ke kahe
gaye haiM? gautama! pAMca prakAra ke kahe gaye haiN| jaise-ekendriya
audArikazarIra, yAvat [dvIndriya audArikazarIra, trIndriya audArikazarIra,
caturindriya audArikazarIra aura paMcendriya audArikazarIra  /  ityAdi
prajJApanokta] garbhaja manuSya paMcendriya audArikazarIra taka jAnanA caahie|
597-orAliyasarIrassaNaM bhaMte ! kemahAliyA sarIrogAhaNA paNNattA? goyamA !
jahanneNaM aMgulaasaMkhejjatibhAgaM, ukkoseNaM sAiregaM joyaNasahassaM evaM jahA
ogAhaNa-saMThANe orAliyapamANaM taha niravasesaM (bhaanniyvvN|)|evN jAva maNusse
tti ukkoseNaM tiNNi gaauyaaii| bhagavan ! audArikazarIra vAle jIva kI utkRSTa
zarIra-avagAhanA kitanI kahI gaI hai? gautama! [pRthivIkAyika Adi kI apekSA]
jaghanya zarIra-avagAhanA aMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa aura utkRSTa
zarIra-avagAhanA [bAdara vanaspatikAyika kI apekSA] kucha adhika eka hajAra
yojana kahI gaI hai|

Page #325 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[206] [Samvayanga Sutra] Just as the proof of the perception of the Audarika
body is stated in the Prajnapana-pada called Avagahana-samsthana, so it should
be said here in its entirety. Thus, as long as a human being's superior body-
perception is called three Gavyutis (kosas). 598 - How many kinds of Vaikriyika
body are there, Bhagavan? Gautama! The Vaikriyika body is said to be of two
kinds - one-sense Vaikriyika body and five-sense Vaikriyika body. Thus, from the
Sanatkumara-kalpa to the Uttara Vimanas, the Vaikriyika Bhavadharaniya body of
the Devas is to be said. It decreases by one Rani at a time. Discussion - The
Vaikriyika body is only found in the air-bodied beings among the one-sense
beings. It is not found in the विकलेन्द्रिय and सम्मूच्छिम Tiryanchas. It is
found in the Narakas, Bhavanavasis, Vanavyantara, Jyotishka Devas, Saudharma
Ishana Kalpas, and from the Sanatkumara Kalpa to the Uttara Vimanas. The
Bhavadharaniya body of the Narakas is from five hundred Dhanus in the seventh
Naraka, decreasing to seven Dhanus, three hands, and six Angulas in the first
Naraka. The Bhavadharaniya body of the Bhavanavasis, Vanavyantara, Jyotishka,
Saudharma, and Ishana Kalpa Devas is seven Ratnis or hands. The Bhavadharaniya
body of the Sanatkumara-Maheindra Devas is six hands. The Bhavadharaniya body of
the Brahma-Lantaka Devas is five hands, the Maha-Shukra-Sahasrar Devas is four
hands, the Anata-Pranata, Aran-Achyuta Devas is three hands, the Graiveyaka
Devas is two hands, and the Uttara Vimanas is one hand. The Tiryanchas who are
born from the womb, and the humans who are born from the womb, do not have a
Bhavadharaniya Vaikriyika body, but some of them have a Vaikriyika body born
from Labdhi-pratyaya. Not all of them. Even among them, it is only found in the
Karmabhumij, Sankhyata-Varsha-Ayushk, and Paryaptak beings. Answer - The
Vaikriyika body of a human being is about one hundred thousand Yojanas in
perception, and that of the Devas is one hundred thousand Yojanas in perception.
The Tiryanchas can have a perception of one hundred separate Yojanas at the
most. 599 - How many kinds of Aharaya body are there, Bhagavan? Gautama! It is
of one kind. It is of one kind, whether it is a human Aharaya body or a non-
human Aharaya body? Gautama! It is a human Aharaya body, not a non-human Aharaya
body. If it is a human Aharaya body, is it a गर्भवक्कं Tiryancha Aharaya body, a
संमुच्छिम human Aharaya body? Gautama! It is not a गर्भवक्कं Tiryancha Aharaya
body, nor a संमुच्छिम human Aharaya body. If it is a गर्भवक्कं Tiryancha Aharaya
body, is it a Karmabhumig or Akarmabhumig? Gautama! It is a Karmabhumig, not an
Akarmabhumig.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 206 ] [ samavAyAGgasUtra isa prakAra jaise avagAhanA saMsthAna nAmaka
prajJApanA- pada meM audArikazarIra kI avagAhanA kA pramANa kahA gayA hai, vaisA
hI yahAM sampUrNa rUpa se kahanA caahie| isa prakAra yAvat manuSya kI utkRSTa
zarIra- avagAhanA tIna gavyUti (koza) kahI gaI hai| 598 - kaivihe NaM bhaMte!
veDavviyasarIre pannatte ? goyamA ! duvihe pannatte - egiMdiyaveuvviyasarIre ya
paMciMdiya - veDavviyasarIre a  /  evaM jAva saNakumAre ADhattaM jAva
anuttarANaM bhavadhAraNijjA jAva tesiM rayaNI parihAyai  /  bhagavan!
vaikriyikazarIra kitane prakAra kA kahA gayA hai ? gautama ! vaikriyikazarIra do
prakAra kA kahA gayA hai - ekendriya vaikriyikazarIra aura paMcendriya
vaikiyikazarIra  /  isa prakAra yAvat sanatkumAra-kalpa se lekara anuttara
vimAnoM taka ke devoM kA vaikriyika bhavadhAraNIya zarIra kahanA  /  vaha
kramazaH eka-eka rani kama hotA hai  /  vivecana - vaikriyikazarIra ekendriyoM
meM kevala vAyukAyika jIvoM ke hI hotA hai| vikalendriya aura sammUcchima
tiryaMcoM ke vaha nahIM hotA  /  nArakoM meM, bhavanavAsI, vAnavyantara,
jyotiSka devoM meM, saudharma IzAna kalpoM ke devoM meM aura sanatkumArakalpa se
lekara anuttara vimAnavAsI devoM taka vaikriyika zarIra hotA hai  /  nArakoM kA
bhavadhAraNIya zarIra sAtaveM naraka meM pA~ca sau dhanuSa se lekara ghaTatA huA
prathama naraka meM sAta dhanuSa, tIna hAtha aura chaha aMgula hotA hai  /
bhavanavAsI, vAnavyantara, jyotiSka, saudharma aura IzAna kalpavAsI devoM kA
bhavadhAraNIya zarIra sAta ratni yA hAtha hotA hai  /  sanatkumAra- mAhendra
devoM kA bhavadhAraNIya zarIra chaha hAtha hotA hai  /  brahma-lAntaka devoM kA
pA~ca hAtha, mahAzukra - sahasrAra devoM kA cAra hAtha, Anata-prANata, AraNa-
acyuta devoM kA tIna hAtha, graiveyaka devoM kA do hAtha aura anuttara
vimAnavAsI devoM kA bhavadhAraNIya zarIra eka hAtha hotA hai| jo tiryaMca
garbhaja haiM, aura jo manuSya garbhaja haiM, unake bhavadhAraNIya vaikriyika
zarIra nahIM hotA hai, kintu labdhipratyaya-janita vaikriyika zarIra hI kisI-
kisI ke hotA hai| sabameM nhiiN| unameM bhI vaha karmabhUmija,
saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka aura paryAptaka jIvoM ke hI hotA hai  /  uttara - vaikriyika
zarIra manuSya ke utkRSTa kucha adhika eka lAkha yojana kI avagAhanAvAlA hotA
hai aura devoM ke eka lAkha yojana avagAhanA vAlA  /  tiryaMcoM ke utkRSTa sau
pRthaktva yojana avagAhanA vAlA ho sakatA hai| 599-AhArayasarIre NaM bhaMte!
kaivihe pannatte ? goyamA ! egAkAre pannatte  /  jar3a egAkAre pannatte, kiM
maNussa AhArayasarIre amaNussa AhArayasarIre ? goyamA ! maNussa AhAragasarIre,
No amaNussa AhAragasarIre  /  evaM jai maNussa AhAragasarIre, kiM gabbhavakkaM
tiyamaNussa AhAragasarIre, saMmucchimamaNussa AhAragasarIre ? goyamA!
gabbhavakkaMtiya- maNussa AhArayasarIre no saMmucchima maNussa AhArayasarIre  /
mai gabbhavakkaMtiya- maNussa AhArayasarIre, kiM kammabhUmiga0 akammabhUmiga0 ?
goyamA ! kammabhUmiga0, no akammabhUmiga0  /

Page #326 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Various Subjects Explained] [207 Jain Karmabhumi, is it numbered-life-span or
unnumbered-life-span? Gotama! It is numbered-life-span, not unnumbered-life-
span. If it is numbered-life-span, is it limited or unlimited? Gotama! It is
limited, not unlimited. If it is limited, is it right-view, wrong-view, or
right-and-wrong-view? Gotama! It is right-view, not wrong-view, not right-and-
wrong-view. If it is right-view, is it concentrated, unconcentrated, or
concentrated-unconcentrated? Gotama! It is concentrated, not unconcentrated, not
concentrated-unconcentrated. If it is concentrated, is it mindful-concentration,
unmindful-concentration, or mindful-unmindful-concentration? Gotama! It is
mindful-concentration, not unmindful-concentration. If it is mindful-
concentration, is it determined or undetermined? Gotama! It is determined, not
undetermined. These things have been explained.] Lord! How many types of food-
body are there? Gotama! The food-body is said to be of only one type. Lord! If
it is said to be of only one type, then is it a human-food-body or a non-human-
food-body? Gotama! It is a human-food-body, not a non-human-food-body. Lord! If
it is a human-food-body, then is it a womb-born human-food-body or a non-womb-
born human-food-body? Gotama! It is a womb-born human-food-body, not a non-womb-
born human-food-body. Lord! If it is a womb-born human-food-body, then is it a
karmabhumi womb-born human-food-body or a non-karmabhumi womb-born human-food-
body? Gotama! It is a karmabhumi womb-born human-food-body, not a non-karmabhumi
womb-born human-food-body. Lord! If it is a karmabhumi womb-born human-food-
body, then is it a numbered-year-lifespan karmabhumi womb-born human-food-body
or an unnumbered-year-lifespan karmabhumi womb-born human-food-body? Gotama! It
is a numbered-year-lifespan karmabhumi womb-born human-food-body, not an
unnumbered-year-lifespan karmabhumi womb-born human-food-body. Lord! If it is a
numbered-year-lifespan karmabhumi womb-born human-food-body, then is it a
sufficient-numbered-year-lifespan karmabhumi womb-born human-food-body or an
insufficient-numbered-year-lifespan karmabhumi womb-born human-food-body?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa] [207 jai kammabhUmiga0, kiM saMkhejjavAsAuya0
asaMkhejjavAsAuya0? goyamA! saMkhenjavAsAuya0, no asaMkhejjavAsAuya0? jai
saMkhejjavAsAuya0, kiM pajjattaya0 apajjattaya0? goyamA! pajjattaya0, no
apajjattaya0  /  jai pajjattaya0 kiM sammaTTiI0 micchadiTThI0
sammAmicchadiTThI0? goyamA! smmdditttthii| no micchadiTThI no
smmaamicchditttthii| jai sammadiTThI0 kiM saMjaya0 asaMjaya0 saMjayAsaMjaya0?
goyamA! saMjaya0, no asaMjaya0 no sNjyaasNjy0| jaDa saMjaya0 kiM
pamattasaMjaya0. appamattasaMjaya? goyamA! pamattasaMjaya0, no apmttsNjy0| jai
pamattasaMjaya0, kiM iDDipatta0 aNiDDipatta ? goyamA! iDipatta0, no anniddiptt0|
vayaNA vi bhaanniyvvaa|| bhagavan ! AhArakazarIra kitane prakAra kA hotA hai ?
gautama! AhAraka zarIra eka hI prakAra kA kahA gayA hai| bhagavan yadi eka hI
prakAra kA kahA gayA to kyA vaha manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai athavA
amanuSyaAhArakazarIra hai| gautama! manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai, amanuSya-
AhArakazarIra nahIM hai| bhagavan ! yadi vaha manuSya-AhAraka zarIra hai to kyA
vaha garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhAraka zarIra hai athavA sammUrchima manuSya-
AhArakazarIra hai? gautama! vaha garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhAraka zarIra hai,
sammUcchima manuSya-AhAraka zarIra nahIM hai| bhagavan ! yadi vaha
garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhAraka zarIra hai, to kyA vaha karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai, athavA akarmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai ? gautama! karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai, akarmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika
manuSyaAhArakazarIra nahIM hai| bhagavan ! yadi karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika
manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai, to kyA vaha saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai athavA asaMkhyAtavarSAyuSka
karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai? gautama! saMkhyAta
varSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai, asaMkhyAta-
varSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhArakazarIra nahIM hai| _
bhagavan ! yadi saMkhyAta-varSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya
AhArakazarIra hai, to kyA vaha paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai athavA aparyAptaka
saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai ?

Page #327 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Samvayanga Sutra Gautama! A human being with a food-consuming body, who has
entered the womb and has a lifespan of sufficient years, is a karma-bhoomi. A
human being with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of insufficient years, is not a karma-bhoomi. 208] Bhagavan! If he is a
karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of sufficient years, then is he a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming
body, who has entered the womb and has a lifespan of sufficient years, with
right faith, or is he a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered
the womb and has a lifespan of sufficient years, with wrong faith, or is he a
karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of sufficient years, with both right and wrong faith? Gautama! He is a
karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith, not a karma-bhoomi with a food-
consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a lifespan of sufficient years,
with wrong faith, and not a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has
entered the womb and has a lifespan of sufficient years, with both right and
wrong faith. Bhagavan! If he is a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who
has entered the womb and has a lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith,
then is he a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb
and has a lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith and restrained, or is
he a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith and unrestrained, or is he a
karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of sufficient years, with both restrained and unrestrained? Gautama! He
is a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith and restrained, not a karma-
bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a lifespan
of sufficient years, with right faith and unrestrained, and not a karma-bhoomi
with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a lifespan of
sufficient years, with both restrained and unrestrained. Bhagavan! If he is a
karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith and restrained, then is he a
karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith, restrained, and heedless, or is
he a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith, restrained, and mindful?
Gautama! He is a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the
womb and has a lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith, restrained, and
heedless, not a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the
womb and has a lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith, restrained, and
mindful. Bhagavan! If he is a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has
entered the womb and has a lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith,
restrained, and heedless, then is he a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body,
who has entered the womb and has a lifespan of sufficient years, with right
faith, restrained, heedless, and possessing supernatural powers, or is he a
karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith, restrained, heedless, and not
possessing supernatural powers? Gautama! He is a karma-bhoomi with a food-
consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a lifespan of sufficient years,
with right faith, restrained, heedless, and possessing supernatural powers, not
a karma-bhoomi with a food-consuming body, who has entered the womb and has a
lifespan of sufficient years, with right faith, restrained, heedless, and not
possessing supernatural powers.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ samavAyAGgasUtra gautama! paryApta saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya-AhArakazarIra hai, aparyAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka
karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya - AhArakazarIra nahIM hai| 208] bhagavan!
yadi vaha paryAtaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika munaSya -
AhAraka zarIra hai, to kyA vaha samyagdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAta-varSAyuSka
karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya AhArakazarIra hai, athavA mithyAdRSTi
paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya AhAraka
zarIra hai athavA samyagmithyAdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAta varSAyuSka karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya- AhAraka zarIra hai ? gautama ! vaha samyagdRSTi
paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya- AhAraka
zarIra hai, na mithyAdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya AhAraka zarIra hai aura na samyagmithyAdRSTi paryAptaka
saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya- AhAraka zarIra hai|
bhagavan ! yadi vaha samyagdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSyaAhArakazarIra hai, to kyA vaha saMyata
samyagdRSTiparyAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika
manuSyaAhArakazarIra hai, athavA asaMyata samyagdRSTi paryAptaka
saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSyaAhArakazarIra hai
athavA saMyatAsaMyata paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSyaAhArakazarIra hai ? gautama! vaha saMyata samyagdRSTi
paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya
AhArakazarIra hai, na asaMyata samyagdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka
karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya AhArakazarIra hai aura na saMyatAsaMyata
paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya
AhArakazarIra hai| bhagavan! yadi vaha saMyata samyagdRSTi paryAptaka
saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSyaAhArakazarIra hai, to
kyA pramattasaMyata samyagdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya- AhArakazarIra hai, athavA apramattasaMyata samyagdRSTi
paryAptaka saMkhyAttavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya-
AhArakazarIra hai ? gautama! vaha pramattasaMyata samyagdRSTi paryAptaka
saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSyaAhArakazarIra hai,
apramattasaMyata samyagdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya AhArakazarIra nahIM hai  /  bhagavan! yadi vaha
pramattasaMyata samyagdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya- AhArakazarIra hai, to kyA vaha RddhiprApta
pramattasaMyata samyagdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAta-varSAyuSka karmabhUmija
garbhopakrAntika manuSya- AhArakazarIra hai athavA anRddhiprApta pramattasaMyata
samyagdRSTi paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmi garbhopakrAntika manuSya -
AhArakazarIra hai ? gautama ! yaha RddhiprApta pramattasaMyata samyagdRSTi
paryAptaka saMkhyAtavarSAyuSka karmabhUmija garbhopakrAntika manuSya -
AhArakazarIra hai, anRddhiprApta pramattasaMyata samyagdRSTi paryAptaka
saMkhyAta varSAyuSka karmabhUmija pakrAntika manuSya - AhArakazarIra nahIM hai
/

Page #328 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Diverse Subject Elucidation  [209 Conclusion - This Aharakaya (food body)
belongs to a Pramattasanyata (distractedly restrained) Muni (ascetic) who has
attained Siddhi (perfection) and resides in the sixth Gunasthan (stage of
spiritual progress). In the original text, the reading is 'Vayana Vibhaniyabva',
which means, "What is the Aharakaya?" The answers given by Bhagwan Mahavir to
the questions asked by Gautam Swami related to this are indicated by a circle
(०) after the words 'Kammabhumig.' etc. in the original text. These are the
words that are indicated to be spoken, which have been fully translated above.
600 - Aharayasarira Samachauransasanthanasanthiee. This Aharakaya is of a square
shape.  Discussion - When a Chaturdasha Purvadhara (fourteen-fold)
Apratmattasanyata (perfectly restrained) Muni who has attained Siddhi has a
doubt about a deep and subtle principle while in meditation, and there is no
Kevali Bhagwan (omniscient being) in that area, then they acquire the Aharakaya
karma. As soon as they become Pramattasanyata, a white, human-shaped effigy
emerges from their head, devoid of blood, flesh, and bones, with one hand. It
goes to where the Kevali Bhagwan resides and touches their feet. As soon as it
touches, it returns and enters the head of the Mahamuni, and their doubt is
resolved. The acquisition, emergence, and entry of this Aharakaya happens in a
single Antarmuhurta (moment). The special feature is that its binding or
acquisition happens in the seventh Gunasthan, and its emergence, entry, etc.
happen in the sixth Gunasthan.  601 - Aharayasarirass Kemahalia Sarirogahana
Pannatta? Goyama! Jahanane Deesuna Rayani, Ukkosena Padipunna Rayani. Bhagwan!
How big is the Sarirogahana (body-absorption) of the Aharakaya said to be?
Gautam! The minimum absorption is said to be less than one Ratni (hand), and the
maximum absorption is said to be a full Ratni.  602 - Teaasarira Nam Bhante
Kativihe Pannatte? Goyama! Panchvihe Pannatte Egi Diya Teyasarira, Vi-Ti-Chaou-
Panch ०. Evam Jav ०. Bhagwan! How many types of Tejasasarira (radiant body) are
said to be?  Gautam! Five types are said to be - Ekaindriyatayasasarira (one-
sense radiant body), Dwiindriyatayasasarira (two-sense radiant body),
Triindriyatayasasarira (three-sense radiant body), Chaturindriyatayasasarira
(four-sense radiant body), and Panchendriyatayasasarira (five-sense radiant
body). In this way, one should know up to Aran-Achyut Kalpa (a period of time).
Discussion - In this Sutra, by mentioning the five types of Tejasasarira in
relation to Ekaindriya, etc., it is indicated that the remaining Tejasasarira
should be known according to the Prajnapanasutra. According to that, it is given
here:  [Bhagwan! How many types of Ekaindriyatayasasarira are said to be?]
Gautam! Five types are said to be. For example, Prithvikaaya
Ekaindriyatayasasarira (earth-bodied one-sense radiant body), Apkaayik
Ekaindriyatayasasarira (water-bodied one-sense radiant body), etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa] [209 upasaMhAra-yaha AhArakazarIra RddhiprApta chaThe
guNasthAnavartI pramattasaMyata muni ko hotA hai| isa sthala para mUlasUtra meM
vayaNA vi bhANiyabvA' pATha hai, usakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki mUla pATha meM
AhArakazarIra kisake hotA hai? isase saMbaddha gautama svAmI dvArA kiye gaye
praznoM ke bha. mahAvIra ne jo uttara diye haiM unheM mUla meM 'kammabhUmiga.'
Adi padoM ke Age gola bindu (0) diye gaye haiM, unase sUcita vacanoM ko kahane
ke lie saMketa kiyA gayA hai, jise Upara anuvAda meM pUrA diyA hI gayA hai|
600-AhArayasarIre smcurNssNtthaannsNtthie| yaha AhAraka zarIra
samacaturasrasaMsthAna vAlA hotA hai| vivecana-jaba kisI caturdaza pUrvadhara
apramatta saMyata RddhiprApta muni ko dhyAnAvasthA meM kisI gahana sUkSma tattva
ke viSaya meM koI zaMkA ho aura usa samaya usa kSetra meM kevalI bhagavAn kA
abhAva ho taba ve AhArakazarIra nAmakarma kA upArjana karate haiM aura
pramattasaMyata hote hI unake mastaka se rakta-mAMsa, haDDI Adi se rahita eka
hAtha kA dhavala varNa vAlA manuSya ke AkAra kA sarvAGga-sampUrNa putalA
nikalatA hai aura jahAM bhI kevalI bhagavAn virAjate hoM, vahAM jAkara unake
caraNa-kamaloM kA sparza karatA hai aura sparza karate hI vaha vahAM se vApisa
Akara mahAmuni ke mastaka meM praveza karatA hai aura unakI zaMkA kA samAdhAna
ho jAtA hai| isa AhArakazarIra ke arjana, nirgamana aura praveza kI kriyA eka
antarmuhUrta meM sampanna ho jAtI hai| vizeSatA yahI hai ki isakA bandha yA
upArjana to sAtaveM guNasthAna meM hotA hai aura udaya yA nirgamana aura praveza
Adi kI kriyA chaThe guNasthAna meM hotI hai| 601-AhArayasarIrassa kemahAliyA
sarIrogAhaNA pannattA? goyamA! jahaNaNeNaM desUNA rayaNI, ukkoseNaM paDipuNNA
rynnii| bhagavan ! AhArakazarIra kI kitanI bar3I zarIra-avagAhanA kahI gaI hai?
gautama ! jaghanya avagAhanA kucha kama eka ratni (hAtha) aura utkRSTa avagAhanA
paripUrNa eka ratni kahI gaI hai| 602-teAsarIre NaM bhaMte kativihe pannatte ?
goyamA! paMcavihe pannatteegidiya teyasarIre, vi-ti-cu-pNc0| evaM jaav0|
bhagavan ! taijasazarIra kitane prakAra kA kahA gayA hai? gautama ! pAMca
prakAra kA kahA gayA hai - ekendriyaMtaijasazarIra, dvIndriyataijasazarIra,
trIndriyataijasazarIra, caturindriyataijasazarIra aura paMcendriyataijasazarIra
/  isa prakAra AraNa-acyuta kalpa taka jAnanA caahie| vivecana- isa sUtra meM
ekendriyAdi kI apekSA taijasazarIra ke pAMca bheda kahakara zeSa taijasa zarIra
kI vaktavyatA ko prajJApanAsUtra ke anusAra jAnane kI sUcanA kI hai, usake
anusAra yahAM dI jAtI hai [bhagavan ! ekendriyataijasa zarIra kitane prakAra ke
kahe gaye haiM?] gautama ! pAMca prakAra ke kahe gaye haiN| jaise- pRthivIkAya
ekendriyataijasazarIra, apkAyika ekendriya

Page #329 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[210] [Samvayanga Sutra] Tejasasarira, Tejaskaayika Ekendiyatejasasarira,
Vaayukaayika Ekendiyatejasasarira and Vanaspatikaayika Ekendiyatejasasarira. In
the same way, one should know up to the Maranantaik Samudghatagat Avgahana of
the Graiveyak Devas. Here, the Sutrakar has not described the Tejasasarira of
the remaining beings, but has indicated the meaning of the Sutra according to
the Prarupana formulated in the Prajnapanasutra by the word "Yavat". The
intention here is that one should know the Avgahana of the Tejasasarira and the
Karmanasarira as much as the Avgahana of the body of the being in its natural
state or in a special state like Samudghat, etc. One should know from the
Prajnapanasutra which beings of which गति have a low and high physical Avgahana,
and which beings assume how many dimensions and extents in the state of
Samudghat. 603 - "Bante! How big is the Avgahana of the body of the Graiveyak
Deva who has attained the Maranantaik Samudghat, said to be equal to the Samoh?"
"Gotama! The body is said to be of the size of the body, and in terms of Aayam
(length), it is said to be as low as the Vidhyadhar श्रेणी, as high as the
villages of the Adholoka, and upwards as high as their own Vimanas, and sideways
as far as the Manushakhetra. In the same way, one should know that of the
Anuttaroppapatik Devas. In the same way, one should describe the Karmanasarira."
Discussion - In this Sutra, the Avgahana of the body of the Graiveyak Deva who
has attained the Maranantaik Samudghat is described, and information is given to
know the Avgahana of the body of the Anuttar Vimanasasi Devas and the Avgahana
of the Karmanasarira. This Sutra is a Madhya Deepak, therefore, one should know
the natural Avgahana of the body of all the beings before the Graiveyak Devas of
the Tiryanagati from Ekendiy to Panchendriya, and of the Narak, Manusya and
Devagati, and the Avgahana in the state of Maranantaik Samudghat, according to
the Prajnapanasutra. Here, a brief description is given. The Avgahana of the
Tejas and Karman bodies of the Ekendiy beings like Prithvikaayika, etc., is as
much as the low and high Avgahana of their bodies has been described. But in
terms of Maranantaik Samudghat or birth after death, the length of the regions
of the Ekendiy is from the countless parts of an Angul to the top and bottom of
the Lokanta, because the Ekendiy Prithvikaayika, etc., beings can be born in the
seventh Prithvi below and in the Ishatpragbhar named Prithvi above after death.
The Dwiindriyadi beings can be born after death up to the end of the
Tiryanagloka, therefore, the Avgahana of their Tejas-Karman body is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 210] [ samavAyAGgasUtra taijasazarIra, tejaskAyika ekendriyataijasazarIra,
vAyukAyika ekendriyataijasazarIra aura vanaspatikAyika ekendriyataijasazarIra  /
isI prakAra yAvat graiveyaka devoM ke mAraNAntika samudghAtagata avagAhanA taka
jAnA cAhie  /  ] yahAM sUtrakAra ne zeSa jIvoM ke taijasazarIra kA varNana na
karake yAvat pada se prajJApanAsUtra meM prarUpita kI prarUpaNA ke anusAra
sUtrArtha ko jAnane kI sUcanA kI hai  /  prakRta meM yaha abhiprAya hai ki jisa
jIva ke zarIra kI svAbhAvika dazA meM yA samudghAta Adi viziSTa avasthA meM
jitanI avagAhanA hotI hai, utanI hI taijasazarIra kI tathA kArmaNazarIra kI
avagAhanA jAnanA caahie| kisa kisa gati ke jIva kI zArIrika avagAhanA jaghanya
aura utkRSTa kitanI hotI hai, tathA kauna kauna se jIva samudghAta dazA meM
kitane AyAma - vistAra ko dhAraNa karate haiM, yaha prajJApanAsUtra jAnanA
caahie| 603 - gevejjassa NaM bhaMte! devassa NaM mAraNaMtiyasamugdhAeNaM
samohayassa samANassa mahAliyA sarIrogAhaNA pannattA ? goyamA !
sarIrappamANamettA vikkhaMbhabAhalleNaM, AyAmeNaM jahanneNaM ahe jAva
vijjAharaseDhIo  /  ukkoseNaM jAva aholoiyaggAmAo  /  uDDhaM jAva sayAiM
vimANAI, tiriyaM jAva maNussakhettaM  /  evaM jAva aNuttarovavAiyA  /  evaM
kammayasarIraM bhANiyavvaM  /  bhagavan ! mAraNAntika samudghAta ko prApta hue
graiveyaka deva kI zarIra - avagAhanA kitanI bar3I kahI gaI hai ? gautama !
viSkambha-bAhalya kI apekSA zarIra pramANamAtra kahI gaI hai aura AyAma (
lambAI) kI apekSA nIce jaghanya yAvat vidyAdhara- zreNI taka, utkRSTa yAvat
adholoka ke grAmoM taka tathA Upara apane vimAnoM taka aura tirachI
manuSyakSetra taka kahI gaI haiM  /  isI prakAra anuttaropapAtika devoM kI
jAnanA caahie| isI prakAra kArmaNa zarIra kA bhI varNana kahanA cAhie  /
vivecana - prastuta sUtra meM mAraNAntikasamudghAtagata graiveyaka deva kI
zArIrika avagAhanA kA varNana kara anuttara vimAnavAsI devoM kI zarIra avagAhanA
aura kArmaNa zarIra avagAhanA ko jAnane kI sUcanA kI gaI hai| yaha sUtra
madhyadIpaka hai, ataH ekendriyoM se lekara paMcendriyoM taka ke tiryaggati ke
tathA nAraka, manuSya aura devagati ke graiveyaka devoM ke pUrvavartI sabhI
jIvoM kI svAbhAvika zarIra - avagAhanA, tathA mAraNAntika samudghAtagata-
avagAhanA kA varNana prajJApanA sUtra ke anusAra jAnanA caahie| yahAM saMkSepa
se kucha likhA jAtA hai pRthivIkAyika Adi ekendriya jIvoM ke zarIroM kI jo
jaghanya aura utkRSTa avagAhanA batAI gaI hai, utanI hI unake taijasa aura
kArmaNa zarIra kI avagAhanA hotI hai  /  kintu mAraNAntika samudghAta yA
marakara utpatti kI apekSA ekendriyoM ke pradezoM kI lambAI jaghanya se aMgula
ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa aura utkarSa se Upara aura nIce lokAnta taka hotI
hai, kyoMki ekendriya pRthivIkAyika Adi jIva mara kara nIce sAtavIM pRthivI meM
aura Upara ISatprAgbhAra nAmaka pRthivI meM utpanna ho sakate haiM  /
dvIndriyAdi jIva utkarSa se tiryagloka ke anta taka mara kara utpanna ho sakate
haiM, ataH unake taijasa-kArmaNa zarIra kI

Page #330 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Diverse Subject Elucidation  [211]  The extent of **avagahana** (the range of
rebirth) should be known. The **avagahana** of a hell-being is said to be a
thousand yojanas, which is more severe than death. This is because a hell-being,
upon death, breaks through the wall of the thousand-yojana wide **paatal
kalash** (hell) and is reborn as a fish. A hell-being from the seventh hell,
upon death, can be reborn as a fish in the **lavan samudra** (salt sea) and
above. It can also be reborn as a fish in the **tirchak** (transverse)
**svayambhuramna samudra** (self-illuminated ocean) and above in the **pandak
vana** (lotus forest) pond. A human being, upon death, can be reborn in all
realms up to the **lokanta** (end of the world). Therefore, the **avagahana** of
their **taijas** (luminous) and **karman** (karmic) bodies should be known to be
that long. The **avagahana** of the **bhavanvaasi** (dwellers in mansions),
**vyantar** (intermediate), **jyotishi** (astronomers), and **soudharma**
(heavenly beings of the **ishan** kalpa) is said to be an infinitesimal part of
an angul (finger). This is because these deities, upon death, can be reborn as
one-sensed earth-bodied beings in their own **vimanas** (celestial vehicles).
Their **avagahana** should be known to extend downwards to the third earth,
transversely to the outer **vedika** (platform) of the **svayambhuramna
samudra**, and upwards to the end of the **ishtapraagbaar** (slightly forward)
earth. The **avagahana** of the **taijas** and **karman** bodies of the deities
from the **sanatkumar** kalpa to the **sahasrar** kalpa is said to be an
infinitesimal part of an angul. This is because these deities, upon death while
bathing in the ponds of the **pandak vana** and other places, are reborn as fish
there. Their **avagahana** should be known to extend downwards to the second
third of the **mahapaatal kalash** (great hell). This is because they can be
reborn as fish there due to the presence of water. Their **avagahana** should be
known to extend transversely to the end of the **svayambhuramna samudra**. Their
**avagahana** is said to extend upwards to the **achyut** heaven. This is
because the deities of the **sanatkumar** and other heavens can go to the
**achyut** heaven with the help of a **sangatik** (companion) deity and, upon
the completion of their lifespan, can die there and be reborn in the
**madhyaloka** (middle world). The **avagahana** of the deities of the **anant**
and other four heavens is said to be an infinitesimal part of an angul. This is
because if a deity from there comes to the **madhyaloka** and dies here, they
can be reborn in the womb of a human woman here. The **avagahana** of the
aforementioned deities should be known to extend downwards to the human realm.
This is because the deities of the last four heavens are reborn as humans upon
death. The **avagahana** of the **graiveyak** (heavenly beings who carry
burdens) and **anuttarvimanovaasi** (dwellers in the highest celestial vehicles)
deities should be known to extend to the **vidyadhar** (celestial beings) range
of the **vijayardha** mountain. Their **avagahana** is said to extend downwards
to the villages of the **adholoka** (lower world), transversely to the human
realm, and upwards to their own **vimanas**.  605 - "How many types of
**avadhijnana** (knowledge of the range of rebirth) are there, sir?"  "There are
two types of **avadhijnana** - **bhavapacchai** (knowledge of the cycle of birth
and death) and **kshayopasamik** (knowledge of the cessation of karma). This is
how the entire **avadhijnana** section of the **Prajnapanasutra** should be
understood."  **Discussion** - The **avadhijnana** that the sutrakar (author of
the sutra) has instructed us to know is as follows: **avadhijnana** is described
through ten doors: its types, subject, location, internal, external,
**deshavadhi** (knowledge of the range of space), growth, decline, **pratipati**
(acceptance), and **apratipati** (non-acceptance). The sutrakar has mentioned
two types of **avadhijnana**. Of these, **bhavapacchai avadhijnana** is
experienced by deities and hell-beings, while **kshayopasamik** - **gunapacchai
avadhijnana** (knowledge of the cessation of karma) is experienced by humans and
animals.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa ] [ 211 avagAhanA utanI hI jAnanI caahie| nAraka kI
maraNa kI apekSA jaghanya avagAhanA eka hajAra yojana kahI gaI hai, kyoMki
prathama naraka kA nArakI marakara hajAra yojana jhAjhorI vistRta pAtAla kalaza
kI bhitti ko bhedakara usameM matsyarUpa se utpanna ho jAtA hai  /  utkarSa se
sAtaveM naraka kA nArakI marakara Upara lavaNasamudrAdi meM matsyarUpa se
utpanna ho sakatA hai  /  tiryak svayambhUramaNa samudra taka, tathA Upara
paMDaka vana kI puSkariNI meM bhI matsyarUpa se utpanna ho sakatA hai| manuSya
marakara sarva ora lokAnta taka utpanna ho sakatA hai, ata: usake taijasa aura
kArmaNazarIra kI avagAhanA utanI lambI jAnanA caahie| bhavanavAsI, vyantara,
jyotiSI aura saudharma - IzAnakalpa ke devoM ke donoM zarIroM kI jaghanya
avagAhanA aMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa hai, kyoMki ye deva mara kara
apane hI vimAnoM meM vahIM ke vahIM ekendriya pRthivIkAyika jIvoM meM utpanna ho
sakate haiM  /  unakI utkRSTa avagAhanA nIce tIsarI pRthivI taka, tirachI
svayambhUramaNa samudra kI bAhirI vedikA ke anta taka aura Upara ISatprAgbhAra
pRthivI ke anta taka lambI jAnanA caahie| sanatkumAra kalpa se lekara
sahasrArakalpa taka ke devoM ke taijasa-kArmaNa zarIra kI jaghanya avagAhanA
aMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa kahI gaI hai, kyoMki ye deva paMDaka
vanAdi kI puSkariNiyoM meM snAna karate samaya maraNa ho jAne se vahIM
matsyarUpa se utpanna ho jAte haiM  /  utkRSTa avagAhanA nIce mahApAtAla kalazoM
ke dvitIya tribhAga taka jAnanA cAhie, kyoMki vahAM jala kA sadbhAva hone se ve
marakara matsyarUpa se utpanna ho sakate haiM  /  tirache svayambhUramaNa
samudra ke anta taka avagAhanA jAnanI caahie| Upara acyuta svarga taka avagAhanA
kahI gaI hai, kyoMki sanatkumArAdi svargoM ke deva kisI sAMgatika deva ke Azraya
se acyuta svarga taka jA sakate haiM, aura Ayu pUrNa hone para vahAM se marakara
yahAM madhyaloka meM utpanna ho sakate haiN| Anata Adi cAra svargoM ke devoM kI
jaghanya avagAhanA aMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga kahI gaI hai, kyoMki vahAM kA
deva yadi yahAM madhya loka meM AyA ho aura yahIM maraNa ho jAye to vaha yahIM
kisI manuSyanI ke garbha meM utpanna ho sakatA hai| ukta devoM kI utkRSTa
avagAhanA nIce manuSyaloka taka jAnanA cAhiye, kyoMki antima cAra svargoM ke
deva marakara manuSyoM meM hI utpanna hote haiN| graiveyaka aura
anuttaravimAnavAsI devoM kI jaghanya avagAhanAM vijayArdha parvata kI vidyAdhara
zreNI taka jAnanA cAhie  /  utkRSTa avagAhanA nIce adholoka ke grAmoM taka,
tirachI manuSya loka aura Upara apane-apane vimAnoM taka kahI gaI hai| 605 -
kaivihe NaM bhaMte! ohI pannattA? goyamA ! duvihA pannattA - bhavapaccaie ya
khaovasamie ya  /  evaM savvaM ohipadaM bhaNiyavvaM  /  bhagavan! avadhijJAna
kitane prakAra kA kahA gayA hai? gautama ! avadhijJAna do prakAra kA kahA gayA
hai- bhavapratyaya avadhijJAna aura kSAyopazamika avdhijnyaan| isa prakAra
prajJApanAsUtra kA sampUrNa avadhijJAna pada kaha lenA cAhie  /  vivecana -
sUtrakAra ne jisa avadhijJAna- pada ke jAnane kI sUcanA kI hai, vaha isa prakAra
haiavadhijJAna kA bheda, viSaya, saMsthAna, Abhyantara, bAhya, dezAvadhi,
vRddhi, hAni, pratipAti aura apratipAti ina daza dvAroM se varNana kiyA gayA
hai| sUtrakAra ne avadhijJAna ke do bheda kahe haiM, unameM se bhavapratyaya
avadhijJAna devoM aura nArakoM ko hotA hai, tathA kSAyopazamika - guNapratyaya
avadhijJAna manuSya aura tiryaMcoM ko hotA hai  /

Page #331 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [212] **The subject of Avadhijnana (clairvoyance) is of four types according
to Dravya (substance), Kshetra (space), Kala (time) and Bhava (state).**  **In
terms of Dravya, Avadhijnana perceives the Dravyas between the Tejasvargana
(luminary) and the Bhashavargana (speech) in a lesser degree, and all Dravyas in
a greater degree.**  **In terms of Kshetra, it perceives a space as small as an
infinitesimal part of an angula (finger) in a lesser degree, and a space as
large as countless divisions of the Lokapramāna (universe) in a greater
degree.**  **In terms of Kala, it perceives the past and future as small as an
infinitesimal part of an Aavali (a unit of time) in a lesser degree, and the
past and future as large as countless Utsarpini (ascending) periods in a greater
degree.**  **In terms of Bhava, it perceives the four ganas (groups) of each
Pudgala Dravya (atomic substance) in a lesser degree, and countless qualities of
each Rupa Dravya (form substance) and infinite qualities of all Rupa Dravyas in
a greater degree.**  **In terms of the institution, the size of Avadhijnana of
Narakas (hell beings) is like a Tapra (a small boat), that of Bhavanavasi Devas
(heavenly beings residing in mansions) is like a Paly (a type of musical
instrument), that of Vyantar Devas (intermediate heavenly beings) is like a
Patha (a type of musical instrument), that of Jyotishka Devas (celestial beings)
is like a Jhala (a type of ornament), that of Kalpopanna Devas (heavenly beings
born in a Kalpa) is like a Mridanga (a type of drum), that of Graiveyak Devas
(heavenly beings who are the guardians of the world) is like a Changri (a type
of musical instrument) with a flower-decorated peak, and that of Anuttar Devas
(highest heavenly beings) is like a Kanyacholaka (a type of garment). The size
of Avadhijnana of Tiryanchas (animals) and Manusyas (humans) is of various
types.**  **In terms of the inner door, it is considered which beings reside
within the area illuminated by their Avadhijnana.**  **In terms of the outer
door, it is considered which beings reside outside the area illuminated by their
Avadhijnana. For example, Narakas, Devas and Tirthankaras are within the area
illuminated by their Avadhijnana. The remaining beings are both external and
internal Avadhijnana holders.**  **In terms of the Deshavadhi door, Devas,
Narakas and Tiryanchas have only Deshavadhijnana (knowledge of a particular
region), because they know only a part of the Dravyas that are the subject of
Avadhijnana. But Manusyas have both Deshavadhi and Sarvavadhi (knowledge of all
regions). It is important to note here that Sarvavadhijnana is only possessed by
the Tadbhava (those who have attained liberation) and the Paramasanyata
(perfectly restrained), not by others.**  **In terms of the Vridhi-Hani
(increase-decrease) door, the Avadhijnana of Manusyas and Tiryanchas increases
during the time of purification of their karmas (actions) and decreases during
the time of their defilement. The Avadhijnana in the form of increase grows from
an infinitesimal part of an angula to the extent of the Lokakasha (space of the
universe). Similarly, it decreases progressively as defilement increases. But
the Avadhijnana of Devas and Narakas remains constant at the level at which it
is generated, it does not increase or decrease.**  **In terms of the Pratipati-
Apratipati (manifest-unmanifest) door, Deshavadhijnana is Pratipati (manifest)
and Sarvavadhijnana is Apratipati (unmanifest). The Bhavapratyay (karma-related)
Avadhijnana is Apratipati until the end of the Bhava (cycle of birth and death)
and becomes Pratipati after the Bhava is ended. The Kshayopaśamika (destruction
of karmas) Gunapratyay (quality-related) Avadhijnana is both Pratipati and
Apratipati.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 212] [samavAyAGgasUtra avadhijJAna kA viSaya dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva kI
apekSA cAra prakAra kA hai| inameM se dravya kI apekSA avadhijJAna jaghanyarUpa
se taijasavargaNA aura bhASAvargaNA ke agrahaNa-prAyogya (donoM ke bIca ke)
dravyoM ko jAnatA hai, tathA utkRSTa rUpa se sarva rUpI dravyoM ko jAnatA hai|
kSetra kI apekSA jaghanya aMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga pramANa kSetra ko
(kSetra meM sthita rUpI dravyoM ko) jAnatA hai aura utkRSTa lokapramANa aloka ke
asaMkhyAta khaMDoM ko jAnatA hai| kAla kI apekSA AvalikA ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga
pramANa atIta aura anAgata kAla ko (kAlavartI rUpI dravyoM ko) jAnatA hai tathA
utkRSTa rUpa se asaMkhyAta utsarpiNI pramANa atIta anAgata kAla ko jAnatA hai|
bhAva kI apekSA jaghanyarUpa se pratyeka pudgala dravya ke rUpAdi cAra gaNoM ko
jAnatA hai aura utkaSTa rUpa se pratyeka rUpI dravya ke asaMkhyAta guNoM ko
tathA sarva rUpI dravyoM kI apekSA ananta guNoM ko jAnatA hai| saMsthAna kI
apekSA nArakoM ke avadhijJAna kA AkAra tapra (DoMgI) ke samAna AkAra vAlA,
bhavanavAsI devoM kA palya ke AkAra kA, vyantara devoM kA paTaha ke AkAra kA,
jyotiSka devoM kA jhAlara ke AkAra, kalpopanna devoM kA mRdaMga ke AkAra,
graiveyaka devoM kA puSpAvalI-racita zikhara vAlI caMgerI ke samAna tathA
anuttara devoM kA kanyAcolaka ke samAna hotA hai| tiryaMcoM aura manuSyoM ke
avadhijJAna kA AkAra aneka prakAra kA hotA hai| _Abhyantara dvAra kI apekSA
kauna-kauna se jIva apane avadhijJAna se prakAzita kSetra ke bhItara rahate
haiM, isakA vicAra kiyA jAtA hai| bAhya dvAra kI apekSA kauna-kauna se jIva
avadhijJAna se prakAzita kSetra ke bAhara rahate haiM, isakA vicAra kiyA jAtA
hai| jaise- nAraka, deva aura tIrthaMkara avadhijJAna ke dvArA prakAzita kSetra
ke bhItara hote haiN| zeSa jIva bAhya avadhijJAnavAle bhI hote haiM aura
Abhyantara avadhijJAna vAle bhI hote haiN| dezAvadhi dvAra kI apekSA devoM,
nArakoM aura tiryaMcoM ko dezAvadhijJAna hI hotA hai, kyoMki ve avadhijJAna ke
viSayabhUta dravyoM ke ekadeza ko hI jAnate haiN| kintu manuSyoM ko dezAvadhi
bhI hotA aura sarvAvadhi bhI hotA hai  /  yahA~ itanA vizeSa jJAtavya hai ki
sarvAvadhijJAna tadbhava mokSagAmI parama saMyata ke hI hotA hai, anya ke nhiiN|
vRddhi-hAni dvAra kI apekSA manuSyoM aura tiryaMcoM kA avadhijJAna pariNAmoM kI
vizuddhi ke samaya bar3hatA hai aura saMkleza ke samaya ghaTatA bhI hai|
vRddhirUpa avadhijJAna aMgula ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga se bar3hakara
lokAkAzapramita kSetra taka bar3hatA jAtA hai| isI prakAra saMkleza kI vRddhi
hone para uttarottara ghaTatA jAtA hai| kintu devoM aura nArakoM kA avadhijJAna
jisa parimANa meM utpanna hotA hai, utane hI parimANa meM avasthita rahatA hai,
ghaTatA-bar3hatA nahIM hai| pratipAti-apratipAti dvAra kI apekSA dezAvadhijJAAna
pratipAti hai aura sarvAvadhijJAna apratipAti hai| bhavapratyaya avadhijJAna
bhavaparyanta apratipAti hai aura bhava chUTane ke sAtha pratipAti hai|
kSAyopazamika guNapratyaya avadhijJAna pratipAti bhI hotA hai aura apratipAti
bhI hotA hai|

Page #332 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Various Topics Explained] [213 605 - The object of pain should be known through
these doors: cold, substance, body, state, suffering, assumption, approach,
sleep, and wakefulness. ||1|| 606 - Venerable sir! Do the hell beings experience
cold pain, hot pain, or both cold and hot pain? Gautama! The hell beings
experience cold pain, thus the word pain should be said. Discussion - The object
of pain should be known through these doors: cold, etc. The word 'c' read before
the word 'cold' in the original text does not indicate the opposite pains.
Accordingly, there are three types of pain - cold pain, hot pain, and both cold
and hot pain. The hell beings of the lower earths experience only cold pain, and
the hell beings of the upper earths experience only hot pain. The living beings
of the remaining three realms experience cold pain, hot pain, and both cold and
hot pain. The word 'substance' indicates the field, time, and feeling along with
the word substance. That is, there are four types of pain - substance pain -
which is experienced in relation to the substance of matter, field pain - which
is experienced in relation to the field of hell, etc., time pain - which is
experienced in relation to the life-time of hell, etc., and is experienced for a
fixed period of time. The pain experienced from the arising of karmic pain is
called feeling pain. From hell beings to the celestial beings of the Vaimānika
realm, all living beings experience all four types of pain. With respect to the
door of 'body', pain is said to be of three types - bodily, mental, and both
bodily and mental. Some pain is only bodily, some is only mental, and some is
related to both. All sentient five-sense beings of the four realms experience
all three types of pain. But beings from one-sense to non-sentient five-sense
beings experience only bodily pain. With respect to the door of 'state', pain is
of three types - state pain, non-state pain, and both state and non-state pain.
All worldly beings experience all three types of pain. The word 'suffering'
indicates three types of pain - pleasant pain, unpleasant pain, and both
pleasant and unpleasant pain. All beings of the four realms experience all three
types of pain. Question - What is the difference between the pain mentioned in
the previous door and the pleasant-unpleasant pain mentioned in this door?
Answer - State-non-state pains occur when state-non-state karmic pain arises.
But...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa] [213 605- sIyA ya davva sArIra sAyA taha veyaNA bhave
dukkhA  /  abbhuvagamavakkamiyA NIyAe ceva aNiyAe  // 1 //  vedanA ke viSaya ke
zIta, dravya, zArIra, sAtA, duHkhA, AbhyupagamikI, aupakramikI, nidA aura anidA
itane dvAra jJAtavya haiM  // 1 //  606-neraiyA NaM bhaMte! kiM sItaM veyaNaM
veyaMti, usiNaM veyaNaM veyaMti, sItosiNaM veyaNaM veyaMti? goyamA! neraiyA0
evaM ceva veyaNApadaM bhANiyavvaM  /  bhagavan ! nArakI kyA zItavedanA vedana
karate haiM,uSNavedanA vedana karate haiM athavA zItoSNavedanA vedana karate
haiM? gautama ! nArakI zItavedanA vedana karate haiM, isa prakAra se vedanA pada
kahanA caahie| vivecana- vedanA ke viSaya meM zIta Adi dvAra jAnane ke yogya
haiN| mUla meM zIta pada ke Age paThita 'ca' zabda se nahIM kahI gaI pratipakSI
vedanAoM kI sUcanA dI gaI hai| tadanusAra vedanA tIna prakAra kI hai--
zItavedanA, uSNavedanA aura shiitossnnvednaa| nIce kI pRthiviyoM ke nArakI
kevala zItavedanA kA hI anubhava karate haiM aura Upara kI pRthiviyoM ke nArakI
kevala uSNavedanA kA hI anubhava karate haiN| zeSa tIna gati ke jIva zItavedanA
kA bhI, uSNavedanA kA bhI, aura zItoSNavedanA kA bhI vedana karate haiN|
'dravya' dvAra meM dravya pada ke sAtha, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva bhI sUcita kiye
gaye haiN| arthAt vedanA cAra prakAra kI hai-dravyavedanA-jo pudgala dravya ke
sambandha se vedana kI jAtI hai, kSetravedanA-jo nAraka Adi upapAta kSetra ke
sambandha se vedana kI jAtI hai, kAlavedanA-jo nAraka Adi ke Ayu-kAla ke
sambandha se niyata kAla taka bhogI jAtI hai| jo vedanIya karma ke udaya se
vedanA bhogI jAtI hai, use bhAvavedanA kahate haiN| nArakoM se lekara vaimAnika
devoM taka sabhI jIva cAroM prakAra kI vedanAoM ko vedana karate haiN| '
'zArIra' dvAra kI apekSA vedanA tIna prakAra kI kahI gaI hai- zArIrI, mAnasI
aura shaariirmaansii| koI vedanA kevala zArIrika hotI hai, koI kevala mAnasika
hotI hai aura koI donoM se sambaddha hotI hai| sabhI saMjJI paMcendriya cAroM
gati ke jIva tInoM hI prakAra kI vedanAoM ko bhogate haiN| kintu ekendriya se
lekara asaMjJI paMcendriya taka ke jIva kevala zArIrI vedanA ko hI bhogate haiN|
'sAtA' dvAra kI apekSA vedanA tIna prakAra kI hai - sAtA vedanA, asAtA vedanA
aura sAtA-asAtA vednaa| sabhI saMsArI jIva tInoM hI prakAra kI vedanAoM ko
bhogate haiN| 'duHkha' pada se tIna prakAra kI vedanA sUcita kI gaI hai
-sukhavedanA, duHkhavedanA aura sukhduHkhvednaa| sabhI caturgati ke jIva ina
tInoM hI prakAra kI vedanAoM kA anubhava karate haiN| prazna-pUrva dvAra meM
kahI sAtAsAta vedanA aura isa dvAra meM kahI sukha-duHkha vedanA meM kyA antara
uttara-sAtA-asAtA vedanAeM to sAtA-asAtA vedanIya karma ke udaya hone para hotI
haiN| kintu

Page #333 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **214]** [Samvayanga Sutra]  Suffering and pleasure sensations
are caused by the stimulation of karmic matter by others. Therefore, there is a
difference between their arising and stimulation. The sensation that is self-
accepted is called *abhyupgamiki* sensation. For example, self-inflicted hair
plucking, taking heat, fasting, etc. The sensation that is experienced when
karmic matter arises on its own or is obtained through stimulation is called
*aupkrami* sensation. Both these sensations are experienced by the five-sensed,
the animal, and the human. But the gods, the hell-beings, and the one-sensed to
the non-conscious five-sensed beings experience only *aupkrami* sensation. The
sensation experienced consciously and willingly is called *nida* sensation, and
the sensation experienced unconsciously or unwillingly is called *anida*
sensation. Conscious beings experience both types of sensations. But non-
conscious beings experience only *anida* sensation. One should study the thirty-
fifth *vedana* chapter of the *Prajnapanasutra* on this subject.  **607-**  "How
many *leshya* are there, Master?" "Gautama! There are six *leshya*, namely,
*krishna* *leshya*, *nila* *leshya*, *kapota* *leshya*, *tejala* *leshya*,
*padma* *leshya*, and *shukla* *leshya*. Thus, the term *leshya* should be
used." **Discussion:** At this point, the Sanskrit commentator has indicated the
need to know the seventeenth *leshya* chapter of the *Prajnapanasutra*. Due to
its extensive nature, it has not been discussed here.  **608-**  "The *anantara*
*ahari*, *abhoga* *ahari*, *anabhoga* *ahari*, those who do not know and see the
*ahari* *pudgala*, and those who know and see them, etc., are to be known as
fourfold, praiseworthy-unpraiseworthy, with determination and without
determination, and those who have attained rightness and wrongness." [1]
**Discussion:** The act of taking in the *pudgala* suitable for the body, as
soon as it is born in the *upapata* field, is called *anantara* *ahari*. All
beings, as soon as they are born, take in the *pudgala* suitable for their body.
Taking in food consciously is called *abhoga* *nirvartita*, and taking in food
unconsciously is called *anabhoga* *nirvartita*. Hell-beings take in both types
of food. Similarly, all beings should be known. Only one-sensed beings take in
*anabhoga* *nirvartita* food. The hell-beings do not know or see the *pudgala*
that they take in as food, through their *avadhi* knowledge. Similarly, the
*asura* to the three-sensed beings do not know or see the *ahari* *pudgala* that
they have taken in. The four-sensed beings have eyes...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 214] [samavAyAGgasUtra sukha-duHkha vedanAeM vedanIya karma kI dUsare ke dvArA
udIraNA karAye jAne para hotI haiM  /  ataH ina donoM meM udaya aura udIraNA
janita hone ke kAraNa antara hai| jo vedanA svayaM svIkAra kI jAtI hai, use
AbhyupagamikI vedanA kahate haiN| jaise-svayaM kezaluMcana karanA, AtApanA lenA,
upavAsa karanA aadi| jo vedanA vedanIya karma ke svayaM udaya Ane para yA
udIraNAkaraNa ke dvArA prApta hone para bhogI jAtI hai, use aupakramikI vedanA
kahate haiN| ina donoM hI vedanAoM ko paMcendriya tiryaMca aura manuSya bhogate
haiN| kintu deva, nAraka aura ekendriya se lekara asaMjJI paMcendriya taka ke
jIva kevala aupakramikI vedanA ko hI bhogate haiN| buddhipUrvaka svecchA se
bhogI jAne vAlI vedanA ko nidA vedanA kahate haiM aura abuddhipUrvaka yA anicchA
se bhogI jAne vAlI vedanA ko anidA vedanA kahate haiN| saMjJI jIva ina donoM hI
prakAra kI vedanAoM ko bhogate haiN| kintu asaMjJI jIva kevala anidA vedanA ko
hI bhogate haiN| isa viSaya meM prajJApanAsUtra ke paiMtIsaveM vedanA pada kA
adhyayana karanA caahie| 607-kai NaM bhaMte! lesAo pannattAo ? goyamA ! cha
lesAo pannattAo, taM jahAkiNhA nIlA kAU teU pamhA sukkaa| lesApayaM bhaanniyvvN|
bhagavan ! lezyAeM kitanI kahI gaI haiM? _gautama! lezyAeM chaha kahI gaI haiM,
jaise- kRSNalezyA, nIlalezyA, kApotalezyA, tejAlezyA, padmalezyA aura
shuklleshyaa| isa prakAra lezyApada kahanA caahie| vivecana- isa sthala para
saMskRtaTIkAkAra ne prajJApanAsUtra ke sattarahaveM lezyA pada ko jAnane kI
sUcanA kI hai| ativistRta hone se yahAM usakA nirUpaNa nahIM kiyA gayA hai| 608-
aNaMtarA ya AhAre AhAra bhogaNA i ya  /  poggalA neva jANaMti ajjhavasANe ya
sammatte  // 1 //  AhAra ke viSaya meM anantara-AhArI, Abhoga-AhArI, anAbhoga-
AhArI, AhAra-pudgaloM ke nahIM jAnane-dekhane vAle aura jAnane-dekhane vAle Adi
caturbhaMgI, prazasta-aprazasta, adhyavasAna vAle aura aprazasta adhyavasAna
vAle tathA samyaktva aura mithyAtva ko prApta jIva jJAtavya haiM  // 1 //
vivecana-upapAta kSetra meM utpanna hone ke sAtha hI zarIra ke yogya pudgaloM ke
grahaNa karane ko anantarAhAra kahate haiN| sabhI jIva utpanna hote hI apane
zarIra ke yogya pudgaloM ko grahaNa karate haiN| buddhipUrvaka AhAra grahaNa
karane ko Abhoga nirvartita aura abuddhipUrvaka AhAra grahaNa karane ko
anAbhoganirvartita kahate haiM  /  nArakI donoM prakAra kA AhAra grahaNa karate
haiM  /  isI prakAra sabhI jIvoM kA jAnanA caahie| kevala eMkendriya jIva
anAbhoganirvartita AhAra karate haiN| nArakI jIva jina pudgaloM ko AhAra rUpa se
grahaNa karate haiM, unheM apane avadhijJAna se bhI nahIM jAnate haiM aura na
dekhate haiM, isI prakAra asuroM se lekara trIndriya taka ke jIva bhI apane
grahaNa kiye gaye AhArapudgaloM ko nahIM jAnate-dekhate haiN| caturindriya jIva
AMkha

Page #334 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Diverse Subject Elucidation] [Even though they are 215 (in the state of being a
liberated soul), they do not see or know because they are knowledgeable of
death. The five-sensed animals and humans who are clairvoyant know and see the
food-karmic particles. The remaining beings know the projected food, but they do
not know or see the hair-food. The inner and luminous gods do not know or see
the food-karmic particles they have consumed. Among the aerial gods, those who
have right vision know and see the food-karmic particles through their specific
knowledge, but the aerial gods who have wrong vision do not know or see them. In
comparison to the door of final liberation, the places of dwelling for the
hellish beings and others are countless, both spacious and cramped. In
comparison to the door of right and wrong vision, all beings from the one-sensed
to the non-conscious five-sensed are wrong-visioned. Among the remaining beings,
some are right-visioned, some are wrong-visioned, and some are both right and
wrong-visioned. The Sutra-maker has given information about all this from verse
number one. 609- "Venerable sir! Are the hellish beings infinite-food eaters?
(At the very first moment of their birth in the realm of suffering, do they
consume the karmic particles suitable for their body?) After that, do they
perform the act of becoming (the formation of the body)? After that, do they
perform the act of assimilation (the consumption of karmic particles suitable
for their limbs and organs)? After that, do they perform the act of
transformation (the consumption of the consumed karmic particles as objects of
sound, etc.)? After that, do they perform the act of service (maintenance)? And
after that, do they perform the act of diversification (various types of
reactions)? (Is this true?)" "Yes, Gautama! It is so. (This statement is true.)
Here (as stated in the Prajnapanasutra), the word 'food' should be used." 610-
"Venerable sir! How many types of bondage of the lifespan karma are stated?"
"Gautama! The bondage of lifespan karma is stated to be of six types, such as-
the lifespan karma of the type of birth, the lifespan karma of the type of
motion, the lifespan karma of the type of position, the lifespan karma of the
type of region, the lifespan karma of the type of portion, and the lifespan
karma of the type of immersion." [Discussion] Every being, at the time of
binding the lifespan of the future birth, also binds the lifespan karma of the
type of birth suitable for that motion, also binds the lifespan karma of the
type of motion, and in the same way, also binds the lifespan karma of the type
of position, region, portion, and immersion (body karma) suitable for it. For
example, a being who is about to be born in the hell realm, at the time of
binding the lifespan of that birth, also binds the lifespan karma of the type of
birth suitable for that hell realm, also binds the lifespan karma of the type of
motion suitable for that hell realm, and in the same way, also binds the
lifespan karma of the type of position, region, portion, and immersion (body
karma) suitable for that hell realm.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa] [215 ke hone para bhI matyajJAnI hone se nahIM dekhate
aura jAnate haiN| paMcendriya tiryaMca aura manuSya jo avadhijJAnI haiM, ve
AhArapudgaloM ko jAnate aura dekhate haiN| zeSa jIva prakSepAhAra ko jAnate
haiM, lomAhAra ko nahI jAnate dekhate haiN| vyantara aura jyotiSka deva apane
grahaNa kiye gaye AhAra-pudgaloM ko na jAnate haiM aura na dekhate haiN|
vaimAnika devoM meM jo samyagdRSTi haiM ve apane-apane viziSTajJAna se AhAra-
pudagaloM ko jAnate aura dekhate haiM, kintu mithyAdRSTi vaimAnika deva nahIM
jAnate-dekhate haiN| adhyavasAna dvAra kI apekSA nAraka Adi jIvoM ke prazasta
aura aprazasta adhyavasAyasthAna asaMkhyAta hote haiN| samyaktva-mithyAtva dvAra
kI apekSA ekendriyoM se lagAkara asaMjJI paMcendriya taka ke sabhI jIva
mithyAtvI hI hote haiM, zeSa jIvoM meM kitane hI samyaktvI hote haiM, kitane hI
mithyAtvI hote haiM aura kitane hI samyagmithyAtvI bhI hote haiN| yaha saba
jAnane kI sUcanA sUtrakAra ne gAthA saMkhyA eka se kI hai| 609-neraiyA NaM
bhaMte! aNaMtarAhArA tao nivvattaNayA tao pariyAiyaNayA tao pariNAmaNayA tao
pariyAraNayA tao pacchA vikuvvaNayA? haMtA goyamA! evN| AhArapadaM bhaanniyvvN|
bhagavan ! nAraka anantarAhArI haiM? (upapAta kSetra meM utpanna hone ke
prathama samaya meM hI kyA apane zarIra ke yogya pudgaloM ko grahaNa karate
haiM?) tatpazcAt nirvartanatA (zarIra kI racanA) karate haiM? tatpazcAt
paryAdAnatA (aMga-pratyaMgoM ke yogya pudgaloM ko grahaNa) karate haiM?
tatpazcAt pariNAmanatA (gRhIta pudgaloM kA zabdAdi viSaya ke rUpa meM upabhoga)
karate haiM? tatpazcAt paricAraNA (pravIcAra) karate haiM? aura tatpazcAt
vikurvaNA (nAnA prakAra kI vikriyA) karate haiM? (kyA yaha satya hai?) hAM
gautama ! aisA hI hai| (yaha kathana satya hai|) yahAM para (prajJApanA
sUtrokta) AhAra pada kaha lenA caahie| 610-kaivihe NaM bhaMte! AugabaMdhe
pannatte? goyamA! chavvihe AugabaMdhe pannatte, taM jahA-jAinAmanihattAue
gatinAmanihattAue ThiinAmanihattAue paesanAmanihattAue aNubhAganAmanihattAue
ogaahnnaanaamnihttaaue| bhagavan ! Ayukarma kA bandha kitane prakAra kA kahA
gayA hai| gautama! Ayukarma kA bandha chaha prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaise-
jAtinAmanidhattAyuSka, gatinAmanidhattAyuSka, sthitinAmanidhattAyuSka,
pradezanAmanidhattAyuSka, anubhAganAmanidhattAyuSka aura
avgaahnaanaamnidhttaayussk| vivecanapratyeka prANI jisa samaya AgAmI bhava kI
Ayu kA bandha karatA hai, usI samaya usa gati ke yogya jAtinAmakarma kA bandha
karatA hai, gatinAmakarma kA bhI bandha karatA hai, isI prakAra usake yogya
sthiti, pradeza, anubhAga aura avagAhanA (zarIranAmakarma) kA bhI bandha karatA
hai| jaise-koI jIva isa

Page #335 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **216]** When the lifespan karma is being bound, at the same
time, the five-sense-category karma is also being bound, the heavenly-realm
karma is also being bound, the fixed-time-duration of the lifespan is also being
bound, and the fixed-quantity karma-regions are also being bound, the fixed-
taste-resultant-section, which gives intense or mild fruits, is also being
bound, and the body, which is the active-immersion in the heavenly realm, is
also being bound. From all these aspects, the lifespan karma is said to be of
six types.  **611]** **Venerable one! How many types of lifespan-binding are
stated for the hell-beings?** **Gautama!** Six types are stated, such as: -
**Category-name-lifespan** - **Realm-name-lifespan** - **Duration-name-
lifespan** - **Region-name-lifespan** - **Section-name-lifespan** - **Immersion-
name-lifespan** Similarly, from the Asura-Kumaras to the Vaimanika Devas, in all
the punishment-receivers, one should know six types of lifespan-binding.
**612]** **Venerable one! After how much time-gap is the rebirth of the hell-
beings stated?** **Gautama!** For the lowest, one time-period, and for the
highest, twelve Muhurtas.  **Explanation:** The time period until the birth of
any being in the desired realm is called the time-gap or interval. If a being is
not born in hell, then it will not be born for at least one time-period. This is
the lowest time-gap. At the most, a being will not be born in hell for twelve
Muhurtas, this is the highest time-gap. (After twelve Muhurtas, some being or
the other is born in hell.)  **613]** Similarly, the lowest and highest time-
gaps for the animal realm, human realm, and heavenly realm should also be known.
**Explanation:** The highest time-gap or interval of twelve Muhurtas mentioned
above is a general statement. According to the specific statement in the
scriptures, the time-gap for the hell-beings in all the seven earths of hell is
different. As is clear from the following verse quoted in the commentary:
**Twenty-four Muhurtas, seven days, then fifteen. A month, then two, then four,
six months is the time-gap.**  **Meaning:** The highest time-gap is twenty-four
Muhurtas in the first earth, seven days in the second, fifteen days in the
third, one month in the fourth, two months in the fifth, four months in the
sixth, and six months in the seventh earth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 216 ] [ samavAyAGgasUtra samaya devAyu kA bandha kara rahA hai to vaha isI
samaya usake sAtha paMcendriya- jAtinAmakarma kA bhI bandha kara rahA hai,
devagati nAmakarma kA bhI bandha kara rahA hai, Ayu kI niyata kAlavAlI sthiti kA
bhI bandha kara rahA hai aura usake niyata parimANa vAle karmapradezoM kA bhI
bandha kara rahA hai, niyata rasa - vipAka yA tIvra-manda phala dene vAle
anubhAga kA bhI bandha kara rahA hai aura devagati meM hone vAle vaikriyika
avagAhanA arthAt zarIra kA bhI bandha kara rahA hai| ina saba apekSAoM se
Ayukarma kA bandha chaha prakAra kA kahA gayA 1 611 - neraiyANaM bhaMte! kaivihe
AugabaMdhe pannatte ? goyamA ! chavvihe pannatte, taM jahA jAtinAma0 gainAma0
ThiinAma0 paesanAma0 aNubhAganAma0 ogAhaNAnAma0  /  evaM jAva vemANiyANaM  /
bhagavan ! nArakoM kA Ayubandha kitane prakAra kA kahA gayA hai ? - gautama !
chaha prakAra kA kahA gayA hai, jaise - jAtinAmanidhattAyuSka,
gatinAmanidhattAyuSka, sthitinAmanidhattAyuSka, pradezanAmanidhattAyuSka,
anubhAganAmanidhattAyuSka aura avagAhanAnAmanidhattAyuSka  /  isI prakAra
asurakumAroM se lekara vaimAnika devoM taka sabhI daMDakoM meM chaha-chaha
prakAra kA Ayubandha jAnanA caahie| 612 - nirayagaI NaM bhaMte! kevaiyaM kAlaM
virahiyA uvavAeNaM pannatA ? goyamA ! jahanneNaM ekkaM samayaM, ukkoseNaM bArasa
muhute  /  bhagavan! narakagati meM kitane viraha - ( antara - ) kAla ke pazcAt
nArakoM kA upapAta (janma) kahA gayA hai ? gautama! jaghanya se eka samaya aura
utkarSa se bAraha muhUrta nArakoM kA virahakAla kahA gayA hai| vivecana - jitane
samaya taka vivakSita gati meM kisI bhI jIva kA janma na ho, utane samaya ko
viraha yA antarakAla kahate haiN| yadi naraka meM koI jIva utpanna na ho, to
kama se kama eka samaya taka nahIM utpanna hogaa| yaha jaghanya virahakAla hai|
adhika se adhika bAraha muhUrta taka naraka meM koI jIva utpanna nahIM hogA,
yaha utkRSTakAla hai  /  (bAraha muhUrtta ke bAda koI na koI jIva naraka meM
utpanna hotA hI hai  / ) 613- evaM tiriyagaI maNussagaI devgii| isI prakAra
tiryaggati, manuSyagati aura devagati kA bhI jaghanya aura utkRSTa antarakAla
jAnanA cAhie  /  vivecana - Upara jo utkRSTa antara yA virahakAla bAraha
muhUrtta pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai, vaha sAmAnya kathana hai| vizeSa kathana kI
apekSA Agama meM naraka kI sAtoM hI pRthiviyoM meM nArakoM kA virahakAla bhinna-
bhinna batAyA gayA hai| jaisA ki TIkA meM uddhRta nimna gAthA se spaSTa hai
cavIsaI muhuttA satta ahoratta taha ya pannarasA  /  mAso ya do ya cauro
chammAsA virahakAlo ti  //  1  //  arthAt - utkRSTa virahakAla pahilI pRthivI
meM caubIsa muhUrtta, dUsarI me sAta ahorAtra, tIsarI meM pandraha ahorAtra,
cauthI meM eka mAsa, pAMcavIM meM do mAsa, chaThI meM cAra mAsa aura sAtavIM
pRthivI meM chaha mAsa kA hotA hai| 1

Page #336 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Diverse Subjects Explained  [217] In the same way, the excellent period of
separation for all those who dwell in houses is twenty-four muhurtas. The birth
of the five stationary beings, starting with the earth-bodied, is continuous,
therefore they do not have a period of separation. The period of separation for
the two-sensed beings is an antarmuhurta. Similarly, the period of separation
for the three-sensed, four-sensed, and the complete five-sensed Tiryanchas is
also an antarmuhurta. The period of separation for the womb-born Tiryanchas and
humans is twelve muhurtas. The period of separation for the complete humans is
twenty-four muhurtas. The period of separation for the gods of the Vyantara,
Jyotishka, and Saudharma-Ishana kalpas is also twenty-four muhurtas. The period
of separation for the gods in the Sanatkumara kalpa is nine days and twenty
muhurtas. The period of separation for the gods in the Mahendra kalpa is twelve
days and ten muhurtas. The period of separation for the gods in the Brahmaloka
is twenty-two and a half nights and days. The period of separation for the gods
in the Lantkaka kalpa is forty-five days and nights, that is, one and a half
months. The period of separation for the gods in the Mahashukra kalpa is eighty
days (two months and twenty days). The period of separation for the gods in the
Sahasraraka kalpa is one hundred days (three months and ten days). The period of
separation for the gods in the Anata-Pranata kalpa is a countable number of
months. The period of separation for the gods in the Aran-Achyuta kalpa is a
countable number of years. In the lower three Graiveyakas, the period of
separation is a countable number of hundred years. In the middle three
Graiveyakas, the period of separation is a countable number of thousand years.
In the upper three Graiveyakas, the period of separation is a countable number
of hundred thousand (lakh) years. In the four Uttara Vimanas, starting with
Vijaya, the period of separation is an uncountable number of years, and in the
Sarvarthasiddha Uttara Vimana, the period of separation is an uncountable number
of parts of a palya.  - 614 - "O Bhagavan! For how long does the Siddhagati
remain devoid of attainment? " "Gautama! From the lowest, it takes one moment,
and from the highest, it takes six months for someone to attain Siddhi. This is
the duration of the separation from the Siddhi." "In the same way, one should
also know the period of separation for the death (udvartana) of all other beings
except the Siddhagati." "Explanation - Except for the desired state, the exit
from it is called udvartana. The beings who attain the Siddhagati never leave
from there, therefore their udvartana is prohibited. The beings from the
remaining four states leave after completing their respective lifespans and take
on a new Paryaya, therefore their udvartana is mentioned in the Agam. One should
know it from the Agam."  - 615 - "O Bhagavan! For how long does the period of
separation for the Narakas of this Ratnaprabha earth remain before they are
called those who have attained the Uppaata?" "In response to the above question,
one should mention the Uppaata-Dandaka (as mentioned in the Prajnapanasutra).
Similarly, one should also mention the Udvartana-Dandaka." "Explanation - The
Uppaata-Dandaka, which the Sutra has instructed to know, is as follows..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa] [217 isI prakAra sabhI bhavanavAsiyoM kA utkRSTa
virahakAla caubIsa muhUrta kA hai| pRthivIkAyika Adi pAMcoM sthAvarakAyika jIvoM
kI utpatti nirantara hotI rahatI hai, ataH unakI utpatti kA virahakAla nahIM
hai| dvIndriya jIvoM kA virahakAla antarmuhUrta hai| isI prakAra trIndriya,
caturindriya aura sammUchima paMcendriya tiryaMcoM kA bhI virahakAla
antarmuhUrta hai| garbhaja tiryaMcoM aura manuSyoM kA virahakAla bAraha muhUrta
hai| sammUchima manuSyoM kA virahakAla caubIsa muhUrta hai| vyantara, jyotiSka
aura saudharma-IzAna kalpa ke devoM kA virahakAla bhI caubIsa muhUrta hai|
sanatkumAra kalpa meM devoM kA virahakAla nau dina aura bIsa muhUrta hai|
mAhendrakalpa meM devoM kA virahakAla bAraha dina aura daza muhUrta hai|
brahmaloka meM devoM kA virahakAla sAr3he bAIsa rAta-dina hai| lAntakakalpa meM
devoM kA virahakAla paiMtAlIsa dina-rAta arthAt Der3ha mAsa hai| mahAzukrakalpa
meM devoM kA virahakAla assI dina (do mAsa bIsa dina) hai| sahasrArakalpa meM
devoM kA virahakAla sau dina (tIna mAha daza dina) hai| Anata-prANata kalpa meM
devoM kA virahakAla saMkhyAta mAsa hai| AraNa-acyuta kalpa meM devoM kA
virahakAla saMkhyAta varSa hai| adhastana tInoM graiveyakoM meM virahakAla
saMkhyAta zata varSa hai| madhyama tInoM graiveyakoM meM virahakAla saMkhyAta
sahasra varSa hai| uparima tInoM graiveyakoM meM virahakAla saMkhyAta zata-
sahasra (lAkha) varSa hai| vijayAdi cAra anuttara vimAnoM meM virahakAla
asaMkhyAta varSa hai aura sarvArthasiddha anuttara vimAna meM virahakAla
palyopama ke asaMkhyAtaveM bhAga-pramANa hai| - 614-siddhagaI NaM bhaMte!
kevaiyaM kAlaM virahiyA sijjhaNayAe pannattA? goyamA! jahanneNaM ekkaM samayaM,
ukkoseNaM chmmaase| evaM siddhivajjA uvvttttnnaa| bhagavan ! siddhagati kitane
kAla taka virahita rahatI hai? arthAt kitane samaya taka koI bhI jIva siddha
nahIM hotA? gautama! jaghanya se eka samaya aura utkarSa se chaha mAsa siddhi
prApta karane vAloM se virahita rahatI hai| arthAt siddhagati kA virahakAla
chaha mAsa hai| isI prakAra siddhagati ko chor3akara zeSa saba jIvoM kI
udvartanA (maraNa) kA viraha bhI jAnanA caahie| vivecama-vivakSita gati ko
chor3akara usase bAhara nikalane ko udvartanA kahate haiN| siddhagati ko prApta
jIva vahA~ se kabhI nahIM nikalate haiM, ata: unakI udvartanA kA niSedha kiyA
gayA hai| zeSa cAroM hI gatiyoM se jIva apanI-apanI Ayu pUrNa kara nikalate haiM
aura navIna paryAya ko dhAraNa karate haiM, ata: una sabakI udvartanA Agama meM
kahI gaI hai| use Agama se jAnanA caahie| 615-imIse NaM bhaMte! rayaNappabhAe
puDhavIe neraiyA kevaiyaM kAlaM virahiyA uvavAeNaM pannattA ? evaM uvavAyadaMDao
bhANiyavvo uvvaTTaNAdaMDao y| bhagavan ! isa ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke nAraka
kitane viraha-kAla ke bAda upapAta vAle kahe gaye haiM? ukta prazna ke uttara
meM yahA~ para (prajJApanAsUtrokta) upapAta-daMDaka kahanA caahie| isI prakAra
udvartanA-daMDaka bhI kahanA caahie| vivecana-sUtra meM jisa upapAta-daNDaka ke
jAnane kI sUcanA kI hai, vaha isa prakAra hai

Page #337 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Samvayanga Sutra, Ratnaprabha  **218]**  The duration of the *upapat* (birth)
of the hell beings of the *Ratnaprabha* earth is from one *muhurt* (48 minutes)
at the lowest to twenty-four *muhurt* at the highest. The highest *upapat*
duration of the hell beings of the *Sharkara* earth is seven nights and days.
The highest *upapat* duration of the hell beings of the *Valuka* earth is half a
month (15 nights and days). The highest *upapat* duration of the hell beings of
the *Pankaprabha* earth is one month. The highest *upapat* duration of the hell
beings of the *Dhumaprabha* earth is two months. The highest *upapat* duration
of the hell beings of the *Tamahprabha* earth is four months. The highest
*upapat* duration of the hell beings of the *Mahatamahprabha* earth is six
months.  The highest *upapat* duration of the *Asura Kumaras* is twenty-four
*muhurt*. Similarly, one should know the *upapat* duration of all the other
*bhavanavasis* (dwellers of the abodes). The *upapat* duration of the five
*ekendriya* (one-sensed) beings, starting with the *prithivicayika*, is not
applicable, as they are constantly being born. The *upapat* duration of the
*dwiendriya* (two-sensed) beings is one *antarmuhurt* (half a *muhurt*).
Similarly, one should know the *upapat* duration of the *triendriya* (three-
sensed), *chaturindriya* (four-sensed), and *sammuchchhim* (fully developed)
*panchendriya* (five-sensed) *tiryanch* (animals). The *upapat* duration of the
*garbhopakrantik* (embryonic) humans is twelve *muhurt*. The *upapat* duration
of the *sammuchchhim* humans is twenty-four *muhurt*. The *upapat* duration of
the *vyantar*, *jyotishk*, and *soudharm* - *ishankalp* gods is also twenty-four
*muhurt* each. The *upapat* duration of the *Sanatkumar* gods is nine days and
twenty *muhurt*. The *upapat* duration of the *Mahendra* gods is twelve days and
ten *muhurt*. The *upapat* duration of the gods of the *Brahmaloka* is twenty-
two and a half days and nights. The *upapat* duration of the *Lantaka* gods is
forty-five nights and days. The *upapat* duration of the *Mahashukra* gods is
eighty days. The *upapat* duration of the *Sahasrar* gods is one hundred days.
The *upapat* duration of the *Anat* gods is a countable number of months.
Similarly, one should know the *upapat* duration of the *Pranat* gods. The
*upapat* duration of the *Aran* and *Achyut* gods is a countable number of
years. The *upapat* duration of the gods of the *Adhastan Graiveyakatrik* is a
countable number of hundred years. The *upapat* duration of the gods of the
*Madhyam Graiveyakatrik* is a countable number of thousand years. The *upapat*
duration of the gods of the *Uparitan Graiveyakatrik* is a countable number of
hundred thousand years. The *upapat* duration of the gods of the four *anuttar*
(highest) *vimanas* (celestial chariots), starting with *Vijaya*, is an
uncountable number of years. The *upapat* duration of the *Sarvarthasiddha* gods
is an uncountable fraction of a *palya* (a measure of time). This is the
duration of the *upapat* (birth).  The act of leaving a particular hell, heaven,
etc., i.e., leaving that *paryaya* (state) and taking birth in another *paryaya*
is called *udvartana* (transmigration). The duration of the *udvartana* is the
same as the duration of the *upapat* mentioned for each *gati* (state of
existence).  **616**  "O Venerable One! How many *aagarsha* (attractions) bind
the *jati-nama-nidhattayushk* (life-span determined by birth) karma?"  "Gautama!
It may be one *aagarsha*, it may be two *aagarsha*, it may be three *aagarsha*,
it may be four *aagarsha*, it may be five *aagarsha*, it may be six *aagarsha*,
it may be seven *aagarsha*, and it may be eight *aagarsha* that bind the *jati-
nama-nidhattayushk* karma. But it is not nine *aagarsha*."  Similarly, one
should know the binding of the other *ayushk* (life-span) karmas. Similarly,
from the *Asura Kumaras*...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 218] [ samavAyAGgasUtra ratnaprabhA pRthivI ke nArakI jIvoM kA upapAta -
virahakAla jaghanya se eka samaya aura utkarSa se caubIsa muhUrta hai| zarkarA
pRthivI ke nArakoM kA utkRSTa upapAta virahakAla sAta rAta-dina hai  /  vAlukA
pRthivI meM nArakoM kA utkRSTa virahakAla ardha mAsa (15 rAta - dina) hai|
paMkaprabhA pRthivI meM nArakoM kA utkRSTa virahakAla eka mAsa hai| dhUmaprabhA
pRthivI meM nArakoM kA utkRSTa virahakAla do mAsa hai  /  tamaHprabhA pRthivI
meM nArakoM kA utkRSTa virahakAla cAra mAsa hai| mahAtamaH prabhA pRthivI meM
nArakoM kA utkRSTa virahAkala chaha mAsa hai  /  asurakumAroM kA utkRSTa
upapAta-virahakAla caubIsa muhUrta hai| isI prakAra zeSa sabhI bhavanavAsiyoM kA
jAnanA caahie| pRthivIkAyika Adi pAMcoM ekendriya jIvoM kA virahakAla nahIM hai,
kyoMki ve sadA hI utpanna hote rahate haiN| dvIndriya jIvoM kA virahakAla
antarmuhUrta hai| isI prakAra trIndriya, caturindriya, sammUcchima paMcendriya
tiryaMcoM kA virahakAla jAnanA caahie| garbhopakrAntika manuSyoM kA virahakAla
bAraha muhUrta hai| sammUcchima manuSyoM kA virahAkala caubIsa muhUrta hai  /
vyantara, jyotiSka aura saudharma - IzAnakalpa ke devoM kA viraha kAla bhI
caubIsa - caubIsa muhUrta hai| sanatkumAra devoM kA virahakAla nau dina aura
bIsa muhUrta hai| mAhendra devoM kA virahakAla bAraha dina aura dasa muhUrta
hai| brahmaloka ke devoM kA virahAkala sAr3he bAIsa dina-rAta hai| lAntaka devoM
kA virahakAla paiMtAlIsa rAta-dina hai| mahAzukra devoM kA virahakAla assI dina
hai  /  sahasrAra devoM kA virahakAla eka sau dina hai| Anata devoM kA
virahakAla saMkhyAta mAsa hai  /  isI prakAra prANata devoM kA bhI jAnanA
caahie| AraNa aura acyuta devoM kA virahakAla saMkhyAta varSa hai| adhastana
graiveyakatrika ke devoM kA virakAla saMkhyAta zata varSa hai| madhyama
graiveyakatrika ke devoM kA virahakAla saMkhyAta sahasra varSa hai| uparitana
graiveyakatrika ke devoM kA virahakAla saMkhyAta zatasahasra varSa hai  /
vijayAdi cAra anuttara vimAnoM ke devoM kA virahakAla asaMkhyAta varSa hai aura
sarvArthasiddha devoM kA virahakAla palyopama kA asaMkhyAtavA~ bhAga pramANa
hai| yaha saba upapAta ke viraha kA kAla hai| vivakSita naraka, svarga Adi se
nikalane ko arthAt usa paryAya ko chor3akara anya paryAya meM janma lene ko
udvartanA kahate haiN| jisa gati kA jitanA upapAta virahakAla batAyA gayA hai,
usakA utanA hI udvartanAkAla jAnanA caahie| - 616 - neraiyA NaM bhaMte!
jAtinAmanihattAugaM kati AgarisehiM pagaraMti ? goyamA ! siya ekkeNaM, siya
dohiM, siya tIhiM, siya cauhiM, siya paMcahiM, siya chahiM, siya sattahiM, siya
aTThahiM [ AgarisehiM pagaraMti ] no ceva NaM navahiM  /  evaM sesANa vi AugANi
jAva vemANiya tti  /  bhagavan! nAraka jIva jAtinAmanidhattAyuSka karma kA
kitane AkarSoM se bandha karate haiM ? gautama! syAt (kadAcit ) eka AkarSa se,
syAt do AkarSoM se, syAt tIna AkarSoM se, syAt cAra AkarSoM se, syAt pA~ca
AkarSoM se, syAt chaha AkarSoM se, syAt sAta AkarSoM se aura syAt ATha AkarSoM
se jAtinAmanidhattAyuSka karma kA bandha karate haiM  /  kintu nau AkarSoM se
bandha nahIM karate haiN| I isI prakAra zeSa AyuSka karmoM kA bandha jAnanA
cAhie  /  isI prakAra asurakumAroM se lekara

Page #338 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Diverse Topics Explained]  **Knowing the Attraction of Ayubandha in All
Dandakas Up to Vaimanika Kalpa**  **Explanation:** Generally, the meaning of
attraction is the reception of karma pudgalas. But here, the opportunities for
binding the age of the upcoming birth of a living being are called attraction
times. This attraction depends on the intensity and slowness of the living
being's efforts. If the efforts are intense, the living being receives the age
divisions in one go. If the efforts are slow, then the age is bound by two
attractions, if slower, then by three, and if the efforts are slowest, then the
age is bound by four, five, six, seven, or eight attractions. There are never
more attractions than this.  **[219**  **617 - "How many types of Sanhanan are
there, O Bhagavan?"**  **"Gautama! There are six types of Sanhanan, as follows:
1. Vajrarṣabhanāracasanhanan, 2. Ṛṣabhanāracasanhanan, 3. Nāracasanhanan, 4.
Ardha-nāracasanhanan, 5. Kīlikāsanhanan, and 6. Sevārtasanhanan."**
**Explanation:** The specific binding of bones within the body is called
Sanhanan. Its six types are mentioned in the presented sutra. Vajra means nail,
Ṛṣabha means strap, and the bone on both sides of the body is called Nāraca. The
body whose two lateral bones are bound by a strap and have a nail in the middle
is called Vajrarṣabhanāracasanhanan. The body whose bones do not have a nail but
whose two lateral bones are bound by a strap is called Ṛṣabhanāracasanhanan. The
body whose bones do not have a strap is called Nāracasanhanan. The body whose
bones are only bound by Mṛga on one side and not on the other is called Ardha-
nāracasanhanan. The body whose bones only have a nail is called Kīlikāsanhanan.
The body whose bones are joined together and covered with skin is called
Sevārtasanhanan. Devas and Naraki beings do not have bones in their bodies,
therefore, their Sanhanan is said to be absent. Humans and Tiryanch Panchendriya
beings have all six Sanhanans. The Sanhanans of the remaining Tiryanch beings,
starting with Ekendriya, are described in the following sutra.  **618 - "O
Bhagavan! Which Sanhanan are Narakas said to have?"**  **"Gautama! Narakas do
not have any of the six Sanhanans. They are Asanhanani because they do not have
bones, veins (arteries), or nerves (intestines). The pudgalas that are there are
anista, akānta, apriya, anādeya, asubha, amanojña, amanāma, and amanobhirāma,
and from these, the body of Narakas is formed without Sanhanan."**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa ] vaimAnika kalpa taka sabhI daMDakoM meM Ayubandha ke
AkarSa jAnanA caahie| vivecana - sAmAnyatayA AkarSa kA artha hai - karmapudgaloM
kA grahaNa  /  kintu yahA~ jIva ke AgAmI bhava kI Ayu ke baMdhane ke avasaroM ko
AkarSakAla kahA hai  /  yaha AkarSa-jIva ke adhyavasAyoM kI tIvratA aura mandatA
para nirbhara haiM  /  tIvra adhyavasAya hoM to eka hI bAra meM jIva Ayu ke
dalikoM ko grahaNa kara letA hai  /  adhyavasAya maMda ho to do AkarSoM se,
mandatara ho to tIna se aura mandatama adhyavasAya ho to cAra-pAMca-chaha-sAta
yA ATha AkarSoM se Ayu kA bandha hotA hai| isase adhika AkarSa kadApi nahIM hote
/  [ 219 617 - kaivihe NaM bhaMte! saMghayaNe pannatte ? goyamA ! chavvihe
saMghayaNe pannatte, taM jahA - vairosabhanArAyasaMghayaNe 1,
risabhanArAyasaMghayaNe 2, nArAyasaMghayaNe 3, arddhanArAyasaMghayaNe 4,
kIliyAsaMghayaNe 5, chevaTTasaMghayaNe 6  /  bhagavan ! saMhanana kitane prakAra
kA kahA gayA hai ? gautama! saMhanana chaha prakAra kA kahA gayA hai| jaise- -
1. vajrarSabhanArAcasaMhanana, 2. RSabhanArAcasaMhanana, 3. nArAcasaMhanana, 4.
ardhanArAcasaMhanana, 5. kIlikAsaMhanana aura 6. sevArtasaMhanana  /  vivecana -
zarIra ke bhItara haDDiyoM ke bandhana vizeSa ko saMhanana kahate haiM  /  usake
chaha bheda prastuta sUtra meM batAye gaye haiN| vajra kA artha kIlikA hai,
RSabha kA artha paTTa hai aura markaTa sthAnIya donoM pArzvo kI haDDI ko nArAca
kahate haiN| jisa zarIra kI donoM pArzvavarttI haDDiyA~ paTTa se baMdhI hoM aura
bIca meM kIlI lagI huI ho, use vajraRSabhanArAcasaMhanana kahate haiM  /  jisa
zarIra kI haDDiyoM meM kIlI na lagI hoM, kintu donoM pArzvoM kI haDDiyA~ paTTe
se bandhI hoM, use RSabhanArAcasaMhanana kahate haiM  /  jisa zarIra kI haDDiyoM
para paTTa bhI na ho use nArAcasaMhanana kahate haiM  /  jisa zarIra kI haDDiyA~
eka ora hI markaTa bandha se yukta hoM, dUsarI ora kI nahIM hoM, use
ardhanArAcasaMhanana kahate haiN| jisa zarIra kI haDDiyoM meM kevala kIlI lagI
ho use kIlikAsaMhanana kahate haiM  /  jisa zarIra kI haDDiyA~ paraspara milI
aura carma se lipaTI huI hoM use sevArta saMhanana kahate haiN| devoM aura
nArakI jIvoM ke zarIroM meM haDDiyA~ nahIM hotI haiM, ataH unake saMhanana kA
abhAva batAyA gayA hai| manuSya aura tiryaMca paMcendriya jIva chahoM saMhanana
vAle hote haiM  /  ekendriyAdi zeSa tiryaMcoM ke saMhananoM kA varNana Age ke
sUtra meM kiyA hai| 618 - neraiyA NaM bhaMte! kiMsaMghayaNI (pannattA ) ? goyamA
! chahaM saMghayaNANaM asaMghayaNI  /  va aTThI va sirA Neva NhArU  /  je
poggalA aNiTThA akaMtA appiyA aNAjjA asubhA amaNuNNA amaNAmA amaNAbhirAmA, te
tesiM asaMghayaNattAe pariNamati  /  bhagavan ! nAraka kisa saMhanana vAle kahe
gaye haiM ? gautama ! nArakoM ke chahoM saMhananoM meM se koI bhI saMhanana
nahIM hotA hai| ve asaMhananI hote haiM, kyoMki unake zarIra meM haDDI nahIM
hai, nahIM zirAeM ( dhamaniyAM ) haiM aura snAyu (AMteM) nahIM haiN| vahA~ jo
pudgala aniSTa, akAnta, apriya, anAdeya, azubha, amanojJa, amanAma aura
amanobhirAma haiM, unase nArakoM kA zarIra saMhanana-rahita hI banatA hai  /

Page #339 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 220] **[Samvayanga Sutra 619]** **"Bante! What kind of saṃhanana are Asura
Kumaras said to have?"** **"Gotama! Asura Kumaras have no saṃhanana. They are
asanhaṇīya (incapable of being held together) because they have no bones, no
veins, and no tendons. Those who are iṣṭa (desirable), kānta (attractive), priya
(dear), ādeya (worthy of being received), subha (auspicious), manojña (pleasing
to the mind), manama (pleasing to the heart), and manobhirāma (pleasing to the
soul) have their bodies formed in such a way that they are asanhaṇīya. This is
the same for all the Kumaras, from Naga Kumaras to Sthanita Kumaras."**
**620]** **"Bante! What kind of saṃhanana are Pṛthivīkāyika beings said to
have?"** **"Gotama! Pṛthivīkāyika beings are said to have sevarta saṃhanana.
This is the same for all beings from Apkāyika to Sammūchhima Panchendriya
Tiryanchyonik. Garbhopakrantiya Tiryanch have all six types of saṃhanana.
Sammūchhima humans have sevarta saṃhanana. Garbhopakrantiya humans have all six
types of saṃhanana. Just as Asura Kumaras are asanhaṇīya, so too are
Vānavyantar, Jyotiṣka, and Vaimānika Devas."**  **621]** **"Bante! How many
types of saṃsthāna are there?"** **"Gotama! There are six types of saṃsthāna: 1.
Samachaturasra saṃsthāna, 2. Nyagrodhaparimandala saṃsthāna, 3. Sādiya or Svāti
saṃsthāna, 4. Vāmana saṃsthāna, 5. Kubja saṃsthāna, 6. Huṇḍa saṃsthāna."**
**Explanation:** The shape of the body is called saṃsthāna. A body whose limbs
and appendages are free from any deficiency or excess, and are in accordance
with the prescribed standards of the scriptures, is called Samachaturasra
saṃsthāna. A body in which the parts above the navel are in accordance with the
standards of anatomy, but the parts below the navel are deficient, is called
Nyagrodha saṃsthāna. A body in which the parts below the navel are in accordance
with the standards of anatomy, but the parts above the navel are deficient, is
called...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 220] [samavAyAGgasUtra 619-asurakumArA NaM bhaMte! kiMsaMghayaNA pannatA?
goyamA! chaNhaM saMghayaNANaM asNghynnii| NevaTThI neva chirA Neva phaaruu| je
poggalA iTThA kaMtA piyA (AejjA) maNuNNA (subhA) maNAmA maNAbhirAmA, te tesiM
asaMghayaNattAe prinnmNti| evaM jAva thnniykumaaraannN| bhagavan ! asurakumAra
deva kisa saMhanana vAle kahe gaye haiM? gautama ! asurakumAra devoM ke chahoM
saMhananoM meM se koI bhI saMhanana nahIM hotA hai| ve asaMhananIya hote haiM,
kyoMki unake zarIra meM haDDI nahIM hotI hai, nahIM zirAeM hotI haiM, aura na hI
snAyu hotI haiN| jo pugadla iSTa, kAnta, priya (Adeya, zubha) manojJa, manAma
aura manobhirAma hote haiM, unase unakA zarIra saMhanana-rahita hI pariNata hotA
hai| isa prakAra nAgakumAroM se lekara stanitakumAra devoM taka jAnanA cAhie
arthAt unake koI saMhanana nahIM hotaa| 620-puDhavIkAiyA NaM bhaMte!
kiMsaMghayaNI pannattA? goyamA! chevaTTasaMghayaNI pnnttaa| evaM jAva
saMmucchima-paMcidiyatirikkhajoNiya tti| gabbhavakkaMtiyA chvvihsNghynnii|
saMmucchimamaNussA chevttttsNghynnii| gabbhavakkaMtiyamaNussA chvvihsNghynnii|
jahA asurakumArA tahA vANamaMtarajoisiya-vemANiyA y| bhagavan ! pRthivIkAyika
jIva kisa saMhanana vAle kahe gaye haiM? gautama ! pRthivIkAyika jIva
sevArtasaMhanana vAle kahe gaye haiN| isI prakAra apkAyika se lekara sammUcchima
paMcendriya tiryagyonika taka ke saba jIva sevArta saMhanana vAle hote haiM  /
garbhopakrAntika tiryaMca chahoM prakAra ke saMhanana vAle hote haiM  /
sammUchima manuSya sevArta saMhanana vAle hote haiM  /  garbhomakrAntika manuSya
chahoM prakAra ke saMhanana vAle hote haiN| jisa prakAra asurakumAra deva
saMhanana-rahita haiM, usI prakAra vAnavyantara, jyotiSka aura vaimAnika deva
bhI saMhanana-rahita hote haiN| . 621-kaivihe NaM bhaMte! saMThANe pannatte?
goyamA! chavvihe saMThANe pnntte| taM jahAsamacauraMse 1, NiggohaparimaMDale 2,
sAie 3, vAmaNe 4, khunje 5, huMDe 6 /  bhagavan ! saMsthAna kitane prakAra kA
kahA gayA hai ? gautama! saMsthAna chaha prakAra kA hai- 1.
samacaturasrasaMsthAna, 2. nyagrodhaparimaMDalasaMsthAna, 3. sAdi yA
svAtisaMsthAna, 4. vAmanasaMsthAna, 5. kubjakasaMsthAna, 6. huNddksNsthaan|
vivecana- zarIra ke AkAra ko saMsthAna kahate haiN| jisa zarIra ke aMga aura
upAMga nyUnatA aura adhikatA se rahita zAstrokta mAna-unmAna-pramANa vAle hote
haiM, use samacaturasrasaMsthAna kahate haiN| jisa zarIra meM nAbhi se Upara ke
avayava to zarIra-zAstra ke anusAra ThIka-ThIka pramANavAle hoM kintu nAbhi se
nIce ke avayava hIna pramANa vAle hoM, use nyagrodhasaMsthAna kahate haiN| jisa
zarIra meM nAbhi se nIce ke avayava to zarIra-zAstra ke anurUpa hoM, kintu nAbhi
se Upara ke avayava usake pratikUla hoM, use

Page #340 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Various Subjects Explained] [221] The term "Sadisansthan" refers to a body with
deformed and small limbs, even though they have the characteristic features, and
a hump on the back or chest in the middle. The term "Kubjakasansthan" refers to
a body where all the limbs are in accordance with the principles of anatomy, but
the body is dwarfed. The term "Hundsansthan" refers to a body where all the
limbs, such as hands and feet, are opposite to the principles of anatomy. All
Naraki beings are said to have Hundsansthan, and all Devas are said to have
Samachatursrasansthan. The remaining humans and animals have all six types of
Sansthans. 622 - "O Venerable One! What kind of Sansthan do Naraki beings have?"
"Gautama! Naraki beings are said to have Hundsansthan." "O Venerable One! What
kind of Sansthan do Asura Kumar Devas have?" "Gautama! Asura Kumar Devas have
Samachatursrasansthan." Similarly, all the Bhavanvasi Devas, up to the Thanik
Kumaras, have Samachatursrasansthan. 623 - "Earth-bodied beings are said to have
Masurasansthan. Apkayik beings are said to have Stibuk (bindu) Sansthan. Tejas-
kayik beings are said to have Sucikalap Sansthan (shaped like a bunch of
needles). Vayukayik beings are said to have Pataaka (flag) Sansthan.
Vanaspatikayik beings are said to have various types of Sansthans." 624 - "Dvi-
indriya, Tri-indriya, Chatur-indriya, and Sammuchhim Pancha-indriya animals are
said to have Hundsansthan, and Garbhopakrantik animals are said to have all six
Sansthans. Sammuchhim humans are said to have Hundsansthan, and Garbhopakrantik
humans are said to have all six Sansthans. Just as Asura Kumar Devas have
Samachatursrasansthan, so do Vanavyantar, Jyotishk, and Vaimanik Devas." 625 -
"O Venerable One! How many types of Vedas are there?" "Gautama! There are three
types of Vedas, namely - Itthive, Purisave, and Napunsave."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vividhaviSaya nirUpaNa] [221 sAdisaMsthAna kahate haiN| jisa zarIra ke avayava
lakSaNayukta hote hue bhI vikRta aura choTe hoM, tathA madhyabhAga meM pITha yA
chAtI kI ora kUbar3a nikalI ho, use kubjakasaMsthAna kahate haiN| jisa zarIra
meM sabhI aMga lakSaNazAstra ke anurUpa hoM, para zarIra baunA ho, use
vAmanasaMsthAna kahate haiN| jisa zarIra meM hAtha paira Adi sabhI avayava
zarIra-zAstra ke pramANa se viparIta hoM use huNDasaMsthAna kahate haiN| sabhI
nArakI jIva huNDasaMsthAna vAle aura sabhI deva samacaturasrasaMsthAna vAle kahe
gaye haiN| zeSa manuSya aura tiryaMca chahoM saMsthAna vAle hote haiN|
622-NeraiyA NaM bhaMte! kiMsaMThANI pnnttaa| goyamA! huMDasaMThANI pnnttaa|
asurakumArA kiMsaMThANI pannattA? goyamA! samacauraMsasaMThANasaMThiyA pnnttaa|
evaM jAva thnniykumaaraa| bhagavan ! nArakI jIva kisa saMsthAnavAle kahe gaye
haiM? gautama! nAraka jIva huMDakasaMsthAna vAle kahe gaye haiN| bhagavan !
asurakumAra deva kisa saMsthAnavAle hote haiM? gautama! asurakumAra deva
samacaturasrasaMsthAna vAle hote haiN| isI prakAra stanitakumAra taka ke sabhI
bhavanavAsI deva samacaturasrasaMsthAna vAle hote haiN| 623 -puDhavI
masUrasaMThANA pnnttaa| AU thibuyasaMThANA pnnttaa| teU sUIkalAvasaMThANA
pnnnnttaa| vAU paDAgAsaMThANA pnnttaa| vaNassaI nANAsaMThANasaMThiyA pnnttaa|
pRthivIkAyika jIva masUrasaMsthAna vAle kahe gaye haiN| apkAyika jIva stibuka
(bindu), saMsthAnavAle kahe gaye haiN| tejaskAyika jIva sUcIkalApa saMsthAnavAle
(suiyoM ke puMja ke samAna AkAra vAle) kahe gaye haiM  /  vAyukAyika jIva
patAkA-(dhvajA-) saMsthAnavAle kahe gaye haiM  /  vanaspatikAyika jIva nAnA
prakAra ke saMsthAnavAle kahe gaye haiN| . 624-beiMdiya-teiMdiya-cauridiya-
sammucchima-paMceMdiyatirikkhA huMDasaMThANA pnnttaa| gabbhavakkaMtiyA
chavvihasaMThANA (pnnttaa)| saMmucchimamaNussA huMDasaMThANagaMThiyA pnnttaa|
gabbhavakkaMtiyANaM maNussANaM chavvihA saMThANA pnnttaa|jhaa asurakumArA tahA
vANamaMtara-joisiyavemANiyA vi| dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya aura
sammUcchima paMcendriyatiryaMca jIva huMDaka saMsthAnavAle aura garbhopakrAntika
tiryaMca chahoM saMsthAnavAle kahe gaye haiN| sammUchima manuSya huMDaka
saMsthAnavAle tathA garbhopakrAntika manuSya chahoM saMsthAnavAle kahe gaye
haiN| jisa prakAra asurakumAra deva samacaturasra saMsthAna vAle hote haiM, usI
prakAra vAnavyantara, jyotiSka aura vaimAnika deva bhI samacaturasra
saMsthAnavAle hote haiN| 625-kaivihe NaM bhaMte! vee pannatte ? goyamA! tivihe
vee pannatte, taM jahA-itthIvee purisavee npuNsvee| bhagavan ! veda kitane
prakAra ke haiM?

Page #341 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[222] [Samvayanga Sutra] Gautama! There are three Vedas - Striveda, Purushaveda
and Napumsakaved. 626 - "Bhagavan! Are the Naraka beings Striveda, Purushaveda
or Napumsakaved?" "Gautama! Naraka beings are neither Striveda nor Purushaveda,
but Napumsakaved." 627 - "Bhagavan! Are the Asurakumara Devas Striveda,
Purushaveda or Napumsakaved?" "Gautama! Asurakumara Devas are Striveda and
Purushaveda, but not Napumsakaved. The same should be known for the Thanitkumara
Devas." 628 - "The Prithvikaayik, Apkaayik, Tejaskaayik, Vaayukaayik,
Vanaspatikaayik, Dwiindriya, Triindriya, Chaturindriya, Sammuchchhima
Panchaindriya Tiryanch and Sammuchchhima Manushya are Napumsakaved. The
Garbhopakrantik Manushya and Garbhopakrantik Tiryanch are all three Vedas. Just
as the Asurakumara Devas are Striveda and Purushaveda, so are the Vanamantara,
Jyotishka Vaimanika Devas." (It is noteworthy that the Graiveyak and Anuttara
Vimana Vaasi Devas and the Laukantika Devas are only Purushavedi.) 000

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 222] [samavAyAGgasUtra gautama ! veda tIna haiM - strIveda, puruSaveda aura
npuNskved| 626 -neraiyA NaM bhaMte! kiM itthIveyA purisaveyA NapuMsagaveyA
pannattA? goyamA! No itthIveyA, No puMveyA, NapuMsagaveyA pnnnnttaa| bhagavan !
nAraka jIva kyA strIveda vAle haiM, puruSaveda vAle haiM athavA napuMsakaveda
vAle haiM? gautama! nAraka jIva na strIveda vAle haiM, na puruSaveda vAle haiM,
kintu napuMsakaveda vAle hote haiN| 627-asurakumArA NaM bhaMte! kiM itthIveyA
purisaveyA NapuMsagaveyA? goyamA! itthIveyA, purisveyaa| No nnpuNsgveyaa| jAva
thnniykumaaraa| bhagavan ! asurakumAra deva strIveda vAle haiM, puruSaveda vAle
haiM, athavA napuMsakaveda vAle haiM? gautama ! asurakumAra deva strIveda vAle
haiM, puruSaveda vAle haiM, kintu napuMsakaveda vAle nahIM hote haiN| isI
prakAra stanitakumAra devoM taka jAnanA caahie| 628-puDhavI AU teU vAU vaNassaI
vi-ti-cauridiya-samucchimapaMciMdiya-tirikkhasaMmucchimamaNussA nnpuNsgveyaa|
gabbhavakkaMtiyamaNussA paMciMdiyatiriyA ya tiveyaa| jahA asurakumArA, tahA
vANamaMtarA joisiya-vemANiyA vi| pRthivIkAyika, apkAyika, tejaskAyika,
vAyukAyika, vanaspatikAyika, dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya,
sammUcchimapaMcendriya tiryaMca aura sammUcchima manuSya napuMsaka vedavAle hote
haiM  /  garbhopakrAntika manuSya aura garbhopakrAntika tiryaMca tInoM vedoM
vAle hote haiN| jaise- asukumAra deva strIveda aura puruSaveda vAle hote haiM,
usI prakAra vAnamantara, jyotiSka vaimAnika deva bhI strIveda aura puruSaveda
vAle hote haiN| (vizeSa bAta yaha hai ki graiveyaka aura anuttara vimAnavAsI
deva tathA laukAntika deva kevala puruSavedI hote haiN|) 000

Page #342 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the past and future times, the great men (Mahapurasha) should be described
according to the Kappan (cosmic cycle) until the time when the Saptya (those
with disciples) and Nirapatya (those without disciples) Ganadharas (leaders of
the Jain community) are extinct (i.e., attain liberation).   In the Jambudvipa
(India) during the Utsarpini (ascending) period of the past, there were seven
Kulgaras (leaders of the Jain community). They were: 1. Mitradam, 2. Sudam, 3.
Suparshva, 4. Swayamprabha, 5. Vimalaghosha, 6. Sugosha, and 7. Mahagosha.  In
the Jambudvipa (India) during the Avasarpini (descending) period of the past,
there were ten Kulgaras. They were: 1. Sanjanjal, 2. Satayu, 3. Ajit Sena, 4.
Anant Sena, 5. Karya Sena, 6. Bhima Sena, 7. Maha Bhima Sena, 8. Dridharatha, 9.
Dasharath, and 10. Shatarath.  In the Jambudvipa (India) during the Avasarpini
(descending) period of the present time, there were seven Kulgaras. They were:
1. Vimala Vahana, 2. Chakshusman, 3. Yashashman, 4. Abhichandra, 5. Prasenajit,
6. Marudeva, and 7. Nabhiray.  These seven Kulgaras had seven wives. They were:
1. Chandrayasha, 2. Chandrakant, 3. Surupa, 4. Pratirupa, 5. Chakshuskanta, 6.
Shrikant, and 7.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atIta-anAgatakAlika mahApuruSa 629-teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM kappassa
samosaraNaM NeyavvaM jAva gaNaharA sAvaccA niravaccA vocchinnnnaa| usa duHSama-
suSamA kAla meM aura usa viziSTa samaya meM [jaba bhagavAn mahAvIra dharmopadeza
karate hue vihAra kara rahe the, taba] kalpabhASya ke anusAra samavasaraNa kA
varNana vahA~ taka karanA cAhie, jaba taka ki sApatya (ziSya-santAna-yukta)
sudharmAsvAmI aura nirapatya (ziSya-santAna-rahita zeSa sabhI) gaNadhara deva
vyucchinna ho gaye, arthAt siddha ho gye| 630-jaMbuddIveNaM dIve bhArahe vAse
tIyAe ussappiNIe satta kulagarA hotthaa| taM jahA mittadAmo sudAme ya supAse ya
sayaMpabhe  /  vimalaghose sughose ya mahAghose ya sattame  // 1 //  isa
jambUdvIpa ke bhAratavarSa meM atItakAla kI utsarpiNI meM sAta kulakara utpanna
hue the| jaise1. mitradAma, 2. sudAma, 3. supArzva, 4. svayamprabha,5.
vimalaghoSa, 6. sughoSa aura 7. mahAghoSa  // 1 //  631 -jaMbuddIve NaM dIve
bhArahe vAse tIyAe osappiNIe dasa kulagarA hotthaa|tN jahA saMyajale sayAU ya
ajiyaseNe aNaMtaseNe ya  /  kajaseNe bhImaseNe mahAbhImaseNe ya sattame  // 2 //
daDharahe dasarahe syrhe| isa jambUdvIpa ke bhAratavarSa meM atItakAla kI
avasarpiNI meM daza kulakara hue the| jaise 1. zataMjala, 2. zatAyu, 3.
ajitasena, 4. anantasena, 5. kAryasena, 6. bhImasena, 7. mahAbhImasena, 8.
dRr3haratha, 9. dazaratha aura 10. zataratha  // 2 //  632-(jaMbuddIve NaM dIve
bhArahe vAse imIse osappiNIe samAe satta kulagarA hotthaa|tN jahA paDhamettha
vimalavAhaNa [cakkhuma jasamaM cautthamabhicaMde  /  tatto paseNaie marudeve.
ceva nAbhI ya]  // 3 //  etesiM NaM sattaNhaM kulagarANa satta bhAriA hotthaa|
taM jahA. caMdajasA caMdakaMtA [surUva paDirUva cakkhukaMtA ya  /  sirikaMtA
marudevI kulagarapattINa NAmAiM]  // 4 //  isa jambUdvIpa ke bhAratavarSa meM
isa avasarpiNI kAla meM sAta kulakara hue| jaise1. vimalavAhana, 2. cakSuSmAn 3.
yazaSmAn 4.abhicandra, 5. prasenajita, 6. marudeva,7. nAbhirAya  // 3 //  ina
sAtoM hI kulakaroM kI sAta bhAeM thiiN| jaise1. candrayazA, 2. candrakAntA, 3.
surUpA, 4. pratirUpA, 5. cakSuSkAntA, 6. zrIkAntA aura 7.

Page #343 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 224] [Samvayanga Sutra, Marudevi. These are the names of the wives of the
Kulakaras. ||4|| 633- In this Jambudvipa, in the Bharatavarsha, in this
Avasarpini, there were twenty-four fathers of the twenty-four Tirthankaras. They
are: 1. Nabhi, 2. Jitasatru, 3. Jitari, 4. Sanvara, 5. Megha, 6. Dhar, 7.
Pratiṣṭha, 8. Mahasen, 9. Sugriva, 10. Dṛḍharatha, 11. Viṣṇu, 12. Vasupujya, 13.
Kṛtavṛmā, 14. Simhasena, 15. Bhānu, 16. Viśvasena, 17. Sūrasena, 18. Sudarśana,
19. Kumbharāja, 20. Sumitra, 21. Vijaya, 22. Samudravijaya, 23. Aśvasena, and
24. Siddārtha Kshatriya. ||5-7|| These fathers of the Jina-varas, the
propagators of the Tirtha, were of high lineage, of pure lineage, and endowed
with excellent qualities. ||8|| 634- In this Jambudvipa, in the Bharatavarsha,
in this Avasarpini, there were twenty-four mothers of the twenty-four
Tirthankaras. They are: 1. Marudevi, 2. Vijaya, 3. Sena, 4. Siddārthā, 5.
Mangalā, 6. Susīmā, 7. Pṛthivī, 8. Lakṣmaṇā, 9. Rāmā, 10. Nandā, 11. Viṣṇu, 12.
Jayā, 13. Śyāmā, 14. Suyaśā, 15. Suvratā, 16. Acira, 17. Śrī, 18. Devī, 19.
Prabhāvatī, 20. Padma, 21. Vaprā, 22. Śivā, 23. Vāmā, and 24. Triśalā Devī.
These are the twenty-four Jina-mātas. ||9-10|| 635- In this Jambudvipa, in the
Bharatavarsha, in this Avasarpini, there were twenty-four Tirthankaras. They
are:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 224] [samavAyAGgasUtra mrudevii| ye kulakaroM kI patniyoM ke nAma haiM  /  / 4
/  /  633-jaMbuddIve NaM dIve bhArahe vAse imIse NaM osappiNIe cauvIsaM
titthagarANaM piyaro hotthaa| taM jahA NAbhI ya jiyasattU ya [jiyArI saMvare iya
/  mehe dhare paiThe ya mahaseNe ya khattie  // 5 //  suggIve daDharahe viNhU
vasupujje ya khattie  /  kayavammA sIhaseNe bhANU vissasaNe iya  // 6 //  sUre
sudaMsaNe kuMbhe sumittavijae samuddavijaye ya  /  rAyA ya AsaseNe ya siddhatthe
cciya khattie  // 7 //  uditodiya kulavaMsA visuddhavaMsA guNehi uvaveyA  /
titthappavattayANaM ee piyaro jiNavarANaM]  // 8 //  isa jambUdvIpa ke
bhAratavarSa meM isa avasarpiNI kAla meM caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM ke caubIsa pitA
hue| jaise 1.nAbhirAya, 2. jitazatra, 3. jitAri, 4. saMvara, 5. megha,6.dhara,
7. pratiSTha, 8. mahAsena, 9. sugrIva, 10. dRr3haratha, 11. viSNu, 12.
vasupUjya, 13. kRtavarmA, 14. siMhasenaM, 15. bhAnu, 16. vizvasena 17. sUrasena,
18. sudarzana, 19. kumbharAja, 20. sumitra, 21. vijaya, 22. samudravijaya, 23.
azvasena aura 24. siddhArtha kSatriya  // 5-7 //  tIrtha ke pravartaka jinavaroM
ke ye pitA ucca kula aura ucca vizuddha vaMza vAle tathA uttama guNoM se
saMyukta the||8|| 634-jaMbuddIve NaM dIve bhArahe vAse imIse osappiNIe cauvIsaM
tithagarANaM mAyaro hotthaa| taM jahA marudevI vijayA seNA [siddhatthA maMgalA
susImA ya puhavI lakkhaNA rAmA naMdA viNhU jayA saamaa]| sujasA suvvaya airA
siriyA devI pabhAvaI pumaa||9||. vappA sivA ya vAmA ya tisalAdevI ya jinnmaayaa|
isa jambUdvIpa ke bhAratavarSa meM isa avasarpiNI meM caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM
kIracauSIsa mAtAeM huIM haiN| jaise 1. marudevI, 2. vijayA, 3. senA, 4.
siddhArthA, 5. maMgalA, 6. susImA, 7. pRthivI, 8. lakSmaNA, 9. rAmA, 10. nandA,
11. viSNu, 12. jayA, 13. zyAmA, 14. suyazA, 15. suvratA, 16. acirA, 17. zrI, 18.
devI, 19. prabhAvatI, 20. padmA, 21. vaprA, 22. zivA, 23. vAmA aura 24. trizalA
devI  /  ye caubIsa jina-mAtAeM haiM  // 9-10 //  635-jaMbuddINe NaM dIve
bhArahe vAse imIse osappiNIe cauvIsaM titthagarA hotthaa| taM

Page #344 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Past Future Great Souls] [225  Rishava 1, Ajita 2, Sambhava 3, Abhinandan 4,
Sumati 5, Padma Prabha 6, Suparshva 7, Chandra Prabha 8, Suvidhi-Pushpadanta 9,
Shital 10, Shreyans 11, Vasupujya 12, Vimala 13, Ananta 14, Dharma 15, Shanti
16, Kunthu 17, Ara 18, Malli 19, Munisuvrata 20, Nimi 21, Nemi 22, Parsva 23,
Vardhamana 24. In this Jambudvipa, in the Bharatavarsha, in this Avasarpini
time, there were twenty-four Tirthankaras. Like- 1. Rishava, 2. Ajita, 3.
Sambhava, 4. Abhinandan, 5. Sumati, 6. Padma Prabha, 7. Suparshva, 8. Chandra
Prabha, 9. Suvidhi Pushpadanta, 10. Shital, 11. Shreyans, 12. Vasupujya, 13.
Vimala, 14. Ananta, 15. Dharma 16. Shanti, 17. Kunthu, 18. Ara, 19. Malli, 20.
Munisuvrata, 21. Nimi, 22. Nemi 23. Parsva and 24. Vardhamana. 636 - These
twenty-four Tirthankaras had twenty-four names in their previous births. Like 1.
First was Vajranabha, 2. Vimala, 3. Vimala Vahan, 4. Dharma Singh, 5. Sumitra,
6. Dharmamitra, 7. Sundar Bahu, 8. Dirgha Bahu, 9. Yug Bahu, 10. Laththa Bahu,
11. Datta, 12. Indra Datta, 13. Sundar, 14. Mahendra, 15. Simharath, 16.
Meghrath, 17. Rukmi, 18. Sudarshan, 19. Nandan, 20. Singhgiri, 21. Adin Shatru,
22. Shankha, 23. Sudarshan and 24. Nandan. These are the names of the previous
births of these Tirthankaras of this Avasarpini. ||1114|| 637 - These twenty-
four Tirthankaras had twenty-four names in their previous births. Like 1.
Sudarshan 1, Suprabha 2, Siddhartha 3, Suprasiddha 4, Vijaya 5, Vejayanti 6,
Jayanti 7, Aparajita 8. 9. Arun Prabha 9, Chandra Prabha 10, Sura Prabha 11,
Agni 12, Suprabha 13, Vimala 14, Panchvarna 15, Sagar Datta 16, Nag Datta 17,
Abhaykar 18, Nivvui Kara 19, Manorama 20, Manohara 21, Devakuru 22, Uttarakura
23, Visal Chandra Prabha 24. These are the names of all the Jinavaras. They are
the conquerors of all the worlds, the shadow of all the auspiciousness. ||18||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atIta anAgatakAlika mahApuruSa] [225 jahA-usabhe 1, ajiye 2, saMbhave 3,
abhiNaMdaNe 4, sumaI 5, paumappahe 6, supAse 7, caMdappabhe 8, suvihi-puSpadaMte
9, sIyale 10, sijaMse 11, vAsupujje 12, vimale 13, aNaMte 14, dhamme 15, saMtI
16, kuMthU 17, are 18, mallI 19, muNisuvvae 20, NamI 21, NemI 22, pAse 23,
vaDDamANo 24 y| isa jambUdvIpa ke bhAratavarSa meM isa avasarpiNI kAla meM
caubIsa tIrthaMkara hue| jaise-1. RSabha, 2. ajita, 3. saMbhava, 4. abhinandana,
5. sumati, 6. padmaprabha, 7. supArzva, 8. candraprabha, 9. suvidhipuSpadanta,
10. zItala, 11. zreyAnsa, 12. vAsupUjya, 13. vimala, 14. ananta, 15. dharma 16.
zAnti, 17. kunthu, 18. ara, 19. mallI, 20. munisuvrata, 21. nami, 22. nemi 23.
pArzva aura 24. vrdhmaan| 636 -eepsiM cauvIsAe titthagarANaM cauvvIsaM
puvvabhavayA NAmadheyA hotthaa| taM jahA paDhamettha vairaNAbhe vimale taha
vimalavAhaNe ceva  /  tatto ya dhammasIhe sumitta taha dhammamitte ya  // 11 //
suMdarabAhu taha dIhabAhU jugabAhU laTThabAhU ya  /  diNNe ya iMdadatte suMdara
mAhiMdare ceva  // 12 //  sIharahe meharahe ruppI a sudaMsaNe ya boddhavve  /
tatto ya NaMdaNe khalu sIhagirI ceva vIsaime  // 13 //  adINasattu saMkhe
sudaMsaNe naMdaNe ya boddhavve  /  .[imIse ] osappiNIe ee titthakarANaM tu
puvvabhavA  // 14 //  ina caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM ke pUrvabhava ke caubIsa nAma
the| jaise 1. unameM prathama nAma vajranAbha, 2. vimala, 3. vimalavAhana, 4.
dharmasiMha, 5. sumitra, 6. dharmamitra, 7. sundarabAhu, 8. dIrghabAhu, 9.
yugabAhu, 10. laSThabAhu, 11. datta, 12. indradatta, 13. sundara, 14. mAhendra,
15. siMharatha, 16. megharatha, 17. rukmI, 18. sudarzana, 19. nandana, 20.
siMhagiri, 21. adInazatru, 22. zaMkha, 23. sudarzana aura 24. nndn| ye isI
avasarpiNI ke tIrthaMkaroM ke pUrvabhava ke nAma jAnanA caahie||1114|| 637-eesiM
cauvvIsAe titthakarANaM cauvvIsaM sIyAo hotthaa| taM jahA sIyA sudaMsaNA 1
suppabhA 2 ya siddhArtha 3 suppasiddhA 4 ya  /  vijayA 5 ya vejayaMtI 6 jayaMtI
7 aparAjiA8 ceva  // 15 //  aruNappabha 9 caMdappabha 10 sUrappaha 11 aggi 12
suppabhA 13 ceva  /  vimalA 14 ya paMcavaNNA 15 sAgaradattA 16 NAgadattA 17 ya
// 16 //  abhayakara 18 NivvuikarA 19 maNoramA 20 taha maNoharA 21 ceva  /
devakuru 22 uttarAkurA 23 visAla caMdappabhA 24 sIyA  // 17 //  eyAo sIAo
savvesiM ceva jiNavariMdANaM  /  savvajagavacchalANaM savvouyasubhAe chAyAe  //
18 //

Page #345 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[226] [Samvayanga Sutra] The twenty-four Tirthankaras had twenty-four Shivikas
(palanquins). (On which the Tirthankaras were seated and went to the forest for
renunciation.) Like 1. Sudarshana Shivika, 2. Suprabha, 3. Siddhartha, 4.
Suprasiddha, 5. Vijaya, 6. Vaijayanti, 7. Jayanti, 8. Aparajita, 9. Arunaprabha,
10. Chandraprabha, 11. Suryaprabha, 12. Agniprabha, 13. Suprabha, 14. Vimala,
15. Panchvarna, 16. Sagardatta, 17. Nagadatta, 18. Abhayakara, 19.
Nirvrittikara, 20. Manorama, 21. Manohara, 22. Devakura, 23. Uttarakura and 24.
Chandraprabha. All these Shivikas were vast. 1517|| These Shivikas of all the
Jinavrendras, who are benevolent to all the worlds, are pleasant in all seasons,
excellent and endowed with auspicious radiance. ||1|| 638- Putvin Okhitta
Manusehim Sa Hatta (8) Romakuvehim. Paccha · Vahanti Siyam Asuri-Surind-Naginda
||19|| Chal-Chaval-Kundaldhara Sachhandaviuvviyabharandharau. Sur-Asur-Vandiaanm
Vahanti Si Jinindaanm ||20|| Puro Vahanti Deva Naga Pun Dahinmmi Pasmmi.
Pacchchhime Na Asura Garula Pun Uttara Pase ||21|| When the Tirthankaras were
taken for the acceptance of Jin-Diksha, these Shivikas of theirs were first
lifted on their shoulders by humans who were thrilled with joy. Behind them,
Asurendra, Surendra and Nagendra carry those Shivikas. ||19|| Those Devatas, who
are the wearers of fickle, restless earrings and who wear ornaments according to
their own will, carry the Shivikas of the Jinendras who are worshipped by the
Suras and Asuras. ||20|| These Shivikas are carried by [Vimanic] Devas in the
east, Naga Kumaras on the south side, Asura Kumaras on the west side and Garuda
Kumaras on the north side. ||21|| 639- Usabho Ya Viniyae Baravaie
Arittvaranemee. Avasesa Tithayara Nikkhanta Jammbhumisu ||22|| Rishabhdeva left
from the city of Vinita, Arishtanemi from the city of Dvaravati and the rest of
the Tirthankaras left from their respective birthplaces to accept Diksha. ||22||
640- Savve Vi Egaduse Na [Niggaya Jinavara Chauvvisam]. Na Ya Naam Annalinge Na
Ya Gihilinge Kulinge Va || 23||, All twenty-four Jinavaras left for Diksha-
acceptance with one Dusya (divine garment dedicated to Indra). None was
initiated by any other heretical Linga, nor by Grihalinga, nor by Kulalinga.
(But all were initiated by Jin-Linga only.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 226] . [samavAyAGgasUtra ina caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM ko caubIsa zivikAeM
(pAlakiyAM) thiiN| (jina para virAjamAna hokara tIrthaMkara pravrajyA ke lie
vana meM ge|) jaise 1. sudarzanA zivikA, 2. suprabhA, 3. siddhArthA, 4.
suprasiddhA, 5. vijayA, 6. vaijayantI, 7. jayantI, 8. aparAjitA, 9. aruNaprabhA,
10. candraprabhA, 11. sUryaprabhA, 12. agniprabhA, 13. suprabhA, 14. vimalA, 15.
paMcavarNA, 16. sAgaradattA, 17. nAgadattA, 18. abhayakarA, 19. nirvRtikarA, 20.
manoramA, 21. manoharA, 22. devakurA, 23. uttarakurA aura 24. cndrprbhaa| ye
sabhI zivikAeM vizAla thiiN| 1517 //  sarvajagat-vatsala sabhI jinavarendroM kI
ye zivikAeM sarva RtuoM meM sukhadAyinI uttama aura zubhakAnti se yukta hotI
haiM  // 1 //  638-puTviM okkhittA mANusehiM sA haTTa (8) romakUvehiM  /  pacchA
* vahaMti sIyaM asuriMda-suriMda-nAgiMdA  // 19 //  cala-cavala-kuMDaladharA
sacchaMdaviuvviyAbharaNadhArau  /  sura-asura-vaMdiANaM vahaMti sI jiNiMdANaM
// 20 //  purao vahaMti devA nAgA puNa dAhiNammi pAsammi  /  paccacchimeNa asurA
garulA puNa uttare pAse  // 21 //  jina-dIkSA grahaNa karane se lie jAte samaya
tIrthaMkaroM kI ina zivikAoM ko sabase pahile harSa se romAJcita manuSya apane
kandhoM para uThAkara le jAte haiN| pIche asurendra, surendra aura nAgendra una
zivikAoM ko lekara calate haiM  // 19 //  caMcala capala kuNDaloM ke dhAraka
aura apanI icchAnusAra vikriyAmaya AbhUSaNoM ko dhAraNa karane vAle ve devagaNa
sura-asuroM se vandita jinendroM kI zivikAoM ko vahana karate haiM  // 20 //
ina zivikAoM ko pUrva kI ora [vaimAnika] deva, dakSiNa pArzva meM nAgakumAra,
pazcima pArzva meM asurakumAra aura uttara pArzva meM garur3akumAra deva vahana
karate haiM  // 21 //  639- usabho ya viNIyAe bAravaIe aritttthvrnnemii| avasesA
titthayarA nikkhaMtA jammabhUmIsu  // 22 //  RSabhadeva vinItA nagarI se,
ariSTanemi dvArAvatI se aura zeSa sarva tIrthaMkara apanI-apanI janmabhUmiyoM se
dIkSA grahaNa karane ke lie nikale the||22|| 640- savve vi egadUseNa [NiggayA
jiNavarA cuvviisN]| Na ya NAma aNNaliMge Na ya gihiliMge kuliMge va  //  23 // ,
sabhI caubIsoM jinavara eka dUSya (indra-samarpita divya vastra) se dIkSA-
grahaNa karane ke lie nikale the| na koI anya pAkhaMDI liMga se dIkSita huA, na
gRhiliMga se aura na kuliMga se dIkSita hue| (kintu sabhI jina-liMga se hI
dIkSita hue the|)

Page #346 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Past Future Great Person] [227 641- One alone, the Lord Hero [with Parsva,
Malli, and three hundred each]. The Lord Vasupujya also went out with six
hundred men.] ||24|| Ugra, Bhoga, Rajanya, and Kshatriya [and four thousand.
Usabha with the rest, a thousand families.] ||25|| To take initiation, Lord
Mahavira went out alone from home. Parsvanatha and Malli went out with three
hundred men each. And Lord Vasupujya went out with six hundred men. ||24|| Lord
Rishabhadeva went out from home with four thousand Ugra, Bhoga, Rajanya, and
Kshatriya families to take initiation. The remaining nineteen Tirthankaras went
out with a thousand men each. ||25|| 642- With constant food [Vasupujya went out
with the fourth. Parsva, Malli with the eighth, the rest with the sixth.] ||26||
Sumati, the Dev, with constant food, Vasupujya with the fourth food, Parsva and
Malli with the eighth food, and the remaining twenty Tirthankaras with the sixth
food rule were initiated. ||26|| 643- These twenty-four Tirthankaras had twenty-
four first food givers. Like 1. Shreyans, 2. Brahmadatt, 3. Surendradatt, 4.
Indradatt, 5. Padma, 6. Somadev, 7. Mahendra, 8. Somadatta, 9. Pushya, 10.
Punarvasu, 11. Purnanand, 12. Sunand, 13. Jay, 14. Vijay, 15. Dharmasinha, 16.
Sumitra, 17. Varga (Vagg) Sinha, 18. Aparajit, 19. Vishvasena, 20.
Vrishabhasena, 21. Datta, 22. Varadatta, 23. Dhanadatta, and 24. Bahul, these
are the twenty-four first food givers to the twenty-four Tirthankaras in order.
All these pure Leshyavalas, inspired by the devotion of the Jinavaras, gave food
to the Jinavarendra Tirthankaras with folded hands at that time and at that
time. ||27-30|| 644- The food was [received by Usabha after a year. The rest
received their first food on the second day.] ||31|| Lokanatha, Lord
Rishabhadeva, received his first food after a year. The rest of the Tirthankaras
received their first food on the second day. ||31||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atIta anAgatakAlika mahApuruSa] [227 641- ekko bhagavaM vIro [pAso mallI ya
tihi tihi saehiM]  /  bhagavaM pi vAsupujjo chahiM purisasaehiM nikkhaMto]  //
24 //  uggANaM bhogANaM rAiNNANaM [ca khattiyANaM ca  /  cauhiM sahassehiM
usabho sesA u sahassa-parivArA]  // 25 //  dIkSA-grahaNa karane ke lie bhagavAn
mahAvIra akele hI ghara se nikale the| pArzvanAtha aura mallI jina tIna-tIna sau
puruSoM ke sAtha nikle| tathA bhagavAn vAsupUjya chaha sau puruSoM ke sAtha
nikale the  //  24 //  bhagavAn RSabhadeva cAra hajAra ugra, bhoga, rAjanya aura
kSatriya janoM ke parivAra ke sAtha dIkSA grahaNa karane ke lie ghara se nikale
the| zeSa unnIsa tIrthaMkara eka-eka hajAra puruSoM ke sAtha nikale the|||25||
642- samuittha NiccabhatteNa [Niggao vAsupujja cottheNaM  /  pAso mallI ya
aTThamoNaM sesA u chaTheNaM]  // 26 //  sumati deva nitya bhakta ke sAtha,
vAsupUjya caturtha bhakta ke sAtha, pArzva aura mallI aSTamabhakta ke sAtha aura
zeSa bIsa tIrthaMkara SaSThabhakta ke niyama ke sAtha dIkSita hue the||26||
643-eesiMNaM cauvIsAe titthagarANaM cauvvIsaM paDhamabhikkhAdAyAro hotthaa|tN
jahA sijjaMsa baMbhadatte suriMdadatte ya iMdadatte ya  /  paume ya somadeve
mAhiMde taha ya somadatte ya  // 27 //  pusse puNavvasU puNNaNaMda suNaMde jaye
ya vijaye ya  /  tatto ya dhammasIhe sumittaM taha vaggasIhe a  // 28 //
avarAjiya vissaseNe vIsaime hoi usabhaseNe ya  /  dipaNe varadatte dhaNe bahule
ya ANupuvvIe  // 29 //  ee visuddhalesA jiNavarabhattIi paMjiliuDA u  /  taM
kAlaM taM samayaM paDilAbheI jiNavariMde  // 30 //  ina caubIsoM tIrthaMkaroM ko
prathama vAra bhikSA dene vAle caubIsa mahApuruSa hue haiN| jaise 1. zreyAnsa,
2. brahmadatta, 3. surendradatta, 4. indradatta, 5. padma,6. somadeva,7.
mAhendra, 8. somadatta, 9. puSya, 10. punarvasu, 11. pUrNananda, 12. sunanda,
13. jaya, 14. vijaya, 15. dharmasiMha, 16. sumitra, 17. varga(vagga) siMha, 18.
aparAjita, 19. vizvasena, 20. vRSabhasena, 21. datta, 22. varadatta, 23.
dhanadatta aura 24. bahula, ye krama se caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM ko pahalI vAra
AhAradAna karane vAle jAnanA caahie| ina sabhI vizuddha lezyAvAloM ne jinavaroM
kI bhakti se prerita hokara aMjalipuTa se usa kAla aura usa samaya meM
jinavarendra tIrthaMkaroM ko AhAra kA pratilAbha kraayaa|| 27-30 //  644-
saMvacchareNa bhikkhA [laddhA usabheNa lognnaahenn| sesehi vIyadivase laddhAo
pddhmbhikkhaao||31||] lokanAtha bhagavAn RSabhadeva ko eka varSa ke bAda
prathama bhikSA prApta huii| zeSa saba tIrthaMkaroM ko prathama bhikSA dUsare
dina prApta huii|| 31 //

Page #347 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[228] [Samvayanga Sutra Discussion - The mention of receiving alms on the second
day of the other Tirthankaras means that those who were initiated with the rules
of the devotee received alms on their second day. 645 - Ikshu-rasa was obtained
by Lord Rishabhadeva in the first alms. The rest of the Tirthankaras received
the supreme food (kheer) like nectar in the first alms. || 32 || All the
Tirthankaras, the Jinas, wherever they received their first alms, there was a
rain of Vasudhara, as high as their body. || 33 || 646 - There were twenty-four
Chaitya trees of these twenty-four Tirthankaras. Like 1. Nyagrodha (Banyan), 2.
Saptaparna, 3. Sal, 4. Priyal, 5. Priyangu, 6. Chhatrah, 7. Sirisha, 8.
Nagavriksh, 9. Sali, 10. Pilankhuvriksh, 11. Tindhuk 12. Patala, 13. Jambu, 14.
Ashvattha (Peepal) 15. Dadhiparna, 16. Nandivriksh, 17. Tilaka, 18. Amravriksh,
19. Ashoka, 20. Champaka, 21. Bakul, 22. Vetrasavriksh, 23. Dhaatkivriksh and
24. Vardhaman's Salavriksh. These are the Chaitya trees of the twenty-four
Tirthankaras. || 3436 || 647 - The Chaitya tree of Vardhaman Bhagwan was thirty-
two Dhanushya high, it was Nitya-rituk, i.e. there was prosperity of leaves,
flowers etc. in it in every season. The Ashoka tree was covered (covered) by the
Sal tree, || 37 || The Chaitya tree of Rishabha Jina was three Gavyutis (kos)
high. The Chaitya trees of the rest of the Tirthankaras were twelve times higher
than their body height. || 38 || All these Chaitya trees of the Jinaveras were
adorned with umbrellas, flags, banners, vedikas, toranas and were worshipped by
the gods, asuras and Garuda. || 39 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 228] [samavAyAGgasUtra vivecana- zeSa tIrthaMkaroM ke dUsare dina bhikSA-prApta
karane ke ullekha kA yaha artha hai ki jo jitane bhakta ke niyama ke sAtha
dIkSita hue, usake dUsare dina unheM bhikSA prApta huii| 645 - usabhassa
paDhamabhikkhA khoyaraso Asi lognnaahss| sesANaM paramaNNaM amiyarasarasovamaM
aasi||32|| savvesiM pi jiNANaM jahiyaM laddhAu pddhmbhikkhaau| tahiyaM
vasudhArAo sarIramettIo vutttthaao||33|| lokanAtha RSabhadeva ko prathama bhikSA
meM ikSurasa prApta huaa| zeSa sabhI tIrthaMkaroM ko prathama bhikSA meM amRta-
rasa ke samAna parama-anna (khIra) prApta huaa|| 32  //  sabhI tIrthaMkaroM
jinoM ne jahA~ jahA~ prathama bhikSA prApta kI, vahA~ vahA~ zarIrapramANa UMcI
vasudhArA kI varSA huI  //  33 //  646-eesiM cauvvIsAe titthagarANaM cauvIsaM
ceiyarukkhA hotthaa| taM jahA Naggoha sattivaNNe sAle piyae piyaMgu chattAhe  /
/  sirise ya NAgarukkhe sAlI ya pilaMkhurukkhe ya  //  34 //  tiMduga pADala
jaMbU Asatthe khalu taheva dahivaNNe  /  NaMdIrukkhe tilae aMbayarukkhe ya asoge
ya  // 35 //  caMpaya vaule ya tahA veDasarukkhe ya dhAyaIrukkhe  /  sAle ya
vaDamANassa ceiyarukkhA jiNavarANaM  // 36 //  ina caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM ke
caubIsa caityavRkSa the| jaise 1. nyagrodha (vaTa), 2. saptaparNa, 3. zAla, 4.
priyAla, 5. priyaMgu, 6. chatrAha, 7. zirISa, 8. nAgavRkSa, 9. sAlI, 10.
pilaMkhuvRkSa, 11. tinduka 12. pATala, 13. jambu, 14. azvattha (pIpala) 15.
dadhiparNa, 16. nandIvRkSa, 17. tilaka, 18. AmravRkSa, 19. azoka, 20. campaka,
21. bakula, 22. vetrasavRkSa, 23. dhAtakIvRkSa aura 24. vardhamAna kA
shaalvRkss| ye caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM ke caityavRkSa haiM  //  3436  /  /  647-
battIsaM dhaNuyAiM ceiyarukkho ya vaddhamANassa  /  Niccougo asoge occhaNNe
sAlarukkheNaM  // 37 //  tiNNeva gAuAI ceiyarukkho jiNassa usabhassa  /  seNANaM
paNa rukkhA sarIrao vArasagaNA u||38|| sacchattA sapaDAgA saveDayA toraNehiM
uvveyaa| sara-asara-garulamahiA ceDayarukkhA jiNavarANaM  // 39 //  vardhamAna
bhagavAn kA caityavRkSa battIsa dhanuSa UMcA thA, vaha nitya-Rtuka thA arthAt
pratyeka Rtu meM usameM patra-puSpa Adi samRddhi vidyamAna rahatI thii|
azokavRkSa sAlavRkSa se Acchanna (DhaMkA huA) thA,  // 37 //  RSabha jina kA
caityavRkSa tIna gavyUti (koza) UMcA thaa| zeSa tIrthaMkaroM ke caityavRkSa
unake zarIra kI UMcAI se bAraha guNe UMce the|| 38 //  jinavaroM ke ye sabhI
caityavRkSa chatra-yukta, dhvajA-patAkA-sahita, vedikA-sahita, toraNoM se
suzobhita tathA suroM, asuroM aura garuDadevoM se pUjita the|| 39 //

Page #348 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Past Future Great Person] [229 Discussion - The tree under which the
Tirthankaras attained omniscience is called the Chaitya tree. According to some,
the tree under which the Tirthankaras take the Jain initiation is called the
Chaitya tree. Kubera establishes the same tree at the place where the
Tirthankara sits in the Samavasarana and adorns it with flags, banners,
platforms and toranas. All these banyan, sal, etc. trees located in the
Samavasarana are called 'Ashoka trees' because as soon as a creature reaches
their shade, his sorrow is removed and he becomes Ashoka (free from sorrow). 648
- There were twenty-four first disciples of these twenty-four Tirthankaras. Like
1. The first disciple of Rishabhdev was Rishabhsen, and the second disciple of
Ajitjin was 2 Singhsen. Again in order 3. Charu, 4. Vajranabh, 5. Chamar, 6.
Suvrat, 7. Vidarbha, 8. Datta, 9. Varaha, 10. Anand, 11. Gostubh, 12. Sudharma,
13. Mandar, 14. Yash, 15. Arishta, 16. Chakrarath, 17. Swayambhu, 18. Kumbha,
19. Indra, 20. Kumbha, 21. Shubh, 22. Varadatta 23. Datta and 24. Indrabuti were
the first disciples. All these were of excellent high lineage, of pure lineage
and endowed with virtues and were the first disciples of the Tirthankara-
founders. ||40-421/2|| 649 - There were twenty-four first disciples of these
twenty-four Tirthankaras. Like 1. Brahmi, 2. Falgu, 3. Shyama, 4. Ajita, 5.
Kashyapi, 6. Rati, 7. Soma, 8. Sumana, 9. Varuni, 10. Sulasa, 11. Dharini, 12.
Dharani, 13. Dharanidhara 14. Padma, 15. Shiva, 16. Shuchi, 17. Anjuka, 18.
Bhavitatma, 19. Bandhumati, 20. Pushpavati, 21. Arya Amila 22. Yashaswini, 23.
Pushpachula and 24. Arya Chandana. All these were of excellent high lineage, of
pure lineage, endowed with virtues and were the first disciples of the
Tirthankara-founders. ||43-45||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atIta anAgatakAlika mahApuruSa] [229 vivecana-jisa vRkSa ke nIce tIrthaMkaroM
ko kevalajJAna prApta huA use caityavRkSa kahate haiN| kucha ke matAnusAra
tIrthaMkara jisa vRkSa ke nIce jina-dIkSA grahaNa karate haiM, use caityavRkSa
kahA jAtA hai| kubera samavasaraNa meM tIrthaMkara ke baiThane ke sthAna para
usI vRkSa kI sthApanA karatA hai aura use dhvajA-patAkA, vedikA aura toraNa
dvAroM se susajjita karatA hai| samavasaraNa-sthita ina vaTa, zAla Adi sabhI
vRkSoM ko 'azokavRkSa' kahA jAtA hai, kyoMki inakI chAyA meM pahuMcate hI zoka-
santapta prANI kA bhI zoka dUra hotA hai aura vaha azoka (zoka-rahita) ho jAtA
hai| 648-eesiM cauvvIsAe titthagarANaM cauvvIsaM paDhamasIsA hotthaa| tahA
paDhamettha usabhaseNe bIie puNa hoI sIhaseNe y| cArU ya vajjaNAbhe camare taha
savvaya vidabbhe  // 40 //  diNNe ya varAhe puNa ANaMde gothubhe suhamme ya  /
maMdara jase ariDhe cakkAha sayaMbhu kuMbhe ya  // 41 //  iMde kuMbhe ya subhe
varadatte diNNa iMdabhUI ya  /  uditodita-kulavaMsA visuddhavaMsA guNehiM
uvaveyA  // 42 //  titthappavattayANaM paDhamA sissA jinnvraannN| . ina caubIsa
tIrthaMkaroM ke caubIsa prathama ziSya the| jaise 1. RSabhadeva ke prathama
ziSya RSabhasena, aura dUsare ajitajina ke prathama ziSya 2 siMhasena the| punaH
krama se 3. cAru, 4. vajranAbha, 5. camara, 6. suvrata, 7. vidarbha, 8. datta,
9. varAha, 10. Ananda, 11. gostubha, 12. sudharma, 13. mandara, 14. yaza, 15.
ariSTa, 16. cakraratha, 17. svayambhU, 18. kumbha, 19. indra,20. kumbha, 21.
zubha, 22. varadatta 23. datta aura 24. indrabhUti prathama ziSya hue| ye sabhI
uttama uccakula vAle, vizuddhavaMza vAle aura guNoM se saMyukta the aura tIrtha-
pravartaka jinavaroM ke prathama ziSya the||40-421/2  //  649-eesiMNaM cauvIsAe
titthagarANaM cauvIsaM paDhamasissaNI hotthaa| taM jahA baMbhI ya phaggu sAmA
ajiyA kAsavI raI somA  /  samaNA vAruNi salasA dhAraNi dharaNI ya dharaNidharA
// 43 //  paumA sivA suI taha aMjuyA bhAviyappA ya  /  rakkhI ya baMdhuvatI
pupphavatI ajjA amilA ya ahiyA  // 44 //  jassiNI pupphacUlA ya caMdaNajjA AhiyA
u  /  uditodiyakulavaMsA visuddhavaMsA guNehiM uvaveyA  // 45 //
titthappavattayANaM paDhamA sissI jinnvraannN| ina caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM kI
caubIsa prathama ziSyAeM thiiN| jaise 1. brAhmI, 2. phalgu, 3. zyAmA, 4. ajitA,
5. kAzyapI, 6. rati, 7. somA, 8. sumanA, 9. vAruNI, 10. sulasA, 11. dhAriNI, 12.
dharaNI, 13. dharaNidharA 14. padmA, 15. zivA, 16. zuci, 17. aMjukA, 18.
bhAvitAtmA, 19. bandhumatI, 20. puSpavatI, 21. AryA amilA 22. yazasvinI, 23.
puSpacUlA aura 24. AryA cndnaa| ye saba uttama unnata kulavAlI, vizuddhavaMza
vAlI, guNoM se saMyukta thIM

Page #349 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[230] [The Samvayanga Sutra and the first female disciples of the Tirthankaras.]
||43-441/2|| 650- In this Jambudvipa, in this Bharatavarsha, in this Avasarpini,
there were twelve Chakravartis. They were: 1. Rishabha, 2. Sumitra, 3. Vijaya,
4. Samudravijaya, 5. Ashvasena, 6. Vishvasena, 7. Surasen, 8. Kartavirya, 9.
Padmottara, 10. Mahahari, 11. Vijaya, and 12. Brahma. These are the names of the
fathers of the twelve Chakravartis. ||46-47|| 651- In this Jambudvipa, in this
Bharatavarsha, in this Avasarpini, there were twelve mothers of the twelve
Chakravartis. They were: 1. Sumangala, 2. Yasasvati, 3. Bhadra, 4. Sahadevi, 5.
Achira, 6. Sri, 7. Devi, 8. Tara, 9. Jvala, 10. Mera, 11. Vappa, and 12.
Chullini. 652- In this Jambudvipa, in this Bharatavarsha, in this Avasarpini,
there were twelve Chakravartis. They were: 1. Bharat, 2. Sagar, 3. Maghava, 4.
Rajashardul Sanatkumar, 5. Shanti, 6. Kunthu, 7. Ar, 8. Kauravavanshi Subhumi,
9. Mahapadma, 10. Rajashardul Harishena, 11. Jaya, and 12. Brahmadutta.
||48-49|| 653- These twelve Chakravartis had twelve wives. They were: 1.
Subhadra, 2. Bhadra, 3. Sunanda, 4. Jaya, 5. Vijaya, 6. Kinnhasiri, 7. Surasiri,
8. Padmasiri, 9. Vasundhara, 10. Devi, 11. Lachchhima, and 12. Kuruma. These are
the names of the wives.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 230] [samavAyAGgasUtra aura tIrtha-pravartaka jinavaroM kI prathama ziSyAeM
huIM  // 43-441/2  //  650-jaMbuddIveNaM[ dIve] bhArahe vAse imIse osappiNIe
bArasa cakkavaTTipiyaro hotthaa| taM jahA usabhe sumitte vijae samuddavijae ya
AsaseNe ya  /  vissaseNe ya sUre sudaMsaNe kattavIrie ceva  // 46 //  paumuttare
mahAharI vijae rAyA taheva ya  /  baMbhe bArasame utte. piunAmA cakkavaTTINaM
// 47 //  isa jambUdvIpa ke isI bhAratavarSa meM isI avasarpiNI kAla meM utpanna
hue cakravartiyoM ke bAraha pitA the| jaise 1. RSabhajina, 2. sumitra, 3.vijaya,
4. samudravijaya, 5. azvasena, 6. vizvasena,7. sUrasena, 8. kArtavIrya, 9.
padmottara, 10. mahAhari, 11. vijaya aura 12. brhm| ye bAraha cakravartiyoM ke
pitAoM ke nAma haiM  /  / 46-47 //  651-jaMbuddIve[NaM dIve] bhArahe vAse imIse
osappiNIe bArasa cakkaTTimAyaro hotthaa| taM jahA-sumaMgalA jasavatI bhaddA
sahadevI airA siridevI tArA jAlA merA vappA culliNi apcchim| isI jambUdvIpa ke
bhAratavarSa meM isI avasarpiNI kAla meM bAraha cakravartiyoM kI bAraha mAtAeM
huiiN| jaise 1. sumaMgalA, 2. yazasvatI, 3. bhadrA, 4. sahadevI, 5. acirA, 6.
zrI, 7. devI, 8. tArA, 9. jvAlA, 10. merA, 11. vaprA, aura 12. bArahavIM
cullinii| 652-jaMbuddIve [NaM dIve bhArahe vAse imIse osappiNIe ] bArasa
cakkavaTTI hotthaa| taM jahA bharaho sagaro maghavaM [saNaMkumAro ya
raaysjhuulo| saMtI kuMthU ya aro havai subhUmo ya koravvo  // 48 //  navamo ya
mahApaumo hariseNo ceva raaysjhuulo| jayanAmo ya naravaI bArasamo -baMbhadatto
y||49|| isI jambUdvIpa ke bhAratavarSa meM isI avasarpiNI kAla meM bAraha
cakravartI hue| jaise 1. bharata, 2. sagara, 3. maghavA, 4. rAjazArdUla
sanatkumAra, 5. zAnti, 6. kunthu,7.ara, 8. kauravavaMzI subhUma, 9. mahApadma,
10. rAjazArdUla hariSeNa, 11.jaya aura 12. bArahavAM narapati brahmadatta  //
48-49  //  653-eesiM bArasaNhaM cakkavaTTINaM bArasa itthirayaNA hotthaa| taM
jahA paDhamA hoi subhaddA bhadda suNaMdA jayA ya vijayA y| kiNhasirI sUrasirI
paumasirI vasuMdharA devii||50|| lacchimaI kurumaI itthIrayaNANa naamaaiN|

Page #350 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Past Future Great Person] [231 These twelve Chakravartis had twelve female
jewels. Like 1. First Subhadra, 2. Bhadra, 3. Sunanda, 4. Jaya, 5. Vijaya, 6.
Krishna Shree, 7. Surya Shree, 8. Padma Shree, 9. Vasundhara, 10. Devi, 11.
Lakshmi Mati and 12. Kuru Mati. These are the names of the female jewels. ||
(50-501/2) || 654-In Jambudvipa [in the island, in the country, in this
Avasarpini] there were nine fathers of nine Baldev and nine Vasudeva. Like
Prajapati, Brahma, Soma, Rudra, Shiva, Maha Shiva, Agni Shikha, Dasharatha and
Vasudeva. || 51 || 655-In Jambudvipa [in the island, in the country, in this
Avasarpini] there were nine mothers of nine Vasudeva. Like Mrigavati, Uma,
Prithvi, Sita, Amrita, Lakshmi Mati, Seshamati, Kekayi and Devaki. || 52 ||
656-In Jambudvipa [in the island, in the country, in this Avasarpini] there were
nine mothers of nine Baldev. Like Bhadra, Subhadra, Suprabha, Sudarshana,
Vijaya, Vaijayanti, Jayanti, Aparajita and Rohini. These were the nine mothers
of Baldev. || 53 || 657-In Jambudvipa [in the island, in the country, in this
Avasarpini] there were nine Dasara Mandalas. Like-Uttama Purusha, Majjhima
Purusha, Pahaana Purusha, Oyamsi, Teyamsi, Vacchamsi, Jasamsi, Chayamsi, Kanta,
Soma, Subhaga, Piyadasana, Suruwa, Suhasila, Suhabhigama, Savvajananayanakant,
Ohbala, Atibala

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atIta anAgatakAlika mahApuruSa] [231 ina bAraha cakavarttiyoM ke bAraha
strIratna the| jaise 1. prathama subhadrA, 2. bhadrA, 3. sunandA, 4. jayA, 5.
vijayA, 6. kRSNazrI, 7. sUryazrI, 8. padmazrI, 9. vasundharA, 10. devI, 11.
lakSmImatI aura 12. kurumtii| ye strIratnoM ke nAma haiM  //  (50-501/2) //
654-jaMbuddIve [NaM dIve bhArahe vAse imIse osappiNIe] navabaladeva-
navavAsudevapitaro hotthaa| taM jahA payAMvaI ya baMbho [somo ruddo sivo
mahasivo y| aggisiho ya dasaraho navamo bhaNio ya vsudevo||51||] isI jambUdvIpa
ke bhAratavarSa meM isI avasarpiNI meM nau baladevoM aura nau vAsudevoM ke nau
pitA hue| jaise 1. prajApati, 2. brahma, 3. soma, 4. rudra, 5. ziva, 6.
mahAziva, 7. agnizikha, 8. dazaratha aura 9. vasudeva  // 51 //  655-jaMbuddIve
NaM [ dIve bhArahe vAse imIse osappiNIe ] Nava vAsudevamAyaro hotthaa| taM jahA
miyAvaI umA ceva puhavI sIyA ya ammyaa| lacchimaI sesamaI kekaI devaI thaa||52||
isI jambUdvIpa ke bhAratavarSa meM isI avasarpiNI kAla meM nau vAsudevoM kI nau
mAtAeM huiiN| jaise 1. mRgAvatI, 2. umA, 3. pRthivI, 4. sItA, 5. amRtA, 6.
lakSmImatI, 7. zeSamatI, 8. kekayI aura 9. devkii||52|| . 656-jaMbuddIveNaM [
dIve bhArahe vAse imIme osappiNIe]Nava baladevamAyaro hotthaa| taM jahA bhaddA
taha subhaddA ya suppabhA ya sudNsnnaa| vijayA vejayaMtI ya jayaMtI
apraajiyaa||53|| NavamIyA rohiNI ya baladevANa maayro| isI jambUdvIpa ke
bhAratavarSa meM isI avasarpiNI kAla meM nau baladevoM kI nau mAtAeM huiiN|
jaise 1. bhadrA, 2. subhadrA, 3. suprabhA, 4. sudarzanA, 5. vijayA, 6.
vaijayantI, 7. jayantI, 8. aparAjitA aura 9. rohinnii| ye nau baladeva kI mAtAeM
thiiN||53|| 657-jaMbuddIve NaM [dIve bhArahe vAse imIse osappiNIe ] nava
dasAramaMDalA hotthaa| taM jahA-uttamapurisA majjhimapurisA pahANapurisA oyaMsI
teyaMsI vaccaMsI jasaMsI chAyaMsI kaMtA somA subhagA piyadaMsaNA suruvA suhasIlA
suhAbhigamA savvajaNaNayaNakaMtA ohabalA atibalA

Page #351 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[232] [Samavayanga Sutra] Mahabala (possessing great strength), Anihata
(unharmed), Aparaiya (unconquerable), Sattumandana (crushing enemies),
Ripusahasamanamahana (destroyer of thousands of enemies), Sanukkosha (possessing
a good treasury), Amacchaara (free from envy), Achal (steadfast), Achanda
(unwavering), Miyamanjulpalavahasya (possessing a gentle and sweet voice),
Gambhiramadhura-padipunnasacchavayana (possessing a deep, sweet, and truthful
speech), Abhuvagayavachchala (possessing a beautiful and charming gait), Saranna
(worthy of refuge), Lakkhan-vanjanagunouveaa (possessing excellent qualities and
adornments), Manummanapamaanapradipunna-sujayasavvangasundaranga (possessing a
beautiful body with perfect proportions), Sasisomaagar-kantapiyadansana
(possessing a moon-like face that is pleasing to the eyes), Amarisana
(possessing a charming smile), Payandadandappabharya (possessing a heavy and
dignified gait), Gambhiradarissanijja (possessing a majestic appearance),
Taladdhovviddha-garulkeu (possessing a sharp and piercing gaze like a Garuda),
Mahadhanuvikaddhaya (possessing a great bow), Mahasattasaara (possessing great
courage), Duddhara (difficult to conquer), Dhanuddhara (possessing a strong
bow), Dheerapurisa (possessing great courage), Juddhakittipurisa (possessing a
great reputation in battle), Viulakulasamubhava (born into a great family),
Maharayana vihadaga (possessing a great and spacious abode), Addhabarahaami
(possessing half the strength of a Tirthankara), Soma (possessing a moon-like
complexion), Rayakulavansatilaya (born into a royal family), Ajiya
(unconquerable), Ajiyarha (unconquerable), Hal-musalakanyak-paani (possessing a
mace, a club, a sword, and a water-pot), Sankha-chakk-gay-satti-nandgadhara
(possessing a conch, a discus, a bow, an arrow, and a flag), Pava-rujjal-
sukkant-vimala-goththu-tirid-dhari (possessing a white, pure, and shining
turban), Kundal-ujjoiyanna (possessing shining earrings), Pundariyanayana
(possessing lotus-like eyes), Ekavali-kanth-laiyavachcha (possessing a single
string of pearls around the neck), Sirivachch-sulanchhana (possessing a
beautiful and auspicious appearance), Varajasa (possessing a great aura),
Savvouyasurabhi-kusuma-rachita-palamb-sobhanta-kanta-vikasanta-vichittavar-
malaraiy-vachcha (possessing a beautiful garland of fragrant flowers),
Atthasayavibhatta-lakkhan-pasattha-sundar-viraiyangamanga (possessing a
beautiful body with eight hundred auspicious marks), Mattagayavarid-laliy-
vikkam-vilasiyagai (possessing a beautiful and graceful gait), Sarayanava
(possessing a great ocean of knowledge), Thinniya-mahura-gambhira-konch-
nigghosa-dundubhisara (possessing a deep and resonant voice like the sound of a
drum), Kadisuttaga-niila-piya-kosenjvasasa (possessing a blue and yellow silk
garment), Pava-ditta-teya (possessing a radiant glow), Narasinha (possessing the
strength of a lion), Naravai (possessing the strength of a man), Narinda
(possessing the strength of a king), Naravasha (possessing the strength of a
hero), Maruyavasabhakappa (possessing the strength of a mountain),
Abbahayarayateyalachchie (possessing a great and auspicious aura), Dippamana
(possessing a radiant glow), Neelaga-piyagavasana (possessing a blue and yellow
garment), Duve Duve Ram-Kesava (possessing the qualities of Rama and Krishna),
Bhayaro Hottha (possessing a fearsome appearance).  Thus, in this Jambudvipa, in
this Bharatavarsha, in this Avasarpini Kal, there have been nine Dasaramandala
(communities of Baldeva and Vasudeva). The Sutrakar describes them:  All these
Baldeva and Vasudeva were great men born into noble families. They were middle
men because they were intermediaries between the Tirthankaras and the other
Shala-purushas. Or, they were middle men because they were stronger than
ordinary people but weaker than the Tirthankaras. They were the leading men of
their time because they possessed the most prominent qualities of courage, etc.
They were powerful because they were endowed with mental strength. They were
radiant because they possessed luminous bodies. They were dominant because they
were endowed with physical strength. They were famous because they achieved fame
through their valor. They were shadowy because they possessed a shadow (aura)
around their bodies. They were radiant because they possessed a radiant glow.
They were gentle because they possessed a moon-like countenance. They were
fortunate because they were beloved by all. They were pleasing to the eyes
because they were very pleasing to look at. They were handsome because they
possessed a square body. They were virtuous because they possessed a good
character. They were easily accessible because everyone could easily meet them.
They were beloved by all because they were pleasing to the eyes of all. They
were powerful because they were strong, tireless, and possessed an uninterrupted
flow of strength. They were very powerful because they surpassed the strength of
all the men of their time. They were supremely powerful because they possessed
great and excellent strength. They were unharmed because they possessed an
uninterrupted lifespan, or because no one could defeat them in a wrestling
match. They were unconquerable because no one could defeat them in battle. They
were crushers of enemies because they crushed their enemies in great battles.
They were destroyers of thousands of enemies because they destroyed the pride of
thousands of enemies. They were benevolent to those who obeyed or served them,
but they were cruel to those who betrayed them. They were free from envy because
they were grateful for even the smallest of qualities in others. They were
steadfast because they possessed a stable mind, speech, and body. They were
unwavering because they were free from fickleness. They were fierce without any
reason.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 232] [samavAyAGgasUtra mahAbalA anihatA aparAiyA sattumaddaNA
ripusahassamANamahaNA sANukkosA amaccharA acavalA acaMDA miyamaMjulapalAvahasiyA
gaMbhIramadhura-paDipuNNasaccavayaNA abbhuvagayavacchalA saraNNA lakkhaNa-
vaMjaNaguNovaveA mANummANapamANapaDipuNNa-sujAyasavvaMgasuMdaraMgA sasisomAgAra-
kaMtapiyadaMsaNA amarisaNA payaMDadaMDappabhArA gaMbhIradarisaNijjA
tAladdhaovviddha-garulakeU, mahAdhaNuvikaDDhayA mahAsattasAarA duddharA
dhaNuddharA dhIrapurisA juddhakittipurisA viulakulasamubbhavA mahArayaNavihADagA
addhabharahasAmI somA rAyakulavaMsatilayA ajiyA ajiyarahA hala-musalakaNaka-pANI
saMkha-cakka-gaya-satti-naMdagadharA pavarujjala-sukkaMta-vimala-gotthubha-
tirIDadhArI kuMDala-ujjoiyANaNA puMDarIyaNayaNA ekAvali-kaNTha-laiyavacchA
sirivaccha-sulaMchaNA varajasA savvouyasurabhi-kusuma-racita-palaMba-sobhaMta-
kaMta-vikasaMta-vicittavara-mAlaraiya-vacchA aTThasayavibhatta-lakkhaNa-
pasattha-suMdara-viraiyaMgamaMgA mattagayavarida-laliya-vikkama-vilasiyagaI
sArayanava thiNiya-mahura-gaMbhIra-koMca-nigghosa-duMdubhisarA kaDisuttaga-nIla-
pIya-kosenjavAsasA pavaradittateyA narassIhA naravaI nariMdA naravasahA
maruyavasabhakappA abbhahiyarAyateyalacchIe dippamANA nIlaga-pIyagavasaNa duve
duve rAma-kesavA bhAyaro hotthaa| taM jahA isa jambUdvIpa meM isa bhAratavarSa
ke isa avasarpiNIkAla meM nau dazAramaMDala (baladeva aura vAsudeva samudAya)
hue haiN| sUtrakAra unakA varNana karate haiM - ve sabhI baladeva aura vAsudeva
uttama kula meM utpanna hue zreSTha puruSa the, tIrthaMkarAdi zalAkA-puruSoM ke
madhyavartI hone se madhyama puruSa the, athavA tIrthaMkaroM ke bala kI apekSA
kama ora sAmAnya janoM ke bala kI apekSA adhika balazAlI hone se ve madhyama
puruSa the| apane samaya ke puruSoM ke zaurvAdi guNoM kI pradhAnatA kI apekSA ve
pradhAna puruSa the| mAnasika bala se sampanna hone ke kAraNa ojasvI the|
dedIpyamAna zarIroM ke dhAraka hone se tejasvI the| zArIrika bala se saMyukta
hone ke kAraNa varcasvI the, parAkrama ke dvArA prasiddhi ko prApta karane se
yazasvI the| zarIra kI chAyA (prabhA) se yukta hone ke kAraNa ve chAyAvanta the|
zarIra kI kAnti se yukta hone se kAnta the, candra ke samAna saumya mudrA ke
dhAraka the, sarvajanoM ke vallabha hone se ve subhaga yA saubhAgyazAlI the|
netroM ko atipriya hone se ve priyadarzana the| samacaturasra saMsthAna ke
dhAraka hone se ve surUpa the| zubha svabhAva hone se ve zubhazIla the|
sukhapUrvaka saralatA se pratyeka jana unase mila sakatA thA, ata: ve
sukhAbhigamya the| sarvajanoM ke nayanoM ke pyAre the| kabhI nahIM thakanevAle
avicchinna pravAhayukta balazAlI hone se ve oghabalI the, apane samaya ke sabhI
puruSoM ke bala kA atikramaNa karane se atibalI the aura mahAn prazasta yA
zreSTha balazAlI hone se ve mahAbalI the| nirupakrama AyuSya ke dhAraka hone se
anihata arthAt dUsare ke dvArA hone vAle ghAta yA maraNa se rahita the, athavA
malla-yuddha meM koI unako parAjita nahIM kara sakatA thA, isI kAraNa ve
aparAjita the| bar3e-bar3e yuddhoM meM zatruoM kA mardana karane se ve
zatrumardana the, sahasroM zatruoM ke mAna kA mathana karane vAle the| AjJA yA
sevA svIkAra karane vAloM para droha chor3akara kRpA karane vAle the| ve
mAtsarya-rahita the, kyoMki dUsaroM ke leza mAtra bhI guNoM ke grAhaka the| mana
vacana kAya kI sthira pravRtti ke kAraNa ve acapala (capalatA-rahita) the|
niSkAraNa pracaNDa

Page #352 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Past and Future Great Personalities] [233] They were devoid of anger, possessed
a gentle, melodious voice and a soft smile. They spoke profound, sweet and
truthful words. They had a loving attitude towards those who submitted to them.
They were protectors of those who sought refuge. They were adorned with
auspicious marks like vajra, swastika, chakra, etc., and had the qualities of
moles, freckles, etc. They were endowed with the perfect height, weight and
proportion of their body, and were born with a beautiful body. They had a
gentle, moon-like face, were radiant and pleasing to behold. They were
'Amasruna', meaning they were not lazy in performing their duties, or
'Amarshana', meaning they were forgiving even to those who wronged them. They
were the upholders of severe punishment for the wicked. They were dignified and
impressive. Baldev was the bearer of a flag with the mark of a Tal tree, and
Vasudev was the bearer of a flag with the mark of Garuda. They were capable of
drawing great bows that spanned from ear to ear, and were oceans of great
strength. It was impossible to withstand their attacks on the battlefield. They
were wielders of great bows, heroes among men, men who had earned fame in
battles, born into great families, and could crush even a diamond with their
thumb and forefinger. They were the rulers of half the Bharat region, i.e.,
three continents. They were gentle in nature. They were the ornaments of royal
families and dynasties. They were 'Ajit' (unconquerable) and 'Ajitarath'
(possessing an invincible chariot). Baldev was the wielder of the plough and the
mace, while Vasudev was the wielder of the Sharanga bow, Panchjanya conch,
Sudarshana chakra, Kaumodaki mace, Shakti and Nandaka sword. They wore a crown
adorned with the excellent, brilliant, radiant, pure Kaustubha gem. Their faces
were illuminated by the light of the gems in their earrings. They had lotus-like
eyes. A garland of pearls adorned their neck and chest. Their chest was marked
with the auspicious Srivatsa mark. They were renowned for their glory throughout
the world. Their chest was always adorned with a long, beautiful, radiant,
blooming, five-colored garland made of fragrant flowers that bloomed in all
seasons. Their beautiful limbs were endowed with one hundred and eight
auspicious marks. They moved with grace, vigor and elegance like a maddened
elephant. They had a sweet, deep voice like the newly risen clouds of autumn,
like the silent cry of the crane and like the sound of the drum. Baldev wore a
blue silk garment with a waist-band, while Vasudev wore a yellow silk garment
with a waist-band. They were endowed with great brilliance and radiance. Being
extremely powerful, they were known as Narasimha (like a lion among men),
Narapati (husband of men), Narendara (supremely powerful) and Naravrishabha (the
best among men). By fully performing their duties, they were worthy of the title
of Marudvrishabha, like the king of gods. They were more radiant than other
kings and emperors with the radiance of Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth. Thus,
the nine blue-clad Ramas (Baldev) and the nine yellow-clad Keshavas (Vasudev)
were both brothers. 1. If the water that spills out of a boat filled with water
is equal to one 'dron' (a unit of measurement), then that man is called 'Man-
prapta'. If the weight of a man sitting on a scale is equal to half a 'bhar' (a
unit of weight), then he is called 'Unman-prapta'. If the height of a body is
one hundred and eight angulas (finger widths) from his fingertip, then he is
called 'Praman-prapta'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atIta anAgatakAlika mahApuruSa] [233 krodha se rahita the, parimita maMjula
vacanAlApa aura mRdu hAsya se yukta the| gambhIra, madhura aura paripUrNa satya
vacana bolate the| adhInatA svIkAra karane vAloM para vAtsalya bhAva rakhate
the| zaraNa meM AnevAle ke rakSaka the| vajra, svastika, cakra Adi lakSaNoM se
aura tila, masA Adi vyaMjanoM ke guNoM se saMyukta the| zarIra ke mAna, unmAna
aura pramANa se paripUrNa the, ve janma-jAta sarvAGga sundara zarIra ke dhAraka
the| candra ke saumya AkAra vAle, kAnta aura priyadarzana the| 'amasRNa' arthAt
karttavya-pAlana meM Alasya-rahita the athavA 'amarSaNa' arthAt aparAdha
karanevAloM para bhI kSamAzIla the| udaMDa puruSoM para pracaNDa daNDanIti ke
dhAraka the| gambhIra aura darzanIya the| baladeva tAla vRkSa ke cihnavAlI
dhvajA ke aura vAsudeva garuDa ke cihnavAlI dhvajA ke dhAraka the| ve
dazAramaNDala karNa-paryanta mahAdhanuSoM ko khIMcanevAle, mahAsattva (bala) ke
sAgara the| raNabhUmi meM unake prahAra kA sAmanA karanA azakya thaa| ve mahAn
dhanuSoM ke dhAraka the, puruSoM meM dhIra-vIra the, yuddhoM meM prApta kIrti ke
dhAraka puruSa the, vizAla kuloM meM utpanna hue the, mahAratna vajra (hIrA) ko
bhI aMgUThe aura tarjanI do aMguliyoM se cUrNa kara dete the| Adhe bharata
kSetra ke arthAt tIna khaNDa ke svAmI the| saumyasvabhAvI the| rAjakuloM aura
rAjavaMzoM ke tilaka the| ajita the (kisI se bhI nahIM jIte jAte the), aura
ajitaratha (ajeya ratha vAle) the| baladeva hala aura mUzala rUpa zastroM ke
dhAraka the, tathA vAsudeva * zArGga dhanuSa, pAJcajanya zaMkha, sudarzana
cakra, kaumodakI gadA, zakti aura nandaka nAmA khaGga ke dhAraka the| pravara,
ujjvala, sukAnta, vimala kaustubha maNi yukta mukuTa ke dhArI the| unakA mukha
kuNDaloM meM lage maNiyoM ke prakAza se yukta rahatA thaa| kamala ke samAna
netra vAle the| ekAvalI hAra kaNTha se lekara vakSaHsthala taka zobhita rahatA
thaa| unakA vakSaHsthala zrIvatsa ke salakSaNa se cihnita thaa| ve vizvavikhyA
yaza vAle the| sabhI RtuoM meM utpanna hone vAle, sugandhita puSpoM se racI gaI,
laMbI, zobhAyukta, kAnta, vikasita, paMcavarNI zreSTha mAlA se unakA
vakSaHsthala sadA zobhAyamAna rahatA thaa| unake sundara aMga-pratyaMga eka sau
ATha prazasta lakSaNoM se sampanna the| ve mada-matta gajarAja ke samAna lalita,
vikrama aura vilAsayukta gati vAle the| zaradaRtu ke nava-udita megha ke samAna
madhura, gambhIra, krauMca pakSI ke nirghoSa aura dundubhi ke samAna svara vAle
the| baladeva kaTisUtra vAle nIla kauzeyaka vastra se tathA vAsudeva kaTisUtra
vAle pIta kauzeyaka vastra se yukta rahate the (baladevoM kI kamara para nIle
raMga kA aura vAsudeva kI kamara para pIle raMga kA dupaTTA baMdhA rahatA thaa|)
ve prakRSTa dIpti aura teja se yukta the, prabala balazAlI hone se ve manuSyoM
meM siMha ke samAna hone se narasiMha, manuSyoM ke pati hone se narapati, parama
aizvaryazAlI hone se narendra tathA sarvazreSTha hone se nara-vRSabha kahalAte
the| apane kArya-bhAra kA pUrNa rUpa se nirvAha karane se ve marudvRSabhakalpa
arthAt devarAja kI upamA ko dhAraNa karate the| anya rAjA-mahArAjAoM se adhika
rAjateja rUpa lakSmI se dedIpyamAna the| isa prakAra nIla-vasanavAle nau rAma
(baladeva) aura nava pIta-vasanavAle kezava (vAsudeva) donoM bhAI-bhAI hue haiN|
1. jala se bharI droNI (nAva) meM baiThane para usase bAhara nikalA jala yadi
droNa (mApa-vizeSa) pramANa ho to vaha puruSa 'mAna-prApta' kahalatA hai| tulA
(tarAjU) para baiThe puruSa kA vajana yadi ardhabhAra pramANa ho to vaha unmAna-
prApta kahalAtA hai| zarIra kI UMcAI usake aMgula se yadi eka sau ATha aMgula ho
to vaha pramANa-prApta kahalAtA hai|

Page #353 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[234] [Samavayanga Sutra 658 - Trivithaye ya [Duvidhe ya Sambhu Purisuttame
Purisisihe. Tatha Purisapundarie Datte Narayane Kanhe ||54|| Ayale Vijaye Bhadde
Supphabe ya Sudansane. Aanande Nandane Paume Rame Yavi] Apachchhime ||55|| Among
them, the names of Vasudevas are as follows - 1. Triprishtha, 2. Dwipristha, 3.
Swayambhu, 4. Purushottama, 5. Purushisingha, 6. Purushapuṇḍarīka, 7. Datta, 8.
Narayana (Lakshmana) and 9. Krishna ||54|| The names of Baladevas are as follows
- 1. Achal, 2. Vijay, 3. Bhadra, 4. Suprabha, 5. Sudarshan, 6. Anand, 7. Nandan,
8. Padma and the last Baldeva is Rama ||55|| 659 - Easinganavahan Baldeva-
Vasudevanam Puvva Bhaviya Nav Namadhejjā Hotthā. Tam Jahā Vissabhūī Pavvayae
Dhanadatta Samuddadatta Isivāle. Piyamitta Lalayamitte Punavvasu Gangadatte Ya
||56|| Eyāī Nāmāī Puvva Bhave Āsi Vasudevanam. Etto Baldevāṇam Jahākkam
Kittassāmi ||57|| Visanandī Ya Subandhu Sagaradatte Asogalalie Ya. Vārāha
Dhammaseṇe Aparāīya Rāyalalie Ya ||58|| These nine Baldevas and Vasudevas had
the following names in their previous births 1. Vishvabhuti, 2. Parvat, 3.
Dhanadatta, 4. Samudradatta, 5. Rishipaal, 6. Priyamitra, 7. Lalitamitra, 8.
Punarvasu, and 9. Gangadatta. These were the names of Vasudevas in their
previous births. I will now tell you the names of Baldevas in order || 56-57||
1. Vishvanandi, 2. Subandhu, 3. Sagaradatta, 4. Ashoka, 5. Lalit, 6. Varaha, 7.
Dharmaseṇa, 8. Aparajit and 9. Rajalalit || 58|| 660 - Easinganavahan Baldeva-
Vasudevanam Puvva Bhaviya Nav Dhammaayariya Hotthā. Tam Jahā Sambhuya Subhadda
Sudansane Ya Seyans Kanha Gangadatte Ya. Sagar Samuddaname Dumseṇe Ya Navame
||59|| Ee Dhammaayariya Kittipurisaṇ Vasudevanam. Puvva Bhave Eyāsin Jaththa
Niyāṇāī Kāsi Ya ||60|| These nine Baldevas and Vasudevas were nine
Dharmaacharyas in their previous births 1. Sambhuta, 2. Subhadra, 3. Sudarshan,
4. Shreyans, 5. Krishna, 6. Gangadatta, 7. Sagar, 8. Samudra and 9. Drumasen ||
59|| These nine were the Acharyas, Kirti Purusha Vasudevas in their previous
births. I will now tell you the names of the cities where Vasudevas attained
liberation in their previous births - || 60||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 234] [samavAyAGgasUtra 658- tiviThe ya [duviDhe ya sayaMbhU purisuttame
purisasIhe  /  taha purisapuMDarIe datte nArAyaNe kaNhe  // 54 //  ayale vijaye
bhadde suppabhe ya sudaMsaNe  /  AnaMde naMdaNe paume rAme yAvi] apacchime  //
55 //  unameM vAsudevoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM - 1. tripRSTha, 2. dvipRSTha,
3. svayambhU, 4. puruSottama, 5. puruSasiMha, 6. puruSapuMDarIka,7. datta, 8.
nArAyaNa (lakSmaNa) aura 9. kRSNa  // 54 //  baladevoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM-
1. acala, 2. vijaya, 3. bhadra, 4. suprabha, 5. sudarzana, 6. Ananda,7. nandana,
8. padma aura antima baladeva raam||55|| 659 -eesiMNaMNavaNhaM baladeva-
vAsudevANaM puvvabhaviyA nava nAmadhejjA hotthaa|tN jahA vissabhUI pavvayae
dhaNadatta samuddadatta isivAle  /  piyamitta laliyamitte puNavvasU gaMgadatte
ya  // 56 //  eyAI nAmAI puvvabhave Asi vAsudevANaM  /  etto baladevANaM
jahakkama kittaissAmi  // 57 //  visanandI ya subandhU sAgaradatte asogalalie ya
/  vArAha dhammaseNe aparAiya rAyalalie ya  // 58 //  ina nava baladevoM aura
vAsudevoM ke pUrva bhava kenau nAma isa prakAra the 1. vizvabhUti, 2. parvata,
3. dhanadatta, 4. samudradatta, 5. RSipAla, 6. priyamitra, 7. lalitamitra, 8.
punarvasu, aura 9. gaMgadatta  /  ye vAsudevoM ke pUrva bhava meM nAma the|
isase Age yathAkrama se baladevoM ke nAma kahU~gA  //  56-57 //  1. vizvanandI,
2. subandhu, 3. sAgaradatta, 4. azoka, 5. lalita, 6. vArAha, 7. dharmasena, 8.
aparAjita aura 9. rAjalalita  //  58 //  660-eesiMnavaNhaM baladeva-vAsudevANaM
puvvabhaviyA nava dhammAyariyA hotthaa|tN jahA saMbhUya subhadda sudaMsaNe ya
seyaMsa kaNha gaMgadatte ya  /  sAgara samuddanAme dumaseNe ya Navamae  // 59 //
ee dhammAyariyA kittIpurisANa vAsudevANaM  /  puvvabhave eyAsiM jattha niyANAI
kAsI ya  // 60 //  ina nava baladevoM aura vAsudevoM ke pUrvabhava meM nau
dharmAcArya the 1. saMbhUta, 2. subhadra, 3.sudarzana, 4. zreyAnsa, 5. kRSNa, 6.
gaMgadatta, 7. sAgara, 8. samudra aura 9. drumasena  //  59 //  ye navoM hI
AcArya kIrti puruSa vAsudevoM ke pUrvabhava meM dharmAcArya the| jahA~ vAsudevoM
ne pUrva bhava meM nidAna kiyA thA una nagaroM ke nAma Age kahate haiM -  //  60
//

Page #354 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Past and Future Great Souls  **661** - These nine Vasudevas had nine Niyāna-
bhūmis in their previous births. (Where they attained Niyāna [liberation]). For
example: 1. Mathura, 2. Kanakavastu, 3. Shravasti, 4. Podanpur, 5. Rajagriha, 6.
Kakandī, 7. Kaushambi, 8. Mithilapuri, and 9. Hastinapur. || 61 ||  **662** -
These nine Vasudevas had nine Niyāna-kāraṇas (causes of liberation). For
example: 1. Gāvi (cow), 2. Yupastambha (sacrificial post), 3. Sangrāma (battle),
4. Ithi (woman), 5. Parāyo (defeat in battle), 6. Rangā (woman's love), 7.
Bhajanuraga (devotion), 8. Goṭṭi (group), 9. Paraiḍḍi (foreigner), 10. Māuā
(mother). || 62 ||  **663** - These nine Vasudevas had nine Padisattus
(enemies). For example: 1. Ashvagrīva, 2. Tārak, 3. Merak, 4. Madhu-Kaitabha, 5.
Nishumbha, 6. Bali, 7. Prabhraj (Prahlāda), 8. Rāvaṇa, and 9. Jarāsandha. || 63
||  These Kirtipurusha (famous men) were the nine enemies of the Vasudevas. All
of them were Chakrayodi (warriors who fought with a chakra) and all of them were
killed in battle by their own chakras. || 64 ||  Out of the nine Vasudevas, one
went to the seventh earth, five went to the sixth earth, one to the fifth, one
to the fourth, and Krishna went to the third earth. || 65 ||  All Rāmas
(Balarama) are Anidānakṛta (not liberated) and all Vasudevas are Niyāna-kṛta
(liberated) in their previous births. All...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atIta anAgatakAlika mahApuruSa ] 661 - eesiM navahaM vAsudevANaM puvvabhave
nava niyANabhUmIo hotthA  /  taM jahA mahurA ya [ kaNNagavatthU sAvatthI poyaNaM
ca rAyagihaM  /  kAyaMdI kosambI mihilapurI] hatthiNAuraM ca  //  61  //  ina
navIM vAsudevoM kI pUrvabhava meM nau nidAna - bhUmiyA~ thiiN| (jahA~ para
unhoMne nidAna [niyANA ] kiyA thA  / ) jaise [ 235 1. mathurA, 2. kanakavastu,
3. zrAvastI, 4. podanapura, 5. rAjagRha, 6. kAkandI, 7. kauzAmbI, 8. mithilApurI
aura 9. hastinApura  //  61  //  662 - ete siM NaM navaNhaM vAsudevANaM nava
niyANakAraNA hotthA  /  taM jahAgAvi juve [ saMgAme taha itthI parAio raMge  /
bhajANurAga goTTI paraiDDI mAuA iya ]  //  62  //  ina navoM vAsudevoM ke nidAna
karane ke nau kAraNa the 1. gAvI (gAya), 2. yUpastambha, 3. saMgrAma, 4. strI,
5. yuddha meM parAjaya, 6. strI- anuroga 7. goSThI, 8. para - Rddhi aura 9.
mAtRkA (mAtA)  //  63 //  663 - eesiM navahaM vAsudevANaM nava paDisattU hotthA
/  taM jahA - assaggIve [ tArae merae mahukeDhave nisuMbhe ya  /  balipaharAe
taha rAvaNe ya navame ] jarAsaMdhe  //  63 //  ee khalu paDisattU [ kittI
purisANa vAsudevANaM  /  savve vi cakkajohI savve vi hayA ] sacakke hiM  //  64
//  ekko ya sattamIe paMca ya chaTThIe paMcamI ekko  /  ekko ya cautthIe kaNho
puNa tacca puDhavIe  //  65  //  aNidANakaDA rAmA [ savve vi ya kesavA
niyANakaDA  /  uDDhagAmI rAmA ke sava savve ahogAmI  //  66 //  aTThatakaDA rAmA
ego puNa baMbhaloyakappaMmi  /  ekkassa gabbhavasahI sijjhissai AgamisseNaM  //
67 //  ina navIM vAsudevoM ke nau pratizatru (prativAsudeva) the| jaise 1.
azvagrIva, 2. tAraka, 3. meraka, 4. madhu-kaiTabha, 5. nizumbha 6. bali, 7.
prabharAja (prahlAda), 8. rAvaNa aura 9. jarAsandha  //  63  //  ye kIrtipuruSa
vAsudevoM ke nau pratizatru the| ye sabhI cakrayodhI the aura sabhI apane cakroM
se yuddha meM mAre gaye  //  64  //  ukta nau vAsudevoM meM se eka mara kara
sAtavIM pRthivI meM, pAMca vAsudeva chaThI pRthivI meM, eka pAMcavIM meM, eka
cauthI meM aura kRSNa tIsarI pRthivI meM gaye  //  65  //  sabhI rAma (baladeva)
anidAnakRta hote haiM aura sabhI vAsudeva pUrva bhava meM nidAna karate haiN|
sabhI

Page #355 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 236] The 23 Ram (Baldev) are upward-going after death, and all Vasudevas are
downward-going. ||66|| Eight Ram (Baldev) are Antakrit, meaning they destroy
karma and end the cycle of birth and death. One final Baldev was born in
Brahmaloka. He will become a Siddha in the next birth after taking a womb.
||66|| 664- In Jambudvipa, in the Airavata Varsha, in this Avasarpini, there
have been 24 Tirthankaras. They are: 1. Suchandra, with a face like the moon, 2.
Agniseen, 3. Nandiseen, 4. Rishi Dutt, the one who practices vows, and 5. Soma
Chandra. I bow to them. ||67|| 6. Yuktiseen, 7. Ajitseen, 8. Shivseen, 9.
Buddha, 10. Devsharm, 11. Nikshipt Shastra (Shreyans). I always bow to them.
||69|| 12. Asanjal, 13. Jinvrushbha, and 14. Anant Jin, the one with infinite
knowledge. I bow to them. 15. Upashant, free from karma dust, and 16. Guptiseen.
I bow to them. ||70|| 17. Atipashva, 18. Supashva, and 19. Marudeva, worshipped
by Deveshwars, 20. Dhar, who attained Nirvana, 21. Shyamkoth, free from
suffering, 22. Agniseen, the conqueror of raga, 23. Agniputra, the one with
diminished raga, and 24. Varisheena, who destroyed raga and dvesha and attained
Siddhi. I bow to them. (There are variations in the order of names in some
texts). ||71-72|| 665- In Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Varsha, in the upcoming
Utsarpini, there will be seven Kulkaras. They are: 1. Mitvahana, 2. Subhoom, 3.
Supprabha, 4. Swayamprabha, 5. Datt, 6. Sukshma, and 7. Subandhu. These seven
will be the Kulkaras in the upcoming Utsarpini. ||73|| 666- In Jambudvipa, in
the Airavata Varsha, in the upcoming Utsarpini, there will be ten Kulkaras. They
are: 1. Vimala Vahana, 2. Simankara, 3. Simandhara, 4. Khemankara, 5.
Khemandhara, 6. Dadhadhanu, 7. Dashadhanu, 8. Sayadhanu, 9. Padisui,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 236] [samavAyAGgasUtra rAma maraNa kara UrdhvagAmI hote haiM aura sabhI
vAsudeva adhogAmI hote haiM  // 66 //  ATha rAma (baladeva) antakRt arthAt kamoM
kA kSaya karake saMsAra kA anta karane vAle hue| eka antima baladeva brahmaloka
meM utpanna he| jo AgAmI bhava meM eka garbha-vAsa lekara siddha hoNge|6||
664-jaMbuddIve [NaM dIve ] eravae vAse imIse osappiNIe cauvvIsaM titthayarA
hotthaa| taM jahA caMdANaNaM sucaMdaM aggIseNaM ca naMdiseNaM ca  /  isidiNNaM
vavahAriM vaMdimo somacaMdaM ca  // 68 //  vaMdAmi juttiseNaM ajiyaseNaM taheva
sivaseNaM  /  buddhaM ca devasammaM sayayaM nikkhittasatthaM ca  // 69 //
asaMjalaM jiNavasahaM vaMde ya aNaMtayaM amiyaNANiM  /  uvasaMtaM ca dhuyarayaM
vaMde khalu guttiseNaM ca  // 70 //  atipAsaM ca supAsaM devesaravaMdiyaM ca
marudevaM  /  nivvANagayaM ca dharaM khINaduhaM sAmakoThaM ca  // 71 //
jiyarAgamaggiseNaM vaMde khINarayamaggiuttaM ca  /  vokkasiyapijjadosaM
vAriseNaM gayaM siddhiM  // 72 //  isI jambUdvIpa ke airavata varSa meM isI
avasarpiNI kAla meM caubIsa tIrthaMkara hue haiM - 1. candra ke samAna mukha
vAle sucandra, 2. agnisena, 3. nandisena, 4. vratadhArI RSidatta aura 5.
somacandra kI maiM vandanA karatA hUM  // 67 // 6. yuktisena, 7. ajitasena, 8.
zivasena, 9. buddha, 10. devazarma, 11. nikSiptazastra (zreyAnsa) kI maiM sadA
vandanA karatA hUM  // 69  // 12. asaMjvala, 13. jinavRSabha aura 14. amitajJAnI
ananta jina kI maiM vandanA karatA huuN| 15. karmaraja-rahita upazAnta aura 16.
guptisena kI bhI maiM vandanA karatA hUM  // 70  // 17. atipArzva, 18. supArzva,
tathA 19. devezvaroM se vandita marudeva, 20.nirvANa ko prApta dhara aura 21.
prakSINa du:kha vAle zyAmakoSTha, 22. rAgavijetA agnisena, 23. kSINarAgI
agniputra aura rAga-dveSa kA kSaya karane vAle, siddhi ko prApta caubIsaveM
vAriSeNa kI maiM vandanA karatA hUM (kahIM-kahIM nAmoM ke krama meM bhinnatA bhI
dekhI jAtI hai|)  // 71-72 //  665-jaMbuddIve [NaM dIve ] AgamissAe ussappiNIe
bhArahe vAse satta kulagArA bhvissNti| taM jahA miyabAhaNe subhUme ya suppabhe
ya syNpbhe| datte suhame subaMdhU ya AgamissANa hokkhNti||73|| isI jambUdvIpa ke
bhAratavarSa meM AgAmI utsarpiNI kAla meM sAta kulakara hoNge| jaise 1.
mitavAhana, 2. subhUma, 3. suprabha, 4. svayamprabha, 5. datta, 6. sUkSma aura
7. subandhu, ye AgAmI utsarpiNI meM sAta kulakara hoNge||73|| 666-jaMbuddIveNaM
dIve AgamissAe ussappiNIe eravae vAse dasa kulagarA bhvissNti| taM jahA-
vimalavAhaNe sImaMkare sImaMdhare khemaMkare khemaMdhare daDhadhaNU dasadhaNU
sayadhaNU paDisUI

Page #356 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Past, Future, and Great Souls  **The Great Souls of the Future**  In the
Airavata Varsha of Jambudvipa, in the upcoming Utsarpini Kala, there will be ten
Kulakaras: 1. Vimala Vahan, 2. Simankara, 3. Simandhara, 4. Kshemankara, 5.
Kshemandhara, 6. Dridhadhanu, 7. Dashadhanu, 8. Shatadhanu, 9. Pratiśruti, and
10. Sumati.  **The Twenty-Four Tirthankaras of the Future**  In the Jambudvipa,
in the Bharatavarsha, in the upcoming Utsarpini Kala, there will be twenty-four
Tirthankaras. They are: 1. Mahapadma, 2. Suradeva, 3. Suparshva, 4.
Swayamprabha, 5. Sarvanubhuti, 6. Devashrut, 7. Uday, 8. Pedhalputra, 9.
Proshthi, 10. Shatakirti, 11. Munisuvrata, 12. Sarvabhavit, 13. Amam, 14.
Niskashaya, 15. Nispulaka, 16. Nirmama, 17. Chitragupta, 18. Samadhigupta, 19.
Sanvara, 20. Anivriti, 21. Vijay, 22. Vimala, 23. Devoppapata, and 24.
Anantavijay. These twenty-four Tirthankaras will preach Dharma-tirtha in the
Bharatavarsha in the upcoming Utsarpini Kala.  **The Past Lives of the Twenty-
Four Tirthankaras**  The past lives of these twenty-four future Tirthankaras
will have twenty-four names: 1. Seniya, 2. Supasa, 3. Uday, 4. Potthilla, 5.
Dhadhau, 6. Kattiya, 7. Sankha, 8. Nanda, 9. Sunanda, 10. Satya, 11. Bodhavva,
12. Devai, 13. Sacchai, 14. Vasudeva, 15. Baldeva, 16. Rohini, 17. Sulasa, 18.
Tattu, 19. Khalu, 20. Revai, 21. Tattu, 22. Havayi, 23. Sayali, 24. Bodhavva,
25. Khalu, 26. Bhayali, 27. Diwayana, 28. Kanha, 29. Tattu, 30. Khalu, 31.
Naraya, 32. Ambada, 33. Darude, 34. Sai, 35. Buddha, 36. Hoi, 37. Bodhavva.
These are the names of the future Tirthankaras in their past lives.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atIta anAgatakAlika mahApuruSa ] sumaiti  /  jambUdvIpa ke airavata varSa meM
AgAmI utsarpiNI kAla meM daza kulakara hoMge 1 . vimalavAhana, 2. sImaMkara, 3.
sImaMdhara, 4. kSemaMkara, 5. kSemaMdhara, 6. dRDhadhanu, 7. dazadhanu, 8.
zatadhanu, 9 pratizruti aura 10. sumati  /  * 667- jaMbuddIve NaM dIve bhArahe
vAse AgamissAe ussappiNIe cauvIsaM titthagarA bhavissaMti  /  taM jahA - [ 237
mahApaume sUradeve sUpAse ya sayaMpabhe  /  savANubhUI arahA devassue ya hokkhai
//  74  //  udae peDhAlaputte ya poTTile sattakitti ya  /  muNisuvvae ya arahA
savvabhAvaviU jiNe  //  75  //  amame NikkasAe ya nippulAe ya nimmame  /
cittautte samAhI ya AgamisseNa hokkhai  //  76  //  saMvare aNiyaTTI ya vijae
vimale ti ya  /  devovavAe arahA aNaMtavijae i ya  //  77  //  ee vRttA
cauvvIsaM bharahe vAsammi kevalI  /  AgamisseNa hokkhaMti dhammatitthassa desagA
//  78  //  1- 1. isI jambUdvIpa ke bhAratavarSa meM AgAmI utsarpiNI kAla meM
caubIsa tIrthaMkara hoNge| jaisemahApadma, 2. sUradeva, 3. supArzva, 4.
svayamprabha, 5. sarvAnubhUti, 6. devazruta, 7. udaya, 8. peDhAlaputra, 9.
proSThi, 10. zatakIrtti, 11. munisuvrata, 12. sarvabhAvavit, 13. amama, 14.
niSkaSAya, 15. niSpulAka, 16. nirmama, 17. citragupta, 18. samAdhigupta, 19.
saMvara, 20. anivRtti, 21. vijaya, 22. vimala, 23 devopapAta aura 24.
anantavijaya  /  ye caubIsa tIrthaMkara bhAratavarSa meM AgAmI utsarpiNI kAla
meM dharmatIrtha kI dezanA karane vAle hoMge  //  74-78  //  668 - eesiM NaM
cauvvIsAe titthakarANaM puvvabhaviyA cauvvIsaM nAmadhejjA bhavissaMti (?)
(hotthA  /  ) seNiya supAsa udae poTTilla taha daDhAU ya  /  kattiya saMkhe ya
tahA naMda sunande ya satae ya  //  79  //  bodhavvA devaI ya saccai taha
vAsudeva baladeve  /  rohiNi sulasA ceva tatto khalu revaI ceva  // 80 //  tatto
havai sayAlI bodhavve khalu tahA bhayAlI ya  /  dIvAyaNe ya kaNhe tatto khalu
nArae ceva  // 81 //  aMbaDa dAruDe ya sAI buddhe ya hoi boddhavve  /  bhAvI
titthagarANaM NAmAI puvvabhaviyAI  // 82 //  ina bhaviSyakAlIna caubIsa
tIrthaMkaroM ke pUrva bhava ke caubIsa nAma isa prakAra haiM

Page #357 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Samvayanga Sutra]  **238]** The names of the previous births of the future
Tirthankaras should be known:  1. Shrenik, 2. Suparshva, 3. Uday, 4. Proshthil
Anagar, 5. Dridhayu, 6. Kartik, 7. Shankh, 8. Nand, 9. Sunand, 10. Shatak, 11.
Devaki, 12. Satyaki, 13. Vasudev, 14. Baldev, 15. Rohini, 16. Sulas, 17. Revati,
18. Shatali, 19. Bhayali, 20. Dwipayan, 21. Narad, 22. Ambad, 23. Swati, 24.
Buddha. || 79-82 ||  **669** - There will be twenty-four fathers, twenty-four
mothers, twenty-four first disciples, twenty-four first female disciples,
twenty-four first alms-givers, and twenty-four Chaitya trees for these twenty-
four Tirthankaras.  **670** - In the Jambudvipa, in the Bharatavarsha, in the
upcoming Utsarpini, there will be twelve Chakravartis. They are: 1. Bharat, 2.
Dirghadant, 3. Gudhadant, 4. Shuddhadant, 5. Shriputra, 6. Shributi, 7. Shrisom,
8. Padma, 9. Mahapadma, 10. Vimalvahan, 11. Vipulvahan, and the twelfth, Risht.
These twelve Chakravartis will be the rulers of the Bharat Kshetra in the
upcoming Utsarpini. || 83-84 ||  **671** - For these twelve Chakravartis, there
will be twelve fathers, twelve mothers, and twelve Striratnas.  **672** - In the
Jambudvipa, in the Bharatavarsha, in the upcoming Utsarpini, there will be nine
Baldev-Vasudev fathers, nine Vasudev mothers, nine Baldev mothers, and nine
Dasaramandala. They are: 1. Uttampurisa, 2. Majjhimapurisa, 3. Pahapurisa, 4.
Oyanti, 5. Teyansi.  And so on, the description should be told until the two
Neelagapitgavasana, two Rama-Keshava brothers. They are: 1. Nand, 2. Nandmitra,
3. Dihbahu, 4. Mahabahu, 5. Aibala, 6. Mahabala, 7. Balabhadda, 8. Duvi, 9.
Tivi, 10. Jayant, 11. Vijaya, 12. Bhadda, 13. Suppabha, 14. Sudansana, 15.
Anand, 16. Nandana, 17. Padma, 18. Sankarisana, 19. Apchchhima.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 238 ] [ samavAyAGgasUtra 1. zreNika, 2 . supArzva, 3. udaya, 4. proSThila
anagAra, 5. dRDhAyu, 6. kArtika, 7. zaMkha, 8. nanda, 9. sunanda, 10.zataka, 11.
devakI, 12. sAtyaki, 13. vAsudeva, 14. baladeva, 15. rohiNI, 16. sulasA, 17.
revatI, 18. zatAlI, 19. bhayAlI, 20. dvIpAyana, 21. nArada, 22. aMbaDa, 23.
svAti, 24. buddha  /  ye bhAvI tIrthaMkaroM ke pUrva bhava ke nAma jAnanA cAhie
//  79-82  //  - 669 - eesi NaM cauvvIsAe titthagarANaM caubvIsaM piyaro
bhavissaMti, cauvvIsaM mAyaro bhavissaMti, cauvvIsaM paDhamasIsA bhabissaMti,
caDabbIsaM paDhamasissaNIo bhavissaMti, cauvvIsaM paDhamabhikkhAdAyagA
bhavissaMti, cauvvIsaM ceiyaruvaravA bhavissaMti  /  ukta caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM
ke caubIsa pitA hoMge, caubIsa mAtAeM hoMgI, caubIsa prathama ziSya hoMge,
caubIsa prathama ziSyAeM hoMgI, caubIsa prathama bhikSA-dAtA hoMge aura caubIsa
caitya vRkSa hoNge| 670 - jaMbuddIve NaM dIve bhArahe vAse AgamissAe ussappiNIe
bArasa cakkavaTTiNo bhavissaMti  /  taM jahA - suddha ya  /  bharahe ya
dIhadaMte gUDhadaMte ga siriutte siribhUI sirisome ya sattame  //  83  //  paume
ya mahApaume vimalavAhaNe (letaha) bipulavAhaNe ceva  /  riTThe vArasame vutte
AgamissA bharahAhivA  //  84  //  isI jambUdvIpa ke bhAratavarSa meM AgAmI
utsarpiNI meM bAraha cakravartI hoNge| jaise 1. bharata, 2. dIrghadanta, 3.
gUDhadanta, 4. zuddhadanta, 5. zrIputra, 6. zrIbhUti, 7. zrIsoma, 8. padma, 9.
mahApadma, 10. vimalavAhana, 11. vipulavAhana aura bArahavA~ riSTa, ye bAraha
cakravartI AgAmI utsarpiNI kAla meM bharata kSetra ke svAmI hoMge  // 83-84 //
- 671 - eesi NaM bArasaNhaM cakkavaTTINaM bArasa piyaro, bArasa mAyaro
bhavissaMti, bArasa itthIrayaNA bhavisasaMti  /  ina bAraha cakravartiyoM bAraha
pitA, bAraha mAtA aura bAraha strIratna hoNge| 672 - jaMbuddIve NaM dIve bhArahe
vAse AgamissAe ussappiNIe nava baladeva - vAsudevapiyaro bhavissaMti, nava
bAsudebamAbaro bhavissaMti, nava baladevamAyaro bhavissaMti, nava dasAramaMDalA
bhavissaMti  /  taM jahA - uttamapurisA majjhimapurisA pahANapurisA oyaMtI
teyNsii| evaM so ceva vaNNao bhANiyavva jAva nIlagapItagavasaNA duve duve rAma-
kesavA bhAyaro bhavissaMti  /  taM jahA - naMde ya naMdamitte dIhabAhU tahA
mahAbAhU  /  aibale mahAbale balabhadde ya sattame  //  85  //  duvi ya tiva ya
AgamissANa vahiNo  /  jayaMta vijae bhadde suppabhe ya sudaMsaNe  //  86  //
ANaMde naMdaNe paDame saMkarisaNe a apacchime  /

Page #358 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Past Future Great Person] [239 In this Jambudvipa, in the coming Utsarpini Kal,
there will be nine Baldev and nine Vasudeva fathers, nine Vasudeva mothers, nine
Baldev mothers, and nine Dasaramandals. They will be Uttama Purusha, Madhyama
Purusha, Pradhan Purusha, Ojasvi Tejasvi, etc., with the aforementioned
adjectives. The detailed description of the Dasaramandal that was given earlier
should be repeated here as well, until Baldev is wearing blue clothes and
Vasudev is wearing yellow clothes. In this way, in the future, there will be two
pairs of Ram and Keshav brothers. Their names will be as follows: 1. Nand, 1.
Nandmitra, 3. Dirghabahu, 4. Mahabahu, 5. Atibal, 6. Mahabhal, 7. Balbhadra, 8.
Dwiprutha and 9. Tripratha, these nine will be the nine Vrishni or Vasudeva in
the coming Utsarpini Kal. And 1. Jayant, 2. Vijay, 3. Bhadra, 4. Suprabha, 5.
Sudarshan, 6. Anand, 7. Nandan, 8. Padma, and the last 9. Sankarshan, these nine
will be Baldev. || 85-86 || 673-These nine Baldev and Vasudeva will have nine
previous birth names, nine Dharmacharys, nine Nidana-Bhumis, nine Nidana-Karana,
and nine enemies. Like 1. Tilak, 2. Lohjangha, 3. Vajrangha, 4. Kesari, 5.
Prabhraj, 6. Aparajit, 7. Bhim, 8. Mahabhim, and 9. Sugriva. These nine will be
the enemies of the Kirtipurusha Vasudeva. All will be Chakrayodi and will be
killed in battle by their own chakras. || 87-88 || 674-In Jambudvipa [in the
island] of Erava, in the coming Utsarpini, there will be twenty-four
Tirthankaras. Like 1. Sumangala, 2. Siddhatha, 3. Nivavane, 4. Mahajasa, 5.
Dhammajja, 6. Arha, will be the coming Tirthankaras. || 89 || 1. Sirichanda, 2.
Pushpakeu, 3. Mahachanda, 4. Kevali, 5. Suyasagara, 6. Arha, will be the coming
Tirthankaras. || 90 || 1. Siddhatha, 2. Punnaghosa, 3. Mahagosa, 4. Kevali, 5.
Sacchseena, 6. Arha, will be the coming Tirthankaras. || 91 || 1. Suraseena, 2.
Arha, 3. Mahaseena, 4. Kevali, 5. Savvananda, 6. Arha, 7. Devutta, will be the
coming Tirthankaras. || 92 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atIta anAgatakAlika mahApuruSa] [239 isI jambUdvIpa ke bhAratavarSa meM AgAmI
utsarpiNI kAla meM nau baladevoM aura nau vAsudavoM ke pitA hoMge, nau vAsudevoM
kI mAtAeM hoMgI, nau baladevakoM kI mAtAeM hoMgI, nau dazAra-maMDala hoNge| ve
uttama puruSa, madhyama puruSa, pradhAna puruSa, ojasvI tejasvI Adi pUrvokta
vizeSaNoM se yukta hoNge| pUrva meM jo dazAramaMDala kA vistRta varNana kiyA
hai, vaha saba yahA~ para bhI yAvat baladeva nIla vasanavAle aura vAsudeva pIta
vasanavAle hoMge, yahA~ taka jyoM kA tyoM kahanA caahie| isa prakAra
bhaviSyakAla meM do-do rAma aura kezava bhAI hoNge| unake nAma isa prakAra hoMge
1. nanda, 1. nandamitra, 3. dIrghabAhu, 4. mahAbAhu, 5. atibala, 6. mahAbala,7.
balabhadra, 8. dvipRSTha aura 9. tripRSTha, ye nau AgAmI utsarpiNI kAla meM nau
vRSNI yA vAsudeva hoNge| tathA 1. jayanta, 2. vijaya, 3. bhadra, 4. suprabha,
5.sudarzana, 6. Ananda,7. nandana,8.padma, aura antima 9.saMkarSaNa ye nau
baladeva hoMga  //  85-86 //  673-eesiNaM navaNhaM baladeva-vAsudevANaM
puvvabhaviyA Nava nAmadhejA bhavissaMti, Nava dhammAyariyA bhavissaMti, nava
niyANabhUmIo bhavissaMti, nava niyANakAraNA bhavissaMti, nava paDisattU
bhbissNti| taM jahA tilae ya lohajaMghe vairajaMghe ya kesarI paharAe  /
aparAie ya bhIme mahAbhIme ya suggIve  //  87 //  ee khalu paDisattU
kittIpurisANa vAsudevANaM  /  savve vi cakkajohI hammahiMti sacakkehiM  // 88 //
ina navoM baladevoM aura vAsudevoM ke pUrvabhava ke nau nAma hoMge, nau
dharmAcArya hoMge, nau nidAna-bhUmiyA~ hoMgI, nau nidAna-kAraNa hoMge aura nau
pratizatru hoNge| jaise 1. tilaka, 2. lohajaMgha, 3. vajrajaMgha, 4. kezarI, 5.
prabharAja, 6. aparAjita, 7. bhIma, 8. mahAbhIma, aura 9. sugriiv| kIrtipuruSa
vAsudevoM ke ye nau pratizatru hoNge| sabhI cakrayodhI hoMge aura yuddha meM
apane cakroM se mAre jaayeNge|| 87-88 //  674-jaMbuddIve [NaM dIve ] eravae vAse
AgamissAe ussappiNIe cauvvIsaM titthakarA bhvissNti| taM jahA sumaMgale ya
siddhatthe NivvAvaNe ya mahAjase  /  dhammajjhae ya arahA AgamissANa hokkhaI  //
89 //  siricaMde puSphakeU mahAcaMde ya kevalI  /  suyasAgare ya arahA
AgamissANa hokkhaI  // 90 //  siddhatthe puNNaghose ya mahAghose ya kevalI  /
saccaseNe ya arahA AgamissANa hokkhaI  // 91 //  sUraseNe ya arahA mahAseNe ya
kevalI  /  savvANaMde ya arahA devautte ya hokkhaI  // 12 //

Page #359 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[240] [Samvayanga Sutra] [13]  Supaase, Suvvae, Araha, Arahe, ya Sukosale. Araha
Anantvijae, Aagamisssaan Hokkhaee. [14]  Vimale, Uttarae, Araha, Araha, ya
Mahabale. Devaanande, ya Araha, Aagamisssaan Hokkhaee. [15]  Eae Vutta Chauvvvi-
saan Erava-yammi Kevali. Aagamisssaan Hokkhanthi Dhammati-thass De-saga. These
twenty-four Tirthankaras will be Kevalis in the Airavata region during the
upcoming Utsarpini Kal. For example: 1. Sumangal, 2. Siddharth, 3. Nirvaan, 4.
Mahayash, 5. Dharma-dhvaj, these Arhant Bhagavants will be in the upcoming time.
[89] Again, 6. Shrichandra, 7. Pushpa-ketu, 8. Mahachandra Kevali, and 9.
Shruta-sagar will be Arhants. [10] Again, 10. Siddharth, 11. Poorna-ghosh, 12.
Maha-ghosh Kevali, and 13. Satya-sen will be Arhants. [91] After that, 14. Soor-
sen Arhant, 15. Maha-sen Kevali, 16. Sarva-anand, and 17. Dev-putra Arhant will
be. [92] After that, 18. Supaarshva, 19. Suvrat Arhant, 20. Sukoshal Arhant, and
21. Anant-vijay Arhant will be in the upcoming time. [93] After that, 22. Vimala
Arhant, after him 23. Maha-bal Arhant, and then 24. Deva-anand Arhant will be in
the upcoming time. [94] These above-mentioned twenty-four Tirthankara Kevalis
will be the ones who preach Dharma-tirth in the Airavata region during the
upcoming Utsarpini Kal. [95] 675 - [In the Jambudvipa, in the Airavata region,
during the upcoming Utsarpini Kal] there will be twelve Chakravartis, twelve
fathers of Chakravartis, twelve mothers of Chakravartis, and twelve wives of
Chakravartis. There will be nine fathers of Baldeva and Vasudeva, nine mothers
of Vasudeva, and nine mothers of Baldeva. There will be nine Dasara Mandals, who
will be Uttama Purusha, Madhyama Purusha, Pradhana Purusha, and so on, up to two
Ram-Keshava (Baldeva-Vasudeva) brothers, who will be shining with the most
radiant royal power and Lakshmi. There will be nine enemies of theirs, nine
names of their previous births, nine Dharma-acharyas, nine Nidana-bhumis, and
nine causes of Nidana. In the same way, in the upcoming Utsarpini Kal, in the
Airavata region, the liberation-journey, arrival from heaven, birth among
humans, and liberation of Baldeva, etc., should be narrated. 676 - In the same
way, in the upcoming Utsarpini Kal, in both the Bharat and Airavata regions, the
narration of Vasudeva, etc., should be done.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 240] [samavAyAGgasUtra supAse suvvae arahA arahe ya sukosale  /  arahA
aNaMtavijae AgamissANa hokkhaI  // 13 //  vimale uttare arahA arahA ya mahAbale
/  devANaMde ya arahA AgamissANa hokkhaI  // 14 //  ee vuttA cauvvIsaM
eravayammi kevlii| AgamissANa hokkhaMti dhammatitthassa desagA  // 15 //  isI
jambUdvIpa ke airavata varSa meM AgAmI utsarpiNI kAla meM caubIsa tIrthaMkara
hoNge| jaise 1. sumaMgala, 2. siddhArtha, 3. nirvANa, 4. mahAyaza, 5.
dharmadhvaja, ye arahanta bhagavanta AgAmI kAla meM hoNge|| 89  //  punaH 6.
zrIcandra, 7. puSpaketu, 8. mahAcandra kevalI aura 9. zrutasAgara arhan hoNge||
10  //  puna: 10 siddhArtha 11. pUrNaghoSa, 12. mahAghoSa kevalI aura 13.
satyasena arhana hoNge||91|| tatpazcAta 14. sUrasena arhan 15. mahAsena kevalI,
16. sarvAnanda aura 17. devaputra arhan hoNge|| 92  //  tadanantara, 18.
supArzva, 19. suvrata arhan, 20. sukozala arhan aura 21. anantavijaya arhan
AgAmI kAla meM hoNge|| 93 //  tadanantara, 22. vimala arhana, unake pazcAt 23.
mahAbala arhan aura phira 24. devAnanda arhan AgAmI kAla meM hoNge|| 94  //  ye
Upara kahe hue caubIsa tIrthaMkara kevalI aivata varSa meM AgAmI utsarpiNI kAla
meM dharmatIrtha kI dezanA karane vAle hoNge|| 95  //  675-[jaMbuddIve NaM dIve
eravae vAse AgamissAe ussappiNIe ] bArasa cakkavaTTiNo bhavissaMti, bArasa
cakkavaTTipiyaro bhavissaMti, bArasa mAyaro bhavissaMti, bArasa itthIrayaNA
bhvissNti| nava baladeva-vAsudevapiyaro bhavissaMti, nava vAsudevamAyaro
bhavissaMti, nava baladevamAyaro bhvissNti| nava dasAramaMDalA bhavissaMti,
uttimA purisA majjhimapurisA pahANapurisA jAva duve duve rAma-kesavA bhAyaro,
bhavissaMti, Nava paDisattU bhavissaMti, nava puvvabhavanAmadhejA, Nava
dhammAyariyA, Nava NiyANabhUmIo, Nava NiyANakAraNA AyAe eravae AgamissAe
bhaanniyvvaa| [isI jaMbUdvIpa ke airavata varSa meM AgAmI utsarpiNI kAla meM]
bAraha cakravartI hoMge, bAraha cakravartiyoM ke pitA hoMge, unakI bAraha mAtAeM
hoMgI, unake bAraha strIratna hoNge| nau baladeva aura vAsudevoM ke pitA hoMge,
nau vAsudevoM kI mAtAeM hoMgI, nau baladevoM kI mAtAeM hoNgii| nau dazAra
maMDala hoMge, jo uttama puruSa, madhyama puruSa, pradhAna puruSa yAvat
sarvAdhika rAjateja rUpa lakSmI se dedIpyamAna do-do rAma-kezava (baladeva-
vAsudeva) bhAI-bhAI hoNge| unake nau pratizatru hoMge, unake nau pUrvabhava ke
nAma hoMge, unake nau dharmAcArya hoMge, unakI nau nidAnabhUmiyAM hoMgI, nidAna
ke nau kAraNa hoNge| isI prakAra se AgAmI utsarpiNI kAla meM airavata kSetra meM
utpanna hone vAle baladevAdi kA mukti-gamana, svarga se Agamana, manuSyoM meM
utpatti aura mukti kA bhI kathana karanA caahie| 676 -evaM dosu vi AgamissAe
bhaanniyvvaa| isI prakAra bharata aura airavata ina donoM kSetroM meM AgAmI
utsarpiNI kAla meM hone vAle vAsudeva Adi kA kathana karanA caahie|

Page #360 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Past Future Great Person] [241 677-This is how it is. Just as there are
lineages of householders, so too are there lineages of Tirthankaras, lineages of
Chakravartis, lineages of Dasaras, lineages of Ganadharas, lineages of Rishis,
lineages of Yatīs, and lineages of Munis. It is called a "Su" or "Suanga" or
"Suyasa" or "Suyakhanda" or "Samavaya" or "Sankhya" because it is a complete and
perfect study of all the angas. _ This Samavayanga Sutra is said to describe
many kinds of emotions and objects. For example, it describes the lineages of
householders. Similarly, it describes the lineages of Tirthankaras,
Chakravartis, Dasaras, Ganadharas, Rishis, Yatīs, and Munis. It is called
"Shruta" because it gives knowledge of all things in the three times indirectly.
It is called "Shrutaanga" because it is a part of the Shruta, the discourse of
the enlightened one. It is called "Shruta-samasa" because it summarizes the
meaning of all the Sutras. It is called "Shruta-skandha" because it describes
the collection of the Shruta. It is also called "Sankhya" because it describes
the collection of all beings and objects. It is called "Samasta" or "complete"
because it is a complete anga, unlike the other angas like Acharanga, which have
divisions like Shruta-skandha. It is also called "Adhyayana" because it does not
have divisions like Uddesa. Thus, Shri Sudharma Swami Jambuswami says,
addressing Bhagavan Mahavira, "I have told you this anga just as I heard it from
Bhagavan Mahavira." Discussion- The lineages of Tirthankaras, etc., mentioned in
this Sutra refer to their traditions. The words Rishi, Yati, etc., generally
refer to ascetics, but those who possess supernatural powers are called Rishis,
those who ascend to the stage of Upshama or Kshapaka are called Yatīs, those who
have knowledge of Avadhi and Manahparyaya are called Munis, and those who are
ordinary ascetics who have renounced their homes are called Anagaras. In the
Sanskrit commentary, all the disciples of Jinendra except the Ganadharas are
called Rishis. According to etymology, one who removes karmic afflictions is
called a Rishi, one who is knowledgeable in the science of the self is called a
Muni, one who strives to destroy sins is called a Yati, and one who is free from
desire even in the body is called an Anagara. Although this Samavayanga is the
fourth of the twelve angas, it describes all the angas in brief, hence its
importance is particularly emphasized. ||Samavayanga Sutra ends|| The wise are
called Rishis because they are a collection of afflictions. The Muni is praised
by the great because of the validity of his knowledge of the self. ||829|| He
who strives to destroy the bonds of sin becomes a Yati. He who is free from
desire even in the body is considered an Anagara by the virtuous. ||830||
-[Yasastilakacampu]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 atIta anAgatakAlika mahApuruSa] [241 677-icceyaM evmaahijjti| taM jahA-
kulagaravaMsei ya, evaM titthagaravaMsei ya, cakkavaTTivaMsei ya dasAravaMsei vA
gaNadharavaMsei ya, isivaMsei ya, jaivaMsei ya, muNivaMsei ya, suei vA, suaMgei
vA suyasamAsei vA, suyakhaMdhei vA samavAeivA, saMkhei vA samattamaMgamakkhAyaM
ajjhayaNaM ti vemi| _ isa prakAra yaha adhikRta samavAyAGga sUtra aneka prakAra
ke bhAvoM aura padArthoM kA varNana karane ke rUpa meM kahA gayA hai| jaise-
isameM kulakaroM ke vaMzoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| isI prakAra tIrthaMkaroM ke
vaMzoM kA, cakravartiyoM ke vaMzoM kA, dazAra-maMDaloM kA, gaNadharoM ke vaMzoM
kA, RSiyoM ke vaMzoM kA, yatiyoM ke vaMzoM kA aura muniyoM ke vaMzoM kA bhI
varNana kiyA gayA hai| parokSarUpa se trikAlavartI samasta arthoM kA parijJAna
karAne se yaha zrutajJAna hai, zrutarUpa pravacana-puruSa kA aMga hone se yaha
zrutAGga hai, isameM samasta sUtroM kA artha saMkSepa se kahA gayA hai, ataH
yaha zrutasamAsa hai, zruta kA samudAya rUpa varNana karane se yaha
'zrutaskandha' hai, samasta jIvAdi padArthoM kA samudAyarUpa kathana karane se
yaha saMkhyA' nAma se bhI kahA jAtA hai| isameM AcArAdi aMgoM ke samAna
zrutaskandha Adi kA vibhAga na hone se yaha aMga 'samasta' arthAt paripUrNa aMga
kahalAtA hai| tathA isameM uddeza Adi kA vibhAga na hone se ise 'adhyayana' bhI
kahate haiN| isa prakAra zrI sudharmAsvAmI jambUsvAmI ko lakSya karake kahate
haiM ki isa aMga ko bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samIpa * jaisA maiMne sunA, usI prakAra
se maiMne tumheM kahA hai| vivecana- prastuta sUtra meM prayukta tIrthaMkarAdi
ke vaMza se abhiprAya unakI paramparA se hai| RSi, yati Adi zabda sAdhAraNataH
sAdhuoM ke vAcaka haiM, to bhI Rddhi-dhAraka sAdhuoM ko RSi, upazama yA
kSapakazreNI para car3hane vAloM ko yati, avadhi, mana:paryaya jJAna vAloM ko
muni aura gRhatyAgI sAmAnya sAdhuoM ko anagAra kahate haiM  /  saMskRta TIkA meM
gaNadharoM ke sivAya jinendra ke zeSa ziSyoM ko RSi kahA hai| nirukti ke anusAra
karma-klezoM ke nivAraNa karane vAle ko RSi, AtmavidyA meM mAnya jJAniyoM ko
muni, pApoM kA nAza karane ko udyata sAdhuoM ko yati aura deha meM bhI ni:spRha
ko anagAra kahate haiN| yaha samavAyAGga yadyapi dvAdazAGgoM meM cauthA hai,
tathApi isameM saMkSepa meM sabhI aMgA kA varNana kiyA gayA hai, ata: isakA
mahattva vizeSa rUpa se pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai| ||smvaayaangg sUtra smaapt||
ressnnaatkleshraashiinaamRssiaamhurmniissinnH| mAnyatvAdAtmavidyAnAM mahadbhiH
kIrtyate muniH||829  /  /  yaH pApapAzanAzAya yatate sa ytirbhvet| yo'nIho deha-
gehe'pi so'nagAraH satAM mataH  /  / 830 //  -[yazastilakacampU]

Page #361 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Samavayanga Sutra 237 224 229 229 85 6 228 230 239 235 242] Appendix (1) Index
of verses in the text, Akumara-bhue je kei 86 | Isadosena aviddhe attuntakada
rama 235 | Ukkhittanae sanghadde anagayassa nayavam 85 | Udae pedhalapputte ya
aniyanakadarama 235 | Uditodita-kulavamsa anantara ya ahare 214 | Uditodita-
kulavamsa annanaiya allobhe | Uditodita-kulavamsa atavasi ya je kei 86 |
Uvagasantam pi jhampitta atipasam ca supasam 236 | Uvattiyam padiviraiyam atthe
ya suriyavatte Uvahi-sua-bhatta-pane adinasattu samkhe Usabhassa padhamabhikkha
apassamano pasami Usabhe sumitte vijae appano ahie bale Ee khalu padisattū
abahussue ya je kei Ee khalu padisattū abamhacari je kei Eedhammayariya
abhayakara nivvuikarā Ee vutte cavvīsam amame nikkasae ya Eevutta cavvīsam ayale
vijae bhadde 234 Ekkarasuttaram hetthimesu arunapabha candappabha 225 Ekko ya
sattamisu asipatte dhanukumbe | Eyaim namaim asanjala jinavasaham 236 |
Kitikammassa ya karane assaggive tare 235 | Kinnhasiri surasiri anaya-panaya
kappe 199 | Gavi juve samgame ayariya-uvajjhaehin 86 | Gudhayari niguhijja
ayariya-uvajjhayānam 86 / Ghamsai jo abhuena aloyana niravalāve | Candajasa
candakanta asiyam battīsam atthavisam Candannam sucandaṃ . ambada darumade ya
237 Campaga baulē ya taha ambe ambarisi ceva | Cavvisai muhutta iddhi jui jaso
vanno Causatthī asuranam isarena aduvā gāmena 86 / Cattari duvālasa attha 225
235 234 33 233 223 236 199 236 199

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [samavAyAGgasUtra 237 224 229 229 85 6 228 230 239 235 242] pariziSTa (1)
granthagatagAthAnukramaNikA akumArabhUe je keI 86 | IsAdoseNa AviDhe aTuMtakaDA
rAmA 235 | ukkhittaNAe saMghADe aNAgayassa nayavaM 85 | udae peDhAlaputte ya
aNiyANakaDA rAmA 235 | uditoditakulavaMsA aNaMtarA ya AhAre 214 |
uditoditakulavaMsA aNNANayA alobhe | uditoditakulavaMsA atavassI ya je keI 86 |
uvagasaMtaM pi jhaMpittA atipAsaM ca supAsaM 236 | uvaTThiyaM paDivirayaM atthe
ya sUriyAvatte uvahI-sua-bhattapANe adINasattu saMkhe usabhassa paDhamabhikkhA
apassamANo pAsAmi usabhe sumitte vijae appaNo ahie bAle ee khalu paDisattU
abahussue ya je keI ee khalu paDisattU abaMbhayArI je keI eedhammAyariyA
abhayakara NivvuikarA ee vuttA cauvvIsaM amame NikkasAe ya eevuttA cauvvIsaM
ayale vijae bhadde 234 ekkArasuttaraM heTThimesu aruNappabha caMdappabha 225
ekko ya sattamIsu asipatte dhaNukuMbhe | eyAiM nAmAI asaMjala jiNavasahaM 236 |
kiikammassa ya karaNe assaggIve tArae 235 | kiNhasirI sUrasirI ANaya-pANaya
kappe 199 | gAvi juve saMgAme Ayariya-uvajjhAehiM 86 | gUDhAyArI nigUhijjA
Ayariya-uvajjhAAyANaM 86 / ghaMsei jo abhUeNaM AloyaNa niravalAve | caMdajasA
caMdakaMtA AsIyaM battIsaM aTThAvIsaM caMdANaNaM sucaMdaM . aMbaDa dArumaDe ya
237 caMpaga baule ya tahA aMbe aMbarisI ceva | cauvIsaI muhuttA iDDhI juI jaso
vaNNo causaTThI asurANaM IsareNa aduvA gAmeNa 86 / cattAri duvAlasa aTTha 225
235 234 33 233 223 236 199 236 199

Page #362 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[243 229 225 223 231 85 7 85 229 228 237 86 Granthagatgathaanu kramanika] Jam
nissiye uvahanai jassini pushphachula ya jaanamaane parisao jayateyam samaarabha
jiyaragam agginisenam je a maanussaye bhoe je kahahigaranaai je nayagam cha
ratthass je ya ahammiye loe je yavi tase paane naggoha sattivanne nabhi ya
jiyasattu ya tatto havi sayali tahevaanantnaaniinam tindug padal jambu tinneva
gauyaaim tilaeya lohajanghe tivithe ya duvithe ya tisa ya pannavisa das chaudas
attaraseva davaddave udaganaaye dinne ya varahe pun diiv-disa-udhiinam duvithu
ya tivithu ya dhii-mai ya sanvega nandi ya nandimitte navamo ya mahapaumo
neyaauyass maggass paumo sivaasui tah paumu uttare mahahari paumye ya mahapaume
pacchakkhane viussagge padhama hoi subhadda 86 | Padameththa ushabhasene 229 |
Padameththa vairanabhe Padameththa vimala vaahan 85 payavai ya bambe | Paninaa
sampihittanam | Puno puno panidhiye | Bammbi ya fagggu sama Battisam dhanuyaai |
Battisatta visa | Bahujanasse neyaram 228 | Baras ekkaraasame 224 bodhavva devai
ya Bhadda tah subhadda ya Bharhe ya dihadante 228 Bharho sagaro maghavan 228 |
Mattangaya ya bhinnga 239 Mandar jase arithhe | Mandar meru manoram marudevi
vijaya sena mahapaume suradeve mahurra ya kanagavaththu migasira adda pusse
mittadame sudame. ya miyavaahane subhume ya miyavai uma cheva vandami
juttiseanam vayachakka kaayachakka vimale uttare araha visanandi ya subandhu
vissabhui pavvaye | Sanganam cha parinnaaya | Sambhuya subhadda sudansane 230 |
Sanvare aniyatthi ya 199 86 191 237 231 238 230 27 231 50 224 237 235 27 223 236
231 236 56 240 234 234 234 237

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [243 229 225 223 231 85 7 85 229 228 237 86 granthagatagAthAnukramaNikA] jaM
nissie uvahaNai jassiNI puSphacUlA ya jANamANe parisao jAyateyaM samArabbha
jiyarAgamaggiseNaM je a mANussae bhoe je kahAhigaraNAI je nAyagaM ca raTThassa
je ya Ahammie loe je yAvi tase pANe Naggoha sattivaNNe NAbhI ya jiyasattU ya
tatto havai sayAlI tahevANaMtanANINaM tiMduga pADala jaMbU tiNNeva gAuyAiM tilae
ya lohajaMghe tiviThe ya duviThe ya tIsA ya paNNavIsA dasa coddasa aTThAraseva
dAvaddave udagaNAe diNNe ya varAhe puNa dIva-disA-udahINaM duviThU ya tiviThU ya
dhii-maI ya saMvega naMdIya ya nandimitte navamo ya mahApaumo neyAuyassa
maggassa paumA sivAsuI taha paumuttare mahAharI paume ya mahApaume paccakkhANe
viussagge paDhamA hoI subhaddA 86 | paDhamettha usabhaseNe 229 | paDhamettha
vairanAbhe paDhamettha vimalavAhaNa 85 payAvaI ya baMbhe | pANiNA saMpihittANaM
| puNo puNo paNidhie | baMbhI ya phaggu sAmA battIsaM dhaNuyAI | battIsaTThA
vIsA | bahujaNassa neyAraM 228 | bArasa ekkArasame 224 bodhavvA devaI ya bhaddA
taha subhaddA ya bharahe ya dIhadaMte 228 bharaho sagaro maghavaM 228 |
mattaMgayA ya bhiMgA 239 maMdara jase ariThe | maMdara meru maNorama marudevI
vijayA seNA mahApaume sUradeve mahurA ya kaNagavatthU migasira addA pusse
mittadAme sudAme. ya miyavAhaNe subhUme ya miyavaI umA ceva vaMdAmi juttiseNaM
vayachakkaM kAyachakkaM vimale uttare arahA visanandI ya subandhU vissabhUI
pavvayae | saMgANaM ca pariNNAyA | saMbhUya subhadda sudaMsaNe 230 | saMvare
aNiyaTThI ya 199 86 191 237 231 238 230 27 231 50 224 237 235 27 223 236 231 236
56 240 234 234 234 237

Page #363 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Samavayanga Sutra 225 225 226 244] Sachchattā sapadāgā sadhe niyadīpaṇṇāṇe
satabhisaya bharani addā satthaparinnā logavijayo sappī jahā aṇḍauḍaṁ. Sayanjale
sayae ya savvesī pi jināṇaṁ sāhāraṇatthā je keī siddatthe puṇṇaghose ya
siricande pupphakeū sissammi ce pahaṇai sīmā sudansanā supphabhā 224 240 228 |
Sīsāveḍheṇa je keī 86 | Sīharahe meharahe Sundarabāhu tah dīhabāhu 23,73 |
Suggīve daḍarahe 86 | Sujasā suvvaya aira 223 | Supāse suvvāe araha -227 / Subhe
ya subhaghose ya 86 | Sumangale ya siddatthe | Sūraseṇe ya araha 239 | Sūre
sudansane kumbe 85 | Seṇiya supās udāe 225 21 239 239 239 224 237

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [samavAyAGgasUtra 225 225 226 244] sacchattA sapaDAgA saDhe niyaDIpaNNANe
satabhisaya bharaNi addA satthapariNNA logavijao sappI jahA aMDauDaM . sayaMjale
sayae ya savvesi pi jiNANaM sAhAraNaTThA je keI siddhatthe puNNaghose ya
siricaMde pupphakeU sissaMmi ce pahaNai sImA sudaMsaNA suppabhA 224 240 228 |
sIsAveDheNa je keI 86 | sIharahe meharahe suMdarabAhu taha dIhabAhU 23,73 |
suggIve daDharahe 86 | sujasA suvvaya airA 223 | supAse suvvae arahA -227 /
subhe ya subhaghose ya 86 | sumaMgale ya siddhatthe | sUraseNe ya arahA 239 |
sUre sudaMsaNe kuMbhe 85 | seNiya supAsa udae 225 21 239 239 239 224 237

Page #364 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix (2) Alphabetical Order of Person Names 234 235 224 236 135 | Ashoka 236
| Ashvagriva 113 Ashvasena 231 | Asanjavala 236 | Anjuka 234 Ambad 133 Anand
224, 232 225 Indradutta Idrabhuuti Udaya Upashanta 229 238 229 229 Akampita
Agniputra Agnibhuti Agnishikha Agnisena Acala Acalabhrada Achira Ajita
Ajitaseena Ajita Atipoorva Atibala Adeenashatru Ananta Anantavijaya Anantaseena
Anivriti Aparajita Aparajita Abhichandra Abhinandan 223 227 229 237 236 . 229
236 239 Uma 231 225 229 236 234 225 225 237 223,238 237 227 231 163,223 225
Rishabha Rishabhaseena Rishi Dutta Rishipaal Kartavirya Kartika Karyaseena
Kashyami Kunthu Amam Amitgyani Amitha Amrita Ara Arisht Arishtanemi Kurumati
Kekayi Kesari Kshemankara Kshemandhara Gupti Sena 230 238 223 229 225 224,229
231 231 239 237 237 236

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa (2) vyaktinAmAnukrama 234 235 224 236 135 | azoka 236 | azvagrIva 113
azvasena 231  /  asaMjvala 236 | aMjukA. 234 aMbaDa 133 Ananda 224, 232 225
indradatta idrabhUti udaya upazAnta 229 238 229 229 akampita agniputra agnibhUti
agnizikha agnisena acala acalabhrAtA acirA ajita ajitasena ajitA atipArzva
atibala adInazatru ananta anantavijaya anantasena anivRtti aparAjita aparAjitA
abhicandra abhinandana 223 227 229 237 236 . 229 236 239 umA 231 225 229 236 234
225 225 237 223,238 237 227 231 163,223 225 RSabha RSabhasena RSidatta RSipAla
kArtavIrya kArtika kAryasena kAzyamI kunthu amama amitajJAnI amitA amRtA ara
ariSTa ariSTanemi kurumatI kekayI kesarI kSemaMkara kSemaMdhara guptisena 230
238 223 229 225 224,229 231 231 239 237 237 236

Page #365 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
238 | Dirghabahu 229 Drdhadhanu 234 Drdharatha Drdhayau Devaki | Devaputra |
Devasharma | Devashruta Devananda [Samavayangasutra 239 237 223,224 238 231,239
240 U 236 w لہ لہ لہ 3 237 240 W 246] Gudhadanta Gostupa Gangadatta Chakraratha
Chandana Chandrakant Chandraprabha Chandrayasha Chamar Chakshuskanta Chakshusman
Charu Chitragupta Chullini Jaya Jayanta Jayanti Jaya Jarasandha Devi لہ بہ
224,231 237 0 234 Devopapat . 229 । Drumasen Dviprishta Dvipayan Dhanadatta 239
। Dhar 231 Dharanihara 230 227 । 234 238 227 224, 238 Dharani 229 229 Dharma 225
240 Jitashatru 225 Jitari Jinavrishabha Jvala Tarak Tara Tilaka Triprishta
Trishaladevi Dharmadhvaja Dharmasimha 236 | Dharmase Dharini Nanda 230 Nandana
Nandamittra 234 | Nanda Nandisen 227 | Nami. 237 Nabhi 223,231 Narada 238
Narayana 234 229 238 225 239 224 224 236 Datta 225 223 1114 Dashadhanu
Dasharatha Dirghadanta 238 234

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 238 | dIrghabAhu 229 dRDhadhanu 234 dRDharatha dRDhAyu devakI | devaputra |
devazarma | devazruta devAnanda [samavAyAGgasUtra 239 237 223,224 238 231,239
240 U 236 w lh lh lh 3 237 240 W 246] gUDhadanta gostUpa gaMgadatta cakraratha
candanA candrakAntA candraprabha candrayazA camara cakSuSkAntA cakSuSmAna cAru
citragupta cullinI jaya jayanta jayantI jayA jarAsandha devI lh bh 224,231 237 0
234 devopapAta . 229  /  drumasena dvipRSTha dvIpAyana dhanadatta 239  /  dhara
231 dharaNIdharA 230 227  /  234 238 227 224, 238 dharaNI 229 229 dharma 225 240
jitazatru 225 jitAri jinavRSabha jvAlA tAraka tArA tilaka tripRSTha trizalAdevI
dharmadhvaja dharmasiMha 236 | dharmasena dhAriNI nanda 230 nandana nandamitra
234 | nandA nandisena 227 | nmi| 237 nAbhi 223,231 nArada 238 nArAyaNa 234 229
238 225 239 224 224 236 datta 225 223 1114 dazadhanu dazaratha dIrghadanta 238
234

Page #366 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[247 224 223 237 Alphabetical Order of Person Names] Nikshiptaśastra Nirmama
Nirvāṇa Nishumbha Nishkaṣāya Nishpulāka Nemi Padma Padmaprabha. Padmashri Padma
Padmottara Parvata 225. Baladav 234 238 227 229 235 239 235 52,121 227 142 238
231 21 230 Pārśva 227 Punarvasu Puruṣapuṇḍarīka Puruṣasiṃha Puruṣottama
Puṣpaketu Puṣpacūlā Puṣpadanta Puṣpavatī 236 | Prabhāvatī 237 | Prasenajit 240.
Priyamitra 235. Proṣṭhila Phalgu 237 | Bandhumatī Baladēva 234 | Balabhadra |
Bali | Balī Bahul | Bāhubalī 234. | Buddha 225 | Brahma 234 | Brahmacarī 234 |
Brahmadatt 234 | Brāhmī 234 | Bhadra Bhadrā Bhayālī Bharata Bhānu Bhāvitātmā
Bhīma Bhīmasēna Maghava 237 | Madhu-Kaiṭabha 231 | Marudēva 223 | Marudēvī 236
Mallī | Mahāsēna 239. Mahāghōṣa 225 Puṣya Pṛthvī 229 234 237 238 238 224 229 239
232 230 235 223 224 225 224 223,241 Pūrṇaghōṣa Pūrṇananda Peḍhālaputra Prajāpati
Pratirupā Pratiśruti Pratiṣṭha Prabhraj

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [247 224 223 237 vyaktinAmAnukrama] nikSiptazastra nirmama nirvANa nizumbha
niSkaSAya niSpulAka nemi padma padmaprabha  /  padmazrI padmA padmottara parvata
225  /  baladava 234 238 227 229 235 239 235 52,121 227 142 238 231 21 230
pArzva 227 punarvasu puruSapuNDarIka puruSasiMha puruSottama puSpaketu puSpacUlA
puSpadanta puSpavatI 236 | prabhAvatI 237 | prasenajita 240  /  priyamitra 235
/  proSThila phalgu 237 | bandhumatI baladeva 234 | balabhadra | bali | balI
bahula | bAhubalI 234.| buddha 225 | brahma 234 | brahmacArI 234 | brahmadatta
234 | brAhmI 234 | bhadra bhadrA bhayAlI bharata bhAnu bhAvitAtmA bhIma
bhImasena maghavA 237 | madhu-kaiTabha 231 | marudeva 223 | marudevI 236 mallI |
mahAsena 239  /  mahAghoSa 225 puSya pRthvI 229 234 237 238 238 224 229 239 232
230 235 223 224 225 224 223,241 pUrNaghoSa pUrNananda peDhAlaputra prajApati
pratirUpA pratizruti pratiSTha prabharAja

Page #367 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
237 [Samavāyanga Sūtra 234 234 224 235 238 225 231 238 238 248] Mahācandra
Mahāpadma Mahābala Mahābāhu Mahābhīma Mahābhīmasena Mahāyasa Mahāvīra Mahāśiva
Mahāsena Mahāhari Māhendra Mitavāhana Midas Munisuvarata Mṛgāvatī Megha
Megharata Meraka Merā 224 231 234 234 225 240 | Rājalalita Rāma Rāmā 200 Rāvaṇa
239 | Riṣṭa Rukmi 240 Rudra | Revatī 231 | Rohinī 240 Lakṣaṇā 230 Lakṣmīmatī 225
| Lalita 236 | Lalitamitra 223 | Laṣṭabāhu 225 | | Lohajangha 231 | Vajrajangha
224 | Vajranābha Vargaśimha Vardhamāna 238 Vaprā Varadatta Varāha Vasiṣṭha 229 |
Vasudeva Vasundharā 223 | Vasupūjya 238 | Vāmā 117 | Vārāha 236 | Vāriṣeṇa 225 |
Vāsudeva Vāsupūjya Vijay 239 239 225 . 227 225 234,232 228 229 Māuryaputra 124
Mangalā Maṇḍitaputra WW 229 Mandara Yasa Yaśasman Yaśasvatī Yaśasvinī Yuktiseṇa
Yugabāhu 224 224 234. 236 238 Rati 225 224

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 237 [samavAyAGgasUtra 234 234 224 235 238 225 231 238 238 248] mahAcandra
mahApadma mahAbala mahAbAhu mahAbhIma mahAbhImasena mahAyaza mahAvIra mahAziva
mahAsena mahAhari mAhendra mitavAhana midAsa munisuvrata mRgAvatI megha
megharatha meraka merA 224 231 234 234 225 240 | rAjalalita rAma rAmA 200 rAvaNa
239 | riSTa rukmi 240 rudra | revatI 231 | rohiNI 240 lakSaNA 230 lakSmImatI 225
| lalita 236 | lalitamitra 223 | laSTabAhu 225 | | lohajaMgha 231 | vajrajaMgha
224 | vajranAbha vargasiMha vardhamAna 238 vaprA varadatta varAha vaziSTha 229 |
vasudeva vasundharA 223 | vasupUjya 238 | vAmA 117 | vArAha 236 | vAriSeNa 225 |
vAsudeva vAsupUjya vijaya 239 239 225 . 227 225 234,232 228 229 mauryaputra 124
maMgalA maMDitaputra WW 229 maMdara yaza yazaSmAna yazasvatI yazasvinI yuktisena
yugabAhu 224 224 234. 236 238 rati 225 224

Page #368 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
| Shri [249 224,261 224,233 223 240 Vyaktinaamanukrama] Vijaya Vidarbha
Vipulavahana Vimala Vimala (Arhat) Vimalaghosha Vimala vahana Vishvanandi
Vishvabhuuti Vishvasena Vishnu 21 238 238 238 Veer 227 230 240 230 Veerabhadra
Vaijayanti Shataka Shatakirti Shatanjala Shatadhanu 237 224,231 | Shyama 229 238
Shrikant 225 Shrichandra 225 Shridhar 223 Shriputra 223,135 . | ShriBhuuti 234
Shrisoma 234 Shrenik 224,229,235 Shreyans (Arhat) 224 Shreyans 227 Sagar 21
Satyaseen 231 | Sanatkumar 237 | Samadhigupta 237 | Samudra 223 | Samudradatt |
Samudravijaya | Sarvabhaavavit 238 | Sarvanand | Sarvanubhuuti | Sahadevi Sagar
224 | Sagardatt Satyaki 229 | Singhagir 238 | Simharath 229 | Singhseen 21 |
Siddhart 23 | Siddhārtha 238 | Sita 236 | Simankar 234 234 224 Shatayu . 237 240
Shatali Shanti 233 Shiv 237 230 234 234 . P 238 225 225 Shivseen Shiva Sheetal
Shuchi Shuddhadant Shubha Shubhaghosha Seshamati Shankha Shyamkostha 224 224 224
231 237

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 | zrI [249 224,261 224,233 223 240 vyaktinAmAnukrama] vijayA vidarbha
vipulavAhana vimala vimala (arhat) vimalaghoSa vimalavAhana vizvanandI
vizvabhUti vizvasena viSNu 21 238 238 238 vIra 227 230 240 230 vIrabhadra
vaijayantI zataka zatakIrti zataJjala zatadhanu 237 224,231 | zyAmA 229 238
zrIkAntA 225 zrIcandra 225 zrIdhara 223 zrIputra 223,135  /  | zrIbhUti 234
zrIsoma 234 zreNika 224,229,235 zreyAMsa (arhat) 224 zreyAMsa 227 sagara 21
satyasena 231 | sanatkumAra 237 | samAdhigupta 237 | samudra 223 | samudradatta
| samudravijaya | sarvabhAvavit 238 | sarvAnanda | sarvAnubhUti | sahadevI
sAgara 224 | sAgaradatta sAtyakI 229 | siMhagiri 238 | siMharatha 229 |
siMhasena 21 | siddhArtha 23 | siddhArthA 238 | sItA 236 | sImaMkara 234 234 224
zatAyu . 237 240 zatAlI zAnti 233 ziva 237 230 234 234 . P 238 225 225 zivasena
zivA zItala zuci zuddhadanta zubha zubhaghoSa zeSamatI zaMkha zyAmakoSTha 224
224 224 231 237

Page #369 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[250] Simandhar Sukoshal Sugreev Sughoṣ Sudarṣan Sudarṣana Sudam Sudharma
Sunanda Sunanda Sundar Sundarbahu Sundari Supārśva (Arhat) Supārśva Suprabha
Suprabha Subandhu Subhadra Subhadra Subhūma Sumangal Sumangala 237 | Sumitra 240
| Suyaśā 224,241 | | Surūpā 223 | Surendradatt 224,227,236,237,240 Suvrat 231 |
| Suvratā 223 Suvidhi 229 | Susimā 227 Sūkṣma 231 | Sūradeva 225 | Sūryasrī 225
/ Sūrasena 140 Senā 225,227,239 | Soma 223,241 Somadatta 234 Somadeva 231
Somachandra 234 Sankarsana Sambhava Sambhūta 234 Sanvara 240 Svayam Prabha 230
Svayambhū 225 Svāti 229 | Harisen [Samavāyāṅgasūtra 225 224 223 227 229 224 225
224 236 237 233 240 224 21,231 227 227 236 237 225 234 224,239 223,238,239 227
238 230 234 231 Sumati Sumana

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 250] sImaMdhara sukozala sugrIva sughoSa sudarzana sudarzanA sudAma sudharma
sunanda sunandA sundara sundarabAhu sundarI supArzva (arhat) supArzva suprabha
suprabhA subandhu subhadra subhadrA subhUma sumaMgala sumaMgalA 237 | sumitra
240 | suyazA 224,241 | | surUpA 223 | surendradatta 224,227,236,237,240 suvrata
231  /  | suvratA 223 suvidhi 229 | susImA 227 sUkSma 231 | sUradeva 225 |
sUryazrI 225 / sUrasena 140 senA 225,227,239 | soma 223,241 somadatta 234
somadeva 231 somacandra 234 saMkarSaNa saMbhava saMbhUta 234 saMvara 240
svayaMprabha 230 svayaMbhU 225 svAti 229 | hariSeNa [samavAyAGgasUtra 225 224
223 227 229 224 225 224 236 237 233 240 224 21,231 227 227 236 237 225 234
224,239 223,238,239 227 238 230 234 231 sumati sumanA

Page #370 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 251: Unfavorable Times for Study [Excerpted from the Nandi Sutra,
edited by Acharya Atmaramji Maharaj]  One should study scriptures only during
the times prescribed in the Agamas for study. Studying during unfavorable times
is prohibited.  The Manusmriti and other Smritis also describe unfavorable times
in detail. Vedic people also mention unfavorable times for studying the Vedas.
Similarly, other ancient texts are also considered to have unfavorable times.
Jain Agamas, being the word of the omniscient, divinely inspired, and self-
illuminating, also have unfavorable times mentioned in them, such as:  **Ten
unfavorable times related to the sky:**  1. **Ukkavate (Meteor Shower):** If
there is a large meteor shower, one should not study for one prahar. 2.
**Disidadhe (Fiery Sky):** When the sky appears red, as if on fire, one should
not study. 3. **Gajjite (Thunder):** Thunder and lightning are common during
certain seasons. Therefore, from the Ardra to the Svati Nakshatra, study is not
considered unfavorable. 4. **Nigghate (Lightning):** When there is loud thunder
without clouds, or when there is lightning with clouds, there is an unfavorable
time for study for two prahars. 5. **Juvate (Yupaka):** In the bright fortnight,
the first, second, and third days, when the light of the evening and the moon
combine, is called Yupaka. During these days, one should not study until the
night prahar. 6. **Jakkhaliitte (Yakshadipt):** When there is a flash of light
in a direction, like lightning, but with a slightly delayed glow, it is called
Yakshadipt. One should not study until the Yaksha-like light disappears from the
sky. 7. **Dhumita (Smoky):** From Kartik to Magh, the months of the clouds'
gestation, there is smoke in the sky.   **Ten unfavorable times related to the
body:**  1. **Atthi (Bones):** 2. **Mansam (Flesh):** 3. **Sonitte (Blood):** 4.
**Asutisamante (Death):** 5. **Susanasamante (Cemetery):** 6. **Chandovarate
(Moon Eclipse):** 7. **Surovvarate (Solar Eclipse):** 8. **Padane (Falling):**
9. **Rayavuggahe (Loss of Wealth):** 10. **Ubassayassa Anto Oralie Sarirage
(Death of a Body):**  **Four Mahapratipada (Great Days):**  1.
**Asadhapadivae:** 2. **Indamahapadivae:** 3. **Kattiapadivae:** 4.
**Sugimhapadivae:**  **Four Mahapratipada Full Moons:**  1. **Padimate:** 2.
**Pacchimaate:** 3. **Mazzhanhe:** 4. **Addharatte:**  **Four Sandhyas
(Twilight):**  1. **Puvvanhe:** 2. **Avaranhe:** 3. **Paose:** 4. **Pacchuse:**
According to the above sutra, there are 32 unfavorable times: ten related to the
sky, ten related to the body, four Mahapratipada, four Mahapratipada full moons,
and four Sandhyas. These are briefly described as follows:  **Ten unfavorable
times related to the sky:**  1. **Meteor Shower:** If there is a large meteor
shower, one should not study for one prahar. 2. **Fiery Sky:** When the sky
appears red, as if on fire, one should not study. 3. **Thunder:** Thunder and
lightning are common during certain seasons. Therefore, from the Ardra to the
Svati Nakshatra, study is not considered unfavorable. 4. **Lightning:** When
there is loud thunder without clouds, or when there is lightning with clouds,
there is an unfavorable time for study for two prahars. 5. **Yupaka:** In the
bright fortnight, the first, second, and third days, when the light of the
evening and the moon combine, is called Yupaka. During these days, one should
not study until the night prahar. 6. **Yakshadipt:** When there is a flash of
light in a direction, like lightning, but with a slightly delayed glow, it is
called Yakshadipt. One should not study until the Yaksha-like light disappears
from the sky. 7. **Smoky:** From Kartik to Magh, the months of the clouds'
gestation, there is smoke in the sky.  8. **Mahitta (Great):** 9. **Rayugghaate
(Loss of Wealth):** 10. **Ubassayassa Anto Oralie Sarirage (Death of a Body):**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [251 anadhyAyakAla [sva. AcAryapravara zrI AtmArAmajI ma. dvArA sampAdita
nandIsUtra se uddhRta] svAdhyAya ke lie AgamoM meM jo samaya batAyA gayA hai,
usI samaya zAstroM kA svAdhyAya karanA caahie| anadhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya
varjita hai| _ manusmRti Adi smRtiyoM meM bhI anadhyAyakAla kA vistArapUrvaka
varNana kiyA gayA hai| vaidika loga bhI veda ke anadhyAyoM kA ullekha karate
haiN| isI prakAra anya ArSa granthoM kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| jainAgama
bhI sarvajJokta, devAdhiSThita tathA svaravidyA saMyukta hone ke kAraNa, inakA
bhI AgamoM meM anadhyAyakAla varNita kiyA gayA hai, jaise ki dasavidhe
aMtalikkhite asajjhAe paNNatte, taM jahA-ukkAvAte, disidAdhe, gajjite, nigghAte,
juvate, jakkhAlitte, dhUmitA, mahittA, ryugghaate| dasavihe orAlite asajjhAtite,
taM jahA- aTThI, maMsaM, soNitte, asutisAmaMte, susANasAmaMte, caMdovarAte,
sUrovarAte, paDane, rAyavuggahe, ubassayassa aMto orAlie sriirge|
-sthAnAGgasUtra, sthAna 10 no kappati niggaMthANa vA, niggaMthINa vA cauhiM
mahApADivaehiM sajjhAyaM karittae, taM jahAAsADhapADivae, iMdamahApADivae,
kattiapADivae, sugimhpaaddvie| no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA, cauhiM
saMjhAhiM sajjhAyaM karettae, taM jahA-paDimAte, pacchimAte, majjhaNhe,
addddhrtte| kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA, cAukkAlaM sajjhAyaM karettae,
taM jahA-puvvaNhe, avaraNhe, paose, pccuuse| -sthAnAGgasUtra, sthAna 4, uddeza 2
uparokta sUtrapATha ke anusAra, dasa AkAza se sambandhita, dasa audArika zarIra
se sambandhita, cAra mahApratipadA, cAra mahApratipadA kI pUrNimA aura cAra
sandhyA isa prakAra battIsa anadhyAya mAne gaye haiN| jinakA saMkSepa meM nimna
prakAra se varNana hai, jaiseAkAza sambandhI dasa anadhyAya - 1. ulkApAta-
tArApatana-yadi mahat tArApatana huA hai to eka prahara paryanta zAstra-
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 2.digdAha-jaba taka dizA raktavarNa kI ho arthAt
aisA mAlUma par3e ki dizA meM Aga-sI lagI hai, taba bhI svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
caahie| 3-4.-garjita-vidyut-garjana aura vidyuta prAyaH Rtu svabhAva se hI hotA
hai| ataH ArdrA se svAti nakSatra paryanta anadhyAya nahIM mAnA jaataa| 5.
nirghAta-binA bAdala ke AkAza meM vyantarAdikRta ghora garjana hone para yA
bAdaloM sahita AkAza meM kar3akane para do prahara taka asvAdhyAyakAla hai|
6.yUpaka-zukla pakSa meM pratipadA, dvitIyA, tRtIyA ko sandhyA kI prabhA aura
candraprabhA ke milane ko yUpaka kahA jAtA hai| ina dinoM prahara rAtri paryanta
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 7. yakSAdIpta-kabhI kisI dizA meM bijalI camakane
jaisA, thor3e-thor3e samaya pIche jo prakAza hotA hai vaha yakSAdIpta kahalAtA
hai| ataH AkAza meM jaba taka yakSAkAra dIkhatA rahe taba taka svAdhyAya nahIM
karanA caahie| 8.dhUmikA kRSNa-kArtika se lekara mAgha taka kA samaya meghoM kA
garbhamAsa hotA hai| isameM dhUmra

Page #371 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[252]**  **9.  Dhumika-Krishna:** A fine mist of water
particles, appearing dark in color, is called Dhumika-Krishna.  As long as this
mist persists, one should not engage in self-study.  **9.  Mihika-Shweta:** In
the winter, a fine mist of water particles, appearing white in color, is called
Mihika. As long as this mist falls, it is a time for non-study.  **10.  Raj
Udghāt:** Due to wind, dust spreads throughout the sky. As long as this dust
remains, one should not engage in self-study.  The above ten reasons are related
to the sky and are considered times for non-study. The following ten reasons are
related to the material world and are also considered times for non-study.
**11-12-13.  Bones, Flesh, and Blood:** If the bones, flesh, and blood of a
five-sensed non-human being are visible, then one should not engage in self-
study until these objects are removed.  The commentator considers a radius of 60
cubits around these objects as a time for non-study.  Similarly, the bones,
flesh, and blood of a human being are also considered a time for non-study. The
difference is that the non-study period for these objects extends to 100 cubits
and lasts for one day and night.  For a woman's menstrual cycle, the non-study
period is three days. For the birth of a boy and a girl, the non-study period is
seven and eight days respectively.  **14.  Ashchi-Mal-Mūtra:** As long as
excrement and urine are visible, it is a time for non-study.  **15.  Shmashān:**
A radius of 100 cubits around a cremation ground is considered a time for non-
study.  **16.  Chandragrahaṇa:** During a lunar eclipse, one should not engage
in self-study for eight, twelve, or sixteen praharas, depending on the severity
of the eclipse (least, moderate, and most severe respectively).  **17.
Sūryagrahaṇa:** During a solar eclipse, one should also not engage in self-study
for eight, twelve, or sixteen praharas, depending on the severity of the eclipse
(least, moderate, and most severe respectively).  **18.  Patan:** Upon the death
of a great king or a prominent person, one should not engage in self-study until
their cremation is completed. Alternatively, one should gradually resume self-
study after a new authority takes over.  **19.  Rājavyuḍgraha:** When
neighboring kings engage in war, one should not engage in self-study until peace
is restored. Even after peace is restored, one should not engage in self-study
for one day and night.  **20.  Audārika Sharīra:** If a five-sensed being dies
within the shelter, one should not engage in self-study until the body is
removed. If the lifeless body remains within a radius of 100 cubits, one should
not engage in self-study.  The above ten reasons are related to the material
body and are considered times for non-study.  **21-28.  Four Mahotsava and Four
Mahāpratipadā:** The four Mahotsava are: Āṣāḍha Pūrṇimā, Āśvina Pūrṇimā,
Kārttika Pūrṇimā, and Chaitra Pūrṇimā. The pratipadā that follows these Pūrṇimā
is called Mahāpratipadā. Self-study is prohibited during these days.  **29-32.
Prātaḥ, Sāyam, Madhyāhna, and Ardharātri:** One should not engage in self-study
one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after sunrise, one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī
after sunset, one ghaḍī before and one ghaḍī after midday, and one ghaḍī before
and one ghaḍī after midnight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 252] [samavAyAGgasUtra varNa kI sUkSma jalarUpa dhuMdha par3atI hai| vaha
dhUmikA-kRSNa kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhuMdha par3atI rahe, taba taka
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 9. mihikAzveta-zItakAla meM zveta varNa kI sUkSma
jalarUpa dhundha mihikA kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha giratI rahe, taba taka
asvAdhyAya kAla hai| 10.raja udghAta-vAyu ke kAraNa AkAza meM cAroM ora dhUli
chA jAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhUli phailI rahatI hai, svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
caahie| uparokta dasa kAraNa AkAza sambandhI asvAdhyAya ke haiN| audArika
sambandhI dasa anadhyAya 11-12-13. haDDI mAMsa aura rudhira-paMcendriya tiryaMca
kI haDDI, mAMsa aura rudhira yadi sAmane dikhAI deM, to jaba taka vahA~ se yaha
vastueM uThAI na jAe~, taba taka asvAdhyAya hai| vRttikAra Asa-pAsa ke 60 hAtha
taka ina vastuoM ke hone para asvAdhyAya mAnate haiN| isI prakAra manuSya
sambandhI asthi mAMsa aura rudhira kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| vizeSatA
itanI hai ki inakA asvAdhyAya sau hAtha taka tathA eka dina rAta kA hotA hai|
strI ke mAsika dharma kA asvAdhyAya tIna dina tk| bAlaka evaM bAlikA ke janma kA
asvAdhyAya kramazaH sAta evaM ATha dina paryanta kA mAnA jAtA hai| 14. azaci-
mala-mUtra sAmane dikhAI dete taka asvAdhyAya hai| 15.zmazAna-zmazAnabhUmi ke
cAroM ora sau-sau hAtha paryanta asvAdhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| 16. candragrahaNa-
candragrahaNa hone para jaghanya ATha, madhyama bAraha aura utkRSTa solaha
prahara paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 17. sUryagrahaNa-sUryagrahaNa
hone para bhI kramaza: ATha, bAraha aura solaha prahara paryanta asvAdhyAyakAla
mAnA gayA hai| 18.patana-kisI baDe mAnya rAjA athavA rASTa paruSa kA nidhana
hone para jaba taka usakA dAhasaMskAra na ho taba taka svAdhyAya na karanA
caahie| athavA jaba taka dUsarA adhikArI sattArUDha na ho taba taka zanaiH
zanaiH svAdhyAya karanA caahie| 19. rAjavyudgraha-samIpastha rAjAoM meM
paraspara yuddha hone para jaba taka zAnti na ho jAe, taba taka usake pazcAt bhI
eka dina-rAtri svAdhyAya nahIM kreN| 20.audArika zarIra-upAzraya ke bhItara
paMcendriya jIva kA vadha ho jAne para jaba taka kalevara par3A rahe, taba taka
tathA 100 hAtha taka yadi nirjIva kalevara par3A ho to svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
caahie| asvAdhyAya ke uparokta 10 kAraNa audArika zarIra sambandhI kahe gaye
haiN| 21-28-cAra mahotsava aura cAra mahApratipadA-ASADha pUrNimA, Azvina-
pUrNimA, kArtikapUrNimA aura caitra-pUrNimA ye cAra mahotsava haiN| ina
pUrNimAoM ke pazcAt Ane vAlI pratipadA ko mahApratipadA kahate haiN| isameM
svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha hai| 29-32. prAtaH sAyaM madhyAhna aura ardharAtri-
prAtaH sUrya ugane se eka ghar3I pahile tathA eka ghar3I piiche| sUryAsta hone
se eka ghar3I pahile tathA eka ghar3I piiche| madhyAhna arthAt dopahara meM eka
ghar3I Age aura eka ghar3I pIche evaM ardharAtri meM bhI eka ghar3I Age tathA
eka ghar3I pIche svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 000

Page #372 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
-Sad-Suchi/ - Sri Agam Prakashan Samiti, a list of the names of the members who
have contributed to this effort, with their respective locations.  **Mahastamh
1.** 1. Sri Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Madras 2. Sri Birdicandji Prakashcandji
Telesara, Pali 3. Sri Gulabchandji Mangilalji Surana, Sikandrabad 4. Sri
Gyanrajji Kevalchandji Mootha, Pali 5. Sri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta
City 6. Sri Pukharajji Shishodia, Byawar 7. Sri Sh. Jadawmalji Manakchandji
Betala, Bagalkot 8. Sri Sayermalji Jethamalji Chordia, Bangalore 9. Sri
Premrajji Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal, Durg 10. Sri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopda,
Byawar 11. Sri S. Kishanchandji Chordia, Madras 12. Sri Mohanlalji Nemichandji
Lalwani, Changaitola 13. Sri Kanwarlalji Betala, Guwahati 14. Sri Seth Khivrajji
Chordia, Madras 15. Sri Deepchandji Chandanmalji Chordia, Madras 16. Sri
Gumanmalji Chordia, Madras 17. Sri Pannalalji Bhagchandji Bothra, Changaitola
18. Sri S. Badalchandji Chordia, Madras 19. Sri J. Doolichandji Chordia, Madras
20. Sri S. Ratanchandji Chordia, Madras 21. Sri J. Annarajji Chordia, Madras 22.
Sri S. Sayerchandji Chordia, Madras 23. Sri R. Shantillalji Uttamchandji
Chordia, Madras 24. Sri Siremalji Hirachandji Chordia, Madras 25. Sri J.
Hukumchandji Chordia, Madras  **Mahastamh 2.** 1. Sri Bastimalji Mohanlalji
Bohra (KGF), Jadan 2. Sri Thanchandji Mehta, Jodhpur 3. Sri Bhairudanji
Labhchandji Surana, Nagaur 4. Sri Khubchandji Gadia, Byawar 5. Sri Mishrilalji
Dhanrajji Vinaykia, Byawar 6. Sri Indrachandji Baid, Rajnandgaon 7. Sri
Rawatmalji Bhikmachandji Pagaria, Balaghat 8. Sri Agarchandji Fatechandji Parkh,
Jodhpur 9. Sri Jasrajji Ganeshmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 10. Sri Tilokchandji
Sagarmalji Sancheti, Madras 11. Sri Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana, Katangi 12.
Sri R. Prasannachandji Chordia, Madras 13. Sri Deepchandji Chordia, Madras 14.
Sri Moolchandji Chordia, Katangi 15. Sri Ganeshmalji Dharmicandji Kankaria,
Tangla 16. Sri Suganchandji Bokadria, Indore 17. Sri Harkachandji Sagarmalji
Betala, Indore 18. Sri Raghunathmalji Likhmichandji Lodha, Changaitola 19. Sri
Siddhakarnajji Shikharchandji Baid, Changaitola 20. Sri Vardhaman Industries,
Kanpur 21. Sri Mangilalji Mishrilalji Sancheti, Durg 22. Sri S. Suganchandji
Jhamar, Madurantakam

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -sadasva-sUcI/ - zrI AgamaprakAzana-samiti, yAvara arthasahayogI sadasyoM kI
zubha nAmAvalI mahAstambha 1. zrI seTha mohanamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 1. zrI
biradIcaMdajI prakAzacaMdajI talesarA, pAlI 2. zrI gulAbacandajI mAMgIlAlajI
surANA, 2. zrI jJAnarAjajI kevalacandajI mUthA, pAlI sikandarAbAda 3. zrI
premarAjajI jatanarAjajI mehatA, mer3atA siTI 3. zrI pukharAjajI zizodiyA,
byAvara 4. zrI za. jar3AvamalajI mANakacandajI betAlA, 4. zrI sAyaramalajI
jeThamalajI corar3iyA, baiMgalora . bAgalakoTa 5. zrI premarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI
zrIzrImAla, durga 5. zrI hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, byAvara 6. zrI esa.
kizanacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 6. zrI mohanalAlajI nemIcandajI lalavANI, 7.
zrI kaMvaralAlajI baitAlA, gohATI cAMgATolA 8. zrI seTha khIMvarAjajI corar3iyA
madrAsa 7. zrI dIpacaMdajI candanamalajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 9. zrI gumAnamalajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 8. zrI pannAlAlajI bhAgacandajI botharA, cAMgATolA 10. zrI
esa. bAdalacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 9. zrImatI sireku~vara bAI dharmapatnI
sva. zrI 11. zrI je. dulIcandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa suganacandajI jhAmar3a,
madurAntakam 12. zrI esa. ratanacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 10. zrI bastImalajI
mohanalAlajI boharA (KGF) 13. zrI je. annarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa jAr3ana 14.
zrI esa. sAyaracandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 11. zrI thAnacandajI mehatA, jodhapura
15. zrI Ara. zAntilAlajI uttamacandajI coraDiyA, 12. zrI bhairUdAnajI
lAbhacandajI surANA, nAgaura madrAsa 13. zrI khUbacandajI gAdiyA, byAvara 16.
zrI siremalajI hIrAcandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 14. zrI mizrIlAlajI dhanarAjajI
vinAyakiyA, 17. zrI je. hukmIcandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa byAvara 15. zrI
indracandajI baida, rAjanAMdagAMva 1. zrI agaracandajI phatecandajI pArakha,
jodhapura 16. zrI rAvatamalajI bhIkamacandajI pagAriyA, 2. zrI jasarAjajI
gaNezamalajI saMcetI, jodhapura bAlAghATa 3. zrI tilokacaMdajI sAgaramalajI
saMcetI, madrAsa 17. zrI gaNezamalajI dharmIcandajI kAMkariyA, TaMgalA 4. zrI
pUsAlAlajI kistUracaMdajI surANA, kaTaMgI 18. zrI suganacandajI bokar3iyA,
indaura 5. zrI Ara. prasannacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 19. zrI harakacandajI
sAgaramalajI betAlA, indaura 6. zrI dIpacandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 20. zrI
raghunAthamalajI likhamIcandajI lor3hA, 7. zrI mUlacandajI corar3iyA, kaTaMgI
cAMgATolA 8. zrI varddhamAna iNDasTrIja, kAnapura 21. zrI siddhakaraNajI
zikharacandajI baida, 9. zrI mAMgIlAlajI mizrIlAlajI saMcetI, durga cAMgATolA

Page #373 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- **Sadast-Soochi** / 22. Shri Sagarmalji Nortamlaji Pinch, Madras 7. Shri B.
Gajrajji Bokdia, Salem 23. Shri Mohanrajji Mukanchandji Baliya, 8. Shri
Phoolchandji Gautamchandji Kante, Pali Ahmedabad 9. Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna,
Madras 24. Shri Keshrimalji Janvarilaji Talesara, Pali 10. Shri Rooprajji
Jodhrajji Motha, Delhi 25. Shri Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi, Byawar 11. Shri
Mohanlalji Mangalchandji Pagaria, 26. Shri Dharmichadji Bhagchandji Bohra,
Jhutha Raipur 27. Shri Chhogmalji Hemrajji Lodha Dondi Lohara 12. Shri Nathmalji
Mohanlalji Lunia, 28. Shri Gunachandji Dalichandji Kataria, Bellary Chandawal
29. Shri Moolchandji Sujanmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 13. Shri Bhanvarlalji
Gautamchandji Pagaria, 30. Shri C. Amarchandji Bothra, Madras Kushalpura 31.
Shri Bhanvarlalji Moolchandji Surana, Madras 14. Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji,
Jodhpur 32. Shri Badalchandji Jugrajji Mehta, Indore 15. Shri Moolchandji Parkh,
Jodhpur 33. Shri Lalchandji Mohanlalji Kothari, Gothan 16. Shri Sumermalji
Medtiya, Jodhpur 34. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Ajmer 17. Shri
Ganeshmalji Nemichandji Tantia, Jodhpur 35. Shri Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria,
18. Shri Udayrajji Pukharajji Sancheti, Jodhpur Bangalore 19. Shri Badarmalji
Pukharajji Bant, Kanpur 36. Shri Bhanvarimalji Chordia, Madras 20. Smt.
Sundarbai Gothi Dharmpatni Shri Tarachandji 37. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gothi, Madras
Gothi, Jodhpur 38. Shri Jalmachandji Rikhbachandji Bafna, Agra 21. Shri
Raychandji Mohanlalji, Jodhpur 39. Shri Ghevarchandji Pukharajji Bhurat,
Guwahati 22. Shri Ghevarchandji Rooprajji, Jodhpur 40. Shri Jabarchandji Gelda,
Madras. 23. Shri Bhanvarlalji Manakchandji Surana, Madras 41. Shri Jadavmalji
Suganchandji, Madras 24. Shri Janvarilaji Amarchandji Kothari, 42. Shri
Pukharajji Vijayrajji, Madras 43. Shri Chenmalji Surana Trust, Madras 25. Shri
Manakchandji Kishnalalji, Medtacity 44. Shri Lunakaranji Rikhbachandji Lodha,
Madras 26. Shri Mohanlalji Gulabchandji Chatar, Byawar 45. Shri Surajmalji
Sajjanrajji Meheta, Koppal 27. Shri Jasrajji Janvarilaji Dhariawal,
Sahyogisadasy ' Jodhpur 1. Shri Devkaranji Shrichandji Dosi, Medtacity 28. Shri
Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur 2. Smt. Chhaganibai Vinaykia, Byawar 29.
Shri Nemichandji Dakalia Mehta, Jodhpur 3. Shri Poonamchandji Nahata, Jodhpur
30. Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji Karnavat, Jodhpur 4. Shri Bhanvarlalji
Vijayrajji Kankaria, 31. Shri Asumal & Co., Jodhpur Chillipuram 32. Shri
Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur 5. Shri Bhanvarlalji Chopra, Byawar 33. Smt. Suganibai
Dharmpatni Shri Mishrilalji 6. Shri Vijayrajji Ratnalalji Chatar, Byawar Sand,
Jodhpur Byawar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -sadastha-sUcI/ 22. zrI sAgaramalajI noratamalajI pIMcA, madrAsa 7. zrI bI.
gajarAjajI bokaDiyA, selama 23. zrI mohanarAjajI mukanacandajI bAliyA, 8. zrI
phUlacandajI gautamacandajI kAMTheDa, pAlI ahamadAbAda 9. zrI ke. pukharAjajI
bAphaNA, madrAsa 24. zrI kezarImalajI jaMvarIlAlajI talesarA, pAlI 10. zrI
rUparAjajI jodharAjajI mUthA, dillI 25. zrI ratanacandajI uttamacandajI modI,
byAvara 11. zrI mohanalAlajI maMgalacaMdajI pagAriyA, 26. zrI dharmIcandajI
bhAgacandajI boharA, jhUThA rAyapura 27. zrI chogAmalajI hemarAjajI lor3hA
DoMDIlohArA 12. zrI nathamalajI mohanalAlajI lUNiyA, 28. zrI guNacaMdajI
dalIcaMdajI kaTAriyA, bellArI caNDAvala 29. zrI mUlacandajI sujAnamalajI
saMcetI, jodhapura 13. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI gautamacandajI pagAriyA, 30. zrI sI.
amaracandajI botharA, madrAsa kuzAlapurA 31. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mUlacandajI
surANA, madrAsa 14. zrI uttamacaMdajI mAMgIlAlajI, jodhapura 32. zrI
bAdalacaMdajI jugarAjajI mehatA, indaura 15. zrI mUlacandajI pArakha, jodhapura
33. zrI lAlacaMdajI mohanalAlajI koThArI, goThana 16. zrI sumeramalajI
mer3atiyA, jodhapura 34. zrI hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, ajamera 17. zrI
gaNezamalajI nemIcandajI TAMTiyA, jodhapura 35. zrI mohanalAlajI pArasamalajI
pagAriyA, 18. zrI udayarAjajI pukharAjajI saMcetI, jodhapura baiMgalora 19. zrI
bAdaramalajI pukharAjajI baMTa, kAnapura 36. zrI bhaMvarImalajI coraDiyA,
madrAsa 20. zrImatI sundarabAI goThI dharmapatnIzrI tArAcaMdajI 37. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI goThI, madrAsa goThI, jodhapura 38. zrI jAlamacaMdajI
rikhabacaMdajI bAphanA, AgarA 21. zrI rAyacandajI mohanalAlajI, jodhapura 39.
zrI ghevaracaMdajI pukharAjajI bhuraTa, gohATI 22. zrI ghevaracandajI
rUparAjajI, jodhapura 40. zrI jabaracandajI gelar3A, madrAsa  /  23. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI mANakacaMdajI surANA, madrAsa 41. zrI jar3AvamalajI
suganacandajI, madrAsa 24. zrI jaMvarIlAlajI amaracandajI koThArI, 42. zrI
pukharAjajI vijayarAjajI, madrAsa 43. zrI cenamalajI surANA TrasTa, madrAsa 25.
zrI mANakacaMdajI kizanalAlajI, mer3atAsiTI 44. zrI lUNakaraNajI rikhabacaMdajI
lor3hA, madrAsa 26. zrI mohanalAlajI gulAbacandajI catara, byAvara 45. zrI
sUrajamalajI sajjanarAjajI mahetA, koppala 27. zrI jasarAjajI jaMvarIlAlajI
dhArIvAla, sahayogI sadasya ' jodhapura 1. zrI devakaraNajI zrIcandajI DosI,
mer3atAsiTI 28. zrI mohanalAlajI campAlAlajI goThI, jodhapura 2. zrImatI
chaganIbAI vinAyakiyA, byAvara 29. zrI nemIcaMdajI DAkaliyA mehatA, jodhapura 3.
zrI pUnamacandajI nAhaTA, jodhapura 30. zrI tArAcaMdajI kevalacaMdajI karNAvaTa,
jodhapura 4. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI vijayarAjajI kAMkariyA, 31. zrI AsUmala eNDa
kaM. , jodhapura cillIpuram 32. zrI pukharAjajI loDhA, jodhapura 5. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI caupar3A, byAvara 33. zrImatI suganIbAI dharmapatnI zrI
mizrIlAlajI 6. zrI vijayarAjajI ratanalAlajI catara, byAvara sAMDa, jodhapura
byAvara

Page #374 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
-Sadast-Soochi/ 34. Shri Bachhrajji Surana, Jodhpur 63. Shri Chandanmalji
Premchandji Modi, Bhilai 35. Shri Harkachandji Mehta, Jodhpur 64. Shri
Bheevrajji Baghmar, Kuchera 36. Shri Devrajji Labhchandji Medtiya, Jodhpur 65.
Shri Tilokchandji Premprakashji, Ajmer 37. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji Golia,
Jodhpur 66. Shri Vijaylalji Premchandji Gulechha,  Rajnandgaon 38. Shri
Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur 67. Shri Ravatmalji Chajed, Bhilai 39.
Shri Mangilalji Chordia, Kuchera 68. Shri Bhanwarlalji Dungarmalji Kankaria,
Bhilai 40. Shri Sardarmalji Surana, Bhilai 69. Shri Hiralalji Hastimalji
Deshlhara, Bhilai 41. Shri Okchandji Hemrajji Soni, Durg  70. Shri Vardhman
Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, 42. Shri Surajkaranji Surana, Madras  Dalli-
Rajhara 43. Shri Gheesulalji Lalchandji Parkh, Durg 71. Shri Champalalji
Budhrajji Bafna, Bayar 44. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, (Jain Transport Co.)  Jodhpur
45. Shri Champalalji Saklecha, Jalna 72. Shri Gangaramji Indrachandji Bohra,
Kuchera 46. Shri Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar, Bangalore  73. Shri Fatehrajji
Nemichandji Karnavat, 47. Shri Bhanwarlalji Motha & Sons, Jaipur  Kolkata 48.
Shri Lalchandji Motilalji Gadiya, Bangalore 74. Shri Balchandji Thanchandji
Bhurt, Kolkata 49. Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratanmalji Sankhla,  75. Shri
Sampatrajji Kataria, Jodhpur Metupalium 50. Shri Pukharajji Chhallani, Karanguli
76. Shri Javrilalji ShantiLalji Surana, Bolaram 51. Shri Asakaranji Jasrajji
Parkh, Durg  77. Shri Kanmalji Kothari, Dadia 52. Shri Ganeshmalji Hemrajji
Soni, Bhilai 1. Shri Pannalalji Motilalji Surana, Pali 53. Shri Amritrajji
Jaswantrajji Mehta,  Shri Manakchandji Ratnalalji Munot, Tangla Medtacity 80.
Shri Chimman Singhji Mohansinghji Lodha, Bayar 54. Shri Ghevarchandji
Kishoramalji Parkh, Jodhpur 81. Shri Ridhkarajji Ravatmalji Bhurt, Guwahati 55.
Shri Mangilalji Rekchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 82. Shri Parsamalji Mahavirchandji
Bafna, Gothan 56. Shri Munnilalji Mulchandji Gulechha, Jodhpur 83. Shri
Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrisrimal,  Kuchera 57. Shri Ratnalalji Lakhpatrajji,
Jodhpur 84. Shri Mangilalji Madanlalji Chordia,  58. Shri Jeevrajji Parsamalji
Kothari, Medta Bhairunda City 85. Shri Sohनलालji Loonkarajji Surana, Kuchera 59.
Shri Bhanwarlalji Rikhabchandji Nahata, Nagaur 86. Shri Gheesulalji, Parsamalji,
Javrilalji  60. Shri Mangilalji Prakashchandji Runwal, Kothari, Gothan 87. Shri
Sardarmalji & Company, Jodhpur 61. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, Pipaliya Kalan 88.
Shri Champalalji Hiralalji Bagrecha,  62. Shri Harkachandji Jugrajji Bafna,
Bangalore Jodhpur  Sita

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 -sadastha-sUcI/ 34. zrI baccharAjajI surANA, jodhapura 63. zrI candanamalajI
premacaMdajI modI, bhilAI 35. zrI harakacandajI mehatA, jodhapura 64. zrI
bhIvarAjajI bAghamAra, kucerA 36. zrI devarAjajI lAbhacaMdajI mer3atiyA,
jodhapura 65. zrI tilokacaMdajI premaprakAzajI, ajamera 37. zrI kanakarAjajI
madanarAjajI goliyA, jodhapura 66. zrI vijayalAlajI premacaMdajI gulecchA 38.
zrI ghevaracandajI pArasamalajI TAMTiyA, jodhapura rAjanAMdagA~va 39. zrI
mAMgIlAlajI corar3iyA, kucerA 67. zrI rAvatamalajI chAjer3a, bhilAI 40. zrI
saradAramalajI surANA, bhilAI 68. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI DUMgaramalajI kAMkariyA,
41. zrI okacaMdajI hemarAjajI sonI, durga bhilAI 42. zrI sUrajakaraNajI surANA,
madrAsa 69. zrI hIrAlAlajI hastImalajI dezalaharA, 43. zrI ghIsUlAlajI
lAlacaMdajI pArakha, durga bhilAI 60. zrI vardhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina
zrAvakasaMgha, 44. zrI pukharAjajI boharA,(jaina TrAnsaporTa kaM.) dallI-
rAjaharA _jodhapura 45. zrI campAlAlajI sakalecA, jAlanA 71. zrI campAlAlajI
buddharAjajI bAphaNA, byAvara 46. zrI premarAjajI mIThAlAlajI kAmadAra,
baiMgalora 72. zrI gaMgArAmajI indracaMdajI boharA, kucerA 73. zrI phateharAjajI
nemIcaMdajI karNAvaTa, 47. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mUthA eNDa sansa, jayapura
kalakattA 48. zrI lAlacaMdajI motIlAlajI gAdiyA, baiMgalora 74. zrI bAlacaMdajI
thAnacandajI bhuraTa, kalakattA 49. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI navaratnamalajI sAMkhalA,
75. zrI sampatarAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura meTUpaliyama 76. zrI javarIlAlajI
zAMtilAlajI surANA, bolArama 50. zrI pukharAjajI challANI, karaNagullI 77. zrI
kAnamalajI koThArI, dAdiyA 51. zrI AsakaraNajI jasarAjajI pArakha, durga 1. zrI
pannAlAlajI motIlAlajI surANA, pAlI 52. zrI gaNezamalajI hemarAjajI sonI, bhilAI
zrI mANakacaMdajI ratanalAlajI muNota, TaMgalA 53. zrI amRtarAjajI
jasavantarAjajI mehatA, 80. zrI cimmanasiMhajI mohanasiMhajI loDhA, byAvara
mer3atAsiTI 81. zrI riddhakaraNajI rAvatamalajI bhuraTa, gauhATI 54. zrI
ghevaracaMdajI kizoramalajI pArakha, jodhapura 82. zrI pArasamalajI
mahAvIracaMdajI bAphanA, goThana 55 zrI mAMgIlAlajI rekhacaMdajI pArakha,
jodhapura 83. zrI phakIracaMdajI kamalacaMdajI zrIzrImAla, 56. zrI munnIlAlajI
mUlacaMdajI gulecchA, jodhapura kucerA 57. zrI ratanalAlajI lakhapatarAjajI,
jodhapura 84. zrI mAMgIlAlajI madanalAlajI corar3iyA, 58. zrI jIvarAjajI
pArasamalajI koThArI, mer3atA bhairUMdA siTI 85. zrI sohanalAlajI lUNakaraNajI
surANA, kucerA 59. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI rikhabacaMdajI nAhaTA, nAgaura 86. zrI
ghIsUlAlajI, pArasamalajI, jaMvarIlAlajI 60. zrI mAMgIlAlajI prakAzacandajI
rUNavAla, koThArI, goThana maisUra 87. zrI saradAramalajI eNDa kampanI,
jodhapura 61. zrI pukharAjajI boharA, pIpaliyA kalAM 88. zrI campAlAlajI
hIrAlAlajI bAgarecA, 62. zrI harakacaMdajI jugarAjajI bAphanA, baiMgalora
jodhapura siTA

Page #375 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Uttaradhyayanasutra/  89. Shri Pukharajji Kataria, Jodhpur 112. Shri
Chandmalji Dhanrajji Modi, Ajmer 90. Shri Indrachandji Mukanchandji, Indore 113.
Shri Ramprasanna Gyanprasar Kendra, Chandrapur 91. Shri Bhanwarlalji Bafna,
Indore 114. Shri Bhurmalji Dulichandji Bokardia, Medta 92. Shri Jethmalji Modi,
Indore City 115. Shri Mohanlalji Dhariawal, Pali 93. Shri Balchandji Amarchandji
Modi, Byawar 116. Shrimati Ramkunwarbai Dharmapatni Shri Chandmalji 94. Shri
Kundanmalji Parsamalji Bhandari, Bangalore 117. Shrimati Kamalakanwar Lalwani
Dharmapatni Sw. Lodha, Bombay 95. Shrimati Kamalakanwar Lalwani Dharmapatni Sw.
Parsamalji Lalwani, Gothan 118. Shri Mangilalji Uttamchandji Bafna, Bangalore
96. Shri Akhechandji Loonkaranji Bhandari, 119. Shri Sanchalalji Bafna,
Aurangabad 97. Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon 120. Shri Bhikhmachandji
Manakchandji Khabia, (Kudalore) Madras 98. Shri Prakashchandji Jain, Nagaur 121.
Shrimati Anopkunwar Dharmapatni Shri Champalalji 99. Shri Kushalchandji
Rikhabchandji Surana, Sanghavi, Kuchera Bolaram 122. Shri Sohनलालji Sojatia,
Thanwala 100. Shri Lakshmichandji Ashok Kumarji Shrisrimal, Kuchera 123. Shri
Champalalji Bhandari, Calcutta 101. Shri Gudarmalji Champalalji, Gothan 124.
Shri Bhikhmachandji Ganeshmalji Choudhary, Dhule 102. Shri Tejarajji Kothari,
Mangaliyaavas 125. Shri Pukharajji Kishनलालji Tateड़, Sikandrabad 103. Shri
Sampatrajji Chordia, Madras 126. Shri Mishrilalji Sajjanlalji Kataria,
Sikandrabad 104. Shri Amarchandji Chajed, Padu Bari 127. Shri Vardhaman
Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, Bagar Nagar 105. Shri Jugrajji Dhanrajji
Barmecha, Madras 128. Shri Pukharajji Parsamalji Lalwani, Pura 106. Shri
Pukharajji Naharmalji Lalwani, Madras 129. Shri T. Parsamalji Chordia, Madras
107. Shrimati Kanchandevi and Nirmala Devi, Madras 130. Shri Motilalji Asulalji
Bohra & Co., Bangalore 108. Shri Dulerajji Bhanwarlalji Kothari, Kushal- 131.
Shri Sampatrajji Surana, Manmad 109. Shri Bhanwarlalji Mangilalji Betala, Deh
110. Shri Jeevrajji Bhanwarlalji Chordia, Bhairunda 111. Shri Mangilalji
Shantilalji Runwal, Harsolav

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 uttarAdhyayana sUtra/ 89. zrI pukharAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 112. zrI
cAMdamalajI dhanarAjajI modI, ajamera 90. zrI indracandajI mukanacandajI,
indaura 113. zrI rAmaprasanna jJAnaprasAra kendra, candrapura 91. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI bAphaNA, indaura 114. zrI bhUramalajI dulIcaMdajI bokar3iyA,
mer3atA92. zrI jeThamalajI modI, indaura siTI 93. zrI bAlacandajI amaracandajI
modI, byAvara 115. zrI mohanalAlajI dhArIvAla, pAlI 94. zrI kundanamalajI
pArasamalajI bhaMDArI, baiMgalora 116. zrImatI rAmakuMvarabAI dharmapatnI zrI
cAMdamalajI 95. zrImatI kamalAkaMvara lalavANI dharmapatnI sva. loDhA, bambaI
zrI pArasamalajI lalavANI, goThana 117. zrI mA~gIlAlajI uttamacaMdajI bAphaNA,
baiMgalora 96. zrI akhecandajI lUNakaraNajI bhaNDArI, 118. zrI sAMcAlAlajI
bAphaNA, auraMgAbAda _kalakattA 119. zrI bhIkhamacandajI mANakacandajI khAbiyA,
97. zrI suganacandajI saMcetI, rAjanAMdagA~va (kuDAlora)madrAsa 98. zrI
prakAzacaMdajI jaina, nAgaura 120. zrImatI anopakuMvara dharmapatnI zrI
campAlAlajI 99. zrI kuzAlacaMdajI rikhabacandajI surANA, saMghavI, kucerA
bolArama 121. zrI sohanalAlajI sojatiyA, thAMvalA 100. zrI lakSmIcaMdajI
azokakumArajI zrIzrImAla, 122. zrI campAlAlajI bhaNDArI, kalakattA kucerA 123.
zrI bhIkhamacandajI gaNezamalajI caudharI, 101. zrI gUdar3amalajI campAlAlajI,
goThana dhUliyA 102. zrI tejarAjajI koThArI, mAMgaliyAvAsa 124. zrI pukharAjajI
kizanalAlajI tAter3a, 103. zrI sampatarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa sikandarAbAda
104. zrI amaracaMdajI chAjer3a, pAdu bar3I 125. zrI mizrIlAlajI sajjanalAlajI
kaTAriyA, . 105. zrI jugarAjajI dhanarAjajI baramecA, madrAsa sikandarAbAda 106.
zrI pukharAjajI nAharamalajI lalavANI, madrAsa 126. zrI varddhamAna sthAnakavAsI
jaina zrAvaka saMgha, 107. zrImatI kaMcanadevI va nirmalA devI, madrAsa
bagar3Inagara 108. zrI dulerAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI koThArI, kuzAla- 127. zrI
pukharAjajI pArasamalajI lalavANI, purA bilAr3A 109. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
mAMgIlAlajI betAlA, Deha 128. zrI TI. pArasamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 110. zrI
jIvarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI corar3iyA, bhairUMdA 129. zrI motIlAlajI AsUlAlajI
boharA eNDa 111. zrI mAMgIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI rUNavAla, kaM., baiMgalora
harasolAva 130. zrI sampatarAjajI surANA, manamAr3a

Page #376 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Biographical Sketch of Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji M.Sa. 'Madhukar' Muni
**Birth Date:**  Margashirsha Shukla Chaturdashi, Vikram Samvat 1970 **Birth
Place:** Tinwari Nagar, Jodhpur District, Rajasthan **Mother:** Smt. Tulsibai
**Father:** Shri Jamnalalji Dhaadiwal  **Initiation Date:**  Vaishakh Shukla 10,
Vikram Samvat 1980 **Initiation Place:** Bhinay Gram, Ajmer District
**Initiation Guru:** Shri Joravarmalji M.Sa. **Teaching Guru (Guru-Bhrata):**
Shri Hazarimlalji M.Sa.  **Acharya Parampara:** Pujya Acharya Shri Jaymallji
M.Sa.  **Acharya Pad:** Jay Gachch - Vikram Samvat 2004 **Resignation from
Acharya Pad for the Unity of the Shraman Sangh:** Vikram Samvat 2009 **Upadhyaya
Pad:** Vikram Samvat 2033, Nagaur (Varshavas) **Declaration of Yuvacharya Pad:**
Shravan Shukla 1, Vikram Samvat 2036, 25 July 1979 (Hyderabad) **Yuvacharya Pad
Chadar Mahotsav:** Chaitra Shukla 10, Vikram Samvat 2037, 23 March 1980, Jodhpur
**Nirvana:**  Mrigasira Vad 7, Vikram Samvat 2040, 26 November 1983, Nasik
(Maharashtra)  **Your Personality and Knowledge:**  * A glorious, grand, and
radiant forehead, bright large eyes, a smile that illuminated the face, and a
gentle voice showering affection and courtesy. * A manifestation of spiritual
brilliance, profound reverence for gurus, humility along with knowledge, wisdom
along with authority, and a disciplined Shraman.  **Knowledge:**  * He possessed
profound knowledge of Prakrit, Sanskrit, Grammar, Prakrit Grammar, Jain Agamas,
Nyaya Darshan, etc. * He was a highly skilled orator, novelist, storyteller, and
commentator.  **Published Works:**  **Pravachan Sangrah (Discourse
Collections):**  1. Antar Ki Aur, Part 1 & 2 2. Sadhana Ke Sutra 3. Paryushana
Parva Pravachan 4. Anekanta Darshan 5. Jain-Karmasiddhanta 6. Jain Tattva-
Darshan 7. Jain Sanskrit - Ek Vishleshan 8. Grihasth Dharma 9. Aparigraha
Darshan 10. Ahimsa Darshan 11. Tap Ek Vishleshan 12. Adhyatma-Vikas Ki Bhoomika
**Katha Sahitya (Story Literature):**  * Jain Katha Mala, Part 1 to 51
**Upanyas (Novels):**  1. Pinjare Ka Panchhi 2. Ahimsa Ki Vijay 3. Talash 4.
Chhaya 5. Aan Par Balidan  **Other Books:**  1. Agam Parichay 2. Jain Dharma Ki
Hazar Shikshaen 3. Jiyo To Aise Jiyo  **Special:**  * Coordinator and Chief
Editor of Agam Battisi  **Disciple:**  * Muni Shri Vinaykumarji 'Bheem'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
yuvAcArya zrI mizrImalajI ma.sA. 'madhukara' muni kA jIvana paricaya janma tithi
vi.saM. 1970 mArgazIrSa zuklA caturdazI janma-sthAna tiMvarI nagara, jilA-
jodhapura (rAja.) mAtA zrImatI tulasIbAI pitA zrI jamanAlAlajI dhAr3IvAla dIkSA
tithi vaizAkha zuklA 10 vi.saM. 1980 dIkSA-sthAna bhiNAya grAma, jilA-ajamera
dIkSAguru zrI jorAvaramalajI ma.sA. zikSAguru (gurubhrAtA) zrI hajArImalajI
ma.sA. AcArya paramparA pUjya AcArya zrI jayamallajI ma.sA. AcArya pada jaya
gaccha-vi.saM.2004 zramaNa saMgha kI ekatA hetu AcArya pada kA tyAga vi.saM.
2009 upAdhyAya pada vi.saM. 2033 nAgaura (varSAvAsa) yuvAcArya pada kI ghoSaNA
zrAvaNa zuklA 1 vi.saM. 2036 dinAMka 25 julAI 1979 (haidarAbAda) yuvAcArya pada-
cAdara mahotsava vi.saM. 2037 caitra zuklA 10 dinAMka 23-3-80, jodhapura
svargavAsa vi.saM. 2040 migasara vada 7 dinAMka 26-11-1983, nAsika (mahArASTra)
ApakA vyaktitva evaM jJAna : gauravapUrNa bhavya tejasvI lalATa, camakadAra
bar3I A~kheM, mukha para smita kI khilatI AbhA aura sneha tathA saujanya varSAti
komala vANI, AdhyAtmika teja kA nikhAra, gurujanoM ke prati agAdha zraddhA,
vidyA ke sAtha vinaya, adhikAra ke sAtha viveka aura anuzAsita zramaNa the| 2.
prAkRta, saMskRta, vyAkaraNa, prAkRta vyAkaraNa, jaina Agama, nyAya darzana Adi
kA praur3ha jJAna munizrI ko prApta thaa| Apa uccakoTi ke pravacanakAra,
upanyAsakAra, kathAkAra evaM vyAkhyAkAra the| Apake prakAzita sAhitya kI
nAmAvalI pravacana saMgraha : 1. antara kI ora, bhAga 1 va 2, 2. sAdhanA ke
sUtra, 3. paryuSaNa parva pravacana, 4. anekAnta darzana, 5. jaina-
karmasiddhAnta, 6. jainatattva-darzana, 7. jaina saMskRta-eka vizleSaNa, 8.
gRhasthadharma, 9. aparigraha darzana, 10. ahiMsA darzana, 11. tapa eka
vizleSaNa, 12. AdhyAtma-vikAsa kI bhuumikaa| kathA sAhitya : jaina kathA mAlA,
bhAga 1 se 51 taka upanyAsa : 1. piMjare kA paMchI, 2. ahiMsA kI vijaya, 3.
talAza, 4. chAyA, 5. Ana para blidaan| anya pustakeM : 1. Agama paricaya,
2.jainadharma kI hajAra zikSAe~,3. jiyo to aise jiyo| vizeSa : Agama battIsI ke
saMyojaka va pradhAna smpaadk| ziSya : Apake eka ziSya haiM- 1. muni zrI
vinayakumArajI 'bhIma' 1.

