Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/034696/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namo Namo Nimmaladansanas Bal Brahmachari Shri Neminaathay Namah Pujya Anand-
Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar-Guru-bhyo Namah Aagam-29 Sastarak Aagam Sutra
Hindi Anuvaad 44444444 Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak Aagam Deepaakar Muni Deepa Ratna
Sagarji [M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi] Aagam Hindi-Anuvaad-Shreni Pushp-29

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa bAla brahmacArI zrI neminAthAya namaH pUjya Ananda-
kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara-gurUbhyo nama: Agama-29 sastAraka AgamasUtra
hindI anuvAda 44444444 anuvAdaka evaM sampAdaka Agama dIvAkara muni
dIparatnasAgarajI [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi] Agama hindI-anuvAda-zreNI
puSpa-29

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 29, Payannasutra-6, 'Sanstarak' Agam Sutra-29- "Sanstarak
Payannasutra-6- Hindi Translation Where to see what? | Page order Order Subject
Subject Page 1 Mangal and Sanstarak's qualities Sanstarak's form and benefits 05
| 3 Sanstarak's examples 4 Feeling Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Sanstarak)" Agam
Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, 'saMstAraka' AgamasUtra-29- "saMstAraka
payannAsUtra-6- hindI anuvAda kahAM kyA dekhe? | pRSTha krama krama viSaya
viSaya pRSTha 1 maMgala tathA saMstAraka ke guNa saMstAraka kA svarupa evaM
lAbha 05  /  3 saMstAraka ke dRSTAnta 4 bhAvanA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 2

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Agam Sutra 29, Payannasutra-6, Sanstark" 45 Agam Classification Order Agam Name
Sutra | Order Agam Name Angasutra-1 Payannasutra-2 01 Achar 02 Sutrakrit
Angasutra-2 26 03 Sthan Angasutra-3 | 25 Aturpratyakhyan | Mahapratyakhyan
Bhaktaparijna 28 | Tandulavaichar Sanstark 27 Payannasutra-3 Payannasutra-4
Payannasutra-5 04 Samavay Angasutra-4 05 Angasutra-5 29 Payannasutra-6 Bhagavati
Jnatadharmakatha 06 | Angasutra-6 Payannasutra-7 Upasakadasha Angasutra-7
Payannasutra-7 Antakrit Dasha 09 Anuttaroppapatikadasha Angasutra-8 Angasutra-9
30.1 | Gachhachar 30.2 Chandravedhyak 31 | Ganividya Devendrastav Virastav
Payannasutra-8 Payannasutra-9 32 | 10 Prashnavyakaranadasha Angasutra-10 33
Angasutra-11 34 | Nishit 11 Vipakshrut 12 Aupapatik Payannasutra-10
Chhedasutra-1 Chhedasutra-2 Upangasutra-1 Brihatkalp Vyavahar Rajaprashchiy
Upangasutra-2 Chhedasutra-3 14 Jivajivabhigam Upangasutra-3 37 Upangasutra-4
Upangasutra-5 Upangasutra-6 Chhedasutra-4 Chhedasutra-5 Chhedasutra-6 40
Upangasutra-7 Dashashrutaskandh 38 Jitakalp 39 Mahanishit Aavashyak 41.1
Oghanuyukti 41.2 | Pindanuyukti 42 | Dashavaikalik 43 Uttaradhyayanasutra 44
Nandi Anuyogadwar Mulsutra-1 Mulsutra-2 Mulsutra-2 15 Prajnapana 16
Suryaprajnapti 17 Chandraprajnapti | Jambudvipaprajnapti 19 Nirayavalika
Kalpavatamsika 21 | Pushpika | Pushpachulika 23 Vrishnidasha 24 Chatuhsharan
Upangasutra-8 Upangasutra-9 Upangasutra-10 Upangasutra-11 Upangasutra-12
Payannasutra-1 Mulsutra-3 Mulsutra-4 Chuliakasutra-1 Chuliakasutra-2 Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit “(Sanstark)” Agam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad" Page 3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, saMstAraka' 45 Agama vargIkaraNa krama Agama kA
nAma sUtra | krama Agama kA nAma aMgasUtra-1 payannAsUtra-2 01 AcAra 02 sUtrakRt
aMgasUtra-2 26 03 sthAna aMgasUtra-3 | 25 AturapratyAkhyAna | mahApratyAkhyAna
bhaktaparijJA 28 | taMdulavaicArika saMstAraka 27 payannAsUtra-3 payannAsUtra-4
payannAsUtra-5 04 samavAya aMgasUtra-4 05 aMgasUtra-5 29 payannAsUtra-6
bhagavatI jJAtAdharmakathA 06  /  aMgasUtra-6 payannAsUtra-7 upAsakadazA
aMgasUtra-7 payannAsUtra-7 aMtakRt dazA 09 anuttaropapAtikadazA aMgasUtra-8
aMgasUtra-9 30.1 | gacchAcAra 30.2 candravedhyaka 31 | gaNividyA devendrastava
vIrastava payannAsUtra-8 payannAsUtra-9 32  /  10 praznavyAkaraNadazA
aMgasUtra-10 33 aMgasUtra-11 34 | nizItha 11 vipAkazruta 12 aupapAtika
payannAsUtra-10 chedasUtra-1 chedasUtra-2 upAMgasUtra-1 bRhatkalpa vyavahAra
rAjaprazciya upAMgasUtra-2 chedasUtra-3 14 jIvAjIvAbhigama upAgasUtra-3 37
upAMgasUtra-4 upAMgasUtra-5 upAMgasUtra-6 chedasUtra-4 chedasUtra-5 chedasUtra-6
40 upAMgasUtra-7 dazAzrutaskandha 38 jItakalpa 39 mahAnizItha Avazyaka 41.1
oghaniyukti 41.2 | piMDaniyukti 42 | dazavaikAlika 43 uttarAdhyayana 44 nandI
anuyogadvAra mUlasUtra-1 mUlasUtra-2 mUlasUtra-2 15 prajJApanA 16 sUryaprajJapti
17 candraprajJapti | jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti 19 nirayAvalikA kalpavataMsikA 21 |
puSpikA | puSpacUlikA 23 vRSNidazA 24 catu:zaraNa upAgasUtra-8 upAMgasUtra-9
upAMgasUtra-10 upAMgasUtra-11 upAMgasUtra-12 payannAsUtra-1 mUlasUtra-3
mUlasUtra-4 cUlikAsUtra-1 cUlikAsUtra-2 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(saMstAraka)"
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 3

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aagam Sutra 29, Payannasutra-6, Sanstark  **Box** 10 06 02 01 13 05 04 09
**Muni Diparatnasagarji Published Literature Aagam Literature** Aagam Literature
Literature Name Box Order Literature Name Original Aagam Literature: 147 6 |
Aagam Other Literature: 1-1- Aagamsuuttaani-Moolam print [49] -1- Maaram
Thanuyog -2- Aagamsuuttaani-Moolam Net [45] -2- Aagam Sambandhi Saahitya -3-
Aagammanjooasha (Moola Prat) [53] -3- Rishibhaashit Sutraani | Aagam Anuvaad
Saahitya: 165 -4- Aagamiya Suktaavali 01 -1- Aagam Sutra Gujarati Anuvaad [47] |
Aagam Saahitya- Kul Pustak 516 -2- Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad Net [47] | -3-
Aagamsootra English Trans. | [11] | -4- Saamsutra Sati 42raati Manuvaah [48] -5-
Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad print [12] Other Literature: 3 Aagam Vivechan
Saahitya: 171 Tattvabhyaas Saahitya-1- Aagam Sutra Satikam [46] 2 Sutraabhyaas
Saahitya 06 1-2- Aagam Sutraani Satikam Prataakar-1 / Vyakaran Saahitya| -3-
Aagam Sutraani Satikam Prataakar-2 Vyakhyaan Saahitya. -4- Aagam Churni Saahitya
[09] 5 Unalat Saahitya|-5- Savrittik Aagam Sutraani-1 [40] 6 V Saahitya 04 -6-
Savrittik Aagam Sutraani-2 [08] 7 Maaraadhana Saahitya 03 |-7- Sachurnik
Aagamsuuttaani. [08] 8 Pariyay Saahitya 04 Aagam Kosh Saahitya: 1479 Poojan
Saahitya-1- Aagam Saddakoso [04] 10 Tartan 52 Sanksipt Darshan -2- Aagam
Kahaakoso [01] | 11hi Saahitya-3- Aagam-Sagar-Kosh: [05] 12 Diparatnasagarna
Laghushodhanibandh 05 -4- Aagam-Shabdadhi-Sangrah (Pra-San-Gu) [04] Aagam
Siwayanu Saahitya Kool Pustak 5 Aagam Anukram Saahitya: 09 -1-
Saagamvishayanoomub- (Bhoog) | 1-Aagam Saahitya (Kul Pustak) | 516 -2- Aagam
Vishayanoomukram (Satikam) 04 | 2-Aagametar Saahitya (Kul 085 -3- Aagam Sutra-
Gaatha Anukram Diparatnasagarji ke Kul Prakashan | 601 A
AAEmunihiparatnasagarunu Saahitya | Bhunitiparatnasagarunu Saagam Saahitya [Is
Pustak8 516] Tana Huda Paana [98,300] 2 Bhunitiparatnasagarunu Many Saahitya
[Hut Pustak8 85] Tana Hus Paana [09,270] Bhumihiparatnasar Sanshatit Tattvarth
Sutra'ni Vishisht DVD Tana Hul Paana [27,930]| Abhaa2praashanoos S०१ + Vishisht
DVD Is Paana 1,35,500 Muni Diparatna Sagar Krit “(Sanstark)” Aagam Sutra-Hindi
Anuvaad” Page 4 02 25 05 02 | 03

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, saMstAraka' baksa 10 06 02 01 13 05 04 09 muni
dIparatnasAgarajI prakAzita sAhitya Agama sAhitya Agama sAhitya sAhitya nAma
baksa krama sAhitya nAma mUla Agama sAhitya: 147 6 | Agama anya sAhitya:1-1-
AgamasuttANi-mUlaM print [49] -1- mArAma thAnuyoga -2- AgamasuttANi-mUlaM Net
[45] -2- Agama saMbaMdhI sAhitya -3- AgamamaJjUSA (mUla prata) [53] -3-
RSibhASita sUtrANi | Agama anuvAda sAhitya: 165 -4- Agamiya sUktAvalI 01 -1-
AgamasUtra gujarAtI anuvAda [47] | Agama sAhitya- kula pustaka 516 -2-
AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda Net [47] | -3- Aagamsootra English Trans. | [11] | -4-
sAmasUtra saTI 42rAtI manuvAH [48] -5- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda print [12] anya
sAhitya:3 Agama vivecana sAhitya: 171 tattvAbhyAsa sAhitya-1- AgamasUtra saTIkaM
[46] 2 sUtrAbhyAsa sAhitya 06 1-2- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM pratAkAra-1 / vyAkaraNa
sAhitya| -3- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM pratAkAra-2 vyAkhyAna sAhitya. -4- Agama cUrNi
sAhitya [09] 5 unalata sAhitya|-5- savRttika AgamasUtrANi-1 [40] 6 va sAhitya 04
-6- savRttika AgamasUtrANi-2 [08] 7 mArAdhanA sAhitya 03 |-7- sacUrNika
AgamasuttANi  /  [08] 8 pariyaya sAhitya 04 Agama koSa sAhitya: 1479 pUjana
sAhitya-1- Agama saddakoso [04] 10 tArthaM 52 saMkSipta rzana -2- Agama kahAkoso
[01] | 11hI sAhitya-3- Agama-sAgara-koSa: [05] 12 dIparatnasAgaranA
laghuzodhanibaMdha 05 -4- Agama-zabdAdi-saMgraha (prA-saM-gu) [04] Agama
sivAyanuM sAhitya kUla pustaka 5 Agama anukrama sAhitya: 09 -1-
sAgamaviSayAnubha- (bhUga) | 1-Agama sAhitya (kula pustaka) | 516 -2- Agama
viSayAnukrama (saTIka) 04 | 2-Agametara sAhitya (kula 085 -3- Agama sUtra-gAthA
anukrama dIparatnasAgarajI ke kula prakAzana | 601 A AAEmunihIparatnasAgaranuM
sAhitya | bhuniTIparatnasAgaranuM sAgama sAhitya [isa pusta8 516] tanA hudA pAnA
[98,300] 2 bhuniTIparatnasAgaranuM manya sAhitya [huta pusta8 85] tanA husa pAnA
[09,270] bhumihIparatnasAra saMzatita tatvArthasUtra'nI viziSTa DVD tanA hula
pAnA [27,930]| abhA2prAzanosa S01 + viziSTa DVD isa pAnA 1,35,500 muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 4 02 25 05 02
| 03

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 29, Payannā Sūtra-6, 'Sanstāraka' [29] Sanstāraka Payannā Sūtra-6
- Hindi Translation Sūtra-1 Saluting the Supreme Lord Mahāvīra, the Śramaṇa
Bhagavān, the Kevala Jnānī, who is like a bull among the common Kevala Jnānīs,
and the Lord of Gods, Śrī Jineśvara Deva; I speak of the tradition obtained by
accepting the Santhāra, which is the worship of the final time. Sūtra-2 This
worship, as spoken by Śrī Jina, is in the form of the worship of the Dharma of
conduct. Well-behaved men desire this final worship, because it is the
acceptance of the flag of all their worship throughout their lives. Sūtra-3 Just
as poor men find joy in wealth, grain, etc., and then strong men take pride in
winning the victory flag, and from its lack they experience disgrace and sorrow,
so well-behaved men find joy and pride in this worship. Sūtra-4,5 Just as
vaidūrya is for all kinds of gems, sandalwood is for all kinds of fragrant
substances, and vajra is for all kinds of jewels, and just as the Arihant
Paramātma is for all the best men, and the mother of the Tīrthankaras is for all
the women of the world, so this worship of Santhāra is superior for the well-
behaved soul. Sūtra-6 And just as the lineage of Śrī Jineśvara Deva is for the
lineage, the Śrāvakakula is for all the families, the Siddhi Gati is for the
movement, the liberation is for all kinds of happiness, and Sūtra-7 just as the
Śrī Jina-spoken Ahiṃsā Dharma is for all the Dharma, the words of the virtuous
man are for the words of the people, and the purity of the Ātmaguṇa in the form
of Samyaktva is for all kinds of purity, so this worship is essential in the Śrī
Jina-spoken worship of the final time. Sūtra-8 This worship in the form of
Samadhi-Mṛtyu is truly auspicious. It is the ultimate cause of progress and
advancement. Therefore, such worship is rare even for the gods in the three
worlds. Even the Indra of the heavenly world desires the death of a learned man
with Samadhi with one mind. Sūtra-9 O obedient one! You have obtained the Śrī
Jina-spoken death of a learned man. Therefore, without any doubt, you have
obtained the victory flag in the form of the attainment of that Siddhi by
defeating the Karma-Malla. Sūtra-10 Just as the Paramśukladhyāna is for all
kinds of meditation, Kevala Jnāna is for knowledge like Matyādi Jnāna, and the
Yathākhyāta Chāritra obtained from the suppression of Kṣaya, etc., is the cause
of liberation in all kinds of Chāritra. Muni Dīparatnasāgara Kṛt “(Sanstāraka)”
Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Translation” Page 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, 'saMstAraka' [29] saMstAraka payannAsUtra-6-
hindI anuvAda sUtra-1 zrI jinezvaradeva-sAmAnya kevalajJAnIoM ke bAremeM vRSabha
samAna, devAdhideva zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra paramAtmA ko namaskAra karake;
antima kAla kI ArAdhanA rUpa saMthArA ke svIkAra se prApta honevAlI paramparA ko
maiM kahatA hU~ sUtra -2 zrI jinakathita yaha ArAdhanA, cAritra dharma kI
ArAdhanA rUpa hai  /  suvihita puruSa isa taraha kI antima ArAdhanA kI IcchA
karate haiM, kyoMki unake jIvana paryanta kI sarva ArAdhanAoM kI patAkA ke
svIkAra rUpa yaha ArAdhanA hai| sUtra-3 daridra puruSa dhana, dhAnya Adi meM
jaise Ananda mAnate haiM, aura phira malla puruSa jaya patAkA pAne meM jaise
gaurava lete haiM aura isakI kamI se vo apamAna aura duAna ko pAte haiM, vaise
suvihita puruSa isa ArAdhanA meM Ananda aura gaurava ko prApta karate haiN|
sUtra-4,5 maNikI sarva jAti ke lie jaise vaiDUrya, sarva taraha ke khuzabUdAra
dravya ke lie jaise candana aura ratna meM jaise vajra hotA hai tathA- sarva
uttama puruSoM meM jaise arihaMta paramAtmA aura jagata ke sarva strI samudAya
meM jaise tIrthaMkaroM kI mAtA hotI hai vaise ArAdhanA ke lie isa saMthArA kI
ArAdhanA, suvihita AtmA ke lie zreSThatara hai| sUtra-6 aura vaMza meM jaise zrI
jinezvara deva kA vaMza, sarva kula meM jaise zrAvakakula, gati ke lie jaise
siddhigati, sarva taraha ke sukha meM jaise mukti kA sukha, tathAsUtra -7 sarva
dharma meM jaise zrI jinakathita ahiMsAdharma, lokavacana meM jaise sAdhu puruSa
ke vacana, itara sarva taraha kI zuddhi ke lie jaise samyaktva rUpa AtmaguNa kI
zuddhi, vaise zrI jinakathita antimakAla kI ArAdhanA meM yaha ArAdhanA jarUrI
hai| sUtra-8 samAdhimaraNa rUpa yaha ArAdhanA saca hI meM kalyANakara hai  /
abhyudaya unnati kA paramahetu hai  /  isalie aisI ArAdhanA tIna bhuvana meM
devatAoM ko bhI durlabha hai  /  devaloka ke indra bhI samAdhipUrvaka ke
paMr3ita maraNa kI eka mana se abhilASA rakhate haiN| sUtra-9 vineya ! zrI
jinakathita paMDita maraNa tUne pAyA  /  isalie niHzaMka karma malla ko haNakara
usa siddhi kI prApti rUpa jayapatAkA paaii| sUtra-10 sarva taraha ke dhyAna meM
jaise paramazukladhyAna, matyAdi jJAna meM kevalajJAna aura sarva taraha ke
cAritra meM jaise kaSAya Adi ke upazama se prApta yathAkhyAta cAritra kramazaH
mokSa kA kAraNa banatA hai| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-
hindI anuvAda" Page 5

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Āgama Sūtra 29, Payannāsūtra-6, Sanstāraka Sūtra - 11, 12**  Shree Jin-kathith
Shramanatva, is considered the best benefit among all kinds of best benefits;
because through its practice, Shree Tirthankaratva, Kevalgyan and Moksha,
happiness is attained. And then, for the benefit of the afterlife, the root of
attaining Moksha for the blood-stained and afflicted Mithyatvi soul, which is
considered to be Samyaktva, is considered to be of special importance. From
this, the importance of the benefit of attaining Shree Jin-kathith Shramanatva
is even greater. Because, the success of the cause of liberation, which is equal
to knowledge and vision, has been based on Shramanatva. Sūtra-13  And, in all
kinds of Leshya, just as Shukulaleshya is considered a special quality for all
vows, Yamas, etc., like the vow of Brahmacharya and for all kinds of rules, like
Shree Jin-kathith five Samitis and three Guptis, similarly Shramanya is the main
quality in all qualities. While the worship of Santhara is considered even
greater than this. Sūtra - 14  In all the best Tirths, just as the Tirth of
Shree Tirthankar Dev, the Abhishek performed by Devdevendra, like the peak of
Sumeru, for the Abhishek of all castes, the worship of Santhara of a well-
equipped man is considered superior. Sūtra - 15  White lotus, full Kalash,
Swastika Nandavart and beautiful flower garland, all these auspicious things are
also more auspicious than the worship of Santhara, which is the form of the last
time. Sūtra - 16  Those great souls who destroy the karma-wood with the fire of
Jin-kathith tapas, who are brave in the observance of the rules of Viraati, who
are pure in self-realization through Samyaggyan, and who have attained the path
of the best Dharma, ride on the elephant of Santhara and happily cross over.
Sūtra - 17  This Santhara is an unparalleled support for the well-equipped soul.
It is the abode of qualities, it is the form of Kalpa-Achar, and it is the root
cause of the supreme Shree Tirthankar Pad, Moksha-Gati and Siddha-Dasha. Sūtra -
18  You have obtained a body adorned with nectar like Shree Jin-Vachan. The
Vasudhara, which resides in your abode, is resting on the jewel of Dharma. Sūtra
- 19  Because you have obtained everything worth having in the world. And by
adopting the worship of Santhara, you have shown good patience for Jin-
Pravachan. Therefore, you have obtained the tradition of such auspicious
benefits, which are served by the best men and are supremely divine. Sūtra - 20
And, you have obtained the beautiful jewel of Samyaggyan and Darshan, adorned
with the special kind of light of knowledge, and the pure Triratna Mala, with
qualities like character, conduct, etc. Sūtra - 21  The well-equipped man,
through whose practice, the tradition of qualities can be obtained, those souls
who obtain Shree Jin-kathith Santhara, which is virtuous, have increased their
brilliance in the world with the adornment of the essential jewel of knowledge,
etc.  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit “(Sanstāraka)” Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Anuvād”** Page
6

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, saMstAraka' sUtra - 11, 12 zrI jinakathita
zramaNatva, sarva taraha ke zreSTha lAbha meM sarvazreSTha lAbha ginA jAtA hai;
ki jisake yoga se zrI tIrthaMkaratva, kevalajJAna aura mokSa, sukha prApta hotA
hai  /  aura phira paraloka ke hita meM rakta aura kliSTa mithyAtvI AtmA ko bhI
mokSa prApti kI jar3a jo samyaktva ginA jAtA hai, vo samyaktva, dezavirati kA
aura samyagjJAna kA mahattva vizeSa mAnA jAtA hai  /  isase to zrI jina-kathita
zramaNatva kI prApti rUpa lAbha kI mahattA vizeSatara hai| kyoMki jJAna darzana
samAna mukti ke kAraNa kI saphalatA kA AdhAra zramaNatva para rahA hai| sUtra-13
tathA sarva taraha kI lezyA meM jaise zuklalezyA sarva vrata, yama Adi meM jaise
brahmacarya kA vrata aura sarva taraha ke niyama ke lie jaise zrI jinakathita
pA~ca samiti aura tIna gupti samAna guNa vizeSa gine jAte haiM, vaise zrAmaNya
sabhI guNa meM pradhAna hai  /  jaba ki saMthArA kI ArAdhanA isase bhI adhika
mAnI jAtI hai| sUtra - 14 sarva uttama tIrtha meM jaise zrI tIrthaMkara deva kA
tIrtha, sarva jAti ke abhiSeka ke lie sumeru ke zikhara samAna devadevendra se
kie gae abhiSeka kI taraha suvihita puruSa kI saMthArA kI ArAdhanA zreSThatara
mAnI jAtI hai| sUtra-15 zvetakamala, pUrNakalaza, svastika nandAvarta aura
sundara phUlamAlA yaha saba maMgala cIja se bhI antima kAla kI ArAdhanA rUpa
saMthArA adhika maMgala hai| sUtra - 16 jinakathita tapa rUpa agni se
karmakASTha kA nAza karanevAle, virati niyamapAlana meM zUrA aura samyagjJAna se
vizuddha Atma pariNativAle aura uttama dharma rUpa pAtheya jisane pAyA hai aisI
mahAnubhAva AtmAeM saMthArA rUpa gajendra para ArUr3ha hokara sukha se pAra ko
pAte haiN| sUtra - 17 yaha saMthArA suvihita AtmA ke lie anupama Alambana hai  /
guNa kA nivAsasthAna hai, kalpa-AcAra rUpa hai aura sarvottama zrI tIrthaMkara
pada, mokSagati aura siddhadazA kA mUla kAraNa hai| sUtra-18 tumane zrI
jinavacana samAna amRta se vibhUSita zarIra pAyA hai| tere bhavana meM
dharmarUpa ratna ko Azraya karake rahanevAlI vasudhArA par3I hai| sUtra - 19
kyoMki jagata meM pAne lAyaka sabakucha tUne pAyA hai| aura saMthArA kI ArAdhanA
ko apanAne ke yoga se, tUne jinapravacana ke lie acchI dhIratA rakhI hai  /
isalie uttama puruSa se sevya aura paramadivya aise kalyANalAbha kI paramparA
prApta kI hai| sUtra - 20 _tathA samyagjJAna aura darzana rUpa sundara ratna se
manohara, viziSTa taraha ke jJAnarUpa prakAza se zobhA ko dhAraNa karanevAle
aura cAritra, zIla Adi guNa se zuddha triratnamAlA ko tUne pAyA hai| sUtra-21
suvihita puruSa, jisake yoga se guNa kI paramparA prApta kara sakate haiM, usa
zrI jinakathita saMthArA ko jo puNyavAna AtmAeM pAtI haiM, una AtmAoM ne jagata
meM sArabhUta jJAnAdi ratna ke AbhUSaNa se apanI zobhA bar3hAI hai| kyAApA muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 6

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 29, Payannasutra-6, Sanstarak' Sutra-22 You have found the Shri
Jinpranit Tirth, which is the best in the entire world and the one that leads to
the crossing of the ocean of worldly existence, because by bathing in the pure
and cool water of the qualities of the Shri Jinpranit Tirth, the infinite
Munivers have attained Nirvana bliss. Sutra - 23 The principles of Asrava,
Samvara, and Nirjara, etc., which are well-organized and protected in the Tirth;
and the path of the Tirth is well-organized with the beautiful path of Shila,
Vrat, etc., which are the virtues of Dharma. This is called the Shri Jinpranit
Tirth. Sutra - 24 Those who conquer the army of Pariṣaha and become endowed with
the highest kind of restraint, those virtuous souls, freed from karma, enjoy the
unsurpassed, infinite, unobstructed, and unbroken bliss of Nirvana. Sutra - 25
By obtaining the worship of the Jinakathit Santhara, you have attained the bliss
of the root cause Samadhi in the kingdom of the three worlds. You have also
attained the Santhara-like royal coronation, which is the cause of extraordinary
and vast results in all principles. Sutra - 26 Therefore, my mind feels
indescribable joy today, because you have attained the Santhara, which is the
means of liberation and the path of liberation from the ultimate reality. Sutra
- 27 Even the gods who enjoy various kinds of divine bliss in the Devlok, with
full respect for the worship of the Shri Jinakathit Santhara, abandon their
seats, beds, and other activities. And Sutra - 28 They are as beautiful as the
moon and as radiant as the sun. And then those well-established Sadhus, who are
wealthy in knowledge, virtuous, and famous like the great Himalayas for their
quality of stability, are - Sutra - 29 They are united with the Gupti Samiti;
and then they are useful in restraint, penance, rules, and yoga; and they are
single-minded in the worship of knowledge and vision, and they are such Sadhus
who are endowed with Samadhi. Sutra - 30 Just as Mount Meru is in the mountains,
just as the self-born ocean is in all the oceans, just as the moon is for the
group of stars, so the Santhara-like ritual is considered to be the main one in
the midst of all kinds of auspicious rituals. Sutra - 31 O Bhagavan! For what
kind of Sadhupurusha is the worship of this Santhara prescribed? And then, by
obtaining what support can this worship of the final time be done? And when can
one take the vow of fasting? I want to know this. Sutra - 32 Those Sadhus who
have good yoga in their mind, speech, and body, and who have developed various
kinds of diseases in their body, and who, considering their death to be near,
adopt the Santhara, are pure Santhara. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Sanstarak)"
Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, saMstAraka' sUtra-22 samasta loka meM uttama
aura saMsArasAgara ke pAra ko pAnevAlA aisA zrI jinapraNIta tIrtha, tUne pAyA
hai kyoMki zrI jinapraNIta tIrtha ke sApha aura zItala guNa rUpa jalapravAha meM
snAna karake, anantA munivarane nirvANa sukha prApta kiyA hai| sUtra - 23
Azrava, saMvara aura nirjarA Adi tattva, jo tIrtha meM suvyavasthita rakSita
haiM; aura zIla, vrata Adi cAritra dharmarUpa sundara pagathI se jisakA mArga
acchI taraha se vyavasthita hai vo zrI jinapraNIta tIrtha kahalAtA hai| sUtra -
24 jo pariSaha kI senA ko jItakara, uttama taraha ke saMyamabala se yukta banatA
hai, vo puNyavAna AtmAeM karma se mukta hokara anuttara, ananta, avyAbAdha aura
akhaMDa nirvANa sukha bhugatatA hai| sUtra - 25 jinakathita saMthArA kI ArAdhanA
prApta karane se tUne tIna bhuvana ke rAjya meM mUla kAraNa samAdhi sukha pAyA
hai  /  sarva siddhAntameM asAmAnya aura vizAla phala kA kAraNa aise
saMthArArUpa rAjyAbhiSeka, use bhI tUne pAyA hai| sUtra-26 isalie merA mana Aja
avarNya Ananda mahasUsa karatA hai, kyoMki mokSa ke sAdhanarUpa upAya aura
paramArtha se nistAra ke mArga rUpa saMthArA ko tUne prApta kiyA hai| sUtra - 27
devaloka ke lie kaI taraha ke devatAI sukha ko bhugatanevAle deva bhI, zrI
jinakathita saMthArA ki ArAdhanA kA pUrNa AdarabhAva se dhyAna karake Asana,
zayana Adi anya sarva vyApAra kA tyAga karate haiM  /  tathAsUtra - 28 candra kI
taraha prekSaNIya aura sUraja kI taraha teja se dedIpyamAna hote haiM  /  aura
phira vo suvihita sAdhu, jJAnarUpa dhanavAle, guNavAna aura sthiratA guNa se
mahAhimavAna parvata kI taraha prasiddhi pAte haiM  /  jo - sUtra - 29 gupti
samiti se sahita; aura phira saMyama, tapa, niyama aura yoga meM upayogazIla;
aura jJAna, darzana kI ArAdhanA meM ananya manavAle, aura samAdhi se yukta aise
sAdhu hote haiM  /  sUtra-30 parvata meM jaise merU parvata, sarva samudroM meM
jaise svayaMbhUramaNa samudra, tAroM ke samUha ke lie jaise candra, vaise sarva
taraha ke zubha anuSThAna kI madhya meM saMthArA rUpa anuSThAna pradhAna mAnA
jAtA hai| sUtra - 31 he bhagavan ! kisa taraha ke sAdhupuruSa ke lie isa
saMthArA kI ArAdhanA vihita hai ? aura phira kisa Alambana ko pAkara isa antima
kAla kI ArAdhanA ho sakatI hai ? aura anazana ko kaba dhAraNa kara sake ? isa
cIja ko maiM jAnanA cAhatA huuN| sUtra - 32 jisake mana, vacana aura kAyA ke
zubhayoga sIdAte ho, aura phira jisa sAdhu ko kaI taraha kI bImArI zarIra meM
paidA huI ho, isa kAraNa se apane maraNakAla ko najadIka samajhakara, jo
saMthArA ko apanAte haiM, vo saMthArA suvizuddha haiN| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 7

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 29, Payannasutra-6, 'Sanstarak' Sutra-33**  But those who are not
ready to accept criticism from their Guru with simplicity, being intoxicated by
the three types of Garva (pride); if such a Sadhu adopts Santhara, then that
Santhara is impure. Sutra - 34  Those who are worthy of criticism and accept
criticism from their Guru with purity of mind and adopt Santhara, their Santhara
is considered pure. Sutra - 35  The Santhara of a Sadhu whose Samyagdarshan
(right vision) jewel is tarnished by doubts and other impurities, and who
maintains Shramanatva (being a monk) by loosely following the principles of
conduct, is not pure - it is impure. Sutra - 36, 37  The Santhara of a noble
Sadhu whose Samyagdarshan is extremely pure, and who maintains his Sadhutva
(being a virtuous person) by strictly following the principles of restraint, is
pure. And,  The Santhara of a virtuous Sadhu who is free from attachment and
aversion, who takes care of the soul by avoiding evil actions of mind, speech,
and body, and who is free from the three types of Shalya (afflictions) and the
eight types of Mad (intoxication), is pure. Sutra - 38  The Santhara of a
Shraman Mahatama (great monk) who is free from the three types of Garva, who has
renounced the three types of sinful punishments, and whose fame has spread
throughout the world, is pure. Sutra - 39  The Santhara of a Sadhu Mahatama who
has destroyed the four types of Kashaya (passions) - anger, pride, deceit, and
greed - and who is always free from the four types of Vikatha (false beliefs),
is pure. Sutra - 40, 41  The Santhara of a virtuous Sadhu who is dedicated to
following the five Mahavratas (great vows) and who is skilled in maintaining the
five Samitis (principles of conduct), is pure. .......... The Santhara of a
Sadhu who is free from the sin of killing living beings, who is wise and free
from the seven places of fear, is pure. Sutra - 42  The Santhara of a Sadhu who
has renounced the eight Madasthanas (places of intoxication), and who is
dedicated to destroying the eight types of Karma, is pure. Sutra - 43  The
Santhara of a Sadhu who strictly follows the nine types of Brahmacharya
(celibacy) and who is skilled in maintaining the ten Yati Dharmas (duties of a
monk), is considered pure. Sutra - 44  What benefit does a Sadhu who conquers
Kashaya, who is free from all types of Kashaya Vikaras (afflictions), and who is
dedicated to performing the final rites, receive by adopting Santhara? Sutra -
45  And what kind of happiness does a Sadhu who conquers Kashaya, who is free
from all types of worldly afflictions, and who is dedicated to performing the
final rites, receive by adopting Santhara according to the prescribed rules?
Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Sanstarak)" Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation" Page 8

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, 'saMstAraka' sUtra-33 lekina jo tIna taraha ke
gArava se unmatta hokara guru ke pAsa se saralatA se pApa kI AlocanA lene ke lie
taiyAra nahIM hai; yaha sAdhu saMthArA ko apanAe to vo saMthArA avizuddha hai  /
sUtra - 34 jo AlocanA ke yogya hai aura guru ke pAsa se nirmalabhAva se AlocanA
lekara saMthArA apanAte haiM, vo saMthArA suvizuddha mAnA jAtA hai  /  sUtra -
35 zaMkA Adi dUSaNa se jisakA samyagdarzanarUpa ratna malina hai, aura jo
zithilatA se cAritra kA pAlana karake zramaNatva kA nirvAha karate haiM, usa
sAdhu ke saMthArA kI ArAdhanA zuddha nahIM-avizuddha hai| sUtra-36, 37 jo
mahAnubhAva sAdhu kA samyag darzanaguNa ati nirmala hai, aura jo niraticArarUpa
se saMyamadharma kA pAlana karake apane sAdhupana kA nirvAha karate haiM  /
tathA rAga aura dveSa rahita aura phira mana, vacana aura kAyA ke azubha yoga se
AtmA kA jatana karanevAle aura tIna taraha ke zalya aura ATha jAti ke mada se
mukta aisA puNyavAna sAdhu saMthArA para ArUr3ha hotA hai| sUtra-38 tIna gArava
se rahita, tIna taraha ke pApa daMr3a kA tyAga karanevAle, isa kAraNa se jagata
meM kisakI kIrti phailI hai, aise zramaNa mahAtmA saMthArA para ArUr3ha hotA
hai| sUtra - 39 krodha, mAna Adi cAroM taraha ke kaSAya kA nAza karanevAlA,
cAroM vikathA ke pApa se sadA mukta rahanevAle aise sAdhu mahAtmA saMthArA ko
apanAte haiM, una sarva kA saMthArA suvizuddha hai| sUtra-40,41 pA~ca prakAra ke
mahAvrata kA pAlana karane meM tatpara, pA~ca samiti ke nirvAha meM acchI taraha
se upayogazIla aise puNyavAna sAdhupuruSa saMthArA ko apanAte haiM  /
.......... cha jIvanikAya kI hiMsA ke pApa se virata, sAta bhayasthAna rahita
buddhivAlA, jisa taraha se saMthArA para ArUr3ha hotA haisUtra - 42 jisane ATha
madasthAna kA tyAga kiyA hai aisA sAdhu puruSa ATha taraha ke karma ko naSTa
karane ke lie jisa taraha se saMthArA para ArUr3ha hotA haisUtra-43 nau taraha
ke brahmacarya kI gupti kA vidhivat pAlana karanevAlA aura dazavidha yatidharma
kA nirvAha karane meM kuzala aisA saMthAre para ArUr3ha hotA hai una sarva kA
saMthArA suvizuddha mAnA jAtA hai| sUtra-44 kaSAya ko jItanevAle aura sarva
taraha ke kaSAya ke vikAra se rahita aura phira antimakAlIna ArAdhanA meM udyata
hone ke kAraNa se saMthArA para ArUr3ha sAdhu ko kyA lAbha milatA hai ? sUtra
-45 aura phira kaSAya ko jItanevAlA evaM sarva taraha ke viSayavikAra se rahita
aura antimakAlIna ArAdhanA meM udyata hone se saMthArA para vidhi ke anusAra
ArUr3ha honevAle sAdhu ko kaisA sukha prApta hotA hai ? muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 8

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 29, Payannasutra-6, 'Sanstarak' Sutra-46, 47 Who can estimate the
priceless benefit that a great soul, who has ascended Santhara according to the
Dharma, receives on the very first day?  .......... Because on that occasion,
that great sage, through the power of a unique auspicious determination,
destroys all karmas, which are countless in number and exist in all states of
existence.  Therefore, that virtuous soul, at that time, attains unique
Shramanaguna. Sutra - 48 And then, on that occasion, even after ascending
Santhara on dry grass, that great sage, who is free from attachment, pride and
delusion, and who attains the unparalleled bliss of liberation and detachment,
where can a chakravarti, who is always immersed in attachment, find such bliss?
Sutra - 49 By the power of Vaikriya Labdhi, gods, who perform musical dramas in
thirty-two thousand ways, cannot experience the joy that a great sage, who has
ascended Santhara on his own hand-span, experiences. Sutra - 50 The lord of the
six realms, who experiences the poisonous worldly pleasures, which are full of
attachment, hatred and bitter consequences, does not experience the bliss of
detachment, which a virtuous soul, free from attachment, experiences. He only
experiences the bliss of unbroken self-absorption. Sutra - 51 In the Jain
tradition, there is no count of years in solitude for attaining the bliss of
liberation. The entire foundation rests only on the unwavering state of the
devotee's soul. Because even those who have lived in the Gachchha for many
years, but whose souls are wavering, have drowned in the ocean of birth and
death. Sutra - 52 Those souls who, in their final moments, embrace Santhara, a
form of worship through Samadhi, and die, those great souls can quickly achieve
their own welfare even in the last stage of life. Sutra - 53 Santhara on dry
grass or lifeless, barren land is not the only support for worship in the final
moments. But the soul, who is capable of practicing pure, non-transgressive
conduct, is the support for Santhara. Therefore, such a soul is the support for
worship. Sutra - 54 A soul who is eager to embrace Sanlekhana through the body,
and who is austere and rough through the renunciation of passions, always
becomes a manifestation of the worship described by the Jinas in any field, at
any time, due to his unwavering nature in the Jain tradition. Sutra - 55 After
performing various austerities well during the rainy season, the devotee ascends
Santhara for all states in the Hemant season. Sutra - 56, 57 In Potanpur, the
Dharma Guru of Pushpachula Arya, Shri Arnikaputra, was famous. On one occasion,
he was crossing the Ganges River by boat.  ..... The people on the boat pushed
him into the Ganges at that time.  After that, Acharya Shri Arnikaputra embraced
Santhara at that time and died in Samadhi. Muni Diparatnasagar Krut
"(Sanstarak)" Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation" Page 9

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, 'saMstAraka' sUtra-46, 47 vidhi ke anusAra
saMthArA para ArUr3ha hue mahAnubhAva kSapaka ko, pahale dina hI jo anamola
lAbha kI prApti hotI hai, usakA mUlya aMkana karane ke lie kauna samartha hai ?
.......... kyoMki usa avasara para, vo mahAmuni viziSTa taraha ke zubha
adhyavasAya ke yoga se saMkhyeya bhava kI sthitivAle sarvakarma pratisamaya
kSaya karate haiM  /  isa kAraNa se vo kSapaka sAdhu usa samaya viziSTa taraha
ke zramaNaguNa prApta karate haiN| sUtra - 48 aura phira usa avasara para tRNa-
sUkhe ghAsa ke saMthArA para ArUr3ha hone ke bAda bhI rAga, mada aura moha se
mukta hone ke kAraNa se vo kSapaka maharSi, jo anupama mukti-ni:saMgadazA ke
sukha ko pAtA hai, vo sukha hamezA rAgadazA meM par3A huA cakravartI bhI kahA~
se prApta kara sake ? sUtra - 49 vaikriyalabdhi ke yoga se apane puruSarUpa ko
vikurvake, devatAeM jo battIsa prakAra ke hajAra prakAra se, saMgIta kI
layapUrvaka nATaka karate haiM, usameM vo loga vo Ananda nahIM pA sakate ki jo
Ananda apane hastapramANa saMthArA para ArUr3ha hae kSapaka maharSi pAte haiN|
sUtra -50 rAga, dveSamaya aura pariNAma meM kaTu aise viSapUrNa vaiSayika sukha
ko cha khaMDa kA nAtha mahasUsa karatA hai use saMgadazA se mukta, vItarAga
sAdhupuruSa anubhUta nahIM karate, vo kevala akhaMDa AtmaramaNatA sukha ko
mahasUsa karate haiM sUtra-51 mokSa ke sukha kI prApti ke lie, zrI jainazAsana
meM ekAnte varSakAla kI ginatI nahIM hai  /  kevala ArAdhaka AtmA kI apramatta
dazA para sArA AdhAra hai  /  kyoMki kAphI sAla taka gaccha meM rahanevAle bhI
pramatta AtmA janmamaraNa samAna saMsAra sAgara meM DUba gae haiN| sUtra-52 jo
AtmAeM antima kAla meM samAdhi se saMthArA rUpa ArAdhanA ko apanAkara maraNa
pAte haiM, vo mahAnubhAva AtmAeM jIvana kI pIchalI avasthA meM bhI apanA hita
zIghra sAdha sakate haiN| sUtra -53 sUkhe ghAsa kA saMthArA yA jIvarahita
prAsuka bhUmi hI kevala antimakAla kI ArAdhanA kA Alambana nahIM hai| lekina
vizuddha niraticAra cAritra ke pAlana meM upayogazIla AtmA saMthArA rUpa hai  /
isa kAraNa se aisI AtmA ArAdhanA meM Alambana hai| sUtra - 54 dravya se
saMlekhanA ko apanAne ko tatpara, bhAva se kaSAya ke tyAga dvArA rUkSa-lUkhA
aisA AtmA hamezA jaina zAsana meM apramatta hone ke kAraNa se kisI bhI kSetra
meM kisI bhI vakta zrI jinakathita ArAdhanA meM pariNata banate haiM sUtra - 55
varSAkAla meM kaI taraha ke tapa acchI taraha se karake, ArAdhaka AtmA hemanta
Rtu meM sarva avasthA ke lie saMthArA para ArUr3ha hote haiN| sUtra-56,57
potanapura meM puSpacUlA AryA ke dharmaguru zrI arNikAputra prakhyAta the, vo
eka avasara para nAva ke dvArA gaMgA nadI meM Utarate the- ..... nAva meM baiThe
logoM ne usa vakta unheM gaMgA meM dhakela diyaa| usake bAda zrI arNikAputra
AcArya ne usa vakta saMthArA ko apanAkara samAdhipUrvaka maraNa paayaa| muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt "(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 9

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 29, Payannasutra-6, Sanstark' Sutra -58-60 In the city of Kumbhakar,
the minister named Papbuddhi Palak of Dandakaraja, due to being defeated later
by Skandakkumar -.......... in a fit of rage, he became a Maya, and five hundred
innocent Sadhus, including Shri Skandasuri, who had taken the five great vows,
were ground in a mill -.......... those four hundred ninety-nine great sages,
devoid of affection, beyond ego, and unattached even to their own bodies,
attained liberation by embracing Santhara and remaining in the state of worship,
even after being ground in that way. Sutra - 61 The well-known Rajarshi named
Dand, who was among those who wore the image. On one occasion, he was standing
in the garden of Yamunavakra Nagar, wearing the image, in Kayotsarga meditation,
when the Yavana king pierced him with arrows. At that time, he embraced Santhara
and remained in the state of worship. Sutra - 62 After that, the Yavana king,
filled with remorse, embraced Shramanatva. He stood in Kayotsarga meditation,
becoming devoid of attachment to the body. On that occasion, someone pierced him
with an arrow. Even then, the great sage attained Samadhi by embracing Santhara.
Sutra - 63 Shri Sukoshal Rishi, the son of Shri Kirtidhar Raja of Saketapur, was
descending from the mountain with his father Muni on the day of the Parana of
Masakshaman during Chaturmas. At that time, his mother from a previous birth, a
tigress, tore him apart. Sutra - 64 Even then, he remained steadfast in his
renunciation, making good use of it. He died in Samadhi after being eaten by the
tigress. Sutra - 65 Shri Avantisukumal of Ujjayini Nagar, having attained the
feeling of remorse, took initiation. At the right time, he embraced Padap-ogam
Anashan and remained in solitary meditation in the middle of the cremation
ground. Sutra - 66 A ferocious she-wolf, filled with rage, tore him apart in
terror. He died in Samadhi after being eaten for three Praharas. Sutra - 67 Shri
Kartikarya Rishi of Suravanagram, whose body was filled with the dirt of the
body, the dust of the road, and sweat, etc., but who was a knower of the
inherent impurity of the body, was like a foundation of virtue and restraint.
Such a great sage, whose body was afflicted by indigestion, always remained
absorbed in Samadhi. Sutra - 68 One time, while searching for Prasook food in
Rohidkanagar, the Rishi was pierced by a Kshatriya, his former enemy, with a
weapon. Sutra - 69 Despite the piercing of his body, the great sage, in a
solitary, desolate, and unattached vast land, gave up his body and died in
Samadhi. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Sanstark)" Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation"
Page 10

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, saMstAraka' sUtra -58-60 kumbhakara nagara meM
daMDakarAjA ke pApabuddhi pAlaka nAma ke maMtrI ne, skaMdakakumAra dvArA bAda
meM parAjita hone ke kAraNa se -.......... krodhavaza banakara mAyA se, paMca
mahAvratayukta aise zrIskandasUri Adi pA~ca sau nirdoSa sAdhuoM ne yaMtra meM
pIsa die -.......... mamatA rahita, ahaMkAra se para aura apane zarIra ke lie
bhI apratibaddha aise vo cAra sau ninnAnave maharSi puruSane usa taraha pIsane
ke bAvajUda bhI saMthArA ko apanAkara ArAdhakabhAva meM rahakara mokSa paayaa|
sUtra - 61 daMDa nAma ke jAnemAne rAjarSi jo pratimA ko dhAraNa karanevAloM meM
the  /  eka avasara para yamunAvakra nagara ke udyAna meM vo pratimA ko dhAraNa
karake kAyotsarga dhyAna meM khar3e the, vahA~ yavana rAjA ne usa maharSi ko
bANoM se bIMdha diyA, vo usa vakta saMthArA ko apanAkara ArAdhaka bhAva meM
rahesUtra-62 usake bAda yavana rAjA ne saMvega pAkara zramaNatva ko apanAyA  /
zarIra ke lie spRhArahita banakara kAyotsarga dhyAna meM khar3e rahe  /  usa
avasara para kisIne unheM bANa se bIMdha liyA  /  phira bhI saMthArA ko
apanAkara usa maharSi ne samAdhikaraNa paayaa| sUtra - 63 sAketapura ke zrI
kIrtidhara rAjA ke putra zrI sukozala RSi, cAturmAsa meM mAsakSamaNa ke pAraNe
ke dina, pitA muni ke sAtha parvata para se utara rahe the  /  usa vakta
pUrvajanma kI vAghaNa mA~ ne unheM phAr3a DAlAsUtra - 64 phira bhI usa vakta
gAr3ha taraha se dhIratA se apane pratyAkhyAna meM acchI taraha upayogazIla rahe
/  vAghaNa se khA jAne se unhoMne anta meM samAdhipUrvaka maraNa pAyA  /  sUtra
- 65 ujjayinI nagarI meM zrI avantisukumAla ne saMvega bhAva ko pAkara dIkSA lI
/  sahI avasara para pAdapogama anazana apanAkara vo zmazAna kI madhya meM
ekAnta dhyAna meM rahe the| sUtra - 66 roSAyamAna aisI ziyAlaNa ne unheM
trAsapUrvaka phADakara khA liyA  /  isa taraha tIna prahara taka khAne se
unhoMne samAdhipUrvaka maraNa paayaa| sUtra - 67 zarIra kA mala, rAste kI dhUla
aura pasInA Adi se kAdavamaya zarIravAle, lekina zarIra ke sahaja azuci svabhAva
ke jJAtA, suravaNagrAma ke zrI kArtikArya RSi zIla aura saMyamaguNa ke AdhAra
samAna the  /  gItArtha aise vo maharSi kA deha ajIrNa bImArI se pIDita hone ke
bAvajUda bhI vo sadAkAla samAdhi bhAva meM ramaNa karate the| sUtra - 68 eka
vakta rohir3akanagara meM prAsuka AhAra kI gaveSaNA karate hue usa RSi ko
pUrvavairI kisI kSatriya ne zakti ke prahAra se bIMdha liyAsUtra - 69 deha
bhedana ke bAvajUda bhI vo maharSi ekAnta-virAna aura tAparahita vizAla bhUmi
para apane deha kA tyAga karake samAdhi maraNa pAyA  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 10

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 29, Payannasutra-6, Sanstark' Sutra-70 In the city of Pataliputra,
King Chandragupta had a friend named Dharma Singh.  Filled with emotion, he
renounced Chandragupta's wealth and embraced the life of a monk. Sutra-71,72
Established in the Jain Dharma, he practiced fasting in the city of Follpar and
performed the Gaddhaprishtha Pacchakkhan without sorrow. At that time, a
thousand animals in the forest gnawed at his body. ..... Thus, the great sage,
whose body was being eaten, renounced his body and attained a wise death. Sutra
- 73 Chanakya, the minister, was famous in the city of Pataliputra-Patna. On one
occasion, he renounced all sins from the beginning and embraced the Ingini
death. Sutra - 74 After that, he practiced the Padupopagam fast in the cow shed
and stood in Kayotsarga meditation. Sutra - 75 On this occasion, the former
enemy, Subandhu, the minister, lit a fire there under the pretext of offering a
favorable puja. Even though his body was burning, the sage Chanakya attained
death in samadhi. Sutra - 76 In the city of Kakand, there was a king named
Amritghosh. At the appropriate time, he handed over the kingdom to his son and
embraced the life of a monk. Sutra - 77 Skilled in sutras and their meaning, and
having attained the secrets of the scriptures, the royal sage, free from sorrow,
wandered the earth and gradually arrived in the city of Kakand. Sutra-78 There,
an enemy named Chandaveg pierced his body with a weapon. Even as his body was
being pierced, the great sage remained steadfast in samadhi and attained a wise
death. Sutra-79-80 In the city of Kaushambi, Lalitghata, thirty-two men, were
famous. Knowing the futility of the world, they embraced the life of a Shraman.
Having attained the secrets of the Shruta Sagar, they accepted the Padupopagam
fast. Suddenly, they were swept away by a river flood and went into the middle
of a large whirlpool. Even on this occasion, they attained a wise death in
samadhi. Sutra-81-83 In the city of Krinala, there was a king named
Vaishramandas. This king had a minister named Risht, who was of false vision and
stubborn nature. On one occasion in that city, the Muni, like a bull, the holder
of the Ganipitka, the Shridwadashangi, the one who had crossed the entire Shruta
Sagar, and the wise, Shri Rishabhsen Acharya, arrived with his family. The
disciple of that Suri, Shri Singhsen Upadhyay, who was knowledgeable in the
secrets of various kinds of Shastraarth and who satisfied the Gan, had a debate
with the royal minister Risht. Risht was defeated in the debate. Burning with
anger, the cruel Risht burned the peaceful and well-behaved Shri Singhsen Rishi
in fire. The body burning in fire _ Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Sanstark)" Agam
Sutra-Hindi Translation" Page 11

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, saMstAraka' sUtra-70 pATalIputra nagara meM zrI
candragupta rAjA kA zrI dharmasiMha nAma kA mitra thA  /  saMvegabhAva pAkara
usane candragupta kI lakSmI kA tyAga karake pravrajyA apanAIsUtra-71,72 zrI
jinakathita dharma meM sthita aise usane phollapara nagara meM anazana ko
apanAyA aura gaddhapRSTha paccakkhANa ko zokarahitarUpa se kiyA  /  usa vakta
jaMgala meM hajAra jAnavaroM ne unake zarIra ko cUMtha DAlA  /  ..... isa taraha
jisakA zarIra khAyA jA rahA hai, aise vo maharSine zarIra ko vosirAke-tyAga
karake paMDita maraNa paayaa| sUtra - 73 pATalIputra-paTaNA nagara meM cANakya
nAma kA maMtrI prasiddha thA  /  kisI avasara para sarva taraha ke pApa Arambha
se nivRtta hokara unhoMne iMginI maraNa apanAyA  /  sUtra -74 usake bAda gAya ke
vADe meM pAdapopagama anazana ko apanAkara vo kAyotsargadhyAna meM khaDe rhe|
sUtra - 75 isa avasara para pUrvabairI subandhu maMtrI ne anukUla pUjA ke bahAne
se vahA~ chANe jalAe, aise zarIra jalane ke bAvajUda bhI, zrI cANakya RSi ne
samAdhipUrvaka maraNa ko prApta kiyaa| sUtra - 76 kAkandI nagarI meM zrI
amRtaghoSa nAma kA rAjA thA  /  ucita avasara para usane putra ko rAja
sauMpakara pravrajyA grahaNa kii| sUtra - 77 sUtra aura artha meM kuzala aura
zruta ke rahasya ko pAnevAle aise vo rAjarSi zokarahitarUpa se pRthvI para
vihAra karate kramazaH kAkandI nagara meM padhAre  /  sUtra-78 vahA~ caMr3avega
nAma ke vairIne unake zarIra ko zastra ke prahAra se cheda diyA  /  zarIra chedA
jA rahA hai usa vakta bhI vo maharSi samAdhibhAva meM sthira rahe aura paMDita
maraNa prApta kiyaa| sUtra-79-80 kauzAmbI nagarI meM lalItaghaTA battIsa puruSa
vikhyAta the| unhoMne saMsAra kI asAratA ko jAnakara zramaNatva aMgIkAra kiyA  /
zrutasAgara ke rahasyoM ko prApta kiye hue aise unhoMne pAdapopagama anazana
svIkAra kiyA  /  akasmAt nadI kI bAr3ha se khIMcate hue bar3e draha madhya meM
vo cale gae  /  aise avasara meM bhI unhoMne samAdhipUrvaka paMDita maraNa
prApta kiyaa| sUtra-81-83 kRNAla nagara meM vaizramaNadAsa nAma kA rAjA thA  /
isa rAjA kA riSTha nAma kA maMtrI ki jo mithyA dRSTi aura durAgraha vRttivAlA
thA  /  usa nagara meM eka avasara para munivara ke lie vRSabha samAna,
gaNipiTakarUpa zrI dvAdazAMgI ke dhAraka aura samasta zrutasAgara ke pAra ko
pAnevAle aura dhIra aise zrI RSabhasena AcArya, apane parivAra sahita padhAre
the  /  usa sUri ke ziSya zrI siMhasena upAdhyAya ki jo kaI taraha ke zAstrArtha
ke rahasya ke jJAtA aura gaNa kI tRpti ko karanevAle the  /  rAjamaMtrI riSTha
ke sAtha unakA vAda huA  /  vAda meM riSTha parAjita huA  /  isase roSa se
dhamadhamate, nirdaya aise usane prazAnta aura suvihita zrI siMhasena RSi ko
agni se jalA diyA  /  zarIra agni se jala _ muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 11

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 29, Payannasutra-6, "Sanstark" remains.** In this state, the sage
attained death in samadhi. Sutra-84  The best of the Kuru clan, Hastinapur's
Kuru-datta, son of a श्रेष्ठी, had taken initiation from the elders. On one
occasion, he was standing in the city's garden in Kayotsarga meditation. There,
a cowherd, innocent as he was, burned him like a piece of wood from a Salmali
tree. Even then, in this state, he attained the death of a learned sage in
samadhi. Sutra-85  A thief named Chilatiputra, having heard the three-footed
path of Upashama, Vivek, and Sanvar, took initiation. On that occasion, he
remained there in Kayotsarga meditation. Ants gnawed at his body. Even after his
body was eaten in this way, he attained death in samadhi. Sutra-86  The sage
Shri Gajasukumal was in Kayotsarga meditation in the city's garden. Innocent and
peaceful as he was, a sinful soul bound him with green leather, as if he had
been adorned with thousands of flowers, and threw him on the earth. Even then,
he attained death in samadhi. (There is a possibility of some confusion in this
story.) Sutra-87  Mankhali Goshalak had burned the innocent Shri Sunakshatra and
Shri Sarvanubhuti, disciples of the great soul Mahavira, with Tejo-leshya. While
burning in that way, both the sages attained the death of a learned sage,
embracing samadhi. Sutra-88  The method of adopting Santhara is known by a क्षपक
साधु, who is secret, hidden by three गुप्ति, through ज्ञपरिज्ञा, at the
appropriate time. Then, for the rest of his life, he performs पच्चक्खाण of all
four types of food, including आगार, in the midst of the Sangha community,
according to the Guru's command. Sutra-89  Or, for the purpose of attaining
samadhi, a क्षपक साधु performs पच्चक्खाण of three types of food on some occasion
and takes only the food of प्रासुक जल. Then, at the appropriate time, he also
abandons water. Sutra-90  The क्षपक should apologize in such a way that others
are moved, and he should say in the midst of the entire Sangha community, "I
forgive all the offenses I have committed, caused to be committed, and approved
of, by my actions, words, and body in the past." Sutra-91  He should join his
two hands to his forehead and say again, "Free from malice, I forgive all
offenses today. May all beings, like my parents, forgive me." Sutra-92  The
patient man, having taken the form, and then the virtuous man, practices the
death of a learned sage - Santhara, which is always to be followed and extremely
difficult for cowardly souls, while seated on a stone slab, being a detached and
blessed soul. Sutra-93  Be careful and think. How have you experienced happiness
and sorrow in hell, in the animal realm, in the realm of gods, and in the human
realm?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, saMstAraka' rahA hai| isa avasthA meM usa
RSivara ne samAdhipUrvaka maraNa ko prApta kiyaa| sUtra-84 hastinAgapura ke
kurudatta zreSThIputra ne sthaviroM ke pAsa dIkSA ko apanAyA thA  /  eka avasara
para nagara ke udyAna meM vo kAyotsarga dhyAna meM khaDe the  /  vahA~ gopAla ne
nirdoSa aise unako zAlmalI peDa ke lakaDe kI taraha jalA diyA  /  phira bhI isa
avasthA meM unhoMne samAdhipUrvaka paMDita maraNa prApta kiyaa| sUtra -85
cilAtIputra nAma ke cora ne, upazama, viveka aura saMvararUpa tripadI ko
sunakara dIkSA grahaNa kI  /  usa avasara para vo vahA~ hI kAyotsarga dhyAna meM
rahe  /  cIMTIoM ne unake zarIra ko challI kara diyA  /  isa taraha zarIra khAe
jAne ke bAda bhI unhoMne samAdhi se maraNa paayaa| sUtra-86 zrI gajasukumAla RSi
nagara ke udyAna meM kAyotsarga dhyAna meM rahe the  /  nirdoSa aura zAnta aise
unako, kisI pApI AtmAne hajAro khIle se jaise ki mar3hA diyA ho usa taraha se
hare camar3e se bA~dhakara, pRthvI para paTakA  /  isake bAvajUda bhI unhoMne
samAdhipUrvaka maraNa pAyA  /  (isa kathAnaka meM kucha garabaDI hone kA
saMbhava hai|) sUtra - 87 maMkhalI gozAlakane nirdoSa aise zrI sunakSatra aura
zrI sarvAnubhUti nAma ke mahAvIra paramAtmA ke ziSyoM ko tejolezyA se jalA diyA
thA  /  usa taraha jalate hue vo donoM munivara ne samAdhibhAva ko apanAkara
paMr3ita maraNa pAyA sUtra-88 saMthArA ko apanAne kI vidhi ucita avasara para,
tIna gupti se gupta aisA kSapakasAdhu jJaparijJA se jAnatA hai| phira yAvajjIva
ke lie saMgha samudAya ke bIca meM guru ke Adeza ke anusAra AgAra sahita cAroM
AhAra kA paccakkhANa karatA hai| sUtra - 89 yA phira samAdhi TIkAne ke lie, koI
avasara meM kSapaka sAdhu tIna AhAra kA paccakkhANa karatA hai aura kevala
prAsuka jala kA AhAra karatA hai| phira ucita kAla meM jala kA bhI tyAga karatA
hai| sUtra - 90 zeSalogoM ko saMvega prakaTa ho usa taraha se vaha kSapaka
kSamApanA kare aura sarva saMgha samudAya ke bIca meM kahanA cAhie ki pUrve
mana, vacana aura kAyA ke yoga se karane, karavAne aura anumodane dvArA maiMne
jo kucha bhI aparAdha kie ho unheM maiM khamAtA huuN| sUtra-91 do hAtha ko
mastaka se jur3akara use phira se kahanA cAhie ki zalya se rahita yaha maiM Aja
sarva taraha ke aparAdha ko khamAtA hU~  /  mAtA-pitA samAna sarva jIva mujhe
kSamA krnaa| sUtra - 92 dhIra puruSane prarUpe hue aura phira satpuruSa ne sadA
sevana kie jAnevAle, aura kAyara AtmAoM ke lie ati duSkara aise paMDita maraNa-
saMthArA ko, zilAtala para ArUDha hae niHsaMga aura dhanya AtmAeM sAdhanA karatI
haiN| sUtra - 93 sAvadha hokara tU soca  /  tUne naraka aura tiryaMca gati meM
aura devagati evaM mAnavagati meM kaise kaise sukha-duHkha muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt "(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 12

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Sutra 29, Payannasutra-6, 'Sanstarak' experiences.** Sutra-94 ! For the
sake of the body, you have experienced countless times the unbearable,
agonizing, unusual and intense pain of hell. Sutra-95,96 And then, in the state
of being a god and in the state of being a human, you have experienced the pain
of being a slave to others, the pain that gives rise to sorrow, anguish and
suffering, countless times, and O virtuous one! You have experienced countless
times the great pain of being born in the state of a Tiryanch, from which you
could not escape. In this way, you have wandered in the world for an infinite
time, where birth and death are like the revolving wheels of a rent. Sutra-97
You have experienced countless births and deaths for an infinite time in the
world. All this suffering is natural for all living beings in the world.
Therefore, do not be afraid of the suffering of the present moment and do not
forget the worship. Sutra-98 There is no greater fear than death, and there is
no other suffering like birth. Therefore, quickly break the attachment to the
body, which is the cause of the great fear of birth and death. Sutra-99 This
body is different from the soul. And the soul is different from the body. You
should definitely break the attachment to the body, which is the root of
suffering and affliction, like the material cause. Because in this vast and
boundless world, the soul experiences countless times the suffering related to
the body and the mind. Sutra-100 Therefore, if you want to attain the state of
Samadhi-death, you should completely abandon the attachment to the body and
other internal and external possessions for the sake of attaining that supreme
meaning. Sutra-101 I forgive all my offenses to the entire congregation, who are
like a refuge for the world, and who are benevolent, with a pure heart and free
from malice, and I also forgive the congregation, who are like a foundation of
virtue. Sutra-102 And I forgive, with three-fold yoga, all those whom I have
caused to generate passions, including the Acharya, the Upadhyaya, the disciple,
the fellow-religionist, the family and the group, etc., because I was the cause
of their passions. Sutra-103 I forgive all the offenses of the entire Shraman
congregation with folded hands, as if in offering. And I also forgive everyone.
Sutra-104 And then, with a mind devoted to the Dharma spoken by the Jinas, I
forgive, with a pure heart and with a feeling of brotherhood, all the living
beings in the world. And I also forgive everyone. Muni Diparatnasagar Krit
“(Sanstarak)” Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation” Page 13

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, 'saMstAraka' bhugate haiN| sUtra-94 ! naraka ke
lie tUne asAtA bahala duHkhapUrNa, asAmAnya aura tIvra darda ko zarIra kI
khAtira prAyaH anantIbAra bhugatA hai| sUtra-95,96 aura phira devapana meM aura
mAnavapana meM parAye dAsabhAva ko pAkara tUne duHkha, saMtApa aura trAsa ko
upajAne vAle darda ko prAyaH anantIbAra mahasUsa kiyA hai aura he puNyavAn !
tiryaJcagati ko pAkara pAra na pA sake aisI mahAvedanAoM ko tUne kaI bAra
bhugatA hai  /  isa taraha janma aura maraNa samAna reMTa ke Avarta jahA~ hamezA
calate haiM, vaise saMsAra meM tU anantakAla bhaTakA hai| sUtra - 97 saMsAra ke
lie tUne anantakAla taka anantIbAra anantA janma maraNa ko mahasUsa kiyA hai  /
yaha saba duHkha saMsAravartI sarva jIva ke lie sahaja hai| isalie vartamAnakAla
duHkha se mata ghabarAnA aura ArAdhanA ko mata bhUlanA sUtra - 98 maraNa jaisA
mahAbhaya nahIM hai aura janma samAna anya koI duHkha nahIM hai  /  isalie
janma-maraNa samAna mahAbhaya ke kAraNa samAna zarIra ke mamattvabhAva ko tU
zIghra cheda DAla  /  sUtra - 99 yaha zarIra jIva se anya hai  /  aura jIva
zarIra se bhinna hai yaha nizcayapUrvaka duHkha aura kleza kI jar3a samAna
upAdAna rUpa zarIra ke mamatva ko tujhe chedanA cAhie  /  kyoMki bhIma aura
apAra isa saMsAra meM, AtmA ne zarIra sambandhI aura mana sambandhI duHkha ko
anantIbAra bhugate haiN| sUtra-100 isalie yadi samAdhi maraNa ko pAnA ho to usa
uttama artha kI prApti ke lie tujhe zarIra Adi abhyantara aura anya bAhya
parigraha ke lie mamattvabhAva ko sarvathA vosirA denA-tyAga karanA caahie|
sUtra - 101 jagata ke zaraNa samAna, hitavatsala samasta saMgha, mere sAre
aparAdhoM ko khamo aura zalya se rahita banakara maiM bhI guNa ke AdhAra samAna
zrI saMgha ko khamAtA huuN| sUtra-102 aura zrI AcAryadeva, upAdhyAya, ziSya,
sAdharmika, kula aura gaNa Adi jo kisI ko maiMne kaSAya utpanna karavAyA ho,
kaSAya kA maiM kAraNa banA hotA una sabako maiM trividha yoga se khamAtA huuN|
sUtra - 103 sarva zramaNa saMgha ke sabhI aparAdha ko maiM mastaka para do hAtha
jur3ane samAna aMjali karake khamAtA huuN| aura maiM bhI sabako kSamA karatA
huuN| sUtra - 104 aura phira maiM jinakathita dharma meM arpita cittavAlA hokara
sarva jagata ke jIva samUha ke sAtha baMdhubhAva se niHzalya taraha se khamatA
huuN| aura maiM bhI sabako khamAtA huuN| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(saMstAraka)"
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 13

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Āgama Sūtra 29, Payannāsūtra-6, Sanstāraka Sūtra-105  The क्षपक soul, who
forgives such transgressions and attains the unparalleled penance and the
unparalleled samadhi, dwells in equanimity, consuming the group of karmas, the
root cause of various obstacles, afflictions, etc. Sūtra - 106  The क्षपक soul,
who is mounted on Santhara, destroys all the groups of karmas, which are bound
by the tradition of countless lakhs of kotis of inauspicious births, in one
moment, through the power of auspicious determination. Sūtra - 107  On this
occasion, if the great क्षपak, mounted on Santhara, experiences pain arising
from the inauspicious yogas of the past, which obstructs the state of samadhi,
then to pacify it, give him soothing Dharma teachings like cool sandalwood, in
the form of songs. Sūtra - 108  O virtuous one! The ancient Munis, who have
surrendered everything in devotion, were engaged in Kayotsarga meditation on the
peak of a terrifying mountain, surrounded by wild animals, even without such
practices. Sūtra - 109  And then, those great sages, who possess extreme
fortitude and dwell in the path of the Jinakathita devotion in an unparalleled
manner, maintain their state of samadhi and practice the highest Dharma, even
when they are in the jaws of wild animals. Sūtra - 110  O well-being! The
निर्यामक sadhu, who possesses fortitude and a healthy mental state, always helps
others. In such circumstances, can they not attain the state of samadhi and
cross the Santhara devotion? Meaning, you should easily cross the Santhara.
Sūtra - 111  Because the soul is different from the body, and the body is also
different from the soul. Therefore, the well-being person, who has abandoned
attachment to the body, also abandons the body for the sake of the Jinakathita
Dharma devotion. Sūtra - 112  "The क्षपak, mounted on Santhara, endures the
pains arising from the inauspicious karmas of the past with equanimity, and
shakes the tradition of karma-stains like a vine from its roots. Therefore, you
too should endure this pain with equanimity and destroy karma." Sūtra - 113  The
soul, who consumes the group of karmas through penance, actions, etc., for many
crores of years, protects the soul through the yogas of mind, speech, and body.
The wise soul consumes that group of karmas only in a breath. Because the effect
of the practice with right knowledge is inconceivable. Sūtra - 114  The wise
soul, who protects the soul through mind, speech, and body, consumes the eight
types of karmas accumulated from many births, which are equal to sin, only in a
breath. Therefore, O well-being! You should also be diligent in this devotion,
with the support of right knowledge.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "(Sanstāraka)"
Āgama Sūtra - Hindi Translation Page 14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, saMstAraka' sUtra-105 aise aticAroM ko
khamAnevAlA aura anuttara tapa evaM apUrva samAdhi ko prApta karanevAlI kSapaka
AtmA; bahuvidha bAdhA saMtApa Adi ke mUla kAraNa karmasamUha ko khapAte hue
samabhAva meM viharatA hai  /  sUtra - 106 anaginata lAkha koTi azubha bhava kI
paramparA dvArA jo gAr3ha karma bA~dhA ho; una sarva karmasamUha ko saMthArA
para ArUr3ha honevAlI kSapaka AtmA, zubha adhyavasAya ke yoga se eka samaya meM
kSaya karate haiN| sUtra - 107 isa avasara para, saMthArA para ArUr3ha hue
mahAnubhAva kSapaka ko zAyada pUrvakAlIna azubha yoga se, samAdhi bhAva meM
vighna karanevAlA darda udaya meM Ae, to use zamA dene ke lie gItArtha aise
niryAmaka sAdhu bAvanA candana jaisI zItala dharmazikSA de  /  sUtra-108 he
puNya puruSa ! ArAdhanA meM hI jinhoMne apanA sabakucha arpaNa kiyA hai, aise
pUrvakAlIna munivara; jaba vaisI taraha ke abhyAsa binA bhI kaIM jaMgalI
jAnavara se cAroM ora ghire hae bhayaMkara parvata kI coTI para kAyotsarga
dhyAna meM rahate the| sUtra-109 aura phira ati dhIravRtti ko dharanevAle isa
kAraNa se zrI jinakathita ArAdhanA kI rAha meM anuttara rUpa se viharanevAle vo
maharSi puruSa, jaMgalI jAnavara kI dAr3ha meM Ane ke bAvajUda bhI samAdhibhAva
ko akhaMDa rakhate haiM aura uttama artha kI sAdhanA karate haiN| sUtra - 110 _
he suvihita ! dhIra aura svastha mAnasavRttivAle niryAmaka sAdhu, jaba hamezA
sahAya karanevAle hote haiM aise hAlAta meM samAdhibhAva pAkara kyA isa saMthAre
kI ArAdhanA kA pAra nahIM pA sakate kyA ? matalaba tujhe AsAnI se isa saMthArA
ke pAra ko pAnA caahie| sUtra-111 kyoMki jIva zarIra se anya hai, vaise zarIra
bhI jIva se bhinna hai  /  isalie zarIra ke mamatva ko chor3a denevAle suvihita
puruSa zrI jinakathita dharma kI ArAdhanA kI khAtira avasara para zarIra kA bhI
tyAga kara dete haiN| sUtra - 112 'saMthArA para ArUr3ha hue kSapaka,
pUrvakAlIna azubha karma ke udaya se paidA huI vedanAoM ko samabhAva se
sahakara, karma sthAna kalaMka kI paramparA ko velar3I kI taraha jar3a se hilA
dete haiM  /  isalie tumheM bhI isa vedanA ko samabhAva se sahana karake karma
kA kSaya kara denA caahie|' sUtra - 113 bahuta kror3a sAla taka tapa, kriyA Adi
ke dvArA AtmA jo karmasamUha ko khapAte haiM  /  mana, vacana, kAyA ke yoga se
AtmA kI rakSA karanevAle jJAnI AtmA, usa karmasamUha ko kevala sA~sa meM khapAte
haiM  /  kyoMki samyagjJAna pUrvaka ke anuSThAna kA prabhAva acintya hai| sUtra
- 114 mana, vacana aura kAyA se AtmA kA jatana karanevAle jJAnI AtmA, bahuta
bhava se saMcita kie ATha prakAra ke karmasamUha samAna pApa ko kevala sA~sa meM
khapAte haiM  /  isa kAraNa se he suvihita ! samyagjJAna ke Alambana pUrvaka
tumheM bhI isa ArAdhanA meM udyamI rahanA caahie| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt
"(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 14

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Āgama Sūtra 29, Payannāsūtra-6, ‘Sāṃstāraka’ Sūtra - 115**  Those fortunate
souls who obtain this kind of beneficial instruction, having been praised by
their guru and other elders, will, with fortitude, mount the saṃthāra, consume
all kinds of karmic defilement, and surely attain siddhi in this or the third
existence, and obtain the state of great bliss. Sūtra - 116  Charming due to
qualities like secrecy and the committee, invaluable due to the three jewels of
right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct, and possessing qualities like
restraint, austerity, and rules; Sūtra - 117  The great crown of the glorious
assembly, adorned with gold, is worthy of worship, extremely rare, and pure in
the three realms of gods, demigods, asuras, and humans. It is the foundation of
pure qualities, therefore supremely pure, and is revered by all. Sūtra - 118
Even though burning in the heat of the sun, which is fierce and powerful with a
thousand rays, like a red-hot iron cauldron in the summer season, mounted on a
black rock; Sūtra - 119  The fortunate man, who has conquered passions and other
afflictions, who is always engaged in meditation, who is endowed with the
supreme purity of knowledge and faith, and whose mind is dedicated to worship;
Sūtra - 120  He has attained samadhi-death, which is like the result of the
highest leshyā, as rare as the measurement of the sun's rays, like perfect
knowledge, and full of equanimity, like the highest meaning. Sūtra - 121  Thus,
I have praised those who have mounted the back of the elephant of saṃthāra, the
final stage of life, as described by the Jinas, and who are like the moon for
kings, the Śramaṇa men, who are eternal, independent, and possess an unbroken
tradition of everlasting happiness.  **29 Sāṃstāraka-Prakirṇaka-6, Muni
Dīparatnasāgara's Hindi Translation Complete**  Muni Dīparatnasāgara's
“(Sāṃstāraka)” Āgama Sūtra-Hindi Translation”  Page 15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, 'saMstAraka' sUtra - 115 isa prakAra ke
hitopadezarUpa Alambana ko pAnevAle suvihita AtmAeM, guru Adi vaDiloM se
prazaMsA pAnevAle saMthArA para dhIrajapUrvaka ArUr3ha hokara, sarva taraha ke
karma mala ko khAnepUrvaka usa bhava meM yA tIsare bhava meM avazya siddha hotA
hai aura mahAnanda pada ko prApta karate haiN| sUtra - 116 gupti samiti Adi guNa
se manohara, samyagjJAna, darzana aura cAritrarUpa ratnatrayI se mahAmUlyavAna
aura saMyama, tapa, niyama Adi guNa rUpa; sUtra - 117 suvarNajar3ita zrI
saMgharUpa mahAmukuTa, deva, devendra, asura aura mAnava sahita tIna loka meM
vizuddha hone ke kAraNa se pUjanIya haiM, ati durlabha haiM  /  aura phira
nirmala guNa kA AdhAra haiM, isIlie paramazuddha haiM, aura sabako zirodhArya
haiN| sUtra-118 grISma Rtu meM agni se lAla tape lohe ke tAvar3e ke jaisI kAlI
zilA meM ArUr3ha hokara hajAra kiraNoM se pracaMDa aura ugra aise sUraja ke tApa
se jalane ke bAvajUda bhI; sUtra-119 kaSAya Adi loga kA vijaya karanevAle aura
dhyAna meM sadAkAla upayogazIla aura phira ati suvizuddha jJAnadarzana rUpa
vibhUti se yukta aura ArAdhanA meM arpita cittavAle suvihita puruSa ne;
sUtra-120 uttama lezyA ke pariNAma samAna, rAdhAvedha samAna durlabha,
kevalajJAna sadRza, samatAbhAva se pUrNa aise uttama artha samAna samAdhimaraNa
ko pAyA hai| sUtra-121 isa taraha se maiMne jinakI stuti kI hai, aise zrI
jinakathita antima kAlIna saMthArA rUpa hAthI ke skandha para sukhapUrvaka
ArUr3ha hue, narendra ke lie candra samAna zramaNa puruSa, sadAkAla zAzvata,
svAdhIna aura akhaMDa sukha kI paramparA do| 29 saMstAraka-prakirNaka-6 kA muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt hindI anuvAda pUrNa muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(saMstAraka)"
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 15

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 29, Payannasutra-6, 'Sanstarak' Namo Namo Nimmaladansanas  Pujapaadu
Shri Anand-Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar Gurubhyo Nam: 29 Sanstarak Agam
Sutra Hindi Anuvaad [Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak Agam Diwaakar Muni
Deeperatnasagarji ' [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi ] Vansath:- (1)  (2)
deepratnasagar.in Bhel Dress:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com Bhoja
09825967397 Muni Deeperatnasagar Krit “(Sanstarak)” Agam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad"
Page 16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Agama sUtra 29, payannAsUtra-6, 'saMstAraka' namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa
pUjyapAdu zrI AnaMda-kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara gurUbhyo nama: 29
saMstAraka AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda [anuvAdaka evaM saMpAdaka Agama dIvAkara
muni dIparatnasAgarajI ' [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] vanasAtha:- (1)
(2) deepratnasagar.in bhela Dresa:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com bhojA
09825967397 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "(saMstAraka)" Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda"
Page 16

