Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003459/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In memory of the revered Gurudev, Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, USTEER 24ta
Coordinator and Chief Editor Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Surya Prajnapti -
Chandra Prajnapti (Original - Translation - Commentary - Notes - Appendix)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sva. pUjya gurudeva  /  zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja kI smRti meM Ayojita USTEER
24ta saMyojaka evaM pradhAna sampAdaka yuvAcArya zrI madhukara muni
sUryaprajJapti-candraprajJapti ( mUla-anuvAda-vivecana-TippaNa-pariziSTa-yukta )

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
ॐ Arhat Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 21 [Organized in the auspicious memory of
the most revered Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj] Suryapajnapati-
Chandrapajnapati [Original text, introduction and appendix included] Inspiration
0 (Late) Up-Pravartak Shasansevi Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj Original Compiler
and Chief Editor. (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Editor
Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' Chief Editor. Late. Pandit Shobhachandra Bharill
Publisher - Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 OM arha jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka 21 [paramazraddheya gurudeva pUjya
zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja kI puNya-smRti meM Ayojita] sUryapajJapti-
candrapajJapti [mUlapATha, prastAvanA tathA pariziSTa yukta ] preraNA 0 (sva0 )
upapravartaka zAsanasevI svAmI zrI brajalAlajI mahArAja AdyasaMyojaka tathA
pradhAna sampAdaka  /  (sva0 ) yuvAcArya zrI mizrImalajI mahArAja 'madhukara'
sampAdaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala' mukhya sampAdaka  /  sva.
paM.zobhAcandra bhArilla prakAzaka - zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara
(rAjasthAna)

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 21 Nirdéshan Mahasati Shri Umravkunvarji
'Archana' Sampadak Mandal Anuyogpravartak Muni Sw. Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Acharya Sw. Shri Devendramuni Shastri Shri Ratnamuni Samprerak Muni Shri
Vinaykumar 'Bhim' . Tritiya Sanskaran Viranirvan Samvat 2529 Vikram Samvat 2059
February San 2003 Prakashk Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti
Bhavan Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar (Rajasthan) Byawar - 305901 Phone: 250087 Mudrak
Ajanta Paper Converters Lakshmi Chowk, Ajmer - 305 001, Phone: 2420120 Shabd-
Sanyogan Rohit Computers, Ajmer - 305 008, Phone: 2660916

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka 21 nirdezana mahAsatI zrI umarAvakuMvarajI
'arcanA' sampAdaka maNDala anuyogapravartaka muni sva. zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI
'kamala' AcArya sva. zrI devendramuni zAstrI zrI ratanamuni sampreraka muni zrI
vinayakumAra 'bhIma' . tRtIya saMskaraNa vIranirvANa saMvat 2529 vikrama saMvat
2059 pharavarI san 2003 prakAzaka zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, zrI braja-
madhukara smRti bhavana pIpaliyA bAjAra, byAvara (rAjasthAna) byAvara - 305901
phona : 250087 mudraka ajantA pepara kanvarTarsa lakSmI cauka, ajamera - 305
001, phona : 2420120 zabda-saMyojana rohita kampyUTarsa, ajamera - 305 008,
phona : 2660916

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Ji M.Sa. 卐Mahamantra卐 Namo Arihantanan, Namo
Siddhanan, Namo Ayariyanan, Namo Uvvajhayanan, Namo Loesavva Sahunan, Eso Panch
Namokaro' Savvapavapanasano | Mangalanan Cha Savvesim, Padham Havai Mangalam ॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yuvAcArya zrI madhukara munIjI ma.sA. Wan mahAmaMtraWan  Namo arihaMtANaM, Namo
sidhdANaM, Namo AyariyANaM, Namo uvajjhAyANaM, Namo loesavva sAhUNaM, eso paMca
NamokkAro' savvapAvapaNAsaNo | maMgalANaM ca savvesiM, paDhama havai maMgalaM
//

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (chastity) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published on the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj Suryaprajnapti - Chandraprajnapti [Original Text, Introduction and
Appendices] Inspiring Soul Up-pravartaka Shasansevi (Late) Swami Shri Brijlalji
Maharaj Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj
'Madhukar' Editor Muni Shri Kanhaiyalaji 'Kamal' Chief Editor (Late) Pt.
Shobhachandra Bharilla Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Published on the Holy Remebrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj Suryaprajnapti - Chandraprajnapti [Original Text, Introduction and
Appendices] Inspiring Soul Up-pravartaka Shasansevi (Late) Swami Shri Brijlalji
Maharaj Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj
'Madhukar' Editor Muni Shri Kanhaiyalaji 'Kamal' Chief Editor (Late) Pt.
Shobhachandra Bharilla Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 21 O Direction Mahasati Shri Umravkunwarji
‘Archana' ᄆ Board of Editors Anuyogapravartaka Muni Late Shri Kanhaiyalalji
‘Kamal' Acharya Late Shri Devendra Muni Shastri Shri Ratan Muni Promotor
Munishri Vinayakumar 'Bhima' Third Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2529 Vikram Samvat
2059 FEBRUARY, 2003 Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Shri Brij Madhukar
Smriti Bhawan Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) [India] Pin 305 901 Phone: 250087
Printer Ajanta Paper Convertors Laxmi Chowk, AJMER : 2420120 Graphics ROHIT
Computers, Ajmer - 305 001 Price: Rs. 65/ Phone: 2660916

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 21 O Direction Mahasati Shri Umravkunwarji
'Archana' m Board of Editors Anuyogapravartaka Muni Late Shri Kanhaiyalalji
'Kamal' Acharya Late Shri Devendra Muni Shastri Shri Ratan Muni Promotor
Munishri Vinayakumar 'Bhima' Third Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2529 Vikram Samvat
2059 FEBRUARY, 2003 Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Shri Brij Madhukar
Smriti Bhawan Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) [India] Pin 305 901 Phone: 250087
Printer Ajanta Paper Convertors Laxmi Chowk, AJMER : 2420120 Graphics ROHIT
Computers, Ajmer - 305 001 Price: Rs. 65/ Phone: 2660916

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is the third edition of the 29th volume of the *Jinaagam Granthamala*
series, presented to the *Aagam*-loving readers. It includes two *Aagams*,
*Surya Prajnapti* and *Chandra Prajnapti*. The reason for printing both together
is discussed in detail in the editorial by *Aagam*-usage-promoter Muni Shri
Kanhaiyalalji M. 'Kamal', so there is no need to repeat it here.  Both the
presented *Aagams* are being published with the original text and appendices. No
meaning-interpretations etc. are given. This is because there is no consensus on
some of the texts and their meanings. In addition, their subject is astrology,
which is difficult for the general public. This topic is also discussed in the
editorial.  This publication has been included in the curriculum of many *Aagam*
colleges and universities. Therefore, it was considered necessary that their
availability should continue. For this reason, second, third, and fourth
editions of all *Aagams* whose copies are running out have been published.  It
is a matter of satisfaction that these publications of the *Granthamala* have
been given due respect by society and scholars. It is hoped that they will be
further disseminated in the future and the efforts of the Shri *Aagam*
Publication Committee will prove to be more successful and fruitful.  Finally,
we express our heartfelt gratitude to Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. 'Kamal' for
editing the original text and to Dr. Shri Rudradevji Tripathi for writing the
important introduction, despite being busy with the vast work of *Aagam*-usage.
We are also grateful to the late Pandit Shobhachandji Bharill for his end-to-end
review and to the supporting staff for their cooperation.  - Sagarmal Betala -
Ratanchand Modi Acting President - Knowledgechand Binayakiya - Sardarmal Chordia
Secretary President Mahamana Minister Shri *Aagam* Publication Committee, Byawar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya zrI jinAgama granthamAlA ke 29veM granthAGka kA tRtIta saMskaraNa
AgamapremI pAThakoM ke samakSa prastuta hai| isameM sUryaprajJapti aura
candraprajJapti do AgamoM kA samAveza kiyA gayA hai| donoM kA eka sAtha mudraNa
karAne kA hetu kyA hai, isa viSaya meM Agama-anupayoga-pravartaka muni zrI
kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. 'kamala' ne apane sampAdakIya meM vistRta carcA kI hai,
ataeva yahAM doharAne kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai| prastuta donoM Agama mUla pATha
evaM pariziSTa Adi ke sAtha hI prakAzita kiye jA rahe haiN| artha-vivecana Adi
nahIM diye gaye haiM  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki inameM Aye katipaya pAThoM
aura unake artha meM mataikya nahIM ho sakA hai| isake atirikta inakA viSaya
jyotiSa hai jo sarvasAdhAraNa ke liye durUha hai| isa viSaya kI carcA bhI
sampAdakIya meM kI gaI hai| prastuta prakAzana ke aneka Agama kaoNlejoM aura
vizvavidyAlayoM ke pAThyakrama meM nirdhArita kiye gaye haiN| ataeva yaha
Avazyaka samajhA gayA ki inakI upalabdhi niraMtara banI rhe| isa kAraNa samasta
AgamoM meM jinakI pratiyAM samApta ho rahI haiM, unake dvitIya, tRtIya, caturtha
saMskaraNa prakAzita karA diye gaye haiN| - saMtoSa kA viSaya hai ki granthamAlA
ke ina prakAzanoM kA samAja evaM vidvadvarga ne paryApta Adara kiyA hai| AzA hai
bhaviSya meM inakA aura adhika pracAra-prasAra hogA aura zrI Agama prakAzana
samiti kA prayAsa adhika saphala aura suphalapradAyaka siddha hogaa| anta meM
Agama-anupayoga ke vizAla kArya meM vyasta hote hue bhI munizrI kanhaiyAlAlajI
ma. 'kamala' ne mUlapATha kA sampAdana kara va DAkTara zrI rudradevajI tripAThI
ne mahattvapUrNa prastAvanA likhakara jo sahayoga pradAna kiyA usake liye
AdarapUrvaka AbhAra mAnate haiN| sAtha hI sva. paM. zobhAcandrajI bhArilla ne
isakA AdyopAnta avalokana kiyA evaM sahayogI kAryakattAoM se sahayoga prApta huA
tadartha unake bhI hama AbhArI haiN| sAgaramala betAlA ratanacanda modI
kAryavAhaka adhyakSa - nivedaka jJAnacanda binAyakiyA saradAramala coraDiyA
mahAmaMtrI adhyakSa mahAmanA maMtrI zrI Agama prakAzana-samiti byAvara

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**President:** Shri Sagarmal Betala, Indore **Acting President:** Shri
Ratanchandji Modi **Vice Presidents:** Shri Dhanrajji Vinayakia, Byawer Shri
Bhanwarlalji Gothi, Chennai Shri Hukmichandji Parkh, Jodhpur Shri Dulichandji
Chaurdia, Chennai Shri Jasrajji Parkh, Durg **General Secretary:** Shri
Sardarmalji Chordia, Chennai **Secretaries:** Shri Gyanchandji Vinayakia, Byawer
Shri Gyanrajji Mootha, Pali **Joint Secretaries:** Shri Prakashchandji Chopra,
Byawer **Treasurer:** Shri Janvarilalji Shishodia, Byawer Shri R. Prasannchandji
Chordia, Chennai **Advisors:** Shri Manakchandji Sancheti, Jodhpur Shri
Reekhabchandji Lodha, Chennai **Members:** Shri S. Sayermalji Chordia, Chennai
Shri Mulchandji Surana, Nagaur Shri Motichandji Chordia, Chennai Shri
Amarchandji Modi, Byawer Shri Kishnalalji Betala, Chennai Shri Jatanrajji Mehta,
Medta City Shri Devrajji Chordia, Chennai Shri Gautam Chandji Chordia Shri
Sumermalji Medtiya, Jodhpur Shri Prakashchandji Chordia, Chennai Shri
Pradeepchandji Chordia, Chennai **Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Byawer** **Executive
Committee**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 adhyakSa : zrI sAgaramala betAlA, indaura kAryavAhaka adhyakSa zrI ratanacanda
jI modI upAdhyakSa : zrI dhanarAjajI vinAyakiyA, byAvara zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
goThI, cainnaI zrI hukmIcanda jI pArakha, jodhapura zrI dulIcandrajI cauraDiyA,
cainnaI zrI jasarAjajI pArakha, durga mahAmaMtrI : zrI saradAramala jI
corar3iyA, cainnaI mantrI : zrI jJAnacandajI vinAyakiyA, byAvara zrI jJAnarAjajI
mUthA, pAlI sahamantrI zrI prakAzacandajI caupar3A, byAvara koSAdhyakSa zrI
jaMvarIlAlajI zizodiyA, byAvara zrI Ara. prasannacandajI coraDiyA, cainnaI
parAmarzadAtA : zrI mANakacandajI saMcetI, jodhapura zrI rIkhabacanda jI lor3hA,
caitraI sadasya : zrI esa. sAyaramalajI coraDiyA, cainnaI zrI mUlacandajI
surANA, nAgaura zrI motIcandajI coraDiyA, cainnaI zrI amaracandajI modI, byAvara
zrI kizanalAlajI betAlA, cainnaI zrI jatanarAjajI mehatA, mer3atA siTI zrI
devarAja jI coraDiyA, cainnaI zrI gautama candajI coraDiyA zrI sumeramalajI
mer3atiyA, jodhapura zrI prakAzacandajI coraDiyA, cainnaI zrI pradIpacandajI
coraDiyA, cainnaI zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara kAryakAriNI samiti

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Edition Generous Contributors: Introduction Seth Shri Kishनलालji Baitala
Seth Shri Kishनलालji Baitala is a devout, religious, and generous श्रावक. He has
always had a special feeling for social service. His life has been filled with
human virtues. Service and philanthropy are ingrained in his very being. He is
associated with many institutions of the Shwe..स्था. community.  He earned
immense wealth through his hard work and, imbued with a pure human spirit, used
that wealth for the service of religion and society. He and his entire family
have always had a special interest in education and literary promotion.  His
father, Pujya Shri Poonamchandji Baitala, and mother, Shrimati Rajibai Baitala,
were very peaceful, religious, and eager to serve the संतमुनिराज.  He has four
brothers - Shri Dulichandji, Shri Maणkchandji, Shri Madनलालji, and Shri
Kanvarlalji. All the brothers have been skilled in industry and business,
prosperous, and have contributed wholeheartedly to religious and social work.
His wife, Shrimati Vimla Devi Baitala, is a very gentle, service-oriented, and
religious woman. He has four sons - Shri Prakashchandji, Shri Shrichandji, Shri
Premchandji, and Shri Rajendraji.  His family has also contributed significantly
to the publication of the story series published by Muni Shri HajariMal Smriti
Prakashan.  He has immense devotion, faith, and respect for Pujya Swami Shri
HajariMalji M. Sa., Shri Brijlalji M. Sa., Pujya Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni
Ji M. Sa., and Pujya Mahasati Shri Umravkunwarji M. Sa. 'Archana'.  He has
provided his significant and heartfelt support to the publication of this book.
The committee is grateful to him and hopes that he will continue to provide such
support in the future.  Gyanchand Vinayakiya Minister Shri Aagam Prakashan
Samiti, Byawar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama saMskaraNa meM udAra sahayogI : paricaya seTha zrI kizanalAlajI
baitAlA seTha zrI kizanalAlajI baitAlA niSThAvAna dharmapremI evaM udAramanA
zrAvaka haiM  /  Apa meM samAjasevA kI vizeSa bhAvanA zurU se rahI hai| ApakA
jIvana mAnavIya sadguNoM se ota-prota rahA hai| sevA aura paropakAravRtti Apake
kaNa-kaNa meM basI huI hai| Apa zve..sthA. samAja kI anekAneka saMsthAoM se
jur3e hue haiN| Apane apane puruSArtha bala se vipula lakSmI kA upArjana kiyA
aura pavitra mAnavIya bhAvanA se ota-prota hokara dharma tathA samAja kI sevA ke
liye usa lakSmI kA sadupayoga bhI kiyaa| zikSA evaM sAhitya pracAra meM ApakI
evaM Apake samasta parivAra kI vizeSa ruci prArambha se hI rahI hai| Apake pitA
pU. zrI pUnamacandajI baitAlA evaM mAtA zrImatI rAjIbAI baitAlA bahuta hI zAnta,
dharmazIla evaM saMtamunirAjoM kI sevA karane meM tatpara rahate the| Apake cAra
bhrAtA haiM - sarvazrI dulIcaMda jI, mANakacaMda jI, madanalAla jI evaM
kaMvaralAla jii| sabhI baMdhu udyoga evaM vyavasAya meM kuzala, vaibhava
sampanna evaM dhArmika tathA sAmAjika kAryoM meM tana-mana-dhana se sahayoga
karate rahe ApakI dharmapatnI zrImatI vimalA devI baitAlA bar3I suzIlA,
sevAbhAvI, dharmazIlA nArI hai| Apake cAra putra haiM - sarvazrI prakAzacaMda
jI, zrIcaMda jI, premacaMda jI evaM rAjendra jii| muni zrI hajArImala smRti
prakAzana dvArA prakAzita kathAmAlAoM ke prakAzana meM bhI Apake parivAra kA
kAphI yogadAna rahA hai| Apa pUjya svAmI jI zrI hajArImala jI ma. sA., zrI
bRjalAla jI ma. sA. evaM pUjya yuvAcArya zrI madhukara muni jI ma. sA. tathA pU.
mahAsatI zrI umarAvaku~vara jI ma. sA. 'arcanA' ke prati atyadhika bhakti,
niSThA evaM Adara bhAvanA rakhate haiN| Apane isa grantha ke prakAzana meM zrI
A. pra. sa. ko apanA mahatvapUrNa hArdika sahayoga pradAna kiyA hai etadartha
samiti ApakI AbhArI hai evaM apekSA rakhatI hai ki bhaviSya meM bhI ApakA isI
prakAra kA sahayoga milatA rhegaa| jJAnacaMda vinAyakiyA maMtrI. zrI Agama
prakAzana samiti,byAvara

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Editorial: Jyotiganarajprajnapti, i.e., Chandraprajnapti and Suryaprajnapti
[From the First Edition]  **Sutra-patha of Suryaprajnapti**  If one were to
compare the original sutras of the Suryaprajnapti presented here with the
previously published Suryaprajnapti, they would not match exactly. This is
because the sutras in this edition have been supplemented with several
additional sentences. However, the authenticity of the sutra-patha remains
intact. Only experts in the Agamas will be able to understand the justification
for the arrangement of the sutra-patha.  **Introduction to the Two Upangas**
Apart from minor differences, Chandraprajnapti and Suryaprajnapti are completely
identical. Therefore, an introduction to one automatically introduces the other.
* The name determined by the compiler is Jyotiganarajprajnapti. * Initially, the
combined name in circulation would have been Chandra-Suryaprajnapti. Later, the
two Upangas were divided and named Chandraprajnapti and Suryaprajnapti, which
are still in use today. * Each Prajnapti has twenty Prabhritas, and each
Prajnapti has 108 sutras. * From the third Prabhrita to the ninth Prabhrita,
i.e., in seven Prabhritas, and from the eleventh Prabhrita to the twentieth
Prabhrita, i.e., in ten Prabhritas, there are no 'Prabhrita-Prabhritas'. * Only
the first, second, and tenth Prabhritas have 'Prabhrita-Prabhritas'. - According
to the combined number, there are no 'Prabhrita-Prabhritas' in seventeen
Prabhritas. Only three Prabhritas have 'Prabhrita-Prabhritas'.  **Classified
Subject Index**  The available Chandra-Suryaprajnapti is not classified by
subject matter. If the scattered topics were classified, the inquisitive world
could benefit greatly.  **Outline of the Subject Index of Chandraprajnapti:**
1. Detailed form of the Moon 2. The Moon's conjunction with the Sun 3. The
Moon's conjunction with the planets 4. The Moon's conjunction with the
constellations 5. The Moon's conjunction with the stars  **Outline of the
Subject Index of Suryaprajnapti:**  1. Detailed form of the Sun 2. Sutras of the
planets

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sampAdakIya jyotiSagaNarAjaprajJapti arthAt candraprajJapti aura sUryaprajJapti
[prathama saMskaraNa se] sUryaprajJapti ke sUtrapATha pUrva prakAzita
sUryaprajJapti ke mUla sUtroM se prastuta sUryaprajJapti ke mUla sUtra yadi
akSarazaH milAnA cAheMge to nahIM mileNge| kyoMki isa saMskaraNa ke sUtroM ko
kaI pUraka vAkyoM se pUrita kiyA hai, phira bhI sUtra pAThoM kI prAmANikatA
yathAvata AgamoM ke vizeSajJa hI sUtra pAThoM kI vyavasthA ke aucitya ko samajha
skeNge| sAmAnya aMtara ke atirikta candraprajJapti aura sUryaprajJapti sarvathA
samAna haiM, isaliye eka ke paricaya se dAnoM kA paricaya svataH ho jAtA hai|
upAMgadvaya - paricaya . saMkalanakartA dvArA nirdhArita nAma -
jyoSigaNarAjaprajJapti hai| prArambha meM saMyukta pracalita nAma - candra-
sUryaprajJapti rahA hogaa| bAda meM upAMgadvaya ke rUpa meM vibhAjita nAma -
candraprajJapti, sUryaprajJapti ho gaye haiM, jo abhI pracalita haiN| pratyeka
prajJapti meM bIsa prAbhRta haiM aura pratyeka prajJapti meM 108 sUtra haiN|
tRtIya prAbhRta se navam prAbhRta paryaMta arthAt sAta prAbhRtoM meM aura
gyAharaveM prAbhRta se bIsaveM prAbhRta paryaMta arthAt dasa prAbhRtoM meM
prAbhRta-prAbhRta' nahIM haiN| kevala prathama, dvitIya aura dasaveM prAbhRta
meM 'prAbhRta-prAbhRta' haiN| - saMyukta saMkhyA ke anusAra sataraha prAbhRtoM
meM prAbhRta-prAbhRta' nahIM hai| kevala tIna prAbhRtoM meM prAbhRta-prAbhRta'
haiN| upalabdha candra-sUrya prajJapti kA viSayAnukrama vargIkRta nahIM hai|
yadi inake vikIrNa viSayoM kA vargIkaraNa kiyA jAya to jijJAsu jagata adhika se
adhika lAbhAnvita ho sakatA hai| vargIkRta viSayAnukrama candraprajJapti ke
viSayAnukrama kI rUparekhA - 1. candra kA vistRta svarUpa 2. candra kA sUrya se
saMyoga 3. candra kA grahoM se saMyoga 4. candra kA nakSatroM se saMyoga 5.
candra kA tArAoM se saMyoga sUryaprajJapti ke viSayAnukrama kI rUparekhA - 1.
sUrya kA vistRta svarUpa 1. grahoM ke sUtra

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  2. The conjunction of the Sun with the Moon 2. The threads of
the constellations 3. The conjunction of the Sun with the planets 3. The threads
of the stars 4. The conjunction of the Sun with the constellations 1. The
distinctions of time 5. The conjunction of the Sun with the stars 2. The threads
of day and night 1. The combined threads of the Moon and Sun 3. The threads of
the year 2. The combined threads of the Moon, Sun, and planets 4. The threads of
the metaphorical time 3. The combined threads of the Moon, Sun, planets, and
constellations 5. The threads of time and space 4. The combined threads of the
Moon, Sun, planets, constellations, and stars. Explanations of the appointment
of both Prajnaptis, etc.  In the current accepted order of the twelve Upangas,
Chandraprajnapti is the sixth and Suryaprajnapti is the seventh Upanga.
Therefore, Acharya Malayagiri would have first written the commentary on
Chandraprajnapti and then the commentary on Suryaprajnapti.  If Acharya
Malayagiri's commentary on Chandraprajnapti is available anywhere, has it been
published or not? Or if any other appointment, Churni or commentary has been
published, it is worth investigating.  Acharya Malayagiri has written in his
commentary on Suryaprajnapti - Suryaprajnapti-niyukti has been lost. Therefore,
by the grace of the Guru, I am composing the commentary. Naming and division
The names of all the Angas and Upangas are available somewhere at the beginning
or end, but why are the names Chandraprajnapti or Suryaprajnapti not mentioned
in the Uththānika or the Upsanhar of these two Upangas? This is a question worth
considering.  When and why was their division into two Upangas done? This is a
subject of research. Planets, constellations, and stars are celestial deities -
their Indra are the Moon and Sun - these two are the Jyotishganaraj.  In the
prose and verse sutras of the Uththānika and Upsanhar, only the name
'Jyotishganarajprajnapti' is available, but these Upangas are not known by this
name, but by the names Chandraprajnapti and Suryaprajnapti.  The compiler of
'Jyotish-Raj-Prajnapti' promises to call the independently compiled commentary
with the single name 'Jyotish-Gan-Raj-Prajnapti' at the beginning of the text.
Its unambiguous basis is the third and fourth verses given at the beginning of
Chandraprajnapti.  Asya niyuktir abhoot, purva shri Bhadrabahu surikruta.
Kalidoshat sa aneshad vyachakshe kevalam sutram || Suryaprajnaptim aham
gurupadeshanusaratah kinchit. Vivrunomi yatha shakti spashtam svaparopakaraya ||
- Suryo Prajnapti Vritti Prao 1 3. Gahao - Phud-Viyad-Pagadaththam, Vuchcham
Puvvasuy-Sar-Nissandam || Suhumm Ganino Vaite Joisganray-Patti || 3 || Nameen
Indabhuiti, Goyamo Vandiun Tivihenam. Puchchai Jinavaravasahm, Joisrayass
Panatti || 4 || [ 10 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2. sUrya kA candra se saMyoga 2. nakSatroM ke sUtra 3. sUrya kA grahoM se
saMyoga 3. tArAoM ke sUtra 4. sUrya kA nakSatroM se saMyoga 1. kAla ke bheda
prabheda 5. sUrya kA tArAoM se saMyoga 2. ahorAtra ke sUtra 1. candra, sUrya ke
saMyukta sUtra 3. saMvatsara ke sUtra 2. candra, sUrya, graha ke saMyukta sUtra
4. aupamika kAla ke sUtra 3. candra, sUrya graha nakSatra ke saMyukta sUtra 5.
kAla aura kSetra ke sUtra 4. candra, sUrya, graha, nakSatra, tArAoM ke saMyukta
sUtra donoM prajJaptiyoM kI niyukti Adi vyAkhyAe~ dvAdaza upAMgoM ke vartamAna
mAnya krama meM candraprajJapti chaThA aura sUryaprajJapti sAtavAM upAMga hai -
isaliye AcArya malayagiri ne pahale candraprajJapti kI vRtti aura bAda meM
sUryaprajJapti kI vRtti racI hogii| yadi AcArya malayagirikRta candraprajJapti-
vRtti kahIM se upalabdha hai to usakA prakAzana huA hai yA nahIM ? yA anya kisI
ke dvArA kI gaI niyukti, cUrNi yA TIkA prakAzita ho to anveSaNIya hai| AcArya
malayagiri ne sUryaprajJapti kI vRtti meM likhA hai - sUryaprajJaptiniyukti
naSTa ho gaI hai| ataH guru kRpA se vRtti kI racanA kara rahA huuN| nAmakaraNa
aura vibhAjana sabhI aMga-upAMgoM ke Adi yA anta meM kahIM na kahIM unake nAma
upalabdha haiM kintu ina donoM upAMgoM kI utthAnikA yA upasaMhAra meM
candraprajJapti yA sUryaprajJapti kA nAma kyoM nahIM hai ? yaha eka vicAraNIya
prazna hai| do upAMgoM ke rUpa meM inakA vibhAjana kaba aura kyoM huA ? yaha
zodha kA viSaya hai| graha, nakSatra, tArA jyotiSka deva haiM - inake indra haiM
candra-sUrya - ye donoM jyotiSagaNarAja hai| utthAnikA aura upasaMhAra ke gadya-
padya sUtroM meM jyotiSagaNarAjaprajJapti' nAma hI upalabdha hai kintu isa nAma
se ye upAMga prakhyAta na hokara candraprajJapti aura sUryaprajJapti nAma se
prakhyAta hue haiN| 'jyotiSa-rAja-prajJapti' kA saMkalanakarttA grantha ke
prArambha meM jyotiSa-gaNa-rAja-prajJapti' isa eka nAma se kI gaI svataMtra
saMkalita vRtti ko hI kahane kI pratijJA karatA hai| isakA asaMdigdha AdhAra
candraprajJapti ke prArambha meM dI huI tRtIya aura caturtha gAthA hai| asyA
niyuktirabhUta, pUrva zrI bhdrbaahusuurikRtaa| kalidoSAt sA'nezad vyAcakSe
kevalaM sUtram  //  sUryaprajJaptimahaM gurUpadezAnusArataH kiMcit  /  vivRNomi
yathAzaktiM spaSTaM svpropkaaraay|| - sUrya0 pra0 vRtti pra01 3. gAhAo - phuDa-
viyaDa-pAgaDatthaM, vucchaM puvvsuy-saar-nnissNdN|| suhUmaM gaNiNovaiTeM
joisagaNarAya-pattiM  // 3 //  nAmeNa iMdabhUitti, goyamo vaMdiUNa tivihennN|
pucchai jiNavaravasahaM, joisarAyassa paNNattiM  // 4 //  [ 10 ]

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the same way, in the first two verses of the praise verses given at the end
of the Chandra and Surya Prajnapti, the compiler has said, 'I have engraved this
Bhagavati Jyotish-Raj-Prajnapti.' The author of this text has not said anywhere
that 'I will speak of Chandra Prajnapti or Surya Prajnapti, but 'Jyotish-Raj-
Prajnapti' is the only name that its author has clearly stated, in this context
this evidence is sufficient. When was this Upanga considered as an Upanga? And
when were its two studies or two Shruta-skandhas considered as two Upangas? What
can be said in the absence of historical evidence. The compiler of Jyotish-Raj-
Prajnapti The question arises - who was the compiler of 'Jyotish-Raj-Prajnapti'?
A definite solution to this question is not possible, as the name of the
compiler is not available anywhere. 'Chandra Prajnapti and Surya Prajnapti' have
been written by many as Ganadharakrit. It is possible that this is based on the
fourth verse of the beginning of Chandra Prajnapti. But how can it be proved
from this verse that Gautam Ganadharakrit is? Its compiler is some Purvadhar or
Shrutadhar sthavir, who is saying that 'Indrabhuiti' named Gautam Ganadhar,
after bowing to Bhagwan Mahavira with three yogas, asks about 'Jyotish-Raj-
Prajnapti'. . Compilation period of Jyotish-Raj-Prajnapti • The time between
Bhagwan Mahavira and the Niruktikar Shri Bhadrabahusuri can be called the
compilation period of this Granthraj, because Bhadrabahusurikrit 'Surya
Prajnapti's Nirukti' was destroyed before the Vrittikar Acharya Malayagiri, he
himself writes this in the Vritti of Surya Prajnapti. In this verse, the use of
the verb 'puccha' has been done by some other compiler. Jyotish-Raj-Prajnapti is
an independent work The compiler bows in five verses in the second verse of
Chandra Prajnapti and in the third verse he says that 'to reveal the subtle
mathematics in the form of a stream of the essence of the previous Shruta - a
waterfall', I will say 'Jyotish-Gan-Raj-Prajnapti'. This clearly indicates -
this is an independent work. At the beginning of each sutra of Chandra Prajnapti
and Surya Prajnapti, the use of 'ta' is there. This use of 'ta' is strong
evidence to prove it as an independent work. 1. Gaha - Iya S Pagadatta,
Abhavvajanhiyay Dullabha Inmo. Ukkitiya Bhagavati, Joisrayassa Panatti || 3 ||
Namen Indabhuiti, Goyamo Vandiun Tivihenam. Pucchai Jinavaravasahm, Joisrayassa
Panatti || 4 || Namuun Sur-Asur Garul-Bhuyanga Parivandhie Gayakilesse. Arihe
Siddhayarie Uvjjhay Savvasahu Ya || 2 || Phud - Viyad - Pagadathm, Vucchm
Puvvasuy-Sarani Ssandam. Suhumm Ganinovitth, Joisganray - Panatti || 3 || [ 11 ]
2. 3. 4.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isI prakAra candra aura sUrya prajJapti ke anta meM dI huI prazasti gAthAoM meM
se prathama gAthA ke do padoM meM saMkalanakarttA ne kahA hai 'isa bhagavatI
jyotiSa - rAja-prajJapti kA maiMne utkIrtana kiyA hai|' isa grantha ke racayitA
ne kahIM yaha nahIM kahA ki 'maiM candraprajJapti yA sUryaprajJapti kA kathana
karUMgA, kintu 'jyotiSa-rAja-prajJapti' yahI eka nAma isake racayitA ne spaSTa
kahA hai, isa sandarbha meM yaha pramANa paryApta hai| yaha upAMga eka upAMga ke
rUpa meM kaba mAnA gayA ? aura isake do adhyayanoM athavA do zrutaskandhoM ko do
upAMgoM ke rUpa meM kaba ye mAna liyA gayA ? aitihAsika pramANa ke abhAva meM
kyA kahA jAya  /  jyotiSa - rAja-prajJapti ke saMkalanakarttA prazna uThatA hai
- 'jyotiSa - rAja-prajJapti' ke saMkalanakarttA kauna the ? isa prazna kA
nizcita samAdhAna saMbhava nahIM hai, kyoMki saMkalanakarttA kA nAma kahIM
upalabdha nahIM hai  /  'candra prajJapti aura sUryaprajJapti' ko kaiyoM ne
gaNadharakRta likhA hai| saMbhava hai isakA AdhAra candraprajJapti ke prarambha
kI caturtha gAthA' ko mAna liyA gayA hai| kintu isa gAthA se gautama
gaNadharakRta hai, yaha kaise siddha ho sakatA hai ? isake saMkalanakarttA koI
pUrvadhara yA zrutadhara sthavira haiM, jo yaha kaha rahe haiM ki 'indrabhUti'
nAma ke gautama gaNadhara bhagavAna mahAvIra ko tIna yoga se vaMdanA karake
'jyotiSa - rAja - prajJapti' ke sambandha meM pUchate haiN| . jyotiSa-rAja-
prajJapti kA saMkalanakAla * bhagavAna mahAvIra aura niryuktikAra zrI
bhadrabAhusUri ina donoM ke bIca kA samaya isa grantharAja kA saMkalanakAla kahA
jA sakatA hai, kyoMki bhadrabAhusUrikRta 'sUryaprajJapti kI niryukti' vRttikAra
AcArya malayagiri ke pUrva hI naSTa ho gaI thI, aisA ve sUryaprajJapti kI vRtti
meM svayaM likhate haiM  /  isa gAthA meM 'pucchara' kriyA kA prayoga anya kisI
saMkalanakartA ne kiyA hai| jyotiSa-rAja-prajJapti eka svataMtra kRti hai
saMkalanakarttA candraprajJapti kI dvitIya gAthA meM pA~ca padoM kA vandana
karatA hai aura tRtIya gAthA' meM vaha kahatA hai ki 'pUrvazruta kA sAra
niSyanda - jharanA' rUpa sphuTa - vikaTa sUkSma gaNita ko prakaTa karane ke liye
'jyotiSa - gaNa - rAja - prajJapti ' ko kahU~gA  /  isase spaSTa dhvanita hotA
hai - yaha eka svataMtra kRti hai  /  candraprajJapti aura sUryaprajJapti ke
pratyeka sUtra ke prArambha meM 'tA' kA prayoga hai| yaha 'tA' kA prayoga isako
svataMtra kRti siddha karane ke liye prabala pramANa hai| 1. gAhA - iya esa
pAgaDatthA, abhavvajaNahiyaya dullabhA iNamo  /  ukkittiyA bhagavatI,
joisarAyassa paNNattI  //  3  //  nAmeNa iMdabhUitti, goyamo vaMdiUNa tiviheNaM
/  pucchai jiNavaravasahaM, joisarAyassa paNNatti  //  4  //  namiUNa sura-asura
garula-bhuyaMgaparivaMdie gayakilese  /  arihe siddhAyarie uvajjhAya savvasAhU
y|| 2  //  phuDa - viyaDa - pAgaDatthaM, vucchaM puvvasuya-sAraNissaMdaM  /
suhumaM gaNiNovaiTTha, joisagaNarAya - paNNattiM  //  3  //  [ 11 ] 2. 3. 4.

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This type of 'ta' is not available in any of the Anga or Upanga sutras. The
beginning of each question-sutra in the Chandra-Surya Prajnapti does not have
'Bhanta!' and the beginning of the answer-sutra does not have 'Goyama'. While in
other Anga-Upanga sutras, 'Bhanta!' and 'Goyama!' are used almost everywhere,
therefore it is undeniable that this work is completely independently compiled.
One text, two Uththaniks. One Uththanika of Jyotish-Raj-Prajnapti is of the
verses given at the beginning of Chandra Prajnapti and one Uththanika is of
prose sutras. These Uththanikas have been used in different forms by editors of
different manuscripts - 1. Some have given both Uththanikas. 2. Some have given
one Uththanika of prose sutras. 3. Some have given one Uththanika of verse-
verses. Similarly, praise verses are given at the end of Chandra Prajnapti and
at the end of Surya Prajnapti. While these verses were given at the end of
Jyotish-Raj-Prajnapti. It is possible that when Jyotish-Raj-Prajnapti was
divided into two Upangas, the same praise verses were given at the end of both
Upangas. Compilation style of Jyotish-Raj-Prajnapti In what form would Jyotish-
Raj-Prajnapti have been compiled in the distant past? The planet is the subject
of historians of Agam literature, but the verses given at the beginning of the
currently available Chandra Prajnapti and Surya Prajnapti, which are the same in
terms of subject-direction, indicate the main subject of the first Prabhrit as
'mathematics of the movement of the sun in the solar systems', but the first
sutra of both Upangas is of the loss and increase of Muhurtas. _ All the sutras
related to solar mathematics and lunar mathematics are scattered here and there.
This is not a systematic order of the sutras of constellations and stars.
Therefore, expert editors of Agamas, whether Shraman or Sadgrihastha, if they
edit these Upangas in modern editing style, then there can be an unexpected
increase in mathematics. There are two sutras in the fifth Prabhrit-Prabhrit of
the first Prabhrit. In the sixteenth sutra, there are five propositions
regarding other beliefs regarding the movement of the sun and in the
seventeenth, the form of self-belief is presented. Thus, the presentation of
other beliefs and self-belief in two different sutras is not found elsewhere.
Compilation time Ghandhar Anga compiles the Agamas as Sutra Agamas first and
Shruthadhar Sthavir compiles the Upangas later. This chronological order of
compilation is undeniable. Ghandhar, who compiles the Anga Agamas, is one and
Shruthadhar, who compiles the Upanga Agamas, [ 12 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isa prakAra kA 'tA' kA prayoga kisI bhI aMga upAMgoM ke sUtroM meM upalabdha
nahIM hai| candra-sUrya prajJapti ke pratyeka praznasUtra ke prArambha meM
'bhaMte !' kA aura uttarasUtra ke prArambha meM 'goyamA' kA prayoga nahIM hai|
jabaki anya aMga-upAMgoM ke sUtroM meM bhaMte ! aura goyamA! kA prayoga prAyaH
sarvatra hai, ata: yaha mAnyatA nirvivAda hai ki yaha kRti pUrNarUpa se
svataMtra saMkalita kRti hai| grantha eka, utthAnikAe~ do jyotiSa-rAja-prajJapti
kI eka utthanikA candraprajJapti ke prArambha meM dI huI gAthAoM kI hai aura eka
utthanikA gadya sUtroM kI hai| ina utthAnikAoM kA prayoga vibhinna pratiyoM ke
sampAdakoM ne vibhinna rUpoM meM kiyA hai - 1. kisI ne donoM utthAnikAe~ dI
haiN| 2. kisI ne eka gadha-sUtroM kI utthAnikA dI hai| 3. kisI ne padya-gAthAoM
kI utthAnikA dI hai| isI prakAra prazasti gAthAyeM candraprajJapti ke aMta meM
aura sUryaprajJapti ke aMta meM bhI dI hai| jabaki ye gAthAyeM jyotiSa -rAja-
prajJapti ke aMta meM dI gaI thiiN| saMbhava hai jyotiSa-rAja-prajJapti ko jaba
do upAMgo ke rUpa meM vibhAjita kiyA gayA hogA, usa samaya donoM upAMgoM ke aMta
meM samAna prazasti gAthAyeM de dI gaI haiN| jyotiSa-rAja-prajJapti kI
saMkalana-zailI cira atIta meM jyotiSa-rAja-prajJapti kA saMkalana kisa rUpa meM
rahA hogA? graha to Agama-sAhitya ke itihAsavizeSajJoM kA viSaya hai kiMtu
vartamAna meM upalabdha candraprajJapti tathA sUryaprajJapti ke prarambha meM dI
gaI viSaya-nirdezaka samAna gAthAoM meM prathama prAbhRta kA pramukha viSaya
'sUryamaNDaloM meM sUrya kI gati kA gaNita' sUcita kiyA gayA hai, kintu donoM
upAMgoM kA prathama sUtra muhUrtoM kI hAni-vRddhi kA hai| _ sUrya saMbaMdhI
gaNita aura candra saMbaMdhI gaNita ke sabhI sUtra yatra-tatra vikIrNa haiN|
yaha nakSatra aura tArAoM ke sUtroM kA bhI vyavasthita krama nahIM hai| ata:
AgamoM ke vizeSajJa sampAdaka zramaNa yA sadgRhastha ina upAMgoM ko Adhunika
sampAdana zailI se sampAdita kareM to gaNita kI AzAtIta vRddhi ho sakatI hai|
prathama prAbhRta ke pA~caveM prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM do sUtra haiN| solahaveM
sUtra meM sUrya kI gati ke saMbaMdha meM anya mAnyatAoM kI pA~ca pratipattiyA~
haiM aura satrahaveM meM svamAnyatA kA prarUpaNa hai| isa prakAra anya mAnyatAoM
kA aura svamAnyatA kA do vibhinna sUtroM meM nirUpaNa anyatra nahIM hai|
saMkalanakAla gaNadhara aMga AgamoM ko sUtrAgamoM ke rUpa meM pahale saMkalita
karatA hai aura zrutadhara sthavira upAMgoM ko bAda meM saMkalita karate haiN|
yaha saMkalana kA kAlakrama nirvivAda hai| aMga AgamoM ko saMkalita karane vAlA
gaNadhara eka hotA hai aura upAMga AgamoM ko saMkalita karane vAle zrutadhara [
12 ]

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Different times have different characteristics, therefore their concepts and
methods of compilation cannot be the same. The **Sthānāṅga** is an **āgama**. In
its two sūtras, the reference to the names of the **Chandra-Sūrya-Prajñapti** is
ambiguous, because the reference to them in it is only possible if the
**Chandra-Sūrya-Prajñapti** was compiled before the **Sthānāṅga**. Before
addressing this contrary concept, one should keep in mind that there is a
contradiction in the order of the **nakshatra** calculation. The **Chandra-
Sūrya-Prajñapti** is the first **prābhṛta** of the tenth **prābhṛta** onwards,
and it presents the form of the self-acceptance of the order of **nakshatra**
calculation - according to this, there is an order of 28 **nakshatras** from
**Abhijit** to **Uttaraṣāḍha**, but in **Sthānāṅga** A. 2, U. 3, sūtra 95, there
are three verses on the order of **nakshatra** calculation, and these same three
verses are in the **Anuyogadvāra** in the **upkrama** division, sūtra 185. These
contain the order of **nakshatras** from **Kṛttikā** to **Bhaṇī**. The
**Sthānāṅga** is an **āgama** - if the order of **nakshatra** calculation
mentioned in it is according to self-acceptance, then how can the order of
**nakshatra** calculation mentioned in the **Sūryaprajñapti** be considered
self-acceptance? Because the authenticity of an **āgama** is self-evident
compared to an **upāṅga**. 1. 2. For the sake of the **bahuśruta**, a solution
should be presented, but this brief reading does not provide information about
the solution, these are two separate sūtras. If any commentator had accepted the
order of **nakshatra** calculation specified in the **Sthānāṅga** as another
acceptance, then the contradiction would have been removed, but the order of
self-acceptance from **Abhijit** to **Uttaraṣāḍha** is from the **āgama** texts
like **Jambūdvīpaprajñapti** etc., other orders are of other acceptances.
According to the **Sūryaprajñapti** commentary, the meaning of the word
**prābhṛta** is 1 2 3 - To offer a rare object that is beneficial and suitable
for the time and place for the desired person. Or to offer the desired person an
object that pleases the mind, these are both meanings. (a) **Sthānāṅga** A. 2,
U. 2, sū. 160 (b) **Sthānāṅga** A. 4, U. 1, sū. 277 (a) What is the meaning of
the word **prābhṛta**? It is said - here **prābhṛta** is a word known in the
world, which is offered to the desired person, a rare object, beautiful in its
outcome, suitable for the time and place. (b) **prābhṛta** is that which, by
excellence, is offered from all sides, nourishes and pleases the mind of the
desired person. They are offered according to the time. - (c) The **grantha**
methods that are desired are also extremely rare, beautiful in their outcome,
and are offered to the desired disciples who are endowed with virtues like
humility, etc., according to the time and place. **Sūrya. sū. 6** commentary -
**patra 7**, the first part, in the **Śvetambara** tradition, the word
**prābhṛta** is used for the study of the **Chandra-Sūrya-Prajñapti**, etc.,
divisions. The different meanings of the word **pāhuḍ** used for the
**Kaṣāyapahūḍ** etc., **siddhānta** texts of the **Digambara** tradition are | -
Whose steps are clear - Expressed, is called **pāhuḍ**. - —- Which is offered by
the excellent **puruṣottama** Which is accepted by the excellent **jñānīs**. -
The ultimate meaning of the word **prābhṛta** - =   [13] - Established, is
called **pāhuḍ**. Which has been accepted or obtained by tradition, is called
**pāhuḍ** - quoted from the **Jainendra Siddhānta Koṣa**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vibhinna kAla meM vibhinna hote haiM ataH unakI dhAraNAeM tathA saMkalana
paddhati samAna saMbhava nahIM hai| sthAnAMga aMga Agama hai| isake do sUtroM
meM candra-sUrya prajJapti ke nAmoM kA nirdeza duvidhAjanaka hai, kyoMki
sthAnAMga ke pUrva candra-sUrya-prajJapti kA saMkalana hone para hI unakA usameM
nirdeza saMbhava ho sakatA hai| isa viparIta dhAraNA ke nivAraNa ke se pUrva
unheM yaha dhyAna meM rakhanA cAhiye nakSatra - gaNanAkrama meM paraspara
virodha hai candra-sUrya-prajJapti dazama prAbhRta ke prathama prAbhRta-prAbhRta
meM nakSatra gaNanAkrama kI svamAnyatA kA prarUpaNa hai - tadanusAra abhijita ke
uttarASAr3hA paryanta 28 nakSatroM kA gaNanAkrama hai kintu sthAnAMga a. 2, u.
3, sUtrAMka 95 meM tIna gAthAe~ nakSatra - gaNanAkrama kI haiM aura yahI tIna
gAthAe~ anuyogadvAra ke upakrama vibhAga meM sUtra 185 meM haiN| inameM kRttikA
se bharaNI paryaMta nakSatroM kA gaNanAkrama hai| sthAnAMga aMga Agama hai -
isameM kahA gayA nakSatra - gaNanAkrama yadi svamAnyatA ke anusAra hai to
sUryaprajJapti meM kahe gaye nakSatra - gaNanAkrama ko svamAnyatA kA kaise mAnA
jAya ? kyoMki upAMga kI apekSA aMga Agama kI prAmANikatA svataH siddha hai| 1.
2. liye bahuzrutoM ko samAdhAna prastuta karanA cAhiye kintu samAdhAna prastuta
karane yaha saMkSipta vAcanA kI sUcanA nahIM hai ye dAnoM alaga-alaga sUtra
haiN| yadi sthAnAMga meM nirdiSTa nakSatra gaNanAkrama ko kisI vyAkhyAkAra ne
anya mAnyatA kA mAna liyA hotA to paraspara virodha nirasta ho jAtAM kintu
jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti Adi ke Agama pAThoM se svamAnyatA kA krama abhijita se
uttarASAr3hA paryaMta kA hai anya krama anya mAnyatA ke haiN| sUryaprajJapti
vRtti ke anusAra prAbhRta zabda ke artha 1 2 3 - iSTa puruSa ke liye dezakAla ke
yogya hitakara durlabha vastu arpita karanA athavA jisa padArtha se mana
prasanna ho aisA padArtha iSTa puruSa ko arpita karanA, ye donoM zabdArtha haiM
/  (ka) sthAnAMga a. 2, u. 2, sU. 160 (kha) sthAnAMga a. 4, u. 1, sU. 277 (ka)
atha prAbhRtamiti kaH zabdArtha : ? ucyate - iha prAbhRtaM nAma loke prasiddhaM
yadabhISTAya puruSAya deza-kAlocitaM durlabha vastu pariNAmasundaramupanIyate  /
(kha) prakarSeNa A-samantAd mriyate poSyate cittamabhISTasya puruSasyAneneti
prAbhRtam  /  kAlaucityenopanIyante  /  - (ga) vivakSitA api ca
granthapaddhatayaH paramadurlabhA pariNAmasundarAzcAbhISTebhyo
vinayAdiguNakalitebhyaH ziSyebhyo deza- sUrya. sU. 6 vRtti-patra 7 kA pUrvabhAga
zvetAmbara paramparA meM candra-sUrya prajJapti ke adhyayana Adi vibhAgoM ke lie
'prAbhRta' zabda prayukta hai| digambara paramparA ke kaSAyapAhuDa Adi siddhAnta
granthoM ke liye prayukta 'pAhuDa' zabda ke vibhinna artha | - jisake pada
sphuTa - vyakta haiM vaha 'pAhuDa' kahA jAtA hai| - --- jo prakRSTa puruSottama
dvArA AbhRta jo prakRSTa jJAniyoM dvArA AbhUta jAtA hai| - prAbhRta pada kA
paramArtha - = [13] - prasthApita hai vaha 'pAhuDa' kahA jAtA hai| dhAraNa kiyA
gayA hai athavA paramparA se prApta kiyA gayA hai vaha 'pAhuDa' kahA - jainendra
siddhAnta koSa se uddhata

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Meaning related to Chandra-Surya-Pragyapti  This rare text, filled with
virtues like humility and others, is given for the study of disciples who
possess these qualities, for the benefit of the country and the times. The
adjective "country-time-beneficial" is particularly noteworthy here.  In the
Kalik and Utkalik Nandi Sutra, Gamik is called "Utkalik" and Agamik is called
"Kalik".  Dristivad is Gamik. The third division of Dristivad is Purvagat. The
Jyotishganaraj-Pragyapti (Chandra-Pragyapti-Surya-Pragyapti) is derived from
this Purvagat, as known from the third verse of the Uththani of Chandra-
Pragyapti.  The Angas and Upangas are related to each other. All of them are
Agamik, therefore they are all Kalik. According to the same Nandi Sutra,
Chandra-Pragyapti is Kalik and Surya-Pragyapti is Utkalik.  Except for a few
prose and verse sutras, all the sutras of Chandra-Pragyapti and Surya-Pragyapti
are exactly the same. So, on what basis are one considered Kalik and the other
Utkalik?  If one of the Upangas is considered Kalik and the other Utkalik in
these days, then it seems appropriate to believe that "all their sutras were not
the same". In the cruel interval of time, some sutras of these Upangas have been
lost and some have been scattered.  How much similarity is there in the original
sutras of Chandra-Pragyapti and Surya-Pragyapti, which are originally different
but have the same meaning? This is automatically known by observing both from
beginning to end. But in the past, there was an explanation of all the sutras of
Chandra-Pragyapti based on the moon and an explanation of all the sutras of
Surya-Pragyapti based on the sun. It cannot be said how true this statement is,
because it is not mentioned anywhere in any commentary, appointment, etc. If
such a mention is found in any commentary, appointment, etc., then scholars
should publish it.  It is not impossible for a single verse or a single verse to
have multiple meanings. Dvisandhan, Panchasandhan, Saptasandhan, etc. poetry are
available today. In these, different story-based commentaries on each verse can
be seen. But in the context of Chandra-Pragyapti and Surya-Pragyapti, it does
not seem appropriate to say different meanings without any strong evidence.
Jyotishshastra is considered to be Nimittshastra. Its expert can be successful
in knowing Shabha-Shabha. The greatest curiosity of man is to know the future
because he wants the coincidence of the desired and the success of the work.
Chandra-Pragyapti and Surya-Pragyapti are Upangas of the subject of Jyotish -
although they have more mathematics and less fruit, yet the one who knows them
perfectly is considered to be the knower of auspicious and inauspicious omens -
this belief has been prevalent since ancient times.  Planets and stars are
indicators of the future of all mankind, therefore they have a wide connection
with human life.  1. 2. 3. Nandi Sutra, Gamik Agamik Shruta Sutra 44. Nandi
Sutra, Dristivad Shruta Sutra 90. Nandi Sutra, Utkalik Shruta Sutra 44. Nandi
Sutra, Kalik Shruta Sutra 44.  [ 14 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 candra-sUrya-prajJapti se sambandhita artha vinayAdi guNa sampanna ziSyoM ke
liye deza-kAlopayogI zubhaphalaprada durlabha grantha svAdhyAya hetu denaa|
yahA~ 'deza-kAlopayogI' vizeSaNa vizeSa dhyAna dene yogya hai| kAlika aura
utkAlika nandIsUtra meM gamika ko 'utkAlika' aura agamika ko 'kAlika' kahA hai|
dRSTivAda gamika hai| dRSTivAda kA tRtIya vibhAga pUrvagata hai, usI pUrvagata
se jyotiSagaNarAja-prajJapti (candraprajJaptisUryaprajJapti) kA nirvRhaNa kiyA
gayA hai, aisA candraprajJapti kI utthanikA kI tRtIya gAthA se jJAta hotA hai|
aMga-upAMgoM kA eka dUsare se saMbaMdha hai, ye saba agamika haiM, ata: ve saba
kAlika haiN| usI nandIsUtra ke anusAra candraprajJapti kAlika hai aura
sUryaprajJapti utkAlika hai| candraprajJapti aura sUryaprajJapti ke katipaya
gadya-padya sUtroM ke atirikta sabhI sUtra akSarazaH samAna haiM, ataH eka
kAlika aura eka utkAlika kisa AdhAra para mAne gaye haiM ? yadi ina dinoM
upAMgoM meM se eka kAlika aura eka utkAlika nizcita hai to 'inake sabhI sUtra
samAna nahIM the' yaha mAnanA hI ucita pratIta hotA hai, kAla ke vikarAla
aMtarAla meM ina upAMgoM ke kucha sUtra vichinna ho gaye aura kucha vikIrNa ho
gaye haiN| mUla abhinna aura artha bhinna candraprajJapti aura sUryaprajJapti ke
mUla sUtroM meM kitanA sAmya hai ? yaha to donoM ke AdyopAnta avalokana se
svataH jJAta ho jAtA hai; kintu candraprajJapti ke sabhI sUtroM kI candraparaka
vyAkhyA aura sUryaprajJapti ke sabhI sUtroM kI sUryaparaka vyAkhyA atIta meM
upalabdha thii| yaha kathana kitanA yathArtha hai, kahA nahIM jA sakatA hai,
kyoMki aisA kisI TIkA, niyukti Adi meM kahIM kahA nahIM hai| yadi isa prakAra kA
ullekha kisI TIkA, niyukti Adi meM dekhane meM AyA ho to vidvajjana prakAzita
kreN| eka zloka yA eka gAthA ke aneka artha asambhava nahIM haiN| dvisaMdhAna,
paMcasaMdhAna, saptasaMdhAna Adi kAvya vartamAna meM upalabdha haiN| inameM
pratyeka zloka kI vibhinna kathAparaka TIkAe~ dekhI jA sakatI haiN| kintu
candraprajJapti aura sUryaprajJapti ke sandarbha meM binA kisI prabala pramANa
ke bhinnArtha kahanA ucita pratIta nahIM hotaa| jyotiSazAstra nimittazAstra mAnA
gayA hai| isakA vizeSajJa zabhAzabha jAnane meM saphala ho sakatA hai| mAnava kI
sarvAdhika jijJAsA bhaviSya jAnane kI hotI hai kyoMki vaha iSTa kA saMyoga evaM
kArya kI siddhi cAhatA candraprajJapti aura sUryaprajJapti jyotiSa viSaya ke
upAMga haiM - yadyapi inameM gaNita adhika hai aura phalita atyalpa hai, phira
bhI inakA paripUrNa jJAtA zubhAzubha nimitta kA jJAtA mAnA jAtA hai - yaha
dhAraNA prAcIna kAla se pracalita hai| graha-nakSatra mAnavamAtra ke bhAvI
dyotaka haiM ataeva inakA mAnava jIvana ke sAtha vyApaka saMbaMdha hai| 1. 2. 3.
nandIsUtra, gamika agamika zruta sUtra 44. nandIsUtra, dRSTivAda zruta sUtra 90.
nandIsUtra, utkAlika zruta sUtra 44. nandIsUtra, kAlika zruta sUtra 44. [ 14 ]

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The profound faith that humans have in the science of *nimitta* is also due to
the auspicious and inauspicious effects of planets and stars. The connection of
astrological deities with the living world is the eternal connection of the
human and non-human beings of this middle world with the moon and other
astrological deities. Because they are all self-luminous deities of this middle
world and they continue to illuminate all the substances of this earth. The
relationship between the astrological world and the human world is that of the
illuminator and the illuminated. (1) The word 'Chandra' is derived from the root
'chadi' which means 'to delight'. The moon is the source of delight for the
living world, hence the tradition of moon-watching is prevalent. There are many
synonyms of Chandra, some of which indicate a close relationship between the
moon and all the substances of this earth and men. *Kumudabandhav* - The moon is
the brother of the *kumudini* (water lily) that blooms in water bodies, hence it
is called *kumudabandhav*. The moon's synonyms *himaanshu*, *shubhraanshu*,
*sudhaanshu* are directly related to the *kumudini* through their nectar-like
qualities. This is evidenced by the saying of a Rajasthani poet: > *Doha* - The
*kumudini* dwells in water, the moon dwells in the sky. > Whoever dwells in the
mind, is near to him. *Aushadhish* - The herbs of the forest are 'aushadhi' -
they have the miraculous power to cure diseases, which comes from the nectar-
like rays of *sudhaanshu*. Man desires health, which is obtained from medicines
- therefore, there is a close relationship between man and *aushadhish* (moon).
*Nishapati* - The lord of the night - is the moon. 'Laborers' work during the
day and rest at night. By resting in the light of the moon, man becomes healthy,
therefore, man's relationship with *nishaanaath* (moon) is very close. The Jain
scriptures explain the synonym 'Shash' of the moon. 1. *All Sadass Visittaththo*
> Q. By what means, O Venerable One, is the moon called 'Shash'? > A. O Gautam!
The moon, the king of the celestial bodies, has a beautiful chariot in the sky,
with beautiful gods and goddesses, and beautiful seats, beds, pillars, vessels,
and other equipment, and the moon himself is gentle, radiant, auspicious,
pleasing to behold, and beautiful. > O Gautam! For this reason, the moon is
called 'Shash' (or Sashri). [15]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nimittazAstra ke prati jo mAnava kI agAdha zraddhA hai, vaha bhI graha-
nakSatroM ke zubhAzubha prabhAva ke kAraNa hI hai| jyotiSI devoM kA jIva-jagat
se saMbaMdha isa madhyaloka ke mAnava aura mAnavettara prANI-jagata se candra
Adi jyotiSI devoM kA zAzvata saMbaMdha hai| kyoMki ve saba isI madhyaloka ke
svayaM prakAzamAna deva haiM aura ve isa bhUtala ke samasta padArthoM ko prakAza
pradAna karate rahate haiN| jyotiSa loka aura mAnava loka kA prakAzya-prakAzaka
kA bhAva saMbaMdha isa prakAra hai - (1) candra zabda kI racanA cadi AhlAdane
dhAtu se 'candra' zabda siddha hotA hai| candramAhlAdaM mimIte nirmimIte iti
candramA prANijagat ke AhlAda kAjanaka candra hai, isaliye candradarzana kI
paramparA pracalita hai| candra ke paryAyavAcI aneka haiM unameM se kucha aise
paryAyavAcI haiM jinameM isa pRthvI ke samasta padArthoM se evaM puruSoM se
candra kA pragAr3ha saMbaMdha siddha hai| kumudabAndhava - jalAzayoM meM
praphullita kumudini kA baMdhu candra hai isaliye 'kumudabAndhava' kahA jAtA
hai| kalAnidhi candra ke paryAya himAMzu, zubhrAMzu, sudhAMzu kI amRtamayI
kalAoM se kumudinI kA sIdhA saMbaMdha hai| isakI sAkSI hai rAjasthAnI kavi kI
sUkti - dohA - jala meM base kumudinI, candA base aakaash| jo jAhu ke mana base,
so tAhu ke pAsa  //  auSadhIza - jaMgala kI jar3I bUTiyAM 'auSadhI' haiM -
unameM roga-nivAraNa kA adbhuta sAmarthya sudhAMzu kI sudhAmayI razmiyoM se AtA
hai| mAnava Arogya kA abhilASI hai, vaha auSadhiyoM se prApta hotA hai - isaliye
auSadhISa candra se mAnava kA ghaniSTha saMbaMdha hai| nizApati - nizA-rAtri kA
pati - candra hai| 'zramajIvI dina meM 'zrama' karate haiM aura rAtri meM
vizrAma karate haiM  /  AhlAdajanaka candra kI candrikA meM vizrAnti lekara
mAnava svastha ho jAtA hai isaliye mAnava kA nizAnAtha se ati nikaTa kA
saMbaMdha siddha hotA hai| jainAgamoM meM candra ke eka 'zazi' paryAya kI hI
vyAkhyA hai| 1. sabhI sadassa visiTTha'ttho pra. se keNaTheNaM bhaMte! evaM
vuccaI - caMde sasI, caMde sasI? u. goyamA! caMdassa NaM joisiMdassa joisaraNNo
miyaMke vimANe, kaMtA devA, kaMtAo devIo, kaMtAI AsaNasayaNa-khaMbha-
bhaMDamattovagaraNAiM, appaNA vi yaNaM caMde jotisiMde jotisarAyA some kaMte
subhae piyadaMsaNe surUve se teNaTheNaM goyamA ! evaM vuccaI - 'caMde sasI,
caMde ssii'| - bhaga. sa. 12, u.6, su. 4 zazi zabda kA viziSTArtha pra. he
bhagavan ! caMdra ko 'zazi' kisa abhiprAya se kahA jAtA hai ? u.he gautama!
jyotiSkendra jyotiSarAja candra ke mRgAMka vimAna meM manohara deva, manohara
deviyAM tathA manojJa Asana-zayana-stambhabhANDa-pAtra Adi upakaraNa haiM aura
jyotiSkendra jyotiSarAja candra svayaM bhI saumya, kAnta, subhaga, priyadarzana
evaM surUpa hai| he gautama ! isa kAraNa se candra ko 'zazi' (yA sazrI) kahA
jAtA hai| [ 15 ]

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(2) The word "Surya" is derived from the root "Su" meaning "to inspire". "Surya"
is the one who inspires all beings to act. "Suraj" is the word used by rural
people for "Surya". "Suraj" is derived from "Su" meaning "best" and "Urj"
meaning "energy". Surya is the source of the best energy. Surya has many
synonyms. Some of these synonyms reveal a deep connection between Surya and
humans. "Sahasranshu" refers to the thousands of rays of Surya which provide
warmth to all beings, sustaining life on Earth. Every human body has life as
long as there is warmth. Life ends with the end of warmth. "Bhaskar",
"Prabhakar", "Vibhakar", "Diwakar", "Ghumani", "Aharpati", "Bhanu" etc. are
synonyms of Surya, signifying him as the god of light. All human activities take
place in light. Without light, humans are helpless. Surya's heat cures many
diseases. Solar energy is being used to develop many powerful machines. Thus,
humans have an eternal connection with Surya. Jain scriptures explain the
meaning of the synonym "Aditya" for Surya, stating that he is the beginning of
all time periods.  (3) The word "Graha" is derived from the root "Grah" meaning
"to hold". Jain scriptures mention six and eight "Grahas". 1. "Sure Sahasss
Visitthaththo" - Q. Why is Surya called Aditya, Venerable Sir? A. Gautam! Surya
is the cause of time, the beginning of the cycle of time, the beginning of the
descending and ascending time periods. Therefore, Gautam! Surya is called
Aditya. Six "Taraggaha" are mentioned: 1. Shukra, 2. Budha, 3. Brihaspati, 4.
Angaraka, 5. Sanichchara, 6. Ketu. - Tthananga 6, Sutra 48. Eight "Mahagghaha"
are mentioned: 1. Chanda, 2. Sure, 3. Shukra, 4. Budha, 5. Brihaspati, 6.
Angaraka, 7. Sanichchara, 8. Ketu. - Tthananga 8, Sutra 6/3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (2) sUrya zabda kI racanA sU preraNe dhAtu se 'sUrya' zabda siddha hotA hai|
suvati-prerayati karmaNi lokAn iti sUryaH - jo prANi mAtra ko karma karane ke
liye prerita karatA hai vaha sUrya sUraja - grAmINa jana 'sUrya' ko 'sUraja'
kahate haiN| su Urja se sUrja yA sUraja uccAraNa hotA hai| su zreSTha - Urja =
UrjA - shkti| . sUrya se zreSTha zakti prApta hotI hai| sUrya ke paryAya anake
haiN| inameM kucha aise paryAya haiM, jinase sUrya kA mAnava ke sAtha gahana
saMbaMdha siddha hotA hai| sahastrAMzu - sUrya kI sahastra razmiyoM se prANiyoM
ko jo 'USmA prApta hotI hai, vahI jagat ke jIvoM kA jIvana pratyeka mAnava
zarIra meM jaba taka USmA - garmI rahatI hai, taba taka jIvana hai| USmA samApta
hone ke sAtha hI jIvana samApta ho jAtA hai| bhAskara, prabhAkara, vibhAkara,
divAkara, ghumaNi, aharpati, bhAnu Adi paryAyoM se 'sUrya' prakAza dene vAlA
deva hai| mAnava kI sabhI pravRttiyAM prakAza meM hI hotI haiN| prakAza ke binA
yaha akiMcitkara hai| sUrya ke tApa se aneka rogoM kI cikitsA hotI hai saura
UrjA se aneka yaMtra zaktiyoM kA vikAsa ho rahA hai| isa prakAra mAnava kA sUrya
se zAzvata saMbaMdha hai| jainAgamoM meM sUrya ke eka 'Aditya paryAya kI vyAkhyA
dvArA sabhI kAlavibhAgoM kA Adi sUrya kahA gayA hai| (3) gRha-graha kI racanA
graha upAdAne dhAtu se yaha graha zabda siddha hotA hai| jainAgamoM meM chaha
graha aura ATha graha kA ullekha hai| 1. sUra sahassa visiTThattho - pra.se
keNaTheNaM bhaMte! evaM vuccai - 'sUre Adicce sUre Adicce'? u.goyamA! surAdIyA
NaM samayAivA, AvaliyAivA, jAva osappiNIi vA, ussappiNIi vaa| se teNa-NaM
goyamA! evaM vuccai - 'sUre Adicce sUre aadicce|' - bhaga. sa. 12, u. 6, su.5
sUrya zabda kA viziSTArtha pra. he bhagavan ! sUrya ko Aditya kisa abhiprAya se
kahA jAtA hai ? u. he gautama! samaya, AvalikA yAvat avasarpiNI, utsarpiNI kAla
kA Adi kAraNa sUrya hai| he gautama! isa kAraNa se sUrya ko Aditya kahA jAtA
hai| cha tAraggahA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. sukko, 2. buhe, 3. bahaspati, 4.
aMgArake, 5. sANicchare, 6. ketu| - ThANaM a. 6, su. 48 aTTha mahaggahA paNNattA
taMjahA - 1. cande, 2. sUre, 3. sukke, 4. buhe, 5. bahassati, 6. aMgArake, 7.
saNicchare, 8. ketu  /  - ThANaM 8, sU.6/3

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Moon and Sun are considered grahapatis (lords of planets), while the
remaining six are considered grahas (planets). Rahu and Ketu are not considered
separate, only Ketu is considered.  There are 88 grahas (planets) as well. Other
texts mention nine grahas (planets). Regarding the influence of grahas
(planets), the astrologers Vashishtha and Brihaspati have said the following:
Vashishtha - Grahas give kingdom, grahas take away kingdom. All the three
worlds, movable and immovable, are controlled by grahas. Brihaspati - The entire
world is under the influence of grahas, humans and gods are under the influence
of grahas. Time and knowledge are under the influence of grahas, grahas are the
givers of the fruits of karma. (32nd Gochar Prakaran - Brihadvaignaranjan, p.
84) (4) Nakshatra and the group of humans The word Nakshatra is formed as
follows: 1. 'Kshad' means to harm, it is a root word in the Sutra. It is in the
Atmanepadi form.  'Shtan' (U. 4/159) 'Nabhranapad' (6/3/75) - This is the nature
of the 'Nan' (suffix). 2. 'Nakshati' means to move (Bhava. P. Se.). 'Asi-
Nakshati-Yaji-Vadhi-Patibhyo Tran' (U. 3/105) - 'Tran' (suffix) is added to
these words. 3. 'Nakshatra' means 'N Kshanoti'. 'Kshanu' means to harm (T. U.
Se.) (Shtran) (U. 4/159). 4. 'N Kshatra' - because of divinity, 'Kshatra' means
to break. The one who protects from injury and danger is called 'Kshatra'. The
'duty of protection' of that 'Kshatra' is called 'Kshatra Dharma'. The offspring
of Kshatra is called 'Kshatriya'. - The protectors of this earth are 'Kshatra'
and the protectors who reside in the sky are 'Nakshatra'. The relationship
between these Nakshatras and the human Kshatra is the Nakshatra relationship.
Out of the 28 Nakshatras, 'Abhijit' Nakshatra is not used in practice, only 27
Nakshatras are used. Each Nakshatra has four charanas (quarters), that is, four
aksharas (letters). Thus, there are 108 aksharas (letters) in 27 Nakshatras.
When these 108 aksharas (letters) are divided into twelve rashi (signs), each
rashi (sign) has 9 aksharas (letters). Thus, the names of all beings and objects
are determined by these 108 aksharas (letters) of 27 Nakshatras and twelve rashi
(signs). This is the trikalik (three-time) relationship between Nakshatra and
the group of humans. These Nakshatras, which are described by eleven names, such
as char (moving), sthira (fixed), andha (blind), kana (one-eyed), etc., are the
cause of the success of every work. [17]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 candra-sUrya ko grahapati mAnA hai|, zeSa chaha ko graha mAnA hai,rAhu-ketu ko
bhinna na mAnakara eka ketu ko hI mAnA aTThAsI graha bhI mAne haiN| anya
granthoM meM nau graha mAne haiN| grahoM ke prabhAva ke saMbaMdha meM vaziSTha
aura bRhaspati nAma ke jyotirvidAcArya ne isa prakAra kahA hai - vaziSTha -
grahA rAjyaM prayacchaMti, grahA rAjyaM haranti ca  /  grahaistu vyapitaM sarva,
trailokyaM sacarAcaram  //  bRhaspati - grahAdhInaM jagatsarvaM, grahAdhInA
nraamraaH| kAlaM jJAnaM grahAdhInaM, grahAH krmphlprdaaH|| (32 vAM gocara
prakaraNa - vRhadaivajJaraMjana, pR. 84) (4) nakSatra aura narasamUha nakSatra
zabda kI racanA 1. na kSadate hinasti 'kSada' iti sautro dhAtu : hiMsArtha
aatmnepdii| STana (u. 4/159) nabhrAnapAd (6/3/75) iti naJaH prkRtibhaavH| 2.
NakSa gatau (bhvA. pa. se.) nkssti| asi-nakSi-yaji-vadhi-patibhyo tran (u.
3/105) pratyaye kRte| 3. na kSaNoti. kSaNu hiMsAyAm (ta. u. se.) (STran) (u.
4/159) nakSatraM  /  4. na kSatraM devatvAt kSatra bhintvaat| jo kSata-khatare
se rakSA kare vaha 'kSatra' kahA jAtA hai| usa 'kSatra' kA jo 'rakSA karanA'
dharma hai vaha kSAtra dharma' kahA jAtA hai| kSatra kI saMtAna 'kSatriya' kahI
jAtI hai| -- isa bhUtala ke rakSaka nara 'kSatra' haiM aura nabha - AkAza meM
rahane vAle rakSaka deva 'nakSatra' haiN| ina nakSatroM kA nara kSatra se
saMbaMdha nakSatra saMbaMdha hai| aTThAIsa nakSatroM meM se 'abhijit ' nakSatra
ko vyavahAra meM na lekara sattAIsa nakSatroM se vyavahAra kiyA hai| pratyeka
nakSatra ke cAra caraNa haiM arthAt cAra akSara haiN| isa prakAra sattAIsa
nakSatroM ke 108 akSara hote haiN| ina 108 akSaroM ko bAraha rAziyoM meM
vibhakta karane para pratyeka rAzi ke 9 akSara hote haiN| isa prakAra sattAIsa
nakSatroM evaM bAraha rAziyoM 108 akSaroM se pratyeka prANI evaM padArthoM ke
'nAma' nirdhArita kiye jAte haiN| vaha nakSatra aura nara samUha kA traikAlika
saMbaMdha hai| cara sthira Adi sAta, aMdha kANa Adi cAra ina gyAraha saMjJAoM se
abhihita ye nakSatra pratyeka kArya kI siddhi Adi meM nimitta hote haiN| [ 17 ]

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(5) The Formation of the Word "Taramandal" (Constellation)  The word "tara"
(star) is feminine. It is derived from the root "tar" (to swim, to float).
"Taranti anaya iti tara" (They swim by this, hence "tara").  Sailors, who were
traders, used to navigate the seas at night by observing the constellations. The
Pole Star remains stationary and indicates the north direction. The other
directions are determined by the regular movement of planets, stars, and zodiac
signs. Therefore, those that help in the navigation of boats, etc., are called
"tara" (stars).  Travel in the desert is comfortable at night, so travelers use
the stars to navigate at night.  Experts in constellations know the auspicious
and inauspicious aspects of a province or country. Therefore, the relationship
between stars and the creatures of the earth is very close.  Thus, the moon,
sun, planets, stars, and constellations are the cause of human happiness and
sorrow. The mathematics of Ganitanuyog is "Samyak Shruta" (rightly known).  In
the list of "Mithyashruta" (falsely known), mathematics is considered
"Mithyashruta". This does not mean that all types of mathematics are
"Mithyashruta".  One should understand that only that mathematics which is not
useful or helpful in the practice of self-purification is "Mithyashruta". Here,
"Mithya" means "useless", not false.  One of the causes of the origin of
detachment is the knowledge of the nature of the world, i.e., "Lokabhavna"
(worldly feelings). Therefore, all mathematics related to the lower and higher
worlds is "Samyak Shruta", because it cannot be the cause of livelihood or other
careful actions.  The mathematical formulas in the three parts of "Sthanank",
"Samvayang", and "Vyakhyaprajnapti", and in the three sub-parts of
"Jambudvipaprajnapti", "Chandraprajnapti", and "Surya Prajnapti" are all "Samyak
Shruta" because the parts and sub-parts are "Samyak Shruta".  **Citations from
Other Beliefs - Formulation of Self-Beliefs**  The "Chandra-Surya Prajnapti"
contains citations from many beliefs, as well as formulations of self-beliefs.
The word "Pratipatti" indicates other beliefs. The list of "Pratipattis" in the
"Chandra-Surya Prajnapti" is as follows:  1. Nandi Sutra 2. Jagat Kayasvabhavi
Cha Samvega-Vairagyarthah. Tattvarth Sutra A. 7 [18]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (5) tArAmaNDala tArA zabda kI racanA tArA zabda strIliMga hai| tR plavana-
taraNayoH dhAtu se 'tArA' zabda kI siddhi hotI hai| taranti anayA iti taaraa|
sAMyAtrika - jahAjI vyApAriyoM ke nAvika rAtri meM samudra yAtrA tArAmaNDala ke
dizA bodha se karate the| _ dhruva tArA sadA sthira raha kara uttara dizA kA
bodha karAtA hai| zeSa dizAoM kA bodha graha, nakSatra aura rAziyoM kI niyamita
gati se hotA rahatA hai| isaliye naukA Adi ke tirane meM jo sahAyaka hote haiM,
vaha tArA kahe jAte haiN| registAna kI yAtrA rAtri meM sukhapUrvaka hotI hai isa
liye yAtrA ke Ayojaka rAtri meM tArA se dizAbodha karate hue yAtrA karate haiN|
tArAmaNDala ke vizeSajJa prAnta kA, deza kA zubhAzubha jAna lete haiM isaliye
tArAoM kA pRthvItala ke prANiyoM se ati nikaTa kA saMbaMdha siddha hai| isa
prakAra candra, sUrya, graha, nakSatra aura tArA mAnava ke sukha-duHkha ke
nimitta hai| gaNitAnuyoga kA gaNita samyak zruta hai mithyAzrutoM kI nAmAvalI
meM gaNita ko mithyAzruta mAnA hai', isakA yaha abhiprAya nahIM hai ki - 'sabhI
prakAra ke gaNita mithyAzruta haiN|' Atmazuddhi kI sAdhanA meM jo gaNita upayogI
yA sahayogI nahIM hai, kevala vahI gaNita 'mithyAzruta' hai, aisA samajhanA
caahiye| yahAM 'mithyA' kA abhiprAya 'anupayogI' hai, jhUThA nhiiN| vairAgya kI
utpatti ke nimittoM meM lokabhAvanA arthAt lokasvarUpa kA vistRta jJAna bhI eka
nimitta hai, ata: adho aura Urdhva loka se saMbaMdhita sArA gaNita 'samyaka
zrata' hai, kyoMki vaha gaNita AjIvikA yA anyAnya sAvadha kriyAoM kA hetu nahIM
ho sakatA hai| sthAnAMka, samavAyAMga aura vyAkhyAprajJapti - ina tInoM aMgoM
meM tathA jambUdvIpaprajJapti, candraprajJapti aura sUryaprajJapti - ina tInoM
upAMgoM meM gaNita saMbaMdhI jitane sUtra haiM ve saba samyakzruta haiN| kyoMki
aMga, upAMga samyakzruta haiN| anya mAnyatAoM ke uddharaNa - svamAnyatAoM kA
prarUpaNa candra-sUryaprajJapti meM aneka mAnyatAoM ke uddharaNa diye gaye haiM,
sAtha hI svamAnyatAoM ke prarUpaNa bhI kiye gaye haiN| anya mAnyatAoM kA sUcaka
'pratipatti' zabda hai| candra-sUryaprajJapti meM jitanI pratipattiyAM haiM,
unakI sUcI isa prakAra hai - 1. nandIsUtra 2. jagatkAyasvabhAvI ca sNveg-
vairaagyaarthm| ttattvArthasUtra a. 7 [ 18 ]

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##    **6** **0** **0** **0** **39 v0 0 0 0** **0** **0** **0** **0**  **In the
Surya Prajnapti, the number of Prathipattis (statements) are as follows:**
**Prathipatti Number** | **Prathipatti** | **Prathipatti Number** |
**Prathipatti** ------- | -------- | -------- | -------- 1 | 15 | 1 | 20 2 | 6 |
2 | 3 3 | 20 | 3 | 5 4 | 8 | 4 | 17 5 | 22 | 5 | 2 6 | 23 | 6 | 18 7 | 12 | 7 |
7 8 | 16 | 8 | 8 9 | 20 | 9 | 10 10 | 5 | 10 | 25 11 | 5 | 11 | 10 12 | 20 | 12
| 17 13 | 88 | 13 | 3 14 | 89 | 14 | 3 15 | 100 | 15 | 25 16 | 102 | 16 | 2 17 |
103 | 17 | 96  **Prathipatti Number** | **Prathipatti** ------- | -------- 18 |
2 19 | 20 20 | 'Samaanyata of One' 21 | 'Bahushruta's Duty'  **It is proposed to
present the Upanga Dwaya (two Upangas) by:**  * Providing the location of the
Prathipattis cited in the Upanga Dwaya. * Providing the original text of the
Prathipatti from the source text. * Refuting other viewpoints and presenting the
justification for the accepted viewpoint.  **This can be achieved by using
modern editorial methods.**  **Alternatively:**  * Commission a detailed
research paper on the Chandra-Surya Prajnapti through a research institution. *
Encourage a qualified Shraman-Shramani or scholar to write the research paper. *
Provide the necessary resources for writing the research paper. * Honor the
author of the research paper.  **All these are great acts of Shruta Seva
(service to the scriptures).**  **A widespread misconception:**  **The 17th
Prathipatti-Prathipatti of the 10th Prathipatti of both Upangas contains
separate food regulations for each constellation. These include regulations for
meat consumption.**  **This raises a concern in the mind of a general student:**
1. (a) The question-sutra (question-verses) preceding these Prathipattis are
incomplete. (b) The Sutra-ansha (sutra-verses) presenting the personal opinion
following these Prathipattis are also incomplete.  **The compilers of the Upanga
Dwaya have not provided the names of the source texts, the names of the authors,
the chapters, the verses, or the sutra numbers for the Prathipattis they have
cited.**  **[19]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 0 0 0 39 v0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 sUryaprajJapti meM pratipattiyoM kI saMkhyA
prAbhRta prAbhRta-prAbhRta sUtra pratipatti saMkhyA prAbhRta prAbhRta-prAbhRta
sUtra pratipattiyAM saMkhyA 15 6 pratipattiyAM 1 20 3 pratipattiyAM 5
pratipattiyAM 2 8 pratipattiyAM 17 svamata kathana 2 22 2 pratipattiyAM 18 7
pratipattiyAM 23 4 pratipattiyAM 19 8 pratipattiyAM 12 pratipattiyAM 'eka ke
samAna svamAnyatA' 4 16 pratipattiyAM prAbhRta prAbhRta-prAbhRta sUtra
pratipatti saMkhyA prAbhRta prAbhRta-prAbhRta sUtra pratipattiyAM saMkhyA 20
pratipattiyAM 10 5 pratipattiyAM 25 pratipattiyAM 10 5 pratipattiyAM 20
pratipattiyAM 17 88 25 pratipattiyAM 3 pratipattiyAM 18 89 25 pratipattiyAM 3
pratipattiyAM 19 100 12 pratipattiyAM 25 pratipattiyAM 20 102 2 pratipattiyAM 2
pratipattiyAM' 20 103 2 pratipattiyAM 96 pratipattiyAM bahuzrutoM kA kartavya .
upAMgadvaya meM uddhRta pratipattiyoM ke sthala nirdeza karanA, pramANabhUta
grantha se pratipatti kI mUla vAkyAvalI dekara anya mAnyatA kA nirasana karanA
aura svamAnyAtAoM kA yuktisaMgata pratipAdana karanA ityAdi Adhunika paddhati kI
sampAdana prakriyA se sampanna karake upAMgadvaya ko prastuta krnaa| athavA -
kisI zodhasaMsthAna ke mAdhyama se candra-sUryaprajJapti para vistRta
zodhanibandha likhvaanaa| kisI yogya zramaNa-zramaNI yA vidvAn ko zodhanibandha
likhane ke liye utsAhita krnaa| zodhanibandha-lekhana ke liye Avazyaka granthAdi
kI vyavasthA krnaa| zodhanibandha lekhaka kA sammAna krnaa| ye saba zrutasevA ke
mahAn kArya haiN| eka vyApaka bhrAnti donoM upAMgoM ke dasaveM prAbhRta ke
satarahaveM prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM pratyeka nakSatra kA pRthaka-pRthaka bhojana-
vidhAna hai| inameM mAMsa bhojana ke vidhAna bhI haiN| inheM dekhakara sAmAnya
svAdhyAyI ke mana meM eka AzaMkA utpanna hotI hai| 1. (ka) ina pratipattiyoM ke
pUrva ke praznasUtra vicchinna haiN| (kha) ina pratipattiyoM ke bAda svamata-
pratipAdaka sUtrAMza bhI vicchinna haiN| upAMgadvaya ke saMkalanakartA ne
pratipattiyoM ke jitane uddharaNa diye haiM, unake pramANabhUta mUla granthoM ke
nAma, granthakAroM ke nAma, adhyAya, zloka, sUtrAMka Adi nahIM diye haiN| [ 19 ]

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
These two Upangas are Agamas - how are the rules of meat eating in them? This
question has been unanswered since time immemorial. The commentator of Surya
Prajnapti, Malayagiri, has also not given any explanation or clarification
regarding these rules of meat eating. He has explained the food rules of one
Krittika constellation and informed that the food rules of the remaining
constellations are to be understood as the same as Krittika. Regarding not
explaining the food rules of the remaining constellations, it is speculated that
- what should be the explanation of the words "meat eaters"? Or, would it not
have been appropriate for them to imagine that meat eaters are actually plant
eaters? Or, was there no such traditional belief at that time? Late revered Shri
Ghasilal Ji Maharaj has proved this food formula to be interpolated and has also
proved some meat-free foods to be plant-free foods. These two acts are
contradictory to each other. If this formula of constellation food is
interpolated, then what is the benefit of proving meat-free foods to be plant-
based foods? Because the formulators of Surya Prajnapti cannot formulate a
careful method for the achievement of worldly tasks and it is certain that the
Ganadharas who weave the Sutra Agamas do not use such misleading words.
Therefore, our learned scholars should declare a unanimous decision regarding
this formula. In Jain Agamas, the order of constellation calculation starts from
Abhijit and ends at Uttaraashada. In this formula of the present Prabhruta, the
order of constellations starts from Krittika and ends at Bharani. This order of
constellation calculation is also present in many available astrological texts -
therefore, it is clear that the present 1. The compiler of Chandra-Surya-
Prajnapti, Shrutadhar Sthavir, has presented five different beliefs of the order
of constellation calculation and formulated his own belief. Presentation of five
other beliefs - the order of calculation of twenty-eight constellations - 1.
From Krittika constellation to Bharani constellation 28 constellations 2. From
Magha constellation to Ashlesha constellation 28 constellations 3. From
Dhanishtha constellation to Shravana constellation 28 constellations 4. From
Ashwini constellation to Revati constellation 28 constellations 5. From Bharani
constellation to Ashwini constellation 28 constellations Formulation of own
belief - From Abhijit constellation to Uttaraashada constellation 28
constellations. - Chandra-Surya-Prajnapti, Dasham Prabhruta, Saptadasham
Prabhruta-Prabhruta, Su. 32 This order of constellation calculation clearly
shows that the constellation food rules presented in Dasham Prabhruta and
Saptadasham Prabhruta-Prabhruta are not the compiler's own belief. The surprise
is that the translators etc. of the edited and published Chandra-Surya
Prajnaptis have not written any explanation in this regard and have not shown
the courage to remove this widespread misconception. [ 20 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ye donoM upAMga Agama haiM - inameM ye mAMsa bhojana ke vidhAna kaise haiM ?
yaha AzkA ajJAtakAla se calI A rahI hai| sUryaprajJapti ke vRttikAra malayagiri
ne bhI ina mAMsabhojanavidhAnoM ke saMbaMdha meM kisI prakAra kA UhApoha yA
spaSTIkaraNa nahIM kiyA hai| eka kRttikA nakSatra ke bhojana vidhAna kI vyAkhyA
karake zeSa nakSatroM ke bhojana kRttikA ke samAna samajhane kI sUcanA dI hai|
zeSa nakSatroM ke bhojana vidhAnoM kI vyAkhyAe~ na karane ke saMbaMdha meM yaha
kalpanA hai ki - mAMsavAcI zabdoM kI vyAkhyA kyA kI jAya ? athavA mAMsavAcI
bhojanoM ko vanaspativAcI siddha karane kI kalpanA karanA unheM ucita nahIM lagA
hogA ? yA usa samaya aisI koI paramparAgata dhAraNA na rahI hogI? sva. pUjya zrI
ghAsIlAla jI ma. ne isa bhojana sUtra ko prakSipta siddha kiyA hai aura katipaya
mAMsaniSpanna bhojanoM ko vanaspatiniSpanna bhojana bhI siddha kiyA hai| ye
dAnoM paraspara virodhI kArya haiN| nakSatra bhojana kA yaha sUtra yadi
prakSipta hai to mAMsaniSpanna bhojanoM ko vanaspatyAdi niSpanna bhojana siddha
karane se lAbha hI kyA hai ? kyoMki sUryaprajJapti ke prarUpaka laukika kAryoM
kI siddhi ke liye sAvadha vidhi kA prarUpaNa hI nahIM kara sakate aura
sUtrAgamoM kA guMthana karane vAle gaNadhara aise bhrAmaka zabdoM kA prayoga bhI
nahIM karate, yaha nizcita hai| isaliye hamAre bahuzrutoM ko isa sUtra ke
saMbaMdha meM sarvasammata nirNaya ghoSita karanA hI caahiye| jainAgamoM meM
nakSatra gaNanA kA krama abhijita se prArambha ho kara uttarASAr3hA paryanta kA
hai| prastuta prAbhRta ke isa sUtra meM nakSatroM kA krama kRttikA se prArambha
ho kara bharaNIparyanta kA hai|' uplabdha aneka jyotiSa granthoM meM bhI yaha
nakSatra gaNanA kA krama vidyamAna hai - ata: yaha spaSTa hai ki prastuta 1.
candra-sUrya-prajJapti ke saMkalanakartA zrutadhara sthavira ne nakSatra gaNanA
krama kI pA~ca vibhinna mAnyatAoM kA nirUpaNa karake svamAnyatA kA prarUpaNa
kiyA hai| pA~ca anya mAnyatAoM kA nirUpaNa - aTThAIsa nakSatroM kA gaNanAkrama -
1. kRttikA nakSatra se bharaNI nakSatra paryanta 28 nakSatra 2. maghA nakSatra
se azleSA nakSatra paryanta 28 nakSatra 3. dhaniSThA nakSatra se zravaNa
nakSatra paryanta 28 nakSatra 4. azvinI nakSatra se revatI nakSatra paryanta 28
nakSatra 5. bharaNI nakSatra se azvinI nakSatra paryanta 28 nakSatra svamAnyatA
kA prarUpaNa - abhijita nakSatra se uttarASAr3hA nakSatra paryanta 28 nakSatra
/  - candra-sUrya-prajJapti, dazama prAbhUta, prathama prAbhRta-prAbhRta, sU. 32
nakSatra gaNanA ke isa krama ke vidhAna se yaha spaSTa hai ki dazama prAbhRta va
saptadazama prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM nirupita nakSatrabhojanavidhAna sUryaprajJapti
ke saMkalanakartA kI svamAnyatA kA nahIM hai| Azcarya yaha hai ki aba taka
sampAdita evaM prakAzita candra-sUrya prajJaptiyoM ke anuvAdakoM Adi ne isa
saMbaMdha meM spaSTIkaraNa likha kara vyApaka bhrAnti ke nirAkaraNa ke liye
satsAhasa nahIM kiyaa| [ 20 ]

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Nakshatra Bhojan Vidhan sequence is quoted from another astrological text.
According to the compilation style of these two sub-texts, the principle of
self-acceptance would have come after other beliefs, which is believed to have
been disrupted by the influence of the odd time. Ordinary intellectuals have
been very careless in accepting this Nakshatra Bhojan Vidhan and the Nakshatra
Ganana Kram as self-agreed. Due to this single thread, many miraculous things
have been said about the two sub-texts, spreading misconceptions. No one with
great knowledge has ever tried to solve this problem by understanding their
responsibility to eliminate these misconceptions. As a result, the study of
these sub-texts has also stopped. Comparative thinking of Chandra-Surya
Prajnapti and other astrological texts Nakshatra institution in the eighth
Praabhrut-Praabhrut of the tenth Praabhrut 1. Nakshatra, star number in the
ninth Praabhrut-Praabhrut Nakshatra Swami-Devatas In Chandra-Surya Prajnapti, in
the twelfth Praabhrut-Praabhrut of the tenth Praabhrut, the names of the
Nakshatra Devatas are mentioned in Sutra 46. In the Nakshatra Prakaran of
Muhurta Chintamani, the names of the Nakshatra Devatas are mentioned. The
depiction of Nakshatra Devatas in both is completely acceptable. Only the
difference is in the sequence of Nakshatra calculation. Similarly, in the
thirteenth Praabhrut-Praabhrut of the tenth Praabhrut, the names of thirty
Muhurtas, in the fourteenth Praabhrut-Praabhrut, the names of fifteen days and
nights, in the fifteenth Praabhrut-Praabhrut, the names of day and night Tithis,
in the sixteenth Praabhrut-Praabhrut, the names of Nakshatra Gotras, in the
seventeenth Praabhrut-Praabhrut, the rules of Nakshatra Bhojan. All the above
mentioned topics are available in Brihad Daivajnarajanam, Muhurta Martanda etc.
texts. Kulmasha, Til, Tandula, and also Masha, Gavyam, Tvajya, Dugdham, Atha
Enam, Mansam, Aparam, Tasyaiva Raktam, Tadatpayasam, Cha Apalalam, Marg, Shash,
Shashtivayam, Priya Gvapupam, Athava Chitraandajan, Satphalam. Kaurma, Sarika,
Godhika, Cha Palalam, Shalya, Havishyam, Haya. Ghrukshe Syan Krusharannam
Udampina Pishtam Yavanaan Tatha. Matsyannm Khalu Chinim Athava Dadhyakrumevam
Kramat. Bhakshyabhakshyam Idam Vicarya Matimaan Bhakshet Tathaa Alokayet. [ 21 ]
Dadhi. Tatha. Tatha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nakSatrabhojanavidhAna kA krama anya kisI jyotiSa grantha se 'uddhRta hai| ina
upAMgadvaya kI saMkalana zailI ke anusAra anya mAnyatAoM ke bAda svamAnyatA kA
sUtra rahA hogA, jo viSamakAla ke prabhAva se vichinna ho gayA hai - aisA
anumAna hai| sAmAnya manISiyoM ne isa nakSatrabhojanavidhAna ko aura
nakSatragaNanAkrama ko svasammata mAnane kI bahuta bar3I asAvadhAnI kI hai| isI
eka sUtra ke kAraNa upAMgadvaya ke saMbaMdha meM aneka camatkAra kI bAteM kaha
kara bhrAMtiyAM phailAI gaI haiN| ina bhrAMtiyoM ke nirAkaraNa ke liye Ajataka
kisI bhI bahuzruta ne apane uttaradAyitva ko samajhakara samAdhAna karane kA
prayatna nahIM kiyA hai| isakA pariNAma yaha huA ki ina upAMgoM kA svAdhyAya
honA bhI baMda ho gyaa| candra-sUryaprajJapti aura anya jyotiSa granthoM kA
tulanAtmaka cintana dazama prAbhRta ke aSTama prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM nakSatra
saMsthAna 1. navam prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM nakSatra, tArA saMkhyA nakSatra svAmI-
devatA candra-sUrya prajJapti meM dazama prAbhRta ke bArahaveM prAbhRta-
prAbhRta ke sUtra 46 meM nakSatra devatAoM ke nAma haiM  /  muhUrtaciMtAmaNi ke
nakSatra prakaraNa meM nakSatra devatAoM ke nAma haiM 1 ina donoM ke nakSatra
devatA nirUpaNa meM sarvathA mAnya hai| kevala nakSatra gaNanA krama kA aMtara
hai| isI prakAra dazama prAbhRta ke terahaveM prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM tIsa
muhUrtoM ke nAma, caudahaveM prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM pandraha dinoM ke aura
rAtriyoM ke nAma, pandrahaveM prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM divasa tithiyoM aura rAtri
tithiyoM ke nAma, solahaveM prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM nakSatra gotroM ke nAma,
sattarahaveM prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM nakSatra bhojanoM ke vidhAna  /  vRhad
daivajJaraMjanam, muhUrtamArtaNDa Adi granthoM meM Upara aMkita sabhI viSaya
upalabdha haiN| kulmASAMstilatAMDulAnapi tathA mASAMzca gavyaM tvAjyaM
dugdhamathaiNamAMsamaparaM tasyaiva raktaM tadatpAyasameva cApapalalaM mArga ca
zAzaM SaSTivayaM ca priyagvapUpamathavA citrANDajAna satphalam  //  kaurmaM
sArikagodhikaM ca palalaM zAlyaM haviSyaM hayA  /  ghRkSe
syAnkRsarAnnamudamapinA piSTaM yavAnAM tathA  //  matsyAnnaM khalu cinimathavA
dadhyakRmevaM kramAt  /  bhakSyAbhakSyamidaM vicArya matimAn
bhakSettathA''lokayet  //  [ 21 ] dadhi  /  tathA  // . tathA  /

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Anandānubhūti  I am experiencing great Anandānubhūti in this great Yajna of
Śruta Seva, with the courteous and wise support of Śrī Vinay Muni Ji and others.
I wish for the success of the saṃyama sādhanā of all the collaborators.
**Ātmaśodhana** - Wherever there may be any error or inconsistency in the
editing of the Sūryaprajñapti, due to inadvertence, the Āgamajña Bahuśruta
should correct it and study it carefully, and send useful suggestions for the
next publication.  **Sahkāra Sābhār Svīkāra**  The mathematics department has
provided valuable assistance by writing a concise commentary on some of the
sūtras of the Sūryaprajñapti. This was done by Śrī Mahendraṛṣi Ji, a disciple of
Ācārya Pravara Śrī Kāntiṛṣi Ji M.Sā. of the Khambhāt Sampradāya, who is a
scholar of Nyāya literature and grammar.  Pandit Śrī Śobhācandra Ji Bhārill has
actively contributed to the editing of this edition by providing many useful
suggestions from time to time.  Śrī Rudradeva Ji Tripāṭhi has written the
introduction to the Sūryaprajñapti, inspiring inquisitive astrologers to study
it.  The knowledgeable members of the Āgama Samiti have distributed this edition
among inquisitive people, ensuring the success of my efforts.  31 January '89 [
22 ] - A. Pra. Muni Kanhaiyalal 'Kamal' Śrī Vardhamāna Mahāvīra Kendra, Ābū
Parvat - 307501

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AnandAnubhUti zrutasevA ke isa mahA yajJa meM zrI vinaya muni jI Adi ke
savinaya saviveka vividha sahayogoM se adhika AnandAnubhava kara rahA hU~ aura
sabhI sahayogiyoM kI saMyama sAdhanA saphala ho yaha kAmanA kara rahA hU~  /
Atmazodhana - sUryaprajJapti ke saMpAdana meM jahA~ kahIM pramAdavaza kucha bhI
viparIta yA asaMgata huA ho to AgamajJa bahuzruta sudhAra kara svAdhyAya kareM
aura AgAmI prakAzana ke liye upayogI sujhAva preSita kareM  /  sahakAra sAbhAra
svIkAra sUryaprajJapti ke katipaya sUtroM se saMbaMdhita gaNita vibhAga kA
saMkSsipta vivecana khambhAta sampradAya ke AcArya pravara zrI kAntiRRSi jI ma.
sA. ke praziSya sva. zrI mahendraRSi jI nyAya sAhitya - vyAkaraNAcArya ne likha
kara hArdika sahayoga kiyA hai| paMDita sAhaba zrI zobhAcandra jI bhArilla ne
samaya samaya para aneka upayogI sujhAva de kara prastuta saMskaraNa ke
sampAdana meM sakriya sahayoga kiyA hai| zrI rudradeva jI tripAThI ne
sUryaprajJapti kI prastAvanA likha kara jijJAsu jyotirvidoM ko sUryaprajJapti ke
svAdhyAya ke liye prerita kiyA hai| Agama samiti ke sUtradhAra sajjana jJAvakoM
ne mere zrama kI saphalatA ke liye jijJAsu janoM meM isa saMskaraNa ko vitarita
kiyA hai| 31 janavarI' 89 [ 22 ] - a. pra. muni kanhaiyAlAla 'kamala' zrI
vardhamAna mahAvIra kendra, AbU parvata - 307501

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction (From the First Edition) Dr. Rudradeva Tripathi Sanskrit and
Hindi Literature, Philosophy and Yoga Acharya, M.A. (Sanskrit and Hindi), Ph.D.,
D.Litt. Director Birla Research Center, Ujjain (M.P.)  1. **Dharma Triveni and
its Universally Accepted Literature** The Jain, Brahman and Buddhist Acharyas,
who preserved the knowledge-filled pitcher of the great sages and renounced ones
of India, and distributed its nectar-like drops for the welfare of all beings,
have promoted a religious/universally accepted literature whose equality is not
found in any other literature in the world. This universally accepted
literature, which illuminates the inner being of every individual with the rays
of divine light emanating from the Jain Agamas, Brahman Vedas and Buddhist
Pitakas, was taught by our forefathers with pure intentions and a spirit of
public welfare. This is why it has been assimilated into society with complete
faith for a long time, is being assimilated now, and will continue to be
assimilated for a long time to come. This literature, which preserves the
totality of the eternal truths of religion, bestows glory upon India, inspires
all humanity to see the truth, guides them on the right path, teaches them the
wisdom of duty and non-duty, and helps them to reach the goal of becoming a
pilgrim on the path of liberation, free from worldly attachments.  2. **One
Goal: 'Liberation' and its Gradual Context** Despite the diversity of language,
sentiment, expression, the speaker, the seer, and the multiplicity of listeners
and collectors, the inner teachings of the Agamas, Vedas, and Tripitakas are
undeniably united. The core principles of these teachings - 1. Karma and its
consequences, 2. The bondage of the world, and 3. Liberation, primarily fulfill
one goal: the attainment of liberation through the destruction of all karmas.
Whose liberation is desired? This question naturally arises in the context of
liberation. All philosophers have the same answer: 'The soul's'. This answer
naturally leads to the question, 'What is the soul?'. Then all philosophers
presented their own processes of 'self-reflection' in this regard. The
presenters of these processes established a long tradition in Indian literature,
and Jain, Buddhist, Vedic, and many other thinkers presented them with great
maturity and seriousness. Due to the multiplicity of traditional distinctions
like theistic and atheistic, Charvaka, while accepting only direct experience as
evidence, advocated 'Bhutatmavada and Dehatmavada'  1. Puuvakammakhayaṭṭhae imaṁ
dehaṁ ............। - Utt. A. 6, Ga. 13. [ 23 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA (prathama saMskaraNa se) DaoN. rudradeva tripAThI sAhitya-sAMkhya-
yogadarzanAcArya, ema. e. (saMskRta evaM hindI), pI-eca. DI., DI. liT. nidezaka
brajamohana bir3alA zodha kendra, ujjaina (ma.pra.) 1. dharmatriveNI aura usakA
sarvamAnya sAhitya bhArata ke siddha tapasvI mantradraSTA maharSi aura mahAn
tyAgI-virAgiyoM dvArA pradatta jJAnapIyuSa ke kalaza ko surakSita rakhate hue
usakI amRta-binduoM ko prANImAtra ke kalyANa ke liye vitarita karane vAle jaina,
brAhmaNa evaM bauddhAcAryoM ne jisa dhArmika / sarvamAnya sAhitya ko puraskRta
kiyA, usakI samatA vizva ke samakSa kisI anya sAhitya meM upalabdha nahIM hotI
hai| jaina Agama, brAhmaNa-veda tathA bauddha piTaka' ke rUpa meM vyApta divya-
prakAza kI kiraNoM se jana-jana ke antara ko ujjavala banAne vAle isa sarvamAnya
sAhitya kA hamAre pUrvAcAryoM ne vizuddha bhAva se loka kalyANa kI bhAvanA se hI
upadiSTa kiyA thA, yahI kAraNa hai ki yaha sudIrgha kAla se pUrNa zraddhA ke
sAtha samAja meM AtmasAt huA hai, ho rahA hai aura cirakAla taka hotA rhegaa|
dharma ke sanAtana-satyoM kI samaSTi ko cira-sthira rakhane vAlA yaha sAhitya
bhArata ko gaurava pradAna karAtA hai, mAnava-mAtra ko satya ke darzana kI
preraNA detA hai, samucita mArga kA nirdeza karatA hai, kartavyAkartavya kA
viveka sikhAtA hai aura sAMsArika-prapaMcoM se mukta hokara mokSa-patha kA
pathika banane ke lakSya taka pahuMcAtA hai| 2. eka lakSya 'mokSa-prApti' aura
usake kramika sandarbha bhASA, bhAva, kathana kI vividhatA, vaktA kI aura draSTA
kI bhinnatA evaM zrotA-saMgrahakartA Adi kI anekatA ke rahate hue bhI 'Agama,
veda athavA tripiTakoM ke Antarika upadezoM meM aikya nitAnta susiddha hai|
samAna tAttvika siddhAntoM ke hArdatattva - 1. karma-vipAka, 2. saMsAra-bandhana
aura 3. mukti, mukhyataH eka hI dhyeya kI pUrti karate haiM, vaha hai -
sarvakarmoM kA kSaya karake mokSa kI prApti  /  mokSa kisakA apekSita hai? yaha
prazna mokSa-prApti ke prasaMga meM sahaja uThatA hai to isakA sabhI
darzanakAroM kA eka hI uttara hotA hai 'AtmA kaa'| isa uttara se 'AtmA kyA hai
?' yaha prazna uThanA bhI svAbhAvika ho gayA, taba sabhI darzanakAroM ne isa
saMbaMdha meM apanI-apanI dRSTi se 'Atma-cintana' kI prakriyAe~ prastuta kii|
ina prakriyAoM ke prastotAoM kI bhAratIya-vAGmaya meM eka sudIrgha paramparA
pravartita huI aura jaina, bauddha evaM vaidika tathA inake avAntara aneka
cintakoM ne atyanta praur3hatA evaM gambhIratA ke sAtha ve upasthApita kii|
Astika aura nAstika jaise paramparA-poSaka bhedoM kI bahulatA ke kAraNa cArvAka
ne jahAM pratyakSa ko hI pramANa mAnakara 'bhUtAtmavAda aura dehAtmavAda' 1.
puvvakammakhayATThae imaM dehaM ............ /  - utta. a. 6,gA. 13. [ 23 ]

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The very birth of the concept of the soul gave rise to subtle theories like
'Mind-Soulism', 'Sense-Soulism' (which includes 'Single-Sense-Soulism' and
'Collective-Sense-Soulism'), 'Life-Soulism', 'Son-Soulism', and 'Self-Soulism'.
Similarly, Vedic thinkers, through the Vedas, Brahmanas, Aranyakas, Upanishads,
Nyaya-Vaisheshika, Sankhya-Yoga, Mimamsa, and Advaita Vedanta, engaged in
various speculative inquiries about the soul, leading to detailed discussions on
numerous elements like 'Dharma', 'Chetan', 'Karma', 'Dev', 'Maya', 'Brahma',
'Jiva', 'Jad', 'Purusha', 'Prakriti', etc.  In Jain philosophy, taking into
account the etymology of 'Atma' as 'Ati/Gachhati iti Atma' (meaning 'that which
goes'), the grammatical convention of interpreting the verb 'Gaman' (to go) as
'Jnana' (knowledge) is accepted. This leads to the interpretation that 'Atma' is
that which 'abides in qualities like knowledge, etc., or exists in totality with
the triad of 'Utpada' (production), 'Vyaya' (destruction), and 'Dhrauvya'
(stability).  Jain philosophers have considered the soul from numerous
perspectives, which is why Jain philosophy is also known as 'Anekanta Darshan'
(philosophy of many-sidedness). The primary characteristic of the soul is its
'Chaitanya Swaroop' (conscious nature). According to Jainism, other
characteristics include: 'Chaitanya Swaroop: Parinama Karma Karta Sakshat Bhokta
Deha Parimaan: Pratikshetra Bhinna: Paudgalikadrishtavanchayam' (Conscious,
transformative, doer, direct experiencer, having a body, different in each
field, and possessing perception of matter).  The synonym for 'Atma' is 'Jiva',
and its fundamental analysis is as follows:  Jain philosophy's 'Atma Shastra'
(science of the soul) is extremely subtle and its examination is entirely
scientific. While various philosophers acknowledge the existence of the soul,
some do not accept its 'plurality, eternality, or agency-liberation, etc.'
However, Jain philosophy considers the soul to be eternal and indestructible.
Regarding the existence of the soul, Vardhaman Mahavira, through the sutra 'Jivo
Uvago Lakkhano', has shown the path to its identification.  Jain scholars use
the term 'Jiva' as a synonym for the soul, which signifies life, vital force,
and consciousness. The soul is called 'Jiva' because it possesses the quality of
life in all three times (past, present, and future). Based on 'life', ten types
of 'Pran' (vital breaths) are described. This is a practical perspective. From
the perspective of certainty, anything that possesses 'Chetana' (consciousness)
is 'Jiva'. According to Jain philosophy, the characteristic of 'Jiva' is
'Upayoga' (function). Function is the consequential result of consciousness. It
has two divisions: 'Jnana' (knowledge) and 'Darshan' (perception), and the
holder of both is called 'Jiva'. Like inanimate matter, 'Jiva' also has
'Pradesh' (region) and 'Avayava' (parts), which is why it is called 'Astikaya'
(having a body).  There is continuous transformation within it, yet it does not
abandon its original form/qualities. The synonyms 'Utpada', 'Vyaya', and
'Dhrauvya' are always found in it. Due to these reasons, 'Jiva' is:  Utt. A. 28,
Ga. 11 1. (a) Nana cha Dansana cha Charitta cha Tavo taha. Viriyam Uvago ya eyam
Jivassa Lakkhanam || (b) Brihad Dravya Sangrah - 57 Pramananaya-Tattvalok, 7-56
3. a. Utt. A. 28, Ga. 10 b. Upayogo Lakshanam - Tattvarth Sutra A. 2, Su. 8
Tattvarth Rajavartika, 147 5. Tattvarth Rajavartika, 281 6. Utpada Vyaya
Dhrauvya Yuktam Sat. - Tattvarth Sutra A. 5, Su. 29 [ 24 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ko janma diyA vahIM unake sUkSma rUpa se 'mana-AtmavAda, indriyAtmavAda
(ekendriyAtmavAda tathA samUhAtmavAda), prANAtmavAda, putrAtmavAda,
arthAtmavAda' ke siddhAnta bhI ubhara aaye| isI prakAra vaidika-vicArakoM meM
veda, brAhmaNa, AraNyaka, upaniSad, nyAya-vaizeSika, sAMkhya-yoga, mImAMsA evaM
advaita vedAnta ke dvArA bhI vibhinna UhApoha-pUrvaka AtmA kI khoja meM 'dharma,
cetana, karma, deva, mAyA, brahma, jIva, jar3a, puruSa, prakRti' Adi aneka
tattvoM kI sAGgopAGga mImAMsA kI gii| jaina-darzana meM 'atati/gacchati iti
AtmA' isa vyutpatti ko lakSya meM rakhakara, gamanArthaka dhAtu ko jJAnArthaka
bhI .. mAnane kI vyAkaraNa-sammata vyavasthA ko svIkRta karate huye yaha vyAkhyA
prastuta kI ki jo 'jJAna Adi guNoM meM AsAmantAt rahatA hai, athavA utpAda,
vyaya aura dhauvyarUpa trika ke sAtha samagra rUpa meM rahatA hai, vaha AtmA
hai|" jainadarzanakAroM ne AtmA ke saMbaMdha meM aneka dRSTiyoM se vicAra kiyA
hai, isIliye jainadarzana kA apara nAma 'anekAntadarzana' bhI prasiddha hai|
'caitanyasvarUpa' yaha AtmA kA mukhya vizeSaNa hai| jaina matAnusAra anya
vizeSaNa isa prakAra hai - 'caitanyasvarUpaH pariNAmI kartA sAkSAd bhoktA
dehaparimANaH pratikSetraM bhinnaH paudgalikAdRSTavAMzcAyam  /  3. AtmA kA
paryAya 'jIva' tathA usakA maulika vizleSaNa jainadarzana kA 'AtmazAstra'
atyanta sUkSma hai| isakI vicAraNA sampUrNa vaijJAnika hai| vibhinna darzanakAra
AtmA kA astitva to mAnate haiM kintu unameM se kucha AtmA kA 'anekatva, nityatva
athavA kartRtva-mokSAdi' nahIM mAnate haiM kintu jainadarzana meM AtmA ko nitya
aura avinAzI mAnA gayA hai| AtmA ke astitva ke bAre meM 'jIvo uvaogalakkhaNo'
sUtra dvArA vardhamAna mahAvIra ne usakI pahacAna kA mArga dikhalAyA hai| jaina
zAstrakAra AtmA ke paryAya rUpa meM 'jIva' zabda kA prayoga karate haiM aura
vaha jIvana, prANazakti evaM cetanA kA dyotaka hai| traikAlika jIvana guNa se
yukta hone ke kAraNa AtmA kI 'jIva' saMjJA sArthaka hai| 'jIvana' ke AdhAra
dazavidha 'prANa' batalAye gaye haiN| yaha vyavahAra dRSTi hai| nizcayadRSTi se
jisameM 'cetanA' pAI jAe vaha 'jIva' hai| jIva kA lakSaNa jainadarzana ke
anusAra 'upayoga' hai| upayoga, cetanA kA anuvidhAyI pariNAma hotA hai| isake
'jJAna' aura 'darzana' nAma se do bheda haiM tathA ina donoM ke dhAraka ko
'jIva' kahate haiM  /  jIva meM acetana padArthoM kI taraha 'pradeza' aura
'avayava' bhI mAne gaye haiM, use isI kAraNa 'astikAya' kahA gayA hai| " usameM
pratikSaNa pariNamana kriyA hotI rahatI hai, phira bhI vaha apane mUlarUpa/guNa
ko nahIM chodd'taa| ye 'utpAda, vyaya aura dhauvya' ye paryAya usameM sadA pAye
jAte haiN| ina kAraNoM se jIva ko utta. a. 28,gA.11 1. (ka) nANaM ca daMsaNaM
ceva carittaM ca tavo thaa| vIriyaM uvaogo ya eyaM jIvassa lkkhnnN|| (kha) bRhad
dravyasaMgraha - 57 pramANanaya-tattvAloka, 7-56 3. ka. utta. a. 28, gA. 10 kha.
upayogo lakSaNam - tattvArthasUtra a. 2, sU.8 tattvArtharAjavArtika, 147 5.
tattvArtharAjavArtika, 281 6. utpAdavyayadhrauvyayuktaM st| - tattvArthasUtra
a.5, sU. 29 [ 24 ]

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is also considered a 'dravya'. Jiva-dravya are infinite. They are all arupa
and have the quality of being conscious, so they are constantly the doers and
experiencers of their own external and internal results, and they are also the
knowers of their own and others' results. In addition to jiva-dravya, there are
four other 'ajiva-dravya' which are devoid of consciousness and have the quality
of inertness. These are: 1. 'Dharma-astikaya' dravya, which is 'arupa' and has
the quality of 'motion-helper'. 2. 'Adharma-astikaya' dravya is also arupa and
has the quality of 'position-helper'. 3. 'Lokaloka praman 'Akasha-astikaya'
dravya is also arupa, having the quality of giving space. 4. 'Pudgala-astikaya'
dravya is a rupa dravya, which is filled with particles, regions, and atoms, and
has the nature of filling and melting, and is endowed with qualities like color,
smell, taste, and touch. 4. The need for knowledge of the 'jagat' and its form
as jiva and ajiva dravya. The omniscient and all-seeing Shri Vitrag Jineshwara
has called the entire 'jagat' a collection of jiva and ajiva dravya, and it is
also established that this 'jagat' is eternal, infinite, and 'pancha-astikaya-
maya'. Therefore, all the dravya that are seen in the 'jagat' and come in the
enjoyment and consumption of jiva dravya are all pudgala dravya, and in the
association and dissociation of the various results of the inert pudgala dravya,
those who experience happiness, sorrow, etc. in different forms are different
jiva dravya. Because inert dravya do not have the knowledge and consciousness of
experiencing happiness, sorrow, etc. Therefore, from the Jain point of view, the
entire 'jagat' is divided into two substances: jiva and ajiva, and the various
results of ajiva are directly visible. 1. P. Kai Nan Bhante 1 Athikaya Panatta?
U. Goya Ma 1 Pancha Asthikaya Panatta, Tan Jaha - 1. Dhammathikae, 2.
Adhammathikae, 3. Agasathikae, 4. Jivathikae, 5. Poggalathikae. - Viya. S. 2, U.
10, Su. 1 Although there are only five dravya in Jainism, 'Pancha-astikayo
lokah' is the sutra that proves it, however, sometimes 'kal' is considered as an
independent dravya and 'shad-dravya' is also mentioned. Davvanam Namai - P. Se
Kin Tan Davvaname? 3. Davva-name Chhavvihe Panatte, Tan Jaha - 1. Dhammathikae,
2. Adhammathikae, 3. Agasathikae, 4. Jivathikae, 5. Poggalathikae 6. Addhasamae,
A. Se Tan Davya-name. - Anu. Su. 218 Tattvarthakara has also clearly written in
the 30th sutra of the fifth chapter that 'Kalashchetyeke', i.e. some acharyas
consider kal as an independent dravya. While pancha-drashya-vadis consider 'kal'
as a synonym of jiva and ajiva. 2. (a) Duve Rasi Panatta, Tan Jaha - 1 Jivrasi
Ya, Ajivrasi Ya. - Sam. Su. 148 (b) Asthi Jiwa, Aththi Ajiwa, - Uv. Su. 56 (c)
Ke Ayan Loge? Jivaccheva, Ajivachcheva. Ke Ananta Loge? Jivaccheva,
Ajivachcheva. Ke Sasaya Loge? Jivaccheva, Ajivachcheva. - Thanam. A. 2, U. 4,
Su. 114 [ 25 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhI eka 'dravya' mAnA gayA hai| jIva-dravya ananta haiN| ve sabhI arUpI aura
caitanya guNa vAle hone se nirantara apane-apane bAhya-Abhyantara ubhaya
pariNAmoM ke kartA aura bhoktA banate haiM tathA sva-para pariNAmoM ke jJAtA bhI
haiN| jIvadravya ke atirikta anya cAra 'ajIva-dravya' bhI haiM jo caitanya-
rahita jaDatva-guNa se yukta haiN| inameM 1. dharmAstikAya' dravya hai, jo
'arUpI' aura 'gati-sahAyaka' guNa-dharma vAlA hai| 2. 'adharmAstikAya' dravya
bhI arUpI evaM sthiti-sahAyaka guNa-dharma vAlA hai| 3. lokAloka pramANa
'AkAzastikAya' dravya bhI arUpI, avakAza dene ke guNa-dharma vAlA hai| 4.
'pudgalAstikAya' dravya skandha deza-pradeza aura paramANu svarUpa se pUraNa-
galana-svabhAva vAlA aura varNa-gandha-rasa aura sparzAdi dharma se yukta hokara
rUpI dravya hai| 4. jIva tathA ajIva dravya rUpa 'jagat' aura usake jJAna kI
AvazyakatA sarvajJa evaM sarvadarzI zrI vItarAga jinezvara ne samasta jagat ko
jIva aura ajIva dravyoM kA rAzi rUpa kahA hai aura yaha bhI prarUpita hai ki
yaha jagat anAdi, ananta tathA 'paMcAstikAyamaya' hai| ata: jagat meM jo-jo
dravya dikhAI dete haiM aura vibhinna svarUpa meM jIva dravyoM ke bhoga-upabhoga
meM Ate haiM, ve sabhI pudgaladravya haiM tathA jar3a pudgala-dravyoM ke
citravicitra pariNAmoM ke saMyoga-viyogAdi meM, jisa-jisa ko bhinna-bhinna
svarUpa meM sukha-duHkhAdi kA anubhava hotA hai ye bhinna-bhinna jIva-dravya
haiN| kyoMki jar3a dravyoM meM sukha-duHkhAdi kI anubhava rUpa jJAna-cetanA
nahIM hotii| isaliye jaina dRSTi se samasta jagat jIva aura ajIva aise do
padArthoM meM vibhakta hai aura ajIva ke vividha pariNamanarUpa meM pratyakSa
dikhAI dene 1. pa. kai NaM bhaMte 1 atthikAyA paNNattA ? u. goyamA 1 paMca
asthikAyA paNNattA, taM jahA - 1. dhammatthikAe, 2. adhammatthikAe, 3.
AgAsatthikAe, 4. jIvatthikAe, 5. poggltthikaae| - viyA. sa. 2, u. 10, su. 1
yadyapi jaina zAsana meM dravya pAMca hI hai 'paMcAstikAyo lokaH' yaha sUtra
isakA pramANa hai, tathApi kahIM-kahIM 'kAla' ko svataMtra dravya mAnakara
'SaDdravya' bhI batalAye gaye haiN| davvANaM nAmAI - pa. se kiM taM davvaNAme ?
3. davva-NAme chavvihe paNNatte, taM jahA - 1. dhammatthikAe, 2. adhammatthikAe,
3. AgAsatthikAe, 4. jIvatthikAe, 5. poggalatthikAe 6. addhAsamae, a| se taM dvy-
nnaame| - aNu. su. 218 tattvArthakAra ne bhI pAMcaveM adhyAya ke 30 veM sUtra
meM spaSTa likhA hai ki 'kAlazcetyeke' arthAt kucha AcArya kAla ko bhI svataMtra
dravya mAnate haiN| jabaki paMcadraSyAvAdI 'kAla' ko jIva aura ajIva kA paryAya-
svarUpa mAnate haiN| 2. (ka) duve rAsI paNNattA, taM jahA - 1 jIvarAsI ya,
ajIvarAsI y| - sama. sU. 148 (kha) asthi jIvA, atthi ajIvA, - uva. su.56 (ga) ke
ayaM loge? jIvacceva, ajIvacceva  /  ke aNaMtA loge? jIvacceva, ajiivccev| ke
sAsayA loge? jIvacceva, ajiivccev| - ThANaM. a. 2, u. 4, sU. 114 [ 25 ]

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The entire universe in this world is real in the form of nine substances. Which
has never been created by anyone at any time, and which has never been
completely destroyed at any time, such eternal and infinite substances with the
modifications of origination, destruction, and permanence, whatever diverse
modifications occur in them due to the difference of time etc., all of them are
'self-caused' and 'caused by others'. Therefore, it is necessary to know the
true nature of the causal relationship associated with them.  The substances
like the Dharmastikayas etc. pervade the worldly space. In this very world, the
existence of the living beings is, and the living beings have been longing for
happiness and peace since time immemorial. Seeing the living beings yearning for
happiness and peace, the compassionate Arihanta Tirthankaras expound the true
path of happiness and peace, saying that 'those souls who have the desire for
happiness and peace should manifest the impulse of the desire for liberation
from the cycle of birth and death, and the state of detachment from worldly
pleasures, only then can they experience happiness and peace.'  Therefore, the
eminent speaker Sri Umaswati has also stated the means of generating impulse and
detachment, saying that - 'the nature of the world and the body is for the
purpose of impulse and dispassion.' And in the same 'Tattvartha Sutra' and
'Navatattva', the contemplation of twelve contemplations has been mentioned to
manifest the state of restraint in the soul. Among them, the contemplation of
the nature of the world is one. This contemplation of the nature of the world
can be done only when one knows the nature of the world.  The alternative term
for 'world' is 'Loka'. The meaning of Loka is also the visible and invisible
'region'. Therefore, the region in which the substances like Dharmastikayas etc.
are manifesting is also called 'Loka'. The command to know this nature of Loka
is given in the Jain scriptures and other texts. It is said in the Acarangasutra
-  "Knowing the world, one should renounce the worldly attachments."
Accordingly, the heroic renunciation of attachment to objects is prescribed only
after the knowledge of the world. In this way, the Slokavarttikara has also
insisted on knowing all the objects related to the world through description. In
fact, the knowledge of external reality along with the knowledge of internal
reality is considered necessary. Therefore, in the scriptures that are the
authority of Jains and other religious followers, the 'science of creation' is
presented in the form of religious discourse. Moreover, since it is expounded by
the omniscient Jinesvara, it is included under the 'Dharmadhayana' division,
which is one of the four divisions of the main means of liberation, where the
'contemplation on the nature and form of the world and the various islands,
regions, and oceans situated in it' is called 'Sthanavicarana-dhyana'. By
cultivating such a worldview, the soul reaches the 'Sthanavicarana-dhyana' and
then reaches the 'Sukladhyana', and by destroying the eight karmas, it attains
eternal happiness. Due to such numerous facts, the analysis of the 'position and
expansion of the world' etc. has been elaborately discussed in the Jain
scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vAlA yaha samasta jagat navatattvAtmaka svarUpa se sat hai| jisakI kisI bhI
kAla meM, kisI se utpatti nahIM huI aura jisakA kisI bhI kAla meM AmUla-sarvathA
vinAza bhI nahIM hai, aise anAdi-ananta, utpAda-vyaya-dhrauvya pariNAmI pAMcoM
astikAya dravyoM meM kAlAdi bheda se jo-jo citra-vicitra paryAya-pariNamana hote
haiM, ve sabhI 'svataH' aura 'parataH sahetuka hote haiN| ata: unase sambaddha
kArya-kAraNabhAva kA yathArtha svarUpa jAnanA Avazyaka hai| dharmAstikAyAdi
padArtha lokAkAza rUpa jagat meM hI vyApta haiN| isI jagat meM jIvoM kI sthiti
hai aura jagat ke ta jIvoM ko anAdikAla se sukha aura zAnti kI apekSA rahatI hI
AyI hai| sakha aura zAnti ke liye taDapate hae jIvoM ko sukha-zAntiA kA
vAstavika mArga batalAne kI dRSTi se hI parama karuNAmUrti arihaMta tIrthaMkara
dharmatIrtha kI prarUpaNA karate hue kahate haiM ki 'jina AtmAoM ko sukha aura
zAnti kI abhilASA ho, unheM apanI AtmA se mokSAbhilASarUpa saMvegabhAva tathA
sAMsArika sukha ke prati anAsakta bhAva rUpa nirveda prakaTa karanA cAhiye,
tabhI ve sukha-zAnti kA anubhava kara sakate haiN|' isI liye vAcakapravara zrI
umAsvAti ne bhI saMvega-nirveda kI utpatti kA upAya batalAte hue kahA hai ki -
jagat-kAyasvabhAvau ca saMvega-vairAgyArtham aura usI 'tattvArthasUtra' meM
tathA 'navatattva' meM AtmA meM saMvarabhAva prakaTa karane ke liye bAraha
bhAvanAoM ke bhAvane kI bAta kahI gaI hai| usameM loka-svabhAva-bhAvanA bhI eka
hai| yaha lokasvabhAva-bhAvanA tabhI bhAvita kara sakatA hai jabaki use loka kA
svarUpa jJAta ho| _ 'jagata' kA apara-paryAya 'loka' hai| loka kA artha
dRzyAdRzya 'kSetra' bhI hotA hai| ataH dharmAsti-kAyAdi dravya jisa AkAza meM
vilasita ho rahe haiM, usa kSetra ko bhI 'loka' kahate haiN| isI lokasvarUpa-
parijJAna karane kI AjJA jainAgama tathA anya zAstroM meM dI gaI hai| 'AcArAGga-
sUtra' meM kahA gayA hai - "vidittA logaM vaMtA logasaNNaM se maimaM
prikkmejaasi| isake anusAra lokaviSayaka jJAna ke anantara hI viSayAsakti meM
tyAga ke parAkrama nirdiSTa haiN| isa prakAra - _ 'dvIpa-samudra-parvata-kSetra-
sarita-prabhRti-vizeSaH samyak sakala-naigamAdi-nayena jyotiSAM
pravacanamalasatrairjanya-mAnena kathamapi bhAvavidabhiH sadabhiH svayaM
parvAparazAstrArtha-paryAlocanena pravacana-padArthavidapAsanena cAbhiyogAdi-
vizeSavizeSeNa vA prapaMcena parivedya iti| kathana dvArA zlokavArtikAra ne bhI
loka-viSayaka sabhI padArthoM ke jJAna karane kA Agraha kiyA hai| vastuta:
Antarika sattA ke jJAna ke sAtha bAhya-sattA kA jJAna bhI Avazyaka mAnA gayA
hai| isIliye jaina aura anyAnya sabhI dharmAnuyAyiyoM ke pramANabhUta AgamAdi
granthoM meM 'sRSTi-vijJAna' ko dharmacarcA ke rUpa meM prastuta karate hue
mAnyatA dI gaI hai| sAtha hI vijJAna ko sarvajJa jinezvara-prarUpita hone ke
kAraNa ise mokSa ke pramukha sAdhanabhUta dharma ke cAra bhedoM ke antargata
'dharmadhyAna' nAmaka bheda meM loka ke svabhAva aura AkAra evaM usameM sthita
vividha dvIpAdi, kSetra tathA samudrAdi ke svarUpa-cintana meM manoyoga
saMsthAna-vicaya' nAmaka dharmadhyAna hotA hai - aisA kahA gayA hai| isa prakAra
kI loka-bhAvanA karate hue AtmA saMsthAna-vicaya' nAmaka dharmadhyAna meM
pahu~cane se apane karmoM kA nAza kara zukladhyAna meM pahu~catA hai aura
kSapaka zreNI meM AjAne se aSTakarma kSaya karake apanI AtmA ko zAzvata sukha kA
bhAgI banAtA hai| aise aneka tathyoM ke kAraNa hI loka kI sthiti aura vistAra'
Adi kI mImAMsA jaina AgamoM meM paryApta vistAra utta. a. 28, gA. 14 1. jIvAjIvA
ya baMdho ya puNNa-pAvAsavA thaa| saMvaro nijarA mokkhosaMtee tahiyA nv|| 14  //
AcArAMgasUtra - zruta. 1, a.3, u. 1, sU. 25. tattvArthasUtra 3/70 para
zlokavArtika. 4. jJAnArNava 34/4-8 tathA haimayogazAstra 7/10-12. [ 26 ]

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the essence of the Dharma, the importance of religious discussions has always
been paramount. Therefore, in these discussions, 'folk wisdom and folk thinking'
have also been given importance. One such essential practice has supreme
spiritual significance, and that is:  "O Venerable! Is there any place in this
vast universe where this soul has not gone or will not go?" "No, it is not so, O
Venerable!" "How is it so, O Venerable?" "It is said, O Venerable, that there is
no place in this vast universe where this soul has not gone or will not go."
"Suppose, O Venerable, a man were to travel for a thousand years, and in that
time he were to pluck out one hair, two hairs, or three hairs, and were to throw
them away. Then, O Venerable, the people of that city, the inhabitants of that
city, would pluck out one hair, two hairs, or three hairs, and throw them away
for six months. Is there, O Venerable, any place in that man's journey where
there would not be a single atom of dust that would not be touched by his hair,
his breath, his play, his roar, his walk, his bile, his feces, his urine, his
blood, his skin, his hair, his horns, his hooves, his nails, or his sweat?" "No,
it is not so, O Venerable!"  "Suppose, O Venerable, a man were to travel for a
thousand years, and in that time he were to pluck out one hair, two hairs, or
three hairs, and were to throw them away. Then, O Venerable, the people of that
city, the inhabitants of that city, would pluck out one hair, two hairs, or
three hairs, and throw them away for six months. Is there, O Venerable, any
place in that man's journey where there would not be a single atom of dust that
would not be touched by his hair, his breath, his play, his roar, his walk, his
bile, his feces, his urine, his blood, his skin, his hair, his horns, his
hooves, his nails, or his sweat?" "No, it is not so, O Venerable!"  "And in this
vast universe, O Venerable, there is no place where the soul has not gone or
will not go, where the world is not without beginning, where the soul is not
eternal, where there is no abundance of karma, where there is no abundance of
birth and death."  "Therefore, O Venerable, it is said that there is no place in
this vast universe where this soul has not gone or will not go."  - Viya. S. 12,
U. 7, Su. 3/1-2.  That is to say, there is no place in this world where the soul
has not been born and died many times. In the world where humans are born,
through self-knowledge, they begin to think, "In every part of this world, I
have been born and died many times. Therefore, I must be liberated from this
cycle of birth and death." This awareness makes them familiar with various
virtues and vices, good deeds and bad deeds, and by understanding their nature,
they become determined to abstain from bad deeds and engage in good deeds, thus
securing their safe destination. If the scriptures did not describe the entire
world and the islands, etc., located on the earth, the soul would remain
ignorant of its own nature and would not be able to achieve liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 e eo se huI hai, usake mUla meM dharmabodha kI hI pradhAnatA rahI hai aura
isaliye dhArmika carcAoM meM sarvatra 'lokavijJAna, lokacintana' ko bhI mahattva
milA hai| aisI eka Avazyaka caryA kA AdhyAtmika mahattva sarvopari hai aura vaha
hai - eyaMsi NaM bhaMte ! emahAlayaMsi logaMsi asthi kei paramANupoggalatte vi
paese jattha NaM ayaM jIve na jAe vA, na mae vA vi? no iNaDhe smtthe| se
keNaDheNaM bhaMte ! evaM vuccai - 'eyaMsi NaM emahAlayaMsi logaMsi natthi keI
paramANupoggalamatte vi paese jattha NaM ayaM jIve Na jAe vA na mae vA vi?'
goyamA! se jahAnAmae kei purise ayAsahassassa egaM mahaM ayAvayaM karejA, se NaM
tattha jahaNNeNaM ekkaM vA do vA tiNNi vA, ukkoseNaM ayAsahassaM pakkhivejjA,
tAo NaM tattha pauragoyarAo paurapANiyAo, jahaNNeNaM egAhaM vA, duyAhaM vA,
tiyAhaM vA, ukkoseNaM chammAse privsejjaa| atthi NaM goyamA! tassa ayAvassa keyi
paramANupoggalamette vi paese je NaM tAsiM ayANaM uccAreNa vA pAsavaNeNa vA
kheleNa vA siMghANaeNa vA vaMteNa vA pitteNa vA pUraNa vA sukkeNa vA soNieNa vA
cammehi vA romehi vA siMgehi vA khurehiM vA nahehiM vA aNokkaMtapuvve bhavai ?
u. No iNaThe smtthe| hojjA vi NaM goyamA! tassa ayAvayassa keyi
paramANupoggalamatte vi paese je NaM tAsiM ayANaM uccAreNaM vA jAva nahehiM vA
aNokkaMtapuvve no ceva NaM eyaMsi emahAlayaMsi logaMsi logassa ya sAsayabhAvaM,
saMsArassa ya aNAdibhAvaM, . jIvassa ya niccabhAvaM kammabahuttaM jammaNa-
maraNAbAhullaM ca paDucca natthi keyi paramANapoggalamatte vi paese - 'jattha
NaM ayaM jIve na jAe vA, mae vA vi|' se teNaTheNaM goyamA! vuccai - 'eyaMsi NaM
emahAlayaMsi logaMsi natthi kei paramANupoggalamatte vi paese jattha NaM ayaM
jIve NaM jAe vA na mae vA vi|' -viyA. sa. 12, u. 7,su.3/1-2. arthAt isa loka kA
aisA koI pradeza nahIM hai, jahA~ aneka bAra jIva utpanna huA aura marA nhiiN|
jisa loka meM mAnava utpanna huA hai, usake svarUpa-parijJAna se vaha socane
lagatA hai ki 'isa loka ke pratyeka pradeza meM mere aneka bAra janma aura
maraNa hue haiM, ataH isa punaH punaH janma-maraNa ke cakra se mujhe mukta honA
caahiye|' usakI yaha jAgarukatA use vibhinna puNya-pApa, satkarma-duSkarma Adi
se paricita karAtI hai aura unake svarUpoM se paricita ho kara asatkarmoM se
nivRtti evaM satkarmapravRttipUrvaka apane nirApada gantavya kA nirdhAraNa
karane meM tatpara ho jAtA hai| yadi samasta loka tathA pRthvI para sthita
dvIpAdi kA nirUpaNa zAstroM meM nahIM hotA to jIva apane svarUpa ke paricaya se
aparicita hI raha jAtA aura vaisI [ 27 ]

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When there is no faith in self-knowledge, the possibilities of knowledge and
other virtues also disappear.  He who does not know the self, does not know the
non-self. He who does not know the self and the non-self, how can he be
restrained? || 35 ||  He who knows the self, knows the non-self. He who knows
the self and the non-self, he is not restrained. || 36 ||  He who knows both the
self and the non-self, he knows all beings in many ways. || 37 ||  He who knows
all beings in many ways, he attains merit and virtue. He who attains merit and
virtue, he knows the bondage and liberation. || 38 ||  He who knows the bondage
and liberation, he knows the divine and the human. || 39 ||  He who knows the
divine and the human, he controls the internal and external associations. || 40
||  He who controls the internal and external associations, he becomes a monk, a
renunciate. || 41 ||  He who becomes a monk, a renunciate, he attains the
supreme Dharma, the restraint of the senses. || 42 ||  He who attains the
supreme Dharma, the restraint of the senses, he purifies the karma, the
defilement. || 43 ||  He who purifies the karma, the defilement, he attains all-
pervading knowledge and vision. || 44 ||  He who attains all-pervading knowledge
and vision, he knows the world and the non-world, he becomes a Jina, a Kevali.
|| 45 ||  He who knows the world and the non-world, he becomes a Jina, a Kevali,
he renounces the world, he becomes a monk. || 46 ||  He who renounces the world,
he becomes a monk, he destroys the karma, he attains liberation. || 47 ||  He
who destroys the karma, he attains liberation, he becomes a Siddha, a liberated
soul. || 48 ||  [ 28 ] - Das. A. 4, Ga. 35-48

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sthiti meM Atma jJAna ke prati zraddhAna tathA jJAnAdi kI saMbhAvanAe~ bhI
vilupta ho jaatiiN| jo jIve vi na yANAti ajIve vi na yANati  /  jIvA'jIve
ayANaMto kahaM so nAhIi saMjamaM  //  35  //  jo jIve vi viyANAti ajIve
viviyANAti  /  jIvAjIve viyANato so hu nAhIi saMjamaM  //  36  //  jayA
jIvamajIve ya do vi ee viyANaI  /  tayA gaI bahuvihaM savvajIvANaM jANaI  //  37
//  tayA gaI bahuvihaM savvajIvANaM jAI  /  tayA puNNaM ca pAvaM ca jayA puNNaM
ca pAvaM ca tayA nivvidae bhoe je baMdhaM mokkhaM ca jANaI  //  38  //  baMdhaM
mokkhaM ca jANaI  /  divve je ya mANuse  //  39  //  jayA nivvidae bhoe je divve
je ya mANuse  /  tayA cayai saMjogaM sa'bhitara bAhiraM  //  40  //  tayA cayai
saMjogaM sabhitara bAhiraM  /  tayA muMDe bhavittANaM pavvaie aNagAriyaM  //  41
//  jayA muMDe bhavittANaM pavvaie aNagAriyaM  /  tayA saMvaramukkiTTha dhammaM
phAse aNuttaraM  // 42  //  jayA saMvaramukkiTTha dhammaM phAse aNuttaraM  /
abohikalusaM kaDaM  //  43  //  tayA dhuNai kammarayaM jayA dhuNai kammarayaM
abohikalusaM kaDaM  /  tayA savvattagaM nANaM daMsaNaM cAbhigacchaI  // 44  //
jayA savvattagaM nANaM daMsaNaM cAbhigacchaI  /  tayA logamalogaM ca jiNo jANai
kevalI  //  45  //  jayA logamalogaM ca jiNo jANai kevalI  /  tayA joge
niraMbhittA selesiM paDivajjaI  //  46  //  jayA joge niraMbhittA selesiM
paDivajjaI  /  tayA kammaM khavittANaM siddhiM gacchai nIrao  // 47 //  jayA
kammaM khavittANaM siddhiM gacchai nIrao  /  tayA logamatthayattho siddho bhavai
sAsao  //  48  //  [ 28 ] - dasa. a. 4, gA. 35-48

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
For all these reasons, knowledge of the world has been considered essential, and
the study of the Agamas has always been considered necessary for the attainment
of this knowledge. 5. The World and the 'Sun' in it - As mentioned above, the
'science of the world' has been elaborated in detail in the Jain Agamas. Its
introduction, '1. Whole, 2. Different parts and 3. Specific parts', has been
further elaborated and flourished by the Acharyas of later times in the form of
commentaries, Vittas, etc. In such literature - for the introduction of the
world 1. Acharanga Sutra 1 Shruta Skandha, 2. Adhyayan, 1 Uddeshak'. 2. Stananga
Sutra, 1 Stan. 3. Samavayanga Sutra - First Samavay. 4. Bhagavati Sutra 11
Shatak, 10 Uddeshak. in x i n bi im 1. Thus, in the world, the deluded, oh king,
who are tormented, born from time to time, bound by the knot of karma, greedy,
attached, with a confused mind, are repeatedly born again and again. 2. Place.
A. 1, Su. 5 Sam. A. 1, Su. 3. Q. Tell me, sir, 1. What is the world? A. Yes,
sir! The world is of four types, namely - 1. Dava-loka, 2. Kshetra-loka, 3.
Kala-loka, 4. Bhava-loka. Q. Sir, how many types of Kshetra-loka are there? A.
Yes, sir! There are three types, namely - 1. Ahelo-khetra-loka, 2. Tirya-loka-
khetra-loka, 3. Udda-loka-khetra-loka. Q. Sir, how many types of Ahelo-khetra-
loka are there? A. Yes, sir! There are seven types, namely - Rayan-Prabha-
Pudhavi-Ahelo-khetra-loka to Ahesattam-Pudhavi-Ahelo-khetra-loka. Q. Sir, how
many types of Tirya-loka-khetra-loka are there? A. Yes, sir! There are countless
types, namely - Jambudvipa-Tirya-loka-khetra-loka to Sayambhuramana-Samudra-
Tirya-loka-khetra-loka. Q. Sir, how many types of Udda-loka-khetra-loka are
there? A. Yes, sir! There are fifteen types, namely - Sohammakappa-Udda-loka-
khetra-loka to Achuya-Udda-loka-khetra-loka. Geveja-Vimana-Udda-loka-khetra-loka
to Anuttara-Vimana-Udda-loka-khetra-loka. Isip-Pabhara-Pudhavi-Udda-loka-khetra-
loka. - Viya. S. 11, U. 10, Su. 2-6 bi im bi im sim [ 29 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 inhIM saba kAraNo se loka saMbaMdhI jJAna atyAvazyaka mAnA gayA hai aura isa
jJAna kI upalabdhi ke liye AgamasAhitya sadaiva parizIlanIya mAnA gayA hai| 5.
loka aura usameM 'sUrya' - jaisA ki Upara batAyA gayA hai ki 'loka vijJAna' kA
nidarzana jaina-AgamoM meM vistAra se huA hai| vahIM usakA paricaya'1. samagra,
2. vibhinna aMga aura 3. aMga-vizeSa' ke rUpa meM nirdiSTa hokara uttarakAla ke
AcAryoM dvArA bhASya, vitti Adi ke rUpa meM use aura bhI pallavita evaM puSpita
kiyA gayA hai| aise sAhitya meM - loka paricaya ke liye 1. AcArAMga sUtra 1
zrutaskandha, 2. adhyayana, 1 uddeshk'| 2. sthAnAMga sUtra, 1 sthaan| 3.
samavAyAMga sUtra - prathama smvaay| 4. bhagavatIsUtra 11 zataka, 10 uddeshk| in
x i n bi im 1. iccatthaM gaDhie loe vase pamatte aho ya rAo ya paritappamANe
kAlAkAlasamuTThAyI saMjogaTThI aTThAlobhI AluMpe sahasakkAre viNiviTThacitte
ettha satthe puNo punno|| 2. ThANaM. a. 1, su. 5 sama. a. 1, su. 3 pra. kavihe
NaM bhaMte 1. loe paNNatte ? goyamA! cauvihe loe paNNatte, taM jahA - 1.
davvaloe, 2. khettaloe, 3. kAlaloe, 4. bhaavloe| khettaloe NaM bhaMte ! kaivihe
paNNatte ? u. goyamA! tivihe paNNatte, taM jahA - 1. aheloyakhettaloe, 2.
tiriyaloyakhettaloe, 3. uddddhloykhettloe| aheloyakhettaloe NaM bhaMte! kaivihe
paNNatte ? goyamA! sattavihe paNNatte, taM jahA -
rayaNappabhApuDhaviaheloyakhettaloe jAva ahesttmpuddhviaheloykhettloe|
tiriyaloyakhettaloe NaM bhaMte ! kaivihe paNNatte ? goyamA! asaMkhejaivihe
paNNatte, taM jahA - jaMbuddIvatiriyaloyakhetta loe jAva
syNbhurmnnsmuddtiriyloykhettloe| pra. uDDhaloyakhettaloe NaM bhaMte ! kaivihe
paNNatte ? goyamA! paNNarasavihe paNNatte, taM jahA -
sohammakappauDDhaloyakhettaloe jAva accuyuddddhloykhettloe|
gevejavimANauDDhaloyakhetta loe aNuttara vimaannuddddhloykhettloe|
isipbbhaarpuddhviuddddhloykhettloe| - viyA. sa. 11, u. 10,su.2-6 bi im bi im sim
[ 29 ]

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
5. Study the topics discussed in the 13th century, 4th Uddesaka, and other
relevant texts. 2. For the understanding of the size of the Lok: 1. See
Acharangasutra Shruta 1. A. 8, U. 2. The scope of inquiry regarding the Lok is
very vast. In Jain Agamas, the intended meaning of Lok is 'Rajju Lok', because
it is divided into 14 divisions, hence it is also known as 'Fourteen Rajju Lok'.
Similarly, the concept of 'Fourteen Rajju Lok' is also found and described in
Vedic scriptures. Proof of one Rajju Lok - 'If a god throws an iron ball
weighing a thousand bharas from the sky with all his might, and that iron ball
crosses as much area in six months, six days, ghari, six pal, that area is
called one Rajju Lok.' The size of the fourteen Rajju Lok is like a man standing
with both legs straight and hands placed on both sides of his waist. In Agam
literature, it is called Lok Purusha. In this, there are six substances,
including Dharma-astikaya (time substance). The Akasha-astikaya outside the Lok
is called 'Alok' because it does not have these six substances. The extent of
Alok is infinitely larger than that of Lok. There are three parts of the Lok:
'Urdhva', 'Adha' and 'Tiriyak'. In these, there is a 'Tiriyaklok' which is nine
hundred yojanas above and nine hundred yojanas below, making a total thickness
of eighteen hundred yojanas, one Rajju wide. From there, there is an 'Adholok'
of seven Rajju measure, nine hundred yojanas less, and the 'Urdhva Lok' is also
seven Rajju measure, nine hundred yojanas less. In short, this is a general
introduction to the Lok. For special knowledge, the beginning to end observation
of Ganitanuyog, 'Lok Prakash', Kshetra-samas etc. are worth seeing. 6. The light
of the Sun and its nature The light that pervades the Tiriyaklok is obtained
only from the Suns. The Suns that illuminate the divisions inside and outside
the human Lok are separate, and from this point of view, the plurality of Suns
is proved. The illuminator of this middle Lok P. Kahi Nam Bhanta! Logassa Aayam
Majjhe Panate? U. Go Yama! Imise Rayan Prabhae Pudhave, Ovasantarassa
Asankhejjai Bhaganga Ettha Van Logassa Aayam Majjhe Panate. Pr. Kahi Nam Bhanta!
Ahe Logassa Aayam Manjhe Panate? U. Go Yama! Chauthie Pakappbhaae Pudhave,
Ovasantarassa Sairagem Addham Ogaahita, Ettha Nam Ahe Logassa Aayam Manjhe
Panate. . Pr. Kahi Nam Bhanta Uddhalogassa Aayam Majjhe Panate? U. Go Yama!
Uppim Sanankumar-Mahi Daanang Kapanang Hethim Bambaloae Kappe Rithe Viman
Pathhade Ettha Nam Uddhalogassa Aayam Majjhe Panate. Pr. Kahi Nam Bhanta!
Tiriyalogassa Aayam Manjhe Panate? U. Go Yama! Jambuddive Dive Mandarassa
Pavvaya Bahumajjha Desabhaae Imise Rayan Prabhae Pudhave Uvarim Hetthille Su
Khudhug Payare Su, Etthanam Tiriyaloyamanjhe Atthap Aesie Ruye Panate, Jao Nam
Imaao Das Disao Pavahanti, Tam Jaha-Puratthima Puratthima Dahi Na Evam Jaha
Dasamasate Jav Namdhej Tti Viya, Sa, 13 U. 4 Su 10-15 2. Athiloye, Natthiloye,
Dhuleloye, Adhuleloye, Sadieloe, Anadiyaloe Sapjjavasiye Loe Apjjasie Loe,
Sukade Ti Va Dukade Ti Va Kallaane Ti Va, Paave Ti Va Sadhu Ti Va Asadhu Ti Va
Siddhi Ti Va Asiddhi Ti Va Nirae Ti Va Anirrae Ti Va. Bhasha. Shru. 9 A. 8 U. 1
Su 200 [ 30 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 5. 13 zataka, 4 uddeshk| tathA anya sUtroM meM prAsaMgika rUpa se carcita
viSayoM kA adhyayana kiyA jAye tathA2. loka ke AkAra-jJAna ke liye - 1.
AcArAMgasUtra zruta 1. a. 8, u. 2  /  draSTavya haiN| loka-viSayaka vicAraNA kA
kSetra atyaMta vistRta hai| jaina AgamoM meM loka kA abhipretArtha 'rajju loka'
hai, kyoMki yaha 14 vibhAgoM meM vibhAjita hai, ata: ise 'caudaha raju loka' ke
nAma se bhI pahacAnA jAtA hai| vaise vaidikadharmagranthoM meM bhI 'caudaha
rajju loka' kI mAnyatA evaM varNana milate haiN| eka rajju loka kA pramANa -
'koI deva eka hajAra bhAra vAle lohe ke gole ko apanI samagra zaktipUrvaka AkAza
se phaiMke aura vaha loha golaka 6 mAha, 6dina, ghar3I, 6 pala meM jitanA kSetra
lAMgha jAye utanA kSetra eka rajju loka kahalAtA hai|' caudaha rajju loka kA
AkAra donoM paira sIdhe karake kaTi ke donoM pAzvoM para hAtha rakha kara khar3e
hue puruSa ke samAna hai| Agama sAhitya meM ise loka puruSa kI saMjJA dI gaI
hai| isI meM dharmAstikAyAdi (kAla dravya, sahita) chaha dravya hai| loka ke
bAhara jo AkAzAstikAya hai, usameM ina chaha dravyoM ke na hone se use 'aloka'
kahate haiM  /  aloka kA vistAra loka kI apekSA anaMta gunA vizAla hai| loka ke
'Urdhva', 'adhaH' aura 'tiryaka ' aise tIna bhAga haiN| inameM 'ratnaprabhA' se
nau so yojana Upara tathA nau so yojana nIce isa prakAra kula aThAraha sau
yojana moTAI vAlA, eka rajju caur3A aisA 'tiryakloka' hai| vahA~ se nau sau
yojana nyUna sAta rajju pramANa 'adholoka' hai aura 'Urdhva loka ' bhI nau sau
yojana nyUna sAta rajju pramANa hai| saMkSepa meM yaha loka kA sAmAnya paricaya
hai| vizeSa jJAna ke liye gaNitAnuyoga kA AdyopAnta avalokana 'loka prakAza',
kSetrasamAsa Adi darzanIya hai| 6. sUrya kA Aloka aura usakA svarUpa tiryakloka
meM jo prakAza vyApta hai, vaha sUryoM ke dvArA hI prApta hai| manuSya loka ke
andara aura bAhara ke vibhAgoM ko prakAzita karane vAle sUrya pRthaka-pRthaka
haiM aura isa dRSTi se sUryoM kI anekatA siddha hai| isa madhya loka ke
prakAzaka pa. kahi NaM bhaMte! logassa AyAmamajhe paNNate? u. goyamA! imIse
rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe, ovAsaMtarassa asaMkhejjaibhAgaM ettha vAM logassa
AyAmamajjhe pnnnnte| pra. kahi NaM bhaMte ! ahelogassa AyAmamaNjhe paNNate? u.
goyamA! cautthIe pakappabhAe puDhavIe, ovAsaMtarassa sAiregaM addhaM ogAhitA,
ettha NaM ahelogassa AyAmamajjhe pnnnnte| . pra. kahiNaM bhaMte uDDhalogassa
AyAmamajjhe paNNate? u. goyamA! uppiM saNaMkumAra-mAhidANaM kapANaM
heThiMbaMbhaloe kappe riThe vimANapatthaDe ettha NaM uDDhalogassa AyAmamajjhe
pnnnnte| pra. kahiNaM bhaMte! tiriyalogassa AyAmamaNjhe paNNate? u. goyamA!
jambuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa bahumajjhadesabhAe imIse rayaNappabhAe
puDhavIe uvarimaheTThillesu khuDugapayaresu, etthaNaM tiriyaloyamaNjhe
aTThapaesie rUyae paNNate, jao NaM imAo dasa disAo pavahaMti, taM jahA-
puratthimA purathimadAhiNA evaM jahA dasamasate jAva nAmadheja tti viyA, sa, 13
u.4 su 10-15 2. atthiloe, Natthiloe, dhuveloe, adhuveloe, sAdieloe, anADiyaloe
sapajjavasie loe apajjasie loe, sukaDe ti vA dukaDe ti vA kallANe ti vA, pAvae
ti vA sAdhU ti vA asAdhu ti vA siddhI ti vA asiddhi ti vA nirae ti vA anirae ti
vaa| bhASA. zru. 9 a.8 u.1 su 200 [ 30 ]

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The introduction of the Sun and its associated deities, known as the Jyotishka
Devas, is described in the Agamas as follows:  The realm of the Jyotishchakra
begins 790 yojanas above the flat land of Mount Meru, located in the center of
Jambudvipa, and extends for 110 yojanas. This means the Jyotishchakra is
situated in the Madhyaloka (middle realm). Excluding 10 yojanas, the Sun's
celestial vehicles are located 800 yojanas above the flat land of Meru. The
Moon's celestial vehicles are 80 yojanas above that. From there, up to 20
yojanas, meaning a total of 900 yojanas above the flat land of Meru, are the
planets, constellations, and scattered stars. The reason for calling the group
of stars scattered is that some stars are erratic and move sometimes below the
Sun and Moon, and sometimes above them. All these Jyotishkas are also located in
the Madhyaloka.  The Jyotishkas are within the boundaries of the Manushyaloka
(human realm) and they keep moving. Therefore, they are called "Char Jyotishkas"
(moving celestial bodies). The concept of Muhurta (auspicious time), Prahar
(watch), Ahoratra (day and night), Paksha (fortnight), Masa (month), Atit
(past), Vartaman (present), and countless other time periods are based on the
movement of these Char Jyotishkas.  Beyond the boundaries of the Manushyaloka,
the celestial vehicles of the Jyotishkas are stationary. By nature, they remain
fixed in one place and do not move. Therefore, they do not rise or set, and
their light remains constant, yellow in color and extending for lakhs of
yojanas. Hence, they are called "Sthir Jyotishkas" (stationary celestial
bodies).  All Jyotishkas are divided into five groups, representing the Sun,
Moon, planets, constellations, and stars. It appears that they are constantly
moving only for the sake of human creation. Here, an explanation regarding the
multiplicity of the Sun and Moon is necessary for understanding the symbolic
nature of Jain principles. Primarily, it is believed that there are two Suns and
two Moons in Jambudvipa (Madhyaloka). The division of time is determined by the
movement of these luminous deities.  According to Jain philosophy, all visible
and invisible substances in the universe are divided into six categories of
substances, and "Kal" (time) is considered one of them. Both conscious and inert
substances are active in all three times. The only basis for determining the
time limit of the activity of the soul and the inert substance is the substance
of time. Generally, there is no independent substance called "Kal" in the
universe, but because it is extremely beneficial in relation to the
aforementioned inert and conscious substances, the scholars have also called it
a formal substance. Here, the meaning of Kal is indicative of time (seconds,
minutes, hours, days, fortnights, months, and years, etc.). If there are any
means of determining this time, they are the "Sun and Moon."  The omniscient
Tirthankara, the Supreme Being, has said that both the Sun and Moon are
countless, and there is no difference in their number. In fact, they are
"Jyotish Devas" (celestial deities) among the four types of deities. The
universe is illuminated by the light of the intricate and unique jewels in their
celestial vehicles. The jewels in the Sun's celestial vehicle cause the present
one-sensed beings to experience hot light due to the Atap Karma (karma related
to heat), and the jewels in the Moon's celestial vehicle cause the present one-
sensed beings to experience cold light due to the Udyot Karma (karma related to
light).  There are countless Suns who are the Indra (chief) of the Jyotishka
group, and the celestial vehicles of these countless Sun Indras are different.
Similarly, the celestial vehicles of the Moons are also different. Each
celestial vehicle of the Sun is carried by 16,000 Abhiyogi (servants, etc.)
deities, with 4,000 in the form of lions in the east, 4,000 in the form of
elephants in the south, 4,000 in the form of bulls in the west, and 4,000 in the
form of horses in the north. The Sun's celestial vehicles are 800 yojanas high
from the Earth and are eternal. One yojana of eternal substances is equal to
3,600 miles. The Sun and Moon are constantly spreading light in Jambudvipa and
the countless islands and oceans beyond it. As follows: [381

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUrya aura inake sahayogI anya deva, jo ki jyotiSka deva ke rUpa meM pahacAne
jAte haiM - ina sabakA paricaya AgamoM meM isa prakAra hai - jambUdvIpa ke
madhya meM sthita 'meruparvata' kI samatala bhUmi se Upara 790 yojana kI U~cAI
ke pazcAt jyotizcakra kA kSetra prArambha hotA hai jo ki 110 yojana pramANa hai
arthAt jyotizcakra kI sthiti isI madhya loka meM hai| ina 110 yojanoM meM se 10
yojana chor3akara usake Upara meru kI samatala bhUmi se 800 yojana kI U~cAI para
sUrya ke vimAna haiN| usase 80 yojana kI U~cAI para candra ke vimAna haiN| vahA~
se 20 yojana taka arthAt meru kI samatala bhUmi se 900 yojana kI U~cAI taka kI
paridhi meM graha, nakSatra aura prakIrNa tArAgaNa haiM  /  tArAsamUha ko
prakIrNa kahane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki anya katipaya tAre aniyatacArI hone se
kabhI sUrya aura, candra ke nIce bhI calate haiM tathA kabhI Upara bhii| ina
saba jyotiSkoM kI sthiti bhI isI madhya loka meM hai| manuSya loka kI sImA meM
jyotiSka haiM ve bhramaNa karate rahate haiN| isaliye unheM 'cara jyotiSka'
kahate haiN| cara jyotiSkoM kI gati kI apekSA se hI muhUrta, prahara, ahorAtra,
pakSa, mAsa, atIta, vartamAna Adi tathA saMkhyeya-asaMkhyeya Adi kAla kA
vyavahAra hai| manuSya loka kI sImA se bAhara jyotiSkoM ke vimAna sthira haiN|
svabhAvataH ve eka sthAna para sthira rahate haiM, bhramaNa nahIM krte| ata:
unakA udaya-asta na hone se unakA prakAza bhI eka samAna pItavarNI aura lakSa
yojana-pramANa rahatA hai| isaliye unheM 'sthira jyotiSka' kahA hai| sabhI
jyotiSka pA~ca yUthoM meM vibhAjita hote haiM aura ve sUrya, candra, graha,
nakSatra aura tArAoM kA pratinidhitva karate haiN| kevala manuSya sRSTi ke liye
hI ye satat gatizIla rahate haiM aisA pratIta hotA hai, yahA~ sUrya-candra kI
bahulatA ke saMbaMdha meM spaSTIkaraNa jaina siddhAMta kI lAkSaNikatA ke liye
Avazyaka hai| mukhyata: jambUdvIpa (madhyaloka) meM do sUrya, do candroM kA honA
mAnA jAtA hai| samaya vibhAjana ina jyotirmaya devoM kI gati se hI nirdhArita
hotA hai| jaina darzana kI dRSTi meM jagat meM vyApta dRSTa-adRSTa sabhI
padArtha jina SaD dravyoM meM vibhakta haiM unameM 'kAla' ko bhI eka dravya mAnA
hai| cetana aura jar3a pudgala tInoM kAloM meM sakriya rahate haiN| jIva tathA
pudgala kI sakriyatA kI samaya maryAdA nizcita karane kA ekamAtra AdhAra kAla-
dravya hai| sAmAnyata: jagat meM 'kAla' nAmaka koI svataMtra padArtha nahIM hai
tathApi uparyukta jar3a aura cetana padArtha ke saMbaMdha meM atyaMta upakAraka
hone se zAstrakAroM ne isako aupacArika dravya bhI kahA hai| kAla kA artha yahA~
samaya (saikaNDa, miniTa, ghanTe, dina, pakSa, mAsa aura varSa Adi) kA sUcaka
hai| isa samaya ko yadi koI bhI nizcita kara dene vAle sAdhana haiM, to ve haiM
'suury-cndr'| anantajJAnI tIrthaMkara paramAtmA ne sUrya-candra donoM hI
asaMkhya kahe haiM aura inameM paraspara tanika bhI nyUnAdhikatA nahIM hai|
vastuta: ye cAra prakAra ke devoM meM jyotiSI deva' haiN| inake vimAnoM meM
jaTita viziSTa ratnoM ke prakAza se jagat ke sarva padArtha prakAzita hote haiN|
sUryavimAna ke ratnoM meM vartamAna ekendriya jIvoM ko Atapa nAmakarma se uSNa
prakAza kA anubhava hotA hai aura candra vimAna ke ratnoM meM vartamAna
ekendriya jIvoM ko udyota nAmakarma se zItaprakAza kA anubhava hotA _asaMkhya
sUrya jyotiSI-nikAya ke indra haiM aura ina asaMkhya sUrya-indroM ke rahane ke
vimAna bhinna-bhinna hote haiN| usI prakAra candroM ke bhI vimAna bhinna-bhinna
haiM  /  sUrya kA pratyeka vimAna pUrva dizA meM 4000 siMha rUpa, dakSiNa meM
4000 hasti rUpa, pazcima meM 4000 vRSabha rUpa tathA uttara meM 4000 azva rUpa
isa prakAra kula 16000 Abhiyogika (sevakAdi) deva ina vimAnoM ko vahana karate
haiN| sUrya ke vimAna pRthvI se 800 yojana U~ce haiM tathA ve zAzvata haiM  /
zAzvata padArthoM kA 1 yojana 3600 mIla jitanA hotA hai| jambUdvIpa aura usake
bAda vAle asaMkhya dvIpa-samudroM meM sUrya-candra sadA hara samaya prakAza
phailA rahe haiN| yathA - [381

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In Jambudvipa, in the Lavanasamudra, in the Dhataki Khand, in the Kalodhi
Samudra, in the Ardha-Pushkar Dvipa, in the Manushyaloka, the Sun-Moons 2 Suns 4
Suns 132 Suns In relation to these Suns-Moons, other things to be known are as
follows: 12 Suns 42 Suns 72 Suns 1. Unstable (rotating) 2. The base of their
aircraft is semi-arched 3. Moon aircraft 56/62 yojanas (length-width) 4. Height
of the Moon aircraft 28/61 yojanas Suns-Moons outside the Manushyaloka 1. Stable
(non-rotating) 5. Sun aircraft 48/61 yojanas (length-width) 6. Height of the Sun
aircraft 24/61 yojanas. 2. Square brick-shaped 3. Moon aircraft 28/61 yojanas
(length-width) 4. Height of the Moon aircraft 14/61 yojanas 5. Sun aircraft
24/61 yojanas (length-width) 6. Height of the Sun aircraft 24/61 yojanas. 111 2
Moons 4 Moons 12 Moons 42 Moons 72 Moons 132 Moons In Jambudvipa, one Moon, one
Sun completes each mandala in 48 hours. In Jambudvipa, when one Sun is in the
Bharat Kshetra in the south, the other Sun is in the Airvat Kshetra in the
north. At the same time, one Moon is in the east Maha Videha, while the other
Moon is in the west Maha Videha. Where the Sun is, there is day, and where the
Moon is, there is night. Therefore, the Suns-Moons that are visible today in
each region are not visible the next day. Thus, the rotation of the Suns-Moons
is constantly ongoing. All the Suns-Moons of the two and a half Dvipas are
constantly rotating around the Meru mountains of the Dvipas. Thus, a total of
132 Suns-Moons are orbiting the Meru in the middle of the two and a half Dvipas,
they are divided into two sections of 66-66 in number, and their line always
orbits together. As the Sun rotates and moves forward, it is called sunrise in
that region, and as it moves, it is last seen in the previous region, then it is
called sunset. In fact, the discussion of the celestial deities like the Sun-
Moon etc. described in the Jain Agamas is so important and full of subtlety that
it is not possible to describe it here. This subject is explained in detail in
Bhagavati Sutra, Jivaabhigam, Surya-Pragyapti, Chandra Pragyapti, Jyotish
Karandika, Kshetralok Prakash, Brihat Sangrahani, Kshetra Samas (small and
large) and Triloksara etc. Not only this, the supreme authority of the Sun has
been praised with great respect in the major scriptures of other religions as
well. [ 32 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jambUdvIpa meM lavaNasamudra meM dhAtakIkhaNDa meM kAlodadhisamudra meM ardha -
puSkara dvIpa meM manuSyaloka ke sUrya-candra 2 sUrya 4 sUrya 132 sUrya ina
sUrya-candroM ke saMbaMdha meM anya jJAtavya isa prakAra hai 12 sUrya 42 sUrya
72 sUrya 1. asthira (paribhramaNazIla) 2. inake vimAna kI pIThikA ardha
koSThakAkAra 3. candra vimAna 56 / 62 yojana (lambAI-caur3AI) 4. candra vimAna
kI U~cAI 28/61 yojana manuSyaloka se bAhara ke sUrya-candra 1. sthira
(paribhramaNarahita) 5. sUrya vimAna 48 / 61 yojana ( lambAI-caur3AI) 6. sUrya
vimAna kI U~cAI 24/61 yojn| 2. caturasra iSTakAkAra 3. candra vimAna 28 / 61
yojana (lambAI-caur3AI) 4. candra vimAna kI U~cAI 14/61 yojana 5. sUrya vimAna
24/61 yojana (lambAI-caur3AI) 6. sUrya vimAna kI U~cAI 24 / 61 yojana  /  111 2
candra 4 candra 12 candra 42 candra 72 candra 132 candra jambUdvIpa meM eka
candra, eka sUrya 48 ghaNTe meM pratyeka maNDala ko pUrNa karatA hai| jambUdvIpa
meM eka sUrya dakSiNa dizA meM bharata kSetra meM hotA hai taba dUsarA sUrya
uttaradizA meM - airavata kSetra meM rahatA hai| usI samaya eka candra pUrva
mahA videha meM hotA hai taba dUsarA candra pazcima mahAvideha meM rahatA hai|
jahA~ sUrya hotA hai vahA~ dina aura jahA~ candra hotA hai vahA~ rAtri hotI hai
/  ata: pratyeka kSetra meM jo sUrya-candra Aja dikhAI dete haiM, ve dUsare dina
nahIM dikhAI dete  /  isa prakAra sUrya-candra kA paribhramaNa satata cAlU hai|
aDhAI dvIpavartI sabhI sUrya candra dvIpavartI meru parvatoM ke cAroM ora satata
paribhramaNa kara rahe haiM  /  isa prakAra kula 132 sUrya-candra aDhAIdvIpoM ke
madhyastha meru kI parikramA kara rahe haiM, ve do vibhAga meM vibhakta 66 - 66
saMkhyA meM rahate haiM aura inakI paMkti sadA eka sAtha hI parikramA karatI
hai| sUrya paribhramaNa karate hue jaise-jaise Age bar3hatA hai vaise usa kSetra
meM sUryodaya kahalAtA hai aura vaha gati karatA huA pichale kSetra meM antima
dikhAI detA hai taba sUryAsta kahalAtA hai| vastutaH jaina AgamoM meM varNita
sUrya-candrAdi jyotiSka devoM kI vicAraNA itanI mahattvapUrNa evaM sUkSmatA se
paripUrNa hai ki usakA varNana karanA yahA~ saMbhava nahIM hai| bhagavatIsUtra,
jIvAbhigama, sUrya - prajJapti, candraprajJapti, jyotiSkaraNDaka,
kSetralokaprakAza, bRhatsaMgrahaNI, kSetrasamAsa (laghu evaM bRhat) tathA
trilokasArAdi meM yaha viSaya vistAra se samajhAyA gayA hai| itanA hI nahIM,
anya dharmoM ke pramukha granthoM meM bhI sUrya kI sarvopari sattA ko bahuta hI
Adara ke sAtha sarAhA gayA [ 32 ]

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is said in the Vedas that the Sun is "the life of all beings, the rising Sun,
the brilliant, the great, the all-pervading, the visible Sun, the Sun is the
soul of the moving and the stationary," and "moving with the dark dust, he
deposits the nectar, mortal. With the golden chariot, the divine Savita goes to
the worlds, seeing."  The Gayatri Mantra, which is worshipped by all, also
praises and prays to the deity Savita. Many scientific aspects of the Sun are
also expressed in the Vedic mantras, in whose commentaries the Acharyas have
also given instructions for very subtle experiments. The Sun, situated in a
chariot drawn by seven horses, illuminates the world. In the Rig Veda, it is
said, "Seven yoke the chariot with one wheel," thus describing the world as
having seven categories. These seven categories are - earth, water, fire, air,
space, directions and time. The nine members of the solar system are the nine
planets. Descriptions of the diameters, motions, conjunctions, eclipses, etc. of
the Sun and other planets are found extensively in the Puranas and Jyotish
texts. In the "Vridha Garg Samhita", in the latter part of the
"Mahasaliladhyaya", there is a detailed description of scientific subjects in
the "Grahakoshadhyaya, Nakshatrakarmaganadhyaya", etc. Thus, the eternal
existence of the Sun is also widely accepted in the ancient religious texts.
"Surya-Prajnapti" is a great text that expresses the universal glory of the Sun
in a unique way, through a thought-provoking and scientific approach. It is
introduced as follows: 7. The Place of Surya-Prajnapti in Agamic Literature
According to the oldest classification, Jain Agamic literature was classified as
"Purva" and "Anga", which is said to be pre-Mahavira. Later, the "Purva Shruta"
was compiled in a simple form and "Dristivad" was included in it, which led to
the eleven Angas, including the Achara, being called "Dwadashangi". The Shruta
treasure of Mahavira, the founder of the Achara, etc., was known as "Fourteen
Purvas" or "Dristivad". It was classified into two parts: "Anga-Pravist" and
"Anga-Bahya". The first is "created by Ganadhar in the Sutra" and the second is
"included in the Sthavir". In addition, a further subtle analysis is given in
the Nandi Sutra, which introduces the entire branch of Agamas as "Aavashyak,
Aavashyak-Vyatirikt, Kalik and Utkalik". In addition, according to Digambar
beliefs, the "Anga-Pravist" Agamas are classified into five parts: 1. Parikarma,
2. Sutra, 3. Prathamanuyog, 4. Purvagat and 5. Chulik. Shri Aryaraksit divided
the Agamas into four parts according to the Anuyogs, which he named "1. Charan-
Karananuyog, 2. Dharmakathaanuyog, 3. Ganitanuyog and 4. Dravybhanuyog". He also
pointed out two forms of Agamas from the perspective of the order of
explanation: 1. Aprithaktvanuyog and 2. Prithaktvanuyog. In addition to all
this, a new perspective is revealed in the Churni of the Nandi Sutra, in which
the Dwadashangi is referred to as the limbs of the "Shruta Purusha". At the same
time, the twelve Upangas were also used, and one Upanga (a Sutra that clarifies
the meaning of what is said in the Angas) was also determined for each Anga.
Among these and other such distinctions, the "Surya-Prajnapti" Sutra, written by
Shruta Sthavir, is placed in the Anga, Dristivad, Anga-Bahya, Aavashyak
Vyatirikt, Utkalik, the first category of Dristivad, Parikarma, Ganitanuyog,
Prithaktvanuyog and the Upanga of the Jnatadharmakathaanga of the Shruta
Purusha. It is the 22nd in the order of thirty-two Agamas. In some texts, it is
said to be the fifth and in some the sixth Upanga. 8. The Nature of Surya-
Prajnapti This Upanga text, which provides a systematic overview of the "Sun and
the Jyotish Chakra" in Jain Agamic literature, mainly expresses ideas through a
complex system of knowledge and science. It contains important discussions on
mathematics and astrology. [ 33 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai| vedoM meM sUrya ko 'prANaH prajAnAmudayatyeSa sUryaH, vibhrATa, bRhat,
vizvAya, dRze sUryama, sUrya AtmA jagatastasthuSazca,' aura 'AkRSNena rajasA
vartamAno nivezayannamRtaM mrtyshc| hiraNyayena savitA rathana devo yAti
bhuvanAni pazyan' ityAdi aneka maMtroM se vividha rUpa meM vyakta kiyA hai|
sarvArAdhya gAyatrI maMtra meM bhI savit devatA kI hI mahimA aura prArthanA hai|
sUrya ke vaijJAnika dRSTikoNa se bhI aneka vivecana vaidika maMtroM meM
abhivyakta haiM, jinake bhASyoM meM AcAryoM ne sUkSmAtisUkSma parIkSaNAtmaka
prayogoM ke nirdeza bhI diye haiN| sUrya saptAzva ratha meM sthita ho kara jagat
ko prakAzita karatA hai| Rgaveda meM 'sapta yuJjanti rathamekacakraM ' kahate
hue jagat ko sapta vargI hI batAyA hai  /  ye sAta varga - pRthvI, jala, teja,
vAyu, AkAza, dik aura kAla haiM  /  saura-parivAra ke nau sadasya navagraha haiM
/  sUrya Adi grahoM ke bimboM kA vyAsa, gati, yuti, grahaNa Adi ke varNana
purANoM tathA jyotiSa ke granthoM meM vyApaka rUpa se Aye haiN| 'vRddha
gargasaMhitA' meM 'mahAsalilAdhyAya' ke uttarArdha meM 'grahakoSAdhyAya,
nakSatrakarmagaNAdhyAya' Adi meM vaijJAnika viSayoM kA vistRta varNana bhI
darzanIya hai| isa prakAra sUrya kI akhaNDa sattA sanAtana dharma granthoM meM
bhI vistAra se svIkRta hai| aisI hI sUrya kI sArvatrika mahimA ko vaijJAnika
dRSTi se samanvita cintana-pradhAna asAdhAraNa vivecanA ke dvArA vyakta karane
vAlA eka mahAna grantha 'sUrya-prajJapti' hai| jisakA paricaya isa prakAra hai -
7. sUrya-prajJapti kA Agama sAhitya meM sthAna jaina Agama-sAhitya prAcInatama
vargIkaraNa ke anusAra pUrva' aura 'aMga' ke rUpa meM vargIkRta huA thA jise
zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra se pUrvavartI batalAyA hai| isake pazcAt 'pUrvazruta'
ko sarala rUpa meM grathita kara usameM 'dRSTivAda' ko sammilita karane se
AcArAdi gyAraha aMgoM ko 'dvAdazAMgI' kahA gyaa| AcArAMga Adi ke prarUpaka
mahAvIra kI zrutarAzi 'caudaha pUrva' athavA 'dRSTivAda' ke nAma se pahacAnI
jAtI thii| isakA vargIkaraNa 'aMgapraviSTa' aura 'aMgabAhya' aise do bhAgoM meM
kiyA gyaa| inameM prathama 'gaNadhara dvArA sUtra meM nirmita' aura dvitIya
sthavirakRta samAviSTa haiM  /  inake atirikta eka aura sUkSma vivecana karate
hue nandIsUtra meM 'Avazyaka, Avazyaka-vyatirikta, kAlika aura utkAlika' rUpa
meM Agama kI sampUrNa zAkhaoM kA paricaya diyA gayA hai| inake atirikta
digambara mAnyatAoM ke anusAra 'aMgapraviSTa' AgamoM kA eka evAda ke 1.
parikarma, 2. sUtra, 3. prathamAnuyoga,4. pUrvagata evaM 5. cUlikA ke rUpa meM
huA hai| zrI AryarakSita ne AgamoM ko anuyogoM ke anusAra cAra bhAgoM meM
vibhAjita kiyA jinake '1. caraNa-karaNAnuyoga, 2. dharmakathAnuyoga, 3.
gaNitAnuyo tathA 4. dravbhAnuyoga' ye nAma diye haiN| inhIM ne vyAkhyAkrama kI
dRSTi se 1. apRthaktvAnuyoga aura 2. pRthaktvAnuyoga ke rUpa meM AgamoM ke do
rUpa bhI btlaaye| ina saba ke atirikta nandIsUtra kI cUrNi meM eka dRSTi aura
udghATita huI jisameM dvAdazAMgI ko 'zruta puruSa' ke aMgoM kI saMjJA se
abhihita kiyA gyaa| sAtha hI dvAdaza upAMgoM kA bhI viniyoga huA aura pratyeka
aMga ke sAtha eka-eka upAMga (aMgoM meM kahe gaye arthoM kA spaSTa bodha karAne
vAlA sUtra) bhI nirdhArita hue| ina aura aise hI anya bhedoM meM zrutasthavira-
viracita 'sUrya-prajJapti' sUtra kramazaH aMga, dRSTivAda, aMgabAhya, Avazyaka
vyatirikta meM utkAlika, dRSTivAda kA prathama bheda parikarma, gaNitAnuyoga,
pRthaktvAnuyoga aura zrutapuruSa ke jJAtAdharmakathAMga ke upAMga meM apanA
sthAna rakhatI hai| battIsa AgamoM ke krama meM yaha upAMgagata 22vIM saMkhyA
para hai| kucha granthoM meM ise pA~cavAM aura kahIM chaThA upAMga batalAyA gayA
hai| 8. sUrya-prajJapti kA svarUpAtmaka paricaya jaina-Agama vAGmaya meM 'sUrya
aura jyotiSkacakra' kA vyavasthita digdarzana karAne vAlA yaha upAMga grantha
mukhyataH jJAna evaM vijJAna kI saMkliSTa paddhati se vicAroM ko vyakta karatA
hai| gaNita aura jyotiSa kI mahattvapUrNa vivecanA isameM [ 33 ]

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It holds a unique position. Its composition uses 108 prose sutras and 103 verse
stanzas. It has one study, 20 prabhritas and the available original text is 2200
shlokas in size. 'Surya-Prajnapti' is a very ancient text, as it has been
accepted by all three - Shvetambar, Digambar and Sthanakvasi. From this
perspective, it can be said that its position was before the division of the
three. Its time should be before Vikram. From the point of view of the subject
matter, the 20 prabhritas of this text present such subtle considerations of
astronomy that they have not been presented together anywhere else. Its
inception took place in Mithila city, in the reign of Jitashatru, after the
sermon of Vardhaman Mahavira in the Manibhadra Chaitya outside the city, to
solve the curiosity of Ganadhar Gautam. It includes - 'Mandlagatisankhya,
Surya's transverse rotation, Prakasya Kshetra Parimana, Prakash Sansthan, Leshya
Pratighāt, Ojaḥ Sansthiti, Suryavarak Uday Sansthiti, Pauraushi Chāyāpraman,
Yoga Swaroop, Beginning and end of years, Differences in years, Increase and
decrease of the moon, Jyotisna Praman, Shighragati Nirnay, Jyotisna Lakshana,
Chyavan and Upapat, Height of the moon, sun etc., their size and the experiences
of the moon etc.' There is a detailed discussion on these topics. Therefore,
this text presents sufficient useful facts for thinkers of astronomy. Upadhyay
Shri Devendra Muni Shastri has given a detailed introduction of Surya Prajnapti
in his great book 'Jain Agam Sahitya: Manan aur Meemamsa'. The summary is as
follows - In the first prabhrit - '30 Muhurtas in day and night, Nakshatra
month, Surya month, Chandra month and Ritu month, increase in Muhurtas, the time
of Surya's motion from the first to the last and from the last to the first
mandala, Surya's motion once in the last mandala and twice in the remaining
mandalas, Dakshinayan and Uttarayan of Aditya-Samvatsar, the least and the best
Muhurtas of Aho-ratra and the reason for the increase and decrease of Aho-ratra
Muhurtas, the area of sunrise of Surya in Bharat and Airavat region, the
difference in the motion of one Surya from the first to the last and from the
last to the first in both the ayanas of Aditya Samvatsar, six other beliefs
related to the difference, the size of Surya's rotation in one Aho-ratra in
relation to the crossing of islands and seas by Surya and the creation and
expansion of mandalas are described.' In the second prabhrit - 'After describing
the rise and fall of the sun, the views of other Tirthankaras have been
mentioned, which include - 1. The sun rising in the east and moving across the
sky, 2. The sun being a group of circular rays and being destroyed in the
evening, 3. The sun being a deity and its nature being sunrise and sunset, 4.
The sun being a deity and its eternal state, 5. Rising in the east in the
morning and reaching the west in the evening and from there illuminating the
lower world and returning downwards etc. are prominent. Finally, the idea of the
sun moving from one mandala to another and how much area it rotates in one
muhurta is expressed, and the self-opinion is also presented. Other religious
followers believe that the earth is round, but Jainism believes differently,
which is also indicated by this.' In the third prabhrit - there is a description
of the islands and seas illuminated by the moon and the sun. In this context,
twelve [ 34 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 apanA viziSTa sthAna rakhatI hai| isakI racanA meM 108 gadya-sUtra aura 103
padya-gAthAeM prayukta haiN| isameM eka adhyayana, 20 prAbhRta aura upalabdha
mUla pATha 2200 zloka parimANa hai| 'sUrya-prajJapti' ati prAcIna grantha hai,
kyoMki isakA ullekha zvetAmbara, digambara aura sthAnakavAsI - tInoM meM mAnya
rahA hai| isI dRSTi se yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki isakI sthiti tInoM ke
vibhAjana se pUrva thii| isakA samaya vikrama pUrva kA honA caahiye| viSaya
vistAra kI dRSTi se isake 20 prAbhRtoM meM khagola zAstra kI jitanI sUkSma
vicAraNAe~ prastuta huI haiM, utanI anyatra kahIM eka sAtha prastuta nahIM huI
haiN| isakA upakrama mithilA nagarI meM jitazatru ke rAjya meM nagara se bAhara
maNibhadra caitya meM vardhamAna mahAvIra ke padhArane para dharmopadeza ke
pazcAt gaNadhara gautama kI jijJAsA ke samAdhAna hetu huA hai| isameM -
'maMDalagatisaMkhyA, sUrya kA tiryak paribhramaNa, prakAzya kSetra parimANa,
prakAza saMsthAna, lezyA pratighAta, ojaH saMsthiti, sUryAvaraka udaya
saMsthiti, pauruSI chAyApramANa, yoga svarUpa, saMvatsaroM ke Adi aura aMta,
saMvatsara ke bheda, candra kI vRddhi apavRddhi, jyotsnA pramANa, zIghragati
nirNaya, jyotsnA lakSaNa, cyavana aura upapAta, candra sUrya Adi kI UMcAI, unakA
parimANa evaM candrAdi ke anubhAva Adi' viSayoM kI vistRta carcA hai| ataH yaha
grantha khagolazAstra ke cintakoM ke liye paryApta upayogI tathya upasthApita
karatA hai| upAcArya zrI devendra muni zAstrI ne apane mahanIya grantha 'jaina
Agama sAhitya : manana aura mImAMsA' meM sUryaprajJapti kA vistRta paricaya dete
huye likhA hai| sArAMza isa prakAra hai - prathama prAbhRta meM - 'dina va rAtri
meM 30 muhUrta, nakSatramAsa, sUryamAsa, candramAsa aura RtumAsa ke muhUrtoM kI
vRddhi, prathama se aMtima aura aMtima se prathama maMDala paryanta sUrya kI
gati ke kAla kA pratipAdana evaM aMtima maMDala meM sUrya kI eka bAra tathA zeSa
maMDaloM meM sUrya kI do bAra gati honA, Aditya-saMvatsara ke dakSiNAyana aura
uttarAyana meM ahorAtra ke jaghanya tathA utkRSTa muhUrta evaM ahorAtra ke
muhUrtoM kI hAnivRddhi ke kAraNa bharata aura airAvata kSetra ke sUrya kA udyota
kSetra, Aditya saMvatsara ke donoM ayanoM meM prathama se aMtima aura aMtima se
prathama paryanta eka sUrya kI gati kA aMtara, aMtara ke saMbaMdha meM chaha
anya mAnyatAe~, sUrya dvArA dvIpa samudroM ke avagAhana saMbaMdha meM eka
ahorAtra meM sUrya ke paribhramaNa kA parimANa evaM maMDaloM kI racanA tathA
vistAra varNita hai|' dvitIya prAbhRta meM - 'sUrya ke udaya aura asta kA
varNana karake anya tIrthakoM ke matoM kA ullekha kiyA hai, jisameM - 1. sUrya
kA pUrva dizA meM udita hokara AkAza meM calA jAnA, 2. sUrya ko golAkAra kiraNoM
kA samUha batalAkara saMdhyA meM naSTa honA, 3. sUrya ko devatA batalAkara usakA
svabhAva meM udayAsta honA, 4. sUrya ke deva hone se usakI sanAtana sthiti
rahanA, 5. prAta: pUrva dizA meM udita hokara sAyaM pazcima meM pahuMcanA tathA
vahAM se adholoka ko prakAzita karate huye nIce kI ora lauTa jAnA Adi pramukha
haiN| aMta meM sUrya ke eka maMDala se dUsare maMDala meM gamana kA aura vaha
eka muhUrta meM kitane kSetra meM paribhramaNa karatA hai ? isakA vicAra vyakta
karate huye svamata kA bhI pratipAdana huA hai| anya dharmAvalambI pRthvI kA
Akara gola mAnate haiM kintu jaina dharma kI mAnyatA usase bhinna hai, yaha bhI
isase saMketita hai|' tRtIya prAbhRta meM - candra, sUrya dvArA prakAzita kiye
jAne vAle dvIpa evaM samudroM kA varNana hai| isI prasaMga meM bAraha [ 34 ]

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Instructions have also been given for other opinions. In the fourth Prabhrit -
there is mention of the 1. Vimana establishment and 2. Establishment of the
illuminated area of the Moon and Sun and their relationship. Here, the
establishment of the Udyot and Tap क्षेत्र in each mandala has been explained
from the point of view of the self, and the area of darkness has been described.
The magnitude of the upward, downward and transverse heat fields of the Sun are
also described here. In the fifth Prabhrit - the description of the Sun's rays
is given. In the sixth Prabhrit - the Sun's Ojas is described, i.e. whether the
Sun remains in one form forever or changes every moment? There are 25
propositions in this regard. It has been expressed from the Jain point of view
that the Sun remains in Jambudvipa for only 30 Muhurtas every year and remains
unstable for the rest of the time. Because there is one Sun on each mandala for
30 Muhurtas. It has been clarified that from the point of view of the mandala on
which it resides, it is present and from the point of view of the other mandala,
it is absent. In the seventh Prabhrit - it has been explained that the Sun
illuminates Meru Parvatadi and other regions with its light. In the eighth
Prabhrit - the Sun that rises in the south-east illuminates the Bharatadi
regions located in the south of Meru and the Sun that rises in the west-north
illuminates the Airavatadi regions located in the north of Meru. Thus, the
existence of two Suns has been established and the system of day and night has
been clarified from this. Along with this, the statement of Utsarpini-Avasarpini
time in relation to different regions is also described in this Prabhrit. In the
ninth Prabhrit - while proving the human shadow, it has been explained that
there is a shadow of 59 human measures at the time of sunrise and sunset. And in
this regard, while mentioning many opinions and counter-opinions, an
establishment has been made regarding the human shadow according to one's own
opinion. In the tenth Prabhrit - the order of the constellations, the number of
Muhurtas, the east-west part and the constellations that combine with the Moon
from both parts, the division of the constellations that combine at the
beginning of the Yuga, the total number of constellations, sub-families and
family sub-families, 12 full moons and new moons, the combination of
constellations in them, the full moon and new moon with the same constellations,
the establishment of constellations, their stars, rain, winter and summer
seasons, the combination of constellations in the month cycle, human proof,
constellations that combine with the Moon from the south-north and both paths,
Moon mandala without constellations, Moon mandala without Sun, deities of
constellations, names of 30 Muhurtas, 15 days, night and dates, gotras of
constellations, food provision in constellations, combination of constellations
with Moon and Sun in one Yuga, months of the year and their worldly and
transcendental names, five types of years, their 5-5 divisions and 28 divisions
of the last Shani-year, two Moons, doors of constellations, two Suns and the
Muhurta magnitude of constellations that combine with them, the boundary and
diameter of constellations etc. have been established in detail in its 22 sub-
chapters. In the eleventh Prabhrit - the description of the beginning, end and
combination of constellations of the years is given. In the twelfth Prabhrit -
the description of constellations, Moon, seasons, Sun and 5 increased years,
proof of six seasons, 6-6 Kshamadik dates, the number of revolutions of Sun and
Moon in one Yuga and the combination of constellations at that time and the time
of combination etc. is given. [ 35 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 matAntaroM kA bhI nirdeza huA hai| caturtha prAbhRta meM - candra aura sUrya ke
1. vimAna saMsthAna tathA 2. prakAzita kSetra ke saMsthAna aura unake saMbaMdha
ullekha hai| yahIM svamata se pratyeka maMDala meM udyota tathA tApa kSetra kA
saMsthAna batalAkara aMdhakAra ke kSetra kA nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| sUrya ke
Urdhva, adhaH evaM tiryak tApa-kSetra ke parimANa bhI yahIM varNita haiN|
pAcaveM prAbhRta meM - sUrya kI lezyAoM kA varNana hai| _chaThe prAbhRta meM -
sUrya kA oja varNita hai arthAt sUrya sadA eka rUpa meM avasthita rahatA hai
athavA pratikSaNa parivartita hotA rahatA hai ? isa saMbaMdha meM 25
pratipattiyAM haiM  /  jaina dRSTi se vyakta kiyA hai ki jambUdvIpa meM
prativarSa kevala 30 muhUrta taka sUrya avasthita rahatA hai tathA zeSa samaya
meM anavasthita rahatA hai| kyoMki pratyeka maMDala para eka sUrya 30 muhUrta
rahatA hai| isameM jisa-jisa maMDala para vaha rahatA hai, usa dRSTi se vaha
avasthita hai aura dUsare maMDala kI dRSTi se vaha anasthita hai, yaha spaSTa
kiyA hai| sAtaveM prAbhRta meM - sUrya apane prakAza se meruparvatAdi ko ora
anya pradezoM ko prakAzita karatA hai, yaha batalAyA hai| AThaveM prAbhata meM -
jo sarya parva-dakSiNa meM udita hotA hai. vaha meru ke dakSiNa meM sthita
bharatAdi kSetroM ko prakAzita karatA hai aura jo meru ke pazcima-uttara meM
udita hotA hai, vaha meru ke uttara meM sthita airAvatAdi kSetroM ko prakAzita
kiyA hai isa prakAra do sUryoM kI sattA pratipAdita huI hai aura isI se dina-
rAtri kI vyavasthA spaSTa kI gaI hai| sAtha hI bhinna-bhinna kSetroM kI apekSA
utsarpiNI-avasarpiNI kAla kA kathana hI isI prAbhUta meM varNita hai| " nauveM
prAbhRta meM - pauruSI chAyA kA pramANa batalAte hue sUrya ke udayAsta ke samaya
59 puruSa-pramANa chAyA hotI hai, yaha batalAyA hai aura isa saMbaMdha meM aneka
mata-matAntaroM kA ullekha karate hue svamatAnusAra pauruSI-chAyA ke saMbaMdha
meM sthApanA kI hai| dasaveM prAbhata meM - nakSatroM meM AvalikA krama, muhUrta
kI saMkhyA, pUrva-pazcima bhAga tathA ubhayabhAgoM se candra ke sAtha yoga
karane vAle nakSatra, yugArambha meM yoga karane vAle nakSatroM kA pUrvAdi
vibhAga, nakSatroM ke kula, upakula tathA kulopakula, 12 pUrNimA aura amAvasyAoM
meM nakSatroM ke yoga, samAna nakSatroM ke yoga vAlI pUrNimA tathA amAvasyA,
nakSatroM ke saMsthAna, unake tAre, varSA, hemanta aura grISma RtuoM meM
mAsakrama ke nakSatroM kA yoga tathA pauruSI pramANa, dakSiNa-uttara evaM
ubhayamArga se candra ke sAtha yoga karane vAle nakSatra, nakSatra rahita
candramaNDala, sUryarahita candramaNDala, nakSatroM ke devatA, 30muhUrtoM ke
nAma, 15 dina, rAtri aura tithiyoM ke nAma, nakSatroM ke gotra, nakSatroM meM
bhojana kA vidhAna, eka yuga meM candra tathA sUrya ke sAtha nakSatroM kA yoga
evaM saMvatsara ke mahIne aura unake laukika tathA lokottara nAma, pA~ca prakAra
ke saMvatsara, unake 5-5 bheda aura antima zanaizcara-saMvatsara ke 28 bheda, do
candra, nakSatroM ke dvAra, do sUrya aura unake sAtha yoga karane vAle nakSatroM
ke muhUrta parimANa, nakSatroM kI sImA tathA viSkambha Adi kA pratipAdana
vistAra ke sAtha isake 22 upa-adhyAyoM meM huA hai| gyArahaveM prAbhRta meM -
saMvatsaroM ke Adi, anta aura nakSatroM ke yoga kA varNana hai| bArahaveM
prAbhRta meM - nakSatra, candra, Rtu, Aditya aura abhivardhita 5 saMvatsaroM kA
varNana, chaha RtuoM kA pramANa,6-6 kSamAdhika tithiyAM, eka yuga meM sUrya aura
candra kI AvRttiyAM aura usa samaya nakSatroM ke yoga aura yoga kAla Adi kA
varNana hai| [ 35 ]

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The thirteenth Prabhruta describes the waxing and waning of the moon in both the
Krishna and Shukla Paksha, the conjunction of Rahu with the lunar mansions
during the 62 full moons and 62 new moons, the lunar orbital motion in each
ayana, and other related topics.  The fourteenth Prabhruta describes the
evidence of moonlight and darkness in the Krishna and Shukla Paksha.  The
fifteenth Prabhruta explains the motion of the moon and other celestial deities
in a single Muhurta, and then describes the orbital motion of the moon, sun, and
planets in the Nakshatra month, as well as the orbital motion in the Ritu month
and Aditya month.  The sixteenth Prabhruta describes the synonyms of moonlight,
sunlight, and darkness.  The seventeenth Prabhruta mentions 25 different
opinions regarding the setting and rising of the sun, and then establishes its
own opinion.  The eighteenth Prabhruta describes the height of the sun, moon,
and other celestial bodies from the earth, mentions 25 different opinions, and
then presents its own opinion. It also discusses the celestial spheres of the
moon and sun, the location of stars above, below, and in between these spheres,
the family of planets, stars, and constellations associated with the moon, the
distance between the celestial sphere and Mount Meru, the outer and inner
boundaries of Jambudvipa, the stars that move up and down, the location,
dimensions, and abundance of the moon, sun, and other celestial bodies, the
number of deities carrying them and their directions, their forms, their fast
and slow motion, their scarcity and abundance, the family of the moon and sun's
chief wives, their distortions, their powers, and the superior and inferior
positions of the gods and goddesses.  The nineteenth Prabhruta raises the
question of whether the moon and sun illuminate the entire universe or only a
part of it, mentions 12 different opinions, and then presents its own opinion.
It also describes the dimensions and circumference of the salt ocean, the moon,
sun, constellations, and stars. It further describes the location of the Dhataki
Khand, the Kalodadhi Sea, the Pushkarardha Island, and the human realm. This
Prabhruta also explains the order in the absence of Indra, the inferior and
superior periods of Indra's absence, the origin and motion of the moon outside
the human realm, and finally, the dimensions, circumference, and perimeter of
the islands and seas up to the Swayambhramana Sea.  The twentieth Prabhruta
describes the nature of the moon and other celestial bodies, Rahu, the two types
of Rahu, and the inferior and superior periods. It explains why the moon is
called Shashi and the sun is called Aditya, stating that the moon's chariot is
adorned with the symbol of a deer (Shash) and the sun is the creator of time,
the Avali, and the ascending and descending periods. It also compares the chief
wives of the moon and sun to human wives and their enjoyment of pleasures, and
finally, lists the names of 88 planets. These Prabhruta are further divided into
smaller Prabhruta.  From the above topics, it can be easily inferred that the
Surya Prajnapti not only discusses the sun and related topics but also
encompasses a detailed and comprehensive discussion of the entire celestial
family. Moreover, it also contains a collection of ancient beliefs related to
astrology. The topics discussed here share some similarities with the topics
discussed in the scriptures of other religions.  The Surya Prajnapti's extensive
discussion of various topics inspired the author, Shri Bhadrabahu, to create
commentaries on the ten Agamas, including the Surya Prajnapti. Unfortunately, it
is now unavailable. However, the commentary by Acharya Malayagiri...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahaveM prAbhRta meM - kRSNa aura zukla pakSa meM candra kI hAni-vRddhi, 62
pUrNimA tathA 62 amAvasyAoM meM candrasaryoM ke sAtha rAha kA yoga, pratyeka
ayana meM candra kI maNDala-gati Adi kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| caudahaveM
prAbhRta meM - kRSNa aura zukla pakSa kI jyotsanA aura aMdhakAra kA pramANa
varNita hai| pandrahaveM prAbhUta meM - candrAdi jyotiSka devoM kI eka muhUrta
kI gati hai, yaha batalAkara nakSatra mAsa meM candra, sUrya, grahAdi kI maNDala
gati aura RtumAsa tathA AdityamAsa meM bhI maNDalagati kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai|
solahaveM prAbhRta meM - candrikA, Atapa aura andhakAra ke paryAyoM kA varNana
hai| satrahaveM prAbhRta meM - sUrya ke cyavana tathA upapAta ke saMbaMdha meM
anya 25 mata-matAntaroM kA ullekha karane ke pazcAt svamata kA saMsthApana kiyA
hai| aThArahaveM prAbhRta meM - bhUmi sesUrya-candrAdi kI U~cAI kA parimANa
batAte hue anya 25 mata-matAntaroM kA ullekha karake svamata kA pratipAdana kiyA
hai| candra-sUrya ke vimAnoM ke nIce, Upara tathA sama vibhAga meM tArAoM ke
vimAna hone ke kAraNa eka candra kA graha, nakSatra aura tArAoM kA parivAra,
meru parvata se jyotiSkacakra kA antara, jambUdvIpa meM sarva bAhya-Abhyantara,
Upara nIce calane vAle nakSatra, candra-sUryAdi ke saMsthAna, AyAma, viSkambha
aura bAhulya, unako vahana karane vAloM devoM kI saMkhyA aura unake dizAkrama se
rUpa, zIghra-maMda gati, alpabahutva, candra-sUrya kI agra mahiSiyoM kA
parivAra, vikurvaNA, zakti evaM deva-deviyoM kI jaghansa utkRSTa sthiti Adi
viSayoM para vistAra se vicAra huA hai| unnIsaveM prAbhRta meM - candra aura
sUrya sampUrNa loka ko prakAzita karate haiM athavA loka ke eka vibhAga ko ?
yaha prazna uThA kara isa saMbaMdha meM bAraha mata-matAntaroM kA ullekha karate
hue svamata kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai| sAtha hI lavaNa samudra kA AyAma, viSkambha
aura candra, sUrya nakSatra evaM tArAoM kA varNana hai| usI prakAra
dhAtakIkhaNDa ke saMsthAna, kAlodadhisamudra aura puSkArArdha dvIpa tathA
manuSya kSetra Adi kA vivaraNa prastuta huA hai| isI prAbhRta meM yaha bhI
batalAyA gayA hai ki - indra ke abhAva meM vyavasthA, indra kA jaghanya aura
utkRSTa virahakAla, manuSya kSetra ke bAhara candra kI utpatti aura gati tathA
anta meM svayambharamaNa samudra taka dvIpasamudroM ke AyAma, viSkambha, paridhi
Adi kA varNana hai| bIsaveM prAbhRta meM - candrAdi kA svarUpa, rAhU kA varNana,
rAhU ke do prakAra tathA jaghanya-utkRSTa kAla kA varNana hai| yahIM candra ko
zazi aura sUrya ko Aditya kahane kA kAraNa batalAte hue spaSTa kiyA hai ki
jyotiSkoM ke indra - candra kA mRga (zaza) ke cihna vAlA 'mRgAGka-vimAna' hai
aura sUrya samaya, AvalikA Adi se lekara avasarpiNI-utsarpiNI kAla kA AdikartA
hai| candra aura sUrya kI agramahiSiyoM aura candra-sUrya ke kAmabhogoM kI
mAnavIya kAmabhogoM ke sAtha tulanA bhI yahA~ prastuta huI hai tathA anta meM 88
grahoM ke nAma batAye gaye haiN| ina prAbhRtoM ke bhI anya laghu prAbhRtoM ke
rUpa meM vibhAjana uparyakta viSayoM ke avalokana se sahaja hI yaha anumAna kiyA
jA sakatA hai ki sUrya-prajJapti ke AyAma meM na kevala sUrya aura usase
saMbaddha viSayoM kA hI isameM vimarza huA hai, apitu samagra jyotiSka parivAra
kA prasaMgAnusAra sUkSma evaM sthUla vimarza samAvRta ho gayA hai| itanA hI
nahIM, yahA~ prAcIna jyotiSa-saMbaMdhI mUla mAnyatAoM kA bhI saGkalana A gayA
hai| isameM carcita viSaya anyAnya dharmoM ke mAnya-granthoM meM carcita viSayoM
se bhI kucha aMzoM meM sAmya rakhate haiN| 9. sUrya-prajJapti kI niyukti evaM
anya vivecanAe~ sUrya-prajJapti ke vyApaka viSaya-vivecana se prabhAvita ho kara
niyuktikAra zrI bhadrabAhu ne dasa AgamoM para niyuktiyoM kI racanA kI thI,
unameM sUrya-prajJapti bhI thii| kintu durbhAgya se vaha aba anupalabdha hai|
kintu AcArya malayagiri kI vRtti [ 36 ]

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I have been instructed to do this. They have written there - 'Due to the
destruction of the appointment made by Bhadrabahu Suri, I will only lecture on
the original sutra.' In the meantime, commentaries and churni were also written,
but there is no evidence that anyone wrote on Surya-Prajnapti. _ Acharya
Malayagiri's time is considered to be the 15th century. The book 'Surya
Prajnapti Upang Tika' written by him is available in 9500 verses. Its other name
is 'Surya Prajnapti Vritti'. The Acharya has described Mithilanagari, Mani
Bhadra Chaitya, King Jitashatru, Dharini Devi and Lord Mahavira in the
beginning. After that, there is a description of Ganadhar Indrabhuti Gautam. By
the way, the discussion of twenty Prabhutos of Surya-Prajnapti is worth
considering and in it, special thinking, criticism and self-opinion have been
given space here and there. Although most Acharyas, who have shown considerable
generosity in writing commentaries, appointments, churni or tikas on the Agam
scriptures, have rarely written on Surya-Chandra related Prajnaptis. One reason
for this seems to be that they would have had a special interest in subjects
like direct spirituality and conduct-worship. Or it can also be said that they
may have left these Prajnaptis knowing that their subject matter is very close
to science. In later times, some Acharyas understood this deficiency and
undertook to write commentaries on it again. Among them, Acharya Muni
Dharmsinghji (18th century) of Stanakwasi built 'Yantra' of Surya Prajnapti and
other Acharyas of the same tradition, Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj, have written
commentaries in Sanskrit language on 32 Agams, including 'Pramaye Bodhini' on
Surya-Prajnapti. The commentary/explanation called Surya Prajnapti-Prakashika is
important. In this, Acharya Shri has given the Sanskrit shadow and Sanskrit
explanation of the original sutra. Its translation in Hindi and Gujarati
language has also been published in two parts, which has been planned by Pandit
Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji. The names of the Hindi and Gujarati translators have
not been mentioned. Acharya Shri Amolkarishiji has also translated Prajnapti
into Hindi. It was published from Hyderabad and some other learned Acharyas have
also discussed it. In connection with Surya-Prajnapti, thinkers and sages from
India and abroad have also expressed many different opinions in different
articles. Varahamihira, who is highly respected in the field of Indian
astrology, was the brother of the appointment maker Bhadrabahu, he wrote in his
book 'Varaha Samhita' based on some topics of Surya Prajnapti. Similarly, the
famous astrologer Bhaskara has expressed his critical views on some beliefs of
Surya Prajnapti, which are visible in the book 'Siddhant Shiromani'. Similarly,
Brahmagupta has made it the basis of criticism in the book 'Sphutasiddhanta'.
But in this era, foreign scholars have accepted the importance of Surya-
Prajnapti and considered it a book of science, Dr. Winternitz is the first among
them. Dr. Shubing has even said that 'without studying Surya-Prajnapti, the
history of Indian astrology cannot be understood correctly.' Weber published an
essay called 'Uver de Surya-Prajnapti' in 1868. Dr. Sibo, in his research paper
'On the Surya-Prajnapti', has stated that before the arrival of the Greeks in
India, the theory of 'two suns and two moons' was prevalent there, and he has
also shown the similarity of the principles of Surya-Prajnapti with the beliefs
of the Vedanga scripture of ancient astrology. 10. Present publication and some
questions: some solutions - The dignity of 'Prajnapti' is self-evident, that
such a book should be studied most, contemplated 1. See, the practice of
Gachchachar. [ 37 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 meM isakA nirdeza huA hai| unhoMne vahA~ likhA hai - 'bhadrabAhusUri kRta
niyukti kA nAza ho jAne se maiM kevala mUla sUtra kA hI vyAkhyAna kruuNgaa|'
isake bIca ke kAla meM bhASya aura cUrNiyAM bhI likhI gaI kintu sUrya-prajJapti
para kisI ne likhA ho, aisA koI pramANa nahIM miltaa| _ AcArya malayagiri kA
sthitikAla 15vIM zatI mAnA jAtA hai |inke dvArA likhe gaye granthoM meM
'sUryaprajJaptyupAGga TIkA' 9500 zloka pramANa upalabdha hotI hai| isI kA
aparanAma 'sUryaprajJaptivRtti' pracalita hai| AcArya ne yahA~ AraMbha meM
mithilAnagarI, maNibhadra caitya, jitazatru rAjA, dhAriNI devI aura bhagavAn
mahAvIra kA sAhityika varNana kiyA hai| tadanantara gaNadhara indrabhUti gautama
kA varNana hai| vaise sUrya-prajJapti ke bIsoM prAbhUto kA vivecana mananIya hai
aura usameM yatra-tatra viziSTa cintana, AlocanA evaM svamata-nirUpaNa ko hI
sthAna diyA hai| yadyapi adhikAMza AcArya, jinhoMne Agama-granthoM para bhASya,
niyukti, cUrNi yA TIkAe~ likhane meM paryApta udAratA vyakta kI hai, parantu
sUrya-candra saMbaMdhI prajJaptiyoM para prAyaH nahIM likhA hai| isakA eka
kAraNa yaha pratIta hotA hai ki sIdhaM adhyAtma evaM AcAra-upAsanA jaise viSayoM
ke prati unakI ruci vizeSa rahI hogii| athavA yaha bhI kahA jA sakatA hai ki ina
prajJaptiyoM ke viSaya vijJAna ke atinikaTa hone se kliSTa jAna kara chor3a diye
hoN| uttarakAla meM kucha AcAryoM ne isa kamI ko samajhA aura punaH isa para
TIkA likhane kA upakrama kiyaa| inameM sthAnakavAsI AcArya muni dharmasiMhajI
(18 vIM zatI)ne sUryaprajJapti ke yantra' nirmita kiye aura isI paramparA ke
anya AcArya zrI ghAsIlAlajI mahArAja ne 32 AgamoM para jo saMskRta bhASA meM
TIkAe~ likhI haiM unameM sUrya-prajJapti para 'prmeybodhinii'| sUrya prajJapti-
prakAzikA nAmaka TIkA/vyAkhyA mahattvapUrNa hai| isameM AcArya zrI ne mUlasUtra
kI saMskRta chAyA aura saMskRta vyAkhyA kI hai| isakA hindI aura gujarAtI bhASA
meM anuvAda do bhAgoM meM prakAzita bhI huA hai, jisakA niyojana paNDita muni
zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ne kiyA hai| hindI aura gujarAtI anuvAdakartAoM kA nAmollekha
nahIM huA hai| AcArya zrI amolakaRSijI ne bhI prajJapti kA hindI anuvAda kiyA
hai isakA prakAzana haidarAbAda se huA hai tathA aura bhI kucha vidvAn AcAryoM
ne isa para vivecana kiye haiN| sUrya-prajJapti ke saMbaMdha meM deza-videza ke
vicAraka manISiyoM ne bhI bahuta se abhimata bhinna-bhinna lekhoM meM vyakta
kiye haiN| bhAratIya jyotiSa ke kSetra meM bahumAnya varAhamihira' niyuktikAra
bhadrabAhu ke bhrAtA the, unhoMne apane grantha 'varAhasaMhitA' meM sUrya
prajJapti ke katipaya viSayoM ko AdhAra banAkara una para likhA hai| isI prakAra
prasiddha jyotirvida bhAskara ne sUrya prajJapti kI kucha mAnyatAoM ko lekara
apane khaNDanAtmaka vicAra vyakta kiye haiM jo 'siddhAntaziromaNi' grantha meM
draSTavya haiM  /  isI prakAra brahmagupta ne 'sphuTasiddhAnta' grantha meM
khaNDana kA AdhAra banAyA hai| kintu isa yuga meM vaidezika vidvAnoM ne sUrya-
prajJapti ke mahatva ko svIkAra karate hue ise vijJAna kA grantha mAnA hai,
DaoN. vinTaranitja unameM prathama hai| DaoN.zubiMga ne to yahAM taka kahA hai
ki 'sUrya-prajJapti ke adhyayana ke binA bhAratIya jyotiSa ke itihAsa ko sahI
rUpa se nahIM samajhA jA sktaa|' vebara ne san 1868 meM 'uvera DI sUrya-
prajJapti' nAmaka nibandha prakAzita kiyA thaa| DaoN.sibo ne 'oNna da sUrya-
prajJapti' nAmaka apane zodha pUrNa lekha meM grIka logoM ke bhAratavarSa meM
Agamana se pUrva vahAM 'do sUrya aura do candra' kA siddhAnta sarvamAnya thA,
aisA pratipAdita kiyA hai tathA unhoMne atiprAcIna jyotiSa ke vedAMga grantha kI
mAnyatAoM ke sAtha sUrya-prajJapti ke siddhAntoM kI samAnatA bhI batalAI hai|
10. prastuta prakAzana aura kucha prazna : kucha samAdhAna -prajJapti' kI garimA
se svataH siddha ho jAtA hai ki aise grantha kA sarvAdhika svAdhyAya ho, manana
ho 1. draSTavya, gacchAcAra kI vRtti. [ 37 ]

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
And seriously, the topics described in it should be considered again and again
from the point of view of self-welfare. It is probably this auspicious feeling
that has led to its publication, which is commendable. Although this book is
published in its original form, but its editor Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'
has diligently tried to publish its texts in a pure form. Along with this, he
has also raised many questions in the footnotes and also wished for their proper
solutions. When I observed this, some questions also arose in my mind. It would
not be inappropriate to present a gradual consideration of all of them here.
Here, along with the presentation of those questions, their available solutions
are also presented - Question 1. The Surya-Prajnapti text is actually
fragmented, then how did this text become complete? Solution: It is said that
its texts are almost similar to the texts of Chandra-Prajnapti. Therefore, the
ancient teachers themselves have given it its present form by mutual textual
research. Question 2. Why are there still textual variations in the original
texts of the present Surya-Prajnapti? This situation is clearly evident by
comparing it with the 'Surya-Prajnapti' texts published before this edition. For
example, 'Veerastuti' is not given in the beginning. Somewhere some parts have
been omitted in the prose text, then there has also been a change in the words
in the text here and there, etc. Solution: It is possible that this was done
because the editors may have found other manuscripts like this. Along with this,
in the words of Upadhyay Shri Devendramuni Shastri, it is also possible that
Jain Agamas give more importance to meaning than 'words'. They are not word-
oriented like the Vedas. Therefore, such a textual difference would have
occurred. One reason for this could also be that after the collection by the
elders, the readings that took place in different periods, there may have been
such an arrangement. Question 3. There is another important question in this
text about the consumption of meat, etc. in the Nakshatra-Bhojan? How did this
statement, which is completely contrary to Jainism, come into this? Solution:
Different solutions are obtained in this regard. Such as - 1. This text is
interpolated. 2. There was some more text before this text, which has become
fragmented. 3. In this regard, the opinion of Agam Prabhakar Punyavijayi was
that 'some sentences before this have become fragmented, in which this is not
stated by Bhagwan Ra, but it is presented as a quotation in response to a
question, the views of others. 4. Other teachers say that the word 'mans' used
here does not mean 'pranyang mans', but it is used in the sense of 'vegetable
fruits, nuts, etc.' used in ancient times. Similarly, other synonyms of meat,
'pishit, taras, pallal, kravya and amish' words are also not indicative of
'pranyangjanit mans', but are indicative of other meanings. Bhanuji Dikshit, the
commentator of Amarakosha, has given the derivation of the word formed by the
root and suffix, from which 'pishit-avayavavan, taras-balavan, mans-manakarak,
pallal-gamanakarak, kravya-bhayakarak or gatikakarak and amish-kinchit
spardhakarak or sechan' meaning is only established. In addition to the
lexicographers, Ayurvedic texts have also used many such words in the sense of
plants. 5. In the Vedas, Brahmanas, Upanishads and other Samhita texts, the use
of such words like meat, etc. is never used for 'pranyangjanit mans'. 6. The
same situation is in the Tantra texts. There, such words are actually indicated
in spiritual meanings, but in the name of Vamachara, the tongue-loving class has
fulfilled their desires 1. This was said by Upadhyay Shri Devendramuni
Shastriji, while he himself had asked Agam Prabhakarji for this. [ 38 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aura gambhIratA pUrvaka isameM varNita viSayoM kA sva-para kalyANa kI dRSTi se
punaH punaH vicAra ho| sambhavataH isI kalyANamayI bhAvanA se isakA prakAzana
kiyA gayA hai, jo ki abhinandanIya hai| _ yadyapi yaha grantha mUla rUpa meM hI
prakAzita hai kintu isake sampAdanakartA muni zrI kanhaiyAlAla jI 'kamala' ne
parizrama pUrvaka isake pAThoM ko vizuddha rUpa meM prakAzita karane kA prayAsa
kiyA hai| sAtha hI pAda-TippaNiyoM meM aneka praznoM ko bhI uThAyA hai tathA
unake samucita samAdhAnoM kI kAmanA bhI kI hai| maiMne jaba isa kA avalokana
kiyA to mere mana meM bhI kucha prazna ubhara aaye| una sabakA kramika vicAra
bhI yahAM prastuta karanA anucita na hogaa| yahAM una praznoM kI upasthApanA ke
sAtha hI unake yathopalabdha samAdhAna bhI prastuta haiM - prazna 1. sUrya-
prajJapti grantha vastutaH khaMDita hai phira yaha grantha kaise pUrNa huA ?
samAdhAna : aisA kahA jAtA hai ki isake pAThoM meM aura candraprajJapti ke
pAThoM meM prAyaH sAmya hai| ataH pUrvAcAryoM ne hI ise paraspara
pAThAnusaMdhAna dvArA vartamAna rUpa diyA hai| prazna 2. vartamAna
sUryaprajJapti ke mUlapAThoM meM aba bhI pAThAntara kyoM hai ? yaha sthiti isa
saMskaraNa se pUrva prakAzita 'sUryaprajJapti' granthoM se milAne se spaSTataH
pratIta ho jAtI hai| jaise prArambha meM 'vIrastuti' nahIM dI hai| kahIM
gadyapATha meM kucha aMza tyAga diye haiM to yatra-tatra pAThagata zabdoM meM
vyatyaya bhI huA hai, aadi| samAdhAna : sambhavata: yaha isa isaliye kiyA gayA
hogA ki sampAdaka-varga ko aisI anya pANDulipiyoM upalabdha huI hoN| sAtha hI
upAcArya zrI devendramuni zAstrI ke zabdoM meM yaha bhI saMbhava hai ki jaina
Agama 'zabda' kI apekSA artha ko adhika mahattva dete haiN| vedoM kI taraha
zabdavAdI nahIM hai| ataH aisA pATha bheda huA hogaa| eka yaha bhI kAraNa ho
sakatA hai ki sthaviroM ke dvArA saMgraha hone ke pazcAt inakI jo bhinna-bhinna
kAloM meM vAcanAe~ huI haiM, unameM vaisI vyavasthA huI ho| prazna 3. isa
grantha meM eka aura mahattvapUrNa prazna hai nakSatra-bhojana meM mAMsAdi ke
bhojana kA? yaha jainadharma ke sarvathA pratikUla kathana isameM kaise AyA ?
samAdhAna : isa saMbaMdha meM bhinna-bhinna samAdhAna prApta hote haiM  /  yathA
- 1. yaha pATha prakSipta hai| 2. isa pATha se pUrva aura bhI kucha pATha thA,
jo vichinna ho gyaa| 3. isa saMbaMdha meM AgamaprabhAkara puNyavijayI kA
abhimata thA ki 'isake pahale ke kucha vAkya khaNDita ho gaye haiM, jinameM yaha
bhagavAn rA kathita na hokara kisI prazna ke uttara meM uddharaNa ke rUpa meM
anya matoM kA pradarzana kiyA gayA hai| 4. anya AcAryoM kA kathana hai ki yahAM
prayukta 'mAMsa' zabda kA artha prANyaGga mAMsa nahIM hai, apitu yaha atyanta
prAcIna kAla meM prayukta hone vAle artha 'vanaspatijanita phala mevA' Adi ke
artha meM vyavahRta hai| isI prakAra mAMsa ke paryAyavAcI anya zabda 'pizita,
taras, palala, kravya aura AmiSa' zabda bhI prANyaGgajanya mAMsa ke sUcaka na
hokara anya arthoM ke hI sUcaka haiN| amarakoSa ke TIkAkAra bhAnujI dIkSita ne
jo dhAtapratyaya janita zabda kI vyutpatti dI hai, usase 'pizita-avayavavAna,
tarasa-balavAn, mAMsa-mAnakAraka, palala-gamanakAraka, kravya-bhayakAraka athavA
gatikAraka aura AmiSa-kiMcit spardhAkAraka athavA secana artha kA hI pratipAdana
hotA hai| kozakAroM ke atirikta Ayurveda ke granthoM meM bhI aise aneka zabdoM
ko vanaspatiyoM ke arthoM meM hI prayukta kiyA hai| 5. veda, brAhmaNa, upaniSad
aura anya saMhitA granthoM meM bhI aise mAMsAdi zabdoM ke prayoga nirvivAdarUpa
se prANyaGgajanita mAMsa ke liye kadApi prayukta nahIM hai  /  6. tantragranthoM
meM bhI yahI sthiti hai| vahAM aise zabdoM ko vastutaH AdhyAtmika arthoM meM hI
sUcita kiyA hai kintu vAmAcAra ke nAma para jihvAlolupavarga apanI lipsAoM 1.
yaha bAta upAcArya zrI devendramuni zAstrIjI ne kahI thI, jabaki unhoMne isake
liye svayaM AgamaprabhAkarajI se pUchA thaa| [ 38 ]

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They follow a distorted path by interpreting it according to their own
understanding. People with evil intentions, who spread corruption in society by
arbitrarily interpreting the true facts and processes of the traditional method
of statement of the ancient sages, or who seek to defame, do this. The actual
meaning of the words "meat, fish, etc." used in Jain literature is definitely
not the meaning prevalent in modern usage. This fact has been explained in great
detail in the second chapter of the "Manav-Bhojy-Mimamsa" text by Pannyas Shri
Kalyanvijayji Gani. The ignorant class spreads such ill-will because they do not
have the discernment between the known and the unknown. The talk of "Nakshatra-
Bhojan" in Surya-Prajnapti is related to the food of substances that appease the
stars to free them from their defects. In astrology, such remedies are often
shown for the removal of weekday defects, date defects, planetary defects, omen
defects, bad luck, etc. These are also given here briefly as an example. This
assumption is certainly acceptable. The "Muhurta-Chintamani" also mentions food
items to get rid of the defects of such stars. The word "meat" is also used in
them. But its famous commentator Govind Jyotirvit has clearly written in his
"Piyushdhara" commentary that - "Nakshatradohadam Kulmashaanityadikamidam
Bhakshyabhakshyam Varnabhedena Deshabhedena Va Bhakshyametadabhakshyamiti
Vicharya Bhakshyasambhave Bhakshayate Abhakshyasambhave Alekayet Pashyet Sprused
Vettyapi Dhyeyam." (p. 390, Nirnayasagar Bombay Publication). Its summary is
this - "In the observance of Nakshatradohad, consider what is edible and
inedible based on caste differences and regional differences, and do what is
appropriate. If it is not edible, then look at it or touch it." - There is also
an indication of the statement of Nakshatra-Dohad by Narada in some text and by
Vasishtha, Kashyap, Shripati and Bhatta Utpal. In support of his statement, the
commentator, quoting the words of the "Guru", has stated that - "Atra
Yadabhakshyam Dushpraapam Va Tat Samatva Drishtava Datva Gantvyamityah Guru."
This clearly shows that these Dohad-Bhojy were indicated keeping in mind the
common people and they gave priority to discernment. Acharya Shrimali Giri, in
his explanation of this incident, has simply said, "In Krittika, the work
started is accomplished without any obstacles, for this purpose, food of rice
mixed with curd is eaten," and said, "See the rest of the sutras." Acharya Shri
Ghasilalji Maharaj, in his commentary Prameh-Bodhini (in the seventeenth
Prabhut-Prabhut of the tenth Prabhut), has stated, "Namaikadeshagrahanena
Namagrahanam Bhavattiti Niyamati", and has stated that "The essence of Dhatura
or its powder is to be taken from Vrishabhamas." and has explained the meaning
of Mrigamans as Indravaruni plant, Deepakamans - Ajwain powder, Mandukamans -
Mandukaparni powder, Nakhimas - Vaghnakhi powder, Varahamas - Varahikanth
powder, Jalcharamans - Jalchar Kumbhika powder, Tintinikamans - Tamarind powder.
Acharya Shri Amolkarishiji has also expressed similar meanings in his
commentary, a table of which is as follows - See, Commentary text, pp. 1048 to
1052. Shri Suryaprajnaptisutram (First Part), A. Bha. Shwe. Sta. Jain
Shastroddhar Samiti, Ahmedabad published. [ 39 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ke anusAra artha karake vikRta mArga kA anusaraNa karate haiN| pracIna
maharSiyoM kI kathana-paddhati kA vAstavika tathya evaM prakriyA kA pAramparika
bodha na hone se manamAnA artha lagAkara samAja meM dUSaNa phailAne vAle athavA
AkSepasiddhi ke liye durvRtti ke loga aisA karate haiN| 'jaina-sAhitya meM
prayukta mAMsa-matsyAdi zabdoM ke vAstavika artha' Adhanika vyavahAra meM
pracalita artha kathamapi nahIM hai, yaha nizcita hai| isa tathya ko 'mAnava-
bhojya-mImAMsA' grantha ke dvitIya prakaraNa meM atyanta vistAra se paMnyAsa zrI
kalyANavijayajI gaNI ne spaSTa kiyA hai| prasiddhArtha aura aprasiddhArtha kA
viveka nahIM rakhane se hI alpajJa varga aisI durbhAvanAe~ phailAte haiM  /
sUrya-prajJapti meM 'nakSatra-bhojana' kI bAta nakSatroM ke doSa se mukta hone
ke liye unakI tuSTi karane vAle padArthoM ke bhojana se saMbaddha hai|
jyotiSazAstra meM vAradoSa, tithidoSa, grahadoSa, zakunadoSa, duryoga Adi kI
nivRtti ke liye aise upAya bahudhA dikhAye gaye haiM, unhIM ko yahAM bhI
udArahaNa ke rUpa meM prasaGgapUrvaka saMkSepa meM diyA hogaa| yaha dhAraNa
avazya hI svIkaraNIya hai| 'muhUrta-cintAmaNi' meM bhI aise nakSatroM ke doSa se
chuTakArA pAne ke liye khAdya-vastuoM kA kathana huA hai| unameM bhI 'mAMsa'
zabda prayukta hai| kintu usake prasiddha TIkAkAra govinda jyotirvit ne apanI
'pIyuSadhArA' TIkA meM spaSTa likhA hai ki - 'nakSatradohadaM
kulmASanityAdikamidaM bhakSyAbhakSyaM varNabhedena dezabhedena vA
bhakSyametadabhakSyamiti vicArya bhakSyasambhave bhakSayate abhakSyasammave
Alekayet pazyet spRzed vetyapi dhyeym|' (pR. 390, nirNayasAgara bambaI
prkaashn)| isakA sArAMza yaha hai ki - 'nakSatradohada ke pAlana meM varNabheda
aura dezabheda ke AdhAra para bhakSyAbhakSya kA vicAra karake jaisA ucita ho
vaha kre| yadi bhakSya na ho to usako dekhe athavA sparza kare' - vahIM nArada
ke kisI grantha kA tathA vasiSTha, kazyapa, zrIpati aura bhaTTa utpala dvArA bhI
nakSatra-dohada kathana kA saMketa diyA hai| apane kathana ke pramANa meM
TIkAkAra ne 'guru' ke vacanoM ko uddhRta karate huye batalAyA hai ki - 'atra
yadabhakSyaM duSprApaM vA tat samatvA dRSTvA dattvA gantavyamityAha guruH|'
isase spaSTa hai ki ye dohada-bhakSya janasAdhAraNa ko lakSya meM rakhakara
sUcita kiye the aura unameM viveka ko pradhAnatA dI thii| AcArya zrImalayagiri
ne isa prasaMga kI vyAkhyA meM sAmAnya artha ke rUpa meM 'kRttikA meM prArabdha
kArya nirvighna siddha ho, tadartha dadhimizrita odana kA bhojana kiyA jAtA hai'
itanA kahakara 'zeSa sUtroM meM dekheM' kaha diyA hai| AcArya zrI ghAsIlAlajI
mahArAja ne apanI vyAkhyA prameha-bodhinI meM (dazama prAbhUta ke satrahaveM
prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM) 'nAmaikadezagrahaNena nAmagrahaNaM bhavatIti niyamAt'
kahakara 'vRSabhamAMsa se dhature kA sAra avathA cUrNa grAhya hai ' aisA
batalAyA hai tathA mRgamAMsa kA artha indrAvaruNI vanaspati, dIpakamAMsa-
ajavAina kA cUrNa, maNDUkamAMsa-maNDUkaparNI kA cUrNa, nakhImAMsa-vAghanakhI kA
cUrNa, varAhamAMsa-vArAhIkanda kA cUrNa, jalacaramAMsa-jalacara kumbhikA kA
cUrNa, tintiNIkamAMsa-imalI kA cUrNa - aise artha spaSTa kiye haiN| AcArya zrI
amolakaRSijI ne bhI apanI vyAkhyA meM aise hI arthoM ko vyakta kiyA hai, jisakI
tAlikA isa prakAra hai - draSTavya, TIkA grantha, pR. 1048 se 1052 tk| zrI
sUryaprajJaptisUtram (prathama bhAga), a. bhA. zve. sthA. jaina zAstroddhAra
samiti, ahamadAbAda se prkaashit| [ 39 ]

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nakshatra-Bhojan-Talika (Star-Food-Table)  **Dahi (Yogurt) Ghrit (Ghee)
Kasturi (Musk) Navneet (Butter)**  **Ghrit (Ghee)**  **Dahi (Yogurt) Vasahmans
(Pork) Migamans (Deer Meat) Navaniy (Fresh) Ghay (Milk) Kheer (Rice Pudding).
Deevaghans (Fish) Kasari (Crab) Medhaghans (Goat Meat) Nakkhimans (Chicken)
Vatthaanieg (Vegetables)**  **Kavchasinga (Conch Shell) Athava (Or) Kamal Keshar
(?) Athava (Or) Kesara (Saffron) Elayachi (Cardamom) Athava (Or) Aloo (Potato)
Lasun Kanda (Garlic) Athava (Or) Aloo (Potato) Singhada (Water Chestnut) Moong
Ki Daal (Green Gram)**  **Magsue (Millet)**  **Phal (Fruit)**  **Atishia
(Gooseberry)**  **1. Kritika 2. Rohini 3. Migasir 4. Ardra 5. Punarvasu 6.
Pushya 7. Ashlesha 8. Magha 9. Purva Phalguni 10. Uttara Phalguni 11. Hasta 12.
Chitra 13. Swati 14. Visakha 15. Anuradha 16. Jyeshta 17. Mula 18. Purvashadha
19. Uttarashadha 20. Abhijit 21. Shravana 22. Dhanishta 23. Shatabhisha 24.
Purvabhadrapada 25. Uttarabhadrapada 26. Revati 27. Ashwini 28. Bharani**
**Masa (Month) Karen (Do) Kolatthiya (Pumpkin)**  **Moolak (Radish)**  **Athali
(Bitter Gourd) Athava (Or) Shak (Greens) Mith (Sweet) Kuro (Rice) Dhanya (Grain)
Kola-Kaddu (Pumpkin) Mooli (Radish) Athava (Or) Mogare Ka Shak (Jasmine Greens)
Aamla (Gooseberry) Vilva Phal (Bael Fruit) Athava (Or) Pakka Nimbu (Ripe Lemon)
Pushp (Flower)**  **Aamlag (Gooseberry)**  **Vill (Bael)**  **Pushp (Flower)**
**Kheer (Rice Pudding)**  **Juice**  **Karela (Bitter Gourd) Athava (Or) Sakkar
Kola (Sweet Pumpkin) Tumba Karela (Bottle Gourd)**  **Tumbaraat (Bottle Gourd)
Kariye (Do) Varahams (Pig) Jalayarams (Fish) Tittarams (Partridge) Til (Sesame)
Tandal (Rice)**  **Kapoor (Camphor) Jalchar (Aquatic) Phulan (Flowers) Athava
(Or) Pani (Water) Sitafal (Custard Apple)**  **Tilli Ka Tel (Sesame Oil) Athava
(Or) Chawal (Rice)**  **[40]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nakSatra-bhojana-tAlikA dadhi ghRta kastUrI navanIta (makkhana) ghRta dahI
vasahamaMsa migamaMsa NavaNIya ghaya khIra. dIvagamaMsa kasAri meDhagamaMsa
NakkhimaMsa vatthANiega kavacasiMga athavA kamala kezara (?) athavA kesAra
elAyacI athavA AlU lasUNakaMda athavA AlU siMghADA mUMga kI dAla magasUe phala
AtisiyA 1. kRtikA 2. rohiNI 3. migasira 4. ArdrA 5. punarvasu 6. puSya 7. azleSA
8. maghA 9. pUrvAphAlgunI 10. uttarAphAlguNI 11. hasta 12.citrA 13. svAti 14.
vizAkha 15. anurAdhA 16.jyeSThA 17. mUla 18. pUrvASADhA 19. uttarASADhA
20.abhijita 21. zravaNa 22. dhaniSThA 23. zatabhiSA 24. pUrvAbhAdrapadA 25.
uttarabhAdrapadA 26.revatI 27. azvinI 28. bharaNI mAsA kareNa kolaThThiya mUlaka
AThalI athavA zAka mitha kuro dhAnya kolA-kaddU mUlI athavA mogare kA zAka
AMvalA vilva phala athavA pakkA nIMbU puSpa Amalaga villa puSpha khIra jUsa
karelA athavA sakkara kolA tUMbA karelA tumbarAta kAriyae varAhamaMsa
jalayaramaMsa tittaramaMsa tila taMdula kapUra jalacara phUlana athavA pAnI
sItAphala tillI kA tela athavA cAvala [ 40 ]

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Thus, the subject of food of twenty-eight constellations is written as it has
been seen in other places. The commentator Shri Malayagiri Acharya has not
commented on it. The truth is only knowable by the Kevali. Acharya Amolkarishi
Ji M. Edited by Acharya Shri Hastimalji Maharaj, Surya Prajnapti Pa. 10
Antarpahuḍ - 17 Pp. 220 - 223. 11. Conclusion and Divine Knowledge - Through all
these discussions, we arrive at one conclusion that 'the world is known in its
entirety only by the omniscient'. The intellectual world has always been
incapable of recognizing its totality. To gain knowledge of the difficult-to-
understand Adhibhautik elements, the curiosity of the living world cannot be
fulfilled without becoming established in the Adhidaivik and Adhyatmik realms.
The attainment of supernatural elements or the realization of truth is possible
only through the Agamas. This is why the treasure trove of world knowledge, the
Agamas, are revered by all. Being the word of the omniscient, every part of it
is true, worthy of reverence and worship. It is also noteworthy that 'to
understand the real essence of the Agamic literature, one should acquire
knowledge of the traditional commentary from the knowledgeable sages, only then
can we know something'. Surya Prajnapti is also such an Agamic text, whose
secret meaning can be as futile as grinding chaff without understanding the
ancient mathematical and astronomical definitions, rather than modern
definitions. Finally, I would like to say that in the search for the eternal
truth-revealing elements of these unparalleled gem-like texts of Indian culture,
scholars and thinkers should jointly examine the texts of the Jain, Vedic and
Buddhist traditions, because all three streams have flowed from the same goal
from the beginning, but in the intervening period, some have become disjointed
due to their own prejudices and some due to the influence of outsiders. Until we
come together and complete each other's shortcomings, the attainment of
perfection will remain a mere figment of imagination. Therefore, You are you, we
are we, all of us are always the same, those who are killed by the killer, those
who have fallen into the trap of attachment, have not fallen into anything.
Thinking carefully, again, to lift up one's own self, you are those who are we,
let them speak to each other with their own selves. This is the request, the
desire and the prayer. ॐ ॥ [ 41 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isa taraha aTThAIsa nakStroM ke bhojana kA viSaya jaisA anya sthAna meM dekhane
meM AyA hai vaisA hI likhA hai| TIkAkAra zrI malayagiri AcArya ne isakI TIkA
nahIM kI hai| tattva kevaligamya  /  AcArya amolakaRSi jI ma. AcArya zrI
hastImalajI mahArAja dvArA sampAdita sUryaprajJapti pA. 10 antarapAhuDa - 17 pR.
220 - 223. 11. upasaMhAra evaM rtivya-bodha - ina saba vivecanoM ke dvArA hama
eka hI niSkarSa para pahuMcate haiM ki 'vizva ko sarvAMza meM sarvajJa hI jAnate
haiM  /  buddhijIvI jagat isakI samagratA ko pahacAnane meM sadaiva akSama hI
rahA hai  /  durvijJeya Adhibhautika tattvoM kA jJAna prApta karane ke liye
Adhidaivika aura AdhyAtmika bhUmikArUDha hue binA jIva-jagata kI jijJAsA pUrNa
nahIM ho sktii| alaukika tattvopalabdhi athavA satya kA sAkSAtkAra AgamoM ke
dvArA hI sambhava hai| yahI kAraNa hai ki vizva vidyAoM ke nidhAna AgamoM kA
pratyeka akSara sabhI ke liye bahumAnya hai  /  sarvajJa kI vANI hone se usakA
pratyeka aMza satya hai, zraddheya hai aura upAsya hai aura sAtha hI yaha bhI
dhyAtavya hai ki 'Agama-sAhitya ke vAstavika tattvoM ko samajhane ke unake liye
marmajJa manISiyoM se pAramparika sampradAyArtha kA jJAna prApta karanA cAhiye,
tabhI hama kucha jAna sakate haiN| sUrya - prajJapita bhI eka aisA hI Agama
grantha hai, jisake rahasyArtha kA parijJAna Adhunika paribhASAoM kI apekSA
prAcIna gANitika evaM khagolIya paribhASaoM ko samajhe binA tuSa kuTTana ke
samAna hI niSphala ho sakatA hai| anta meM maiM eka bAta aura kahanA cAhatA hUM
ki bhAratIya saMskRti ke ina apUrva-grantha ratnoM ke cirantana satya ke
paricAyaka tattvoM kI khoja meM vidvAn gaveSakoM evaM cintakoM ko jaina, vaidika
aura bauddha paramparA ke granthoM kA saMyukta rUpa se parizIlana karanA cAhiye,
kyoMki ye tInoM dhArAe~ prArambha se hI eka hI lakSya se bahI hai kintu vIca ke
sAmpAtika kAla meM kucha to svayaM ke durAgrahoM se aura kucha parAye logoM ke
bahakAve ke kAraNa vizrRMkhalita ho gaI haiN| jaba taka paraspara milakara eka-
dUsare kI nyUnatAoM ko pUrNa nahIM kiyA jAyegA taba taka pUrNatA kI prApti AkAza
- puSpa hI banI rahegI  /  ataH yUyaM yUyaM vayamiha vayaM sarvadaivaM
buvadbhihantA hantAgraha - nipatitai bhraMzitaM naiva kiM kim  /  saJcintyAtaH
punarapi nijaM svatvamuddhartumAryA, yUyaM ye te vayAmiti mithaH svAtmanA
saMvadantu  //  yahI nivedana hai, kAmanA hai aura prArthanA hai  //  OM  //  [
41 ]

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Prabhruta Prabhruta **Veeraththui** **Panchapaya Vandana** -  A
detailed explanation of the Joisaray Pannaatti, including the subject matter of
the Paahudas. **Subject Matter of the Paahudas** **First Paahuda** -  Subject
matter of the first eight Paahudas. **Number of verses in the first Paahuda**
**Subject matter of the second Paahuda** **Number of verses in the second
Paahuda** **Subject matter of the twenty-two Paahudas from the tenth Paahuda
onwards** -  Including the months, Muhurtas, Vaddhi-Avaddhi, the movement of the
Sun in the entire solar system, the duration of the day and night in the solar
system, and the duration of the year. **Conclusion**  ## Second Prabhruta
Prabhruta **The arrangement of the southern hemisphere of the Sun** **The
arrangement of the northern hemisphere of the Sun**  ## Third Prabhruta
Prabhruta **The movement of the Sun**  ## Fourth Prabhruta Prabhruta **The
distance between the Sun and other celestial bodies**  ## Fifth Prabhruta
Prabhruta **The movement of the Sun after sunrise and sunset**  ## Sixth
Prabhruta Prabhruta **The movement of the Sun in different circles and its
intersection with other circles**  ## Seventh Prabhruta Prabhruta **The
arrangement of the Moon and the Sun**  ## Eighth Prabhruta Prabhruta **The outer
limits, length, width, and circumference of all the circles of the Sun** [ 42 ]
3 3 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 6 6 6 8 9 10 13 15 18 21 24 25

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRtaprAbhRta vIratthuI paMcapayavaMdaNaM
joisarAyapaNNattiparUvaNapaiNNA ya pAhuDANaM visayaparUvaNaM paDhamapAhuDagaya
aTThapAhuDapAhuDasuttANaM visayaparUvaNaM paDhamapAhuDassa paDivattisaMkhA
bitiyapAhuDassa visayaparUvaNaM bitiyapAhuDassa paMDivattisaMkhA dasame pAhuDe
bAvIsaM pAhuDapAhuDANaM visayaparUvaNaM mAsassa muhuttANaM vaddhI'vaddhI
savvasUramaMDalamagge sUrassa gamaNAgamaNe rAIdiyappamANaM sUramaMDalesu sUrassa
saiM dukkhutto vA cAraM AiccasaMvacchare ahorattappamANaM upasaMhAramuttaM
dvitIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta sUrassa dAhiNA addhamaMDala saMThiI sUrassa uttarA
addhamaMDalasaMThiI tRtIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta sUriyANaM saMcaraNa - khettaM
caturtha prAbhRtaprAbhRta sUriyANaM aNNamaNNassa aMtaracAraM viSayAnukrama
paMcama prAbhRtaprAbhRta sUrassa dIvasamudda- avagAhaNANaMtaraM cAraM prathama
prAbhRta SaSTha prAbhRtaprAbhRta sUrassa egamege rAidie maMDalAo
maMDalasaMkamaNakhettacAraM saptama prAbhRtaprAbhRta caMda - sUramaMDala -
saMThiI aSTama prAbhRtaprAbhRta sUrassa savvamaMDalANaM bAhallaM AyAma -
vikkhaMbha- parikkhevaM ca [ 42 ] 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 6 6 6 8 9 10 13 15 18 21 24
25

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The distance between the outer edge of all the celestial spheres and the center
is half the measure of the *praabhrut*.  First *praabhrut* *praabhrut* The
*terichchhagai* of the suns. Second *praabhrut* *praabhrut* The transition
between the spheres of the suns. Third *praabhrut* *praabhrut* The measure of
the *muhuttagai* of the sun. Third *praabhrut* The *obhaasakhetta*,
*ujjoyakhetta*, *taavakhetta*, and *pagaasakhetta* of the moon and sun. Fourth
*praabhrut* The *santhii* of the moon and sun. The *santhii* of the sun with its
*taavakhetta*. The *santhii* of the *taavakhetta*. The *lesaapadighaayaga*
mountains of the sun. The *oysanthii* of the sun. The *pagaasiya* mountains of
the sun. The *udayasethi* of the sun. *Vaasa* *uu*. *Hemant* *uu*. *Gimh* *uu*.
Second *praabhrut* *Ayanai*. *Ussappini* - *Osappini*. *Lavanasamuddo*.
*Dhaayido*. *Abbhantarpuukkharaddo*. Fifth *praabhrut* Sixth *praabhrut* Seventh
*praabhrut* Eighth *praabhrut* [ 43 ] 29 30 32 34 39 42 *Che* 42 44 46 49 52 57
58 64 64 65 65 66 66 66 67

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 savvasUramaMDalANaM bAhallaM aMtaraM addhApamANaM ca prathama prAbhRtaprAbhRta
sUrANaM tericchagaI dvitIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta sUrassa maMDalAo
maMDalAntarasaMkamaNaM tRtIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta sUrassa muhuttagaipamANaM tRtIya
prAbhRta caMdima-sUriyANaM obhAsakhettaM ujjoyakhettaM tAvakhetaM pagAsakhettaM
ca caturtha prAbhRta seyAte saMThiI caMdima - sUriyasaMThiI sUriyassa
tAvakkhettasaMThitI tAvakkhettasaMThiie bAhAo sUyassa lessApaDighAyagA pavvatA
sUriyassa oyasaMThiI sUrieNa pagAsiyA pavvayA sUrassa udayaseThi vAsA uu hemaMta
uu gimha uu dvitIya prAbhRta ayaNAi ussappiNI- osappiNI lavaNasamuddo dhAyaiDo
abbhaMtarapukkharaddo paMcama prAbhRta SaSTha prAbhRta saptama prAbhRta aSTama
prAbhRta [ 43 ] 29 30 32 34 39 42 ce 42 44 46 49 52 57 58 64 64 65 65 66 66 66
67

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Navama Prabhruta Porisichchāyanivvattanaṃ Porisinivvattanaṃ Porisipamāṇaṃ Dasama
Prabhruta Prathama Prabhrutaprābhruta Nakkhatāṇaṃ Āvaliyā-ṇivāyajogo Ya Dvitiya
Prabhrutaprābhruta Nakkhatāṇaṃ Candeṇa Jogakālo Nakkhatāṇaṃ Sūreṇa Jogakālo
Tṛtiya Prabhrutaprābhruta Nakkhatāṇaṃ Puvvaibhāgā Khetta-kālappmāṇaṃ Ca Caturtha
Prabhrutaprābhruta Nakkhatāṇaṃ Candeṇa Jogārambhakālo Pañcama Prabhrutaprābhruta
Nakkhatāṇaṃ Krīlovakulāi Ṣaṣṭha Prabhrutaprābhruta Duvālasāsu Puṇṇamāsīṇīsu
Kulāi-ṇakkhaṭṭa-jogasaṃkhā Duvālasāsu Amāvāsāsu Nakkhaṭṭajogasaṃkhā Duvālasāsu
Amāvāsāsu Kulāi-ṇakkhaṭṭa-jogasaṃkhā Saptama Prabhrutaprābhruta Duvālasa
Puṇṇimāsu Amāvāsāsu Ya Candeṇa-ṇakkhaṭṭasaṃjogo Aṣṭama Prabhrutaprābhruta
Nakkhatāṇaṃ Saṃṭhāṇaṃ Navama Prabhrutaprābhruta Nakkhatāṇaṃ Tāraggaṃsaṃkhā
Dasama Prabhrutaprābhruta Vāsa-hemanta-gimha-rāindiyāṇaṃ Gyāharavāṃ
Prabhrutaprābhruta Candamago Nakkhaṭṭajogasaṃkhā Ravi-sasi-ṇakkhaṭṭehiṃ
Avirahiyāṇaṃ, Virahiyānaṃ Sāmaṇṇāṇa Ya Candamaṇḍalāṇaṃ Saṃkhā Bārahavāṃ
Prabhrutaprābhruta Nakkhatāṇaṃ Devayā [ 44]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama prAbhRta porisicchAyanivvattaNaM porisinivattaNaM porisipamANaM dazama
prAbhRta prathama prAbhRtaprAbhRta NakkhatANaM AvaliyA-NivAyajogo ya dvitIya
prAbhRtaprAbhRta NakkhatANaM caMdeNa jogakAlo NakkhatANaM sUreNa jogakAlo tRtIya
prAbhRtaprAbhRta NakkhatANaM puvvAibhAgA khetta-kAlappamANaM ca caturtha
prAbhRtaprAbhRta NakkhatANaM caMdeNa jogAraMbhakAlo paMcama prAbhRtaprAbhRta
NakkhatANaM kRlovakulAI SaSTha prAbhRtaprAbhRta duvAlasAsu puNNamAsiNIsu kulAi-
Nakkhatta-jogasaMkhA duvAlasAsu amAvAsAsu NakkhattajogasaMkhA duvAlasAsu
amAvAsAsu kulAi-Nakkhatta-jogasaMkhA saptama prAbhRtaprAbhRta duvAlasa puNNimAsu
amAvAsAsu ya caMdeNa-NakkhattasaMjogo aSTama prAbhRtaprAbhRta NakkhattANaM
saMThANaM navama prAbhRtaprAbhRta NakkhattANaM tAraggasaMkhA dazama
prAbhRtaprAbhRta vAsa-hemaMta-gimha-rAiMdiyANaM gyAharavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta
caMdamago NakkhattajogasaMkhA ravi-sasi-NakkhattehiM avirahiyANaM, virahiyANaM
sAmaNNANa ya caMdamaMDalANaM saMkhA bArahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta NakkhattANaM
devayA [ 44]

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The thirteenth Prabhruta Prabhruta Muhurta is named. The fourteenth Prabhruta
Prabhruta is named for the days. The fifteenth Prabhruta Prabhruta is named for
the three. The sixteenth Prabhruta Prabhruta is the lineage of the
constellations. The seventeenth Prabhruta Prabhruta is the eating of the
constellations, the accomplishment of the task. The eighteenth Prabhruta
Prabhruta is the number of the Sun and Moon in one Yuga. The nineteenth
Prabhruta Prabhruta is the months of one year. The twentieth Prabhruta Prabhruta
is the number and characteristics of the years. The characteristics of the
Lakshana year. The twenty-first Prabhruta Prabhruta is the constellation of the
wife. The twenty-second Prabhruta Prabhruta is the constellation of the Saruva
Paruva, the boundary circumference of the constellation circle. The
constellation's connection with the Moon. The Moon's connection with the full
moon, the Sun's connection with the full moon. The connection. The Moon's
connection with the new moon, the Sun's connection with the new moon. The Moon's
connection with the full moon, the Sun's connection with the full moon, the
constellation's connection. The Moon's connection with the new moon, the Sun's
connection with the new moon, the constellation's connection. The time of the
Moon's connection with the Sun, the Moon's connection with the Sun, the planets,
the constellations. The Moon's connection with the Sun, the planets, the
constellations. [ 45 ] 114 115 116 117 120 122 123 124 125 126 129 131 132 132
134 135 135 136 137 138 139 139

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta muhuttANaM NAmAI caudahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta
divasarAINaM NAmAI pandrahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta tihINaM NAmAI solahavAM
prAbhRtaprAbhRta kkhattANaM gottA sattarahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta NakkhattANaM
bhoyaNaM kajjasiddhI ya aThArahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta ege juge Adicca -
caMdacArasaMkhA unnIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta egasaMvaccharassa mAsA bIsavAM
prAbhRtaprAbhRta saMvaccharANaM saMkhA lakkhaNaM ca lakkhaNasaMvaccharassa bheyA
ikkIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta kkhattANaM dArAI bAvIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta
NakkhattANaM sarUvaparUvaNaM NakkhattamaMDalANaM sImAvikkhaMbho NakkhattANaM
caMdeNa jogo caMdassa puNNimAsiNIsu jogo sUrassa puNNimAsiNIsu jogo jogo
caMdassa amAvAsAsu sUrassa amAvAsAsu jogo puNNimAsiNIsu caMdassa ya sUrassa ya
NakkhattANaM jogo amAvAsAsu caMdas ya sUrassa ya NakkhattANaM jogo caMdeNa ca
sUreNa ya NakkhattANaM jogakAlo caMda - sUra-gaha-NakkhattANaM gaisamAvaNNattaM
caMda-sUra-gaha-NakkhattANaM jogo [ 45 ] 114 115 116 117 120 122 123 124 125 126
129 131 132 132 134 135 135 136 137 138 139 139

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Prabhrit  **Five-year cycle, beginning and ending time, conjunction
of moon and sun, and constellations:**  * First lunar year * Second lunar year *
Third increasing year * Fourth lunar year * Fifth increasing year  **Number of
months and Muhurta in the five-year cycle:**  * First constellation year *
Second lunar year * Third Udu year * Fourth Aiccha year * Fifth increasing year
**Number of days and Muhurta in one Yuga:**  **End of the five-year cycle,
beginning and ending time:**  **Udu, name, and time:**  **Number of Aavam and
Airitta:**  ## Twelfth Prabhrit  **Conjunction of moon and sun with
constellations in Vasikkia and Auttia, and conjunction of moon and sun with
constellations in Hemantiya and Auttia:**  **Conjunction of moon and sun:**
**Waxing and waning of the moon:**  **Full moon and new moon in one Yuga, lunar
half-month, and movement of the moon:**  * First lunar path * Second lunar path
* Third lunar path  **Reasons for the darkness of the night:**  **Movement of
moon, sun, planets, constellations, and stars:**  **Specific movement of moon,
sun, and constellations:**  ## Thirteenth Prabhrit  ## Fourteenth Prabhrit  ##
Fifteenth Prabhrit

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM prAbhRta paMcaNhaM saMvaccharaNaM pAraMbha-pajjavasANakAlaM, caMda
sUrANa - NakkhattasaMjogakAlo ca paDhamaM caMdasaMvaccharaM bitiyaM
caMdasaMvaccharaM tatiyaM abhivaDDhiyaM saMvaccharaM cautthaM caMdasaMvaccharaM
paMcamaM abhivaDDhiyaM saMvaccharaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM mAsANaM ca
rAiMdiyamuhuttappamANaM paDhamaM NakkhattasaMvaccharaM bitiyaM caMdasaMvaccharaM
tatiyaM uDusaMvaccharaM cautthaM 'AiccasaMvaccharaM paMcamaM
abhivaDDhiyasaMvaccharaM egassa jugassa ahoratta-muhuttappamANaM paMcaM
saMvaccharaNaM pAraMbha-pajjavasANakAlassa samattaparUvaNaM uDUNaM NAmAI
kAlappamANaM ca avama-airittarattANaM saMkhA heU ca bArahavAM prAbhRta
vAsikkiyAsu AuTTiyAsu caMdeNa sUreNa ya NakkhattajogakAlo hemaMtiyAsu AuTTiyAsu
caMdeNa sUreNa ya NakkhattajogakAlo jogANaM caMdeNa saddhiM joga-parUvaNaM
caMdamaso vaDDho'vaDDhI egayuge puNNimAsiNIo amAvAsAo caMdAicca addhamAse
caMdAiccANaM maMDalacAraM paDhame caMdAyaNe docce caMdAyaNe tacce caMdAyane
dosiNA aMdhayArassa ya bahuttakAraNaM caMda - sUra-gaha - Nakkhatta- tArANaM
gaiparUvaNaM caMda-sUra - NakkhattANaM visesagaiparUvaNaM terahavAM prAbhRta
caudahavAM prAbhRta pandrahavAM prAbhRta [ 46 ] 141 141 141 142 142 143 144 144
144 145. 145 146 146 147 148 148 148 149 150 151 151 152 152 153 154 156 157 158

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The motion of the Moon in the constellations, the motion of the Moon in the
lunar mansions, the motion of the Sun in the constellations, the motion of the
Sun in the lunar mansions. A - The motion of the Moon, the Sun, and the
constellations in the lunar month. B - The motion of the Moon, the Sun, and the
constellations in the lunar month. C - The motion of the Moon, the Sun, and the
lunar month in the lunar month. D - The motion of the Moon, the Sun, and the
constellations in the solar month. E - The motion of the Moon, the Sun, and the
constellations in the intercalary month. The motion of the Moon, the Sun, and
the constellations in the day and night, the motion of the Moon, the Sun, and
the constellations in the different lunar mansions, the motion of the Moon, the
Sun, and the constellations in the different lunar mansions. Signs of the
planets. The sixteenth chapter. The seventeenth chapter. The eighteenth chapter.
The eclipses of the Moon and the Sun. The parts of the Earth that are
illuminated by the Moon. The stars that are not illuminated. The reasons for the
eclipses of the Moon, the constellations, and the stars. The family of the Moon,
the constellations, and the stars. The motion of the planets in the Mandara
mountain. The motion of the planets in the Loanta mountain. The motion of the
constellations in the ocean. The arrangement of the Moon, the Sun, the planets,
and the constellations. The size, diameter, and circumference of the Moon, the
Sun, the planets, the constellations, and the stars. The motion of the Moon, the
Sun, the planets, the constellations, and the stars. The fast and slow motion of
the planets. The increase and decrease of the planets. The distance between the
stars. The wives of the Moon, the family of the Moon, the wives of the Sun, the
family of the Sun, the gods of the planets. [ 47 ] 158 158 158 159 159 159 160
160 160 160 160 161 162 163 166 167 168 169 169 169 170 171 172 176 176 176 177
178 178

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caMdassa NakkhattANa ya jogagaiparUvaNaM caMdassa gahANa ya joga -
gaikAlaparUvaNaM sUrassa NakkhattANa ya joga-gaikAlaparUvaNaM sUrassa gahANa ya
joga - gaikAlaparUvaNaM ka - NakkhattamAse caMdassa sUrassa Nakkhattassa ya
maMDalacAraM kha - caMdamAse caMdassa sUrassa Nakkhattassa ya maMDalacAraM ga -
uDumAse caMdassa sUrassa NakkhattamAsassa ya maMDalacAraM gha - AiccamAse
caMdassa sUrassa NakkSattassa ya maMDalacAraM Ga - abhivaDDhiyamAse caMdassa
sUrassa Nakkhattassa ya maMDalacAraM egamege ahoratte caMda-sUra NakkhattANaM
maMDalacAraM egamege maMDale caMda-sUra-NakkhattANaM ahoratte cAraM gajuge
caMda-sUra - NakkhattANaM maMDala cAraM dosiNAiyANaM lakkhaNA solahavAM prAbhRta
sattarahavAM prAbhRta aThArahavAM prAbhRta caMda-sUriyANaM cavaNovabAyA
caMdAiccAINaM bhUmibhAgAo uDDhattaM tArANaM aNutte tullatte kAraNAiM caMdassa
gaha - Nakkhatta- tArANaM parivAro maMdarapavvayAo joisacAraM loaMtAo
joisaThANaM NakkhattANaM abdhaMtarAiM cAraM ' caMda - sUra-gaha -
NakkhattavibhANANaM saMThANAI caMda-sUra-gaha-Nakkhatta tArA- vimANANaM AyAma -
vikkhaMbha-parikkheva bAhillAi caMda - sUra-gaha-Nakkhatta-tArANaM
vimANaparivahaNaM joisiyANaM siggha-maMdagaiparUvaNaM jo siyANaM appa -
mahiDDhiparUvaNaM tArANaM abAhA aMtaraparUvaNaM caMdassa aggamahisIo
devIparivAra viuvvaNA ya sUrassa aggamahisIo devIparivAra viuvvaNA ya joisiyANaM
devANaM ThiI [ 47 ] 158 158 158 159 159 159 160 160 160 160 160 161 162 163 166
167 168 169 169 169 170 171 172 176 176 176 177 178 178

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
179 180 181 181 182 183 186 186 187 191 192 192 .193 The nineteenth *praabhrut*
is the measurement of the moon, sun, planets, constellations, and stars. The
measurement of the *joisiya* in Jambudvipa is Jambudvipa, the measurement of the
*joisiya* in the Salt Ocean is the *Dhayee* island, the measurement of the
*joisiya* in the Time Ocean is the *Pukkhara* island, the measurement of the
*joisiya* in the Human North Mountain is the *Agbhintara-Pukkhara*, the
measurement of the *joisiya* in the *Samayakkhetta* is the *Antomanussakhetta*.
The *uddhvovaṇṇagaaiparūvaṇa* of the *joisiya* is the appearance of the moon
after the moon's *chavaṇa* and the appearance of the other moons. The
*uddhvovaṇṇagaaiparūvaṇa* of the *joisiya* outside the Human Realm is the
measurement of the *joisiya* in the remaining islands and oceans. The twentieth
*praabhrut* is the influence of the moon and sun, the *raahu-kammaparūvaṇa*, the
nine names of *raahu*, the five colors of *raahu*, the two types of *raahu*, the
moon's name *sasi*, the sun's name *aicha*, the *kaama-bhogaparūvaṇa* of the
moon and sun, the eight great planets, the *sangahaṇīgaha*, the *uvasanhaara*,
the *suyathvirapaniyam*, the *chandapanṇattisuttam*, the appendix, the *Sri
Surya-Chandraprajnapti Sutra*, the mathematics section, the *Surya Prajnapti
Sutra* 20 and 24, the appendix. 196 197 198 198 199 200 200 200 . 202 203 204
205 208 238 [ 48 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 179 180 181 181 182 183 186 186 187 191 192 192 .193 joisiyANaM appabahuttaM
unnIsavAM prAbhRta caMda-sUra-gaha-Nakzatta-tArANaM parimANaM jambuddIvo-
jambuddIve joisiyaparimANaM lavaNasamuddo dhAyaIttaDadIve kAloe samudde
pukkharavaradIve mANusuttare pavvae agbhiMtara-pukkharaddhe samayakkhette
aMtomaNussakhette joisiyANaM uDDhovavaNNagAiparUvaNaM puvvaiMdassa
cavaNANaMtaraM aNNaiMdassa uvavajaNaM mANusakhettassa bahiyA joisiyANaM
uDDhovavaNNagAiparUvaNaM sesANaM dIva-samuddANaM AyAmAi bIsavAM prAbhRta
caMdima-sUriyANaM aNubhAvo rAhu-kammaparUvaNaM rAhussa Nava NAmAI rAhussa vimANA
paMcavaNNA rAhussa duvihattaM caMdassa sasI-abhihANaM sUrassa AiccAbhihANaM
caMda-sUrAI NaM kAma-bhogaparUvaNaM aTThAsII mahaggahA saMgahaNIgAhAo uvasaMhAro
suyathavirapaNIyaM caMdapaNNAttisuttaM pariziSTa zrI sUrya-candraprajJaptisUtra
kA gaNita vibhAga sUryaprajJapti sUtra 20 va 24 kA pariziSTa 196 197 198 198 199
200 200 200 . 202 203 204 205 208 238 [ 48 ]

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Suyatheraviraiyam Uvanga Suriyapanṇattisuṭṭam Candapanṇattisuṭṭam
Śrutasthaviraviracit Upāṅga Sūryaprajñaptisūtra Candraprajñaptisūtra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 suyatheraviraiyaM uvaMga sUriyapaNNattisuttaM caMdapaNNattisuttaM
zrutasthaviraviracita upAMga sUryaprajJaptisUtra candraprajJaptisUtra

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Prabhrita  [First Prabhrita Prabhrita] Vīratthuī Hail the new lotus-lake,
the destroyer of the multitude of enemies' pride! The hero, the source of
auspiciousness, the embodiment of the power of the ocean-like knowledge ॥1॥
Obeisance to the five-fold reverence, the exposition of the doctrine of
Jyotiṣkaraṇa-rāja, Saluting the one adored by the Asuras, Devas, Garuḍas, and
Bhujañgas, who has conquered the defilements ॥2॥ Expounding the essence of the
previous scriptures, the subtle doctrine comprehended by the ascetics, The
doctrine of Jyotiṣkaraṇa-rāja ॥3॥ Venerating Gautama, known as 'Indrabhaṭi', he
inquires of the Jina-lord the doctrine of Jyotiṣkarāja ॥4॥ 1-2. At that time,
there was a city named 'Mithilā', as described. Outside of this Mithilā city, in
the north-western direction, there was a temple named 'Māṇibhadra', as
described. In this Mithilā, King 'Jitaśatru' resided, as described. His queen
was named 'Dhāriṇī', as described. At that time, in that Māṇibhadra temple, the
lord (Tīrthaṅkara) manifested, as described. [a] The assembly departed, the
doctrine was expounded. [b] The assembly returned. [c] The king went in the same
direction as he had come. At that time, the senior disciple of the Blessed Lord
Mahāvīra, the ascetic named 'Indrabhaṭi', while residing in the posture of
salutation, spoke thus -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta [prathama prAbhRtaprAbhRta] vIratthuI jayai nava-naliNa-
kuvalaya, viysiy-syvtt-pttl-dlccho|| vIro gaiMda-mayaMgala, salaliya-gayavikkamo
bhayavaM  // 1 //  paMca-paya-vaMdaNaM joisagaNarAya-paNNatti-parUvaNa-paiNNA ya
namiUNa asura-sura-garula - bhuyaMga-parivaMdie gykilese|| arihe siddhAyariya-
uvajjhAe savvasAhU y||2|| phuDa-viyaDa-pAgaDatthaM, vucchaM puvv-suy-saar-
nnissNd|| suhumaM gaNiNovaiTeM, joisagaNarAya-paNNattiM  // 3 //  nAmeNa
'iMdabhUi' tti, goyamo vaMdiUNa tivihennN|| pucchai jiNavaravasahaM,
joisarAyassa paNNattiM  // 4 //  1-2. teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM 'mihilA'
NAmaM NayarI hotthA, vnnnno| tIse NaM mihilAe NayarIe bahiyA uttarapurathime
disibhAe, ettha NaM 'mANibhadde' NAma ceie hotthA, vnnnno| tIse NaM mihilAe
'jiesattU' rAyA parivasai, vnnnno| tassa NaM jiyasattussa raNNo 'dhAriNI' NAmaM
devI hotthA, vnnnno| teNaM kAleNaM, teNaM samaeNaM taMmi bhANibhadde ceie sAmI
samosaDhe, vnnnno| [ka] parisA NiggayA, dhammo khio| [kha] parisA pddigyaa| [ga]
rAyA jAmeva disiM pAunbhUe, tAmeva disiM pddige| teNaM kAleNaM, teNaM samaeNaM
samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa jeDhe aMtevAsI 'iMdabhUI' NAmaM aNagAre jAva
paMjaliuDe pajjuvAsamANe evaM vayAsI -

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Surya Prajnapti Sutra  **Chapter 20: Subject Matter**  **3. Verses - 1.** How
many mandalas are there? **2.** What is the nature of the tiryancha? **3.** How
does it shine? **4.** What is its composition? **1.** **5.** Where is the sun's
path? **6.** Where is its setting? **7.** Who worships the sun? **8.** How does
it rise? **2.** **9.** How many khatthas are there in the porisichchhaya?
**10.** What is the nature of the jokey? **11.** What is the nature of the
samvatsara? **12.** How many samvatsaras are there? **3.** **13.** How does the
moon wax? **14.** How many dosinas are there? **15.** What is the nature of the
sigghgaya? **16.** How is the dosina-lakkhana? **4.** **17.** What is the nature
of the chayanavavaya? **18.** What is the nature of the uchchatta? **19.** What
is the nature of the sun? **20.** What is the nature of the anubhava? Thus,
there are twenty. **5.**  **Chapter 8: Subject Matter**  **4. Verses - 1.** What
is the nature of the increase and decrease of the muhurtas? **2.** What is the
nature of the madhyamandala? **3.** What are the signs that it carries? **4.**
What is the nature of the antar? **1.** **5.** How does it shine? **6.** How
does it vibrate? **7.** What is the nature of the mandalas? **8.** What is the
nature of the vikkhambha? **2.**  **Chapter 1: Subject Matter**  **5. Verses -
4.** Six, **5.** Five, **6.** Seven, **7.** Eight, **8.** Three are the
parivatti. **1.**  **Chapter 1: Subject Matter**  **1. Verses - 1.** There are
these parivatti. **1.**  **Chapter 2: Subject Matter**  **6. Verses - 1.** The
parivatti are in the udaya, and also in the atthamana. **2.** What is the nature
of the bheyagya? **3.** What is the nature of the muhurtas? **1.**  **2. Verses
- 1.** The sigghgaya is fast when it exits, and slow when it enters. **2.** The
chulasii is the self of the purisas, and their parivatti. **2.**  **Chapter 1:
Subject Matter**  **1. Verses - 1.** Eight are mentioned in the udaya, **2.**
Two are the parivatti in the bheyagya. **3.** Four are the parivatti in the
muhurtas. **3.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra bIsa pAhuDANaM visayaparUvaNaM 3. gAhAo - 1. kai maMDalAi
vaccai, 2. tiricchA kiM ca gcchi|| 3. obhAsai kevaiyaM, 4. seyAi kiM te
sNtthiii||1|| 5. kahiM paDihayA lesA, 6. kahiM te oysNtthiii|| 7. ke sUriyaM
varayaMti, 8. kahaM te udayasaMThiI  // 2 //  9. kai kaTThA porisicchAyA, 10.
joke kiM te va aahie|| 11. kiM te saMvacchareNAI, 12. kai saMvacchArAi y||3||
13. kahaM caMdamaso vuDDhI, 14. kayA te dosiNA bhuu|| 15. ke sigghagaI vutte,
16. kahaM dosiNa - lkkhnnN||4|| 17. cayaNovavAya, 18.uccatte, 19. sUriyA kaha
aahiyaa|| 20. aNubhAve ke va saMvutte, evameyAi vIsaI  // 5 //
paDhamapAhuDagaya aTThapAhuDapAhuDasuttANaM visayaparUvaNaM 4. gAhAo - 1. vaDDho
vaDDhI muhUttANa, 2. mddhmNddl-sNtthiii|| 3. ke te ciNNaM pariyarai, aMtaraM kiM
caraMti y||1|| 5. ogAhai kevaiyaM, 6. kevaiyaM ca vikNpi|| 7. maMDalANa ya
saMThANe, 8. vikkhaMbho-aTTha paahuddaa||2|| paDhamapAhuDassa paDivattisaMkhA 5.
gAhA - 4. cha, 5. ppaMca ya, 6. satteva ya, 7. aTTha, 8. tinni ya havaMti
pddivttii|| paDhamassa pAhuDassa, havaMti eyAu pddivttii||1|| bitiyapAhuDassa
visaya-parUvaNaM 6. gAhAo - paDivattAo udae, taha atthamaNesu y|| 2. bheyagyAe
kaNNakalA, 3. muhuttANaM gatI ti y||1|| nikkhamamANe sigghagaI, pavisaMte
maMdagaI iy|| culasIi sayaM purisANaM, tesiM ca pddivttiio||2|| paDivattisaMkhA
gAhA - 1. udayaMmi aTTha bhaNiyA, 2. bheyagyAe duve ya pddivttii|| 3. cattAri
muhuttagaIe, huMti taiyaMmi pddivttii||3||

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Prabhrit - First Prabhrit Prabhrit  **Tenth Pahuda - Twenty-two Pahuda
- Pahuda's Subject Matter - 7. Gathaos - 1. Avaliya, 2. Muhuttago, 5. Kulaai, 6.
Punnamaasi Ya, 9. Taraggam Cha, 10. Neta Ya, 18. Aicchachar, 21. Joiss Ya,
Daraai, Tenth Pahuda, Aa, 'Maassass' Muhuttaanam Vaddho'avaddhi, 3. Evam Bhaga
Ya, Devata Ya Ajzhayane, 14. Divasa - Raiwuttha Ya, 15. Tihi, 16. Gotta, 17.
Bhoyanani Ya, 19. Maasa Ya, 1. Jogass, 4. Jogaass, 5. Sannivaaye Ya, 7.
Sannivaaye Ya, 8. Santhii. 1. 11. Chandamaggatti, 12. Yaavare, 13. Muhuttaanam
Namaai Ya. 2. 20. Panch Sanvachcharaai Ya. 3. 22. Nakkhatta Vijaye Vi Ya.
Twenty-two Pahuda - Pahuda. 4.**  **8. Ta Kaham Te Vaddho'avaddhi Muhuttaanam
Ahie Tti, Vadejja?**  **Ta Atthe Egunavise Muhuttasae Sattaavisaam Cha
Sattibhage Muhuttasss Ahie Tti Vadejja. 1 Savvasuramandalamagge Surass
Gamanaagamana-Raindhiyappamanam**  **(a) How is this formula of Muhurta's loss -
gain given here? This is a question worth considering.**  In the beginning of
Surya Prajnapti, after the Uththaniika, there are five Gathaas that outline the
primary subjects of the twenty Prabhrit's. Among them, the first Gatha, in the
first Prabhrit, in the first Prabhrit Prabhrit, the first line of the Gatha
outlining the primary subject is 'Kai Mandalaai Vacchai'. According to this, the
subject is 'In one year, how many mandalas does the Sun traverse once and how
many mandalas does it traverse twice'. The commentator, Shri Malayagiri,
explains this line as follows: 'In the first Prabhrit - how many mandalas does
the Sun traverse once and how many mandalas does it traverse twice in a year,
this is to be investigated. What is said? When this question was asked by
Gautam, the subsequent explanation of the subject is to be given in the first
Prabhrit'. However, in the first Gatha of the two Gathaas outlining the subject
matter of the eight Prabhrit Prabhrit's of the first Prabhrit, the first line is
'Vaddho'avaddhi Muhuttaanam'. According to this, in the first Prabhrit Prabhrit
of the first Prabhrit, in the first formula, according to the commentator, there
is an outline of the loss - gain of Muhurta in four types of months.  The
commentator, Shri Malayagiri, explains this line as follows: 'In the first
Prabhrit, in the first Prabhrit Prabhrit, the loss - gain of Muhurta, which is
related to day - night, is to be explained'.  Before the creation of the Gathaas
outlining the subject matter and before the commentator, this has been reversed.
The commentator himself ignored this reversal, so what to say about other common
Shruthadharas? Where should this formula be placed according to the sequence,
this will be written in detail at the appropriate place.  **(b) This formula of
Muhurta's loss - gain also seems fragmented, because the question in the
presented formula is about the loss - gain of Muhurta, but the answer only
mentions the Muhurta of the Nakshatra months.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta- prathama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] dasame pAhuDe bAvIsaM pAhuDa -
pAhuDANaM visayaparUvaNaM 7. gAhAo - 1. Avaliya, 2. muhuttaggo, 5. kulAI, 6.
puNNamAsI ya, 9. tAraggaM ca, 10. netA ya 18. AiccacAra, 21. joissa ya, dArAI,
dasame pAhuDe ee, 'mAsassa' muhuttANaM vaddho'vaddhI 3. evaM bhAgA ya, devatA ya
ajjhayaNe, 14. divasA - rAivuttA ya, 15. tihi, 16. 19. mAsA ya, 1. 4. jogassa  /
[ 5 7. sannivAe ya 8. saMThiI  //  1  //  11. caMdamaggatti, 12. yAvare  /  13.
muhuttANaM nAmAi ya  //  2  //  gottA, 17. bhoyaNANi ya  /  20. paMca
saMvaccharAi ya  //  3  //  22. nakkhattA vijaye vi ya  /  bAvIsaM pAhuDa-
pAhuDA  //  4 //  8. tA kahaM te vaddho'vaddhI muhuttANaM Ahie tti, vadejjA ? tA
aTTha egUNavIse muhuttasae sattAvIsaM ca saTTibhAge muhuttassa Ahie ti vadejjA
/  1 savvasUramaMDalamagge sUrassa gamaNAgamaNa-rAiMdiyappamANaM (ka) muhUrto kI
hAni - vRddhi kA yaha sUtra yahAM kaise diyA gayA hai ? yaha eka vicAraNIya
prazna hai  /  sUryaprajJapti ke prArambha meM utthAnikA ke bAda bIsa prAbhRtoM
ke prAthamika viSayoM kI prarUpaka pAMca gAthAe~ haiM  /  unameM se prathama
gAthA meM prathama prAbhRta ke prathama prAbhRtaprAbhRta kI prAthamika
viSayasUcaka gAthA kA 'kai maMDalAI vaccai' yaha prathama pada hai| isake
anusAra 'eka varSa meM sUrya kitane maMDaloM meM eka vAra aura kitane maMDaloM
meM do vAra gati karatA hai|' yaha viSaya hai  /  vRttikAra zrImalayagiri ukta
pada kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra karate haiM- 'prathame prAbhRte - sUryo varSamadhye
kati maNDalAnyekavAraM, kati vA maNDalAni dviH kRtvA vrajatItyetannirUpaNIyam  /
kimuktaM bhavati ? evaM gautamena prazne kRte tadanantaraM sarvaM tadviSayaM
nirvacanaM prathame prAbhRte vaktavyamiti  / ' kintu prathama prAbhRta ke ATha
prAbhRtaprAbhRtoM kI viSayaprarUpaka do gAthAoM meM se prathama gAthA ke
prathama pada meM 'vaDDho'vaDDhI muhuttANaM' yaha pada hai| isake anusAra
prathama prAbhRta ke prathama prAbhRtaprAbhRta meM prathama sUtra meM vRttikAra
ke anusAra cAra prakAra ke mAsoM ke muhUrtI kI hAni - vRddhi kA prarUpaNa hai  /
vRttikAra zrImalayagiri ukta pada kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra karate haiM-
'prathamasya prAbhRtasya satke prathame prAbhRtaprAbhRte muhUrtAnAM divasa -
rAtrigatAnAM vRdvyapavRddhI vaktavye  / ' viSayaprarUpaka saMgrahaNI gAthAoM kI
racanA ke pUrva evaM vRttikAra ke pUrva yaha vyutkrama ho gayA hai| vRttikAra
svayaM ukta vyutkrama kI upekSA kara gae to anya sAmAnya zrutadharoM kA to
kahanA hI kyA ? yaha sUtra kramAnusAra kahAM honA cAhiye, isa saMbaMdha meM Age
yathAsthAna likhane kA saMkalpa hai| (kha) muhUrtoM kI hAni - vRddhi kA yaha
sUtra bhI khaNDita pratIta hotA hai, kyoMki prastuta sUtra ke praznasUtra meM
muhUrtoM kI hAni - vRddhi kA prazna hai, kintu uttarasUtra meM kevala
nakSatramAsoM ke muhUrtoM kA hI kathana hai  /

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Surya Prajnapti Sutra (Chapter 9-11)  **9.** When the Sun traverses the
innermost circle, encompassing all the other circles, and when it traverses the
outermost circle, encompassing all the other circles, how many *raindhiya* are
there in this half-cycle? There are three *raindhiya* in this half-cycle. The
Sun's journey is characterized by suffering.  **10.** In this half-cycle, how
many circles does the Sun traverse? It traverses 105 circles. It traverses 100
circles with suffering, as it exits and enters. It traverses two circles without
suffering, namely the innermost and outermost circles. The duration of day and
night in a solar year...  **11.** If in a solar year, there are 18 *muhutta* in
a day and 18 *muhutta* in a night, there are 12 *muhutta* in a day and 12
*muhutta* in a night, in the first six months, there are 18 *muhutta* in a
night, but not 18 *muhutta* in a day, there are 18 *muhutta* in a day, but not
12 *muhutta* in a night. In the second six months, there are 18 *muhutta* in a
day, but not 18 *muhutta* in a night, there are 12 *muhutta* in a night, but not
12 *muhutta* in a day. In the first six months or the second six months, there
are not 15 *muhutta* in a day, nor 15 *muhutta* in a night.  What is the reason
for this?  The Jambudvipa island, encompassing all the islands and oceans, is
100,000 *yojana* in length and breadth, and 300,000 *yojana* in circumference,
with 27 *yojana* and 3 *kosa*, 28 *dhanu* and 13 *angula*, half an *angula*, and
a little more.  When the Sun traverses the innermost circle, it rises at the
highest point of the mountain, resulting in 18 *muhutta* in a day and 12
*muhutta* in a night.  When the Sun is exiting, beginning a new year, in the
first day and night, it traverses the innermost circle...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 9. tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtarAo maMDalAo
savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, savvabAhirAo maMDalAo
savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, esa NaM addhA kevaiyaM
rAiMdiyagge NaM Ahite tti vadejA? tA tiNNi chAvaThe rAiMdiyasae rAiMdiyagge NaM
Ahite tti vdejjaa| sUramaMDalesu sUrassa saI dukkhutto vA cAraM . 10. tA etAe
addhAe sUrie kati maMDalAiM carai ? tA culasIyaM maMDalasayaM cri| bAsIi
maMDalasayaM dukkhutto carai, taM jahA - NikkhamamANe ceva, pavesamANe cev| duve
ya khalu maMDalAiM saI carai, taM jahA - savvabbhaMtaraM ceva maMDalaM,
savvabAhiraM ceva mNddlN| AiccasaMvacchare ahorattappamANaM 11. jai khalu
tasseva Adiccassa saMvaccharassa saiM aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai saiM
aTThArasa muhuttA rAI bhavai, saI duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, saI
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, paDhame chammAse-asthi aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai,
natthi aTThArasa muhutte divase, atthi aTThArasamuhutte divase, natthi
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| docce chammAse-asthi aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai,
natthi aTThArasamuhuttA rAI, atthi duvAlasamuhuttA rAI, natthi duvAlasamuhutte
divase bhvi| paDhame chammAse vA docce chammAse vA Natthi paNNarasamuhutte
divase bhavai, Natthi paNNarasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| tattha NaM kaM heuM vadejjA? tA
ayaNNaM jaMbuddIve dIve savvadIva-samuddANaM savvabbhaMtarAe savvakhuDDAge vaTe
jAva joyaNasayasahassamAyAma-vikkhaMbhe NaM, tini joyaNa-sayasahassAI donni ya
sattAvIse joyaNasae tinni kose, aTThAvIsaM ca dhaNusayaM terasa ya aMgulAI,
addhaMgulaM, ca kiMci visesAhie parikkheve NaM pnnnntte| tA jayA NaM sUrie
savvabbhaMtara-maNDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte
ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAIM bhavai, _
se nikkhamamANe sUrie navaM saMvacharaM ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi
abhiMtarANaMtaraM maMDalaM

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Prabhruta - First Prabhruta Prabhruta  The sun, moving in the outermost
circle, travels for 18 muhurtas, minus 2/61 muhurtas, in a day, and 12 muhurtas,
minus 2/61 muhurtas, in a night.  The sun, moving in the innermost circle,
travels for 18 muhurtas, minus 4/61 muhurtas, in a day, and 12 muhurtas, minus
4/61 muhurtas, in a night.  Thus, as the sun moves from one circle to the next,
it travels for 2/61 muhurtas in each circle, decreasing the day and increasing
the night.  When the sun has traveled through all the inner circles and reaches
the outermost circle, it travels for 3/61 muhurtas, minus 3/61 muhurtas, in a
day, and 18 muhurtas, minus 12 muhurtas, in a night. This is the end of the
first six months.  The sun, entering the second six months, moves in the
outermost circle, traveling for 18 muhurtas, minus 2/61 muhurtas, in a night,
and 12 muhurtas, minus 2/61 muhurtas, in a day.  The sun, entering the innermost
circle, travels for 18 muhurtas, minus 4/61 muhurtas, in a night, and 12
muhurtas, minus 4/61 muhurtas, in a day.  Thus, as the sun moves from one circle
to the next, it travels for 2/61 muhurtas in each circle, increasing the day and
decreasing the night.  When the sun has traveled through all the outer circles
and reaches the innermost circle, it travels for 3/61 muhurtas, minus 3/61
muhurtas, in a night, and 18 muhurtas, minus 12 muhurtas, in a day. This is the
end of the second six months.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta - prathama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraI, tA
jayA NaM sUrie abbhiMtarANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai tayA NaM
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai dohiM egasaTThibhAga muhuttehiM uunne|
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai dohiM egasaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyA, se nikkhamamANe
sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi abbhittara taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri|
tA jayA NaM sUrie abbhitaraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai tayA NaM
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, cauhiM egasaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM UNe,
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavaI, cauhiM egasaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM AhiyA, evaM khalu
eeNaM uvAeNaM NikkhamamANe sUrie tayANaMtarANaMtaraM maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM
maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe do do egaTThibhAgamuhutte egamege maMDale
divasakhettassa NivuDDhemANe NivuDDhemANe rayaNikhettassa abhivuDDhemANe
abhivuDDhemANe savvabAhiramaMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, .. tA jayA NaM
sUrie savvabbhaMtarAo maMDalAo savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai
tayA NaM savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM paNihAya ege NaM tesIe NaM rAiMdiyasae NaM
tiNNi chAvaDhe egasaTTi bhAgamuhuttasae divasa-khettassa NivuDDhittA rayaNi-
khettassa abhivuDDhittA cAraM carai tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyoM
aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, jahaNNae bArasamuhutte divase bhavai, esa NaM
paDhame chammAse, esa NaM paDhamassa chamAsassa pjjvsaanne| se pavisamANe sUrie
doccaM chammAsaM ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi bAhirANaMtaraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tA jayA NaM sUrie bAhirANaMtaraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai tayA NaM aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, dohiM
egasaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM uNA, duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavaI, dohi
egasaTThibhAgamuhuteti Ahie, se pavisamANe sUrie bAhiraM taccaM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri|| tA jayA NaM sUrie bAhiraM taccaM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai tayA NaM aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, cauhiM
egasaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM UNA, duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, cauhiM
egasaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie, evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM pavisamANe sUrie
tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe do do
egasaTThibhAgamuhutte egamege maMDale rayaNikhessa NivuDDhemANe NivuDDhemANe
divasakhettassa abhivaDDhemANe abhivaDDhemANe savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhirAo maMDalAo
savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM savvabAhiraM
maMDalaM paNihAya ege NaM tesIe NaM rAiMdiyasae NaM tinni chAvaDhe
egasaTThibhAgamuhuttasae rayaNikhettassa nivuDDhettA divasakhettassa
abhivaDDhettA cAraM carai tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Surya Prajnapti Sutra  In a year of 18 muhurtas, there are 12 muhurtas of day
and 12 muhurtas of night. This is the first six months. This is the first
fortnight of the second six months. This is the first year of the sun. This is
the first fortnight of the first year of the sun.   **Upasamhara Sutra**  Thus,
in the year of the sun, there are 18 muhurtas of day, 18 muhurtas of night, 12
muhurtas of day, and 12 muhurtas of night.  In the first six months, there are
18 muhurtas of night, but not 18 muhurtas of day. There are 12 muhurtas of day,
but not 12 muhurtas of night. In the second six months, there are 18 muhurtas of
day, but not 18 muhurtas of night. There are 12 muhurtas of night, but not 12
muhurtas of day.  In the first six months or the second six months, there are
not 15 muhurtas of day, nor 15 muhurtas of night. There is no increase or
decrease in the muhurtas, nor any change in the muhurtas, nor any sequence.
There are no verses to be recited.  **Commentary:**  There are verses mentioned
in this Surya Prajnapti Sutra by Bhadrabahu Swami, which are either lost or not
found in any existing texts. Therefore, they cannot be recited or explained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA
rAI bhavai, esa NaM docce chammAse, esa NaM duccassa chammAsassa pjvsaanne| esa
NaM Adicce saMvacchare esa NaM Adiccassa saMvaccharassa pjjvsaanne|
upasaMhArasuttaM evaM khalu tasseva Adiccassa saMvaccharassa saiM
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, saiM aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, saI
duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, saI duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, paDhame chammAse
- atthi aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, natthi aTThArasamuhutte divase, atthi
duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, natthi duvAlasamuhuttA raaii| docce vA chammAse -
atthi aTThArasamuhutte divase bhvi| natthi aTThArasamuhuttA rAI, atthi
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI natthi duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, paDhame vA chammAse
docce vA chammAse - Natthi paNNarasamuhutte divase bhavai, Natthi
paNNarasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, Natthi rAiMdiyANaM vaDDhovaDDhIe, muhuttANa vA
cayovacaeNaM NaNNattha vA aNuvAyagaIe, gAhAo bhaanniyvvaao| 1. atra
anantaroktArthasaMgAhikA asyA eva sUryaprajJapterbhadrabAhusvAminA yA niyuktiH
kRtA tatpratibaddhA anyA vA kAzcana granthAntarasuprasiddhA gAthA vartante
tA'bhaNitavyA' paThanIyA, tAzca samprati kvApi pustake na dRzyantaiti
vyavacchinnA sambhAvyante tato na kathayituM 'vyAkhyAtuM vA shkynte|' - sUrya.
TIkA.

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Prabhruta [Second Prabhruta Prabhruta]  The Southern Hemisphere of the
Sun 12. How are these hemispheres established? There are two hemispheres
established here, as follows: 1. The Southern Hemisphere, 2. The Northern
Hemisphere. How is the Southern Hemisphere established?  It is established that
Jambudvipa, the island, along with all the islands and oceans, is circular in
all directions, with a diameter of one hundred thousand yojanas, a circumference
of three hundred thousand yojanas, two hundred and twenty-seven yojanas, three
kosas, twenty-eight dhanus, thirteen angulas, and a little more than half an
angula.  _When the Sun travels in the Southern Hemisphere, it is established
that the day is eighteen muhurtas long, and the night is twelve muhurtas long,
at the highest point of the earth._  When the Sun sets, at the beginning of the
new year, in the first day and night, it travels in the Northern Hemisphere,
moving from the Southern Hemisphere to the Northern Hemisphere.  When the Sun
travels in the Northern Hemisphere, the day is eighteen muhurtas long, minus two
and a half muhurtas. The night is twelve muhurtas long, plus two and a half
muhurtas.  When the Sun sets, in the second day and night, it travels in the
Southern Hemisphere, moving from the Northern Hemisphere to the Southern
Hemisphere.  When the Sun travels in the Southern Hemisphere, the day is
eighteen muhurtas long, minus four and a half muhurtas. The night is twelve
muhurtas long, plus four and a half muhurtas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta [dvitIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta] sUrassa dAhiNA addhamaMDalasaMThiI
12. tA kahaM te addhamaMDalasaMThiI AhitAti vadejA ? tattha khalu ime duve
addhamaMDalasaMThiI paNNattA, taM jahA - 1. dAhiNA ceva addhamaMDalasaMThiI, 2.
uttarA ceva addhmNddlsNtthiii| tA kahaM te dAhiNA addhamaMDalasaMThiI AhitAti
vadejA ? tA ayaNNaM jaMbuddIve dIve savvadIva-samudANaM savvabhaMtarAe
savvakhuDDAge vaTTe jAva joyaNasayasahassamAyAma - vikkhaMbheNaM tiNNi
joyaNasayasahassAI, donni ya sattAvIse joyaNasae, tiNNi kose aTThAvIsaM ca
dhaNusayaM terasa ya aMgulAI addhaMgulaM ca kiMcivisesAhie parikkheveNaM
pnnnntte| _mA jayA NaM sUrie savvanbhaMtaraM dAhiNaM addhamaMDalasaMThiti
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte
divase bhavai, jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| _ . se nikkhamamANe sUrie
NavaM saMvaccharaM ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi dAhiNAe aMtarAe bhAgAe
tassAdipadesAe abbhiMtarANaMtaraM uttaraM addhamaMDalaM saMThiI uvasaMkamittA
cAraM cri| tA jayA NaM sUrie abhiMtarANaMtaraM uttaraM addhamaMDalasaMThiI
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM aTThArasamuhuttehiM divase bhavai dohiM
egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM uunne| duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, dohiM
egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyaa| se nikkhamamANe sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi
uttarAe aMtarAe bhAgAe tassAdipadesAe abbhiMtaraM taccaM dAhiNaM
addhamaMDalasaMThitiM uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri| tA jayA NaM sUrie abbhiMtaraM
taccaM dAhiNaM addhamaMDalasaMThitiM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, cauhiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM uunne|
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, cauhiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyaa|

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Surya Prajnapti Sutra  Thus, when the Sun sets out from its abode, it
traverses the successive mandalas, and in those successive mandalas, in those
respective regions, it traverses the respective half-mandala formations, moving
and moving towards the northern part of the space, and from that point onwards,
it traverses the entire outer northern half-mandala formation.  10. When the Sun
traverses the entire outer northern half-mandala formation, then the day is of
eighteen muhurtas, which is equal to twelve muhurtas of night.  This is the
first six months, this is the end of the first six months.  When the Sun enters
the second six months, in the first half of the day and night, it traverses the
outer southern half-mandala formation, moving towards the northern part of the
space, and from that point onwards.  When the Sun traverses the outer southern
half-mandala formation, then the day is of eighteen muhurtas, less two one-
eighth muhurtas, which is equal to twelve muhurtas of night, less two one-eighth
muhurtas.  When the Sun enters the second six months, in the second half of the
day and night, it traverses the outer northern half-mandala formation, moving
towards the southern part of the space, and from that point onwards.  When the
Sun traverses the outer northern half-mandala formation, then the day is of
eighteen muhurtas, less four one-eighth muhurtas, which is equal to twelve
muhurtas of night, less four one-eighth muhurtas.  Thus, when the Sun sets out
from its abode, it traverses the successive mandalas, and in those successive
mandalas, in those respective regions, it traverses the respective half-mandala
formations, moving and moving towards the southern part of the space, and from
that point onwards, it traverses the entire outer southern half-mandala
formation.  When the Sun traverses the entire outer southern half-mandala
formation, then the day is of eighteen muhurtas, which is equal to twelve
muhurtas of night.  This is the second six months, this is the end of the second
six months.  This is the solar year, this is the end of the solar year.  The
Sun's Northern Half-mandala Formation  13. How is the northern half-mandala
formation?  Thus, in Jambudvipa, in the island, in all the islands and oceans,
in all the spaces, in all the directions, it extends in a circle, with a
diameter of one hundred thousand yojanas, three hundred thousand yojanas, two
hundred and twenty-seven yojanas, three...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM NikkhamamANe sUrie tayANaMtarAo
maMDalAo tayANaMtaramaMDalassa taMsi taMsi desaMsi taM taM addhamaMDalasaMThitiM
saMkamamANe saMkamamANe dAhiNAe aMtarAe bhAgAe tassAdipadesAe savvabAhiraM
uttaraM addhamaMDalasaMThitiM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a  /  10 tA jayA NaM
sUrie savvabAhiraM uttaraM addhamaMDalasaMThitiM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a,
tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, jahaNNae
duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai  /  esa NaM paDhame chammAse, esa NaM paDhamassa
chammAssa pajjavasANe  /  se pavisamANe sUrie doccaM chammAsaM ayamANe
paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi uttarAe aMtarAe bhAgAe tassAdipadesAe bAhirANaMtaraM
dAhiNaM addhamaMDalasaMThitiM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a tA jayA NaM sUriye
bAhirANaMtaraM dAhiNaaddhamaMDalasaThitiM uvasaMkamitA cAraM carar3a, tayA NaM
aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, dohiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM UNA, duvAlasamutte
divase bhavai, dohiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie, se pavisamANe sUrie doccaMsi
ahorattaMsi dAhiNAe aMtarAe bhAgAe tassAdipadesAe bAhiraMtaraM taccaM uttaraM
addhamaMDalasaMThitiM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a, tA jayA NaM sUrie bAhiraM
taccaM uttaraM addhamaMDalasaMThitiM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a, tayA NaM
aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, cauhiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM UNA, duvAlasamuhute
divase bhavai, cauhiM egATThibhAgamuhutehiM ahie, evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM
pavisamANe sUrie tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraMsi taMsi taMsi desaMsi taM
taM addhamaMDalasaMThiiM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe uttarAe aMtarAe bhAgAe
tassAdipadesAe savvantaraM dAhiNaM addhamaMDalasaMThi uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai
/  tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabdhaMtaraM dAhiNaM addhamaMDalasaMThitiM uvasaMkamittA
cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai,
jahaNNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai  /  esa NaM docce chammAse, esa NaM
doccassa chammAsassa pajjavasANe, esa NaM Aicce saMvacchare, esa NaM Aiccassa
saMvaccharassa pajjavasANe  /  sUrassa uttarAaddhamaMDalasaMThiI 13. tA kahaM te
uttarA addhamaMDalasaMThiI Ahiteti vadejjA ? tA ayaNNaM jaMbuddIve dIve
savvadIva-samuddANaM savvabdhaMtarAe savvakhuD DAge vaTTe jAva
joyaNasayasahassamAyAma-vikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi joyaNasayasahassAiM, donni ya
sattAvIse joyaNasae, tiNNi

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[11 Twenty-eight *dhanus* and thirteen *anguli*, plus half an *anguli* are the
measurements of the *praabhrut* as determined by the *parikkhēvēṇaṃ*. When the
Sun, moving through the *sabbhabdhantar* (entire space), reaches the northern
*addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle), it is then the *uttamakatthapatta* (highest
point) and the day is eighteen *muhutta* long, while the night is twelve
*muhutta* long. As the Sun moves out of the *sabbhabdhantar* (entire space) and
into the first *ahoratta* (day and night) of the new year, it moves towards the
northern *addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle) and then moves towards the southern
*addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle) through the *abbhantarāṇantar* (inner space).
When the Sun, moving through the *abbhantarāṇantar* (inner space), reaches the
southern *addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle), the day is eighteen *muhutta* long,
minus two *muhutta*, while the night is twelve *muhutta* long, plus two
*muhutta*. As the Sun moves out of the *sabbhabdhantar* (entire space) and into
the second *ahoratta* (day and night) of the new year, it moves towards the
southern *addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle) and then moves towards the northern
*addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle) through the *abbhantarāṇantar* (inner space).
When the Sun, moving through the *abbhantarāṇantar* (inner space), reaches the
northern *addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle), the day is eighteen *muhutta* long,
minus four *muhutta*, while the night is twelve *muhutta* long, plus four
*muhutta*. Thus, as the Sun moves out of the *sabbhabdhantar* (entire space) and
into the subsequent *ahoratta* (day and night) of the new year, it moves towards
the northern *addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle) and then moves towards the
southern *addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle) through the *abbhantarāṇantar*
(inner space), and as it moves through the *abbhantarāṇantar* (inner space), it
reaches the southern *addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle) through the
*sabbhabahīra* (entire outer space). When the Sun, moving through the
*sabbhabahīra* (entire outer space), reaches the southern *addhamandalasanthi*
(half-circle), it is then the *uttamakatthapatta* (highest point) and the night
is eighteen *muhutta* long, while the day is twelve *muhutta* long. This is the
first *chammāsa* (six months), this is the end of the first *chammāsa* (six
months). As the Sun moves into the second *chammāsa* (six months) of the new
year, it moves towards the southern *addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle) and then
moves towards the northern *addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle) through the
*bāhirāṇantar* (outer space) in the first *ahoratta* (day and night). When the
Sun, moving through the *bāhirāṇantar* (outer space), reaches the northern
*addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle), the night is eighteen *muhutta* long, plus
two *muhutta*, while the day is twelve *muhutta* long, plus two *muhutta*. As
the Sun moves into the second *ahoratta* (day and night) of the new year, it
moves towards the northern *addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle) and then moves
towards the southern *addhamandalasanthi* (half-circle) through the *bāhira*
(outer space) in the first *ahoratta* (day and night). When the Sun, moving
through the *bāhira* (outer space), reaches the southern *addhamandalasanthi*
(half-circle), the night is eighteen *muhutta* long, minus four *muhutta*,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta- dvitIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 11 kose aTThAvIsaM ca
dhaNusayaM terasa ya aMgulAI, arddhagulaM ca kiMci visesAhie parikkheveNaM
paNNatte, tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabdhaMtaraM uttaraM addhamaMDalasaMThiiM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte
divase bhavai, jahaNNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, se nikkhamamANe sUrie NavaM
saMvaccharaM ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi uttarAe aMtarAe bhAgAe tassAipaesAe
abbhaMtarANaMtaraM dAhiNaM addhamaMDalasaMThiiM uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraI  /  tA
jayA NaM sUrie abdhaMtarANaMtaraM dAhiNaM addhamaMDalasaMThi uvasaMkamittA cAraM
carar3a, tayA NaM aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, dohiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM
UNe, duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, dohiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyA  /
seNikkhamamANe sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi dAhiNAe aMtarAe bhAgAe tassAipaesAe
abbhiMtarANaMtaraM taccaM uttaraM addhamaMDalasaMThi uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a
/  tAjA sUri abdhiMtarANaMtaraM taccaM uttaraM addhamaMDalasaMThiiM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a tayA NaM aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, cauhiM
egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM UNe, duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, cauhiM
egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyA, evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM NikkhamamANe sUrie
tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe taMsi taMsi
desaMsi taM taM addhamaMDalasaMThiI saMkamamANe saMkamamANe uttarAe aMtarAe
bhAgAe tassAipaesAe savvabAhiraM dAhiNaM addhamaMDalasaMThi uvasaMkamittA cAraM
carar3a, tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiraM dAhiNaM addhamaMDalasaMThiiM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA
aTThArasamuhuttA rAi bhavai, jahaNNae duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, esa NaM
paDhame chammAse, esa NaM paDhamassa chammAsassa pajjavasANe, se pavisamANe
sUrie doccaM chammAsaM ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi dAhiNAe aMtarAe bhAgAe
tassAipaesAe bAhirANaMtaraM uttaraM addhamaMDalasaMThi uvasaMkamittA cAraM
carar3a, tA jayA NaM sUrie bAhirANaMtaraM uttaraM addhamaMDalasaMThiGgaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a tayA NaM aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, dohiM
egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM UgA, duvAlasamuhute divase bhavai dohiM
egaTTibhAgamuhutehiM ahie, se pavisamANe sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi uttarAe
aMtarAe bhAgAe tassAipaesAe bAhiraM tacchaM dAhiNaM addhamaMDalasaMThiiM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a, tA jayA NaM sUrie bAhiraM taccaM dAhiNaM
addhamaMDalasaMThiiM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a tayA NaM aTThArasamuhuttA rAI
bhavai cauhiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM UNA,

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
12 ] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra In a day of twelve muhurtas, there are four one-
eighth muhurtas, Thus, when the sun enters (the zodiac) in this way, the
mandalas (zodiac signs) move one after another, and as they move, the half-
mandalas (half-zodiac signs) in those respective regions move one after another,
and as they move, the sun moves in the eastern direction, in the northern half-
mandala, for the entire duration, Therefore, when the sun moves in the northern
half-mandala for the entire duration, it is said to be in the Uttara Kattha
Patti (northern solstice) for eighteen muhurtas in a day, when it is twelve
muhurtas in the Raa (equinox), This is for the two half-years, this is for the
half-year of the two half-years, this is for the year, this is for the year of
the year.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai cauhiM
egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie, evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM pavisamANe sUrie
tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe taMsi taMsi
desaMsi taM taM addhamaMDalasaMThiI saMkamamANe saMkamamANe dAhiNAe aMtarAe
bhAgAe tassAipaesAe savvabbhaMtaraM uttaraM addhamaMDalasaMThiI uvasaMkamittA
cAraM carai, tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM uttaraM addhamaMDalasaMThiI
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayANaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte
divase bhavai, jahaniyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, esa NaM docce chammAse, esa
NaM doccassa chammAsassa pajavasANe, esa NaM Aicce saMvacchare, esa NaM Aiccassa
saMvaccharassa pjjvsaanne|

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Movement of the Suns - The Field  **First Prabhrit** [Third Prabhrit
Prabhrit]  14. **Question:** What is the mark that they revolve around?
**Answer:** There are two suns, namely the Bharah sun and the Erav sun. These
two suns revolve around each other.  They revolve around each other, each
covering half a circle in thirty muhurtas, and a full circle in sixty muhurtas.
When they are moving out, these two suns do not revolve around each other's
mark. When they are moving in, these two suns revolve around each other's mark.
**Question:** What is the reason for this?  **Answer:** Jambudvipa is a circular
island, with a diameter of one hundred thousand yojanas, and a circumference of
three hundred thousand yojanas, twenty-seven hundred yojanas, three hundred and
twenty-eight dhanus, thirteen angulas, and half an angula.  The Bharah sun
revolves around the Jambudvipa island, in the south-east direction, covering a
circle of twenty-four yojanas. It revolves around its own mark.  The Erav sun
revolves around the Jambudvipa island, in the north-east direction, covering a
circle of twenty-four yojanas. It revolves around the mark of the Bharah sun.
In the south-west direction, the Erav sun revolves around the mark of the Bharah
sun, covering a circle of nineteen yojanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUriyANaM saMcaraNa - khettaM prathama prAbhRta [ tRtIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] 14.
tA kiM te ciNNaM paDicarati Ahiteti vadejjA ? tattha khalu ime duve sUriyA
paNNattA, taM jahA bhArahe ceva sUrie  /  eravae ceva sUrie  /  tANaM duve
sUriyA patteyaM patteyaM tIsAe tIsAe muhuttehiM egamegaM addhamaMDalaM carar3a,
saTTI saTThI muhuttehiM egamegaM maMDalaM saMghAtayati  /  tA nikkhamamANe khalu
ete duve sUriyA No aNNamaNNassa ciNNaM paDicaraMti, pavisamANA khalu ete duve
sUriyA aNNamaNNassa ciNNaM paDicaraMti taM sayamegaM coyAlaM, pa. - tattha NaM
ko hetu, tti vadejjA ? u. - tA ayaNNaM jaMbuddIve dIve savvadIva-samuddANaM
savvabdhaMtarAe savvakhuDDAge vaTTe jAva joyaNasayasahassamAyAma- vikkhaMbheNaM,
tiNNi joyaNasayasahassAI, donni ya sattAvIse joyaNasae, tiNNi kose aTThAvIsaM ca
dhaNusayaM, terasa ya aMgulAI, arddhagulaM ca kiciM visesAhie parikkheveNaM
paNNatte  /  - - tattha NaM ayaM bhArahae ceva sUrie jaMbuddIvassa dIvassa
pAINapaDINAyayAe udINa- dAhiNAyayAe jIvAe maMDalaM cauvIsaeNaM saeNaM chettA -
dAhiNa-puratthimillaMsi caubbhAgamaMDalaMsi bANautiya sUriyamayAiM jAI sUrie
appaNA ceva ciNNAI paDicarai, tattha NaM ayaM bhArahe sUrie eravayassa sUriyassa
jaMbuddIvassa dIvassa pAINa-paDINAyayAe udINadAhINAyayAe jIvAe maMDalaM
cauvIsaeNaM saraNaM chettA uttara-puratthimillaMsi caubbhAgamaMDalaMsi
bANaur3aya sUriyamayAiM jAI sUrie parassa ceva ciNNAI paDicarai, dAhiNa-
paccatthimillaMsi caubbhAgamaMDalaMsi ekkANauiyaM sUriyamayAI jAI sUrie parassa
ceva ciNNAI paDicarai,

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
14 ] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra There, in this Era, the Sun of Jambudvipa, the
island, in its rising and setting, in its north and south course, in its life,
in its circle, in its twenty-four hundredth part, in the north-east quadrant, in
the four-part circle, in the eighth part, the Sun goes, and the Sun itself marks
its own course, > in the south-east quadrant, in the four-part circle, in the
nineteenth part, the Sun goes, and the Sun itself marks its own course, There,
in this Era, the Sun of Bharata, the Sun of Jambudvipa, the island, in its
rising and setting, in its north and south course, in its life, in its circle,
in its twenty-four hundredth part, in the south-west quadrant, in the four-part
circle, in the eighth part, the Sun goes, and the Sun of the other marks its own
course, in the north-west quadrant, in the four-part circle, in the nineteenth
part, the Sun goes, and the Sun of the other marks its own course, These two
Suns, when they go out, do not mark each other's course. These two Suns, when
they enter, do not mark each other's course, they are alone, they are separate.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra tattha NaM ayaM eravae ceva sUrie jaMbuddIvassa
dIvassa pAINapaDINAyayAe udINa-dAhiNAyayAe jIvAe maMDalaM cauvIsaeNaM saeNaM
chettA uttara-purathimillasi caubbhAgamaMDalaMsi bANauiyaM sUriyamayAI jAI sUrie
appaNA ceva ciNNAI paDicarai, > dAhiNa-purathimillaMsi caubbhAgamaMDalaMsi
ekkANauiya sUriyamayAiM jAiM sUrie appaNA ceva ciNNAI paDicarai, tattha NaM ayaM
eravae sUrie bhArahassa sUriyassa jaMbuddIvassa dIvassa pAINa-paDINAyayAe
udINadAhiNAyayAe jIvAe maMDalaM cauvIsaeNaM saeNaM chettA dAhiNa-
paccathimillaMsi caubbhAgamaMDalaMsi bANauiya sUriyamayAeM jAiM sUrie parassa
ceva ciNNAI paDicarai, uttara-purathimillaMsi caubbhAgamaMDalaMsi ekkANauiya
sUriyamayAiM jAiM sUrie parassa ceva ciNNAI paDicarai, tA nikkhamamANA khalu ee
duve sUriyA No aNNamaNNassa ciNNaM pddicrNti| pavisamANA khalu ee duve sUriyA No
aNNamaNNassa ciNNaM paDicarati sayamegaM coyaalN|

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Prabhrit [Fourth Prabhrit Prabhrit] The mutual distance between the two
Suns  15. How far apart do these two Suns travel from each other? There are six
different opinions on this matter, as follows:  1. Some say: The two Suns travel
a distance of one thousand yojanas and thirty-three hundred yojanas from each
other.  2. Others say: The two Suns travel a distance of one thousand yojanas
and forty-four hundred yojanas from each other.  3. Others say: The two Suns
travel a distance of one thousand yojanas and forty-five hundred yojanas from
each other.  4-1. Others say: The two Suns travel a distance of one island and
one ocean from each other.  5-2. Others say: The two Suns travel a distance of
two islands and two oceans from each other.  6-3. Others say: The two Suns
travel a distance of three islands and three oceans from each other.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta [caturtha prAbhRtaprAbhRta] sUriyANaM aNNamaNNassa aMtara-
cAraM 15. tA kevaiyaM ee duve sUriyA aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTu cAraM caraMti,
Ahiteti vadejjA? tattha khalu imAo cha paDivattIo paNNattAo, taM jahA - 1.
tattha ege evamAhaMsu - tA egaM joyaNasahassaM egaM ca tettIsaM joyaNasayaM
aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTu sUriyA cAraM caraMti, Ahiteti vadejA, ege evmaahNsu|
2. ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA egaM joyaNasahassaM egaM ca cottIsaM joyaNasayaM
aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTu sUriyA cAraM caraMti, Ahiteti vadejA, ege evamAhaMsu,
3. ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA egaM joyaNasahassaM egaM ca paNatIsaM joyaNasayaM
aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM. kaTu sUriyA cAraM caraMti, Ahiteti vadejjA, ege
evamAhaMsu, 4-1. ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA egaM dIvaM, egaM samudaM aNNamaNNassa
aMtaraM kaTu sUriyA cAraM caraMti, Ahiteti vadejA, ege evamAhaMsu, 5-2. ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - tA do dIve, do samudde aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTu sUriyA cAraM
caraMti, Ahiteti vadejA, ege evamAhaMsu, 6-3. ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA tiNNi
dIve, tiNi samudde, aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTu sUriyA cAraM caraMti, Ahiteti
vadejA, ege evamAhaMsu,

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [16] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ]  We say that these two suns, moving in their
orbits, are always at a distance of five yojanas, thirty-five one-eighths of a
yojana, from each other, increasing or decreasing their distance, as they move
in their orbits.  Who says this? We say this.  This Jambudvipa, the island of
all islands and oceans, is circular in shape, with a diameter and circumference
of one hundred thousand yojanas, three hundred thousand yojanas, two hundred and
twenty-seven yojanas, three kosas, eighty-eight dhanus, thirteen hundred
angulas, and half an angula, as per the calculations.  1. When these two suns
move in their orbits, always maintaining a distance from each other, they move
at a distance of ninety-nine thousand yojanas, six hundred and forty-four
yojanas from each other.  When they reach the highest point of their orbit, the
day is eighteen muhurtas long, and the night is twelve muhurtas long.  2. When
the suns are moving outwards, in the first half of the year, they move in their
orbits, maintaining a distance from each other.  When these two suns move in
their orbits, maintaining a distance from each other, they move at a distance of
ninety-nine thousand yojanas, six hundred and forty-nine yojanas, thirty-five
one-eighths of a yojana from each other.  The day is eighteen muhurtas long,
minus two one-eighths of a muhurta, and the night is twelve muhurtas long, plus
two one-eighths of a muhurta.  3. When the suns are moving outwards, in the
second half of the year, they move in their orbits, maintaining a distance from
each other.  When these two suns move in their orbits, maintaining a distance
from each other, they move at a distance of ninety-nine thousand yojanas, six
hundred and fifty-one yojanas, nine one-eighths of a yojana from each other.
The day is eighteen muhurtas long, minus four one-eighths of a muhurta, and the
night is twelve muhurtas long, plus four one-eighths of a muhurta.  Thus, these
two suns, moving outwards, move in their orbits, maintaining a distance from
each other, increasing or decreasing their distance, as they move in their
orbits, always maintaining a distance of five yojanas, thirty-five one-eighths
of a yojana, from each other, as they move in their orbits.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo - tA paMca paMca joyaNAiM
paNatIsaM ca egaTThibhAge joyaNassa egamege maMDale aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM
abhivaDDhemANA vA, nivaDDhemANA vA sUriyA cAraM caraMti, Ahiteti vadejA, tattha
NaM ko heu ? Ahiteti vadejA, tA ayaM NaM jaMbuddIve dIve savvadIva-samuddANaM
savvabbhaMtarAe savvakhuDDAge vaTTe jAva joyaNasayasahassamAyAma-vikkhaMbheNaM,
tiNNi joyaNasayasahassAI doNNi ya sattAvIse joyaNasae, tiNNi kose aTThAvIsaM ca
dhaNusayaM terasaya-aMgulAI addhaMgulalaM ca kiMci visesAhie parikkheveNaM
paNNatte, 1. tA jayA NaM ete duve sUriyA savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA
cAraM caraMti, tayA NaM NavaNauI joyaNasahassAiM, chacca cattAle joyaNasae
aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTTu cAraM caraMti Ahiteti vadejA, tayA NaM
uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai jahaNiyA
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, 2. te nikkhamamANA sUriyA NavaM saMvaccharaM ayamANA
paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi anbhiMtarANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti,
tA jayA NaM ete duve sUriyA abbhiMtarANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM
caraMti, tayA NaM NavaNauI joyaNasahassAI chacca paNayAle joyaNasae paNatIsaM ca
egaTThibhAge joyaNassa aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTu cAraM caraMti Ahiteti vadejA,
tayA NaM aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, dohiM egaTThibhAga muhuttehiM UNe,
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai dohiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyA, 3. te
nikkhamamANA sUriyA doccaMsi ahorattaMsi abbhiMtaraM taccaM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti, tA jayA NaM ete duve sUriyA abbhiMtaraM taccaM
maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti, tayA NaM NavaNauI joyaNasahassAI chacca
ikkAvaNNe joyaNasae nava ya egaTThibhAge joyaNassa aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTu
cAra caraMti Ahiteti vadejA, tayA NaM aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai cauhiM
egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM UNe, duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai cauhiM
egaTThibhAgamuhutehiM ahiyA, evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM nikkhamamANA ete duve
sUriyA tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANataraM maMDalaM saMkamamANA saMkamamANA paMca
paMca joyaNAI paNatIsaM ca egaTThibhAge joyaNassa egamege maMDale aNNamaNNassa
aMtaraM abhivaDDhe mANA abhivaDDhe mANA, savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA
caraM caraMti,

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Prabhruta - Fourth Prabhruta  It is said,  1. When these two Suns
traverse the outermost circle, and their distance from each other is one hundred
thousand yojanas plus sixty yojanas, then the day is eighteen muhurtas long, and
the night is twelve muhurtas long. This is in the first six months, and this is
at the end of the first six months.  2. When the entering Sun traverses the
outermost circle in the first half of the day and night of the Uttarayana six
months, and these two Suns traverse the outermost circle, and their distance
from each other is one hundred thousand yojanas plus forty-four yojanas and
thirty-six yojanas and one-half, then the day is eighteen muhurtas long, minus
two-thirds of a muhurta, and the night is twelve muhurtas long, minus two-thirds
of a muhurta.  3. When the entering Sun traverses the outermost circle in the
first half of the day and night of the Dakshinayana six months, and these two
Suns traverse the outermost circle, and their distance from each other is one
hundred thousand yojanas plus eighty-eight yojanas and fifty-two yojanas and
one-third, then the day is eighteen muhurtas long, minus four-thirds of a
muhurta, and the night is twelve muhurtas long, minus four-thirds of a muhurta.
Thus, these two entering Suns, traversing the circles in between, traverse the
outermost circle, with a distance of five yojanas and thirty-seven yojanas and
one-third between each circle, and their distance from each other is ninety-nine
thousand yojanas plus forty-four yojanas. Then the day is eighteen muhurtas
long, and the night is twelve muhurtas long. This is in the Uttarayana six
months, and this is at the end of the Uttarayana six months. This is in the
solar year, and this is at the end of the solar year.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta - caturtha prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] bhavai, [ 17 tA jayA NaM ete
duve sUriyA savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti, tANaM egaM
joyaNasayasahassaM chacca saTThe joyaNasae aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTTu cAraM
caraMti, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai
jahaNNae duvAlasamuhutte divase esa NaM paDhame chammAse, esa NaM paDhamassa
chammAsassa pajjavasANe, 2. te pavisamANA sUriyA doccaMchammAsaM ayamANAM
paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi bAhirANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti, tA
jayA NaM ete duve sUriyA bAhirANaMtaraMmaMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti,
tayA NaM egaM joyaNasayasahassaM chacca cauppaNNe joyaNasae chattIsaM ca
egadvibhAge joyaNassa, aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTTU cAraM caraMti, tayA NaM
aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, dohiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM UNA, duvAlasamuhutte
divase bhavai, dohiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie, 3. te pavisamANA sUriyA
doccaMsi ahorattaMsi bAhiraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti, tA
jayA NaM ete duve sUriyA bAhiraM tacchaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti,
tANaM egaM joyaNasayasahassaM chacca aDayAle joyaNasae bAvaNNaM ca egaTTibhAge
joyaNassa, aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTTU cAraM caraMti, bhavai, tayA NaM
aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, cauhiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM UNA, duvAlasamuhutte
divase bhavai, cauhiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie, evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM
pavisamANA ete duve sUriyA tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM maMDalaM
saMkamamANA saMkamamANA paMca paMca joyaNAI paNatIse ca egaTTibhAge joyaNassa
egamege maMDale aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM nivaDDhemANA nivaDDhemANA savvabdhaMtaraM
maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti, tA jayA NaM duve sUriyA savvabdhaMtaraM
maMDala uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti, tayA NaM NavaNauiM joyaNasahassAiM chacca
cattAle joyaNasae aNNamaNNassa aMtaraM kaTTU cAraM caraMti, tayA NaM
uttamakaTThapatte, ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNNiyA
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI esa NaM docce chammAse esa NaM doccassa chammAsassa
pajjavasANe, esa NaM Aicce saMvacchare, esa NaM Aiccassa saMvaccharassa
pajjavasANe  /

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Prabhrit [Fifth Prabhrit Prabhrit] After the Sun's crossing of the
island and the ocean, four (verses)  16-17. How far does the Sun travel after
crossing the island or the ocean?  There are five interpretations about this, as
follows:  1. Some say that the Sun travels one thousand yojanas and thirty-three
hundred yojanas after crossing the island or the ocean. 2. Some say that the Sun
travels one thousand yojanas and thirty-four hundred yojanas after crossing the
island or the ocean. 3. Some say that the Sun travels one thousand yojanas and
thirty-five hundred yojanas after crossing the island or the ocean. 4. Some say
that the Sun travels an immeasurable distance after crossing the island or the
ocean. 5. Some say that the Sun does not travel any specific distance after
crossing the island or the ocean.  Those who say that the Sun travels one
thousand yojanas and thirty-three hundred yojanas after crossing the island or
the ocean, say...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta [paMcama pAbhRtaprAbhRta] sUrassa dIva-samudda-
ogAhaNANaMtaraM cAraM 16-17. tA kevaiyaM te dIvaM vA samudaM vA ogAhittA sUrie
cAra carai, Ahiteti vadejA ? tattha khalu imAo paMca paDivattIo paNNattAo taM
jahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. tA egaM joyaNa-sahassaM egaM ca tettIsaM
joyaNasayaM, dIvaM vA samuI vA ogAhittA sUrie cAraM, carai, ege evamAhaMsu, ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA egaM joyaNa-sahassaM, egaM ca cauttIsaM joyaNasayaM,
dIvaM vA samuhaM vA ogAhittA sUrie cAraM carai, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 3. tA egaM joyaNa-sahassaM, egaM ca paNattIsaM joyaNasayaM, dIvaM
vA samuhaM vA ogAhittA sUrie cAraM carai, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu -
4. tA avaDDhe dIvaM vA, samuI vA, ogAhittA sUrie cAraM carai ege evamAhaMsu, 5.
ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA no kiMci egaM joyaNasahassaM egaM ca tettIsaM
joyaNasayaM dIvaM vA, samudda vA ogAhittA sUrie cAraM carai, ege evamAhaMsu,
tattha je te evamAhaMsu - 1. tA egaM joyaNasahassaM egaM ca tettIsaM
joyaNasayaM, dIvaM vA samuha vA ogAhittA sUrie cAraM carai, te evamAhaMsu -

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**First Prabhrita - Fifth Prabhrita**  **A** - When the Sun traverses the
innermost circle, it covers a distance of one thousand yojanas and thirty-three
hundred yojanas, encompassing Jambudvipa. At the time of the Uttarakatthapattas,
the day lasts for eighteen muhurtas, while the night lasts for twelve muhurtas.
**B** - When the Sun traverses the outermost circle, it covers a distance of one
thousand yojanas and thirty-three hundred yojanas, encompassing the salt ocean.
At the time of the Uttarakatthapattas, the day lasts for eighteen muhurtas,
while the night lasts for twelve muhurtas.  **2.** Similarly, it should be
understood that the Sun covers thirty-four hundred yojanas, thirty-five hundred
yojanas, and so on.  **3.** Those who say that the Sun traverses a larger
Jambudvipa or ocean, they say that when the Sun traverses the innermost circle,
it covers a larger Jambudvipa, and at the time of the Uttarakatthapattas, the
day lasts for eighteen muhurtas, while the night lasts for twelve muhurtas.
**4.** Similarly, in the outermost circle, it should be understood that the Sun
traverses a larger salt ocean, and the day and night remain the same.  **5.**
Those who say that the Sun does not traverse any island or ocean, they say that
when the Sun traverses the innermost circle, it does not traverse any island or
ocean, and at the time of the Uttarakatthapattas, the day lasts for eighteen
muhurtas, while the night lasts for twelve muhurtas.  **6.** Similarly, in the
outermost circle, it should be understood that the Sun does not traverse any
salt ocean, and the day and night remain the same.  **1.** Similar to the above
mentioned sutra.  **2.** Similar to the above mentioned sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta - paMcama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] ka - tA jayA NaM sUrie
savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM jaMbuddIvaM dIvaM
ega joyaNasahassaM, egaM ca tettIsaM joyaNasayaM ogAhittA sUrie cAraM carai,
tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNiyA
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, kha - tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM lavaNasamudaM egaM joyaNasahassaM, egaM ca
tettIsaM joyaNasayaM ogAhittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA
aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, jahaNNae duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, 2. evaM
cauttIse'vi joyaNasayaM, 3. paNatIse'vi evaM ceva bhANiyavvaM, 4. tattha NaM je
te evamAhaMsu - tA avaDDhaM dIvaM vA, samudaM vA, ogAhittA sUrie cara carai, te
evamAhaMsu - tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM
carai, tayA NaM avaDDhaM jaMbuddIvaM dIvaM ogAhittA sUrie cAraM carai, tayA NaM
uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNiyA
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, . evaM savvabAhire maMDale'vi, NavaraM - 'avaDDhaM
lavaNasamuI' tayA NaM - 'rAiMdiyaM' taheva, 5. tattha NaM je te evamAhaMsu - tA
no kiMci dIvaM vA samuha vA ogAhittA cAraM carai, te evamAhaMsu - tA jayA NaM
sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM no kiMci
dIvaM vA, samudaM vA ogAhittA sUrie cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte
ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai,
evaM savvabAhire maMDale vi, NavaraM - 'no kiMci lavaNasamudaM ogAhittA sUrie
cAraM carai, rAiMdiyaM taheva',' 1. Upara aMkita sUtra ke samAna hai| 2. Upara
aMkita sUtra ke samAna hai|

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
20 ] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra We say thus and we explain - K - When the Sun
traverses the inner circle, it traverses the Jambudvipa island, which is 100
yojanas in extent, and it traverses the entire inner circle.  When it reaches
the highest point, it is day for 18 muhurtas, and when it reaches the lowest
point, it is night for 12 muhurtas. Kh - When the Sun traverses the outer
circle, it traverses the salt ocean, which is 330 yojanas in extent, and it
traverses the entire outer circle. When it reaches the highest point, it is
night for 18 muhurtas, and when it reaches the lowest point, it is day for 12
muhurtas.  This is what is said in the scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 20 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo - ka - tA jayA NaM sUrie
savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM jaMbuddIvaM dIvaM
asIyaM joyaNasayaM ogAhittA sUrie cAraM carai, tayANaM uttamakaTThapatte ukosae
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, kha - tA
jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAra carai, tayA NaM
lavaNasamuI tiNNi tIse joyaNasae ogAhittA sUrie cAraM carai, tayA NaM
uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, jahaNNae duvAlasamuhutte
divase bhavai, gAhAo bhaanniyvyaao|

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Prabhruta [Sixth Prabhruta Prabhruta]  Regarding the Sun's movement in
the Mandala, the Mandala Sankraman Kshetrachar:  18. How does the Sun move in
the Mandala, oscillating back and forth, in a single direction?  There are seven
different opinions on this matter:  1. Some say that the Sun moves in a single
direction, oscillating back and forth, by a distance of two yojanas and forty-
four and a half parts of a yojana. 2. Some say that the Sun moves in a single
direction, oscillating back and forth, by a distance of two and a half yojanas.
3. Some say that the Sun moves in a single direction, oscillating back and
forth, by a distance of three yojanas and one-third. 4. Some say that the Sun
moves in a single direction, oscillating back and forth, by a distance of three
yojanas and fifty-two and a half parts of a yojana. 5. Some say that the Sun
moves in a single direction, oscillating back and forth, by a distance of four
and a half yojanas. 6. Some say that the Sun moves in a single direction,
oscillating back and forth, by a distance of four yojanas and fifty-two and a
half parts of a yojana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta [chaThA prAbhRtaprAbhRta] sUrassa egamege rAidie maMDalAo
maMDalasaMkamaNakhettacAraM 18. tA kevaiyaM te egamege NaM rAidie NaM
vikaMpaittA vikaMpaittA sUrie cAra carai, Ahiteti vadejA? tattha khalu imAo
satta paDivattIo paNNattAo taM jahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. tA do joyaNAI
addhaducattAlIse tesII sayabhAge joyaNassa, egamegeNaM, rAidieNaM vikaMpaittA
vikaMpaittA sUrie cAraM, carai, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA
aDDhAijjAI joyaNAI egamegeNaM rAidieNaM vikaMpaittA vikaMpaittA sUrie cAra
carai, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 3. tA tibhAgUNAI tini joyaNAI
egamegeNaM rAidieNaM vikaMpaittA vikaMpaittA sUrie cAra carai, ege evamAhaMsu,
ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 4. tA tiNNi joyaNAI addhasItAlIsaM ca tesIisayabhAge
joyaNassa, egamegeNaM, rAidieNaM vikaMpaittA vikaMpaittA sUrie cAra carai, ege
evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 5. tA adhuTThAiM joyaNAI egamegeNaM, rAidieNaM
vikaMpaittA vikaMpaittA sUrie cAraM carai, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu -
7. tA cattArijoyaNAiM addhabAvaNNaM ca tesIisayabhAge joyaNassa egamegeNaM,
rAidieNaM vikaMpaittA vikaMpaittA sUrie cAraM carai, ege evamAhaMsu,

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 22  We are now going to discuss the movement of the sun.  **Question:** How
does the sun move?  **Answer:**  The Jambudvipa island, along with all the other
islands and oceans, is a circular landmass with a diameter of 100,000 yojanas.
It is further specified that the diameter is 300,000 yojanas, 227 yojanas, 300
kosas, 28 dhanus, 13 angulas, and half an angula.  1. When the sun moves through
the entire outer circle, it takes 18 muhurtas for a day, which is equivalent to
12 muhurtas of night.  2. When the sun starts its journey in the first year, it
moves through the first inner circle. The sun moves through this circle with a
speed of 2 yojanas and 49/64 of a yojana, vibrating with each movement. This
takes 18 muhurtas for a day, which is equivalent to 12 muhurtas of night, minus
1/64 of a muhurta.  3. When the sun starts its journey in the second year, it
moves through the second inner circle. The sun moves through this circle with a
speed of 5 yojanas and 35/64 of a yojana, vibrating with each movement. This
takes 18 muhurtas for a day, which is equivalent to 12 muhurtas of night, minus
1/16 of a muhurta.  4. In this way, the sun moves through all the inner circles,
each time increasing its speed by 2 yojanas and 49/64 of a yojana, vibrating
with each movement. Finally, it reaches the outermost circle.  5. When the sun
moves through the outermost circle, it moves with a speed of 155 yojanas,
vibrating with each movement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22 ] vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo tA do joyaNAI aDayAlIsaM ca egadvibhAge joyaNassa
egamegaM maMDalaM egamegeNaM rAIdieNaM vikaMpaittA vikaMpaittA sUrie cAraM
carar3a, tattha NaM ko heU ? iti vadejjA  /  bhavai, [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra tA
ayaM NaM jaMbuddIve dIve savvadIva-samuddANaM savvabdhaMtarAe savvakhuDDAge
vaTTe jAva joyaNasayahassamAyAmavikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi joyaNasayasahassAiM doNNi
ya sattAvIse joyaNasae, tiNNi kose aTThAvIsaM ca dhaNusayaM terasa aMgulAI,
addhaMgulaM ca kiMci visesAhie parikkheveNaM paNNatte  /  1. tA jayA NaM sUrie
savvabdhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte
ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI - 2. se
nikkhamamANe sUrie NavaM saMvaccharaM ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi
abdhiMtarANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a, tAjA NaM sUrie
abdhiMtarANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a, tayA NaM do joyaNAI
aDayAlIsaM ca egaTTibhAge joyaNassa egeNaM rAIdieNaM vikaMpaittA vikaMpaittA
cAraM carar3a, tayA NaM aThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, dohi
egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM UNe, duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, dohiM
egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyA  /  3. se nikkhamamANe sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi
abdhiMtaraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tAjA NaM sUrie
abdhiMtaraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a, tayA NaM paMca joyaNAi
paNatIsaM ca egaTTibhAge joyaNassa dohiM rAidiehiM vikaMpaittA vikaMpaittA cAraM
carai, tayA NaM aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, cauhiM egaTTibhAgasamuhuthiM
UNe, duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai cauhiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyA, evaM khalu
eeNaM uvAeNaM nikkhamamANe sUrie tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM maMDalaM
saMkamamANe saMkamamANe do do joyaNAI aDayAlIsaM ca egadvibhAge joyaNassa
egamegaM maMDalaM egamegeNaM rAidieNaM vikaMpamANe vikaMpamANe savvabAhiraM
maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai  /  tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabdhaMtarAo
maMDalAo savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM
savvabdhaMtaraM maMDalaM paNihAya egeNaM tesIeNaM rAIdiyasaeNaM
paMcadasuttarajoyaNasae vikaMpaittA vikaMpaittA cAraM carai,

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Prabhrit - Sixth Prabhrit Prabhrit] [ 23 When the sun reaches the highest
point (Uttmakaththapatta) in the sky, it takes 18 muhurtas to complete a day,
which is equivalent to 12 muhurtas in the night. This occurs during the first
six months of the year, and specifically during the first fortnight of the first
six months. 1. When the sun enters the first six months, it moves through the
outer circle of the sky, covering a distance of 2 yojanas and 48 yojanas and
1/8th of a yojana in each muhurta. This results in a day of 18 muhurtas, which
is 2/8th of a muhurta less than the night, which is 12 muhurtas. 2. When the sun
enters the outer circle of the sky during the day, it moves through the outer
circle of the sky, covering a distance of 5 yojanas and 35 yojanas and 1/2 of a
yojana in each muhurta. This results in a day of 18 muhurtas, which is 4/8th of
a muhurta less than the night, which is 12 muhurtas. Thus, as the sun enters the
different circles of the sky, it covers a distance of 2 yojanas and 48 yojanas
and 1/8th of a yojana in each muhurta, moving through each circle at a rate of 1
yojana per muhurta. When the sun has moved through all the outer circles of the
sky, it then moves through the inner circle, covering a distance of 105 yojanas
in each muhurta. This results in a day of 18 muhurtas, which is equivalent to 12
muhurtas in the night. This occurs during the second six months of the year, and
specifically during the first fortnight of the second six months. This also
occurs during the entire year, and specifically during the first fortnight of
the entire year. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta - chaThA prAbhRtaprAbhRta] [ 23 tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA
ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, jahaNNae duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai,
esa NaM paDhame chammAse, esa NaM paDhamassa chammAsassa pajavasANe, 1. se
pavisamANe sUrie doccaM chammAsaM ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi bAhirANaMtaraM
maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, _tA jayA NaM sUrie bAhirANaMtaraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM do do joyaNAI aDayAlIsaM ca egaTThibhAge
joyaNassa egeNaM rAidieNaM vikaMpaittA cAra carai, tayA NaM aTThArasamuhuttA rAI
bhavai dohiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM UNA, duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai dohiM
egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie, 2. se pavisamANe sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi bAhiraM
taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, * tA jayA NaM sUrie bAhiraM taccaM
maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM paMcajoyaNAI paNatIsaM ca
egaTThibhAge joyaNassa dohiM rAidiehiM vikaMpaittA vikaMpaittA cAraM carai, tayA
NaM aTThArasama huttA rAI bhavai cauhiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM UNA,
duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, cauhiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie, evaM khalu
eeNaM uvAeNaM pavisamANe sUrie tayA'NaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM maMDalaM
saMkamamANe saMkamamANe do joyaNAI aDayAlIsaM ca egaTThibhAge joyaNassa egamegaM
maMDalaM egemegeNaM rAidieNaM vikaMpamANe vikaMpamANe savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tA jayA NaM sUriye savvabAhirAo maMDalAo
savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM savvabAhiraM
maMDalaM paNihAya ege NaM tesIe NaM rAiMdiyasaeNaM paMcadasuttare joyaNasae
vikaMpaittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte, ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte
divase bhavai, jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, esa NaM docce chammAse esa
NaM doccassa chammAsassa pajavasANe, esa NaM Aicce saMvacchare, esa NaM Aiccassa
saMvaccharassa pjvsaanne|

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Prabhrit [Seventh Prabhrit Prabhrit] Chand-Sur-Mandala-Santhi 19. How
are those Mandala-Santhi? Tell us. There are eight different opinions about it,
as follows: - Some say - 1. All the Mandalas are Sama-Chaurans-Santhan-Santhi,
some say - 2. All the Mandalas are Visama-Chaurans-Santhan-Santhi, some say - 3.
All the Mandalas are Sama-Chaukkon-Santhi, some say - 4. All the Mandalas are
Visama-Chaukkon-Santhi, some say - 5. All the Mandalas are Sama-Chakkaval-
Santhi, some say - 6. All the Mandalas are Visama-Chakkaval-Santhi, some say -
7. All the Mandalas are Chakkaddha-Chakkaval-Santhi, some say - 8. All the
Mandalas are Chhatagar-Santhi, some say - Those who say that all the Mandalas
are Chhatagar-Santhi, they are not wrong, nor are they right. The Paahuḍagaha
are to be spoken.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta [saptama prAbhRtaprAbhRta] caMda-sUra-maMDala-saMThiI 19. tA
kahaM te maMDala-saMThiI Ahiteti vadejjA ? tattha khalu imAo aTTha paDivattIo
paNNattAo, taM jahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. tA savvA vi NaM maMDalAvatA
samacauraMsa-saMThANasaMThiyA paNNattA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 2.
tA savvA vi NaM maMDalAvatA visamacauraMsa-saMThANasaMThiyA paNNattA,
egeevamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 3. tA savvA vi NaM maMDalAvatA
samacaukkoNasaMThiyA paNNttA , egeevamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 4. tA savvA
vi NaM maMDalAvatA visamacaukkoNasaMThiyA paNNttA , egeevamAhaMsu, ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 5. tA savvA vi NaM maMDalAvatA samacakkavAlasaMThiyA paNNttA ,
egeevamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 6. tA savvA vi NaM maMDalAvatA
visamacakkavAlasaMThiyA paNttA , egeevamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 7. tA
savvA vi NaM maMDalAvatA cakkaddhacakkavAlasaMThiyA pattA, egeevamAhaMsu, ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - 8. tA savvA vi NaM maMDalAvatA chattAgArasaMThiyA paNNttA ,
egeevamAhaMsu, tattha je te evamAhaMsu - tA savvA vi NaM maMDalAvatA
chatAgArasaMThiyA paNNattA, eeMge NaeNaM NAyavvaM, No ceva NaM iyarehiM  /
pAhuDagAhAo bhaanniyvvaao| .

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Prabhruta [ Eighth Prabhruta Prabhruta ] Of all the mandalas, the
diameter, the circumference, and the perimeter of the sun are to be examined.
20. So all of them are in terms of yojanas - What is the diameter in yojanas?
What is the circumference in yojanas? What is the perimeter in yojanas? It is
said. There are three interpretations of this, as follows: There, they said
thus: 1 - So all of them are in terms of yojanas, the diameter is one yojana,
one thousand yojanas and thirty-three hundred yojanas is the circumference,
three thousand yojanas and ninety-nine hundred yojanas is the perimeter, some
said thus, - Some others said thus: 2 - So all of them are in terms of yojanas,
the diameter is one yojana, - one thousand yojanas and thirty-four hundred
yojanas is the circumference, three thousand yojanas and forty-four hundred
yojanas is the perimeter, some said thus, some others said thus - 3 - So all of
them are in terms of yojanas, the diameter is one yojana, one thousand yojanas
and thirty-five hundred yojanas is the circumference, three thousand yojanas and
forty-five hundred yojanas is the perimeter, some said thus, We, however, say
thus: So all of them are in terms of yojanas, the diameter is one and a half
yojanas, -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta [ aSTama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] sUrassa savvamaMDalANaM bAhallaM
AyAma-vikkhabhaM parikkhevaM ca 20. tA savvA vi NaM maMDalavayA - ke vaiyaM
bAhalleNaM ? kevaiyaM AyAma - vikkhaMbheNaM ? kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM ? Ahiteti
vadejjA  /  tattha khalu imA tiNNi paDivattIo paNNattAo, taM jahA tatthege
evamAhaMsu 1 - tA savvA vi NaM maMDalavayA joyaNaM bAhalleNaM, egaM
joyaNasahassaM egaM tettIsaM joyaNasayaM AyAma - vikkhaMbheNaM, tiNi
joyaNasahassAiM tiNNi ya NavaNauI joyaNasae parikkheveNaM paNNattA, ege
evamAhaMsu, - ege puNa evamAhaMsu 2 - tA savvA viNaM maMDalavayA joyaNaM
bAhalleNaM, - egaM joyaNasahassaM egaM ca cauttIsaM joyaNasayaM AyAma -
vikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi joyaNasahassAI castAri viuttarAI joyaNasayAiM parikkheveNaM
paNNattA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 3- tA savvA vi NaM maMDalavayA
joyaNaM bAhalleNaM, egaM joyaNasahassaM egaM ca paNatIsaM joyaNasayaM AyAma -
vikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi joyaNasahassAiM cattAri paMcuttarAI joyaNasayAiM
parikkheveNaM paNNattA, ege evamAhaMsu, vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo tA savvA vi NaM
maMDalavayA aMDayAlIsaM egadvibhAge joyaNassa bAhalleNaM, -

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
26 ] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra It is said that the diameter and circumference are
measured by the Aṇiya, what is the reason for that? So, on this Jambudvipa
island, in all the islands and oceans, in all the interiors, in all the corners,
it extends up to a thousand yojanas in diameter and circumference, three hundred
thousand yojanas, two hundred and twenty-seven yojanas, three kosas, twenty-
eight dhanus, thirteen angulas, and a little more than half an angula in
circumference. 1. The sun travels in a circle, encompassing all the interiors,
and its speed is forty-eight parts of a yojana out of sixty-one parts, with a
diameter and circumference of nine thousand nine hundred and sixty-four yojanas,
three hundred thousand yojanas, fifteen thousand yojanas, and one hundred and
ninety-nine yojanas, with a little more than half an angula in circumference. It
takes eighteen muhurtas to reach the highest point in the sky, and twelve
muhurtas to reach the lowest point. 2. When the sun sets, it travels in a circle
encompassing the inner interior for nine years, starting from the first day and
night. When the sun travels in a circle encompassing the inner interior, its
speed is forty-eight parts of a yojana out of sixty-one parts, nine thousand
nine hundred and sixty-four yojanas, six hundred and forty-five yojanas, and
thirty-five parts of a yojana in diameter and circumference, three hundred
thousand yojanas, fifteen thousand yojanas, and one hundred yojanas, with a
little more than half an angula in circumference. 1. The Surya Prajnapti and
Jambudvipa Prajnapti Sutras mention the diameter and circumference of the solar
system, but the Samavayaanga Sutra only mentions the circumference. The solution
is that the diameter and circumference of a circle are always equal, and the
solar system is circular, so by mentioning only the circumference, both the
diameter and circumference should be understood. The Surya Prajnapti states that
the outer diameter of the solar system is forty-eight parts of a yojana out of
sixty-one parts. The Jambudvipa Prajnapti states that the outer diameter of the
solar system is twenty-four parts of a yojana out of sixty-one parts. It is a
matter of research which of these two types of outer diameter measurements is
real. The Surya Prajnapti states that the diameter, circumference, and perimeter
of the solar system are irregular compared to the inner and outer circles, but
the Jambudvipa Prajnapti does not state that the diameter, circumference, and
perimeter of the solar system are irregular. In the Jambudvipa Prajnapti, the
diameter, circumference, and perimeter of the solar system are mentioned, but
are they for the inner or outer circles? Because the diameter, circumference,
and perimeter measurements mentioned in the Surya Prajnapti for the inner and
outer circles do not match the diameter, circumference, and perimeter
measurements mentioned in the Jambudvipa Prajnapti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra aNiyayA AyAma-vikkhaMbha-parikkheveNaM, Ahiteti
vadejA, tattha NaM ko heU ? tti vdejaa| tA ayaM NaM jaMbuddIve dIve savvadIva-
samudANaM savvabbhaMtarAe savvakhuDDAge vaTTe jAva joyaNasahassamAyAma-
vikkhaMbheNaM, tiNi joyaNasayasahassAiM, doNNi ya sattAvIse joyaNasae, tiNNi
kose, aTThAvIsaM ca dhaNusayaM, terasa ya aMgulAI, addhaMgulaM ca kiMci
visesAhie parikkheveNaM paNNatte, 1. tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM sA maMDalavayA aDayAlIsaM egaTThibhAge
poyaNassa bAhelleNaM, NavaNaui joyaNasahassAI chacca cattAle joyaNasayAI AyAma-
vikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi joyaNasayasahassAiM paNNarasa joyaNasahassAiM egUNaNauI
joyaNAI kiMci visesAhie parikkheveNaM, tayANaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| 2. se
nikkhammamANe sUrie NavaM saMvaccharaM ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi
abbhitarANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tA jayA NaM sUrie
abhiMtarANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM sA maMDalavayA
aDayAlIsaM egaTThibhAge joyaNassa bAhalleNaM, . NavaNauI joyaNasahassAiM chacca
paNayAle joyaNasae paNatIsaM ca egaTThibhAge joyaNassa AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi
joyaNasayasahassAiM paNNarasa joyaNasahassAI egaM cauttaraM joyaNasayaM kiMci
visesUNaM 1. sUryaprajJapti tathA jambUdvIpraprajJapti ke sUtroM meM
sUryamaNDala kA AyAma-viSkambha kahA gayA hai kintu samavAyAMga sUtra meM kevala
viSkambha hI kahA gayA hai| isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki vRttAkAra kA AyAma-
viSkambha sadA samAna hotA hai, sUryamaNDala vRttAkAra hai, ataH kevala
viSkambha kahane se AyAma aura viSkambha donoM samajha lene caahiye|
sUryaprajJapti meM sUryamaNDala kA bAhalya eka yojana ke ikasaTha bhAgoM meM se
ar3atAlIsa bhAga jitanA kahA gayA hai| jambUdvIpaprajJapti meM sUryamaNDala kA
bAhalya eka yojana ke ikasaTha bhAgoM meM se caubIsa bhAga jitanA kahA gayA hai|
ina do prakAra ke bAhalya pramANo meM se kauna sA vAstavika hai, yaha zodha kA
viSaya hai| sUryaprajJapti meM sUryamaNDala kA AyAma-viSkambha aura paridhi
bAhyAbhyantara maNDaloM kI apekSA aniyata hai, aisA likhA hai kintu
jambUdvIpaprajJapti meM sUryamaNDala kA AyAma, viSkambha aura paridhi aniyata
nahIM likhI hai| jambUdvIpaprajJapti meM sUryamaNDala kA AyAma-viSkambha aura
paridhi jo kahI hai vaha Abhyantara yA bAhyamaNDaloM kI hai ? kyoMki
sUryaprajJapti meM kathita bAhyAbhyantara maNDaloM ke AyAma-viSkambhapramANoM
meM jambUdvIpaprajJaptikathita AyAma-viSkambha paridhi kA pramANa milatA nahIM
hai|

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ 27 By calculation, on the eighteenth muhurta day, two and one-eighth muhurtas
less, twelve muhurtas night, two and one-eighth muhurtas more, 3. When the sun
exits, it travels in the outer circle of the day and night, when the sun travels
in the inner circle of the day and night, then that circle is 39 and one-eighth
yojanas in diameter, 99,000 yojanas, 600 yojanas, 9 and one-eighth yojanas in
length and breadth, 300,000 yojanas, 15,000 yojanas, 119 yojanas by calculation,
on the eighteenth muhurta day, four and one-eighth muhurtas less, twelve
muhurtas night, four and one-eighth muhurtas more, 4. Thus, when the sun exits,
it travels in the outer circle of the day and night, when the sun travels in the
outer circle of the day and night, then that circle is 39 and one-eighth yojanas
in diameter, 100,000 yojanas, 606 yojanas in length and breadth, 300,000
yojanas, 18,000 yojanas, 315 yojanas by calculation, then the highest point of
the sun is reached, eighteen muhurtas night, twelve muhurtas day, this is the
first six months, this is the first six months, 1. When the sun enters, it
travels in the outer circle of the day and night, when the sun travels in the
outer circle of the day and night, then that circle is 39 and one-eighth yojanas
in diameter,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta - aSTama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 27 parikkheveNaM, tayA NaM
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, dohiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM UNe,
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai dohiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyA, 3. se nikkhammANe
sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi atiraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tA
jayA NaM sUrie abbhiMtaraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM
sA maMDalavayA ar3ayAlIsaM egaTThibhAge joyaNassa bAhalleNaM, NavaNaui
joyaNasahassAI chacca ekAvanne joyaNasae Nava ya egaTThibhAge joyaNassa
AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi joyaNasayasahassAI paNNarasa joyaNasahassAI ega ca
paNavIsaM joyaNasayaM parikkheveNaM patte, tayA NaM aTThArasamuhutte divase
bhavai, cauhiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM UNe, duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai cAhiM
egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyA, 4. evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM nikkhammamANe sUrie
tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe paMca paMca
joyaNAI paNatIsaM ca egaTThibhAge joyaNassa egamege maMDale vikkhaMbhavuDDhi
abhivaDDhemANe abhivaDDhemANe aTThArasa aTThArasa joyaNAiM parirayavuDDhi
abhivaDDhemANe abhivaDDhemANe savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai,
tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM sA
maMDalavayA ar3ayAlIsaM egaTThibhAge joyaNassa bAhalleNaM, egaM ca
joyaNasayasahassAhaM chaccasaTTe joyaNasae AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi
joyaNasayasahassaM aTThArasa sahassAI tiNNi ya paNNarasuttare joyaNasae
parikkheveNaM, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapette ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai,
jahaNNie duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, esa NaM paDhame chammAse esa NaM
paDhamassa chammAsassa pajavasANe, 1. se pavisamANe sUrie doccaM chammAsaM
ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi bAhirANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM
carai, tA jayA NaM sUrie bAhirANaMtara maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA
NaM sA maMDalavayA ar3ayAlIsaM egaTThibhAge joyaNassa bAhalleNaM,

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  28 [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ]  A diameter and breadth of one hundred thousand
yojanas, six hundred and twenty-six yojanas and one-eighth of a yojana, A
circumference of three hundred thousand yojanas, eighteen thousand yojanas and
two hundred and seventy-nine yojanas, This is the measure of the day, eighteen
muhurtas less two one-eighth muhurtas, twelve muhurtas is the day, two one-
eighth muhurtas is the night. 2. When the sun enters, it moves in a circle
outside the outermost circle, and when the sun moves in a circle outside the
outermost circle, then the measure of that circle is eighty-four yojanas and
one-eighth of a yojana, A diameter and breadth of one hundred thousand yojanas,
six hundred and eighty-two yojanas and fifty-two yojanas and one-eighth of a
yojana, A circumference of three hundred thousand yojanas, eighteen thousand
yojanas and two hundred and ninety-nine yojanas, This is the measure of the day,
eighteen muhurtas less four one-eighth muhurtas, twelve muhurtas is the day,
four one-eighth muhurtas is the night. Thus, when the sun enters, it moves from
one circle to another, and as it moves from one circle to another, it increases
in diameter and breadth by five yojanas and thirty-five one-eighth yojanas, and
as it moves from one circle to another, it increases in circumference by
eighteen yojanas, and as it moves from one circle to another, it moves in a
circle outside the outermost circle, When the sun moves in a circle outside the
outermost circle, then the measure of that circle is eighty-four yojanas and
one-eighth of a yojana, a diameter and breadth of nine thousand nine hundred and
sixty-four yojanas, A circumference of three hundred thousand yojanas, fifteen
thousand yojanas and one hundred and ninety-nine yojanas, a little more than
that, This is the measure of the day, eighteen muhurtas is the day, twelve
muhurtas is the night, This is the measure of the six months, this is the
measure of the end of the six months, this is the measure of the year, this is
the measure of the end of the year.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra egaM joyaNasayasahassaM chacca cauppaNe joyaNasae
chavvIsaM ca egaTThibhAge joyaNassa AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi
joyaNasayasahassAiM aTThArasa sahassAiMdoNNi ya sattANaue joyaNasae
parikkheveNaM paNNatte, tayA NaM aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai dohiM
egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM UNA, duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, dohiM
egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie, 2. se pavisamANe sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi bAhiraM
taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tA jayA NaM sUrie bAhiraM taccaM
maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM sA maMDalavayA aDayAlIsaM
egaTThibhAge joyaNassa bAhalleNaM, egaM joyaNasayasahassaM chacca aDayAle
joyaNasae bAvaNNaM ca egaTThibhAge joyaNassa AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi
joyaNasayasahassAI aTThArasasahassAI doNNi ya egUNAsIe joyaNasae parikkheveNaM
paNNatte, tayA NaM aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai cauhiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM
UNA, duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai cAhiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie, evaM khalu
eeNaM uvAeNaM pavisamANe sUrie tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM maMDalaM
saMkamamANe saMkamamANe paMca paMca joyaNAI paNatIsaM ca egaTThibhAge joyaNassa
egamege maMDale vikkhaMbhavuTTi nivuDDhemANe nivuDDhemANe aTThArasa joyaNAI
parirayavaDDi nivuDDhemANe nivuDDhemANe savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA
cAraM carai, tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM
carai, tayA NaM sA maMDalavayA ar3ayAlIsaM egaTThibhAge joyaNassa bAhalleNaM,
NavaNauI joyaNasahassAiM chacca cattAle joyaNasae AyAma-vikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi
joyaNasayasahassAI paNNarasasahassAI egUNaNauI ca joyaNAI kiMci visesAhie
parikkheveNaM paNNatte, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte
divase bhavai jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, esa NaM docce chammAse, esa
NaM doccassa chammAsassa pajjavasANe, esa NaM Aicce saMvacchare esa NaM Aiccassa
saMvaccharassa pjjvsaanne|

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Prabhrita - Eighth Prabhrita Prabhrita] The outer diameter of all the
celestial spheres is half the measure. All the celestial spheres have a diameter
of 42,000 yojanas, [29 All the celestial spheres have a diameter of two yojanas,
This half is equal to 55 yojanas, So, what is the distance between the inner and
outer celestial spheres? It is 55 yojanas. What is the distance between the
inner and outer celestial spheres? It is 55 yojanas and 1/2 yojana. What is the
distance between the inner and outer celestial spheres? It is 59 yojanas and
13/2 yojanas. What is the distance between the inner and outer celestial
spheres? It is 55 yojanas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama prAbhRta- aSTama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] savvasUramaMDalANaM bAhallaM
aMtaraM addhA pamANaM ca tA savvA viNaM maMDalavayA aDayAlIsaM ca egaTTibhAge
joyaNassa bAhelleNaM, [ 29 savvA vi NaM maMDalaMtariyA do joyaNAiM
vikkhaMbheNaM, esa NaM addhA tesIya sayapaDuppaNNe paMcadasuttare joyaNasae Ahie
tti vaejA, tA abdhiMtarAo maMDalavayAo bAhiraM maMDalavayaM bAhirAo vA
maMDalavayAo abdhiMtaraM maMDalavayaM, esaNaM addhA ke vaiyaM Ahie tti vadejjA ?
tA paMcadasuttare joyaNasae Ahie tti vaejjA, abdhiMtarAe maMDalavayAe bAhirA
maMDalavayA esa NaM addhA kevaiyaM Ahie ti vaejjA ? tA paMcadasuttare joyaNasae
aDayAlIsaM ca egadvibhAge joyaNassa ahiyA, tA abdhiMtarAo maMDalavayAo
bAhiramaMDalavayA bAhirAo maMDalavayAo abdhiMtaramaMDalavayA - esa. NaM addhA ke
vaiyaM Ahie ti vadejjA ? tA paMcanavuttare joyaNasae terasa egadvibhAge
joyaNassa Ahie tti vadejjA, abbhiMtarAo maMDalavayAo bAhirA maMDalavayA, bAhirAe
maMDalavayAe abdhiMtara-maMDalavayA esa NaM addhA kevaiyA Ahie tti vadejjA ? tA
paMcadasuttare joyaNasae Ahie ti vadejjA  /  gim -

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Suraṇ Teriṣṣagāī ## Second Prābhṛta [First Prābhṛta]  21. "How then is the
Teriṣṣagāī?" Thus it is asked. There, indeed, these eight interpretations are
established, as follows: There, they said thus:  1. "From the eastern horizon,
the rays of the Marīcī rise in the sky, it makes this world slant, having made
it, it sets in the western horizon in the evening in the sky." Thus some said.
Some, however, said thus:  2. "From the eastern horizon, the Sun rises in the
sky, it makes this world slant, having made it, it sets in the western horizon
in the evening." Thus some said. Some, however, said thus:  3. "From the eastern
horizon, the Sun rises in the sky, it makes this world slant, having made it, it
enters the sky in the evening, having entered, it goes to sleep, having gone to
sleep, it rises again from the lower eastern horizon in the sky." Thus some
said. Some, however, said thus:  4. "From the eastern horizon, the Sun rises
from the earth, it makes this world slant, having made it, it sets in the
western horizon in the evening." Thus some said. Some, however, said thus:  5.
"From the eastern horizon, the Sun rises from the earth, it makes this world
slant, having made it, it enters the earth in the evening, having entered, it
goes to sleep, having gone to sleep, it rises again from the lower eastern
horizon." Thus some said. Some, however, said thus:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUrANa tericchagaI dvitIya prAbhRta [ prathama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] 21. tA kahaM
te tericchagaI Ahie ? tti vaejjA  /  tattha khalu imAo aTTha paDivattIo
paNNattAo, taM jahA tatthege evamAhaMsu - - 1. tA puratthimAo loyaMtAo pAo
marIcI AgAsaMsi uTThei, se NaM imaM loyaM tiriyaM karei, karittA paccatthimaMsi
loyaMtaMsi sAyaMmi AgAsaMsi viddhaMsai ege evamAhaMsu  /  ege puNa evamAhaMsu -
2. tA puratthimAo loyaMtAo pAo sUrie AgAsaMsi uTThei, se NaM imaM loyaM tiriyaM
karei, karittA paccatthimaMsi loyaMtaMsi sAyaMsUrie AgAsaMsi viddhaMsai ege
evamAhaMsu  /  ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 3. tA puratthimAo loyaMtAo pAo sUrie
AgAsaMsi uTThei, se NaM imaM loyaM tiriyaM karei, karittA paccatthimaMsi
loyaMtaMsi sAyaM sUrie AgAsaM aNupavisai, aNupavisittA ahe paDiyAgacchai
paDiyAgacchittA puNaravi avarabhU-puratthimAo loyaMtAo pAo sUrie AgAsaMsi uTThei
ege evamAhaMsu  /  ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 4. tA puratthimAo loyaMtAo pAo sUrie
puDhavIo uTThei, se NaM imaM tiriyaM karei, karittA paccatthimaMsi loyaMtaMsi
sAyaM sUrie puDhavikAyaMsi uTThei ege evamAhaMsu  /  ege puNa evamAhaMsu - . 5.
tA puratthimAo loyaMtAo pAo sUrie puDhavIo uTThei, se NaM imaM loyaM tiriyaM
karei, karittA paccatthimaMsi loyaMtaMsi sAyaM sUrie puDhavikAyaM aNupavisai,
aNupavisittA ahe paDiyAgacchai paDiyAgacchittA puNaravi avarabhU-puratthimAo
loyaMtAo pAo sUrie puDhavIo uTThei ege evamAhaMsu  /  ege puNa evamAhaMsu

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Prabhruta - First Prabhruta Prabhruta  6. Some say that the sun rises
in the east, then traverses this world horizontally, and sets in the west.  [31
Some others say - 7. The sun rises in the east, then traverses this world
horizontally, then sets in the west, then enters (the earth), then descends,
then again rises in the east. Some say this. Some others say - 8. The sun rises
far away in the east, many yojanas, many yojana-hundreds, many yojana-thousands
high, then traverses this southern hemisphere horizontally, then sets in the
northern hemisphere, then traverses this northern hemisphere horizontally, then
sets in the southern hemisphere, then traverses these southern and northern
hemispheres horizontally, then rises far away in the east, many yojanas, many
yojana-hundreds, many yojana-thousands high. Some say this.  We, however, say
this: The two suns rise in the sky, eight yojana-hundreds high, in the regions
of the earth, which are very worthy of being remembered, in the four-part
mandala, which is the southern, eastern, northern, and western part of the
Jambudvipa island, which is the living mandala of the four directions, the
north, south, east, and west.  Then they traverse these southern and northern
parts of Jambudvipa horizontally, then set in the eastern and western parts of
Jambudvipa.  Then they traverse these eastern and western parts of Jambudvipa
horizontally, then set in the southern and northern parts of Jambudvipa.  They
traverse these southern and northern, eastern and western parts of Jambudvipa
horizontally, then rise in the sky in the regions of the earth, which are very
worthy of being remembered, in the four-part mandala, which is the southern,
eastern, northern, and western part of the Jambudvipa island, which is the
living mandala of the four directions, the north, south, east, and west.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya prAbhRta- prathama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] 6. tA puratthimAo loyaMtAo pAo
sUrie AukAyaMsi uTThei, se NaM imaM loyaM tiriyaM karer3a, karittA
paccatthimaMsi loyaMtaMsi sAyaM sUrie AukAyaMsi viddhaMsai ege evamAhaMsu  /  [
31 ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 7. tA puratthimAo loyaMtAo pAo sUrie Auo uTThei, se NaM
imaM loyaM tiriyaM karei, karittA paccatthimaMsi loyaMtaMsi sAyaM sUrie
AukAyaMsi pavisai, pavisittA ahe paDiyAgacchai paDiyAgacchittA puNaravi
avarabhU-puratthimAo loyaMtAo pAo sUrie Auo uTThei ege evamAhaMsu  /  ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 8. tA puratthimAo loyaMtAo bahUI joyaNAI bahUiM joyaNasayAiM bahUiM
joyasahassAiM uDDhaM dUraM uppaittA ettha NaM pAo sUrie AgAsaMsi uTThei, se NaM
imaM dAhiNaMDDhaM loyaM tiriyaM karei, karittA uttaraDDhaloyaM tameva rAo, se
NaM iyaM uttaraoloyaM tiriyaM karei, karittA dAhiNailoyaM tameva rAo, se NaM
imAiM dAhiNa-uttaraDDhaloyAiM tiriyaM karei, karittA puratthimAo loyaMtAo bahUI
joyaNAI bahUI joyaNasayAiM, bahUiM joyaNasahassAiM uDDhaM dUraM uppaittA, ettha
NaM pAosUrie AgAsaMsi uTThei, ege evamAhaMsu  /  vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo tA
jaMbuddIvassa dIvassa pAINa-paDINAyaya-udINa- dAhiNAyayAe jIvAe maMDalaM
cauvvIseNaM saraNaM chettA dAhiNa - puratthimaMsi uttara-paccatthimaMsi ya
caubbhAga - maMDalaMsi imIse rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe bahusamaramaNijjAo
bhUmibhAgAo aTThajoyaNasayAI uDDhaM uppaittA- ettha NaM pAo duve sUriyA AgAsAo
uttiTThasi, - te NaM imAI dAhiNuttarAI jaMbuddIva-bhAgAI tiriyaM kareMti,
kareMtittA puratthima-paccatthimAI jaMbuddIvabhAgAI tAmeva rAo, te NaM imAiM
puratthima-paccatthimAI jaMbuddIvabhAgAI tiriyaM kareMti, kareMtittA
dAhiNuttarAI jaMbuddIvabhAgAI tAmeva rAo, imAI dAhiNuttarAiM puratthima-
paccatthimAiM jaMbuddIvabhAgAiM tiriyaM kareMti, kareMtittA jaMbuddIvassa
dIvassa pAINa-paDINAyaya-udINa dAhiNAyayAe jIvAe maMDalaM cauvvIse NaM saeNaM
chettA dAhiNa puratthimaMsi uttara-paccatthimaMsi ya caubbhAga-maMDalaMsi imIse
rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe bahusamaramaNijjAo bhUmibhAgAo aTTha joyaNasayAI uDDhaM
uppaittA- ettha NaM pAo duve sariyA AgAsaMsi uttiTThasi  /

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Chapter [Second Chapter] The Sun's Transition from one Mandala to
another  22. How does the Sun move from one Mandala to another? There are two
different opinions on this, as follows:  1. Some say that the Sun moves from one
Mandala to another by breaking through (**bhedha**). 2. Others say that the Sun
moves from one Mandala to another by leaving a hole (**kannakala**).  Those who
say that the Sun moves from one Mandala to another by breaking through
(**bhedha**) have this fault:  "If the Sun moves from one Mandala to another by
breaking through (**bhedha**), then it does not fully enter the other Mandala.
It would only partially enter the other Mandala and would not be able to
complete its cycle."  Those who say that the Sun moves from one Mandala to
another by leaving a hole (**kannakala**) have this fault:  "If the Sun moves
from one Mandala to another by leaving a hole (**kannakala**), then it would not
be able to move from one Mandala to another. It would be stuck in the hole."
Therefore, the Sun moves from one Mandala to another by breaking through
(**bhedha**). The **bhedha** is the space between the two Mandalas. The Sun
moves through this space and enters the other Mandala. Once it enters the other
Mandala, it continues to move within it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya prAbhRta [dvitIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta] sUrassa maMDalAo maMDalAMtara-
saMkamaNaM 22. tA kahaM te maMDalAo maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe sUrie cAraM
carai Ahie ? ti vaejA, tattha khalu imAo duve paDivattIo paNNatAo taM jahA -
tatthege evamAhaMsu1. tA maMDalAo maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe sUrie
bheyadhAeNaM saMkAmai, ege evamAhaMsa, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA maMDalAo
maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe sUrie kaNNakalaM nivveDhei, ege evamAhaMsu, .
tattha NaM je te evamAhaMsu - 1. tA maMDalAo maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe
sUrie bheyadhAeNaM' saMkAmai, tesiNaM ayaM dose, "tA jeNaMtareNaM maMDalAo
maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe bheyadhAeNaM saMkamai-evaiyaM ca NaM addhaM
purao na gacchai, purao purao agacchamANe maMDalakAlaM parihavei' tesi NaM ayaM
dose| tattha NaM je te evamAhaMsu - 1. maNDalAdaparamaNDalaM saMkrAman
saMkramitumicchan sUryo bhedaghAtena saMkramati, bhedo maNDalasya
maNDalasyApAntarAlaM tatra ghAto - gamanaM, etacca prAgevoktaM, tena saMkrAmati,
kimuktaM bhavati? vivakSite maNDale sUryeNApUrite sati
tadantaramapAntarAlagamanena dvitIya maNDalaM saMkrAmati saMkamya ca tasmin
maNDale cAraM crti|

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Prabhrita - Second Prabhrita Prabhrita ] 2. When the Sun transits from
one mandala to another, it detaches the *kanna-kala* (ear-point). However, it
does not go completely through it in half the time. When it goes completely
through it, it does not leave the mandala-kala. This is the special feature of
it. There, those who said this - "When the Sun transits from one mandala to
another, it detaches the *kanna-kala* (ear-point) at that particular place, and
not by this means," The Sun, desiring to transit from one mandala to another,
detaches the *kanna-kala* (ear-point) of the next mandala from the first moment
onwards. This is the contemplation here - "Like Bharat or Airavata, the Sun,
having risen in its own place, aims at the *kanna* (ear-point) of the next
mandala, which is the first koti-bhaga (part), and gradually detaches the next
mandala with that particular *kala* (time), and moves in that way." By which,
when that day and night have passed, it is present at the beginning of the next
mandala. The *kanna-kala* (ear-point) should be understood as a specific action,
and it should be contemplated in this way - "The Sun detaches the next mandala,
aiming at the *kanna* (ear-point), which is the first koti-bhaga (part) of the
next mandala, from the first moment onwards, moment by moment, as it is crossed
by the *kala* (time)." - Surya. Tika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya prAbhRta - dvitIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] 2. tA maMDalAo maMDalaM
saMkamamANe sUrie kaNNakalaM' nivveDhei, evaiyaM ca NaM addhaM purao na gacchai,
purao gacchamANe maMDalakAlaM na parihavei, tesi NaM ayaM visese| tattha NaM je
te evamAhaMsu - maMDalAo maMDalaM saMkamamANe sUrie kaNNakalaM nivveDhei eeNaM
ThAeNaM NeyavvaM, No ceva NaM iyareNaM, maNDalAnmaNDalaM saMkrAman
saMkramitumicchan sUryastadadhikRtaM maMDalama prathamakSaNAdRrdhvamArabhya
karNa-kalaM nirveSTayati muMcati, iyamatra bhAvanA-'bhArata airAvato vA sUryaH
sva-svasthAne udgataH san aparamaNDalagataM karNaM prathamakoTibhAgarUpaM
lakSyIkRtya zanaiHzanairadhikRtaM maNDalaM tayA kayAcanApi kalayA muMcana cAraM
carati' yena tasminnahorAtre'tikrAnte sati aparAnantaramaNDalasyArambhe vartate
iti| karNakalamiti ca kriyAvizeSaNaM draSTavyaM, taccaivaM bhAvanIyaM - karNa-
aparamaNDalagataprathamakoTibhAgarUpaM lakSyIkRtyAdhikRtamaNDalaM
prathamakSaNAdUrdhva kSaNe kSaNe kalayA'tikrAntaM yathA bhavati tathA
nirvessttytiiti| - sUrya. TIkA.

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Chapter  **[Third Chapter]** The measure of the Sun's movement in a
Muhurta.  23. What is the distance the Sun travels in one Muhurta? The learned
ones say: There are four different opinions on this matter, as follows:  (1)
Some say that the Sun travels six thousand Yojanas in one Muhurta.  (2) Some say
that the Sun travels five thousand Yojanas in one Muhurta.  (3) Some say that
the Sun travels four thousand Yojanas in one Muhurta.  (4) Some say that the Sun
travels six, five, or four thousand Yojanas in one Muhurta.  Now, those who say
that the Sun travels six thousand Yojanas in one Muhurta, say:  When the Sun
travels the entire inner circle, it takes eighteen Muhurtas for the day and
twelve Muhurtas for the night. In this case, the distance traveled in one day is
one hundred thousand Yojanas plus eight thousand Yojanas.  When the Sun travels
the entire outer circle, it takes eighteen Muhurtas for the night and twelve
Muhurtas for the day.  In this case, the distance traveled in one day is eight
thousand Yojanas. Therefore, the Sun travels six thousand Yojanas in one
Muhurta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya prAbhRta _ [tRtIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta] sUrassa muhutta-gai-pamANaM 23. tA
kevaiyaM te khettaM sUrie egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gacchai ? Ahie tti vejaa| tattha
khalu imAo cattAri paDivattIo paNNattAo, taM jahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - (1) tA
cha cha joyaNasahassAI sUrie egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gacchai, ege evamAhaMsu - ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - (2) tA paMca paMca joyaNasahassAI sUrie egamegeNaM muhutteNaM
gacchai, ege evamAhaMsu - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - (3) tA cattAri cattAri
joyaNasahassAiM sUrie egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gacchai, ege evamAhaMsu - ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - (4) tA chavi, paMca vi, catAri vi joyaNasahassAiM sUrie egamegeNaM
muhuteNaM gacchai, ega evmaahesu| tattha NaM je te evamAhaMsu - (1) tA cha cha
joyaNasahassAI sUrie egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gacchai, te evamAhaMsu - tA jayA NaM
sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM
uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNNiyA
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| taMsi ca NaM divasaMsi ega joyaNasayasahassaM aTTha ya
joyaNasahassAI tAvakkhette pnnnntte| _tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhuttA
rAI bhavai jahannae duvAlasamuhatte divase bhvi| taMsi ca divasaMsi bAbatari
joyaNasahassAI tAvakkhete paNNate, tayA NaM cha cha joyaNasahassAiM sUrie
egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi|

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Praabhrut - Third Praabhrut Praabhrut  [ 35 There, those who said -
(2) The sun travels five five yojana-sahasras in one muhurta, they said - Those
who said the sun travels in the inner circle, for them, the day is eighteen
muhurtas, when the night is twelve muhurtas, due to the rising of the sun at the
highest point. In that, the distance travelled in a day is nine yojana-sahasras.
Those who said the sun travels in the outer circle, for them, the night is
eighteen muhurtas, when the day is twelve muhurtas, due to the setting of the
sun at the highest point. In that, the distance travelled in a day is sixteen
yojana-sahasras. Therefore, the sun travels five five yojana-sahasras in one
muhurta. There, those who said - (3) The sun travels four four yojana-sahasras
in one muhurta, they said - Those who said the sun travels in the inner circle,
for them, the day is eighteen muhurtas, when the night is twelve muhurtas, due
to the rising of the sun at the highest point. In that, the distance travelled
in a day is seventy-two yojana-sahasras. Those who said the sun travels in the
outer circle, for them, the night is eighteen muhurtas, when the day is twelve
muhurtas, due to the setting of the sun at the highest point. In that, the
distance travelled in a day is sixty-nine yojana-sahasras. Therefore, the sun
travels four four yojana-sahasras in one muhurta. There, those who said - (4)
The sun travels six, five, or four yojana-sahasras in one muhurta, they said -
The sun travels six six yojana-sahasras in one muhurta, when it rises and sets
quickly. The sun travels five five yojana-sahasras in one muhurta, when it
travels at an average speed, in the middle of the distance. The sun travels four
four yojana-sahasras in one muhurta, when it travels slowly, at the end of the
middle distance. Those who said the sun travels in the inner circle, for them,
the day is eighteen muhurtas, when the night is twelve muhurtas, due to the
rising of the sun at the highest point.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya prAbhRta - tRtIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 35 tattha NaM je te evamAhaMsu -
(2) tA paMca paMca joyaNasahassAiM sUrie egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gacchai, te
evamAhaMsu - tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM
carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai,
jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| taMsi ca NaM divasaMsi naui joyaNasahassAiM
tAvakkhette pnnnntte| tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA
cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai,
jahaNNae duvAlasamuhutte divase bhvi| taMsi ca NaM divasaMsi saTuiM
joyaNasahassAI tAvakkhette pnnnntte| tayA NaM paMca paMca joyaNasahassAI sUrie
egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi| tattha NaM je te evamAhaMsu - (3) tA cattAri
cattAri joyaNasahassAI sUrie egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gacchai, te evamAhaMsu - * tA
jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM
uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai jahaNiyA
duvAlasamuhutte rAI bhvi| taMsi ca NaM divasaMsi bAvattari joyaNasahassAiM
tAvakkhette pnnnntte| tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA
cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai,
jahaNNae duvAlasamuhutte divase bhvi| taMsi ca NaM divasaMsi aDayAlIsaM
joyaNasahassAiM tAvakkhette pnnnntte| tayA NaM cattAri cattAri joyaNasahassAI
sUrie egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi| tattha NaM je te evamAhaMsu - (4) tA cha vi,
paMca vi, cattAri vi joyaNasahassAI sUrie egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gacchai, te
evamAhaMsu - tA sUrie NaM uggamaNamuhuttaMsi ya, asthamaNamuhuttaMsi yaM
sigghagaI bhavai, tayA NaM cha cha joyaNasahassAI egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi|
majjhimaM tAvakkhette samAsAemANe samAsAemANe sUrie majjhimagaI bhavai, tayA NaM
paMca paMca joyaNasahassAiM egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi| majhimaM tAvakkhettaM
saMpatte sUrie maMdagaI bhavai, tayA NaM cattAri cattAri joyaNasahassAI
egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi| . tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTTe ukkosae

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  36 [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ]  A day with eighteen muhurtas is when there are
twelve muhurtas of night. In such a day, the distance traveled by the sun is set
at one thousand and one yojanas. _When the sun travels in the outer circle, then
the day with eighteen muhurtas is when there are twelve muhurtas of night. In
such a day, the distance traveled by the sun is set at one thousand and one
yojanas. Some say that the sun travels one thousand yojanas, five thousand
yojanas, or four thousand yojanas in one muhurta. We, however, say that the sun
travels five thousand yojanas in one muhurta. _Question: What is the size of
Jambudvipa? Answer: Jambudvipa is a circular island with a diameter of one
hundred thousand yojanas, and it is surrounded by the ocean. It is three
thousand yojanas wide, two hundred and twenty-seven yojanas long, and three
kosas deep. It is also eight hundred dhanus wide, thirteen angulas deep, and a
little more than half an angula deep. When the sun travels in the outer circle,
it travels five thousand yojanas, two hundred and eleven yojanas, and thirty-six
yojanas in one muhurta. The sun appears to a human being on earth at a distance
of seventy-two thousand yojanas, two hundred yojanas, and twenty-one yojanas.
When the sun travels in the outer circle, then the day with eighteen muhurtas is
when there are twelve muhurtas of night. When the sun is setting, it travels in
the inner circle during the first day and night of the new year. When the sun
travels in the inner circle, it travels five thousand yojanas, two hundred and
eleven yojanas, and seventy-two yojanas in one muhurta. The sun appears to a
human being on earth at a distance of seventy-two thousand yojanas, one hundred
and seventy-seven yojanas, and sixty yojanas. It is also one-sixth of a yojana,
one-twenty-second of a yojana, and one-twenty-fourth of a yojana. When the sun
travels in the inner circle, then the day with eighteen muhurtas is when there
are twelve muhurtas of night. When the sun is setting, it travels in the inner
circle during the second day and night of the new year.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNiyA
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| taMsi ca divasaMsi ekkANaui joyaNasahassAI tAvakkhette
pnnnntte| _tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai,
tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, jahaNNae
duvAlasamuhutte divase bhvi| taMsi ca NaM divasaMsi egaTThijoyaNasahassAI
tAvakkhette pnnnntte| tayA NaM cha vi, paMca vi, cattAri vi joyaNasahassAI sUrie
egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gacchai, ege evamAhaMsu  /  vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo - tA
sAiregAiM paMca paMca joyaNasahassAI sUrie egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi| . pra. -
tattha ko heU ? tti vejaa| u. - tA ayaNNaM jaMbuddIve dIve savvadIva-samuddANaM
savvabbhaMtarAe savvakhuDDAge vaTTe jAva joyaNasayasahassamAyAma-vikkhaMbheNaM,
tini joyaNasahassAI doni ya sattAvIse joyaNasae tinni kose, aTThAvIsaM ca
dhaNusayaM, terasa ya aMgulAI, addhaMgulaM ca kiMcivisesAhie parikkheveNaM
pnnnntte| tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai,
tayA NaM paMca paMca joyaNasahassAI doNNi ya ekkAvaNNe joyaNasayAI egUNatIsaM ca
saTThibhAe joyaNassa egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi| tayA NaM ihagayassa maNUsassa
sIyAlIsAe joyaNasahassehiM dohi ya tevaDhehiM joyaNasaehiM ekkavIsAe ya
saTThibhAgehiM joyaNassa sUrie cakkhupphAsaM hvvmaagcchi| tayA uttamakaTThapatte
ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| se
nikkhamamANe sUrie NavaM saMvacDaraM ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi
abhiMtarANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri| tA jayA NaM sUrie
abdheitarANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM paMca paMca
joyaNasahassAI doNNi ya ekkAvaNNe joyaNasae sIyAlIsaM ca saTThibhAe joyaNassa
egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi| tayA NaM ihagayassa maNUsassa sIyAlIsAe
joyaNasahassehiM egUNAsie ya joyaNasae sattAvaNNAe saTThibhAgehiM joyaNassa
saTThibhAgaM ca egaTThihA chettA egUNavIsAe cuNNiAbhAgehiM sUrie cakkhupphAsaM
hvvmaagcchi| tayA NaM aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, dohiM egaTThibhAga
muhuttehiM uunne| duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai dohiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM
ahiyaa| se nikkhamamANe sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi abhiMtaraM taccaM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri|

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Prabhruta - Third Prabhruta Prabhruta  [ 37 _When the Sun travels
within the innermost circle, it travels five thousand yojanas, two hundred and
fifty-two yojanas, and sixty parts of a yojana in each muhurta. For a human
being on Earth, the Sun's apparent diameter is sixty thousand yojanas, sixty-six
yojanas, thirty-three parts of a yojana, and sixty parts of a yojana, all
combined, and this is equal to two parts of a chuniya. Thus, there are eighteen
muhurtas in a day, minus four parts of a muhurta. There are twelve muhurtas in a
night, plus four parts of a muhurta. As the Sun moves outward, it travels from
one circle to the next, and in each muhurta, it travels eighteen parts of a
yojana. As it moves outward, the shadow of a man decreases by eighty-four
yojanas, and it continues to decrease until it reaches the outermost circle.
When the Sun travels within the outermost circle, it travels five thousand
yojanas, one hundred and fifty-three yojanas, and fifteen parts of a yojana in
each muhurta. For a human being on Earth, the Sun's apparent diameter is thirty-
one thousand yojanas, eighty-one thousand yojanas, thirty parts of a yojana, and
this is equal to sixty parts of a yojana. Thus, there are eighteen muhurtas in a
night, and twelve muhurtas in a day. This is the first six months, and this is
the end of the first six months. When the Sun enters the second six months, it
travels within the outermost circle in the first day and night. When the Sun
travels within the outermost circle, it travels five thousand yojanas, one
hundred and forty-seven yojanas, and fifty-seven parts of a yojana in each
muhurta. For a human being on Earth, the Sun's apparent diameter is thirty-one
thousand yojanas, one hundred and sixteen yojanas, forty-one parts of a yojana,
and sixty parts of a yojana, all combined, and this is equal to sixty parts of a
chuniya. Thus, there are eighteen muhurtas in a night, minus two parts of a
muhurta. There are twelve muhurtas in a day, plus two parts of a muhurta. When
the Sun enters the second six months, it travels within the innermost circle in
the first day and night. When the Sun travels within the innermost circle, it
travels five thousand yojanas,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya prAbhRta - tRtIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 37 _tA jayA NaM sUrie abhiMtaraM
taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM paMca paMca joyaNasahassAI
doNNi ya bAvaNNe joyaNasae paMca ya saTThibhAe joyaNassa egamegeNaM muhutteNaM
gcchi| tayA NaM ihagayassa maNUsassa sIolIsAe joyaNasahassehiM chaNNauIe ya
joyaNehiM tettIsAe ya saTThibhAgehiM joyaNassa saTThibhAgaM ca egaTThihA chettA
dohiM cuNNiAbhAgehiM sUrie cakkhupphAsaM hvvmaagcchi| tayA NaM aTThArasamuhutte
divase bhavai, cauhiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM uunne| duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai,
cauhiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyaa| evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM nikkhamamANe
sUrie tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe
aTThArasa aTThArasa saTThibhAge joyaNassa egamege maMDale muhuttagaI
abhivuDDhemANe abhivuDDhemANe culasIyaM culasIyaM sIyAiM joyaNAI purisacchAyaM
nivvuDDhemANe nivvuDDhemANe savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri| . tA
jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM paMca
paMca joyaNasahassAI tini ya paMcuttare joyaNasae paNNarasa ya saTThibhAge
joyaNassa egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi| tayANaM ihagayassa maNUsassa ekkatIsAe
joyaNasahassehiM aTThahiM ekkatIsehiM joyaNasahassehi tIsAe ya saTThibhAgehiM
joyaNassa sUrie cakkhupphAsaM hvvmaagcchi| tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA
aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, jahaNNae duvAlasamuhutte divase bhvi| esa NaM
paDhame chammAse, esa NaM paDhamassa chammAsassa pjjvsaanne| se pavisamANe sUrie
doccaM chammAsaM ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi bAhirANaMtaraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri| tA jayA NaM sUrie bAhirANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA
cAraM carai, tayA NaM paMca paMca joyaNasahassAI tiNNi ya cauruttare joyaNasae
sattAvaNNaM ca saTThibhAe joyaNassa egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi|| tayA NaM
ihagayassa maMNUsassa ekkatIsAe joyaNasahassehiM navahiM ya solasuttarehiM
joyaNasaehiM eguNacattAlIsAe saTThibhAgehiM joyaNassa saTThibhAgaM ca egaTThihA
chettA saTThIe cuNiyA bhAgehiM, sUrie cakkhupphAsaM hvvmaagcchi| tayo NaM
aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, dohiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM uunnaa|
duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, dohiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie| se pavisamANe
sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi bAhiraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri| tA
jayA NaM sUrie bAhiraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM paMca
paMca joyaNasahassAI

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  38 [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ]  The sun travels one sixty-fourth of a yojana
in one muhurta, in the northern direction.  Therefore, for a human being on
earth, the sun's visual appearance (chakkhuphaasam) occurs after traveling
32,000 yojanas, minus one-fourth, plus sixty-fourths of a yojana, and twenty-
seven parts of a hundred.  Therefore, the day is eighteen muhurtas, minus one-
fourth of a muhurta, and the night is twelve muhurtas, minus one-fourth of a
muhurta.  Thus, as the sun enters the different mandalas (regions), it travels
from one mandala to the next, covering eighteen sixty-fourths of a yojana in
each mandala, in one muhurta. As it travels, it gradually increases its speed,
reaching a speed of eighty-five yojanas, and then gradually decreases its speed,
covering the entire mandala in four muhurtas.  When the sun covers the entire
mandala in four muhurtas, it travels five thousand yojanas, plus two hundred and
eighty-eight sixty-fourths of a yojana, in one muhurta.  Therefore, for a human
being on earth, the sun's visual appearance (chakkhuphaasam) occurs after
traveling 73,000 yojanas, plus two hundred and twenty-one sixty-fourths of a
yojana.  Therefore, the day is eighteen muhurtas, when the sun is at its highest
point (uttamakatthapatte), and the night is twelve muhurtas.  This is the
duration of the six months, and this is the duration of the six months of the
sun's journey. This is the duration of the year, and this is the duration of the
year of the sun's journey.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra tinni ya cauruttare joyaNasae egUNacattAlIsaM ca
saTThibhAe joyaNassa egamegeNaM muhutteNaM gcchi| tayA NaM ihagayassa maNUsassa
egAhiehiM battIsAe joyaNasahassehiM egUNapaNNAe ya saTThibhAehiM joyaNassa
saTThibhAgaM ca egaTThihA chettA tevIsAe cuNNiyAbhAgehiM sUrie cakkhupphAsaM
hvvmaagcchi|  /  tayA NaM aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, cauhiM
egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM uunnaa| duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, cauhiM
egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie| evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM pavisamANe sUrie
jayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe aTThArasa
aTThArasa saTThibhAge joyaNassa egamege maMDale muhuttagaI nivvuDDhemANe
nivvuDDhemANe sAiregAI paMcAsIi paMcAsIi joyaNAI purisacchAyaM abhivuDDhemANe
abhivuDDhemANe savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri| tA jayA NaM
sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM paMca paMca
joyaNasahassAI doNNi ya ekkAvaNNe joyaNasae aTThatIsaM ca saTThibhAge joyaNassa
egamege NaM muhutte NaM gcchi| tayA NaM ihagayassa maNUsassa sIyAlIsAe
joyaNasahassehiM dohiM ya dovade'hiM joyaNasaehiM ya ekkavIsAe ya saTThibhAgehiM
joyaNassa sUrie cakkhupphAsaM hvvmaagcchi| tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| esa NaM docce
chammAse, esa NaM doccassa chammAsassa pjvsaanne| esa NaM Aicce saMvacchare, esa
NaM Aiccassa saMvaccharassa pjvsaanne|

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third Prabhrita, the field of the moon and sun's **Oobhas** (radiance), the
field of **Ujjoy** (illumination), the field of **Tav** (heat), and the field of
**Pagas** (light).  24. P. - What are the fields where the moon and sun
**Oobhas**, **Ujjoy**, **Tav**, and **Pagas**? Please tell me. U. - There are
twelve **Pativvatti** (interpretations) as follows:  1. Some say that the moon
and sun **Oobhas**, **Ujjoy**, **Tav**, and **Pagas** on one island and one
ocean. 2. Some say that the moon and sun **Oobhas**, **Ujjoy**, **Tav**, and
**Pagas** on three islands and three oceans. 3. Some say that the moon and sun
**Oobhas**, **Ujjoy**, **Tav**, and **Pagas** on half of four islands and half
of four oceans. 4. Some say that the moon and sun **Oobhas**, **Ujjoy**,
**Tav**, and **Pagas** on seven islands and seven oceans. 5. Some say that the
moon and sun **Oobhas**, **Ujjoy**, **Tav**, and **Pagas** on ten islands and
ten oceans. 6. Some say that the moon and sun **Oobhas**, **Ujjoy**, **Tav**,
and **Pagas** on twelve islands and twelve oceans. 7. Some say that the moon and
sun **Oobhas**, **Ujjoy**, **Tav**, and **Pagas** on forty-two islands and
forty-two oceans.  1. **Avabhasayanti** (illuminate), **Avabhaso**
(illumination) is also used for knowledge, therefore, to differentiate, it is
said **Udyotayanti** (radiate). **Udyoto** (radiation) is known in the world
with different meanings, like **Atap** (sunlight) for the sun and **Prakash**
(light) for the moon. However, the word **Atap** is also used for the moon's
light, as it is said "**Chandrika** (moonlight), **Kaumudi** (moonlight),
**Jyothsna** (moonlight), and **Chandragata** (moonlight)". Similarly, the word
**Prakash** is also used for the sun's light. This is understood by many,
therefore, to understand the meaning, both words are used together, which have
the same meaning. **Tapayanti** (heat) and **Prakashayanti** (illuminate) are
the verbs.  - Sanskrit Commentary

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya prAbhRta caMdima-sUriyANaM obhAsakhettaM ujjoyakhettaM tAvakhetaM
pagAsakhettaM ca 24. pa. - tA kevaiyaM khettaM caMdima-sUriyA obhAsaMti,
ujjoveMti taveMti pagAseMti ? Ahietti vaejjA, u. - tattha khalu imAo bArasa
paDivattIo paNNattao taM jahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. tA egaM dIvaM egaM
samudda caMdima-sUriyA obhAseMti ujjoveti taveMti pagAseMti' ege evamAhaMsu, ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA tiNNi dIve, tiNNi samudde caMdima-sUriyA obhAseMti jAva
pagAseMti ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 3. tA addhacautthe dIve,
addhacautthe samudde caMdima-sUriyA obhAseMti jAva pagAseMti ege evamAhaMsu, ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - 4. tA sattadIve, sattasamudde caMdima-sUriyA obhAseMti jAva
pagAseMti ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 5. tA dasadIve, dasasamudde
caMdima-sUriyA obhAseMti jAva pagAseMti ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 6.
tA bArasadIve, bArasasamudde caMdima-sUrayA obhAseMti jAva pagAseMti ege
evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 7. tA bAyAlIsaM dIve, bAyAlIsaM samudde
caMdima-sUriyA obhAseMti jAva pagAseMti ege evamAhaMsu, 1. avabhAsayanti,
tatrAvabhAso jJAnasyApi vyavahiyate atastadvyavacchedArthamAha-udyotayanti, sa
codyoto yadyapi loke bhedena prasiddho yathA sUryagata Atapa iti, candragataH
prakAza iti, tathApyAtapazabdazcandraprabhAyAmapi vartate, yaduktam 'candrikA
kaumudI jyotsnA, tathA candragata:smRtaH iti' prakAzazabdaH sUryaprabhAyAmapi,
etacca prAyo bahUnAM supratItaMtata etadarthapratipatyarthamubhayasAdhAraNaM
bhUyo'pyekArthakadvayamAha tApayanti prakAzayanti AkhyAtA iti  /  - saMskRtaTIkA

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
40 ] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra Some said - 8. There are 72 islands and 72 oceans,
the moon and sun shine on them until they set. Some said - 9. There are 42
islands and 42 oceans, the moon and sun shine on them until they set. Some said
- 10. There are 72 islands and 72 oceans, the moon and sun shine on them until
they set. Some said - 11. There are 42 thousand islands and 42 thousand oceans,
the moon and sun shine on them until they set. Some said - 12. There are 72
thousand islands and 72 thousand oceans, the moon and sun shine on them until
they set. We, however, say - This Jambudvipa island, with all the islands and
oceans, all the inner and outer parts, all the hills, is round, its diameter is
one hundred thousand yojanas, its circumference is three hundred thousand
yojanas, two hundred and twenty-seven yojanas, three kosas, twenty-eight dhanus,
thirteen angulas and a little more than half an angula, as per the calculation.
This Jambudvipa is surrounded by a single ocean, which is eight yojanas high. -
As per the calculation. Just as the Jambudvipa is calculated, Similarly, in the
Jambudvipa, there are twenty-four thousand oceans and fifty-six thousand oceans,
as per the calculation. In the Jambudvipa island, there are five parts of the
wheel. What is the reason? Please tell us. - So, how are there five parts of the
wheel in the Jambudvipa island? Please tell us. 1. The text from the first
chapter of the Jambudvipa Prajnapti, from Sutra 4 to Sutra 125 of the sixth
chapter, is to be understood here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 40 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 8. tA bAvattari dIve,
bAvattariM samudde caMdima-sUrayA obhAseMti jAva pagAseMti ege evamAhaMsu, ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - 9. tA bAyAlIsaM dIvasayaM bAyAlIsaM samuddasayaM caMdima-
sUrayA obhAseMti jAva pagAseMti ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 10. tA
bAvattari dIvasayaM bAvattari samuisayaM caMdima-sUrayA obhAseMti jAva pagAseMti
ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 11. tA bAyAlIsaM dIvasahassaM, bAyAlIsaM
samuddasahassaM caMdima-sUrayA obhAseMti jAva pagAseMti ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 12. tA bAvattaraM dIvasahassaM, bAvattaraM samuddasahassaM caMdima-
sUrayA obhAseMti jAva pagAseMti ege evamAhaMsu, vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo - tA ayaM
NaM jaMbuddIve dIve savvadIva-samudANaM savvabhaMtarAe savvakhuDDAge vaTTe jAva
joyaNasayasahassamAyAma - vikkhaMbhe NaM tiNNi joyaNasayasahassAI, doNNi ya
sattAvIse joyaNasae, tiNNi kose, aTThAvIsaM ca dhaNusayaM, terasa ya aMgulAI
addhaMgulaM ca kiMci visesAhie parikkheveNaM paNNatte, se NaM egAe jagaIe savvao
samaMtA saMparikkhitte sA NaM jagaI aTTha-joyaNAI uDDhaM uccatteNaM - paNNattA,
eva jahA jaMbuddIvapaNNattIe jAva, evAmeva sapuvvAvare NaM jaMbuddIve coisa
salilAsayasahassA chappaNNaM ca salilAsahassA bhavaMtItimakkhAyaM, jaMbuddIve
NaM dIve paMca cakkabhAgasaMThie ? Ahietti vaejjA, pa. - tA kahaM jaMbuddIve
dIve paMca cakkabhAgasaMThie ? Ahie tti vaenjA, 1. jambUdvIpaprajJapti ke
prathama vakSaskAra sUtrAMka 4 se SaSTha vakSaskAra sUtrAMka 125 paryanta ke
sabhI sUtroM ke pATha yahAM samajhane kI sUcanA hai|

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Third Prabhrita] U. - When these two suns, having encompassed the entire outer
circle, move around, then they illuminate three and five chakra-bhagas of
Jambudvipa, the island, until they set. Just as one sun illuminates one chakra-
bhaga until it sets, and one sun illuminates one chakra-bhaga until it sets,
then, when the sun rises from the Uttarakatta-patta, there are eighteen muhurtas
of day and twelve muhurtas of night. - - [41] When these two suns, having
encompassed the entire outer circle, move around, then they illuminate two and
five chakra-bhagas of Jambudvipa, the island, until they set. One sun
illuminates one chakra-bhaga until it sets, one sun illuminates one chakra-bhaga
until it sets, then, when the sun rises from the Uttarakatta-patta, there are
eighteen muhurtas of night and twelve muhurtas of day.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya prAbhRta ] u. - tA jayA NaM ee duve sUriyA savvabhaMtaraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti tayA NaM jaMbuddIvassa dIvassa tiNNi paMca
cakkabhAge obhAseMti jAva pagAseMti, taM jahA tAege vi sUrie egaM divaDhaM paMca
cakkabhAgaM obhAsei jAva pagAsei, tAege vi sUrie egaM divaDDhaM paMca
cakkabhAgaM obhAsei jAva pagAsei, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai jahaNNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, - bhavai, [
41 tA jayA NaM ee duve sUriyA savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM caraMti
tayA NaM jaMbuddIvassa dIvassa doNNi paMca cakka bhAge obhAseMti jAva pagAseMti,
tA ege vi sUrie egaM paMca cakkavAlabhAgaM obhAsei jAva pagAsei, tAege vi sUrie
egaM paMca cakkavAlabhAgaM obhAsei jAva pagAsei, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA
ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhutta rAI bhavai jahaNNae duvAlasamuhutte divase

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the fourth (day) onwards, the arrangement is made. P. - So, how is the
arrangement made? U. - There are two types of arrangements mentioned here,
namely: 1. - The arrangement of the Moon and the Sun. 2. - The arrangement of
the field. The arrangement of the Moon and the Sun P. - So, how is the
arrangement of the Moon and the Sun? U. - There are sixteen types of
arrangements mentioned here. 1. - Some say - The arrangement of the Moon and the
Sun is made with the arrangement of the rays. Some say. 2. - Some say - The
arrangement of the Moon and the Sun is made with the arrangement of the rays
that are not equal. Some say. 3. - Some say - The arrangement of the Moon and
the Sun is made with the arrangement of the angles. Some say. 4. - Some say -
The arrangement of the Moon and the Sun is made with the arrangement of the
angles that are not equal. Some say. 5. - Some say - 1. The commentator explains
'whiteness' as follows - 'This whiteness exists in the Moon and Sun vehicles as
well, and also in the field created by them. Therefore, both are called by the
word whiteness due to the presence of whiteness.' 2. The arrangement of the Moon
and Sun vehicles has been mentioned elsewhere. Therefore, the commentator
explains the questioner's intention regarding the arrangement of the Moon and
Sun vehicles as follows - 'This arrangement in the form of the arrangement of
the Moon and Sun vehicles has been mentioned earlier. Therefore, the arrangement
of the Moon and Sun vehicles mentioned here should be understood as the
arrangement of the four positions.'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha prAbhRta seyAte saMThiI . pa. - tA kahaM te seAte' saMThiI Ahiteti
vadejA ? u. - tattha khalu imA duvihA saMThitI paNNattA, taM jahA - 1. -
caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI y| 2. - tAvakkhettasaMThitI y| caMdima-sUriyasaMThiI pa.
- tA kahaM te caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI AhitAti vadejA? u. - tattha khalu imAo
solasa paDivattIo pnnnnttaao| 1.- tatthege evamAhaMsu - tA samacau raMsasaMThiyA
caMdima-sUriyasaMThItI paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 2. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA
visamacauraMsasaMThiyA caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 3. - ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - tA samacaukkoNasaMThiyA caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege
evmaahsu| 4. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - _tA visamacaukkoNasaMThiyA caMdima-
sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 5. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 1. vRttikAra
ne 'zvetatA' kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra kI hai - 'iha zvetatA candra-
sUryavimAnAnAmapi vidyate, tatkRtatApakSetrasya ca, tataH zvetatAyogAdubhayamapi
shvettaashbdenocyte| 2. candra-sUrya vimAnoM ke saMsthAna anyatra kahe gaye
haiN| ata: candra-sUrya vimAnoM kI saMsthiti ke saMbaMdha meM praznakartA ke
abhiprAya kA spaSTIkaraNa vRttikAra ne isa prakAra kiyA hai - 'iha candra-
sUryavimAnAnAM saMsthAnarUpA saMsthitiH prAgevAbhihitA tata iha candra-
sUryavimAna-saMsthitizcaturNAmapi avasthAnarUpA pRSTA drssttvyaa|'

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fourth Chapter] [ 43 Some said that the moon and sun are formed by the
Samchakkavala-santhiti. 6. - Some others said - That the moon and sun are formed
by the Visamchakkavala-santhiti. 7. - Some others said - That the moon and sun
are formed by the Chakkaddhachakkavala-santhiti. 8. - Some others said - That
the moon and sun are formed by the Chhattagara-santhiti. 9. - Some others said -
That the moon and sun are formed by the Geh-santhiti. 10. - Some others said -
That the moon and sun are formed by the Gehavana-santhiti. 11. - Some others
said - That the moon and sun are formed by the Pasaya-santhiti. 12. - Some
others said - That the moon and sun are formed by the Gopura-santhiti. 13. -
Some others said - That the moon and sun are formed by the Pechchaghar-santhiti.
14. - Some others said - That the moon and sun are formed by the Valabhi-
santhiti. 15. - Some others said - That the moon and sun are formed by the
Hammiyatala-santhiti. 16. - Some others said - That the moon and sun are formed
by the Balaggrapotia-santhiti. There, those who said - The word Balaggrapotika
is a local word, and in the sky and the lake, it is a place for playing and
bathing, a small palace. - Surya. Vritti

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha prAbhRta ] [ 43 tA samacakkavAlasaMThiyA caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI
paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 6. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA visamacakkavAlasaMThiyA
caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 7. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA
cakkaddhacakkavAlasaMThiyA caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 8. -
ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA chattAgArasaMThiyA caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege
evmaahNsu| 9. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA gehasaMThiyA caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI
paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 10. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA gehAvaNasaMThiyA caMdima-
sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 11. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - * tA
pAsAyasaMThiyA caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 12. - ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - tA gopurasaMThiyA caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu|
13. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - _tA pecchAgharasaMThiyA caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI
paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 14. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA valabhIsaMThiyA caMdima-
sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 15. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - . tA
hammiyatalasaMThiyA caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege evmaahNsu| 16. - ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - tA bAlaggapotiyAsaMThiyA' caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI paNNatA, ege
evmaahNsu| tattha je te evamAhaMsu - bAlAgrapotikAzabdo
dezIzabdatvAdAkAzataDAgamadhye vyavasthitaM krIDA-snAnaM lghupraasaadm| - sUrya.
vRtti

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 44 [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ]  **The arrangement of the Moon and Sun, as
described in the Samchaturansa-Santhita, is not to be accepted. The arrangement
of the Sun's orbit is as follows:**  **P. - How is the arrangement of the Sun's
orbit?**  **U. - There are sixteen different views on this matter, as follows:**
1. **Some say:** The arrangement of the Sun's orbit is based on the arrangement
of houses. 2. **Some say:** The arrangement of the Sun's orbit is based on the
arrangement of the courtyard. 3. **Some say:** The arrangement of the Sun's
orbit is based on the arrangement of the passageway. 4. **Some say:** The
arrangement of the Sun's orbit is based on the arrangement of the gate. 5.
**Some say:** The arrangement of the Sun's orbit is based on the arrangement of
the back room. 6. **Some say:** The arrangement of the Sun's orbit is based on
the arrangement of the Valabhi. 7. **Some say:** The arrangement of the Sun's
orbit is based on the arrangement of the Hamiyatala.  **Only one of these
sixteen views is accepted by the Sutrakar. The Vrittikar says:**  "Tathetyadi -
tatra tesham sodasham paratirthikanam madhye ye te vadin evam ahuḥ -
samchaturansasanthita chandrasuryasanthitiḥ prajnasai iti, etena nayena,
netavyaṁ etena abhiprāyeṇāsmānmate'pi chandra-suryasanthitiravadharyeti bhavah,
tathahi - 'iha sarve'pi kalaviseshaḥ susamasusamadayo yugamulaḥ. yugasya chadau
shravana mase bahulapakshapratipadi pratarudayasamaye ekasuryo dakshinapurvasyaṁ
disi vartate, tadvitiyastva parottarasyaṁ, chandramā api tat samaye eko
dakshinaparasyaṁ disi vartate, dvitiya uttarapurvasyamata eteshv yugasya dau
chandra-suryah samchaturansasanthita vartante."  **Translation:**  "The word
'Tathetyadi' refers to the fact that among these sixteen views of the
Paratirthikas, some say that the arrangement of the Moon and Sun is based on the
Samchaturansa-Santhita. This view is not to be accepted. Our view is that the
arrangement of the Moon and Sun should be understood in this way:  "All these
specific times, like the beginning of the Yuga, are based on the balance of the
seasons. At the beginning of the Yuga, on the first day of the bright fortnight
of the month of Shravana, at sunrise, the Sun is in the southeast direction, the
second Sun is in the northeast direction, and the Moon is in the south
direction, and the second Moon is in the northeast direction. At the beginning
of the Yuga, the Moon and Sun are arranged in a square."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra tA samacauraMsa-saMThiyA caMdima-sUriyasaMThitI
paNNattA, eeNaM NaeNaM NeyavvaM No ceva NaM iyrehi| sUriyassa
tAvakkhettasaMThitI pa. - tA kahaM te tAvakkhettasaMThitI ? Ahietti vejjaa| u. -
tattha khalu imAo solasa naDivattIo paNNattAo, taM jahA - tattha NaM - 1. - ege
evamAhaMsu - tA geha saMThitA tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| 2. -
ege puNa evamAhaMsu - gehAvaNasaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege
evmaahNsu| 3. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - pAsAyasaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThitI
paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| 4. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - gopurasaMThiyA
tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| 5. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu -
picchAgharasaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| 6. - ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - valabhIsaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| 7. -
ege puNa evamAhaMsu - hammiyatalasaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege
evmaahNsu| 1. paratIrthikoM kI ina solaha pratipattiyoM meM se kevala eka
pratipatti sUtrakAra kI mAnyatAnusAra hai - isa viSaya meM vRttikAra kA kathana
yaha hai - 'tatthetyAdi-tatra teSAM SoDazAnAM paratIrthikAnAM madhye ye te
vAdina evamAhuH' - samacaturastrasaMsthitA candasUrya-saMsthitiH prajJAsA iti,
etena nayena, netavyaM etenAbhiprAyeNAsmanmate'pi candra-
sUryasaMsthitiravadhAryeti bhAvaH, tathAhi - 'iha sarve'pi kAlavizeSAH
suSamasuSamAdayo yugmuulaaH| yugasya cAdau zrAvaNe mAse bahulapakSapratipadi
prAtarudayasamaye ekasUryo dakSiNapUrvasyAM dizi vartate, tadvitIyastva
parottarasyAM, candramA api tatsamaye eko dakSiNaparasyAM dizi vartate, dvitIya
uttarapUrvasyAmata eteSu yugasyAdau candra-sUryAH samacaturastrasaMsthitA
vrtnte|

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Chapter  [45]  8. - Some say - The arrangement of the *Tavak Khett* is
according to the arrangement of the *Balagg* *Poti*. Some say this. 9. - Some
say - The arrangement of the *Tavak Khett* is according to the arrangement of
the *Jambudvipa*. Some say this. 10. - Some say - The arrangement of the *Tavak
Khett* is according to the arrangement of the *Bharat* *Vasa*. Some say this.
11. - Some say - The arrangement of the *Tavak Khett* is according to the
arrangement of the *Ujaan*. Some say this. 12. - Some say - The arrangement of
the *Tavak Khett* is according to the arrangement of the *Nijan*. Some say this.
13. - Some say - The arrangement of the *Tavak Khett* is according to the
arrangement of the *Ega Nisadh*. Some say this. 14. - Some say - The arrangement
of the *Tavak Khett* is according to the arrangement of the *Duha Nisadh*. Some
say this. 15. - Some say - The arrangement of the *Tavak Khett* is according to
the arrangement of the *Seyanag*. Some say this. 16. - Some say - The
arrangement of the *Tavak Khett* is according to the arrangement of the
*Seyanag* *Patth*. Some say this. But we say - The arrangement of the *Tavak
Khett* is according to the arrangement of the *Uddhi* *Muh* *Kalamb* *Apupph*.
It is contracted inside, and expanded outside. It is round inside, and flat
outside.  The discrepancy in the arrangement of the circles, as the Sun is in
the innermost circle and the Moon is in the outermost circle, is not considered
significant. This is because, at the beginning of the *Yuga*, when all the time
periods are in balance, the Sun and the Moon are situated in a square shape.
Therefore, their arrangement is described as being in a square shape. Otherwise,
according to tradition, the square shape should be considered.  No other theory,
including the theory of the arrangement of the Sun and the Moon, should be
considered, as they are false. This is the correct description of the
arrangement of the Sun and the Moon.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha prAbhRta ] [ 45 8. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - bAlaggapotiyAsaMThiyA
tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| 9. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu -
jassaMThie jaMbuddIve tassaMThie tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu|
10. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - jassaMThie bhArahe vAse tassaMThie
tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| 11. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu -
ujANasaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege evmaahsu| 12. - ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - nijANasaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| 13. -
ege puNa evamAhaMsu - egao NisadhasaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege
evmaahNsu| 14. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - duhao NisadhasaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThitI
paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| 15. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu - seyaNagasaMThiyA
tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| 16. - ege puNa evamAhaMsu -
seyaNagapaTThasaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThitI paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| vayaM puNa
evaM vadAmo - tA uddhImuhakalaMbuApupphasaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThitI pnnnnttaa|
aMto saMkuciyA, bAhiM vitthddaa| aMto vaTTA, bAhiM pidhulaa| yattvatra
maNDalakRtaM vaiSamyaM yathA sUryoM sarvAbhyantaramaNDale vartate, candramasau
sarvabAhya iti tadalpamitikRtvA na vivkssyte| tadevaM yataH sakalakAlavizeSANAM
suSamAsuSamAdirupANAmAdibhUtasya yugasyAdau samacaturasrasaMsthitAH sUrya-
candramasau bhavanti, tatasteSAM saMsthitiH samacaturasrasaMsthAnenopavarNitA,
anyathA vA yathAsampradAyaM samacaturastrasaMsthitiH pribhaavniiyeti|| no ceva
NaM iyarehiM ti - no ceva naiva itaraiH- zeSairnayaizcandra-
sUryasaMsthitirjAtavyA, teSAM mithyArUpatvAt tadevamuktA cndr-suurysNsthitiH|'

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
46 ] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra Inside, the Ankamukhasanathiya, outside the
Satthiya Mukhasanathiya. In that, there are two Bahas, On both sides, there are
thirty-two Bahas, which are Avattthiyas, with an extent of 49,000 yojanas. There
are thirty-two Bahas which are Anavattthiyas, as follows: 1. - The Sarvabhtariya
Baha. 2. - The Sarvabahiriya Baha. P. - What is that? Vaeja. U. - That is the
Jambudvipa, the island - The entire island, the entire ocean, the entire
mountain. It is round, with a Tellapuy-santhana-santhi. It is round, with a
Rahchakkaval-santhana-santhi. It is round, with a Pukkharakanniya-santhana-
santhi. It is round, with a Padipunna Chand-santhana-santhi. With an extent and
diameter of 100,000 yojanas. With an extent of 3,000,000 yojanas, 16,000
yojanas, 270 yojanas, 3 kosas, 28 dhanus, 13 angulas, and half an angula, with a
little excess, it is established by calculation. That is the calculation of the
Tavakhetasanthi. When the Sun traverses the entire inner circle, the Uddhi Mukha
Kalambua Pupha Santhi is in the Tavakhetasanthi, Vaeja. Inside, it is
contracted, outside, it is expanded, inside, it is round, outside, it is thick,
1. In the direction of the inner Meru, the Anka-Padmasana-upavishtasya Utsanga-
rupa Asanabandh, its mouth is in the shape of a circle in the front, its own
position is the position of that. 2. Similarly, in the direction of the outer
Lavana, the Svastika-mukha-santhita, the Svastika is well-known, its mouth is
the front, its own position is very wide, That is that. 3. 'These two Bahas are
situated in the extent of the Jambudvipa, according to the extent of the
Jambudvipa.' Suri. Vritti. 4. 'Two Bahas are not situated, as follows: the
Sarvabhyantara, the Sarvabahirya.' (a) The Baha which is near the Meru, with a
greater diameter, is the Sarvabhyantara. (b) The Baha which is in the direction
of the Lavana, up to the Jambudvipa, with a greater diameter, is the
Sarvabahirya Baha. (c) The extent is to be understood as south-north, the
diameter as east-west.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra aMto aMkamuhasaMThiyA, bAhiM stthiymuhsNtthiyaa|
tAvakkhettasaMThiie duve bAhAo ubhao pAseNaM tIse duve bAhAo avaTThiyAo
bhavaMti, paNayAlIsaM paNayAlIsaM joyaNasahassAI aayaamennN| tIse duve bAhAo
aNavaTThiAo bhavaMti, taM jahA - 1. - savvabtariyA ceva baahaa| 2. -
savvabAhiriyA ceva baahaa| pa. - tattha ko heu tti ? vejaa| u. - tA ayaNNaM
jabuddIve dIve - savvadIva-samuddANaM savvabbhaMtarAe, svvkhuddddaae| vaTTe
tellaapuuy-sNtthaann-sNtthie| vaTTe rhckkvaal-sNtthaann-sNtthie| vaTTe
pukkhrknnnniyaa-sNtthaann-sNtthie| vaTTe pddipunnnncNd-sNtthaann-sNtthie| egaM
joyaNasayasahassaM aayaam-vikkhNbhennN| tiNNi joyaNasayasahassAI solasasahassAI
doNNi ya sattAvIse joyaNasae, tiNNi ya kose, aTThAvIsaM ca dhaNusayaM, terasa
aMgulAI addhaMgulaM ca kiMci visesAhiyaM parikkheveNaM pnnnntte|
tAvakkhettasaMThiie parikkhevo. tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carati, tayA NaM uddhImuhakalaMbuApupphasaMThiyA
tAvakkhettasaMThiIM AhitAti vaejjA, aMto saMkuDA, bAhiM vitthaDA, aMto vaTTA,
bAhiM pi thulA, 1. aMtarmerudizi aMka-padmAsanopaviSTasyotsaMgarUpa AsanabandhaH
tasya mukhaM agrabhAgorkhavalayAkArastasyeva saMsthitaM saMsthAnaM yasya saa| 2.
tathA bahilavaNadizi svastikamukhasaMsthitA, svastikaH supratItaH tasya mukham-
agrabhAgaH tasyevAtivistIrNatayA saMsthitaM-saMsthAnaM yasyA saa| 3. 'ye dve
bAhe te AyAmena-jambUdvIpagatamAyAmamAzrityAvasthite bhvtH|' sUriya. vRtti. 4.
'dve ca bAhe anavasthite bhavataH, tadyathA sarvAbhyantarA, sarvabAhyA c|' (ka)
tatra yA merusamIpe viSkambhamadhikRtya bAhA sA srvaabhyntraa| (kha) yA tu
lavaNadizi jambUdvIpaparyante viSkambhamadhikRtya bAhA sA srvbaahybaahaa| (ga)
AyAmazca-dakSiNAyatatayA pratipattavyo, viSkambhaH puurvaapraayttyaa|

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fourth Prabhrita] [47] The inner circumference is measured in Ankamuhasthaniya,
the outer circumference is measured in Shastrimuhasthaniya, both are measured in
the same way up to the outermost circumference.  (a) The innermost circumference
is: The Mandaraparvata is surrounded by it, which is 9,004 yojanas in
circumference. Q - What is the specific measurement of this circumference? A -
The circumference of the Mandaraparvata, when multiplied by three and then
divided by ten, is the specific measurement of this circumference.  (b) The
outermost circumference is: The Lavaṇa ocean, which is 84,008 yojanas and 84
yojana-parts in circumference. Q - What is the specific measurement of this
circumference? A - The circumference of the Jambudvipa, when multiplied by three
and then divided by ten, is the specific measurement of this circumference. This
also describes the dimensions of the Andhakara-kshetra.  Q - What is the
measurement of this Andhakara-kshetra? A - It is 78,033 yojanas in length.  Q -
What is the shape of the Andhakara-kshetra? A - It is shaped like an inverted
lotus flower.  The innermost circumference is the Mandaraparvata, which is 6,624
yojanas in circumference. Q - What is the specific measurement of this
circumference? A - The circumference of the Mandaraparvata, when multiplied by
two and then divided by ten, is the specific measurement of this circumference.
The outermost circumference is the Lavaṇa ocean, which is 63,262 yojanas in
circumference. Q - What is the specific measurement of this circumference? A -
The circumference of the Jambudvipa, when multiplied by two and then divided by
ten, is the specific measurement of this circumference.  1. The circumference of
Meru is 31,623 yojanas. When multiplied by three, it becomes 94,869 yojanas.
When divided by ten, it becomes 9,486 9/10 yojanas - this is the circumference
of the innermost baha. 2. The circumference of Jambudvipa is 316,227 yojanas,
three kosa, twenty-eight dhanus, and thirteen and a half angulas. When divided
by ten, it becomes 94,868 yojanas. Four parts out of ten of one yojana is the
specific circumference of the outermost baha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha prAbhRta ] [ 47 aMto aMkamuhasaMThiyA, bAhiM satthiyamuhasaMThiyA,
duhao pAseNaM tIse taheva jAva savvabAhiriyA ceva baahaa| (ka ) tIse NaM
savvabbhaMtariyA bAhA = maMdarapavvayaM teNaM Nava joyaNasahassAI cattAri ya
chalasIe joyaNasae Nava ya dasabhAge joyaNassa parikkheveNaM Ahie tti vejaa| pa.
- tA se NaM parikkhevavisese kao ? Ahie tti vaejA ? u. - tAje NaM maMdarassa
pavvayassa parikkheve taM parikkhevaM, tihiM guNittA, dasahiM chittA dasahiM
bhAge hIramANe = esa NaM parikkheva-visese, Ahie tti vejaa| (kha) tIse NaM
savvabAhiriyA bAhA = lavaNa samudaMteNaM, cauNauiM joyaNasahassAiM, aTTha ya
aTThasaThe joyaNasae, cattAri ya dasabhAge joyaNassa parikkheveNaM, Ahie tti
vejjaa| pa. - tA se NaM parikkhevavisese kao? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. - tA je NaM
jaMbUhIva-dIvassa parikkheve taM parikkhevaM tihiM guNittA, dasahiM chettA,
dasahiM bhAge hIramANe = esa NaM parikkheva-visese, Ahie tti vejaa|
tAvakhettassa aMdhakArakhettassa ya AyAmAINaM parUvaNaM pa. - tA tIse NaM
tAvakkhette kevaiyaM AyAmeNaM ? Ahie tti vejaa| u. - tA aTThattari
joyaNasahassAiM, tiNNi ya tettIse joyaNasae joyaNatibhAge ca AyAmeNaM, Ahie tti
vejjaa| pa. - tayA NaM kiMsaMThiyA aMdhakArasaMThiI ? Ahiya tti vejaa| u. -
uddhImuha-kalaMbuApupphasaMThiyA taheva jAva bAhiriyA ceva baahaa| tIse NaM
savvabbhaMtariyA bAhA maMdarapavvayaMteNaM chajjoyaNasahassAI tiNNi ya cauvIse
joyaNasae chacca dasabhAge joyaNassa parikkheveNaM, Ahiya tti vejjaa| pa. - tA
tIse NaM parikkheva visese ? Ahiya tti vejjaa| u. - tA je NaM maMdarassa
pavvayassa parikkheve NaM taM parikkhevaM dohiM guNettA, dasahiM chittA dasahiM
bhAge hIramANe, esa NaM parikkheva-visese, Ahiya tti vejjaa| tIse NaM
savvabAhiriyA bAhA lavaNasamudaM teNaM tevaTThi joyaNasahassAiM doNNi ya
paNayAle joyasAe chacca dasa bhAge joyaNassa parikkheveNaM Ahiya tti vejjaa| 1.
meru kI paridhi 31,6,23 yojana kI hai, ise tIna se guNA karane para 94,8,79
yojana hue, inake daza kA bhAga dene para 9,8,86 9/10 labdha hote haiM - yaha
sarva Abhyantara bAhA kI paridhi hai| 2. jaMbUdvIpa kI paridhi 3,16,2,27 yojana
tIna kosa 28 dhanuSa 13 aMgula tathA Adhe aMgula se kucha adhika hai| isameM
daza kA bhAga dene para 94,8,68 yojana aura eka yojana ke dasa bhAgoM meM se
cAra bhAga jitanI sarvabAhya bAhA kI paridhi vizeSa hai|

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
48 ] P. So, what is the specific circumference of the Jambudvipa island? Please
tell me. U. - The circumference of the Jambudvipa island is calculated by
multiplying the circumference by two, then dividing by ten, then dividing by
ten, and then by ten again. This is the specific circumference. Please tell me.
P. So, what is the length of the darkness? Please tell me. U. — — — [ Surya
Prajnapti Sutra It is 77,000 yojanas, 330 yojanas, and a part of a yojana in
length. Please tell me. At the highest point of the Uttarakuru mountain, there
are 18 muhurtas of day. There are 12 muhurtas of night. P. - So, when the sun
has risen above the entire circle and is moving, what is the arrangement of the
light? Please tell me. U. - The arrangement of the light is like the arrangement
of the petals of the Udumbara flower. Please tell me. Just as the darkness is
arranged in the inner circle, so is the light arranged in the outer circle. Just
as the light is arranged there, so is the darkness arranged in the outer circle.
This should be understood. At the highest point of the Uttarakuru mountain,
there are 18 muhurtas of night. There are 12 muhurtas of day. The measurement of
the light P. - So, on the Jambudvipa island, how much distance does the sun
travel upwards, how much distance does it travel horizontally, and how much
distance does it travel diagonally? U. - So, on the Jambudvipa island, the sun
travels 100 yojanas upwards. It travels 1800 yojanas horizontally. It travels
7,000 yojanas, 220 yojanas, and 21 parts of a yojana diagonally.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 48 ] pa. tAse NaM parikkhevavisese kao ? Ahiya tti vaejjA  /  u. - tAjeNaM
jambuddIvassa dIvassa parikkheve, taM parikkhevaM dohiM guNettA dasahiM chettA
dasahiM bhAgehiM hIramANe esa NaM parikkhevavisese, Ahiya tti vaejA  /  pa. tAse
NaM aMdhakAre kevaiyaM AyAmeNaM ? Ahiya tti vaejjA  /  u. -- -- - [
sUryaprajJaptisU tA aTThattaraM joyaNasahassAiM tiNNi ya tettIse joyaNasae
joyaNatibhAgaM ca AyAmeNaM, Ahiyati vajA  /  tayA NaM uttamakaTTapatte ukkoseNaM
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavati  /  jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai  /  pa.
- tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai tayA NaM
kiMsaMThiyA tAvakhettasaMThiI ? Ahiya tti vaejjA  /  u. - tA uddhamuha-
kalaMbuyApupphasaMThiyA tAvakkhettasaMThiI Ahiya tti vaejjA, evaM jaM
abbhiMtaramaMDale aMdhakAra saMThiIe pamANaM taM bAhiramaMDale
tAvakkhettasaMThiIe, jaM tahiM tAvakkhettasaMThiIe taM bAhiramaMDale
aMdhakArasaMThiIe bhANiyavvaM, jAva tayA NaM uttamakaTTapattA ukkoseNaM
aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavati, jahaNNie duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai  /
sUriyANaM tAvakhettapamANa-parUvaNaM pa. - tAjaMbuddIve dIve sUriyA kevaiyaM
khettaM uDnuM tavaMti, kevaiyaM khettaM ahe tavaMti, ke vaiyaM khettaM tiriyaM
tavaMti ? u. - tA jaMbuddIve NaM dIve sUriyA egaM joyaNasayaM uDnuM tavaMti  /
aTThArasa joyaNasayAiM ahe patavanti  /  sIyAlIsaM joyaNasahassAiM dunni ya
tevaTThe joyaNasae ekkavIsaM ca sadvibhAge joyaNassa tiriyaM tavaMti  /

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the fifth (Pancham) onwards, the rays of the sun are obstructed by the
mountains. 26.  Where are the rays of the sun obstructed?  It is said.  There
are twenty (Vīsam) different opinions (Paḍivattī) stated, as follows:  Some
(Ege) said: 1.  The rays of the sun are obstructed by the Mandara mountain, it
is said.  Some (Ege) said, Some (Ege) again said: 2.  The rays of the sun are
obstructed by the Meru mountain, it is said.  Some (Ege) said, Some (Ege) again
said: 3.  The rays of the sun are obstructed by the Manoram mountain, it is
said.  Some (Ege) said, Some (Ege) again said: 4.  The rays of the sun are
obstructed by the Sudarsana mountain, it is said.  Some (Ege) said, Some (Ege)
again said: 5.  The rays of the sun are obstructed by the Sayamprabha mountain,
it is said.  Some (Ege) said, Some (Ege) again said: 6.  The rays of the sun are
obstructed by the Giriraja mountain, it is said.  Some (Ege) said, Some (Ege)
again said: 7.  The rays of the sun are obstructed by the Rayanuccaya mountain,
it is said.  Some (Ege) said, Some (Ege) again said: 8.  The rays of the sun are
obstructed by the Siluccaya mountain, it is said.  Some (Ege) said, Some (Ege)
again said: 9.  The rays of the sun are obstructed by the Loyamajha mountain, it
is said.  Some (Ege) said, Some (Ege) again said:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama prAbhRta sUriyassa lessA paDighAyagA pavvayA 26. . tA kassiM NaM
sUriyassa lessA paDihayA ? Ahiya tti vejaa| tattha khalu imAo vIsaM paDivattIo
paNNattAo, taM jahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. tA maMdaraMsi NaM pavvayaMsi
sUriyassa lessA paDihayA, Ahiya tti vaejA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu -
* 2. tA meruMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA, Ahiya tti vaejA, ege
evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 3. tAmaNoramaMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa
lessA paDihayA, Ahiyatti vaejA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 4. tA
sudaMsaNaMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA, Ahiyatti vaejA, ege
evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 5. tA sayaMpabhaMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa
lessA paDihayA, Ahiya tti vaejA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 6. tA
girirAyaMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA, Ahiyatti vaejjA, ege
evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 7. tA rayaNuccayaMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa
lessA paDihayA, Ahiya tti vaejjA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 8. tA
siluccayaMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyasa lessA paDihayA, Ahiyatti vaejjA, ege
evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 9. tAloyamajhaMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa
lessA paDihayA, Ahiyatti vaejjA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu -

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
50 ] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra 10. Some said that the mountains are the rays of
the sun, others said that they are not. - 11. Some said that the mountains are
the rays of the sun, others said that they are not. - 12. Some said that the
mountains are like the sun, others said that they are not. - 13. Some said that
the mountains are the coverings of the sun, others said that they are not. - 14.
Some said that the mountains are the best, others said that they are not. - 15.
Some said that the mountains are in all directions, others said that they are
not. - 16. Some said that the mountains are the parts of the sun, others said
that they are not. - 17. Some said that the mountains are the nails of the
earth, others said that they are not. - 18. Some said that the mountains are the
horns of the earth, others said that they are not. - 19. Some said that the
mountains are the teeth of the earth, others said that they are not. - 20. Some
said that the mountains are the kings of the earth, others said that they are
not. - We, however, say that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 50 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 10. tA loganAbhiMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA
paDihayA, Ahiyatti vaejA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 11. tA acchaMsi
NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA, Ahiya tti vaejA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - 12. tA sUriyAvattaMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA,
Ahiya tti vaejA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 13. tA sUriyAvaraNaMsi
NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA, Ahiya tti vaejA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - 14. tA uttamaMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA,
Ahiya tti vaejjA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 15. tA disAdisi NaM
pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA, Ahiyatti vaejA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 16. tA avayaMsaMsiNaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA, Ahiya
tti vaejjA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 17. tA dharaNikhIlaMsi NaM
pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA, Ahiya tti vaejA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 18. tA dharaNisiMgasi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA,
Ahiya tti vaejA, ege evamAsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 19. tA pavvaiMdaMsi NaM
pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA, Ahiya tti vaejjA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 20. tA pavvayarAyasi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA,
Ahiyatti vaejA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo,

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [From the Fifth Chapter Onwards]  [51] Just as the sun's rays fall upon the
mountains, so they also fall upon the Mandara mountain, and even upon the
mountain king. [a] Those beings who are illuminated by the sun's rays are also
those who are touched by the sun's rays. [b] Even the unseen beings are touched
by the sun's rays. Those beings who are in the last stage of liberation are also
touched by the sun's rays.  1. Sixteen names of the Mandara mountain are
mentioned in the scriptures, as follows:  1. Mandara 2. Meru 3. Manorama 4.
Sudarsana 5. Sayamprabha 6. Giriraja 7. Rayanuccaya 8. Piyadarsana 9-19. In the
middle of the world, the navel [1] 11. Acchaya 12. Suryavatte 13. Suryavaranetti
14. Uttama 15. Disadi 16. Vadensei, sixteen in total [2]  a - Sam. S. 16, Su. 3
b - Jambu. Vakkh. 4, Su. 109  These two verses list sixteen names of the Mandara
mountain. In addition to these, there are four other metaphorical names.  These
twenty synonyms of the Mandara mountain are considered by different schools of
thought to be different mountains. However, the compiler of the Surya Prajnapti,
in accordance with the Samavayanga and Jambudvipa Prajnapti, has reconciled all
other beliefs by considering these twenty synonyms to be names of the Mandara
mountain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcama prAbhRta ] . [ 51 jaMsi NaM pavvayaMsi sUriyassa lessA paDihayA, se tA
maMdare vi pavuccai jAva pavvayarAyA vi pavuccai, [ka] tA je NaM puggalA
sUriyassa lessaM phusaMti te NaM puggalA sUriyassa lessaM paDihaNaMti, [kha]
adiTThA vi NaM puggalA sUriyassa lessaM pddihnnNti| carimalessaMvaragayA vi
puggalA sUriyassa lessaM pddihnnNti| 1. maMdarassa NaM pavvayassa solasa
nAmadhejjA paNNattA, taM jahA gAhAo - 1. maMdara 2. meru 3. maNorama 4.
sudaMsaNa 5. sayaMpabhe ya 6. giriraayaa| 7. rayaNuccaya 8. piyadaMsaNa 9 - 19.
majjhe logassa, nAbhI ya  // 1 //  11. acche ya 12. sUriyAvatte 13. sUriyAvaraNe
tti y| 14. uttame ya 15. disAdI ya 16. vaDeMsei ya solase  // 2 //  ka- sama.
sa. 16, su.3 kha - jaMbU. vakkha. 4, su. 109 ina donoM gAthAoM meM 'maMdara
parvata' ke solaha nAma ginAye haiM, yahAM inake atirikta cAra aupamika nAma
aura bhI haiN| maMdara parvata ke ina bIsa paryAyavAcI nAmoM ko anyAnya
mAnyatAvAle bhinna bhinna parvata mAnate haiN| kintu sUryaprajJapti ke
saMkalanakartA ne samavAyAMga aura jambUdvIpa-prajJapti ke anusAra mandara
parvata ke ye bIsa paryAyavAcI nAma mAnakara sabhI anya mAnyatAoM kA 'samanvaya'
kiyA hai|

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixth **Praabhrut** (dawn) is the time when the sun rises.  **P.** - How do
you know that it is the time when the sun rises?  **U.** - There are nineteen
**Pativratti** (interpretations) about this. They are as follows:  1. Some say
that the sun rises and sets at the **Anusamaya** (instant). 2. Some say that the
sun rises and sets at the **Anumuhuutta** (moment). 3. Some say that the sun
rises and sets at the **Anuraidiya** (day). 4. Some say that the sun rises and
sets at the **Anupakkha** (fortnight). 5. Some say that the sun rises and sets
at the **Anumaasa** (month). 6. Some say that the sun rises and sets at the
**Anuu** (year). 7. Some say that the sun rises and sets at the **Anuayan**
(cycle of years). 8. Some say that the sun rises and sets at the
**Anusamvachchar** (century). 9. Some say that the sun rises and sets at the
**Anujug** (eon).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA prAbhRta sUriyassa oyasaMThiI pa. - tA kahaM te oyasaMThiI ? Ahiya tti
vejaa| u. - tattha khalu imAo paNavIsaM paDivattIo paNNattao, taM jahA -
tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. tA aNusamayameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei,
ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA aNumuhuttameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA
uppajjai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 3. tA aNurAidiyameva
sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 4.
tA aNupakkhameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 5. tA aNumAsameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege
evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu6. tA aNuuumeva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA
avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 7. tA aNuayaNameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA
uppajjai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 8. tA
aNusaMvaccharameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - 9. tA aNujugameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege
evmaahNsu|

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixth Prabhruta] [ 53 Some said - 10. That in an Anuvasa, some (suns) arise,
some perish, some said. Some said - 11. That in an Anuvasa-thousand, some (suns)
arise, some perish, some said. Some said - 12. That in an Anuvasa-hundred-
thousand, some (suns) arise, some perish, some said. Some said - 13. That in an
Anupuvva, some (suns) arise, some perish, some said. Some said - 14. That in an
Anupuvva-hundred, some (suns) arise, some perish, some said. Some said - 15.
That in an Anupuvva-thousand, some (suns) arise, some perish, some said. Some
said - 16. That in an Anupuvva-hundred-thousand, some (suns) arise, some perish,
some said. Some said - 17. That in an Anupaliyovama, some (suns) arise, some
perish, some said. Some said - 18. That in an Anupaliyovama-hundred, some (suns)
arise, some perish, some said. Some said - 19. That in an Anupaliyovama-
thousand, some (suns) arise, some perish, some said. Some said - 20. That in an
Anupaliyovama-hundred-thousand, some (suns) arise, some perish, some said. Some
said - 21. That in an Anusagarovama-hundred, some (suns) arise, some perish,
some said. Some said -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA prAbhRta ] [ 53 ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 10. tA aNuvAsasayameva sUriyassa
oyA aNNA uppajjai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 11. tA
aNuvAsasahassameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - 12. tA aNuvAsa-saya-sahassameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai,
aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 13. tA aNupuvvameva sUriyassa
oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 14. tA
aNupuvva-sayameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 15. tA aNupuvvasahassameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajjai, aNNA avei,
ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 16. tA aNupuvvasayasahassameva sUriyassa
oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 17. tA
aNupaliovamameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 18. tA aNupaliovamasayameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei,
ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - . 19. tA aNupaliovamasahassameva sUriyassa
oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 20. tA
aNupaliovamasayasahassameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajjai, aNNA avei, ege .
evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 21. tA aNusAgarovama-sayameva sUriyassa oyA
aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu -

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[54] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] 22. Some say that the sun's rays increase and
decrease by an amount equal to an ocean of dust particles. Others say - 23. Some
say that the sun's rays increase and decrease by an amount equal to a thousand
oceans of dust particles. Others say - 24. Some say that the sun's rays increase
and decrease by an amount equal to a hundred thousand oceans of dust particles.
Others say - 25. Some say that the sun's rays increase and decrease by an amount
equal to the time of an Utsarpini-Avasarpini. We, however, say - (a) The sun's
rays increase and decrease by an amount equal to thirty muhurtas. (b) The sun's
rays decrease for six months. _ The sun's rays increase for six months. (c) The
sun's rays decrease when it is leaving the country. The sun's rays increase when
it is entering the country. P. - What is the reason for this? A. - This is what
we have learned. U. - The Jambudvipa, which is the center of all the islands and
oceans, is a circle with a diameter of a hundred thousand yojanas, three hundred
thousand yojanas, two hundred and twenty-seven yojanas, three kosas, twenty-
eight dhanus, thirteen angulas, and a little more than half an angula. 1. When
the sun travels through the entire circle, it takes eighteen muhurtas to
complete a day, which is equal to twelve muhurtas of night. 2. When the sun is
leaving the country, it travels through the inner circle in the first year of
the Avyamana Samvatsara. 1. It appears from these statements that the terms
'Palya-upam-Sagaro-upam, Utsarpini-Avasarpini', etc., which are used to denote
the time of the Aupamika Kala, were also used in other philosophical Puranas and
other texts besides the Jain Agamas. If these terms are used in any of the
Puranas or other texts, then scholars should try to find them and publish them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 22. tA aNusAgarovama-sayameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA
uppajjai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 23. tA aNusAgarovama-
sahassameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 24. tA aNusAgarovama-sayasahassameva sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai,
aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 25. tA aNuussappiNi-osappiNimeva
sUriyassa oyA aNNA uppajai, aNNA avei, ege evmaahNsu| vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo -
(ka) tA tIsaM tIsaM muhutte sUriyassa oyA avaTThiyA bhavai teNa paraM sUriyassa
oyA aNavaTThiyA bhvi| (kha) chammAse sUrie oyaM nnivvuddddhei| _ chammAse sUrie
oyaM abhivuddddhei| (ga) nikkhamamANe sUrie desaM nnivvuddddhei| pavisamANe
sUrie desaM abhivuddddhei| pa. - tattha ko heU ? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. - tA ayaM
NaM jaMbuddIve dIve savvadIva-samuddANaM savvabbhaMtarAe savva khuDDAge vaTTe
jAva joyaNasayasahassamAyAma-vikkhaMbheNaM tiNNi joyaNasayasahassAiM, doNNi ya
sattAvIse joyaNasae, tiNNi kose, aTThAvIsaM ca dhaNusayaM, terasa ya aMgulAI
addhaMgulaM ca kiMci visesAhie parikkheve NaM pnnnntte| 1. tA jayA NaM sUrie
savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte
ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| 2. se
nikkhamamANe sUrie NavaM saMvaccharaM ayamANe paDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi
abhiMtarANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri| 1. ina pratipattiyoM se aisA
pratIta hotA hai ki jainAgamoM ke atirikta anya dArzanika purANAdi granthoM meM
bhI aupamikakAlavAcaka 'palyopama-sAgaropama, utsarpiNI-avasarpiNI' Adi zabdoM
kA prayoga thaa| vartamAna meM bhI yadi purANAdi granthoM ina aupamikakAla
vAcaka zabdoM kA kahIM prayoga ho to anveSaNazIla vidvAn prayatna karake
prakAzita kreN|

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Praabhrut  [55]  **1.** When the fresh sun, after entering the inner
circle, moves around it, then in one day, with one *raaidie* (unit of time), it
covers one part of the day-field, leaving the night-field, and moves around the
circle, which is divided into eighteen *tisas* (units of time).  Therefore, the
day is of eighteen *muhurtas* (units of time), less two *egaattibhagamuhurtas*
(units of time).  The night is of twelve *muhurtas* (units of time), more two
*egaattibhagamuhurtas* (units of time).  **2.** When the sun, after entering the
inner circle, moves around it, then in one day, with two *raaidies* (units of
time), it covers two parts of the day-field, leaving the night-field, and moves
around the circle, which is divided into eighteen *tisas* (units of time).
Therefore, the day is of eighteen *muhurtas* (units of time), less four
*egaattibhagamuhurtas* (units of time).  The night is of twelve *muhurtas*
(units of time), more four *egaattibhagamuhurtas* (units of time).  **3.** Thus,
when the sun, after entering the inner circle, moves around it, then it moves
from one circle to another, and with one *raaidie* (unit of time), it covers one
part of the day-field, leaving the night-field, and moves around the outer
circle.  **4.** When the sun, after entering all the inner circles, moves around
the outer circle, then it covers one part of the day-field, leaving the night-
field, and moves around the circle, which is divided into eighteen *tisas*
(units of time).  Therefore, the day is of eighteen *muhurtas* (units of time),
less two *egaattibhagamuhurtas* (units of time).  The night is of twelve
*muhurtas* (units of time), more two *egaattibhagamuhurtas* (units of time).
**5.** When the sun, after entering all the inner circles, moves around the
outer circle, then it covers one part of the day-field, leaving the night-field,
and moves around the circle, which is divided into eighteen *tisas* (units of
time).  Therefore, the day is of eighteen *muhurtas* (units of time), less four
*egaattibhagamuhurtas* (units of time).  The night is of twelve *muhurtas*
(units of time), more four *egaattibhagamuhurtas* (units of time).  **6.** Thus,
when the sun, after entering all the inner circles, moves around the outer
circle, then it moves from one circle to another, and with one *raaidie* (unit
of time), it covers one part of the day-field, leaving the night-field, and
moves around the outer circle.  **7.** When the sun, after entering all the
inner circles, moves around the outer circle, then it covers one part of the
day-field, leaving the night-field, and moves around the circle, which is
divided into eighteen *tisas* (units of time).  Therefore, the day is of
eighteen *muhurtas* (units of time), less two *egaattibhagamuhurtas* (units of
time).  The night is of twelve *muhurtas* (units of time), more two
*egaattibhagamuhurtas* (units of time).  **8.** This is the first six months,
this is the first six months, the *pajjavasaana* (end of the rainy season).
**9.** When the sun, after entering the outer circle, moves around it, then in
one day, with one *raaidie* (unit of time), it covers one part of the night-
field, leaving the day-field, and moves around the circle, which is divided into
eighteen *tisas* (units of time).  Therefore, the day is of eighteen *muhurtas*
(units of time), less two *egaattibhagamuhurtas* (units of time).  The night is
of twelve *muhurtas* (units of time), more two *egaattibhagamuhurtas* (units of
time).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA prAbhRta ] [ 55 tAjA sUrie abdhiMtarANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA
cAraM carar3a, tayA NaM egeNaM rAIdieNaM egaM bhAgaM oyAe divasakhittassa
nivvuDDhittA rayaNi khittassa abhivuDDittA cAraM carar3a, maMDalaM aTThArasehiM
tIsehiM ehiM chettA  /  tayA NaM aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, dohiM
egaTTibhAgamahuttehiM UNe  /  duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai - dohiM
egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyA  /  3. se nikkhamamANe sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi
abdhiMtarANaMtaraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai | tAjA sUrie
abdhiMtarANaMtaraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carar3a, tayA NaM dohiM
rAidiehiM do bhAge oyAe divasa - khettassa nivvuDDhittA, rayaNi khettassa
abhivuDDittA cAraM carar3a, maMDalaM aTThArasehiM tIsehiM saehiM chettA  /  tayA
NaM aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, cauhiM egaTTibhAgamahuttehiM UNe  /
'duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai - cauhiM egaTTibhAgamuhuttehiM ahiyA  /  4. evaM
khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM nikkhamamANe sUrie tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM
maMDalaM saMkamamANe saMkamamANe egamege maMDale, egamegeNaM rAIdieNaM egamegaM
egamegaM bhAgaM oyAe divasa - khettassa nivvuDDhemANe nivvuDDhemANe rayaNi
khettassa abhivuDDhemANe abhivuD DhemANe savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA
cAraM carai  /  5. tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabdhaMtarAo maMDalAo savvabAhiraM
maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM savvabdhaMtaraM maMDalaM paNihAya
egeNaM tesieNaM rAiMdiyasaeNaM egaM tesIyabhAgasayaM oyAe divasa khettassa
nivvuDDhettA rayaNi khettassa abhivuDDhettA cAraM carar3a, maMDalaM aTThArasehiM
tIsehiM saehiM chettA  /  tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhuttA
rAI bhavai, jahaNNae duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai  /  esa NaM paDhame chammAse,
esa NaM paDhamassa chammAsassa, pajjavasANe  /  1. se pavisamANe sUrie doccaM
chammAsaM ayamANepaDhamaMsi ahorattaMsi bAhirANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA
cAraM carai  /  tAjA NaM sUrie bAhirANaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM
carar3a, tayA NaM egeNaM rAIdieNaM egaM bhAgaM oyAe rayaNikhettassa
nivvuDDhettA, divasa- khettassa abhivuDDhettA cAraM carar3a, maMDalaM
aTThArasehiM sehiM saehiM chettA  /  tayA NaM aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, dohiM
egaTTibhAgamahuttehiM UNA  /

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 56 [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ]  1. The day consists of twelve muhurtas, and the
night consists of twelve muhurtas.  2. When the sun enters, it traverses the
outer circle of its mandala, moving in four directions.  As the sun traverses
the outer circle of its mandala, it moves in four directions, causing two rays
to illuminate the field of light, and two rays to illuminate the field of day.
The mandala is divided into eighteen, thirty, and one hundred parts.  Therefore,
the day consists of eighteen muhurtas, minus four parts of a muhurta. The night
consists of twelve muhurtas, minus four parts of a muhurta.  3. Thus, as the sun
enters, it traverses the mandalas, moving from one mandala to another. Each
mandala, with its own rays, illuminates the field of light, and illuminates the
field of day. The sun traverses all the mandalas, moving in four directions.  4.
When the sun traverses all the outer mandalas, and all the inner mandalas, it
traverses the outermost mandala, causing one hundred rays to illuminate the
field of light, and one hundred rays to illuminate the field of day. The mandala
is divided into eighteen, thirty, and one hundred parts.  Therefore, the day
consists of eighteen muhurtas, when the sun reaches its highest point, just as
the night consists of twelve muhurtas.  This is the duration of the six months,
and this is the end of the six months. This is the duration of the solar year,
and this is the end of the solar year.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 56 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, dohiM
egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie| 2. se pavisamANe sUrie doccaMsi ahorattaMsi
bAhirANaMtaraM taccaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri| tA jayA NaM sUrie
bAhirANaMtaraM taccaM maMDalaM tavasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM dohiM
rAiMdiehiM do bhAe oyAe rayaNikhettassa nivvuDDhettA, divasa-khettassa
abhivuDDhettA cAraM carai, maMDalaM aTThArasehiM tIsehiM saehiM chettaa| tayA
NaM aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, cauhiM egaTThibhAgamahuttehiM uunnaa|
duvAlasamuhutte divase bhavai, cauhiM egaTThibhAgamuhuttehiM ahie| 3. evaM khalu
eeNaM uvAeNaM pavisamANe sUrie tayANaMtarAo maMDalAo tayANaMtaraM maMDalaM
saMkamamANe saMkamamANe egamege maMDale, egamegeNaM rAidieNaM egamegaM bhAgaM
oyAe rayaNi-khettassa nivvuDDhemANe nivvaDaDhemANe divasa-khettassa
abhivaDaDhemANe abhivaDDhemANe savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM cri|
4. tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhirAo maMDalAo savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM savvabAhiraM maMDalaM paNihAya egeNaM
tesIeNaM rAiMdiyasaeNaM egaM tesIyaM bhAgasayaM oyAe rayaNikhettassa
nivvuDDhettA divasa-khettassa abhivuDDhettA cAraM carai, maMDalaM aTThAraseMhi
tIsehiM saehiM chettaa| tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte
divase bhavai, jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| esa NaM docce chammAse, esa
NaM doccassa chammAsassa pjjvsaanne| esa NaM Aicce saMvacchare, esa NaM Aiccassa
saMvaccharassa pjvsaanne|

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Seventh Prabhruta Surya by Pagasia Pavva**  **P. -** What is the Surya (Sun)
worshipped on? Please tell me.  **U. -** There are twenty different
interpretations (**Padivatti**) mentioned in this context, as follows:  1. Some
say that the Surya is worshipped on the **Mandara** mountain. 2. Others say that
the Surya is worshipped on the **Meru** mountain. 3. - 19. Similarly, other
interpretations should be considered in the same way. 20. Some say that the
Surya is worshipped on the **Pavvayaraya** mountain.  We, however, believe that
the Surya is worshipped on the **Mandara** mountain. This is also mentioned in
the **Surya Prajnaptti** (Chapter 5, Sutra 26).  The Surya is also worshipped on
the **Pavvayaraya** mountain.  (a) Those who see the Surya's rays (**Lesa**) are
worshipping the Surya. (b) Even those who cannot see the Surya are worshipping
it. (c) Even those who are in the last stage of **Lesa** (**Charimalesa**) are
worshipping the Surya.  1. In the **Surya Prajnaptti** (Chapter 5, Sutra 26),
under the heading "**Surya's Lesa Padihayaga Pavva**", twenty mountains that
obstruct the Surya's rays are mentioned. Here, all the speakers should be
considered according to the original text. 2. In the above mentioned section,
the compiler of the **Surya Prajnaptti** has considered the twenty names of the
**Mandara** mountain as synonyms and has harmonized them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptama prAbhRta sUriyeNa pagAsiyA pavvayA pa. - tA kiM te sUriyaM varai ?
Ahietti vejjaa| u. - tattha khalu imAo vIsaM paDivattIo paNNattao taM jahA -
tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. tA maMdare NaM pavvae sUriyaM varai, ege evmaahNsu| ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA merU NaM pavvae sUriyaM varai ege evmaahNsu| 3-19. evaM
eeNaM abhilAveNaM NeyavvaM taheva jaav| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 20. tA pavvayarAye
NaM pavvae sUriyaM varai, ege evmaahNsu| vayaM puNa evaM badAmo - tA maMdare NaM
pavvae sUriyaM varai, evaM pi pavuccai taheva jAva (1-20 sUriya. pA. 5, su. 26
ko dekheN)| tA pavvayarAye NaM pavvae sUriyaM varai, evaM pi pvucci| (ka) tA je
NaM poggalA sUriyassa lesaM phusaMti, te NaM puggalA sUriyaM vryNti| (kha)
adiTThA vi NaM poggalA sUriyaM vryNti| (ga) carimalessaMtaragayA viNaM poggalA
sUriyaM vryNti| 1. 'sUriyassa lessA paDidhAyagA pavvayA' isa zIrSaka ke
antargata sUrya. prA. 5, su. 26 meM bIsa pratipattiyoM ke anusAra sUrya kI lezyA
/  ko pratihata karane vAle bIsa parvatoM ke nAma ginAye haiN| yahAM bhI usI ke
anusAra mUla-pATha ke sabhI AlApaka kahane caahiye| 2. Upara ke TippaNa meM
sUcita zIrSaka ke antargata sUrya. pA.5,su. 26 ke anusAra sUryaprajJapti ke
saMkalanakartA ne yahAM bhI maMdara parvata ke bIsa nAmoM ko paryAyavAcI
mAnakara samanvaya kara liyA hai|

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth (Aṣṭama) and onwards: The Sunrise (Udaya-saṇṭhī)  **P.** - Tell me,
what is the Sunrise (Udaya-saṇṭhī)? **U.** - There are three (tiṇṇi) types of
Sunrise (Udaya-saṇṭhī) in this (tathā) context. They are:  **(a)** They (tathā)
said (āhamsu) that when it is eighteen (aṭṭhārasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the
Southern (dāhiṇadḍhe) part of Jambudvīpa, it is also eighteen (aṭṭhārasamuhuṭṭe)
Muhūrta days in the Northern (uttaredḍhe) part. When it is eighteen
(aṭṭhārasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Northern (uttaredḍhe) part of Jambudvīpa,
it is also eighteen (aṭṭhārasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Southern (dāhiṇadḍhe)
part.  **(b)** They (tathā) said (āhamsu) that when it is seventeen
(sattarasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Southern (dāhiṇadḍhe) part of Jambudvīpa,
it is also seventeen (sattarasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Northern
(uttaredḍhe) part. When it is seventeen (sattarasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the
Northern (uttaredḍhe) part of Jambudvīpa, it is also seventeen
(sattarasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Southern (dāhiṇadḍhe) part.  **(c)** They
(tathā) said (āhamsu) that when it is sixteen (solasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in
the Southern (dāhiṇadḍhe) part of Jambudvīpa, it is also sixteen (solasamuhuṭṭe)
Muhūrta days in the Northern (uttaredḍhe) part. When it is sixteen
(solasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Northern (uttaredḍhe) part of Jambudvīpa, it
is also sixteen (solasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Southern (dāhiṇadḍhe) part.
**(d)** They (tathā) said (āhamsu) that when it is fifteen (paṇṇarasamuhuṭṭe)
Muhūrta days in the Southern (dāhiṇadḍhe) part of Jambudvīpa, it is also fifteen
(paṇṇarasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Northern (uttaredḍhe) part. When it is
fifteen (paṇṇarasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Northern (uttaredḍhe) part of
Jambudvīpa, it is also fifteen (paṇṇarasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Southern
(dāhiṇadḍhe) part.  **(e)** They (tathā) said (āhamsu) that when it is fourteen
(cauddhasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Southern (dāhiṇadḍhe) part of Jambudvīpa,
it is also fourteen (cauddhasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Northern (uttaredḍhe)
part. When it is fourteen (cauddhasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Northern
(uttaredḍhe) part of Jambudvīpa, it is also fourteen (cauddhasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta
days in the Southern (dāhiṇadḍhe) part.  **(f)** They (tathā) said (āhamsu) that
when it is thirteen (terasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the Southern (dāhiṇadḍhe)
part of Jambudvīpa, it is also thirteen (terasamuhuṭṭe) Muhūrta days in the
Northern (uttaredḍhe) part.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama prAbhRta  /  sUrassa udaya-saMThiI pa. - tA kaha te udayasaMThiI AhiyA ?
ti vejaa| u. - tattha khalu imAo tiNNi paDivattIo paNNttAo, taM jahA - 1.
tatthege evamAhaMsu - (ka) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi aTThArasamuhutte divase
bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhvi| (kha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe
sattarasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi sattarasamuhutte divase
bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe sattarasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi
sattarasamuhutte divase bhvi| (ga) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe
solasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi solasamuhutte divase bhvi|
jayA NaM uttaraDDhe solasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi
solasamuhutte divase bhvi| (gha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe
paNNarasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi paNNarasamuhutte divase
bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe paNNarasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi
paNNarasamuhutte divase bhvi| (Ga) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe
cauddasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi cauddasamuhutte divase
bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe cauddasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi
cauddasamuhutte divase bhvi| (ca) tA jayA NaM jaMbuhIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe
terasasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi terasasamuhutte divase
bhvi|

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Chapter  [59]  (a) If it is the thirteenth muhurta day in the northern
hemisphere, then it is the thirteenth muhurta day in the southern hemisphere.
(b) If it is the twelfth muhurta day in the southern hemisphere of Jambudvipa,
then it is the twelfth muhurta day in the northern hemisphere. If it is the
twelfth muhurta day in the northern hemisphere, then it is the twelfth muhurta
day in the southern hemisphere.  (c) If it is the fifteenth muhurta day in the
east-west direction of Mount Mandara in Jambudvipa, then it is the fifteenth
muhurta day in the east-west direction of Mount Mandara. This is the rule, O
monks! Some say this.  2. Some others say:  (a) If it is the eighteenth muhurta
day in the southern hemisphere of Jambudvipa, then it is the eighteenth muhurta
day in the northern hemisphere. If it is the eighteenth muhurta day in the
northern hemisphere, then it is the eighteenth muhurta day in the southern
hemisphere.  (b) If it is the seventeenth muhurta day in the southern hemisphere
of Jambudvipa, then it is the seventeenth muhurta day in the northern
hemisphere. If it is the seventeenth muhurta day in the northern hemisphere,
then it is the seventeenth muhurta day in the southern hemisphere.  (c) If it is
the sixteenth muhurta day in the southern hemisphere of Jambudvipa, then it is
the sixteenth muhurta day in the northern hemisphere. If it is the sixteenth
muhurta day in the northern hemisphere, then it is the sixteenth muhurta day in
the southern hemisphere.  (d) If it is the fifteenth muhurta day in the southern
hemisphere of Jambudvipa, then it is the fifteenth muhurta day in the northern
hemisphere. If it is the fifteenth muhurta day in the northern hemisphere, then
it is the fifteenth muhurta day in the southern hemisphere.  (e) If it is the
fourteenth muhurta day in the southern hemisphere of Jambudvipa, then it is the
fourteenth muhurta day in the northern hemisphere. If it is the fourteenth
muhurta day in the northern hemisphere, then it is the fourteenth muhurta day in
the southern hemisphere.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama prAbhRta ] [ 59 jayA NaM uttaraDDhe terasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA
NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi terasamuhutte divase bhvi| (cha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi bArasamuhutte
divase bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe bArasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM
dAhiNaDDhe 'vi bArasamuhutte divase bhvi| (ja ) tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
maMdarassa pavvayassa puratthima-paccatthime NaM sayA paNNarasamuhutte divase
bhavai, sayA paNNarasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, avaTThiyA NaM tattha rAiMdiyA
paNNattA, samaNAuo! ege evmaahNsu| 2. ege puNa evamAhaMsu - (ka) tA jayA NaM
jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe aTThArasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM
uttaraDDhe'vi aTThArasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe
aTThArasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi
aTThArasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhvi| _ (kha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
dAhiNaDDhe sattarasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi
sattarasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe sattarasamuhuttANaMtare
divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi sattarasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhvi| (ga)
tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe solasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA
NaM uttaraDDhe'vi solasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe
solasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi solasamuhuttANaMtare
divase bhvi| (gha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe
paNNarasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayANaM uttaraDDhe'vi
paNNarasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai ! jayA NaM uttaraDDhe
paNNarasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi
paNNarasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhvi| (Ga) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe
coddasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi
coddasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe coddasamuhuttANaMtare
divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi coddasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhvi|

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
60 ] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra (c) Now, when it is thirteen muhurtas in the
southern part of Jambudvipa, it is also thirteen muhurtas in the northern part.
When it is thirteen muhurtas in the northern part of Jambudvipa, it is also
thirteen muhurtas in the southern part. (ch) Now, when it is twelve muhurtas in
the southern part of Jambudvipa, it is also twelve muhurtas in the northern
part. When it is twelve muhurtas in the northern part of Jambudvipa, it is also
twelve muhurtas in the southern part. (j) Now, when it is fifteen muhurtas in
the east and west of Mount Mandara in Jambudvipa, it is fifteen muhurtas in the
night. The night is called "Rati" and the day is called "Divasa". Thus, the
Samanas said. 3. Some others said: (k) Now, when it is eighteen muhurtas in the
southern part of Jambudvipa, it is twelve muhurtas in the night in the northern
part. When it is eighteen muhurtas in the northern part of Jambudvipa, it is
twelve muhurtas in the night in the southern part. (kh) Now, when it is eighteen
muhurtas in the southern part of Jambudvipa, it is twelve muhurtas in the night
in the northern part. When it is eighteen muhurtas in the northern part of
Jambudvipa, it is twelve muhurtas in the night in the southern part. (k) Now,
when it is seventeen muhurtas in the southern part of Jambudvipa, it is twelve
muhurtas in the night in the northern part. When it is seventeen muhurtas in the
northern part of Jambudvipa, it is twelve muhurtas in the night in the southern
part. (kh) Now, when it is seventeen muhurtas in the southern part of
Jambudvipa, it is twelve muhurtas in the night in the northern part. When it is
seventeen muhurtas in the northern part of Jambudvipa, it is twelve muhurtas in
the night in the southern part. (k) Now, when it is sixteen muhurtas in the
southern part of Jambudvipa, it is twelve muhurtas in the night in the northern
part.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra ( ca tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe
terasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe 'vi terasamuhuttANaMtare
divase bhavai  /  jayA NaM uttaraDDhe terasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA
NaM dAhiNaDDhe 'vi terasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai  /  (cha) tA jayA NaM
jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, , tayA NaM
uttaraDDhe'vi bArasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai  /  jayA NaM uttaraDDhe
bArasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi bArasamuhuttANaMtare
divase bhavai  /  (ja) tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa
puratthima-paccatthime NaM No sayA paNNarasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA No sayA
paNNarasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, aNavaTThiyA NaM tattha rAiMdiyA paNNattA, ,
samaNAuso ! ege evamAhaMsu  /  3. ege puNa evamAhaMsu - (ka) tA jayA NaM
jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai  /  jayA NaM uttaraDDhe aTThArasamuhutte divase
bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasa muhuttA rAI bhavai  /  (kha) tA jayA NaM
jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe aTThArasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM
uttaraDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai  /  jayA NaM uttaraDDhe
aTThArasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI
bhavai  /  (ka) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe sattarasamuhutte divase
bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai  /  jayA NaM uttaraDDhe
sattarasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai  /
(kha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe sattarasamuhuttANaMtare divase
bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai  /  jayA NaM uttaraDDhe
sattarasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI
bhavai  /  (ka) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe solasamuhutte divase
bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhavai  /

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Aṣṭama Prābhṛta] [ 61 If a day occurs in the North with sixteen Muhūrtas, then
a night occurs in the South with twelve Muhūrtas. (b) If a day occurs in the
South with sixteen Muhūrtas in Jambudvīpa, then a night occurs in the North with
twelve Muhūrtas. If a day occurs in the North with sixteen Muhūrtas, then a
night occurs in the South with twelve Muhūrtas. (a) If a day occurs in the South
with fifteen Muhūrtas in Jambudvīpa, then a night occurs in the North with
twelve Muhūrtas. If a day occurs in the North with fifteen Muhūrtas, then a
night occurs in the South with twelve Muhūrtas. (b) If a day occurs in the South
with fifteen Muhūrtas in Jambudvīpa, then a night occurs in the North with
twelve Muhūrtas. If a day occurs in the North with fifteen Muhūrtas, then a
night occurs in the South with twelve Muhūrtas. (a) If a day occurs in the South
with fourteen Muhūrtas in Jambudvīpa, then a night occurs in the North with
twelve Muhūrtas. If a day occurs in the North with fourteen Muhūrtas, then a
night occurs in the South with twelve Muhūrtas. (b) If a day occurs in the South
with fourteen Muhūrtas in Jambudvīpa, then a night occurs in the North with
twelve Muhūrtas. If a day occurs in the North with fourteen Muhūrtas, then a
night occurs in the South with twelve Muhūrtas. (a) If a day occurs in the South
with thirteen Muhūrtas in Jambudvīpa, then a night occurs in the North with
twelve Muhūrtas. If a day occurs in the North with thirteen Muhūrtas, then a
night occurs in the South with twelve Muhūrtas. (b) If a day occurs in the South
with thirteen Muhūrtas in Jambudvīpa, then a night occurs in the North with
twelve Muhūrtas. If a day occurs in the North with thirteen Muhūrtas, then a
night occurs in the South with twelve Muhūrtas. (a) If a day occurs in the South
with twelve Muhūrtas in Jambudvīpa, then a night occurs in the North with twelve
Muhūrtas. If a day occurs in the North with twelve Muhūrtas, then a night occurs
in the South with twelve Muhūrtas. (b) If a day occurs in the South with twelve
Muhūrtas in Jambudvīpa, then a night occurs in the North with twelve Muhūrtas. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama prAbhRta ] [ 61 jayA NaM uttaraDDhe solasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA
NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| (kha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
dAhiNaDDhe solasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe solasamuhuttANaMtare divase
bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| (ka ) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve
dIve dAhiNaDDhe paNNarasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe paNNarasamuhutte divase bhavai,
tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| (kha ) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
dAhiNaDDhe paNNarasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe paNNarasamuhuttANaMtare divase
bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| (ka ) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve
dIve dAhiNaDDhe coddasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe coddasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA
NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| (kha ) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
dAhiNaDDhe coddasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe
duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe cohasamuhuttANaMtare divase
bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| (ka ) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve
dIve dAhiNaDDhe terasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe duvAlasamuhuttA
rAI bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe terasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe
bArasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| (kha ) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe
terasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe duvAlasamuhuttA rAI
bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe terasamuhuttANaMtare divase bhavai, tayA NaM
dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| (ka ) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe
bArasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| jayA
NaM uttaraDDhe bArasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA
rAI bhvi| (kha ) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttANaMtare
divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi|

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[62] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] Where it is day for twelve muhurtas in the north,
it is night for twelve muhurtas in the south. Where it is day for fifteen
muhurtas on the eastern side of Mount Mandara in Jambudvipa, it is night for
fifteen muhurtas on the western side. Some say that the night is then in the
south. But we say: The sun in Jambudvipa rises in the east, moves towards the
south, moves towards the west, moves towards the north, and moves towards the
east again. (a) Where it is day on the southern side of Mount Mandara in
Jambudvipa, it is also day on the northern side. Where it is day on the northern
side, it is night on the eastern and western sides of Mount Mandara in
Jambudvipa. (b) Where it is day on the eastern side of Mount Mandara in
Jambudvipa, it is also day on the western side. Where it is day on the western
side, it is night on the north and south sides of Mount Mandara in Jambudvipa.
(a) Where it is day for eighteen muhurtas on the southern side of Mount Mandara
in Jambudvipa, it is also day for eighteen muhurtas on the northern side. Where
it is day for eighteen muhurtas on the northern side, it is night on the... 1.
P. In Jambudvipa, Venerable Sir, does the sun rise in the east, move towards the
south, move towards the west, move towards the north, and move towards the east
again? U. Yes, indeed! As stated in the first section of the fifth chapter,
where there is no... - Bhag. S. 5, U. 1, Su. 5 (a) Jamb. Vakkh. 7, Su. 150

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra jayA NaM uttaraDDhe bArasamuhuttANaMtare divase
bhavai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe bArasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
maMdarassa pavvayassa purathimapaccatthime NaM Nevatthi paNNarasamuhutte divase
bhavai, Nevatthi paNNarasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| vocchiNNA NaM tattha rAiMdiyA
paNNattA, samaNAuo! ege evmaahsu| vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo tA jaMbuddIve dIve
suuriyaa| udINa-pAINamuggacchaMti, paaiinn-daahinnmaagcchNti| pAINa-
dAhiNamuggacchaMti, daahinn-pddiinnmaagcchNti| dAhiNa-paDINamuggacchaMti,
pddiinn-udiinnmaagcchNti| paDINa-udINamuggacchaMti, udiinn-paaiinnmaagcchNti|'
(ka) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa dAhiNaDDhe divase bhavai,
tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi divase bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe divase bhavai, tayA NaM
jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa purathima-paccitthame NaM rAI bhvi| (kha)
tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa purathime NaM divase bhavai,
tayA NaM paccatthime'vi divase bhvi| _ jayA NaM paccatthime NaM divase bhavai,
tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa uttaradAhiNe NaM rAI bhvi| (ka)
tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa dAhiNaDDhe ukkosae
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavaI, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte
divase bhvi| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA
NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa 1. pa. jambUddIve NaM bhaMte ! dIve
sUriA ? udINapAINamuggaccha pAINadAhiNamAgacchaMti ? pAINadAhiNamuggaccha
dAhiNapaDINamAgacchaM ti ? dAhiNapaDINamuggaccha paDINaudINamAgacchaMti ?
paDINaudINamuggaccha udINapAINamAgacchaMti ? u. haMtA goyamA ! jahA paMcamasae
paDhame uddese jAva Nevatthi ussappiNI avaTuiMe NaM tattha kAle paM. samaNAuso!
- bhaga. sa. 5, u.1 su.5 (ka) jaMbu. vakkha. 7, su. 150

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ Eighth Chapter ] [ 63 ] In the east and west, there are twelve muhurtas of
night. (b) When the sun rises in the east on Jambudvipa, the mountain Mandara,
it is eighteen muhurtas of day, and when it sets in the west, it is also
eighteen muhurtas of day. When the sun sets in the west, it is eighteen muhurtas
of day, and when it rises in the east on Jambudvipa, the mountain Mandara, it is
twelve muhurtas of night. Thus, it should be understood that On the day after
eighteen muhurtas - there are twelve muhurtas of night. On the day after
seventeen muhurtas - there are thirteen muhurtas of night. On the day after
seventeen muhurtas - there are thirteen muhurtas of night. On the day after
sixteen muhurtas - there are fourteen muhurtas of night. On the day after
sixteen muhurtas - there are fourteen muhurtas of night. On the day after
fifteen muhurtas - there are fifteen muhurtas of night. On the day after fifteen
muhurtas - there are fifteen muhurtas of night. On the day after fourteen
muhurtas - there are sixteen muhurtas of night. On the day after fourteen
muhurtas - there are sixteen muhurtas of night. On the day after thirteen
muhurtas - there are seventeen muhurtas of night.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama prAbhRta ] [ 63 puratthima-paccatthime NaM jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI
bhvi| (kha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa purathime NaM
ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai, tayA NaM paccatthime'vi ukkosae
aTThArasamuhutte divase bhvi| jayA NaM paccatthime NaM ukkosae aTThArasamuhutte
divase bhavai, tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa uttaradAhiNe NaM
jahaNiyA duvAlasamuhuttA rAI bhvi| evaM eeNa gameNaM NeyavvaM
aTThArasamuhuttANaMtare divase - sAirega-duvAlasa-muhuttA raaii| sattarasa-
muhutte-divase - ters-muhuttaa-raaii| sattarasa-muhuttANaMtare divase - sAirega-
terasa-muhuttA raaii| solasa-muhutte divase - coddasa-muhuttA raaii| solasa-
muhuttANaMtare divase - sAirega-coisa-muhuttA raaii| paNNarasa-muhutte divase -
paNNarasa-muhuttA raaii| paNNarasa-muhuttANaMtare divase - sAirega-paNNarasa-
muhuttA raaii| coddasa-muhutte divase - solasa-muhuttA raaii| coisa-
muhuttANaMtare divase - sAirega-solasa-muhuttA raaii| terasa-muhutte divase -
sattarasa-muhuttA raaii|

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[64] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] On days with thirteen Muhurtas, the Sairag is
seventeen Muhurtas. As on days with twelve Muhurtas, the Ukkoshiya is eighteen
Muhurtas. This is how it should be said. (a) When the Vasa begins in the first
moment on the southern side of the Mandara mountain on Jambudvipa, it also
begins in the first moment on the northern side. When the Vasa begins in the
first moment on the northern side, it begins in the first moment on the eastern
and western sides of the Mandara mountain on Jambudvipa, in the subsequent time
period. (b) When the Vasa begins in the first moment on the eastern side of the
Mandara mountain on Jambudvipa, it also begins in the first moment on the
western side. When the Vasa begins in the first moment on the western side, it
begins in the first moment on the north and south sides of the Mandara mountain
on Jambudvipa, in the subsequent time period. As the time is, so are the
following: 1. Avaliya, 2. Anapanu, 3. Theve, 4. Lave, 5. Muhurta, 6. Ahoratta,
7. Pakkha, 8. Mase. These eight are the Alapagas. As the Vasa is, so it should
be said. Hemant (a) When the Hemant begins in the first moment on the southern
side of the Mandara mountain on Jambudvipa, it also begins in the first moment
on the northern side. When the Hemant begins in the first moment on the northern
side, it begins in the first moment on the eastern and western sides of the
Mandara mountain on Jambudvipa, in the subsequent time period. (b) When the
Hemant begins in the first moment on the eastern side of the Mandara mountain on
Jambudvipa, it also begins in the first moment on the western side. When the
Hemant begins in the first moment on the western side, it begins in the first
moment on the north and south sides of the Mandara mountain on Jambudvipa, in
the subsequent time period. 1. In the above Sutra, 'Padhame Samaye' is mentioned
eight times. In those places, the following Alapagas should be said, and for
each Alapaga, two Sutras should be said similar to the above - 1. Padhama
Avaliya, 2. Padamo Anapanu, 3. Padame Theve, 4. Padame Lave, 5. Padhame Muhurte,
6. Padhame Ahoratte, 7. Padhame Pakkha, 8. Padhame Mase.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra terasa-muhuttANaMtare divase - sAirega-sattarasa-
muhuttA raaii| jahaNNae duvAlasa-muhutte divase bhavai - ukkosiyA aTThArasa-
muhuttA rAI bhavai evaM bhANiyavvaM  / ' vAsAuu (ka ) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve
dIve maMdarassa pavvassa dAhiNaDDhe vAsANaM paDhame samae paDivajai, tayA NaM
uttaraDDhe'vi vAsANaM paDhame samae pddivji| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe vAsANaM paDhame
samae paDivajjai, tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvassa purasthima-
paccatthime NaM aNaMtara-purakkhaDa-kAla-samayaMsi vAsANaM paDhame samae
pddivji| (kha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvassa puratthime NaM
vAsANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai, tayA NaM paccatthime 'vi vAsANaM paDhame samae
pddivji| jayA NaM paccatthime NaM vAsANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai, tayA NaM
jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvassa uttara-dAhiNe NaM aNaMtarapacchAkaya-kAla-
samayaMsi vAsANaM paDhame samae paDivanne bhvi| . jahA samao tahA 1. AvaliyA, 2.
ANApANU, 3. theve, 4. lave, 5. muhutte, 6. ahoratte, 7. pakkhe, 8. mAse, ee
aTTha AlAvagA, jahA vAsANaM tahA bhaanniyvvaa| hemata u u (ka ) tA jayA NaM
jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvassa dAhiNaDDhe hemaMtANaM paDhame samae
paDivajai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi hemaMtANaM paDhame samae pddivji| jayA NaM
uttaraDDhe hemaMtANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai, tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
maMdarassa pavvayassa puratthima-paccatthime NaM aNaMtara-purakkhaDa-kAla-
samayaMsi hemaMtANaM paDhame samae pddivji|| (kha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
maMdarassa pavvayassa purathime NaM hemaMtANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai, tayA
NaM paccatthime 'vi hemaMtANaM paDhame samae pddivji| jayA NaM paccatthime NaM
hemaMtANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai, tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa
pavvassa 1. Upara sUtra meM 'paDhame samae' ATha sthAnoM para hai una sthAnoM
meM nIce likhe AlApaka kaheM, aura pratyeka AlApaka ke do do sUtra Upara ke
samAna kaheM - 1. paDhamA AvaliyA, 2. paDhamo ANApANU, 3. paDha me thove, 4.
paDha me lave, 5. paDhame muhutte, 6. paDhame ahoratte, 7. paDhame pakkhe, 8.
paDhame maase|

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Aṣṭama Prābhṛta ] 65 Uttara R-Dāhiṇe ṇam Aṇantara-Pacchākṛd-Kāla-Samayansī
Hemaṇṭāṇam Paḍhame Samaye' Paḍivvajjaī. Jahā Samao Tahā 1. Āvaliyā, 2. Āṇāpāṇū,
3. Thove, 4. Lave, 5. Muhutte, 6. Ahoratte, 7. Pakkhe, 8. Māse, Ee Aṭṭha
Ālāvagā, Jahā Hemaṇṭāṇam Tahā Bhāṇiyavvā. Gimha Uu (k) Tā Jayā ṇam Jambudīve
Dīve Mandarasssa Pavvayassa Dāhiṇadḍhe Gimhāṇam Paḍhame Samaye Paḍivvajjaī, Tayā
ṇam Uttaraḍḍhe'avi Gimhāṇam Paḍhame Samaye Paḍivvajjaī. Jayā ṇam Uttaraḍḍhe
Gimhāṇam Paḍhame Samaye Paḍivvajjaī, Tayā ṇam Jambudīve Dīve Mandarasssa
Pavvayassa Puratthima-Pacchthime ṇam Aṇantara Purakkhad - Kāla - Samayansī
Gimhāṇam Paḍhame Samaye Paḍivvajjaī. (kh) Tā Jayā ṇam Jambudīve Dīve Mandarasssa
Pavvayassa Puratthime ṇam Gimhāṇam Paḍhame Samaye Paḍivvajjaī, Tayā ṇam
Pacchthime'avi Gimhāṇam Paḍhame Samaye Paḍivvajjaī. Jayā ṇam Pacchthime ṇam
Gimhāṇam Paḍhame Samaye Paḍivvajjaī, Tayā ṇam Jambudīve Dīve Mandarasssa
Pavvayassa Uttara-Dāhiṇe ṇam Aṇantara-Pacchākṛd-Kāla-Samayansī Gimhāṇam Paḍhame
Samaye Paḍivvajjaī. Jahā Samao Tahā 1. Āvaliyā, 2. Āṇāpāṇū, 3. Thove, 4. Lave,
5. Muhutte, 6. Ahoratte, 7. Pakkhe, 8. Māse, Ee Aṭṭha Ālāvagā, Jahā Gimhāṇam
Tahā Bhāṇiyavvā. Ayaṇāī (k) Tā Jayā ṇam Jambudīve Dīve Mandarasssa Pavvayassa
Dāhiṇadḍhe Paḍhame Ayaṇe Paḍivvajjaī, Tayā ṇam Uttaraḍḍhe'avi Paḍhame Ayaṇe
Paḍivvajjaī. Jayā ṇam Uttaraḍḍhe Paḍhame Ayaṇe Paḍivvajjaī, Tayā ṇam
Dāhiṇadḍhe'avi Paḍhame Ayaṇe Paḍivvajjaī. Jayā ṇam Uttaraḍḍhe Paḍhame Ayaṇe
Paḍivvajjaī, Tayā ṇam Jambudīve Dīve Mandarasssa Pavvayassa Puratthima-
Pacchthime ṇam Aṇantara Purakkhad - Kāla-Samayansī Paḍhame Ayaṇe Paḍivvajjaī.
(kh) Tā Jayā ṇam Jambudīve Dīve Mandarasssa Pavvayassa Puratthime ṇam Paḍhame
Ayaṇe Paḍivvajjaī, Tayā ṇam Pacchthime'avi Paḍhame Ayaṇe Paḍivvajjaī. Jayā ṇam
Pacchthime ṇam Paḍhame Ayaṇe Paḍivvajjaī, Tayā ṇam Jambudīve Dīve Mandarasssa
Pavvayassa Uttara-Dāhiṇe ṇam Aṇantara-Pacchākṛd-Kāla-Samayansī Paḍhame Ayaṇe
Paḍivvajjaī. 1,2. Upara Sūtra Me 'Paḍhame Samaye' Aṭṭha Sthāno Par Hai Un Sthāno
Me Nīce Likhe Ālāpak Kahen, Aur Praṭyek Ālāpak Ke Do Do Sūtra Upara Ke Samān
Kahen - 1. Paḍhamā Āvaliyā, 2. Paḍamo Āṇāpāṇū, 3. Paḍhamre Thove, 4. Paḍhame
Lave, 5. Paḍhame Muhutte, 6. Paḍhame Ahoratte, 7. Paḍhame Pakkhe, 8. Paḍhame
Māse. 3. Jahā Jahā Paḍhame Ayaṇe Hai, Vahā Vahā Dīcce Ayaṇe Kahen.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama prAbhRta ] 65 uttara ra-dAhiNe NaM aNaMtara- pacchAkaDa-kAla- samayaMsi
hemaMtANaM paDhame samae' paDivajjai  /  jahA samao tahA 1. AvaliyA, 2. ANApANU,
3. thove, 4. lave, 5. muhutte, 6. ahoratte, 7. pakkhe, 8. mAse, ee aTTha
AlAvagA, jahA hemaMtANaM tahA bhANiyavvA  /  gimha uu (ka) tA jayA NaM
jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa dAhiNaDDhe gimhANaM paDhame samae
paDivajjai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi gimhANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai  /  jayA
NaM uttaraDDhe gimhANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai, tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
maMdarassa pavvayassa puratthima-paccatthime NaM anaMtara purakkhaDa - kAla -
samayaMsi gimhANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai  /  (kha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve
dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa puratthime NaM gimhANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai,
tayA NaM paccatthime'vi gimhANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai  /  jayA NaM
paccatthime NaM gimhANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai, tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
maMdarassa pavvayassa uttara-dAMhiNe NaM aNaMtarapacchAkaya-kAla- samayaMsi
gimhANaM paDhame samae paDivajjai  /  jahA samao tahA 1. AvaliyA, 2. ANApANU, 3.
thove, 4. lave, 5. muhutte, 6. ahoratte, 7. pakkhe, 8. mAse, ee aTTha AlAvagA,
jahA gimhANaM tahA bhANiyavvA  /  ayaNAi (ka) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve
maMdarassa pavvayassa dAhiNaDDhe paDhame ayaNe paDivajjai, tayA NaM
uttaraDDhe'vi paDhame ayaNe paDivajjai  /  jayA NaM uttaraDDhe paDhame ayaNe
paDivajjai, tayA NaM dAhiNaDDhe'vi paDhame ayaNe paDivajjai  /  jayA NaM
uttaraDDhe paDhame ayaNe paDivajjai, tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa
pavvayassa puratthimapaccatthime NaM anaMtara purakkhaDa - kAla-samayaMsi
paDhame ayaNe paDivajjai  /  (kha) tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa
pavvayassa puratthime NaM paDhame ayaNe paDivajjai, tayA NaM paccatthime'vi
paDhame ayaNe paDivajjai  /  jayA NaM paccatthime NaM paDhame ayaNe paDivajjai,
tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa uttaradAhiNe NaM aNaMtara-
pacchAkaDa-kAla- samayaMsi paDhame ayaNe paDivajjai  /  1,2.Upara sUtra meM
'paDhame samae' ATha sthAnoM para hai una sthAnoM meM nIce likhe AlApaka kaheM,
aura pratyeka AlApaka ke do do sUtra Upara ke samAna kaheM - 1. paDhamA AvaliyA,
2. paDhamo ANApANU, 3. paDhamre thove, 4. paDhame lave, 5. paDhame muhutte, 6.
paDhame ahoratte, 7. paDhame pakkhe, 8. paDhame mAse  /  3. jahA~ jahA~ paDhame
ayaNe hai, vahA~ vahA~ dIcce ayaNe kaheM  /

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[66] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] Just as the first ayana is described, so is the
second ayana. Just as the ayana, so is the year, the yuga, the vasas, the
vasasahasra, the vasasayasahasra, the puvva, the puvve, until the seas are
filled with the sisaphelia. Ussappini Now, when the ussappini rises in the south
of Mount Mandara on Jambudvipa, then the ussappini also rises in the north. When
the ussappini rises in the north, then there is no ussappini, no osappini in the
east-west of Jambudvipa on Mount Mandara. At that time, the Samanauaso are
established. Thus, the osappini. The salt sea Now, when the day is in the south
of the salt sea, then the day is also in the north of the salt sea. When the day
is in the north of the salt sea, then there is rain in the east-west of the salt
sea. The rest is the same as in Jambudvipa, until the osappini. Dhayi Khand Now,
in the Dhayi Khand, the sun - 1. (a) Where there is 'ussappini', there is
'osappini'. 2. 'Just as the rotation of Jambudvipa is described, so is the salt
sea described in the same way.' Navaran - With this understanding, all the
ayanas should be described. P. (a) In the salt sea, O Master! The sun - Does it
rise in the north-west and set in the south-west? (b) Does it rise in the south-
west and set in the north-west? (c) Does it rise in the south-west and set in
the north-west? (d) Does it rise in the north-west and set in the north-west? U.
(a-d) Yes, O Master! In the salt sea, the sun - It rises in the north-west and
sets in the south-west, until it rises in the north-west and sets in the north-
west. With this understanding, it should be understood - until P. (a) When, O
Master! the first ussappini rises in the south of the salt sea, then does the
first ussappini also rise in the north? (b) When the first ussappini rises in
the north, then there is no osappini, no ussappini in the east-west of the salt
sea? Are the Samanauaso established at that time? U. Yes, O Master! That should
be said until the Samanauaso! - Bhag. S. 5, U. 1, Su. 22

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra jahA paDhamassa ayaNassa AlAvago tahA doccassa
ayaNassa bhaanniyvyo| jahA ayaNe tahA saMvacchare, juge, vAsasae, vAsasahasse,
vAsa-sayasahasse, puvvage, puvve, jAva sIsapaheliyA paliovame sAgarovame y|
ussappiNI tA jayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa dAhiNaDDhe ussappiNI
paDivajai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi ussappiNI pddivji| jayA NaM uttaraDDhe
ussappiNI paDivajjai, tayA NaM jaMbuddIve dIve maMdarassa pavvayassa
purathimapaccatthime NaM Nevatthi ussappiNI Nevatthi osappiNI avaTThie NaM
tattha kAle paNNatte smnnaauso| evaM osppinnii| lavaNasamuddo _tA jayA NaM
lavaNesamudde dAhiNaDDhe divase bhavai, tayA NaM lavaNesamudde uttaraDDhe'vi
divase bhavai  /  jayA NaM lavaNesamudde uttaraDDhe divase bhvi| tayA NaM
lavaNesamudde purathima-paccatthime NaM rAI bhvi| sesaM jahA jaMbuddIve dIve
taheva jAva osppinnii| dhAyaikhaMDo tA dhAyaikhaMDe NaM dIve sUriyA - 1. (ka)
Upara jahA~ jahA~ 'ussappiNI' hai vahA~ vahA~ 'osappiNI' kheN| 2. 'jacceva
jaMbUddIvassa vattavvatA bhaNitA, sacceva savvA aparisesitA lavaNasamudassa vi
bhaannitssyaa|' navaraM - imeNaM abhilAveNaM savye AlAvagA bhaannitvvaa| pa.
(ka) lavaNe NaM bhaMte ! samudde sUriyA - udINa-pAdINamuggaccha pAdINa-
dAhiNamAgacchaMti ? (kha) pAdINa-dAhiNamuggaccha dAhiNa-pAdINamAgacchaMti ? (ga)
dAhiNa-pAdINamuggaccha pAdINa-udINamAgacchaMti ? (gha) pAdINa-udINamuggaccha-
udINa-pAdINamAgacchaMti ? u. (ka-gha) haMtA goyamA! lavaNe NaM samudde sUriyA -
udINa-pAdINamuggaccha pAdINa-dAhiNamAgacchaMti, jAva pAdINa-udINamuggaccha
udiinn-paadiinnmaagcchNti| eteNaM abhilAveNaM NetavyaM - jAva pa. (ka) jadA NaM
bhaMte ! lavaNasamudde dAhiNaDDhe paDhamA ussappiNI paDivajati tadA NaM
uttaraDDhe vi paDhamA ussappiNI paDivajjati ? (kha) jadA NaM uttaraDDhe paDhamA
ussappiNI paDivajjati, tadA NaM lavaNasamudde purathimapaccatthime NaM nevatthi
osappiNI, nevatthi ussappiNI ? avaTThite NaM kAle paNNatte ? u. haMtA goyamA!
taM ceva uccAreyavvaM jAva samaNAuso! - bhaga. sa. 5, u. 1, su. 22

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Aṣṭama Prābhṛta] They rise in the east, move towards the south, until they set
in the west, and rise in the east again. On the day when the sun rises in the
south on the Mandara mountain in the Dhāyisaṇḍa island, it sets in the north on
the same day. On the day when the sun rises in the north, it sets in the east-
west direction on the Mandara mountain in the Dhāyisaṇḍa island. The same is
true for all the islands, from Jambudvīpa to Osappinī. The same is true for the
oceans, like the salt ocean. In the Abbhantar-Pukkharaḍḍha island, the sun rises
in the east, moves towards the south, until it sets in the west, and rises in
the east again. On the day when the sun rises in the south on the Mandara
mountain in the Abbhantar-Pukkharaḍḍha island, it sets in the north on the same
day. On the day when the sun rises in the north, it sets in the east-west
direction on the Mandara mountain in the Abbhantar-Pukkharaḍḍha island. The same
is true for all the islands, from Jambudvīpa to Osappinī.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama prAbhRta ] udINa-pAINamuggacchaMti, pAINa-dAhiNamAgacchaMti, jAva
paDINa-udINamuggacchaMti, udINa-pAINamAgacchaMti, tA jayA NaM dhAyaisaMDe dIve
maMdAraNaM pavvayANaM dAhiNaDDhe divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi divase
bhavai, jayA NaM uttaraDDhe divase bhavai, tayA NaM dhAyaisaMDe dIve maMdarANaM
pavvayANaM purathima-paccatthimeM NaM rAI bhavati, sesaM jahA jaMbuddIve dIve
taheva jAva osappiNI, kAloe NaM samudde jahA lavaNe smudde|
abbhaMtarapukkharaddho tA abbhaMtara-pukkharaddhe NaM dIve sUriyA - udINa-
pAINamuggacchaMti, pAINa-dAhiNamAgacchaMti, jAva paDINa-udINamuggacchaMti,
udINa-pAImAgacchaMti, tA jayA NaM abbhaMtara-pukkharaddhe maMdarANaM pavvayANaM
dAhiNaDDhe divase bhavai, tayA NaM uttaraDDhe'vi divase bhavai, jayA NaM
uttareDDhe divase bhavai, tayA NaM abbhiMtarapukkharaddhe maMdarANaM pavvayANaM
purathimapaccatthime NaM rAI bhavai, sesaM jahA jaMbuddIve dIve taheva jAva
osppinnii|

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter: The Elimination of the Doubt Regarding the Sun's Rays - 30.
**Q:** How does the sun eliminate the doubt?  **A:** There are three views on
this matter:  1. Some say that the beings who are touched by the sun's rays
become heated, and these heated beings then heat the external beings. 2. Others
say that the beings who are touched by the sun's rays do not become heated, and
these unheated beings then heat the external beings. 3. Still others say that
the beings who are touched by the sun's rays become heated in a certain way, but
not in another way. Those who are heated in a certain way then heat the external
beings in that way, and those who are not heated in that way do not heat the
external beings in that way.  However, we say that the rays of the sun and moon,
which are emitted from the bodies of the gods, are scattered and spread out.
From the space between these rays, other rays emerge. These emerging rays, which
are scattered and spread out, then heat the external beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama prAbhRta porisicchAya-nivvattaNaM 30. pa. tA kaikaTTha te sUrie
porisicchAyaM Nivvetti ? Ahie tti vaejjA, u. tattha khalu imAo tiNNi paDivattIo
paNNattAo, taM jahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. tAje NaM poggalA sUriyassa lesaM
phusaMti, te NaM poggalA saMtappaMti, te NaM poggalA saMtappamANA tadaNaMtarAiM
bAhirAI poggalAI saMtAveMtIti, esa NaM se samie tAvakkhette ege evamAhaMsu, eo
puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA je NaM poggalA sUriyassa lesaM phusaMti, te NaM poggalA
no saMtappaMti, te NaM poggalA . asaMtappamANA tadaNaMtarAI bAhirAI poggalAI
saMtAveMtIti, - esa NaM se samie tAvakkhette ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu
- 3. tA je NaM poggalA sUriyassa lesaM phusaMti, te NaM poggalA atthegaiyA
saMtappaMti, atthegaiyA no saMtappaMti, tattha atthegaiyA saMtappamANA
tadaNaMtarAI bAhirAI poggalAI atthegayAiM saMtAveMti, atthegayAiM no
saMtAvetIti, esa NaM se samie tAvakkhette ege evamAhaMsu, vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo
- tAjAo imAo caMdima-sUriyANaM devANaM vimANehiMto lesAo bahittA ucchUDhA
abhiNisaTThAo patAveMti, eyAsi NaM lesANaM aMtaresu aNNayarIo chiNNalesAo
saMmucchaMti, tae NaM tAo chiNNalessAo saMmucchiyAo samANIo tadaNaMtarAiM
bAhirAI poggalAI saMtAveMtIti, esa NaM se samie taavkkhette|

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter  **Porisi-chchhaya-nivattana**  **31.**  **Q.** How does the
sun's porisi-chchhaya disappear?  **A.** There are twenty-nine different views
on this matter.  **Some say:**  1. The sun's porisi-chchhaya disappears in a
moment.  **Others say:**  2. The sun's porisi-chchhaya disappears in a muhurta.
These views are all to be rejected because they are contradictory.  **Some
say:**  25. The sun's porisi-chchhaya disappears in a ussappini-osappini.
**Others say:**  **We say:**  The sun's porisi-chchhaya disappears when:  1. The
height and the shadow are equal. 2. The height and the shadow are equal. 3. The
shadow and the height are equal.  **A.** There are two views on this matter.
**Some say:**  (a) 1. There are days when the sun's porisi-chchhaya disappears
four times. (b) There are days when the sun's porisi-chchhaya disappears twice.
**Others say:**  (a) 2. There are days when the sun's porisi-chchhaya disappears
twice.  1. Surya. Pa. 6. Su. 27 2. According to the compilation style of Surya
Prajnapti, there should be a question here. However, this question is not found
in any manuscript. Therefore, it is assumed that the question is missing. The
commentators of Surya Prajnapti are silent on this matter. Therefore, the space
for the question is left blank. If the question is found in any manuscript,
please inform the scholars so that it can be added in the next edition.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama prAbhRta ] porisicchAya-nivattaNaM 31. tA kaikaTThe te sUrie
porisicchAyaM Nivvatteti ? Ahie tti vajA  /  pa. u. tattha khalu imAo paNavIsaM
paDivattIo paNNattAo taMjahA tatthege evamAhaMsu 1. tA aNu samayameva sUrie
porisicchAyaM Nivvattei, Ahie tti vaejA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu -
2. tA aNumuhuttameva sUrie porisicchAyaM Nivvattei, Ahie tti vaejA, jAo ceva
oyasaMThiIe paDivattIo eeNaM abhilAveNaM NeyavvAo, jAva' [ 3-24] ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 25. tA aNuussappiNi-osappiNimeva sUrie porisicchAyaM Nivvatter3a
Ahie tti vaejjA, ege evamAhaMsu, - vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo tA sUriyasa - - [ 69
1. uccattaM ca lesaM ca paDucca chAyuddese, 2. uccataM ca chAyaM ca paDucca
lesuddese, 3. lessaM ca chAyaM ca paDucca uccattodde 2 pa. u. tattha khalu imAo
duve paDivattIo paNNattAo, taMjahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - (ka) 1. tA atthi NaM
se divase jaMsi NaM divasaMsi sUrie cauporisicachAyaM nivvattei, (kha) atthi NaM
se divase jaMsi NaM divasaMsi sUrie du-porisicchAyaM nivvattei, ege evamAhaMsu,
ege puNa evamAhaMsu - (ka) 2. tA atthi NaM divase jaMsi NaM divasaMsi sUrie du-
porisicchAyaM nivvattei, 1. sUrie. pA. 6. su. 27 2. sUryaprajJapti kI saMkalana
zailI ke anusAra yahA~ praznasUtra honA cAhiye thA, kintu yahA~ praznasUtra A.
sa. Adi kisI prati meM nahIM hai, ata: yahA~ kA praznasUtra vichinna ho gayA
hai, aisA mAna lenA hI ucita hai| sUrya prajJapti ke TIkAkAra bhI yahA~
praznasUtra ke hone na hone ke saMbaMdha sarvathA mauna haiM, ataH yahA~
praznasUtra kA sthAna rikta rakhA hai| yadi kahIM kisI prati meM praznasUtra ho
to svAdhyAyazIla AgamajJa sUcita karane kI kRpA kareM, jisase agale saMskaraNa
meM parivardhana kiyA jA ske|

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
70 ] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra (b) Is there any increase in the size of the sun on
the days of the Jains, on the days of the Jains? Some say - (a) 1. There is an
increase in the size of the sun on the days of the Jains, on the days of the
Jains. (b) There is an increase in the size of the sun on the days of the Jains,
on the days of the Jains. They say, (a) When the sun travels in the inner
circle, it is 18 muhurtas long on the day of the Jain, and 12 muhurtas long on
the night of the Jain. On that day, the sun increases in size by four
porisichchhaya, as follows: - at the time of sunrise and at the time of sunset,
the size increases, but does not decrease.   (b) When the sun travels in the
outer circle, it is 18 muhurtas long on the day of the Jain, and 12 muhurtas
long on the night of the Jain. On that day, the sun increases in size by two
porisichchhaya, as follows: - at the time of sunrise and at the time of sunset,
the size increases, but does not decrease. Some say - 2. There is an increase in
the size of the sun on the days of the Jains, on the days of the Jains. There is
no increase in the size of the sun on the days of the Jains, on the days of the
Jains. They say, [a] When the sun travels in the inner circle, it is 18 muhurtas
long on the day of the Jain, and 12 muhurtas long on the night of the Jain. On
that day, the sun increases in size by two porisichchhaya, as follows: - at the
time of sunrise and at the time of sunset, the size increases, but does not
decrease. [b] When the sun travels in the outer circle, it is 18 muhurtas long
on the day of the Jain, and 12 muhurtas long on the night of the Jain. On that
day, the sun does not increase in size, as follows: - at the time of sunrise and
at the time of sunset,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 70 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra (kha) asthi NaM se divase jaMsi NaM divasaMsi sUrie
no kiMci porisicchAyaM nivvattei, tattha je te evamAhaMsu - (ka ) 1. mA asthi
NaM se divase jaMsi NaM divasaMsi sUrie cau-porisicchAyaM nivvattei, (kha) asthi
NaM se divase jaMsi NaM divasaMsi sUrie du-porisicchAyaM nivvattei, te
evamAhaMsu, (ka) tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM
carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapatte ukkosie aTThArasamuhutte divase bhavai,
jahaNiyA duvAlasa-muhuttA rAI bhvi| taMsi ca NaM divasaMsi sUrie cau-
porisicchAyaM nivvattei, taM jahA - uggamaNa-muhuttaMsi ya, atthamaNa-muhuttaMsi
ya, lesaM abhivaDDhemANe no ceva NaM nivvuddddhemaanne| (kha) tA jayA NaM sUrie
savvabAhiraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA
ukkosiyA aTThArasamuhuttA rAI bhavai, jahaNNie duvAlasa-muhutte divase bhvi|
taMsi ca NaM divasaMsi sUrie du-porisicchAyaM nivvattei,taM jahA - uggamaNa-
muhuttaMsi ya, asthamaNamuhuttaMsi ya, lesaM abhivaDDhemANe no ceva NaM
nivvuddddhemaanne| tattha NaM je te evamAhaMsu - 2. tA asthi NaM se divase jaMsi
NaM divasaMsi sUrie du-porisicchAyaM nivvattei, atthi NaM se divase jaMsi NaM
divasaMsi sUrie no kiMci porisicchAyaM nivvattei, te evamAhaMsu, [ka] tA jayA
NaM sUrie savvabbhaMtaraM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM
uttamakaTThapatte ukkosie aTThArasa-muhutte divase bhavai, jahaNiyA duvAlasa-
muhuttA rAI bhavai, taMsi ca NaM divasaMsi sUrie du-porisicchAyaM nivvattei, taM
jahA - uggamaNa-muhuttaMsi ya, atthamaNamuhuttaMsi ya, lesaM abhivaDDhemANe, no
ceva NaM nivvuDDhemANe, [kha] tA jayA NaM sUrie savvabAhiraM maMDalaM
uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tayA NaM uttamakaTThapattA ukkosiyA aTThArasa-muhuttA
rAI bhavai, jahaNNie duvAlasa-muhutte divase bhavai, taMsi ca NaM divasaMsi
sUrie no kiMci porisicchAyaM nivvattei, taM jahA - uggamaNa-muhuttaMsi ya,
asthamaNa-muhuttaMsi ya,

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Navama Prabhrita] [ 71 Nor is it said that it is increasing or decreasing. 'P.
Ta Kaikatte Te Suriye Porisichhayam Nivvattei?' Ahie Tti Vaeeja. U. Tattha Imaao
Chhannauvi Padivattio Pannaattao, Tam Jaha - Tatthege Evmahamsu - 1. Ta Asthi
Nan Se Dese Jansi Nan Desansi Suriye Egaporisiyam Chhayam Nivvattei, Ege
Evmahamsu, Ege Pun Evmahamsu - 2. Ta Asthi Nan Se Dese Jansi Nan Desansi Suriye
Du-porisiyam Chhayam Nivvattei, Ege Evmahamsu, Evam Aeenam Abhilaavena Neyavvam,
Jaav (3-95) Ege Pun Evmahamsu - 96 - Ta Asthi Nan Se Dese Jansi Nan Desansi
Suriye Chhannauvi Porisiyam Chhayam Nivvattei, Ege Evmahamsu, Tattha Je Te
Evmahamsu - 1. Ta Atthi Nan Se Dese Jansi Nan Desansi Suriye Eg-porisiyam
Chhayam Nivvattei 'Tti' Te Evmahamsu, Ta Suriyass Nan Savvahetthimao Sur-
ppadhiho Bahitta Abhinisattaahi Leasaahi Tadijmaanihi Imisse Rayanppabhaae
Pudhaviye Bahusamaramanijao Bhumi Bhagao Jaavaiyam Suriye Uddham Uccatteena,
Evaiyaae Egaae Addaae, Egena Chhayanumaanappamaanaena Umaae, Tattha Se Suriye
Egaporisiyam Chhayam Nivvattei Tti, Tattha Je Ve Evmahamsu - 2. Ta Atthi Nan Se
Dese Jansi Nan Desansi Suriye Du-chorisiipam Chhayam Nivvattei 'Tti' Te
Evmahamsu, Ta Suriyass Nan Savvahetthimao Sur-ppadhiho Bahitta Abhinisattaahi
Leasaahi Tadijmaanihi Imisse Rayanppabhaae Pudhaviye Bahusamaramanijao Bhumi
Bhagao Jaavaiyam Suriye Uddhe Uccatteena, Evaiyaai Dohi Addaahi, Dohi
Chhayanumaanappamaanohi Umaae, Ettha Nan Se Suriye Daporisiyam Chhayam Nivvattei
Tti,  _ 3.95 - Evam Aeenam Abhilaavena Neyavvam, Jaav .... 1. After this, there
is no sentence here indicating 'Vayam Pun Evam Vayaamo' and there is no
statement of one's own opinion. Therefore, having heard the two interpretations
of the other sects, Bhagavan Gautama asks his own opinion, 'Ta Katthai
Kamitiyaadi' - Surya. Tika. The commentator's statement is not in accordance
with the compilation style of the Surya Prajnapti - because the statement of
one's own opinion is always presented after the statement of the interpretations
with the sentence 'Vayam Pan Evam Vayaamo'. 2. Tatra-teshan Shannavate: Among
the other sects, some say, 'Ta' as before, there is that country, in which
country the sun, having arrived, casts a shadow of one purusha-measure (purusha-
grahana is a euphemism for all visible objects, their own measure). - Surya.
Tika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama prAbhRta ] [ 71 no ceva NaM lesaM abhivaDDhemANe vA, nivvuDDhemANe vaa|'
pa. tA kaikaTThe te sUrie porisicchAyaM nivvattei ? Ahie tti vejaa| u. tattha
imAo chaNNaui paDivattIo paNNattAo, taM jahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. tA asthi
NaM se dese jaMsi NaM desaMsi sUrie egaporisiyaM chAyaM nivvattei, ege
evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA asthi NaM se dese jaMsi NaM desaMsi
sUrie du-porisiyaM chAyaM nivvattei, ege evamAhaMsu, evaM eeNaM abhilAveNaM
NeyavvaM, jAva (3-95) ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 96 - tA asthi NaM se dese jaMsi NaM
desaMsi sUrie chaNNaui porisiyaM chAyaM nivvattei, ege evamAhaMsu, tattha je te
evamAhaMsu - 1. tA atthi NaM se dese jaMsi NaM desaMsi sUrie ega-porisiyaM
chAyaM nivvattei 'tti' te evamAhaMsu, tA sUriyassa NaM savvaheTThimAo sUra-
ppaDihIo bahittA abhiNisaTTAhiM lesAhiM tADijamANIhiM imIse rayaNappabhAe
puDhavIe bahusamaramaNijAo bhUmibhAgAo jAvaiyaM sUrie uDDhaM uccatteNaM, evaiyAe
egAe addhAe, egeNaM chAyANumANappamANeNaM umAe, tattha se sUrie egaporisIyaM
chAyaM nivvattei tti, tattha je ve evamAhaMsu - 2. tA atthi NaM se dese jaMsi
NaM desaMsi sUrie du-corisipaM chAyaM nivvattei 'tti' te evamAhaMsu, tA
sUriyassa NaM savvaheTThimAo sUra-ppaDihIo bahittA abhiNisaTTAhiM lesAhiM
tADijamANIhiM imIse rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe bahusamaramaNijAo bhUmibhAgAo
jAvaiyaM sUrie uDDhe uccatteNaM, evaiyAI dohiM addhAhiM, dohiM
chAyANumANappamANohiM umAe, ettha NaM se sUrie duporisIyaM chAyaM nivvattei tti,
_ 3.95 - evaM eeNaM abhilAveNaM Neyavva, jAva .... 1. isake anantara yahA~
svamata sUcaka 'vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo' yaha vAkya nahIM hai aura na svamata kA
kathana hI hai| tadevaM paratIrthika-pratipattidvayaM zrutvA bhagavAn gautamaH,
svamataM pRcchati, tA kaTThai kamityAdi - sUrya. TIkA TIkAkAra kA yaha kathana
sUryaprajJapti kI saMkalanazailI ke anurUpa nahIM hai - kyoMki pratipattiyoM ke
kathana ke anantara 'vayaM paNa evaM vayAmo' isa vAkya se hI sarvatra svamata kA
pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai| 2. tatra-teSAM SaNNavate : paratIrthikAnAM madhye,
eke evamAhuH, 'tA' iti pUrvavat asti sa dezo, yasmin deze sUryaH Agata:san
ekapaurupI-ekapurupapramANAM (purupagrahaNamupalakSaNaM sarvasyApi
prakAzyavastunaH sva-pramANAM) chAyAM nirvrtyti| - sUrya. TIkA.

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
72 1 There, those who said - 96. 'There are indeed countries, in those
countries, the sun sets after 60 *porisi* of shadow' - they said so, Then, the
sun, all the *hittimao* (rays) of the sun, having gone beyond the *surya-padhi*
(horizon), with the *abhinisadvahi* (rays) of the sun, with the *lesa* (rays) of
the sun, with the *tadijjamani* (rays) of the sun, with the *imise* (rays) of
the sun, with the *rayan-prabha* (rays) of the sun, on the earth, many
*samarmanijjao* (places) of the earth, as long as the sun rises high, in this
way, with the measure of 60 *porisi* of shadow, with the measure of *uma*
(time), here, the sun sets after 60 *porisi* of shadow, We, however, say this -
The sun sets after 60 *porisi* of shadow in the *sairag-aunattthi-porisi*. The
measure of *porisi-chhaya* (shadow of a *porisi*) Q. Then, is the shadow of a
*porisi* on a day, gone or remaining? A. It is gone or remaining in one part. Q.
Then, is the shadow of an *aunattthi-porisi* on a day, gone or remaining? A. It
is gone or remaining in 22,000 parts. Q. Then, is the shadow of a *porisi* on a
day, gone or remaining? A. It is gone or remaining in four parts. Q. Then, is
the shadow of a *divad-porisi* on a day, gone or remaining? A. It is gone or
remaining in five parts. Q. Then, is the shadow of a *bi-porisi* on a day, gone
or remaining? A. It is gone or remaining in six parts. Q. Then, is the shadow of
an *addhaijja-porisi* on a day, gone or remaining? A. It is gone or remaining in
seven parts. Q. A. Q. A. - Q. A. Q. A. [ Surya-prajnapti Sutra Q. A. 1.
Definition of *Paurushi* - 'A *purisa* (man), a *sanku* (rod), a *purisa-sarira*
(human body), from that *purisa*, a *porisi* is born, in this way, when the
shadow of any object is equal to its own measure, then it is called, \ This
measure of *porisi* is for one day at the end of *uttarayana* (northern
solstice), at the beginning of *dakshinayana* (southern solstice), after that,
in *dakshinayana*, it increases by 1/61 part of an *angula* (finger), in
*uttarayana*, it decreases, in this way, there are other *porisi* in the
*mandala* (circle). ' This definition of *paurushi* is quoted from the
commentary of *Surya-prajnapti* by Nandi-Churni. The language of Churni is
Sanskrit-mixed Prakrit, therefore, the above mentioned Churni text is not
incorrect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72 1 tattha je te evamAhaMsu - 96. 'tA atthi NaM se dese jaMsi NaM desaMsi
sUrie chaNNauI porisIyaM chAyaM nivvattei tti' te evamAhaMsu, tA sUriyasa NaM
savvahiTTimAo sUrappaDihIo bahittA abhiNisadvAhiM lesAhiM tADijjamANIhiM imIse
rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe bahusamaramaNijjAo bhUmibhAgAo jAvaiyaM sUrie uDDhe
uccatteNaM, evaiyAI chaNNauIe chAyANumANappamANehiM umAe, ettha NaM sUrie
chaNNauI porisIyaM chAyaM nivvattei tti, vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo - tA sAirega-
auNaTThi- porisINaM sUrie porisicchAyaM nivvattei tti  /  porisicchAya- ppamANaM
pa. tA avaddha porisI NaM chAyA divasassa kiM gae vA sese vA ? tAti-bhAge gae vA
sese vA  /  u. tA auNasaTThiporisI NaM chAyA divasassa kiM gae vA sese vA ? tA
bAvIsasahassabhAge gae vA sese vA  /  tA porisI NaM chAyA divasassa kiM gae vA
sese vA ? tA caubbhAge gae vA sese vA  /  tA divaDa porisI NaM chAyA divasassa
kiM gae vA sese vA ? tA paMcabhAge gae vA sese vA  /  tA bi-porisI NaM chAyA
divasassa kiM gae vA sese vA ? tA chabbhAgagae vA sese vA  /  tA aDDAijja
-porisI NaM chAyA divasassa kiM gae vA sese vA ? tA sattabhAgagae vA sese vA  /
pa. u. pa. u. - pa. u. pa. u. [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra pa. u. 1. pauruSI kI
paribhASA - 'purisa tti, saMku, purisa sarIraM vA, tato purise nipphannA porisI,
evaM savvassaM vatthuNo yadA svapramANA chAyA bhavati, tadA havai, \ evaM porisI
pramANaM uttarAyaNassa aMte, dakkhiNAyaNassa AIe ikkaM diNaM bhavai, ato paraM
addha- egasaTThibhAgA aMgulassa dakkhiNAyaNe vaDDhati, uttarAyaNe hassaMti, evaM
maMDale annA porisI  /  ' yaha pauruSI kI paribhASAsUrya-prajJapti kI TIkA meM
nandi- cUrNi se uddhRta hai| cUrNi kI bhASA saMskRta-mizrita prakRta hotI hai,
ata: Upara aMkita cUrNi pATha azuddha nahIM hai  /

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter  [73]  And, leaving the half-pौरुषी, leaving the half-pौरुषी,
ask, leaving the day-part, leaving the day-part, the calculation, until... Q.
Then, the 67.5-pौरुषी, is the shadow gone or not? A. Then, it is gone or not in
1900 parts of the day. Q. Then, the 67.5-pौरुषी, is the shadow gone or not? A.
Then, it is gone or not in 22,000 parts of the day. Q. Then, the 67.5-pौरुषी, is
the shadow gone or not? A. Then, it is not gone or not in anything. There,
indeed, these 25 kinds of shadows are established, such as -  1. Pillar-shadow
2. Rope-shadow 3. Gate-shadow 4. Passage-shadow 5. Rising-shadow 6. Height-
shadow 7. Consequent-shadow 8. Antecedent-shadow 9. Beginning-shadow 10.
Following-shadow 11. Equal-shadow...  1. Thus, if, in this way, the
'half-pौरुषी' shadow, of the measure of half a man, is thrown, thrown, the
question, the question-thread, should be seen. - Surya. Commentary. 2. 'Day-
part', by increasing the day-part one by one, compared to the previous, previous
thread, the calculation, the answer-thread, should be known. - Surya.
Commentary. 3. Here, the question-answer marked here is corrected according to
the information of the brief reading given here. In the four copies of the
Surya-prajnapti, '1 A.S. | 2 Sha.S. | 3 A.Su. | 4 H.Gr.', how much are the
question-answers given there contrary to the information of the brief reading
given here? The reader should decide this himself. Q. 'Then, the 67.5-pौरुषी, is
the shadow gone or not? A. Then, it is gone or not in 1900 parts of the day. Q.
Then, the 67.5-pौरुषी, is the shadow gone or not? A. Then, it is gone or not in
22,000 parts of the day. Q. Then, the 67.5-pौरुषी, is the shadow gone or not? A.
Then, it is not gone or not in anything. (a) Here, it seems that there is a
reversal in these question-answers. First, there is the question-answer of the
67.5-pौरुषी shadow. The second question-answer is of the 67.5-pौरुषी shadow. The
third question-answer is of some more 67.5-pौरुषी shadow. (b) Here, the answer
is not in accordance with the questions. In the first question-answer - 'The
67.5-pौरुषी shadow is produced from 119 parts of the day' is assumed, but
according to the information of the brief reading text, it is produced from 120
days. In the second question-answer - the production of the 67.5-pौरुषी shadow
is from 22,000 parts of the day - is assumed, but this assumption is completely
irrelevant, because in the commentary of the information text of the brief
reading, there is only the indication of increasing one day-part by one. In the
third question-answer - the question itself is irrelevant, because in the
information text of the brief reading, if there is a question related to the
half-pौरुषी shadow, then the answer-thread said here is true.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama prAbhRta ] [ 73 evaM avaDDaporisiM choDhuM choDhuM pucchA, divasabhAgaM
choDhuM choDhuM vAgaraNaM jAva .... pa. tA auNasaTThi-porisI NaM chAyA divasassa
kiM gae vA, sese vA ? u. tA egUNavIsa-saya-bhAge gae vA, sese vaa| pa. tA
auNasaTThiporisI NaM chAyA divasassa kiM gae vA, sese vA? u. tA vAvIsahassabhAge
gae vA, sese vaa| pra. tA sAirega-auNasaTThi-porisI NaM chAyA divasassa kiM gae
vA, sese vA ? u. tA natthi kiMci gae vA, sese vaa| tattha khalu imA paNavIsavihA
chAyA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. khaMbha-chAyA 2. rajju-chAyA 3. pAgAra-chAyA 4.
pAsAya-chAyA 5. uggama-chAyA 6. uccattachAyA 7. aNuloma-chAyA 8. paDiloma-chAyA
9. AraMbhiyA-chAyA 10. uvahayA-chAyA 11. samA-chAyA 1. evamityayadi-evamuktena
prakAreNa 'arddhapauruSI' addhapuruSapramANAM chAyA kSiptvA, kSiptvA pRcchA
pRcchAsUtraM draSTavyaM  /  - sUrya. TIkA. 2. divasabhAga' ti, pUrva-
pUrvasUtrApekSayA ekaikamadhikaM divasabhAgaM kSiptvA kSipvA vyAkaraNaM,
uttarasUtraM jnyaatvym| - sUrya. TIkA. 3. yahAM aMkita praznottara yahAM dI gaI
saMkSipta vAcanA kI sUcanAnusAra saMzodhita hai| sUryaprajJapti kI '1 A. s.| 2
zA. s.| 3 a.su.| 4 ha.gra.' ina cAroM pratiyoM meM diye gaye praznottara yahAM
dI gaI saMkSipta vAcanA kI sUcanA se kitane viparIta haiM ? yaha nirNaya pAThaka
svayaM kreN| pa. 'tA addhaauNasaTThi porisI NaM chAyA divasassa kiM gae vA, sese
vA? u. tA egUNavIsasayabhAge gae vA, sese vaa| pa. tA auNasaTThi porisI NaM
chAyA divasassa kiM gae vA, sese vA? u. tA bAvIsa-sahassa bhAge gae vA, sese
vaa| pa. tA sAirega-auNasaTThi-porisI NaM chAyA divasassa kiM gae vA, sese vA?
u. tA natthi kiMci gae vA, sese vaa| (ka) yahAM ina praznottaroM meM vyatikrama
ho gayA pratIta hotA hai| sarvaprathama sADhe gunasaTha pauruSI chAyA kA
praznottara hai| dvitIya praznottara gunasaTha pauruSI chAyA kA hai| tRtIya
praznottara kucha adhika gunasaTha pauruSI chAyA kA hai| (kha) yahAM praznoM ke
anurUpa uttara bhI nahIM hai| prathama praznottara meM - 'sADhe gunasaTha
pauruSI chAyA, eka sau unnIsa divasa bhAga se niSpanna hotI hai' aisA mAnA hai
kintu saMkSiptavAcanA pATha ke sUcanAnusAra eka sau bIsa divasa se niSpanna hotI
hai| dvitIya praznottara meM - gunasaTha pauruSI chAyA kI niSpatti bAvIsa hajAra
divasa bhAga se hotI hai - aisA mAnA hai, kintu yaha mAnanA sarvathA asaMgata
hai, kyoMki saMkSipta vAcanA ke sUcanApATha kI TIkA meM eka eka divasa bhAga
bar3hAne kA hI sUcana hai| tRtIya praznottara meM - prazna hI asaMgata hai,
kyoMki saMkSipta vAcanA ke sUcanA pATha meM arddha pauruSI chAyA se saMbaMdhita
prazna ho to yahAM kahA gayA uttarasUtra yathArtha hai|

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 74 [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra 12. Padihaya-chhaya 13. Khil-chhaya 14. Pakkha-
chhaya 15. Puro-udaya-chhaya 16. Purim Kanthabhag-uvagaya-chhaya 17. Pacchim-
kanth-bhag-uvagaya-chhaya 18. Chhaya-nuvaini-chhaya 19. Kittha-nuvaini-chhaya
20. Chhaya-chhaya 21. Vikkappa-chhaya 22. Vehas-chhaya 23. Kad-chhaya 24. Gol-
chhaya 25. Pitt-hodagga-chhaya. There are eight types of Gol-chhaya, as follows:
1. Gol-chhaya 2. Avaddha-gol-chhaya 3. Gadha-gol-chhaya 4. Avaddha-gadha-gol-
chhaya 5. Golvali-chhaya 6. Avaddha-golavali-chhaya 7. Gol-punj-chhaya 8.
Avaddha-gol-punj-chhaya. 1. This Sutra mentions twenty-five types of chhaya and
eight types of Gol-chhaya. Tatthetyadi, tatra = tasam panchavimshti-chhayana
madhye khalvayam gol-chhaya ashtavidha prajnapta. This statement from the
commentary of Surya Prajnapti suggests that there was a type of chhaya called
'Gol-chhaya' among the twenty-five types, and it had eight distinct types.
However, the three copies of Surya Prajnapti, '1 A.S. 2 Sha.S. 3 A.Su.', only
list seventeen names for chhaya and eight names for Gol-chhaya. This makes a
total of twenty-five names. The seventeen names do not include Gol-chhaya, yet
it is surprising to accept the twenty-five names as complete, aligning with the
'Tatthetyadi' text. One 'H.Gr.' copy lists twenty-five names for chhaya and
eight names for Gol-chhaya, which aligns with the original text. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 12. paDihayA-chAyA 13.khIla-chAyA 14. pakkha-chAyA
15. puraoudayA-chAyA 16. purima kaMThabhAguvagayAchAyA 17. pacchima-kaMTha-
bhAguvagayA chAyA 18. chAyANuvAiNI-chAyA 19. kiTThANuvAiNI-chAyA 20. chAya-chAyA
21. vikkappa-chAyA 22. vehAsa-chAyA 23. kaDa-chAyA 24. gola-chAyA
25.pitttthodggaachaayaa| tattha NaM gola-chAyA aTTavihA paNNattA, taM jahA - 1.
gola-chAyA 2. avaDDha-gola-chAyA 3. gAr3ha-gola-chAyA 4. avaDDha-gADha-gola-
chAyA 5. golavali-chAyA 6. avaDDha-golAvali-chAyA 7. golapuMja-chAyA 8. avddddh-
gol-puNj-chaayaa| 1. prastuta sUtra meM chAyA ke paccIsa prakAra tathA gola
chAyA ke ATha prakAra kA kathana hai| tatthetyAdi, tatra = tAsAM
paMcaviMzatichAyAnAM madhye khalvayaM gola-chAyA aSTavidhA prjnyptaa|' sUrya-
prajJapti kI TIkA ke isa kathana se pratIta hotA hai ki chAyA ke paccIsa
prakAroM meM 'gola-chAyA' kA nAma thA aura usake ATha prakAra bhinna the, kintu
sUryaprajJapti kI '1 A. s.| 2 zA. s.| 3 a.su.' ina tIna pratiyoM meM chAyA ke
kevala sattaraha nAma haiM aura gola chAyA ke ATha nAma haiN| isa prakAra
paccIsa pUre nAma liye gaye haiN| sattaraha nAmoM meM gola chAyA kA nAma nahIM
hai, phira bhI 'tattheyAdi' pATha se saMgati karake paccIsa nAma pUre mAnanA
Azcaryajanaka hai| eka 'ha.gra.' prati meM chAyA ke paccIsa nAma tathA gola-
chAyA ke ATha nAma haiM, jo mUla pATha ke anusAra haiN|

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dashama Prabhruta  [Prathama Prabhruta Prabhruta] The connection of the
Nakshatras with the Avaliya-Nivaaya is 32. P. So how are those connections with
the Avaliya-Nivaaya? It is said. U. There are five different opinions on this,
as follows: - There they said - 1. All the Nakshatras are connected with the
Katttiya-adiya Bharani-pajjavasaana, some said. Some others said - 2. All the
Nakshatras are connected with the Maha-adiya Asse-panj-avasaana, some said. Some
others said - 3. All the Nakshatras are connected with the Dhanittha-adiya
Savana-pajjavasaana, some said. Some others said - 4. All the Nakshatras are
connected with the Assini-adiya Revayi-pajjavasaana, some said. Some others said
- 5. All the Nakshatras are connected with the Bharani-adiya Assini-
pajjavasaana, some said. We, however, say -  All the Nakshatras are connected
with the Abhiyi-adiya Uttara-ashadha-pajjavasaana, as follows: - Abhiyi-Savani
until Uttara-ashadha. 1. In Jambudvipa, the island, there are 27 Nakshatras
connected with the Abhiyi-vajjeyi. - Sam. 27, Su. 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [prathama prAbhRtaprAbhRta] NakkhattANaM AvaliyA-NivAyajogo ya
32. pa. tA kahaM te joge ti vatthussa AvaliyA-NivAe ? Ahie tti vejaa| u. tattha
khalu imAo paMca paDivattIo paNNttAo, taMjahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. tA
savve vi NaM NakkhattA, kattiyAdiyA bharaNipajavasANA paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu|
ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA savve vi NaM NakkhattA, mahAdiyA assesa-panjavasANA
paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 3. tA savve vi NaM NakkhattA,
dhaNiTThAdiyA savaNapajjavasANA paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu -
4. tA savve vi NaM NakkhattA, assiNI-AdiyA revaIpajjavasANA paNNattA, ege
evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 5. tA savve viNaM NakkhattA, bharaNIAdiyA
assINIpajjavasANA paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo - tA savve vi
NaM NakkhattA, abhiI AdiyA uttarAsADhA pajjavasANA paNNattA, taMjahA - abhiI
savaNI jAva uttraasaaddhaa| 1. jaMbuddIve dIve abhiivajjehiM sattAvIsAe
NakkhattehiM saMvavahAre vati  /  - sama. 27, su. 2

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dasham Prabhruta [Dvitiya Prabhruta Prabhruta]  **33. P. How many Muhurtas
are there for the conjunction of the Moon with the Nakshatras?**  **U. There are
28 Nakshatras.**  **[a]** There are some Nakshatras which are in conjunction
with the Moon for 9 Muhurtas, 27 Muhurtas, and 76 Muhurtas.  **[b]** There are
some Nakshatras which are in conjunction with the Moon for 15 Muhurtas.  **[c]**
There are some Nakshatras which are in conjunction with the Moon for 30
Muhurtas.  **[d]** There are some Nakshatras which are in conjunction with the
Moon for 45 Muhurtas.  **[a] P. So, out of these 28 Nakshatras, which Nakshatras
are in conjunction with the Moon for 9 Muhurtas, 27 Muhurtas, and 76 Muhurtas?**
**[b] Which Nakshatras are in conjunction with the Moon for 15 Muhurtas?**
**[c] Which Nakshatras are in conjunction with the Moon for 30 Muhurtas?**
**[d] Which Nakshatras are in conjunction with the Moon for 45 Muhurtas?**
**[a] U. Out of these 28 Nakshatras, the Nakshatras which are in conjunction
with the Moon for 9 Muhurtas, 27 Muhurtas, and 76 Muhurtas are only one,
Abhijit.**  **[b] Out of these 28 Nakshatras, the Nakshatras which are in
conjunction with the Moon for 15 Muhurtas are six, namely:**  - 1. Satabhisha,
2. Bharani, 3. Adda, 4. Aslesha, 5. Sati, 6. Jyeshta.  **[c] Out of these 28
Nakshatras, the Nakshatras which are in conjunction with the Moon for 30
Muhurtas are 15, namely:**  - 1. Savano, 2. Dhanishta, 3. Purvabhadrapada, 4.
Revati, 5. Ashwini, 6. Krittika, 7. Magha, 8. Pushya, 9. Maha, 10. Purva
Phalguni, 11. Hasta, 12. Chitra, 13. Anuradha, 14. Mula, 15. Purvashadha.  **[d]
Out of these 28 Nakshatras, the Nakshatra Abhijit is in conjunction with the
Moon for 9 Muhurtas.**  **9 Su. 5**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [ dvitIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] NakkhattANaM caMdeNa jogakAlo 33.
pa. tA kahaM te muhuttagge Ahie ? ti vaejjA, u. tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe
NakkhattANaM, [ka] atthi Nakkhatte je NaM Nava muhutte sattAvIsaM ca
sattaTThibhAe muhuttassa caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joe  /  [kha] atthi NakkhattA je
NaM paNNarasa muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti  /  [ga] atthi NakkhattA je
NaM tIsaM muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti  /  [kha] atthi NakkhattA je NaM
paNayAlIse muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti  /  [ka] pa. tA eeMsi NaM
aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, kayare Nakkhatte je NaM Nava muhutte sattAvIsaM ca
sattaTTibhAe muhuttassa caMdeNaM saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? [kha] kayare NakkhattA
je NaM paNNarasa muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? [ga] kayare NakkhattA je
NaM tIsaM muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? [gha] kayare NakkhattA je NaM
paNayAlIsaM muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? [ka] u. tA eeMsi NaM
aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, tattha je te Nakkhatte, je NaM Nava muhutte, sattAvIsaM
ca sattaTTibhAe muhuttassa caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joti, se NaM ege, abhIyI  /
[kha] tA eeMsi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattA NaM, tattha je te NakkhattA, je NaM
paNNarasa muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti, te NaM cha, , taM jahA - 1.
satabhisayA, 2. bharaNI, 3. addA, 4. assesA, 5. sAti, 6. jeTThA  /  [ga] tA esi
NaM NaTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, tattha je te NakkhattA, je NaM tIsaM muhuttaM
caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti, te NaM NaNNarasa taM jahA - 1. savaNo, 2.
dhaNiTThA, 3. puvvAbhaddavayA, 4. revaI, 5. assiNI, 6. kattiyA, 7. maggasirA, 8.
pussI, 9. mahA, 10. puvvAphagguNI, 11. hattho, 12. cittA, 13. aNurAhA, 14. mUlo,
15. puvvaasaaddhaa| [gha] tA esi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, 1. abhijiNakkhatte
sAirege Nava muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM jogaM joei sama. 9 su. 5

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ 77 Of the twenty-eight Nakshatras, there are six that are joined with the Moon
for 15 Muhurtas. They are: 1. Uttarabhadrapada, 2. Rohini, 3. Punarvasu, 4.
Uttaraphalguni, 5. Visakha, 6. Uttarashadha. _ Surya. Pa. 10, Pah. 2, Su. 33
Nakshatranam Surena Jogakalo 34. – There are twenty-eight Nakshatras, [a] some
of which are joined with the Sun for four days and six Muhurtas. [b] Some are
joined with the Sun for six days and twenty-one Muhurtas. [c] Some are joined
with the Sun for thirteen days and twelve Muhurtas. [d] Some are joined with the
Sun for twenty days and three Muhurtas. P. [a] Of the twenty-eight Nakshatras,
which ones are joined with the Sun for four days and six Muhurtas? [b] Of the
twenty-eight Nakshatras, which ones are joined with the Sun for six days and
twenty-one Muhurtas? [c] Of the twenty-eight Nakshatras, which ones are joined
with the Sun for thirteen days and twelve Muhurtas? [d] Of the twenty-eight
Nakshatras, which ones are joined with the Sun for twenty days and three
Muhurtas? U. [a] Of the twenty-eight Nakshatras, those that are joined with the
Sun for four days and six Muhurtas are one, namely Abhiyi. [b] Of the twenty-
eight Nakshatras, those that are joined with the Sun for six days and twenty-one
Muhurtas are six, namely: 1. Satabhisha, 2. Bharani, 3. Ashwini, 4. Aslesha, 5.
Shatabhisha, 6. Jyeshta. [c] Of the twenty-eight Nakshatras, those that are
joined with the Sun for thirteen days and twelve Muhurtas are fifteen, namely:
1. Savana, 2. Dhanishta, 3. Purvabhadrapada, 4. Revati, 5. Ashlesha, 6.
Krittika, 7. Magha, 8. Pushya, 9. Maha, 10. Purvaphalguni, 11. Hasta, 12.
Chitra, 13. Anuradha, 14. Mula, 15. Purvashadha. [d] Of the twenty-eight
Nakshatras, those that are joined with the Sun for twenty days and three
Muhurtas are six, namely: 1. Uttarabhadrapada, 2. Rohini, 3. Punarvasu, 4.
Uttaraphalguni, 5. Visakha, 6. Uttarashadha. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - dvitIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 77 tattha je te NakkhattA, je
NaM paNayAlIsaM muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti, te NaM cha, taM jahA - 1.
uttarAbhaddavayA, 2. rohiNI, 3. puNavvasU, 4. uttarAphagguNI, 5. visAhA, 6.
uttraasaaddhaa| _ sUriya. pA. 10, pAhu. 2, su. 33 NakkhAttaNaM sUreNa jogakAlo
34. - tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, [ka ] asthi Nakkhatte je NaM catAri
ahoratte, chacca muhutte sUreNa saddhiM joyaM joeNti| [kha] asthi NakkhattA je
NaM cha ahoratte, ekkavIsaM ca muhutte sUreNa saddhiM joyaM joeNti| [ga] asthi
NakkhattA je NaM terasa ahoratte, bArasa ya muhutte sUreNa saddhiM joyaM joeNti|
[gha ] atthi NakkhattA je NaM vIsaM ahoratte, tiNNi ya muhutte sUreNa saddhiM
joyaM joeNti| pa. [ka ] tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, kayare Nakkhatte
jaM cattAri ahoratte, chacca muhutte sUreNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? [kha] tA eesi
NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, kayare Nakkhatte je NaM cha ahoratte, ekkavIsaM ca
muhutte sUreNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? [ga] tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM,
kayare NakkhattA je NaM terasa ahoratte, bArasa ya muhutte sUreNa saddhiM joyaM
joeMti ? [gha ] tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, kayare NakkhattANaM je NaM
bIsaM ahoratte, bArasa ya muhutte sUreNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? u. [ka ] tA eesi
NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, tattha je te Nakkhatte je NaM cattAri ahoratte
chacca muhutte sUreNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti se NaM ege abhiiyii| [kha] tA eesi
NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, tattha je te NakkhattA je NaM cha ahoratte
ekkavIsaM ca muhutte sUreNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti te NaM cha, taM jahA - 1.
satabhisayA, 2. bharaNI, 3. addA, 4. assesA, 5. sAti, 6. jetttthaa| [ga] tA eesi
NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, . tattha je te NakkhattA je NaM terasa ahoratte
duvAlasa ya muhutte sUreNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti te NaM paNNarasa taM jahA - 1.
savaNo, 2. dhaNiTThA, 3. puvvAbhaddavayA, 4. revaI, 5. assiNI, 6. kattiyA, 7.
maggasiraM, 8. pusso, 9. mahA, 10. puvvAphagguNI, 11. hattho, 12. cittA, 13.
aNurAhA, 14. mUlo, 15. puvvaasaaddhaa| [gha ] tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe
NakkhattANaM, uttha je te NakkhattA, je vIsaM ahoratte, tiNNi ya muhutte, sUreNa
saddhiM joyaM joeMti te NaM cha taM jahA - 1. uttarAbhaddavayA, 2. rohiNI, 3.
puNavvasU, 4. uttarAphagguNI, 5. visAhA, 6. uttraasaaddhaa|

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## From the tenth [third] Prabhruta [Prabhruta] onwards, the field-time measure
of the eastern parts of the Nakshatras is 35. P. How are these parts of the
Nakshatras? It is said, U. Thus it is, in the twenty-eight Nakshatras, [a] There
are Nakshatras with eastern parts, with a full field of thirty Muhurtas. [b]
There are Nakshatras with western parts, with a full field of thirty Muhurtas.
[c] There are Nakshatras with southern parts, with a reduced field of fifteen
Muhurtas. [d] There are Nakshatras with both parts, with an extended field of
forty-five Muhurtas. P. [a] Thus it is, in the twenty-eight Nakshatras, Which
Nakshatras have eastern parts, with a full field, of thirty Muhurtas? [b] Thus
it is, in the twenty-eight Nakshatras, Which Nakshatras have western parts, with
a full field, of thirty Muhurtas? [c] Thus it is, in the twenty-eight
Nakshatras, Which Nakshatras have southern parts, with a reduced field, of
fifteen Muhurtas? [d] Thus it is, in the twenty-eight Nakshatras, Which
Nakshatras have both parts, with an extended field, of forty-five Muhurtas? U.
[a] Thus it is, in the twenty-eight Nakshatras, There, those Nakshatras with
eastern parts, with a full field, of thirty Muhurtas, are six, namely - 1.
Purvaphalguni, 2. Krittika, 3. Maha, 4. Purvaphalguni, 5. Mula, 6. Purvashadha.
[b] Thus it is, in the twenty-eight Nakshatras, There, those Nakshatras with
western parts, with a full field, of thirty Muhurtas, are ten, namely - 1.
Abhijit, 2. Savana, 3. Dhanishtha, 4. Revati, 5. Ashvini, 6. Mrigashira, 7.
Pushya, 8. Hasta, 9. Chitra, 10. Anuradha. [c] Thus it is, in the twenty-eight
Nakshatras, There, those Nakshatras with southern parts, with a reduced field,
of fifteen Muhurtas, are six, namely - 1. Sayabhisha, 2. Bharani, 3. Adda, 4.
Ashlesha, 5. Satabhisha, 6. Jyeshta. [d] Thus it is, in the twenty-eight
Nakshatras, There, those Nakshatras with both parts, with an extended field, of
forty-five Muhurtas, are six, namely - 1. Uttaraphalguni, 2. Rohini, 3.
Punarvasu, 4. Uttaraphalguni, 5. Visakha, 6. Uttarashadha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [ tRtIya prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] NakkhattANaM puvvAibhAgA khetta -
kAlappamANaM ca 35. pa. tA kahaM te evaM bhAgA NakkhattA ? AhiyA ti vaejjA, u.
tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, [ka] atthi NakkhattA puvvaMbhAgA,
samakhettA tIsai muhuttA paNNattA  /  [kha] atitha NakkhattA paMcchabhAgA,
samakhettA tIsai muhuttA paNNattA  /  [ga] atthi NakkhattA NattaMbhAgA,
avaDDhakhettA paNNarasa-muhuttA paNNattA  /  [gha] atthi NakkhattA ubhayaM
bhAgA, viDDhakhettA paNayAlIsaM muhuttA paNNattA  /  pa. [ka] tA eesi NaM
aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, kayare NakkhattA puvvaM bhAgA, samakhettA, tIsai
muhuttA paNNattA ? [kha] tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, kayare NakkhattA
paMcchabhAgA, samakhettA, tIsai muhuttA paNNattA ? [ga] tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe
NakkhattANaM, kayare NakkhattA NattaM bhAgA, avaDDhakhettA, paNNarasa-muhuttA
paNNattA ? [gha] to eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, kayare NakkhattA ubhayaM
bhAgA, divaDDhakhettA, paNayAlIsaM muhuttA paNNattA ? u. [ka] tA eesi NaM
aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, tattha je te NakkhattA puvvaMbhAgA, samakkhettA, tIsai
muhuttA, paNNattA, te NaM cha taMjahA - 1. puvvApoTThavayA, 2. kattiyA, 3. mahA,
4. puvvAphagguNI, 5. mUlo, 6. puvvAsADhA  /  [kha] tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe
NakkhattANaM, tattha je te NakkhattA pacchaMbhAgA samakkhettA tIsai muhuttA
paNNattA te NaM dasa, taMjahA - 1. abhiI, 2. savaNo, 3. dhaNiTThA, 4. revaI, 5.
assiNI, 6. migasiraM, 7. pUso, 8. hattho, 9. cittA, 10. aNurAhA  /  [ga] tA eesi
NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM, tattha je te NakkhattA NattaM bhAgA avaDDhakhettA
paNNarasa-muhuttA paNNattA, te NaM cha taMjahA - 1. sayabhisayA, 2. bharaNI, 3.
addA, 4. assesA, 5. sAtI, 6. jeTThA  /  [gha] tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe
NakkhattANaM, tattha je te NakkhattA ubhayaM bhAgA divaDUkhettA, paNayAlIsaM
muhuttA paNNattA, ,te NaM cha, taMjahA - 1. uttarApoTThavayA, 2. rohiNI, 3.
puNavassU, 4. uttarAphagguNI, 5. visAhA, 6. uttraasaaddhaa|

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dashama Prabhruta [Chaturtha Prabhruta Prabhruta] Nakshatranam Chande.
Jogaarambha Kaalo  36. P. Ta Kaham Te Jogass Aai? Ahie Ti Vaeeja, U. Ta Abhiyi-
Savana Khalu Duve Nakshatta, Pacchhabhaga Samakhitta', Saieregayegunachattalisai
Muhutta' Tappadhamaye Sayam Chanden Sadhim Joyam Joenti', Tao Pacchha Avaram
Sairegam Divasan. Evam Khalu Abhiyi-Savana Duve Nakshatta Egarain Egam Cha
Sairegam Divasan Chanden Sadhim Joyam Joenti, Joyam Jo Etta Joyam
Anupariyattati, Joyam Anupariyattita Sayam Chandam Dhanittaanam Sammati. 2. Ta
Dhanitta Khalu Nakshatte Pacchhambhage Samakkhette Tisaai-Muhutte Tappadhamaye
Sayam Chanden Sadhim Joyam Joeai, Tao Pacchharain Avaram Cha Divasan. Evam Khalu
Dhanitta Nakshatte Egam Cha Rai Egam Cha Divasan Chanden Sadhim Joyam Joeai,
Joyam Joetta Joyam Anupariyattai, Joyam Anupariyattitta Sayam Chandam
Sayabhisayanam Sampapei, 1. 'Iha Abhijinnaskhatram Na Samakshetram,
Napyapardhakshetram, Napi Dvayardhakshetram, Kevalam Shravananakshatrena Saha
Sambaddhamupattamittyabhedopacarat Tadapi Samakshetram Upkalpya
Samakshetramityuktam' 2. 'Saatireka Navamuhurtaah Abhijitt Trinshanmuhurtaah
Shravanasyetyubhayamilane Yathokatam Muhurtaparimanam Bhavati.' 3. 'Sayam-
Vikalavelayaam, Iha Divasasy Katitamatchaaramaad Bhagaadarabhya Yavadraatre
Katitamo Bhago Yavannadhaapi Parisphuta-Nakshatramandalalo Kastavan
Kaalaviseshah Sayamiti Vivakshito Drashtavyaah' 4. 'Ihaabhijinnaskhatram Yadyapi
Yugasyaadou Pratachaindrena Saha Yogamupaiti, Tathaapi Shravanena Saha
Sambaddhamiha Tadvikshita, Shravananakshatram Cha Madhyahaadurdhavam Apasarati
Divase Chandrena Saha Yogamupadatte, Tatastatsaacharyat Tadapi Sayam Samaye
Chandrena ''Sadhim Joyam Joenti' Ityuktam. Athava Yugasyaadimatirichaanyada
Bahulyamadhikrityedamuktam Tato Na Kaschiddoshah. - Teeka 5. 'Etaavantan Kalam
Yogam Yuktva Tadanantara Yogamanuparivartalate, Atmanachayaavayatityarthaah?' -
Suryaprajnapti Ki Teeka Se Udhrut. 6. 'Samakshetra Trinshanmuhurtam 'Chandra Ke
Saath Kisi Bhi Nakshatra Ka Yog, Yadi Tisa Muhurta Paryant Rahta Hai To Vah
'Samakshetra-Yog' Kaha Jata Hai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [caturtha prAbhRtaprAbhRta] NakkhattANaM cNde| jogAraMbhakAlo
36. pa. tA kahaM te jogAssa AI ? Ahie ti vaejA, u. tA abhiyI-savaNA khalu duve
NakkhattA, pacchAbhAgA samakhittA', sAiregaegUNacattAlisai muhuttA'
tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti', tao pacchA avaraM sAiregaM
divsN| evaM khalu abhiyI-savaNA duve NakkhattA egarAiM egaM ca sAiregaM divasaM
caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti, joyaM jo ettA joyaM aNupariyaTTati, joyaM
anupariyaTTitA sAyaM caMdaM dhaNiTThANaM smmti| 2. tA dhaNiTThA khalu Nakkhatte
pacchaMbhAge samakkhette tIsai-muhutte tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM
joei, tao pacchArAiM avaraM ca divsN| evaM khalu dhaNiTThA Nakkhatte egaM ca rAI
egaM ca divasaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joettA joyaM aNupariyaTTai,
joyaM aNupariyaTTittA sAyaM caMdaM sayabhisayANaM samappei, 1. 'iha
abhijinnakSatraM na samakSetraM, nApyapArdhakSetraM, nApi dvayarddhakSetraM,
kevalaM zravaNanakSatreNa saha sambaddhamupAttamityabhedopacArAt tadapi
samakSetramupakalpya samakSetramityuktam' 2. 'sAtirekA navamuhUrtAH abhijit
triMzanmuhurtAH zravaNasyetyubhayamIlane yathoktaM muhurtaparimANaM bhvti|' 3.
'sAyaM-vikAlavelAyAM, iha divasasya katitamAccaramAd bhAgAdArabhya yAvadrAtre
katitamo bhAgo yAvannAdhApi parisphuTa-nakSatramaNDalAlokastAvAn kAlavizeSaH
sAyamiti vivakSito draSTavyaH' 4. 'ihAbhijinnakSatraM yadyapi yugasyAdau
prAtazcandreNa saha yogamupaiti, tathApi zravaNena saha sambaddhamiha
tadvikSitaM, zravaNanakSatraM ca madhyAhAdUrdhvamapasarati divase candreNa saha
yogamupAdatte, tatastatsAhacaryAt tadapi sAyaM samaye candreNa yujyamAnaM
vivakSitvA sAmAnyataH sAyaM candreNa''saddhiM joyaM joeMti' ityuktm| athavA
yugasyAdimatiricyAnyadA bAhulyaMmadhikRtyedamuktaM tato na kshciddossH| - TIkA
5. 'etAvantaM kAlaM yogaM yuktvA tadanantaraM yogamanuparivartalate,
AtmanazcayAvayata ityarthaH?' - sUryaprajJapti kI TIkA se uddhRt| 6. 'samakSetra
triMzanmuhUrtam 'candra ke sAtha kisI bhI nakSatra kA yoga, yadi tIsa mUhUrta
paryanta rahatA hai to vaha 'samakSetra-yoga' kahA jAtA hai|

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 80 [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ] 3.  The Sayabhisha Nakshatra, in the Avaddha
Kshetra (half field) of the Nakshatra Mandala, for fifteen Muhurtas, joins with
the Moon in the evening. It does not reach the next day. Thus, the Sayabhisha
Nakshatra, for one Rati, joins with the Moon in the evening. It joins, then it
continues to join, then it continues to join, and then in the evening, it
completes the joining with the Moon for the Purva-Pottva (first quarter).  4.
The Purva-Pottva Nakshatra, in the Purva Bhaga (first part) of the Sama Kshetra
(whole field), for thirty Muhurtas, joins with the Moon in the morning. Then, it
reaches the next Rati. Thus, the Purva-Pottva Nakshatra, for one day and one
Rati, joins with the Moon in the evening. It joins, then it continues to join,
then it continues to join, and then in the morning, it completes the joining
with the Moon for the Uttara-Pottva (second quarter).  The Uttara-Pottva
Nakshatra, in both parts of the Divaddha Kshetra (double field), for forty-five
Muhurtas, joins with the Moon in the morning. It reaches the next Rati, and then
it reaches the next day. Thus, the Uttara-Pottva Nakshatra, for two days and one
Rati, joins with the Moon in the evening. Then it continues to join, and then in
the evening, it completes the joining with the Moon for the Revati.  The Revati
Nakshatra, in the Pacchamma Bhaga (last part) of the Sama Kshetra (whole field),
for thirty Muhurtas, joins with the Moon in the evening. Then, it reaches the
next day. Thus, the Revati Nakshatra, for one Rati and one day, joins with the
Moon in the evening. It joins, then it continues to join, then it continues to
join, and then in the evening, it completes the joining with the Moon for the
Ashvini.  7. The Ashvini Nakshatra, in the Pacchamma Bhaga (last part) of the
Sama Kshetra (whole field), for thirty Muhurtas, joins with the Moon in the
evening. Then, it reaches the next day.  1. 'Apara-Kshetram Panchadasha
Muhurtam' - If the joining of any Nakshatra with the Moon lasts for fifteen
Muhurtas, it is called 'Apara-Kshetra-Yoga' or 'Half Field Yoga'. 2. 'Iha Purva-
Prosthapada-Nakshatra-sya Pratha-chandrena saha Prathamataya Yoga-pravritti
Itidam Purva-Bhagamucyate' - This is the Purva-Bhaga (first part) where the
Purva-Prosthapada Nakshatra joins with the Moon in the morning for the first
time. 3. 'Idam Kilottara-Bhadrapada-akhyam Nakshatramukta-prakarena Pratha-
chandrena saha-yogam adhigachchati. Kevalam Prathaman Panchadasha-muhurtan
adhikan-apaniya sama-kshetram kalpayitva yada yogaschintyate tada naktamapi
yogas-tityubhaya-bhagmavaseyam' - This is the Uttara-Bhadrapada Nakshatra, which
joins with the Moon in the morning in the same way as mentioned before. When the
joining is considered, keeping in mind only the first fifteen Muhurtas, and not
exceeding them, then the joining is also in the night. Thus, both parts should
be understood. 4. 'Uttara-Prakoṣṭha-pada-nakshatram khalu bhayabhagavyartha-
kshetram pancha-chatvarimśan-muhūrta, tat-prathamataya-yoga-prathamataya pratha-
chandrena sardha yogam yunakti, taccha, tatha yuktam sat tam sakalam api divasam
aparam cha ratrim tatas-pashchad aparam divasam yavad-vartate' - The Uttara-
Prakoṣṭha-pada Nakshatra, in both parts of the half field, for forty-five
Muhurtas, joins with the Moon in the morning for the first time. This joining,
thus joined, lasts for the whole day, then for the night, and then for the next
day, as long as it continues.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 80 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 3. tA sayabhisayA khalu Nakkhatte NattaMbhAge
avaDDakhette paNNarasa-muhutte, tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei,
no labhai avaraM divasaM, evaM khalu sayabhisayA Nakkhatte, egaM rAiM ca caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joettA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA
sAyaM caMdaM puvvapoTThavayANaM samappei, 4. tA puvvA-poTuvayA khalu Nakkhatte
puvvaM bhAge' samakkhette tIsai-muhutte tappaDhamayAe pAo caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM
joei, tao pacchA avaraM rAI, evaM khalu puvvA-poTTavayA Nakkhatte egaM ca
divasaM egaM ca rAiM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joettA aNupariyaTTai,
joyaM aNupariyaTTittA pAo caMdaM uttarApoTThavvayANaM samappei, tA
uttarApoTuvvayA khalu Nakkhatte ubhayaM bhAge divaDDakhette paNayAlIsa-muhutte ,
tappaDhamayAe pAo caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, avaraM ca rAI tao pacchA avaraM ca
divsN| evaM khalu uttarApoTThavayA Nakkhatte do divase egaM ca rAI caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA sAyaM caMdaM revaINaM samappei,
tArevaI khalu Nakkhatte pacchaMbhAge samakkhette tIsai-muhutte tappaDhamayAe
sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, tao pacchA avaraM divasa, evaM khalu revaI
Nakkhatte egaM ca rAI, egaM ca divasaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joettA
joyaM aNupariyaTTai, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA sAyaM caMdaM assiNINaM samappei, 7.
tA assiNI khalu Nakkhatte pacchaMbhAge samakkhette tIsai-muhutte tappaDhamayAe
sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, tao pacchA avaraM divasaM, 1. 'apArdha-kSetraM
paMcadazamuhUrtam ' candra ke sAtha kisI bhI nakSatra kA yoga, yadi pandraha
muhUrta paryanta rahatA hai, to vaha 'apArdhakSetra-yoga' arthAt 'AdhA kSetra
yoga' kahA jAtA hai| 2. 'iha pUrvaproSThapapadAnakSatra sya prAtazcandreNa saha
prathamatayA yogaH pravRtta itIdaM puurvbhaagmucyte|' 3. 'idaM
kilottarAbhadrapadAkhyaM nakSatramuktaprakAreNa prAtazcandreNa
sahayogamadhigacchati  /  kevalaM prathamAn paMcadaza-muhUrtAn adhikAnapanIya
samakSetraM kalpayitvA yadA yogazcintyate tadA naktamapi
yogo'stItyubhayabhAgamavaseyam  /  4. 'uttaraprakoSThapadAnakSatraM
khalubhayabhAgaM vyardhakSetraM paMcacatvAriMzanmuhUrta, tatprathamatayA-
yogaprathamatayA prAtazcandreNa sArda yogaM yunakti, tacca, tathAyuktaM sat taM
sakalamapi divasamaparaM ca rAtriM tataH pazcAdaparaM divasaM yAvadvartate  /

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## From the tenth (Dasham) onwards - ## From the fourth (Chaturth) onwards
Thus, in this Pakkhatta, one night and one day, the moon joins with the
constellation Bharani. After joining with it, the moon leaves Bharani in the
evening.  8. Now, in the Bharani constellation, in the night portion, in the
Avaddha Kshetra, in the 15th Muhurta, in the Tappadhama, the moon joins with
Bharani in the evening. It does not reach another day. Thus, in the Bharani
constellation, one night, the moon joins with it. After joining, the moon leaves
Bharani. After leaving Bharani, the moon joins with the constellation Kattinya
in the evening.  9. Now, in the Kattinya constellation, in the Purva Bhaga, in
the Sama Kshetra, in the 30th Muhurta, in the Tappadhama, the moon joins with
Kattinya in the evening. Then, after one night, Thus, in the Kattinya
constellation, one day and one night, the moon joins with it. After joining, the
moon leaves Kattinya. After leaving Kattinya, the moon joins with the
constellation Rohini in the evening.  1. 'By changing the Yoga, the moon leaves
the constellation in the evening, at the time when the constellation's light is
clear, and joins with Bharani. This Bharani constellation, according to the
rules, joins with the moon in the night. Therefore, the night portion should be
understood.'  2. Further, in the original text, the 'Sanshipta Vachana' is as
follows: - 'Rohini is like Uttarabhadrapada', 10. 11. Magasira is like
Dhanishta, 12. Adda is like Satabhisha, 13. Punarvasu is like Uttarabhadrapada,
14. Pushya is like Dhanishta, 15. Aslesha is like Satabhisha, 16. Maha is like
Purva Phalguni, 17. Purva Phalguni is like Purva Bhadrapada, 81 18. Uttara
Phalguni is like Purva Bhadrapada, 19-20. Hasta and Chitta are like Dhanishta,
21. Satti is like Satabhisha, 22. Visakha is like Uttarabhadrapada, 23. Anuradha
is like Dhanishta, 24. Jyeshta is like Satabhisha, 25. Mula is like Purva
Bhadrapada, 26. Purva Ashadha is like Purva Bhadrapada, 27. Uttara Ashadha is
like Uttara Bhadrapada.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - caturtha prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] evaM khalu assiNI pakkhatte, egaM
ca rAI, egaM ca divasaM, caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA,
sAyaM caMdaM bharaNINaM samappei  /  8. tA bharaNI khalu Nakkhatte NattaM
bhAge,' avaDDhakhette paNNarasamuhutte tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM
joei, no labhai avaraM divasaM, evaM khalu bharaNI Nakkhatte, egaM ca rAI
caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joettA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, joyaM
aNupariyaTTittA, pAo caMdaM kattiyANaM samappar3a  /  9. tA kattiyA khalu
Nakkhatte puvvaM bhAge samakkhette tIsai-muhutte tappaDhamayAe pAo caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joei, tao pacchArAI, evaM khalu kattiyA Nakkhatte, egaM ca divasaM
egaM ca rAI caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joettA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, joyaM
aNupariyaTTittA, pAo caMdaM rohiNINaM samappei  /  1. 'yogamanuparivartya sAyaM
parisphuTanakSatramaNDalAlokasamaye bharaNyAH samarpayati, idaM ca bharaNI
nakSatramuktayuktyA rAtrau candreNa sai yogamupaiti tato naktaM bhAgamavaseyam'
2. isake Age mUla prati meM 'saMkSiptavAcanA' kA pATha isa prakAra hai - - .'
rohiNI jahA uttarAbhaddavayA', 10. 11. magasiraM jahA dhaNiTThA, 12. addA jaha
satabhiyasA, 13. puNavvasU jahA uttarAbhaddavayA, 14. pussI jahA dhaNiTThA, 15.
asalesA jahA satabhiyasA, 16. mahA jahA puvvAphagguNI, 17. puvvAphaggaguNI jahA
puvvAbhaddavayA, 81 18. uttarAphagguNI jahA puvvAbhaddavayA, 19. - 20. hattho,
cittA ya jahA dhaNiTThA, 21. sAtI jahA satabhisayA, 22. visAhA jahA
uttarAbhaddavayA, 23. aNurAhA jahA dhaNiTThA, 24. jiTThA jahAsatabhiyasA 25.
mUlo jahA puSvAbhaddavayA, 26. puvvAsADhA jahApuvvAbhaddavayA 27. uttarAsADhA
jahA uttarAbhaddavayA

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Surya Prajnapti Sutra (Chapter 10-15)  **10.** Now, in the Rohini Nakshatra,
in the eastern half of the sky, the moon joins with the sun for forty-five
Muhurtas, plus a fraction, and then there is a night, and then a day. Thus, in
the Rohini Nakshatra, the moon joins with the sun for two days and one night.
When the moon joins, it then moves on.  When it moves on, the moon sets in the
Mrigashira Nakshatra.  **11.** Now, in the Mrigashira Nakshatra, in the western
half of the sky, the moon joins with the sun for thirty Muhurtas, plus a
fraction, and then there is a night, and then a day. Thus, in the Mrigashira
Nakshatra, the moon joins with the sun for one night and one day.  When the moon
joins, it then moves on.  When it moves on, the moon sets in the Ardra
Nakshatra.  **12.** Now, in the Ardra Nakshatra, in the middle of the night, the
moon joins with the sun for fifteen Muhurtas, plus a fraction, and then there is
no day. Thus, in the Ardra Nakshatra, the moon joins with the sun for one night.
When the moon joins, it then moves on.  When it moves on, the moon sets in the
Punarvasu Nakshatra.  **13.** Now, in the Punarvasu Nakshatra, in the eastern
half of the sky, the moon joins with the sun for forty-five Muhurtas, plus a
fraction, and then there is a night, and then a day. Thus, in the Punarvasu
Nakshatra, the moon joins with the sun for two days and one night.  When the
moon joins, it then moves on.  When it moves on, the moon sets in the Pushya
Nakshatra.  **14.** Now, in the Pushya Nakshatra, in the western half of the
sky, the moon joins with the sun for thirty Muhurtas, plus a fraction, and then
there is a night, and then a day. Thus, in the Pushya Nakshatra, the moon joins
with the sun for one night and one day.  When the moon joins, it then moves on.
When it moves on, the moon sets in the Ashlesha Nakshatra.  **15.** Now, in the
Ashlesha Nakshatra, in the middle of the night, the moon joins with the sun for
fifteen Muhurtas, plus a fraction, and then there is no day.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 10. tA rohiNI khalu Nakkhatte ubhayabhAge divaDDakhette
paNayAlIsa-muhutte tappaDhamayA pAo caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, avaraM ca rAI
tao pacchA avaraM divasaM, evaM khalu rohiNI Nakkhatte, do divase egaM ca rAI
caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM jor3attA joyaM aNupariyaTTA, joyaM
aNupariyaTTittA, sAyaM caMdaM migasaraM samappei  /  11. tA migasire khalu
Nakkhatte pacchaMbhAge samakkhette tIsaimuhutte tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joei, tao pacchArAI avaraM ca divasaM, 82 evaM khalu migasire
Nakkhatte, egaM ca rAI egaM ca divasaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joettA
joyaM aNupariyaTTA, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA, sAyaM caMdaM addAe samappei  /  12.
tA addA khalu Nakkhatte nattaMbhAge avaDDhakhette paNNarasa-muhutte
tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM jo joei, no labhai avaraM divasaM, evaM
khalu addA Nakkhatte, egaM rAI caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joettA joyaM
aNupariyaTTai, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA, sAyaM caMdaM puNavvasUNaM samapper3a  /
13. tA puNavvasU khalu Nakkhatte ubhayaMbhAge divaDDakhette paNayAlIsa-muhutte
tappaDhamayAe pAo caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, avaraM ca rAI tao pacchA avaraM ca
divasaM, evaM khalu puNavvasU Nakkhatte do divase egaM ca rAI caMdeNa saddhiM
joyaM joei, joyaM joettA joyaM aNupariyaTTa, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA, sAyaM caMdaM
pussassa samappei  /  14. tA pusse khalu Nakkhatte pacchaMbhAge samakhette
tIsai-muhutte tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, tao pacchArAI
avaraM ca divasaM, evaM khalu pusse Nakkhatte, egaM ca rAI egaM ca divasaM
caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, jo joettA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, jo aNupariyaTTittA,
sAyaM caMdaM asilesAe samappei  /  15. tA asilesA khalu Nakkhatte nattaM bhAge
avaDDhakhette pannarasamuhutte tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei,
no labhai avaraM divasaM,

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Dasham Prabhrit - Chaturth Prabhrit Prabhrit] _83_  Thus, in the Asilesa
Nakshatra, the moon joins with one Rai, joins with it, then moves on from it,
and after moving on from it, gives the moon to Magha.  16. Now, in the Magha
Nakshatra, in the eastern part of the Samakshetra, for thirty Muhurtas, the moon
joins with one Rai, then after that, another Rai,  Thus, in the Magha Nakshatra,
the moon joins with one day and one Rai, joins with it, then moves on from it,
and after moving on from it, gives the moon to Purva Phalguni.  17. Now, in the
Purva Phalguni Nakshatra, in the eastern part of the Samakshetra, for thirty
Muhurtas, the moon joins with one Rai, then after that, another Rai,  Thus, in
the Purva Phalguni Nakshatra, the moon joins with one day and one Rai, joins
with it, then moves on from it, and after moving on from it, gives the moon to
Uttara Phalguni.  18. Now, in the Uttara Phalguni Nakshatra, in both parts of
the Diddhakhetra, for forty-nine Muhurtas, the moon joins with one Rai, then
after that, another Rai, and then another day,  Thus, in the Uttara Phalguni
Nakshatra, the moon joins with two days and one Rai, joins with it, then moves
on from it, and after moving on from it, gives the moon to Hasta in the evening.
19. Now, in the Hasta Nakshatra, in the western part of the Samakshetra, for
thirty Muhurtas, the moon joins with one Rai in the evening, then after that,
another Rai, and then another day,  Thus, in the Hasta Nakshatra, the moon joins
with one Rai and one day, joins with it, then moves on from it, and after moving
on from it, gives the moon to Chitra in the evening.  20. Now, in the Chitra
Nakshatra, in the western part of the Samakshetra, for thirty Muhurtas, the moon
joins with one Rai in the evening, then after that, another Rai, and then
another day,  Thus, in the Chitra Nakshatra, the moon joins with one Rai and one
day, joins with it, then moves on from it, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - caturtha prAbhRtaprAbhRta] _83 evaM khalu asilesA Nakkhatte,
egaM rAiM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joittA joyaM aNupariyaTTei, joyaM
aNupariyaTTittA, pAo caMdaM maghANaM smppei| 16. tA maghA khalu Nakkhatte
puvvaMbhAge samakkhette tIsai-muhutte tappaDhamayAe pAo caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM
joei, tao pacchA avaraM rAI, evaM khalu maghA Nakkhatte, egaM ca divasaM egaM ca
rAI caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joittA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, joyaM
aNupariyaTTittA, pAo caMdaM puvvAphagguNINaM smppei| 17. tA puvvAphagguNI khalu
Nakkhatte puvvaMbhAge samakkhette tIsai-muhutte tappaDhamayAe pAo caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joei, tao pacchA avaraM rAI, evaM khalu puvvAphagguNI Nakkhatte,
egaM ca divasaM egaM ca rAI caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joittA joyaM
aNupariyaTTei, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA, pAo caMdaM uttarAphagguNINaM smppei|.. 18.
tA uttarA-phagguNI khalu Nakkhatte ubhayaMbhAge diDDhakhette paNayAlIsai-muhutte
tappaDhamayAe pAo caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, avaraM ca rAiM tao pacchA avaraM
ca divasaM, evaM khalu uttarAphagguNI Nakkhatte, do divase egaM ca rAI caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joittA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA,
sAyaM caMdaM hatthaM smppei| 19. tA hatthe khalu Nakkhatte pacchaMbhAge
samakkhette tIsaimuhutte tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, tao
pacchArAiM avaraM ca divasaM, evaM khalu hatthaNakkhatte egaM ca rAI, egaM ca
divasaM.caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joittA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, joyaM
aNupariyaTTittA, sAyaM caMdaM cittAe smppei| 20. tA cittA khalu Nakkhatte
pacchaMbhAge samakkhette tIsaimuhutte tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM
joei, tao pacchArAI avaraM ca divasaM, evaM khalu cittA Nakkhatte egaM ca rAI,
egaM ca divasaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joittA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, .
. .

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[84] When the Jo-yam is Anu-pariyattitta, it is given to the moon in the Sayam.
21. Then, in the Sayam, the moon joins the Jo-yam in the Nakshatra of Sai, in
the Natt-ambaga, in the Avaddha-kheta, in the 15th Muhurta, in the Tappadhama-
maya. It does not get another day. Thus, in the Nakshatra of Sai, the moon joins
the Jo-yam for one Rai. The Jo-yam is added, the Jo-yam is Anu-pariyattitta.
[Surya-prajnapti-sutra When the Jo-yam is Anu-pariyattitta, it is given to the
moon in the Visakha. 22. Then, in the Visakha, the moon joins the Jo-yam in the
Ubha-bhag, in the Divaddha-kheta, in the 42nd Muhurta, in the Tappadhama-maya.
It gets another Rai, and then another day. Thus, in the Nakshatra of Visakha,
the moon joins the Jo-yam for two days and one Rai. The Jo-yam is added, the Jo-
yam is Anu-pariyattitta. When the Jo-yam is Anu-pariyattitta, it is given to the
moon in the Anuradha. 23. Then, in the Anuradha, the moon joins the Jo-yam in
the Pachchha-bhag, in the Sama-kheta, in the 30th Muhurta, in the Tappadhama-
maya. It gets another Rai, and then another day. Thus, in the Nakshatra of
Anuradha, the moon joins the Jo-yam for one Rai and one day. The Jo-yam is
added, the Jo-yam is Anu-pariyattitta. When the Jo-yam is Anu-pariyattitta, it
is given to the moon in the Jyeshta. 24. Then, in the Jyeshta, the moon joins
the Jo-yam in the Natt-ambaga, in the Avaddha-kheta, in the 15th Muhurta, in the
Tappadhama-maya. It does not get another day. Thus, in the Nakshatra of Jyeshta,
the moon joins the Jo-yam for one day. The Jo-yam is added, the Jo-yam is Anu-
pariyattitta. When the Jo-yam is Anu-pariyattitta, it is given to the moon in
the Mula. 25. Then, in the Mula, the moon joins the Jo-yam in the Puvva-bhag, in
the Sama-kheta, in the 30th Muhurta, in the Tappadhama-maya. It gets another
Rai, and then another day. Thus, in the Nakshatra of Mula, the moon joins the
Jo-yam for one day and one Rai. The Jo-yam is added, the Jo-yam is Anu-
pariyattitta. When the Jo-yam is Anu-pariyattitta, it is given to the moon in
the Purva-ashadha. 26. Then, in the Purva-ashadha, the moon joins the Jo-yam in
the Puvva-bhag, in the Sama-kheta, in the 30th Muhurta, in the Tappadhama-maya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 84 ] joyaM aNupariyaTTittA, sAyaM caMdaM sAie samappei  /  21. tA sAI khalu
Nakkhatte nattaMbhAge avaDDhakhete paNNarasamuhutte tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joei, no labhai avaraM divasaM, evaM khalu sAI Nakkhatte egaM rAI
caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM jor3attA joyaM aNupariyaTTA, [
sUryaprajJaptisUtra joyaM aNupariyaTTittA pAo caMdaM visAhANaM, samappei  /  22.
tA visAhA khalu Nakkhatte ubhayabhAge divaDDhakhete paNayAlIsa-muhutte
tappaDhamayAe pAo caMde saddhiM joyaM joei avaraM ca rAI tao pacchA avaraM
divasaM, evaM khalu visAhA Nakkhatte do divase egaM ca rAI caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM
joei, joyaM jor3attA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA sAyaM caMdaM
aNurAhAe samappei  /  23. tA aNurAhA khalu Nakkhatte pacchaMbhAge samakkhette
tIsai muhutte tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, tao pacchArAiM
avaraM ca divasaM, evaM khalu aNurAhA Nakkhatte egaM rAI, egaM ca divasaM
caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joitA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, jo aNupariyaTTittA,
sAyaM caMdaM jiTThAe samapper3a  /  24. tA jeTThA khalu Nakkhatte nattaM bhAge
avaDDhakhete paNNarasa-muhutte tappaDhamayAe sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei,
no labhai avaraM divasaM, evaM khalu jiTThA Nakkhatte egaM divasaM caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM joitA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA pAo
caMdaM mUlassa samappei  /  25. tA mUle khalu Nakkhatte puvvaM bhAge samakkhette
tIsai-muhutte tappaDhamayAe pAo caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, tao pacchA avaraM ca
rAI, evaM khalu mUlaM NakkhattaM egaM ca divasaM ca rAI ca caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM
joei, joyaM joitA joyaM aNupariyaTTai, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA pAo caMdaM
puvvAsADhANaM samappei  /  26. tA puvvAsADhA khalu Nakkhatte puvvaM bhAge
samakkhette tIsai-muhutte tappaDhamayAe pAo caMdeNa

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[From the tenth to the fourth *prābhṛta* ] He joins with the moon, then
afterwards with the *rātri*, Thus, the *puvvāsāḍhā* constellation joins with the
moon for one day and one *rātri*, Joining, joining, *aṇu-pariyatṭa*, [85 He who
has *aṇu-pariyatṭita* reaches the moon in *uttarāsāḍhā* at the end. 27. Now, in
the *uttarāsāḍhā* constellation, in both parts of the day and night, for forty-
two *muhūrta* in the *tappiḍhamaya*, he joins with the moon, then afterwards
with the *rātri*, then afterwards with the day, Thus, the *uttarāsāḍhā*
constellation joins with the moon for two days and one *rātri*, Joining,
joining, *aṇu-pariyatṭa*, He who has *aṇu-pariyatṭita* reaches the moon in
*abhijit* in the evening. 1. The text from *sūtrāṅka* 10 to 27 is quoted here
from the commentary on the *sūryaprajñapti*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - caturtha prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] saddhiM joyaM joei, tao pacchA
avaraM ca rAI, evaM khalu puvvAsADhA NakkhattaM egaM ca divasaM ca rAI caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM jor3attA joyaM aNupariyaTTA, [ 85 jo aNupariyaTTittA
pAo caMdaM uttarAsADhANaM samappei  /  27. tA uttarAsADhA khalu Nakkhatte
ubhayaMbhAge divaDDhakhete paNayAlIsa muhutte tappaDhamayAe pAo caMdeNa saddhiM
joyaM joei, avaraM ca rAI tao pacchA avaraM ca divasaM, evaM khalu uttarAsADhA
Nakkhate do divase egaM ca rAI caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joei, joyaM jor3attA joyaM
aNupariyaTTA, joyaM aNupariyaTTittA sAyaM caMdaM abhiI savANANaM samappei  /  1.
sUtrAMka 10 se 27 paryanta meM mUlapATha sUryaprajJapti kI TIkA se yahA~ uddhRta
kiyA hai|

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## From the Tenth (Dasham) onwards [From the Fifth (Pancham) onwards] the number
of constellations (Nakshatra) in the families (Kula, Uvakula, Kulovakula) is 37.
How are these families (Kula, Uvakula, Kulovakula)? Here is the explanation.
There are twelve families (Kula), twelve sub-families (Uvakula), and four
combined families (Kulovakula). The twelve families (Kula) are:  1. Dhanishtha
Kula 2. Uttarabhadrapada Kula 3. Ashwini Kula 4. Krittika Kula 5. Mrigashira
Kula 6. Pushya Kula 7. Magha Kula 8. Uttara Phalguni Kula 9. Chitra Kula 10.
Visakha Kula 11. Mula Kula 12. Uttarashadha Kula  The twelve sub-families
(Uvakula) are:  1. Shravana Uvakula 2. Purvaphalguni Uvakula 3. Revati Uvakula
4. Bharani Uvakula 5. Rohini Uvakula 6. Punarvasu Uvakula 7. Ashlesha Uvakula 8.
Purva Phalguni Uvakula 9. Hasta Uvakula 10. Satabhisha Uvakula 11. Jyeshta
Uvakula 12. Purvashadha Uvakula  The four combined families (Kulovakula) are:
1. Abhijit Kulovakula 2. Satabhisha Kulovakula 3. Ashwini Kulovakula 4. Anuradha
Kulovakula  1. The question in the Surya Prajnapti is incomplete, therefore, the
words "Uvakula, Kulovakula" have been added in brackets to complete it. In the
Jambudvipa Prajnapti, Vakh. 7, Sutra 161, the question is as follows:  > Q. How
many, O Venerable One, are the families (Kula)? How many are the sub-families
(Uvakula)? How many are the combined families (Kulovakula)? > A. Gotama! There
are twelve families (Kula), twelve sub-families (Uvakula), and four combined
families (Kulovakula).  The rest of the text is similar to the Surya Prajnapti,
but in this question-answer Sutra of the Jambudvipa Prajnapti, after the names
of the twelve constellations (Nakshatra), there is a verse indicating the
characteristics of the Kula, etc., which is also quoted in the commentary of the
Surya Prajnapti, and this verse is quoted in the present collection. If the
compiler of the Jambudvipa Prajnapti had given this verse at the beginning or
end of the present Sutra, it would have been more appropriate.  **Verse:**  >
The durations of the months are the families (Kula), the sub-families (Uvakula)
are below them. > The combined families (Kulovakula) are Abhijit, Satabhisha,
Ashwini, and Anuradha.  - Jambudvipa Prajnapti, Vakh. 7, Sutra 161  > "What are
the characteristics of the Kula, etc.? It is said: The durations of the months -
the completions of the months - are the families (Kula). What is the meaning
here? The constellations by which the completions of the months are usually
brought about, and which are named after the months, are known as families
(Kula)."  > "The constellations below the families (Kula), starting with
Shravana, are the sub-families (Uvakula). The constellations that are near the
families (Kula) are the sub-families (Uvakula) by courtesy."  > "Those that are
below the families (Kula) and the sub-families (Uvakula) are the combined
families (Kulovakula)."  - Jambudvipa Prajnapti, Commentary.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [paMcama prAbhRtaprAbhRta] NakkhattANaM kulovakulAI - 37. tA
kahaM te kulA ( uvakulA, kulovakulA)? Ahie ti vejjaa| tattha khalu ime bArasa
kulA, bArasa uvakulA, cattAri kulovakulA pnnnnttaa| bArasakulA paNNattA taM jahA
- 1. dhaNiTThA kulaM 2. uttarAbhaddavayA kulaM 3. assiNI kulaM 4. kattiyAkulaM
5. migasirakulaM 6. pussakulaM 7. mahAkulaM 8. uttarAphagguNI kulaM 9.
cittAkulaM 10. visAhAkulaM 11. mulaMkulaM 12. uttraasaaddhaakulN| bArasa uvakulA
paNNattA taM jahA - 1. savaNo uvakulaM 2. puvvApoTThavayAuvakulaM 3. revaI
uvakulaM 4. bharaNI uvakulaM 5. rohiNI uvakulaM 6. puNavvasu uvakulaM 7. assesA
uvakulaM 8. puvvAphagguNI uvakulaM 9. hattho uvakulaM 10. sAtI uvakulaM 11.
jeTThA uvakulaM 12. puvvAsADhA uvakulaM  /  cattAri kulovakulA paNNattA taM jahA
- 1. abhiyI kulovakulaM 2. satabhisayA kulovakulaM 3. addA kulovakulaM 4.
aNurAhA kulovkulN| 1. sUryaprajJapti meM prastuta praznasUtra khaMDita haiM,
ata: koSThaka ke antargata 'uvakulA, kulovakulA' aMkita karake use pUrA kiyA
hai, jambUdvIpaprajJapti vakSa.7 sUtra 161 meM, yaha praznasUtra isa prakAra hai
- pra. kati NaM bhaMte ! kulA ? kati uvakulA ? kati kulovakulA paNNttA ? u.
goyamA! bArasa kulA bArasa uvakulA, cattAri kulovakulA pnnnnttaa| zeSa pATha
sUryaprajJapti ke samAna hai, kintu jambUdvIpaprajJapti ke isa praznottara sUtra
meM bAraha kula nakSatroM ke nAmoM ke bAda kulAdi ke lakSaNoM kI sUcaka eka
gAthA dI gaI hai jo sUryaprajJapti kI TIkA meM bhI uddhRta hai aura yaha gAthA
prastuta saMkalana meM uddhRta hai| jambUdvIpa prajJapti ke saMkalanakartA yadi
yaha gAthA prastuta sUtra ke prArambha meM yA anta meM dete to adhika upayukta
rhtii| gAhA - mAsANaM parimANA, hoMti kulA, uvakulA u hetttthimgaa|| hoMti puNa
kulovakulA, abhiyii-sybhisy-a6-annuraahaa| - jaMbu. vakkha. 7, su. 161 'kiM
kulAdInAM lakSaNam? ucyate-mAsAnAM pariNAmAni-parisamApakAni bhavanti kulAni,
ko'rthaH iha yairnakSatraiH prAyo mAsAnAM parisamAptayaH upajAyante
mAsasadRzanAmAni ca tAni nakSatrANi kulAnIti prsiddhaani|' 'kulAnAmadhastanAni
nakSatrANi zravaNAdIni upakulAni, kulAnAM samIpamupakulaM tatra vartante yAni
nakSatrANi taanyupcaaraadupkulaani|' 'yAni kulAnAmupakulAnAM cAdhastanAni tAni
kulopkulaanii|' - jambU. TIkA.

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ 87 In twelve full moon nights, the number of Nakshatra conjunctions is 38. P.
So, how are those full moon nights? Tell me. U. There are twelve full moon
nights and twelve new moon nights, as follows: 1. Savitthi, 2. Potthavai, 3.
Asoya, 4. Kattia, 5. Maggasirri, 6. Posi, 7. Mahi, 8. Phagguni, 9. Cheti, 10.
Visaihi, 11. Jetthamoli, 12. Asadhi. 1. P. So, how many Nakshatras are
associated with the Savitthi full moon? U. Three Nakshatras are associated with
it, as follows: 1. Abhi, 2. Savano, 3. Dhanitta. 2. P. So, how many Nakshatras
are associated with the Potthavai full moon? U. Three Nakshatras are associated
with it, as follows: 1. Satabhisaya, 2. Puvva Potthavaya, 3. Uttara Potthavaya.
3. P. So, how many Nakshatras are associated with the Asoya full moon? U. Two
Nakshatras are associated with it, as follows: 1. Revati, 2. Assini. 4. P. So,
how many Nakshatras are associated with the Kattia full moon? U. Two Nakshatras
are associated with it, as follows: 1. Bharani, 2. Kattia. 5. P. So, how many
Nakshatras are associated with the Maggasirri full moon? U. Two Nakshatras are
associated with it, as follows: 1. Rohini, 2. Maggasirro. 6. P. So, how many
Nakshatras are associated with the Posi full moon? U. Three Nakshatras are
associated with it, as follows: 1. Adda, 2. Punavvasu, 3. Pusso. 7. P. So, how
many Nakshatras are associated with the Mahi full moon? U. Two Nakshatras are
associated with it, as follows: 1. Assesa, 2. Maha. 8. P. So, how many
Nakshatras are associated with the Phagguni full moon? U. Two Nakshatras are
associated with it, as follows: 1. Puvva Phagguni, 2. Uttara Phagguni. 9. P. So,
how many Nakshatras are associated with the Chitti full moon? U. Two Nakshatras
are associated with it, as follows: 1. Hattho, 2. Chitta. 10. P. So, how many
Nakshatras are associated with the Visaihi full moon? U. Two Nakshatras are
associated with it, as follows: 1. Sati, 2. Visaiha. 11. P. So, how many
Nakshatras are associated with the Jettha-muli full moon? U. Three Nakshatras
are associated with it, as follows: 1. Anuraha, 2. Jettha, 3. Mulo. 12. P. So,
how many Nakshatras are associated with the Asadhi full moon? U. Two Nakshatras
are associated with it, as follows: 1. Puvva Asadha, 2. Uttara Asadha. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - paMcama prAbhRtaprAbhRta] [ 87 duvAlasAsu puNNamAsiNIsu
Nakkhatta-saMjoga-saMkhA 38. pa. tA kahaM te puNNimAsiNI ? Ahie tti vaejjA? u.
tattha khalu imAo bArasa puNNimAsiNIo, bArasa amAvAsAo paNNattAo taMjahA - 1.
sAviTThi, 2. poTThavaI, 3. AsoyA, 4. kattiyA 5. maggasirI, 6. posI, 7. mAhI, 8.
phagguNI, 9. cetI, 10. visAhI, 11. jeTThAmUlI, 12. aasaaddhii| 1. pa. tA
saviTThiNNaM puNNamAsiM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u. tA tiNNi NakkhattA joeMti,
taM jahA - 1. abhiI, 2. savaNo, 3. dhnnitttthaa| 2. pa. tA poTThavaiNNaM
puNNamAsiM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u. tA tiNNi NakkhattA joeMti,taM jahA - 1.
satabhisayA, 2. puvvApoTThavayA, 3. uttraapotttthvyaa| 3. pa. tA AsoiNNaM
puNNamAsiM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? _ u. tA doNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA - 1.
revatI, 2. assiNI y| 4. pa. tA kattiiNNaM puNNamAsiM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? _u.
tA doNNi NakkhattA joeti, taMjahA - 1. bharaNI, 2.kattiyA y| 5. pa. tA maggasiri
puNNamAsiM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u. tA doNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA - 1.
rohiNI, 2. maggasiro y| 6. pa. tA posiNNaM puNNamAsiM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u.
tA tiNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA - 1. addA, 2. puNavvasU, 3. pusso| 7. pa. tA
mAhiNNaM puNNamAsiM kati NakkhattA joeMti? _u. tA doNNi NakkhattA joeMti,
taMjahA - 1. assesA, 2. mahA y| 8. pa. tA phagguNiNaM puNNamAsiM kati NakkhattA
joeMti ? u. tA doNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA - 1. puvvAphagguNI, 2.
uttarAphagguNI y| 9. pa. tA cittiNNaM puNNamAsiM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u. tA
doNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA - 1. hattho, 2. cittA y| 10. pa. tA visAhiNNaM
puNNamAsiM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u. tA doNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA - 1.
sAtI, 2. visAhA y| 11. pa. tA jeTThA-mUliNNaM puNNamAsi kati NakkhattA joeMti ?
_u. tA tiNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA - 1. aNurAhA, 2. jeTThA, 3. muulo| 12.
pa. tA AsADhiNNaM puNNamAsiM kati NakkhattA joeMti ?  /  u. tA doNNi NakkhattA
joeMti, taMjahA - 1. puvvAsADhA, 2. uttarAsADhA y|

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Prabhruta [Sixth Prabhruta Prabhruta]  **Twelve Full Moons, Kula-
Nakshatra-Yoga Combinations**  **39.**  **1.** **Q.** On the Savitthini Full
Moon, which Kula is joined, which Uvakula is joined, which Kulovakula is joined?
**A.** The Kula is joined, or the Uvakula is joined, or the Kulovakula is
joined.  **1.** When the Kula is joined, the Dhanishtha Nakshatra is joined.
**2.**   **3.**   **-**  **2.** When the Uvakula is joined, the Savana Nakshatra
is joined.  **3.** When the Kulovakula is joined, the Abhijit Nakshatra is
joined.  On the Savitthini Full Moon, whether the Kula is joined, or the Uvakula
is joined, or the Kulovakula is joined, it should be said that the Savitthini
Full Moon is joined with the Kula, or the Uvakula, or the Kulovakula.  **Q.** On
the Potthavini Full Moon, which Kula is joined, which Uvakula is joined, which
Kulovakula is joined?  **A.** The Kula is joined, or the Uvakula is joined, or
the Kulovakula is joined.  **1.** When the Kula is joined, the Uttara-Potthavaya
Nakshatra is joined.  **2.** When the Uvakula is joined, the Purva-Potthavaya
Nakshatra is joined.  **3.** When the Kulovakula is joined, the Satabhisha
Nakshatra is joined.  On the Potthavini Full Moon, whether the Kula is joined,
or the Uvakula is joined, or the Kulovakula is joined, it should be said that
the Potthavini Full Moon is joined with the Kula, or the Uvakula, or the
Kulovakula.  **Q.** On the Ashadhi Full Moon, which Kula is joined, which
Uvakula is joined, which Kulovakula is joined?  **A.** The Kula is joined, or
the Uvakula is joined, but the Kulovakula is not joined.  **1.** The remaining
sutra can be inferred as "Thus it should be considered," until it is said that
the Ashadhi Full Moon is joined. The Pausha Full Moon, the Jyeshta-Mooli Full
Moon, also joins the Kulovakula. In the remaining Full Moons, the Kulovakula is
not joined, so it should be considered and said.  **Suryatika**  -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [ chaThA prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] duvAlasAsu puNNamAsiNIsu kulAi -
Nakkhatta-jogasaMkhA 39. 1. pa. tA sAviTThiNNaM puNNmaM NaM kiM kulaM joei
uvakulaM joei, kulovakulaM joei ? u. tAkulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei,
kulovakulaM vA joei, 1. kulaM joemANe dhaNiTThA Nakkhatte joei, 2. siyA  /  3. -
2. uvakulaM joemANe savaNe Nakkhatte joei, 3. kulovakulaM joemANe abhiI
Nakkhatte joei, sAviTTiNiM puNNamaM kulaM vA joer3a, uvakulaM vA joei
kulovakulaM vA joei, kuvA, uvakuleNa vA kalovakuleNa vA juttA sAviTThI puNNimA
juttAti vattavvaM siyA  /  pa. tA poTThavaiNNaM puNNamaM kiM kulaM joei,
uvakulaM joei, kulovakulaM vA joei ? tA kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei,
kulovakulaM vA joei, u. 1. kulaM joemANe uttarApoTThavayA Nakkhatte joei, 2.
uvakulaM joemANe puvvApoTThavayA Nakkhatte joei, 3. kulovakulaM joemANe
satabhisayA Nakkhatte joei, poTThavaiNNaM puNNamaM kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA
joei kulovakulaM vA joei, ' kuleNa vA, uvakuleNa vA kulovakuleNa vA juttA
puTThavayA puNNimA juttA ti vattavvaM pa. tA AsoiNNaM puNNamaM kiM kulaM joei
uvakulaM joei, kulovakulaM joei u. tA kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei, nolabhai
kulovakulaM, 1. zeSamapi sUtraM nigamanIyaM 'evaM neyavvAo,' jAva AsADhI-
puNNimaM jutteti vattavvaM siyA, NavaraM pauSI paurNamAsI, jyeSThAmUlI ca
paurNamAsIM kulopakulamapi yunakti, avazeSAsu ca paurNamAsISu kulopakulaM
nAstIti paribhAvya vaktavyAH  /  sUrya TIkA -

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dasham Prabhrit - Chatha Prabhrit Prabhrit  1. When the Kula is joined, it is
joined in the Ashwini Nakshatra. 2. When the Uvakula is joined, it is joined in
the Revati Nakshatra. If the Ashoina Purnima is joined with the Kula or the
Uvakula, it is to be said that the Ashoina Purnima is joined with the Kula or
the Uvakula. 4. Q. What is joined with the Kattika Purnima, the Kula, the
Uvakula, or the Kula Uvakula? A. The Kula or the Uvakula is joined, the Kula
Uvakula is not obtained. 1. When the Kula is joined, it is joined in the Kattika
Nakshatra. 2. When the Uvakula is joined, it is joined in the Bharani Nakshatra.
[89 If the Kattika Purnima is joined with the Kula or the Uvakula, it is to be
said that the Kattika Purnima is joined with the Kula or the Uvakula. Q. What is
joined with the Margashira Purnima, the Kula, the Uvakula, or the Kula Uvakula?
A. The Kula or the Uvakula is joined, the Kula Uvakula is not obtained. 1. When
the Kula is joined, it is joined in the Margashira Nakshatra. 2. When the
Uvakula is joined, it is joined in the Rohini Nakshatra. If the Margashira
Purnima is joined with the Kula or the Uvakula, it is to be said that the
Margashira Purnima is joined with the Kula or the Uvakula. 6. Q. What is joined
with the Pausha Purnima, the Kula, the Uvakula, or the Kula Uvakula? A. The
Kula, the Uvakula, or the Kula Uvakula is joined. 1. When the Kula is joined, it
is joined in the Pushya Nakshatra. 2. When the Uvakula is joined, it is joined
in the Punarvasu Nakshatra. 3. When the Kula Uvakula is joined, it is joined in
the Ashlesha Nakshatra. If the Pausha Purnima is joined with the Kula, the
Uvakula, or the Kula Uvakula, it is to be said that the Pausha Purnima is joined
with the Kula, the Uvakula, or the Kula Uvakula. Q. What is joined with the
Magha Purnima, the Kula, the Uvakula, or the Kula Uvakula? A. The Kula or the
Uvakula is joined, the Kula Uvakula is not obtained. 1. When the Kula is joined,
it is joined in the Magha Nakshatra. 7.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - chaThA prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] 1. kulaM joemANe assiNI Nakkhatte
joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe revaI Nakkhatte joei, AsoiNNaM puNNamaM kulaM vA joei,
uvakulaM vA joei, kuleNa vA, uvakuleNa vA juttA AsoiNNaM puNNimaM jutteti
vattavvaM siyA  /  4. pa. tA kattiiNNaM puNNamaM kiM kulaM joei, uvakulaM joei,
kulovakulaM joei ? u. tA kulaM joei uvakulaM vA joei, no labhai kulovakulaM, 1.
kulaM joemA kattiA Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe bharaNI Nakkhatte joei,
[89 kattiiNNaM puNNamaM kuleNa vA joei, uvakuleNa vA joei, kuleNa vA uvakuleNa
vA juttA kattiiNNaM puNNimaM jutteti vattavvaM siyA  /  pa. tA mAgasirI puNNimaM
kiM kulaM joei, uvakulaM joei, kulovakulaM joei ? u. tA kulaM vA joeD uvakulaM
vA joei, no labhai kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe maggasiraM Nakkhatte joei, 2.
uvakulaM joemANe rohiNI Nakkhatte joei, mAgasirI puNNimaM kulaM vA joei,
uvakulaM vA joei, kuleNa vA uvakuleNa vA juttA mAgasirI puNNimaM jutteti
vattavvaM siyA  /  6. pa. tA posiNNaM puNNamaM kiM kulaM joei, uvakulaM joei,
kulovakulaM joei ? u. tA kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei, kulovakulaM vA joei,
1. kulaM joemANe pusse Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe puNavassU Nakkhatte
joei, 3. kulovakulaM joemANe addA Nakkhatte joei, posiNNaM puNNimaM kulaM vA
joei, uvakulaM vA joei, kulovakulaM vA joei, kuleNa vA, uvakuleNa vA,
kulovakuleNa vA juttA posiNNaM puNNimaM jutteti vattavvaM siyA  /  pa. tA
mAhiNNaM puNNamaM kiM kulaM joei, uvakulaM joei, kulovakulaM joei ? u. tA kulaM
vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei, no labhai kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe mahA
Nakkhatte joei, 7.

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 90 [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra 2. If a *Uvakula* is to be born, it is born in the
*Nakshatra* of *Jyestha*, if a *Kula* is to be born, it is born on the full moon
of the month, either by the *Kula* or by the *Uvakula*. If both *Kula* and
*Uvakula* are to be born, then it is to be said that both *Kula* and *Uvakula*
are born on the full moon of the month. 8. Q. On the full moon of *Phalguna*,
which is born, *Kula* or *Uvakula*, or both *Kula* and *Uvakula*? A. Either
*Kula* or *Uvakula* is born, both *Kula* and *Uvakula* are not born. 1. If
*Kula* is to be born, it is born in the *Nakshatra* of *Uttara Phalguni*, 2. If
*Uvakula* is to be born, it is born in the *Nakshatra* of *Purva Phalguni*, on
the full moon of *Phalguna*, either by the *Kula* or by the *Uvakula*. If both
*Kula* and *Uvakula* are to be born, then it is to be said that both *Kula* and
*Uvakula* are born on the full moon of *Phalguna*. 9. Q. On the full moon of
*Chaitra*, which is born, *Kula* or *Uvakula*, or both *Kula* and *Uvakula*? A.
Either *Kula* or *Uvakula* is born, both *Kula* and *Uvakula* are not born. 1.
If *Kula* is to be born, it is born in the *Nakshatra* of *Chitra*, 2. If
*Uvakula* is to be born, it is born in the *Nakshatra* of *Hasta*, on the full
moon of *Chaitra*, either by the *Kula* or by the *Uvakula*. If both *Kula* and
*Uvakula* are to be born, then it is to be said that both *Kula* and *Uvakula*
are born on the full moon of *Chaitra*. 10. Q. On the full moon of *Vaisakha*,
which is born, *Kula* or *Uvakula*, or both *Kula* and *Uvakula*? A. Either
*Kula* or *Uvakula* is born, both *Kula* and *Uvakula* are not born. 1. If
*Kula* is to be born, it is born in the *Nakshatra* of *Visakha*, 2. If
*Uvakula* is to be born, it is born in the *Nakshatra* of *Satabhisha*, on the
full moon of *Vaisakha*, either by the *Kula* or by the *Uvakula*. If both
*Kula* and *Uvakula* are to be born, then it is to be said that both *Kula* and
*Uvakula* are born on the full moon of *Vaisakha*. 11. Q. On the full moon of
*Jyestha-Mula*, which is born, *Kula* or *Uvakula*, or both *Kula* and
*Uvakula*? A. Either *Kula* or *Uvakula*, or both *Kula* and *Uvakula* are born.
1. If *Kula* is to be born, it is born in the *Nakshatra* of *Mula*, 2. If
*Uvakula* is to be born, it is born in the *Nakshatra* of *Jyestha*, 3. If both
*Kula* and *Uvakula* are to be born, it is born in the *Nakshatra* of
*Anuradha*. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 90 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 2. uvakulaM joemANe assesA Nakkhatte joei, mAhiNNaM
puNNimaM kuleNa vA joei, uvakuleNa vA joei kuleNa vA, uvakuleNa vA juttA
mAhiNNaM puNNimaM jutte tti vattavvaM siyaa| 8. pa. tA phagguNINaM puNmiM kiM
kulaM joei uvakulaM joei, kulovakulaM joei ? u. tA kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA
joei, no labhai kulovalulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe uttarAphagguNI Nakkhatte joei, 2.
uvakulaM joemANe puvvAphagguNI Nakkhatte joei, phagguNINaM puNNimaM kuleNa vA
joei, uvakaleNa vA joei, kaleNa vA, uvakuleNa vA juttA phagguNINaM puNNimaM
jutteti vattavvaM siyaa| 9. pa. tA cittiNNaM puNNimaM kiM kulaM joei, uvakulaM
joei, kulovakulaM vA joei ? u. tA kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei, no labhai
kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe cittA Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe hattha
Nakkhatte joei, cittiNNaM puNNimaM kuleNa vA joei, uvakuleNa vA joei, kuleNa vA,
uvakuleNa vA juttA cittiNNaM puNNimaM jutteti vattavvaM siyaa| 10. pa. tA
visAhiNNaM puNNimaM kiM kulaM joei, uvakulaM joei, kulovakulaM vA joei ? u. tA
kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei, no labhai kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe visAhA
Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe sAtI Nakkhatte joei, visAhiNNaM puNNimaM
kuleNa vA joei, uvakuleNa vA joei, kuleNa vA, uvakuleNa vA juttA visAhiNNaM
puNNimaM jutteti vattavvaM siyaa| 11. pa. tA jeTThA-mUliNNaM puNNimaM kiM kulaM
joei, uvakulaM joei, kulovakulaM joei ? u. tA kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei,
kulovakulaM vA joei, 1. kulaM joemANe mUle Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe
jeTThA Nakkhatte joei, 3. kulovakulaM joemANe aNurAhA Nakkhatte joei,

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[From the tenth to the sixth Prabhruta Prabhruta] It is so. 12. Q. On the full
moon of Ashadha, what lineage is obtained, what sub-lineage is obtained, what
lineage-sub-lineage is obtained? A. On the full moon of Ashadha, neither lineage
nor sub-lineage is obtained, 1. If lineage is obtained, it is obtained in the
Uttarashadha Nakshatra, 2. If sub-lineage is obtained, it is obtained in the
Purvashadha Nakshatra, On the full moon of Ashadha, neither lineage nor sub-
lineage is obtained, It should be said that the full moon of Ashadha is obtained
by lineage or sub-lineage. The number of Nakshatra combinations in the twelve
Amavasyas 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Jyeshta - Mula - On the full moon, lineage or
sub-lineage or lineage-sub-lineage is obtained, it should be said that the full
moon of Jyeshta-Mula is obtained by lineage or sub-lineage or lineage-sub-
lineage. 8. Q. On the Amavasya of Savitthi, how many Nakshatras are obtained? A.
Two Nakshatras are obtained, namely - Aslesha and Magha, Q. On the Amavasya of
Potthavai, how many Nakshatras are obtained? A. Two Nakshatras are obtained,
namely - Purva Phalguni and Uttara Phalguni, Q. On the Amavasya of Asoi, how
many Nakshatras are obtained? A. Two Nakshatras are obtained, namely - Hasta and
Chitra, Q. On the Amavasya of Katti, how many Nakshatras are obtained? A. Two
Nakshatras are obtained, namely - Satabhisha and Visakha, Q. On the Amavasya of
Magha, how many Nakshatras are obtained? A. Three Nakshatras are obtained,
namely - Anuradha, Jyeshta and Mula, Q. On the Amavasya of Posi, how many
Nakshatras are obtained? 91 A. Two Nakshatras are obtained, namely - Purvashadha
and Uttarashadha, Q. On the Amavasya of Mahi, how many Nakshatras are obtained?
A. Three Nakshatras are obtained, namely - 1. Abhijit, 2. Savana, 3. Dhanishta,
Q. On the Amavasya of Phalguni, how many Nakshatras are obtained? A. Three
Nakshatras are obtained, namely - 1. Satabhisha, 2. Purva Potthavai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - chaThA prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] siyA  /  12. pa. tA AsADhiNNaM
puNNimaM kiM kulaM joei, uvakulaM joei, kulovakulaM joei ? u. tA kulaM vA joei,
uvakulaM vA joei, no labhai kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe uttarAsADhA Nakkhatte
joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe puvvAsADhA Nakkhatte joei, AsADhaNNaM puNNamaM kulaM
vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei, kuleNa vA, uvakuleNa vA, juttA AsADhiNNaM puNNimaM
jutteti vattavvaM siyA  /  duvAlasAsu amAvAsAsu Nakkhattajoga-saMkhA 1. 2. 3. 4.
5. 6. 7. TThA - mUliNaM puNNamaM kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei, kulovakulaM vA
joei, kuleNa vA, uvakuleNa vA, kulovakuleNa vA juttA jeTThA mUliNNaM puNNimaM
jutteti vattavvaM 8. pa. tA sAviTThi NaM amAvAsaM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u.
duNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA- assesA ya maghA ya, pa. tA poTThavaI NaM
amAvAsaM kati NakkhattA joeMsi ? u. duNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taM jahA-
puvvAphagguNI uttarAphagguNI, pa. tA AsoiM NaM amAvAsaM kati NakkhattA joeMti ?
u. duNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA - hattho, cittA ya, pa. tA kattiiM NaM
amAvAsaM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u. duNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA-sAtI, visAhA
ya, pa. tA maggasiriM NaM amAvAsaM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u. tiNiNa NakkhattA
joeMti, taMjahA- aNurAdhA, jeTThA-mUlo ya, pa. tA posiM NaM amAvAsaM kati
NakkhattA joeMti ? 91 u. duNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA- puvvAsADhA,
uttarAsADhA, pa. tA mAhiM NaM amAvAsaM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u. tiNiNa
NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA- 1. abhIyI, 2. savaNo, 3. dhaNiTThA, pa. tA phagguNI
NaM amAvAsaM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u. Ni NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA - 1.
satabhisayA, 2. puvvApoTThavayA  /

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 92 [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ]  9. P.  What constellations are associated with
the Amavasya (new moon) in the month of Cheti? U. Two constellations are
associated, namely, Tangiharevai and Assini.  10. P. What constellations are
associated with the Amavasya in the month of Visakha? U. Two constellations are
associated, namely, Bharani and Kattara.  11. P. What constellations are
associated with the Amavasya in the month of Jyestha-Muli? U. Two constellations
are associated, namely, Rohini and Magha.  12. P. What constellations are
associated with the Amavasya in the month of Ashadha? U. Three constellations
are associated, namely, 1. Adha, 2. Punavvasu, 3. Pushya.  In the twelve
Amavasyas, the number of constellations associated with the Kula (main
constellation) is:  1. P. What Kula (main constellation) is associated with the
Amavasya in the month of Savan? Does it have an Uvakula (sub-constellation) or a
Kulovakula (sub-sub-constellation)? U. It is associated with the Kula, but not
with the Uvakula or Kulovakula. 1. When associated with the Kula, the Maha
constellation is associated. 2. When associated with the Uvakula, the Asilesa
constellation is associated. Therefore, the Amavasya in the month of Savan is
associated with the Kula or the Uvakula. It should be said that it is associated
with the Kula or the Uvakula, depending on the constellation.  2. P. What Kula
(main constellation) is associated with the Amavasya in the month of Potthavai?
Does it have an Uvakula (sub-constellation) or a Kulovakula (sub-sub-
constellation)? U. It is associated with the Kula, but not with the Uvakula or
Kulovakula. 1. When associated with the Kula, the Uttara Phalguni constellation
is associated. 2. When associated with the Uvakula, the Purva Phalguni
constellation is associated. Therefore, the Amavasya in the month of Potthavai
is associated with the Kula or the Uvakula. It should be said that it is
associated with the Kula or the Uvakula, depending on the constellation.  3. P.
What Kula (main constellation) is associated with the Amavasya in the month of
Asoi? Does it have an Uvakula (sub-constellation) or a Kulovakula (sub-sub-
constellation)? U. It is associated with the Kula, but not with the Uvakula or
Kulovakula. 1. When associated with the Kula, the Chitra constellation is
associated. 2. When associated with the Uvakula, the Hasta constellation is
associated. Therefore, the Amavasya in the month of Asoi is associated with the
Kula or the Uvakula.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 92 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 9. pa. tA cetiM NaM amAvAsaM kati NakkhattA joeMti ?
u. duNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahArevaI, assiNI ya, 10. pa. tA visAhiM NaM
amAvAsaM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u. duNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA-bharaNI,
kattiyA rA, 11. pa. tA jeTThA-mUliM NaM amAvAsaM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u.
duNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA-rohiNI, maggasiraM ca, 12. pa. tA AsADhiM NaM
amAvAsaM kati NakkhattA joeMti ? u. tiNNi NakkhattA joeMti, taMjahA-1. addhA, 2.
puNavvasU, 3. pusso, duvAlasAsu amAvAsAsu kulAi-Nakkhatta-joga-saMkhA - 1. pa.
tA sAva4i NaM amAvAsaM kiM kulaM joeiM, uvakulaM joei kulovakulaM joei ? u.
kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei no labhai kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe mahA
Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe asilesA joei, tA sAvaDhei NaM amAvAsaM kulaM
dA joei, uvakulaM vA joei, kuleNa vA juttA, uvakuleNa vA juttA sAviTThi asAvAsA
juttA vi vattavvaM siyaa| 2. pa. tA poTThavaI NaM amAvAsaM kiM kulaM joeiM,
uvakulaM joei, kulovakulaM joei ? u. kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei no labbhai
kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe uttarAphagguNI joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe
puvvAphagguNI joei, puTThavaiMNaM amAvAsaM kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei,
kuleNa vA juttA, uvakuleNa vA juttA poTTavayA amAvAsA juttAtti vattavvaM siyaa|
3. pa. tA AsoI NaM amAvAsaM kiM kulaM joeI, uvakulaM joei kulovakulaM joei ? u.
kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei no labbhai kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe cittA
Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe hattha Nakkhatte joei, tA AsoI NaM amAvAsaM
kulaM joei, uvakulaM joei,'

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[From the tenth Prabhruta to the sixth Prabhruta Prabhruta] It should be said
that the one who is born on an Amavasya is either a Kula or an Uvakula. 4. Q. On
which Nakshatra is the Amavasya born? Is it a Kula, an Uvakula, or a Kulovakula?
A. It is either a Kula or an Uvakula, but not a Kulovakula. 1. If it is a Kula,
it is born on the Visakha Nakshatra. 2. If it is an Uvakula, it is born on the
Saayi Nakshatra. Therefore, the Amavasya is either a Kula or an Uvakula. It
should be said that the one who is born on an Amavasya is either a Kula or an
Uvakula. 5. Q. On which Nakshatra is the Magha Amavasya born? Is it a Kula, an
Uvakula, or a Kulovakula? A. It is either a Kula or an Uvakula, but not a
Kulovakula. 1. If it is a Kula, it is born on the Mula Nakshatra. 2. If it is an
Uvakula, it is born on the Jyeshta Nakshatra. 3. If it is a Kulovakula, it is
born on the Anuradha Nakshatra. Therefore, the Magha Amavasya is either a Kula,
an Uvakula, or a Kulovakula. It should be said that the one who is born on the
Magha Amavasya is either a Kula, an Uvakula, or a Kulovakula. 6. Q. On which
Nakshatra is the Posha Amavasya born? Is it a Kula, an Uvakula, or a Kulovakula?
A. It is either a Kula or an Uvakula, but not a Kulovakula. 1. If it is a Kula,
it is born on the Purvashadha Nakshatra. 2. If it is an Uvakula, it is born on
the Uttarashadha Nakshatra. Therefore, the Posha Amavasya is either a Kula or an
Uvakula. It should be said that the one who is born on the Posha Amavasya is
either a Kula or an Uvakula. 7. Q. On which Nakshatra is the Maaha Amavasya
born? Is it a Kula, an Uvakula, or a Kulovakula? A. It is either a Kula, an
Uvakula, or a Kulovakula. 1. If it is a Kula, it is born on the Abhijit
Nakshatra. 2. If it is an Uvakula, it is born on the Savana Nakshatra. 3. If it
is a Kulovakula, it is born on the Dhanishta Nakshatra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - chaThA prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] kuleNa vA juttA, uvakuleNa vA juttA
Asoi asAvAsA juttA tti vattavvaM siyaa| 4. pa. kattaI NaM amAvAsaM kiM kulaM
joeiM, uvakulaM joei kulovakulaM joei ? u. kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei no
labbhai kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe visAhA Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe
sAI Nakkhatte joei, tA kattiI NaM amAvAsaM kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei,
kuleNa vA juttA, uvakuleNa vA juttA kattiI NaM amAvAsaM juttAttivattavvaM siyaa|
5. pa. tA maggasiri NaM amAvAsaM kiM kulaM joeiM, uvakulaM joei kulovakulaM joei
? u. kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei no labbhai kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe
mUlaNakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe jeTThA Nakkhatte joei, 3. kulovakulaM
joemANe aNurAhA Nakkhatte joei, tA maggasiriNaM NaM amAvAsaM kulaM vA joei,
uvakulaM vA joei, kulovakulaM vA joei kuleNa vA juttA uvakuleNa vA juttA
kulovakuleNa vA juttA, maggasiriM NaM amAvAsaM juttAttivattavvaM siyaa| 6. pa.
poSi NaM amAvAsaM kiM kulaM joeiM, uvakulaM joei kulovakulaM joei ? u. kulaM vA
joei, uvakulaM vA joei no labbhai kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe puvvAsADhA
Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe uttarAsADhA Nakkhatte joei, tA poSiM NaM
amAvAsaM kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei, kuleNa vA juttA, uvakuleNa vA juttA
poSiNaM amAvAsA juttAtti vattavvaM siyaa| 7. pa. tA mAhiM NaM amAvAsaM kiM kulaM
joeI, uvakulaM joei kulovakulaM joei ? u. kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei
kulovakulaM vA joei, 1. kulaM joemANe abhIyI Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe
savaNe Nakkhatte joei, 3. kulovakulaM joemANe dhaNiTThA Nakkhatte joei,

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[94] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] If a person is born on an Amavasya (new moon) in a
Kula (family), or in an Uvakula (sub-family), or in a Kulovakula (combined
family), then it should be said that he is born in a Kula, or in an Uvakula, or
in a Kulovakula, respectively. 8. P. Now, on the Amavasya of the month of
Phalguna, in what Kula is a person born? In an Uvakula? In a Kulovakula? A. He
is born in a Kula, or in an Uvakula, but not in a Kulovakula. 1. If he is born
in a Kula, he is born in the Nakshatra Satabhisha. 2. If he is born in an
Uvakula, he is born in the Nakshatra Purvaphalguni. Therefore, on the Amavasya
of Phalguna, he is born in a Kula, or in an Uvakula, but not in a Kulovakula. 9.
P. Now, on the Amavasya of the month of Chaitra, in what Kula is a person born?
In an Uvakula? In a Kulovakula? A. He is born in a Kula, or in an Uvakula, and
also in a Kulovakula. 1. If he is born in a Kula, he is born in the Nakshatra
Revati. 2. If he is born in an Uvakula, he is born in the Nakshatra Ashwini.
Therefore, on the Amavasya of Chaitra, he is born in a Kula, or in an Uvakula,
and also in a Kulovakula. 10. P. Now, on the Amavasya of the month of Vaisakha,
in what Kula is a person born? In an Uvakula? In a Kulovakula? A. He is born in
a Kula, or in an Uvakula, but not in a Kulovakula. 1. If he is born in a Kula,
he is born in the Nakshatra Bharani. 2. If he is born in an Uvakula, he is born
in the Nakshatra Krittika. Therefore, on the Amavasya of Vaisakha, he is born in
a Kula, or in an Uvakula, but not in a Kulovakula. 11. P. Now, on the Amavasya
of the month of Jyeshtha, in what Kula is a person born? In an Uvakula? In a
Kulovakula? A. He is born in a Kula, or in an Uvakula, but not in a Kulovakula.
1. If he is born in a Kula, he is born in the Nakshatra Rohini. 2. If he is born
in an Uvakula, he is born in the Nakshatra Mrigashira. Therefore, on the
Amavasya of Jyeshtha, he is born in a Kula, or in an Uvakula, but not in a
Kulovakula.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 94 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra tA mAhiM NaM amAvAsaM kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA
joei, kulovakulaM vA joei, . kuleNa vA juttA, uvakuleNa vA juttA kulovakuleNa vA
juttA mAhiNaM amAvAsA juttAtti vattavvaM siyaa| 8. pa. tA phagguNiM NaM amAvAsaM
kiM kulaM joeiM, uvakulaM joei kulovakulaM joei ? u. kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA
joei no labbhai kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe satabhisayA Nakkhatte joei, 2.
uvakulaM joemANe puvvApoTThavayA Nakkhatte joei, tA phagguNI amAvAsaM kulaM vA
joei, uvakulaM vA joei, kuleNa vA juttA, uvakuleNa vA juttA phagguNiM amAvAsA
jutati vattavvaM siyaa| 9. pa. tA cetiM amAvAsaM ki kulaM joeiM, uvakulaM joei
kulovakulaM joei ? u. kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei labbhai kulovakulaM, 1.
kulaM joemANe revatI Nakkhatte joei, . 2. uvakulaM joemANe assiNI Nakkhatte
joei, tA cetiM amAvAsaM kulaM dA joei, uvakulaM vA joei, kuleNa vA juttA,
uvakuleNa vA juttA cettiM amAvAsA jutati vattavvaM siyaa| 10.pa. tA vesAhiM
amAvAsaM kiM kulaM joei, uvakulaM joei kulovakulaM joei ? u. kulaM vA joei,
uvakulaM vA joei no labbhai kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe bharaNi Nakkhatte
joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe kattiyA Nakkhatte joei, tA vesAhiM amAvAsaM kulaM vA
joei, uvakulaM vA joei, kuleNa vA juttA, uvakuleNa vA juttA vesAhiM amAvAsA
juttatti vattavvaM siyaa| 11.pa. tA jeTThAmUlI amAvAsaM kiM kulaM joei, uvakulaM
joei kulovakulaM joei ? u. kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei no labbhai
kulovakulaM, 1. kulaM joemANe rohiNI Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM joemANe
maggasire Nakkhatte joei, tA jeTThAmUlI amAvAsaM kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA
joei,

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[From the tenth Prabhruta to the sixth Prabhruta Prabhruta] [ 95 It should be
said that the Ashadha Amavasya is the Jutta of the Kula, or the Jutta of the
Uvakula, or the Jutta of the Kulovakula. 12.p. So, which Kula is the Ashadha
Amavasya, the Kula, the Uvakula, or the Kulovakula? A. The Kula, or the Uvakula,
or the Kulovakula. 1. If the Kula is the Jutta, then the Adha Nakshatra is the
Jutta. 2. If the Uvakula is the Jutta, then the Punavassu Nakshatra is the
Jutta. 3. If the Kulovakula is the Jutta, then the Pussa Nakshatra is the Jutta.
So, the Ashadha Amavasya is the Jutta of the Kula, or the Jutta of the Uvakula,
or the Jutta of the Kulovakula. It should be said that the Ashadha Amavasya is
the Jutta of the Kula, or the Jutta of the Uvakula, or the Jutta of the
Kulovakula. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - chaThA prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 95 kuleNa vA juttA, uvakuleNa vA
juttA jeTThAmUlI amAvAsA juttatti vattavvaM siyaa| 12.pa. tA AsADhiM amAvAsaM
kiM kulaM joeiM, uvakulaM joei kulovakulaM joei ? u. kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA
joei kulovakulaM, vA joei, 1. kulaM joemANe addhA Nakkhatte joei, 2. uvakulaM
joemANe puNavassU Nakkhatte joei, 3. kulovakulaM joemANe pusse Nakkhatte joei,
tA AsADhiM amAvAsaM kulaM vA joei, uvakulaM vA joei, kulovakulaM vA joei, kuleNa
vA juttA, uvakuleNa vA juttA kulovakuleNa vA juttA, AsAThiM amAvAsA juttatti
vattavvaM siyaa|

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ख] From the tenth [seventh from the seventh] to the twelfth, on the full moons
and new moons, and also on the conjunction of the moon and the constellations -
40. 1. P. How are these days connected? Ans. [क] When the Savitthi full moon
occurs, then the Mahii new moon occurs. [ख] When the Mahii full moon occurs,
then the Savitthi new moon occurs. 2. [क] When the Putthavai full moon occurs,
then the Phagguni new moon occurs. When the Phagguni full moon occurs, then the
Putthavai new moon occurs. [क] When the Asoi full moon occurs, then the Chetti
new moon occurs. [ख] When the Chetti full moon occurs, then the Asoi new moon
occurs. [क] When the Kattiyai full moon occurs, then the Vesaihi new moon
occurs. [ख] When the Vesaihi full moon occurs, then the Kattiyai new moon
occurs. [क] When the Maggasir full moon occurs, then the Jetthamuuli new moon
occurs. [ख] When the Jetthamuuli full moon occurs, then the Maggasir new moon
occurs. [क] When the Posii full moon occurs, then the Asadhi new moon occurs.
[ख] When the Asadhi full moon occurs, then the Posii new moon occurs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [kha] dazamaprAbhRta [saptama prAbhRtaprAbhRta] duvAlasAsu puNNimAsu amAvAsAsu
ya caMdeNa-NakkhatasaMjogo - 40. 1. pa. tA kahaM te saNNivAe Ahie tti vaejjA? u.
[ka] tA jayA NaM sAviTThI puNNimA bhavai, tayA NaM mAhI amAvAsA bhvi| [kha] tA
jayA NaM mAhI puNNimA bhavai, tayA NaM sAviTThI amAvAsA bhvi| 2. [ka] tA jayA
NaM puTThavai puNNimA bhavai, tayA NaM phagguNI amAvAsA bhvi| tA jayA NaM
phaggNI puNNimA bhavai, tayA NaM puTThavai amAvAsA bhvi| [ka] tA jayA NaM AsoI
puNNimA bhavai, tayA NaM cettI amAvAsA bhvi| [kha] tA jayA NaM cettI puNNimA
bhavai, tayA NaM AsoI amAvAsA bhvi| [ka] tA jayA NaM kattiyI puNNimA bhavai,
tayA NaM vesAhI amAvAsA bhvi| [kha] _tA jayA NaM vesAhI puNNimA bhavai, tayA NaM
kattiyI amAvAsA bhvi| [ka] tA jayA NaM maggasirI puNNimA bhavai, tayA NaM
jeTThAmUlI amAvAsA bhvi| [kha] tA jayA NaM jeTThAmUlI puNNimA bhavai, tayA NaM
maggasirI amAvAsA bhvi| [ka] tA jayA NaM posI puNNimA bhavai, tayA NaM AsADhI
amAvAsA bhvi| [kha] tA jayA NaM AsADhI puNNimA bhavai, tayA NaM posI amAvAsA
bhvdd|

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Arrangement of the Nakshatras  **41.**  **From the Tenth** [From the
Eighth, From the Eighth]  1. **Q.** How are these Nakshatras arranged? **A.**
They are arranged according to the twenty-eight Nakshatras.  2. **Q.** What is
the arrangement of the **Gosisavali** Nakshatra? **A.** It is arranged according
to the **Go** (cow) **Sisa** (head) **Aval** (row).  3. **Q.** What is the
arrangement of the **Savana** Nakshatra? **A.** It is arranged according to the
**Kahar** (eating) **Sant** (together).  4. **Q.** What is the arrangement of
the **Dhanishtha** Nakshatra? **A.** It is arranged according to the **Sau**
(hundred) **Ni** (not) **Pali** (row) **Na** (not) **Ga** (going).  5. **Q.**
What is the arrangement of the **Sayabhisha** Nakshatra? **A.** It is arranged
according to the **Puppha** (flower) **Ova** (above) **Yara** (going) **Sant**
(together).  6. **Q.** What is the arrangement of the **Puvva** (east) **A**
(and) **Potthava** (rising) Nakshatra? **A.** It is arranged according to the
**Avaddha** (not) **Vavi** (going) **Sant** (together).  7. **Q.** What is the
arrangement of the **Uttara** (north) **A** (and) **Potthava** (rising)
Nakshatra? **A.** It is arranged according to the **Avaddha** (not) **Vavi**
(going) **Sant** (together).  8. **Q.** What is the arrangement of the **Revai**
Nakshatra? **A.** It is arranged according to the **Nava** (new) **Sant**
(together).  9. **Q.** What is the arrangement of the **Assi** (eight) **Ni**
(not) Nakshatra? **A.** It is arranged according to the **Asakkh** (not)
**Andha** (blind) **Sant** (together).  10. **Q.** What is the arrangement of
the **Bharani** Nakshatra? **A.** It is arranged according to the **Bha**
(light) **Ga** (going) **Sant** (together).  11. **Q.** What is the arrangement
of the **Kattiya** Nakshatra? **A.** It is arranged according to the **Chur**
(knife) **Ghar** (house) **Ga** (going) **Sant** (together).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 NakkhattANaM saMThANaM 41. dazamaprAbhRta [ aSTama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] 1. pa. tA
kahaM te NakkhattasaMThiI Ahie tti vaejA ? tA eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM
abhIyI Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. gosisAvali - saMThie paNNatte, 2. pa.
tA savaNe Nakkhatte kiM saMThie paNNatte ? u. kAhAra-saMTie paNNatte, 3. pa. tA
dhaNiTThA Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. sauNIpalINaga-saMThie paNNatte, 4.
pa. tA sayabhiyasA Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. pupphovayArasaMThie
paNNatte, 5. pa. tA puvvApoTThavayA Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u.
avaDDhavAvisaMThie paNNatte, 6. pa. tA uttarApoTThavayA Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie
paNNatte ? u. avaDDhavAvi-saMThie paNNatte, 7. pa. tA revaI Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie
paNNatte ? u. NAvAsaMThie paNNatte, 8. pa. tA assiNI Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie
paNNatte ? u. AsakkhaMdha-saMThie paNNatte, 9. pa. tA bharaNI Nakkhatte
kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. bhaga-saMThie paNNatte, 10.pa. tA kattiyA Nakkhatte
kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. churagharaga-saMThie paNNatte,

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
98] 11.P. What is the **santhi** of the **Rohini** nakshatra? A.
**Sagduddhi**-santhi. 12.P. What is the **santhi** of the **Mrigashira**
nakshatra? A. **Magasisaavali**-santhi. 13.P. What is the **santhi** of the
**Ardra** nakshatra? A. **Ruhirabindu**-santhi. 14.P. What is the **santhi** of
the **Punarvasu** nakshatra? A. **Tula**-santhi. 15.P. What is the **santhi** of
the **Pushya** nakshatra? A. **Vaddhaman**-santhi. 16.P. What is the **santhi**
of the **Ashlesha** nakshatra? A. **Padaag**-santhi. 17.P. What is the
**santhi** of the **Magha** nakshatra? A. **Paagaar**-santhi. 18.P. What is the
**santhi** of the **Purva Phalguni** nakshatra? A. **Addhapaliank**-santhi.
19.P. What is the **santhi** of the **Uttara Phalguni** nakshatra? A.
**Addhapaliank**-santhi. 20.P. What is the **santhi** of the **Hasta**
nakshatra? A. **Hattha**-santhi. 21.P. What is the **santhi** of the **Chitra**
nakshatra? A. **Muhphull**-santhi. 22.P. What is the **santhi** of the **Swati**
nakshatra? A. **Kheelaag**-santhi. 23.P. What is the **santhi** of the
**Visakha** nakshatra? A. **Daamani**-santhi. [ **Surya Prajnapti Sutra**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 98 ] 11.pa. tA rohiNI Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. sagaDuDDhi - saMThie
paNNatte, 12.pa. tA miyasirA Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. magasisAvali-
saMThie paNNatte, 13.pa. tA addA Nakkhatte kiM saMThie paNNatte ? u.
ruhirabiMdu-saMThie paNNatte, 14.pa. tA puNavvaNakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ?
u. tulA - saMThie paNNatte, 15. pa. tA pusse Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u.
vaddhamANa - saMThie paNNatte, 16.pa. tA assesA Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ?
u. paDAga - saMThie paNNatte, 17.pa. tA mahA Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u.
pAgAra-saMThie paNNatte, 18. pa. tA puvvAphagguNI Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte
? u. addhapaliyaMka- saMThie paNNatte, 19.pa. tA uttarAphagguNI Nakkhatte
kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. addhapaliyaMka - saMThie paNNatte, 20.pa. tA hattha
Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. hattha-saMThie paNNatte, 21. pa. tA cittA
Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. muhaphulla - saMThie paNNatte, 22. pa. tA sAI
Nakkhatte kiM saMThie paNNatte ? u. khIlaga-saMThie paNNatte, 23.pa. tA visAhA
Nakkhatte kiM saMThie paNNatte ? u. dAmaNi- saMThie paNNatte, [
sUryaprajJaptisUtra

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[From the tenth onwards - from the eighth onwards]** **24.Q.
How is the Ashta Nakshatra (eighth constellation) formed?** **A. It is formed by
the Egaavali (single line) formation.** **25.Q. How is the Jyeshta Nakshatra
(tenth constellation) formed?** **A. It is formed by the Gayadanta (elephant
tusk) formation.** **26.Q. How is the Mula Nakshatra (twelfth constellation)
formed?** **A. It is formed by the Vichchhuyalangola (scorpion tail)
formation.** **27.Q. How is the Purvashadha Nakshatra (fourteenth constellation)
formed?** **A. It is formed by the Gayavikkama (elephant's gait) formation.**
**28.Q. How is the Uttarashadha Nakshatra (fifteenth constellation) formed?**
**A. It is formed by the Sihanisaiya (lion's roar) formation.**  **1.Q.
Venerable Sir! How is the remaining twenty-eight Nakshatras formed?** **A. Go!
They are formed by the Gosi Savali (cow's tail) formation.**  **Explanation:**
**1. Gosi Savali, 2. Kahar, 3. Sauni, 4. Puphovyar, 5-6. Vavi.** **7. Nava, 8.
Asakkhandhaga, 9. Bhaga, 10. Chhurgharaye, 11. Asangadudhi.** **12. Migsi
Savali, 13. Ruhirbindu, 14. Tula, 15. Baddhamanaga, 16. Padaga.** **17. Pagare,
18-19. Paliyanke, 20. Hatthe, 21. Muhphullae.** **22. Khilga, 23. Damani, 24.
Egaavali, 25. Gayadanta, 26. Vichchhuyalangule.** **27. Gayavikkama, 28.
Sihanisihi.**  **These verses are quoted in the commentary of Surya
Prajnaptti.**  **-**  **The formations of Purvabhadrapada - Uttarabhadrapada and
Purvafalguni - Uttarafalguni are considered similar, but the formations of
Purvashadha - Uttarashadha are considered different.**  **The reason for this
difference in formations is as follows:**  **Purvabhadrapada has an Ardhavaapi
(half-well) formation, and Uttarabhadrapada also has an Ardhavaapi formation.
These two Ardhavaapis combine to form a complete Vaapi (well), hence the term
Vaapi is used in the sutra.**  **Purvafalguni has an Ardhapalyanka (half-bed)
formation, and Uttarafalguni also has an Ardhapalyanka formation. Here too, the
two Ardhapalyanakas combine to form a complete Palyanka (bed), hence there is no
reduction in the number.**  **[Jambudvipa Vyakhyana 6, Sutra 160 Commentary]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta- aSTama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] 24.pa. tA aNarAhA Nakkhatte
kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. egAvali-saMThie paNNatte, 25.pa. tA jeTThA Nakkhatte
kiM saMThie paNNatte ? u. gayadaMta - saMThie paNNatte, 26.pa. tA mUle Nakkhatte
kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. vicchuyalaMgolasaMThie paNNatte, 27.pa. tA puvvAsADhA
Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. gayavikkama - saMThie paNNatte, 28.pa. tA
uttarAsADhA Nakkhatte kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. sIhanisAiyasaMThie paNNatte,' 1.
pa. eesi NaM bhaMte! aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM abhII Nakkhatte kiMsaMThiI paNNatte
? u. goyamA ! gosIsAvalisaMThiI paNNatte, gAhAo - . 1. gosIsAvali, 2. kAhAra, 3
. sauNI, 4. pupphovayAra, 5- 6. vAvI y| [ jaMbu. vakkha. 7, su. 160 99 He 7.
NAvA, 8. AsakkhaMdhaga, 9. bhaga, 10. churagharae, 11. a saMgaDuddhI  //  12.
migasIsAvalI, 13. ruhirabiMdu, 14. tulA, 15. baddhamANaga, 16. paDAgA  /  17.
pAgAre, 18 - 19. paliaMke, 20 hatthe, 21. muhaphullae ceva  //  22. khIlaga, 23.
dAmaNI, 24. egAvalI ya, 25. gayadaMta, 26. vicchuyalaMgule ca  //  27.
gayavikkame ya tatto, 28. sIhanisIhI ya saMThANA  //  sUryaprajJapti kI vRtti
meM ye gAthAeM uddhRta haiN| - pUrvAbhAdrapada - uttarAbhAdrapada ke saMsthAna
tathA pUrvAphAlgunI-uttarAphAlgunI ke saMsthAna samAna mAne gae haiM kintu
pUrvASADhAuttarASADhA ke saMsthAna bhinna bhinna mAne gae haiN| saMsthAnoM kI
isa vibhinnatA ko hetu isa prakAra hai : pUrva bhadrapadAyAH
arddhavApIsaMsthAnaM, uttarabhadrapadAyA apyardhavApI saMsthAnaM,
etadarddhavApIdvayamIlanena paripUrNA vApI bhavati, tena sUtre vApItyuktam  /
pUrvaphalgunyA arddhapalyaMkasaMsthAna, uttaraphalgunyA apyardhapalyaMka
saMsthAnaM, atrApi arddhapalyaMkadvayamIlanena paripUrNakalyaMko bhavati, tena
saMkhyAnyUnatA na  /  jaMbu. vakkha. 6, su. 160 vRtti

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dashama Prabhruta  [Navama Prabhruta Prabhruta]  The number of stars in the
constellations, Sutra 42-1. P. How many stars are there in those constellations?
U. How many stars are there in the Abhijit constellation? U. There are one star.
P. How many stars are there in the Savana constellation? U. There are one star.
P. How many stars are there in the Dhanishtha constellation? U. There are five
stars. P. How many stars are there in the Satabhisha constellation? U. There are
one hundred stars. 1. K-P. So, how many stars are there in the Abhijit
constellation? U. Go-yama! There are one star.  Thus, the number of stars in
each constellation is as follows:  1. Three, three, five, one hundred, two,
thirty-two, three, three, six, five, three, one, five, three, six. 2. Seven,
two, two, five, one, one, five, four, three. Eleven, four, four.  - Jambudvipa
Vyakhyana 6, Sutra 159: Abhijit constellation has one star, Savana has one,
Ashvini has one, Bharani has one, Magha has one, Purva Phalguni has one, Uttara
Phalguni has one, Hasta has one, Chitra has one, Swati has one, Visakha has one,
Anuradha has one, Jyeshta has one, Mula has one, Purva Ashadha has one, Uttara
Ashadha has one, Shravana has one, Dhanishtha has one, Shatabhisha has one,
Purva Bhadrapada has one, Uttara Bhadrapada has one, Revati has one. - Thananga
A. 3, U. 3, Sutra 227: Abhijit constellation has one star. - Samaya Sar 3, Sutra
9: Thananga A. 3, U. 3, Sutra 227 Samaya Sar 3, Sutra 9: K. Five constellations
have five stars each, namely: 1. Dhanishtha, 2. Rohini, 3. Punarvasu, 4. Hasta,
5. Visakha. - Thananga A. 5, U. 3, Sutra 473: Kh. Samaya Sar 5, Sutra 13: 4.
Satabhisha constellation has one hundred stars. - Samaya Sar 100, Sutra 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [navama prAbhRtaprAbhRta] NakkhattANaM tAraggasaMkhA sUtra 42-1.
pa. tA kahaM te tAragge Ahie tti vaejjA ? tA eesiM NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM
abhII Nakkhatte katitAre paNNate ? u. titAre paNNatte, pa. savaNe Nakkhatte
katitAre paNNatte ? u. titAre paNNatte, pa. dhaNiTThA Nakkhatte katitAre
paNNatte ? u. paMcatAre paNNatte, pa. satabhisayA Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ?
u. satatAre paNNatte, 1. ka-pa. eesi NaM bhaMte ! aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM abhiI
Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. goyamA! titAre paNNatte, evaM NeyavvA jassa
jaiyAo tArAo, imaM ca taM tAragAM, gAhAo:tiga-tiga-paMcaga-saya-duga-battIsaga-
tigaM taha tigaM c| cha, paMcaga-tiga-ekkaga-paMcaga-tiga-chakkagaM ceva  // 1
//  sattaga-duga-duga-paMcaga-ekkekkaga-paMca-caTha-tigaM cev| ekkArasaga-
caThakkaM, caukkaM ceva tAraggaM  //  2 //  - jaMbu. vakSa. 6, su. 159
abhiiNakkhatte titAre paNNatte, evaM savaNo, assiNI bharaNI, magasire, pUse,
jeTThA - ThANaM. a. 3, u.3, su. 227 abhiiNakkhatte titAre paNNatte, - sama.
sa.3, su.9 ThANaM a.3, u. 3, su. 227 sama. sa. 3, su. 9 ka. paMca NakkhattA
paMcatArA paNNattA, taM jahA - 1. dhaNiTThA, 2. rohiNI, 3. puNavvasU, 4. hattho,
5. visAhA, - ThANaM a.5, u. 3, su. 473 kha. sama. sa. 5, su. 13  /  4.
satabhisayANakkhatte egasayatAre paNNatte, - sama. sa. 100, su. 2

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dasham Prabhrit - Navam Prabhrit Prabhrit  **1. a.** **b.**  **2. a.** **b.**
**Q. How many stars are there in the constellation Puvvapoththavaya?** **A. Two
stars.**  **Q. How many stars are there in the constellation
Uttarapoththavaya?** **A. Two stars.**  **Q. How many stars are there in the
constellation Revayi?** **A. Thirty-two stars.**  **Q. How many stars are there
in the constellation Assini?** **A. One star.**  **Q. How many stars are there
in the constellation Bharani?** **A. One star.**  **Q. How many stars are there
in the constellation Kattiya?** **A. Six stars.**  **Q. How many stars are there
in the constellation Rohini?** **A. Five stars.**  **Q. How many stars are there
in the constellation Migasire?** **A. One star.**  **Puvvabhadavaya
constellation has two stars, Sam. S. 2, Su. 6.** **Uttarabhadavaya constellation
has two stars, Sam. S. 2, Su. 6.**  **3. a.** **b.**  **4. a.** **b.**  **5.
a.** **b.**  **6. Kattiya constellation has six stars, Sam. S. 6, Su. 7.**  **7.
a.** **b.**  **8. a.** **b.**  **Revana constellation has thirty-two stars,
location A. 3. U. 3, Su. 227, Sam. S. 3, Su. 9.**  **Location A. 3. U. 3, Su.
227, Sam. S. 3, Su. 9.**  **Location A. 6, Su. 539.**  **Location A. 5. U. 3,
Su. 473, Sam. S. 5, Su. 13.**  **Location A. 3. U. 3, Su. 227, Sam. S. 3, Su.
9.**  **Location A. 2. U. 4, Su. 110.**  **Location A. 2. U. 4, Su. 110.**
**Sam. S. 32, Su. 5.**  **[101**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta- navama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] 1. ka. kha. 2. ka. kha. pa.
puvvApoTThavayA Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. dutAre paNNatte, pa.
uttarApoTThavayA Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. dutAre paNNatte,  pa. revaI
Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. batIsaitAre paNNatte, pa. assiNI Nakkhatte
katitAre paMNNatte ? u. titAre paNNatte, pa. bharaNI Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte
? u. titAre paNNatte, 5 pa. kattiyA Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. chatAre
paNNatte, pa. rohiNI Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. paMcatAre paNNatte, " pa.
migasire Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. titAre paNNatte,'
puvvAbhaddavayANakkhatte dutAre paNNatte, sama. sa. 2, su. 6
uttarAbhaddavayANakkhatte dutAre paNNatte, ka. kha. 7. ka. kha. 8. ka. kha. 6.
7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. sama. sa. 2, su. 6 revaNakkhatte battIsai tAre paNNatte,
ThANaM, a. 3. u. 3, su. 227 sama. sa. 3, su. 9 ThANaM, a. 3. u. 3, su. 227 sama.
sa. 3, su. 9 3. 4. ka. kha. 5. ka. kha. 6. kattiyA Nakkhatte chatAre paNNatte
ThANaM a. 6. su. 539 sama. sa. 6, su. 7 ThANaM a. 5. u. 3, su. 473 sama. sa. 5,
su. 13 ThANaM a. 3. u. 3, su. 227 sama. sa. 3, su. 9 ThANaM a. 2. u. 4, su. 110
ThANaM a. 2. u. 4, su. 110 sama. sa. 32, su. 5 [ 101

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[102] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] 13. Q. How many stars are there in the Nakshatra
Adha? A. One star. Q. How many stars are there in the Nakshatra Punarvasu? A.
Five stars. Q. How many stars are there in the Nakshatra Pushya? A. Three stars.
Q. How many stars are there in the Nakshatra Ashlesha? A. Six stars. 17. Q. How
many stars are there in the Nakshatra Magha? A. Seven stars. Q. How many stars
are there in the Nakshatra Purva Phalguni? A. Two stars. Q. How many stars are
there in the Nakshatra Uttara Phalguni? A. Two stars. 20. Q. How many stars are
there in the Nakshatra Hasta? A. Five stars. There is one star in the Nakshatra
Adha. Location, A. 1, S. 55, S. 1, S. 23 Location, A. 5, U. 3, S. 473, S. 5, S.
13 Location, A. 3, U. 3, S. 227, S. 3, S. 9 Location, A. 6, S. 539, S. 6, S. 7
There are seven stars in the Maha Nakshatra. Location, A. 7, S. 589, S. 7, S. 7
Location, A. 2, U. 4, S. 110, S. 2, S. 6 Location, A. 2, U. 4, S. 110, S. 2, S.
6 Location, A. 5, U. 3, S. 473, S. 5, S. 13 1. K. 4. K. Kh. Kh.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 102 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 13. pa. addhA Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u.
egatAre paNNatte, pa. puNavvasU Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. paMcatAre
paNNatte, pa. pusse Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. titAre paNNatte, pa. assesA
Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. chatAre paNNatte, 17. pa. maghA Nakkhatte
katitAre paNNatte ? u. sattatAre paNNatte, pa. puvvAphagguNI Nakkhatte katitAre
paNNatte ? u. dutAre paNNatte, pa. uttarAphagguNI Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ?
u. dutAre paNNatte, 20. pa. hattha Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. paMcatAre
paNNatte, addhA Nakkhatte egatAre paNNatte, ThANaM, a. 1, su.55 sama. sa. 1, su.
23 ThANaM, a.5, u. 3, su. 473 sama. sa. 5, su. 13 ThANaM, a. 3, u.3, su. 227
sama. sa. 3, su. 9 ThANaM, a. 6. su. 539 sama. sa. 6, su.7 mahA Nakkhatte
sattatAre paNNatte, ThANaM, a. 7., su. 589 sama. sa. 7, su.7 ThANaM a. 2, u. 4,
su. 110 sama. sa. 2, su.6 ThANaM ThA. 2, u. 4, su. 110 sama. sa. 2, su.6 ThANaM,
ThA. 5, u. 3, su. 473 sama. sa. 5, su. 13 1. ka. 4. ka. kha. kha.

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Dasham Prabhrit - Navam Prabhrit Prabhrit] [103 21. Q. How many stars are there
in the Chitta Nakshatra? A. One star. 22. Q. How many stars are there in the
Satti Nakshatra? A. One star. 23. Q. How many stars are there in the Visakha
Nakshatra? A. Five stars. 24. Q. How many stars are there in the Anuradha
Nakshatra? A. Five stars. Q. How many stars are there in the Jyeshta Nakshatra?
A. Three stars. 26. Q. How many stars are there in the Mula Nakshatra? A. One
star. 27. Q. How many stars are there in the Purva Ashadha Nakshatra? A. Four
stars. 28. Q. How many stars are there in the Uttara Ashadha Nakshatra? A. Four
stars. - Thanam, A. 4, U. 4, Su. 386 1. K. Thanam, Tha. 1, Su. 55 B. Sam. S. 1,
Su. 55 Thanam, Tha. 1, Su. 55 B. Sam. S. 1, Su. 23 Thanam, Tha. 5, U. 3, Su. 473
B. Sam. S. 5, Su. 12 Anuradha Nakshatra has four stars. Sam. 4, Su. 7 5. K.
Thanam, Tha. 3, U. 3, Su. 227 B. Sam. S. 3, Su. 9. Mula Nakshatra has eleven
stars. 7. K. Thanam, Tha. 4, U. 4, Su. 386 B. Sam. S. 4, Su. 8 8. K. Thanam,
Tha. 4, U. 4, Su. 386 B. Sam. S. 4, Su. 9 - Sam. 11, Su. 5. .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - navama prAbhRtaprAbhRta] [ 103 21. pa. cittA Nakkhatte
katitAre paNNatte ? u. ekatAre paNNatte, 22. pa. sAtI Nakkhatte katitAre
paNNatte ? u. ekatAre paNNatte, 23. pa. visAhA Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? .
u. paMcatAre paNNatte, 24. pa. aNurAhA Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u.
paMcatAre paNNatte, pa. jeTThA Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. titAre paNNatte,
26. pa. mUle Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. egatAre paNNatte, 27. pa.
puvvAsADhA Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? u. cautAre paNNatte, 28. pa.
uttarAsADhA Nakkhatte katitAre paNNatte ? . u. cautAre paNNatte, - ThANaM, A. 4,
u.4, su. 386 1. ka. ThANaM, ThA. 1, su. 55 kha. sama. sa. 1, su.55 ThANaM, ThA.
1, su. 55 kha. sama. 1, su. 23 ThANaM, ThA. 5, u. 3, su. 473 kha. sama. sa.5,
su. 12 aNurAhA Nakkhatte cautAre paNNatte sama. 4, su.7 5. ka. ThANaM, ThA. 3,
u. 3, su. 227 kha. sama. sa. 3, su.9  /  mUlanakkhatte ekkArasatAre paNNatte 7.
ka. ThANaM, ThA. 4, u. 4, su. 386 kha. sama. sa. 4, su.8 8. ka. ThANaM, ThA. 4,
u. 4, su. 386 kha. sama. sa. 4, su. 9 - sama.11, su.5 .

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the tenth (Dasham) onwards [from the tenth onwards] the season - Hemant
(winter) - has 43 days. 1. Tell me, how many constellations (Nakshatra) are
there in this season? Answer: There are four constellations in this season,
namely: 1. Uttarashadha, 2. Abhijit, 3. Sravana, 4. Dhanishtha. 1. Uttarashadha
stays for 14 days, 2. Abhijit stays for 7 days, 3. Sravana stays for 8 days, 4.
Dhanishtha stays for 1 day. In this month, the sun moves in the sky with a
shadow of four angulas (finger widths). On the last day of this month, the
shadow is two padas (feet) and four angulas. 2. Tell me, how many constellations
are there in the second month of this season? ... Answer: There are four
constellations in this month, namely: 1. Dhanishtha, 2. Satabhisha, 3.
Purvaphalguni, 4. Uttaraphalguni. 1. Dhanishtha stays for 14 days, 2. Satabhisha
stays for 7 days, 3. Purvaphalguni stays for 8 days, 4. Uttaraphalguni stays for
1 day. In this month, the sun moves in the sky with a shadow of eight angulas.
On the last day of this month, the shadow is two padas and eight angulas. 3.
Tell me, how many constellations are there in the third month of this season?
Answer: There are three constellations in this month, namely: 1. Uttaraphalguni,
2. Revati, 3. Ashwini. 1. Uttaraphalguni stays for 14 days,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [ dazama prAbhRtaprAbhRta] vAsaM-hemaMta-giha-rAiMdiyANaM 43 pa.
1. tA kahaM te NetA Ahie tti vaejA ? tA vAsANaM paDhamaM mAsaM kati NakkhattAM
NeMti ? u. tA cattAri NakkhattA Neti, taM jahA - 1. uttarasADhA, 2. abhiI, 3.
savaNo, 4. dhnnitttthaa| 1. uttarAsADhA coddassa ahoratte Nei, 2. abhiI satta
aho ratte Nei, 3. savaNe aTTha ahoratte Nei, 4. dhaNiTThA egaM ahorattaM Nei,
taMsi NaM mAsaMsi cauraMgulaporisIe chAyAe sUrie aNupariyaTTai, tassa NaM
mAsassa carime divase do pAdAiM cattAri ya aMgulANi porisI bhvi| pa. 2. tA
vAsANaM bitayiM mAsaM katti NakkhattA Neti ? ... .. u. tA cattAri NakkhattA
Neti, taMjahA - 1. dhaNiTThA, 2. satabhisayA, 3. puvvapoTThavayA, 4.
uttrpotttthvyaa| 1. dhaNiTThA coddassa ahoratte Nei, 2. satabhisayA satta aho
ratte Nei, 3. puvvopoTThavayA aTTha ahoratte Nei, 4. uttarapoTThavayA egaM
ahorattaM Nei, taMsi NaM mAsaMsi aTuMgulaporisIe chAyAe sUrie aNupariyaTTai,
tassa NaM mAsassa carime divase do pAdAiM aTTha aMgulAI porisI bhvi| pa. 3. tA
vAsANaM tatiyaM mAsaM katti NakkhattA Neti ?  /  u. tA tiNNi NakkhattA Neti,
taMjahA - 1. uttarapoTThavayA, 2. revaI, 3. assiNI, 1. uttarapoTThavayA coddassa
ahoratte Nei,

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[105 2. Revayi fifteen days, 3. Assiini one day, in these months, the sun moves
in the shadow of twelve angulas. On the last day of this month, the shadow is
three padas. P. 4. What are the stars of the fourth month of Vasa? A. There are
three stars, namely - 1. Assiini, 2. Bharani, 3. Kattinya, - 1. Assiini fourteen
days, 2. Bharani fifteen days, 3. Kattinya one day, in these months, the sun
moves in the shadow of sixteen angulas. On the last day of this month, the
shadow is three padas and four angulas. P. 1. What are the stars of the first
month of Hemanta? A. There are three stars, namely - 1. Kattinya, 2. Rohini, 3.
Santhana, 1. Kattinya fourteen days, 2. Rohini fifteen days, 3. Santhana one
day, in these months, the sun moves in the shadow of twenty angulas. On the last
day of this month, the shadow is three padas and eight angulas. P. 2. What are
the stars of the second month of Hemanta? A. There are four stars, namely - 1.
Santhana, 2. Adha, 3. Punavvasu, 4. Pusso, 1. Santhana fourteen days, 2. Adha
seven days, 3. Punavvasu eight days, 4. Pusso one day, in these months, the sun
moves in the shadow of twenty angulas. On the last day of this month, the shadow
is four padas. P. 3. What are the stars of the third month of Hemanta? A. There
are three stars, namely - 1. Pusso, 2. Asseesa, 3. Maha, 1. Pusso fourteen days,
2. Asseesa fifteen days,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - dazama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 105 2. revaI paNNarasa ahoratte
Nei, 3. assiNI ega ahorattaM Nei, taMsi ca NaM mAsaMsi duvAlasaMgulAe porisIe
chAyAe sUrie aNupariyaTTai, tassa NaM mAsassa carime divase lehatthAI tiNNi
payAI porisI bhvi| pa. 4. tA vAsANaM cautthaM mAsaM katti NakkhattA Neti ? u. tA
tiNNi NakkhattA Neti, taMjahA - 1. assiNI, 2. bharaNI, 3. kattiyA, - 1. assiNI
cauddasa ahoratte Nei, 2. bharaNI paNNarasa ahoratte Nei, 3. kattiyA erga
ahorattaM Nei, taMsi ca NaM mAsaMsi solasaMgulAe porie chAyAe sUrie
aNupariyaTTai, tassa NaM mAsassa carime divase tiNNi payAiM cattAri aMgulAI
porisI bhvi| pa. 1. tA hemaMtANaM paDhamaM mAsaM kati NakkhattA Neti ? u. tA
tiNNi NakkhattA NeMti, taM jahA - 1. kattiyA, 2. rohiNI, 3. saMThANA, 1. kattiyA
cauddasa ahoratte Nei, 2. rohiNI paNNarasa ahoratte Nei, 3. saMThANA egaM
ahorattaM Nei, taMsi ca NaM mAsaMsi vIsaMgulaporisIe chAyAe sUrie aNupariyaTTai,
tassa NaM mAsassa carime divase tiNNi payAiM aTTha aMgulAI porisI bhvi| pa. 2.
tA hemaMtANaM bitiyaM mAsaM kati NakkhattA Nati ? u. tA cattAri NakkhattA Neti,
taMjahA - 1. saMThANA, 2. addhA, 3. puNavvasU, 4. pusso, 1. saMThANA cauddasa
ahoratte Nei, 2. addhA satta ahoratte Nei, 3. puNavvasU aTTha ahoratte Nei, 4.
pusse egaM ahorattaM Nei,' taMsi ca NaM mAsaMsi vIsaMgulaporisIe chAyAe sUrie
aNupariyaTTai, tassa NaM mAsassa carime divase lehatthAiM cattAri padAi porisI
bhvi| pa. 3. tA hemaMtANaM tatiyaM mAsaM kati NakkhattA Neti ? u. tA tiNNi
NakkhattA Neti, taMjahA - 1. pusso, 2.assesA, 3. mahA, 1. pusso cauddasa
ahoratte Nei, 2. assesA paMcadasa ahoratte Nei,

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[106] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] 3. The Sun stays in one *Ahoratta* for one month,
and in that month, the Sun moves in the shadow of 20 *Angulas* in the *Porisi*.
On the last day of that month, it becomes 3 *Payais* and 8 *Angulas* in the
*Porisi*. P. 4. So, how many *Nakshatras* are there in the fourth month of
*Hemant*? A. There are 3 *Nakshatras*, namely: 1. *Magha*, 2. *Puvva Phalguni*,
3. *Uttara Phalguni*. 1. *Magha* stays for 14 *Ahorattas*, 2. *Puvva Phalguni*
stays for 15 *Ahorattas*, 3. *Uttara Phalguni* stays for 1 *Ahoratta*, and in
that month, the Sun moves in the shadow of 16 *Angulas* in the *Porisi*. On the
last day of that month, it becomes 3 *Payais* and 4 *Angulas* in the *Porisi*.
P. 1. So, how many *Nakshatras* are there in the first month of *Grihma*? A.
There are 3 *Nakshatras*, namely: 1. *Uttara Phalguni*, 2. *Hattha*, 3.
*Chitta*. 1. *Uttara Phalguni* stays for 14 *Ahorattas*, 2. *Hattha* stays for
15 *Ahorattas*, 3. *Chitta* stays for 1 *Ahoratta*, and in that month, the Sun
moves in the shadow of 12 *Angulas* in the *Porisi*. On the last day of that
month, it becomes *Lehatthai* and 3 *Payais* in the *Porisi*. P. 2. So, how many
*Nakshatras* are there in the second month of *Grihma*? A. There are 3
*Nakshatras*, namely: 1. *Chitta*, 2. *Sai*, 3. *Visaha*. 1. *Chitta* stays for
14 *Ahorattas*, 2. *Sai* stays for 15 *Ahorattas*, 3. *Visaha* stays for 1
*Ahoratta*, and in that month, the Sun moves in the shadow of 8 *Angulas* in the
*Porisi*. On the last day of that month, it becomes 2 *Payais* and 8 *Angulas*
in the *Porisi*. P. 3. So, how many *Nakshatras* are there in the third month of
*Grihma*? A. There are 3 *Nakshatras*, namely: 1. *Visaha*, 2. *Anuradha*, 3.
*Jyeshthamulo*. 1. *Visaha* stays for 14 *Ahorattas*, 2. *Anuradha* stays for 15
*Ahorattas*, 3. *Jyeshthamulo* stays for 1 *Ahoratta*,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 3. mahA ega ahorattaM Nei, taMsi ca NaM mAsaMsi
vIsaMgulaporisIe chAyAe sUrie aNupariyaTTai, tassa NaM mAsassa carime divase
tiNNi padAiM aTuMgulAI porisI bhvi| pa. 4. tA hemaMtANaM cautthaM mAsaM kati
NakkhattA Neti ? u. tA tiNNi NakkhattA Neti, taMjahA - 1. maghA, 2.
puvvAphagguNI, 3. uttarAphagguNI, 1. maghA cauddasa ahoratte Nei, 2.
puvvAphagguNI paNNarasa ahoratte Nei, 3. uttarAphagguNI ega ahorattaM Nei, taMsi
ca NaM mAsaMsi solasa aMgulAI porisIe chAyAe sUrie aNupariyaTTai, tassa NaM
mAsassa carime divase tiNNi payAI cattAri aMgulAI porisI bhvi| pa. 1. tA
gimhANaM paDhamaM mAsaM kati NakkhattA Neti ? u. tA tiNNi NakkhattA vaMti, taM
jahA - 1. uttarAphagguNI, 2. hattho, 3. cittA, 1. uttarAphagguNI cauddasa
ahoratte Nei, 2. hattho paNNarasa ahoratte Nei, 3. cittA ega ahorattaM Nei,
taMsi ca NaM mAsaMsi duvAlasaMgulaporisIe chAyAe sUrie aNupariyaTTai, tassa NaM
mAsassa carime divase lehaTThAI ya tiNNi payAI porisI bhvi| pa. 2. tA gimhANaM
bitayiM mAsaM katti NakkhattA Neti ? u. tA tiNNi NakkhattA Neti, taMjahA - 1.
cittA, 2. sAI, 3. visAhA, 1. cittA cauddasa ahoratte Nei, 2. sAI paNNarasa
ahoratte Nei, 3. visAhA egaM ahorataM Nei, taMsi ca NaM mAsaMsi aTuMgulAe
porisIe chAyAe sUrie aNupariyaTTai, tassa NaM mAsassa carime divase do payAI
aTTha aMgulAI porisI bhvi| pa. 3. tA gimhANaM tatiyaM mAsaM katti NakkhattA Neti
? u. tA tiNNi NakkhattA Neti, taMjahA - 1. visAhA, 2.aNurAhA, 3. jeTThAmUlo, 1.
visAhA cauddasa ahoratte Nei, 2.aNurAhA paNNarasa ahoratte Nei, 3. jeTThAmUlo
egaM ahorataM Nei,

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[107 When the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula, 2.
Purvashadha, 3. Uttarashadha, 1. Mula enters on the fourteenth day, 2.
Purvashadha enters on the fifteenth day, 3. Uttarashadha enters on the sixteenth
day, when the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula, 2.
Purvashadha, 3. Uttarashadha, 1. Mula enters on the fourteenth day, 2.
Purvashadha enters on the fifteenth day, 3. Uttarashadha enters on the sixteenth
day, when the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula, 2.
Purvashadha, 3. Uttarashadha, 1. Mula enters on the fourteenth day, 2.
Purvashadha enters on the fifteenth day, 3. Uttarashadha enters on the sixteenth
day, when the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula, 2.
Purvashadha, 3. Uttarashadha, 1. Mula enters on the fourteenth day, 2.
Purvashadha enters on the fifteenth day, 3. Uttarashadha enters on the sixteenth
day, when the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula, 2.
Purvashadha, 3. Uttarashadha, 1. Mula enters on the fourteenth day, 2.
Purvashadha enters on the fifteenth day, 3. Uttarashadha enters on the sixteenth
day, when the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula, 2.
Purvashadha, 3. Uttarashadha, 1. Mula enters on the fourteenth day, 2.
Purvashadha enters on the fifteenth day, 3. Uttarashadha enters on the sixteenth
day, when the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula, 2.
Purvashadha, 3. Uttarashadha, 1. Mula enters on the fourteenth day, 2.
Purvashadha enters on the fifteenth day, 3. Uttarashadha enters on the sixteenth
day, when the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula, 2.
Purvashadha, 3. Uttarashadha, 1. Mula enters on the fourteenth day, 2.
Purvashadha enters on the fifteenth day, 3. Uttarashadha enters on the sixteenth
day, when the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula, 2.
Purvashadha, 3. Uttarashadha, 1. Mula enters on the fourteenth day, 2.
Purvashadha enters on the fifteenth day, 3. Uttarashadha enters on the sixteenth
day, when the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula, 2.
Purvashadha, 3. Uttarashadha, 1. Mula enters on the fourteenth day, 2.
Purvashadha enters on the fifteenth day, 3. Uttarashadha enters on the sixteenth
day, when the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula, 2.
Purvashadha, 3. Uttarashadha, 1. Mula enters on the fourteenth day, 2.
Purvashadha enters on the fifteenth day, 3. Uttarashadha enters on the sixteenth
day, when the sun revolves in the shadow of the four-fingered porisi in the
month of Tans, then on the last day of that month, it becomes two padas and four
angulas in porisi. P. 4. What are the three constellations of the fourth month
of summer, Katti? A. There are three constellations, namely - 1. Mula

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - dazama prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 107 taMsi ca NaM mAsaMsi
cauraMgulaporisIe chAyAe sUrie aNupariyaTTai, tassa NaM mAsassa carime divase do
payANi ya cattAri aMgulANi porisI bhvi| pa. 4. tA gimhANaM cautthaM mAsaM katti
NakkhattA Neti ? u. tA tiNi NakkhattA vaMti, taMjahA - 1. mUlo, 2. puvvAsADhA,
3. uttarAsADhA, 1. mUlo cauddasa ahoratte Nei, 2. puvvAsADhA paNNarasa ahoratte
Nei, 3. uttarAsADhA egaM ahorataM Nei, taMsi ca NaM mAsaMsi vaTTAe
samacauraMsasaMThiyAe NaggodhaparimaMDalAe sakAyamaNuraMgiNIe chAyAe sUrie
annupriytttti| tassa NaM mAsassa carime divase lehaTThAiM do padAI porisIe bhvi|
.

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chandamagga Nakshatra Jog Sankhya 44  **P.** **U.** **P.** **Dashama
Prabhruta [Gyarahava Prabhruta Prabhruta]**  **Q.** How are these Chandamaggas?
**A.** There are 28 Nakshatras:  1. Some Nakshatras are aligned with the Moon to
the South. 2. Some Nakshatras are aligned with the Moon to the North. 3. Some
Nakshatras are aligned with the Moon to both the South and North. 4. Some
Nakshatras are aligned with the Moon to the South and also to the West. 5. Some
Nakshatras are aligned with the Moon to the South and also to the East.  **Q.**
Out of these 28 Nakshatras:  1. Which Nakshatras are aligned with the Moon to
the South? 2. Which Nakshatras are aligned with the Moon to the North? 3. Which
Nakshatras are aligned with the Moon to both the South and North? 4. Which
Nakshatras are aligned with the Moon to the South and also to the West? 5. Which
Nakshatras are aligned with the Moon to the South and also to the East?  **A.**
1. Out of these 28 Nakshatras, there are 6 Nakshatras aligned with the Moon to
the South:      1. Santhana     2. Adha     3. Pusso     4. Asseesa     5.
Hattho     6. Mulo  2. Out of these 28 Nakshatras, there are 12 Nakshatras
aligned with the Moon to the North:      1. Abhii     2. Savano     3. Dhanittha
4. Satabhisaya     5. Puvva Bhadavaya     6. Uttara Bhadavaya     7. Revai
8. Assini     9. Bharani     10. Puvva Phalguni     11. Uttara Phalguni     12.
Sati  3. Out of these 28 Nakshatras, there are 7 Nakshatras aligned with the
Moon to both the South and North:      1. Kattiya     2. Rohini     3. Punavvasu
4. Maha     5. Chitta     6. Visakha     7. Anuradha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caMdamagge NakkhattajogasaMkhA 44 pa. u. pa. dazamaprAbhRta [ gyArahavA
prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] tA kahaM te caMdamaggA Ahie tti vaejjA ? tAsi NaM aTThAvIsAe
NakkhattANaM - 1. atthi NakkhattA jeNaM sayA caMdassa dAhiNeNaM jogaM joeMti, 2.
atthi NakkhattA je NaM sayA caMdassa uttareNaM jogaM joeMti, 3. atthi NakkhattA
je NaM caMdassa dAhiNeNa'vi uttareNa'vi jogaM joeMti, 4. atthi NakkhattA jeNaM
caMdassa dAhiNeNa'vi pamaddapi jogaM joeMti, 5. atthi NakkhattA je NaM caMdassa
sayA pamaddaM jogaM joeMti, tAeesi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM 1. kayare
NakkhattA je NaM sayA caMdassa dAhiNeNaM jogaM joeMti ? 2. kayare NakkhattA
jeNaM sayA caMdassa uttareNaM jogaM joeMti ? 3. kayare NakkhattA je NaM caMdassa
dAhiNeNa'vi uttareNa'vi jogaM joeMti ? 4. kayare NakkhattA je NaM sayA caMdassa
dAhiNeNa'vi pamaddaM jogaM joeMti ? 5. kayare NakkhattA je NaM caMdassa sayA
pamaddaM jogaM joeMti ? u. 1. tAeesi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM - tattha je NaM
NakkhattA sayA caMdassa dAhiNeNaM jogaM joeMti, te NaM cha, taMjahA 1. saMThANA,
2. addhA, 3. pusso, 4. assesA, 5. hattho, 6. mUlo, 2. tattha je te NakkhattA je
NaM sayA caMdassa uttareNaM jogaM joeMti, te NaM bArasa, taMjahA - 1. abhiI, 2.
savaNo, 3. dhaNiTThA, 4. satabhisayA, 5. puvvabhaddavayA, 6. uttarabhaddavayA,
7. revaI, 8. assiNI, 9. bharaNI, 10. puvvaphagguNI, 11. uttaraphagguNI, 12.
sAtI, 3. tattha je te NakkhattA je NaM caMdassa dAhiNeNa'vi uttareNa'vi pamaddaM
jogaM joeMti, te NaM satta, taM jahA - 1. kattiyA, 2. rohiNI, 3. puNavvasU, 4.
mahA, 5. cittA, 6. visAhA, 7. aNurAhA,

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[109 4. Among those stars which are aligned with the south of the moon, there
are two Ashadhas which are aligned with the outer circle of the universe, or
will be aligned, or are going to be aligned. 5. Among those stars which are
aligned with the north of the moon, there is only one, Jyestha. The number of
lunar mansions, along with the Sun, Moon and stars, is 45. a. There are lunar
mansions which are not separated from the stars. b. There are lunar mansions
which are separated from the stars. c. There are lunar mansions which are the
combination of the Sun, Moon and stars. d. There are lunar mansions which are
separated from the Sun. p. a. Among these fifteen lunar mansions, which lunar
mansions are not separated from the stars? b. Which lunar mansions are separated
from the stars? c. Which lunar mansions are the combination of the Sun, Moon and
stars? d. Which lunar mansions are separated from the Sun? u. a. Among these
fifteen lunar mansions, 1. p. 1. There are, venerable sir, twenty-eight stars.
Which stars are aligned with the south of the moon? 2. Which stars are aligned
with the north of the moon? 3. Which stars are aligned with both the south and
north of the moon? 4. Which stars are aligned with the south of the moon? 5.
Which stars are aligned with the moon? 1. Gotama! There are, venerable sir,
twenty-eight stars. Among those stars which are aligned with the south of the
moon, there are six, namely: 1. Sthana, 2. Adda, 3. Pushya, 4. Ashlesha, 5.
Hasta, 6. Mula. These six stars are outside the outer circle of the universe. 2.
Among those stars which are aligned with the north of the moon, there are
twelve, namely: 1. Abhijit, 2. Savana, 3. Dhanishtha, 4. Shatabhisha, 5.
Purvabhadrapada, 6. Uttarabhadrapada, 7. Revati, 8. Ashvini, 9. Bharani, 10.
Purva Phalguni, 11. Uttara Phalguni, 12. Satabhisha. 3. Among those stars which
are aligned with both the south and north of the moon, there are seven, namely:
1. Krittika, 2. Rohini, 3. Punarvasu, 4. Magha, 5. Chitra, 6. Visakha, 7.
Anuradha. 4. Among those stars which are aligned with the south of the moon,
there are two Ashadhas which are aligned with the outer circle of the universe,
or will be aligned, or are going to be aligned. 5. Among those stars which are
aligned with the moon, there is only one, Jyestha. - Jambudvipa-Vyakhyana 7,
Sutra 157]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - gyArahavA prAbhRtaprAbhRta] [ 109 4. tattha je te NakkhattA
je NaM caMdassa dAhiNeNa'vi pamaI jogaM joeMti, tAo NaM do AsADhAo savvabAhire
maMDale jogaM joeMsu vA, joeMti vA joessaMti vA, 5. tattha je te Nakkhatte je
NaM sayA caMdassa pamaI jogaM joei,sA NaM egA, jetttthaa| ravi-sasi-NakkhattehiM
avirahiyANaM sAmaNNANa ya caMdamaMDalANaM saMkhA 45. ka. tA eesiM NaM
paNNarasaNhaM caMdamaMDalANaM - atthi caMdamaMDalA je NaM sayA NakkhattehiM
avirahiyA, kha. atthi caMdamaMDalA je NaM sayA NakkhattehiM virahiyA, ga. atthi
caMdamaMDalA je NaM ravi-sasi-NakkhattANaM sAmaNNA bhavaMti, gha. asthi
caMdamaMDalA je NaM sayA AdiccehiM virahiyA. pa. ka. tA eesiMNaM paNNarasaNhaM
caMdamaMDalANaM - kayare caMdamaMDalA je NaM sayA NakkhattehiM avirahiyA ? kha.
kayare caMdamaMDalA je NaM sayA NakkhattehiM virahiyA ?  /  ga. kayare
caMdamaMDalA je NaM ravi-sasi-NakkhattANaM sAmaNNA bhavaMti ? gha. kayare
caMdamaMDalA je NaM sayA AdiccehiM virahiyA ? u. ka. tA eesiMNaM paNNarasaNDaM
caMdamaMDalANaM - 1. pa. 1. eesi NaM bhaMte! aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM - kayare
NakkhattA je NaM sayA caMdassa dAhiNeNaM jogaM joeMti ? 2. kayare NakkhattA je
NaM sayA caMdassa uttareNaM jogaM joeMti ? 3.kayare NakkhattA je NaM caMdassa
dAhiNeNa'vi uttareNa'vi pamaI jogaM joeMti? 4. kayare NakkhattA je NaM sayA
dAhiNeNaM pamaI jogaM joeMti? 5. kayare NakkhattA je NaM sayA caMdassa jogaM
joeMti ? 1. goyamA! eesi NaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM - tattha NaM je te
NakkhattA je NaM sayA caMdassa dAhiNeNaM jogaM joeMti, te NaM cha, taM jahA - 1.
saMThANa, 2. addha, 3. pusso, 4. asilesa, 5. hattho, 6. taheva mUlo a bAhirao
bAhira maMDalassa chappete NakkhattA, 2. tattha NaM je te NakkhattA je NaM sayA
caMdassa uttareNaM jogaM joeMti, te NaM bArasa, taM jahA - 1. abhiI, 2. savaNo,
3. dhaNiTThA, 4. sayabhisayA, 5. puvvabhaddavayA,6. uttarabhaddavayA,7.
revaI,8.assiNI, 9. bharaNI, 10. puvvaphagguNI, 11. uttaraphagguNI, 12. sAtI, 3.
tattha NaM je te NakkhattA je NaM sayA caMdassa dAhiNao'vi uttarao'vi pamaI
jogaM joeMti jogaM joeMti, te NaM satta, taM jahA - 1. kattiyA, 2. rAhiNo, 3.
puNavvasU, 4. maghA, 5. cittA, 6. visAhA, 7. aNurAhA, 4. tattha NaM je te
NakkhattA ja NaM sayA caMdassa dAhiNao pamaI jogaM joeMti, tAo NaM duve AsADhAo
savvabAhirae _ maMDale jogaM joeMsu vA, joeMti vA, joessaMti vA, 5. tattha NaM
je se NakkhattA, je NaM sayA caMdassa jogaM joei sA NaM egA jeTThA, - jaMbu.
vakkha.7, su. 157

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 110  **a.**  Of those lunar mansions which are not devoid of stars, there are
eight: 1. The first lunar mansion, 2. The third lunar mansion, 3. The sixth
lunar mansion, 4. The seventh lunar mansion, 5. The eighth lunar mansion, 6. The
tenth lunar mansion, 7. The eleventh lunar mansion, 8. The thirteenth lunar
mansion.  **b.** Of those lunar mansions which are devoid of stars, there are
seven: 1. The second lunar mansion, 2. The fourth lunar mansion, 3. The fifth
lunar mansion, 4. The ninth lunar mansion, 5. The twelfth lunar mansion, 6. The
thirteenth lunar mansion, 7. The fourteenth lunar mansion.  **c.** Of those
lunar mansions which are the common abode of the Sun and Moon stars, there are
four: 1. The first lunar mansion, 2. The second lunar mansion, 3. The eleventh
lunar mansion, 4. The fifteenth lunar mansion.  **d.** Of those lunar mansions
which are devoid of the Sun stars, there are five: 1. The sixth lunar mansion,
2. The seventh lunar mansion, 3. The eighth lunar mansion, 4. The ninth lunar
mansion, 5. The tenth lunar mansion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110 ] tattha je te caMdamaMDalA je NaM sayA NakkhattehiM avirahiyA, NaM aTTha,
taMjA - - 1. paDhame caMdamaMDale, 2. tatie caMdamaMDale, 3. chaTThe
caMdamaMDale, 4. sattame caMdamaMDale, 5. aTThame caMdamaMDale, 6. dasame
caMdamaMDale, 7. ekAdase caMdamaMDale, 8. paNNarasame caMdamaMDale, kha. tattha
je te caMdamaMDalA je NaM sayA NakkhattehiM virahiyA, NaM satta taMjA [
sUryaprajJaptisUtra - 1. bitie caMdamaMDale, 2. cautthe caMdamaMDale, 3. paMcame
caMdamaMDale, 4. navame caMdamaMDale, 5. bArasame caMdamaMDale, 6. terasame
caMdamaMDale, 7. cauddasame caMdamaMDale, - ga. tattha je te caMdamaMDalA je NaM
ravi-sasi NakkhattANaM sAmaNNA bhavaMti, te NaM cattAri taMjahA 1. paDhame
caMdamaMDale 2. bIecaMdamaMDale 3. ikkArasamecaMdamaMDale 4.
pavvasamecaMdamaMDale, gha. tattha je te caMdamaMDalA je NaM sayA AdiccehiM
virahiyA te NaM paMca taMjahA 1. chaTThe caMdamaMDale, 2. sattame caMdamaMDale,
3. aTTame caMdamaMDale, 4. navame caMdamaMDale, 5. dasame caMdamaMDale  /

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the tenth Prabhruta [the twelfth Prabhruta-Prabhruta] onwards, the deities
of the Nakshatras are 46. How are the deities of these Nakshatras assigned?  So,
for the twenty-eight Nakshatras:  1. To which deity is the Abhijit Nakshatra
assigned? Ans: To Brahma Deva.  2. To which deity is the Savan Nakshatra
assigned? Ans: To Vishnu Deva.  3. To which deity is the Dhanishtha Nakshatra
assigned? Ans: To Vasu Deva.  4. To which deity is the Shatabhisha Nakshatra
assigned? Ans: To Varuna Deva.  5. To which deity is the Purva-Phalguni
Nakshatra assigned? Ans: To Aja Deva.  6. To which deity is the Uttara-Phalguni
Nakshatra assigned? Ans: To Ahi-Varddhi Deva.  7. To which deity is the Revati
Nakshatra assigned? Ans: To Pushya Deva.  8. To which deity is the Ashwini
Nakshatra assigned? Ans: To Ashva Deva.  9. To which deity is the Bharani
Nakshatra assigned? Ans: To Yama Deva.  10. To which deity is the Krittika
Nakshatra assigned? Ans: To Agni Deva.  1. Abhivriddhi, Angtra-Ahirbudhna etc.
2. Pousha-Poushanamka Deva, not Surya-paryaya, as Revati is known as Poushanam.
3. Ashva-namka Deva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [bArahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta] NakkhattANaM devayA 46 pa. tA kahaM
te NakkhatANaM devayA Ahie tti vaejjA ? tA eeNaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM - abhII
Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNtte ? u. baMbhadevayAe paNNatte, 2. pa. tA savaNe
Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. viNhudevayAe paNNatte, 3. pa. tA dhaNiTThA
Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. vasudevayAe paNNatte, 4. pa. tA sayabhisayA
Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. varuNadevayAe paNNatte, 5. pa. tA
puvvapoTThavayA Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. ajadevayAe paNNatte, 6. pa.
tA uttarApoTThavayA Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. ahivaDDi devayAe'
paNNatte, 7. pa. tArevaI Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. pussadevayAe'
paNNatte, 8. pa. tA assiNI Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. assadevayAe'
paNNatte, 9. pa. tA bhariNI Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? _ u. jamadevayAe
paNNatte, 10.pa. tA kattiyA Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. aggidevayAe
paNNatte, 1. abhivRddhi, angtra-ahirbudhna iti| 2. pUSA-pUSanAmako devo, na tu
sUryaparyAyastena revatyeva pauSNamiti prasiddhama 3. azvanAmako dev|

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 112] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra 11.P. To which Deva is the Rohini Nakshatra
assigned? _A. It is assigned to Payavaideva, 12.P. To which Deva is the Santhana
Nakshatra assigned? A. It is assigned to Soma Deva, 13.P. To which Deva is the
Adda Nakshatra assigned? A. It is assigned to Rudra Deva, 14.P. To which Deva is
the Punarvasu Nakshatra assigned? A. It is assigned to Aditi Deva, 15.P. To
which Deva is the Pusya Nakshatra assigned? A. It is assigned to Bahasai Deva,
16.P. To which Deva is the Ashlesha Nakshatra assigned? A. It is assigned to
Sappa Deva, 17.P. To which Deva is the Maha Nakshatra assigned? A. It is
assigned to Piti Deva, 18.P. To which Deva is the Purva Phalguni Nakshatra
assigned? A. It is assigned to Bhaga Deva, 19.P. To which Deva is the Uttara
Phalguni Nakshatra assigned? - A. It is assigned to Ajjama Deva, 20.P. To which
Deva is the Hasta Nakshatra assigned? A. It is assigned to Suviya Deva, 21.P. To
which Deva is the Chitra Nakshatra assigned? A. It is assigned to Tathe Deva,
22.P. To which Deva is the Swati Nakshatra assigned? A. It is assigned to Vau
Deva, 1. Prajapati is the Deva with the name Brahma, and he bears all the
synonyms of Brahma, hence the famous Brahma, etc. 2. Soma is the Moon, hence the
famous Saumya, Chandramas, etc. 3. Rudra is Shiva, hence the famous Raudra,
Kalini, etc. 4. Pitar is the name of a Deva, 5. Aryama is a specific Deva, 6.
Savita is the Sun, 7. Tvasta is a Deva with the name Tvastra, hence the famous
Tvastri, Chitra, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 11.pa. tA rohiNI Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ?
_u. payAvaidevayAe' paNNatte, 12.pa. tA saMThANA Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ?
u. somadevayAeM paNNatte, 13.pa. tA addA Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u.
ruddadevayAe' paNNatte, 14.pa. tA puNavvasU Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u.
aditidevayAe paNNatte, 15.pa. tA pusse Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u.
bahassai devayAe paNNatte, 16.paM. tA assesA Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u.
sappadevayAe paNNatte, 17.pa. tA mahA Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u.
pitidevayAe' paNNatte, 18.pa. tA puvvAphagguNI Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ?
u. bhagadevayAe paNNatte, 19.pa. tA uttarAphagguNI Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte
? - u. ajjama devayAe paNNatte, 20.pa. tA hatthe Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ?
u. suviyA devayAya paNNatte, 21.pa. tA cittA Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u.
taThedevayAe" paNNatte, 22.pa. tA sAtI Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u.
vAudevayAe paNNatte, 1. prajApatiriti brahmanAmako devaH ayaM ca brahmaNaH
paryAyAn sahate, tena brAhmAmityAdi prsiddhm| 2. somaH - candrastena saumyaM
cAndramasamityAdi prasiddham  /  3. rudraH - zivastena raudrA kAlinIti prsiddhm|
4. pitRnAmA devaH, 5. aryamA - aryamanAmako devavizeSaH, 6. savitA - sUryaH, 7.
tvaSTA - tvaSTranAmako devastena tvASTrI - citrA iti prsiddhm|

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ From the tenth to the twelfth ] [ 113 23.Q. To which deity is the Visakha
Nakshatra assigned? A. To Indra, 24.Q. To which deity is the Anuradha Nakshatra
assigned? A. To Mitra, ......... 25.Q. To which deity is the Jyeshta Nakshatra
assigned? A. To Indra, 26.Q. To which deity is the Mula Nakshatra assigned? A.
To Nirriti, . 27.Q. To which deity is the Purvashadha Nakshatra assigned? A. To
Apa, 28.Q. To which deity is the Uttarashadha Nakshatra assigned? A. To
Visvedeva, 1. K - Visakha - Dvidaivatamiti prasiddham. 2. Nairritah -
Rakshasasten. 3. Apo - Jalanama devasten Purvashadha toyamiti prasiddham. 4.
Visvedevastrayodasa. K. P. Aesi nam bhanta! Atthavisae nakkhattaanam abhii
nakkhatte kindevayae pannatte? A. Goma! Brahmadevaya pannatta, Gahao: 1. Brahma,
2. Vishnu, 3. Vasu, 4. Varuna, 5. Aya, 6. Abhivadhi, 7. Puse, 8. Ase, 9. Jame,
10. Agni, 11. Payavai, 12. Some, 13. Rudde, 14. Adi. 15. Bahassai, 16. Sappe,
17. Piu, 18. Bhage, 19. Ajame, 20. Savia, 21. Tattha, 22. Vau, 23. Indaggo, 24.
Mitto, 25. Inde, 26. Nirai, 27. Au, 28. Vissa ya. Thus, the Nakshatras are
assigned to deities in a particular order, until the Uttarashadha Nakshatra. Q.
To which deity is the Uttarashadha Nakshatra assigned? A. Goma! To Visvedeva, -
Jambu. Vakkh. 7, Su. 158

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - bArahavA prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 113 23.pa. tA visAhA Nakkhatte'
kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. iMdaggIdevayAe paNNatte, 24.pa. tA aNurAhA Nakkhatte
kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. mittadevayAe paNNatte, ......... 25.pa. tA jeTThA
Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. iMdadevayAe paNNatte, 26.pa. tA mUle
Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. NiraidevayAe paNNatte, . 27.pa. tA puvvAsADhA
Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ?. u. AudevayAepaNNatte, 28.pa. tA uttarAsADhA
Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. vissadevayAe paNNatte, 1. ka - vizAkhA -
dvidaivatamiti prsiddhm| 2. nairRtaH - raakssssten| 3. Apo - jalanAmA devastena
pUrvASADhA toyaMmiti prsiddhm|| 4. vishvedevaastryodsh| ka. pa. eesi NaM bhaMte
! aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM abhII Nakkhatte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. goyamA!
bamhadevayA paNNattA, gAhAo:1. bamhA, 2. viNhu, 3. vasU, 4. varUNe, 5. aya, 6.
abhivaddhI, 7. pUse, 8.Ase, 9. jame, 19. aggI, 11. payAvaI, 12. some, 13. rudde,
14. adii||1|| 15. bahassaI, 16. sappe, 17. piU, 18. bhage, 19. ajama, 20. saviA,
21. taTThA, 22. vAu, 23. iMdaggo, 24. mitto, 25. iMde, 26. niraI, 27. Au, 28.
vissA y||2|| evaM NakkhattANaM egA parivADI NeavvA, jAva pa. uttarAsADhA
Nakkhatte NaM Rte kiMdevayAe paNNatte ? u. goyamA! vissadevayA paNNattA, -
jaMbU. vakkha.7, su. 158

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Names of Muhurtas - 47.  **K. P. Ta. Kaham te Muhurttaanaam Naamadhejjhaa?
Ahie tti Vaejjaa, U. Egamegassa Nam Ahoraattassa Tiisan Muhurtta Pannaatta
Tanjhaa Gahaao:**  1. Rodde, 2. Satte, 3. Mittae, 4. Vaa, 5. Supee, 6.
Abhichande, 7. Mahinde, 8. Palambe, 9. Bhambe, 10. Sacche, 11. Aanande, 12.
Vijaye, 13. Vissasene, 14. Paayaavacche, 15. Uvasame, 16. Isaane, 17. Tatthe,
18. Bhaaviyappa, 19. Vesamane, 20. Varune, 21. Satarise, 22. Gandhavve, 23.
AggiviSayaane, 24. Aatave, 25. Aate, 26. Tatthave, 27. Bhoome, 28. Risabhe, 29.
Savvatthasiiddhe, 30. Rakkhase.  **Gahaao:**  Dashamapraabhrut [Terahvaam
Praabhrutpraabhrut]  - Etaya - Brahma-Vishnu-Varunadhirpaya Paripaatyaa, Na Tu
Parateerthikaprayukta - Ashva-Yama-Dahan - Kamalajaadhirpaya Netavyaa Parisamadi
Praapaniya.  - 1. Bhamha, 2. Vindu, 3. Avasu, 4. Varune, 5. Ay, 6. Vuddhi, 7.
Paus, 8. Aas, 9. Jame, 10. Aggi, 11. Payaavai, 12. Some, 13. Rudde, 14. Aditi,
15. Bahassai, 16. Sappe, 17. Piu, 18. Bhag, 19. Ajjam, 20. Savia, 21. Tattha,
22. Vaa, 23. Taheva, Indaggi, 24. Mittae, 25. Inde, 26. Nirui, 27. Aath, 28.
Vissa Ya Boddhvave.  Jambhu. Vakkha. 47, Su. 174  Eka Hee Aagam Me Atthavaas
Nakshatra Devataao Ke Naamo Ki Gaathaae Bhinna-Bhinna Rachnaa Shaili Me Do Baar
Aana, Vichaaraniya Prasna Hai. Iska Samaadhaan Bahushrut Karen To Jigyaasuo Ke
Gyaan Ki Vruddi Ho.  1. Egamege Nam Ahoraatte Tiisan Muhurtte Muhurttgge Nam
Pannaatta, Easi Nam Tiisaae Muhurttaanaam Tiisan Naamadhejjhaa Pannaatta, Tam
Jhaa 1. Rodde, 2. Satte, 3. Mittae, 4. Vaa, 5. Supee, 6. Abhichande, 7. Mahinde,
8. Palambe, 9. Bhambe, 10. Sacche, 11. Aanande, 12. Vijaye, 13. Vissasene, 14.
Paayaavacche, 15. Uvasame, 16. Isaane, 17. Tatthe, 18. Bhaaviyappa, 19.
Vesamane, 20. Varune, 21. Satarise, 22. Gandhavve, 23. AggiviSayaane, 24.
Aatave, 25. Aate, 26. Tatthave, 27. Bhoome, 28. Risabhe, 29. Savvatthasiiddhe,
30. Rakkhase.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 muhuttANaM NAmAI - 47. kha. pa. tA kahaM te muhuttANaM NAmadhejjA ? Ahie tti
vaejjA, u. egamegassa NaM ahorattassa tIsaM muhuttA paNNattA taMjahA gAhAo: 1.
rohe, 2. sete, 3. mitte, 4. vAyu, 5. sugIe, 6. abhicaMde  /  7. mahidaM, 8.
balava, 9. baMbho, 10. bahusacce, 11. ceva IsANe  //  1  //  12. taTTheya, 13.
bhAviyappA, 14. vesamaNe, 15. varuNe ya, 16. ANaMde,  /  17. vijaya e, 18.
vIsaseNe, 19. pAyAvacce ceva, 20. uvasame y|| 2  //  21. gaMghavva, 22.
aggivese, 23. sayarisahe, 24. AyavaM ca, 25. amame ya,  /  26. aNavaM, 27. ca
bhoma, 28. risahe, 29. savvaTThe, 30. rakkhase ceva  //  3  //  gAhAo :
dazamaprAbhRta [terahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] - etayA - brahma-viSNu-
varuNAdirupayA paripATyA, na tu paratIrthikaprayukta - azva-yama-dahana -
kamalajAdirUpayA netavyA parisamadi prApaNIyA  /  - 1. bamhA, 2. viNDu, 3.
avasU, 4. varUNe, 5. aya, 6. vuDDhI, 7. pUsa, 8. Asa, 9. jame, 10. aggi, 11.
payAvai, 12. some, 13. rudde, 14. aditi, 15. bahassaI, 16. sappe,  //  1  //
17. piu, 18. bhaga, 19. ajjama, 20. saviA, 21. taTThA, 22. vAu, 23. taheva,
iMdaggI, .. 24. mitte 25. iMde, 26. niruI, 27. ATha, 28. vissA ya boddhavve  //
2  //  jaMbU. vakkha. 47, su. 174 eka hI Agama meM aTThAvIsa nakSatra devatAoM
ke nAmoM kI gAthAeM bhinna-bhinna racanA zailI meM do bAra AnA, vicAraNIya
prazna hai| isakA samAdhAna bahuzruta kareM to jijJAsuoM ke jJAna kI vRddhi ho
/  1. egamege NaM ahoratte tIsamuhutte muhuttaggeNaM paNNattA, eesi NaM tIsAe
muhuttANaM tIsaM nAmadhejjA paNNattA, taM jahA 1. rodde, 2. satte, 3. mitte, 4.
vAu, 5. supIe, 6. abhicaMde, 7. mAhiMde, 8. palaMbe, 9. baMbhe, 10. sacce, 11.
ANaMde, 12. vijae, 13. vissaseNe, 14. pAyAvacce, 15. uvasame, 16. IsANe, 17.
taTThe, 18. bhAviappA, 19 vesamaNe, 20. varuNe, 21. satarisame, 22. gaMdhavve,
23. aggivesAyaNe, 24. Atave, 25. Ate, 26. taTThave, 27. bhUmahe, 28. risabhe,
29. savvaTTasiddhe, 30. rakkhase  /

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Tenth Prabhruta [Fourteenth Prabhruta-Prabhruta]  **Question:** What are
the names of the 48 days?  **Answer:** There are 15 days in each fortnight,
named as follows:  * **Days:** 1. Padivaya, 2. Bitiya, 3. Taiya, 4. Chauthi, 5.
Panchmi, 6. Chhathi, 7. Sattami, 8. Athamo, 9. Navami, 10. Dasami, 11.
Ekkharasi, 12. Barasi, 13. Terasi, 14. Chaudas, 15. Pannares.  * **Names:** 1.
Puvange, 2. Siddhamanorame, 3. Y Tattho, 4. Manoharo Cheva, 5. Jasabhadde, 6.
Jasodhara, 7. Savvakamasamiddhe Ti Ya, 8. Inde Muddhabhisitte Ya, 9. Somanas,
10. Dhananjay, 11. Ya Boddhvave, 12. Aththasiddhe, 13. Abhijaye, 14. Accasana,
15. Satangaye, 16. Aggivise, 17. Uvasame.  **Question:** What are the names of
the 48 Raio?  **Answer:** There are 15 Raio in each fortnight, named as follows:
* **Raio:** 1. Padivaraai, 2. Bitiyaraai, 3. Tatiyaraai, 4. Chauthiraai, 5.
Panchmiraai, 6. Chhathiraai, 7. Satmiraai, 8. Athmiraai, 9. Navmiraai, 10.
Dasmiraai, 11. Ekkharasiraai, 12. Barasiraai, 13. Terasiraai, 14. Chaussiraai,
15. Pannaressiraai.  * **Names:** 1. Uttama Ya, 2. Sunakhatta, 3. Elavaccha, 4.
Jasodhara, 5. Somanas Cheva Taha, 6. Sirisambhuta Ya Boddhva, 7. Vijaya Ya, 8.
Vejayanti, 9. Jayanti, 10. Aparajia Ya, 11. Gachcha Ya, 12. Samahara Cheva Taha,
13. Te Ya Taha Ya, 14. Atitaya, 15. Devanandanirati.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [caudahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta] divasarAINaM NAmAI - 48. pa. tA
kahaM te divasA ? Ahie tti vaejjA, u. tA egamegassa NaM pakkhassa paNNarasa
paNNarasa divasA paNNattA, taMjahA - paDivayA divase, bitiyA divase, taiyA
divase, cautthI divase, paMcamI divase, chaTThI divase, sattamI divase, aTThamo
divase, navamI divase, dasamI divase, ekkArasI divase, bArasI divase, terasI
divase, cauddasI divase, paNNarase divase, tA eesi NaM paNNarasaNhaM divasANaM
paNNarasa NAmadhejA paNNattA, taMjahA - gAhAoH - ..... 1. puvvaMge, 2.
siddhamaNorame, ya tatto, 3. maNoharo cev| 4. jasabhadde, 5. jasodhara, 6.
savvakAmasamiddhe ti y||1|| 7. iMde muddhAbhisitte ya, 8. somaNasa, 9.
dhaNaMjae, ya boddhvve| 10. atthasiddhe 11. abhijAe, 12. accAsaNe, 13.
stNje||2|| . 14. aggivese, 15. uvasame, divasANaM nnaamdhejaaii| pa. tA kahaM te
rAIo paNNattAo? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA egamegassa NaM pakkhassa paNNarasa
paNNarasa rAIo paNNatAo, taMjahA - paDivArAI, bitiyArAI, tatIyArAI, cautthIrAI,
paMcamIrAI, chaTThIrAI, sattamIrAI, aTThamIrAI, navamIrAI, dasamIrAI,
ekkArasIrAI, bArasIrAI, terasIrAI, caussIrAI, paNNarasIrAI, tA eyAsiNaM
paNNarasaNhaM rAINaM paNNarasa jAmedhejA paNNattA, taMjahA - gAhAoH - 1. uttamA
ya, 2. suNakkhattA, 3. elAvaccA, 4. jsodhraa| 5. somaNasA ceva tahA, 6.
sirisaMbhUtA ya boddhavvA  // 1 //  7. vijayA ya, 8. vejayaMtI, 9. jayaMti, 10.
aparAjiyA ya, 11. gacchA y| 12. samAhArA ceva tahA, 13. teyA ya tahA ya, 14.
atiteyaa||2|| 15. devANaMdAniratI, rayaNINaM nnaamdhejaaiN|

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dashama Prabhruta [Pandrahvaam Prabhruta Prabhruta] Tihinaa Namaai - 49. P.
Ta Kaham Te Tihinaa? Ahie Tti Vaejjaa.  U. Tattha Khalu Imaa Duvihaa Tihinaa
Pannaatta, Tam Jahaa - 1. Divasatihi, 2. Raaitihi Ya, P. Ta Kaham Te Divas
Tihinaa? Ahie Tti Vaejjaa. U. Ta Egamegassa Nam Pakkassa Pannaaras Pannaaras
Divasatihi Pannaatta Tam Jahaa -  1. Nande, 2. Bhadde, 3. Jae, 4. Tusse, 5. Pune
Pakkassa Panchmi, Punaravi - 6. Nande, 7. Bhae, 8. Jae, 9. Tusse, 10. Punne.
Pakthkhassa Dasami, Punaravi - 11. Nande, 12. Bhadde, 13. Jae, 14. Tusse, 15.
Punne Pakkassa Pannaaras,  Evam Te Tigunaa Tihinaa Savvesin Divasaanam. P. Ta
Kaham Me Raaitiho? Ahie Tti Vaejjaa. U. Ta Egamegassa Nam Pakkassa Pannaaras
Raaitihi Pannaatta Tam Jahaa -  1. Uggawai, 2. Bhogawai, 3. Jasawai, 4.
Savvasiddhaa, 5. Suhanaama, Punaravi - 6. Uggawai, 7. Bhogawai, 8. Jasawai, 9.
Savvasiddhaa, 10. Suhanaama, Punaravi - 11. Uggawai, 12. Bhogawai, 13. Jasawai,
14. Savvasiddhaa, 15. Suhanaama, Eae Tigunaa Tihinaa Savvesin Raainam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [pandrahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta] tihINaM NAmAI - 49. pa. tA kahaM
te tihI ? Ahie tti vaejjA, u. tattha khalu imA duvihA tihI paNNattA, taM jahA -
1. divasatihI, 2. rAItihI ya, pa. tA kahaM te divasa tihI? Ahie tti vejjaa| u.
tA egamegassa NaM pakkhassa paNNarasa paNNarasa divasatihI paNNattA taM jahA -
1.NaMde, 2. bhadde, 3. jae,4. tucche, 5. puNe pakkhassa paMcamI, puNaravi - 6.
NaMde, 7. bhahe, 8. jae, 9. tucche, 10. puNNe . pakthkhassa dasamI, puNaravi -
11. NaMde, 12. bhadde, 13. jae, 14. tucche, 15. puNNe pakkhassa paNNarasa, evaM
te tiguNA tihIo savvesiM divsaannN| pa. tA kahaM me rAItiho ? Ahie tti vejjaa|
u. tA egamegassa NaM pakkhassa paNNarasa rAItihI paNNattA taM jahA - . 1.
uggavaI, 2. bhogavaI, 3. jasavaI, 4. savvasiddhA,5. suhaNAmA, puNaravi - 6.
uggavaI, 7. bhogavaI, 8. jasavaI, 9. savvasiddhA,10. suhaNAmA, puNaravi - 11.
uggavaI, 12. bhogavaI, 13. jasavaI, 14. savvasiddhA,15. suhaNAmA, ee tiguNA
tihIo savvesiM raaiinnN||

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dasham Prabhruta [Solahvam Prabhruta Prabhruta] Nakshatranam Gottam - 50. P.
Ta Kaham Te Gottam? Ahie Tti Vaejja, P. 1. Ta Easinam Atthavisae Nakshattanam -
Abhiyi Nakshatte Kingotte Panatte? .U. Ta. Moggalayan Sagotte Panatte. P. 2.
Savane Nakshatte Kingotte Panatte? U. Sankhayan Sagotte Panatte. P. 3. Dhanitta
Nakshatte Kingotte Panatte? U. Aggittavas Sagotte Panatte. P. 4. Satabhisaya
Nakshatte Kingotte Panatte? U. Kannaloayan Sagotte Panatte. P. 5.
Puvvapoththavaya Nakshatte Kingotte Panatte? U. Joukanniya Sagotte Panatte. P.
6. Uttarapoththavaya Nakshatte Kingotte Panatte? U. Dhananjay Sagotte Panatte.
.. P. 7. Revai Nakshatte Kingotte Panatte? U. Pussaayan Sagotte Panatte. P. 8.
Assini Nakshatte Kingotte Panatte? U. Assadan Sagotte Panatte. P. 9. Bharani
Nakshatte Kingotte Panatte? U. Bhaggaves Sagotte Panatte. P. 10. Kattiya
Nakshatte Kingotte Panatte?  Aggives Sagotte Panatte. 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [solahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta] NakkhattANaM gottA - 50. pa. tA
kahaM te gottA? Ahie tti vaejjA, pa. 1. tA eesiNaM aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM -
abhiyI Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? .u. tA.moggalAyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 2.
savaNe Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte? u. saMkhAyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 3.
dhaNiTThA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. aggittAvasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 4.
satabhisayA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. kaNNaloyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 5.
pUvvApoTThavayA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. joukaNNiyasagotte pnnnntte| pa.
6. uttarApoTThavayA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. dhanaMjayasagotte pnnnntte|
.. pa. 7. revaI Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. pussAyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa.
8. assiNI Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. assAdaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 9.
bharaNI Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. bhaggavesasagotte pnnnntte| pa.
10.kattiyA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte? aggivesasagotte pnnnntte| 5

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[118] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] P. 11. In which gotra is the Rohini nakshatra
established? A. It is established in the Gotama gotra. P. 12. In which gotra is
the Santhana nakshatra established? A. It is established in the Bharadvaja
gotra. P. 13. In which gotra is the Adha nakshatra established? A. It is
established in the Lahicchaayana gotra. P. 14. In which gotra is the Punarvasu
nakshatra established? A. It is established in the Vasishtha gotra. P. 15. In
which gotra is the Pushya nakshatra established? A. It is established in the
Ujjayana gotra. P. 16. In which gotra is the Ashlesha nakshatra established? A.
It is established in the Mandavvaayana gotra. P. 17. In which gotra is the Magha
nakshatra established? A. It is established in the Pingayana gotra. P. 18. In
which gotra is the Purva Phalguni nakshatra established? A. It is established in
the Govallayana gotra. P. 19. In which gotra is the Uttara Phalguni nakshatra
established? A. It is established in the Kasava gotra. P. 20. In which gotra is
the Hasta nakshatra established? A. It is established in the Kosiya gotra. P.
21. In which gotra is the Chitra nakshatra established? A. It is established in
the Dabbiyaana gotra. P. 22. In which gotra is the Swati nakshatra established?
A. It is established in the Chamarachcha gotra. P. 23. In which gotra is the
Visakha nakshatra established? A. It is established in the Sungayana gotra. P.
24. In which gotra is the Anuradha nakshatra established? A. It is established
in the Golavvaayana gotra. P. 25. In which gotra is the Jyeshta nakshatra
established? A. It is established in the Tigicchaayana gotra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra pa. 11.rohiNI Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u.
gotamasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 12.saMThANA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u.
bhAraddAyasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 13.addhA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u.
lAhiccAyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 14.puNavvasu Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u.
vAsiTThasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 15.pusse Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u.
ujjAyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 16.assesA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. *
maMDavvAyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 17.maghA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u.
piMgAyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 18.puvvAphagguNI Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u.
govallAyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 19.uttarAphagguNI Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ?
u. sa kAsavagotte pnnnntte| pa. 20.hatthe Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. sa
kosiyagotte pnnnntte| pa. 21.cittA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u.
dabbhiyANasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 22.sAI Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. sa
cAmaracchasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 23.visAhA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u.
suMgAyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 24.aNurAhA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u.
golavvAyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 25.jeTThA Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u.
tigicchAyaNasagotte pnnnntte|

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ 119 P. 26. In which gotra is the Mula Nakshatra? A. It is in the Kachayan
gotra. P. 27. In which gotra is the Purvashadha Nakshatra? A. It is in the
Vazhiayan gotra. P. 28. In which gotra is the Uttarashadha Nakshatra? A. It is
in the Vagyavach gotra. P. Thus, venerable sir! In which gotra are the twenty-
eight Nakshatras? Goyama! They are in the Moggalayan gotra, the planets are - 1.
Moggalayan, 2. Sankhayan, 3. Agga-bhava, 4. Kasinalle. Then 5. Ja-ukanne, 6.
Dhananjaye and Boddhvave. ||1|| 7. Pusayan, 8. Assayan, 9. Bhaggave, 10. Aggi-
ve. 11. Goam, 12. Bharada, 13. Lohi-che, 14. Vasite. ||2|| 15. Omjayana, 16.
Mandavayana, 17. Pingayana, 18. Govalle. 19. Kasava, 20. Kosiya, 21. Dabbiya,
22. Chamarachcha, 23. Sungaya. ||3|| 24. Golavayana, 25. Tegicchayana, 26.
Kachayan is the Mula. 27. Then Majjiayana, 28. Vaggavach is the gotra. ||4|| -
Jambu. Vakkh. 7, S. 160 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - solahavA prAbhRtaprAbhRta] [ 119 pa. 26.mUle Nakkhatte
kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. kaccAyaNasagotte pnnnntte| pa. 27.puvvAsADhA Nakkhatte
kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. vajhiyAyaNaNasagotte pnnnntte| . pa. 28.uttarAsADhA
Nakkhatte kiMgotte paNNatte ? u. vagyAvaccasagotte pnnnntte| pa. eesi NaM bhaMte
! aTThAvIsAe NakkhattANaM abhiiNakkhatte kiMgotte paNNate? goyamA!
moggalAyaNasagotte paNNatte, gahAo - 1. moggalAyaNa, 2. saMkhAyaNe ataha 3.
aggabhAva, 4. ksinnlle| tato a 5. jA ukaNNe, 6. dhaNaMjae ceva boddhavve  // 1
//  7. pussAyaNe ya,8. assAyaNe ya, 9. bhaggavese ya, 10. aggivese y| 11. goama,
12. bhAradAe, 13. lohicce ceva, 14. vAsiTe  // 2 //  15. omajjAyaNa, 16.
maMDavyAyaNe, 17. piMgAyaNe ya, 18. govlle| 19. kAsava, 20. kosiya, 21.
dabbhiya, 22. cAmaracchA ya, 23. suNgaay||3|| 24. golavyAyaNa, 25. tegicchAyaNe
a, 26. kacyAyaNe havai muule| 27. tatto a majjhiyAyaNa, 28. vagghAvacce ya
gottaaii||4|| -jaMbu. vakkha.7, sa. 160

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Nakshatra Food for Success**  **51. P.** **U.** **From the tenth [to the
seventeenth] Nakshatra**  **1.** **2.** **3.** **4.** **How are these foods?**
It is said that: **In the twenty-eighth Nakshatra:** * **Krittika:**  Success is
achieved by eating curd. * **Rohini:** Success is achieved by eating Vasa-mansa
(meat of a particular animal). * **Mrigashira:** Success is achieved by eating
deer meat. * **Aardra:** Success is achieved by eating salt. * **Punarvasu:**
Success is achieved by eating ghee. * **Pushya:** Success is achieved by
drinking milk. * **Ashlesha:** Success is achieved by eating Divaga-mansa (meat
of a particular animal). * **Magha:** Success is achieved by eating Kasoti (a
type of food). **5.** **6.** **7.** **8.** **9.** **Purva Phalguni:** Success is
achieved by eating frog meat. **10.** **Uttara Phalguni:** Success is achieved
by eating Nakhhi-mansa (meat of a particular animal). **11.** **Hasta:** Success
is achieved by eating Vatthani (a type of food). **12.** **Chitra:** Success is
achieved by eating Mugga Suvena (a type of food). **13.** **Swati:** Success is
achieved by eating fruits. **14.** **Visakha:** Success is achieved by eating
Asitti (a type of food). **15.** **Anuradha:** Success is achieved by eating
Misakur (a type of food). **16.** **Jyeshta:** Success is achieved by eating
Kolatti (a type of food). **17.** **Moola:** Success is achieved by eating
Mulapanna (a type of food). **18.** **Purva Ashadha:** Success is achieved by
eating Amalag-sarira (a type of food). **19.** **Uttara Ashadha:** Success is
achieved by eating Bille (a type of food). **1.** **Rohini:** Success is
achieved by eating Chamsa-mansa (a type of meat).  **A.S. Samiti published this
text on page 151 (with variations).**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 NakkhattANaM bhoyaNaM kajjasiddhI ya 51. pa. u. dazamaprAbhRta [ sattarahavAM
prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] 1. 2. 3. 4. tA kahaM te bhoyaNA ? Ahie tti vaejjA, tA eesi
NaM aTThAvIsAe NaM NakkhattANaM majjhe - kattiyAhiM dadhiNA bhoccA kajjaM
sAdheMti, rAhiNIhiM vasabha-maMsaM bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, migasire NaM (
saMThANAhiM ) miga-maMsaM' bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, addhahiM NavaNIeNaM bhoccA
kajjaM sAdheMti, puNavvasuNA'tha ghaeNaM bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, pusse NaM
khIreNa bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, assesAe dIvaga-maMsaM bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti,
mahAhiM kasotiM bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. puvvAhiM phagguNIhiM
meDhaka-maMsaM bhocyA kajjaM sAdheMti, 10. uttarAhiM phagguNIhiM NakkhI-maMsaM
bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, 11. hattheNa vatthANIeNaM bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, 12.
cittAhiM mugga sUveNaM bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, 13. sAiNA phalAiM bhocyA kajjaM
sAdheMti, 14. visAhA hiM AsittiyAo bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, 15. aNurAhAhiM
missakUraM bhocyA kajjaM sAdheMti, 16. jeTThAhiM kolaTThieNaM bhoccA kajjaM
sAdheMti, 17. mUleNaM mUlApanneNaM bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, 18. puvvAhiM
AsADhAhiM Amalaga-sarIraM bhocyA kajjaM sAdheMti, 19. uttarAhiM AsADhAhiM
billehiM bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, 1. rAhiNIhiM casama - maMsaM (camasamaMsaM )
bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, A. sa. samiti se prakAzita prati ke pRSTha 151 para (
pAThantara) hai|

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## From the tenth Prabhruta to the seventeenth Prabhruta Prabhruta:  20. They
perform the Bhocca ceremony with flowers on the Abhijit Nakshatra. 21. They
perform the Bhocca ceremony with milk on the Savana Nakshatra. 22. They perform
the Bhocca ceremony with juice on the Dhanishta Nakshatra. 23. They perform the
Bhocca ceremony with Tuvari on the Satabhisha Nakshatra. 24. They perform the
Bhocca ceremony with the remains of the previous day's food on the Pushya
Nakshatra. 25. They perform the Bhocca ceremony with boar meat on the Uttara
Nakshatra. 26. They perform the Bhocca ceremony with aquatic animal meat on the
Revati Nakshatra. 27. They perform the Bhocca ceremony with bird meat or turtle
meat on the Asvini Nakshatra. 28. They perform the Bhocca ceremony with sesame
and rice on the Bharani Nakshatra.  1. Kulmasa, rice, Masha, cow's yogurt, ghee,
milk, buffalo meat, its blood, payasa, sesame, Marg, Shasha, sixty types of
Priyangu, puffed rice, and colored eggs are considered good fruits. || 84 ||
Karm, Sarika, Godhika, sesame, Shalya, Havishya, horse's ghee, Krisara, Mudga,
and ground barley are also considered good. || 85 || Fish, colored food, and
yogurt food are also considered good. Thus, a wise person should consider what
is edible and what is not edible and eat accordingly. || 85 ||  [ 121 - This
seventeenth Prabhruta Prabhruta in the Muhurta Chintamani, the chapter on
travel, is not actually taught by the Bhagavan, but seems to have been added by
someone else. This style of language is not found in the Bhagavan's teachings.
For example, in some places, the third case plural is used, such as "Kattiyahim,
Rohinihim, Addahim," while in other places, the third case singular is used,
such as "Punavvasuna, Pussehena, Addaae." Also, in the context of food, the
third case is used in some places, while the second case is used in others. For
example, "Dahina Bhocca, Baniyena Bhocca, Khirena Bhocca" uses the third case,
while "Vasabha Mansa Bhocca, Miga Mansa Bhocca, Deeva Mansa Bhocca" uses the
second case. This inconsistent use of language suggests that this section was
not taught by the Bhagavan.  Furthermore, in some places, the consumption of
land, water, and air animals is mentioned as a cause for success. This is
completely inappropriate, as the Bhagavan, who teaches the protection of the six
bodies and the six-bodied beings, would never advocate for the consumption of
meat. Such teachings are not found anywhere in the scriptures. Therefore, it is
certain that this section is not part of the Bhagavan's teachings.  However,
there is another logical reason. In the scriptures, the counting of the
Nakshatras always starts from the Abhijit Nakshatra, as it is the first
Nakshatra of the Yuga. In this scripture, the first Prabhruta Prabhruta of the
tenth Prabhruta begins with the following sutra:  "How do you know that the
objects are arranged in this way? What is the basis for this arrangement? They
said, "There are five different interpretations here. They said, "All the
Nakshatras, starting from Krittika and ending with Bharani, are one." || 1 ||
This is the first interpretation of the other Tirthankaras. They believe that
the Nakshatras, starting from Krittika and ending with Bharani, are one. There
are five such interpretations of the other Tirthankaras. The second
interpretation is: "All the Nakshatras, starting from Magha and ending with
Ashlesha, are one." || 2 ||  The third interpretation is: "All the Nakshatras,
starting from Dhanishta and ending with Shravana, are one." || 3 ||  The fourth
interpretation is: "All the Nakshatras, starting from Ashvini and ending with
Revati, are one." || 4 ||  The fifth interpretation is: "All the Nakshatras,
starting from Bharani and ending with Ashvini, are one." || 5 ||  After refuting
all these five interpretations, the Bhagavan presents his own view:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta- sattarahavA prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] 20. abhIyiNA pupphehiM bhoccA
kajjaM sAdheMti, 21. savaNeNaM khIreNaM bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, 22. dhaNiTThAhiM
jUseNaM bhocyA kajjaM sAdheMti, 23. satabhisayAe tuvarIo bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti,
24. puvvAhiM puTThavayAhiM kArillaehiM bhocyA kajjaM sAdheMti, 25. uttarAhiM
puTThavayAhiM varAhamaMsaM bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, 26. revatIhiM jalayara-maMsaM
bhoccA kajjaM sAdheMti, 27. assiNIhiM titira-maMsaM vaTTakamaMsaM vA bhoccA
kajjaM sAdheMti, 28. bharaNIhiM talaM (tila) taMdulakaM bhocyA kajjaM sAdheMti
/  1. kulmASAMstilataNDulAnapi tathA mASAMzca gavyaM dadhi, tvAjyaM
dugdhamathaiNamAMsamaparaM tasyaiva raktaM tathA  /  tadvatpAyasameva
cASapalalaM mArgaM ca zAzaM tathA, SaSTivayaM ca priyaMgvapUpamathavA
citrANDajAn satphalam  //  84  //  karma sArikagodhikaM ca palalaM zalyaM
haviSyaM hayAghRkSe syAnkRsarAnamudgamapi vA piSTaM yavAnAM tathA  /  matsyAnnaM
khalu citritAnnamathavA dadhyannamevaM kramAdbhakSyAbhakSyamidaM vicArya matimAn
bhakSettathA''lokayet  //  85  //  [ 121 - muhUrtacintAmaNi yAtrAprakaraNa
vastutaH idaM saptadazaM prAbhRtaprAbhRtaM na bhagavatA pratipAditaM kintu
kenA'pyatra prakSiptamiti pratibhAti, neyaM bhASAzailI bhagavato lakSyate,
yato'tra sUtre kutracit 'kattiyAhiM rohiNIhiM, addhAhiM ' ityAdi
tRtIyAbahuvacanaM labhyate kutracicca 'puNavvasuNA, pusseNaM, addAe' ityAdi
tRtIyaikavacanaM labhyate  /  anyaca bhojyavastuviSaye kutracittRtIyA kutracid
dvitIyA ca  /  yathA - 'dahiNA bhoccA, baNIyeNa bhoccA, khIreNa bhoccA' iti
tRtIyA, kutravicca yatra mAMsaviSayakathanaM tatra dvitIyA, yathA-
'vasabhamaMsaM bhoccA, migamaMsaM bhoccA, dIvagamaMsaM bhoccA' ityAdi,
evamavayavasthitajalpanena jJAyate nedaM bhagavatA prasapitamiti  /  anyacca
katipayasthaleSu sthalacarajalacara - khecara prANinAM mAMsabhakSaNaM
kAryasiddhau kAraNatvena pratipAditaM tattu nitAntamasaGgatameva, yataH
SaTakAyapratipAlakasya SaTakAyarakSaNopadezatatparasya ca bhagavato mukhAnnaiva
mAMsabhasakSaNavidhirbhavitumarhati zAstreSu kutrApi naitAdRzI vANI bhagavataH
samupalabhyate 'to nizcIyate-nedaM bhagavadupadezakaviSayakamiti  /  astu,
anyadapi saMyuktikaM kAraNaM zrUyatAm - zAstreSu sarvatra nakSatrANAM gaNanA
abhijinnakSatrAdArabhyaiva kRtA yugasyAdyadivase'bhijita evaM sadbhavAt  /
atraiva zAstre pUrva dazamaprAbhRtasya prathame prAbhRtaprAbhRte AdAveva
sUtramidam - 'tA kahaM te jogeti vatthussa AvaliyANivAe Ahieti vaejjA, tattha
khalu imAo paMca paDivattIo paNNattAo, tatthege evamAhaMsu tA savvevi NakkhattA,
kattiyAdiyA bharaNIpajjavasANA ege evamAhaMsu  //  1  //  iyamanyatIrthikAnAM
prathamA pratipattiH, ete kRttikAdIni bharaNIparyavasAnAni nakSatrANi manyante,
evamanyatIrthikAnAM paJca pratipattayaH santi  /  tatra dvitIyAH - 'maghAdikAni
azleSAparyavasAnAni sarvANi nakSatrANi iti ' 2. tRtIyA - dhaniSThAdIni
zravaNaparyavasAnAni iti 3. caturthA azvinyAdIni revatIparyavasAnAni sarvANi
nakSatrANi 4, eke bharaNyAdikAni azvinI paryavasAnAni iti kathayanti  /  5  /
etA paJcApi pratipattayo mithyArUpA iti kathayitvA bhagavAn svamataM
pradarzayati -

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Tenth Prabhruta [Eighteenth Prabhruta-Prabhruta]  In one Yuga, the number
of solar and lunar cycles is 52. P.K. How are these cycles? Answer: There are
two types of cycles here, as follows: 1. Solar cycles, 2. Lunar cycles. P.K. How
are the lunar cycles? Answer: In a Yuga of five years,   1. The moon joins with
the Abhijit Nakshatra for 77 cycles, 2. The moon joins with the Savana Nakshatra
for 77 cycles, and so on, until 3-28. The moon joins with the Uttara Ashadha
Nakshatra for 77 cycles. P.K. How are the solar cycles? Answer: In a Yuga of
five years,   1. The sun joins with the Abhijit Nakshatra for five cycles, and
so on, until 2-28. The sun joins with the Uttara Ashadha Nakshatra for five
cycles.  "We say this - all the Nakshatras from Abhijit to Uttara Ashadha are
established, as follows: Abhijit, Savana, until Uttara Ashadha."  The commentary
by Malayagiri Suri on this is as follows:  The beginning of the Yuga starts on
the first day of the bright fortnight of Shravana month, when the moon joins
with the Abhijit Nakshatra at the time of the Balavakarna. This is stated in the
Jyotish Karndaka:  "On the first day of the bright fortnight of Shravana month,
the moon joins with the Abhijit Nakshatra."  "In all cases, the beginning of the
Yuga is considered to be the time of the moon's conjunction." This is stated by
Bharata, the great scholar. Thus, the Nakshatras from Abhijit onwards are
established, considering the moon's conjunction as the beginning of all specific
times.  Here, the Nakshatras from Krittika to Bharani are considered to be the
first by the early Tirthankaras. According to their view, this Prabhruta-
Prabhruta is seen. This is not the view of the Bhagavan, as it is clear that in
this seventeenth Prabhruta-Prabhruta, the Bhagavan's form cannot be established.
This is enough elaboration.  - Chandraprajnapti Prakashka Commentary

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [aThArahavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta] ege juge Adicca-caMdacArasaMkhA -
52. pa. ka. tA kahaM te cArA ? Ahie tti vaejA, u. tattha khalu imA duvihA cArA
paNNattA, taM jahA - 1. AdiccacArA ya, 2. caMdacArA y| pa. ka. tA kahaM te
caMdacArA ? Ahie tti vaejjA, u. tA paMca saMvaccharie NaM juge, 1. abhIi
Nakkhatte sattasaTThicAre caMdeNa saddhiM jogaM joei, 2. savaNe Nakkhatte
sattasaTThicAre caMdeNa saddhiM jogaM joei, evaM jAva, 3-28. uttarAsADhA
Nakkhatte sattasaTThicAre caMdeNa saddhiM jogaM joei, pa. kha. tA kahaM te
AiccacArA? Ahi tti vaejjA, u. tA paMcasaMvaccharie NaM juge, 1. abhII Nakkhatte
paMcacAre sUreNa saddhiM jogaM joei, evaM jAva, 2-28. uttarAsADhA Nakkhatte
paMcacAre sUreNa saddhiM jogaM joei| 'vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo - savveviNaM
NakkhattA abhiI AiyA uttarAsADhApajjavasANA paNNattA, taMjahA - abhiI savaNo
jAva uttraasaaddhaa||' iti| asya malayagirisUriNA kRtA TIkA yathA - yugasya
cAdiH pravartate zrAvaNamAsi bahulapakSe pratipadi tithau bAlavakaraNe
abhijinnakSatre candreNa saha yogamupAgacchati (sti)| tathA coktama-
jyotiSkaraNDake - sAvaNa bahulapaDivae bAlavakaraNe abhiiinkkhtte| savvattha
paDhamasamaye jugassa AiM viyANAhi  //  1 //  iti 'savvattha' sarvatreti
bharatairavate mahAvidehe c| itthaM sarveSAmapi kAlavizeSANAmAdau
candrayogamadhikRtyAbhijinnakSatrasya vartamAnatvAdabhijidAdIni nakSANi
prjnyptaani| iti ttiikaa| atra kRttikAto bharaNIparyavasAnAni nakSatrANi
prathamAnyatIrthikaiH - saMmatAni santi, tanmatAnusAreNedaM- prAbhataprAbhataM
dRzyate  /  nedaM bhagavato matamityataH spaSTaM jJAyate'smin saptadaze
prAbhRtaprAbhRte bhagavataH prarUpaNA na bhavitumarhatItyalaM vistrenneti| -
candraprajJaptiprakAzikA TIkA

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dashama Prabhruta [Nineteenth Prabhruta Prabhruta]  A year has 53 months. P.
How are those months? A. Thus it is said, U.  A year has twelve months, and they
are named in two ways, as follows: 1. Loiya, 2. Lo Uttariya.  The Loiya names
are: 1. Savane, 2. Bhaddave, 3. Asoe, 4. Kattie, 5. Maggasire, 6. Pose, 7. Mahe,
8. Phaggune, 9. Chette, 10. Vesah, 11. Jette, 12. Asadhe.  The Lo Uttariya names
are:  - 1. Abhinandane, 2. Supaithe, 3. Vijaye, 4. Piivaddhane, 5. Sejanse, 6.
Siviya, 7. Sisire, 8. Hemvan. ||1|| 9. Navame Vasanta Mase, 10. Dasame Kusuma
Sambhave, 11. Ekadasame Nidaho, 12. Vanavirohi ya Barase. ||2|| 1. Jambu. Vakkh.
7, Su. 153

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [unnIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta] egasaMvaccharassa mAsA - 53. pa. tA
kahaM te mAsA ? Ahie tti vaejA, u. tA egamegassa NaM saMvaccharassa bArasa mAsA
paNNattA, teMsi ca duvihA NAmadhejjA paNNattA, taM jahA - 1. loiyA, 2.
louttariyA y| tattha loiyA NAmA :1. sAvaNe, 2. bhaddavae, 3. Asoe, 4. kattie, 5.
maggasire, 6. pose, 7. mAhe, 8. phagguNe, 9. cette, 10. vesAhe, 11. jeTTe, 12.
aasaaddhe| louttariyA NAmA :gAhAo - 1. abhiNaMdaNe, 2. supaiThe ya, 3. vijae, 4.
piiivddhnne| 5. sejaMse ya, 6. siveyA vi, 7. sisire vi ya, 8. hemavaM  // 1 //
9. navame vasaMtamAse, 10. dasame kusumsNbhve| 11. ekAdasame NidAho, 12.
vaNavirohI ya bArase  // 2 //  1. jaMbu. vakkha. 7, su. 153

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Types of Years and Their Characteristics  **54.** **Q.** What are the types
of years? **A.** There are five types of years: 1. Nakshatra-Samvatsara, 2.
Yuga-Samvatsara, 3. Paman-Samvatsara, 4. Lakshan-Samvatsara, 5. Sanichchar-
Samvatsara.  **55.** **1. Nakshatra-Samvatsara:** **a.** There are twelve
Nakshatras in a Nakshatra-Samvatsara: 1. Savana, 2. Bhadrava, 3. Asouya, 4.
Kattika, 5. Maggasira, 6. Pousa, 7. Mahe, 8. Phagguniya, 9. Chitta, 10. Vaisaha,
11. Jetta, 12. Asadha. **b.** The entire Nakshatra Mandala is completed in
twelve years by the Bahussai Mahaggha.  **56.** **2. Yuga-Samvatsara:** **a.**
There are five types of Yuga-Samvatsara: 1. Chanda, 2. Chanda, 3. Abhivaddiya,
4. Chanda, 5. Abhivaddiya. **b.** The first Chanda-Samvatsara has 24 Pavas, the
second Chanda-Samvatsara has 24 Pavas, the Abhivaddiya-Samvatsara has 26 Pavas,
the fourth Chanda-Samvatsara has 24 Pavas, and the fifth Abhivaddiya-Samvatsara
has 26 Pavas. **c.** Thus, in a Yuga of five years, there are 124 Pavas in
total.  **57-58.** **3. Paman-Samvatsara:** **a.** There are five types of
Paman-Samvatsara: 1. Nakshatra, 2. Chanda, 3. Udu, 4. Aicha, 5. Abhivaddiya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMvaccharANaM saMkhA lakkhaNaM ca 54. pa. tA kahaM NaM saMvacchare ? Ahie tti
vaejjA, u. tA paMca saMvaccharA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. Nakkhatta-saMvacchare, 2.
juga-saMvacchare, 3. pamANasaMvacchare, 4. lakkhaNa-saMvacchare, 5. saNicchara-
saMvacchare  /  1 NakkhattasaMvaccharassa bheyA tassa kAlapamANaM ca 55.
dazamaprAbhRta [ bIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] 1. ka. tA NakkhattasaMvacchare NaM
duvAlasaMvihe paNNatte, taMjahA - 1. sAvaNe, 2. bhaddavae, 3. Asoe, 4. kattie,
5. maggasire, 6. pose, 7. mAhe, 8. phagguNIe, 9. citte, 10. vaisAhe, 11. jeTTe,
12. AsADhe  /  - 2. kha. jaM vA bahassaI mahaggahe duvAlasahiM saMvaccharehiM
savvaM NakkhattamaMDalaM samANei  /  jugasaMvaccharassa bheyA kAlapamANaM ca 1.
2. 3. 4. 5. 56. 2. tA jugasaMvacchare NaM paMcavihe paNNatte, taMjahA - 1.
caMde, 2. caMde, 3. abhivaDDie, 4. caMde, 5. abhivaDDie  /  tA paDhamassa NaM
caMdasaMvaccharassa cauvIsaM pavvA paNNattA, doccassa NaM caMdasaMvaccharassa
cauvIsaM pavvA paNNattA, taccassa NaM abhivaDDiya saMvaccharassa chavvIsaM pavvA
paNNattA, cautthassa NaM caMda saMvaccharassa cauvIsaM pavvA paNNattA,
paMcamassa NaM abhivaDDiya saMvaccharassa chavvIsaM pavvA paNNattA, evAmeva
sapuvvAvareNaM paMcasaMvaccharie juge ege cauvIse pavvasae bhavaMtItimakkhAyaM
/  3. pamANasaMvaccharassa bheyA 57-58 Aicce, 5. abhivaDDie, 1. ThANaM. 5, u. 3,
su. 460 2. ThANaM. 5, u. 3, su. 460 3. ThANaM. 5, u. 3, su. 460 --
tApamANasaMvacchare NaM paMcavihe paNNatte, taM jahA 1. Nakkhatte, 2. caMde, 3.
uDU, 4. 3

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ 125 4. Lakshana Samvatsara's Characteristics - _In Lakshana Samvatsara, five
types are established, namely - 1. Nakshatra, 2. Chandra, 3. Udu, 4. Aiccha, 5.
Abhivaddhiya. 5. Sanichchara Samvatsara's Characteristics - In Sanichchara
Samvatsara, twenty-eight types are established, namely - 1. Abhiyi, 2. Savana,
3. Dhanishtha, 4. Satabhisaya, 5. Puvvapoṭṭavaya, 6. Uttarapoṭṭavaya, 7. Revati,
8. Assiṇi, 9. Bharani, 10. Kattiya, 11. Rohini, 12. Sanṭhaṇā, 13. Adda, 14.
Punavassu, 15. Pussa, 16. Asseṣa, 17. Maha, 18. Puvvafagguni, 19. Uttarafagguni,
20. Hatthe, 21. Chitta, 22. Sai, 23. Visaha, 24. Anuraha, 25. Jettha, 26. Mule,
27. Puvvasaḍha, 28. Uttarasadha. In Sanichchara, the entire Nakshatra Mandala is
completed in thirty years. Gatha - Nakshatra Samvatsara Lakshana - All
Nakshatras rise together, all Udu's culminate together. There is no absence,
Many Nakshatras rise. ||1|| Chandra Samvatsara Lakshana - The moon rises
together with the full moon, The Nakshatras rise in an uneven manner. There is
much rain, That is called Chandra Samvatsara. ||2|| 3. Udu (Karma) Samvatsara
Lakshana - The uneven ones culminate, The flowers and fruits are not ripe. The
season does not stay properly, That is called Karma Samvatsara. ||3|| Aiccha
Samvatsara Lakshana - It gives the taste of earth and water, And the flowers and
fruits in Aiccha. Even with little rain, The crops are fully ripened. ||4||
Abhivaddhiya Samvatsara Lakshana - The Aiccha's influence is seen, The moments,
seconds, and days culminate. It fills the earth with dust, That is called
Abhivaddhiya. ||5|| 1. Thaṇam. 5, U. 3, Su. 460 2. Thaṇam. 5, U. 3, Su. 460 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - bIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 125 4. lakkhaNasaMvaccharassa
bheyA - _tA lakkhaNasaMvacchare NaM paMcavihe paNNatte taMjahA - 1. Nakkhatte,
2. caMde, 3. uDU, 4. Aicce, 5. abhivddddie| 5. saNiccharasaMvacchara bheyA - tA
saNiccharasaMvacchare NaM aTThAvIsaivihe paNNatte, taMjahA - 1. abhiyI, 2.
savaNe, 3. dhaNiTThA, 4. satabhisayA, 5. puvvApoTTavayA, 6. uttarApoTTavayA, 7.
revai, 8. assiNI, 9. bharaNI, 10. kattiya, 11. rohiNI, 12. saMThANA, 13. addA,
14. puNavassU, 15. pusse, 16. assesA, 17. mahA, 18. puvvAphagguNI, 19.
uttarAphagguNI, 20. hatthe, 21.cittA, 22. sAI, 23. visAhA, 24. aNurAhA, 25.
jeTThA, 26. mUle, 27. puvvAsADhA, 28. uttraasaaddhaa| jaM vA saMNicchare
mahaggahe tIsAe saMvaccharehiM savvaM NakkhattamaMDalaM smaannei| gAhAo -
NakkhattasaMvaccharalakkhaNaM - samagaM NakkhattA joyaM joeMti, samagaM uDU
prinnmNti| naccuNhaM nAisIe, bahu udae hoi nkkhtte||1||
caMdasaMvaccharalakkhaNaM - sasi samaga puNNamAsiM, joiM tA visamacAri
nnkkhttaa| kaDuo bahu udagavao, tamAhu saMvaccharaM caMdaM  // 2 //  3. uDu
(kamma) saMvaccharalakkhaNaM - visamaM pavAliNo pariNamaMti, aNausu diti
pussphphlN| vAsaM na samma vAsai, tamAhu saMvaccharaM kammaM  // 3 //
AiccasaMvaccharalakkhaNaM - puDhavi-dagANaM ca rasaM, puSpha-phalANaM ca dei
aaicce| appeNa vi vAseNaM, sammaM nipphajjae sassaM  // 4 //
abhivuDDiyasaMvaccharalakkhaNaM - AiccateyataviyA, khaNa-lava-divasA uU
prinnmNti| pUrei reNu-thalayAI, tamAhu abhivaDDiya jANa  // 5 //  1. ThANaM. 5,
u. 3, su. 460 2. ThANaM. 5, u. 3, su. 460

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Prabhruta [Twenty-first Prabhruta Prabhruta]  The direction of the
Nakshatras - 59. P. Ta, how is the direction of the Tejo?  Ahiye tti vaejja, U.
Tatha khalu imao panch padivattao pannattio, tanjaha -  There, they said - 1.
Ta, the seven Nakshatras starting from Katta are in the East direction, some
said. Some, however, said - 2. Ta, the seven Nakshatras starting from Maha are
in the East direction, some said. Some, however, said - 3. Ta, the seven
Nakshatras starting from Dhanishtha are in the East direction, some said. Some,
however, said - 4. Ta, the seven Nakshatras starting from Ashlesha are in the
East direction, some said. Some, however, said - 5. Ta, the seven Nakshatras
starting from Bharani are in the East direction, some said.  1. There, those who
said - (a) Ta, the seven Nakshatras starting from Katta are in the East
direction, they said, tanjaha - 1. Katta, 2. Rohini, 3. Mrigashirsha, 4. Ardra,
5. Punarvasu, 6. Pushya, 7. Ashlesha. (b) The seven Nakshatras starting from
Maha are in the South direction, tanjaha - 1. Maha, 2. Purva Phalguni, 3. Uttara
Phalguni, 4. Hasta, 5. Chitra, 6. Swati, 7. Visakha. (c) The seven Nakshatras
starting from Anuradha are in the West direction, tanjaha - 1. Anuradha, 2.
Jyeshta, 3. Mula, 4. Purva Ashadha, 5. Uttara Ashadha, 6. Abhijit, 7. Shravana.
(d) The seven Nakshatras starting from Dhanishtha are in the North direction,
tanjaha - 1. Dhanishtha, 2. Shatabhisha, 3. Purva Bhadrapada, 4. Uttara
Bhadrapada, 5. Revati, 6. Ashlesha,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [ikkIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta] NakkhattANaM dArAI - 59. pa. tA
kahaM tejoissa dArA ? Ahie tti vaejjA, u. tattha khalu imAo paMca paDivattAo
paNNattIo, taMjahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. tA kattiyAdIyA satta NakkhattA
puvvadAriyA paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA mahAdIyA satta
NakkhattA puvvadAriyA paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu3. tA
dhaNiTThAdIyA satta NakkhattA puvvadAriyA paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| _ ege puNa
evamAhaMsu 4. tA assiNIyAdIyA satta NakkhattA puvvadAriyA paNNattA, ege
evmaahNsu| _ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 5. tA bharaNIyAdIyA satta NakkhattA
puvvadAriyA paNNattA, ege evmaahNsu| 1. tattha NaM je te evamAhaMsu - (ka) tA
kattiyAdIyA satta NakkhattA puvvadAriyA paNNattA, te evamAhaMsu, taMjahA - 1.
kattiyA, 2. rohiNI, 3. saMThANA, 4. addA, 5. puNavassU, 6. pusso, 7. asilesaa|
(kha) mahAdIyA satta NakkhattA dAhiNadAriyA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. mahA, 2.
puvvAphagguNI, 3. uttarAphagguNI, 4. hattho, 5.cittA, 6.sAI, 7. visAhA, (ga)
aNurAdhAdIyA satta NakkhattA pacchimadAriyA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. aNurAdhA, 2.
jeTThA, 3. mUlo, 4. puvvAsADhA, 5. uttarAsADhA, 6. abhIi, 7. savaNo (gha)
dhaNiTThAyAdIyA satta NakkhattA uttaradAriyA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. dhaNiTThA,
2. satabhisayA, 3. puvvApoTTavayA, 4. uttarApoTTavayA, 5. revaI, 6.assiNI,

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ 127 7. Bharani. 2. There, those who said this - (a) The seven constellations
starting with Maha are located in the east, they said, for example - 1. Maha, 2.
Purva Phalguni, 3. Uttara Phalguni, 4. Hasta, 5. Chitta, 6. Swati, 7. Visakha,
(b) The seven constellations starting with Anuradha are located in the south,
for example - 1. Anuradha, 2. Jyestha, 3. Mula, 4. Purva Ashadha, 5. Uttara
Ashadha, 6. Abhijit, 7. Sravana, (c) The seven constellations starting with
Dhanishtha are located in the west, for example - 1. Dhanishtha, 2. Shatabhisha,
3. Purva Bhadrapada, 4. Uttara Bhadrapada, 5. Revati, 6. Ashwini, 7. Bharani.
(d) The seven constellations starting with Krittika are located in the north,
for example - 1. Krittika, 2. Rohini, 3. Mrigashira, 4. Ardra, 5. Punarvasu, 6.
Pushya, 7. Aslesha. 3. There, those who said this - • (a) The seven
constellations starting with Dhanishtha are located in the east, they said, for
example - 1. Dhanishtha, 2. Shatabhisha, 3. Purva Bhadrapada, 4. Uttara
Bhadrapada, 5. Revati, 6. Ashwini, 7. Bharani. (b) The seven constellations
starting with Krittika are located in the south, for example - 1. Krittika, 2.
Rohini, 3. Mrigashira, 4. Ardra, 5. Punarvasu, 6. Pushya, 7. Aslesha. (c) The
seven constellations starting with Maha are located in the west, for example -
1. Maha, 2. Purva Phalguni, 3. Uttara Phalguni, 4. Hasta, 5. Chitta, 6. Swati,
7. Visakha, (d) The seven constellations starting with Anuradha are located in
the north, for example - 1. Anuradha, 2. Jyestha, 3. Mula, 4. Purva Ashadha, 5.
Uttara Ashadha, 6. Abhijit, 7. Sravana. 4. There, those who said this - (a) The
seven constellations starting with Ashwini are located in the east, they said,
for example - 1. Ashwini, 2. Bharani, 3. Krittika 4. Rohini, 5. Mrigashira, 6.
Ardra, 7. Punarvasu, 1. (a) The seven constellations starting with Krittika are
located in the east, (b) The seven constellations starting with Maha are located
in the south, (c) The seven constellations starting with Anuradha are located in
the west, (d) The seven constellations starting with Dhanishtha are located in
the north, - Sam. S. 7, Su. 8, 9, 10, 11, the sutras given here are indicative
of other beliefs, but there is no such sentence in these sutras that would allow
a common reader to know these sutras as other beliefs. Although the first
constellation in the Jain Agamas is Abhijit and the last constellation is Uttara
Ashadha, how is it possible to know the different orders of the different
constellations that changed at different times without studying the Agamas?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - ikkIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 127 7. bhrnnii| 2. tattha NaM
je te evamAhaMsu - (ka) tA mahAdIyA satta NakkhattA puvvadAriyA paNNattA, te
evamAhaMsu, taMjahA - 1. mahA, 2. puvvAphagguNI, 3. uttarAphagguNI, 4. hattho,
5.cittA, 6. sAtI, 7. visAhA, (kha) aNurAdhAdIyA satta NakkhattA dAhiNadAriyA
paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. aNurAdhA, 2. jeTThA, 3. mUle, 4. puvvAsADhA, 5.
uttarAsADhA, 6. abhII, 7. savaNe, (ga). dhaNiTThAdIyA satta NakkhattA
pacchimadAriyA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. dhaNiTThA, 2. satabhisayA, 3.
puvvApoTThavayA, 4. uttarApoTThavayA, 5. revaI, 6.assiNI, 7. bhrnnii| (gha)
kattiyAdIyA satta NakkhattA uttaramadAriyA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. kattiyA, 2.
rohiNI, 3. saMThANA, 4. ahA, 5. puNavassU, 6. pusso, 7. assesaa| 3. tattha NaM
je te evamAhaMsu - * (ka) dhaNiTThAdIyA satta NakkhattA puvvadAriyA paNNattA, te
evamAhaMsu, taMjahA - 1. dhaNiTThA, 2. satabhiyasA, 3. puvvApoTThavayA, 4.
uttarApoTThavayA, 5. revaI, 6.assiNI, 7. bhrnnii| (kha) kattiyAdIyA satta
NakkhattA dAhiNadAriyA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. kattiyA, 2. rohiNI, 3. saMThANA,
4. addA, 5. puNavassU, 6. pusso, 7. assesaa| (ga) mahAdIyA satta NakkhattA
pacchimadAriyA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. mahA, 2. puvvAphagguNI, 3. uttarAphagguNI,
4. hattho, 5.cittA, 6.sAI, 7. visAhA, (gha) aNurAdhAdIyA satta NakkhattA
uttaradAriyA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1.aNurAdhA, 2.jeTThA, 3. mUlo, 4. puvvAsADhA,
5. uttarAsADhA, 6. abhIyI,7. svnno| 4. tattha NaM je te evamAhaMsu - (ka) tA
assiNI, AdIyA satta NakkhattA puvvadAriyA paNNattA, te evamAhaMsu, taMjahA - 1.
assiNI, 2. bharaNI, 3. kattiyA 4. rohiNI, 5. saMThANA, 6.addA, 7. puNavvasU, 1.
(ka) kattiyAIyA satta NakkhattA puvvadAriyA paNNattA, (kha) mahAIyA satta
NakkhattA dAhiNadAriyA paNNattA, (ga) aNurAhAIyA satta NakkhattA abaradAriyA
paNNattA, (gha) dhaNiTThAiyA satta NakkhattA uttaradAriyA paNNattA, - sama. sa.
7, su. 8, 9, 10, 11 ye samavAyAMga ke jo sUtra yahAM diye gaye haiM ve anya
mAnyatA ke sUcaka haiM kintu ina sUtroM meM koI aisA vAkya nahIM hai jisase
sAmAnya pAThaka ina sUtroM ko anya mAnyatA ke jAna ske| yadyapi jainAgamoM meM
nakSatramaNDala kA prathama nakSatra abhijit hai aura aMtima nakSatra
uttarAsADhA hai, para isake atirikta bhinna-bhinna kAloM meM parivartita
nakSatramaNDaloM ke bhinna-bhinna kramoM kA parijJAna AgamoM ke svAdhyAya ke
binA kaise sambhava ho?

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 128] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra (b) The seven Nakshatras starting with Pushya
are in the South direction, they are: 1. Pushya, 2. Ashlesha, 3. Magha, 4. Purva
Phalguni, 5. Uttara Phalguni, 6. Hasta, 7. Chitra. (c) The seven Nakshatras
starting with Satabhisha are in the West direction, they are: 1. Satabhisha, 2.
Visakha, 3. Anuradha, 4. Jyeshta, 5. Mula, 6. Purva Ashadha, 7. Uttara Ashadha.
(d) The seven Nakshatras starting with Abhijit are in the North direction, they
are: 1. Abhijit, 2. Swati, 3. Dhanishta, 4. Shatabhisha, 5. Purva Bhadrapada, 6.
Uttara Bhadrapada, 7. Revati. 5. There are some who say: (a) The seven
Nakshatras starting with Bharani are in the East direction, they are: 1.
Bharani, 2. Krittika, 3. Rohini, 4. Mrigashira, 5. Ardra, 6. Punarvasu, 7.
Pushya. (b) The seven Nakshatras starting with Ashlesha are in the South
direction, they are: 1. Ashlesha, 2. Magha, 3. Purva Phalguni, 4. Uttara
Phalguni, 5. Hasta, 6. Chitra, 7. Swati. (c) The seven Nakshatras starting with
Visakha are in the West direction, they are: 1. Visakha, 2. Anuradha, 3.
Jyeshta, 4. Mula, 5. Purva Ashadha, 6. Uttara Ashadha, 7. Abhijit. The seven
Nakshatras starting with Swati are in the North direction, they are: 1. Swati,
2. Dhanishta, 3. Shatabhisha, 4. Purva Bhadrapada, 5. Uttara Bhadrapada, 6.
Revati, 7. Ashwini. We, however, say: (a) The seven Nakshatras starting with
Abhijit are in the East direction, they are: 1. Abhijit, 2. Swati, 3. Dhanishta,
4. Shatabhisha, 5. Purva Bhadrapada, 6. Uttara Bhadrapada, 7. Revati. (b) The
seven Nakshatras starting with Ashwini are in the South direction, they are: 1.
Ashwini, 2. Bharani, 3. Krittika, 4. Rohini, 5. Mrigashira, 6. Ardra, 7.
Punarvasu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 128 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra (kha) pussAdIyA satta NakkhattA dAhiNadAriyA
paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. pussA, 2. assesA, 3. mahA, 4. puvvAphagguNI, 5.
uttarAphagguNI, 6.hattho, 7. cittA, (ga) sAiyAiyA satta NakkhattA pazcimadAriyA
paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. sAtI, 2. visAhA, 3. aNurAhA, 4. jeTThA, 5. mUlo,
6.puvvAsADhA, 7. uttarAsADhA, (gha) abhiiyAdIyA satta NakkhattA uttaradAriyA
paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. abhiI, 2. savaNo, 3. dhaNiTThA, 4. satabhisayA, 5.
puvvabhaddavayA, 6.uttarabhaddavayA, 7. revaI, 5. tattha NaM je te evamAhaMsu -
(ka) tA bharaNiyAdIyA satta NakkhattA puvvadAriyA paNNattA, te evamAhaMsu,
taMjahA - . 1. bharaNI, 2. kattiyA 3. rohiNI, 4. saMThANA, 5. addA, 6.
puNavvasU, 7. pusso| (kha) assesAdIyA satta NakkhattA dAhiNadAriyA paNNattA,
taMjahA - 1. assesA, 2. mahA 3. puvvAphagguNI, 4. uttarAphagguNI, 5. hattho, 6.
cittA, 7. saaii| (ga) visAhAdIyA satta NakkhattA pacchimadAriyA paNNattA,
taMjahA - . 1. visAhA, 2. aNurAhA 3. jeTTA, 4. mUlo, 5. puvvAsADhA, 6.
uttarAsADhA, 7. abhiii| savaNAdIyA satta NakkhattA uttaradAriyA paNNattA,
taMjahA - 1. savaNo, 2. dhaNiTThA, 3. satabhisayA, 4. puvvApoTThavayA, 5.
uttarApoTThavayA, 6. revaI, 7. assinni| vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo - (ka) tA
abhiiyAdIyA satta NakkhattA puvvadAriyA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. abhiI, 2. savaNo
3. dhaNiTThA, 4. satabhisayA, 5. puvvApoTThavayA, 6. uttarApoTThavA, 7. revii|
(kha) assiNIAdIyA satta NakkhattA dAhiNadAriyA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. assiNI, 2.
bharaNI 3. kattiyA, 4. rohiNI, 5. saMThANA, 6. addA, 7. punnvssu|

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## From the tenth Prabhruta [twenty-second Prabhruta-Prabhruta] ## Of the
Nakshatras, the Saruva-Paruva-na ## 60. P. So, how is that Nakshatra-vijaya?
Tell me. ## U. So, in Jambudvipa, in the island, of all the islands, of all the
seas, of all the oceans, of all the continents, of all the mountains, up to one
hundred thousand yojanas in length and breadth, three hundred thousand yojanas,
sixteen thousand, two hundred and twenty-seven hundred yojanas, three kosas,
twenty-eight dhanus, thirteen angulas, and a little more than half an angula, it
is declared by calculation. ― K. So, in Jambudvipa, in the island, Two Chandras,
1. Prabhasensu va, 2. Prabhasenti va, 3. Prabhasissanti va, Kh. Two Suryas, 1.
Tavinsu va, 2. Taventi va, 3. Tavissanti va, Thus, G. Fifty-six Nakshatras, 1.
Joensu va, 2. Joenti va, 3. Joissanti va, 1. Two Abhi, 2. Two Savana, 3. Two
Dhanitta, 4. Two Satabhisaya, 5. Two Puhva Potthavaya, 6. Uttara Potthavaya, 7.
Two Revai, 8. Two Assini, 9. Two Bharani, 10. Two Kattiya, 11. Two Rohini, 12.
Two Santhana, 13. Two Adda, 14. Two Punavassu, 15. Two Pussa, 16. Two Assesaao,
17. Two Mahaao, 18. Two Puhvafagguni, 19. Two Uttarafagguni, 20. Two Hattha, 21.
Two Chitta, 22. Two Sai, 23. Two Visaha, 24. Two Anurada, 25. Two Jettha, 26.
Two Mula, 27. Two Puhvasadha, 28. Two Uttarasaadha. So, these fifty-six
Nakshatras, K. There are Nakshatras which, in nine Muhurtas, twenty-seven and
seventy-six parts of a Muhurta, join with the Chandra. - Kh. There are
Nakshatras which, in fifteen Muhurtas, join with the Chandra. G. There are
Nakshatras which, in thirty Muhurtas, join with the Chandra. Gh. There are
Nakshatras which, in forty-five Muhurtas, join with the Chandra. P. K. So, these
fifty-six Nakshatras - - Which Nakshatras, in nine Muhurtas, twenty-seven and
seventy-six parts of a Muhurta, join with the Chandra?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaprAbhRta [ bAvIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] NakkhattANaM sarUvaparUvaNaM 60.
pa. tA kahaM te Nakkhattavijae ? Ahie tti vaejjA, u. tA ayaNNaM jaMbuddIve dIve
savvadIvasamuddANaM savvasamuddANaM savvabdhaMtarAe savvakhuDDAe jAva egaM
joyaNasayasahassaM AyAma - vikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi joyaNasayahassAiM,
solasasahassAIM, doNNi ya sattAvIse joyaNasae tiNi ya kose, aTThAvIsaM ca
dhaNusayaM, terasa aMgulAI, addhaMgulaM ca kiMci visesAhiyaM parikkheveNaM
paNNatte  /  -- ka. tA jaMbuddIve NaM dIve do caMdA 1. pabhAseMsu vA, 2.
pabhAseMti vA, 3. pabhAsissaMti vA, kha. do sUriyA, 1. taviMsu vA, 2. taveMti
vA, 3. tavissaMti vA, taMjahA ga. chappaNNaM NakkhattA joyaM 1. joeMsu vA, 2.
joeMti vA, 3. joissaMti vA, 1. do abhII, 2. do savaNA, 3. do dhaNiTThA, 4. do
satabhisayA, 5. do puvvA poTThavayA, 6. uttarApoTThavayA, 7. do revaI, 8. do
assiNI, 9. do bharaNI, 10. do kattiyA, 11. do rohiNI, 12. do saMThANA, 13. do
addA, 14. do puNavassU, 15. do pussA, 16. do assesAo, 17. do mahAo, 18. do
puvvAphagguNI, 19. do uttarAphagguNI, 20. do hatthA, 21. do cittA, 22. do sAI,
23. do visAhA, 24. do aNurAdhA, 25. do jeTThA, 26. do mUlA, 27. do puvvAsADhA,
28. do uttarAsADhA  /  tA eesi NaM chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM ka. atthi NakkhattA
je NaM Nava muhutte sattAvIsaM ca sattadvibhAge muhuttassa caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM
joeMti, - kha. atthi NakkhattA je NaM paNNarasa muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM
joeMti, ga. atthi NakkhattA je NaM tIsaM muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti,
gha. atthi NakkhattA je NaM paNayAlIsaM muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti,
pa. ka. tA eesiM chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM - - kayare NakkhattA je NaM Navamuhutte
sattAvIsaM ca sattaTTibhAge muhuttassa caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joti ?

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [130] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra]  **b. Which constellations join with the moon
for fifteen muhurtas?** **c. Which constellations join with the moon for thirty
muhurtas?** **d. Which constellations join with the moon for forty-five
muhurtas?** **e. a. Thus, there are fifty-six constellations.** **Among them,
those constellations which join with the moon for nine muhurtas and twenty-seven
parts of a muhurta are two, b. Among them, those constellations which join with
the moon for fifteen muhurtas are twelve, such as:** 1. Two Satabhisha, 2. Two
Bharani, 3. Two Adda, 4. Two Assesa, 5. Two Sati, 6. Two Jyestha. **c. Among
them, those constellations which join with the moon for thirty muhurtas are
thirty, such as:** 1. Two Savana, 2. Two Dhanishtha, 3. Two Purvabhadrapada, 4.
Two Revati, 5. Two Asvini, 6. Two Krittika, 7. Two Santhana, 8. Two Pushya, 9.
Two Maha, 10. Two Purva Phalguni, 11. Two Hasta, 12. Two Chitra, 13. Two
Anuradha, 14. Two Mula, 15. Two Purvashadha. **d. Among them, those
constellations which join with the moon for forty-five muhurtas are twelve, such
as:** 1. Two Uttaraphalguni, 2. Two Rohini, 3. Two Punarvasu, 4. Two
Uttaraphalguni, 5. Two Visakha, 6. Two Uttarashadha. **a. Thus, there are fifty-
six constellations.** **There are constellations which join with the sun for
four days and six muhurtas, they are two, b. There are constellations which join
with the sun for six days and twenty-one muhurtas, c. There are constellations
which join with the sun for thirteen days and twelve muhurtas, d. There are
constellations which join with the sun for twenty days and three muhurtas, e. a.
Thus, there are constellations.** **Which constellations join with the sun for
four days and six muhurtas? b. Which constellations join with the sun for six
days and twenty-one muhurtas? c. Which constellations join with the sun for
thirteen days and twelve muhurtas? d. Which constellations join with the sun for
twenty days and three muhurtas? e. a. Thus, there are fifty-six
constellations.** **Among them, those constellations which join with the sun for
four days and six muhurtas are...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra kha. kayare NakkhattA je NaM paNNarasa muhutte
caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? ga. kayare NakkhattA je NaM tIsaM muhutte caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? gha. kayare NakkhattA je NaM paNayAlIsaM muhutte caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? u. ka. tA eesi NaM chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM - tattha je te
NakkhattA, je NaM Nava muhutte sattAvIsaM ca sattasaTThibhAge muhuttassa caMdeNa
saddhiM joyaM joeMti, te NaM do abhII, kha. tattha je te NakkhattA, je NaM
paNNarasa muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti, te NaM bArasa, taMjahA - 1. do
satabhisayA, 2. do bharaNI, 3. do addA, 4. do assesA, 5. do sAtI, 6. do
jetttthaa| ga. tattha je te NakkhattA, je NaM tIsaM muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM
joyaM joeMti, te NaM tIsaM, taMjahA - 1. do savaNA, 2. do dhaNiTThA, 3. do
puvvAbhaddavayA, 4. do revaI, 5. do assiNI, 6. do kattIyA, 7. do saMThANA, 8. do
pussA, 9. do mahA, 10. do puvvAphagguNI, 11. do hatthA, 12. do cittA, 13. do
aNurAdhA, 14. do mUlA, 15. do puvvAsADhA, gha. tattha je te NakkhattA, je NaM
paNayAlIsaM muhutte caMdeNa saddhiM jogaM joeMti, te NaM bArasa, taMjahA - 1. do
uttarApoTThavayA, 2. do rohiNI, 3. do puNavassU, 4. do uttarAphagguNI, 5. do
visAhA, 6. do uttraasaaddhaa| ka. tA eesi NaM chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM - atthi
NakkhattA je NaM cattAri ahoratte, chacca muhutte sUrieNaM saddhiM jogaM joeMti,
te NaM do abhIyI, kha. atthi NakkhattA je NaM cha ahoratte, egavIsaM ca muhutte
sUrieNaM saddhiM jogaM joeMti, ga. asthi NakkhattA je NaM terapta ahoratte,
bArasa ya muhutte sUreNa saddhiM jogaM joeMti, gha. atthi NakkhattA je NaM vIsaM
ahoratte, tinni ya muhutte sUreNa saddhiM jogaM joeMti, pa. ka. tA eesi NaM
NakkhattANaM - _ kayare NakkhattA je NaM cattAri ahoratte chacca muhutte
sasUrieNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? kha.kayare NakkhattA je NaM cha ahoratte
egavIsaM ca muhutte sUrieNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? ga. kayare NakkhattA je NaM
terasa ahoratte bArasa ya muhutte sUrieNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti ? gha. kayare
NakkhattA je NaM vIsaM ahoratte tinni ya muhutte sUrieNa saddhiM joyaM joeMti ?
u. ka. tA eesiNaM chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM - tattha je te NakkhattA, je NaM
cattAri ahoratte, chacca muhutte sUreNa saddhiM jogaM joeMti, te

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[131 From the tenth Prabhruta to the twenty-second Prabhruta-Prabhruta] [131
There are two types of Nakshatras, those that are in conjunction with the Sun
for twenty-one Muhurtas in a day and night, and those that are in conjunction
with the Sun for twelve Muhurtas in thirteen days and nights. a. The Nakshatras
that are in conjunction with the Sun for twenty-one Muhurtas in a day and night
are twelve in number, namely: 1. Two Satabhisha, 2. Two Bharani, 3. Two Adda, 4.
Two Assesa, 5. Two Sati, 6. Two Jettha. b. The Nakshatras that are in
conjunction with the Sun for twelve Muhurtas in thirteen days and nights are
thirty in number, namely: 1. Two Savana, 2. Two Dhanishtha, 3. Two
Purvabhadrapada, 4. Two Revati, 5. Two Asvini, 6. Two Kattta, 7. Two Santhana,
8. Two Pushya, 9. Two Maha, 10. Two Purva Phalguni, 11. Two Hasta, 12. Two
Chitta, 13. Two Anuradha, 14. Two Mula, 15. Two Purvashadha. c. The Nakshatras
that are in conjunction with the Sun for three Muhurtas in twenty days and
nights are twelve in number, namely: 1. Two Uttaraphalguni, 2. Two Rohini, 3.
Two Punarvasu, 4. Two Uttaraphalguni, 5. Two Visakha, 6. Two Uttarashadha. The
boundary extent of the Nakshatra Mandala is 61. Q. How is this boundary extent?
Please tell me. A. a. There are Nakshatras whose boundary extent is 630, 76
parts out of 30 parts. b. There are Nakshatras whose boundary extent is 1076
parts out of 30 parts. c. There are Nakshatras whose boundary extent is 2076
parts out of 30 parts. d. There are Nakshatras whose boundary extent is 3076
parts out of 30 parts. Q. a. Which Nakshatras have a boundary extent of 630, 76
parts out of 30 parts? b. Which Nakshatras have a boundary extent of 1076 parts
out of 30 parts? c. Which Nakshatras have a boundary extent of 2076 parts out of
30 parts? d. Which Nakshatras have a boundary extent of 3076 parts out of 30
parts? A. a. The Nakshatras whose boundary extent is 630, 76 parts out of 30
parts are two in number.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - bAvIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 131 NaM do abhII, kha. tattha
je te NakkhattA, je NaM cha ahoratte egavIsaM ca muhutte sUreNa saddhiM jogaM
joeMti, te NaM bArasa taMjahA - 1. do satabhisayA, 2. do bharaNI, 3. do addA, 4.
do assesA, 5. do sAtI, 6. do jetttthaa| ga. tattha je te NakkhattA, je NaM
terasa ahoratte, bArasa ya muhutte sUreNa saddhiM jogaM joeMti, te _NaM tIsaM,
taMjahA - 1. do savaNA, 2. do dhaNiTThA, 3. do puvvAbhaddavayA, 4. do revatI, 5.
do assiNI, 6. do kattiyA, 7. do saMThANA, 8. do pussA, 9. do mahA, 10. do
puvvAphagguNI, 11. do hatthA, 12. do cittA, 13. do aNurAdhA, 14. do mUlA, 15. do
puvvAsADhA, gha. tattha je te NakkhattA, je NaM vIsaM ahoratte tiNNi ya muhutte
sUreNa saddhiM jogaM joeMti, te NaM bArasa, taMjahA - - 1. do uttarApoTThavayA,
2. do rohiNI, 3. do puNavassU, 4. do uttarAphagguNI, 5. do. visAhA, 6.do
uttraasaaddhaa| NakkhattamaMDalANaM sImAvikkhaMbho - 61. pa. tA kahaM te
sImAvikkhaMbhe? Ahie tti vejaa|| u. ka. tA eesiNaM chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM -
atthi NakkhattA, jesi NaM cha sayA tIsA sattasaTThibhAga tIsai bhAgANaM
sImAvikkhaMbho, kha. atthi NakkhattA, jesi NaM sahassaM paMcottaraM
sattasaTThibhAga tIsai bhAgANaM sImA-vikkhaMbho, ga. atthi NakkhattA, jesiNaM do
sahassA dasuttarA sattasaTThibhAga tIsai bhAgANaM sImAvikkhaMbho, gha. atthi
NakkhattA, jesi NaM tisahassaM paMcadasuttaraM sattasaTThibhAga tIsai bhAgANaM
sImAvikkhaMbho, pa. ka. tA eesiM NaM chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM - _ kayare
NakkhattA jesi NaM chasayA, tIsA sattasaTThibhAga tIsai bhAgANaM sImA-vikkhabho,
kha. kayare NakkhattA jesi NaM sahassaM, paMcottaraM sattasaTThibhAga tIsai
bhAgANaM sImA-vikkhabho, ga. kayare NakkhattA jesiNaM do sahassA dasuttarA
sattasaTThibhAga tIsai bhAgANaM sImA-vikkhabho, gha. kayare NakkhattA jesi NaM
tisahassaM paMcadasuttaraM sattasaTThibhAga tIsai bhAgANaM sImA vikkhabho, u.
ka. tA eesiNaM chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM - . tattha je te NakkhattA, jesi NaM cha
sayA tIsA sattasaTThibhAga tIsai bhAge NaM sImAvikkhaMbho, te NaM do abhiiii|

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [132] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ]  **b.**  Those stars, whose boundary
diameter is 76 parts and 30 parts of a thousand and five, are twelve in number,
namely: 1. Two Satabhisha, 2. Two Bharani, 3. Two Adda, 4. Two Assesa, 5. Two
Sati, 6. Two Jettha.  **c.** Those stars, whose boundary diameter is 76 parts
and 30 parts of two thousand and ten, are thirty in number, namely: 1. Two
Savana, 2. Two Dhanishtha, 3. Two Purvabhadrapada, 4. Two Revati, 5. Two Asvini,
6. Two Kattta, 7. Two Santhana, 8. Two Pushya, 9. Two Maha, 10. Two Purva
Phalguni, 11. Two Hasta, 12. Two Chitta, 13. Two Anuradha, 14. Two Mula, 15. Two
Purvashadha.  **d.** Those stars, whose boundary diameter is 76 parts and 30
parts of three thousand and fifteen, are twelve in number, namely: 1. Two
Uttarapotthapada, 2. Two Rohini, 3. Two Punarvasu, 4. Two Uttara Phalguni, 5.
Two Visakha, 6. Two Uttarashadha.  **The conjunction of the Moon with the stars
- 62.**  **p.** **k.**  In these fifty-six stars, which of them are in
conjunction with the Moon at the time of its rising?  **b.** In these fifty-six
stars, which of them are in conjunction with the Moon at the time of its
setting?  **c.** In these fifty-six stars, which of them are in conjunction with
the Moon when it enters and exits?  **u.** **k.** In these fifty-six stars, none
of them are in conjunction with the Moon at the time of its rising.  **b.** None
of them are in conjunction with the Moon at the time of its setting.  **c.**
None of them are in conjunction with the Moon when it enters and exits, because
there are two eclipses.  Therefore, these two eclipses occur thirty-four times
each, both during the new moon and the full moon.  **The conjunction of the Moon
with the full moon - 63.**  Therefore, these twenty-eight full moons and twenty-
eight new moons are established.  **1.** **p.** In these five years, on which
full moon does the Moon join the first star?  **u.** On the same full moon on
which the Moon joins the last star in the last of these twenty-eight full moons.
**1.** Therefore, from the position of the full moon, the last twenty-eighth
full moon, from the position of the end of the full moon, the circle is divided
by 124.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 132 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra kha. tattha je te NakkhattA, jesi NaM sahassaM
paMcuttaraM sattasaTThibhAga tIsai bhAge NaM sImA vikkhaMbho, te NaM bArasa,
taMjahA - 1. do satabhisayA, 2. do bharaNI, 3. do addA, 4. do assesA, 5. do
sAtI, 6. do jetttthaa| ga. tattha je te NakkhattA, jesi NaM do sahassA dasuttarA
sattasaTThibhAga tIsai bhAge NaM sImAvikkhaMbho, te NaM tIsaM, taMjahA - 1. do
savaNA, 2. do dhaNiTThA, 3. do puvvAbhaddavayA, 4. do revaI, 5. do assiNI, 6. do
kattiyA,7. do saMThANA, 8. do pussA, 9. do mahA, 10. do puvvAphagguNI, 11. do
hatthA, 12. do cittA, 13. do aNurAdhA, 14. do mUlA, 15. do puvvAsADhA, gha.
tattha je te NakkhattA, jesi NaM tiNNi sahassA paNNarasuttarA sattasaTThibhAga
tIsai bhAge NaM sImA-vikkhaMbho, te NaM bArasa, taMjahA - 1. do
uttarApoTThavayA, 2. do rohiNI, 3. do puNavassU, 4. do uttarAphagguNI, 5. do
visAhA, 6. do uttraasaaddhaa| NakkhattANaM caMdeNa jogo - 62. pa. ka. tA eesiNaM
chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM - kiM sayA pAdo caMdeNa saddhiM jogaM joeMti ? kha. tA
eesiNaM chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM - kiM sayA sAyaM caMdeNa saddhiM jogaM joeMti ?
ga. tA eesiNaM chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM - _kiM sayA duhA pavisiya pavisiya
caMdeNa saddhiM jogaM joeMti ? u. ka. tA eesiNaM chappaNNAe NakkhattANaM - na
kiM pitaM jaM sayA pAdo caMdeNa saddhiM jogaM joeMti, kha.na sayA sAyaM caMdeNa
saddhiM jogaM joeMti ? ga. na sayA duhao pavisittA pavisittA caMdeNa saddhiM
jogaMjoeMti, NaNNattha dohiM abhiiihiN| tA eeNaM do abhiI pAyaMciya pAyaMciya
cottAlIsaM cottAlIsaM amAvAsaM joeMti No ceva NaM punnnnmaasinniN| caMdassa
puNNimAsiNIsu jogo - 63. tattha khalu imAo bAvaSTuiM puNNimAsIo bAvaSTuiM
amAvAsAo paNNattAo, 1. pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM paDhamaM
puNNimAsiNiM caMde kaMsi desaMsi joei ? u. jaMsiNaM desaMsi caMde carimaM
bAvaTThi puNNimAsiNiM joei tAe teNaM puNNimAsiNiTThANAe' 1.
tasmAtpUrNamAsIsthAnAt-caramadvASaSTitama - paurNamAsIparisamAptisthAnAt parato
maNDalaM, catuviMzatyadhikena zatena chitvA vibhjy||

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[133 The mandala should be divided into 32 parts by 24 hundred, 64 parts should
be considered for the first full moon, 2. Q. In which country does the moon
appear on the second full moon of these five years? A. In the country where the
moon appears on the first full moon, the mandala should be divided into 32 parts
by 24 hundred, 64 parts should be considered for the second full moon, 3. Q. In
which country does the moon appear on the third full moon of these five years?
A. In the country where the moon appears on the second full moon, the mandala
should be divided into 32 parts by 24 hundred, 64 parts should be considered for
the third full moon, 4. Q. In which country does the moon appear on the twelfth
full moon of these five years? A. In the country where the moon appears on the
third full moon, the mandala should be divided into 180 parts by 24 hundred, 64
parts should be considered for the twelfth full moon, thus, according to this
calculation, the mandala should be divided into 32 parts by 24 hundred, 64 parts
should be considered for each full moon in each country. 5. Q. In which country
does the moon appear on the last, 62nd full moon of these five years? A. In
Jambudvipa, the mandala should be divided into 27 parts by 24 hundred, 64 parts
should be considered for the southern quadrant, 18 parts should be considered
for the western quadrant, 20 parts should be considered for the northern
quadrant, and the remaining 3 parts and 2 kalas should be considered for the
eastern quadrant, the moon appears on the last, 62nd full moon in this region.
1. 'Two hundred and eighty parts' means, The twelfth full moon after the third
full moon is the ninth full moon, Then, by multiplying nine by ninety, two
hundred and eighty are obtained. 2. 1. 'Jambudvipa' etc. In the phrase
'Jambudvipa', the word 'dvipa' is used in the sense of 'island', and the word
'prachina' is used in the sense of 'ancient', and the word 'apachina' is used in
the sense of 'modern'. Therefore, the meaning is that the moon appears in the
north-east, south-west, north-south, east-west, and south-north directions, and
the mandala should be divided into 24 hundred parts, and then divided into four
parts, and then the southern quadrant should be divided into 27 parts, and then
the western quadrant should be divided into 18 parts, and then the northern
quadrant should be divided into 20 parts, and then the remaining 3 parts and 2
kalas should be considered for the eastern quadrant, and the moon appears on the
last, 62nd full moon in this region. - Commentary

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - bAvIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 133 maMDalaM cauvvIseNaM
saeNaM chattA battIsaM bhAge uvAiNAvettA, ettha NaM se caMde paDhamaM
puNimAsiNiM joei, 2. pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM doccaM puNNimAsiNiM
caMde kaMsi desaMsi joei ? u. jaMsi NaM desaMsi caMde paDhamaM puNNimAsiNiM
joei, tAe teNaM puNNimAsiNiTThANAe maMDalaM cauvvIseNaM saeNaM chettA battIsaM
bhAge uvAiNAvettA, ettha NaM se caMde doccaM puNNimAsiNiM joei, 3. pa. tA
eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM taccaM puNNimAsiNiM caMde kaMsi desaMsi joei ?
u. jaMsi NaM desaMsi caMde doccaM puNNimAsiNiM joei tAe te NaM
puNNimAsiNiTThANAe maMDalaM cauvvIseNaM saeNaM chettA battIsaM bhAge uvAiNAvettA
ettha NaM se caMde taccaM puNimAsiNiM joei, 4. pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM
saMvaccharANaM duvAlasamaM puNNimAsiNiM caMde kaMsi desaMsi joei ? u. jaMsi NaM
desaMsi caMde taccaM puNNimAsiNiM joei tA puNNimAsiNiTThANAe . maMDalaM
cauvvIseNaM saeNaM chettA doNi aTThAsIe bhAgasae' uvAiNAvettA, ettha NaM se
caMde duvAlasamaM puNNimAsiNiM joei, evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM tAe tAe
puNNimAsiNiTThANAe maMDalaM cauvvIseNaM saeNaM chettA battIsaM bhAge uvAiNAvettA
taMsi taMsi desaMsi taM taM puNNimAsiNiM caMde joei| 5. pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM
saMvaccharANaM caramaM bAvaDhei puNNimAsiNiM caMde kaMsi desaMsi joei? _u. tA
jaMbudIvassa NaM dIvassa pAINa-paDiNAyayAe udINa-dAhiNayayAe jIvAe maMDalaM
cauvvIseNaM sae NaM chettA dAhiNaMsi caubbhAmaMDalaMsi satAvIsaM bhAge uvAiNAktA
aThAvIsai bhAge vIsahA chettA aThThArasabhAge uvAraNAvettA tihiM bhAgehiM dohi
ya kalAhiM paccathimillaM caubbhAgamaMDalaM asaMpatte etthaNaM caMde carimaM
bAvaDhei puNNimAsiNiM joei|' 1. 'doNNi aTThAsIe bhAgasae' tti, tRtIyasyAH
paurNamAsyAH parato dvAdazI kila paurNamAsI navamI bhavati, tato navabhitriMzato
guNane dve zate aSTAzItyadhike bhvtH| 2. 1. 'jaMbuddIvassa NamityAdi'
jaMbuddIpasya Namiti vAkyAlaMkAre dvIpasyopari prAcInA prAcInatayA, iha
prAcInagrahaNenottarapUrvA (IzAna) gRhyate, apAcInagrahaNena dakSiNAparA,
(naiRty)| tato'yamarthaH pUrvottara-dakSiNAparAyatayA, evamudIci-dakSiNAyatayA,
pUrva-dakSiNottarAparAyatayA jIvayA pratyaMcayA davarikayA ityarthaH, maNDalaM
caturviMzena-caturviMzatyadhikena zatena chittvA vibhajya
bhUyazcaturbhivibhajyate, tato dAkSiNAtye caturbhAgamaNDale
ekatriMzadbhAgapramANe saptaviMzatibhAgAnupAdAyASTAviMzatitamaM ca bhAgaM
viMzatithA chittvA tadgatAnaSTAdazabhAgAnupAdAya zestribhirbhAgaizcaturthasya
bhAgasya dvAbhyAM kalAbhyAM, pAzcAtyaM caturbhAgamaNDalamasaMprAptaH asmin
pradeze candro dvASaSTitamAM caramA paurNimAsI prismaapyti| - TIkA

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [134] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra]  **1. Q:** In these five years, on which day
of the full moon does the sun enter the first constellation? **A:** The sun
enters the last constellation on the full moon day. From that full moon day, the
circle is divided into 240 parts, and the first constellation is 9/240 of the
circle. The sun enters the first constellation on that full moon day.  **2. Q:**
In these five years, on which day of the full moon does the sun enter the second
constellation? **A:** The sun enters the first constellation on the full moon
day. From that full moon day, the circle is divided into 240 parts, and the
second constellation is 9/240 of the circle. The sun enters the second
constellation on that full moon day.  **3. Q:** In these five years, on which
day of the full moon does the sun enter the third constellation? **A:** The sun
enters the second constellation on the full moon day. From that full moon day,
the circle is divided into 240 parts, and the third constellation is 9/240 of
the circle. The sun enters the third constellation on that full moon day.  **4.
Q:** In these five years, on which day of the full moon does the sun enter the
twelfth constellation? **A:** The sun enters the third constellation on the full
moon day. From that full moon day, the circle is divided into 240 parts, and the
twelfth constellation is 84/240 of the circle. The sun enters the twelfth
constellation on that full moon day.  Thus, in this way, from each full moon
day, the circle is divided into 240 parts, and the sun enters each constellation
on the corresponding full moon day.  **5. Q:** In these five years, on which day
of the full moon does the sun enter the last constellation? **A:** The sun
enters the last constellation on the full moon day. From that full moon day, the
circle is divided into 240 parts, and the last constellation is 27/240 of the
circle.  **1. '84/240'** The twelfth full moon is nine days after the third full
moon. Then, 9 is multiplied by 9, resulting in 84.  **2.** The last full moon of
the western era is the 62nd full moon. From that point, the circle is divided
into 240 parts. The sun enters each constellation after 9/240 of the circle.
Then, 9 is multiplied by 62, resulting in 558. Then, 558 is divided by 240,
resulting in 2.325. This means that the sun completes 2 full circles and enters
the 33rd constellation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 134 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra sUrassa puNNimAsiNIsu jogo - .64. 1. pa. tA eesiNaM
paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM paDhamaM puNNimAsiNiM sUre kaMsi desasi joei ? u. tA
jaMsi NaM desaMsi sUre carimaM bAvaTuiM puNNimAsiNiM joei, tAe puNNimAsiNiThANAe
maMDalaM cauvvIseNaM saeNaM chettA cauNavaiM bhAge uvAiNAvettA ettha NaM se
sUrie paDhamaM puNNimAsiNiM joei| 2. pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM
doccaM puNNimAsiNiM sUre kaMsi desaMsi joei ? u. tA jaMsi NaM desaMsi sUre
paDhamaM puNNimAsiNiM joei, tAe puNNimAsiNiThANAe maMDalaM cauvvIseNaM saeNaM
chettA cauNavaibhAge uvAiNAvettA ettha NaM se sUrie doccaM puNNimAsiNiM joei| 3.
pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM tacca puNNimAsiNiM sUre kaMsi desaMsi
joei ? u. tA jaMsi NaM desaMsi sUre doccaM puNNimAsiNiM joei, tAe
puNNimAsiNiThANAe maMDalaM cauvvIseNaM saeNaM chettA cauNavaibhAge uvAiNAvettA
ettha NaM se sUrie taccaM puNNimAsiNiM joei| 4. pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM
saMvaccharANaM duvAlasaM puNNimAsiNiM sUre kaMsi desaMsi joei ? u. tA jaMsi NaM
desaMsi sUre taccaM puNNimAsiNiM joei, tAe puNNimAsiNiThANAe maMDalaM
cauvvIseNaM saeNaM chattA aTThachattAle bhAgasae' uvAiNAvettA ettha NaM se sUrie
duvAlasamaM puNNimAsiNiM joei, evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM tAe tAe
puNNimAsiNiTThANAe maMDalaM cauvvIse NaM saeNaM chettA cauNavaI cauNavaI-bhAge
uvAiNAvettA', taMsi taMsi NaM desaMsi taM taM puNNimAsi NaM sUre joei, 5. pa. tA
eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvacchArANaM carimaM bAvaThiM puNNimAsiNiM sUre kaMsi
desaMsi joei? u. tA jaMbUddIvassa NaM dIvassa pAINa-paDiNAyayAe udINa-
dAhiNAyayAe jIvAe maMDalaM cauvvIseNaM saeNaM chettA purathimillasi
caubbhAgamaMDalaMsiM sattAvIsaM bhAge uvAiNAvettA 1. 'aTThachattAle bhAgasae'
tti, tRtIyasyA paurNamAsyAH parato dvAdazI kila paurNamAsI navamI,
tatazcaturnavatirnavabhirguNyate, jAtAnyaSTau zatAni ssttctvaariNshddhikaani| 2.
pAzcAtyayugacaramadvASaSTitamapaurNamAsIparisamAptinibandhanAt sthAnAt parato
maMDalasya caturviMzatyadhika rAta pravibhaktasya satkAnAM  /
caturnavaticaturnavatibhAgAnAmatikrame tasyAH tasyAH paurNamAsyAH parisamAptiH,
tatazcaturnavatirdviSaTyA guNyate, jAtAnyaSTA - paMcAzacchatAni
aSTAviMzatyadhikAni, teSAM caturvizatyadhikena zatena bhAgo hriyate labdhAH
sptctvaariNshtsklmNddlpraavrtaaH| - TIkA

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ 135 Twenty-eight parts are to be divided by twenty-six, eighteen parts are to
be divided by eighteen, in these parts, two are to be divided by two. The
southern quadrant of the mandala is not complete. Here, the sun is seen on the
last full moon day. The moon is seen on the new moon day. 65. P. So, on which
day of the year will the new moon be seen in which country? A. In the country
where the moon is seen on the last full moon day, the mandala of the new moon
day is to be divided by twenty-four, thirty-two parts are to be divided by
thirty-two. Here, the moon will be seen on the first new moon day. Similarly, as
the full moon days are named, so are the new moon days, such as - second, third,
twelfth. So, in this way, the mandala of the new moon day is to be divided by
twenty-four, thirty-two parts are to be divided by thirty-two. In those
countries, the new moon will be seen on that day. P. So, on which day of the
year will the last new moon be seen in which country? A. In the country where
the moon is seen on the last full moon day, the mandala of the full moon day is
to be divided by twenty-four, sixteen parts are to be divided by sixteen. Here,
the moon will be seen on the last new moon day. The sun is seen on the new moon
day. P. So, on which day of the year will the first new moon be seen in which
country? A. In the country where the sun is seen on the last new moon day, the
mandala of the new moon day is to be divided by twenty-four, forty-nine parts
are to be divided by forty-nine. Here, the sun will be seen on the first new
moon day. Similarly, as the full moon days of the sun are named, so are the new
moon days. 1. 'Evamityadi' In this way, as the full moon days of the moon are
named, so are the new moon days, such as - second, third, twelfth. P. So, on
which day of the year will the second new moon be seen in which country? A. In
the country where the moon is seen on the first new moon day, the mandala of the
new moon day is to be divided by twenty-four, thirty-two parts are to be divided
by thirty-two. Here, the moon will be seen on the second new moon day. P. So, on
which day of the year will the third new moon be seen in which country? A. In
the country where the moon is seen on the second new moon day, the mandala of
the new moon day is to be divided by twenty-four, thirty-two parts are to be
divided by thirty-two. Here, the moon will be seen on the third new moon day. P.
So, on which day of the year will the twelfth new moon be seen in which country?
A. In the country where the moon is seen on the new moon day, the mandala of the
new moon day is to be divided by twenty-four, two hundred and eighty-eight parts
are to be divided by two hundred and eighty-eight. Here, the moon will be seen
on the twelfth new moon day.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - bAvIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 135 aTThAvIsaibhAgaM vIsahA
chettA aTThArasabhAge uvAiNAvettA tihiM bhAgehiM dohi ya kalAhiM dAhiNillaM
caubbhAgamaMDalaM asaMpatte ettha NaM sUrie carimaM bAvar3ei puNNimAsiNiM joei|
caMdasya amAvAsAsu jogo 65. pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvacchArANaM paDhamaM
amAvAsaM caMde kaMsi desaMsi joei ? u. tA jaMsi NaM desaMsi caMde carimaM
bAvaDhei amAvAsaM joei, tAe amAvAsaTTAe maMDalaM cauvvIse NaM saeNaM chettA
battIsaM bhAge uvAiNAvettA ettha NaM se caMde paDhama amAvAsaM joei, evaM jeNeva
abhilAveNaM caMdassa puNNimAsiNIo bhaNiAo teNeva abhilAveNaM amAvAsAo
bhANiyavvAo, taMjahA - viiyA, taiyA, duvaalsmii| evaM khalu eeNaM uvAeNaM tAe
tAe amAvAsAThANAe maMDalaM cauvvIse NaM saeNaM chettA battIsaM battIsaM bhAge
uvAiNAvettA, taMsi taMsi desaMsi taM taM amAvAsaM caMdeNa joei, pa. tA eesiNaM
paMcaNhaM saMvacchArANaM carimaM bAvaThiM amAvAsaM caMde kaMsi desaMsi joei ? u.
tA jaMsi NaM desaMsi caMde carima bAvaThiM puNNimAsiNi joeMti tAe puNNimAsiNi
ThANAe _maMDalaM cauvvIseNaM saevaM chettA solasa bhAge osakkAvaittA, etthaNaM
se caMde carimaM vAvaTThi amAvAsaM joei| sUrassa amAvAsAsu jogo pa. tA eesiNaM
paMcaNhaM saMvacchArANaM paDhama amAvAsaM caMde kaMsi desaMsi joei ? u. tA jaMsi
NaM desaMsi sUre carimaM bAvaTuiM amAvAsaM joei, tAe amAvAsasaMThANAe maMDalaM
cauvvIseNaM saeNaM chettA cauNauibhAge uvAiNAvettA, ettha NaM se sUre paDhamaM
amAvAsaM joei, evaM jeNeva abhilAveNaM sUriyassa puNNimAsiNIo teNeva abhilAveNaM
amAvAsAo 1. 'evamityAdi' evamuktaprakAreNa yenaivAbhilApena candrasya
paurNamAsyo bhaNitAstenaivAbhiAlApenAmAvAsyA api bhaNitavyAH, tadyathA -
dvitIyA, tRtIyA, dvAdazI ca taashcaivm| pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM
doccaM amAvAsaM caMde kaMsi desIma joei? u. tA jasi NaM desaMsi caMde paDhamaM
amAmAsaM joei, tAo NaM amAvAsaTANAo maMDalaM cauvIseNaM saeNaM chettA, battIsaM
bhAge uvAiNAvettA, ettha NaM se caMde docca amAvAsaM joei, pa. tA eesiNaM
paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM taccaM amAvAsaM caMde kaMsi desaMmi joei? u. tA jasi
NaM desaMsi caMde doccaM amAvAsaM joei, tAo amAvAsaTThANAo maMDalaM cauvIseNaM
saeNaM chettA, battIsaM bhAge uvAiNAvettA, ettha NaM se caMde taccaM amAvAsaM
joei, pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM duvAlasamaM amAvAsaM caMde kaMsi
desaMmi joei ?  /  u. tA jasi NaM desaMsi caMde amAvAsaM joei, tAo NaM
amAvAsaTThANAo maMDalaM cauvIseNaM saeNaM chettA, doNNi aTThAsIe bhAgasae
uvAiNAvettA, ettha NaM se caMde duvAlasamaM amAvAsaM joei,

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[136] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] * Niyavvaos, tanjaha - biiya, taiya, duvalasami.
Ekhalu aenan uvaenan taae taae amaavasatthanaae mandalam cauvviseṇam saenaṁ
chetta, ca uṇauīṁ cauṇauī bhāge uvaināvetta, tansi tansi desansi taṁ taṁ
amaavasaṁ sūrie joed. P. Ta aesiṇam pañcaṇhaṁ samvaccharāṇam carimāṁ bāvaṭṭhi
amaavasaṁ sūre kansi desansi joei? U. Ta jansi ṇam desansi sūre carimāṁ bāvaṣṭuṁ
amaavasaṁ joei, taae puṇṇimāsiṇīṭhaṇāae . mandalam cauvvise ṇam saenaṁ chetta
sattālīsaṁ bhāge osakkāvaitta, ettha ṇam sūrie carimāṁ bāvaṭuṁ amaamāsaṁ joei.
Puṇṇimāsiṇisu candass ya sūrass ya ṇakkhaṭṭāṇam jōgō 67. 1. K. P. Ta aesiṇam
pañcaṇhaṁ samvaccharāṇam paḍhama puṇṇimāsiṇi cande keṇam ṇakkhate joei? U. Ta
ḍhaṇiṭṭāhiṁ, ḍhaṇiṭṭhāṇam tiṇṇi muhuttā egūṇavīsaṁ ca bāvaṭṭhibhāgā muhuttass
bāvaṭṭhibhāgaṁ ca sattaṭṭhidhā chetta paṇṇatṭi cuṇṇiyā bhāgā sesā. Kh. P. Taṁ
samayaṁ ca ṇam sūrie keṇam ṇakkhateṇam joei? U. Ta puvvafaggūṇīhiṁ, puvvafaggūṇī
aṭṭhāvīsaṁ muhuttā aṭṭhatīsaṁ ca bāvaṭṭhibhāgā muhuttass bāvaṭṭhibhāgaṁ ca
sattaṭṭhidhā chetta battisaṁ cuṇṇiyā bhāgāsesā, 2. K. P. Ta aesiṇam pañcaṇhaṁ
samvaccharāṇam doccaṁ puṇṇimāsiṇiṁ cande keṇam ṇakkhate joei? U. Ta uttarāhiṁ
poṭṭavayāhiṁ, uttarāṇam poṭṭhavayāṇam sattāvīsaṁ muhuttā coddas ya bāvaṭṭhibhāgā
muhuttass bāvaṭṭhibhāgaṁ ca sattaṭṭidhā chetta bāvaṭuṁ cuṇṇiyā bhāgāsesā. Kh. P.
Taṁ samayaṁ ca ṇam sūrie keṇam ṇakkhateṇam joei?  _ U. Ta uttarāhiṁ faggūṇīhiṁ,
uttarāfuggūṇīṇam sattamuhuttā tetisaṁ ca bāvaṭṭhibhāgā muhuttass 1. 'Evamityādi'
evamuktena prākāreṇa temaivaabhilāpena sūryasya paurṇamāsya
uktāstenaivābhilāpenaamāvāsyā api vaktavyaḥ, tadyathā  _- dvitīyā, tṛtīyā,
dvādaśī ca tāścaivam. P. Aesi ṇam pañcaṇhaṁ samvaccharāṇam doccaṁ amaavasaṁ sūre
kansi desansi joei? U. Ta jasiṇam desansi sūre paḍhamaṁ amaavasaṁ joei, taao
amaavasatthanaao mandalam cauvīseṇam saenaṁ chetta, cauṇauī bhāge uvaināvetta,
ettha ṇam sūre doccaṁ amaavasaṁ joei, P. Ta aesiṇam pañcaṇhaṁ samvaccharāṇam
taccaṁ amaavasaṁ sūre kansi desansi joei? U. Ta jasi ṇam desansi docca amaavasaṁ
joei, taao amaavasatthanaao mandalam cauvīseṇam saenaṁ chetta, cauṇauī bhāge
uvaināvetta, ettha ṇam sūre taccaṁ amaavasa joei, P. Ta aesiṇam pañcaṇhaṁ
samvaccharāṇam duvalasamaṁ sūre kansi desansi joei? U. Ta jansi ṇam desansi sūre
taccaṁ amaavasaṁ joei, taao amaavasatthanaao mandalam cauvīseṇam saenaṁ chetta,
aṭṭha chhattale aṭṭhāsie bhāgasae uvaināvetta, ettha ṇam se sare duvalasamaṁ
amaavasaṁ joei.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra * NiyavvAo, taMjahA - biiyA, taiyA, duvaalsmii|
ekhalu eeNaM uvAeNaM tAe tAe amAvAsaTThANAe maMDalaM cauvvIseNaM saeNaM chettA,
ca uNauiM cauNauI bhAge uvAiNAvettA, taMsi taMsi desaMsi taM taM amAvAsaM sUrie
joedd| pa. ta eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvacchArANaM carimaM bAvaTThi amAvAsaM sUre
kaMsi desaMsi joei ? u. tA jaMsi NaM desaMsi sUre carimaM bAvaSTuiM amAvAsaM
joei, tAe puNNimAsiNIThANAe . maMDalaM cauvvIse NaM saeNaM chettA sattAlIsaM
bhAge osakkAvaittA, ettha NaM sUrie carimaM bAvaTuiM amAmAsaM joei|
puNNimAsiNisu caMdassa ya sUrassa ya NakkhattANaM jogo 67. 1. ka. pa. tA eesiNaM
paMcaNhaM saMvacchArANaM paDhama puNimAsiNi caMde keNaM Nakkhatte joei ? u. tA
dhaNiTThAhiM, dhaNiTThANaM tiNNi muhuttA egUNavIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa
bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA paNNaTTi cuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa. taM
samayaM ca NaM sUrie keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA puvvaphagguNIhiM,
puvvaphagguNI aTThAvIsaM muhuttA aTThatIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa
bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA battIsaM cuNNiyA bhAgAsesA, 2. ka. pa. tA
eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvacchArANaM doccaM puNNimAsiNiM caMde keNaM Nakkhatte joei
? u. tA uttarAhiM poTTavayAhiM, uttarANaM poTThavayANaM sattAvIsaM muhuttA
coddasa ya bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTTidhA chettA
bAvaTuiM cuNiyA bhaagaasesaa| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUrie keNaM
NakkhatteNaM joei ? _ u. tA uttarAhiM phagguNIhiM, uttarAphugguNINaM
sattamuhuttA tettIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa 1. 'evamityAdi' evamuktena
prakAreNa temaivAbhilApena sUryasya paurNamAsya uktAstenaivAbhiAlApenAmAvAsyA
api vaktavyAH, tadyathA _- dvitIyA, tRtIyA, dvAdazI ca tAzcaivam  /  pa. eesi
NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM doccaM amAvAsaM sUre kaMsi desaMsi joei ? u. tA
jasiNaM desaMsi sUre paDhamaM amAvAsaM joei, tAo amAvAsaTThANAo maMDalaM
cauvIseNaM saeNaM chettA, cauNauI bhAge uvAiNAvettA, ettha NaM sUre doccaM
amAvAsaM joei, pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM taccaM amAvAsaM sUre
kaMsi desaMsi joei? u. tA jasi NaM desaMsi docca amAvAsaM joei, tAo
amAvAsaTThANAo maMDalaM cauvIseNaM saeNaM chettA, cauNaui bhAge uvAiNAvettA,
ettha NaM sUre taccaM amAvAsa joei, pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM
duvAlasamaM sUre kaMsi desaMsi joei? u. tA jaMsi NaM desaMsi sUre taccaM
amAvAsaM joei, tAo amAvAsaTThANAo maMDalaM cauvIseNaM saeNaM chettA, aTTha
chattAle aTThAsIe bhAgasae uvAiNAvettA, ettha NaM se sare duvAlasamaM amAvAsaM
joei|

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ 137 The 26th part is divided into 70, the remaining 21 parts are the fine
parts. 3. Q. P. On the 5th year, on which constellation does the moon fall on
the full moon day? A. On Asvini, on Asvini, 21 Muhurtas and 9 parts of the
Muhurta, the 26th part is divided into 70, the remaining fine parts. Q. P. On
which constellation does the sun fall at that time? A. On Chitra, on Chitra, 1
Muhurta and 28 parts of the Muhurta, the 26th part is divided into 70, the
remaining 30 fine parts. 4. Q. P. On the 5th year, on which constellation does
the moon fall on the 12th full moon day? A. On Uttara, on Ashadha, on Uttara and
Ashadha, 26 Muhurtas and 26 parts of the Muhurta, the 26th part is divided into
70, the remaining 44 fine parts. Q. P. On which constellation does the sun fall
at that time? A. On Punarvasu, on Punarvasu, 16 Muhurtas and 8 parts of the
Muhurta, the 26th part is divided into 70, the remaining 20 fine parts. 5. Q. P.
On the 5th year, on which constellation does the moon fall on the last full moon
day? A. On Uttara, on Ashadha, on Uttara and Ashadha, at the last time. Q. P. On
which constellation does the sun fall at that time? A. On Pushya, on Pushya, 19
Muhurtas and 43 parts of the Muhurta, the 26th part is divided into 70, the
remaining 33 fine parts. The conjunction of the moon, sun and constellations on
the new moon day 68. 1. Q. P. On the 5th year, on which constellation does the
moon fall on the first new moon day? A. On Aslesha, on Aslesha, 1 Muhurta and 44
parts of the Muhurta, the 26th part is divided into 70, the remaining 26 fine
parts. Q. P. On which constellation does the sun fall at that time? A. On
Aslesha, on Aslesha, 1 Muhurta and 44 parts of the Muhurta, the 26th part is
divided into 70, the remaining 26 fine parts. 2. Q. P. On the 5th year, on which
constellation does the moon fall on the second new moon day? A. On Uttara, on
Falgun, on Uttara and Falgun, 40 Muhurtas and 35 parts of the Muhurta, the 26th
part is divided into 70, the remaining 15 fine parts. Q. P. On which
constellation does the sun fall at that time?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - bAvIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 137 bAvaTThibhAgaM ca
sattaTThidhA chettA ekkavIsaM cuNiyA bhAgA sesaa| 3. ka. pa. tA eesiNaM
paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM taccaM puNNimAsiNiM caMde keNaM NakkhateNaM joei ? u.
tA assiNIhiM, assiNINaM ekkavIsaM muhuttA Nava ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa,
bAvaTThibhAgaM _ ca sattaTThidhA chettA tevahi~ cuNiyA bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa. taM
samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? _ u. tA cittAhiM, cittANaM ekko
muhutto aTThAvIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM ca - sattaTThidhA
chettA tIsaM cuNiyAbhAgA sesaa| 4. ka. pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM
duvAlasamaM puNNimAsiNiM caMde keNaM NakkhateNaM joei? u. tA uttarAhiM,
AsADhAhiM, uttarANaM ca AsADhANaM chavIsaM muhuttA chavIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA
muhuttassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTTidhA chettA, cauppaNNaM cuNNiyA bhAgA sesA,
kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? . u. tA puNaNvasuNA
puNavvasussa solasa muhuttA aTTha ya bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa bAvaTThibhAgaMca
sattaTThidhA chettA vIsaM cuNiyAbhAgA sesaa| 5. ka. pa. tA eesiNaM paMcaNhaM
saMvaccharANaM caramaM bAvaSTuiM puNNimAsiNiM caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei? u.
tA uttarAhiM, AsADhAhiM, uttarANaM AsADhANaM crmsme| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM
sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA pusse NaM pussassa egUNavIsaM muhuttA
tetAlIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa bAvaTThibhAgaM _ca sattaTThidhA chettA
tetIsaM cuNNiyAbhAgA sesaa| amAvAsAsu caMdassa ya sUrassa ya NakkhattANaM jogo
68. 1. ka. pa. eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM paDhamaM amAvAsaM caMde keNaM
NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA assesAhiM ceva assesANaM ekke muhutte cattIlIsaM ca
bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTTidhA chettA, bAvaTTi cuNiyA
bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA
assesAhiM ceva asmesANaM ekko muhutto cattAlIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa
bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA, bAvaTuiM cuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa| 2. ka. pa.
tAeesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM doccaM amAvAsaM caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM
joei ? u. tA uttarAhiM ceva phagguNIhiM uttarANaM phagguNINaM cattAlIsaM muhuttA
paNatIsaM bAvaTThibhAgA _ muhuttassa bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA,
paNahi~ cuNiyA bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM
joei ?

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [138] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra]  **U.**  What is the conjunction of the moon
with the asterism Uttara Phalguni in the Uttara Phalguni month? **A.**  It is
the same as the conjunction of the moon with the asterism Uttara Phalguni.
**K.P.**  What is the conjunction of the moon with the asterism Uttara Phalguni
on the 5th amavasya of the year? **U.**  It is 4 muhurtas and 10/60th of a
muhurta after the asterism Uttara Phalguni.  **K.P.**  What is the conjunction
of the sun with the asterism Uttara Phalguni at that time? **U.**  It is the
same as the conjunction of the moon with the asterism Uttara Phalguni.  **K.P.**
What is the conjunction of the moon with the asterism Uttara Phalguni on the
12th amavasya of the year? **U.**  It is 4 muhurtas and 10/60th of a muhurta
before the asterism Uttara Phalguni.  **K.P.**  What is the conjunction of the
sun with the asterism Uttara Phalguni at that time? **U.**  It is the same as
the conjunction of the moon with the asterism Uttara Phalguni.  **K.P.**  What
is the conjunction of the moon with the asterism Uttara Phalguni on the last
amavasya of the year? **U.**  It is 22 muhurtas and 42/60th of a muhurta after
the asterism Punarvasu.  **K.P.**  What is the conjunction of the sun with the
asterism Uttara Phalguni at that time? **U.**  It is the same as the conjunction
of the moon with the asterism Uttara Phalguni.  **K.P.**  What is the time
difference between the conjunction of the moon and the sun with the asterisms?
**U.**  The time difference between the conjunction of the moon and the sun with
the asterisms is 69.  **K.P.**  If the conjunction of the moon with an asterism
is observed in one place, what is the time difference for the conjunction of the
moon with the same asterism in another place? **U.**  If the conjunction of the
moon with an asterism is observed in one place, the time difference for the
conjunction of the moon with the same asterism in another place is 18 muhurtas
and 24/60th of a muhurta.  **K.P.**  If the conjunction of the moon with an
asterism is observed in one place, what is the time difference for the
conjunction of the moon with the same asterism in another place? **U.**  If the
conjunction of the moon with an asterism is observed in one place, the time
difference for the conjunction of the moon with the same asterism in another
place is 16 muhurtas and 44/60th of a muhurta.  **K.P.**  If the conjunction of
the moon with an asterism is observed in one place, what is the time difference
for the conjunction of the moon with the same asterism in another place? **U.**
If the conjunction of the moon with an asterism is observed in one place, the
time difference for the conjunction of the moon with the same asterism in
another place is 4000 muhurtas and 9 muhurtas.  **K.P.**  If the conjunction of
the moon with an asterism is observed in one place, what is the time difference
for the conjunction of the moon with the same asterism in another place? **U.**
If the conjunction of the moon with an asterism is observed in one place, the
time difference for the conjunction of the moon with the same asterism in
another place is 1009 muhurtas and 8 muhurtas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 138 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra u. tA uttarAhiM ceva phagguNIhiM uttarANaM
phagguNINaM jaheva cNdss| 3. ka. pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM taccaM
amAvAsaM caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA hattheNaM ceva hatthassa cattAri
muhuttA tIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA,
bAva icuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM
joei : u. tA hattheNaM ceva hatthassa jaheva cNdss| ka. pa. tA eesi NaM
paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM duvAlasamaM amAvAsaM caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u.
tA abAhiM ceva adANaM cattAri muhuttA, dasa ya bAvaTThi bhAgA muhuttassa,
bAvaTThibhAgaM ca . sattaTThidhA chettA, cauppaNNaM cuNiyA bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa.
taM samayaM ca sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA addAhiM ceva adANaM jahA
cNdss| ka. pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM carimaM bAvaDiM amAvAsa
caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei? _ u. tA puNavvasuNA ceva puNavvasussa bAvIsaM
muhuttA bAyAlIsaM ca bAsaTThibhAgA muhuttassa sesaa| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM
sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA puNavvasuNA ceva, puNavvasussa jahA cNdss|
caMdeNa ya sUreNa ya NakkhattANaM jogakAlaM 69. 1. ka. tA jeNaM aja NakkhatteNaM
caMde jogaM joei jaMsi desaMsi se NaM imAiM aTTha egUNavIsAi muhuttasayAiM
cauvIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA,
bAvaTuiM cuNNiyAbhAge uvAiNAvettA puNaravi se NaM caMde aNNeNaM sarisaeNaM ceva
NakkhatteNaM jogaM joei aNNaMsi desNsi| kha.tA jeNaM aja NakkhatteNaM caMde
jogaM joei, jaMsi desaMsi se NaM imAI solasa aTThatIsaM muhuttasayAiM auNApaNNaM
ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA, paNaDheiM
cuNNiyAbhAge uvAiNAvettA puNaravi se caMde teNaM ceva NakkhatteNaM jogaM joei
aNNaMsi desNsi| ga. tA jeNaM aja NakkhatteNaM caMde jogaM joei jaMsi desaMsi se
NaM imAiM caupaNNa-muhuttasahassAI Nava ya muhutasayAI uvAiNAvettA puNaravi se
caMde aNNeNa tArisaeNaM NakkhatteNaM jogaM joei, taMsi desNsi| gha. tA jeNaM aja
NakkhateNaM caMde jogaM joei jaMsi desaMsi se NaM imAiM egalakkhaM nava ya
sahassaM aTTha ya muhutasae uvAiNAvetA puNaravi se caMde teNaM NakkhateNaM jogaM
joei, taMsi desNsi|

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
10th Prabhrita - Twenty-second Prabhrita  2. a. By which constellation the sun
is conjoined, in that region he takes up the three sets of thirty-six lunar
days. Then again, he is conjoined by another similar constellation in that
region.  b. By which constellation the sun is conjoined, in that region he takes
up the thirty-seven sets of lunar days. Then again, he is conjoined by another
similar constellation in that region.  c. By which constellation the sun is
conjoined, in that region he takes up the eighteen sets of thirty-one lunar
days. Then again, he is conjoined by the same constellation in that region.  d.
By which constellation the sun is conjoined, in that region he takes up the
thirty-six sets of sixty lunar days. Then again, he is conjoined by the same
constellation in that region.  70. The attainment of the course of the moon,
sun, planets, and constellations. When this moon attains the course, then the
other moons also attain the course. When the other moons attain the course, then
this moon also attains the course. When this sun attains the course, then the
other suns also attain the course. When the other suns attain the course, then
this sun also attains the course. Similarly for the planets and constellations.
The conjunction of the moon, sun, planets, and constellations. When this moon is
conjoined in the conjunction, then the other moons also are conjoined in the
conjunction. When the other moons are conjoined in the conjunction, then this
moon also is conjoined in the conjunction. Similarly for the sun, planets, and
constellations. Some moons are conjoined in the conjunctions, some suns are
conjoined in the conjunctions, some planets are conjoined in the conjunctions,
some constellations are conjoined in the conjunctions, both the moons are
conjoined in the conjunctions,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazama prAbhRta - bAvIsavAM prAbhRtaprAbhRta ] [ 139 2. ka. tA jeNaM aja
NakkhatteNaM sUre jogaM joei jaMsi desaMsi se NaM imAiM tiNNi chAvaTThAiM
rAiMdiyasayAiM uvAiNAvettA puNaravi se sUrie aNNeNaM tArisaeNaM ceva
NakkhatteNaM jogaM joei taM desNsi| kha. tA jeNaM aja NakkhatteNaM sUre jogaM
joei taMsi desaMsi se NaM imAiM satta dutIsaM rAiMdiyasayAI _ uvAiNAvettA
puNaravi se sUre aNNeNaM ceva tArisaeNaM NakkhatteNaM jogaM joei, taMsi desNsi|
ga. tA jeNaM aja NakkhatteNaM sUre jogaM joei, jaMsi desaMsi se NaM imAiM
aTThArasa tIsAiM rAiMdiyasayAI uvAiNAvettA puNaravi sUre teNaM ceva NakkhatteNaM
jogaM joei, taMsi desNsi| gha. tAjeNaM aja NakkhatteNaM sUre jogaM joei jaMsi
desaMsi se NaM imAiM chattIsaM saTThAI rAiMdiyasayAI uvAiNAvettA puNaravi se
sUre teNaM ceva NakkhatteNaM jogaM joei taMsi desNsi| caMda-sUra-gaha
NakkhattANaM gaisamAvaNNattaM 70. tA jayA NaM ime caMde gaisamAvaNNae bhavai,
tayA NaM iyare'vi caMde gaisamAvaNNae bhvi| jayA NaM iyare caMde gaisamAvaNNae
bhavai, tayA NaM ime'vi caMde gaisamAvaNNae bhvi| tA jayA NaM ime sUrie
gaisamAvaNNae bhavai, tayA NaM iyare'vi sUrie gaisamAvaNNae bhvi| tA jayA NaM
iyare sUrie gaisamAvaNNae bhavai, tayA NaM ime'vi sUrie gaisamAvaNNae bhvi| evaM
gahe vi, Nakkhatte vi| caMda-sUra-gaha NakkhattANaM jogo tA jayA NaM ime caMde
jutte joge NaM bhavai, tayA NaM iyarevi caMde jutte joge NaM bhvi| tA jayA NaM
iyare caMde jutte joge NaM bhavai, tayA NaM ime'vi caMde jutte joge NaM bhvi|
evaM sUre'vi gahe'vi nnkkhtte'vi| sayA vi caMdA juttA jogehiM, sayA vi sUrA
juttA jogehiM, sayA vi gahA juttA jogehiM, sayA viNakkhattA juttA jogehi,
duhao'vi caMdA juttA jogehiM,

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[140] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ] The Sun is connected by yogas, the planets are
connected by yogas, the stars are connected by yogas, the mandala is divided
into 108,000 parts by 27 nakshatras, this is the division of the sky, the
victory of the nakshatras, thus I say.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 140 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra duhao'vi sUrA juttA jogehiM, duhao'vi gahA juttA
jogehiM, duhao'vi NakkhattA juttA jogehiM, maMDalaM sayasahasseNaM aTThANauIe
saehi chettA iccesa Nakkhatte khesaparibhAge, Nakkhattavijae pAhuDe, tti bemi|

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Prabhruta  **Five years, the beginning of the Paryushana period, and
the time of the conjunction of the moon, sun, and constellations - 71. K.1. P.
How are these years, etc.?**  **A. It is said,**  **U. There are five years
designated here, as follows:**  1. Canda 2. Canda 3. Abhivaddiya 4. Canda 5.
Abhivaddiya  **The first Canda year - K.1. P. What is the beginning of the first
Canda year in these five years?**  **A. It is said,**  **U. The beginning of the
first Canda year is at the Paryushana of the fifth Abhivaddiya year, and the
time is after that.**  **G. P. What is the Paryushana?**  **A. It is said,**
**U. The Paryushana of the first Canda year is at the beginning of the second
Canda year, and the time is after that.**  **Gh. P. What constellation is the
moon in at that time?**  **U. It is in Uttara Ashadha, 26 Muhurtas of Uttara
Ashadha, 62 parts of a Muhurta, 77 parts of a part of a Muhurta, and 44 parts of
a part of a part of a Muhurta remaining.**  **P. What constellation is the sun
in at that time?**  **U. It is in Punarvasu, 16 Muhurtas of Punarvasu, 8 parts
of a Muhurta, 72 parts of a part of a Muhurta, and 20 parts of a part of a part
of a Muhurta remaining.**  **The second Canda year - K.2. P. What is the
beginning of the second Canda year in these five years?**  **A. It is said,**
**U. The beginning of the second Canda year is at the Paryushana of the first
Canda year, and the time is after that.**  **Kh. P. What is the Paryushana?**
**A. It is said,**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 . gyArahavAM prAbhRta paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM, pAraMbha-pajavasANakAlaM caMda-
sUrANa-NakkhattasaMjogakAlaM ca - 71. ka.1. pa. tA kahaM te saMvaccharANAdI ?
Ahie tti vaejA, u. tattha khalu ime paMca saMvacchare paNNatte taM jahA - 1.
caMde, 2. caMde, 3. abhivaDDie, 4. caMde, 5. abhivddie| paDhamaM
caMdasaMvaccharaM - kha. 1. pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM paDhamassa
caMdassa saMvaccharassa ke AdI ? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tAje NaM paMcamassa
abhivaDDiyasaMvaccharassa pajavasANe, se NaM paDhamassa caMdassa saMvaccharasa
_AdI, aNaMtarapurakkhaDe sme| ga.. pa. tA se NaM kiM pajavasIe ? Ahie tti vejaa|
u. tA je NaM doccassa caMdasaMvaccharasa AdI, se NaM paDhamassa
caMdasaMvaccharasa pajavasANe, aNaMtarapacchAkkhaDe sme| gha. pa. taM samayaM ca
NaM caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA uttarAhiM AsADhAhiM, uttarANaM
AsADhANaM chaduvIsaM muhuttA, cha duvIsaM ca vAsaTThibhAgA, muhuttassa
bAsaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chittA, cauppaNaM cuNiyA bhAgA sesaa| pa. taM
samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA puNaNvasuNA, puNavvasussa
solasa muhuttA aTTha ya bAsaTThibhAgA, muhuttassa bAsaTThibhAgaM ca sattadvidhA
chettA vIsaM cuNiyA bhAgA sesaa| bitiyaM caMdasaMvacchara ka. 2. pa. tA eesiNaM
paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM doccassa caMdasaMvaccharasa ke AdI ? Ahie tti vejjaa|
u. tA je NaM paDhamassa caMdasaMvaccharasa panavasANe, se NaM doccassa
caMdasaMvaccharasa AdI, aMNaMtarapurakkhaDe sme| kha. pa. tA se NaM ki pajavasie
? Ahie tti vejjaa|

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[142] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] U. So, what is the beginning of the *Abhivaddhiya*
year?   P.  At the end of the *Dvoccha* lunar year, the next moment is the
beginning of the *Abhivaddhiya* year. U.  At that time, what constellation is
the moon in? P.  In the *Purva Ashadha*, seven *muhurtas* of the *Purva
Ashadha*, 26 parts of the *muhurta*, 70 parts of the *bhaga*, 39 parts of the
*churniya* are remaining. U.  At that time, what constellation is the sun in? P.
In the *Punarvasu*, 42 *muhurtas* of the *Punarvasu*, 35 parts of the *muhurta*,
60 parts of the *bhaga*, 7 parts of the *churniya* are remaining. K.  What is
the beginning of the third *Abhivaddhiya* year? P.  So, what is the beginning of
the third *Abhivaddhiya* year in the five years? U.  At the end of the *Dvoccha*
lunar year, the next moment is the beginning of the third *Abhivaddhiya* year.
K.  What is the beginning of the third *Abhivaddhiya* year? U.  At the beginning
of the fourth lunar year, the next moment is the end of the third *Abhivaddhiya*
year. P.  At that time, what constellation is the moon in? U.  In the *Uttara
Ashadha*, 13 *muhurtas* of the *Uttara Ashadha*, 26 parts of the *muhurta*, 70
parts of the *bhaga*, 27 parts of the *churniya* are remaining. U.  At that
time, what constellation is the sun in? P.  In the *Punarvasu*, 2 *muhurtas* of
the *Punarvasu*, 56 parts of the *muhurta*, 60 parts of the *bhaga*, 60 parts of
the *churniya* are remaining. K.  What is the beginning of the fourth lunar
year? P.  So, what is the beginning of the fourth lunar year in the five years?
U.  At the end of the third *Abhivaddhiya* year, the next moment is the
beginning of the fourth lunar year. K.  What is the beginning of the fourth
lunar year? U.  At the beginning of the last *Abhivaddhiya* year, the next
moment is the end of the fourth lunar year. P.  At that time, what constellation
is the moon in? 4

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 142 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra u. tA je NaM taccassa abhivaDDiya-saMvaccharasa
AdI, se NaM doccassa saMvaccharassa pajjavasANe aNaMtarapacchAkkhaDe sme| pa.
taM samayaM ca NaM caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA puvvAhiM AsADhAhiM,
puvvANaM AsADhANaM satta muhuttA, tevaNNaM ca vAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa,
bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA igatAlIsaM cuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa| gha. pa.
taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA puNavvasuNA,
puNavvasussa NaM bAyAlIsaM muhuttA paNatIsaM ca bAsaTThibhAgA muhuttassa,
bAsaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA satta cuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa| . tatiyaM
abhivaDDhiyaM saMvaccharaM ka. paH tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM taccassa
abhivaDDiyasaMvaccharassa ke AdI ? Ahie . tti vejjaa| u. tA je NaM doccassa
caMdasaMvaccharasa pajjavasANe, se NaM taccassa abhivaDDiyasaMvaccharassa AdI,
aNaMtarapuramakkhaDe sme| kha. pa. tA se NaM kipajavasie ? Ahie tti vejjaa|| u.
tAje NaM cautthassa caMdasaMvaccharasa AdI, se NaM taccassa
abhivaDiyasaMvaccharassa pajjavasANe _aNaMtarapacchAkkhaDe sme| pa. taM samayaM
ca NaM caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA uttarAhiM AsADhAAhiM, uttarANaM
AsADhANaM terasamuhuttA, terasa ya vAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa, bAbaTThibhAgaM ca
sattaTThidhA chettA sattAvIsaM cuNiyA bhAgA sesaa| gha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM
sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? . u. tA puNavvasuNA, puNavvasussa do muhuttA,
chappaNNaM bAbaTThibhAgA, muhuttassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM sattaTThidhA chettA saTThI
cuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa| cautthaM caMdasaMvaccharaM ka. 4. pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM
saMvaccharANaM cautthassa caMdasaMvaccharassa ke AdI ? Ahie tti vaejjA  /  u. tA
je NaM taccassa abhivaDiya-saMvaccharassa pajavasANe, se NaM cautthassa
caMdasaMvaccharassa AdI, aNaMtarapacchAkkhaDe sme| kha. pa. tA se NaM
kiMpajjavasie ? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA je NaM carimassa
abhivaDDiyasaMvaccharassa AdI, se NaM cautthassa caMdasaMvaccharassa pajjavasANe
aNaMtarapacchAkkhaDe sme| ga. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM
joei ? 4

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Prabhruta  [143]  **Q:** On what day and time does the eleventh
Prabhruta begin?  **A:** It begins on the Uttara Ashadha, forty-four Muhurtas
after the beginning of Uttara Ashadha. Forty-four Muhurtas are equal to sixty-
four parts of a Muhurta, and sixty-four parts are equal to seventy-two parts of
a Muhurta. The remaining parts are forty-four.  **Q:** At that time, in which
Nakshatra is the Sun?  **A:** At that time, the Sun is in Punarvasu. The Sun is
twenty-nine Muhurtas and twenty-one parts of a Muhurta into Punarvasu. Twenty-
one parts of a Muhurta are equal to seventy-two parts of a Muhurta. The
remaining parts are fifty-three.  **Q:** What is the beginning of the fifth
Abhivaddhiya year?  **A:** Please tell me.  **A:** The beginning of the fifth
Abhivaddhiya year is the end of the fourth Chandra year.  **Q:** When is the end
of the fourth Chandra year?  **A:** Please tell me.  **A:** The end of the
fourth Chandra year is the beginning of the first year.  **Q:** At that time, in
which Nakshatra is the Moon?  **A:** At that time, the Moon is in Uttara
Ashadha, at the end of Uttara Ashadha.  **Q:** At that time, in which Nakshatra
is the Sun?  **A:** At that time, the Sun is in Pushya. The Sun is twenty-one
Muhurtas and forty-three parts of a Muhurta into Pushya. Forty-three parts of a
Muhurta are equal to seventy-two parts of a Muhurta. The remaining parts are
thirty-three.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM prAbhRta ] [ 143 u. tA uttarAhiM AsADhAhiM, uttarANaM AsADhANaM
cattAlIsaM muhuttA, cattAlIsaM ya bAsaTThibhAgA muhuttassa, bAsaTThibhAgaM ca
sattaTThidhA chettA causaTThI cuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa| pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre
keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA puNavvasuNA, puNavvasussa auNatIsaM muhuttA,
ekkavIsaM ca bAsaTThibhAgA, muhuttassa, bAsaTThibhAgaM sattaTThidhA chettA
sitAlIsaM cuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa| paMcamaM abhivaDDhiyaM saMvaccharaM ka. 5. pa. tA
eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM paMcamassa abhivaDDiyasaMvaccharassa ke AdI ?
Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA je NaM cautthassa caMdasaMvaccharasa pajjavasANe, se NaM
paMcamassa abhivaDviyasaMvaccharassa AdI, aNaMtarapurakkhaDe sme| pa. tA se NaM
kipajavasie ? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA je NaM paDhamassa saMvaccharassa AdI se NaM
paMcamassa abhivaDiyasaMvaccharassa pajavasANe aNaMtarapacchAkkhaDe sme| pa. taM
samayaM ca NaM caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA uttarAhiM AsADhAAhiM,
uttarANaM AsADhANaM crmsme| pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei
? u. tA pusseNaM, pussassa NaM ekkavIsaM muhuttA, tetAlIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA,
muhuttassa bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA tettIsaM cuNiyA bhAgA sesaa|

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Prabhrit  **Five Years, Months and Muhurta Measurement** - 72. K.1.
P. How many years are there? Tell me. **A.** There are five years mentioned
here, namely: 1. Nakshatra, 2. Chandra, 3. Udu, 4. Aicha, 5. Abhivaddhia.
**First Nakshatra Year** - K. P. How many Muhurtas are there in the first
Nakshatra year, in the Nakshatra month, with 30 Muhurtas per day? Tell me.
**A.** There are 27 Raindhiyas and 21/60th of a Raindhiya, tell me. G. P. How
many Muhurtas are there? Tell me. **A.** There are 821 Muhurtas and 27/60th of a
Muhurta, tell me. Gh. P. This is half of the 12-Nakshatra year, how many
Raindhiyas are there? Tell me. **A.** There are 327 Raindhiyas and 51/60th of a
Raindhiya, tell me. Ng. P. How many Muhurtas are there? Tell me. **A.** There
are 9832 Muhurtas and 56/60th of a Muhurta, tell me.  **Second Chandra Year** -
2. K. P. How many Raindhiyas are there in the second Chandra year, in the
Chandra month, with 30 Muhurtas per day? Tell me. **A.** There are 39 Raindhiyas
and 32/60th of a Raindhiya, tell me.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM prAbhRta paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM, mAsANaM ca rAiMdiya-
muhuttappamANaM - 72. ka.1. pa. tA kati NaM saMvaccharA ? Ahie tti vaejjA? u.
tattha khalu ime paMca saMvaccharA paNNattA taM jahA - 1. Nakkhatte, 2. caMde,
3. uDU, 4. Aicce , 5. abhivddddie| paDhamaM Nakkhatta-saMvaccharaM kha. pa. tA
eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM paDhamassa NakkhattasaMvaccharassa
NakkhattamAse tIsai muhutteNaM tIsai muhutteNaM ahoratteNaM mijamANe kevaie
rAiMdiyaggeNaM? Ahie tti vejaa| _ u. tA sattAvIsaM rAiMdiyAI ekkavIsaM ca
sattaThibhAgA rAiMdiyassa rAiMdiyaggeNaM, Ahie tti vejjaa| ga. pa. tA se NaM
kevaie muhuttaggeNaM ? Ahie tti vaejA? _u. tA aTThasae egUNavIse muhuttANaM,
sattAvIsaM ca sattaTThibhAge muhuttassa muhuttaggeNaM, Ahie tti vejjaa| gha. pa.
tA eesi NaM addhA duvAlasakkhuttakaDA Nakkhatte saMvacchare , tA se NaM kevaie
rAiMdiyagge NaM? Ahie tti vejaa| u. tA tiNNi sattAvIse rAiMdiyasae ekkAvannaM ca
sattaTThibhAge rAiMdiyassa rAiMdiyagge NaM Ahie tti vejjaa| Ga pa. tA se NaM
kevaie muhuttagge NaM ? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA Nava muhutasahassA aTTa ya
battIse muhuttasae chappannaM ca sattaTThibhAge muhuttassa muhuttagge NaM, Ahie
tti vejjaa| bitiyaM caMdasaMvaccharaM 2. ka. pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM
saMvaccharANaM doccassa caMdasaMvaccharassa caMde mAse tIsaimuhutte NaM
tIsaimuhutte NaM ahoratteNaM mijamANe kevaie rAiMdiyagge NaM ? Ahie tti vejjaa|
u. tA egUNatIsaM rAiMdiyAiM battIsaM bAsaTThibhAgA rAiMdiyassa rAiMdiyagge NaM,
Ahie tti vejaa|

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Prabhrit  **1. ** **Q.** How many Muhurta-Ggas are there in a
Chandrasamvatsara? **A.** There are 850 Muhurtas and 36 parts of a Muhurta in a
Chandrasamvatsara.  **2.** **Q.** How many Raindhiya-Ggas are there in half of a
Chandrasamvatsara (12 Muhurta-Kadas)? **A.** There are 372 Raindhiyas and 12
parts of a Raindhiya in half of a Chandrasamvatsara.  **3.** **Q.** How many
Muhurta-Ggas are there in half of a Chandrasamvatsara (12 Muhurta-Kadas)? **A.**
There are 10,069 Muhurtas and 25 parts of a Muhurta in half of a
Chandrasamvatsara.  **Second Udusamvatsara (3)**  **1.** **Q.** If there are 15
years and the Udusamvatsara has 30 Muhurtas in its Udumas, how many Raindhiya-
Ggas are there in 30 Muhurtas? **A.** There are 30 Raindhiyas in 30 Muhurtas.
**2.** **Q.** How many Muhurta-Ggas are there in 30 Muhurtas? **A.** There are
900 Muhurta-Ggas in 30 Muhurtas.  **3.** **Q.** How many Raindhiya-Ggas are
there in half of an Udusamvatsara (12 Muhurta-Kadas)? **A.** There are 306
Raindhiyas in half of an Udusamvatsara.  **4.** **Q.** How many Muhurta-Ggas are
there in half of an Udusamvatsara (12 Muhurta-Kadas)? **A.** There are 10,080
Muhurta-Ggas in half of an Udusamvatsara.  **Third Aicchasamvatsara (4)**
**1.** **Q.** If there are 15 years and the Aicchasamvatsara has 30 Muhurtas in
its Aicchamas, how many Raindhiya-Ggas are there in 30 Muhurtas? **A.** There
are 30 Raindhiyas and half a part of a Raindhiya in 30 Muhurtas.  **2.** **Q.**
How many Muhurta-Ggas are there in 30 Muhurtas? **A.** There are 915 Muhurta-
Ggas in 30 Muhurtas.  **3.** **Q.** How many Raindhiya-Ggas are there in half of
an Aicchasamvatsara (12 Muhurta-Kadas)? **A.** There are 306 Raindhiyas in half
of an Aicchasamvatsara.  **4.** **Q.** How many Muhurta-Ggas are there in half
of an Aicchasamvatsara (12 Muhurta-Kadas)? **A.** There are 10,090 Muhurta-Ggas
in half of an Aicchasamvatsara.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM prAbhRta ] [ 145 kha. pa. tA se NaM kevaie muhuttaggeNaM ? Ahie tti
vaejjA ? u. tA aTThapaMcAsae muhutte tettIsaMbAsaTThibhAgA muhuttaggeNaM, Ahie
tti vejjaa| ga. pa. tA esa NaM addhA duvAlasakkhuttakaDA caMdesaMvacchare , tA
se NaM kevaie rAiMdiyagge NaM ? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA tiNNi cauppatre
rAiMdiyasae duvAlasa ya bAsaTThibhAgA rAiMdiyagge NaM Ahie tti vejjaa| gha. pa.
tA se NaM kevaie muhuttagge NaM? Ahie tti vejaa| u. tA dasamuhutasahassAI chacca
paNavIse muhuttasae paNNasaM ca bAsaTThibhAge muhutte NaM, Ahie tti vejaa|
tatiyaM uDusaMvaccharaM 3. ka. pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM taccassa
uDusaMvaccharassa uDumAse tIsai muhutteNaM, tIsai muhutte NaM mijamANe kevaie
rAiMdiyagge NaM? Ahie tti vejjaa| . u. tA tIsaM rAiMdiyANaM rAiMdiyagge NaM,
Ahie tti vejjaa| kha. pa. tA se NaM kevaie muhuttaggeNaM ? Ahie tti vaejjA ? u.
tA NavamuhuttasayAI muhuttagge NaM, Ahie tti vejaa| ga. pa. tA esa NaM addhA
duvAlasakhuttakaDA uDU saMvacchare , tA se NaM kevaie rAiMdiyagge NaM ? Ahie tti
vejaa| u. tA tiNNi saTe rAiMdiyasae rAiMdiyagge NaM Ahie tti vejaa| gha. pa. tA
se NaM kevaie muhuttagge NaM ? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA dasamuhuttasahassAiM aTTha
ya sayAI muhuttagge NaM, Ahie tti vejaa| cautthaM AiccasaMvaccharaM 4. ka. pa.
tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM cautthassa AdiccasaMvaccharassa Aicce mAse
tIsai muhutte NaM tIsaimuhutteNaM ahoratteNaM mijamANe kevaie rAiMdiyaggeNaM?
Ahie tti vejaa| u. tA tIsaM rAiMdiyAiM avaddhabhAgaM ca rAiMdiyassa rAiMdiyagge
NaM, Ahie tti vejaa| kha. pa. tA se NaM kevaie muhuttaggeNaM ? Ahie tti vaejjA?
u. tA Nava paNNarasa muhuttasae muhuttagge NaM, Ahie tti vejjaa| ga. pa. tA ee
NaM addhA duvAlasakhuttakaDA Adicce saMvacchare , tA se NaM kevaie rAiMdiyagge
NaM? Ahie tti vejaa| u. tA tini chAvaDhe rAiMdiyasae rAiMdiyagge NaM Ahie tti
vejjaa| gha. pa. tA se NaM kevaie muhuttagge NaM ? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA
dasamuhuttassa sahassAI Nava asIe muhuttasae muhuttagge NaM, Ahie tti vejjaa|

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Surya Prajnapti Sutra]  **146]**  **5. a.  ** If a *Abhivaddiya* year is
five years, then how many *Raindhiya* units are there in the fifth *Abhivaddiya*
year?  **Answer:** There are thirty-nine *Raindhiya* units and thirty-three
*Muhurta* units, seventeen sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit.  **b. ** How many
*Muhurta* units are there in the fifth *Abhivaddiya* year? **Answer:** There are
nine hundred and ninety-seven *Muhurta* units, seventeen sixtyths of a *Muhurta*
unit.  **c. ** If half of a *Dvaadasa Khutta Kada* is an *Abhivaddiya* year,
then how many *Raindhiya* units are there in it? **Answer:** There are three
hundred and thirty-three *Raindhiya* units and thirty-one *Muhurta* units,
eighteen sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit.  **d. ** How many *Muhurta* units are
there in half of a *Dvaadasa Khutta Kada*? **Answer:** There are eleven thousand
and fifty-five *Muhurta* units, eighteen sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit.  **73. a.
** How many *Raindhiya* units are there in nine *Yuga*s? **Answer:** There are
seventeen thousand and eighty-nine *Raindhiya* units, nineteen *Muhurta* units,
forty-seven sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit, and seventy-six sixtyths of a
*Muhurta* unit, which is equal to one and sixteen sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit.
**b. ** How many *Muhurta* units are there in nine *Yuga*s? **Answer:** There
are seventy-nine thousand and forty-nine *Muhurta* units, forty-seven sixtyths
of a *Muhurta* unit, and seventy-six sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit, which is
equal to one and sixteen sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit.  **c. ** How many
*Raindhiya* units are there in a *Jagapatti*? **Answer:** There are thirty-eight
*Raindhiya* units, ten *Muhurta* units, four sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit, and
seventy-six sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit, which is equal to one and sixteen
sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit.  **d. ** How many *Muhurta* units are there in a
*Jagapatti*? **Answer:** There are eleven thousand and forty-five *Muhurta*
units, four sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit, and seventy-six sixtyths of a
*Muhurta* unit, which is equal to one and sixteen sixtyths of a *Muhurta* unit.
**e. ** How many *Raindhiya* units are there in a *Yuga*? **Answer:** There are
eighteen thousand and thirty-three *Raindhiya* units.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 146 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra paMcama abhivaDiyasaMvaccharaM 5. ka. pa. tA eesi
NaM paMcaNDaM saMvaccharANaM paMcamassa abhivaDDiyasaMvaccharassa abhivaDDie
mAse tIsaimuhuteNaM NaM ahoratteNaM mijamANe kevaie rAiMdiyaggeNaM ? Ahie tti
vejaa| u. tA egatIsaM rAiMdiyAiM egUNatIsaM ca muhuttA sattarasa bAsaTThibhAge
muhuttassa rAiMdiyagge _NaM, Ahie tti vejjaa| kha. pa. tA se NaM kevaie
muhuttaggeNaM ? Ahie tti vaejjA ? u. tA Nava egUNasaTTe muhuttasae sattarasa
bAsaTThibhAge muhuttassa muhuttaggeNaM Ahietti vejjaa| ga. pa. tA esa NaM addhA
duvAlasakhuttakaDA abhivaDDiyasaMvacchare, tA se NaM kevaie rAiMdiyagge NaM?
Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA tiNi tesIe rAiMdiyasae ekkatIsaM ca muhuttA aTThArasa
bAsaTThibhAge muhuttassa _ rAiMdiyagge NaM Ahie tti vejaa| gha. pa. tA se NaM
kevaie muhuttagge NaM ? Ahie tti vejaa| u. tA ekkArasamuhuttasahassAiM paMca ya
ekkArasamuhuttasae aTThArasa bAsaTThibhAge muhuttassa muhuttagge NaM Ahie tti
vejjaa| egassa jugassa ahoratta-muhuttappamANaM 73. ka. pa. tA kevaiyaM te no-
juge rAiMdiyaggeNaM ? Ahie tti vejaa| .. u. tA sattarasa ekANaue rAiMdiyasae,
egUNavIsaM ca muhutta, sattAvaNNe bAsaTThibhAge muhuttassa, bAsaTThibhAgaM ca
sattaTThidhA chettA paNapannaM cuNiyA bhAge rAiMdiyagge NaM Ahie tti vejaa| kha.
pa. tA se NaM kevaie muhuttaggeNaM ? Ahie tti vaejjA ? u. tA
tevaNNamuhuttasahasassAI, satta ya auNApanne muhuttasae, sattAvavaNNaM
bAsaTThibhAge muhuttassa, bAsaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA paNapaNNaM
cuNiyA bhAgA muhutte NaM, Ahie tti vejaa| ga. pa. tA kevaiye NaM te jagapatte
rAiMdiyagge NaM? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA aTThatIsaM rAiMdiyAiM dasa ya muhuttA,
cattAri ya bAsaTThibhAge muhuttassa bAsaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA
duvAlasa cuNiyA bhAge rAiMdiyagge NaM, Ahie tti vejjaa| gha. pa. tA se NaM
kevaie muhuttagge NaM ? Ahie tti vejaa| u. tA ekkArasa paNNAse muhuttasae,
cattAri ya bAsaTThibhAge muhuttassa, bAsaTTebhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA
duvAlasa cuNNyiA bhAge muhuttagge NaM, Ahie tti vejaa| Ga pa. tA kevaiyaM juge
rAiMdiyaggeNaM ? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA aTThArasa tIse rAiMdiyasae rAiMdiyagge
NaM Ahie tti vejjaa|

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Prabhrit  **C. Q. How many Muhurtas are there in a year?** **A. There
are 44,000 Muhurtas, 900 Muhurtas, and some Muhurtas, in a year.**  **The
completion of the Parambha-Pajjavasa period of five years** **147**  **C. Q. How
many 60th parts of a Muhurta are there in a year?** **A. There are 34,000, 28,
and 60th parts of a Muhurta in a year.**  **74. 1. K. Q. How many solar and
lunar years are there in a Samadi Samapajjavasi?** **A. There are 60 solar
months and 62 lunar months.**  **These are half of 12 Khuttakadas, 12 times 30
solar years, and 31 lunar years.** **Therefore, there are 30 solar years and 31
lunar years in a Samadi Samapajjavasi.**  **Kh. Q. How many solar, Udu, lunar,
and Nakshatra years are there in a Samadi Samapajjavasi?** **A. There are 60
solar months, 61 Udu months, 62 lunar months, and 70 Nakshatra months.**
**These are half of 12 Khuttakadas, 12 times 60 solar years, 61 Udu years, 62
lunar years, and 70 Nakshatra years.** **Therefore, there are 60 solar years, 61
Udu years, 62 lunar years, and 70 Nakshatra years in a Samadi Samapajjavasi.**
**G. Q. How many Abhivaddiya solar, Udu, lunar, and Nakshatra years are there in
a Samadi Samapajjavasi?** **A. There are 77 months, 7 days, 11 Muhurtas, 20 60th
parts of a Muhurta in an Abhivaddiya month, 60 solar months, 61 Udu months, 62
lunar months, and 70 Nakshatra months.**  **These are half of 56 Khuttakadas, 12
times 744 Abhivaddiya years, 780 solar years, 791 Udu years, 876 lunar years,
and 1088 Nakshatra years.** **Therefore, there are 744 Abhivaddiya years, 780
solar years, 791 Udu years, 876 lunar years, and 1088 Nakshatra years in a
Samadi Samapajjavasi.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM prAbhRta ] [ ca. pa. tA se NaM kevaie muhuttagge NaM ? Ahie tti
vaejjA  /  u. tA cauppaNNaM muhuttasahassAiM Nava ya muhuttasayAiM muhuttagge
NaM, Ahie tti vaejjA  /  paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM pAraMbha-pajjavasANakAlassa
samattaparUvaNaM 147 cha. pa. tA se NaM kevaie bAsaTTibhAgaM muhuttagge NaM ?
Ahie tti vaejjA  /  u. tA cottIsaM sayasahassAiM aTThAvIsaM ca bAsaTThi
bhAgamuhuttasae bAsaTTibhAga muhuttagge NaM, Ahie ti vajjA  /  74. 1. ka. pa. tA
kayA NaM ee Adicca-caMda saMvaccharA samAdIyA samapajjavasiyA ? Ahie tti vaejjA
? u. tA saTThi ee AdiccamAsA bAsaTThi ee ya caMdamAsA  /  esa NaM addhA
chakhuttakaDA duvAlasabhayitA tIsaM ee AdiccasaMvaccharA, ekkItIsaM ee
caMdasaMvaccharA, tayA NaM ee Adicca- caMda- saMvaccharA samAdIyA
samapajjavasiyA Ahie tti vaejjA  /  kha. pa. tA kayA NaM ee Adicca uDu-caMda-
NakkhattA-saMvaccharA samAdIyA samapajjavasiyA ? Ahie ti vaejjA ? u. tA saTThi
ee AdiccA mAsA egaTThi ee uDumAsA, bAsaTThi ee caMdamAsA, sattaTThi ee
NakkhattamAsA  /  esa NaM addhA duvAlasa khuttakaDA duvAlasabhayitA saTThi ee
AicyA saMvaccharA, egaTThi ee uDDu saMvaccharA, bAsaTThi ee caMdA saMvaccharA,
sattaTThi ee NakkhattA saMvaccharA  /  tayA NaM ee Aicya-uDDu-caMda - NakkhattA
saMvaccharA samAdIyA samapajjavasiyA ? Ahie tti vaejjA ? - ga. pa. tA kayA NaM
ee abhivaDDhiya Aicca uDu-caMda - NakkhattA-saMvaccharA samAdIyA.
samapajjavasiyA ? Ahie tti vaejjA ? u. tA sattAvaNNaM mAsA, satta ya ahorattA,
ekkArasa ya muhuttA, tevIsaM bAsaTThi bhAgAmuhuttassa ee abhivaDDhiyA mAsA,
saTThi ee AicyAmAsA, egaTThi ee uDumAsA bAsaTThi ee caMdamAsA sattaTThi ee
Nakkhata mAsA  /  esa NaM addhA chappaNNa-sayakhuttakaDA duvAlasa bhayitA satta
sayA coyAlA, ee NaM abhivaDDhiyA saMvaccharA, sattasayA asIyA, ee NaM AicyA
saMvaccharA, sattasayA teNauyA, ee NaM uDu saMvaccharA, aTThasattA challuttarA,
ee NaM caMdA saMvaccharA  /  ekasatarI aTThasayA ee NaM NakkhatA saMvaccharA  /
tayA NaM ee abhivaDDhiya - Aicca uDu - caMda-NakkhattA saMvaccharA samAdIyA

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **148]** **1.**  "What is the duration of a
*rainditya*?" **2.**  "It is said that in a lunar year, three *chaupaṇṇa*
*rainditya*s, twelve and sixty-four parts of a *rainditya*, constitute a
*rainditya*." **3.**  "It is said that in a lunar year, three *chaupaṇṇa*
*rainditya*s, five *muhūrta*s, fifty and sixty-four parts of a *muhūrta*,
constitute a *rainditya*."  **75.** **[Sūryaprajñaptisūtra]** **1.**  "There are
six seasons, namely: 1. *Pāusa*, 2. *Varisārātta*, 3. *Sarata*, 4. *Hemānta*, 5.
*Vasānta*, 6. *Gimha*." **2.**  "All these six seasons, two months each, are
calculated by the *chaupaṇṇa* *chaupaṇṇa* *āyāṇa* and are said to be sixty-one
*rainditya*s in a *rainditya*."  **3.**  "There are six *avam* *aitiratta*s,
namely: 1. *Taiya* *pavva*, 2. *Sattama* *pavva*, 3. *Ekkārasa* *pavva*, 4.
*Paṇṇarasa* *pavva*, 5. *Egūṇavīsai* *pavva*, 6. *Tevisai* *pavva*."  **4.**
"There are six *atiratta*s, namely: 1. *Chauttha* *pavva*, 2. *Aṭṭhama* *pavva*,
3. *Bārasa* *pavva*, 4. *Solasama* *pavva*, 5. *Vīsai* *pavva*, 6. *Chauvīsai*
*pavva*."  **5.**  **Gāhā** "Six are *aitiratta*s, they are the days of humans.
Six are *avam* *aitiratta*s, they are the days of the moon."  **76.** **1.**
"There are five *vāsikki*s and five *hemānta* *auṭṭi*s." **2.**  "In a period of
five years, on which *nakkhatta* does the first *vāsikki* *auṭṭi* occur?" **3.**
"It occurs on the *nakkhatta* *Abhijinā* *Abhijinā*." **4.**  "On which
*nakkhatta* does the sun occur at that time?" **5.**  "It occurs on the
*nakkhatta* *Pūsa*, nineteen *muhūrta*s and forty-two parts of a *muhūrta*, two
parts of a *muhūrta*, seven parts of a *cheṭṭā*, thirty-three parts of a
*cuṇṇiya*." **6.**  "In a period of five years, on which *nakkhatta* does the
second *vāsikki* *auṭṭi* occur?"  **Notes:**  * **rainditya:** A unit of time
used in Jain cosmology. * **chaupaṇṇa:** A unit of time equal to 72 *muhūrta*s.
* **muhūrta:** A unit of time equal to 48 minutes. * **āyāṇa:** A unit of time
equal to 30 days. * **avam:** A lunar day that is shorter than a solar day. *
**aitiratta:** A lunar day that is longer than a solar day. * **pavva:** A lunar
day. * **vāsikki:** A type of lunar eclipse. * **auṭṭi:** A type of lunar
eclipse. * **nakkhatta:** A lunar mansion. * **cheṭṭā:** A unit of time equal to
1/12 of a *muhūrta*. * **cuṇṇiya:** A unit of time equal to 1/144 of a
*muhūrta*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 148] samapajjavasiyA, Ahie tti vaejjA ? 2. tANayaTTayAe NaM caMde saMvacchare
tiNNi cauppaNNe rAiMdiyasae, duvAlasa ya bAsaTTibhAge rAiMdiyassa, Ahie tti
vaejjA  /  3. tA ahAtacce NaM caMde saMvacchare tiNNi cauppaNNe rAiMdiyasae,
paMca ya muhutte paNNAsaM ca bAsaTThi bhAge muhuttassa, Ahie tti vaejjA  /
uDUNaM NAmAI kAlapyamANaM ca 75. [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra tattha khalu ime cha uDU
paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. pAuse, 2. varisAratte, 3. sarate, 4. hemaMte, 5. vasaMte,
6. gimhe  /  tA savve vi NaM ee caMda-uDU duve duve mAsA ticauppaNNasaeNaM
ticauppaNNasaeNaM AyANeNaM gaNijjamANA sAiregAI egUNasaTThi egUNasaTThi
rAiMdiyAI rAIdiyaggeNaM' Ahie tti vaejjA  /  avama- airittarattANaM saMkhA ta
heuM ca tattha khalu ime cha omarattA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. taie pavve, 2.
sattame pavve, 3. ekkArasame pavve, 4. paNNarasame pavve, 5. egUNavIsaime pavve,
6. tevIsaime pavve  /  tattha khalu ime cha atirattA paNNattA, , taMjahA - 1.
cautthe pavve, 2. aTTame pavve, 3. bArasame pavve, 4. solasame pavve, 5. vIsaime
pavve, 6. cauvIsaime pavve  /  gAhA chacceva ya airattA, AicyAo havaMti mANAI  /
chacceva omarattA, caMdAhiM havaMti mANAI  //  1  //  vAsikkiyAsu AuTTiyAsu
caMdeNa sUreNa ya Nakkhatta jogakAlo 76. tattha khalu imAo paMcavAsikIo, paMca
hemaMtIo AuTTIo paNNattAo  /  1 ka. pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM
paMDhama vAsikkiM AuTTiM caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? tA abhiiNA abhiissa
paDhamasaeNaM  /  kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u.
tA pUseNaM, pUsassa egUNavIsaM muhuttA tetAlIsaM ca bAvaTTibhAgA muhuttassa
bAvadvibhAgaM ca sattadvidhA chettA tettIsaM cuNNiyA bhAgA sesA  /  2. ka. pa.
tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM doccaM vAsikkiM AuTTiM caMde keNaM
NakkhatteNaM joei ? 1. ThANaM, 6, suM. 526 2. caMdassa NaM saMvaccharassa
egamege u U egUNasaTThi rAiMdiyAI rAiMdiyaggeNaM paNNattA  /  3. ka. parvaNi
pksse| yahAM parva-pakSa kA paryAyavAcI hai| kha. ThANaM 6, su. 524

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Prabhrit  **1.** **Q.** In what constellation does the moon rise at
the beginning of the first Hemanti-Avatti of the five-year cycle? **A.** In
Hathi, the fifth muhurta of Hathi, with fifty bavatthi-bhagas of the muhurta,
and seventy-seven chunniya-bhagas remaining after dividing the bavatthi-bhagas
by seventy-two. **Q.** In what constellation does the sun rise at that time?
**A.** In Uttara Ashadha, at the end of Uttara Ashadha.  **2.** **Q.** In what
constellation does the moon rise at the beginning of the second Hemanti-Avatti
of the five-year cycle? **A.** In Satabhisha, the second muhurta of Satabhisha,
with twenty-eight bavatthi-bhagas of the muhurta, and forty-three chunniya-
bhagas remaining after dividing the bavatthi-bhagas by seventy-two. **Q.** In
what constellation does the sun rise at that time? **A.** In Uttara Ashadha, at
the end of Uttara Ashadha.  **3.** **Q.** In what constellation does the moon
rise at the beginning of the first Vasikkin of the five-year cycle? **A.** In
Visakha, the thirteenth muhurta of Visakha, with forty-four bavatthi-bhagas of
the muhurta, and forty-four chunniya-bhagas remaining after dividing the
bavatthi-bhagas by seventy-two. **Q.** In what constellation does the sun rise
at that time? **A.** In Pushya, at the beginning of Pushya.  **4.** **Q.** In
what constellation does the moon rise at the beginning of the fourth Vasikkin of
the five-year cycle? **A.** In Revati, the nineteenth muhurta of Revati, with
thirty-two bavatthi-bhagas of the muhurta, and thirty-six chunniya-bhagas
remaining after dividing the bavatthi-bhagas by seventy-two. **Q.** In what
constellation does the sun rise at that time? **A.** In Pushya, at the beginning
of Pushya.  **5.** **Q.** In what constellation does the moon rise at the
beginning of the fifth Vasikkin of the five-year cycle? **A.** In Purva
Phalguni, the twelfth muhurta of Purva Phalguni, with forty-seven bavatthi-
bhagas of the muhurta, and thirteen chunniya-bhagas remaining after dividing the
bavatthi-bhagas by seventy-two. **Q.** In what constellation does the sun rise
at that time? **A.** In Pushya, at the beginning of Pushya.  **6.** **Q.** In
what constellation does the moon rise at the beginning of the first Avatti of
the five-year cycle? **A.** In Santhana, the eleventh muhurta of Santhana, with
thirty-nine bavatthi-bhagas of the muhurta, and seventy-seven chunniya-bhagas
remaining after dividing the bavatthi-bhagas by seventy-two. **Q.** In what
constellation does the sun rise at that time? **A.** In Pushya, at the beginning
of Pushya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM prAbhRta ] [ 149 u. tA saMThANAhiM, saMThANANaM ekkArasa muhutte,
egUNatAlIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa, bAvadvibhArga _ca sattaTThidhA chettA,
vepaNNaM cuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM
NakkhatteNaM joei ? _ u. tA pUse NaM, pUsassa NaM taM ceva, jaM pddhmaae| 3. ka.
pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM taccaM vAsikkiM AuTTi caMde keNaM
NakkhatteNaM joei? u. tA visAhAhiM, visAhA NaM terasa muhuttA, cauppaNNaM ca
bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattadvidhA chettA, cattAlIsaM
cuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ?
_ u. tA pUse NaM, pUsassa NaM taM ceva, jaM pddhmaae| 4. ka. pa. tA eesi NaM
paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM ca cautthaM vAsikkiM AuTTi caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM
joei? u. tArevaIhiM, revaINaM pagavIsaM muhuttA battIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA
muhuttassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattadvidhA chettA, chattIsaM cuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa|
kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA pUse NaM,
pUsassa NaM taM ceva, jaM pddhmaae| 5. ka. pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM
saMvaccharANaM ca paMcama vAsikkiM AuTTi caMde keNaM Nakkhatte NaM joei? u. tA
puvvAhiM, phagguNIhiM puvvAphagguNINaM bArasamuhuttA sattAlIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA
muhuttassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA terasa cUNiyA bhAgA sesaa|
kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA pUseNaM,
pUsassa taM NaM ceva, jaM pddhmaae| hemaMtiyAsu AvaTTiyAsu caMdeNa sUreNa ya
NakkhattajogakAlo 77.1. pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM paDhamaM
hemaMti-AuTTi caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA hattheNaM, hatthassa NaM
paMcamuhuttA paNNAsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM ca
sattaTThidhA chettA sazi cuNiyA bhAgA kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM
NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA uttarAhiM AsADhAhiM uttarANaM AsADhANaM crimsme| 2.
ka. pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM doccaM hemaMti AuTTi caMde keNaM
NakkhateNaM joei ? u. tA satabhisayAhiM, satabhisayANaM dunni muhuttA aTThAvIsaM
ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhutassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThiyA chetA chetAlIsaM ca
cuNiyA bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhateNaM joei ? u.
tA uttarAhiM AsAThAhiM uttarANaM AsAThANaM crimsme|

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 150] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] 3. a. P. What is the 5th Hemanti Utt (lunar
eclipse) in a cycle of 5 years, on which Nakshatra (constellation) does the Moon
fall? U. On Pushya, 19 Muhurtas (time units) of Pushya, 43 Bavatthi Bhaga (sub-
units of Muhurta), 72 Chettha (sub-units of Bavatthi Bhaga), 33 Chunniya Bhaga
(sub-units of Chettha) remaining. b. P. On which Nakshatra does the Sun fall at
that time? U. On Uttara Ashadha, at the end of Uttara Ashadha. 4. a. P. What is
the 4th Hemanti Utt in a cycle of 5 years, on which Nakshatra does the Moon
fall? U. On Mula, 6 Muhurtas of Mula, 48 Bavatthi Bhaga, 70 Chettha, 20 Chunniya
Bhaga remaining. b. P. On which Nakshatra does the Sun fall at that time? U. On
Uttara Ashadha, at the end of Uttara Ashadha. 5. a. P. What is the 5th Hemanti
Utt in a cycle of 5 years, on which Nakshatra does the Moon fall? U. On
Krittika, 18 Muhurtas of Krittika, 36 Bavatthi Bhaga, 70 Chettha, 0 Chunniya
Bhaga remaining. b. P. On which Nakshatra does the Sun fall at that time? U. On
Uttara Ashadha, at the end of Uttara Ashadha. The Moon's conjunction with the
Sun, and the conjunction's duration, 78. There are 10 types of conjunctions, as
follows: 1. Vasbhanu Joge, 2. Venuyanu Joge, 3. Manche Joge, 4. Manchai Manche
Joge, 5. Chhatte Joge, 6. Chhattai Chhatte Joge, 7. Jaanaddhe Joge, 8.
Ghansammadde Joge, 9. Pinie Joge, 10. Mandukaputte Joge. 1. P. What is the
Chhattai Chhatte Joge (conjunction) of the Moon in a cycle of 5 years, in which
country does it occur? U. In Jambudvipa, in the Paiin-Padini Ayyaya, Udin-Dahin
Ayyaya, the Jeeva Mandala (sphere of life) is divided into 24 parts, in the
southern-eastern quadrant, 27 parts are to be counted, 28 parts are to be
counted, 18 parts are to be counted, in these 3 parts, 2 Kala (sub-units of
parts), the southern-eastern quadrant is incomplete, here the Chhattai Chhatte
Joge of the Moon occurs. The Moon rises, is in the middle of the Nakshatra, and
sets. 2. P. On which Nakshatra does the Moon fall at that time? U. On Chitra, at
the end of Chitra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 3. ka. pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM
taccaM hemaMti AuTTi caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei? u. tA pUse NaM, pusassa
egUNavIsaM muhuttA tetAlIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM ca
sattadvidhA chettA tettIsaM ca cuNNiyA bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM
sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? - u. tA uttarAhiM, AsADhAhiM uttarANaM AsADhANaM
crimsme| 4. ka. pa. eesi NaM paMcaNhaM saMvaccharANaM cautthiM hemaMti AuTTiM
caMde keNaM Nakkhatte joei ? u. tA mUleNaM, mUlassa cha muhuttA, aTThAvannaM ca
bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa, bAvaTThibhAgaM ca sattaTThidhA chettA vIsaM cuNNiyA
bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca NaM sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA
uttarAhiM AsADhAhiM uttarANaM AsADhANaM crimsme| 5. ka. pa. eesi NaM paMcaNhaM
saMvaccharANaM paMcamaM hemaMti AuTTi caMde keNaM NakkhateNaM joei ? u. tA
kattiyAhi , kattiyANaM aTThArasa muhuttA, chattIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa
bAvaTThibhAgaM sattaTTidhA chettA ca cuNiyA bhAgA sesaa| kha. pa. taM samayaM ca
sUre keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA uttarAhiM AsADhAhiM uttarANaM AsADhANaM
crimsme| jogANaM caMdeNa saddhiM joga-parUvaNaM 78. tattha khalu ime dasavihe
jAe paNNatte, taM jahA 1. vasabhANu joe, 2. veNuyANu joe 3. maMce joe, 4.
maMcAimaMce joe 5. chatte joe, 6. chattAi chatte joe 7. jaaNaddhe joe, 8.
ghaNasaMmadde joe 9. pINie joe, 10. maMDukappute joe 1.pa. tA eesi NaM paMcaNhaM
saMvaccharANaM chattAicchattaM joyaM caMde kaMsi desaMsi joei ? u. tA
jaMbuddIvassa dIvassa, pAINa-paDiNIAyayAe,udINa-dAhiNAyayAe jIvAe maMDalaM
cauvvIseNaM saeNaM chittA dAhiNapurathimillasi caubhAgamaMDalaMsi sattAvIsaM
bhAge uvAiNAvettA aTThAvIsaibhAgaM vIsadhA chettA aTThArasabhAge uvAiNAvettA
tihiM bhAgehiM dohiM kalAhiM dAhiNa-purathimillaM caubbhAgamaMDalaM asaMpatte
ettha NaM se caMde chattAticchattaM joyaM joei| uppiM caMdo, majjhe Nakkhatte,
heTThA aaicce| 2.pa. taM samayaM ca NaM caMde keNaM NakkhatteNaM joei ? u. tA
cittAhiM crmsme|

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirteenth Praabhrut  **B.** **79. Q.** How is the moon's increase and
decrease? Please explain. **A.**  It is 75 muhurtas and 30 bavatthi bhagas of a
muhurta.  **Q.** How is the moon's increase and decrease in the dark fortnight?
**A.** In the dark fortnight, the moon increases for 412 muhurtas and 36
bavatthi bhagas of a muhurta. For example, in the first day, the first part
increases, in the second day, the second part increases, and so on, until the
15th day, the 15th part increases. At the end, the moon becomes full. In the
remaining time, the moon becomes both full and waning. This is called Amavasya.
Similarly, in the first fortnight, on Amavasya, the dark fortnight begins. In
the dark fortnight, the moon increases for 412 muhurtas and 36 bavatthi bhagas
of a muhurta. For example, in the first day, the first part increases, in the
second day, the second part increases, and so on, until the 15th day, the 15th
part increases. At the end, the moon becomes waning. In the remaining time, the
moon becomes both full and waning. This is called Purnima.  Similarly, in the
second fortnight, it is Purnima.  **80. Q.** How many Purnimas and Amavasyas are
there in one Yuga? **A.** There are 48 Purnimas and 48 Amavasyas. There are 48
Kasina ragas, 48 Kasina viragas, 24 fortnights, and 24 Kasina raga-viraga
fortnights. In 5 years, there are 24 such fortnights.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM prAbhRta kha. caMdamasovaDDho'vaDDhI 79. pa. tA kahaM te caMdamaso
vaDDo'vaDDI ? Ahie tti vaejjA? u. tA aTTha paMcAtIse muhuttasate tIsaM ca
bAvaTThibhAge muhuttss| ka. tA dosiNApakkhAo aMdhagArapakkhaM ayamANe caMde
cattAri bAyAlasae, chattAlIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAge muhuttassa jAiM caMde rajai,
taMjahA - paDhamAe paDhama bhAgaM bitiyAe bitiyaM bhAgaM jAva paNNarasIe
paNNarasamaM bhAga, caramasamae caMde ratte bhavai, avasese samae caMde ratte ya
viratte ya bhavai, iyaNNaM amAvAsA, etthaM NaM paDhame pavve amAvAse tA
aMdhagArapakkho, tA NaM dosiNApakkhaM ayamANe caMde cattAre bAyAle muhuttasae
chattAlIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAgA muhuttassa jAiM caMde virajai, taMjahA - paDhamAe
paDhamaM bhAgaM bitiyAe bitiyaM bhAgaM jAva paNNarasIe paNNarasamaM bhAgaM,
carimasamae caMde viratte bhavai, avasesasamae ratte ya, viratte ya bhavai,
iyaNNaM puNNamAsiNI, etthaM NaM docce pavve punnnnimaasinnii| egayuge
puNNimAsiNIo amAvAso 80. pa. tattha khalu imAo bAvaDhei puNNimAsiNIo bAvaTuiM
amAvAsAo paNNattao, bAvaThiM ete kasiNA rAgA, bAvaThiM ete kasiNA virAgA, ete
cauvvIse pavvasae, ete cauvvIse kasiNa-rAga-virAgasae, jAvaiyANaM paMcaNhaM
saMvaccharANaM samayA ege NaM cauvvIseNaM samayasaeguNagA,

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[152] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ] It is said that there are countless days,
passions, and dispassions in this world.  On the new moon, there are 480
muhurtas and 36 parts of a muhurta.  On the full moon, there are 480 muhurtas
and 36 parts of a muhurta.  On the new moon, there are 85 muhurtas and 30 parts
of a muhurta.  On the full moon, there are 85 muhurtas and 30 parts of a
muhurta.  This is the case in a lunar month. This is the case in all the yugas.
The moon travels 81 mandalas in half a lunar month.  Q. How many mandalas does
the moon travel in half a lunar month?  A. The moon travels 14 and 1/24th
mandalas in half a lunar month.  Q. How many mandalas does the moon travel in
half a solar month?  A. The moon travels 16 mandalas in half a solar month.  The
moon travels 16 mandalas, and there are two exceptional movements of the moon.
Q. What are the two exceptional movements of the moon?  A. The two exceptional
movements of the moon are: 1. When the moon is leaving the new moon, 2. When the
moon is entering the full moon.  These are the two exceptional movements of the
moon.  In the first lunar month, When the moon enters the southern part of the
sky in the first lunar month, it travels 7 and 1/2 mandalas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra evaiyA parittA asaMkhejA desa-rAga-virAga sayA
bhavaMtItimakkhAyA, tA amAvAsAo NaM puNNimAsiNI cattAri bAyAle muhuttasae
chattAlIsaM bAvaTThibhAge muhuttassa Ahie tti vaejjA, tA puNNimAsiNIo NaM
amAvAsA cattAri bAyAle muhuttasae chattAlIsaM bAvaTThibhAge muhuttassa Ahie tti
vaejjA, tA amAvAsAo NaM amAvAsA aTThapaMcAsIe muhuttasae tIsaM ca bAvaTThibhAge
muhuttassa Ahie tti vaejjA, tA puNNimAsiNIo NaM puNNimAsiNI aTuM paMcAsIe
muhuttasae tIsaM bAvaTThibhAge muhuttassa Ahie tti vaejA, esa NaM evaie caMde
mAse, esa NaM evaie sagale juge| caMdAicca addhamAse caMdAiccANaM maMDalacAraM
81. ka. pa. tA caMdeNa addhamAseNaM caMde kai maMDalAiM carai ? _u. tA cauddasa
caubbhAgamaMDalAiM carai egaM ca cauvIsasayabhAgaM mNddlss| kha. pa. tA AicceNaM
addhamAseNaM caMde kai maMDalAI carai ? u. tA solasa maMDalAiM carai,
solasamaMDalacArI tayA avarAI khalu duve aTThakAI jAiM caMde keNaDa asAmaNNagAI
sayameva pavidvittA pavidvittA cAraM crdd| ga. pa. kayarAiM khalu duve aTThagAI
jAI caMde keNai asAmaNNagAI sayameva pavidvittA paviTThittA cAraM carai ? u.
imAI khalu te duve aTThagAI jAiM caMde keNai asAmaeNagAI sayameva paviTThittA
paviTThittA cAraM carai taM jahA - 1. nikkhamamANe ceva amAvAsaMte NaM, 2.
pavisamANe ceva puNNimAsiMteNaM, eyAiM khalu duve aTThagAiM jAiM caMde keNaI
asAmaNNagAiM sayameva paviTThittA paviTThittA cAraM cri| paDhame caMdAyaNe tA
paDhamA paDhamAyaNagae caMde dAhiNagae bhAgAe pavisamANe satta addhamaMDalAiM
jAiM caMde

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirteenth Prabhruta  [153]  When the Moon enters the right side, it moves
through four (quarters).  P. Which are those four quarters through which the
Moon moves when it enters the right side in seven half-mandalas?  U. These are
the seven half-mandalas through which the Moon moves when it enters the right
side:  1. Second half-mandala 2. Fourth half-mandala 3. Sixth half-mandala 4.
Eighth half-mandala 5. Tenth half-mandala 6. Twelfth half-mandala 7. Fourteenth
half-mandala  These are the seven half-mandalas through which the Moon moves
when it enters the right side.  When the Moon enters the north side in the first
Ayan, it moves through six half-mandalas and thirteen and seventy-six parts of a
half-mandala.  When the Moon enters the north side, it moves through four
(quarters).  P. Which are those four quarters through which the Moon moves when
it enters the north side in six half-mandalas and thirteen and seventy-six parts
of a half-mandala?  U. These are the six half-mandalas and thirteen and seventy-
six parts of a half-mandala through which the Moon moves when it enters the
north side:  1. Third half-mandala 2. Fifth half-mandala 3. Seventh half-mandala
4. Ninth half-mandala 5. Eleventh half-mandala 6. Thirteenth half-mandala and
thirteen and seventy-six parts of the fifteenth mandala.  These are the six
half-mandalas and thirteen and seventy-six parts of a half-mandala through which
the Moon moves when it enters the north side.  Thus, the first Chandrayan is
completed.  In the second Chandrayan...  Neither in the half-month of the
Nakshatra nor in the half-month of the Moon,  Neither in the half-month of the
Moon nor in the half-month of the Nakshatra,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM prAbhRta ] [153 dAhiNAe bhAgAe pavisamANe cAraM carai, pa. kayarAiM
khalu tAI satta addhamaMDalAiM jAiM caMde dAhiNAe bhAgAe pavisamANe, cAraM carai
? u. imAiM khalu tAI satta addhamaMDalAiM jAiM caMde dAhiNAe bhAgAe pavisamANe
cAraM carai, taM jahA - 1. biie addhamaMDale, 2. cautthe addhamaMDale, 3. chaThe
addhamaMDale, 4. aTThame addhamaMDale, 5. dasage addhamaMDale, 6. bArasame
addhamaMDale 7. caudasame addhmNddle| eyAiM khalu tAI satta addhamaMDalAiM jAiM
caMde dAhiNAe bhAgAe pavisamANe cAraM carai, sA paDhamAyaNagae caMde uttarAe
bhAgAe pavisamANe cha addhamaMDalAiM terasa ya sattaTThibhAgAiM addhamaMDalasya
jAI caMde uttarAe bhAgAe pavisamANe cAraM caraI, pa. kayarAiM khalu tAI cha
addhamaMDalAiM terasa ya sattaTThibhAgAiM addhamaMDalasya jAiM caMde uttarAe
bhAgAe pavisamANe cAraM carai? u. imAiM khalu tAI cha addhamaMDalAiM terasa ya
sattaTTibhAgAiM addhamaMDalassa jAiM caMde uttarAe bhAgAe pavisamANe cAraM
carai, taMjahA - 1. taIe addhamaMDale, 2. paMcame addhamaMDale, 3. sattame
addhamaMDale, 4. navame addhamaMDale, 5. ekArasame addhamaMDale, 6. terasame
addhamaMDale paNNarasamaMDalassa terasa sattaTTibhAgAiM, etAI khalu tAI cha
addhamaMDalAiM terasa ya sattaTTibhAgAiM addhamaMDalassa jAiM caMde uttarAe
bhAgAe pavisamANe cAraM carai, eyAvayA ca paDhame caMdAyaNe samatte bhavai docce
caMdAyaNe .. tANakkhatte addhamAse no caMde addhamAse, caMde addhamAse no
Nakkhatte addhamAse,

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[154] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] Q. What is the path of the moon in half a lunar
month? A. It travels half a circle, 77 parts of half a circle, 31 parts and 9
parts. When the moon exits from the last part of the Uttarayana, it travels 7
parts and 4 parts of the other's circle, 7 parts and 13 parts of its own circle.
When the moon exits from the last part of the Dakshinayana, it travels 6 parts
and 4 parts of the other's circle, 6 parts and 13 parts of its own circle. The
remaining 2 parts and 13 parts of the moon travel in an unusual way, self-
illuminated. Q. How do these 2 parts and 13 parts of the moon travel in an
unusual way, self-illuminated? A. These 2 parts and 13 parts of the moon travel
in an unusual way, self-illuminated, in two ways: 1. Within the entire circle,
2. Outside the entire circle. These 2 parts and 13 parts of the moon travel in
an unusual way, self-illuminated, in these two ways. This completes the
explanation of the Uttarayana and Dakshinayana of the moon. In a lunar month,
there is no solar month, In a solar month, there is no lunar month. Q. What is
the path of the moon in half a lunar month? A. It travels two half circles, 8
parts and 77 parts of half a circle, 77 parts and 31 parts and 18 parts. When
the moon enters from the last part of the Dakshinayana, it travels 11 parts and
77 parts of its own circle, and 13 parts and 77 parts of the other's circle.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra pa. tANakkhattAo addhamAsAo te caMde caMdeNaM
addhamAseNaM kimadhiyaM carai? u. tA egaM addhamaMDalaM carai,cattAri ya
sattaTTibhAgAiM addhamaMDalassa sattaTTibhAgaM egatIsAe chettA Nava bhAgAI, tA
doccAyaNgae caMde puracchimAe bhAgAe NikkhamamANe satta cauppaNAI jAiM caMde
parassa cinnaM paDicarai,satta terasagAI jAiM caMde appaNA ciNNaM carai, tA
doccAyaNagae caMde paccatthimAe bhAgAe NikkhamamANe cha cauppaNNaiM jAiM caMde
parassa ciNNaM paDicarai,cha terasagAiM caMde appaNo ciNNaM paDicarai, avaragAiM
khalu duve terasagAI jAiM caMde keNai asAmannagAI sayameva paviTTittA paviTTittA
cAraM carai, pa. kayarAiM khalu tAI duve terasagAI jAiM caMde keNai
asAmaNNagayAI sayameva paviTTitA paviTTitA cAraM carai? u. imAiM khalu tAI duve
terasagAI jAiM caMde ke gai asAmaNNagayAiM sayameva paviTTitA paviTTitA cAraM
carai, 1. savvababhaMtare ceva maMDale, 2. savvabAhire ceva maMDale, eyANi khalu
tANi duve terasagAI jAiM caMde keNai asAmaNNagayAiM sayameva paviTTitA
paviTTittA cAraM tarai, eyavayA docce caMdAyaNe samatte bhvi| tacce caMdAyaNe
tANakkhate mAse no caMde mAse, caMde mAse no Nakkhate mAse, pa. tANakkhattAe
mAsAe caMde caMdeNa mAseNaM kimadhiya carai? u. tA do addhamaMDalAiM carai,aTTa
ya sattaTTi bhAgAiM addhamaMDalassa,sattaTTibhAgaM ca ekatIsadhA chettA aTTArasa
bhAgAI, tA taccAyaNagae caMde paccatthimAe bhAgAe pavisamANe bAhirANaMtarassa
paccathimillassa addhamaMDalassa igayAlIsaM sattaTTiabhAgAiM jAiM caMde
appaNo,parassa ya cinnapaDicarai, terasa sattaTTibhAgAiM jAiM caMde parassa
ciNNaM paDicarai,

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Thirteenth Prabhrta]  The moon traverses thirteen and sixty-seven parts of
its own and the other's course. This makes up the complete half-circle of the
outer (eastern) side. When the moon enters the eastern part, it traverses forty-
eight and sixty-seven parts of the outer eastern half-circle, thirteen and
sixty-seven parts of the other's course, and thirteen and sixty-seven parts of
its own course. This completes the outer eastern half-circle.   When the moon
enters the western part, it traverses eighty-seven and sixty-seven parts of the
fourth western half-circle, and subtracting sixty-seven parts, it traverses
eighteen parts of its own and the other's course. This completes the fourth
western half-circle.  Thus, the moon in one month traverses thirteen and forty-
four parts of the other's course, thirteen and thirteen parts of its own course,
two and forty-one parts, eighty-seven and sixty-seven parts, subtracting sixty-
seven parts, it traverses eighteen parts of its own and the other's course. The
remaining two and thirteen parts, which the moon traverses by itself without any
association, constitute its wandering course.  This is the moon, the moon, the
auspicious, the moon, the moon.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM prAbhRta ] terasa sattaTThibhAgAiM caMde appaNo parassa ca ciNNaM
paDicarai, eyAkyA bAhirANatare paccathimille addhamaMDale samatte bhvi|
taccAyaNagae caMde purathimAe bhAgAe pavisamANe bAhira taccassa purathimillassa
addhamaMDalassa igayAlIsaM sattaTTibhAgAiM jAiM caMde appaNo parassa ya ciNNaM
paDicarai, terasa sattaTTibhAgAiM jAiM caMde parassa ciNNaM paDiyarai, terasa
sattaTTibhAgAiM jAiM caMde appaNo parassa ya ciNNaM paDiyarai, eyAvayA
bAhiratacce purathimille addhamaMDale samatte bhavai, tA taccAyaNagae caMde
paccatthimAe bhAgAe pavisamANe bAhira cautthassa paccatyimillassa
addhamaMDalassa aTaThasattaTTibhAgAiM,sattaTThibhAgaM ca ekkatIpadhA chetA
aTaThArasa bhAgAiM jAI caMde appaNo parassa ya ciNNaM paDiyarai, eyAvayA bAhira
cauttha paccatthimille addhamaMDale samatte bhavai, eMva khalu caMdeNa mAseNaM
caMde terasa cauppaNNagAI duve terasagAI jAI caMde parassa ciNNaM paDiyarai,
terasa terasaMgAI jAiM caMde appaNo ciNNAiM paDiyarai, duve igayAlIsagAI duve
terasagAI, aTaTha sattaTTibhAgAiM sattaTTibhAgaM ca ekkatIsadhA chettA
aTaThArasabhAgAiM jAiM caMde appaNo parassa ya ciNNaM paDiyarai,. avarAI khalu
duve terasagAI jAiM caMde keNai asAmannagAI sayameva paviTTittA paviTTitA cAraM
carai, icceso caMdamAso abhigamaNa-NikkhamaNa-vuDDi-NivvuDDi-aNavaTTiya-
saMThANasaMThiIviuvvaNagiDDipatte caMde deve caMde deve,Ahie tti vejjaa| ////

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourteenth Prabhruta  **The Many Causes of Darkness and Sin**  **A.**  1.
**Question:** What are the many causes of sin? **Answer:** The many causes of
sin are on the side of sin. 2. **Question:** How are the many causes of sin on
the side of sin? **Answer:** The many causes of sin are on the side of darkness.
3. **Question:** How are the many causes of sin on the side of darkness?
**Answer:** When the moon is waning, there are 48 muhutas and 64 parts of a
muhuta, and the moon is waning in those 64 parts. For example, the first part is
waning in the first part, the second part is waning in the second part, and so
on until the 15th part is waning in the 15th part. Thus, the many causes of sin
are on the side of darkness. 4. **Question:** How many are the many causes of
sin? **Answer:** They are countless.  **B.**  1. **Question:** What are the many
causes of darkness? **Answer:** The many causes of darkness are on the side of
darkness. 2. **Question:** How are the many causes of darkness on the side of
darkness? **Answer:** The many causes of darkness are on the side of sin. 3.
**Question:** How are the many causes of darkness on the side of sin?
**Answer:** When the moon is waning, there are 48 muhutas and 64 parts of a
muhuta, and the moon is waning in those 64 parts. For example, the first part is
waning in the first part, the second part is waning in the second part, and so
on until the 15th part is waning in the 15th part. Thus, the many causes of
darkness are on the side of sin. 4. **Question:** How many are the many causes
of darkness? **Answer:** They are countless.  **Note:** The meaning of Sutra 79
in the Surya Prajnapti Prabhruta 13 and Sutra 82 in the Surya Prajnapti
Prabhruta 14 is the same. The only difference is that Sutra 79 speaks of the
"decrease and increase of the moon," while Sutra 82 speaks of the "increase of
moonlight and darkness." However, the decrease and increase of the moon leads to
the increase of moonlight and darkness.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caudahavAM prAbhRta dosiNA aMdhayArassa ya bahuttakAraNaM 82. ka. 1. pa. tA
katA te dosiNA bahU AhiteMti vadejjA ? u. tA dosiNApakkhe NaM dosiNA bahU
Ahiteti vadejjA  /  2. pa. tA kahaM te dosiNApakkhe dosiNA bahU Ahiteti vadejjA
? u. tA aMdhakArapakkhAo NaM dosiNA bahU Ahiteti vadejjA  /  3. pa. tA kahaM te
aMdhakArapakkhAo NaM dosiNApakkakhe dosiNA bahU Ahiteti vadejjA ? u. tA
aMdhakArapakkhAoM NaM dosiNApakkhaM ayamANe caMde cattAri bAyAle muhuttasate
chattAlIsa ca bAvaTTibhAge muhuttassa jAI caMde virajjati, taMjahA paDhamAe
paDhamaM bhAgaM bidiyAe bidiyaM bhAgaM jAva paNNarasIe paNNarasaM bhAga  /  eMva
khalu aMdhakArapakkhAo NaM dosiNApakkakhe dosiNA bahU AhitAti vadejjA  /  4. pa.
tA kevatiyA NaM dosiNApakkhe dosiNA bahU AhitAti vadejjA ? u. tA parittA
asaMkhejjA bhaagaa| - kha. 1. pa. tA katA te aMdhakAre bahU Ahiteti vadejjA ? u.
tA aMdhakArapakkhe NaM aMdhakAre bahU Ahiteti vadejjA, 2. pa. tA kahaM te
aMdhakArapakkhe NaM aMdhakAre bahU Ahiteti vadejjA ? u. tA dosiNApakkhAo
aMdhakArapakkhe NaM aMdhakAre bahU Ahiteti vadejjA ? 3. pa. tA kahaM te
dosiNApakkhAo aMdhakArapakkheNaM aMdhakAre bahU Ahiteti vadejjA ? u. tA
dosiNApakkhAo NaM aMdhakArapakkhaM ayamANe caMde cattAri bAyAle muhuttasate
chattAlIsaM ca bAvaTTibhAge muhuttassa jAI caMde rajjati, taMjahA- paDhamAe
paDhamaM bhAgaM bitiyAe bitiyaM bhAgaM jAva paNNarasaM bhAgaM, eMva khalu
dosiNApakkhAo NaM aMdhakArapakkhe aMdhakAre bahU Ahiteti vadejjA  /  4. pa. tA
kevatie NaM aMdhakArapakkhe aMdhakAre bahU Ahiteti vadejjA ? u. paritte
asaMkhejja bhAge  /  1. 'sUryaprajJapti prAbhRta 13, sUtra 79 aura
sUryaprajJapti prA. 14 sUtra 82' ina donoM sUtroM kA phalitArtha samAna hai  /
antara itanA hI hai ki sUtra 79 meM 'candra kI hAni - vRddhi' kA kathana hai|
sUtra 82 meM 'candrikA tathA andhakAra kI adhikatA' kA kathana hai  /  kintu
candra kI hAni - vRddhi se hI candrikA evaM andhakAra kI adhikatA hotI hai|

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifteenth Praabhrut  **The Relative Speed of the Moon, Sun, Planets,
Constellations, and Stars**  **Q:** How do these (Moon, Sun, Planets,
Constellations, and Stars) move in relation to each other?  **A:** The Moon
moves faster than the Sun, the Sun faster than the Planets, the Planets faster
than the Constellations, and the Constellations faster than the Stars. The Moon
is the slowest of all, and the Stars are the fastest.  **Q:** How many parts of
its own circle does the Moon traverse in a Muhurta (48 minutes)?  **A:** The
Moon traverses 77/64 parts of its own circle in a Muhurta. Its circle is 100,000
yojanas in circumference.  **Q:** How many parts of its own circle does the Sun
traverse in a Muhurta?  **A:** The Sun traverses 18/32 parts of its own circle
in a Muhurta. Its circle is 100,000 yojanas in circumference.  **Q:** Which of
these (Moon, Sun, Planets, Constellations, and Stars) moves faster or slower
than the others?  **A:** The Moon moves faster than the Sun, the Sun faster than
the Planets, the Planets faster than the Constellations, and the Constellations
faster than the Stars. The Moon is the slowest of all, and the Stars are the
fastest.  **Note:** The text does not mention the speed of the Planets. The
commentator explains that the Planets have irregular and unpredictable
movements, so their speed cannot be calculated in the same way as the Moon, Sun,
Constellations, and Stars.   **Commentary:**  The Planets move in a curved and
irregular manner, so their speed cannot be calculated in the same way as the
Moon, Sun, Constellations, and Stars. The text states that the Moon moves faster
than the Sun, the Sun faster than the Planets, and so on. The Planets are all
slower than the Moon.  **Further Explanation:**  * The Moon traverses 77/64
parts of its own circle in a Muhurta. * The Sun traverses 18/32 parts of its own
circle in a Muhurta. * The Planets have irregular and unpredictable movements,
so their speed cannot be calculated in the same way as the Moon, Sun,
Constellations, and Stars. * The Constellations are slower than the Planets. *
The Stars are the fastest of all.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pandrahavA~ prAbhRta caMda-sUra-gaha-Nakkhatta-tArANaM gaiparUvaNaM pa. tA
kahaM te sigdhagaI? Ahie tti vejaa| u. tA eesi NaM caMdima -sUriya-gahagaNa-
Nakkhatta-tArArUvANaM caMdehito sUre sigghagaIM, sUrehito gahA sigghagaI,
gahehito NakkhattA sigghagaI, Nakkhattehito tArA sigghagaI, savvappagaI caMdA
savvasigghagaI taaraa| 1. pa. tA egamegeNaM muhutteNaM caMde kevaiyAiM
bhAgasayAiM gacchai? u. tA jaM jaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai tassa
tassa maMDalaparikkhevassa sattarasa aDasaTTi bhAgasae gacchai,maMDala
sayasahasse NaM aTTANaui saehiM chattA chettaa| 2. pa. tA egamegeNaM muhutteNaM
sUrie kevaiyAiM bhAgasayAI gacchai? u. tAjaM jaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM
carai,tassa tassa maMDala-parikkhevassa aTTArasa tIse - bhAgasae
gacchai,maMDalaM sayasahasse NaM aTTANauisaehiM chettA chettaa| tA eesi NaM
caMdima-sUriya-gaha-Nakkhatta-tArArUvANaM kayare kayarehiMto sigghagaI vA
maMdagaI vA? u. tA caMdehiMto sUrA sigghagaI, sUrehiMtogahA sigghagaI, gahe
hiMto NakkhattA sigghaI, savvappagaI caMdA, savvasigghagaI taaraa| 2. grahoM kI
gati kA nirUpaNa mUla pATha meM nahIM hai| grahoM kI gati ke saMbaMdha meM
TIkAkAra kA spaSTIkaraNa - grahAstu
vakrAnuvakrAdigatibhAvato'niyatagatiprasthAnAstato na teSAmuktaprakAreNa
gatipramANaprarUpaNA kRtA, uktaM ca gAhAocaMdehiM sigghayarA, sUrA sUrehiM hoMti
nnkkhttaa| aNiyayagaipatthANA, havaMsi sesA gahA savve  // 1 //  aTThArasa
paNatIse, bhAgasae gacchai muhuttennN| nakkhattaM caMdo puNa, sattarasasae u
aDasaDhe  // 2 //  aTThArasa bhAgasae, tIse gacchai ratI muhuttenn|
nakkhattasImachedo, so ceva ihaM pi nnaayvvo||3||

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **158]**  **3. Q. How many parts of a *nakṣatra* does the moon
traverse in a *muhūrta*?**  **A.** The moon traverses 18 and 1/3 parts of the
*nakṣatra* in a *muhūrta*. The moon traverses 19 parts of the *maṇḍala* in
100,000 *maṇḍalas*.  **Specific Differences in the Motion of the Sun, Moon, and
*Nakṣatras***  **84**  **(Sun-Moon-Nakṣatra)**  **1. Q. What is the difference
in the motion of the moon and the sun when they are in conjunction?**  **A.**
The difference is 22 parts.  **2. Q. What is the difference in the motion of the
moon and the *nakṣatra* when they are in conjunction?**  **A.** The difference
is 77 parts.  **3. Q. What is the difference in the motion of the sun and the
*nakṣatra* when they are in conjunction?**  **A.** The difference is 5 parts.
**Conjunction of the Moon and *Nakṣatras***  When the moon is in conjunction
with a *nakṣatra* in the eastern part of the sky, it will be in conjunction with
the *nakṣatra* for 9 *muhūrtas* and 77 parts of a *muhūrta*. The conjunction
will then be in the *anupariyatṭa* state. When the conjunction is in the
*anupariyatṭa* state, it will be in the *vippajahaḍa* state until it becomes a
*vigayajogī*.  When the moon is in conjunction with a *nakṣatra* in the eastern
part of the sky, it will be in conjunction with the *nakṣatra* for 30
*muhūrtas*. The conjunction will then be in the *anupariyatṭa* state. When the
conjunction is in the *anupariyatṭa* state, it will be in the *vippajahaḍa*
state until it becomes a *vigayajogī*.  This should be applied to the 15th,
30th, and 45th *muhūrtas*. It should be said that the moon is in conjunction
with the *nakṣatra* until the *Uttaraṣāḍhā* *nakṣatra*.  **Conjunction of the
Moon and Planets**  **84. Q. When the moon is in conjunction with a planet in
the eastern part of the sky, what is the duration of the conjunction?**  **A.**
When the moon is in conjunction with a planet in the eastern part of the sky,
the conjunction will be in the *anupariyatṭa* state. When the conjunction is in
the *anupariyatṭa* state, it will be in the *vippajahaḍa* state until it becomes
a *vigayajogī*.  **Conjunction of the Sun and *Nakṣatras***  When the sun is in
conjunction with a *nakṣatra* in the eastern part of the sky, it will be in
conjunction with the *nakṣatra* for...  **1. The original text states that the
motion of the stars is the fastest, but it does not mention the measure of the
motion. The commentator has also not said anything about this.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 158 ] 3. pa. tA egamegeNaM muhuteNaM Nakkhatte kevaiyAI bhAgasayAiM gacchai ?
u. tAjaM jaM maMDalaM uvasaMkamittA cAraM carai, tassa tassa maMDala
parikkhevassa aTTArasa paNatIse bhAgasae gacchai,maMDala sayasahasse NaM
aTTANaui~saehiM chettA chettA  /  " caMda sUra-NakkhatANaM visesagaiparUvaNaM 84
[ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 1. pa. tA jayA NaM caMdaM gaisamAvaNNaM sUre gaisamAvaNNe
bhavai, se NaM gaimAyAe ke vaiyaM visesei ? u. bAvaTTibhAge visesei  /  2. pa.
tA jayA NaM caMdaM gaisamAvaNNaM Nakkhate gaisamAvaNNe bhavai, se NaM gaimAyAe
ke vaiyaM visesei ? u. tA sattaTTi bhAge visesei  /  3. pa. tA jayA NaM sUraM
gaisamAvaNaM Nakkhate gaisamAvaNNe bhavai, se NaM gaimAyAe ke vaiyaM visesei ?
u. tA paMca bhAge visesei  /  caMdassa-NakkhattANa ya jogagaiparUvaNaM tA jayA
NaM caMde gaisamAvaNNaM abhiI Nakkhatte NaM gaisamAvaNNe puratthimAe bhAgAe
samAsAei samAsAittA Navamuhutte satAvIsaM ca sattasaTTibhAge muhuttassa caMdeNa
saddhi joga joei, jogaM joetA jogaM aNupariyaTTai, jogaM aNupariyaTTittA, jogaM
vippajahar3a vigayajogI yAvi bhavai, tA jayA NaM caMdaM gaisamAvaNNaM savaNe
Nakkhatte gaisamAvaNNe puratthimAe bhAgAe samAsAei, samAsAittA tIsaM muhutte
caMdeNa saddhi jogaM joei, jogaM joettA jogaM aNupariyaTTai jogaM
aNupariyaTTittA joMga vippajahai vigayajogI yAvi bhavai  /  eMva eeNaM
abhilAveNa NeyavvaM, paNNarasamuhuttAiM, tIsaimuhuttAiM paNayAlIsamuhuttAiM  /
bhANiyavvAiM jAva uttarAsADhA, caMdassa gahANa ya joga-gaikAlaparUvaNaM 84. tA
jayA NaM caMda gaisamAvaNaM gahe gaisamAvaNNe puratthimAe bhAgAe samAsAei,
puratthimAe bhAgAe samAsAittA caMdeNa saddhi jogaM joe nogaM joettA jogaM
aNupariyaTTai, jogaM aNupariyaTTitA jogaM vippajahai, vigayajogI yAvi bhavai  /
sUrassa NakkhattANa ya joga- gaikAlaparUvaNa tA jayA NaM sUraM gaisamAvaNNaM
abhiiNakkhatte gaisamAvaNNe puramthimAe bhAgAe samAsAei 1. 'tArAoM kI gati
sabase adhika hai' aisA mUla pATha meM kathana hai kintu gati ke pramANa kA
kathana nahIM hai, TIkAkAra ne bhI isa saMbaMdha meM kucha nahIM kahA hai|

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifteenth Praabhrut  [159]  In the eastern part, when the sun sets, it joins
with the moon for four days and six muhurtas. When it joins, it gradually moves
away from the moon. When it moves away, it leaves the moon. The moon becomes
free from the sun's influence.  Thus, in six days and twenty-one muhurtas, in
thirteen days and twelve muhurtas, and in twenty days and three muhurtas, all
should be said as follows:  When the sun sets in the Uttaraashaadha Nakshatra,
it sets in the eastern part. When it sets in the eastern part, it joins with the
moon for twenty days and three muhurtas. When it joins, it gradually moves away
from the moon. When it moves away, it leaves the moon. The moon becomes free
from the sun's influence. The sun's influence on the moon is the time of its
departure.  When the sun sets in the moon's setting, it sets in the eastern
part. When it sets in the eastern part, it joins with the moon. When it joins,
it gradually moves away from the moon. When it moves away, it leaves the moon.
The moon becomes free from the sun's influence.  **A - The Moon's, Sun's, and
Nakshatra's Movement in a Nakshatra Month**  85.  **The number of circles of the
moon, sun, and nakshatra in five nakshatra months**  1. Q. How many circles does
the moon make in a nakshatra month? A. It makes thirteen circles and sixty-seven
parts of a circle.  2. Q. How many circles does the sun make in a nakshatra
month? A. It makes thirteen circles and forty-four parts of a circle.  3. Q. How
many circles does the nakshatra make in a nakshatra month? A. It makes thirteen
circles and forty-five parts of a circle.  **B - The Moon's, Sun's, and
Nakshatra's Movement in a Chandra Month**  1. Q. How many circles does the moon
make in a chandra month? A. It makes fourteen and one-fourth circles and one
part of a circle.  2. Q. How many circles does the sun make in a chandra month?
A. It makes thirteen and one-fourth circles and one part of a circle.  3. Q. How
many circles does the nakshatra make in a chandra month? A. It makes fifteen and
one-fourth circles and six parts of a circle.  **C - The Moon's, Sun's, and
Nakshatra's Movement in an Udu Month**  1. Q. How many circles does the moon
make in an udu month? A. It makes fourteen circles and thirty-one parts of a
circle.  2. Q. How many circles does the sun make in an udu month?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pandrahavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 159 puratthimAe bhAgAe samAsAittA, cattArA ahoratte
chacca muhutte sUreNaM saddhi jogaM joei, jogaM joettA jogaM aNupariyaTTai,
jogaM aNupariyaTTittA jAgaM vippajahai, vigayajogI yAvi bhavai, evaM cha
ahorattA ekvIsaM muhuttA ya, terasa ahorattA bArasa muhuttA ya, vIsaM ahorattA
tiNNi muhuttA ya savve bhaNiyavvA jAva - tA jayA NaM sUraM gaisamAvaNNaM
uttarAsADhA Nakkhate gaisamAvaNNe puratthimAe bhAgAe samAsAei, puratthimAe
bhAgAe samAsAittA vIsaM Aharatte tiNNi ya muhutte sureNa saddhi jogaM joei,
jogaM joettA jogaM aNupariyaTTai, jogaM aNupariyaTTitA jogaM vippajahai,
vigayajogI yAvi bhavai  /  sUrassa gahANa ya joga - gaikAlaparUvaNaM tA jayA NaM
sUraM gaisamAvaNNaM gahe gaisamAvaNNe puratthimAe bhAgAe samAsAei, puratthimAe
bhAgAe samAsAittA sUreNa saddhi jogaM joei, jogaM joettA jogaM aNupariyaTTai,
jogaM aNupariyaTTitA jogaM vippajahai vigayajogI yAvi bhavai  /  ka-
NakkhattamAse caMdasya sUrassa, Nakkhattassa ya maMDalacAraM 85. NakkhattAisu
paMcasu mAsesu caMdassa sUrassa Nakkhattassa ca maMDalacArasaMkhA ] 1. pa. tA
NakkhatteNaM mAseNaM caMde kai maMDalAI carai ? u. tA terasa maMGalAI carar3a,
terasa ya sattaTTibhAge maMDalassa  /  2. pa. tA NakkhatteNaM mAseNaM sUre kai
maMDalAI carai ? u. tA terasa maMDalAI carai, cottAlIsaM ca sattaTTibhAge
maMDalassa  /  3. pa. tA NakkhatteNaM mAseNaM Nakkhatte kai maMDalAI, carai ? u.
tA terasa maMDalAI carai, addhasettAlIsa ca sattaTTibhAge maMDalassa kha -
caMdamAse caMdassa sUrassa Nakkhattassa ya maMDala cAraM 1. pa. tA caMdeNaM
mAseNaM caMde kai maMDalAI carai ? u. tA coddassa caubhAgAiM maMDalAI carai,
egaM ca cauvIsasayaM bhAgaM maMDalassa  /  2. pa. tA caMdeNaM mAseNaM sUre kai
maMDalAI carai ? u. tANaNNarasa caubhAgUNAI maMDalAI carai, egaM ca cauvIsasayaM
bhAgaM maMDalassa  /  3. pa. tA caMdeNaM mAseNaM Nakkhatte kai maMDalAI carai ?
u. tA paNNarasa caubhAgUNAI maMDalAI carai, chacca cauvIsasayaM bhAge maMDalassa
/  ga- uDumAse caMdassa sUrassa NakkhattamAsassa ya maMDalacAraM 1. pa. tA uDuNA
mAseNaM caMde kai maMDalAI cadai ? u. tA coddasa maMDalA carai tIsaM ca
egaTTibhAge maMDalassa  /  2. pa. tA uDaNA mAseNaM sUre kai maMDalAI carai ?

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Surya Prajnapti Sutra]  **160]**  **Q. How many mandalas does the moon
traverse in a *panna-rasa* month?** **A.** It traverses fifteen mandalas, and
three and a half *bhagas* of a mandala.  **Q. How many mandalas does the sun
traverse in a *panna-rasa* month?** **A.** It traverses fifteen mandalas, and
five and thirty-two hundredths *bhagas* of a mandala.  **Q. How many mandalas
does the *nakshatra* traverse in a *panna-rasa* month?** **A.** It traverses
fifteen mandalas, and five and thirty-two hundredths *bhagas* of a mandala.
**Q. How many mandalas does the moon traverse in an *abhivaddiya* month?**
**A.** It traverses fifteen mandalas, and sixty-three *bhagas* of a mandala.
**Q. How many mandalas does the sun traverse in an *abhivaddiya* month?** **A.**
It traverses sixteen mandalas, minus three *bhagas*, and two hundred and eighty-
eight *bhagas* of a mandala.  **Q. How many mandalas does the *nakshatra*
traverse in an *abhivaddiya* month?** **A.** It traverses sixteen mandalas, and
forty-one hundredths *bhagas*, fourteen and eighty-eight *bhagas* of a mandala.
**Q. How many mandalas does the moon traverse in a single *ahoratra*?** **A.**
It traverses half a mandala, minus thirty-one *bhagas*, and nine and fifteen
hundredths *bhagas* of a mandala.  **Q. How many mandalas does the sun traverse
in a single *ahoratra*?** **A.** It traverses half a mandala.  **Q. How many
mandalas does the *nakshatra* traverse in a single *ahoratra*?** **A.** It
traverses half a mandala, minus two *bhagas*, and seven and thirty-two
hundredths *bhagas* of a mandala.  **Q. How many *ahoratras* does the moon take
to traverse a single mandala?** **A.** It takes two *ahoratras*, minus thirty-
one *bhagas*, and four and forty-eight hundredths *bhagas* of an *ahoratra*.
**Q. How many *ahoratras* does the sun take to traverse a single mandala?**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra u. tA paNNarasa maMDalAI cri| 3. pa. tA uDuNA
mAseNaM Nakkhatte kai maMDalAiM carai ? u. tA paNNarasa maMDalAiM carai,paMca ya
bAvIsa sayabhAge mNddlss| gha- AiccamAse caMdassa,sUrassa Nakkhattassa ya
maMDalacAraM 1. pa. tA AicceNaM mAseNaM caMde kai maMDalAiM carai ? u. tA coissa
maMDalAiM carai,ekkArasa paNNarasa ya bhAge mNddlss| 2. pa. tA AicceNa mAseNaM
sUre kai maMDalAiM cri| u. tA paNNarasa caubhAgAhigAI maMDalAiM cri| . 3. pa. tA
AicceNaM mAseNaM Nakkhatte kai maMDalAiM carai ? u. tA paNNarasa caubhAgAhigAI
maMDalAiM carai paMcatIsaM ca cauvIsasayabhAga maMDalAI cri| Ga -
abhivaDDiyamAse caMdassa sUrassa Nakkhattassa ya maMDalacAraM 1. pa. tA
abhivaDDieNaM mAseNaM caMde kai maMDalAiM carai ? _u. tA paNNarasa maMDalAiM
carai,tesIiM chalasIyabhAge mNddlss| 2. pa. tA abhivaDiDhaeNaM mAseNaM sUre kai
maMDalAiM carai? _u. tA solasa maMDalAiM carai,tihiM bhAgehiM UNagAiM dohiM
aDayAlehiM saehi mNddlNchittaa| 3. pa. tA abhivaDDiDhaeNaM mAseNaM Nakkhatte kai
maMDalAiM carai?  /  _ u. tA solasa maMDalAiM carai seyAlIsaehiM bhAgehiM
ahiyAhiM coddasahiM aTTAsIehiM mNddlNchettaa| egamege ahoratte caMda-sUra-
NakDakhattANaM maMDalacAraM 86.1. pa. tA egamegeNaM ahoratteNaM caMde kai
maMDalAiM carai? u. tA egaM addhamaMDala carai,ekkatIsehiM bhAgehiM UNaM NavahiM
paNNarasehiM saehiM addhamaNDala chettaa| 2. pa. tA egamegeNaM ahoratteNaM sUre
kai maMDalAI carai? u. tA egaM addhamaMDalaM cri| 3. pa. tA egamegeNaM
ahoratteNaM Nakkhatte kai maMDalAiM carai? u. tA egaM addhamaMDalaM carai,dohiM
bhAgehiM ahiyaM sattahiM batIsehiM saehiM addhamaMDala chettaa| egamege maMDale
caMda-sUra-NakkhattANaM ahoratte cAraM 1. pa. tA egamegaM maMDalaM caMde katihiM
ahorattehi carai? u. tA dohiM ahorattehiM carai,ekatIsehiM bhAehiM ahiehiM
cauhiM coyAlehiM saehi rAiMdiehiM chettA  /  2. pa. tA egamegaM maMDalaM sUre
katihiM ahorattehiM carai ?

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ Fifteenth Praabhrut ] [ 161 U. Ta dohin ahorattehin charai. 3. P. Ta egamegam
mandalam nakkhatte katihin ahorattehin charai? U. Ta dohin ahorattehin charai,
dohin bhaagehin unehin tihin sattasattahin saehin rainddiehin chetta.
Egamegajuge chand-sur-nakkhattaanam mandalacharam 1. P. Ta juge nam chande kai
mandalaain charai? U. Ta atthachulasie mandalasae charai. 2. P. Ta juge nam sure
kai mandalaain charai? U. Ta nav-pannarasamandalasae charai. 3. P. Ta juge nam
nakkhatte kai mandalaain charai? U. Ta attarasa panatise dubhagamandalasae
charai. Icchesa muhuttagai rikkh-udamas-rainddiy-jugamandal-pavibhatti sigdhgai
vaththa ahie tti bemi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pandrahavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 161 u. tA dohiM ahorattehiM cri| 3. pa. tA egamegaM
maMDalaM Nakkhatte katihiM ahorattehiM carai ? u. tA dohiM ahorattehiM
carai,dohiM bhAgehiM UNehiM tihiM sattasaTTahiM saehiM rAiMdiehiM chettaa|
egamegajuge caMda-sUra-NakkhattANaM maMDalacAraM 1. pa. tA juge NaM caMde kai
maMDalAiM carai ? u. tA aTThaculasIe maMDalasae cri| 2. pa. tA juge NaM sure kai
maMDalAiM carai ? u. tA Nava-paNNarasamaMDalasae cri| 3. pa. tA juge NaM
Nakkhatte kai maMDalAiM carai ? u. tA aTThArasa paNatIse dubhAgamaMDalasae cri|
iccesA muhuttagaI rikkha-uDamAsa-rAiMdiya-jugamaMDala-pavibhattI sigdhagaI
vattha Ahie tti bemi|

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixteenth Praabhrut Signs of Doshanai 87. 1. P. How are the signs of
Doshanai? Tell me. U. They are Chandalesai. 2. P. Chandalesai and Doshanai, are
they one in meaning or in signs? U. They are one in meaning and one in signs. 1.
P. How are the signs of Sooralesa? Tell me. U. They are Sooralesai and Ayavei.
2. P. Sooralesai and Ayavei, are they one in meaning or in signs? U. They are
one in meaning and one in signs. 1. P. How are the signs of Chhaya? Tell me. U.
They are Chhaya and Andhkarai. 2. P. Chhaya and Andhkarai, are they one in
meaning or in signs? U. They are one in meaning and one in signs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavA~ prAbhRta dosaNAiyANa lakkhaNA 87. 1 pa. tA kahaM te dosiNAlakkhaNA ?
Ahie tti vaejA ? u. tA caMdalesAi ya dosiNAi ya  /  2 pa. dosiNAi ya caMdalesAi
ya ke aTThe, kiMlakkhaNe ? u. tA egaTThe egalakkhaNe  /  1 pa. tA kahaM te
sUralessAlakkhaNo ? Ahie tti vaejA ? u. tA sUralessAi ya Ayavei ya  /  2 pa. tA
sUralessAi ya, Ayavei ya ke aTThe kiMlakkhaNe ? u. tA egaTThe, egalakkhaNe 1 pa.
tA kaha te chAyAlakkhaNe? Ahie tti vaejjA  /  u. tA chAyAi ya, aMdhakArAi ya  /
2 pa. tA chAyAi ya aMdhakArAi ya ke aTThe kiMlakkhaNe? u. tA egaTThe egalakkhaNe
/

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Seventy-seventh Prabhṛta**  In the context of the sun and moon, what are their
distinct or shared characteristics?  The answer: Indeed, these celestial bodies
have certain qualities that can be elaborated upon as follows:  1. At the very
elemental level, the moon and sun share similarities, but as their journey
progresses, they separate and exhibit their unique attributes; this has been
stated.  2. In brief spans of time, the moon and sun reflect differences in
behavior; this has been noted.  3. It is said that in a similar manner as above,
so too can it be observed in the lower aspects and in the previously discussed
twenty-five aspects of the Prabhṛta, up till the ultimate particle of existence
according to scriptures.  4. In brief: the moon and sun exhibit distinctions
based on their phases, or qualitative aspects, unequally, and this is how they
relate; this has been stated. 5. Hence, in a minute measure of time, the moon
and sun also articulate their differences and shared characteristics; this is
acknowledged.  6. (Continued comments on the next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sattarahavA~ prAbhRta caMda-sUriyANaM cavaNovavAyA 88.. pa. tA kahaM te
cavaNovavAyA, Ahie tti vaejA? u. tattha khalu imAo paNavIsaM paDivattIo
paNNattAo taMjahA - tattha ege evamAhaMsu1. tA aNusamayameva caMdima-sUriyA aNNa
caMyati aNNe uvavajaMti, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA
aNumuhuttameva caMdima-sUriyA aNNe cayaMti aNNe uvvjNti| 1. 'evaM jahA hiTThA
taheva jAvetyAdi - evaM uktena prakAreNa yathA adhastAt SaSThe prAbhRte
paJcaviMzatiH pratipattayastathaivAtrApi vaktavyAH yAvat aNuosappiNi- -
ussappiNimevetyAdi crmsuutrm| tAzcaivaM bhaNivavyAHege puNa evamAhaMsuHtA
aNurAiMdiyameva caMdima-sUriyA aNNe cayaMti, aNNe uvavajjati, Ahie tti vaejjA,
ege evamAhaMsa, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 4. tA aNupakkhameva caMdima-sUriyA aNNe
cayaMti, aNNe uvavajaMti, Ahie tti vaejjA, ege evamAhaMsu, _ege puNa evamAhaMsu
- 5. tA aNumAsameva caMdima-sUriyA aNNe cayaMti, aNNe uvavajaMti, Ahie tti
vaejjA, ege evamAhaMsu, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 6. tA aNu-uumeva ege puNa
evamAhaMsu - 7. tA aNu-ayaNameva, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 8. tA aNu-
saMvaccharameva, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 9. tA aNujugameva, ege puNa evamAhaMsu
(zeSa TippaNiyAM agale pRSTha para)

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 164] 3-24. Just as below, so above. 25. Some said, "These **Anu** are
**Osa**-like, **Ussa**-like, some **Chandim**-like, **Surya**-like, some
**Anu**-like, some **Uva-vajja**-like." 10. Some said, "These **Anu** are
**Vasas**-like." 11. Some said, "These **Anu** are **Vasas-sahas**-like." 12.
Some said, "These **Anu** are **Vasas-sahas**-like." 13. Some said, "These
**Anu** are **Puva**-like." 14. Some said, "These **Anu** are **Puva-ya**-like."
15. Some said, "These **Anu** are **Puva-sahas**-like." 16. Some said, "These
**Anu** are **Puva-sahas**-like." 17. Some said, "These **Anu** are **Pali-
ova**-like." 18. Some said, "These **Anu** are **Pali-ova-sa**-like." 19. Some
said, "These **Anu** are **Pali-ova-sahas**-like." 20. Some said, "These **Anu**
are **Pali-ova-sahas**-like." 21. Some said, "These **Anu** are **Sagaro-
va**-like." 22. Some said, "These **Anu** are **Sagaro-va-sa**-like." 23. Some
said, "These **Anu** are **Sagaro-va-sahas**-like." 24. Some said, "These
**Anu** are **Sagaro-va-sahas**-like."  The twenty-fifth **Pratipatti**-sutra is
directly shown by the Sutra-maker. These are the **Paratithi** **Pratipatti**s.
[ **Surya-prajnapti**-sutra - • Commentary.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 164 ] 3 - 24. evaM jaheva heTThA taheva jAva' 25. ege puNa evamAhaMsu tA
aNuosappiNI, ussapiNImeva caMdima-sUriyA aNNe cayaMti, aNNe uvavajnaMti, 10. tA
aNuvAsasayameva, puNa evamAhaMsu . 11. tA aNuvAsasahassameva ege puNa evamAhaMsu
12. tA aNu vAsasayassahassameva, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 13. tA aNupuvvameva, - -
puNa evamAhaMsu 14. tA aNupuvvayameva ege puNa evamAhaMsu 15. tA
aNupuvvasahassameva, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 16. tA aNupuvvasayasahassameva, puNa
evamAhaM 17. tA aNupaliovameva, ege puNa evamAhaMsu 18. tA aNupaliovamasayameva,
ege puNa evamAhaMsu 19. tA aNupaliovamasahassameva, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - - - -
20. tA aNupaliovamasayasahassameva, ege puNa evamAhaMsu 21. tA aNusAgarovameva,
ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 22. tA aNusAgarovamasayameva, ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 23. tA
aNusAgarovamasahassameva ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 24. tA
aNusAgarovamasayasahassameva  /  paMcavizatitamaM pratipattisUtraM tu sAkSAdeva
sUtrakRtA darzitam tadevamuktAH paratIrthika pratipattayaH  /  [
sUryaprajJaptisUtra - * TIkA.

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Seventeenth Praabhrut] [165] They said thus: We are of this opinion and we
declare - those Chandīma-Sūriya gods are Mahīḍḍiya, Mahājuiyā-Mahābala,
Mahājasa, Mahāsaukka, Mahāṇubhāva. They are Vara Khatthadhara, Varamalladhara,
Varagandhaghara, Varābharaṇadhara, and at the time of the Avvochittiṇayattthaya,
some are born, some die, and the cycle of birth and death continues, thus we
declare.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sattarahavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 165 ege evmaahNsu| vayaM puNa evaM vyAmo - tA
caMdima-sUriyANaM devA mahiDDiyA, mahAjuIyA-mahAbalA, mahAjasA, mahAsokkhA,
mhaannubhaavaa| vara khatthadharA, varamalladharA, varagaMdhagharA,
varAbharaNadharA, avvochittiNayaTThayAe kAle aNNe cayaMti, aNNe uvavati,
cavaNovavAyA Ahie tti vejaa|

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The eighteenth **Praabhrut** (chapter) **Chandayichchaina** (section)
**Bhoomibhagao** (topic) **Uddhattam** (question) 89. **P. Ta Kaham Te Ucchatte
Aahiteti Vadeja?** (How high are they?) **U.** (Answer) **Tath Khulu Imaao
Panavinsam Padivattio, Pannaattao, Tanjaha -** (There are nineteen opinions, as
follows) **Tathege Evam Ahansu - 1. To Egam Joyanasahas Suure Uddhe Ucchattenam,
Divaddham Chaande, Ege Evam Asu.** (Some say that the Sun is one **Joyanasahas**
(league) high, and the Moon is half that.) **Ege Pun Evam Ahansu - 2. Ta Do
Joyanasahassai Suure Uddham Ucchattenam, Addatijai Chaande, Ege Evam Ahansu.**
(Some say that the Sun is two **Joyanasahas** high, and the Moon is one and a
half that.) **Ege Pun Evam Ahansu - 3. Ta Tinni Joyanasahassai Suure Uddham
Ucchattenam, Adhutthai Chaande, Ege Evam Ahansu.** (Some say that the Sun is
three **Joyanasahas** high, and the Moon is two and a half that.) **Ege Pun Evam
Ahansu - 4. Ta Chattari Joyanasahassain Suure Uddham Ucchattenam, Addhapanamaai
Chaande, Ege Evam Ahansu.** (Some say that the Sun is four **Joyanasahas** high,
and the Moon is three and a half that.) **Ege Pun Evam Ahansu - 5. Ta Panch
Joyanasahassain Suure Uddhe Ucchattenam, Addhachhatthai Chaande, Ege Evam
Ahansu.** (Some say that the Sun is five **Joyanasahas** high, and the Moon is
four and a half that.) **Ege Pun Evam Ahansu - 6. Ta Chha Joyanasahassai Suure
Uddham Ucchattenam, Addhasattamaai Chaande, Ege Evam Ahansu.** (Some say that
the Sun is six **Joyanasahas** high, and the Moon is five and a half that.)
**Ege Pun Evam Ahansu - 7. Ta Sattajoyanasahassain Suure Uddham Ucchattenam,
Advatthamaim Chaande, Ege Evam Ahansu.** (Some say that the Sun is seven
**Joyanasahas** high, and the Moon is six and a half that.) **Ege Pun Evam
Ahansu - 8. Ta Atth Joyanasahassai Suure Uddhe Ucchattenam, Addhanavamaim
Chaande, Ege Evam Ahansu.** (Some say that the Sun is eight **Joyanasahas**
high, and the Moon is seven and a half that.) **Ege Pun Evam Ahansu - 9. Ta
Navajoyanasahassain Suure Uddham Ucchattenam, Addhadasamaim Chaande, Ege Evam
Ahansu.** (Some say that the Sun is nine **Joyanasahas** high, and the Moon is
eight and a half that.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavA~ prAbhRta caMdAiccAiNaM bhUmibhAgAo uDDhattaM 89. pa. tA kahaM te
uccatte Ahiteti vadejA ? u. tattha khalu imAo paNavIsaM paDivattio, paNNattAo,
taMjahA - tatthege evamAhaMsu - 1. to egaM joyaNasahassa sUre uDDhe uccatteNaM,
divaDDhaM caMde, ege evmaasu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA do joyaNasahassAI sUre
uDDhaM uccatteNaM, aDDAtijAI caMde, ege evmaahNsu| _ ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 3. tA
tinni joyaNasahassAI sUre uDDhaM uccatteNaM, adhuTThAI caMde, ege evmaahNsu| _
ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 4. tA cattAri joyaNasahassAiM sUre uDDhaM uccatteNaM,
addhapaMcamAI caMde, ege evmaahNsu| _ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 5. tA paMca
joyaNasahassAiM sUre uDDhe uccatteNaM, addhachaTThAI caMde, ege evmaahNsu| ege
puNa evamAhaMsu - 6. tA cha joyaNasahassAI sUre uDDhaM uccatteNaM, addhasattamAI
caMde, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 7. tA sattajoyaNasahassAiM sUre
uDDhaM uccatteNaM, advaTThamAiM caMde, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 8.
tA aTTha joyaNasahassAI sUre uDDhe uccatteNaM, addhanavamAiM caMde, ege
evmaahNsu| _ ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 9. tA navajoyaNasahassAiM sUre uDDhaM
uccatteNaM, addhadasamAiM caMde, ege evmaahNsu|

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Eighteenth Prabhrita] [167] Some say thus - 10. The sun is ten thousand
yojanas high in height, and the moon is half a yojana less, some say thus. Some
say thus - 11. The sun is eleven thousand yojanas high in height, and the moon
is half a yojana less, some say thus. These are to be understood in this manner
- 12. The sun is twelve, and the moon is half a yojana less than thirteen, 13.
The sun is thirteen, and the moon is half a yojana less than fourteen, 14. The
sun is fourteen, and the moon is half a yojana less than fifteen, 15. The sun is
fifteen, and the moon is half a yojana less than sixteen, 16. The sun is
sixteen, and the moon is half a yojana less than seventeen, 17. The sun is
seventeen, and the moon is half a yojana less than eighteen, 18. The sun is
eighteen, and the moon is half a yojana less than nineteen, 19. The sun is
nineteen, and the moon is half a yojana less than twenty, 20. The sun is twenty,
and the moon is half a yojana less than twenty-one, 21. The sun is twenty-one,
and the moon is half a yojana less than twenty-two, 22. The sun is twenty-two,
and the moon is half a yojana less than twenty-three, 23. The sun is twenty-
three, and the moon is half a yojana less than twenty-four, 24. The sun is
twenty-four, and the moon is half a yojana less than twenty-five, some say thus
- 25. The sun is twenty-five thousand yojanas high in height, and the moon is
half a yojana less than twenty-six, some say thus. We, however, say thus - In
this Ratnaprabha earth, the regions of the earth's surface extend to seventy-two
hundred yojanas upwards, and they move about in the lower Taravimanas. From the
Chandravimana, they rise up twenty yojanas upwards and move about in the upper
Tararupas. Similarly, in the longitudinal and latitudinal dimensions, they move
about in the innumerable Jyotisavisaya, the region of luminous bodies, extending
to ten hundred yojanas in breadth. The reasons for the unequal and equal nature
of the stars are ninety. There are, indeed, among the devas of the moon and the
sun - some who are inferior to the Tararupas, some who are equal, and some who
are equal as well as inferior to the Tararupas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 167 ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 10.tA dasajoyaNasahassAI
sUre uDDhaM uccatteNaM, addhaekkArasa caMde, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu
- 11.tA ekkArasa joyaNasahassAiM sUre uDDhaM uccatteNaM, addhabArasa caMde, ege
evmaahNsu| ete NaM abhilAveNaM NetavvaM - 12.bArasa sUre, addhaterasa caMde, 13.
terasasUre addhacoddasa caMde, 14. coisa sUre addhapaNNarasacaMde, 15. paNNarasa
sUre addhasolasa caMde, 16.solasa sUre, addhasattarasa caMde, 17. sattarasa sUre
addhaaTThArasa caMde, 18. aTThArasa sUre addhaekoNavIsaM caMde, 19. ekoNavIsaM
sUreaddhavIsaM caMde, 20.vIsaM sUre, addhaekkavIsaM caMde, 21. ekkavIsaM sUre,
addhabAvIsaM caMde, 22.bAvIsaM sUre, addhatevIsaM caMde, 23. tevIsaM sUre, addha
cauvIsaM caMde, 24.cauvIsaM sUre addhapaNavIsaM caMde, ege puNa evamAhaMsu -
25.tA paNavIsa joyaNasahassAI sUre uDDhaM uccatteNaM, advachavvIsaM caMde, ege
evmaahNsu| vayaM puNa evaM vadAmo - tA imIse rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
bahusamaramaNijAo bhUmibhAgAo sattaNaui joyaNasae uDDhe uppatittA heTThille
tArAvimANe cAraM carati jAva tA caMdavimANAto NaM vIsaM joyaNAI uDDhe uppatittA
uvarillate tArArUve cAraM crti| evAmeva sapuvvAvareNaM dasuttaraM joyaNasataM
bAhalle tiriyamasaMkheje jotisavisae jotisacAraM carati Ahiteti vdejaa| tArANaM
aNutte tullatte kAraNAI 90. tA asthi NaM caMdima-sUriyANaM devANaM - hiTuMpi'
tArArUvA aNuMpi, tullA vi, samaMpi tArArUvA aNuMpi tullA vi, 1. jaMbu. vakkha.7
su. 162 hiTTha pitti - kSetrApekSayA adhastanA api tArArUpavimAnAdhiSThAtAro
devAste'picaMdra-sUryANAM devAnAM dyutivibhavAdikamapekSaya kecidaNavo'pi
bhavaMti, kecittulyA api| 2. 'samamavi tti - caMdravimAnaiH sUryavimAnaizca
kssetraapekssyaasmshrennyaapi|'

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[168] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ] Above the star-shaped vehicles, there are also,
some smaller, some equal, some larger. Above the star-shaped vehicles, there are
also, some smaller, some equal, some larger. As the gods' observance of the
rules of penance and celibacy is weak, so they are smaller or equal. Thus, the
gods of the moon and sun, there are also, some smaller, some equal, some larger.
Above the star-shaped vehicles, there are also, some smaller, some equal, some
larger. The family of the moon, planets and stars is 91. How many families of
planets are assigned to each moon god? How many families of constellations are
assigned? How many families of stars are assigned? Each moon god has 88 families
of planets assigned. 88 families of constellations are assigned. 64,000, 900 and
50 more. One family, of countless stars. Families are assigned. 1. 'Above'
refers to the moon and sun vehicles. 2. As those who have practiced weak penance
and celibacy in the past, have attained the state of being a god who presides
over star-shaped vehicles, they are inferior to the moon and sun gods in terms
of brilliance and other qualities. Those who have practiced intense penance and
celibacy in the past, have attained the state of being a god who presides over
star-shaped vehicles, they are equal to the moon and sun gods in terms of
brilliance and other qualities. This is not unreasonable. Even in the human
world, some people, due to the merit accumulated in past lives, attain kingship,
but they are equal in power to the king. 3. Jambu. Vakh. 7, Su. 163 4. a. 'Each
moon and sun god has 88 families of planets assigned.' - Sam. 88, Su. 1 b. Each
moon and sun god... (Remaining notes on the next page)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 168 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra uppiMpi' tArArUvA aNuMpi, tullA vi| pa. tA kahaM te
caMdima-sUriyANaM devANaM - hiTuMpi tArArUvA aNuMpi, tullA vi, samaMpi tArArUvA
aNuMpi tullA vi, uppiMpi tArArUvA aNuMpi, tullA vi| u. tA jahA jahA NaM tesi NaM
devANaM tava-Niyama-baMbhacerAI ussiyAI bhavaMti - tahA tahA NaM tesiM devANaM
evaM bhavaMti, taMjahA - aNuMtte vA, tullatte vaa| . tA evaM khalu caMdima-
sUriyANaM devANaM - hiTThapi tArArUvA aNuMpi, tullA vi, samaMpi tArArUvA aNuMpi,
tullA vi, uppiMpi tArArUvA aNuMpi, tullA vi| caMdassa gaha-Nakkhatta-tArANaM
parivAro 91. pa. ka. tA egamegassa NaM caMdassa devassa kevaiyA gahA parivAro
paNNatto ? kha. kevaiyA NakkhattA parivAro paNNatto ? ga. kevaiyA tArA parivAro
paNNatto ? u. ka. tA egamegassa NaM caMdassa devassa aTThAsIigahA parivAro
paNNatto, . kha. aTThAvIsaM NakkhattA parivAro paNNatto, ga. gAhA - chAvaTThi
sahassAiM, Nava ceva sayAI pNcuttraaii| egasasIparivAro,
taaraagnnkoddikoddiinnN|| parivAro pnnnntto| 1. 'uppiM pi tti caMdravimAnAnAM
sUryavimAnAnAM coprypi|' 2. tA jahajatyAdi ...yaiH prAgbhave taponiyama -
brahmacaryANi maMdAni kRtAni te tArArUpavimAnAdhiSThAtR-devabhava-
manuprAptAzcandrasUryadevebhyo dhuti-vibhavAdikamapekSya hInA bhvNti|
yaistubhavAntare taponiyama-brahmacaryANi atyutkaTAnyAsevitAni te
tArArUpavimAnAdhiSThAtRrUpadevatvamanuprAptA dyutivibhavAdikamapekSya caMdra-
sUryairdevaH saha samAnA bhavanti na caitdnuppnnm| _ dRzyante hi manuSyaloke'pi
kecijanmAntaropacitatathAvidhapuNyaprAgbhArA rAjatvamanuprAptA api rAjJA 6 tulya
vibhavA iti| 3. jammU. vakkha.7, su. 163 4. ka. 'egamegassa NaM caMdima-
sUriyassa aTThasIe aTThasIi mahaggahA parivAro pnnnntto|' - sama.88, su. 1 kha.
pa. egamegassa NaM caMdima-sUriyassa .... (zeSa TippaNiyAM agale pRSTha para)

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eighteenth Praabhrut] [169 How many yojanas away from the Mandar mountain does
the sun travel? _A. The sun travels 11 yojanas and 21 yojanas away from the
Mandar mountain.1 What is the distance between the sun and the moon? P. How many
yojanas away from the moon are the stars located? U. The stars are located 11
yojanas and 11 yojanas away from the moon.2 What is the distance between the
stars? 93. 1 P. In Jambudvipa, which star travels in the innermost circle? 2 P.
Which star travels in the outermost circle? • 3 P. Which star travels in the
uppermost circle? 4 P. Which star travels in the lowermost circle? 1 U. Abhijit
star travels in the innermost circle. U. The verses - 88 and 28 are the stars.
One hundred and one families, I will tell you about these stars. Thirty-six
thousand, nine hundred and five hundred. One hundred and one families, the
number of stars is countless. - - Jiwa.P.3, U. 2, Su.194 G. Jiwaabhigaman Prati.
3, U.2, Su. 194 - 'The questions and answers are for both the moon and the sun.
In the original, there is only a symbol for the question and two verses as the
answer.' In the commentary - 'This is the symbol for the question - Egmegasas N.
Bhanta! Chandim-Suriyasya, etc. The commentator's explanation regarding this
symbol is - 'Ekaikasya Bhadant! Chandra-Suryaasya' by this word, just as the
moon is the lord of the stars, so is the sun, because of his Indrahood ....
....... Here, there is a lot of difference in reading in the books and the
verses are also corrupted in many books, therefore, to understand the difference
in reading as it is, and to extract the corrupted verses, even these easy ones
are being separated ..... 1. Sam. S. 11, Su. 3 K. Sam. S. 11, Su. 2 Kh. Jambu.
Vakkh.7, Su. 154 'Sarvaabhyantara, Sarvebhyo Mandalebyo Abhyantara,
Sarvaabhyantara, by this, the second and other circle-traveling sun is
described' 'Although Abhijit, etc., twelve stars are said to be the innermost
circle-traveling stars, still, this is located in the Meru direction, and it
travels in the circle, therefore, it is said to be the innermost circle-
traveling star'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 169 maMdarapavvayAo loitacAraM 92. 1 pa. tA maMdarassa
NaM pavvayassa NaM kevaiyaM abAhAe joise cAraM carai ? _u. tA ekkArasa ekkavIse
joyaNasae abAhAe joise cAraM cri|1 loaMtAo joisaThANaM pa. loaMtAo NaM
kevaiyaMabAhAe joise paNNatte ? u.. tA ekkArasa ekkAre joyaNasae abAhAe joise
pnnnntte|2 NakkhattANaM abbhaMtarAiM cAraM 93. 1 pa. tA jaMbuddIve NaM dIve
_kayare Nakkhatte savvabbhaMtarillaM cAra carai ? 2 pa. kayare Nakkhatte
savvabAhirillaM cAraM carai ? * 3 pa. kayare Nakkhatte savvuvarillaM cAraM carai
? 4 pa. kayare Nakkhatte savvaheTThillaM cAra carai ? 1 u. abhiI Nakkhatte
savvabbhaMtarillaM cAra cri| u. gAhAo - aTThAsItiM ca gahA, aTThAvIsaM ca hoi
nnkkhttaa| egasasIparivAro, etto tArANa vocchAmi  //  chAvaTThIsahassAiM, Nava
ceva sayAI pNcsyraaiN| egasasIparivAro, tArAgaNakoDikoDINaM  //  - - jIvA.pa.3,
u. 2, su.194 ga. jIvAbhigama prati. 3, u.2, sU. 194 meM - 'candra aura sUrya
donoM ke saMyukta praznottara haiN| mUla meM praznasUtra kA kevala pratIka hai
aura uttara ke rUpa meM do gAthAe~ haiN|' TIkA meM -'praznasUtra kA yaha pratIka
hai - egamegassa NaM bhaMte! caMdima-sUriyasyetyAdi isa pratIka ke saMbaMdha meM
TIkAkAra kA spaSTIkaraNa yaha hai - 'ekaikasya bhadanta ! caMdra-sUryasya' anena
ca padena yathA nakSatrAdInAM caMdraH svAmI tathA sUryo'pi, tasyApIndratvAt ....
....... iha bhUyAn pustakeSu vAcanAbhedo galitAni ca sUtrANi bahuSu pustakeSu
tato yathAvasthitavAcanAbhedapratipatyartha galitasUtroddharaNArtha caivaM
sugamAnyapi viviyante ..... 1. sama. sa. 11, su. 3 ka. sama. sa. 11, su. 2 kha.
jambu. vakkha.7, su. 154 'sarvAbhyantaraM sarvebhyo maNDalebhyo'bhyantaraH
sarvAbhyantaraH anena dvitIyAdi-maNDalacArasudAsaH' 'yadyapi
sarvAbhyantaramaNDalacArINyabhijidAdidvAdazanakSatrANyabhihitAni, tathApIdaM
zeSaikAdazanakSatrApekSayA meru dizi sthitaM sat cAraM caratIti
srvaabhyntrcaariityuktm'|

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 170] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra. 2. U. In the Mrigashira constellation, the
charan moves outside everything. 3. U. In the Saayi constellation, the charan
moves above everything. 4. U. In the Bharani constellation, the charan moves
inside everything. The arrangement of the Chandra-Surya-Graha-Nakshatra Vimana
is 94. P. What is the arrangement of the Chandra Vimana? U. It is arranged in
the form of an Ardha-Kavitthaga, with all the sides falling in the form of an
Abhhuga-Yamusya-Pahasiya, adorned with various jewels and precious stones, with
Y-Vijay-Vejayanti-Padaga flags and umbrellas, rising high above the sky, with a
net of jewels and a cage of jewels, with a lotus-like arrangement of jewels,
with a white-colored moon-like appearance, inside and outside, with a beautiful
appearance, with a beautiful appearance, with a beautiful appearance. Similarly,
the Surya Vimana, the Graha Vimana, the Nakshatra Vimana, and the Tara Vimana.
'Sarvabahya-Sarvato Nakshatramandalikaaya Bahischcharam Charati'. 'Although the
Mrigashira and other constellations, which are the charans of the fifteen
mandalas, are said to be two stars each in the middle of the four stars of
Purvashadha and Uttarashadha, yet this is said to be Sarvabahya because it moves
in the direction of the salt water, being situated outside the other
constellations.' K. 'In the Jyotishchakra, which is 100 yojanas in length, the
area of the constellations is 4 yojanas in length, and in relation to that, the
lower and upper parts of the said constellations are to be known.' The quoted
passage is from the Jambudvipa Vyakhyana 7, Sutra 165 Tika. Kh. This Sutra of
the Surya Prajnapti is similar to Sutra 165 of the Jambudvipa Prajnapti. How do
the Ardha-Kavitthaga houses of the Gahaos not appear in the direction of the
rising moon, the Vimana of the Sun and Moon, which are situated in the
horizontal plane? The Ardha-Kavitthaga house is elevated, and the platform is
above it. The circular line is drawn from there, and the distance is equal in
all directions. This is a special explanation given by Jinabhadra Ganikashama
Shraman, with Akshapurassara. 'If the Chandra Vimana is situated in the form of
an Ardha-Kavitthaga, which is half the size of a Pitthaphala, then at the time
of sunrise or sunset, or if it is revolving horizontally during the full moon,
why is the half-Pitthaphala shape not visible?' Because the circular shape is
visible from the top of the head, because the part of the half-Pitthaphala that
is far away is not visible due to its distance, it is said to be circular. Here,
the half-Pitthaphala shape of the Chandra Vimana is not to be understood as a
whole, but the platform of the Chandra Vimana, and above the platform is the
palace of the Chandradeva, the king of the Jyotishchakra, and that palace is
arranged in such a way that it becomes circular with the platform, and due to
its distance, it appears to be circular to the people from a distance, so there
is no fault. - Surya Tika, Jambudvipa Vyakhyana 7, Sutra 125 4.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra . 2 u. mUle Nakkhatte savvabAhirillaM cAraM cri|' 3
u. sAI Nakkhatte savvuvarillaM cAraM cri| 4 u. bharaNI Nakkhatte savvahechillaM
cAra cri| caMda-sUra-gaha-NakkhattavimANANaM saMThANAI 94. pa. tA caMdavimANe
NaM kiMsaMThie paNNatte ? u. tA addhakaviTThaga-saMThANasaMThie savvaphAliyAmae
abbhugayamUsiyapahasie viviha-maNi-rayaNa bhatticitte, vAu ya-vijaya-
vejayaMtIpaDAgA chattAichattakalie, tuMge gagaNatalamaNulihaMtasihare,
jAlaMtararayaNa-paMjarummIliyavva maNikaNagathUbhiyAge, viyasiya-
sayavattapuMDarIya-tilayarayaNaddhacaMdacitte, aMto bahiM ca saNhe,
tavaNijabAlugApatthaDe suhaphAse sassirIyarUve pAsAIe darisaNije abhirUve
pddiruuve| evaM sUravimANe, gahavimANe, nakkhattavimANe taaraavimaanne|'
'sarvabAhya-sarvato nakSatramaNDalikAyA bahizcAraM crti'| 'yadyapi
paMcadazamaNDalAbadizcArINi mRgaziraHprabhRtIni SaD nakSatrANi
pUrvASADhottarASADhayozcaturNAtArakANAM madhye dve dve ca tAre uktAni,
tathApyetadaparabahizcArinakSatrApekSayA lavaNadizi sthitaM saccAraM caratIti
srvbhishcaariityuktm|' ka. 'dazottarazatayojanarUpe jyotizcakrabAhalye yo
nakSatrANAM kSetravibhAgazcaturyojanapramANastadapekSayoktanakSatrayoH .
krameNAdhastanoparitanabhAgo jnyeyo|' isa TippaNa meM uddhRta uddharaNa jambU.
vakkha.7, sU. 165 TIkA ke haiN| kha.jambUdvIpaprajJapti ke sUtra 165 ke samAna
yaha sUryaprajJapti kA sUtra bhI hai| gAhAoaddhakaviTThAgArA udayatthamaNami
kahaM na dIsaMti, sasi-sUrANa vimANA, tiriyakkhettaTThiyANaM ca ?
uttANaddhakaviTThAgAraM, pIDhaM taduvariM ca paasaao| vaTTAlekheNa tao,
samavaTeM duurbhaavaao|| jinabhadragaNikSamAzramaNena
vizeSaNAvatyAmAkSapapurassaramuktam  //  'yadi
candravimAnamuttAnIkRtArddhamAtrakapitthaphalasaMsthAnasaMsthitaM tata udayakAle
astamayakAle vA, yadi vA tiryak paribhramat paurNamAsyAM kasmAttadardhaka
pitthaphalAkAraM nopalabhyante ?' kAmaM zirasa upari vartamAnaM
vartulamupalabhyate ardhakapitthasya upari dUramavasthApitasya
parabhAgAdarzanato vartulatayA dRzyamAnatvAt ucyte| ihArddhakapitthaphalAkAraM
candravimAnaM na sAmastyena pratipattavyaM, kintu tasya candravimAnasya pIThaM,
tasya ca pIThasyopari candradevasya jyotizcakrarAjasya prAsAdaH sa ca
prAsAdastathA kathaMcanApi vyavasthito yathA pIThena saha bhUyAn vartulAkAro
bhavati, sa ca dUrabhAvAdekAntataH samavRttatayA janAnAM pratibhAsate, tato na
kshciddossH|| - sUrya. TIkA, jaMbu. vakkha. 7, su. 125 4.

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighteenth Praabhrut  **Dimensions of the Moon-Vehicle, Sun-Vehicle,
Earth-Vehicle, and Star-Vehicles**  **Q. A.** What is the **Aayam-Vikkhambha**
(length and breadth) of the Moon-Vehicle? **B.** What is its **Parikkheva**
(circumference)? **C.** What is its **Baahalla** (thickness)?  **A. A.** It is
**56/1** **Yojanas** in **Aayam-Vikkhambha**. **B.** It is **three times** its
**Aayam-Vikkhambha** plus **one** **Yojana** in **Parikkheva**. **C.** It is
**28/1** **Yojanas** in **Baahalla**.  **Q. A.** What is the **Aayam-
Vikkhambha** of the Sun-Vehicle? **B.** What is its **Parikkheva**? **C.** What
is its **Baahalla**?  **A. A.** It is **81/2** **Yojanas** in **Aayam-
Vikkhambha**. **B.** It is **three times** its **Aayam-Vikkhambha** plus **one**
**Yojana** in **Parikkheva**. **C.** It is **24/1** **Yojanas** in **Baahalla**.
**Q. A.** What is the **Aayam-Vikkhambha** of the Earth-Vehicle? **B.** What is
its **Parikkheva**? **C.** What is its **Baahalla**?  **A. A.** It is **1/2**
**Yojana** in **Aayam-Vikkhambha**. **B.** It is **three times** its **Aayam-
Vikkhambha** plus **one** **Yojana** in **Parikkheva**.  **Q. A.** What is the
**Aayam-Vikkhambha** of the Moon-Sphere? **B.** What is its **Parikkheva**?
**C.** What is its **Baahalla**?  **A. A.** It is **56/61** **Yojanas** in
**Aayam-Vikkhambha**. **B.** It is **three times** its **Aayam-Vikkhambha** plus
**one** **Yojana** in **Parikkheva**. **C.** It is **28/61** **Yojanas** in
**Baahalla**.  The Moon-Sphere is divided into **61** parts.  This Sutra clearly
states that the Moon-Vehicle and the Moon-Sphere are the same.  **Jambudvipa-
Vyakhyana 7, Sutra 145** **Samavayanga 61, Sutra 3**  **[171]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavA~ prAbhRta ] caMda-sUra-gaha-Nakkhatta tArAvimANANaM AyAma-1 ma-
vikkhaMbha-parikkheva - bAhallAI pa. ka. tA caMdavimANe NaM ke vaiyaM AyAma -
vikkhaMbheNa ? - kha. kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM ? ga. ke vaiyaM bAhalleNaM paNNatte
? u. ka. tA chappaNNaM egaTTibhAge joyaNassa AyAma - vikkhaMbheNaM  /  kha. taM
tiguNaM savisesaM parikkheveNaM  /  ga. aTThAvIsaM egaTTibhAge joyaNassa
bAhalleNaM paNNatte  /  pa. ka. tA sUravimANe NaM kevaiyaM AyAma - vikkhaMbheNaM
? kha. kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM  /  ga. ke vaiyaM bAhalleNaM paNNatte ? u. ka. tA
aDayAlIsaM egadvibhAge joyaNassa AyAma - vikkhaMbheNa  /  kha. taM tiguNaM
savisesaM parikkheveNaM  /  ga. cauvvIsaM egaTTibhAge joyaNassa bAhalleNaM
paNNatte  /  pa. ka. tA gahavimANe NaM kevaiyaM AyAma - vikkhaMbheNaM ? kha.
kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM ? ga. kevaiyaM bAhalleNaM paNNatte ? u. ka. tA
addhajoyaNaM AyAma - vikkhaMbheNa  /  kha. taM tiguNaM savisesaM parikkheveNaM
/  1. pa. ka. caMdamaMDale NaM bhaMte  /  kevaiyaM AyAma - vikkhaMbheNaM ? kha.
kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM ? ga. kevaiyaM bAhalleNaM paNNatte ? u. ka. goyamA !
chappanna egasaTThi bhAe joaNassa AyAma vikkhaMbheNaM, kha. taM tiguNaM
savisesaM parikkheveNaM, ga. aTThAvIsaM ca egasaTThibhAe joyaNassa bAhalleNaM,
paNNatte  /  caMdamaMDale NaM egasaTThivibhAga- vibhAie samaMse paNNatte  /  isa
sUtra se yaha spaSTa hai ki candravimAna aura candramaNDala eka hI hai| jaMbu.
vakkha. 7, su. 145 - sama. 61, su. 3 [ 171

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 172] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra G. How much is the extent of the Kosha? P. K.
What is the extent of the Tanakkhatta Vimana in terms of its length and breadth?
Kh. What is its circumference? G. How much is its extent? U. K. The Kosha is the
extent of its length and breadth. Kh. Its circumference is three times its
extent plus a little more. G. Its extent is half a Kosha. P. K. What is the
extent of the Tara Vimana in terms of its length and breadth? Kh. What is its
circumference? G. How much is its extent? U. K. The Tara Vimana is half a Kosha
in terms of its length and breadth. Kh. Its circumference is three times its
extent plus a little more. G. Its extent is five Dhanushya. The Vimana of the
Moon, Sun, Planets and Stars. P. How many Deva Sahasri carry the Moon Vimana? U.
Sixteen Deva Sahasri carry it, such as - 1. P. K. Venerable Sir! What is the
extent of the Moon Vimana in terms of its length and breadth? What is its
extent? U. The Moon Mandala is fifty-six Bhae in diameter. Its extent is twenty-
eight Bhae. ||1|| The Sun Mandala is forty-nine Bhae in diameter. Its extent is
twenty-four Bhae. ||2|| The extent of the Planets and Stars is two Kosha. The
extent of the Stars is the same as their extent. ||3|| - Jambudvipa Vyakhyana 7,
Su. 165 'The extent of one Yojana is one-sixth of one Angula. The extent of the
Moon Mandala is fifty-six parts of one Yojana. The extent of the Sun Mandala is
forty-nine parts of one Yojana. The extent of the Planets and Stars is two
Kosha. The extent of the Stars is the same as their extent.' 'The circumference
of a circle is three times its diameter plus a little more.' This explanation is
given by the commentator of the Jambudvipa Prajnapti for the above mentioned
Sutra. Kh. Although the Jiva. P. 3, U. 2, Su. 197 are question-answer Sutras,
but they use the word 'Bhanta' and 'Go-yama' more.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 172 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra ga. kosaM bAhalleNaM pnnnntte| pa. ka.
tANakkhattavimANe NaM kevaiyaM AyAma-vikkhaMbheNaM ? kha. kevaiyaM prikkhevennN|
ga. kevaiyaM bAhalleNaM? u. ka. tA kosaM aayaam-vikkhNbhenn| kha. taM tiguNaM
savisesaM prikkhevennN| ga. addhakosaM bAhalleNaM pnnnntte| pa. ka. tA
tArAvimANe NaM kevaiyaM AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM ? _kha. kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM ? 'ga.
kevaiyaM bAhalleNaM? u. ka. tA addhakosaM aayaamvikhNbhenn| kha. taM tiguNaM
savisesaM prikkhevennN| ga. paMcadhaNusayAI bAhalleNaM pnnnntte| caMda-sUra-
gaha-Nakkhatta tArANaM vimANaparivahaNaM pa. tA caMdavimANe NaM kai devasAhassIo
parivahati ? u. solasa devasAhassIo parivahanti, taMjahA - 1. pa. ka.
caMdavimANe NaM bhaMte ! kevaiyaM AyAma-vikkhaMbheNaM ? kevaiyaM bAhelleNaM? u.
chappaNNaM khalu bhAe-vichiNNaM caMdamaDalaM hoii| aTThAvIsaM bhAe bAhallaM
tassa boddhavyaM  // 1 //  aDayAlIsaM bhAe, vicchiNNaM sUramaMDalaM hoi||
cavIsaM khalu bhAe, bAhallaM tassa boddhavvaM  //  2 //  do kose a gahANaM,
NakkhattANaM tuhavai tassaddhaM  /  tassaddhaM tArANaM, tassaddhaM ceva bAhalle
// 3 //  - jaMbu. vakkha.7, su. 165 'ekasya
pramANAguMlayojanasyaikapaSTibhAgIkRtasya SaTpaMcAzatA bhAgaiH
samuditairyavatpramANaM bhavati, tAvatpramANo'sya vistAraH' 'vRttavastunaH
sadRzAyAma-viSkambhAt' parikSepastu svayamabhyUhyaH vRttasya savizeSastriguNaH
paridhiriti prsiddhH|  /  yaha spaSTIkaraNa jaMbudvIpaprajJapti ke vRttikAra ne
Upara likhita sUtra kA diyA hai| kha. yadyapi jIvA. pa. 3, u. 2, sU. 197
praznottarAtmaka sUtra haiM kintu usameM 'bhaMte 'goyamA' kA prayoga adhika hai|

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighteenth Praabhrut  **1. P.** **U.** Four Deva-sahasris carry it from
the east, with lion-like faces. Four Deva-sahasris carry it from the south, with
elephant-like faces. Four Deva-sahasris carry it from the west, with bull-like
faces. Four Deva-sahasris carry it from the north, with horse-like faces. Thus,
the Surya-vimana also...  **P.** How many Deva-sahasris carry the Gah-vimana?
**U.** Eight Deva-sahasris carry it, as follows: Two Deva-sahasris carry it from
the east, with lion-like faces, and so on... Two Deva-sahasris carry it from the
north, with horse-like faces.  **P.** How many Deva-sahasris carry the
Nakshatra-vimana? **U.** Four Deva-sahasris carry it, as follows: One Deva-
sahasri carries it from the east, with lion-like faces, and so on... One Deva-
sahasri carries it from the north, with horse-like faces.  **P.** How many Deva-
sahasris carry the Tara-vimana? **U.** Two Deva-sahasris carry it, as follows:
Five Deva-sayas carry it from the east, with lion-like faces, and so on... Five
Deva-sayas carry it from the north, with horse-like faces.  **P.** How many
Deva-sahasris carry the Chandra-vimana, Bhante? **U.** Sixteen Deva-sahasris
carry it, Gotama!  The Chandra-vimana, from the east, has... **Se-a-na**
(beautiful), **Subhaga-na** (auspicious), **Supphaba-na** (radiant),
**Sankhatala-vimala-nimmala-dadhishana-gokhira-phena-rayana-nigara-prabhasa-na**
(with a brilliance like conch-shell, pure, spotless, like curds, milk, foam,
jewels, and mountains), **Thira-lattha-patta-vatta-piva-susilittha-visittha-
tikkha-daadha-vidambia-muha-na** (with firm, strong, broad, round, wide, well-
polished, excellent, sharp, strong, and smiling faces), **Rantuppa-lapatta-mauy-
sumala-talu-jiha-na** (with lips, teeth, soft, beautiful palates, and tongues),
**Mah-guli-a-pingala-kkha-na** (with large, round, and reddish eyes), **Pivara-
voru-padipunna-viula-kandha-na** (with wide, full, and broad shoulders)...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavA~ prAbhRta ] 1. pa. u. puratthimeNaM sIharUvadhArINaM cattAri
devasAhassIo parivahaMti, dAhiNeNaM gayarUvadhArINaM cattAri devasAhassIo
parivahaMti, paccabhimeNaM vasabharUvadhArINaM cattAri devasAhassIo parivahaMti,
uttareNaM turagarUvadhArINaM cattAri devasAhassIo parivarhati  /  evaM
sUravimANaM pi, pa. tA gahavimANe NaM kai devasAhassIo parivahaMti ? u. tA aTTha
devasAhassIo parivahanti, taMjahA - puratthimeNaM siMharUvadhArINaM devANaM do
devasAhassIo parivahaMti, evaM jAva - uttareNaM turagarUvadhArINaM devANaM do
devasAhassIo parivahaMti  /  pa. tA NakkhatavimANe NaM kai divasAhassIo
parivahaMti ? u. tA cattAri devasAhassIo parivahaMti taMjahA - puratthimeNaM
sIharUvadhArINaM devANaM ekkA devasAhassI parivahar3a, evaM jAva - uttareNaM
turagarUvadhArINaM devANaM ekkA devasAhassI parivahai  /  pa.. tA tArAvimANe NaM
kai devasAhassIo parivahaMti ? tA do devasAhassIo parivahaMti, taM jahA [ 173
puratthimeNaM sIharUvadhArINaM devANaM paMcadevasayA parivahaMti, evaM jAva -
uttareNaM turagarUvadhArINaM devANaM paMcadevasayA parivarhati  /  caMdavimANe
NaM bhaMte! kati devasAhassIo parivahaMti ? goyamAM! solasa devasAhassIo
parivahaMti  /  caMdavimANassa NaM puratthimeNaM, seANaM, subhagANaM,
suppabhANaM, saMkhatala- vimala-nimmala-dadhiSaNa- gokhIrapheNa-
rayaNaNigarappabhAsANaM, thira-laTThapaTTa vaTTa - pIvara susiliTTha - visiTTha-
tikkhadADhA - viDaMbia-muhANaM, raMtuppalapatta-mauya-sUmAlatAlu jIhANaM, mahu-
gulia - piMgalakkhANaM, pIvaravaroru- paDipuNNa-viula-khaMdhANaM,

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The four divine
chariots of the Sihara-roopa (lion-formed) deities, carrying the charming,
beautiful, delicate, marked, excellent, variegated, kesara-like, shining,
raised, well-formed, expanded, long-tailed, vairamaya (diamond-like), shining,
sharp-toothed, sharp-fanged, tapanija (fiery) tongued, tapanija palated,
tapanija well-formed, well-joined, beautiful, lustful, desiring, mind-going,
mind-charming, victorious, amrita (nectar)-powered, heroic, manly-effort-making,
with a loud, sweet, charming sound of roaring, fill the sky and beautify the
directions.   The four divine chariots of the Gaya-roopa (bull-formed) deities,
carrying the beautiful, auspicious, bright, moving, trembling, proud-gait, well-
formed, marked, excellent, jewel-adorned, hanging, swinging, tinkling bell-
sounds, charming, with proper proportions, excellent-marked, beautiful-haired,
well-formed, sharp-tusked, diamond-like, variegated, jewel-crowned, necklace-
adorned, pure, diamond-like, sharp-pointed, ankusa (elephant-goad) -like, well-
bound, proud-armed, pure, dense, diamond-like, saliva-licking, well-formed,
marked, excellent, jewel-like, silver-bound, hanging bell-pairs, with sweet,
charming sounds, well-proportioned, excellent-marked, beautiful-haired, light,
agile, marked, excellent, jewel-like, fiery-tongued, fiery-palated, fiery well-
formed, beautiful, desiring, mind-going, mind-charming, victorious, amrita
(nectar)-powered, heroic, manly-effort-making, with a deep, rumbling, sweet,
charming sound, fill the sky and beautify the directions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 174 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra miu-visaya-suhuma-lakkhaNa-pasattha-varavaNNa-
kesarasaTovasohiANaM, Usia-sunamia-sujAya-apphoDia-laMgUlANaM, vairAmaya-
NakkhANaM, vairAmaya-dADhANaM, vairAmaya-daMtANaM, tavaNija-jIhANaM, tavaNija-
tAluANaM, tavaNija-jutta-jottagasujoiANaM kAmagamANaM, pIigamANaM, maNogamANaM,
maNoramANaM, abhijiagaINaM, amia-bala-vIria-purisakkAra-parakkamANaM, mahayA
apphoDia-sIhaNAya-bola-kalakala-raveNaM mahureNaM maNahareNaM pUretA aMbaraM,
dizAo ya sobhayaMtA, cattAri devasAhassIo sIharUvadhArINaM purithimillaM vAhaM
vahaMti, caMdavimANassa NaM dAhiNeNaM, seANaM, subhagANaM, suppamANaM,
saMkhatala-vimala-Nimmala-dadhiSaNa-gokhIrapheNa-rayaya-NigarappagAsagANaM,
vairAmayakuMbhayugala-suTThia-pIvara-varavairasoMDa-vaTTia-ditta-suratta,
paumappagAsANaM, abbhuNNaya-muhANaM, tavaNijja-visAlakaNNacaMcala-calaMta-
vimalujalANaM, mahuvaNNa-bhisaMta-Niddha-pattala-Nimmala-tivaNNa-maNi-rayaNa-
loyaNANaM, abbhuggaya-maula-malliAdhavalasarisasaMThiya-NivaNNadaDha-kasiNa-
phAliAmaya-sujAya-daMtamusalovasobhiANaM, kaMcaNakosI-paviTTa-daMtAga-vimala-
maNi-rayaNa-ruila-peraMta-cittarUvaga-virAiANaM, tavaNijja visAla tilagappamuha
parimaNDiyANaM NANAmaNi rayaNa muddha gevijja baddha galayavara bhUSaNANaM
verUlipa viciMta daNDa nimmala bairAmaya tikkhalaTTha aMkusa
kuMbhajuyalayaMtaroDiANaM, tavaNijja-subaddha-kaccha-dappia-baluddharANaM,
vimala-ghaNa-maMDala-vairAmaya-lAlAlaliyatAlaNaM, NANAmaNi-rayaNa-ghaMTa-pAsaga-
rajatamaya-baddha-rajju-laMbiya-ghaMTAjuyala-mahurasaramaNaharANaM, allINa-
pamANajutta-vaTTia-sujAya-lakkhaNa-pasattha-ramaNijja-vAlagattaparipuMchaNANaM,
uvacia-paDipuNNa-kumma-calaNa-lahu vikkamANaM, aMkAmayaNakkhANaM, tavaNijja-
jIhANaM, tavaNijjatAluANaM, tavaNijja-jottaga-sujoiANaM, kAmagANaM, pIigANaM,
maNogamANaM, manoramANaM, amiyagaINaM, amiya-bala-vIriya-
purisakkAraparakkamANaM, mahayA-gaMbhIra-gulagulAitaraveNaM mahureNaM
maNahareNaM, pUretA aMbaraM, disAo ya sobhayaMtA, cattAri devasAhassIo
gayarUvadhArINaM devANaM dakkhiNillaM vAhaM parivahaMti, caMdavimANassa NaM
paccatthimeNaM, seANaM, subhagANaM, suppabhANaM, cala-cavala-kakuha-sAlINaM,
ghaNa-nicia-subaddha-lakkhaNuNNayaIsiANaya-vasabhoTThANaM, caMkamia-lalia-pulia-
calacavala-gavvia-gaINaM, sannatapAsANaM saMgatapAsANaM sujAyapAsANaM,
pIvaravaTria-susaMThia-kaDINaM, olaMba-palaMba-lakkhaNa-pamANajutta-ramaNijja-
vAlagaMDANaM samakhuravAlidhANANaM, samalihia-siMga-tikkhagga-saMgayANaM, taNu-
suhuma-sujAya-Niddha-lomacchavINaM, uvacia-maMsala-visAla-paDipuNNa-khaMdha-
paesa-suMdarANaM, verulia-bhisaMta-kaDakkha-sunirikkhaNANaM, juttappamANa-
pahANalakkhaNa-pasattha-ramaNija-gaggara-galla-sobhiyANaM,

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Eighteenth Prabhrita]  The chariots of the deities, adorned with beautiful
and melodious bells, resplendent with golden and jeweled bells, with the
garlands of fragrant flowers like lotus and jasmine, with excellent horses, of
various kinds, with teeth made of ivory, with tongues that move gracefully, with
palates that move gracefully, with eyes that shine beautifully, desirable,
delightful, enchanting, and charming, of immortal gait, of immense strength,
valor, and heroic prowess, roaring with a deep and captivating voice, filling
the sky with their sweet and enchanting sound, and illuminating the directions,
carry four thousand celestial beings of divine form, to the north of the lunar
mansion, the excellent, auspicious, resplendent, and supremely adorned chariots,
with swiftly moving, graceful, and agile movements, with swaying, pendulous, and
excellent ornaments, with well-crafted, well-joined, and beautifully made seats,
with long, broad, and proportionate tails, with delicate, soft, smooth, and
fine-haired bodies, with beautifully adorned manes of fine, soft, and delicate
texture, with excellent and beautiful forehead ornaments, with faces adorned
with beautiful crowns, fans, and waist ornaments, with gracefully moving hooves,
tongues, palates, and beautifully shining eyes, desirable, delightful,
enchanting, and charming, of immortal gait, of immense strength, valor, and
heroic prowess, roaring with a deep and sweet voice, filling the sky with their
captivating sound, and illuminating the directions, carry four thousand
celestial beings of divine form, to the north of the lunar mansion, the
excellent, auspicious, and resplendent chariots, with swiftly moving, graceful,
and agile movements, with swaying, pendulous, and excellent ornaments.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavA~ prAbhRta ] gharagharaga-susadda-baddha-kaMDa- parimaMDiyANaM,
NANAmaNi- kaNaga-rayaNaghaMTiA vegacchiga-sukayamAliANaM, varaghaMTA-galaya-
mAlujjala-sirigharANaM, paumuppala - sagala - surabhi - mAlA - vibhUsiANaM,
varakhurANaM, vivihakkhurANaM, phAliAmaya-daMtANaM, tavaNijja-jIhANaM,
tavaNijjatAluANaM, tavaNijja-jottaga-sujoiANaM, kAmagamANaM, pIigamANaM,
maNogamANaM, manoramANaM, amiyagaINaM, amiya-balavIriya- purisakkAraparakkamANaM
mahayA gajjIa - gaMbhIra-raveNaM, mahureNaM maNaharaNaM, pUreM tA aMbaraM, disAo
ya sobhaMtA, cattAri devasAhassIo vasaharUvadhArINaM devANaM paccatthimillaM
vAhaM parivahaMti, caMdavimANassa NaM uttareNaM ANaM, subhagANaM, suppabhANaM,
varamallihAyaNANaM taramalliacchANaM caMcuccia seANaM, lalia - pulia calacavala-
caMcalagaINaM, lalaMtalAma - galalAya - varabhUsaNANaM, sannayapAsANaM
saMgatapAsANaM sujAyapAsANaM, pIvaravaTTima - susaMThia-kaDINaM, olaMba-
palaMba-lakkhaNa- pamANajutta-ramaNijja- vAlapucchANaM, taNusuhuma-sujAya-
Niddha-lomacchaviharANaM, miThavisaya- suhuma- lakkhaNa-pasattha-vitthiNNa-
kesaravAliharANaM, lalaMta - thAsaga - lalADa - varabhUsaNANaM, muhamaNDaga -
ocUlaga- cAmara-thAsaga parimaNDia - kaDINaM, tavaNijja - khurANaM, tavaNijja -
jIhANaM, tavaNijja- tAluANaM, tavaNijja-jottaga-sujoiANaM, kAmagamANaM
pIigamANaM, maNogamANaM, maNoramANaM, amiagaINaM, amia- balavIria
purisakkAraparakkamANaM, [ 175 mahayA gajia mahureNaMraveNaM, gaMbhIra-
maNahareNaM pUreMtA aMbaraM, disAo ya sobhayaMtA, cattAri devasAhassI ovasa
harUvadhArINaM devANaM paccatthimillaM vAhaM parivahaMti, caMda vimANassa NaM
uttareNaM seANaM subhagANaM, suppamANaM taramalliacchANaM caMcuccia - seyANaM,
lalia - pulia - calacavala- caMcalagaINaM, lalaMtalAma-galalAya -
varabhUsaNANaM, jaMbu. vakkha. 7, su. 168 -

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 176] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra **Concerning the fast and slow movement of the
celestial bodies** 95. Q. Now, tell me, among the moon, sun, planets,
constellations, and stars, which moves faster and which moves slower? A. The sun
moves faster than the moon, the planets move faster than the sun, the
constellations move faster than the planets, and the stars move faster than the
constellations. The moon moves slowest of all, and the stars move fastest of
all. **Concerning the small and large size of the celestial bodies** Q. Now,
tell me, among the moon, sun, planets, constellations, and stars, which is
smaller and which is larger? A. The constellations are larger than the stars,
the planets are larger than the constellations, the sun is larger than the
planets, and the moon is larger than the sun. The stars are smallest of all, and
the moon is largest of all. **Concerning the distance between the stars** Q.
Now, tell me, on Jambudvipa, what is the distance between the stars? A. There
are two distances between the stars, namely: 1. The distance of a "vaagha"
(tiger), and 2. The distance of a "nivvagha" (non-tiger). A. Now, the distance
of a "vaagha" is two hundred yojanas in length. B. The distance of a "nivvagha"
is twelve thousand yojanas plus two hundred yojanas in length. 1. A. B. Sutra 83
and this Sutra are similar. Jambudvipa Vakya 7, Sutra 169 Jambudvipa Vakya 7,
Sutra 170

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 176 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra joisiyANaM siggha-maMdagaiparUvaNaM 95. pa. sA eesi
NaM caMdima-sUriya-gaha-Nakkhatta-tArA-rUvANaM kayare kayarehiMto sigghagaI vA,
maMdagaI vA? u. caMdehito sUrA sigyagaI, sUrehiMto gahA sigghagaI, gahehiMto
NakkhattA sigghagaI, NakkhattehiMto tArA sigghagaI, savvappagaI caMdA,
savvasigghagaI taaraa|' joisiyANaM appa-mahiDDhiparUvaNaM pa. tA eesi NaM
caMdima-sUriya-gaha-Nakkhatta-tArArUvANaM kayare kayarehito appaDDiyA vA
mahiDDiyA vA? tA tArAhiMto mahiDDhiyA NakkhattA, NakkhattehiMto mahiDDhiyA ghaa|
gahehiMto mahiDDhiyA sUrA, sUrehiMto mahiDDhiyA caMdA, savvappaDDhiyA tArA,
savvamahiDDhiyA cNdaa| tArANaM abAhA aMtaraparUvaNaM pa. tA jaMbuddIve NaM dIve
tArArUvassa tArArUvassa ya esa NaM kevaie abAhAe aMtare paNNatte ? u. duvihe
aMtare paNNatte taMjahA - 1. vAghAime ya, 2. nivvAghAime y| ka. tattha NaM je se
vAghAime, se NaM jahaNNeNaM doNNi DAvaDhe joynnse| ukkoseNaM, bArasa
joyaNasahassAiM doNNi bAyAle joyaNasae tArArUvassa ya tArArUvassa ya abAhAe
aMtare pnnnntte| 1. ka. kha. sUtra 83 aura isa sUtra meM sAmya hai| jaMbu.
vakkha.7, su. 169 jaMbu. vakkha.7, su. 170

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighteenth Praabhrut  [177]  **b.** There, those who are in the state of
liberation, they are, as it were, five hundred yojanas away,  separated by a
distance of half a yojana, like stars, from the star-like form, and from the
star-like form,  which is beyond measure. The chief queen of the moon, along
with her entourage of goddesses, is also...  **p.** So, how many chief queens
are there, who are the wives of the moon, the lord of the moon?  **u.** So,
there are four chief queens, namely: 1. Chandraprabha, 2. Dosinabha, 3.
Acchimali, 4. Pabhankara.  There, each of these goddesses has an entourage of
four thousand goddesses.   **p.** So, are these goddesses, each one of them,
surrounded by four thousand goddesses?  **u.** So, each of these goddesses is
surrounded by an entourage of four thousand goddesses.  Similarly, sixteen
thousand goddesses are present, along with their entire entourage. They are all
joyful.   **p.** So, are they, the moon, the lord of the moon, the lord of the
moon, in the moon-palace, in the assembly hall,  in the state of joy, along with
the joyful ones, enjoying celestial pleasures?  **u.** No, they are not.
**p.** So, how is it that they are not, the lord of the moon, the lord of the
moon, in the moon-palace, in the assembly hall,  in the state of joy, along with
the joyful ones, enjoying celestial pleasures?  **u.** **k.** So, the moon, the
lord of the moon, the lord of the moon, in the moon-palace, in the assembly
hall, in the state of joy,  there are many Jina-saints, who are gathered
together, in the human world, in the celestial world, in the world of the gods,
in the round, full world. They are the ones who are the moon, the lord of the
moon, the lord of the moon, who are worthy of being  worshipped, honored,
revered, respected, and praised by many other Jina-saints, gods, and goddesses.
They are the ones who  bring about auspiciousness, prosperity, and happiness.
Thus, the moon, the lord of the moon, the lord of the moon, is not in the  moon-
palace, in the assembly hall, in the state of joy, along with the joyful ones,
enjoying celestial pleasures.  **b.** So, the moon, the lord of the moon, the
lord of the moon, in the moon-palace, in the assembly hall, in the state of joy,
on the moon-throne, along with a thousand, four, chief queens, along with their
entourage, three attendants, seven others,  seven others, sixteen thousand
guardian-god-saints, and many other Jina-saints, gods...  **1.**  Jamb. Vakkh.
7, Su. 171

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 177 kha. tattha NaM je se NivvAghAime se NaM
jahaNNeNaM paMca ghaNusayAI, ukkoseNaM addhajoyaNaM tArArUvassa ya tArArUvassa
ya abAhAe aMtare pnnnntte| caMdassa aggamahisIo devIparivAraviuvvaNA ya pa. tA
caMdassa NaM joisiMdassa joisaraNNo kai aggamahisIo paNNattAo ? u. tA cattAri
aggamahisIo paNNattAo, taMjahA - 1. caMdappabhA, 2. dosiNAbhA, 3. accimAlI, 4.
pbhNkraa| tattha NaM egamegAe devIe cattAri devIsAhassIparivAro pnnnntto| pa.
pabhU NaM tAo egamegA devI aNNAiM cattAri cattAri devIsahassAiM parivAra
viuvvittae ? u. pabhU NaM tAo egamegA devI devIsAhassIparivAraM viuvvitte|
evAmeva sapuvvAvareNaM solasadevIsahassA paNNattA, se ttaM tuddie| pa. tA pabhU
NaM caMde joisiMde joisarAyA caMdavaDiMsae vimANe sabhAe suhammAe tuDieNaM
saddhiM _ divvAiM bhogabhogAI bhuMjamANe viharittae? u. No iNaDhe smtthe| pa. tA
kahaM te No pabhU joisiMde joisarAyA caMdavaDiMsae vimANe sabhAe suhammAe
tuDieNaM saddhiM divvAiM bhogabhogAI bhuMjamANe viharittae ? u. ka. tA caMdassa
NaM joisiMdassa joisaraNNo caMdavaDiMsae vimANe sabhAe suhammAe mANavaesu
ceiyakhaMbhesu vairAmaesu golavaTTasamuggaesu bahave jiNasakahAo saMNikkhittAo
citttthti| tAo NaM caMdassa joisiMdassa joisaraNNo aNNesiM ca bahUNaM joisiyANaM
devANa ya, devINa ya accaNijjAo vaMdaNijAo pUyaNijjAo sakkAraNijjAo
sammANaNijAo, kallANaM maMgalaM devayaM ceiyaM pjuvaasnnijaao| evaM khalu No
pabhU caMde joisiMde joisarAyA caMdavaDiMsae vimANe sabhAe suhammAe tuDieNa
saddhiM divvAiM bhogabhogAI bhuMjamANe vihritte| kha. pabhU NaM caMde joisiMde
joisarAyA caMdavaDiMsae vimANe sabhAe suhammAe caMdaMsi sIhAsaNaMsi cAhiM
sAmANiyasAhassIhi, cauhiM, aggamahisIhiM saparivArAhiM, tihiM parisAhiM,
sattahiM aNiehiM, sattahiM aNiyAhivaIhiM, solasahiM Ayarakkha-deva-sAhassIhiM,
aNNehi ya bahUhiM joisiehiM devehiM 1. jaMbu. vakkha. 7, su. 171

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The devis (goddesses)
along with him (the sun god) are surrounded, singing and playing the
mahathahana-gita-vayika-tala-tala-tudiya-ghana-muinga (musical instruments),
emitting divine sounds, enjoying the divine pleasures, residing solely by the
power of their retinue. The chief queens of the sun, the devis, are the
ornaments of the sun's retinue.  Q. How many chief queens of the sun, the
jyotisirinda (lord of the stars), are mentioned? A. Four chief queens are
mentioned, namely - 1. Suraprabha, 2. Atava, 3. Accimali, 4. Prabhamkara. The
rest is as in the case of the moon, except that they do not engage in sexual
activity in the sun's palace.  The abode of the jyotisiya (astral) devas is 98
(palya). Q. For how long is the abode of the jyotisiya devas mentioned? A. At
the minimum, it is 8/9th of a palya, at the maximum, it is a palya, exceeding a
thousand years.  Q. For how long is the abode of the jyotisini (astral) devis
mentioned? A. At the minimum, it is 8/9th of a palya, at the maximum, it is half
a palya, exceeding fifty thousand years.  Q. For how long is the abode of the
devas in the moon palace mentioned? A. At the minimum, it is 1/4th of a palya,
at the maximum, it is a palya, exceeding a thousand years.  Q. For how long is
the abode of the devis in the moon palace mentioned? A. At the minimum, it is
1/4th of a palya, at the maximum, it is half a palya, exceeding fifty thousand
years.  Q. For how long is the abode of the devas in the sun palace mentioned?
A. At the minimum, it is 1/4th of a palya, at the maximum, it is a palya,
exceeding a thousand years.  Q. For how long is the abode of the devis in the
sun palace mentioned? A. At the minimum, it is 1/4th of a palya, at the maximum,
it is half a palya, exceeding five hundred years.  Q. For how long is the abode
of the devas in the planet palace mentioned?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 178 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra devIhi ya saddhiM saMparivuDe, mahathAhayaNaTTa-
gIya-vAiya-tala-tAla-tuDiya-ghaNa-muiMga paDuppavAiya-raveNaM, divvAI bhoga-
bhogAI bhuMjamANe viharittae kevalaM privaarnniddddhiie| sUrassa aggamahisIo
devIparivAraviuvvaNA ya pa. tA sUrassa NaM joisiMdassa joisaraNNo kai
aggamahisIo paNNattAo? u. tA cattAri aggamahisIo paNNattAo, taMjahA - 1.
sUrappabhA, 2. AtavA, 3. accimAlI, 4. pbhNkraa| sesaM jahA caMdassa, NavaraM
sUravaDeMsae vimANe jAva no ceva NaM mehunnvttiyaae| joisiyANaM devANaM ThiI 98.
pa. tA joisiyANaM devANaM kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI paNNattA ? u. tA jahanneNaM
aTThabhAgapaliovamaM, ukkoseNaM paliovamaM, vAsasayasahassabbhahiyaM  /  pa. tA
joisiNI NaM devINaM kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI paNNattA ? u. tA jahanneNaM
aTThabhAgapaliovamaM, _ ukkoseNaM addhapaliovamaM paNNAsAe vAsasahassehiM
abbhahiyaM  /  pa. tA caMdavimANe NaM devANaM kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI paNNattA ? u.
tA jahanneNaM caubbhAgapaliovamaM, _ ukkoseNaM paliovamaM,
vAsasayasahassabbhahiyaM  /  pa. tA caMdavimANe NaM devINaM kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI
paNNattA ? u. tA jahanneNaM caubbhAgapaliovamaM, ukkoseNaM addhapaliovamaM
paNNAsae vAsasahassehiM abbhhiyN| pa. tA sUravimANeNaM devANaM kevaiyaM kAla
ThiIpaNNatA ? u. tA jahanneNaM caubbhAga paliovayaM, ukkoseNaM paliovayaM vAsa
syshssmbbhhiyN| pa. tA sUravimANe NaM devINaM kevAyaM kAlaM ThiI papaNattA ? u.
tA jahanneNaM caubbhAgapaliovamaM, _ ukkoseNaM addha paliovamaM paMcahiM
vAsasaehi abbhahiyaM  /  pa. tA gahavimANe NaM devANaM kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI
paNNattA ? 4A

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighteenth Praabhrut  [ 179 Q. How long do the gods in the Gahavimaana stay,
in terms of Jahanne and Ukkosa? A. They stay for one-fourth of a Jahanne and
half of an Ukkosa. Q. How long do the gods in the Nakkhattavimaana stay, in
terms of Jahanne and Ukkosa? A. They stay for one-fourth of a Jahanne and half
of an Ukkosa. Q. How long do the goddesses in the Nakkhattavimaana stay, in
terms of Jahanne and Ukkosa? A. They stay for one-eighth of a Jahanne and one-
fourth of an Ukkosa. Q. How long do the gods in the Taraavimaana stay, in terms
of Jahanne and Ukkosa? A. They stay for one-eighth of a Jahanne and one-fourth
of an Ukkosa. Q. How long do the goddesses in the Taraavimaana stay, in terms of
Jahanne and Ukkosa? A. They stay for one-eighth of a Jahanne and one-eighth and
a half of an Ukkosa.   Q. Among the Chandra, Surya, Gaha, Nakkhatta, and Tara,
which are few, many, equal, or have a special quality? A. Chandra and Surya are
equal, Nakkhatta are many, Gaha are numerous, and Tara are numerous. 1. Jambu.
Vakkh. 7, Su. 173 2. Jambu. Vakkh. 7, Su. 175 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 179 u. tA jahanneNaM caubbhAgapaliovamaM, ukkoseNaM
pliovmN| pa. tA gahavimANe NaM devINaM kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI paNNattA? u. tA
jahanneNaM caubbhAgapaliovamaM, ukkoseNaM addhpliovmN| pa. tANakkhattavimANe NaM
devANaM kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI paNNattA ? u. tA jahanneNaM caubbhAgapaliovamaM,
ukkoseNaM addhapaliovamaM  /  pa. tA NakkhattavimANe NaM devINaM kevaiyaM kAlaM
ThiI paNNattA ? u. tA jahanneNaM aTThabhAgapaliovamaM, . ukkoseNaM
caubbhAgapaliovamaM  /  pa. tA tArAvimANe NaM devANaM kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI
paNNattA? u. tA jahanneNaM aTThabhAgapaliovamaM, ukkoseNaM caubbhAgapaliovamaM
/  pa. tA tArAvimANe NaM devINaM kevaiyaM kAlaM ThiI paNNattA ? u. tA jahanneNaM
aTThabhAgapaliovamaM, ukkoseNaM sAiregaaTThabhAgapaliovamaM  / ' joisiyANaM
appa-bahuttaM pa. tA eesi NaM caMdima-sUriya-gaha-Nakkhatta-tArANaM kayare
kayarehito appA vA, bahuyA vA, tullA vA visesAhiyA vA? u. tA caMdA ya, sUrA ya
eeNaM dovi tullA, savvatthovA NakhattA, saMkhijaguNA gahA, saMkhijaguNA taaraa|
1. jaMbu. vakkha. 7, su. 173 2. jaMbu. vakkha. 7, su. 175

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The nineteenth **Praabhrut** of the moon, sun, constellations, and stars is 100.
How many moons and suns illuminate, brighten, shine, and radiate throughout the
universe?   The **Vaeyaja** said: There are twelve **Padivatti**
(interpretations) established in this regard:  1. Some say that one moon and one
sun illuminate, brighten, shine, and radiate throughout the universe. 2. Some
say that three moons and three suns illuminate, brighten, shine, and radiate
throughout the universe. 3. Some say that eight moons and eight suns illuminate,
brighten, shine, and radiate throughout the universe. 4. Some say that seven
moons and seven suns,  5. ten moons and ten suns,  6. twelve moons and twelve
suns,  7. forty-two moons and forty-two suns,  8. forty-two moons and forty-two
suns,  9. forty-two hundred moons and forty-two hundred suns,  10. forty-two
hundred moons and forty-two hundred suns,  11. forty-two thousand moons and
forty-two thousand suns,  12. forty-two thousand moons and forty-two thousand
suns illuminate, brighten, shine, and radiate throughout the universe.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ prAbhRta caMda-sUra-Nakkhatta-tArANaM parimANaM . 100. pa. tA kai NaM
caMdima-sUriyA savvaloyaM obhAsaMti, ujjoeMti, tati, pabhAseMti ? Ahie tti
vejaa| u. tattha khalu imAo duvAlasa paDivattIo paNNattAo taMjahA - tatthege
evamAhaMsu1. tA ege caMde ege sUre savvaloyaM obhAsai, ujjoei, tavei, pabhAsai,
ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. tA tiNNiI caMdA, tiNNiI sUrA savvaloyaM
obhAseMti ujjoeMti, taveMti, pabhAseti, ege evmaahNsu| ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 3.
tA aTTha caMdA aTTha sUrA savvaloyaM obhAseMti jAva pabhAseMti ege evmaahNsu|
eeNaM abhilAveNaM NeyavvaM, 4. satta caMdA, satta sUrA, 5. dasa caMdA, dasa
sUrA, 6. bArasa caMdA, bArasa sUrA, 7. bAyAlIsaM caMdA, bAyAlIsaM sUrA, 8.
bAvattarI caMdA, bAvattarI sUrA, 9. bAyAlIsaM caMdasayaM bAyAlIsaM sUrasayaM,
10.bAvattaraM caMdasayaM bAvattaraM sUrasayaM, 11.bAyAlIsaM caMdasahassaM
bAyAlIsaM sUrasahassaM, 12.bAvattaraM caMdasahassaM, bAvattaraM sUrasahassaM,
savvaloyaM obhAsaMti ujoeMti taveMti, pabhAseMti ege evamAhaMsu,

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nineteenth Praabhrut] [181 - We say this and we know - Jambudvipa - in
Jambudvipa, the extent of a yojana That Jambudvipa, the island, with all the
islands and seas, with all the interiors and all the exteriors, up to one
hundred thousand yojanas in length and breadth, three hundred thousand yojanas,
sixteen thousand, two hundred and twenty-seven yojanas, three kosas, twenty-
eight dhanus and thirteen angulas, and a little more than half an angula, is
declared by calculation. 1 p. Jambudvipa, the island - How many moons shine, or
shine, or will shine? 2 p. How many suns rise, or rise, or will rise? 3 p. How
many planets move, or move, or will move? 4 p. How many stars shine, or shine,
or will shine? 5 p. How many constellations of stars shine, or shine, or will
shine? 1 u. That Jambudvipa, the island - Two moons shine, or shine, or will
shine. 2 u. Two suns rise, or rise, or will rise. 3 u. Sixty-six planets move,
or move, or will move. 4 u. Fifty-six stars shine, or shine, or will shine. 5 u.
One hundred thousand, thirty-three thousand, nine hundred and fifty
constellations of stars shine, or shine, or will shine. Gahas - Two moons, two
suns, fifty-six stars. Sixty-six planets, in Jambudvipa, the wise say. One
hundred thousand, thirty-three thousand, indeed, are the thousands. Nine hundred
and fifty, constellations of stars. The Salt Sea That Jambudvipa, the island, is
surrounded by the sea called Lavana, which is circular in shape and surrounds it
completely.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 181 - vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo - jambUhIvo-jaMbuddIve
joisiyaparimANaM tA ayaNNaM jaMbuddIve dIve savvadIvasamudANaM savvabbhaMtarAe
savvakhuDDAe jAva ega joyaNasayasahassaM AyAma-vikkhaMbheNaM, tiNNi
joyaNasayasahassAI, solasa sahassAI, doNNi ya sattAvIse joyaNasae, tiNNi ya
kose, aTThAvIsaM ca dhaNusayaM terasa aMgulAI, addhaMgulaM ca kiMci visesAhiyaM
parikkheveNaM pnnnntte| 1 pa. jaMbuddIve dIve - kevaiyA caMdA pabhAsiMsu vA,
pabhAsiMti vA pabhAsissaMti vA ? 2 pa. kevaiyA sUrA taviMsu vA, taveMti vA
tavissaMtti vA ? 3 pa. kevaiyA gahA cAraM cariMsu vA, caraMti vA carissaMti vA ?
4 pa. kevaiyA NakkhattA joyaM joiMsu vA, joeMti vA joissaMti vA ? 5 pa. kevaiyA
tArAgaNakoDi-koDIo sobhaM sobhesu vA, sobhaMti vA sobhissaMti vA? 1 u. tA
jaMbuddIve dIve - do caMdA pabhAseMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA, pabhAsissaMti vaa| 2 u.
do sUriyA taviMsu vA, taveMti vA, tavissaMti vaa| 3 u. chAvattari gahasayaM cAra
cariMsu vA, caraMti vA, carissaMti vaa| 4 u. chappaNNaM NakkhattA joyaM joeMsu
vA joeMti vA, joissaMti vaa| 5 u. egaM sayasahassaM tettIsaM ca sahassA Nava
sayA paNNAsA tArAgaNakoDikoDINaM sobhaM sobhesu vA, sobhaMti vA, sobhissaMti
vaa| gAhAo - do caMdA do sUrA, NakkhattA khalu havaMti, chppnnaa| chAvattaraM
gahasayaM, jaMbuddIve vicaariinnN|| egaM ca sayasahassaM tettIsaM khalu bhave
shssaaiN| Nava ya sayA paNNAsA, taaraagnnkoddikoddiinnN|| lavaNasamuddo tA
jaMbuddIvaM dIvaM lavaNe nAmaM samudde vaTTe valayAkArasaMThANasaMThie savvao
samaMtA saMparikkhittA NaM citttthi|

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[182] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] Q. Is the salt ocean (Lavana Samudra) a circular
or non-circular wheel-shaped universe? A. The salt ocean is a circular wheel-
shaped universe, not a non-circular wheel-shaped universe. Q. What is the
diameter and circumference of the salt ocean? A. The diameter of the salt ocean
is two hundred thousand yojanas, and the circumference is fifteen hundred
thousand yojanas, one hundred and one thousand yojanas, and forty yojanas,
slightly more. Verse: Fifteen hundred thousand, one hundred and one thousand,
and slightly more, is the circumference of the salt ocean. Q. How many moons
have shone, shine, or will shine in the salt ocean? Q. How many suns have risen,
rise, or will rise? Q. How many great planets have moved, move, or will move? Q.
How many constellations have joined, join, or will join? Q. How many billions of
billions of stars have shone, shine, or will shine? A. Four moons have shone,
shine, or will shine in the salt ocean. A. Four suns have risen, rise, or will
rise. A. Fifty-two great planets have moved, move, or will move. A. One hundred
and two constellations have joined, join, or will join. A. Two hundred thousand,
seven hundred and nine thousand, and nine hundred billions of billions of stars
have shone, shine, or will shine. Verses: Four moons and four suns in the salt
ocean. One hundred and two constellations, and fifty-two great planets. Two
hundred thousand, seven hundred and nine thousand, and nine hundred billions of
billions of stars in the salt ocean. Dhayee Sand Deepa Q. Is the island called
Dhayee Sand Deepa, which is circular and surrounded by a wall, a circular or
non-circular wheel-shaped universe? A. The island called Dhayee Sand Deepa is a
circular wheel-shaped universe, not a non-circular wheel-shaped universe.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 182 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra pa. tA lavaNe NaM samudde kiM samacakkavAlasaMThie
visamacakvAlasaMThie ? u. tA lavaNasamudde samacakkavAlasaMThie, no
vismckvaalsNtthie| pa. tA lavaNasamudde kevaiyaM cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM,
kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM ? Ahie tti vejaa| u. tA do joyaNasayasahassAiM
cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM, paNNarasa joyaNasayasahassAI ekkAsIyaM ca sahassAiM
sayaM ca egUNacAlIsaM kiMci visesUNaM parikkheveNaM  /  gAhA - paNNarasa
sayasahassA, ekkAsIyaM sayaM ca uutaalN| kiMci viseseNUNo, lavaNodahiNo
prikkhevo|| 1 pa. tA lavaNasamudde - kevaiyA caMdA pabhAsiMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA,
pabhAsissaMti vA ? 2 pa. kevaiyA sUrA taviMsu vA, taviMti vA tavissaMtti vA ? 3
pa. kevaiyA gahA cAraM cariMsu vA, caraMti vA carissaMti vA ? 4 pa. kevaiyA
NakkhattA jogaM joiMsu vA, joeMti vA joissaMti vA ? 5 pa. kevaiyA tArAgaNakoDi-
koDIo sobhaM sobhesu vA sobhaMti vA sobhissaMti vA ? 1 u. tA lavaNasamudde
cattAri caMdA pabhAsiMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA, pabhAsissaMti vaa| 2 u. cattAri
sUriyA taviMsu vA, taviMti vA, tavissaMti vaa| 3 u. tiNNi bAvaNNA mahaggahasayA
cAraM cariMsu vA caraMti vA, carissaMti vaa| 4 u. bArasa NakkhattasayaM jogaM
joeMsu vA joeMti vA, joissaMti vaa| 5 u. do sayasahassA sattaTuiM ca sahassA
Nava ya sayA tArAgaNakoDikoDINaM sobhaM sobheMsa vA sobhaMti vA. sobhissaMti
vaa| gAhAo cattAri ceva caMdA, cattAri ya sUriyA lvnntoe| bArasa NakkhattasayaM,
gahANa tiNNeva baavnnnnaa|| docceva sayasahassA, sattaDheiM khalu bhave
shssaaiN| Nava ya sayA lavaNajale, taaraagnnkoddikoddiinnN|| dhAyaIsaMDadIve tA
lavaNasamudaM dhAyaIsaMDe NAmaM dIve vaTTe valayAgArasaMThANasaMThie savvao
samaMtA saMparikkhittA NaM citttthi| pa. tA dhAyaIsaMDe NAmaM dIve kiM
samacakkavAlasaMThie visamacakkavAlasaMThieM ? u. tA dhAyaIsaMDe NAmaM dIve
samacakkavAlasaMThie, no vismckkvaalsNtthieN|

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nineteenth Praabhrut] [183] Q. What is the diameter of the Dhaayee-sande island
and what is its circumference? Please tell me. A. Its diameter is four hundred
thousand yojanas and its circumference is eighty-four hundred thousand yojanas,
ten thousand nine hundred and one yojanas, a little more than that. Please tell
me.  **Gatha** 1. Q. Dhaayee-sande island - Dhaayee-sande's circumference is
eighty-four hundred thousand. Nine hundred and one, a little less than that. How
many moons shine, or will shine, or will shine? 2. Q. How many suns shine, or
will shine, or will shine? 3. Q. How many great planets revolve, or will
revolve, or will revolve? 4. Q. How many constellations are seen, or will be
seen, or will be seen? 5. Q. How many stars, countless in number, shine, or will
shine, or will shine? 1. A. Twelve moons shine, or will shine, or will shine. 2.
A. Twelve suns shine, or will shine, or will shine. 3. A. One thousand six
hundred and fifty-six great planets revolve, or will revolve, or will revolve.
4. A. Thirty-six hundred constellations are seen, or will be seen, or will be
seen. 5. A. Gatha - One hundred thousand, three thousand seven hundred. One
hundred and one families, countless stars. Twenty-four moons and suns, thirty-
six hundred constellations. One thousand great planets, six hundred and fifty-
six in Dhaayee-sande. One hundred thousand, three thousand seven hundred.
Dhaayee-sande island, countless stars. Kalo-e ocean  So, the Dhaayee-sande
island is called Kalo-e ocean, it is circular in shape and is completely
surrounded by a ring. Q. Is the Kalo-e ocean circular or elliptical? A. The
Kalo-e ocean is circular, not elliptical.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 183 pa. dhAyaIsaMDe NaM dIve kevaiyaM
cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA cattAri
joyaNasayasahassAI cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM IyAlIsaM joyaNasayasahassAiM dasa ya _
sahassAiM Nava ya egaTTe joyaNasae kiMci visesUNaM parikkheveNaM, Ahie tti
vaejjA gAhA 1 pa. dhAyaisaMDe dIve - dhAyaisaMDa parirao IyAla dasUttarA
syshssaa| _Nava ya sayA egaTThA, kiMci viseseNa prihiinnaa|| kevaiyA caMdA
pabhAseMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA, pabhAsissaMti vA ? 2 pa. kevaiyA sUriyA taveMsu
vA, taviMti vA, tavisissaMti vA ? 3 pa. kevaiyA gahA cAraM cariMsu vA, caraMti
vA carissaMti vA ? 4 pa. kevaiyA NakkhattA jogaM joiMsu vA, joeMti vA joissaMti
vA ? 5 pa. kevaiyA tArAgaNakoDAkoDIo sobhaM sobhesu vA, sobhaMti vA sobhissaMti
vA ? 1 u. bArasa caMdA pabhAseMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA, pabhAsissaMti vaa| 2 u.
bArasa sUriyA taveMsu vA, taviMti vA, tavisissaMti vaa| 3 u. egaM chappaNNaM
mahaggahasahassaM cAra cariMsu vA, caraMti vA, carissaMti vaa| 4 u. tiNNiM
chattIsA NakkhattasayA jogaM joeMsu vA, joeMti vA, joissaMti vaa| 5 u. gAhAo -
advaiva saya sahassa, tiNNi sahassAiM satta ya syaaii| egasasIparivAro,
taaraagnnkoddikoddiinnN|| cauvIsaM sasi-raviNo, NakkhatasayA ya tiNNi chttiisaa|
egaM ca gahasahassaM, chappaNaM dhaayiisNdde|| advaiva sayasahassA, tiNNi
sahassAI satta ya sayAI dhAyaisaMDe dIve, tArAgaNa koddikoddiinnN|| kAloe
samudde tA dhAyaIsaMDaM NaM dIvaM kAloe NAmaM samudde vaTTe
valayAkArasaMThANasaMThie savvao samaMtA saMparikkhittANaM citttthi| pa. tA
kAloe NaM samudde kiM samacakkavAlasaMThie visamacakvAlasaMThie ? u. tA kAloe
NaM samudesamacakkavAlasaMThie, no vismckvaalsNtthie|

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[184] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] ... P. What is the circumference of the ocean of
time, and what is its depth? A. The circumference of the ocean of time is eight
hundred thousand yojanas. Its depth is one hundred and nine thousand, seventy
thousand, six hundred and fifty yojanas, a little more. Gatha - One hundred and
nine thousand, seventy thousand is the circumference of it. Six hundred and
fifty is the depth of the ocean of time. 1. P. What number of moons have shone,
shine, or will shine in the ocean of time? 2. P. What number of suns have risen,
rise, or will rise? 3. P. What number of great planets have moved, move, or will
move? 4. P. What number of constellations have joined, join, or will join? 5. P.
What number of kodi-kodi of stars have shone, shine, or will shine? 1. A. Forty-
two moons have shone, shine, or will shine in the ocean of time. 2. A. Forty-two
suns have risen, rise, or will rise. 3. A. Three thousand, six hundred and
sixty-nine great planets have moved, move, or will move. 4. A. Eleven hundred
and sixty-four constellations have joined, join, or will join. 5. A. Twenty-
eight hundred thousand, twelve thousand, nine hundred and fifty kodi-kodi of
stars have shone, shine, or will shine. Gatha - Forty-two moons, forty-two suns.
In the ocean of time, they move with their associated planets. One thousand and
sixty-four constellations. Six hundred and sixty-nine great planets, three
thousand. Twenty-eight hundred thousand, twelve thousand. Nine hundred and fifty
kodi-kodi of stars.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 184 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra .. pa. tA kAloe NaM samudde kevaiyaM
cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM, kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM ? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA kAloe
NaM samudde aTTha joyaNasayasahassAI cakkavAlavikhaMbheNaM, pnnnntte| ekkANauI
joyaNasayasahassAiM sattariM ca sahassAI chacca paMcuttare joyaNasae kiMci
visesAhie parikkheveNaM, Ahie tti vejaa| gAhA - ekkANauI sayasahassaM, sattari
sahassAI parirao tss| AhiyAI chacca paMcuttarAI, kAlodadhi vrss|| 1 pa. tA kAloe
NaM samudde - kevaiyA caMdA pabhAsiMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA, pabhAsissaMti vA ? 2
pa. kevaiyA sUrA taviMsu vA, taveMti vA tavissaMtti vA ? 3 pa. kevaiyA gahA
cAraM cariMsu vA, caraMti vA carissaMti vA ? 4 pa. kevaiyA NakkhattA jogaM
joiMsu vA, joeMti vA joissaMti vA? - 5 pa. kevaiyA tArAgaNakoDikoDIo sobhaM
sobhesu vA sobhaMti vA sobhissaMti vA ? 1 u. tA kAloe NaM samudde bAyAlIsaM
caMdA pabhAseMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA, pbhaasissNti.vaa| 2 u. bAyAlIsaM sUrA
taveMsu vA, taveMti vA, tavissaMti vaa| 3 u. tinni sahassA chacca channauyA
mahaggahasayA cAraM cariMsu vA caraMti vA, carissaMti vaa| 4 u. ekkArasa
chAvattarA NakkhattasayA jogaM joiMsu vA joeMti vA, joissaMti vaa| 5 u.
aTThAvIsaM sayasahassAiM, bArasa sahassAiM nava ya sayAI paNNAsA
tArAgaNakoDikoDIo sobhaM sobhesu vA, sobhaMti vA, sobhissaMti vaa| gAhAo -
bAyAlIsaM caMdA, bAyAlIsaM ca dinnkraadittaa| kAlodahimi ee, carati
sNbddhlesaagaa|| NakkhattasahassaM, egami chAvattaraM ca stmnnnne| chaccasayA
chaNNauyA, mahaggaha, tiNNi ya shssaa|| aTThAvIsaM sayasahassaM, bArasa ya
shssaaii| NavayasayA paNNAsA, tArAgaNa koddikiiddiinnN||

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nineteenth Chapter] [185] [The Island of Pukhkaravara]  At that time, there is
an island named Pukhkaravara in the ocean, which is circular in shape and
completely surrounded on all sides.  Q. Is that island of Pukhkaravara circular
or elliptical in shape? A. That island of Pukhkaravara is circular, not
elliptical.  Q. What is the diameter of that circular island of Pukhkaravara?
What is its circumference? A. It has a diameter of sixteen thousand yojanas.
Its circumference is one yojana kodi, eighty-nine thousand, eight hundred and
forty-nine yojanas.  Verse: One kodi, eighty-nine thousand, Eight hundred and
forty-nine, Is the circumference of Pukhkaravara.  Q. On that island of
Pukhkaravara, 1. How many moons shine, shone, or will shine? 2. How many suns
rise, rose, or will rise? 3. How many great planets revolve, revolved, or will
revolve? 4. How many constellations move, moved, or will move? 5. How many kodi-
kodi stars shine, shone, or will shine?  A. 1. Forty-two hundred moons shine,
shone, or will shine. 2. Forty-two hundred suns rise, rose, or will rise. 3.
Twelve thousand, six hundred and sixty great planets revolve, revolved, or will
revolve. 4. Four thousand and thirty-two constellations move, moved, or will
move. 5. Sixteen thousand, forty-two thousand and four hundred kodi-kodi stars
shine, shone, or will shine.  Verses: Forty-two hundred moons, Forty-two hundred
suns, Shine on the island of Pukhkaravara.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 185 pukkharavaradIve tA kAloyaM NaM samudaM pukkharavare
NAma dIve vaTTe valayAkArasaMThANasaMThie savvao samaMtA saMparikkhittA NaM
citttthi| pa. tA pukkhare NaM dIve kiM samacakkavAlasaMThie visamacakvAlasaMThie
? u. tA pukkharavare NaM dIve samacakkavAlasaMThie, no vismckvaalsNtthie| pa. tA
pukkharavare NaM dIve kevaiyaM samacakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM ? kevaiyaM
parikkheveNaM ? u. tA solasa joyaNasayasahassAI ckkvaalvikkhNbhennN| egA
joyaNakoDI bANauiM ca sayasahassAI auNAvanaM ca sahassAiM aTTha cauNaue
joyaNasae parikkheveNaM, Ahie tti vejjaa| gAhA - koDI bANauI khalu, auNANauiM
bhave shssaaii| aTThasayA cauNauyA, parirao pokkhrvrss|| 1. pa. tA pukkharavare
NaM dIve - kevaiyA caMdA pabhAsiMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA, pabhAsissaMti vA ? 2 pa.
kevaiyA sUrA taviMsu vA, taveMti vA tavissaMtti vA ? 3 pa. kevaiyA gahA cAraM
cariMsu vA, caraMti vA carissaMti vA ? 4 pa. kevaiyA NakkhattA jogaM joiMsu vA,
joeMti vA joissaMti vA ? 5 pa. kevaiyA tArAgaNakoDikoDIo sobhaM sobheMsu vA
sobhaMti vA sobhissaMti vA ? 1 u. tA coyAlaM caMdasayaM pabhAseMsu vA,
pabhAsiMti vA, pabhAsissaMti vaa| 2 u. coMyAlaM sUriyANaM sayaMtaviMsu vA,
taveMti vA, tavissaMti vaa| 3 u. bArasa sahassAiM chacca bAbatarA mahaggahasayA
cAraM cariMsu vA, caranti vA, carissaMti vaa| 4 u. cattAri sahassAiM battIsaM ca
NakkhatA jogaM joiMsu vA, joyaMti vA, joissaMti vaa| 5 u. chaNNauisayasahassAI,
coyAlIsaM sahassAiM catAri ya sayAI tArAgaNakoDikoDINaM sobhaM sobhesu vA,
sobheti vA, sobhissaMti vaa| gAhAo cattAlaM caMdasayaM, cattAlaM ceva sUriyANa
syN| pokkharavaradIvammi ya, caraMti ee pbhaasNtaa||

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[186] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] There are four thousand and thirty-two
constellations. There are six hundred and seventy-two great planets and twelve
thousand planets. There are sixty-nine hundred thousand and forty-four thousand
stars. There are four hundred star clusters, countless kotis of stars.  In the
Manushutra mountain, In the Manushutra mountain, which is described in the
scriptures, the Pushkaravar island, which is circular in shape and is divided
into two parts, is situated. These two parts are: 1. The inner Pushkaravardha,
and 2. The outer Pushkaravardha. In the inner Pushkaravardha, Q. Is the inner
Pushkaravardha circular or non-circular? A. It is circular, not non-circular. Q.
What is the diameter and circumference of the inner Pushkaravardha? A. The
diameter of the inner Pushkaravardha is eight hundred thousand yojanas, and the
circumference is one kodi, forty-two hundred thousand, thirty thousand, and two
yojanas. "The diameter of the inner Pushkaravardha is one hundred thousand." Q.
How many moons shine, are shining, or will shine in the inner Pushkaravardha? Q.
How many suns shine, are shining, or will shine? Q. How many planets move, are
moving, or will move? Q. How many constellations shine, are shining, or will
shine? Q. How many star clusters shine, are shining, or will shine? A. Sixty-two
moons shine, are shining, or will shine. A. Sixty-two suns shine, are shining,
or will shine. A. Six thousand great planets, three hundred and sixty-four
planets move, are moving, or will move. A. Two thousand and sixteen
constellations shine, are shining, or will shine. A. Countless kotis of star
clusters shine, are shining, or will shine. These are the first two lines of the
verse.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 186 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra cattAri sahassAiM, battIsaM ceva huMti nnkkhttaa|
chacca sayA bAvattaraM, mahaggahA bAraha shssaa|| chaNNaui sayasahassA,
cottAlIsaM khalu bhave shssaaii| cattAra ya sayA khalu, tArAgaNa koDi koDI nnN||
mANusuttare pavvae tA pukkharavarassa NaM dIvassa bahumajhadesabhAe mANusuttare
NAmaM pavvae paNNatte, vaTTe valayAkArasaMThANasaMThie je NaM pukkharavaraM
dIvaM duhA vibhayamANe vibhayamANe ciTThai, taMjahA - 1. abbhiMtarapukkharaddhaM
ca, 2. bAhirapukkhaddharaddhaM c| abhiMtara-pukkharaddhe pa. tA abhiMtara-
pukkharaddhe NaM kiM samacakkavAlasaMThie, visamacakkavAlasaMThie ? u. tA
samacakkavAlasaMThie, no vismckkvaalsNtthie| pa. tA abbhiMtara-pukkharaddhe NaM
kevaiyaM cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM ? Ahie tti vejjaa| u. tA
aTTha joyaNasayasahassAiM cakkavAlavikkhaMbhe NaM, ekkA joyaNa koDI bAyAlIsaM ca
sayasahassAI tIsaM ca sahassAI do aMuNApaNNe joyaNasae parikkheveNaM, Ahie tti
vaejjA, 'advaiva sayasahassA abhiMtarapukkharassa vikkhNbho|" 1. pa. tA
abbhiMtarapukkharaddhe NaM kevaiyA caMdA pabhAseMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA,
pabhAsissaMti vA? 2 pa. kevaiyA sUrA taveMsu vA, taveMti vA tavissaMtti vA ? 3
pa. kevaiyA gahA cAraM cariMsu vA, caraMti vA carissaMti vA ? 4 pa. kevaiyA
NakkhattA jogaM joiMsu vA, joeMti vA joissaMti vA ? 5 pa. kevaiyA
tArAgaNakoDikoDIo sobhaM sobheMsu vA sobhaMti vA sobhissaMti vA? 1 u. bAvattariM
caMdA pabhAseMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA, pabhAsissaMti vaa| 2 u. bAvattari sUriyA
taveMsu vA, taveMti vA, tavissaMti vaa| 3 u. cha mahaggahasahassA tinni sae ya
chattIsA cAraM careMsu vA, caraMti vA, carissaMti vaa| 4 u. doNNi solA
NakkhattasahassA jogaM joeMsu vA joeMti vA, joissaMti vaa| 1. ye gAthA ke
prArambha ke do pada haiN|

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Prabhruta  **5. U.** Eighty-eight hundred thousand, twenty-two
thousand, two hundred, star-group-kodi-kodi, shine, shine in, shine, or will
shine.  **Gatha:**  * In the realm of the Pukkhara-varda, * Seventy-two are the
moons, seventy-two are the suns. * They move, these shining ones. * Three
hundred thirty-six, six hundred thousand are the great planets. * Sixteen, two
thousand. * Of the stars, there are * Twenty-two thousand. * Star-group-kodi-
kodi.  **88 hundred thousand, two hundred in the realm of the Pukkhara, in the
Samayakshetra.**  **P.** So, in the Samayakshetra, what is the length, what is
the breadth, what is the circumference? Tell me.  **U.** So, eighty-eight
hundred thousand yojana is the length, breadth. One yojana-kodi, eighty-two
hundred thousand, two hundred, forty-five yojana is the circumference. Tell me.
**Gatha:**  * Eighty-eight hundred thousand, * The circumference of the
Samayakshetra. * One kodi, eighty-two thousand, two hundred, forty-five. * The
circumference of the Samayakshetra, the same for the realm of the Pukkhara.
**1. P.** So, in the Samayakshetra, how many moons shine, shine in, or will
shine? **2. P.** How many suns move, move in, or will move? **3. P.** How many
planets move, move in, or will move? **4. P.** How many stars join, join in, or
will join? **5. P.** How many star-group-kodi-kodi shine, shine in, or will
shine?  **187**  **1. U.** So, thirty-two hundred moons shine, shine in, or will
shine. **2. U.** Thirty-two hundred suns move, move in, or will move. **3. U.**
So, eleven thousand, six hundred sixteen great planets move, move in, or will
move.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ prAbhRta ] 5 u. aDayAlIsaM sayasahassA, bAvIsaM ca sahassA doNNi ya
sayA tArAgaNakoDikoDINaM sobhaM sobheMsu vA sobhaMti vA, sobhissaMti vA  /
gAhAo - pukkharavaradIvaDDhe bAvattaraM ca caMdA bAvattarimeva diNakarAdittA  /
caraMti ee pabhAseMtA  //  tiNi sayA chattIsA, chacaca sahassA mahaggahANaM tu
/  solAI duve sahassAiM  //  NakkhattANaM tu bhave, bAvIsaM khalu bhave
sahassAiM  /  tArAgaNakoDikoDINaM  //  aDayAlasayasahassA, do ya saya
pukkharaddhe, samayakkhette * pa. tA samayakkhette NaM kevaiyaM AyAma -
vikkhaMbheNaM kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM ? Ahie tti vaejjA  /  u. tA paNayAlIsaM
joyaNasayasahassAiM AyAma - vikkhaMbheNaM egA joyaNakoDI, bAyAlIsaM ca
sayasahassAiM doNNi ya aDaNApaNNe joyaNasae vikkhaMbheNaM Ahie tti vaejjA, gAhA
paNayAla saya sahassA, samayakhettassa vikkhaMbho  /  koDI bAyAlIsaM, sahassa
dusayA ya auNapaNNAsA  /  samayakhettassa parirao, emeva ya pukkharaddhassa  //
1. pa. tA samayakhette NaM kevaiyA caMdA pabhAseMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA,
pabhAsissaMti vA ? 2 pa. kevaiyA sUrA taveMsu vA, taveMti vA tavissaMtti vA ? 3
pa. kevaiyA gahA cAraM cariMsu vA, caraMti vA carissaMti vA ? 4 pa. kevaiyA
NakkhattA jogaM joiMsu vA, joeMti vA joissaMti vA ? 5 pa. kevaiyA
tArAgaNakoDikoDIo sobhaM sobheMsu vA sobhaMti vA sobhissaMti vA ? - 187 - 1 u.
tA battIsa caMdasayaM pabhAseMsu vA, pabhAsiMti vA, pabhAsissaMti vA  /  2 u.
battIsa sUrasayaM taveMsu vA, taveMti vA, tavissaMti vA  /  3 u. tA ekkArasa
sahassA chacca solasa mahaggahasayA cAraM carisu vA, caraMti vA, carissaMti vA
/

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 188] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra 4. Those three thousand six hundred and sixty-
nine constellations, they shine, or they are shining, or they will shine.  5.
Those eighty-eight hundred thousand, forty thousand, seven hundred stars, they
are the brilliance of the kodi-kodi (infinite) stars.  Gatha: Thirty-two hundred
moons, thirty-two suns, they are the brilliance of all the human world.  Eleven
thousand, six hundred and sixteen great planets, six hundred and sixty-nine
constellations, three thousand.  Eighty-eight, forty thousand, hundred thousand
in the human world.  Seven hundred less, the kodi-kodi stars.  This is the star
cluster, in summary, in the human world.  But outside, the stars are countless,
as said by the Jinas.  This is the star cluster, as spoken in the human world.
It shines, moving like a flower cluster, in the four kalpas.  Sun, moon,
planets, constellations, they are like this in the human world.  Their names and
lineage, they are not to be known, they are beyond knowledge.  The clusters of
the shining ones: The cluster of the moon, in the human world.  Two moons, two
suns, they are in one cluster.  The cluster of the great planets, in the human
world.  Sixty-seven planets, they are in one cluster.  The cluster of the
constellations, in the human world.  Fifty-six constellations, they are in one
cluster.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 188 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 4 u. tA tiNNi sahassA chacca chaNNauyA
NakkhattasayA jogaM joIsu vA joeMti vA, joissaMti vaa| _ 5 u. tA aTThAsII
sayasahassAiM cattAlIsaM ca sahassA satta ya sayA tArAgaNakoDikoDINaM sobhaM
sobhesu vA, sobhaMti vA, sobhissaMti vaa| gAhAo - battIsaM caMdasayaM, battIsaM
ceva sUriyANa sraaN| sayalaM mANusaloyaM caraMti ee pbhaaseNtaa|| ekkArasa ya
sahassA, chappiya solA mahaggahANaM tu| chacca sayA chaNNauyA NakkhattA tiNNi ya
shssaa|| aTThAsIi cattAiM, saya sahassAI mnnuylogNmi| satta ya sayA aNUNA,
taaraagnnkoddikoddiinnN|| eso tArApiMDo, savvasamAseNa mnnuylogNmi| bahiyA puNa
tArAo, jiNehiM bhaNiyA asNkhejaa|| evaiyaM tAragaM, jaM bhaNiyaM mANusaMsi
logNmi| cAraM kalaMbuyA-pupphasaMThiyaM joisaM cri|| ravi sasi gaha NakkhattA,
evaiyA AhiyA mnnuyloe| jesiMNAmAgottaM, na pAgayA, pnnnnvehiti|| joisiyANaM
piDagAI - chAvaDhei piDagAI, caMdAiccANa mnnuylogNmi| do caMdA do sUrA, ya huMti
ekkekae pidde|| chAvaTTi piDagAI, mahAgahANaM mnnuylogNmi| chAvattaraM
gahasayaM, hoi ekkekae pidde|| chAvaDhei piDagAI NakkhattANaM tu mnnuylogNmi|
chappaNNaM NakkhattA huMti ekkekkae pidde||

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Chapter  **The Rows of the Zodiac**  - There are four rows of the
zodiac in the human world. Each row has six signs. There are sixty-six signs in
the human world. Each row has six signs. - There are sixty-six signs in the
human world. Each row has six signs. - There are fifty-six rows of
constellations in the human world. Each row has six signs.  **The Circle of the
Zodiac**  - All the circles are in the form of a lotus. - They revolve around
Mount Meru, in a circular motion, with the moon, sun, and planets. - The
constellations and stars are also in a circular motion, revolving around Mount
Meru.  **The Movement of the Zodiacal Circles**  - The moon and sun do not move
up or down. - The movement of the circles is only from inside to outside and
from outside to inside.  **The Four Causes of Happiness and Suffering in the
Zodiac**  - The moon, sun, constellations, and planets are the four causes of
happiness and suffering for humans.  **The Zodiacal Sphere**  - The sphere of
the zodiac expands when they enter it. - It contracts when they leave it. - The
sphere of the zodiac is like a lotus bud. - The moon and sun are inside the
sphere, and they expand outwards.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ prAbhRta ] joisiyANaM paMtIo gAo - - cattAri ya paMtIo, caMdAiccANa
maNuyalogaMmi  /  chAvaTThi chAvaTThi ca, havai ekkekkiyA paMtI  //  chAvattaraM
gahANaM, paMtisayaM havaMti maNuyalogaMmi  /  chAvaTThi chAvaTThi ca havai
ekkekkiyA paMtI  //  chappannaM paMtIo, NakkhattANaM tu maNuyalogaMmi  /
chAvaTThi chAvaTThi havai ekkekkiyA paMtI  //  joisiyANaM maMDalA gAhAo
padAhiNavatta maMDalA savve  /  te merumaNucaraMtA, aNavaTTiya jogehiM, caMdA
sUrA gahagaNA ya  //  Nakkhatta- tArAgANaM, avaTThiyA, maMDalA muNeyavvA  /
te'vi ya padAhiNAvattemeva meruM aNucaraMti  //  joisiyANaM maMDalasaMkamaNaM -
'rayaNikara- diNakarANaM, uddhaM ca aheva saMkamo natthi  /  maMDalasaMkamaNaM
puNa, sabdhaMtara - bAhiraM tirie  //  joisANaM cAraM suha- duhassa
nimittakAraNaM - rayaNikara- diNakarANaM, NakkhattANaM mahaggahANaM ca  /
cAraviseseNa bhave, suha- dukkhavihI maNussANaM  //  joisiyANaM tAvakkhettaM
tesiM pavisaMtANaM tAvakkhettaM tu vaDDhae NiyayaM  /  teNeva kameNa puNo,
parihAyai nikkhamANANaM  //  teMsi kalaMbuyApupphasaMThiyA huMti tAvakkhettapahA
/  aMto ya saMkuDA bAhiM vitthaDA caMda-sUrANaM  //  [ 189

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 190] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra ]  **Gatha:** How does the moon increase? How
does the moon decrease? Is it by time or by space? By what nature does the moon
increase and decrease? How does the Rahu-Vimana always remain inseparable from
the moon? It is four angulas in size, and the moon always travels with it.
**Gatha:** It increases by twenty-eight, day by day, during the bright
fortnight. As the moon increases, it also decreases in time.  **Gatha:** It
increases by one-fifteenth, and it also decreases by one-fifteenth.  **Gatha:**
Thus, the moon increases, and the moon decreases. It is by time or by space, by
this nature does the moon increase and decrease.  **Gatha:** What are the
celestial bodies in the human realm? There are four types of celestial bodies.
There are five types of celestial bodies: the moon, the sun, and the planets.
**Gatha:** Beyond these, there are the moon, the planets, the stars, and the
constellations. There are not four types of celestial bodies, but they are to be
considered as four.  **Gatha:** What is the measure of the celestial bodies in
the Jambudvipa, the Lavana, and the Dhāyisaṇḍa?  **Gatha:** In the Jambudvipa,
there are twice as many, in the Lavana there are four times as many, and in the
Lavana-Gāha there are three times as many. In the Dhāyisaṇḍa, there are twelve
moons and suns.  **Gatha:** There are two moons in this Jambudvipa, four in the
Lavana, and twelve moons and suns in the Dhāyisaṇḍa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 190 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra caMdassa parivuDDi-parihANI - gAhAo - keNai vaDDai
caMdo ? parihANI keNa huMti caMdassa ? kAlo vA joNho vA ? keNa'NubhAveNa
caMdassa? kiNhaM rAhuvimANaM NiccaM caMdeNa hoi avirahiyaM  /
cauraMgulamasaMpattaM, hiccA caMdassa taM cri|| bAvaSTuiM bAvaDhei, divase
divase tu sukkpkkhss| jaM parivaDDai caMdo, khavei ceva kAle nnN|| paNNarasai
bhAgeNa ya caMdaM paNNarasameva taM vri| paNNarasai bhAgeNa ya, puNo'vi taM ceva
vkkmi|| evaM vaDDhai caMdo, parihANI eva hoi cNdss| kAlo vA joNho vA,
evaSNubhAveNa cNdss|| aNavaTThiyA avaTThiyA vA joisiyA - gAhAo - aMtomaNussa
khette, havaMti cArovagA u uvvnnnnaa| paMcavihA joisiyA, caMdA sUrA gahagaNA y||
teNa paraM je sesA, cNdaaicc-gh-taar-nnkkhttaa| Natthi gaI Navi cAro, avaTThiyA
te munneyvvaa|| aDDhAijesu dIva-samuddesu joisiyANaM pamANaM - gAhAo - evaM
jaMbuddIve, duguNA, lavaNe caugguNA huNti| lAvaNagA ya tiguNiyA, sasi-sUrA
dhaayisNdde|| do caMdA iha dIve, cattAri ya sAyare lvnntoe| dhAyaisaMDe dIve,
bArasa caMdA ya sUrA y||

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Chapter  **The Measure of the Distance of the Stars from Humans**
**Verse:**  - The moon is three times the size of the earth, and the sun is many
times larger than the moon. The sun is like a blazing fire, and the moon is like
a cool, refreshing water. The stars are like tiny sparks, and the earth is like
a small speck of dust.  **Verse:**  - The distance between the moon and the sun
is fifty thousand yojanas. The distance between the sun and the sun is one
hundred thousand yojanas. The distance between the moon and the moon is one
hundred thousand yojanas. The distance between the earth and the stars is many
yojanas.  **The One Hundred and One Family of Stars**  **Verse:**  - There are
eighty-eight constellations and twenty-eight stars in the one hundred and one
family of stars. There are sixty-six thousand, nine hundred and fifty stars in
the one hundred and one family of stars.  **The Movement of the Stars in the
Human Realm**  **Question:**  - In the human realm, what is the movement of the
moon, sun, constellations, and stars? Are they moving in a straight line, a
circle, a spiral, or a combination of these?  **Answer:**  - The moon, sun,
constellations, and stars are not moving in a straight line, a circle, a spiral,
or a combination of these. They are moving in a way that is beyond our
comprehension.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ prAbhRta ] mANusaNagassa bahiyA joisiyANaM pamANaM gAhAo - -
dhAyaisaMDappabhiissa, uddiTThA tiguNiyA bhave caMdA  /  AillacaMda sahiyA,
aNaMtarANaMtare khetteg|| rikkhaggaha- tArAgaggaM, dIva-samudde jahicchasI NAuM
/  tassasIhiM tagguNiyaM, rikkha-ggaha-tAraggaM tu  //  bahiyA u mANusaNagassa
caMda-sUrANa'vaTThiyA joNhA  /  caMdA abhiIjuttA, sUrA puNa huMti pussehiM  //
mANusanagampa bahiyA joisiyANaM aMtaraM - - gAhAo - caMdAo sUrassa ya, sUrA
caMdassa aMtaraM hoI  /  paNNAsasahassAiM tu joyaNANaM aNUNAIM  //  sUrassa ya
sUrassa ya, sasiNo sasiNo ya aMtaraM hoI  /  bAhiM tu mANusanagassa joyaNANaM
sayasahassaM  /  sUratariyA caMdA, caMdaMtariyA ya diNayarA dittA  /  .
cittataralesAgA, suhalesA maMdalesA ya  //  1 [191 mANusanagassa bahiyA
egasasIparivAro - gAhAo - aTThAsIiMca gahA, aTThAvIsaM ca huMti NakkhattA NaM  /
egasasI parivAro, etto tArANa vocchAmi  //  chAvaTThi sahassAiM Nava ceva
sayAiMpaMcasayarAiM  /  egasasI parivAro, tArAgaNa koDikoDINaM  //
aMtomaNussakhette joisiyANaM uDDhovavaNNagAiparUvaNaM - pa. aMto bhaNussakhette
je caMdima-sUriyA gaha Nakkhatta- tArArUvA te NaM devA kiM uDDhovavaNNagA,
kappovavaNNagA, vimANovavaNNagA, cArovavaNNagA, cAradvitiyA, gatiratiyA
gatisamAvaNNagA ? u. tA te NaM devA no uDDhovavaNNagA, no kappovavaNNagA,
vimANovavaNNagA, cArovavaNNagA,

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[192] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] They are not aerial, not terrestrial, not
celestial. With a vast, magnificent, and well-arranged structure, extending for
thousands of yojanas, with thousands of such regions outside, and with a
surrounding, vast, and magnificent, celestial palace, with a resounding,
musical, and melodious sound of celestial drums, with a roaring, loud, and
thunderous sound of celestial lions, they enjoy celestial pleasures and wander
about. With a beautiful, bright, and radiant light, with a mind full of joy,
with various celestial pleasures, they shine, illuminate, and radiate light in
all directions, like stars in the sky. P. Then, which Indra do these gods
worship? How do they worship him? U. Four or five Samaṇīya gods reside in that
place, until another Indra is born in this world. P. For how long is it ordained
that they reside in the Indra's abode? U. For one period, or six months, in the
higher realm.  The transformation of the moon and the sun, the stars and the
constellations, outside the human realm - P. Are those gods, the moon, the sun,
the stars, and the constellations, outside the human realm, aerial, terrestrial,
celestial, or all of these? Are they four-bodied, two-bodied, terrestrial, or
celestial? U. Those gods are not aerial, not terrestrial, not celestial, not all
of these, not four-bodied, not two-bodied, not terrestrial, not celestial. With
a vast, magnificent, and well-arranged structure, extending for hundreds of
thousands of yojanas, with hundreds of thousands of such regions outside, and
with a surrounding, vast, and magnificent, celestial palace, with a resounding,
musical, and melodious sound of celestial drums, with a roaring, loud, and
thunderous sound of celestial lions, they enjoy celestial pleasures and wander
about. With a beautiful, bright, and radiant light, with a mind full of joy,
with various celestial pleasures, they shine, illuminate, and radiate light in
all directions, like stars in the sky. P. Then, which Indra do these gods
worship? How do they worship him? U. Four or five Samaṇīya gods reside in that
place, until another Indra is born in this world. P. For how long is it ordained
that they reside in the Indra's abode? U. For one period, or six months, in the
higher realm.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 192 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra no thAraTThaIyA gairaiyA gaisamAvaNNA  /
uDDhAmuha-kalaMbu apupphasaMThANasaMThiehiM joyaNasAhassiehiM tAvakkhettehiM
sAhassiehiM bAhirAhi ya veDavviyAhiM parisAhiM mahayAhayaNaTTagIyavAiya-taMtI
tala-tAla-tuDiya- ghaNamuiMga-paDuppavAiyaraveNaM, mahayA ukkiTTha
sIhaNAdabolakalakalaraveNaM, acchaM pavvayarAyaM payAhiNAvattamaMDalacAraM meruM
aNupariyaTTheti  /  puvvaiMdassa cavaNANaMtaraM aNNaiMdassa uvavajjaNaM paM. tA
teMsi NaM devANaM jAhe iMde cayai se kayamidANiM pakarei ? u. tA cattAri paMca
sAmANiyA devA taM ThANaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharaMti jAva aNNe ittha iMde
uvavaNNe bhavai  /  pa. tA iMdaThANe NaM kevaieNaM kAleNaM vihariyaM paNNattaM ?
u. tA jahaNNeNaM ikkaM samayaM ukkoseNaM chammAse  /  mANusakhettassa
bahiyAjoisiyANaMuDDhovavaNNagAiparUvaNaM - pa. tA bahiyA NaM mANurasakhettassa
je caMdimasUriyA gahagaNa - Nakkhatta-tArArUvA te NaM devA kiM uDDhovavaNNagA,
kappovavaNNagA, vimANovavaNNagA, cArovavaNNagA, cArar3iyA, gairaIyA
gaisamAvaNNagA ? u. tA te NaM devA no uDDhovavaNNagA, no kappovavaNNagA,
vimANovavaNNagA, no cArovavaNNaMgA, cAradviiyA no gairaiyA, no gaisamAvaNNA  /
pagiTThagasaMThANasaMThiehiM joyaNasayasAhassiehiM tAvakkhettehiM
sayasAhassiehiM bAhirAhiM veuvviyAhiM parisAhiM mahayAhaya-NaTTa-gIya - vAiya-
taMtI tala-tAla-tuDiya - ghaNamuiMga-paDuppavAiyaraveNaM, mahayA ukkiTTha
sIhaNAda- bolakalakalaraveNaM, divvAiM bhogabhogAI bhuMjamANe viharar3a  /
suhalesA maMdalesA maMdAyavalesA, cittaMtaralesA, aNNa'NNa sabhogADhAhiM lesAhiM
kUDA iva ThANaThiyA te padese savvao samaMtA obhAsaMti ujjoveMti taveMti
pabhAseMti  /  pa. tA teMsi NaM devANaM jAhe iMde cayai, se kahamidANiM pakarei
? u. tA cattAri paMca sAmANiyA devA taM ThANaM uvasaMpajittANaM viharaMti, jAva
aNNe ittha iMde uvavaNNe bhavai  /  pa. tA iMdaThANe NaM kevaieNaM kAleNaM
virahiyaM paNNatte  /  u. tA jahaNNeNaM ekkaM samayaM, ukkoseNaM chammAse  /

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nineteenth Praabhrut] [193 The extent of the Sesana island-ocean is 101. That
island, named Pukkharode, is situated in the Pukkharode ocean, circular in
shape, completely surrounded on all sides. Q. Is that Pukkharode ocean circular
or elliptical? A. It is circular, not elliptical. Q. What is the diameter of
that Pukkharode ocean? What is its circumference? What is said? A. It is said to
be of the extent of countless yojanas in diameter, and countless yojanas in
circumference. Q. How many moons shine in that Pukkharode ocean, and how many
constellations of stars shine brightly? A. Countless moons shine in that
Pukkharode ocean, and countless constellations of stars shine brightly. Thus, in
the same way - 1. Varunavare island, 2. Varunode ocean, 1. Kheeravare island, 2.
Khirode ocean, 1. Ghayavare island, 2. Ghayode ocean, 1. Khoyavare island, 2.
Khoyode ocean, 1. Nandisaravare island, 2. Nandisaare ocean, 1. Aruna island, 2.
Arunode ocean, 1. Arunavare island, 2. Arunavarode ocean, 1. Arunavaroabhase
island, 2. Arunavarabhasode ocean, 1. Kudale island, 2. Kudalode ocean, 1.
Kudalavare island, 2. Kudalavarode ocean, 1. Kudalavaroabhase island, 2.
Kudalavarabhasode ocean. The diameter and circumference of all of them are the
same as the Pukkharodesagar. That Kudalavarabhasode ocean is situated around the
Ruya island, circular in shape, completely surrounded on all sides.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 193 sesANaM dIva-samuddANaM AyAmAha 101. tA
pukkharavaraMNaM dIvaM pukkharode NAmaM samudde vaTTe valayAkArasaMThANasaMThie
savvao samaMttA saMparikkhittA NaM citttthi| pa. tA pukkharode NaM samudde kiM
samacakkavAlasaMThie visamacakkavAlasaMThie ? u. tA samacakkavAlasaMThie no
visamacakkavAlasaMThie  /  pa. tA pukkharode NaM samudde kevaiyaM
cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM ? kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM ? Ahie tti vaejjA? u. tA
saMkhejAI joyaNasahassAiM AyAmavikkhaMbheNaM, saMkhejAI joyaNasahassAI
parikkheveNaM Ahie tti vejaa| pa. tA pukkharode NaM samudde kevaiyA caMdA
pabhAseMsuvA, jAva kevaiyA tArAgaNa-koDikoDIo sobhaM sobhissaMti vaa| u. tA
pukkharode NaM samudde saMkhejjA caMdA pabhAseMsu vA jAva saMkhejAo
tArAgaNakoDikoDIo sobhaM sobhissaMti vaa| evaM eeNaM abhilAveNaM - 1. varuNavare
dIve, 2. varuNode samudde, 1. khIravare dIve, 2. khIrode samudde, 1. ghayavare
dIve, 2. ghayode samudde, 1. khoyavare dIve, 2. khoyode samudde, 1.
naMdIsaravare dIve, 2. naMdIsare samudde, 1. aruNe dIve, 2. aruNode samudde, 1.
aruNavare dIve, 2. aruNavarode samudde, 1. aruNavarobhAse dIve, 2.
aruNavarabhAsode samudde, 1. kuDale dIve, 2. kuDalode samudde, 1. kuDalavare
dIve, 2. kuDalavarode samudde, 1. kuDalavarobhAse dIve, 2. kuDalavarabhAsode
smudde| savvesiM vikkhaMbha-parikkhevo joisAiM ca pukkhrodsaagrsrisaaii| tA
kuDalavarabhAsodaM samudaM ruyae dIve vaTTe valayAkArasaMThANasaMThie, savvao
samaMtA saMparikkhittANaM

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[194] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] "Tell me, is the Sun a world with a circular or an
elliptical shape?" "It is a world with a circular shape, not an elliptical one."
"Tell me, what is the diameter and circumference of the Sun?" "It is said that
the diameter of the Sun is countless thousands of yojanas, and its circumference
is countless thousands of yojanas." "Tell me, how many moons and stars adorn the
Sun?" "It is said that countless moons and countless star-clusters adorn the
Sun." In the same way, there are: 1. The Ruya-Gava-world, 2. The Ruya-Gava-
ocean, 1. The Ruya-Gava-world with light, 2. The Ruya-Gava-ocean with light. In
the same way, there are three worlds and oceans, up to: 1. The Sun-world, 2. The
Sun-ocean, 1. The Sun-world with light, 2. The Sun-ocean with light. All of
these have a diameter and circumference equal to the Ruya-Gava-world. Now, the
Sun-ocean with light is surrounded by a world called Deva, which is circular in
shape and completely enclosed. "Tell me, is the Deva-world circular or
elliptical?" "It is circular, not elliptical." "Tell me, what is the diameter
and circumference of the Deva-world?" "It is said that the diameter of the Deva-
world is countless thousands of yojanas, and its circumference is countless
thousands of yojanas." "Tell me, how many moons and star-clusters adorn the
Deva-world?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 194 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra citttthi| pa. tA ruyae NaM dIve
samacakkavAlasaMThie, visamacakkavAlasaMThie ? u. tA samacakkavAlasaMThie, no
vismckkvaalsNtthie|| pa. tA ruyae NaM dIve kevaiyaM samacakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM
kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM? u. tA asaMkhejjAI joyaNasahassAI cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM,
asaMkhejAI joyaNasahassAI parikkheveNaM Ahie tti vaejjA, pa. tAruyae NaM dIve
kevaiyA caMdA pabhAseMsu vA jAva kevaiyA tArAgaNakoDikoDIo sobhaM so.su
sobhissaMti vA? u. tAruyae NaM dIve asaMkhejA caMdA pabhAseMsu vA jAva
asaMkhejAo tArAgaNakoDikoDIo sobhaM sobhissaMti vaa| evaM ruyagode samudde, 1.
ruyagavare dIve, 2. ruyagavarode smudde| 1. ruyagavarobhAse dIve, 2.
ruyagavarabhAsode smuhe| evaM tipaDoyArA dIve-samuddA NAyavvA, jAva, 1. sUre
dIve, 2. sUrode samudde, 1. sUravare dIve, 2. sUravarode samudda, 1.
sUravarobhAse dIve, 2. sUravarabhAsode smudde| savvesiM vikkhaMbha-parikkhevo
joisAiM ruygvrdiivsrisaaii| tA sUravarobhAsodaM NaM samudaM deve NAmaM dove
vaTTe valAyAkArasaMThANasaMThie savvao samaMtA saMparikkhittANaM citttthi| pa.
tA deve NaM dIve kiM samacakkavAlasaMThie visamacakkavAlasaMThie ? u. tA
samacakkavAlasaMThie no visamacakkavAlasaMThie  /  pa. tA deve NaM dIve kevaiyaM
cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM? Ahie tti vaejjA  /  u. tA
asaMkhejjAiM joyaNasahassAiM cakkavAlavikkhaMbheNaM asaMkhejAiM joyaNasahassAI
parikkheveNaM Ahie tti vejjaa| pa. tA deveNaM dIve kevaiyA caMdA pabhAseMsu vA
jAva kevaiyA tArAgaNa-koDikoDIo sobhaM sobhissaMti vaa|

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nineteenth Praabhrut] [195 U. Ta deve nam dive asankhejjā candā pabhāsensu vā
jāva asankhejjāo tāraganakodīkodīo sobham sobhisanti vā. Evam devodē samuddē -
1. jāgē dive, 2. nāgodē samuddē, 1. jakkhē dive, 2. jakkhōdē samuddē, 1. bhūē
dive, 2. bhūōdē samuddē, 1. sayambhūramanē dive, 2. sayambhūramanē samuddē.
Savvesim vikkhambha-parikkhēvē joisaim devadīvasarisāi. ܀ 담은 믿음

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 195 u. tA deve NaM dIve asaMkhejjA caMdA pabhAseMsu vA
jAva asaMkhejjAo tArAgaNakoDikoDIo sobhaM sobhissaMti vA  /  evaM devode samudde
- 1. jAge dIve, 2. NAgode samudde, 1. jakkhe dIve, 2. jakkhode samudde, 1. bhUe
dIve, 2. bhUode samudde, 1. sayaMbhUramaNe dIve, 2. sayaMbhUramaNe samudde  /
savvesiM vikkhaMbha-parikkheve joisAiM devadIvasarisAI  /  // dameun mideum

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Subtlety of the Moon and Sun**  102. **P.** How is that subtlety? Please
explain. **U.** There are two interpretations here, as follows:  **1.** Some
say: The Moon and Sun are neither living nor non-living, neither gross nor
subtle, nor bodies of water, wind, or fire. They do not have 1. rising, 2.
trembling, 3. strength, 4. heroism, 5. activity of merit. They do not attract
lightning, nor thunder, nor clouds. Even when the wind blows strongly, it
attracts lightning, thunder, and clouds. 'Some say this.'  **1.** Others say:
The Moon and Sun are living, not non-living, gross, not subtle, bodies of water,
wind, and fire. They do have 1. rising, 2. trembling, 3. strength, 4. heroism,
5. activity of merit. They attract lightning, thunder, and clouds. 'Some say
this.'  We, however, say: The Moon and Sun are the great servants, great lords,
great powerful, great glorious, great happy, great influential ones of the gods.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caMdima-sUriyANaM aNubhAvo 102. pa. tA kahaM te aNubhAve ? Ahie tti vaejjA  /
vA  /  vA  /  bIsavA~ prAbhRta u. tA tattha khalu imAo do paDivattIo paNNattAo,
taMjahA 1. tatthege evamAhaMsu - tA caMdima-sUriyA NaM no jIvA, ajIvA, - no
ghaNA, jhUsirA, no bAdaraboMdidharA kalevarA  /  natthi NaM teMsi 1. uTThANei
vA, 2. kamper3a vA, 3. balei vA, 4. vIrieDa vA, 5. purisakkAraparakkamei no
vijju lavaMti, no asaNiM lavaMti, no ghaNiyaM lavaMti  /  ahe ya NaM bAdare
vAukAe saMmucchar3a, saMmucchittA vijjuM pi lavaMti, asaNiM pi lavaMti, thaNiyaM
pi lavaMti 'ege evamAhaMsu'  /  1. ege puNa evamAhaMsu - tA caMdima-sUriyA NaM -
- - jIvA, no ajIvA, ghaNA, no jhUsirA, bAdaraboMdidharA no kalevarA  /  atthi
NaM teMsi 1. uTThANei vA, 2. kammei vA, 3. balei vA, 4. vIrieDa vA, 5.
purisakkAraparakkamei vijjuM pi lavaMta, asaNiM pi lavaMti, thaNiyaM pi lavaMti,
'ege evamAhaMsu'  /  vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo tA caMdima-sUriyA NaM devANaM
mahiDDiyA, mahajjuiyA, mahabbalA, mahAjasA, mahAsokkhA, mahANubhAgA

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twentieth Chapter  Those who wear fine clothes, those who wear fine garlands,
those who wear fine ornaments, some eat, some fast.  **The Nature of Rahu
Karma**  103. P. How is Rahu Karma? Tell me. U. There are two interpretations
here, as follows:  Some say: 1. There is a Rahu deity who swallows the moon or
the sun.  Others say: 2. There is no Rahu deity who swallows the moon or the
sun.  Those who say: "There is a Rahu deity who swallows the moon or the sun,"
they say: When Rahu deity swallows the moon or the sun: 1. He swallows it with
his mind and releases it with his mind. 2. He swallows it with his mind and
releases it with his mouth. 3. He swallows it with his mouth and releases it
with his mind. 4. He swallows it with his mouth and releases it with his mouth.
1. He swallows it with his left hand and releases it with his left hand. 2. He
swallows it with his left hand and releases it with his right hand. 3. He
swallows it with his right hand and releases it with his left hand. 4. He
swallows it with his right hand and releases it with his right hand.  Those who
say: "There is no Rahu deity who swallows the moon or the sun," they say:  There
are fifteen types of celestial bodies, as follows: 1. Simha, 2. Jadil, 3. Khara,
4. Khat, 5. Anjana, 6. Khanjana, 7. Sitla, 8. Himasitla, 9. Kelasa, 10.
Arunabha, 11. Parijja, 12. Nabhasura, 13. Kavilia, 14. Pingala, 15. Rahu.  When
these fifteen celestial bodies are in a particular position with respect to the
moon or the sun, people say: "Rahu is swallowing the moon or the sun." When
these fifteen celestial bodies are not in a particular position with respect to
the moon or the sun, then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavA~ prAbhRta ] varavatthadharA, varamalladharA, varAbharaNadharA
avochittiNayaTTayAe anne cayaMti, anne uvavajjaMti  /  rAhu-kammaparUvaNaM 103.
pa. tA kahaM te rAhukamme ? Ahie tti vaejA ? u. tattha khalu imAo do paDivattIo
paNNattAo taM jahA etthege evamAhaMsu - 1. atthi NaM se rAhu deve je NaM caMdaM
vA sUraM vA giNhai, 'ege evamAhaMsu'  /  ege puNa evamAhaMsu - 2. natthi NaM se
rAhU deve je NaM caMdaM vA sUraM vA giNhai, ege evamAhaMsu  /  tattha je te
evamAhaMsu - atha se rAhU deve je NaM caMdaM vA sUraM vA giNhai, se evamAhaMsu -
tA rAhUNaM deve caMdaM vA sUraM vA geNhamANe - 1. buddhateNaM giNhittA,
buddhateNaMmuyai, 2. buddhateNaM gihittA, muddhateNaMmuyai, 3. muddhateNaM
gihittA, buddhateNaMmuyai, 4. muddhateNaM giNhittA, muddhateNaMmuyai, 1.
vAmabhuyaMteNaM gihittA, vAmabhuyaMteNaM muyai, 2. vAmabhuyaMteNaM giNhittA,
dAhiNabhuyaMteNaM muyai, 3. dAhiNabhuyaMteNaM giNhittA, vAmabhuyaMteNaM muyai,
4. dAhiNabhayaMteNaM giNhittA, dAhiNabhuyaMteNaM muyai  //  - [197 tattha je te
evamAhaMsu - tA natthAM se rAhU deve je NaM caMdaM vA, sUraM vA geNhai, te
evamAhaMsu - tattha NaM ime paNNarasakasiNapoggalA, paNNattA, taMjahA - 1.
siMghANae, 2. jaDilae, 3. kharae, 4. khatae, 5. aMjaNe, 6. khaMjaNe, 7. sItale,
8. himasItale, 9. kelAse, 10. aruNAbhe, 11. parijjae, 12. NabhasUrae, 13.
kavilie, 14. piMgalae, 15. rAhU  /  tA jayA NaM ee paNNarasa kasiNA kasiNA
poggalA sayA caMdassa vA sUrassa vA lesANubaddhacAriNo bhavati, tayA NaM
mANusaloyaMsi mANusA evaM vayaMti - 'evaM khalu rAhU caMdaM vA sUraM vA geNhai,
evaM tA jayA NaM ee paNNarasa kasiNA kasiNA poggalA No sayA caMdassa vA surassa
vA lesAvubaddhacAriNo bhavaMti No

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[198] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] Indeed, in this human world, humans say this:
"Indeed, Rahu swallows the moon or the sun, they say so." But we say this: Rahu
is a god, mighty, powerful, strong, glorious, very happy, very virtuous, a
bearer of good things, a bearer of good strength, a bearer of good ornaments.
Rahu has nine names. Indeed, that god Rahu has nine names, namely: 1. Singhaḍa,
2. Jaḍila, 3. Khara, 4. Khetta, 5. Ḍaḍḍara, 6. Magara, 7. Maccha, 8. Kaccbha, 9.
Kaṇṇasappa. Rahu's chariot is of five colors. Indeed, that god Rahu's chariot is
of five colors, namely: 1. Black, 2. Blue, 3. Red, 4. Yellow, 5. White.
Sometimes Rahu's chariot is said to be of the color of a crow. Sometimes Rahu's
chariot is said to be of the color of a blue lotus. Sometimes Rahu's chariot is
said to be of the color of a ruby. Sometimes Rahu's chariot is said to be of the
color of a yellow lotus. Sometimes Rahu's chariot is said to be of the color of
a shining star. When Rahu, the god, comes, goes, moves, or revolves, and covers
the moon or the sun from the west, he swallows it from the east. When Rahu, the
god, comes, goes, moves, or revolves, and covers the moon or the sun from the
south, he swallows it from the north. Therefore, he swallows it from the east
when he covers it from the west, and he swallows it from the north when he
covers it from the south. When Rahu, the god, comes, goes, moves, or revolves,
and covers the moon or the sun from the southwest, he swallows it from the
northeast. When Rahu, the god, comes, goes, moves, or revolves, and covers the
moon or the sun from the southeast, he swallows it from the northwest.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 198 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra khalu tayA mANusaloyaMsi mANusA evaM vayaMti -
'evaM khalu rAhu caMda vA sUraM vA geNhai, te evmaahNsu|' vayaM puNa evaM vayAmo
- tA rAhU NaM deve mahiDDIe mahajjuie mahabbale mahAyase mahAsokkhe mahANubhAve,
varavatthadhare, varamalladhare, vraabhrnndhaarii| rAhussa Nava NAmAI tA rAhussa
NaM devassa Nava NAmadhejA paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. siMghADae, 2. jaDilae, 3.
kharae, 4. khettae, 5. DhaDDare, 6. magare, 7. macche, 8. kakchabhe, 9.
knnnnsppe| rAhussa vimANA paMcavaNNA tA rAhussa NaM devassa vimANA paMcavaNNA
paNNattA, taMjahA - 1. kiNhA, 2. nIlA, 3. lohiyA, 4. hAliddA, 5. sukkillaa|
atthi kAlae rAhuvimANe khaMjaNavaNNAbhe pnnnntte| atthi nIlae rAhuvimANe
lAuyavaNNAbhe pnnnntte| atthi lohie rAhuvimANe maMjiTThAmaNNAbhe pnnnntte| atthi
hAliie rAhuvimANe hAliddAvaNNAbhe pnnnntte| asthi sukkillae rAhuvimANe
bhAsarAsivaNNAbhe pnnnntte| tA jayA NaM rAhU deve AgacchamANe vA, gacchamANe vA,
viuvvemANe vA, pariyAremANa vA, caMdassa vA, sUrassa vA lessaM purathimeNaM
AvarittA paccatthimeNaM vIIvayai, tayA NaM purathimeNaM caMde vA sUre vA
uvadaMsei paccatthimeNaM raahuu| tA jayA NaM rAhU deve AgacchamANe vA,
gacchamANe vA, viuvvemANe vA, pariyAremANe vA, caMdassa vA, sUrassa vA lessaM
dAhiNeNaM AvarittA uttareNaM vIIvayai, tayA NaM dAhiNeNaM caMde vA sUre vA
uvadaMsei uttareNaM raahuu| eeNaM abhilAveNaM paccatthimeNaM AvarittA
puratthimeNaM vIIvayai, uttareNaM AvarittA dAhiNeNaM viiiivyii| tA jayA NaM rAhU
deve AgacchamANe vA, gacchamANe vA, viuvvemANe vA, pariyAremANe vA, caMdassa vA
sUrassa vA lesaM dAhiNapurathimeNaM AvarittA uttarapaccatthimeNaM vIIvayai, tayA
NaM dAhiNapurathimeNaM caMde vA sUre vA uvadaMsei, uttarapaccatthimeNaM raahuu||
tA jayA NaM rAhU deve AgacchamANe vA, gacchamANe vA, viuvvemANe vA, pariyAremANe
vA caMdassa vA sUrassa vA lesaM dAhiNapaccatthimeNaM AvarittA
uttarapurasthimeNaM vIIvayai, tayA NaM dAhiNapaccatthimeNaM

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twenty-first Chapter  [199]  When Rahu, either in the north or in the south,
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-west, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-west.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu, while approaching, departing, or passing
by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the north-east, and when it
covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,
while approaching, departing, or passing by, covers the Moon or the Sun, it is
said to be in the north-east, and when it covers the Moon or the Sun, it is said
to be in the south-east.  When Rahu,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 199 caMde vA, sUre vA uvadaMsei uttarapurasthimeNaM
raahuu| eeNaM abhilAveNaM uttarapaccatthimeNaM AvarettA dAhiNapurasthimeNaM
vIIvayaI, uttarapurasthimeNaM AvarettA dAhiNapaccatthimeNaM viiiivyi| . tA jayA
NaM rAhU deve AgacchamANe vA gacchamANe vA viuvvemANe vA, pariyAremANe vA
caMdassa vA sUrassa vA lesaM AvarettA pAseNaM vIIvayai, tayA NaM mANusaloyaMsi
maNussA evaM vayaMti - 'rAhuNA caMde vA, sUre vA ghie|' tA jayA NaM rAhU deve
AgacchamANe vA, gacchamANevA viuvvemANe vA, pariyArebhANe vA caMdassa vA sUrassa
vA lessaMAvaretA pAseNaM vIIvayai tayA NaM mANusaloyaMti maNussA eva vayatiM
'caMdeNa vA, sUreNa vA rAhussa kucchI bhinnnnaa|' tA jayA NaM rAhU dave
AgacchamANe vA, gacchamANe vA, viubvemANe vA, pariyAremANe vA, caMdassa vA,
sUrassa vA lesaM AvarettA paccosakkai tayA NaM mANusaloyaMsi maNussA evaM
vayaMti - 'rAhuNA caMde vA, sUre vA vNte|' tA jayA NaM rAhU deve AgacchamANe vA,
gacchamANe vA, viuvvemANe vA, pariyAremANe vA, caMdassa vA, sUrassa vA lesaM
AvarettA majjhaM majheNaM vIIvayai, tayA NaM mANusaloyaMsi maNussA evaM vayaMti
- 'rAhuNA caMde vA, sUre vA viiyrie|' tA jayA NaM rAhU deve AgacchamANe vA,
gacchamANe vA, viuvvemANe vA, pariyAremANe vA, caMdassa vA, sUrassa vA lesaM
AvarettA ahe apakkhiM sapaDidisiM ciTThai, tayA NaM mANusaloyaMsi maNussA evaM
vayaMti - 'rAhuNA caMde vA sUre vA ghtthe|' rAhussa duvihattaM pa. kaivihe NaM
rAhU paNNatte ? u. duvihe paNNatte, taMjahA - tA dhuvarAhU ya pavvarAhU y| ka.
tattha NaM je se dhuvarAhU se NaM bahulapakkhassa pADivae paNNarasai bhAgeNaM
bhAgaM caMdassa lesaM AvaremANe AvaremANe ciTThai, taMjahA - paDhamAra paDhamaM
bhAgaM, jAva paNNarasamIe paNNarasamaM bhaag| carame samae caMde ratte bhavai,
avasese samae caMde ratte ya, viratte ya bhvi| tameva sukkapakkhe uvadaMsemANe
uvadaMsemANe ciTThai, taMjahA - paDhamAe paDhamaM bhAga, jAva paNNarasamIe
paNNarasamaM bhaagN| carame samae caMde viratte ya bhavai,

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sūryaprajñapti Sūtra]  In the remaining time, the moon becomes bright and dark.
There, those who are the moon's followers, in the minimum, for six months, and
in the maximum, for forty-two months of the moon, and for forty-two years of the
sun. The moon's name is Śaśi.   How then is the moon called Śaśi, the moon Śaśi?
It should be said.  Then, the moon, the lord of the stars, the king of the
stars, has divine lovers, divine beloveds, and divine furniture, bedding, seats,
vessels, and other accoutrements.   The moon god himself, the lord of the stars,
the king of the stars, Soma, is the beloved, auspicious, lovely to behold, and
handsome.  Thus, it should be said that the moon is Śaśi, the moon Śaśi.  The
sun's name is Āditya.  How then is the sun called Āditya, the sun Āditya? It
should be said.  Then, the sun rises, sets, breathes in and out, or stands
still, up to the ascending and descending cosmic cycles. Thus, it should be said
that the sun is Āditya, the sun Āditya.  The description of the sensual
pleasures of the moon and the sun.   How many chief queens are ascribed to the
moon, the lord of the stars, the king of the stars?  Four chief queens are
ascribed: 1. Candraprabha, 2. Doṣiṇābhā, 3. Accimālī, 4. Prabhāṃkarā. As stated
before, they do not engage in sexual activity.  The same should be understood
for the sun as well.  How do the moon and sun, the lords of the stars, the kings
of the stars, experience sensual pleasures?  It is like this: There is a man,
capable of the prime of youth, together with a wife capable of the prime of
youth, who has recently married, who is seeking wealth and searching for it, who
has traveled to sixteen countries, who, having obtained the desired wealth, has
returned home, satisfied and content.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra avasese samae caMde ratte ya, viratte ya bhvi| kha.
tattha NaM je te pavvarAhU se jahaNNeNaM chaNhaM mAsANaM, ukkoseNaM bAyAlIsAe
mAsANaM caMdassa, aDayAlIsAe saMvaccharANaM suurss| caMdassa sasI-abhihANaM 104.
pa. tA kahaM te caMde sasI caMde sasI Ahie ? ti vejjaa| u. tA caMdassa NaM
joisiMdassa joisaraNNo miyaMke vimANe kaMtA devA, kaMtAo devIo, katAI aasnn-
synn-khNdd-bhNdd-mttovgrnnaaiN| appaNA vi NaM caMde deve joisiMde joisarAyA some
kaMte subhe piyadasaNe suruuve| tA evaM khalu caMde sasI, caMde sasI Ahie tti
vejjaa| sUrassa AiccAbhihANaM pa. tA kahaM te sUrie Aicce sUrie Aicce Ahie ? tti
vejjaa| u. tA sUrAdIyA samayAi vA AvaliyAi vA ANApANUi vA thovai vA, jAva
ussapiNI, osappiNIi vaa| tA evaM khalu sUre Aicce sUre Aicce Ahie tti vejaa|
caMda-sUrAINaM kAma-bhogaparUvaNaM 105. pa. tA caMdassa NaM joisiMdassa
joisaraNNo kai aggamahisIo paNNattAo? u. tA cattAri aggamahisIo paNNattAo,
taMjahA - 1. caMdappabhA, 2. dosiNAbhA, 3. accimAlI, 4. pbhNkraa| jahA heTThA
taM ceva jAva No ceva NaM mehuNavattiyaM  /  evaM sUrassa vi nneyvvN| pa. tA
caMdima-sUriyA joisiMdA joisarAyANo kerise kAmabhoge paccuNubhavamANA viharaMti
? u. tA se jahANAmae keI purise, paDhamajovvaNuTThANabalasamatthe,
paDhamajovvaNuTThANabalasamatthAe bhAriyAe saddhiM, aciravattavivAhe, atthatthI
atthagavesaNayAe solasabAsavippavasie, se NaM tato laddhaDhe kayakaje
aNahasamagge puNaravi NiyagadharaM havvamAgae,

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Twentieth Prabhrita] [201] Having bathed, having performed the Kayotsarga,
having recited the Mangala-paryushana, having purified the body, having adorned
the body with excellent ornaments, having eaten a pure meal of eighteen
varieties, while residing in such a pleasant abode, within which there is no
activity of the soul, outside, on a beautiful, spacious, and variegated terrace,
on a soft and smooth surface, divided into many parts, in a moonlit night, in
the pleasant fragrance of excellent aloe, camphor, and other perfumes, becoming
fragrant, in such a pleasant resting place, lying on a high and deep bed,
embraced on both sides, with both sides adorned with garlands, on the beautiful
banks of the Ganga, with soft sand, covered with a clean, white, and soft cloth,
with a pleasant touch of cool breeze, fragrant with the powder of excellent
flowers, engaged in the pleasures of the senses, along with a beautiful and
charming woman, skilled in the arts of love, affection, and conversation, not
thinking of anything else, experiencing the fivefold human sensual pleasures of
sound, touch, taste, form, and smell - how does that person experience the
highest happiness?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavA~ prAbhRta ] [ 201 pahAe kayabalikamme kayakouyamaMgalapAyacchitte
suddhappavesAI maMgalAI vatthAI pavaraparihie, appa-
mahagghAbharaNAlaMkiyasarIre, maNuNNaM thAlIpAkasuddhaM aTThArasavaMjaNAulaM
bhoyaNaM bhutte samANe, taMsi tArisagaMsi vAsagharaMsi aMto sacittakamme ,
bAhirao dUmiyaghaTThamaDhe vicittaulloa-cilliyatale bahusamasuvibhattabhUmibhAe,
mnnirynnpnnaasiyNdhyaare| kAlAgurU-pavarakuMdurukka-turukka dhUva-
maghamaghetagaMdhuddhayAbhiArAme sugaMdhavaragaMdhie, gaMdhavaTTibhUe, taMsi
tArisagaMsi sayaNijasi duhao uNNae majhe NayagaMbhIre ubhao sAliMgaNavaTTie,
ubhao paNNattagaMDabibboyaNe, surambhe gaMgApuliNa bAluA uddAla sAlisae
suviraiyarayatANe, oyaviya khomiyaraNomadugUlapaTTa paDicchAyaNe raMtasusaMvuDe,
. suramme AINaga-rUya-bUra-NavaNIya-tUlaphAse, sugaMdhavara-kusumacuNNa-
sayaNovayArakalie, tAe tArisAe bhAriyAe saddhiM siMgArAgAracAruvesAe saMgata-
hasita-bhaNita-ciTThita saMlAva-vilAsaNiuNajuttovayArakusalAe aNurattAvirattAe
maNo'NukUlAe saddhiM egaMtaratipasatte aNNattha katthaI maNaM akuvvamANe iThe
sadda-pharisa-rasa-rUva-gaMdhe paMcavihe mANussae kAmabhoge paccaNubhavamANe
vihrijjaa| ..... pa. tA se NaM purise viusamaNakAlasamayaMsi kerisae sAyAsokkhaM
paccaNubhavamANe viharai ? u. urAlaM smnnaauso| tA tassa NaM purisassa
kAmabhogehiMto etto aNaMtaguNavisiTThatarA ceva vANamaMtarANaM devANaM
kAmabhogA, vANamaMtarANaM devANaM kAma-bhogehito aNaMtaguNavisiTThatarA ceva
asuriMdavajjiyANaM bhavaNavAsINaM devANaM kAmabhogA, asuriMdavajiyANaM devANaM
kAma-bhogehiMto etto aNaMtaguNavisiTThatarA ceva asurakumArANaM iMdabhUyANaM
devANaM kAmabhogA, asurakumArANaM devANaM kAma-bhogehito aNaMtaguNavisiTThatarA
ceva gahagaNa-Nakkhatta-tArA-rUvANaM kAmabhogA, gahagaNa-Nakkhatta-tArArUvANaM
kAma-bhogehito aNaMtaguNavisidrutarA ceva caMdima-sUriyANaM devANaM kAmabhogA,
tA erisae NaM caMdima-sUriyA joisiMdA joisarAyANo kAmabhoge paccuNubhavamANA
vihrNti|

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighty-Eight Mahāggaha  106. There are eighty-eight Mahāggaha, namely:  1.
Ingāla, 2. Viyāla, 3. Lohiyakkha, 4. Saṇicchare, 5. Āhuṇie, 6. Pāhuṇie, 7. Kaṇe,
8. Kaṇae, 9. Kaṇakaṇae, 10. Kaṇaviyāṇae, 11. Kaṇasatāṇae.  12. Some, 13. Sahie,
14. Assāsane, 15. Kajjoyae, 16. Kabbaḍae, 17. Ayakarae, 18. Dundabha, 19.
Sankhe, 20. Sankhavaṇṇe, 21. Sankhavaṇṇābha, 22. Kamse.  23. Kamsavaṇṇe, 24.
Kamsavaṇṇābha, 25. Nīle, 26. Nīlobhāse, 27. Ruppi, 28. Ruppobhāse, 29. Bhāse,
30. Bhāsarāsi, 31. Tile, 32. Tilpūpfavaṇṇe, 33. Dage.  34. Dagapāñcavaṇṇe, 35.
Kāle, 36. Kākaṇḍhe, 37. Indaggi, 38. Dhūmakeū, 39. Hari, 40. Piṅgale, 41. Buhe,
42. Sukke, 43. Bahassai, 44. Rāhu.  45. Agatthi, 46. Māṇavage, 47. Kāse, 48.
Phāse, 49. Dhūre, 50. Pamuhe, 51. Viyaḍe, 52. Visandhi, 53. Niyallae, 54.
Payalle, 55. Jaḍiāille.  56. Aruṇe, 57. Aggille, 58. Kāle, 59. Mahākāle, 60.
Sotthiya, 61. Sovatthie, 62. Vaddhamāṇage, 63. Palambe, 64. Niċċāloe, 65.
Niċċujjoe, 66. Sayamphabe.  67. Obhāse, 68. Seyankare, 69. Khemankara, 70.
Ābhankara, 71. Pabhankare, 72. Aparājie, 73. Arae, 74. Asogae, 75. Viyasogae,
76. Vimale, 77. Viyatte.  78. Vitathe, 79. Visale, 80. Sāle, 81. Suvvae, 82.
Aniyaṭṭi, 83. Egajaḍi, 84. Dujaḍi, 85. Karakarie, 86. Rāyaggale, 87. Pūpfakeū,
88. Bhāvakeū.  1. In the **Stāṇāṅga** (A. 2, U. 3, Sū. 95), the number of the
eighty-eight planets of the two moons and two suns of Jambudvīpa is given as two
by two.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aTThAsII mahaggahA 106. tattha khalu ime aTThAsII mahaggahA paNNattA, taMjahA -
1. iMgAlae, 2 . viyAlae, 3. lohiyakkhe, 4. saNicchare, 5. AhuNie, 6. pAhuNie, 7.
kaNe, 8. kaNae, 9. kaNakaNae, 10. kaNaviyANae, 11. kaNasatANae  /  12. some, 13.
sahie, 14. assAsaNe, 15. kajjoyae, 16. kabbaDae, 17. ayakarae, 18. duMdabhae,
19. saMkhe, 20. saMkhavaNNe, 21. saMkhavaNNAbhe, 22. kaMse  /  23. kaMsavaNNe,
24. kaMsavaNNAbhe, 25. NIle, 26. NIlobhAse, 27. ruppI, 28. ruppobhAse, 29.
bhAse, 30. bhAsarAsI, 31. tile, 32. tilapupphavaNNe, 33. dage  /  34.
dagapaMcavaNNe 35. kAle, 36. kAkaMdhe, 37. iMdaggi, 38. dhUmakeU, 39. harI, 40.
piMgale, 41. buhe, 42. sukke 43. bahassaI, 44. rAhu  /  45. agatthI, 46.
mANavage, 47. kAse, 48. phAse, 49. dhUre, 50. pamuhe, 51. viyaDe, 52. visaMdhi,
53. Niyalle, 54. payalle, 55. jaDiyAille  /  56. aruNe, 57. aggillae, 58. kAle,
59. mahAkAle, 60. sotthiya, 61. sovatthie, 62. vaddhamANage, 63. palaMbe, 64.
NiccAloe, 65. niccujjoe, 66. sayaMpabhe  /  67. obhAse, 68. seyaMkare, 69.
khemaMkare, 70. AbhaMkare, 71. pabhaMkare 72. aparAjie, 73. arae, 74. asoge, 75.
vIyasoge, 76. vimale, 77. viyatte  /  78. vitathe, 79. visAle, 80. sAle, 81.
suvvae, 82. aniyaTTI, 83. egajaDI, 84. dujaDI, 85. karakarie, 86. rAyaggale, 87.
pupphakeU, 88. bhAvakeU'  /  1. sthAnAMga a. 2, u. 3, sU. 95 meM jaMbUdvIpa ke
do candroM do sUryoM ke 88 grahoM kI saMkhyA do do kI dI gaI hai| ceoeum

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter 1**  1. Ingala, 2. Viyala, 3. Lohi Yakkha, 4. Saniccha Re Cheva. 5.
Ahunie, 6. Pahunie, 7-11. Kanagasanama U Pancheva.  **Chapter 2**  12. Some, 13.
Sahie, 14. Asasana, 15. Kajovae Ya, 16. Kabbadaye. 17. Ayakare, 18. Dunduhaye,
19-21. Sankhasanamao Tinneva.  **Chapter 3**  22-24. Tinena Kansa Nama, 25-26.
Nila, 27-28. Ruppo Ya Hoti Chattari. 29-30. Bhas, 31-32. Tilpusphavanna, 33-34.
Dag-Panavanna Ya, 35. Kay, 36. Kakandhe.  **Chapter 4**  37. Indaggi, 38. Dhumke
U, 39. Hari, 40. Pingalaye, 41. Buhe Ya, 42. Sukke Ya. 43. Bahassai, 44. Rahu,
45. Agatthi, 46. Manavaye, 47. Kas, 48. Fase Ya.  **Chapter 5**  49. Dhure, 50.
Pamuhe, 51. Viyde, 52. Visandhi, 53. Niyale, 54. Taha Payalle Ya. 55. Jadiaile,
56. Aruna, 57. Aggill, 58. Kale, 59. Mahakale Ya.  **Chapter 6**  60. Sotthiya,
61. Sovatthiya, 62. Vaddhamanage, 63. Taha Palam Be Ya. 64. Nichaloe, 65. Nicca
Joe, 66. Sayamphabe, 67. Cheva Obhase.  **Chapter 7**  68. Seyankar, 69.
Khemankar, 70. Abhankar, 71. Pabhankare Va Boddhvave. 72. Arae, 73. Virae Ya
Taha, 74. Asogae, 75. Viyasogae Ya.  **Chapter 8**  76. Vimala, 77. Vitatta, 78.
Vitathe, 79. Visala, 80. Taha Sala, 81. Suvvae Cheva. 82. Aniyattie, 83. Egjadi
Ya, 84. Hoi Bijadi Ya Boddhvave.  **Chapter 9**  85. Karakare, 86. Rayaggal, 87.
Boddhvave Pupha, 88. Bhavake U Ya.  - Attasi Gaha Khalu Neyavva Anupuvvie.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMgahaNIgAhAo 1. iMgAlae, 2. viyAlae, 3. lohi yakkhe, 4. saNiccha re ceva  /
5.. AhuNie, 6. pAhu Nie, 7-11. kaNagasanAmA u paMceva  //  2. 12. some , 13.
sahie, 14. AsAsaNe, 15. ka jovae ya, 16. kbbdde| 17. ayaka rae, 18. duMduhae,
19-21. saMkhasanAmAo tinneva  //  3. 22-24. tinena kaM sanAmA, 25-26. NIlA,
27-28. ruppo ya hoti cttaari| 29-30. bhAsa, 31-32.tilapuSphavaNNe, 33-34. daga-
paNavaNNe ya, 35. kAya, 36. kaakNdhe|| * 4. 37. iMdaggi, 38. dhUmake U, 39.
hari, 40. piMgalae, 41. buhe ya, 42. sukke y| 43. bahassaI, 44. rAhu, 45.
agatthI, 46. mANavae, 47. kAsa, 48. phAse y|| 5. 49. dhUre, 50. pamuhe, 51.
viyaDe, 52. visaMdhi, 53. Niyale, 54. tahA payalle y| 55. jaDiyAilae, 56. aruNe,
57. aggilla, 58. kAle, 59. mahAkAle y|| 6. 60. sotthiya, 61. sovatthiya, 62.
vaddhamANage, 63. tahA palaM be y| .64. NicAloe, 65. Nicca joe, 66. sayaMpabhe ,
67. ceva obhAse  //  7. 68. se yaMkara , 69. khemaMkara, 70. AbhaMkara, 71.
pabhaMkare va boddhavve  /  72. arae, 73. virae ya tahA, 74. asoge, 75. vIyasoge
y|| 8. 76. vimala, 77. vitatta, 78. vitathe, 79. visAla, 80. taha sAla, 81.
suvvae cev| 82. aniyaTTI, 83. egajaDI ya, 84. hoi bijaDI ya boddhavve  //  9.
85. ka ra ka rae, 86. rAyaggala, 87. boddhavve puppha, 88. bhAvake U y| -
aTThAsII gahA khalu NeyavvA aannupuvviie||

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
107. This is the conclusion of this Pahuḍa, the joy of the liberated soul. This
has been spoken by the Bhagavan, the well-wisher of the world. This is the
essence of the saints, the one who is worthy of respect and reverence. It should
not be given to many, but should be given to the worthy. With faith, wisdom,
enthusiasm, effort, strength, energy, and respect, the saint who has learned
this, will be freed from the cycle of birth and death. He is outside the family,
clan, community, and assembly, free from the shackles of attachment and
aversion. He is worthy of being called an Arhat, a Ther, a member of the
assembly of the liberated. Therefore, for those who have learned faith, wisdom,
enthusiasm, effort, strength, and energy, the rules should be followed, and they
should not be given to the unworthy. I bow down to the victorious Bhagavan, the
one who is free from old age, death, defilements, and faults. May I attain
liberation through his teachings. || The Surya Pannatti is complete ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 107. uvasaMhAro iha esa pAhuDatthA, abhavvajaNahiyayadullAhA innmo| ukkittiyA
bhagavaI, joisarAyassa pnnnnttii|| esa gahiyA'vi saMtA, thaddhe gAraviya maanni-
pddinniie| abahussae Na deyA, tavivarIe bhave deyaa|| sddhaa-dhiti-
utttthaannucchhh-kmm-bl-viriy-puriskaarehiN| jo sikkhio'vi saMto, abhAyaNe
pkkhivejaahiN|| so pavayaNa-kula-gaNa-saMghabAhiro nnnnnn-vinny-prihiinno|
arahaMta-thera-gaNaharameraM kira hoi voliinno|| tamhA dhitiuTThANucchAha kmm-
bl-viriysikkhinnaannN| dhAreyavvaM NiyamA Na ya aviNaesu dAyavvaM  //
vIravarassa bhagavao, jr-mrnn-kiles-dosrhiyss| vaMdAmi viNayapaNao, sokkhuppAe
sayA paae||  //  sUriyapaNNattI smttaa||

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Suya-thavira-paniya Chandapannatti-sutta: Homage to the Arhats!  1. The hero,
whose lotus-like eyes are wide open, whose gait is majestic, whose prowess is
like the flowing of a river, is victorious.  2. Bowing down to him who is
worshipped by the gods, asuras, and serpents, the Arhat, the Siddha, the Acarya,
the Upadhyaya, and all the Sadhus.  3. (This text) is the essence of the
previous scriptures, subtle, comprehended by the Ganadhara, and the exposition
of the science of astrology.  4. Goamama, paying homage in three ways, asks the
Jina about the exposition of the science of astrology.  5-8. (Questions about)
the movement of the planets, the paths of the stars, the brightness of the sun,
the setting of the sun, the position of the lunar mansions, the increase and
decrease of the moon, the speed of the planets, and their characteristics.  9.
In this way, there are twenty questions about the various phenomena.  10. Sutra
1: The increase and decrease (of the moon), the position of the muhurtas, who
observes the (celestial) movements, and what they do in between.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 suyathavirapaNIyaM caMdapaNNattisuttaM namo arihNtaannN|| jayai nv-nlinn-kuvly-
viysiy-syvtt-pttldlccho| vIro gaiMda-mayagala-salaliya-gayavikkamo bhyvN||1||
namiUNa asura-sura-garula-bhuyaga-parivaMdie gnnekilese| arihe siddhAyariya-
uvajjhAe savvasAhU y||2|| phuDa-vigaDa-pAgaDatthaM, vucchaM puvv-suy-saar-
niisNdN| suhumaM . gaNiNovaiTeM, joisa-gaNarApapaNNatiM  // 3 //  nAmeNa
iMdabhUiti goyamo vaMdiUNa tivihennN| pucchai jiNavara vasahaM joisarAssa
paNNatiM  // 4 //  kar3a maMDalAi vaccai 1, tiricchA kiM ca gacchaI 2 /  obhAsai
kevaiyaM 3, seyAi kiM te saMThiI 4 // 5 //  kahiM paDihayA lesA 5, kahaM te
oyasaMThiI 6 /  ke sUriyaM varayate 7, kahaM te udayasaMThiI 8 // 6 //
kaikaTThA porisIcchAyA 9, jogetti kiM te Ahie 10 /  kiM te savaccharANAI 11, kai
saMvaccharAi ya 12 // 7 //  kahaM caMdamaso vuDDI 13, kayA te do (jo) siNA bahU
14 /  ke sigghagaI vutte 15, kiM te do (jo) siNalakkhaNaM 16 // 8 //
cayaNovavAya 17, uccatte 18, sUriyA kai AhiyA 19 /  /  aNubhAve kerise vutte 20,
evameyAiM viisii||9|| sUtra 1 vaDDovaDDI 1, muhuttANa-maddhamaMDalasaMThiI 2 /
ke te ciNNaM pariyarai 3, aMtaraM kiM caraMti ya 4 // 10 //

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Chapter 206] [The Sutra of the Knowledge of the Sun]  **Verse 11:**  There
are five types of *kevali* and six types of *vikampa*. There are seven types of
*mandala* formations, eight types of *vikkhambha*, and eight *pahuḍa*.  **Verse
12:**  The second *sutra* states that six, seven, eight, and three are the
*paḍivatti* (transformations). The first *pahuḍa* has these *paḍivatti*.
**Verse 13:**  The third *sutra* states that the *paḍivatti* arise from the
*udaya* (rising) and *aduv* (setting) of the celestial bodies. They are also
related to the *bheyagha* (fearful), *kaṇṇakala* (ear-related), and *muhutta*
(moments).  **Verse 14:**  When the celestial bodies are setting, they move
quickly, and when they are rising, they move slowly. There are 108 *purisa*
(units of time), and these are the *paḍivatti* for them.  **Verse 15:**  The
fourth *sutra* states that there are eight *bheyagha* (fearful) and two
*paḍivatti* related to them. There are four *muhutta* (moments) and three
*paḍivatti* related to them.  **Verse 16:**  The fourth *sutra* also states that
there are one *āvaliya* (cycle), two *muhutta* (moments), three *evambhāga*
(divisions), four *jogassa* (connections), five *kulāiṁ* (families), six
*puṇṇamāsi* (full moons), seven *sannivāe* (gatherings), and eight *sanṭhiī*
(arrangements).  **Verse 17:**  There are nine *tāraggaṁ* (star-related), ten
*caṇetā* (movements), eleven *candamaggatti* (moon-related), twelve *devatāṇam
ajjhayana* (study of deities), and thirteen *muhuttāṇam nāmayā* (names of
moments).  **Verse 18:**  There are fourteen *divasa* (days), fifteen *rāi*
(nights), sixteen *tihi* (three), seventeen *goṭṭa* (groups), eighteen
*bhoyanāṇi* (food), nineteen *āicca* (sun-related), twenty *māsa* (months), and
twenty *pañca samvachchārā* (five years).  **Verse 19:**  There are twenty-one
*joissassa dārāi* (astrological knowledge), twenty-two *nakkhatavicaye* (study
of constellations). In the tenth *pahuḍa*, there are twenty-two *pahuḍa-pahuḍa*
(sub-chapters).  **Verse 1:**  At that time, in that era, there was a city named
*Mihila* in the *riddhasthimīyasamiddha* (prosperous and stable) region,
inhabited by people of good character and knowledge, and full of joy.  **Verse
2:**  Thirty *yojana* (miles) north of the city of *Mihila*, there was a place
called *Maṇibhaddā* where a *ceiya* (shrine) was built.  **Verse 3:**  Thirty
*yojana* (miles) south of the city of *Mihila*, there was a king named
*Jiyasattūṇāma* and a queen named *Dhāriṇī Devī*.  **Verse 4:**  At that time,
in that era, in the *ceiya* (shrine) of *Maṇibhaddā*, a gathering of people took
place. The *samī* (leader) of the gathering spoke about the *dharma*
(righteousness). The people listened, and the king and queen also came to the
gathering.  **Verse 6:**  At that time, in that era, the *samana* (ascetic)
*Bhagavā Mahāvīra* had a disciple named *Indabhūī* who was an *anagāra*
(celibate) from the *goyam* clan.  **Verse 7:**  ... (The text continues with a
description of *Indabhūī* and his life.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 206 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra ogAhai kevaiyaM 5, kevaiyaM ca vikaMpai 6 /
maMDalANa ya saMThANe 7, vikkhaMbho 8, aTTha paahuddaa||11|| sUtra 2 chappaMca
ya satteva ya, aTTha ya tini ya havaMti pddivttii| paDhamassa pAhuDassa u,
havaMti eyAo pddivttii||12|| sUtra 3 paDivattIo udae, aduva atthamaNesu y|
bheyaghAe kaNNakalA, muhuttANa gaIi y||13|| nikkhamamANe sigghagaI, pavisaMte
maMdagaIi y| culasIisayaM purisANaM, tesiM ca pddivttiio||14|| udayammi aTTha
bhaNiyA, bheyagyAe duve ca pddivttii| cattAri muhuttagaIe, hoti taiyammi
pddivttii|| 15 //  sUtra 4 Avaliya 1, muhuttagge 2, evaMbhAgA 3 ya, jogassA 4 /
kulAiM 5, puNNamAsI 6 ya, saMnivAe 7 ya saMThiI 8 // 16 //  tAraggaM 9, caNetA
ya, 10, caMdamaggatti 11 yaavre| devatANaM ya ajjhayaNA 12, muhuttANaM nAmayA 13
iy||17|| divasA rAI ya vuttA 14 ya, tihi 15, gottA 16bhoyaNANi ya 17 /
AiccacAra 18, mAsA 19 ya, paMca saMvaccharA 20 iy||18|| joisassa ya dArAI 21,
nakkhatavicae 22 viy| dasame pAhuDe ee, bAvIsaM paahudd-paahuddaa||19|| sUtra 5
teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM mihilA NAmaM NayarI hotthA riddhasthimiyasamiddhA
pamuiyajaNajANavayA jAva pAsAdIyA, vnnnno||1|| tIse NaM mihilAe NayarIe bahiyA
uttarapurasthime disIbhAe ettha NaM mANibhadde NAmaM ceie hotthA cirAIe,
vnnnno||2|| tIse NaM mihilAe NayarIe jiyasattUNAmaM rAyA, dhAriNI devI,
vnnnno||3|| teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM taMmi mANibhadde ceie sAmI samosaDhe,
parisA NiggayA, dhammo kahio, parisA paDigayA jAva rAyA jAmeva disiM pAubbhUe
tAmeva disiM pddige||4|| sUtra 6 //  teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNassa
bhagavao mahAvIrassa jeThe aMtevAsI iMdabhUI NAmaM aNagAre goyamagotte NaM
sattussehe jAva pajuvAsamANe evaM vayAsI  //  sUtra 7 //

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Suryaprajnapti Sutra] [207 P. How do you say that the increase in muhutas is
present? U. Gotama! You should say that there are twenty-seven muhutas and
seventy-six parts of a muhuta. || Sutra 8 || Jao ................. This is a
valuable thing, rare for the ignorant. It is the proclamation of the Bhagavati
Joisraya. || 1 || This is to be kept secret, to be honored by the worthy. It
should not be given to many, it should be given to the worthy. || 2 || (Faith)
With enthusiasm, effort, strength, and diligence, one should test the learned
saint. || 3 || He who is outside the family, clan, and assembly of the virtuous,
who is deficient in knowledge and discipline, is a liar, a deceiver of the
Arhats and the elders. || 4 || Therefore, one should hold fast to faith,
enthusiasm, effort, strength, diligence, and knowledge. One should not give it
to the undisciplined. || 5 || I bow down to the victorious Bhagavan, free from
old age, death, defilements, and faults, with respect and reverence. || 6 ||
Sutra 107 || The twentieth chapter is complete. || || The Chandapanatti is
complete. ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUryaprajJaptisUtra ] [ 207 pa. tA kahaM te vaDDhovaDDhI muhutANaM Ahitetti
vadejjA ? u. goyamA! tA aTTha egUNavIse muhuttasate sattAvIsaM ca sattaTThibhAgo
muhuttassa Ahitetti vdejaa|  //  sUtra 8 //  jAva ................. iya esa
pAgaDattha, abhavvajaNahiyaya-dullabhA innmo| ukkittiyA bhagavatI joisarAyassa
pnnnnttii||1|| esa gahiyAvi saMtI, thaddhe gaarviymaannpddinniie| abahussue Na
deyA, tavivarIe bhave deyaa||2|| (saddhA) dhiiutttthaannucchaah-kmmblviriy-
puriskaarehi| jo sikkhiovi saMto, abhAyaNe prikkhvijaahi||3|| so pavayaNa-kula-
gaNa-saMghabAhiro nnaannvinny-prihiinno| arahaMta-theragaNaharameraM kira hoi
voliinno||4|| tamhA dhiiuTThANucchAha-kammabalavIriyasikkhiyaM naannN|
dhAreyavvaM NiyamA, Na ya aviNaesu dAyavvaM  // 5 //  vIravarassa bhagavato,
jrmrnn-kiles-dosrhiyss| vaMdAmi viNayapaNato sokkhuppAe sayA paae||6|| sUtra 107
//  vIsaimaM pAhuDaM smttN||  //  caMdapannattI smttaa||

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix ## Mathematical Section of the Surya-Chandra Prajnapti Sutra ##
Sutra Number 8 ## Loss and Gain in the Magnitude of Muhurta: Magnitude of
Muhurta in a Nakshatra Masa  There are 1830 days and nights in a Yuga. There are
67 Nakshatra Masas in a Yuga. Dividing the number of days in a Yuga by the
number of Nakshatra Masas in a Yuga (1830 / 67) gives us 27 days and 21/67
Muhurtas. This is calculated as follows:  67) 1830 (27 134 490 469 21 21/67  To
convert this into Muhurtas, we multiply by 30, which gives us 21430 = 630.
Dividing this by 67 (630:67) gives us 9 Muhurtas and 27/67 parts. Therefore, a
Nakshatra Masa is equal to 27 days, 9 Muhurtas and 27/67 parts.   Multiplying 27
by 30 to convert it into Muhurtas gives us 27 x 30 = 810. Adding 9 to this gives
us 819. Therefore, the number of Muhurtas in a Nakshatra Masa is 819 and 27/67.
## Number of Muhurtas in a Surya Masa  There are 1830 days in a Yuga and 60
Surya Masas in a Yuga. To calculate the number of days in a Surya Masa, we
divide 1830 by 60, which gives us 30 days and 30/60. To convert this into
Muhurtas, we multiply the number of days in a Surya Masa by 30, which gives us
30 x 30 = 900. Multiplying 30/60 by 30 gives us 30 x 30 / 60 = 15 Muhurtas.
Adding this to 900 gives us 915 Muhurtas. Therefore, the number of Muhurtas in a
Surya Masa is 915.  ## Number of Muhurtas in a Chandra Masa  There are 62
Chandra Masas in a Yuga and 1830 days in a Yuga. To calculate the number of days
in a Chandra Masa, we divide 1830 by 62, which gives us 29 days and 32/62. To
convert this into Muhurtas, we multiply by 30, which gives us 29 x 30 = 870.
Multiplying 32/62 by 30 gives us 960/62, which is equal to 15 Muhurtas and 30/62
parts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa zrI sUrya-candraprajJapti sUtra kA gaNita vibhAga sUtrasaMkhyA. 8
muhUrta ke parimANa kI hAni - vRddhi : nakSatramAsa ke muhUrta kA parimANa eka
yuga ke ahorAtra 1830 hote haiN| eka yuga ke nakSatramAsa kI saMkhyA 67 hai| eka
nakSatra mAsa ke divasa 1830 : 67 karane se 27 dina 21/67 muhUrta pramANa hotA
hai| vaha isa prakAra - 67) 1830 (27 134 490 469 21 21/67 ke muhUrta karane ke
liye 30 se guNA karane para 21430 = 630 hote haiN| unako 67 se bhAga dene para
(630:67) 9 muhUrta 27/67 bhAga hote haiM  /  arthAt nakSatramAsa 27 divasa 9
muhUrta 27/67 bhAga hotA hai| usake muhUrta karane para 27430 = 810 hote haiN|
unameM 9 jor3ane se 819 hote haiM  /  ataeva nakSatramAsa ke muhUrtoM kI saMkhyA
819  /  27/67 hotI hai  /  sUryamAsa ke muhUrtoM kI saMkhyA eka yuga ke divasa
1830 haiM aura eka yuga ke sUryamAsa 60 haiM  /  sUryamAsa ke divasa karane ke
liye 1830 ko 60 se bhAga dene para 30 dina aura 30/60 hoNge| unake muhUrta
karane ke liye sUryamAsa ke dinoM ko 30 'guNA karane para 30x30 = 900 hote haiM
aura 30/60 ko 30 se guNA karane para 30x30 : 60 karane para 15 muhUrta hote
haiN| inako 900 meM jor3ane para 915 muhUrta hote haiM  /  arthAt sUryamAsa ke
muhUrtoM kI saMkhyA 915 hotI hai| candramAsa ke muhUrtoM kI saMkhyA eka yuga ke
candramAsa 62 hote haiM aura eka yuga ke divasa 1830 haiM  /  candramAsa ke dina
banAne ke liye 1830 : 62 karane se 29 dina 32 / 62 prApta hote haiN| inake
muhUrta banAne ke liye 30 se guNA karane para 29x30=870 hoMge aura 32 / 62430
karane para 960 / 62 hoMge evaM muhUrta ke rUpa meM 15 muhUrta 30/62 hoMge  /

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix ] Adding this number to the aforementioned 870, the total number of
Muhurtas will be 885 Muhurtas and 30/62 Muhurtas. The number of Muhurtas in a
Karmamas is  There are 30 days in a Karmamas. To calculate the number of
Muhurtas, we multiply 30 by 30, which gives us 30 x 30 = 900. This is the number
of Muhurtas in a Karmamas. Months 1. Nakshatra Maas 2. Surya Maas 3. Chandra
Maas 4. Karma Maas || The eighth Sutra of the first Prabhrit ends here || Sutra
numbers 9, 10, 11 The measure of 366 nights and days The Sun travels through 184
mandalas in 366 days. - Sutra [ 209 The Sun takes (366 nights and days) to
travel from the innermost mandala to the outermost mandala and from the
outermost mandala to the innermost mandala. - Sutra no. 9 The measure of the
loss and gain of night and day No. 10 Number of Muhurtas _811x27/67 Mu. 915 Mu.
885. 30/62 Mu. 900 Mu. The Sun revolves from the innermost mandala to the
outermost mandala and from the outermost mandala to the innermost mandala in 366
days. It takes 183 days to revolve from the innermost mandala to the outermost
mandala. When the Sun is in the innermost mandala, there are 18 Muhurtas of day
and 12 Muhurtas of night. It takes 183 days to travel from the innermost mandala
to the outermost mandala, and during that time there is a loss or gain of 6
Muhurtas. There is a gain or loss of 2/61 parts of a Muhurta in a day. That is,
there is a loss of 2/61 parts of a Muhurta in the duration of the day and a gain
of 2/61 parts of a Muhurta in the duration of the night. As the Sun moves
towards the outer mandala, the duration of the day decreases and the duration of
the night increases. When the Sun is present in the outermost mandala, there are
12 Muhurtas of day and 18 Muhurtas of night. As the Sun moves towards the
innermost mandala, the day increases and the night decreases. In the first six
months, the day decreases and the night increases. In the next six months, the
day increases and the night

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] isa saMkhyA ko pUrvokta 870 meM milAne para 885 muhUrta pUrNa evaM
30 / 62 muhUrta kI saMkhyA hogI  /  karmamAsa ke muhUrtoM kI saMkhyA eka yuga
meM 30 dina kA karmamAsa hotA hai| usake muhUrta banAne ke liye 30 se guNA
karane para 30x30=900 hote haiN| yaha karmamAsa ke muhUrtoM kI saMkhyA hai| mAsa
1 nakSatramAsa 2 sUryamAsa 3 candramAsa 4 karmamAsa  //  prathama prAbhRta kA
AThavAM sUtra samApta  //  sUtra saMkhyA 9, 10, 11 366 rAtri - divasa kA pramANa
sUrya 366 divasa meM 184 maMDala meM saMcAra karatA hai  /  - sUtra [ 209
sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala ke sarvabAhya maMDala meM gamana karane para evaM
sarvabAhya maMDala ke sarvAbhyaMtara maMDala meM gamana karane para sUrya ko
(366 rAtri divasa) lagate haiM  /  - sUtra saM. 9 rAtri - divasa kI hAni -
vRddhi kA pramANa saM. 10 muhUrtoM kI saMkhyA _811x27/67 mu. 915 mu. 885  /
30/62 mu. 900 mu. sUrya 366 divasa meM sarvAbhyantaramaMDala meM se
sarvabAhyamaMDala meM, sarvabAhyamaMDala meM se sarvAbhyaMtara maMDala meM
parikramA karatA hai| sarvAbhyaMtara maMDala meM se sarvabAhya maMDala taka 183
divasa meM parikramA karatA hai| jaba sUrya sarvAbhyaMtara maMDala meM hotA hai
taba 18 muhUrta kA dina evaM 12 muhUrta kI rAtri hotI hai| sarvAbhyaMtara
maMDala meM se sarvabAhya maMDala taka jAne meM 183 dina hote haiM aura usa
samaya meM 6 muhUrta kI hAni - vRddhi hotI hai  /  eka divasa meM muhUrta ke 2 /
61 bhAga kI vRddhi hAni hotI hai| arthAt divasa ke parimANa meM muhUrta ke 2/61
bhAga kI hAni hotI hai aura rAtri ke parimANa meM muhUrta ke 2/61 bhAga kI
vRddhi hotI hai  /  sUrya jaise jaise bAhyamaMDala kI ora gamana karatA hai
vaise vaise divasa ke parimANa meM hAni aura rAtri ke parimANa meM vRddhi hotI
hai  /  sUrya jaba sarvabAhyamaMDala meM vartamAna hotA hai taba 12 muhUrta kA
dina aura 18 muhUrta kI rAtri hotI hai  /  sUrya jaise-jaise sarvAbhyaMtara
maMDala kI tarapha gamana karatA hai vaise-vaise dina meM vRddhi aura rAtri meM
hAni hotI hai  /  prathama 6 mAsa meM divasa ghaTatA hai aura rAtri bar3hatI
hai| dUsare 6 mAsa meM divasa bar3hatA hai aura rAtri

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [210] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra]  **Sutra 11:** The rate of loss and gain is
2/61 parts of a Muhurta.  **First Prabhrut, First Prabhrut-Prabhrut ends.**
**Third Prabhrut-Prabhrut:** The meaning cannot be understood because the
'Sayamegam Choyalam' gatha is incomplete. The remaining part is a separate
section. Thus, Shri Aamolak Rishiji has written in the language of Surya
Prajnapti, and even with the commentary by Malayagiri, the actual mathematics
does not come to 144. Those who have knowledge of the mathematical process, if
they are kind enough to explain, it will be considered a service to the
scriptures.  **First Prabhrut, Third Prabhrut-Prabhrut ends.**  **Sutra 15:**
The difference in the time of movement of the two Suns (Bharat and Eravata)
During their movement, there is a difference of 5 yojanas and 35/61 parts in
each mandala between the two Suns. When both Suns are present in the innermost
mandala, there is a difference of 99640 yojanas between them.  The Jambudvipa
region is one lakh yojanas in diameter. Each Sun travels 180 yojanas in its
descent.  Out of 100000 yojanas, the descent area of both Suns is 180 and 180
yojanas, totaling 360 yojanas. Subtracting this from 100000 yojanas, 99640
yojanas remain, which is the difference between the two Suns present in the
innermost mandala.  There are 183 differences in the 184 solar mandalas, and
there is a difference of 2 yojanas and 48/61 parts from one mandala to the next.
Therefore, when the Sun moves from one mandala to another, the difference
between the two mandalas on both sides, when added together (2 yojanas 48/61 and
2 yojanas 48/61), becomes 5 yojanas and 35/61 parts.  The difference between the
two Suns present in the outermost mandala:  The difference between the two Suns
in each mandala is 5 yojanas and 35/61 parts, as explained earlier. The
outermost mandala is the 183rd from the innermost mandala. Multiplying 183 by 5
yojanas and 35/61 parts, we get 3434°, which comes to 1020 yojanas. Adding this
1020 yojanas difference to 99640, we get 100660 yojanas, which is the difference
between the two Suns present in the outermost mandala.  **Sutra 15**  **First
Prabhrut, Fourth Prabhrut-Prabhrut ends.**  **The Sun's movement area in one day
and night:**  The Sun travels 2 yojanas and 48/61 parts in one day and night. In
183 days, the Sun travels 510 yojanas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 210 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra ghaTatI hai| hAni-vRddhi kA pramANa muhUrta ke 2/61
bhAga jitanA hotA hai| - sUtra 11  //  prathama prAbhRta kA prathama prAbhRta-
prAbhRta samApta  //  tRtIya prAbhRta-prAbhRta meM 'sayamegaM coyAlaM' gAthA
apUrNa hone se artha nahIM kara sakate haiN| zeSa vyavaccheda hai  /  isa
prakAra zrI amolaka RSi jI ne sUryaprajJapti kI bhASA meM likhA haitathA
TIkAkAra malayagirikRta TIkA se bhI yathArtha gaNita 144 AtA nahIM hai| jinake
dhyAna meM gaNita kI prakriyA ho, yadi ve batAne kI kRpA kareMge to zrutasevA
mAnI jaayegii|  //  prathama prAbhRta kA tRtIya prAbhRta-prAbhRta samApta  //
sUtra 15 do sUryoM ke (bharata aura eravata ke ) saMcaraNa samaya meM paraspara
aMtara saMcaraNa karate samaya donoM sUryoM ke bIca pratyeka maMDala meM 5
yojana 35/61 bhAga aMtara hotA hai| jaba donoM sUrya sarvAbhyantaramaMDala meM
vartamAna hoM taba donoM sUryoM ke bIca 99640 yojana aMtara hotA hai| jambU
dvIpa kSetra eka lAkha yojana ke viSkambha vAlA hai| pratyeka sUrya 180 yojana
avagAhana karake saMcAra karatA hai| _ 100000 yojana meM se donoM sUrya kA
avagAhana kSetra 180 aura 180 yojana kula milA kara 360 yojana kama karane para
99640 yojana zeSa rahate haiM  /  jo sarvAbhyantaramaMDala meM vartamAna donoM
sUryoM kA aMtara hotA hai| 184 sUryamaMDala ke 183 aMtara hote haiM aura eka
maMDala kA dUsare maMDala taka 2 yojana 48/61 bhAga kA aMtara hotA hai| ata:
jaba sUrya eka maMDala se dUsare maMDala meM jAtA hai taba donoM ora ke maMDala
ke aMtara 2 yojana 48/61 aura 2 yojana 48/67 kA jor3a karane para 5 yojana 35/61
bhAga hotA hai| sarvabAhyamaMDala meM vartamAna donoM sUryoM kA paraspara aMtara
donoM sUryoM kI apekSA pratimaMDala 5 yojana 35/61 bhAga anantara pUrva meM
batAyA hai| sarvaAbhyantara maMDala se sarvabAhyamaMDala 183 vAM hotA hai  /
183 ko 5 yojana 35/61 se guNA karane para 3434deg isa prakAra 1020 yojana antara
AtA hai  /  isa 1020 yojana aMtara ko 996/40 meM milAne para 100660 yojana hotA
hai| jo sarvabAhyamaMDala meM vartamAna do sUryoM kA paraspara aMtara hai| -
sUtra 15  //  prathama prAbhRta kA cauthA prAbhRta-prAbhRta samApta  //  eka
ahorAtra meM sUrya kA saMcaraNa-kSetra sUrya eka ahorAtra meM 2 yojana 48/61
bhAga saMcaraNa karatA hai| sUrya 183 divasa meM 510 yojana

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix] The Sun traverses 2 yojanas and 48/61 parts in a day. The Sun
traverses 183 mandalas in 183 days. It traverses one mandala in a day. The total
area traversed by the Sun in all the mandalas is 510 yojanas. The traversal of
one mandala in a day is 2 yojanas and 48/61 parts. - Sutra 18 || The sixth
prabhrut of the first prabhrut - prabhrut ends || Sutra 20 The diameter-extent
of each mandala When the Sun is in the innermost mandala, it traverses 48/61
parts of 1 lakh yojanas from the outer edge, with an extent of 99640 yojanas, a
diameter of 315089 yojanas, and a displacement of 315089 yojanas. Then there is
a superior day of 18 muhurtas and an inferior night of 12 muhurtas. When the Sun
traverses to the mandala next to the innermost mandala, it traverses 48/61 parts
of one yojana from the outer edge, with an extent of 99645 yojanas and 35/61
parts, a diameter of 315107 yojanas, and a slightly less displacement. Then the
measure of day and night is the same as in the innermost mandala. The measure of
extent-diameter in the innermost mandala [ 211 One Sun traverses by moving 180
yojanas. Compared to the two Suns of Jambudvipa, the traversal of 360 yojanas is
reduced from the 1 lakh yojanas of the Jambudvipa region, leaving 99640 yojanas.
This is the extent-diameter of the innermost mandala. Sutra 20 The displacement
of the innermost mandala The displacement of the innermost mandala is (315089)
yojanas. It is as follows: (Diameter of the innermost mandala) 2x10 Considering
the displacement from this formula, it will be as follows: ) (99640) 2x10
)9928129600×10 ) 99281296000 99281296000

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] saMcaraNa karatA hai, jisase eka divasa meM 2 yojana 48 /61 bhAga
saMcaraNa karatA I 183 maMDala kA 183 divasa meM sUrya saMcaraNa karatA hai| eka
divasa meM eka maMDala meM saMcAra karatA hai  /  sUrya ke sarvamaMDaloM kA
saMcaraNa kSetra 510 yojana kA hai| eka maMDala kA eka divasa kA saMcaraNa 2
yojana 48/ 61 bhAga hotA hai  /  - sUtra 18  //  prathama prAbhRta kA chaThA
prAbhRta-prAbhRta samApta  //  sUtra 20 pratyeka maMDala kA viSkambha-AyAma jaba
sUrya sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala meM ho taba 1 lAkha yojana kA 48 / 61 bhAga bAhalya
se 99640 yojana AyAma viSakambha se 315089 yojanA parikSepa se saMkramaNa karatA
hai taba 18 muhUrta kA utkRSTa divasa aura jaghanya 12 muhUrta kI rAtri hotI hai
/  jaba sUrya sarvAbhyantaramaMDala ke anantaravartI maMDala meM saMkramaNa
karatA hai taba eka yojana kA 48 / 61 bhAga bAhalya 99645 yojana 35/61 bhAga
AyAma viSkambha se, 315107 yojana kiMcita vizeSa nyUna parikSepa se cAra (gati)
karatA hai| taba divasa aura rAtri kA pramANa sarvAbhyantaramaMDala ke samAna hI
hotA hai  /  sarvAbhyantaramaMDala meM AyAma-viSkambha kA pramANa [ 211 eka
sUrya 180 yojana avagAhana karake gati karatA hai  /  jambU dvIpa ke donoM sUrya
kI apekSA 360 yojana avagAhanA jambUdvIpa kSetra ke 1 lAkha yojana pramANa meM
se kama karane para 99640 yojana rahate haiM  /  jo sarvAbhyantaramaMDala kA
AyAma - viSkambha hai  /  sUtra 20 sarvAbhyantaramaMDala kA parikSepa
sarvAbhyantaramaMDala kA parikSepa (315089) yojana hai| vaha isa prakAra hai
(sarvAbhyantaramaMDala kA viSkambha ) 2x10 isa sUtra se parikSepa kA vicAra
karane para nimnaprakAra se hogA  /  ) (99640) 2x10 )9928129600x10 ) 99281296000
99281296000

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
212 315089 Yojan Parikshep 3 + 3 61 +8 625 +4 63008 + 6 630169 +9 92281296000 9
0 61 3181 3125 00562960 504064 05689600 5671521 [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra 630178
0018079 By calculating in this way, the Parikshep of the innermost circle is
315089 Yojan and 18079 remain. Parikshep of each circle In each circle, there is
an increase of 5 Yojan 35/61 parts in the Aayam-Vishkambh. Accordingly, the
Aayam-Vishkambh of the circle following the innermost circle is 99645 Yojan
35/61 parts. To calculate (to know) the Parikshep of each circle, dividing 5
Yojan by 61, we get 561 = 305. Adding 35 parts to them, we get 340. Method of
calculating Parikshep (Vishkambh) x 10 ) (340) 2x10 ) 115600 x 10 ) 1156000 1075

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 212 315089 yojana parikSepa 3 + 3 61 +8 625 +4 63008 + 6 630169 +9 92281296000
9 0 61 3181 3125 00562960 504064 05689600 5671521 [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 630178
0018079 ukta prakAra se gaNita karane para sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala kA parikSepa
315089 yojana hotA hai aura 18079 zeSa rahate haiM  /  pratyeka maMDala kA
parikSepa pratyeka maMDala meM 5 yojana 35 / 61 bhAga AyAma - viSkaMbha meM
vRddhi hotI hai| tadanusAra sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala ke anantaravartI maMDala kA
AyAma viSkaMbha 99645 yojana 35 / 61 bhAga hai  /  pratyeka maMDala kA parikSepa
nikAlane ke liye (jAnane ke liye) 5 yojana ke ikasaThiyA bhAga karane para 561 =
305 Ate haiM  /  unameM 35 bhAga aura milAne para 340 hote haiM  /  parikSepa
nikAlane kI vidhi ( viSkaMbha kA ) x 10 ) (340) 2x10 ) 115600x10 ) 1156000 1075

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix ] 1) 1156000 1 1 207 01560 7 1449 [ 213 2145011100 5 10725 2150
00375 To make 1075 yojanas, divide by 61 [ 1075 / 61] which gives 17 yojanas
38/61. In each mandala, the parikshep increases by 17 yojanas 38/61. The
parikshep of each parimandala is 18 yojanas by vyavahar and 17 yojanas 38/61 by
nischya. Adding 18 yojanas to the parikshep of each mandala gives the parikshep
of the next mandala. Doing this, the sun transits and reaches the outermost
mandala, then the ayam vishkambh becomes 100660. The parikshep of the outermost
mandala is 318314.869. By vyavahar, it is 618315. Method to calculate the ayam -
vishkambh - parikshep of the outermost mandala In each mandala, 5 yojanas 35/61
increase, so how much will the increase be in the outermost mandala? Since there
are 183 parimandala, multiplying by 5 yojanas 35/61 gives 183 mandalas 45
yojanas = 915 yojanas. 35 parts × 183 mandalas = 6405. To make these into
yojanas, divide 6405 by 61, which gives 105 yojanas. Adding 105 yojanas to the
aforementioned 915 yojanas gives 1020 yojanas. Adding 1020 yojanas to the ayam
of the innermost mandala, 99640 yojanas, gives the ayam of the outermost
mandala, 100660 yojanas. The parikshep of the outermost mandala is 318315
yojanas. The method to obtain this is as follows: Method to calculate the
parikshep of the outermost mandala To calculate the parikshep: ) (ayam) 2x10 )
(100600) 2×10 ) 10132435600×10 -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] 1) 1156000 1 1 207 01560 7 1449 [ 213 2145011100 5 10725 2150 00375
1075 ke yojana banAne ke liye 61 se bhAga dene para [ 1075 / 61] 17 yojana 38
/61 aaeNge| pratyeka maMDala meM 17 yojana 38 /61 bhAga parikSepa bar3hatA hai|
pratyeka parimaMDala kA parikSepa vyavahAra se 18 yojana aura nizcaya se 17
yojana 38/61 bhAga hai  /  pratyeka maMDala kA parikSapa meM 18 yojana milAne
para dUsare maMDala kA parikSepa hotA hai| aisA karane para sUrya saMkramaNa
karatA-karatA sarvabAhya maMDala meM AtA haitaba AyAma viSkaMbha 100660 hotA hai
/  sarvabAhya maMDala kA parikSepa 318314.869 hai  /  vyavahAra se 618315 hotA
hai  /  sarvabAhya maMDala kA AyAma - viSkaMbha-parikSepa nikAlane kI vidhi
pratyeka maMDala meM 5 yojana 35 / 61 bhAga bar3hatA hai jisase sarvabAhya
maMDala meM kitanI vRddhi hogI ? parimaMDala 183 hone se 5 yojana 35 / 61 bhAga
se guNA karane para 183 maMDala 45 yojana = 915 yojana hote haiN| 35 bhAga x 183
maMDala = 6405 hote haiN| inake yojana banAne ke liye 6405 ko 61 se bhAga dene
para 105 yojana Ate haiN| pUrvokta 915 yojana meM 105 yojana milAne se 1020
yojana hote haiM  /  sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala ke AyAma 99640 yojana meM 1020 yojana
jor3ane se sarvabAhyamaMDala kA 100660 yojana AyAma hotA hai| sarvabAhya maMDala
kA parikSepa 318315 yojana hai| jisako prApta karane kI vidhi isa prakAra hai
sarvabAhyamaMDala kA parikSepa nikAlane kI vidhi parikSepa nikAlane ke liye  /
) (AyAma) 2x10 ) (100600) 2x10 ) 10132435600x10 -

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ Surya Prajnapti Sutra 318314.869 Yojana Parikshepa ) । 3 101324356000 113 5224
5024 6363 020035 19089 63661 0094660 636624 63661 3099900 2546496 6366278
055340400 50930304 63662966 0441009600 381975796 636629729 5903380400 9
5629667561 This way, it is less than 869 thousand, but according to the
principle of 'Ardhaadurdhvamekam Grahyam', 315 is taken instead of 314. Thus,
the Parikshepa of the outermost Mandala is 318315 Yojana (in practice). The
Parikshepa of the innermost Mandala is 315089 Yojana. As explained earlier, the
Parikshepa of each Mandala increases by 17 Yojana and 38/61 parts, then how much
Yojana Parikshepa increases in 183 Mandalas? 183 Mandalas x 17 Yojana = 3111
Yojana. By multiplying 183 Mandalas x 38 (parts of Yojana), we get 6954 parts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 214 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 318314.869 yojana parikSepa )  /  3 101324356000 sh
s m 113 5224 5024 6363 020035 19089 63661 0094660 636624 63661 3099900 2546496
6366278 055340400 50930304 63662966 0441009600 381975796 636629729 5903380400 9
5629667561 isa prakAra 869 hajAra se kama hai, parantu 'ardhAdUrdhvamekaM
grAhyam' isa nyAya se 314 ke sthAna para 315 grahaNa kiye haiM  /  isa prakAra
sarvabAhyamaMDala kA parikSepa 318315 yojana (vyavahAra se) hotA hai|
sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala kA parikSepa 315089 yojana hai| pUrva meM batAI gaI rIti
se pratyeka maMDala ke parikSepa | 17 yojana 38/61 bhAga kI vRddhi hotI hai to
183 maMDala meM kitane yojana parikSepa kI vRddhi hotI hai ? 183 maMDalax17
yojana = 3111 yojana hote haiN| 183 maMDalax38 (yojana kA bhAga) karane para
6954 bhAga aayeNge|

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix] To divide 6954 yojanas by 61, we get 114 yojanas. Adding 114
yojanas to 3111 yojanas, we get 3225 yojanas, which is the increase in the
circumference of the 183rd circle. Adding 3225 yojanas to the circumference of
the innermost circle, which is 315089 yojanas, we get the circumference of the
outermost circle, which is 318314 yojanas. The original text of this formula
states that the circumference of the outermost circle is 318315 yojanas. This
should be understood practically. Because when we calculate the circumference of
each circle, a remainder of 375 yojanas increases. Multiplying this by 183
circles, we get 68625. Dividing this number by 2150, we get 31. Since this is
more than the expected 61 half-parts, it is considered complete in practice and
is stated as 318315. Ka Formula 2.3 The speed of the Sun in each circle per
muhurta The difference between each circle is 2 yojanas 48/61 parts. The
difference between both the Sun's circles is 5 yojanas 35/61 parts. The area of
the entire circle is 510 yojanas. Formula 20 || The first prabhrit is the eighth
prabhrit-prabhrit ends || [ 215 - That is, in 2 days and nights, both Suns
complete one circle. The specific speed of the Sun in each muhurta can be known
from this formula - - Speed in 1 muhurta = Circumference of the circle /
Muhurtas in 2 days and nights According to 30 muhurtas in 1 day and night, there
are 60 muhurtas in 2 days and nights. The circumference of the innermost circle
is 315089 yojanas. Both Suns complete the revolution of the innermost circle in
60 muhurtas. When the Sun transitions between circles, it transitions with its
own specific speed. Both the Suns of Bharat Kshetra and Airāvata Kshetra
transition with their specific speeds and complete one circle in 60 muhurtas.
The speed of the Sun in 1 muhurta in the innermost circle Circumference of the
innermost circle / 60 muhurtas = Speed in 1 muhurta. 315089 yojanas / 60
muhurtas = 5251 yojanas 29/60 parts is the speed of the Sun in 1 muhurta.
Practically, there is a difference of 18 yojanas in the circumference of each
circle. That is, adding 18 yojanas to the circumference of the innermost circle,
we get the circumference of the next circle. Accordingly,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] 6954 bhAga ke yojana karane ke liye 61 se bhAga dene para 114
yojana hoNge| 3111 yojana meM 114 yojana milAne para 3225 yojana 183 parimaMDala
kI parikSepa vRddhi hotI hai  /  sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala ke parikSepa 315089
yojana meM 3225 yojana ke milAne para sarvabAhya maMDala kA parikSepa 318314
hogA  /  isa sUtra ke mUla pATha meM 318315 yojana sarvabAhyamaMDala kA
parikSepa kahA hai  /  vaha vyavahAra se samajhanA caahiye| kyoMki pUrva meM
pratyeka maMDala kA parikSepa nikAlane para 375 zeSa bar3hate haiM  /  unako 183
maMDala se guNA karane para 68625 Ate haiN| isa saMkhyA ko 2150 se bhAga dene
para 31 Ate haiM  /  jo 61 ardhabhAga kI apekSA vizeSa hone se vyavahAra se
pUrNa mAnakara 318315 kahe haiM  /  kai sUtra 2.3 sUrya kI pratyeka maMDala meM
pratimuhUrtta kI gati pratyeka maMDala kA aMtara 2 yojana 48 / 61 bhAga hai|
donoM sUrya ke maMDala kA antara 5 yojana 35 / 61 bhAga hai| sarvamaMDala kA
kSetra 510 yojana hai  /  sUtra 20  //  prathama prAbhRta kA aSTama prAbhRta-
prAbhRta samApta  //  [ 215 - arthAt 2 ahorAtra meM donoM sUrya 1 maMDala kI
parikramA pUrNa karate haiM  /  pratyeka muhurta kI sUrya kI vizeSa gati isa
sUtra jJAta kI jA sakatI hai - - 1 muhUrtta kI gati = maMDala kI paridhi / 2
ahorAtra ke muhUrtta 1 ahorAtra ke 30 muhUrtta ke anusAra 2 ahorAtra ke 60
muhUrtta hote haiM  /  sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala kI paridhi 315089 yojana hai  /
sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala kI parikramA donoM sUrya 60 muhUrta meM pUrNa karate haiM
/  sUrya jaba maMDala meM saMkramaNa karatA hai taba apanI eka vizeSa gati se
saMkramaNa karatA hai  /  bharatakSetra aura airavata kSetra ke donoM sUrya
apanI viziSTagati se saMkramaNa karake 60 muhUrtta meM 1 maMDala kI parikramA
pUrNa karate haiM  /  sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala meM sUrya kI 1 muhUrtta kI gati
sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala kI paridhi / 60 muhUrtta =1 mUhUrtta kI gati  /  315089
yojana/ 60 mUhUrtta = 5251 yojana 29/60 bhAga sUrya kI 1 muhUrta kI gati hai  /
pratyeka maMDala kI paridhi meM vyavahAra se 18 yojana kA aMtara hotA hai|
arthAt sarvAbhyaMtara maMDala kI paridhi meM 18 yojana milAne para
sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala ke anantaravartI dUsare meM usako paridhi AtI hai|
tadanusAra

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [216] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra]  The circumference of the third circle is
obtained by adding 18 yojanas to the circumference of the second circle. In this
way, the circumference of each circle can be determined.  To know how much the
Sun's speed increases in one muhurta in each circle, this formula should be
used:  Increase in circumference of each circle / 60 muhurtas.  There is an
increase of 18 yojanas in the circumference of each circle. Dividing it by 60
muhurtas will give the speed increase in one muhurta.  18 yojanas (increase in
circumference of each circle) / 60 muhurtas = 18/60 yojanas increase in speed
per muhurta.  **Method to determine the difference in the Sun's visual path
area**  To determine the difference in the Sun's visual path area in each
circle, the following formula should be used:  The Sun's speed in one muhurta in
each circle is half of the day-measure.  The measure of the Sun's visual path
area in the innermost circle is 47263 yojanas 21/60 parts. Using the above
formula to know this: 5251 yojanas 29/60 parts.  (Sun's speed in one muhurta in
the innermost circle) x 9 muhurtas (half of the day-measure) = 31508949 2835801
/ 60 = 47263 yojanas 21/60 parts is the Sun's visual path area in the innermost
circle.  **Another method to know the measure of the Sun's visual path area in
the innermost circle**  Circumference of each circle x half of the day-measure
60  Circumference of each circle x half of the day-measure 60  31508949 60

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 216 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra dUsare maMDala kI paridhi meM 18 yojana milAne para
tIsare maMDala kI paridhi AtI hai| isa prakAra pratyeka maMDala kI paridhi jJAta
kI jA sakatI hai| pratyeka maMDala meM sUrya kI eka muhUrta meM kitanI
gativRddhi hotI hai, yaha jAnane ke liye isa sUtra kA upayoga karanA cAhiye -
pratyeka maMDala meM paridhi kI vRddhi / 60 muhuurt| pratyeka maMDala meM 18
yojana paridhi meM vRddhi hotI hai| use 60 muhUrta se bhAga dene para 1 muhUrta
meM hone vAlI gativRddhi prApta hogii| 18 yojana pratyeka maMDala kI paridhi meM
hone vAlI vRddhi /60 muhUrta =18/60 yojana muhUrta meM gati meM vRddhi hotI hai|
sUrya ke dRSTipatha kSetra kA aMtara jJAta karane kI vidhi usa-usa maMDala meM
vidyamAna sUrya dRSTipatha ke kSetra kA aMtara jJAta karane ke liye nimnalikhita
sUtra kA upayoga karanA cAhiye - sUrya kI usa-usa maMDala meM eka muhUrta kI
gati 4 dinamAna kA ardhbhaag| sarvAbhyaMtara maMDala meM sUrya ke dRSTipatha
kSetra kA pramANa 47263 yojana 21/60 bhAga hai  /  usako jAnane ke liye
uparyukta sUtra kA upayoga karane para - 5251 yojana 29/60 bhaag|
(sarvAbhyataramaMDala meM sUrya kI eka muhUrta kI gati) x 9 muhUrta (dinamAna kA
ardhabhAga) _ 31508949 2835801 60 = 47263 yojana 21/60 bhAga sarvAbhyaMtara
maMDala meM sUrya kA dRSTipatha kSetra hai| sarvAbhyaMtara maMDala meM sUrya kA
dRSTipatha kSetrapramANa jAnane kI dUsarI vidhi usa-usa maMDala kI paridhi
dinamAna kA ardhabhAga 60 usa-usa maMDala kI paridhi dinamAna kA ardhabhAga 60
31508949 60

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix] [ 217 =2835801 60 -47263 Yojan 21/60 parts is the field of vision of
the Sun in the innermost circle. The proof of the field of vision of the Sun in
the outermost circle The speed of the Sun in one Muhurta in the outermost circle
is the time taken by the outermost circle to revolve around the circle - - 60
Muhurta 318315 Yojan = 5305 Yojan 15. 60 parts is the speed of the Sun in one
Muhurta. To find the proof of the field of vision of the Sun in the outermost
circle, the following formula should be used - The speed of the Sun in one
Muhurta in the outermost circle is half of the day-measure = 31831546 Muhurta
half of the day-measure 60 = 1909890 60 = 31831 Yojan 30. 60 parts is the proof
of the field of vision in the outermost circle. Second method - Circumference x
half of the day-measure 60 = 31831546 60 = 1909890 60 . = 31831 Yojan 30. 60
parts is the proof of the field of vision in the outermost circle 1 - To find
the speed of the Sun in one Muhurta in each circle, the circumference of each
circle should be

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] [ 217 =2835801 60 -47263 yojana 21/60 bhAga sarvAbhyantaramaMDala
meM sUrya kA dRSTipatha kSetra hai| sarvabAhyamaMDala meM sUrya kA dRSTipatha
kSetra kA pramANa sarvabAhyamaMDala meM sUrya kI eka muhUrta kI gati
sarvabAhyamaMDala kI paridhi maMDala kI parikramA karate hue lagatA samaya - -
60 muhUrta 318315 yojana = 5305 yojana 15 /  60 bhAga 1 muhUrta meM sUrya kI
gti| sarvabAhyamaMDala meM sUrya kA dRSTipatha kSetrapramANa jJAta karane ke
liye nimnalikhita sUtra kA upayoga karanA cAhiye - sarvabAhyamaMDala meM sUrya
kI 1 muhUrta meM gati 4 dinamAna kA ardhabhAga = 31831546 muhUrta dinamAna kA
ardhabhAga 60 = 1909890 60 = 31831 yojana 30 / 60 bhAga sarvabAhyamaMDala meM
dRSTipatha kSetra kA prmaann| dvitIya vidhi - paridhixdinamAna kA ardhabhAga 60
= 31831546 60 = 1909890 60 . = 31831 yojana 30  /  60 bhAga sarvabAhyamaMDala
meM dRSTipatha kSetra kA pramANa 1 - usa-usa maMDala meM sUrya kI 1 muhUrta kI
gati nikAlane ke liye usa-usa maMDala kI paridhi ko

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[218] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] Dividing 60 by 1 gives the speed of 1 Muhurta. 2 -
To find the measure of the field of vision, multiply the speed of 1 Muhurta by
half the day-span (of the Sun). The result is the measure of the field of
vision. - Sutra 23 || Second Prabhrut is complete || Sutra 24 The measure of the
area illuminated by the Sun _When the Sun is in the innermost circle, it
illuminates one and a half parts of the five imagined circles of Jambudvipa and
one part remains unilluminated. In Jambudvipa, both Suns illuminate three parts
of the five circles and two parts remain unilluminated. That is, in the five
imagined parts of Jambudvipa, three parts are day and two parts are night. _
Imagining 366 parts of Jambudvipa, 1 part (circle) has 732 parts, 3 circles have
2196 parts. That is, out of 3660 parts, 2196 parts are day and 1464 parts are
night, or both Suns complete one revolution of the circle in 60 Muhurtas.
Imagining 5 circles of Jambudvipa, 1 circle is 12 Muhurta-like. The time of 12
Muhurtas is 732 parts in the imagined 3660 parts of Jambudvipa. When the Sun
moves from the innermost circle towards the outermost circle, there is a loss-
gain of 2.61 parts in the day-night in each circle. . Reducing the innermost
circle, the outermost circle comes 183rd. By doing 18342, there is a loss-gain
of 366/61 parts in the day-night. That is, there is a loss of 6 Muhurtas in the
day and an increase in the night. With respect to both Suns, there is a loss-
gain of 12 Muhurtas. In the outermost circle, the Sun illuminates one part and
one and a half parts remain unilluminated. As mentioned earlier, with respect to
each Sun, there is 1 part day and 1 and a half parts night. With respect to both
Suns, there are 2 parts day and 3 parts night. In the innermost circle, there
are 3 parts day and 2 parts night. In the outermost circle, there are 2 parts
day and 3 parts night. 1 part should be known as 12 Muhurta-like.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 218 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 60 se bhAga dene para 1 muhUrta kI gati prApta hotI
hai| 2 - dRSTipatha kSetra kA pramANa nikAlane ke liye 1 muhUrta kI gati ko
(sUrya kI) dinamAna ke ardhabhAga se guNA karane para jo labdhi Aye vaha
dRSTipatha kSetra kA pramANa jAnanA caahiye| - sUtra 23  //  dUsarA prAbhRta
samApta  //  sUtra 24 sUrya dvArA prakAzamAna kSetra kA pramANa _jaba sUrya
sarvAbhyaMtara maMDala meM vartamAna hotA hai taba jaMbUdvIpa ke kalpita pAMca
cakravAla meM se DeDha bhAga prakAzita karatA hai aura eka bhAga aprakAzita hotA
hai| jambUdvIpa meM vartamAna donoM sUrya kI apekSA pAMca cakravAla meM se tIna
bhAga prakAzita karate haiM aura do bhAga aprakAzita hote haiM  /  arthAt
jambUdvIpa ke kalpita pAMca bhAga meM se tIna bhAga dina hotA hai aura do bhAga
rAtri hotI hai| _ jambUdvIpa ke 366 bhAga kI kalpanA karane para 1 bhAga
(cakravAla) ke 732 bhAga hote haiM , 3 cakravAla ke 2196 bhAga hote haiM  /
arthAt 3660 bhAga meM se 2196 bhAga kA divasa hotA hai 1464 bhAga rAtri hotI
hai, athavA donoM sUrya 60 muhUrta meM 1 maMDala kI parikramA pUrNa karate haiM
/  jambUdvIpa ke 5 cakravAla kI kalpanA karane para 1 cakravAla 12 muhUrtAtmaka
hotA hai  /  12 muhUrta kA kAla jambUdvIpa ke 3660 bhAga kI kalpanA meM 732
bhAgAtmaka hotA hai| sarvAbhyaMtara maMDala se sUrya jaba sarvabAhyamaMDala kI
ora gamana karatA hai taba pratimaMDala meM ahorAtra meM 2 /  61 bhAga hAni-
vRddhi hotI hai| . sarvAbhyaMtaramaMDala ko kama karane para sarvabAhyamaMDala
183 vAM AtA hai| jisase 18342 karane para 366/61 bhAga kI hAni-vRddhi ahorAtra
meM hotI hai| arthAt 6 muhUrta divasa meM hAni aura rAtri meM vRddhi hotI hai  /
donoM sUrya kI apekSA 12 muhUrta kI hAni vRddhi hotI hai| sarvabAhyamaMDala meM
sUrya eka bhAga prakAzita karatA hai aura Der3ha bhAga aprakAzita rahatA hai|
pUrva meM batAye gaye anusAra eka-eka sUrya kI apekSA 1 bhAga divasa aura Der3ha
bhAga rAtri rahatI hai| donoM sUrya kI apekSA 2 bhAga divasa aura 3 bhAga rAtri
hotI hai| sarvAbhyaMtara maMDala meM 3 bhAga divasa aura 2 bhAga rAtri hAtI hai|
sarvabAhyamaMDala meM 2 bhAga divasa aura 3 bhAga rAtri hotI hai| 1 bhAga 12
muhUrtAtmaka jAnanA cAhiye

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ Appendix ] [ 219 Considering the 5 Chakravalas of Jambudvipa, 1 Chakravala is
12 Muhurta-atmak. Because the time of 60 Muhurtas is 5 Bhaga-atmak in comparison
to the Sun. || Third Prabhrit Sampt. - Sutra 24 Sampt. || Sutra 25 Tapkshetra
Sansthiti Tapkshetra Sansthiti's Abhyantar-Bahya Ka Parikshep 9486 Yojana 9/10
Bhaga is. Its Ganit is as follows - Parikshep .. - ) (Aayam)2 - 10 )
(Vishkambh)2 x 10 (Its Vishkambh)2 - 10 (10000)2510 )100000000x10 ) 1000000000
316220776 - ) 1000000000 100 61 3900 3756 6322 014400 12644 63242 0175600 126484
632447 04911600 4427129

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] [ 219 jambUdvIpa ke 5 cakravAla kI parikalpanA karane para 1
cakravAla 12 muhUrtAtmaka hotA hai| kyoMki dAnoM sUrya kI apekSA 60 muhUrta kA
kAla 5 bhAgAtmaka hotA hai|  //  tIsarA prAbhRta smaapt| - sUtra 24 samApta  //
sUtra 25 tApakSetra kI saMsthiti tApakSetra saMsthiti kI AbhyaMtara-bAhya kA
parikSepa 9486 yojana 9/10 bhAga hai| usakA gaNita nimna prakAra hai - parikSepa
.. - ) (AyAma)2 - 10 ) (viSkambha)2 x 10 (usakA viSkambha)2 - 10 (10000)2510
)100000000x10 ) 1000000000 316220776 - ) 1000000000 100 61 3900 3756 6322 014400
12644 63242 0175600 126484 632447 04911600 4427129

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 220] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra 6324547 048447100 44271829 63245546 0427527100
379473276 63245552 48053824 776 is greater than half (500) of one thousand.
According to the rule 'Ardhaadurdhvamekam Grahyam', the previous number is
counted and 31623 Yojanas are mentioned in practice. Multiplying them by three
gives 94869. Dividing them by 10 gives 9486 Yojanas 9/10 parts, which is the
magnitude of the innermost outer boundary of the Tapaskhetra. The magnitude of
the outermost boundary from the circumference of Jambudvipa is ‘Parikshep =
(Vishkambh)410 The circumference of Jambudvipa is well-known. Multiplying it by
3 and dividing by 10 gives 94868 Yojanas 4/10. The circumference of Jambudvipa
is 316227 Yojanas, 3 Gavyutis 128 Yojanas and 13/ Angulas. But in practice,
considering it as 316228 Yojanas and multiplying it gives 948684 Yojanas.
Dividing them by 10 gives 94868 Yojanas 4/10 parts, which is the magnitude of
the outermost boundary. The dimension of the Tapaskhetra from North to South
direction is Aayam = Difference between North and South direction Vishkambh =
Difference between East and West direction The dimension of the Tapaskhetra is
78333 Yojanas 1/3 parts. From Meru Parvat to Jambudvipa, it is 45000 Yojanas.
One-sixth of the extent of the Lavana Samudra is 33333.333 Yojanas. Adding both
gives the dimension of the Tapaskhetra as 78333.333 Yojanas. The magnitude of
the innermost outer boundary of the Andhakar Sansthiti is The magnitude of the
innermost outer boundary of the Andhakar Sansthiti is 6324 Yojanas 6/10 parts.
Multiplying the circumference of Meru Parvat by 2 and dividing by 10 gives 63246
Yojanas. Dividing them by 10 gives 6324 Yojanas 6/10, which is the innermost
outer boundary of the Andhakar Sansthiti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 220 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 6324547 048447100 44271829 63245546 0427527100
379473276 63245552 48053824 776 eka hajAra ke ardhabhAga (500) kI apekSA adhika
hai| 'arddhAdUrdhvamekaM grAhyam' ke vidhAna se pUrva saMkhyA gina kara
vyavahAra se 31623 yojana batalAye haiN| unake tigune karane se 94869 hote haiM
/  unako 10 se bhAjita karane para-9486 yojana 9/10 bhAga sarvAbhyantara
tApakSetra saMsthiti kI sarvAbhantara-bAhA kA parimANa hai| jambUdvIpa ke
parikSepa se sarvabAhya bAhA kA parimANa 'parikSepa = (viSkambha)410 jambUdvIpa
kA parikSepa prasiddha hai| use 3 se guNA karake 10 se bhAga dene para 94868
yojana 4/10 hote haiN| jambUdvIpa kA parikSepa 316227 yojana, 3 gavyUti 128
yojana aura 13/ aMgula hai  /  parantu vyavahAra se 316228 yojana mAna kara ise
guNA karane para 948684 yojana hote haiN| unako 10 se bhAga dene para 94868
yojana 4/10 bhAga sarvabAhya bAhA kA parimANa hotA hai| uttara-dakSiNa dizA se
tApa kSetra kA AyAma AyAma = uttara-dakSiNa dizA kA aMtara viSkambha = pUrva-
pazcima dizA kA aMtara tApakSetra kA AyAma parimANa 78333 yojana 1/3 bhAga hai|
meruparvata meM jambUdvIpaparyanta 45000 yojana hai| lavaNa samudra ke vistAra
kA chaThA bhAga 33333.333 yojana hai| donoM kA jor3a karane para tApa kSetra kA
AyAma parimANa 78333.333 yojana hotA hai| andhakAra saMsthiti kI sarvAbhyantara
bAhA kA parimANa andhakAra saMsthiti ko sarvAbhyantara bAhA kA parimANa 6324
yojana 6/10 bhAga hai| meruparvata ke parikSepa ko 2 se guNA kara 10 se bhAjita
karane para 63246 yojana hote haiN| unheM 10 se bhAga dene para 6324 yojana 6/10
aMdhakAra saMsthiti kI sarvAbhyantara bAhA AtI hai|

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix ] [ 221 The outermost boundary of the darkness region extending from
the salt sea to the nearby Jambudvipa The outermost boundary is obtained by
multiplying the circumference of Jambudvipa by 2 and dividing by 10. The
circumference of Jambudvipa is 316228 yojanas. Multiplying it by 2 gives 632456
yojanas. Dividing by 10, we get 63245 yojanas 6/10 parts as the outermost
boundary. The length of the darkness region should be known as the length of the
heat region. The heat region in the innermost circle should be known as the
darkness region in the outermost circle. The darkness region in the innermost
circle should be known as the heat region in the outermost circle. That is, the
inner boundary of the heat region in the outermost circle is 6324 yojanas 6/10
parts. The outer boundary is 63245 yojanas 6/10 parts. The length of the heat
region is 78333.333 yojanas. The darkness region in the outermost circle has an
inner boundary of 9486 yojanas 9/10 parts. The remaining boundary is 94868
yojanas 4/10 parts. The length of the darkness region is 78333.333 yojanas. -
Sutra 25 ends || Fourth Prabhrut ends || Sutra 33 Second Prabhrut of the tenth
Prabhrut - Prabhrut _ One should imagine 67 parts of the day and night. 67 parts
of the day and night are the number of constellations along with the moon
Constellation name from the part number Yoga Muhurta 9 mu. 27/67 Abhijit 33
parts 1/2 15 mu. Shatabhisha, Bharani, Aardra, Ashlesha Swati, Jyeshta 67 15 30
mu. Shravana, Dhanishta, Purva, Bha. Revati, Ashwini, Krittika Mrigashira,
Pushya, Magha, Pu. Pha. Hasta, Chitra, Anuradha, Mula, Purvashadha 100 parts 1/2
45 mu. U. Bha. Rohini Pun. U. Pha. Visakha, Uttarashadha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] [ 221 lavaNasamudra kI nikaTavartI jambUdvIpa taka kI aMdhakAra
saMsthiti kI sarvabAhya bAhA jambUdvIpa kI paridhi ke 2 se guNA kara 10 se bhAga
dene para sarvabAhya bAhA kA parimANa prApta hotA hai| jambUdvIpa kI paridhi
316228 yojana hai| use 2 se guNA karane para 632456 yojana hote haiN| jinheM
1063245 yojana 6/10 bhAga sarvabAhya bAhA kA parimANa hotA hai| andhakAra
saMsthiti kI lambAI tApamAna kI lambAI jitanA jAnanI caahiye|
sarvAbhyantaramaMDala meM jo tApamAna kI sthiti hai vaha sarvabAhya maMDala meM
andhakAra kI sthiti jAnanA caahiye| sarvAbhyantaramaMDala meM jo andhakAra kI
sthiti hai vaha sarvabAhyamaMDala meM tApa kI sthiti jAnanA caahiye| arthAt
sarvabAhyamaMDala meM tApamAna kI AbhyAntara bAhA 6324 yojana 6/10 bhAga hai|
sarvabAhya bAhA 63245 yojana 6/10 bhAga hai  /  tApamAna kI lambAI 78333.333
yojana hai| andhakAra kI saMsthiti sarvabAhya maMDala meM AbhyAntara bAhA 9486
yojana 9/10 bhAga hai| zeSa bAhA 94868 yojana 4/10 bhAga hai| andhakAra
saMsthiti kI lambAI 78333.333 yojana hai| - sUtra 25 samApta  //  caturtha
prAbhRta samApta  //  sUtra 33 dasaveM prAbhRta kA dUsarA prAbhRta-prAbhRta _
ahorAtra ke 67 bhAga kI kalpanA karanA caahiye| ahorAtra ke 67 bhAga nakSatra
saMkhyA candra ke sAtha nakSatranAma meM se bhAga saMkhyA yoga muhUrta 9 mu.
27/67 abhijita 33 bhAga 1/2 15 mu. zatabhiSA, bharaNI, AdrA, azleSA svAti,
jyeSThA 67 15 30 mu. zravaNa, dhaniSThA, pUrvA, bhA0 revatI, azvinI, kRtikA
mRgazira, puSya, maghA, pU0 phA0 hasta, citrA, anurAdhA, mUla, pUrvASAr3hA 100
bhAga 1/2 45 mu. u0 bhA0 rohiNI puna0 u. phA. vizAkhA, uttarASAr3hA0

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [222] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra Muhurta]  This section explains how many
Muhurtas a particular Nakshatra (constellation) forms with the Moon.  **To
determine the Muhurta formed by a Nakshatra with the Sun:**  * **Nakshatra
Name:** Abhijit, Shatabhisha, Bharani, Aardra, Ashlesha, Swati, Jyeshta,
Shravana, Dhanishta, Purva Bhadrapada, Revati, Ashwini, Krittika, Mrigashira,
Pushya, Magha, Purva Phalguni, Hasta, Chitra, Anuradha, Moola, Purva Ashadha,
Uttara Bhadrapada, Rohini, Punarvasu, Uttara Phalguni, Visakha, Uttara Ashadha.
* **Days:** 203  **Calculation:**  * A Nakshatra travels a certain number of
parts out of 67 parts of a day with the Moon. * To find the Muhurta formed with
the Sun, divide the number of parts traveled with the Moon by 5. * The result
will be in days and parts of a Muhurta. * To convert parts of a Muhurta to full
Muhurtas, multiply by 30.  **Example:**  * Abhijit Nakshatra travels 21/67 parts
of a day with the Moon. * Dividing 21 by 5 gives 4 days and 1.5 parts of a
Muhurta. * Multiplying 1.5 by 30 gives 6 Muhurtas. * Therefore, Abhijit
Nakshatra forms a conjunction with the Sun for 4 days and 6 Muhurtas.  **Another
Example:**  * Shatabhisha Nakshatra travels 33/67 parts of a day with the Moon.
* Dividing 33 by 5 gives 6 days and 3/5 parts of a Muhurta. * Multiplying 3/5 by
30 gives 18 Muhurtas. * Therefore, Shatabhisha Nakshatra forms a conjunction
with the Sun for 6 days and 18 Muhurtas.  **Note:** This calculation applies to
all the Nakshatras listed above.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 222 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra muhUrta uparyukta koSThaka nakSatra kA caMdra ke
sAtha kitane muhUrta kA yoga hotA hai, yaha batalAne ke liye hai| nakSatroM kA
sUrya ke sAtha yoga nakSatra saMkhyA sUrya ke sAtha yoga nakSatroM kA nAma
divasa abhijita zatabhiSA, bharaNI, AdrA, AzleSA, svAti, jyeSThA zravaNa,
dhaniSThA, pUrvA, bhA. revatI, azvinI kRtikA, mRgazira, puSya, maghA; pU. phA.
hasta, citrA, anurAdhA, mUla, pUrvASAr3hA 203 u. bhA., rohiNI, punarvasu, u.
phA., vizAkhA, u. ssaaddh'aa| jo nakSatra candramA ke sAtha 1 divasa ke 67 bhAga
meM se athavA usase vizeSa jitane bhAga gamana karatA hai, usake pA~caveM bhAga
pramANa sUrya ke sAtha divasa aura muhUrta ke parimANa se gamana karatA hai|
jaise ki abhijita nakSatra candra ke sAtha 21  /  67 bhAga gamana karatA hai to
sUrya ke sAtha kitanA gaMmana karatA hai ? yaha jAnane ke liye 21 bhAga ko 5 se
bhAga dene para 4 divasa 1  /  5 bhAga muhUrta Ate haiN| 1 / 5 muhUrta nikAlane
ke liye 30 se guNA karane para 6 muhUrta Ate haiN| jisakA Azaya yaha huA ki
abhijita nakSatra sUrya ke sAtha 4 divasa 6 muhUrta yoga karatA hai| isa prakAra
anya sthAna para bhI samajhanA caahiye| 15 muhUrta candra ke sAtha yoga karane
para nakSatra kA sUrya ke sAtha yogakAla zatabhiSA nakSatra candra ke sAtha 1
divasa ke 67 bhAga meM se 33% bhAga yoga karatA hai, to sUrya ke sAtha kitane
divasa aura kitane muhUrta yoga karatA hai ? ataH 6 divasa 7  /  10 muhUrta
sUrya ke sAtha yoga karatA hai| 1. ke muhUrta jAnane ke liye 30 se guNA karane
para 21 muhUrta Ate haiM  /  arthAt zatabhiSA nakSatra kA sUrya ke sAtha 6
divasa aura 21 muhUrta yoga hotA hai| isI prakAra anya nakSatroM ke liye jAnanA
caahiye|

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix ] [ 223 30 Muhurta Yoga with Moon, Nakshatra's Yoga Time with Sun If
Shravana Nakshatra makes a yoga of 67 parts with the Moon in one day, then how
much time does it make yoga with the Sun? To know the time of yoga with the Sun,
divide the time of yoga with the Moon by 5, the quotient obtained from the
divisor-dividend ratio should be understood as the yoga time of the Nakshatra
with the Sun. 67/5 = 13, days To get 2.5 Muhurta, multiply by 30, which makes 12
Muhurta. Therefore, in that way, 13 days 12 Muhurta should be known as the yoga
time of the Sun with other Nakshatras. 45 Muhurta Yoga with Moon, Nakshatra's
Yoga Time with Sun Uttarabhadrapada Nakshatra makes a yoga of 201 parts with the
Moon. To understand how much time it makes yoga with the Sun, divide by 5, 201/4
= 201. Making days out of them, there will be 20 days and 3 Muhurta time. Which
is the yoga time of Uttarabhadrapada Nakshatra with the Sun. - Sutra 34 ends . .
|| Second Prabhrit of the Tenth Prabhrit - Prabhrit ends || Sutra 40 Full Moon
and New Moon's Moon Yoga, Sannipat Purnima Total Nakshatra, Upkula Nakshatra,
Kulopakul Nakshatra, Shravana, Magh Dhanishtha, Shravana Abhijit, Bhadrapada,
Falguni, U. Bhadrapada, P. Bhadrapada, Shatabhisha, Ashwini, Chaitri Ashwini,
Revati, Kartika, Vaishakhi, Krittika Bharani, Margashirsha, Jyeshta Mrigashira,
Rohini, Pausha, Ashadha, Pushya Punarvasu, Madhvi, Shravana Ashlesha, Falguni U.
Falguni, P. Falguni, Chaitri, Ashwini, Chitra Hasta, 10. Vaishakhi, Kartiki,
Visakha, Swati Amavasya 2. ni ni Aadra w Magha Bhadrapada

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] [ 223 30 muhUrta candra ke sAtha yoga karane para nakSatra kA sUrya
ke sAtha yogakAla zravaNa nakSatra ke sAtha eka divasa ke 67 bhAga yoga karatA
hai to sUrya ke sAtha kitane samaya yoga karatA sUrya ke sAtha hone vAle yoga kA
samaya jAnane ke liye candra ke sAtha hone vAle yoga ke samaya ko 5 se bhAga
dene para jo bhAjya-bhAjaka bhAva se upalabdha hotA hai vaha nakSatra kA sUrya
ke sAtha kA yogakAla samajhanA caahiye| 675 = 13, divasa 2 / 5 ke muhUrta
nikAlane ke liye 30 se guNA karane para 12 muhUrta hote haiM  /  ataeva usa
prakAra se 13 divasa 12 muhUrta anya nakSatra ke sAtha bhI sUrya kA yogakAla
jAnanA caahiye| 45 muhUrta candra ke sAtha yoga karane para nakSatra kA sUrya ke
sAtha yogakAla uttara bhAdrapada nakSatra candra ke sAtha 201 bhAga yoga karatA
hai| usakA sUrya ke sAtha kitane samaya yoga hotA hai, yaha samajhane ke liye 5
se bhAga dene para 2014 karane para 201 aayegaa| unake divasa banAne para 20
divasa aura 3 muhUrta samaya hoNge| jo uttarabhAdrapada nakSatra kA sUrya ke
sAtha yogakAla hai| - sUtra 34 samApta . .  //  dasaveM prAbhRta kA dUsarA
prAbhRta-prAbhRta samApta  //  sUtra 40 pUrNimA aura amAvasyA kA candra yoga ko
adhikAra kara sannipAta pUrNimA kula nakSatra upakula nakSatra kulopakula
nakSatra zrAvaNI mAgha dhaniSThA zravaNa abhijita bhAdrapadI phAlgunI u.
bhAdrapada pU. bhAdrapada zatabhiASA azvinI caitrI azvinI revatI kArtika
vaizAkhI kRttikA . bharaNI mArgazIrSI jeSThA mRgazira rohiNI pauSI ASAr3hI puSya
punarvasu mAdhvI zrAvaNI AzleSA phAlgunI u. phAlgunI pU. phAlgunI caitrI azvinI
citrA hasta 10. vaizAkhI kArtikI vizAkhA svAti amAvasyA 2. ny ny AdrA w maghA
bhAdrapadI

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 224] [ Surya Prajnapti Sutra Original Anuradha 11. Jyestha 12. Ashadha
Margashirsha Pausha U. Shadha Jyestha Pu. Shadha - Sutra 40 ends || Seventh
Prabhrut-Prabhrut of the Tenth Prabhrut ends || Tenth Prabhrut of the Tenth
Prabhrut Dakshinayan 1. r in Month Shravan Bhadrapada Asouj Kartik Margashirsha
Pausha Paurushi 2 Pada 4 Angul 2 Pada 8 Angul 3 Pada 3 Pada 4 Angul 3 Pada 8
Angul 4 Pada Vridhi 4 Angul 8 Angul 1 Pada 1 Pada 4 Angul 1 Pada 8 Angul 2 Pada
x j w Uttarayana Month Vridhi Magh Paurushi 3 Pada 8 Angul 3 Pada 4 Angul
Phalgun 3 Pada 4 Angul 8 Angul 1 Pada 1 Pada 4 Angul 1 Pada 8 Angul 2 Pada
Vaishakh Jyestha 2 Pada 8 Angul 2 Pada 4 Angul 2 Pada Ashadha - Sutra 43 ends ||
Tenth Prabhrut of the Tenth Prabhrut ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 224 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra mUla anurAdhA 11. jyeSThA 12. ASADhI mArgazIrSI
pauSI u. SAr3hA jyeSThA pU. SAr3hA - sUtra 40 samApta  //  dazama prAbhRta kA
sAtavA~ prAbhRta-prAbhRta samApta  //  dazama prAbhRta kA dasavA~ prAbhRta-
prAbhRta dakSiNAyana 1. r in mAsa zrAvaNa bhAdrapada Asauja kArtika mArgazIrSa
pauSa pauruSI 2 pAda 4 aMgula 2 pAda 8 aMgula 3 pAda 3 pAda 4 aMgula 3 pAda 8
aMgula 4 pAda vRddhi 4 aMgula 8 aMgula 1 pAda 1 pAda 4 aMgula 1 pAda 8 aMgula 2
pAda x j w uttarAyaNa mAsa vRddhi mAgha pauruSI 3 pAda 8 aMgula 3 pAda 4 aMgula
phAlguna 3 pAda 4 aMgula 8 aMgula 1 pAda 1 pAda 4 aMgula 1 pAda 8 aMgula 2 pAda
vaizAkha jyeSTha 2 pAda 8 aMgula 2 pAda 4 aMgula 2 pAda ASAr3ha - sUtra 43
samApta  //  dazama prAbhRta kA dasavA~ prAbhRta-prAbhRta samApta  //

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix ] The 22nd (twenty-second) Prabhrit-Prabhrit of the tenth Prabhrit
**Sutra 62** **Section on the Circumference of the Boundary** 630 1005 2010 3015
56 (See the names of the Nakshatras in the second Prabhrit-Prabhrit of the tenth
Prabhrit) One should imagine 67 parts of an Aho-ratra. **Nakshatra Number** 2
**Ardhakshetra Nakshatras 12** **Samakshetra Nakshatras 30** **Dvyardhakshetra
Nakshatras 12** **Sutra 72: Twelfth Prabhrit** **Proof of the Years** There are.
Five types of years have been mentioned. - It is 67 parts. [ 1. Nakshatra
Samvatsara, 2. Chandra Samvatsara, 3. Ritu Samvatsara, 4. Aditya Samvatsara, 5.
Abhivrdhit Samvatsara. In a Nakshatra month, there are 27 days and 21/67
Muhurtas. A Nakshatra month is 119 Muhurtas and 27/ 1. Nakshatra Samvatsara 225
**Name of the Nakshatra** Two Abhijit Two Shatabhasha up to two Jyestha Two
Shravana up to two Purvashadha Two Uttarabhadrapada up to two Uttarashadha
**Sutra 62 ends.** How many days are there in a Nakshatra Samvatsara? - There
are 327 days and 51/67 parts. A Nakshatra Samvatsara is 9832 Muhurtas and 55/67
parts. 1830x30 67 There are 67 Nakshatras in one Yuga. There are 1830 days in
one Yuga. To find the days of a Nakshatra month, divide 1830 by 67, which gives
27 days and 21/67 parts. = To find the Muhurtas of a Nakshatra month, multiply
the days of the Nakshatra month by 30 Muhurtas of one day, which will give the
number of Muhurtas - 54900 67 819 Muhurtas and 27/67 parts To find the days of a
Nakshatra Samvatsara, multiply the days of a Nakshatra month by 12.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] dasaveM prAbhRta kA 22 (bAisavA~ ) prAbhRta-prAbhRta sUtra 62
sImAviSkambha bhAga 630 1005 2010 3015 56 (nakSatra ke nAma dasaveM prAbhRta ke
dUsare prAbhRta - prAbhRta meM dekheM) 1 ahorAtra ke 67 bhAga kI kalpanA karanA
cAhiye  /  nakSatra saMkhyA 2 ardhakSetra nakSatra 12 samakSetra nakSatra 30
dvyardhakSetra nakSatra 12 sUtra 72 : bArahavA~ prAbhRta saMvatsaroM kA pramANa
haiM  /  saMvatsara pA~ca prakAra ke kahe gaye haiN| - 67 bhAgAtmaka hai| [ 1.
nakSatra saMvatsara, 2. candra saMvatsara, 3. Rtu saMvatsara, 4. Aditya
saMvatsara, 5. abhivardhita saMvatsara  /  nakSatra mAsa meM 27 divasa 21 / 67
muhUrtta hote haiN| nakSatra mAsa 119 muhUrtta 27/ 1. nakSatra saMvatsara 225
nakSatra kA nAma do abhijita do zatabhASA yAvat do jyeSThA do zravaNa yAvat do
pUrvASAr3hA do uttarAbhAdrapada yAvat do uttarASAr3hA sUtra 62 samApta. nakSatra
saMvatsara ke divasa kitane ? - 327 divasa 51 / 67 bhAga hote haiN| nakSatra
saMvatsara 9832 muhUrtta 55/67 bhAgAMtmaka hai  /  1830x30 67 1 yuga ke 67
nakSatra hote haiM  /  1 yuga ke 1830 divasa hote haiM  /  nakSatra mAsa ke
divasa jJAta karane ke liye 1830 ko 67 se bhAga dene para 27 divasa 21 / 67
bhAga Ate = nakSatra mAsa ke muhUrtta jAnane ke liye 1 divasa ke 30 muhUrta se
nakSatra mAsa ke divasoM ko guNA karane para muhUrtoM kI saMkhyA prApta hogI -
54900 67 819 muhUrtta 27/67 bhAga nakSatra saMvatsara ke divasa jJAta karane ke
liye nakSatramAsa ke divasoM ko 12 se guNA karanA cAhiye  /

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [226] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] 1830412 21960 - = 67 327 Muhurta 51/67 parts
67. Nakshatra Samvatsara has these days. To calculate the Muhurta of Nakshatra
Samvatsara, multiply the days of Nakshatra Samvatsara by 30. Doing so, 21960 x
30 - 658800 - 9832 Muhurta 56/67 parts are the Muhurta of Nakshatra Samvatsara.
2. Chandra Samvatsara The Chandra Maas has 29 days 32/62 Muhurta. Chandra Maas
is 885 Muhurta 30/60 parts. Chandra Samvatsara is 354 days 12/62 Muhurta.
Chandra Samvatsara is 10625 Muhurta 50/62 parts. 1 Yuga has 62 Chandra Maas. 1
Yuga has 1830 days. To know the days of 1 Chandra Maas, divide 1830 by 62. 1830
/ 62 = 29 days 32/62 Muhurta. To know the Muhurta of Chandra Maas, multiply the
number of days of Chandra Maas by 30 - 1830 x 30 - 54900 - 885 Muhurta 30/62
parts. 62 To know the days of Chandra Samvatsara, multiply the days of Chandra
Maas by 12. 1830 x 12 - 21960 - 354 days 12/62 Muhurta is Chandra Samvatsara. 67
67 To know the Muhurta of Chandra Samvatsara, multiply the days of the year by
30. 21960 x 30 - 658800 - 10625 Muhurta 50/62 parts. 62 2. Ritu Samvatsara 1
Yuga has 61 Ritu Maas. 1 Ritu Maas has 30 days. 1 Ritu Maas has 900 Muhurta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 226 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 1830412 21960 - = 67 327 muhUrta 51/67 bhAga 67 .
nakSatra saMvatsara ke divasa hote haiN| nakSatrasaMvatsara ke muhUrta banAne ke
liye nakSatrasaMvatsara ke divasoM ko 30 se guNA karanA caahiye| aisA karane
para 21960430-658800-9832 muhUrta 56/67 bhAga nakSatra saMvatsara ke muhUrta
haiN| 2. candrasaMvatsara candramAsa ke 29 divasa 32/62 muhUrta haiN| candramAsa
885 muhUrta 30/60 bhAgAtmaka hai| candrasaMvatsara 354 divasa 12/62 muhUrtAtmaka
hai| candrasaMvatsara 10625 muhUrta 50/62 bhAgAtmaka hai| 1 yuga ke candramAsa
62 haiN| 1 yuga ke divasa 1830 haiN| 1 candramAsa ke divasa jAnane ke liye 1830
ko 62 se bhAga denA caahiye| 1830 62 = 29 divasa 32/62 muhUrta hote haiN|
candramAsa ke muhUrta jAnane ke liye candramAsa ke divasoM kI saMkhyA ko 30 se
guNA karanA cAhiye - 1830430 -54900 - 885 muhUrta 30/62 bhAga hote haiN| 62
candrasaMvatsara ke divasa jAnane ke liye candramAsa ke divasoM ko 12 se guNA
karanA caahiye| 1830x12 - 21960 - 354 divasa 12/62 muhUrtAtmaka candrasaMvatsara
hotA hai| 67 67 candrasaMvatsara ke mUhUrta jAnane ke liye varSa ke divasoM ko
30 se guNA karanA caahiye| 21960430 - 658800 - 10625 muhUrta 50/62 bhAga hote
haiN| 62 2. RtusaMvatsara 1 yuga ke RtumAsa 61 haiN| 1 RtumAsa ke divasa 30
haiN| 1 RtumAsa ke muhUrta 900 haiN|

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Appendix** [227] 1. There are 360 days in a season year. 2. There are 10,800
moments (an ancient Indian unit of time) in a season year.  3. In the
Adityasamvat (the year starting with the sun), there are 60 Adityamasa (solar
months).  4. Each Adityamasa has 30 days.  5. Each Adityamasa has 915 moments.
6. There are 366 days in an Adityasamvat.  7. There are 10,980 moments in an
Adityasamvat.   2. In the Abhivardhita samvat (an enhanced year), there are 31
days in an Abhivardhita month, 29 moments, and 17/62 parts.  1. Each
Abhivardhita month has 959 moments and 17/62 parts.  2. In an Abhivardhita
samvat, there are 383 days, 21 moments, and 18/62 parts.  3. An Abhivardhita
samvat has 11,511 moments and 18/62 parts.  - Sutra 72 ends, Sutra 73 begins.
Evidence for the day and night of the nine yugas 1. Nakshatrasamvat (lunar year)
has 327 days, 22 hours, and 51 minutes.  2. Chandrasamvat (lunar year) has 354
days.  3. Ritusamvat (season year) has 360 days.  4. Adityasamvat has 366 days.
5. Abhivardhita samvat has 383 days and 21 moments (time unit).  Total moments
in the nine yugas 1,791,157 and 55/67 parts   How many days are needed to
complete a yuga in the nine yugas? - 38 days and 10 moments: Completing a yuga
requires adding 12/67 parts.  Day 3 5 x x x x x x

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] [ 227 1 RtuvarSa ke divasa 360 haiN| 1 RtuvarSa ke muhUrta 10800
haiN| 2. AdityasaMvatsara 1 yuga ke AdityamAsa 60 haiN| 1 AdityamAsa ke 30
divasa haiN| 1 AdityamAsa ke 915 haiN| 1 AdityasaMvatsara ke 366 divasa haiN| 1
AdityasaMvatsara ke 10980 muhUrta hote haiN| 2. abhivardhitasaMvatsara 1
abhivardhita mAsa ke 31 divasa 29 muhUrta 17/62 bhAga hote haiM  /  1
abhivardhita mAsa ke 959 muhUrta 17/62 bhAga  /  1 abhivardhita saMvatsara ke
383 divasa 21 muhUrta 18/62 bhAga hote haiN| 1 abhivardhita saMvatsara ke 11511
muhUrta 18/62 bhAga hote haiN| - sUtra 72 samApta sUtra 73 no yuga ke ahorAtra
kA pramANa vAsaThiyA bhAga cUrNita bhAga 1. nakSatrasaMvatsara 327 22 51 55/67
2. candrasaMvatsara 354 3.RtusaMvatsara 360 4. AdityasaMvatsara 366 5.
abhivardhitasaMvatsara 383 21 1791 1 57 55/67 no yuga ke muhUrta
1791430-53730+19-53749.57 55/67 cUrNita bhaag| no yuga meM kitane divasa milAne
para yuga pUrNa hotA hai ? - 38 divasa 10 muhUrta : bhAga 12/67 cUrNita bhAga
milAne se yuga pUrNa hotA hai| divasa 3 5 x x x x x x |

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[228] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra]  How many Muhurta are required to complete the
Muhurta of a Yuga? 38430-1041+10-11 Muhurta, 1150 Muhurta, divided by 12/67,
when added to the Churnita Bhaga, complete the Muhurta of a Yuga. How many days
are there in a Yuga? 1830 days. How many Muhurta are there in a Yuga? 1830 x
430-54900 Muhurta. How many Vasathiya Bhaga are there in 54900 Muhurta? 54900 x
462 = 3403800 Vasathiya Bhaga. - Sutra 73 ends || Twelfth Prabhrut ends || Sutra
79 Thirteenth Prabhrut, the decrease and increase of the Moon In the Shukla
Paksha, there is an increase, and in the Krishna Paksha, there is a decrease. In
the Shukla Paksha, there is an increase of 442 Muhurta 46/62 Bhaga. In the
Krishna Paksha, there is a decrease of 442 Muhurta 46/62 Bhaga. The measure of
the Chandra Masa and the measure of the Muhurta of the Chandra Masa should be
known according to Sutra 72. In the Shukla Paksha, there are 442 Muhurta 46/62
Bhaga. In the Krishna Paksha, there are 442 Muhurta 46/62 Bhaga. One Paksha is
14 days 47/62 Bhaga. - Sutra 79 ends. Sutra 80 In one Yuga, there are 62 Purnima
and 62 Amavasya. Until Amavasya and Purnima, there are 442 Muhurta 46/62 Bhaga.
From Purnima to Amavasya, there are 442 Muhurta 46/62 Bhaga. From Purnima to
Purnima, there are 885 Muhurta 30/62 Bhaga. From Amavasya to Amavasya, there are
885 Muhurta 30/62 Bhaga. - Sutra 80 ends. || Thirteenth Prabhrut ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 228 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUra kitane muhUrta milAne se yuga ke muhUrta pUrNa hote
haiM ? 38430-1041+10-11 muhUrta 1150 muhUrta ' bhAga 12/67 cUrNita bhAga milAne
para yuga ke muhUrta pUrNa hote haiN| yuga ke divasa kitane ? 1830 divs| yuga ke
muhUrta kitane ? 1830430-54900 muhuurt| 54900 muhUrta ke kitane vAsaThiyA bhAga
hote haiM ? 54900462= 3403800 vAsaThiyA bhaag| - sUtra 73 samApta  //  bArahavA~
prAbhRta samApta  //  sUtra 79 terahavAM prAbhRta candramA kI hAni-vRddhi
zuklapakSa meM vRddhi hotI hai aura kRSNapakSa meM hAni hotI hai| zuklapakSa meM
442 muhUrta 46/62 bhAga kI vRddhi hotI hai| kRSNapakSa meM 442 muhUrta 46/62
bhAga kI hAni hotI hai| candramAsa kA pramANa evaM candramAsa ke muhUrtoM kA
pramANa sUtra 72 ke anusAra jAnanA caahiye| zuklapakSa meM 442 muhUrta 46/62
bhAga haiN| kRSNapakSa meM 442 muhUrta 46/62 bhAga haiM  /  ekapakSa 14 divasa
47/62 bhAgAtmaka hai| - sUtra 79 smaapt| sUtra 80 1 yuga meM 62 pUrNimA aura 62
amAvasyA hotI haiN| amAvasyA aura pUrNimA taka 442 muhUrta 46/62 bhAga hote
haiN| pUrNimA se amAvasyA taka 442 muhUrta 46/62 bhAga hote haiN| pUrNimA se
pUrNimA taka 885 muhUrta 30/62 bhAga hote haiM  /  amAvasyA se amAvasyA taka 885
muhUrta 30/62 bhAga hote haiN| - sUtra 80 samApta  /   //  terahavA~ prAbhRta
samApta  //

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix ] ## Sutra 83 ## The Moon's Motion in One Muhurta (1/60th of a
Ghati)  In one Muhurta, the Moon travels 1768 parts of its respective Mandala
(circle). There are 1768 Ardhamandalas (half-circles) in one Yuga (epoch). One
Yuga is 1830 days. How many nights and days does the Moon take to complete one
Mandala (circle)?  To find this: - 1830 days x 2 Ardhamandalas 3660 1768 parts
1768 = 2 days 124/1768 parts.  To convert 124/1768 parts into Muhurtas, multiply
them by 30: 124 x 30 = 3720 = 465 221 x 109800 13725 = - 1768 1768 221 = 2 days
2 Muhurtas 23/221 parts.  Therefore, the Moon completes one Mandala in 2 days 2
Muhurtas 23/221 parts.  What is the Moon's speed in one Muhurta?  If the Moon
travels 109800 parts (the circumference of the Mandala) in 62 Muhurtas 23/221
parts, then to find its speed in one Muhurta: 24265800 13725 Multiplying by 1768
parts The Moon travels 1768 parts in one Muhurta.  The Sun travels 1830 parts in
one Muhurta. The Sun completes one Mandala in two days, meaning it travels
109800 parts in 60 Muhurtas. How many parts does it travel in one Muhurta? [229
-

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] sUtra 83 pandrahavA~ prAbhRta eka muhUrtta meM candra kI gati eka
muhUrta meM candra usa-usa maMDala ke 1768 bhAga gati karatA hai  /  eka yuga ke
ardhamaMDala 1768 haiM  /  1 yuga 1830 divasa haiM  /  do ardhamaMDala arthAt
eka maMDala kI parikramA candra kitane rAtri - divasa meM pUrNa karatA hai ?
yaha jJAta karane ke liye - 1830 divasa x 2 ardhamaMDala 3660 1768 bhAga 1768 =
2 divasa 124 / 1768 bhAga Ate haiN| 124/1768 bhAga ke muhUrtta banAne ke liye
unheM 30 se 124x30 3720 465 = 221x109800 13725 = - 1768 1768 221 = 2 divasa 2
muhUrtta 23 / 221 bhAga meM candra 1 maMDala pUrNa karatA hai  /  eka muhUrtta
kI gati kitanI ? 62 muhUrtta 23/221 bhAga meM candra 109800 bhAga (maMDala kA
parikSepa) gati karatA hai to eka muhUrta kI gati jAnane ke liye 24265800 13725
'guNA karane para 1768 bhAga candra 1 muhUrtta meM 1768 bhAga gamana karatA hai
/  sUrya eka muhUrta meM 1830 bhAga gati karatA hai  /  sUrya do divasa meM 1
maMDala pUrNa karatA hai  /  arthAt 60 muhUrtta meM 109800 bhAga gamana karatA
hai  /  eka muhUrta meM kitane bhAga gamana karatA hai ? [229 -

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[230] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra 109800 1830 60 Surya travels 1830 parts in one
part. Nakshatra travels 1835 parts in one Muhurta. To know Muhurta, it is
necessary to find the transition time of 1 Mandala. It takes 1830 days to
complete 1835 Ardha Mandala. How many days does it take to complete two Ardha
Mandala? 24183° = 1 day 1825/1835 Muhurta 1835 1825 parts of Muhurta are made,
1825430 - 1875 29 Muhurta 307/367 come. That is, it takes 1 day 29 Muhurta
307/367 parts of time for Nakshatra to complete 1 Mandala. That is, it takes
307/367 parts of time in 59 Muhurta. That is, it travels 109800 parts in 59
Muhurta. How many parts will it travel in one Muhurta? 1835 59307 367 21960 367
3674109800 21960 = 1835 parts travel in one Muhurta. What is the special feature
in the movement of Surya-Chandra? Surya-Chandra travels 62 parts special. Surya
1830 - Chandra 1768 = 62 parts When Chandra's movement is completed, what is
special about Nakshatra's movement? Nakshatra travels 67 parts special. Because
Nakshatra travels 1835 parts. Chandra travels 1768 parts. Nakshatra 1835 -
Chandra 1768 = 67 parts travel more.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 230 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 109800 1830 60 sUrya eka bhAga meM 1830 bhAga
gamana karatA hai| nakSatra eka muhUrta meM 1835 bhAga gamana karatA hai|
muhUrta jAnane ke liye 1 maMDala kA saMkramaNakAla nikAlanA jarUrI hai| 1835
ardhamaMDala pUrNa karane meM 1830 divasa lagate haiN| do ardhamaMDala pUrNa
karane meM kitane divasa lagate haiM ? 24183deg = 1 divasa 1825/1835 muhUrta
1835 1825 bhAga ke muhUrta banAne ke liye 1825430 - 1875 29 muhUrta 307/367 Ate
haiN| arthAt nakSatra ko 1 maMDala pUrNa karane meM 1 divasa 29 muhUrta 307/367
bhAga samaya lagatA hai| arthAt 59 muhUrta meM 307/367 bhAga samaya lagatA hai|
arthAt 59 muhUrta meM 109800 bhAga parikSepa karatA hai| eka muhUrta meM kitane
bhAga parikSepa karegA? 1835 59307 367 21960 367 3674109800 21960 = 1835 bhAga
eka muhUrta meM gamana karatA hai| sUrya-candra kI gati meM kyA vizeSatA hai ?
sUrya-candra kI apekSA 62 bhAga vizeSa gamana karatA hai| sUrya 1830 - candra
1768 = 62 bhAga jaba candra gati samApanna ho taba nakSatra kI gati se kyA
vizeSa hai ? nakSatra 67 bhAga vizeSa gati karatA hai| kyoMki nakSatra 1835
bhAga gamana karatA hai| candra 1768 bhAga gamana karatA hai| nakSatra 1835 -
candra 1768 = 67 bhAga adhika gamana karatA hai|

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix] [ 231 Sutra 85 How many mandalas does the Moon traverse in a
Nakshatra month? The Moon traverses 13 mandalas and 13/67 parts in a Nakshatra
month. The reason for this is that there are 67 Nakshatra months in a Yuga. The
lunar mandala is 884. In 67 Nakshatra months, the Moon traverses 884 lunar
mandalas. How many mandalas does it traverse in one Nakshatra month? 884 / 67 =
13 mandalas and 13/67 parts. How many mandalas does the Sun traverse in a
Nakshatra month? It traverses 13 mandalas and 44/67 parts. If the Sun traverses
915 solar mandalas in 67 Nakshatra months of a Yuga, how many mandalas does it
traverse in one month? 915 / 67 = 13 mandalas and 44/67 parts. How many mandalas
does a Nakshatra traverse in a Nakshatra month? It traverses 1835 ardhamandalas
in 67 Nakshatra months of a Yuga. 1835 / 67 = 27 ardhamandalas and 26/67 parts.
Upon dividing them by 2 to form mandalas, we get 1835 / 2 = 13 16/67 mandalas.
How many mandalas does the Moon traverse in a Chandra month? It traverses 884
mandalas in 124 parvas. How many mandalas does it traverse in 2 parvas? 248 /
884 = 1768 / 124 = 124 / 124 = 144 14 mandalas and 32/124 parts of the fifteenth
mandala. How many mandalas does the Sun traverse in a Chandra month? One-fourth
less than 15 mandalas and one part of 124 parts. 14 mandalas and 94/124 parts of
the fifteenth mandala. How is this so?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] [ 231 sUtra 85 nakSatramAsa meM candra kitane maMDala gati karatA
hai ? candra eka nakSatramAsa meM 13 maMDala 13/67 bhAga gati karatA hai  /
isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki eka yuga ke nakSatramAsa 67 haiN| candramaMDala 884
hai| 67 nakSatramAsa meM 884 candramaMDala candragati karatA hai| eka
nakSatramAsa meM kitane maMDala gati karatA hai ?  /  884 5 67 = 13 maMDala
13/67 bhAga gati karatA hai| nakSatramAsa meM sUrya kitane maMDala gati karatA
hai ? 13 maMDala 44/67 bhAga gati karatA hai| eka yuga ke 67 nakSatramAsa meM
915 sUryamaMDala kI gati kare to eka mAsa meM kitane maMDala gati karatA hai?
115 - 13 maMDala 44/67 bhAga gati karatA hai| nakSatramAsa meM nakSatra kitane
maMDala gati karatA hai ? eka yuga ke 67 nakSatramAsa meM 1835 ardhamaMDala gati
karatA hai| 1835 = 27 ardhamaMDala 26/67 bhAga unake maMDala banAne para 2 se
bhAga dene para 1635 : 2 = 13 16 /  maMDala candramAsa meM candra kitane maMDala
gati karatA hai ? 124 parva meM 884 maMDala gati karatA hai| 2 parva meM kitane
maMDala gati karatA hai ? 24884 1768 124 - 124 - 144 14 maMDala tathA
pandrahaveM maMDala ke 32/124 bhaag| candra mAsa meM sUrya kitane maMDala gati
karatA hai ? 15 maMDala meM cauthA bhAga nyUna tathA 124 bhAga kA eka aNsh| 14
maMDala tathA pandrahaveM maMDala ke 94/124 bhaag| vaha kisa prakAra se?

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[232] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra] If the Sun travels 915 **mandalas** in 124
**parvas**, then how many **mandalas** does it travel in 2 **parvas**? 24915 .
1830 . 147 124 - 124 - 10 124 **mandalas** it travels. How many **mandalas**
does the Moon travel in a **Chandra masa**? 14 **mandalas** and 34 parts of the
15th **mandala**. In 124 **parvas**, the Moon travels 1835 **ardha mandalas**.
How many **ardha mandalas** does it travel in 2 **parvas**? 241835 3670 124 -
124 - 29 124 Since two **ardha mandalas** make one **mandala**, dividing by two
gives - 36702.4 **mandalas** and 99/124 parts. 124 = 14 **mandalas** and How
many **mandalas** does the Moon travel in a **Ritu masa**? In 61 **karma
masas**, the Moon travels 884 **mandalas**. How many **mandalas** will it travel
in one **karma masa**? 884  _ 61. 30 14 - 61 14 **mandalas** and 30/61 parts of
the 15th **mandala**. How many **mandalas** does the Sun travel in a **Ritu
masa**? In 61 **karma masas**, the Sun travels 915 **mandalas**. How many
**mandalas** will it travel in one **karma masa**? 915 - = 61 15 **mandalas** it
travels.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 232 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 124 parva meM 915 sUryamaMDala gati karatA hai to 2
parva meM kitane sUrya maMDala gati karatA hai ? 24915 . 1830 . 147 124 - 124 -
10 124 maMDala gati karatA hai| candramAsa meM nakSatra kitane maMDala gati
karatA hai ? 14 maMDala tathA pandrahaveM maMDala ke 34bhaag| 124 parva meM 1835
nakSatra ardhamaMDala gati karatA hai| to do parva meM kitane nakSatra
ardhamaMDala gati karatA hai ? 241835 3670 124 - 124 - 29 124 do ardhamaMDala kA
eka maMDala hotA hai to do se bhAga dene para - 36702.4 maMDala tathA 99/124
bhaag| 124 = 14 maMDala tathA RtumAsa meM candra kitane maMDala gati karatA hai
? 61 karmamAsa meM 884 candramaMDala gati karatA hai| to karmamAsa meM kitane
candramaMDala gati karegA? 884 _ 61. 30 14 - 61 14 maMDala tathA paMdrahaveM
maMDala ke 30/61 bhaag| RtumAsa meM sUryakitane maMDala kI gati karatA hai ? 61
karmamAsa meM 915 sUryamaMDala gati karatA hai| 1 karmamAsa meM kitane
sUryamaMDala gati karegA ? 915 - = 61 15 maMDala gati karatA hai|

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix] How many mandalas does a Nakshatra move in a Ritumaas? 1835 Nakshatra
mandalas move in 122 Ritumaas. So how many Nakshatra mandalas will move in one
Ritumaas? 1835 122 884 60 How many mandalas does a Chandra move in a Suryamas?
884 Chandra mandalas move in 60 Suryamas. So how many Chandra mandalas will move
in one Suryamas? 15 915 60 14 1835 120 5 122 14 mandalas, 11/15th of the 15th
mandala. How many mandalas does a Surya move in a Suryamas? 915 Surya mandalas
move in 60 Suryamas. So how many Surya mandalas will move in one Suryamas? 15 11
15 15 15 mandalas move. 60 15 mandalas, 1/4th part. How many mandalas does a
Nakshatra move in a Suryamas? 1835 Nakshatra mandalas move in 120 Suryamas. So
how many Nakshatra mandalas will move in one Suryamas? 35 120 mandalas 15
mandalas, 35/120th part of the 16th. [233

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] RtumAsa meM nakSatra kitane maMDala gati karatA ? 122 RtumAsa meM
1835 nakSatramaMDala gati karatA hai  /  to eka RtumAsa meM kitane
nakSatramaMDala gati karegA ? 1835 122 884 60 sUryamAsa meM candra kitane
maMDala gamana karatA hai ? 60 sUryamAsa meM 884 candramaMDala gati karatA hai
/  to eka sUryamAsa meM kitane candramaMDala gati karegA ? 15 915 60 14 1835 120
5 122 14 maMDala pandrahaveM maMDala kA 11/15 bhAga  /  sUryamAsa meM sUrya
kitane maMDala gamana karatA hai ? 60 sUryamAsa meM 915 sUryamaMDala gamana
karatA hai  /  to eka sUryamAsa meM kitane sUryamaMDala gamana karegA ? 15 11 15
15 15 maMDala gamana karatA hai  /  60 15 maMDala 1/4 bhAga  /  sUryamAsa meM
nakSatra kitane maMDala gamana karatA hai ? 120 sUryamAsa meM 1835
nakSatramaMDala gamana karatA hai| to eka sUryamAsa meM kitane nakSatramaMDala
gamana karegA ? 35 120 maMDala 15 maMDala 16 veM ke 35 / 120 bhAga  /  [ 233

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [234] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra]  How many lunar mandalas does the moon
traverse in an adhimasa (intercalary month)? There are 573 adhimasas in a Yuga.
As stated in the Muhurta Parva of an adhimasa, there are 95937 Muhurtas in a
month. 959462 + 17 - 51675 Muhurtas in a Yuga = 1830430 - 54900 Muhurtas. These
should be divided into 62 parts. 54900 / 62 = 3403800 parts. 59475 / 62 Muhurtas
make up one adhimasa. How many months will there be in 54900 Muhurtas? 54900 /
62 = 3403800.  59475 / 59475 = 57.3 (The remainder is 4775). 57 x 13725 = 57
adhimasas = 3/13 parts.  The moon traverses 884 lunar mandalas in 57 adhimasas.
So, how many lunar mandalas will it traverse in one adhimasa? 57.3 = 744/13. How
many lunar mandalas will the moon traverse in 744/13 adhimasas?  884 / 13 =
11492.15 744 744 185 15 lunar mandalas. 83/186 parts.  How many lunar mandalas
does the sun traverse in an adhimasa?  There are 744/13 adhimasas in a Yuga, and
the sun traverses 915 solar mandalas in them. So, how many solar mandalas will
the sun traverse in one adhimasa?  915 / 13 = 11895.15245 744 = 744 - 15248

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 234 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra abhivardhita mAsa meM candra kitane maMDala gamana
karatA hai ? eka yuga ke abhivardhita mAsa 573, haiN| kyoMki eka abhivardhita
mAsa ke muhUrta parva meM batAye gaye anusAra - 95937 muhUrta kA eka maas|
959462+17 - 51675 yuga ke muhUrta 1830430 - 54900 muhuurt| unake 62 bhAga karanA
caahiye| 54900462 = 3403800 bhaag| 59475/62 muhUrta kA eka abhivardhita mAsa
hotA hai| 54900 muhUrta ke kitane mAsa hoMge? 54900462 3403800 59475 59475
"59475 57.3 (4775 se cheda calatA hai|)| 57 13725 57 abhivardhita mAsa 3/13
bhaag| 57, abhivardhita mAsa meM 884 candramaMDala gamana karatA hai| to eka
abhivardhita mAsa meM kitane candramaMDala gamana karegA? 57,3 - 744/13 hote
haiN| 744/13 abhivardhita mAsa meM kitane candramaMDala gamana karegA? 884413
11492 . 15 744 744 185 15 maMDala candra gati karatA hai| 83/186 bhaag|
abhivardhitamAsa meM sUrya kitane maMDala gamana karatA hai| eka yuga ke
abhivardhita mAsa 744/13 haiM, unameM 915 sUryamaMDala gati karatA hai to eka
abhivardhita mAsa meM sUrya kitane maMDala gamana karegA? 915413 11895 . 15245
744 = 744- 15248

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ Appendix ] [ 235 15 mandalas and 3 parts less in the 16th mandala. How many
mandalas does a star travel in an adhivarshita masa? There are 744/13
adhivarshita masas in a yuga. In that, it travels 1835/2 mandalas. So, how many
mandalas will a star travel in one adhivarshita masa? 1341835 23855 47 . 24744
-1488 - 16 mandalas will be travelled.   - Sutra 85 ends. Sutra 86 begins 15 How
many mandalas does the moon travel in a night? There are 1830 aharatras in a
yuga. In them, it travels 1768 ardhamandalas. So, how many ardhamandalas will it
travel in one aharatra? 1768 884 - 915 It travels 31 parts less than one
ardhamandala. 1830 How many ardhamandalas does the sun travel in one aharatra?
There are 1830 days in a yuga, in them it travels 1830 ardhamandalas. So, how
many ardhamandalas will it travel in one aharatra? 1830 - 1 ardhamandala will be
travelled. How many ardhamandalas does a star travel? There are 1830 days in a
yuga. In them, it travels 1835 ardhamandalas. So, how many ardhamandalas will it
travel in one aharatra? 1835 = 1 ardhamandala 5/1830 parts will be travelled.
How much time does the moon take to travel one mandala? It takes 1830 days for
the moon to travel 884 mandalas, so how many days will it take to travel one
mandala? 1830

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] [ 235 15 maMDala tathA 16 veM maMDala meM 3 bhAga nyuun|
abhivardhita mAsa meM nakSatra kitane maMDala gamana karatA hai ? eka yuga ke
744/13 abhivardhita mAsa haiM  /  usameM 1835/2 maMDala gamana karatA hai| to
eka abhivardhita mAsa meM nakSatra kitane maMDala gamana karegA ? 1341835 23855
47 . 24744 -1488 - 16 maNDala paribhramaNa kregaa| - sUtra 85 smaapt| sUtra 86
prAbhRta 15 candra rAtri meM kitane maNDala paribhramaNa karatA hai ? eka yuga
ke ahorAtra 1830 haiN| unameM 1768 ardhamaNDala gati karatA hai| to eka ahorAtra
meM kitane ardhamaMDala gati karegA ? 1768 884 - 915 eka ardhamaMDala ke 31
bhAga nyUna gati karatA hai| 1830 sUrya eka ahorAtra meM kitane ardhamaMDala
gati karatA hai ? eka yuga ke divasa 1830 haiM, unameM 1830 ardhamaMDala gati
karatA hai  /  to eka ahorAtra meM kitane ardhamaMDala gati karegA? 1830 - 1
ardhamaMDala gati kregaa| nakSatra kitane ardhamaMDala gati karatA hai ? . eka
yuga ke divasa 1830 haiM  /  unameM 1835 ardhamaMDala gati karatA hai  /  to eka
ahorAtra meM kitane ardhamaMDala gati karegA? 1835 = 1 ardhamaMDala 5/1830 bhAga
gati karatA hai| eka maMDala gati karane para candra ko kitanA samaya lagatA hai
? 884 maMDala gati karane para candra ko 1830 divasa lagate haiM to eka maMDala
kI gati karane para kitane divasa lageMge? 1830

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[236] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra 1830 , = 2 31 r   = two days and 31/442 parts in
one mandala motion. 884 How many nights and days does the sun take to complete
one mandala? 915 If the sun takes 1830 days to complete one mandala motion, how
many days does it take to complete one mandala? 1830 = 2 Aho-ratra 915 How many
days does a nakshatra take to complete one mandala motion? 1835/2 If a nakshatra
takes 1830 days to complete 1835/2 mandala motion, how many days will it take to
complete one mandala? 1830 732 365 18354 2 - 380 = 1 368 Two Aho-ratra minus two
parts, one Aho-ratra of 367 parts. How many mandalas does the moon complete in a
yuga? The moon completes 1768 parts of a mandala in one muhurta out of 109800
parts. Muhurta in a yuga It completes 1768/109800 in one muhurta. How much will
it complete in 54900 muhurta? 54900 109100 1058-109800 97063200 = 884 14 . = 884
mandalas. Number of sun mandalas in a yuga?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 236 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra 1830 , = 2 31 ra = do divasa aura 31/442 bhAga meM
eka maMDala gati karatA hai| 884 eka maMDala sUrya kitane rAtri-divasa meM
gamana karatA hai| 915 maMDala gati karane para sUrya ko 1830 divasa lagate
haiM, to eka maMDala kI gati karane para kitane divasa lagate haiM ? 1830 = 2
ahorAtra 915 nakSatra kitane divasa meM eka maMDala gati karatA hai ? 1835/2
maMDala gati karane para nakSatra ko 1830 divasa lagate haiM to eka maMDala kI
gati karane para nakSatra ko kitane divasa lageMge? 1830 732 365 18354 2 - 380 =
1 368 do ahorAtra meM do bhAga kama eka ahorAtra ke 367 bhaag| yuga meM candra
kitane maMDaDhala gati karatA hai ? candra eka muhUrta meM maMDala ke 109800
bhAga meM se 1768 bhAga gati karatA hai  /  yuga ke muhUrta eka muhUrta meM
1768/109800 gati karatA hai| to 54900 muhUrta meM kitanI gati karegA? 54900
109100 1058-109800 97063200 = 884 14 . = 884 maMDala gati karatA hai| yuga meM
sUrya maMDaloM kI saMkhyA ?

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix] Will it? Will it? That is, how many mandalas does the sun move in one
Yuga? If the sun moves 1830/109800 parts in one Muhurta, then how much does it
move in 54900 Muhurtas? 54900 x 1830 / 109800 Number of stars in a Yuga? It
moves 915 mandalas. That is, how many mandalas does a star move in one Yuga? If
a star moves 1835/109800 parts in one Muhurta, then how much does it move in
54900 Muhurtas? 54900 x 1835 / 109800 = 917 mandalas 1/2 parts. = 917 mandalas #

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa ] karegA? karegA ? arthAt eka yuga meM sUrya kitane maMDala gati
karatA hai ? sUrya eka muhUrtta meM 1830 / 109800 bhAga gati karatA hai to 54900
muhUrtta meM kitanI gati 54900x1830 109800 yuga meM nakSatroM kI saMkhya ? 915
maNDala gati karatA hai| . arthAt eka yuga meM nakSatra kitane maMDala gati
karatA hai ? nakSatra eka muhUrtta meM 1835/109800 bhAga gati karatA hai to
54900 muhUrta meM kitanI gati 1835 54900x1835 109800 2 917 maMDala 1/2 bhAga
gati karegA  /  = [ 237 = 917 maMDala #

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix - 2 Surya Prajnapti Sutra Sutras 20 and 24 The dimensions,
circumference and diameter of the solar sphere are described. **Question:**
Venerable Sir! What are the dimensions, circumference and diameter of the solar
sphere? **Answer:**  Venerable Sir! The solar sphere is described as having a
diameter of 49 yojanas and 61 angulas, a circumference of three times the
diameter plus 22 angulas, and a diameter of 24 yojanas and 61 angulas. -
Jambudvipa Vakya 7, Sutra 130 The area illuminated by the sun on Jambudvipa is
described. **Question:** Venerable Sir! On Jambudvipa, is the area illuminated
by the sun the same, less or more than the area illuminated by the sun?
**Answer:** Venerable Sir! The area illuminated by the sun is not the same, it
is less than the area illuminated by the sun, and it is not more than the area
illuminated by the sun. **Question:** Venerable Sir! Is the area illuminated by
the sun in front or behind? **Answer:** Venerable Sir! The area illuminated by
the sun is in front, not behind. **Question:** Venerable Sir! Is the area
illuminated by the sun in one direction or in six directions? **Answer:**
Venerable Sir! The area illuminated by the sun is in one direction, not in six
directions. 1. (a) The solar sphere is described as having a diameter of 49
yojanas and 61 angulas. - Sama 48, Sutra 3 (b) The solar sphere is described as
having a diameter of 13 yojanas and 61 angulas less than the diameter of the
Jambudvipa. - Sama 13, Sutra 8 2. The word "Yavat" is used to indicate that the
area illuminated by the sun is limited. **Question:** Venerable Sir! Is the area
illuminated by the sun dense or sparse? **Answer:** Venerable Sir! The area
illuminated by the sun is dense, not sparse. **Question:** Venerable Sir! Is the
area illuminated by the sun continuously dense or intermittently dense?
**Answer:** Venerable Sir! The area illuminated by the sun is continuously
dense, not intermittently dense. **Question:** Venerable Sir! Is the area
illuminated by the sun inside or outside? **Answer:** Venerable Sir! The area
illuminated by the sun is both inside and outside. **Question:** Venerable Sir!
Is the area illuminated by the sun above, sideways or below? **Answer:**
Venerable Sir! The area illuminated by the sun is above, sideways and below.
**Question:** Venerable Sir! Is the area illuminated by the sun at the
beginning, middle or end? **Answer:** Venerable Sir! The area illuminated by the
sun is at the beginning, middle and end. **Question:** Venerable Sir! Is the
area illuminated by the sun with or without a shadow? **Answer:** Venerable Sir!
The area illuminated by the sun is with a shadow, not without a shadow. (To be
continued)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa - 2 sUryaprajJaptisUtra sUtra 20 va 24 sUramaMDalassa AyAma-
vikkhaMbho parikkhevo bAhallaM ca pa. sUramaMDale NaM bhaMte! kevaiyaM AyAma-
vikkhaMbheNaM kevaiyaM parikkheveNaM kevaiyaM bAhalleNaM paNNatte ? u. goyamA!
sUramaMDale aDayAlIsaM egasaTThibhAe joyaNassa AyAma-vikkhaMbheNaM taM tiguNaM
savisesaM parikkheveNaM cauvIsaM egasaTThibhAe joyaNassa bAhalleNaM pnnnntte| -
jaMbu. vakkha.7, su. 130 jaMbuddIve sUriyA paDuppannaM khettaM obhAsaMti pa.
jaMbuddIve NaM bhaMte! dIve sUriyA kiM tIyaM khettaM obhAsaMti, paDupannaM
khettaM obhAsaMti, aNAgayaM khettaM obhAsaMti? goyamA! no tIyaM khettaM
obhAseMti, paDupanaM khettaM obhAseMti, no aNAgayaM khettaM obhaaseNti| pa. taM
bhaMte! kiM puDheM obhAseMti, apuDheM obhAseMti ? u. goyamA! puDheM obhAseMti,
no puDhaM obhAseMti jaav| pa. taM bhaMte! kiM egadisiM obhAseMti, chaddirsi
obhAseMti ? 1. (ka) sUramaMDale NaM aDayAlIsaM egasaTThibhAe joyaNassa
vikkhaMbheNaM paNNatte, - sama. 48, su. 3 (kha) sUramaMDalaM joyaNe NaM
terasahiM egaTThibhAehiM joyaNassa UNaM paNNattaM, - sama. 13, su.8 2. yAvat
pada se saMgrahIta sUtra pa. taM bhaMte ! kiM ogADhaM obhAseMti, aNogADhaM
obhAseMti ? goyamA! ogADhaM obhAseMti, no aNogADhaM obhAseMti, pa. taM bhaMte !
kiM aNaMtarogADhaM obhAseMti, paraMparogADhaM obhAseMti ? u. goyamA!
aNaMtarogADhaM obhAseMti, no paraMparogADhaM obhAseMti, pa. taM bhaMte ! kiM
aNuM obhAseMti, bAyaraM obhAseMti ? goyamA! aNuM pi obhAseMti, bAyaraM pi
obhAseMti, taM bhaMte ! kiM uDDhe obhAseMti, tiriyaM obhAseMti ahe obhAseMti? u.
goyamA! uDDhe pi, tiriyaM pi, ahe vi obhaaseNti| pa. . taM bhaMte ! kiM AI
obhAseMti, majjhe obhAseMti aMte obhAseMti ? u. goyamA! AI pi, majjhevi, aMte vi
obhAseMti, taM bhaMte ! kiM savisae obhAseMti, avisae obhAseMti ? _ goyamA!
savisae obhAseMti, no avisae obhAseMti, (kramazaH)

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Appendix-2] [239] Q. Gotama! Do they shine in one direction, or in all six
directions? A. Gotama! They do not shine in one direction, they shine in all six
directions. - Viya. S. 8, U. 8, Su. 39, 40 Q. Venerable Sir! On Jambudvipa, does
the sun's light illuminate the land that is below, the land that is above, or
the land that is neither above nor below? A. Gotama! It does not illuminate the
land that is neither above nor below, it illuminates the land that is below, it
does not illuminate the land that is above, it is like this, it is like this, as
long as they shine in all six directions. - Viya. S. 8, U. 8, Su. 41-42 Q.
Venerable Sir! On Jambudvipa, how high does the sun's light extend? How low does
it extend? How far does it extend sideways? A. Gotama! It extends one hundred
yojanas high, eighteen hundred yojanas low, and sixty-six yojanas sideways,
twice that number of yojanas, and twenty-one yojanas. - Viya. S. 8, U. 8, Su. 45
Q. Venerable Sir! Does it shine proportionally, or disproportionately? A.
Gotama! It shines proportionally, it does not shine disproportionately. Q.
Venerable Sir! In which direction does it shine? A. Gotama! It shines in all six
directions. - Viya. S. 8, U. 8, Su. 39 Note [Q. Venerable Sir! Does it shine in
one direction, or in all six directions? A. Gotama! It does not shine in one
direction, it shines in all six directions.] (Variant reading) 1. Jambu. Vakkh.
7, Su. 137 2. Jambu. Vakkh. 7, Su. 137 3. (a) Jambu. Vakkh. 7, 139 (b) Suriy.
Pa. 4, Su. 25 The sun's chariot is one hundred yojanas above the chariot of
Saturn, and that is the limit of the celestial sphere. Therefore, there is no
heat zone above this. 4. From the western Mahavideha of Jambudvipa towards the
Jayanta Gate, near the Salt Sea, the land is one thousand yojanas below. In
comparison to this, the sun's chariot is one thousand yojanas high and eight
hundred yojanas high from the level ground near Meru. Combining these eight
hundred yojanas, the heat zone below the sun's chariot is eighteen hundred
yojanas. In other islands, the land remains level. Therefore, the heat zone
below the sun there is only eight hundred yojanas. Combining the eighteen
hundred yojanas of the heat zone below and the one hundred yojanas of the heat
zone above, the sun's heat zone is nineteen hundred yojanas. 5. The sideways
heat zone is mentioned in relation to the east-west direction, meaning that the
sun is visible to the human eye at that distance. In the north, the sun is
visible at a distance of forty-five thousand yojanas minus one hundred and
eighty yojanas, and in the south, it is visible at a distance of thirty-three
thousand three hundred and thirty-three yojanas in the island and one hundred
and eighty yojanas in the Salt Sea, plus one-third of a yojana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 ] [ 239 u. goyamA! no egadisiM obhAseMti, niyamA chaddisiM
obhaaseNti| viyA. sa.8, u.8, su. 39, 40 jaMbuddIve sUriyA paDuppannaM khettaM
ujjoveti  /  pa. jaMbuddIve NaM bhaMte! dIve sUriyA kiM tIyaM khettaM ujoveMti
paDuppannaM khettaM ujjoveMti, aNAgayaM khettaM ujjoveMti ? u. goyamA! no tIye
khettaM ujoveMti, paDuppannaM khettaM ujjoveMti, no aNAgayaM khettaM ujoveMti,
evaM taveMti, evaM bhAsaMti jAva niyamA chaddisiM bhaasNti| _jaMbuddIve
sUriyANaM tAva khettaM pamANaM - viyA. sa.8, u.8,su. 41-42 pa. jaMbuddIveNaM
bhaMte ! dIve sUriyA kevaiyaM khettaM uDDhaM tavaMti ? kevaiyaM khettaM ahe
tavaMti ? kevaiyaM khettaM tiriyaM tavaMti? u. goyamA! egaM joyaNasayaM uDDhaM
tavaMti, aTThArasajoyaNasayAI ahe tavaMti, sIyAlIsaM joyaNasahassAI doNNi
tevaDhe joyaNasae ekkavIsaM ca saTThibhAe joyaNassa tiriyaM tvNti| - viyA sa. 8,
u.8, su. 45 pa. taM bhaMte ! ANupuvviM obhAseMti, no aNANupuvviM obhAseMti ? u.
goyamA! ANupuTviM obhAseMti, no aNANupuvviM obhAseMti, pa. taM bhaMte ! kai
disiM obhAseMti ? u. goyamA! niyamA chaddisiM obhAseMti, -viyA. sa.8, u.8, su.
39 TippaNa [pa.taM bhaMte ! kiM egadisiM obhAseMti, saddirsi obhAseMti ? u.
goyamA! no egadisiM obhAseMti, niyamA chaddisiM obhaaseti|] (pAThAntara)
1.jaMbu. vakkha.7, su, 137 2.jaMbu. vakkha.7, su. 137 3. (ka) jaMbu. vakkha. 7,
139 (kha) sUriya. pA. 4, su. 25 sUrya ke vimAna se sau yojana Upara zanaizcara
graha kA vimAna hai aura vahIM taka jyotiSa cakra kI sImA hai, ata: isase Upara
sUrya kA tApakSetra nahIM hai| 4. jaMbudvIpa ke pazcima mahAvideha se
jayaMtadvAra kI ora lavaNasamudra ke samIpa kramaza: eka hajAra yojana paryanta
bhUmi nIce hai, isa apekSA se eka hajAra yojana tathA meru ke samIpa kI
samabhUmi se 800 yojana U~cA sUrya kA vimAna hai, ye ATha sau yojana saMyukta
karane para aThAraha sau yojana sUrya vimAna se nIce kI ora kA tApakSetra hai,
anya dvIpoM meM bhUmi sama rahatI hai| isaliye vahAM sUrya kA nIce kA tApakSetra
kevala ATha sau yojana kA hai| aThAraha sau yojana nIce kI ora ke tApakSetra ke
aura sau yojana Upara kI ora ke tApakSetra ke, ina donoM saMkhyAoM ke saMyukta
karane para 1900 yojana kA sUrya kA tApakSetra hai| 5. yahAM tirache tApakSetra
kA kathana pUrva-pazcima dizA kI apekSA se kahA gayA hai, arthAt utkRSTa itanI
dUrI para sthita sUrya mAnava cakSu se dekhA jA sakatA hai| uttara meM 180
yojana nyUna paiMtAlAsa hajAra yojana tathA dakSiNadizA meM dvIpa meM 180 yojana
aura lavaNasamudra meM teMtIsa hajAra tIna sau tetIsa yojana tathA eka yojana ke
tRtIya bhAga saMyukta dUrI se sUrya dekhA jA sakatA hai|

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Anadhyaya Kaal (Excerpt from Nandi Sutra, edited by Acharya Pravara Shri
Atmaramji Maharaj)  The study of scriptures should be done only during the time
prescribed in the Agamas for self-study.  Studying during the Anadhyaya Kaal is
prohibited.  The Manusmriti and other Smritis also describe Anadhyaya Kaal in
detail. Vedic people also mention the Anadhyayas of the Vedas. Similarly, other
Aarya Granthas are also considered Anadhyaya.  Since the Jain Agamas are
considered Sarvajnokt (spoken by the omniscient), Devaadhisthit (divine), and
Swaravidya (self-knowledge), their Anadhyaya Kaal is also mentioned in the
Agamas. For example:  **Ten Anadhyayas related to the sky:**  1.  Ukkavaate
(meteor shower): If there is a large meteor shower, one should not study
scriptures for one prahar (3 hours).  **Ten Anadhyayas related to the body:**
1.  Atthi (bone):  One should not study scriptures when a bone is broken.
**Four Mahapratipada (major festivals):**  1.  Ashadha Padivaa 2.  Inda
Mahapadivaa 3.  Katta Padivaa 4.  Sugimha Padivaa  **Four Mahapratipada Purnima
(full moon days of major festivals):**  1.  Ashadha Padivaa Purnima 2.  Inda
Mahapadivaa Purnima 3.  Katta Padivaa Purnima 4.  Sugimha Padivaa Purnima
**Four Sandhya (twilight times):**  1.  Pradimate (dawn) 2.  Pachchimaate
(sunset) 3.  Majjhane (noon) 4.  Addharatte (midnight)  **Four Kaal (times):**
1.  Puvvane (morning) 2.  Avarane (afternoon) 3.  Paose (evening) 4.  Pacchuse
(night)  According to the above Sutrapath, there are 32 Anadhyayas, which are
divided into ten related to the sky, ten related to the body, four
Mahapratipada, four Mahapratipada Purnima, and four Sandhya.  These are briefly
described as follows:  **Ten Anadhyayas related to the sky:**  1.  Ukkavaate
(meteor shower): If there is a large meteor shower, one should not study
scriptures for one prahar (3 hours).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anadhyAyakAla (sva. AcAryapravara zrI AtmArAmajI ma. dvArA sampAdita nandIsUtra
se uddhRta) svadhyAya ke liye AgamoM meM jo samaya batAyA gayA hai, usI samaya
zAstroM kA svAdhyAya karanA caahie| anadhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya varjita hai|
manusmRti Adi smRtiyoM meM bhI anadhyAyakAla kA vistArapUrvaka varNana kiyA gayA
hai| vaidika loga bhI veda ke anadhyAyoM kA ullekha karate haiN| isI prakAra
anya ArSa granthoM kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| jainAgama bhI sarvajJokta,
devAdhiSThita tathA svaravidyA saMyukta hone ke kAraNa, inakA bhI AgamoM meM
anadhyAyakAla varNita kiyA gayA hai, jaise ki - dasavidhe aMtalikkhite asajjhAe
paNNatte, taM jahA - ukkAvAte, disidAghe, gajite, vijute, nigghAte, juvate,
jakkhAlitte, dhUmitA, mahitA, ryugghaate| dasavihe orAlite asajjhAtite, taM jahA
- aTThI, maMsaM, soNite, asutisAmaMte, susANasAmaMte, caMdovarAte, sUrovarAte,
paDane, rAyavuggahe, uvassayassa aMto orAlie sriirge| - sthAnAGga sUtra, sthAna
10 no kappati niggaMthANa vA, niggaMthINa vA cauhiM mAhApADivaehiM sajjhAyaM
karittae, taM jahA - AsADhapADivae, iMdamahApADivae, kattaapADivae
sugimhpaaddive| no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA, cauhiM saMjhAhiM
sajjhAyaM karettae, taM jahA - paDimAte, pacchimAte majjhaNhe, addddhrtte|
kappai niggaMthANaM vA niggaMthINa vA, cAukkAlaM sajjhAyaM karettae, taM jahA -
puvvaNhe avaraNhe, paose, pccuuse| - - sthAnAGga sUtra, sthAna 4, uddezaka 2
uparyukta sUtrapATha ke anusAra, dasa AkAza se sambandhita, dasa audArika zarIra
se sambandhita, cAra mahApratipadA, cAra mahApratipadA kI pUrNimA aura cAra
saMdhyA, isa prakAra battIsa anadhyAya mAne gae haiM, jinakA saMkSepa meM nimna
prakAra se varNana hai, jaise - AkAza sambandhI dasa anadhyAya 1. ulkApAta-
tArApatana - yadi mahat tArApatana huA hai to eka prahara paryanta
zAstrasvAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie|

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Chapter of Non-Study] [241]  2. **Digdaha** -  One should not study when
the direction appears to be filled with fire, i.e., when the direction appears
blood-red. 3. **Garjit** - One should not study for one prahar (3 hours) after
the thunder of clouds. 4. **Vidhyut** - One should not study for one prahar
after lightning. However, the non-study period due to thunder and lightning
should not be considered during Chaturmas (four months of the rainy season).
This is because thunder and lightning are often a natural occurrence during this
season. Therefore, non-study is not considered from Ardra to Swati Nakshatra
(constellations). 5. **Nirghat** - When there is a loud roar in the sky without
clouds, or when there is thunder with clouds, there is a non-study period of two
prahar. 6. **Yupaka** - In the Shukla Paksha (bright fortnight), the meeting of
the evening glow and the moonlight on the first, second, and third days is
called Yupaka. One should not study during these days until the night. 7.
**Yakshadipt** - When there is a light in a direction that appears like
lightning, but occurs intermittently, it is called Yakshadipt. One should not
study until the light in the sky disappears. 8. **Dhumika-Krishna** - The time
from Kartik to Magh (October-February) is the time of clouds. During this time,
a fine mist of water with a smoky color falls. This is called Dhumika-Krishna.
One should not study until this mist disappears. 9. **Mihika-Shweta** - In
winter, a fine mist of water with a white color falls. This is called Mihika.
One should not study until this mist disappears. 10. **Raj-Udghāt** - Due to
wind, dust spreads all around in the sky. One should not study until this dust
settles.  The above ten reasons are related to the sky. The following ten
reasons are related to the body.  11-12-13. **Haddi, Mans, and Rudhir** - If the
bones, flesh, and blood of a five-sensed animal are visible, one should not
study until these things are removed from there. The commentator considers non-
study for 60 hands (approximately 100 feet) around these things.  Similarly,
non-study is considered for bones, flesh, and blood of humans. The difference is
that the non-study period for these is 100 hands and one day and night. The non-
study period for a woman's menstrual cycle is three days. The non-study period
for the birth of a boy and a girl is seven and eight days respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anadhyAyakAla ] [ 241 2. digdAha - jaba taka dizA raktavarNa kI ho arthAt aisA
mAlUma par3e ki dizA meM Aga sI lagI hai taba bhI svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie|
3. garjita - bAdaloM ke garjana para eka prahara paryanta svAdhyAya na kre| 4.
vidyuta - bijalI camakane para eka prahara paryanta svAdhyAya na kre| kintu
garjana aura vidyuta kA asvAdhyAya cAturmAsa meM nahIM mAnanA caahie| kyoMki
vaha garjana aura vidyuta prAyaH Rtu-svabhAva se hI hotA hai| ataH ArdrA se
svAti nakSatra paryanta anadhyAya nahIM mAnA jaataa| 5. nirghAta - binA bAdala
ke AkAza meM vyantarAdikRta ghora garjanA hone para, yA bAdaloM sahita AkAza meM
kar3akane para do prahara taka asvAdhyAya kAla hai| 6. yUpaka - zuklapakSa meM
pratipadA, dvitIyA, tRtIyA ko saMdhyA kI prabhA aura candraprabhA ke milane ko
yUpaka kahA jAtA hai| ina dinoM prahara rAtri paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
caahie| . 7. yakSAdIpta - kabhI kisI dizA meM bijalI camakane jaisA,
thor3e-thor3e samaya pIche jo prakAza hotA hai vaha yakSAdIpta kahalAtA hai|
ataH AkAza meM jaba taka yakSAkAra dIkhatA rahe taba taka svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
caahie| 8. dhUmikA-kRSNa - kArtika se lekara mAgha taka kA samaya meghoM kA
gabhamAsa hotA hai| isameM dhUmra varNa kI sUkSma jalarUpa dhuMdha par3atI hai|
vaha dhUmikA-kRSNa kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhuMdha par3atI rahe, taba taka
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 9. mihikAzveta - zItakAla meM zveta varNa kI
sUkSma jalarUpa dhuMdha mihikA kahalAtI hai| jaba taka giratI rahe, taba taka
asvAdhyAyakAla hai| 10. raja-udghAta - vAyu ke kAraNa AkAza meM cAroM ora dhUli
chA jAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhUli phailI rahatI hai, svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
caahie| uparokta dasa kAraNa AkAza sambandhI asvAdhyAya ke haiN| audArika zarIra
sambandhI dasa anadhyAya 11-12-13. haDDI, mAMsa aura rudhira - paMcendriya
tiryaMca kI haDDI, mAMsa aura rudhira yadi sAmane dikhAI deM, to jaba taka vahA~
se yaha vastue~ uThAI na jAe~ taba taka asvAdhyAya hai| vRttikAra Asa-pAsa ke 60
hAtha taka ina vastuoM ke hone para asvAdhyAya mAnate haiN| isI prakAra manuSya
sambandhI asthi, mAMsa aura rudhira kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| vizeSatA
itanI hai ki inakA asvAdhyAya sau hAtha taka tathA eka dina-rAta kA hotA hai|
strI ke mAsika dharma kA asvAdhyAya tIna dina tk| bAlaka evaM bAlikA ke janma kA
asvAdhyAya kramazaH sAta evaM ATha dina

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [242] [Surya Prajnapti Sutra]  **14. Impurity:**  Asvadhyaya (study) is
prohibited until the appearance of excrement and urine.  **15. Cremation
Ground:** Asvadhyaya is prohibited within a hundred cubits (hastas) around a
cremation ground.  **16. Lunar Eclipse:** During a lunar eclipse, Asvadhyaya
should not be performed for eight praharas (a unit of time) for the lowest
category, twelve praharas for the middle category, and sixteen praharas for the
highest category.  **17. Solar Eclipse:** During a solar eclipse, Asvadhyaya is
also prohibited for eight, twelve, and sixteen praharas respectively.  **18.
Demise:** When a great king or a national leader passes away, Asvadhyaya should
not be performed until their cremation. Alternatively, Asvadhyaya should be
gradually resumed until a new authority takes over.  **19. Royal Conflict:**
When neighboring kings engage in war, Asvadhyaya should be prohibited until
peace is restored. Even after peace is established, Asvadhyaya should be avoided
for one day and night.  **20. Noble Body:** When a five-sense being dies within
an Upashraya (Jain temple), Asvadhyaya should be prohibited until the body is
removed. If the lifeless body remains within a hundred cubits, Asvadhyaya should
be avoided.  The above ten reasons for Asvadhyaya are related to the noble body.
**21-28. Four Festivals and Four Mahapratipada:** The four festivals are Ashadha
Purnima, Ashwin Purnima, Kartik Purnima, and Chaitra Purnima. The pratipada
(first day) following these full moons is called Mahapratipada. Asvadhyaya is
prohibited during these periods.  **29-32. Morning, Evening, Midday, and
Midnight:** Asvadhyaya should be avoided one ghari (a unit of time) before and
after sunrise, one ghari before and after sunset, one ghari before and after
midday, and one ghari before and after midnight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 242 ] [ sUryaprajJaptisUtra paryanta kA mAnA jAtA hai| 14. azuci - mala-mUtra
sAmane dikhAI dene taka asvAdhyAya hai| 15. zmazAna - zmazAnabhUmi ke cAroM ora
sau-sau hAtha paryanta asvAdhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| 16. candragrahaNa -
candragrahaNa hone para jaghanya ATha, madhyama bAraha aura utkRSTa solaha
prahara paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| .. 17. sUryagrahaNa -
sUryagrahaNa hone para bhI kramazaH ATha, bAraha aura solaha prahara paryanta
asvAdhyAyakAla mAnA gayA hai| 18. patana - kisI bar3e mAnya rAjA athavA
rASTrapuruSa kA nidhana hone para jaba taka usakA dAhasaMskAra na ho, taba taka
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| athavA jaba taka dUsarA adhikArI sattArUDha na
ho, taba taka zanaiH zanaiH svAdhyAya karanA caahie| 19. rAjavyudgraha -
samIpastha rAjAoM meM paraspara yuddha hone para jaba taka zAnti na ho jAe, taba
taka aura usake pazcAt bhI eka dina-rAtri svAdhyAya nahIM kreN| 20. audArika
zarIra - upAzraya ke bhItara paMcendriya jIva kA vadha ho jAne para jaba taka
kalevara par3A rahe, taba taka tathA 100 hAtha taka yadi nirjIva kalevara par3A
ho to svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahiye| asvAdhyAya ke uparokta 10 kAraNa
audArikazarIra sambandhI kahe gaye haiN| 21-28. cAra mahotsava aura cAra
mahApratipadA - ASADha-pUrNimA, Azvina-pUrNimA, kArtikapUrNimA aura caitra-
pUrNimA ye cAra mahotsava haiN| ina pUrNimAoM ke pazcAt Ane vAlI pratipadA ko
mahApratipadA kahate haiN| inameM svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha hai| . 29-32.
prAtaH, sAyaM, madhyAhna aura ardharAtri - prAtaH sUrya ugane se eka ghar3I
pahile tathA eka ghar3I piiche| sUryAsta hone se eka ghar3I pahale tathA eka
ghar3I piiche| madhyAhna arthAt dopahara meM eka ghar3I Age aura eka ghar3I
pIche evaM ardharAtri meM bhI eka ghar3I Age tathA eka ghar3I pIche svAdhyAya
nahIM karanA caahie|

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar **List of Benefactor Members**
**Hastambh** 1. Shri Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Madras 2. Shri Gulabchandji
Mangilalji Surana, Secunderabad 3. Shri Pukharajji Shishodia, Byawar 4. Shri
Sayermalji Jethamalji Chordia, Bangalore 5. Shri Premrajji Bhanwarlalji
Shrisrimal, Durg 6. Shri S. Kishanchandji Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Kanwarlalji
Baitala, Guwahati 8. Shri Seth Khivrajji Chordia, Madras 9. Shri Gumanmalji
Chordia, Madras 10. Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia, Madras 11. Shri J.
Doolichandji Chordia, Madras 12. Shri S. Ratanchandji Chordia, Madras 13. Shri
J. Annarajji Chordia, Madras 14. Shri S. Sayerchandji Chordia, Madras 15. Shri
R. Shanti Lalji Uttamchandji Chordia, Madras 16. Shri Siremalji Hirachandji
Chordia, Madras 17. Shri J. Hukmichandji Chordia, Madras  **Sambh Members** 1.
Shri Agarchandji Fatechandji Parkh, Jodhpur 2. Shri Jasrajji Ganeshmalji
Sancheti, Jodhpur 3. Shri Tilakchandji Sagarmalji Sancheti, Madras 4. Shri
Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana, Katangi 5. Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia,
Madras 6. Shri Deepchandji Chordia, Madras 7. Shri Moolchandji Chordia, Katangi
8. Shri Vardhman Industries, Kanpur 9. Shri Mangilalji Mishrilalji Sancheti,
Durg  **Patrons** 1. Shri Birdicchandji Prakashchandji Telesara, Pali 2. Shri
Gyanrajji Kevalchandji Motha, Pali 3. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta
City 4. Shri Sh. Jadavmalji Manakchandji Baitala, Bagalkot 5. Shri Hiralalji
Pannalalji Chopra, Byawar 6. Shri Mohanlalji Nemichandji Lalwani, Changaitola 7.
Shri Deepchandji Chandanmalji Chordia, Madras 8. Shri Pannalalji Bhagchandji
Bothra, Changaitola 9. Smt. Sirekunwar Bai, Wife of Late Shri Suganchandji
Jhamar, Madurantakam 10. Shri Bastimalji Mohanlalji Bohra (KGF) Jadan 11. Shri
Thanchandji Mehta, Jodhpur 12. Shri Bhairudanji Labhchandji Surana, Nagaur 13.
Shri Khubchandji Gadiya, Byawar 14. Shri Mishrilalji Dhanrajji Vinaykia, Byawar
15. Shri Indrachandji Baid, Rajnandgaon 16. Shri Ravatmalji Bhikmachandji
Pagaria, Balaghat 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Dharmicchandji Kankaria, Tangla 18. Shri
Suganchandji Bokdia, Indore 19. Shri Harkachandji Sagarmalji Baitala, Indore 20.
Shri Raghunathmalji Likhmichandji Lodha, Changaitola 21. Shri Sidhkarannji
Shikharchandji Baid, Changaitola

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara arthasahayogI sadasyoM kI zubha nAmAvalI
hAstambha 1. zrI seTha mohanamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 2. zrI gulAbacandajI
mAMgIlAlajI surANA, sikandarAbAda 3. zrI pukharAjajI zizodiyA, byAvara 4. zrI
sAyaramalajI jeThamalajI corar3iyA, baiMgalora 5. zrI premarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI
zrIzrImAla, durga 6. zrI esa. kizanacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 7. zrI
kaMvaralAlajI baitAlA, gohATI 8. zrI seTha khIMvarAjajI corar3iyA madrAsa 9. zrI
gumAnamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 10. zrI esa. bAdalacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa
11. zrI je. dulIcandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 12. zrI esa. ratanacandajI corar3iyA,
madrAsa 13. zrI je. annarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 14. zrI esa. sAyaracandajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 15. zrI Ara. zAntilAlajI uttamacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 16.
zrI siremalajI hIrAcandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 17. zrI je. hukmIcandajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa sambha sadasya 1. zrI agaracandajI phatecandajI pArakha,
jodhapura 2. zrI jasarAjajI gaNezamalajI saMcetI, jodhapura 3. zrI
tilokacaMdajI, sAgaramalajI saMcetI, madrAsa 4. zrI pUsAlAlajI kistUracaMdajI
surANA, kaTaMgI 5. zrI Ara. prasannacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 6. zrI
dIpacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 7. zrI mUlacandajI corar3iyA, kaTaMgI 8. zrI
varddhamAna iNDasTrIja, kAnapura 9. zrI mAMgIlAlajI mizrIlAlajI saMcetI, durga
saMrakSaka 1. zrI biradIcaMdajI prakAzacaMdajI talesarA, pAlI 2. zrI jJAnarAjajI
kevalacandajI mUthA, pAlI 3. zrI premarAjajI jatanarAjajI mehatA, mer3atA siTI
4. zrI za. jar3AvamalajI mANakacandajI betAlA, bAgalakoTa 5. zrI hIrAlAlajI
pannAlAlajI caupar3A, byAvara 6. zrI mohanalAlajI nemIcandajI lalavANI,
cAMgATolA 7. zrI dIpacaMdajI candanamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 8. zrI pannAlAlajI
bhAgacandajI botharA, cAMgATolA 9. zrImatI sireku~vara bAI dharmapatnI sva. zrI
suganacandajI jhAmar3a, madurAntakam zrI bastImalajI mohanalAlajI boharA (KGF)
jAr3ana 10. 11. zrI thAnacandajI mehatA, jodhapura 12. zrI bhairUdAnajI
lAbhacandajI surANA, nAgaura 13. zrI khUbacandajI gAdiyA, byAvara 14. zrI
mizrIlAlajI dhanarAjajI vinAyakiyA, byAvara 15. zrI indracandajI baida,
rAjanAMdagAMva 16. zrI rAvatamalajI bhIkamacandajI pagAriyA, bAlAghATa 17. zrI
gaNezamalajI dharmIcandajI kAMkariyA, TaMgalA 18. zrI suganacandajI bokar3iyA,
indaura 19. zrI harakacandajI sAgaramalajI betAlA, indaura 20. zrI
raghunAthamalajI likhamIcandajI lor3hA, cAMgATolA 21. zrI siddhakaraNajI
zikharacandajI baida, cAMgATolA

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
22. Shri Sagarmalji Nortamlaji Pinch, Madras 7. Shri B. Gajrajji Bokdia, Salem
23. Shri Mohanrajji Mukanchandji Balia, 8. Shri Phoolchandji Gautamchandji
Kante, Pali Ahmedabad 9. Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna, Madras 24. Shri Keshrimalji
Janvarilaji Talesara, Pali 10. Shri Rooprajji Jodhrajji Mootha, Delhi 25. Shri
Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi, Byawar 11. Shri Mohanlalji Mangalchandji
Pagaria, 26. Shri Dharmichadji Bhagchandji Bohra, Jhutha Raipur 27. Shri
Chhogmalji Hemrajji Lodha Dondi Lohara 12. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji Lunia, 28.
Shri Gunachandji Dalichandji Kataria, Bellary Chandawal 29. Shri Moolchandji
Sujanmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 13. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gautamchandji Pagaria, 30.
Shri C. Amarchandji Bothra, Madras Kushalpura 31. Shri Bhanvarlalji Moolchandji
Surana, Madras 14. Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji, Jodhpur 32. Shri Badalchandji
Jugrajji Mehta, Indore 15. Shri Moolchandji Parkh, Jodhpur . 33. Shri Lalchandji
Mohanlalji Kothari, Gothan 16. Shri Sumermalji Medtiya, Jodhpur 34. Shri
Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Ajmer 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Nemichandji Tantia,
Jodhpur 35. Shri Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria, 18. Shri Udayrajji Pukharajji
Sancheti, Jodhpur Bangalore 19. Shri Badarmalji Pukharajji Bant, Kanpur 36. Shri
Bhanvarimalji Chordia, Madras 20. Smt. Sundarbai Gothi Dharmpatni Shri
Tarachandji 37. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gotha, Madras Gothi, Jodhpur 38. Shri
Jalmachandji Rikhbachandji Bafna, Agra 21. Shri Raychandji Mohanlalji, Jodhpur
39. Shri Ghevarchandji Pukharajji Bhurat, Guwahati 22. Shri Ghevarchandji
Rooprajji, Jodhpur 40. Shri Jabarchandji Gelda, Madras 23. Shri Bhanvarlalji
Manakchandji Surana, Madras 41. Shri Jadavmalji Suganchandji, Madras 24. Shri
Janvarilaji Amarchandji Kothari, 42. Shri Pukharajji Vijayrajji, Madras 43. Shri
Chenmalji Surana Trust, Madras 25. Shri Manakchandji Kishnalalji, Medtacity 44.
Shri Lunakaranji Rikhbachandji Lodha, Madras 26. Shri Mohanlalji Gulabchandji
Chatar, Byawar 45. Shri Surajmalji Sajanrajji Meheta, Koppal 27. Shri Jasrajji
Janvarilaji Dhariawal, Jodhpur 1. Shri Devkaranji Shrichandji Dosi, Medtacity
28. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur 2. Smt. Chhaganibai Vinaykia,
Byawar 29. Shri Nemichandji Dakalia Mehta, Jodhpur 3. Shri Poonamchandji Nahata,
Jodhpur 30. Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji Karnavat, Jodhpur 4. Shri Bhanvarlalji
Vijayrajji Kankaria, 31. Shri Asumal & Co. , Jodhpur Villipuram 32. Shri
Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur 5. Shri Bhanvarlalji Chopra, Byawar 33. Smt. Suganibai
Dharmpatni Shri Mishrilalji 6. Shri Vijayrajji Ratnalalji Chatar, Byawar Sand,
Jodhpur Byawar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22. zrI sAgaramalajI noratamalajI pIMcA, madrAsa 7. zrI bI. gajarAjajI
bokaDiyA, selama 23. zrI mohanarAjajI mukanacandajI bAliyA, 8. zrI phUlacandajI
gautamacandajI kAMTheDa, pAlI ahamadAbAda 9. zrI ke. pukharAjajI bAphaNA,
madrAsa 24. zrI kezarImalajI jaMvarIlAlajI talesarA, pAlI 10. zrI rUparAjajI
jodharAjajI mUthA, dillI 25. zrI ratanacandajI uttamacandajI modI, byAvara 11.
zrI mohanalAlajI maMgalacaMdajI pagAriyA, 26. zrI dharmIcandajI bhAgacandajI
boharA, jhUThA rAyapura 27. zrI chogAmalajI hemarAjajI lor3hA DoMDIlohArA 12.
zrI nathamalajI mohanalAlajI lUNiyA, 28. zrI guNacaMdajI dalIcaMdajI kaTAriyA,
bellArI caNDAvala 29. zrI mUlacandajI sujAnamalajI saMcetI, jodhapura 13. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI gautamacandajI pagAriyA, 30. zrI sI. amaracandajI botharA,
madrAsa kuzAlapurA 31. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mUlacandajI surANA, madrAsa 14. zrI
uttamacaMdajI mAMgIlAlajI, jodhapura 32. zrI bAdalacaMdajI jugarAjajI mehatA,
indaura 15. zrI mUlacandajI pArakha, jodhapura . 33. zrI lAlacaMdajI
mohanalAlajI koThArI, goThana 16. zrI sumeramalajI mer3atiyA, jodhapura 34. zrI
hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, ajamera 17. zrI gaNezamalajI nemIcandajI
TAMTiyA, jodhapura 35. zrI mohanalAlajI pArasamalajI pagAriyA, 18. zrI
udayarAjajI pukharAjajI saMcetI, jodhapura baiMgalora 19. zrI bAdaramalajI
pukharAjajI baMTa, kAnapura 36. zrI bhaMvarImalajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 20. zrImatI
sundarabAI goThI dharmapatnIzrI tArAcaMdajI 37. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI goThA,
madrAsa goThI, jodhapura 38. zrI jAlamacaMdajI rikhabacaMdajI bAphanA, AgarA 21.
zrI rAyacandajI mohanalAlajI, jodhapura 39. zrI ghevaracaMdajI pukharAjajI
bhuraTa, gohATI 22. zrI ghevaracandajI rUparAjajI, jodhapura 40. zrI
jabaracandajI gelar3A, madrAsa 23. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mANakacaMdajI surANA,
madrAsa 41. zrI jar3AvamalajI suganacandajI, madrAsa 24. zrI jaMvarIlAlajI
amaracandajI koThArI, 42. zrI pukharAjajI vijayarAjajI, madrAsa 43. zrI
cenamalajI surANA TrasTa, madrAsa 25. zrI mANakacaMdajI kizanalAlajI,
mer3atAsiTI 44. zrI lUNakaraNajI rikhabacaMdajI lor3hA, madrAsa 26. zrI
mohanalAlajI gulAbacandajI catara, byAvara 45. zrI sUrajamalajI sajanarAjajI
mahetA, koppala 27. zrI jasarAjajI jaMvarIlAlajI dhArIvAla, jodhapura 1. zrI
devakaraNajI zrIcandajI DosI, mer3atAsiTI 28. zrI mohanalAlajI campAlAlajI
goThI, jodhapura 2. zrImatI chaganIbAI vinAyakiyA, byAvara 29. zrI nemIcaMdajI
DAkaliyA mehatA, jodhapura 3. zrI pUnamacandajI nAhaTA, jodhapura 30. zrI
tArAcaMdajI kevalacaMdajI karNAvaTa, jodhapura 4. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
vijayarAjajI kAMkariyA, 31. zrI AsUmala eNDa kaM. , jodhapura villIpuram 32. zrI
pukharAjajI loDhA, jodhapura 5. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI caupar3A, byAvara 33. zrImatI
suganIbAI dharmapatnI zrI mizrIlAlajI 6. zrI vijayarAjajI ratanalAlajI catara,
byAvara sAMDa, jodhapura byAvara

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
34. Shri Bachhrajji Surana, Jodhpur 63. Shri Chandanmalji Premchandji Modi,
Bhilai 35. Shri Harkachandji Mehta, Jodhpur 64. Shri Bhirajjji Baghmar, Kuchera.
36. Shri Devrajji Labhchandji Medtiya. Jodhpur 65. Shri Tilokchandji
Premprakashji, Ajmer 37. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji Golia, Jodhpur 66. Shri
Vijaylalji Premchandji Gulechha Raj 38. Shri Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia,
Jodhpur Nandgaon 39. Shri Mangilalji Chordia, Kuchera 67. Shri Ravatmalji
Chajed, Bhilai 40. Shri Sardarmalji Surana, Bhilai. 68. Shri Bhanwarlalji
Dungarmalji Kankaria, 41. Shri Okchandji Hemrajji Soni, Durg Bhilai 69. Shri
Hira Salalji Hastimalji Deshlhara, 42. Shri Suraj Karanji Surana, Madras 43.
Shri Ghisulalji Lalchandji Parkh, Durg Bhilai 44. Shri Pukharajji Bohra. (Jain
Transport Co.) - •60. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakvasi Jain Shravak Sangh. Dalli-
Rajhara Jodhpur 71. Shri Champalalji Budhrajji Bafna, Byawar 45. Shri
Champalalji Saklecha, Jalna 72. Shri Gangaramji Indachandji Bohra, Kuchera 46.
Shri Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar, Bangalore 73. Shri Fatehrajji Nemichandji
Karnavat, 47. Shri Bhanwarlalji Motha & Sons, Jaipur Kolkata 48. Shri Lalchandji
Motilalji Gadiya, Bangalore 74. Shri Balchandji Thanchandji Bhurt, Kolkata 49.
Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratanmalji Sankhla, 75. Shri Sampatrajji Kataria, Jodhpur
Metupalium 76. Shri Javrilalji Shantillali Surana, Bolaram 50. Shri Pukharajji
Chhallani, Karanguli 77. Shri Kanmalji Kothari, Dadia 51. Shri Asakaranji
Jasrajji Parkh, Durg 75. Shri Pannalalji Motilalji Surana, Pali 52. Shri
Ganeshmalji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai 79. Shri Manakchandji Ratnalalji Munot, Tangla
3. Shri Amritrajji Jaswantrajji Mehta, 80. Shri Chimmansinghji Mohansinghji
Lodha, Byawar. Medtacity 81. Shri Riddhakaranji Ravatmalji Bhurt, Guwahati 54.
Shri Ghevarchandji Kishoramalji Parkh, Jodhpur 82. Shri Parsamalji
Mahavirchandji Bafna, Gothan 55 Shri Mangilalji Rekchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 83.
Shri Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrisrimal, 56. Shri Munnilalji Mulchandji
Gulechha, Jodhpur Kuchera. 57. Shri Ratnalalji Lakhpatrajji, Jodhpur 84. Shri
Mangilalji Madanlalji Chordia, 58. Shri Jivrajji Parsamalji Kothari, Medta-
Bhairunda  85. Shri Sohनलालji Lunakaranji Surana, Kuchera 59. Shri Bhanwarlalji
Rikhabchandji Nahata, Nagaur 86. Shri Ghisulalji, Parsamalji, Javrilalji 60.
Shri Mangilalji Prakashchandji Runwal, Kothari, Gothan 87. Shri Sardarmalji &
Company, Jodhpur 61. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, Pipaliya Kalan 88. Shri Champalalji
Hiralalji Bagrecha, 62. Shri Harkachandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore Jodhpur
Mysore

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34. zrI baccharAjajI surANA, jodhapura 63. zrI candanamalajI premacaMdajI modI,
bhilAI 35. zrI harakacandajI mehatA, jodhapura 64. zrI bhIvarAjajI bAghamAra,
kuceraa| 36. zrI devarAjajI lAbhacaMdajI meDatiyA. jodhapara 65. zrI
tilokacaMdajI premaprakAzajI, ajamera 37. zrI kanakarAjajI madanarAjajI goliyA,
jodhapura 66. zrI vijayalAlajI premacaMdajI gulecchA rAja38. zrI ghevaracandajI
pArasamalajI TAMTiyA, jodhapura nAMdagA~va 39. zrI mAMgIlAlajI corar3iyA, kucerA
67. zrI rAvatamalajI chAjer3a, bhilAI 40. zrI saradAramalajI surANA, bhilAI .
68. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI DUMgaramalajI kAMkariyA, 41. zrI okacaMdajI hemarAjajI
sonI, durga bhilAI 69. zrI hIrAsalAlajI hastImalajI dezalaharA, 42. zrI
sUrajakaraNajI surANA, madrAsa 43. zrI ghIsUlAlajI lAlacaMdajI pArakha, durga
bhilAI 44. zrI pukharAjajI boharA.(jaina TAnsaporTa kaM)- *60. zrI varddhamAna
sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvakasaMgha. dallI-rAjaharA jodhapura 71. zrI campAlAlajI
buddharAjajI bAphaNA, byAvara 45. zrI campAlAlajI sakalecA, jAlanA 72. zrI
gaMgArAmajI indacaMdajI boharA, kucerA 46. zrI premarAjajI mIThAlAlajI kAmadAra,
baiMgalora 73. zrI phateharAjajI nemIcaMdajI karNAvaTa, 47. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
mUthA eNDa sansa, jayapura kalakattA 48. zrI lAlacaMdajI motIlAlajI gAdiyA,
baiMgalora 74. zrI bAlacaMdajI thAnacandajI bhuraTa, kalakattA 49. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI navaratnamalajI sAMkhalA, 75. zrI sampatarAjajI kaTAriyA,
jodhapura meTUpaliyama 76. zrI javarIlAlajI zAMtilAlI surANA, bolArama 50. zrI
pukharAjajI challANI, karaNagullI 77. zrI kAnamalajI koThArI, dAdiyA 51. zrI
AsakaraNajI jasarAjajI pArakha, durga 75. zrI pannAlAlajI motIlAlajI surANA,
pAlI 52. zrI gaNezamalajI hemarAjajI sonI, bhilAI 79. zrI mANakacaMdajI
ratanalAlajI muNota, TaMgalA 3. zrI amRtarAjajI jasavantarAjajI mehatA, 80. zrI
cimminasiMhajI mohanasiMhajI loDhA, byAvara . mer3atAsiTI 81. zrI riddhakaraNajI
rAvatamalajI bhuraTa, gauhATI 54. zrI ghevaracaMdajI kizoramalajI pArakha,
jodhapura 82. zrI pArasamalajI mahAvIracaMdajI bAphanA, goThana 55 zrI
mAMgIlAlajI rekhacaMdajI pArakha, jodhapura 83. zrI phakIracaMdajI kamalacaMdajI
zrIzrImAla, 56. zrI munnIlAlajI mUlacaMdajI gulecchA, jodhapura kuceraa| 57. zrI
ratanalAlajI lakhapatarAjajI, jodhapura 84. zrI mAMgIlAlajI madanalAlajI
coraDiyA, 58. zrI jIvarAjajI pArasamalajI koThArI, mer3atA- bhairUMdA siTI 85.
zrI sohanalAlajI lUNakaraNajI surANA, kucerA 59. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
rikhabacaMdajI nAhaTA, nAgaura 86. zrI ghIsUlAlajI, pArasamalajI, jaMvarIlAlajI
60. zrI mAMgIlAlajI prakAzacandajI rUNavAla, koThArI, goThana 87. zrI
saradAramalajI eNDa kampanI, jodhapura 61. zrI pukharAjajI boharA, pIpaliyA
kalAM 88. zrI campAlAlajI hIrAlAlajI bAgarecA, 62. zrI harakacaMdajI jugarAjajI
bAphanA, baiMgalora jodhapura maisUra

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
89. Shri Pukharajji Kataria, Jodhpur 112. Shri Chandmalji Dhanrajji Modi, Ajmer.
90. Shri Indrachandji Mukanchandji, Indore 113. Shri Ramprasanna Gyanprasar
Kendra, Chandrapur. 91. Shri Bhanwarlalji Bafna, Indore 114. Shri Bhurmalji
Dulichandji Bokardia, Medta 92. Shri Jethamalji Modi, Indore City 93. Shri
Balchandji Amarchandji Modi, Byawar 115. Shri Mohanlalji Dhariawal, Pali 24.
Shri Kundanmalji Parsamalji Bhandari, Bangalore 116. Shrimati Ramkunwarbai
Dharmapatni Shri Chandmalji Lodha, Bombay 95. Shrimati Kamalakanwar Lalwani
Dharmapatni Swah Shri Parsamalji Lalwani, Gothan. 117. Shri Mangilalji
Uttamchandji Bafna, Bangalore 96. Shri Akhechandji Loonkarannji Bhandari,
Calcutta 148. Shri Sanchalalji Bafna, Aurangabad 97. Shri Suganchandji Sancheti,
Rajnandgaon 119. Shri Bhikhamchandji Manakchandji Khabia, (Kudalore) Madras 98.
Shri Prakashchandji Jain, Nagaur 120. Shrimati Anopkunwar Dharmapatni Shri
Champalalji Sanghvi, Kuchera Bolaram 99. Shri Kushalchandji Rikhabchandji
Surana, 121. Shri Sohनलालजी Sojatiya, Thanwala 100. Shri Lakshmichandji Ashok
Kumarji Shrisrimal, Kuchera 122. Shri Champalalji Bhandari, Calcutta 101. Shri
Gudarmalji Champalalji, Gothan 123. Shri Bhikhamchandji Ganeshmalji Choudhary,
Dhullia 102. Shri Tejarajji Kothari, Mangaliyaavas 124. Shri Pukharaji
Kishनलालजी Tateड़, 103. Shri Sampatrajji Chordia, Madras 125. Shri Mishrilalji
Sajनलालजी Kataria, Sikandrabad 104. Shri Amarchandji Chajed, Padu Bari 126. Shri
Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, Sikandrabad 105. Shri Jugrajji
Dhanrajji Barmecha, Madras 127. Shri Pukharajji Parsamalji Lalwani, Bagar Nagar
106. Shri Pukharajji Naharpalji Lalwani, Madras 128. Shri T. Parsamalji Chordia,
Madras 107. Shrimati Kanchandevi and Nirmala Devi, Madras 129. Shri Motilalji
Asulalji Bohra & Co., Bangalore 108. Shri Dulerajji Bhanwarlalji Kothari,
Kushal- 130. Shri Sampatrajji Surana, Manmad 109. Shri Bhanwarlalji Mangilalji
Betala, Deh 110. Shri Jivrajji Bhanwarlalji Chordia, Bhairunda 111. Shri
Mangilalji Shantilalji Runwal, Harsolav

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 89. zrI pukharAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 112. zrI cAMdamalajI dhanarAjajI modI,
ajamera  /  90. zrI indracandajI mukanacandajI, indaura 113. zrI rAmaprasanna
jJAnaprasAra kendra, candrapura. 91. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI bAphanA, indaura 114.
zrI bhUramalajI dulIcaMdajI bokar3iyA, mer3atA92. zrI jeThamalajI modI, indaura
siTI 93. zrI bAlacandajI amaracandajI modI, byAvara 115. zrI mohanalAlajI
dhArIvAla, pAlI 24. zrI kundanamalajI pArasamalajI bhaMDArI, baiMgalora 116.
zrImatI rAmakuMvarabAI dharmapatnI zrI cAMdamalajI 95, zrImatI kamalAkaMvara
lalavANI dharmapatnI svaH loDhA. bambaI zrI pArasamalajI lalavANI, goThana . .
117. zrI mAMgIlAlajI uttamacaMdajI bAphaNA, baiMgalora 96. zrI akhecandajI
lUNakaraNajI bhaNDArI, 148. zrI sAMcAlAlajI bAphaNA, auraMgAbAda kalakattA 119.
zrI bhIkhamacandajI mANakacandajI khAbiyA, 97. zrI suganacandajI saMcetI,
rAjanAMdagAMva (kuDAlora)madrAsa 98. zrI prakAzacaMdajI jaina, nAgaura 120.
zrImatI anopakuMvara dharmapatnI zrI campAlAlajI 99. zrI kuzAlacaMdajI
rikhabacandajI surANA, . saMghavI, kucerA bolArama 121. zrI sohanalAlajI
sojatiyA, thAMvalA 100. zrI lakSmIcaMdajI azokakumArajI zrIzrImAla, 122. zrI
campAlAlajI bhaNDArI, kalakattA _ kucerA 123. zrI bhIkhamacandajI gaNezamalajI
caudharI, k01. zrI gUdar3amalajI campAlAlajI, goThana dhUliyA k02. zrI
tejarAjajI koThArI, mAMgaliyAvAsa 124. zrI pukharAjI kizanalAlajI tAter3a, 103.
zrI sampatarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa sikandarAbAda k04. zrI amaracaMdajI
chAjer3a, pAdu bar3I 125. zrI mizrIlAlajI sajanalAlajI kaTAriyA, 105. zrI
jugarAjajI dhanarAjajI baramecA, madrAsa sikandarAbAda 206. zrI pukharAjajI
nAharapalajI lalavANI, madrAsa 126. zrI vardhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvaka
saMgha, k07. zrImatI kaMcanadevI va nirmalA devI, madrAsa . bagar3Inagara k08.
zrI dulerAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI koThArI, kuzAla- 127. zrI pukharAjajI pArasamalajI
lalavANI, bilAr3A k09. zrI bhaMvalAlajI mAMgIlAlajI betAlA, Deha 128. zrI TI.
pArasamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 910. zrI jIvarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI corar3iyA,
bhairuMdA 129. zrI motIlAlajI AsUlAlajI boharA eNDa 11. zrI mAMgIlAlajI
zAMtilAlajI rUNavAla, kaM., baiMgalora harasolAva 130. zrI sampatarAjajI surANA,
manamAr3a 00

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar**  **Published Agam-Sutras**  *
**Acharangasutra** - Translator-Editor: Acharya Chand Suraana 'Kamal' *
**Upasakadasangasutra** - Dr. Chaganlal Shastri (M.A., Ph.D.) *
**Jnatadharmakathangasutra** - Pt. Shobhachand Bharill * **Ankridashangasutra**
- Sadhvi Divyaprabha (M.A., Ph.D.) * **Anuttarovvaiayasutra** - Sadhvi
Muktiprabha (M.A., Ph.D.) * **Sthanangasutra** - Pt. Hiralal Shastri *
**Samavayangasutra** - Pt. Hiralal Shastri * **Sutrakritangasutra** - Shri Chand
Suraana 'Suraana' * **Vipaksutra** - Translator: Pt. Roshanlal Shastri, Editor:
Pt. Shobhachand Bharill * **Nandisutra** - Translator: Sadhvi Umravkunwar
'Archana', Editor: Kamla Jain 'Gigi' (M.A.) * **Aupapatik Sutra** - Dr.
Chaganlal Shastri * **Vyakhyaprajnaptisutra** (Four Parts) - Shri Amarmuni *
**Rajprashniyasutra** - Vaanibhushan Ratnamuni, Editor: Devkumar Jain *
**Prajnapanasutra** (Three Parts) - Jainbhushan Gyanmuni *
**Prashnavyakaranasutra** - Translator: Muni Pravin Rishi, Editor: Pt.
Shobhachand Bharill * **Uttaradhyayanasutra** - Shri Rajendramuni Shastri *
**Niryavalikasutra** - Shri Devkumar Jain * **Dashavaikalikasutra** - Mahasati
Pushpavati * **Aavashyakasutra** - Mahasati Suprabha (M.A., Ph.D.) *
**Jambudipaprajnaptisutra** - Dr. Chaganlal Shastri * **Anuyogadwarasutra** -
Upadhyay Shri Kevalmuni, Editor: Devkumar Jain * **Surya Prajnapti, Chandra
Prajnapti Sutra** - Editor: Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' *
**Jivajivaabhigamsutra** (Two Parts) - Shri Rajendra Muni * **Nishitasutra** -
Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal', Shri Tilakmuni * **Trini Chhed Sutraani** -
Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal', Shri Tilakmuni * **Shri Kalpasutra** (Patrakar)
- Upadhyay Muni Shri Pyarchandji Maharaj * **Shri Antkridashangasutra**
(Patrakar) - Upadhyay Muni Shri Pyarchandji Maharaj  **For Special Information,
Contact:**  **Agam Prakashan Samiti** Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan, Peepliya
Bazaar, Byawar-305901 **Diamond Jubilee Press, Ajmer** 9431898

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara dvArA prakAzita Agama-sUtra nAma anuvAdaka-
sampAdaka AcArAMgasUtra [do bhAga zrI candra surAnA 'kamala' upAsakadazAMgasUtra
DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI (ema. e. pI-eca. DI.) jJAtAdharmakathAMgasUtra paM.
zobhAcandra bhArilla ankRddazAMgasUtra sAdhvI divyaprabhA (ema. e., pI-eca. DI)
anuttarovavAiyasUtra sAdhvI muktiprabhA (ema. e., pI-eca. DI) sthAnAMgasUtra
paM. hIrAlAla zAstrI samavAyAMgasUtra paM. hIrAlAla zAstrI sUtrakRtAMgasUtra zrI
candra surAnA 'surANA' vipAkasUtra anu. paM. rozanalAla zAstrI sampA, paM.
zobhAcanda bhArilla nandIsUtra anu. sAdhvI umarAvakuMvara 'arcanA' sampA. kamalA
jaina 'jIjI' ema. e. aupapAtikasUtra DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI
vyAkhyAprajJaptisUtra [cAra bhAga] zrI amaramuni rAjapraznIyasUtra vANIbhUSaNa
ratanamuni, saM. devakumAra jaina prajJApanAsUtra [tIna bhAga] jainabhUSaNa
jJAnamuni praznavyAkaraNasUtra anu. muni pravINaRSi sampA, paM. zobhAcandra
bhArilla uttarAdhyayanasUtra zrI rAjendramuni zAstrI nirayAvalikAsUtra zrI
devakumAra jaina dazavaikAlikasUtra mahAsatI puSpavatI AvazyakasUtra mahAsatI
suprabhA (ema. e. pIeca. DI.) jambUdvIpaprajJaptisUtra DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI
anuyogadvArasUtra upAdhyAya zrI kevalamuni, saM. devakumAra jaina,
sUryaprajJapti, candraprajJaptisUtra sampA. muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala'
jIvAjIvAbhigamasUtra [do bhAga] zrI rAjendra muni nizIthasUtra munizrI
kanhaiyAlAla jI 'kamala', zrI tilokamuni trINichedasUtrANi munizrI kanhaiyAlAla
jI 'kamala', zrI tilokamuni zrI kalpasUtra (patrAkAra) upAdhyAya muni zrI
pyAracaMda jI mahArAja zrI antakRddazAMgasUtra (patrAkAra) upAdhyAya muni zrI
pyAracaMdajI mahArAja vizeSa jAnakArI ke liye samparkasUtra Agama prakAzana
samiti zrI braja-madhukara smRti bhavana, pIpaliyA bAjAra, byAvara-305901 di
DAyamaNDa jubilI presa, ajamera 9431898

