Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/032440/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**SUM KING** To Open. **स्व. आचार्य प्रवर गुरुदेव श्री सोहनलाल जी म.सा.** In the
auspicious memory of: **सूत्रकृता-सूत्र** **शीलांकाचार्य कृत संस्कृत टीकानुवाद
सहित** **प्रधान सम्पादक शासन गौरव आचार्य प्रवर श्री सुदर्शन लाल जीम-सा.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 p 1. SUM KING ye To Open. oslalo sva. AcArya pravara gurudeva zrI sohanalAla jI
ma.sA.  /  kI puNya smRti meM : sUtrakRtA-sUtra zIlAMkAcArya kRta saMskRta
TIkAnuvAda sahita pradhAna sampAdaka zAsana gaurava AcArya pravara zrI sudarzana
lAla jIma-sA.

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##    **H** **Chief Editor**  The birth of Shri Parsamalji, son of the revered
Utsavrajji Choudhary and Smt. Bhanwari Baiji Choudhary, on the auspicious day of
Paush Badi 10, VS 2029, was like the first rays of the sun, blessing the
spiritual realm.   From childhood, Shri Parsamalji was intelligent, detached,
sociable, pure of heart, and gentle in his conduct. He became a great traveler
on the path of renunciation, austerity, knowledge, and spiritual practice. On
Magh Sudi 10, VS 2044, he received the Arhati Diksha in Bijaynagar and became
'Muni Sudarshan', a beloved disciple of the revered Acharya Pravar Shri
Sohनलालji M. Sa.  A symbol of meditation and spiritual practice, a source of
inspiration for pure character, a tranquil ocean of harmony, a messenger of the
message of Sarvodaya Tirth, Shri Sudarshan Muni Ji, the Shaasanagaurav, earned
immense fame as a guardian of the five principles of non-violence and a
successful preacher of Dharma.  He gained the title of a skilled interpreter of
abstract subjects by deeply studying languages like Hindi, Sanskrit, Prakrit,
and subjects like grammar, logic, philosophy, Agam, and literary studies. He
became the architect of service, organization, and spiritual practice, and the
center of faith for the people. He connected youth with Samayik Swadhyay,
earning their devotion. He expanded his knowledge by deeply studying Agamic
commentaries.  From the 6th of Maatra Badi, VS 2055, he took on the weighty
responsibility of the Acharya पद, making the titles of 'Shaasanagaurav' and
'Yuva Manishi' meaningful. He became a bridge between youth, adults, and the
elderly, and a respected and memorable figure as an inexhaustible treasure of
good conduct, good thoughts, and good morals.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 H pradhAna sampAdaka zAsanagaurava, yuvAmanISI, AcArya pravara zrI
sudarzanalAla jI ma. sA. SCO pauSa badI10 vi.saM.2029 kA prabhAta ravi-razmiyoM
ke prathama avataraNa ke samAna zraddheya utsavarAjajI caudharI evaM zrImatI
bha~varI bAI jI caudharI ke Atmaja zrI pArasamalajI ke janma ne adhyAtma ke
dharAtala ko dhanya kara diyA  /  0 bAlyakAla meM buddhi se medhAvI, mana se
vItarAgI, svabhAva se milanasAra, hRdaya se nizchala-nirmala evaM vyavahAra se
Rju-mRdu zrI pArasamalajI tyAga-tapa-jJAna-sAdhanA patha ke mahApathika bana vi.
saM. 2044 mAghasudI 10 ko bijayanagara meM ArhatI dIkSA aMgIkAra kara AcArya
pravara zraddheya sohanalAlajI ma. sA. ke priya suziSya 'muni sudarzana' bana
gae  /  dhyAna-sAdhanA ke pAvana pratIka, pavitracaritra ke preraNA srota,
samarasa ke prazAnta sAgara sarvodaya-tIrtha ke saMdezavAhaka, zAsanagaurava zrI
sudarzana munijI ne ahiMsAdi paMcazIla ke abhibhAvaka va paramArtha-dharma ke
saphala upadezaka bana vipula khyAti arjita kI  /  hindI, saMskRta, prAkRta Adi
bhASAoM evaM vyAkarapA, nyAya, darzana, Agama, sAhityazAstra Adi kA gahana
adhyayana kara amUrta viSayoM ke kuzala vivecaka kA viruda prApta kiyaa| sevA-
saMgaThana-sAdhanA ke sUtradhAra bana jana-jana kI AsthA ke kendra bane  /
yuvAoM ko sAmAyikasvAdhyAya se saMpRktakara yuvAvarga kI zraddhA samarjita kii|
Agamika TIkAoM ke gahana adhyayana se apane jJAna-phalaka ko vistAra diyA  /
visaM.2055 kI mAtra badI 6 se AcAryapada kA gurutara dAyitva vahana karate hue
'zAsanagaurava', 'yuvAmanISI' ke viruda ko sArthaka kiyA  /  yuvAoM, praur3hoM
va vayovRddhoM ke madhya setu bana sadvyavahAra, sadvicAra-sadAcAra ke akSaya
koSa ke rUpa meM sammAnanIya - smaraNIya bana ge|

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the auspicious memory of  Sw. Acharya Pravara Gurudev Shri Sohनलालji M.Sa.
Sutrakritanga Sutra [Pratham Shruta Skandha] with Sanskrit Tika-Anuvaad by
Sheelankaacharya (Chief Editor) Shasan Gaurav Acharya Pravara Shri
Sudarshanlalji M.Sa. -: Tika-Anuvaadak and Editor: Shraddhey Shri Priyadarshan
Muniji M.Sa. - Dr. Chhaganlalji Shastri,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sva. AcArya pravara gurudeva zrI sohanalAla jI ma.sA. kI puNya smRti meM
sUtrakRtAMgasUtra [prathama zruta skandha] zIlAMkAcArya kRta saMskRta TIkAnuvAda
sahita pradhAna sampAdaka) zAsana gaurava AcArya pravara zrI sudarzanalAla jI
ma.sA. -: TIkAnuvAdaka evaM sampAdaka :zraddheya zrI priyadarzana munijI ma. sA.
- DaoN. chaganalAlajI zAstrI,

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
O O O O D O O Āgama Sūtrakr̥tāṅga Sūtra (Prathama Śrutaśkaṇḍha) Śīlaṅkācārya
Kṛta Ṭīkā Hindī Anuvādyukta Nideśaka Ojassvī Vakta Śraddheya Priyadarśana Muni
Jī M.Sā. Samprerikā Saṅgha Jyoti Sādhvīpramukhā Śraddheyā Jayavantikāṁvar Jī
M.Sā. Paramviduṣī, Śraddheyā Kamalaprabhā Jī M.Sā. Sādhvīratnatrayī Dr.
Jñānalatā Jī M.Sā. Śrī Sūtrakr̥tāṅga Sūtram Paramarśa Maṇḍala Śāsana Gaurav,
Yuvāmaṇīṣī, Ācāryaprava Śrī Sudarśanalāl Jī M.Sā. Dr. Chaganalāl Jī Śāstrī Śrī
Ratnalāl Gokharu Prakāśaka Śrī Śvetāṁbara Staṇakavāsī Jain Svādhyāyī Saṅgha,
Gulābpura Akhila Bhāratīya Śrī Prājña Jain Yuvāmaṇḍala, Bijayanagara Prakāśana
Varṣa 24 Janavārī, 1999 Māgha Śuklā 7, Samvat 2055 Prathamāvr̥tti - 1100
Pratiyāṁ Mūlya 250/ Mudraka evaṁ Kampyūṭar Sāṭing Niyo Bloka and Prints Purānī
Maṇḍī, Ajamer : 422291 iv

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 O O O O D O O Agama sUtrakRtAGga sUtra ( prathama zrutaskaMdha ) zIlaMkAcArya
kRta TIkA hindI anuvAdayukta nidezaka ojasvI vaktA zraddheya priyadarzana munijI
ma.sA. samprerikA saMgha jyoti sAdhvIpramukhA zraddheyA jayavaMtakaMvara jI
ma.sA. paramaviduSI, zraddheyA kamalaprabhA jI ma.sA. sAdhvIratnatrayI DaoN.
jJAnalatA jI ma.sA. zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram parAmarza maNDala zAsanagaurava,
yuvAmanISI, AcAryapravara zrI sudarzanalAla jI ma.sA. DaoN. chaganalAla jI
zAstrI zrI ratanalAla gokharu prakAzaka zrI zvetAmbara sthAnakavAsI jaina
svAdhyAyI saMgha, gulAbapurA akhila bhAratIya zrI prAjJa jaina yuvAmaNDala,
bijayanagara prakAzana varSa 24 janavarI, 1999 mAgha zuklA 7, saMvat 2055
prathamAvRtti - 1100 pratiyAM mUlya 250/ mudraka evaM kampyUTara saiTiMga nio
blaoNka eNDa prinTsa purAnI maNDI, ajamera : 422291 iv

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra **Dedication**  O Messenger of Revolution,
Salutations.  O Light of Dharma, Venerable Acharya, O Swift Poet, here, in this
simple-hearted forest, I have received your mercy like a new blossoming flower.
Having touched your lotus feet, my heart, filled with new emotions, has come to
you, seeking refuge under the shade of that great tree.  I have awakened my
emotions and dedicated this work, which addresses the suffering of the world, to
you, O Divine One. My mind and head bow in reverence once again.  This pen you
gave me, I am its master! This is its offering. The Ganga you have flowed, is a
sweet melody.  This composition is its...  V - Acharya Sudarshan Muni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram samarpaNa he krAntidUta, vandana  /  he dharmajyoti,
AcAryapravara tumako he Azukavi, yahA~ saralahRdayabana, kiyA dayA kA nava
guMjana  //  pAkara pAda-padmoM kA sparza, antara ko nUtana bhAva maiM klAnta
hRdaya calakara AyA, usI mahA-viTapa kI chA~va tale  //  mile  /  so'ham bhAva
ko jAgratakara, jaga-pIr3A kA kiyA yaha kRti samarpaNa tumheM deva, mana-mastaka
karatA punaH namana  //  hanana  /  jo kalama Apane dI mujhako, yaha usakA svAmI
! pratiphala hai  /  jo bhAgIrathI bahAI tumane, kalakala hai  //  yaha racanA
usakA V - AcArya sudarzana muni

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra (Published)  India has always been a land of
religion. Here, the traditions of the Shramanas and the Brahmanas have been
dominant. The Brahmanical tradition followed the Vedas - the Veda was its
primary scripture, while the scriptures of the Buddhists within the Shraman
tradition were called 'Pitaka' and the scriptures of the Jains were called
'Agam'.  Of the Agams available today, the eleven Anga Shastras were taught by
Lord Mahavira and compiled by his chief disciples - the Ganadharas. The main
area of Lord Mahavira's travels was the Magadha country (present-day Bihar
state), so it was natural for these Agams to be compiled in the Ardhamagadhi
language used there. For a long time after Mahavira, this Agam knowledge
remained safe in the Shruta tradition, but gradually, due to memory weakness,
errors began to creep in. Therefore, during the time of Devarddigni
Kshamashraman, all the Agam literature was written down.  To clarify and explain
in detail all the principles and teachings described in the Agams, later
Acharyas wrote Churnis, Bhashyas and Tikas. The Tika literature was in Sanskrit,
which, due to its grammatical complexity, became inaccessible to the common
people over time - its reading and study became less and less. As a result, many
Sadhus, Sadhvis, Shravaks and Shravikas were unable to fulfill their desire to
know the Agamic principles. Due to their lack of knowledge of Sanskrit and
Prakrit, they found it difficult to understand the essence of the Agams.
Reverend Vallabhmuni Ji M.Sa., the Prabhakar of Pravachans, felt this particular
lack while teaching his resident small Munis and obedient Sadhvis. A thought
arose in his mind: why not translate these Sanskrit Tikas into the national
language Hindi, which could be enjoyed by all? At that time, there was a stir in
his thought world. He also had the Tikas compiled for the fulfillment of the
goal, but due to his untimely demise, this thought could not take concrete form
in his lifetime.  Thereafter, Acharya Pravara Reverend Sudarshanlal Ji M.Sa. and
the eloquent speaker Reverend Priyadarshanmuni Ji M.Sa., while studying with the
renowned scholar Shriman Dr. Chaganlal Ji Sa. Shastri, also felt this lack and
presented their idea of translating these Tikas into Hindi to the Swadhyaya-
Shiromani, Reverend Acharya Pravara Shri Sohनलाल Ji M.Sa. Reverend Acharya
Pravara, recognizing the importance of this work, granted permission to publish
the translations of the Tikas written by Sheelankacharya and Abhaydev Suri of
the eleven Anga Shastras.  This is the fruit of the blessings of Reverend
Acharya Pravara Shri Sohनलाल Ji M.Sa. and the hard work of the present Acharya
Shri Sudarshanlal Ji M.Sa. and the eloquent speaker Reverend Priyadarshanmuni Ji
M.Sa., that the work was started immediately as planned and, under the advice
and guidance of the learned scholar Reverend Dr. Chaganlal Ji Sa. Shastri, the
translation of the Tika written by Sheelankacharya of the first Shruta Skandha
of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra has come to light. We are immensely happy to
dedicate this to the readers of the Agam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  ( prakAzakIya bhAratavarSa sadA se dharmapradhAna
deza rahA hai  /  yahA~ zramaNa evaM brAhmaNa paramparA kI pradhAnatA rahI  /
brAhmaNa paramparA vedAnugAmI thI - veda usakA pramukha dharmazAstra thA jabaki
zramaNa paramparAntargata bauddhoM ke dharmazAstra 'piTaka' evaM jainoM ke
dharmazAstra 'Agama' kahalAte the  /  _ vartamAna meM upalabdha AgamoM meM se
gyAraha aMga zAstra bhagavAna mahAvIra dvArA upadiSTa evaM unake pradhAna ziSyoM
- gaNadharoM dvArA saMgrathita haiM  /  prabhu mahAvIra kA vicaraNa-kSetra
mukhyataH magadha deza (vartamAna meM bihAra rAjya) rahA ataH vahA~ prayukta
hone vAlI ardhamAgadhI bhASA meM ina AgamoM kA saMgrathana honA svAbhAvika thA
/  mahAvIra ke kAphI samaya bAda taka yaha Agama - jJAna zruta-paramparA se
surakSita rahA kintu zanaiH zanaiH smRti-daurbalya ke kAraNa usameM bhUla
par3ane lagI ataH devarddhigaNi kSamAzramaNa ke samaya samasta Agama-sAhitya ko
pustakAruDha kiyA gayA  /  AgamoM meM varNita samasta siddhAntoM va upadezoM kI
spaSTatA va vizada vyAkhyA ke lie paravartI AcAryoM dvArA cUrNi, bhASya evaM
TIkAeM likhI gaI  /  TIkA-sAhitya saMskRta bhASA meM thA jo apanI vyAkaraNika
jaTilatA ke kAraNa kAlAntara meM sAmAnya janatA ke lie agrAhya ho gaI - usakA
paThana-pAThana alpa se alpatara hotA gayA  /  isakA pariNAma huA ki aneka
sAdhu-sAdhvI evaM zrAvaka-zrAvikA Agamika tatvajJAna kI jijJAsA - pUrti meM
asamartha rahane lage  /  saMskRta va prAkRta ke jJAna kI nyUnatA ke kAraNa
unheM AgamoM kA marma samajhane meM kaThinAI hone lagI  /  pravacana-prabhAkara
zraddheya vallabhamuni jI ma.sA. ne apane antevAsI laghu muniyoM va
AjJAnuvartinI sAdhviyoM ko adhyayana karAte samaya isakI vizeSa kamI mahasUsa kI
/  unake mana meM eka bhAvanA jagI ki kyoM na ina saMskRta TIkAoM kA rASTrabhASA
hindI meM anuvAda karAyA jAya jo sarvajana bhogya bana sake  /  usa samaya unake
vicAra-jagat meM eka halacala rahI  /  lakSyapUrti ke lie unhoMne TIkAoM kA
saMkalana bhI karAyA kintu asamaya meM hI unake kAladharma ko prApta ho jAne se,
yaha vicAra, unake jIvanakAla meM mUrtarUpa nahIM le sakA  /  tatpazcAt
AcAryapravara zraddheya sudarzanalAla jI ma.sA. evaM ojasvI vaktA zraddheya
priyadarzanamuni jI ma.sA. ne bhI labdhapratiSTha vidvAn zrImAn DaoN.
chaganalAla jI sA. zAstrI se adhyayana karate samaya yahI kamI mahasUsa kI evaM
ina TIkAoM kA hindI meM anuvAda karAne kA apanA vicAra svAdhyAya-ziromaNi,
zraddheya AcAryapravara zrI sohanalAla jI ma.sA. kI sevA meM prastuta kiyA  /
zraddheya AcArya pravara ne bhI isa kArya kI upAdeyatA mAnate hue gyAraha
aGgazAstroM kI zIlaMkAcArya evaM abhayadeva sUri racita TIkAoM kA anuvAda
prakAzita karAne kI svIkRti pradAna kii| zraddheya AcAryapravara zrI sohanalAla
jI ma.sA. ke zubhAzIrvAda evaM vartamAna AcAryazrI sudarzanalAla jI ma.sA. va
ojasvI vaktA zraddheya priyadarzana muni jI ma.sA. ke parizrama kA hI yaha
suphala hai ki tatkAla yojanAnusAra kArya prAraMbha kiyA gayA evaM vidvadvareNya
zraddheya DaoN. chaganalAla jI sA. zAstrI ke parAmarza va mArgadarzanAnusAra
sUtrakRtAGga sUtra ke prathama zrutaskaMdha kI zIlaMkAcAryakRta TIkA kA anuvAda
prakAza meM AyA  /  Agama ke pAThakoM ko ise samarpita karate hue Aja hameM
apAra harSa hai  /  vi

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This manuscript of the commentary on the Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra has been
prepared with dedicated efforts by our esteemed friends Shri Amolkachand Ji Sa.
Hingad, Ajmer and Shri Mahendrakumar Ji Sa. Khabia, Pisangan. Shri Amolkachand
Ji Sa. has also proofread it. We express our heartfelt gratitude for your
affectionate support.  This translation was completed during the Chaturmas of
Acharya Pravar in Ajmer and it was decided to release it on January 24, 99, on
the occasion of the Acharya-Pad-Chadar Samarpana ceremony. Neo Block & Prints,
headed by Shri Jitendra Ji Patni 'Pintu Ji', has worked tirelessly to complete
the printing process in this short period and make it available to all. We
express our heartfelt gratitude to him as well.  During the Chaturmas period,
young colleagues like Shri Vinaykumar Ji Barmecha, Nihalchand Ji Sa. Chaudhary,
Rupchand Ji Sa. Bohra, etc., have given their valuable suggestions by reading
the manuscript again and again to enhance the beauty of the text and make it
useful for the readers. This has further enhanced its usefulness and external
appearance. I consider it my duty to express my gratitude to them. Shri A. Bha.
Prajna Jain Yuva Mandal's President Shri Prakashchand Ji Sa. Jamdar and Minister
Shri Gyanchand Ji Sa. Bafna and their young colleagues have encouraged us from
time to time and provided necessary support, making this publication possible.
Therefore, they are also worthy of thanks.  How can I express my gratitude to
the honorable scholar Dr. Chaganlal Ji Sa. Shastri in words? You are our loved
ones, our guide as a creative thinker in this large family. His vast knowledge
has always been an inspiration in the completion of this translation work. Even
though you were not in perfect health, I express my heartfelt gratitude with a
hundred bows for the guidance you provided.  I also express my heartfelt
gratitude to our loved ones, our supreme Guru devotees, the embodiment of faith
and service, Shri Nitinkumarji Kavdia (Saddiwale) Delhi, Shri Inderchand Ji Sa.
Harkavat Jaipur, Shri Budhraj Ji Sa. Lunawat, Bijaynagar, Shri Jabarchand Ji Sa.
Chordia, Medtacity, Shri Roshanlal Ji Sa. Khatod Sareri and Shri Gyanchand Ji
Sa. Singhavi Bijaynagar, who have presented their wealth to bring this
commentary to light, demonstrating their unparalleled devotion to the
scriptures. Their devotion to the teachings of the Jinas and their faith are
exemplary for us. Bowing to their service, study and affection!  Many thanks and
gratitude to all those who have directly and indirectly contributed to its
publication by offering their blessings and encouraging us. Enough said.
Nemichand Khabia Minister, Gulabpura Shri Shwe. Sta. Jain Swadhyayi Sangh, Dt.
24.1.99 Gulabpura vii

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram prastuta TIkAnuvAda kI pAMDulipi taiyAra karane meM
suhRdavara zrImAn amolakacanda jI sA. hIMgar3a, ajamera evaM zrImAn
mahendrakumAra jI sA. khAbiyA, pIsAMgana vAloM ne samarpita bhAva se parizrama
kiyA hai| zrImAn amolakacaMda jI sA. ne to isakA prUpha-saMzodhana bhI kiyA hai
/  Apake snehapUrNa sahayoga ke lie hArdika AbhAra prakaTa karate haiM  /
AcAryapravara ke ajamera cAturmAsa meM hI yaha anuvAda taiyAra ho cukA thA evaM
AcArya-pada-cAdarasamarpaNa samAroha ke avasara para dinAGka 24 janavarI, 99 ko
ise lokArpita karane kA nizcaya kiyA jA cukA thA  /  isa alpa avadhi meM isakA
mudraNa kArya saMpanna kara ise sava-jana ke lie upalabdha karAne meM nio
blaoNka eNDa priNTsa ke adhyakSa zrI jitendra jI pATanI 'pinTU jI' ne athaka
parizrama kiyA hai ataH unake prati bhI hArdika AbhAra prakaTa karate haiM  /
/  cAturmAsa kAla meM pANDulipi ko punaH punaH par3hakara grantha kI zobhAvRddhi
ke lie evaM pAThakoM ke lie upayogI banAne kI dRSTi se zrImAn vinayakumAra jI
baramecA, nihAlacaMda jI sA. caudharI, rUpacanda jI sA. boharA prabhRti yuvA
sAthiyoM ne apane amUlya sujhAva die hai jisase isakI upAdeyatA va bahirsajjA
adhika bar3ha gaI hai ataH unake prati kRtajJatA prakaTa karanA maiM apanA
karttavya mAnatA hU~  /  zrI a. bhA. prAjJa jaina yuvA maNDala ke adhyakSa
zrImAn prakAzacaMda jI sA. jAmar3a evaM maMtrI zrImAn jJAnacaMda jI sA. bAphaNA
va unake yuvA sAthiyoM ne samaya-samaya para hameM utsAhita kara va Avazyaka
sahayoga pradAna kara isakA prakAzana saMbhava banAyA hai ataH ve bhI
dhanyavAdAha haiM  /  _mAnanIya vidvadvareNya DaoN. chaganalAla jI sA. zAstrI kA
AbhAra kina zabdoM meM vyakta karU~  /  Apa hamAre AtmIya haiM, isa vRhat
parivAra ke eka sRjanazIla-cintaka ke rUpa meM hamAre mArgadarzaka haiM  /
unakI bahujJatA, isa anuvAda kArya kI saMpannatA meM sadaiva preraka rahI hai  /
svAsthya kI pUrNa anukUlatA nahIM hote hue bhI ApakA jo patha-pradarzana milA
usake prati zatazaH namanapUrvaka hArdika zraddhAbhivyakti karate hue AbhAra
prakaTa karatA hU~  /  hamAre, apane AtmIya, parama gurubhakta, zraddhA evaM
sevA kI sAkAra pratimA zrImAn nitinakumArajI kAvar3iyA (sAdar3I vAle) dillI,
zrImAn indaracaMda jI sA. harakAvata jayapura, zrImAn budharAja jI sA. lUNAvata,
bijayanagara, zrImAn jabaracaMda jI sA. coraDiyA, mer3atAsiTI, zrImAn rozanalAla
jI sA. khaTor3a sarerI evaM zrImAn jJAnacaMda jI sA. siMghavI bijayanagara vAloM
kA bhI hRdaya se AbhAra mAnatA hU~ jinhoMne apane dravya kA sadvyayakara
prastuta TIkAnuvAda ko prakAza meM lAkara apUrva zrutabhakti kA paricaya diyA
hai  /  unakI jinavANI-anuraktatA evaM AsthA hamAre lie anukaraNIya haiM  /
unakI sevA, svAdhyAya evaM vAtsalyabhAva ke prati namana ! pratyakSa aura
parokSa rUpa se jinhoMne bhI isake prakAzana meM apanI zubhakAmanAeM
samarpitakara hamArA utsAhavarddhana kiyA, una sabhI ke prati anekAneka
sAdhuvAdapUrvaka kRtajJatA-jJApana  /  ityalam  /  nemIcanda khAbiyA maMtrI
gulAbapurA zrI zve. sthA. jaina svAdhyAyI saMgha, di. 24.1.99 gulAbapurA vii

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra (Editorial Note)  The Jain Agamas hold an
extraordinary significance in the religious and spiritual literature of the
world from many perspectives. This is a very ancient literature that records the
vibrant journey of the upward-moving consciousness of humanity. It contains the
story of the pursuit and attainment of supreme peace, not finding true peace in
material wealth, splendor, and luxury. It is through this that weary humanity
experienced the realization of oneself and the Supreme Being, experiencing
unparalleled detachment and peaceful emotions.  These Agamas contain a detailed
account of both worldly and otherworldly life. From an otherworldly perspective,
they depict the sacred emotions of vows, restraint, truth, non-violence, non-
possession, contentment, etc., while also containing a detailed history of human
life spanning thousands of years. From both spiritual and worldly perspectives,
they contain abundant material for study. This significance and utility is the
reason why many Acharyas and wise saints after Bhagwan Mahavira have produced a
vast amount of commentary, analysis, and explanatory literature on the Agamas in
the form of commentaries, interpretations, summaries, and annotations. The
Sanskrit commentaries written on the Agamas are of great importance from the
perspective of multifaceted analysis and clarification of the principles
enunciated and indicated in the Agamas.  It is a matter of great joy that there
has been a widespread dissemination of knowledge in the field of study. Some
time ago, people were not interested in studying the literature of other
religions besides their own accepted religion. This is not the case today.
People have developed an interest in studying other philosophies and religious
principles. In many universities and institutes, a group of researchers is
engaged in research on Jain philosophy, culture, religion, Agamas, etc. Jain
Chairs have been established in many universities. Departments of Jain Studies
are running in educational centers like Madras University, Udaipur University,
Magadh University, etc., where students and researchers are engaged in study and
research. This is a favorable time when world-renowned ideas based on many
principles of Jain philosophy can be made scholarly and accessible to the
public, so high-quality Jain literature should come to light.  There is a lot of
publication of literature in the present time, but there is very little
literature related to the Agamas and the Agamas. There is a great need for
Agamic literature to understand philosophy and principles, but due to less
interest in Agamic literature, general literature full of stories, discourses,
hymns, etc., is more visible, or it can be said that unnecessary things are
being encouraged more than necessary.  It was the heartfelt desire of our
revered Acharya, the worshipful Gurudev Shri Sohनलाल जी म.सा., and the discourse
luminary, the worshipful Vallabhmuni जी म.सा., that we should have the Agamas
along with the Agamic commentaries.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram (sampAdakIya udgAra zAsana gaurava, AcAryapravara zrI
sudarzanalAla jI ma.sA. vizva ke dhArmika kiMvA AdhyAtmika vAGmaya meM
ardhamAgadhI jainAgamoM kA aneka dRSTiyoM se asAdhAraNa mahattva hai  /  yaha
vaha atyanta prAcIna sAhitya hai jisameM mAnava kI urdhvamukhI cetanA kI jIvanta
vikAsayAtrA kA lekhA-jokhA hai  /  bhautika sampadA, vaibhava aura vilAsitA meM
saccI zAnti kA anubhava na kara usa paramazAMti ke prayAsa aura upalabdhi kI
vaha gAthA inameM hai, jisase parizrAnta mAnava ko apane ApakA va paramAtmA kA
sAkSAtkAra huA, anupama nirveda aura prazAnta bhAva kA anubhava huaa| aihika
aura pAralaukika jIvana kA vizada lekhA-jokhA inameM hai  /  pAralaukika dRSTi
se jahA~ vrata, saMyama, satya, ahiMsA, aparigraha, santoSa Adi pavitra bhAvoM
kA citraNa hai vahIM sahasroM varSoM ke janajIvana kA vistRta itivRtta bhI
inameM hai, adhyAtma aura loka - ina donoM hI dRSTiyoM se inameM vipula adhyeya
sAmagrI hai  /  yaha mahanIyatA aura upayogitA hI vaha kAraNa hai jisase
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke uttaravatI aneka AcAryoM aura manISI saMtoM ne niyukti,
bhASya, cUrNi, TIkA Adi kI dRSTi se AgamoM para vipula parimANa meM vivecana,
vizleSaNa evaM vyAkhyAmUlaka sAhitya kA praNayana kiyA  /  AgamoM meM saMsUcita,
sAMketita siddhAntoM ke bahumukhI vizleSaNa aura vizadIkaraNa kI dRSTi se AgamoM
para racI gaI saMskRta TIkAoM kA atyanta mahattva hai  /  - yaha bar3e harSa kA
viSaya hai ki adhyayana ke kSetra meM Aja vyApakatA kA saMcAra huA hai  /  kucha
samaya pUrva apane svIkRta dharma ke atirikta itara dharmoM ke sAhitya ke
adhyayana meM loga aruci rakhate the  /  Aja vaisA nahIM hai  /  logoM meM anya
darzanoM aura dharma siddhAntoM ke adhyayana meM abhirUci utpanna huI hai  /
aneka vizvavidyAlayoM evaM vidyApIThoM meM aura jaina darzana, saMskRti, dharma,
Agama ityAdi viSayoM para anusaMdhitsuvRnda zodhakArya meM saMlagna hai  /
aneka vizvavidyAlayoM meM jaina pITha - Jain Chairs saMsthApita haiM  /  madrAsa
vizvavidyAlaya, udayapura vizvavidyAlaya, magadha vizvavidyAlaya Adi vidyA-
kendroM meM jaina-vidyA ke vibhAga cala rahe haiM, jahA~ vidyArthI-
anusaMdhAnArthI adhyayana evaM zodhakArya meM saMlagna haiM  /  yaha anukUla
samaya hai jaba jainadarzana ke aneka siddhAntoM para Azrita vizvajanIta vicAroM
ko vidvadbhogya evaM lokabhogya banAyA jA sakatA hai, ataH ucca koTi kA jaina-
sAhitya prakAza meM AnA cAhie  /  vartamAna samaya meM sAhitya kA prakAzana to
bahuta ho rahA hai, para usameM Agama evaM AgamoM se saMbaMdhita sAhitya atyalpa
hai  /  darzana evaM siddhAnta ko samajhane hetu Agamika sAhitya kI atyadhika
AvazyakatA hai, kintu Agamika rUci kama hone se kathA, pravacana, bhajanAdi se
paripUrNa sAmAnya sAhitya hI adhika dRSTigocara hotA hai yA yoM kahA jAye ki
AvazyakatA ko gauNa kara anAvazyaka ko adhika protsAhana diyA jA rahA hai  /
ArAdhyadeva zraddheya AcAryapravara pUjya gurudeva zrI sohanalAla jI ma.sA. evaM
pravacana prabhAkara zraddheya vallabhamuni jI ma.sA. kI yaha hArdika abhilASA
thI ki hameM AgamoM ke sAtha Agamika TIkAoM kA (viii

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra was studied. After the
passing of revered Gurudev Shri Vallabhmuni Ji M.Sa., my feelings were expressed
to the eminent scholar Dr. Chaganlal Ji Shastri. Dr. Shastriji readily accepted
the heartfelt and emotional outpouring of Gurudev and dedicated himself to
teaching. The study began with the commentary on the Sutra Kritanga Sutra by
Acharya Sheelank. This commentary analyzes the Agam from a philosophical
perspective. The commentator, taking the basis of ancient Niyukti and Churni
literature, has clarified and strengthened the profound subject of Agam with new
arguments. In fact, this commentary by Acharya Sheelank is unique for
understanding a philosophical Agam like the Sutra Kritanga.  During the study, I
had the idea that special work should be done on the eleven Angas, which are the
primary sources of Jain knowledge. In this regard, I discussed this with the
eminent scholar, a profound student of Jain Agam-Darshan, Shriyut Dr. Chaganlal
Ji Shastri, who has been involved in our teaching and continues to be so. He
found my idea very appropriate and beneficial. We also discussed this with all
our Sadhus and Sadhvis.  As a result of this brainstorming, it seemed
appropriate to all that the commentaries of Acharya Sheelank on the Acharang and
Sutra Kritanga Sutras, and the commentaries of Abhaydev Suri on the remaining
nine Angas, be published in Hindi translation. Hindi is the national language of
India, and most people in the country speak, write, and read in this language.
In North India and Central India, almost all universities offer higher education
in Hindi medium. Literature published in Hindi can be used by everyone.
Therefore, on the auspicious occasion of Akshaya Tritiya, in the memory of
Swadhyaya Shiromani Ashukaviratna, Agam Varidhi, Paramaraadhya Acharya Pravar
Pujya Gurudev Shri Sohनलाल Ji M.Sa., at the Super Sincotex India Ltd. Mills of
Shri Bhimsingh Ji Sancheti, it was decided to publish the Hindi translation of
these commentaries. This important work was found very useful by the scholarly
world, and it gave us a sense of satisfaction.  In the Ajmer Chaturmas of Samvat
2055, we had the desire to have Shriyut Dr. Chaganlal Ji Shastri's presence for
all four months for study. It gives us a sense of spiritual joy to express that
Dr. Shastriji, setting aside his other programs, gave us four months of his
time. Our study continued, and Dr. Shastriji and Muni Priyadarshan Ji undertook
the translation of the commentary by Acharya Sheelank on the first Shruta
Skandha of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra. The work was very extensive, and we
wondered if it could be completed within the Chaturmas period. But by the grace
of Paramaraadhya Gurudev Shri and the tireless efforts of Muni Priyadarshan Ji,
this work was completed in a very appropriate manner.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram bhI adhyayana karavAyA jAye  /  pUjya gurudeva zrI ne
zraddheya vallabhamuni jI ma.sA. ke svargavAsa ke bAda vidvajjagata ke mUrdhanya
manISI DaoN. chaganalAla jI zAstrI ke sammukha apane bhAvodgAra prakaTa kie  /
DaoN. zAstrIjI ne bhI gurudeva ke AtmIya evaM bhAva vihvala udgAra ko sahaja -
svIkRta kara liyA aura adhyApana meM samarpita ho gae  /  sarvaprathama
sUtrakRtAGga sUtra kI zIlAGkAcAryakRta TIkA kA hI adhyayana prAraMbha kiyA...
gayA  /  isa TIkA meM Agama kA dArzanika dRSTi se vizleSaNa hai  /  TIkAkAra ne
prAcIna niyukti va cUrNi sAhitya kA AdhAra lete hue nae-nae hetuoM dvArA Agama
ke gahana viSaya ko aura adhika spaSTatA dete hue, puSTa kiyA hai  /  vastutaH
sUtrakRtAGga jaise dArzanika Agama ko samajhane ke lie AcArya zIlAGka kI yaha
TIkA advitIya hai  /  adhyayana ke daurAna mere mana meM aisA vicArodbhAvana huA
ki gyAraha aGgoM para jo jaina vidyA ke mUla srota hai - vizeSa kArya kiyA jAye
/  isa sambandha meM vidvad- mUrdhanya, jaina Agama-darzana ke gahana adhyetA
zrIyut DaoN. chaganalAla jI zAstrI, kA jo hamAre adhyApana meM nirata rahe haiN|
- Aja bhI hai ke samakSa yaha carcA calI  /  unako merA vicAra bahuta hI
upayukta evaM lAbhapradalagA  /  hamane, apane sabhI sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke sAtha
bhI isa para vicAra-vimarza kiyA  /  - isa vicAra-maMthana ke pariNAmasvarUpa
sabhI ko aisA samIcIna pratIta huA ki zIlAGkAcArya kRta AcArAMga tathA
sUtrakRtAGga sUtra kI TIkAoM kA tathA abhayadeva sUri kRta zeSa nau aGgoM kI
TIkAoM kA hindI anuvAda prakAza meM lAyA jAya  /  hindI bhArata kI rASTrabhASA
hai, deza meM adhikatama loga isI bhASA meM bolate haiM evaM likhate-par3hate
haiM  /  uttara bhArata evaM madhya - bhArata meM prAyaH sabhI vizvavidyAlayoM
meM hindI mAdhyama se uccatama adhyayana ho rahA hai  /  hindI bhASA meM
prakAzita sAhitya sabake upayoga meM A sakatA hai  /  ataeva gata akSaya tRtIyA
ke pAvana prasaGga para zrI bhImasiMha jI saMcetI kI supara sinkoTeksa iNDiyA
li. milsa meM svAdhyAya ziromaNi Azukaviratna, Agama vAridhi, paramArAdhya
AcAryapravara pUjya gurudeva zrI sohanalAla jI ma.sA. kI puNya smRti meM ina
TIkAoM ke hindI anuvAda ko prakAza meM lAne kA nirNaya kiyA  /  yaha
mahattvapUrNa kArya vidvajjagat ko bahuta hI upayogI lagA, isase hameM
AtmaparitoSa milaa| saM. 2055 ke ajamera cAturmAsa meM hamArI yaha bhAvanA rahI
ki adhyayanArtha zrIyut DaoN. chaganalAla jI zAstrI kA hameM cAroM mAha yoga
prApta ho  /  hameM yaha vyakta karate hue AdhyAtmika ullAsa kI anubhUti hotI
hai ki DaoN. zAstrI jI ne apane anyAnya kAryakramoM ko chor3akara cAra hI mAha
kA samaya diyA  /  hamArA adhyayana to calA hI, sAtha hI sAtha DaoN. zAstrIjI
evaM muni priyadarzana jI ne sUtrakRtAGga sUtra ke prathama zrutaskaMdha kI
zIlAGkAcArya kRta TIkA ke anuvAda kA kArya hAtha meM liyo  /  kArya bahuta
vistRta thA, hama socate the ki kyA yaha kArya cAturmAsAvadhi meM sampanna ho
sakegA ? kintu paramArAdhya gurudevazrI kI kRpA se evaM muni priyadarzana jI ke
athaka parizrama se yaha kArya bar3e hI samIcIna rUpa se sampanna ho gayA  /  ix

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This translation of the Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra is presented as a glimpse into
the study. The study should not be limited to oneself, but should also be
helpful for other seekers of Agamas. Therefore, an attempt has been made to
prepare the translation in a written form along with making it heart-felt. This
translation is the result of the hard work of Shri Priyadarshan Muni Ji, who is
helpful in Sangha Seva, and Dr. Chaganlal Ji Shastri, who is helpful in Shruta
Aradhana. By working towards this, you have done an unparalleled work of Shruta
Aradhana, for which they deserve heartfelt congratulations. And in the future
too, the same expectation is from both of them that they continue to move
forward in Shruta Aradhana in the form of study and teaching. As I got the
opportunity, I read the entire translation from beginning to end and also gave
necessary instructions and comments. I am very pleased to write that the
translation is in modern, clear Hindi and in a refined style. Those who read
with the Sanskrit commentary will benefit greatly from it, and the translation
has been done in such a flowing style that even Hindi readers will be able to
assimilate the Agamic secrets revealed by the commentator. This book will prove
to be a strong support for the inquisitive people of the spiritual world. It
will serve as an unparalleled provision in the great journey of the soul towards
Nirvana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram yaha anuvAda adhyayana kI jhalaka ke rUpa meM prastuta
hai  /  adhyayana svayaM taka hI sImita na rahe, anya Agama-pipAsuoM ke lie bhI
sahayogI ho, isa hetu anuvAda hRdayaMgama karane ke sAtha likhita rUpa meM bhI
taiyAra karane kA prayAsa kiyA hai  /  yaha anuvAda saMghasevA meM sahayogI zrI
priyadarzana muni jI evaM zrutArAdhanA meM sahayogI DaoN. chaganalAla jI zAstrI
ke parizrama kA hI supariNAma hai  /  isa ora parizrama kara Apane zrutArAdhanA
kA apratima kArya kiyA hai, etadartha unheM hArdika sAdhuvAda  /  evaM bhaviSya
meM bhI donoM se yahI AkAMkSA hai ki adhyayana-adhyApanarUpa zrutArAdhanA meM
nirantara agrasara hoM  /  mujhe jyoM-jyoM avasara milA, maiMne sampUrNa anuvAda
ko AdyopAnta par3hA evaM Avazyaka nirdeza va TippaNiyAM bhI dI  /  mujhe yaha
likhate hue atyanta paritoSa hotA hai ki anuvAda Adhunika prAMjala hindI meM va
pariniSThita zailI meM huA hai  /  saMskRta TIkA ke sAtha par3hane vAloM ko to
isase vizeSa lAbha hogA hI, sAtha hI anuvAda aisI pravAhazIla zailI meM kiyA
gayA hai ki hindI meM par3hane vAle bhI TIkAkAra dvArA udghATita Agamika
rahasyoM ko AtmasAt kara skeNge| prastuta graMtha AdhyAtmika jagata ke jijJAsuoM
ke lie eka saMbala siddha hogA  /  AtmA kI nirvANonmukhI mahanIya yAtrA meM yaha
apUrva pAtheya kA kAma degA  /

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shriman Jabarchandji Sa. Chordia and Dh.P. Shrimati Pistabaiji Chordia Shriman
Nitinkumarji Sa. Kavdia and Dh.P. Shrimati Sajjanbaiji Kavdia

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrImAn jabaracaMdajI sA. corar3iyA evaM dha.pa. zrImatI pistAbAIjI coraDiyA
zrImAn nitinakumArajI sA. kAvar3iyA evaM dha.pa. zrImatI sajjanabAIjI kAvar3iyA

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shriman Roshanlalji Sa. Khatod and Dh.P. Shrimati Chanchalbaiji Khatod Shriman
Mohanlalji Sa. Lunawat Shriman Gulabchandji Sa. Lunawat Shrimati Jenibaiji
Sindhi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrImAn rozanalAlajI sA. khaTor3a evaM dha.pa. zrImatI caMcalabAIjI khaTor3a
zrImAn mohanalAlajI sA. lUNAvata zrImAn gulAbacaMdajI sA. lUNAvata zrImatI
jenIbAIjI siMdhavI

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Our Publication Collaborators  1. Shriman Jabarchand Ji Sa. Chordia, Medta
Grandson of Shriman Jeevraj Ji Sa. Chordia, resident of Bhairunda, and son of
Shriman Bhanwarlal Ji Sa. Chordia, Shriman Jabarchand Ji Sa. Chordia is a
generous, hardworking, and devout Shravak. He has always been dedicated to the
Nanak lineage. He has gained remarkable popularity in the business world for his
authenticity and efficiency, and in the religious and social world for his
selfless and generous nature. His wife, Shrimati Pista Kanwarbaiji, is also a
devout woman. His four sons, Shriman Gyanchandji, Sujitkumarji, Gautamchandji,
and Padamchandji, are also obedient, righteous, and enthusiastic young forces.
They are engaged in business in Medta, Ahmedabad, and Coimbatore. His two
daughters, Shrimati Kamlesh Ji Suriya (Bhilwara) and Shrimati Vimlesh Ji Ostwal
(Biyawar), are also well-mannered and devout, and have earned a leading position
in society through their religious interest.  2. Shriman Nitin Kumar Ji Sa.
Kavdia, Delhi The life of that person is blessed, whose mind possesses the
virtuous qualities of affection, goodwill, generosity, and austerity. When we
examine the life of the devout Shravak, Shriman Nitin Kumar Ji Sa. Kavdia,
against this criterion, his life appears to be supremely successful and
brilliant. He is originally from Saddi (Marwar). His father, Shriman Khubilalji
Sa. Kavdia, and mother, Shrimati Kamalabai Ji, were embodiments of compassion,
generosity, and religious devotion. The deep imprint of his simple nature,
philanthropic attitude, and kindness has also fallen on his son, Shriman Nitin
Kumar Ji. He has continuously progressed in his private business, Patel Angadiya
& Co., with integrity, determination, and efficiency. Like him, his wife,
Shrimati Sajjanbai Ji, is also a generous, devout, and ardent devotee of the
Guru. His uncle, Shriman Sampatrajji Sa., has a well-known business called
'Nutan Rajumani Transport'. His sons, Chi. Aashish and Saurabh, are well-
mannered and brilliant children.  3. Shriman Roshanlal Ji Sa. Khatod, Sareri
Shriman Roshanlal Ji Sa. Khatod, son of the supremely service-oriented, strong-
faith Shravak, Shriman Bhairulal Ji Sa. Khatod, is a resident of Sareri Bandh
(Bhilwara district). He is respected in society as a dutiful and enthusiastic
young man. His business experience, humble demeanor, and integrity have led to
the progress of his petrol pump business, known as 'Anand Filling Station'.
Being a young heart, he is also a member of the management committee of the A.B.
Prajna Jain Yuva Mandal.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hamAre prakAzana sahayogI 1. zrImAn jabaracaMda jI sA. corar3iyA, mer3atA
bhairUndA nivAsI zrImAn jIvarAja jI sA. corar3iyA ke pautra evaM zrImAn
bhaMvaralAla jI sA. corar3iyA ke suputra zrImAn jabaracaMda jI sA. corar3iyA eka
udAra, karmaTha evaM dharmaniSTha suzrAvaka haiM jinakA khyAtanAmA nAnaka vaMza
ke prati sadA se samarpaNa-bhAva rahA hai  /  vyAvasAyika jagata meM apanI
prAmANikatA evaM kAryakuzAlatA se evaM dhArmika va sAmAjika jagata meM apanI
tyAga-pradhAna udAra pravRti se spRhaNIya lokapriyatA prApta kI hai| ApakI
dharmapatnI zrImatI pistA kaMvarabAIjI bhI dharmAnAgiNI mahilA hai| Apake cAroM
suputra zrImAn jJAnacaMdajI, sujItakumArajI, gautamacaMdajI evaM padamacaMdajI
bhI AjJAkArI, dharmazIla va utsAhI yuvA-zAktiyA~ hai| jo mer3atA, ahamadAbAda va
koyambaTUra meM vyavasAyarata haiN| ApakI do suputriyA~-zrImati kamaleza jI
sUriyA (bhIlavAr3A) evaM zrImatI vimaleza jI ostavAla (byAvara) bhI saMskArazIla
evaM zraddhAsampanna hai tathA apanI dhArmika rUci se samAja meM agraNI sthAna
banAe hue hai| 2.zrImAna nitina kumAra jI sA.kAvar3iyA, dillI usI vyakti kA
jIvana ghanya hai, jisake mana meM sneha, sadbhAvanA, udAratA va tapa-tyAga kI
sAtvika vRttiyAM vidyamAna hoN|is kasauTI para jaba ham gharmaniSTha suzrAvaka
zrImAn nitina kumAra jI sA. kAvar3iyA kA jIvana parakhate hai to ApakA jIvana
parama yazasvI evaM tejasvI dRSTigata hotA hai| Apa mUlataH sAdar3I (maravAr3a)
ke nivAsI haiN| Apake pitA zrImAn khUbIlAlajI sA, kAvar3iyA evaM mAtA zrImatI
kamalAbAI jI karUNA, udAratA evaM dharmAnurAgitA kI sAkAra pratimA thii| Apake
sarala svabhAva, paropakArI vRtti evaM dayAlutA kI gaharI chApa Apake suputra
zrImAn nitina kumAra jI para bhI par3I aura Apa satyaniSThA, dRDhanizcaya evaM
kAryakuzalatA se nijI vyavasAya paTela AMgaDiyAM eNDa kaM. meM nirantara unnati
karate rhe| Apake samAna ApakI dharmapatnI zrImatI sajjanabAI jI bhI udAra,
dharmaniSTha va parama gurU bhakta mahilA hai| Apake kAkA sAhaba zrImAn
saMpatarAjajI sA. kA 'nUtana rAjumaNi TrAMsaporTa' nAma se vikhyAta vyavasAya
hai| Apake suputra ci. AzISa va saurabha acche saMskAra vAna meghAvI bAlaka
haiN| 3. zrImAn rozanalAla jI sA.khaTor3a, sarerI parama sevAzIla, sudRDha AsthA
vanta suzrAvaka zrImAn bhairUlAla jI sA. khaTor3a ke Atmaja zrImAn rozalalAla jI
sA. khaTor3a sarerI bAMdha (jilA bhIlavAr3A) ke nivAsI haiN| Apa
karttavyaniSTha, utsAhI navayuvaka ke rUpa meM samAja meM samAdRta hai| Apake
vyAvasAyika anubhava, vinamra vyavahAra evaM satyaniSThA se ApakA 'Ananda
philiMga sTezana' nAma se peTrola pampa kA vyavasAya unnati para haiN| yuvA-
hRdaya hone ke kAraNa Apa a. bhA. prAjJa jaina yuvA maMDala kI saMcAlana samiti
ke sadasya bhI haiN|

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Your mother, Mrs. Ejanbai Ji, was also a virtuous woman. Your wife, Mrs.
Chanchalbai Ji Khatod, is an ideal homemaker and takes great interest in
religious activities. Your entire family is traditionally dedicated to Acharya
Shri Sohan Lal Ji M. Sa. and the current Acharya Shri Sudarshanlal Ji M. Sa. 4.
Mr. Budhraj Ji Sa. Lunawat, Bijaynagar Bijaynagar (District-Ajmer), the owner of
the renowned firm - Mr. Mohanlal-Shobhagamal, Mr. Budhraj He is a good
religious, devout, visionary, sweet-spoken, generous person. Your hard work and
determination have made your business, which is spread across Bijaynagar,
Indore, Ahmedabad, etc., continuously progress. You also use the wealth earned
through hard work wisely in auspicious deeds. Your father, Mr. Mohanlal Ji Sa.
Lunawat, was also a devout and devout Shravak. Your elder brother, Mr.
Gulabchand Ji Sa. Lunawat, was the president of Shri Sangh Bijaynagar for
decades and gave full support with body, mind and wealth in the operation of
every institution ordained by the revered Guru Shri Pannalal Ji M. Sa. Mr.
Budhraj Ji Sa.'s virtuous life partner, Mrs. Chandkanwarbai Ji, is also an ideal
homemaker who believes in religion. Your sons, Mr. Mahendrakumar Ji, Mr.
Surendrakumar Ji, Mr. Rajendrakumar Ji and Mr. Narendra Kumar Ji are also
enthusiastic young people. Your entire family has complete dedication and firm
faith in the Nanak dynasty. 5. Mrs. Sobhag Kanwar Bai Ji Harkawat - Originally a
resident of Kishangarh, the wife of the late Mr. Motisingh Ji Sa. Harkawat, Mrs.
Sobhagkanwar Bai Ji is an ideal religious woman. You are known in society as a
selfless, generous, affectionate mother. Out of your five sons, Mr. Parsamal Ji
Sa. Harkawat is engaged in government service in Kishangarh itself. Mr.
Inderchand Ji Sa. Harkawat started his jewelry business in Jaipur and Mr.
Gautamchand Ji, Padamchand Ji and Gyanchand Ji are also involved in the same
business with you. Apart from Jaipur, your business is also flourishing in
Bangkok, etc. abroad. Mr. Inderchand Ji Sa. has been the treasurer of Shri
Subodh Jain Shiksha Samiti and is currently adorning the post of vice-president
of Shri Swadhyayi Sangh Gulabpura. 6. Mrs. Jenibai Ji Sindhi, Bijaynagar The
wife of the late Bhurallal Ji Sa. Singhi, a resident of Bijaynagar, Mrs. Jenibai
Ji Singhi is a devout ideal Shravak. She has guided the entire family with the
morality of her life, making them leaders in the field of service, culture and
generosity. Your son, Mr. Manakchand Ji Sa., has a prestigious and authentic
'Sarraf' business in Bijaynagar. Your grandson, Mr. Gyanchandji Singhi, is a
generous, hardworking and devout young man. You have also made immense progress
in the field of cement business and have been honored by the J.K. Group.
Currently, you are a minister in the Shri Nanak Jain Shravak Samiti Bijaynagar
and are a leader in the field of social service.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ApakI mAtAjI zrImatI ejanabAI jI bhI dharmazIlA mahilA thii| ApakI dharmapatnI
zrImatI caMcalabAI jI khaTor3a eka Adarza gRhiNI evaM dharma kAryoM meM paryApta
rUci lene vAlI hai| ApakA pUrA parivAra paraMparAtaH AcArya zrI sohana lAla jI
ma. sA. evaM vartamAna AcArya zrI sudarzanalAla jI ma. sA. ke prati pUrNataH
samarpita haiN| 4. zrImAna budharAja jI sA. lUNAvata, bijayanagara bijayanagara
(jilA-ajamera) kI vikhyAta pharma - zrImAn mohanalAla-zobhAgamala ke mAlika
zrImAn budharAja ta eka acche dhArmika, zraddhAzIla, dUradRSTi saMpanna, madhura
bhASI, udAra hRdayI vyakti haiN| ApakI parizramazIlatA evaM dRr3ha adhyavasAya
se bijayanagara, indaura, ahamadAbAda Adi kSetroM meM phailA huA vyavasAya
nirantara pragati para haiN| parizrama pUrvaka upArjita lakSmI kA Apa zubhakAryo
meM mukta dRsta se sadupayoga bhI karate haiN| Apake pitA zrImAn mohanalAla jI
sA. lUNAvata bhI parama gurUbhakta evaM zraddhAlu suzrAvaka the| Apake jyeSTha
bhrAtA zrImAn gulAbacaMda jI sA. lUNAvata dazAbdiyoM taka zrI saMgha
bijayanagara ke adhyakSa rahe evaM pUjya gurUvarya zrI pannAlAla jI ma. sA.
dvArA samupadiSTa pratyeka saMsthA ke saMcAlana meM samarpaNa bhAvoM se tana-
mana-dhana se bharapUra sahayoga dete rhe| zrImAn budharAja jI sA. kI dharmazIlA
jIvana-saMginI zrImatI cAMdakaMvarabAI jI bhI dharma para zraddhA rakhane vAlI
Adarza gRhiNI hai| Apake suputra zrI mahendrakumAra jI, zrI surendrakumAra jI,
zrI rAjendrakumAra jI va zrI narendrakumAra jI bhI utsAhI yuvAzakti hai| zrI
nAnaka vaMza ke prati Apake sampUrNa parivAra kA pUrNataH samarpaNa-bhAva va
dRDha zraddhA-bhakti rahI hai| 5. zrImatI sobhAga kaMvara bAI jI harakAvata
_mUlataH kizanagar3ha nivAsI sva. zrImAn motIsiMha jI sA. harakAvata kI
dharmapatnI zrImatI sobhAgakaMvara bAI jI eka Adarza dharmAnurAgiNI mahilA hai|
Apa sevAzIla, udAra hRdayI, bAtsalya mUrti mAtAjI ke rUpa meM samAja meM
samAhata haiN| Apake pA~ca putroM meM se zrImAn pArasamala jI sA. harakAvata
kizanagar3ha meM hI rAjakIya sevAoM meM saMlagna hai| zrImAna indaracaMda jI sA.
harakAvata ne jayapura meM Akara apanA jvelarI kA vyavasAya prAMrabha kiyA evaM
zrImAn gautamacaMda jI, padamacaMda jI va jJAnacaMda jI bhI Apake sAtha vahIM
vyavasAya meM saMlagna hai| jayapura ke atirikta videzoM meM bhI baiMkAka Adi
sthAnoM para ApakA vyavasAya unnati para hai| zrImAn indaracaMda jI sA. zrI
subodha jaina zikSA samiti ke koSAdhyakSa rahe hai tathA vartamAna meM zrI
svAdhyAyI saMgha gulAbapurA ke upAdhyakSa pada ko suzobhita kara rahe haiN| 6.
zrImatI jenIbAI jI siMdhavI, bijayanagara bijayanagara nivAsI sva. bhUrAlAla jI
sA. siMghavI kI dharmapatnI zrImatI jenIbAI jI siMghavI dharmaparAyaNA Adarza
suzrAvikA hai| unhone apane jIvana kI naitikatA se sampUrNa parivAra ko dizA-
nirdeza dekara sevA, saMskAra evaM udAratA ke kSetra meM agraNI bnaayaa| Apake
suputra zrImAna mANakacaMda jI sA. kA bijayanagara meM 'sarrApha' kA pratiSThita
evaM prAmANika vyavasAya hai| Apake supautra zrImAn jJAnacaMdajI siMghavI udAra,
karmaTha evaM dharmaniSTha honahAra yuvaka haiM  /  Apa sImenTa-vyavasAya ke
kSetra meM bhI apAra pragati kara je.ke samUha se sammAnita hue haiN| vartamAna
meM Apa zrI nAnaka jaina zrAvaka samiti bijayanagara ke maMtrI pada para
rahakara samAja-sevA ke kSetra meM agraNI bane hue haiN|

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra ### Introduction  Humanity has been in pursuit of
ultimate truth for a long time. Material pleasures, comforts, worldly
achievements, wealth, prosperity, and other attractive elements have always been
pursued by humans, and they continue to be pursued even today. However, they
have not been able to provide complete satisfaction, ultimate peace, supreme
happiness, or uninterrupted bliss. Even after attaining all these things, humans
have felt incomplete and unsatisfied.  This is because, while these things may
seem appealing on the surface, they ultimately prove to be bland, contradictory,
or prone to suffering. As contemplation progressed, humans sought a divine
spiritual joy that is absolute and entirely self-sufficient. There, all
disparities, adversities, and cycles of suffering are left behind, and
liberation from them is achieved. This is what is called liberation or moksha.
Thinkers and practitioners progressed further and further in the direction of
attaining it. They adopted Dharma as a means to achieve it. Dharma has been
interpreted in many ways. The nature of the soul is Dharma, the one who saves a
being fallen into misery is Dharma, the one that leads to worldly prosperity and
liberation is Dharma. This practical analysis is included in the Shruti and the
harmony of character, good conduct, and Dharma.  In the world, Dharma, Artha,
Kama, and Moksha are considered the four Purusharthas. No matter who you look
at, they are seen striving around these four. These four can be divided into two
pairs: Artha and Kama, and Dharma and Moksha. Artha and Kama are entirely
worldly or material, while Dharma and Moksha are spiritual or transcendental.
When Artha and Kama are disciplined and controlled by Dharma and Moksha, they
adopt a direction that leads them towards creation instead of destruction. This
is the essence of the philosophical discussions, speculations, contemplations,
and deliberations associated with Dharma. Where it progressed with this
emotional ground, it spread peace, universal brotherhood, equality, and harmony
in the world. Where this ideal was abandoned and mobility was based on narrow
and selfish ideologies, there were bloody conflicts and disturbances in the name
of Dharma, which can be called the dark pages of the history of righteousness.
India has been a predominantly religious country for a long time. Vedic, Jain,
and Buddhist are the main religions here. They have their own scriptures, their
own views, and their own codes of conduct. The Vedic tradition followers accept
the Vedas as their ultimate authoritative scriptures. The word Veda is derived
from the root "vid", which means knowledge. The Vedas contain many topics
related to worldly and otherworldly knowledge, explained in hymns and mantras.
Vedic followers do not consider the Rig, Yajur, Sama, and Atharva, this tetrad,
to be man-made. They call them Apaurusheya, meaning they are not the creations
of any particular person. The Supreme Father, the Supreme God, revealed the
knowledge in the hearts of the Rishis, which manifested in the form of various
hymns and mantras. Therefore, the Rishis are not called Mantra-srashta (creators
of mantras), but Mantra-drashta (seers of mantras).  The oldest scriptures of
the Buddhists are called Pitakas. They are known as Vinaya Pitaka, Sutta Pitaka,
and Abhidhamma Pitaka. These are taught by the Tathagata Buddha. According to
Buddhist followers, Buddha was an Arhat or an omniscient being.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram prastAvanA parama satya kI gavaiSaNA meM cirakAla se
mAnava cintanazIla rahA hai, bhautika sukha, suvidhAe~, laukika abhisiddhiyA~,
vaibhava, samRddhi Adi ke rUpa meM jo jo AkarSaka upAdAna prApta haiM, jinake
pIche mAnava sadA se daur3atA A rahA hai, Aja bhI daur3a rahA hai, paramazAMti,
paramasukha, avyAbAdha Ananda athavA tRpti ke sampUraka nahIM bana pAye, yaha
saba prApta kara lene para bhI mAnava ne apane ko apUrNa aura atRpta mAnA  /
kyoMki ye pratyakSa sarasa to rahe, kintu pariNAma meM sabhI virasa, viparIta yA
duHkhapravaNa siddha hue  /  cintana kA krama Age bar3hatA gayA, usake
pariNAmasvarUpa mAnava ne eka aise divya AdhyAtmika Ananda kI khoja kI, jo
paranirapekSa evaM sarvathA svasApekSa hai  /  vahA~ saba viSamatAe~,
pratikUlatAeM tathA kleza-paramparAeM chUTa jAtI hai, unase chuTakArA mila jAtA
hai  /  ataH use mukti yA mokSa ke nAma se abhihita kiyA gayA hai  /  cintaka
evaM sAdhaka use avApta karane kI dizA meM uttarottara Age bar3he  /  usake
sAdhana ke rUpa meM unhoMne dharma ko upAtta kiyA  /  dharma ko aneka prakAra se
vyAkhyAta kiyA gayA  /  AtmA kA svabhAva dharma hai, durgati me patita hote jIva
ko jo bacA le vaha dharma hai, jisase laukika abhyudaya evaM niHzreyas kI siddhi
ho vaha dharma hai| isakA vyAvahArika vivecana zruta evaM cAritra-sadbhAva evaM
sat caryA dharma hai, isa vizleSaNa meM samAviSTa hai  /  saMsAra meM dharma,
artha, kAma, mokSa ye cAra puruSArtha mAne gae hai, kisI ko bhI dekheM, vaha ina
cAroM ke irda girda prayatnazIla dRSTigocara hotA hai, ina cAroM ko artha evaM
kAma tathA dharma evaM mokSa ina do yugaloM meM bAMTA jA sakatA hai, artha evaM
kAma nitAnta saMsAraparaka yA bhautika hai, dharma aura mokSa AdhyAtmika yA
pAramArthika haiM  /  artha aura kAma jaba paramArtha, adhyAtma yA dharma evaM
mokSa se anuzAsita, niyaMtrita hote hai, taba ve aisI dizA ko apanAte hai, jo
vinAza ke badale nirmANa kI ora unheM le jAtI hai  /  dharma ke sAtha jur3e
tAtvika vimarza, uhApoha, cintana tathA paryAlocana kA yaha sAra hai  /  jahA~
vaha isa bhAva bhUmi ke sAtha Age bar3hA, usane saMsAra kI zAMti, vizva
bandhutva, samatva aura sauhArda kA saMprasAra kiyA  /  jahA~ isa Adarza kA
parityAga kara saMkIrNa tathA svArthaparAyaNa vicAradhArA ko lekara gatizIlatA
banI, vahA~ dharma ke nAma para aise raktapAta bahula saMgharSa evaM upadrava
hue jo dhArmikatA ke itihAsa ke kAle pRSTha kahe jA sakate hai| bhAratavarSa
cirakAla se eka dharmapradhAna deza rahA hai  /  vaidika, jaina evaM bauddha
yahA~ ke mukhya dharma hai, unake apane-apane zAstra hai, apane-apane mantavya
hai, apanI-apanI AcAravidhAeM hai  /  vaidika paramparAnuvartI vedo ko apane
parama prAmANika zAstra svIkAra karate hai, veda zabda vid dhAtu se banA hai,
jisakA artha jJAna hai  /  vedoM meM aihika, pAralaukika jJAna sambandhI aneka
viSaya RcAoM evaM maMtroM meM vyAkhyAta hue hai  /  vaidika dharmAnuyAyI Rk,
yajuH, sAma tathA atharva isa catuSTayI ko mAnavakRta nahIM mAnate, ve unhe
apauruSeya kahate hai, arthAt ve kisI puruSa vizeSa kI racanAeM nahIM hai  /
parama pitA paramezvara ne RSiyoM ke anta:karaNa meM jJAna kA udbhAsa kiyA, jo
vividha RcAoM aura mantroM ke rUpa meM prakaTa huA, isalie RSi mantrasraSTA
nahIM kahe jAte, mantra draSTA kahe jAte hai| bauddhoM ke prAcInatama zAstra
piTaka kahe jAte hai, ve vinaya piTaka, sutta piTaka evaM abhidhamma piTaka ke
nAma se prasiddha haiM  /  ye tathAgata buddha dvArA upadiSTa haiM, bauddha
dharmAnuyAyiyoM ke anusAra buddha arhat yA sarvajJa the| ( xi

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** is an ancient scripture of Jainism, known as
**Agamas**. The word **Agama** refers to a specific stream of knowledge that has
been passed down for a long time. **Agamas** are spoken by **Sarvagna
Tirthankaras**, a long chain of **Tirthankaras** divided into units of twenty-
four, connected to the **Utsarpini** and **Avasarpini** periods. The **twenty-
fourth** and final **Tirthankara** of the current **Avasarpini**, **Lord
Mahavira**, delivered the teachings that we have received in the form of **Jain
Agamas**.  **Lord Mahavira's** main area of work was the region that is
primarily part of present-day **Bihar**. At that time, the main languages spoken
in North India were **Magadhi, Ardha Magadhi, and Shaurseni Prakrit**. **Magadhi
Prakrit** was prevalent in **Magadh**, the southern part of **Bihar**.
**Shaurseni Prakrit** was prevalent in the western part of North India,
extending to the **Vraj Mandal** or **Mathura**. The language between
**Magadhi** and **Shaurseni** was called **Ardha Magadhi**, which had
characteristics of both **Magadhi** and **Shaurseni**. Therefore, it was a
language that could be understood by people living in **Magadhi, Shaurseni**,
and the intervening areas. It was a kind of **lingua franca** of the Prakrit
region, which is called **Lingua-Fvanca** in linguistics. **Lord Mahavira** used
**Ardha Magadhi** in his teachings. This is specifically mentioned in the
**Samavayanga Sutra**.  The **Dasha Vaikalik Vritti** also states that
**Tattvadarshis** (philosophers) presented the principles in **Prakrit** to
benefit children, women, elders, and ignorant people who desired **charitra-
dharmacharan** (righteous conduct). The main purpose of using **Ardha Magadhi**
in religious teachings was so that the listeners could easily understand the
teachings without any hindrance or need for an intermediary interpreter. The
**Aavashyak Niyukti** mentions that **Arhat-Tirthankaras** explain the meaning,
**Ganadharas** compile it skillfully in the form of **Sutras** for the welfare
of the **Dharma Sangha** (religious community), thus establishing the
**Sutras**.  The teachings delivered by **Lord Mahavira** and compiled by his
chief disciples, **Ganadharas**, are divided into the following **twelve
Angas**:  1. **Achar** 2. **Sutra Krit** 3. **Sthan** 4. **Samavay** 5.
**Vyakhya Prajnapti** 6. **Jnata Dharma Katha** 7. **Upasaka Dasha** 8.
**Antakrid Dasha** 9. **Anuttaraupapatik Dasha** 10. **Prashna Vyakaran** 11.
**Vipak** 12. **Drishtivad**  **2.**  **Lord Mahavira** taught in the **Ardha
Magadhi** language. This **Ardha Magadhi** language, spoken by **Tirthankaras**,
became the language of all **Aryan** beings, including **humans, animals, birds,
and reptiles**, for their own comfort and happiness. - **Samavayanga
Sutra-34.22.23**  For the benefit of children, women, elders, and ignorant
people who desire righteous conduct, philosophers presented the principles in
Prakrit. - **Dasha Vaikalik Vritti, page 223**  **Arhats** explain the meaning,
**Ganadharas** skillfully compile it into a **Sutra** for the welfare of the
**Dharma Sangha**. - **Aavashyak Niyukti 92**  **3.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram jaina dharma kA prAcIna sAhitya AgamoM ke nAma se
vikhyAta hai  /  Agama kA artha vaha jJAna kA viziSTa pravAha hai, jo dIrghakAla
se calA A rahA ho  /  Agama sarvajJa tIrthaMkaroM dvArA bhASita hai,
tIrthaMkaroM kI eka lambI zrRMkhalA hai, jo caubIsa-caubIsa kI IkAiyoM meM ba~TI
huI hai, utsarpiNI evaM avasarpiNI kAla se saMpRkta hai, vartamAna avasarpiNI ke
caubIsaveM - antima tIrthaMkara bhagavAna mahAvIra ne jo dharma dezanA dI vaha
jaina AgamoM ke rUpa meM hameM prApta hai| bhagavAna mahAvIra kA kAryakSetra
mukhyataH ve bhU-bhAga rahe, jo mukhyata: Aja ke bihAra ke antargata the| taba
uttara bhArata meM mukhyataH mAgadhI, arddha mAgadhI tathA zaurasainI Adi
prAkRta bhASAoM kA prasAra thA, magadha jo bihAra kA dakSiNI bhAga thA-meM
mAgadhI prAkRta pracalita thI, uttara bhArata meM-pazcimAMcala meM zaurasenI
prAkata kA pracalana thA, jo vraja maNDala yA mathurA taka vyApta the, ina
donoM-mAgadhI evaM zaurasainI ke bIca kI jo bhASA thI, use arddha mAgadhI kahA
jAtA thA, usameM mAgadhI evaM zaurasainI donoM ke lakSaNa milate the  /  isalie
vaha aisI bhASA thI jo mAgadhI, zaurasainI tathA usake antarvartI kSetra meM
rahane vAle logoM dvArA samajhI jA sakatI thii| vaha eka prakAra se prAkRta
kSetra kI samparka bhASA thI, jise bhASA vijJAna meM Lingua-Fvanca kahA jAtA
hai| bhagavAna mahAvIra apanI dharma dezanA meM arddha mAgadhI kA hI prayoga
karate the  /  samavAyAGga sUtra meM isakA vizeSa rUpa se ullekha hai  /  /
dazavaikAlika vRtti' meM bhI likhA gayA hai ki cAritra-dharmAcaraNa kI AkAMkSA-
abhilASA rakhane vAle bAlaka, strI, vRddha, mUrkha-apaNDita ina sabhI logoM para
anugraha karane ke hetu tattva darziyoM ne prAkRta meM siddhAntoM kA nirUpaNa
kiyA  /  dharmopadeza meM arddha mAgadhI ke upayoga kA mukhya Azaya yaha thA ki
zrotRgaNa dharma dezanA ko sIthe-binA kisI vyavadhAna ke yA binA kisI
madhyavartI vyAkhyAkAra ke dharma tatva ko sahaja rUpa meM svAyatta kara sake  /
ra Avazyaka niyukti meM ullekha hai ki arhat-tIrthaMkara arthabhASita-
pratipAdita karate hai, gaNadhara-dharmazAsana yA dharma saMgha ke kalyANArtha
nipuNatA-kuzalatApUrvaka sUtra rUpa meM usakA saMgranthana karate hai, isa
prakAra sUtra kA pravartana hotA hai| bhagavAna mahAvIra dvArA upadiSTa tathA
unake pramukha antevAsI gaNadharoM dvArA saMgrathita upadeza nimnAMkita 12 aGgoM
ke rUpa meM vibhAjita hai - 1. AcAra, 2. sUtrakRta, 3. sthAna, 4. samavAya; 5.
vyAkhyA prajJapti, 6. jJAtAdharmakathA, 7. upAsakadazA, 8. antakRddazA, 9.
anuttaraupapAtikadazA, 10. praznavyAkaraNa, 11. vipAka, 12. dRSTivAda 2.
bhagavaM ca NaM addhamAgahIe bhASAe, dhammamAikkhai  /  savi ya NaM addha mAgahI
bhAsA bhAsijjamANI tersi savvesiM AriyamaNAriyANaM duppaya-caThappaya-miya-pasu-
pakkhi-sarIsivANaM appaNo hiyasiva-suhaya bhAsattAe pariNamaI  /  - samavAyAGga
sUtra-34.22.23 bAla strI vRddha mUrkhANAM nRNAM cAritrakAMkSiNAm  /
anugrahArthaM tattvajJaiH siddhAntaH prAkRtaH kRtaH  //  - dazavaikAlikavRtti,
pRSTha-223 atthaM bhAsai arahA, sutaM gaMthaMti gaNaharA niuNaM  /  sAsaNassa
hiyaTThAe, tao suttaM pavettai  //  - Avazyaka niyukti 92  /  xii 3.

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra: In ancient times, the scriptures of all religions
were memorized by disciples from their gurus. This tradition continued, and this
is likely the reason why the Vedas, which are called Shruti, were memorized by
disciples from their teachers. The same reason seems to be behind the Jain
scriptures being called Shruti. The Buddhists also memorized their scriptures
through the Shravana tradition. This may also be because the renunciates,
ascetics, Nirgranthas, and monks of all these traditions did not like to keep
possessions, and a collection of scriptures is also a form of possession. If the
scriptures are memorized, there is no need to keep books. This was possible
because people then had excellent physical strength and memory.  After the
Nirvana of Lord Mahavira, for about 560 years, the scriptures were preserved
through the Shravana tradition of memorization. However, as time passed,
people's physical strength and memory gradually declined. Another obstacle arose
- a severe famine lasting 12 years occurred in Magadha, which was the main area
of the Jains. This was during the reign of Emperor Chandragupta Maurya in all of
North India. The conditions for obtaining proper, forbidden alms were not there,
and the Jain monks scattered. Many died due to lack of food and water, and a
concern arose in the Jain community that most of the scholars had perished.
There was a fear that this rare Shruti treasure of our religion might be lost. A
meeting was organized of the remaining monks who remembered the scriptures.
Accordingly, under the leadership of Acharya Sthulabhadra, a meeting of Jain
monks was held in Pataliputra to organize the Agamas. The Agamas were recited
and preserved in memory.  Eleven Angas were compiled and organized at this
meeting. The twelfth Anga, Drishtivad, was not remembered by any of the monks
present at the meeting. According to history, only Acharya Bhadrabahu knew
Drishtivad-Chaturdasha Purvas at that time. He was called Shruta Kevali. He was
highly inclined towards sadhana, and therefore he was engaged in Mahapran
meditation in a secluded place in Nepal. There is no discussion anywhere about
what Mahapran meditation was. Meditation has certainly been of great importance
in the Jain sadhana tradition. The ninth study of the first Shruti Skandha of
the Acharang Sutra describes the charia of Lord Mahavira, where it is described
that he meditated in many ways. The descriptions of Egg Poggal Nividdittthi -
meditating by focusing one's vision on a single particle - indicate this. It
seems that these various meditation techniques have not been preserved today.
This Mahapran meditation was probably a specific practice of meditation based on
the breathing process. Thus, the Jain community decided to send suitable,
intelligent, and hardworking monks to him for study so that they could learn
Drishtivad from him. It is said that 1500 monks were sent for this purpose, 500
of them were students and 1000 were their servants. They requested Acharya
Bhadrabahu to impart knowledge with great humility and persuasion. The Acharya
graciously agreed and began to teach them.  The study was so complex that the
student monks could not stay there and gradually began to leave. In the end,
only Sthulabhadra remained, who diligently continued his studies. He had
thoroughly mastered the text and meaning of the first ten Purvas. The study of
the eleventh Purva was about to begin when an unexpected event occurred.
Sthulabhadra's sisters, who were nuns, arrived there to see their brother, the
monk. Sthulabhadra...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram prAcIna kAla meM sabhI dharmoM ke zAstroM ko ziSya
apane guruoM se zravaNa kara kaNThastha rakhate the, uttarottara yaha paramparA
calatI rahI, vedoM ko jo zruti kahA jAtA hai, sambhavataH usakA yahI kAraNa hai
kyoMki ve AcArya se sunakara ziSyoM dvArA smaraNa rakhe jAte the  /  jaina
vAGmaya ko zruta kahe jAne ke pIche bhI yahI hetu pratIta hotA hai  /  bauddhoM
meM bhI zravaNa paramparA se hI zAstra smRti meM rakhe jAte rahe, isake pIche
yaha bhI kAraNa rahA ho ki ina sabhI paramparAoM ke virakta jana-saMnyAsI,
nirgrantha evaM bhikSu apane pAsa parigraha rakhanA pasaMda nahIM karate the,
grantha saMgraha bhI parigraha kA hI rUpa hai, yadi zAstra kaNThastha ho to pAsa
meM pustakeM rakhane kI koI AvazyakatA hI nahIM hotii| yaha isalie sambhava ho
sakA ki taba logoM kA zArIrika saMhanana bala tathA smaraNazakti utkRSTa koTi kI
thii| bhagavAna mahAvIra ke nirvANa ke anantara lagabhaga 560 varSa paryanta
yaha zravaNa paramparA dvArA kaNThastha zailI se zAstra svAyattatA kA krama
gatizIla rahA, kintu Age vyatIta hote samaya ke sAtha-sAtha logoM kA daihika
saMhanana, zArIrika zakti aura smRti kramazaH hasita hone lagI  /  eka vighna
aura upasthita huA-magadha meM, jo jainoM kA mukhya kSetra thA, 12 varSa kA
bhISaNa durbhikSa par3A  /  yaha taba kI bAta hai jaba samagra uttara bhArata
meM samrATa candragupta maurya kA zAsana thA  /  samucita doSa varjita bhikSA
prApta hone kI sthitiyA~ vahA~ nahIM rahI, jaina zramaNa idhara udhara bikhara
gaye  /  AhAra pAnI ke abhAva meM aneka divaMgata ho gae, jaina saMgha meM eka
cintA vyApta huI ki zAstra vettA adhikAMza munigaNa samApta ho gae haiM, kahIM
aisA na ho ki hamAre dharma kI yaha durlabha zruta sampati vilupta ho jAye  /
jo kucha bace khuce munigaNa hai, jinheM zAstra smaraNa hai, unakA sammelana
Ayojita kiyA jAya, tadanusAra AgamoM ko vyavasthita karane hetu AcArya
sthUlabhadra ke netRtva meM pATaliputra meM jaina sAdhuoM kA sammelana Ayojita
huA, AgamoM kA pArAyaNa kiyA gayA, unheM yathAvat smRti meM TikAyA gayA  /  _
isa sammelana meM gyAraha aGgoM kA saMkalana, vyavasthApana kiyA jA sakA,
bArahavA~ aMga dRSTivAda sammelana meM upasthita kisI bhI sAdhu ko smaraNa nahIM
thA  /  itihAsa ke anusAra usa samaya kevala AcArya bhadrabAhu hI dRSTivAda-
caturdaza pUrvo ke jJAtA the  /  ve zruta kevalI kahe jAte the  /  sAdhanA kI
ora unakA atyadhika jhukAva thA, ataeva ve nepAla meM kisI ekAMta sthAna meM
mahAprANa dhyAna kI sAdhanA meM nirata the  /  mahAprANa dhyAna kyA thA isa
sambandha meM kahIM koI vivecana nahIM milatA  /  jaina sAdhanApaddhati meM
dhyAna kA nizcaya hI bar3A mahattva rahA hai, AcArAGga sUtra ke prathama zruta
skandha ke navama adhyayana meM bhagavAn mahAvIra kI caryA kA varNana hai, vahA~
bhagavAn dvArA aneka prakAra se dhyAna kiye jAne kA varNana huA hai  /  egga
poggala nividadiTThI - eka pudgala para apanI dRSTi ko saMniviSTa kara dhyAna
kiyA jAnA Adi varNanoM se yaha sUcita hai  /  aisA pratIta hotA haiM ki Aja ve
vividha dhyAna paddhatiyA~ surakSita nahIM raha sakI hai  /  yaha mahAprANa
dhyAna bhI saMbhavataH zvAsa prakriyA para Azrita dhyAna kI eka viziSTa sAdhanA
rahI ho, astu jaina saMgha ne yaha cintana kiyA ki suyogya medhAvI zramazIla
muniyoM ko unake pAsa adhyayana hetu bhejA jAya, ve unase dRSTivAdaM kA jJAna
prApta kareM  /  kahA jAtA hai tadanusAra pandraha sau muni isa lakSya se bheje
gae, unameM pA~ca sau adhyetA the evaM eka hajAra unakI sevA karane vAle  /
bar3e anunaya vinaya ke sAtha AcArya bhadrabAhu se jJAna pradAna karane hetu
nivedana kiyA, AcArya ne anugraha kara unheM par3hAnA prArambha kiyA  /
_adhyayana itanA jaTila thA ki adhyayanArthI muni vahA~ Tika nahIM sake, dhIre-
dhIre vahA~ se khisakane lage anta meM eka mAtra sthUlabhadra hI bace, jo
zramapUrvaka adhyayana meM saMvirata rahe  /  dasa pUrvo taka unhoMne pATha aura
artha bhalI bhAMti svAyatta kara liyA  /  gyArahaveM pUrva kA adhyayana
prArambha hone ko thA, eka apratyAzita ghaTanA ghaTI, sthUlabhadra kI bahaneM jo
sAdhviyA~ thI, apane sahodara muni ke darzana hetu vahA~ pahu~cI  /
sthUlabhadra ne

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that due to curiosity and a display of
knowledge, a monk transformed into a lion. The nuns were terrified. When the
monk returned to his human form, they were reassured.  ...  When Acharya
Bhadrabahu learned of this incident, he was very angry with Sthulabhadra. He
told him, "Knowledge is not for display. The life goal of a Jain monk is
spirituality and peace. You have not done well. Your studies will cease now."
Sthulabhadra accepted his mistake, repented deeply, and pleaded to be taught the
remaining knowledge of the **fourteen Purvas**. With great humility, devotion,
and respect, he repeatedly requested this. Acharya Bhadrabahu agreed to teach
him the remaining **fourteen Purvas** but only the text, not the meaning.
Accordingly, he taught Sthulabhadra only the text of the **four Purvas** and
sent him back.  Thus, after Bhadrabahu, the complete knowledge of the **fourteen
Purvas** was lost. Ten **Purvas** remained with both text and meaning, while the
remaining four **Purvas** only had the text.  The first attempt to compile the
**Agamas** in Pataliputra under the leadership of Acharya Sthulabhadra is called
the first reading of the **Agamas**. It is also called the Pataliputra reading
because it was performed in Pataliputra. The compilation or reading of the
**Agamas** meant that the **Agamas** that were memorized were to be collected,
corrected, and organized. This was done, but the **Agamas** were kept in their
memorized form. As mentioned earlier, like the Jain **Agamas**, the Vedas were
also kept in the **Shruti** tradition or memorized. There was no attempt to
compile them again, nor was it considered necessary. There is a difference: the
Vedas are written in Sanskrit, which is a grammatical language. The structure of
a language governed by grammar does not allow for much change. Also, there has
been a special effort to keep the word structure of the Vedas unchanged and
stable. There have been five stages of recitation of the same mantra: **Sangeeta
Path**, **Pad Path**, **Kram Path**, **Jata Path**, and **Ghan Path**. These
stages use different forms of recitation of the mantra with a highly scientific
method, which prevents any change in the words. To keep the recitation order
uninterrupted, there are rules for **Udatta**, **Anudatta**, and **Sanswarita**,
which have resulted in the Vedas being recited today in the same way they were
recited hundreds of years ago.  The Jain **Agamas** are in a different
situation. They are in **Ardha Magadhi Prakrit**, which was a vernacular
language. Unlike Sanskrit, it was not bound by the complex rules of grammar.
Vernacular languages are not bound by strict grammatical rules and flow with the
common language. Texts written in such languages are prone to change. This is
why, about 270-289 years after the Pataliputra reading, around 827-840 years
after the Nirvana of Lord Mahavira, another attempt was made to organize the
**Agamas**. Coincidentally, there was a terrible famine at that time, which made
it difficult for the monks to get alms. As a result, many Jain monks died, and
the proper order of study of the **Agamas** was disrupted. This led to the Jain
community considering holding a gathering of monks to preserve the **Agamas** in
their pure form. Accordingly, under the leadership of Arya Skandil, who was the
leading Jain Acharya at that time, a gathering of monks was organized in
Mathura, which was once a major center of Jainism. Monks from different places
who had the **Agamas** present came to the gathering. The **Agamas** were read
and compiled, and the **Agamas** were organized accordingly.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kutuhalavaza vidyAbala se siMha kA rUpa banA liyA
sAdhviyA~ bhayAkrAMta ho uThI, muni phira mAnava rUpa meM A gae taba ve Azvasta
huI  /  1... jaba AcArya bhadrabAhu ko yaha ghaTanA vidita huI to ve
sthUlabhadra para bahuta nArAja hue, unhoMne unase kahA - vidyA pradarzana hetu
nahIM hotI  /  eka jaina muni kA jIvana lakSya to adhyAtma aura zAMti hai,
tumane yaha acchA nahIM kiyA, aba Age adhyayana nahIM calegA  /  sthUla bhadra
ne apanI truTi svIkAra karate hue bar3A pazcAtApa kiyA aura nivedana kiyA ki
unheM pUrvoM kA bAkI rahA jJAna punaH pradAna kareM  /  atyanta namratA bhakti
aura Adara ke sAtha bAra-bAra nivedana karane para AcArya bhadrabAhu ne itanA to
svIkAra kiyA ki ve avaziSTacAra pUrvoM kA pATha jJAna to de deMge kintu artha
nahIM deMge  /  tadanusAra unhoMne sthUlabhadra ko cAra pUrva kevala pATha mAtra
par3hAye aura unako vApasa lauTA diyA  /  isa prakAra bhadrabAhu ke anantara
cavadaha pUrvoM kA paripUrNa jJAna nahIM rahA, daza to pATha aura artha donoM
rahe, bAkI ke cAra pUrva pATha mAtra rahe  /  AcArya sthUlabhadra ke netRtva meM
AgamoM ke saMkalana kA pATaliputra meM jo prathama prayAsa huA use AgamoM kI
prathama vAcanA kahA jAtA hai  /  pATaliputra meM niSpAdita hone ke kAraNa ise
pATaliputra vAcanA ke nAma se bhI abhihita kiyA jAtA hai  /  AgamoM ke saMkalana
yA vAcana kA tAtparya yaha thA ki jo kaMThAgra Agama the, unheM milAkara ThIka
kara liyA jAya, vyavasthita kara liyA jAya  /  vaisA huA kintu AgamoM ko
kaMThAgra rUpa meM hI svAyatta rakhA gayA  /  jaisA Upara kahA gayA hai, jaina
AgamoM kI taraha vedoM ko bhI zruti paramparA yA kaMThAgra rakhane kA hI krama
thA, vahA~ punaH saMkalana Adi kI dRSTi se koI prayatna nahIM huA, na Avazyaka
hI mAnA gayA  /  usameM eka antara hai, ve saMskRta meM nibaddha hai, jo
vyAkaraNa niSTha bhASA hai  /  vyAkaraNa ke niyamAnukUla jo saMracanA hotI hai
usameM parivartana kI guMjAiza nahIM rahatI  /  sAtha hI sAtha vedoM kI zabda
racanA ko aparivartita tathA susthira banAye rakhane hetu vahA~ vizeSa prayatna
rahA hai  /  saMgItA pATha, pada-pATha, kramapATha, jaTApATha tathA ghanapATha
ke rUpa meM eka hI maMtra ke uccAraNa ke pAMca krama rahe hai, jinameM bar3I
vaijJAnika vidhi se maMtra ke uccAraNa krama se vibhinna rUpa meM prayoga rakhe
gae hai, jisase zabdoM meM jarA bhI parivartana saMbhAvita nahIM hai, uccAraNa
krama ko bhI avicchinna rakhane ke lie udAtta, anudAtta, saMsvarita ke rUpa meM
vahA~ jo niyamana rahA hai, usakA pariNAma yaha hai ki saikar3oM varSa pUrva
vedoM kA jisa rUpa meM uccAraNa hotA thA Aja bhI vaisA hotA hai  /  jaina AgamoM
ke sAtha eka anya sthiti hai, ve arddha mAgadhI prAkRta meM hai jo loka bhASA
thI, saMskRta kI taraha vaha vyAkaraNa ke jaTila niyamoM se paribaddha nahIM thI
/  lokabhASA kA aisA hI svabhAva hotA hai, usameM vyAkaraNa ke kaThora baMdhana
nahIM hote, vaha loka pravAha ke sAtha calatI hai vaisI bhASA meM racita
granthoM meM parivartana hone kI saMbhAvanA banI rahatI hai  /  yahI kAraNa hai
ki pATaliputra vAcanA ke lagabhaga 270 - 289 varSa ke anantara arthAt bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke nirvANa ke lagabhaga 827- 840 varSa ke bIca AgamoM ko vyavasthita
karane kA eka aura prayAsa huA  /  saMyogavaza taba bhI bhayAnaka durbhikSa kI
sthiti A par3I thI, phalataH sAdhuoM ko bhikSA milane meM kaThinAI utpanna huI,
usa kAraNa aneka jaina sAdhu divaMgata ho gae, AgamoM ke abhyAsa kA jo samIcIna
krama gatizIla thA vaha vicchinna hone para jaina saMgha meM yaha vicAra uThA ki
AgamoM ko apane zuddha svarUpa meM banAye rakhane hetu eka sAdhu sammelana
Ayojita kiyA jAe  /  tadanusAra Arya skandila jo taba pramukha jaina AcArya the-
ke netRtva meM mathurA meM jo kabhI jaina dharma kA bar3A kendra rahA sAdhuoM ke
sammelana kA Ayojana kiyA gayA  /  bhinnabhinna sthAnoM se ve sAdhu jinheM Agama
upasthita the, sammelana meM Aye AgamoM kA vAcana huA, saMkalana huA tadanusAra
Agama suvyavasthita kiye gae  /  xiv

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** was the second attempt at compiling the
Agamas, hence it is called the **Dvitiya Vachana**. It is also known as
**Mathuri Vachana** because it was held in Mathura.  Around the time of the
Mathuri Vachana, a conference was held in Vallabhi, a city in the Saurashtra
region, under the leadership of Acharya Nagarjuna Suri. The purpose of this
conference was to compile and organize the Agamas. The Agam-knowing monks
recited, discussed, and harmonized the Agamas. The Agamas were organized
systematically.  One reason for having two Vachanas at the same time could be
that it was not considered possible for all monks, both near and far, to reach
one location. Jain monks are traditionally **padavihari**, meaning they do not
use vehicles, and travel on foot, no matter the distance. It is possible that
monks from North India, West India, and East India reached Mathura. Mathura may
have been too far for monks from Central India and South India. Vallabhi, which
was once a renowned center of Jainism in India, may have been closer to the
monks of Central and South India, making it a suitable location for a second
conference. This seems practical and useful. This is also referred to as the
second Vachana. It is called **Vallabhi Vachana** because it was held in
Vallabhi.  In this Vachana, the Agamas were also kept in the memorized order.
However, as time passed, people's memory became weaker. They also lacked the
same physical strength. Therefore, it became difficult to keep the vast
knowledge of the Agamas intact in memory. It began to be forgotten. It then
seemed necessary to recite the Agamas again. Accordingly, a conference of monks
was held in Vallabhi 980-993 years after the Nirvana of Bhagwan Mahavira. The
renowned Agam-knowing Acharya Shri Devarddhiganikshama Shraman led the
conference. The monks present at the conference were aware of the previous two
Vachanas. They recited, discussed, and compiled the Agamas according to their
memory. They primarily considered the Mathuri Vachana as their reference and
worked based on it.  Some variations in the text had developed among different
Shraman groups. There were also differences in the Vachanas in some places. All
of these were harmonized, and the text of the Agamas was organized. While
attempting to harmonize, any text that could not be harmonized was marked with a
note indicating the difference in the Vachana, i.e., "according to such and such
Vachana, these are the texts." The twelfth Anga, **Dristivad**, was not present
in the memory of any Shraman, so it could not be compiled and was declared lost.
One special feature of this Vachana was that while the Agamas were not written
down in the previous two Vachanas, they were only kept in memory. Here,
considering that memory would no longer be sufficient, the Agamas were written
down. The Agamas available to us today are in the form of the Agamas compiled in
this third Vachana.  It is important to note that the available Agamas are
accepted by the **Shwetamber** tradition of Jainism. They are not considered
authentic by the **Digamber** tradition. They believe that the **Dwadashanga**
was lost 683 years after the Nirvana of Bhagwan Mahavira. Therefore, they do not
accept any text as authentic in the form of the words spoken by Bhagwan
Mahavira. In the middle of the first and second centuries AD, there was a
prominent Acharya named **Dharasen** in the Digamber tradition. It is said that
he had some knowledge of **Dristivad** in his memory.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram - AgamoM ke saMkalana kA yaha dUsarA prayAsa thA,
isalie ise dvitIya vAcanA kahA jAtA hai  /  mathurA meM sampanna hone ke kAraNa
ise mAthurI vAcanA ke nAma se bhI abhihita kiyA jAtA hai  /  _ mAthurI vAcanA ke
samaya ke Asa-pAsa hI saurASTra pradeza ke antarvI vallabhI nAmaka nagara meM
AcArya nAgArjuna sUrI ke netRtva meM AgamoM ke saMkalana vyavasthApana kA
dRSTikoNa lie eka sammelana huA jisameM Agama vettA muniyoM dvArA AgamoM kA
vAcana pATha melana Adi kiyA gayA  /  Agama suvyavasthita kiye gae  /  eka hI
kAla meM do vAcanAeM hone kA eka kAraNa yaha ho sakatA hai ki kisI eka sthAna
para nikaTavartI evaM dUravartI sabhI muniyoM kA pahuMcanA saMbhava na mAnA gayA
ho, jaina muni niyamataH pAdavihArI hote hai, ve vAhanoM kA prayoga nahIM
karate, cAhe kitanI bhI dUrI kI yAtrA karanI ho, ve paidala hI jAte, saMbhava
hai uttara bhArata, pazcima bhArata evaM pUrvabhArata ke muni mathurA pahu~ce
ho, madhyabhArata evaM dakSiNa bhArata ke muniyoM ke lie mathurA dUravartI
sthAna rahA ho, vallabhI jo kisI samaya jaina dharma kA bhArata vikhyAta kendra
thA-ke mathurA kI apekSA madhya evaM dakSiNa ke muniyoM ke nikaTa hone ke kAraNa
vahA~ dUsarA sammelana Ayojita kiyA gayA ho, aisA honA sarvathA vyAvahArika evaM
upayogI pratIta hotA hai  /  yaha bhI dUsarI vAcanA hI kahI jAtI hai  /
vallabhI meM Ayojita hone ke kAraNa ise vallabhI vAcanA bhI kahA jAtA hai| isa
vAcanA meM bhI Agama kaNThastha krama meM hI rakhe gae, kintu jyoM-jyoM samaya
bItatA gayA, logoM kI smRti aura adhika durbala hone lagI  /  zArIrika saMhanana
meM bhI vaisI zakti nahIM rahI, ataH vipula Agama jJAna-tanmUlaka pATha ko smRti
meM akSuNNa banAye rakhanA kaThina lagane lagA, vismRta hone lagA, taba yaha
Avazyaka pratIta huA ki AgamoM kI punaH vAcanA kI jAya tadanusAra bhagavAna
mahAvIra ke nirvANa ke 980-993 varSoM ke pazcAt vallabhI meM muni sammelana
Ayojita huA, usa samaya ke khyAtanAmA AgamavettA AcArya zrI
devarddhigaNikSamAzramaNa ne sammelana kA netRtva kiyA  /  sammelana meM
upasthita zrutadhara-AgamajJa muniyoM ke samakSa pichalI do vAcanAoM ke
saMdarbha vidyamAna the  /  unhoMne apanI smRti ke anusAra AgamoM kA vAcana
kiyA, melana kiyA, saMkalana kiyA, unhoMne mukhya rUpa meM mAthurI vAcanA ko
apane samakSa rakhA  /  usake AdhAra para kArya kiyA  /  vibhinna zramaNa
saMghoM meM kucha pAThAntara pravRtta ho gae the, vAcanA bheda bhI kahIM-kahIM
thA, una sabakA samanvaya kiyA gayA, tathA AgamoM ke pATha vyavasthita kiye gae,
samanvaya kA prayatna karate hue bhI jo-jo pATha samanvita nahIM ho sake, vahA~
vAcanAntara kA saMketa kara diyA gayA arthAt amuka-amuka vAcanA ke anusAra ye-ye
pATha hai  /  bArahavAM aGga dRSTivAda kisI bhI zramaNa kI smRti meM upasthita
nahIM thA, ataH usakA saMkalana nahIM kiyA jA sakA, tathA usakA viccheda ghoSita
kara diyA gayA  /  isa vAcanA kI eka vizeSatA yaha rahI thI ki pUrvavartI donoM
vAcanAoM meM jahA~ AgamoM ko lipibaddha nahIM kiyA gayA, kevala smRti ke AdhAra
para hI rakhA gayA, yahAM yaha socate hue ki aba smRti pUrvavat kAma nahIM de
pAyegI. Agama lipibaddha kiye gaye  /  vartamAna meM jo Agama hameM upalabdha
hai, ve isI tIsarI vAcanA meM saMkalita AgamoM kA rUpa lie hue hai| yahA~ yaha
jJAtavya hai ki upalabdha Agama jainoM kI zvetAmbara paramparA dvArA svIkRta
hai, digambara paramparA meM inheM prAmANika nahIM mAnA jAtA. | vahAM yaha mAnA
jAtA hai ki bhagavAna mahAvIra ke nirvANa ke 683 varSa uparAnta dvAdazAGga kA
lopa ho gayA, ataH bhagavAna mahAvIra dvArA bhASita zabdAvalI ke rUpa meM kisI
bhI grantha ko digambara mAnyatA nahIM dete  /  prathama tathA dvitIya IsvI
zatAbdI ke madhya meM digambara paramparA ke antargata dharasena nAmaka pramukha
AcArya hue  /  aisA kahA jAtA hai ki unheM dRSTivAda ke kucha aMza kA jJAna thA-
smRti meM vaha (xy

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  It is said that the authors of this text resided in
the Chandragufa cave on Mount Girnar in Saurashtra for the purpose of their
spiritual practice. The Digambara Jain community decided to acquire knowledge
from them to prevent the loss of their tradition. Therefore, the community sent
two highly revered monks, Pushpadanta and Bhootbali, to learn from them. Both
monks diligently acquired knowledge from them and returned after gaining it.
Later, these same monks, Pushpadanta and Bhootbali, composed a scripture in six
parts, known as the Shatkhandagama. Acharya Pushpadanta composed the
Satpraroopan in one hundred and seventy-seven (177) sutras, and Acharya
Bhootbali composed the remaining text in six thousand (6000) sutras. This was
primarily based on the fourth Prabhrit Adhikar, named Maha Karma Prakriti, of
the second Agraahmani Purva, within the Chaturdasha Purva. This Agama is
considered equivalent to the scriptures in the Digambara tradition.  Many
Acharyas have written commentaries on the Shatkhandagama over time. In the
eighth century, a great scholar named Acharya Vira Sena wrote a very important
commentary on the Shatkhandagama, known as the Dhavala. It is written in a
mixture of Sanskrit and Prakrit and contains seventy-two thousand (72,000)
verses. Around the time of Acharya Dharasen, there was a very accomplished
Acharya named Gunadhar in the Digambara tradition. It is believed that he also
had partial knowledge of the Dvadasanga Sutra. He composed the Siddhanta text
called Kashaya Prabhrit. Acharya Vira Sena also wanted to write a commentary on
Kashaya Prabhrit and began writing, but he could only complete a portion
containing two thousand verses before his passing. His learned disciple, Acharya
Jinsen, completed the remaining work. This commentary is known as Jay Dhavala
and contains a total of sixty thousand verses. The Shatkhandagama is a very
important work on Jain Karmavada.  Thus, the Jain Agamas discussed above are
accepted by the Svetambara tradition. However, there is no consensus among all
Svetambara sects regarding their number. The Svetambara Mandir Margi sect
considers 84 or 45 Agamas, while the Svetambara Sthanakvasi and Terapanthi
sects, who do not believe in idol worship, accept 32 Agamas: Achar, Sutra Krit,
Sthan, Samavay, Vyakhya Prajnapti, Jnatadharmakatha, Upasak Dasha, Antakridasha,
Anuttaroupapathik Dasha, Prashna Vyakaran, Vipak.  **11 Angas**  **12 Upangas**
- Aupapathik, Raj Prasniya, Jivaabhigam, Prajnapana, Surya Prajnapti, Jambudvipa
Prajnapti, Chandra Prajnapti, Nirayavaliya, Kalpavatanshika, Pushpika,
Pushpachoolika, Vrishni Dasha.  Vyavahar, Vrihatkalpa, Nishita, Dasha Shruta
Skandha.  Dasha Vaikalik, Uttaradhyayana, Nandi, Anuyogadwar.  **4 Cheda**  **4
Mool**  **1 Aavashyak**  Of these, 11 Angas and 21 Upangas are external,
connected to the Angas in terms of subject matter and other aspects. Acharya Ary
Rakshit Suri, considering the differences in subject matter, explanation, and
analysis, divided the Agamas into four categories, known as Anuyogas. The Agamas
that primarily discuss the tradition of conduct, analysis of vows, right
knowledge, and right faith, along with restraint, penance, control of passions,
and avoidance of negative tendencies, are accepted in the Charan Karan Anuyog
category. They also describe the virtues of community, contemplation, images,
purification of offerings, copying, secrecy, and acceptance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram upasthita thA, ve sAdhanA hetu saurASTra meM giranAra
parvata kI candraguphA meM AvAsa karate the  /  digambara jaina saMgha meM yaha
vicAra huA ki unase jJAna prApta kiyA jAya tAki vaha paramparA lupta na ho,
isalie saMgha ne puSpadanta evaM bhUta balI nAmaka do parama bheghAvI muniyoM ko
adhyayana hetu unase jJAna prApta karane hetu bhejA  /  donoM muniyoM ne bar3e
zrama evaM lagana ke sAtha unase jJAna prApta kiyA, jJAna prApta kara ve lauTa
Aye  /  Age calakara inhIM puSpadanta evaM bhUta balI nAmaka muniyoM ne 6 bhAgoM
meM zAstra racanA kI, jo SaDkhaNDAgama nAma se vikhyAta hai  /  AcArya
puSpadanta ne eka sau sattattara (177) sUtroM meM satprarUpaNA kI racanA kI aura
AcAryabhUtabalI ne chaH hajAra (6000) sUtroM meM samagra avaziSTa grantha rcaa|
yaha caturdazapUrva ke antargata dvitIya agrAhmaNI pUrva ke mahAkarmaprakRti
nAmaka caturtha prAbhRta adhikAra ke AdhAra para mukhya rUpa se nirmita huA  /
digambara AmnAya meM yaha Agama tulya mAnyatA lie hue hai 1 SaTkhaNDAgama para
samaya-samaya para aneka AcAryoM ne TIkAoM kI racanA kI  /  AThavIM zatAbdI meM
vIrasena nAmaka eka mahAn vidvAn AcArya hue unhoMne SaDkhaNDAgama para atyanta
mahattvapUrNa TIkA likhI, jo dhavalA ke nAma se prasiddha hai, vaha saMskRta -
prAkRta mizrita bhASA kA rUpa lie hue hai, bahattara hajAra (72000) zloka
pramANa hai  /  lagabhaga AcArya dharasena ke samaya meM hI digambara paramparA
meM guNadhara nAmaka bar3e susampanna AcArya the, aisA mAnA jAtA hai ki unheM
bhI dvAdazAGga sUtra kA aMzataH jJAna prApta thA, unhoMne kaSAya prAbhRta nAmaka
siddhAnta grantha kA praNayana kiyA  /  AcArya vIrasena kaSAya prAbhRta para bhI
TIkA likhanA cAhate te, lekhana kArya cAlU kiyA, kintu dvisahasra zloka pramANa
bhAga hI likha pAye, isa bIca ve divaMgata ho gae, unake avaziSTa kArya ko unake
vidvAn ziSya AcArya jinasena ne pUrNa kiyaa| yaha TIkA jaya dhavalA ke nAma se
prasidda hai  /  isakA samagra kalevara sATha hajAra zloka pramANa hai  /  jaina
karmavAda para Sar3akhaNDAgama atyanta mahatvapUrNa racanA hai  /  astu, Upara
zvetAmbara paramparA sammata jina AgamoM kI carcA kI gaI hai, zvetAmbaroM meM
unakI saMkhyA ke sambandha meM saba sampradAya eka mata nahIM hai  /  zve.
mandira mArgI sampradAya meM 84 yA 45 kI saMkhyA meM Agama mAne jAte hai, zve.
sthAnakavAsI, terApaMthI sampradAya jo mUrtipUjA nahIM mAnate 32 Agama svIkAra
karate haiM - AcAra, sUtrakRta, sthAna, samavAya, vyAkhyA prajJapti,
jJAtAdharmakathA, upAsaka dazA, antakRdazA, anuttaraupapAtika dazA,
praznavyAkaraNa, vipAka  /  11 aMga - - 12 upAGga - aupapAtika, rAja praznIya,
jIvAbhigama, prajJApanA, sUrya prajJapti, jambUdvIpa prajJapti, candraprajJapti,
nirayAvaliyA, kalpAvataMsikA, puSpikA, puSpacUlikA, vRSNi dazA  /  vyavahAra,
vRhatkalpa, nizItha, dazAzrutaskandha | dazavaikAlika, uttarAdhyayana, nandI,
anuyogadvAra  /  4 cheda 4 mUla 1 Avazyaka  /  1 inameM 11 aGga tathA ikkIsa
aGga bAhya hai, jo aGgoM ke sAtha viSaya Adi kI dRSTi se saMbaddha hai| AcArya
Arya rakSita sUrI ne viSaya, vyAkhyA, vivecana Adi ke bheda ko dRSTi meM rakhate
hue AgamoM ko cAra vargoM meM vibhakta kiyA, jo anuyoga kahalAte haiM  /  jina
AgamoM meM mukhya rUpa se AcAraparamparA, vratavizleSaNa, samyakjJAna darzana
evaM cAritra, saMyama, tapazcaraNa, kaSAyanigraha tathA vaiyAvRtya Adi jo mUla
guNa hai- kA vivecana hai, sAtha hI sAtha samiti, bhAvanA, pratimA, piNDa
vizuddhi, pratilekhana, gupti tathA abhigraha Adi uttara guNoM kA varNana hai,
unheM caraNa karaNAnuyoga nAmaka varga meM svIkAra kiyA gayA  /  xvi

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Śrī Sūtrakr̥tāṅga Sūtra**, under the **Caraṇakaraṇānuyoga**, includes the
**Ācārāṅga**, **Praśnavyākaraṇa**, **Daśavaikālika**, **Niśītha**,
**Vyavahāra**, **Vṛhatkalpa**, and **Daśāśruta-skandha**.  The **Dharma
Kathānuyoga** category includes Āgamas that primarily discuss the limbs of
Dharma, such as **dāna**, **śīla**, **kṣamā**, **ārjava**, **mārda**, **dayā**,
etc., through narratives and stories. This category includes
**Jñātādharmkathā**, **Upāsakadāśā**, **Antakṛtadāśā**, **Anuttaroppapātidāśā**,
**Aupapātika**, **Rājapraśnīya**, **Niryāvalī**, **Kalpāvatansīkā**,
**Puṣpikā**, **Puṣpa-cūlikā**, **Vṛṣṇidāśā**, **Vipāka**, and
**Uttarādhyayana**.  The **Gaṇitanuyoga** category includes Āgamas that discuss
mathematical topics or topics based on mathematics. This category includes
**Jambūdvīpa Prajñapti** and **Sūryacandra Prajñapti**.  The **Dravyānuyoga**
category includes Āgamas that provide detailed and subtle discussions of the 66
substances (**dravya**), including **jīva**, **ajīva**, and their related
narratives. This category primarily includes **Sūtrakr̥tāṅga**, **Sthānāṅga**,
**Samavāyāṅga**, and **Vyākhyā Prajñāti** (**Bhagavatī**).  Jain Āgamas provide
detailed discussions of Jain philosophy, ethical guidelines, analysis of
principles, detailed explanations of vows, practices of austerity, spiritual
practices, and topics related to the self-respect of every individual. This is
their inherent importance. However, they also provide valuable evidence of
ancient Indian society, laws, regulations, customs, traditions, social life,
agriculture, commerce, governance, and other social topics. This evidence is
crucial for understanding the long history of human development.  Among Indian
literature, the **Ardha-māgadhī Āgamas** and the **Pāli Tripitaka** are the only
texts that do not solely focus on the grandeur of the state and the power of
rulers. Instead, they also include events related to the lives of ordinary
people. Among these, the Jain Āgamas hold exceptional significance. They provide
detailed descriptions of farmers, laborers, merchants, administrators, security
forces, soldiers, culinary arts, clothing, utensils, art, writing, scripts,
paintings, music, and other fine arts. This evidence provides a glimpse into
human culture and history. Therefore, the study of Jain Āgamas is not only
beneficial for those who believe in Jainism but also for those who study
culture, religion, history, philosophy, sociology, linguistics, and other
subjects.  Until now, scholars and learned individuals have not paid much
attention to this subject. However, there has been a growing interest in
studying these texts from a broader perspective. Indians, in particular, became
interested in this subject when renowned German scholar Dr. Hermann Jacobi and
others engaged in deep and meticulous studies of Jain Āgamas and Ardha-māgadhī.
They made scholars aware of the vast usefulness of these texts.  I was fortunate
to have dedicated a significant part of my life to studying Prakrit, Jain
philosophy, and Jain Āgamas. I had the opportunity to study, research, and teach
at the Vaiśālī Research Institute, a prominent center for research on Prakrit,
Jain philosophy, and non-violence in India. Subsequently, the young Ācārya,
**Śrī Vardhamāna Sthā. Jain Śramaṇa Saṅgha**, **Saumya-cetā**, **Vidvan-
mūrdhanya**, **Prabuddha Āgama-jña**, **Svāmi Śrī Miśrīmal Jī 'Madhukara'**,
planned to translate and annotate the 32 Āgamas into Hindi and publish them. I
continuously contributed to the implementation of this plan. I translated,
analyzed, and annotated the **Upāsakadāśāṅga Sūtra** and three other Āgamas,
including **Jambūdvīpa**. Most of the Āgamas were published during the lifetime
of the young Ācārya. The remaining Āgamas were published soon after his passing.
This collection of 32 Āgamas, including Hindi translations, became a beautiful
edition that scholars have deemed very useful and beneficial to the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 | zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram caraNakaraNAnuyoga ke antargata AcArAGga,
praznavyAkaraNa, dazavaikAlika, nizItha, vyavahAra, vRhatkalpa, dazAzrutaskandha
ko parigRhIta kiyA gayA  /  jina AgamoM meM vizeSataH AkhyAnoM evaM kathAoM ke
AdhAra para dAna, zIla, kSamA, Arjava, mArdava, dayA Adi dharma ke aGgoM kA
vivecana vizleSaNa hai, ve dharma kathAnuyoga nAmaka varga meM lie gaye  /
isameM jJAtAdharmakathA, upAsakadazA, antakRtadazA, anuttaropapAtidazA tathA
aupapAtika, rAjapraznIya, nirayAvalI, kalpAvataMsikA, puSpikA, puSpacUlikA,
vRSNidazA, vipAka tathA uttarAdhyayana ko liyA gayA  /  jina AgamoM meM gaNita
sambandhI viSayoM yA gaNita ke AdhAra para viSayoM kA vivecana hai ve
gaNitanuyoga varza meM svIkAra kiye gae isameM jambUdvIpa prajJapti, sUryacandra
prajJapti kA samAveza hai  /  jIva ajIva Adi 66 dravyoM tathA vRtAMtoM kA jina
AgamoM meM vistArapUrvaka sUkSma vivecana huA hai ve dravyAnuyoga ke antargata
Ate isameM sUtrakRtAGga, sthAnAGga, samavAyAGga tathA vyAkhyA prajJAti
(bhagavatI) sUtra vizeSataH lie gae hai  /  jaina Agama jaina darzana sammata
AcAra maryAdA, tatvavizleSaNa, vratavivecana, tapazcaraNa adhyAtma sAdhanA evaM
jana jana ke Atma sammAna se sambaddha viSayoM kA vizada vivecana lie hue hai,
yaha to inakA apanA mahattva hai hI, kintu sAtha hI sAtha prAgitihAsa kAlIna
bhAratIya samAja, vidhi, vidhAna, rIti, maryAdA, loka jIvana, kRSi, vANijya,
zAsana ityAdi sAmAjika viSayoM kA jo atyanta mArmika sAkSya lie hue hai vaha
mAnava jAti ke vikAsa kI lambI kahAnI meM bahuta hI mahattpavUrNa upAdAna
prastuta karate hai| bhAratIya sAhitya meM arddhamAgadhI Agama evaM pAlI
tripiTaka hI aise grantha hai, jinameM kevala rAjya vaibhava aura sattA prakarSa
kA itivRtta nahIM hai varan janasAdhAraNa ke jIvana se jur3I huI ghaTanAeM hai,
unameM bhI vizeSataH jaina Agama apanA asAdhAraNa mahattva lie hue hai  /
kisAna, majadUra, vyApArI, prazAsaka, ArakSI dala, sainika, pAkavidyA, vastra,
pAtra, kalA, lekhana, lipi, citra, saMgIta Adi lalita kalAoM kA sthAna-sthAna
para jo savistAra varNana huA hai vaha mAnavIya saMskRti aura itihAsa ke
adhyayana meM jIvana kA sAkSya prastuta karate hai ataH jaina AgamoM kA
adhyayana kevala jaina dharma meM AsthAzIla janoM ke lie hI upayogI nahIM hai
varan saMskRti, dharma, itihAsa, darzana, samAjavijJAna, bhASAvijJAna Adi
viSayoM para adhyayana karane vAle janoM ke lie bhI bahuta hI upayogI hai, aba
taka isa viSaya kI ora adhyetRvRnda kA-vidvad jana kA vizeSa dhyAna nahIM gayA
aba isa dizA ke logoM meM vyApaka dRSTi se unake adhyayana kA bhAva ujAgara huA
hai, vizeSataH isa ora bhAratIyoM kA dhyAna taba AkRSTa huA, jaba suprasiddha
jarmana vidvAn DaoN. haramanajekobI Adi ne jaina Agama tathA ardhamAgadhI Adi ke
gahana aura sUkSma adhyayana ke sAtha apane ko jor3A tathA inakI vyApaka
upAdeyatA se vidvavRnda ko avagata karAyA  /   /  merA eka sahaja saubhAgya
banA, maiMne prAkRta, jaina darzana tathA jaina AgamoM ke adhyayana meM apane
jIvana kA mahatvapUrNa samaya lgaayaa| bhArata ke prAkRta, jaina darzana evaM
ahiMsA ke viziSTatama adhyayana anusaMdhAna kendra vaizAlI zodha saMsthAna meM
mujhe adhyayana anusaMdhAna evaM adhyApana kA suavasara prApta huA  /
tadanantara zrI vardha. sthA. jaina zramaNa saMgha ke yuvAcArya, saumyacetA,
vidvanmUrdhanya, prabuddha AgamajJa sva-zrI mizrImala jI 'madhukara' ne batIsa
AgamoM ke hindI anuvAda evaM vivecana ke sAtha sampAdana prakAzana kI yojanA
banAI, jisake kriyAnvayana meM merA satata yogadAna rahA, maiMne upAsakadazAGga
sUtra aura jambUdvIpa Adi tIna AgamoM kA vivecana, vizleSaNa, anuvAda kiyA  /
adhikAMza Agama yuvAcArya zrI ke jIvanakAla meM hI prakAzita ho gae the  /
avaziSTa Agama unake svargavAsa ke uparAnta zIghra hI prakAzita hue  /  hindI
anuvAda sahita yaha Agama battIsI kA eka sundara saMskaraNa banA, jisase vidvat
vRnda ne jagata meM bahuta upayogI tathA lAbhaprada batAyA  /  (xvii

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Śrī Sūtrakr̥tāṅga Sūtra** is an important text in the context of the Jain
tradition. I had the opportunity to study under the guidance of **Śrī Nānak
Āmnāya**, the head of the **Staṇakavāsī Jain tradition**, **Sv. Ācārya Śrī
Sohनलाल Jī M. Sā.**, who was a scholar of the **Āgamas**, a poet, and a close
friend of mine during the last four years of his life. I also had the
opportunity to teach **Muni Śrī Sadarśanalāl Jī** (now **Ācārya Śrī Sadarśan
Manijī**) and **Priyadarśan Jī**, who were young monks at the time, under his
tutelage. I taught them various subjects, including Sanskrit, Prakrit, grammar,
literature, philosophy, poetry, ethics, and yoga, as well as the **Āgamas**.
Following the wishes of **Sv. Ācārya Śrī Sohनलाल Jī**, we began studying the
commentary on the **Sūtrakr̥tāṅga** by **Śīlāṅkācārya** in **Gulābpura** in
**Vikram Samvat 2052**. **Ācārya Pravara** was very happy about this, especially
during his stay in **Rātakot**.  Many scholars from India and abroad have
considered the **Sūtrakr̥tāṅga** to be a very important text within the
**Dvādaśāṅga**. Scholars like **Dr. Harman** and **Dr. Pishel** have identified
the language of the **Ācārāṅga** and **Sūtrakr̥tāṅga** as the oldest form of
**Ardha-Māgadhī Prakrit**.  The discussions of non-Jain philosophical views in
the **Sūtrakr̥tāṅga** are very useful for comparative philosophical studies.
This is the only **Āgama** that presents the theories of different philosophers
on topics like the soul, the world, and karma.  The **Sūtrakr̥tāṅga** discusses
**Kriyāvāda**, **Akriyāvāda**, **Ajñānavāda**, **Kṣaṇikavāda**,
**Pañcabhūtavāda**, and **Ātmaṣaṣṭhavāda**, but it does not provide a detailed
explanation of any single philosophy. However, there are some hints that allow
us to identify these theories with different philosophical schools. The
discussions of various philosophical topics in the **Sūtrakr̥tāṅga** suggest
that the philosophies that are available to us today had not yet reached their
refined and established forms. This was probably the early stage of the
development of philosophies. Different thinkers emphasized different theories to
establish their own views. The descriptions in the **Sūtrakr̥tāṅga** inspire
researchers to conduct further in-depth study and research on these topics.
Researchers should pay special attention to this aspect. Studying these topics
can help solve many mysteries in the field of philosophy.  The **Āgama**
literature has always been considered important and useful in the Jain world.
This is why a vast amount of explanatory literature has been written on them in
the form of **niyuktis**, **bhāṣyas**, **cūrṇis**, and **ṭīkās**. The
**niyuktis** are written in **Ārya-gāthā** meter in Prakrit. They explain the
meaning or implication of the **sūtras** in a definitive way. To make the
explanations understandable, many stories and examples are used, but only their
mention is found in the **niyuktis**. These explanations are very symbolic and
concise, and it is difficult to understand them without the help of **bhāṣyas**
and **ṭīkās**. Therefore, the commentators of the **Āgamas** have written
commentaries on the **niyuktis** along with the **Āgamas**. One special feature
of the **niyuktis** is that they are short and written in verse, making them
easy to memorize. Therefore, they could be quoted in religious sermons.
Tradition holds that **Ācārya Dvitīya Bhadravāhu**, who was an expert in
**Aṣṭāṅga Nimitta** and **Mantra Vidya**, was the author of the **niyuktis**.
Just as there were compositions in Prakrit **gāthās** for the **niyuktis**,
there were also compositions for the **bhāṣyas**. The language of the
**niyuktis** and **bhāṣyas** is ancient **Ardha-Māgadhī**. The main **bhāṣyas**
are the **Niśītha Bhāṣya**, **Vyavahāra Bhāṣya**, and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram usI sandarbha meM eka ora mahattvapUrNa prasaGga banA
sthAnakavAsI jaina paramparA ke antaravartI zrI nAnaka AmnAya ke saMghanAyaka
svAdhyAya ziromaNI, Agama vAridhi, Azukavi ratna sva. AcArya zrI sohanalAla jI
ma. sA. kA unake jIvana ke aMtima cAra varSoM meM naikaTyapUrNa sAnnidhya prApta
rahA  /  unake yuvA aMtevAsI muni zrI sadarzanalAlajI (vartamAna meM AcArya zrI
sadarzana manijI) tathA priyadarzana jI ko unakI chatra chAyA meM adhyayana
karAne kA mujhe suavasara prApta huA  /  saMskRta, prAkRta, vyAkaraNa, sAhitya,
darzana, kAvya zAstra, nItizAstra, yoga zAstra Adi aneka viSayoM ke sAtha-sAtha
maiMne unako AgamoM kA adhyayana bhI krvaayaa| sva. AcAryazrI sohanalAla jI kI
bhAvanA ke anusAra vi. saM. 2052 ko gulAbapurA meM sUtrakRtAGga para
zIlAGkAcArya kRta TIkA kA adhyayana cAlU karAyA jo AcArya pravara ke rAtAkoTa
pravAsa meM AcArya pravara isase bar3I harSAnubhUti karate the| deza videza ke
anekoM ucca koTi vidvAnoM ne dvAdazAGga ke aMtargata sUtrakRtAGga ko atyadhika
mahatvapUrNa mAnA hai  /  DaoN. haramana, DaoN. pizela Adi vidvAnoM ne bhASA kI
dRSTi se AcArAGga aura sUtrakRtAGga ko prAcInatama arddhamAgadhI prAkRta kA rUpa
lie hue batalAyA hai  /  . sUtrakRtAGga meM jainetara dArzanika matavAdoM kI jo
carcA AI hai, vaha dArzanika vAGmaya tulanAtmaka dRSTi se bahuta upayogI hai,
yahI eka aisA Agama hai jisameM jIva, jagata, karma Adi ke sambandha meM bhinna-
bhinna darzanavAdiyoM ke siddhAnta nirUpita hue hai| sUtrakRtAna meM kriyAvAda,
akriyAvAda, ajJAnavAda, kSaNikavAda, paMcabhUtavAda, AtmaSaSThavAda Adi kA jo
vivecana AyA hai vaha kisI eka-eka darzana kA vizada spaSTa rUpa lie hue to
nahIM hai kintu kucha sAMketikatAeM vahA~ avazya hai jisameM ina siddhAntoM kI
bhinna-bhinna darzanoM ke sAtha pahacAna kI jA sakatI hai  /  sUtrakRtAGga meM
Aye vibhinna darzana viSayaka vivecanoM se yaha prakaTa hotA hai ki taba taka
vartamAna meM jo darzana upalabdha hai apanA pariSkRta, pariniSThita svarUpa
prApta nahIM kara sake the| darzanoM ke vikAsa kA saMbhavataH vaha prArambhika
yuga thA  /  vibhinna matavAdI vizeSataH kisI eka siddhAnta para jora dekara
apanA matavAda khar3A karate the  /  jo bhI varNana huA hai, vaha anusaMdhitsuoM
ko isa sambandha meM aura adhika gahana adhyayana aura anusaMdhAna kI preraNA
pradAna karate hai  /  vizeSataH zodhakartAoM ko isa pakSa para adhika dhyAna
denA cAhie  /  inake adhyayana se darzana ke kSetra kI aneka gutthiyAM sulajha
sakatI hai  /  Agama sAhitya kI jaina jagata meM sadA se mahattA aura upayogitA
svIkRta rahI hai, isI kAraNa niyukti, bhASya, cUrNi aura TIkAoM ke rUpa meM ina
para vipula vyAkhyAtmaka sAhitya racA gayA  /  niyuktiyA~ AryA-gAthA chanda meM
prAkRta meM racita hai, unameM sUtra meM nizcita kie hue-nizcayAtmaka rUpa meM
pratipAdita kie hue artha yA tAtparya kA vivecana hai, vivecana ko bodhagamya
banAne ke lie aneka kathAnakoM dRSTAntoM kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai, jinakA inameM
kevala ullekha prApta hotA hai, yaha bahuta hI sAMketika aura saMkSipta vivecana
lie hue hai, inheM bhASya aura TIkAoM ke sahAre ke binA samajhA jAnA kaThina hai
/  ataH AgamoM ke TIkAkAroM ne AgamoM para TIkAoM ke sAtha-sAtha niyuktiyoM para
bhI prAyaH TIkAeM racI hai, eka vizeSatA kI bAta avazya hai ki padyAtmaka rUpa
meM saMkSipta racanA hone ke kAraNa inheM kaNThAgra rakhanA sarala thA, ataeva
dharma pravacana meM inheM uddhRta kiyA jA sakatA thA  /  paramparA se aisA mAnA
jAtA hai ki AcArya dvitIya bhadrabAhu jo aSTAGga nimitta aura mantra vidyA meM
niSNAta the, niyuktiyoM ke racanAkAra the  /  jisa prakAra niyuktiyoM kI prAkRta
gAthAoM meM racanAeM huI usI prakAra bhASyoM kI bhI racanAeM huI, niyuktiyoM kI
bhASA aura bhASyoM kI bhASA prAcIna arddhamAgadhI hai  /  bhASyoM meM mukhyataH
nizItha bhASya, vyavahAra bhASya aura xviii

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra**, **Brihatkalpa Bhashya** are considered to be
of great importance. They contain numerous worldly stories, ancient traditions
of ascetics, and their thoughts.   These three commentaries are essential for
understanding the ancient philosophy, conduct, and rituals of the Jain ascetic
community. After the **niyuktis** and **bhashyas**, **churnis** come into play.
These were written in prose. The reason for this was that it was relatively
difficult to elaborate on the principles of Jain philosophy and religion in the
**niyuktis** and **bhashyas**, which were written in Prakrit verses.
**Churnis**, being written in prose, provided a better platform for this.
Additionally, **churnis** introduced a novel linguistic experiment. They were
written in a mixture of Sanskrit and Prakrit, a style known as **Mani Praval
Naya** in literature. Just as beads and corals, when combined, remain distinct,
so too do Sanskrit and Prakrit, even when blended, retain their individual
identities. Prakrit predominates in **churnis**. The narrative portion of
**churnis** is written entirely in Prakrit, presenting topics like religious
stories, moral tales, and folk tales in a style accessible to the common people.
Wherever necessary, the etymologies of words are also provided in Prakrit. As
the context demands, numerous verses in Sanskrit and Prakrit are also quoted.
The **Churnis** on **Nishith Sutra** and **Aavashyak Sutra** hold immense
significance. They provide a wealth of archaeological and historical material.
They shed light on the diverse social customs and traditions prevalent in
different countries in ancient times, including festivals, celebrations, periods
of abundance and scarcity, trade, commerce, trade routes, maritime trade,
merchant caravans, carriers, bandits, thieves, guards, food items, clothing,
ornaments, art, and skills. This analysis in **churnis** is invaluable for
students of Indian knowledge. **Churni** literature is also highly significant
from the perspectives of folklore and linguistics.   **Jinadas Ganimahattar** is
widely recognized as the author of most **churnis**. He is said to have belonged
to the **Vaanijya Kula**, **Kautika Gan**, and **Braj Shakha**. While definitive
evidence regarding his time is unavailable, scholars speculate that he lived
around the 6th century CE.   **Churnis** are available on **Aachaarang**,
**Sutra Kritanga**, **Bhagavati**, **Kalpa**, **Vyavahar**, **Nishith**,
**Panchakalapa Dasha Shruta Skandha**, **Jeet Kalpa**, **Jeevaabhigam**,
**Prajnaapana**, **Sharira Pad**, **Jambudeep Prajna**, **Uttaraadhyaayan**,
**Aavashyak Sutra**, **Dasha Vaikalik**, **Nandi**, and **Anuyogadvaar Sutra**.
To provide a detailed analysis of the principles and ideas presented in the
**Agamas**, a vast body of literature in the form of commentaries was created in
Sanskrit. Sanskrit holds exceptional importance from a linguistic perspective.
It possesses the unique ability to convey a maximum meaning with a minimum of
words. The clarity and suitability that Sanskrit offers for explaining subjects
like knowledge are unmatched by any other language. Jain scholars were not
dogmatic; they were always pragmatic. They never shied away from accepting
anything that proved useful or beneficial. Although the core literature of the
Jain tradition is in Prakrit, when it came to presenting analytical
perspectives, Jain thinkers embraced Sanskrit with great enthusiasm. The **Mani
Praval Naya** mentioned in the context of **churnis**, which combines Sanskrit
and Prakrit, points to this very approach.  Another point worth considering is
that Sanskrit holds significance even from the perspective of being suitable for
learned audiences. **Aachaarya Siddharsi**, the author of **Upamiti Bhav
Prapancha Katha**, explains why he chose to write his work in Sanskrit instead
of Prakrit. He writes that through Sanskrit, the ideas presented in his work...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram bRhatkalpa bhASya kA bar3A mahattva mAnA gayA hai,
inameM anekAneka laukika kathAeM tathA sAdhuoM kI prAcIna AcAra vidhAeM-vicAra
saraNiyA~ Adi kA vivecana hai  /  _ jaina sAdhu saMgha ke prAcIna jIvana darzana
caryA tathA vidhi vidhAna Adi ko jAnane kI dRSTi se ye tInoM bhASya adhyetavya
hai, niyuktiyoM aura bhASyoM ke bAda cUrNiyoM kA sthAna AtA hai, inakI racanAeM
gadya meM huI  /  kAraNa yaha rahA ho ki prAkRta gAthAoM meM racita niyuktiyoM
aura bhASyoM meM jaina darzana-dharma ke siddhAntoM ko vistRta rUpa meM
pratipAdita karane kI apekSAkRta adhika suvidhA nahIM rahI  /  cUrNiyA~ gadya
meM likhI gaI, ataH yahAM vaisA sambhAvita thA, sAtha hI sAtha cUrNiyoM meM
bhASAtmaka dRSTi se eka abhinava prayoga huA  /  una saMskRta evaM prAkRta meM
mizrita rUpa meM huI, ise sAhitya meM maNi pravAla nyAya kahA jAtA hai, maNiyA~
aura maMge yadi eka sAtha milA diye jAye to bhI ve alaga-alaga pratIta hote hai
/  vaise hI saMskRta evaM prAkRta ko milA die jAne ke anantara bhI unheM bhinna-
bhinna rUpa meM dekhA jA sakatA hai  /  cUrNiyoM meM prAkRta kI pradhAnatA rahI
hai  /  cUrNiyoM kA kathA bhAga prAkRta meM hI likhA gayA hai jisameM
dharmakathA, arthakathA, lokakathA Adi ke rUpa meM varNyaviSaya lokajanIna zailI
meM prastuta kie gae hai  /  jahA~-jahA~ apekSita huA zabdoM kI vyutpattiyA~ bhI
prAkRta meM dI gaI hai  /  yathA prasaGga saMskRta prAkRta ke anekAneka padya
bhI uddhRta kie hai  /  cUrNiyoM meM nizItha sUtra aura Avazyaka sUtra kI cUrNi
kA atyanta mahatvapUrNa sthAna hai, inameM purAtatva evaM itihAsa kI atyadhika
sAmagrI prApta hotI hai  /  prAcIna kAla meM bhinna-bhinna dezoM meM kaisI-kaisI
sAmAjika rIti aura rivAja the, kaisekaise mele, parva dina tathA tyauhAra Adi
the, subhikSa, durbhikSa, vyApAra, vyavasAya, vyApAra ke mArga, sAmudrika
vyApAra, vyApAriyoM ke kAphile, sArthavAha, dasyu, cora, praharI, rakSaka,
bhojya sAmagrI, vastra prayoga, AbharaNa sajjA, kalA, kauzala Adi kA cUrNiyoM
meM jo vizleSaNa huA hai, vaha bhAratIya vidyA ke adhyetAo ke lie bahuta
mahattvapUrNa hai  /  loka kathA, bhASA vijJAna Adi kI dRSTi se bhI cUrNi
sAhitya kA bar3A mahatva hai, adhikAMza cUrNiyo ke racanAkAra ke rUpa meM
jinadAsa gaNi mahattara kA nAma vizruta hai  /  batAyA jAtA hai ki ve vANijya
kula, kauTikagaNa, brajazAkhA se sambandhita the  /  yadyapi inake samaya ke
sambandha meM nizcita pramANa prApta nahIM hai, kintu vidvAn chaThI IsvI zatAbdI
ke AsapAsa inake samaya kI parikalpanA karate hai  /  AcArAGga, sUtrakRtAGga,
bhagavatI, kalpa, vyavahAra, nizItha, paMcakalpa dazAzruta skaMdha,jIta kalpa,
jIvAbhigama, prajJApanA,zarIrapada, jambUdvIpa prajJA, uttarAdhyayana, Avazyaka
satra, dazavaikAlika, nandI tathA anuyogadvAra-sUtra para cUrNikAeM prApta hotI
hai  /  AgamoM meM varNita siddhAntoM evaM vicAroM kA vizada vistRta vizleSaNa
karane hetu saMskRta meM una para TIkAoM ke rUpa meM vipula sAhitya sarjana huA
/  saMskRta kA bhASA zAstrIya dRSTi se apanA asAdhAraNa mahatva hai| kama se
kama zabdoM meM adhika se adhika Azaya vyakta karane kA usameM vilakSaNa
sAmarthya hai jJAna jaise viSayoM ke vizadIkaraNa meM saMskRta meM jo suvidhA
aura anukUlatA hotI hai, vaha anya bhASA meM nahIM hai  /  jaina vidvAn
AgrahavAdI nahIM the, ve sadA upayogitAvAdI rahe  /  jo vastu jisa kArya meM
upayogI siddha ho, lAbhaprada ho, use svIkAra karane meM unhoMne kabhI mu~ha
nahIM mor3A, yadyapi jaina paramparA kA mUla sAhitya prAkRta meM hai kintu
vizleSaNAtmaka dRSTi se jaba prastuta karane kA prasaGga AyA to jaina manISiyoM
ne bar3I rUci ke sAtha saMskRta ko apanAyA  /  cUrNiyoM ke prasaGga meM jo
maNipravAla nyAya se saMskRta prAkRta kI mizrita rUpa kI carcA huI hai, vaha isI
dRSTikoma kI ora iMgita karatI hai| yahA~ eka bAta aura vicAraNIya hai,
vidvadjanabhogyatva kI dRSTi se bhI saMskRta, kA prayoga apanA mahattva rakhatA
hai  /  upamIti bhava prapaJca kathA ke racayitA AcArya siddharSi ne isa bAta kA
spaSTIkaraNa karate hue ki unhoMne apanA grantha prAkRta meM na racakara
saMskRta meM kyoM racA, likhA hai ki saMskRta ke mAdhyama se mere
graMthagatavicAra (xix

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** will reach the scholars, they will take it for
contemplation, if even one scholar understands the truth, it is far more
valuable than thousands of ordinary people understanding it. Because through it,
that message will reach millions, the commentators must have had such a tendency
in their minds. Many Acharyas have written commentaries on many Agamas, which
are useful from their own perspective. Acharya Sheelank has commentaries on
**Acharang** and **Sutra Kritanga**, as mentioned above. Acharya Sheelank has
discussed the principles, doctrines, and thought streams that have come in the
Agamas with great scholarship, his language is mature, his style of description
is serious, and there is a confluence of logic. The symbolic descriptions that
have come in the Agamas have become very clear and detailed due to the
commentary. During the time of study and teaching of the commentary, a thought
arose that it would be good if it were published in the simple form of the
national language Hindi, in a modern style. The scholar Acharya Shri
Sudarshanlal Ji M. Sa. and Munishri Priyadarshan Ji M. Sa. further emphasized
that this would be of special benefit to the inquisitive, the seekers, and the
students studying Prakrit and Jainology in various universities, as **Sutra
Kritanga** is accepted as a textbook in Prakrit and Jainology in many
universities. Discussions were also held with the officials and workers of the
**Shri Sthanakwasi Jain Swadhyayi Sangh**, everyone found this idea to be
worthy. On Akshaya Tritiya, Vikram Samvat 2055, a grand celebration of the year-
long fast was organized in the presence of the venerable Acharya Pravar Shri
Sudarshanlal Ji M. Sa., the young sage, at the **Shriman Bhim Singh Ji
Sancheti's Mill Super Synthetics Ltd.** At that time, all the sadhus and sadhvis
of the Nanak Amnaya were present. A seminar was organized in the presence of the
venerable Acharya, in which I also had the opportunity to be present. In the
seminar, the thought arose that in the memory of the revered Gurudev Acharya
Pravar Late Shri Sohनलाल Ji M. Sa., the Swadhyayi Sangh should take up some
literary work that would benefit the entire Jain world and the field of Jain
studies for all time. After contemplation and deliberation, it was concluded
that the commentaries written by Acharya Sheelank on these two Angas,
**Acharang** and **Sutra Kritanga**, and the commentaries written by Acharya
Abhaydevsuri on the remaining nine Angas, should be published in Hindi
translation in the memory of the revered Gurudev Acharya Shri Sohनलाल Ji M. Sa.
There has been very little effort to translate the commentaries into Hindi. The
translation of the commentary of Sheelankacharya on **Sutra Kritanga** was done
by Pandit Ambikadatt Ji Ojha under the guidance of Shrimad Javahiracharya, which
was published a long time ago and is now unavailable. In this long period, the
national language Hindi has undergone multifaceted development in terms of
style, presentability, etc. Therefore, its translation in a modern style will be
useful for the people at present, keeping this in mind, it was decided to
publish the Hindi translation of the commentaries of eleven Angas. In this
regard, correspondence was done with eminent Jain Acharyas, learned multi-
learned Munis, and distinguished scholars of Prakrit, Jain Agamas, and
philosophy in the country. Everyone considered this work necessary and worthy
and expressed their willingness to cooperate. In this context, the thought arose
here that we should start this work with the translation of the Sanskrit
commentary of Sheelankacharya on **Sutra Kritanga**. Accordingly, the main
editor of this work, the young sage, _xx_

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram vidvAnoM taka pahu~ceMge, una dvArA cintanArtha
parigRhIta hoMge, yadi eka bhI vidvAn sattatva ko samajha jAya to sahasroM
sAdhAraNa janoM ke samajhane kI dRSTi se kahIM bar3hakara hai  /  kyoMki usake
mAdhyama se sahasroM lAkhoM taka vaha bAta pahu~cegI, TIkAkAroM ke mana meM bhI
kucha aisA rUjhAna rahA ho  /  aneka AcAryoM ne aneka AgamoM para TIkAoM kI
racanA kI jinakI apanI-apanI dRSTi se upayogitA hai  /  AcArAGga aura
sUtrakRtAGga para AcArya zIlAGka kI TIkAeM hai, jaisA Upara ullekha kiyA gayA
hai  /  AcAryazIlAGka ne Agama meM Ae hue vAdoM kA siddhAntoM kA, evaM cintana
dhArAoM kA bar3I vidvattA ke sAtha vivecana kiyA hai, unakI bhASA meM praur3hatA
hai, varNana zailI meM gambhIratA hai, aura naiyAyikatA kA saMpuTa hai Agama meM
Aye, sAMketika varNana TIkA ke kAraNa bar3e spaSTa aura vizada ho gae hai| TIkA
ke adhyayana adhyApana ke samaya meM eka vicAra samutthita huA ki kitanA acchA
ho ki rASTrabhASA hindI ke prAJjala rUpa meM, adhunAtana zailI meM isakA anuvAda
prakAzita kiyA jAya  /  adhyetA AcAryazrI sudarzanalAla jI ma. sA. tathA munizrI
priyadarzana jI ma. sA. ne isa para aura vizeSa bala diyA ki aisA hone se AgamoM
ke adhyayana meM nirata jijJAsuoM, mumukSuoM tathA vibhinna vizvavidyAlayoM meM
prAkRta evaM jainolaoNjI kA adhyayana karane vAle chAtroM ko bhI isase vizeSa
lAbha hogA, kyoMki aneka vizvavidyAlayoM meM sUtrakRtAGga prAkRta evaM
jainolaoNjI meM pAThyagrantha ke rUpa meM svIkRta hai| zrI sthAnakavAsI jaina
svAdhyAyI saMgha ke adhikAriyoM evaM kAryakartAoM ke sAtha bhI carcAeM calI,
sabhI ko yaha vicAra upAdeya pratIta huA  /  akSaya tRtIyA vi. saM. 2055 para
varSItapa pAraNoM kA vizAla AyojanazAsanagaurava, yuvAmanISI, pUjya AcArya
pravara zrI sudarzanalAla jI ma. sA. ke sAnnidhya meM zrImAn bhImasiMha jI
saMcetI kI mila supara sintheTiksa li. meM Ayojita huA  /  usa samaya nAnaka
AmnAya ke sabhI sAdhu sAdhvI vRnda upasthita the  /  AcArya pravara ke sAnnidhya
meM eka goSThI Ayojita huI  /  jisameM mujhe bhI upasthita rahane kA suavasara
prApta huA, goSThI meM yaha cintana calA ki paramArAdhya gurudeva AcArya pravara
sva. zrI sohanalAla jI ma. sA. kI puNyasmRti meM koI aisA sAhityika kArya
svAdhyAyI saMgha hAtha meM le jisase samagra jaina jagata aura jaina vidyA
kSetra ke logo ko cirakAla paryanta lAbha prApta hotA rahe  /  cintana maMthana
ke bAda yaha niSkarSa nikalA ki AcArAGga evaM sUtrakRtAGga ina do aMgoM para
AcArya zIlAGka dvArA racita TIkAoM kA tathA avaziSTa nau aMgoM para AcArya
abhayadevasUrI dvArA racita TIkAoM ke hindI anuvAda kA prakAzana Agama vAridhi
parama pUjya gurudeva AcArya zrI sohanalAla jI ma. sA. kI puNya smRti meM kiyA
jAye  /  TIkAoM ke hindI anuvAda kA prayatna aba taka bahuta kama huA hai  /
sUtrakRtAGga kI zIlAGkAcArya kI TIkA kA anuvAda zrImad javAhirAcArya ke
tatvAvadhAna meM paNDita ambikAdatta jI ojhA dvArA kiyA gayA kAphI samaya pUrva
prakAzita huA jo aba aprApya hai  /  isa lambI avadhi meM rASTrabhASA hindI kA
zailI preSaNIyatA Adi kI daSTi se bahamakhI vikAsa haA hai| ataH adhanAtana
zailI meM isakA anavAda vartamAna samaya meM jana-jana ke lie upayogI hogA, yaha
socate hue gyAraha aGgoM kI TIkAoM kA hindI anuvAda prakAzana kA nizcaya kiyA
gayA  /  isa sambandha meM gaNamAnya jaina AcAryoM, vidvAn bahuzruta muniyoM
tathA deza ke prAkRta, jaina Agama evaM darzana ke viziSTa vidvAnoM se patra
vyavahAra kiyA gayA  /  sabhI ne isa kArya ko Avazyaka evaM upAdeya mAnA tathA
saharSa sahayoga karane kA bhAva vyakta kiyA  /  isa saMdarbha meM yahA~ cintana
calA ki hameM isa kArya ko sUtrakRtAGga kI zIlAGkAcArya kRta saMskRta TIkA ke
anuvAda se prArambha karanA cAhie, tadanusAra isa kArya meM prastuta grantha
mAlA ke pradhAna sampAdaka yuvA manISI _xx

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The valuable assistance of Acharya Shri Sudarsanlalji M. Sa. in the form of
editing and guidance for the Shri Sutrakrutanga Sutra was continuously received.
I took up this work with Muni Shri Priyadarshanji, with the resolve to complete
it within this Chaturmas period. Our combined work continued almost all three
times, morning, noon, and afternoon, and we are pleased to say that this work
was completed well before the end of the Chaturmas period. Keeping the
sentiments of the original commentator intact, we have humbly attempted to
present this translation in modern, simple Hindi. The order of the sentence
structure is such that even if only the translation is read without the
original, there is no hindrance in the sentiments. For those who read with the
original, this "translation will be useful because the words of the commentary
are often presented in their original form, explaining their meaning. To
facilitate understanding of different sentiments in detail, an attempt has also
been made to give the same passage in different paragraphs. An attempt has been
made to express the difficult and most complex sentiments in the simplest words.
Hopefully, this translation will prove useful for those who are curious about
the Agamas, and for students, researchers, and scholars of Prakrit and Jain
scriptures in various universities and institutions, they will study it with
interest. It is to be noted here that the commentator has written some proposals
from his side at the beginning of each study, it was not considered necessary to
take it in order from the point of view of the original verses of the Agamas,
because it is the commentator's own thoughts, so that the study does not become
burdensome for the students, it remains simple and easy, from this point of
view, their translation has not been given. Shri Amolchandji Hingad and Shri
Mahendra Singhji Khabia, the devout followers, have taken great pains in
preparing the press version of the original, verses, shadow, Sanskrit commentary
and Hindi translation of the commentary. They are worthy of praise for the
heartfelt cooperation they have given in this Shrutopasana original work. Kartik
Shukla 15 VS 2055 Permanent Address: Kevalya Dham Sardar City District Churu
(Rajasthan) Dr. Chaganlal Shastri (M.A. Tri, Ph.D.), Kavya Tirth, Vidya
Mahodadhi, Nimbark Bhushan . Former Professor, Research Institute of Prakrit
Jainology, Ahimsa, Vaishali Bihar University, Department of Jainology, Madras
University, Madras

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram evaM prabuddha cintaka AcArya zrI sudarzanalAla jI
ma. sA. kA sampAdana evaM parAmarza ke rUpa meM nirantara bahumUlya sahayoga
prApta huaa| muni zrI priyadarzana jI ke sAtha maiMne isa kArya ko hAtha meM
liyA, isa saMkalpa ke sAtha ki isa cAturmAsAvadhi ke bhItara hI ise parisamApta
karanA hai, hamArA yaha sammilita kArya prAtaH, madhyAhna, aparAnha tInoM samaya
lagabhaga calatA rahA aura yaha vyakta karate hue hameM Atma paritoSa hotA hai
ki cAturmAsAvadhi ke parisamApana ke lagabhaga eka mAsa pUrva hI yaha kArya
bhalI bhA~ti sampanna ho gayA  /  mUla TIkAkAra ke, bhAvoM ko avicchinna rakhate
hue hamane adhunAtana prAJjala hindI meM yaha anuvAda prastuta karane kA vinamra
prayAsa kiyA hai  /  vAkya saMracanA kA aisA krama rakhA hai ki mUla ke binA bhI
yadi kevala anuvAda ko hI par3hA jAye to bhI bhAvoM meM koI vyavadhAna na Aye  /
mUla ke sAtha par3hane vAloM ke lie yaha "anuvAda upayogI hogA hI kyoMki
TIkAgata zabdoM ko prAyaH yathAvata rUpa meM upasthita karate hue unake Azaya kA
spaSTIkaraNa kiyA hai  /  bhinna-bhinna bhAvoM ko vizada rUpa meM samajha pAne
meM suvidhA rahe ataH eka hI avataraNa ko alaga-alaga Paragraphs meM bhI dene kA
prayatna kiyA hai  /  duruha aura jaTilatama bhAvoM ko saralatama zabdoM meM
prakaTa karane kI ceSTA kI gaI hai  /  AzA hai yaha anuvAda AgamoM ke jijJAsu
abhyAsArthiyoM tathA vibhinna vizvavidyAlayoM evaM vidyApIThoM meM prAkRta evaM
jaina zAstroM ke adhyayanArthiyoM, zodhArthiyoM aura anusaMghitsuoM ke lie
upayogI siddha hogA, ve isakA sAbhirUci adhyayana kreNge| yahA~ yaha jJAtavya
hai ki TIkAkAra ne pratyeka adhyayana ke prArambha meM apanI ora se kucha
prastAvika likhA hai, Agama kI mUlagAthAoM kI dRSTi se kramAnusAra adhyayana kI
dRSTi se use liyA jAnA apekSita nahIM samajhA gayA, kyoMki vaha TIkAkAra ke
apane vicAra hai adhyetAoM ke lie adhyayana adhika bhAravAhI na bane, sarala
evaM sugama rahe, isa dRSTi se unakA anuvAda nahIM diyA gayA hai| mUla, gAthAeM,
chAyA, saMskRta TIkA evaM TIkA ke hindI anuvAda kI presavRti taiyAra karane meM
tatvAnurAgI zrAvakavarya zrI amolakacanda jI hIMgar3a tathA zrI mahendra siMha
jI khAbiyA ne bar3A zrama kiyA, isa zrutopAsanA mUla kArya meM unhoMne jo
hArdika sahayoga kiyA hai ve sAdhuvAdAha hai| kArtika zuklA 15 vi. saM. 2055
sthAyI patA : kevalya dhAma saradAra zahara jilA curu (rAjasthAna) DaoN.
chaganalAla zAstrI (ema. e.traya, pI.eca.DI.) , kAvyatIrtha, vidyAmahodadhi,
nimbArkabhUSaNa . pUrva prophesara, ricarsa iMsTiTyUTa oNpha prAkRta
jainolaoNjI, ahiMsA, vaizAlI bihAra vizvavidyAlaya, DipArTamenTa oNpha
jainolaoNjI, madrAsa vizvavidyAlaya, madrAsa

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra **Heartfelt Expression**  To the revered Shri
Priyadarshan Muni Ji M. Sa.  It is our good fortune that the words of Bhagwan
Mahavira are still preserved in the form of eleven Angas. This is the speech
that resonates with the eternal voice of self-awakening, well-being, and
prosperity for all. This is the literature that proved to be extremely
beneficial for humanity in the past. Even today, people can find the right path
to happiness and peace by following the principles laid out in it. Today, when
the highest human qualities like religion, spirituality, ethics, morality,
honesty, authenticity, and compassion are fading away, there is a dire need to
spread the principles of non-violence, truth, purity, and non-possession as laid
out in the Agamas. Truth is never old, it is timeless, and its utility is also
timeless. This Agama is such a nectar-like literature that has the extraordinary
ability to guide everyone on the path of upliftment forever.  During my studies,
I had the opportunity to listen to the Agama principles from the mouth of my
unforgettable, most revered Gurudev, the late Acharya Pravar Shri Sohनलाल Ji M.
Sa., which not only strengthened my spiritual curiosity but also provided me
with solutions. As a result of the immense grace, efforts, and feelings of the
same revered Gurudev Shri, I and the current Sanghanayak Acharya Pravar Shri
Sudarshanlal Ji M. Sa. got the opportunity to study from Dr. Chaganlal Ji
Shastri, a renowned scholar of India, a master of Sanskrit, Prakrit, Pali, and
other oriental and Indian languages. Along with literature, grammar, and other
subjects, I specifically studied the Sanskrit commentary on Sutra Kritanga by
Sheelangaacharya under him. This commentary is indeed very important from the
point of view of revealing the secrets of the scriptures, deep understanding of
the principles, and analysis of the discussion. While reading it, our thirst for
knowledge and curiosity got even more strength, and we got the inspiration to
immerse ourselves in the further study of the Agamas.  The beautiful outcome of
this was that the Jain Swadhyayi Sangh, under the auspices of the Shwe. Sta.,
planned to publish Hindi translations of the Sanskrit commentaries written on
the eleven Angas. This will enable the Hindi world to benefit from the deep
study and contemplation of the commentators on the subject of Agamas.  1  Under
the same plan, the work of translating the commentary on Sutra Kritanga was
started. The special inspiration of the most revered Acharya Pravar Shri
Sudarshanlal Ji M. Sa. and the learned Dr. Shastri Ji was that I should also be
involved in this translation work. Accordingly, I, along with Dr. Shastri Ji,
started this translation work. xxii

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram hRdayodgAra zraddheya zrI priyadarzana muni jI ma. sA.
bhagavAna mahAvIra kI vANI gyAraha aGgoM ke rUpa meM Aja bhI surakSita hai, yaha
hamArA saubhAgya  /  yaha vaha vANI hai, jisameM jana-jana ke Atma- jAgaraNa,
kalyANa aura zreyas ke zAzvata svara mukharita hai  /  yaha vaha vAGmaya hai, jo
atIta meM mAnava jAti ke lie atyanta kalyANakArI siddha huA  /  Aja bhI isameM
nirUpita siddhAntoM kA avalambana lekara loga sukha zAMti kA sahI mArga prApta
kara sakate hai| Aja jabaki dharma, adhyAtma, nIti, sadAcAra, ImAnadArI,
prAmANikatA, sahRdayatA jaise uttamottama mAnavIya guNa miTate jA rahe hai,
Agama nirUpita ahiMsA, satya, zauca, aparigraha jaise siddhAntoM ke nitAnta
prasAra kI AvazyakatA hai  /  satya kabhI purAtana nahIM hotA, trikAlavartI hotA
hai, usakI upayogitA bhI trikAla vartanI hotI hai  /  yaha Agama eka aisA hI
amRtasAhitya hai, jo sadA sarvadA jana-jana ke utthAna ke patha para agrasara
karane kA vilakSaNa sAmarthya rakhatA hai  /  apane adhyayana krama ke bIca
apane prAtaHsmaraNIya, parama pUjya gurudeva sva. AcArya pravara zrI sohanalAla
jI ma. sA. ke sAnnidhya meM unake mukhArabinda se Agama tatva zravaNa karane kA
mujhe avasara milatA rahA, jisase merI AdhyAtmika jijJAsA ko na kevala bala hI
milA, samAdhAna bhI milatA rahA  /  unhIM pUjya gurudeva zrI ke asIma anugraha,
prayAsa aura bhAvanA ke pariNAmasvarUpa mujhe tathA vartamAna saMghanAyaka
AcArya pravara zrI sudarzanalAla jI ma. sA. ko bhArata ke khyAtanAmA vidvAn,
saMskRta, prAkRta, pAlI Adi prAcya bhASAoM evaM bhAratIya bhASAoM ke
mUrdhanyamanISI DaoN. chaganalAla jI zAstrI se adhyayana karane kA suavasara
prApta huaa| sAhitya, vyAkaraNa Adi anyAnya viSayoM ke sAtha-sAtha AgamoM ke
antargata sUtrakRtAGga kI zIlAGkAcAryakRta saMskRta TIkA kA unase vizeSa rUpa se
adhyayana kiyA  /  zAstrIya rahasyoM ke udghATana, gambhIra tatvAvagAhana tathA
vivecana vizleSaNa kI dRSTi se vAstava meM yaha TIkA atyanta mahatvapUrNa hai  /
isako par3hate samaya hamArI pIpaThiSA evaM jijJAsA ko aura adhika bala milA
aura AgamoM ke uttarottara adhyayana meM rama jAne kI preraNA prApta huI  /  isI
kA sundara pariNAma yaha AyA ki gyAraha aGgoM para likhI gaI saMskRta TIkAoM ke
hindI anuvAda ke prakAzana kI zve. sthA. jaina svAdhyAyI saMgha kI ora se yojanA
taiyAra kI gaI  /  isase hindI jagata TIkAkAroM ke Agama viSayaka gahana
adhyayana tathA ciMtana se lAbhAnvita ho sakegA  /  1 usI yojanA ke antargata
sUtrakRtAGga kI TIkA ke anuvAda se kArya prArambha kiyA gayA  /  parama
zraddheya AcArya pravara zrI sudarzanalAla jI ma. sA. evaM vidvadvareNya DaoN.
zAstrIjI kI vizeSa rUpa se preraNA rahI ki isa anuvAda kArya meM maiM bhI sAtha
rahU~, tadanusAra DaoN. zAstrI jI ke sAtha maiM isa anuvAda kArya xxii

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I have been involved in the translation of the **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra**.
Working with a highly learned scholar has been a great learning experience. I
have gained many new insights in terms of language style, presentation, etc., by
being involved in the translation. This has also inspired me to humbly attempt
to translate commentaries on some other **Agamas**. I believe this will provide
me with a wonderful opportunity to refine my knowledge, contemplate, reflect,
and practice, which is a blessing for a virtuous life. What greater benefit can
a **nirgrantha muni** have than to dedicate his life to the eternal worship of
**Shruta** and **Charitra**?  As Dr. Shastriji has stated in the preface, it is
hoped that readers, students, and scholars will benefit from studying this
translation along with the original text.  While translating the commentary on
the **Agama**, utmost care has been taken to ensure that the sentiments of the
**Agama** and the commentator are preserved. However, if any shortcomings remain
due to my limited knowledge, I humbly request the readers to inform me of them
with the witness of the infinite **Siddhas** so that corrections can be made.
**Parsparopagraho Jivaanam** xxiii

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram meM saMlagna huA  /  eka ucca koTi ke vidvAn ke sAtha
kArya karane meM bahuta kucha sIkhane ko milatA hai, maiMne unake sAtha anuvAda
meM juTe rahakara bhASA zailI, prastutikaraNa Adi ke saMdarbha meM aneka nUtana
upalabdhiyA~ arjita kI  /  mere mana meM yaha navotsAha bhI udita huA ki maiM
yathAsaMbhava katipaya anya AgamoM kI TIkAoM kA anuvAda karane vinamra prayAsa
karUM  /  maiM mAnatA hU~-isase mujhe apane jJAna ko parimArjita karane kA,
manana, ciMtana evaM anuzIlana karane kA sundara avasara prApta hogA, jo sAdhu
jIvana ke lie eka varadAna hai  /  zruta evaM cAritra ke zAzvata samArAdhana meM
yaha jIvana laga jAe, isase bar3A lAbha eka nirgrantha muni ko aura kyA ho
sakatA hai| jaisA ki prastAvanA meM DaoN. zAstrI jI ne vyakta kiyA hai, pAThaka,
svAdhyAyIgaNa evaM vidyArthIvRnda mUla ke sAtha isa anuvAda kA adhyayana kara
lAbhAnvita hoMge, aisI AzA hai  /  Agama kI TIkA kA anuvAda karate samaya pUrNa
sAvadhAnI rakhI gaI hai ki Agama evaM TIkAkAra ke bhAva surakSita raheM, phira
bhI yadi alpajJatA ke kAraNa kucha kamI raha gaI ho to ananta siddhoM kI sAkSI
se micchAmi dukkar3am dete hue pAThakoM se apekSA haiM ki ve kamI kI ora hameM
sUcita kareM tAki saMzodhana kiyA jA sake  /  parasparopagraho jIvAnAm xxiii

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##    1. 2. 3. 4. 5. First Study - 1. 2. 3. 4. Second Study First Objective
Second Objective Third Objective Fourth Objective - - 1. First Objective 2.
Second Objective 3. Third Objective Third Study Prefix Knowledge 1. First
Objective 2. Second Objective 3. Third Objective 4. Fourth Objective Fourth
Study Woman Knowledge 1. First Objective 2. Second Objective Fifth Study 1.
First Objective 2. Second Objective Sixth Study Seventh Study Eighth Study -
Shri Veeryadhyayana Dharma Sama - 6. 7. 8. 9. Ninth Study 10. Tenth Study 11.
Eleventh Study 12. Twelfth Study 13. Thirteenth Study 14. Fourteenth Study 15.
Fifteenth Study 16. Sixteenth Study - - - Self-Time-Statement-Authority -
Vaitaliya Hell Division Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra Index Shrimarg Samavasarana
Yatharthya - Veer Stuti Saptakushila Parigna Granth Adan Gatha } xxiv 1 56 92
114 130 149 178 · 197 210 224 242 262 289 306 327 Page Number 1 to 128 130 to
196 197 to 261 262 to 305 306 to 342 343 to 365 366 to 392 393 to 414 415 to 442
443 to 465 466 to 493 494 to 542 543 to 566 567 to 594 595 to 617 618 to 627

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. prathama adhyayana - 1. 2. 3. 4. dvitIya adhyayana prathama
uddezaka dvitIya uddeza tRtIya uddezaka caturtha uddezaka - - 1. prathama uddeza
2. dvitIya uddezaka 3. tRtIya uddezaka tRtIya adhyayana upasarga parijJA 1.
prathama uddezaka 2. dvitIya uddezaka 3. tRtIya uddezaka 4. caturtha uddeza
caturtha adh strI parijJA 1. prathama uddezaka 2. dvitIya uddezaka paMcama
adhyayana 1. prathama uddeza 2. dvitIya uddezaka SaSThama adhyayana saptama
adhyayana aSTama adhyayana - zrI vIryAdhyayana dharma sama - 6. 7. 8. 9. navam
adhyayana 10. dazama adhyayana 11. ekAdaza adhyayana 12. dvAdaza adhyayana 13.
trayodaza adhyayana 14. caturdaza adhyayana 15. paMcadaza adhyayana 16. SoDaza
adhyayana - - - svasamayavaktavyatAdhikAra - vaitAliya naraka vibhakti zrI
sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anukramaNikA zrImArga samavasaraNa yAthAtathya - vIra stuti
saptakuzIla parijJA grantha AdAna gAthA } xxiv 1 56 92 114 130 149 178 * 197 210
224 242 262 289 306 327 pRSTha saMkhyA 1 se 128 130 se 196 197 se 261 262 se 305
306 se 342 343 se 365 366 se 392 393 se 414 415 se 442 443 se 465 466 se 493 494
se 542 543 se 566 567 se 594 595 se 617 618 se 627

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Authority of Self-Time Statement **Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra - First Study
with Accurate Translation - The Authority of Self-Time Statement - First
Uddesaka**  **Bujjhijjatti tiuttījjā, bandhanaṃ parijāṇiā. Kimāha bandhanaṃ
vīro, kim vā jāṇaṃ tiuttī? ||1||**  **Chāyā** - **Budhyetītrod bandhanaṃ
parijñāya. Kimāha bandhanaṃ vīraḥ kim vā jānaṃ stroṭayati ||1||**
**Translation:** A human being should strive to attain knowledge, to know the
truth. They should also understand what bondage is. What is the nature of
bondage as explained by Lord Mahavira? How can one understand and break the
bondage of karma?  **Commentary:** This sutra is found in the Sutra Kritanga and
other texts. It has a connection with the Acharanga. As stated in the Acharanga,
"A being is of six types, based on their physical form. Their killing leads to
the bondage of karma," and so on. All this is worth knowing. Alternatively, some
schools of thought believe that liberation is attained through knowledge alone,
while others believe it is attained through action alone. However, Jainism
believes that liberation is attained through both, conduct and action. This
verse highlights this point. Even there, action performed with knowledge is
particularly fruitful. Therefore, the word "Bujjhijjā" - "Budhyet" signifies
knowledge. The word "Tiuttī" - "Stroṭayet" refers to action. The meaning is that
a person should attain knowledge, understand reality. What should they
understand? Keeping this question in mind, it is said that they should
understand bondage. The regions of a being where they are interconnected, the
karma particles...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH zrIsUtrakRtAMgasUtram - saTIka bhASAnuvAda sahitam
prathamAdhyayanaM - svasamayavaktavyatAdhikAraH prathama uddezakaH bujjhijjatti
ttiuTTijjA, baMdhaNaM parijANiyA  /  kimAha baMdhaNaM vIro, kiM vA jANaM tiuTTaI
?  // 1 //  chAyA - budhyetitrod baMdhanaM parijJAya  /  kimAha baMdhanaM vIraH
kiM vA jAnaM stroTayati  // 1 //  anuvAda - manuSya ko cAhie ki vaha bodha
prApta kare- satya ko jaane| use yaha bhI samajhanA cAhie ki bandhana kyA hai ?
bhagavAna mahAvIra ne bandhana kA kyA svarUpa batalAyA hai ? bandhana yA karmoM
ke bandha ko kisa prakAra jAna samajhakara tor3A jA sakatA hai ? TIkA asya
saMhitAdikrameNa vyAkhyA - budhyetetyAdi  /  sUtramidaM sUtrakRtAGgAdauvartate
/  asya cAcArAGgena sahAyaM sambandhaH  /  tadyathA''cArAGge'bhihitam - "jIvo
chakkAyaparuvaNA yatesiM vaheNa baMdhotti" ityAdi, tatsarvaM budhyetetyAdi  /
yadiveha keSAJcidvAdinAM jJAnAdeva muktyavAptiranyeSAM kriyAmAtrAt, jainAnA
ntubhAbhyAM niH zreyasAdhigama ityetadanena zlokena pratipAdyate tatrA'pi
jJAnapUrvikA kriyA phalavatI bhavatItyAdau budhyetetyanena jnyaanmuktm|
troTayedityanena ca kriyoktA  /  tatrA'yamartho budhyeta avagacchet bodhaM
vidadhyAdityupadezaH  /  kiMpunastadbudhyetAta Aha - 'baMdhaNaM' badhyate
jIvapradezairanyo'nyAnuvedharUpatayA vyavasthApyata iti baMdhanaM,
jJAnAvaraNIYAdyaSTaprakAraM karma, taddhetavo vA mithyAtvAviratyAdayaH
parigrahArambhAdayo vA  /  na ca bodhamAtrAdabhilaSitArthAvAptirbhavatItyataH
kriyAM darzayati - tacca baMdhanaM parijJAya viziSTayA
kriyayAsaMyamAnuSThAnarupayA troTayedapanayedAtmanaH pRthak kuryyAtparityajedvA
/  evaJcAbhihite jambU svAmyAdiko vineyo bandhAdisvarUpaM viziSTaM jijJAsuH
papraccha 'kimAha' kimuktavAn baMdhanaM vIraH tIrthakRt kiMvA jAnan
avagacchaMstadbandhanaM troTayati tato vA truTyati ? iti zlokArthaH  // 1 //  -
- TIkArtha isa sUtra kI saMhitA - padoM ke spaSTa uccAraNa Adi ke krama se
vyAkhyA kI jA rahI hai| yaha sUtra-gAthA sUtrakRtAMga ke prArambha meM hai  /
isakA AcArAMga ke sAtha saMbaMdha hai  /  AcArAMga meM kahA gayA hai 'jIva chaH
kAryoM ke hote haiM kAyika-zArIrika dRSTi se ve 6 prakAra ke hote haiN| unake
vadha - hiMsA se karmo kA bandha hotA hai, ityAdi  /  yaha saba jAnane yogya hai
/  athavA eka abhiprAya yaha hai 'kaI vAdI- saiddhAntika jJAna se hI mukti
prApta honA mAnate haiN| dUsare kaI kevala kriyA se hI mukti mAnate hai kintu
jainoM ke siddhAntAnusAra mokSa ina donoM se AcAra aura kriyA se prApta hotA
hai| yaha zloka isa bhAva ko prakaTa karatA hai  /  vahA~ bhI jJAnapUrvaka kI
gaI kriyA vizeSataH phalaprada hotI hai, isalie pahale bujjhijjA - budhyet isa
zabda dvArA jJAna kA kathana kiyA gayA hai  /  Age tiuTTaI troTayet zabda dvArA
kriyA kA ullekha hai  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki puruSa bodha prApta kare,
vAstavikatA ko jaane| vaha kisa bAta ko jAne, aisI jijJAsA ko dRSTi meM rakhate
hue kahA gayA ki baMdhana ko jAne  /  jIva ke pradeza jahA~ paraspara anuvedha
rUpa se sambaddha hote hai, karma paramANuoM 1

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga. When things become attached to each other,
they become intertwined, they merge into each other, this is called bondage.
There are eight types of karma, such as Jnanavaraniya. Or, it should be known
that the causes of these are Mithyatva, Aviriti, etc., or Parigraha, Himsa, etc.
Just by attaining Kevala Jnana, the desired or desired purpose is not achieved,
therefore, it shows the direction of action. Knowing the bondage, one should
break the bondage by specific actions in accordance with restrained conduct, one
should separate the soul from the group of bound karma, Samavaya karma. When
this was said, Jambuswami and other disciples, with a special curiosity about
the nature of bondage, etc., asked - What did Tirthankara Mahavira call bondage,
or what does a man know to break bondage, or by what does bondage break - this
is the meaning of this verse. **Verse 2** **Chittamantamachittam va, parigriha
kisamavi.** **Annam va anujanaai, evam dukkha na mucchai.** **Translation:** A
person who is Chittavant - conscious - accepts bipeds, quadrupeds, etc., or
Achittavant - unconscious - accepts gold, silver, etc., valuable things, or even
very ordinary things like straw, grass, and pus, as Parigraha, keeps them, and
allows others to do the same - to accept them as Parigraha, does not become free
from suffering, does not get rid of it. **Commentary:** To explain the nature of
the question of bondage, it is said - Here, bondage is referred to as karma-
related or karma-induced, there, the cause is not shown without the cause of the
birth of the cause, so the cause is shown. There, too, all beginnings are mostly
karma-based, arising from the attachment to the self, so Parigraha is shown
first. Chitta is the use, knowledge, that which has it is Chittavant - bipeds,
quadrupeds, etc., other than that is Achittavant - gold, silver, etc., accepting
both of these as Parigraha, even accepting the small, even straw, dust, etc., is
the meaning. Or, if it is the act of taking, the act of taking, the result of
the movement of the living being with the understanding of Parigraha, then, in
this way, by accepting Parigraha for oneself, by accepting others, or by
allowing others, one suffers from suffering - eight types of karma, their
fruits, or the form of Asatodaya, etc., therefore, one does not get rid of it.
Parigraha itself is the root of all evil in reality. And so it is said: "As long
as there is the fever of ego, the fire of pride, It is the mouth of death, there
is no peace, no upliftment. Those who desire fame and happiness, by these means,
They are rejected by others, somehow, from somewhere." And so, "Hatred is the
abode of attachment, the decay of patience, The opposite of patience is the
rule, The dwelling place of disturbance, the friend of pride, The enemy of
meditation is difficult. The origin of suffering, the death of happiness, the
abode of sin is oneself, Even for the wise, Parigraha is like a snare, for
suffering and destruction." And so, in the case of Parigraha, there is anxiety
and sorrow when it is not obtained, and when it is obtained, there is
protection, enjoyment, and dissatisfaction, so in the presence of Parigraha, one
does not get rid of the bondage of suffering. **Commentary:** While explaining
the nature of the question related to bondage, it is said -  1 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  ke sAtha svayaM mila jAte hai-saMzliSTa ho jAte
hai, unheM apane meM milA lete hai, use baMdhana kahA jAtA hai  /  jJAnAvaraNIya
Adi ATha prakAra ke karma hai  /  athavA mithyAtva avirati Adi yA parigraha
hiMsA Adi unake hetu hai yaha jJAtavya hai  /  kevala bodha prApta kara lene
mAtra se abhilaSita yA vAMchita prayojana kI prApti nahIM hotI, isalie kriyA kA
digdarzana karAte hai  /  bandhana ko jAnakara saMyata AcaraNa ke anurUpa
viziSTa kriyA dvArA baMdhana ko tor3anA cAhie, use-baMdhe hue karma samavAya-
karma samUha se AtmA ko pRthak karanA caahie| aisA kahe jAne para jambUsvAmI Adi
ziSya vRnda ne bandha Adi ke svarUpa kI vizeSa rUpa se jijJAsA karate hue pUchA-
tIrthaMkara mahAvIra ne bandha kise kahA athavA puruSa kyA jAnatA huA bandhana
ko tor3atA hai, athavA kisase bandhana TUTatA hai-isa gAthA kA yaha abhiprAya
hai  /  cittamaMtamacittaM vA, parigijha kisAmavi  /  /  annaM vA aNujANAi, evaM
dukkhA Na muccai  // 2 //  chAya - cittavanta macitaM vA parigRhya kRzamapi  /
anyaM vA anujAnAti, evaM duHkhAnnamucyate  // 2 //  anuvAda - jo manuSya
cittavAna-caitanyayukta-dvipadacatuSpada Adi prANiyoM ko athavA
acittavAnacaitanyarahita-svarNa, rajata Adi mUlyavAna athavA tRNa, ghAsa, pusa
Adi ati sAdhAraNa padArthoM ko bhI parigraha ke rUpa meM svIkAra karatA hai,
rakhatA hai, auroM ko vaisA karane kI-parigraha ke rUpa meM grahaNa karane kI
AjJA detA hai vaha duHkha se mukta nahIM hotA, nahIM chUTatA  /   /  TIkA -
baMdhanapraznasvarupa nirvacanAyAha - iha baMdhanaM karmataddhatado
vA'bhidhIyante, tatra na nidAnamantareNa nidAnino janmeti nidAnameva darzayati,
tatrA'pi sarvArambhAH karmopAdAnarUpAH prAyaza AtmAtmIyagrahotthAnA iti
kRtvA''dau parigrahameva darzitavAn  /  cittamupayogo jJAnaM tadvidyate yasya
taccittavat-dvipadacatuSpadAdi, tato'nyadacittavatkanakarajatAdi,
tadubhayarupamapiparigrahaM parigRhya, kRzamapi stokamapi
tRNatuSAdikamapItyarthaH, yadivA kasanaM kasaH parigrahabuddhayA jIvasya gamana
pariNAma itiyAvat tadevaM svataH parigrahaM
parigRhyAnyAnvAgrAhayitvAgRhNatovA'nyAnanujJAyaduH khayatItiduHkham-aSTaprakAraM
karma tatphalaM vA'sAtodayAdirUpaM tasmAnnamucyata iti  /  parigrahAgrahaeva
paramArthato'narthamUlaM bhavati  /  tathA coktam - "mamAhamiti caiSa
yAvadabhimAnadAhajvaraH, kRtAntamukhameva tAvaditi na prazAntyunnayaH  /  yazaH
sukha pipAsi tairayamasAvanoMttaraiH, parairapasadaH kuto'pi
kathamapyapAkRSyate"  // 1 //  .. tathA ca-"dveSasyAyatanaM dhRterapacayaH
kSAnteH pratIpo vidhi, vyAkSepasya suhRnmadasya bhavanaM dhyAnasya kaSTo ripuH|
duHkhasya prabhavaH sukhasya nidhanaM pApasya vAso nijaH, prAjJasyA'pi parigraho
graha iva klezAya nAzAya ca  // " // 2 //  tathA ca parigraheSvaprAptanaSTeSu
kAGgAzoko prApteSu ca rakSaNamupabhoge cAtRptirityevaM parigrahe sati duH
khAtmakAd baMdhanAnnamucyata iti  // 2 //  TIkArtha - baMdhanaviSayaka prazna ke
svarUpa kA nirvacana-vivecana karate hue kahate haiM - 1 2

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement of Authority  Here, karma or the causes of karma are
called bondage. Without a cause or reason, the effect of the cause does not
arise - it does not come into existence, therefore, here we first explain the
bondage of the Agamas. All actions beginning with violence are the material
cause of karma. These actions are mainly born from the feeling of "I" and
"mine", from the grasping intellect. Therefore, in the beginning, only the
grasping is shown.  Anything that has the activity of mind, knowledge, or
consciousness is called "chittavan". Two-legged, four-legged creatures are
included in this. Besides them, gold, silver, etc., which are devoid of mind or
consciousness, are called "achitta". This is of two types. To take and keep both
these types of grasping, even if it is something as insignificant as grass and
dust, comes under keeping grasping. Another explanation of grasping is to be
attracted to an object, to be driven towards it by the grasping intellect - this
is also included in grasping. The person who himself keeps grasping, makes
others do the same, and approves of those who keep grasping, does not become
free from the eight types of karma and their painful fruits. To be attached to
grasping, to remain bound by it, is truly meaningless.  It is said - "This is
mine, this is me", this ego-based burning fever, as long as it remains in a
person, then the face of Yama, the god of death, is his only refuge - until
death, he remains trapped in it. He does not attain peace. Those who have a
thirst for fame and pleasure - a strong desire, which ultimately bears only
misfortune, acquire this grasping, which is harmful and painful, with great
difficulty. And also,  This grasping is the dwelling place of hatred, the decay
of patience, the enemy of forbearance, the friend of mental distraction, the
abode of pride, the painful enemy of meditation, the cause of suffering, the
destroyer of happiness, and the dwelling place of sin - it is filled with sin.
Grasping, like the opposite of grasping, destroys the wise man, causing him
pain.  The desire to obtain grasping that is not obtained remains, when it is
obtained and goes away, then a longing arises in the mind. There is also pain in
protecting the obtained grasping, the mind remains restless, even when it is
continuously enjoyed, there is no satisfaction - man does not become free from
it. Therefore, as long as grasping remains, there is no escape from the painful
bondage.  **Verse:**  *Self-inflicts death upon oneself, or causes it to be
inflicted by others. He who approves of the killer, increases his own enmity
towards those beings.*  **Translation:**  *A person who inflicts death upon
himself or others, or approves of those who do so, increases his enmity towards
those beings - his conduct towards them is like that of an enemy.*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH yahA~ karma yA karma ke kAraNoM ko bandhana kahA
gayA hai| nidAna kAraNa yA hetu ke binA nidAnI kAkArya kA janma nahIM hotA -
vaha utpanna nahIM hotA, isalie yahA~ pahale AgamakAra bandhana kA nirupaNa
karate haiN| sabhI Arambha-hiMsAdiMupakrama karma ke upAdAna kAraNa hai| ve
Arambha mukhyata: maiM aura merepana ke bhAva se parigrahAtmaka buddhi se
utpanna hote hai  /  ataH prArambha meM parigraha kA hI digdarzana karAyA gayA
hai| jisameM citta - upayoga, jJAna yA cetanA kA vyApAra vidyamAna hotA hai, use
cittavAna kahA jAtA hai  /  dvipada- do pairo vAle, catuSpada cAra pairoM vAle
prANI usameM samAviSTa hai  /  unake atirikta sonA, cAMdI Adi jo citta yA cetanA
vyApAra rahita hai ve acitta kahalAte haiN| yaha do prakAra kA parigraha hai  /
ina donoM prakAra ke parigrahoM ko grahaNa karanA, rakhanA, cAhe vaha ghAsa pusa
jaisA tuccha padArtha bhI ho parigraha rakhane ke antargata AtA hai  /
parigraha kI eka vyAkhyA yaha bhI hai kisI padArtha ke prati AkRSTa honA,
parigraha buddhi se jIva kA usakI ora gatizIla honA - pravRtta honA bhI
parigraha kare antargata hai  /  yo svayaM jo parigraha rakhatA hai, auroM se
vaisA karavAtA hai, jo parigraha rakhate hai unakA anumodana karatA hai, vaha
puruSa duHkha se ATha prakAra ke karmoM aura unake duHkhAtmaka phala se mukta
nahIM ho pAtA, parigraha meM Agraha rakhanA usase baMdhe rahanA vAstava meM
anarthamUlaka hai  /  kahA gayA hai-yaha merA hai, yaha maiM hU~, yaha ahaMkAra
mUlaka dAhajvara jaba taka manuSya meM banA rahatA hai, taba taka kRtAnta yA
yamarAja kA mukha-mRtyu hI usakI zaraNa hai- mRtyuparyanta vaha usameM pha~sA
rahatA hai  /  use zAMti prApta nahIM hotI  /  jinameM kIrti aura sukha kI
pIpAsA - tIvra abhilASA hai, jisakA antataH anartha hI phala hai, ve isa
parigraha ko jo apasada - duHkhaprada hai, bar3I kaThinatA se arjita karate hai
/  aura bhI yaha parigraha dvaiSa kA Ayatana - AvAsasthAna hai, dhRti-dhairya kA
apacaya kSaya hai, kSAnti kSamAzIlatA kA virodhI hai, caitasika vikSepa kA citta
kI caMcalatA kA mitra hai, mada-garva yA ahaMkAra kA bhavana hai, dhyAna kA
kaSTaprada zatru hai, duHkha kA utpatti hetu hai, sukha kA vinAza karatA hai,
pApa kA apanA nivAsa sthAna hai - pApapuMja vyApta hai  /  parigraha
viparItagraha kI jyoM buddhimAna puruSa ke lie kaSTaprada hai, usakA nAza kara
DAlatA hai| jo prApta nahIM haiM, vaise parigraha ko pAne kI icchA banI rahatI
hai, jo prApta hokara calA jAtA hai, taba mana meM zauka utpanna hotA hai  /
prApta parigraha kI rakSA karane meM bhI kaSTa hotA hai, citta meM vyAkulatA
banI rahatI hai, usakA upabhoga karate rahane para bhI tRpti nahIM hotI -
manuSya usase uparata nahIM hotA hai  /  ata: jaba taka parigraha rahatA hai,
duHkhAtmaka - duHkhaprada bandhana se chuTakArA nahIM ho pAtA  /  sayaM tivAyae
pANe, aduvA'nnehiM haNataM vA'NujANAi, veraM vaDDhai chAyA -
svayamatipAtayetprANAnathavA'nyairdhAtayet  /  dhantaM vA'nujAnAti vairaM
vardhayatyAtmanaH  // 3 //  - - ghAyae  /  appaNo  // 3 //  puruSa prANiyoM kA
svayaM atipAta-hiMsA yA ghAta karatA hai athavA auroM dvArA vaisA karavAtA
anuvAda jo haiM, jo ghAtakara rahA ho, usakA anumodana karatA hai, vaha una
prANiyoM ke sAtha apanA zatrubhAva bar3hAtA hai- una prANiyoM ke prati usakA
yaha AcaraNa zatruvat hai  /  3

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra ### Commentary  This commentary explains that a
person attached to possessions inevitably engages in actions that lead to
violence. The text states:  "If, in another way, the person bound by possessions
is not satisfied, and desires more, and is driven by the desire to acquire more,
and is the cause of trouble, then he himself destroys the life of a living being
through his mind, speech, and body, or through his life force, strength, and
body. The word 'tiwayae' is actually 'atiwayae', meaning to destroy life
excessively."  The commentary further explains that a person attached to
possessions not only harms others directly but also encourages others to do so.
By engaging in violence, supporting violence, and encouraging violence, such a
person creates a cycle of hatred that binds them to suffering for countless
lifetimes. The commentary concludes by stating that other forms of harmful
actions, such as lying, are also causes of bondage.  The text then quotes a
verse:  "In a family where a person is born, or where they live, a child is
born, and they faint in the presence of others."  This verse highlights the
suffering that arises from attachment to possessions and the consequences of
violence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA parigrahavatazcAvasyaMbhAvyArambhastasmi~zca
prANAtipAta iti darzayitumAha yadivA-prakArAntareNa '
bandhanamevAha-'saMyatItyAdi', saparigrahavAnasaMtuSTo bhUyastadarjanaparaH
samarjitopadravakAriNI ca dveSamupagatastataH svayamAtmana 'tribhyo'
manovAkkAyebhya AyurbalazarIrebhyo vA 'pAtayet' cyAvayet prANAn prANinaH  /
akAralopAdvA atipAtayet prANAniti  /  prANAzcAmI - tathA sa parigrahAgrahI na
kevalaM svato vyApAdayati aparairapi ghAtayati ghratazcAnyAn samanujAnIte  /
tadevaM kRMtakAritAnumatibhiH prANyupamarddanena
janmAMtarazatAnubandhyAtmanovairaM vardhayati, tatazca duHkhaparamparArupAd
baMdhanAnnamucyata iti  /  prANAtipAtasya copalakSaNArtha tAnmRSAvAdAdayo'pi
bandhahetavo draSTavyA iti  // 3 //  - vaha parigraha ko TIkArtha parigraha meM
rata puruSa ke dvArA Arambha samArambha avazya hote rahate haiM surakSita
rakhate aura bar3hAne ke lie aneka prakAra ke Arambha karatA rahatA haiN| vaisA
karane meM hiMsA hotI haiM, isI viSaya kI AgamakAra vyAkhyA karate haiM "
paJcendriyANi trividhaM balazca, ucchvAsanizvAsamathAnyadAyuH  /  prANAdazaite
bhagavadbhiruktA steSAM viyogI karaNantu hiMsA  // 1 //  prANa yaha hai
prakArAntara se sUtrakAra 'sayaM' pada se prArambha hone vAlI isa gAthA ke dvArA
bandhana kA svarUpa batalAte haiM  /  parigraha meM racApacA manuSya kabhI
saMtuSTa paritRpta nahIM hotA, vaha punaH parigraha ke arjana meM- dhanAdi ke
saMgraha meM tatpara hotA haiM  /  apane dvArA aMrjita parigraha meM jo upadrava
- bAdhA utpanna karatA hai - hAni pahu~cAnA cAhatA hai, usake prati vaha
parigrahI puruSa dvaiSa karatA hai, vaha mana vANI aura zarIra dvArA usa prANI
ke prANoM kA vyAghAta karatA yA usakI Ayu, bala aura zarIra ina tInoM kA nAza
karatA hai  /  'tivAyae' isa pada meM akAra kA lopa huA hai, mUlataH yaha
ativAyae pada haiM, isakA tAtparya prANoM kA atipAta yA kSaya karanA hai  /  - -
bhagavAna ne pAMca indriyAM, tIna bala, ucchavAsa - nicchavAsa aura Ayu ye dasa
prANa batalAye hai  /  ina prANoM kA viyojana karanA hiMsA 1 jisakA parigraha
meM Agraha hai - atyadhika AkarSaNa hotA haiM, vaha kevala svayaM hI prANiyoM kI
hiMsA nahIM karatA auroM dvArA bhI vaisA karavAtA hai  /  jo hiMsA meM lage hote
haiM, unakA anumodana karatA hai  /  isa prakAra kRtakArita evaM anumodita
svayaM karanA, dUsare se karavAnA, karate hue kA samarthana karanA, yoM tIna
prakAra se prANiyoM kI hiMsA karane ke phalasvarUpa vaha unase saikar3o janmoM
taka Tikane vAle zatrubhAva kI vRddhi karatA hai  /  usa kAraNa vaha duHkhoM kI
paramparA se jur3e hue baMdhana se chUTa nahIM paataa| yahA~ prANAtipAta ke
upalakSaNa-saMsUcana dvArA mRSAvAda asatya Adi se sambaddha baMdhana ke kAraNoM
ko bhI samajhanA cAhie  /  - jassiM kule samuppanne jehiM vA saMvase nare  /
mamAi luppar3e bAle aNNe aNNehi mucchie  // 4 //  chAyA yasminkule samutpannau
yai rvA saMvasennaraH  /  ri lumyate bAlaH anyeSvanyeSu mUrcchitaH  // 4 //  4

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement of Authority  A person, due to the family he was born
into or the people he lives with, if he develops attachment, he suffers, is
destroyed, or is distressed. Such an ignorant man becomes unconscious, deluded,
or attached to other things, worldly objects.  **Commentary:**  This verse
further elaborates on the nature of bondage. It says, "In which" (meaning the
family, nation, etc.) a person is born, or with whom he plays in the dust as a
child, or with whom he lives as a friend, wife, etc., in those (mother, father,
brother, sister, wife, etc.), he develops attachment, thinking "this is mine,"
and becomes attached to them. Due to this attachment, he suffers, is destroyed,
or is distressed. This is because of the karma generated by attachment, which
binds him to the cycle of birth and death, characterized by hell, animal life,
human life, and heavenly life. Who is this person? He is a child, ignorant,
lacking the ability to discern between right and wrong. This means that due to
excessive attachment, he becomes unconscious, deluded, greedy, and attached to
various things. First, he is attached to his parents, then to his wife, and then
to his children, and so on.  **Verse 5:**  Wealth, siblings, and even life
itself cannot protect anyone from suffering. Knowing the impermanence and
brevity of life, a being should strive to break free from the bonds of karma.
**Commentary:**  This verse explains how to break free from bondage. It says,
"Wealth, possessions, whether animate or inanimate, and siblings, brothers,
sisters, etc., all this" (meaning wealth, etc.) cannot protect a being from the
intense physical and mental suffering that he experiences in this world. Knowing
this, and knowing that life is short, a being should renounce attachment to
possessions, animate and inanimate, and to life itself. He should also renounce
harming other beings, attachment to family, and other forms of bondage. By doing
so, he will break free from the bonds of karma. Alternatively, it could mean
that he breaks free from karma through action, through the practice of self-
control and discipline.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH anuvAda manuSya jisa kula meM samutpanna huA
athavA jinake sAtha vaha nivAsa karatA hai, unameM vaha yadi mamatvabhAva
rakhatA hai to vaha lupta pIr3ita yA duHkhita hotA hai  /  vaisA ajJAnI puruSa
anyAnya vastuoM meM, sAMsArika padArthoM meM mUrcchita - moha, mUr3ha yA Asakta
hotA jAtA hai  /  TIkA - punabandhanamevAzrityAha - 'jassi' mityAdi, yasmin
rASTrakulAdau kule jAto yai rvA saha pAMsukrIDitai vayasyairbhAryyAdibhi rvA
saha saMvasennaraH, teSu mAtRpitRbhrAtRbhaginIbhAryyAdiSu mamAyamiti mamatvavAn
snihyan lupyate vilupyate  /  mamatvajanitena karmaNA
nArakatiryyaGmanuSyAmaralakSaNe saMsAre bhramyamANo bAdhyate - pIDayate  /
kau'sau ? bAlaH-ajJaH-sadsadvivekarahitatvAt  /  anyeSvanyeSu ca
mUrcchitogRddho'dhyupapanno mamatvabahula ityarthaH  /  pUrvaM tAvanmAtA
pitrostadanu bhAryyAyAM punaH putrAdau snehavAniti  // 4 //  TIkArtha Age
bandhana ko Azrita upalakSita kara kahate haiM jisameM - rASTrakulaAdi
vaMzaparamparA meM manuSya utpanna hotA hai, yA jinake sAtha bacapana meM dhUli
meM khelA, kUdA una mitroM yA patni Adi nikaTatam saMbaMdhiyoM ke sAtha rahatA
hai, mAtA-pitA bhAI-bahina pani Adi ke prati ye mere hai, usameM aisA mamatva
paidA ho jAtA hai, vaha unameM Asakta ho jAtA hai, vaisA karatA huA lupta,
vilupta yA duHkhita hotA hai, mamatva ke kAraNa jo karma baMdhate hai, unake
pariNAmasvarUpa vaha narakagati, tiryaJcagati, manuSyagati yA devagati mUlaka
saMsAra meM bhaTakatA rahatA hai  /  duHkhita hotA rahatA hai| isI ko spaSTa
karate hue TIkAkAra apane Apase prazna karate hai - vaha kauna hai ? svayaM
usakA uttara dete hue likhate hai - vaha bAla hai - ajJAnI hai, use sat, asat -
bhale bure yA zubha azubha kA viveka nahIM hai  /  isakA Azaya yaha hai ki
mamatva kI adhikatA ke kAraNa vaha bhinna-bhinna padArthoM meM mUrcchit -
mohamUr3ha, gRddha-lolupa, adhyupapanna - Asakta hotA jAtA hai  /  pahale
mAtApitA meM phira pati patnI meM tatpazcAt putraAdi meM kramazaH usakA sneha yA
moha bar3hatA jAtA hai  /  : vittaMsoyariyAceva, saMkhAe jIviyaM - savvameyaM na
cevaM, - kammuNA chAyA vittaM sodaryyAzcaiva sarvamaitanna trANAya  /  saMkhyAya
jIvitaJcaiva karmaNastu truTati  // 5 //  anuvAda - vitta, sampatti, sahodara -
eka mA~ se utpanna bhAI bahina Adi koI bhI prANI ko trANa nahIM de sakate,
duHkhoM se bacA nahIM skte| jIvana ke svarUpa ko nazvara aura svalpa hai
jAnakara prANI karmabaMdhana hai  /  5 tANai  /  uTTiI  // 5 //  TIkA
sAmprataMyaduktaM prAk kiM vA jAnan baMdhanaM troTayatIti' asyanirvacanamAha -
vittaM dravyaM tacca sacittamacittaM vA, tathAsodaryyAbhrAtRbhaginyAdayaH,
sarvamapi caM 'etad' vittAdikaM saMsArAntargatasyAsumato'tikaTukAH zArIra
mAnasIrvedanAH samanubhavato na trANAya rakSaNAya bhavatItyetatsaMkhyAya jJAtvA
tathA jIvitaM ca prANinAM svalpamiti saMkhyAyajJaMparijJayA, pratyAkhyAna
parijJayA tu sacittAcittaparigraha prANyupaghAtasvajanasnehAdIni
bandhanasthAnAni pratyAkhyAya karmaNaH sakAzAt 'truTyati' apagacchatyasau,
turavadhAraNe truTayedeveti  /  yadi vAkarmaNA kriyayA saMyamAnuSThAnarupayA
baMdhanAt truTyati karmaNaH pRthagbhavatItyarthaH  // 5 //

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Commentary:**  Previously, it was stated that a
being who knows, breaks the bonds. Now, analyzing the same, it is said:
**Wealth** refers to material possessions, which are of two types: **Saccitta-
Saprana** (possessing consciousness and life) and **Acitta-Aprana** (lacking
consciousness and life).  Brothers, sisters, and possessions, wealth, etc., in
the world, are unable to save a being from the intense, painful, physical and
mental suffering they experience. Knowing this, and understanding that the life
of beings is short, a being, through **Jnana-Parijna** (knowledge-based
consciousness) and **Pratyakhyana-Parijna** (renunciation-based consciousness),
renounces **Saccitta** and **Acitta** possessions, violence towards beings,
attachment and delusion towards family members, etc., which are the locations or
causes of **Karma-bandha**. By renouncing these, they break free from **Karma**,
become separate, and are liberated. Here, the word "Tu" is used in the sense of
certainty, meaning they **do** break free. This also implies that they are
liberated from the bonds of **Karma** through actions aligned with **Samyama-
palana** (self-control).  **Om Om Om**  **Verse 6:**  **Text:**   एए गंथे
विउक्कम्म, एगे समणमाहणा । अयाणंता विउस्सित्ता, सत्ता कामेहि माणवा ॥६॥
**Shadow:** एतान् ग्रंथान् व्युत्क्रम्य एके श्रमण ब्राह्मणाः । अजानन्तो
व्युत्सिताः सक्ताः कामेषु मानवाः ॥६॥  **Translation:**  Many **Shramanas** (non-
Jain monks) - **Ajainas**, **Buddha**, **Ajitakeshakambla**,
**Sanjayvelatthiputra**, etc., monks of the **Shramana** tradition, and
**Brahmanas** - **Brihaspati**, etc., followers of the **Brahmana** tradition -
those within the **Brahmana** tradition, violate and reject these principles,
remaining bound to their own doctrines. They are ignorant and remain attached to
sensual pleasures.  **Commentary:**  After stating the authority for study, and
explaining the **Sva-samaya** (own doctrine), the author now intends to explain
the **Para-samaya** (other doctrines).  **Etan** (these) refers to the
principles mentioned earlier. **Vyutkramya** (rejecting) and **Parityaajya**
(abandoning) refer to those who reject the principles and create their own
doctrines. **Satta:** (bound) - the word "Sita" is used here, meaning "bound" -
not all, but some. **Eke** (some) - this indicates that not all, but some reject
the principles. **Grantha-atikram** (violation of the principles) - this refers
to their rejection of the principles mentioned earlier. **Anantara-grantha**
(later texts) - this refers to the principles mentioned in later texts.
**Tadyatha** (for example) - the principles mentioned in later texts are as
follows: **Jiva-sattva** (the existence of the soul), **Jnana-avaran**
(knowledge-obscuring karma), etc., **Karma-bandha** (the bondage of karma).
**Tasy-hetu** (the causes of karma) - **Mithyatva** (false belief), **Avirati**
(lack of restraint), **Pramada** (carelessness), etc., **Parigraha-arambha**
(the beginning of attachment), etc. **Tat-trota** (the breaking of karma) -
**Samyag-darshan** (right faith), etc., **Moksha-sadbhaav** (the possibility of
liberation), etc.  **Eke Shramanas** (some monks) - **Shakyas**, etc.,
**Barhaspatya-mata-anusari** (followers of the Brihaspati doctrine),
**Brahmanas** (Brahmanas) - these **Shramanas** and **Brahmanas** reject the
principles mentioned by the **Arhats** (enlightened ones), and being ignorant of
the ultimate truth, are bound to their own doctrines. **Vividham** (various) -
**Anek-prakar** (many types) - **Ut-pravalya** (with great force) - **Sita**
(bound) - **Sva-samaya** (their own doctrines).  **Tathacha** (thus) -
**Shakyas** (Buddhists) - **Pratipadayan** (explain) - **Sukha-duhkha**
(pleasure and pain) - **Iccha-dvesha** (desire and aversion) - **Jnana-adhar**
(the basis of knowledge) - **Na-astya-atma** (there is no soul) - **Kinchit**
(any) - **Kintu** (but) - **Vijnana** (consciousness) - **Ekam** (one) -
**Vivartata** (manifests) - **Iti** (thus) - **Kshanika** (momentary) - **Sarva-
samskaara** (all formations) - **Iti** (thus).  **Tatha** (thus) - **Sankhya**
(Sankhya philosophers) - **Evam** (thus) - **Vyavasthita** (arranged) -
**Sattva-raja-tama** (sattva, rajas, and tamas) - **Saamya-avastha** (state of
equilibrium) - **Prakriti** (nature) - **Prakriti** (nature) - **Mahaan**
(great) - **Mahata** (greatness) - **Ahamkara** (ego) - **Tasmad** (from that) -
**Gana** (group) - **Shodashaka** (sixteen) - **Tasmad** (from that) -
**Shodashaka** (sixteen) - **Api** (also) - **Pancha-bhuta** (five elements) -
**Chaitanya** (consciousness) - **Purusha** (soul) - **Swarupa** (nature) -
**Iti** (thus).  **Vaisheshika** (Vaisheshika philosophers) - **Puna** (again) -
**Aahu** (say) - **Dravya-guna-karma** (substance, quality, and action) -
**Saamanya-vishesha-samavaya** (generality, particularity, and inherence) -
**Shat-padartha** (six categories) - **Iti** (thus).  **Naiyayika** (Nyaya
philosophers) - **Pramana-prameya** (means of knowledge and objects of knowledge

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - pahale jo kahA gayA ki kyA jAnatA huA prANI
bandhana ko tor3a detA hai, aba usI kA vizleSaNa karate hue kahate haiM - vitta
kA artha dravya hai, vaha sacitta- saprANa aura acitta aprANa do prakAra kA hotA
hai  /  bhAI bahina Adi tathA sampatti, vaibhava Adi saMsAra meM atyanta kaThora
kaSTaprada zArIrika mAnasika vedanAeM anubhava karate rahate hue prANI ko trANa
dene meM unase usako bacAne meM samartha nahIM hote| ise jAnakara tathA prANiyoM
kA jIvana alpakAlIna hai, yaha samajhakara vaha jJaparijJA- jJAnAtmaka cetanA
tathA pratyAkhyAna parijJA-tyAgamUlaka cetanA dvArA sacitta tathA acitta
parigraha, prANiyoM kI hiMsA, pArivArikajanoM ke prati mamatva-moha mamatva Adi
jo karmabaMdha ke sthAna yA hetu hai inakA parityAgakara vaha karma se TUTa jAtA
hai- pRthak ho jAtA haiM, dUra ho jAtA hai  /  yahA~ 'tu' zabda kA prayoga
nizcayAtmakatA ke artha meM haiM, arthAt TUTa hI jAtA hai  /  isakA yaha bhI
abhiprAya hai vaha karma se saMyamapAlana ke anurUpa kriyA dvArA karma ke
baMdhana se chUTa jAtA hai, pRthak ho jAtA 1 1 OM OM OM ee gaMthe viukkamma, ege
samaNamAhaNA  /  ayANaMtA viussittA, sattA kAmehi mANavA  // 6 //  chAyA - etAn
graMthAn vyutkramya eke zramaNa brAhmaNAH  /  ajAnanto vyutsitAH saktAH kAmeSu
mAnavAH  // 6 //  anuvAda - kaI zramaNa- ajainana-buddha, ajitakezakaMbala,
saMjayavelaTThiputra Adi zramaNa paramparA ke bhikSu tathA brAhmaNa-bRhaspati
Adi ke matAnuyAyI - brAhmaNaparamparAntarvartI jana ina siddhAntoM kA vyutkrama
kara ullaMghana kara apane siddhAntoM meM anubaddha rahate haiM  /  ve ajJAnI
kAmabhogoM meM Asakta bane rahate haiM  /  TIkA
adhyayanArthAdhikArAbhihitatvAtsvasamayapratipAdanAntaraM parasamaya
pratipAdanAbhidhitsayA''ha etAn anantaroktAn granthAn
vyutkramyaparityajyasvaruciviracitArtheSu grantheSu sattA: 'sitA:' baddhAH eke,
na sarveitisambandhaH  /  granthAtikramazcaiteSAM taduktArthAnabhyupagamAt  /
anantaragrantheSu cAyamartho'bhihita: tadyathA - jIvAstitvesatiM jJAnAvaraNIyAdi
karma bNdhnm| tasyahetavo mithyAtvAvirati pramAdAdayaH parigrahAraMbhAdayazca,
tat troTanaJcasamyagdarzanAdyupAyena mokSasadbhAvazcetyevamAdikaH  /  tadevameke
zramaNA: zAkyAdayo bArhaspatyamatAnusAriNazca brAhmaNAH 'etAn' arhaduktAn
granthAnatikramyaparamArthamajAnAnAH vividham aneka prakAram ut prAvalyena sitAH
baddhAH svsmyessvbhinivissttaaH| tathAcazAkyAevaM pratipAdayanti yathA -
sukhaduHkhecchAdveSajJAnAdhArabhUtonAstyAtmA kazcit kintu vijJAnamevaikaM
vivartata iti, kSaNikAH sarvasaMskArAH ityAdi  /  tathA sAMkhyA evaM
vyavasthitAH - " sattvarajastamasAMsAmyAvasthA prakRtiHprakRtermahAn
mahato'haMkArastasmAdgaNazcaSor3azakaH tasmAt SoDazakAdapi paJcabhUtAni,
caitanyaM puruSasya svarUpamityAdi  / " vaizeSikA : punarAhu:-" dravyaguNa
karmasAmAnyavizeSasamavAyAH SaT padArthA" iti  /  tathA naiyAyikAH
-pramANaprameyAdInAM padArthAnAmanvayavyatirekaparijJAnAnniH zreyasAdhigamaiti
vyavasthitAH  /  tathA mImAMsakAH codanAlakSaNodharmo na ca sarvajJaH
kazcidvidyate muktyabhAvazcetyevamAzritAH  /  cArvAkAstvevamabhihitavanto,
yathAnAsti kazcit paralokayAyI bhUtapaJcakAdvyatirikto jIvAkhyaH padArtho, nA'pi
puNyapApestaityAdi  /  evaM cAGgIkRtyaite lokAyatikA ? 'mAnavAH' puruSAH 'saktA'
gRddhA adhyupapannAH kAmeSu, icchAmadanarUpeSu, tathAcocuH "aitAvAneva
puruSoyAvAnindriya -

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Self-Time Statement of Authority**  **Passage:**  "O Blessed One! Have you
heard the wise say, 'Drink and eat, O handsome one! What has passed, O beautiful
form, is not yours. Do not fear! What has passed does not return. This body is
merely a collection.' Thus, those who are internally influenced by the meaning
of self-time, having crossed over the meaning of the scriptures, which is the
true meaning of the scriptures, are attached to their own scriptures and to
desires."  **Commentary:**  The first study in the commentary includes the
exposition of self-time - Jain principles, followed by the exposition of other-
time - non-Jain principles. Therefore, after stating his own principles, the
author of the scripture says:  Many men abandon the principles that have been
discussed before and remain attached to scriptures created according to their
own liking. The word "Aae-Eke" used in this verse means that not all are like
this, some are. The intention of accepting the principles of the scriptures
composed by them is that they transgress the aforementioned scriptures - Jain
scriptures. The aforementioned scriptures have expounded the meaning - the
implication that beings have their own independent existence, there is karma-
bondage of knowledge-obscuration, etc., false belief, non-restraint,
carelessness, attachment, beginning, etc., are the causes of their karma-
bondage. This bondage breaks through the means of right faith, etc. As a result,
liberation is attained. Some Shakyas - Buddhists, Shramanas, and Brahmanas
following the principles of Brihaspati, etc., transgress - violate all the
aforementioned principles spoken by the Tirthankaras, not knowing the ultimate
truth - the ultimate reality or truth, and remain stubbornly attached to their
own principles in many ways. The Shakyas expound:  There is no independent
entity called the soul as the basis of happiness, sorrow, desire, aversion, and
knowledge, but only a manifestation of knowledge manifests in various forms. All
karmic formations - substances are momentary, fleeting.  Those who believe in
the Sankhya philosophy explain their substances or elements in this way:  The
state of equilibrium - equal state of sattva guna, rajo guna, and tamo guna is
called nature. From nature, the great - intellect element arises. From
intellect, ego arises. From ego, the group of sixteen elements arises. From
that, the five great elements arise. The nature of the element called purusha or
soul is consciousness or awareness.  Those who believe in the Vaisheshika
philosophy explain:  Substance, quality, action, generality, particularity, and
inherence are the six substances.  The Nyaya philosophers expound:  Liberation
is attained through the knowledge of:  1. Anvaya - that which is present when
something else is present. 2. Vyatireka - that which is absent when something
else is absent.  The Mimamsakas say:  The protection of dharma is inspiration.
Inspiration means Vedic sentences that reveal unknown meaning. Through it, the
meaning of dharma, etc., is understood. There is no man called omniscient. That
is, no one is omniscient. There is no existence - reality of liberation.  Anvaya
is that which is present when something else is present. Vyatireka is that which
is absent when something else is absent.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH gocara: ) bhadre ! vRkapadaMpazyayad
vadantyabahuzrutAH ? " piba khAda ca sAdhuzobhane  /  yadatItaM varagAtri !
tnnte| nahi bhIrU ! gataM nivartate samudayamAtramidaM kalevaram  /  evaM te
tantrAntarIyAH svasamayArthavAsitAnta:karaNAH santo bhagavadarhaduktaM
granthArthamajJAna paramArthAH samatikramya svakIyeSu grantheSu sitA:-
saMbaddhAH kAmeSu ca saktA iti  // 6 //  TIkArtha prathama adhyayana meM
svasamaya - jainasiddhAnta ke pratipAdana ke pazcAt parasamaya-
-jainetarasiddhAntoM ke pratipAdana kA bhI samAveza hai, ataH apane siddhAntoM
ke kathana ke bAda itara siddhAntoM ko batAte hue AgamakAra kahate haiM - kaI
puruSa pahale jina siddhAntoM kI carcA kI hai unakA parityAga kara apanI rUci ke
anusAra nirmita granthoM meM Asakta rahate hai, yahA~ gAthA meM jo 'ee- eke'
zabda kA prayoga huA hai, usakA tAtparya yaha hai ki saba aise nahIM hote, kucha
hote haiM  /  apane dvArA racita granthoM ke siddhAntoM ko svIkAra karane kA
Azaya yaha hai ki ve pUrvokta granthoM-jaina granthoM kA atikramaNa karate haiM
/  pUrvokta granthoM meM aisA artha - abhiprAya nirupita huA hai- jIvoM kA apanA
svatantra astitva hai, jJAnAvaraNIyAdi karmabaMdhana hai, mithyAtva, avirati,
pramAda, parigraha Arambha Adi usake-karmabaMdha ke hetu hai  /  samyagdarzana
Adi upAyoM se vaha bandhana TUTatA hai  /  phalataH mokSa prApta hotA hai,
katiya zAkya - ya - bauddhAnuyAyI zramaNa tathA bRhaspati Adi ke siddhAntoM kA
anusaraNa karane vAle brAhmaNa, tIrthaMkaroM dvArA kahe sabhI uparyukta
siddhAntoM kA atikramaNa - ullaMghana kara paramArtha- paramatatva yA satya ko
nahIM jAnate hue aneka prakAra se apane-apane siddhAntoM meM AgrahapUrvaka
baddha-Asakta rahate haiM  /  zAkya aisA pratipAdana karate haiM sukha, duHkha,
icchA, dveSa aura jJAna kA AdhArasvarUpa koI AtmA nAma kA svatantra tatva nahIM
hai kintu eka vijJAna kA hI vivartana nAnA rUpoM meM pariNayana hotA hai  /
sabhI saMskAra - padArtha kSaNika kSaNavartI hai  /  sAMkhyavAdiyoM meM vizvAsa
karane vAle apane padArthoM yA tatvoM kI vyAkhyA kA isa prakAra nirUpaNa karate
sattvaguNa, rajoguNa aura tamoguNa kI sAmyAvasthA - eka samAna sthiti ko prakRti
kahA jAtA hai, prakRti se mahAn - buddhi tatva utpanna hotA hai  /  buddhi se
ahaMkAra kI niSpatti hotI hai, ahaMkAra se solaha tatvoM kA samUha AvirbhUta
hotA hai, usase pAMca mahAbhUta utpanna hote haiM  /  puruSayA AtmA nAmaka tatva
kA svarUpa caitanya yA cetanA hai  /  vaizeSika darzana meM vizvAsa rakhane vAle
batalAte haiN| dravya, guNa, karma sAmAnya, vizeSa evaM samavAya ye chaH
padArtha hai  /  naiyAyika isa prakAra pratipAdana karate hai - ke bodha se
mokSa prApta hotA hai  /  1. 2. anvaya' aura vyatireka' ke jJAnapUrvaka pramANa
prameya Adi mImAMsaka aisA kahate haiM- dharma kA rakSaNapreraNA hai, preraNA kA
tAtparya ajJAta artha ko jJApita karane vAlA vaidika vAkya haiM  /  usa dvArA
dharma artha Adi kA avabodha hotA hai  /  sarvajJanAmaka koI puruSa nahIM hai  /
arthA koI bhI sarvajJa nahIM hotA  /  mukti kA sadbhAva - astitva nahIM hai  /
yatsatve yatsatvamanvayaH jisake hone para jo ho, use anvama kahA jAtA hai  /
yadhabhAve yadabhAvaH vyatirekaH jisake na hone para jo na ho, use vyatireka
kahA jAtA 1 7

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra - The Charvakas explain their doctrines as follows:
(There is no substance called soul that goes to the afterlife - obtains another
existence after death - besides the five elements. There is no sin and no
virtue. Accepting such doctrines, these Lokayatikas - those who consider this
world as everything - Charvakas - those who believe in these doctrines - remain
greedy, attached to desires - the pursuit of worldly pleasures and enjoyment.
They address a woman in these words: "O auspicious one! This human world is only
as much as is perceived by the senses, obtained. A man went out on a path. His
footprint was marked on the path. Seeing it, an ignorant man says that this is
the mark of a wolf's paw. Heaven, etc., are also such false imaginations born of
ignorance. O beautiful one! - possessor of an excellent body, eat and drink
well. What has passed is not yours. O naive one! What has gone does not return.
This body is a collection or a combined mass of five elements."  Thus, those
whose hearts are attached to their own doctrines do not know the ultimate truth.
They transgress - abandon - the doctrines propounded by the Tirthankara Bhagwan,
remain bound by the doctrines in their own scriptures, and indulge in sensual
pleasures.  "There are five great elements, this is what they say. Earth, water,
then wind, and the fifth is space." (7)  Commentary: "There are five great
elements, these are the names given. Earth, water, fire, wind, and space are the
five." (7)  Translation: The proponents of the five elements declare that earth,
water, fire, wind, and space are the fundamental elements in this world.
Commentary: Here, the author of the sutra specifically refers to the Charvaka
doctrine and says: "There are, and they are great, and they are elements, and
they are great elements. They are great because they permeate all worlds. This
refutes the doctrine of the non-existence of elements. 'Here' in this world,
they are declared by the proponents of the elements. They are declared by the
Tirthankaras, or by the proponents of the elements, who follow the Barhaspatya
doctrine. They are accepted by themselves and declared by others. And these are:
earth, which is hard; water, which is fluid; fire, which is hot; wind, which is
mobile; and space, which is empty. And those who have these five, they are as
they are. These are well-known and can be perceived by direct experience, so
they cannot be refuted by anyone.  Now, the Samkhyas and others also accept
elements. For example, the Samkhyas say: "From the three qualities of sattva,
rajas, and tamas, the great one arises, which means intellect. From the great
one arises ego - the feeling of 'I'. From ego arises the group of sixteen, which
includes the five sense organs of touch, etc., the five organs of action -
speech, hands, feet, anus, and genitals - the eleventh, mind, and the five
subtle elements. These are: the subtle elements of smell, taste, form, touch,
and sound. From the subtle element of smell arises earth, which has smell,
taste, form, and touch. From the subtle element of taste arises water, which has
taste, form, and touch. From the subtle element of form arises fire, which has
form and touch. From the subtle element of touch arises wind, which has touch.
From the subtle element of sound arises space, which is devoid of smell, taste,
form, and touch."  Similarly, the Vaisheshikas also mention elements. For
example, they say: "Earth arises from the quality of earthness. It is eternal,
characterized by atoms. It is impermanent in the form of effects produced by the
process of two atoms, etc. It has fourteen qualities: form, taste, smell, etc."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram - cArvAka isa prakAra apane siddhAntoM kI vyAkhyA
karate haiM - (pAMcabhUtoM ke atirikta koI bhI paraloka jAne vAlA-mRtyu ke
uparAnta anyabhava prApta karane vAlA AtmA nAma kA padArtha nahIM hai  /  na
pApa hai aura na puNya hai  /  aise siddhAntoM ko svIkRtakara ye lokAyatika-
isaloka ko hI saba kucha mAnane vAle cArvAka-ina siddhAntoM meM vizvAsa karane
vAle puruSa kAmanAoM meM-sAMsArika sukhoM kI abhipsA aura bhoga Adi meM Asakta
lolupa bane rahate haiN| ve ina zabdoM meM eka mahilA ko saMbodhita karate hue
kahate haiM-he kalyANI ! ye mAnavaloka itanA hI hai jitanA indriyoM dvArA
dRSTigocara hotA hai, prApta hotA hai  /  eka manuSyamArga se nikalA  /  mArga
meM usake paira kA nizAna aMkita ho gayA, use dekhakara abahuzruta-ajJAnI puruSa
kaha dete hai ki ye bher3iye ke paMje kA nizAna hai  /  svarga, Adi bhI isI
prakAra ajJAnajanita mityAkalpanAeM hai  /  he sundarI !-uttama dehadhAriNI,
acchA khAo aura pIo  /  jo vyatIta ho gayA, vaha tumhArA nahIM hai  /  he bholI
! jo calA gayA, vo vApasa nahIM lauTatA  /  yaha zarIra pAMca tatvoM kA samudaya
yA sammilita puMja hai  /  isa prakAra apane-apane siddhAntoM meM jinakA
antaHkaraNa anuvAsita-Asakta hai, ve paramArtha ko nahIM jAnate  /  tIrthaMkara
bhagavAn dvArA pratipAdita siddhAntoM kA atikramaNakara-tyAgakara apane-apane
granthoM meM siddhAntoM meM baMdhe rahate haiM tathA kAma bhogoM meM lipta
rahate haiM  /  saMti paMca mahabbhUyA, iha megesimAhiyA  /  puDhavI Au teU vA
vAu AgAsapaMcamA  // 7 //  chAyA - saMti paJca mahAbhUtAnIhaikeSA mAkhyAtAni  /
pRthivyApastejo vA vAyurAkAzapaJcamAni  // 7 //  anuvAda - paMcabhUtavAdI aisA
pratipAdana karate haiM ki pRthvI, jala, agni, vAyu aura AkAza ye pAMca
mahAbhUta hI isa jagata meM mUla tatva hai  /  TIkA - sAmprataM vizeSeNa
sUtrakAra eva cArvAkamatamAzrityAha - saMti vidyante mahAnti ca tAni bhUtAni ca
mahAbhUtAni, sarvalokavyApitvAnmahatvavizeSaNam anen ca
bhUtAbhAvavAdinirAkaraNaM draSTavyam 'iha' asmin loke ekeSAM bhUtavAdinAm
AkhyAtAni' pratipAditAni tattIrthakRtA tairvA
bhUtavAdibhirbArhaspatyamatAnusAribhirAkhyAtAni svayamaGgIkRtAnyeSAJca
pratipAditAni  /  tAni cAmUni, tadyathA-pRthivI kaThinarUpA, ApodravalakSaNAH
tejauSNarUpaM, vAyuzcalanalakSaNaH, AkAzaM suSiralakSaNamiti, taccapaJcamaM
yeSAM tAni tathA, etAni sAGgopAGgAni prasiddhatvAt pratyakSa pramANAvaseyatvAcca
na kaishcidpotuNshkyaani|nnu ca sAMkhyAdibhirapi bhUtAnyabhyupagatAnyeva,
tathAhi sAMkhyAstAvadevamUcuH -satvarajastamorUpAn, pradhAnAnmahAn
buddhirityarthaH mahato'haGkAraH-ahamiti pratyayaH, tasmAdapyahaGkArAt SoDazako
gaNa utpadyate, sacAyaM-paJcasparzanAdIni buddhIrindrayANi,
vAkpANipAdapAyUpastharUpANi paJcakarmendriyANi, ekAdazamanaH, paJcatanmAtrANi,
tadyathA-gandha rasa rUpasparzazabda tanmAtrAkhyAni  /  tatra
gandhatanmAtrAtpRthivI, gndhrsruupsprshvtii|rstnmaatraadaapo
rsruupsprshvtyH|ruuptnmaatraattejo rUpasparzavat sparzatanmatrAdvAyuHsparzavAn
zabdatanmAtrAdAkAzaM gandha rasarUpa sparzavarjitamutpadyata iti  /  tathA
vaizeSikA api bhUtAnyabhihitavantaH tadyathA-pRthivItvayogAtpRthivI, sAca
paramANu lakSaNA nityA, dvayaNukAdiprakramaniSpanna kAryyarUpatayAtvanityA  /
caturdazabhirguNai rUparasagandha 8

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Earth, water, fire, air, and space are the five elements. They are pervasive in
the world, hence the term "great elements" is used. This refutes the view of
those who deny the existence of elements.   Earth is characterized by solidity,
water by fluidity, fire by heat, air by movement, and space by emptiness. These
are well-known and can be perceived directly. Therefore, no one can deny their
existence.   Other schools of thought, such as the Samkhya, also accept the five
elements. The Samkhya school states that the Mahat principle arises from the
primordial nature, which is composed of the three qualities of sattva, rajas,
and tamas. Mahat means intellect. From intellect arises ego, which is the
feeling of "I am." From ego arises a group of sixteen elements: five sense
organs (touch, taste, sight, smell, and hearing), five organs of action (speech,
hands, feet, anus, and genitals), mind, and five subtle elements. The subtle
elements are: smell, taste, form, touch, and sound. Earth arises from the subtle
element of smell, and possesses the four qualities of smell, form, taste, and
touch. Water arises from the subtle element of taste, and possesses the three
qualities of taste, form, and touch. Fire arises from the subtle element of
form, and possesses the two qualities of form and touch. Air arises from the
subtle element of touch, and possesses the quality of touch. Space arises from
the subtle element of sound, and is devoid of smell, taste, form, and touch.
Those who follow the Vaisheshika school also describe these elements. According
to them, earth arises from the quality of earthiness. It is of two types:
eternal and non-eternal. It is eternal in its atomic form, and non-eternal in
its composite forms, such as molecules. It possesses fourteen qualities: form,
taste, smell, touch, number, quantity, separateness, conjunction, disjunction,
being, non-being, gravity, fluidity, and velocity. Water arises from the quality
of wateriness. It possesses the qualities of form, taste, touch, number,
quantity, separateness, conjunction, disjunction, being, non-being, gravity, and
velocity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH sparzasaMkhyAparimANapRthaktvasaMyoga vibhAga
paratvAparatva gurutva dravatvavegAkhyai ruupetaa|
tathA'ptvayogAdApaH,tAzcaruparasasparza saMkhyA parimANa pRthaktva saMyoga
vibhAga paratvAparatva gurutvasvAbhAvika dravatva sneha vegavatyaH tAsu ca rupaM
zuklameva, rasomadhura eva sparza:zIta eveti  /  tejasvAbhisambandhAttejaH,
tacca rupasparzasaMkhyA parimANa pRthaktva
saMyogavibhAgaparatvAparatvanaimittikadravatvavegAkhyairekAdazabhirguNairguNavat
/  tatra rUpaM zuklaM bhAsvaraMca, sparza ussnneveti| vAyutvayogAd vAyuH,
sacAnuSNAzItasparzasaMkhyAparimANapRthaktvasaMyogavibhAgaparatvAparatva
vegAkhyaivabhirguNairguNavAn, hRtkampazabdAnuSNazItasparzaliGgaH  /  AkAzamiti
pAribhASikI saMjJA ekatvAttasya, tacca saMkhyAparimANa pRthaktva
saMyogavibhAgazabdAkhyaiH SaDbhirguNairguNavat, zabdaliGgaJceti  /
evamanyairapi vAdibhirbhUtasadbhAvAzrayaNe kimiti lokAyatikamatApekSayA
bhUtapaJcakopanyAsa iti ? ucyate-sAMkhyAdibhirhi pradhAnAt sAhaGkArikaM tathA
kAladigAtmAdikaM cAnyadapi vastujAtamabhyupeyate, lokAyatikaistu
bhUtapaJcakavyatiriktaM nAtmAdikaM kiJcidabhyupagamyata ityatastanmatAzrayaNe
naiva sUtrArtho vyAkhyAyataiti  // 7 //  TIkArtha - sUtrakAra vizeSa rUpa se
cArvAka siddhAnta ko upalakSita kara kahate haiM - 'ye pAMcoM samasta loka meM
vyApta haiM, isalie inake sAtha mahattva vizeSaNa kA upayoga huA hai, ye
mahAbhUta kahe jAte haiM  /  isa vivecana se jo bhUtoM kA abhAva mAnate haiM,
aise siddhAntavAdiyoM kA mata khaNDita ho jAtA hai-aisA samajhanA cAhie  /  isa
saMsAra meM bhUtavAdI, unake tIrthaMkara-siddhAnta prarUpaka puruSa athavA
bRhaspati ke siddhAntoM kA anusaraNa karane vAle puruSoM meM inhIM
pAMcamahAbhUtoM kA AkhyAna yA pratipAdana kiyA hai, svayaM isako svIkAra kiyA
hai, dUsaroM ko vaisA karane kA upadeza diyA hai  /  ve pAMca mahAbhUta isa
prakAra hai - (1) pRthvI kA svarUpa kaThinatA yA sakhtI lie hue haiM  /  (2)
jala drava yA tarala rUpa hai, (3) agni kA svarUpa uSNatA hai, (4) vAyu kA
lakSaNa calanazIlatA yA gatizIlatA hai (5) AkAza kA svarUpa riktatA yA khAlIpana
hai| ye bhalI bhA~ti prasiddha haiM  /  pratyakSapramANa dvArA jAne jA sakate
haiM  /  isalie koI inheM asatya nahIM kaha sktaa| sAMkhyaAdi anya darzanoM ne
bhI pAMca bhUtoM ko svIkAra kiyA hai  /  sAMkhyadarzanavettA aisA batalAte haiM-
satoguNa, rajoguNa tathA tamoguNa mUlaka prakRti se mahat tatva utpanna hotA hai
/  mahat kA artha buddhi hai  /  buddhi se ahaMkAra kI utpatti hotI hai, ahaM-
maiM hU~ aisI pratIti hotI haiM, usa ahaMkAra se solaha tatvoM kA samUha utpanna
hotA hai  /  jo isa prakAra hai-sparzana Adi pAMca jJAnendriyAM, vANI, hAtha,
paira, malasthAna, mUtrasthAna ye pAMca karmendriyA, gyArahavAM mana, tathA
pAMcatanmAtrAaiM  /  ve tanmAtrAe-gandhatanmAtrA, rasatanmAtrA, rUpatanmAtrA,
sparzatanmAtrA aura zabdatanmAtrA ke rUpa meM hai  /  gandha tanmAtrA se pRthvI
utpanna hotI hai, pRthvI meM gandha, rUpa, rasa aura sparza ye cAra guNa hai|
rasatanmAtrA se jala utpanna hotA hai, usameM rasa, rUpa aura sparza ye tIna
guNa hai  /  rUpatanmAtrA meM agni utpanna hotI hai, usameM rUpa aura sparza ye
do guNa haiM  /  sparzatanmAtrA se vAyu utpanna hotA hai  /  sparzavAyu kA guNa
hai| zabda tanmAtrA se AkAza utpanna hotA hai  /  vaha gandha, rasa rUpa aura
sparza se rahita hai| vaizeSika darzana meM AsthAzIlajanoM ne bhI ina bhUtoM kA
varNana kiyA hai  /  unake anusAra pRthivItva yoga se-pRthvI dharma ke saMbaMdha
se pRthvI utpanna hotI hai  /  vaha nitya aura anitya do prakAra kI hai  /
paramANu ke rUpa meM-paramANuvika svarUpa kI apekSA se nitya hai  /  dvayaNukAdi
ke krama se usake jo bhinna-bhinna kArya utpanna hote hai, unake anusAra vaha
anitya hai  /  rUpa, rasa, gandha, sparza, saMkhyA, parimANa pRthaktva, saMyoga,
vibhAga, paratva, aparatva, gurutva, dravatva aura vega ina 14 guNoM se yukta
hai  /  apatva-jalatva ke yoga se-jalatva dharma ke saMbaMdha se jala kA astitva
hai  /  vaha rUpa, rasa, sparza, saMkhyA, parimANa pRthaktva, saMyoga, vibhAga,
paratva, aparatva, gurutva,

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Kritanga Sutra  The earth element is composed of 14 qualities: natural
fluidity, affection, and velocity. Its original form is white. Its taste is
sweet and its touch is cool. Fire is produced from the element of fire or by the
association of the quality of fire. It acquires 11 qualities: form, touch,
number, quantity, separateness, combination, division, externality, internality,
induced fluidity, and velocity. Its form is white, luminous, and its touch is
hot. Air exists due to the association of the quality of air or the quality of
air. It is neither hot nor cold to the touch. It possesses 9 qualities: number,
quantity, separateness, combination, division, externality, internality, and
velocity.    The perception of space is through the vibration of the heart, the
hearing of sound, and the touch that is neither hot nor cold. Space is a defined
term in itself. It is one. It possesses the qualities of number, quantity,
separateness, combination, division, and sound. Sound is its characteristic - it
is perceived through sound.  **[Question]** Why are the five elements described
in this way, when other philosophers also accept the existence of the five
elements? This question arises in comparison to the Lokayata or Charvaka
philosophy.  **[Answer]** According to the Sankhya and other philosophers, ego
and other things are produced from nature. They accept many other things like
time, direction, and soul. However, the Charvaka philosophy does not accept any
other things besides the five elements, including the soul. Therefore, the
explanation of the Sutra is given in comparison to their philosophy.  **[Verse
8]** These five elements are called one. With their destruction, the destruction
of the embodied being occurs.  **[Commentary]** As it is, to show this, it is
said: "These five elements..." The five elements, earth, etc., mentioned
earlier, are called one because they are transformed into the body. There is no
soul, separate from the elements, that is a form of consciousness. There is no
other being, separate from the elements, that is imagined as a soul, a enjoyer
of happiness and suffering, and a being called a living being. They say this.
They also prove it this way: There is no soul separate from earth, etc., because
there is no evidence to perceive it. The evidence here is only direct
perception, not inference, etc. Because there is no direct connection of the
object with the sense organ, there is a possibility of error. If there is a
possibility of error, and there is a possibility of contradiction in similar
things, then the characteristic itself would be faulty, and there would be doubt
everywhere. As it is said:  "A person running on a rough path, with a hand
touching something, etc., is not difficult to find a fallacy with inference as
the main thing."  Inference here is also a sign of the path, etc., because there
is no direct connection with the object, and the action is only through the
touch of the hand. Therefore, direct perception is the only evidence. And by
that, the soul, separate from the elements, is not perceived. Whatever
consciousness is found in them, it is manifested in the elements themselves,
transformed into the body.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrakRtAGga sUtram zrI svAbhAvika dravatva sneha aura vega nAmaka 14 guNoM se
yukta hai| jala kA mUla rUpa zukla hai  /  rasa madhura hai evaM sparzazItala
hai  /  tejastva ke saMbaMdha se athavA tejastva dharma ke yoga se teja yA agni
kI niSpatti hotI hai  /  rUpa, sparza, saMkhyA, parimANa pRthaktva, saMyoga,
vibhAga, paratva, aparatva, nimittajanya dravatva aura vega ye 11 guNa usake
prApta hote haiM  /  usakA rUpazukla, bhAsvara - dyutimaya tathA sparza
uSNatAyukta hotA hai  /  vAyutva ke yoga se athavA vAyutva dharma ke saMbaMdha
se vAyu kA astitva hai, vaha anuSNa, azIta-na garama na ThaNDe sparza se yukta
hai  /  saMkhyA, parimANa, pRthaktva, saMyoga, vibhAga paratva, aparatva aura
vega ye 9 guNa usameM pAye jAte haiM  /  hRdaya kI kampana, zabda zravaNa,
uSNatA aura zItalatArahita sparza dvArA usakA bodha hotA AkAza apane ApameM eka
paribhASika saMjJA hai  /  vaha eka hai  /  saMkhyA, parimANa, pRthaktva,
saMyoga, vibhAga tathA zabda pAye jAte haiM  /  zabda usakA liGga hai-zabda
dvArA usakI pratIti hotI hai  /  6 guNa usake (isI prakAra anya siddhAntavAdiyoM
ne bhI pAMcamahAbhUtoM kA astitva svIkAra kiyA hai  /  taba lokAyatika yA
cArvAka mata kI apekSA se hI pAMca bhUtoM kA varNana kyoM kiyA gayA 2] yaha
prazna upasthita hotA hai ? isake samAdhAna rUpa meM kahA jAtA hai ki sAMkhya
Adi dArzaniko ke anusAra prakRti seahaMkAra Adi kI utpatti hotI hai, ve kAla
dizA tathA AtmAAdi anya aneka padArtha svIkAra karate hai to cArvAka pAMca
mahAbhUtoM ke atirikta AtmA Adi anya kinhIM bhI padArthoM ko svIkAra nahIM
karate, ataeva unake siddhAnta kI apekSA se hI sUtra kI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai  /
eepaMca mahabbhUyA, tebbho egotti AhiyA  /  aha tesiM viNAseNaM, viNAso hoi
dehiNo  // 8 //  chAyA - etAni paJcamahAbhUtAni, tebhya ekaityAkhyAtavantaH  /
atha tesAM vinAzena, vinAzo bhavati dehinaH  // 8 //  anuvAda ve
cArvAkasiddhAntAnuyAyI aisA kahate haiM ki pahale varNita pAMcamahAbhUta hI
maulika tatva hai, unase unake samanvaya, sammilana se AtmA utpanna hotI hai  /
jaba inakA vinAza-pArthakya ho jAtA hai-ye alaga-alaga ho jAte haiM taba AtmA kA
bhI nAza ho jAtA hai  /  - TIkA - yathAcaitat tathAdarzayitumAha-eepaMca
mabbhUyA ityAdi  /  'etAni' anantaroktAnipRthivyAdInipaJcamahAbhUtAniyAni,
tebhyaH kAyAkArapariNatebhya ekaH kazciccidrUpo bhUtAvyatirikta AtmAbhavati  /
na bhUtebhyo vyatirikto'paraH kazcit paraparikalpitaH paralokAnuyAyI
sukhaduHkhabhoktA jIvAkhyaH padArtho'stItyevamAkhyAtavantaste  /  tathA (te) hi
evaM pramANayaMti-napRthivyAdi vyatirikta AtmA'sti tadgrAhakapramANAbhAvAt
pramANaJcAtra pratyakSameva, nAnumAdikaM tatrendriyeNa sAkSAdarthasya
sambandhAbhAvAd vyAbhicAra saMbhavaH  /  satica vyabhicArasaMbhave sadRze ca
bAdhAsaMbhave tallakSaNameva dUSitaM syAditi sarvatrAnAzvAsaH  /  tathAcoktam
"hastasparzAdivAndhena viSamepathidhAvatA  /  anumAna pradhAnena vinipAto na
durlabhaH " ? anumAnaJcAtropalakSaNa mAgamAdInAmapi,
sAkSAdarthasaMbaMdhAbhAvAddhastasparzaneneva pravRttiriti  /
tasmAtpratyakSamevaikaM pramANaM tena ca bhUtavyatiriktasyAtmano na grahaNaM
yattu caitanyaM teSUpalabhyate, tadbhUteSveva kAyAkArapariNateSvabhivyajyate, 10

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement of Authority  It is said that the power of intoxication
arises from the combination of ingredients in intoxicating drinks. Similarly,
consciousness cannot be something other than the elements, because it is their
function, just like a pot. Thus, since there is no self other than the elements,
consciousness is merely a manifestation of the elements, like the bubbles in
water. Some Lokayatikas accept that even space is an element, so the theory of
five elements is not a fault.  But if there is no other substance called the
self, distinct from the elements, then how can there be the designation of
death? To this doubt, it is said:  "When the body form of these beings changes
and consciousness manifests, then, upon the destruction of one of them, the
destruction of the other, or both, the destruction of the embodied being,
Devadatta, is accepted. Therefore, the designation of death arises, not the
destruction of the soul." This is the argument of the proponent of consciousness
distinct from the elements.  To refute this, the author of the text says:  "The
five elements, along with their other qualities, are the cause of consciousness.
The five sense organs do not perceive anything other than the five elements."
[33]  Here, the statement "the five elements, along with their other qualities,
are the cause of consciousness" is a declaration. The other statements are
presented as reasons, and the example is implied, as it is easily understood.
Therefore, the Charvaka should be asked:  "What is this consciousness that
manifests from the combination of the elements? Is it independent of them, or is
it dependent on them?"  Now, it cannot be independent, because it is said:  "The
other qualities of the elements are the cause of consciousness." [33]  For
example, the quality of hardness is the quality of earth, the quality of
fluidity is the quality of water, the quality of burning is the quality of fire,
the quality of movement is the quality of air, and the quality of pervasiveness
is the quality of space. Or, as mentioned earlier, the qualities of smell, etc.,
are the qualities of earth, etc. Each of these qualities is distinct from
consciousness. The word "and" indicates the possibility of another alternative.
Since the qualities of earth, etc., exist, and the quality of consciousness does
not exist in each of them, nor in their combination, the quality of
consciousness cannot be established.  The example here is:  The combination of
elements is taken as the subject of the argument, and it does not have the
quality of consciousness. This is because the quality of consciousness is the
quality of other elements. The combination of any other qualities does not
produce a new quality. For example, the quality of oil, which is the quality of
smoothness, does not arise in a combination of sand. Similarly, the quality of a
pillar, etc., does not arise in a combination of a pot and a cloth. It is
observed that consciousness is present in the body, and it will be the quality
of the self, not of the elements.  The author presents another reason for the
same conclusion:  "The five sense organs do not perceive anything other than the
five elements." [33]  The five sense organs are touch, taste, sight, smell, and
hearing. Their locations are the spaces where they reside. Since they do not
have the quality of consciousness, consciousness does not arise from the
combination of elements.  The heart of this argument is:  The Lokayatikas do not
accept the existence of a separate perceiver. They believe that the sense organs
themselves are the perceivers. Their locations are the material causes of
perception. Since they are non-conscious, consciousness does not arise from the
combination of elements.  The locations of the sense organs are:  The sense of
hearing is located in space, because space is hollow. The sense of smell is
located in earth, because it is its essence. The sense of sight is located in
fire, because it is its form. Similarly, the sense of taste is located in water,
and the sense of touch is located in air.  The example here is:  The sense
organs are capable of perception. Since they are caused by non-conscious
qualities, whatever is caused by non-conscious qualities is non-conscious, like
a pot and a cloth. Thus, the absence of consciousness in the combination of
elements is established.  The author presents another reason:  "The sense organs
do not perceive anything other than the five elements." [33]  Each sense organ
is made up of an element. Since there is no separate perceiver, they are the
perceivers. Each sense organ perceives its own object and does not perceive the
object of another sense organ. Therefore, no sense organ knows another sense
organ. Thus, the idea of a self that knows all five objects does not arise. It
is experienced that there must be a single perceiver, and it is his
consciousness, not the consciousness of the combination of elements.  The
example here is:  Consciousness does not arise from the combination of elements,
because the sense organs, which are caused by it, perceive only their own
objects. If one sense organ could perceive the object of another sense organ,
then Devadatta's perception would also be perceived by Yajnadatta. But this is
not observed.  Now, if the argument is based on independence, then there is a
fault. If, on the other hand, the argument is based on the dependence of the
elements on each other, and the quality of consciousness arises from the
combination of elements, then how can there be any fault?  The answer to this
is:  It has been said that consciousness arises from the combination of
elements, which are dependent on each other. Let us consider this: Is this
combination different from the elements that combine?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH madyAGgeSu samuditeSu madazaktivaditi  /  tathA na
bhUtavyatiriktaM caitanyaM tatkAryyatvAd, ghaTAdivaditi  /  tadevaM
bhUtavyatiriktasyA''tmano'bhAvAdbhUtAnAmeva caitanyAbhivyakti: jalasya
budbudAbhivyaktivaditi keSAJcillokAyatikAnAmAkAzasyA'pi
bhUtatvenAbhyupagamAdbhUta paJcakopanyAso na doSAyeti  /  na nu ca yadi
bhUtavyatirikto'paraH kazcidAtmAkhyaH padArtho na vidyate kathaMtarhimRta iti
vyapadeza ityAzaGkayAha- athaiSAM kAyAkAra pariNatau caitanyAbhivyaktau satyAM
tadUrdhvaM teSAmanyatamasyavinAze'pagame vAyostejasazcobhayo rvA dehino
devadattAkhyasya vinAzo'pagamo bhavati, tatazca mRtaiti vyapadezaH pravartate na
punarjIvApagama iti bhUtAvyatirikta caitanyavAdi pUrvapakSaiti  /  atra
pratisamAdhAnArthaM niryuktikRdAha ." paJcaNhaM saMjoe aNNaguNANaM ca
ceyaNAiguNo  /  paMciMdiyaThANANaM Na aNNamuNiyaM muNai aNNo ||33|| paJcAnAM
pRthivyAdInAM bhUtAnAM saMyoge kAyAkAra pariNAme caitanyAdika AdizabdAt bhASA
caGkamaNAdikazcaguNo na bhavatIti pratijJA, anyAdayastvatra hetutvenopAttAH
dRSTAntastvabhyUhyaH sulabhatvAttasya nopAdAnam  /  tatredaM cArvAkaH
praSTavyaH- -yadetadbhUtAnAM saMyoge caitanya mabhivyajyate tatkiM teSAM
saMyoge'pi svAtantrya e'vAhosvit parasparApekSayA pAratantrya iti ? kiMcAta: ?
/  na tAvatsvAtantrye, yata Aha " aNNaguNANaMceti" [caitanyAdanye guNAyeSAM
tAnyanyaguNAni tathAhi - AdhArakAThinyaguNApRthivI, dravaguNAApaH,
paktRguNaMtejaH, calanaguNovAyuH, avagAhadAnaguNamAkAzamiti yadivA prAgabhihitA
gandhAdayaH pRthivyAdInAmekaika parihAMnyA'nyeguNazcaitanyAditi, tadevaM
pRthivyAdInyanyaguNAni  /  'ca' zabdo dvitIyavikalpavaktavyatAsUcanArthaH
caitanyaguNe sAdhyepRthivyAdInAmanyaguNAnAM satAM caitanyaguNasya
pRthivyAdInAmekaikasyApyabhAvAnna tatsamudAyAccaitanyAkhyoguNaH siddhyatIti  /
prayogastvatra-bhUtasamudAyaH svAtantrye sati dharmitvenopAdIyate, na tasya
caitanyAkhyoguNo'stIti sAdhyodharmaH pRthivyAdInAmanyaguNatvAt, yo yo'nya
guNAnAM samudAyastatra tatrA pUrvaguNotpatirnabhavatIti ) yathA sikatAsamudAye
snigdhaguNasya tailasya notpattiriti, ghaTapaTasamudAye 'vA na
stambhAdyAvirbhAva iti, dRzyate ca kAye caitanyaM tadAtmaguNo bhaviSyati na
bhUtAnAmiti  /  /  asminneva sAdhyehetvantaramAha "paMcidiyaThANANaMtti; paJcaM
ca tAni sparzanarasanamrANa cakSuH zrotrAkhyAnIndriyANi teSAM sthAnAni-
avakAzAsteSAM caitanyaguNAbhAvAnnabhUtasamudAye caitanyam - idamatrahRdayaM-
lokAyatikAnAM hi aparAsyadraSTuranambhupagamAdindriyANyeva draSTRNi, teSAM
cayAni sthAnAni upAdAnakAraNAni teSAmAcidrUpatvAnna bhUtasamudAye ' caitnymiti|
indriyANAJcAmUnisthAnAni, tadyathA zrotrendriyasyAkAzaM suSirAtmakatvAt,
ghrANendriyasya pRthivItadAtmakatvAt cakSurindriyasya tejastadrUpatvAt evaM
rasanendriyasyApaH sparzanendriyasyavAyuriti  /
prayogazcAtranendriyANyupalabdhimanti, teSAmacetana guNArabdhatvAt,
yadyadacenaguNArabdhaM tattadacetanaM yathA ghaTapaTAdIni, evamapi ca
bhUtasamudAye caitanyAbhAvaevasAdhinobhavati  /  punahetvaramAha-"Na aNNamuNiyaM
aNNotti" ihendriyANi pratyekabhUtAtmakAni tAnyevAparasya draSTurabhAvAd
draSTRNi, teSAJca pratyekaM svaviSaya grahaNAdanyaviSaye cApravRtternAnya
dindriya jJAtamanyadindriyaM jAnAtIti, ato mayA paJcA'pi viSayA jJAtA
ityevamAtmaka: saMkalanApratyayo na prApnoti, anubhUyate cAyaM tasmAdekenaiva
draSTrA bhavitavyam, tasyaivaca caitanyaM na bhUtasamudAyasyeti  /  prayogaH
punarevaM-nabhUtasamudAye caitanyaM tadArabdhendriyANAM pratyekaviSayagrahitve
sati saMkalanA pratyAyAbhAvAt, yadi punaranyagRhItamapyanyogRhNIyAd
devadattagRhItaM yajJadattenA'pi gRhyeta, na caitad dRSTamiSTaM veti  /  nanuca
svAtantryapakSe'yaM doSa:, yadApunaH parasparasApekSANAM
saMyogapAratantryAbhyupagamena bhUtAnAmeva samuditAnAM caitanyAkhyo dharmaH
saMyogavazAdavirbhavati, yathA kiNvodakAdiSumadyAGgeSu samuditeSu pratyeka
mavidyamAnA'pi madazaktiriti, tadA kuto'syadoSasyAvakAza iti ? atrottaraMgA
thopAttacazabdAkSiptamabhidhiyateyattAvaduktaM yathA-- bhUtebhyaH
parasparasavyapekSasaMyogabhAgbhyazcaitanyamutpadyate, tatra vikalpayAmaH
kimasau saMyoga: saMyogibhyo bhinna bhinno 11

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Is the Sutra-kritanga Sutra a single entity or different? If it is different,
then there is the implication of six substances. And there is no other proof for
you to accept a substance called "samyoga" (combination) other than the five
elements, because you accept only perception as proof. And because of that,
there is no acceptance of it. And if you accept another proof, then there will
be no acceptance of the soul. If it is not different from the elements, then
this should also be considered: Are the elements each conscious or unconscious?
If they are conscious, then there is the implication of one sense organ, and
also the implication of five kinds of consciousness in the aggregate. If they
are unconscious, then there is the previously mentioned fault. For if that which
is not present in each part is not found in the aggregate, then it is like sand
and oil, etc. And what is said here, "Just as the power of intoxication is not
present in each part of the body, but appears in the aggregate," is also not
right. Because the power that is found in yeast, etc., is like this: the power
to remove hunger in yeast, the power to cause fermentation, the power to remove
thirst in water, etc. And if you accept that the elements are each conscious,
then there is a difference between the example and the thing being explained.
Moreover, if you accept that the elements are conscious, then there is no death.
Because the elements like earth, etc., are present even in a dead body. This is
not true. Because death is present due to the absence of air or fire in a dead
body. This is the talk of an uneducated person. Because the absence of air is
not perceived in a dead body, and because of the perception of the nature of
cooking in boiling, fire is not absent. If you say that some subtle air or fire
has gone away, then the soul is accepted by another name. This is all that is.
And if consciousness arises only from the aggregate of elements, then
consciousness is not perceived even when earth, etc., are arranged together. If
you say that it is manifested when the body is formed, then that is also not
right. Because even when all the elements are present in a clay image, only
inertness is perceived. Thus, by considering the presence and absence, this
quality called consciousness should not belong to the elements. And it is
perceived in bodies. Therefore, by the process of elimination, this belongs to
the soul. So, discarding your own viewpoint, accept this. And what was said
before, "I am not different from earth, etc., because there is no proof to
accept it, and perception is the only proof here," etc., is refuted here.
Because what is said, "Perception is the only proof, not inference, etc.," is
the statement of a teacher who has not been followed. Because proof is said to
be that which is not contradictory to the object. And the validity of perception
is established like this: Some instances of perception are accepted as valid by
the proof, "These are proofs because they are not contradictory to the object,
like the instances of perception that have been experienced." And these
instances of perception themselves, which are known to themselves, cannot be
used to prove anything else. Because perception is mute due to its being
confined to its own knowledge. And if inference is proof, then how can a
Carvaka, who does not refute inference, be insane? He would refute its validity
like this: "Inference is not proof because it is contradictory to the object,
like the instances of inference that have been experienced." And this is also
inference. If you say that this is said by common knowledge, then that is also
not right. Because is that common knowledge inference proof or not proof? If it
is proof, then how is inference said to be not proof? If it is not proof, then
how can someone be convinced by something that is not proof? If you say that it
is accepted by someone else as valid, then that is also not right. If someone,
due to foolishness, considers something that is not proof to be proof, then is
that accepted by you, who is very intelligent? If someone thinks that poison is
a sweet substance, then is that accepted by an intelligent person who is about
to kill him? Thus, you, who are establishing the validity and invalidity of
perception and inference, are forced to accept the validity of inference even
though you do not want to. And what proof do you use to deny heaven, liberation,
and deities? Perception cannot be used to deny them. Because does perception
deny something that is present or something that is not present? It cannot deny
something that is present because it is contradictory to its being the object of
absence. And it cannot deny something that is not present because it does not
exist, and therefore there is no perception. This is not logical. Because if
something that pervades is absent, then the pervaded is also absent. And the
perception of a Carvaka cannot be considered to pervade all objects. How can the
absence of an object be established by the absence of perception? Thus, you, who
are denying heaven, etc., are definitely accepting another proof. And because
you accept the knowledge of another's opinion, another proof is clearly accepted
here. Otherwise, how could a Carvaka have composed scriptures to teach others?
This is enough of this implication. Thus, there is another proof besides
perception. By that, the soul will be established. If you ask, "What is that?",
then it is said: There is a soul because of the perception of its unique
qualities, like the eye sense organ. The eye sense organ is directly perceived.
The touch sense organ, etc., are inferred by their power to produce knowledge of
form, etc., which is common. Similarly, the soul is also inferred by its unique
qualities, which are different from earth, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram vA ? bhinnazcetSaSTha bhUtaprasaGgo, na cAnyat
paJcabhUtavyatirikta saMyogAkhyabhUtagrAhakaM bhavatAM
pramANamastipratyakSasyaivaikasyAbhyupagamAt, tena ca tasyAgrahaNAt,
pramANAntarAbhyupagame catenaiva jiivsyaa'pigrhnnmstu| atha abhinno
bhUtebhyosaMyogaH, tatrApyetaccintanIyam-kiM bhUtAni pratyekaM cetanAvantya
cetanAntivA ? yadi cetanAvanti tadA ekendriyasiddhiH, tathA (ca) samudAsya
paJcaprakAracaitanyApattiH  /  athAcitanAni, tatra coktodoSo, nahi yadyatra
pratyekamavidyamAnaM tat tatsamudAye bhava dupalabhyate,
siktaasutailvdityaadinaa| yadapyatroktaM-yathAmadyaGgeSvavidyamAnA'pi pratyekaM
madazaktiH samudAye prAdurbhavatIti, tadapyayuktaM, yatastatra kiNvAdiSuyAca
yAvatI ca zakti rupalabhyate, tathAhi-kiNvebubhukSApanayanasAmarthyaM
bhramijananasAmarthyaJca, udakAya tR'panayana sAmarthyamityAdineti, bhUtAnAJca
pratyekaM caitanyAnabhyupagame dRSTAnta dAntikayorasAmyam  /  kiJca-
bhUtacaitanyAbhyupagamemaraNAbhAvo, hatakAye'pi pRthivyAdInAM bhUtAnAM sadbhAvAt
/  naitadasti tatra mRtakAye vAyostejaso vA'bhAvAnmaraNasadbhAva
ityazikSitasyollApaH, tathAhimRtakAyezophopalabdherna vAyorabhAvaH, kothasya ca
paktisvabhAvasya darzanAnnAgneriti  /  atha sUkSmaH kazcid vAyu vizeSo'gnirvA
tato'pagata itimatiriti evaJca jIva eva nAmAnta reNAbhyupagato bhavatIti,
yatkiJcidetat  /  tathAna bhUta samudAya mAtreNa caitanyAvirbhAvaH,
pRthivyAdiSvekatra vyavasthApiteSvapi caitanyAnupalabdhe  /  atha
kAyAkArapariNatau satyAM tadabhivyaktiriSyate, tadapi na yato
lepyamayapratimAyAM samastabhUtasadbhAve'pi jaDatvamevopalabhyate  /
tadevamanvayavyatirekAbhyAmAlocya mAnonAyaM caitanyAkhyo guNo bhUtAnAM
bhavitumarhati  /  samupalabhyate cAyaMzarIreSu, tasmAt pArizeSyAt
jIvasyaivAyamiti svadarzanapakSapAtaM vihAyAGgIkriyatAmiti  /  yaccoktaM prAk -
"napRthivyAdivyatiriktaAtmA'smi, tadgrAhakapramANAbhAvAn
pramANaJcAtrapratyakSamevaikamityAdi, tatra pratividhIyateyattAvaduktaM
pratyakSa me vaikaM pramANaM nAnumAnAdika' mityetadanupAsitagurorvacaH tathAhi-
arthAvisAvAdakaM pramANamityucyate, pratyakSasya ca prAmANyamevaM
vyavasthApyate-kAzcitpratyakSavyaktIrdharmitvenopAdAya pramANayati-pramANametAH,
arthavisaMvAdakatvAd, anubhUta pratyakSa vyaktivat na ca tAbhireva
pratyakSavyaktibhiH svayaMviditAbhiH paraM vyavahArayitumayamIzaH, tAsAM
svasaMvinniSThatvAnmUkatvAcca pratyakSasya  /  tathAnAnumAnaM pramANamityanumAne
naivAnumAnanirAsaM kurvaMzcArvAkaH kathaMnonmattaH syAda? evaM hrasau
tadapramANyaM pratipAdayed yathA-nAnumAnaM pramANaM visaMvAdakatvAt,
anubhUtAnumAna vyaktivaditi, etataccAnumAnam, atha para prasiddhayaitaducyate,
tadapyayuktaM, yatastatparaprasiddhamanumAnaM bhavataH pramANamapramANaM vA ?
pramANaM cetkathamanumAnamapramANamityucyate, athApramANaM kathamapramANena satA
tena paraH pratyAyyate ? pareNa tasya prAmANyenAbhyupagatatvAditi cet,
tadapyasAmprataM, yadi nAmaparo mauDhyAdapramANameva pramANAmityadhyavasyati,
kiM bhavatA'tinipuNenA'pitenaivAsau pratipAdyate ? yohyajJoguDameva viSamiti
manyate kiM tasya mArayitukAyenA'pi buddhimatA guDa evadIpyate ? tadevaM
pratyakSAnumAnayoH prAmANyAprAmANye vyavasthApayato bhavato'nicchato'pi
balAdAyAtamanumAnasya prAmANyam  /  tathA svargApavargadevatAdeH pratiSedhaM
kurvan bhavAn kena pramANena karoti ? natAvatpratyakSeNa pratiSedhaH kartuM
pAyaMte, yatastpratyakSaM pravartamAnaM vAtanniSedha vidadhyAnnivartamAnaM vA ?
na tAvatpravartamAnaM tasyAbhAvaviSayatvavirodhAt
nA'pinivartamAnaM,yatastattvanA'sti tena ca pratipattirityasaMGgataM tathAhi-
vyApakavinivRttau vyApyasyA'pi (vi) nivRttiriSyate, na cArvAgdarzipratyakSeNa
samastavastuvyAptiH sambhAvyate tatkathaM pratyakSavinivRttau
padArthavyAvRttiriti ? tadevaM svargAdeH pratibedhaM kurvatA
caavkinnaa'vshyNprmaannaantrmbhyugtm|tthaa'nyaabhipraayvijnyaanbhyupgmaadtr
spaSTameva pramANAntaramabhyupagatam, anyathA kathaM parAvabodhAya
zAstrapraNayanamakAri cArvAkeNetyalamati prasaGgena  /  tadevaM
pratyakSAdanyadapi pramANamasti. tenA''tmAsetsyati, kiMpunastaditiced, ucyate,
astyAtmA, asAdhAraNatadguNopalabdheH, cakSurindriyavat, cakSurindriyaM hina
sAkSAdupalabhyate, sparzanAdIndriyA sAdhAraNa rUpavijJAnotpAdana
zaktyAtvanumIyate, tathA''tmA'pi pRthivyAdyasAdhAraNa 12)

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is inferred that the self has the power of self-awareness, which is a quality
of consciousness. Consciousness is an extraordinary quality, and its existence
in the aggregate of earth and other elements is established by the fact that it
is not refuted. Similarly, the self exists because there is a perception of the
collection of all objects perceived by the senses, like Devadatta, who is
perceived as one by the five senses, each of which perceives a different aspect.
Similarly, the self exists because the senses are the instruments of perception,
and even when they are absent, the objects perceived by them are remembered,
just as Devadatta is remembered even after the window is closed, because he was
perceived through the window. Similarly, the existence of the self is also
established by inference. For example, in the aggregate of earth and other
elements, there is no existence of actions like attachment, karma, etc., and
therefore, by inference, there must be a substance that is the common cause of
actions like happiness, sorrow, desire, aversion, effort, etc., which is
different from the elements, and that is the self. Thus, other inferences based
on perception, inference, etc., are also to be considered, and their
characteristic is:  **"Sixfold knowledge is the proof, where the object is not
otherwise. If one postulates another unseen object, that is called inference."**
(1)  Similarly, the existence of the self is also established by scripture,
which says, **"There is a self, as the scriptures declare."** If one doubts
this, then the self is established by the highest proof, perception, which is
the most reliable of all proofs. The self is perceived because its qualities are
knowledge, and knowledge is not different from its possessor. The self is
perceived just as a cloth is perceived by the perception of its qualities like
color, etc. For example, I am happy, I am sorrowful, I am this, I am that, and I
am the self, which is directly perceived. I am directly aware of myself, because
I am the form of self-awareness. My body is old, my actions are old, and I am
different from my body, because I am described as being different from my body.
Thus, many other proofs are also to be considered in establishing the existence
of the self.  The statement, **"There is no consciousness other than the
elements, because it is their effect, like a pot,"** is not appropriate, because
the reason is not established. For example, consciousness is not the effect of
the elements, because they do not have the quality of consciousness, and it is
impossible to perceive the collection of consciousness as the effect of the
elements. Thus, the self exists, and it is the basis of knowledge, which is
different from the elements.  Now, if the self is the basis of knowledge, and it
is different from knowledge, then how can it be the support of knowledge, since
knowledge itself will be the cause of all perception, etc.? Or, is the self a
mere concept within knowledge? For example, since knowledge is itself the form
of consciousness, and it is related to the elements, which are inanimate and
have the form of the body, then actions like happiness, sorrow, desire,
aversion, effort, etc., arise, and there is perception, and there is movement
from one life to another. Thus, if this is the case, then what is the need for
the self?  It is said that the self is the one basis, and without it, perception
does not occur. For example, when each sense perceives its own object, and it is
inclined towards another object, then there is no one perceiver, and therefore,
all objects are perceived as one, and there is no perception of the self. If it
is said that there is one consciousness, the storehouse consciousness, then even
in this case, the self is established, because it is the basis of this
consciousness. And, the quality of knowledge cannot exist without its possessor,
and therefore, the self, which is the possessor, must exist. And, it is all-
pervasive, because its quality is not perceived in any place, like a pot. And,
it is not as small as a grain of rice or as big as a thumb joint, because it
pervades the body, which is acquired. And, it is perceived as pervading the
body, from the skin to the end. Therefore, it is established that the self
pervades the body, from the acquired body to the skin. And, since it is
connected to karma, which is beginningless, it does not remain in the form of
the self in the worldly existence, and therefore, even though it is formless,
its connection with karma, which is formed, is not contradictory. And, due to
the connection with karma, there are many different states, like subtle, gross,
one-sense, two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, five-sense, etc., which arise.
And, if it is completely momentary, then there will be no meditation, study,
effort, or recognition. And, if it is completely eternal, then there will be no
change in the states of hell, animal, human, and god. Therefore, it is not
eternal, and it is not non-eternal, and therefore, it is the self. This is the
excessive conclusion. (8)  **Commentary:**  The author of the Charvaka
philosophy, taking the phrase **"These five great elements,"** argues that
first, the five great elements, earth, etc., are discussed. When they combine
and become the body, then from those five great elements, a self, which is the
form of consciousness and knowledge, arises. They say that there is no other
being or self, which other philosophers postulate, and that it does not go to
the other world, it does not get a new birth after death, and it does not
experience happiness and sorrow. They prove this by saying that there is no
other substance called the self, apart from the elements, because there is no
proof of its existence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH caitanya guNopalabdherastItyanumIyate, caitanyaM
ca tasyAsAdhAraNaguNaityetat pRthivyAdibhUtasamudAye
caitanyasyanirAkRtatvAdavaseyam  /  tathA'styAtmA,
samastendriyopalabdhArthasaGkalanApratyayasadbhAvAt,
paJcagavAkSA'nyA'nyopalabdhArthasaMkalanAvidhAyyeka devadattavat  /  tathA''tmA,
arthadraSTAnendriyANi, tadvigame'pi tadupalabdhArthasmaraNAt, gavAkSoparame'pi
taddvAropalabdhArthasmRrtRdevadattavat  /  tathA
arthApattyA'pyAtmA'stItyavasIyate  /  tathAhi-satyapipRthivyAdibhUta samudAye
lepyakarmAdau na sukhaduHkhecchAdveSaprayatnAdi kriyANAM sadbhAva iti,
ataHsAmarthyAdavasIyate-astibhUtAtiriktaH kazcitsukha, duHkhecchAdInAMkriyANAM
samavAyikAraNaM padArthaH, sacA''tmeti, tadevaM pratyakSAnumAnAdi
pUrvikA'nyA'pyarthApattirabhyUhyA, tasyAstivadaM lakSaNam - pramANaSaTkavijJAno,
yatrA'rtho nAnyathA bhavan  /  adRSTaM kalpayedanyaM, sArthApattirudAhRtA  // 1
//  tathA''gamAdapyastitvamavaseyaM, sacAyamAgamaH "atthime ANA uvavAie" ityAdi
/  yadivA kimatrAparapramANacintayA ? sakala pramANajyeSThena
pratyakSeNaivAtmA'stItyavasIyate, tadguNAnya jJAnasya pratyakSatvAt,
jJAnaguNasyaca guNino'nanyatvAt
pratyakSaevAtmA,rUpAdiguNapratyakSatvenapaTAdipratyakSavat, tathAhi-ahaM
sukhyahaMduHkhyevamAdyahaM pratyakSagrAhyazcAtmApratyakSaH, ahaM pratyakSAya
svasaMvidrUpatvAditi  /  mamedaMzarIraM purANakarmeti ca zarIrAdbhedena
nirdizyamAnatvAd ityAdInyanyAnyapi pramANAni jIvasiddhAvabhyUhyAnIti  /  tathA
yaduktaM-'na bhUtavyatiriktaM caitanyaM tatkAryyatvAt ghaTAdivadi' ti,
etadapyasamIcInaM, heto rasiddhatvAt, tathAhi-na bhUtAnAM caitanyaM kAryaM
teSAmatadguNatvAt, bhUtakAryacaitanye saMkalanApratyAyAsaMbhavAcca,
ityAdinoktaprAyam, ato'styAtmA bhUtavyatirikto jJAnAdhAra itisthitam  /  nanuca
kiM jJAnAdhAramUtenAtmanA jJAnAdbhinnenAzritena, yAvatA jJAnAdeva
sarvasaMkalanApratyayAdikaM setsyati, kimAtmAnAntargaDukalpeneti, tathAhi-
jJAnasyaivacidrUpatvAd bhUtairacetanaiH kAyAkArapariNataiH sahasambandhe
satisukhaduHkhecchAdveSaprayatnakriyA:prAduSyaMti, tathAsaMkalanApratyayo
bhavAntara gamanaM ceti tadevaM vyavasthite kimAtmanA kalpite neti ? atrocyate,
nahyAtmAnamekamAdhArabhUtamantareNasaMkalanApratyayo ghaTate  /  tathAhi-
pratyekamindriyaiH svaviSayagrahaNe sati paraviSaye cA pravRtterekasya ca
pariccheturabhAvAnmayApaJcA'piviSayAH paricchinnA ityAtmakasya
saMkalanApratyayasyAbhAvaiti  /  AlayavijJAnameka mastIti cedevaM
satyAtmanaevamAnAntaraMbhavatA kRtasyAt  /  na ca jJAnAkhyo guNo guNinamantareNa
bhavatItyavazyamAtmanA guNinAbhAvyamIti  /  sa ca sarvavyApI tadguNasya
sarvatrAnupalabhyayAnatvAt ghaTavat  /
nA'pizyAmAkatandulamAtro'GgaSThaparvamAtro vA, tAvanmAtrasyopAttazarIrA
vyApitvAt  /  tvakpayaMtazarIra vyApitvena copAlabhyamAna guNatvAt  /
tasmAtsthitabhidam-upAttazarIratvak paryantavyApyAtmeti  /  tasya cAnAdikarma
sambaddhasya kadAcidapi sAMsArikAsyAtmanaH svarUpe'navasthAnAt satyapyamUrttatve
mUrtena karmaNA sambandho na virudhyate  /  karma sambandhAcca
sUkSmavAdaraikendriyadvitricatuSpaJcendriyaparyAptAparyAptAdyavasthA bahuvidhAH
prAdurbhavanti  /  tasyacaikAntena kSaNikatve dhyAnAdhyayana
zramapratyabhijJAnAdhabhAvaH  /  ekAntanityatve ca nArakatiyaGmanuSyAmaragati
pariNAmAbhAvaH sthAt, tasmAtasyAda nityaH syAnnitya AtmetyalamatiprasaMgena  //
8 //  TIkArtha - cArvAka mata kA sUtrakAra "eepaMcamahabbhUyA' isa pada ko lete
hue vivecana karate hai-pahale pRthvIAdi ina pAMca mahAbhUtoM kI carcA kI hai,
ve jaba milakara zarIra ke rUpa meM pariNata ho jAte hai to una paMcamahAbhUtoM
se abhinna eka cid rUpa-jJAnasvarUpa AtmA kI utpatti hotI hai  /  unakA kathana
hai ki ina pAMca bhUtoM ke atirikta dUsarA koI jIva yA AtmA nAmaka, padArtha,
jisakI dUsare matavAdI kalpanA karate haiM, paraloka nahIM jAtA-marakara nayA
janma nahIM pAtA, sukhadu:kha nahIM bhogatA  /  ve ise isa prakAra siddha karate
haiM-pRthvIAdi bhUtoM ke atirikta-unake pRthak AtmA nAmaka koI padArtha nahIM
hai, kyoMki aisA koI pramANa nahIM haiM jo usakA ( 13

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** teaches that the only valid proof is **direct
perception (pratyaksha)**.  Other proofs accepted by other philosophies, such as
**inference (anumana)**, **scriptural authority (agama)**, and **comparison
(upamana)**, are not valid because they do not involve direct contact between
the object of knowledge (pramaya) and the sense organ. This lack of direct
contact leaves room for error, leading to a distorted understanding of the
object of knowledge, making it unreliable.   It is like a blind man walking on a
rough and uneven path, relying only on touch. It is not impossible for him to
fall. Similarly, those who rely on inference or other proofs to understand
reality are prone to error. This applies to **agama** as well, as it also lacks
direct contact between the object of knowledge and the sense organ. Therefore,
only **direct perception** is a reliable source of knowledge.  According to this
philosophy, the soul (atma) cannot be directly perceived by the senses. The
consciousness (chaitanya) that we experience is a product of the five elements
(panchamahabut) coming together. Just as the ingredients of wine produce its
intoxicating effect when combined, consciousness is not a separate entity from
the five elements. It is a function of them, just as the function of a pot is a
result of the clay. Therefore, consciousness is not a separate entity from the
five elements. It is a manifestation of them, just as bubbles appear on water.
Some may question the inclusion of space (akasha) as one of the five elements,
as traditionally only earth, water, fire, and air are considered. The
commentator clarifies that some Charvaka philosophers also consider space as an
element, making the inclusion of five elements valid.  If there is no separate
soul (atma) distinct from the five elements, then why do we say that a person
has died? The commentator explains that consciousness is a manifestation of the
five elements in the form of a body. When one of these elements, such as air or
fire, is destroyed, we say that the person has died. This does not mean that a
separate soul has left the body. It is simply a change in the combination of the
five elements.  The commentator further clarifies that the five elements, even
when combined to form a body, cannot produce consciousness. The word "adi"
(meaning "etc.") used in conjunction with consciousness refers to qualities or
actions like speech, movement, and walking, which are not produced by the five
elements. This is the commentator's assertion. The word "adi" in this context is
used in a general sense, and the reader should be able to understand its meaning
through their own experience.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram bodha karAtA ho  /  pramANa kevala pratyakSa hI hai  /
anumAna, Agama, upamAna Adi jinheM anya dArzanika svIkAra karate haiM, ve
pramANa nahIM hai, kyoMki anumAna Adi pramANoM meM padArtha kA-prameya kA
tadgrAhakaindriya ke sAtha sAkSAt saMbaMdha nahIM hotA, isalie vahA~ doSa kI
saMbhAvanA banI rahatI hai, taba padArtha yA prameya kA lakSaNa bAdhita hotA
hai, dUSita ho jAtA hai, isalie vaha sarvatra avizvasanIya hotA hai  /  kahA
hai-eka andhA puruSa viSamaubar3a khAbar3a mArga meM hAtha ke sparza ke sahAre
daur3atA huA jAtA hai, jaise usakA gira par3anA durlabha-asambhava nahIM hotA,
usI prakAra anumAna ke sahAre calane vAle yA padArthoM ko siddha karane kA
prayAsa karane vAle puruSa kA saskhalita honA, cUkanA asambhava nahIM hotA  /
anumAna ke sAtha-sAtha yahA~ Agama Adi kA bhI samAveza ho jAtA hai, kyoMki vahA~
bhI indriya ke sAtha padArtha yA prameyatatva kA sAkSAt saMbaMdha nahIM hotA
ataH aMdhe ke gira par3ane ke samAna vahA~ bhI skhalita ho jAnA kaThina nahIM
hai, vaisI AzaMkA banI rahatI hai, isalie kevala pratyakSa hI ekamAtra
tathyaparaka pramANa hai| unake anusAra pAMca mahAbhUtoM ke atirikta AtmA kA
indriyoM dvArA sAkSAt grahaNa nahIM hotA  /  pAMcamahAbhUtoM ke samavAya meM-
unake milane para jo caitanya prApta hotA hai-anubhUta hotA hai, vaha deha ke
rUpa meM pariNata una bhUtoM se hI abhivyakta hotA hai  /  jaise jina padArthoM
ke milane se madirA banatI hai, ve padArtha jaba mila jAte haiM, taba unameM
sahaja hI mAdakatA utpanna hotI haiM, usI prakAra caitanya pAMcabhUtoM se
pRthaka koI tatva nahIM hai, kyoMki vaha ghaTa Adi kI jyoM kArya hai,
paMcamahAbhUta usake kAraNa hai| isa prakAra pAMcabhUtoM ke atirikta-bhinna AtmA
kA astitva na hone ke kAraNa caitanya yA cetanA zakti kI abhivyakti-
prAkaTyatatvataH pAMcamahAbhUtoM kA hI hai, una para hI TikA haiM  /  jaise pAnI
para bubud Adi abhivyakta hote haiM vaise AtmA kI bhUtoM se hI abhivyakti hotI
haiM  /  yahA~ jo pAMcamahAbhUtoM kI carcA kI hai, usa para eka zaMkA hotI hai
ki pRthvI jala agni aura vAyu ye cAra hI bhUta mAne jAte rahe haiM phira AkAza
ko kyoM liyA gayA  /  isakA samAdhAna karate hue TIkAkAra likhate haiM-kaI
cArvAka matAnuyAyI AkAza ko bhI eka bhUta mAnate haiM, isalie pAMcamahAbhUtoM kA
ullekha karanA doSayukta nahIM hai| yadi pAMca mahAbhUtoM se pRthak AtmAnAmaka
kisI svatantra padartha kA astitva nahIM hai to amuka vyakti mara gayA, aisA
vacana vyavahAra kyoM hotA haiM, aisI zaMkA ko dhyAna meM rakhate hue TIkAkAra
likhate haiM-deha ke rUpa meM pariNata pAMca mahAbhUtoM se cetanAzakti
abhivyakta hotI hai  /  vaisA hone ke bAda jaba una bhUtoM meM se kisI eka kA
nAza ho jAtA hai "vAyu yA agni athavA donoM jaba vichinna ho jAte haiM taba
udAharaNArtha devadatta nAmaka vyakti kA nAza ho gayA, vaha mara gayA, aisA
vyavahAra hotA hai- kahA jAtA hai, kintu paMcabhUtoM se pRthak koI jIva nAmaka
padArtha zarIra se calA gayA, vastu:sthiti yaha nahIM hai-vAstava meM aisA nahIM
hotA  /  yahA~ isake samAdhAna meM niyuktikAra ne kahA hai - pRthvI Adi
pAMcabhUtoM ke Apasa meM milane para athavA deha ke rUpa meM parivartita ho jAne
para unase caitanya Adi utpanna nahIM ho sakate  /  caitanya ke sAtha jo Adi
zabda kA prayoga huA hai, vaha bhASA-bolanA, caMkramaNa-gati, calanA Adi guNoM
yA kAryoM kA bodhaka hai  /  jo caitanya kI taraha paMcabhUtoM se paidA nahIM
hote| niyuktikAra kI yaha pratijJA-parijJApana hai, ve isa rUpa meM samajhAte
hai  /  isa gAthA meM anya Adi zabda hetu rUpa se prayukta hai, isa sambandha
meM pAThakoM ko dRSTAnta svayaM jAna lenA cAhie, kyoMki vaisA saralatA se prApta
ho sakatA hai, isalie yahA~ usakA ullekha nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  /  14

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement of Authority  In this regard, the question should be
asked of the Charvaka - this question can be asked - when these great elements
combine, the power of consciousness-awareness is expressed, then does it
manifest independently when these elements combine, or does it manifest
dependently when they combine? What is the meaning of asking this, the solution
is as follows - the power of consciousness of the five great elements is not
capable of manifesting independently, that is, none of them can manifest
consciousness, keeping that in mind, the proponent says, "Aṇṇaguṇāṇoceti" by
this word, that these five great elements are not endowed with the quality of
consciousness, but are endowed with other qualities. In other words, earth etc.
have their own qualities, which are different from consciousness. To be the
basis of matter, to be hard, is the quality of earth. The quality of water is
fluidity or liquidity, the quality of fire is the power of digestion or
digestion. The quality of air is movement - mobility, the quality of space is
space - space or place. Or it can be said - those mentioned earlier, they are
the qualities of earth etc., respectively, one by one, abandoning - abandoning
smell etc. qualities. These qualities are distinct from consciousness. Thus,
earth etc. elements have other qualities different from consciousness. The use
of the word 'c' in this verse indicates the statement related to the second
option. The Charvaka want to prove the origin of consciousness from earth etc.,
but the five great elements of earth etc. have their own qualities - other than
consciousness. Thus, when none of the substances from earth etc. have the
quality of consciousness, then the emergence of the quality of consciousness
from their combination cannot be proved. This can be understood by the method of
experiment or inference. The community of elements - the five great elements are
independent, therefore they are taken as the Dharmipaksa, and the quality of
those elements is not consciousness, this is the Sadhya Dharma. The qualities of
earth etc. are different from consciousness, they are different, this is the
reason. In the community or group of substances with other qualities, the
unprecedented quality that is not already present in them, does not arise, for
example, oil cannot be produced from the community of sand grains, which is
endowed with the quality of smoothness. Similarly, pillars etc. cannot be
produced from the community of pots and clothes. The quality of consciousness is
visible - experienced in the body, it may be the quality of the soul, not of the
five great elements.  To prove the same, the proponent presents another reason -
the five senses of touch, taste, smell, sight, hearing, and cognition, which are
the locations or causes, lack the quality of consciousness, they are devoid of
consciousness. Then consciousness is impossible in the community of elements.
The meaning here is - the Charvaka do not consider anyone else besides the
senses as the seer - the one who sees, the one who knows. According to their
theory, the senses are the seer or the knower. The materials that are the
original causes of those senses are achitt - not cognitive or conscious.
Therefore, the community of conscious elements - the five great elements cannot
be their quality. The location - the original cause or the original cause of the
senses is as follows - the location of the auditory sense is space, because the
auditory sense is hollow - hollow or empty-rooted. The original cause of the
olfactory sense or the nose is earth because it is earth-like in terms of
vitality. The original cause of the eye is light or fire, because the eye is
light-like or luminous. Similarly, the original cause of the taste sense is
water and the original cause of the touch sense is wind.  1. What is transformed
into the form of work is called the original cause, for example, the original
cause of the pot is clay.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH isa saMbaMdha meM cArvAka se yaha pUchA jAnA cAhie
- yaha prazna kiyA jA sakatA hai- ina mahAbhUtoM kA Apasa meM saMyoga hone para
caitanya-cetanAzakti abhivyakta hotI hai to vaha kyA ina bhUtoM kA saMyoga hone
para hI svatantra rUpa se prakaTa hotI hai yA unakA Apasa meM saMyoga hone para
paratantratA se prakaTa hotI hai  /  aisA pUchane kA kyA abhiprAya hai, isakA
samAdhAna isa prakAra hai - svatantratA se pAMcabhUtacetanA zakti ko prakaTa
karane meM samartha nahIM hai arthAt unameM se koI eka bhI caitanya ko prakaTa
nahIM kara sakatA, usI bAta ko dRSTi meM rakhate hue niyuktikAra "
aNNaguNANocetti" isa zabda dvArA yaha batAyA hai ki ye pAMcamahAbhUta
caitanyaguNayukta nahIM hai, usake atirikta anya guNoM se yukta haiN| dUsare
zabdoM meM pRthvI Adi ke apane-apane guNa haiM, jo caitanya se bhinna hai  /
padArthoM kA AdhAra bananA, kaThinatA kA honA pRthvI kA guNa hai| jala kA guNa
dravatva yA taralapana hai, agni kA guNa paktRtva-pAcana yA pacAne kI zakti hai|
vAyu kA calana - gatizIlatA guNa hai, AkAza kA guNa avagAha - avakAza yA sthAna
deza hai  /  athavA yoM kahA jA sakatA hai- pahale jinakA ullekha huA hai, ve
gandha Adi guNa kramazaH eka-eka kA parihAra-parityAga kara pRthvI Adi ke guNa
hai| ye guNa cetanA se pRthak haiN| yoM pRthvI Adi bhUta cetanA se anya bhinna
guNa lie hue haiN| isa gAthA meM jo 'ca' zabda kA prayoga huA haiM vaha dUsare
vikalpa se saMbaMddha kathana ko sUcita karatA hai  /  cArvAka pRthvI Adi se
cetanA kI utpatti siddha karanA cAhate haiM kintu pRthvI Adi pAMcamahAbhUtoM ke
apane-apane guNa-caitanya se anya - itara hai  /  isa prakAra jaba pRthvI Adi
meM se kisI eka padArtha kA bhI caitanya guNa nahIM hai, taba unake milane se
caitanya guNa kA utpanna honA siddha nahIM ho sakatA  /  isa bAta ko prayoga-
vidhi yA anumAna dvArA samajhA jA sakatA hai  /  bhUta samudAya - paMcamahAbhUta
svatantra hai, isalie ve dharmIpakSa rUpa meM grahaNa kiye jAte haiM, aura una
bhUtoM kA guNa caitanya nahIM hai, yaha sAdhya dharma hai  /  pRthvI Adi ke
guNacaitanya se anya hai, dUsare haiM, yaha hetu hai  /  anya guNa yukta
padArthoM ke jo samudAya yA samUha hai, usa samudAya meM apUrva guNa jo unameM
pahale se vidyamAna nahIM hai, utpanna nahIM hotA jaise bAlUkA ke kaNoM ke
samudAya se taila utpanna nahIM ho sakatA, jo snigdhatAguNa yukta hai  /  usI
prakAra ghar3oM aura vastroM ke samudAya stambha Adi utpanna nahIM ho sakate  /
zarIra meM caitanya guNa dRSTigocara - anubhUta hotA hai, vaha AtmA kAhI guNa ho
sakatA hai, paMcabhUtoM kA nahIM  / ] 1 isI bAta ko siddha karane ke lie
niyuktikAra anya hetu upasthita karate haiM- sparzana, rasana, ghrANa, netra,
karNa, saMjJaka pAMcaindriyoM ke jo sthAna yA kAraNa hai, unameM caitanyaguNa kA
abhAva hai, ve cetanA rahita hai  /  taba bhUta samudAya meM caitanya
asaMbhAvita hai  /  yahA~ kahane kA hArda - abhiprAya hai - cArvAka indriyoM ke
atirikta anya kisI ko draSTA-dekhane vAlA, jAnane vAlA nahIM mAnate  /  unake
siddhAntAnusAra indriyA hI draSTA yA jJAtA hai  /  una indriyoM ke jo upAdAna'
mUla kAraNa hai, ve acitta rUpa hai - jJAnAtmaka yA cetanAtmaka nahIM hai  /
ataeva caitanyabhUtasamudAya kA-pAMcamahAbhUtoM kA guNa nahIM ho sakatA  /
indriyoM ke sthAna - upAdAna yA mUlakAraNa isa prakAra hai - zrotendriya kA
sthAna AkAza hai, kyoMki zrotrendriyasuSira - chidra yA riktamUlaka hai  /
ghANendriya yA nAsikA kA mUla kAraNa pRthvI hai kyoMki prANAtmakatA kI dRSTi se
vaha pRthvI svarUpa hai  /  naitra kA upAdAna kAraNa teja yA agni hai, kyoMki
naitrendriya teja: svarUpa yA jyotirmaya haiM  /  isI prakAra rasanendriyakA
upAdAna kAraNa jala aura sparzanendriya kA pavana hai  /  I 1. jo kArya rUpa meM
pariNata ho, use upAdAna kAraNa kahate haiM, jaise-ghaTa kA upAdAna kAraNa
mRttikA hai  /  15

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  Here, inference should be used in this way: The
senses are not endowed with attainment - the conscious power to control the
object of attainment is not of the senses, because they are derived from
substances that do not have the quality of consciousness. Whatever is derived
from unconscious, non-conscious substances, is all endowed with unconscious
qualities, like a pot, a cloth, etc. Thus, the absence or non-existence of
consciousness in the five great elements is proven.  The commentator then
presents another reason to prove this: Each of the senses has a physical form
derived from the elements. According to the Charvaka doctrine, no other seer-
knower is considered. The senses themselves are the seers. They individually
perceive their respective objects. An object that can be known or perceived by
one sense cannot be known by another sense besides that one. In such a
situation, I have known the five objects - I have experienced the objects of the
five senses. This collective, combined, or unitary knowledge is not obtained or
experienced, but it is actually experienced in life. From this, it appears that
there must be a seer or knower different from the senses. Consciousness is its
quality, not of the five elements.  Again, this topic is clarified here by
another method of inference: The five elements do not have the quality of
consciousness in their aggregate, because the senses derived from those elements
have the capacity to perceive their respective objects - they perceive one
object related to each of them, but they cannot perceive the collective,
combined knowledge of all five. If one sense could know what another sense has
perceived or known, then if Devadatta knew a certain object or idea, Yajnadutta
would also know it, but this is not visible, because another man cannot know an
object known and experienced by one man.  Thus, a doubt arises: Independently,
none of the five elements have the quality of consciousness. If this is
accepted, then this fault is proven, but when the five great elements are
mutually relative, then due to their mutual combination or union, the quality of
consciousness arises in a new form, just as the ingredients of wine, like yeast
and water, etc., do not have this power or intoxication, but when they combine,
the intoxicating power, which was absent in each individually, arises. If this
happens, where is the scope or possibility for the above-mentioned fault?  The
answer lies in the 'ch' sound used in the above verse of the commentary: You
said that consciousness arises from the mutual, relative combination of the five
elements. We present this solution through this alternative: The combination by
which the five great elements produce the quality of consciousness is either
different or separate from those combiners, the mutually combining great
elements, or it is not different or separate. If you consider that combination
to be different from them, then it will become a sixth element in addition to
the five, but according to your view, there is no sixth element called
combination in addition to the five elements - it is unproven. You only accept
direct perception as evidence, and that direct perception evidence does not
reveal combination or prove its existence. If you accept the acceptance of
combination through another evidence, then the existence of living beings can
also be accepted through that other evidence.  If you consider combination to be
not different or separate from the five elements, then it is still debatable
whether each element is conscious or unconscious. If each element is considered
to be conscious by all five elements, then one sense is proven, i.e., one sense
alone, due to its consciousness, perceives different objects.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram yahA~ anumAna kA prayoga isa vidhi se kiyA jAnA cAhie -
indriyA~ upalabdhi yukta nahIM hai-upalabdhipadArtha ko svAyata karane kI
cetanAtmaka zakti indriyoM kI nahIM hai, kyoMki unakI aniSpatti una padArthoM se
huI haiM, jinakA guNacetanA nahIM hai| jo jo acetana-cetanAzUnya padArthoM se
niSpanna hote hai, ve saba acetana guNayukta hote hai, jaise ghaTa-paTa Adi  /
isa prakAra pAMcamahAbhUtoM meM caitanya kA abhAva yA nAstitva siddha hotA hai
/  niyuktikAra phira ise siddha karane ke liye eka ora kAraNa prastuta karate
haiM-indriyoM meM se pratyeka bhUtAtmakabhautika svarUpa liye hue hai  /
cArvAka siddhAntAnusAra dUsarA koI draSTA- jJAtA nahIM mAnA gayA hai  /  ve
indriyAM hI draSTA haiM  /  ve pRthak-pRthak apane-apane viSayoM ko grahaNa
karatI haiN| kisI dUsarI indriya dvArA jJAta yA grahaNa kiye jAne yogya viSaya
ko usa indriya ke atirikta dUsarI indriya nahIM jAna pAtI  /  aisI sthiti meM
maiMne pAMcoM viSaya jAne- pAMcoM indriyoM ke viSaya ko anubhava kiyaa| yaha
saMkalanAtmaka samavAyAtmaka yA ekatvamUlaka jJAna prApta yA anubhUta nahIM hotA
kintu vaisA vAstava meM jIvana meM anubhUta hotA hai  /  isase yaha pratIta ho
hai ki koI eka indriyoM se bhinna draSTA yA jJAtA honA cAhiye  /  cetanA usI kA
guNa hai| pAMca bhUtoM kA nhiiN| punaH yahA~ anumAna dvArA eka anya vidhi se isa
viSaya ko spaSTa kiyA jAtA hai-pAMca bhUtoM ke samudAya meM cetanA guNa nahIM
hai kyoMki una bhUtoM se niSpanna indriyoM meM apane-apane viSaya kA grAhitva to
hai - ve apaneapane se saMbaMddha eka-eka viSaya ko grahaNa karatI hai kintu
saMkalanAtmaka - pAMcoM ke samanvita jJAna kI pratIti ve nahIM kara pAtI  /
yadi kisI eka dvArA grahaNa kiye hue - jAne hue - padArtha yA abhiprAya ko
dUsarA bhI jAna taba to phira devadatta ne jisa padArtha yA abhiprAya ko jAnA
use yajJadatta bhI jAna le kintu aisA dRSTigocara nahIM hotA kyoMki eka puruSa
dvArA jJAta anubhUta padArtha ko anya puruSa nahIM jAna pAtA  /  isa prakAra eka
zaMkA upasthita kI jAtI hai - svatantra rUpa se pAMca bhUtoM meM se kisI meM bhI
cetanA guNa nahIM hai  /  yaha mAnane para to yaha doSa siddha hotA hai parantu
jaba paraspara sApekSapAMca mahAbhUta mila jAte haiM to unake pArasparika
saMyoga yA sammilana ke kAraNa naye rUpa meM caitanya guNa utpanna hotA hai,
jaise madirA ke upAdAna bhUta kiNva aura jala Adi meM se kisI meM yaha zakti yA
mAdakatA nahIM hotI para jaba ve paraspara mila jAte haiM to pratyeka meM alaga-
alaga avidyamAna mada zakti utpanna ho jAtI hai| aisA hone para uparyukta doSa
kA avakAzaguMjAiza kahAM rahatI hai  /  isakA uttara niyukti kI uparyukta gAthA
meM upAt prayukta yA Aye hue 'ca' zabda meM saMnihita hai - jo Apane kahA ki
pAMcabhUtoM kI pArasparika-sApekSa-saMyoga se caitanya utpanna hotA hai, isakA
samAdhAna hama isa vikalpa dvArA prastuta karate haiM btlaaye| pAMcamahAbhUta
jisase yoga ke bala cetanA guNa utpanna karate haiM vaha saMyoga una saMyogiyoM
se-paraspara milane vAle mahAbhUtoM se bhinna yA pRthak hai athavA abhinna yA
apRthak hai  /  yadi vaha saMyoga unase bhinna mAnate haiM taba to vaha una
pAMca ke atirikta eka chaThA tattva bana jAyegA kintu Apake matAnusAra
pAMcabhUtoM ke atirikta saMyoga nAmaka chaThA tattva nahIM hai- apramANita hai
/  Apa ekamAtra pratyakSa ko hI pramANa mAnate haiM aura vaha pratyakSa pramANa
saMyoga ko nahIM batalAtA athavA usase saMyoga kA honA siddha nahIM hotA  /
yadi kisI dUsare pramANa dvArA saMyoga kA grahaNa kiyA jAnA svIkAra karate haiM
to usa dUsare pramANa se jIvoM kA bhI to grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  yadi
saMyoga ko paMcabhUtoM se abhinna yA pRthak mAnate hoM to bhI yaha vicAraNIya
hai ki pratyekabhUta cetanAyukta hai athavA cetanA rahita hai  /  yadi pratyeka
bhUta pAMcoM bhUtoM ko cetanAmaya pratipAdita karate hoM taba eka indriya siddha
hotI hai arthAt eka hI indriya se caitanyavattA ke kAraNa bhinna-bhinna viSayoM
ko 16

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement of Authority 1  The ability to perceive is acquired. In
such a situation, the consciousness of the body, which is born from the
community of the five elements, will be potentially of five types.  If each
element is considered to be unconscious, then a difficulty arises - how can the
quality that is not present in any one of the five be obtained in their
community? Just as oil is not produced from grains of sand. Just as there is no
oil in a single grain of sand, so there cannot be oil in many grains of sand
combined.  •  It is also not reasonable to say, as the Charvaka said, that the
intoxicating power of intoxication is produced when they are combined, even
though it is not present in each part of the liquor, because the intoxicating
power of intoxication is present in some form in the ferment, etc. The ferment
has the power to quench or remove hunger. Its consumption causes dizziness in
the head. Water has the power to quench thirst. Therefore, the intoxication that
resides in liquor does not come from outside. If it is assumed that there is no
consciousness in any of the five elements, then the analogy and the example do
not prove to be similar. The meaning of analogy is to present a subject by way
of example. The meaning of example is the event mentioned in the example. If
there is no consciousness in the analogy and it is mentioned in the example,
then they do not occur together - they are opposite. If the elements are
accepted as conscious, then the state of death cannot arise. Even in a dead
body, the existence of earth, etc. elements remains. If you say that this does
not happen because there is a lack of air and fire in the dead body, therefore
death occurs, then saying so is merely the ravings of an uneducated, ignorant
man, because swelling is found in the dead body - swelling is caused by air,
therefore the lack of air in the dead body cannot be considered. There is also
the function of fire in that body, which is of the nature of digestion or
digestion, because pus or pus is produced in it. Therefore, the non-existence of
fire in it cannot be considered. If you say that such air, which is subtle, such
fire, which is subtle, which has the power to sustain life, leaves the dead
body, therefore death occurs. Saying so is to accept the soul or the soul by
another name. Therefore, this is not a different or another device.  1
Consciousness cannot be produced from the group of elements even by their
combination, because if we arrange the five elements, earth, etc., in one place,
make one mind, then consciousness is not available from them. If you say that
consciousness is expressed only when these five elements are transformed into
the form of a body, then this also does not seem right, because if a body shape
is made by plastering lime, etc., on a wall, etc., then even though all the
elements exist in it, only inertness - unconsciousness is available. Thus, by
criticizing by analogy and difference, it is not proved that the quality called
consciousness is present in the five elements. It is obtained in the body in its
entirety. Due to the pervasiveness of the soul in the body, it is proved to be
the quality of the soul. Leave your own philosophical principles or opinions and
accept this.  As the Lokayatika has previously stated, there is no element
called soul, distinct from the elements of earth, etc., because no evidence of
that soul is found.  17

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH 1 grahaNa karane kA sAmarthya prApta ho jAtA hai
/  aisI sthiti meM paMcabhUtoM ke samudAya se niSpanna zarIra kA caitanya pAMca
prakAra kA saMbhAvita hogA  /  yadi pratyeka bhUta ko acetana mAnoM to eka
kaThinAI upasthita hogI- jo guNa pAMcoM meM se kisI eka meM vidyamAna nahIM hai
vaha unake samudAya meM kaise prApta ho sakatA hai  /  jaise bAlU ke kaNoM se
tela utpanna nahIM hotA  /  jisa prakAra bAlU ke eka kaNa meM tela nahIM hai
vaise hI mile hue bahuta se kaNoM meM bhI tela nahIM ho sakatA  /  * cArvAka kI
ora se jo yaha kahA gayA ki madirA ke pratyeka aMga meM vidyamAna na hote hue
bhI mada zakti mAdakatA unake milane para utpanna ho jAtI hai, yaha kahanA bhI
yuktisaMgata nahIM hai kyoMki kiNva Adi meM madazakti mAdakatA kisI na kisI rUpa
kucha hotI hI hai  /  kiNva meM bhUkha ko miTAne yA dUra karane kI zakti hotI
hai  /  usake sevana se mastaka meM cakkara Ane lagate haiN| jala meM pIpAsA
zAMta karane kI zakti hotI hai  /  ataH madirA meM rahane vAlI mAdakatA kahIM
bAhara se nahIM aatii| pAMcoM bhUtoM meM se kisI meM caitanya nahIM hai aisA
mAnane para dRSTAnta aura dAntika meM samAnatA siddha nahIM hotI  /  dRSTAnta kA
tAtparya kisI viSaya ko udAharaNa dvArA prastuta karanA hai  /  dAntika kA artha
udAharaNa meM kahI gaI ghaTanA hai  /  dRSTAnta meM caitanya na ho aura dAntika
meM use batAyA jAya to ve donoM paraspara ghaTita nahIM hote - viparIta hote
haiM  /  yadi bhUtoM ko caitanyamaya svIkAra karate hoM to phira maraNa kI
sthiti upasthita nahIM ho sakatI  /  mare hue zarIra meM bhI pRthvI Adi bhUtoM
kA astitva rahatA hai  /  yadi kaho ki aisA nahIM hotA kyoMki kyoMki mRta zarIra
meM vAyu aura teja-agni kA abhAva ho jAtA hai, isalie mRtyu hotI hai, aisA
kahanA eka azikSita jJAna rahita puruSa kA pralApa mAtra hai kyoMki mRtazarIra
meM sUjana pAI jAtI hai- sUjana kA phulAva vAyu se hotA hai isaliye mRta zarIra
meM vAyu kA abhAva nahIM mAnA jA sktaa| usa zarIra me pakti svabhAva yA pAcana
svarUpAtmaka teja kA kArya bhI hai kyoMki usameM kotha yA mavAda utpanna hotA
hai  /  ataH usameM agni kA nAstitva nahIM mAnA jA sktaa| yadi yoM kaho ki usa
mRta zarIra meM se aisI vAyu jo sUkSma hai, aisI agni jo sUkSma hai, jinameM
jIvana kI AdhAyakatA-TikAye rakhane kI zakti hai- nikala jAtI hai, isaliye mRtyu
hotI hai| yoM kahanA to eka prakAra nAmAntara dvArA jIva yA AtmA ko hI svIkAra
karanA hai  /  isalie yaha koI bhinna yA dUsarI yukti nahIM 1 bhUtoM ke samUha
se unake milane se bhI cetanA zakti utpanna nahIM ho sakatI kyoMki yadi hama
pRthvI Adi pAMcoM tattvoM ko eka sthAna para vyavasthita kara deM, eka citta
kara deM to unameM se cetanA upalabdha nahIM hotI, yadi yoM kahe ki ina pAMca
bhUtoM ke deha ke rUpa meM pariNata hone para hI cetanA abhivyakta hotI hai, to
yaha bhI ThIka nahIM lagatA kyoMki dIvAra Adi para cUne Adi kA lepa kara deha kA
AkAra banAyA jAya to usameM sabhI bhUtoM kA astitva hote hue bhI jar3atA-
acetanA hI upalabdha hotI hai  /  isa prakAra anvaya vyatireka dvArA AlocanA
karane para cetanAnAmaka guNa kA pAMca bhUtoM meM honA siddha nahIM hotA yaha
zarIra meM hI samagra rUpa meM prApta hotA hai  /  AtmA ke zarIra vyApti hone ke
kAraNa isakA AtmA kA guNa honA siddha hotA hai  /  apane darzana - siddhAnta yA
mata kA Agraha chor3a kara ise svIkAra kareM  /  jaisA ki lokAyatika dvArA pUrva
meM pratipAdita huA hai ki pRthvI Adi bhUtoM ke atirikta, unase bhinnapRthak koI
AtmA nAmaka tattva nahIM hai kyoMki usa AtmA kA grAhaka yA sAdhaka koI pramANa
nahIM miltaa| 17

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra is the only valid direct perception. Its counter-
argument is as follows: Direct perception is the only valid proof. Inference and
other types of proofs are not included. This statement may be made by someone
who has not worshipped the Guru or studied the scriptures in the Guru's
presence. That which reveals the true nature of an object or substance is called
proof. The validity of direct perception is proven as follows: Take any direct
perceivers as righteous or partisan, then their validity is proven as follows:
'This is proof' because they are not inconsistent with the meaning - they do not
contradict it. They do not present it otherwise, they present it in its true
form. For example, we are directly seeing a person.  The person who has been
directly seen, known, is known in his own soul, but he who has seen directly
cannot behave in the same way towards another person, he cannot show it directly
because what he has seen is contained in the knowledge of the perceivers, the
knowledge of direct perception does not speak, it is silent.  Inference is not
proof - this statement of the Charvakas is also based on inference. Then if he
refutes inference, it is like the talk of a madman. If it is said that the
Charvakas consider inference to be invalid - they cannot accept it as proof
because inference is not proof. It is inconsistent with the meaning - it does
not reveal it in its true form. For example, experiencing - knowing - a person
through inference - but this is also an inference.  If you say that other
philosophers consider inference to be proof, therefore, based on their belief,
we also take recourse to inference and refute inference on the basis of that
inference, it is not reasonable to say so. It can be asked whether the inference
famous in other philosophies is proof or non-proof in your view. If you consider
it to be proof, then there is no situation to call inference invalid. If you
consider it to be invalid, then how do you convince others on its basis? If you
say that the other considers inference to be proof, therefore, he can be
convinced - explained - by inference, it is also unreasonable to say so. If any
other man accepts the invalid as proof due to foolishness, then why do you,
being very skilled - competent - try to convince him by means of that invalid?
If an ignorant - ignorant man considers jaggery to be poison, does any
intelligent person try to give him jaggery to kill him? Does he himself act
ignorantly in accordance with his ignorance? Therefore, accepting direct
perception as proof and not accepting inference as proof, even though you do not
want to, the validity of inference forcefully comes to you.  You have denied
heaven and liberation, by what proof do you prove that hell and liberation
exist? They cannot be denied by direct perception. Tell me, does direct
perception, being present in heaven and liberation, deny them or, being absent,
reject them? Direct perception cannot deny heaven and hell by being present
because it contradicts the non-existent object, in other words, how can there be
a tendency of direct perception in that which does not exist, you do not believe
in the existence of heaven and liberation, then there is no situation for direct
perception to be present in them. Direct perception denies heaven and liberation
by being absent, this is also not possible because when heaven and liberation
are directly  18

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram pramANa kevala pratyakSa hI hai  /  isakA pratividhAna
pratikAra yoM hai| pratyakSa hI ekamAtra pramANa hai  /  anumAna Adi pramANa
koTi meM nahIM aate| aisA kathana usakA ho sakatA hai jisane guru kI upAsanA
nahIM kI ho- guru ke sAnidhya meM baiThakara zAstrAdhyayana nahIM kiyA ho  /  jo
artha padArtha yA vasta kA avisaMvAdaka hai use yathArtha rUpa meM batalAtA hai
vaha pramANa kahA jAtA hai  /  pratyakSa kA prAmANya pramANa honA isa prakAra
siddha kiyA jAtA hai, kinhIM pratyakSa vyaktiyoM ko dharmI yA pakSa ke rUpa meM
le taba unakA prAmANya isa prakAra siddha kiyA jAtA hai'yaha pramANa hai' kyoMki
ye artha ke avisaMvAdaka hai-usakA visaMvAda nahIM karate haiM  /  use anyathA
pratipAdita nahIM karate, use yathArtha rUpa meM nirUpita karate haiM  /  jaise
hama kisI vyakti ko pratyakSa rUpa meM dekha rahe ho  /  I jisa vyakti ko
pratyakSa rUpa meM dekhA hai, jAnA hai, vaha apanI AtmA meM jJAta hai kintu vaha
jisane pratyakSa dekhAdUsare vyakti ke prati vaisA vyavahAra nahIM kara sakatA,
use pratyakSa nahIM dikhA sakatA kyoMki apane dvArA dekhA huA vaha pratyakSa
vyakti dekhane vAloM ke jJAna meM saMniviSTa hai, pratyakSa kA jJAna bolatA
nahIM, vaha mUka hai 1 anumAna pramANa nahIM hai-cArvAka kA yaha kathana bhI
anumAna ke AdhAra para hI hai| phira vaha yadi anumAna kA khaNDana karatA hai to
vaha eka unmatta kI sI bAta hai  /  yadi aisA kahA jAya ki cArvAka anumAna ko
isaliye apramANa mAnatA hai-pramANa ke rUpa meM svIkAra nahIM kara sakatA kyoMki
anumAna pramANa nahIM hai  /  vaha artha kA visaMvAdaka hai- use yathArtha rUpa
meM nahIM batalAtA  /  jaise anumAna dvArA kisI vyakti ko anubhUta karanA -
jAnanA - kintu yaha bhI eka anumAna hI hai  /  yadi yoM kaho ki anya dArzanika
anumAna ko pramANa mAnate haiM isalie unakI mAnyatA ke AdhAra para hama bhI
anumAna kA Azraya lekara usa anumAna ke AdhAra para yahAM anumAna kA khaNDana
karate haiM, aisA kahanA yuktisaMgata nahIM hai  /  yaha pUchA jA sakatA hai ki
anya darzanoM meM prasiddha anumAna ApakI dRSTi meM pramANa hai yA apramANa hai
/  yadi Apa use pramANa mAnate haiM to phira anumAna ko apramANa kahane kI
sthiti nahIM bntii| yadi use apramANa mAnate haiM to usake AdhAra para dUsare ko
kaise pratIti karAte ho ! yadi kaho ki dUsarA anumAna ko pramANa mAnatA hai
isaliye use anumAna pratIti karAI jA sakatI hai - samajhAyA jA sakatA hai, yoM
kahanA bhI ayuktiyukta hai  /  yadi koI anya puruSa mUr3hatA vaza apramANa ko
pramANa svIkAra kara letA hai to Apa atyanta nipuNa - yogya - hokara bhI usa
apramANa ke dvArA use pratIti karAne kA samajhAne kA kyoM upakrama karate ho ?
yadi koI ajJa - jJAnazUnya puruSa gur3a ko hI viSa mAnatA hai to kyA koI
buddhimAna use mArane ke liye gur3a dene kA prayatna karatA hai  /  kyA usakI
ajJatA ke anurUpa svayaM bhI ajJatApUrNa kArya karatA hai ? ataH pratyakSa ko
pramANa mAnanA aura anumAna ko pramANa na mAnanA yaha siddha karate hue Apake na
cAhane para bhI anumAna kA prAmANya jabaradastI A phaTakatA hai  /  Apane svarga
aura mokSa kA niSedha kiyA kisa pramANa dvArA Apa ise siddha karate haiM ki
naraka aura mokSa hai  /  pratyakSa pramANa dvArA inakA niSedha nahIM kiyA jA
sakatA  /  batalAye pratyakSa pramANa svarga aura mokSa meM pravarttamAna hokara
unakA pratiSedha karatA hai athavA nivartamAna hokara unheM asvIkAra karatA hai
? vaha pratyakSa pravarttamAna hokara svarga aura naraka kA niSedha nahIM kara
sakatA kyoMki usakA abhAvAtmaka vastu ke sAtha virodha hotA hai dUsare zabdoM
meM jo vastu nahIM hai usameM pratyakSa kI pravRtti hI kaise hogI, Apa svarga
aura mokSa kA astittva mAnate hI nahIM haiM taba pratyakSa ke unameM pravRtta
hone kI sthiti hI nahIM bana sktii| pratyakSa nivarttamAna hokara svarga aura
mokSa kA pratibaMdha karatA hai, yaha bhI saMbhava nahIM ho sakatA kyoMki svarga
aura mokSa jaba pratyakSa 18

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement of self-time is not available. How can there be cessation in them
when there is no direct perception? Thus, it is not possible for direct
perception to determine them in both the present and the past states. The
situation is this - when the pervasive substance ceases, the pervaded substance
is also considered to cease, but the direct evidence that shows the present
object is not pervasive in all things. This means that it cannot know all
things, it only knows the present. Therefore, when direct perception ceases, how
can it be known that the substance which it cannot know independently or which
is not directly perceived, exists? The denial of heaven etc. by the Charvakas
through the means of direct evidence also proves that the Charvakas accept
another evidence besides direct perception. The Charvakas accept the opinion of
others as knowledge. This makes it clear that they accept another evidence
besides direct perception. If this were not the case, why did the Charvakas
create scriptures to make others understand their doctrines? Thus, it is not
necessary to elaborate on this subject further. From this discussion, it is
proved that there is another evidence besides direct perception. The existence
of that evidence is proved. What is that evidence? It is said - the soul -
because it has an extraordinary, unusual or specific quality. The example of the
eye sense is being given for this. The eye sense is very subtle and fine,
therefore it is not directly available. Its existence can be inferred from the
expectation of the ability to know the form of science, which cannot be obtained
by the senses of touch etc. Similarly, the independent existence of the soul can
be inferred from the expectation of consciousness, which is not found in the
earth etc. elements. Consciousness is the extraordinary, unusual or only quality
of the soul. The quality of consciousness is not found in the combination of the
five elements of earth etc. Therefore, it is a matter of knowing that the soul
exists. Certainly the soul exists, because all the senses know the objects -
ideas, which are collectively - combined - knowledge or perception. For example,
there are five windows in a building. A man named Devadatta sees the five
objects known by them collectively. Similarly, the soul, not the senses, has a
collective - combined - direct perception of the objects of knowledge by the
senses. Even when the senses are destroyed, the objects known by them remain in
the memory of the soul, just as the objects spoken by the windows remain in the
memory of the person named Devadatta even when the windows are destroyed. The
existence of the soul is also proved by the evidence of inference. If the earth
etc. five elements create a human form on a wall etc., then it does not have
actions like happiness-suffering, desire, hatred and effort. This makes it
certain that there is a substance other than the five elements, which is the
material cause of happiness-suffering, desire, etc. actions - without which the
work cannot be done. It is different from the five elements, it is the soul.
Thus, the soul is proved by direct perception and inference etc. as well as by
inference. This should be understood. The definition of inference is as follows
- according to all six evidences, a substance which cannot be proved without
another substance, is imagined to be an unseen substance for its proof, it is
called inference. And the soul is also proved by argument, this should be known.
The scriptures mention - my soul is उपपात | 19

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH  /  dvArA prApta nahIM hai taba pratyakSa kI
unameM nivRtti kaise ho sakatI hai  /  isa prakAra prarvattamAna aura
nivartamAna donoM hI sthitiyoM meM pratyakSa dvArA unakA nizcaya ho sakanA
saMbhava nahIM hai  /  vastu sthiti yaha hai-vyApaka padArtha kI nivRtti hone
para vyApya padArtha kI bhI nivRtti honA mAnA jAtA hai kintu jisa pratyakSa
pramANa se sammukhIna padArtha ko batAtA hai, vaha samasta vastuoM meM vyApaka
nahIM hai  /  isakA Azaya yaha hai ki vaha samasta padArthoM kA jJAna nahIM karA
sakatA, vaha to kevala sammukhIna kA hI jJAna karAtA hai  /  isaliye pratyakSa
jaba nivRtta ho jAtA hai jisa prakAra vaha svAyatta nahIM kara pAtA hai athavA
jisa padArtha kA pratyakSa bodha nahIM hotA hai usapadArtha kA astittva hI nahIM
hai use kaise jAnA jA sakatA hai  /  cArvAka dvArA pratyakSa pramANa ke mAdhyama
se jo svarga Adi kA niSedha kiyA jAtA hai isase cArvAka dvArA pratyakSa ke
atirikta kisI anya pramANa kA svIkRta kiyA jAnA bhI siddha hotaahai| cArvAka
dUsare ke abhiprAya ko jJAna rUpa meM svIkAra karatA hai  /  isase usa dvArA
pratyakSa ke atirikta kisI dUsare pramANa kA aura mAnA jAnA spaSTa ho jAtA hai|
yadi aisA nahIM hotA to auroM ko apane siddhAntoM kA avabodha karAne ke liye
cArvAka ne zAstra kI racanA kyoM kI ? astu isa viSaya ko aba aura adhika vistRta
karanA apekSita nahIM hai  /  , isa vivecana se yaha siddha hotA hai ki
pratyakSa ke atirikta dUsarA bhI pramANa hai  /  usa pramANa kA astittva siddha
ho jAtA hai  /  vaha kauna sA pramANa hai ? kahA jAtA hai-AtmA hai-kyoMki usakA
asAdhAraNa-asAmAnya yA viziSTa guNa pAyA jAtA hai  /  isake liye cakSuindriya kA
udAharaNa diyA jA rahA hai  /  cakSuindriya atyanta sUkSma-bArIka hone ke kAraNa
pratyakSa rUpa meM upalabdha parijJAta nahIM hotii| sparzana Adi indriyoM dvArA
na prApta ho sakane yogya rUpa vijJAna-rUpa ko jAnane kI kSamatA kI apekSA se
usake astittva kA anamAna kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  isI prakAra pRthvI Adi bhUtoM
meM na prApta hone vAlI cetanA kI apekSA se AtmA ke svatantra astittva kA
anumAna kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  cetanA AtmA kA asAdhAraNa-asAmAnya yA ekamAtra
guNa hai  /  pRthvI Adi pAMca bhUtoM ke samavAya meM caitanya guNa prApta nahIM
hotA  /  ataeva AtmA kA astittva hai, yaha jAnane kI bAta hai  /  nizcita hI
AtmA hai, kyoMki samasta iMdriyAM jina padArthoM-abhiprAyoM, ko jAnatI hai unakA
saMkalanAtmakaeka sAtha milA huA-pratyaya jJAna yA pratIti hotI hai  /
udAharaNArtha-eka bhavana meM pAMca khir3akiyAM hai  /  una dvArA jAne hue pAMca
padArthoM ko eka devadatta-eka puruSa saMkalita kara dekhatA hai vaise hI
indriyoM dvArA parijJAnapadArthoM kA saMkalanAtmaka-sammelanAtmaka sAkSAtkAra
AtmA karatI hai, iMdriya nahIM karatI  /  iMdriyoM ke vigamavinAza hone para bhI
unake dvArA jAne hue padArtha AtmA ko smaraNa rahate haiM jaise khir3akiyoM ke
miTa jAne para bhI una dvArA kahe jAne hue padArtha devadatta nAmaka vyakti kI
smRti meM rahate haiM  /  arthApatti pramANa dvArA bhI AtmA kA honA siddha hotA
hai, pRthvI Adi paMcabhUtoM dvArA dIvAla Adi para mAnavIya AkAra banA de to bhI
usameM sukha-duHkha, icchA, dveSa aura prayatna Adi kriyAeM nahIM hotii| isase
aisA nizcita hotA hai ki pAMca bhUtoM ke atirikta koI aisA padArtha hai jo
sukha-duHkha, icchA, Adi kriyAoM kA samavAyI kAraNa-jisake hue binA kArya siddha
nahIM hotA hai  /  vaha pAMcabhUtoM se bhinna hai, vaha AtmA hai  /  isa prakAra
pratyakSa tathA anumAna Adi pUrvaka arthApatti dvArA bhI AtmA kI siddhi hotI hai
ise samajhanA cAhiye  /  arthApatti kI paribhASA isa prakAra hai-chahoM pramANoM
ke anusAra jo padArtha kisI anya padArtha ke binA siddha nahIM ho sakatA usakI
siddhi ke liye eka adRSTa padArtha kI kalpanA kI jAtI hai, use arthApatti kahA
jAtA hai tathA Argama se bhI AtmA kI siddhi hotI hai, yaha jAnanA cAhiye  /
Agama meM ullekha hai-merI AtmA upapAta | 19

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra states that the soul goes to the other world or to a
new life. What is the need to search for another proof to prove the soul? The
soul is proven by the most senior or best proof among all proofs because
knowledge is the attribute of the soul which is direct. The attribute is not
different from the attributed, the knowledge attribute is not different from the
soul attribute, it is inseparable. Therefore, the soul is direct in the same way
as the directness of the cloth etc. attributes from the directness of the form
etc. attributes. I am happy, I am sad, in this way, the language where "I" is
used, the soul is directly perceived by the knowledge of "I" because the
knowledge of "I" is the form of self-knowledge, the form of the soul, it is the
knowledge of the soul. It is my body, it is my old karma, etc., the way it is
directed, it indicates the difference of the soul from the body. Similarly,
there are other proofs that prove the soul. Charvaka said that consciousness is
nothing but the elements, it is not different from the elements because it is
the function of the elements, just as the pot etc. are the functions of the clay
etc., this statement is also inappropriate and illogical because it has the
fallacy of the reason, consciousness is not the function of the elements because
it is not their attribute, this has already been explained. If consciousness is
considered to be the function of the elements, then the knowledge of the five
senses or the five objects cannot be achieved, this proves that the soul is the
basis of knowledge, separate from the elements. Another doubt is raised. What is
the need to know the soul, the basis of knowledge, or the soul different from
knowledge, because with the help of knowledge, the all-encompassing perception
or the collective knowledge can be achieved, therefore, what is the need to
believe in a useless soul like the fat glands on the body, like a boil?
Everything can be contained in knowledge, which is like this - knowledge is
conscious. When it is related to the elements, which are devoid of
consciousness, changing in the form of the body, then actions like happiness,
sorrow, desire, hatred, effort, etc. arise. The same is perceived by the
collective perception or the collective knowledge. The same knowledge goes to
the other world. In this way, all the subjects are well-organized and well-
known. Then why is it necessary to hypothesize the soul? The solution is this -
the collective perception or the collective knowledge cannot be the basis of
knowledge without believing in the soul, which is different from or separate
from knowledge. Each sense organ perceives its own object, a different sense
organ does not perceive the object of another sense organ. In such a situation,
in the absence of a soul, the knower who perceives all the objects, I have
understood all the five objects, this collective perception or knowledge does
not happen. If it is said that there is a principle called Alaya-vijnana, then
that collective knowledge can happen, then the answer is this - you have renamed
the soul as Alaya-vijnana. In fact, it is the soul. The knowledge attribute
cannot exist without the attributed, therefore, its soul attribute is definitely
desired, it should be. The soul is not omnipresent because its attribute,
knowledge, is not available everywhere. The pot is an example of this. The soul
is like a grain of black gram, some people say this. 20

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram paraloka meM yA navajIvana meM jAne vAlI hai-ityaadi|
AtmA siddha karane ke liye dUsare pramANa kI khoja karane kI AvazyakatA hI kyA
hai  /  saba pramANoM meM jyeSTha-variSTha yA uttama pramANa se hI AtmA kA honA
siddha hotA hai kyoMki jJAna AtmA kA guNa hai jo pratyakSa hai  /  guNa guNI se
bhinna nahIM hotA, jJAnarUpI guNa AtmA rUpI guNI se bhinna nahIM hai, vaha
abhinna hai  /  isaliye AtmA usI prakAra pratyakSa hai, jisa prakAra rUpa Adi
guNoM ke pratyakSa hone se vastra Adi guNoM kA pratyakSa hotA hai  /  maiM sukhI
hU~, maiM duHkhI hU~, isa taraha jo bhASA hai vahA~ 'maiM" malaka jJAna dvArA
AtmA kA hI grahaNa pratyakSa hotA hai kyoMki maiM rUpa jJAna svasaMvida rUpa-
AtmarUpa hI hai-AtmA kA hI jJAna hai  /  yaha merA zarIra hai, yaha merA
purAtana karma hai ityAdi ke rUpa meM jo nirdezita kiyA jAtA hai, usase AtmA kA
zarIra se pArthakya bodhita hotA hai  /  isI prakAra aura bhI pramANa hai jinase
AtmA kI siddhi hotI hai| cArvAka ne yaha jo kahA ki cetanA bhUtoM ke atirikta
kucha nahIM hai, bhUtoM se bhinna nahIM hai kyoMki vaha bhUtoM kA kArya hai
jaise ghaTa Adi mRtikA Adi ke kArya haiM, aisA kahanA bhI asamIcIna-ayuktiyukta
hai kyoMki isameM hetu kI asiddhatA hai, caitanya bhUtoM kA kArya nahIM hai
kyoMki vaha unakA guNa nahIM hai yaha pahale hI batalA diyA gayA hai  /
caitanya ko yadi bhUtoM kA kArya mAnA jAyegA to pAMcoM iMdriyoM ke yA pAMcoM
viSayoM ke saMkalanAtmaka yA sammelanAtmaka jJAna kI upalabdhi nahIM ho sakatI,
isase siddha hotA hai ki bhUtoM se pRthak AtmA hI jJAna kA AdhAra hai| eka zaMkA
aura kI jAtI hai  /  jJAna kI AdhArabhUta AtmA ko yA jJAna se bhinna AtmA ko
jAnane kI kyA AvazyakatA hai kyoMki jJAna ke sahAre hI sarvasaMkalanAtmaka
pratIti yA sammelanAtmaka jJAna kI siddhi ho sakatI hai isaliye zarIra para
ubharI huI meda graMthiyAM-basaulI kI taraha eka nirarthaka AtmA ko mAnane kI
kyA AvazyakatA hai  /  jJAna meM hI saba sada sakatA hai, jo isa prakAra hai-
jJAna cetanAtmaka hai  /  kAyA ke AkAra meM parivartita cetanA rahita bhUtoM ke
sAtha usakA saMbaMdha hone para sukha,duHkha, icchA, dveSa, prayatna Adi kriyAoM
kA prAdurbhAva hotA hai  /  usI ko saMkalanA pratyaya yA sammelanAtmaka jJAna
avagata hotA hai  /  dUsare bhava meM bhI vahI jJAna jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra
saba viSaya vyavasthita suparijJAta ho jAte haiM  /  phira AtmA kI parikalpanA
karanA kyoM Avazyaka hai ? isakA samAdhAna yoM hai-jJAna se bhinna yA pRthak
AtmA ko mAne binA jJAna kA AdhArabhUta saMkalanA pratyaya yA sammelanAtmaka
jJAna ho nahIM sakatA  /  eka-eka iMdriya sva sva viSaya ko hI grahaNa karatI
hai, kisI dUsarI indriya ke viSaya ko usase bhinna iMdriya grahaNa nahIM karatI
/  aisI sthiti meM saba viSayoM kA pariccheda karane vAle jAnane vAle-eka AtmA
ke abhAva meM, maiMne pAMcoM hI viSayoM kA avabodha kiyA yaha saMkalanAtmaka
pratIti yA jJAna nahIM hotA  /  yadi kahA jAya ki Alaya vijJAna nAmaka eka
tattva hai usase vaha saMkalanAtmaka jJAna ho sakatA hai to isakA uttara yaha
hai-Apane AtmA kA hI Alaya vijJAna ke rUpa meM nAmAntara kara diyA  /  vastutaH
vaha AtmA hI hai  /  jJAna saMjJaka guNa guNI ke binA nahIM Tika sakatA isaliye
usakA AtmArUpa guNI avazya vAMchita haivaisA honA caahiye| vaha AtmA sarvatra
vyApta nahIM hai kyoMki usakA guNa jJAna sarvatra-saba sthAnoM para upalabdha
nahIM hotA  /  ghar3A isakA udAharaNa hai  /  AtmA zyAmAka dhAnya ke dAne ke
samAna hai, kucha loga aisA kahate 20

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement of self-time is like the joints of the thumb, some people say.
This is not so, because if the soul were so small, it could not be present in
the body it has obtained due to its own past karma. That soul is found pervading
from all the limbs to the skin. This creates a situation that proves that the
soul is pervading the entire body up to the skin. The soul that is in the state
of samsara is bound by karma from time immemorial. It is not established in its
own nature - it is not situated. Therefore, despite being formless, it has a
relationship with the form of karma. There is no obstacle in it. Due to being
bound with karma, it passes through many types of states, such as subtle, gross,
one-sense, two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, five-sense, sufficient and
insufficient. If the soul is momentary in its solitary form, then meditation,
study, effort and recognition etc. do not occur in it - they do not last. If it
is considered eternal in its solitary form, then it cannot be transformed into
the states of hell, animal, human and god. Therefore, the soul is eternal in one
respect and non-eternal in another. More elaboration is needed in this regard.
Just as one stupa of the earth appears in many ways, so too, O friend, the whole
world appears in many ways. Commentary - Now the author presents the monism or
non-dualism discussed earlier under the discussion of the first proposition as
the opposing view. To understand the meaning of the statement, an example is
given. The word "yathā" indicates an example, and the word "cha" means "and". It
should be seen after the words "different order" and "one". The stupa of the
earth is the real stupa of the earth, the group of earth, the constituent part,
and even though it is one, it appears in many forms - it is seen as diverse due
to being the basis of rivers, seas, mountains, cities, settlements, etc., or it
is seen as diverse due to being low, high, soft, hard, red, yellow, etc. But
there is no difference in the earth element due to this difference. In the same
way, "O friend", the whole world - conscious and unconscious - is one wise
being. This is the heart of the matter - the one soul, the wise being, the mass
of knowledge, appears in many forms like earth, etc., and there is no difference
in the soul element due to this. Thus it is said: "One is the soul of beings,
established in every being. It is seen in one way and in many ways, like water
and the moon." And "This whole thing, whatever is wonderful, whatever is to be,
the lord of immortality, whatever grows by food, whatever moves, whatever does
not move, whatever is far, whatever is near, whatever is within, whatever is
outside of all this, is indeed the Purusha." This is dualism. _ Commentary - Now
the author presents the monism or non-dualism discussed earlier under the
discussion of the first proposition as the opposing view. - 21

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH haiM, aMguThe ke parva-perave ke samAna haiM aisA
bhI kucha loga kahate haiM  /  aisA nahIM haiM kyoMki yadi AtmA itanI choTI hogI
to use svapUrvakRta karmavaza jo zarIra prApta hai usameM vaha vyApta nahIM ho
sakatI  /  vaha AtmA saba aMgoM se lekara camar3I taka meM vyApta pAI jAtI hai
/  isase aisI sthiti banatI hai yaha pramANita hotA hai ki AtmA samagra deha meM
tvacA paryanta parivyApta hai| jo AtmA saMsArAvasthA meM hai vaha anAdikAla se
karmabaMdha se baMdhI huI hai  /  vaha apane svarUpa meM anavasthita hai-sthita
nahIM hai  /  ataH amUrta hone ke bAvajUda usakA mUrta karma ke sAtha saMbaMdha
hotA hai  /  usameM koI bAdhA hI nahIM AtI  /  karmoM ke sAtha baMdhe hone ke
kAraNa sUkSma, sthUla, ekeMdriya, dviiMdriya, triiMdriya, caturiiMdriya,
paMceMdriya paryApta tathA aparyApta Adi bahu prakAra kI sthiti meM se vaha
gujaratI hai| yadi AtmA ekAnta rUpa se kSaNika-kSaNavartI ho to dhyAna,
adhyayana, prayatna aura pahacAna Adi usameM ghaTita nahIM hote-Tika nahIM pAte
/  yadi use ekAnta rUpa se nitya mAnA jAya to vaha nAraka, tiryak, manuSya aura
deva gati ke rUpa meM pariNata nahIM ho sakatI  /  ataH AtmA syAt nitya-eka
apekSA se nitya tathA syAt anitya-eka apekSA se anitya hai  /  isa saMbaMdha meM
aura adhika vistAra Avazyaka hai| jahA ya puDhavIthUme, ege nANAhi dIsai  /
evaM bho ! kasiNe loe, vinnU nANAhi dIsai  // 9 //  chAyA - yathA ca
pRthivIstUpa eko nAnAhi dRzyate  /  evaM bhoH ! kRtsno lokaH vidvAn nAnA hi
dRzyate  //  anuvAda - jaise pRthvI kA eka stUpa, samUha yA piMDa bhinna-bhinna
rUpoM meM dRSTigocara hotA hai usI taraha eka hI AtmA samasta jagata meM bhinna-
bhinna rUpoM meM dikhAI detI hai  /  TIkA -
sAmpratamekAtyAdvaitavAdamuddezArthAdhikArapradarzitaM pUrvapakSAyitumAha
dRSTAntabalenaivArthasvarUpAvagate: pUrvaM dRSTAntopanyAsaH, yathetyupadarzane,
cazabdo'pizabdArthe, sa ca bhinnakrama eke ityasyAnantaraM dRSTavyaH, pRthivyeva
stUpaH pRthivyA vAstUpaH pRthivIsaMghAtAkhyo'vayavI,sacaiko'pi yathA nAnArUpaH-
saritsamudraparvatanagarasannivezAdyAdhAratayA vicitro dRzyate
nimnonnatamRdukaThinaraktapItAdibhedena vA dRzyate, na ca tasya
pRthivItattvasyaitAvatA bhedena bhedo bhavati, "evam' uktarItyA 'bho' iti
paramAntraNe kRtsno'pi loka:-cetanAcetanarUpa eko vidvAn vartate idamatra
hRdayam-eka eva hyAtmA vidvAna jJAnapiNDaH pRthivyAdibhUtAdyAkAratayA nAnA
dRzyate, na ca tasyAtmana etAvatA''tmatattvabhedo bhavati, tathA coktam "eka eva
hi bhUtAtmA, bhUte bhUte vyavasthitaH  /  ekadhA bahudhA caiva, dRzyate
jalacandravat  // 1 //  "tathA 'puruSa evedaM sarvaM yadbhutaM yaccaM bhAvyaM
utAmRtatvasyezAno yadannenAtirohati, yadejati yannejati yad dUre yadu antike
yadantarasya sarvasya yatsarvasyAsyA bAhyataH' ityAtyA dvaitavAdaH  // 9 // " _
TIkArtha - aba zAstrakAra pahale uddezaka ke vivecana ke antargata carcita
ekAtmavAda yA advaitavAda ko pUrva pakSa ke rUpa meM upasthita karate haiM  /  -
21

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** uses examples to help understand the nature of
things. This verse presents an example, indicated by the word "yathā". The word
"cha" here is used in the sense of "api" and indicates a different order.
Therefore, it should be placed after the word "eke".  The verse mentions the
earth stupa, which is a group of earth elements, one. However, it appears in
different forms based on rivers, oceans, mountains, cities, and suburbs, or it
appears in different forms like low, high, soft, hard, red, yellow, etc. Despite
these differences, the essence of the earth element remains the same.
Similarly, in this conscious and unconscious world, there is only one knowledge-
filled soul. This means that the same knowledge-filled soul is seen in different
forms in the earth and other elements, but there is no difference in the actual
nature of that soul. It is said that the same soul exists in all beings,
appearing in many forms like the moon reflected in water. The Upanishads say
that everything that exists in this world, everything that will come into
existence, is the same Purusha or soul. That soul resides in the divine, and it
manifests in the form of the world for the enjoyment of beings. It is mobile,
immobile, distant, and near. It is within everyone and outside everyone. Thus,
the discussion of the principle of soul-non-duality ends.  **Translation of the
verse:**  "They say, 'There is only one,' those who are weak and rely on the
beginning. Some, by doing evil themselves, bring upon themselves intense
suffering." (10)  **Commentary:**  This verse explains the principle of soul-
non-duality. Some people, who are weak in understanding and rely on the
beginning of the world, say that there is only one soul. However, the reality is
that those who are attached to the beginning of actions, like violence, create
evil karma and suffer its consequences. Others do not suffer.  The verse
emphasizes that those who engage in harmful actions are the ones who experience
intense suffering. It also implies that if there were only one soul, then
everyone would suffer, even those who perform good actions. This is not the
case, as only those who engage in harmful actions experience suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram dRSTAnta ke sahAre hI padArtha kA svarUpa AtmasAta hotA
hai, isaliye yahAM isa sUtra meM pahale dRSTAnta upasthita kiyA gayA hai isa
gAthA meM 'yathA' zabda kA prayoga huA hai vaha dRSTAnta kA sUcaka hai  /  yahAM
'ca' zabda api zabda ke artha meM prayukta huA hai, vaha bhinna krama kA dyotaka
haiM  /  isaliye ise 'eke' pada ke bAda meM lenA caahiye| _gAthA meM pRthvIstUpa
kI carcA AI hai, vaha pRthvI stUpa yA pRthvI samUha avayavI hai, eka hai| kintu
vaisA hone para bhI saritA sAgara, giri, zahara aura upanagara Adi ke AdhAra
para vaha bhinna-bhinna rUpoM meM dikhAI detA hai athavA nimna, unnata, mRdu,
kaThora, lAla pIlA Adi bhinna-bhinna rUpoM meM dRSTigocara hotA hai| yaha hone
para bhI-ina bhinnatAoM ke bAvajUda pRthvI rUpa tattva meM koI bheda nahIM
par3atA  /  isI prakAra isa cetanAtmaka aura acetanAtmaka loka meM eka hI
jJAnamaya AtmA hai  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki eka hI jJAnasvarUpa AtmA
pRthvI Adi bhUtoM kI AkRtiyoM meM bhinna-bhinna prakAra se dekhI jAtI hai, aisA
hote hue bhI usa AtmA ke vAstavika svarUpa meM koI bhinnatA nahIM hotI  /  kahA
gayA hai eka AtmA hI samagra bhUtoM meM vidyamAna hai jala meM pratibimbita
candra jaise aneka rUpoM meM dRSTigocara hotA hai, vaise hI vaha AtmA eka hotI
huI bhI aneka rUpoM meM dikhAI detI hai | upaniSadoM meM kahA gayA hai - isa
jagata meM jo astittva meM AyA, jo Age astittva meM AyegA vaha saba puruSa yA
AtmA hI hai  /  vaha AtmA hI devattva meM adhiSThita hai, vahI prANiyoM ke bhoga
hetu jagata rUpa meM abhivarddhita hokara prakaTa hotI hai  /  vaha gatizIla
hai, gativarjita hai, vahI dUra hai aura vahI samIpa hai  /  vaha sabake
antargata hai aura bahirgata bhI hai  /  yoM AtmAdvaita ke siddhAnta kA vivecana
samApta hotA evamegetti jappaMti, mandA ArambhaNissiA  /  ege kiccA sayaM pAvaM,
tivvaM dukkhaM niyacchai  // 10 //  chAyA - evameka iti jalpanti maMdA AraMbha
ni:zritAH, eke kRtvA svayaM pApaM, tIvaM duHkhaM niyacchanti anuvAda -
ajJAnayukta puruSa kahate haiM ki saba meM eka hI AtmA hai parantu jagata kI
sthiti yaha hai ki jo jIva hiMsAdi AraMbha samAraMbha meM Asakta rahate haiM,
pApa karma kara ve hI unake phalasvarUpa duHkha kA bhoga karate haiM  /  unake
atirikta dUsare duHkha nahIM bhogate  /   /  TIkA - asyottaradAnAyAha  /  eva'
miti anantaroktAtmAdvaitavAdopapradarzanam eke' kecana puruSakAraNavAdino
'jalpanti' pratipAdayanti, kimbhUtAste ityAha-'mandA'
jar3AHsamyakparijJAnavikalAH, mandatvaM ca teSAM yukti
vikalAtmAdvaitapakSasamAzrayaNAt, tathAhi-yadyeka evAtmA syAnnAtmabahutvaM tato
ye sattvAH-prANinaH kRSIvalAdayaH 'eke' kecana Arambhe-prANyupamardanakAriNI
vyApare ni:zritA AsaktAH sambaddhA adhyupannA te ca saMrambhasamArambhArambhaiH
kRtvA upAdAya svayamAtmanA pApamazubhaprakRtirUpamasAtodayaphalaM tIvaM duHkhaM
tadanubhavasthAnaM vA narakAdikaM niycchtiiti| ArSatvAdbahuvacanArthe
ekavacanamakAri tatazcAyamartho-nizcayena yacchantyavazyantayA gacchanti-
prApnuvanti taevArambhAsaktA nAnya iti, etannasyAd apitvekenApi azubhe karmANi
kRte sarveSAM zubhAnuSThAyinAmapi tIvraduHkhAbhisambandhaH syAd, -220

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(The statement of the right time) Because of the oneness of the soul, it is not
seen like this. For example, whoever is a doer of unrighteousness, he alone
experiences the corresponding ridicule in the world, not another. Similarly, in
the omnipresence of the soul, there would be no bondage or liberation, and due
to the absence of distinction between the teacher and the taught, there would be
no creation of scriptures. Because of the relevance of this meaning, the
previous verse is explained here, as follows: In the five elements, earth etc.,
which have transformed into a body form, consciousness is perceived. If,
however, there is only one soul, which is all-pervasive, then consciousness
would be perceived in pots etc. as well. But this is not the case. Therefore,
there is not one soul. And the different qualities of the elements would not
exist, because of the non-differentiation of the one soul. Similarly, in the
case of the five sense organs and the five sense-based knowledge, if there is
only one soul, then the knowledge known by one would also be known by another,
and this would not be the case. ||10||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH) ekatvAdAtmana iti, na caitadevaM dRzyate  /
tathAhi-ya eva kazcidasamajjasakArI sa eva loke tadanurUpA viDambanAH
samanubhavanupalabhyate nAnya iti,tathA sarvagatatveAtmano
baMdhamokSAdyabhAvaH,tathA pratipAdyapratipAdakavivekAbhAvAcchAratrapraNayanA
bhAvazca syAditi  /  etadarthasaMvAditvAtprAktanyeva niyuktikRdvAthA'tra
vyAkhyAyate, tadyathA-paJcAnAM pRthivyAdInAM bhUtAnA mekatra kAyAkAra
pariNatAnAM caitanyamupalabhyate, yadi punareka evAtmA vyApI syAttadA
ghaTAdiSvapi caitanyopalabdhi: syAt, na caivaM, tasmAnnaika AtmA  /
bhUtAnAzcAnyAnyaguNatvaM na syAdekasyAdAtmano'bhinnatvAt  /  tathA
paMcedriyasthAnAnAMpaMcedriyAzritAnAM jJAnAnAM pravRttau satyA manyena jJAtvA
vidita manyo na jAnAtItyetadapi na syAd yadyeka evAtmA syAditi  // 10 //
TIkArtha - niyuktikAra AtmA dvaitavAda kA samAdhAna karate hue pratipAdana
karate haiM-isa gAthA meM evaM pada AyA hai, vaha pahale nirUpita kiye gaye
AtmAdvaitavAda ko saMketita karane hetu hai  /  jo puruSa brahma ko jagata kA
kAraNa batalAte haiM ve kaise haiM ? yaha batalAte hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM ki
aisA pratipAdana karane vAle maMdabuddhihIna yA samyak viveka se vivarjita hai
/  unheM maMda isaliye kahA gayA hai ki ve ekAtmavAda ke usa siddhAnta ko
svIkAra karate haiM jo yuktisaMgata nahIM hai  /  usakI yuktiyoM se asaMgati isa
prakAra hai, yadi AtmA eka hI hai, aneka nahIM hai to aise kaI kRSaka Adi prANI
jo jIvoM kI hiMsA meM Asakta rahate haiM-baMdhe rahate haiM-udyata rahate haiM
ve saMrambha-prANiyoM kI hiMsA kA ciMtana tatparatA tathA vyApAdana-hanana
karate haiM, pApa karma kA upArjana karate haiM, azubha pravRtyAtmaka-asAtA
vedanIya kA udaya hone para tIvra duHkha pAte haiM  /  athavA jahAM tIvra duHkha
bhoganA par3atA hai aise naraka Adi meM jAte haiM  /  ArSa-Agamika prayoga hone
se bahuvacana meM ekavacana AyA hai, usakA tAtparya yaha hai ki ve nizcita rUpa
se avazya hI naraka meM jAte hai  /  hiMsAdi Arambha sArambha meM jo Asakta-
saMlagna haiM ve hI naraka Adi kA duHkha prApta karate haiM, dUsare nahIM karate
/  yadi sabameM eka hI AtmA kA astittva hotA to aisA nahIM hotA apitu eka AtmA
jo azubha karma karatI hai. to zubha anuSThAna karane vAle-puNya karma karane
vAle puruSoM ko bhI usake azubha-pApa karma kA duHkha bhoganA par3atA, kyoMki
uparyukta mAnyatA ke anusAra saba meM eka hI AtmA hai  /  kintu aisA dRSTigocara
nahIM hotA  /  isa loka meM jo asamIcIna yA duSita karma karatA hai, vahI usake
phalasvarUpa viDambanAoM kA anubhava karatA hai, duHkha pAtA hai, dUsare nahIM
paate| AtmA kA sarvagatatva-sarvavyApitva svIkAra karane para usake sAtha baMdha
aura mokSa ghaTita nahIM hote| pratipAdakajo zAstra kA pratipAdana yA upadeza
karatA hai tathA pratipAdya-jisako zAstra kA upadeza diyA jAtA hai phira una
donoM kI bhinnatA nahIM rahegI, upadeSTA aura upadezya kA bheda miTa jAyegA  /
taba zAstroM ke praNayana-sarjanakI sthiti hI nahIM banegI, usakA abhAva ho
jAyegA  /  prastuta viSaya ke sAtha saMvAditA-samAna arthayuktatA ke kAraNa
pUrva uddhRta niyukti kI gAthA kA yahA~ vivecana kiyA jAtA hai-deha rUpa meM
pariNata pRthvI Adi pAMca bhUtoM meM cetanA pAI jAtI hai-isa para yoM vicAra
kiyA jAya, yadi AtmA eka hI hai, vaha sarvavyApaka hai to ghar3e Adi meM cetanA
pAyA jAnA sulabha hogA kintu aisA nahIM hai  /  ghaTAdi meM caitanya upalabdha
nahIM hotA, ataH AtmA eka nahIM hai  /  pRthvI Adi bhUtoM ke jo alaga-alaga guNa
hai yadi saba meM AtmA eka ho to ve Tika nahIM pAyeMge kyoMki ve AtmA se pRthak
nahIM hoMge  /  pAMca indriya sthAnoM se-pAMca indriyoM ke mAdhyama se jo puruSa
jAnatA hai vaha jJAna use hI hotA hai  /  kisI dUsare puruSa dvArA jAnA huA
usake atirikta anya nahIM jAna pAtA yaha sthiti hai  /  yadi (23)

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra states that if the soul is one and all-
pervading, then it would not be possible for one to know what another knows. A
leaf came to the Kasina, a child, a wise one. There are no souls, there are no
souls, there are no souls. ||11|| Shadow - Each and every one of the soul, those
who are children and those who are wise. There are souls after death, but they
are not souls, there are no souls. Translation - In this world, the soul of all
those who are children, ignorant, wise, and knowledgeable, is separate and
distinct, not one. After death, the soul does not exist, and only the souls of
the beings who are born again exist - they do not go to the other world.
Commentary - The author of the text presents the view of those who believe in
the body as the soul as the opposing view. The view of those who believe in the
body as the soul is that consciousness arises or manifests from the five
elements that have transformed into the form of the body. Therefore, in each
body, there is a separate soul. All souls exist in this form. Those who are
children or ignorant, devoid of knowledge, and those who know the difference
between good and bad, the wise, are all separate. One should not accept that
there is one soul that pervades all. Accepting this would lead to the
impossibility of distinguishing between the knowledgeable and the ignorant. Now,
fearing that the multiplicity of souls due to their being in each body might be
objectionable, the author says, "There are souls" - they exist as long as the
body exists, but they do not exist when the body does not exist. For example,
consciousness arises in the elements that have transformed into the form of the
body, and consciousness disappears when the collection of elements
disintegrates. Consciousness is not found elsewhere. This is what the author is
showing by saying, "There are no souls" - "After death" in the other world,
there are no souls. The meaning is that there is no soul called "soul" that is
different from the body and enjoys the fruits of its own actions. Why is this
so? The author says, "There are no souls" - the word "are" is a negation of the
word "are" and should be understood in the plural. The meaning is that "there
are no souls" - there are no souls who have been born again, because they are
not born again, they do not go to another world. For example, the scripture
says, "These beings arise from the mass of consciousness, and they perish along
with them. There is no consciousness after death." Now, what is the difference
between the view of those who believe in the elements and the view of those who
believe in the body as the soul? The author says, "The view of those who believe
in the elements is that the elements themselves, which have transformed into the
form of the body, perform actions like running, jumping, etc. The view of those
who believe in the body as the soul is that consciousness, the soul, arises or
manifests from the elements that have transformed into the form of the body, and
it is inseparable from them." This is the difference. ||11|| _Commentary - The
author of the text presents the view of those who believe in the body as the
soul as the opposing view. The view of those who believe in the body as the soul
is that consciousness arises or manifests from the five elements that have
transformed into the form of the body. Therefore, in each body, there is a
separate soul. All souls exist in this form. Those who are children or ignorant,
devoid of knowledge, and those who know the difference between good and bad, the
wise, are all separate. One should not accept that there is one soul that
pervades all. Accepting this would lead to the impossibility of distinguishing
between the knowledgeable and the ignorant.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram AtmA eka ho-sarvavyApI ho to aisA nahIM bana pAyegA
arthAt eka dvArA jAne hue ko dUsarA bhI sahaja hI jAna legA  /  patte kasiNe
AyA, je bAlA je a paMDiyA  /  saMti piccA na te saMti, natthi sattovavAiyA  //
11 //  chAyA - pratyekaM kRtsnA AtmanaH ye bAlA ya ca paMDitAH  /  santi pretya
na te santi, na santi sattvA aupapAtikAH  //  anuvAda - isa jagata meM jo bAla
ajJAnI paMDita jo jJAnI hai-una jJAnI ajJAnI sabhI janoM kI AtmA pRthak-pRthak
hai, eka nahI haiM  /  pretya bhAva-mRtyu ke anantara AtmA kA astittva nahIM
rahatA aura sattvopapAtikAna prANiyoM kA punarjanma hI hotA hai-ve paralokagAmI
nahIM hote-nahIM jAte  /  TIkA - sAmprataM tajjIvataccharIravAdimataM
pUrvapakSayitumAha-tajjIvataccharIravAdinAmayamabhyu-pagamaH- yathA paMcabhyo
bhUtebhyaH kAyAkAra pariNatebhyazcaitanyamutpadyate abhivyajyate vA tainaikaikaM
zarIraM prati pratyeka mAtmAnaH 'kRtsnAH ' sarve'pyAtmAna evamavasthitAH, ye
'bAlA' ajJA ye 'paNDitAH' sadasadvivekajJAstesarve pRthagvayavasthitAH,
nokaevAtmA sarva vyApitvenA'bhyupagantavyo, baalpNdditaadyvibhaagprsNgaat| nanu
pratyeka zarIrAzrayatvenAtma
bahutvamArhatAnAmapISTamevetyAzaGkayAha-'santi'vidyante yAvaccharIraM vidyante
tadabhAve tu na vidyante, tathAhi kAyAkArapariNateSu bhUteSu
caitanyAvirbhAvobhavati, bhUta samudAyavighaTane ca caitanyApagamo, na
punaranyatra gacchaccaitanyamupalabhyate, ityetadeva darzayati-'piccA na te
saMtIti' 'pretya' paraloke na te AtmAnaH 'santi' vidyante paralokAnuyAyI
zarIrAdbhinnaH svakarmaphalabhoktA na kazcidAtmAkhyaH padArtho'stIti bhAvaH  /
kimityevamataAha-'natthi sattovavAiyA' 'asti' zabdastiGantapratirUpako nipAto
bahuvacane draSTavyaH  /  tadayamartha:-'na santi' na vidyante 'sattvAH' prANina
upapAtena nirvRttA aupapAtikAbhavAdbhavAntaragAmino na bhavantIti tAtparyyArthaH
/  tathAhi tadAgamaH-"vijJAnaghana evaitebhyo bhUtebhyaH samutthAya
tAnyevAnuvinazyati na pretya sNjnyaa'stiiti"| nanu prAgupanyastabhUtavAdino'sya
ca tajjIvataccharIravAdinaH ko vizeSa iti ? atrocyate, bhUtavAdino 'bhUtAnyeva
kAyAkArapariNatAni dhAvanabalganAdikAM kriyAM kurvanti, asya t
kAyAkArapariNatebhyo bhUtebhyazcaitanyAkhya Atmotpadyate'bhivyajyate vA
tebhyazcAbhinna ityayaM vizeSaH  // 11 //  _TIkArtha - AgamakAra tacjIva
taczarIravAda meM vizvAsa rakhane vAle saiddhAntikoM ko pUrva pakSa ke rUpa meM
upasthita karate hue kahate haiM - tajjIvattazarIravAda darzana meM AsthA
rakhane vAloM kA yaha abhimata hai ki deha ke rUpa meM pariNata pRthvI Adi pAMca
mahAbhUtoM se cetanA zakti udbhUta hotI hai, yA abhivyakta hotI hai  /  ata:
eka-eka zarIra meM, ekaeka AtmA pRthak-pRthak rUpa meM vidyamAna hai  /  sabhI
AtmAeM isI rUpa meM avasthita haiM  /  jo bAla yA ajJa haiM, jJAnavarjita haiM
tathA jo sat asat kA-zubhAzubha kA bheda jAnate haiM, jJAnI haiM, ve sabhI
pRthak-pRthak hai  /  koI eka saba meM vyApta AtmA hai, aisA nahIM svIkAra
karanA cAhiye  /  aisA svIkAra karane se jJAnayukta aura jJAna rahita kA bheda
nahIM ho sakatA  /

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement of Authority  Those who believe in the principles
propounded by the Arhats, while accepting the principle of 'Atmabahutva'
(plurality of souls), believe that each body has a separate soul. Why then do
you present this doctrine? This doubt arises. It is said that as long as the
body exists, so does the soul. When the body ceases to exist, the soul also
ceases to exist, because consciousness arises from the five great elements
transformed into the form of the body. When the community of the five elements
disintegrates and becomes separate, consciousness is lost and destroyed.
Consciousness does not become available or visible, separated from the body and
going elsewhere. The Agamkaras are to show the view of the Tatchiva
Tatcharirvadi theorists.  Why is there no substance or element called soul
separate from the body, which obtains Pretyabhava (afterlife), dies, goes to the
other world, or takes rebirth and enjoys the fruits of its actions? Keeping this
question in mind, it is said - Natthi Satthovvaiya - there is no existence of a
being. Here, the word 'Asti' in Natthi-Na'asti is a Tingt Pratiroopka Nipat,
which should be understood in the plural. This means that there is no Upapat
(birth) or transition of a being from one Bhav (existence) to another, i.e.,
they are not Aupapattik (born from another being). This is the meaning of the
doctrine of the Tatchiva Tatcharirvadi, who present citations from their Agam or
scriptures - This soul, which is the wealth of knowledge, is like a cognitive
lump. It arises from these elements and is destroyed along with the destruction
of those elements. After death, there is no remaining consciousness, knowledge,
or awareness in it.  A doubt is raised - First, the view of the Panchbhutvadi
theorist was presented. What is the special feature of the Tatchiva
Tatcharirvadi doctrine compared to their doctrines?  In its solution, it is said
- According to the Bhutvadi, the elements transformed into the form of the body
perform all actions, and from them arises the soul. The Tatchiva Tatcharirvadi
believes that from the elements transformed into the form of the body, the soul,
which is called consciousness, arises or is obtained, and it is inseparable from
them. This is the difference between the Tatchiva Tatcharirvadi and the
Bhutvadi.  Natthi Punne Va Pave Va, Natthi Loe Ito Vare. Sarirass Vi Nase Nam,
Vinaso Hoi Dehi No. || 12 ||  Shadow Nasti Punyam Va Papam Va, Nasti Lok Itah
Parah. Sarirasya Vinashena, Vinash Bhavat Dehinah. ||  Translation There is
neither the existence of merit nor of sin. There is no other world apart from
the world in which we are. When the body is destroyed, the soul is also
destroyed along with it.  -  Commentary And to show that because of the absence
of the Dharmin (soul), there is also the absence of Dharma (merit and demerit),
the Sutrakar says - Punyam (merit) is characterized by the attainment of
prosperity, and its opposite, Papam (demerit), both of these do not exist,
because of the absence of the Atman (soul), which is the Dharmin, and because of
its absence, there is no other world 'Parah' from this world, where there is the
experience of merit and demerit. In this context, the Sutrakar states the reason
- 'Sarirasya' (body) Vinashena (destruction) by the disintegration of the
elements. 25 -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH arhata dvArA pratipAdita siddhAntoM meM vizvAsa
rakhane vAle bhI pratyeka zarIra meM alaga-alaga AtmA mAnate hue 'Atmabahuttva'
kA siddhAnta svIkAra karate haiM  /  phira ukta matavAda ko kyoM upasthita
karate ho yaha zaMkA upasthita hotI hai  /  isa para kahA jAtA hai ki jaba taka
zarIra kA astitva banA rahatA hai, taba taka hI AtmA kA astitva rahatA hai|
zarIra ke na rahane para AtmA bhI vidyamAna nahIM rahatI kyoMki deha ke AkAra
meM pariNata pAMca mahAbhUtoM se cetanA kA AvirbhAva hotA hai| pAMca bhUtoM ke
samudAya ke vighaTita - pRthak-pRthak ho jAne para cetanA kA apagama-vinAza ho
jAtA hai  /  deha se alaga hokara anyatra jAtI huI cetanA upalabdha nahIM hotI,
dikhAI nahIM detI  /  tacjIva va taczarIra vAdi saiddhAntikoM ke mata kA
digdarzana karAne ke liye AgamakAra haiM pretyabhAva prApta kara marakara
paraloka meM jAkara athavA nayA janma pAkara apane karmoM kA phalaM bhoga karane
vAlA deha se pRthak AtmA nAma kA koI padArtha yA tattva nahIM hai, aisA kyoM hai
? isa prazna ko sammukha rakhate hue kahA gayA hai - natthi satthovavAiyA -
nAsti satvopapAditA koI prANI Age jAkara naye rUpa meM utpanna nahIM hote, yahAM
natthi-nA'sti meM AyA huA 'asti' zabda tiGnta pratirUpaka nipAta hai, use
bahuvacana meM samajhAnA jAnA cAhiye  /  isakA yaha abhiprAya hai ki upapAta -
utpatti yA eka bhava se dUsare bhava meM prANI nahIM jAte arthAt aupapAtika
nahIM haiN| tacjIva taczarIravAdiyoM ke siddhAnta kA yaha Azaya hai, ve apane
Agama yA zAstra kAyoM uddharaNa prastuta karate haiM- yaha AtmA jo vijJAna dhana
hai - jJAnAtmaka piMDavata hai  /  ina bhUtoM se samutthita hokara-AvirbhUta
hokara unhIM bhUtoM ke vinAza ke sAtha-sAtha vinaSTa ho jAtI hai| maraNa ke
anantara usameM saMjJA yA jJAna yA cetanA avaziSTa nahIM rhtii| eka zaMkA
upasthita kI jAtI hai-pahale paMcabhUtavAdI saiddhAntika kA mata prastuta kiyA
gayA  /  unake siddhAntoM kI tulanA meM tacjIva taczarIravAdI ke siddhAntoM kI
kyA vizeSatA hai ? isake samAdhAna meM kahA jAtA hai- bhUtavAdI ke anusAra deha
ke rUpa meM pariNata bhUta hI saba kriyAeM karate haiM, unhIM se AtmA kI utpatti
hotI hai  /  tacjIva taczarIravAdI kI mAnyatA hai ki deha ke AkAra meM pariNata
bhUtoM se caitanya saMjJaka AtmA kI utpatti yA labdhi hotI hai aura vaha unase
abhinna hai, bhUtavAdI ke mata meM tacjIva taczarIravAdI kA yaha antara hai  /
natthi puNNe va pAve vA, natthi loe ito vare  /  sarIrassa viNAseNaM, viNAso hoi
dehiNo  //  12 //  chAyA nAsti puNyaM va pApaM vA, nAsti loka itaH paraH  /
zarIrasya vinAzena, vinAzo bhavati dehinaH  //  anuvAda vAstava meM na puNya kA
astittva hai aura na pApa kA hii| jisa loka meM hama haiM usase pRthak anya koI
bhI loka nahIM hai| jaba zarIra naSTa hotA hai to usake sAtha AtmA bhI naMSTa ho
jAtI hai| - TIkA evaM ca dharmiNo'bhAvAddharmasyApyabhAva iti darzayitumAha -
puNyamabhyudayaprAptilakSaNaM tadviparItaM pApametadubhayamati na vidyate,
Atmano dharNiNo'bhAvAt tadabhAvAcca nAsti ataH asmAllokAta 'paraH' anyo loko
yatra puNyapApAnubhava iti  /  atracArthe sUtrakAraH kAraNa mAha 'zarIrasya'
kAyasya vinAzena bhUtavighaTanena 25 -

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga  "Destruction" is the absence of the
embodied self, for there is no self apart from the body. When the body is
destroyed, the self does not go to another world to experience merit or demerit.
Therefore, for the Dharmi (the embodied self), the absence of the self means the
absence of merit and demerit. There are many examples of this, such as: just as
a water bubble is not separate from the water, so too the self is not separate
from the five elements. Just as when the outer skin of a banana stem is peeled
away, there is no inner essence, so too when the aggregate of elements
disintegrates, there is no inner essence called the self. Just as a rotating
piece of straw creates the illusion of a wheel, so too the aggregate of
elements, with its specific activities, creates the illusion of a living being.
Just as in a dream, we experience external forms through our own consciousness,
so too the consciousness of the self arises from the aggregate of elements. Just
as in a mirror, due to its clarity, an object outside is reflected and appears
to be inside, but is not actually there, and just as in summer, the heat of the
sun causes mirages to appear as water, so too Gandharva cities and other such
things appear to be real, but are not. Similarly, the self, being separate from
the aggregate of elements, creates the illusion of being real when the body
undergoes transformation. Some Sutras explain these examples in detail, but we
have not included them in this commentary due to their absence in the ancient
commentaries.  If there is no self separate from the elements, and there is no
merit or demerit, then how can the diversity of the world be explained? For
example, some are rich, some are poor, some are beautiful, some are ugly, some
are happy, some are unhappy, some are healthy, some are sick, etc. What is the
basis for this diversity?  It is said that this diversity arises from the nature
of things. For example, a piece of sandalwood, when rubbed, produces a fragrant
smell and experiences the pleasure of incense, while a piece of stone is used
for washing feet. There is no inherent merit or demerit in these two pieces of
stone, but they experience different states due to their nature. Similarly, the
diversity of the world arises from the nature of things. As it is said: "The
sharpness of a thorn, the beauty of a peacock, and the colors of a copper-
colored head are all due to their nature." This is the view of the "Jiva-Tattva-
Sharir-Vadi" (those who believe in the self and its body).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram 'vinAzaH' abhAvaH dehina Atmano'pyabhAvo bhavati yataH,
na punaH zarIre vinaSTe tasmAdAtmA paralokaM gatvA puNyaM pApaM vADanubhavatIti
/  ato dharmiNa Atmano'bhAvAtaddharmayoH puNyapApayorapyabhAva iti  /
asmizcArthe bahavo dRSTAntAH santi, tadyathA-yathA jala budbudo jalAtirekeNa
nApara: kazcidvidyate tathA bhUtavyatirekeNa nA'paraH kazcidAtmeti  /  tathA
yathA kadalIstambhasya bahistvagapanayane kriyamANe tvaGmAtrameva sarvaM nAntaH
kazcitsAro'sti, evaM bhUta samudAye vighaTati sati tAvanmAtraM vihAya nAntaH
sArabhUtaH kazcidAtmAkhyaH padArtha upalabhyate, yathA vAlAtaM
bhrAmyamANamatadrupamapi cakrabuddhi mutpAdayati, evaM bhUta samudAyo'pi
viziSTakriyopeto jIvabhrAntimutpAdayatIti  /  yathA ca svapne bahirmukhAkAratayA
vijJAnamanubhUyate'ntareNaiva bAhyamartham, evamAtmAnamantareNa tadvijJAnaM
bhUta samudAye prAdurbhavatIti  /  tathA yathA''darze svacchatvAtpratibimbito
bahiH sthito'pyartho'ntargato lakSyate, na cAsau tathA, yathA ca grISme
bhaumenoSmaNAparispandamAnA marIcayo jalAkAraM vijJAnamutpAdayanti eva manye'pi
gandharvanagarAdayaH svasvarUpeNA tathA bhUtA api tathA pratibhAsante,
tathA''tmA'pi bhUtasamudAyasya kAyAkArapariNatau satyAM pRthagasanneva tathA
bhrAntiM samutpAdayatIti  /  abhISAJca dRSTAntAnAM pratipAdakAni kecitsUtrANi
vyAcakSate, asmAbhistu sUtradarzeSu cirantanaTIkAyAM cAdRSTatvAnnolliGgitAnIti
/  nanu ca yadi bhUtavyatiriktaH kazcidAtmA na vidyate, tatkRte ca puNyApuNye na
staH tatkathametajjagadvaicitryaM ghaTate ? tadyathA kazcidIzvaro'paro
daridro'nyaH subhago'parodurbhagaH sukhI duHkhI surupo mandarUpo vyAdhito
nIrogIti, evaM prakArA ca vicitratA kiM nibandhaneti ? atrocyate, svabhAvAt,
"tathAhi - kutracicchilAzakale pratimArUpaM niSpAdyate tacca
kuMkumAgarucandanAdivilopanAnubhoga manubhavati dhUpAdyAmodaJca, anyasmiMstu
pASANakhaMDe pAdakSAlanAdi kriyate, na ca tayoH pASANakhaNDayoH zubhAzubhe'staH
yadudayAtsa tAdRgvidhAvasthAvizeSa ityevaM svAbhAvAjjagadvaicitryaM, tathA
coktam - "kaNTakasya ca tIkSNatvaM, mayUrasya vicitratA  /  varNAzca
tAmracUDAnAM svabhAvena bhavanti hi " iti tajjIva taccharIravAdimataM gatam  //
12 //  TIkArtha - tacjIva taczarIravAdI ke siddhAntAnusAra jo pahale batAyA gayA
ki AtmA jo dharmI hai usake na rahane para usake dharma kA astitva nahIM rahatA
/  sUtrakAra ise upasthita kahate haiM - jo AtmA jisase abhyadaya - unnati yA
anukUla sukha samRddhi prApta karatI hai use puNya kahA jAtA hai  /  puNya se
ulTA hai arthAt jIva jisase abhyudaya nahIM pAtA, pratikUla - duHkhAtmaka
paristhitiyAM prApta karatA hai, use pApa kahA jAtA hai  /  puNya aura pApa
donoM kA koI astitva nahIM hai kyoMki dharmIrUpa AtmA kA hI koI astitva nahIM
hai  /  taba yaha to dharma hai, inakA astitva kahA~ se ho  /  AtmA kA astitva
na hone se isa loka se pRthak koI anya loka bhI nahIM hai, jahAM manuSya puNya
aura pApa kA phala bhoga sake  /  sUtrakAra isa saMbaMdha meM kAraNa kA upAdAna
karate haiM  /  zarIra rUpa meM vidyamAna bhUtoM kA vighaTana yA vinAza hone se,
unake pRthak-pRthak ho jAne se AtmA kA bhI abhAva ho jAtA hai, astittva nahIM
rahatA  /  ataH deha ke vinaSTa ho jAne para usase pRthak hokara AtmA paraloka
jAkara puNya va pApa ke phala kA anubhava nahIM karatI  /  ataH AtmA jo dharmI
hai, usakA abhAva ho jAne para unake puNya pApa rUpI dharmI kA bhI abhAva ho
jAtA hai yaha tajjIva taczarIra vAdiyoM ke mata kI bAta  /  isa saMbaMdha meM
aneka dRSTAnta upasthita karate haiN| jaise pAnI kA eka bulabulA vastutaH pAnI
se koI pRthak padArtha nahIM hai, usI prakAra AtmA pAMca bhUtoM se koI alaga
padArtha nahIM hai  /  jaise kadali staMbha ke tane se chilake utArate jAya to
chilake utarate jAte haiN| unase bhinna koI sAra rUpa padArtha upalabdha nahIM
hotA, yahI bAta bhUta samavAya ke sAtha hai ! bhUtoM ke vighaTita - vichinna-
pRthak pRthak ho jAne para bhItara koI sArabhUta AtmA nAma 26 7

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement of Authority  No substance is available. Just as a spark,
when rotated, appears to be a circle of light, but in reality it is not so,
similarly, the community of elements, being associated with a specific action,
creates the illusion of a living being or soul, but in reality there is nothing
like that. Just as in a dream, even though external objects do not exist, their
experience is felt, similarly, in the absence of the soul, knowledge about it
arises in the community of elements, such a glimpse appears. A mirror is very
clean. When reflected in it, external objects also seem as if they are inside
the mirror, but in reality it is not so - it is not inside the mirror. Just as
in the summer season, the rays of the sun, pulsating from the heat of the earth,
produce watery knowledge, appearing as water. Gandharva Nagar etc. are as they
are in their own form, they appear different from that. Similarly, the soul,
even though it is not separate from the five elements in the form of the body,
creates the illusion of being separate.  Many commentators analyze and discuss
certain sutras that are proponents of these illustrations, but we have not seen
those sutras in the old copies of the sutras - in the ancient commentaries.
Therefore, they are not mentioned here. To tell  A doubt arises that if there is
no independent substance called soul, apart from or in addition to the five
elements, then the merits and demerits done by it cannot be done either. Then
how can this world, which has so much diversity, happen? As a result of whom do
these diverse situations appear? In this world, someone is powerful, someone is
humble, someone is fortunate, someone is unfortunate, someone is prosperous,
someone is suffering, someone is beautiful, someone is ugly, someone is
diseased, someone is healthy without disease. Why do these diversities in the
world happen?  In resolving this doubt, it is said from the side of the Tatchiva
Tatcharirvadis that whatever happens, happens by nature, its cause is nature.
For example, somewhere a stone block is given the form of a deity, kumkum, agar,
sandalwood etc. are applied on it. They are wiped off, incense etc. fragrant
substances are offered. She gets the opportunity to get the fragrance etc. of
these. In other words, it can be said that she experiences it. There is another
stone block on which people wash their feet etc. Such a low-grade work is used
in which. No merits and demerits are associated with both the stone blocks, due
to the rise of which they are getting such states. Therefore, it is proved that
the cause of the diversity of the world is nature itself. It has been said that
the sharpness in the thorn - the peculiarity in the peacock form, the variegated
colorfulness, the peculiar color in the rooster - the cause of all this is
nature itself. Here the principle of Tatchiva Tatcharirvadis has been explained.
* * *  **कुव्वं च कारयं चेव, सव्वं कुव्वं न विज्जई । एवं अकारओ अप्पा, एवं ते उ
पगभिआ ॥ १३ ॥**  * * *

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH kA padArtha upalabdha nahIM hotaa| jaise koI
cinagArI ko gola ghumAve to vaha jyoti kA cakraM sA pratIta hotA hai kintu
vAstava meM vaisA nahIM hotaa| isI prakAra bhUta samudAya bhI viziSTa kriyA se
yukta hokara jIva yA AtmA kI bhrAMti utpanna karatA hai kintu vastutaH vaisA
kucha nahIM hotA  /  jisa prakAra svapna meM bAhya padArthoM ke vidyamAna na
hone para bhI unakI anubhUti hotI hai isI prakAra AtmA ke na hone para bhI bhUta
samudAya meM tad viSayaka vijJAna prAdurbhUta hotA hai, vaisI jhalaka pratIta
hotI hai| darpaNa atyanta svaccha hotA hai  /  usameM pratibimbita hone para
bAhya padArtha bhI aisA lagatA hai ki vaha mAnoM darpaNa ke bhItara rahA huA ho
kintu vAstava meM vaisA nahIM - vaha darpaNa ke bhItara nahIM hotA  /  jaise
grISma Rtu meM bhUmi kI uSNatA se parispaMdita hotI huI sUrya kI kiraNeM
jalAtmaka vijJAna utpanna karatI hai, jalarUpa pratIta hotI hai  /  gandharva
nagara Adi apane-apane AkAra meM jaise hote haiM, usase bhinna pratIta hote haiM
/  isI prakAra AtmA bhI pAMca bhUtoM ke deha rUpa meM pariNata hone para unase
pRthak na hotI huI bhI pRthak hone kI bhrAMti samutpanna karatI hai  /  kaI kaI
vyAkhyAkAra ina dRSTAntoM ke pratipAdaka katipaya sUtroM kA vizleSaNa - vivecana
karate haiM kintu hamane sUtrAdarzo - sUtroM kI purAnI pratiyoM meM aura
purAtana TIkAoM meM una sUtroM ko nahIM dekhA hai| isaliye yahA~ unakA ullekha
nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  batAnA eka zaMkA upasthita kI jAtI hai ki yadi pAMca
bhUtoM ke atirikta yA unase pRthak koI AtmA nAmaka svataMtra padArtha nahIM hai
usa dvArA kiye gaye puNya aura pApa bhI nahIM ho skte| phira yaha jagata jisameM
itanI vicitratA haiM, kisa prakAra ghaTita ho sakatA hai  /  kinake phalasvarUpa
ye vicitra sthitiyAM prakaTa hotI haiN| isa jagata meM koI aizvaryazAlI hai, koI
dIna hIna hai, koI saubhAgyazAlI hai, koI durbhAgyayukta hai, koI sukha sampanna
hai, koI duHkha pIr3ita haiM, koI suMdara rUpa se yukta hai koI kurUpa hai, koI
roga yukta hai, koI roga rahita svastha | jagata meM yaha jo vicitratAeM haiM
vaha kyoM ghaTita hotI hai  /  isa zaMkA kA samAdhAna karate hue tacjIva
taczarIravAdiyoM kI ora se kahA jAtA hai ki yaha jo kucha bhI hotA hai vaha
svabhAva se hotA hai usakA kAraNa svabhAva hai  /  udAharaNArtha- kahIM eka
pASANa khaNDa ko deva pratimA kA rUpa diyA jAtA hai, usa para kuMkuma, agara,
candana Adi car3hAye jAte haiN| unakA vilepana kiyA jAtA hai dhUpa Adi
sugaMdhita padArtha upahRta kiye jAte haiN| vaha inakI sugaMdha Adi pAne kA
avasara pAtI hai| dUsare zabdoM meM yoM kahA jA sakatA hai ki vaha aisA anubhava
karatI hai| eka dUsarA pASANa khaNDa hai jisa para loga paira Adi dhote haiM  /
aise nimna koTI ke kAryoM meM jisakA upayoga hotA hai| una donoM pASANa khaNDoM
ke sAtha koI pApa puNya nahIM jur3e haiM jinake udaya se ve vaisI avasthAeM
prApta kara rahe haiM  /  ataH yaha pramANita hotA hai ki jagata kI vicitratA kA
kAraNa svabhAva hI hai  /  kahA gayA hai kAMTe meM jo tIkSNatA hai - tIkhApana
mayUrarUpa jo vilakSaNatA hai jo vividha raMgamayatA hai, murge meM jo vicitra
raMga hai - ina sabakA kAraNa svabhAva hI hai  /  yahAM tacjIva taczarIravAdiyoM
kA siddhAMta batAyA gayA hai  /  kuvvaM ca kArayaM ceva, savvaM kuvvaM na vijjaI
/  evaM akArao appA, evaM te u pagabhiA  //  13  //  27 * * *

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse:**  "Even though it appears to be doing, or
causing to be done, it does not do anything at all. Thus, the Self is an Akara
(non-doer), and this is what the Sankhyas proclaim."  **Translation:**  The Self
does not engage in any action on its own, nor does it cause any action to be
done by another. It exists without doing anything. In other words, it is an
Akara - not the doer of any action.  **Commentary:**  Here, the author, with the
intention of explaining the Akara (non-doer) doctrine, says: "The word 'Kurvan'
(doing) refers to an independent doer. But the Self, being formless, eternal,
and all-pervading, cannot be a doer. For the same reason, the Self cannot be a
causer either. The first 'cha' (and) negates the Self's past and future actions,
while the second 'cha' is a connective. Therefore, the Self does not engage in
any action on its own, nor does it cause any action to be done by another.
Although it appears to perform actions like eating and drinking, due to the
'Mudra-Pratibimbo-dayana' (reflection in a mirror) and 'Japasphatika' (crystal)
analogies, it is not actually the doer of any action. This is shown by the
phrase 'Savvam Kuvvan Na Vijjai' (It does not do anything at all). The word
'Sarvam' refers to all actions, including pulsation, movement, and obtaining
things from different places. The Self does not do any of these because it is
all-pervading, formless, and inactive like space. This is also stated in the
verse: 'Akara, Nirguna, Bhokta, Atma-Sankhya-Nidarsane' (The Self is a non-doer,
attributeless, and enjoyer, as explained by the Sankhya philosophy). The word
'Evam' (thus) indicates that the Self is an Akara in this way. The word 'Te'
(they) refers to the Sankhyas, and the word 'Tu' (but) emphasizes their distinct
view. The Sankhyas, being 'Pragalbhitah' (proclaimers), repeatedly state their
view, as in the statement: 'Prakriti does, Purusha enjoys, and the Purusha,
through the intellect, understands the meaning of the object.' This is the Akara
doctrine of the Sankhyas."  **Mudra-Pratibimbo-dayana:**  If an image is
reflected in a mirror, it appears to be present there, even though it does not
make any effort to be there. Similarly, the Self does not make any effort to
manifest its state, nor does it perform any action, but it appears to be doing
so, like the reflection in a mirror. This is called the 'Mudra-Pratibimbo-
dayana' analogy.  **Japasphatika:**  The flower of the 'Japas' plant, which is
red, when placed near a crystal, makes the crystal appear red. In reality, the
crystal is not red, it remains white, but due to the reflection of the red
flower, it appears red. This example illustrates that, according to the Sankhya
philosophy, although the Self is devoid of the capacity to enjoy, it does not
experience the fruits of actions. The enjoyment is experienced by the intellect,
and due to its association with the intellect, it appears to be experienced by
the Self. This is why the Self is considered the enjoyer. This is the meaning of
the 'Japasphatika' analogy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA kurvaMzca kAraya~ zcaiva, sarvAM kurvanna vidyate
/  evamakAraka AtmA, evaM te tu pragalbhitAH  //  anuvAda AtmA svayaM kucha
karate hue nahIM rahatI - svayaM kisI karma yA kriyA meM udyata nahIM hotI  /
na kisI anya ke dvArA koI kriyA karavAtI hai  /  yoM vaha kucha bhI na karatI
huI avasthita hai  /  dUsare zabdoM meM vaha akAraka - kisI kriyA kI kartA nahIM
hai  /  - TIkA - idAnImakArakavAdimatAbhidhitsayA''ha - 'kurvanniti svatantraH
kartA'bhidhIyate, AtmanazcAmUrtattvAnnityatvAt sarvavyApitvAcca
kartuttvAnupapattiH, ata eva hetoH kArayitRtvamapyAtmano'nupapannamiti,
pUrvazcazabdo'tItAnAgatakartRtvaniSedhako dvitIyaH samuccayArthaH, tatazcAtmA na
svayaM kriyAyAM pravartate, nApyanyaM pravartayati, yadyapi ca sthitikriyAM
mudrApratibimbodayanyAyena [japAsphaTikanyAyena ca] bhujikriyAM karoti tathA'pi
samastakriyAkartRtvaM tasya nAstItyetaddarzayati- 'savvaM kuvvaM Na vijjaI' tti
'sarvAM' parispandAdikAM dezadezAntara prAptilakSaNAM kriyAM kurvannAtmA na
vidyate sarvavyApitvenAmUrtatvena cAkAzasyevAtmano niSkriyatvamiti, tathA
coktAm-" akartA nirguNo bhoktA, AtmAsAGkhyanidarzane" iti  /  'evam' anena
prakAreNAtmA'kAraka iti, 'te' sAGkhyAH, tu zabdaH pUrvebhyo vyatirekamAha, te
punaH sAGkhyA evaM 'pragalbhitA : ' pragalbhavanto dhAryavantaH santo
bhUyobhUyastatra tatra pratipAdayanti, yathA "prakRti: karoti, puruSa
upabhuGkte, tathA buddhayadhya vasitamarthaM puruSazcetayate"
ityAdyakArakavAdimatamiti  // 13 //  1. 2. yahAM jo kurvan pada AyA hai vaha
satR pratyaya kA rUpa hai  /  usakA tAtparya hai ki vaha svatantra kartRttva
taka hai| AtmA amUrta mUrta yA AkAra rahita nitya-nAza rahita aura sarvavyApI
hai  /  isaliye usameM kartRttva utpanna nahIM hotA-vaha karttA nahIM ho sakatI
/  jaba usameM svayaM kartRttva nahIM hai to kisI anya ke dvArA
kArayitRttvakriyA karAyA jAnA bhI niSpanna nahIM hotA  /  isa gAthA meM pahale
joM 'ca' zabda kA prayoga huA hai vaha AtmA ke atItakAlIna aura bhaviSyakAlIna
karttApana kA pratiSedha karatA hai  /  dUsarA 'ca' zabda samuccavAcaka hai  /
vaha padoM ko jor3atA hai  /  ataeva isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki AtmA svayaM kisI
kriyA meM pravRtta-saMlagna nahIM hota aura vaha kisI anya ko kisI kriyA meM
saMlagna nahIM kara pAtI  /  'mudrA prati bimbodakara tathA japAsphaTika nyAya'
se vaha khAnA pInA Adi kriyAeM karatI huI pratIta hotI hai kintu vastutaH usakA
vahAM kartRttva kartApana TIkArtha - akArakavAdiyoM ke siddhAnta kA vivecana
karane kI dRSTi se AgamakAra yahAM batalAte haiM - mudrApratibimbodaka kisI
darpaNa meM yadi koI mUrti pratibimbita ho to vaha apane vahAM vidyamAna yA
avasthita hone kA koI prayatna na karane ke bAvajUda vaha usa darpaNa meM
avasthita pratIta hotI hai  /  isI prakAra AtmA apanI sthiti vyakta karane hetu
koI prayatna nahIM karatI, na vaha kucha kriyA hI karatI hai kintu darpaNa ke
pratibimba kI jyoM karatI huI sI pratIta hotI hai  /  ise mudrApratibimbodaka
nyAya kahA jAtA hai  /  - japAsphaTika nyAya sphaTika maNi ke samIpa japA nAmaka
latA kA puSpa jo lAla raMga kA hotA hai, taba vaha sphaTika maNi bhI lAla raMga
kI hI dRSTigocara hotI hai, vastutaH vaha lAla nahIM hotI, sapheda hI rahatI hai
kintu lAla raMga ke puSpa kI praticchAyA yA paribimba par3ane se vaha lAla jAna
par3atI hai isa udAharaNa se yaha pratipAdita kiyA jAtA hai ki sAMkhya siddhAnta
ke anusAra yadyapi AtmA bhoktRtva rahita hai vaha karmaphala bhoga nahIM karatI
parantu buddhi dvArA kiyA jAtA bhoga, buddhi ke sAtha saMsarga ke kAraNa AtmA
meM pratIta hotA hai isI kAraNa AtmA ko bhoktA mAnA jAtA hai  /  japAsphaTika
nyAya kA aisA abhiprAya hai  /  28

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement of self-time authority is not there. Therefore, the Agamkaras say
in the words "Savvam kuvvam na vijjai" that the soul moves from one place to
another, etc., and performs actions that are pulsating and dynamic. When the
soul is considered all-pervasive and without form, its state becomes like that
of space. Just as space is inactive and devoid of action, so too is it devoid of
action. It has been said in the Sankhya philosophy that the soul is inactive,
devoid of agency, devoid of the qualities of sattva, rajas, and tamas, and
devoid of the enjoyment of the fruits of actions. In other words, it is not the
doer of any action, it is devoid of qualities, and it is devoid of the enjoyment
of the fruits of actions. Thus, the inactivity of the soul is proved.  In this
verse, the word "tu" is used to indicate the difference between the previously
mentioned proponents of the theory and the Sankhya theorists. As mentioned
earlier, those who believe in the Sankhya philosophy dare to assert that the
soul is devoid of agency, and they repeatedly assert that nature is the only
active principle. The soul-purusha is the enjoyer of the fruits of that action.
The intellect understands the meaning, and the soul experiences it. This is the
view of the inactive theorists.  "Je te u vaino evam, loe tesin kao sia? Tamao
te tamm janti manda aaramhnissia." ||14|| Shadow - "Ye te tu vadin evam, lokas
tesam kutah syat? Tamasaste tamo yanti, manda aaramhnisritah." Translation -
"Those who argue that the soul is inactive and devoid of action, according to
their theory, if their theory is accepted, how can the existence of this world,
which is full of four movements, be proved? Its existence cannot be proved by
such a theory. Those who expound such a theory are full of ignorance. They are
attached to the beginnings of violence, etc. As a result, they move from one
darkness to another, from one ignorance to another, and they acquire more and
more ignorance."  Commentary - "Now, wishing to refute the view of those who
believe that the body is the doer, he says - "Those who believe that the soul is
not different from the body, having accepted the soul as different from the
elements, as stated earlier, are refuted. What they have said - "Just as the
soul is not different from the body," is not correct, because there is evidence
to support it. And this is it - this body is made by a doer, because it has a
definite form from the beginning. Here, whatever has a definite form from the
beginning is seen to be made by a doer, such as a pot. And whatever is not made
by a doer does not have a definite form from the beginning, such as space.
Because the pervasiveness of the one who has a definite form from the beginning
is the pervasiveness of the doer. The disappearance of the pervader means the
disappearance of the pervaded. This should be applied everywhere. Similarly, the
senses are made by a doer, because they are instruments. Here, whatever is an
instrument is seen to be made by a doer, such as a stick, etc. The instrument
cannot exist without a doer, just as space cannot exist. The soul is the doer of
the senses, and it is different from them. Similarly, this group of objects of
the senses is made by a doer, because there is the existence of the giver and
the receiver. Here, wherever there is the existence of the giver and the
receiver, there is seen a giver-receiver, such as... -29

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH nahIM hai  /  ataeva AgamakAra 'savvaM kuvvaM na
vijjaI' ina zabdoM dvArA AtmA ke eka sthAna se anya sthAna para jAnA Adi
parispaMdanAtmaka-gatyAtmaka kriyAoM kA karanA batalAte haiM  /  AtmA ko jaba
sarvavyApI aura mUrttatva rahita mAnA jAtA hai taba usakI sthiti AkAza jaisI
banatI hai  /  AkAza jisa prakAra niSkriya-kriyA zUnya hai usI prakAra vaha bhI
kriyA virahita hogI  /  kahA gayA hai-sAMkhya darzana meM AtmA akartA-
kartRtvarahita, nirguNasatva rajasa tamasa guNa rahita tathA abhoktA-karmoM ke
phala ke bhoktRtva se vivarjita hai  /  dUsare zabdoM meM vaha kisI kriyA kA
kartA nahIM hai, guNa rahita hai, karmaphala bhoga rahita hai  /  isa prakAra
AtmA kA akArakattva siddha hotA hai| isa gAthA meM 'tu' zabda kA prayoga pUrva
varNita siddhAntavAdiyoM se sAMkhyavAdI saiddhAntikoM kA bheda sUcita karane ke
liye huA hai  /  ve sAMkhya darzana meM vizvAsa rakhane vAle jaisA pahale
batalAyA gayA ki AtmA ko kartRttva rahita batAne kI dhRSTatA-durAgraha yA
DhIThapana karate haiM tathA sthAna-sthAna para punaH-punaH aisA pratipAdita
karate haiM ki prakRti hI kriyAzIla hai  /  puruSa-AtmA usa kriyA ke phalakA
bhoktA-bhogane vAlA hai  /  buddhi jisa artha ko adhyavasita-parijJAta karatI
hai, AtmA usakA anubhava karatI hai yaha akArakavAdiyoM kA mata haiM  /  je te u
vAiNo evaM, loe tesiM kao siyA ? tamAo te tamaM jaMti maMdA AraMbhanissiyA  //
14 //  chAyA - ye te tu vAdina evaM, lokasteSAM kutaH syAt ? tamasaste tamo
yAnti, maMdA AraMbhani:zritAH  //  anuvAda - jo vAdI isa prakAra AtmA ko
kartRttva rahita-akaraNazIla mAnate haiM, unake siddhAnta ke anusAra-yadi unake
siddhAnta ko svIkAra kara liyA jAya to isa loka-cAra gatiyoM se yukta saMsAra kA
astitva hI kaise siddha ho sakatA hai-vaisA hone se usakA astitva siddha nahIM
ho sakatA  /  aise siddhAnta kA nirupaNa karane vAle maMda-ajJAna se yukta haiM
/  ve hiMsAdi ArambhoM meM saMsakta-saMlagna hai  /  phalataH ve eka aMdhakAra
se nikalakara dUsare aMdhakAra meM eka prakAra ke ajJAna se nikala kara dUsare
ajJAna meM pravRSTa hote haiM-uttarottara ajJAna prApta karate jAte haiN| TIkA-
sAmprataM tajjIvataccharIrAkArakavAdinormataM nirAcikIrSurAha-tatra ye
tAvaccharIrAvyatiriktAtmavAdinaH 'eva' miti pUrvoktayA nItyA
bhUtAvyatiriktamAtmAnamabhyupagatavantaste nirAkriyante-tatra
yattaistAvaduktam-'yathA na zarIrAdbhinno'styAtme' ti tadasaMgataM,
yatastatprasAdhakaM pramANamasti, taccedam-vidyamAnakartRkamidaM zarIram,
AdimatpratiniyatAkAratvAt, iha yadyadAdimatpratiniyatAkAraM
tattadvidyamAnakartRkaM dRSTaM, yathA ghaTaH, yaccA'vidyamAnakartRkaM
tadAdimatpratiniyatAkAramapi na bhavati, yathA''kAzam, AdimatpratiniyatAkArasya
casakartRtvena vyApteH, vyApakanivRttau vyApyasya vinivRttiriti sarvatra
yojanIyam  /  tathA vidyamAnAdhiSThAtRkAnIndriyANi karaNatvAt, yadyadiha karaNaM
tattadvidyamAnAdhiSThAtRkaM dRSTaM, yathA daNDAdikamiti, adhiSThAtAramantareNa
karaNatvA'nupapattiH yathA''kAzasya, hRSIkANAMcAdhiSThAtA''tmA, sa ca tebhyo'nya
iti, tathA vidyamAnA''dAtRkamidamindriyaviSayakadambakam, AdAnAdeyasadbhAvAt,
iha yatra yatrA''dAnAdeyasadbhAvastatra tatra vidyamAna AdAtA-grAhako dRSTaH,
yathA -29

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  This is different from the iron, which is different
from the body and the bundle of sense organs. The one who is the receiver of the
objects through the sense organs and instruments, he is the different self.
Similarly, this body, which is the enjoyer, is the object of enjoyment, like
rice and so on. Here, the self would be like the potter and others, because of
the perception of their form, impermanence, and unity. Therefore, the objection
based on the opposite means of proving the special nature of the self is not to
be considered. The self of the transmigrating being is somehow considered to
have form and so on, due to its association with karma and other attachments.
Similarly, what is said, "There are no beings who are born spontaneously," is
also not correct. Because, the desire of the newborn child for the breast is
preceded by another desire, because it is a desire, like the desire of a young
boy. Similarly, the knowledge of the child is preceded by another knowledge,
because it is knowledge, like the knowledge of a young boy. Because, even the
newborn child, until he understands that this is the breast, does not offer his
mouth to the breast. Therefore, there is a trace of knowledge in the child, and
it is preceded by another knowledge. And that other knowledge is the knowledge
of the previous life. Therefore, there are beings who are born spontaneously.
Similarly, what is said, "These beings arise from the mass of knowledge and
perish with them," also has this meaning: "The mass of knowledge" is the self,
the mass of knowledge. "Arising from the beings," means that due to the previous
karma, the self experiences the fruits of its karma through the aggregate of
beings, which has taken the form of a particular body. And upon the destruction
of that, the self also perishes with it, and is reborn in another form. It does
not perish with them. Similarly, what is said, "Due to the absence of the self,
there is no absence of its qualities, virtue and vice," is also appropriate.
Because, the self is established by the following chain of reasoning. And with
its establishment, the establishment of its qualities, virtue and vice, is also
to be understood. This is also seen in the diversity of the world. The example
of the fruit fragment, which is based on nature, is also explained as such due
to the karma of the enjoyer. Therefore, the existence of virtue and vice is
inevitable. The many examples like the banana tree, which are presented to prove
the absence of the self, also only prove the talkativeness of the person,
because the self, which is different from the beings, the one who goes to the
other world, the essential one, is established by the above mentioned method.
The rest of the Sutra is explained now. Thus, "Their" - the ones who say that
the self is non-existent, different from the beings - "world" - the four-fold
transmigrating world, which is characterized by the movement from one existence
to another, which is established earlier, which is characterized by the
diversity of the world, like the movement of the good, the bad, the beautiful,
the ugly, the lord, the poor, and so on - "from where does it arise?" - how can
it be explained? - because of the non-acceptance of the self, it is not possible
in any way. "And they" - the non-believers, who do not accept the existence of
the soul who goes to the other world, and who accept the absence of virtue and
vice, go to another greater darkness, which is in the form of ignorance, from
the darkness which is in the form of the doer, because of the ignorance which is
in the form of the doer. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form of
the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in the
form of the covering of knowledge, because of the darkness which is in the form
of the covering of knowledge. Or, they go to a greater darkness, which is in

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram saMdaMzakAyaspiNDayostadbhinno'yaskAra iti
yazcAtrendriyaiH karaNai viSayANAmAdAtA grAhakaH sa tadbhinna Atmeti, tathA
vidyamAna bhoktRkamidaM zarIraM bhogyatvAdodanAdivat, atra ca kulAlAdInAM
mUrtattvAnityatvasaMhatatvadarzanAdAtmApitathaiva syAditi dharmi
vizeSaviparItasAdhanatvena viruddhAzaMkA na vidheyA, saMsAriNa AtmanaH karmaNA
sahAnyo'nyAnubandhataH kathaJcinmUrttatvAdyabhyupagamAditi, tathA yaduktam
'nAsti sattvA aupapAtikA' iti tadapyayuktaM yatastadahajatibAlakasya yaH
stanAbhilASaH so'nyAbhilASapUrvakaH, abhilASatvAt, kumArAbhilASavat tathA
bAlavijJAnamanyavijJAnapUrvakaM, vijJAnatvAt, kumAra vijJAnavat, tathAhi
tadaharjAtabAlako'pi yAvatsa evAyaM stana ityevaM nAvadhArayati
tAvannoparatarudito mukhamarpayati stane iti, ato'sti bAlake vijJAnalezaH,
sacAnyavijJAnapUrvakaH, taccAnyadvijJAnaM bhavAntara vijJAnaM, tasmAdastisattva
aupapAtika iti  /  tathA yadabhihitaM, 'vijJAnaghanaevaitebhyo bhUtebhyaH
samutthAya tAnyevAnuvinazyatIti, tatrApyayamartho - 'vijJAnaghano' vijJAnapiNDa
AtmA 'bhUtebhya utthAyeti prAktana karmavazAttathAvidhakAyAkArapariNate
bhUtasamudAyetadvAreNa svakarmaphalamanubhUya punastadvinAze AtmApi tadanu
tenAkAreNa vinazyAparaparyAyAntareNotpadyate, na punastaireva saha vinazyatIti
/  tathA yaduktam- ' dharmiNo'bhAvAttaddharmayoH puNyapApayorabhAva' iti,
tadapya samIcInaM, yato dharmI tAvadanantarokti kadambakena sAdhita:, tatsiddhau
ca taddharmayoH puNyapApayorapi siddhiravaseyA jagadvaicitryadarzanAcca  /
yattu svabhAvamAzrityophalazakalaM dRSTAntatvenopanyastaM tadapi
tadbhoktRkarmavazAdeva tathA tathA saMvRttamiti durnivAra: puNyApuNyasadbhAva
iti  /  ye'pi bahavaH kadalIstambhAdayo dRSTAntA Atmano'bhAvasAdhanAyopanyastAH
te'pyabhihitanItyA''tmano bhUtavyatiriktasya paralokayAyinaH sArabhUtasya
sAdhitatvAt kevalaM bhavato vAcAlatAM prakhyApayanti ityalamatiprasaMgena  /
zeSaM sUtraM vivriyate'dhuneti  /  tadevaM 'teSAM'
bhUtavyatiriktAtmanihnavavAdinAM yo'yaM 'lokaH' caturgatikasaMsAro
bhavAdbhavAntaragatilakSaNaH prAk prasAdhitaH
subhagadurbhagasurupamandarUpezvaradAridrayAdigatyA jadagadvaicitryalakSaNazca
sa evambhUto lokasteSAM 'kutobhavet ?' kayopapatyA ghaTeta ?
Atmano'nabhyupagamAt, na kathaJcidityarthaH, 'te ca' nAstikAH paralokayAyi
jIvA'nabhyupagamena puNyapApayozcA'bhAvamAzritya yatkiJcana
kAriNo'jJAnarUpAttamasaH sakAzAdanyattabho yAnti bhUyo'pi jJAnAvaraNAdirUpaM
mahattaraM tamaH saJcinvantItyuktaM bhavati, yadivA - tama iva
tamoduHkhasamudghAtena sadasadvivekapradhvaMsitvAdyAtanAsthAnaM tasmAd evaM
bhUtAttamasaH parataraM tamo yAnti, saptamanarakapRthivyAM
rauravamahArauravakAlamahAkAlApratiSThAnAkhyaM narakAvAsaM yAntItyarthaH  /
kimiti ? yataste 'mandA' jar3AmUrkhA:, satyapi yuktyupapanne
AtmanyasadabhinivezAttadabhAvamAzritya prANyupamardakAriNi vivekijananindite
Arambhe-vyApAre nizcayena nitarAM vA zritA:- sambaddhAH, puNyapApayorabhAva
ityAzritya paralokanirapekSatayA''rambhanizritA iti  /  tathA
tajjIvatacchazarIravAdimataM niyuktikAro'pi nirAcikIrSurAha - 'paMcaNDa'
mityadigAthA prAgvada - trApi  //  33  //
sAmpramakArakavAdimatamAzrityAyamanantara (rokta) zloko bhUyo'pi vyAkhyAyate ye
ete akArakavAdina Atmano'mUrttatvanityatvasarvavyApitvebhyo hetubhyo
niSkriyatvamevAbhyupannAH teSAM ya eSa 'loko '
jarAmaraNazokAkrandanaharSAdilakSaNo narakatiryaGmanuSyAmaragatirUpaH
so'yamevambhUto niSkriye satyAtmanyapracyutAnutpanna sthiraika svabhAve ' kuta:
'kasmAddhetoH syAt ? na kathaJcitkutazcitsyAdityarthaH, tatazca
dRSTeSTabAdhArUpAttamaso'jJAnarUpAttetamo'ntaraM - nikRSTaM yAtanAsthAnaM yAnti,
kimiti ? yato 'mandA' jar3A: prANyapakArakA''rambhanizritAzca te iti  //  adhunA
niyuktikAro'kArakavAdimatanirAkaraNArtha ko veeI akayaM ? kayanAso paMcahA gaI
natthi  /  devamaNussagayAgai jAIsaraNA iyANaM ca ||34|| Atmano'kartRtvAtkRtaM
nAsti, tatazcAkRtaM ko vedayate ? tathA niSkriyatve vedanakriyA'pi na ghaTAM
prAJcati, athAkRtamapyanubhUyeta tathA satyakRtAgamakRtanAzApattiH syAt, tatazca
ekakRtapAtakena sarvaH prANigaNo duHkhitaH 30

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"It is said that one should be happy with virtue and have the right to speak at
the right time. But this is not seen or desired. And since the self is all-
pervasive and eternal, there would be no five types of destinies - hell, animal,
human, celestial, and liberation. Therefore, the arguments of the Sankhyas
regarding the wearing of saffron robes, shaving the head and beard, carrying a
staff, begging for food, and following the teachings of the five nights are all
meaningless. Similarly, the statement:  "He who knows the twenty-five
principles, Is devoted to the refuge wherever he may be, Whether he has matted
hair, a shaved head, or a tuft of hair, He is liberated, there is no doubt.
||1||"  and so on, is also meaningless. There would be no coming and going in
the realms of gods, humans, etc., because the self is all-pervasive and eternal.
Also, due to the eternal nature of the self, there would be no forgetting,
remembering of past lives, etc. And since the self is the first cause, the
action of eating, which is based on the principle "Nature acts, the self
enjoys," is also not possible, because the self is also an agent. If it is said
that "enjoyment is through the principle of the reflection of the seal," then
this is refuted by the constant friends, because it is merely a matter of words,
and the reflection of the seal is also a specific action. And since the self is
eternal and unchanging, there is no reflection of the seal, and therefore this
is all meaningless. ||34||  "But even if the self is active through the mere
action of eating and the mere reflection of the seal, we do not consider it to
be active merely through these. What then? It is active through all actions."
This doubt is addressed by the author:  "It is not that the absence of a tree is
the cause of the absence of fruit. Nor is it that whenever there is fruit, there
is a tree, and that there is something else besides the tree. Similarly, even
though the self may be inactive in a state of sleep, etc., it does not deserve
to be called inactive. And the absence of fruit is not a sufficient reason for
the absence of a tree, because even a tree with little fruit is still considered
a tree. Similarly, even though the self may have little action, it is still an
agent. Perhaps you may think that a self with little action is inactive, just as
a person with one karshapan is not considered wealthy. Similarly, the self is
inactive because it has little action. This is also not correct, because this
analogy is understood in relation to a specific person, or in relation to all
people? If it is the former, then it is a case of proving the already proven,
because he is poor compared to someone with thousands of karshapanas. If it is
the latter, then it is not valid, because even one karshapan is considered
wealth compared to others who are beggars. Similarly, if the self is considered
inactive in relation to a person with specific qualities, there is no harm. But
in relation to the general, it is an agent. Therefore, this is not a valid
argument. Similarly, the two reasons, namely, the absence of fruit and the
absence of fruit at a specific time, are not sufficient reasons for the absence
of a tree. And so on. Similarly, the reasons of the absence of milk and the
presence of little milk do not prove the absence of a cow. This is similar to
the analogy of the dart, which is not relevant to the task at hand. ||35||14||
Commentary: Now, in order to refute the views of those who believe that the self
is inseparable from the body and those who believe that the self is inactive,
the author of the scripture explains:  The view of those who believe that the
self is inseparable from the body is refuted here. They have stated that the
self is not separate from the body, but this is not consistent. This statement
is not consistent because the self is separate from the body. There is evidence
to prove this fact. It is this: This body has a maker, it is made by someone,
because it is equipped with a beginning and an end, and it has a definite form.
In this world, all objects that have a beginning and an end and have definite
forms and shapes have a maker, as can be seen. That is, they are made by
someone. A pot is an example. There is no maker visible for an object that does
not have a maker, which is (31) "

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH syAt puNyena ca sukhI syAditi, na caitad
dRSTamiSTaM vA, tathA vyApitvAnnityatvAccAtmanaH 'paMcadhA' paMcaprakArA nAraka
tiryaGmanuSyAmara mokSalakSaNA gatirna bhaveta, tatazca bhavatAM sAMkhyAnAM
kASAyacIvara dhAraNa zirastuNDamuNDanadaNDadhAraNabhikSAbhojitvapaMcarAtropadezA
nusArayamaniyamAdyanuSTAnaM tathA - "paMcaviMzatitatvajJo, yatra tatrAzraye
rataH  /  jaTI muNDI zikhI vApi, mucyate nAtra saMzayaH  // 1 //  ityAdi
sarvamapArthakamApnoti tathA devamanuSyAdiSu gatyAgatI na syAtAM,
sarvavyApitvAdAtmanaH, tathA nityatvAcca vismaraNAbhAvAjAtismaraNAdikA ca kriyA
nopapadyate, tathA AdigrahaNAt 'prakRtiHkaroti puruSa upabhuGkte' iti bhujikriyA
yA samAzritA sA'pi na prApnoti, tasyA api kriyAtvAditi, atha
'mudrApratibimbodayanyAyena bhoga' iti ced, etattu nirantarAH suhRdaH
pratyeSyanti, vAGamAtratvAt, pratibimbodayasyApi ca kriyA vizeSatvAdeva, tathA
nitye cAvikAriNyAtmani pratibimbodayasyAbhAvAdyatkiJcidetaditi ||34||nnu ca
bhuji kriyAmAtreNa prati bimbodayamAtreNa ca yadyapyAtmA sakriyaH tathApi na
tAvanmAtreNAsmAbhiH sakriyatvamiSyate, kiM tarhi ? samasta kriyAvatve
satItyetadAzaGkya niyuktikRdAha - Na hu aphalathovaNicchita kAlaphalattaNamihaM
adumaheU  /  NAduddhathova duddhattaNe NagAvittaNe heU  // 35 //  na hu'
naivAphalatvaM drumA'bhAve sAdhye heturbhavati, nahi yadaiva phalavAM stadaiva
drumaH anyadAtvadruma itibhAvaH, evamAtmano'pisuptAdyavasthAyAM yadyapi
kathaJcinniSkriyatvaM tathApi naitAvatAtvasau niSkriya iti vyapadezamarhati,
tathA stokaphalatvamapi na vRkSA'bhAvasAdhanAyAlaM, svalpaphalo'pi hi
panasAhivRkSavyapadezabhAgbhavati, evamAtmA'pi svalpakriyo'pi kriyAvAneva,
kadAcideSA matirbhavato bhavet-stokakriyo niSkriya eva, yathaika kArSApiNadhano
na dhanitva (vyapadeza) mAskandati evamAtmA'pi svalpakriyatvAdakriya iti,
etadapyacArU, yato'yaM dRSTAntaH pratiniyatapuruSApekSayA co ('tro) pagamyate
samasta puruSApekSayA vA ? tatra yadyAdyaH pakSaH tadA siddhasAdhyatA, yataH
sahasrAdidhanavadapekSayA nirdhana evAsau, atha samastapuruSApekSayA tadasAdhu,
yato'nyAn jaraccIvaradhAriNo'pekSya kArSApaNa dhano'pi dhanavAnena, tathA''tmApi
yadi viziSTasAmopetapuruSa- kriyApekSayA niSkriyo'bhyupagamyate na kAcitkSatiH
sAmAnyApekSayA tu kriyAvAneva, ityalamatiprasaMgena, evamanizcitA-
kAlaphalatvAkhya hetu dvayamapi na vRkSA'bhAvasAdhakam ityAdi yojyam,
evamadugdhatvastokadugdhatvarUpA vapi hetU na gotvA'bhAvaM sAdhayataH,
uktanyAyenaiva dArTAntikayojanAkAryeti  // 35 // 14 //  TIkArtha - aba tanjIva
taczarIravAdI tathA akArakavAdI siddhAntikoM ke mata kA nirAkaraNa karane ke
liye AgamakAra batalAte haiM - AtmA ko deha se avyattirikta yA apRthak mAnane
vAle saiddhAntikoM ke mata kA yahAM nirAkaraNa kiyA jAtA hai-isa saMbaMdha meM
unhoMne jo yaha pratipAdita kiyA ki deha se AtmA pRthak nahIM hai yaha asaMgata
hai-aisA kahane meM saMgati phalita nahIM hotI, kyoMki AtmA kA deha se pArthakya
hai  /  isa tathya ko sAbita karane vAlA pramANa upalabdha hotA hai  /  vaha
yaha hai - _isa deha kA koI kartA vidyamAna hai-kisI kartA dvArA yaha kRta-
nirmita hai, kyoMki yaha sAdi-Adiyukta hai, prati niyatAkAra-eka nizcita AkAra
liyA huA hai  /  isa saMsAra meM jo jo padArtha sAdi Adiyukta hai tathA jinake
AkAra-AkRtiyAM sunizcita haiM unakA koI na koI kartA vidyamAna-dRSTigocara hotA
hai arthAt ve kisI kartA dvArA racita hai, ghar3A isakA udAharaNa hai  /  jisa
padArtha kA koI kartA vidyamAna dikhAI nahIM detA, jo (31)

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** is not created by anyone, it is not
beginningless and does not have a definite shape, like the sky. Therefore,
whatever substance is beginningless and has a definite shape, it has a doer - it
is done by someone, this is the pervasiveness - the principle of pervasiveness.
Where there is no pervasiveness - where there is no pervader, there is also no
pervaded - there is also no pervaded. Therefore, if the body is not created by
anyone, then it cannot be beginningless and have a definite shape. This should
be connected everywhere and also - there is definitely a controller of the
senses, because the senses are in the form of instruments or means. In this
world, whatever instruments or means there are, there is definitely a controller
of them. The potter's stick used to rotate the wheel is an example of this. The
stick is the means, the potter is not its controller, it cannot be the
instrument or means. The sky is an example of this. The sky has no controller,
therefore the sky is not an instrument or means. The soul is the controller of
the senses. It is separate from those senses. There must be a receiver of those
senses and objects, because there is a relationship between the receiver and the
received - the receiver and the received. Wherever there is a receiver and
received, there must be some substance that receives. For example, a piece of
iron and a hammer can be taken. The hammer can be considered as the sense organ
and the piece of iron as the object. The blacksmith is their controller. This
example can be connected with the sense, object and their receiver, the soul.
Therefore, the soul is separate from the senses, which are the instruments or
means by which the objects are received. That is, there must be an enjoyer of
this body, because just as rice etc. are enjoyable, so is this body an enjoyable
substance. In the previous example, the potter is a material, impermanent and
composite substance. Seeing this, why should the soul not be material,
impermanent and composite? It is not right to doubt this, because worldly souls
are bound with karma, so they are considered to be material etc. to some extent.
It is also wrong to say that beings do not go to the next world, do not take
rebirth, because a child born on the same day shows a desire and effort to drink
milk from its mother's breasts. This knowledge or tendency is due to some
previous knowledge, because every desire that arises - knowledge, there are
other desires and knowledge before it. The child's knowledge is an example of
this. A child born on the same day does not put its mouth to the breast until it
knows, until it is certain that this is the breast, which is unfamiliar to it.
This proves that the child has some knowledge. That partial knowledge is due to
other knowledge, that is, there was other knowledge before it. That other
knowledge is the knowledge of the other world. It is according to the knowledge
or experience gained in the other world. This proves that the being is
transmigratory, goes to the next world, takes birth in the other world. -3204

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kisI dvArA kRta nirmita nahIM hai, vaha Adiyukta aura
nizcita AkArayukta nahIM hotA, jaise AkAza isakA udAharaNa hai  /  ataeva jo
padArtha Adiyukta tathA nizcita AkAra yukta hotA hai usakA sakartRka hotA hai-
vaha kisI na kisI dvArA kRta-kiyA huA hotA hai, yaha vyApti hai-vyApakatA kA
siddhAnta hai  /  jahAM vyApakatA kI nivRtti hotI hai-jahAM vyApaka nahIM hotA,
vahAM vyApya kI bhI vinivRtti hotI hai-vahAM vyApya bhI nahIM hotA  /  ataeva
yadi deha kisI dvArA kRta nahIM hai to vaha sAdi aura niyata AkAra yukta bhI
nahIM ho sakatA  /  isa bAta ko saba jagaha jor3anA cAhiye aura bhI-indriyoM kA
koI na koI avazya hI adhiSThAtA hai-saMcAlaka hai, kyoMki indriyA~ karaNa yA
sAdhana kA rUpa liye hue hai  /  isa saMsAra meM jo jo karaNa-sAdhana hote haiM,
unakA koI na koI saMcAlayitA avazya hI hotA hai  /  cAka ghumAye jAne ke liye
prayukta kumhAra kA daMDa yA DaNDA isakA udAharaNa hai  /  daMDa sAdhana hai,
kumbhakAra isakA adhiSThAtA yA saMcAlaka nahIM hotA, vaha karaNa yA sAdhana
nahIM ho sktaa| AkAza isakA udAharaNa hai  /  AkAza kA koI adhiSThAyaka nahIM
hai, isaliye AkAza karaNa yA sAdana nahIM hai  /  indriyoM kA adhiSThAyaka AtmA
hai  /  vaha una indriyoM se pRthak hai-bhinna hai  /  una indriyoM aura viSayoM
kA AdAtA-grAhaka, grahaNa karane vAlA koI avazya hai kyoMki vahAM AdAnAdeya
bhAva-grAhaka grAhyabhAvagrahaNa karane vAle aura grahaNa kiye jAne vAle kA
saMbaMdha dRSTigocara hotA hai-pratIta hotA hai| jahAM jahAM AdAnAdeya yA
grAhaka grAhya bhAva hotA hai vahAM AdAna yA grahaNa karane vAlA koI na koI
padArtha avazya hotA hai  /  udAharaNa ke liye lauha ke piMDa aura saMDAsI ko
liyA jA sakatA hai  /  saMDAsI ko iMdriya sthAnIya aura lauha piMDa ko viSaya
rUpa mAnA jA sakatA hai  /  luhAra unakA adhiSThAyaka yA saMcAlaka hai  /
iMdriya viSaya aura unake grAhaka AtmA ke sAtha isa udAharaNa ko jor3A jA sakatA
hai| _isaliye indriyAtmaka yA indriya rUpa karaNoM yA sAdhanoM dvArA jo viSayoM
kA AdAtA yA grAhaka hotA hai vaha unase-indriyoM se pRthak AtmA hai  /  arthAt
isa zarIra kA bhoktA-bhoga karane vAlA koI avazya honA hI cAhiye kyoMki cAvala
Adi khAdya padArtha jisa prakAra bhogya hai usI prakAra yaha zarIra bhI eka
bhogya padArtha hai  /  pUrvavartI udAharaNa meM Aye kumbhakAra padArtha mUrta-
mUrttimAna anitya-nazvara tathA avayavI avayavavAna hai  /  inheM dekhate AtmA
bhI mUrta, nazvara aura avayavavAna aMgopAMga yukta kyoM nahIM hai  /  aisI
zaMkA karanA yukti viruddha hai-nahIM karanI cAhiye ? kyoMki sAMsArika AtmAeM
karma ke sAtha baMdhI huI hone se kathaJcita-eka sImA takaeka apekSA se mUrtatva
Adi se yukta bhI mAnI jAtI hai| _yaha jo kahA gayA ki prANI paraloka meM nahIM
jAte, nayA janma nahIM grahaNa karate, aisA kahanA bhI ayuktiyukta hai kyoMki
usI dina janme bacce meM apanI mA~ ke stanoM kA dUdha pIne kI abhilASA aura
ceSTA dikhAI par3atI hai  /  yaha jJAna yA pravRtti anya vijJAnapUrvaka kisI
pahale ke jJAna ke kAraNa hotI hai kyoMki jo jo icchA utpanna hotI hai-jJAna
hotA hai, usake pUrva meM anya icchA aura jJAna rahate haiM  /  bAlaka kA jJAna
usakA udAharaNa hai  /  usI dina janmA huA bAlaka jaba taka yaha nahIM jAna
pAtA, nahIM nizcaya kara pAtA ki vaha yahI stana hai, jo usakA anubhUtapUrva
hai, taba taka vaha rUdana chor3akara usa stana meM muMha nahIM lagAtA  /  isase
yaha sAbita hotA hai ki bAlaka meM vijJAna leza-AMzika jJAna avazya hai  /  vaha
AMzika jJAna anya vijJAnapUrvaka hai, arthAt usake pUrva meM anya vijJAna rahA
huA hai| vaha anya vijJAna bhavAntara kA vijJAna hai  /  dUsare bhava meM prApta
jJAna yA anubhava ke anusAra hai  /  isase yaha siddha hotA hai ki prANI
aupapAtika hai-paralokagAmI hai, dUsare bhava meM janma letA -3204

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement of Authority  The statement made by the proponents of the
"Tajjiva Tatcharirvadi" theory, that the soul is a "Vigyanghana" - a highly
scientific entity, and a "Vigyanpinda" - a scientific body, which arises from
the five elements and is destroyed when they are destroyed, is not correct. The
scriptural verse they cite does not mean that. The meaning of that verse is that
the "Vigyanghana" and "Vigyanpinda" soul, according to the karmas accumulated in
the previous birth, takes on a body form through the five elements, experiences
the fruits of its karmas, and when those elements are destroyed, it is destroyed
from that form and then is born again in another body - another birth. The verse
does not mean that the soul is destroyed along with those elements.  It is also
not logical to say that since the existence of the soul in its "Dharmi" form is
not proven, the existence of "Dharma" - virtue and vice - is also not proven. If
there is no "Dharmi" soul, then where would "Dharma" - virtue and vice - come
from? This statement is not logical. The arguments presented earlier prove the
existence of the soul in its "Dharmi" form. When the existence of the soul in
its "Dharmi" form is established, then "Dharma" - virtue and vice, which are its
attributes, are also established. This is how it should be understood. Also, the
diversity, uniqueness, and variety that we see in this world also proves the
existence of virtue and vice.  The example of the stone blocks given by the
"Tajjiva Tatcharirvadi" proponents to prove the diversity of the world, taking
the meaning of "nature," is also not appropriate. This is because the effect of
the karmas of the owners or authorities who experience those stone blocks is the
reason for that diversity. According to them, the existence of virtue and vice
cannot be erased. The examples of the banana stem, etc., given to prove the non-
existence or absence of the soul are also mere statements. Because the arguments
presented earlier prove the existence of the soul - which is the essence -
separate from the elements that go to the afterlife. Therefore, it is not
necessary to go into further detail in this regard.  While explaining the
remaining sutra, it is said that this world is filled with beings of four paths.
They go from one birth to another. Some are fortunate, some are unfortunate,
some are beautiful, some are ugly, some are wealthy, and some are poor, etc.
They are born in different forms. According to the theory of the "Tajjiva
Tatcharirvadi" proponents, who do not believe in the existence of a separate
entity called the soul, distinct from the elements, how can this happen? By what
logic does this happen? They do not believe in the existence of the soul, so
according to their theory, the diversity and variety of the world cannot happen.
Therefore, they are atheists - they do not believe in the afterlife, etc. They
do not accept the existence of a soul that goes to the afterlife. Therefore,
they do not believe in virtue and vice. Therefore, they do whatever comes to
their mind. They come out of one ignorance-based darkness and go into another
ignorance-based darkness. This means that they accumulate greater and greater
darkness in the form of karmas, etc., which cover the knowledge that is veiled
by ignorance. Or, what is similar to darkness is called "Tam" here. This word is
used for the place of hell, etc., where beings are subjected to severe
suffering, which causes the "Sadbhaav" - the wisdom of the hell-dwellers - to be
destroyed. They come out of that darkness - from those hellish places - and go
into even greater darkness - into the hells. From there, they go to the seventh
hell, which contains the specific hells of Raurava, Maharaurava, Kala, Maha
Kala, and Apratisthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH tajjIva taccharIravAdI saiddhAntikoM ne AtmA ke
saMbaMdha meM jo batalAyA ki vaha vijJAna ghana - atyanta vijJAna samanimvata
tathA vijJAna piMDa hai, paMcabhUtoM se samutthita AvirbhUta hokara unakA vinAza
hone para vinaSTa ho jAtI hai, yaha ThIka nahIM hai  /  jisa zruti kA
zAstravAkya kA ve ullekha karate haiM usa zruti kA abhiprAya isa prakAra hai -
vijJAna ghana, vijJAnapiMDa AtmA pUrva bhava meM AcIrNa karmoM ke anusAra deha
rUpa pariNata paMcamahAbhUtoM ke mAdhyama se apane karmoM kA phala bhoga kara,
una bhUtoM kA vinAza ho jAne para apane usa rUpa se vaha vinaSTa ho jAtI hai
aura phira apara paryAya- dUsare deha meM- bhava meM utpanna hotI hai| una
bhUtoM ke sAtha AtmA vinaSTa ho jAtI hai, isa zruti kA aisA abhiprAya nahIM hai|
sAtha hI yaha jo kahA gayA hai ki dharmI rUpa meM AtmA kA astittva siddha na
hone se dharma rUpa pApa puNya kA bhI astitva siddha nahIM hotA jaba dharmI AtmA
nahIM hai to pApa puNya rUpa dharma kahAM se hoNge| aisA kahanA bhI yukti
saMgata nahIM hai abhI pahale jo yuktiyAM upasthita kI gaI hai, unase dharmI
rUpa AtmA kA astitva siddha ho jAtA hai| jaba dharmI ke rUpa meM AtmA kI siddhi
ho jAtI hai to pApa puNya jo usake dharma hai-ve bhI siddha ho jAte haiM, aisA
samajhanA cAhiye  /  tathA isa saMsAra meM vicitratA vilakSaNatA yA vividhatA
dRSTigocara hotI hai, usase bhI pApa puNya kA honA siddha hotA hai  /  tajjIva
taccharIravAdI ne svabhAva kA Azaya lekara jagata kI vicitratA siddha karane
hetu pASANakhaNDoM kA jo udAharaNa diyA vaha bhI upayukta nahIM hai kyoMki vaha
una pASANa khaNDoM kA bhoga karane vAle unake adhikAriyoM yA mAlikoM ke karmoM
ke prabhAva vaisA huA hai  /  unake anusAra pApa puNya kA sadbhAva - astitva
miTAyA nahIM jA sakatA  /  AtmA kA abhAva yA nAstitva siddha karane hetu kele ke
tane Adi ke jo udAharaNa diye gaye haiM, ve bhI kevala kathana mAtra haiM,
kyoMki pahale jo yuktiyAM dI gaI haiM, usase paraloka jAne vAle bhUtoM se pRthak
AtmA- jo sArabhUta hai - siddha ho jAtA hai  /  isaliye isa saMbaMdha meM aura
adhika vistAra meM jAnA Avazyaka nahIM hai  /  avaziSTa sUtra kI vyAkhyA karate
hue kahA jAtA hai  /  yaha saMsAra cAra gatiyoM ke prANiyoM se yukta hai| vaha
eka bhava se dUsare bhava meM jAte haiN| koI subhaga- saubhAgyayukta, koI
durbhaga- durbhAgyayukta, koI surupa - sundara rUpa yukta, koI maMda rUpa-rUpa
rahita yA kurupa, koI aizvaryazAlI - dhana vaibhava sampanna tathA koI daridra -
abhAvagrasta ityAdi bhinna-bhinna rUpoM meM utpanna hotA hai| bhUtoM se pRthak
AtmA nAmaka svatantra padArtha na mAnane vAle tajjIva taccharIravAdiyoM ke
siddhAntAnusAra yaha kisa prakAra ho sakatA hai| kisa yukti se ghaTita hotA hai
/  ve AtmA kA astittva nahIM mAnate, isaliye unake siddhAntAnusAra jagata kI
vicitratA, vividharUpatA ghaTita nahIM hotI  /  ataH ve nAstika - parabhava Adi
meM AsthA nahIM rakhane vAle, aisI AtmA kA astitva svIkAra nahIM karate jo
paralokagAmI hai  /  ataH ve puNya-pApa ko bhI nahIM mAnate  /  isaliye jaisA
mana meM AtA hai ve karate haiM  /  ve eka ajJAnarUpa aMdhakAra se nikala kara
phira dUsare ajJAna mUlaka aMdhakAra meM jAte haiN| isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ve
yoM karate hue jJAnAvaraNIya jJAna ko DhaMkane vAle karma Adi ke rUpa meM
mahattara- bar3e se bar3e aMdhakAra kA saMcaya karate haiM athavA jo aMdhakAra
ke sadRzya hai use yahAM tama ke rUpa meM abhihita kiyA gayA hai  /  naraka Adi
ke sthAna ke liye, jahAM jIvoM ko ghora kaSTa diye jAte haiM, jisake kAraNa una
sthAnoM meM nArakIyoM kA sadbhAva - viveka naSTa ho jAtA hai, yaha zabda
prayukta hai, usa aMdhakAra se una naraka sthAnoM se nikalakara usa se bhI ghora
tara aMdhakAra meM-narakoM meM prayANa karate haiM usase Age ve saptama naraka
bhUmi meM jisameM raurava, mahAraurava, kAla, mahAkAla, apratiSThAna saMjJaka
naraka khAsa vidyamAna hai, jAte haiM  /  33

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **The question arises - why do they go to hell? The
answer is that they are dull-witted, devoid of knowledge, rooted in ignorance,
and devoid of consciousness. They are fools. Even though they are proven by the
methods of the soul, they do not accept it due to their attachment and false
beliefs. They are definitely engaged in the actions that wise men have condemned
as animal oppression and animal violence. Believing that there is no such thing
as virtue and vice, they remain completely detached from the afterlife, not
caring about it. They are engaged in the initial mixed violence and other
initial and subsequent actions. The author, refuting the theory of the body-
worshippers, has also presented the 'Panchana' etc. verses. That verse, as
before, applies here as well. Now, relying on the theory of the non-doer, this
verse is reinterpreted.**  **I**  **These non-doers consider abstractness,
formlessness, eternity, indestructibility, and omnipresence as the qualities of
the soul. Accordingly, they call the soul eternal, formless, and omnipresent.
They consider it inactive. If their opinion is considered correct, and the soul
is truly inactive, then how is this world possible with old age, death, sorrow,
grief, crying, beating, joy, and the states of hell, animal, human, and god? How
can these things be achieved through inactivity? If the soul is considered to be
without birth and destruction, stable, and existing with one nature, then the
aforementioned state of the world cannot be formed in any way. Therefore, those
men who believe in non-doing, emerging from ignorance that hinders the
acceptance of things that are seen and desired, attain a lower level of
ignorance, a place of torment - hell, a place of great suffering.**  **Why does
this happen? It is said that they are dull and inert, engaged in harming and
hurting beings. Now, the author refutes the theory of the non-doers.**  **Who
knows the action that has not been done? That is, if there is no doer, then
there cannot be any action done by him. How can one experience what has not been
done? If the soul is considered inactive, devoid of action, then favorable and
unfavorable, painful and pleasurable, happiness and sorrow do not occur. If one
experiences happiness and sorrow even without doing any action, then there are
faults in the form of 'Akrtaagam' and 'Kritnash'. 'Akrtaagam' means experiencing
the fruits of actions that have not been done. This can be considered
impossible. And not experiencing the fruits of actions that have been done is
called the fault of 'Kritnash'. It is also an impossible situation that an
action has been done but its fruits are not experienced.**  **T**  **Keeping in
mind the omnipresent aspect of the soul, it is said that if that is the case,
then the sinful actions done by one being should be experienced by all beings,
they should be unhappy, and all beings should be happy due to the virtuous
actions performed by one. But this is not visible, nor is it desirable. If the
soul is omnipresent, it is eternal, then the five states of hell, animal, human,
god, and liberation cannot be achieved. Then, the wearing of saffron robes by
the followers of the Sankhya philosophy, the shaving of the head, the carrying
of a staff, the sustenance by food received in alms, and the observance of Yama
- non-violence, truth, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-possession, according to
the teachings of their scripture called Pancharatra, would be meaningless. Along
with this, it is said that the twenty-five elements - nature, Mahat, ego, five
subtle elements, ten senses, one**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram aba prazna uThAyA jAtA hai-ve narakoM meM kyoM jAte
haiM ? samAdhAna meM kahA jAtA hai ve maMda - jJAna rahita jar3a - bauddhika
cetanA zUnya hai, mUrkha haiN| AtmA ke yuktiyoM dvArA siddha hone para bhI apane
abhiniveza-mithyA Agraha ke kAraNa use nahIM mAnate haiM aura vivekazIla puruSoM
ne prANI upamardana-prANI hiMsA rUpa jina kAryoM kI niMdA kI hai usameM ve
nizcita rUpeNa lage rahate haiM  /  ve puNya aura pApa kucha nahIM hai aisA
mAnakara paraloka se sarvathA nirapekSa rahate hue, usakI cintA yA paravAha na
karate hue AraMbha mizrita hiMsA Adi AraMbha samAraMbha kAryoM meM udyata rahate
haiN| niyuktikAra ne bhI tajjIvatazarIravAdI ke siddhAnta kA nirAkaraNa karate
hue 'paMcaNha' ityAdi gAthA kA pratipAdana kiyA  /  vaha gAthA pahale kI jyoM
yahAM para bhI lAgU hotI hai  /  aba akArakavAdI ke siddhAnta ko Azrita kara
lete hue isa zloka kI punaH vyAkhyA kI jAtI hai  /  I ye akArakavAdI amUrtatva-
nirAkAratA, nityatva, avinazvaratA tathA sarvavyApitva sarvatra vyApakatA -
inheM AtmA kA guNa mAnate haiM, tadanusAra AtmA ko ve nitya, amUrta sarvavyApI
kahate haiM  /  niSkriya mAnate haiM  /  yadi unake mata ko sahI mAnA jAya, AtmA
vastutaH niSkriya ho, to vRddhAvasthA, mRtyu duHkha, Akrandana-zoka se ronA
pITanA tathA harSa Adi aura nAraka tiryaMca manuSya aura deva gati rUpa yaha
saMsAra kaise saMbhava ho sakatA hai  /  niSkriyatA se ye bAteM kaise sadha
sakatI hai  /  yadi AtmA ko utpatti aura vinAza rahita, sthiratAyukta tathA eka
svabhAva se vidyamAna mAnA jAye to pUrvokta saMsAra kI sthiti kisI prakAra nahIM
banatI, isaliye ve akArakavAda meM AsthAvAna puruSa jo dRSTa-dekhI jAtI aura
ISTa cAhI jAtI vastu ke svIkArane meM bAdhA upasthita karane vAle eka ajJAna se
nikalakara usase bhI nimna koTi ke ajJAna ko, yAtanA sthAna - narakAdi ghora
pIr3A janaka sthAna ko prApta karate haiM  /  aisA kyoM hotA hai, isa para
kahate haiM ki ve maMda evaM jar3a hai prANiyoM ke apakAra - hiMsA meM unheM
pIr3A dene meM saMlagna rahate haiM  /  aba niyuktikAra akArakavAdiyoM ke
siddhAnta kA nirAkaraNa - khaNDana karane hetu pratipAdita karate haiM  /  akRt-
nahIM kiyA huA karma kauna jAnatA hai ? arthAt yadi koI karttA nahIM hai to usa
dvArA kRtakiyA karma bhI nahIM ho sktaa| jo nahIM kiyA gayA hai use kauna kaise
anubhava kara sakatA hai| yadi AtmA ko niSkriya kriyA rahita - katRtva rahita
mAnA jAya to anukUla pratikUla vedanIyAtmaka sukha duHkha bhI ghaTita nahIM hotA
/  yadi kisI karma ke na kiye jAne para bhI usakA sukha duHkha bhogA jAya to
akRtAgama aura kRtanAza ke rUpa meM doSa upasthita hote haiM  /  akRtAgama kA
tAtparya jo karma nahIM kiye gaye hai, unakA phala bhoganA hai| jise asambhava
kI koTi meM mAnA jA sakatA hai tathA kRta karma kA phala na bhoganA kRtanAza
doSa ke rUpa abhihita hotA hai  /  karma kiyA gayA ho aura phala na bhogA jAya,
yaha bhI asaMbhava jaisI sthiti hai  /  T AtmA ke sarva vyApitva mUlaka pakSa ko
dRSTi meM rakhate hue kahA jAtA hai ki vaisA hone se eka prANI dvArA kiye gaye
pApa karmoM ko saba prANI bhoge, duHkhI ho tathA kisI eka ke dvArA Acarita puNya
kArya se sabhI prANI sukhI ho aisA honA cAhiye  /  kintu aisA dRSTigocara nahIM
hotA aura na aisA honA iSTa- abhIpsita hI hai  /  AtmA yadi sarva vyApaka hai
vaha nitya hai to naraka gati, tiryak gati, manuSya gati devagati tathA mukti
meM pAMcoM sadha nahIM sktii| to Apa sAMkhya matAlambiyoM dvArA kASAya vastra
dhAraNa kiyA jAnA, mastaka Adi kA muMDana karAyA jAnA, daNDa dhAraNa kiyA jAnA,
bhikSA meM prApta bhojana dvArA nirvAha karanA, paMcarAtra nAmaka apane zAstra
ke upadezAnurUpa yama-ahiMsA, satya, acaurya, brahmacarya, aparigraha kA pAlana
karanA nirarthaka hogA  /  sAtha sAtha yaha jo kahA gayA hai ki jo paccIsa
tattvoM-prakRti, mahat, ahaMkAra, paMcatanmAtrAeM, dasa indriyAM, eka 34

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement that the soul, which knows the mind, the five great elements, and
the one man-soul, is liberated, regardless of whether it resides in an ashram,
wears matted hair, or has a topknot, is meaningless and pointless.  By
considering the soul as pervasive and eternal, it is not possible for it to be
born in a divine or human womb, to leave it, and to be reborn in another womb.
Since the soul is eternal, it does not experience any kind of forgetfulness or
delusion. All things remain in its memory as they are. Therefore, actions like
remembering one's birth and caste do not arise.  The use of "tathā" and other
such words here implies that nature is the doer. The doership of all actions in
the world lies with nature. The soul is the enjoyer of its fruits. In Samkhya,
the soul is called Purusha. Therefore, the implication here is that the soul
enjoys the fruits of actions performed by nature. This is not proven because
enjoyment is also an action. In Samkhya, the soul is considered inactive or
inert.  If it is said that the soul enjoys the fruits of actions performed by
nature through the analogy of the reflection of a seal, i.e., just as a seal and
an image remain outside but are reflected in a mirror and appear to be in the
mirror, similarly, although the action of enjoyment does not occur in the soul,
it appears to be in the soul like the image reflected in a mirror, this
statement is merely a play of words and devoid of logic. Only those who are not
aware of reality will accept this.  Is it not also worth considering that the
appearance of a reflection in a mirror is also a kind of action? When the soul
is eternal, unchanging, and without modification, how can this action occur in
it? Just as the appearance of an image in a mirror does not occur in the soul,
such an action never occurs.  If you say that the action of enjoyment and the
appearance of a reflection occur in the soul, then we can consider the soul to
be active in this regard. However, we cannot consider it to be capable of
performing all actions simply because of this action. The soul can be considered
active if it performs all actions.  The author, anticipating such a doubt,
writes:  The absence of fruit does not prove the absence of a tree, because if a
tree bears fruit, it is called a tree, and if it does not bear fruit, it is not
considered a tree. Similarly, although the soul is inactive and without action
in certain bodily states, such as sleep, it cannot be called actionless simply
because of this. Trees that bear little fruit are not evidence of the absence of
a tree, i.e., it is not necessary to have abundant fruit to be called a tree.
Jackfruit trees, etc., bear very little fruit, but they are still called trees.
Similarly, if the soul is slightly active, it is still called active.  If you
state your opinion as follows: "That which has little action is actionless, just
as someone who has only one penny is not called wealthy, similarly, the soul is
not called active because of its slight activity, it is inactive," this is not
inappropriate or unsuitable.  The question is, did you give this analogy with
respect to a particular individual or with respect to all individuals? If you
gave it with respect to someone who...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH mana, paMcamahAbhUta eka puruSa-AtmA-ko jAna letA
hai, vaha cAhe jisa Azrama meM vAsa kare, cAhe jaTA dhAraNa kare tathA mastaka
maMDAye rahe athavA zikhA-coTI dhAraNa kare nizcaya hI vaha mukta ho jAtA hai,
mokSa pA letA hai, yaha kathana bhI apArthaka-nirarthaka hogA  /   /  AtmA ko
sabameM vyApaka mAnane se, nitya mAnane se devayoni, manuSya yoni Adi meM jAnA,
vahAM se AnA-punaH kisI yoni meM janma lenA yaha saMbhava nahIM ho sakatA  /
AtmA ko nitya mAnane se use kisI prakAra kI vismRti-vismaraNa yA bhUla nahIM
hotI  /  usameM saba yathAvata smRti meM banA rahatA hai| aisA hone se jAti
smaraNapUrva janma kA jJAna Adi kriyA bhI utpanna-niSpanna nahIM hotI  /
'tathA' Adi ke prayoga se yahAM yaha tAtparya hai ki prakRti kartR hai-jo kucha
kriyA jagata meM kI jAtI hai usakA kartRttva prakRti meM hai  /  puruSa usake
phala kA bhoktA hai  /  sAMkhya meM AtmA ko puruSa kahA jAtA hai  /  isaliye
yahA~ isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki prakRti dvArA kiye gaye karmoM kA phala AtmA
bhogatI hai  /  aisA siddha nahIM hotA kyoMki bhoganA bhI eka kriyA hai  /  AtmA
ko sAMkhya meM niSkriya yA akriya mAnA jAtA hai  /  yadi yoM kahA jAya ki mudrA
pratibimba nyAya se AtmA dvArA prakRtikRta karmoM kA phala bhogA jAnA mAnA jA
sakatA hai arthAt jaise mudrA-mUrti Adi bAhara rahate hue bhI darpaNa meM
pratibimbita hote haiM, ve darpaNa meM rahe hue pratIta hote haiM, usI taraha
bhoga kriyA yadyapi AtmA meM nahIM hotI para vaha darpaNa meM pratibimbita mUrti
kI jyoM pratIta hotI hai  /  yaha kathana kevala vAk vilAsa hai, yukti zUnya hai
/  ise Apake vahI suhadamitra svIkAra kareMge jinheM vAstavikatA kA bodha nahIM
hotA  /  yaha bhI kyA vicAraNIya nahIM hai ki darpaNa meM pratibimba kA udita
honA bhI eka prakAra kI kriyA hI hai  /  jaba AtmA nitya hai-avikArIvikAra
rahita yA parivartana rahita hai, to usameM yaha kriyA kaise ho sakatI hai  /
darpaNa meM mUrti ke pratibimba ke udita hone kI taraha AtmA meM usa prakAra kI
kriyA kA abhAva rahatA hai, vaisI kriyA kabhI niSpanna hotI nhiiN| yadi aisA
kahate ho ki AtmA meM bhuji kriyA-bhogAtmaka kriyA tathA pratibimba kA udaya
hotA hai  /  ataeva isa apekSA se hama AtmA ko sakriya mAnate haiM to ThIka hai|
itane mAtra se-isa kriyA kI apekSA se hama AtmA ko sakriya mAna sakate haiM
kintu itane mAtra se hama use samasta kriyAeM karane meM sakSama yA samudyata
nahIM mAna sakate  /  samasta kriyAeM karane para AtmA ko sakriya mAnA jA sakatA
hai  /  aisI AzaMkA kara niyuktikAra likhate phala kA na laganA vRkSa ke abhAva
ko siddha nahIM karatA kyoMki vRkSa ke yadi phala lage to vaha vRkSa kahalAye
aura phala na lage to vaha vRkSa kahalAne yogya nahIM hai, aisA nahIM hotA  /
isI prakAra yadyapi AtmA zayanAdi daihika sthitiyoM meM kathaMcita-ukta
sthitiyoM kI apekSA se niSkriya-kriyA rahita hotI hai kintu itane mAtra se use
kriyA zUnya kahA jAya aisA saMgata nahIM hotA  /  jina vRkSoM ke thor3e phala
lagate haiM ve vRkSa ke abhAva yA avRkSatva ke sAdhaka nahIM hote arthAt
bharapUra phala lagane se hI pRthak kahA jAya aisA nahIM hotaa| kaTahala Adi
vRkSoM ke bahuta kama phala lagate haiM, para ve vRkSa kahe jAte haiM  /  isI
prakAra AtmA yadi svalpa kriyAvAna ho-thor3I kriyAkartI ho to bhI vaha
kriyAvAna-sakriya kahI jAtI hai  /  yadi Apa apanA mantavya yoM batalAye ki
jisake thor3I kriyA hotI hai, vaha kriyA-zUnya hI hai, jisake pAsa mAtra eka
paisA ho vaha dhanI nahIM kahA jAtA isI prakAra AtmA bhI svalpa kriyatva-thor3I
kriyAkAritA ke kAraNa sakriya nahIM kahI jAtI hai, vaha akriya hI hai-yoM kahanA
acArU-asundara yA anupayukta nahIM hai  /  prazna hai Apane yaha dRSTAnta kisI
pratiniyata-vizeSa puruSa kI apekSA se diyA hai athavA samasta puruSoM kI apekSA
se diyA hai  /  yadi Apane kisI aise vyakti - 35)

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  This analogy is given with respect to a man who has
thousands of coins. That man who has only one coin proves the universally
accepted meaning because, compared to the man who has thousands of coins, the
man who has only one coin is undoubtedly poor. If you call the man who has one
coin poor with respect to the men who have thousands of coins, then it is not
correct because, compared to the men who do not have even one coin, who wear
worn-out clothes, the man who has one coin is also wealthy. If you call the soul
inactive or actionless with respect to the action of a specific powerful man,
then there is no harm or obstacle, but if you call the soul inactive with
respect to the general public, then it is not appropriate because, with respect
to the general public, the soul is active and functioning. Now, to say more on
this subject would be too irrelevant, so it is not necessary to say it.
Therefore, according to the previous discussion, even in the case of a tree that
is not certain to bear fruit and does not bear fruit definitely - which does not
bear fruit at the right time, bears fruit before or after - there is no lack of
treehood. It is a tree. The tree is not different from the tree, etc. This
analogy should be nurtured here - understood as it is. Similarly, the fact that
a cow does not give milk at all or that a cow gives a small amount of milk does
not prove the absence of cowhood, i.e., it cannot be assumed that they are not
cows. They are cows. This example should be used to nurture the truth contained
therein. The truth should be established by comparison.  **Santi**  **Five great
elements, these are declared here.** **The sixth is the soul, they say, the soul
and the world are eternal.**  **Translation:** Many proponents - theorists -
declare that in this world there are five great elements, earth, etc. The sixth
is the soul. They further declare that the soul and the world are eternal.
**Commentary:** To present the view of the soul-sixth-ists as the opposing view,
the author says, "Santi" - they exist, "five great elements" - earth, etc.,
"here" - in this world, "of these" - the Vedic proponents, the Samkhya, and the
Shaiva authorities - this has been declared or the elements have been declared.
These proponents say this - they have declared this, as "the soul is the sixth"
- those for whom the soul is the sixth, those are the soul-sixth elements that
exist. And these soul-sixth elements, just as they are impermanent for other
proponents, so also for these, he shows. The soul, "and the world" - in the form
of earth, etc., "eternal" - imperishable. There, the soul's pervasiveness and
formlessness, like that of space, are its eternality, and the earth, etc., are
imperishable due to their non-decay in that form.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kI apekSA se jisake pAsa sahasroM mudrAyeM haiM, yaha
dRSTAnta diyA hai to vaha puruSa, jisake pAsa mAtra eka paisA hai sarvamAnya -
jise saba svIkAra karate haiM, artha ko hI sAbita karatA hai kyoMki jisake pAsa
sahastroM mudrAeM haiM usakI tulanA meM vaha puruSa niHsandeha nirdhana hai,
jisake pAsa mAtra eka paisA hai, yadi Apa puruSoM kI apekSA se usa puruSa ko
jisake pAsa eka paisA hai, nirdhana kahate haiM to yaha sahI nahIM hai kyoMki
una puruSoM kI apekSA se jinake pAsa eka bhI paisA nahIM hai, jo jIrNa kSIrNa
vastra dhAraNa kiye rahate haiM vaha eka paisA vAlA bhI dhanavAna hI hai| yadi
Apa kisI viziSTa sAmarthyopeta - viziSTa zakti sampanna puruSa kI kriyA kI dRSTi
se apekSA se AtmA ko niSkriya yA kriyA zUnya batalAte haiM taba to koI hAni -
bAdhA nahIM hai kintu yadi sarva sAmAnya kI apekSA se AtmA ko niSkriya batAte
hoM to yaha saMgata nahIM hai kyoMki sarva sAmAnya kI apekSA AtmA
sakriyakriyAzIla hai  /  aba prastuta viSaya meM aura adhika kahanA ati
prAsAMgika hogA vaisA kahanA Avazyaka nahIM hai  /  astu, pUrvavartI carcA ke
anusAra jisa vRkSa dvArA phala diyA jAnA nizcita nahIM hai aura nizcita rUpa se
phala nahIM detA- jo akAla phalatva-ThIka samaya para phala nahIM detA, Age
pIche phala detA hai usameM bhI vRkSatva kA abhAva nahIM hotA  /  vaha vRkSa to
hai hI  /  vRkSa vRkSa se bhinna nahIM ityAdi dRSTAnta ko yahAM poSita karanA
cAhiye-yathAvata samajhanA caahiye| isI prakAra jo gAya bilkula dUdha nahIM detI
yA jo gAya alpa mAtrA meM dUdha detI hai vahAM gautva kA abhAva siddha nahIM
hotA arthAt ve gAyeM hI nahIM haiM, aisA nahIM mAnA jA sakatA  /  gAyeM to ve
haiM hii| isa udAharaNoM dvArA tadgata tathya kI posanA karanI cAhiye  /
tulanApUrvaka satya kI sthApanA karanA cAhiye  /  saMti paMca mahabbhUyA,
ihamegesimAhiyA  /  Aya chaTTo puNo Ahu, AyA loge ya sAsa  // 15 //  chAyA saMti
paMca mahAbhUtAni ihaikeSAmAkhyAtAni  /  AtmaSaSThAni punarAhu, rAtmA lokazca
zAzvataH  //  anuvAda - kaI vAdI- saiddhAntika aisA nirUpita karate haiM ki isa
jagata meM pRthvI Adi pAMca mahAbhUta haiN| chaThI AtmA hai  /  ve punaH yo
pratipAdana karate haiM ki AtmA aura loka nitya haiM  /  TIkA *
sAmpratamAtmaSThavAdimataM pUrvapakSayitumAha- 'saMti' vidyante 'paMca
mahAbhUtAni' pRthivyAdIni 'iha' asmin saMsAre 'ekeSAM' veda vAdinAM sAMkhyAnAM
zaivAdhikAriNAJca etad AkhyAtam AkhyAtAni vA bhUtAni, teca vAdina evamAhuH -
evamAkhyAtavantaH, yathA 'AtmaSaSThAni' AtmA SaSTho yeSAM tAniAtmaSaSThAni
bhUtAni vidyante iti etAni cAtmaSaSThAni bhUtAni yathA'nyeSAM vAdinAmanityAni
tathA nAmISAmiti darzayati AtmA 'lokazca' pRthivyAdirUpaH 'zAzvataH " avinAzI,
tatrAtmanaH sarvavyApitvAdamUrttatvAccAkAzasyeva zAzvatatvaM pRthivyAdInAM ca
tadrupApracyututairavinazvaratvamiti  // 15 //  TIkArtha - sUtrakAra aba
AtmaSaSThavAdI ke siddhAnta ko pUrva pakSa ke rUpa meM upasthita karate hue
kahate haiN| veda vAdI - vedoM meM vizvAsa karane vAle sAMkhya aura ziva ko
parama tattva mAnane vAle vaizeSika aisA nirUpita 36 13

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Svayam-Vaktvyata-Adhikarah** state that there are five great elements in
this world, namely earth, water, fire, air, and space. They also state that in
addition to these five elements, there is a sixth element, the soul. While other
schools of thought consider these elements to be impermanent, they do not. To
demonstrate this, they say that the world, which is born from these five
elements, and the soul are eternal and do not perish. The soul, like space, is
all-pervasive and formless, and it is eternal. The five elements, due to their
inherent nature, are indestructible and cannot be destroyed.  **"Dah-o na
vinassan-ti, no ya uparajjae asan. Savve-a-vi savva-ha bhaava niyattimaav-ama-
gaya."** (16)  **"Chhaya - Dvidha-api na vinashyati, nacho-tpad-yate-asan.
Sarve-api sarvatha bhaava niyati-bhaava-ma-gata."**  **Translation:** The five
elements, including the soul, which were mentioned earlier, do not perish either
with or without a cause. That which does not exist cannot be created. In other
words, only that which exists can be created. All things are imbued with the
nature of **niyati** (eternity) and are therefore eternal.  **Commentary:** To
further emphasize the concept of eternity, the text states: "**Te**" (referring
to the soul and the five elements) do not perish due to either the presence or
absence of a cause. Just as the **Boddh-as** (enlightened beings) are inherently
imperishable, so too are these elements. As it is said:  **"Jaati-reva-hi
bhaava-naam, vinaashe hetu-rishyate. Yo jaata-shcha na cha dhvasto, nas-yet pas-
chaat-sa kena cha?"** (1)  Just as the **Vaisheshikas** believe that destruction
occurs due to the presence of a cause, such as the proximity of a hammer and a
pot, so too, the world and the soul are not destroyed by either cause or no
cause. Alternatively, the text could be interpreted as saying that the soul,
being two-fold in nature (consciousness and non-consciousness), does not perish
due to its inherent nature. Similarly, earth, fire, air, and space are eternal
because they do not lose their inherent nature. As it is said:  **"Na kadaachid-
ani-drish-am jagad-i"** (Never has this world been non-existent).  The soul is
also eternal because it is not created. As it is said:  **"Naenam chhindatti
shastraani, naenam dahati paavaka. Na chaenam kledayanty-a-po, na sho-shayati-
ma-aruta."** (1)  **"A-ch-ched-yo-ayam a-bhed-yo-ayam a-vi-kaaryo-ayam u-ch-
yate. Nitya sarva-gata sthaan-ur a-chalo-ayam sana-tana."** (2)  Therefore,
nothing can be created from non-existence, because everything exists eternally.
Since there is no action of a cause in non-existence, the principle of **sat-
kaarya-vaad** (the effect is always pre-existent in the cause) holds true. If
something could be created from non-existence, then even things like the horn of
a god could be created. As it is said:  **"Asad-karanaad-upa-daana grahanaat
sarva-sam-bhaava-abhaavaat. Shakt-asya shakya-karanaat, kaarana-bhaava-cha sat-
kaarya."** (1)  Similarly, a pot exists in the clay, because the potter takes
the clay to make the pot. If something could be created from non-existence, then
it would come from anywhere and everywhere. There would be no need for the
potter to take the clay. Therefore, the effect is always created from a pre-
existent cause. Thus, all things, including the five elements and the soul, are
imbued with the nature of **niyati** (eternity). They do not become non-existent
and then become existent. They are simply manifestations and disappearances. As
it is said:  **"Na-sato jaayate bhaavo, na-abhaavo jaayate sata."** (Nothing
comes from non-existence, and non-existence does not come from existence).  The
text continues with the phrase **"Ko ve-e-i"** (Who is this?), which refers to
the previous verse. The acceptance of the eternity of all things leads to the
concept of **krit-ritva-parinaama** (the transformation of the agent).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH karate haiM ki isa saMsAra meM pRthvI Adi pAMca
mahAbhUta haiM  /  ve batalAte haiM ki unake atirikta chaThI AtmA hai| jaise
dUsare matavAdI inheM anitya mAnate haiM vaise ye inheM anitya nahIM mAnate  /
isI bAta kA digdarzana karAne ke liye kahate haiM ki yaha pRthvI Adi pAMca
bhUtoM se niSpanna loka evaM AtmA zAzvata haiM-nAza nahIM hotA  /  AtmA AkAza kI
jyoM sarva vyApitva-sarvatra vyApakatA liye hue hai tathA yaha amUrta-mUrtatA yA
AkAra rahita hai, zAzvata hai  /  pRthvI Adi apane svarUpa se pracyuta-naSTa na
hone ke kAraNa avinazvara haiN| dahao Na viNassaMti, no ya uparajjae asaM  /
savve'vi savvahA bhAvA niyattImAvamAgayA  // 16 //  chAyA - dvidhA'pi na
vinazyati, nacotpadyate'san  /  sarve'pi sarvathA bhAvAH niyatIbhAvamAgatA  //
anuvAda - pRthvI Adi pAMcabhUta chaThI AtmA jo pIche varNita hue haiM, ve kisI
hetu dvArA yA binA hetu dvArA-donoM hI prakAra se vinaSTa nahIM hote  /  jisa
padArtha kA astitva hI nahIM hai, vaha kabhI utpanna nahIM hotA  /  arthAt jo
sat haiM, vahI utpanna hotA hai, sabhI padArtha niyati bhAva yA nityatva bhAva
ko liye hue haiMve nitya haiN| TIkA - zAzvatattvameva bhUyaH pratipAdayitumAha -
'te' AtmaSaSThAH pRthivyAdayaH padArthA 'ubhayata' iti
nirhetukasahetukavinAzadvayena na vinazyanti, yathA boddhAnAM svata evaM
nirhetukovinAzaH tathA ca te UcuH 'jAtirevahi bhAvAnAM, vinAze heturiSyate  /
yo jAtazca na ca dhvasto, nazyet pazcAtsa kena ca ?  // 1 //  yathA ca
vaizeSikANAM lakuTATikAraNasAnnidhye vinAzaH sahetukaH, tenobhayarUpeNApi
vinAzena lokAtmano na vinAza iti tAtparyArthaH, yadivA-'duhao' tti
dvirUpAdAtmanaH svabhAvAccetanAcetanarUpAnna vinazyantIti,
tathAhipRthivyaptejovAyvAkAzAni svarUpAparityAgatayA nityAni, 'na
kadAcidanIdRzaM jagadi' ti kRtvA, AtmA'pi nitya eva, akRtakatvAdibhyo hetubhyaH,
tathA coktam - "nainaM chindatti zastrANi, nainaM dahati pAvakaH  /  na cainaM
kledayantyApo, na zoSayatimArutaH  // 1 //
acchedyo'yamabhedyo'yamavikAryo'yamucyate  /  nityaH sarvagataH sthANuracalo'yaM
sanAtanaH  // 2 // ". evaM ca kRtvA nAsadutpadyate, sarvasya sarvatra sadbhAvAd
asati ca kArakavyApArAbhAvAt satkAryavAdaH, yadi ca asadutpadyeta
zvaraviSANAderapyutpatti:syAditi tathA coktam - "asadakaraNAdupAdAna grahaNAt
srvsmbhvaa'bhaavaat| zaktasya zakyAkaraNAt, kAraNabhAvAcca stkaarym||1||" evaM
cakRtvA mRtpiMDe'pighaTo'sti, tadarthinAM mRtpiNDopAdAnAt, yadi cAsadutpadyeta
tato yataHkutazcidevasyAt, nAvasyametadardhinA mRtpiMDopAdAnameva kriyate iti,
ataH sadeva kAraNe kAryamutpadyata iti evaM ca kRtvA sarve'pi bhAvAH-
pRthivyAdaya AtmaSaSThAH 'niyatibhAva' nityatvamAgatA nAbhAvarUpatAmabhUtvA ca
bhAvarUpatAMpratipadyante, AvirbhAvatirobhAvamAtratvAdutpattivinAzayoriti, tathA
cAbhihitam-"nAsato jAyate bhAvo, nAbhAvo jAyate sataH"ityAdi, asyotaraM
niyuktikRdAha-'ko veeI' tyAdi prAktanyevagAthA, sarvapadArtha
nityatvA'bhyupagame kartRtvapariNAmo -37DH .

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra:  **The Sutra states:** "It is not so, for if the
self is not the doer, then there is no binding of karma, and without that, who
experiences pleasure, pain, etc.? This means that there would be no destruction
of what is done. Similarly, if there is no origination of what is not, then the
fivefold path, which is characterized by the birth of a new existence after the
abandonment of the previous existence, would be false. And from this, the
absence of liberation would make the performance of rituals like initiation
meaningless. Also, if the self is unchanging, unoriginated, and eternally
stable, then its movement through the realms of gods and humans, as well as the
remembrance of its birth, would not occur. And what is said, 'It is born as a
god,' is also false, because if it is eternally a god, how can it be born? If it
is born, then it is not eternally a god. Thus, it is said:  "**The qualities and
designations of karma do not exist before birth, because what is not is to be
known as non-existent, from the activity of the doer.**" (1)  Therefore, it is
to be understood that all things are eternal in some way, and that the theory of
the existence of only what is real is true. Thus, it is said:  "**In all beings,
there is constant change from moment to moment, and there is no difference. This
is true because of the arrangement of form, species, and birth.**" (1)  And
also:  "**There is no unity with difference, nor is difference the function of
unity. The difference of clay is the function of the contact of two different
types of clay, and the pot is a different species.**" (2)  **Commentary:**  The
Agamakaras, while discussing the eternity of the five elements (earth, water,
fire, air, and space) and the sixth entity (the soul), say that these six
entities are never destroyed. Destruction is of two types: without cause and
with cause. These entities are not destroyed by either of these types. According
to the Buddhists, things are destroyed spontaneously without any cause. They say
that the birth or origination of things is considered the cause of their
destruction. What is not destroyed immediately after its origination cannot be
destroyed by any cause later. Those who believe in the Vaisheshika philosophy
say that the destruction of things caused by a stick, a staff, or a club, due to
their striking or hitting, is called destruction with cause, because these
causes remain present in the destruction. This destruction is called with cause
or caused by a reason because the stick, etc., have been used in the
destruction. The followers of the Atmashathvada believe that neither the soul
nor the world is destroyed by either of these types of destruction, with or
without cause. This is the opinion of the Atmashathvada. Or, the soul, which is
characterized by consciousness, and the five elements, which are characterized
by non-consciousness, never deviate from their nature, never get destroyed,
because earth, water, fire, air, and space never abandon their nature, they
remain immersed in their own nature. Therefore, they are eternal, and this
world, as it is, never becomes different, therefore it is eternal. The soul is
also eternal because it is not created or made by anyone. The Gita says in this
regard: The soul cannot be cut by weapons, it cannot be burned by fire, water
cannot wet it, wind cannot dry it. The soul is indestructible, it cannot be
pierced, it is impenetrable, it is unchanging, it is eternal, it is all-
pervading, it is stable, it is unmoving, it is ancient.  While discussing the
theory of the existence of only what is real, it is said that the five elements
(earth, water, fire, air, and space) and the sixth entity (the soul) are
eternal. They always exist. Therefore, what is not real, what does not exist,
never originates. All things are always real and existing. If they were not
real, then the actions of the doer, the object of action, and the instrument of
action would not be possible in them. This leads to the theory of the existence
of only what is real.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  na syAt, tatazcAtmano'kartRtve
karmabandhAbhAvastadabhAvAcca ko vedayati na
kazcitsukhaduHkhAdikamanubhavatItyarthaH evaM casati kRtanAzaH syAt tathA
asatazcotpAdA'bhAve yeyamAtmanaH pUrvabhavaparityAgenAparabhavotpatti lakSaNA
paMcadhA gatirUcyate sAna syAt, tatazcamokSagaterabhAvAddIkSAdikriyA'nuSThAna
manarthakamApadyeta, tathA'pracyutAnutpannasthiraikasvabhAvatve cAtmano
devamanuSyagatyAgatI tathA vismRtebhAvAt jAtismaraNAdikaM ca na
prApnoti,yaccoktaM 'sadevotpadyate' tadapyasat, yato yadi sarvathA sadeva
kathamutpAdaH ?' utpAdazcet na tarhi sarvathA saditi, tathA coktam - "karmaguNa
vyapadezAH prAgutpatte na santi yattasmAt  /  kAryamasadvijJeyaM
kriyApravRttezca kartRNAm  // 1 // " tasmAtsarvapadArthAnAM kathaJcinnityatvaM
sadasatkAryavAdazcetyavadhArya, tathA cAbhihitam - "sarvavyaktiSu niyataM kSaNe
kSaNe'nyatvamatha ca na vishessH| satyozcityapacityo rAkRtijAti
vyvsthaanaat||1||" iti, tathA - "nAnvayaH sahi bhedatvAnna bhedo'nvayavRttiH
mRdbhedadvayasaMsargavRttirjAtyantaraM ghaTaH  // 2 // "  // 16 //  TIkArtha -
pRthvI Adi bhUtoM kI zAzvatA kA punaH pratipAdana karate hue AgamakAra kahate
haiM pRthvI Adi pAMca mahAbhUta aura chaTThI AtmA-ye chahoM padArtha kabhI naSTa
nahIM hote  /  nAza nirhetuka-kAraNa rahita sahetuka-kAraNa sahita-do prakAra kA
hai  /  ina donoM hI prakAra se ye padArtha vinaSTa nahIM hote  /  bauddhoM ke
anusAra binA kisI hetu ke svataH hI padArthoM kA vinAza ho jAtA hai  /  ve
kahate haiM-jAti padArthoM kA janma yA utpatti hI unake vinAza kA kAraNa kahA
jAtA hai  /  jo samutpanna hote hI dhvasta nahIM hotA-naSTa nahIM hotA, vaha
tatpazcAt kisI kAraNa dvArA naSTa ho sakatA hai  /  vaizeSika darzana ke
AsthAvAna jana lakuTa-yaSTikA yA lAThI Adi ke kAraNa se unake prahAra se-AghAta
yA coTa se padArthoM kA jo vinAza hotA hai use sahetuka kahate haiM, kyoMki
usake nAza meM ye hetu bane rahate haiN| yaha nAza sahetuka yA kAraNa sahita
kahA jAtA hai kyoMki laTThI Adi kAraNoM kA vahAM nAza rUpa kAryoM meM upayoga
huA hai  /  AtmaSaSThavAdiyoM kA yaha mantavya hai ki isa donoM prakAra ke
sahetuka aura nirhetuka nAza dvArA AtmA kA aura loka kA nAza nahIM hotA  /  aisA
AtmaSaSThavAdiyoM kA abhiprAya hai  /  athavA cetanAtmaka svabhAva yukta AtmA
tathA acetana svarUpa yukta pAMcabhUta apane svarUpa se kabhI cyuta nahIM hote,
naSTa nahIM hote kyoMki pRthvI, apa-jala, teja-agni, vAyu tathA AkAza apane
svarUpa kA kabhI parityAga nahIM karate-apane svarUpa meM nimagna rahate haiM  /
ataeva ve nitya haiM tathA yaha jagata bhI jaisA hai, usase kabhI aura taraha kA
nahIM ho jAtA, isaliye nitya hai  /  AtmA bhI nitya hI hai kyoMki vaha kisI
dvArA kI gayI yA banAyI gayI nahIM hai, gItA meM isa saMbaMdha meM kahA hai-AtmA
ko zastra chinna-bhinna nahIM kara sakate, kATa nahIM sakate, agni use dagdha
nahIM kara sakatI-jalA nahIM sakatI, pAnI use klin nahIM kara sakatAbhIgo nahIM
sakatA, vAyu usakA zoSaNa nahIM kara sakatI-ise sukhA nahIM sakatI, yaha AtmA
achedya-chedana na kiye jAne yogya hai-isakA chedana nahIM kiyA jA sakatA, yaha
abhedya-bhedana na kiye jAne yogya hai, yaha avikAryavikRta na hone yogya hai,
isameM koI vikAra yA viparINamana utpanna nahIM hotA, yaha nitya hai sarvagata-
sarvavyApaka hai, yaha sthANu-sthiratAyukta hai, calana-vicalana rahita hai,
yaha sanAtana-sadA se calA AtA hai  /  satkAryavAda kI carcA karate hue kahate
haiM-pRthvI AdipAMca bhUta tathA chaTThI AtmA nitya hai  /  inakA sarvadA
astitva hai  /  isa kAraNa asad-jo sat nahIM hai-kabhI utpanna nahIM hotA-sabhI
padArtha sarvatra sat-vidyamAna hai  /  yadi ve asat ho to unameM kartA karma
karaNa Adi kArakoM kA vyApAra nahIM ho sktaa| isase satkAryavAda 38

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The doctrine of self-existence is proven. If non-existent things could be
produced, then things like the horns of a donkey or the poison of a snake could
also be produced. Therefore, it is said:  (That which is not present in a place
or in something cannot be produced from it. When any substance is produced,
there is a need for the acceptance of the material cause, without which it
cannot exist. For example, if a pot is produced, it needs the material cause in
the form of clay. The acceptance of the material cause is necessary for the
accomplishment of the work. Without it, the accomplishment of the work is not
possible. If the non-existent is produced, then what is the need to accept the
material cause? Good things can come out of any object. This is not possible -
what is good in it, comes out of it. What can be done from it, can be done from
it, what cannot be done from it, cannot be produced from it. Only that which is
possible is produced. Every work has its own cause. The work is produced from
the cause. From all these expectations, the work is good. For example, the pot
is present in the lump of clay because the pot comes into existence only by
accepting the lump of clay. If the non-existent is produced, then it can be
produced from anywhere, then it is not necessary to accept the lump of clay for
it. Therefore, the cause in which the good is present - the work already has its
own existence, from it its production is certain. In this way, all the objects
of feeling - earth etc. five elements - the sixth soul, all these have eternal
existence. These do not become transformed into the form of non-existence and
then produced in the form of existence, it is only the form of non-appearance-
disappearance, production and destruction. (In the Gita) it is said:  Non-
existence does not produce existence, and existence does not produce non-
existence. The appointed person has answered this. In it, the aforementioned
verse "ko veei" etc. has been discussed - if all substances are accepted as
eternal - accepted or attached - they are considered eternal, then the result or
principle of action does not occur. If the soul does not have the result of
action, then it cannot have karma-bondage, and if there is no karma-bondage,
then one cannot experience happiness or sorrow. In such a situation, the fault
called "kritnash" arises. That is, the principle that a being has to experience
the fruits of its own actions is destroyed. If the production or origin of the
non-existent is not accepted, then the five types of motion of the soul, which
are said to be born in another existence after abandoning the previous
existence, cannot happen. In such a situation, if there is no liberation, then
the practice of initiation etc. as a way of accepting a restrained life becomes
meaningless. If the soul is considered to be unchanging - stable in one form -
without destruction, unproduced - free in nature, then it is not possible for it
to be born in the form of a god, human etc. in the divine realm, human realm
etc. Due to eternity, there is no forgetfulness, due to which the origin of
knowledge like caste-memory is not possible. Therefore, considering the soul as
eternally separate is inconsistent - untrue. What is said that only the good is
produced - to say so is also untrue, inappropriate, if it exists completely in
the form of good, then how can the situation of its production or origin arise?
Production is of that which does not exist. If there is production or origin, it
cannot be completely good. Therefore, it is said:  Until the substances are not
produced, they cannot have qualities and names. For example, until the pot is
produced, how can the work of bringing water by it happen? Its non-existence
-39D

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH siddha ho jAtA hai  /  yadi asat padArtha bhI
utpanna ho-asat se sat kI utpatti ho to kharaviSANa-gadhe ke sIMga Adi kI bhI
utpatti saMbhava hai  /  isaliye kahA hai - (jo padArtha jahAM yA jisameM
vidyamAna nahIM hai usakI usase utpatti nahIM ho sakatI  /  jaba koI bhI
padArtha utpanna hotA hai to upAdAna ke grahaNa kI AvazyakatA hotI hai, upAdAna
binA vaha nahIM hotaa| jaise yadi ghar3A utpanna hotA hai to use mRtikA rUpa
upAdAna kI AvazyakatA hotI hai  /  upAdAna ko grahaNa karanA kArya kI niSpatti
Avazyaka hotI hai  /  usake binA kArya kI niSpatti saMbhava nahIM hai  /  yadi
asat kI utpatti ho to upAdAna ko grahaNa karane kI kyA AvazyakatA rahatI hai  /
kisI bhI vastu se sad vastueM nikala sakatI hai-niSpanna ho sakatI hai  /  yaha
saMbhava nahIM hai-jisameM jo sat hai, vahI usase bAhara nikalatA hai  /  jisase
jo kiyA jAnA zakya hai, usI se vaha ho sakatA hai, jisase jisakA honA zakya
nahIM hotA, vaha usase niSpanna  /  nahIM ho sakatA  /  vahI niSpanna hotA hai
jo zakya hai  /  pratyeka kArya kA apanA-apanA kAraNa hai  /  kAraNa se hI kArya
kI utpatti hotI hai  /  ina saba apekSAoM se kArya sat hai  /  udAharaNArtha
mRtikA piMDa meM ghaTa vidyamAna hai kyoMki mRtikA piMDa ke grahaNa se hI ghar3A
astitva meM AtA hai  /  yadi asat kI utpatti hotI ho to vaha jahAM kahIM se ho
sakatI hai, phira usake liye mRtikA piMDa ko grahaNa karanA Avazyaka nahIM hai
/  isaliye jisa kAraNa meM sat hai-kArya pahale se hI apanA astitva lie hue hai,
usI se usakA utpanna honA nizcita hai| isa prakAra sabhI bhAva-padArtha-pRthvI
Adi pAMcabhUta-chaThI AtmA ye saba nityatva liye hue hai| ye abhAva rUpa meM
pariNata hokara phira bhAva rUpa meM utpanna nahIM hote, avirbhAva-tirobhAva,
utpatti aura vinAza kA hI rUpa hai  /  (gItA meM) kahA gayA hai - asat se bhAva-
sat utpanna nahIM hotA tathA sat se abhAva yA asat AvirbhUta nahIM hotA  /
niyuktikAra ne isakA uttara diyA hai  /  usameM 'ko veeI' ityAdi pUrvokta gAthA
meM vivecana kiyA hai-yadi samasta padArtha nityatva se abhyupagata-svIkRta yA
saMlagna jAne jAya-unheM nitya mAnA jAya to kartRtva kA pariNAma yA siddhAnta
ghaTita nahIM hotA  /  AtmA kA yadi kartRtva pariNAma na ho to usake karmabaMdha
nahIM ho sakatA tathA karmabaMdha na hone para koI sukha duHkha nahIM bhoga
sakatA  /  aisA hone para kRtanAza nAmaka doSa AtA hai  /  arthAt apane kRta
karma kA phala prANI ko bhoganA par3atA hai yaha siddhAnta khaMDita hotA hai  /
asat kA utpAda yA utpatti na mAnane para pUrva bhava kA parityAga kara anya
bhava meM utpanna hone vAlI AtmA kI jo pAMca prakAra kI gati batalAI gaI hai,
vaha nahIM ho sakatI  /  aisI sthiti meM mokSa gati na hone para saMyamI jIvana
ko svIkAra karane ke rUpa meM dIkSA Adi kA anuSThAna nirarthaka ho jAtA hai  /
AtmA ko apracyuta-eka hI rUpa meM sthira-vinAza rahita, anutpannaeka svabhAva
mukta mAnane para isakA devagati, manuSya gati Adi meM-devatA mAnava Adi rUpa
meM janma pAnA saMbhava nahIM hotA  /  nityatva ke kAraNa vismRti bhI nahIM
hotI, jisase jAtismaraNa Adi jJAna kI utpatti saMbhava nahIM ho sakatI  /  ataH
AtmA ko ekAntarUpeNa nitya mAnanA asaMgata hai-ayarthAtha hai  /  yaha jo kahA
ki sat hI utpanna hotA hai-yoM kahanA bhI asat hai, anupayukta hai, yadi vaha
sarvathA sat ke rUpa meM vidyamAna hai to usake utpAda yA utpatti kI sthiti
kaise A sakatI hai  /  utpatti to usakI hotI hai jo nahIM hotA  /  yadi utpAda
yA utpatti hotI hai vaha sarvathA sat nahIM ho sakatA  /  isaliye kahA hai -
jaba taka padArthoM kI utpatti nahIM hotI unake kabhI guNa aura nAma bhI nahIM
ho sakate  /  udAharaNArtha jaba taka ghar3A utpanna nahIM hotA, taba usake
dvArA jala lAne kA kArya kaise ghaTita ho sakatA hai usake na hone -39D

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra states that qualities cannot exist where the substance
itself does not exist, and names like "pot" cannot be applied to them.
Furthermore, the action of making a pot occurs when the pot does not exist. Once
the pot is made, that action ceases. Therefore, it should be understood that
actions are non-existent before their creation.  All substances are eternal in
some respects and impermanent in others. This is the principle of the existence
and non-existence of actions.  It is said: 1. All individuals, objects, or
substances are constantly changing, but their difference or distinction is not
perceived. They remain essentially the same in their nature. This is because
substances undergo decay and growth. They decrease and increase, but their form
and kind remain stable.  The action is not completely inseparable from the
cause. There is a perception of difference between cause and effect, but there
is no complete separation. Because the cause is inherent in the effect.
Therefore, the pot, which has a relationship of difference and non-difference
with clay, is a substance of a different kind. This is the situation.  Some
ignorant people say that the five skandhas are momentary. They say that the soul
is neither different nor non-different from the five elements. It is neither
caused nor uncaused.  Commentary:  The author, refuting the Buddhist view,
presents the argument against the doctrine of impermanence. He says, "Some
Buddhists say that there are five skandhas: form, feeling, perception, mental
formations, and consciousness. They say that there is no other skandha called
the soul."  Form skandha includes earth, water, fire, air, and space. Feeling
skandha includes pleasure, pain, and neutral feeling. Perception skandha
includes perception of form, taste, smell, sound, and touch. Mental formations
skandha includes mental impressions. Consciousness skandha includes the faculty
of consciousness.  There is no other substance called the soul apart from these
five skandhas. This is because there is no evidence to support the existence of
a soul, and it cannot be inferred. There is no other valid means of knowledge
besides perception and inference. Therefore, Buddhists, like children,
understand the truth in a childish way.  They say that these skandhas are
momentary. A moment is the shortest possible duration of time. They are
connected with a moment. They exist only for a moment. They say that a
substance, when it arises, is either impermanent or permanent. If it is
permanent, then it would be eternal and there would be no action. Therefore, the
substance itself would not exist.  Because whatever is the cause of action is
truly real. And that which is eternal is always active. Does it act gradually or
simultaneously? It cannot act gradually, because if it did, then it would have
the nature of acting in another way at another time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram para usake guNa bhI vahAM nahIM ho sakate tathA ghaTa
Adi ke rUpa meM unake abhidhAna-nAma bhI nahIM ho skte| aura ghaTa banAne kI
kriyA meM pravRtta bhI hote haiM jaba ghaTa na ho  /  ghaTa niSpanna ho jAne
para vaisI pravRtti nahIM hotI  /  isaliye utpatti se pahale kArya asat haiM,
aisA jAnanA caahiye| sabhI padArtha kathaMcita-kisI apekSA se nitya aura
kathaMcita-kisI apekSA se anitya haiM, aisA samajhanA caahiye| isake anusAra sat
asat kAryavAda kA siddhAnta svIkAra karanA cAhiye  /  kahA gayA hai - 1. sabhI
vyakti, vastueM yA padArtha pratikSaNa parivartita hote rahate haiM kintu unameM
anyatva yA bheda pratIta nahIM hotA  /  ve mUlataH, svarUpataH vaise hI bane
rahate haiM-isakA hetu yaha hai ki padArthoM kA apacaya-hAsa aura
upacayasaMvarddhana yA vRddhi hotA rahatA hai  /  arthAt ve ghaTate bar3hate
rahate haiM kintu unakI AkRti aura jAti sadaiva vyavasthitasthira banI rahatI
hai  /  tathA kAraNa ke sAtha kArya ekAnta rUpa se abhinna nahIM hai  /  kAraNa
aura kArya meM bheda kI pratIti hotI hai para unameM ekAnta bheda bhI nahIM hai
/  kyoMki kArya meM kAraNa anvita-anugata rahatA hai  /  ataH jisa ghaTa kA
mRttikA ke sAtha bheda aura abheda mUlaka saMbaMdha hai vaha jAtyantarIya-anya
jAti kA padArtha hai  /  vastu sthiti yoM banatI hai  /  /  paMca khaMdhe
vayaMtege vAlA u khaNa joiNo  /   /  aNNo aNaNNo NevAhu heuyaM ca aheuyaM  // 17
//  chAyA - paMca skandhAna vadantyeke bAlAstu kSaNayoginaH  /  anya mananyaM
naivAhu hetukaJcAhetukam  //  anuvAda - kaI ajJAnI pAMca skandhoM kA pratipAdana
karate haiM jo unake anusAra kSaNa mAtra sthAyI hai| pAMca bhUtoM se anya-
pRthak, bhinna tathA ananya-apRthak, abhinna AtmA nahIM hai  /  vaha na hetuka-
kAraNa se utpanna hotI hai tathA na ahetuka-kAraNa ke binA hI utpanna hotI hai,
aisA unakA abhimata hai  /  TIkA - sAmprataM bauddhamataM
pUrvapakSayanniyuktikAropanyastamaphalavAdAdhikAramAvirbhAvayannAha - 'eke'
kecana vAdino bauddhAH paMcaskandhAnvadanti' rUpavedanAvijJAna
saMjJAsaMskArAkhyA: paMcaiva skandhA vidyante nAparaH kazcidAtmAkhyaH
skandho'stItyevaM pratipAdayanti, tatra rUpaskandhaH pRthivIdhAtvAdayo
rUpAdayazca ? sukhA duHkhA aduHkhasukhA ceti vedanA vedanA skandhaH 2
rUpavijJAnaM rasavijJAnamityAdivijJAnaM vijJAna skandhaH 3 saMjJAskandhaH
saMjJAnimittodgrAhaNAtmakaH pratyayaH 4 saMskAraskandhaH
puNyApuNyAdidharmasamudAya iti 5  /  na caitebhyo vyatiriktaH kazcidAtmAkhyaH
padArtho'dhyakSaNAdhyavasIyate, tadavyabhicAriliMgagrahaNA'bhAvAn nApyanumAnena,
na ca pratyakSAnumAnavyatiriktamarthAvisaMvAdi pramANaAntaramastItyevaM bAlA iva
bAlAyathA'vasthitArthaparijJAnAt bauddhAH pratipAdayanti, tathA te skandhAH
kSaNayoginaH paramaniruddhaH kAlaH kSaNaH kSaNena yoga:-saMbaMdhaH kSaNayogaH sa
vidyate yeSAM te kSaNayoginaH, kSaNamAtrAvasthAyina ityarthaH, tathA ca
te'bhidadhatisvakAraNebhyaH padArtha utpadyamAnaH kiM vinazvarasvabhAva
utpadyate'vinazvara svabhAvo vA ? yadyavinazvarastatastadvayApinyAH
kramayogapadyAbhyAmarthakriyAyA abhAvAt padArthasyApi vyApyasyA'bhAvaH
prasajati, tathAhi yadevArthakriyAkAri tadeva paramArthataH saditi, sa ca
nityo'rtha kriyAyAM pravartamAnaH krameNa vA pravarteta yaugapadyena vA ? na
tAvat krameNa, yato hokasyA arthakriyAyAH kAle tasyAparArtha kriyAkaraNasvabhAvo
vidyate -40D

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Is there a right to speak at the right time or not? If there is, how is it
ordered? If it is dependent on cooperation, then does the cooperator do
something extraordinary or not? If he does, is it by abandoning his previous
nature or by abandoning it? If it is by abandoning it, then it is impermanent
due to the attainment of an unformed state. Or, if it is by abandoning his
previous nature, then there is no extraordinary thing, so is it dependent on
cooperation? Or, even if he does nothing, he depends on something specific for
his work, which is not right, because:  "If someone depends on another to do
something, What is the thing that does nothing, depends on anything?" ||1||  Or,
at the time of doing an action for one purpose, he does not have the nature of
doing an action for another purpose, and in that case, the loss of permanence is
clear. Or, he is eternal and does an action for a purpose simultaneously, in
which case, since he does all actions in the first moment, he becomes inactive
in the second moment, and thus, there is impermanence. Or, because of his
nature, he does the same action again and again in the second moments, which is
not possible because of the absence of doing what was done. Moreover, even the
things that are to be achieved in the second moments are obtained in the first
moment, because of his nature. If he is not of that nature, then his
impermanence is established. Thus, due to the absence of action for a purpose
from the eternal one, due to the order and simultaneity, the eternal one is not
produced from its causes. Or, the impermanent nature arises, and in that case,
due to the absence of obstacles, the impermanence of all things, as we have
said, is established. Thus, it is said:  "The nature itself is considered to be
the cause of the destruction of things. The one who has nature and is not
destroyed, how will he be destroyed later by whom?" ||1||  Now, even if there is
impermanence, when the cause of destruction is present, then there is
destruction. Thus, even the things that are impermanent due to the absence of
the cause of their own destruction are not momentary. This is also the statement
of the teacher who is not to be disregarded. For example, what is done by a
hammer, etc., which is the cause of destruction, to a pot, etc.? What is to be
asked here? Absence is done. And here, the beloved of the gods, absence, is to
be asked. Is this a denial of a statement or a denial of a consequence? If it is
a denial of a statement, then the meaning is that absence is different from
existence, it is another existence, a pot, a cloth, etc., that is absence. If
there is no action of a hammer, etc., in another existence, then nothing is done
to the pot by it. If it is a denial of a consequence, then the meaning is that
it makes the cause of destruction absent. What is said? It does not make
existence. Thus, only the denial of action is done. And the action of a pot,
etc., is not done by a hammer, etc., because it is done by its own causes. Or,
existence-absence is absence, it does that. But, due to its insignificance and
formlessness, how can there be action of an agent and a cause there? Or, if
there is action of an agent there, then the agents would act in a rhinoceros
horn, etc., as well. Thus, due to the inactivity of the cause of destruction,
the momentariness is established due to the absence of an obstacle to the
arising of things that are made momentary by their own causes. The word "tu"
indicates the difference from the previous statements. The same is shown in the
latter half of the verse, "anno ananno". For, just as the Buddhists, like the
Atma-Shashthavadins, the Samkhyas, etc., have accepted a self that is different
from the elements, and just as the Charvakas have accepted a self that is
different from the elements, called consciousness, so they have not said or
accepted that the self is born from causes, is made of the body, is transformed
into the elements, and is produced. Thus, they, the Buddhists, have not accepted
that self as causeless, beginningless, and endless, and eternal. ||17||
Commentary: Now, the author of the scripture presents the Buddhist philosophy as
the opposing view, and then describes the doctrine of non-fruitfulness as
propounded by the author of the work.  Many theorists - those who believe in the
Buddhist philosophy - propound the five aggregates. They say that in this world,
there are five aggregates called form, feeling, perception, mental formations,
and consciousness. There is no other or separate aggregate-substance called
soul. Earth element and form, etc., are called the form aggregate. The
experience of pleasure, the experience of pain, and the experience of neither
pleasure nor pain are called the feeling aggregate. Form  (41)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 .svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH vA na vA ? yadividyate kimiti kramakaraNam ?
sahakAryapekSayeti cet tena sahakAriNA tasya kazcidatizayaH kriyate na vA? yadi
kriyate kiM pUrvasvabhAvaparityAgena parityAgena vA? yadi parityAgena
tato'tAdavasthayApatteranityatvam, atha pUrvasvabhAvAparityAgena
tato'tizayA'bhAvAt kiM sahakAryapekSayA ? atha akiJcitkaro'pi viziSTa
kAryArthapekSate, tadayuktam, yataH "apekSeta paraM kazcidyadi kurvIta kiMcana
/  yadakiJcitkaraM vastu, kiM kenacidapekSyate ?  // 1 // " atha
tasyaikArthakriyAkaraNakAle'parArthakriyAkaraNasvabhAvo na vidyate, tathA ca
sati spaSTaiva nityatAhAniH  /  athA'sau nityo yaugapadyenArthakriyAM kuryAt
tathA sati prathama kSaNa evAzeSArthakriyANAM karaNAt
dvitIyakSaNe'kartRtvamAyAtaM, tathA ca saivAnityatA  /  atha tasya
tatsvabhAvattvAttA evArthakriyA bhUyo bhUyo dvitIyA dikSaNeSvapikuryyAt,
tadasAmpratam kRtasya karaNAbhAvAditi  /  kiMca dvitIyAdikSaNasAdhyA apyarthAH
prathamakSaNa eva prApnuvanti, tasya tatsvabhAvatvAt atatsvabhAvatve ca
tasyAnityatvApattiriti  /  tadevaM nityasya kramayogapadyAbhyAmartha
kriyAvirahAnna svakAraNebhyo nityasyotpAda iti  /  athAnityasvabhAvaH
samutpadyate, tathA ca sati vighnAbhAvAdAyA tamasmaduktamazeSapadArthajAtasya
kSaNikatvam, tathAcoktam "jAtireva hi bhAvAnAM vinAze heturiSyate  /  yo jAsazca
na ca dhvasto nazyet pazcAtsa kena ca"  // 1 //  nanusatyapyanityatve yasya yadA
vinAzahetusadbhAvastasya tadA vinAzaH,tathA
casvavinAzakAraNApekSANAmanityAnAmapi padArthAnAM na kSaNikatvamiti
etaccAnupAsitagurorvacaH, tathAhi tena mudgarAdikena vinAzahetunA ghaTAdeH kiM
kriyate? kimatra praSTavyam ? abhAvaH kriyate, atra ca praSTavyo devAnAM priyaH
abhAva iti kiM paryudAsapratiSedho'yamutaprasajyapratiSedha iti ? tatra yadi
paryudAsastato'yamartho bhAvAdanyo'bhAvo bhAvAntaraM ghaTAtpaTAdiH so'bhAva iti,
tatra bhAvAntare yadi mudgarAdi vyApAro na tarhi tena kiMcita ghaTasya kRtamiti
/  atha prasajyapratiSedhastadA'yamarthovinAzaheturabhAvaM karoti, kimuktaM
bhavati ? bhAvaM na karotIti tatazca kriyApratiSedha eva kRtaHsyAt, na ca
ghaTAdeH padArthasya mudgarAdinA karaNaM, tasya svakAraNaireva kRtatvAt atha
bhAvAbhAvo'bhAvastaM karotIti, tasya tucchasya nIrUpatvAt kutastatrakArakAraNAM
vyApAraH ? atha tatrA'pi kArakavyApAro bhavet kharazRMgAdAvapi vyApriyeran
kArakANIti  /  tadevaM vinAzahe torakiMcitkaratvAt svahetuta
evAnityatAkroDIkRtAnAM padArthAnAmutpattervighnahetozcAbhAvAt
kSaNikatvamavasthitamiti  /  'tu' zabdaH pUrvAvAdibhyo'sya vyatirekapradarzakaH,
tameva zlokapazcArdhana darzayati 'aNNo aNaNNo' iti  /  te hi bauddhA
yathA''tmaSaSThavAdinaH sAMkhyAdayo bhUtavyatiriktamAtmAnamabhyupagatavanto
yathA ca cArvAkA bhUtAvyatiriktaM caitanyAkhyamAtmAnamiSTavantastathA naivAhu
voktavantaH, tathA hetubhyo jAto hetukaH kAyAkArapariNatabhUtaniSpAdita
itiyAvat, tathA'hetuko'nAdya paryavasitatvAnnitya ityevaM tamAtmAnaM te
bauddhA:nAbhyupagatavanta iti  // 17 //  TIkArtha - aba AgamakAra bauddha
darzana ko pUrva pakSa ke rUpa meM prastuta karate hue niyuktikAra dvArA
pratipAdita aphalavAda kA nirUpaNa karate haiM - kaI siddhAntavAdI-bauddha
darzana ko mAnane vAle pAMca skandhoM kA pratipAdana karate haiM  /  unakA
kathana hai ki isa saMsAra meM rUpa, vedanA, vijJAna, saMjJA tathA saMskAra
nAmaka pAMca skandha vidyamAna haiM  /  inase anya yA pRthak koI AtmA nAma kA
skandha-padArtha nahIM hai  /  pRthvI dhAtu tathA rUpa Adi ko rUpa skandha kahA
jAtA hai  /  sukhAnubhUti, duHkhAnubhUti aura na sukha evaM na duHkha kI
anubhUti ko vedanA skandha kahA jAtA hai  /  rUpa (41)

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that **knowledge**, **science of
taste**, and other such **sciences** are called **knowledge-skandha**. Words
that are the **extractors**, **illuminators**, or **indicators** of substances
are called **name-skandha**. **Sin**, **merit**, and other such **dharma-
samudaya-samavaya-samskara** are called **skandha**. Apart from these, the
substance called **soul** is not experienced directly. No **sign**, **mark**, or
**characteristic** is found that is **invariably** and **perfectly** associated
with the soul. Therefore, the soul cannot be known through **inference** either.
Apart from **direct perception** and **inference**, there is no third **proof**
that can establish the truth of the soul, which is **non-contradictory** and
**true**. Therefore, just as ignorant children are devoid of knowledge of
substances, they state that the five **skandha** are **momentary**. **Extremely
restricted** or **subtle time** is called a **moment**. The connection or
**yoga** with that **moment** is called **momentary**. The substance that is
connected or associated with that **moment** is called **momentary**. That
**moment** alone exists or persists. Buddhists present their doctrine in this
way to prove it. They say in the language of questions: Is the substance that
arises due to its causes **perishable** or **imperishable**? If it arises as
**imperishable**, then the **meaningful actions** that are present in the
substance can arise simultaneously and gradually. Therefore, due to the absence
or non-existence of the **meaningful action** in its **extensive form**, the
**substance** that is capable of being **pervaded** and **pervading** will also
not exist. The **meaningful action** that is **capable** of acting on the
substance or object is truly **real** and **eternal**. Its nature is not
**perishable**. A question arises: Does that **eternal substance** engage in
**meaningful action** simultaneously or gradually? If you say that it engages in
action gradually, then it is not consistent because in the time when it is
engaged in performing one action, the question arises whether it has the nature
of performing another action or not. If you say that it has the nature of
performing another action, then why does it not perform other actions
simultaneously? Why does it perform them in order or gradually? If you say that
the nature of that **philosophy** to perform other actions besides the **action
being performed** exists in that time, but its **action** is connected with
**cooperating causes**, therefore, it performs actions gradually, not
simultaneously, depending on them, as they are available. This is also not
appropriate. Tell me whether the **cooperating cause** produces something
**extraordinary** in the object or not. If it produces something
**extraordinary**, then does it arise by abandoning the previous nature of the
object or without abandoning it? If it arises by abandoning the previous nature
of the object, then the object becomes **impermanent** due to the absence of its
**original state** or **nature**. It cannot be **eternal**. If it is said that
the previous nature of the object is not abandoned, then there is an absence of
any **extraordinary** or **distinctive feature** in it due to the **cooperating
cause**. No **extraordinary** can be produced in it. When this is the case, then
what is the need for the **cooperating cause**? If it is said that the
**cooperating cause**, although it does nothing, is still needed for a specific
task, then this is also unreasonable. It has been said: 42

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram vijJAna, rasa vijJAna ityAdi vijJAna vijJAnaskandha
kahe jAte haiM  /  padArtho ke udagrAhaka-udbodhaka yA sUcaka zabda saMjJA
skandha kahe jAte haiM  /  pApa puNya Adi dharma samudaya-samavAya saMskAra
skandha kahe jAte haiM  /  inase vyatiriktapRthak yA bhinna AtmA nAma kA
padArtha pratyakSa rUpa meM anubhava nahIM kiyA jAtA hai| usa AtmA ke sAtha
avyabhicArInirdoSa rUpa meM, niyata rUpa meM saMbaMdha rakhane vAlA koI liMga
bhI-cihna bhI yA lakSaNa bhI prApta nahIM hotA  /  ataH anumAna pramANa dvArA
bhI AtmA kA jJAna nahIM ho sakatA  /  pratyakSa aura anumAna ke vyatirikta-unake
sivAya use satya siddha karane vAlA avisaMvAdI-aviparIta-satya nirUpita karane
vAlA koI tIsarA pramANa bhI vidyamAna nahIM hai  /  ataH ve ajJAnI bAlaka kI
jyoM padArtha ke jJAna se rahita hokara uparyukta rUpa meM kathana karate haiM,
ve batalAte haiM ki pAMca skandha kSaNayogI hai  /  atyanta niruddha yA sUkSma
kAla ko kSaNa kahA jAtA hai  /  usa kSaNa ke sAtha jo saMbaMdha yA yoga hotA hai
use kSaNayogI ke nAma se abhihita karate haiM, jo padArtha usa kSaNa ke sAtha
jur3atA hai, saMbaddha hotA hai vaha kSaNayogI kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha kSaNa
mAtra hI avasthita rahatA hai-TikatA hai  /  bauddha apane siddhAnta ko sAbita
karane ke liye isa prakAra pratipAdita karate haiM  /  ve prazna' kI bhASA meM
kahate haiMapane kAraNoM se jo padArtha utpanna hotA hai kyA vaha nazvara-
vinAzazIla svabhAva liye hotA hai yA anazvaravinAza rahita svabhAva yukta hotA
hai  /  yadi vaha nAza rahita svabhAva liye utpanna hotA hai to padArtha meM
vyApta hokara niSpanna hone vAlI arthakriyA kramazaH aura eka sAtha hI utpanna
ho sakatI hai ataeva vyApaka rUpa usa artha kriyA kA abhAva yA nAstitva hone ke
kAraNa vyApya-vyApta hone yogya usa padArtha kA bhI astitva nahIM rahegA-abhAva
hogA  /  jo artha kriyA kArI hai-jo padArtha yA vastu kI kriyA karane meM
samartha hai vahI vAstava meM sat hai-vaha nitya hai  /  usakA svabhAva
vinazvara nahIM hotaa| eka prazna upasthita hotA hai  /  vaha nitya padArtha
artha kriyAkAritA meM pravRtta hotA hai to kyA vaha eka sAtha vaisA karatA hai
yA kramazaH pravRtta hotA hai  /  yadi aisA kaho ki vaha kriyA karane meM
kramazaH pravRtta hotA hai to yaha saMgata nahIM hai kyoMki jisa kAla meM kisI
eka kriyA karane meM jisakI pravRtti hotI hai, jisameM vaha apane ko lagAtA hai
vahAM yaha prazna khar3A hotA hai ki usa samaya usameM aparakriyA karaNa kA-
dUsarI kriyA karane kA svabhAva vidyamAna hotA hai yA nahIM  /  yadi kaho ki
vaisA karane kA svabhAva vidyamAna hotA hai to vaha eka hI sAtha anya kriyAoM ko
bhI kyoM nahIM niSpanna karatA, kyoM vaha unako yathAkrama yA kramazaH karatA
hai  /  yadi aisA kaho ki usa darzana kA kriyamANa kriyA ke atirikta anya kriyA
karane kA svabhAva to usa kAla meM vidyamAna rahatA hai, kintu usakI kriyAkAritA
sahakArI kAraNoM ke sAtha jur3I hai  /  isaliye unakI apekSA se-jaise-jaise ve
sahakArI kAraNa milate haiM, vaha kramazaH kriyAeM karatA hai-eka sAtha nahIM
karatA  /  aisA kahanA bhI samucita nahIM hai  /  yaha batalAye ki kyA vaha
sahakArIkAraNa usa vastu meM kucha atizaya-vizeSa bAta paidA karatA hai athavA
nahIM karatA  /  yadi vaha atizaya utpanna karatA hai to kyA vaha usake
pUrvavartI svabhAva kA parityAga karAkara utpanna hotA hai yA parityAga karAye
binA hI utpanna hotA hai  /  yadi padArtha ke pUrvavartI svabhAva kA parityAga
karA kara vaha atizaya utpanna hotA hai to usa padArtha meM
"atAdavastya"-tadavasthA yA apanI pahalI avasthA yA svabhAva ke na rahane ke
kAraNa anitya siddha ho jAtA hai  /  vaha nitya nahIM ho sakatA  /  yadi yoM
kahA jAya ki usa padArtha ke pUrva svabhAva kA parityAga nahIM hotA, taba
sahakArIkAraNa dvArA usameM koI atizaya-vaiziSTya kA abhAva rahatA hai-usameM
koI atizaya utpanna nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  jaba aisA hai to phira sahakArI
kAraNa kI apekSA hI kyA raha jAtI hai ? yadi yoM kahA jAya ki sahakArI kAraNa
yadyapi akiMcitkara hai-kucha bhI nahIM karatA kintu aisA hone ke bAvajUda
viziSTa kArya ke liye usakI apekSA kI jAtI hai, aisA kahanA bhI ayuktiyukta hai
/  kahA gayA hai - 42

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement of Authority  I  It is expected, it is considered
necessary, that one who does something for someone, who does a favor, should be
expected, but why should one expect anything from someone who does nothing, who
does no favor? Who will consider his need for what? If it is said that the
substance, while performing one action, does not have the nature of performing
any other action, therefore, while performing one action, it does not have the
nature of performing any other action. That is, while performing one action, it
does not perform any other action. This being the case, it is clear that there
is a loss of permanence in them. They are not permanent. If it is said that it
performs the meaning-action of the permanent word-pair simultaneously, then
consider - if all the actions are done in the first moment, then in the second
moment, the substance becomes inactive, non-doer, and impermanence arises. If it
is said that the nature of that substance is such that it continues to perform
the meaning-actions again and again in the second and subsequent moments, then
this is inconsistent, illogical, because there is a lack of repetition of the
done, that is, what has been done once cannot be done again. If it can do all
the actions at once, then the substances that are to be in the second and
subsequent moments also happen in the first moment. The reason for this is that
the nature of the emergence of the substances that are to be produced in the
second and subsequent moments is also in that first moment. If such a nature
does not exist in the first moment, then it is impermanent, this is clearly
proven. Thus, that substance can neither perform the meaning-action gradually
nor is it capable of doing so all at once. The substance that is permanent
cannot be produced from its causes. Thus, if it is proven that the impermanent
nature itself produces substances, then all substances will be momentary,
because only the impermanent, perishable, or momentary can be produced. This
does not pose any obstacle or hindrance to the proof of our exposition. It has
been said that the nature, the origin of the substances, is the cause of their
destruction or impermanence. The substance that was produced and did not perish,
that is, did not perish as soon as it was produced, will be destroyed by whom
later - it will never be destroyed.  Further, it is doubted - if there is
impermanence in substances, but when the cause of the destruction or destruction
of a substance is present, then that substance is destroyed. Therefore, even if
substances are destroyed in relation to their respective causes of destruction,
the momentariness of substances that are impermanent is not proven - they do not
last for a moment - such a situation does not arise.  In resolving this, it is
said - this is what is said - the words of those who have not worshipped the
Guru - who have not acquired knowledge in the presence of the Guru. What is the
point of asking more in the present context? It is self-evident. It is said that
absence is made - by breaking a pot with a pestle, etc., its absence is made -
those who advocate this, the beloved of the gods - the ignorant or the fool
should be asked - is the use of nay in the word absence here a paryudasa or a
prasajjapratisedha? Think about it. If it is paryudasa, then the meaning will be
to go from one state to another, or to be in another state by leaving one state,
or according to this, the meaning of ghatabhava is to be the absence of pat,
etc., different from ghat. In that situation, that is, if the mudgar operates in
the ghat, etc., if it is struck by the mudgar, then what can it spoil? That is,
it is not capable of doing anything. If, instead of considering it paryudasa,
the use of nay is considered to be its  43

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH I jo padArtha kisI ke liye kucha karatA hai -
upakAra karatA hai usI kI apekSA kI jAtI hai, AvazyakatA samajhI jAtI hai kintu
jo kucha bhI nahIM karatA koI upakAra nahIM karatA usakI apekSA kisI ke dvArA
kyoM kI jAya usakI AvazyakatA kauna kisaliye mAnegA ? yadi yoM kahA jAya ki usa
padArtha kA eka kriyA karate samaya usake atirikta kisI anya kriyA ke karane kA
svabhAva nahIM hai  /  isaliye vaha eka kriyA karane ke samaya kisI anya kriyA
karane kA svabhAva lie hue nahIM hotA  /  arthAt vaha eka kriyA karate samaya
koI dUsarI kriyA nahIM karatA  /  aisA hone se yaha spaSTa hai ki unameM
nityattva kI hAni hotI hai  /  ve nitya nahIM hote  /  yadi aisA kahA jAya ki
vaha nitya pada - yugapata - eka sAtha arthakriyA karatA hai taba jarA vicAreM -
pahale hI kSaNa saba kriyA ho jAtI hai to dUsare kSaNa meM usa padArtha meM
akartRtva-akartApana AtA hai aura anityatA AtI hai  /  yadi yoM kahA jAya ki usa
padArtha kA svabhAva aisA hai ki vaha dvitIya Adi Age ke kSaNoM meM bhI
arthakriyAoM ko punaH punaH karatA rahatA hai to yaha asaMgata hai- ayuktiyukta
hai kyoMki kRta ke punaHkaraNa kA abhAva hotA hai arthAt jo eka bAra kiyA jA
cukA ho phira use kiyA jAnA saMbhava nahIM hai  /  yadi vaha eka hI sAtha saba
kriyAoM ko kara sakatA hai to dvitIya Adi agale kSaNoM meM hone vAle padArtha
bhI prathama kSaNa meM hI ho jAte haiM  /  aisA hone kA kAraNa yaha hai ki
dvitIya Adi kSaNoM meM niSpanna hone vAle padArthoM kI niSpatti kA svabhAva usa
prathama kSaNa bhI hai  /  yadi prathama kSaNa meM vaisA svabhAva vidyamAna
nahIM hai to vaha anitya hai, yaha spaSTatayA siddha ho jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra
vaha padArtha na to kramazaH arthakriyA kara sakatA hai aura na eka sAtha vaisA
karane meM sakSama hai, jo padArtha nitya hai, usakI utpatti apane kAraNoM se
saMbhava nahIM hotI  /  yoM yadi yaha siddha hotA hai ki anitya svabhAva hI
padArthoM ko utpanna karatA hai taba to sabhI padArtha kSaNamAtra sthAyI hoMge
kyoMki anitya- nazvara yA kSaNa mAtra Tikane vAle hI niSpanna ho sakate haiN|
isase hamAre nirUpaNa - pratipAdana ke siddha hone meM koI vighna yA bAdhA
upasthita nahIM hotI  /  kahA gayA hai ki bhAvoM padArtho kI jAti, utpatti hI
unake vinAza yA nazvaratA kA hetu hai  /  jo padArtha utpanna huA aura dhvasta
nahIM huA arthAt utpanna hote hI vinaSTa nahIM hotA, vaha bAda meM kisake dvArA
naSTa hogA- kabhI naSTa nahIM hogA  /  Age zaMkA kI jAtI hai- yadi padArthoM meM
anityatva hai kintu jaba jisa padArtha ke vinAza yA dhvaMsa kA hetu upasthita
hotA hai taba vaha padArtha vinaSTa ho jAtA hai  /  ataeva apane-apane vinAza ke
hetuoM kI apekSA se padArthoM ke naSTa hone para bhI ve padArtha jo anitya haiM,
unakA kSaNikatva siddha nahIM hotA- ve kSaNa bhara Tikate hoM- aisI sthiti nahIM
banatI  /  isakA samAdhAna karate hue kahate haiM- yaha jo kahA gayA hai- aise
logoM kA vacana hai jinhoMne guru kI upAsanA nahIM kI ho- guru ke sAnidhya meM
jJAnArjana nahIM kiyA ho  /  prastuta prasaMga meM adhika pUchane kI bAta hI kyA
hai ? vaha to svayaM spaSTa hai  /  kahA jAtA hai ki abhAva kiyA jAtA hai -
mUsala Adi se ghar3e ko phor3a DAlane se usakA abhAva ho jAtA hai-yoM
pratipAdita karane vAle, devAnAMpriya - ajJAnI yA mUrkha se yaha pUchA jAnA
cAhiye ki yahAM abhAva zabda meM naya kA prayoga paryudAsa hai yA
prasajjapratiSedha hai ? jarA socA jAya  /  yadi vaha paryudAsa hai to abhiprAya
eka bhAva se dUsare bhAva meM jAnA yA eka bhAva ko chor3akara dUsare bhAva meM
avasthita honA hogA, yA isake anusAra ghaTAbhAva kA artha ghaTa se bhinna paTa
Adi abhAva honA hai  /  usa sthiti meM arthAt ghaTa Adi meM yadi mudgara kA
vyApAra hotA hai, mudgara dvArA usa para prahAra kiyA jAtA hai to vaha usakA kyA
bigAr3a sakatA hai arthAt vaha kucha bhI karane meM samartha nahIM hotA  /  yadi
paryudAsa na mAnakara naya kA prayoga usake 43

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra, in the sense of prohibition, means that the cause of
destruction, like a mallet, etc., produces non-existence. What is its meaning?
It does not produce any feeling or object. By the word "non-existence," only the
action is prohibited. A mallet, etc., a pot, etc., do not produce any substance,
because substances are produced by their own causes. If it is said that the non-
existence of feeling-non-feeling is called non-existence by the word "non-
existence," then it should be understood that that non-existence is produced by
a mallet, etc., but this is not the case, because non-existence is a state of
non-existence, it is formless. How can the action of the agents, the producers,
be possible in it? If there is also an effort or use of agents for non-
existence, then it should also be possible for it to produce horns on a donkey,
but this never happens. Therefore, a mallet, etc., has no agency in the cause of
destruction, but substances are produced by their own nature in an impermanent
form. Therefore, there is no obstacle to their being momentary; they are indeed
momentary.  The use of the word "tu" in the present verse is to indicate the
difference between the present view and the views of the previous Jain thinkers,
which have been discussed earlier. This is expressed in the latter half of the
present verse, in the next two lines, by the words "anno ananno." Its meaning is
that the Sankhya school accepts five elements and a sixth soul, and at the same
time believes that the soul is distinct from the elements, and the Charvaka
school considers the soul to be inseparable or identical with the five elements.
The Buddhists, like both of them, do not accept the existence of the soul. In
short, they do not accept the eternal, infinite, and permanent soul, which is
produced from the five elements that have become transformed into the form of
the body.  "Pudhvi aou teuu ya, taha vaau ya egau." "Chattari dhauno ruvam, ev
mahansu avare." ||18|| Shadow - Earth, water, fire, and air are one. Four forms
of the elements, thus say others. Translation - In another tradition of
Buddhists, it is believed that earth, water, fire, and air are the four elements
or forms of the elements. When these four become one, transformed into the form
of the body, then they are called by the name of "jiva." Commentary - And other
Buddhists say that this world is made up of four elements, to show this, it is
said - Earth is an element, water is an element, fire and air are also elements,
because they are the holders and nourishers. "Egau" means that when these four
become one in form, in the form of the body, then they are called "jiva." And
thus they say - "This body is made up of four elements, there is no soul other
than that." "Evam ahamsu yaavareti" - These particular Buddhists say "ahu" -
they have said. Sometimes the reading is "janaga." There also, this should be
related to "janaka" - we, the knowers, are indeed burnt by the fire of pride.
Their non-fruitfulness is evident from the fact that the doer is completely
destroyed at the moment of action, because there is no connection with the fruit
of the action. All the previous thinkers should be considered non-fruitful,
because some accept the eternal and unchanging soul, and some do not accept the
soul at all. For the sake of answering this, the previous one...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram prativedha ke artha meM mAne to yaha tAtparya hogA ki
vinAza kA kAraNa mudgara Adi abhAva utpanna karatA hai usakA kyA Azaya hogA  /
vaha kisI bhAva ko yA vastu ko utpanna nahIM karatA  /  isase abhAva zabda ke
dvArA kriyA kA hI niSedha kiyA jAtA hai  /  mudgara Adi ghaTa Adi kisI padArtha
ko niSpanna nahIM karate kyoMki padArtha apane hI karaNoM se utpanna hue haiM  /
yadi yoM kahA jAya ki bhAvAbhAva-bhAva ke abhAva ko na hone ko abhAva zabda se
abhihita kiyA jAtA hai to yo samajhanA cAhiye ki vaha abhAva mudgara Adi dvArA
utpanna kiyA jAtA ho, aisA nahIM hai kyoMki abhAva avastu dazA hai, arUpa hai  /
usameM kArako kA-kArya utpanna karane vAloM kA vyApAra-prayoga kaise saMbhava ho
sakatA hai  /  yadi abhAva ke bhI kArakoM kA udyama-prayatna yA prayoga ho to
aisA bhI honA cAhiye ki vaha gadhe ke bhI sIMga utpanna kara sake kintu aisA
kabhI hotA nahIM isaliye vinAza ke kAraNa mudgara Adi kA kucha bhI kArakatva
nahIM hai kintu apane svabhAva se hI padArtha anitya rUpa meM utpanna hote haiM
/  ataeva unake kSaNika hone meM koI bAdhA nahIM AtI vastutaH ve kSaNika haiN|
prastuta gAthA meM jo 'tu' zabda kA prayoga huA hai vaha pahale jinamatavAdiyoM
ke siddhAntoM kI carcA kI hai, unase prastuta matavAdI ke siddhAnta kA bheda
jJApita karane ke liye hai, prastuta gAthA ke uttarArddha-Age ke Adhe bhAga-
agale do caraNoM meM 'aNNo aNaNNo' zabdoM ke dvArA prakaTa kiyA gayA hai  /
usakA Azaya yaha hai ki sAMkhyavAdI jisa prakAra pAMca bhUta aura chaThI AtmA
svIkAra karate haiM tathA sAtha hI sAtha yaha mAnate haiM ki AtmA bhUtoM se
pRthak nahIM hai aura cArvAka AtmA ko pAMca bhUtoM se apRthak yA abhinna mAnate
haiM  /  bauddha ina donoM kI taraha hI AtmA kA astitva svIkAra nahIM karate  /
sArAMza yaha hai ki ye zarIra rUpa meM pariNata pAMca bhUtoM se niSpanna anAdi,
ananta, nitya AtmA ko svIkAra nahIM karate  /  puDhavI Au teU ya, tahA vAU ya
egao  /  cattAri dhAuNo rUvaM, eva mAhaMsu Avare  // 18 //  chAyA -
pRthivyApastejazca tathA vAyuzcaikataH  /  catvAri dhAtorUpANi, evamAhurapare  /
anuvAda - bauddhoM kI eka anya paramparA meM aisA mAnA jAtA hai ki pRthvI, jala,
agni aura pavana ye cAra dhAtu yA dhAtu rUpa hai  /  jaba ye cAroM deha rUpa meM
pariNata hokara eka ho jAte haiM taba ve jIva saMjJA dvArA abhihita hote haiN|
TIkA - tathA'pare bauddhAzcAturdhAtukamidaM jagadAhurityetaddarzayitumAha-
pRthivI dhAturApazca dhAtustathA tejo vAyuzceti dhArakatvAtpoSakatvAcca
dhAtutvameSAm 'egao' tti, yadaite catvAro'pyekAkArapariNatiM vibhraMti
kAyAkAratayA tadA jIvavyapadezamaznuvate  /  tathA cocuH-"cAturdhAtukamidaM
zarIm, na tadvyatirikta AtmA'stI" ti  /  'evamAhaMsu yAvaretti' apare
bauddhavizeSA evam 'AhuH' abhihitavanta iti  /  kvacid 'jANagA' iti pAThaH  /
tatrA'pyayamoM 'jAnakA' jJAnino vayaM kiletyabhimAnAgnidagdhAH santa eva
mAhuriti sambandhanIyam  /  aphalavAditvaM caiteSAM kriyAkSaNa eva kartuH
sarvAtmanA naSTatvAt kriyAphalena sambandhAbhAvAdavaseyam  /  sarvaeva vA
pUrvavAdino'phalavAdino draSTavyAH kaizcidAtmano nityasyAvikAriNo'bhyupagatatvAt
kaizcittvAtmana evAnabhyupagamAditi  /  atrottaradAnArtha prAktanyeva 44)

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement of the self-time is explained by the appointment story "Who is the
self" etc. If there is no substance called self other than the five aggregates,
then from its absence, who experiences happiness, sorrow, etc.? The story is to
be explained as before. Thus, from the absence of the self, this self-known
experience of happiness and sorrow, whose is it? Consider, is this experience of
the knowledge aggregate? No, because it is also momentary, and because the
moment of knowledge is very subtle, there is no experience of happiness and
sorrow. And because the moments of action and its result are completely
incompatible, there is the fall into destruction and non-arrival. If there is a
single stream of knowledge, then from the absence of anything other than that
stream, this is something. If the previous moment will leave a trace of vasana
in the next moment, then it has been said:  "In the same stream, where the
vasana of karma is placed! The result binds there, just as redness in cotton?"
Here also this is doubtful - is that vasana separate from the moments or not
separate? If it is separate, then the non-existence of the vasana-maker is not
established. If it is not separate, then like the moment, it is destroyed with
the moment. Thus, in the absence of the self, there would be no experience of
happiness and sorrow. But there is the experience of happiness and sorrow,
therefore there is the self. Otherwise, after the experience of the five
objects, there would be no understanding of the combination of the sense-
knowledges not being directed towards their own objects. If it is said that it
will be from the storehouse consciousness, then the self is admitted by another
cognition. Thus, the Buddhist scriptures also advocate the self, and this is it:
"In this ninety-ninth kalpa, I was killed by the powerful man. By the result of
that karma, I am pierced in the foot, O monks!" ||1||  Similarly - "The karmas
done are very terrible, they are experienced in the self by reproach. I speak of
their complete eradication from the root by illumination and concealment." ||2||
And so on. Also, what is said to establish momentariness, such as "A substance,
arising from causes, is either eternal or non-eternal," etc., there, in the
eternal, there is no possibility of the eternal side because there is no
activity of the causes in the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and
because there is no possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity
of the causes in the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because
there is no possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the
causes in the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there
is no possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes
in the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes in
the unchanging, unproduced, stable, single nature, and because there is no
possibility of the eternal side because there is no activity of the causes

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH niyuktigAthA "ko veei" ityAdi vyAkhyAyate, yadi
paJcaskandhavyatiriktaH kazcidAtmAkhyaH padArtho na vidyate
tatastadabhAvAtsukhaduHkhAdikaM ko'nubhavatItyAdi gAthA prAgvad vyAkhyeyeti  /
tadevamAtmano'bhAvAdyo'yaM svasaMviditaH sukhaduHkhAnubhavaH sa kasya bhavatviti
cintyatAm ? jJAnaskandhasyAyamanubhava iticenna, tasyA'pi kSaNikatvAt,
jJAnakSaNasya cAtisUkSmatvAtsukhaduHkhAnubhavAbhAvaH |kriyAphalavatozca
kSaNayoratyantAsaMgate:kRtanAzAkRtAbhyAgamApattiriti )  /  jJAnasantAna
eko'stIti cettasyA'pi santAnivyatiriktasyAbhAvAd ytkinycidett| pUrvakSaNa eva
uttarakSaNe vAsanAmAdhAya vinakSyatIti cet, tathA coktam "yasminneva hi santAne,
AhitA karmavAsanA! phalaM tatraiva sandhatte kArpAse raktatA yathA ?" atrApIdaM
vikalyate-sA vAsanA kiM kSaNebhyo vyatiriktA'vyatiriktA vA? yadi vyatiriktA,
vAsakatvA'nupapattiH, athAvyatiriktA, kSaNavat kSaNakSayitvaM tasyAH
tadevamAtmA'bhAve sukhaduHkhAnubhavAbhAvaH syAd, asti ca sukhaduHkhAnubhavo,
atostyaatmeti|anythaa paMca viSayAnubhavottarakAlamindriyajJAnAnAmsvaviSayAdanya
trApravRtteHsaMkalanApratyayo na syAt  /  AlayavijJAnAd bhaviSyatIti cedAtmaiva
tarhi saMjJAntareNAbhyupagata iti  /  tathA bauddhAgamo'pyAtmapratipAdako'sti,
sa cAyam - "ita ekanavattau kalpe, zaktyA me puruSo hataH  /  tena karma
vipAkena pAde viddho'smi bhikSavaH !"  // 1 //  tathA - "kRtAni
karmANyatidAruNAni, tanUbhavantyAtmani grhnnen| prakAzanAtsaMvaraNAcca
teSAmatyantamUleddharaNaM vdaami||2||" ityevamAdi  /  tathA yaduktaM kSaNikatvaM
sAdhAyatA yathA 'padArthaH kAraNebhya utpadyamAno nityaH samutpadyate'nityo
ve'tyAdi,tatra nitye'pracyutAnutpannasthiraika
svabhAvekArakANAMvyApArAbhAvAdatiriktA vAcoyuktiriti nitytvpkssaanutpttirev|
yacca nityatvapakSe bhAvatA'bhihitaM 'nityasya na krameNArthakriyAkAritvaM nA'pi
yaugapadyeneti' tatkSaNikatve'pi samAnaM, yataH kSaNiko'pyarthakriyAyAM
pravartamAnaH krameNa yaugapadyenavA'vazyaM sahakArikAraNa savyapekSa eva
pravartate, yataH sAmagrI janikA, nahyekaM kiMciditi  /  tena ca sahakAriNA na
tasya kazcidatizayaH kartuM pAyaMte, kSaNasyAvivekatvenAnAdheyAtizayatvAt,
kSaNAnAMca
parasparopakArakopakAryyatvAnupapatteHsahakAritvAbhAvaH,sahakAryyanapekSAyAM ca
prativiziSTakAryAnupapattiriti  /  tadeva manityaeva kAraNebhyaH padArthaH
samutpadyata iti dvitIyapakSasamAzrayaNameva, tatrA'pi cetadAlocanIyaM-kiM kSaNa
kSayitvenAnityatva mAhosvit pariNAmAnityatayeti ? tatra kSaNa kSayitve kAraNa
kAryAbhAvAt kArakANAM vyApAraevAnupapannaH kutaHkSaNikAnityasya kAraNebhya
utpAda iti ? |ath pUrvakSaNAduttarakSaNotpAda sati kAryakAraNabhAvo
bhavatItyucyate, tadayuktaM yato'sau pUrvakSaNo vinaSTo vottarakSaNaM
janayedavinaSTovA ? na tAvadvinaSTaH tasyAsattvAjanakatvAnupapatteH,
nA'pyavinaSTaH, uttarakSaNakAle
pUrvakSaNavyApArasamAvezAtkSaNabhaMgabhaMgApatteH  /  pUrvakSaNo
vinazyaMstUttarakSaNa mutpAdayiSyiti tulAntayo monnAmavaditicedevaM tarhi
kSaNayoH spssttaivaikkaaltaa''shritaa| tathA hi-yA'sau
vinazyadavasthA,sA'vasthAturabhinnA utpAdAvasthA'pyutpitsoH,tatazca
tayorvinAzotpAdayo yauMgapadyAbhyupagame, taddharmatA'nubhyupagame,
taddharmiNorapi pUrvottarakSaNayo reka kAlAvasthAyitvamiti  /
taddharmatA'nabhyupagame ca vinAzotpAdayoravastutvApattiriti  /
yaccoktam-"jAtireva hi bhAvAnA mi" tyAdi, tatredayamidhIyate-yadi
jAtirevautpattireva bhAvAnAM padArthAnAmabhAve
hetustato'bhAvakAraNasyasannihitatvena virodhenaaghraattvaadutpttybhaavH|
athotpattyuttarakAlaM vinAzo bhaviSyatItyabhyupagamyate, tathA sati
utpattikriyAkAle tasyA'bhUtatvAtpazcAcca bhavannanatara eva bhavati na bhUyasA
kAleneti kimatra niyAmakam ? vinAzahetvabhAva iti cet yata
uktam-"nirhetutvAdvinAzasyasvabhAvAdanubandhiteti", -.450

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This Sutra-Kritanga Sutra is also incorrect, because it is observed that the
destruction of a pot, etc., occurs immediately after the action of a hammer,
etc. Now, it is said, "What is done to the pot, etc., by the hammer, etc.?" This
is indeed said, but it is incorrect. For, this which is posited by the two
alternatives of "presumption" and "exclusion," has a fault in both sides.
Because, in the case of exclusion, how can the hammer, etc., do anything to the
pot, etc., since the pot, etc., becomes a skull-like form due to its
impermanence, and thus attains that form? And, the presumption-based denial does
not make the object, so it is based on the denial of action. What then? Among
the four, namely, prior non-existence, destruction-non-existence, and other
absolute non-existences, destruction-non-existence is posited here. There, the
action of the agents does occur, because that which is posited is not merely
non-existence, but a particular state, and since that particular state is of the
nature of existence, and since it is active due to the previous instruction, the
very production of the skull, etc., is the destruction of the pot, etc., so the
destruction is established as having a cause. Moreover, it is to be understood
that destruction is caused by the fact that it occurs sometimes. For the sake of
the arrangement of objects, and for the sake of the arrangement of words, the
four types of non-existence are to be accepted. It is said, "The object and the
material are without beginning, when prior non-existence is destroyed, and when
destruction-non-existence is destroyed, it goes to infinity." "That which is
all-pervading is one, by the exclusion of others, etc." Thus, since the
momentary is incapable of being examined, the side of impermanence of
transformation is better. And thus, the true self is the transformer, the
support of knowledge, the one who undergoes change, different from the elements
in some way, united with the body, not different from others due to the
continuity of others, and also having a cause, not a hell-being, an animal, a
human, or a god, because it is being transformed by the karma that produces
these states, and because it is of the nature of a synonym. Thus, the eternal
doctrine is also caused by the non-destruction of the nature of the self. And
since the self is established as being distinct from the body, "The body is only
the four elements, this is the raving of a madman, it should be ignored." Enough
of this discussion. ||18||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram etadapyayuktaM, yato ghaTAdInAM
mudgarAdivyApArAnantarameva vinAzo bhavan lakSyate  /  nanu coktamevAtra tena
mudgarAdinA ghaTAdeH kiM kriyate ? ityAdi, satyamukta midamayuktaM tUktaM,
tathAhi-abhAva iti prasajyaparyudAsavikalpadvayena yo'yaM vikalpitaH,
pakSadvaye'pi ca doSaH pradarzitaH so'doSa eva  /  yataH paryudAsapakSe
kapAlAkhyabhAvAntarakaraNe ghaTasya ca pariNAmAnityatayA tadrUpatApatteH kathaM
mudgarAderghaTAdIn pratyakiMcita karatvam ? prasajyapratiSedhastu bhAvaM na
karotIti kriyApratiSaidhAtmako'tranAzrIyate kiM tarhi ?
prAgabhAvapradhvaMsAbhAvetaretarAtyantAbhAvAnAM caturNAMmadhye pradhvaMsAbhAva
evehaashriiyte|ttr cakArakANAMvyApArobhavatyeva,yato'sauvastuta: pa-
yo'vasthAvizeSo nAbhAvamAtraM, tasya cAvasthAvizeSasya bhAvarUpatvAtpUrvopardena
ca pravRttatvAd yaeva kapAlAderUtpAdaH sa eva ghaTAdevinAza iti vinAzasya
sahetukatva mavasthitam-api ca kAdAcitkatvena vinAzatya sahetukatva mavaseyamiti
/  padArtha vyavasthArthazcAvazyamabhAva cAturvidhyamAzrayaNIyam  /  taduktam-
"kAryyadravyamanAdi syAt prAgabhAvasyaninhave pradhvaMsasya cAbhAvasya
pracyave'nantatAM vrajet" ? "sarvAtmakaM tadekaM syAdanyApohavyatikrame ityAdi
/  tadevaM kSaNikasya vicArAkSamatvAtpariNAmAnityapakSa eva jyAyAniti  /  evaJca
satyAtmA pariNAmI jJAnAdhArobhavAntarayAyI, bhUtebhyaH kathaMcidanya eva
zarIreNa sahAnyo'nyAnuvedhAdananyo'pi tathA sahetuko'pi,
nArakatiryaGmanuSyAmarabhavopAdAnakarmaNA tathA tathA vikriyamANatvAt
paryAyarUpatayeti  /  tathA''tmasvarUpApracyuternityavAda hetuko'pIti  /
Atmanazca zarIra vyatiriktasya sAdhitatvAt 'caturdhAtukramAtraM, zarIra meved
mityetadunmatta-pralapitamapakarNayitavyamityalaM prasaMganeti  // 18 //
TIkArtha - anya bauddha aisA mAnate haiM ki yaha jagata cAra dhAtuoM se niSpanna
hai usake siddhAnta kA digdarzana karAne ke liye AgamakAra kahate haiM - pRthvI,
jala, agni aura vAyu inheM dhAtu kahA jAtA hai  /  zAbdika dRSTi se yaha
tAtparya hai ki ye cAroM jagata ko dhAraNa karate haiM-jagata ina cAroM para
TikA hai  /  ye usake AdhAra haiM  /  ye jagata kA poSaNa karate haiM, isaliye
inheM dhAtu kahA jAtA hai  /  jaba ye cAroM ekAkAra pariNati prApta karate haiM-
paraspara mila kara zarIra ke rUpa meM pariNata ho jAte haiM, taba jIva zabda
dvArA inheM abhihita kiyA jAtA hai  /  isIliye kahA gayA hai ki yaha zarIra cAra
dhAtu se niSpanna hai  /  unake vyatirikta-unase pRthak, koI AtmA nAmaka
padArtha nahIM hai yaha eka anya paramparA ke bauddhoM kA kathana hai kahIM
'jANagA' pATha prApta hotA hai, vahA~ yaha abhiprAya hai-ve bauddha apane jJAna
kA abhimAna karate hue-ahaMkAra kI agni se dagdha bane hue, kahate haiM-hama
bar3e jAnakAra haiM-jJAnI haiN| ye bauddhamatAnuyAyI aphalavAdI haiM-phala ko
nahIM mAnate kyoMki kriyA karane ke kSaNa meM hI inake anusAra kartA-kriyA
karane vAle kA sarvAtmanA-sampUrNarUpeNa nAza ho jAtA hai, ataeva usa kartA
dvArA kI gaI kriyA ke phala ke sAtha abhAva rahatA hai-saMbaMdha nahIM jaDatA
yahAM yaha bhI mAnanA cAhiye ki pahale jinavAdiyoM kI carcA kI gaI hai, ve sabhI
phala meM vizvAsa nahIM karate  /  unameM se koI nitya avikArI AtmA kA astitva
svIkAra karate haiM  /  kaI AtmA kA astitva hI nahIM mAnate  /  yahA~ prastuta
viSaya kA uttara dene ke liye yA samAdhAna karane ke liye pahale kahI gaI 'ko
veyai' ityAdi niyukti gAthA kA vizleSaNa kiyA jAtA hai  /  yadi pAMca skandhoM
ke vyatirikta koI AtmA saMjJaka padArtha vidyamAna nahIM hai to batalAeM, AtmA
kA abhAva hone se sukha-anukUla vedanIya, duHkha-pratikUla vedanIya kA anubhava
kauna karatA hai  /  Age niyukti kI vyAkhyA jaise pahale kI gaI hai, kara lenI
cAhiye-samajha lenI cAhiye  /  yadi AtmA kA abhAva hai-AtmA nahIM 46

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If there is self-time statement authority, then who can experience the happiness
and sorrow known by oneself - this is a matter of contemplation. If it is said
that this experience of happiness and sorrow is the subject of the knowledge
skandha, then it does not seem appropriate to state so because the knowledge
skandha is also momentary - the moment is permanent. Knowledge, being extremely
subtle, cannot experience happiness and sorrow. (There is a great difference
between the substance that acts and the substance that receives its fruit. They
are very consistent with each other. This being so, the two defects of Kritnash
and Akritagam, which have been discussed earlier, come into your opinion. If you
say that the knowledge lineage - the thread or sequence of knowledge is one,
therefore the knowledge lineage that acts is the same one that enjoys its fruit,
therefore there are no defects of Kritnash and Akritagam, it is not consistent -
it is not logical. Therefore, no fruit is produced from that knowledge lineage.
If it is said that the former substance, in the former moment, destroys itself
by basing or establishing its desire in the latter substance, in the latter
moment, then as it has been said - the fruit is realized in the same knowledge
lineage in which the karma desire is present or situated - the fruit is produced
in the same. For example, the fruit is produced in the cotton that has redness.
Here also, the option arises that whether that desire is separate from the
moments, from the momentary substances, or is inseparable. If it is separate,
then the desire cannot produce the desire. That desire cannot desire that
momentary substance. If it is inseparable, then like the moment, it too will be
destroyed in a moment. Therefore, if there is no soul, no existence, then there
can be no enjoyment of happiness and sorrow, but the reality is that happiness
and sorrow are experienced in this world, therefore the existence of the soul is
definitely proved. If there is no soul, then after experiencing the five objects
of smell, form, taste, touch and sound, I have known all five objects, this
collective knowledge is not obtained because the knowledge of each sense does
not go to another place or to the object of another sense. If it is said that
the collective knowledge of all five objects is obtained simultaneously by the
Alaya-vijnana, then by saying so, you have accepted the soul by another name.
There is also an Agam-shastra text in the Buddhist Agamas that advocates the
soul. For example, on one occasion, when a thorn pricked Buddha's foot, when the
monks asked - why did this happen, then he says that eighty-four kalpas ago, I
injured a man with a weapon with a sharp point, O monks! This thorn is stuck in
my foot as a result of that karma. It has also been said - the very cruel,
merciless or ruthless karma done by humans becomes lighter by self-reproach or
self-criticism. By publishing them - by telling them openly in front of
everyone, by repenting and repenting for them, by not doing them again, they are
completely eradicated or destroyed. 1 To prove that substance is momentary, the
Buddhists said that the substance that is produced from its causes, whether that
substance is produced eternally or impermanently, it is not appropriate to raise
such an option because the substance that is eternal is free from production and
destruction. It is neither produced nor destroyed. It remains stable - always in
one form and is of one nature. Therefore, the business of causes cannot happen
in it. It is unconnected with causes, therefore eternity 47

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH hai to saMvidita-svataH apane dvArA jAne hue sukha
duHkha kI anubhUti kauna kara pAyegA - yaha cintana kA viSaya hai  /  yadi yoM
kahA jAya ki yaha sukha duHkhAtmaka anubhUti vijJAna skaMdha kA viSaya hai to
aisA pratipAdita karanA saMgata nahIM lagatA kyoMki vijJAna skandha bhI kSaNika
hai- kSaNa sthAyI hai| jJAna kSaNa ati sUkSma hone ke kAraNa sukha-duHkhAtmakatA
kI anubhUti nahIM kara paataa| ( jo padArtha kriyA karatA hai tathA jo padArtha
usakA phala pAtA hai, una donoM kA atyanta bheda hotA hai| ve paraspara atyanta
saMgata hote haiN| aisA hone se kRtanAza aura akRtAgama nAmaka doSa, jinakI
pahale carcA kI jA cukI hai, Apake mata meM A jAte haiM  /  yadi yoM kahate haiM
ki jJAnasaMtAna - jJAna kA tAnA bAnA yA silasilA eka hai ataH jJAna saMtAna jo
kriyA karatA hai vahI usakA phala bhoga karatA hai, isaliye vahAM kRtanAza aura
akRtAgama doSa nahIM Ate aisA kahanA susaMgata nahIM haiyuktiyukta nahIM hai  /
ataH usa jJAna saMtAna se bhI kucha phala niSpatti nahIM hotI  /  yadi yoM kahA
jAya ki pUrva padArtha pUrva kSaNa, uttara padArtha uttara kSaNa meM apanI
vAsanA ko AdhArita yA sthApita karake naSTa ho jAtA hai to jaisA ki kahA gayA
hai-jisa jJAna saMtAna meM karma vAsanA Ahita yA avasthita rahatI hai-usI meM
phala kA saMdhAna hotA hai usI meM phala paidA hotA hai| udAharaNArtha jisa
kapAsa meM raktatA - lAlimA hotI hai, usI meM phala paidA hotA hai  /  yahAM bhI
yaha vikalpa upasthita hotA hai ki vaha vAsanA kyA kSaNoM se kSaNika padArthoM
se pRthak hai, athavA apRthak hai  /  yadi pRthak hai to usa vAsanA se vAsakatva
utpanna nahIM ho sakatA  /  vaha vAsanA usa kSaNika padArtha ko vAsita nahIM
kara sakatI  /  yadi vaha vyatirikta apRthak hai, to kSaNa kI jyoM usa kSaNika
ke samAna vaha bhI kSaNa bhara meM naSTa ho jAne vAlI hai  /  isaliye yadi AtmA
kA abhAva hai, astitva nahIM hai, to sukhaduHkha kA bhoga nahIM ho sakatA kintu
vAstavikatA yaha hai ki isa jagata meM sukha kA, duHkha kA paribhoga anubhUta
kiyA jAtA hai, ataeva AtmA kA astitva nizcaya hI siddha hotA hai  /  yadi AtmA
kA astitva na ho to gaMdha, rUpa, rasa, sparza evaM zabda ina pAMca viSayoM kA
anubhava hone ke anantara maiMne pAMcoM hI viSayoM ko jAnA, yaha saMkalanAtmaka
jJAna prApta nahIM hotA kyoMki pratyeka indriya kA jJAna apane viSaya se anyatra
- dUsare sthAna para yA dUsarI indriya ke viSaya taka nahIM jaataa| yadi yoM
kahA jAya ki Alaya vijJAna dvArA saMkalanAtmakapAMcoM viSayoM kA eka sAtha
sAmudAyika jJAna ho jAtA hai, to aisA kahakara Apane nAmAntara se AtmA ko
svIkAra kara liyA  /  bauddha AgamoM meM bhI AtmA kA pratipAdana karane vAlA
Agama-zAstra pATha hai| jaise eka prasaMga para jaba buddha ke paira meM kAMTA
cubha gayA, jaba bhikSuoM ne pUchA- aisA kyoM huA, taba ve kahate haiM ki abase
ikyAnaveM kalpa pUrva maiMne zakti - tIvra dhAradAra noMka vAle zastra se eka
puruSa ko Ahata kiyA, he bhikSuoM ! usa karma 'phalasvarUpa mere paira meM yaha
kAMTA gar3A hai| aura bhI kahA hai- mAnava dvArA kiye hue atyanta dAruNa-
niSkaruNa yA nirdayatApUrNa karma AtmagarhA se Atma nindA yA AtmAlocana se halke
ho jAte haiN| unakA prakAzana karane se-sabake sAmane khule rUpa meM batAne se
unake liye prAyazcita aura pazcAtApa kara lene se punaH unheM na karane se unakA
sarvathA mUloccheda yA nAza ho jAtA hai  /  1 jo yaha kahA gayA ki padArtha
kSaNika hai yaha siddha karane ke liye bauddhoM ne yaha kahA ki apane kAraNoM se
jo padArtha utpanna hotA hai ki vaha padArtha nitya utpanna hotA hai yA anitya
utpanna hotA hai, aisA vikalpa khar3A karanA samucita nahIM hai kyoMki jo
padArtha nitya hotA hai vaha utpatti aura vinAza se rahita hotA hai  /  na vaha
utpanna hotA hai aura na vaha miTatA hai| vaha sthira - sadA eka rUpa meM sthita
rahatA hai aura eka svabhAvayukta hotA hai  /  ataH usameM kAraNoM kA vyApAra ho
nahIM sakatA  /  vaha kAraNoM se asaMbaddha hotA hai, isaliye nityatva 47

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is illogical to assume that substances are produced from the **Sutrakritanga
Sutra** and then argue for the permanence of substances that are produced.  The
argument that permanent substances cannot act sequentially or simultaneously
applies equally to the theory of impermanence, as impermanent substances also
require cooperating causes to act sequentially or simultaneously.  Cooperating
causes are necessary for their production, as materials and resources are what
bring about the work.  No single substance can bring about the work.  However,
cooperating causes cannot produce any excess or peculiarity in an impermanent
substance, as an impermanent substance, due to its impermanence, is not capable
of being known by the intellect and therefore cannot be established as having
excess.  Furthermore, impermanent substances are not mutually beneficial or
beneficiaries of each other.  In such a situation, there is also a lack of
cooperation between them.  They cannot become cooperating causes.  Without
cooperating causes, specific actions cannot be produced.  Therefore, it is more
logical to consider substances as impermanent rather than momentary.  Substances
are produced from their causes.  They are produced as impermanent.  Accepting
the other side of this argument is also not logical.  This side should also be
criticized by considering that substances are momentary, meaning they perish in
an instant.  Therefore, they are impermanent, or they transform into various
forms, and therefore are impermanent.  If it is accepted that substances are
momentary, meaning they perish in an instant, then they are impermanent.
According to this view, no substance can be the cause of another substance, nor
can any substance be the effect of a cause.  If all substances are only
permanent for an instant, then who will be the cause of whom and who will be the
effect of whom?  In such a situation, the activity of causation by perishable
substances that perish in an instant is also not possible.  How can it be
accepted that impermanent substances that perish in an instant are produced from
causes?  If it is said that the subsequent substance is produced from the
preceding substance that exists for only an instant, then even momentary
substances can be causes of each other.  Causes can transform into effects.
Thus, it is not logical to assume that there is a cause-and-effect relationship
between them.  A question arises here: does the preceding momentary substance
itself perish and then produce the subsequent substance, or does it produce the
subsequent substance without perishing?  If it is said that the preceding
substance itself perishes and then produces the subsequent substance, then this
explanation is also not appropriate.  How can a substance that itself perishes
produce others?  If it is said that the preceding substance produces the
subsequent substance without perishing, then this is also not true, as the
activity of the preceding substance would still exist at the time of the
existence of the subsequent substance, and the theory of momentariness would not
hold.  If it is said that just as one side of a balance scale lowers itself and
raises the other side, in the same way the preceding substance lowers itself and
raises the subsequent substance, then this is also not logical.  The preceding
substance cannot lower itself and raise the subsequent substance, as the
preceding substance is itself perishable and does not have the capacity to raise
the subsequent substance.  Therefore, the theory of momentariness is not
logical.  It is not possible for a substance to be produced from another
substance that is itself perishable.  Therefore, it is more logical to consider
substances as impermanent rather than momentary.  Substances are produced from
their causes.  They are produced as impermanent.  This is the only logical
conclusion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram padArtha kA utpanna honA mAnakara, utpadyamAna
padArthoM meM nityatva ke pakSa ko pratipAdana karanA ayuktiyukta hai| nityattva
ke pakSa meM doSa kathana karate hue jo Apane yaha pratipAdita kiyA ki nitya
padArtha na to kramaza:eka ke bAda eka yoM kramAnusAra kriyA kara sakatA hai
aura na yugapata-eka hI sAtha kriyA karane meM vaha samartha hai  /  yaha doSa
Apa dvArA pratipAdita kSaNikatva ke pakSa meM bhI eka samAna rUpa se lAgU hotA
hai kyoMki kSaNika padArtha kramazaH athavA yugapata kriyA ke liye pravRtta hotA
huA kSaNika padArtha bhI sahakArI kAraNoM kI AvazyakatA rakhatA hai  /  usakI
niSpatti ke liye sahakArI kAraNoM kI AvazyakatA Avazyaka rahatI hai  /  kyoMki
sAmagrIsAdhana hI kArya ko niSpanna karate haiM  /  koI eka padArtha niSpanna
nahIM karatA, kintu eka bAta yaha hai ki sahakArI kAraNa kSaNika padArtha meM
koI atizaya yA vaiziSTya utpanna nahIM kara sakatA kyoMki kSaNika padArtha
vivekatva se anAdheya-viveka dvArA jAnane yogya na hone ke kAraNa atizayatva
sthApita karane meM yogya-samartha nahIM hotaa| yaha bhI hai ki kSaNavartI
padArtha paraspara upakAraka-eka dUsare kA upakAra karane vAlA tathA upakArya-
jisakA upakAra kiyA jAye-aisA bhI nahIM hotA  /  aisI sthiti meM unameM
sahakAritva kA bhI abhAva ho jAtA hai  /  ve sahakArI bhI nahIM bana pAte  /
sahakArI kI anapekSAyeM arthAta usake sahAre ke binA prati viziSTa kArya utpanna
nahIM ho skte| isaliye padArthoM ko kSaNavartI na mAnakara anitya mAnanA hI
susaMgata hai  /  padArtha apane kAraNoM se utpanna hotA hai  /  vaha anitya hI
utpanna hotA hai  /  aisA jo dUsarA pakSa hai, use svIkAra karanA bhI tarka
saMgata nahIM hai  /  isa pakSa meM bhI aisI AlocanA-upApoha yA cintana kiyA
jAnA cAhiye ki padArtha kSaNakSayitva liye hue hai arthAt kSaNamAtra meM unakA
kSaya ho jAtA hai  /  ataH ve anitya haiM athavA vividha rUpoM meM ve pariNata
hote haiM isaliye anitya haiM  /  aisI sthiti meM yadi yaha svIkAra kiyA jAya ki
padArtha kSaNakSayitva yukta hai-kSaNabhara meM naSTa ho jAte haiM ataH ve
anitya haiM  /  aisI sthiti meM isa pakSa-mantavya ke anusAra koI padArtha na to
kisI anya padArtha kA hetu ho sakatA hai aura na koI padArtha kisI kAraNa kA-
kisI kAraNa dvArA prasUta-utpanna kArya ho sakatA hai kyoMki jaba sabhI
padArthoM kA sthAyitva kSaNamAtra ke liye haiM to kauna kisakA kAraNa hogA aura
kauna kisakA kArya hogA, vaise kSaNabhara meM kSaya ko prApta hone vAle
vinAzazIla padArthoM kArakatva kA vyApAravyavahAra bhI saMbhava nahIM hotA  /
aisI sthiti meM kSaNa meM kSaya prApta karane vAle anitya padArthoM kI kAraNoM
se niSpatti hotI hai-ve kAraNoM se utpanna hote haiM  /  yaha kaise mAnA jA
sakatA hai ? yadi yoM kahA jAya ki kSaNa mAtra ke liye Tikane vAle pUrvavartI
padArtha se uttaravartI padArtha kI niSpatti hotI hai  /  isa prakAra kSaNavartI
padArtha bhI Apasa meM eka dUsare ke kAraNa bana sakate haiM  /  kAraNa kArya
rUpa meM pariNata ho sakate haiM  /  yoM unameM Apasa meM kArya kAraNa bhAva
saMbhava hai-aisA mAnanA bhI yuktisaMgata nahIM hai  /   /  yahAM eka prazna
upasthita hotA hai ki pUrvavartI kSaNika padArtha svayaM kSaya prApta kara-
vinaSTa hokara uttara padArtha ko samutpanna karatA hai yA kSaya na hokara use
paidA karatA hai  /  yadi yo kahA jAya ki pUrvavartI padArtha svayaM naSTa ho
jAtA hai taduparAnta vaha uttara padArtha ko utpanna karatA hai to yaha nirupaNa
bhI ucita nahIM hai  /  jo padArtha svayaM miTa jAtA hai phira vaha dUsaroM ko
kisa prakAra paidA kara sakatA hai isa para yadi yoM kahA jAya ki pUrvavartI
padArtha svayaM naSTa na hokara uttara vartI padArtha ko niSpanna karatA hai to
yaha bhI yathArtha nahIM hainyAyocitta nahIM hai kyoMki uttaravartI padArtha ke
samaya meM vidyamAnatA meM pUrva padArtha kA vyApAra-kArya, yadi vidyamAna
rahatA hai to kSaNabhaMgura vAda kA siddhAnta hI kahIM Tika nahIM sakatA  /  isa
para yadi yoM kahA jAya ki tulA kA eka palar3A jaise apane Apako nIcA jAtA huA
dUsare palar3e ko U~cA uThAtA hai, usI prakAra pUrvavartI 48

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement that a substance, while undergoing decay, produces a subsequent
substance, is not justified. If we accept this, it is clear that both substances
would exist simultaneously, which contradicts the principle of क्षणभंगवाद
(Kṣaṇabhanga). The decay of a substance is not separate from the substance
itself; it is inseparable. Similarly, the state of being produced (उत्पन्नमान)
is inseparable from the substance being produced.  It is important to consider
that accepting both production and decay simultaneously would imply that the
previous substance and the subsequent substance, along with their inherent
qualities, would exist simultaneously. If production and decay are not
considered inherent qualities of substances, then they would not be considered
objects at all; their existence as objects would not occur.  The statement that
the production of substances is the cause of their destruction can be refuted as
follows: If the production of substances were the cause of their destruction,
then no substance should ever be produced, because the cause of their
destruction (production) is already present. If we say that destruction occurs
after production, then it would occur at the time of production, or at the very
next moment after production. It would not occur after a long time. Why is this?
How can this be refuted? If we say that the cause of destruction does not exist,
then destruction would not occur after a long time, because it has been said
that destruction occurs without a cause; it is inherent. This statement is also
not justified, because we see in the world that the destruction of a pot, etc.,
occurs only after being struck by a hammer, etc. If you say that we have already
stated that a hammer, etc., cannot destroy a pot, etc., then this is not
factual. You may have said this, but simply saying it does not make it true.
Your statement is not based on logic, because according to the meaning of नय
(naya) in the context of absence (अभाव), based on पर्युदास (paryudāsa) and
प्रसज्जप्रतिषेध (prasajjapratiṣedha), a hammer, etc., produces pieces of the pot
in the form of shards, etc., separate from the pot. The pot is impermanent
(अनित्य) and subject to change (परिणमनशील), so it transforms into shards.
Therefore, how can a hammer, etc., not destroy a pot? प्रसज्जप्रतिषेध prohibits
action, which cannot be accepted here. However, among the different types of
absence (अभाव) – प्राग्भाव (prāgabhāva), प्रध्वंसाभाव (pradhvaṃsābhāva),
अत्यंताभाव (atyantābhāva), and अन्योन्याभाव (anyonyābhāva) – प्रध्वंसाभाव is
accepted here. In प्रध्वंसाभाव, the action of the cause is involved. In fact, it
is a synonym for a substance, a particular state or condition of the substance,
not just absence. That state or condition is भाव (bhāva) – a state of being.
Therefore, it arises by destroying the previous state. Thus, the production of
shards, etc., is the destruction of the pot. This proves that destruction is
caused by a cause. It is produced by a cause. It is कादाचित्क (kādaचितka) – it
happens sometimes, not always. Therefore, it is also proven that it is caused by
a cause.  To maintain the proper order of substances, it is necessary to accept
four types of absence. It has been said that if we reject प्राग्भाव
(prāgabhāva), then there will be no substance, etc., in the form of an effect.
There will be no beginning or origin of any effect. If we do not accept
प्रध्वंसाभाव (pradhvaṃsābhāva), then there will be no end (प्रच्यव) of a
substance; it will become infinite. If we contradict अन्योन्याभाव
(anyonyābhāva), then its existence will be accepted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH padArtha kSaya prApta karatA huA uttaravartI
padArtha ko utpanna karatA hai  /  yaha yukti bhI aucityapUrNa nahIM hai kyoMki
yadi aisA mAna lete ho to yaha bilkula sApha hai ki Apa donoM padArthoM kI eka
hI samaya meM sthiti aMgIkAra karate haiM, aisA karanA kSaNabhaMgavAda ke
siddhAnta ke viruddha hai, jisa padArtha kA kSaya hotA hai usakI kSayAvasthA usa
padArtha se pRthak nahIM hotI-abhinna hotI hai  /  isI se yaha jAnanA cAhiye ki
utpannamAna-utpanna hote hue padArtha kI utpatti kI sthiti bhI usa padArtha se
pRthak nahIM hotI usase abhinna hotI hai  /  yahAM yaha vicAraNIya hai ki
utpatti aura kSaya ko eka sAtha svIkAra kara lene para pUrva padArtha aura
uttara padArtha bhI jo unake dharmI hai unakA eka hI samaya meM avasthita honA
sAbita hogA  /  yadi utpatti aura kSaya ko una padArthoM kA dharma na mAnA jAya
to ve koI vastu hI siddha nahIM hoMge-vastu rUpa meM unakA astitva hI ghaTita
nahIM hogA  /  yaha jo kahA gayA ki padArthoM kA utpanna honA hI unake naSTa
hone kA hetu hai, isakA nirAkaraNa yA samAdhAna isa prakAra hai-yadi padArthoM
kI utpatti hI unake kSaya kA hetu bane to phira kisI padArtha kI utpatti honI hI
nahIM cAhiye kyoMki unake vinAza yA kSaya kA hetu utpatti unake samIpa hI sthita
hai, yadi yoM kahA jAya ki utpatti ke anantara padArtha kA kSaya hotA hai to
vaha kSaya utpatti ke samaya meM hokara jaba usake bAda ho to vaha utpatti ke
agale hI kSaNa meM hogA, cira kAla ke bAda to hogA nahIM ? aisA kyoM hai ? isakA
kisa prakAra nirAkaraNa kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  yadi yoM kahA jAya ki kSaya kA
kAraNa vidyamAna nahIM hotA  /  ataH cirakAla-lambe samaya ke bAda kSaya nahIM
hotA, kyoMki kahA gayA hai-kSaya kA vinAza kAraNa ke binA hI hotA hai-vaha
svabhAvajanita hai  /  aisA kahA jAnA bhI yukti saMgata nahIM hai kyoMki hama
jagata meM dekhate haiM-mudgara-mogarI Adi dvArA coTa kiye jAne ke bAda hI ghaTa
Adi kA kSaya dRSTigocara hotA hai  /  yadi isa para yoM kaho ki hamane pahale hI
aisA kaha diyA hai ki mudgara Adi ghaTa kA kyA bigAr3a sakate haiM ityaadi|
kintu yaha tathya paraka nahIM hai  /  Apane uparyukta bAta avazya hI kahI hai
kintu kahane mAtra se kyA-ApakA kathana yuktiyoM para nahIM TikA hai kyoMki
abhAva pakSa meM paryudAsa aura prasajjapratiSedha dvArA naya kA artha mAnane
para mudgara-ghaTa se pRthak kapAla-ThikariyoM ke rUpa meM usake Tukar3e paidA
karatA hai  /  ghaTa pariNamanazIla haianitya hai ataH vaha kapAla ke rUpa meM
parivartita ho jAtA hai  /  isaliye mudgara Adi ghaTa kA kucha nahIM bigAr3a
sakate, yaha kaise ho sakatA hai ? prasajjapratiSedha kriyA kA pratiSedha yA
niSedha karatA hai vaha to yahAM svIkAra nahIM kiyA jA sakatA kintu prAgbhAva-
pradhvaMsAbhAva, atyaMtAbhAva aura anyonyAbhAva ke rUpa meM abhAva ke jo bheda
mAne gaye haiM unameM yahAM pradhvaMsAbhAva ko grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai  /
pradhvaMsAbhAva meM kArakoM kA vyApAra-vyavahAra yA upayoga hotA hI hai  /
vastuta: vaha kisI padArtha kA eka paryAya arthAt usakI eka vizeSa avasthA yA
sthiti hai, kevala abhAva nahIM hai  /  vaha sthiti yA avasthA bhAvAtmaka hai  /
ata: vaha pUrva avasthA kA kSaya kara utpanna hotA hai  /  ataeva kapAla Adi kA
utpanna honA hI ghaTa kA vinaSTa honA hai yA miTanA hai  /  isase yaha sAbita
hotA hai ki vinAza kAraNa janita hai  /  vaha kAraNa dvArA niSpanna hotA hai  /
vaha kAdAcitka, hai-yadAkadA hotA hai yA kabhI kabhI hotA hai-sadaiva nahIM hotA
/  isa kAraNa bhI vaha hetujanita hai-yaha sAbita hotA hai  /  padArthoM kI
yathAvata vyavasthA ke nimitta cAra prakAra ke abhAvoM ko mAnanA apekSita hai  /
kahA haiyadi prAgbhAva kA nihnava-asvIkAra kareMge-prAgbhAva ko nahIM mAneMge to
kArya rUpa dravya Adi rahita hogaa| kisI bhI kArya kI Adi yA zuruAta nahIM mAnI
jA sakegI yadi pradhvaMsAbhAva ko svIkAra nahIM kareMge to vastu kA pracyava-
anta nahIM hogA-vaha ananta ho jAyegI  /  yadi anyonyAbhAva kA vyatikrama
mAneMge-usakA astittva svIkAra -49

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra states that if one does not accept the Jain principles,
then one object will become all objects. Thus, the concept of momentariness or
Kshanabhangavada is not logical. It is illogical to think in that way,
therefore, an object or substance is impermanent because it is transient. It is
appropriate to believe so. This soul is a result of transformation. It is the
basis of knowledge. It is a transmigrator, going to other births, obtaining a
new birth due to its own karma. Therefore, it is different from the past in some
way. It exists in conjunction with the body through mutual knowledge. Therefore,
it is also inseparable from it, distinct from it. It is also inseparable. This
soul is transformed into different forms by the karmas that lead to hell, animal
life, human life, and godhood. Therefore, the soul does not deviate from its own
nature. Its own nature is never destroyed. Therefore, it is eternal and without
cause-and-effect transformation. Thus, even after it is proven that the soul is
different from the body, to believe that it is made up of four elements, that it
is just the body, is like the ramblings of a madman, which is not worth
listening to by a wise man. Those who believe in other non-Jain philosophies say
that those who live in houses, householders, those who live in the forest,
forest dwellers or ascetics, those who are renunciates, who have taken
renunciation or initiation and become monks, those who accept our principles,
are freed from all kinds of suffering. Commentary: The author of the sutra wants
to refute the views of those who believe in the five elements, the non-dual
soul, the soul being the same as the body, the six moments, the five aggregates,
and the momentary nature of the five aggregates. He wants to show that their
views are fruitless. He says: "A house is a house, those who live in it, those
who dwell in it, are householders. Those who live in the forest, ascetics, and
renunciates, such as the Buddhists, are also possible. They believe that those
who accept our teachings, our philosophy, are freed from all suffering. The
singular form in the sutra is used to refer to the aryas, because the view of
those who believe in the five elements, the soul, and the body is: "Just as
those who accept our teachings are householders, they are freed from all
suffering, such as shaving the head, wearing a staff, a loincloth, matted hair,
saffron robes, cutting off hair, fire penance, bodily hardship. And they say:
"Penances are various tortures, restraint is deception of enjoyment. Agnihotra
and other rituals are like children's play." The Samkhyas and others who believe
in liberation believe that those who accept our teachings, which are based on
non-action, non-dual soul, and the five aggregates, are renunciates, and they
are freed from all suffering, such as birth, old age, death, the cycle of birth
and death, and the intense suffering of the body and mind. They attain
liberation, which is freedom from all duality."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram nahIM kareMge to eka vastu samasta vastuoM ke rUpa meM
pariNata hogI  /  isa prakAra kSaNikavAda yA kSaNabhaMgavAda kA cintana saMgata
nahIM hai  /  usa saMbaMdha meM vicAra karanA asaMgata hai, ataeva vastu yA
padArtha parigamanazIla hai, isa apekSA se vaha anitya hai  /  aisA mAnanA ucita
hai  /  yaha AtmA pariNAmI-pariNamanazIla hai  /  jJAnAdhAra-jJAna kA AdhAra
svarUpa hai  /  yaha bhavAntaragAmI-anya bhavoM meM jAne vAlA-svakarmavaza naye
janma prApta karane vAlA hai  /  ataeva vaha kathaMcita-kisI apekSA se bhUtoM se
bhinna hai  /  vaha deha ke sAtha anyonya veda dvArA-paraspara ghula mila kara
vidyamAna rahatA hai| isaliye usase ananya-abhinna bhI hai-pRthak bhI hai  /
vaha apRthak bhI hai  /  vaha AtmA naraka gati, tiryaMcagati, manuSyagati aura
devagati jinase prApta hotI hai, una karmoM ke dvArA bhinna bhinna rUpoM meM
parivartita yA pariNata hotI hai  /  ataH AtmA apane svarUpa se pracyuta nahIM
hotI  /  usake apane svarUpa kA kabhI nAza nahIM hotA  /  isaliye vaha nitya hai
aura ahetuka-kAraNagata pariNamana se rahita hai  /  isa prakAra AtmA deha se
bhinna hai, yaha sAbita ho jAne para bhI yaha mAnanA ki vaha cAra dhAtuoM se
nirmita hai-zarIra mAtra hai, yaha to unmatta-pAgala ke pralapita-pralApa yA
asaMgata bhASaNa kI jyoM hai, jo eka buddhimAna puruSa dvArA azravya hai-sunane
yogya nahIM hai| agAramAvasaMtAvi araNNA vAvi pavvayA  /  imaM darisaNamAvaNNA,
savvadukkhA vimuccaI  // 19 //  chAyA - AgAramAvasaMto'pi AraNyA vA'pi
pravrajitAH  /  idaM darzanamApannAH sarvaduHkhAtpramucyate  /  anuvAda - ve
anya jainettara darzanoM meM vizvAsa rakhane vAle kahate haiM ki jo AgAra-ghara
meM rahate haiM, gRhastha haiM, jo vana meM rahate haiM, vAnaprastha yA tApasa
hai, jo pravrajita haiM-pravrajyA yA dIkSA lekara muni ke rUpa meM pariNata
haiM, unameM se jo bhI hamAre siddhAntoM ko svIkAra karate haiM, ve saba prakAra
ke duHkhoM se miTa jAte TIkA - sAmprataM paMcabhUtAtmA'dvaitatajjIva
taccharIrAkArakAtmaSaSThakSaNikapaMcaskandhavAdinAmaphalavAditvaM vaktukAmaH
sUtrakArasteSAM svadarzanaphalA'bhyupagamaM darzayitumAha - agAraM gRhaM tad
AvasaMtaH tasmiMstiSThanto gRhasthA ityarthaH AraNyA vA tApasAdayaH
pravrajitAzca zAkyAdayaH apiH saMbhAvane idaM te saMbhAvayanti yathA-idam
asmadIpaM darzanam ApannA AzritAH sarvaduHkhebhyo vimucyante ArSatvAdekavacanaM
sUtre katuM, tathAhi-paMcabhUtatajjIvataccharIravAdinAmayamAzayaH -
_yathedamasmadIyaM darzanaM ye samAzritAste gRhasthA: saMtaH sarvebhyaH
zirastuNDamuNDana daNDAjinajaTA
kASAyacIvaradhAraNakezolluJcananAgnyatapazcaraNakAyaklezarUpebhyo duHkhebhyo
mucyate, tathA cocuH"tapAMsi yAtanAzcitrAH saMyamo bhogavaJcanam  /
agnihotrAdikaM karma, bAlakrIDeva lakSyatai" itisAMkhyAdayastu mokSavAdina evaM
sambhAvayantiyathAye'smadIyaM darzanamakartRtvAtmA'dvaita
paMcaskandhAdipratipAdakamApannAHpravajitAste sarvebhyo
janmajarAmaraNagarbhaparamparA'neka zArIramAnasAtitIvratarAsAtodayarUpebhyo
duHkhebhyo vimucyate, sakaladvandvavinirmokSaM mokSamAskandantItyuktaM bhavati
// 19 //  50

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Self-Time Statement of Authority**  Commentary: Now, in order to demonstrate
the futility of the five-element theory, the theory of the soul's duality, the
theory of the soul and body being the same, the theory of non-action, the theory
of the soul's sixth category, and the theory of the five aggregates being
momentary, from the perspective of achieving liberation, we will first present
their respective views.  The word "agar" means "house," and those who reside
there are "agari" or householders. Those who live in the forest are
"vanaprastha" or ascetics, and those who have accepted "pravrajya-upasampada" or
initiation, the "shakya" and other "shramanas," believe that those who accept
our philosophy, our principles, are liberated from all suffering. The word "api"
is used here in the sense of possibility. Due to the use of the Vedic language,
the singular form is used in the sutra instead of the plural.  The five-element
theorists and those who believe the soul and body are the same have the view
that those who accept our philosophy, while remaining householders, avoid the
painful bodily afflictions of shaving their heads, carrying a staff and deer
skin, wearing matted hair, saffron robes, cutting their hair, and remaining
naked. They say that austerities are various forms of torture and suffering.
Accepting restraint is to be deprived of worldly pleasures, and rituals like
fire sacrifices are meaningless like children's play.  Those who believe in
liberation, those who have faith in the Samkhya philosophy, believe that those
who accept our philosophy, which advocates non-action, non-duality, and the
theory of the five aggregates being the soul, and who become renunciants,
initiated, or accept sannyasa, are freed from birth, old age, death, the cycle
of repeated births, and various intense bodily and mental afflictions. They
attain liberation, free from all conflicts and troubles.  "Te na api sandhim
jnatva, na te dharmavido janah. Ye te tu vaidino evam, na te oghaantara
akhyatah." (20)  Commentary: Now, to demonstrate the futility of their views, it
is said: "Te" - the five-element theorists, "na api" - not even, "sandhim" - the
gap, the opening, which is of two types due to the difference in the nature of
substance. There is the "dravya sandhi" - the gap in substance, like a house,
and the "bhavasandhi" - the gap in the state of being, like the covering of
knowledge, karma, and other forms of obstruction. "Tam jnatva" - not knowing
this, "te" - they, "pravrittah" - have embarked on this path. This is a figure
of speech, just as the gap between the self and action is characterized by
duality, so too, without understanding, they have embarked on this path for the
sake of liberation from suffering. As they are, so it will be demonstrated in
part and will be further demonstrated. Or, if "sandhana" - understanding,
"sandhi" - the progressive knowledge of objects, "tad jnatva" - not knowing
this, "pravrittah" - they have embarked on this path. And since they are not
experts in the proper understanding of dharma, "janah" - the people, the five-
element theorists and others. For, they advocate dharma in various ways, not
knowing the tenfold dharma of patience, etc., and because of the lack of
results, their views are futile, which will be further explained in the
subsequent chapters.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH TIkArtha- aba AgamakAra paMcabhUtAtmavAda,AtmAdvai
tavAda,tacjIvataczarIravAda,akArakavAda,AtmaSaSThavAda, kSaNika
paMcaskandhavAda-ina sabako niSphala-mokSa prApti kI dRSTi se aphalaprada
pratipAdita karane hetu-unakA jo apanA apanA mantavya hai, pahale use prakaTa
karate hue kahate haiM - agAra kA artha ghara hai, vahAM jo nivAsa karate haiM,
ve agArI yA gRhastha haiM  /  jo vana meM rahate haiM, ve vAnaprastha yA tApasa
haiM tathA jo pravrajyA-upasampadA yA dIkSA svIkAra kiye hue haiM, una zAkya Adi
zramaNoM ke yahA~ Azaya hai, ve saba aisA vizvAsa karate haiM ki jo puruSa
hamAre darzana ko-hamAre siddhAntoM ko svIkAra kara lete haiM, ve samagra
duHkhoM se vimukta ho jAte haiM  /  'api' zabda yahAM saMbhAvanA ke artha meM
prayukta huA hai| ArSa prayoga hone se bahuvacana ke sthAna para sUtra meM
ekavacana AyA hai| paMcabhUtavAdI tathA tajjIvataccharIravAdI . janoM kA aisA
Azaya-abhiprAya yA mantavya hai ki jo loga hamAre darzana ko aMgIkAra karate
haiM ve gRhastha meM rahate hue sanyAsI ke rUpa meM mastaka muMDAnA daNDa aura
mRgachAlA dhAraNa karanA, jaTAjUTa rakhanA, gerueM vastra dhAraNa karanA, keza
luMcana karanA, nagna-nirvastra rahanA, tapazcaraNa karanA ityAdi du:khamaya-
daihika klezoM se baca jAte haiM  /  unakA kahanA hai ki tapasyAeM to taraha-
taraha kI yAtanAeM-kaSTa haiM  /  saMyama svIkAra karanA sAMsArika bhogoM se
vaMcita rahanA hai tathA Agnihotra Adi kRtya bAlakoM kI krIr3A ke samAna
nirarthaka hai  /  mokSavAdI-mokSa ko svIkAra karane vAle, sAMkhya darzana meM
AsthA rakhane vAle jana isa prakAra saMbhAvita mAnate haiM ki akartRtvavAda-
advaitavAda, paMcaskandhAtmavAda Adi kA pratipAdana karane vAle hamAre darzana
yA siddhAntoM ko svIkAra kara jo loga pravrajrita hote haiM-dIkSita hote haiM yA
saMnyAsa svIkAra karate haiM ve janma, vRddhAvasthA, mRtyu, bAra bAra garbha meM
jAne kI paramparA-saMsAra meM AvAgamana aura aneka prakAra ke atyanta tIvra
daihika aura mAnasika kaSToM se chUTa jAte haiM  /  saba prakAra ke dvandvoM se-
saMkaToM se rahita hokara ve mokSa prApta kara lete haiN| te NAvi saMdhiM NaccA
NaM, na te dhammavio jaNA  /  je te u vAiNo evaM, na te ohaMtarA''hiyA  // 20 //
chAyA - te nA'pi sandhiM jJAtvA, na te dharmavido janAH  /  ye te tu vAdina evaM
na te oghantarA AkhyAtAH  //  anuvAda - jinakI pahale carcA AI hai, ve anya
darzanoM meM vizvAsa karane vAle saMdhi ko nahIM jAnate, ve dharma kA tatva
nahIM jAnate  /  ve isa saMsAra sAgara ko pAra nahIM kara sakate-aisA kahA gayA
hai  /  TIkA - idAnIM teSAmevAphalavAditvAviSkaraNAyAha - te-paMcabhUtavAdyAyAH
nA'pi naiva sandhiM chidraM vivaraM, sa ca dravyabhAvabhedAd dvedhA, tatra
dravyasandhiH kuDyAdeH, bhAvasandhizca jJAnAvaraNAdirUpakarmavivara ruupH|
tamajJAtvA te pravRttAHNamiti vAkyAlaMkAre, yathA''tmakarmaNoH sandhi
dvidhAbhAvalakSaNoM bhavati tathA abuddhvaiva te
varAkAduHkhamokSArthamabhyudyatA ityarthaH  /  yathA ta evaMbhUtAstathA
pratipAditaMlezataH pratipAdayiSyate ca  /  yadivA sandhAnaM sandhiM-uttarottara
padArtha-parijJAnaM, tadajJAtvA pravRttA iti  /  yatazcaivamataste na samyag
dharmaparicchede kartavye vidvAMso-nipuNAH 'janA:' paMcabhUtAstitvAdivAdino lokA
iti  /  tathAhi-kSAntyAdiko dazavidho dharmastamajJAtvaivA'nyathA'nyathA ca
dharmaM pratipAdayanti, yatphalAbhAvAcca teSAmaphalavAditvaM
taduttaragraMthenoddezaka - 51

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra **At the end of the summary, it is shown - 'Ye te
tviti' is a word and its meaning, which is used after 'ya'. Those who are like
this, as mentioned earlier, are non-believers, etc., and they are not able to
cross the ocean of existence, which is the ocean of suffering. This is the
meaning of the verse. ||20||**  **Commentary:** Those who believe in the
previously mentioned principles do not believe in the fruit. They are non-fruit
believers. To express this, the Agamkar says -  Those who believe in the five
great elements, etc., do not know the meaning of the word 'Shandhi'. The meaning
of 'Shandhi' is a hole, a gap, or a cavity. This hole, gap, or cavity is of two
types, depending on the substance and the feeling - the 'Shandhi' that is found
in a wall or a house is called 'Dravya Shandi'. And the 'Shandhi' or the
connection that is found in the form of karma like 'Jnana Avaraniya', etc., is
called 'Bhav Shandi'. Those who believe in the previously mentioned principles
do not know this 'Bhav Shandi' and are engaged in action. They do not understand
the nature of karma bondage and perform actions. Here, the word 'Nam' is used in
the sentence structure for the sake of sentence arrangement. Its meaning is that
without knowing how the soul can be free from karma, how it can be separated
from the connection of karma, they strive to get rid of suffering. They are of
the category of those who believe in other philosophies. This has been briefly
stated earlier. It will be further explained as the occasion arises.  **This
part of the verse also has this meaning - the meaning of 'Shandhi' is to gain
knowledge of more and more substances, one after the other. Those other
philosophers do not do this, i.e., they do not strive to gain more and more
knowledge of substances, and yet they are engaged in action. Again, the
commentator clarifies that those who believe in other philosophies like the five
elements, etc., are not able to understand the true nature of religion, because
they do not know 'Shandhi'. They do not understand the process of karma
connecting with the soul. Patience, forgiveness, etc., are the ten
characteristics of religion. Religion is of this nature. Those other
philosophers do not understand the essence of religion. Therefore, they describe
other things in place of religion - things that are not religion. They explain
them, but the religion explained by them, the things said in the name of
religion, do not have any fruit. Therefore, they are called non-fruit believers.
Taking the ultimate intention of the speaker, the Agamkar describes it with the
word 'Ye te tviti'. Here, the word 'Tum' is used in the sense of 'Cha'.
Therefore, it should be used after the word 'Ye'. Thus, the meaning of this
verse is that those who believe in the doctrines that have been discussed
earlier, those who state them, non-believers, etc., cannot cross the ocean of
existence, i.e., they cannot be freed from the cycle of birth and death due to
doubt.**  **Te na avi sandi nam cha nam, na te dhamma vio jana. Jete u vaino
evam na te sansara paraga. ||21||**  **Shadow:** **Te na api sandi jnatva, na te
dharmavido jana. Ye te tu vadin evam na te sansara paraga. ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram parisamAptayvasAnena darzayati-'ye te tviti ' tu
zabdazcazabdArthe, ya ityasyAnantaraM prayujyate  /  ye ca te
evamanantaroktaprakAravAdino nAstikAdayaH, 'odho' bhavaudhaH
saMsArastattaraNazIlAste na bhavantIti zlokArthaH  // 20 //  TIkArtha pUrva
varNita siddhAntoM meM vizvAsa karane vAle, phala ko nahIM mAnate  /  ve
aphalavAdI haiM, yaha vyakta karane ke liye AgamakAra kahate haiM - paMca
mahAbhUta Adi meM vizvAsa karane vAle una siddhAntoM ko pratipAdita karane vAle
vAdI saMdhi ko nahIM jAnate  /  saMdhi kA artha vivara chidra yA cheda hai  /
vaha vivara- chidra dravya aura bhAva kI apekSA se do prakAra kA hotA hai -
kuDya-bhitti yA dIvAra Adi meM jo saMdhi hotI hai use dravya saMdhi kahA jAtA
hai| tathA jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karmoM ke rUpa meM jo saMdhi-chidra yA usakA jor3a
hotA hai use bhAva saMdhi kahA jAtA hai  /  ve pUrva varNita anya siddhAntavAdI
usa bhAva saMdhi ko na jAnate hue kriyA meM saMlagna hai  /  ve karma baMdha ke
svarUpa ko nahIM samajhate hue kriyAeM karate haiM  /  yahA~ " NaM" zabda
vAkyAlaMkAra meM vAkya sajjA hetu prayukta huA hai  /  isakA tAtparya hai ki
AtmA karmarahita kaise ho sakatA, karmoM kI saMdhi se kaise pRthak ho sakatA
hai, yaha jAne binA hI duHkhoM se chUTane ke liye udyata hote haiM- prayatnazIla
hote haiN| ve anya darzanoM meM vizvAsa karane vAle isa koTi ke haiM  /  yaha
saMkSipta rUpa meM pahale pratipAdita kara diyA gayA hai| Age bhI usakA yathA
prasaMga pratipAdana kiyA jAyegA  /  1 isa gAthA ke isa aMza kA yoM bhI artha
hotA hai-saMdhi kA artha uttarottara- Age se Age adhika se adhika padArthoM kA
parijJAna prApta karanA hai| ve anya dArzanika vaise kiye binA hI arthAt
padArthoM kA adhikAdhika jJAna arjita kiye binA hI karma karane meM udyata hote
haiM  /  punaH isI bAta ko TIkAkAra spaSTa karate haiM kipaMcabhUtavAdI Adi
itara darzanoM meM vizvAsazIla jana dharma ko bhalI bhAMti jAnane meM, usakI
vAstavikatA ko samajhane meM samartha nahIM hote kyoMki ye saMdhi ko nahIM
jAnate unako AtmA ke sAtha karmoM ke jur3ane kI prakriyA kA bodha nahIM hotA  /
kSAnti, kSamAzIlatA Adi dharma ke dasa lakSaNa haiM-dharma isa prakAra kA hai,
ve itara dArzanika dharma ke tattva ko jAna nahIM pAte ataH ve dharma ke sthAna
para anyathA - jo dharma nahIM hai aise tattvoM kA nirUpaNa karate haiM-
vyAkhyAna karate haiM, kintu una dvArA vyAkhyAta kiye gaye dharma kA dharma ke
nAma para batalAI gaI bAtoM kA koI phala nahIM hotA, ataeva ve aphalavAdI kahe
gaye haiM  /  uddezaka ke aMtima Azaya ko lete hue AgamakAra 'ye te tviti' zabda
dvArA usakA nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  yahA~ para 'tuM' zabda 'ca' ke artha meM
prayukta huA hai  /  isaliye 'ye' zabda ke anantara use lagAnA cAhiye  /  isa
prakAra isa gAthA kA tAtparya yaha hai ki jina matoM kA pahale vivecana huA hai,
unheM mAnane vAle- unakA kathana karane vAle nAstika Adi isa saMsAra rUpI
samudra ko lAMgha nahIM sakate arthAt saMzaya se janma maraNa ke AvAgamana cakra
se vimukta nahIM ho sakate  /  te NAvi saMdhiM NaccA NaM, na te dhammavio jaNA
/  jete u vAiNo evaM na te saMsArapAragA  // 21 //  chAyA te nA'pi sandhiM
jJAtvA, na te dharmavido janAH  /  ye te tu vAdina evaM na te saMsAra pAragAH
//  52

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  They do not know the
Sandhi (union or connection) in other philosophies, and they are not people who
know the Dharma. Those who are such debaters, they are not able to cross over
the Garbha (cycle of birth and death).  They do not know the Sandhi, and they
are not people who know the Dharma. Those who are such debaters, they are not
able to cross over the Janma (birth).  They do not know the Sandhi, and they are
not people who know the Dharma. Those who are such debaters, they are not able
to cross over the Duhkha (suffering).  They do not know the Sandhi, and they are
not people who know the Dharma. Those who are such debaters, they are not able
to cross over the Mara (death).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH, anuvAda - ve anya darzanoM meM AsthAvAna jana
saMdhi ko nahIM jAnate  /  karma karane meM udyata hote haiM, unheM dharma ke
tattvoM kA bodha nahIM hotA  /  isa kAraNa ve saMsAra sAgara ko pAra nahIM kara
sakate  /  te NAvi saMdhiM NaccA NaM na te dhammavio jaNA  /  je te u, vAiNo
evaM na te gabbhassa pAragA  // 22 //  chAyA - te nA'pi saMdhiM jJAtvA, nate
dharmavidojanAH  /  ye te tu vAdina evaM na te garbhasya pAragA  //  anuvAda -
ve itara siddhAnta vAdI AtmA aura karma kI saMdhi yA karmabandha kI prakriyA ko
nahIM smjhte| ve dharma kA rahasya nahIM jAnate  /  ve mithyAvAdI hai-mithyAvAda
meM vizvAsa karate haiM  /  ve garbha ko-punaH punaH saMsAra meM janma maraNa yA
AvAgamana kI paramparA ko lAMgha nahIM sakate  /  te NAvi saMdhiM NaccA NaM, na
te dhammavio jaNA  /  je te u vAiNo evaM, na te jammassa pAragA  // 23 //  chAyA
- te nApi saMdhiM jJAtvA, na te dharmavidojanAH  /  ye te tu vAdina evaM na te
janmanaH pAragAH  //  anuvAda - ve anya siddhAntavAdI karma saMdhAna ko nahIM
samajhate, dharma ke svarUpa kA unheM bodha nahIM hotA ve asatya siddhAnta kA
nirUpaNa karate haiM ve janma ko lAMgha nahIM pAte  /  unheM punaH punaH janma
lenA par3atA te NAvi saMdhiM NaccA NaM na te dhammavio jaNA  /  je te u vAiNo
evaM na te dukkhassa pAragA  // 24 //  chAyA - te nA'pi sandhiM jJAtvA, na te
dharmavido janAH  /  ye te tu vAdina evaM na te duHkhasya pAragAH  //  anuvAda -
ve pUrvokta itaravAdI saMdhi ko nahIM jAnate  /  dharma tattva kA unheM avabodha
nahIM hotaa| ve pUrvokta rUpa meM mithyA tattvoM kA pratipAdana karate haiM  /
ve duHkha ko lAMgha nahIM sakate  /  unheM bAra bAra duHkha meM par3anA hotA
hai| te NAvi saMdhiM NaccA NaM na te dhammavio jnnaa|  /  je te u vAiNo evaM na
te mArassa pAragA  // 25 //  -53D

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Śrī Sūtrakrtaṅga Sūtra, Chāyā and Anuvāda:  **Chāyā:**  They do not know the
nature of the agreement, nor are they free from the bondage of karma. Those who
argue like this are not truly liberated from death.  **Anuvāda:**  Those who
believe in non-Jain doctrines do not understand the nature of the agreement.
They are not aware of the process of karma-bandha. They do not know the nature
of Dharma. They engage in actions arbitrarily. They do whatever they please in
the name of Dharma. They cannot transcend death because those who are born must
inevitably die.  **Tīkā:**  And thus, those who argue like this are not
liberated from the birth, suffering, and death of the womb of the world.
**Tīkā-artha:**  The commentator, summarizing verses 21 to 25, states that those
previously discussed are proponents of false doctrines, propagating falsehood.
Therefore, they wander in this ocean of the world, are born in the womb, take
birth, experience various kinds of suffering, and finally die. This cycle
continues.  **Chāyā:**  They experience various kinds of suffering again and
again. They wander in the cycle of the world, filled with death, disease, and
old age.  **Anuvāda:**  Those who hold false views experience various kinds of
suffering again and again. They wander in this world, filled with death,
disease, and old age, trapped in the cycle of existence.  **Tīkā:**  To show
what they experience, the Āgama-kāra says, "They experience various kinds of
suffering, which are characterized by the arising of the non-self."  For
example, in hell, they are torn apart by saws, cooked in cauldrons, wrapped in
hot iron, and embraced by thorny Śālmalī trees. In the animal realm, they are
born and experience cold, heat, suppression, pain, branding, being burned with
hot iron, beating, being burdened with excessive weight, and the suffering of
hunger and thirst. In the human realm, they experience the separation from loved
ones, the association with the undesirable, sorrow, and crying. In the realm of
the gods, they experience accusations, slander, poison, and falling from their
position, among many other kinds of suffering. Those who argue like this
experience these sufferings repeatedly. This half-verse applies to all the
subsequent verses. The rest is easy to understand, as the purpose is fulfilled.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA - te nA'pi sandhiM jJAtvA, na te dharmavidojanA
/  ye te tu vAdina evaM na te mArasya pAragAH  //  anuvAda - jainettara
siddhAntoM meM AsthAvAna puruSa saMdhi kA svarUpa nahIM samajhate  /
karmabandha kI prakriyA kA unheM jJAna nahIM hotA  /  ve dharma kA svarUpa nahIM
jAnate  /  manamAne rUpa meM kriyAoM meM pravRtta hote haiM  /  jaisA jaMcatA
hai, dharma ke nAma para manacAhI kriyAeM karate haiM  /  ve mRtyu ke pAra nahIM
jA sakate kyoMki jo janma lete haiM unheM anivAryataH maranA hotA hai| TIkA -
tathA ca na te vAdinaH saMsAragarbhajanmaduHkhamArAdipAragA
bhvntiiti||21/22/23/24/25|| TIkArtha - 21 se 25 taka kI gAthAoM kA TIkAkAra ne
sAra batAte hue likhA hai ki jinakI pahale carcA AI hai ve mithyA siddhAntavAdI-
asatya kI prarUpaNA karate haiM  /  isaliye ve isa saMsAra sAgara meM bhaTakate
haiM, garbha meM Ate haiM, janma lete haiM  /  taraha-taraha ke kaSTa pAte haiM
aura anta meM mara jAte haiM  /  yaha krama calatA hI rahatA hai| nANAvihAiM
dukkhAiM aNuhoti puNo puNo  /  saMsAracakkavAlaMmi, maccuvAhijarAkule ||26||tti
bemi|| chAyA - nAnAvidhAni duHkhAnyanubhavanti punaH punaH  /  _
saMsAracakravAle mRtyuvyAdhijarAkule |iti brviimi|| . anuvAda - ve mithyA
darzanavAdI vibhinna prakAra ke duHkhoM ko bAra bAra anubhava karate haiM  /
mRtyu vyAdhi, roga aura jarA-vRddhatva se paripUrNa isa saMsAra meM cakkara
kATate rahate haiM, bhaTakate rahate haiM  /  TIkA - yatpunaste prApnuvaMti
taddarzayitumAha - "nAnAvidhAni" bahuprakArANi 'duHkhAni
asAtodayalakSaNAnyanubhavanti punaH punaH  /  tathAhi-narakeSu karapatradAraNa
kumbhIpAkataptAyaH zAlmalIsamAliMga nAdIni tiryakSuca zItoSNadamanAGka na
tADanA'tibhArA ropaNakSuttRDAdIni  /  manuSyeSu, iSTa viyogAniSTasaMprayogazokA
krNdnaadiini| deveSu cAbhiyogyeyA'kilviSikatvacyavanAdInyanekaprakArANi duHkhAni
ye evaMbhUtA vAdinaste pauna:punyena smnubhvnti| etacca zlokArdhaM sarveSUttara
zlokArtheSvevayojyam, zeSaM sugamaM yAvaduddezaka samAptiriti  // 26 //
_TIkArtha - pUrva varNita mithyA siddhAntavAdI jo duHkha anubhava karate haiM
usakA digdarzana karAte hue AgamakAra kahate haiM - ve asAtodaya-
pratikUlavedanIya ke rUpa meM aneka prakAra ke duHkhoM kA anubhava karate haiM
/  ve narakoM meM Are dvArA vidIrNa kiye jAte haiM  /  kumbhIpAka meM pakAye
jAte haiM  /  garma lohe meM lapeTa diye jAte haiM-saTA diye jAte haiM tathA
unako ghora kaMTakapUrNa zAlmali vRkSa se lipaTAyA jAtA hai  /  tiryaMca yoni
meM unheM janma lenA par3atA haiN| vahAM sardI, garmI, damana, pIr3A, aMkana,
garma lohoM se dAgA jAnA, tADanA-mArapITa tathA atibhArAropaNa-atyadhika bhAra
lAdA jAnA ityAdi kaSTa tathA bhUkha pyAsa ke kaSTa sahana karane par3ate haiM  /
manuSya yoni meM iSTaviyoga-priyajanoM se, priya vastuoM se viyoga-viraha,
aniSTa saMprayoga-avAMchita anabhipsita janoM se, padArthoM se saMyoga, zoka (
541

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Statement of the Right Time  **Painful Events** - As a result of various
sorrows, one has to experience pain in the form of grief, weeping, lamentations,
etc. In the realm of gods, due to the high and low positions of gods, those in
lower positions experience sorrow, envy, inferior games and entertainment, and
after the decline of merit, they suffer various kinds of pain. The implication
is that those who hold false doctrines repeatedly experience these sorrows. The
latter part of this verse should be combined with the latter part of all the
verses. The rest is easy to understand until the end.  **High and Low**  **Naya
Putra** Those who go to high and low places will enter the womb endlessly. The
great hero, the best Jina, Mahavira, says so. - They go, they will be born in
the womb endlessly. Mahavira, the best Jina, says so. ||27||  **Translation** -
The great hero, the descendant of the knowers, Mahavira, declared that those who
hold false views wander in the best and worst realms and repeatedly enter the
womb, are born, and die.  **Commentary** - The word "Ucchavacani" refers to the
various types of dwelling places, both low and high, that they go to. They
wander from womb to womb, entering endlessly and without interruption.
Sudharmaswami says to Jambuswami, "I say this according to the command of the
Tirthankara, not according to my own intellect. I say what I have heard from the
Tirthankara. This refutes the theory of momentariness."  **End of the First
Chapter of the Samakhya**  The commentary concludes the previous context by
saying that those who have been discussed go to different dwelling places, both
low and high, in different realms. They wander from one womb to another. This
cycle continues endlessly and uninterrupted. Sudharmaswami says to Jambuswami,
"Jambuswami, I speak only what is commanded by the Tirthankara. I do not speak
from my own intellect. I speak only what I have heard from the Tirthankara, the
Lord Mahavira, who established the path of Dharma. This refutes the theory of
momentariness because if the one who heard was momentary, then the listener
would have perished at that very moment. How can I, who am speaking today, be
the listener? But the reality is that I, the listener and speaker, exist today
in the same form. I am speaking what I heard. This proves the theory of
momentariness to be false."  Thus, the first chapter of the Samakhya, called
"Time," ends.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH duHkha pUrNa ghaTanAeM - Akrandana- vividha
duHkhoM ke pariNAma svarUpa rUdana - vilApa Adi ke rUpa meM pIr3AeM prApta
karanI hotI haiM  /  deva yoni meM Abhiyogya-U~ce, nIce, devapadoM ke kAraNa
nIce pada vAloM ko vyathA, IrSyA, anuttama krIDAeMvinoda aura puNya kSaya ke
bAda patana-ye aneka prakAra ke duHkha vahAM bhogane hote haiM  /  kahane kA
abhiprAya yaha hai ki ve mithyA siddhAntavAdI bAra-bAra ina duHkhoM kA anubhava
karate haiM  /  isa gAthA ke uttarArddha ko sabhI gAthAoM ke uttarArddha ke
sAtha yojita karanA cAhiye  /  bAkI kA saba samApti paryanta sugama - subodhya
hai  /  uccAvayANi nAyaputte chAyA uccAvacAni gacchaMto garbhameSyantyanantazaH
/  jJAtaputro mahAvIra evamAha jinottamaH  //  - gacchaMtA, gabbhayessaMti
NaMtaso  /  mahAvIre, evamAha jiNottame  // 27 //  anuvAda - jJAtaputra -
jJAtavaMzIya bhagavAna mahAvIra ne aisA pratipAdita kiyA ki pUrva varNita
mithyAdarzanavAdI uttama, adhama gatiyoM meM bhaTakate haiM tathA punaH punaH
garbha meM Ate haiM, janma lete haiM aura marate haiM  /  TIkA' - navaram
"uccAvacAnI" ti adhamottamAni nAnAprakArANi vAsasthAnAni gacchantIti, gacchanto
bhramanto garbhAd garbhameSyaMti yAsyantyanantazo nirvicchedamiti bravImIti
sudharmasvAmI jambU svAminaM pratyAha- bravImyahaM tIrthaMkarAjJayA, na
svamanISikayA, sa cAhaM bravImi yena mayA tIrthaMkarasakAzAcchutam etena ca
kSaNikavAdinirAso draSTavya ||27|| iti samAkhyaprathamAdhyayane prathamoddezakaH
samAptaH  //  TIkArtha pUrva prasaMga kA upasaMhAra karate hue Arya sudharmA
svAmI zrI jambUsvAmI se kahate haiM ki jinakI carcA kI gaI hai ve anya
saiddhAntika adhama-nIcI, uttama UMcI, bhinna bhinna vAsa sthAnoM meM- yoniyoM
meM jAte haiM-bhaTakate haiM  /  eka garbha meM Akara dUsare garbha meM jAte
haiM  /  ananta kAla taka anavacchinna rUpa meM yaha krama calatA rahatA hai  /
Arya sudharmA svAmI jambU se kahate haiM ki jambU ! maiM vaisA hI bolatA hU~ jo
tIrthaMkara dvArA AjJapta hai unakI AjJA meM hai  /  maiM apanI manISA se buddhi
se kucha nahIM khtaa| maiM vaisA hI kahatA hU~ jaisA maiMne tIrthaMkara-dharma
tIrtha kI sthApanA karane vAle prabhu mahAvIra se sunA hai  /  isase kSaNikavAda
kA siddhAnta svayaM nirasta athavA khaMDita ho jAtA hai kyoMki jisane sunA, yadi
kSaNikavAda ho to sunane vAlA usI kSaNa naSTa ho gayA  /  Aja maiM jo bola rahA
hU~, vaha sunane vAlA kaise ho sakatA hU~, kintu vastusthiti yaha hai ki sunane
vAlA aura kahane vAlA maiM Aja usI rUpa meM vidyamAna huuN| jo sunA, vaha kaha
rahA hU~  /  isase kSaNikavAda kA siddhAnta mithyA siddha hotA hai 1 isa prakAra
samaya nAmaka prathama adhyayana kA prathama uddezaka samApta huA  /  - Bian  55

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Sutra Kritanga Sutra, Second Uddesaka**  It is said by some that the jivas
are all separate and distinct. They experience happiness and suffering
separately, and they also die and are reborn separately.  **Commentary:**  The
second Uddesaka of the first chapter begins here. The first Uddesaka has been
discussed, and now the second is being explained. The connection between them is
this: In the following Uddesaka, the views of the Bhutas, etc., are presented
and refuted. Here, the remaining views of the Niyativadis, etc., are presented
and refuted.  Alternatively, in the previous Uddesaka, it was said that "one
should understand bondage and break it." This bondage does not exist according
to the Niyativadis. Thus, this Uddesaka is connected to the previous one. The
four types of Anuyoga should be applied to this Sutra, and the Sutra should be
recited with the qualities of accuracy, etc.  The connection with the following
Sutra should be explained. The connection is this: In the following Sutra, it is
said that those who are deluded by the views of the five elements, etc., are
ignorant of the true Self and are trapped in the cycle of samsara. They wander
through the world, experiencing pain, death, and old age, and they search for
liberation. Here, the same cycle of samsara is explained, but it is said that it
is due to the four types of karma, ignorance, and knowledge.  The connection
with the previous Sutra is also important. In the previous Sutra, it was said
that "one should understand." Here, it is said that the Niyativadis understand.
Thus, the connection with the previous Sutras should be established as much as
possible.  Now, the meaning of this Sutra, which is connected to the previous
and following Sutras, is explained. The word "punar" (again) indicates a
difference from the previous view. It is said by some Niyativadis that...  The
word "akhyatam" (said) is in the passive voice, and the suffix "veni" indicates
that the action is done by someone else. The sixth case ending indicates the
agent of the action. Thus, the meaning is:  It is said by those Niyativadis.
Their view is...  The word "upapannah" (established) means "established by
reason."  This refutes the view of the five elements, the jivas, and the body.
The reasoning will be presented briefly here and will be explained in detail
later.  The word "prithak prithak" (separately) indicates that the jivas are not
one. This refutes the view of the Advaita Vedanta, which says that the Self is
one.  Who are these "prithak upapannah" (separately established)? The answer is:
"jivah" (jivas), "praninah" (living beings), "sukha duhkha bhoginah" (those who
experience happiness and suffering). This refutes the view of the Buddhists, who
say that the jivas are not real.  These jivas are located in different bodies
and experience happiness and suffering separately. We do not deny that each
individual experiences suffering. This refutes the view of the Akartrivadis, who
say that there is no doer. The Akartrivadis say that the Self is not a doer, and
therefore it cannot experience happiness and suffering.  The word "aduve" (die)
means that these living beings experience happiness and suffering, and then they
die. They leave their bodies and are reborn in other bodies.  Thus, the meaning
of the verse is that we refute the view of the Niyativadis, who say that the
jivas are separate and distinct.  **Verse 1:**  It is said by some that the
jivas are all separate and distinct. They experience happiness and suffering
separately, and they also die and are reborn separately.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram dvitIya uddezakaH AghAyaM puNaegesiM, UvavaNNA puDho
jiyA  /  vedayaMtisuhaM dukkhaM, aduvA luppaMti ThANau  // 1 //  chAyA -
AkhyAtaM punarekeSA mupapannAH pRthagjIvAH  /  vedayanti sukhaM duHkha mathavA
lupyante sthAnataH  //  anuvAda - kinhIM kinhIM matavAdiyoM kI aisI mAnyatA hai
ki jIva saba pRthak pRthak-alaga alaga hai  /  ve alaga-alaga hI sukha bhogate
haiM tathA alaga-alaga hI duHkha bhogate haiM aura alaga-alaga hI eka deha kA
tyAga kara dUsarI deha meM cale jAte-punarjanma prApta karate haiM  /  TIkA -
atha prathamAdhyayane dvitIya uddezakaH prArambhate-uktaH prathamoddezakastadanu
dvitIyo'bhidhIyatesya cAyamabhisambandha:-ihAnantaroddezake
svasamayaparasamayaprarUpaNAkatA. ihApyadhyayanArthAdhikAratvAta saivAbhidhIyate
yadivA'nantaroddezake bhUtavAdAdimataM pradarzya tannirAkaraNaM kRtaM, tadihApi
tadavaziSTaniyativAdyAdimithyAdRSTimatAnyupadarya nirAkriyante  /  athavA
prAguddezake'bhyadhAyi yathA 'bandhanaM budhyeta tacca troTayediti' tadeva ca
bandhanaM niyativAdyabhiprAyeNa na vidyata iti pradarzyate - tadevamane
kasambandhenAyAtasyAsyoddezakasya catvAryyanuyogadvArANi vyAvaya
sUtrAnugame'skhalitAdiguNopetaM sUtramuccAraNIyaM, taccedam -
asyacAnantaraparamparasUtre sambandho vaktavyaH tatrAnantarasUtra sambandho'yam-
ihAnantarasUtrai idamabhihitaM, yathA paMcabhUtaskandhAdivAdino
mithyAtvopahatAntarAtmAno'sadagrahAbhinitiSTAH paramArthAvabodhavikalA:?
santa:saMsAracakravAle vyAdhimRtyujarAkule uccAvacAni sthAnAni gacchanto
narbhameSyantyanveSayantivA'nantaza iti, tadihA
niyatyajJAnijJAnacaturvidhakarmApacavAdinAM tadeva saMsAra cakra
bAlabhramaNagarbhAnveSaNaM pratipAdyate  /  paramparasUtraM tu 'bujjheje' tyAdi
tena ca sahAyaM saMbaMdhaH-tatra budhyetetyetat pratipAditam, ihApi yadAkhyAtaM
niyativAdibhistabudhyeta, ityevaM madhyasUtrairapi yathA saMbhavaM sambandho
laganIya iti  /  tadevaM pUrvottarasambandhasambaddhasyAsya sUtrasyAdhunA'rthaH
pratanyatepunaH zabdaH pUrvavAdibhyo vizeSa darzayati  /  niyatavAdinAM
punarekeSAmetadAkhyAtaM, atra ca 'avivakSitakarmakAapi
akarmakAbhavantItikhyAterdhAto veniSThA pratyayaH, tadyoge kartari SaSThI
tatazcAyamarthaH - tairniyativAdibhiH punaridayAkhyAtaM, teSAmayamAzaya
ityarthaH  /  tadyathA-'upapannAH' yuktyA ghaTamAnakA iti|| anenaca
paMcabhUtatajjIvataccharIravAdimatamapAkRtaM bhavati, yuktistu lezataH
prAgdarzitaiva pradarzayiSyate ca  /  pRthak pRthak nArakAdibhaveSu zarIreSu
veti, anenA'pyAtmA'dvaitavAdinirAso'vaseyaH  /  ke punaste pRthagupapannA:?
tadAha-jIvAH prANinaH sukha du:khabhoginaH, anena ca
paMcaskandhAriktijIvAbhAvapratipAdakabauddhamatApakSepaH kRto dRSTavyaH  /
tathA te jIvAH pRthak pRthak pratyekadehe vyavasthitAH sukhaM duHkhaJca
vedayanti anubhvnti| na vayaM pratiprANi pratItaM duHkhAnubhavaM nihnamahe,
anenacAkartRvAdino nirastA bhavanti  /  akartaryavikAriNyAtmani sukha duH
khAnubhavAnupapatteritibhAvaH tathaivadasyAbhi palapyate 'aduve' ti athavA te
prANinaH sukha duHkhaM cAnubhavanti vilupyante ucchidyante svAyuSaH
pracyAvyantesthAnAtsthAnAntaraM saMkrAmyanta ityarthaH  /
tatazcaupapAtikatvamapyasmAbhisteSAM ca niSidhyata iti zlokArthaH  // 1 //  -560

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement Authority  **Commentary**  This section continues from
the first objective, which has already been discussed. It is connected to the
first objective. The first objective outlined the principles of Self-Time (Jain
philosophy) and Other-Time (theories of other schools of thought). This second
objective further elaborates on the first objective, or rather, the discussion
of Self-Time and Other-Time is connected to this second objective.
Alternatively, the first objective presented the views of other theorists like
the Panch-Bhootvadis and refuted them. Now, this study will present the views of
the remaining theorists like the Niyativadis and other non-right-view theorists
and refute them. Alternatively, the first objective stated that humans should
understand the nature of bondage and then break it, destroy it. However,
according to the views of other theorists like the Niyativadis, bondage does not
exist. This objective will shed light on this. Thus, after describing the four
Anuyog Dwars of this objective, which are connected through various
relationships, it is stated that in the Sutra-Angam, it is expected to pronounce
the sutra with qualities like flawless pronunciation, etc.  The present sutra is
directly connected to another sutra without any interruption, and it is also
connected to other sutras, which are interrupted by other sutras. The next sutra
states that the intellect of those who believe in the five great elements, those
who describe them, and those who believe in the five skandhas, has been
destroyed by falsehood. This is the reason why they are attached to false
substances. They are devoid of true knowledge of the essence of reality. They
are afflicted by disease, death, and old age, and they wander in the cycle of
existence, going to higher and lower births, endlessly moving from one womb to
another, being born and dying. The same applies here. The Niyativadis and the
Agnanavadis, who do not consider the four types of karma as binding, also wander
in the cycle of existence like other philosophers. They move from one womb to
another. 'Bujjhijjā' etc. is the traditional sutra here. Its connection with
this sutra is as follows: 'Bujjhijjā' etc. states that the soul should attain
knowledge. This also connects here. The Niyativadis also state that one should
attain knowledge. Similarly, its connection with the sutras in between should be
made wherever possible. Thus, the meaning of this sutra, which is connected to
the previous and subsequent sutras, is explained here in detail. The word
'punah' (again) used here highlights the characteristic of the Niyativadis in
comparison to the previous theorists.  According to grammar, verbs whose action
is not desired, whose action is not considered worthy of being spoken, become
intransitive. Therefore, the word 'ākhyāt' used here has the suffix 'niṣṭhā' in
the sense of 'bhāva' (state). When this happens, the sixth case (ṣaṣṭhī
vibhakti) is used in the word 'agetim' for the agent (kartṛ). Thus, its meaning
is that these Niyativadi theorists have said this, i.e., this is their
intention.  Through reasoning and logic, the existence of souls is established.
This statement refutes the views of the Panch-Bhootvadis and the Taj-Jiva-Tatch-
Sharirvadis. The reasoning by which the aforementioned theories are refuted has
been presented earlier. Later, its...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH TIkArtha prathama uddezaka meM jo kahA jA cukA hai
usase Age kA dUsare uddezaka meM batAyA jA rahA  /  yaha prathama uddezaka ke
sAtha saMbaddha hai - jur3A huA hai| prathama uddezaka meM svasamaya - apane
siddhAnta - jaina darzana ke siddhAnta tathA para samaya- anya matavAdiyoM ke
siddhAnta kI prarupaNA kI gaI hai  /  vahIM dUsare uddezaka meM bhI Age kI jAtI
hai athavA prathama uddezaka kA arthAdhikAra- svasamaya aura parasamaya kA
vivecana isa dUsare uddezaka se sambaddha hai  /  athavA prathama uddezaka meM
paMcabhUtavAdI Adi anya saiddhAntikoM ke mata upasthita kara unakA nirAkaraNa yA
khaNDana kiyA gayA hai| aba isa adhyayana meM unase avaziSTa - bace hue
niyativAdI Adi asamyagdRSTi matavAdiyoM ke mata upasthita kara unakA nirAkaraNa
kiyA jAegA athavA pahale uddezaka meM jo pratipAdita kiyA gayA hai ki mAnava ko
cAhiye ki vaha baMdhana kA svarUpa jAne aura phira use tor3e miTAye naSTa kare,
kintu niyativAdI prabhRti anya saiddhAntikoM ke matAnusAra bandhana hotA hI
nahIM hai  /  isa uddezaka meM isakA digdarzana karAyA jaaygaa| isa prakAra
aneka sambandhoM se jur3e isa uddezaka ke cAra anuyoga dvAroM kA varNana karane
ke anantara batAyA jAtA hai ki sUtrAGgama meM askhalanA rahita uccAraNa Adi ke
guNoM ke sAtha sUtra kA uccAraNa karanA apekSita hai  /  prastuta sUtra kA
anantara-avyavahita- kisI anya sUtra ke vyavadhAna se rahita, atyanta nikaTastha
sUtra tathA parampara-anya sUtra dvArA vyavahita- anya sUtra yA sUtroM ke
vyavadhAna se yukta sUtra ke sAtha saMbaMdha yA vaktavya-kathana . karane yogya
hai  /  anantara sUtra meM yaha pratipAdita huA hai ki paMcamahAbhUtavAda meM
AsthA rakhane vAle, unakA nirUpaNa karane vAle tathA paMcaskandhavAda kI mAnyatA
meM vizvAsa rakhane vAle vAdI janoM kI buddhi mithyAtva dvArA vinaSTa ho gaI hai
/  yahI kAraNa hai ki ve asadgraha - mithyApadArthoM meM Agraha liye hue haiM  /
paramArtha bodha-vastu tattva ke sahI jJAna se vikala-rahita haiM  /  ve vyAdhi-
rugNAvasthA, mRtyu-maraNa tathA jarA- vRddhatva se Akula- pIr3ita hote hue
saMsAra cakra meM uttama, adhama yoniyoM meM jAte haiM, bhramaNa karate haiM,
anantobAra eka garbha se nikalakara dUsare garbha meM jAte rahate haiM  /
janmate marate rahate haiN| vahI bAta yahAM hai  /  niyativAdI tathA ajJAnavAdI
Adi jo caturvidha karma ko bandhanaprada nahIM maante| ve bhI anya
darzanavAdiyoM kI jyoM saMsAra cakra meM bhaTakate haiN| eka garbha se dUsare
garbha meM jAte haiM  /  'bujjhijjA' Adi yahAM parampara sUtra hai  /  usake
sAtha isakA sambandha isa prakAra hai 'bujjhijjA' Adi sUtra meM prarUpita huA
hai ki jIva ko bodha prApta karanA cAhiye  /  yahAM bhI yaha jur3atA hai|
niyativAdiyoM ke dvArA bhI yaha pratipAdita huA hai ki bodha yA jJAna prApta
karanA cAhiye  /  isI prakAra bIca meM sUtroM ke sAtha bhI isakA saMbaMdha jaisA
jahA~ saMgata ho- saMbhava ho jor3anA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra pahale ke aura Age
ke sUtroM ke sAtha sambandha rakhane vAle isa sUtra kA tAtparya vistRta rUpa meM
yahA~ vyAkhyAta kiyA jAtA hai| yahAM AyA huA punaH zabda pUrva saiddhAntikoM kI
tulanA meM niyativAdI kI vizeSatA prakaTa karatA hai  /  - vyAkaraNa ke anusAra
jinake karma kI avivakSA kI jAtI hai - jinakA karma vivakSita vaktuM icchitakahe
jAne yogya nahIM hotA, ve dhAtu akarmaka ho jAte haiM  /  isaliye yahAM jo
'AkhyAta' zabda AyA hai usameMbhAva meM niSThA pratyaya kA prayoga huA hai|
vaisA hone para usake yoga meM 'egetiM' pada meM kartRSaSThI - karttA meM SaSThI
vibhakti AI hai  /  isa taraha isakA Azaya yaha hotA hai ki ina niyativAdI
saiddhAntikoM ne aisA kahA hai arthAt unake kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai  /
yukti dvArA tarka evaM nyAya dvArA - jIvoM ke astitva kI siddhi hotI hai  /  isa
prativAdana - kathana dvArA paMcabhUtavAdI, tajjIva taccharIravAdI siddhAntikoM
kA mata apAkRta-nirAkRta yA khaMDita ho jAtA hai  /  jisa yukti dvArA pUrvokta
siddhAnta nirAkRta- khaMDita hote haiM, usa yukti kA pahale nirUpaNa huA hai  /
Age calakara usakA 57

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** and its commentary will be discussed.  Living
beings (Jivas) are born in different hells, realms, and species, or in different
bodies. This should be understood as refuting or negating the theory of soul-
monism.  What are the things that are individually obtained or proven by logic?
They are the living beings (Jivas) or creatures. They are the ones who
experience happiness and sorrow. This argument refutes the Buddhist theory that
there is no living being (Jiva) besides the five aggregates (Panchaskandha).
They do not accept the existence of a living being (Jiva).  Living beings
(Jivas) reside in different bodies, one by one, and experience happiness and
sorrow. The experience of happiness and sorrow, which every creature feels,
cannot be called false. This refutation negates the view of those who do not
accept the agency of the living being (Jiva) or soul, because if the soul is
inactive and unchanging, then it cannot experience happiness and sorrow.
Creatures experience happiness and sorrow. When their lifespan is complete, they
become extinct, cut off, and fall, meaning their connection with the body is
extinguished and they leave one place, one realm, and move to another realm.
This cannot be called false. Thus, we do not deny the transmigration of living
beings (Jivas) from one realm to another, their birth, or their going. This is
the meaning of this verse.  **Verse:**  * **Not self-made is sorrow, nor made by
another, how could it be?** * **Happiness or sorrow, whether natural or
unnatural.** * **Not self-made, but experienced by individual living beings.** *
**This is the collective experience of these beings, as stated here.**
**Translation:**  * **Worldly beings experience two types of sorrow: one caused
by external factors and the other without any cause.** * **This sorrow is
neither their own doing nor done by another. It is ordained by fate.** * **This
is the statement of the fatalists.**  **Commentary:**  * **Thus, by refuting the
view of those who believe in the existence of the five elements, the fatalists
argue their point in these two verses.** * **They say that the happiness and
sorrow experienced by living beings, as well as the loss of their place, is not
self-made or caused by their own actions.** * **The word "sorrow" is used to
refer to the cause of sorrow, due to the conventional usage of the word "cause"
for the effect.** * **Since this is a general term, it also includes happiness
and other things.** * **Therefore, if it is said that this experience of
happiness and sorrow is not caused by one's own actions, then how could it be
caused by another, such as a god, fate, or natural law?** * **The word "not" in
the verse is used for emphasis.** * **If happiness and other experiences were
caused by one's own actions, then servants, merchants, and those who exploit
others would all be equal.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram aura vivecana kiyA jAyegA  /  jIva pRthak pRthak naraka
Adi bhavoM meM yoniyoM meM athavA zarIroM meM jAte haiMjanma lete haiM  /  isase
AtmAdvaitavAda kA siddhAnta nirasita-nirAkRta yA khaMDita ho jAtA hai yaha
samajhanA caahiye| yukti se pRthak pRthak jo upapanna-prApta hote haiM yA sAbita
hote haiM ve kauna hai ? ve jIva haiM-prANI haiM  /  ve hI sukha-duHkha kA
anubhava karate haiM  /  isa kathana yA yukti se bauddhoM kA vaha siddhAnta
khaMDita ho jAtA hai, jisake anusAra ve paMcaskandha ke atirikta jIva kA abhAva
mAnate haiM-jIva kA astitva svIkAra nahIM karate haiM  /  ve jIva pRthak pRthak
deha-eka-eka deha meM vyavasthita-Tike hue rahate haiM tathA sukha-duHkha kA
vedana karate haiManubhava karate haiM  /  vaha sukha duHkhAtmaka anubhava jise
pratyeka prANI mahasUsa karate haiM-asatya nahIM kahA jA sakatA  /  isa
pratipAdana se unakA mata nirasta ho jAtA hai jo jIva yA AtmA kA kartRtva
svIkAra nahIM karate kyoMki AtmA yadi akartA ho, avikArI ho to sukha duHkhAtmaka
anubhava nahIM ho sakatA  /  prANI sukha-duH kha kA anubhava karate haiM  /
apanI Ayu pUrNa ho jAne para vilupta-uchinna aura pracyuta ho jAte haiM arthAt
zarIra ke sAtha unakA saMbaMdha vilupta evaM uchinna ho jAtA hai-miTa jAtA hai
aura ve eka sthAna kA-eka bhava kA parityAga kara dUsare bhava meM saMkrAnta ho
jAte haiM-cale jAte haiM  /  ise asatya nahIM kahA jA sakatA  /  isa prakAra
jIvoM ke opapAtikatva kA-eka bhava se dUsare bhava meM upapAta hone kA-janma
lene kA yA jAne kA hama niSedha nahIM karate  /  yaha isa gAdhA kA tAtparya hai
/  na taM sayaM kaDaM dukkhaM, kao annakaDaM ca NaM ? suhaM vA jai vA dukkhaM,
sehiyaM vA ase hiyaM  // 2 //  sayaM kaDaM na aNNehiM, vedayaMti puDho jiyA  /
saMhaiaM taM tahA tesiM, iha megesi AhiaM  // 3 //  chAyA - na tat svayaM kRtaM
duHkhaM kuto'nyakRtaJca ? sukhaM vA yadi vA duHkhaM, saiddhikaMvA'saiddhikam  //
svayaM kRtaM nA'nyairvedayanti pRthajIvAH  /  sAMgatikaM
tattathAteSAmihaikeSAmAkhyAtam  //  anuvAda - sAMsArika prANI do prakAra duHkha
bhogate haiM  /  eka bAharI kAraNoM tathA dUsarA binA kAraNoM dvArA  /  yaha
duHkha bhoga na unakA apanA kiyA huA hai aura na kisI anya dvArA kiyA huA hai  /
vaha to niyatikRta hai  /  niyativAdiyoM kA aisA kathana hai  /  TIkA - tadevaM
paMcabhUtAstitvAdivAdI nirAsaM kRtvA yattairniyativAdibhirAzrIyate
tacchrokadvayena darzayitumAhayat taiH prANibhiranubhUyate sukha-duHkhaM
sthAnavilopanaM vA na tat svayamAtmanA puruSakAreNa kRtaM niSpAditam  /
du:khamiti kAraNe kAryopacArAt duHkhakAraNamevoktam, asya copalakSaNatvAt
sukhAdyapi grAhyam  /  tatazceda muktaM bhavati-yo'yaM sukha-duHkhAnubhavaH sa
puruSakArakRtakAraNa janyo na bhavatIti, tathA kuto'nyena kAlezvara
svabhAvakarmAdinA ca kRtaM bhavet 'Na' mityalaMkAre, tathAhi-yadi
puruSakArakRtaM sukhAdyanubhUyeta tata: sevakavaNikkarSakAdInAM samAne - 58

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If the attainment of results were due to human effort, then there would be no
difference in the attainment of results, nor would there be any non-attainment
of results. Even in the absence of service or other activities, the attainment
of specific results would be possible. Therefore, what is attained from human
effort? It is only **niyati** (destiny). This will be explained in the second
verse. Time is also not the doer, because due to its uniformity in the world,
the diversity of results would not be possible. For, in the difference of
causes, there is a difference in effects, not in the absence of difference. For
example, this difference is the cause of difference, or it becomes the cause of
difference, namely, the attribution of opposite qualities and the difference in
causes. Even if the Lord is the doer, there would not be happiness and sorrow,
because is the Lord embodied or unembodied? If embodied, then like a worldly
man, he would not be the doer of everything. If unembodied, then like the true
sky, he would be completely inactive. Moreover, if he has attachment, etc., then
due to his non-difference from us, the whole world would be inactive. If he is
free from attachment, then the diversity of the world, such as prosperity,
misfortune, lordship, poverty, etc., would not be created by him. Therefore, the
Lord is not the doer. Similarly, the nature of things is also not the doer of
happiness, sorrow, etc., because is nature different from or non-different from
the soul? If different, then it is not possible for it to be the doer of
happiness and sorrow, which are dependent on the soul, because of its
difference. Nor is it non-different, because in non-difference, the soul itself
would be the doer, and its non-doing is already established. Nor is karma the
doer of happiness and sorrow, because is karma different from or non-different
from the soul? If non-different, then karma would be the same as the soul, and
the defect mentioned there would arise. If different, then is it conscious or
unconscious? If conscious, then there would be two consciousnesses in one body.
If unconscious, then how can it be the doer of the production of happiness and
sorrow, like a piece of stone? This will be explained in detail later.
Therefore, enough of this digression. Thus, happiness is theoretical, being the
characteristic of liberation, or sorrow is non-theoretical, being the
characteristic of non-liberation, worldly. Or both happiness and sorrow are
real, being established in the enjoyment of things like clothes, sandalwood, and
women, or being established in things like being beaten with a stick, being
branded, etc., theoretical. Similarly, other happiness, which is in the form of
bliss, is accidental, not determined by external causes, and is non-theoretical.
Similarly, sorrow, which is in the form of fever, headache, pain, etc., is
bodily and non-theoretical. Both of these are not done by the soul itself, nor
are they done by anyone else, such as time, etc. This is experienced by
individual living beings. How then did it happen to them? The **niyati**
(destiny) theorist reveals his opinion: "**Sang** (association)". (The movement
of the self with its own transformation - the experience of happiness and
sorrow, wherever and whenever it is, is **sangati** (association), **niyati**
(destiny). What happens in it is **sangatik** (associated with destiny). Since
happiness and sorrow, etc., are not done by human effort, etc., therefore, they
are said to be done by **niyati** (destiny) for those living beings. In this
theory of the experience of happiness and sorrow, it is said by some theorists
that this is their assumption. Thus it is said: "Whatever is obtained by relying
on the power of **niyati** (destiny), that surely happens to humans, whether
auspicious or inauspicious. Even with great effort on the part of beings, what
is not to be, does not become, and what is to be, does not perish." (2/3)
_Commentary - After refuting the views of the five-element theorists, etc., the
**niyati** (destiny) theory is now presented in the next two verses. The
experiences of happiness and sorrow that are experienced by living beings in the
world are not done by their own efforts. Similarly, going from one existence to
another - being born in one womb to another - is also not accomplished by one's
own efforts. Here, in this verse, the effect is dealt with in the cause, and the
word "duhkha" (sorrow) is used to establish the cause of sorrow. The word
"duhkha" (sorrow) is suggestive, therefore, happiness, etc., should also be
taken from it. The meaning of this statement is that the experience of happiness
and sorrow is not capable of being generated or produced by the efforts of
living beings. And how can it be done by other things like time, the Supreme
Being, nature, and karma, etc.? That is, it is not done by them either. Here,
the word "ṇam" is used for the sake of the figure of speech called
**vakyalankara** (sentence ornament). If the experience of happiness, etc., were
to be obtained as a result of one's own efforts, then the servant, the master,
and the farmer, etc., would all have the same effort - they all work hard in
their own way - but despite this, the results are different, or sometimes the
results are not obtained at all. (59)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH puruSakAre sati phala prAptivaisadRzyaM
phalAprAptizca na bhavet kasyacittu sevAdivyApArAbhAve'pi
viziSTaphalA'vAptiddezyata iti, atona puruSakArAtkiJcidAsAdyate, kiMtarhi ?
niyatereveti  /  etacca dvitIya zlokante'bhidhAsyate  /  nA'pi kAlaH kartA
tasyaikarUpatvAjjagati phalavaicitryAnupapatteH, kAraNabhede hi kArya bhedo
bhavati nA'bhede, tathAhiayameva hi bhedo bhedahetu rvA ghaTate yaduta
viruddhadharmAdhyAsaH kAraNabhedazca tathezvara kartRke'pi sukha duHkhe na
bhavataH, yato'sAvIzvaro mUrto'mUrto vA? yadi mUrtastata: prAkRtapuruSasyeva
sarvakartRtvAbhAvaH, athAmUrtastathA satyAkAzasyeva sutarAM niSkriyatvam, api ca
yadyasau rAgAdimAMstato'smadAdyavyatirekAdvizvasyAkatava, athA'sau
vigatarAgastatastatkRtaM subhagadurbhagezvaradaridrAdi jagadvaicitryaM na ghaTAM
prAscati, tato nezvaraH karteti, tathA svabhAvasyA'pi sukha duH
khAdikartRtvAnupapattiH, yato'sau svabhAvaH puruSAdbhinno'bhinnovA ? yadi bhinno
na puruSAzrite sukha duHkhe kartumalaM tasmAdbhinnatvAditi  /  nA'pyabhinnaH,
abhedepuruSa evasyA ttasya cAkartRtva muktameva  /  nA'pi karmaNaH sukhadukhaM
prati kartRtvaM ghaTate, yatastatkarma puruSAdbhinna mabhinnaM vA bhaveta ?
abhinnaM cetpuruSamAtratApattiH karmaNaH, tatra cokto doSaH atha bhinnaM
tatkiMsacetanamacetanaMvA ? yadi sacetana mekasmin kAye caitanyadvayApattiH,
athAcetanaM tathA sati kutastasyapASANakhaNDasyevAsvataMtrasya sukha-
duHkhotpAdanaM prati krtRtvmiti| etaccottaratra vyAsena pratipAdayiSyata ityalaM
prasaMgena, tadevaM sukhaM saiddhikaM siddhAvapavargalakSaNAyAM bhavaM yadivA
duHkhamasAtodayalakSaNamasaiddhikaM sAMsArikaM,
yadivobhayamapyetatsukhadukhaMvAstrak candanAMganAdyupabhogakriyAsiddhau bhavaM
tathA kazAtADanAGkanAdi siddhau bhavaM saiddhikaM, tathA asaiddhikaM
sukhamAntaramAnanda rUpa mAkasmikamanavadhAritabAhya nimittam evaM duHkhamapi
jvarazirortizUlAdirUpamaMgotthamasaiddhikaM tadevadubhayamapi na svayaM puruSa
kAreNa kRtaM nA'pyanyena kenacit kAlAdinA kRtaM vedayantyanubhavanti pRthajjIvAH
prANina iti  /  kathaM tarhi tatteSAmabhUd ? iti niyativAdI
svAbhiprAyamAviSkaroti 'saMga iyaM' tti, (samyak svapariNAmena gatiH-yasya yadA
yatra yatsukhaduHkhAnubhavanaM sA saMGgatirniyatistasyAM bhavaM sAMGgatikaM,
yatazcaivaM na puruSakArAdi kRtaM sukha duHkhAdi atastatteSAM prANinAM
niyatikRtaM saaNnggtikmityucyte| 'iha' asmina sukhaM duHkhAnubhavavAde ekeSAM
vAdinAmAkhyAtaM teSAmayamamyupagamaH  /  tathA coktam-prApThyoniyativalAzrayeNa
yo'rtha, so'vazyaM bhavati nRNA zubho'zubhovA  /  bhUtAnAM mahatikRte'pi hi
prayatne, nAbhAvyaM bhavati na bhAvino'sti nAzaH  // 2/3 /  /  _TIkArtha -
uparyukta rUpa meM paMcabhUtavAdI Adi saiddhAntikoM ke mata kA nirAsa-nirAkaraNa
yA khaNDana karake aba Age do zlokoM dvArA niyativAdiyoM ke siddhAnta kA
digdarzana karAte haiM - jagata meM prANIvRnda dvArA jo sukhAtmaka aura
duHkhAtmaka anubhava kiye jAte haiM, ve unake apane udyama dvArA kRta nahIM hai
/  usI prakAra eka bhava se dUsare bhava meM jAnA-eka yoni se dUsarI yoni meM
janma lenA-yaha bhI apane puruSArtha dvArA niSpAdita kiyA huA nahIM hai  /
yahAM isa gAthA meM kAraNa meM kArya kA upacAra karake duHkha zabda dvArA du:kha
ke kAraNa kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai-kathana kiyA gayA hai  /  yaha duHkha zabda
upalakSaNa hai-sUcaka hai, ata: isase sukha Adi ko bhI liyA jAnA cAhiye  /  isa
prakAra kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jo yaha sukha duHkhAtmaka anubhUti hotI
hai, vaha jIvoM ke puruSakAra-puraSArtha yA udyama dvArA janya-utpanna hone
yogya nahIM hai  /  tathA vaha kAla, paramAtmA, svabhAva aura karma Adi anyAnya
padArthoM ke dvArA bhI kiyAhuA kisa prakAra ho sakatA hai, arthAt ina dvArA bhI
vaha kiyA huA nahIM hai  /  yahA 'NaM' zabda vAkyAlaMkAra hetu prayukta huA hai
/  yadi apane apane puruSArtha yA udyama ke phalasvarUpa sukha Adi kI anubhUti-
prApti ho to naukara seTha tathA kRSaka Adi kA udyoga yA parizrama to samAna hI
hotA hai-ye sabhI apane apane tarIke se mehanata karate haiM kintu aisA hone ke
bAvajUda phala bhinna bhinna prakAra kA hotA hai yA kabhI kabhI phala aprApta
bhI rahatA (59)

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The 'Sutrakritanga Sutra' is not available. Some people experience specific
results even without engaging in service or other activities. We see this in the
world. This proves that nothing is achieved through effort or endeavor, but
happiness and other things are obtained only through destiny. We will discuss
this further in the next verse.  It is also not possible that time, happiness,
and suffering are the creators or makers of anything. Time has a single form -
it always remains the same. The fruits in the world appear in various and
diverse forms. This cannot happen due to the single form of time. When there is
a difference in the cause, there is a difference in the effect accordingly. When
there is no difference in the cause, there is no difference in the effect.
Taking refuge in opposing dharma or a different cause is the reason for this
difference.  Similarly, happiness and suffering are not caused by God or the
Supreme Being. The question arises whether that Supreme Being is embodied or
disembodied. If He is embodied, then He is like an ordinary man, and He cannot
be the creator or performer of all things. If He is disembodied, then He is
completely inactive like the sky. If that Supreme Being is attached like us,
like worldly people, then He cannot be considered the creator of the world. If
He is free from attachment, then He cannot create this diverse world with its
beautiful, ugly, pleasant, and unpleasant, rich and poor forms. Therefore, God
is not the creator.  Nature cannot be the creator of happiness and suffering
either. The question arises whether nature is separate from or inseparable from
man. If you consider it separate from man, then it is clear that it cannot
produce happiness and suffering for man because it is separate from him. If
nature is inseparable from man, then it is essentially man himself, and in that
situation, it cannot be the creator of happiness and suffering. This has already
been discussed.  Karma cannot be the creator of happiness and suffering either,
because here too the question arises whether it is different from or inseparable
from man. If karma is considered inseparable from man, then it is essentially
man himself, nothing else. Therefore, its ability to create happiness and
suffering is not proven. As mentioned earlier, considering it as the creator
leads to flaws. If karma is different from or separate from man, then another
question arises: is it conscious or unconscious? If it is considered conscious,
then it would mean that there are two conscious beings: the living being and
karma. If karma is unconscious, then it is like a piece of stone, itself
dependent on others. How can it be the creator of happiness and suffering? We
will discuss this in detail later, so it is not necessary to say more here.  The
word 'saiddhika' has been used here. Siddhi means liberation. The happiness that
arises in liberation is called saiddhika. The world is called asiddhi. The
suffering that arises in the world due to the emergence of asatavedaniya karma
is called asiddhika, meaning worldly suffering is asiddhika. Or it should be
understood this way: happiness and suffering are both of two types: saiddhika
and asiddhika. Flowers, garlands, sandalwood, beautiful women...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI 'sUtrakRtAGga sUtram hai, vaha milatA hI nhiiN| kisI kisI ko to sevA Adi
kArya na karane para bhI viziSTa phala prApta hotA hai| aisA hama jagata meM
dekhate haiM  /  isase yaha sAbita hotA hai ki puruSArtha se udyama se kucha bhI
prApta nahIM hotA kintu niyati se hI sukha Adi prApta hote haiM  /  dUsare zloka
ke anta meM isa viSaya meM pratipAdita kareMge  /  kAla, sukha evaM duHkha Adi
kA kartA yA vidhAyaka haiM, yaha bhI saMbhava nahIM hai kyoMki kAla meM eka
rUpatva hai - vaha sadA eka hI rUpa meM rahatA hai  /  jagata meM phala vicitra
- vibhinna vibhinna prakAra ke dikhAI dete haiM, kAla kI eka rUpatA ke kAraNa
aisA nahIM ho sktaa| jaba kAraNa meM bheda hotA hai taba tadanurUpa kArya meM
bhI bheda hotA hai| kAraNa meM jaba bheda nahIM hotA to kArya meM bheda nahIM
AtA  /  viruddha dharma kA Azraya lenA yA kAraNa kA bhinna honA, isI se bheda
hotA hai-yahI bheda kA kAraNa hai| isI prakAra sukha evaM duHkha Izvara yA
paramAtmA dvArA bhI kiye hue nahIM hai  /  prazna upasthita hotA hai ki vaha
paramAtmA mUrtta-sazarIra zarIra sahita hai athavA amUrta-azarIra yA zarIra
rahita hai  /  yadi vaha mUrtta - zarIra sahita hai taba to vaha eka sAdhAraNa
puruSa jaisA hai, usI kI jyoM vaha saba padArthoM kA kartA yA niSpAdaka nahIM ho
sktaa| yadi amUrta-zarIravarjita hai to phira AkAza kI jyoM vaha nitAnta
kriyAvihIna hai| yadi vaha paramAtmA hama logoM ke samAna - sAMsArika logoM kI
jyoM rAgayukta hai to vaha jagata kA karttA nahIM mAnA jA sakatA  /  yadi vaha
vigatarAga-rAgavarjita hai to vaha subhaga, sundara, saumya tathA durbhaga,
kurupa bhaddA Izvara dhana-sampanna tathA daridranirdhana rUpa meM isa vicitra
vividhatAyukta jagata kI sRSTi nahIM kara sakatA  /  isIliye Izvara sRSTi kartA
nahIM hai  /  svabhAva bhI sukha duHkha kA sraSTA nahIM ho sakatA  /  eka prazna
upasthita hotA hai ki svabhAva puruSa se pRthak hai yA apRthak hai  /  yadi use
puruSa se pRthak mAnate ho to yaha sApha hai ki vaha puruSa 1 ke sukha tathA
duHkha ko utpanna karane meM samartha nahIM ho sakatA kyoMki usakA puruSa se
pArthakya hai  /  yadi svabhAva puruSa se apRthak yA abhinna ho to vaha eka
prakAra se puruSa hI ghaTitahotA hai, tathA vaisI sthiti meM vaha sukha duHkha
kA sraSTA nahIM hotaa| isa saMbaMdha meM kahA bhI jA cukA 1 karma bhI sukha
duHkha kA sraSTA nahIM ho sakatA kyoMki yahAM bhI yaha savAla uThatA hai ki vaha
karma usase bhinna yA pRthak hai athavA abhinna yA apRthak hai  /  yadi karma ko
puruSa se abhinna yA apRthak mAnA jAya taba to vaha eka prakAra se puruSa hI
hai, anya nahIM  /  ataH usameM sukha kA tathA duHkha kA kartRtva siddha nahIM
hotA  /  jaise pahale batalAyA gayA hai ki usameM kartRtva mAnane se doSa AtA
hai  /  yadi vaha karma puruSa se pRthak yA bhinna hai, to eka savAla aura
khar3A hotA hai ki vaha sacetana - cetanAyukta athavA acetana-cetanAvirahita hai
/  yadi use sacetana mAne to eka hI zarIra jIva tathA karma do cetana prANI haiM
aisA mAnanA hogA  /  yadi karma caitanyarahita hai to vaha patthara ke khaNDa kI
jyoM khuda bhI parAdhIna hai - parataMtra hai sukha duHkha kA sraSTA kaise ho
sakatA hai  /  Age vistAra se kaheMge, isaliye yahAM adhika kahanA apekSita
nahIM hai I yahAM 'saiddhika' zabda AyA hai  /  siddhi kA tAtparya mokSa hai jo
sukha mokSa meM utpanna hotA hai use saiddha kahA jAtA hai  /  saMsAra kA nAma
asiddhi hai| saMsAra meM asAtAvedanIya karma ke udaya hone para jo duHkha
AvirbhUta hotA hai use asaiddhika kahA jAtA hai arthAt sAMsArika duHkha
asaiddhika haiN| athavA ise yoM samajhA jAnA cAhiye ki sukha evaM duHkha ye
donoM hI saiddhika tathA asaiddhika do prakAra ke hote  /  puSpa mAlA, candana,
sundara ramaNI 60

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The happiness that arises from the action or accomplishment of consuming food,
etc., is called theoretical happiness. The suffering that arises from the
accomplishment or action of being beaten with a whip, being branded with hot
iron, etc., is called theoretical suffering. The inner joy-like happiness that
arises suddenly, whose external causes are not visible, is called non-
theoretical happiness. Similarly, the suffering that arises from one's own limbs
in the form of fever, headache, abdominal pain, etc., is called non-theoretical
suffering. Both types of happiness and suffering do not arise from man's own
efforts. Nor are they produced by time or anything else. Both types of happiness
and suffering are experienced by beings separately. The question arises - why do
these happiness and suffering occur to beings? To make this known, the
determinist explains his opinion through the word *sangaiansanghatikam*.
*Samyak* - the movement that comes from its result is called *sangati*. This
means that the situation from which the suffering of the being who is to
experience happiness and suffering arises is called *sanghatik*. It is destiny.
The happiness and suffering that arise from that destiny are *sanghatik*.  Thus,
according to what has been said earlier, the happiness and suffering of beings
are not done by their own efforts or endeavors, but are done by their destiny,
therefore they are called *sanghatik*. Here, the discussion of the subject of
happiness and suffering experience, which has been done by some principle
theorists, is their accepted principle. It has been said - whatever material
object is to be obtained, good or bad, good or bad, it will surely be obtained
by man by the force of destiny. What is not to be obtained, what is not to be
obtained, is not obtained by beings even after great effort. What is to be, will
never perish.  *Ev meyani jampanta, bala pandiamanino. Niyayanaiyam santam,
ayanamta abuddhiya. ||4||*  *Chhaya* - *Evametaani jalpanto balaha
panditamaninah. Niyatanaiyatam santam majananto'buddhikaha. ||*  *Anuvaad* -
Those who have been discussed earlier are the determinists, they are ignorant,
but they consider themselves wise and knowledgeable, they say. In reality,
happiness and suffering are fixed from one perspective and uncertain from
another perspective, i.e., they are *niyatanaiyat*, but the determinists do not
accept this without knowing it.  *Teeka* - *Evam shloka dvayena niyativadimatam
upanyasyasyothar danaayaha. Evamityananta roktasya uprapradarshane. Etaani
puroktaani niyativadaashritani vachanani jalpanto abhidhadhato balaa iva balaa
agnaha sadasadivveka vikala api santah panditamanina atmanam panditam mantum
shelam yesham te tatha kimiti ta eva muchyantan? Iti tadaha - ) Yato
'niyayanaiyam santamiti' sukhaadikam kinchit niyatikritam avashyambhavya
udayaprapitam tatha aniyatam atmapurushakarashavaradiprapitam sat
niyatikritameva ekante nasrayanti, ato'janaanaha
sukhadhukhaadikaranamabuddhikaha buddhirahita* (61)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH Adi ke upabhoga kI kriyA yA siddhi se jo utpanna
hote haiM ve sukha saiddhika kahe jAte haiM  /  kor3e se pITA jAnA, garama lohe
se dAgA jAnA Adi siddhi yA kriyA dvArA jo duHkha utpanna hote haiM ve saiddhika
duHkha kahe gaye haiM  /  jo akasmAt utpanna hotA hai, jisake bAharI kAraNa
dikhAI nahIM par3ate vaisA Antarika Ananda rUpa sukha asaiddhika sukha kahalAtA
hai  /  isI prakAra bukhAra, sira meM darda, peTa meM zUla Adi ke rUpa meM jo
duHkha apane aMgoM se utthita hote haiM-utpanna hote haiM ve asaiddhika duHkha
kahe gaye haiM  /  ye donoM hI prakAra ke sukha evaM duHkha manuSya ke apane
puruSArtha se utpanna nahIM hote  /  tathA ye na kAla Adi kisI anya ke dvArA hI
niSpanna kiye jAte haiM  /  ina donoM prakAra ke sukha duHkha ko prANI pRthak
pRthak bhogate haiM  /  savAla uThatA hai-ye sukha aura duHkha prANiyoM ko kisa
kAraNa hote haiM ? yaha avagata karAne hetu niyativAdI apanA abhiprAya
saMgaiaMsAMghatikaM zabda dvArA batalAtA hai| samyak-apane pariNAma se bhalI
bhAMti jo gati AtI hai use saMgati kahA jAtA hai  /  isakA Azaya yaha hai ki
jaba jisa prANI ko sukha duHkha kI anubhUti karanI hotI hai vaha vaisI sthiti
jisase utpanna hotI hai use sAMghatika kahA gayA hai vaha niyati hai usa niyati
dvArA jo sukha duHkha utpanna hote haiM ve sAMghatika haiN| yoM pUrvokta rUpa se
jo kahA gayA hai usake anusAra prANiyoM ke sukha tathA duHkha unake apane
puruSArtha yA udyama dvArA kRta nahIM haiM kintu ve usakI niyati dvArA kRta
haiM, ataeva ve sAMghatika kahe jAte haiM  /  yahAM sukhAtmaka duHkhAtmaka
anubhUti ke viSaya meM katipaya siddhAntavAdiyoM kA yaha jo vivecana kiyA gayA
hai vaha unakA svIkRta siddhAnta hai  /  kahA gayA hai-zubha yA azubha, acchA yA
burA jo bhI padArtha vastu prAptavya haiprApta hone yogya hai, vaha niyati ke
bala se manuSya ko avazya prApta hogI  /  jo prApta na hone yogya hai, jo
abhAvya hai-nahIM hone yogya hai vaha prANiyoM dvArA mahAna prayatna karane para
bhI nahIM hotI  /  jo bhAvI-hone vAlA hai, usakA kabhI nAza nahIM hogA  /  eva
meyANi jaMpaMtA, bAlA paMDiamANiNo  /  niyayAniyayaM saMtaM, ayANaMtA abuddhiyA
// 4 //  chAyA - evametAni jalpaMto bAlAH paNDitamAninaH  /  niyatAniyataM santa
majAnanto'buddhikAH  //  anuvAda - pahale jo carcita hue haiM ve-niyativAdI
ajJAnI haiM, kintu ve apane Apako paMDita jJAnavAna mAnate haiM, kahate haiM  /
vAstava meM sukha tathA duHkha eka apekSA se niyata hai-nizcita hai tathA eka
apekSA se aniyataanizcita hai arthAt ve niyatAniyata haiM kintu ise nahIM jAnate
hue niyativAdI aisA svIkAra nahIM karate  /  TIkA - evaM zlokadvayena
niyativAdimatamupanyasyAsyottara dAnAyAha  /  evmitynntroktsyopprdrshne| etAni
pUrvoktAni niyativAdAzritAni vacanAni jalpanto'bhidadhato bAlA iva bAlA ajJAH
sadasadviveka vikalA api santaH paNDitamAnina AtmAnaM paNDitaM mantuM zIlaM
yeSAM te tathA kimiti ta eva mucyanta ? iti tadAha- ) yato 'niyayAniyayaM
saMtamiti' sukhAdikaM kiMcinniyatikRtamavazyaMbhAvyudayaprApitaM tathA
aniyatamAtmapuruSakArezvarAdiprApitaM sat niyatikRtamevaikAntenAzrayanti,
ato'jAnAnAHsukhaduHkhAdikAraNamabuddhikAH buddhirahitA (61)

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sutrakritanga says, "Thus it is: For the Arhats, some happiness
and suffering, etc., are indeed determined by fate. This is because the karma
that is the cause of it is destined to arise at a certain time, and is therefore
said to be created by fate. However, some things are not created by fate, but by
the efforts of the individual, time, the nature of the Lord, karma, etc. In this
case, it is also accepted that happiness and suffering, etc., can be achieved by
the efforts of the individual. For, action leads to results, and action is
initiated by the efforts of the individual. As it is said: "Do not, thinking it
is fate, abandon your own efforts. Without effort, who can obtain oil from
sesame seeds?" (1)  The objection that there is a diversity of results in the
same human activity, which is presented as a fault, is not a fault. For, even
there, the diversity of human effort is the cause of the diversity of results.
The lack of results for some in the same human activity is due to unseen karma.
This too is accepted by us as a cause. Time is also a doer, for the flowering
and fruiting of bakula, champaca, ashoka, punnaga, naga, sahakar, etc., occurs
only at a specific time, not always. And what is said, "The uniformity of time
does not account for the diversity of the world," is not a fault for us. For, we
do not accept time alone as the doer, but also karma. Therefore, there is no
fault in the diversity of the world. The Lord is also a doer. The self, which
pervades the entire world through the door of birth, is the Lord. His role as
the creator of happiness and suffering is established without any doubt by all.
The objection that there is a distinction between the material and the
immaterial, etc., is far removed when the Lord is accepted. The nature of things
is also a doer in some way. For, the characteristics of the self, such as its
use, its infinite extent, the material nature of the pudgalas, the movement,
stability, and support provided by the bodies of virtue and vice, and their
immaterial nature, etc., are all established by nature. The objection that there
is a distinction between the self and its nature is also a fault. For, nature is
not different from the self. And since the role of the self is accepted, this
too is established by nature. Karma is also a doer. It is arranged with the
regions of the living being in the form of mutual dependence, and is in some way
not different from the self. Due to its influence, the self wanders in the
realms of hell, animal, human, and god, experiencing happiness, suffering, etc.
Thus, since the role of fate and non-fate is established by reason, those who
accept the role of fate alone are foolish. This is to be understood. (4)
Commentary: The author of the text, having presented the view of the fatalists
in the previous two verses, now provides a solution to it.  The word "thus" is
used in the present verse to introduce the previous statement of the fatalist.
Those who formulate the principles of fatalism do not have a true understanding
of the nature of existence and non-existence. They are ignorant, like children.
Despite this, they consider themselves wise and knowledgeable. Why are fatalists
called ignorant, devoid of knowledge, and arrogant in their wisdom? The author
of the text, in order to provide a solution to this potential question or
curiosity, mentions fate and non-fate, and explains that many situations
conducive to happiness and prosperity are determined by fate, because such
karmic fruition occurs. And many situations are indeterminate, i.e., they are
accidental, due to one's own efforts or some unseen power. Even so, fatalists
claim that all situations conducive to happiness and prosperity, as well as
suffering and adversity, are definitively determined by fate. Thus, they do not
understand the true cause of happiness and suffering. They are devoid of
intelligence. The Arhats, the Tirthankaras and the omniscient ones, believe that
some happiness and suffering are indeed determined by fate, because the karma
that is the cause of them arises at a specific time. Thus, they are indeed the
result of the arising of karma, but because they arise at a specific time, in a
specific way, they are considered to be within the realm of fate.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram , bhavantIti, tathAhi-ArhatAnAM kiMcitsukhaduHkhAdi
niyatita eva bhavati, tatkAraNasya karmaNaH kasmiMzcidavasare
avazyaMbhAvyudayasadbhAvAnniyatikRtikRtamityucyate,tathA kiMcidaniyatikRtaJca-
puruSakArakAlezvarasvabhAvakarmAdikRtaM, tatra kathaJcit sukhadu:khAdeH
puruSakArasAdhyatvamapyAzrIyate, yataH kriyAtaH phalaM bhavati kriyA ca
puruSakArAyattA pravartate, tathA coktam - . "na daivamiti saJcintya
tyajedudyamamAtmanaH  /  anudyamena kastailaM tilebhyaH prAptumarhati" ?  // 1
//  yattu samAne puruSavyApAre phala vaicitryaM duSaNatvenopanyastaM
tadadUSaNameva, yatastatrA'pi puruSakAra vaicitryamapi phala vaicitrye kAraNaM
bhavati, samAne vA puruSa kAre yaH phalAbhAvaH kasyacidbhavati so'dRSTakataH,
tadapi cA'smAbhiH kAraNatvenAzritameva tathA kAlo'pi kartA, yato
bakulacampakAzokapunnAganAgasahakArAdInAM viziSTa eva kAle puSpaphalAdhudbhavo
na sarvadeti, yaccoktaM-'kAlasyaikarUpatvAjagadvaicitryaM na ghaTata' iti,
tadasmAn prati na dUSaNaM yato'smAbhirna kAla evaikaH
katRtvenA'bhyupagamyate'pitu karmA'pi, tato jagadvaicitryamityadoSaH  /
tathezvaro'pi kartA, Atmaiva hi tatra
tatro'tpattidvAreNasakalajagadvyApanAdIzvaraH tasya sukhadukhotpattikartRtvaM
sarvavAdinAmavigAnena siddhameva  /  yaccAtra mUrttAmUrtAdikaM dUSaNamupanyastaM
tadevaMbhUtezvara samAzrayaNe dUrotsAditameveti  /  svabhAvAsyA'pi kathaMcit
kartRtvameva, tathAhi Atmana upayoga lakSaNatvamasaMkhyeyapradezatvaM pudgalAnAM
ca mUrttatvaM
dharmAdharmAstikAyayorgatisthityupaSTambhakAritvamamUrttatvaJcetyevamAdi
svabhAvApAditam  /  yadapi cAtrAtma vyatirekAvyatireka rUpaM dUSaNamupanyastaM
tadrUSaNameva, yataH svabhAva Atmano'vyatiriktaH, Atmano'pi ca
kartRtvamabhyupagatametadapi svabhAvApAdita meveti  /  tathA karmA'pi kartR
bhavatyeva, taddhi jIva pradezaiH sahA'nyo'nyAnuvedharUpatayA vyavasthitaM
kathaJciccAtmano'bhinnaM,tadvazAccAtmA nArakatiryaGmanuSyAmarabhaveSu
paryaTansukhaduHkhAdikamanubhavatIti |tdevN niyatyaniyatyoH kartRtve
yuktyupapanne sati niyatereva kartRtvamabhyupagacchanto nirbuddhikAH
bhavantItyavaseyam  // 4 //  TIkArtha - zAstrakAra pUrvokta do zlokoM dvArA
niyativAdiyoM kA mata upanyastakara-upasthApita kara aba usakA samAdhAna dete
haiM - prastuta gAthA meM niyativAdI ke pUrvokta kathana ko upasthita karane
hetu 'evaM' zabda kA prayoga huA hai, niyativAdI-niyativAda sambandhI siddhAntoM
kI prarUpaNA karane vAloM ko sat-astitva jo padArtha hai, asatnAstitva-jo
padArtha nahIM hai, isa sambandha meM yathArtha viveka nahIM hai, ve jJAnazUnya
hai, ve bAlaka kI taraha jJAnazUnya haiM, aisA hone ke bAvajUda ve apane ko
paMr3ita-jJAnI-mAnate haiM  /  niyativAdiyoM ko ajJAnI-jJAna zUnya aura
paMDitamAnIpAMDitya kA abhimAna karane vAle kyoM kahA jAtA hai ? sUtrakAra isa
saMbhAvita prazna yA jijJAsA kA samAdhAna dene hetu ve niyayAniyayaM-
niyatAniyataM kA ullekha karate hue batalAte haiM ki kaI sukha-anukUla sAtA
mUlaka sthitiyA aisI haiM jo niyata-nizcita rUpa meM hotI hai kyoMki vaisA
kArmika udaya hotA hai tathA kaI aniyata arthAt apane udyama athavA kisI adRSTa
zakti ke dvArA kiye jAne se aniyata-anizcita, Akasmika hotI haiM aisA hote hue
bhI niyativAdI sabhI sukho-anukUla sAtAmUlaka sthitiyoM tathA duHkhoM-
asAtAmUlaka sthitiyoM ko ekAnta rUpa se-nizcita rUpa se niyatikRta batalAte haiM
/  isa prakAra ve niyativAdI sukha evaM duHkha ke paryAya kAraNa ko nahIM
jAnate, ve buddhi rahita haiM  /  ArhatoM kA-tIrthaMkaroM evaM sarvajJoM kA yaha
abhimata hai ki kaI sukha aura duHkha aise haiM jo niyati se hI hote haiM-jo
niyata hai kyoMki una sukha duHkhoM ke kAraNa jo karma haiM, unakA kisI vizeSa
avasara para-samaya para Avazyaka rUpa meM udaya hotA hai  /  yoM ve haiM to
karmoM ke udaya se niSpanna parantu kisI vizeSa rUpa meM, vizeSa avasara para
niyata dazA meM udaya hone ke kAraNa unheM niyati ke antargata -62)

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The doctrine of free will is accepted. It is said that happiness and sorrow are
ordained by fate. There are many happiness and sorrows that are not considered
to be ordained by fate. They are produced by a person's own efforts, time,
inherent nature, and karma. Taking this view, those who believe in the Arhat-
Jain religion also accept that happiness and sorrow, etc., are achievable
through effort, i.e., they are caused by human effort or endeavor. The reason
for this is that any result is produced or manifested by some action, and action
is based on effort or endeavor. Therefore, it has been said that one should not
stop trying even if one thinks that only what is written in fate will be
obtained, because even a drop of oil cannot be obtained without effort or
endeavor. The determinist, accusing determinism, said that although the effort
or endeavor of many individuals is the same, there is a difference or variation
in the results. Consider this, it is not really a fault because the effort of
all those who make an effort is different according to their ability,
circumstances, etc. When there is a difference in effort, how can the result be
the same? Even with the same effort, some results are not obtained at all, this
is the result of the hindering karmas done in the past. They are not visible,
therefore they are called unseen. Jains also consider them to be the cause of
happiness and sorrow. Similarly, time also has a role to play in a way, just as
the Vakula, Champaka, Ashoka, Punnaga, Naga, and Amra trees do not bear fruit at
the same time - in the same season. Their fruits have their own separate times
to come. Karma cooperates with time in a special way. The determinist,
presenting his side, said that time is a form, therefore, a world full of
diversity and variations cannot be produced from it. This statement does not
apply to us as a fault because we do not only accept the agency of time, but
also the agency of karma. Therefore, it is due to the diversity and variety of
karma that diversity or variety is seen in the world. There is no fault in our
doctrine. It has been said that God is the creator of the world, in this regard,
our proposition is that the soul is born in different forms of beings according
to its own karmas, in this way, from one perspective, it is omnipresent, it can
also be called God, that soul or God is the creator of happiness and sorrow - it
produces happiness through its good karmas and sorrow through its bad karmas.
There is no dispute in this regard in the doctrines of all the schools of
thought in the world. It is proven according to everyone's perspective. To prove
that God is the creator of happiness and sorrow, to refute it, the determinist
has tried to prove the fault by raising the question whether the soul is
concrete or abstract. We consider the soul to be God. There is no other God
different from it according to our doctrine. Therefore, this fault does not
apply to us. Nature is also an agent from one perspective because the soul is
the essence of use, it is infinite in its regions. Pudgala is concrete, Dharma-
stikaya is helpful in motion and Adharma-stikaya is helpful in stillness. These
are abstract - all these situations are produced by nature itself. The
determinist has tried to show the fault in the agency of nature by saying that
nature is separate from the soul or not, this is not proven because nature is
not separate from the soul. We have accepted that the soul is the agent.
Therefore, the agency of the soul is inherent in nature. Karma is also called
the agent - 63

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH  /  liyA jAtA hai  /  isaliye ve sukhaduHkha
niyati kRta haiM aisA kahA jAtA hai  /  kaI sukha duHkha aise haiM jo niyatikRta
nahIM kahe jAte  /  ve kisI manuSya ke apane udyama, kAla, adRSTa svabhAva tathA
karma Adi dvArA niSpanna hote haiM  /  isa dRSTikoNa ko lete hue Arhata-jaina
dharma meM vizvAsa karane vAle sukha duHkha Adi ko kisI apekSA se udyama sAdhya
bhI svIkAra karate haiM arthAt ve mAnava ke parizrama yA prayatna se hote haiN|
isakA hetu yaha hai ki koI bhI phala kriyA se kucha karane se niSpanna hotA hai-
prakaTa hotA hai tathA kriyA puruSArtha yA udyama para AdhArita hai  /  isIlie
kahA gayA hai ki jo daiva-bhAgya meM likhA hai vahI prApta hogA, yaha ciMtana
kara kisI bhI vyakti ko prayatna karanA nahIM chor3anA cAhiye kyoMki udyama yA
prayatna karane se kisI ko tiloM meM bhI tela upalabdha nahIM ho sakatA  /
niyativAdI ne niyatAniyatavAda para doSAropaNa karate hue jo kahA ki-aneka
vyaktiyoM kA udyama yA prayatna yadyapi samAna hotA hai kintu phala meM bheda yA
bhinnatA dikhAI detI hai  /  jarA vicAra kareM, vAstava meM yaha doSa nahIM hai
kyoMki jitane loga udyama karate haiM, vaha unakI kSamatA, paristhiti Adi ke
anusAra vicitratAbhinnatA liye hue hotA hai  /  jaba udyama meM bhinnatA hotI
hai to phira phala abhinna kaise ho sakatA hai ? eka samAna prayatna karane para
bhI kucha phala milatA hI nahIM hai yaha usake adRSTa-pUrva meM kiye gaye
bAdhaka karmoM kA pariNAma hai  /  ve dRSTigocara nahIM hote isaliye vaha adRSTa
kahA jAtA hai  /  jaina usako bhI sukha evaM duH kha kA kAraNa mAnate haiM  /
isI prakAra kAla bhI eka dRSTi se kartApana liye hue hai jaise vakula, campaka,
azoka, phunnAga, nAga tathA Amra Adi vRkSoM ke eka hI samaya-eka hI Rtu meM
phala nahIM lagate  /  unake phala Ane kA apanA pRthak pRthak samaya hai| kAla
ke sAtha vizeSa rUpa se vahAM karmoM kA sahayoga ghaTita hotA hai| niyati ne
apanA pakSa prastuta karatehue jo yaha kahA ki kAla eka rUpAtmaka hai, ata:
usase vaicitryayukta-vividhatAoM se paripUrNa jagata utpanna nahIM ho sakatA  /
yaha kahanA hama logoM para doSa rUpa meM lAgU nahIM hotA kyoMki hama kevala
kAla kA hI kartRtva svIkAra nahIM karate apitu karma kA bhI kartRtva svIkAra
karate haiM  /  isaliye karma kI vicitratA-vividhatA ke phalasvarUpa hI jagat
meM vicitratA yA vividhatA dRSTigocara hotI hai isase hamAre siddhAnta meM koI
doSa nahIM AtA  /  jo yaha kahA gayA ki Izvara jagata kA kartA hai, isa
saMbaMdha meM hamArA yaha pratipAdana ki AtmA hI apane karmoM ke anurUpa bhinna
bhinna prANiyoM ke rUpa meM utpanna hotI hai isa prakAra eka apekSA se vaha
sarvavyApaka hai, use Izvara bhI kahA jA sakatA hai, vaha AtmA yA Izvara hI
sukha tathA duH kha utpanna hone kA kartA hai-vahI apane zubha karmoM dvArA
sukha aura aMzubha karmo dvArA duHkha utpanna karatA hai| saMsAra ke sabhI
matavAdiyoM ke siddhAntoM meM isa saMbaMdha meM koI vivAda nahIM hai  /  sabhI
ke dRSTikoNAnusAra yaha siddha hai  /  sukha evaM duHkha kA kartA Izvara hai
isako sadoSa sAbita karane ke liye, isakA khaMDana karane ke liye niyativAdI ne
AtmA mUrta-AkArayukta hai tathA amUrta-nirAkAra hai, yaha prazna uThAte hue doSa
siddha karane kA prayAsa kiyA hai  /  hama to AtmA ko hI Izvara mAnate haiN|
usake atirikta koI bhinna Izvara hamAre siddhAntAnusAra nahIM hai  /  isaliye
yaha doSa hama para lAgU nahIM hotA  /  svabhAva bhI kisI eka apekSA se kartA
hai kyoMki AtmA upayoga svarUpa hai, asaMkhya pradezAtmaka hai  /  pudgala mUrta
haiM, dharmastikAya gati meM sahAyaka hai tathA adharmAstikAya sthiti meM
sahAyaka hai  /  ye amUrta haiM-ye saba sthitiyAM-svabhAva ke dvArA hI niSpanna
hotI haiM  /  niyativAdI ne svabhAva AtmA se pRthak hai yA apRthak ityAdi
kahakara svabhAva ke kartApana meM jo doSAropaNa kiyA hai-doSa dikhalAyA hai
vaha bhI siddha nahIM hotA kyoMki svabhAva AtmA se pRthak nahIM hai  /  yaha
hamane aMgIkAra kiyA hI hai ki AtmA kartA hai  /  isaliye AtmA kA karttApana
svabhAvajanita hI hai  /  karma ko bhI jo karttA kahA - 63

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Sutrakritanga Sutram  The statement in the Shri Sutrakritanga Sutram is
correct because karmas or karmic particles coexist and intermingle with the
regions of the jiva (living being). Therefore, from one perspective, karma is
inseparable from the jiva. It is due to the results of karma that the atma
(soul) goes to the gati (state of existence) of naraka (hell), tiryañca (animals
and plants), manushya (human) and deva (celestial beings), and experiences
happiness or suffering accordingly. In this way, the agency of niyati (destiny)
and aniyati (non-destiny) is proven through logic and reasoning. Those who are
solely fatalists, accepting only niyati as the doer, are to be known as devoid
of proper intellect.  Evam eke tu pavasthas, te bhuyah vipragalbhitah. Evam
upadhvita santa, na te duhkhavimokshakah. (5)  Translation: The fatalists, in
the aforementioned manner, consider niyati alone as the doer of pleasure and
pain - this is their arrogance and obstinate statement. Even though they engage
in religious practices related to the afterlife, they are unable to attain
liberation from suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram gayA hai vaha sahI hai kyoMki karma yA karmANu jIva ke
pradezoM ke sAtha paraspara ghulamilakara rahate haiM  /  ataeva karma eka
apekSA se jIva se apRthak hai  /  karma ke hI phalasvarUpa AtmA naraka gati,
tiryaJcagati, manuSyagati aura deva gati Adi meM jAtI hai  /  vahAM apanI-apanI
gati ke anurUpa sukha yA duHkha kA bhoga karatI hai  /  isa prakAra niyati aura
aniyati ina donoM kA kartApana yukti evaM tarka se sAbita hotA hai  /  jo
niyativAdI kevala niyati meM hI kartRtva ko svIkAra karate haiM ve nirbuddhika-
buddhi rahita haiM, aisA jAnanA caahiye| evamege u pAsatthA, te bhajjo
vippagabbhiA  /  evaM uvadviA saMtA, Na te dukkhavimokkhayA  // 5 //  chAyA -
evameke tu pAvasthA ste bhUyo vipragalbhitAH  /  evamupasthitAH santo na te
duHkhavimokSakAH  //  anuvAda - niyativAdI pUrvokta rUpa meM eka mAtra niyati ko
hI sukha tathA duHkha kA kartA mAnate haiM, yaha unakI dhRSTatA hai-durAgraha
pUrNa kathana hai  /  ve apane mantavya ke anusAra pAralaukika-dharma tapa Adi
se sambaddha kriyA meM saMlagna hokara bhI duHkha se chuTakArA nahIM pA sakate
/  /  TIkA - tadevaM yuktyA niyativAdaM duSiyitvA tadvAdinAmapAyadarzanAyAha-
evamiti pUrvA'bhyupagamasaMsUcakaH, sarvasminnapi vastuni niyatAniyate satyeke
niyatimevA'vazyambhAvyeva kAlezvarAdernirAkaraNena nirhetukatayA
niyativAdamAzritAH  /  turavadhAraNe, taevanAnye, kiM viziSTAH punasta iti
darzayati-yuktikadambakAdvahistiSThantIti pArzvasthAH paraloka kriyA pArzvasthA
vA, niyatipakSasamAzrayaNAtparaloka kriyAvaiyarthya, yadi vA-pAza iva
pAza:-karmabandhanaM, tacceha yuktivikalaniyativAdaprarUpaNaM tatra sthitAH
pAzasthAH  /  anye'pyekAntavAdinaH kAlezvarAdikAraNikAH pArzvasthAH pAzasthA vA
draSTavyA ityAdi te punarniyativAdamAzrityA'pi, bhUyo vividhaM vizeSeNa vA
pragalbhitA dhASTayoM pagatA paraloka sAdhikASu kriyASupravartante dhASA
zrayaNaM tu teSAM niyativAdAzrayaNe satyeva punarapi tatpratipanthinISu kriyAsu
prvrtnaaditi| te punarevamapyupasthitAH paralokasAdhikAsu kriyAsu pravattA api
santo nAtmaduHkhavimokSakAH  /  asamyak pravRttatvAnnAtmAnaM duHkhAdvimocayanti
]gatA niyativAdinaH  // 5 //  TIkArtha - sUtrakAra yukti dvArA niyativAda ko
sadoSa siddha karate hue unakI vinAzonmukhatA kA digdarzana karAte haiM-prastuta
gAthA meM AyA huA-'evaM' zabda pahale varNita niyativAdI siddhAnta kI ora iMgita
karatA hai| ve sabhI padArtha-vastueM niyata evaM aniyata donoM prakAra kI hotI
haiM kintu kaI puruSa aise haiM jo kAla, Izvara Adi ko asvIkAra kara kevala
niyati-avazyaMbhAvitA yA honahAra meM hI kisI kAraNa ke binA kartA rUpa meM
svIkAra karate haiM  /  yahAM 'tu' zabda avadhAraNa, nizcitatA yA jora dene ke
artha meM hai  /  isakA Azaya yaha hotA hai ki niyativAda meM AsthA rakhane vAle
una logoM kA hI aisA mantavya hai  /  anyoM kA nahIM  /  ve niyativAdI kisa
prakAra ke hote haiM. isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue AgamakAra pratipAdita karate
haiM ki ve niyativAdI pArzvastha haiM  /  pArzvastha unheM kahA jAtA hai jo
yuktikadambaka-yuktiyoM ke samUha se bAhara yA eka tarapha rahatA hai-yuktiyoM
ko svIkAra nahIM karatA athavA eka artha yaha bhI hai ki ve niyativAdI
pAralaukika dhArmika kriyA se bahirbhUta rahate haiM kyoMki ve to niyati meM hI
saba kA kartRtva svIkAra karate haiM  /  aisA mAnane para unakI pAraloka
viSayaka -64

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement of self-time authority is proven to be meaningless. There is
another interpretation of this word. When the word 'pas' in the word 'pasattha'
is taken as 'pas' instead of 'pārśva', it means that it is like 'pas', it is
located near, they are called 'pas'. The meaning of 'pas' is karma-bandhana. The
subject presented here is the proposition of prohibited determinism. The
determinists in it are 'pasattha' - bound by karma-bandhana. Other proponents,
who accept the agency of all only in time and God etc., should also be
understood as 'pārśvastha' or 'pasattha'. Although determinists believe that
everything is fructified by destiny, they are still inclined to perform various
actions that are related to the attainment of the afterlife. This is their great
audacity and arrogance. It is such a great audacity and prejudice that
determinists accept the principle that everything happens only by destiny, but
they perform actions that are contrary to the principle. Therefore, even while
engaging in so-called religious activities that aim to attain the afterlife,
they cannot free their souls from suffering. The reason is that they are not
engaged in action with the knowledge of right faith and right belief. Therefore,
they cannot free their souls from suffering. The discussion of determinism ends
here.  The deer that are without a protector are very fickle. They doubt where
there is no need to doubt, where there is no fear, and they do not fear where
there is fear. Thus, those who are fearful in a safe place and fearless in a
place bound by 'pas' - bondage, fall into the place bound by 'pas' due to their
ignorance and fear. Similarly, those who believe in other philosophies, abandon
the protection of the non-dualistic principle, like the armor of protection, and
take refuge in monism, which proves to be disastrous for them.  Commentary: To
refute the current view of knowledge, an example is given - just as the deer,
which are swift and are forest animals, are without protection, they are without
protection, meaning they are deprived of protection. Or, if the bondage is the
bondage of words, etc., then they are terrified, they are afraid, their eyes are
filled with fear, their minds are confused, they are deprived of right
discrimination, they doubt the places that are free from false bonds, etc., and
they doubt them, considering them to be producers of harm. And those that are
doubtful, doubt.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH kriyA nirarthaka siddha hotI hai  /  isa zabda kI
eka vyAkhyA aura hai  /  "pAsatthA" pada meM Aye 'pAsa' zabda ko pArzva ke
badale jaba pAsa ke rUpa meM lete haiM to usakA artha yaha hotA hai ki yo pAsa
ke samAna hai, pAsa meM avasthita hai, ve pAsa kahe jAte haiM  /  'pAsa' kA
artha karmabaMdhana hai  /  yahAM prastuta viSaya yukti varjita niyativAda kA
pratipAdana hai  /  usameM sthita niyativAdI pAsattha hai-karmabaMdha se jakar3e
hue haiM  /  anya vAdI, jo ekAnta rUpa se kAla evaM Izvara Adi meM hI sabakA
kartRtva svIkAra karate haiM ve bhI pArzvastha yA pAsattha hai, aisA samajhanA
caahiye| niyativAdI yadyapi yaha mAnate haiM ki saba kucha niyati se hI phalita
hotA hai  /  phira bhI ve taraha taraha vaisI kriyAeM karane meM pravRta rahate
haiM jinakA paraloka sAdhane se saMbaMdha hai  /  yaha unakI kitanI bar3I
dhRSTatADhIThapana hai  /  yaha kitanI bhArI dhRSTatA va durAgraha hai ki
niyativAdI saba kucha niyati se hI hotA hai, isa siddhAnta ko svIkAra kiye hue
hai para kriyAeM aisI karate haiM jo siddhAnta se viparIta hai  /  ataeva
paraloka ko sAdhane vAlI tathAkathita dharma kriyAoM meM saMlagna hote hue bhI
ve apanI AtmA ko du:kha se nahIM chur3A sakate  /  kAraNa yaha hai ki ve samyak-
satzraddhAna yukta jJAna pUrvaka kriyA meM saMlagna nahIM haiM  /  ataH ve apanI
AtmA ko duH kha se mukta nahIM kara sakate  /  niyativAda kA vivecana samApta
hotA hai  /  javiNo migA jahA saMtA, paritANeNa vajiA  /  asaMkiyAI saMkaMti,
saMkiAI asaMkiNo  // 6 //  pariyANi ANi saMketA, pAsitANi asaMkiNo  /
aNNANabhayasaMviggA saMpaliMti tahiM tahiM  // 7 //  chAyA - javinomRgA yathA
santaH paritrANena varjitAH  /  azaGkitAni zaGkante zaGkitAnyazaGkinaH  //
paritrANi tAni zaMkamAnAH pAzitAnyazaGkinaH  /  ajJAnabhayasaMvignAH
samparyyayante tatra tatra  //  anuvAda - ve mRga jo rakSaka rahita hai atyanta
capalatA yukta haiM  /  jina sthAnoM meM zaMkA nahIM kI jAnI cAhiye, jahAM koI
bhaya AzaMkita nahIM hai, vahAM zaMkA karate haiM aura jahAM bhaya kI AzaMkA hai
vahAM bhaya nahIM karate  /  isa prakAra surakSita sthAna meM AzaMkita rahane
vAle aura pAsayukta-bandhana yukta sthAna meM anAzaMkita rahane vAle ajJAnayukta
bhayodvigna mRga apanI bhrAMti ke kAraNa pAsayukta sthAna meM hI girate haiM usI
prakAra anya darzanoM meM vizvAsa karane vAle rakSAyukta-anekAMta siddhAnta
jaise rakSA ke kavaca se yukta dharma yA darzana ko chor3akara ekAntavAda kA
Azraya lete haiM jo unake liye anarthakArI siddha hotA hai| TIkA -
sAmpratamajJAnimataM dUSayituM dRSTAntamAha - yathA javino vegavantaH santo mRgA
AraNyAH pazavaH pari-samantAt trAyate rakSatIti paritrANaM tena varjitA rahitAH
paritrANavikalA ityarthaH  /  yadi vA-paritAnaM vAgurAdibandhanaM tena tarjitA
bhayaM grAhitAH santobhayodbhAMtalocanA:samAkulIbhUtAnta:karaNAH samyag
vivekavikalA azaMGkanIyAni kUTapAzadirahitAni sthAnAnyazaMkAhA'Ni tAnyeva
zaMkante'narthotpAdakatvena gahNanti  /  yAni punaH zaMkAhA'Ni, zaMkA -65)

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The English translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The Shri
Sutrakritanga Sutra states that those things which are worthy of Yogyata
(fitness) are considered as Shankita (doubtful) and Shankayogya (worthy of
doubt), such as Vagura (fetters) and others. Those who are engaged in doubting
them, they wander about in Pasha (bonds) and other such things, according to the
context.  Further, to reveal the extreme delusion, it is said - "Parityrajati"
(it protects). The Parityrajana (protection) born in them, those who, due to
extreme foolishness, have perverted intellect, even though they are worthy of
protection, apprehend fear. Similarly, the Pashita (bound) ones, i.e., those
endowed with Pasha (bonds), considering them as causing Anarthapada (harm),
while they themselves, out of ignorance and fear, are completely overwhelmed and
subjugated, either considering the Shankaneya (doubtful) as Ashankaneya (not
doubtful) or the Parityrajanopaita (endowed with protection) as Pashadi
Anarthopeta (endowed with bonds and other harms), wander about in those places
where there is abundance of Anartha (harm), like Pasha, Vagura, etc., getting
completely absorbed in them.  Having established this illustration, the
Ekantavadins (absolutists), who are the proponents of Niyativada (fatalism) and
Ajnanavada (ignorance), should be refuted as Dantika (tamed), because they too,
being Ekantavadins (absolutists) and Ajnanika (ignorant), devoid of Anekantavada
(non-absolutism) which is the protector, apprehend the Anekantavada, which is
free from all defects, by accepting the causality of Kalesvaraadi (time, God,
etc.), as not worthy of doubt, while they do not doubt the Ekanta (absolute)
Niyatyajnanavada (doctrine of fatalistic ignorance), though it is worthy of
doubt. Being such, they, while doubting the Anekantavada which is worthy of
Parityrajana (protection), considering the Ekantavada, which is logically
untenable and full of Anarthas (harms), as not worthy of doubt, remain enveloped
in ignorance, and wander about in those places of Karmabandha (bondage of
karmas).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram saMjAtA yeSuyogyatvAttAni zaMkitAni zaMGkAyogyAni
vAgurAdIni tAnyazaMGkAtanasteSu zaMGkAyakurvANAH tatra tatra pAzAdike
samparyyayantaityuttareNa sambandhaH ||6|| punarapyetadevAtimohAviSkaraNAyAha -
paritrAyata iti paritrANaM tajjAtaM yeSu tAni tathA, paritrANayuktAnyeva
zaGkamAnA atimUDhatvAdviparyyastabuddhayaH trAtaryyapi bhayamutprekSamANAH tathA
pAzitAni pAzopetAni - anarthApAdakAnyazaGkinasteSu zaMGkAmakurvANAH
saMto'jJAnena bhayena ca saMviggatti samyag vyAptAH vazIkRtAH
zaGkanIyamazaGkanIyaM vA tathA paritrANopetaM pAzAdyanarthopetaM vA samyag
vivekanA jAnAnAstatra tatrAnarthabahule pAzavAgurAdike bandhane samparyyayante
sam ekIbhAvena pari samantAdayante yAnti vA gacchantItyuktaM bhavati  /  tadevaM
dRSTAntaM prasAdhya niyativAdAdyekAntAjJAnavAdino dAntikatvenA''yojyAH
yataste'pyekAntavAdino'jJAnikA strANabhUtA'nekAntavAdavarjitAH
sarvadoSavinirmuktaM
kAlezvarAdikAraNavAdA'bhyupagamenAnAzaGkanIyamanekAntavAdamAzaGkante,
zaGkanIyaJca niyatyajJAnavAdamekAntaM na zaGkante te evaMbhUtAH
paritrANArhe'pyanekAntavAde zaGkA kurvANA
yuktyA'ghaTamAnakamanarthabahulamekAntavAda mazaGkanIyatvena
gRNanto'jJAnAvRttAsteSu teSu karmabandhanasthAneSu samparyyayanta iti  // 7 //
TIkArtha - zAstrakAra ajJAniyoM ke siddhAnta meM doSa batAne hetu dRSTAnta kA
pratipAdana karate haiMjaise vegavAna tIvra gatizIla hiraNa Adi jaMgalI pazu
paritrANa se vaMcita hote haiM  /  paritrANa kA vyutpattilabhya artha pari-cAroM
ora se, trANa-rakSA kiyA jAnA hai| pazuoM ke liye aisA koI paritrANa yA rakSaNa
kA sAdhana nahIM hotA  /  paritrANa kA eka rUpa paritAna hotA hai  /  lagAma Adi
baMdhana ko paritAna kahA jAtA hai  /  usase tarjita bhayagrasta pazu Dara ke
kAraNa udbhAnta locana aura Akulita hRdaya ho jAte haiM arthAt unakI A~khoM meM
bhaya vyApta ho jAtA hai  /  unakA hRdaya becaina ho jAtA hai| unheM samyak
viveka bhale bure kA jJAna nahIM rahatA  /  ve viveka zUnya hote haiM  /  yahI
kAraNa hai ki ve kUTapAza- baMdhana Adi se varjita sthAna meM jahAM zaMkA nahIM
kI jAnI cAhiye, jo nirApada hote haiM, usameM ve zaMkA karate haiM  /  unako ve
anarthotpAdaka- ahita janaka mAnate haiM tathA jina sthAnoM meM zaMkA kI jAnI
cAhiye, jahAM unheM pakar3ane hetu baMdhana Adi lage rahate haiM, rakhe rahate
haiM, vahAM ve zaMkA nahIM karate - niDara hokara cale jAte haiN| ve vahAM
bandhanoM meM baMdha jAte haiN| Age kI gAthA se ise yoM jor3a lenA cAhiye  /
sUtrakAra ajJAnI kI ati mohayukta avasthA ko vyakta karane ke liye kahate
atyanta mUrkhatA ke kAraNa viveka zUnya yA viparIta jJAnayukta vyakti surakSita
sthAna meM zaMkA karate haiM bhaya kI AzaMkA rakhate haiN| jahAM anarthotpAdaka
kaSTa kAraka pAza- phaMde, jAla, bandhana Adi hote haiM vahAM ve nizaMka rahate
haiN| unakI tulanA una pazuoM se kI jAtI hai jo zaMkanIya sthAnoM para zaMkA
nahIM karate tathA azaMkanIya aura rakSAyukta sthAna meM zaMkA karate haiN| ve
nahIM jAnate ki unake liye kauna sA sthAna anarthakAraka hai  /  ve apane ajJAna
yA vivekazUnyatA ke kAraNa jAla meM phaMde meM yA baMdhana meM jA par3ate haiM
/  yaha dRSTAnta niyativAdI tathA ekAMtarUpeNa ajJAnavAdiyoM ke sAtha jor3anA
cAhiye  /  ekAntavAdI unhIM ajJAnI pazuoM kI jyoM hai jinakA yahAM dRSTAntarUpa
meM ullekha huA hai  /  ve ajJAnI puruSa anekAntavAda se jo rakSA rUpa hai,
rahita haiM  /  anekAntavAda aisA darzana hai jo saba prakAra ke doSoM se
vinirmukta hai- rahita hai  /  apekSA bheda se kAla, Izvara Adi ko bhI kAraNa
mAnane ke kAraNa zaMkAyukta nahIM hai usameM kisI prakAra kI AzaMkA nahIM hotI,
niyativAda tathA ajJAnavAda aikAntika dRSTikoNa ko liye hue haiN| isaliye ve
zaMkAspada hai- zaMkA karane yogya hai  /  phira bhI ve niyativAdI I 66 -

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The self-proclaimed authorities
and the ignorant do not doubt them, but accept them without any hesitation.
Though they are afraid of the non-absolutist doctrine that provides liberation,
and do not proceed in that direction, they accept the absolutist doctrine -
which is against logic and reasoning, and is destructive in its consequences, as
free from doubt and secure, and thus they enter the realms of karmic bondage.
(2)  If that (deer) were to leap over the binding, or go beneath the binding, it
would be freed from the fetters, but the dull-witted one does not see that.
Commentary: The author, not being satisfied with the previous example, presents
another illustration to point out additional flaws. The term 'bandha' refers to
the fence, snare or any kind of binding. If the deer, trapped in it, were to
jump over it or cleverly get out from underneath, it could free itself from the
fetters. But the ignorant, deluded one does not perceive this means of escape.
The self-harming one with harmful knowledge, having arrived at the uneven end,
is bound by the fetters and there he meets his doom. (9)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH aura ajJAnavAdI unameM zaMkA nahIM karate,
nizaMkatayA unheM apanAeM rahate haiM  /  yoM ve paritrANa karane vAle
anekAntavAda meM AzaMkA rakhate hue usase bhayabhIta rahate hue usa dizA meM Age
na bar3hate hue ekAntavAda-jo tarka aura yukti ke viruddha hai, jo pariNAma meM
anarthotpAdaka hai, usako azaMkanIya-zaMkA vivarjita surakSita mAnate hue
svIkAra karate haiM, yoM ve karma bandhana ke sthAnoM meM jAte haiM  /  (2) aha
taM paveja bajhaM, ahe bajjhassa vA vae  /  mucceja payapAsAo, taM tu maMde Na
dehae  // 8 //  chAyA - atha taM plaveta bandha madho bandhasya vA vrajet  /
muccetpadapAzAttattu mando na pazyati  //  anuvAda - pUrvokta dRSTAnta kA Age
spaSTIkaraNa karate hue kahA jAtA hai ki vaha pUrva varNita mRga yadi lage hue
baMdhana ke Upara se kUda kara calA jAya athavA baMdhana ke nIce se caturAI se
nikala jAya to vaha usa baMdhana se chUTa sakatA hai kintu usa ajJAnI kI dRSTi
meM yaha bAta nahIM AtI  /  vaha aisA nahIM krtaa| TIkA -
pUrvadoSairaparituSyannAcAryo doSantaraditsayA punarapi prAktana
dRSTAntamadhikRtyA''ha - atha anantara masau mRgastat 'vajjha' miti baddhaM
bandhanAkAreNa vyavasthitaM vAgurAdikaM vA bandhanaM baMdhakatvAd
baMdhamityucyate tadevabhUtaM kUTapAzAdikaM bandhanaM yadyasAvupari plaveta
tadadhastAdatikramyopari gaccheta, tasya bAderbandhanasyAdho (vA) gacchet tata
evaM kriyamANe'saumRgaH pade nAzaH padapAzo vAgurAdibandhanaM tasmAnmucyeta yadi
vA padaM kUTaM pAzaH pratItastAbhyAM mucyeta, kvacitpadapAzAdIti paThyate,
AdigrahaNAd vadha tADanamAraNAdikAH kriyAH gRhyante, evaM saMtamapi
tamanarthapariharaNopAyaM maMdojaDo'jJAnAvRtto na dehatIti na pazyatIti  // 8 //
TIkArtha - zAstrakAra pahale dRSTAnta dvArA doSoM kA digdarzana karAte haiM  /
usase unheM saMtoSa nahIM hotaa| isaliye usa dRSTAnta meM ora doSa dikhAne hetu
ve pratipAdana karate haiM - vAgurA-phaMdA, jAla Adi baMdhana yA baMdha kahe
jAte haiM  /  inameM sthita-par3A huA hirana yadi kucha kara inheM lAMgha jAya
athavA camar3e se bane usa baMdhana ke nIce hokara vahAM se nikala jAya to vaha
usase baca sakatA hai  /  yahAM jo 'pada' zabda AyA hai usakA eka abhiprAya
kapaTa bhI hai  /  pAza, bandhana kA nAma hai jo prasiddha hai  /  vaha mRga ina
donoM se mukta ho sakatA hai arthAt kapaTapUrvaka cAlAkI ke sAtha pakar3ane ke
liye lagAye gaye phaMde se-jAla se vaha chUTa sakatA hai  /  kahIM kahIM
'padapAzAdi' aisA pATha AyA hai| vahAM 'Adi' kA abhiprAya vadha-bAMdhanA,
tAr3anA-pITanA aura mAraNa-jAna lenA hai  /  ye kriyAeM vahAM jur3atI hai  /
vaha viveka vikala ajJAna yukta mRga anartha yA saMkaTa ko dUra karane kA upAya
vidyamAna hone para bhI use nahIM dekhatA  /  ahiappA'hiyapaNNANe,
visamaMteNuvAgate sa braddhe payapAseNaM, tathya dhAyaM niyacchai  // 9 //
chAyA - ahitA'tmA'hitaprajJAnaH viSamAntenopAgataH  /  .. sa baddhaH padapAzena
tatra ghAtaM niyacchati  //  67

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The deer, being ignorant, does not know its own benefit
and harm through intellect, and continues to cause its own harm and loss. It
goes to those uneven, high and low places where traps, snares etc. are laid. Its
feet get entangled in the bondage and it gets destroyed, perishes.  Commentary -
To illustrate the state that it attains, the author says - That deer is
'ahitātmā', i.e. one who does not do good for his own self, 'ahitaprajñānaḥ',
i.e. one who has intellect that causes harm. Being such 'ahitaprajñāna', it goes
to the uneven place having traps, snares etc. and if it falls there, it gets
bound by those traps etc. and attains various states of misery and calamity. In
that bondage, it meets its destruction, i.e. death.  Thus, there are some
Śramaṇas (ascetics) who are 'mithyādṛṣṭi' (of wrong belief), 'anārya' (devoid of
noble qualities), who doubt and fear in the observances where there should be no
doubt, and do not doubt in those which are doubtful and fearsome.  Commentary -
Having illustrated with the example, the author himself explains the purport -
Just as the deer, being enveloped in ignorance, attains various calamities,
similarly, some Śramaṇas, being of particular heretical beliefs, are
'mithyādṛṣṭi', i.e. of perverted view, and 'anārya', i.e. devoid of noble
qualities. They doubt and fear in the observances which are not to be doubted,
and do not doubt in those which are doubtful and fearsome, like the deluded
deer.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 | zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - vaha mRga ajJAnI hone ke kAraNa buddhi
dvArA apanA hita-ahita na jAnane ke kAraNa apanA ahita-hAni nukasAna karatA
rahatA hai  /  vaha una viSama-UMce nIce, ubar3a-khAbar3a sthAnoM meM jahAM
phaMde jAla Adi lage hote haiM, calA jAtA hai  /  usakA paira baMdhana meM
jakar3a jAtA hai aura vaha naSTa ho jAtA hai, samApta ho jAtA TIkA -
kUTapAzAdikaJcApazyan yAmavasthAmavApnoti tAM darzayitumAha - sa mRgo'hitAtmA
tathA'hitaM prajJAnaM bodho yasya so'hitaprajJAnaH, sacAhitaprajJAnaH san
viSamAntena kUTapAzAdiyuktena pradezenopAgataH yadi vA viSamAnte kUTapAzAdike
AtmAna manupAtayet, tatra cAsau patito baddhazca tena kUTAdinA
padapAzAdInanarthabahulAn * avasthAvizeSAn prAptaH tatra bandhane ghAtaM vinAzaM
niyacchati prApnotIti  // 9 //  TIkArtha - AgamakAra yahAM usa mRga kI durvasthA
kA varNana karate hue kahate haiM jo kUTapAza Adi ko na dekhate hue udhara
bar3ha jAtA hai-vaha puruSa ahitAtmA hai-apanI AtmA kA hita nahIM karatA hai,
ahita karatA hai, vaha ahita prajJAna hai, aisI buddhi se yukta hai, jo ahita yA
hAni karatI hai  /  vaha jAla, phaMde Adi se yukta U~ce nIce sthAna meM calA
jAtA hai aura vahAM gira par3atA hai jahAM pAza-phaMdA Adi lage hote haiM  /
vaha unameM baMdha jAtA hai  /  usake paira Adi aMga usameM phaMsa jAte haiM  /
vaha anartha kaSTa yukta avasthA yA duHkha prApta karatA hai  /  usI baMdhana
meM vaha vinaSTa ho jAtA hai-mara jAtA hai| evaM tu samaNA ege, micchadiTThI
aNAriA  /  asaMkiAI saMkaMtiH, saMkiAI asaMkiNo  // 10 //  chAyA - evaM tu
zramaNA eke mithyAdRSTayo'nAryAH  /  azaGkitAni zaGkante zaMkitAnyazaGkinaH  //
anuvAda - upara ke dRSTAnta ke anusAra kaI aise mithyAdRSTi-samyaktva rahita,
anArya-uttama guNa varjita, tathA kathita zramaNa una anuSThAnoM meM kAryoM meM,
jahAM kucha bhI zaMkA nahIM kI jAnI cAhiye, zaMkA karate haiMDarate haiM aura jo
kArya zaMkA karane yogya haiM-zaMkanIya haiM, jinase DaranA cAhiye unameM ve
zaMkA nahIM karate  /  TIkA - evaM dRSTAnta pradarzya sUtrakAra eva
dASTAntikamajJAnavipAkaM darzayitumAha - evamiti yathA mRgA ajJAnAvRttA
anarthamanekazaH prApnuvanti turavadhAraNe, evameva zramaNAH kecit
pAkhaMDavizeSAzritA eke na sarve, kimbhUtAsta iti darzayati-mithyA-viparItA
dRSTiryeSAmajJAnavAdinAM niyativAdinA vA te mithyAdRSTayaH tathA anAr2yA
ArAdyAtAH, sarvaheyadharmebhya ityAryAH na A- anAryA
ajJAnavRttatvAdasadanuSThAyina iti yAvad  /  ajJAnAvRtatvaJca darzayati-
azaGkitAni azaGkanIyAti sudharmAnuSThAnAdIni zaGkarAnAH tathA zaGkanIyAni
apAyabahulAni ekAnta pakSa samAzrayaNAni azaMkino mRgA iva mUDha
cetasastattadA''rambhanteyadyadanAya sampadyata iti  // 10 //  TIkArtha-
AgamakAra Upara dRSTAnta prastuta kara aba usakA tulanA ke rUpa meM vaha sAra
batalAte haiM, jo unakA pratipAdya hai - jisa prakAra ajJAna se AvRtta-Dhake
hue, ajJAna yukta, vivekazUnya mRga taraha taraha ke kaSTa pAte haiM, usI taraha
ve puruSa jo pAkhaNDa vizeSa ko dharma ke nAma para adharma ke siddhAntoM ko
svIkAra karate haiM, zramaNa kahe 680

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The Right to Speak at the Appropriate Time Many types of
misfortunes, sufferings, and pains are obtained. Here, the word 'you' used in
the verse is conceptual. The ascetics (Śramaṇa) are of what kind, the author
gives this direction, whose vision is contrary to right faith or true faith -
they are called Mithyādṛṣṭi (those with false beliefs). The advocates of
ignorance and fatalism are Mithyādṛṣṭi. Those persons who remain far from all
the detestable or renunciable dharmas (qualities) are called Ārya. Those who are
not Ārya are called Anārya, i.e., those who, being covered by ignorance, remain
engaged in inauspicious, unreal conduct. Those who were discussed earlier also
fall into this category of Anārya among other philosophical schools. The
scriptural author (Āgamakāra) indicates that those persons who are engrossed in
other philosophical schools are covered by ignorance, they are such that doubt
should not be raised about them, who are not worthy of doubt, in this way, in
the best religious observances and activities, they remain doubtful, and what is
worthy of doubt, they are endowed with traps, snares, etc. From the perspective
of the ignorant person, those who are endowed with principles contrary to
absolutism. In such places, they go without doubt, they are like deer lacking in
discrimination, ignorant. They commit acts of violence, etc., the fruit of which
is inauspicious.  The shadow of the exposition of the Dharma, that they doubt,
the foolish ones. They do not doubt the violent acts, the unmanifest, the
unwise.  Translation: Those other philosophers - who believe in philosophical
systems other than Jainism, who are devoid of knowledge, lacking in
discrimination, and empty of scriptural knowledge - they remain doubtful about
the true exposition of Dharma, the true principles. But they do not doubt the
violent acts, being unmanifest and unwise.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH jAte haiM - aneka prakAra ke anartha, kaSTa,
duHkha prApta karate haiN| yahAM gAthA meM 'tU' zabda kA prayoga huA hai vaha
avadhAraNA-mUlaka hai  /  ve zramaNa kisa prakAra ke haiM, sUtrakAra yaha
digdarzana karAte haiM, jinakI dRSTi mithyA-asamyak yA satzraddhA ke pratikUla
hai - ve mithyAdRSTi kahe jAte haiM  /  ajJAnavAdI tathA niyativAdI mithyAdRSTi
haiM  /  jo puruSa samasta heya yA tyAjya dharmoM se dUra rahate haiM, unheM
Arya kahA jAtA hai  /  jo Arya nahIM haiM unheM anArya kahA jAtA hai arthAt jo
ajJAna se AvRtta r3hake hue hone ke kAraNa asat - azubha anuSThAna kArya meM
lage rahate haiM ve anArya haiM  /  jinakI pahale carcA kI gaI hai ve anya
matavAdI isI anArya koTi meM Ate haiM  /  AgamakAra yaha digdarzana karAte haiM
ki ve anyAnya matavAdoM meM par3e hue puruSa ajJAna se r3hake hue haiM, ve aise
haiM ki jahAM zaMkA nahIM kI jAnI cAhiye, jo zaMkA ke yogya nahIM haiM, isa
prakAra ke uttama dhArmika anuSThAnoM meM, kAryoM meM ve zaMkAzIla bane rahate
haiM tathA jo zaMkA karane yogya hai, jAla, phaMde Adi se yukta haiM  /  ajJAnI
puruSa kI dRSTi se jo ekAntavAda ke viparIta siddhAnta se yukta haiM  /  aise
sthAnoM meM zaMkA nahIM karate nizaMka hokara jAte haiM, ve anya darzanoM meM
vizvAsa karane vAle mRga ke samAna viveka vikala haiM, ajJAnI haiN| ve
AraMbhahiMsAdi karate haiM jisakA phala anarthajanaka hotA hai  // 10 //
dhammapaNNavaNA jA sA, taM tu saMkaMti mUDhagA  /  AraMbhAI na saMkaMti aviyattA
akoviA  // 11 //  chAyA dharmaprajJApanA yA sA tAntu zaGkante mUr3hakAH  /
AraMbhAnna zaGkante avyaktA akovidAH || - anuvAda ve anyatIrthI - jaina darzana
ke atirikta anya darzanoM meM vizvAsa karane vAle jo jJAna rahita, viveka rahita
aura zastra jJAna zUnya haiM ve dharma kI jo sahI vyAkhyA hai, jo satya
siddhAnta hai, unameM zaMkAzIla rahate haiM aura Arambha hiMsA Adi meM vaise
siddhAntoM meM nizaMka pravRtta hote haiM  /  -- TIkA
zaMkanIyAzaMkanIyaviparyyAsamAha - dharmasya kSAntyAdidazalakSaNopetasya yA
prajJApanA - prarUpaNA tAntu iti tAmeva
zaGkante'saddharmaprarUpaNeyamityevamadhyavasyanti ye punaH pApopAdAnabhUtAH
samArambhAstAnnazaGkante, kimiti ? yato'vyaktAH mugdhAH sahajasadviveka vikalAH
tathA akovidA apaMDitA: sacchAstrAvabodhara hitA iti  //  11  //  TIkArtha
zAstrakAra zaMkanIya- zaMkA karane yogya aura azaMkanIya-zaMkA nahIM karane
yogya dharmoM kI pArasparika viparItatA kA pratipAdana karate hue kahate haiM -
kSAnti, kSamAzIlatA, sahanazIlatA Adi jo dasa lakSaNa yukta dasa prakAra ke
dharma kI jo prajJApanA- prarUpaNA yA saiddhAntika vyAkhyA hai, ve ajJAnI usameM
zaMkAzIla rahate haiN| ve aisA mAnate haiM ki yaha dharma kI nahIM- adharma kI
prarUpaNA-yA vivecanA hai  /  ve una AraMbhajanita - hiMsApUrNa kAryoM meM zaMkA
nahIM karate jo pApa ke upAdAna bhUta-azubha bandha ke kAraNabhUta haiM  /
prazna kI zailI meM ve kahate haiM ve vaisA kyoM karate haiM ? uttara rUpa meM
batAte haiM ki ve svabhAva se hI avyakta - viveka rahita - mugdha - mUr3ha aura
ayogya hai  /  apaNDita hai- paMDA yA buddhirahita hai  /  satzAstroM kA jJAna
nahIM hai  /  69

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra.
Sarvapragam viukkassam, sarvam numam vihuniya. Appattiyam akammanase, eyamattum
mige chue. ॥12॥  Meaning - The karmas of the soul are destroyed and cut off only
when it renounces greed, ego, deceit, fraud and hypocrisy. But the ignorant
being, like the deer in the example, does not know the reality, and therefore
does not renounce anger etc.  Commentary - They, the ignorant persons who are
enveloped in ignorance, do not attain that which they should attain. The author
explains this by saying - "Sarvapragam" means the greed which is present
everywhere, that greed should be renounced. Similarly, the diverse kinds of
pride or arrogance called "vyutkarsha" should be renounced, and also the "numam"
i.e. deceit, fraud and hypocrisy should be renounced. By renouncing the
passions, the renunciation of the deluding karmas is also implied. And due to
the absence of karmas, he becomes "akarmansa" i.e. devoid of karmas. This state
of being devoid of karmas is attained through specific knowledge, not through
ignorance. Therefore, the author says that the ignorant being, like the deer,
"tyajet" i.e. abandons or falls away from this state of being devoid of karmas.
Ye eyam na abhijananti, micchadditthi anaria. Miga va pasabaddha te, ghaya
mesanti nantaso. ॥13॥  Meaning - Those who do not know this, the false-
believers, the non-Aryans, like the deer bound in a snare, will meet with
destruction endlessly.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  savvappagaM viukkassaM, savvaM NUmaM vihUNiA  /
appattiaM akammaMse, eyamaTuM mige cue  // 12 //  chAyA - sarvAtmakaM vyutkarSaM
sarvaM chAdakaM vidhUya  /  _apratyayamakarmAMza etamarthaM mRgastyajet  //
anuvAda - AtmA ke tabhI karma nirjIrNa hote haiM-kaTate haiM-jaba vaha lAlaca,
ahaMkAra, chala, kapaTa aura kapaTa kA tyAga kara detI hai, kintu ajJAnarahita
jIva pUrvokta dRSTAnta meM kahe gaye hiraNa ke samAna hai  /  vaha asaliyata ko
nahIM jAnatA, isaliye krodha Adi kA tyAga nahIM karatA  /  TIkA - te ca
ajJAnAvRttA yannApnuvanti tadarzanAyAha - sarvatrA'pyAtmA yasyA'sau sarvAtmako
lobha staM vidhUyeti sambandhaH  /  tathA vividha utkarSoM garvo vyutkarSo, mAna
ityarthaH, tathA 'NUmaM' tti mAyA tAM vidhUya tathA 'appattiyaM' tti krodhaM
vidhUya, kaSAyavidhUnanena ca mohanIyavidhUnanamAveditaM bhavati
tadapagamAccAzeSakarmAbhAvaH pratipAdito bhavatItyAha- akarmAMza iti na vidyate
karmAMzo'syetyakarmAMzaH sa cAkarmAMzo viziSTajJAnAd bhavati nA'jJAnAdityeva
darzayati-enamarthaM karmAbhAvalakSaNaM mRga iva mRgaH-ajJAnI 'cue' tti tyajet
/  vibhaktivipariNAmena vA asmAdevaMbhUtAdarthAt cyavet bhrazyediti  // 12 //
TIkArtha - ve ajJAnayukta puruSa kisa vastu ko prApta nahIM kara sakate, isakA
spaSTIkaraNa karane kI dRSTi se AgamakAra kahate haiM - yahAM isa gAthA meM
pahalA zabda 'savvappagama' AyA hai, isakA saMskRta rUpa sarvAtmaka hotA hai|
sarvAtmaka kA artha lobha hai, kyoMki vaha sarvatra-saba meM pAyA jAtA hai  /
vaise lobha ke artha meM yaha eka pAribhASika zabda hai  /  usa lobha ke tyAga
kA yahAM sambandha yA abhiprAya hai  /  vividha prakAra kA taraha taraha kA
utkarSa-apane ko bahuta UMcA yA bar3A mAnanA yA garva karanA vyutkarSa kahalAtA
hai  /  usakA Azaya mAna hai  /  yahAM 'NUmaM' zabda mAyA yA chala kapaTa ke
artha meM AyA hai usa mAna, mAyA aura krodha tathA kaSAyoM kA vidhUnana kara-
Atma bala se unheM kaMpA kara unakA parityAga kara jIva samasta karmoM kA
apagama kara detA hai-kSaya kara detA hai  /  yahA~ kaSAya tyAga ke pratipAdana
se mohanIya karma kA tyAga bhI-samAviSTa ho jAtA hai  /  vaha akarmAMza-karmoM
kA apagama yA nAza viziSTa jJAna se hotA hai, ajJAna se nahIM hotA  /  ataeva
sUtrakAra batalAte haiM ki 'evamaTuM'-evaM arthaisa karma ke kSaya rUpa artha yA
prayojana ko-karaNIya kArya ko ajJAnI jIva usa mRga ke samAna chor3a detA haiuse
kartA nhiiN| yahAM vibhakti kA viparINamana kara yaha bhI artha kiyA jA sakatA
hai ki ajJAna yukta jIva karma kSaya rUpa lakSya se bhraSTa patita ho jAtA hai|
je eyaM nAbhijANaMti, micchadiTThI aNAriyA  /  migA vA pAsabaddhA te, ghAya
mesaMti NaMtaso  // 13 //  chAyA - ya etannAbhijAnanti mithyAdRSTayo'nAryAH  /
mRgA vA pAzabaddhAste ghAta meSyantyanantazaH  //  (70)

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Translation with Jain terms preserved:  The Authority to Speak on One's Own Time
The ignorant opponents, who are of wrong belief (asammyadrishti), devoid of
noble qualities (arya-gunas), do not truly understand this meaning or fact. Like
a deer caught in a snare, they repeatedly experience birth and death - they come
and go in the cycle of birth and death.  Commentary Further, the author expounds
on the defects of the ignorant proponents: Those who have taken refuge in the
doctrine of ignorance (ajnana-paksha), who do not know the means of destruction
of karmas (karmakshapaṇopāya) - the spiritual practice for the annihilation of
karmas, who are obsessed with their own false beliefs (asadgraha-gasta), who are
of wrong belief (mithyadrishti), devoid of noble qualities (aryya), they, like a
deer bound by a snare, will repeatedly experience destruction and annihilation,
or will seek it, because of their inability to perform the appropriate spiritual
activities, continuously and without interruption. Thus are the ignorant
proponents.  Verse Some Brahmanas and some Shramanas, all proclaim their own
knowledge. But the beings in the entire world do not know anything.  Commentary
Now, the author wishes to expose the fallacy in the stance of the ignorant
proponents. Some specific Brahmanas (belonging to the Brahmanical tradition) and
some Shramanas (ascetics) - all of them proclaim their own particular knowledge.
They expound their own knowledge as if it is unique and superior. They believe
that the entire world of living beings (sarvaloke'pi pranah) do not know
anything at all.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH anuvAda itara darzanavAdI jo asamyagdRSTi haiM,
Arya guNoM-uttama guNoM se rahita haiM ve isa artha yA tathya ko yathAvata nahIM
samajha pAte, ve phaMde meM phaMse hiraNa kI jyoM ananta bAra ghAta prApta
karate haiM- janma maraNa meM Ate jAte haiM  /  TIkA - bhUyo'pyajJAnavAdinAM
doSAbhidhitsayA''ha ye'jJAnapakSaM samAzritA enaM karmakSapaNopAyaM na jAnanti,
AtmIyA'sadgrahagastA mithyAdRSTayo'nAryyAste mRgA iva pAzabaddhAH ghAtaM
vinAzameSyanti yAsyantyanveSayanti vA, tadyogyakriyAnuSThAnAd
anantazo'vicchedenetyajJAnavAdinogatAH  // 13 //  TIkArtha AgamakAra ajJAnavAda
meM vizvAsa karane vAle aura usakA pratipAdana karane vAle logoM ke doSa batAte
hue pratipAdana karate haiM - - - jo manuSya ajJAna ke pakSa kA Azraya liye
rahate haiM, jo karmakSapaNa-kAryanAza ke upAya-saMvara nirjarAtmaka
dharmasAdhanA ko nahIM jAnate, viparIta siddhAntoM ke sAtha durAgrahapUrvaka
jur3e rahate haiM, jo asamyagdRSTi haiM, AryaguNa rahita haiM ve ananta kAla
paryanta anantAbAra usI prakAra vinAza ko prApta karate haiM jaise pAzabaddha-
phaMde meM baMdhA huA mRga ghAta - vinAza yogya karma kA anusaraNa kara ghAta yA
vinAza ko prApta karatA hai| ve ajJAnavAdI aise haiM  /  mAhaNA samaNA ege,
savve savvaloge'vi je pANA na te - chAyA brAhmaNAH zramaNA eke sarve jJAnaM
svakaM vadanti  /  sarvaloke'pi ye prANAH na te jAnanti kiMcana  //  - nANaM
sayaM vae  /  jANaMti kiMcaNa  // 14 //  anuvAda kaI brAhmaNa paramparA se jur3e
hue puruSa tathA kaI zramaNa paramparA se saMbaddha jana sabhI apanA apanA jJAna
pratipAdita karatehaiM  /  apane apane jJAna ko vizeSa rUpa se vyAkhyAta karate
haiM  /  ve aisA mAnate haiM ki samasta loka meM prANIvRnda haiM unameM kucha
bhI jJAna nahIM hai - ve kucha bhI nahIM jAnate  /  TIkA - idAnImajJAnavAdinAM
dUSaNodvibhAvayiSayAsvavAgyantritA vAdino na caliSyantIti
tanmatAviSkaraNAyAhaeke kecana brAhmaNavizeSAstathA 'zramaNAH '
parivrAjakavizeSAH sarve'pyete jJAyate'neneti jJAnaMheyopAdeyArthA''virbhAvakaM
parasparavirodhena vyavasthitaM svakamAtmIyaM vadanti na ca tAni jJAnAni
parasparavirodhena pravRttatvAtsatyAni tasmAdajJAnameva zreyaH kiM
jJAnaparikalpanayeti, etadeva darzayati-sarvasminnapi loke ye prANAH prANino na
te kiJcanApi samyagapetavAcaM (cyaM) jAnantIti vidantIti  // 14 //  - TIkArtha
zAstrakAra ajJAnavAdiyoM ke siddhAnta ko doSapUrNa sAbita karane ke liye unake
mantavya kI carcA karate haiM, jisake dvArA ajJAnavAdI apane hI vacana meM
baddha hokara nirUttara hokara, idhara udhara nahIM jA sakate, ajJAnavAdiyoM kA
mantavya hai ki yahAM kaI brAhmaNa vizeSa - brAhmaNa paramparA se sambaddha
matavAdI aura zramaNa parivrAjaka vizeSa zramaNa paramparA se sambaddha sAdhu
sanyAsI ye sabhI heya - tyAgane yogya tathA upAdeya - grahaNa karane yogya
siddhAntoM ko prakaTa karane vAle apane-apane jJAna kA pratipAdana karate haiM-
nirupaNa karate haiN| jisake dvArA padArtha jAnA jAtA hai, use jJAna kahA jAtA
hai  /  unakA yahAM varNita zramaNa, brAhmaNoM kA jJAna paraspara viruddha 71

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra
states that since it is not based on facts, the knowledge it presents is not
true. Therefore, ignorance is better than such knowledge, as the conception of
knowledge is not required - it is unnecessary. The Sutrakara further clarifies
that all the beings in the entire world do not know the complete truth or
reality accurately.  Milakkhu abhilakkhussa, jaha vuttanubasae. Na heum se
vijanaai, bhasitam t'anubasae. (15)  Translation: A Mleccha (barbarian), who is
disconnected from and devoid of culture or etiquette, translates or recites the
speech of an Amleccha (noble or Arya) person. However, he does not know the
reason or purpose behind what is spoken, and merely recites or repeats the
words.  Tika (Commentary): Even though their knowledge has come down through the
lineage of their teachers, since it is rootless, it is not true. The author
illustrates this through an example - just as a Mleccha who is unacquainted with
the Arya language, merely recites or translates the speech of an Amleccha (Arya)
who is unfamiliar with the Mleccha language, without properly understanding the
intended meaning or purpose behind the speech. Similarly, the Mleccha does not
definitively know the reason or basis for which the Arya person used that
particular language, and merely follows the words without the true
comprehension.  Evam-annania-nanam, vayantavi sayam-sayam. Nicchayattham na
jananti, milakkhuva abo-hiya. (16)  Translation: Similarly, those who are
ignorant speak of knowledge, each in their own way. But they do not know the
true essence or certainty, being like ignorant Mlecchas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram yA asaMgata hone ke kAraNa tathya paraka nahIM hai,
isaliye jJAna ke badale ajJAna hI uttama hai, jJAna kI parikalpanA apekSita
nahIM hai-anAvazyaka hai  /  sUtrakAra Age aura spaSTa karate haiM ki samagra
loka meM jitane prANI haiM ve kucha bhI samyak yathArtha yA ThIka ThIka nahIM
jAnate  /  milakkhU abhilakkhUssa, jahA vuttANubhAsae  /  Na heuM se vijANAi,
bhAsiaM ta'NubhAsae  // 15 //  chAyA - maleccho'mlecchasya yathoktA'nubhASakaH
/  na hetuM sa vijAnAti bhASitantvanubhASate  //  anuvAda - eka maleccha jana
samparka rahita, saMskAra yA ziSTAcAra varjita puruSa, amleccha-Arya yA uttama
puruSa ke kathana kA anuvAda karatA hai, usake pIche pIche bola jAtA hai kintu
usake kathana yA bhASaNa kA kyA nimitta hai, kisa prayojana se vaha vaisA karatA
hai, ise vaha nahIM jaantaa| . TIkA - yadyapi teSAM gurupAramparyeNa
jJAnamAyAtaM tadapi chinnamUlatvAdavitathaM na bhavatIti dRSTAntadvAreNa
darzayitumAha - yathA maleccha AryabhASA'nabhijJaH amlecchasya Aryyasya mleccha
bhASAnabhijJasya yad bhASitaM tad anubhASate, anuvadati kevalaM, na samyak
tadabhiprAyaM vetti, yathA'nayA vinakSayA'nena bhASitamiti  /  na ca hetuM
nimittaM nizcayenA'saumlecchastadbhASitasya jAnAti kevalaM paramArtha zUnyaM
tadbhASitamevAnubhASata iti  // 15 //  TIkArtha - yadyapi guru paramparA se una
brAhmaNoM evaM zramaNoM kA apanA jJAna calA A rahA hai para vaha chinnamUla hai,
usakA koI Thosa AdhAra nahIM hai  /  isaliye vaha avitatha yA satya nahIM ho
sktaa| dRSTAnta dvArA AgamakAra ise nirUpita karate haiM - _ jaise eka mleccha
jo Arya kI bhASA nahIM jAnatA-usa bhASA ko nahIM samajhatA, vaha mleccha bhASA
ko nahIM jAnane vAle amleccha yA Arya ke bhASaNa kA, usakI bolI kA kevala
anuvAda karatA hai, usake pIche pIche vaisA bola jAtA hai, kintu Arya puruSa kI
kyA vivakSA hai-vaha kyA kahanA cAhatA hai, kisa Azaya yA abhiprAya se use kahA
hai, vaha ise bhalIbhAMti samajha nahIM pAtA  /  isI bAta ko punaH kahate haiM
ki vaha mleccha yaha nahIM jAnatA ki Arya puruSa ne nizcita rUpa se kisa kAraNa
ko lekara isa bhASA kA prayoga kiyA hai vaha to artha jJAna se rahita kevala
usakI bhASA ke zabdoM kA anusaraNa mAtra karatA hai, vaise hI zabda bola jAtA
evamannANiyA nANaM, vayaMtAvi sayaM sayaM  /  nicchayatthaM na yANaMti,
milakkhuvva abohiyA  // 16 //  chAyA - evamajJAnikAH jJAnaM vadanto'pi svakaM
svakam  /  nizcayArthaM na jAnanti mlecchA ivAbodhikAH  //  72

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Swasama Vaktavyataadhikarah The translation is as follows:  The right to speak
on one's own matter The translation and commentary show that the Brahmin and
Shramana traditions, who are devoid of true knowledge, expound their own
knowledge, but they do not know the definite meaning. They are similarly devoid
of understanding - devoid of knowledge. Just as an mleccha (barbarian) who lacks
knowledge of the Arya language can only translate the Arya language without
understanding its true meaning, similarly the ignorant Shramanas and Brahmanas,
though speaking, do not know the definite meaning due to contradictory speech
claiming their own knowledge as authoritative. Thus, they determine their own
Tirthankaras as omniscient and act according to their teachings, but the
intention of the omniscient cannot be grasped by the limited vision, as it is
said "the non-omniscient cannot know the omniscient."  Similarly, due to the
inscrutability of the mental tendencies of others, the teacher also, due to the
impossibility of grasping the intended meaning as it actually is, only expresses
the unexplained, like the mlecchas, being devoid of understanding. Therefore,
ignorance itself is the best. Thus, the greater the acceptance of knowledge, the
greater the possibility of grave faults. For example, he who touches someone's
head with his foot commits a great offense, while he who touches without using
the limbs does not offend. Thus, ignorance itself experiences the main state,
not knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH anuvAda isa prakAra jJAna rahita brAhmaNa aura
zramaNa paramparA se sambaddha vyakti apane apane jJAna kA pratipAdana karate
haiM, para ve sunizcita artha ko nahIM jAnate  /  ve usI taraha bodha rahita -
jJAna rahita haiM  /  jisa prakAra Arya bhASA ke jJAna se rahita eka mleccha
Arya bhASA ko kevala anuvAda mAtra kara pAtA hai, usakA tAtparya nahIM jAnatA  /
TIkA evaM dRSTAntaM pradarzya dRSTAntikaM yojayitumAha  /  yathA
mleccho'mlecchasya paramArthamajAnAnaH kevalaM tadbhASitamanubhASate tathA
ajJAnikAH samyagjJAnarahitAH zramaNAH brahmaNA vadanto'pi svIyaM svIyaM jJAnaM
pramANatvena parasparaviruddhArtha bhASaNAt nizcayArthaM na jAnanti, tathAhi te
svakIyaM tIrthaMkaraM sarvajJatvena nirddhAryya tadupadezena kriyAsu
pravarteran, na ca sarvajJavivakSA, arvAgdarzinA grahItuM zakyate 'nAsarvajJa
sarvajJaM jAnAtI' tinyAyAt  /  tathA coktam 'sarvajJo'sAvitihyetattatkAle'pi
bubhutsubhiH  /  tadjJAnajJeyavijJAnarahitai rgamyate katham  // 1 //  evaM
paracetovRttInAM duranvayatvAdupadeSTurapi yathAvasthitavivakSayA
grahaNAsambhavAnnizcayArthamajAnAnA: mlecchavadaparoktamanubhASanta eva abodhikA
bodha rahitAH kevalamiti, ato'jJAnameva zreya iti  /  evaM
yAvadyAvajjJAnAbhyupagama stAvattAvadgurutaradoSa-sambhavaH  /  tathAhi
yo'vagacchan pAdena kasyacit ziraH spRzati tasya mahAnaparAdho bhavati
yastvabhogena spRzati tasmaina kazcidaparAdhyatIti evaJcAjJAnameva
pradhAnabhAvamanubhavati, na tu jJAnamiti  // 16 //  TIkArtha - ajJAnavAdiyoM
dvArA apane pakSa ke samarthana hetu diye jAne vAle dRSTAnta ko prastuta kara
aba dRSTAnta dvArA vivecyamAna tathya ke sAtha AgamakAra yojanA karate haiN| 44
jaise eka mleccha puruSa amleccha puruSa - Aryajana dvArA prakaTita bhASA yA
vANI kA sahI sahI artha nahIM jAnatA, vaha kevala usakI anuvRtti yA
punarAvRttimAtra karatA hai, jinakA abhiprAya jAnane kI dRSTi se kucha bhI
phalita nahIM hotA  /  vahI bAta samyak jJAna vivarjita zramaNo- zramaNa
paramparA ke antaravartI jainettaravAdiyoM tathA brAhmaNoM-brAhmaNa paramparA ke
antaravartI tApasa-parivrAjaka Adi vAdiyoM para lAgU hotI hai  /  yadyapi ve
saba apane apane dvArA pratipAdita jJAna ko prAmANika batalAte haiM ve jo
abhiprAya yA Azaya prakaTa karate haiM vaha unameM paraspara mela nahIM khAtA  /
eka dUsare ke viparIta hotA hai, ve apane apane tIrthaMkaroM ko siddhAnta
pravartakoM ko sarvajJa mAnate haiM  /  unake upadeza ke anurUpa kriyA meM
pravRtta hote haiM kintu sarvajJa kI vivakSA- vaktuMicchA - abhiprAya ko
arvAkadarzI - mAtra sammukhIna yA apane sAmane kI vastu ko dekhane vAle bahuta
sAdhAraNa yogyatA vAle puruSa nahIM jAna pAte  /  kAraNa yaha hai ki sarvajJa ko
vahI jAna sakatA hai jo sarvajJa hai  /  asarvajJa sarvajJa ko jAna pAne meM
kabhI sakSama nahIM hotA  /  kahA gayA hai, jisa puruSa ko sarvajJa ke jJAna ke
saMbaMdha meM aura jJeya - jAnane yogya artha samudAya ke saMbaMdha meM jJAna
nahIM hai, yadi usake samIpa sarvajJa upasthita bhI ho to vaha unheM kaise jAna
sakatA hai arthAt nahIM jAna sakatA  /  citta kI vRttiyAM duranvaya- bar3I
kaThinAI se jAnane yogya hotI hai  /  upadeSTAupadeza dene vAle puruSa kI
yathAvasthita vivakSA jo padArtha jaise haiM, unako ThIka usI rUpa meM vivakSita
karane kI - pratipAdita karane kI kSamatA ko bhI jAna pAnA saMbhava nahIM hotA
/  isaliye nizcita artha ko jAnane meM asamartha - use yathAvata rUpa meM nahIM
jAna sakane vAle ajJAnavAdI pahale varNita mleccha kI jyoM kevala anya puruSa kI
ukti kA anuvAda - anusaraNa yA anuvacana mAtra hI kara sakate haiM kyoMki
yathArthataH ve bodha zUnya hai, jJAna rahita hai  /  isIliye ajJAna hI zreSTha
hai, aisA unakA mantavya hai  /  ve aisA pratipAdita karate haiM ki jyoM jyoM I
I 73

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Sutrakritanga Sutram  The more the knowledge increases, the more the
gravity of the faults also increases. In other words, if a Jnani (enlightened
being) commits any fault, it is considered grave. If a person knowingly touches
the head of another person with his foot - places his foot on their head, then
this act is considered a grave offense. On the other hand, if due to ignorance
or by mistake, one's foot touches the head of another person, then this act is
not considered a fault due to the ignorance. Therefore, ignorance is the main
basis of life, not knowledge, say the proponents of ignorance.  "The examination
of the ignorant, does not determine in ignorance. One's own self is not capable
of instructing another, how then can one instruct others?" (Sutrakritanga 17)
Commentary: The author now refutes the doctrine of the advocates of ignorance.
They claim that ignorance itself is the highest good. This justification in
favor of ignorance is not logically proven. These advocates of ignorance are
themselves incapable of convincing or satisfying themselves with their own
doctrine, so how can they instruct others?  Further, even if it is said that due
to the difficulty in understanding the mental states of others, ignorance is the
best, this too is invalid, because they themselves, by advocating the
superiority of ignorance, are acknowledging the knowledge of others' mental
states.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram jJAna kI abhivRddhi hotI hai tyoM tyoM doSa kI gurutA
bhI bar3hatI jAtI hai arthAt jJAnI dvArA jo jAnatA hai, yadi koI doSa kiyA jAtA
hai to use bhArI mAnA jAtA hai  /  jo vyakti jAna bUjhakara dUsaroM ke mastaka
ko apane paira se chUtA hai-usa para paira rakha detA hai to usakA yaha karanA
bhArI aparAdha mAnA jAtA hai  /  isake viparIta ajJAna ke kAraNa yA bhUla se
kisI anya puruSa ke mastaka kA paira se sparza kara detA hai, usake sira ke
paira lagA detA haiM, to usake ajJAna ke kAraNa vaisA karanA koI doSa nahIM mAnA
jAtA  /  ataH ajJAna hI jIvana kA mukhya bhAva hai-AdhAra hai, jJAna nahIM,
ajJAna vAdI aisA kahate haiN| annANiyANaM vImaMsA, aNNANe Na viniyacchai  /
appaNo ya paraM nAlaM, kuto annANusAsiuM  // 17 //  chAyA - ajJAnikAnAM
vimarzaH, ajJAne na viniyacchati  /  Atmanazca paraM nAlaM kuto'nyAnanuzAsitum
//  - anuvAda - ajJAnavAdiyoM kI yaha mImAMsA-AlocanAtmaka pratipAdana ki ajJAna
hI sarvottama hai| yaha ajJAna ke pakSa meM yukti yukta siddha nahIM hotI hai  /
ve ajJAnavAdI apane isa siddhAnta se apane Apako samajhAne meM bhI-apane ko
samAdhAna dene meM bhI sakSama nahIM hai-isase unakA apanA samAdhAna bhI nahIM
sadha pAtA  /  phira ve anya ko kisa prakAra samAdhAna de sakate haiN| TIkA -
evamajJAna vAdimatamanUcedAnIM tadrUSaNAyAha - na jJAnamajJAnaM tadvidyate
yeSAnte'jJAninaH  /  ajJAna zabdasya saMjJA zabdatvAdvA matvarthIyaH
gaurakharavadaraNyamiti yathA  /  teSAmajJAninAmajJAnameva zreya ityevaM
vAdinAM, yo'yaM vimarzaH pAlocanAtmako mImAMsA vA mAtuM paricchettumicchA sA
ajJAne ajJAna viSaye na 'Niyacchati' na nizcayena yacchati-nAvatarati, na
yujyata iti yAvat tathAhi-yaivaMbhUtA mImAMsA vimarzo vA kimetajjJAnaM
satyamutAsatyamiti ? "yathA ajJAna meva zreyo, yathA yathA ca jJAnAtizaya stathA
tathA ca doSAtireka iti" so'yamevaMbhUto vimarzasteSAM na yujyate, evaMbhUtasya
parsAlocanasya jJAnarUpatvAditi  /  api ca-te'jJAnavAdina Atmano'pi paraM
pradhAnamajJAnavAdamiti zAsitumupadeSTuM nAlaM na samarthAH
teSAmajJAnapakSasamAzrayaNenAjJatvAditi, kutaH punaste svayamajJAH santo'nyeSAM
ziSyatvenopagatAnAmajJAnavAdamupadeSTumalaM samarthA bhaveyuriti ?
yadapyuktam-"chinnamUlatvAmlecchAnubhASaNavat sarvamupadezAdikam" tadapyayuktaM
yato'nubhAvaNamapi na jJAnamRte kartuzakyate  /  tathA yadapyuktaM "para
cetovRttInAM duranvayatvAdajJAnameva zreya iti tadapyasat, yato
bhavataivAjJAnameva zreya ityevaM paropadezadAnAbhyudyatena
paracetovRttijJAnasyAbhyupagamaH kRta iti  /
tathA'nyairapyabhyadhAyi-"AkArairiGgitairgatyA, ceSTayA bhASitena ca  / "
netravaktravikAraizca gRhyate'ntargataM manaH"  // 17 //  TIkArtha - yoM
ajJAnavAda ke siddhAnta kA nirUpaNa kara AgamakAra use sadoSa sAbita karate hue
kahate haiM-jo jJAna nahIM hai, jJAna kA abhAva hai, use ajJAna kahA jAtA hai  /
jinako ajJAna hotA hai ve ajJAnI kahe jAte haiM athavA ajJAna zabda vyAkaraNa ke
anusAra 'saMjJA' zabda hai  /  ataH 'gauravaravadaraNyaM' ke niyamAnusAra isameM
'matvarthIya' pratyaya huA hai  /  ajJAna hI zreyaskara hai, uttama hai, aisA
nirUpaNa karane vAle ajJAnavAdI jo yaha paryAlocanAtmaka-vizleSaNAtmaka mImAMsA-
cintanapUrNa vicAra prastuta karate haiM  /  jo padArtha kA nizcaya karane yA 74

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Swasama vaktatvatadhikarah their definite form present to wish, in fact their
that analytical analysis is not proved reasonable. Whether a certain knowledge
is true or it is false. Their such critical thinking and ignorance itself is the
best, such a consideration and as knowledge increases, so the defect also
increases, it is not appropriate to believe because the critical thinking that
is done in this way is also cognitive, on the basis of which that thinking
progresses. In such a situation, the ignorant cannot even solve themselves from
the ignorance which they consider the best. So when they themselves cannot
solve, undoubtedly they are ignorant, then those who want to get knowledge from
them, want to get theoretical education, how can they teach them - can solve
their problem. As it has been said - they themselves are unsettled - without
solution. It has also been said by the ignorant that all the teachings,
theoretical education etc. are as groundless as the translation-following or
recitation of Arya language by a mleccha, this is unreasonable because even the
translation of someone else's language cannot be done without knowledge. The
ignorant has also said that it is difficult-impossible to know the mental state
of another. Therefore, the statement that ignorance itself is the best is also
devoid of logic and reason, because when you say that ignorance itself is the
best, you have to accept that you have the knowledge of the mental state of
others, when you are inclined to teach others the doctrine of ignorance. If the
mental state of others cannot be known, then how can your students who want to
get knowledge-teaching from you, know your mental state, how can they assimilate
your thoughts and thinking. Then why do you teach them the principles of
ignorance. Other thinkers or philosophers also accept that the mental state of
another can be known, understood, this is a clear example - the inner mind can
be understood from the shape of a person, from the gesture, from the movement,
from the action-activity, from the speech, from the changes or changes in the
eyes, mouth etc.  In the forest, the foolish creature, the foolish follower.
Both these are ignorant, they suffer intense sorrow.  Commentary - In this way,
those ascetics who are ignorant, are not capable of teaching themselves and
others properly, so he illustrates it through an example - Just as a certain
foolish creature in the forest, who is unable to determine the direction, when
such a one goes, and another foolish creature follows him, then both of them,
being ignorant, suffer intense, unbearable sorrow.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH una kA nizcita svarUpa upasthita karane kI icchA
karate haiM, vastuta: unakA vaha paryAlocanAtmaka vizleSaNa yuktiyukta siddha
nahIM hotA  /  amuka jJAna satya hai athavA vaha asatya hai  /  unakA aisA
AlocanAtmaka ciMtana tathA ajJAna hI zreSTha hai aisI vicAraNA aura jyoM jyoM
jJAna kI abhivRddhi hotI hai tyoM tyoM doSa kI bhI abhivRddhi hotI hai, aisA
mAnanA samucita nahIM hai kyoMki isa prakAra jo AlocanAtmaka vicAra kiyA jAtA
hai vaha bhI to jJAnAtmaka hI hai jisake AdhAra para vaha ciMtana Age bar3hatA
hai  /  aisI sthiti meM ve ajJAnavAdI apane dvArA sarvottama mAne hue ajJAnavAda
se apane ApakA bhI samAdhAna nahIM kara sakate  /  yoM jaba ve svayaM samAdhAna
nahIM kara pAte to ni:saMdeha ve ajJAnI haiM taba unake samIpa Akara unakA
ziSyatva svIkAra kara jo unase jJAna pAnA cAhate haiMsaiddhAntika zikSA pAnA
cAhate haiM ve unheM kisa prakAra zikSA de sakate haiM - unakA samAdhAna kara
sakate haiM  /  jaisA ki kahA gayA hai-ve svayaM hI asamAhita haiM-samAdhAna
rahita haiM  /  ajJAnavAdiyoM dvArA aisA bhI kahA gayA hai ki saba upadeza-
saiddhAntika zikSA Adi usI prakAra nirAdhAra hai, jisa prakAra eka mleccha dvArA
kiyA gayA Arya bhASA kA anuvAda-anusaraNa yA anuvacana yaha bAta ayuktiyukta hai
kyoMki kisI dUsare kI bhASA kA anuvAda bhI jJAna ke na hone para nahIM kiyA jA
sakatA.ajJAnavAdI ne jo eka yaha bAta bhI kahI ki kisI anya kI cittavRtti ko
jAna pAnA duSkara hai-saMbhava nahIM hai  /  ataeva ajJAna hI uttama hai yaha
kathana bhI tarka evaM yukti rahita hai kyoMki jaba Apa yaha kahate haiM ki
ajJAna hI uttama hai, yaha auroM ko upadeza dene hetu jaba Apa pravRtta hote
haiM to svayaM dUsare kI cittavRtti kA jJAna hotA hai aisA svIkAra karanA hogA
/  yadi anya kI cittavRtti tA to phira Apake ziSya jo Apake pAsa jJAna lenA
cAhate haiM-upadeza lenA cAhate haiM, ve ApakI cittavRtti ko kaise jAna sakate
haiM, ve Apake vicAra evaM cintana ko kaise AtmasAta kara sakate haiN| phira Apa
unako ajJAnavAda ke siddhAnta kA upadeza kyoM dete haiM  /  dUsare matavAdI yA
dArzanika bhI yaha svIkAra karate haiM ki kisI anya kI cittavRtti ko jAnA jA
sakatA hai samajhA jAtA hai, yaha spaSTa udAharaNa hai-kisI manuSya ke AkAra se,
saMketa se, gati se, ceSThA-kriyA se, bhASaNa se, A~kha, mu~ha Adi ke vikAra yA
parivartita rUpa se unakA antaramana samajhA jA sakatA hai  /  vaNe mUDhe jahA
jantU, mUDhe NeyANugAmie  /  dovi ee akoviyA, tivvaM soyaM niyacchai  // 18 //
chAyA - vane mUr3ho yathA jantu mUMDhanetranugAmikaH  /  dvAvapyetAvakovidau
tIvra zokaM niyacchataH  //  anuvAda - jaMgala meM eka dikmUDha-jise digbhrama
ho gayA hai, jo pUrva, pazcima, uttara, dakSiNa dizAoM ko ThIka ThIka nahIM
pahacAna pA rahA hai-calA jA rahA hai yadi dUsarA digbhrAnta prANI usake pIche-
pIche calatA hai to ve donoM hI digbhrama ke kAraNa ghora duHkha prApta karate
haiM-atyanta duHkhita hote haiM  /  TIkA - tadevaM te tapasvino'jJAnina AtmanaH
pareSAJca zAsane kartavye yathA na samarthAstathA dRSTAntadvAreNa darzayitumAha
- vane'TavyAM yathA kazcinmUDho jantuH prANI dikparicchedaM kartumasamarthaH sa
evaMbhUto yadA paraM mUDhameva netAramanugacchati tadA dvAvapyakovidau samyag
jJAnAnipuNau santau tIvramasahyaM sroto gahana zokaM vA niyacchato -75

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra.  Those who have attained the path by conviction, due
to their ignorance, are like those who are ignorant of their own path and
consider it to be the right path, while considering the path of others to be
wrong. They are themselves deluded and delude others. ||18|| _Commentary - The
ignorant cannot convince themselves or others about their own doctrines. The
author of the Agamas illustrates this point with an example - Just as a foolish,
lost creature in the forest is unable to know the directions and follows another
lost creature, both of them, not being wise or clever in knowing the path well,
suffer intense unbearable pain or get lost in the dense forest because they are
covered with ignorance, their knowledge is not uncovered. Similarly, those
ignorant people who consider their own path - their own theoretical beliefs - to
be the right and good truth and the path of others - their doctrines - to be
wrong and untrue, are themselves deluded - possessed by delusion - and make
others deluded. The blind leads the blind, far away they go. The creature falls
into a wrong path, following a wrong path. ||19|| _Commentary - The author
presents another example for the same point - Just as a blind man, leading
another blind man, goes far away from the intended path, further than the
intended path, so the blind creature falls into a wrong path. Or, he may follow
another path, not the intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The author presents an
example for the same point - Just as a blind man, leading another blind man,
goes far away from the intended path, further than the intended path, so the
blind creature falls into a wrong path. Or, he may follow another path, not the
intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The author presents an example for the same
point - Just as a blind man, leading another blind man, goes far away from the
intended path, further than the intended path, so the blind creature falls into
a wrong path. Or, he may follow another path, not the intended path. ||19||
_Commentary - The author presents an example for the same point - Just as a
blind man, leading another blind man, goes far away from the intended path,
further than the intended path, so the blind creature falls into a wrong path.
Or, he may follow another path, not the intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The
author presents an example for the same point - Just as a blind man, leading
another blind man, goes far away from the intended path, further than the
intended path, so the blind creature falls into a wrong path. Or, he may follow
another path, not the intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The author presents an
example for the same point - Just as a blind man, leading another blind man,
goes far away from the intended path, further than the intended path, so the
blind creature falls into a wrong path. Or, he may follow another path, not the
intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The author presents an example for the same
point - Just as a blind man, leading another blind man, goes far away from the
intended path, further than the intended path, so the blind creature falls into
a wrong path. Or, he may follow another path, not the intended path. ||19||
_Commentary - The author presents an example for the same point - Just as a
blind man, leading another blind man, goes far away from the intended path,
further than the intended path, so the blind creature falls into a wrong path.
Or, he may follow another path, not the intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The
author presents an example for the same point - Just as a blind man, leading
another blind man, goes far away from the intended path, further than the
intended path, so the blind creature falls into a wrong path. Or, he may follow
another path, not the intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The author presents an
example for the same point - Just as a blind man, leading another blind man,
goes far away from the intended path, further than the intended path, so the
blind creature falls into a wrong path. Or, he may follow another path, not the
intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The author presents an example for the same
point - Just as a blind man, leading another blind man, goes far away from the
intended path, further than the intended path, so the blind creature falls into
a wrong path. Or, he may follow another path, not the intended path. ||19||
_Commentary - The author presents an example for the same point - Just as a
blind man, leading another blind man, goes far away from the intended path,
further than the intended path, so the blind creature falls into a wrong path.
Or, he may follow another path, not the intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The
author presents an example for the same point - Just as a blind man, leading
another blind man, goes far away from the intended path, further than the
intended path, so the blind creature falls into a wrong path. Or, he may follow
another path, not the intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The author presents an
example for the same point - Just as a blind man, leading another blind man,
goes far away from the intended path, further than the intended path, so the
blind creature falls into a wrong path. Or, he may follow another path, not the
intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The author presents an example for the same
point - Just as a blind man, leading another blind man, goes far away from the
intended path, further than the intended path, so the blind creature falls into
a wrong path. Or, he may follow another path, not the intended path. ||19||
_Commentary - The author presents an example for the same point - Just as a
blind man, leading another blind man, goes far away from the intended path,
further than the intended path, so the blind creature falls into a wrong path.
Or, he may follow another path, not the intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The
author presents an example for the same point - Just as a blind man, leading
another blind man, goes far away from the intended path, further than the
intended path, so the blind creature falls into a wrong path. Or, he may follow
another path, not the intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The author presents an
example for the same point - Just as a blind man, leading another blind man,
goes far away from the intended path, further than the intended path, so the
blind creature falls into a wrong path. Or, he may follow another path, not the
intended path. ||19|| _Commentary - The author presents an example for the same
point - Just as a blind man, leading another blind man, goes far away from the
intended path, further than the intended path, so the blind creature falls into
a wrong path. Or, he may follow another path,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  nizcayena gacchataHprAptutaH ajJAnAvRtatvAdevaM
te'pyajJAnavAdina AtmIyaM mArgazobhanatvena nirdhArayantaH
parakIyaJcAzobhanatvena jAnAnAH svayaM mUDhAH santaH parAnapi mohayantIti  // 18
//  _TIkArtha - ajJAnavAdI na to apane Apako tathA na dUsare ko hI apane
siddhAntoM ke saMdarbha meM samAdhAna de pAne meM sakSama ho sakate haiM  /
AgamakAra eka dRSTAnta dvArA isa tathya kA upapAdAna karate haiM - jaise vana
meM koI mUr3ha-digbhrAnta prANI dizAoM kA jJAna karane meM asamartha rahatAhai
aura vaha kisI anya digbhrAnta prANI kA anusaraNa karatA hai-usake pIche pIche
calatA hai taba ve donoM hI prANI jo mArga ko bhalI bhAMti jAnane meM kovida-
nipuNa yA catura nahIM hai, ve tIvra asahya duHkha ko prApta karate haiM athavA
ve ghora jaMgala meM kho jAte haiM kyoMki ve ajJAna se AvRtta-r3hake hue haiM
unakA jJAna anAvRtta hai  /  isI prakAra ve ajJAnavAdI jo apane mArga ko-apanI
saiddhAntika mAnyatAoM ko zobhana-uttama satya tathA dUsare ke mArga ko-
siddhAntoM ko azobhana-anuttama, asatya samajhate haiM ve svayaM mUr3ha haiM-
mohagrasta haiM aura anya ko mohagrasta banAte haiN| aMdho aMdhaM pahaM Nito,
dUramaddhANugacchai  /  Avaje uppahaM jaMtU, aduvA paMthANugAmie  // 19 //
chAyA - andho'ndhaM panthAnaM nayan dUramadhvAna manugacchati  /  * Apadyata
utpathaM janturathavApanthAnamanugAmikaH  //  anuvAda - eka netrahIna puruSa
mArga meM cala rahA hai, dUsare netrahIna ko apane pIche liye jA rahA hai| aisA
karatA huA vaha jahA~ jAnA hai, vahA~ se dUra nikala jAtA hai athavA utpatha-
ulTe-rAste para calA jAtA hai, athavA kisI aura hI rAste ko pakar3a letA hai  /
/  TIkA - asminnevArthe dRSTAntAntaramAha- yathA'ndhaH svayamaparamandhaM
panthAnaM nayana dUramadhvAnaM vivakSitAdadhvanaH parataraM gacchati,
tathotpathamApadyate janturandhaH  /  athavA paraM panthA namanugacchet, na
vivakSitamevAdhvAnamanuyAyAditi  // 19 //  TIkArtha - zAstrakAra isI viSaya para
eka dRSTAnta upasthita karate haiM - jaise eka aMdhA puruSa svayaM dUsare aMdhe
puruSa ko mArga meM le jAtA huA apane vivakSita-abhipsitajisase jAnA upayukta
hai, usase dUra nikala jAtA hai  /  utpatha-usase bhinna yA ulTe rAste para cala
par3atA hai athavA kisI dUsare rAste ko apanA letA hai kintu jisa rAste se jAnA
hai, usa rAste para nahIM jAtA  /  evamege NiyAyaTThI, dhammamArAhagA vayaM  /
aduvA ahammamAvaje Na te savvajjuyaM vae  // 20 //  chAyA - evameke niyAgArthino
dharmArAdhakAH vayam  /  athavA'dharmamAporan na te sarvarjukaM vrajeyuH  //
760

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Swasama Vaktavyataadhikarah  Translation:  The authority to speak on one's own
time  Translation - Some of the other philosophical thinkers mentioned earlier
say that the goal of our life is moksha (liberation). We worship the true dharma
(righteous path). However, as they say, they do not act accordingly, but act in
the opposite manner. They move towards adharma (unrighteousness). The path of
samyama (restraint) is very simple and straightforward, but they do not go in
that direction - they do not practice samyama.  Commentary - And in order to
demonstrate the exemplary case, the author says - "Thus" in the demonstration of
the previously stated meaning, some who are deluded in their feelings, and blind
in their perception, such as the Ajivikas, etc., consider 'niyaya' or 'niyaga'
as moksha or true dharma, and they are the seekers of that. They, indeed,
claiming that "we are the worshippers of true dharma", being eager for
renunciation, engaged in the activities of harming the living beings of the
earth, water and vegetation, such as cooking and getting others to cook, etc.
And they themselves do not follow it, and they instruct others, whereby they
fall from the intended goal of attaining moksha. Or, even if the attainment of
moksha is not possible, still, by engaging in such unrighteous acts, they would
incur sins. This is indicated by the arising of the notion of impurity. And
further, these Ajivikas and others, who are followers of the Goshalaka doctrine,
engaged in the path of ignorance, do not at all go or attain the straight,
excellent, intended path of moksha or true dharma, which is completely straight.
If the completely straight is true, then these blind due to ignorance, who are
deluded in their knowledge, would not say so. And these ignorant ones are of
sixty-seven divisions, and these divisions are to be demonstrated by this
method, that is, the nine categories (of the Jain philosophy) - the living, the
non-living, the existent, the non-existent, the indescribable, the existent-
indescribable, the non-existent-indescribable - by these seven modes, they
cannot be known, nor is there any purpose in knowing them, and this is the
contemplation - who knows the living as existent? What is known by that? Who
knows the living as non-existent? What is known by that? Similarly, in the case
of the non-living and others, there are seven alternatives for each, the sixty-
three modes. And some others insert four (alternatives) in the sixty-three, that
is, who knows the origination of the existent? What is known by that? Similarly,
who knows the origination of the non-existent, the existent-non-existent? What
is known by that? The remaining three alternatives are not possible here, as
they depend on the parts of the object. Thus, by the insertion of this tetrad,
it becomes sixty-seven. Therein, the meaning of "who knows the living as
existent" is that there is no specific knowledge of anyone who would experience
the transcendental living beings, nor is there any fruit obtained by that
knowledge, because if (the living being) is eternal, all-pervading, formless,
endowed with the qualities of knowledge, etc., or distinct from these qualities,
then what is the achievement of the human goal from that? Therefore, ignorance
itself is the best.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH anuvAda - pUrvokta itara darzanavAdiyoM meM se kaI
kahate haiM ki hamAre jIvana kA lakSya mokSa hai  /  hama dharma kI ArAdhanA
karate haiM  /  kintu jaisA kahate haiM, ve vaisA karate nahIM, usake viparIta
karate haiM  /  adharma kI ora bar3hate haiM  /  saMyama kA rAstA to bar3A
sarala aura sIdhA hai kintu ve usa ora nahIM jAte - saMyama pAlana nahIM karate
/  TIkA - evaM dRSTantaM prasAdhya dASTantikamarthaM darzayitumAha - evamiti
pUrvoktArthopapradarzane, evaM bhAvamUDhAH bhAvAndhAzcaike AjIvikAdayaH
NiyAyaTThI' tti niyAgo mokSaH saddharmo vA tadarthinaH  /  te kila vayaM
saddharmArAdhakA ityenaM sandhAya pravrajyAyA mudyatAH santaH
pRthivyambuvanaspatyAdikAyomaparddena pacanapAcanAdikriyAsu pravRttAH
santastatsvayamanu tiSThanti anyeSAJcepadizanti yenA'bhipretAyA :
mokSAvApterbhrazyanti  /  athavA'stAM tAvad mokSAbhAvaH, ta evaM pravartamAnA
adharmaM pApamApadyeran sambhAvanAyAmutpannena lipratyayenaitaddarzayati
etadaparaM teSAmanarthAntaraM sambhAvyate yaduta vivakSitArthAbhAvA
viparItArthAvApteH pApopAdAnamiti api ca ta evamasadanuSThAyina AjIvikAdayo
gozAlakamatAnusAriNo'jJAnavAdapravRttAH sarvaiH prakArairRju :- praguNo
vivakSita mokSagamanampratyakuTilaH sarvarju :- saMyamaH saddharmo vA taM
sarvaMrjukaM te na vrajeyuH na prApnuyurityuktambhavati  /  yadi vA sarvarjukaM
satyaM tatte'jJAnAndhAH jJAnApalApino na vadeyuriti ete cAjJAnikA:
saptaSaSTibhedA bhavanti, te ca bhedA amunopAyena pradarzanIyAH, tadyathA -
jIvadayo nava padArthAH sat asat sadasat avaktavyaH sadavaktavyaH asada
vaktavyaH sadasadavaktavya ityetaiH saptabhiH prakArai vijJAtuM na zakyante, na
ca vijJAtaiH prayojanamasti bhAvanA ceyam-san jIva iti ko vetti ? kiM vA tena
jJAtena ? asan jIva iti ko vetti ? kiM vA tena jJAtenetyAdi  /  evamajIvAdiSvapi
pratyekaM sapta vikalpAH, nava saptakAritraSaSTiH  /  amIcAnye catvAra
striSaSTimadhye prakSipyante, tadyathA-satI bhAvotpattiriti ko jAnAti ?
kiMvA'nayA jJAtayA ? evamasatI sadasatya vaktavyA bhAvotpattiriti ko jAnAti ?
kiMvA'nayA jJAtayeti  /  zeSavikalpatrayantUtpattyuttarakAlaM
padArthAvayavApekSamato'tra na sambhavatIti noktam  /  etaccatuSTaya
prakSepAtsapta SaSTirbhavati  /  tatra san jIva iti ko vettItyasyAyamarthona
kasyacidviziSTaM jJAnamasti yo'tIndriyAn jIvAdInavabhotsyate na ca tai jJataiH
kiJcitaphalamasti, tathAhi - yadi nityaH sarvagato'mUrtto jJAnAdiguNopeta
etadguNavyatirikto vA tataH katamasya puruSArthasya siddhiriti ?
tasmAdajJAnameva zreya iti  // 20 //  TIkArtha AgamakAra dRSTAnta upasthita kara
vyAkhyeya tattva kA pratipAdana karane hetu kahate haiM prastuta gAthA ke
prAraMbha meM 'jo' ' evaM ' zabda AyA hai, vaha pahale batAye gaye artha ko
vyakta karane ke liye hai pahale jina AjIvaka Adi anya tIrthiyoM kA ullekha huA
hai ve vAstava meM bhAvamUr3ha haiM - unakI bhAvanA meM, ciMtana meM mUr3hatA yA
ajJAna bharA huA hai  /  ve bhAvAndha haiM  /  jaise eka aMdhe vyakti ke sAmane
saba ora aMdherA hI aMdherA rahatA hai, usI prakAre unake sAmane ajJAna kA
aMdherA phailA rahatA hai  /  yahA~ niyAya - niyAga zabda mokSa yA saddharma kA
sUcaka hai jo usakI icchA karate haiM ve niyAgArthI kahe jAte haiM  /  ve anya
tIrthika apane ko mokSArthI ke rUpa meM prastuta karate haiM  /  hama sat -
yathArtha yA uttama dharma ke ArAdhaka haiM, ve aisA mAnate haiM  /  tadartha ve
pravajyA svIkAra karane ko udyata hote haiM, pravrajita ho jAte haiM, dIkSA le
lete haiM  /  ve dIkSita ho kara bhI pRthvI, pAnI aura vanaspati kAya ke jIvoM
kA upamardana yA hiMsA karate hue svayaM bhojana pakAnA, dUsare se bhojana
pakavAnA Adi kriyAoM meM pravRtta hote haiM, vaise kArya karate haiM, anya logoM
ko bhI vaisA karane kA upadeza dete haiM, vaisA karane vAle mokSa prApti ke
mArga se bhraSTa ho jAte haiM arthAt unake ye hiMsAmUlaka pacana pAcana Adi
kAryakalApa mokSamArga ke pratikUla hai, aise kArya karate hue unheM mokSa
milanA to dUra rahA ulTe ve pApoM kA saMgraha karate haiM  /  - 77

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In this verse of the Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra, the word 'Aavaje' - 'Aapadyeran'
appears. It is in the Linga Lakar, signifying possibility. Through this, the
Agamkar indicates that another type of adverse consequence is possible for those
who follow the Ajivika doctrine. This means they do not attain their desired or
intended goal. Instead, they experience the opposite, a sinful, adverse
consequence. Thus, those who practice falsehood, who advocate ignorance as the
path to liberation, and who believe in the determinism of Goshalak, like the
Ajivikas, cannot attain the path of restraint. They cannot follow the true
Dharma, nor can they strive towards the path of liberation, which is completely
straightforward.   Alternatively, this should be understood as follows: those
who are devoid of inner light due to ignorance, who are blind, who declare
knowledge to be false or untrue, cannot embrace truth, cannot mold their lives
according to it, which is the most direct path to attaining liberation. These
ignorant people consider ignorance to be the path to liberation or welfare.
Their 67 divisions have been mentioned. These divisions should be understood as
follows: Sat, Asat, Sad-Asat, Avaktvy, Sad-Avaktvy, Asad-Avaktvy, Sad-Asad-
Avaktvy.   Living beings and other substances cannot be known through these
alternatives, and knowing them does not serve any purpose. Their association
should be made as follows: who knows that the living being is Sat? What is the
benefit of knowing that? What is the outcome? Who knows that the living being is
Asat? What is the purpose of knowing that? Similarly, the alternatives of Sad-
Asad, etc., should also be associated with the living being. Similarly, in the
case of non-living beings, etc., these alternatives should be associated with
each one.   Two Navas + seven make 63 divisions of ignorance. Four more
divisions should be added to these 63 divisions: (1) Who knows that the origin
of feeling is from Sat existence? What is the purpose of knowing this? What is
the result? (2) Who knows that the origin of feeling is from Asat? What is the
purpose of knowing this? What is the outcome? (3) Who knows that the origin of
feeling is from Sad-Asat? What is the result of knowing this? What is the
outcome? (4) Who knows that the origin of feeling is from Avaktvy? What is the
outcome of knowing this?  Of the seven alternatives mentioned above, four have
been stated here in relation to the origin of feeling. The other three
alternatives have not been discussed because they apply to the components after
the substance has come into existence. This is not possible in the case of the
origin of feelings.  Of the seven alternatives mentioned above, "Who knows that
the living being is Sat?" is the first alternative. This means that no being in
the world has such specific knowledge. It is impossible to know such beings and
other substances that are beyond the senses, which cannot be perceived by the
senses. Knowing them does not serve any purpose because whether the living being
is eternal, omnipresent, formless, and free from qualities like knowledge, or
the opposite, it does not serve any purpose or meaning. Therefore, ignorance is
truly beneficial and conducive to welfare.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram isa gAthA meM 'Avaje'-Apadyeran pada AyA hai  /  vaha
liMga lakAra meM hai, saMbhAvanA ke artha meM hai, isake dvArA AgamakAra yaha
digdarzana karate haiM ki una AjIvana matavAdiyoM ke liye eka anya prakAra kA
anarthaviparIta kArya bhI saMbhAvita hai  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki ve
iSTa-abhIpsita yA cAhe hue artha ko nahIM pAte  /  usake pratikUla-viparIta ulTe
pApamUlaka anartha ko pAte haiM  /  isa prakAra asat kA anuSThAna-AcaraNa karane
vAle, ajJAna hI kalyANa kA mArga hai, aisA pratipAdana karane vAle gauzAlaka ke
niyativAda meM vizvAsa rakhane vAle AjIvaka Adi saMyama ke pada ko nahIM pA
sakate  /  saddharma kA anusaraNa nahIM kara sakate aura na mokSa Adi ke patha
para Age bar3hane ke liye, jo sarvathA sIdhA hai, prayatna hI kara sakate haiM
/  athavA ise yoM samajhA jAnA cAhiye-jo ajJAna ke kAraNa Antarika jyoti se
vihIna haiM, andhavat haiM, jJAna ko mithyA yA asatya batAte haiM  /  satya ko
nahIM apanA sakate, usameM apanA jIvana nahIM r3hAla sakate jo mokSa ko svAyata
karane kApAne kA sabase sIdhA rAstA hai  /  ye ajJAnavAdI ajJAna ko kalyANa yA
zreyas kA mArga batAte haiM  /  unake 67 bheda kahe gaye haiM una bhedoM ko isa
prakAra sat, asat, sadasat, avaktavya, sadavaktavya, asadavaktavya,
sadasadavaktavya isa prakAra samajhanA cAhie  /  jIva Adi padArtha ina vikalpoM
dvArA nahIM jAne jA sakate aura unako jAnane se koI prayojana bhI siddha nahIM
ho sakatA  /  inakI saMgati yoM karanI cAhiye-jIva sat hai yaha kauna jAnatA
hai, vaisA jJAta karane se kyA lAbha hai,usakA kyA pariNAma nikalatA hai  /
jIva asat hai, ise kauna jAnatA hai, use jAnane kA kyA prayojana hai  /  isI
prakAra sadaasada Adi bhedoM ke vikalpoM kI bhI jIva ke sAtha saMgati karanI
cAhiye  /  isI prakAra ajIva Adi padArthoM meM bhI pratyeka ke sAtha ina
vikalpoM kI saMgati karanI cAhiye  /  do nava + saptaka milakara ajJAna ke 63
bheda hote haiM  /  ina 63 bhedoM meM cAra bhedoM ko aura jor3A jAnA cAhiye- (1)
bhAva kI utpatti sat astitva se hotI hai yaha kauna jAnatA hai, isake jAnane kA
kyA prayojana hai-phala hai  /  (2) bhAva kI utpatti asat se hotI hai, yaha kise
jJAta hai athavA ise jJAta karane kA kyA prayojana hai-kyA pariNAma nikalatA hai
/  (3) sadasat se bhAva kI utpatti hotI hai, ise kauna jJAta karatA hai, jJAta
karane se kyA phala hai-kyA pariNAma nikalatA hai  /  (4) bhAva kI utpatti
avaktavya se hotI hai, yaha kauna jJAta karatA hai, jJAta karane se kyA pariNAma
AtA hai  /  Upara jo sAta vikalpa varNita hue haiM inameM se cAra vikalpoM ko
yahAM bhAva utpatti ke viSaya meM abhihita kiyA gayAhai  /  bAkI ke tIna
vikalpoM kI carcA nahIM kI gaI hai kyoMki ve tIna vikalpa padArtha ke utpanna ho
jAne ke anantara avayavoM kI apekSA se lAgU hote haiM  /  bhAvotpatti-bhAvoM kI
utpatti ke viSaya meM yaha saMbhava nahIM hai| uparyukta sAta vikalpoM meM jIva
sat hai yaha kauna jAnatA hai  /  yaha pahalA vikalpa hai  /  isakA abhiprAya
yaha hai ki jagata meM kisI bhI prANI ko aisA viziSTa jJAna nahIM hotA  /  jo
atIndriya-indriyAtIta jise indriyoM se grahaNa na kiyA jA sake, aise jIvoM evaM
anya padArthoM ko jJAta kara sake, unheM jJAta karane se koI prayojana bhI
siddha nahIM hotA kyoMki jIva cAhe nitya, sarvagata-sarvavyApi, amUrta-AkAra
rahita tathA jJAna Adi guNoM se mukta ho yA isake viparIta-pratikUla ho, use
kisI prakAra kA prayojana yA artha siddha nahIM ho sakatA  /  isaliye vAstava
meM ajJAna hI zreyaskara kalyANakArI hai  /  78

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Swasama vaktatvatadhikarah Evame Viyakkahi, no annam pajjuvasiya. Appano ya
viyakkahi, ayamanjuhi dummati ||21||  Translation:  The right to speak on one's
own time Thus, They speak, but do not understand. And their own speech, this
foolish one considers it right.  Chaya evameke vitarkabhir nanyam paryupasate.
Atmanas ca vitarkabhir ayam rjur hi durmatiyo ||  Translation:  Some, by their
speculations, do not approach any other (teacher). And by their own
speculations, this one is indeed straight-forward, but foolish.  Anuvada veprani
jinkki buddhi dushit hai, sat tattva ko grahan karne ka jinmein gun nahi hai, jo
pahle kaha gaye vikalpom ke karan jnanavadi ki paryupasana nahi karte, unke
sannidhy se labhanvit nahi hote, ve un vikalpom ke karan ajnana ko hi moksha
prapti ka saral marg svikar karte hain.  Translation:  The explanation: Those
whose intellect is impure, who lack the quality of grasping the true reality,
who do not approach the knowledgeable ones due to the previously mentioned
alternatives, do not benefit from their proximity, and accept ignorance itself
as the simple path to liberation, due to those alternatives.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH evame viyakkAhiM, no annaM pajjuvAsiyA  /  appaNo
ya viyakkAhiM, ayamaMjUhiM dummaI  // 21 //  chAyA evameke vitarkAbhi rnA'nyaM
paryupAsate  /  Atmanazca vitarkAbhirayamRjurhi durmatayaH  //  anuvAda veprANI
jinakI buddhi dUSita hai, sat tattva ko grahaNa karane kA jinameM guNa nahIM
hai, jo pahale kahe gaye vikalpoM ke kAraNa jJAnavAdI kI paryupAsanA nahIM
karate, usake sAnnidhya se lAbhAnvita nahIM hote, ve una vikalpoM ke kAraNa
ajJAna ko hI mokSa prApti kA sarala mArga svIkAra karate haiM  /  - TIkA -
punarapi tadUSaNAbhidhitsayA''ha - evamanantaroktayA nItyA eke kecanAjJAnikAH
vitarkAbhiH mImAMsAbhiH svotprekSitAbhirasatkalpanAbhiH paramanyamArhatAdikaM
jJAnavAdinaM na paryyupAsate na sevante svAvalepagrahagrastAH vayameva
tattvajJAnAbhijJAH nApara: kazcidityevaM nA'nyaM paryupAsata iti  /
tathA'tmIyairvitakairevamabhyupagatavanto- yathA ayameva asmadIyo'jJAnameva
zreya ityevamAtmako mArgaH ariti nirdoSatvAdvyaktaH - spaSTaH
paraistiraskartumazakyaH RjurvA - praguNo'kuTilaH yathAvasthitArthabhidhAyitvAt
kimiti (te) evamabhidadhati ? hi yasmAdarthe yasmAtte durmatayo
viparyyastabuddhaya ityarthaH  //  21  //  TIkArtha zAstrakAra punaH
ajJAnavAdiyoM kA mata doSa yukta hai, yaha batAne hetu pratipAdita karate
haiMpahale jo nIti-paddhati yA mArga batalAyA gayA hai, usa dvArA ajJAnI -
ajJAnavAdI apane ora se kI gaI vitarkaNA-mImAMsA Adi ke AdhAra para niSpanna
asatkalpanAoM ke kAraNa anya kisI jJAnavAdI - arhatoM kI, vaise mahApuruSoM kI
sevA nahIM karate  /  unakA sAnidhya lAbha nahIM krte| ve ahaMkAra rUpI graha se
magaramaccha se grasita haiM  /  hama hI tattva jJAna ke abhijJa- viziSTa jJAtA
haiM, anya koI nahIM haiM, aisA samajhakara anya kriyA kI paryupAsanA nahIM
karate - sAnidhya lAbha nahIM karate  /  ve apane dvArA kI gaI kalpanA athavA
vitarka ke kAraNa aisA svIkAra karate haiM ki hamArA ajJAnamaya mArga hI zreyas
kA mArga hai, doSa rahita hai, anya saiddhAntikoM dvArA usakA khaNDana nahIM
kiyA jA sakatA  /  yaha Rju vyakta praguNa- uttama guNa yukta tathA akuTila -
kuTilatA rahita sarala mArga hai kyoMki jo padArtha jisa rUpa meM avasthita hai,
unako vaha usI prakAra vyAkhyAta karanA hai  /  phira eka prazna ke sAtha
upasaMhAra karate haiM ki ve ajJAnavAdI aisA kyoM kahate haiM ? isakA uttara
yaha hai ki ve durmati haiM, unakI buddhi dUSita haiM- viparIta hai- satya
tathya ko gRhIta nahIM karatI  /  chAyA - evaM takkAi sAhiMtA dhammAdhamme
akoviyA  /  duHkhaM te nAituTTaMti sauNI paMjaraM jahA  // 22 //  - evaM tarkaiH
sAdhayantaH dharmAdharmayorakovidAH  /  duHkhante nAtitroTayanti zakuniH
paJjaraM yathA  //  anuvAda - ve ajJAnavAdI jinakA pahale varNana kiyA gayA hai,
vastutaH dharma tathA adharma kA svarUpa nahIM jAnate kintu ve tarka, nyAya,
yukti dvArA apane siddhAntoM ko satya sAbita karane kA upakrama karate haiM  /
79

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra:  Just as a bird confined in a cage cannot break free
from the cage, in the same way, they (the ignorant ones) cannot break free from
the bondage of karmas.  Commentary: The proponents of knowledge (Jnanavadi)
clearly state that the doctrine of the ignorant ones (Ajnanavadi) is
meaningless. In accordance with the aforementioned logic and through their own
conjectures, the ignorant ones establish and propound their principles. However,
they are unskilled and incompetent in understanding the dharma of peace,
forgiveness, and other virtues, as well as the sin of harming living beings.
They are unable to sever the bondage of karmas, which are the cause of misery
and unpleasant experiences, due to their falsehood and delusion.  It is
absolutely certain that they are incapable of breaking free from the bondage of
karmas. The author illustrates this with an example - just as a bird confined in
a cage cannot break free from the cage's bondage and liberate itself, in the
same way, the ignorant ones are unable to free themselves from the cycle of
birth and death or transmigration.  Verse 23: Praising their own doctrines and
criticizing the words of others, Those who are learned in that (doctrine) are
liberated from the cycle of transmigration.  Commentary: The adherents of other
philosophical systems (Anyatirthika-Jainetara Siddhantavadi) praise and justify
their own established doctrines, and criticize and condemn the words or
doctrines of others. In doing so, they display their own erudition and
scholarship. They are deeply entangled and bound in the strong fetters of the
cycle of transmigration.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram jisa prakAra piMjare meM baMdhA huA pakSI piMjare ko
tor3a nahIM sakatA-tor3akara mukta nahIM ho sakatA, usI prakAra ve karmoM ke
baMdhana ko tor3a nahI sakate  /  TIkA - sAmpratamajJAnAdinAM jJAnavAdI
spaSTamevAnarthAbhidhitsA''ha - evaM pUrvoktanyAyena tarkayA svakIyavikalpanayA
sAdhayantaH pratipAdayanto dharme kSAntyAdike'dharme ca jIvopamardApAdite
akovidA anipuNAH duHkhamasAtodayalakSaNaM taddhetuM vA mithyAtvAdyupacita
karmabandhanaM nAtitroTayanti  /  atizayenaitadvyavasthitaM tathA te na
troTayanti-apanayantIti  /  atra dRSTAntamAha-yathA paMjarasthaH zakuniH
paMjaraM troTayituM pajjarabandhanAdAtmAnaM mocayituM nAlamevamasAvapi
saMsArapaMjarAdAtmAnaM mocayituM nAlamiti  // 22 //  _TIkArtha - aba
ajJAnavAdiyoM kA siddhAnta anarthakAraka hai, yaha spaSTa rUpa meM batAne ke
liye jJAnavAdI kahate haiM - pUrvokta nyAya ke anusAra apanI managaDhanta
kalpanA dvArA ajJAnavAdI apane siddhAntoM ko siddha karate haiM  /  ve zAMti-
kSamAzIlatA Adi siddhAntoM se yukta dharma ko tathA prANiyoM kI hiMsA se hone
vAle pApa ko jAnane meM akovida-anipuNa yA asamartha hai, ve mithyAtva Adi dvArA
hone vAle karma baMdha ko-baMdhane vAle karmoM ko tor3a nahIM sakate  /  jo
duHkha tathA asAtA-pratikUla vedanIya ke hetu haiM  /  yaha sarvathA nizcita hai
ki ve karmabaMdha ko tor3ane meM sakSama nahIM hote  /  prastuta viSaya ko
AgamakAra dRSTAnta dvArA nirUpita karatehaiM-jaise piMjare meM sthita pakSI use
tor3akara piMjare ke baMdhana se apane ko chur3Ane meM sakSama nahIM hotA usI
prakAra ajJAnavAdI saMsArajanma maraNa yA AvAgamana ke piMjare se apane ko
chur3Ane meM samartha nahIM hotaa| sayaM sayaM pasaMsaMtA garahaMtA paraM vayaM
/  je u tattha viussaMti saMsAraM te viussiyA  // 23 //  chAyA - svakaM svakaM
prazaMsanto garhayaMtaH paraM vacaH  /  _ ye tu tatra vidvasyante saMsArante
vyucchritA  //  anuvAda - anyatIrthi-jainettara siddhAntavAdI apane apane
siddhAntoM kI prazasti karate haiM, unheM uttama batalAte haiM tathA auroM ke
vacana vAda yA siddhAntoM kI nindA karate haiM, unheM aprazasta batalAte haiM  /
aisA karane meM jo apane vaidUSya-pAMDitya kA pradarzana karate haiM  /  ve
saMsAra ke gAr3he bandhana meM baMdhe hue yA jakar3e hue haiM  /  TIkA - adhunA
sAmAnyenaikAntavAdimatadUSaNArthamAha - svakaM svakamAtmIyamAtmIyaM
darzanamabhyupagataM prazaMsanto varNayantaH samarthayanto vA, tathA gahamANAH
nindanta parakIyAM vAcaM, tathA hi-sAGkhyAH sarvasyAvirbhAvatirobhAva vAdinaH
sarvaM vastu kSaNikaM niranvayavinazvaraM cetyevaMvAdino bauddhAn dUSayanti
te'pi nityasya kramayogapadyAbhyAmartha kriyAvirahAt sAGkhyAn, eva manye'pi
draSTavyA iti  /  tadevaM 'ye' ekAntavAdinaH turavadhAraNe bhinnakramazca,
tatraiva teSvevA'tmIyAtmIyeSu darzaneSu prazaMsAMkurvANAH paravAcaJca
vigarhamANAH vidvasyante vidvAMsa ivA''caranti teSu vA vizeSeNozanti-
svazAstraviSaye viziSTaM yuktivAtaM vadanti, te caivaM vAdinaH saMsAraM
caturgatibhedena saMsRti rUpaM vividham anekaprakAram ut prAvalyena zritAH
sambaddhAH, tatra vA saMsAre uSitAH saMsArAntarvartinaH sarvadA bhavantItyarthaH
// 23 //  -800

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  Now the Aagamakara
(scriptural author) generally propounds the doctrines of all those who believe
in Ekantavada (absolutism) as being defective - The persons who believe in other
philosophical systems praise, describe and support their own philosophies, and
criticize, condemn and denigrate the statements and views of others. For
example, the followers of the Samkhya philosophy criticize the Buddhists who
believe in the origination, production and dissolution of all substances.
Similarly, the Buddhists also criticize the Samkhyavadins. They say that what is
eternal cannot perform any activity, nor can it do so successively or
simultaneously. In the same way, other philosophers also behave, it should be
understood. The word 'tu' (but) used here indicates distinction and different
order. These different philosophers praise their own philosophies and censure,
condemn or denigrate the arguments of others. While doing so, they behave like
scholars harboring mutual animosity. They propound specific arguments in support
of their theoretical standpoints. In doing so, these theorists get deeply
entangled in various ways in this world of four-fold destiny (Chaturgatimaya
Samsara) which is full of diverse and strong bondages. They keep revolving in
this Samsara forever.  Ahavaram purakkhayam kiriya vaidarisanam |
Kammachintapanatthanam samsarassa pavaddhanam || 24 ||  Translation - There is
also another previously proclaimed doctrine of the Kriyavadins (ritualists). The
contemplation on karma (karmic activity) is neglected or ignored by them. Their
view leads to the perpetuation of the cycle of Samsara (transmigration).  The
commentary explains that the Aagamakara is now presenting another philosophical
view, that of the Kriyavadins, after dealing with the views of those who believe
in Ekantavada. The Kriyavadins consider ritual activity as the primary means of
liberation, but they have neglected the contemplation on karma. Therefore, their
doctrine leads to the continuation of the cycle of Samsara.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH TIkArtha - AgamakAra aba sAmAnyataH una sabhI
matavAdiyoM ke siddhAntoM ko, jo aikAntikatA meM vizvAsa karate haiM doSayukta
batAne hetu pratipAdana karate haiM - _ anyAyanya darzanoM meM vizvAsa karane
vAle vyakti apane apane darzanoM kI prazaMsA karate haiM, varNana karatehaiM
tathA samarthana karate haiM, dUsaroM ke vacanoM kI, mantavyoM kI nindA karate
haiM  /  udAhaNArtha-samagra padArthoM ke AvirbhAva-utpatti tathA tirobhAva
vilaya meM vizvAsa karane vAle sAMkhya darzana ke anuyAyI bauddhoM kI nindA
karate haiM, jo saba padArthoM ko kSaNika tathA niranvaya-Age pIche ke sambandha
se rahita vinazvara mAnate haiM  /  bauddha bhI sAMkhyavAdiyoM kI nindA karate
haiM  /  ve kahate haiM ki jo padArtha nitya hai, vaha artha kriyA nahIM kara
sakatA, na to vaha kramazaH vaisA kara sakatA hai aura na yugapata-eka sAtha hI
vaisA kara sakatA hai  /  isI prakAra anya darzanavAdI bhI karate haiM, aisA
samajhanA cAhiye  /  yahAM para AyA huA 'tu' zabda avadhAraNa aura bhinna krama
kA sUcaka hai  /  ve vibhinna matavAdI apane apane darzanoM kI prazaMsA karate
haiM tathA anyoM ke vAdoM kI vigarhaNA-nindA yA avahelanA karate haiM  /  aisA
karatehue ve paraspara vidveSa karatehue vidvAnoM ke samAna AcaraNa karate haiM
/  ve apane saiddhAntika pakSa ke samarthana meM viziSTa yuktiyAM pratipAdita
karate haiM, aisA karane vAle ve siddhAntavAdI isa caturgatimaya-cAra gatiyoM se
yukta saMsAra meM vividha prakAra se aneka taraha se gAr3ha baMdhanoM meM
baMdhate haiM  /  ve isa saMsAra meM sarvadA nivAsa karate haiM cakkara kATate
haiN| ahAvaraM purakkhAyaM kiriyA vAidarisaNaM  /  kammaciMtApaNaTThANaM
saMsArassa pavaDvaNaM  // 24 //  chAyA - athA'paraM purA''khyAtaM
kriyAvAdidarzanam  /  karmacintApranaSTAnAM saMsArasya pravardhanam  //  anuvAda
- anya tIrthakoM meM eka kriyAvAdI darzana bhI hai vahAM karma kI cintA-
karmavAda viSayaka cintana pranaSTa hai-upekSita hai, usa para vicAra nahIM kiyA
jAtA  /  unakA mata saMsAra ko-AvAgamana ke cakra ko bar3hAne vAlA hai| TIkA -
sAmprataM yaduktaM niyuktikAreNoddezakArthAdhikAre karma cayaM na gacchati
caturvidhaM bhikSu samaya iti tadadhikRtyAha - athetyAnantarye,
ajJAnavAdimatAnantaramidamanyat purA pUrvamAkhyAtaM kathitam, kiM
punastadityAhakriyAvAdidarzanam, kriyaiva caityakarmAdikA pradhAnaM
mokSAGgamityevaM vadituM zIlaM yeSAM te kriyAvAdina steSAM darzanam AgamaH
kriyAvAdidarzanam, kiM bhUtAste kriyAvAdina ityAha-karmaNi jJAnAvaraNAdike cintA
pAlocanaM karma cintA tasyAH, praNaSTA-apagatAH karmacintApraNaSTAH
yataste'vijJAnAdyupacitaM caturvidhaM karmabandhaM necchanti
ata:karmacintApraNaSTAH, teSAJcedaM darzanam duHkhaskandhasya
asAtodayaparamparAyAH vivardhanaMbhavati  /  kvacitsaMsAravardhanamiti * pAThaH
tehyevaM pratipadyamAnAH saMsArasya buddhimeva kurvanti nocchedamiti  //
TIkArtha - niyuktikAra ne uddezaka ke adhikAra meM jo yaha pratipAdita kiyA ki
bhikSuoM ke siddhAntAnusAra cAra prakAra ke karma baMdhana kAraka nahIM hote  /
usI saMdarbha ko lekara AgamakAra yahAM pratipAdita karate haiM - -810

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:  The word 'Atha'
appearing in the Gatha of the Shri Sutrakritanga Sutram indicates continuity or
immediacy. This is the second Darsana (philosophical view) of the Kriyavadins,
which was mentioned earlier, after the view of the Ajnanavadins. Those who
declare Chaitya-karma (worship of the Jina) and other related activities as the
primary means for attaining Moksha (liberation) are known as the Kriyavadins.
The Agamakaras (scriptural authors) raise the question - what kind of
Kriyavadins are they? They say that contemplation, reflection, etc. regarding
Karmas like Jnanavaranaiya (knowledge-obscuring) are called Karma-chinta
(concern about Karmas). Those whose Karma-chinta has been destroyed, i.e., those
who do not attain the right knowledge of Karmas like Jnanavaranaiya and perform
actions arbitrarily, are called Karma-chinta-pranashta (those whose concern
about Karmas has been destroyed). The Buddhist Shramanas and others, without the
knowledge of Abhijnana (higher knowledge), do not consider the four types of
Karmas performed without proper collection and accumulation as bondage-causing,
and therefore, they are Karma-chinta-pranashta. Their view increases the series
of sorrowful experiences or the unpleasant Asatodaya (inauspicious) suffering.
In some places, the reading 'Samsaravardhanam' is found, which means that those
Bhikshus (monks) who do not consider the four types of Karmas as bondage-causing
increase the cycle of birth and death or Samsara.  The verse 25 states: Janaṃ
kāyeṇāṇakuṭṭī, abuho yaṃ ca hiṃsati | Puṭṭho saṃveyaī paraṃ aviyattaṃ khu
sāvajjaṃ || 25 ||  Translation: The one who, knowing, does not harm with the
body, but harms with the mind, and the one who, not knowing, harms with the body
but not with the mind, both commit only subtle, imperceptible sin.  The
commentary explains that the one who, knowing, does not physically harm living
beings but harms them mentally due to anger, does not accumulate Karma, as he is
not engaged in physical activities like cutting or breaking the limbs of living
beings. Similarly, the one who, not knowing, harms living beings physically but
not mentally, also does not accumulate Karma. Thus, both types of actions, even
though different, are subtle and imperceptible in terms of Karmic bondage.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram gAthA meM AyA huA 'atha' zabda Anantarya-arthAt
anantaratA kA bodhaka hai, ajJAnavAdiyoM ke mata ke anantara yaha dUsarA
kriyAvAdiyoM kA darzana hai jisakA pahale ullekha huA hai  /  caityakarma Adi-
tadviSaya kriyA kalApa ko jo mokSa kA mukhya aMga-upAya batalAte haiM, unakA
darzana kriyAvAdI ke nAma se abhihita huA hai| ve kriyAvAdI kisa prakAra ke haiM
? aisA prazna uThAkara AgamakAra kahate haiM-jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karmoM ke
saMbaMdha meM cintana-paryAlocana Adi karanA karma cintA kahA jAtA hai, jinakI
karma cintA pranaSTa ho gaI hai, miTa gaI hai, unheM karma cintA pranaSTa kahA
gayA hai arthAt jo jJAnAvaraNIyAdi karmoM kA samyak jJAna prApta nahIM karate
aura manamAne rUpa se kriyAeM karate haiM, ve karma viSayaka sat cintana se
rahita haiM  /  ve-bauddha zramaNa Adi abhijJAnajJAna ke binA upacita-
saMgrahita, kiye gaye cAra prakAra ke karmoM ko bandhanakArI nahIM mAnate,
ataeva ve karmacintA pranaSTa haiM  /  unakA yaha mantavya duHkhaskandha yA
asAtodaya-azubha pratikUla bhoga rUpa duHkha paramparA ko bar3hAtA hai  /  kahIM
kahIM 'saMsAravardhanaM' aisA pATha hai jisakA tAtparya yaha hai ki jo bhikSu
cAra prakAra ke karmoM ko baMdhana prada nahIM mAnate ve saMsAra kI, janma
maraNa yA AvAgamana kI vRddhi karate haiM  /  jANaM kA eNa'NAuTTI, abuho jaM ca
hiMsati  /  puTTho saMveyai paraM aviyattaM khu sAvajaM  // 25 //  chAyA - jAnan
kAyenAnA kuTTI, abudho yaM ca hinasti  /  spRSTaH saMvedayati para mavyaktaM
khalu sAvadyam  //  anuvAda - jo manuSya jAnatA huA zarIra se hiMsA nahIM karatA
kintu mAnasika hiMsA karatA hai tathA jo puruSa nahIM jAnatA huA zarIra se hiMsA
karatA hai para mana se nahIM karatA vaha kevala sparza mAtra hI karmoM kA
bandha karatA hai kyoMki kiye jAte donoM prakAra ke karma bandha avyakta-aspaSTa
hai  /  TIkA - yathA te karma cintAto naSTAstathA darzayitumAha - yo hi jAnan
avagacchan prANino hinasti, kAyena cAnAkuTTI 'kuTTa chedane' AkuTTana mAkuTTaH
sa vidyate yasyAsAvAkuhI nAkuTyanAkuTTI, idamuktambhavatiyo hi kopAdenimittAt
kevalaM manovyApAreNa prANino vyApAdayati na ca kAyena prANyavayavAnAM
chedanabhedanAdike vyApAre vartate na tasyAvA tasya karmopacayo na
bhavatItyarthaH  /  tathA abudho'jAnAnaH kAyavyApAramAtreNa yaJca hinasti
prANinaM, tatrApi manovyApArAbhAvAnna karmopacaya iti  /  anena ca zlokArthena
yaduktaM niyuktikRtA yathA"caturvidhaM karma nopacIyate bhikSu samaya" iti,
tatra parijJopacitavijJopacitAkhyaM bhedadvayaM sAkSAdupAttaM zeSantvI-
pathasvapnAntikabhedadvayaM cazabdenopAttaM tatreraNamIgamanaM tatsaMbaddhaH
panthA i-pathastatpratyayaM karmeryApathametaduktambhavati pathi gacchato
yathAkathaJcidanabhisandheryat prANivyApAdanambhavati tena karmaNazcayo na
bhavati tathA svapnAntikamiti-svapnaeva lokoktyA svapnAntaH sa vidyate yasya
tatsvapnAntikaM tadapi na karmabandhAya, yathA svapne bhujikriyAyAM
tRptyabhAvastathA karmaNo'pIti, kathantarhi teSAM karmopacayo bhavatIti ?
ucyate, yadyasau hanyamAnaH prANIbhavati hantuzca yadi prANItyevaM
jJAnamutpadyate tathainaM hanmItyevaM ca yadi buddhiH prAduHSyAd eteSu ca satsu
yadi kAyaceSTA pravartate tasyAmapi yadyasau prANI vyApAdyate tato hiMsA tatazca
karmopacayo bhavatIti, eSA manyatarAbhAve'pi na hiMsA na ca krmcyH| atra ca
paJcAnAM padAnAM dvAtriMzadbhaGgAH bhavanti, tatra prathamabhaGge
hiMsako'pareSvekatriMzatsvahiMsakaH tathA coktam 82

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement of the right time is: "The killing of a living being with the
knowledge of its being a living being and with the intention to kill, and the
action done in that way. The separation from life is caused by five kinds of
violence." ||1||  It is said that karma is not accumulated by mere knowledge,
etc. To show that there is some accumulation even in the subtle, the second half
of the verse says, "Puththo". Thus, even by four kinds of karma, namely,
knowledge-based, body-based, ignorance-based, and dream-like, one is slightly
touched, and he experiences the result of that karma by mere touch, not by
excessive ripening. This means that just as a lump of earth falling on a roof is
immediately cleaned, so also the result is experienced immediately after the
touch. Therefore, it is said that there is no decay of it, but not its complete
absence. Thus, that which is subtle, indistinct, and not clearly experienced in
the result, like the holding of a hoof, is subtle and exists with the fault.
That is the karma based on knowledge, etc. ||25||  Commentary: The Āgama-kāra
explains the statement that karma is free from mental anxiety, by saying:  A
person who knows that he is killing a living being, but is not a killer by body,
does not have the bondage of karma. The root "kuṭṭa" means piercing. The action
of piercing is called ākuṭṭana or ākuṭṭa. The one who does it is called ākuṭṭī.
The one who is not ākuṭṭī is called anākuṭṭī. Anākuṭṭī means non-violent or free
from violence. This means that a person who kills a living being by mere mental
action due to anger, etc., but does not pierce, cut, or destroy the limbs of the
living being, does not have the accumulation or bondage of his evil karma. A
person who is ignorant, does not have anger, etc., in his mind, and kills a
living being by mere bodily action, does not have the accumulation or bondage of
karma because there is no mental violence. The half part of this verse has
already been said by the commentator in this regard, that the monks have this
principle that four types of karma are not accumulated or bound. In this, the
two divisions of knowledge-based and ignorance-based, which are done knowingly
and unknowingly, are directly taken by the first half of the verse. And the
remaining two divisions, namely, path-based and dream-like, are taken by the
word "cha". The meaning of "īraṇa" or "īrya" is going. The path or way related
to it is called "īrya-path". The karma that is bound by it is called "īrya-path"
or "īrya-pathic". This means that while walking on the road, if a living being
is killed unknowingly, karma is not bound. Dream-like karma is also not bound.
According to common belief, dream is called "svapnānta". The one who is related
to "svapnānta" is called "svapnānta". That "svapnānta" karma is also not
binding. For example, if someone eats food in a dream, but in reality, he does
not feel satisfied or his hunger is not satisfied. Similarly, karma is not bound
by killing a living being in a dream. The question is raised, then how do those
monks have karma bound? How do they believe in karma bondage? In this context,
they say that if the one who is being killed is a living being, and the one who
is killing, the killer, knows that he is a living being, and the killer has the
thought that I am killing him, then if the killer tries to kill him with his
body, and as a result of that effort, the living being is killed, then there is
actually violence, and only then is there accumulation or bondage of karma. (83)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH "prANI prANijJAnaM ghAtakacittaJca tadgatA ceSTA
/  prANaizca viprayogaH paJcabhirApAdyate hiMsA"  // 1 //  kiyekAntenaiva
parijJopacitAdinA karmopacayo na bhavatyeva? bhavati kAcidavyaktamAtreti
darzayituMzlokapazcArdhamAha'puTTho' tti tena kevala manovyApAra
rUpaparijJopacitena kevala kAyakriyotthena vA'vijJopaciteneryApathena
svapnAntikena ca caturvidhenA'pi karmaNA spRSTa ISacchuptaH saMstatkarmA'sau
sparzamAtreNaiva paramanubhavati na tatyAdhiko vipAko'sti
kuDyApatitasikatAmuSTivat sparzAnantarameva prishttniityrthH| ataeva tasya
cayAbhAvo'bhidhIyate na punaratyantAbhAva iti  /  evaJca kRtvA tad avyaktam
aparisphuTaM, khuravadhAraNe avyaktameva spaSTa vipAkAnubhavAbhAvAt
tadevamavyaktaM sahAvadyena-gaSeNa vartate tatparijJopacitAdi karmeti  // 25 //
TIkArtha - ve kriyAvAdI karma cintA se rahita hai, aisA jo kahA gayA hai, use
spaSTa karate hue AgamakAra batalAte haiM - jo puruSa jAnatA huA prANiyoM kI
hiMsA karatAhai kintu zarIra dvArA vaha anAkuTTI hai, usake karma kA baMdha
nahIM hotA  /  'kuTTa' dhAtu chedana ke artha meM hai  /  chedanamUlaka kArya
AkuTTana yA AkuTTa kahA jAtA hai  /  use jo karatA hai use AkuTTI kahA jAtA hai
/  jo AkuTTI nahIM hai vaha anAkuTTI kI saMjJA se abhihita huA hai  /  anAkuTTI
kA tAtparya ahiMsaka yA hiMsA varjita se haiM  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki jo
vyakti kopaAdi ke kAraNa mAtra apane mano vyApAra se-mAnasika kriyA se prANiyoM
kA vyApAdana karatA hai. mAratA hai. unakI hiMsA karatA hai kinta vaha prANiyoM
ke avayavoM kA. aMgoM kA chedana bhedana malaka vyApAra kArya nahIM karatA hai,
unheM kATakara naSTakara chinna bhinna nahIM karatA hai. usake avadya-pApa yA
azabha karma kA upacaya-saMgraha yA baMdha nahIM hotA  /  jo puruSa abuddha hai-
nahIM jAnatA hai, mana meM krodhAdi vikAra nahIM hai kevala kAya vyApAra se
zarIra kI kriyA se prANI kI hiMsA karatA hai, vahAM mana kA vyApAra-mAnasika
hiMsA bhAva na hone se karma kA upacayabaMdha-nahIM hotA  /  isa gAthA ke Adhe
bhAga meM jo yaha kahA gayA hai, niyuktikAra ne isa saMbaMdha meM pahale kahA hI
hai ki bhikSuoM kA yaha siddhAnta hai ki cAra prakAra ke karma upacita nahIM
hote-saMgrahita yA baddha nahIM hote, nahIM baMdhate  /  isameM parijJopacitta-
jAnate hue bhI kiye gaye, tathA avijJopacita-na jAnate hue kiye gaye ye do bheda
zloka ke pUrvArddha dvArA sAkSAt parigRhIta hai-liye gaye haiM tathA avaziSTa
IryApatha evaM svapnAntika ina do bhedoM ko 'ca' zabda se liyA gayA hai  /
IraNa yA IryA kA artha gamana hai  /  tadviSayaka patha yA mArga ko IryApatha
kahA jAtA hai, usake dvArA jo karma bandha hotA hai, ve IryApatha yA IryApathika
kahe jAte haiM  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki rAste calate samaya yathA
kathaMcita anajAne, jo prANI vyApadana-kisI jIvadhArI kA ghAta ho jAtA hai, use
karma upacita-baddha nahIM hotA  /  svapnAntika karma bhI nahIM baMdhatA  /
lokokti-janamAnyatA ke anusArasvapna hI svapnAnta kahA jAtA hai  /  svapnAnta se
jisakA saMbaMdha ho use svapnAntika kahate haiM  /  vaha svapnAntika. karma bhI
baMdhana kAraka nahIM hotA  /  jaise svapna meM kisI ne bhojana kiyA para vaisA
hone para vAstava meM tRpti  /  yA bhUkha kI nivRtti nahIM hotI  /  usI prakAra
svapna yA sapane meM kiye gaye prANI vyApAdana se karma bandha nahIM hotA  /
prazna uThAyA jAtAhai taba una bhikSuoM ke kisa prakAra karma baMdha hotA hai ve
kaise karmabandha honA mAnate haiM ? isa saMdarbha meM ve kahate haiM ki jise
mArA jA rahA hai| yadi vaha prANavAna hai, jo mAra rahA hai, hantA hai use usake
prANI hone kA jJAna hotAhai tathA hantA kI yaha buddhi hotI hai-soca hotA hai ki
maiM isakA ghAta karatA hU~ aisA saba hone kI sthiti meM-aisA hone para yadi
haMtA apanI kAyA se use mArane kA prayatna karatA hai, vaise prayatna ke
pariNAmasvarUpa usa prANI kA ghAta ho jAtA hai, taba vAstava meM hiMsA hotI hai
aura tabhI karma kA upacaya yA baMdha hotA hai| (83)

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **If any one of these five factors is absent, then
neither violence nor karmic bondage occurs. There are thirty-two variations of
these five factors. The person who commits the first variation is violent, while
the remaining thirty-one variations do not involve violence.**  **It is said
that violence arises from these five factors: the living being, the knowledge of
the living being's existence, the mental state of the killer, the killer's
action, and the separation of the victim's life.**  **The question arises: Does
an action performed with knowledge (Parijnopacita-jnana) not lead to karmic
accumulation or bondage?**  **It is said that the karma that binds from these
actions is in an unmanifest form, very subtle or very ordinary. To illustrate
this, the Agamkar explains in the latter part of the verse that a person who
acts with four types of karma - mental activity (Parijnopacita karma), physical
action without knowledge (Avijnopacita karma), actions related to the path of
life (Iryapathika karma), and actions in dreams (Swapnanatika karma) - binds
karma in a subtle form.**  **Therefore, he is called the doer of those actions,
and he experiences the fruit or result of those actions only in a subtle way,
because he does not experience them in a full-fledged manner.**  **An example is
given: Just as a handful of sand thrown at a wall touches the wall and then
scatters, similarly, the above four types of karma are destroyed after a subtle
touch. Therefore, due to being touched only subtly, it is said that there is no
accumulation of those karmas, but it is not said that they are completely
absent.**  **Thus, it can be said that these four karmas are unmanifest,
unexpressed, and subtle. The word "khu" used here is conceptual. Therefore, the
above four types of karma are unmanifest because their fruit or result is not
clearly experienced.**  **Therefore, Avijnopacita and other karmas are sinful in
an unmanifest form.**  **Verse 26:**  **There are three causes (Aayana) that
lead to sin: attacking a living being directly, sending someone to kill it, and
mentally approving of its killing.**  **Translation:**  **There are three causes
(Aayana) that lead to sin: attacking a living being directly (Abhikram), sending
someone to kill it (Presya), and mentally approving of its killing (Manasa
Anujanya).**  **Commentary:**  **It is asked: If the four types of karma
mentioned above do not lead to accumulation, then how does karmic accumulation
occur? To answer this doubt, it is said that there are three causes (Aayana)
that lead to sin. These are: attacking a living being directly (Abhikram),
sending someone to kill it (Presya), and mentally approving of its killing
(Manasa Anujanya).**  **The first cause (Abhikram) is when a person directly
attacks a living being with the intention of killing it. The second cause
(Presya) is when a person sends someone to kill a living being. The third cause
(Manasa Anujanya) is when a person mentally approves of the killing of a living
being.**  **These three causes are the root of sin. They are the actions that
lead to the accumulation of negative karma.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI 'sUtrakRtAGga sUtram inameM se kisI eka ke bhI na hone para na to hiMsA hI
hotI hai aura na karma kA baMdha hii| yahAM jo pAMca pada yA vikalpa ullikhita
huehaiM, unake battIsa bhaMga banate haiM  /  unameM prathama bhaMga kA vyakti
hI hiMsaka hai avaziSTa ikatIsa bhaMgoM meM hiMsA nahIM hotI  /  kahA gayA hai
ki prANI, prANI ke astittva kA jJAna, haMtA kI caitAsika bhUmi, usakI tad
viSayaka kriyA aura hanyamAna ke prANoM kA viyoga ina pAMca vikalpoM se hiMsA kI
niSpatti hotI hai  /  prazna upasthita kiyA jAtA hai ki kyA parijJopacita-jJAna
yA jAnakArI ke sAtha kI gaI pravRtti - hiMsA se karma kA upacaya yA baMdha nahIM
hotA ? isa para kahA jAtA hai inase jo karma baMdhatA hai, vaha avyakta rUpa
liye hue hotA hai- bahuta aspaSTa yA bahuta sAdhAraNa hotA hai  /  isakA
digdarzana karAne ke liye AgamakAra gAthA ke uttarArddha meM batAte haiM ki
kevala mAnasika vyApAra rUpa parijJopacita karma - jAnakArI ke sAtha kiye gaye
karma tathA kevala daihika kriyA dvArA avijJopacita - jAnakArI yA jJAna ke binA
kiye gaye karma tathA IryApathika evaM svapnAntika karma - ina cAra prakAra ke
karmoM se pravRtta hone vAlA vyakti kiMcita sparza rUpa karma kA baMdha karatA
hai  /  isa nAte vaha tatkarmA-una karmoM kA kartA kahA jAtA hai, vaha una
karmoM kA vipAka yA phala sparza mAtra anubhava karatA hai, bhogatA hai| kyoMki
vaha adhikatA liye hue nahIM hotaa| eka udAharaNa dvArA ise sApha kiyA jAtA hai
ki jaise dIvAra para yadi muTThI bharakara bAlU pheMkI jAtI hai to vaha dIvAra
ko chUkara nIce bikhara jAtIhai, usI prakAra uparyukta cAroM prakAra ke karma
sparza mAtra ke bAda dhvasta ho jAte haiM, isa dRSTi se sparza mAtra dvArA
paribhukta ho jAne ke kAraNa una karmoM ke upacaya kA abhAva kahA jAtA hai
parantu use atyantA bhAva nahIM kahA jAtA  /  isa prakAra yoM kahA jA sakatA hai
ki ve cAra karma avyakta hai, aparisphuTa haiM, aspaSTavata hai| yahAM AyA huA
'khu' pada avadhAraNA mUlaka hai| ataeva uparyukta cAroM prakAra ke karma
avyakta hI haiM kyoMki unakA vipAka-phalAnubhava spaSTa anubhUta nahIM hotA  /
ataeva avijJopacitAdi karma avyakta rUpeNa sAvadya haipApa pUrNa haiM  /  saMti
me tau AyANA, jehiM kIrar3a pAvagaM  /  abhikammAya pesAya, maNasA aNujANiyA  //
26  //  chAyA saMtImAni trINyAdAnAni, yaiH kriyatepApakam  /  abhikramya ca
preSya ca manasA'nujJAya  //  anuvAda - ve tIna AdAna- hetu yA kAraNa hai,
jinase manuSya pApa karma karatA hai-kisI jIva kA vadha karane hetu svayaM usa
para hamalA karanA, preSya- naukara Adi bhejakara usakI hatyA karavAnA tathA
mana se hatyA karane kI anujJA denA- anumodana karanA  /  -   TIkA' - nanu ca
yadyanantaroktaM caturvidhaM karma nopacayaM yAti kathaMtarhi karmopacayo
bhavatItyetadAzaGkyAhasaMti vidyante amUni trINi AdIyate svIkriyate amIbhiH
karmetyAdAnAni, etadeva darzayati yairAdAnaiH kriyate vidhIyate niSpAdyate
pApakaM kalbhaSaM, tAni cAmUni tadyathA - abhikramyeti Abhimukhyena vadhyaM
prANinaM krAntvA - tadghAtAbhimukhaM cittaM vidhAya yatra svata eva prANinaM
vyApAdayati tadekaM karmAdAnaM athA'paraM ca prANidhAtAya preSyaM samAdizya
yatprANivyApAdanaM tadvitIyaM karmAdAnamiti, tathA'paraM vyApAdayantaM
manasA'nujAnIta ityetattRtIyaM 84

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Self-Time Statement of Authority  **Karma-Adana, the difference from
Parijnopchita:**  Here, only mental contemplation is involved, while the other
(Parijnopchita) involves approval of the killing of a living being by another.
|| 26 ||  **Commentary:**  The question arises regarding the previously
mentioned four types of karma, that if they are not accumulated, then how does
karma accumulate?  The Agamkar (Jain scripture) explains the view of those who
hold this opinion:  - There are three Adanas (causes).  The origin of Adana is
as follows:  Those by which karma is taken or accepted are called Adana.  The
Agamkar, pointing this out, says that the Adanas (causes) by which sinful or
impure, low or inauspicious karma is done are as follows:  - **First Adana:**
To kill a being oneself with the intention of killing it.  - **Second Adana:**
To have someone else kill a being on your behalf.  - **Third Adana:**  To
mentally approve of the killing of a being by another.  The difference between
this and Parijnopchita karma is that in Parijnopchita, there is only mental
contemplation of killing, while here, approval is given in the context of
another killing a being.  **These are the three Adanas:**  **Thus, whoever
abandons these three, becomes free from attachment and attains Nirvana.** || 27
||  **Commentary:**  These three Adanas are the causes by which sin is
committed.  Thus, by being free from attachment, one attains Nirvana.  **Om Om
Om**  **Translation:**  There are three Adanas (causes) of karma-bondage, by
which sinful karma, inauspicious karma, is bound.  Where these three are not
present, there is purity of thought, and there is no bondage of karma, but
rather Nirvana or liberation is attained.  **Commentary:**  Thus, where there is
self-action, causing action, and approval of the killing of a living being,
there is accumulation of karma due to the afflicted determination of the killing
of a living being.  The Agamkar says that this is the only place where karma
accumulates, not elsewhere.  **Further Explanation:**  These three previously
mentioned Adanas, either individually or collectively, are the causes by which
sinful karma is accumulated due to the afflicted determination.  Thus, where
there is no self-action, causing action, or approval of the killing of a living
being, there is no accumulation of karma for one who is free from attachment,
with a mind free from hatred, even if there is killing of a living being.  This
is because there is no mental intention, either through the body or the mind,
and with pure consciousness, there is no accumulation of karma.  Due to the
absence of karma, Nirvana, the state of cessation of all duality, is attained.
|| 27 ||  **Commentary:**  In the context of the killing of living beings, there
are three options: to do it oneself, to have someone else do it, and to approve
of it being done.  These are the causes.  When these are taken, and the killing
of a living being is done with an afflicted determination, full of anger and
other afflictions, then karma is accumulated.  Karma is not accumulated
elsewhere.  The Agamkar says this to show this.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH karmAdAnaM, parijJopacitAdasyAyaM bhedaH tatra
kevalaM manasA cintanamihatvapareNa vyApAdyamAne prANinyanumodana miti  //  26
//  TIkArtha pahale caturvidha karmoM ke upacita na hone kA jo vicAra upasthita
kiyA gayA, usa para prazna upasthita karate hue ki phira karma kA upacaya kisa
prakAra hotA hai, AgamakAra ukta matavAdiyoM kA usa para mantavya batalAte haiM
- - AdAna yA kAraNa tIna haiM  /  AdAna kI vyutpatti isa prakAra hai - jinake
dvArA karma grahaNa kiye jAte haiM yA svIkAra kiye jAte haiM, ve AdAna kahe jAte
haiM  /  AgamakAra isI kA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiMjina AdAnoM-kAraNoM
dvArA pApa yA kalmaSa-nIca yA azubha karma kiye jAte haiM ve AdAna isa prakAra
haiM- vadhyajisakA vadha karanA hai, usa prANI ko mArane kI icchA se svayaM
usakA vyApAdana karanA, yaha eka yA prathama karmAdAna hai  /  prANI kI ghAta yA
hatyA hetu kisI naukara ko bhejakara usakA vyApAdana karAnA - vadha karAnA
dUsarA karmAdAna hai  /  jo kisI kA vyApAdana kara rahA ho, mAra rahA ho, mana
se usakA anumodana karanA, anujJA denAtIsarA karmAdAna hai  /  parijJopacita
karma se isakA antara yaha haiM ki parijJopacita meM kevala mana se vadha karane
kA cintana hotA hai para isameM kisI anya dvArA vadha kiye jAte hue prANI ke
saMdarbha meM usake ghAta yA vadha kA anumodana kiyA jAtA hai  /  ete u tau
AyANA evaM jehiM kIrai pAvagaM  /  bhAva visohIe, nivvANamabhigacchai  // 27 //
chAyA etAni tu trINyAdAnAni yaiH kriyate pApakam  /  evaM bhAvavizuddhayA tu
nirvANa mabhigacchati  //  - - OM OM OM anuvAda karmabaMdhana ke tIna AdAna-
kAraNa haiM jinake dvArA pApa karmoM kA azubha karmoM kA baMdha hotA hai  /
jahAM ye tInoM nahIM hote vahAM bhAva vizuddha - atyanta zuddha hote haiM  /
karmoM kA bandha nahIM hotA varan nirvANa yA mukti prApta hotI hai  /  I TIkA -
tadevaM yatra svayaM kRtakAritAnumataya: prANighAte kriyamANe vidyante
kliSTAdhyavasAyasya prANAtipAtazca tatraiva karmopacayo nA'nyatrepi
darzayitumAha turavadhAraNe, etAnyeva pUrvoktAni trINi vyastAni samastAni vA
AdAnAni yairduSTAdhyavasAyasavyapekSaiH pApakaM karmoMpacIyata iti  /  evaJca
sthite yatra kRtakAritAnumatayaH prANivyaparopaNamprati na vidyante tathA
bhAvavizuddhayA araktadviSTabuddhyA pravartamAnasya satyapi prANAtipAte kevalena
manasA kAyena vA mano'bhisandhirahitenobhayena vA vizuddhabuddherna karmopacayaH
tadabhAvAcca nirvANaM sarvadvandvoparati svabhAvam abhigacchati AbhimukhyenA
prApnotIti  // 27 //  TIkArtha prANiyoM ke ghAta yA vadha ke saMdarbha meM
svayaM vaisA karanA auroM dvArA karAnA tathA karate hue kA anumodana karanA - ye
tIna vikalpa hote haiM- kAraNa hote haiN| inako lete hue kliSTa klezapUrNa-
krodhAveza Adi se yukta adhyavasAya se prANI kA ghAta kiyA jAtA hai vahIM karma
kA apacaya-baMdha hotA hai  /  anyatra karma baMdha nahIM hotA  /  isakA
digdarzana karAne ke liye AgamakAra kahate haiM : 1 85

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra - Here the word 'tu' is used in the sense of
'concept'. Therefore, it means that the three causes of karma-bandha mentioned
earlier are the cause of karma-bandha in a separate and combined form. When
there is a connection with evil-defective, malicious determination-effort,
undertaking, then by these causes, the bondage of sinful karma takes place.
Where the three conditions of killing, causing, and approving are not present,
where there is no tendency motivated by attachment, aversion, etc., even if
violence occurs only with the mind or with the body, or with the mind and body
devoid of internal evil intentions, then due to the purity of emotions, the
karma-jiva becomes free from all kinds of dualities - obstacles and troubles -
and attains liberation.  **Verse 28:** A father, driven by a terrible calamity,
may kill his son and eat his flesh to save his own life, but even doing so, he
does not become bound by karma. Similarly, a wise sage, free from attachment and
aversion, even if he eats meat, does not become bound by karma.  **Commentary:**
The text explains that karma-bandha does not occur for one who acts with pure
intentions. It gives an example: A householder father, driven by a terrible
calamity, may kill his son and eat his flesh to save his own life. Even though
he is driven by attachment and aversion, he does not become bound by karma.
Similarly, a wise sage, free from attachment and aversion, even if he eats meat,
does not become bound by karma. The word 'cha' here is used in the sense of
'api'. The essence is that whether a householder or a monk, whoever has pure
intentions, does not become bound by karma even if he eats meat.  **Verse 29:**
Those who are pure in mind, their minds do not waver. They are free from
impurities, and they are not bound by karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram - yahAM 'tu' zabda kA prayoga avadhAraNA ke artha meM
hai  /  ataH isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki pahale karmabaMdha ke jo tIna hetu
batAye gaye, ve hI vyastarUpa meM-alaga alaga aura samasta rUpa meM eka sAtha
milakara karma baMdha ke kAraNa hai  /  inameM duSTa-doSayukta, durAzayapUrNa
adhyavasAya-prayatna, upakrama jur3A rahatA hai, taba ina kAraNoM dvArA pApa
karma kA baMdha hotA hai  /  jahAM prANI kI hiMsA ke prati kRta, kArita aura
anumodita-ye tInoM sthitiyAM nahIM rahatI, rAga dveSAdi se prerita pravRtti
nahIM hotI, vahAM kevala mana se yA deha se athavA Antarika duHsaMkalpa rahita
mana aura deha se hiMsA ho jAne para bhI bhAvoM ke vizuddha hone ke kAraNa karma
jIva saba prAkara ke dvandvoM se-bAdhAoM aura jhaMjhaToM se uparata-rahita
hokara mokSa prApta kara letA hai| puttaM piyA samArabbha, AhA rejja asaMjae  /
bhuMjamANo ya mehAvI, kammuNA nova lippai  // 28 //  chAyA - putraM pitA
samArabhyAhArayedasaMyataH  /  bhuJjAnazca medhAvI karmaNA nopalipyate  //
anuvAda - kisI ghora vipattI ke samaya gRhastha pitA yadi apanA jIvana bacAne
hetu putra kA vadha kara usakA mAMsa bhakSaNa kara le to bhI vaha-vaisA karatA
huA bhI karmabaddha nahIM hotA, isI prakAra koI medhAvIrAga dveSa rahita sAdhu
bhI mAMsa bhakSaNa kara le to vaha karmabaddha nahIM hogaa| TIkA - bhAva
zuddhayA pravartamAnasya karmabandho na bhavatItyatrA'rthe dRSTAntamAha -
putramapatyaM pitA janakaH samArambha vyApAdya AhArArthaM
kasyAJcittathAvidhAyAmApadi taduddharaNArthaparaktadviSTo'saMyato
gRhasthastatpizitaM bhujAno'pi, ca zabdasyA'pi zabdArthatvAditi tathA meghAvyapi
saMyato'pItyarthaH tadevaM gRhastho bhikSu rvA zuddhAzayaH pizitAzyapi karmaNA
pApena nopalipyate nAzliSyata iti  /  yathAcA'tra pituH putraM
vyApAdayatastatrAraktadviSTamanasaH karmabandho na bhavati
tathA'nyasyA'pyaraktadviSTAntaHkaraNasya prANivadhe satyapi na karmabandho
bhavatIti  // 28 //  TIkArtha - bhAvoM kI zuddhi ke sAtha pravRtta hotA hai,
pravRtti yA kriyA karatA hai, usa vyakti ke karmoM kA baMdha nahIM hotA, isa
sambandha meM AgamakAra anya dArzanikoM kA mantavya prakaTa karate haiM jaise
koI gRhastha pitA kisI bhayAvaha vipatti ke samaya usase bacane ke liye apane
putra kA hanana kara usakA mAMsa bhakSaNa kara le to vaha rAga dveSa rahita hone
ke kAraNa karma baddha nahIM hotA-usase pApa karma nahIM lagate  /  usI prakAra
rAga dveSa rahita sAdhu bhI mAMsa khAtA huA karmopalipta nahIM hotaa| yahAM 'ca'
zabda kA prayoga api ke artha meM hai  /  isakA sAra yaha hai ki cAhe gRhastha
ho yA bhikSu ho, jisakA Azaya-bhAva yA abhiprAya zuddha hotA hai, vaha AmiSa
bhojana karatA huA bhI karmabaddha nahIM hotA-pApa se upalipta nahIM hotaa|
punaH usI bAta ko spaSTa karate hue kahate haiM-jaise rAgAtmaka aura dveSAtmaka
bhAvanA se vivarjita pitA putra kA vadha karane para bhI karmabandha nahIM
karatA usI prakAra jisakA anta:karaNa rAga aura dveSa se rahita hai, usake dvArA
prANI kI hiMsA ho jAya to karmabandha nahIM hotA  / ' maNasA je paussaMti,
cittaM tesiM Na vijai  /  aNavaja matahaM tesiM, Na te saMvuDacAriNo  // 29 //
86)

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"The statement of those who hold other views is this: those who harbor hatred in
their minds towards any living beings, their minds are not pure, free from
impurities and faults. Their assertion that there is no sin in harboring hatred
in the mind is false and untrue. They are not those who follow the path of
restraint."  "Commentary: The author now refutes this claim. Those who harbor
hatred in their minds, their intention is to kill, therefore their minds are not
pure. Their claim that there is no sin in merely harboring hatred is false,
because they are not those who follow the path of restraint, as their minds are
impure. The mind is the primary cause of karmic accumulation, as even they have
stated that there is no karmic accumulation in mere physical actions without the
involvement of the mind. Therefore, whatever is the primary cause of something
happening or not happening, that is the primary cause. It may be argued that
even without physical actions, there is no cause. This is true, but it is also
true that the mind is the primary cause, as it is said, "By purifying the mind,
one attains liberation." It is also said, "The mind is the cause of samsara,
filled with attachments and other afflictions. Is it possible to be liberated
from this mind?" It is also said, "O mind, I bow to you, for even though you are
equal to all, you are the cause of both good and bad. Some are destined for
hell, while others are destined for heaven, depending on the good or bad karma
they have accumulated." Thus, it is clear that the mind is the cause of karmic
bondage. Even if one does not act on their thoughts, the mind is still impure,
and this leads to karmic bondage. If one acts on their thoughts, then it is due
to lack of mindfulness, and this also leads to karmic bondage. It is said, "Even
in a dream, if the mind is impure, there is karmic bondage. This is also
accepted by you, as you have said, "That which is unseen is impure." Thus, even
a single impure thought leads to karmic bondage. Therefore, what you have said,
"Knowledge of living beings," etc., is all false. What you have said, "Son,
father, beginning," etc., is also not well-considered, because as long as there
is no change in the mind, no one kills. And how can the mind be pure if it has
changed? Karmic bondage is inevitable when the mind is impure. This is the
contradiction here. What you have said, "Eating the flesh of another who has
been killed by another, or being burned by a hot coal that has been picked up by
another, does not have any karmic consequences," is like the ramblings of a
madman, and should not be listened to. Because, even if one eats the flesh of
another who has been killed by another, they are still consenting to it, and
this leads to karmic bondage. It is also said, "Those who consent, those who
kill, those who buy and sell, those who process, those who consume, and those
who kill, are all eight types of killers." The three types of consent, which you
have mentioned, are nothing but the enjoyment of the fruits of the actions of
others. Thus, those who claim that there is no karmic accumulation in these four
types of actions, are ignorant of karma. This is a well-established principle."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH chAyA manasA ye pradviSanti cittaM teSAM na
vidyate  /  anavadya matathyaM teSAnnate saMvRta cAriNaH  //  anuvAda -
itaramatavAdiyoM kA aisA mantavya hai ki jo manuSya mana dvArA kinhIM prANiyoM
ke sAtha dveSa karate haiM unakA mana nirmala-mala rahita, doSa rahita nahIM
hotA  /  mana se dveSa karane para bhI pApa nahIM lagatA, unakA aisA nirUpaNa -
pratipAdana, atathya-asatya yA mithyA hai| ve saMvRtacArI saMyama kA anusaraNa -
anupAlana karane vAle nahIM haiM  /  - TIkA - sAmpratametadUSaNAyAha - ye hi
kutazcinnimittAt manasA antaHkaraNena prAduHSyanti pradveSa mupayAnti teSAM
vadhapariNatAtAM zuddhaM cittaM na vidyate tadevaM yattairabhihitaM yathA
kevalamanaH pradveSe'pi anavadyaM karmopacayAbhAvaiti tat teSAm
atathyamasadarthAbhidhAyitvaM yato na te saMvRtacAriNo manaso'zuddhatvAt,
tathAhi karmopacaye kartavye mana eva pradhAnaM kAraNaM yatastairapi manorahita
kevala kAya vyApAre karmopacayA'bhAvo'bhihitaH, tatazca yat yasmin sati
bhavatyasati tu na bhavati tattasya pradhAnaM kAraNamiti  /  nanu tasyA'pi
kAyaceSTArahitasyAkAraNatva muktaM, satyamukta mayuktantUktaM yato bhavataiva
"evaM bhAva vizuddhayA nirvANamabhigacchatIti bhaNatA manasa evaikasya prAdhAnya
mabhyadhApi tathA'nyadapyabhihitam  / " "cittameva hi saMsAro rAgAdiklezavAsitam
/  tadeva tairvinirmuktaM bhavAnta iti kathyate ?  // " tathA'nyairapyabhihitaM
'"mativibhava ! namaste yatsamatve'pi puMsAm  /  pariNamasi zubhAMzaiH
klmssaaNshaistvmev| naraka nagaravartmaprasthitA:kaSTameke, upacita zubha zaktyA
sUryyasaMbhedino'nye"  /  tadevaM bhavadabhyupadamenaiva kliSTamanovyApAraH
karmabandhAyetyuktambhavati  /  tatherthyApathe'pi yadyanupayukto yAti
tato'nupayuktataiva kliSTacittateti karmabandho bhavatyeva  /  athopayukto yAti
tato'pramattatvAdabandhaka eva tathA coktam " uccAliyaMmi pAe iriyAsamiyassa
saMkamaTThAe  /  vAvajjejja kuliGgI marejja taM joga mAsajja  // 1 //  tasa
tannimitto bandho suhamo'vi desio samae  /  aNavajjou payogeNa savva bhAveNa so
jamhA  // 2 //  svapnAntikepyazuddhacittasadbhAvA dISad baMdho bhavatyeva sa ca
bhavatA'bhyupagataeva " avyaktaM tatsAvadya mityaneneti  /  tadevaM manaso'pi
kliSTasyaikasyaiva vyApAre bandhasadbhAvAt yaduktaM bhavatA " prANIprANijJAnaM"
mityAdi tatsarvaM plavata iti  /  yaduktaM " putra pitA samArambhe 'tyAdi
tadapyanAlocitAbhidhAnaM yato mArayAmItyevaM yAvanna cittapariNAmo'bhUttAvanna
kazcid vyApAdayati, evambhUtacittapariNatezca kathamasaMkliSTatA ?
cittasaMklezecA'vazyaMbhAvI karmabandha ityubhayoH saMvAdo'treti  /  yadapi ca
taiH kvaciducyate, yathA "paravyApAditapizitabhakSaNe para
hastAkRSTAGgAradAhAbhAvavanna doSa' iti, yadapi unmattapralapitavadanAkarNanIyaM
yataH paravyApAdite pizitabhakSaNo'numatirapratihatA tasyAzca karmabandha iti  /
tathA cA'nyairapyabhihitam " anumantA vizasitA saMhartA krayavikrayI, saMskartA
copabhoktAca ghAtakazcA'STaghAtakAH ? yacca kRtakAritAnumatirupamAdAnatrayaM
tairabhihitaM tajjainendramatalavAsvAdanameva tairakArIti  /  tadevaM karma
catuSTayaM nopacayaM yAtItyevaM tadabhidadhAnAH karmacintAto naSTA ipi
supratiSThitamidamiti  //  29 //  TIkArtha aba AgamakAra isa siddhAnta ko sadoSa
batAne ke liye pratipAdana karate haiN| - - " jo manuSya kisI kAraNa se prANiyoM
ke sAtha apane mana se dveSa karate haiM, unakA Azaya yA pariNAma una prANiyoM
ko mArane kA hotA hai isaliye unakA citta nirdoSa nahIM hotA, ve jo isa prakAra
kahate haiM ki 87

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement that there is no karma accumulation or bondage from hating someone
solely through the mind is false. Their mind is impure, lacking religious purity
and sanctity, which is why they do not follow the path of restraint. In reality,
the mind is the primary cause of karma bondage. Therefore, the early Jains have
also stated that karma is not accumulated or bound solely through physical
actions without mental activity, thought, or intention. Thus, the primary cause
is that which exists when something happens and does not exist when it does not.
Just as karma is bound when there is a mind, when good or bad intentions arise
in the mind, and karma is not accumulated when there is no mind. Therefore, the
mind is the main cause of karma bondage.  A doubt arises: The previous
proponents have stated that mental activity, thought, or intention alone,
without physical action or effort, is not the cause of karma bondage. Why do you
say that the mind is the main cause of karma bondage? They also consider the
mind to be the primary cause of karma accumulation.  In response, the Agamas
say: Although you, the aforementioned proponents, have said this, your statement
is not logical. For you have said that liberation is attained through the purity
of the mind. In saying this, you have declared the mind to be the primary cause
of liberation. You have also said that the mind that is contaminated with
attachments, aversions, and other defilements is the cause of worldly existence,
the cause of wandering in the world. If that mind becomes free from attachment,
aversion, etc., it is called the end of the world, meaning it is liberated from
worldly bonds and attains liberation. Other philosophers have also said: O Mind,
I bow to you, although all beings are equal, you become transformed into the
good aspects of some and the bad aspects of others. This is why some beings walk
the path leading to the city of hell, while others, through their own inherent
power, pierce the solar system and attain liberation. Thus, according to your
principles, it is proven that contaminated mental activity, mental intentions
with bad consequences, are the cause of karma bondage.  Even in the path of
walking, if a person walks without proper use, they accumulate karma. This is
because not using properly is a mental defilement. If that person walks with
proper use, they do not accumulate karma, because they are not negligent in
their walking. It is said that when a person who is mindful of their walking
lifts their foot to place it on the earth, if a subtle being is killed under
their foot, that person does not incur even a slight amount of sin. This is
because that person is free from sin due to being mindful of the protection of
all beings.  Even in the dream state, due to the purity of the mind, there is
some karma bondage. You have also acknowledged that in the dream state, there is
subtle, indistinct sin. Thus, karma bondage arises from mental activity that is
full of defilement. You have said this. The discussion of beings, knowledge of
beings, etc., is all illogical. Your statement that when a father eats the flesh
of his son in times of great distress, free from attachment and aversion, he
does not incur karma bondage, is also devoid of true contemplation. Because, "I
kill," until this intention arises in the mind, no one is inclined to kill.
Consider this: Is the mental intention, "I kill," not contaminated? Does it not
indicate a contaminated mental state?  - 88

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kevala mana ke dvArA kisI ke prati dveSa karane se
karma kA upacaya-saMgraha yA baMdha nahIM hotA, unakA yaha kathana asatyahai,
unakA mana azuddha hai-usameM dhArmika nirmalatA, pavitratA nahIM hai, isa
kAraNa ve saMyama kA anusaraNaAcaraNa karane vAle nahIM hai  /  vAstava meM
karmoM kA baMdha karane meM sabase mukhya kAraNa mana hai, isaliye pahale
jinavAdiyoM kI carcA AI hai, unhoMne bhI mAnasika vyApAra cintana yA saMkalpa ke
binA kevala daihika vyApAra dvArA-zArIrika kriyA dvArA karma kA upacita-baddha
na honA batAyA hai  /  isaliye jo jisake hone para hotA hai tathA nahIM hone
para nahIM hotA, vaha usakA pradhAna kAraNa hai  /  jaise mana hone para-mana
meM zubha azubha saMkalpa Ane para karma kA baMdha hotA hai, vaisA na hone para
karmopacaya nahIM hotA  /  ataeva karma bandha kA mukhya hetu mana hI hai isa
para eka zaMkA upasthita kI jAtI hai-pUrvoktavAdI ne daihika ceSTA yA upakrama
ke binA kevala mAnasika vyApAra-mAnasika cintana yA saMkalpa ko karmabaMdha kA
hetu na honA kahA hai phira Apa aisA kyoM kahate haiM ki mana hI karma bandha kA
mukhya hetu hai, ve bhI to mana ko hI karmopacaya kA pradhAna kAraNa batalAte
haiM  /  meM isakA samAdhAna dete hue AgamakAra kahate haiM ki-yadyapi Apane-
ukta vAdI ne yaha jarUra kahA hai kintu ApakA kahanA yuktiyukta nahIM hai kyoMki
Apane hI to kahA hai ki citta kI vizuddhi se mokSa prApta hotA hai, aisA kahate
hue Apane mana ko mokSa kA pradhAna kAraNa batalAyA hai, tathA Apane aura bhI
kahA hai ki jo citta rAga dveSAdi saMkliSTa bhAvoM se vAsita hai vahI citta
saMsAra hai-saMsAra meM bhaTakane kA hetu hai  /  yadi vaha citta rAga Adi se
pRthak ho jAya to use saMsAra kA anta kahA jAtA hai, arthAt vaha sAMsArika
baMdhano se chUTakara mukti taka pahuMca jAtA hai  /  anya dArzanikoM ne bhI
batalAyA hai-he mativibhava ! - mananazIla mana, maiM tumheM namana karatA hU~,
yadyapi sabhI puruSa samattva yukta hai-samAna hai, kintu tuma kisI ke zubha
aMzoM meM aura kisI ke azubha aMzoM meM parivartita ho jAte ho, yahI kAraNa hai
ki koI puruSa naraka rUpI nagara kI ora jAne vAle rAste para calatA hai aura koI
apanI samacita uttama zakti-Atma bala dvArA sarya maMDala kA bhedana karatA hai-
mokSa prApta kara letA hai  /  isa prakAra Apake siddhAnta ke anusAra kliSTa
manovyApAra-azubha pariNAmayukta mAnasika abhiprAya karmabaMdhana kA kAraNa hai
aisA pramANita hotA hai  /  IryApatha meM bhI yadi vyakti anupayukta-upayoga
rahita hokara calatA hai to use karmoM kA baMdha hotA hai kyoMki upayoga nahIM
rakhanA caitasika kliSTatA hai  /  yadi vaha vyakti upayoga yukta hokaragamana
kriyA karatA hai to use karmoM kA baMdha nahIM hotA, kyoMki vaha calane meM
apramattapramAda rahita hai  /  kahA hai-IryAsamiti se yukta puruSa jaba pRthvI
para rakhane hetu apanA paira uThAtA hai to usake paira ke nIce Akara yadi koI
sUkSma prANI vyApAdita ho jAya-mara jAya to bhI usa vyakti ko jarA sA bhI pApa
kA upalepa nahIM hotA, aisA zAstroM meM kahA hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki
vaha vyakti saba prakAra ke prANiyoM ke rakSaNa meM upayogayukta hone ke kAraNa
pApa rahita hotA hai  /  citta kI zuddhatA ke kAraNa svapnAntika sthiti meM bhI
yatkiciMta karmabaMdha hotA hI hai, Apane bhI yaha svIkAra kiyA hai ki
svapnAntika dazA meM avyakta, aspaSTa pApa hotA hai yoM caitasika kliSTApUrNa
vyApAra se karmabaMdha hotA hai, Apane yaha kahA hai  /  prANI-prANIjJAna ityAdi
kI carcA kI hai, yaha saba ayuktiyukta hai  /  Apane yaha jo pratipAdita kiyA ki
ghora vipatti ke samaya rAga dveSa zUnya hokara pitA yadi putra kA mAMsa
bhakSaNa kara letA hai to bhI use karmabaMdha nahIM hotA, ApakA yaha kathana bhI
yarthAthataH cintana rahita hai kyoMki maiM mAratA hU~, jaba taka citta meM aisA
pariNAma nahIM hotA, taba taka koI mArane ke liye udyata nahIM hotA  /  jarA
vicAriyemaiM mAratA hU~, yaha caitasika pariNAma kyA saMkleza yukta nahIM hai ?
kyA vaha asaMkliSTa cittavRtti kA dyotaka - 88

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Self-time statement authority. Huh? Certainly, mental afflictions or
complexities bind karma. In this regard, your and our views are in agreement.
Therefore, it is inappropriate to declare the son-slayer father as sinless.
What the speaker stated elsewhere, that a hand does not burn from embers taken
by another person's hand, similarly, the sin of karma does not bind from the
consumption of animal flesh by another person - this statement is also like the
ramblings or nonsense of a madman - not worth listening to. The reality is that
even when consuming the flesh of an animal slaughtered by another person, the
eater's approval is certainly involved. When approval is present, the binding of
karma is necessary. Other philosophers also establish that the one who approves
of killing an animal, who cuts and separates the animal's limbs, who takes the
animal to the place where it is to be killed, who buys or sells the animal for
slaughter, who cooks the animal's flesh, who eats that flesh - these eight
individuals are violent, who are stained with sin from the killing of the
animal. The aforementioned thinkers have established that the sin of killing an
animal, causing it to be killed by another, and approving of it - the sin that
occurs in these is a sign of their partial tasting - sampling - of the
principles of the Vitaraga Lord. Therefore, those other philosophers who declare
that four types of karma are not accumulated, do not bind, are devoid of the
concern of karma - the subtle contemplation of the karmic process.  This is the
view, the merchants of the seven treasures. They take refuge, believing thus,
and serve the fire. ||30|| Shadow - With these views, relying on the seven
treasures. Believing it to be refuge, people serve the evil. || Translation -
Those thinkers who are engrossed in enjoying pleasures and fame, glory,
prestige, etc., based on these views or principles accepted by them. _Commentary
- Now, to show the series of misfortunes of these action-oriented thinkers, he
says - With these aforementioned views, that four types of karma do not
accumulate, they, the thinkers, rely on the seven treasures, are attached to
ease, do whatever they can, eat whatever they can get, and believe that this,
their own philosophy, is the refuge capable of rescuing them from the world.
Believing thus, they serve, do, the evil, the wrong, even though they are
virtuous people, like ordinary people. ||30|| Commentary - The author of the
scripture, revealing the futile, fruitless views of these action-oriented
thinkers, says Four types of karma are not accumulated - do not bind. Those
other philosophers who follow this principle, while being attached to enjoyment
and prestige, do everything. They do not pay attention to what is right and
wrong. They eat whatever is available. They do not pay any attention to what is
desirable and undesirable, etc. They believe that their philosophy - the
principles accepted by them - are the ones that will rescue them from the ocean
of the world. Their (89

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH  /  hai ? caitasika saMkleza yA kliSTatA se
nizcaya hI karmoM kA baMdha hotA hai  /  isa saMbaMdha meM Apake aura hamAre
vicAroM meM sahamati hai  /  ataH putra haMtA pitA ko niSpApa pratipAdita karanA
anucita hai  /  uktavAdI dvArA kisI anya sthAna para jo yaha pratipAdita kiyA
gayA ki kisI anya vyakti ke hAtha dvArA grahaNa kiye gaye aMgAra se dUsare kA
hAtha nahIM jalatA, usI prakAra dUsare vyakti ke dvArA vyApAdita prANI ke AmiSa
bhojana se pApa baMdha nahIM hotA-yaha kathana bhI eka pAgala ke pralApa yA
bakavAsa jaisA hai-sunane lAyaka nahIM hai  /  vAstavikatA yaha hai ki kisI anya
vyakti dvArA vyApAdita prANI kA bhI mAMsa khAne para usameM khAne vAle kA
anumodana to avazya hI hotA hai  /  anumodana hone para karmoM kA baMdhanA
jarUrI hai| anya darzanavAdI bhI yaha nirupita karate haiM ki jo pazu ko mArane
kA anumodana karatA hai, pazu ke avayavoM ko uchinna karakATakara pRthak pRthak
karatA hai, pazu ko mArane hetu use, jahAM mAranA hai usa sthAna para le jAtA
hai, pazu ko vyApAdana hetu kharIdatA hai yA becatA hai, pazu kA mAMsa pakAtA
hai, usa mAMsa ko khAtA hai-ye ATha vyakti hiMsaka hai jo pazu ke ghAta se
pApopalipta hote haiM  /  pUrvokta matavAdiyoM ne pazu kI hiMsA karanA, dUsare
se karavAnA tathA karate hue kA anumodana karanA-inameM jo pApa hone kA nirUpaNa
kiyA hai vaha vItarAga prabhu ke siddhAnta ko aMzataH una dvArA AsvAdita kiye
jAne kA-cakhane kA saMketa hai  /  isaliye cAra prakAra ke karma upacita nahIM
hote, unakA baMdha nahIM hotA, aisA pratipAdita karane vAle itara darzanavAdI
karma kI ciMtA se-karma prakriyA ke sUkSma cintana se varjita hai  /  icceyAhI
ya diTThIhiM, sAtAgAravaNissiyA  /  saraNaMti mannamANA sevaMtI pAvagaM jaNA  //
30 //  chAyA - ityetAbhizca dRSTibhiH sAtagauravanizritAH  /  zaraNamiti
manyamAnAH sevante pApakaM janAH  //  anuvAda - ye matavAdI apanI ina dRSTiyoM
yA apane dvArA svIkRta siddhAntoM ke AdhAra para sukhopabhoga tathA yaza, kIrti,
gaurava Adi pAne meM lipta rahate haiN| _TIkA - adhunaiteSAM
kriyAvAdinAmanarthaparamparAM darzayitumAha - ityetAbhiH pUrvoktAbhizcaturvidhaM
karma nopacayaM yAtItidRSTibhirabhyupagamaiste vAdinaH sAtagauravanizritAH
sukhazIlatAyAmAsaktAH yatkiJcanakAriNo yathAlabdhabhojinazca
saMsAroddharaNasamarthaM zaraNam idamasyadIyaM darzana miti evaM manyamAnA
viparItAnuSThAnatayA sevante kurvate pApamavadyam evaM vratino'pi santo janA iva
janAH prAkRtapuruSasadRzA ityarthaH  // 30 //  TIkArtha - AgamakAra ina
kriyAvAdiyoM ke anarthamUlaka duSphalaprada mantavyoM ko prakaTa karate hue
kahate cAra prakAra ke karma upacita nahIM hote-baMdhate nahIM  /  isa siddhAnta
ke AdhAra para calane vAle itara darzanavAdI sukha bhoga tathA mAna pratiSThA
meM Asakta rahate hue saba kucha karate haiM  /  ucita anucita kA dhyAna nahIM
rkhte| jaisA upalabdha ho jAtA hai vaisA bhojana kara lete haiM  /  eSaNIya
anaiSaNIya Adi kA jarA bhI dhyAna nahIM rkhte| ve aisA mAnate haiM ki unakA
darzana-una dvArA svIkRta siddhAnta hI saMsAra sAgara se uddhAra karAne vAle
haiM  /  apanI (89

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
। Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra । With such a belief, they perform rituals contrary
to the right faith, thus they consume sinful karma - they are bound by sin, they
are thus like ordinary humans, even though they are vow-takers, according to
their perspective and even though they follow the so-called vows. Jha Asavi Nim
Navam, Jai Andho Duruhhiya. Ichchai Parmagantu Antara Ya Visiyai. ||31|| Shadow
- As Astaavini Navam Jatyandho Duruhya. Ichchati Parmagantu Mantara Cha
Visidati. || Translation - A man blind from birth, boarding a leaky boat, wants
to cross the river, but he cannot cross it by that boat. He drowns in the middle
and dies. Commentary - The example is given to explain the same meaning -
A-Samantat Sravathi Tachiila Wa Asraavini Sachhidrethyarthah, Tam Tathaabhutam
Navam Yatha Jatyandhah Samaruhhya Parantatmaagantu Praptumichchatyasau, Tasyasch
Sraavinitvena Udakaplutatvad Antarale Jalmadhye Ev Visidati Varini Nimajjati
Tatraiva Cha Panchatvam Upayatiti. ||31|| Commentary Meaning - To explain this
meaning, the Agamkar explains through an example - A boat in which water is
leaking from all sides is called an Asraavini boat. Asraavini means full of
holes. A blind man from birth, boarding such a boat, wants to cross the river,
but because the boat is leaky, water keeps coming in, the boat becomes full of
water and the man drowns in the middle of the water - he drowns and dies. Evam
Tu Samana Ege, Micch Ditthi Anariya. Sansarprakankhi Te, Sansar Anu Pariyatriti.
||32|| Shadow - Evantu Shramana Eke Mithyadrishtayo Anarya. Sansar
Parakankhinsaste Sansar Manuparyatanti. || Translation - Similarly, many so-
called Shramanas, whose perspective is wrong, who are Anarya, devoid of good
karma, want to cross the ocean of Samsara for their such perspective and
conduct, but they cannot cross it, they keep wandering in it. Commentary - Now,
to explain the meaning of Datantika, it is said - Evamiti Yatha Andhah
Sachhidram Navam Samaruhdah Paragamanaaya Naalam Tatha Shramana Eke Shakyadayo
Mithya Viparita Drishtiyeshante Mithyadrishtayastatha
Pishitashaananumaterana-:Swadarshananuragena 90

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  aisI mAnyatA ke sAtha ve viparIta-
dharmaviruddha anuSThAna-kArya karate haiM, yoM ve pApa karma kA sevana karate
haiM-pApavaddha hote haiM, ve isa prakAra vratadhArI hote hue bhI apane
dRSTikoNa ke anusAra tathA kathita vratoM kA pAlana karate hue bhI prAkRta-
sAdhAraNa yA sAmAnya manuSyoM ke sadRza hI haiM  /  jahA assAviNiM NAvaM,
jAiaMdho duruhiyA  /  icchaI pAramAgaMtuM aMtarA ya visIyaI  // 31 //  chAyA -
yathA AstAviNI nAvaM jAtyandhoduruhya  /  icchati pAramAgantu mantarA ca
viSIdati  //  anuvAda - janma se hI aMdhA puruSa eka aisI nAva para car3hakara,
jo chidrayukta hai, jisameM pAnI cU cU kara A rahA hai, nadI ko pAra karanA
cAhatA hai parantu usa naukA dvArA vaha use pAra nahIM kara sakatA  /  bIca meM
hI pAnI meM DUba jAtA hai aura mara jAtA hai| TIkA - asyaivArthasyopadarzakaM
dRSTAntamAha - A-sAmantAtsravati tacchIlA vA AsrAviNI sacchidretyarthaH, tAM
tathAbhUtAMnAvaM yathA jAtyandhaHsamAruhyaH pAraMtaTamAgantuM
prAptumicchatyasau, tasyAzcasrAviNItvenodakaplutatvAd antarAle jalamadhye eva
viSIdati vAriNi nimajjati tatraiva ca paJcatvamupayAtIti  // 31 //  TIkArtha -
isa Azaya kA spaSTIkaraNa karane hetu AgamakAra dRSTAnta dvArA samajhAte haiM-
jisa naukA meM cAroM ora se jala cU cU kara A rahA ho, ise AsrAviNI naukA kahA
jAtA hai  /  AsrAviNI kA artha sachidrachidro se yukta hai  /  aisI naukA para
ArUr3ha hokara eka janma se aMdhA vyakti nadI ko lAMghanA cAhatA hai kintu naukA
ke chidrayukta hone ke kAraNa naukA meM cU cU kara jala Ate rahane ke kAraNa
vaha jala se ApUrNa ho jAtI hai aura vaha puruSa jala ke madhya meM hI nimagna
ho jAtA hai-DUba jAtA hai aura paMcatva ko prApta ho jAtA haimara jAtA hai| evaM
tu samaNA ege, miccha diTThI aNAriyA  /  saMsArapArakaMkhI te, saMsAra aNu
pariyaTRti  // 32 //  chAyA - evantu zramaNA eke mithyAdRSTayo'nAr2yAH  /
saMsAra pArakAMkSiNaste saMsAra manuparyaTanti  //  anuvAda - isI taraha kaI
aise tathAkathita zramaNa, jinakA dRSTikoNa asamyak hotA hai, jo anArya uttama
karma vivarjita hote haiM, ve apane vaise dRSTikoNa aura AcAra ke lie saMsAra
sAgara ko pAra karanA cAhate hai kintu ve pAra nahIM kara sakate, usameM
bhaTakate rahate haiM  /  TIkA - sAmprataM dATantikayojanArthamAha - evamiti
yathA'ndhaH sacchidrAM nAvaM samArUr3haH pAragamanAya nAlaM tathA zramaNA eke
zAkyAdayo mithyA viparItA dRSTiyeSAnte mithyAdRSTayastathA
pizitAzanAnumateranA-:svadarzanAnurAgeNa 90

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Right Time Statement of Authority  Those who desire liberation from the
cycle of birth and death, even though they are in the world, do not understand
the four types of karma and therefore, due to their incompetence, they continue
to wander in the cycle of transmigration, which is the form of the four realms
of existence. They experience the suffering of birth, old age, death, and misery
for an infinite period of time and do not attain the desired happiness of
liberation. This is what I say, as before. ||32||  This is the second chapter of
the *Samaya* section of the *Sutrakritanga* Sutra. › Completed. - To connect
this parable with the principle to be discussed, the *Agam* authors say that
just as a blind man, riding on a boat with holes, wants to cross the river but
is unable to do so, similarly, those whose views are contrary to the true
reality, *asamyak* or *mithya*, who support meat-eating, such un-Aryan, devoid
of Aryan qualities, and those who are forbidden from good conduct and behavior,
such Buddhist monks, remain attached to their beliefs and desire to cross the
world, to be free from birth and death and attain the happiness of liberation.
But as mentioned earlier, their views do not accept the four types of karma-
bondage. Due to this, they are unable to cross the world and escape the cycle of
transmigration. They wander in the world, which is filled with the four realms
of existence. They repeatedly experience birth, old age, death, and misery in
this world, and continue to wander in the world for an infinite period of time.
They cannot attain the desired happiness of liberation. This is what I say, and
it should be understood as before.  The second chapter of the *Samaya* section
of the *Sutrakritanga* Sutra Completed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH saMsArapApakAMkSiNo mokSAbhilASukAH api santaste
caturvidhakarmacayAnabhyupagamenA'nipuNatvAcchAsanasya saMsArameva
caturgatisaMsaraNarUpamanuparyyanti bhUyo bhUyastatraiva
janmajarAmaraNadaurgatyAdiklezamanubhavanto'nantamapi kAlamAsate na vivakSita
mokSasukhamApnuvanti iti vravIbhIti pUrvavaditi  // 32 //  iti sUtra kRtAGge
samayAkhyAdhyayanasya dvitIyodezakaH > samAptaH  /  - isa dRSTAnta ko vivecanIya
tattva ke sAtha yojita karane hetu AgamakAra kahate haiM jisa prakAra eka aMdhA
puruSa chidrayukta naukA para samArUr3ha hokara car3hakara nadI pAra karanA
cAhatA hai kintu vaha vaisA karane meM asamartha rahatA hai, isI prakAra jinakA
dRSTikoNa sat tattva ke viparIta asamyak yA mithyA hotA hai jo mAMsAhAra kA
samarthana karate haiM  /  aise anArya AryaguNa rahita, uttama zIla AcAra Adi se
varjita bauddha paramparA ke bhikSu apanI mAnyatAoM meM Asakta rahatehue saMsAra
ko pAra karanA cAhate haiM-janma maraNa se chUTakara mokSa kAsukha prApta karanA
cAhate haiM parantu jaisA pahale varNita huA hai, unake mantavya meM cAra
prAkara ke karmabandha ko svIkAra nahIM kiyA jAtA, aisA hone ke kAraNa- - aisA
pratipAdita karane ke kAraNa ve saMsAra ko pAra karane meM AvAgamana ke cakra se
nikalane meM sakSama nahIM hote ve cAra gatiyoM se yukta saMsAra meM bhaTakate
rahate haiN| ve punaH punaH- isa jagata meM janma, vRddhAvasthA, mRtyu tathA
durgati Adi kaSToM ko bhogate hue anantakAla paryanta saMsAra meM paryaTana
karate rahate haiM  /  vivakSita-abhIpsita, mokSa kA sukha prApta nahIM kara
sakate haiN| aisA maiM kahatA hU~ yaha pUrvavat samajhanA cAhiye  /
sUtrakRtAGga sUtra ke samayAkhya- samaya nAmaka prathama adhyayana kA dvitIya
uddezaka samApta huA  /  Bian  91

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra of the Sutra-Creator (Sutra-Kritanga Sutra) ### Third Uddesaka
(Section)  **Whatever is tainted, even a single particle of food, is intended
for the devotees who come.** **He who eats it, even if it is a thousand yojanas
away, serves both sides.** (1)  **Commentary:**  This is the third Uddesaka of
the first Adhyayana (Chapter). It follows the second Uddesaka. Its connection to
the previous Uddesaka is this: the subject matter of the first Adhyayana is to
present the principles of our own time (Jainism) and the principles of other
times (other philosophies). The first two Uddesakas have already presented the
principles of our own time and other times. This Uddesaka also does the same.
Alternatively, the first two Uddesakas have presented the faults of other
philosophies and their defects. This Uddesaka also presents the defects of their
conduct.  This Uddesaka, with its four Anuyoga (applications), should be recited
with the qualities of clarity and non-slippage. This is it:  This Uddesaka is
also connected to the following Sutra. The following Sutra, up to the end of
this Uddesaka, says, "Thus, some Shramanas..." and so on. This is also connected
here. Some Shramanas eat whatever is tainted and wander through the world.  The
following Sutra says, "Understand..." and so on. Whatever is tainted, one should
understand.  Similarly, the connection with other Sutras should be established
by looking at the context.  Now, the meaning of the Sutra is explained:
"Whatever" refers to any kind of food, whether it is small or large. "Tainted"
means that it has been touched by an Adhakarma (action that creates karma) or
something similar. "Intended for the devotees who come" means that it has been
prepared by a devotee with faith for other devotees who come. "Even if it is a
thousand yojanas away" means that even if the food is taken from a house that is
a thousand yojanas away, he who eats it serves both sides, the side of the
householder and the side of the monk.  This means that even if the food is
prepared by someone else for other devotees, and even if it is a thousand
yojanas away, he who eats it serves both sides. What then of those who prepare
all their food themselves and eat it themselves? They are certainly serving both
sides.  Alternatively, "both sides" could refer to the worldly path and the path
of liberation. Or, it could refer to the previous bound states, such as the
state of being a Nikaachita (one who has been expelled from the community), and
the state of being a Karma-Prakriti (one who has a karmic nature).  The Agamas
(Jain scriptures) say, "What kind of karmic bondage is created for a Shramana
who eats food that is not his own? Gotama! Eight kinds of karmic bondage are
created: loose bondage, tight bondage, bondage of action, bondage of speech,
bondage of thought, bondage of anger, bondage of hatred, and bondage of greed."
Therefore, the Shramanas and other Tirthankaras, by eating food prepared by
others, are serving both sides. This is the meaning of the Sutra. (1)
**Commentary on the Commentary:**  Now, the third Uddesaka of the first
Adhyayana is begun.  The second Uddesaka has been explained. Now, the third
Uddesaka is begun. Its connection to the previous Uddesaka is this: the subject
matter of the first Adhyayana is to present the principles of our own time
(Jainism) and the principles of other times (other philosophies). The first two
Uddesakas have already presented the principles of our own time and other times.
This Uddesaka also does the same.  Alternatively, the first two Uddesakas have
presented the faults of other philosophies and their defects. This Uddesaka also
presents the defects of their conduct.  This Uddesaka, with its four Anuyoga
(applications), should be recited with the qualities of clarity and non-
slippage. This is it:  This Uddesaka is also connected to the following Sutra.
The following Sutra, up to the end of this Uddesaka, says, "Thus, some
Shramanas..." and so on. This is also connected here. Some Shramanas eat
whatever is tainted and wander through the world.  The following Sutra says,
"Understand..." and so on. Whatever is tainted, one should understand.
Similarly, the connection with other Sutras should be established by looking at
the context.  Now, the meaning of the Sutra is explained:  "Whatever" refers to
any kind of food, whether it is small or large. "Tainted" means that it has been
touched by an Adhakarma (action that creates karma) or something similar.
"Intended for the devotees who come" means that it has been prepared by a
devotee with faith for other devotees who come. "Even if it is a thousand
yojanas away" means that even if the food is taken from a house that is a
thousand yojanas away, he who eats it serves both sides, the side of the
householder and the side of the monk.  This means that even if the food is
prepared by someone else for other devotees, and even if it is a thousand
yojanas away, he who eats it serves both sides. What then of those who prepare
all their food themselves and eat it themselves? They are certainly serving both
sides.  Alternatively, "both sides" could refer to the worldly path and the path
of liberation. Or, it could refer to the previous bound states, such as the
state of being a Nikaachita (one who has been expelled from the community), and
the state of being a Karma-Prakriti (one who has a karmic nature).  The Agamas
(Jain scriptures) say, "What kind of karmic bondage is created for a Shramana
who eats food that is not his own? Gotama! Eight kinds of karmic bondage are
created: loose bondage, tight bondage, bondage of action, bondage of speech,
bondage of thought, bondage of anger, bondage of hatred, and bondage of greed."
Therefore, the Shramanas and other Tirthankaras, by eating food prepared by
others, are serving both sides. This is the meaning of the Sutra. (1)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram tRtIya uddezakaH jaM kici u pUikaDaM, saDDhI mAgaMtu
mIhiyaM  /  sahassaMtariyaM bhuMje dupakkhaM ceva sevai  // 1 //  chAyA -
yatkiJcitpUtikRtaM zraddhAvatA''gantukebhya IhitaM  /  sahasrAntaritaM bhujIta
dvipakSaJcaiva sevate  //  anuvAda - jo AhAra, AdhAkarmI AhAra kI eka kaNikA se
bhI yukta hai, apavitra hai  /  zraddhAlu zramaNopAsaka dvArA zramaNoM ke liye
jo banAyA gayA hai, usa AhAra ko eka sahasra gharoM kA-eka hajAra gharoM kI dUrI
para bhI jo ghara ho, vahAM jAkara bhI jo letA hai, vaise AhAra kA sevana karatA
hai, vaha zramaNa-sAdhu, gRhastha-donoM pakSoM kA sevana karatA hai| _TIkA -
atha prathamAdhyayane tRtIyoddezaka Aramyate - dvitIyoddezakAnantaraM tRtIyaH
samArabhyate asya cAyamabhisambandhaH-adhyayanArthAdhikAraH
svasamayaparasamayaprarUpaNeti, tatroddezakadvayena svaparasamayaprarUpaNA kRtA
atrA'pi saiva kriyate  /  athavA''dyayoruddezakayoH kudRSTayaH pratipAditAH
taddoSAzca tadihA'pi teSAmAcAradoSaH pradIta ityanena
sambandhenAyAtasyAsyoddezakasya catvAryyanuyogadvArANi vyAvAskhalita guNopetaM
sUtramuccAraNIyaM tccedm| _ asya cAnantarasUtreNa sahAyaM sambandha-
ihAnantaroddezakaparyyantasUtre'bhihitam "evaM tu zramaNA eke" ityAdi tadihA'pi
sambadhyate, eke zramaNA:yatkiJcit pUtikRtaM bhuJjAnAH saMsAra paryaTantIti  /
paramparasUtre tvabhihitaM bujjhijja" ityAdi, yatkiJcitpUtikRtaM tadbudhyeteti
/  evamanyairapi sUtrai rUtprekSyasambandho yojyaH  /  adhunA sUtrArthaH
pratanyate yatkiJciditi AhArajAtaM stokamapi AstAM tAvatprabhUtaM tadapi
pUtikRtamAdhAkarmAdisikthenApyupasRSTam AstAnAtAvadAdhAkarma tadapi na
svayaMkRtamapituzraddhAvatA'nyena bhaktimatA'parAn AgantukAnuddizya IhitaM
ceSTitaM niSpAditaM tacca sahasrAntaritamapi yo bhuJjIta abhyavaharedasau
dvipakSaM gRhasthapakSaM pravrajitapakSaJcAsevate  /
etaduktambhavatievambhUtamapi parakRta maparAgantukayatyarthaM niSpAditaM
yadAdhAkarmAdi tasya sahasrAntaritasyApiyo'vayavastenApyupasRSTa mAhArajAtaM
bhuJAnasya dvipakSasevana mApadyate kiM punaH ya ete zAkyAdayaH svayameva
sakalamAhArajAtaM niSpAdya svayamevacopabhuJjate ? te ca sutarAM dvipakSasevino
bhavantItyarthaH  /  yadi vA dvipakSa miti I-pathaH sAmparAyikaJca, athavA
pUrvabaddhAH nikAcitAdyavasthAH karmaprakRtIrnayatyapUrvAzcAdatte, tathAcAgamaH
"AhArakammaM NaM bhuMjamANe samaNe kai kammapagaDIo baMdhai ? goyamA !
aTThakammapagaDIo baMdhai siDhilabaMdhaNabaddhAo dhaNiyabaMdhaNabaddhAo karei
ciyAo karei uvaciyAo karei hassaThiiyAo dIhaThiiyAo karei' ityAdi, tatazcaivaM
zAkyAdayaH paratIrthikAH svayUthyA vA AdhAkarma bhuJjAnAH dvipakSamevA''sevanta
iti sUtrArthaH  // 1 //  TIkArtha - aba prathama adhyayana kA tIsarA uddezaka
prAraMbha kiyA jAtA hai  /  dvitIya uddezaka AkhyAta kiyA jA cukA hai  /  aba
isake bAda tRtIya uddezaka zuru kiyA jAtA hai  /  isakA abhisaMbaMdha-pUrvA para
saMbaMdha isa prakAra hai - prathama adhyayana kA arthAdhikAra yA vivecya viSaya
svasamaya-apane jainadharma ke siddhAnta tathA parasamayaanyavAdiyoM ke
siddhAnta ko prarUpita karanA hai  /  isaliye prathama adhyayana ke do uddezakoM
meM svasamaya tathA parasamaya -g2A

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Right Time for Speaking  The **svayam-samaya vaktvyata-adhikāra** has
been explained. This section will also discuss the same, or it may be said that
the previous two sections have presented the views of the **kudṛṣṭi-
mithyādṛṣṭi** (those with wrong vision and false vision). Their faults have been
shown. Now, in this section, their faults in conduct are being presented. In
this regard, the four **anuyoga-dvāra** (gates of the anuyoga) of this section
should be presented, and one should pronounce the seven sūtras (aphorisms) of
the qualities of speaking without stumbling, not getting stuck, etc. That sūtra
is as follows:  **Its meaning is as follows:**  This sūtra is connected to the
previous sūtra. In the last sūtra of the previous section, it was said, "**evaṃ
tu samaṇānge**" (thus, the monks). That statement is also relevant here.
Therefore, its meaning is that any **śramaṇa** (monk) who consumes even a little
**pūtikṛta** (impure, contaminated) food wanders in the world, gets lost. From
the traditional sūtra, "**bujji-jja**" etc. has been said, which means that a
person should attain **bodha** (knowledge). Therefore, the **śramaṇa** should be
aware of the food that is slightly contaminated with **ādha-karma** (half-karma)
etc. faults. He should gain accurate knowledge about it. This connection should
be made here. Similarly, one should be aware of the connection of this sūtra
with other sūtras. Now, the meaning of that sūtra is revealed:  What to say of
food that is abundant in **ādha-karma** etc. faults, even food that is
contaminated with a single particle of contaminated food, and which has been
prepared by a devout householder in anticipation of the arrival of monks for
alms? Even if he himself did not cook it, the **śramaṇa** who consumes such
food, even if he keeps a distance of a thousand houses, consumes both the
**sadhu** (holy) and the **gṛhastha** (householder) sides. The meaning is that
any **śramaṇa** who consumes food that is even contaminated with a single
particle of food prepared by a devout householder for visiting monks, even if he
keeps a distance of a thousand houses, consumes both the **sadhu** and the
**gṛhastha** sides. In such a situation, what to say of the **bhikṣu** (monks)
of the **Bauddha** tradition and the **śramaṇa-tāpasa** (monks-ascetics) of
other traditions? What can be said about them? They themselves prepare and
consume the entire meal. They completely consume both the **sadhu** and the
**gṛhastha** sides.  Or, the explanation of the **dvipada** (two-footed) can
also be given as follows: **īryāpatha** (path of conduct) and **sāmprāyika**
(conventional) are the two sides. Or, it can be understood as follows: The
person who consumes the previously mentioned **pūtikṛta** (impure, contaminated)
or **sadosa** (faulty) food first transforms the bound **karma-prakrti** (karmic
tendencies) into **nikācita** (eliminated) etc. states, and then binds new
**karma-prakrti** (karmic tendencies).  **1**  In the **āgama** (scripture), it
is said about **ādha-karma** (half-karma) etc., which is as follows: "O
**Bhagavan** (Lord)! How many **karma-prakrti** (karmic tendencies) does a
**śramaṇa** bind when he consumes **ādha-karma** (half-karma) food?" This
question was asked by **Gaṇadhara Gautama** to **Prabhu Mahāvīra**. **Bhagavan
Mahāvīra** replied, "**Gautama**! That **śramaṇa** binds eight **karma-prakrti**
(karmic tendencies). He transforms the **karma** (actions) bound in **śithila-
bandhana** (loose bondage) into **saghana-bandhana** (strong bondage). He
**caya** (accumulates) and **upacaya** (increases) **karma** (actions). He makes
the **karma** (actions) that are **hrasva-sthiti** (short-lived) into **dīrgha-
sthiti** (long-lived), i.e., he expands the **karma** (actions) whose duration
is short. According to this, the **sānkhya-bhikṣu** (Sānkhya monks) etc.
**paratīrthi** (those who belong to other religions) and **svayūthika-jana**
(those who belong to their own group) who consume both the **sadhu** (holy) and
the **gṛhastha** (householder) sides...  **93**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH kA nirUpaNa huA hai  /  isa uddezaka meM bhI vaisA
hI hogA athavA pUrvavartI do uddezakoM meM kudRSTi-mithyAdRSTivAdiyoM kA
pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai| unake doSoM kA digdarzana karAyA gayA hai| aba yahAM
isa uddezaka meM unake AcAragata doSa pradarzita kiye jA rahe haiM  /  isa
saMbaMdha se prastuta isa uddezaka ke cAra anuyoga dvAroM ko pratipAdita kara
askhalita-bolane meM skhalanA na karanA, na aTakanA Adi guNoM ke sAta sUtra kA
uccAraNa karanA cAhiye  /  vaha sUtra isa prakAra hai- usakA abhiprAya isa
prakAra hai isa sUtra kA anantara - pichale sUtra ke sAtha saMbaMdha yaha hai  /
pichale uddezaka ke antima sUtra meM evaM tu samaNAeMge' aisA kahA gayA hai, usa
kathana kA saMbaMdha yahAM bhI hotA hai  /  isaliye isakA abhiprAya yaha huA ki
koI zramaNa jo thor3A bhI pUtikRta - apavitra - azuddha AhAra kA sevana karate
haiM ve saMsAra meM paryaTana karate haiM, bhaTakate haiN| paramparita sUtra se
'bujjhijjha' ityAdi kahA gayA hai jisakA tAtparya hai manuSya ko bodha prApta
karanA cAhiye  /  ataH jo AhAra svalpa rUpa meM AdhA karmI Adi doSoM se yukta
hai  /  zramaNa ko cAhiye ki vaha isakA bodha prApta kare  /  usake saMbaMdha
meM sahI jAnakArI hAsila kre| yaha saMbaMdha yahAM jor3anA cAhiye  /  isI
prakAra anya sUtroM ke sAtha bhI isa sUtra kA saMbaMdha svayaM avagata kara lenA
cAhiye  /  aba usa sUtra kA tAtparya prakaTa kiyA jAtA hai - jisa AhAra meM AdhA
karma Adi doSa bahulatayA prApya ho usakI to bAta hI kyA jo AhAra doSa yukta
AhAra kI eka kaNikA se bhI yukta ho evaM kisI zraddhAzIla gRhastha ne muniyoM ke
bhikSArtha Ane kI saMbhAvanA mAnate hue unake nimitta banAyA ho  /  svayaM cAhe
usane nahIM pakAyA ho phira bhI vaise AhAra ko jo muni eka sahasra gharoM kA
antara rakhate hue bhI grahaNa karatA hai-ra - khAtA hai, vaha gRhastha evaM
sAdhu donoM ke pakSoM kA sevana karatA hai  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki jo AhAra
Agantuka zramaNoM ke liye zraddhAvAna gRhastha ne taiyAra kiyA ho| usa AhAra kI
eka kaNikA se bhI yukta AhAra koI zramaNa eka sahasra gharoM kA antara dekara
bhI yadi khAtA hai to vaha sAdhu evaM gRhastha donoM pakSoM kA sevana karatA
hai| aisI sthiti meM una bauddha paramparA ke bhikSuoM tathA anya paramparAoM ke
zramaNoM-tApasoM kI to bAta hI kyA ? unake liye to kahA hI kyA jAya ? ve to
svayaM sampUrNa AhAra taiyAra karavAte haiM aura usakA sevana karate haiN| ve to
sAdhu aura gRhastha donoM ke pakSoM kA sarvathA sevana karate haiM  /  athavA
dvipada kI vyAkhyA yoM bhI kI jAtI hai-IryApatha tathA sAmparAyika dvipada-do
pakSa haiM athavA ise yoM samajhA jAya, pahale kahe gaye pUtikRta - azuddha yA
sadoSa AhAra kA sevana karane vAlA puruSa pahale bAMdhI huI, karma prakRtiyoM ko
nikAcita Adi avasthAoM meM pariNata karatA hai tathA punaH nUtana karma
prakRtiyAM bAMdhatA 1 Agama meM 'AhAkammaM' AdhA karma ityAdi ke viSaya meM kahA
gayA hai jo isa prakAra hai- he bhagavana ! jo zramaNa AdhA karma AhAra kA
sevana karatA hai vaha kitanI karma prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai| yaha prazna
gaNadhara gautama ne prabhu mahAvIra se kiyA  /  bhagavAna mahAvIra ne uttara
diyA "gautama ! vaha zramaNa ATha karma prakRtiyoM kA baMdha karatA hai, vaha
zithila bandhana meM baMdhe hue karmoM ko saghana - dRr3ha baMdhana meM pariNata
karatA hai, vaha karmoM kA caya aura upacaya karatA hai jo prakRti hasva sthiti
yukta hai use dIrgha sthitiyukta banAtA hai arthAt jina karmoM kI sthiti svalpa
hotI hai unheM vistIrNa karatA hai| isake anusAra jo sAMkhya bhikSu Adi
paratIrthi evaM svayUthikajana sAdhu evaM gRhastha donoM ke pakSoM kA sevana
karate haiM  /  93

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga: Those who do not know the nature of half-
karma food, who are ignorant of the eight types of karma, and who are not
knowledgeable about the four paths of existence, are like the Vaishalika fish
who are distressed when the water recedes.  The Vaishalika fish are large fish
who are caught in the shallows when the water recedes, and they are then eaten
by birds and other animals.  Just as these fish are distressed, so too are those
who do not know the nature of half-karma food.  They are caught in the cycle of
birth and death, and they suffer greatly.  Commentary:  The author of this text
uses the example of the Vaishalika fish to illustrate the suffering that comes
from not understanding the nature of half-karma food.  The Vaishalika fish are
large and strong, but they are helpless when the water recedes.  They are caught
in the shallows and become easy prey for birds and other animals.  Similarly,
those who do not understand the nature of half-karma food are caught in the
cycle of birth and death.  They are unable to escape the suffering that comes
from their actions, and they are constantly being reborn into new lives.  The
author warns that those who do not understand the nature of half-karma food will
suffer greatly.  They will be caught in the cycle of birth and death, and they
will be unable to escape the suffering that comes from their actions.
Therefore, it is important to understand the nature of half-karma food and to
avoid it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram tameva aviyANaMtA, visamaMsi akoviyA  /  macchAvesAliyA
. ceva udagassa'bhiyAgame  // 2 //  udagassa pabhAveNa, sukkaM sigdhaMtarmiti u
/  DhaMkehi ya kaMkehi ya, AmisatthehiM te duhI  // 3 //  chAyA -
tamevAvijAnanto viSame 'kovidAH  /  matsyAH vaizAlikAzcaivodakasyAbhyAgame  /
udakasya prabhAveNa zuSkaM snigdhaM tametyatu  /  Dhabaizca
kaGkazzAmiSArthibhiste duHkhinaH  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa-bhikSu AdhA karma
AhAra svIkAra karane meM kyA kyA doSa hote haiM nahIM jaante| cAra gatiyoM ke
saMbaMdha meM jinheM koI jJAna nahIM hai, jo ATha prakAra ke karmoM ke svarUpa
samajhane meM akovidaayogya hai aura AdhA karma AhAra kA sevana karate haiM ve
una vaizAlika mata se-bar3I bar3I machaliyoM yA vizAla nAmaka, jAti vAlI
machaliyoM kI jyoM duHkhita hote haiM jo pAnI kI bAr3ha Ane para-jala taraMgoM
ke atyadhika ucchalita hone para, jala ke bahAva ke kAraNa zuSka Ardra sthAna
para pahuMca jAtI haiM jahAM DhaMka aura kaMka Adi mAMsa bhakSI jantu khAne ko
udyata rahate haiN| TIkA - idAnImeteSAM sukhaiSiNA mAdhAkarmabhojinAM
kaTukavipAkAvirbhAvanAya zlokadvayena
dRSTAntamAhatamebAdhAkarmopabhogadoSamajAnAnAHviSama aSTaprakAra karmabandho
bhavakoTibhirapi durmokSaHcaturgatisaMsArovA tasminnakovidAH kathameSa
karmabandho bhavati kathaM vA na bhavati, kenopAyena saMsArArNavastIryyata
ityatrA kuzalA stasminneva saMsArodare karmapAzAvapAzitAH duHkhino bhavantIti  /
atra dRSTAntamAha-yathA matsyAH pRthuromANo vizAlaH samudrastatra bhavAH
vaizAlikAH vizAlAkhyaviziSTajAtyudbhavA vA vaizAlikAH vizAlA eva vA vaizAlikAH
vRhaccharIrAste evambhUtAH mahAmatsyA udakasyAbhyAgame samudravelA (yA mAgatA)
yAM satyAM prabalamarudvegodbhUtotuGgakallolamAlApanunnAH santa udakasya
prabhAvena nadImukhamAgatAH punarvelA'pagame tasminnudake zuSke vegenaivAgapate
sati bRhatvAccharIrasya tasminneva dhunImukhe vilagnA avasIdaMta
AmiSagRnubhiGgaiH kakaizca pakSivizeSai ranyaizca
mAMsavasArthibhirmatsyabandhAdibhi jIvanta eva vilupyamAnAHmahAntaM
duHkhasamuddhAtamanubhavanto'zaraNA: ghAtaM vinAzaMyAnti prApnuvanti  /
turavadhAraNe,trANAbhAvAdvinAzameva yAntIti zlokadvayArthaH  // 2 // 3 //
TIkArtha - isa samaya una puruSoM kA zAstrakAra do gAthoM meM prastuta dRSTAnta
dvArA nirUpaNa karate haiMjo sukhaiSI hai-sukha cAhate haiM  /  AdhA karma AhAra
kA sevana karate haiM aura usakA kaTuvipAka yA kaDavA phala prApta karate haiM -
AdhAkarma AhAra ke sevana se kyA doSa hote haiM, jo yaha nahIM jAnate, ve
karor3oM bhavoM meM bhI jinase chuTakArA pAnA kaThina hai, aise ATha prakAra ke
karmabandhana ko bhI jAnane meM asamartha hote haiM  /  cAra gatiyoM se mukta
saMsAra kA svarUpa ve nahIM jAnate, karmabandha kisa prakAra hotA hai, kisa
prakAra nahIM hotA tathA isa saMsAra rUpI samudra ko kisa prakAra lAMghA jAtA
hai, yaha jinheM jJAna nahIM hai, ve karmoM ke phaMde meM phaMse hue saMsAra
rUpI 94D

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those who are attached to present pleasures wander in the ocean of misery. In
this regard, the Agamkar presents an example: A large fish, called Visala, born
in the ocean, with thick hair, belonging to a specific species or having a large
body, is struck by the strong wind and waves when the waves rise in the ocean.
It is driven by the high waves of water and comes to the river bank. When the
water that came there dries up quickly after the waves recede, the fish remains
stranded on the river bank due to its large size. It is torn apart by
carnivorous animals like Dhak and Kank, and by humans who are greedy for flesh
and fat. It has no protector or shelter. It dies in pain. Here, the word 'tu'
means 'you'. Therefore, due to the lack of protection or a protector, it is
destroyed. This is the meaning of these two verses.  And those Shramanas who are
attached to present pleasures, like the Visala fish, will face destruction
countless times in this world.  Commentary: The Agamkar, after presenting this
example, explains its application to the present situation. Just as the Visala
fish is destroyed, so too are the Sankhya, Pasupata, and other monks, or those
who follow their own paths, destroyed. The Agamkar explains what kind of
Shramanas they are: Those who consider the enjoyment of food, which is the
result of their actions, as present pleasure, are attached to present pleasures.
Just as the sea crow is attached to the momentary pleasure it receives, so too
are the Sankhya, Pasupata, and other monks attached to momentary pleasures and
enjoyments. They consume food without any thought, and as a result, they
experience very severe suffering. Like the large-bodied fish mentioned earlier,
they are destroyed. Just as the bucket of a well repeatedly dips and rises in
the water, this cycle continues endlessly. Similarly, they wander in the ocean
of samsara, never able to cross it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH samudra meM bhaTakate hue duHkha pAte rahate haiM
/  isa saMbaMdha meM AgamakAra dRSTAnta upasthita karate haiM-samudra meM
utpanna eka pRthuromayukta-moTe bAloM se yukta vizAla nAmaka viziSTa jAti se
saMbaddha athavA vizAla-vRhat zarIra yukta machalI samudra meM taraMge uThane
para vAyu ke prabala vega se TakarAtI huI taraMgoM se U~ce uThatI jala kI
laharoM se tAr3ita hokara nadI ke kinAre para calI AtI hai aura taraMgoM ke
vApasa haTa jAne para jaba vahAM AyA huA jala zIghra hI sUkha jAtA hai, taba
vaha machalI apane zarIra kI vizAlatA ke kAraNa nadI taTa para hI par3I raha
jAtI hai  /  mAMsabhakSI DhaMka evaM kaMka Adi jantuoM tathA mAMsa tathA vasA-
carbI ke lobhI manuSyoM dvArA jindI hI chinna bhinna kara dI jAtI hai-kATI jAtI
hai  /  use koI zaraNa dene vAlA-rakSaka nahIM hotA  /  vaha kaSTa pAtI huI mara
jAtI hai| yahAM 'tu' zabda evaM ke artha meM hai  /  isaliye trANa yA koI
trANaprada-zaraNa dene vAlA rakSaka na hone se vaha nAza ko prApta karatI hai  /
ina do gAthAoM kA yaha abhiprAya hai| evaM tu samaNo ege vttttmaannsuhesinno|
macchA vesAliyA ceva, ghAtamessaMti NaMtaso  // 4 //  chAyA - evantu zramaNA eke
vartamAna sukhaiSiNaH  /  matsyAH vaizAlikAzceva ghAtameSyantyanantazaH  //
anuvAda - isI prakAra jo zramaNa-vatarmAna sukhoM kI icchA-kAmanA se yukta hote
haiM, ve vaizAlika matsya kI taraha isa saMsAra meM ananta bAra ghAta prApta
karate haiM-janmate marate haiN| TIkA - evaM dRSTAntamupadarzya dArTAntike
yojayitumAha-yathaite'nantaroktAH matsyA stathA zramaNAH zrAmyantIti zramaNA eke
zAkyapAzupatAdayaH svayUthyA vA kimbhUtAsta iti darzayati-vartamAna meva sukha
mAdhAkarmopabhogajanita meSituM zIlaM yeSAnte vartamAnasukhaiSiNaH
samudravAyasavat tatkAlAvAptasukhalavA''saktacetaso'nAlocitAdhAkarmopabhogajanit
AtikaTukaduHkhaughAnubhavAH, vaizAlikamatsyAiva ghAtaM vinAzam eSyanti
anubhaviSyanti anantazo'rahaTTaghaTInyAyena bhUyo bhUyaH saMsArodanvati
nimajjanaM kurvANAH na te saMsArAmbhodheH pAragAmino bhaviSyantItyarthaH  // 4
//  TIkArtha - pahale do gAthAoM meM jo dRSTAnta pratipAdita kiyA gayA aba
AgamakAra usa dvArA pratipAdyanirUpaNIya sAra batalAte haiM - jisa prakAra
vaizAlika-vizAlakAyayukta matsya naSTa ho jAtA hai, usI prakAra sAMkhya,
pAzupata Adi bhikSu athavA kaI svayUthika zramaNa nAza ko prApta karate haiM  /
jo zrama karatA hai-tapazcaraNa karatA hai use zramaNa kahA jAtA hai  /
sAMkhya, pAzupata Adi tathA svayUthika kisa prakAra ke zramaNa haiM, AgamakAra
yaha digdarzana karAte haiMvartamAna kAla meM jinase sukha milatA hai, anukUlatA
prApta hotI hai, isa prAkara ke AdhAkarma doSayukta AhAra ke sevana meM ve sukha
mAnate haiM  /  jaise samudra kA kauA tatkAla prApta hone vAle tuccha sukha meM
Asakta rahatA hai, usI prakAra sAMkhya tathA pAzupata Adi bhikSu tAtkAlika
tuccha sukhoM meM-bhogoM meM Asakta rahate haiM  /  ve koI cintana kie binA
AdhAkarmI AhAra kA upabhoga karate haiM, pariNAmasvarUpa atyanta kaThora duHkhoM
ko ve pAte haiM  /  pahale kahe gaye vizAla deha yukta matsya ke samAna ve nAza
prApta karate haiM  /  jaise rahaTTa ke ghar3e, kueM ke pAnI meM bAra bAra
DUbate haiM-utarAte haiM-Upara Ate haiM  /  yaha krama nirantara calatA rahatA
hai-kabhI baMda nahIM hotaa| usI prakAra ve saMsAra sAgara meM bhaTakate rahate
haiM, kabhI use pAra nahIM kara pAte  /  /  95

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- This is another kind of ignorance, which some people say is created by a god,
while others say it is created by Brahma. - This world is created by God, with
the main elements and so on, according to others. It is full of living beings
and non-living beings, and it is full of happiness and suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram iNamannaM tu annANaM, iha megesi mAhiyaM  /  devautte
ayaM loe, baMbhautteti Avare  // 5 //  chAyA - idamanyattvajJAna mihakeSA
mAkhyAtam  /  devopto'yaM lokaH brahmopta ityapare  //  anuvAda - pahale jo
ajJAna carcita huA hai usake atirikta eka dUsarA ajJAna bhIhai jisake anusAra
kucheka vAdI aisA kahate haiM ki yaha loka kisI deva ke dvArA kRta yA racita
hai, dUsare vAdI kahate haiM ki isakI utpatti brahmA se huI hai| TIkA -
sAmpramaparAjJAbhimatopa pradarzanAyAha-idamiti vakSyamANaM, 'tu' zabdaH
pUrvebhyo vizeSaNArthaH  /  ajJAnamiti moha vijRmbhaNam iha asmin loke ekeSAM na
sarveSAm AkhyAtam abhiprAyaH, kiM punastadAkhyAtamiti? tadAha-devenopto
devoptaH, karSakeNeva bIjavapanaM kRtvA niSpAdito'yaM loka ityarthaH  /  devai
rvA gupto-rakSito devagupto devaputro vetyevamAdikamajJAnamiti  /  tathA.
brahmaNA upto brahmepto'yaMloka ityapare evaM vyavasthitAH  /  tathA hi
teSAmayamabhyupagamaH-brahmA jagatpitAmahaH sa caika eva jagadAdAvAsIttena ca
prajApatayaH sRSTAH taizca krameNaitatsakalaM jagaditi  // 5 //  TIkArtha - aba
AgamakAra anya ajJAniyoM kA mata pratipAdita karane hetu kahate haiM - isa gAthA
meM jo 'idaM' zabda kA prayoga huA hai  /  isase Age pratipAdita kiye jAne vAle
mato kA jJApana hotA hai  /  gAthA meM 'tu' zabda kA prayoga pUrvokta matoM kI
apekSA isakI vizeSatA prakaTa karane ke hetu hai  /  arthAt pahale pratipAdita
matoM se bhinna yaha mata jo vakSyayANa hai-kahA jAyegA ajJAna yA moha se
prasUta hai  /  isa zloka meM sabhI kA nahIM kintu kinhIM kA aisA nirUpaNa hai
/  viSaya kI spaSTatA ke liye vaha kisa prakAra AkhyAta huA hai-yaha prazna
upasthita karate hue AgamakAra kahate haiM ve anya matavAdI-prastuta siddhAnta
meM vizvAsa karane vAle mAnate haiM ki jaise kRSaka bIja botA hai tathA usase
vaha dhAnya Adi paidA karatA hai, usI taraha kisI deva ne isa loka ko niSpanna-
utpanna kiyA hai athavA katipaya devoM dvArA yaha loka guptarakSita hai-deva
isakI rakSA karate haiM  /  gAthA ke tRtIya caraNa meM deva ke sAtha Aye 'ut'
zabda kA prAkRta vyAkaraNa ke niyamAnusAra putra artha bhI hotA hai  /  isakA
artha yaha hai ki yaha loka deva kA putra hai  /  putra jaise pitA se utpanna
hotA hai vaise hI yaha deva se utpanna hai  /  isa prakAra ajJAnavAdiyoM kA aisA
abhimata hai  /  dUsare kahate haiM ki yaha loka brahmA se utta-niSpAdita yA
utpAdita hai  /  unakA yaha mantavya hai ki brahmA saMsAra ke pitAmaha hai  /
unake anusAra ve jagata ke Adi-prAraMbha meM eka hI the unhoMne prajApatiyoM kI
sRSTi kI tathA prajApatiyoM ne kramazaH samasta jagata ko racA-banAyA  /
IsareNa kaDe loe, pahANAi tahAvare  /  jIvAjIvasamAutte, suhadukkhasamannie  //
6 //  chAyA - IzvareNa kRto lokaH pradhAnAdinA tathA'pare  /  jIvAjIvasamAyuktaH
sukhaduHkhasamanvitaH  //  96D

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement of Authority - Translation  **Others who hold different
views say that this world is created by God. The Samkhya philosophers say that
this world is created by Pradhana or Prakriti and others. This world is composed
of Jiva, Ajīva, Sukha and Duhkha.**  **Commentary:**  Those who believe in God
as the cause of the world say that this world is created by God. They provide
evidence for their claim by saying that all this, including the body, the
universe, the senses, etc., is accepted as Dharma (righteousness) because it is
based on a wise cause. Dharma is achievable through intelligent reasoning and is
based on the specific structure of things. For example, a pot, etc., is created
by an intelligent cause because it has a specific structure. Similarly, temples,
wells, etc., are also created by an intelligent cause because they have a
specific structure. Similarly, the ocean, mountains, rivers, earth, body, etc.,
are also subject to debate because they have a specific structure. Therefore,
they are created by an intelligent cause. The one who is the creator of this
entire world cannot be an ordinary human being, but must be God. Similarly, the
body, the universe, the senses, etc., are accepted as Dharma because they are
based on a wise cause. Dharma is achievable through intelligent reasoning
because it is a consequence, like a pot, etc. Similarly, it is active because of
its nature, like a fire, etc.  Others have accepted that the world is created by
Pradhana, etc. Prakriti is the state of equilibrium of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas.
It acts for the purpose of the soul, i.e., for enjoyment and liberation. The
word "Adi" used with Pradhana means that the principle of Buddhi is born from
Prakriti. From Buddhi, Ahamkara, the feeling of "I", is born. From Ahamkara,
sixteen principles are born. From those sixteen principles, five elements are
born. This is the process of creation. If we accept the principle of nature,
then the meaning is that the world is created by nature, like the sharpness of
thorns, etc. Others say that the world is created by destiny, like the peacock's
feathers, etc. This world is composed of Jiva and Ajīva. Jiva is characterized
by its use, while Ajīva is characterized by Dharma, Adharma, Akasha, Pudgala,
etc. It is composed of the ocean, mountains, earth, etc.  **Further, to explain
the world, it is said that it is composed of Sukha (happiness) and Duhkha
(suffering). Sukha is the form of bliss and Ananda, while Duhkha is the form of
sorrow and misery. It is appropriate to be composed of both.**  **Commentary on
the Commentary:**  Those who believe in God as the creator of the world say that
this world is created by God. They try to prove their point by saying that there
are different opinions among different philosophers regarding the body, the
universe, and the senses. Therefore, all these are debatable. These debatable
topics are based on a wise cause, i.e., they are created by an intelligent
creator. This is because they have a specific structure, i.e., they have
specific parts or organs. This is the reason why things with a specific
structure are created by an intelligent creator, like temples, wells, etc.,
which have a specific structure. Therefore, they are created by an intelligent
creator. Similarly, the ocean, mountains, rivers, earth, and body, etc., are
also debatable because they have a specific structure. Therefore, they are
created by an intelligent creator. The one who is the creator of this entire
world cannot be an ordinary human being, but must be God. The body, the
universe, the senses, etc., are created by an intelligent creator because they
are consequences, like a pot, etc. The body and the senses are created by an
intelligent creator because they are active in their respective functions, like
fire, etc.  Other philosophers, the Samkhya philosophers, say that this world is
created by Pradhana, etc. Prakriti is the state of equilibrium of Sattva, Rajas,
and Tamas. It acts for the purpose of the soul, i.e., for enjoyment and
liberation. The word "Adi" used with Pradhana means that the principle of Buddhi
is born from Prakriti. From Buddhi, Ahamkara, the feeling of "I", is born. From
Ahamkara, sixteen principles are born. From those sixteen principles, five
elements are born. This is the process of creation. If we accept the principle
of nature, then the meaning is that the world is created by nature, like the
sharpness of thorns, etc. Others say that the world is created by destiny, like
the peacock's feathers, etc. This world is composed of Jiva and Ajīva. Jiva is
characterized by its use, while Ajīva is characterized by Dharma, Adharma,
Akasha, Pudgala, etc. It is composed of the ocean, mountains, earth, etc.
Further, to explain the world, it is said that it is composed of Sukha
(happiness) and Duhkha (suffering). Sukha is the form of bliss and Ananda, while
Duhkha is the form of sorrow and misery. It is appropriate to be composed of
both.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH anuvAda - dUsare siddhAntavAdI aisA kahate haiM ki
yaha loka Izvara dvArA kRta-racita hai  /  sAMkhya darzanavAdI kahate haiM ki
yaha loka pradhAna yA prakRti Adi dvArAnirmita hai  /  yaha jIva, ajIva, sukha
evaM duHkha se samAyukta _TIkA - tathezvareNa kRto'yaM loka evameka
IzvarakAraNikA abhidadhati, pramANayanti ca te-sarvamidaM
vimatyadhikaraNabhAvApannaM tanubhuvanakaraNAdikaM dhArmitvenopAdIyate,
buddhimatkAraNapUrvaka mitisAdhyo dharmaH, saMsthAnavizeSatvAditi hetuH  /
yathA ghaTAdiriti dRSTAnto'yaM yadyatsaMsthAna vizeSavattattad
buddhimatkAraNapUrvakaM dRSTaM yathA devakulakUpAdIni  /  saMsthAna vizeSavacca
makarAkaranadIdharAdharadharAzarIrakaraNAdikaM vivAdagocarApannamiti, tasmAd
buddhimatkAraNapUrvakaM, yazca samastasyAsya jagataH kartA sa sAmAnyapuruSo na
bhavatItyasAvIzvara iti  /  tathA sarvamidaM tanubhuvanakaraNAdikaM
dharmitvenopAdIyate, buddhimatkAraNapUrvakamiti sAdhyo dharmaH kAryyatvAd
ghaTAdivat  /  tathA sthitvA pravRttervAsyAdivaditi  /  tathA'pare pratipannA
yathA-pradhAnAdikRto lokaH, sattvarajastamasAM sAmyAvasthA prakRtiH sA ca
puruSArtha prati pravartate |aadigrhnnaacc "prakRtemahAn tato'haGkArastasmAcca
gaNaH SoDazaka stasmAdapi SoDazakAtpaJcabhyaH paJcabhUtAnI" tyAdikayA prakriyayA
sRSTirbhavatIti  /  yadi vA Adi grahaNAtsvabhAvAdikaM gRhyate, tatascAyamarthaH
svabhAvena kRto lokaH kaNTakAdi taikSNyavat  /  tathA'nye niyatikRto loko
mayUrAGgaruhavadityAdibhiH kAraNaiH kRto'yaMloko jIvAjIvasamAyukto jIvairupayoga
lakSaNaistathA'jIvai:dharmAdharmAkAzapudgalAdikaiHsamanvitaHsamudradharAdharAdik
a iti  /  punarapi lokaM vizeSayitumAhasukhamAnandarUpaM
duHkhamasAtodayarUpamiti tAbhyAM samanvito yukta iti  // 6 //  _TIkArtha -
Izvara ko jagata kA kAraNa mAnane vAle matavAdI aisA kahate haiM ki yaha loka
Izvara dvArA racita hai, ve apanI bAta ko sapramANa siddha karane ke liye
pratipAdita karate haiM ki tanu-deha bhuvana tathA iMdriya Adi ke saMbaMdha meM
bhinna bhinna siddhAntavAdiyoM ke bhinna bhinna abhimata haiM  /  ataH ve saba
vivAdAspada haiM  /  ye vivAdapUrNa viSaya-padArtha jo pakSa hai, kisI
buddhimattA yukta kAraNapUrvaka yA kisI buddhimAna kartA ke dvArA racita hai,
yaha sAdhya hai, kyoMki usake apane saMsthAnavizeSa haiM-viziSTa prakAra ke
avayava yA aMga haiM, yaha hetu hai, jisa jisa vastu kI saMsthAna racanA yA
AMgika nirmANa vizeSa prakAra kA hotA hai, vaha vastu kisI buddhimAna kartA
dvArA niSpAdita yA racita hotI hai jaise devakala-devasthAna, kapa-kaMA Adi
vizeSa prakAra ke saMsthAna liye hue haiM  /  isaliye ve kisI buddhimAna kartA
dvArA hI racita haiM  /  isI taraha vivAda gocara-vivAdapUrNa yA carcAspada
viSaya samudra, nadI, pahAr3a, pRthvI aura deha Adi bhI vizeSa saMsthAna yA
avayava yukta hai  /  aisA hone se ve kisI buddhimAna sraSTA dvArA sRSTa-kRta yA
niSpAdita hai  /  jo isa samasta jagata kA sraSTA hai, vaha sAmAnya puruSa nahIM
ho sktaa| Izvara hI ho sakatA hai  /  zarIra, bhuvana, indriya Adi buddhimAna
kartA dvArA niSpAdita hai kyoMki ghaTa Adi kI taraha ve kArya hai deha aura
iMdriyAM-usake aMgopAMga kisI buddhimAna kartA ke dvArA racita haiM kyoMki ve
vasUle Adi ke samAna apane apane kAryoM meM pravRttizIla hote haiN| dUsare
matavAdI-sAMkhya siddhAntavAdI pratipAdita karate haiM ki yaha loka pradhAna-
prakRti Adi ke dvArA racA gayA hai  /  satva, raja evaM tama-ina tInoM guNoM kI
sAmyAvasthA-samAna avasthiti prakRti kahI jAtI hai  /  vaha puruSa-AtmA ke artha
yA prayojana-bhoga aura mokSa ke liye kriyA meM pravRtta hotI hai| yahAM
pradhAna ke sAtha jo Adi zabda kA prayoga huA hai usakA yaha Azaya hai ki
prakRti se mahAna yA buddhi tattva paidA hotA hai  /  buddhi tattva se ahaMkAra,
abhimAna yA ahaM kA anubhava utpanna hotA hai| ahaMkAra se solaha tattva paidA
hote haiM  /  una 970

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that five **Maha Bhutas** (great
elements) are born from five **Panchatatmaas** (five subtle elements). This
process is how creation arises. Alternatively, the word "**Aadi**" (beginning)
refers to inherent nature. Therefore, it means that sharpness is inherent in
thorns. Similarly, the entire universe is born from inherent nature, not created
by any creator. Other thinkers say that just as the feathers, hair, and other
parts of a peacock are created in a beautiful and diverse way by destiny, so too
is the entire world born from destiny. Thus, this world, which is born from the
causes mentioned earlier, such as God, is filled with conscious beings,
**Dharma** (righteousness), **Adharma** (unrighteousness), **Aakash** (space),
**Pudgal** (matter), and other non-living things, as well as oceans, mountains,
etc. However, to explain the uniqueness of the world, the **Aagam** (scripture)
says that the world is filled with both happiness arising from **Aanandaatmak**
(blissful) and suffering arising from **Asata** (unfavorable) and **Pratikul**
(adverse) experiences.  **"Samyambhuna Kade Loe Iti Vuttam Mahesina. Marena
Santhuya Maya, Tena Loe Asasae."** (Verse 7)  **"Chhaya - Samyambhuva Krto Lok
Ityuktam Maharshina. Marena Sanstuta Maya Tena Loko'ashaashvata."**
(Translation)  Some thinkers say that this world was created by **Samyambhu**
(self-existent) - Vishnu. Our great sage, **Maharshi**, has said this. **Yama
Raja** (the god of death) created **Maya** (illusion). Thus, this world is
impermanent.  **_Tika_ -** "Samyambhuna" etc. - **Samyambhu** is Vishnu or
someone else who is self-existent. In the beginning, there was only one, who was
blissful. He desired another. After this thought, another power arose, and then
the creation of the world took place. Our **Maharshi** has said this. Thus,
those who believe in the creation of the world accept a creator of the world.
Furthermore, they say that **Samyambhu** created the world, but out of fear of
the immense burden - the world would continue to grow - he created **Mara**
(Yama Raja), who destroys the world. **Mara** created **Maya**. People die
because of **Maya**. In reality, there is no destruction of the conscious being,
which is characterized by its use. Therefore, the death of a person is just
**Maya**. It is not true. Thus, this world is impermanent, non-eternal, and
perishable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram solaha meM se pAMca se-paMcatanmAtrAoM se pAMca
mahAbhUta paidA hote haiM  /  isa prakriyA dvArA sRSTi kI utpatti hotI hai  /
athavA yahAM 'Adi' zabda ke prayoga se svabhAva Adi ko liyA jAtA hai  /
tadnusAra isakA abhiprAya yaha hotA hai ki kaMTaka-kAMTe meM taikSNya-tIkSNatA
yA tIkhApana svabhAvajanita hai  /  usI taraha samasta jagata svabhAva se
utpanna hai kisI kartA dvArA racita nahIM hai  /  dUsare matavAdI aisA kahate
haiM ki jaise mora ke aMga rUha-roma paMkha Adi citra-vicitra rUpa meM niyati
dvArA nirmita hai  /  usI prakAra yaha samagra loka niyati se hI utpanna huA hai
/  isa prakAra pahale batalAye gaye Izvara Adi kAraNoM se niSpanna yaha loka
upayoga-jJAna yA cetanAyukta jIvoM aura dharma adharma, AkAza pudgala Adi ajIvoM
evaM samudra, parvata Adi se samanvita-samAyukta yA paripUrNa hai| phira bhI
loka kA vaiziSTya batAne ke liye AgamakAra kahate haiM ki AnandAtmaka sukha
tathA asAtA pratikUla vedanIya ke udaya se prApta duHkha ina donoM se yaha loka
parivyApta hai| sayaMbhuNA kaDe loe iti vuttaM mahesiNA  /  mAreNa saMthuyA
mAyA, teNa loe asAsae  // 7 //  chAyA - svayambhuvA kRto loka ityuktaM maharSiNA
/  mAreNa saMstutA mAyA tena loko'zAzvata:  //  anuvAda - kucha matavAdI aisA
kahate haiM ki svayaMbhU-viSNu dvArA yaha loka kRta yA racita hai| aisA hamAre
maharSi-mahAna RSi ne kahA hai, yamarAja ne mAyA kI racanA kI  /  isa prakAra
yaha loka anitya hai  /  _TIkA - kiJca-'sayaMbhuNA' ityAdi, svayambhavatIti
svayambhUH viSNuranyo vA  /  sacaika evAdAvabhUt, tatraikAkI ramate,
dvitIyamiSTavAn, taccintAnantarameva dvitIyA zaktiH samutpannA tadantarameva
jagatsRSTirabhUditi evaM maharSiNA uktam abhihitam  /  evaM vAdino lokasya
kartAramabhyupagatavantaH  /  api ca tena svayambhuvA lokaM
niSpAdyAtibhArabhayAdyamAkhyo mArayatIti mAro vyadhAyi, tena mAreNa saMstutA
kRtA prasAdhitA mAyA, tathA ca mAyayA lokAH mriyante  /  na ca paramArthato
jIvasyopayogalakSaNasya vyApattirasti ato mAyaiSA yathA'yaM mRtaH  /
tathAcA'yaM loko'zAzvataH anityo vinAzIti gamyate  // 7 //  TIkArtha - jo svayaM
hotA hai-kisI dUsare dvArA utpanna nahIM kiyA jAtA arthAt jisakA astittva svayaM
niSpanna hai vaha svayaMbhU kahA jAtA hai, vaha viSNu hai athavA anya koI  /
Adi meM-zuru meM ve eka hI the, ramaNazIla the, unhoMne dUsare kI abhipsA kI,
unake cintana ke anantara eka anya zakti utpanna huI usake bAda isa sAre jagata
kI sRSTi huI  /  hamAre maharSi ne aisA abhihita kiyA hai, isa prakAra loka kI
niSpatti mAnane vAle matavAdI loka kA sRSTA svIkAra karate haiM  /  phira ve yoM
pratipAdita karate haiM ki svayaMbhU ne loka ko niSpanna kiyA to sahI kintu
atyanta bhAra ke Dara se-loka uttarottara bar3hatA hI nA jAya isa bhaya se
jagata ko mArane vAle mAra-yamarAja ko utpanna kiyA  /  yamarAja ne mAyA kI
racanA kI  /  usa mAyA se hI loga marate haiM  /  upayoga lakSaNAtmaka jIva kA
paramArthataH-vAstava meM kabhI vyApatti-vinAza nahIM hotA  /  isaliye amuka
vyakti mara gayA yaha kevala mAyA hai  /  vAstava meM satya nahIM hai  /  isa
prakAra yaha loka azAzvata, anitya aura vinAzazIla hai, aisA pratIta hotA hai  /
98

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Swasama Vaktavyataadhikarah Jage. Maahana Samana Ege Aaha Andakade Aso Tatta
Makasi Ya, Ayaantaa Musam Vade ||8||  Translation:  The Brahmanas and the
Shramanas (ascetics) say that this world is created from an egg. They claim that
Brahma created the aggregate of substances, and this world is the result of
that. Those who say so are indeed ignorant. They do not know the true facts and
they speak falsehoods.  The Brahmanas and some Shramanas (such as the
Tridashdis) and certain Pauranikas say that this world of mobile and immobile
beings is created from an egg. They also say that when there was nothing at all,
this universe was in a state of void, then Brahma created the egg in the water,
and from that gradually developed the division into the upper and lower worlds.
And within that, all the elements came into existence - thus the establishment
of the earth, water, fire, air, space, ocean, rivers, and mountains, etc.
occurred.  They also say that before the creation of the world, this universe
was in a state of darkness, unknown, and indescribable. It was unimaginable,
unknowable, and dormant everywhere. In that state of the world, Brahma created
the egg, and from the process of that, he created this world. But those
Brahmanas and other traditional scholars, not knowing the ultimate truth, speak
falsely. The reality is different from what they proclaim.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH jage  /  mAhaNA samaNA ege Aha aMDakaDe aso tatta
makAsI ya, ayANaMtA musaM vade  // 8 //  chAyA 10. P - anuvAda kapitaya brAhmaNa
paramparAntarvarti tathA zramaNa paramparAntavarti vAdI aisA kahate haiM ki yaha
jagata aMDe se nirmita huA hai  /  brahmA ne tattva samUha kA sarjana kiyA, usI
kA pariNAma yaha jagata hai  /  aisA kahane vAle vAstava meM ajJAnI haiN| ve
tathya yA satya tathya ko nahIM jAnate aura ve mithyA asatya hI kahate haiM  /
brAhmaNAH zramaNA eke AhuraNDakRtaM jagat  /  asau tattva makArSIcyA jAnanto
mRSA vadanti  //  TIkA api ca brAhmaNA dhigjAtayaH zramaNAH tridaNDiprabhRtaya
eke kecana paurANikAH na sarve, evam, Ahu ruktavanto, vadanti ca yathA -
jagadetaccarAcara maMDena kRta maNDakRta maNDAjjAta mityarthaH  /  tathA te
vadanti yadA na kiJcidapi vastvAsIt padArtha zUnyo'yaM saMsAra stadA brahmA'psu
aNDa masRjat tasmAcca krameNa vRddhAt pazcAd dvidhAbhAvamupagatAdUrdhvAdho
vibhAgo'bhUt  /  tanmadhye ca sarvAH prakRtayo'bhUvan, evaM pRthivyaptejo
vAyvAkAzasamudrasaritparvatmakrAkarasaMnivezAdisaMsthitirabhUditi  /  tathA
coktam " AsIdidaM tamobhUtayaprajJAtamalakSaNam  /  apratarksa mavijJeyaM,
prasuptamiva sarvataH " ? evambhUte cA'smin jagati asau brahmA, tasya bhAva
stattvaM padArthajAtaM tadaNDAdikrameNa akArSIt kRtavAn iti  /  te ca
brAhmaNAdayaH paramArthamajAnAnAH santo mRSA vedanta evaM vadanti  /  anyathA ca
sthitaM tattvamanyathA vadantItyarthaH  // 8 // ) - TIkArtha - brAhmaNa kA artha
dhiga jAtIya arthAt jo jAti yA janma kI dRSTi se svayaM ko sarvocca mAnate auroM
ko hIna mAnate haiM, ve vipra, zramaNa- zramaNa paramparA ke antaravartI
tridaNDI Adi tApasa, jinameM se saba nahIM tathA paurANika - purANoM meM vizvAsa
rakhane vAle kahate haiM ki yaha cala, acala jaGgama sthAvara jagata aMDe se
utpanna huA haiM  /  ve Age kahate haiM ki jaba koI vastu vidyamAna nahIM thI,
yaha saMsAra padArtha zUnya thA 1 taba brahmA ne jala meM aMDA chor3A, vaha aMDA
kramazaH baDhatA gayA, phira vaha do khaNDoM meM vibhakta ho gayA  /  usa 3
pariNAma svarUpa urdhva Upara kA loka tathA adhaH- nIce kA loka ye do vibhAgaM
utpanna hue, unameM sabhI prakAra kI prajA - prANI utpanna hue  /  isa prakAra
pRthvI, jala, agni, vAyu, AkAza, samudra, nadI evaM parvata Adi kI niSpatti huI
/  ve aisA bhI kahate haiM ki jagata kI racanA se pahale yaha saMsAra tamo
bhUta- aMdhakAramaya tathA apragyAtajJAna zUnya tathA alakSaNa-lakSaNa rahita
thA  /  usa samaya yaha saMsAra apratarksa-atarkaNIya-tarka dvArA avicAraNIya
ajJeya - jJAna kA aviSaya, na jAnane yogya tathA saba ora se prasupta - soyA huA
sA thA  /  jaba jagata aisI sthiti meM thA taba brahmA ne aMDe kI utpatti kI
aura usake prayoga krama se isa jagata kA nirmANa kiyA  /  paramArthavAstavika
tathya ko nahIM jAnane vAle brAhmaNa Adi paramparAoM ke siddhAntavAdI isa jagata
ko brahmA dvArA kRta yA racita mAnate haiM  /  jo satya se pare haiM,
vAstavikatA to ora hai kintu ve usase bhinna rUpa meM pratipAdita karate haiM  /
isa gAthA kA aisA abhiprAya hai 13 33 3 99

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra says, "They describe the world as created by their own
means, their own ideas, their own special arguments. They do not know the truth,
the reality. This world is never destroyed, never completely wiped out."
Commentary: Now, in response to those who believe in the world being created by
gods, Brahma, or Ishvara, it is said: "They describe the world as created by
their own means, their own ideas, their own special arguments." For example,
they say the world was created by gods, Brahma, Ishvara, the primordial
elements, or by itself, or by Maya, or that it is born from an egg, etc. They
present their own arguments to prove their point, as if their view is the only
truth. All those who hold such views do not know the truth, the ultimate
reality, the true nature of the world. They do not understand that the world, in
terms of its substance, is not destroyed, not completely wiped out. This world
is not created by anyone, but it exists, has existed, and will continue to
exist. For example, they say, "The world was created by gods." This is not true.
There is no evidence to support the idea that the world was created by gods. And
even if there were, such an argument would not convince wise people. Moreover,
was the god who created the world born or unborn? If he was unborn, then he
would not have the power to create, just like a barren bull. If he was born,
then did he create the world by himself or by someone else? If he created it by
himself, then why wouldn't the world also have been created by itself? If he was
born by someone else, then that someone else must have been born by someone
else, and so on, leading to an infinite regress. This is like a vine that
spreads endlessly, covering the entire sky. If the god is said to be unborn and
eternal, then why not say the same about the world? What is the problem with
that? Furthermore, is this eternal god unchanging or changing? If he is
unchanging, then he cannot act because he is not subject to the laws of cause
and effect. If he is changing, then he would be destroyed after his birth, and
he would not be able to protect himself, let alone create anything else. Also,
is this god formless or formed? If he is formless, then he would be like space,
incapable of acting. If he is formed, then he would be like a human being, who
needs tools to act, and it would be clear that he is the creator of the entire
world. The arguments of the Devagupta and Devaputra schools are too weak to be
considered. The same criticism applies to the Brahma-upta school, as their
arguments are similar. It is said that the world was created by a wise being
with a specific intention, like a pot, because it has a specific purpose. This
is not true, because the existence of a specific cause is not sufficient to
prove the existence of a specific effect. The mere existence of a cause only
leads to the understanding of a specific effect if there is a pre-existing
restriction. But in the case of the world, there is no such restriction. It is
said that the pot was created by a potter because we can see the specific
purpose of the pot. But we cannot say the same about rivers, oceans, mountains,
etc., because we do not see a wise being as the cause of their existence. It is
argued that just as we see a specific form in a pot, we also see a specific form
in mountains, etc., and therefore we can infer that they were created by a wise
being. This is not true, because the mere existence of a specific form does not
necessarily imply that it was created by a wise being. If that were the case,
then an anthill would also be considered the creation of a potter, because it is
made of earth. It is said that if the potter created the pot, then he must have
also created the anthill. Therefore, it is clear that the existence of a
specific form does not necessarily imply that it was created by a wise being.
Only when we see a specific form that is connected to a wise being can we infer
that it was created by that being. The form itself is not enough. Moreover, we
see a specific potter as the creator of pots, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram saehiM pariyAehiM, loyaM bUyA kaDeti ya  /  tattaM te
Na vijANaMti Na viNAsI kayAivi  // 9 //  chAyA - svakaiH paryAyairloka mabruvan
kRtamiti ca  /  /  tattvante na vijAnanti na vinAzI kadAcidapi  //  anuvAda -
pahale jinakA varNana AyA hai ve devakRta sRSTivAda Adi meM vizvAsa karane vAle
anya tIrtha apanI icchAnurUpa-jaisA mana meM AtA hai, jagata ko kisI dvArA
racita bAlAte haiN| ve tattva- vAstavikatA ko nahIM jAnate haiM  /  yaha jagata
kabhI bhI vinAza ko prApta nahIM hotA-kabhI bhI sarvathA miTatA nahIM  /  TIkA -
adhunaiteSAM devoptAdijagadvAdinAmuttaradAnAyA''ha - svakaiH svIkayaiH paryAyai
rabhiprAyai yuktivizeSai rayaMlokaH kRta ityeva mabruvan abhihitavantaH  /
tadyathA devopto brahmopta IzvarakRtaH pradhAnAdiniSpAditaH svayambhuvA vyadhAyi
tanniSpAditamAyayA mriyate tathANDajazcAyaM loka
ityaadi|svkiiyaabhiruuppttibhiHprtipaadynti yathA'smaduktameva satyaM nAnyaditi
/  te caivaMvAdino vAdinaH sarve'pi tattvaM paramArtha yathAvasthitalokasva
bhAvaM nAbhi (navi) jAnanti na samyag vivecayanti, yathA'yaM loko dravyArthatayA
na vinAzIti-nirmUlataH kadAcana  /  nacAyamAdita Arambha . kenacit
kriyate'pitvayaM loko'bhUdbhavati bhaviSyati ca  /  tathAhi-tattAvaduktaM yathA
'devopto'yaM loka' iti  /  tadasaMgatam  /  yato devoptatve lokasya na
kiJcittathAvidhaM pramANa masti, nacApramANaka mucyamAnaM vidvajjamananAMsi
prINayati  /  api ca - kimasau deva utpanno'nutpanno vA lokaM sRjeta ? na
tAvadanutpannastasya kharaviSANasyevAsattvAtkaraNAbhAvaH  /  athotpannaH sRjet
tatkiM svato'nyato vA ? yadi svataevotpanna stathAsati
tallokasyApisvataevotpattiH kiM neSyate ? athAnyatautpannaH sanlokakaraNAya,
so'pyanyo'nyataH so'pyanyo'nyataityevamanavasthA latA nabhomaNDala
vyApinyanivAritaprasarA prasarpatIti  /  athA'sau devo'nAditvAnnotpanna
ityucyate, ityevaMsati loko'pyanAdirastu, ko doSaH ? kiJca asAvanAdiH
sannityo'nityo vA syAta ? yadi nityastadAtasya
kramayogapadyAbhyAmarthakriyAvirodhAnnakartRtvam, athA'nityastathAsati
svataevotpattyanantaraM vinAzitvAdAtmano'pi na trANAya, kuto'nyatkaraNamprati
tasya vyApAracinteti ? tathA kimamUrto mUrttimAnvA ?
ydymuurtstdaa''kaashvdkrtev| atha mUrttimAn, tathAsati prAkRta
puruSasyevopakaraNasavyapekSasya spaSTameva sarvajagadakartRvya miti  /
devagupta devaputrapakSau, tvatiphalgutvAdapakarNayitavyAviti  /  etadeva
dUSaNaM brahmoptapakSe'pi dRSTavyaM tulyayogakSematvAditi tathA
yaduktaM'tanubhuvanakaraNAdikaM vimatyadhikaraNabhAvApannaM viziSTa buddhi
matkAraNapUrvakaM kAryyatvAd ghaTAdivaditi, tadayuktaM tathA vidha viziSTa
kAraNa pUrvakatvena vyAptyasiddheH, kAraNapUrvakatvamAtreNa tu kAyaM vyAptaM
kAryya vizeSopalabdhau kAraNavizeSa pratipattirgRhItapratibandhasyaiva bhavati,
nacAtyantAdRSTe tathA pratItirbhavati  /  ghaTe tatpUrvakatvaM pratipannamiti
ced yuktaM tatra ghaTasya kAryavizeSatva pratipatteH, natvevaM
saritsamudraparvatAdau buddhimatkAraNapUrvakatvena sambandho gRhIta iti  /
nanvataeva ghaTAdisaMsthAnavizeSadarzanavat parvatAdAvapi
viziSTasaMsthAnadarzanAd buddhimatkAraNa pUrvakatvasya sAdhanaM kriyate,
naitadevaM yuktaM, yato nahi saMsthAnazabda pravRttimAtreNa sarvasya
buddhimatkAraNapUrvaka tvAvagatirbhavati, yadi tu syAd mRdvikAratvAd
valmIkasyA'pi ghaTavat kumbhakAra kRtiH syAt, tathA coktamanyathA kumbhakAreNa
mRdvikArasya kasyacit  /  ghaTAdeH karaNA tsiddhayed valmIkasyA'pi tatkRtiH  /
? iti, tadevaM yasyaiva saMsthAna vizeSasya buddhimatkAraNa pUrvakatvena
sambandho gRhItastaddarzanameva tathAvidhakAraNAnumApakambhavati na
sNsthaanmaatrmiti| apicaghaTAdisaMsthAnAM kumbhakAra evaM viziSTaH
kartopalakSyate (100

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement of the self-time is not the Lord, if it were the Lord, then what
would the potter do? This is not the case, even there the Lord is engaged as the
cause of the cause by pervading everything. But in this way, there would be a
concept of the destruction of what is seen and the creation of what is not seen.
Thus it is said:  "From the connection with the medicine of the enemy, etc., the
wound of the arrow heals. What is the cause of the stationary object which is
not connected?"  Therefore, the concept of the unseen by abandoning the seen
cause is not justified. Moreover, the creator of the Devakulaavat, etc., is seen
as having parts, non-pervasive, and impermanent. This is also proved by the
example, and the Lord is also like this. Otherwise, there is no example of the
other, and there is no inference due to the non-establishment of pervasiveness.
Staying in this direction, the means of production, etc., should also be
considered as means and non-means, because of the equality of yoga and welfare.
What is also said, "This world is created by the primary, etc.", is also not
appropriate, because what is that primary, is it concrete or abstract? If it is
abstract, then the birth of the concrete from the Makarakara, etc., is not
possible, because nothing is seen to be born from the sky, because of the
contradiction between the concrete and the abstract in terms of cause and
effect. If it is concrete, then from where is it born? It is not from itself,
because there would be the possibility of the world being born in the same way.
Nor is it from another, because of the non-establishment of the other. Just as
the primary, etc., exists from the beginning without being born, so also the
world should not be considered. Moreover, the primary is said to be the state of
equilibrium of sattva, rajas, and tamas. And you do not accept the birth of the
great, etc., from the un-modified primary, nor does the designation of the
modified primary stand, therefore, there is no birth of the great, etc., from
the primary. Moreover, how can the inert have an inclination towards the purpose
of man, as stated by you? By which there would be creation with the possibility
of enjoyment, if it is said that this is the nature of the primary, then in that
case, the nature itself is stronger, which controls even the primary, and from
that the world should also be, why the concept of the unseen primary, etc.? If
it is said that some people accept the causality of nature from the beginning,
then it is not the case, because the nature does not cause us any harm, as it is
accepted. Because, nature is nature, its own birth, and that is accepted for all
things. And what is said, "This world is created by destiny", there also the
regulation is destiny, just as the building is destiny, and when considered, it
does not go beyond nature. And what you have said, "The world is created by the
self-born", is also not beautiful, because what is said by the self-born? Is it
that when it becomes, then it becomes independent and free from others? Or is it
designated as self-born because of its beginningless existence? If the
acceptance of independent existence is there, then why is the existence of the
world not accepted? Is it self-born? If it is beginningless, then because of its
beginninglessness, it is eternal, and because of the eternality, it is uniform,
and because of the uniformity, there is no possibility of being a doer. And
because of being free from attachment, there is no possibility of the diversity
of the world, if it is attached, then because of its non-difference from us, it
is not the creator of the world. The concrete and abstract, etc., should be
considered as before. And what is also said here, "By that Mara is born, and he
destroys the world", is just talk, because of the statement of non-doership. And
what is said, "This world is born from the egg, etc.", is also inappropriate,
because the eggs which are laid by the fish, etc., are just as they are within
the egg, so also the world is born, and there is no obstacle seen in this
acceptance. And why does that Brahma not create the world until he creates the
egg? Why with this difficult, illogical, and egg-concept? If it is so, then some
have said that the Brahmanas were born from the mouth of Brahma, the Kshatriyas
from the arms, the Vaishyas from the thighs, and the Shudras from the feet. This
is also illogical, because the birth of anyone from the mouth of God is not
seen. If it is so, then there would be no difference between the varnas, because
of the birth from one. And there would be no difference between the Brahmanas,
like the Katha Upanishad, etc., because of the birth from one mouth. And there
would be no existence of the Upanayana, etc., or if there is, then there would
be the possibility of taking the wife of one's own sister, etc. Because of many
such defects and evils, this birth of the world should be accepted. Therefore,
it is established that those who argue in this way, do not know the truth of the
world, which is beginningless and endless, fourteen rajjus in length, in the
form of a man with two hands placed on the waist in the Vaishkha place, with a
lower world in the form of a wrestler with seven earths, a middle world with
countless islands, seas, and bases, an upper world in the form of a wrestler
emerging from the sea, made up of dharma, adharma, space, and the essence of
life, eternal in terms of substance, momentary in terms of change, the truth of
substance established by birth, decay, and permanence, the world of many births
established by the beginningless karma of life, marked by the end of the world
for those who are free from the eight types of karma, they speak falsely.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH nezvaraH yadi punarIzvaraH syAta kiM
kumbhakAreNeti? naitadasti, tatrA'pIzvara eva sarvavyApitayA nimittakAraNatvena
vyApriyate, nanvevaM dRSTahAni raddaSTakalpanA syAt  /  tathA coktam
zatrauSadhAdisambandhAccaitrasya vraNarohaNe  /  asambaddhasya kiM sthANoH'
kAraNatvaM na kalpyate ?  / 1 /  tadevaM dRSTakAraNaparityAgenAdRSTaparikalpanA
na nyAyyeti  /  apica-devakulAvaTAdInAM yaH kartA sa sAvayavo'vyApyanityo dRSTaH
tad dRSTAntasAdhitazcezvara evambhUta eva prApnoti, anyathAbhUtasya ca
dRSTAntAbhAvAd, vyAptyasiddhernAnumAnamiti  /  anayaiva dizA sthitvA
prakRttyAdikamapi sAdhana masAdhana mAyojyaM tulya yogkssemtvaaditi|
yadapicoktaM pradhAnAdikRto'yaMloka" iti tadapyasaGgataM, yatastatpradhAnaM kiM
mUrtamamUrtaMvA ? yadyamUrtaM natato makarAkarAdermUtasyodbhavo ghaTate, na
hyAkAzAkiJcidutpadyamAna mAlakSyate, mUrtAmUrtayoH kAryakAraNavirodhAditi  /
atha mUrtaM tatkutaH samutpanna ? na tAvatsvato, lokasyA'pi tathotpattiprasaGgAt
/  nApyanyato'navasthApatteriti  /
yathA'nutpannemevapradhAnAdyanAdibhAvenA''ste tadvalloko'pi kiM neSyate ? apica-
sattvarajastamasAM sAmyAvasthA pradhAnamityucyate, nacAvikRtAtpradhAnmahadAde
rutpattiriSyate bhavadbhiH, naca vikRtaM pradhAna vyapadeza mAskandatItyato na
pradhAnAnmahadAderutpattiriti  /  apica acetanAyAH prakRtaiH kathaM puruSArthaM
prati pravRttiH ? yenA'tyano bhogopapattyA sRSTiH syAditi, prakRterayaM svabhAva
iti cedevaM tarhi svabhAva eva valIyAn yastAmapi prakRtiM niyamayati, tata eva
ca loko'pyastu kimadRSTapradhAnAdikalpanayeti ?  /  athAdigrahaNAt
svabhAvasyA'pi kAraNatvaM kaizcidiSyata iti cedastu, na hi
svabhAvo'bhyupagamyamAnau naH kSati mAtanoti  /  tathAhi-svobhAvaH svabhAvaH
svakIyotpattiH sA ca padArthAnA miSyata eveti tathA yaduktaM
"niyatikRto'yaMloka" iti tatrA'pi niyamanaM niyati yadyathA , bhavanaM
niyatirityucyate, sA cAlocyamAnA na svabhAvAdatiricyate  /  yaccA'bhyadhAyi-
sviyambhuvotpAdito loka' iti tadapyasundarameva, yataH svayambhUriti
kimuktambhavati ? kiM yadA'saubhavati tadA svatantro'nyanirapekSa eva bhavati,
athAnAdibhavanAtsvayambhUriti vyapadizyate ? tadyadi
svatantrabhavanA'bhyupagamastadvallokasyApi bhavanaM kiM nA'bhyupeyate ? kiM
svayambhuvA ? athA'nAdi statastasyA'nAditve nityatvaM
nityasyacaikarUpatvAtkartRtvA'nupapattiH, tathA vItarAgatvAttasya saMsAra
vaicitryAnupapattiH, atha sarAgo'sau tato'smadAdyavyatirekAtsutarAM
vishvsyaakrtaa| mU-mUttIdivikalpAzca prAgvadAyojyA iti yadapi
cAtrA'bhihitam-'tena mAraH samutpAditaH, sa ca lokaM vyApAdayati'
tadapyakartRtvasyabhihitatvAtpralApamAtra miti tathA yaduktam "aNDAdikramajo'yaM
loka" iti tadapyasamIcInaM, yato yAsvapsu tadaNDaM nisRSTaM tAH
yathA'NDamantareNAbhUvan tathA loko'pi bhUta ityabhyupagame na kAcid bAdhA
dRzyate tathA'sau brahmA yAvadaNDaM sRjati tAvallokameva kasmAnnotpAdayati ?
kimanayA kaSTayA yuktyasaGgatayA cANDaparikalpanayA ? evamastviti cet tathA
kecidabhihitavanto yathA brahmaNo mukhAd brAhmaNAH samajAyanta bAhubhyAM
kSatriyA urubhyAM vaizyAH padbhyAM zUdrA iti, tadapyayuktisaGgatameva, yato na
mukhA deH ksycidutpttirbhvntyuplkssyte| athA'pi syAttathAsati varNAnAmabhedaH
syAd, ekasmAdutpatteH  /  tathA brAhmaNAnAM kaThataittirIyakakalApAdikazca bhedo
na syAd, ekasmAnmukhAdutpatteH  /  evaJcopanayanAdisadbhAvo na bhaved bhAve vA
svasrAdigrahaNApattiH syAd evamAdyanekadoSa duSTatvAdevaM lokotpatti
bhyuipagantavyA  /  tatazca sthitametat-ta evaM vAdino lokasyAnAdyaparyyavasita
syordhvAdhazcaturdazarajjupramANasya,
vaizAkhasthAnasthakaTinyastakarayugmapuruSAkRteradhomukhamallakAkArasaptapRthi
vyAtmakAdholokasya, sthAlAkArAsaMkhyeyadvIpa samudrAdhAramadhyalokasya,
mallakasamudgakAkArova'lokasya,
dharmAdharmAkAzapuddhalajIvAtmakasya,dravyArthatayA nityasya,paryAyApekSayA
kSaNakSayiNaH, utpAdvyayadhrauvyApAditadravyasatattvasyAnAdijIvakarmasambandhApA
ditAnekabhavaprapaJcasyASTavidhakarmavipramuktA''tma lokAntopalakSitasya
tattvamajAnAnAH mRSA vadantIti  // 9 // ] 101

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- **Śrī Sūtrakr̥tāṅga Sūtraṃ Ṭīkā-rtha** - The Āgama-kāra says that in order to
refute the doctrines of those who say that this world is created by gods, etc.,
_Previously discussed, those who believe in other philosophies claim that this
world is created by their own desired and agreeable methods. Among them, many
say that it is created by Devopta-Devakṛta, many by Brahmopa-Brahmā, and many by
Īśvarakṛta-Īśvara. Many say that it is produced by nature, etc., and many say
that it is self-created. Those who believe that it is self-created say that it
is destroyed by the same self-created Māyā. Many say that it is born from an
egg. Those who believe in their own theories, methods, and arguments say that
what we have said is true, and what others have said is not true. In reality,
these previously mentioned theorists do not know the truth. They do not know
what the nature of this world is. They cannot properly analyze it. The fact is
that this world never completely perishes, because it always exists in the form
of dravya. Nor is it the case that it was created in the beginning, because this
world existed before, exists now, and will continue to exist in the future.
Those who believe in Devopta-vādi, that the world is created by gods, say that
this world is Devakṛta. This is completely illogical, because no god created
this world. No strong evidence is found in this regard. Scholars and wise men
are not satisfied with what has no evidence. They do not accept it. Another
doubt arises: the god who created this world, was he born and then created this
world, or was he unborn and created it without being born? Here, it is important
to understand that he cannot create this world without being born, because what
is not born, what does not exist, has no existence, like the horns of a donkey.
When there is no existence of oneself, how can one create others? If you believe
that he was born and created the world, then what is the solution? Tell me? Was
he born on his own, or was he born by someone else? If you believe that he was
born on his own, then why not believe that this world was also born on its own?
If you believe that he was born from someone else and created this world, then
that other god will be born from another third god. That third god will be born
from a fourth god. This process of birth will continue indefinitely, and will
never stop. This will lead to the fault of Anvastā, which will spread like a
vine, without stopping, and will fill the entire sky, so that the root cause of
everything will not be proven. If it is said that he is Anadi, that he has no
beginning, therefore he is not born, then consider, why not believe that this
world is also Anadi? Another question arises: the god who created this world, is
he eternal or non-eternal? If you believe him to be eternal, then it will
contradict the meaning of action. An eternal substance does not mean an actor.
He cannot perform actions simultaneously. (102)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - isa saMsAra ko deva Adi dvArA racita
batAne vAle vAdiyoM ke siddhAntoM ke nirAkaraNa hetu AgamakAra kahate haiM - _
pahale carcita anya darzanoM meM vizvAsa karane vAle vAdI apanI acchA se-
manacAhI yuktiyoM dvArA isa jagata ko racA huA batalAte haiM  /  unameM se kaI
ise devopta-devakRta, kaI brahmopta-brahmA dvArA racita, tathA kaI IzvarakRta-
Izvara racita batalAte haiM  /  kaI ise prakRti Adi dvArA niSpAdita aura kaI
svayaMbhU dvArA nirmita kahate haiM  /  jo ise svayaMbhU dvArA racita mAnate
haiM ve kahate haiM ki yaha usI svayaMbhU dvArA niSpAdita mAyA se maraNa prApta
karatA hai, naSTa hotA hai  /  kaI isako aNDe se paidA honA batalAte haiN| ve
vAdI apanI-apanI upepattiyo-yuktiyoM evaM tarkoM ke sahAre kahate haiM ki hamane
jo kahA hai vahI satya hai, auroM kA kahA satya nahIM hai  /  vAstava meM yaha
pUrva varNita siddhAntavAdI satya tathya ko nahIM jaante| unheM yaha jJAta nahIM
hai ki isa loka kA kyA svabhAva hai| isakI ve bhalI bhAMti vivecanA nahIM kara
pAte  /  vastuH sthiti yaha hai ki yaha loka kabhI bhI ekAntarUpeNa sarvathA
nAza prApta nahIM karatA-nahIM miTatA kyoMki dravya rUpa se vaha sadA vidyamAna
rahatA hai, na aisA hI hai ki Adi meM-zuru zuru meM yA pahale pahala kisI ne
isakI racanA kI ho kyoMki yaha loka pahale bhI vidyamAna thA, vartamAna meM bhI
vidyamAna hai aura bhaviSya meM bhI vidyamAna rhegaa| bevoptavAdI-deva dvArA
loka kI sRSTi honA mAnane vAle isa loka ko devakRta kahate haiM  /  yaha bilkula
ayuktiyukta hai kyoMki isa loka kA kisI deva ne sarjana kiyA ho  /  isa
saMbaMdha meM koI bhI prabala samartha pramANa prApta nahIM hotA  /  jisa bAta
kA koI pramANa nahIM hotA usase vidvAnoM-jJAniyoM ke mana ko saMtoSa nahIM
hotaa| ve use svIkAra nahIM karate  /  dUsarI zaMkA yaha khaDI hotI hai ki jisa
deva ne isa loka kI racanA kI vaha deva svayaM utpanna hokara isa loka kA
sarjana karatA hai athavA anutpanna-utpanna hue binA hI use banAtA hai| yahAM
yaha samajhane kI bAta hai ki vaha utpanna hue binA isa saMsAra kI racanA nahIM
kara sakatA kyoMki jo utpanna hI nahIM hai-vidyamAna hI nahIM hai usakA
kharaviSANa-gadhe ke sIMga kI jyoM koI astittva hI nahIM hotA  /  jaba svayaM kA
hI koI astittva nahIM hai to auroM kI kyA sRSTi karegA  /  yadi aisA mAno ki
vaha deva utpanna hokara sRSTi kI racanA karatA hai to isakA samAdhAna kyA hogA
/  batalAyeM ? kyA vaha apane Apa hI utpanna hotA hai athavA kisI anya ke dvArA
utpanna kiyA jAtA hai  /  yadi aisA mAnate ho ki usakI utpatti svayaM hI hotI
hai to phira isa loka ko bhI svayaM hI utpanna hotA huA kyoM nahIM mAna lete  /
yadi aisA mAnate ho ki vaha deva kisI anya se utpanna hokara isa loka kI racanA
karatA hai to vaha dUsarA deva kisI anya tIsare deva se utpanna hogA  /  vaha
tIsarA kisI cauthe deva se utpanna hogA, yaha utpatti kA krama Age se Age calatA
jAyagA, kahIM para jAkara nahIM rukegA  /  isa prakAra anavasthA doSa AyegA,
vaha anavasthArUpI latA-bela anivAritabinA ruke hue Age se Age prasarpaNa-
vistAra pAtI huI yA phailAva karatI huI samasta gagana maNDala ko ApUrNa kara
degI-bhara degI, yoM sabakA mUla kAraNa koI bhI pramANita nahIM ho paayegaa|
yadi aisA kahA jAye ki vaha deva anAdi hai, usakA koI Adi yA prAraMbha nahIM
hai, isaliye vaha utpanna nahIM hotA, taba vicAra kiyA jAye isI prakAra isa
jagata ko anAdita kyoM na mAna liyA jAya  /  eka prazna aura upasthita hotA hai
ki jisa deva ne isa loka kI racanA kI, vaha nitya hai yA anitya  /  yadi use
nitya mAnate ho to usakA artha kriyA ke sAtha virodha hogA  /  nitya padArtha
artha kriyAkArI nahIM hotA  /  vaha yugapat-eka sAtha kriyAeM nahIM kara sakatA
(102)

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Self-Time Statement Authority** and he cannot perform actions in sequence. If
he is a dev who is impermanent, then after creation, he is self-destructive, and
therefore he is not capable of protecting himself, then how can he undertake the
creation or destruction of another? Then the question arises, the dev who
created this world, is he concrete or abstract? If he is abstract - formless,
then he is like the sky, an inactive entity. The sky is formless, it has no
agency, the same will happen with the dev. If he is concrete, then for the
accomplishment of the task, a common man needs tools - resources, he will also
need resources. Where will the resources come from? In such a situation, he is
not the creator of the entire world, this is absolutely clear.  In the third
verse of the fifth chapter, the word 'devutte' has come. From the perspective of
Prakrit, it forms two forms, Devgupta and Devputra. Their discussion has come
before. This is extremely 'falgu' - negligible or insignificant, and therefore
not worth listening to. The same fault applies to the Brahmopt side, because it
is also similar to the Devgupta side. Those who consider God to be the cause of
the world, they state regarding the body, the universe, and the senses, which
different thinkers have explained according to their own views, that these are
created by a specific intelligent creator, just as a pot is created by someone.
Their statement is unreasonable because in a specific cause, the scope of the
action is not accepted, but it is accepted in the cause itself. The man who
knows that a particular person does a particular work, another cannot do it.
That person. By seeing that work, he can guess, estimate the specific person who
did it. But in a substance that is extremely invisible, completely inaccessible
to sight, such a perception cannot be formed. In other words, a person who has
never been seen by anyone creating something, cannot be guessed at by looking at
that thing. If it is said that by looking at the pot, its creator, the potter,
is guessed, who is a substance of a specific caste, similarly, by looking at the
world, its specific doer, God, can be guessed, this is also not logical -
factual. Because the pot is a special kind of work. The potter, who is its
creator, is seen directly doing it - making the pot. Therefore, it is correct to
guess the potter by looking at the pot. It is logical to do so, but God cannot
be guessed by looking at the world because the potter, who creates the pot, is
directly visible, in the same way, no intelligent doer - God is ever visible
creating the river, the ocean, the mountain, etc. Therefore, the specific
intelligent creator of the world cannot be guessed by looking at it. If it is
said that due to the specific institution - shaped form, the pot, etc.
substances are created by an intelligent creator, similarly, due to the specific
institution, the mountain, etc. substances are also created by an intelligent
creator, it can be proved, it is also not logical to say so because all
substances are created by an intelligent creator due to the creation of a
specific institution or limbs, it does not appear. If the above statement is
accepted, then the Balmik - the mound of earth - the heap, which is the
distortion of the earth, should also be created by the potter like the pot, just
as the potter creates the pot, etc. substances from the earth. It cannot be
stated by looking at it that whatever substances are made from earth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH aura na vaha kramazaH kriyAeM kara sakatA  /  yadi
vaha deva anitya hai to utpatti ke anantara svayaM vinAzazIla hone ke kAraNa
vaha apanA bhI trANa-rakSA karane meM sakSama nahIM hai phira vaha dUsare kI
utpatti yA niSpatti hetu udyama kisa prakAra kara sakatA hai  /  phira savAla
khar3A hotA hai jisa deva ne isa jagata kI racanA kI vaha mUrta hai athavA
amUrta  /  yadi vaha amUrta hai-nirAkAra hai to vaha AkAza kI taraha akartA hai
/  AkAza nirAkAra hai, usameM kisI prakAra kA kartRtva nahIM hai, vahI deva ke
sAtha ghaTita hogA  /  yadi vaha mUrta hai to kArya kI niSpatti hetu eka
sAdhAraNa puruSa ko jaise upakaraNoM kI-sAdhanoM kI AvazyakatA hotI hai use bhI
sAdhanoM kI . AvazyakatA hogii| sAdhana kahAM se AyeMge  /  aisI sthiti meM vaha
samasta loka kA sarjaka nahIM hai, yaha bilkula sApha hai| . . pAMcavI gAthA ke
tIsare caraNa meM 'devautte' pada AyA hai  /  usake prAkRta kI dRSTi se
devagupta evaM devaputra do rUpa banate haiM  /  inakI pahale carcA AI hai  /
yaha atyanta 'phalgu'-nagaNya yA tuccha hone ke kAraNa sunane yogya bhI nahIM
hai  /  yahI doSa brahmopta pakSa meM bhI lAgU hotA hai kyoMki vaha bhI
devagupta pakSa ke sadRza hI hai| jo Izvara ko jagata kA kAraNa mAnate haiM ve
zarIra bhuvana aura iMdriyoM ke sambandha meM jinheM vibhinna matavAdiyoM ne
apane apane mantavyoM ke anusAra vyAkhyAta kiyA haiM, ve pratipAdita karate haiM
ki ye kisI viziSTa buddhimAna srASTA dvArA banAye gaye haiM jaise ghaTa kisI ke
dvArA banAyA gayA hai| unakA yaha kathana ayuktiyukta hai kyoMki kisI viziSTa
kAraNa meM, kArya kI vyApti svIkAra nahIM kI jAtI kintu vaha kAraNa meM hI
svIkAra kI jAtI hai  /  jo puruSa yaha jAnatA hai ki amuka vyakti amuka kArya
karatA hai, dUsarA nahIM kara sakatA  /  vaha vyakti  /  usa kArya ko dekhakara
use karane vAle viziSTa vyakti kA anumAna kara sakatA hai, andAjA lagA sakatA
hai| para jo padArtha atyanta adRSTa hai, sarvathA dRSTigamya nahIM hai, usameM
aisI pratIti nahIM ho sakatI  /  dUsare zabdoM meM jisakI racanA karatA huA koI
vyakti kabhI bhI kisI ke dvArA dRSTigocara nahIM huA, usa vastu ko dekhakara
usake viziSTa racanAkAra kA anumAna nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  yadi yaha kahA jAya
ki ghaTa ko dekhakara usake racayitA kumbhakAra kA anumAna kiyA jAtA hai jo eka
viziSTa jAti kA padArtha hai, isI prakAra jagata ko. dekhakara usake viziSTa
kartA Izvara kA anumAna kiyA jA sakatA hai yaha bhI yukti saMgata-tathya pUrNa
nahIM hai| kyoMki ghaTa eka vizeSa prakAra kA kArya hai  /  kumbhakAra jo usakA
sraSTA hai, use kartA huA-ghaTa ko banAtA huA pratyakSa dekhA jAtA hai | ataH
ghaTa ko dekhakara kumbhakAra kA anumAna kiyA jAnA sahI hai  /  aisA kiyA jAnA
saMgata hai kiMtu jagata ko dekhakara Izvara kA anumAna nahIM kiyA jA sakatA
kyoMki ghaTa kA nirmANa karatA huA kumbhakAra jaise pratyakSa dRSTigocara hotA
hai usa prakAra nadI, sAgara pahAr3a Adi kA nirmANa karatA huA koI buddhimAna
kartA-Izvara kadA'pi dRSTi gamya nahIM hotA  /  ataH jagata ko dekhakara usake
viziSTa buddhimAna sraSTA kA anumAna nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  yadi kahA jAya ki
viziSTa saMsthAna-AkArayukta hone se ghaTa Adi padArtha eka buddhimAna racayitA
dvArA racita hai, isI prakAra viziSTa saMsthAna yukta hone ke kAraNa parvata Adi
padArtha bhI buddhimAna sraSTA dvArA sarjita hai, yaha sAbita kiyA jA sakatA
hai, aisA kahanA bhI yuktiyukta nahIM hai kyoMki viziSTa saMsthAna yA aMgopAMga
kI racanA hone se hI sabhI padArtha buddhimAna sraSTA dvArA racita ho, yaha
pratIta nahIM hotaa| yadi Upara ke kathana ko mAnA jAya to balmIka-miTTI kA jamA
stUpa-Dhera bhI jo mRttikA kA vikAra haiM ghaTa ke sadRza kumbhakAra dvArA hI
racita honA-cAhie jaise kuMbhakAra mRttikA se ghaTa Adi padArthoM kI racanA
karatA hai  /  use dekhakara aisA pratipAdita nahIM kiyA jA sakatA ki jo jo
padArtha mRttikA se nirmita hai  /  una -103)

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that all creators are potters because
if we accept that the mounds of earth, sand, and clay are created by potters,
then it would be proven that even the mounds of earth, sand, and clay are
created by potters. This is not a factual statement. Similarly, just by looking
at the creation of an institution, we cannot say that all institutions or
components that are created are created by an intelligent creator. The reality
is that the creation of an institution that is known to be created by an
intelligent creator can be used to infer the specific creator of that
institution. We cannot infer the creator just by looking at the creation of an
institution. We cannot infer the creator God just by looking at the creation of
an institution because the specific creator of the creation of pots and other
objects is the potter, not God. If God is the creator of the pot, then why do we
need to accept the potter? If it is said that God is omnipresent, then his
involvement in the creation of pots and other objects is indirect. This leads to
the concept of the visible and the invisible. The situation is that the potter,
the creator of the pot, is directly available, visible, and not accepting him is
a loss of the visible. God, who creates the pot, is never visible, and
considering him as the cause of the pot is a hypothesis of the invisible.  ...
It has been said that a person named Chaitra's wound heals through surgery with
instruments and application of medicine. Therefore, the instruments and medicine
are the cause of the healing of his wound, not other substances. Why don't we
consider the **sthānu** (a stump) which has no connection with the healing of
the wound as the cause of the healing of the wound? Therefore, it is not just to
accept the cause of something without accepting the substance that is visible as
its cause. It is not just and reasonable. In this context, the creator of the
temple, well, or pit is visible as having components, being non-pervasive, and
impermanent. Therefore, the God that is proven by their example is visible as
having components, being non-pervasive, and impermanent. Therefore, the God that
is proven by their example is proven to be having components, non-pervasive, and
impermanent. No example can be found to prove the opposite, that is, a God who
is without components, pervasive, and eternal. It cannot be proven by inference.
Just as this **kāryatva rūpa** (causality) is not capable of proving God, it
cannot prove God. Similarly, the reasons that have been given, such as being
present first and then acting, cannot prove God. This should be understood here
because these reasons are similar to the **kāryatva rūpa** (causality), they are
not the means to achieve the desired meaning. The statement that this world is
created by nature is also not logical. The question arises whether nature is
concrete or abstract. If it is abstract, then concrete things like the ocean
cannot be created from it. Abstract form is an example of this, from which no
object is seen to be created. Therefore, the cause-and-effect relationship
between the concrete and the abstract is not proven, that is, the abstract
cannot be the cause of the concrete. If nature is concrete, then from what...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram sabakA sRSTA kumbhakAra hai kyoMki aisA pratipAdita
karane se-mAnane se balmIka-bAMbI-miTTI kA jamA stUpaDhera bhI kumbhakAra dvArA
racita siddha hogA  /  jo tathyapUrNa nahIM hai  /  isI prakAra saMsthAna racanA
ko dekhane mAtra se yaha nahIM kahA jA sakatA ki jo jo saMsthAna yA avayava
racanAyukta hai, ve sabhI buddhimAna sraSTA dvArA sarjita hai| vAstavikatA yaha
hai ki jisa saMsthAna racanA kA buddhimAna racanAkAra dvArA racita honA jAnA jA
cukA hai| usI saMsthAna racanA ko dekhakara usake viziSTa racayitA kA anumAna
kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  kevala saMsthAna racanA mAtra ko dekhakara anumAna nahIM
kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  saMsthAna racanA ko dekhakara racanAkAra Izvara kA bhI
anumAna nahIM kiyA jA sakatA kyoMki ghaTAdi padArthoM kI saMsthAna racanA kA
viziSTa racayitA kumbhakAra hI dRSTi gocara hotA hai-Izvara dRSTigocara nahIM
hotA  /  yadi ghaTa kA bhI sraSTA Izvara hI hai to kumbhakAra ko mAnane kI kyA
AvazyakatA hai  /  yadi aisA kahA jAya ki Izvara sarvavyApI hai ataH nimitta
rUpa se ghaTAdi kI racanA meM bhI usakA vyApAra-pravartana hotA hai to isase
dRSTa-jo pratyakSa dikhAI detA hai, usakI hAni vinAza yA aprApti evaM adRSTa-jo
dikhAI nahIM detA usakI kalpanA kA prasaMga upasthita hotA hai  /  sthiti yaha
hai, ghaTa kA racayitA kumbhakAra pratyakSa upalabdha hai, dRSTigocara hai, use
na mAnanA-asvIkAra karanA dRSTa hAni hai aura ghaTa kA nirmANa karatA huA Izvara
kadApi dRSTigocara nahIM hotA use ghaTa kA nimitta mAnanA adRSTa kI parikalpanA
.. kahA gayA hai caitra nAmaka vyakti kA vraNa-ghAva aujAra dvArA oNparezana
tathA davA ke lepa Adi dvArA ThIka hotA hai  /  ata: usake ghAva ke miTane meM,
ThIka hone meM aujAra aura davA hI kAraNa hai, dUsare padArtha kAraNa nahIM hai
/  sthANu-eka DhUMTha ko jisakA usa ghAva ke acche hone meM kucha bhI saMbaMdha
nahIM hai use usa ghAva ke acche hone kA kAraNa kyoM nahIM mAna lete  /  isaliye
jisa padArtha kA jo kAraNa dRSTigocara hotA hai, use usakA kAraNa svIkAra na
kara, jo usakA kAraNa hI nahIM hai, use usakA kAraNa mAna lenA nyAyya nahIM hai
/  nyAya tathA yuktipUrNa nahIM hai  /  isI saMdarbha meM jo devakula-
devasthAna, AvaTTa-kuMA yA gaDhDhA Adi kA jo racayitA hai vaha saMsthAna avayava
sahita hai, avyApaka aura anitya hai aisA dRSTigocara hotA haiM isalie unake
dRSTAnta se . jisa Izvara ko pramANita karate haiM, vaha saMsthAna avayava
sahita hai, avyApaka aura anitya hai aisA dRSTi gocara hotA hai  /  isaliye
unake dRSTAnta meM jisa Izvara ko pramANita karate haiM vaha saMsthAna yukta-
aMgopAMga yukta avyApakavyApakatA rahita tathA nityatva rahita siddha hotA hai
/  isake pratikUla arthAt saMsthAna varjita-avayava rahita, vyApaka, tathA nitya
Izvara ko siddha karane ke liye koI dRSTAnta prApta nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /
anumAna dvArA vaisA siddha nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  jisa prakAra yaha kAryatva
rUpa hetu Izvara ko pramANita karane hetu sakSama nahIM hai-isase Izvara kI
siddhi nahIM ho sakatI  /  isI prakAra pahale sthita hokara pravRtta honA Adi jo
hetu batAye gaye haiM ve bhI Izvara ko siddha nahIM kara sakate  /  aisA yahAM
samajha lenA cAhiye kyoMki ve hetu bhI kAryatva rUpa hetu ke sadRza hI hai, ve
abhipsita artha ke sAdhaka nahIM haiM  /  jo yaha pahale kahA ki yaha loka
prakRti Adi dvArA racita hai, vaha bhI yakti saMgata nahIM hai  /  prazna
upasthita hotA hai ki prakRti mUrta-sAkAra hai yA amUrta-nirAkAra hai  /  yadi
vaha amUrta-nirAkAra hai to usase mUrta-sAkAra samudra Adi utpanna nahIM ho
sakate, amUrta AkAra isakA udAharaNa hai, jisase koI bhI vastu utpanna hotI huI
dRSTigocara nahIM hotI  /  ataH mUrta aura amUrta kA Apasa meM kArya kAraNa
bhAva siddha nahIM hotA arthAt amUrta mUrta kI niSpatti meM kAraNa nahIM bana
sakatA  /  yadi prakRti mUrta-sAkAra hai to vaha kisase | 104

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The question arises regarding the authority of the statement about the self-
existent nature of the universe. It cannot be said that it is self-existent,
because if it is assumed to be self-existent, then why can't the world also be
considered self-existent? It cannot be said that it is created by something
else, because if we assume that, then the chain of creation will continue
indefinitely, leading to the fallacy of infinite regress. Therefore, just as you
consider nature to be uncreated and eternal, why can't the world also be
considered uncreated and eternal? You call the state of equilibrium of the three
qualities, sattva, rajas, and tamas, as nature. You do not accept the creation
of the subtle elements, etc., from that unaltering, unchanging nature. You state
that the world is created from nature that is subject to change and alteration,
but that which is unchanging and unaltering cannot be nature. Therefore, it is
illogical to accept the creation of the subtle elements, etc., from nature.
Nature is devoid of consciousness and awareness, then how can it be motivated to
fulfill the purpose of the soul, which would enable the soul to become the
experiencer and make the creation of the universe possible? If it is said that
it is the nature of nature to be motivated to fulfill the purpose of the soul,
even though it is unconscious, then nature itself would be weaker than its
nature, because nature controls it. In such a situation, why don't you accept
nature itself as the cause of the world? Then what is the significance of the
concept of an unseen nature, etc.? If you say that by the word "adi"
(beginning), you also accept nature as one of the causes of the world, let them
accept it, there is no harm in that. Accepting nature as the cause of the world
does not pose any obstacle to the beliefs of the Arhats (Jain saints), because
one's own nature is called "svabhava" (nature). Jains also accept the creation
of substances. There is no fault in accepting the view of those who believe in
determinism, who have stated that this world is created by destiny, because the
way a substance is, its being in that way, its being fixed in that form, is
destiny. Upon reflection, it does not appear to be anything other than nature.
The earlier statement that this world is created by the self-existent is also
not consistent. What is self-existent? What is its meaning? Consider this.
"Self-existent" is that which exists by itself. According to this, when they are
self-existent, when they exist independently, do they exist independently
without the need for any other cause? Is that why they are called self-existent?
Is that why they are eternal? If they are called self-existent because they
exist by themselves, then why don't you accept the world as also being self-
existent? Then what is the need to accept the self-existent? If they are called
self-existent because they are eternal, then they cannot be the creators of the
world, because that which is eternal is permanent, and that which is permanent
is unchanging. Therefore, it is not possible for such eternal self-existent
beings to be the creators of the world. If you say that they are self-existent,
devoid of attachment, etc., then they cannot be the creators of this diverse
world. If, contrary to being devoid of attachment, you consider them to have
attachment, etc., then they are just like us worldly beings, not the creators of
the universe. Similarly, one should also consider the collection of concrete and
abstract alternatives. The statement that the self-existent created Yama (the
god of death), and Yama destroys the world, is also a kind of delusion, because
it has already been said that the self-existent cannot be the creator of this
world. Whoever has stated that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH utpanna huI yaha prazna uThatA hai  /  vaha svayaM
hI utpanna huI ho, aisA nahIM kahA jA sakatA kyoMki usakA svayaM utpanna honA
mAnA jAya to yaha loka bhI svayaM utpanna huA aisA kyoM nahIM mAnA jA sakatA  /
yaha bhI nahIM kahA jA sakatA ki yaha prakRti kisI anya se utpanna hai kyoMki
aisA mAnane para yaha utpatti krama Age se Age bar3hatA jAyagA  /  aisA hone se
anavasthA doSa AyegA  /  isaliye jaise prakRti ko anutpanna aura anAdi mAnate ho
isI taraha loka ko bhI anutpanna anAdi kyoM nahIM mAnA jA sakatA  /  sattva,
raja aura tama-ina tIna guNoM kI sAmyAvasthA ko Apa prakRti kahate haiM  /  usa
avikRta-vikAra rahita prakRti se mahat Adi padArthoM kI utpatti mAnanA Apako
iSTa nahIM hai-vaisA Apa nahIM mAnate  /  vikRta-vikAra yukta prakRti se hI
jagata kI utpatti hotI hai, aisA Apa pratipAdita karate haiM kintu jo vikRta-
vikAra rahita hai vaha prakRti nahIM ho sakatI, isaliye prakRti se mahat Adi
tattvoM kI utpatti mAnanA ayuktiyukta hai| prakRti acetana-cetanA rahita hai,
taba vaha puruSa-AtmA kA artha-prayojana siddha karane ke liye kaise saMpravRtta
ho sakatI hai jisa dvArA AtmA kA bhI bhoktRtva siddha hokara sRSTi kI racanA
saMbhava ho ske| yadi aisA kahA jAya ki acetana hone ke bAvajUda prakRti kA-
puruSa kA prayojana siddha karane hetu pravRtta honA svabhAva hai, aisA mAnane
para to prakRti se svabhAva hI balavattara hogA kyoMki vaha prakRti ko bhI apane
niyamana-niyaMtraNa meM rakhatA hai  /  aisI sthiti meM Apa svabhAva ko hI
jagata kA kAraNa kyoM nahIM mAna lete phira adRSTa prakRti Adi kI kalpanA kI kyA
sArthakatA hai| yadi Apa aisA kahate ho ki Adi zabda dvArA svabhAva ko bhI koI
eka jagata kA kAraNa mAnate haiM, unako vaisA mAnane do, koI harja nhiiN|
svabhAva ko jagata kA kAraNa svIkAra karane para ArhatoM-jainoM kI mAnyatA meM
koI bAdhA upasthita nahIM hotI kyoMki sva-apane bhAva ko arthAt apanI utpatti ko
svabhAva kahA jAtA hai  /  padArthoM kA utpanna honA jaina bhI mAnate haiM  /
niyativAda meM AsthAvAna janoM ne jo pratipAdita kiyA ki yaha loka niyati dvArA
niSpAdi sA unake isa pakSa meM bhI-aisA mAnane meM bhI koI doSa nahIM AtA kyoMki
jo padArtha jaisA hai usakA vaisA honA-usa rUpa meM niyata honA niyati hai  /
cintana karane para yaha niyati svabhAva ke atirikta aura kucha ho, aisA pratIta
nahIM hotA  /  pahale jo yaha pratipAdita kiyA gayA ki yaha loka svayaMbhU dvArA
pratipAdita kiyA gayA, yaha bhI saMgata nahIM hai  /  svayaMbhU kyA hai ? usakA
kyA tAtparya hai| vicAra kareM  /  svayaMbhavati iti svayaMbhU-jo svayaM hote
haiM ve svayaMbhU kahalAte haiM  /  isake anusAra jaba ve svayaMbhU hote haiM-
svayaM astitva bhAvApanna hote haiM usa samaya kyA kisI anya kAraNa kI apekSA ke
binA hI svataMtra rUpa se vaisA hote hai ? kyA isaliye ve svayaMbhU kahalAte
haiM, kyA isIliye anAdi hai yadi ve apane Apa hone ke kAraNa svayaMbhU kahalAte
haiM to isI prakAra isa loka kA bhI svayaM-apane Apa utpanna honA, kyoM nahIM
svIkAra kara lete, taba svayaMbhU ko mAnane kI kyA AvazyakatA rahatI hai  /
yadi ve svayaMbhU anAdi hone ke kAraNa svayaMbhU kahalAte haiM to phira ve loka
ke sraSTA nahIM ho sakate kyoMki jo anAdi hotA hai, vaha nitya hotA hai, jo
nitya hotA hai eka rUpAtmaka hotA hai  /  ataeva vaise nitya svayaMbhU loka ke
sarjaka ho sake, yaha saMbhava nahIM hai  /  yadi kaho ve svayaMbhUvItarAga-
rAgAdi zUnya hai, yadi aisA hai to isa vicitratAyukta jagata ke racayitA nahIM
ho sakate  /  yadi vItarAga ke viparIta unheM sarAga-rAgAdi sahita mAnate haiM
to ve hama sAMsArika logoM ke samAna hI hai, vizva ke kartA nahIM ho skte| isI
prakAra mUrta, amUrta Adi vikalpoM kA bhI samAhAra kara lenA cAhiye jo yaha kahA
gayA ki svayaMbhU ne yamarAja kI utpatti kI, yamarAja hI loka ko mAratA hai,
yaha bhI eka prakAra se pralApa hI hai kyoMki yaha kahA jA cukA hai ki svayaMbhU
isa saMsAra kA sraSTA ho nahIM sakatA  /  kisI ne jo yaha pratipAdita (105

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is not logical to say that this world originated from an egg or emerged
gradually. Because the water in which the egg was produced was already present
before the egg, only then could the egg be deposited in it. Similarly, there is
no obstacle in believing that this world was also produced without an egg. Why
doesn't Brahma create this world while he is creating the egg? Therefore, this
idea of an egg is illogical. What is its purpose? If you say that Brahma creates
this world without an egg, well, that is correct. Then there is one thing,
someone has said that Brahmins were born from Brahma's mouth, Kshatriyas from
his arms, Vaishyas from his thighs, and Shudras from his feet. This statement is
also not logical because the birth of anyone from the mouth, etc., is not
evident - it is not visible. If this were the case, there would be no difference
between the Brahmin, etc., classes. They would not be different because they are
all born from the same Brahma. Along with this, there would be no difference
between the Kauth, Taittiriya, and Kalap, etc., of the Brahmins because if all
the Brahmins were born from Brahma's mouth, then how can there be a difference?
In addition to this, the Upanayana ceremony, marriage ceremony, etc., of the
Brahmins would also not be possible. If this were to happen, then taking the
hand of one's own sister would also be acceptable. Since there are many such
flaws, accepting the birth of the world from Brahma's mouth, etc., is not
acceptable. Therefore, it is proven that the aforementioned - previously
discussed - opinion holders do not know the true nature of this world.
Therefore, they present false statements - they present false truths.  This
world is above, below, and fourteen rajjus in length. Its shape is like a man
standing with his hands on his waist, dancing in a Vaishkhastan - a place for
entertainment or a theater. This world is like a squeezed gourd placed upside
down with its mouth facing down, and it is composed of seven lower worlds. It is
composed of countless islands and oceans, with the middle world as its base,
which is shaped like a plate. In its upper part, like the belly of a gourd, is
the upper world. In this world, Dharmaastikaya, Adharmaastikaya, Akashaastikaya,
Pudgalastikaya, and Jeevaastikaya are pervasive. These are identical, according
to the Dravyarthik Nay, they are eternal from the point of view of substance,
and according to the Paryayaatmak Nay, they are momentary - changing from moment
to moment. It is composed of production, destruction, and permanence. Therefore,
it is the nature of substance. The soul and karma are connected from time
immemorial. Therefore, this world is connected to various types of births and
deaths - coming and going, etc. The liberated soul, free from the eight types of
karma, resides in the Lokan - at the end of this world. Those who do not know
the true nature of this world, those other opinion holders, speak falsely - they
present false truths.  **Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.**
**Samutpadamajananta, kaham nayanti sanvaram?** ||10||  **Chhaya -
Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham
jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Anuvaad - Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.**
**Samutpadamajananta, katham jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation -
Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham
jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation - Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva
vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation -
Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham
jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation - Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva
vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation -
Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham
jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation - Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva
vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation -
Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham
jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation - Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva
vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation -
Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham
jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation - Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva
vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation -
Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham
jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation - Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva
vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation -
Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham
jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation - Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva
vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation -
Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham
jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation - Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva
vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation -
Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham
jnasyanta sanvaram?**  **Translation - Amanojnasamutpadam dukkhameva
vijnaniya.** **Samutpadamajananta, katham jnasyanta sanvar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kiyA ki yaha saMsAra aNDe se nikalA hai, kramazaH
prakaTa huA hai, aisA kahanA bhI nyAya saMgata nahIM hai  /  kyoMki jisa pAnI
meM aMDA paidA kiyA, vaha pAnI to aMDe ke binA pahale se hI utpanna thA, tabhI
to usameM aMDA nidhApita kiyA jA sakA  /  usI prakAra yaha jagata bhI aMDe ke
binA hI utpanna huA, aisA mAnane meM koI bAdhA nahIM AtI  /  brahmA jaba taka
aMDe kA nirmANa karate haiM taba taka isaloka kA hI nirmANa kyoM nahIM kara dete
haiM  /  ataH yaha aMDe kI kaSTa kalpanA ayuktiyukta hai  /  isakA kyA prayojana
hai ? yadi aisA kahate ho ki aMDe ke binA hI brahmA isa loka kI sRSTi karate
haiM  /  khaira aisA hI sahI  /  phira eka bAta hai kisI ne kahA hai ki brahmA
ke mukha se brAhmaNa, bhujAoM se kSatriya, jaMghAoM se vaizya tathA pairoM se
zUdra utpanna hue  /  yaha pratipAdana bhI yuktisaMgata nahIM hotA kyoMki mukha
Adi se kisI kA utpanna honA upalakSita nahIM hotA-dRSTigocara nahIM hotA  /
yadi aisI hI bAta ho to brAhmaNAdi vargoM kA paraspara abheda hogA  /  ve bhinna
bhinna nahIM raheMge kyoMki ve eka hI brahmA se utpanna haiM  /  isake sAtha
sAtha brAhmaNoM kA kaTha, taitirIyaka tathA kalApa Adi bheda nahIM ho sakeMge
kyoMki jaba sabhI brAhmaNa brahmA ke mukha se utpanna hue to phira bheda kaisA ?
isake atirikta brAhmaNoM kA upanayana saMskAra, vivAha saMskAra Adi bhI saMbhava
nahIM hoNge| aisA hone para apanI bahina ke sAtha pANigrahaNa karanA bhI mAnya
hogA  /  isa prakAra aneka doSa hone ke kAraNa brahmA ke mukha Adi se loka kI
utpatti mAnanA svIkAra karane yogya nahIM hai  /  isaliye yaha sAbita hotA hai
ki pUrvokta-pahale carcita matavAdI isa loka kA vAstavika svarUpa nahIM jAnate
haiM  /  ataeva ve mithyA pratipAdita karate haiM (yaha loka urdhva-Upara adhaH
nIce, caturdaza raju pramANa hai  /  isakA AkAra vaizAkhAsthAna-raMgazAlA yA
nATyazAlA meM kamara para hAtha rakhakara nRtya karane hetu khaDe hue puruSa ke
samAna hai  /  yaha jagata nIce mukha kiye hue audhe rakhe hue sikore ke samAna
AkAra yukta adhopI sAta loko se samAyukta hai  /  asaMkhyAta dvIpa tathA sAgaroM
ke AdhAra sthala thAlI ke samAna AkAra vAle madhya loka se yukta hai  /  sikoroM
kI peTI ke samAna isake UparI bhAga meM urdhva loka hai  /  isa loka meM
dharmAstikAya, adharmAstikAya, AkAzAstikAya, pudgalAstikAya, evaM jIvAstikAya
parivyApta hai  /  ye tadAtmaka hai, dravyArthika naya ke anusAra dravyatva kI
dRSTi se yaha nitya hai tathA paryAyAtmaka dRSTi se kSaNakSayI-kSaNa kSaNa
parivartita hone vAlA hai  /  yaha utpAda, vyaya evaM dhrovya-dhruvatA se yukta
hai  /  ataeva yaha dravya svarUpa hai  /  jIva aura karma anAdi kAla se
saMbaddha haiN| ataeva yaha loka aneka prakAra ke bhava prapaMcoM se-janma
maraNAdi-AvAgamana Adi se jur3A hai  /  ATha prakAra ke karmoM se rahita mukti
prApta jIva lokAna meM-isake anta meM avasthita hai| jagata ke isa yathArtha
svarUpa ko jo nahIM jAnate ve itara matavAdI asatya bhASaNa karate haiM-mithyA
tattvoM kA pratipAdana karate haiM  /  amaNunnasamuppAyaM, dukkhameva vijANiyA
/  samuppAMyamajANaMtA, kahaM nAyaMti saMvaraM ?  // 10 //  chAyA -
amanojJasamutpAdaM duHkhameva vijAnIyAt  /  samutpAdamajAnantaH kathaM jJAsyanti
saMvaram  //  anuvAda - amanojJa-azubha karma se hI duHkha utpanna hotA hai jo
vyakti du:kha ke utpanna hone kA kAraNa nahIM jAnate  /  ve du:kha ke saMvaraNa-
nAza kA upAya kaise jAna sakate haiM  /  106

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Right Time to Speak Out  **Commentary**  Now, to prove the ignorance of
those who believe in the teachings of the Devoptavada and others, and to show
them the consequences of their beliefs, the author says:  "What is pleasing to
the mind, what is beautiful, is called *manojña*. *Manojña* means what is good
and pleasant. What is not *manojña* is called *amanojña*. *Amanojña* means wrong
conduct or evil karma. The suffering that arises from *amanojña* karma or wrong
conduct is called *amanojña samudaya*. The word 'evam' here means 'thus'. It
should be understood in this way: suffering arises only from wrong conduct or
evil karma. A wise person should understand this. This means that suffering
arises only from one's own wrong conduct or evil karma, not from anything else.
Even though this is established, those who follow the teachings mentioned
earlier do not understand that suffering arises from wrong conduct. They believe
that suffering arises from other causes like God. How can those who believe in
such causes understand the means to stop suffering, the means to overcome
suffering?  The destruction of the cause leads to the destruction of the effect.
But they do not know the true cause of suffering. How can they strive to
eliminate suffering without knowing the cause? Even if they strive, they will
not be able to eliminate suffering. Instead, they will continue to be bound by
the cycle of birth, old age, death, separation from loved ones, and other forms
of suffering. They will continue to wander in the cycle of existence like the
wheels of a water-wheel, endlessly turning, according to the law of
*arhattaghatti*.  ## Pure Soul  **Commentary**  Some people believe that the
soul is pure, free from sin, but they commit offenses due to their attachment
and aversion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH TIkA idAnImeteSAmeva devoptAdivAdinAmajJAnitvaM
prasAdhya tatphaladidarzayiSayA''ha - mano'nukUlaM manojJaM-zobhanamanuSThAnaM
na manojJa mamanojJam asadanuSThAnaM tasmAdutpAdaH prAdurbhAvo yasya duHkhasya
tadamanojJasamutpAdam, evakAro'vadhAraNe, sa caivaM saMbandhanIyaH
amanojJasamutpAdameva duHkhamityevaM vijAnIyAdavagacchetprAjJaH  /
etaduktambhavatisvakRtAsadanuSThAnAdeva duHkhasyodbhavo bhavati nAnyasmAditi,
evaM vyavasthite'pi sati anantaroktavAdino'sadanuSThAnodbhavasya duHkhasya
samutpAdamajAnAnAH santo'nyata IzvarAde duHkhasyotpAdamicchanti, te caiva
micchantaH kathaM kena prakAreNa duHkhasya saMvaraM duHkhapratighAta hetuM
jJAsyanti  /  nidAnocchedena hi nidAnina ucchedo bhavati  /  te ca nidAnameva na
jAnanti, taccAjAnAnAH kathaM duHkhocchedAya yatiSyante ? yatnavanto'pi ca naiva
duHkhocchedanamavApsyanti, api tu saMsAra eva janmajarAmaraNeSTa viyogAdyaneka
duHkhavrAtAghAtAH bhUyobhUyo'rahadRghaTInyAyenAnantamapi kAlaM saMsthAsyanti  //
10  //  kA isa samaya devoptavAda Adi meM vizvAsa rakhane vAle anyatIrthikoM kA
ajJAnitva - ajJAnI pana siddha kara aba AgamakAra unako jo phala prApta hotA
hai, usakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM I 1 jo mana ke anukUla - mana ko
acchA lagane vAlA hotA hai, use manojJa kahate haiM  /  manojJa kA tAtparya.
zobhana -suhAvanA yA sundara hai  /  jo manojJa nahIM hai use amanojJa kahA jAtA
hai, amanojJa kA artha asat anuSThAna yA azubha karma hai  /  jisa amanojJa
karma yA asat anuSThAna se jo utpanna hotA hai use amanojJa samutpAda kahA jAtA
hai |'evN' zabda yahAM avadhAraNA ke artha meM hai  /  usakA sambandha isa
taraha jor3anA cAhiye -asat anuSThAna yA azubha karma karane se hI duHkha paidA
hotA hai  /  jJAnI yA buddhimAna ko yaha samajhanA cAhiye -isakA abhiprAya yaha
hai ki apane dvArA kRta-AcArita asat anuSThAna - azubha karma se hI duHkha kI
niSpatti hotI hai  /  kisI anya se nahIM hotI  /  aisI sthiti hone ke bAvajUda
pUrva varNita matavAdI aisA nahIM mAnate ki asat anuSThAna se duHkha utpanna
hotA hai  /  Izvara Adi anya padArthoM hetuoM dvArA duHkha kA utpanna honA
mAnate haiM  /  isa prakAra duHkha kA niSpanna honA mAnane vAle duHkha ke vinAza
kA kAraNa kaise jAna sakate haiN| kArya kA nAza tabhI hotA hai jaba kAraNa kA
nAza ho, kintu ve anya saiddhAntika duHkhotpatti ke yathArtha hetu ko nahIM
jAnate, jaba ve duHkha ke kAraNa ko nahIM jAnate to duHkha ke uccheda ke liye
kisa prakAra prayatna kara sakate haiM  /  yadi ve duHkha nAza kA prayatna bhI
kareM to unakA duHkha miTa nahIM sakatA  /  varan janma, vRddhAvasthA, mRtyu,
priya viyoga Adi aneka prakAra ke duHkha samUha Ahata hote hue ve '
arahaTTaghaTTI nyAya' se anavarata cakkara kATane vAle rahaMTa ke ghar3oM kI
taraha anantakAla taka saMsAra meM par3e raheMge  /  - suddhe puNo chAyA -
ihamegesimAhiyaM  /  avarajjhaI  // 11 //  apAvae AyA, kiDDApadoseNaM so tattha
zuddho'pApaka AtmA, ihaikeSAmAkhyAtam  /  punaH krIDApradveSeNa sa
tatrAparAdhyati  //  anuvAda - kinhIM matavAdiyoM kA isa saMsAra meM aisA
mantavya hai ki AtmA zuddha hai, apApaka- pAparahita hai, kintu vaha
krIDApradveSa- rAga tathA dveSa bhAva ke kAraNa aparAdha karatI hai-karma baddha
hotI hai  /  107

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  The commentator, explaining the view of the
Kritavadins in a different way, says: Here, in this proposition of the
Kritavadins, there are three categories of the soul, which are called
*trairasika*. According to the followers of Goshalak, there are twenty-one
sutras, arranged according to the previous *trairasika* sutra tradition. They
say that this soul, being pure, becomes a human being, and by becoming pure in
conduct, becomes free from all impurities and blemishes, and becomes free from
sin in liberation. This means that all its karmas are eliminated. This is stated
by some followers of Goshalak. Again, that soul, being in the state of two
categories, purity and non-action, becomes attached to passion or hatred in
liberation itself, and becomes stained by the dust of karma. This means that,
seeing the worship of his own sect and the defeat of other sects, he experiences
joy, and seeing the disrespect of his own sect, he experiences hatred. Thus,
that soul, being attached to passion and hatred, gradually becomes stained by
the dust of karma, like a clean cloth becomes stained by use. And being stained
by karma, it is reborn in the world again due to the weight of karma. In this
state, it becomes the third category, the state of being active. || 11 ||  The
commentator further explains:  Here, the Muni, born in this world, becomes free
from sin. Just as pure water becomes impure, so too does he become impure by
sinful actions. || 12 ||  **Translation:**  A being born in this world, becomes
a Muni, following the rules of Yama and Niyama, and becomes free from sin. But
just as pure water becomes impure, so too does he become impure by sinful
actions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA sAmprataM prakArAntareNa
kRtavAdimatamevopanyasyannAha - iha asmin kRtavAdiprastAve trairAzikA : gozAlaka
matAnusAriNo yeSAmekaviMzatisUtrANi pUrvagata trairAzikasUtraparipATyA
vyavasthitAni  /  te evaM vadanti yathA'yamAtmA zuddho manuSyabhava
evazuddhAcAro bhUtvA apagatAzeSamalakalaGkI mokSe'pApako bhavati - apagatA
zeSakarmA bhavatItyarthaH  /  idamekeSAM gozAlakamatAnusAriNAmAkhyAtam  /
punarasAvAtmA zuddhatvAkarmakatva rAzidvayAvastho bhUtvA krIDayA pradveSeNavA sa
tatra mokSastha eva aparAdhyati rajasA zliSyate  /  idamuktaM bhavati tasya hi
svazAsana pUjA mupalabhyAnyazAsanaparAbhava zcopalabhya krIDotpadyate - pramoda
: saJjAyate, svazAsananyakkAra darzanAcca dveSaH, tato'sau
krIDAdveSAbhyAmanugatAntarAtmA zanaiH zanairnirmalapaTavadupabhujya mAno rajasA
malinIkriyate  /  malIyasazca karmagauravAdbhUyaH saMsAre'vatarati  /
asyAJcAvasthAyAM sakarmakatvA tRtIyarAzyavastho bhavati  //  11  //  TIkArtha
aba AgamakAra eka anya prakAra se kRtavAdiyoM ke mata ko pratipAdita karate hue
batalAte haiM - yahAM - isa jagata meM jo AtmA kI tIna rAziyAM yA avasthAeM
batalAte haiM unheM trairAzika kahA jAtA hai| gauzAlaka ke siddhAntAnuyAyI aisA
AtmA kI tIna rAziyAM mAnate haiN| ina zramaNoM ke pUrvagata trairAzika sUtroM kI
paripATI ke anurupa ikkIsa sUtra haiN| ve aisA kahate haiM ki yaha AtmA manuSya
bhava-mAnava kI yoni meM hI zuddha AcAravAna hokara samagra mala kalaMka -
karmakAlimA se vimukta hokara niSpApa ho jAtI hai  /  mokSa pA letI hai  /
usake samasta karma apagata ho jAte haiN| aisA katipaya gauzAlaka mata anuyAyI
pratipAdita karate haiN| isa taraha vaha AtmA zuddhattva, akarmatva rUpa do
rAziyoM meM avasthAoM meM sthita hokara punaH rAga athavA dveSa ke kAraNa mokSa
meM hI karmaraja se kArmaNa pudgaloM se lipta ho jAtI hai  /  isakA abhiprAya
yaha hai ki use apane zAsana, dharma sampradAya kI pUjA-satkAra aura dUsaroM ke
dharma sampradAya kA tiraskAra anAdara dekha kara pramoda harSa utpanna hotA hai
tathA apane dharma sampradAya kA tiraskAra dekhakara dveSa hotA hai| isa prakAra
vaha AtmA rAga dveSa se lipta ho jAtI hai  /  jaise upabhoga karane se kAma meM
lene se nirmala vastra - sApha kapar3A malina ho jAtA hai, usI prakAra kramazaH
vaha AtmA karmoM kI raja se karma pudgaloM se malina ho jAtI hai  /  yoM karma
malina hokara AtmA karmoM ke bhArIpana ke kAraNa punaH saMsAra meM avatarita
hotI hai - janma letI hai| isa avasthA meM, karma yukta hone ke kAraNa AtmA
tIsarI rAzi kI avasthA ko arthAt sakarmAvasthA - karmayukta avasthA ko pA hai  /
iha saMvuDe muNI jAe, pacchA hoi apAvae  /  viyaDaMbu jahA bhujjo, nIrayaM
sarayaM tahA  // 12 //  chAyA - iha saMvRto munirjAtaH pazvAdbhavatyapApakaH  /
vikaTAmbu yathA bhUyo nIrajaskaM sarajaskaM tathA  //  anuvAda - koI eka prANI
isa saMsAra meM - manuSya jIvana meM saMvRta-saMvara, yama niyama yukta hotA huA
apApaka- pAparahita muni dharma apanAtA hai, kintu jaise svaccha pAnI Age jAkara
malina-gaMdA ho jAtA hai  /  usI prakAra vaha puruSa bhI pApAcaraNa se malina ho
jAtA hai  /  108

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(Self-time statement of authority) _Commentary - Now, to refute this objection,
it is said - Indeed, in this human birth, having obtained it, having entered
into the order of renunciation, having become a self-controlled soul, having
become devoted to the rules, afterwards he becomes free from sin - the taint of
all karma is removed, meaning that he becomes free from karma-obstruction. Then,
by igniting his own discipline, he becomes liberated. Again, due to seeing the
worship and respect of his own discipline, and due to the arising of attachment
and aversion, the inner self, which was previously pure, becomes polluted like
water, which, though initially clear, becomes muddy due to contact with dust
particles carried by the wind. Just as that self becomes polluted, so too this
self, after an infinite period of time, having become free from the world,
having become established in pure conduct, then, upon attaining liberation,
becomes free from karma. Again, due to seeing the worship and respect of his own
discipline, attachment and aversion arise, and he becomes bound by karma. Thus,
the self is said to be in three states, like the three terms of a rule of three.
It is said: "The fuel that has been burnt does not burn again, Having destroyed
the world, liberation is not to be feared. Having become liberated himself, and
having become a hero for the sake of others, How can there be a kingdom of
delusion in those who have resisted your discipline? ||12||" Commentary - Now,
the author of the scripture says, to refute this view: The being who obtains
human life, accepts the renunciation-initiation, becomes a self-controlled soul,
devoted to the rules of restraint. Afterwards, he becomes free from sin - free
from sin. All his karmic taint - karmic defects are erased - he becomes free
from karma-obstruction. After this, by igniting his own discipline - the
religious community - making it bright, by influencing it, he attains
liberation. But then, seeing the worship, respect, and honor of his own
religion, he becomes attached, and seeing disrespect or insult, he becomes
averse. Thus, due to the arising of attachment and aversion, his soul becomes
polluted. Just as pure water is initially clear, then it becomes muddy due to
contact with dust particles carried by the wind. This means that after an
infinite period of time, the being becomes detached from the world, engaged in
the practice of pure conduct, and becoming like that, he attains liberation -
becomes free from karma. But he again becomes attached seeing the praise of his
own religion or sect, and becomes averse seeing neglect. Due to attachment and
aversion, he becomes bound by karma. Thus, according to the rule of three, the
soul attains three states or conditions. It is said: "O Lord! What a kingdom of
delusion reigns over those men who do not accept your discipline. They
ignorantly assert that the liberated being, free from karma, returns to the
world. They say this under the influence of delusion. The wood that has been
burnt does not burn again. Similarly, the being who becomes liberated after
destroying the world does not return to the world. But they, other theorists,
believe that even after liberation, the being returns to the world. What a
wonder! Such people dare to liberate others." _These are the views of the wise,
They do not dwell in celibacy. All these preachers are different, Each one
proclaims his own view. ||13||_ Commentary - The wise, the knowers of the truth
of religion, having reflected on the doctrines of these other Tirthankaras, have
decided that they do not practice celibacy - restraint. All these preachers are
different, each one proclaiming his own view as the truth. 109

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH) _TIkA - adhunaitaduSayitumAha - kiJca-iha asmin
manuSyabhave prAptaH san pravrajyAmabhyupetya saMvRtAtmAyama niyamarato jAtaH
san pazcAdapApo bhavati-apagatAzeSakarma kalaGko bhavatIti bhAvaH  /  tataH
svazAsanaM prajvAlya muktyavastho bhavati  /  punarapi
svazAsanapUjAdarzanAnnikAropalabdhezca rAgadveSodayAt kaluSitAntarAtmA
vikaTAmbuvad udakavannIrajaskaM sadvAtoddhatareNunivahasampRktaM sarajaskaM-
malinaM bhUyo yathA bhavati tathA'yamapyAtmA'nantena kAlena saMsAro
dvegAcchudvAcAravastho bhUtvA tato mokSAvAptau satyAmakarmAvastho bhavati  /
punaH zAsanapUjAnikAradarzanAdrAgadveSodayAt sakarmA bhavatIti  /  evaM
trairAzikAnAM rAzitrayAvastho bhavatyAtmetyAkhyAtam  /  uktaJca "dagdhendhanaH
punarupaiti bhavaM pramathya, nirvANamapyanavadhAritabhIrUniSTham  /  muktaH
svayaM kRtabhavazca parArthazUrastvacchAsanapratihateSviha moharAjyam ?  // 12
//  TIkArtha - aba AgamakAra isa mata ko doSamukta batAne hetu kahate haiM - jo
prANI manuSya jIvana prApta kara pravrajyA-dIkSA svIkAra karatA hai saMvRtAtmA-
saMvara yukta yama niyama nirata hotA hai  /  pazcAt vaha apApa-pApa rahita ho
jAtA hai  /  usakA samasta karmakalaMka-karmadoSa miTa jAtA hai-vaha karmAvaraNa
rahita ho jAtA hai  /  isake pazcAt apane zAsana ko-dharma saMgha ko
pravajvalita kara-ujjavala banAkara usakI prabhAvanA kara muktAvasthA pA letA
hai, kintu phira apane dharma zAsana kI pUjA pratiSThA sammAna dekhakara
rAgayukta hotA hai tathA tiraskAra yA apamAna dekhakara dveSa yukta hotA hai  /
isa prakAra rAga dveSa ke utpanna hone se usakI AtmA kaluSita hotI hai  /  jaise
nirmala jala pahale svaccha hotA hai, phira vaha havA ke dvArA uDAye gaye
rajakaNoM ke saMyoga se malina-gaMdA ho jAtA hai  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki
ananta kAla ke anantara jIva saMsAra se virata hokara zuddha AcAra ke paripAlana
meM saMlagna hotA hai tathA vaisA hotA huA vaha mokSa ko prApta karatA hai-karma
rahita ho jAtA hai kintu vaha punaH apane zAsana yA sampradAya kI prazasti
dekhakara rAga karatA hai tathA avahelanA dekhakara dveSa karatA hai  /  rAga
dveSa ke kAraNa vaha karma sahita ho jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra trairAzika
siddhAnta meM AtmA tIna rAziyoM yA avasthAoM ko prApta karatI hai  /  kahA gayA
hai - he prabhu ! Apake zAsana ko nahIM mAnane vAle puruSoM para moha kA kaisA
sAmrAjya chAyA hai  /  ve ajJAnI nirupita karate haiM ki mukta-karmoM se chUTA
huA jIva punaH saMsAra meM AtA hai  /  moha ke prabhAvavaza hI ve aisA kahate
haiM  /  jo kATha jala jAtA hai, vaha punaH nahIM jltaa| isI prakAra saMsAra kA
pramathanakara jo jIvamukta ho jAtA hai, vaha phira saMsAra meM nahIM AtA kintu
ve anya saiddhAntika aisA mAnate haiM ki mukta hone para bhI jIva punaH saMsAra
meM AtA hai, kaisA Azcarya hai  /  aise loga dUsare ko mukti dilAne kA duHsAhasa
karate haiN| etANuvIti mehAvI, baMbhacereNa te vase  /  puDhopAvAuyA savve,
akkhAyAro sayaMsayaM  // 13 //  chAyA - etAnanucintya meghAvI, brahmacarye na
tevaseyuH  /  pRthak prAvAdukAH sarve AkhyAtAraH svakaM svakam  //  anuvAda -
medhAvI-buddhimAna-dharmatattvavettA ina anya tIrthiyoM ke siddhAntoM para
anucintana kara yaha nizcita mAne ki ye brahmacarya-saMyama kA pAlana nahIM
karate haiM tathA ye sabhI prAvAduka-apane vAda ko hI yathArtha mAnate hue use
pratipAdita karate haiM, uttama batalAte haiM  /  109

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Sutra Kritanga Sutra Commentary**  A wise and discerning person, having
considered the arguments of these previous proponents, should understand that
these proponents of the three categories of existence, and those who believe in
the world being created by the gods, do not abide in true celibacy or in the
practice of restraint.   This is because they hold the view that karma binds
liberated beings through the praise, honor, and disregard of their own
doctrines. However, the reality is that both praise and disregard of their
doctrines are inevitable, and this inevitably leads to an increase in karma. An
increase in karma leads to a lack of purification, and a lack of purification
leads to a lack of liberation.   Liberated beings, who have shed all karmic
stains, who have fulfilled their purpose, who have understood the true nature of
all things, who are indifferent to praise and blame, and who have renounced all
attachments, cannot be affected by attachment and aversion. Without attachment
and aversion, how can there be karmic bondage? And without karmic bondage, how
can liberated beings return to the cycle of existence?   Therefore, although
these proponents of false doctrines may practice celibacy in a material sense,
they are not truly engaged in the practice of restraint due to their lack of
true knowledge.   All these proponents of false doctrines, driven by their
attachment to their own views, proclaim their own doctrines as the best. But
those who have truly understood the nature of reality should not have faith in
these doctrines.   **Verse 14**  "In their own positions, there is no other
attainment than liberation.  Indeed, here alone is one who is in control, who
has surrendered all desires."  **Commentary**  This verse emphasizes that true
liberation is the only goal worth pursuing, and that it can only be achieved
through the practice of restraint and the renunciation of all desires.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - etAn pUrvoktAn vAdino'nucintya medhAvI prajJAvAn
maryAdAvyavasthito vA etadavadhArayet yathA-naite rAzitrayavAdino devoptAdiloka
vAdinazca brahmacarye tadupalakSite vA saMyamAnuSThAne vaseyuH avtisstthernniti|
tathAhi-teSAmayamabhyupagamo yathA svadarzanapUjAnikAradarzanAt karma baMdho
bhavati evaJvAvazyaM-tadarzanasya pUjayA tiraskAre Na vobhayena vAbhAvyaM
tatsambhavAcca karmopacayastadupacayAcca zuddhayabhAvaH zuddhayabhAvAcca
mokSAbhAvaH  /  na ca muktAnAmapagatAzeSakarmakalaGkAnA
kRtakRtyAnAmavagatAzeSaya-thAvasthitavastutattvAnA samastuti
nindAnAmapagatAtmAtmIyaparigrahANAM rAgadveSAnuSaGgaH tadabhAvAcca kutaH punaH
karmabandhaH ? tadvazAcca saMsArAvarataraNamityarthaH  /  ataste yadyapi
kathaJcid dravyabrahmacarye vyavasthitA stathApisamyagajJAnAbhAvAnna te
samyaganuSThAnabhAja iti sthitam  /  api 'ca sarve'pyeteprAvAdukAH svakaM svakam
AtmAyamAtmIyaM darzanaM svadarzanAnurAgAdAkhyAtAraH zobhananatvena
prakhyApayitAra iti naca tatra viditavedyenAsthA vidheyeti  // 13 //  . TIkArtha
- ina pUrvokta prAvAdukoM para, unake siddhAntoM para anucintana kara-vicArakara
buddhimAna puruSajJAnI vyakti yaha nizcaya kare ki ye trairAzikavAdI-AtmA kI
tIna rAziyAM yA avasthAeM mAnane vAle evaM isa loka ko devopta-deva dvArA racita
mAne vAle brahmacarya meM athavA saMyama ke anusaraNa-anupAlana meM saMlagna
nahIM haiM  /  ina logoM kA yaha abhyupagama-mantavya hai ki apane dharma zAsana
kI-sampradAya kI pUjA prazasti, pratiSThA tathA nikAra-tiraskAra yA avahelanA
dekhane se mukta jIvoM ko karmoM kA baMdha hotA hai kintu sthiti yaha hai ki
inake darzana kI pUjA-kIrti, prazasti tathA nikAra-tiraskAra yA apamAna ye donoM
hI hue binA nahIM rahate-kahIM na kahIM to hote hI rahate haiM aura vaisA hone
para karma kA upacaya-saMgraha yA baMdha avazya hogA  /  karmopacaya se zuddhi
kA abhAva hogA-zuddhi miTegI  /  zuddhi kA abhAva yA apagama hone se mokSa kA
bhI abhAva hogA-mokSa prApta nahIM ho sakegA  /  ataH yaha siddhAnta samIcIna
nahIM hai kyoMki jinake samasta kalaMka-kAlimA naSTa ho gaI hai tathA jo samagra
padArthoM kA saccA svarUpa jAnate haiM, jo kRtakRtya ho cuke haiM jinheM jo
karanA thA, vaha saba kara cuke haiM, jo stuti tathA niMdA ko eka samAna
samajhate haiM, yaha maiM hUM-yaha merA hai aisA parigrahAtmaka bhAva jinakA
apagata ho cukA hai, aise mukta jIvoM meM rAga dveSa utpanna honA kabhI saMbhava
nahIM hotA  /  jaba unameM rAgadveSa hIna ho-to karmabaMdha kaise ho sakatA hai
/  karmabaMdha na hone se mokSagata jIva punaH saMsAra meM kaise A sakate haiN|
ataeva isa asat yA mithyA siddhAnta meM vizvAsa karane vAle ve paramatavAdI
yadyapi dravya rUpa meM kathaJcit saMyama kA anupAlana karate haiM kintu jJAna
ke samyak na hone para ve jisameM pravRtta haiM, vaha anuSThAna bhI saMyama
apane apane darzana-siddhAntoM ke prati anurAga hone ke kAraNa ye sabhI aisA
kahate haiM ki hamAre siddhAnta sabase acche haiM kintu viditavedya-jAnane yogya
tattva ko jisane jAna liyA ho-vastu svarUpa ko yathAvata rUpeNa samajha liyA ho.
usako ina matavAdiyoM ke siddhAntoM meM zraddhA nahIM karanI cAhiye  /  sae sae
uvaTThANe, siddhimeva na annahA  /  aho iheva vasavattI savvakAmasamappie  // 14
//  chAyA - svake svake upasthAne siddhimeva nAnyathA  /  atha ihaiva vazavartI
sarvakAma samarpitaH  //  -110)

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Self-Time Statement of Authority**  The attainment of perfection is achieved
only through the establishment and practice of one's own principles, and not
through any other means. Before attaining liberation, a human being should be in
control of their senses and mind. In this way, all their desires and wishes will
be fulfilled.  **Commentary**  To show that the principles of the Āgama-kāra
(Jain scriptures) are different from those of other schools of thought, the
Āgama-kāra says that the followers of other schools, such as the Shaivas
(worshippers of Shiva) and the Ekadandīs (those who carry a single staff),
establish their own principles and practices. They believe that perfection is
achieved through their own practices, such as initiation, following the
teachings of a guru, and serving the guru's feet. They claim that perfection
cannot be attained through any other means. For example, the Shaivas believe
that liberation is attained through initiation, while the Ekadandīs believe that
liberation is attained through the knowledge of twenty-five principles.
Similarly, other schools of thought, such as the Vedantīs, believe that
perfection is attained through the practice of meditation, study, and samadhi.
In this way, each school of thought presents its own path to liberation.  The
Āgama-kāra states that before attaining liberation, which is characterized by
the cessation of all dualities (duḥkha), one attains eight types of powers in
this very life through the practice of the principles laid down in their
scriptures. The Āgama-kāra says that a person who is in control of their self
and senses is not overwhelmed by worldly desires. All their desires and wishes
are fulfilled. Before attaining liberation, a person attains eight types of
powers, which are:  * **Aṇimā:** The ability to make one's body as small as an
atom. * **Laghimā:** The ability to make one's body as light as cotton. *
**Mahimā:** The ability to make one's body as large as one desires. *
**Prākaṁya:** The ability to fulfill one's desires. * **Īśitva:** The ability to
have complete control over one's body and mind. * **Vaśitva:** The ability to
control others. * **Apratighātitva:** The ability to not be obstructed by
anything. * **Yatra-kāma-avasyāyitva:** The ability to make anything one desires
last as long as one desires.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH anuvAda apane-apane siddhAntoM ke upasthAna-
anuSThAna unake anusaraNa se hI siddhi prApta hotI hai  /  kisI anya prakAra se
nahIM  /  mokSa prApti se pahale manuSya ko vazavartI-apanI iMdriyoM va mana ko
vaza meM kara rahanA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra usakI samasta kAmanAeM - icchAeM
pUrNa hoMgI  /  - TIkA punaranyathA kRtavAdimatamupadarzayitumAha te kRtavAdinaH
zaivaika daNDi prabhRtayaH svakIye svakIye upatiSThantyasminnityupasthAnaM
svIkayamanuSThAnaM dIkSA guru caraNa zuzrUSAdikaM tasminneva siddhim azeSa
sAMsArikaprapaJcarahitasvabhAvAmabhihitavanto nAnyathA nA'nyena prakAreNa
siddhiravApyata iti tathAhi - zaivAH da eva mokSa ityevaM vyavasthitAH
ekadaNDikAstu paJcaviMzatitattvaparijJAnAnmuktirityabhihitavantaH tathA'nye'pi
vedAntikAH dhyAnAdhyayanasamAdhimArgAnuSThAnAt siddhimuktavanta ityavamanye'pi
yathAsvaM darzanAnmokSamArgaM pratipAdayantIti  /  azeSa dvandvoparamalakSaNAyAH
siddhi prApte radhastAt prAgapi yAvadadyApi siddhiprApti na bhavati tAvadihaiva
janmanyasmadIyadarzanoktAnuSThAnAnubhAvAdaSTaguNaizvaryyaM sadbhAvo bhavatIti
darzayati Atmavaze vartituM zIlamasyeti vazavartI vazendriya ityuktambhavati  /
nahyasau sAMsArikaiH svabhAvairabhibhUyate sarve kAma  /  abhilASA arpitAH
sampannA yasya sa sarvakAmasamarpito yAn yAn kAmAn kAmayate te'sya sarve
siddhayantIti yAvat, tathAhi siddherArAdaSTaguNezvaryyalakSaNA siddhi rbhavati
/  tadyathA aNimA, laghimA mahimA prAkAbhya mIzitvaM vazitvamapratighAtitvaM
yatra kAmA vasAyitvamiti  // 14 //  TIkArtha - AgamakAra kRtavAdiyoM ke
siddhAnta ko anyathA - eka aura prakAra se batAne hetu kahate haiMve kRtavAdI
zaiva- ziva ko parama deva mAnane vAle tathA eka daNDI - eka daNDa rakhane vAle
Adi apane apane siddhAntoM kA yoM pratipAdana karate haiM ki svIya anuSThAna
apane dhArmika upakrama, dIkSA grahaNa karanA, guru caraNoM kI sevA karanA Adi
apane apane anuSThAnoM se hI manuSya samagra sAMsArika prapaMcoM-jhaMjhaToM yA
duH khoM se rahita hokara mokSa prApta karatA hai  /  kisI anya prakAra ke
anuSThAna se siddhi prApta nahIM hotI (zaiva matAnuyAyI dIkSA se hI mukti
svIkAra karate haiM tathA eka daNDI paccIsa tattvoM ke jJAna se mokSa honA
svIkAra karate haiM-pratipAdita karate haiM  /  anya vedAntI yoM nirupaNa karate
haiM ki dhyAna, adhyayana tathA samAdhi kA abhyAsaanuSThAna karane se siddhi
prApta hotI hai  /  isI prakAra anyAnya dArzanika siddhAntoM meM vizvAsa karane
vAle vyakti apane-apane siddhAntoM ko mokSa kA pakSa unake anusaraNa se mokSa
prApta honA batalAte haiM  /  ve kahate haiM ki mokSa-jahAM saba prakAra ke
dvandva-duHkha samApta ho jAte haiM, ke pUrva isI janma meM hamAre siddhAntoM ke
anusaraNaanupAlana se ATha prakAra ke aizvaryoM se yukta siddhi prApta hotI hai
/  AgamakAra isI bAta ko yoM kahate haiMjo vyakti Atmavaza-apane vaza meM yA
niyantraNa meM rahatA hai, jo indriyoM ke vaza meM nahIM hotA, vaha puruSa
sAMsArika svabhAva se abhibhUta-sAMsArika sthitiyoM se prabhAvita nahIM hotA  /
usake saba kAma - abhilASAeM pUrNa hotI hai| vaha puruSa jo jo kAma-kAmanAeM -
icchAe karatA hai ve saba saphala ho jAtI haiM  /  usa vyakti ko mokSa prApta
hone se pUrva ATha prakAra kI aizvarya zAlinI siddhiyAM upalabdha hotI hai jo
aNimA - apanI deha ko paramANuoM ke sadRza sUkSma banA denA, laghimA apanI deha
ko rUI ke samAna halkA banA lenA, mahimA - apanI deha ko bar3I se bar3I kara
lenA, prAkAmya-apanI icchA ko saphala karanA ISitva - deha aura mana para pUrA
adhikAra yA niyaMtraNa pA lenA, vazitva - prANiyoM ko apane vaza meM kara lenA,
apratighAtitva- kisI bhI vastu dvArA na rokA jA sakanA tathA yatrakAmAvazAyitva-
jisa vastu kA bhoga karane kI icchA ho, use icchApUrti taka naSTa na hone denA,
isa prakAra hai  /  - 111

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra - It is said that those who are free from disease, they
are said to be Siddhas. Those who consider Siddhi as the ultimate goal, they are
bound by their own beliefs. ||15|| Commentary - Siddhas are free from disease
and are said to be free from all dualities. Those who consider Siddhi as the
ultimate goal, they are bound by their own beliefs. || Translation - Other
Tirthankaras believe that Siddhi is attained by being bound by their own
doctrines. They say that those who attain Siddhi by following our doctrines are
free from disease and suffering. _ Commentary - Thus, it is said that those who
follow our teachings attain Siddhi, which is characterized by eight qualities,
and in this world, they attain Siddhi, which is characterized by the cessation
of all dualities. - Those who follow our teachings, in this birth, attain
Siddhi, which is characterized by eight qualities, and after attaining Siddhi,
they abandon their bodies through a special type of Samadhi Yoga, and become
Siddhas, free from all dualities, and free from disease. The term "arog" is a
euphemism, meaning that they are not touched by any physical or mental
suffering, because they are free from body and mind. Thus, in this world, in the
discussion of Siddhi, some, like the Shaivas, say this. And these Shaivas,
considering Siddhi as the ultimate goal, accept liberation, and are bound by
their own beliefs, their own views, and they present arguments that support
their views. Like ordinary people, who are ignorant of the scriptures, present
arguments to achieve their desired goals, so too, these so-called scholars, who
do not know the ultimate truth, present arguments to support their own views.
And it is said - A biased person wants to use logic to prove his point, where
his mind is fixed. But a person who is free from bias, uses logic where his mind
is fixed. ||1||15|| Commentary - Other Tirthankaras say that those who follow
our teachings, in this birth, attain Siddhi, which is characterized by eight
qualities, and in the next world, they attain liberation. Where all kinds of
dualities, troubles, are removed. The Agamkaras show this. Other opinion holders
argue that those who follow the rules and practices mentioned in our philosophy,
attain Siddhi, which is characterized by eight qualities, in this birth. Then,
by practicing special Samadhi Yoga, they abandon their bodies and attain
Siddhatva. They become free from all dualities, free from suffering, and free
from disease. Here, the word "arog" is a euphemism, meaning that they are not
touched by any kind of physical or mental suffering, because they are free from
body and mind, i.e., they transcend body and mind. Shaivas, etc., present their
views on Siddhi in this way. They consider Siddhi as the ultimate goal, present
it as the main point, are attached to their own doctrines, and present arguments
that support them. Just as ordinary people, who are ignorant of the scriptures,
use logic to achieve their desired goals, so too, these Shaivas, etc., who do
not know the ultimate truth, who consider themselves scholars or knowledgeable,
use logic to prove their own biased views. It is said - A biased person, who is
fixed on his own beliefs, wants to use logic to prove his point, to twist it in
his favor. But a person who is free from bias, accepts the truth, the meaning,
or the principle that is logical. - 112)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram - siddhAyate arogA ya, ihamegesimAhiyaM  /  siddhimeva
purokAuM, sAsae gaDhiyA narA  // 15 //  chAyA - siddhAzcate'rogAzca
ihaikeSAmAkhyAtam  /   /  siddhimeva puraskRtya, svAzaye grathitAH narAH  //
anuvAda - anya tIrthika siddhi ko prApta honA apane siddhAntoM meM grathita-
gUMthA huA mAnate haiM- unhIM se vaha nikalatI hai yA prApta hotI hai  /  ve
kahate haiM ki hamAre siddhAntoM ke anusaraNa se jo siddhi prApta karate haiM,
ve aroga-roga rahita yA duHkha rahita hote haiM  /  _ TIkA -
tadevamihaivAsmaduktAnuSThAyino'STaguNaisvayaMlakSaNA, siddhirbhavatyamutra
cAzeSa dvandvoparamalakSaNA siddhirbhavatIti darzayitumAha - ye hyasmadukta
manuSThAnaM samyaganutiSThanti te'smin janmanyaSTaguNaizvaryyarUpAM
siddhimAsAdya punarviziSTa samAdhiyogena zarIratyAgaM kRtvAsiddhAzca
azeSadvandvarahitA arogA bhavanti, arogagrahaNaJcopalakSaNam aneka
zArIramAnasadvandvairnaspRzyante zarIramanasorabhAvAditi  /  evam iha asmin loke
siddhivicAre vA ekeSAM zaivAdInAmidamAkhyAtaM, te ca zaivAdayaH siddhimeva
puraskRtya muktimevAGgIkRtya svakIye Azaye svadarzanAbhyupagame grathitAH
saMbaddhA adhyupapannAstadanukUlA: yuktI: pratipAdayanti  /  narAH iva narAH
prAkRtapuruSAHzAstrAvabodhavikalA: svAbhipretArthasAdhanAya yuktIH
pratipAdayanti evaM te'pi paNDitammanyAH paramArthamajAnAnAH svAgrahaprasAdhikAH
yuktI rudghoSayantIti, tathA coktam-AgrahI vata ninISati yuktiM, tatra yatra
matirasya niviSTA  /  pakSapAtarahitasya tu yuktiryata tatra matireti nivezam
// 1 // 15 //  TIkArtha - ve anya tIrthika isa prakAra kahate haiM ki-hamAre
kathana kA-siddhAntoM kA jo anuSThAnaanupAlana karate haiM unako isI janma meM
ATha guNAtmaka aizvaryamUlaka siddhi upalabdha hotI hai tathA paraloka meM mokSa
prApta hotA hai  /  jahAM saba prakAra ke dvandva-prapaMca, jhaMjhaTa dUra ho
jAte haiM  /  AgamakAra isI bAta kA digdarzana karAte haiM ve anyamatavAdI
nirupita karate haiM ki jo vyakti hamAre darzanameM batAe hue niyamoM kA AcAroM
kA bhalI bhAMti pAlana karate haiM ve isI janma meM aSTa guNAtmaka
aizvaryamUlaka siddhi prApta karate haiM  /  phira viziSTa samAdhi yoga ko
sAdhakara, deha kA parityAga kara siddhattva prApta kara lete haiM  /  ve isa
prakAra samagra dvandva rahita-kleza rahita, aroga-duHkha rahita ho jAte haiM  /
yahAM 'aroga' zabda upalakSaNa hai, sAMketika hai  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki una
logoM ko aneka prakAra ke daihika aura mAnasika duHkha sparza nahIM karate
kyoMki unake deha aura mana kA abhAva ho jAtA hai arthAt ve deha se aura mana se
atIta ho jAte haiM  /  zaiva Adi isa prakAra siddhi ke saMbaMdha meM apanA
mantavya batAte haiM  /  ve siddhi ko Age rakhate haiM, usI ko mukhya rUpa meM
prastuta karate haiM, apane siddhAntoM meM Asatti liye rahate haiM aura
tadanakala yaktiyoM dvArA unakA nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  jaise zAstra jJAna se
za sAmAnya puruSa apane cAhe hue prayojana ko sAdhane ke liye yuktiyoM kA
prayoga karatA hai, usI taraha ve zaiva Adi jinheM paramArtha kA bodha nahIM
hai, jo apane ko paMDita yA jJAnI mAnate haiM, ve apane AgrahapUrNa mantavya ko
siddha karane hetu yuktiyAM lagAte haiN| kahA gayA hai-eka AgrahI-apanI
baddhamUla dhAraNA para aDA huA puruSa apanI mAnyatA ke anusAra yukti ko le jAnA
cAhatA hai, use vaisA mor3a denA cAhatA hai, kintu vaha puruSa jise koI
pakSapAta yA Agraha nahIM hai vaha usI artha-abhiprAya yA tattva ko jo yukti
yukta hotA hai, svIkAra karatA hai| - 112)

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They, devoid of **samvara** (self-control) and **asambhrata** (victory over
senses), i.e., under the control of senses, other **tirthankaras** wander in the
cycle of birth and death again and again. Due to the influence of **bala tapa**
(ignorance-based austerities), they are born in **asura** (demonic) realms for a
long time, as **kilvishika** (inferior) gods.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH asaMvuDA aNAdIyaM bhamihiMti puNopuNo  /
kappakAlamuvajati ThANA AsurakivvisiyA ||16||ttibemi|| chAyA - asaMvRtA anAdikaM
bhramiSyanti punaH punaH  /  kalpakAlamutpadyante sthAnA AsurakilviSikA |iti
brviimi|| anuvAda - ve asaMvRta-saMvara rahita, iMdriya vijaya rahita arthAt
indriyoM ke vaza meM vidyamAna anya tIrthika punaH punaH saMsAra meM bhramaNa
karate rahate haiM  /  ve bAla tapa-ajJAnapUrNa tapa ke prabhAva se bahuta
samaya taka asura yoniyoM meM utpanna hote haiM, kilviSika deva hote haiN|
_TIkA- sAmpratameteSAmanarthapradarzanapuraHsaraM dUSaNamidhitsayA''ha-te hi
pAkhaMDikAHmokSAbhisandhinAsamutthitA api asaMvRtA indriya no
indriyairasaMyatAihApyasmAkaM lAbha. indriyAnurodhena sarvaviSayopabhogAd amutra
muktyavApteH tadevaM mugdhajanaM pratArayanto'nAdisaMsArakAntAraM bhramiSyanti
paryATiSyanti svaduzcaritopAttakarmapAzAvazApi (pAzi) tAH paunaH puNyena
narakAdiyAtanAsthAneSutpadyante  /  tathAhi-nendriyairaniyamitai
razeSadvandvapracyutilakSaNA siddhiravApyate  /  yA'pyaNimAdyaSTaguNa
lakSaNaihikI siddhirabhidhIyate sA'pi mugdhajanapratAraNAya dambhakalpaiveti  /
yA'pi ca teSAM bAlatapo'nuSThAnAdinA svargAvAptiH sA'pyevaMprAyA bhavatIti
darzayati  /  kalpakAlaM prabhUtakAlam utpadyante saMbhavanti AsurA:-asura
sthAnotpannA nAgakumArAdayaH tatrA'pi na pradhAnA kintarhi ? kilviSikAH adhamAH
preSyabhUtA alpardhayo'lpabhogAH svalpAyuH sAmarthyAdhupetAzca bhavantIti  /
iti uddezaka parisamApmAptyarthe, vravImIti pUrvavata 16/75 iti
samayAkhyAdhyayanasya tRtIyoddezakaH samAptaH  /  TIkArtha - AgamakAra aba una-
anya tIrthakoM ke siddhAntoM kI nirarthakatA kA digdarzana karAte hue unheM
doSayukta pratipAdana karane hetu kahate haiM - ve pAkhaNDI mokSa mArga meM
udyata hokara bhI asaMvRta-saMvara rahita hote haiM  /  indriya aura mana ko
vaza meM nahIM rakha pAte, asaMyata hote haiM  /  ve aisA mAnate haiM ki isa
loka meM bhI hameM lAbha hai, sukha hai, kyoMki indriyoM ke anurodha se-indriyoM
kI preraNA se, saba viSayoM kA upabhoga karane se paraloka meM mokSa prApta hotA
hai  /  ve yo mugdha janoM ko-bhole bhAle logoM ko pratArita karate hue-Thagate
hue isa anAdi saMsAra rUpI vana meM bhaTakate rahate haiM  /  ve apane
duScaritra-durAcaraNa ke kAraNa karmoM ke phaMde meM baMdhakara bAra-bAra naraka
Adi kaSTa pUrNa sthAnoM meM paidA hote haiM kyoMki iMdriyoM ko niyamita-
niyaMtrita kiye binA mokSa-jahAM samasta duHkha nivRtta ho jAte haiM, prApta
nahIM hotA  /  ve jo aNimA Adi aSTa vidha aihika-isa saMsAra se saMbaddha
siddhiyoM kA jo varNana karate haiM, ve bhI bhole bhAle-sIdhe logoM ko pratArita
karane hetu daMbha mAtra hI hai  /  una viparIta dharmAcaraNa meM lagna puruSoM
ko asamyak tapa ke prabhAva se jo svarga kI prApti hotI hai, usakA digdarzana
karAte hue kahate haiM ki-ve bahuta samaya taka nAgakumAra Adiasura sthAnoM meM
alpa Rddhi, alpa Ayu, alpa zakti yukta adhama-nimna koTika preSya bhUta-sevaka
vRtti yukta deva ke rUpa meM paidA hote haiM  /  mukhya deva ke rUpa meM nahIM
hote  /  iti zabda uddezaka kI pUrti ke artha meM hai  /  bravImi-bolatA
hU~-yaha zabda pahale kI jyoM hai-isakA Azaya vahI hai jo pahale varNita huA
hai| samaya adhyayana kA tIsarA uddezaka samApta huA  /  -.113

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Translation preserving Jain terms:  O you who are conquered by passions! You
have no refuge, being conceited fools. Abandoning your previous associations,
you have become teachers of duties.  Commentary: The author, addressing the
disciple, says that these (people) who believe in other philosophies are
conquered by the six enemies - desire, anger, delusion, greed, pride, and
hatred. They have no refuge to escape the cycle of birth and death. They have no
stability anywhere. They are truly ignorant, but consider themselves as learned
and wise. Though they have abandoned their family relationships and left home,
they remain attached to possessions and still give instructions on the duties of
a householder.  The connection with the previous section is that in the previous
section, it was stated that the heretics are born in the abodes of the Asuras
due to their sinful conduct. Why is that so? Because these (people) are
conquered by adversities and calamities, and the connection with the previous
sutra is this - "He should understand and reject (them)." And then this is also
to be understood - just as these proponents of the doctrine of the five
elements, the self, and the body, and the followers of the Gosala doctrine, are
conquered by adversities and calamities, and by the six enemies of desire,
anger, greed, pride, delusion, and intoxication, so the connection with other
sutras is also to be inferred.  Having established this connection, the
explanation of this sutra is now presented. "These" refers to the proponents of
the doctrine of the identity of the five elements, the self, and the body, the
followers of the Gosala doctrine, and the Trairasika, who are conquered and
overpowered by attachment, aversion, and other sense objects, as well as by the
powerful delusion-born ignorance. "O you" is an address to the disciple, meaning
"Accept this as such, that these heretics, due to their incorrect instruction,
are not worthy of refuge for anyone, nor are they able to protect anyone."  Why
is this so? Because they are like children, lacking the discrimination between
right and wrong, and whatever they do or say is meaningless. Similarly, these
(people) too, though ignorant themselves, delude others. And though being such,
they consider themselves learned.  Alternatively, the reading "where the child
is lost" indicates that where there is ignorance, the child (i.e., the ignorant
person) is lost. There they (the heretics) are established, since they are not
able to provide refuge to anyone. And what they have practiced wrongly, that is
shown in the latter half - "Abandoning their previous associations" means that
abandoning their connections with wealth, grains, and kinsmen, we (the ascetics)
have become free from attachments. But again, they are bound and attached to the
undertakings of possessions, and the instruction they give is the harmful
activity of cooking, serving, grinding, and pounding, etc. for the householders.
Or alternatively, "they may be" - the plural is used due to the archaic nature,
meaning "the duties, the main activities, those who are teachers of duties, the
ascetics, though they have renounced, do not differ from the householders in all
situations, being engaged in the five sensual activities."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 * chAyA ete jiyA bho ! na saraNaM, bAlA paMDiyamANiNo  /  hiccANaM
puvvasaMjoyaM, siyA kiccovaesagA  // 1 //  zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram caturtha
uddezakaH - ete jitAH bhoH ! na zaraNaM bAlA paMDitamAnino  /  hitvA tu
pUrvasaMyogaM sitAH kRtyopadezakAH  //  anuvAda ziSya ko saMbodhita kara
AgamakAra kahate haiM ki anya darzanoM meM vizvAsa karane vAle ye kAma, krodha,
moha, lobha, mohAdi se parAjita haiN| saMsAra se janma maraNa se bacane meM
inake pAsa koI zaraNa nahIM hai  /  inake liye kahIM TikAva nahIM hai| ye
vastutaH ajJAnI hai kintu apane ko paMDita - jJAnI mAnate haiM  /  pUrvasaMyoga-
apane bandhubAndhavoM ke sambandha kA parityAga kara ghara chor3akara bhI
parigraha Adi meM Asakta rahate haiM tathA gRhastha ke kAryoM kA upadeza dete
haiM  /  - TIkA - uktastRtIyoddezaka: adhunA caturthaH samArabhyate, asya
cAyamabhisambandha -
anantaroddezake'dhyayanArtatvAtsvaparasamayavaktavyatoktehApi saivAbhidhIyate,
athavA'nantaroddezake tIrthikAnAM kutsitAcAratvamukta- mahA'pi tadevAbhidhIyate
/  tadanena sambandhe nAyAtasyAsyoddezakasyopakramAdIni
catvAryyanuyogadvArANyabhidhAya sUtrAnugamesUtramuccAraNIyaM taccedam asya
cAnantarasUtreNa sahAyaM sambandhaH tadyathA, anantarasUtre 'bhihitaM- 'tIrthikA
asurasthAneSu kilviSikAH jAyanta' iti, kimiti ? yata ete jitAH parISahopasagaiH,
paramparasUtrasambandhastvayam - AdAvidamabhihitaM 'budhyeta troTayecca'
tatazcaitadapi budhyeta - yathaite paJcabhUtAdivAdino gozAlakamatAnusAriNazca
jitAH parISahopasarge : kAmakrodhalobhamAnamohamadAkhyenAriSaDvargeNa ceti eva
manyairapi sUtraiH sambandha utprekSyaH tadevaM kRtasambandhasyAsya
sUtrasyedAnIM vyAkhyApratanyate  /  'eta' iti,
paJcabhUtaikAtmatajjIvataccharIrAdivAdinaH kRtavAdinazca
gozAlakamatAnusAriNastrairAzikAzca jitA abhibhUtA rAgadveSAdibhiH
zabdAdiviSayaizca tathA prabalamahAmohotthAjJAnena ca, bho iti vineyAmantraNam
evaMtvaM gRhANa yathaite tIrthikAH asamyagupadezapravRttatvAnna kasyaciccharaNaM
bhavitumarhanti na kaJcit trAtuM samarthA ityarthaH kimityevaM yataste bAlAiva
bAlAH yathA zizavaH sadasadviveka vaikalyAd yat kiJcanakAriNo bhASiNazca
tathaite'pi svayamajJAH santaH parAnapi mohayanti  /  evambhUtA api ca santaH
paNDitamAnina, iti  /  kvacit pATho ' jattha bAle'vasIyai' tti, yatra ajJAne
bAlaH ajJolagnaH san avasIdati, tatra te vyavasthitAH yataste na kasyacit
trANAyeti  /  yacca tai rvirupamAcaritaM taduttarArdhena darzayati-hitvA tyaktvA
Namiti vAkyAlaGkAre pUrvasaMyogo dhanadhAnyasvajanAdibhiH saMyogastaM tyaktvA
kila vayaM niHsaGgAH pravrajitA ityutthAya punaH sitAH- vaddhAH
parigrahArambheSvAsaktAste gRhAsthAH teSAM kRtyaM karaNIyaM
pacanapAcanakaNDanapeSaNAdiko bhUtopamardakArI vyApAra stasyopadezastaM
gacchantIti kRtyopadezagAH kRtyopadezakA vA  /  yadivA 'siyA' iti ArSatvAd
bahuvacanena vyAkhyAyate syuH bhaveyuH kRtyaM - karttavyaM sAvadyAnuSThAnaM
tatpradhAnAH kRtyAH-gRhasthAsteSAmupadezaH- saMrambhasamArambhArambharUpaH sa
vidyate yeSAnte kRtyopadezikAH pravrajitA api santaH karttavyai gRhasthebhyo na
bhidyante gRhasthA iva te'pi sarvAvasthAH paJcazUnAvyApAropetA ityarthaH  // 1
//  - TIkArtha . tIsare uddezaka kA varNana kiyA jA cukA hai| aba cauthA
uddezaka prAraMbha kara rahe haiM  /  isa uddezaka kA pUrvApara saMbaMdha yaha
hai - pUre uddezaka meM prathama adhyayana kA arthAdhikAra viSaya nirUpaNa rahA,
jo svasamaya 114

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  This Uddeshaka
(section) discusses the Svsamaya (own system) Vaktavyata (right to speak) and
the Parsamaya (other system) Vaktavyata (right to speak). It either expounds the
Svsamaya-Jain principles and the Parsamaya-non-Jain Tirthankaras' principles, or
describes the despicable, defective, and faulty conduct of other doctrinal
followers in the subsequent Uddeshaka.  Here also, the discussion is in that
context. While describing the four Anuyogas (auxiliary texts) associated with
this Uddeshaka, one should speak according to the Sutranugama (following the
scriptures) - the method of reciting or reading the Sutras (canonical texts).
The Sutra is as follows - this Sutra has a connection with the previous Sutra.
The previous Sutra stated that the Asura (demonic) Paratirthikas (non-Jain
ascetics) are born in unholy wombs. They are Kilvisika (impure) Devas (celestial
beings). They are engaged in Kilvisika (trivial) sports and activities.  Raising
a question on this topic, it is further stated that why are they like this?
While resolving and refuting this, it is said that they are defeated by the
Paratirthika Parisaha (self-inflicted hardships) and Upsarga (afflictions caused
by others). This is the connection with the previous Sutra.  It was also
previously stated that one should attain Bodha (enlightenment) and knowledge,
and by doing so, one should break and destroy the bondage of Karmas. Therefore,
it should also be known here that the followers of the Panchabhautika
(materialistic) and other doctrines, such as the Goshālaka (cow-worshippers),
Niyativādīs (fatalists), etc., are defeated by the Parisaha, Upsarga, Kāma
(desire), Krodha (anger), Lobha (greed), Māna (pride), Moha (delusion), and
Mada-Ahamkāra (intoxication and ego) - the Sad Ripus (six enemies).  Similarly,
the connection with other Sutras should also be understood. Thus, this Sutra,
which is connected or related to the subsequent Sutras, is discussed in detail
here.  The Panchabhautika, Ekātmavādī, Tajjīvataccharīravādī, Kṛtavādī,
Trairāśika, Goshālaka followers - all these doctrinal adherents are defeated by
the impure emotions of Rāga (attachment), Dvesha (aversion), and the powerful
Mahāmoha (great delusion)-induced ignorance, as well as the sense objects like
sound, etc.  The word 'Bho' in the Gāthā (verse) is used to address the
disciple. As in - "O disciple! You should know that these followers of other
doctrines are engaged in preaching teachings contrary to the true and the false.
How can they then be capable of protecting others?" They say this because these
doctrinal adherents are like ignorant children. Just as innocent, ignorant
children, due to the lack of discrimination between the true and the false, say
everything, without any understanding of what is right or wrong, similarly,
these doctrinal adherents are ignorant. Being ignorant themselves, they delude
others. Not only that, but even in their ignorance, they boast of being learned
or knowledgeable.  In some places, the reading is 'Jattha bālo'vasīyai', meaning
where the ignorant child is distressed, afflicted, or tormented. Similarly,
these ignorant doctrinal adherents are afflicted by Klesa (afflictions). They
cannot provide any refuge or protection to anyone.  The latter part of this
Gāthā expounds on these other doctrinal followers who act contrary to the truth.
The word 'Naṃ' here is in the sense of a rhetorical device or sentence
embellishment. These other proponents, while renouncing wealth, grains, and
kinship ties, claim to have given up attachment. They say they have accepted
Pravrajyā (monastic life). While expressing their eagerness to attain
liberation, they continue to be engaged in Pariggraha (possessions) and Ārambha-
Samārambha (violent activities) harmful to life, such as cooking, getting food
cooked, grinding, and pounding, which are the duties of the householders.  In
this Gāthā, the word 'Siyā' is an Ārsha (archaic) form, and it is interpreted as
a plural.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH parasamaya vaktavyatA mUlakathA - jisameM
svasamaya-jaina siddhAnta, para samaya-jainettara tIrthikoM ke siddhAntoM kI
carcA rahI hai, vahI isa uddezaka meM bhI pratipAdita kI jAtI hai, athavA
anantara-Age ke uddezaka meM anya matavAdiyoM ke kutsita, dUSita-doSapUrNa AcAra
kA varNana kiyA hai  /  yahAM bhI usa saMdarbha meM vivecana hai  /  ina
saMbaMdhoM se yukta isa uddezaka meM upakrama Adi cAra anuyogoM kA varNana
karate hue sUtrAnugama se-sUtroccAraNa yA sUtra pATha kI vidhi ke anurUpa bolanA
cAhiye  /  vaha sUtra isa prakAra hai-isa sUtra kA pIche ke sUtra ke sAtha yaha
saMbaMdha hai  /  pIche ke sUtra meM kahA gayA hai ki para tIrthika asura
sthAnoM meM-yoniyoM meM utpanna hote haiN| ve kilviSika deva hote haiM  /
kilviSika-tuccha krIDA kalApa yukta  /  isI viSaya ko eka prazna uThAte hue Age
bar3hAte haiM ki ve aise kyoM hote haiM ? usakA samAdhAna-nirAkaraNa karate hue
kahate haiM ki ve paratIrthika parISaha-apane Apa utpanna hone vAle kaSTa tathA
upasarga-dUsaroM dvArA diye jAne vAle kaSTa yA yAtanA se parAjita hote haiN|
pichale sUtra ke sAtha isakA yaha saMbaMdha hai  /  pahale pahala yaha bhI kahA
gayA ki bodha-jJAna prApta karanA cAhiye aura vaisA karake karmoM ke bandhana ko
tor3anA cAhiye-naSTa karanA cAhiye  /  ataH yahAM yaha bhI jAnanA cAhiye ki
pahale carcita paMcabhautika Adi vAdoM meM vizvAsa karane vAle tathA gauzAlaka
matAnuyAyI niyativAdI Adi anya tIrthika parISaha, upasarga, kAma, krodha, lobha,
mAna, moha tathA mada-ahaMkAra Adi SaD ripuoM se-chaH zatruoM se parAjita haiM
/  isI prakAra dUsare sUtroM ke sAtha bhI saMbaMdha samajhanA cAhiye yoM
anantara sUtroM se sambaddha yA jur3e hue isa sUtra kA vistAra se yahAM vivecana
kiyA jAtA hai  /  paMcabhUtavAdI, ekAtmavAdI, tajjIvataccharIravAdI, kRtavAdI,
trairAzika, gauzAlaka matAnuyAyI-niyativAdIye sabhI rAga, dveSa Adi duSita
bhAva, zabda Adi iMdriya viSaya tathA prabala mahAmohajanita ajJAna dvArA
parAjita haiM  /  gAthA meM 'bho' zabda ziSya ko saMbodhita karane ke liye AyA
hai  /  yathA-he ziSya ! tumheM yaha jAnanA cAhiye ki ye paramatAvalambI asat-
satya ke pratikUla upadeza dene meM pravRtta hai  /  isaliye ve dUsaroM kA trANa
karane meM kaise samartha ho sakate haiM, aisA kyoM kahate haiM ? aisA isaliye
kahate haiM ki ye matavAdI bAlakoM kI jyoM jJAnazUnya haiM  /  jaise zizu-bhole
ajJAnI bAlaka sat, asat ke viveka vaikalpa-jJAna zUnyatA ke kAraNa saba kucha
kaha DAlate haiM  /  unheM aisA karate sat asat yA ucita anucita kA jarA bhI
viveka nahIM rahatA  /  isI prakAra ye matavAdI ajJAnI haiM  /  khuda ajJAnI
hote hue dUsaroM ko moha mUr3ha banAte haiM  /  itanA hI nahIM ajJAnI hokara bhI
apane ko paMDita yA jJAnI batAne kA daMbha karate haiM  /  kahIM-kahIM 'jattha
bAlo'vasIyaI' yatra vAlo avasIdati' aisA pATha hai  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai
ki jaise ajJAna meM saMlagna-ajJAnayukta bAlaka avasanna hotA hai-duHkhita hotA
hai, pIr3ita hotA hai, vaise hI ye ajJAnavartI matavAdI klezAviSTa hote haiM  /
ve kisI ko trANa yA sahArA nahIM de sakate  /  kisI kI rakSA nahIM kara skte| ye
anya matAvalambI jo satya ke pratikUla AcaraNa karate haiM usa saMbaMdha meM isa
gAthA ke uttarArddha meM pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai  /  'NaM' zabda yahAM
vAkyAlaMkAra yA vAkyasajjA ke artha meM hai  /  ye anya vAdI dhanyadhAnya,
baMdhu bAndhavAdI sambandhiyoM kA parityAga kara kahate haiM-hamane Asakti
chor3a dI hai  /  pArivArika Adi kisI ke sAtha hamArA lagAva nahIM hai  /
hamane pravrajyA svIkAra kara lI hai  /  aisA kahate hue ve mokSa pAne kI dizA
meM udyatatA dikhAte haiM kintu ve parigraha tathA AraMbha samArambha mUlaka
hiMsA meM saMlagna rahane vAle gRhIjanoM ke kartavya kA arthAt pakAnA, pakavAnA,
kUTanA, pIsanA Adi jIvoM ke liye vinAzakArI karmoM kA upadeza dete haiM  /  isa
gAthA meM 'siyA' pada ArSa hai use bahuvacana mAnakara vyAkhyA kI jAtI hai  /
isakA abhiprAya yaha hai -115

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The English translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The Shri
Sutrakritanga Sutra states that other Matavadis (proponents of different
philosophical views) are like this. The word 'Krita' means obligatory or sinful
performance or intention. Those who primarily engage in such cautious
observances are also called 'Kritya'. Thus, this word 'Kritya' indicates the
householders. These Paramata-vadis (proponents of other philosophical views)
teach the householders about Samrambha (undertaking), Samaarambha
(commencement), and Aarambha (activity) - activities involving progressive
degrees of violence. Therefore, they are called Krityopadesakas (teachers of
sinful activities).  Although they appear to be in the state of Pravrajya
(renunciation), they are not different from the householders, but their
condition is similar to them. And they commit violence through the five
slaughter-houses mentioned in the Manusmriti for the houses of the householders,
namely, Panchashuna-chullee-chulha (five hearths), Pesani-chakki (grinding
stone), Upaskara-jhadu (equipment-broom), Kandani-unkhali (mortar-pestle), and
Upakumbha-jala-sthana (water-pot-place).  The wise and learned Bhikshu (monk),
knowing these Tirtthikas (heretics), should not be infatuated with them. He
should conduct himself with equanimity, neither exalting himself nor being
attached to them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram ki ve anya matavAdI aise haiM  /  'kRta' zabda kartavya
athavA sAvadya-sapApa anuSThAna yA abhiprAya liye hue hai| jo mukhya rUpa se
vaisA sAvadha anuSThAna karatehaiM ve bhI 'kRtya' kahe jAte haiM  /  yoM yaha
'kRtya' zabda gRhasthoM kA sUcaka hai  /  ye paramatavAdI gRhasthoM ko
saMrambha, samArambha, Arambha mUlaka-kramazaH kriyopakriyomUlaka hiMsApUrNa
kAryoM kA upadeza dete haiM  /  isaliye ve kRtyopadezaka kahe gaye haiM  /
yadyapi ve bAhyarUpeNa pravrajyA dhAraNa kiye hue hote, kintu vAstava meM
gRhasthoM se bhinna nahIM hote, varan unake sadRza hI unakI sthiti hotI hai  /
tathA ve paMcazUnA-cullI-cUlhA, pesaNI-cakkI, upaskara-jhADU, kaMDanI-UMkhalI
tathA upakumbha-jala sthAna-ina dvArA jo manusmRti meM gRhasthoM ke ghara
meMpAMca bUcar3akhAne batalAye gaye haiM, hiMsA karate haiN| taM ca bhikkhU
parinnAna, viyaM tesu Na mucchae  /  aNukkase appalINe majjheNa muNi jAvae  // 2
//  chAyA - taJca bhikSuH parijJAya vidvAMsteSu na mUchet  /  anutkarSo'pralInaH
madhyena muni ryApayet  //  anuvAda - vidvAn-jJAnavAn bhikSu anya matavAdiyoM ko
jAnakara-unake svarUpa ko samajhakara unameM mUrchA na kare, usa ora Asakta na
bane  /  kisI bhI taraha apane jJAna va saMyama Adi kA mada-ahaMkAra na kre|
auroM-anya matavAdiyoM ke sAtha saMsarga-samparka na kare tathA taTastha vRtti
se rahe  /  TIkA - evambhUteSu ca tIrthikeSu satsu bhikSuNA yatkartavyaM
taddarzayitumAha - taM pAkhaNDikalokamasadupadezadAnAbhirataM 'parijJAya'
samyagavagabhya yathaite mithyAtvopahatAntarAtmanaH sadvivekazUnyAH nAtmane
hitAyAlaM nAnyasmai ityevaM paryAlocya, bhAvabhikSuH saMyato 'vidvAn'
viditavedyaH teSu 'na mUrchayet' na gAyaM vidadhyAt, na taiH saha saMparkamapi
kuyaadityrthH| kiM punaH kartavya miti pazcArddhana darzayadi-anutkarSavAniti'
aSTamadasthAnAnAmanyatamenApyutsekamakurvan tathA apralIna: asaMbaddhastIrtikeSu
gRhastheSu pArzvasthAdiSu vA saMzleSamakurvan madhyena rAgadveSayorantarAlena
saMcaran muniH jagat trayavedI yApayed AtmanaM vartayet  /  idamuktambhavati-
tIrthikAdibhiH saha satyapi kathaJcitsambandhe tyaktAhaGkAreNa tathA
bhAvatasteSvapralIyamAnenAraktadviSTena teSu nindAmAtmanazca prazaMsAM
pariharatA muninA''tmA yApayitavya iti  // 2 //  TIkArtha - isa prakAra ke anya
matavAdiyoM ke prati sAdhu kA jo kartavya hai, use prakaTa karane ke liye
AgamakAra batalAte haiM - pAkhaNDI-dharmavirAdhaka, matavAdI asat kA-mithyA
siddhAntoM kA upadeza dene meM anurata haiM  /  ina mithyA dRSTiyoM kA citta
mithyAtva se malina-dUSita hai tathA sadviveka-sadjJAna se rahita hai  /
isaliye ye apanA tathA auroM kA hita sAdhane meM kalyANa karane meM akSama hai
/  yaha jAnakara vidvAna-vastutattvavettA, satya kA yathArtha svarUpa jAnane
vAlA saMyamarata bhAva bhikSu-bhikSu dharma kA sAMgopAMga paripAlana karane vAlA
sAdhaka una anya matavAdiyoM ke sAtha koI Asakti na rakhe, unase samparka bhI na
kare  /  _ unake prati eka bhAvabhikSu-muni kA kaisA vyavahAra ho, isa gAthA ke
uttarArddha meM pratipAdita kiyA gayA 116)

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The one who knows all three worlds, who does not consume any of the eight types
of Madhyasthana, who is free from Tavi, who does not have any relationship with
other-opinionated householders and Parsva, etc., should behave with a neutral
attitude, free from attachment and aversion. This means that if a Sadhu happens
to be in contact with someone who holds a different opinion, etc., he should
abandon ego, not engage with them emotionally, not feel attachment or aversion,
not praise his own qualities or criticize theirs, and spend his time
accordingly.  "With possessions and beginnings, these are declared here. Without
possessions and without beginnings, the monk should wander." (3)
**Commentary:**  "With possessions and beginnings, these are declared here.
Without possessions and without beginnings, the monk should wander." (3)
**Translation:**  Many other opinionated people say that those who have
possessions and those who begin with violence, etc., attain liberation. But the
Bhava-Bhikshu should seek refuge only in those who are free from possessions and
completely free from violence, etc.  **Commentary:**  "Why are they not a refuge
for the Tirthikas?" - To show this, the Agama-kara says:  Those who live with
possessions, such as wealth, grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, etc., are called "Sa-
parigrahi." Even in the absence of external wealth, those who are attached to
their bodies and instruments are also "Sa-parigrahi." Those who engage in
activities that oppress, destroy, or harm living beings are called "Sa-arambha."
Even those who do not engage in activities related to the destruction of living
beings but consume food prepared for themselves are also "Sa-arambha." Other
opinionated people believe that those who have possessions and those who begin
with violence, etc., also cultivate the path to liberation. The Agama-kara
explains in this regard:  Regarding the afterlife, some people believe that
there is no need to shave the head and beard. They say that by the grace of the
Guru, one attains the Supreme Akshara, receives initiation, and then attains
liberation. Such people are not a refuge. Those who are truly capable of saving
are described later:  Those who are free from possessions, except for the means
of livelihood, and who have even a small possession for the enjoyment of their
bodies, are "A-parigrahi." Those who have no beginning of harmful actions are
"A-narambha." Such beings are light in karma, self-liberated, and capable of
rescuing beings from the ocean of existence. The Bhikshu, who is virtuous in
begging, who does not consume food prepared for himself, should seek refuge in
them, go to them, and wander around them. (3)  **Commentary:**  Why can't other
opinionated people protect themselves and others? To show this, the Agama-kara
says:  Those who possess wealth, grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, etc., are called
"Sa-parigrahi." Even in the absence of external wealth, those who are attached
to their bodies and instruments are also "Sa-parigrahi." Those who engage in
activities that oppress, destroy, or harm living beings are called "Sa-arambha."
Even those who do not engage in activities related to the destruction of living
beings but consume food prepared for themselves are also "Sa-arambha." Other
opinionated people believe that those who have possessions and those who begin
with violence, etc., also cultivate the path to liberation. The Agama-kara
explains in this regard:  Regarding the afterlife, some people believe that
there is no need to shave the head and beard. They say that by the grace of the
Guru, one attains the Supreme Akshara, receives initiation, and then attains
liberation. Such people are not a refuge. Those who are truly capable of saving
are described later:  Those who are free from possessions, except for the means
of livelihood, and who have even a small possession for the enjoyment of their
bodies, are "A-parigrahi." Those who have no beginning of harmful actions are
"A-narambha." Such beings are light in karma, self-liberated, and capable of
rescuing beings from the ocean of existence. The Bhikshu, who is virtuous in
begging, who does not consume food prepared for himself, should seek refuge in
them, go to them, and wander around them. (3)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH tInoM lokoM ko jAnane vAlA, ATha prakAra ke
madasthAnoM meM se kisI eka kA bhI sevana na karane vAlA tavirahita rahane vAlA,
anyamatavAdI gRhastha evaM pArzvastha Adi ke sAtha sambandha na rkhe|
taTasthavRtti kesAtha rAgadveSa rahita hokara vyavahAra kare  /  isakA tAtparya
yaha hai ki paramatavAdI Adi kisI ke sAtha yadi kabhI saMyogavaza saMbaMdha ho
jAya to sAdhu ahaMkAra kA parityAga kara unake sAtha bhAvAtmaka dRSTi se
saMbaMdha na rakhatA huA rAga yA dveSa na karatA huA apane guNoM kI prazasti
aura unakI nindA na karatA huA samaya ko bitAye, vyavahAra kare  /  sapariggahA
ya sAraMbhA, ihamegesi mAhiyaM  /  apariggahA aNA raMbhA, bhikkhU tANaM parivvae
// 3 //  chAyA - saparigrahAzca sArambhA ihaikeSAmAkhyAtam  /
aparigrahAnanArambhAn bhikSu strANaM parivrajet  //  anuvAda - kaI anya matavAdI
kahate haiM ki saparigraha-parigraha rakhane vAle tathA sArambha-hiMsAdi AraMbha
samArambha karane vAle jIva mokSa prApta karate haiM kintu bhAvabhikSu unhIM se
trANa pAye-unhIM kI zaraNa meM jAye, jo parigraha rahita aura Arambha samArambha
hiMsAdi se sarvathA dUra ho  /  - TIkA - kimiti te tIrthikAsrANAya na bhavantIti
darzayitumAha - saha parigraheNa dhanadhAnyadvipada catuSpadAdinA vartante
tadabhAve'pi zarIropakaraNAdau mUrchAvantaH saparigrahAH, tathA sahArambheNa
jIvopamardAdikAriNA vyApAreNa vartanta iti tadabhAve'pyaudezikAdibhojitvAt
sArambhAH-tIrthikAdayaH, saparigrahArambhakatvainaiva ca mokSamArga
prasAdhayantIti darzayati-iha paralokacintAyAm ekeSAMkeSAJcid AkhyAtaMbhASitaM,
yathA kimanayA zirastuNDamuNDanAdikayA kriyayA ? paraM guroranugrahAt
paramAkSarAvApti staddIkSAvApti ; yadi bhavati tato mokSo bhavatItyevaM
bhASamANAste na trANAya bhavantIti  /  ye tu trAtuM samarthAstAn pazcAddhena
darzayati-aparigrahAH na vidyante dharmopakAraNAdRte zarIropabhogAya svalpo'pi
parigraho yaSAM te aparigrahAH, na vidyate sAvadha Arambho yeSAM te'nArambhAH te
caivaMbhUtAH karmalaghavaH svayaM yAnapAtrakalpAH saMsAra
mahodadherjantUttAraNasamarthAstAn bhikSuH bhikSaNazIla uddezikAdyaparibhojI
trANaM zaraNaM pari-samantAd vrajed gacchediti  // 3 //  TIkArtha - anya
matavAdI apanA tathA dUsaroM kA rakSaNa kyoM nahIM kara sakate  /  isakA
digdarzana karAne hetu AgamakAra kahate haiM - jo dhana, dhAnya, dvipada-do
pairoM vAle prANI, catuSpada-cAra pairoM vAle prANI Adi ke rUpa parigraha
rakhate hai ve saparigrahI kahalAte haiM  /  dhana dhAnya Adi bAhya sampatti ke
na hone ke bAvajUda jo deha aura upakaraNAdika meM mUrchA-Asakti rakhate haiM ve
bhI saparigrahI haiM  /  jo jIvoM ke upamarda-vinAza yA hiMsA Adi kArya karate
haiM ve sArambha kahalAte haiM  /  jo jIvoM ke vinAza se sambaddha kArya na
karane para bhI audezika-apane liye banAe hue AhAra kA sevana karate haiM, ve
bhI sArambha hai  /  itara matavAdiyoM kA mantavya hai ki saparigraha aura
Arambha vyakti bhI. mokSa mArga kI ArAdhanA karate haiM  /  AgamakAra isa
saMbaMdha meM batalAte haiM - paraloka ke saMbaMdha meM kinhIM kI yaha mAnyatA
hai ki mastaka aura dAr3hI mUMcha muMDAne kI kyA AvazyakatA hai  /  guru kI kRpA
se param akSara kI avApti-upalabdhi tathA dIkSA kI prApti ho jAne para mokSa
prApta ho jAtA - 117)

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** says: Those who speak in this way, who boast
of their own doctrines, are not able to save, shelter, or protect anyone from
the ocean of the world.  In the latter part of the verse, the scriptural scholar
clarifies: Those who do not possess any possessions for the enjoyment of their
bodies, except for the means of sustenance, and who do not engage in any actions
that involve violence, such as killing or harming, are those who have light
karma - those who have largely eradicated their heavy karma. They are like a
boat, capable of carrying beings across the ocean of the world. Therefore, a
**bhikshu** who is a pure **bhikshanna** (one who lives on alms), who does not
consume food that is tainted with **auddeshik** (intentional) or other defects,
should seek refuge in such virtuous men in all respects.  **Verse 4:**  >
**Kadesu ghasamesaja, viuu dattesanam care.** > **Agiddo vippamukko a omaanam
parivajjae.**  **Translation:**  > A wise **muni** should seek out food prepared
by others, investigating its purity. He should desire to receive only what is
given. He should not be greedy or attached to food, free from attachment and
aversion, and should avoid insulting others.  **Commentary:**  > How should a
**sadhu** who is **aparigrahi** (non-possessive) and **anaramhi** (non-
initiator) conduct himself? To show this, the scriptural scholar says: The
**grihastha** (householder) prepares rice and other food for his own benefit
through the means of possessions and initiation. This is called **krit**
(prepared). The **sadhu** should desire to receive alms from this food prepared
by others for their own benefit. The word **krit aahar** (prepared food) here
indicates the avoidance of sixteen types of **udgama doshas** (defects in the
origin of food). **Graas** (food) is that which is swallowed, chewed, or eaten.
**Aahar** is also called **graas**. A wise **sadhu** should investigate and seek
out food that is free from **udgama doshas**. A **muni** who is skilled in the
practice of **samyama** (self-control) should desire to receive only that food
which is given by others without any expectation of reward or reciprocation,
with the intention of **nihsreyas** (liberation). This indicates the avoidance
of sixteen types of **utpadana doshas** (defects in the production of food). The
**bhikshu** should accept food that is free from defects such as
**dautyadhatri** (given by a servant), **nimitta** (given for a specific
purpose), etc. This indicates the avoidance of ten types of **eshanadoshas**
(defects in the desire for food). He should be **agrudh** (non-greedy),
**anadhyupapanna** (not attached), **amurchhita** (not intoxicated), free from
attachment and aversion to food. This also indicates the avoidance of five types
of **graaseshanadoshas** (defects in the desire for food). Such a **bhikshu**
should avoid insulting others, not indulging in pride of austerity or knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram hai  /  isa prakAra bolane vAle, apane siddhAntoM kA
bakhAna karane vAle anya tIrthi saMsAra sAgara se kisI ko trANa dene meM-zaraNa
dene meM yA kisI kI rakSA karane meM sakSama nahIM hai  /  gAthA ke uttarArddha
meM zAstrakAra ise spaSTa karate haiM-jo puruSa dharmopakaraNa ke sivAya apane
zarIropabhoga ke liye-zArIrika AvazyakatAoM kI pUrti ke liye jarA bhI parigraha
nahIM rakhate tathA jo sAvadya-sapApa Arambha hiMsAdi kArya nahIM karate, ve
karma laghu-halke karmoM vAle-jinhoMne apane saghana karma puMja ko adhikAMzata:
ucchinnanirjINa kara DAlA hai  /  saMsAra sAgara se jIvoM ko pAra lagAne ke liye
uddhAra karane ke liye naukA ke tulya samartha hai  /  isaliye auddezika Adi
sadoSa AhAra kA aparibhojI zuddha bhikSAnna jIvI bhikSu-bhAva bhikSu aise hI
satpuruSoM kI zaraNa meM sarvatobhAvena jAye  /  kaDesu ghAsamesejA, viU
dattesaNaM care  /  agiddho vippamukko a omANaM parivajjae  // 4 //  chAyA -
kRteSu grAsameSayet, vidvAn dattaiSaNAM caret  /  agRddho-vipramuktazca apamAnaM
parivarjayet  //  _ anuvAda - vidvAn-jJAna sampanna muni anya dvArA taiyAra kiye
gae AhAra kI gaveSaNA kare-zuddhAzuddha kI khoja kare  /  datta-diye hue AhAra
ko hI lene kI icchA rakhe  /  AhAra meM gRddha-mUrchita, Asakta na bane, rAga
dveSa na kare, tathA kisI anya ke apamAna-tiraskAra kA parivarjana kare-dUsare
kA apamAna na kare  /  TIkA-kathaM punastenAparigraheNAnArambheNa ca vartanIya
mityetaddarzayitumAha - gRhasthaiH parigrahArambhadvAreNA''tmArthaM ye niSpAditA
odanAdayaste kRtA ucyante teSu kRteSu parakRteSu paraniSThiteSvityarthaH anena
ca SoDazodgamadoSa parihAra : sUcitaH, tadevamudgamadoSarahitaM grasyata iti
grAsaH-AhAra stamevaM bhUtam anveSayet mRgayed yaacedityrthH| tathA
vidvAnsaMyamakaraNaikanipuNaH parairAzaMsAdoSarahitai ryanniHzreyasabuddhayA
dattamiti,anena SoDazotpAdanadoSAH parigRhItAH draSTavyAH sadevambhUte
dautyadhAtrInimittAdi doSarahite AhAre sa bhikSuH eSaNAM grahaNaiSaNAM
crednutisstthediti| anenA'pi dazaiSaNAdoSAH parigRhItA iti mantavyaM, tathA
agRddhaH anadhyupapanno'mUrcchita stasminnAhAre rAgadveSavipramuktaH anenA'pi ca
grAsaiSaNA doSAH paJca nirastA avaseyAH  /  sa evambhUto bhikSuH
pareSAmapamAnaM-parAvamadirzitvaM parivarjayet parityajet na tapomadaM
jJAnamadaJca kuryAditibhAvaH  // 4 //  TIkArtha - aparigrahI aura anArambhI
sAdhu ko kaise vartana karanA cAhiye-vyavahAra karanA cAhiye, rahanA cAhiye,
yaha dikhAne hetu AgamakAra kahate haiM - gRhastha ne parigraha tathA AraMbha
dvArA AtmArtha-apane liye jo cAMvala-bhAta Adi bhojana banAyA ho use kRt arthAt
dUsare ke dvArA usake apane liye banAye gaye AhAra meM se sAdhu bhikSA lene kI
icchA kare  /  yahAM 'kRta AhAra' zabda kA grahaNa solaha prakAra ke udgama
doSoM ke parihAra kA saMsUcaka hai  /  jo grasita kiyA jAtA hai, ugAlA jAtA hai,
yA khAyA jAtA hai, use grAsa kahate haiM  /  AhAra grAsa kahalAtA hai  /
vivekazIla sAdhu udgama doSa varjita AhAra kA anveSaNa-gaveSaNa kare  /  saMyama
ke paripAlana meM kuzala-jAgarUka muni usI AhAra ko lene kI icchA kare jo anya
vyakti kisI AzaMsA-pratyupakAra kI AzA Adi ke binA niHzreyasa-AtmakalyANa 118

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Swasama Vaktavyataadhikarah ki drishti se de. Isa kathana dvara yahan solaha
prakaara ke utpada dosha parigrahita hain, yaha samajhana chahiye. Ataeva vaha
bhikshu dautya-duta kaarya, grihasthoṃ ka sandesa pahunchaana, dhaatri-dhaaya ka
kaarya, grihasta ke baccoṃ ko laada pyaara karana aadi tathaa naimittika aadi
doshoṃ se varjita aahaara grihana karane ki icchaa kare. Isa kathana se dasa
prakaara ke eshanaa doshoṃ parigrahita hote hain. Yaha maanana chahiye, jaanana
chahiye. Saadhau aahaara mein amurchhita-anaasakta rahe. Raaga dvesa se
vipramukta-vivarjita rahe, isa kathana se paancha prakaara ke graaishana doshoṃ
ka nirasana ya parivartana ho jaataa hai. Isa prakaara vartana karataa huaa,
rahataa huaa muni dusaroṃ ka apamana na kare. Apani tapasyaa aura jnaana ka
ahankara na karein.  Lokavaayaṃ nisamijjaa, ihamekesi maahiyaṃ.
Vipariyapannasaṃbhuyaṃ, annautaṃ tayaanuyaṃ ||5|| Chhāyā - Lokavādaṃ niśāmayed
ihaike̍ṣām ākhyātam | Viparītaprajñāsambhūtam anyokta̍ṃ tadanugam ||
Translation:  From the perspective of the authority of the topic under
discussion, it should be understood that here sixteen types of production
defects are included. Therefore, that monk should desire to accept food free
from the defects of messenger work, conveying messages of householders, the work
of wet-nurses, fondling the children of householders, and so on, as well as
occasional and other defects. This statement includes ten types of craving
defects. This should be believed, this should be known. The ascetic should
remain unattached and unaffected in accepting food. He should remain free and
detached from attachment and aversion. This statement eliminates or avoids five
types of object-craving defects. Conducting and living in this manner, the monk
should not disrespect others. He should not have the ego of his austerity and
knowledge.  Many say that one should listen to the statements of the Lokavādins
(those who believe in traditional/popular doctrines), but the reality is that
the view of those Lokavādins or traditionalists is born from perverted
intellect. It is false, untrue, just like the views of other sectarians.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH kI dRSTi se de  /  isa kathana dvArA yahAM solaha
prakAra ke utpAdana doSa parigRhIta haiM, yaha samajhanA cAhiye  /  ataeva vaha
bhikSu dautya-dUta kArya, gRhasthoM kA saMdeza pahuMcAnA, dhAtR-dhAya kA kArya,
gRhastha ke baccoM ko lAr3a pyAra karanA Adi tathA naimittika Adi doSoM se
varjita AhAra grahaNa karane kI icchA kare  /  isa kathana se dasa prakAra ke
eSaNAdoSa parigRhIta hote haiM  /  yaha mAnanA cAhiye, jAnanA cAhiye  /  sAdhu
AhAra meM amUrcchita-anAsakta rhe| rAga dveSa se vipramukta-vivarjita rahe, isa
kathana se pAMca prakAra ke grASaiSaNA doSoM kA nirasana yA parivarjana ho jAtA
hai  /  isa prakAra vartana karatA huA, rahatA huA muni dUsaroM kA apamAna na
kare  /  apanI tapasyA aura jJAna kA ahaMkAra na kreN| logavAyaM NisAmijjA,
ihamegesi mAhiyaM  /  viparIyapannasaMbhUyaM, annauttaM tayANuyaM  // 5 //
chAyA - lokavAdaM nizAmayed ihaikeSAmAkhyAtam  /  viparItaprajJAsambhUta
manyoktaM tadanugam  //  anuvAda - kaI kahate haiM ki lokavAdiyoM kA-paurANika
siddhAntoM meM vizvAsa karane vAloM kA kathana sunanA cAhiye kintu vAstavikatA
yaha hai ki una lokavAdiyoM yA paurANikoM kA mantavya viparIta buddhi se utpanna
hai  /  vaha anya matavAdiyoM ke mata kI taraha hI mithyA hai-asatya haiN| TIkA
- evaM niyuktikAreNoddezakArthAdhikArAbhihitaM 'kiccuvamAyacautthe'
ityetpradAdAnIM paravAdimata mevAddezArthAdhikArAbhihitaM darzayitumAha - .
lokAnAM pASANDinAM paurANikAnAM vA vAdo lokavAdaH-yathA svamabhiprAyeNAnyathA
vA'bhyupagamastaM nizAmayeta zRNuyAjAnIyAdityarthaH tadeva darzayati 'iha' asmin
saMsAre ekeSAM keSAzcididamAkhyAta mabhyupagamaH  /  tadeva vizinaSTi viparItA
paramArthAdanyathAbhUtA yA prajJA tayA sambhUtaM samutpannaM
tattvaviparyastabuddhi grathitamiti yAvat, punarapi vizeSa yati-anyai
ravivekibhiryaduktaM tadanugaM yathA vasthitArtha viparItAnusaribhiryaduktaM
viparItArthAbhidhAyitayA tadanugacchatItyarthaH  // 5 //  TIkArtha - niyuktikAra
ne uddezakoM kA adhikAra-abhiprAya batalAte hue pratipAdita kiyA hai ki ve
paratIthi gRhasthoM ke samAna haiM  /  yaha cauthe uddezaka kA arthAdhikAra hai
/  use kahakara aba paravAdiyoM ke siddhAnta kI carcA karate haiM  /  caturtha
uddezaka kA bhI yaha adhikAra hai  /  pAkhaNDiyoM yA paurANikoM kA vAda-
siddhAnta yA mata lokavAda kahA jAtA hai athavA apanI icchAnusAra svIkAra kiye
gaye viparIta mantavya ko lokavAda kahate haiM  /  isa lokavAda kA zravaNa
karanA cAhiye  /  aisA abhiprAya hai  /  zAstrakAra isakA digdarzana karAte hue
kahate haiM ki isa saMsAra meM kaI logoM kA isa prakAra kA siddhAnta hai  /
usakA vizeSa rUpa se digdarzana karAte hue ve batAte haiM ki vaha lokavAda aise
vyaktiyoM dvArA racita hai jo pAramArthika dRSTi se viparIta buddhiyukta hai
tathA jinakA jJAna yathArtha tatvajJAna se ulTA hai  /  phira zAstrakAra punaH
loka ke sambandha meM kahate haiM ki anya avivekI-viveka zUnya matavAdiyoM ne
asatyaM artha yA tattva kA pratipAdana kiyA hai  /  lokavAda bhI usI kA anugAmI
hai  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki jo avivekI-ajJAnI matavAdI padArthoM kA satya
svarUpa na batalAkara 119)

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Sutrakritanga Sutram. They expound the opposite nature, propound false
meanings. Lokavada (worldly doctrine) also propounds the opposite meaning and
untruth. It is a follower of the same - it follows or imitates them.  "The world
is infinite, eternal, does not perish. The wise perceives the world as finite
and eternal." (6)  Commentary: To illustrate the perverted intellect of the
proponents of the Lokavada, the author says that this world is said to be
infinite, i.e., without an end, eternal, i.e., not subject to destruction, and
does not perish. That is, whatever is in this existence, the same continues to
exist even in the next existence, just as a man remains a man and a woman
remains a woman. Or, it is infinite, i.e., without any limit or boundary, and
eternal, i.e., devoid of origination and destruction, of uniform nature, and
ever-existing. And it is eternal, i.e., it does not abandon its essential nature
of being a paramanu (atom) even when it becomes a dyad or triad, etc. Therefore,
it does not perish. This is said with reference to space, soul, etc.   The world
is finite, i.e., has a limit, and eternal, i.e., of uniform nature - such a view
is held by some daring theorists, as Vyasa and others, who propound an unreal
nature of things.  One should listen to the views of the Lokavada. This is
connected to the present verse.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga suutrm| viparIta svarUpa batalAte haiM, mithyA artha
pratipAdita karate haiM  /  unake samAna hI lokavAda bhI viparIta arthaasatya
tattva pratipAdita karatA hai  /  vaha unhIM kA anugAmI hai-unhIM kA anugamana
yA anusaraNa karatA hai  /  aNaMte niie loe sAsae, Na viNassatI  /  aMtavaM Niie
loe iti dhIro'tipAsai  // 6 //  chAyA - ananto nityo lokaH zAzvato na vinazyati
/  antavAnnityo loka iti dhIro'tipazyati  //  anuvAda - yaha loka ananta-
antarahita, nitya-nAzarahita tathA zAzvata-sadA rahane vAlA hai  /  yaha kabhI
vinaSTa nahIM hotA  /  yaha loka antavAna-zAMta yA sImita aura nitya hai  /
aisA kucha dussAhasI matavAdI dekhate haiM, mAnate haiN| _TIkA - tameva
viparyyastabuddhiracitaM lokavAdaM darzayitumAha-nAsyAnto'stItyanantaH na
niranvayanAzena nazyatItyuktaM bhavatIti, tathAhi yo yAdRgiha bhave sa tAdRgeva
parabhave'pyutpadyate, puruSaH puruSa evAGganA aGganaivetyAdi yadi vA
ananto'parimito niravadhika iti yAvat tathA nitya iti
apracyutAnutpannasthiraikasvabhAvo loka iti tathA zazvadbhavatIti
zAzvatodvayaNukAdi kAryyadravyApekSayA'zazvadbhavannapi na kAraNadravyaM
paramANutvaM parityajatIti tathA na vinazyatIti digAtmAkAzAdyapekSayA  /
tathA'nto'syAstItyantavAn loka : 'saptadvIpA vasundhare' ti parimANokteH, saca
tAdRka parimANo nitya ityevaM dhIro kazcitsAhasiko'nyathAbhUtArtha pratipAdanAd
vyAsAdirivAti pazyatItyatipazyati  /  tadevaMbhUtamanekabheda bhinna lokavAdaM
nizAmayediti prakRtena sambandhaH  /  tathA "aputrasya na santi lokAH brAhmaNAH
devAH" zvAno yakSAH gobhirhatasya godhnasya vA na santi lokA" ityevamAdikaM
niyuktikaM lokavAdaM nizAmayediti  // 6 //  TIkArtha - viparIta buddhiyukta
vAdiyoM dvArA racita lokavAda kA digdarzana karAne hetu AgamakAra kahate haiM,
jisakA kabhI anta nahIM hotA, use ananta kahA jAtA hai  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha
hai ki isa loka kA niranvayanAza nahIM hotA jo isa bhava meM jaisA hai para
bhava meM bhI vaha vaisA hI utpanna hotA hai jaise puruSa puruSa ke rUpa meM
tathA aGganA-strI strI ke rUpa meM hI hotI hai athavA yaha loka ananta arthAt
antayA parimANa rahita hai, avadhi rahita hai  /  yaha loka nitya arthAt utpatti
vinAza rahita hai, sthira hai tathA eka svabhAva-sadA eka svabhAva meM rahane
vAlA hai evaM yaha sadA vidyamAna rahatA hai, isaliye zAzvata hai  /  yaha loka
dvayaNuka do paramANuoM ke milita rUpa Adi kArya dravya kI apekSA se yadyapi
zAzvata nahIM hai kintu isakA kAraNa dravya paramANu kabhI bhI apane
paramANuttva ko nahIM chodd'taa| vaha sadaiva paramANu ke rUpa meM vidyamAna
rahatA hai  /  ata: yaha loka zAzvata hai  /  isa loka kA kabhI nAza nahIM hotA
/  yaha bAta dik-dizA, AtmA Adi kI apekSA se kahI gaI hai  /  antavAna use kahA
jAtA hai-jisakA anta hotA hai yA sImA hotI hai  /  yaha loka antavAna hai kyoMki
loka sthita pRthvI sapta dvIpA-sAta dvIpa yukta hai| paurANika aisA parimANa
batalAte haiM, etat parimANa yukta loka nitya hai| isa prakAra padArthoM kA
mithyA svarUpa nirUpita karane ke kAraNa vyAsa saddaza paurANikoM ko dhIra yA
dussAhasI kahA jAnA saMgata hai  /  lokavAda ke mantavyoM ko sunanA cAhiye  /
prastuta gAthA ke sAtha yaha jor3e  /  120

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There is no realm for a man without a son - he does not attain liberation. A
Brahmin is the form of God. Dogs are Yakshas. There is no realm for one who is
killed by cows or who kills cows, etc. One should listen to such Lokavada
statements that are devoid of justice and logic. Many people say this.  **Verse
7**  **Commentary:** Some opinion holders say that there is certainly a man who
knows the immeasurable and the immeasurable, or the transcendental, but he only
knows the finite things. He does not know everything. There is no omniscient
being.  **Explanation:** There is no measure, either in terms of space or time,
for that which is immeasurable. A Tirthankara, as recognized by the Jainas,
knows such immeasurable things. This means that he is a knower of the infinite,
a seer of the transcendental, but not an omniscient being. Or, if the meaning
intended is that he is a knower of the infinite, then he is a seer of the
transcendental. And thus it is said:  "Whether he sees everything or not, let
him see what is desired. What use is the knowledge of the number of insects to
us?"  This is what is said in this world by some who believe in omniscience.
This is their assumption. Thus, the wise mind, with its limited knowledge, is
limited by space and time, and by the karma it has accumulated. It is thus that
the wise man sees excessively. For example, they say that Brahma sleeps for a
thousand divine years - years of the gods. In that state, he does not see
anything. He wakes up for the same amount of time, and then he sees. Thus,
Lokavada is prevalent in many forms.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH putrarahita puruSa ke liye koI loka nahIM hai-
usakI sadgati nahIM hotI  /  brAhmaNa devasvarUpa hai| kutte yakSa hai  /  gAyoM
dvArA jo mArA gayA ho yA jo gAyoM kI hatyA karatA hai use koI loka nahIM milatA
ityAdi lokavAda ke nyAya yukti zUnya mantavyoM ko sunanA cAhiye  /  aisA kaI
loga kahate haiM  /  aparimANaM viyANAI, ihamegesi mAhiyaM  /  savvattha
saparimANaM, iti dhIro'tipAsaI  // 7 //  chAyA - aparimANaM vijAnAti, ihaikeSA
mAkhyAtam  /  sarvatra saparimANamiti dhIro'ti pazyati  //  anuvAda - katipaya
matavAdiyoM kA mantavya hai ki aparimANa-parimANa rahita yA atIndriya padArthoM
ko jAnane vAlA koI eka puruSa avazya hai kintu vaha parimita padArthoM ko hI
jAnatA hai  /  sabako nahIM jaantaa| koI sarvajJa nahIM hotA  /  TIkA - kiJca na
vidyate parimANam iyattA kSetrata: kAlato vA yasya tadaparimANaM, tadevambhUtaM
vijAnAti kazcittIrthikatIrthakRta, etaduktambhavati
aparimitajJo'sAvatIndriyadraSTA, na punaH sarvajJa iti, yadi vA-aparimitajJa
ityabhipretArthAtIndriyadarzIti, tathA coktam "sarva pazyatu vA mA vA
iSTamarthantu pazyatu  /  kITasaMkhyAparijJAnaM tasya naH kvopayujyate ?" iti
'iha' asmiMlloke ekeSAM sarvajJApanhavavAdinAm idamAkhyAtam ayamabhyupagamaH,
tathA sarvakSetramAzritya kAlaM vA paricchedyaM karmatApannamAzritya
sahaparimANaM-saparicchedaM dhI:-buddhiH tayA rAjata iti dhIra ityevamasau atIva
pazyatItyatipazyati, tathAhi-te bruvate divyaM varSasahasramasau brahmA svapiti
tasyAmavasthAyAM na pazyatyasau tAvanmAtraJca kAlaM jAgarti tatra ca pazyatya
sAviti, tadevambhUto bahudhA lokavAdaH pravRttaH  // 7 //  TIkArtha - kSetra yA
kAla kI dRSTi se jisakI koI sImA nahIM hotI use aparimANa kahA jAtA hai|
anyatIrthi jise tIrthaMkara mAnate haiM, vaha aparimANa-parimANarahita yA
sImAtIta padArthoM ko jAnatA hai  /  aparimANa kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki vaha
parimANa rahita-iMdriyoM dvArA agrAhya-atIndriya padArthoM ko dekhatA hai kiMtu
parimita rUpa meM hI  /  vaha sarvajJa nahIM hai  /  dUsare zabdoM meM anya
tIrthiyoM kA tIrthaMkara aparimita jJAnI kahA jAtA hai para vaha atIndriya
padArthoM ko hI jo mokSAdi ke liye upayogI hai, dekhatA hai  /  jagata ke
samasta padArthoM ko vaha nahIM dekhatA  /  ve anyamatavAdI aisA pratipAdana
karate haiM ki hamAre tIrthaMkara saba padArthoM ko dekhe yA na dekhe, usase kyA
banatA hai  /  ISTa-abhipsita yA upayogI artha ko hI dekhanA cAhiye  /  kIDoM kI
saMkhyA kI ginatI hamAre kisa kAma kI  /  isa loka meM koI sarvajJa nahIM hai  /
aisA vizvAsa karane vAle paramatavAdiyoM kA yaha siddhAnta hai  /  ve kahate
haiM ki dhIra puruSa saba deza sthAna-saba samaya meM parimita padArthoM ko hI
dekhatA hai  /  ve Age kahate haiM-brahmA eka hajAra divya varSa-devatAoM ke
varSa taka zayana karate haiM  /  usa avasthA meM ve kucha nahIM dekhate  /
utane hI samaya taka ve jAgRta rahate haiM, taba ve dekhate haiM  /  isa prakAra
loka aneka rUpoM meM pravRta -121)

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 8:**  Those who are mobile (**Trasa**) or
immobile (**Sthavara**) in this world, are indeed interchangeable.  The mobile
sometimes become immobile, and the immobile sometimes become mobile.
**Commentary:**  This verse addresses the question of rebirth and the nature of
existence. It states that all beings, whether mobile or immobile, are subject to
a cycle of rebirth and transformation. This cycle is driven by karma, and it is
not fixed or predetermined.   The commentary explains that the term "**Trasa**"
refers to beings with two or more senses, such as humans and animals. The term
"**Sthavara**" refers to beings that are immobile, such as plants and rocks.
The commentary further argues that the idea of a fixed and unchanging nature for
beings is not supported by evidence. It cites examples from the world to show
that beings can change their form and nature over time.   The commentary also
rejects the idea of an infinite and eternal universe, arguing that such a
concept is not supported by logic or observation.   Finally, the commentary
emphasizes the importance of understanding the true nature of existence, which
is characterized by change and transformation. It concludes that the cycle of
rebirth is driven by karma, and that beings are not fixed in their nature.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram je kei tasA pANA, ciTThati adu thAvarA | pariyAe asthi
se ajU, jeNa te tasathAvarA  // 8 //  chAyA - ye kecit trasAH prANA
stiSThantyathavA sthAvarAH  /  paryyAyo'sti teSA maJju yena te trasasthAvarAH
//  - anuvAda * isa jagata meM jitane trasa - gatizIla yA trAsa pAte pratIta
hone vAle evaM sthAvara-sthitizIlaacala prANI haiM ve nizcaya hI eka dUsare ke
paryAya meM jAte haiM  /  kabhI trasa prANI sthAvara ke rUpa meM utpanna hote
haiM evaM kabhI sthAvara trasa ke rUpa meM pariNata hote haiM  /  TIkA asya
cottaradAnAyAha-ye kecana trasyantIti trasAH dvIndriyAdayaH prANAH prANinaH
sattvA stiSThanti trasatvamanubhavanti, athavA sthAvarAH sthAvara nAmakarmodayAd
(yA) pRthivyAdayaste yadyayaM lokavAdaH satyo bhavet yathA yo yAdRgasmin janmani
manuSyAdiH so'nyasminnapi janmani tAdRgeva bhavatIti, tataH sthAvarANAM
trasAnAJca tAdRzatve sati dAnAdhyayanajapaniyamatapo'nuSThAnAdikAH kriyAH sarvA
apyanarthikA Apadyeran  /  lokenA'pi cAnyathAtva muktaM tadyathA - " sa vai eSa
zRgAlo jAyate yaH sapurISo dahyate" tasmAt sthAvarajaGgamAnAM svakRtakarmavazAt
paraspara saMkramaNAdyanivAritamiti  /  tathA " ananto nityazca lokaH" iti
yadabhihitaM, tatredamabhidhIyate - yadi svajAtyanucchedenAsya
nityatA'bhidhIyate tata: pariNAmAnityatvamasmadabhISTa mevAbhyupagataM na kAcit
kSatiH, athApracyutAnutpannasthiraikasvabhAvatvena. nityatvamabhyupagamyate
tanna ghaTate, tasyAdhyakSabAdhitatvAt, nahi kSaNabhAviparyyAyAnAliGgitaM
kiJcidvastu pratyakSeNA vasIyate, niSparyyAyasya ca khapuSpasyevAsadrUpataiva
syAditi  /  tathA zazvadbhavanaM kAryyadravyasyA''kAzAtmAdezcAvinAzitvaM
yaducyate dravyavizeSApekSayAtadapyasadeva, yataH sarvameva
vastUtpAdavyayadhrauvyayuktatvena nirvibhAgameva pravartate, anyathA
viyadarandisyeva vastutvameva hIyeteti  /  tathA yaduktam 'antavAn lokaH
saptadvIpAvacchinnatvAdityetannirantarAH suhRdaH pratyeSyanti na
prekSApUrvakAriNaH, tadgrAhakapramANAbhAvAditi  /  tathA yadapyuktam ' aputrasya
na santi lokA ityAdItyetadapi bAlabhASitaM tathAhi kiM putrasattAmAtreNaiva
viziSTalokAvAptiruta tatkRtaviziSTAnuSThAnAt ? tadyadi sattAmAtreNa tataH
indramahakAmuka gartAvarAhAdibhi varyAptAH lokAH bhaveyuH, teSAM
putrabahutvasambhavAt athAnuSThAnamA zrIyate, tatra putradvaye satyekena
zobhanamanuSThita mapareNAzobhanamiti tatra kA vArtA ? svakRtAnuSThAnaJca
niSphalamApadyetetyevaM yatkiJcidetaditi  /  tathA 'zvAno yakSA' ityAdi yukti
virodhitvAdanAkarNanIyamiti  /  yadapi coktam 'aparimANaM vijAnAtI' ti tadapi na
ghaTAmiyarti yataH satyAyaparimitajJatve yadyasau sarvajJo na bhavet tato
heyopAdeyopadezadAnavikalatvAnnaivAsau prekSApUrvakAribhirAdriyeta, tathAhi
tasya kITasaMkhyAparijJAnamapyupayogyeva, yato yathaitadviSaye'syAparijJAnameva
manyatrApyA (pItyA) zaGkayA heyopAdeye prekSApUrvakAriNaH pravRtti rna syAt  /
tasmAt sarvajJatvameSTavyam  /  tathA taduktaM 'svApabodha vibhAgena parimitaM
jAnAti' tyetadapi sarvajanasamAnatve yatkiJciditi  /  tadApi ca kaizciducyate
yathA "brahmaNaH svapnAvabodhayo rlokasya pralayodayau bhavata" iti tadapya
yukti saMgatameva pratipAditaM caitatprAgeveti na pratanyate  /  nacAtyantaM
sarvajagatautpAdavinAzauvidyete 'na kadAcidanIdRzaM jagadi' tivacanAt  /
tadevamanantAdikaM lokavAdaM parihRtya yathAvasthita vastusvabhAvAvirbhAvanaM
pazcArddhena darzayati-ye kecana trasAH sthAvarAH nA tiSThantyasmin saMsAre
teSAM svakarma pariNatyA'styasau paryyAyaH 'aMjU' iti praguNo'vyabhicArI tena
paryyAmeNa svakarmapariNatijanitena te trasAH santaH sthAvarAH sampadyante,
sthAvarAapi ca trasatva maznuvate tathA trasA strasatvameva sthAvarAH
sthAvaratvamevAnuvanti na puna ryo yAdRgiha sa tAdRgevAmutrApi bhavatItyayaM
niyama iti  // 8 //  122 -

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Self-Time Statement of Authority  Commentators solve this by stating:  Those
who are distressed, experience fear, and become the subject of such perception
are called *tris*. Two-sensed and other beings fall under the category of
*tris*. They experience the pain of *trisatva*. Those beings who have the
*karma* of *sthavara* arising are called *sthavara* beings, such as earth and
other beings. Those who are like human beings in one existence, are also like
that in the next existence, and are born in the same form, is what the
*lokawadis* believe. If this is considered true, then all actions like charity,
study, acquiring knowledge, chanting, remembering God, and penance would be
meaningless or pointless. But this is not the case. Even the *lokawadis* say
that beings are born in a different form. For example, it is said that a man who
dies with feces in his body is born as a jackal. Therefore, *sthavara* and
forest animals can be born as each other according to their own *karma*. *Tris*
can become *sthavara* and *sthavara* can become *tris*.  The *lokawadis* say
that this world is infinite and eternal. The solution to this is as follows:
Substances do not perish in relation to their own kind. From this perspective,
if the world is called eternal, there is no harm in it. Accepting this, the
principle of *parinaami* eternity, which is in accordance with Jain philosophy,
is accepted. If you do not accept this and call the world eternal by accepting
substances as without origin, without destruction, stable, and having one
nature, then this is not true because there is no such substance visible which
is without origin and destruction, stable, and always having one nature.
Therefore, your opinion is contradicted by direct evidence and is invalid. In
this world, there is not a single substance that is not composed of momentary
*paryayas* or states. *Paryayas* or states are prohibited substances, like the
flower of the sky, which are non-existent and therefore non-existent. If you
call the material substance, space, and soul indestructible, then this is also
beyond the truth in relation to the particular substance, because all substances
in the world are composed of production-origin, expenditure-destruction, and
stability-permanence, and are involved in an undivided form without division. If
this is not accepted, then the reality of the substance, like the flower of the
sky, will not exist.  The *lokawadis* have said that this world is finite
because it is composed of seven islands and a surrounding earth. This can only
be accepted by your ignorant friends. Those who act thoughtfully and with
discernment cannot accept this because there is no evidence to prove it. The
*lokawadis* have stated that a man without a son has no world. This is as
unreasonable as what a child who speaks childishly says. If having a son alone
gives a special world, or if there is a special ritual or work done by the son,
or if a special world is obtained simply by the son's good nature, then the
entire world will be filled with dogs and pigs because they have many sons. If
you accept that a special world is obtained by the good and virtuous rituals
performed by the son, then this is also not appropriate because suppose a father
has two sons. One has performed good and virtuous rituals and the other has
performed evil and sinful rituals. Will the father go to the higher world
because of the son who performed virtuous rituals or will he go to the lower
world because of the son who performed sinful rituals? At the same time, it will
also happen that the *karma* that the father himself has done will be completely
useless. Therefore, for the sonless...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH TIkArtha zAstrakAra isakA samAdhAna karate hue
pratipAdita karate haiN| - jo trasta hote haiM, bhaya prApta karate haiM, vaisA
karate pratIti kA viSaya banate haiM, unheM trasa kahA jAtA hai  /  dvIndriya
Adi prANI trasa zreNI meM Ate haiN| ve trasatvaca-pIr3A kA anubhava karate haiN|
jina prANiyoM ke sthAvara nAma karma kA udaya hotA hai ve pRthvI Adi prANI
sthAvara zreNI meM Ate haiN| jo manuSya Adi prANI eka bhava meM jaise haiM, Age
ke bhAva bhI vaise hI hote haiM, usI rUpa meM janma lete haiM, lokavAdI aisA
mAnate haiM  /  yadi ise saca mAnA jAya to dAna, adhyayana- jJAnArjana japa-
bhagavadsmaraNa tapa Adi sabhI kriyAeM anarthaka yA nirarthaka hoMgI kintu aisA
nahIM hotA  /  lokavAdI dvArA bhI jIvoM ko anyathAtva- - dUsare rUpa meM utpanna
honA kahA jAtA hai  /  udAharaNArtha- aisA kahA gayA hai ki jisa puruSa kA
viSThAsahita dAha hotA hai, vaha puruSa gIdar3a ke rUpa meM janma letA hai  /
ataH sthAvara evaM jaMgala prANI svakRta karmoM ke anusAra eka dUsare ke rUpa
meM utpanna ho sakate haiM  /  trasa sthAvara ho sakate haiM tathA sthAvara
trasa ho sakate haiN| lokavAdI jo yaha kahate haiM ki yaha loka ananta tathA
nitya hai| isakA samAdhAna isa prakAra hai padArthoM kA sva-svajAti kI apekSA se
nAza nahIM hotA  /  isa dRSTi se yadi jagata ko nitya kahA jAya to isameM koI
hAni nahIM hai| aisA svIkAra karane para to jaina darzana sammata pariNAmI
nityatva kA siddhAnta svIkRta ho jAtA hai| yadi aisA na mAnakara Apa padArthoM
ko utpatti rahita, vinAza rahita, sthira, eka svabhAvayukta svIkAra karate hue
jagata ko nitya kahate ho, to yaha satya nahIM hai kyoMki vahAM aisA koI bhI
padArtha dRSTigocara nahIM hotA, jo utpatti vinAza rahita ho, sthira ho aura
sadA eka svabhAvayukta ho  /  ataH ApakA yaha mantavya pratyakSa pramANa se bhI
bAdhita hai, asiddha hai  /  isa jagata meM aisA eka bhI padArtha dikhAI nahIM
detA jo pratikSaNa utpanna hone vAle paryAyoM se yA avasthAoM se yukta na ho|
paryAya yA avasthA varjita padArtha AkAza ke kusuma kI jyoM asat svarUpa hI
astitvahIna hI siddha hogA  /  yadi kArya rUpa dravya ko, AkAza evaM AtmA ko
avinazvara kahate ho to yaha bhI dravya vizeSa kI apekSA se satya se pare hai
kyoMki jagata meM sabhI padArtha utpAda-utpatti, vyaya-vinAza tathA dhrauvya-
dhruvatA, sthiratA yA zAzvatatA ina tInoM se yukta hokara vibhAgarahita hI
avibhakta rUpa meM hI pravRtta hote haiN| yadi aisA svIkAra na kiyA jAya to
AkAza kusuma kI taraha padArtha kA vastutva - astitva hI na rahe  /  lokavAdiyoM
ne jo yaha kahA ki saptadvIpamayI pRthvI se yukta hone ke kAraNa yaha loga
sAnta-antasahita haiM, yaha bhI Apake ajJAnI mitra hI svIkAra kara sakate haiN|
jo vicArapUrvaka - vivekapUrvaka kArya karate haiM, ve ise svIkAra nahIM kara
sakate kyoMki ise sAbita karane vAlA koI prAmANa upalabdha nahIM hai  /
lokavAdiyoM ne jo yaha pratipAdita kiyA ki putra rahita puruSa ke koI loka nahIM
hai, yaha bhI bAlabhASitaajJAnI bAlaka dvArA kahe hue kI jyoM ayuktiyukta hai  /
yadi putra ke hone mAtra se viziSTa loka prApta ho yA putra ke dvArA kiye huye
viziSTa anuSThAna yA kArya aisA ho, putra ke sadbhAva mAtra se yadi viziSTa loka
kI prApti ho to samasta loka kuttoM aura suaroM se bhara jAyagA kyoMki inake
bahuta putra hote haiM  /  putra dvArA kiye hue zubha puNyAtmaka anuSThAna kArya
se viziSTa loka kI prApti hotI hai, aisA svIkAra karate ho to yaha bhI samucita
nahIM hai kyoMki mAna lo eka pitA ke do putra haiN| eka ne zubha-puNyAtmaka
anuSThAna kiyA ho tathA anya ne azubha- pApayukta anuSThAna kiyA ho to vaha pitA
kyA puNyAnuSThAna karane vAle putra ke kAraNa uttama loka meM jAyagA athavA
pApanuSThAna karane vAle putra ke kAraNa adhama loka meM jAyagA  /  sAtha hI
sAtha aisA bhI hogA ki usa pitA ne svayaM jo karma kiye hoM, ve to bilkula
niSphala ho jAyeMge  /  isaliye putrahIna ke liye 123

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"There is no such thing as a world without beings" - this statement is ignorant.
The statement that dogs are Yakshas is clearly illogical and not worth listening
to. The Lokavadis who say that Tirthankaras know immeasurable and immeasurable
things but are not omniscient, are also not truthful. If a man who sees
immeasurable things is not omniscient, he will never be able to give advice on
things that are to be abandoned, things that are to be accepted, and things that
are to be accepted, and therefore he is not worthy of respect by wise men. The
knowledge of the number of insects by such a man would also be useful, because a
wise man would doubt that just as he does not know about insects, he would not
know about other things. Therefore, no one can be influenced by what he says
about things that are to be abandoned, things that are to be accepted, because
his knowledge is not true, therefore the belief in omniscience is necessary.  It
has been stated that Brahmas know nothing in their sleep, they only know when
they are awake. This is not unusual, because all beings are like this, because
they know nothing in their sleep. They all know when they are awake - when they
are awake. The Lokavadis have said that when Brahma sleeps, the world is
destroyed and when he wakes up, it is created. This is also not logical, because
it has been discussed before. Therefore, it is not necessary to elaborate on it
here. In fact, this world is never completely destroyed, nor is it ever
completely created. This world is never anything else. This is the statement.
Leaving aside the statements of the Lokavadis that this world is infinite, etc.,
the latter part of the verse sheds light on the true nature of the Agamkar
substance.  In this world, all beings, whether they are mobile or immobile, must
go from one state to another to experience the fruits of their own actions. This
is certain - necessary. The Tris beings go to the immobile state to experience
their karma. They are born as immobile beings, and the immobile beings go to the
Tris state - they are born as Tris beings, but the Tris beings are born as Vas
in the next life, and the immobile beings are born as immobile beings. That is,
it is not a rule that a being is born in the next life as it is in this life.
"Uralam jagato jogam, vivajjasam palintiya. Savve akkantdukkha ya, ao savve
ahinsya." ||9|| Shadow - Udaran jagato yogam viparyasam palyanta.
Sarve'kantdukkhacha, atah sarve'hinsita. Translation - Those who are generous
beings have their state of being gross. All beings keep going from one state to
another. All beings are akant dukkha - they consider suffering to be unpleasant.
Therefore, no being should be harmed. (124

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram koI loka nahIM hai-yaha kathana ajJAnapUrNa hai  /
yaha jo kahA gayA ki kutte yakSa hai yaha to spaSTa hI yukti viruddha hai,
sunane yogya bhI nahIM hai  /  lokavAdI jo aisA kahate haiM ki tIrthaMkara
aparimANa-parimANa rahita yA aparimita padArthoM ko jAnate haiM kintu ve
sarvajJa-saba kucha jAnane vAle nahIM hai  /  yaha bhI yathArtha-satya nahIM hai
/  yadi aparimita padArthadarzI hote hue bhI jo puruSa sarvajJa nahIM hotA vaha
heya-chor3ane yogya aura upAdeya- grahaNa karane yogya svIkAra karane yogya,
padArthoM ke sambandha meM upadeza dene meM kabhI samartha nahIM ho sakatA, ataH
buddhimAna puruSoM dvArA vaha AdaraNIya nahIM hai  /  vaise puruSa kA kIr3oM kI
saMkhyA kA jJAna bhI phira upayogI hI hogA kyoMki usake bAre meM kisI buddhimAna
puruSa dvArA kI gaI. AzaMkA ki jaise vaha kIr3oM ke saMbaMdha meM nahIM jAnatA,
usI prakAra anya padArthoM ke saMbaMdha meM bhI nahIM jAnatA hogA  /  ataH usake
dvArA heya-tyAgane yogya, upAdeya-grahaNa karane yogya viSaya meM kahI huI bAta
meM koI pravRta nahIM ho sakatA kyoMki usakA jJAna ayathAyatha hai ataH sarvajJa
kI mAnyatA Avazyaka hai  /  yaha to pratipAdita kiyA gayA ki brahmA suptAvasthA
meM kucha nahIM jAnate, ve jAgRtAvasthA meM hI jAnate haiM  /  yaha bAta bhI koI
vilakSaNa nahIM hai kyoMki sabhI prANI aise hI hote haiM kyoMki ve suptAvasthA
meM kucha nahIM jAnate  /  ve jAgRta avasthA meM-jaba ve jage hue hote haiM,
tabhI sabhI jAnate haiN| lokavAdiyoM ne jo yaha batalAyA ki brahmA ke zayana
karane para jagata kA pralaya ho jAtA hai aura unake jAgRta hone para udaya hotA
hai, yaha bhI yuktisaMgata nahIM hai kyoMki isa saMbaMdha meM pahale vivecana
kiyA gayA hai  /  ata: yahAM usakA vistAra karanA Avazyaka nahIM hai  /  vAstava
meM isa jagata kA kabhI bhI atyanta vinAza nahIM hotA, na kabhI atyanta utpAda
hI hotA hai| yaha jagata kabhI bhI anyathA-kisI aura taraha kA nahIM hotA  /
aisA kathana hai  /  yaha jagat ananta hai ityAdi lokavAdiyoM ke dvArA kahI huI
bAtoM ko chor3akara AgamakAra padArtha ke sahI svarUpa para prakAza DAlate hue
prastuta gAthA ke uttarArddha meM kahate haiN| isa jagata meM jo bhI trasa,
sthAvara-cara-acara prANI haiM, ve sva sva-apane apane dvArA kiye gaye karmoM kA
phala bhogane ke liye avazya hI eka paryAya se dUsare paryAya meM jAte haiM  /
yaha sunizcita hai-Avazyaka hai  /  trasa prANI apane karma bhoga ke liye
sthAvara paryAya meM jAte haiM  /  sthAvara prANI ke rUpa meM utpanna hote haiM
tathA sthAvara prANI trasa paryAya meM jAte haiM-trasa prANiyoM ke rUpa meM
utpanna hote haiM, kintu trasa prANI AgAmI janma meM vasa ke rUpa meM janma lete
haiM tathA sthAvara prANI sthAvara ke rUpa meM hI paidA hote haiM arthAt jo
prANI isa janma meM jaisA hotA hai ve agale janma meM bhI vaisA hI utpanna hotA
hai, yaha niyama nahIM hai| urAlaM jagato jogaM, vivajjAsaM paliMtiya  /  savve
akkaMtadukkhA ya, ao savve ahiMsiyA  // 9 //  chAyA - udAraM jagato yogaM
viparyAsaM palyayante  /  sarve'kAntaduHkhAzca, ataH sarve'hiMsitA  //  anuvAda
- jo audArika prANI haiM unakI avasthiti sthUlatA liye hue haiM  /  sabhI prANI
eka avasthA kA parityAga kara dUsarI avasthA meM jAte rahate haiM  /  sabhI
prANI akAnta duHkha hai-duHkha ko apriya mAnate haiN| isaliye kisI bhI prANI kI
hiMsA nahIM karanI cAhiye  /  ( 124

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Right Time to Speak  **Commentary:** To illustrate this point, the text
uses the term "Ural" as a broad metaphor for the "world," encompassing the
activities, endeavors, and specific states of the community of noble beings.
Noble-bodied beings, from their previous states, undergo a transformation from
the stages of embryo, fetus, and womb, to the noble states of childhood, youth,
and adulthood. This signifies that noble-bodied beings, like humans, experience
different stages of life marked by time, such as childhood, youth, etc., which
are clearly observable. However, it is not evident that they remain the same
throughout their previous lives. Similarly, all stationary and mobile beings
undergo various stages of existence, which should be understood. All beings are
afflicted by physical and mental suffering, and they are seen to experience
different states. Therefore, one should refrain from harming any being. Just as
one should avoid causing harm, all beings experience suffering as unpleasant and
happiness as pleasant. Therefore, one should not harm any being, including all
beings. This verse highlights the impermanence of beings and emphasizes the
importance of non-violence.  ## The Essence of Knowledge  **Commentary:** Why
should one not harm beings? The answer lies in the principle of happiness. This
is the essence of knowledge for a wise and discerning individual: to not harm
any living being, whether stationary or mobile, and to not cause them any
distress. This principle also implies that a wise person would not lie, steal,
engage in sexual misconduct, accumulate possessions, or eat after sunset. This
is the essence of knowledge, which encompasses all actions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH TIkA - asminnevArthe dRSTAntAbhidhitsayA''ha
'urAla' miti sthUla mudAraM 'jagata' audArikajantugrAmasya yogaM vyAparaM
ceSTAmavasthAvizeSamityarthaH, audArikazarIriNo hi jantavaH
prAktanAdavasthAvizeSAd garbhakalalAvudarupAd viparyyAsabhUtaM
bAlakaumArayauvanAdikamudAraM yogaM pari samantAdayante gacchantiparyyayante,
etaduktaM bhavati - audArika zarIriNo hi manuSyAde bAlakaumArAdikaH kAla
kRto'vasthA vizeSo'nyathAcAnyathA ca bhavan pratyakSeNaiva lakSyate, na
punayAhik prAk tAhageva sarvadeti, evaM sarveSAM
sthAvarajaGgamAnAmanyathA'nyathA ca bhavanaM draSTavyamiti  /  ca sarve jantava
AkrAntA abhibhUtAH duHkhena zArIramAnasenAsAtodayena duHkhAkrAntAH
santo'nyathA'vasthAbhAjo labhyante, ataH sarve'pi yathA' hiMsitAH bhavanti tathA
vidheyam  /  yadivA sarvepi janta vaH akAntam anabhimataM duHkhaM
yeSAnte'kAntaduHkhAH 'ca' zabdAt priyasukhAzca atastAn sarvAn na hiMsyAdityanena
cAnyathAtvadRSTAnto darzito bhavatyupadezazca datta iti  //  9  //  TIkArtha -
sAMsArika prANI bhinna bhinna avasthAoM meM parivartita hote rahate haiM  /  isa
tathya ko spaSTa karane hetu AgamakAra dRSTAnta dvArA samajhAte haiM - audArika
zarIra yukta jIva yoga vyApAra yA avasthA vizeSa kI dRSTi se udAra - sthUla hote
haiN| ve garbha, kalAla, arbuda rUpa pUrvatana avasthAoM kA parityAga kara
bAlyAvasthA, kaumArAvasthA tathA yauvanAvasthA Adi prApta karate haiM, jo sthUla
haiM  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki audArika zarIra yukta manuSya Adi
prANiyoM kI kAlakRtasamaya para vikasita kaumArya Adi avasthAeM bhinna bhinna
haiM, yaha pratyakSa dRSTigocara hotA hai kintu jo pahalepUrvajanma meM jaisA
hotA hai vaha Age bhI sadA vaisA hI hotA rahe, aisA dikhAI nahIM detA  /  isI
prakAra sthAvara jaMgama Adi sabhI prANI bhinna bhinna avasthAoM ko prApta
karate haiM, yaha samajhanA cAhiye  /  saMsAra meM jitane bhI prANI haiM, ve
saba daihika aura mAnasika Adi duHkhoM se utpIDita hai tathA ve bhinna-bhinna
avasthAeM prApta karate hue dRSTigocara hote haiM  /  ataeva una prANiyoM kI
hiMsA nahIM karanI cAhiye - jisa prakAra hiMsA na ho isakA dhyAna rakhA jAnA
cAhiye athavA sabhI prANiyoM ko duHkha apriya hai tathA sukha priya hai  /
ataeva kisI kI bhI - sabhI kI hiMsA nahIM karanI caahiye| ataeva isa padya dvArA
prANiyoM kA anyathAbhAva batalAyA gayA hai tathA unakI hiMsA na karane kA
upadeza diyA gayA I 1 eyaM khu nANino ahiMsAsamayaM chAyA - - sAraM, janna
hiMsai kiMcaNa  /  ceva, etAvataM viyANiyA  //  10  //  etat khalu jJAninaH
sAraM yanna hinasti kaJcana  /  ahiMsAsamatAJcaivai tAvadvijAnIyAt 11 anuvAda
jJAnI - jJAna sampanna puruSa ke liye yahI sArayukta bAta hai ki vaha kisI kI
hiMsA na kare  /  ahiMsA aura samatA - samatva bhAvanA, saba ko eka samAna
mAnanA yahI satya hai, grAhya hai  /  TIkA kimarthaM sattvAn na hiMsyAdityAha -
zukhadhAraNe, etadeva jJAnino viziSTa vivekavataH sAraM nyAyyaM yat kaJcana
prANijAtaM sthAvarajaGgamaM vA na hinasti na paritApayati  /  upalakSaNazcaitat
tena na mRSA brUyAnnAdattaM gRhNIyAnnAbrahmA''seveta na parigrahaM
parigRhaNIyAnna naktaM bhuJjItetyetadjJAninaH sAraM yanna karmAzraveSu 125

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga is present. Moreover, one should know the
equality of non-violence (ahimsa) as non-violence equality (ahimsa samata) in
this way: just as my death is painful and unpleasant, so it is for other living
beings. The word "eva" signifies determination. Thus, a virtuous and
knowledgeable being should not inflict pain or distress on any living being.
||10||  Commentary: The Agamakaras, while presenting the solution to the
question of why one should not harm living beings, say:  In this verse, the word
"khu" appears. It signifies determination. For a wise and discerning man, this
is the essence: it is proper and necessary that he should not harm any living
being, whether stationary or mobile. He should not inflict torture or pain on
them. Here, not harming is a euphemism, a symbolic representation. From this,
one should also understand that a discerning man should not speak falsely,
should not take what is not given, should not engage in sexual misconduct,
should not accumulate possessions, and should not eat at night. This is the
essence and utility of gaining knowledge: that a man should not fall into karmic
afflictions.  Understand the equality that arises from non-violence as it truly
is. Just as I find death unpleasant and painful, so it is for all living beings.
Knowing this, a discerning muni should not inflict pain or distress, suffering
or hardship on living beings. He should not cause them to suffer or be
tormented.  He who has awakened and is free from greed should properly protect
the right conduct (samm). In walking, sitting, lying down, and eating, he should
be mindful. ||11||  Shadow: He who has awakened and is free from greed should
properly protect the right conduct. In walking, sitting, lying down, and eating,
he should be mindful.  Translation: A virtuous and well-behaved muni, who is
established in virtuous conduct and properly observes it, should be free from
desire in matters of food, etc. He should properly protect knowledge, insight,
and conduct. He should keep them intact. In walking, sitting, and eating, he
should always be mindful of their proper use.  Commentary: The virtuous and
well-behaved is described as having ten characteristics. He is said to be as
sharp as a sword. He who is established in this, who observes it, is called
"vyushita". He who has overcome greed in matters of food, etc., is called
"vigata-girdhi", free from greed or desire. A muni who possesses both these
qualities, which lead to liberation, should properly protect, observe, and
uphold knowledge, insight, and conduct. As these qualities grow, so should he
act accordingly.  How is conduct, etc., maintained? This is shown by the words
"charan, san, shayya, bhakta, pane, antash". Walking should be done with a
purpose, with a view to the moment, by a virtuous man. One should sit on a seat
that is well-considered and well-cleaned. One should lie down on a bed or a mat
that is well-considered and well-cleaned. Food and drink should be taken with
proper mindfulness. This is what is said: food and drink should be taken with
mindfulness, with a view to the proper use of the body, and should be free from
the defects of excessive eating, etc. ||11||  Commentary: The virtuous and well-
behaved is described as having ten characteristics. He is said to be as sharp as
a sword. He who is established in this, who observes it, is called "vyushita".
He who has overcome greed in matters of food, etc., is called "vigata-girdhi",
free from greed or desire. A muni who possesses both these qualities, which lead
to liberation, should properly protect, observe, and uphold knowledge, insight,
and conduct. As these qualities grow, so should he act accordingly.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram vartata iti  /  api ca ahiMsayA samatA ahiMsAsamatA
tAJcaitAvadvijAnIyAt, yathA mama maraNaM duHkha JcApriyamevamanyasyApi prANi
loka syeti  /  evakAro'vadhAraNe, ityevaM sAdhunA jJAnavatA prANinAM
paritApanA'padrAvaNAdi na vidheya meveti  // 10 //  TIkArtha - prANiyoM kI hiMsA
kyoM nahIM karanI cAhiye, isakA samAdhAna prastuta karate hue AgamakAra kahate
haiM - isa gAthA meM "khu" zabda AyA hai  /  vaha avadhAraNA ke artha meM hai  /
jJAnI-viziSTa vivekasampanna puruSa ke lie yahIM sAra yukta bAta haiM-ucita hai,
karaNIya hai ki vaha sthiti zIla, gatizIla kinhIM bhI prANiyoM kI hiMsA na kare
/  unheM yAtanA yA pIDA na de| yahAM hiMsA na karanA upalakSaNa hai-saMketa rUpa
hai  /  isase yaha bhI samajhanA cAhiye ki vivekazIla puruSa asatya bhASaNa na
kare, adatta vastu na le, abrahmacarya na seve, parigraha kA saMgraha na kare,
tathA rAtri bhojana bhI na kare  /  jJAna prApta karane kA yahI sAra hai-
upayogitA hai ki manuSya karmAzravoM meM na par3e  /  ahiMsA ke kAraNa jo
samatva bhAva paidA hotA hai, use yathAvata samajhe  /  jaise mujhe maranA
apriya lagatA hai-duHkhajanaka lagatA hai, usI prakAra sabhI prANiyoM ko vaha
apriya hai| yaha jAnakara vivekazIla muni prANiyoM ko paritApana-pIr3A,
apadrAvaNa-kaSTa na de| unheM pIDita aura paritapta na kare  /  vusie ya
vigayagehI, AyANaM saM (samma) rakkhae  /  cariAsaNa sejjAsu bhattapANe a aMta
so  // 11 //  chAyA - vyuSitazca vigatagRddhi rAdAnaM samyagrakSeta  /
caryAsana zayyAsu bhaktapAne cAntazaH  //  anuvAda - sAdhu samAcArI meM
avasthita-sAdhu AcAra kA samyak paripAlayitA muni AhAra Adi meM lipsA rahita
rahe  /  vaha jJAna, darzana tathA cAritra kI bhalI bhAMti rakSA kare  /  unheM
akSuNNa rakhe  /  calane-phirane tathA khAne-pIne ke saMbaMdha meM sadA upayoga
ke sAtha barate  /  TIkA - vividham-aneka prakAra muSitaH sthito
dazavidhacakravAlasamAcAryAM vyuSitaH, tathA vigatA apagatA AhArAdau
gRddhiryasyA'sau vigatagRddhiH sAdhuH evaMbhUtazcAdIyate svIkriyate prApyate vA
mokSo yena tadAdAnIyaMjJAnadarzanacAritratrayaM tatsamyag rakSayed anupAlayet
yathA yathA ca tasya vRddhirbhavati tathA tathA kuryyAdityarthaH  /  kathaM
punazcAritrAdi pAlitaM bhavatIti darzayati-ca-sanazayyAsu, caraNaM cagamanaM
sAdhunA hi sati prayojane yugamAtradRSTinA gantavyaM, tathA supratyupekSite
supramArjite cAsane upaveSTavyaM tathA zayyAyAM basatau saMstArake vA
supratyupekSitapramArjite sthAnAdi vidheyaM, tathA bhaktapAsaAntazaH
samyagupayogavatA bhAvyam idamuktaM bhavati
IryAbhASaiSaNA''dAnanikSepapratiSThApanAsamitiSUpayuktenAntazo bhaktapAnaM
yAvadudgamAdidoSa rahita manveSaNIya miti  // 11 //  TIkArtha - sAdhu samAcArI
dasa prakAra kI batalAI gaI hai  /  use talavAra ke samAna tIkSNa kahA gayA hai
/  usameMavasthita-usakA pAlana karane vAlA vyuSita kahalAtA hai  /  jisakI
AhAra Adi meM gRddhi yA lolupatA miTa jAtI hai vaha vigata gRddhi-lolupatA
rahita yA lipsAhIna kahA jAtA hai  /  jo muni ina donoM guNoM se, jinase mokSa
prApta hotA hai, yukta hai vaha jJAna, darzana aura cAritra kI bhalI bhAMti
rakSA kare, anupAlana kare  /  jaise jaise (126)

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Self-Time Statement of Authority:**  May his growth, enhancement, and
development be such that he performs actions of the same nature.  How can one
practice conduct (charitra) etc.?  In response to this question, the scriptural
scholar explains:  Walking or going is called "charya."  When there is a
purpose, when it is necessary, if a sadhu goes somewhere, he should walk with
only a single-pointed vision.  He should sit on an asana after carefully
observing and thoroughly cleaning it.  He should carefully observe and clean his
bed and other bedding, and then sit on them.  Similarly, he should be mindful
and use proper awareness in eating and drinking.  The meaning is that a sadhu
should always be mindful and aware in the "iryā" (walking), "ādan-nikshepa"
(taking and depositing), and "pratiṣṭhāpana" (establishment) committees, and
should investigate food and water that is free from "udgama" (origin) and other
defects.  He should accept alms after carefully searching and inquiring.
**Verse:**  > In these three places, the muni is always restrained. > He should
examine the excellence, burning, covering, and the middle ground.
**Translation:**  > The muni should always be restrained in the three places -
the "iryā" committee, the "ādan-nikshepa" committee, and the "eṣaṇā" committee -
remaining mindful and free from carelessness.  He should abandon anger, ego,
delusion, and greed.  **Commentary:**  > Again, to purify conduct, the
scriptural scholar speaks about the qualities:  These three places mentioned
earlier are:  "iryā" committee is one place.  "āsana" and "śayyā" (seat and bed)
are the "ādan-bhāṇḍa-mātra-nikshepaṇā" committee, which is the second place.
"bhakta-pāna" (food and drink) is the "eṣaṇā" committee, which is the third
place.  Since speech is possible when entering a householder's home for food and
drink, the "bhāṣā" committee is also included.  Since there is the possibility
of speech, excretion, and other things while eating, the "pratiṣṭhāpana"
committee is also included.  Therefore, the muni should be properly restrained
in these three places, and should strive for liberation.  This is what is meant
by the action mentioned in the last line of the next verse.  The muni, who is
always constantly aware of the three worlds, is excellent, his self is adorned
with pride, and he is established in this way.  This is "utkarṣa" (excellence).
"Māna" (ego) is the one who burns and consumes his own conduct.  "ṇūma" is a
deep delusion, because it is not in the middle ground.  "madhyastha" (middle
ground) is greed, which is in the midst of the unwholesome.  The word "cha"
indicates a collection.  The muni, who knows the results of these four poisons
(mānas etc.), should always "viginchaye" (examine) them, meaning he should
separate them from himself.  But in another scripture, anger etc. are mentioned
first.  The Bhagavan, who is seated on the throne of the "kṣapaka" (forgiving)
class, destroys anger etc.  Why then does the scripture scholar violate the
established order and mention "mānas" first?  It is said here that anger is
necessarily present when ego is present, but ego may or may not be present when
anger is present.  This is why the order is changed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH usakI vRddhi-saMvardhana-vikAsa ho vaha usI
prakAra ke kArya kare  /  cAritra Adi kA pAlana kisa prakAra ho sakatA hai, yaha
prazna upasthita karate hue zAstrakAra batalAte haiM-calanA yA gamana karanA
caryA kahalAtA hai  /  prayojana hone para-Avazyaka hone para sAdhu kahIM jAye
to vaha yuga mAtra dRSTi rakhakara cale  /  supratyupeSita-bhalI bhAMti
dekhakara supramArjita-bhalI bhA~ti pramArjita kara-jhAr3akara, Asana para
baiThe  /  apanI zaiyyA sthAna saMstAraka-bichaunA Adi ko bhalI bhAMti
dekhakara, pramArjita kara, una para sthita hoM usI prakAra khAne pIne meM bhI
vaha samyak upayoga rakhe, jAgarUka rahe  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki
sAdhu IryA bhASA, AdAna nikSepa aura pratiSThApana mUlaka samitiyoM meM sadaiva
upayoga-jAgarUkatA rakhatA huA udgama Adi doSoM se rahita AhAra pAnI kA anveSaNa
kre| bhalI bhAMti khoja khabara kara bhikSA svIkAra kare  /   /  mAnaH  /
etehiM tihiM ThANehiM, saMjae satataM muNI  /  /  ukkasaM jalaNaM NUmaM,
majjhatthaM ca vigiMcae  // 12 //  chAyA - eteSu triSu sthAneSu saMyataH satataM
muniH  /  utkarSa jvalanaM chAdakaM madhyasthaJca vivecayet  //  anuvAda - muni
tInoM sthAnoM-IryA samiti, AdAna nikSepa samiti tathA eSaNA samiti meM sadaiva
saMyata rahatA huA-jAgarUka yA pramAda rahita rahatA huA krodha, ahaMkAra, mAyA
tathA lobha kA parityAga kare  /  TIkA - punarapi cAritrazuddhayarthaM
guNAnadhikRtyAha-etAni-anantaroktAni trINi sthAnAni, tadyathA IsamitirityekaM
sthAnam AsanaM zayyetyanenAdAnabhANDamAtranikSepaNA samiti rityetacca dvitIyaM
sthAnaM bhaktapAna mityanenaiSaNAsamitirUpAttA bhaktapAnArthaJca praviSTasya
bhASaNasambhavAdbhASA samiti rAkSiptA  /  sati cAhAre uccAra prasravaNAdInAM
sadbhAvAt pratiSThApanAsamitirapyAyAtetyetacca tRtIya sthAnamiti, ata eteSu
triSu sthAneSu samyagyataH saMyata AmokSAya parivrajedityuttarazlokAnte kriyeti
/  tathA satatam anavaratam muniH samyak yathAvasthitajagattrayavettA utkRSyate
AtmA darpAdhyAto vidhIyate'nenetyutkarSoM mAnaH tathA AtmAnaM cAritraM vA
jvalayati dahatIti jvalanaH krodhaH tathA 'NUma' miti gahanaM mAyetyarthaH tasyA
alabdhamadhyatvAdevamabhidhIyate, tathA AsaMsAramasumatAM madhye antarbhavatIti
madhyastho lobhaH, ca zabdaH samuccaye, etAn mAnAdIMzcaturo'pi
kaSAyAMstadvipAkAbhijJo muniH sadA vigiMcaetti vivecayedAtmanaH pRthak
kuryAdityarthaH  /  nanu cAnyatrAgame kraudha AdAvupanyasyate, tathA
kSapakazreNyA mArUr3ho bhagavAna krodhAdIneva saMjvalanAn kSapayati
tatkimarthamAgama prasiddha krama mullaGghayAdau mAnasyopanyAsa iti ? atrocyate,
mAne satyavazyaM bhAvI krodhaH kodhe tu mAnaH syAdvA na vetyasyArthasya
pradarzanAyAnyathA krama karaNamiti  // 12 //  TIkArtha - zAstrakAra cAritra kI
zuddhi hetu apekSita guNoM ke saMbaMdha meM prakAza DAlate hue batalAte haiM-
pUrvAkta kahe gaye tIna sthAnoM meM sAdhu ko cAhiye ki vaha sadA saMyama-
apramAda yA jAgarUka bhAva ke sAtha vartana kare  /  una tInoM meM IryAsamiti
pahalA sthAna hai  /  Asana va zayyA zabda se AdAna evaM bhANDa nikSepaNa samiti
kA kathana kiyA hai  /  yaha dUsarA sthAna hai  /  bhakta pAna zabda dvArA eSaNA
samiti kA pratipAdana huA hai  /  AhAra pAnI lene hetu gRhastha ke ghara meM
pravRSTa sAdhu dvArA bhASaNa kiyA jAnA-bola jAnA bhI saMbhava hai  /  127

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra) Therefore, the language committee should also know
the objection - the language committee should also be taken. On eating, it is
possible to have actions like defecation, urination, excretion, and urine.
Therefore, the replacement committee also comes here. This is the third place.
In these three places, the sadhu should remain active towards liberation,
behaving with restraint. One should connect the action of the subsequent verse.
The sadhu who knows the three worlds in their true form should abandon pride or
ego. The soul is said to be burning with the fire of 'dadhmat-darpa', which
burns the soul and character. That is called 'jwalan', which is anger. The muni
should also abandon that. Maya is called 'nhum' because its middle cannot be
known, it is deep. (The muni should also abandon that). The one who lives among
beings until the end of the world is called 'madhyastha', which is greed because
it never leaves beings. The muni should abandon that. The word 'ch' is used in
this verse. Therefore, the muni who knows the fruit of the four types of kshayas
should separate them from the soul forever. Here, a doubt arises. In other
Agamas, anger is described everywhere. The Lord, who is seated in the Kshapaka
category, destroys anger, etc. Then, why is 'man' presented first here,
bypassing this order, which is famous in the scriptures? In response to this, it
is said that if there is 'man', then there is definitely anger, but if there is
anger, then 'man' is both possible and impossible. This is why there is a
violation of order here. "Samite u saya sahu, panch san var sanvude. Siehin
asiye bhikku, amokkhay parivvajeasi ||13|| tibemi ||" Shadow - "Samitastu sada
sadhu: panchasamvarasamvrittah. Siteshvasito bhikshu ramokshay parivrajediti ||
iti bravimi ||" Translation - The sadhu, who is endowed with the five samitis,
protected by the five samvaras, should not have any attachment or greed for
householders. He should continuously follow restraint until he attains
liberation. This is what I say. Sri Sudharma Swami says to Jambu Swami, this is
what I say. Commentary - Thus, for the sake of summarizing everything, he
mentions the primary and secondary qualities - "Turavadharane, panchabhih
samitibhih samit eva sadhu: tatha pranatipatadadi-panchamahavratopetattvat
panchaprakarasamvarasamvrittah tatha manovakkayaguptiguptah, tatha
grihapashadisu sitah baddha avasakta grihasthastesvasitah - anavavaddhasteshv
murchamakurvana: pankaadharapankajavat tatkarma na adihyamano bhikshu: -
bhikshanasilo bhavaghikshoh amokshay asheshkarmapagamalakshanamokshartham api
samantat braje: samyamanusthanarato bhaves tvamiti vineyasya upadeshah. Iti:
adhyayan samaptou. Bravimi iti ganadhara evam ahah yatha tirthakritoktam
tathaivaham bravimi, na svamanishikayeti. Gato'nugamah. Sampratam nayas tesham
ayam upasamharah." (128

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram ) ataH yahA bhASA samiti kA bhI AkSepa jAnanA cAhiye-
bhASA samiti ko bhI le lenA cAhiye AhAra karane para uccAra-malatyAga,
prasaraNa-mUtra tyAga ke rUpa meM zaucAdi kriyA bhI saMbhava hai  /  isaliye
yahAM pratisthApanA samiti bhI A jAtI haiM  /  yaha tIsarA sthAna hai  /  ina
tInoM sthAnoM meM sAdhu saMyama ke sAtha vartana karatA huA mukti lAbha paryanta
usa ora gatizIla rahe  /  uttaravartI zloka kI kriyA se saMbandha jor3anA cAhiye
/  tInoM lokoM ko yathAvata rUpa meM jAnane vAlA sAdhu utkarSa-mAna yA ahaMkAra
kA tyAga kara de  /  jisase AtmA dadhmAt-darpa agni se sulaga uThatI hai, jo
AtmA tathA cAritra ko jalAtA hai use jvalana kahA jAtA hai, vaha krodha hai,
usakA bhI muni parityAga kara de| mAyA ko 'NhUma' kahA jAtA hai kyoMki isakA
madhya-bIca jAnA nahIM jA sakatA, vaha gahana hai  /  (muni usakA bhI tyAga
kare)  /  AsaMsAra-saMsAra paryanta-yAvajjIvana jo prANiyoM ke madhya meM rahatA
hai use madhyastha kahA jAtA hai, vaha lobha hai kyoMki vaha prANiyoM kA kabhI
sAtha nahIM chor3atA  /  ve muni usakA parityAga kre| prastuta gAthA meM 'ca'
zabda kA prayoga huA hai  /  ata: cAra prakAra kI kaSAyoM kA jo phala jAnatA
hai, vaha muni sadA ke liye AtmA se inheM pRthak kara de| . yahAM eka zaMkA
upasthita hotI hai  /  anyatra AgamoM meM saba kahIM krodha kA varNana huA  /
kSapaka zreNI meM ArUr3ha bhagavAna saMjvalanAtmaka, krodha Adi kA hI kSapaNa-
vinAza karate haiM  /  taba zAstroM meM prasiddha isa krama ko lAMgha kara yahAM
pahale mAna kA pratipAdana kyoM kiyA gayA  /  isakA nirAkaraNa karate hue kahate
haiM ki mAna hone para avazya hI krodha hotA hai parantu krodha hone para mAna
honA saMbhAvita bhI hai aura asaMbhAvita bhI hai  /  isa bAta ko jJApita karane
ke liye yahAM kramollaMghana huA hai| samie u sayA sAhU, paMca saM vara saMvuDe
/  siehiM asie bhikkhU, AmokkhAya parivvaejAsi ||13||ttibemi|| chAyA - samitastu
sadA sAdhuH paJcasaMvarasaMvRttaH  /  siteSvasito bhikSu rAmokSAya parivrajediti
||iti brviimi|| anuvAda - samita-samiti se yukta paMcasaMvara saMvRtta-pAMca
saMvaroM se surakSita hotA huA sAdhu-bhikSaNazIla muni gRhasthoM meM
mUrchAgRddhi yA Asakti na rakhe  /  vaha mukti pAne taka anavarata saMyama kA
pAlana kare  /  yaha maiM kahatA hU~  /  zrI sudharmA svAmI jambU svAmI se
kahate haiM, aisA maiM bolatA hU~  /  TIkA - tadevaM
mUlaguNAnuttaraguNAMscopadAdhunA sarvopasaMhArArthamAha-turavadhAraNe, paJcabhiH
samitibhiH samita eva sAdhuH tathA prANAtipAtAdi-
paJcamahAvratopetatvAtpaJcaprakArasaMvarasaMvRttaH tathA manovAkkAyaguptiguptaH,
tathA gRhapAzAdisu sitAH baddhAH avasaktAH gRhasthAsteSvasitaH-anavabaddhasteSu
murchAmakurvANa: paMkAdhArapaMkajavattatkarmaNA'dihyamAno bhikSuH-bhikSaNa zIlo
bhAvabhikSoH AmokSAya azeSakarmApagamalakSaNamokSArthamapi samantAt braje:
saMyamAnuSThAnarato bhavestvamiti vineyasyopadezaH  /  itiH adhyayana samAptau
/  bravImIti gaNadhara evamAha yathA tIrthakRtoktaM tathaivAhaM bravImi, na
svamanISikayeti  /  gato'nugamaH  /  sAmprataM nayA steSAmayamupasaMhAraH  /
(128

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The statement of the time is: "All are indeed new, there are many ways of
speaking, depending on the context. That which is pure from all perspectives,
that which is established in the qualities of conduct, is considered pure."
||13||88||  Thus ends the first study of the *Samaya* section of the
*Sutrakritanga*.  Commentary: The author of the text, having described the
fundamental and secondary qualities, now concludes by stating:  - Here, the word
"tu" signifies a concept. The monk should always be endowed with the five
virtues and conduct himself in accordance with them. He should abstain from
violence, refrain from killing, and observe the five great vows. He should
remain guarded by the five restraints, protect his soul, and avoid any faults.
He should also remain guarded in his mind, speech, and body, preventing them
from engaging in unrighteous activities and protecting himself. He should not be
attached to householders who are caught in the trap of family life, just as a
lotus remains unstained by the mud even while growing in it. Similarly, even
while interacting with householders, the sage should not become attached to
them. The mendicant, who sustains himself through begging, should remain engaged
in the practice of self-restraint until he attains liberation and all his karmas
are destroyed. This is a teaching directed towards the disciple. Here, the word
"iti" signifies the end of the chapter. The verb "bravimi" is connected with the
*Ganadhara*. He says, "I speak as the *Tirthankara* said, as I have heard." He
does not speak from his own intellect or desire.  The exposition of the *Anugam*
principles has concluded. Now, the conclusion of the *nayas* is presented. There
are many ways of speaking about all the *nayas*. They should be understood as
being free from fault from the perspective of all *nayas*. Those who are
established in the qualities of conduct, who possess right knowledge and action,
are considered pure by the sages.  The *Samaya* section of the *Sutrakritanga*
has come to an end.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 svasamaya vaktavyatAdhikAraH "savvesi pi nayANaM, bahuvidhavaktavyaM nisAmittA
/  taM savvaNayavizuddhaM jaM caraNaguNaThio sAhU" ?  // 13 // 88 //  iti
sUtrakRtAGge samayAravyaM prathamAdhyayanaM samAptam  /  TIkArtha - zAstrakAra
mUla guNoM evaM uttaraguNoM kA varNana kara aba unakA upasaMhAra karate hue
pratipAdana karate haiM - - yahAM 'tu' zabda avadhAraNA ke artha meM hai  /
muni sadaiva pAMcoM samitiyoM se yukta hokara unakA bhalI bhAMti pAlana karatA
huA vartana kare  /  vaha prANAtipAta viramaNa-hiMsA se varati, ahiMsA Adi pAMca
mahAvratoM kA paripAlana karatA huA, pAMca saMvaroM se gupta rahe, AtmA ko
surakSita rakhe, doSa na Ane de| sAtha hI sAtha vaha apane mana, vacana, zarIra
se bhI sadA gupta rahe-unheM asat pravRtti meM na jAne dekara AtmarakSaNa kare
/  pArivArika phaMde meM phaMse hue gRhasthoM meM vaha Asakta na rahe jaise
paMka-kIcar3a meM rahatA huA bhI paMkaja-kamala usase alipta rahatA hai, usI
taraha gRhasthoM ke samparka meM rahatA huA bhI sAdhu unameM Asakta na bane  /
bhikSaNazIla-bhikSA dvArA jIvana nirvAha karane vAlA bhAva bhikSu jaba taka
mukti prApta na ho jAya, samasta karmoM kA kSaya na ho jAya, taba taka saMyama
ke anuSThAna meM-anupAlana meM saMlagna rahe  /  yaha ziSya ko uddiSTa kara
upadeza hai  /  yahAM 'iti' zabda AyA hai  /  vaha adhyAya kI samApti kA sUcaka
hai  /  bravImi kriyA gaNadhara ke sAtha jur3I hai  /  ve kahate haiMtIrthaMkara
ne jaisA kahA, jaisA maiMne sunA, vahI kahatA hU~  /  svamanISikA-apanI buddhi
yA mana kI icchA se nahIM kahatA  /  anugama-siddhAnta nirvacana samApta huaa|
aba nayoM kA upasaMhAra hai  /  saba nayoM kI bahuvidha vaktavyatA hai-ve aneka
prakAra usI ko sarvanaya vizuddha-saba nayoM kI dRSTi se nirdoSa samajhanA
cAhiye  /  jinheM caraNaguNa sthita-samyak jJAna aura kriyA meM vartanazIla
sAdhu vizuddha mAnate haiM  /  zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtra kA samaya nAmaka prathama
adhyayana samApta huA  /  ( 129

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter Two of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra, Second Vaitaliya Study**  **First
Uddeshaka**  Awake! Why do you not awaken? Enlightenment is indeed difficult to
attain after death. The nights that pass do not return, nor is life easily
regained.  **Commentary:**  This sutra, free from errors and possessing other
virtues, is to be recited. Here, the Bhagavan, the first Tirthankara, addresses
his sons, filled with compassion for those who have rejected the path of
liberation. He also speaks to the gods, demons, humans, and animals, saying:
"Awake! You should attain enlightenment in the Dharma, which is characterized by
knowledge, vision, and conduct. For such an opportunity is difficult to obtain.
Even if one is born as a human, and even if one is born in a noble family in a
land of righteousness, and even if one possesses all the senses and has attained
faith and hearing, and even if one has a firm understanding of oneself, why do
you not awaken?"  The meaning is that when one has attained all these qualities,
one should abandon all trivial pleasures and engage in the Dharma to attain
enlightenment. As it is said: "In the human birth, which is conducive to
liberation and happiness, and which is endowed with the Jain Dharma, one should
not indulge in the fleeting pleasures of the senses, even though they are easily
attainable. Even if one finds a treasure trove filled with precious stones like
lapis lazuli, why would one choose to pick up a small piece of shining glass?"
For those who have not practiced the Dharma, enlightenment, which is
characterized by right faith, knowledge, and conduct, is indeed very difficult
to attain after death. As it is said: "Due to carelessness, one who has once
deviated from the practice of Dharma will wander in the cycle of birth and death
for an infinite period of time."  The word "hurit" signifies that the nights
that have passed do not return, nor does the time of youth return. As it is
said: "Having obtained the rare human birth, what carelessness is this that I
have not attained liberation? Even the king of the gods cannot return to life
after death."  Life, which is characterized by restraint, is not easily
attainable in this world. Even if one has life, if it is cut short, it cannot be
restored.  The meaning of the sutra is that enlightenment awakens the sleeping
soul. Sleep is like a dream, and awakening is like waking up from sleep. The
four types of deposits are: name, form, knowledge, and conduct. Here, the author
emphasizes the deposit of form, ignoring the deposit of name.  The sutra says:
"Form is asleep, and it is awakened by knowledge, faith, and restraint. It is
said that there is no attachment, and knowledge, faith, and conduct are
practiced."  This verse shows that form is asleep and is awakened by
enlightenment. The first and last parts of the verse include the sleep of form,
the sleep of the soul, and enlightenment. The sleep of form includes the sleep
of the senses, the sleep of perception, and the sleep of the mind. The sleep of
the soul is the absence of knowledge, vision, and conduct. The awakening of form
is the awakening of the sleeping soul, and the awakening of the soul is the
awakening of knowledge, vision, conduct, austerity, and restraint.  The verse
also shows that the awakening of the soul leads to liberation. This is clearly
shown in the second half of the verse.  Since there are two types of sleep, one
of form and one of the soul, there are four types of awakenings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram dvitIya vaitAliya adhyayana prathama uddezakaH
saMbujjhaha kiM na bujjhaha ? saMbohI khalu pecca dullahA  /  No hUvaNamaMti
rAio, no sulabhaM puNarAvi jIviyaM  // 1 //  chAyA - saMvudhyadhvaM kiM na
budhyadhvaM ? saMbodhiH khalu pretya durlabhA  /  . no hUpa namanti rAtrayaH, no
sulabhaM punarapi jIvitam  /  anuvAda - bhavya janoM ko saMbodhita kara kahA
jAtA hai-Apa bodha ko prApta kareM  /  aisA kyoM nahIM karate ? isa jagata se
cale jAne ke bAda bodha prApta karanA durlabha hai-durgama hai  /  jo rAteM bIta
jAtI haiM, phira ve lauTa kara nahIM AtI  /  jo jIvana calA jAtA hai, vaha phira
sulabha nahIM rahatA  /  TIkA - sAmprataM sUtrAnugame'skhalitAdiguNopetaMsUtra
muccAraNIyaM taccedam - tatra bhagavAn Adi tIrthaMkaroM
bharatatiraskArAgatasaMvegAn svaputrAnuddizyedamAha, yadi vA
surAsuranaroragatirazcaH samuddizya provAca yathA-saMvudhyadhvaM yUyaM
jJAnadarzanacAritralakSaNe dharme bodhaM kuruta, yataH punarevaMbhUto'vasaro
durApaH tathAhi mAnuSaM janma tatrA'pi karmabhUmiH punarAryadezaH sukulotpattiH
sarvendriyapATavaM zravaNazraddhAdiprAptau satyAM-svasaMvittyavaSTambhenAha-kiM
na budhyadhvamiti, avazyamevaMvidhasAmagyavAptau sakarNena tucchAn bhogAn
parityajya saddharme vodho vidheya iti bhAvaH, tathAhi "nirvANAdi sukhaprade
narabhave jainendradharmAnvite, labye svalpamacAru kAmajasukhaM no sevituM
yujyate  /  vaidUryyAdimahopalaughanicite prApte'pi ratnAkare lAtuM svalpa
madIpti kAcazakalaM kiM sAmprataM sAmpratam"? akRtadharmAcaraNAnAntu prANinAM
saMbodhiH samyagdarzanajJAnacAritrAnAptilakSaNA pretya paralokagatAnAM khalu
zabdasyAvadhAraNArthatvAd sudurlabhaiva  /  tathAhi-viSayapramAdavazAt sakRd
dharmAcaraNAda bhraSTasyAnantamapi kAlaM saMsAre paryaTanamabhihitamiti  /
kiJca hurityavadhAraNe, naivAtikrAntArAtrayaH upanamanti punaukante,
nahyatikrAnto yauvanAdikAlaH punarAvartata iti bhAvaH tathAhi
"bhavakoTIbhirasulabhaM mAnuSyaM prApya kaH pramAdo me nahi gatamAyurbhUyaH
pratyetyapi devarAjasya" ? no naiva saMsAre sulabhaM suprApaM saMyamapradhAnaM
jIvitaM, yadi vA jIvitam AyustruTitaM sat tadeva sandhAtuM na zakyata iti
vRttArthaH saMbodhazca prasuptasyasatobhavatisvApazca nidrodaye, nidrAsaMboyozca
nAmAdizcaturddhA nikSepaH tatra nAmasthApane anAdRtyadravyabhAvanikSepaM
pratipAdayituM niyuktikRdAha "davvaM niddAveo daMsaNaNANatavasaMjamA bhAve  /
ahigAro puNa bhaNiyo, nANe tavadaMsaNa carinte  // 42 //  iha ca gAthAyAM
dravyanidrAbhAva saMbodhanazca darzitaH tatrAdyantagrahaNena bhAvanidrAdravya
bodhayostadantarvartinorgrahaNaM draSTavyaM, tatra dravyanidrAnidrAvedo vedana
manubhava: darzanAvaraNIya vizeSodaya iti yAvat,
bhaavnidraatujnyaandrshncaaritrshuunytaa| tatra dravyavodho dravyanidrayA
suptasya bodhanaM, bhAve bhAvaviSaye punarbodho darzanajJAna
cAritratapaHsaMyamAH drssttvyaa| iha ca bhAvaprabodhenAdhikAraH sa ca
gAthApazcArddhana sugamena pradarzita iti  /  atra ca
nidrAbodhayordravyabhAvabhedAccatvAro bhaGgA yojanIyA iti  // 43 //  130

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Vaitaliya Study Commentary - According to Sutragama  The recitation of the
sutra should be done with adherence to the flawless, primordial qualities. The
first Tirthankara, Lord Rishabhdev, addressing those who had developed
dispassion, those who had been rejected by Bharat Chakravarti, or addressing the
gods, demons, humans, snakes, and animals, says: "O noble beings! You should
attain the knowledge of Dharma, which is in the form of right knowledge, right
faith, and right conduct, because such an opportunity is rare."  It is very
difficult to obtain a human birth, a land of karma, an Aryan country, a noble
family, birth and residence, and the ability of all senses to perform their
respective functions.  Seeing the eagerness to listen and the origin of faith,
the Lord expresses his thoughts, saying: "Why do you not attain the knowledge of
right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct? A wise man who has obtained the
aforementioned materials should abandon the consumption of trivial and
insignificant matters and attain the knowledge of true Dharma. The Dharma, which
is the true bliss in the form of liberation, propounded by the Jina, is
available in this human existence. It is not appropriate to consume trivial,
insignificant, and unpleasant objects of desire that cause suffering. If a sea
filled with vaidurya and other gems is obtained, then how appropriate is it to
take a dull, insignificant piece of glass? It is never appropriate. The man who
has not practiced Dharma will find it difficult to attain knowledge, faith, and
conduct in the afterlife. The word 'khalu' in this verse is determinative. A man
who indulges in worldly pleasures and becomes corrupt even once from the
practice of Dharma, wanders in this world for an infinite period. This is what
the Agamas say. Here, the word 'hu' is used in the sense of determination. The
nights that have passed, do not return. The time of youth, etc., that has
passed, does not return. It is said:  "Alas! Why am I negligent, even after
obtaining this human birth, which is difficult to obtain even after millions of
births? The lifespan that has passed does not return, even if it is that of
Indra. In this world, a righteous life, where restraint is paramount, is not
easily attainable. A broken thread of life cannot be mended. It cannot be joined
again." This is the meaning of this verse.  The word 'sambodh' means awakening.
A man who is asleep, who is in deep sleep, is awakened. When sleep arises, there
is sleep and slumber. There are four deposits, namely, name, sleep, awakening,
and establishment. Of these, the commentators explain the deposit of the
appointed substance and the deposit of feeling, leaving aside the deposit of
name and establishment. In this verse, the substance of sleep and the feeling of
awakening are expressed. The substance of sleep is the beginning, and the
feeling of awakening is the end. Therefore, by accepting the beginning and the
end, one should also accept the feeling of sleep and the substance of awakening
in between.  The sleep experienced due to the rise of the darshanavaran karma is
the substance of sleep, and the absence of knowledge, faith, and conduct is the
feeling of sleep. The awakening of a sleeping man in the substance of sleep is
the substance of awakening, and the self-possession of knowledge, faith,
conduct, austerity, and restraint are the feelings of awakening. Here, only the
feeling of awakening is described. This is clearly revealed by the latter part
of this verse. Here, one should understand four distinctions from sleep and
awakening, in relation to the distinction between substance and feeling.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana TIkArtha - sUtrAgama ke anusAra skhalanArahita Adi guNoM kA
pAlana karate hue sUtra kA uccAraNa karanA cAhiye  /  Adi tIrthaMkara bhagavAna
RSabhadeva, bharata cakravartI dvArA tiraskata apane patroM ko janheM vairAgya
utpanna ho gayA thA, unheM uddiSTa kara kahate haiM athavA sura, asura, manuSya,
uraga-nAga aura tiryaJca prANiyoM ko saMbodhita kara kahate haiM ki-he bhavya
jIvoM ! tuma dharma kA bodha prApta karo, jo samyakjJAna, samyakdarzana evaM
samyak cAritra rUpa hai kyoMki phira vaisA avasara prApta honA durlabha hai|
manuSya yoni, sAtha hI sAtha karma bhUmi, Arya deza aura uttama kula meM
utpatti-AvAsa tathA sarvendriya pATava-saba indriyoM kI apane apane kAryoM meM
kuzalatAsakSamatA yaha saba prApta honA bahuta kaThina hai  /  sunane kI
utsukatA aura zraddhA kA udgama Adi dekhakara bhagavAn apane vicAra vyakta
karate hue kahate haiM ki tuma loga samyakjJAna, samyakdarzana, samyakcAritra kA
bodha-jJAna kyoM nahIM prApta karate  /  eka buddhimAna puruSa ko jise pUrvokta
sAmagrI prApta hai, tuccha-nagaNya viSayoM ke sevana kA parityAga kara sacce
dharma kA jJAna prApta karanA cAhiye  /  jinendra bhagavAna dvArA pratipAdita
mokSa rUpa saccA AnaMda pradAna karane vAlA dharma jo isa manuSya bhava meM
prApta hai, vahAM tuccha-nagaNya, asundara-vastuvRttyA duHkhaprada kAmabhoga kA
sevana karanA ucita nahIM hai  /  vaiDUrya Adi maNiyoM se ApUrNa samudra prApta
ho jAya to phira nisteja, nagaNya kAMca ke Tukar3e ko lenA kahAM taka ucita hai
/  kadApi ucita nahIM  /  jisa puruSa ne dharma kA AcaraNa nahIM kiyA, use
paraloka meM sambodhijJAna, darzana, aura cAritra kI prApti durlabha hai  /  isa
gAthA meM 'khalu' zabda avadhAraNAmUlaka hai  /  jo puruSa sAMsArika bhogoM ke
sevana meM par3akara eka bAra bhI dharma ke AcaraNa se bhraSTa ho jAtA hai to
vaha ananta kAla paryanta isa saMsAra meM paryaTana karatA rahatA hai  /  AgamoM
meM aisA kahA hai  /  yahAM 'hU' zabda kA prayoga avadhAraNA ke artha meM hai  /
jo rAteM atikrAnta ho gaI-calI gaI, ve phira lauTakara vApasa nahIM AtI jo
yauvana-javAnI Adi kA samaya atikrAnta ho gayA-calA gayA vaha vApisa nahIM
lauTatA-kahA gayA hai - koTi-karor3oM bhavoM-janmoM ke bAda bhI jisakA prApta
honA asulabha hai aise manuSya bhava ko prApta karake bhI hAya ! maiM kyoM
pramAda kara rahA hU~  /  jo AyuSya vyatIta ho gayA, vaha phira lauTakara nahIM
AtA, cAhe indra kA hI kyoM na ho  /  isa jagata meM saMyama pradhAna-jisameM
saMyama kI mukhyatA ho, aisA dharmiSTha jIvana sulabha aura suprApya nahIM hai
/  TUTI huI Ayu-Ayu ke dhAge kA saMdhAna nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  use phira
jor3A nahIM jA sakatA  /  isa vRtta-padya kA yaha artha hai| saMbodha zabda kA
artha jAganA hai  /  jo puruSa prasupta hotA hai-gAr3hI nIMda meM soyA huA hotA
hai usako saMbodha-jAgaraNa hotA hai vaha jAgatA hai  /  nidrA ke udaya hone
para svApa-zayana hotA hai  /  nidrA aura saMbodha ke nAma Adi cAra nikSepa hote
haiM  /  inameM nAma nikSepa va sthApanA ko chor3akara niyuktikAra dravya
nikSepa aura bhAva nikSepa ko spaSTa karate hue batalAte haiM  /  isa gAthA meM
dravya nidrA aura bhAva saMbodha vyakta kiye gaye haiM  /  dravya nidrA Adi hai
aura bhAva prabodha anta hai  /  ataH Adi aura aMta ke grahaNa se unake madhya
meM bhAva nidrA aura dravya saMbodha kA bhI grahaNa karanA cAhiye  /
darzanAvaraNIya. karma ke udaya se jo nidrA kA anubhava hotA hai vaha dravya
nidrA hai tathA jJAna, darzana evaM cAritra kI zUnyatA-inase rahita honA bhAva
nidrA hai  /  dravya nidrA meM supta puruSa kA jAgRta honA dravya bodha hai
tathA jJAna, darzana, cAritra, tapa tathA saMyama ko svAyatta karanA bhAva bodha
haiM, yahAM bhAva prabodha kA hI varNana hai  /  yaha isa gAthA ke uttarArddha
dvArA bhalIbhAMti prakaTa hai  /  yahAM dravya aura bhAva bheda kI apekSA se
nidrA evaM bodha se cAra bheda samajha lene cAhiye  /  /  ( 131

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 2:**  "Even children, old people, and those
in the womb, humans abandon this life, they die. Just as a hawk seizes a
partridge, so too does death seize life when the lifespan is exhausted."
**Commentary:**  "The Lord, showing that the lifespan of all beings in the world
is not fixed, but subject to beginnings and endings, says: 'Even children, old
people, and those in the womb, humans abandon this life, they die. See this,
you! Who are they? Humans. Humans are the ones who deserve to be taught, so the
term 'humans' is used. Because lifespan is subject to many dangers, all beings
abandon their lives in all stages of life. For example, even someone with a
lifespan of three palya (a unit of time) dies within a moment after reaching the
end of their lifespan. And it is said, 'A being dies in the womb, or at birth.'
Here, an example is given: Just as a hawk, a type of bird, seizes a partridge, a
type of bird, and kills it, so too does death seize the lives of beings. When
the cause of the beginning of the lifespan is exhausted, or when the lifespan is
exhausted, the life of beings is broken, cut off, and destroyed."  **Verse 3:**
"By mothers and fathers, they are robbed, a good path is not easily attained
after death. Seeing these fears, the virtuous should refrain from the
beginning."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram DaharA buDhDhA ya pAsaha gabbhatthA vi cayaMti mANavA
/  baTTayaM hare evaM AukhayaMmi tuTTaI  // 2 //  seNe jaha chAyA - anuvAda
bhagavAna RSabha kahate haiM - yaha saMsAra aisA hai ki bAlaka, vRddha tathA
garbhastha manuSya bhI isa jIvana ko chor3a dete haiM, mara jAte haiN| jarA
dekho, vicAra karo  /  jaise bAja vartaka- baTera pakSI ke prANa hara letA hai -
mAra DAlatA hai  /  usI prakAra Ayu kSINa hone para mRtyu jIvana ko jhapaTa letI
hai  /  daharAH vRddhAzca pazyata garbhasthA api tyajantimAnavAH  /  zyeno yathA
vartikAM haredevamAyuH kSaye truTyati  // 2 //  TIkA bhagavAneva sarvasaMsAriNAM
sopakramatvAdaniyatamAyurupadarzayannAha - DaharAH bAlA eva kecana jIvitaM
tyajanti tathA vRddhAzca garbhasthA api etatpazyata yUyaM, kete ? mAnavAH
manuSyAH teSAmevopadezadAnArhatvAnmAnavagrahaNaM, vahvapAyatvAdAyuSaH
sarvAsvapyavasthAsu prANI prANAMstyajatItyuktaM bhavati, tathAhi
tripalyopamAyuSkasyApi paryyAptyanantaramantamuhUrtenaiva kasya
cinmRtyurupatiSThatIti  /  api ca "garbhasthaM jAyamAna" mityAdi  /  atraiva
dRSTAntamAhayathA zyenaH pakSivizeSo varttakaM tittirajAtIyaM hared vyApAdayed
evaM prANinaH prANAn mRtyurapaharet, upakramakAraNamAyuSka mupakrAmet, tadabhAve
vA AyuSyakSaye truTyati vyavacchidyate jIvAnAM jIvitamitizeSaH  // 2 //  - -
TIkArtha - samasta sAMsArika jIvoM kI Ayu saupakrama-upakrama sahita hone ke
kAraNa niyata nizcita nahIM hai-yaha digdarzana karAte hue bhagavAna RSabha
kahate haiM chAyA 1 koI zaizava meM hI apane jIvana ko tyAga dete haiM tathA kaI
vRddha hokara mRtyu ko prApta hote haiM aura kaI aise bhI haiM jo garbha meM hI
cale jAte haiM  /  yaha dekho ! isa para vicAra karo  /  yoM jIvana ko tyAga
karane vAle ve kauna haiM ? ve mAnava haiM  /  yadyapi sabhI prANiyoM kI yahI
sthiti hai tathApi manuSya hI upadeza dene yogya hote haiM  /  isaliye yahAM
manuSyoM ko hI grahaNa kiyA gayA hai  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki Ayu bahuta
hI apAyoMvighna bAdhAoM se pUrNa haiM  /  isaliye sabhI avasthAoM meM prANI
prANa tyAga kara jAte haiM - mara jAte haiM  /  kaI aise prANI haiM jo
tripalyopama Ayu prApta karake bhI paryApti ke anantara hI antarmuhUrta meM mara
jAte haiM, apanI jIvana lIlA kA saMvaraNa kara jAte haiM  /  isaliye kahA gayA
hai ki koI garbha meM hI, koI janmate hI apane prANa chor3a dete haiM  /  isa
viSaya kA spaSTIkaraNa karane ke liye AgamakAra eka dRSTAnta uSasthita karate
haiM- jaise bAja tittira jAtIya tItara nAmaka pakSI yA baTera ko mAra DAlatA
hai, usI prakAra mRtyu prANiyoM ke prANoM kA apaharaNa kara letI hai  /  AyuSya
ke kSaya kA jaba kAraNa upasthita ho jAtA hai to prANiyoM kA jIvana TUTa jAtA
hai, vyavacchinna ho jAtA hai- naSTa ho jAtA hai  /   /  mAyAhiM piyAhiM,
luppar3a, no sulahA sugaI ya peccao eyAiM bhayAI pehiyA, ArambhA viramejja suvva
//  3  //  - mAtRbhiH pitRbhi lupyate no sulabhA sugatizca pretya  /  etAni
bhayAni prekSya AraMbhAdvirameta suvrataH  //  132

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vaitaliya Study Translation -   There are many people in the world who wander
due to attachment to their parents, family, etc. They do not attain liberation
after death, when their life's play ends. Therefore, attachment to parents,
etc., is a fear. A man who observes vows perfectly, seeing these fears, should
abstain from violence from the beginning.  **Commentary:**  Some people, due to
attachment to their parents and family affection, do not strive for Dharma. They
are led astray by their parents and family, and wander in the world. As it is
said, "The wicked creator has created chains of bondage in the form of parents,
children, wife, and relatives, which are not made of iron, but are much stronger
than iron."  Such a person, whose mind is clouded by attachment, is devoid of
the ability to discern right from wrong. He is willing to do anything to support
his family, and is condemned by the righteous in this world. Even after death,
he does not attain liberation in the next birth. Instead, he suffers due to his
attachment to his parents, and his desire for worldly pleasures, leading to a
bad destiny.  Thus, these are the fears, the causes of fear, and the paths to
bad destinies. A man who is virtuous, seeing these, should abstain from all
wrong conduct from the beginning, and remain steadfast.  **Another reading:**
The world is full of beings who are entangled in their actions. They are bound
by their own deeds and cannot escape their consequences.  **Translation:**
Those who do not abandon wrong and sinful actions in this world suffer greatly.
Beings residing in different places and species, go to hell and other places of
torment to experience the fruits of their actions. They cannot escape the
consequences of their actions without experiencing them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana anuvAda - saMsAra meM kaI aise loga haiM jo mAM bApa Adi ke
moha meM par3akara saMsAra meM bhaTakate haiN| marane para-jIvana lIlA ke
samApta ho jAne para unheM sadgati prApta nahIM hotI  /  isaliye mAtA pitA kA
moha Adi bhaya hai  /  suvrata-uttama rUpa se vratoM kA pAlana karane vAlA
puruSa ina bhayoM ko dekhakara Arambha se-hiMsA se nivRtta rahe  /  TIkA - tathA
kazcinmAtApitRbhyAM mohena svajanasnehane ca na dharmampratyudyamaM vidhatte, sa
ca taireva mAtA-pitrAdibhiH lupyate saMsAre bhrAmyate, tathAhi_
"vihitamalohamahomahanmAtApitR putradAra bandhusaMjJama |snehmy masumatAmadaH
kiM bandhanaM zRGkhalaM khalena dhAtrA"? tasya ca snehA kulitamAnasasya
sadasadvivekavikalasya svajanapoSaNArthaM yatkiJcana kAriNa ihaiva
sadbhirninditasya sugatirapi pretya janmAntare no sulabhA, apitu
mAtApitRvyAmohitamanasastadarthaM klizyato viSayasukhepsozca durgatireva
bhavatItyuktambhavati  /  tadevametAni bhayAni bhayakAraNAni durgatigamanAdIni,
pehiya'tti prekSya ArambhAt sAvadyAnuSThAnarUpAd viramet suvataH san susthito
veti pAThAntaram  // 3 //  TIkArtha - koI manuSya mA~ bApa tathA pArivArika
janoM ke sneha meM, moha meM par3akara dharma ke prati udyata nahIM rahatA  /
usa dizA meM prayatnazIla nahIM rahatA  /  mAtA-pitA Adi pArivArika jana use
saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karAte haiM  /  unake kAraNa vaha saMsAra meM bhaTakatA
hai  /  ataeva kahA hai-khala-duSTa vidhAtA ne jIvoM ko baMdhana meM DAle
rakhane hetu mAtA-pitA, putra putrI, strI, bandhu-bAndhava mUlaka zrRMkhalA-
jaMjIra kI racanA kI hai  /  tathApi ye jaMjIra lohe kI banI huI nahIM hai kintu
usase bhI kahIM jyAdA majabUta hai  /  mA~ bApa aura kuTumbI janoM ke moha meM
par3A manuSya sat, asat ke viveka se rahita ho jAtA hai  /  vaha apane
pArivArika logoM kA paripoSaNa karane hetu nimna se nimna kArya karane ko utAru
ho jAtA hai  /  ataH isa loka meM sajjana puruSoM dvArA vaha nidiMta hotA hai-
sajana-saddharmAnurAgI puruSoM kI dRSTi meM usakI pratiSThA nahIM rahatI  /
paraloka meM bhI vaha sadgatiuttama gati nahIM pAtA  /  abhiprAya yaha hai ki
mA~ bApa Adi kuTumbIjanoM ke moha meM jo grasta rahatA hai, vaiSayika sukhoM kI
abhipsA liye rahatA hai tathA svajanoM ke liye-unake sukha ke liye taraha taraha
ke kaSTa jhelatA hai| vaha durgati ko prApta karatA hai  /  suvrata-suSTuvrata
yukta puruSa isa prakAra durgati Adi bhayotpAdaka kAraNoM ko dekhatA huA
Arambha-hiMsA Adi se nivRtta rahe-dUra raheM  /  jamiNaM jagatI puDho jagA,
kammehiM luppaMti pANiNo  /  samayeva kaDehiM gAhai, No tassa mucceja'puTThayaM
// 4 //  chAyA - yadidaM jagati pRthajagAH, karmabhilRpyante prANinaH  /
svayamena kRtai gArhate, no tasya mucyedaspaSTaH  //  anuvAda - isa saMsAra meM
jo prANI sAvadya-sapApa karmoM ke AcaraNa kA tyAga nahIM karate, unakI bar3I
durvasthA hotI hai  /  pRthak pRthaka sthAnoM meM, yoniyoM meM nivAsa karane
vAle prANI apane dvArA kRta karmoM ke phala bhoga hetu naraka Adi yAtanAmaya
sthAnoM meM jAte haiM  /  ve apane karmoM kA phala bhoga binA vahAM se chUTa
nahIM skte| ( 133

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra - Commentary  **The commentary explains the fault of
those who do not renounce their vices:**  "Why is this the case for those who
have not renounced their vices? In the world, those who are separate, who are
distinct, who are burdened with karmas accumulated through the performance of
virtuous and vicious actions, wander in the realms of torment like hell, etc.
They themselves are bound by the karmas they have created, not by any other
cause like God, etc. They enter the realms of torment like hell, etc., or they
accumulate those karmas which are the cause of suffering. This shows the cause-
and-effect relationship of karmas. And the being is not untouched or unaffected
by the consequences of his evil actions. He does not attain liberation without
experiencing the ripening of his karmas and without undergoing special
austerities, initiation, etc."  **Commentary:**  The author of the scripture
states that those who are not free from vicious and sinful actions, are distinct
and separate from the path of liberation. They are bound by their karmas and
wander in realms of torment like hell, etc. This is not due to any external
cause like God, etc., but due to their own actions. They experience suffering
because of their karmas. This establishes the cause-and-effect relationship
between actions and suffering. The being cannot escape the consequences of his
actions without experiencing them. He cannot attain liberation without
undergoing special austerities, initiation, etc.  **Verse 5:**  "Devas,
Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Asuras, Earth-dwellers, Reptiles, Kings, Merchants,
Brahmanas, all these abandon their abodes when they are afflicted."
**Commentary:**  The commentary explains that all beings in this world,
including Devas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Asuras, Earth-dwellers, Reptiles, Kings,
Merchants, and Brahmanas, are subject to suffering and death. They all abandon
their abodes when they are afflicted. This emphasizes the impermanence of all
worldly things.  **Commentary:**  The author of the scripture states that all
beings in this world, including Devas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Asuras, Earth-
dwellers, Reptiles, Kings, Merchants, and Brahmanas, are subject to suffering
and death. They all abandon their abodes when they are afflicted. This
emphasizes the impermanence of all worldly things.  **Verse 5:**  "Devas,
Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Asuras, Earth-dwellers, Reptiles, Kings, Merchants,
Brahmanas, all these abandon their abodes when they are afflicted."
**Commentary:**  The commentary explains that all beings in this world,
including Devas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Asuras, Earth-dwellers, Reptiles, Kings,
Merchants, and Brahmanas, are subject to suffering and death. They all abandon
their abodes when they are afflicted. This emphasizes the impermanence of all
worldly things.  **Commentary:**  The author of the scripture states that all
beings in this world, including Devas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Asuras, Earth-
dwellers, Reptiles, Kings, Merchants, and Brahmanas, are subject to suffering
and death. They all abandon their abodes when they are afflicted. This
emphasizes the impermanence of all worldly things.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram _TIkA - anivRttasya doSamAha-yad yasmAda nivRttAnAmidaM
bhavati, kiM tat ? jagati 'puDho' tti, pRthagbhUtAH-vyavasthitAH
sAvadyAnuSThAnopacitaiH karmabhiH vilupyante narakAdiSu yAtanAsthAneSu
bhrAmyante, svayameva ca kRtaiH karmabhirnezvarAdyApAditaiH, gAhate
narakAdisthAnAni yAni tAni vA karmANi duHkha hetUni gAhate-upacinoti, anena ca
hetuhetumadbhAvaH karmaNAmupadarzito bhavati, na ca tasya azubhAcaritasya
karmaNo vipAkena aspRSTaH acchupto mucyate jantuH, karmaNAmudayamananubhUya
tapovizeSamantareNa dIkSA pravezAdinA na tadapagamaM vidhatta iti bhaavH||4||
TIkArtha - jo prANI sAvadya-pApayukta kAryoM se dUra nahIM hote unake doSa
prakaTa karane hetu zAstrakAra kahate haiM - . jo puruSa sAvadha kAryoM se
nivRtta nahIM hoteM-pRthak nahIM hote unakI aisI dazA hotIhai  /  unakI kyA dazA
hotI hai ? yaha prazna upasthita kara ve pratipAdita karate haiM ki jagata meM
pRthak pRthak nivAsa karane vAle prANI apane pApapUrNa kAryoM dvArA saMcita
karmoM ke pariNAmasvarUpa narakAdi yAtanAmaya sthAnoM meM bhaTakAye jAte haiN|
ve prANI apane dvArA kiye gaye karmoM ke pariNAmasvarUpa naraka Adi yAtanAmaya-
duHkhamaya sthitiyAM prApta karate haiM  /  Izvara Adi kisI anya kAraNa se yaha
nahIM hotA  /  apane duHkhoM kA apane karmoM ke sAtha kArya kAraNa bhAva
saMbaMdha hai  /  karma kAraNa hai  /  duHkha kArya hai  /  yaha batalAyA gayA
hai  /  prANI apane dvArA kiye gaye karmoM kA phala bhoge binA unase chuTakArA
nahIM pA sakatA  /  vaha apane udaya meM Aye karmoM kA phala bhoga kiye binA
tathA vizeSa tapazcaraNa evaM dIkSA grahaNa Adi ke binA una karmoM kA apagama-
nAza nahIM kara sktaa| devA gaMdhavvarakkhasA, asurA bhUmicarA sarIsivA  /  rAyA
naraseTTimAhaNA, ThANA tevi cayaMti dukkhiyA  // 5 //  chAyA - devAH gandharva
rAkSasAH asurAH bhUmicarAH sarIsRpAH  /  rAjAno narazreSThi brAhmaNAH sthAnAni
te'pi tyajanti duHkhitAH  //  anuvAda - isa saMsAra meM devatA, gaMdharva,
rAkSasa, asura bhUmi para vicaraNazIla prANI sarisRpa, reMgane vAle jaMtu, rAjA,
sAdhAraNa manuSya zreSThijana tathA brAhmaNa ye sabhI duHkhita hokara mRtyukAla
meM apane-apane sthAnoM kA parityAga kara cale jAte haiM  /  TIkA - adhUnA
sarvasthAnAnityatAM darzayitumAha - devAH jyotiSka saudharmAdyAH,
gandharvarAkSasa yo rUpa lakSaNatvAdaSTa prakArAH vyantarAH gRhyante  /  tathA
asurAH dazaprakArAH bhavanapatayaH, ye cA'nye bhUmicarAH sarIsRpAdyAH tiryaJcaH
tathA rAjAnaH cakravartino baladevavAsudevaprabhRtayaH tathA narAH
sAmAnyamanuSyAH zreSThinaH puramahattarAH brAhmaNAzcaite sarve'pi svakIyAni
sthAnAni duHkhitAH santa styajanti, yataH sarveSAmapi prANinAM prANaparityAge
mahad duHkhaM samutpadyata iti  // 5 //  TIkArtha - isa saMsAra meM jitane bhI
prANiyoM ke AvAsa ke-jIvita rahane ke jitane bhI sthAna haiM, yoniyAM haiM, ve
sabhI anitya-nazvara haiM  /  yaha digdarzana karAne hetu AgamakAra kahate haiM
- jyotiSka, saudharma Adi devagaNa, gaMdharva evaM rAkSasa ATha prakAra ke
vyantara deva, dasa prakAra ke bhavanapati deva, pRthvI para calane vAle prANI,
sarIsRpa-peTa ke bala reMgane vAle tiryaJca, baladeva, vAsudeva tathA cakravartI
Adi (134

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of Vaitaliya is such that specific people and ordinary men, the best
people of the city and Brahmins, etc., all leave their respective places with
great sorrow. All beings experience extreme suffering when they die. "Those who
are attached to sensual pleasures and worldly objects, like vultures, are bound
by their karma and suffer accordingly. Just as a ripe fruit falls from a palm
tree when its bond is broken, so too do these beings perish when their lifespan
is exhausted." (6) Commentary: The phrase "kaamehi" etc. refers to those who are
attached to sensual pleasures and worldly objects, like vultures, and who are
bound by their karma. They suffer the consequences of their actions in due time.
This means that those who seek pleasure and indulge in worldly objects only
experience suffering in this life and the next, and never attain peace. As it is
said: "He who seeks to subdue his desires through indulgence in worldly objects,
is like a man who runs towards his own shadow in the afternoon, trying to catch
it." The text further states that those who are about to die cannot be saved by
sensual pleasures or worldly objects. Just as a ripe fruit falls from a palm
tree when its bond is broken, so too do these beings perish when their lifespan
is exhausted. (6) Commentary: Those who are attached to sensual pleasures and
worldly objects, like vultures, and who are bound by their karma, suffer the
consequences of their actions in due time. This means that those who seek
pleasure and indulge in worldly objects only experience suffering in this life
and the next, and never attain peace. As it is said: "He who seeks to subdue his
desires through indulgence in worldly objects, is like a man who runs towards
his own shadow in the afternoon, trying to catch it." The text further states
that those who are about to die cannot be saved by sensual pleasures or worldly
objects. Just as a ripe fruit falls from a palm tree when its bond is broken, so
too do these beings perish when their lifespan is exhausted. (6) Commentary:
Those who are attached to sensual pleasures and worldly objects, like vultures,
and who are bound by their karma, suffer the consequences of their actions in
due time. This means that those who seek pleasure and indulge in worldly objects
only experience suffering in this life and the next, and never attain peace. As
it is said: "He who seeks to subdue his desires through indulgence in worldly
objects, is like a man who runs towards his own shadow in the afternoon, trying
to catch it." The text further states that those who are about to die cannot be
saved by sensual pleasures or worldly objects. Just as a ripe fruit falls from a
palm tree when its bond is broken, so too do these beings perish when their
lifespan is exhausted. (6) Commentary: Those who are attached to sensual
pleasures and worldly objects, like vultures, and who are bound by their karma,
suffer the consequences of their actions in due time. This means that those who
seek pleasure and indulge in worldly objects only experience suffering in this
life and the next, and never attain peace. As it is said: "He who seeks to
subdue his desires through indulgence in worldly objects, is like a man who runs
towards his own shadow in the afternoon, trying to catch it." The text further
states that those who are about to die cannot be saved by sensual pleasures or
worldly objects. Just as a ripe fruit falls from a palm tree when its bond is
broken, so too do these beings perish when their lifespan is exhausted. (6)
Commentary: Those who are attached to sensual pleasures and worldly objects,
like vultures, and who are bound by their karma, suffer the consequences of
their actions in due time. This means that those who seek pleasure and indulge
in worldly objects only experience suffering in this life and the next, and
never attain peace. As it is said: "He who seeks to subdue his desires through
indulgence in worldly objects, is like a man who runs towards his own shadow in
the afternoon, trying to catch it." The text further states that those who are
about to die cannot be saved by sensual pleasures or worldly objects. Just as a
ripe fruit falls from a palm tree when its bond is broken, so too do these
beings perish when their lifespan is exhausted. (6) Commentary: Those who are
attached to sensual pleasures and worldly objects, like vultures, and who are
bound by their karma, suffer the consequences of their actions in due time. This
means that those who seek pleasure and indulge in worldly objects only
experience suffering in this life and the next, and never attain peace. As it is
said: "He who seeks to subdue his desires through indulgence in worldly objects,
is like a man who runs towards his own shadow in the afternoon, trying to catch
it." The text further states that those who are about to die cannot be saved by
sensual pleasures or worldly objects. Just as a ripe fruit falls from a palm
tree when its bond is broken, so too do these beings perish when their lifespan
is exhausted. (6) Commentary: Those who are attached to sensual pleasures and
worldly objects, like vultures, and who are bound by their karma, suffer the
consequences of their actions in due time. This means that those who seek
pleasure and indulge in worldly objects only experience suffering in this life
and the next, and never attain peace. As it is said: "He who seeks to subdue his
desires through indulgence in worldly objects, is like a man who runs towards
his own shadow in the afternoon, trying to catch it." The text further states
that those who are about to die cannot be saved by sensual pleasures or worldly
objects. Just as a ripe fruit falls from a palm tree when its bond is broken, so
too do these beings perish when their lifespan is exhausted. (6) Commentary:
Those who are attached to sensual pleasures and worldly objects, like vultures,
and who are bound by their karma, suffer the consequences of their actions in
due time. This means that those who seek pleasure and indulge in worldly objects
only experience suffering in this life and the next, and never attain peace. As
it is said: "He who seeks to subdue his desires through indulgence in worldly
objects, is like a man who runs towards his own shadow in the afternoon, trying
to catch it." The text further states that those who are about to die cannot be
saved by sensual pleasures or worldly objects. Just as a ripe fruit falls from a
palm tree when its bond is broken, so too do these beings perish when their
lifespan is exhausted. (6) Commentary: Those who are attached to sensual
pleasures and worldly objects, like vultures, and who are bound by their karma,
suffer the consequences of their actions in due time. This means that those who
seek pleasure and indulge in worldly objects only experience suffering in this
life and the next, and never attain peace. As it is said: "He who seeks to
subdue his desires through indulgence in worldly objects, is like a man who runs
towards his own shadow in the afternoon, trying to catch it." The text further
states that those who are about to die cannot be saved by sensual pleasures or
worldly objects. Just as a ripe fruit falls from a palm tree when its bond is
broken, so too do these beings perish when their lifespan is exhausted. (6)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM viziSTa jana evaM sAdhAraNa puruSa, nagara ke zreSThijana
tathA brAhmaNa Adi sabhI bar3e duHkha ke sAtha apane-apane sthAnoM ko chor3akara
cale jAte haiM  /  prANa tyAga karate samaya sabhI prANiyoM ko atyanta kaSTa
hotA hai  /  kAmehi Na saMthavehi giddhA, kammasahA kAleNa jaMtavo  /  tAle jaha
baMdhaNaccue evaM AukkhayaMmi tuTTatI  // 6 //  chAyA - kAmeSu saMstaveSu
gRddhA, karmasahAH kAlena jantavaH  /  tAlaM yathA bandhanAcyutameva mAyuH kSaye
truTayati  //  anuvAda - kAmabhogoM meM-sAMsArika viSayoM meM tRSNAyukta
pArivArika janoM meM Asakta prANI samaya Ane para apane kRta karmoM kA phala
bhogate hue Ayu kSaya hone para usI prakAra samApta ho jAte haiM jaise tAr3a kA
baMdhA huA phala baMdhana ke chUTa jAne para gira jAtA hai  /  TIkA kiJca
'kAmehiM' ityAdi, kAmairicchAmadanarUpaistathA saMstavai pUrvAparabhUtaiH gRddhA
adhyupapannAH santaH kammasahetti karmavipAkasahiSNavaH kAlena karmavipAkakAlena
jantavaH prANino bhavanti  /  idamuktaM bhavatibhogepsorviSayAsevanena
tadupazamamicchata ihAmutra ca kleza eva kevalaM na punarUpazamAvAptiH tathAhi
"upabhogopAyaparo vAJchati yaH zamayituM viSaya tRSNAm  /  dhAvatyAkramitumasau
puro'parAhNe nijacchAyAm "? naca tasya mumUrSoH kAmaiH saMstavaizca trANamastIti
darzayati-yathA tAlaphalaM bandhanAd vRntAtcyutamatrANamavazyaM patati
evamasAvapi svAyuSaH kSaye truTyati jIvitAt cyavata iti  //  6  //  TIkArtha -
icchA madana rUpa kAma viSaya bhoga kI tRSNA se yukta tathA pUrvavartI evaM
pazcAtvartI sambandhI janoM meM Asakta prANI apane karma udita hone para unakA
phala bhogate haiM  /  isakA Azaya yaha hai ki viSaya sevana kI icchA meM
saMlagna puruSa viSayoM dvArA - bhogoM dvArA apanI tRSNA ko miTAnA cAhatA hai,
zAMta karanA cAhatA hai  /  vaha isa loka meM tathA paraloka meM kaSTa hI prApta
karatA hai  /  unakI tRSNA kabhI zAMta nahIM hotI  /  isaliye kahA gayA hai ki
jo vyakti bhogaparAyaNa-bhoga saMlagna rahakara viSaya tRSNA ko zAMta karanA
cAhatA hai, vaha mAnava aparAhna meM madhyAhna ke pazcAt * apanI chAyA ko
AkrAnta karane hetu pakar3ane hetu mAno daur3atA hai  /  maraNazIla mAnava kI
kAma bhoga dvArA tathA paricita janoM evaM padArthoM dvArA trANa nahIM hotA  /
ve usake zaraNa nahIM banate, AgamakAra isakA digdarzana karate hue kahate haiM
ki jaise baMdhana se vRkSa ke vRntayA - tantu se cyuta chUTA huA tAr3a kA phala
avazya hI gira jAtA hai koI bhI use girane se roka nahIM sakatA, usI prakAra
jaba prANI kA AyuSya kSINa ho jAtA hai to vaha apane jIvana se cyuta ho jAtA
hai- mara jAtA hai  /  chAyA je yApi bahussue siyA, dhammiyamAhaNabhikkhue sitA
/  abhiNUmakaDehiM mucchie tivvaM te kammehiM kiccatI  // 7 //  yecA'pi
bahuzrutAH syuH dhArmika brAhmaNabhikSukAH syuH  /  abhicchAdakakRtairmUrcchitA
stIvraM te karmabhiH kRtyante  //  135

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Translation:**  **Verse 7:**  Even if someone is
well-versed in scriptures, deeply religious, a Brahmin, or a monk, if they
engage in deceitful actions, they will suffer greatly as a result of their
karma.  **Commentary:**  Even if someone is well-versed in scriptures,
understands their meaning, is religious and follows Dharma, is a Brahmin, or a
monk who lives by begging, if they engage in deceitful actions, they will be
tormented by their karma. This torment will be both pleasant and unpleasant, and
they will be cut down and oppressed by their actions.  **Verse 8:**  Look! Many
other Tirthankaras arise, abandoning the impermanent world with its attachments,
but they cannot cross the ocean of Samsara because they do not properly follow
restraint. They speak of liberation but do not strive for it. How can you, by
taking refuge in them, know this world and the next? These other Tirthankaras
are cut down and oppressed by their actions, failing to achieve their goal in
the middle of their journey.  **Commentary:**  There is no path to liberation
other than right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct. This is because
these three are the essence of the scriptures. Therefore, the Sutra refutes the
Dharma of those who will come after, who claim to show a path to liberation
separate from right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct.  The Sutra says:
"Look! Some Tirthankaras arise, abandoning attachments and the world, but they
are not liberated from Samsara because they lack proper knowledge. They only
talk about liberation, but they do not practice it. How can you, who have taken
refuge in them, know this world and the next? These other Tirthankaras are cut
down and oppressed by their actions, failing to achieve their goal in the middle
of their journey."  **Commentary:**  There is no path to liberation other than
right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct. This is because these three are
the essence of the scriptures. Therefore, the Sutra refutes the Dharma of those
who will come after, who claim to show a path to liberation separate from right
knowledge, right faith, and right conduct.  **Commentary:**  - 136

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - manuSya cAhe kitane hI bahuzruta pracura
zAstrAdhyayana kiye hue hoM, dhArmika-dharma parAyaNa hoM, brAhmaNa hoM, cAhe
bhikSu zramaNa hoM, yadi ve mAyAyukta kAryoM meM saMlagna rahate haiM to apane
karmoM ke phalasvarUpa atyanta duHkhita hote haiM  /  TIkA ye cA'pi bahuzrutAH
zAstrArthapAragAH tathA dhArmikAH dharmAcaraNazIlAH tathA brAhmaNAH bhikSukAH
bhikSATanazIlAH syuH bhaveyuH, te'pyAbhimukhyena 'NUma' nti karma mAyA vA
tatkRtairasadanuSThAnai rmUrcchitAH gRddhAH tIvramatyartha matra ca chAntasatvAd
bahuvacanaM draSTavyam ta evambhUtAH karmAbhiH savedyAdibhiH kRtyante chidyante
pIDayanta iti yAvat  // 7 //  TIkArtha jo bahuzruta - zAstra tattva ke pAragAmI
haiM, dhArmika-dharma kA AcaraNa karate haiM, brAhmaNa tathA bhikSuka hai-bhikSA
dvArA jIvana nirvAha karane vAle sAdhu haiM, phira bhI ve yadi mAyA- chalanA yA
pravaJcanA yukta kAryoM meM Asakta haiM, to ve sAtAvedanIya - anukUla yA
sukhAtmaka evaM asAtAvedanIya - prati - kUla yA duHkhAtmaka karmoM se utpIDita
hote haiM  /  yahAM chAndasa yA ArSa prayoga kI dRSTi se " kiccatI" - kRtyate ko
bahuvacana meM lenA cAhiye  /  aha pAsa vivegamuTThie, avitinne iha bhAsaI
dhuvaM  /  NAhisi AraM kao paraM vehAse kammehiM kiccatI  // 8 //  chAyA atha
pazya vivekamutthito'vitIrNa iha bhASate dhruvam  /  jJAsyasyAraM kutaH paraM
vihAyasi karmabhiH kRtyate  //  anuvAda - ziSyoM ko yA zrotRgaNa ko saMbodhita
kara zAstrakAra kahate haiM- dekho ! kaI anya tIrthi utthita hote haiM-
parigrahAdi yukta anitya saMsAra kA parityAga kara pravrajita hote haiM, kintu
saMyama kA samyak pAlana na karane ke kAraNa saMsAra sAgara ko pAra nahIM kara
sakate  /  ve mokSa kI bAta to karate haiM kintu usako prApta karane kA prayatna
nahIM karate haiM  /  tuma unakA Azraya lekara isa loka aura paraloka ko kaise
jAna pAte hoM, ve anyatIrthi bIca meM hI apanA lakSya pUrA kiye binA hI apane
karmoM dvArA kATe jAte haiM pIr3ita kiye jAte haiN| TIkA - sAmprataM jJAna
darzana cAritra mantareNa nAparo mokSamArgo'stIti trikAla
viSayatvAtsUtrasyAgAmitIrthikadharmapratiSedhArtha mAha-athetyadhikArAntare,
bahvAdeze ekAdeze iti  /  athetyanantarametacca pazya, kazcittIrthiko vivekaM
parityAgaM parigrahasya parijJAnaM vA saMsArasyAzritya utthitaH
pravajyotthAnena, sa ca samyak parijJAnAbhAvAdavitIrNaH saMsArasamudraM tatIrSuH
kevalamiha saMsAre prastAve vA zAzvatatvAt dhruvo mokSastaM tadupAyaM vA
saMyamaM bhASata eva na puna vidhatte tatparijJAnAbhAvAditi bhAvaH  /  tanmArge
prapannastvamapi kathaM jJAsyasi Aram iha bhavaM kuto vA paraM paralokaM, yadi
vA Aramiti gRhasthatvaM paramiti pravajyAparyyAyam, atha vA Aramiti saMsAraM
paramiti mokSa mevaM bhUtazcA'nyopyubhayabhraSTaH 'vehAsi' tti antarAle
ubhayAbhAvataH svakRtaiH karmabhiH kRtyate pIDyate  // 8 //  samyak jJAna,
samyakM darzana evaM samyak cAritra ke atirikta koI bhI mokSa kA mArga na bhUta
thA na vartamAna meM hai aura na bhaviSya meM hogA  /  aisA zAstroM meM kahA hai
/  isaliye jJAna, darzana evaM cAritra se pRthak tattva ko mokSa prApti kA mArga
batAne vAle anya tIrthi jo Age hoMge, unakA pratiSedha karate hue AgamakAra
batalAte haiM TIkArtha - 136

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The word 'ath' used in this story signifies authority or command.   Addressing
the disciple, the Lord says: Many other Tirthankaras, understanding the
impermanence of the world, renounce possessions and embrace renunciation. They
strive for liberation. They wish to cross the ocean of the world, but due to the
lack of right knowledge, they only discuss liberation or the means of attaining
it, namely restraint. They merely talk about it but do not follow it because
they do not know how to do so. O disciple! If you also follow the path shown by
them, how will you know the 'aar' - this existence and the next existence - this
world and the afterlife? Or, the meaning of 'aar' is also the dharma of a
householder, the dharma of the world, how will you cross it - how will you cross
it by accepting renunciation? Or, one meaning of 'aar' is the world and the
meaning of 'paar' is liberation. How will you know both of these? A man who
walks on the path of other religions is corrupted from both sides and is cut off
by actions in the middle - he is oppressed.  "Even if one is naked and thin,
even if one eats only once a month, If one is bound by this Maya, one will
continue to be born in wombs."  Commentary: Even though a Tirthankara may be
without possessions and has a body burnt by austerities, why does he not attain
liberation? The author raises this doubt and explains: Even though a
Tirthankara, a tapasvi, etc., renounces external possessions and becomes a
renunciant, becomes naked due to the absence of clothes, and becomes thin due to
austerity, and performs his own renunciate practices, even though he performs
austerities like the sixth, eighth, tenth, twelfth, etc., and eats only once a
month, he is still not freed from internal passions. This is shown by the verse:
"He who is bound by this Maya, etc." This is explained as being bound by
passions. He will go from womb to womb, endlessly, for an unlimited time. This
means that even a poor man, even a man whose body is burnt by austerities, will
not be freed from hell, etc., and will continue to wander in the world from womb
to womb for an unlimited time, like a fire that burns.  Commentary meaning: Many
other religious followers are without possessions - they have no possessions.
They burn their bodies with austerities. Still, why do they not attain
liberation? The author raises this doubt and explains.  Even though many
Tirthankaras, tapasvis, etc., are connected to traditions that renounce external
possessions, they become renunciants by renouncing possessions, they remain
naked by giving up clothes, they become thin and weak due to hardship. They
accept their own

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana isa gAthA meM AyA huA 'atha' zabda adhikAra yA Adeza kA
bhAva liye hue hai  /  ziSya ko saMbodhita kara bhagavAna kahate haiM-kaI anya
tIrtha saMsAra ko anitya samajha kara parigraha kA parityAga kara pravrajyA
grahaNa karate haiM  /  mokSa prApti hetu udyata hote haiM  /  ve saMsAra ko
pAra-saMsAra rUpI samudra ko lAMghanA cAhate haiM kintu samyagjJAna ke abhAva
meM mokSa yA isakI prApti ke sAdhana saMyama kI kevala carcA karate haiM  /  usa
saMbaMdha meM kevala bAta banAte haiM kiMtu usakA anusaraNa nahIM karate kyoMki
vaisA karane kA unheM jJAna nahIM hai  /  he ziSya ! tuma bhI yadi una dvArA
batAye hue mArga para caloge to Ara-isa bhava aura parabhava ko-isa loka ko aura
paraloka ko kaise jAna sakoge  /  athavA Ara kA artha gRhastha kA dharma,
saMsAra kA dharma bhI hotA hai, usake pAra kaise jA sakoge-pravrajyA svIkAra
kara kisa taraha use pAra kara sakoge, athavA Ara kA eka artha saMsAra hai aura
pAra kA artha mokSa hai  /  ina donoM ko tuma kaise jAna sakoge  /  jo puruSa
anya matavAdiyoM ke rAste para calatA hai vaha donoM ora se bhraSTa hokara bIca
meM hI karmoM dvArA kATA jAtA haiutpIDita kiyA jAtA hai  /  jai vi ya NagiNe
kise care, jai viya bhuMjiya maasmNtso| je iha mAyAi mijaI, AgaMtA gabbhAya
NaMtaso  // 9 //  chAyA - yadyapi ca nagnaH kRzazcareda, yadyapi ca bhuJjIta
mAsamantazaH  /  ya iha pAyAdinA mIyate, . AgantA garbhAyAnantazaH  //  anuvAda
- jo manuSya mAyA-chalanA pravaMcanA Adi kaSAyoM se yukta hai, vaha cAhe nagna-
vastra vihIna hokara rahe, tapa Adi se kRza-durbala hokara vicaraNa kare, cAhe
eka eka mahine ke bAda khAye-mAsa khamaNa tapa kare, to bhI vaha anantakAla taka
garbha meM AtA hai, AvAgamana ke cakra meM bhaTakatA hai| TIkA - nanu ca tIthikA
api kecana niSparigrahAstathA tapasA niSTaptadehAzca tatkathaM teSAM no
mokSAvAptirityetadAzaGkayAha-yadyapi tIrthikaH kazcit
tApasAdistyaktabAhyagRhavAsAdiparigrahatvAt niSkriJcanatayA nagnaH
tvaktrANAbhAvAcca kRzaH caret svakIya-pravrajyAnuSThAnaM kuryAt yadyapi ca
SaSThASThamadazamadvAdazAdi tapo vizeSaM vidhatte yAvad antazo mAsaM
sthitvAbhuGkte tathApi Antara kaSAyA parityAgAnna mucyate iti darzayatiyaH
tIrthika iha mAyAdinA mIyate, upalakSaNatvAt kaSAyairyukta ityevaM
paricchidyate, asau garbhAya garbhArtha mA samantAt gantA yAsyati, anantazo
niravadhikaM kAlamiti, etaduktaM bhavati-akiJcano'pi, taponiSTaptadeho'pi kaSAyA
parityAgAnnarakAdisthAnAt tiryAgAdisthAnaM garbhAd garbha manantamapi
kAlamagnizarmavat saMsAre paryaTatIti  // 9 //  TIkArtha - kaI eka anya matavAdI
niSparigraha-parigraharahita hote haiM  /  tapa dvArA zarIra ko tapA DAlate haiM
/  phira bhI unako mokSa kI avApti-upalabdhi kyoM nahIM hotI ? zAstrakAra yaha
zaMkA uThAkara pratipAdana karate haiM  /  yadyapi kaI eka paratIrthika-tApasa
Adi paramparAoM se saMbaddha bAharI rUpa meM parigraha kA parityAga kara
akiMcana bana jAte haiM  /  vastra tyAga kara nagna rahate haiM, kaSTa se kRza-
durbalakAya hote haiM  /  apane dvArA svIkRta -137)

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra, those who practice the rules of pravrajya-diksha,
perform austerities for two days, three days, four days, and five days.
Ultimately, they perform austerities for a month. Despite this, if they are
unable to destroy their inner kshaya-krodha, mana, maya, and lobha, if they are
unable to conquer them, then they cannot attain moksha. The scriptures reveal
that:  Those beings who are attached to maya, etc., in this world, continue to
be born in the womb for an infinite period of time. They continue to experience
birth and death. Here, maya also signifies other kshayas. The meaning is that a
person who is akinchana - who has nothing in terms of possessions, whose body is
purified by austerities, but if they are unable to conquer kshayas - if they are
unable to abandon anger, etc., then they suffer the torments and pains of hell,
etc. From there, they go to the animal realm. Again, they repeatedly experience
the womb and die. Just as the person named Agnisharma had to wander in this
world in this way, so too do these individuals have to wander in this world.
**Puriso ram pavakammauna, paliyantam manuyaanam jivayam.** **Sanna iha kamam
ucchaya, moham janti nara asanvuda.** ||10|| **Chhaya - Purusha! Uparam pap
karmaana, palyantam manujaanaam jivitam.** **_ Sanna iha kamam urcchitaah moham
yanti nara asanvrtaaah_**  **Anuvaad -** O man! Do not be engaged in evil deeds,
abandon them. Understand! The life of humans is finite or mortal. Those humans
who are attached to worldly pleasures and desires in this world, and are
unconscious and lost, and are not free from evil deeds like violence, etc., they
attain moha. They become deluded.  **Teeka -** Yato mithyadrishti
upadishtatapasapi na durgatimarg nirudho ato madukta evam marge sthayam etadt
garbham upadesham datumaaha - 'Puriso' itiyaadi, he purusha! Yena papena
karmaana asadanushtaanarupena tvam upalaksitastatra asakritpravrittattvat tasmad
uparam nivartasva. Yatah purushaanaam jivitam subahvapi tripalyopamantan samyam
jivitam va palyopamasya antahmadhye vartate tadapyunaam purvakoti miti yaavat.
Athava parisamantaadanto asyetti palyantam santmityartha: yacchaivam tadgatameva
avagantavyam. Tadevam manushyaanaam stokam jivitam avagamy yaavattann paryeti
taavaddharmanushtaanena saphalam karttavyam, ye punarbhogasnehapanke avasanna
magna 'iha' manushyabhave sansare va kameshu icchhamadanarupesh muurchhita
adhyupannah te naraah moham yanti - hitahit prapti pariharae muhyanti, mohaniyam
va karma chinvanti iti sambhavayate etadasanvrtaanaam hinsasthaanebhyo
anivrittaanaam asanyatendriyaanaam cheti. ||10||  **Teekaarth -** The scriptures
reveal that the austerities prescribed by those with false vision do not prevent
the path to hell. Therefore, one should remain steadfast in the path that we
have described. Revealing this truth, they say:  O man! Abandon the evil deeds
in which you are constantly engaged, and free yourself from the sinful karma
that you have accumulated. For even if the life of humans is very long, it does
not exceed three palyopamas. The life of humans...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram pravrajyA-dIkSA kA-tadgata niyamoM kA anuSThAna karate
haiM  /  do dina kI, tIna dina kI, cAra dina aura pAMca dina kI tapasyA karate
haiM antataH ve eka mAsa taka kA tapa karate haiM  /  isake bAvajUda yadi ve
apane bhItarI kaSAyakrodha mAna mAyA lobha kA nAza nahIM kara pAte, inako nahIM
jIta pAte to, mokSa nahIM pA sakatA  /  zAstrakAra yaha digdarzana karAte haiM
ki - jo prANI isa loka meM mAyA Adi se samAyukta hai, ve ananta kAla taka garbha
meM Ate rahate haiM  /  janma aura mRtyu ko prApta karate rahate haiM  /  yahA
mAyA se anya kaSAya bhI upalakSita hai  /  kahane kA abhiprAya hai ki jo vyakti
akiMcana hai-parigraha kI dRSTi se jinake pAsa kucha bhI nahIM hai, jinakA
zarIra tapa se paritapta hai, kintu yadi ve kaSAya vijaya nahIM kara pAte-krodha
Adi ko nahIM chor3a pAte, to ve naraka vAsa Adi kI yAtanAeMpIr3AeM sahana karate
haiM  /  vahAM se nikalakara phira tiryaJca yoni meM jAte haiM  /  punazca
bArambAra garbhakAla prApta karate haiM aura marate haiM  /  jaise agnizarmA
nAmaka vyakti ko isI prakAra saMsAra meM bhaTakanA par3A thA usI taraha ina
vyaktiyoM ko bhI isa saMsAra meM bhaTakanA par3atA haiM  /  puriso rama
pAvakammuNA, paliyaMtaM maNuyANa jIviyaM  /  sannA iha kAmamucchiyA, mohaM jaMti
narA asaMvuDA  // 10 //  chAyA - puruSa ! uparama pApa karmaNA, paryantaM
manujAnAM jIvitam  /  . _ sannA iha kAmamUrchitAH mohaM yAnti narA asaMvRtAH  //
anuvAda - he puruSa ! tuma pApa karmoM meM udyata na bano, unheM chor3o  /
samajho ! manuSyoM kA jIvana paryanta-anta yukta yA nazvara hai  /  jo manuSya
isa saMsAra meM yA sAMsArika kAma bhogoM meM Asakta-lipta tathA mUrcchitakhoyA
huA hai  /  evaM hiMsA Adi pApa kRtyoM se nivRtta nahIM hai  /  vaha moha ko
prApta hotA hai  /  moha mUr3ha bana jAtA hai| TIkA - yato
mithyAdRSTyupadiSTatapasA'pi na durgatimArganirodho'tomadukta evaM mArge
stheyametadgarbhamupadezaM dAtumAha-'puriso' ityAdi, he puruSa ! yena pApena
karmaNA'sadanuSThAnarUpeNa tvamupalakSitastatrA'sakRtpravRttatvAt tasmAduparama
nivartasva  /  yataH puruSANAM jIvitaM subahvapi tripalyopamAntaM saMyama
jIvitaM vA palyopamasyAntaHmadhyevartate tadapyUnAMpUrvakoTi miti yAvat |athvaa
parisamantAdanto'syeti paryantaMsAntamityartha: yaccaivaM tdgtmevaavgntvym|
tadevaM manuSyANAM stokaM jIvitamavagamya yAvattanna paryeti
tAvaddharmAnuSThAnenasaphalaM karttavyaM, ye punarbhogasnehapaGke'vasannA magnA
'iha' manuSyabhave saMsAre vA kAmeSu icchAmadanarUpeSu mUrcchitA adhyupannA te
narAH mohaM yAnti-hitAhitaprAptiparihAre muhyanti, mohanIyaM vA karma cinvantIti
saMbhAvyate etadasaMvRtAnAM hiMsAsthAnebhyo'nivRttAnAmasaMyatendri yANAJceti  //
10 //  TIkArtha - AgamakAra batalAte haiM ki mithyA dRSTi jina tapoM kA upadeza
karate haiM, unase durgati ke mArga kA nirodha nahIM hotA  /  ataH hamAre dvArA
nirUpita mArga meM hI sthira rahanA cAhiye  /  isI tathya ko prakaTa karate hue
ve kahate haiM - he puruSa ! tuma nirantara azubha kAryoM meM saMlagna rahakara
jisa pApa karma meM grasta ho, usase nivRtta banohaTo, kyoMki manuSyoM kA jIvana
atyadhika bhI ho to vaha tIna palyopama se bar3hakara nahIM hotA  /  puruSoM kA
- 138

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of Vaitaliya (Jain philosophy) takes place only within the context of
a restrained life, and even then, only up to a certain level. Human life is
transient; it should be considered as past or gone. Therefore, this human life
is short-lived and temporary. Knowing this, one should strive to make it
successful through the practice of religious duties until it ends. Those who,
having obtained human life, come into this world and get stuck in the mud of
pleasures and remain attached to lust, are deluded. They do not know how to
obtain their true benefit and abandon harm. Such men bind themselves with
mohaniya karma (karma that leads to attachment). Those who abstain from sinful
acts like violence, who do not wander, and whose senses are unrestrained, also
accumulate mohaniya karma.  "**Jayam viharahi jogavam, anupaana pantha
duruttara.** **Anusasanamaeva pakkame virehi samman paveiyam.** ||19|| **Chhaya
-** Yatmano vihar yogavan, anupraana panthano duruttara. **Anusasanamaeva
prakamade, virehi samyak praveditam.** **Anuvaad -** Human, you should wander
with diligence and awareness, keeping your mind, speech, and body in yoga
(restraint) or with samiti gupti (secret practices). This path is filled with
anupraana (microscopic beings). Without proper care, it is difficult to cross.
You should follow the discipline and restraint as prescribed in the scriptures.
All Tirthankaras have preached, instructed, and commanded this.  **Tika -**
Evamcha sthite yadvidheyam tadarshayitumanah, svalpam jivitam avagamy
vishayancha klesha praayanavabudhya chhitva grihapashabandhanam yatmano yatnam
kurvan praninanam anuprodhen vihar udyukta vihari bhava. Etadeva darshayati
Yogavaniti samyam yogavan guptisamiti gupti ity arthah. Kimiti evam, yatah
anavah sukshmah praanah pranino yeshu pathishu te tatha te chaivam bhutah
panthano anupyuktair jivanupamardain dustarah durgamah iti anena
i-samitirupaksipta. Asyacha upalakshanarthattvad anyasvapi samitishu
satatopayuktena bhavitavyam api cha anusasanamaeva yathagambheva sutranusarenam
samyam prati kramed etaccha sarvereva virehi arhadbhih samyak praveditam
praksharanakyatama iti. ||11||  **Tikaarth -** In the above situation, to reveal
what is the duty of a human, the Agamkar (Jain scriptures) say: "O man! Knowing
your life to be short-lived and the objects of sense to be mostly painful, cut
off the ties of household life and strive diligently to be a wanderer, not
harming any living beings." The scripture writers say: "O man! You should become
gupti gupt (secretly restrained) and samiti samit (following the rules of
samiti). Why so? Because these paths are filled with microscopic beings. Without
proper care, it is difficult to cross them, because without such care, there
will be harm to living beings on those paths.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana saMyamI jIvana palyopama ke bIca hI hotA hai  /  vaha bhI
Una-kucha kama pUrva koTi taka hI hotA hai  /  manuSyoM kA jIvana nazvara hai  /
use gata-gayA huA yA bItA huA hI samajhanA cAhiye  /  ataeva yaha manuSya jIvana
svalpa hai-alpakAla sthAyI hai| yaha jAnakara jaba taka vaha samApta nahIM ho
jAtA taba taka dhArmika kRtyoM ke AcaraNa dvArA use saphala banAnA cAhiye  /  jo
manuSya manuSya jIvana prApta kara isa saMsAra meM Akara bhogoM ke kIcar3a meM
phaMse rahate haiM tathA kAma vAsanAmeMAsakta rahate haiM ve moha mUr3ha hote
haiM  /  unako apanA vAstavika hita-zreyasa pAne kA aura ahita-azreyasa chor3ane
kA jJAna nahIM hotA  /  aise puruSa mohanIya karma kA baMdha karate haiM  /  jo
vyakti hiMsA Adi pApa pUrNa kAryoM se anivRta rahate haiM, aTate nahIM, jinakI
iMdriyAM saMyama rahita hotI hai, ve bhI mohanIya karma kA saMgraha karate haiM
/  jayayaM viharAhi jogavaM, aNupANA paMthA duruttarA  /  aNusAsaNameva pakkame
vIrehiM saMmaM paveiyaM  // 19 //  chAyA - yatamAno vihara yogavAna, aNuprANAH
panthAno duruttarAH  /  anuzAsanameva prakAmeda, vIraiH samyak praveditam  //
anuvAda - mAnava tuma yatanApUrvaka-jAgarUkatA ke sAtha, yogavAna-mana, vacana
evaM kAya yogoM ko gupta rakhate hue athavA samiti gupti se yukta hote hue
vicaraNa karo  /  yaha patha-mArga anuprANa-sUkSmaprANiyoM se bharA huA hai  /
upayoga ke binA yaha duruttara-kaThinAI se pAra kiye jAne yogya hai  /  zAstroM
meM jo anuzAsana-saMyama pAlana kA vidhikrama batalAyA gayA hai, usI ke anusAra
saMyama kA anusaraNa karanA caahiye| sabhI tIrthaMkaroM neaisA pravedita kiyA
hai-upadeza diyA hai, Adeza diyA hai  /  TIkA - evaJca sthite yadvidheyaM
tadarzayitumAhasvalpaM jIvitamavagamya viSayAMzca kleza prAyAnavabudhya chitvA
gRhapAzabandhanaM yatamAnaH yatnaM kurvan prANinAmanuparodhena vihara udyukta
vihArI bhava  /  etadeva darzayati yogavAniti saMyamayogavAn guptisamitigupta
ityarthaH  /  kimityevaM, yataH aNavaH sUkSmAH prANAH prANino yeSu pathiSu te
tathA te caivaM bhUtAH panthAno'nupayuktairjIvAnupamardaina dustarAH durgamA iti
anena ii-smitirupkssiptaa| asyAzcopalakSaNArthatvAda anyAsvapi samitiSu
satatopayuktena bhavitavyam api ca anuzAsanameva yathAgamabheva sUtrAnusAreNa
saMyamaM prati krAmed etacca sarvereva vIraiH arhadbhiH samyak praveditaM
prakarSaNAkhyAtamiti  // 11 //  TIkArtha - uparyukta sthiti meM mAnava kA jo
karttavya hai, use prakaTa karane hetu AgamakAra batalAte he puruSa ! tU apane
jIvana ko svalpa-alpakAlika tathA viSayoM ko klezaprAyaH-adhikAMzataH kaSTapUrNa
jAnakara gRhapAsabandhana-gRhasthI ke jAla ko kATa DAlo, yatnApUrvaka prANiyoM
kI hiMsA na karate hue viharaNa zIla bano  /  zAstrakAra yahI batalAte haiM-ve
kahate haiM ki he puruSa ! tuma gupti gupta aura samiti samita banoguptiyoM aura
samitiyoM kA anupAlana karo  /  aisA kyoM ? isaliye ki ye mArga, rAste, sUkSma-
bahuta choTe choTe prANiyoM se ApUrNa hai-bhare hue haiM  /  upayoga ke binA
inheM pAra karanA kaThina hai kyoMki vaisA hue binA una rAstoM meM jIvoM kA
upamarda-vyApAdana yA hiMsA hue binA nahIM rahatI  /  (139)

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The Acharya has indicated towards the Irya Samiti
(Carefulness in walking) through the Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra. The Irya Samiti
is just an example. All other Samitis (Carefulness) should be taken from this.
The way described in the scriptures, the same way the Samyama (Self-restraint)
should be practiced. All the Tirthankaras (Enlightened Beings) have emphasized
this point.  Virya vira samutthiya, kohakaya riyaipesana. Pane na hananti
savvaso, pavaao viraya'bhinivvuda.  Translation: The courageous ones, who have
risen above, are the crushers of anger, pride, deceit, and greed. They do not
kill any living being completely, for they are established in Virati
(Abstinence) and have been liberated from sins.  Commentary: The ones who are
abstinent from sins like violence, falsehood, etc., and have particularly
destroyed their Karmas, and have risen above by abandoning the undertakings of
violence, etc., they are the Viras (Courageous ones). They have conquered anger,
pride, deceit, and greed. They do not kill any living being completely through
their mind, speech, and body. They are abstinent from all sins and are tranquil
like the liberated souls.  Navi ta ahameva luppe, luppanti lo amsi panino. Evam
sahiehi pasae, anihe se pudhe ahiyasae.  Translation: Not even by them am I
harmed, but the living beings in the world are harmed. Thus, the one who is free
from possessiveness, when he sees with equanimity, he endures what is inflicted
on him.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram yoM pratipAdita kara AgamakAra ne IryA samiti kI ora
saMketa kiyA hai  /  vaha IryA samiti to upalakSaNa mAtra hai  /  isase anya
sabhI samitiyoM ko lenA cAhiye  /  zAstroM meM jaisI rIti batalAI hai, usI
prakAra saMyama kA pAlana karanA cAhiye  /  sabhI tIrthaMkaroM ne isI bAta para
bala diyA hai| virayA vIrA samuTThiyA, kohakAya riyAipIsaNA  /  /  pANe Na
haNaMti savvaso, pAvAo virayA'bhinivvuDA  // 12 //  chAyA - viratAH vIrAH
samutthitAH krodhakAtarikAdipISaNAH  /  prANino na ghnanti sarvazaH pApAdviratA
abhinirvRtAH  //  anuvAda - jo vyakti hiMsA Adi pApa kAryoM se virata-nivRtta
hai-samutthita hai, hiMsAdi-pApakarmoM ko chor3akara Upara uThe hue haiM tathA
krodha, ahaMkAra mAyA-chalanA tathA lobha kA parityAga kara mana se, vacana se
tathA zarIra se prANiyoM kA vyApAdana nahIM karate haiM ve saba pApoM se rahita
hote haiM tathA mokSa prApta jIva ke sadRza hI zAMta hote haiN| TIkA - atha ka
ete vIrA ityAha-'virayA' ityAdi, hiMsAnRtAdi pApebhyo ye viratAH vizeSeNa karma
prerayantIti vIrAH, samyagArambha parityAgenotthitAH samutthitAH, te evaM
bhUtAzca, krodha kAtarikAdipISaNAH, tatra krodhagrahaNAnmAno gRhItaH, kAtarikA
mAyA tadgrahaNAllobho gRhItaH, AdigrahaNAccheSamohanIya parigrahaH
tatpISaNAstadapanetAraH tathA prANino jIvAn sUkSmetarabhedabhinnAn
sarvazomanovAkkAya-karmabhirna ghnanti na vyaapaadynti|
pApAccasarvataHsAvadyAnuSThAnarU-pAdviratAH,nivRttAH tatazca
abhinirvRttA:krodhAdyupazamena zAMtibhUtAH, yadi vA abhinirvattA iva
abhinirvRttAH muktA iva draSTavyA iti  // 12 //  TIkArtha - jinakI pahale carcA
AI hai, usa taraha vicaraNazIla vIra puruSa kauna hai ? ise spaSTa karane ke
liye AgamakAra batalAte haiM  /  jo puruSa hiMsA tathA asatya Adi pApoM se
virata hai-haTe hue haiM tathA jinhoMne vizeSa rUpa se karmoM kA uccheda-kara
diyA hai evaM Arambha-hiMsA Adi kA tyAga kara saMyama ke pAlana meM tatpara haiM
/  jinhoMne krodha aura mAyA kA nAza kara diyA hai arthAt jo krodha, mAna, mAyA,
lobha tathA zeSa mohanIya Adi karmoM kA nAza kara cake haiM, jo mAnasika. vAcika
aura kAyika karma dvArA prANiyoM kA vyApAdana nahIM karate haiM, jo pApa yukta
kAryoM se haTe hue haiM, krodha Adi ke zAMta ho jAne se jinakA jIvana zAMtipUrNa
hai, ve muktAtmA ke sadRza sukha yukta haiM  /  yahAM krodha ke grahaNa se mAna
kA tathA mAyA ke grahaNa se lobha kA evaM Adi zabda se avaziSTa mohanIya karmoM
kA grahaNa haiM  /  Navi tA ahameva luppae, luppaMti lo aMsi pANiNo  /  evaM
sahiehiM pAsae, aNihe se puDhe ahiyAsae  // 13 //  chAyA - nA'pi tairahameva
lupye, lupyante loke prANinaH  /  evaM sahitaH pazyet anihaH sa spRSTo'dhisaheta
//  - 140

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Vaitaliya Study Translation -    A man with true vision and wisdom should
reflect that he is not the only one who suffers from cold, heat, and other
afflictions. He is not the only one who experiences hardship, but there are
other beings in the world who are also afflicted by these afflictions.
Therefore, he should endure them without anger, intolerance, etc.
**Commentary:**  This is another teaching - these afflictions and obstacles
should be endured with the following thought: "I am not the only one who suffers
from cold, heat, etc. There are other beings in this world, both animals and
humans, who are suffering from these afflictions. They are suffering greatly,
and because they lack proper understanding, they do not receive the fruit of
liberation. For it is said: "Patience is not gained through forbearance, nor is
domestic happiness abandoned through contentment. The unbearable cold, heat, and
wind afflictions are not endured through austerity. The contemplation of wealth
day and night with controlled breath does not lead to the ultimate truth. Those
who perform actions for the sake of happiness are deceived by their fruits."
Therefore, enduring afflictions is a virtue for those with proper understanding,
who have embraced restraint. As it is said: "Hunger-induced work, eating coarse
food, enduring cold and heat, roughness on the head, sleeping on the bare ground
- these are considered degradation and suffering for a householder, but they are
considered elevation for a restrained monk. Thus, even faults become virtues
when placed in the right place."  Therefore, a monk, united with knowledge and
other virtues, should see his own benefit and, with a wise mind, should reflect
on the suffering of others. He should not be distressed by anger, etc., even
when he is being harmed. He should endure afflictions with a clear mind and not
allow his mind to be disturbed. If he is not harmed, then his austerity and
restraint in enduring afflictions are not hidden, but manifest.  **This is the
essence of the commentary:**  A wise man should reflect and endure afflictions
and obstacles, knowing that he is not the only one who suffers from cold, heat,
etc., but that there are many other animals, birds, humans, etc., in the world
who are suffering from them. These beings are devoid of right knowledge.
Therefore, even while enduring suffering, they cannot attain the fruit of
liberation, which is the liberation from karma. Therefore, a wise person has
said: "A person thinks that he has endured the suffering of cold, heat, etc.,
but not with a calm and peaceful mind, but out of weakness and compulsion. He
has abandoned the pleasures of a householder, but not because of contentment,
but because of the unfulfilled desires. He has endured the unbearable suffering
of cold, heat, and wind, but not out of a sense of austerity. He has
contemplated religion day and night, but not with a mind free from duality, with
a calm mind, contemplating the ultimate truth, the nature of the Supreme Self.
He has performed all the actions that ascetic monks perform, with the goal of
attaining happiness, but he has not received their fruit."  Those who follow
restraint and have noble thoughts, who endure suffering, do so for their own
good, for their welfare, or for their benefit. Therefore, a wise poet has said:
"The thinness and weakness that comes to the body from lack of food, the
suffering that comes from eating coarse food, the suffering that comes from
enduring cold and heat, the roughness that comes to the hair from not applying
oil, and the discomfort that comes from sleeping on the bare ground without a
bed - these are considered degradation and suffering for a householder, but they
are considered elevation for a restrained monk. This proves that even faults
become virtues when placed in the right place."  Therefore, a monk, united with
knowledge and other virtues, who is devoted to his own welfare, should reflect
on the above facts and control anger, etc. He should become very patient and
tolerant, enduring cold, heat, etc. He should not grieve in any way when he is
obstructed by cold, heat, etc. Such a monk should not hide his inner strength,
which comes from following austerity and restraint and enduring afflictions. He
should not keep it hidden, but manifest it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana anuvAda - yathArtha dRSTA, viveka sampanna puruSa yaha
cintana kare ki zaitya, uSNatA, Adi parISahoM se kevala maiM hI utpIr3ita nahIM
hotA hU~  /  kaSTa nahIM pAtA hU~ kintu jagata meM aura bhI prANI haiM jo ina
parISahoM se duHkhita hote haiM  /  ataH mujhe inako krodha, asahiSNutA Adi se
rahita hokara sahanA caahiye| TIkA - punarapyudezAntarayAha-parISahopasargA
etadbhAvanApareNa soDhavyAH nAhamevaikastAvadiha zItoSNAdiduH kha vizeSailuppe
pIDye apitvanye'pi prANinaH tathAvidhAstiryyaGmanuSyAH asmiMlloke lupyante
atiduHsahai ?H khaiH paritApyante, teSAJca samyagvivekAbhAvAnna
nirjarAkhyAphalamasti, yataH "kSAntaM na kSamayA gRhocitasukhaM tyaktaM na
saMtoSataH, sor3hAH duHsahazItatApa pavana klezAH na taptaM tapaH  /  dhyAtaM
vittamaharnizaM niyamitaprANai na tattvaM paraM, tattatkarma kRtaM
sukhArthibhiraho taistaiH phalairvaJcitAH" ? tadevaM klezAdi sahanaM
sadvivekinAM saMyamAbhyupagame sati guNAyaiveti, tathAhi-"kAryaM kSutprabhavaM
kadanmazanaM zItoSNayoH pAtratA, pAruSyaJca zirorUheSu zayanaM mahyAstale kevale
/  etAnyeva gRhe vahantyavanatiM tAnyunnatiM saMyame, doSAzcA'pi guNAH bhavanti
hi nRNAM, yogye pade yojitA:? evaM sahitojJAnAdibhiH svahiota vA AtmahitaH san
pazyet kuzAgrIyayA buddhayA pAlocayedanantaroditaM, tathA nihanyata iti nihaH na
niho'nihaH krodhAdibhirapIDitaH san sa mahAsattvaH parISahai: spaSTo'pi tAn
adhisaheta manaH pIDAM na vidadhyAditi, yadivA aniha iti tapa:saMyame
parISahasahane cAnigUhitabalavIryaH zeSaH pUrvavaditi  // 13 //  TIkArtha -
vivekI puruSa yaha cintana kara parISahoM aura upasargoM ko sahana kare ki
ThaMDaka tathA garmI Adi ke dvArA maiM hI akelA pIDita nahIM hotA kiMtu saMsAra
meM aura bhI aneka pazu pakSI manuSya Adi prANI hai jo inase pIr3ita hote haiM
/  ve prANI samyakjJAnarahita haiM  /  isaliye kaSTa sahate hue bhI ve nirjarA-
karmoM ke nirjaraNa mUlaka phala ko nahIM pA sakate  /  ataeva kisI jJAnI kI
yaha ukti hai ki eka vyakti socatA hai ki maiMne sardI garmI Adi ke duHkhoM ko
to bardAsta kiyA kintu zAMta-zAMti yukta bhAvanA se nahIM kintu
AsaktidurbalatAvaza-majabUrI se sahana kiyA  /  maiMne gRhastha ke sukha ko
chor3A to sahI kintu saMtoSa ke kAraNa nahIM kintu icchAoM kI apUrti ke kAraNa
/  maiMne sardI garmI aura havA ke asahya duHkha jhele parantu tapa kI bhAvanA
se nahIM  /  maiMne aharniza dharma kA cintana kiyA kiMtu dvandva rahita hokara-
zAMta citta hokara parama tattva kA-paramAtma svarUpa kA cintana nahIM kiyA  /
maiMne sukha pAne ke lakSya se ve sabhI karma kiye jo tapasvI munigaNa karate
haiM kintu mujhe unakA phala nahIM milA  /  saMyama kA pAlana karane vAle uttama
cintanazIla puruSa jo kaSTa sahate haiM ve unake guNa ke liye kalyANa ke liye yA
hita ke liye hotA hai ataeva kisI vidvAna kavi ne kahA hai-bhojana na milane se
zarIra meM jo kRzatAdubalApana AtA hai  /  tuccha anna ke bhojana se ThaMDa
tathA garmI ke duHkha ko sahane se jo kaSTa hotA hai tela na lagAne se bAloM meM
jo rUkSatA AtI hai tathA bistara ke binA zuSka bhUmi para sone se asuvidhA hotI
hai-ye bAteM eka gRhastha ke liye avannati-patana yA du:kha ke cihna mAne jAte
haiM jaba ki ve hI eka saMyamI muni ke liye unnatiprada samajhe jAte haiM  /
isase yaha sAbita hotA hai ki yogya-samucita sthAna para sthApita doSa bhI guNa
bana jAte haiM  /  ataH jJAna Adi saMyukta AtmakalyANa parAyaNa muni uparyukta
tathyoM para cintana karatA huA krodha Adi ko niyantrita kare  /  atyanta
dhairyazIla yA sahiSNu banakara ThaMDa garmI Adi parIsahoM ko bardAsta kare  /
zaitya, uSNatA Adi dvArA bAdhAeM paidA hone para mana meM kisI bhI prakAra kA
zoka na kare  /  aisA muni tapa saMyama ke anusaraNa meM tathA parISahoM ko
sahane se apane Atmabala kA gopana na kare  /  use avyakta na rakhe-prakaTa kare
/  (141

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 14:**  Just as a wall plastered with dung
and mud is made thin by removing the plaster, so too should a muni make his body
thin through fasting and other austerities. He should follow the path of non-
violence. This is what the Muni has taught.  **Commentary:**  The meaning of
"Dhunia" etc. is as follows: Just as a wall plastered with dung and mud becomes
thin by removing the plaster, similarly, a muni should make his body thin by
fasting and other austerities. He should reduce his flesh and blood. This is
because when the flesh and blood of the body become thin, the karmas also become
thin. The word "Vihimsa" refers to various types of violence. Not doing them is
called "Ahimsa". It is the duty of a muni to fully follow the path of non-
violence. He should live his life with non-violence as the primary principle.
The dharma that is conducive to liberation is called "Anudharma". This is non-
violence, bearing the consequences of actions with equanimity, and enduring
hardships with equanimity. The omniscient Lord has declared these to be dharma.
**Verse 15:**  Just as a bird shakes off the dust clinging to its body, so too
does a tapaswi, endowed with excellent vows, destroy his karmas through
austerities.  **Commentary:**  Just as a bird, covered with dust, shakes its
body and removes the clinging dust, so too does a tapaswi, endowed with
excellent vows and who is fit for liberation, destroys his karmas through
austerities like fasting. He removes the karmas of knowledge, belief, and
action. A tapaswi is a virtuous person who is called "Mahan" because he has the
attitude of "Do not kill".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram dhUNiyA kuliyaM va levavaM kisae deha maNAsaNAihiM  /
avihiMsAmeva pavvae aNudhammo muNiNA pavedito  // 14 //  chAyA - dhUtvA kUDayaM
va lepavat karzayedRha manazanAdibhiH  /  avihiMsAmeva pravrajedanudharmo muninA
praveditaH  //  anuvAda - jaise eka dIvAra para gobara, miTTI Adi kA saghana
lepa lagA ho, use girAkara-haTAkara dIvAra kRza yA patalI kara dI jAtI hai usI
prakAra muni ko cAhiye vaha anazana Adi tapa dvArA apanI deha ko kRza kare  /
ahiMsA dharma kA anusaraNa kare  /  bhagavAna mahAvIra ne yahI pratipAdita kiyA
hai  /  TIkA - api ca 'dhUNiyA' ityAdi, dhUtvA vidhUkuliyaM kaDaNakRtaM kuDyaM
lepavat salepam ayamatrArthaH - yathA kuDacyaM goyamAdilepena salepaM
jAghaTyamAnaM lepAmagamAtkRzaM bhavati, evamanazanAdibhi deha karzayed apacita
mAMsa zoNitaM vidadhyAt tapadacayAcca karmaNo'pacayo bhavatIti bhAvaH  /  tathA
vividhA hiMsA vihiMsA na vihiMsA avihiMsA tAmeva prakarSeNa vrajet ahiMsA
pradhAno bhavedityarthaH, anugato mokSampratyanukUlo dharmo'nudharmaH asAvahiMsA
lakSaNaparISahopasargasahanalakSaNazca dharmoM muninA sarvajJena praveditaH
kathita iti  // 14 //  _TIkArtha - gobara tathA mRtikA Adi se lipta bhitti-
dIvAra se jaise lepa haTAkara use kRza-patalA kara diyA jAtA hai usI prakAra
anazana Adi tapazcaraNa dvArA muni ko apanA zarIra kRza karanA cAhiye  /  zarIra
ke mAMsa, rakta Adi ko sukhA denA cAhiye  /  isakA Azaya yaha hai ki zarIra ke
mAMsa, rakta Adi jaba kRza yA nyUna hone lagate haiM to karma bhI kRza yA kSINa
hone lagate haiM  /  yahAM vihiMsA zabda AyA hai jo vividha prakAra kI hiMsA ke
artha meM hai  /  use na karanA avihiMsA kahA jAtA hai| muni kA yaha karttavya
hai ki vaha avihiMsA dharma kA pUrNarUpeNa pAlana kare  /  vaha apane jIvana meM
ahiMsA ko pradhAnatA dekara vartanazIla rahe  /  jo dharma mokSa ke anugata yA
anukUla hotA hai, use anudharma kahA jAtA hai  /  yaha ahiMsA hai, pariSaha evaM
upasargoM ko samabhAvapUrvaka sahanA karanA hai  /  sarvajJa prabhu ne inhIM ko
dharmavat batalAyA hai  /  sauNI jaha paMsuguMDiyA, vihuNiya dhaMsayaI siyaM
rayaM  /  evaM davi ovahANavaM, kammaM khavai tavassimAhaNe  // 15 //  chAyA -
zakunikA yathA pAMsuguNThitA, vidhuya dhvaMsayati sitaM rajaH  /  evaM dravya
upadhAnavAn karma kSayapati tapasvI mAhanaH  //  anuvAda - jaise eka zakuni-
pakSiNI apanI deha para lagI huI raja ko jhAr3akara girA detI hai usI
prakAraupadhAnavAn-uttama vrata yukta tapasvI-tapazcaraNazIla sAdhaka apane
karmoM ko kSINa-dhvasta kara DAlatA hai| TIkA - kiJca, zakunikA pakSiNI yathA
pAMsunA rajasA avaguNThitA khacitA satI aGgaM vidhUya kampayitvA tadrajaH
sitamavabaddhaM sat dhvaMsayati apanayati, evaM dravyoM bhavyoM muktigamanayogyo
mokSampratyupa sAmIpyena dadhAtItyupadhAnamanazanAdikiM tapaH
tadasyAstItyupadhAnavAn sa caivaMbhUtaH karma jJAnavaraNAdikaM kSapayati
apanayati tapasvI sAdhuH 'mAhaNa" tti mA vadhIriti pravRtti yasya sa prAkRta-
zailyA mAhaNetyucyate  // 15 //  142

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the Vaitaliya text, in the context of the verse, refers to the
Sauņi-Śakuni or Śakuni bird. Just as a bird shakes off the dust particles
clinging to its body, similarly, a follower of the Ahimsa Dharma, who is worthy
of liberation and attainment of Moksha, sheds the karmas like knowledge-
obscuring karmas, along with austerities like vows of celibacy and fasting.
"Upadhana" refers to that which establishes a being near Moksha. Fasting and
other austerities fall under this category. The word "Mahan" appears in the
verse. "Mahan" refers to one who does not have the tendency to harm living
beings. In Prakrit, "Mahan" becomes "Mahan."  **Verse 16:**  "The mendicant, who
has renounced the household and is dedicated to the practice of austerity,
stands firm in his resolve. Even if his aged parents, children, and
grandchildren plead with him to return home, they will not be able to sway him."
**Commentary:**  The verse begins with the phrase "Uṭṭhiye," which indicates the
renunciation of the household. The mendicant is described as "Śramaṇa," one who
practices austerity, and "Tāpasvi," one who is dedicated to self-discipline. He
is also described as "Sthāna-sthita," one who is firmly established in his
practice. Even if his family members, including his parents, children, and
grandchildren, try to persuade him to return home, they will not be able to move
him. They may become exhausted in their efforts, but they will not be able to
sway the mendicant, who has attained the ultimate goal of life, Moksha.  **Verse
17:**  "If the relatives weep and lament, even if they cry out for their son,
the mendicant, who has renounced the world, will not be swayed. They will not be
able to persuade him to return."  **Commentary:**  The verse emphasizes the
unwavering resolve of the mendicant. Even if his relatives weep and lament, even
if they cry out for their son, the mendicant will not be swayed. He has
renounced the world and is dedicated to the pursuit of Moksha. He will not be
persuaded to return to the household, even by the most heartfelt pleas of his
family members.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM TIkArtha - gAthA meM AyA huA sauNI-zakunI yA zakunikA
pakSiNI kA bodhaka hai  /  jaise eka pakSiNI apane zarIra para lage hue
rajakaNoM ko kaMpAkara-chilAkara-jhAr3akara girA detI hai, usI prakAra ahiMsA
dharma kA paripAlaka muktigamana yogya-mokSa pAne kA adhikArI upadhAna-anazana
Adi tapomaya vratayukta sAdhu jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karmoM kA kSaya kara detA hai  /
upadhAna use kahA hai jo upa + samIpe + dhIyate arthAt mokSa ke samIpa jIva ko
sthApita karatA hai  /  anazana Adi tapa isameM Ate haiM  /  gAthA meM 'mAhana'
zabda AyA hai  /  'mAhana' use kahA jAtA hai jisameM prANI kI hiMsA kI pravRtti
nahIM hotI  /  prAkRta meM mAhana kA mAhaNa ho jAtA hai| uTThiya maNagAra
mesaNaM, samaNaM ThANaThiaM tavassiNaM  /  DaharA buDDA ya patthae, avi susse Na
ya taM labheja No  // 16 //  chAyA - utthita managArameSaNAM zramaNaM
sthAnasthitaM tapasvinam  /  _daharAH vRddhAzca prArthayeyurapi zuSyeyu na ca
taM labheyuH  //  anuvAda - gRhatyAgI tathA eSaNA ke paripAlana meM uttthitta-
tatpara saMyamI, tapasvI, sAdhu ke samIpa, usake mAtA, pitA, putra, pautrAdi
pArivArika jana Akara yaha abhyarthanA kare ki dIkSita jIvana kA parityAga kara
ghara calo, ve aisA karate karate thaka bhI jAya to bhI ve muni ko AkRSTa nahIM
kara sakate-lubhA nahIM skte| _TIkA - anukUlopasargamAha-'uTThiye' tyAdi, agAraM
gRhaM tadasya nAstI tyanagAraH tamevaMbhUtaM saMyamotthAnenaiSaNAM
pratyutthitaM-pravRtaM, zrAmyatIti zramaNastaM, tathA sthAnasthitam uttarottara
viziSTa saMyama sthAnAdhyAsinaM tapasvinaM viziSTa taponiSTaptadehaM
tamevaMbhUtamapi kadAcit daharAH putranapvAdayaH vRddhAH pitRmAtulAdayaH
unniSkrAmayituM prArthayeyu ryAceran, ta eva mUcuH-bhavatA vayaM pratipAlyAH na
tvAmantareNAsmAkaM kazcidasti, tvaM vA'smAkameka e eva pratipAlyaH (iti)
bhaNantaste janA api zuSyeyuH zramaM gaccheyuH na ca taM sAdhuM
viditaparamArthaM labheran naivAtmasAtkuryyaH naivAtmavazagaM vidadhyuriti  //
16 //  TIkArtha - AgamakAra aba anukUla upasarga-auroM kI tarapha se Ane vAle
vighna kI carcA karate hue kahate haiM - agAra kA artha ghara hai  /  jisake
ghara nahIM hotA use aNagAra kahA jAtA hai  /  eka aisA sAdhu hai jo ghara kA
tyAga kara cukA hai, saMyama dhAraNa kiye hue haiM, eSaNA ke pAlana meM tatpara
hai, tapa meM udyata hai, uttarottara viziSTa saMyamAcaraNa meM saMlagna hotA
huA, viziSTa tapazcaraNa dvArA apanI deha ko paritapta kara rahA hai  /  usa
muni ke pAsa kabhI usake putra, pote Adi vRddha pitA mAmA Adi Akara yaha
prArthanA kare ki hama Apa dvArA pratipAlya haiM-Apa dvArA hamArA pAlana poSaNa
kiyA jAnA cAhiye-dekha rekha kI jAnI cAhiye  /  Apake atirikta hamArA koI sahArA
nahIM hai, Apa hI hamAre pratipAlaka haiM-aisA kahate kahate ve cAhe parizrAnta
ho jAya-sUkha jAya-thaka jAya to bhI paramArthavettA-jIvana ke parama lakSya
mokSa ko jAnane vAle muni ko ve apanA vazavartIAdhIna nahIM banA sakate arthAt
use AkRSTa nahIM kara sakate  /  jai kAluNiyANi kAsiyA jai royaMti ya
puttakAraNA  /  daviyaM bhikkhU samuTThiyaM, No labbhaMti Na saMThavittae  // 17
//  -143)

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Śrī Sūtrakrtaṅga Sūtra, Chāyā:** If they were to do compassionate things, if
they were to weep because of a son, A mendicant who has arisen from wealth, they
would not be able to obtain, nor establish.  **Anuvāda:** If the parents,
relatives, etc., of a virtuous person come to him and speak words that arouse
compassion, or do things that cause pity, or weep for a son, even then they
cannot corrupt the virtuous person who is devoted to restraint. They cannot
bring him back to household life.  **Tīkā:** Even though those parents, father,
son, spouse, etc., come together to him and perform actions or speak words that
are primarily compassionate and like lamentation, for example: "Oh dear, oh
beloved, oh master, oh very dear! You are rare in the world. Without you,
everything is empty. What is the point of everything?" "The clan, the village,
the group, the assembly, wherever you are present, is filled with your presence.
Oh virtuous one! Why are you in this state of renunciation?"  Similarly, if it
is said "they weep," they weep because of a son, for the sake of a son, to
increase the family, to produce a son, and then you should do this again. If
they weep and say this, even though the mendicant is free from attachment and
aversion, and is worthy of liberation, and has arisen from wealth, and has
arisen from proper restraint, they will not be able to obtain the mendicant, nor
will they be able to corrupt him from his renunciation, nor will they be able to
establish him in household life, nor will they be able to make him abandon the
external signs of a mendicant.  **Tīkā-artha:** The parents, son, wife, etc., of
a muni come to him and speak words that are full of lamentation and
compassionate, or they weep, or they do things that arouse compassion, such as
the worldly wife of the muni saying to him: "Oh lord! Oh dear! Oh beloved! Oh
master! Oh very dear! You are rare in the house - you are not available to us.
Oh useless one! Oh unkind one! Without you, everything seems empty. Oh virtuous
one! Wherever you are present, in whatever clan, village, or group, they are all
illuminated by your glory - then why is your house not illuminated by you? What
is the wonder in that?" Weeping for a son, she says: "Produce a son for the
increase, expansion, or development of your family, and then you can accept the
path of restraint." In short, by weeping and speaking in this way, the family
members cannot corrupt the excellent mendicant who is free from attachment and
aversion, who is engaged in the practice of restraint for the sake of
liberation, from his renunciation, from the path of restraint and practice that
he has adopted. They cannot bring him back to household life, nor can they make
him abandon the external signs of a mendicant.  **Jaivīya Kāmehi Lāviyā,
Jahaṇejāhi ṇa Bandhiuṁ Gharam:** Even if they were to be attached to worldly
desires, even if they were to bind him to a house, If the living being does not
desire worldly things, they will not be able to obtain him, nor establish him.
**Chāyā:** Even if they were to be attached to desires, even if they were to
bind him to a house, If the living being does not desire worldly things, they
will not be able to obtain him, nor establish him.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA - yadi kArUNikAni kuryuH yadi rudanti ca
putrakAraNAt  /  dravyaM bhikSu samutthitaM na labhante na saMsthApayitum  //
anuvAda - sAdhu ke mAtA pitA Adi riztedAra usake samIpa Akara yadi aisA vacana
bole jo karuNA paidA karate hoM athavA aise kArya kare jisase mana meM dayA bhI
A jAya athavA putra ke liye rUdana karane lage to bhI ve saMyama meM tatpara
sAdhu ko bhraSTa nahIM kara sakate  /  punaH gRhastha jIvana meM nahIM lA sakate
/  TIkA - kiJca yadyapi te mAtA pitA pitR putra kalatrAdayaH tadantike sametya
karuNApradhAnAni vilApaprAyANi vacAMsyanuSThanAni vA kuryuH, tathAhi "NAha piya
kanta sAmiya, aivallaha dullaho'si bhuvaNaMmi  /  tuha virahamina ya nikkiva  /
suNNaM savvaMvi paDihAi ?" "seNI gAmo goTThI gaNo va taM jattha hosi saMhiNahito
/  dihaI sirie supurisa !  /  kiM puNa niyayaM gharadAraM"  // 2 //  tathA yadi
"royaMti ya" tti, rudanti putrakAraNaM sutanimittaM kulavardhanamekaM suta
mutpAdya punarevaM krtumrhsiiti| evaM rudanto yadi bhaNanti taM bhikSu
rAgadveSarahitatvAnmuktigamana yogya tvAdvA dravyabhUtaM samyak
saMyamotthAnenotthitaM tathApi sAdhuM na lapsyante na zaknuvanti pravrajyAto
bhraMzayituM bhAvAcyAvayituM nA'pi saMsthApayituM gRhasthabhAvena
dravyaliGgAcyAvayitumiti  // 17 //  TIkArtha - muni ke mAtA-pitA, putra, strI
Adi riztedAra usake samIpa Akara yadi aisA vilApapUrNa vacana bole jo
karuNAgarbhita hoM yA rone lage yA aise kArya kare jisase mana meM dayA paidA ho
jaise sAdhu kI saMsAra pakSIyA patnI use kahane lage ki-he nAtha ! he priya ! he
kAnta ! he svAmin ! he ati vallabha !atyanta pyAre ! tuma ghara meM durlabha ho
gaye ho-hameM prApta nahIM ho  /  he niSkRta ! kRpAhIna-nirdayI ! tumhAre viraha
meM saba kucha sUnA lagatA hai  /  he satpuruSa ! tuma jisa zreNI, grAma yA
goSThI meM jahAM bhI sannihita hote hoMupasthita hote hoM, ve saba tumhArI zrI-
zobhA se dIpta ho uThate hoM-phira tumhArA ghara tumase dIpta-prakAzita ho,
isameM Azcarya hI kyA hai ? putra ke lie rotI huI vaha kahe ki apane kula ke
vardhana-vistAra yA vikAsa ke lie eka putra utpanna kara pIche tuma saMyama kA
mArga svIkAra karanA  /  sArAMza yaha hai ki isa prakAra rote hue-kahate hue
pArivArika jana rAgadveSa rahita mokSagamana ke saMyama pAlana meM saMlagna
uttama sAdhu ko pravrajyA se, grahaNa kiye hue saMyama sAdhanA mUlaka mArga se
bhraSTa-patita nahIM kara sakate  /  ve use punaH gRhastha meM lAkara
dravyaliMga se bhI-sAdhu ke bAhya veza meM bhI cyuta nahIM kara sakate  /
jaiviya kAmehi lAviyA, jahaNejAhi Na baMdhiuM gharaM  /  jai jIviya nAvakaMkhae
No labbhaMti Na saMThavittae  // 18 //  chAyA - yadyapi ca kAmai vvayeyuH yadi
nayeyurbadhvA gRham  /  yadi jIvitaM nAvAkAMkSeta no lapsyanti na saMsthApayitum
//  -144)

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Vaitaliya Study**  **Translation:** If a muni's relatives tempt him with
the allure of worldly pleasures, and he refuses to return home, even if they
bind him and take him away, the muni should not desire an unrestrained life. In
such a situation, those relatives cannot control him. They cannot make him a
householder.  **Commentary:**  Even though they, with their love, try to entice
the muni, who has risen through his own virtuous efforts and restraint, with
desires in the form of tempting him, inviting him, and alluring him, this
signifies the acceptance of favorable circumstances. Similarly, if they take him
home by binding him, as indicated by the word 'ण' in the sentence, even if the
muni is overwhelmed by both favorable and unfavorable circumstances, if he does
not desire life, if he does not desire an unrestrained life, or if he does not
welcome it, then his relatives cannot obtain him. They cannot attain him, they
cannot make him their own. They cannot establish him as a householder.
**Commentary Meaning:** A muni who is dedicated to the practice of restraint, if
his relatives come to him and tempt him with worldly pleasures, thus presenting
him with favorable circumstances, and if he does not accept, and they bind him
and take him home, thus presenting him with unfavorable circumstances, meaning
he is overwhelmed by both favorable and unfavorable circumstances, the muni
should not desire life, he should not care. If he does not welcome an
unrestrained life, does not like it, then his family members cannot control him,
and they cannot establish the muni as a householder, they cannot make him a
householder again. In this presented verse, the word 'णं' is used as a figure of
speech.  **Verse 19:**  **Shadow:**  Those who have a sense of 'mine' - parents
and children - teach him with affection.  **Translation:** The muni's parents,
children, wife, etc., come to him and explain to him, "Look! You are a seer, a
subtle observer. You know everything deeply. Therefore, nourish us. You are
ruining the afterlife by not taking care of us, so come and nourish us."
**Commentary:**  And sometimes, his parents, etc., teach him, as indicated by
the word 'ण' in the sentence. They say, "This is mine," with such affection. How
do they teach him? The text explains: "Look at us, we are extremely distressed
due to the lack of your support, and you, as you are, are a seer of the truth, a
subtle observer, meaning you have good hearing." Therefore, nourish us, be
vigilant towards us. Otherwise, by accepting renunciation, you have abandoned
this world, and by abandoning our care, you are also abandoning the afterlife.
They say this with their distress over their own care, and with the desire to
gain merit. As it is said:  "That path, which is burning with suffering, for
those who are attached to their homes, for those who are attached to their
homes, for those who are wandering with their children and wives, go to that
path, my child."  **Commentary Meaning:** A newly initiated muni is approached
by his parents and other relatives, who try to convince him. Here, the word 'णं'
is used as a figure of speech. The muni's relatives, thinking, "This is ours,"
teach him with affection. The scriptures explain how they teach him, how they
convince him. They say, "Look! You are a seer, a subtle observer. You know
everything deeply. Therefore, nourish us. You are ruining the afterlife by not
taking care of us, so come and nourish us."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM anuvAda - yadi muni ke riztedAra use kAma bhogoM kA
pralobhana de, yadi vaha ghara jAne ko taiyAra na ho to use bAMdhakara le jAya,
to bhI muni ko asaMyata jIvana kI vAMchA nahIM karanI caahiye| aisA hone para ve
riztedAra ise apane niyantraNa meM nahIM lA sakate  /  gRhastha nahIM banA
sakate  /  TIkA - api ca 'jaivi' ityAdi, yadyapi te nijAstaM sAdhu
saMyamotthAnenotthitaM kAmairicchAmadanarUpai laviyanti, upa
nimantrayeyurupalobhayeyurityarthaH, anenAnukUlopasargagrahaNaM, tathA yadi
nayeyu rbadhvA gRhaM 'Na' miti vAkyAlaMkAre  /  eva
manukUlapratikUlopasagairabhidruto'pi sAdhuH yadi jIvitaM nAbhikAGkSad yadi
jIvitAbhilASI na bhavedasaMyamajIvitaM vA nAbhinandet tapaste nijA staM sAdhu
'No' labbhaMti' tti, na labhante na prApnuvanti AtmasAtkartuM 'Na saMThavittae'
tti nA'pi gRhasthabhAvena saMsthApayitumalamiti  // 18 //  TIkArtha - eka muni
jo saMyama sAdhanA meM tatpara hai, yadi usake riztedAra usake samIpa Akara use
kAmabhogoM kA lAlaca deM, yoM ve usake liye anukUla upasarga prastuta kare usake
na mAnane para yadi ve usako bAMdhakara ghara le jAe, yoM ve pratikUla upasarga
upasthita kareM arthAt anukUla evaM pratikUla donoM prakAra ke upasargoM se
abhidruta-AkrAnta-utpIr3ita hokara bhI sAdhu ko cAhiye ki vaha jIvana kI icchA
nahIM kare-paravAha nahIM kare  /  yadi vaha asaMyamamaya jIvana kA abhinandana
nahIM karatA, use pasanda nahIM karatA to usake pArivArika jana use apane vaza
meM nahIM kara sakate tathA ve usa muni ko gRhastha meM sthApita nahIM kara
sakate-vApasa usako gRhI nahIM banA sakate  /  isa prastuta gAthA meM 'NaM'
zabda vAkyAlaGkAra ke rUpa meM AyA hai  /  sehaMti ya NaM mamAiNo-mAyapiyA ya
suyAya bhAriyA  /  posAhi Na pAsao tuma loga paraMpi jahAsi posaNo  // 19 //
chAyA - zikSayanti ca mamatvavantaH mAtA pitA ca sutAzcabhAveM  /  poSaya naH
darzaka stvaM lokaM paramapi jahAsi poSaya naH  //  anuvAda - muni ke mAtA-pitA,
putra-patnI Adi saMbandhI jana usake pAsa Ate haiM aura use yoM samajhAte haiM-
dekho ! tuma darzaka-sUkSma dRSTA ho  /  saba bAtoM ko gaharAI se jAnate ho  /
isaliye hamArA poSaNa karo  /  tuma hamArA pAlana na kara paraloka bigAr3a rahe
ho isalie Ao hamArA pAlana karo  /  TIkA - kiJca te
kadAcinmAtApitrAdayastamabhinava-pravrajitaM 'sehaMti' tti, zikSayanti, Namiti
vAkyAlaGkAre "mamAiNo" tti, mamAyamityevaM snehAlavaH, kathaM zikSayantItyata
Aha-pazya naH asmAnatyantaduHkhitAMstvadarthaM poSakAbhAvAdvA, tvaJca
yathAvasthitArthapazyaka:-sUkSmadarzI sazrutika ityarthaH, ataH naH asmAn poSaya
prati jAgaraNaM kuru, anyathA pravrajyAmyupagamenehalokastyakto bhavatA,
asmatpratipAlanaparityAgena ca paralokamapi tvaM tyajasi iti
duHkhitanijapratipAlanena ca puNyAvApti reveti, tathAhi "yA gatiH klezadagdhAnAM
gRheSu gRhamedhinAm  /  vibhratAM putradAraoNstu tAM gatiM vraja putraka"  // 19
//  TAkArtha - eka naye dIkSA liye sAdhu ke pAsa usake mAM-bApa Adi riztedAra
Ate haiM, samajhAte haiN| yahA~ 'NaM' zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke rUpa meM prayukta
hai  /  muni ke riztedAra-yaha hamArA hai-yoM socakara use snehabhAva se zikSA
dete haiM  /  AgamakAra batalAte haiM ve kaise zikSA dete haiM-samajhAte haiM-ve
yoM kahate haiM-ki dekho ! tumhAre - 145)

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra. We are extremely saddened. There is no one else
to nourish and sustain us besides you. You understand this well. You are a
meticulous observer of subtle situations and you are a well-educated scholar.
Therefore, nourish us, take care of us, otherwise just think, you have become a
disciple and destroyed this world and by abandoning our sustenance, you are also
ruining your afterlife.  Virtue is gained by nurturing your distressed family.
Therefore, the scriptures say, addressing the son: O son! The householder is
consumed by hardship in order to sustain his son and wife, he nourishes and
sustains them with great suffering. This is the way of householders, or their
way of life. You too should follow the same.  Those who are not restrained, are
deluded by others and go towards delusion. They are drawn into the unevenness by
the uneven, and they are again overwhelmed by sin.  Commentary: Some are
cowardly and may do this, as it is said, "Others" etc. Some are of weak
character and are deluded by others, their parents etc., and are drawn in. They
are not restrained, they are deluded by others, they are deluded in their
practice.  Since it is the sole cause of worldly existence, unevenness,
unrestraint, is drawn in by the objects of unrestraint, by those who are on the
wrong path, who are afraid of hell, by passion and aversion, which are ingrained
from beginningless time, and are difficult to break, they are drawn into
unrestraint.  And those who are thus, are again involved in sinful actions, they
are overwhelmed, they have become arrogant, they do sinful actions and are not
ashamed.  Commentary meaning: Some are cowardly, who, when favorable
circumstances are presented by their parents etc., do as they do. The scriptures
describe this.  Many men of weak character, are deluded by their parents etc.,
and are attached to worldly things, they become deluded. They deviate from right
vision, right practice etc. In reality, apart from right vision etc., all the
things of this world, even one's own body, are not one's own, they are others.
Therefore, here, everything except the soul is called other. The main cause of
the soul's repeated births and deaths in the world is unrestraint. Therefore,
here, unrestraint is called unevenness. Those who walk on the wrong path, who
are not afraid of their destruction, are brought into unrestraint by those who
are unrestrained, they are pushed back into household life, and they engage in
sin with arrogance. Passion and aversion are ingrained in worldly beings from
beginningless time.  (146)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram  /  liye hama atyanta duHkhI haiM  /  tumhAre atirikta
hamArA koI poSaka-pAlana poSaNa karane vAlA nahIM hai  /  tuma isa bAta ko bhalI
bhAMti samajhate ho  /  tuma pazyaka-sUkSmadarzI-sthitiyoM ko bArIkI se
samajhane vAle tathA tuma sazrutikasuzikSita-vidvAna ho  /  ataH hamArA poSaNa
karo-prati jAgaraNa-dekharekha karo nahIM to jarA soco tumane dIkSita hokara
apane isa loka ko naSTa kara diyA hai aura hamArA pratipAlana karanA chor3akara
tuma apanA paraloka bhI bigAr3a rahe ho  /  apane duHkhita parivAra ke lAlana
pAlana se puNya prApta hotA hai  /  isaliye putra ko sambodhita kara zAstra meM
kahA hai| he putra ! gRhastha apane putra aura strI kA pAlana karane hetu kleza
se dagdha hai-atyanta duHkha sahakara unakA pAlana poSaNa karate haiM  /  yaha
gRhasthoM kI gati yA jIvana paddhati hai  /  tuma bhI usI para calo  /  /  anne
annehiM mucchiyA mohaM jaMti narA asaMvuDA  /  visamaM visamehiM gAhiyA te
pAvehiM puNopagabbhiyA  // 20 //  chAyA - anye'nyairmUrchitAH mohaM yAnti narA
asaMvRtAH  /  viSamaM viSamaiAhitAH, te pApaiH punaH pragalbhitAH  //  anuvAda -
kaI aise asaMvRta-saMvara rahita, saMyama se durbala muni hote haiM jo apane
riztedAroM ke samajhAne se pArivArika janoM meM mUrcchita-mohAsakta ho jAte haiM
/  saMyama ko chor3a dete haiM  /  yoM asaMyata puruSoM dvArA use asaMyama
grahaNa karA diyA jAtA hai  /  asaMyamamaya saMsAra meM ghasITa liyA jAtA hai  /
ve dhRSTatApUrNa pApa karma karane meM laga jAte haiM  /  /  TIkA - evaM
tairupasargitA: kecana kAtarAH kadAcidetatkuryyarityAha-'anne' ityAdi, anye
kecanAlpasattvAH anyaiH mAtApitrAdibhiH mUrcchitA adhyupapannAH samyagdarzanAdi
vyatirekeNa sakalamapi zarIrAdikamanyadityanya grahaNaM te evambhUtA asaMvRtAH
narAH mohaM yAnti sadanuSThAne muhyanti, tathA saMsAragamanaikahetubhUtatvAd
viSama asaMyama staM viSayairasaMyate rUnmArgapravRttatvenA'pAyAbhIrUbhI,
rAgadveSai vA anAdibhavAbhyastatayA duzchedyatvena viSamaiH grAhitAH asaMyamaM
prati vartitA ste caivambhUtAH pApai karmabhiH punarapi pravRttAH pragalbhitAH
dhRSTatAM gatAH, pApakaM karmakurvanto'pi na lajanta iti  // 20 //  TIkArtha -
koI aise kAyara hote haiM jo mAtA pitA Adi riztedAroM dvArA anukUla upasarga
upasthita kiye jAne para, jaisA kara baiThate haiM-AgamakAra usakA nirUpaNa
karate hue batalAte haiM - kaI alpa parAkramI-maMda Atmabalayukta puruSa mAtA
pitA Adi pArivArika janoM meM-sAMsArika padArthoM meM Asakta hokara mohamUr3ha
ho jAte haiM  /  samyakdarzana, sadanuSThAna Adi se vicalita ho jAte haiM  /
vAstava meM samyakdarzana Adi ke atirikta isa jagata ke sabhI padArtha, yahAM
taka ki apanI kAyA bhI apanI nahIM hai, anya haiM  /  isaliye yahAM AtmA
keatirikta sabhI ko anya kahA gayA hai  /  jIva ke saMsAra meM aneka AvAgamana
ke cakra meM par3ane kA mukhya kAraNa asaMyama hai  /  ataeva yahAM asaMyama ko
viSama kahA gayA hai  /  jo puruSa asatya mArga para calate haiM, apane vinAza
kA jinheM Dara nahIM hai, aise saMyama rahita janoM dvArA asaMyama meM lAe hue,
vApasa gRhastha meM dhakele hue puruSa dhRSTatApUrvaka pApa karane meM laga jAte
haiM  /  rAga dveSa kA sAMsArika jIvoM meM anAdikAla (146)

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Study of Vaitalaya  The study is ongoing. Therefore, it is difficult to
separate them. Hence, attachment and aversion are called uneven here. Due to
attachment and aversion, or motivated by them, those cowardly men who accept an
unrestrained life begin to practice sinful deeds with audacity. This means that
they are not ashamed of doing evil.  **Verse 21:**  **Translation:**  O wise
man! You are discerning, free from sin, and tranquil. Therefore, look at the
truth - behold! Those valiant men who are capable of destroying actions walk on
the path that surely leads to liberation, the path that grants the attainment of
perfection.  **Commentary:**  Since this is the case, what should be done? The
text says: Since parents and others are prone to sinful deeds due to delusion,
therefore, the worthy one, who is the object of liberation, should contemplate
the consequences of attachment and aversion, being free from them. The wise man
is endowed with right discernment, free from sinful actions, which are the form
of wrong conduct, and tranquil due to the abandonment of anger, etc. Thus, the
text describes the great path, the path of liberation, which is the path of
knowledge, etc., as the path that leads to liberation, the path that grants
liberation, and is certain and unchanging. Having understood this, one should
follow that path, and not become bold in wrong conduct.  **Verse 22:**
**Translation:**  Having come to the path of liberation, one should be
restrained in mind, speech, and body. Abandoning wealth, relatives, and
beginnings, one should live with a well-restrained life. This is what I say.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAlaya adhyayanaM abhyAsa calatA A rahA hai  /  isaliye inheM chinna bhinna
karanA kaThina hai  /  ataeva rAga dveSa ko yahAM viSama kahA gayA hai  /  rAga
dveSa ke kAraNa yA unase prerita hokara asaMyata jIvana svIkAra kiye ve kAyara
puruSa dhRSTatA ke sAtha pApa karmoM kA AcaraNa karane lagate haiM  /  isakA
abhiprAya yaha hai ki unheM pApa karate jarA bhI zarma nahIM AtI  /  tamhA davi
ikkha paMDie, pAvAo virate'bhinivvuDe  /  paNae vIraM mahAvihiM siddhipahaM
NeAuyaM dhuvaM  // 21 //  chAyA - anuvAda he puruSa ! tuma vivekazIla ho, pApa
se virata ho, abhinirvRta-prazAMta ho| ata: tuma satya kA IkSaNa karo - dekho !
jo vIra puruSa karmoM ko vidIrNa karane meM samartha hote hai ve usa mArga para
calate haiM jo nizcaya hI mokSa meM pahu~cAtA hai jo siddhi-siddhattva prApta
karAne kA patha hai  /  tasmAd dravya IkSasva paNDitaH pApAdvirato'bhinirvRtaH
/  praNatAH vIrAH mahAvIthIM siddhipathaM netAraM dhruvam  //  TIkA yata evaM
tataH kiM karttavya mityAha yato mAtApitrAdi mUrcchitAH pApeSu karmasu pragalbhA
: bhavanti tasmAd dravyabhUto bhavyaH mukti gamana yogyaH, rAgadveSarahito vA
san IkSasva tadvipAkaM paryyAlocaya  /  paMDita: sadvivekayuktaH pApAt
karmaNo'sadanuSThAnarUpAd virataH nivRttaH krodhAdiparityAgAcchAntIbhUta
ityarthaH tathA praNatAH prahvIbhUtAH vIrAH karmavidAraNa samarthA: mahAvIthiM
mahAmArgaM tameva vizinaSTi-siddhipathaM jJAnAdimokSamArga, tathA mokSamprati
netAraM prApakaM dhruvamavyabhicAriNa mityetadavagamya sa eva mArgo'nuSTheyaH
nAsadanuSThAnapragalbhairbhAvyamiti  //  21  //  - TIkArtha - mA~-bApa Adi
pArivArika janoM meM mohAsakta hokara Atmabala rahita puruSa saMyama se patita
ho jAte haiM  /  ataH vaisI sthiti meM kyA karanA cAhiye AgamakAra nirUpaNa
karate haiM chAyA mA~-bApa Adi se mohAsakta puruSa pApAcaraNa meM dhRSTa-dhITha
ho jAte haiN| isaliye tuma muktipatha para gamanazIla rahate hue rAga dveSa kA
vivarjana karate hue usa rAga dveSa ke natIje samajho uttama viveka - sadjJAna
se mukta tathA pApAnuSThAna se nivRtta hokara krodhAdi kA tyAga karo, zAMta bno|
karma ko ucchinna karane meM jo puruSa samartha hote haiM ve hI vAstava meM vIra
hote haiM  /  mahAmArga kA mahAna patha ko svAyatta karate haiM  /  usa
mahAmArga kI vizeSatA batAte hue AgamakAra kahate haiM 1 vaha mahA patha jJAna
kA mokSa kA rAstA hai  /  vaha mokSa taka le jAtA hai  /  vaha dhruva - nizcita
hai, yaha avagata kara usI mArga kA anuSThAna anusaraNa karanA cAhiye  /
pApakarma meM dhRSTa-nirlajja nahIM bananA cAhiye  /  veyAliyamaggamAgao,
maNavayasA kAyeNa saMvuDo  /  ciccA vittaM ca NAyao, AraMbhaM ca susaMvuDe care
// 22 //  ttibemi  //  vaidArakamArgamAgato manasA vacasA kAyena saMvRtaH  /
tyaktvA vittaJca jJAtInArambhaJca susaMvRtazcareta  //  iti bravImi  //  147

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra Translation - One should adopt the path that is
capable of destroying karmas, and become endowed with manogupti, vakgupti and
kayagupti, and renounce wealth, family members and the initiation of ceremonies,
and become a supreme ascetic and wander. - Commentary - Again, concluding with
further instruction, it is said, 'Veyaliyam magga' etc., having become one who
has come to the path of destruction of karma, one should renounce wealth,
property, as well as relatives and family members, and also the initiation of
sinful acts, and become one who is restrained in the senses, and practice
restraint. This is what I say, as before. ||22|| Thus ends the first uddeśaka of
the second study of the Vaitaliya. Commentary Meaning - The author of the Agama,
again giving instruction, concludes this uddeśaka by saying that one should walk
on the path that is capable of destroying karmas, and remain restrained in mind,
speech and body - mental, verbal and physical, and renounce wealth, family
members and sinful acts, and walk on the path of restraint, not being controlled
by the senses. Shri Sudharma Swami says this to Jambu Swami. The first uddeśaka
of the second study of the Vaitaliya is concluded. 卐卐卐 ( 148

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - jo karmoM ko ucchinna karane meM samartha hai
usa mArga kA avalambana kara manogupti, vAkgupti aura kAyagupti se yukta
banakara dhana, pArivArika jana tathA AraMbha samAraMbha kA parityAga kara use
uttama saMyamI banakara vicaraNa karanA cAhiye  /  - TIkA -
punarapyupadezadAnapUrvakamupasaMharantAha-'veyAliyamaggaM' ityAdi, karmaNA
vidAraNamArgamAgato bhUtvA taM tathAbhUtaM manovAkkAyasaMvRttaH punaH tyaktvA
parityajya vittaM dravyaM tathA jJAtIzca svajanAzca tathA sAvadyArambhaJca sRSTu
saMvRta indriyaiH saMmAnuSThAnaM carediti bravImIti pUrvavat  // 22 //  iti
vaitAlIya dvitIyAdhyayanasya prathamoddezakaH samAptaH  /  TIkArtha - AgamakAra
punaH upadeza dete hue isa uddezaka kA samApana karate hue kahate haiM ki jo
mArga karmoM kA vidAraNa karane meM samartha hai usa para calate hue mana vacana
aura kAya se gupta-mAnasika, tathA vAcika amatta pravRtti se virata rahate hue
sampatti, pArivArika jana tathA pApayukta kAryoM kA parityAga kara indriyoM kA
vazavartI na hote hue saMyama ke patha para calanA cAhiye  /  zrI sudharmA svAmI
jambU svAmI se aisA kahate haiM  /  vaitAlIya nAmaka dUsare adhyayana kA
prathama uddezaka pari-samApta hotA hai| Wan Wan Wan  ( 148

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Vaitaliya Study ## Second Uddeshaka  **Commentary:**  The second Uddeshaka
begins after the first one ends. It follows the first Uddeshaka, as the first
one describes the Dharma teachings given by Bhagavan Rishabha to his sons, and
this second Uddeshaka also discusses the same Dharma teachings. The subject
matter of this Uddeshaka is Dharma Upadesha.   The connection between this
Uddeshaka and the previous Sutra is as follows: The previous Sutra mentioned the
abandonment of external possessions, family, and worldly beginnings. This
Uddeshaka emphasizes the abandonment of internal pride, as indicated by the
subject matter of the Uddeshaka.   The first Sutra of this Uddeshaka is:
**Tayasam va jahai se rayam, iti sankhaya muni na majjai. Go yannatarena
mahanena, aha seyakari anneesi inkhini. ||1||**  **Shadow:**  Just as a snake
sheds its skin, so too does the Muni abandon the eight types of Karma,
understanding that this is the way to be free from Kashaya.   **Translation:**
Just as a snake sheds its skin, so too does a Muni abandon the eight types of
Karma, understanding that this is the way to be free from Kashaya.  A Muni,
knowing this, does not become proud of his lineage, caste, or other worldly
achievements. He does not belittle or criticize others, as this leads to the
destruction of his own well-being.  **Commentary:**  Just as a snake sheds its
skin, so too does a virtuous person abandon the eight types of Karma, as they
are the cause of Kashaya.  Knowing this, the Muni, who is aware of the three
periods of time, does not become proud. He does not engage in actions that lead
to pride.  The term "Mahan" refers to a virtuous person, and the text also
mentions "Jeviu," which means a wise and discerning person.  Such a person does
not become proud of his lineage or caste.  Not only should he avoid pride, but
he should also avoid criticizing others.  The text further states that a
virtuous person should not engage in actions that lead to the destruction of
others' well-being.  The following two Sutras, "Tavasamjamanaanesuvi" and "Jai
Maano Vajio Mahasihim," are connected to the previous Sutra, "Tayasam va jahai
se rayam."  **Tavasamjamanaanesuvi, jai maano vajio mahesihim
attasamukkarisattham kim pun hi la u anneesim? ||43||**  **Jai tav nijaram ao,
padisiddho atta maana mahanena. Aviseesamayatthana pariharaivva payattena.
||44||**  **Translation:**  Even if a person is engaged in Tapas, Samyama, and
Jnana for the purpose of self-improvement, if he is proud, even if he is praised
by great sages, what is the use of criticizing others?  If a person is truly
free from pride, then he will avoid all forms of pride, even if he is praised by
great sages.  He will strive to eliminate all forms of pride.  **Veyaaliyassa
Nijjutti Sampatta.**  **Translation:**  This is the true nature of the
Veyaaliya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana dvitIya uddezakaH TIkA- atha dvitIyAdhyayane dvitIya
uddeshk:praarmbhte|prthmaanntrN dvitIyaHsamArabhyate-asya cAyamabhisambandhaH
ihAnantaroddezake bhagavatA svaputrANAM dharmadezanA'mihitA, tadihApi
saivAdhyayanArthadhikaratvAd abhidhIyate  /  sUtrasya sUtreNa sambandho'yam-
anantaroktasUtre bAhyadravyasvajanArambha parityAgo'bhihitaH, tadihApyAntaramAna
parityAga uddezArthAdhikArasUcito'bhidhIyate  /  tadanena
sambandhenAyAtasyAsyoddezaka syAdisUtram - TIkArtha - pahale uddezaka ke samApta
ho jAne ke pazcAt aba dUsarA uddezaka zurU kiyA jA rahA hai| isakA pahalA
uddezaka ke sAtha yaha saMbaMdha hai ki pahale meM Adi tIrthaMkara bhagavAna
RSabha ne apane putroM ke samakSa dharma kA nirUpaNa kiyA  /  isa dUsare
uddezaka meM bhI vahI dharma nirUpaNa hai  /  isakA arthAdhikAra yA vivecya
viSaya dharmopadeza hai  /  sUtra ke sAtha jaisA pahale kahA hai saMbaMdha isa
prakAra hai-jo vyakti vivekazIla hai use bAhya padArthoM se tathA pArivArika
janoMse AraMbha samArambha se saMbaMdha chor3a denA cAhiye  /  isa sUtra meM
yaha pratipAdana kiyA jAtA hai ki vidvAna yA vivekazIla puruSa ko cAhiye ki vaha
Antarika abhibhAva kA tyAga kara de  /  aisA uddezaka ke arthAdhikAra se bhI
saMketita hai  /  isa uddezaka kA prathama sUtra isa prakAra hai - tayasaM va
jahAi se rayaM, iti saMkhAya muNI Na majjaI  /  goyannatareNa mAhaNe, aha
seyakarI annesI iMkhiNI  // 1 //  chAyA - tvacamiva jahAti sa rajaH iti
saMkhyAya munirnamAdyati  /  gotrAnyatareNa mAhano'thAzreyaskaryanyeSA mIkSiNI
//  anuvAda - jisa prakAra eka sarpa apanI keMcula kA parityAga kara detA hai,
usI prakAra apane ATha prakAra ke karmoM kI raja ko tyAga detA hai| yaha
samajhatA haA. hRdayaMgama karatA haA saMya  /  huA saMyamI sAdhaka apane
gautrauccakula Adi kA ghamaMDa nahIM karate  /  dUsaroM kI avahelanA-nindA nahIM
karate  /  aisA karane se zreyasa kAAtma kalyANa kA nAza hotA hai  /  TIkA -
yathA uragaH svAM tvaca mavazyaM parityAgArhatvAt jahAti parityajati,
evamasAvapi sAdhuH raja ivarajaH raja iva rajaH aSTa prakAraM karma tad
akaSAyitvena parityajatIti  /  evaM kaSAyAbhAvo hi karmAbhAvasya kAraNamiti
saMkhyAya jJAtvA muniH kAlatrayavedI, na mAdyati madaM na yAti madakAraNaM
darzayati-gotreNa kAzyapAdinA anyataragrahaNAt zeSANi madasthAnAdi gRhyanta iti,
'mAhaNa' tti sAdhuH, pAThAtaraM vA jeviu' tti, yo vidvAn vivekI sa jAti
kulalAbhAditi na mAdyatIti, na kevalaM svato mado na vidheyaH jugupsA'pyanveSAM
na vidheyeti atha anantaramasau azreyaskarI pApakAriNI iMkhiNI' tti nindA anyeSA
mato na kAryeti  /  "muNI Na majjai" ityAdikasya sUtravayavasya sUtrasparza
gAthA dveyana niyuktikRdAha "tavasaMjamaNANesuvi, jai mANo vajio mahesIhiM
attasamukkarisatthaM kiM puNa hI lA u annesiM ? // 43 //  jai tAva nijaramao,
paDisiddho aTTha mANa mahaNehiM  /  avisesamayaTThANA pariharivvA payatteNaM  //
44 //  veyAliyassa NijjuttI sampattA  /  tapa:saMyama jJAneSvapi
AtmasamutkarSaNArtham utsekArthaM yaH pravRtto mAnaH yadyasAvapi tAvad varjitaH
vyakto maharSibhiH mahAmunibhiH kiM punarnindA'nyeSAM na tyAjyeti  /  yadi
tAvannirjarAyado'pi 149)

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** is the sole cause of liberation. The eight
types of pride have been prohibited by the Arhats. The remaining pride, such as
that arising from birth, should be abandoned with great effort. This is the
meaning of the two verses.  **Commentary:**  Just as a snake sheds its skin
because it is no longer useful, so too do the restrained practitioners abandon
their eight types of karma, like dust particles. These karmas do not bind
because they are devoid of passions. When passions are absent in life, then
karma is also absent.  The Muni, who knows the past, present, and future, does
not become intoxicated by pride. They do not become arrogant.  The Agamkaras
state that pride arises from the lineage of Kashyap and others. The word
"anyatar" refers to other lineages that give rise to pride. Individuals born
into these lineages consider themselves superior to others and are consumed by
pride.  The word "mahan" refers to the virtuous. In some places, the reading
"jeviu" is found, which means that the virtuous do not take pride in their
caste, lineage, or wealth. The virtuous should not be proud, nor should they
criticize or slander others. The Agamkaras provide this insight. The word "ath"
indicates that slander leads to sin and binds one to misfortune. Therefore, one
should never slander anyone.  The commentator presents two verses that touch
upon the essence of the verses: Great practitioners, who have abandoned pride in
their austerities, restraint, and knowledge, which promote self-improvement,
have also abandoned the practice of criticizing others. They naturally abandon
it.  **Nirjara** - the path to liberation - is the sole cause of liberation. The
eight types of pride have been prohibited by the Arhats. They should not be
proud of them. Then what to speak of pride arising from birth, lineage, and
other sources of pride? These should be abandoned with great effort. This is the
meaning of the two verses.  **Translation of the verses:**  "He who despises
another person wanders in this world for a long time. Knowing that slander
accumulates sin, the Muni does not become intoxicated with pride and does not
slander anyone."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram mokSaikagamanahetuH pratiSiddhaH
aSTamAnamathanairarhadbhiH avazeSANi tu madasthAnAni jAtyAdIni prayatnena
sutarAM parihartavyAnIti gAthAdvayArthaH  //  43  // 44 //  ? TIkArtha - uraga-
ura-chAtI se calane vAlA, reMgane vAlA sarpa, jisa prakAra apanI keMcula ko
chor3a detA hai kyoMki yaha chor3ane hI lAyaka hotI hai, usI prakAra saMyatAcArI
sAdhaka dhUlI kaNoM kI taraha apane ATha prakAra ke karmoM ko tyAga dete haiN|
ve karma baMdha nahIM karate kyoMki ve kaSAya rahita hote haiM  /  jaba jaba
jIvana meM kaSAya kA abhAva ho jAtA hai tabhI jIvana meM karmoM kA abhAva
ghaTita hotA hai| muni jo bhUta, vartamAna aura bhaviSya ina tInoM kAloM ko
jAnate haiM  /  yaha samajhate hue mada ke vazagata nahIM hote - ahaMkAra nahIM
karate  /  AgamakAra maMda yA ahaMkAra kA kAraNa batalAte hue pratipAdita karate
haiM - kAzyapa Adi gautra mada sthAnoM ke - ahaMkAra ke kAraNa hote haiN| yahAM
jo anyatara zabda AyA hai  /  vaha anyAnya gautroM ke sUcana hetu hai, jo
ahaMkAra paidA karate haiM  /  ina gautroM meM utpanna vyakti apane ko auroM se
U~cA mAnate haiM tathA ahaMkAra meM dhutta rahate haiM  /  'mAhana' zabda sAdhu
ke liye AyA hai| kahIM-kahIM, 'jeviU' yaha pATha prApta hotA hai jisakA Azaya
yaha hai ki sAdhu jAti, kula aura lAbha kA ahaMkAra nahIM karate  /  sAdhu ko
ahaMkAra to karanA hI nahIM cAhiye varan kisI anya kI nindA yA apakIrti bhI
nahIM karanI cAhiye  /  AgamakAra yaha digdarzana karAte haiN| yahAM 'atha'
zabda AyA hai jo anantara kA bodhaka hai  /  anya kI nindA pApa utpanna karatI
hai usase azubha kA baMdha hotA hai  /  isaliye kabhI kisI kI nindA nahIM karanI
cAhiye  /  niyuktikAra gAthA ke avayava Azaya kA saMsparza karane vAlI do
gAthAe~ yahA upasthita karate haiM - mahAn sAdhakoM ne jaba AtmotkarSa ko
saMvarddhana karane vAle tapazcaraNa, saMyama aura jJAna ke abhimAna kA bhI
parityAga kara diyA hai taba auroM kI nindA karane kA parityAga karane kI to
phira bAta hI kyA hai ? vaha to sarvathA chor3ane yogya hai hI  /  usakA to ve
sahaja hI tyAga kara dete  /  nirjarA - mokSa gamana kA - mukti pAne kA ekamAtra
hetu hai  /  ATha prakAra 'mAna kA mathana karane vAle arhato ne usake mada ko
bhI varjita kiyA hai arthAt usakA bhI abhimAna nahIM karanA cAhiye to phira jAti
janma Adi anya mata sthAnoM kI ucca janma jAti ke AdhAra para kiye jAne vAle
ahaMkAra kI to bAta hI kyA hai ? prayatnapUrvaka inakA parityAga kara denA
cAhiye  /  yaha donoM gAthAoM kA artha hai  /  jo paribhavaI paraM jaNaM,
saMsAre parivattaI mahaM  /  adu iMkhiNiyA upAviyA, iti saMkhAya muNI Na majjaI
// 2 //  chAyA yaH paribhavati paraM janaM, saMsAre parivartate mahat  /  atha
IkSaNikA tu pApikA, iti saMkhyAya muni rna mAdyati  //  anuvAda jo manuSya kisI
dUsare manuSya kA paribhava- tiraskAra yA apamAna karatA hai, vaha bahuta samaya
taka isa saMsAra sAgara meM bhaTakatA rahatA hai| dUsaroM kI nindA se pApa
saMcita hotA hai, yaha jAnakara muni madonmat nahIM hote, kisI kI niMdA nahIM
karate haiM  /  - 150

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vaitaliya Study Commentary -  On the Fault of Criticizing Others
**Commentary:**  The commentary, citing the verse "Jo Paribhavaee" (He who
despises), explains the faults of criticizing others. It states that anyone who
despises another, who is not themselves, will be reborn in the cycle of
transmigration (Samsara) for a long time, like a pot on a wheel. This is due to
the karma generated by such actions. The word "Atha" here signifies "therefore,"
as the ultimate consequence of criticizing others is endless transmigration.
Therefore, criticizing others is considered "Papika" (sinful) or "Doshavati"
(faulty). It leads to a fall from a higher state to a lower one. This is
illustrated by the example of a pig, and also a priest being reborn as a dog in
the next life.  Understanding this, a Muni (Jain monk) should not be proud of
their lineage, knowledge, or austerities. They should not consider themselves
superior to others.  **Verse 3:**  **Shadow Verse:**  "Yashchapyanayaka syaad
yo'pi cha preshyapreshyah syaat | Yo mounpadam upastthito no lajet samatam
sadacharet ||"  **Translation:**  "Even if one is without a master (anayaka) or
is a servant of a servant (preshyapreshy), if they both embrace the path of
restraint (mounpadam) and become a Muni, they should not feel ashamed and should
always practice equality (samatam)."  **Commentary:**  This verse emphasizes the
importance of humility and equality, even for those who are seemingly at the top
or bottom of the social hierarchy. It states that even a king or a servant of a
servant, if they embrace the path of Jainism, should not feel superior or
inferior to each other. They should practice equality and respect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana TIkA - sAmprataM para nindAdoSamadhikRtyAha-'jo paribhavaI'
ityAdi, yaH kazcida vivekI 'paribhavati' avajJayati, paraM janaM' anyaM lokam
AtmavyatiriktaM sa tatkRtena karmaNA 'saMsAre' caturgatilakSaNe
bhavodadhAvaraghaTTa ghaTInyAyena 'parivarttate' bhramati 'mahad' atyarthaM
mahAntaM vA kAlaM, kvacit 'ciram' iti pAThaH, 'adu ti atha zabdo nipAtaH
nipAtAnAmanekArthatvAt ata ityasyArthe vartate, yataH paraparibhavAdAtyantikaH
saMsAraH ataH 'iMkhiNiyA' paranindA tu zabdasyaivakArArthatvAt 'pApikaiva'
doSavatyeva, athavA svasthAnAdadhamasthAne pAtikA, tatreha janmani sudharo
dRSTAntaH, paraloke'pi purohitasyApi zvAdiSUtpattiriti, ityevaM 'saMkhyAya' para
nindA doSavatI jJAtvA muni rjAtyAdibhiH yathA'haM viziSTakulodbhavaH zrutavAn
tapasvI bhavAMstu matto hIna iti na mAdyati  // 2 //  TIkArtha - AgamakAra oroM
kI nindA karane se jo doSa hote haiM, unakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue kahate jo
viveka rahita puruSa kisI anya vyakti kA paribhava karatA hai-avajJA karatA hai,
apamAna karatA haivaha usa paribhava se utpanna hue karma ke phalasvarUpa bahuta
samaya taka caturgatimaya saMsAra meM rahaTa ke ghar3oM kI taraha cakkara kATatA
rahatA hai  /  kahIM kahIM 'ciraM' pATha milatA hai  /  yahAM jo 'atha' zabda
AyA hai vaha nipAta sUcaka hai  /  nipAta aneka arthoM ke dyotaka hote haiM  /
ataH 'atha' yahAM ataH zabda ke artha meM prayukta huA hai| dUsaroM kA paribhava
yA apamAna karane ke phalasvarUpa Atyantika-atyadhika bhavabhramaNa karanA hotA
hai  /  yahI kAraNa hai ki paranindA pApikA-pApapUrNa haiM yA doSavatI-doSapUrNa
hai  /  vaha jIva ko apane uttama sthAna se nimna sthAna meM pahu~cA detI hai  /
yahAM 'tu' zabda evaM ke artha meM AyA hai  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki
dUsaroM kI nindA pApa ko hI paidA karatI hai  /  paranindA pApa ko utpanna
karane vAlI hai  /  isa saMbaMdha meM sUara kA eka dRSTAnta hai, eka aisA
dRSTAnta bhI hai ki eka purohita Age ke bhava meM kutte kI yoni meM janma letA
hai  /  dUsaroM kI nindA karanA pApa kA hetu hai  /  yaha samajhakara muni ko
apane viziSTa kula meM utpanna hone, zAstravettA hone, tapasvI hone kA mada
nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  kisI ko yaha bhI nahIM bolanA cAhiye ki tuma mujhase
hIna ho-tuccha ho| je yAvi aNAyage siyA, je viya pesagapesae siyA  /  je
moNapayaM uvaTTie, No laje samayaM sayAcare  // 3 //  chAyA - yazcApyanAyakaH
syAd yo'pi ca preSyapreSyaH syAt  /  yo maunapada mupasthito no lajeta samatAM
sadA caret  //  anuvAda - eka aisA vyakti jo anAyaka hai-jisakA koI dUsarA svAmI
nahIM hai, jo cakravartI hai, eka aisA vyakti hai jo preSya preSya hai-naukara
kA bhI naukara hai, ve donoM hI yadi saMyama ke patha para Ate haiMmunidharma
svIkAra karate haiM to unheM paraspara lajjA-ucca hIna bhAva chor3akara
samabhAva se vartana karanA cAhiye  /  TIkA-madAbhAve ca yadvidheyaM
taddarzayitumAhaM - yazcApikazcidAstAMtAvad anyo na vidyate nAyako'syetyanAyakaH
-svayaM prabhuzcakravartyAdi: syAt' bhavet, yazcApi preSyasyApi preSyaH-tasyaiva
rAjJaH karmakarasyApi karmakaraH,ya evambhUto maunIndraM padyate-gamyate mokSo
yena tatpadaM-saMyastam upa-sAmIpyena sthitaH upasthita:-samAzritaH
so'pyalajjamAna utkarSamakurvan vA sarvA:kriyAH-parasparato vandanaprati
vandanAdikAH vidhatte, idamuktaM bhavati 151)

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra states that even a Chakravarti (universal emperor), who
is the master of all, should not feel ashamed to bow down to a former servant
who has now attained the Muni (ascetic) status. This is because the Muni has
attained a higher state of being, and the Chakravarti should not feel superior.
The Sutra emphasizes that a Bhikshu (monk) should always maintain "Samata"
(equality) and "Samabhava" (equanimity) and be devoted to "Samyama" (self-
control).  The commentary explains that even a Chakravarti, who is the master of
all, should not feel ashamed to bow down to a former servant who has now
attained the Muni (ascetic) status. This is because the Muni has attained a
higher state of being, and the Chakravarti should not feel superior. The
commentary further explains that a Bhikshu (monk) should always maintain
"Samata" (equality) and "Samabhava" (equanimity) and be devoted to "Samyama"
(self-control).  The commentary also explains that a Muni should always maintain
"Samata" (equality) and "Samabhava" (equanimity) and be devoted to "Samyama"
(self-control). The Muni should not feel ashamed to bow down to a former servant
who has now attained the Muni (ascetic) status. This is because the Muni has
attained a higher state of being, and the Chakravarti should not feel superior.
The commentary also explains that a Muni should always maintain "Samata"
(equality) and "Samabhava" (equanimity) and be devoted to "Samyama" (self-
control). The Muni should not feel ashamed to bow down to a former servant who
has now attained the Muni (ascetic) status. This is because the Muni has
attained a higher state of being, and the Chakravarti should not feel superior.
The commentary also explains that a Muni should always maintain "Samata"
(equality) and "Samabhava" (equanimity) and be devoted to "Samyama" (self-
control). The Muni should not feel ashamed to bow down to a former servant who
has now attained the Muni (ascetic) status. This is because the Muni has
attained a higher state of being, and the Chakravarti should not feel superior.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram cakravartinA'pi maunIndrapadamupasthitena pUrva
mAtmapreSyamapi vandamAnena lajjA na vidheyA itareNa cotkarSa ityevaM 'samatAM'
samabhAvaM sadA bhikSuzcaret-saMyamodyukto bhavediti  // 3 //  TIkArtha - auroM
kA to kahanA hI kyA ? jo svayaM prabhu sabakA svAmI cakravartI samrAT hai,
jisake Upara koI nAyaka nahIM hai, dUsarI ora jo naukara kA bhI naukara hai, usa
samrAT ke karmacArI kA bhI sevaka hai, ve donoM hI-cakravartI aura sovaka yadi
mokSaprada muni vrata ko svIkAra kara lete haiM-saMyama kA patha apanA lete haiM
to unheM lajjA kA parityAga kara-ucca nIca kA bheda chor3akara apane utkarSa-
UMce pada kA garva na karate hue tathA pUrva meM sevaka rahe vyakti ko nIcA na
mAnate hue lajjA chor3akara paraspara vaMdana namaskAra Adi sabhI kriyAoM ko
bhalI bhAMti karanA cAhiye  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki cAhe cakravartI
samrATa bhI kyoM na ho, kintu saMyama le lene ke bAda apane se pahale dIkSA liye
naukara ko bhI jo aba sAdhu hai, vandana-namaskAra karane meM zarma mahasUsa
nahIM karanI cAhiye  /  na dUsaroM ke samakSa apanA utkarSa-baDappana kA
abhimAna prakaTa karanA cAhiye kintu sadaiva samattva bhAva kA Azraya lekara
sAdhu ko saMyama kI ArAdhanA meM tatpara rahanA cAhiye  /  sama annayaraMbhi
saMjame, saMsuddhe samaNe parivvae  /  je AvakahAsamAhiye davie kAla
makAsIpaMDie  // 4 //  chAyA - samo'nyatarasmin saMyame saMzuddhaH zramaNaH
parivrajet  /  yAvat kathA samAhito dravyaH kAla makArSIt paNDitaH  //  _
anuvAda - sama-samattva bhAva yukta, zuddha saMyama meM avasthita sat asat ke
viveka meM nipuNa tapazcaraNa zIla muni apane saMyama sthAna meM sthita hotA huA
sAdhanAmaya jIvana meM avicala rahatA huA pravrajyA kA-muni jIvana kA bhalI
bhAMti pAlana karatA rahe  /  TIkA - kva punarvyavasthitena lajjAmado na
vidhayAviti darzayitumAha-'same' ti samabhAvopenaH sAmAyikAdau saMyame
saMyamasthAne vA SaTsthAnapatitatvAt saMyamasthAnAnAmanyatarasmin saMyamasthAne
chedopasthApanI yAdau vA, tadeva vizinaSTi-samyakzuddhe samyak zuddhoM vA
'zramaNaH' tapasvI lajAmada parityAgena samAnamanA vA parivrajet' saMyamodyukto
bhaveta. syAta-kiyantaM kAlama? yAvata kathA-devadatto yajJadatta iti kathAM
yAvata, samyagAhita AtmA jJAnAdau yena sa samAhitaH samAdhinA vA
zobhanAdhyavasAyena yaktaH dravyabhato rAgadveSAdirahitaH maktigamanayogya tathA
vA bhavyaH sa evambhUtaH kAlamakArSIt 'paMDitaH' sadasadvivekakalitaH, etaduktaM
bhavati-devadatta iti kathA mRtasyApi yAva-mRtyukAlaM tAva llajjAmadaparityAgo
petena saMyamAnuSThAne pravartitavyamiti syAt  /  / 4 /  /  TIkArtha - sAdhu ko
kisI bhI sthiti meM rahate hue ahaMkAra nahIM karanA cAhiye aura apanA baDappana
mAnate hue zarma nahIM karanI cAhiye  /  yaha digdarzana karAne hetu AgamakAra
kahate haiM - samattva bhAva yukta sAmAyika Adi saMyama sthAna meM avasthita
SaTsthAna vibhakta-chaH bhAgoM meM baMTe hue kisI eka saMyama sthAna meM
vidyamAna athavA chedopasthApanIya Adi cAritra meM sthita tapazcaraNazIla muni
zuddha AcArazIlavratazIla bhikSu lajjA tathA ahaMkAra kA parityAga kara apane
mana meM samAnatA pUrNa vRtti liye sAdhanA meM tatpara raheM  /  phira prazna
upasthita karate hue viSaya ko Age bar3hAyA jAtA hai ki vaha sAdhu kitane samaya
taka aisA - 152

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Should one engage in Vaitaliya studies? In response to this question, it is
explained that as long as Devadatta or Yajnadutta exist in the world, one should
follow the path of restraint with a good resolve, keeping one's soul established
in the pursuit of knowledge and worship, in accordance with this prevalent
story. In this way, a sage, free from the material essence of attachment and
aversion, fit for liberation, and endowed with the discernment of truth and
falsehood, should observe restraint throughout their life. The implication is
that even after death, the story of a person named Devadatta continues to
circulate in the world. Therefore, it is stated here that until the time of
death arrives, the muni should remain engaged in the practice of restraint,
abandoning shame and pride.  **"The muni, seeing the distant goal, the path of
Dharma, is struck by harsh words, even when being beaten, remains steadfast in
his time."** (5)  **Translation:** The muni, the knower of the past, present,
and future, the seer of the distant - liberation, even when struck by harsh
words, tormented, and beaten with punishments, remains steadfast on the path of
restraint.  **Commentary:** What is the basis for this conduct? It is explained
that due to its distance, liberation is referred to as "distant." Or, a long
period of time is called "distant." Therefore, the muni, the knower of the three
times - present, past, and future, seeing the distant, i.e., liberation, and
contemplating the distant time, should not be affected by shame or pride.  What
is the meaning of contemplating the distant time? The commentator explains:  The
muni should observe the past, which is connected to the nature or Dharma of
beings, and as a result of which they go to higher or lower realms. He should
also keep his sight on the future. He should understand the nature of both.
While doing so, the muni should not be affected by shame or pride. Even when
beaten with sticks, whips, or harsh words, he should follow the path of
restraint as described in the scriptures, like the disciple of Skandha Muni.
Here, the alternative reading "samya-ahiyasae" means "enduring with equanimity."
(5)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM kare ? usakA nirAkaraNa karate hue batAyA jAtA hai ki jaba
taka devadatta yA yajJadatta haiM, jagata meM isa pracalita kathA ke anurUpa
jaba taka jIvita rahe taba taka jJAnArAdhanA Adi meM apanI AtmA ko saMsthita
karate hue zubha adhyavasAya pUrvaka saMyama kA anupAlana kare anusaraNa kare  /
isa prakAra dravyAbhUta rAga dveSa vivarjita, mokSagamana yogya tathA sat asat
ke viveka se yukta sAdhu yAvajjIvana saMyama kA pAlana kare  /  kahane kA Azaya
yaha hai ki marane ke bAda bhI devadatta nAma kA vyakti thA, aisI bAta saMsAra
meM calatI rahatI hai  /  isaliye yahAM kahA gayA hai ki jaba taka mauta kA
samaya na Aye taba taka muni lajjA aura mada kA parityAga karatA huA saMyama kI
sAdhanA meM saMpravRtta rahe  /  dUraM aNupassiyA muNI, tItaM dhammamaNAgayaM
tahA  /  puTThe pharusehiM mAhaNe, avi haNNU samayaMmi rIyai  // 5 //
dharmayanAgataM dUramanuddazya muniratI taM spRSTaH paruSai mahinaH api
hanyamAnaH samaye anuvAda atIta, vartamAna tathA bhaviSya kA vettA tathA
dUradraSTA- mokSa ko samajhane vAlA muni paruSakaThora vAkyoM dvArA spRSTa,
pratADita tathA daNDa Adi ke dvArA Ahata - mArA pITA jAtA huA bhI saMyama patha
para gatizIla raheM  /  chAyA - - - tathA  /  rIyate  //  TIkA .
kimAlambyaitadvidheyamiti, ucyate dUravarttitvAta dUro- mokSasta manu-pazcAt taM
dRSTvA yadi vA dUramiti dIrghakAlam 'anudRzya' paryAlocya 'muniH' kAlatrayavettA
dUrameva darzayati- atItaM 'dharmaM' svabhAvaM -
jIvAnAmuccAvacasthAnagatilakSaNaM tathA anAgataM ca dharmaM- svabhAvaM
paryAlocya lajjAmadau na vidheyau, tathA 'spRSTa:'
chuptaH'paruSai:'daNDakazAdibhirvAgbhirvA 'mAhaNe' tti muni: 'avihaNNU ' tti api
mAryamANaH skandaziSyagaNavat 'samaye' saMyame 'riyate' taduktamArgeNa
gacchatItyarthaH, pAThAntara vA 'samayA'hiyAsae' tti samatayA sahata iti  // 5
//  TIkArtha kisa padArtha kA avalambana lekara sAdhu aisA kare, AgamakAra isa
para prakAza DAlate hue batalAte haiM dUravartI hone ke kAraNa mokSa ko dUra
zabda dvArA abhihita kiyA gayA hai athavA dIrgha kAla yA lambe samaya ko dUra
kahA jAtA hai  /  ataeva tInoM kAloM ke vettA - vartamAna, bhUta aura bhaviSya
ke draSTA muni ko dUra arthAt mokSa ko dekhakara tathA dUravartI samaya kA
cintana kara lajjA evaM abhimAna nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  dUravartI kAla ko
socane kA kyA abhiprAya hai yaha prazna upasthita kara AgamakAra batalAte haiM
atIta yA bItA huA samaya jo prANiyoM ke svabhAva yA dharma se jur3A rahA usake
pariNAma svarUpa ve U~cI nIcI gatiyoM meM jAte haiM  /  yaha muni ko dekhate
rahanA hai  /  sAtha hI sAtha bhaviSya para bhI use dRSTi rakhanI hai  /  donoM
kA svarUpa samajhate rahanA hai  /  aisA karatA huA muni lajjA yA abhimAna na
kare  /  daNDa- laTThI, kazAcAbuka Adi dvArA mArA; pITA jAtA huA kaThora vANI
dvArA gharSita kiyA jAtA huA bhI vaha skandhaka muni ke ziSya kI jyoM AgamoM meM
nirUpita saMyama patha kA anusaraNa karatA jaaye| yahAM 'samayAhiyAsae' yaha
pAThAntara 153

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 6:**  The Muni, who has attained perfect
wisdom, should always overcome the obstacles and hindrances - the afflictions -
that have been described above, with equanimity.  **[Pannha Samatte Saya Jae
Samata Dhamma Mudahre Muni. Sume U Saya Alusae No Kujjhe No Mani Mahanee.]**
**Commentary:**  The commentary further explains the meaning of the verse:  "The
one who has attained perfect wisdom, who is wise and discerning, is called
'Prajna Samāpta'. Another reading is 'Pannha Sammatthe', which means 'one who is
capable of answering questions'. Such a virtuous person should always conquer
the afflictions, and should preach the principles of equality, non-violence,
etc., with equanimity. He should never allow any hindrance to his self-control.
He should never be angry, nor should he be proud."  **Verse 7:**  The Dharma is
worthy of being honored and accepted by many people.  **[Bahujannammani Samvudo
Savvatthehim Nare Anisshie.]**  The virtuous person, always vigilant in
upholding the Dharma, should not be attached to external things like wealth and
possessions. Like a clear lake, he should always be pure and manifest the Dharma
taught by Lord Mahavira, the Kashyapa. He should follow it himself and inspire
others to do the same. **[Hridaev Saya Ana Vile Dhammam Padurakasi Kasavam.]**
**Translation:**  The Dharma is worthy of being honored and accepted by many
people. The virtuous person, always vigilant in upholding the Dharma, should not
be attached to external things like wealth and possessions. Like a clear lake,
he should always be pure and manifest the Dharma taught by Lord Mahavira, the
Kashyapa. He should follow it himself and inspire others to do the same.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram bhI prApta hotA hai jisakA artha yaha hai ki muni
samattva bhAvapUrvaka Upara jo vighna bAdhAeM - ApattiyAM batalAI gaI hai, unheM
sahatA jAye  /  paNNasamatte sayA jae samatAdhamma mudAhare muNI  /  sume u sayA
alUsae No kujjhe No mANi mAhaNe  // 6 //  chAyA - anuvAda - prajJA samApta-
jisane prajJA yA viveka AtmasAt kiyA hai, aisA buddhizIla sAdhu sadaiva kaSAyAdi
Atma zatruoM ko parAjita kare, vaha samatAdharma kA samasta prANI mAtra kI
samAnatA kA, unakI hiMsA na karane kA upadeza kare  /  vaha kabhI bhI apane
saMyama meM bAdhA na Ane de| vaha kadApi krodha na kare  /  abhimAna na kare  /
TIkA punarapyupadezAntaramAha - prajJAyAM samApta :- prajJA samAptaH
paTuprajJaH, pAThAntaraM vA 'paNhasamatthe' prazna viSaye
pratyuttaradAnasamarthaH 'sadA' sarvakAlaM jayet, jeyaM kaSAyAdikamiti zeSaH  /
tathA samayA samatA tayA dharmam-ahiMsAdilakSaNam 'udAharet' kathayet 'muniH'
yatiH sUkSme tu-saMyame yatkarttavyaM tasya 'alUSakaH' avirAdhakaH, tathA na
dRnyamAno vA pUjyamAno vA krudhyennApi 'mAnI' garvitaH syAt 'mAhaNo' yatiriti
// 6 //  prajJAsamAptaH sadA jayet samatAdharma mudAharenmuniH  /  sUkSme tu
sadA'lUSakaH no krudhyenno mAnI mAhanaH  //  1 chAyA TIkArtha AgamakAra phira
dUsare prakAra se upadeza dete haiM, jisane prajJA ko bhalI bhAMti prApta kara
liyA hai, jo pUrNataH buddhizIla hai, vivekI haiM, unheM prajJAsamApta kahA
jAtAhai  /  yahAM para 'paNhasammatthe - prazna samartha:' yaha anya pATha bhI
prApta hotA hai  /  isakA abhiprAya 'kisI prazna kA uttara dene meM sakSama
puruSa hotA hai  /  sAdhaka jItane yogya kaSAyoM ko jiite| ahiMsA Adi dhArmika
siddhAntoM ko samattvabhAva ke sAtha upadiSTa kare  /  vaha saMyamAtmaka sAdhanA
kI kabhI virAdhanA na kare  /  vaha yadi hanyamAna ho mArA jAtA ho, to bhI
krodha na kare aura pUjyamAna yA sammAnita ho to bhI abhimAna na kare  /
bahajaNaNamaNami saMvuDo savvaTThehiM Nare aNissie  /  hRdaeva sayA aNA vile
dhammaM pAdurakAsI kAsavaM  // 7 //  - bahujananamane saMvRttaH
savArthairnaro'nizritaH  /  hRdaiva sadA'nAvilo dharmaM prAdurakArSItkAzyapam
//  anuvAda dharma bahuta janoM dvArA namana karane yogya Adara karane yogya yA
svIkAra karane yogya hai| sAdhaka usake paripAlana meM sadaiva jAgarUka rahatA
huA, dhana vaibhava Adi bAhya padArthoM meM Asakta na hotA huA, sarovara kI
taraha sadA nirmala hokara, kAzyapa gotrIya bhagavAna mahAvIra dvArA upadiSTa
dharma ko prakaTa kreN| svayaM usakA pAlana kare - auroM ko bhI vaisA karane
hetu prerita kareM  /  154

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Commentary on the Vaitaliya Study  **It is said that the religion which
attracts many people towards itself, or which is praised by them, is called
"Bahujanaman". This is because religion is praised and lauded by many people in
accordance with their own feelings and inclinations. How?**  **A story is
presented to explain this:**  In the city of Rajagriha, King Shrenik ruled. One
day, he was sitting in his court with his son, Abhaykumar, who possessed four
types of wisdom. They were enjoying various stories when a question arose:
**"Are there many righteous people in this world, or are there many unrighteous
people?"**  The entire assembly responded, **"There are many unrighteous people
in this world, but only one person in a hundred follows the path of
righteousness."**  Abhaykumar then said, **"It seems that most people are
righteous. If you are not sure, let us conduct a test."**  The assembly agreed.
Abhaykumar then ordered the construction of two palaces, one white and one
black. He then announced throughout the city by beating a drum, **"Whoever is
righteous in this city should enter the white palace, and whoever is unrighteous
should enter the black palace."**  Everyone in the city entered the white
palace. When they came out, Abhaykumar asked each person, **"How are you
righteous?"**  One person replied, **"I am a farmer. Many birds feed themselves
with my grains. I give them food and thus practice righteousness."**  Another
said, **"I am a Brahmin. I perform the six duties of a Brahmin, maintain great
purity, and perform rituals prescribed in the Vedas. I please my ancestors and
gods."**  Another said, **"I am a merchant. I earn my livelihood by giving alms
and performing other good deeds."**  Another said, **"I am a householder. I earn
my living honestly and support my family."**  Even the cook said, **"I follow
the dharma of my family. Many meat-eaters depend on me for their livelihood."**
In this way, everyone justified their actions and claimed to be righteous.
Meanwhile, two Shravakas entered the black palace. They were asked, **"What
unrighteous deeds have you committed that you have come here?"**  They were
ashamed and confused. They said, **"True righteous people are those who have
taken vows and are able to keep them. We, however, have broken our vow of
abstaining from alcohol."**  They felt that they were unrighteous because of
this transgression. They considered themselves the lowest of the low and entered
the black palace.  **The following verses explain their situation:**  "Having
obtained a human birth, and having received the Jain teachings, Having taken the
vow of abstaining from alcohol, they have not kept it properly." (1)
"Considering themselves unrighteous because of this transgression of their vow,
They have entered the black palace, considering themselves the lowest of the
low." (2)  "Shame is the mother of all virtues. Those who are truly pure of
heart and follow the path of righteousness, Even if they are powerful and
wealthy, they abandon all worldly pleasures. Those who are devoted to their vows
do not break their promises." (3)  "It is better to enter a blazing fire than to
break a vow that has been kept for a long time. It is better to die with a pure
heart than to live with a broken vow." (4)  **Thus, it is clear that most people
consider themselves righteous. This is why the religion that attracts many
people is called "Bahujanaman".**  **The text then goes on to describe a person
who is truly righteous. This person is described as being pure of heart, free
from attachment, and unmoved by external influences. This person is able to
manifest true religion.**  **The text concludes by mentioning the example of
Kashyapa, the first Tirthankara, who manifested true religion.**  **This
commentary explains the concept of "Bahujanaman" and contrasts it with true
religion, which is characterized by purity of heart, detachment, and unwavering
commitment to the path of righteousness.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana TIkA - api ca bahUn janAn AtmAnaM prati nAmayati-
prahvIkaroti tai rvA namyate-stUyate bahujananamano dharmaH, sa eva
bahubhirjanairAtmIyAtmIyAzayena yathA'bhyupagama prazaMsayA stUyate prazasyate,
katham ? atra kathAna kaM rAjagRhe nagare zreNiko mahArAjaH, kadAcidasau
caturvidhabuddhyupetena putreNa abhayakumAreNa sArdhamAsthAnasthitastAbhi
stAbhiH kathAbhirAsAJcakre, tatra kadAcidevambhUtA kathA'bhUt tadyathA-ihaloke
dhArmikAH vahavaH utAdhArmikA iti? tatra samastaparSadA'bhihitam
yathA'trAdhArmikAH bahavo lokAH dharmaM tu zatAnAmapi madhye
kazcidevaikovidhatte, tadAkAbhayakumAreNoktaM-yathA prAyazo lokAH sarva eva
dhArmikAH, yadi na nizcayo bhavatAM parIkSA kriyatAm, parSadA'pyabhihitam
evamastu, tato'bhayakumAreNa dhavaletara-prAsAdadvayaM kAritam, ghoSitaM ca
DiNDibhena nagare, yathA yaH kazcidiha dhArmikaH sa sarvo'pi dhavalaprAsAdaM
gRhItabaliH pravizatu, itarastvitaramiti, tato'sau lokaH sarvo'pi
dhavalaprAsAdameva praviSTo nirgacchaMzca kathaM tvaM dhArmikaH ? ityevaM pRSTaH
kazcidAcaSTe-yathA'haM karSaka: aneka zakunigaNaH maddhAnyakaNairAtmAnaM
prINayati khalaka samAgamadhAnya kaNa bhikSA dAnena ca dharma iti, aparastvAha
yathA haM brAhmaNaH SaTkarmAbhirataH tathA
bahuzaucasnAnAdibhirvedavihitAnuSThAnenapitRdevA~starpayAmi, anyaH kathayati
yathA'haM vaNikkulopajIvI mikSAdAnAdi pravRttaH, aparastvidamAha yathA'haM
kulaputrakaH nyAyAgataM nirgatikaM kuTumbakaM pAlayAmyeva, tAvat
zvapAko'pIdamAha-yathA'haMkulakramAgataM dharmamanupAlayAmiti mannizrayAzca
bahavaH pizitabhujaH prANAn saMdhAra yanti, ityevaM sarvo'pyAtmIyamAtmIyaM
vyApAra muddizya dharme niyojayati, tatrAparamasitaprAsAdaM zrAvakadvayaM
praviSTam, tacca kimadharmAcaraNaMbhavadbhayAmakArItyenaM pRSTaM sat
sakRnmadyanivRttibhaGgavyalIkamakathayat tathA sAdhava evAtra paramArtha to
dhArmikAH yathAgRhItapratijJAnirvAhaNasamarthAH, asmAbhistu - "avApyamAnuSaM
janma, labdhavA jainaJca zAsanam  /  kRtvA nivRttiM madyasya samyak sA'pi na
pAlitA"  // 1 //  anena vratabhaGgena manyamAnA adhArmikam  /
adhamAdhamamAtmAnaM, kRSNaprAsAdamAzritAH  // 2 //  tathAhi -
lajjAguNaughajananI jananI mivAryA  /  matyantazuddhahadayA manuvartamAnAH  //
tejasvinaH sukha masUnapi saMtyajanti  /  satyavratavyasanino na punaH pratijJAm
// 3 //  varaM praveSTu jvalitaM hutAzanaM na cA'pi bhagnaM cirasaMcita vratam
/  varaM hi mRtyuH suvizuddha cetaso na cA'pi zIlaskhalitasya jIvitam  // 4 //
iti tadevaM prAyazaH sarvo'pyAtmAnaM dhArmikaM manyatta iti kRtvA bahu
jananamano dharma iti sthitam  /  tasmiMzca saMvattaH samAhitaH sana naraH
pamAna sarvAthaiH bAhyAbhyantairardhanadhAnyakalatramamattvAdibhiH anizritaH
apratibaddhaH sana dharmaM prakAzitavAnityattareNa saha sambandhaH
nidarzanamAha-hRdaiva svacchAmbhasA bhRtaH sadA anAvilaH anekamatsyAdi jalacara
saMkrameNApyanAkulo'kaluSo vA kSAntyAdilakSaNaM dharma prAdurakArSIt prakaTaM
kRtavAn yadi vA evaM viziSTa eva kAzyapaM tIrthaGkarasambandhinaM dharmaM
prakAzayet chAndasatvAd vartamAne bhUta nirdeza iti  // 7 //  TIkArtha - jo
bahuta logoM ko apanI ora jhukA detA hai-AkRSTa kara letA hai athavA jo una
dvArA prazaMsita hotA hai use bahujana namana kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha dharma hai
kyoMki dharma ko hI bahuta se loga apanI apanI bhAvanA tathA vRtti ke anurUpa
prazaMsita karate haiM  /  prazna uThAtehue kahA gayA hai-kisa prakAra ? isakA
samAdhAna karate hue eka kathAnaka prastuta kiyA jAtA hai rAjagRha nagara meM
zreNika nAmaka rAjA rAjya karatA thA  /  eka dina kI bAta hai  /  vaha apane
putra abhayakumAra ke sAtha jo caturvidha buddhi sampanna thA, rAjasabhA meM
baiThA thA  /  aneka prakAra kI kathAoM se manovinoda kara 155

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** was being recited. Then a question arose: are
there more righteous people in this world or more unrighteous? When the assembly
members were asked their opinion, everyone said that there are more unrighteous
men in the world. Only one or two out of a hundred would follow Dharma. Hearing
this, Abhaykumar said, "You are all righteous. If you are not sure about this,
if you have doubts, then you can investigate." The assembly members agreed.
Then Abhaykumar built two palaces, one white and one black. He announced in the
city that anyone who is righteous should enter the white palace with all their
worship materials, and those who do not consider themselves righteous should go
to the black palace. After that, everyone went to the white palace. When they
started to leave the palace, they were asked how they were righteous. One said,
"I am a farmer. Many birds are satisfied and satiated by the grains of my crops,
and I give alms from the grain I get from the threshing floor, which gives me
Dharma. Therefore, I am righteous." Another said, "I am a Brahmin. I perform
Tarpan for the Pitris and Devas. Therefore, I am righteous." Another said, "I am
a merchant, a descendant of a good family. I earn my living through trade. I do
acts of charity and alms-giving. Therefore, I am righteous." Another said, "I am
a son of a good family, a noble, righteous, and independent man who takes care
of his family. Therefore, I am righteous." Finally, a Shvapak-Chandala also
said, "I follow the Dharma that has been passed down through generations in my
family. And many meat-eaters live under my protection. Therefore, I am
righteous." Thus, everyone started to establish Dharma in their own profession
and activities, but two Shramanopasakas entered the black palace. When they were
asked what sin they had committed, they said, "We had taken a vow to abstain
from drinking alcohol. We broke it once. In reality, only the Munis are truly
righteous in this world because they are able to follow the rules they have
accepted. It is a matter of great sorrow that we have obtained human birth,
received the Jain Shastra, and even after giving up drinking alcohol, we could
not keep our promise. We broke the rule, violated the vow, and therefore,
considering ourselves unrighteous and the lowest of the low, we entered the
black palace because a vow is the mother of good qualities like shame, etc. It
gives birth to them. It is like a pure-hearted, worshipable mother. Those who
follow it are strong, full of self-courage, and true to their vows. They
willingly give up their lives but do not abandon the vow they have taken. It is
better to enter a blazing fire than to break a vow that has been accumulated for
a long time. It is better for a pure-minded, noble-hearted man to die than for a
person who has fallen from virtue to live."  Thus, everyone often considers
themselves righteous. This is why Dharma, which is called the great people's
religion, is right. A human being who is aware of Dharma does not get attached
to wealth, property, grain, various substances, spouse, internal attachment,
etc., but embodies Dharma in life. He is truly righteous. The Uttaragatha is
related to this.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram rahA thA  /  tabhI eka prasaMga upasthita huA ki isa
loka meM dharmiSTa loga adhika haiM yA adharmiSTa adhika haiN| isa para
sabhAsadoM kI rAya pUche jAne para sabhI ne yaha kahA ki saMsAra meM adhArmika
puruSa hI adhika haiM  /  sau meM se koI ekAdha hI aisA hogA jo dharma kA pAlana
karatA ho| yaha zravaNa kara abhayakumAra bolA-Apa sabhI dharmiSTa haiM  /  yadi
isa bAta ko nizcita na samajhate hoM-isameM saMdeha lagatA ho to Apa jAMca kara
leM  /  sabhAsadoM ne yaha svIkAra kiyA  /  _ tadantara abhayakumAra ne eka
dhavala-sapheda tathA eka kRSNa-kAlA aise do mahala banAye  /  usane nagara meM
yaha ghoSita karavAyA ki jo bhI koI dhArmika ho ve sabhI pUjopakAra kA sAmAna
lekara sapheda mahala meM praveza kareM tathA jo apane ko dhArmika na mAnate hoM
ve kAle mahala meM jAMya  /  usake bAda sabhI loga sapheda mahala meM cale gaye
/  jaba ve usa mahala se bAhara nikalane lage to unase prazna kiyA gayA ki tuma
loga kisa prakAra dhArmika ho, aisA pUche jAne para kisI ne kahA-maiM kRSaka hU~
/  bahuta se pakSI mere dhAnya ke kaNoM se apanI tuSThi-tRpti karate haiM tathA
khalihAna se prApta dhAnya meM se maiM bhikSA detA hU~ jisase mujhe dharma lAbha
hotA hai  /  ataH maiM dhArmika huuN| dUsare ne kahA-maiM brAhmaNa hU~  /
pitRgaNa aura devagaNa kA tarpaNa karatA hU~  /  ata: maiM dhArmika hU~  /
dUsarA kahane lagA-maiM vaNika kulopajIvI hU~  /  maiM vyApAra dvArA apanA
nirvAha karatA hU~  /  bhikSAdAna Adi kArya karatA hU~  /  ataH maiM dhArmika
hU~  /  dUsare ne kahA-maiM kulaputra hU~-khAnadAnI raIsa hU~, nyAyAnugata,
itara Azraya se rahita apane kuTumba kA lAlana pAlana karatA hU~  /  isaliye
maiM dhArmika hU~  /  Akhira meM eka zvapAka-cAMDAla ne bhI kahA ki maiM apane
kula kramAgata apane hI vaMza meM pIr3hiyoM se cale Ate dharma kA pAlana karatA
hU~  /  tathA mere Azraya meM rahane vAle bahuta se mAMsabhojI mere sahAre jIte
haiM  /  ata: maiM dhArmika hU~  /  yoM sabhI loga apane-apane vyavasAya meM-
kAryakalApa meM dharma kI sthApanA karane lage kintu unhIM logoM meMse do
zramaNopAsaka kAle mahala meM saMpraviSTa the  /  unase jaba yaha prazna kiyA
gayA ki Apane kauna sA pApa kRtya kiyA hai  /  isa para ve loga bole-hamane
madirA pAna ke tyAga kA niyama liyA thaa| eka bAra use bhaMga kara diyA  /
vAstava meM muni gaNa hI isa saMsAra meM sahI mAyane meM dharmiSTa haiM kyoMki
ve apane dvArA svIkAra kiye gaye niyamoM kA pAlana karane meM sakSama haiM  /
kitane duHkha kI bAta hai ki hama logoM ne mAnavabhava prApta kiyA, jaina zAsana
milaa| madirA pIne kA parityAga karake bhI apanI pratijJA ko nahIM nibhA sake  /
isa prakAra niyama ko tor3A, vrata ko bhaMga kiyA, isaliye hama apane Apako
adhArmika aura adhama se adhama, nIca se nIca samajhakara kAle mahala meM
praviSTa hue kyoMki pratijJA lajjA Adi uttama guNoM kI jananI hai-unheM utpanna
karatI hai  /  vaha zuddha hRdaya yukta pUjanIyA mAM ke samAna hai  /  usakA
anusaraNa karane vAle tejasvI, Atma zaurya ke dhanI, satyavrata kA eka hRdaya se
anusaraNa karane vAle puruSa apane prANa sukhapUrvaka tyAga dete haiM parantu lI
gaI pratijJA kA tyAga nahIM karate-nahIM chor3ate  /  dhadhakatI huI agni meM
praveza kara jAMya yaha uttama hai kintu cira saMcita-bahuta kAla se saMyoje hue
vrata ko bhaMga karanA acchA nahIM hai  /  suvizuddha cettA-uttama cittayukta
puruSa kI mRtyu acchI hai kiMtu jo vyakti zIla se skhalita-patita ho gayA ho
usakA jInA acchA nahIM hai| _yoM sabhI loga aksara apane Apako dhArmiSTha
samajhate haiM  /  isa prakAra dharma ko jo bahuta jana namana kahA gayA hai,
vaha ThIka hI hai  /  dharma meM jAgarUka hotA huA mAnava dhana, sampatti,
dhAnya aneka padArtha, kalatra, antaravartI mamattva Adi meM Asakta na hokara-na
baMdhakara jIvana meM dharma ko sAkAra karatA hai. sahI mAne meM vaha dhArmika
hai  /  uttaragAthA kA isase saMbaMdha hai  /  (156

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vaitaliya Study  An illustration is given in this context. A pond filled with
pure water does not become polluted or dirty even with the movement of many
aquatic creatures. Similarly, a Sadhu, even while living in the world, does not
become polluted. They embody the ten virtues of peace, forgiveness, etc., in
their lives. The Sadhu, living this way, illuminates the Dharma as described by
the Tirthankara Deva. In this verse, due to the use of Chandaas or Aarsh, the
past tense is used to refer to the present.  **Verse:**  > Bahve Paana Pudho Sia
Patteyam Samayam Samihiya. > Jo Monapadum Uvatthiye, Viratim Tattha Akasi
Pandie. ||8||  **Shadow:**  > Bahvah Praanah Prithak Shritah Pratyekam Samatam
Sameekshya. > Yo Maunapadam Upasthito Viratim Tattra Karsheet Panditah. ||
**Translation:**  > In this world, there are many beings who live separately in
their own places. The wise Muni sees them all with equanimity. He remains on the
path of restraint and should refrain from harming beings - remain separate.
**Commentary:**  > To show how a Sadhu, who is revered by many, illuminates
Dharma, the Agamkar says:  > Due to the possession of ten types of Pranas, an
inseparable connection is established between beings with Pranas. Therefore,
they are called Pranas here. In this world, infinite beings reside, who are
different from each other in terms of their form, such as earth, subtle, cloud-
like, substantial, attaining substantiality, not attaining substantiality, and
residing in hell, etc. Although they live separately, each being hates suffering
and desires happiness. They do not want suffering, they want happiness. This is
the same tendency in all beings. Knowing this, and maintaining a neutral
attitude towards all beings, and staying away from inauspicious practices that
hinder the path of restraint, the wise and knowledgeable person should refrain
from harming beings who are different in form, who hate suffering, and who
desire happiness.  **Verse:**  > Dhamass Ya Parae Muni Aarambass Ya Antae Thie.
> Soyanti Ya Nam Mamaino No Labbanti Niyam Pariggaham. ||9||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM isa viSaya meM eka dRSTAnta aura diyA jAtA hai  /  eka
tAlAba nirmala jala se bharA hai, vaha aneka jala jIvI prANiyoM ke saMcaraNa se
bhI malina-mailA yA gaMdA nahIM hotA, isI prakAra sAdhu saMsAra meM rahate hue
bhI malinadUSita nahIM hote  /  zAMti, kSamAzIlatA Adi dasa lakSaNa yukta dharma
ko apane jIvana meM sAkAra karate haiM  /  sAdhu isI prakAra jIvana jItA huA
tIrthaMkara deva dvArA nirUpitadharma ko prakAzita kare  /  isa gAthA meM
chAndasa yA ArSa prayoga ke nAte vartamAna kAla meM bhUtakAla kA nirdeza huA hai
/  bahave pANA puDho siyA patteyaM samayaM samIhiyA  /  jo moNapadaM uvaTThiye,
viratiM tattha akAsi paMDie  // 8 //  chAyA - bahavaH prANAH pRthak zritAH
pratyekaM samatAM samIkSya  /  yo maunapadamupasthito viratiM tatrA kArSIt
paNDitaH  //  anuvAda - isa jagata meM bahuta se prANI hai jo alaga alaga apane
apane sthAnoM meM rahate haiN| vivekI muni una sabako samattva bhAva se dekhatA
hai  /  saMyama ke patha para avasthita rahatA hai, use cAhiye ki vaha prANiyoM
kI hiMsA se virata rahe-pRthak rahe  /  TIkA-sa bahujananamane dharme
vyavasthito yAdRga dharmaM prakAzayati tadarzayitumAha-yadi
vopadezAntaramevAdhikRtyAha'bahave' ityAdi, bahavaH anantAH prANAH
dazavidhaprANabhAktvAttada bhedopacArAt prANinaH pRthagiti pRthivyAdibhedena
sUkSmabAdaraparyAptakA paryAptanarakagatyAdibhedena vA saMsAramAzritAH teSAJca
pRthagAzritAnAmapi pratyekaM samatAM duHkhadveSitvaM sukhapriyatvaJca samIkSya
dRSTvA yadivA samatAM mAdhyasthyamupekSya (tya) yo
maunIndrapadamupasthita:saMyamamAzritaH sa sAdhuH tatra
anenabhedabhinnaprANigaNe duHkha dviSi sukhAmilASiNi sati tadupaghAte karttavye
viratimakArSIta kuryA dveti, pApADDInaH pApAnuSThAnAd davIyAn paNDita iti  // 8
//  TIkArtha - eka sAdhu jo bahuta se logoM dvArA vandanIya hai, vaha dharma ko
jisa prakAra prakAzita karatA hai usakA digdarzana karAte hue AgamakAra kahate
haiM - dasa prakAra ke prANoM ko dhAraNa karane ke kAraNa prANa dhAriyoM kA
prANoM ke sAtha abheda saMbaMdha Aropita hai  /  ata: yahA~ unheM prANa kahA
gayA hai  /  isa jagata meM ananta prANI nivAsa karate haiM jo pRthvI Adi ke
bheda se sUkSma, bAdara-sthUla, paryApta-paryAptiprApta, aparyApta-paryApti
varjita evaM naraka Adi vibhinna gatiyoM meM sthita ityAdi ke rUpa meM ve
paraspara bhinna bhinna haiM  /  yadyapi ye pRthak pRthak rahate haiM kiMtu
inameM se pratyeka prANI duH kha ke sAtha dveSa karatA hai aura sukha ke sAtha
rAga karatA hai, vaha duHkha nahIM cAhatA, sukha cAhatA hai, yaha sabhI prANiyoM
meM eka jaisI vRtti hai, ise jAnakara tathA saba prANiyoM ke prati madhyastha-
taTastha bhAva rakhatA huA evaM saMyama mArga para vighna rUpa meM upasthita
azubha anuSThAna se dUra rahatA huA vivekazIla-jJAnI puruSa du:kha dveSI aura
sukhAbhilASI bhinna bhinna rUpoM meM avasthita prANiyoM kI hiMsA se nivRtta rahe
/  dhammassa ya pArae muNI AraMbhassa ya aMtae Thie  /  soyaMti ya NaM mamAiNo
No labbhaMti NiyaM pariggahaM  // 9 //  -1570

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse:**  The one who has transcended Dharma, who
is free from the beginning of violence, is truly a Muni. Those who are attached
to possessions, who yearn for wealth, are filled with sorrow, yet they cannot
obtain their possessions.  **Commentary:**  One who has transcended Dharma, who
is knowledgeable about the principles of Dharma, who follows the path of Dharma,
who is free from the beginning of violence, is truly a Muni. Those who are not
like this, who do not practice Dharma, are filled with sorrow when they face
death or suffering. This verse uses the word "ṇam" as a figure of speech. Those
who are attached to possessions, who think "this is mine," "I am the owner of
this," are filled with sorrow when they lose their possessions, whether through
death or destruction. Even though they grieve, they cannot obtain their lost
possessions. Possessions are those things that are brought under one's control,
made one's own, or taken. Gold and other valuables, as well as family members,
are considered possessions. When gold is lost or family members die, they cannot
be obtained. Or, when a Muni, who has transcended Dharma, who is free from the
beginning of violence, is approached by his family members, they grieve, showing
their attachment. They consider the Muni to be their possession, but they cannot
obtain him.  **Shadow Verse:**  The wise person does not dwell in a house, for
worldly suffering is painful, and the suffering of the afterlife is also
painful. This Dharma, which leads to destruction, is painful.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA dharmasya ca pArago puni rArambhasya cAntake
sthitaH  /  zocanti ca mamatAvantaH no labhante nijaM parigraham  //  - anuvAda
jo puruSa dharma ke pAragAmI haiM - dharma tattva ke jAnakAra hai, usa para
calane vAle haiM, jo ArambhahiMsAdi se dUravartI haiM ve vastutaH muni haiN| jo
vyakti mamatA meM grasta rahate haiM, parigraha - dhana-daulata ke liye
tar3aphate rahate haiM ve zokAnvita hote hue bhI parigraha ko prApta nahIM kara
pAte  /  TIkA - api ca dharmasya zrutacAritrabhedabhinnasya pAraM gacchatIti
pAragaH siddhAntapAragAmI samyakcAritrAnuSThAyI veti, cAritramadhikRtyAha -
'Arambhasya' sAvadyAnuSThAna rUpasya 'ante' paryante tadabhAvarUpe sthito
munirbhavati ye punarnaivaM bhavanti te akRtadharmAH maraNe duHkhe vA samutthite
AtmAnaMzocanti Namiti vAkyAlaGkAre, yadiveSTamaraNAdau arthanAze vA 'mamAiNo'
tti mameda-mahamasya svAmItyevamadhyavasAyinaH zocanti zocamAnA apyete 'nijama'
AtmIyaM pari samantAt gRhyate AtmasAtkriyata iti parigrahaH  /  hiraNyAdiriSTa-
svajanAdirvA taM naSTaM mRtaM vA 'na labhante' na prApnuvantIti, yadi vA
dharmasyaM pAragaM munimArambhasyAnte vyavasthitamenamAgatya 'svajanA: '
mAtApitrAdayaH zocanti 'mamatvayuktAH' snehAlavaH na ca te labhante
nijamapyAtmIya parigrahabuddhayA gRhItamiti  // 9 //  TIkArtha dharmazruta -
jJAna, cAritra - AcAra bheda se do prakAra kA hai| jisane aise dharma ko pAra
kiyA hai arthAt jo dharma ke siddhAMtoM kA samyakvettA hai, bhalI bhAMti jAnatA
hai- jo zuddha cAritra kA dhArmika caryA kA anusaraNa karatA hai, vaha muni kahA
jAtA hai  /  cAritra ko adhikRta kara kahA jAtA hai ki jo Arambha - sA anuSThAna
rUpa pApa kRtyoM ke abhAva meM avasthita rahatA hai, vaise asat karma nahIM
karatA hai, vaha puruSa muni hai  /  kiMtu aisA nahIM karane vAle loga bhI haiM
ve dharmAcaraNa nahIM krte| mRtyu yA saMkaTa upasthita hone para AtmA ko
zokAnvita banAte haiM  /  yahAM isa gAthA meM 'NaM' zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke rUpa
meM prayukta huA hai  /  iSTa- abhipsita yA priya kI mRtyu yA dhana kA nAza hone
para ye mere haiM, maiM inakA svAmI hU~, ye kyA ho gayA, yoM avasAda pUrvaka
cintana karane vAle unake liye bahuta zokAnvita hote haiM kiMtu zoka karane ke
bAvajUda ve apane naSTa hue parigraha Adi ko prApta nahIM kara sakate  /
parigraha use kahA jAtA hai jo cAroM ora se apane adhIna kiyA hai, svAyatta
kiyAjAtA hai yA grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| sonAAdi padArtha tathA pArivArika jana
parigraha meM Ate haiM, jo svarNa Adi padArtha naSTa ho gaye, jo pArivArika jana
mRtyu ko prApta ho gaye, unheM prApta nahIM kiyA jA sakatA athavA dharma ke
pAragAmI - tattva vettA AcAraniSTa evaM hiMsA Adi AraMbha ke anAsevI muni ke
samIpa Akara usake mAtA pitA Adi riztedAra apanA mamattva dikhalAte haiM, sneha
dikhalAte haiN| una muni dvArA ghara chor3a diye jAne ke kAraNa ve zoka prakaTa
karate haiM  /  usa muni ko ve apanA parigraha, apanI sampatti samajhate haiM
kiMtu use pAne meM samartha nahIM hote| / chAyA - iha loga duhAvahaM viU
paraloge ya duhaM duhAvahaM  /  viddhaMsaNadhammameva taM iti vijjaM ko'gAra
mAvase  //  10  //  - ihalokaduHkhAvahaM vidyAH paraloke ca duHkhaM duHkhAvaham
/  vidhvaMsanadharmameva tad iti vidvAn ko'gAra mAvaset  //  158

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Vaitaliya Study Translation -** Attachment, which includes
gold, silver, and other wealth, as well as family members, is sorrowful in this
world and the next. All of these are perishable. Who is the person who knows
this truth, this reality, and still considers living in a house, being a
householder, or living a worldly life to be good for them?  **Commentary -**
Here, the Nagārjunīya text reads, "Soūṇ tayaṁ uvatṭhiyaṁ kei gihī viġġheṇa
udviyā. Dhammaṁmi aṇuttare muṇī, tampi jiṇijja imeṇa paṇḍie." (1) This means,
"Someone who has come to know the Muni, a householder comes to create obstacles
for them. The Muni, who is the supreme in Dharma, defeats them with their
wisdom." (1)  This is because, in this very world, gold, silver, and family
members bring sorrow. "Viū" means to know, and it is said, "There is sorrow in
earning wealth, sorrow in protecting it, sorrow in its arrival, sorrow in its
expenditure, and sorrow in its possession." (1)  It is also said, "O elephant!
You have the water of the Revā river, the leaves of the Sallaki tree, and your
own beautiful family. Why are you suffering, being consumed by desire for a
female elephant? This attachment is the root of endless suffering." (2)  In the
next world, there is also sorrow born from karma, which arises from attachment
to gold, silver, family members, etc. This is another sorrow, which arises from
the karma of attachment. This means that even what is earned is perishable,
fleeting, and prone to destruction. Knowing this, who is the wise person who
would willingly live in a house, embrace the life of a householder, and bind
themselves with the shackles of a home?  It is said, "Wives are the cause of
humiliation, relatives are a bondage, worldly pleasures are poison. What is this
delusion of people? They have hope for friendship in those who are actually
their enemies." (10)  **Commentary on the Commentary -** According to the
Nagārjunīya text, the passage here reads "Soūṇ" etc., meaning that a
householder, upon knowing the Muni, comes to create obstacles for them. The
Muni, who is the supreme in Dharma, defeats them with their wisdom. This is what
the sutra writer is discussing.  Gold, silver, and other precious things, as
well as family and relatives, are sorrowful even in this world. It is said,
"There is great sorrow in earning wealth, great hardship in acquiring it, and
suffering in protecting it." Thus, there is much suffering in its arrival, its
expenditure, or its loss. This wealth is worthy of condemnation, a vessel of
sorrow. In the context of enjoyment, it is said to the elephant, "O elephant!
You have the water of the Revā river, the leaves of the Sallaki tree, and your
own beautiful family. Why are you suffering, being consumed by desire for a
female elephant? This worldly attachment is the root of endless suffering."
Attachment to gold, silver, and wealth, and being engrossed in them, also leads
to suffering in the next world. That suffering then gives rise to new suffering,
because it compels the person to engage in further negative actions. The fruits
of those actions are also sorrowful. The wealth that is earned does not last
forever. It is not stable, it is destroyed. Who is the wise person who knows
this and still considers a householder's life to be good? Who would willingly
bind themselves with the shackles of a home? It is said, "Wives are the cause of
humiliation, relatives are a bondage, worldly pleasures are poison. What is this
delusion of people? They have hope for friendship in those who are actually
their enemies."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM anuvAda - parigraha jisameM svarNa, rajata Adi sampatti
tathA kuTambI saMbaMdhI janoM kA samAveza hai, isa loka tathA paraloka meM
duHkhaprada hai  /  ye sabhI miTa jAne vAle haiM  /  isa tathya ko-saccAI ko jo
jAnatA haiaisA kauna vyakti hai jo ghara meM rahanA, gRhastha yA sAMsArika
jIvana bitAnA apane liye acchA samajhe  /  TIkA - atrAntare nAgArjunIyAstu
paThanti "souNa tayaM uvaTThiyaM kei gihI viggheNa udviyA  /  dhammaMmi aNuttare
muNI, taMpi jiNijja imeNa paMDie  // 1 //  etadevAha-iha asminneva loke
hiraNyasvajanAdikaM duHkhmaavhti| 'viu' tti vidyAH jAnIhi, tathAhi
arthAnAmarjane du:khamarjitAnAJca rakSaNe  /  Aye du:khaM vyaye du:khaM
dhigarthaM duHkhabhAjanam"  // 1 //  tathAhi- . "revApayaH kisalayAni ca
sallakInAM vindhyopakaNThavipinaM svakulaJca hitvA  /  kiM tAmyasi dvipa!
gato'si vazaM kariNyAH, sneho nibandhanamanarthaparamparAyAH"  // 2 //  paraloke
ca hiraNya svajanAdi mamatvApAdita karmajaM duHkhaM bhavati, tadapyaparaM
duHkhamAvahati, tadupAdAna karmopAdAnAditibhAvaH  /  tathaivadupArjitamapi
vidhvaMsanadharmaM vizarArusvabhAvaM gatvaramityarthaH ityevaM vidvAna jAnan kaH
sakarNa agAravAsaM gRhavAsabhAvaset gRhapAzamanubadhnIyAditi  /  uktaJca "dArA:
paribhavakArAH bandhujano baMdhanaM viSaM viSayAH  /  ko'yaM janasya moho ? ye
ripavasteSu suhRdAzAH  // 10 //  TIkArtha - nAgArjunIya vAcanA ke anusAra yahAM
'soUNa' ityAdi pATha hai arthAt koI sAMsArika puruSa muni ko AyA jAnakaraunake
liye vighna upasthita karane hetu Aye, kahe to anuttara-jisase bar3hakara dUsarA
koI nahIM hai, aise uttama dharma ke paripAlana meM vidyamAna vivekazIla muni
isa prakAra unako jIta le, niruttara kara de, isI bAta ko sUtrakAra vivecana
karate haiM - svarNa Adi bahumUlya padArtha tathA kuTumba evaM parivAra ke loga
isa loka meM bhI duHkhaprada hai ise smjhe| kahA hai-dhana kA arjana karane meM
use kamAne meM bar3A duHkha-bar3I takalIpheM sahanI hotI hai, usakI rakSA karane
meM bhI kaSTa hotA hai "yoM usake Aya-Ane meM, vyaya-kharcane meM yA jAne meM
bahuta kaSTa hotA hai  /  yaha dhana to duHkhoM kA pAtra hai, dhikkAra yogya hai
/  bhoga ke saMdarbha meM hAthI ko saMbodhita kara kahA gayA hai - . _ he gaja !
tumheM revA nadI kA jala, sallakI vRkSa ke patte aura apanA sundara kula prApta
hai  /  ina sabako chor3akara tuma eka hathinI ke prati kAmukatAvaza hokara
duHkhita ho rahe ho-paritapta ho rahe ho  /  saMsAra meM yaha bhautika sneha hI
anartha kI jar3a hai  /  svarNa Adi dhana, vaibhava ke prati mamattva meM grasta
rahane se paraloka meM bhI duHkha prApta hotA hai  /  vaha du:kha phira naye
duHkha ko paidA karatA hai kyoMki usa duHkha vaza vyakti phira nimna kArya
karatA hai  /  unakA phala bhI to duHkhajanaka hI hotA hai  /  jo dhana kamAyA
hai, vaha bhI sadA nahIM rhtaa| sthira nahIM rahatA, naSTa ho jAtA hai  /  jo
isa bAta ko jAnatA hai vaisA kauna vivekI-jJAnI gRhastha jIvana ko acchA
samajhegA  /  gRhastha ke phaMde meM apane kA bAMdhane hetu udyata hogA  /  kahA
hai - striyAM paribhava-apamAna kA kAraNa hotI haiM  /  baMdhu bAMdhava jana
baMdhana hai-unake moha se vyakti karmoM se baMdhatA hai  /  sAMsArika bhoga
jahara ke samAna hai, aisA hote hue bhI manuSya kitanA mohachanna hai| unameM,
jo vAstava meM usake zatru haiM mitra kI sI AzA rakhatA hai| 159

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Knowing that association with worldly beings is like getting stuck in a great
big mud, a wise person should avoid contact with them. He should not be proud of
the respect and worship he receives, because pride is a subtle, sharp thorn that
is very difficult to remove.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram mahayaM parigova jANiyA jAvi ya vaMdaNapUyaNA ihaM  /
suhume salle duruddhare viumaMtA payahija saMthavaM  // 11 //  chAyA - mahAntaM
parigopaM jJAtvA yA'pi ca vaMdanapUjaneha  /  sUkSme zalye duruddhare vidvAna
parijahyAt saMstavam  //  anuvAda - eka muni yaha jAnakara ki sAMsArika prANiyoM
ke sAtha paricaya karanA eka prakAra se mahAnabar3e bhArI kIcar3a meM phaMsanA
hai  /  unake sAtha samparka saMsarga na jor3e  /  apane vaMdana pUjana ko jo
use prApta hai, dekhakara garva na kare kyoMki garva karanA eka sUkSma-bArIka
zalya-kAMTA hai jise uddhRta kara pAnA-nikAla pAnA bahuta kaThina hai| TIkA -
punarapyupadezamadhikRtyAha-'mahAntaM, saMsAriNAM dustyajatvAnmahatA vA
saMrambheNa parigopaNaM parigopaH dravyataH paMGkAdiH bhAvato'bhiSyaGga taM
'jJAtvAM' svarUpataH tadvipAkato vA paricchidya yA'pi ca pravrajitasya sato
rAjAdibhiH kAyAdibhi vandanA vastrapAtrAdibhizca pUjanA tAM ca 'iha' asmin loke
maunIndre vA zAsane vyavasthitena karmopazamajaM phalamityevaM parijJAyotseko na
vidheyaH, kimiti ? yato garvAtmakametatsUkSmaM zalyaM vartate, sUkSmatvAcca
'duruddharaM' duHkhenoddhartuM zakyeta, ataH "vidvAn' sadasadvivekajJastattAvat
'saMstavaM' paricayamabhiSvaGga 'parijahyAt' parityajediti  /  nAgArjunIyAstu
paThanti - . "palimaMtha mahaM viyANiyA, jA'viya vaMdaNayUyaNA iha  /  suhumaM
sallaM duruddharaM, taMpi jiNe eeNa paMDie"  // 1 //  asya cAyamarthaH-sAdho:
svAdhyAyadhyAnaparasyaikAntaniHspRhasya yo'pi cAyaM paraiH vandanApUjanAdikaH
satkAraH kriyate asAvapi sadanuSThAnasya sadgate ; mahAn palimantho-vighnaH,
AstAM tAvacchabdAdiSvabhiSvaGga, tamityevaM parijJAya tathA sUkSma zalyaM
duruddharaM ca atastamapi 'jayed' apanayet paNDitaH 'etena' vakSyamANeneti  //
11 //  TIkArtha - sUtrakAra punaH upadeza dene ke saMdarbha meM pratipAdita
karate haiM - sAMsArika prANI ke liye paricaya kA tyAga karanA bahuta hI kaThina
hai  /  ataeva yahAM paricaya ko mahAna kahA gayAhai athavA mahAna saMrambha ke
artha meM yahA~ 'mahat' zabda kA prayoga huA hai  /  jo prANiyoM ko apane se
grasta kara letA hai-phaMsA letA hai use parigopa kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha dravya
parigopa va bhAva parigopa ke rUpa meM do prakAra kA haiM  /  dravya parigopa
paMka yA kIcar3a kahA gayA hai  /  sAMsArika prANiyoM ke sAtha jo paricaya
saMsarga yA Asakta bhAva rakhA jAtA hai, use bhAva parigopa kahA jAtA hai  /
muni isakI vAstavikatA ko hRdayaMgama kara isakA parityAga kare  /  pravrajita-
dIkSita sAdhanArat muni ko rAjA, sAmanta Adi deha Adi se vandana kare, praNamana
kare, vastra tathA pAtra dvArA sammAna kare-satkAra kare, muni jo bhagavAna
vItarAga ke dharmazAsana meM avasthita hai-yaha mAne ki yaha usake karmoM ke
upazama kA phala hai  /  jisake pariNAma svarUpa isa saMsAra meM sammAna Adi
prApta ho rahe haiM  /  ata: vaha unakA garva-abhimAna na kare  /  garva kyoM na
kare ? aisA savAla uThAkara ise punaH spaSTa kiyA jAtA hai-kyoMki garva eka aisA
sUkSma tIkSNa kAMTA hai ki use uddhRta kara pAnA-nikAla pAnA bahuta kaThina hai
/  isaliye jo muni sat asat ke viveka se yukta hai kabhI saMstava-prazasti, mAna
sammAna prApta kara ghamaMDa na kare  /  nAgArjunIya vAcanA meM isa gAthA ke
sthAna para 'palimaMtha' ityAdi gAthA par3hI jAtI hai  /  usakA abhiprAya yaha
hai ki-vivekazIlapuruSa jo sarvathA spRhA-AkAMkSA se varjita ho, svAdhyAya
parAyaNa aura dhyAnAnurakta (160)

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- This is a study of the Vaitaliya, which means to abandon the worship, respect,
and honor given by others, considering it a great obstacle to good conduct and
progress. If even worship and respect are obstacles to good work and progress,
then what to say of the objects of the senses, such as words, etc.? They are
extremely obstructive. The wise man should remove this subtle, very fine, and
difficult-to-remove thorn, the remedy for which is being told further. A monk
should wander alone, sleep alone, and be absorbed in meditation. Commentary: A
monk should wander alone, without the help of others, and be alone in terms of
material possessions, and free from attachment and aversion in terms of
emotions. He should perform practices like Kayotsarga alone. He should sit
alone, free from attachment and aversion. He should sleep alone, absorbed in
meditation on Dharma, etc. This means that in all situations, whether walking,
sitting, standing, or sleeping, he should be absorbed in meditation, free from
attachment and aversion. The monk who is virtuous in begging should have the
strength of tapasya. He should be silent, and his mind should be absorbed in the
spiritual. Commentary: A virtuous person should wander alone, without the help
of others, and be alone in terms of material possessions, and free from
attachment and aversion in terms of emotions. He should perform practices like
Kayotsarga alone. He should sit alone, free from attachment and aversion. He
should sleep alone, absorbed in meditation on Dharma, etc. This means that in
all situations, whether walking, sitting, standing, or sleeping, he should be
absorbed in meditation, free from attachment and aversion. He should have the
strength of tapasya. He should be silent, and his mind should be absorbed in the
spiritual. A monk should not open or close the door of an empty house. He should
not speak when asked. He should not clean the garbage of that house, and he
should not spread grass for rest. -161)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - vaitAliya adhyayanaM ho, anya logoM dvArA kiye gaye vaMdana pUjana-sammAna
satkAra Adi ko sadanuSThAna-uttama AcaraNa aura uttama gati meM bahuta bar3A
vighna samajhakara usakA parityAga kara de  /  jaba vaMdana pUjana Adi bhI
uttama kArya aura uttama gati meM bAdhAjanaka hai taba phira zabda Adi indriyoM
ke bhogya viSayoM meM Asakta hone kI bAta hI kyA hai ? ve to atyanta
vighnakAraka hai hI  /  vivekazIla puruSa usa sUkSma-Atyanta bArIka aura
duruddhara-kaSTa se nikAle jA sakane yogya kAMTe ko nikAla pheMke jisakA upAya
Age kahA jA rahA hai| ege care (ra) ThANa mANase, sayaNe ege (ga) samAhiye siyA
/  . bhikkhU uvahANavIrie vahagutte ajjhattasaMvuDo  // 12 //  chAyA - ekazcaret
sthAnamAsa ne zayana ekaH sammAhitaH syAt  /  bhikSurupadhAnavIryaH
vAggupto'dhyAtmasaMvRttaH  //  anuvAda - eka bhikSu jo vacana evaM mana dvArA
gupta ho-vAcika aura mAnasika dRSTi se pApa kAryoM se nivRtta ho, tapazcaraNa
meM parAkramazIla ho, adhyAtmalIna ho, sthAna, Asana evaM zayana inameM ekAkI
jIvanayApana karatA huA dharma dhyAna meM anurata rahe-ekAkI vicaraNa kare  /
TIkA - eko'sahAyo dravyata ekallavihArI bhAvato rAga dveSarahitazcaret tathA
sthAnaM kAyotsargAdikam eka eva kuryAt, tathA Asane'pi vyavasthito'pi
rAgadveSarahita eva tiSThet evaM zayane'pyekAkyeva samAhitaH
dharmAdidhyAnayukta: syAt bhavet  /  etaduktaM bhavati sarvAsvapyavasthAsu
caraNasthAnAsanazayanarupAsu rAgadveSavirahAt samAhita eva syAditi  /  tathA
bhikSaNazIlo bhikSuH upadhAnaM tapastatra vIryya yasya sa upadhAna
vIryya:-tapasyanigUhitabalavIrya ityarthaH  /  tathA vAgguptaH supa-
locitAbhidhAyI adhyAtma manastena saMvRtto bhikSu bhavediti  // 12 //  _TIkArtha
- eka sAdhu asahAya-dUsare kI sahAyatA na letA huA dravya dRSTi se ekala vihArI
tathA bhAvatmaka dRSTi se rAgadveSa rahita hokara vicaraNa kare  /  vaha ekAkI
rahatA huA, kAyotsarga Adi kI sAdhanA kare  /  vaha Asana para sthita hotA huA
rAgadveSa vivarjita rahe  /  sotA huA bhI ekAkI hI dharmadhyAna se yukta rahe  /
kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki vaha bhikSaNazIla sAdhu calane baiThane evaM
khar3e hone tathA sone Adi sabhI sthitiyoM meM rAga dveSa se rahita hokara
dharmAdi dhyAna meM lIna rahe  /  vaha tapa kI ArAdhanA meM apanA Atma parAkrama
vizeSa rUpa se prakaTa kare  /  vaha vAkgupta rahe  /  bhalI bhAMti
paryAlocanAcintana vimarza Adi kara vAkya bole| apane mana ko niyaMtraNa meM
rakhe  /  No pIhe Na yAva paMguNe, dAraM sunnadha rassa saMjae  /  puDhe Na
udAhare vayaM, Na samucche No saMthare taNaM  // 13 //  chAyA - no pidadhyAnna
yAvat praguNayevAraM zUnyagRhasyabhikSuH  /  pRSTo no dAharedvAcaM na
samuchiMdyA no saMstarettRNam  //  anuvAda - sAdhu kisI sUne ghara kA daravAjA
na khole aura na banda hI kare  /  koI kucha pUche to kucha na kahe  /  usa
ghara kA kUDA kacarA sApha na kare aura vahAM vizrAma ke liye tRNa ghAsa phUsa
na bichaaye| -161)

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Commentary:** If a monk takes shelter in an empty
house for any reason, he should not close the door of that house with a shutter
or anything else, nor should he move it. If the door or anything else is closed,
he should not open it. If someone asks him about dharma or the path, whether he
is there or elsewhere, he should not speak words that are blameworthy. Even if
he is a Jina Kalpi who has renounced possessions, he should not speak even
blameless words. He should not sweep away the grass and debris in the house. No
monk who has renounced possessions should make a bed of grass for himself. And
what to speak of a blanket? No one else should make a bed of dry grass. ||13||
**Commentary Meaning:** If a virtuous monk takes shelter in an empty house for
any reason, he should not close the door of that house with a shutter or
anything else, nor should he move it. If the door or anything else is closed, he
should not open it. If someone asks him about dharma or the path, whether he is
there or elsewhere, he should not speak words that are blameworthy. If he is a
Jina Kalpi monk who has renounced possessions, he should not speak even
blameless words. He should not sweep away the grass and debris in the house. No
monk who has renounced possessions should make a bed of grass for himself. And
what to speak of a blanket? No one else should make a bed of dry grass.  **Om Om
4**  **Where the sun has set, the monk who has renounced possessions should
dwell without disturbance, whether the place is even or uneven. Even if there
are mosquitoes, fearful creatures, or reptiles there, he should dwell there.**
||14||  **Shadow:**  - - Where the sun has set, the monk who has renounced
possessions should dwell without disturbance, whether the place is even or
uneven. Even if there are mosquitoes, fearful creatures, or reptiles there, he
should dwell there.  **Translation:** A man of good character should dwell where
the sun has set, without disturbance. He should tolerate the place, whether it
is even or uneven, favorable or unfavorable. Even if there are mosquitoes,
fearful creatures, or reptiles there, he should dwell there.  **Commentary:**
The monk should dwell wherever the sun sets, remaining there with kayotsarga
(complete relaxation) etc. Where the sun has set, he should dwell without
disturbance, like the ocean, which remains undisturbed by crocodiles and other
creatures. The monk, knowing the true nature of the world, should tolerate the
unevenness of the place, whether it is favorable or unfavorable, for sleeping,
sitting, etc., without attachment or aversion. If there are mosquitoes, flies,
etc., or fearful creatures like rakshasas, or reptiles, he should tolerate them
all without disturbance. ||14||  **Commentary Meaning:** A man devoted to the
practice of restraint should dwell wherever the sun sets, remaining there with
kayotsarga (complete relaxation) etc. Therefore, it is said that the monk should
dwell wherever the sun sets, without being disturbed by trials and tribulations.
Just as the ocean remains undisturbed by crocodiles and other creatures, so too
should the monk remain undisturbed. The place for sitting and sleeping, etc.,
may be unfavorable or uneven, or favorable and convenient, but the monk, knowing
the true nature of the world, should tolerate it all without attachment or
aversion. If there are mosquitoes, flies, etc., or fearful creatures like
rakshasas, or reptiles, he should tolerate them all without disturbance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA kiJca kenacicchayanAdinimittena zUnyagRhamAzrito
bhikSuH tasya gRhasya dvAraM kapATAdinA na sthagayennApi taccAlayet yAvat 'na
yAvapaMguNe' tti 'nodghATayet' tatrastho'nyatra vA kenaciddharmAdikaM mArga vA
pRSTaH san sAvadyAM vAcaM nodAharennabrUyAt  /  abhigrahiko jina
kalpikAdirniravadyAmapi na brUyAt, tathA na samucchindyAt tRNAni kacavaraM ca
pramArjanena nApanayet nA'pi zayanArthI kazcidAbhigrahikaH tRNAdikaM saMstaret
tRNairapi saMstArakaM na kuryyAt kiM punaH kambalAdinA ? anyo vA zuSiratRNaM na
saMstarediti  // 13 //  TIkArtha sAdhu sone Adi ke nimitta kisI sUne ghara kA
Azraya le to usa ghara ke daravAje ko kivADa lagAkara banda na kare tathA usake
kivADa ko na hilaave| yadi usake kivADa Adi banda ho to unheM na khole  /  vahAM
yA kaI aura jagaha Thahare hue sAdhu se koI mArga Adi pUche to vaha sAvadya
pApayukta, doSayukta vacana na bole  /  yadi abhigraha dhArI jina kalpI sAdhu ho
to vaha nikhadya - avadya yA pApa rahita vacana bhI na bole  /  vaha sAdhu usa
makAna ke ghAsa phUsa, kUDA karakaTa Adi ko jhAr3a buhAra kara dUra na kare  /
koI bhI abhigrahadhArI sAdhu apane sone ke liye ghAsa phUsa kA bichaunA na
lgaaye| phira kambala Adi kI to bAta hI kahAM hai  /  koI aura sAdhu bhI suSira
- paule va mulAyama ghAsa phUsa kA bichaunA na bichAye  /  OM OM 4 jatthatthamie
aNAule samavisamAI muNI'hiyAsae  /  caragA aduvAvi bheravA aduvA tattha sarIsivA
siyA  // 14 //  chAyA - - yatrAstamito'nAkulaH samaviSamANi muniradhisaheta  /
carakA athavA'pi bhairavAH athavA tatra sarIsRpAH syuH  //  anuvAda cAritra
niSTha puruSa jahAM sUrya asta ho jAya-chipa jAye vahIM anAkulabhAva se kSobha
rahita hokara nivAsa kare  /  vaha sthAna sama viSama samatala ubar3a khAbaDa
jaisA bhI anukUla pratikUla ho vaha use sahana kare - kAma meM le  /  yadi usa
sthAna para DAMsa, macchara ho, bhaya janaka prANI ho, sarisRpa peTa ke bala
reMgane vAle sAMpa Adi prANI ho to bhI vahIM nivAsa kare  /  - TIkA tathA
bhikSuryatraivAsta mupaiti savitA tatraiva kAyotsargAdinA tiSThatIti
yatrAstamitaH tathA'nAkulaH samudravannakrAdibhiH parISahopasargerakSubhyan
samaviSamANi zayanAsanAdInyanukUlapratikUlAni muniH
yathAvasthitasaMsArasvabhAvavettA samyag arakta dviSTatayA'dhisaheta tatra ca
zUnya gRhAdau vyavasthitasya tasya caratIti carakAH daMzamazakAdayaH athavA'pi
bhairavAH bhayAnakAH rakSaH zivAdayaH athavA tatra sarIsRpAH syuH bhaveyuH
tatkRtAMzca parIsahAn samyagadhisaheteti ||14|| TIkArtha - saMyama sAdhanA meM
abhirata puruSa, jahAM sUraja chipa jAye usI jagaha kAyotsarga Adi karake nivAsa
karate haiM  /  ataeva kahA jAtA hai ki sUrya jahAM asta ho sAdhu vahIM para
parIsahoM evaM upasargoM se vyAkula na hotA huA nivAsa kre| jaise samudra makara
Adi se kSobha prApta nahIM karatA huA prazAMta banA rahatA hai| vahAM baiThane
tathA sone Adi ke sthAna pratikUla - duvidhApUrNa tathA anukUla - suvidhAjanaka
ho to bhI saMsAra ke satya svarUpa kA parijJAtA muni rAga, dveSa se vivarjita
hokara unase UMcA uThakara vaha saba sahana kare  /  usa sUne ghara Adi sthAnoM
meM Tike hue sAdhu ko yadi DAMsa, macchara Adi prANI, bhaya janaka bhUta preta,
zRMgAla, sarpa Adi prANiyoM dvArA kaSTa utpanna ho to vaha use samyak - binA
ghabarAye sthiratA aura dhIratApUrvaka sahana kare  /  162

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of the Vaitalaya  **Verse 15:**  The great sage, dwelling in the
empty house, endures the three types of afflictions: those from the animal
realm, those from humans, and those from the divine. He does not tremble, not
even a hair on his body, even when faced with these afflictions.
**Commentary:**  This verse discusses the endurance of the three types of
afflictions. The afflictions from the animal realm are caused by creatures like
lions and tigers. The afflictions from humans are caused by both favorable and
unfavorable actions, such as respect, rewards, punishment, and beatings. The
afflictions from the divine are caused by entities like ghosts, spirits, and
gods, and manifest as ridicule, hatred, and suffering. The sage endures all
three types of afflictions without being affected by them. This is further
emphasized by the statement that not even a hair on his body trembles in fear.
The word "adi" (etc.) implies that this includes other afflictions like
distorted vision and facial expressions. The phrase "dwelling in the empty
house" is symbolic and refers to the sage residing in places like cemeteries,
which are considered fearful. The term "Mahamuni" refers to a sage like a Jina.
**Verse 16:**  The sage dwelling in the empty house does not desire life, nor
does he seek worship. The fearsome beings approach him, having been subdued by
his practice.  **Commentary:**  This verse highlights the detachment of the
sage. He does not crave life or seek praise. His practice has subdued even
fearsome beings, who now approach him without fear.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAlaya adhyayanaM tiriyA maNuyA ya divvagA, uvasaggA tivihA'hiyAsiyA  /
lomAdIyaM Na hArise, sunnagAragao mahAmunI  //  15  //   /  chAyA tairazcAn
mAnuSA~zca divyagAn upasargAn trividhAnadhi romAdikamapi na harSayet
zUnyAgAragato mahAmuniH  //  anuvAda sUne ghara meM TikA huA mahAmuni - mahAn
AtmA parAkrama zIla sAdhu vahAM upasthita hone vAle pazu pakSI viSayaka, mAnava
viSayaka tathA deva viSayaka upasargoM tathA vighna-bAdhAoM ko sahana kare  /
bhaya se usakA eka roma bhI bAla bhI na kA~pe  /  1 TIkA sAmprataM
trividopasargAdhisahanamadhikRtyAha tairazcAH siMha vyAghrAdikRtaH tathA mAnuSA
anukUlapratikUlAH satkArapuraskAradaNDakazAtADanAdijanitAH tathA divyagA iti
vyantarAdinA hAsyapradveSAdijanitAH evaM trividhAnapyusargAn adhisahet
topasargai vikAraM gacchet, tadeva darzayati-lomAdikamapi na harSayed bhayena
romomamapi na kuryyAt yadi vA eva mupasargAstrividhA api 'ahiyAsiya' tti
adhisor3hA : bhavanti yadi robhodmAdikamapi na kuryyAt  /  Adi grahaNAt
dRSTimukhavikArAdiparigrahaH, zUnyAgAragataH zUnyagRhavyavasthitasya
copalakSaNArthatvAt pitRvanAdisthito vA mahAmuni rjinakalpikAdiriti  // 15 //
TIkArtha - sAdhu ko tIna prakAra ke upasarga sahane cAhiye  /  isa viSaya ko
prastuta karate hue AgamakAra kahate haiM zera bAgha Adi tiryak prANiyoM dvArA
kiyA gayA upasarga tairazca tiryakyonikRta kahalAtA hai  /  manuSyoM dvArA diyA
gayA satkAra puraskAra - Adara sammAna Adi ke rUpa meM anukUla tathA laTThI,
cAbuka Adi dvArA tADana ke rUpa meM pratikUla upasarga mAnuS upasarga kahalAtA
hai tathA vyantara, bhUta, preta, deva, Adi dvArA hAsya, vinoda, dveSa, pIDA Adi
rUpa meM kiyA gayA upasarga divya yA divyaga kahalAtA hai  /  ina tInoM prakAra
ke upasargoM ko sahana kare  /  inase vikAra prApta na kare  /  mana yA zarIra
meM viparItatA anubhava na kare  /  isaliye AgamakAra kahate haiM ki aisI sthiti
meM usake roma taka meM bhI avasAda yA pIDA vyApta na ho| dUsare zabdoM meM
sAdhu ina upasargoM ke Ane para Dara se apanI roma bhI na kaMpAye  /  tabhI vaha
sAdhu aise trividha upasargoM ko sahana kara sakatA hai yadi unake Ane para
usake eka roma meM bhI bhaya na vyApe  /  yahAM Adi zabda ke prayoga se upara
kahe gaye Adi prANiyoM kA vikRta rUpa meM dekhanA evaM vikRta mukha Adi kA
grahaNa hai  /  yahAM sUne ghara meM rahanA upalakSaNa mAtra hai  /  ataeva
zmazAna Adi bhaya janaka sthAnoM meM Tike hue jina kalpI muni ke saMbaMdha meM
bhI yahI bAta samajhanI cAhiye  /  yahAM mahAmuni zabda jina kalpI ke liye AyA
hai  /   No abhikaMkhejja jIviyaM, no'viya pUyaNapatthae siyA  /  abbhattha
muviMti bheravA sunnAgAragayassa bhikkhuNo  //  16  //  chAyA nAbhikAMkSeta
jIvitaM nA'pi ca pUjanapArthakaH syAt  /  abhyastA upayaMti bhairavAH
zUnyAgAragatasya bhikSoH  //  - 163

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra Translation - A Sadhu, afflicted by the aforementioned
afflictions, obstacles, and hindrances, should not desire life, nor should he
seek praise, honor, glory, and renown while being honored and respected. Thus, a
Sadhu who is detached from worship, prestige, and life, and who dwells in an
empty house, becomes accustomed to enduring fearful afflictions. Commentary -
Even though he is being praised by the terrible afflictions, he should not
desire life. The meaning is that he should endure the afflictions while being
detached from life. He should not desire praise or excellence by enduring
afflictions. Thus, a Sadhu who is detached from life and worship, repeatedly
endures the fearful, terrible Shiva-Pisachas, etc., and becomes accustomed to
them, approaching their nature. By enduring them, the afflictions arising from
cold, heat, etc., become bearable for the mendicant, like a tamed elephant in a
stable. The one who is more advanced, who is fearless, dwells in a secluded
place. They call him a Samayika, because he does not show fear to himself.
Commentary - Again, another teaching is given - The one whose soul has been
brought near to knowledge, etc., is called Upaneet. The one who is extremely
advanced is called Upaneetatar. The one who benefits others, or the one who is a
protector of the right path, is called Tayin. The one who serves is called
Bhajaman. The one who dwells in a place free from women, animals, and fools is
called Vivikt. The omniscient ones call such a Muni a Samayika, because he has a
nature of equanimity. It is necessary to understand that such a Muni should
behave in the way described earlier, and he should not show fear to himself,
meaning he should not be afraid of the afflictions caused by the environment.
They call him a Samayika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - sAdhu uparyukta upasargoM, vighna-bAdhAoM se
utpIDita vyathita hokara jIvana kI kAmanA na kare tathA satkRta-sammAnita hokara
pUjA sammAna mahimA-prazasti Adi kI abhyarthanA na kare  /  yoM pUjA-pratiSThA
tathA jIvana se nirapekSa, sUne ghara meM Tike hue sAdhu ko bhaya janaka
upasarga sahane kA abhyAsa ho jAtA hai  /  TIkA - kiJca sa tai bhairavai
rupasargerudIrNaistotudyamAno'pi jIvitaM nAbhikAGketa jIvita nirapekSeNopasargaH
soDhavya iti bhAvaH na copasargasahanadvAreNa pUjAprArthakaH prakarSAbhilASI
syAt bhavet, evaJca jIvitapUjAnirapekSeNAsakRt samyaka sahyamANA bhairavAH
bhayAnakAH zivApizAcAdayo'bhyastabhAvaM svAtmatAmapasAmIpyena yAnti gacchanti
tatsahanAcca bhikSoH zanyAgAragatasya nIrAjita vAraNasyeva zItoSNAdijanitA
upasargA: sasahA eva bhavantIti bhAvaH  // 16 //  _TIkArtha - sAdhu uparyukta
bhISaNa upasargoM se utpIr3ita hotA huA bhI jIvana kI AkAMkSA na kare  /  vaha
jIvana se nirapekSa rahatA huA usake cale jAne kI paravAha nahIM karatA huA
upasagoM ko sahatA jAya yaha abhiprAya hai  /  upasargoM-vighna bAdhAoM aura
kaThinAiyoM ko sahane se sammAna milegA yoM socakara vaha yaza pratiSThA aura
bar3hAI kI AkAMkSA na kare  /  yoM jIvana aura mAna sammAna kI jarA bhI apekSA
na rakhatA huA sAdhu bAra bAra bhaya janaka pizAca, zRMgAla Adi dvArA janita
upadravoM ko sahatA hai  /  vaha upasargoM ko sahane meM itanA abhyasta ho jAtA
hai ki ve bhUta preta Adi use AtmIyavat lagate haiM  /  una upasargoM ko yoM
bardAzta karane se sUne ghara meM TikA huA vaha sAdhu zItalatA-sardI, uSNatA-
garmI Adi se utpanna upasargoM ko mada vihvala hAthI kI jyoM ArAma se sahana
kara letA hai  /  uvaNIyatarassa tAiNo bhayamANassa vivikkamAsaNaM  /  sAmAiya
mAhu tassa jaM, jo appANa bhae Na daMsae  // 17 //  chAyA - upanItatarasya
tAyino bhajamAnasya viviktamAsanam  /  sAmAyika mAhuH tasya yadya AtmAnaM bhaye
na darzayet  //  anuvAda - jo sAdhu upanItatara hai-jisane apanI AtmA ko jJAna
Adi ke samIpa pahuMcA diyA hai jo trAyI-asat karma se nivRtta hokara apanA tathA
auroM ko nivRtta kara dUsaroM kA trANa karatA hai, rakSA karatA hai, upakAra
karatA hai  /  vivikta-ekAMta strI, napuMsaka Adi se vivarjita sthAna meM nivAsa
karatA hai tIrthaMkaroM ne aise muni ko sAmAyika cAritra kahA hai  /  aise muni
ko kisI bhI sthiti meM bhayabhIta nahIM honA caahiye| TIkA -
punarapyupadezAntaramAha - upa sAmIpyena nItaH prApito jJAnAdAvAtmA yena sa
tathA atizayenopanIta nItatarastasya 'tAyinaH' parAtmopakAriNaH nAyiNo vA
samyakapAlakasya tathA 'bhajamAnasya' sevamAnasya 'viviktaM' strI
pazupaNDakavivarjitam Asyate sthIyate yasminniti tadAsanaM vasatyAdi,
tasyaivambhUtasya muneH 'sAmAyikaM' samabhAvarUpaM sAmAyikAdi cAritramAhuH
sarvajJAH 'yad' yasmAt tatazcAritriNA prAgvasthitasvabhAvena bhAvyam,
yazcAtmAnaM 'bhaye' pariSahopasargajanite 'na darzayet' tadbhIru na bhavet tasya
sAmIyikamAhuriti sambandhanIyamaM  // 17 //  TIkArtha - AgamakAra phira dUsarA
upadeza dete haiM - jisa puruSa ne apane Apako jJAna Adi ke upasamIpa, nIta-
pahuMcA diyA hai, vaha upanIta kahA jAtA hai  /  jo atyadhika upanIta hotA hai,
use upanItatara kahA (164)

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the Vaitaliya is as follows: One who is Upaneetatar and who is
Taayi-Trayi, Trata, that is, one who is beneficial to oneself and others, or one
who is a proper and good caretaker of oneself and others, one who resides in a
place forbidden to women, animals, and eunuchs, the omniscient ones have called
such a Muni's Samabhav form Samayik Charitra. Here, the word 'Asan' means that
which is situated, it is called Asan. Basati etc. are included in it. The
Charitra-Sheel Sadhak should make his nature stable in the aforementioned form.
One who is not afraid of the adverse effects of Sadhu Parisha and Upsarg, the
omniscient ones have called his Samayik Charitra. This should be added here.
Usino-udgatat-bhoino, Dhammatthissa Munissa Himato. Sansaggi Asahu Raihin,
Asamahi U Tahagayassa-vi ||18|| Shadow - Ushnodakatapt-bhojino Dharma-sthitasya
Muni Himmatah. Sansargo'sadhu Rajabhi Rasamadhis-tu Tathagatasyapi ||
Translation - It is not good for a Muni who drinks hot water without cooling it,
who is established in Dharma, who is a devotee of Shruta and Charitra-based
Dharma, who is ashamed of Asanyam, who is ashamed of unbridled conduct, to have
contact with kings etc., to stay in their company, because it breaks the Samadhi
of even the advanced virtuous Sadhu.  Commentary - For a Muni, 'Ushnodakatapt-
bhojino' means one who drinks hot water that has been boiled three times, or it
means that one who drinks hot water without cooling it, the word 'Tapt' is used
here to indicate this. One who is established in Shruta and Charitra-based
Dharma, who is ashamed of Asanyam, who is disgusted with unbridled conduct, for
such a Muni, contact with kings etc. is not good because it leads to harm. For a
Muni who follows the conduct prescribed by the scriptures, contact with kings
etc. leads to Asamadhi, to inattention, and it destroys the possibility of his
Swadhyaya etc. Therefore, the company of kings etc. should be abandoned.
Ahigaran-kadassa Bhikkhuno, Vayamanassa Pasajja Darunam. Adhe Parihayati Bahu
Ahigaranam Na Karej Pandie ||19|| 165

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana jAtA hai  /  jo upanItatara hai aura jo tAyI-trAyI, trAtA
hai arthAt apanA aura dUsaroM kA upakAraka hai, athavA jo apane ApakA tathA
auroM kA samyak-bhalI bhAMti pAlaka hai, pAlana karatA hai, jo strI pazu aura
napuMsaka varjita sthAna meM nivAsa karatA hai, sarvajJoM ne aise muni kA
samabhAva rUpa sAmAyika cAritra AkhyAta kiyA hai| yahAM Aye hue 'Asana' zabda kA
artha isa prakAra hai jisa para sthita hote haiM use Asana kahA jAtA hai  /
basati Adi kA usameM samAveza hai  /  cAritra zIla sAdhaka ko pUrvokta rUpa meM
apane svabhAva ko suvasthita kara denA cAhiye  /  jo sAdhu parISaha evaM
upasarga janita pratikUlatA se DaratA nahIM, sarvajJoM ne usakA sAmAyika cAritra
kahA hai  /  yaha yahAM yojita kara lenA caahiye| . usiNodagatattabhoiNo,
dhammaTThiyassa muNissa hImato  /  saMsaggi asAhu rAihiM, asamAhI u
tahAgayassavi  // 18 //  chAyA - uSNodakataptabhojino dharmasthitasya mune
hrIMmataH  /  saMsargo'sAdhU rAjabhi rasamAdhistu tathAgatasyA'pi  //  anuvAda -
uSNa jala-garma pAnI ko binA zItala kiye hue pIne vAle dharma sthita-zruta evaM
cAritramUlaka dharma ke ArAdhaka hImAnaasaMyama se lajjA karane vAle-asaMyata
AcaraNa se jheMpane vAle muni kA rAjA Adi se saMsarga karanA, unake sAhacarya
meM rahanA acchA nahIM hai kyoMki usase unnata AcArazIla sAdhu kI bhI samAdhi
bhaMga ho jAtI hai| TIkA - kiJca muneH 'uSNodakataptabhojinaH' tridaNDod
vRttoSNodakabhojinaH, yadi vA-uSNaM sanna zItikuryAditi taptagrahaNaM, tathA
zruta cAritrAkhyadharme sthitasya hImato'tti hI:-asaMyama prati lajjA
tadvato'saMyamajugupsAvata ityarthaH, tasyaivambhUtasya munerAjAdiniH sArdhaM
yaH 'saMsargaH' sambandho'sAvasAdhuH anarthodayahetutvAt 'tathAgatasyApi'
yathoktAnuSThAyino'pi rAjAdisaMsargavazAd 'asamAdhireva' apadhyAnameva syAt, na
kadAcit svAdhyAyAdikambhavediti  // 18 //  TIkArtha - jo sAdhu tIna bAra jise
ubAlA gayA ho aise uSNa jala kA pAna karatA hai athavA uSNa jala ko zItala
banAye binA jo pItA hai (yaha sUcita karane ke liye hI yahAM 'tapta' zabda kA
prayoga huA hai) zruta evaM cAritra dharma meM jo vartanazIla rahatA hai,
asaMyata AcaraNa se jo jheMpatA hai yA ghRNA karatA hai, aise muni kA rAjA Adi
ke sAtha samparka-sAhacarya acchA nahIM hotA kyoMki usase anartha paidA hote
haiM  /  jo muni zAstra pratipAdita AcAra kA paripAlana karatA hai, rAjA Adi ke
saMsarga yA sAhacarya se, usako bhI asamAdhiapadhyAna ho jAtA hai, usake
svAdhyAya Adi kI saMbhAvanAeM miTa jAtI haiM  /  ataH rAjA Adi kA sAhacarya
tyAgane yogya hai| ahigaraNakaDassa bhikkhuNo, vayamANassa pasajjha dArUNaM  /
aDhe parihAyatI bahu ahigaraNaM na kareja paMDie  // 19 //  165

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra:  **Verse 19:**  **Shadow:** The mendicant who
engages in disputes and speaks harshly, his purpose (moksha) and the path to it
(restraint) are destroyed. A wise person should not engage in disputes.
**Meaning:** The one who engages in disputes and speaks harshly, their purpose
of liberation and the path to it, restraint, are destroyed. Therefore, a wise
and discerning seeker should never engage in disputes.  **Commentary:** To show
the faults that should be avoided, the Sutra-maker gives this advice: Dispute is
strife, and the one who engages in it is called a disputant. Such a mendicant,
who is prone to disputes, speaks harshly or fearfully. For such a person,
liberation and restraint, which are the means to it, are destroyed. This means
that the great merit earned through long periods of arduous penance is destroyed
in an instant by engaging in disputes and speaking words that harm others. As it
is said:  "The merit earned through penance, restraint, and celibacy, do not
destroy it through disputes, O wise ones."  Therefore, a wise person, who
understands the difference between right and wrong, should not even think about
engaging in disputes.  **Verse 20:**  **Shadow:** The one who dislikes cold
water, has no vows, and avoids actions that bind karma, is called a Samayika by
the omniscient ones. The one who does not eat from a householder's vessel is
also called a Samayika.  **Meaning:** The mendicant who dislikes cold water, has
no vows, and avoids actions that bind karma, is called a Samayika by the
omniscient ones. The one who does not eat from a householder's vessel is also
called a Samayika.  **Commentary:** Cold water is water that is not boiled. The
mendicant who avoids such water is one who avoids unboiled water. Such a
mendicant has no vows or commitments that bind karma. The word "lavan" refers to
karma, and "avasappina" means one who avoids actions that bind karma. Such a
mendicant, who is free from vows and avoids actions that bind karma, is called a
Samayika, which means one who is in a state of equanimity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  chAyA - adhikaraNakarasya bhikSoH vadataH
prasahyadAruNAm  /  arthaH parihIyate bahu adhikaraNaM na kuryAtpaNDitaH  //
anuvAda - jo sAdhu adhikaraNa-kalaha karatA hai tathA prakaTa rUpa meM dAruNa-
kaThora vacana bolatA hai usakA artha-jIvana kA lakSya mokSa tathA use prApta
karane kA mArga saMyama parihIna ho jAtA hai-naSTa ho jAtA hai  /  isaliye
paMDita-jJAnI yA vivekazIla sAdhaka kalaha kadApi na kare  /  TIkA -
parihAryadoSapradarzanena adhunopadezAbhidhitsayA''ha - adhikaraNaM
kalahastatkaroti tacchIlazcaityadhikaraNakaraH tasyaivambhUtasya bhikSo
stathAdhikaraNa karI dAruNAM vA bhayAnakAM vA 'prasahya' prakaTameva vAcaM
bruvata: sataH 'artho' mokSaH tatkAraNabhUto vA saMyamaH sa bahu 'parihIyate'
dhvaMsamupayAti, idamuktaM bhavati bahunA kAlena yadarjitam viprakRSTena tapasA
mahatpuNyaM tatkalahaM kurvataH paropaghAtinI ca vAcaM bruvataH tatkSaNameva
dhvaMsamupayAti, tathAhi _ 'jaM ajjiyaM samIkhallaehiM tavaniyamabaMbhamaiehiM
/  mA hu tayaM kalahaMtA chaDDe aha sAgapattehiM'  // 1 //  ityevaM matvA
manAgapyadhikaraNaM na kuryAta 'paMDitaH' sadasadvivekIti  // 19 //  TIkArtha -
jo doSa tyAgane yogya hai, unakA digdarzana karAkara sUtrakAra upadeza dete haiM
- adhikaraNa kA artha kalaha hai, vaisA karane kA jisakA svabhAva hotA hai use
adhikaraNakara kahA jAtA hai  /  jo sAdhu kalahazIla hai, jisase kalaha utpanna
hotA hai, vaha prakaTa rUpa meM aisI dArUNa-kaThora yA bhayaMkara vANI hI bolatA
hai, vaisA karane vAle kA mokSa yA mokSakA hetu saMyama dhvasta ho jAtA hai-miTa
jAtA hai  /  yahAM kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jo kalaha karatA hai, aisI
vANI bolatA hai jisase dUsare kA citta duHkhita hotA hai, usakA bahuta samaya
meM kaThina tapazcaraNa dvArA arjita puNya tatkAla naSTa ho jAtA hai kyoMki
tapa, niyama aura brahmacarya dvArA jo puNyArjana kiyA hai, use kalaha dvArA
naSTa mata karo-jJAnIjana aisI zikSA dete haiM  /  ataeva sat aura asata kA jo
viveka rakhatA hai, vaha jJAnI puruSa manAka-jarA bhI kalaha na kare  /
sIodagapaDiduguMchiNo, apaDiNNassa lavAvasappiNo  /  sAmAiyamAhu tassa jaM, jo
gihimatte'saNaM na bhuMjatI  // 20 //  chAyA - zItodaka pratijugupsakasya,
apratijJasya lavAvasarpiNaH  /  _sAmAyikamAhu stasya yat yo gRhyamatre'zanaM na
bhuMkte  //  anuvAda - jo zramaNa zItodaka-zItala, sacita jala se ghRNA karatA
hai tathA jo mana meM kisI prakAra kI pratijJA-nidAna yA kAmanA nahIM rakhatA,
jinase karmoM kA baMdha hotA hai, aisI pravRtti se dUra rahatAhai, sarvajJoM ne
usa zramaNa ko sAmAyikastha-samabhAva ke rUpa meM AkhyAta kiyA hai, jo gRhasthoM
ke pAtra meM bhojana nahIM karatA usako bhI samabhAvaka kahA gayA hai  /  TIkA -
tathA zItodakam aprAsukodakaM tatpratijugupsakasyAprAsukodaka parihAriNaH sAdhoH
na vidyate pratijJA nidAnarUpA yasya so'pratijJo'nidAna ityarthaH, lavaM karma
tasmAt avasappiNotti avasarpiNaH yadanuSThAnaM karmabandhopAdonabhUtaM
tatparihAriNa ityarthaH tasyaivambhUtasya sAdhoryasmAk yat 'sAmAyikaM'
samabhAvalakSaNamAhuH (166)

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The Sarvagnas (omniscient ones) have said that the Sadhu
(ascetic) who does not eat from the vessels of the householders, such as copper
vessels, etc., in the 'Grihamatre' (within the house), is to be associated with
Samayika (equanimity) and Mahura (equanimity).  Explanation - The ascetic who
has aversion to impure water, who does not consume impure water, who does not
perform Prajnapana (confession of faults), who avoids Lava-karma (minor
transgressions), i.e., who renounces activities that are the cause of karmic
bondage, the Sarvagnas have called such a Shramana (ascetic) as one established
in Samayika (equanimity) and Mahura (equanimity).  And the Muni (ascetic) does
not get intoxicated, knowing that the broken life (the thread of life) cannot be
mended again, yet the ignorant being becomes audacious and commits sins - the
foolish one is destroyed by his own evil deeds, just as the granary is filled
with grains. Realizing this, the Muni does not indulge in pride and arrogance.
The verses further explain that the wise, who know the secrets of life, have
stated that the life of beings, which is broken by the course of time, cannot be
mended like a broken thread. Yet, the ignorant person becomes bold and commits
sins without any shame. Such an ignorant being is considered sinful due to his
evil deeds, just as the granary is filled with grains. Knowing this, the Muni
(ascetic) does not indulge in pride, as he realizes that he is also one among
those who engage in undesirable activities, but he is the one who is performing
virtuous deeds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana sarvajJAH, yazca sAdhuH 'gRhamAtre' gRhasthabhAjane
kAMsyapAtrAdau na bhuGkte tasya ca sAmAyika-mAhuriti sambandhanIyaniti  // 20 //
TIkArtha - jo sAdhu-zramaNa aprAsuka-sacita jala se ghRNA karatA hai-sacita jala
kA sevana nahIM karatA jo prajJiA-nidAna nahIM karatA, jo lava-karma kA
avasarpaNa karatA hai-usase pRthak rahatA hai arthAt jo pravRtti karmabaMdha kI
hetubhUta hai, usakA tyAga karatA hai, sarvajJoM ne vaise zramaNa ko sAmAyaka-
samabhAvarUpa kahA hai  /  jo zraNaNa gRhasthoM ke kAMsI Adi ke batanoM meM
bhojana nahIM karatA-sarvajJoM ne use bhI sAmAyaka, samabhAvarUpa kahA hai| Na
ya saMkhaya mAhu jIviyaM tahavi ya bAlajaNo pagabbhai  /  bAle pAvehiM mijatI
iti saMkhAya muNI Na majjatI  // 21 //  chAyA - na ca saMskArya mAhurjIvitaM
tathA'pi ca bAlajanaH pragalbhate  /  bAlaH pApai mIryate iti saMkhyAya muni nai
mAdyati  //  anuvAda - sarvajJoM ne kahA hai ki TUTA huA jIvana (jIvana kA
dhAgA) phira nahIM jor3A jA sakatA hai to bhI ajJAnI prANI dhRSTatA pUrvaka
pApakarma karatA hai-asat kArya karane meM bar3A DhITha banA rahatA hai, vaha
ajJAnI puruSa pApI hai  /  yaha samajhakara muni kabhI mada-ahaMkAra nahIM
karatA  /  /  TIkA - kiJca-na ca, naiva jIvitam AyuSkaM kAlaparyAyeNa truTitaM
sat punaH 'saMkhaya' miti saMskartuM tantuvatsandhAtuM zakyate ityeva
mAhastadvidaH, tadhApi-evamapi vyavasthite 'bAlaH' ajJo janaH 'pragalbhate'
pApaM kurvan dhRSTo bhavati, asadanuSThAnarato'pi na lajjata iti, sa caivambhUto
bAlastairasadanuSThAnApAditaiH 'pApaiH' karmabhiH 'mIyate' tadyukta ityevaM
paricchidyate, bhriyate vA meyena dhAnyAdinA prasthakavaditi, evaM 'saMkhyAya'
jJAtvA 'muniH' ca yathAvasthitapadArthAnAM vettA 'na mAdyatIti'
teSvasadanuSThAneSvahaM zobhanaH kartetyevaM pragalbhamAno madaM na karoti  //
21 //  TIkArtha - jo jIvana ke rahasyoM ko jAnate haiM, vaise vidvAna puruSoM ne
batAyA hai ki kAla ke paryAya se TUTA huA prANiyoM kA jIvana TUTe hue dhAgoM kI
jyoM phira jor3A nahIM jA sakatA-gayA huA jIvana lauTAyA nahIM jA sakatA phira
bhI ajJAnI puruSa bar3I dhRSTatA-r3hIThapana ke sAtha pApa karatA hai  /  vaha
asat-bure karma karatA huA bhI lajjita nahIM hotA-vaisA karate use zarma nahIM
AtI  /  vaha ajJAnI prANI azubha pravRttiyoM se utpanna pApoM ke kAraNa pApI
mAnA jAtA hai, jaise phasala nikAlane ke bAda prasthakakoThA anAja Adi dvArA
bhara diyA jAtA hai  /  usI prakAra vaha ajJa prANI pApoM se bhara jAtA hai  /
yaha dekhakara padArthoM ke satya svarUpa kA jJAtA muni yaha jAnatA huA ki pApa
pUrNa pravRttiyAM karane vAle logoM meM maiM hI eka aisA hU~ jo sadanuSThAna yA
uttama kArya kara rahA huuN| yaha soca kara mada-ahaMkAra nahIM karatA  /  maiM
dharmaniSTha hU~, uttama karma karatA hU~, anya manuSya asad anuSThAnakArI hai,
aisA abhimAna karanA pApa hai  /  ataH muni ko abhimAna nahIM karanA caahiye|
chaMdeNa pale imA payA, bahumAyA moheNa pAuDA  /  viyaDeNa paliMti mAhaNe,
sIuNhaM vayasA'driyAsae  // 22 //  -167

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra, Commentary - 'These people are lost in many illusions,
driven by delusion. The virtuous one is lost in the fierce (world) by enduring
cold and heat with his words.' Translation - People covered in delusion, who
practice many kinds of illusions and deceptions, obtain hellish destinies due to
their own desires and passions. However, the virtuous, aiming for liberation,
remain dedicated to renunciation through their pure and unblemished actions.
They endure cold, heat, and everything else with equanimity through their mind,
speech, and actions. Commentary - The text further explains - 'Chanda' refers to
their own intentions, which are the sole cause of their descent into evil
destinies. 'These people' refers to this world, which is lost in those
destinies. For example, some people, blinded by their own intentions, consider
the killing of goats and other animals to be a means of righteousness and act
accordingly. Others, with the intention of accumulating wealth, engage in trade
and other activities, acquiring slaves, servants, money, and grain. Still
others, driven by deceit, deceive innocent people by repeatedly sprinkling water
on their bodies, touching their ears, and engaging in other such tricks. As the
saying goes, "This world is attainable through deceit, not through anything
else. Therefore, for the sake of this world, one should even deceive one's own
father." This 'people' is full of deceit, why? Because they are covered by
'moha' (delusion), which is ignorance. This means they are devoid of the ability
to distinguish between the good and the bad. Understanding this, the 'Mahatma'
(virtuous one) is lost in the 'vikata' (fierce) world, which is the world of
actions, liberation, or excellence. This means he is filled with noble
qualities. He endures cold and heat, as well as favorable and unfavorable
circumstances, with equanimity through his three instruments of action: mind,
speech, and body. Commentary - People obtain different destinies according to
their own intentions or results. The sole cause of their descent into evil
destinies is their own (unwholesome) intentions or thoughts. There are many
people who consider the killing of goats and other animals to be a means of
righteousness according to their own principles. They act in this way with great
audacity. There are many other people who, for the sake of their own groups and
other purposes, accumulate slaves, servants, wealth, and grain. There are many
individuals who repeatedly sprinkle water on their bodies, touch their ears, and
engage in other such deceptive practices. Through these deceitful activities,
they deceive innocent people. They say that this world is attainable through
deceit. 'Kukkuta' (cock) here is used to symbolize deceitful actions. According
to them, no action takes place without deceit or trickery. Therefore, for
worldly gain, one should even engage in deceitful behavior towards one's own
father. These people are full of deceit because they are covered by the
ignorance of delusion. This is why they are devoid of the knowledge to
distinguish between the good and the bad. Knowing this, the virtuous one
understands the futility of such deception and remains dedicated. This means he
is filled with noble qualities. He endures cold, heat, favorable and unfavorable
circumstances with equanimity through his mind, speech, and body. 'Just as the
undefeated warrior shines with his skillful eyes, so too, having taken hold of
the present, we do not fear the Kali Yuga, the Treta Yuga, nor the Dvapara
Yuga.' ( 168

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram chAyA - 'chandasA pralIyante imAH prajAH bahumAyAH
mohena prAvRttAH  /  vikaTena pralIyate mAhanaH zItoSNaM vacasA'dhisaheta  //
anuvAda - bahuta prakAra kI mAyA-chalanA yA pravaJcanA karane vAle mohAcchanna
loga apanI hI icchA se-vAsanA dvArA naraka Adi gatiyAM prApta karate haiM kintu
sAdhu mokSa kA lakSya liye apane nizchala-nirmala karmoM dvArA saMyAna meM
tatpara rahate haiM  /  ve mana, vacana aura karma dvArA ThaMDa, garmI Adi
samabhAvapUrvaka sahate haiM  /  TIkA - upadezAntaramAha - 'chandaH'
abhiprAyastena tena svakIyAbhiprAyeNa kugatigamanaikahetunA 'imAH prajAH' ayaM
lokastAsu gatiSu pralIyate, tathAhichAgAdivadhamapi svAbhiprAyagrahagrastAH
dharmasAdhanamityevaM pragalbhamAnA vidadhati, anye tu saMdhAdikamudizya
dAsIdAsadhanadhAnyAdiparigrahaM kurvanti, tathA'nye mAyApradhAna :
kukkuTairasakRdutprokSaNazrotrasparzanAdibhirmugdhajanaM pratArayanti,
tathAhi"kukkuTasAdhyo loko nAkukkuTataH pravartate kiJcit  /  tasmAllokasyArthe
pitaramapi sa kukkuTaM kuryAt  // 1 // " tatheyaM prajA bahumAyA'
kapaTapradhAnA, kimiti ? yato moha: ajJAnaM tena 'prAvRtA' AcchAditA
sadasadvivekavikaletyarthaH, tadetadavagamya 'mAhaNe' tti sAdhuH 'vikaTena'
prakaTenAmAyena karmaNA mokSe saMyame vA prakarSeNa lIyate pralIyate, zobhana
bhAvayukto bhavatIti bhAvaH tathA zItaM ca uSNaM ca zItoSNaM zItoSNA vA
anukUlapratikUlaparISahAstAn vAcA kAyena manasA ca karaNatrayeNA'pi
samyagadhisaheta iti  // 22 //  TIkArtha - prajAjana-loga apane apane abhiprAya
yA pariNAma ke anusAra bhinna bhinna gatiyA~ prApta karate haiM  /  unake
durgati meM jAne kA ekamAtra kAraNa unakA apanA (azubha) pariNAma yA bhAva hI
hai| kaI aise loga bhI haiM jo bakare Adi prANiyoM kA hanana karanA apane
siddhAntAnurupa dharma kA hetu mAnate haiM  /  ve bar3I dhRSTatA ke sAtha vaisA
karate haiM  /  kaI aise dUsare anya loga bhI haiM jo apane saMgha Adi ke
prayojana hetu dAsa-dAsI, dhana-dhAnya Adi kA jo parigraha hai, saMgraha karate
haiM  /  kaI aise vyakti hai jo apanI deha para bAra-bAra pAnI ke chIMTe dete
haiM, kAnoM ko sparza karate haiM  /  isa prakAra kI pravaJcanA pUrNa
pravRttiyoM dvArA ve bhole-bhAle logoM ko Thagate haiM  /  ve aisA kahate haiM
ki yaha loka kukkuTa sAdhya hai  /  'kukkuTa' yahAM kapaTapUrNa kAryoM ke
saMketa hetu prayukta hai  /  unake anusAra kapaTa yA chalake binA koI bhI kArya
nahIM hotA  /  ataH laukika svArtha hetu apane pitA ke sAtha bhI kapaTapUrNa
vyavahAra karanA cAhiye  /  yaha prajA-loga kapaTapradhAna hai kyoMki ye moha kA
ajJAna se prAvRta-Dhake hue haiM  /  yahI kAraNa hai ki ve sat aura asat ke
viveka-jJAna se rahita haiM  /  sAdhu yaha jAnakara-aise nirupaNa kI vyarthatA
samajha kara tatpara rahatA hai  /  isakA Azaya yaha hai ki vaha zubha bhAva
yukta rahatA hai  /  vaha ThaMDe, garma, anukUla tathA pratikUla sabhI pariSahoM
ko mana, vacana aura zarIra dvArA samabhAva se sahana karatA hai| kujae aparAjie
jahA, akkhehiM kusalehiM dIvayaM  /  kaDameva gahAya No kaliM no tIyaM no ceva
dAvaraM  // 23 //  chAyA - kujayo'parAjito yathA'kSaiH kuzalo dIvyan  /
kRtameva gRhItvA no kaliM no traitaM no caiva dvAparam  //  ( 168

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Vaitaliya Study Translation -** Just as a gambler who is
undefeated in the game of dice - who does not lose to anyone - plays the game of
dice and takes possession of the place called "Krit" (Satyuga), which is
considered the best in gambling, and does not take possession of the places
called Kaliyuga, Dwapara, or Treta; in the same way, a wise man accepts and
embraces the supreme, all-knowing, and benevolent religion, leaving aside all
other paths.  **Commentary -** Even though the victory of this gambler is
considered disgraceful, because even a great victory in gambling is condemned by
the virtuous and is the cause of misfortune, it is disgraceful. The text
clarifies this by saying that he is undefeated due to his skill and is not
defeated by anyone. Just as a skilled gambler, playing with dice or pawns, takes
possession of the fourth place, "Krit," by winning, and remains there, so too,
he, having won, does not take possession of Kaliyuga, Dwapara, or Treta.
**Commentary Meaning -** A person whose victory or win is a cause of reproach
and who is condemned by people is called "Ku-jaya." "Ku-jaya" means a gambler.
Even if a gambler wins a lot in gambling, he is condemned by men because victory
in gambling is the cause of misfortune. Therefore, he is reprehensible. The
author of the text uses the adjective "unconquered" for the gambler. His meaning
is that a gambler who is not defeated by other gamblers due to his skill in the
art of gambling is called "unconquered." A skilled gambler in the art of
gambling, playing with dice or pawns, wins the fourth place, which is called
"Krit." He achieves the greatest success, and it is a sign of his victory. Thus,
playing the game, the gambler becomes victorious by the influence of the place
called "Krit." He then does not win the other three places. The three yugas,
Kaliyuga, Dwapara, and Treta, are taken here as an analogy. It should be known
that "Krit" means Satyuga.  **Thus, in this world, people embrace that religion
which is supreme.** **They consider it the best, like a skilled gambler who
takes possession of the "Krit" place, leaving aside all others.**  **Commentary
-** The text further explains that just as a gambler, having won, takes
possession of the best place, the fourth place, in the same way, in this world,
among human beings, the religion that is spoken of by the Triyana (the all-
knowing, the savior of all), which is characterized by patience, etc., or which
is known as "Shruta-Charitra," has no superior. It is the best, and therefore,
accept it wholeheartedly, without any hesitation. The text further illustrates
this with an example: just as a gambler takes possession of "Krit" (which means
Satyuga), the fourth place, leaving aside the other places, Kaliyuga, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana anuvAda - jo dyUtakAra-juArI cUta krIr3A meM aparAjita hai-
kisI se nahIM hAratA vaha dyUta krIr3A karatA huA kRta nAmaka sthAna satayuga ko
svAyatta karatA hai, jise jue meM sarvottama mAnA jAtA hai vaha kaliyuga,
dvApara yA tretA nAmaka sthAnoM ko grahaNa nahIM karatA  /  usI taraha eka
vivekazIla puruSa sarvajJa prarUpita sarvottama kalyANakArI dharma ko hI grahaNa
karatA hai-svIkAra karatA hai, zeSa sthAnoM ko chor3a detA hai  /  TIkA - api ca
kutsito jayo'syeti kujayo dyUtakAraH, mahato'pi
dyUtajayasyasadbhirninditatvAdanarthahetutvAcca kutsitatvamiti, tadeva
vizinaSTi-aparAjitodIvyan kuzalatvAdanyena na jIyate, akSaiH vA pAzakaiH dIvyan
krIDaMstatpAtajJaH kuzalo nipuNaH yathA'sau dyUtakAro'kSaiH pAzakaiH kapakairvA
ramamANaH 'kaDameve' tti catuSkameva gRhItvA tallabdhajayatvAttenaiva dIvyati,
tato'sau tallabdhajayaH sanna kaliM ekakaM nA'pi traitaM trikaM ca nA'pi
dvAparaM dvikaM gRhNAtIti  // 23 //  TIkArtha - jisa vyakti kI vijaya yA jIta
nindA janaka hotI hai aura loga jisakI bhartsanA karate haiM use kujaya kahA
jAtA hai  /  kujaya kA artha dyUtakAra yA juArI hai  /  dyUtakAra jue meM bahuta
kucha vijaya kara lene para bhI puruSoM dvArA nindita hotA hai, kyoMki dyUtagata
vijaya anartha kA hetu hai  /  isaliye vaha nindanIya hai| AgamakAra ne yahAM
dyUtakAra ke liye eka 'aparAjita' vizeSaNa kA prayoga kiyA hai  /  usakA
abhiprAya yaha hai ki jo dyUtakAra dyUtakalA meM nipuNa hone ke kAraNa dUsare
dyUtakAroM se jItA nahIM jAtA, vaha aparAjita kahA jAtA hai  /  dyUta kalA meM
kuzala dyUtakAra pAsoM dvArA yA kor3iyoM dvArA juA khelatA huA cauthe sthAna ko
pA letA hai  /  sarvAdhika saphalatA pA letA hai, use 'kRta' kahA jAtA hai  /
vaha usakI vijaya kA sUcaka hai  /  yoM khelatA huA juArI kRta nAmaka sthAna
dvArA prabhAvApanna vijayazIla ho jAtA hai  /  vaha phira anya tIna sthAnoM ko
nahIM pAtA  /  prathama kalayuga, dvitIya dvApara tRtIya tretA upamA ke rUpa meM
yahAM ye tIna yuga gRhIta hai  /  yaha jJAtavya hai ki kRta kA artha satayuga
hotA hai  /  evaM logaMmi tAiNA buie je dhamme aNuttare  /  taM giNha hiyaMti
uttama kaDamiva se sa'vahAya paMDie  // 24 //  chAyA - evaM loke trAyiNokto yo
dharmo'nuttaraH  /  taM gRhANa hitamityuttama kRtamiva zeSa mapahAya paMDitaH
//  anuvAda - isa prakAra isa loka meM trAyI-sabake trAtA dharmopadeza dvArA
sabakI rakSA karane vAle, pApoM se bacAne vAle sarvajJa prabhu dvArA jo dharma
kahA gayA hai, vaha anuttara hai-sarvazreSTha hai, zreyaskara hai  /  yaha
samajha kara use hI prApta karo, grahaNa karo  /  jaise eka kuzala dyUtakAra
nIce ke tInoM sthAnoM ko chor3akara upara ke 'kRta' sthAna ko svAyatta karatA
hai  /  TIkA - dArTAntikamAha - yathA dyUtakAraH prAptajayatvAt sarvottamaM
dIvyaM zcatuSkameva gRhNAti evamasmin loke manuSya loke tAyinA trAyiNA vA
sarvajJenokto yo'yaMdharmaH kSAntyAdilakSaNaH zrutacAritrAkhyo vA nAsyottaraH
adhiko'stItyanuttaraH tamekAntahitamiti kRtvA sarvottamaJca gRhANa
visrotasikArahitaH svIkuru, punarapi nigamanA) tameva dRSTAntaM darzayati-yathA
kazcid dyUtakAraH kRtaM kRtayugaM catuSkamityarthaH zeSamekakAdi apahAya
tyaktvAdIvyan 169

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The wise one, even if virtuous, should abandon the remaining worldly
attachments, such as the influence of householders, bad advice, and those who
are not part of the path, and embrace the complete, great, and supreme Dharma.
This is the meaning. ||24||  Commentary: The essence of the example is explained
as follows: A skilled gambler accepts only the best fourth die, the "four,"
considering it the means to victory. Similarly, in this human world, consider
the supreme Dharma, rooted in scripture and character, imbued with qualities
like patience and forgiveness, as the only definite benefit and good, as it is
taught by the omniscient Lord, the protector of all beings.  The author of the
scripture then presents the same point as a conclusion: A gambler, while
playing, accepts only the fourth position, called "Krita," abandoning the first,
second, and third. Similarly, a discerning virtuous person, abandoning
householders who give bad advice, those who preach false doctrines, and those
who are outside the path, and rejecting the principles they advocate, should
embrace the greatest Dharma taught by the omniscient one and follow it.  The
Aryasudharma Swami, addressing his main disciples, Jambū and others, says: "The
worldly pleasures, the objects of the senses, are called 'Grāmadharma' (worldly
duties) for humans. These are difficult to overcome. I have heard from the first
Tirthankara, Lord Ṛṣabha, and from Lord Mahāvīra, that those who abandon these
worldly pleasures and desires, and strive with awakened effort in the pursuit of
restraint, are the followers of the Dharma as exemplified by Lord Mahāvīra."
||25||  Commentary: The author of the scripture further instructs: "Uttara"
means "principal" or "difficult to overcome." What is difficult to overcome? It
is difficult for humans to overcome, because they are the ones who deserve
instruction. Who are they? They are the "Grāmadharma," the worldly duties, which
include things like words and sexual pleasure. Thus, the omniscient ones have
called these worldly duties "Uttara." I have heard this from the past, and this
is all that has been said before and will be said in the future. This is what
the first Tirthankara, the son of the sun, taught his sons, and this is what the
followers of the path, like Aryasudharma Swami, teach their disciples.
Therefore, I have heard this, and it is impeccable. The word "yasmin" (in which)
indicates the fifth or seventh case, meaning those who have abandoned the
worldly duties and have risen through restraint, are the followers of the Dharma
of Ṛṣabha Swami, Vardhamāna Swami, or whoever is related to them. They are the
followers of the Dharma established by the Tirthankaras." ||25||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram gRhNAti evaM paNDito'pi sAdhurapi zeSaM
gRhasthakuprAvacanikapArzvasthAdibhAvamapahAya sampUrNa mahAntaM sarvottamaM
dharma gRhNIyAditi bhAvaH  // 24 //  TIkArtha - dRSTAnta kA sAra batalAte hue
kahate haiM-eka kuzala dyUtakAra vijaya prApti kA sAdhana mAnakara sarvottama
cauthe pAse ko hI-cauka ko hI svIkAra karatA hai, usI taraha isa manuSya loka
meM samasta prANiyoM ke paritrAtA sarvajJa prabhu dvArA pratipAdita
kSAMtikSamAzIlatA Adi aura guNayukta zruta cAritramUlaka sarvazreSTha dharma ko
hI ekAntaH nizcita rUpa meM hitakara zreyaskara samajho-svIkAra karo  /
AgamakAra phira usI sthAna ko nigamana ke rUpa meM upasthApita karate haiM ki-
eka dyUtakAra dyUtakrIDA karatA huA prathama, dvitIya, tRtIya sthAna ko
chor3akara kRta nAmaka caturtha sthAna ko hI gRhIta karatA hai, isI prakAra
vivekazIla sAdhu, gRhastha kuprAvacanika-kutsita yA mithyA siddhAntoM kA
pravacana karane vAle-upadeza karane vAle tathA pArzvastha-dharma se bahirbhUta
yA bahiSkRta janoM ko chor3akara-una dvArA pratipAdita siddhAntoM kA tyAga kara
sabase mahAn sarvajJa dvArA pratipAdita dharma ko grahaNa kare-usakA paripAlana
kre| uttara maNuyANa AhiyA, gAmadhammA (mma ) iha me aNussuyaM  /  jaMsI viratA
samuTThiyA kAsavassa aNudhamma cAriNo  // 25 //  chAyA - uttarAH
manujAnAmAkhyAtAH grAmadharmA iha mayAnuzrutam  /  yebhyo viratAH samutthitAH
kAzyapasyAnudharmacAriNaH  //  anuvAda - Arya sudharmA svAmI apane pramukha
aMtevAsI jambU Adi ziSya samudAya ko sambodhita kara kahate haiM ki grAmadharma-
iMdriyoM ke viSaya sAMsArika bhogoM kA sevana, ye mAnavoM ke liye uttara-
kaThinAI se jIte jA sakane yogya kahe gaye haiM  /  maiMne Adi tIrthaMkara
bhagavAna RSabhadeva dvArA samprerita evaM prabhu mahAvIra dvArA pratipAdita
yaha tathya zravaNa kiyA hai  /  una sAMsArika bhoga vAsanA maya viSayoM kA
parityAga kara jo saMyama ke anusaraNa meM samutthita jAgarUkatApUrvaka
prayatnazIla haiM, ve bhagavAna mahAvIra ke dvArA prarUpita dharma kA anusaraNa
karane vAle _TIkA - punarapyupadezAntaramAha - uttarAH pradhAnAH durjayatvAta,
keSAm ? upadezArhatvAnmanuSyANAmanyathA sarveSAmeveti, ke te ? grAmadharmAH
zabdAdiviSayAH maithunarUpA veti, evaM grAma dharmA uttaratvena
sarvajJairAkhyAtAH mayaitadanu pazcAcchratametacca sarvameva prAguktaM yacca
nakSyamANaM tannAbheyenA''ditIrthakRtA putrAnuddizyAbhihitaM sat
pAzcAtyagaNadharAH sudharmasvAmiprabhRtayaH svaziSyebhyaH pratipAdayanti, ato
mayaitadanuzrutamityanavadyam  /  yasminniti karmaNi lyaplope paJcamI saptamI
veti yAn grAmadharmAn Azritya ye viratA: saMyamarUpeNotthitAH samutthitAste
kAzyapasya RSabhasvAmino vardhamAnasvAmino vA sambandhI yo dharmastadanucAriNaH
tIrthaMkarapraNItadharmAnuSThAyino bhavantItyarthaH  // 25 //  TIkArtha -
AgamakAra phira aura upadeza dete hue pratipAdita karate haiM - uttara kA artha
pradhAna hai  /  jise taira pAnA yA lAMgha pAnA kaThina hotA hai, vaha uttara
kahA jAtA hai  /  ataeva vaha durjaya hai  /  prazna upasthita kara viSaya ko
Age bar3hA rahe haiM kisake liye ? isakA samAdhAna karate hue kahate haiM ki
manuSyoM ke liye kyoMki manuSya hI upadezArha-upadeza dene yogya yA upadeza ke
pAtra haiM  /  aisA - 170

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(Study of Vaitaliya) If it is not there, then this impregnability applies to
everyone. Who is impregnable? It is said - Gramdharma is impregnable. 'Shabda'
etc. subjects and Abrahmacharya etc. are called Gramdharma. Therefore,
Aryasudharma says that I have heard this. Tirthankaras have been advocating that
Gramdharma is impregnable. All this which was previously advocated, was
elucidated by Lord Rishabhdev, the son of Nabhi, addressing his sons.
Thereafter, Sri Sudharmaswami and other subsequent Ganadharas had explained it
to their disciples. Therefore, I have heard this, there is no fault in the
indication that has been made. It should be understood like this. Here, in the
word 'Jansi-Yasmin', the 'Lyap' is dropped in the karma and the use of the fifth
or seventh case is done, according to this, the meaning here is that the man who
is detached from these Gramdharmas or subject enjoyments, or here, due to the
seventh case being in the meaning of the fifth, its meaning is that those who
are detached from these Gramdharmas and are properly established in restraint.
They follow the religion propagated by the first Tirthankara Lord Rishabhdev and
advocated by the last Tirthankara Lord Mahavira. Its meaning is Those who follow
this, I have said, by the great sage. They are risen, they are risen, they are
enlightening each other in terms of Dharma. ||26|| Shadow - Those who follow
this, as said, by the great sage. They are risen, they are risen, they are
enlightening each other in terms of Dharma. || Translation - Those men who
follow the religion advocated by Lord Mahavira, who is a great sage, of the
highest order, a seer, omniscient, born in the Kshatriya clan, are the ones who
are risen in the path of sadhana, are properly established, are striving in that
direction, they are the ones who, when they are about to deviate from the path
of Dharma, inspire each other to remain steadfast in Dharma. _Commentary - And
those men who follow this previously mentioned Dharma, which is characterized by
the renunciation of Gramdharma, are said to be doing it, by the knower, the son
of the knower, 'Mahaya' - because the knowledge of Mahavira is unparalleled,
therefore he is great, and because of his tolerance of favorable and unfavorable
adversities, the great sage Sri Vardhamana Swami has advocated Dharma, those who
follow it are risen by the establishment of restraint, by the avoidance of
Kutirthikas, and by the avoidance of Nihnavadi, they are properly established by
the abandonment of the wrong path, it is not the case with others, those who are
slanderers, Jamali, etc. - this is the meaning. And they, who follow the
aforementioned Dharma, inspire each other, relying on Dharma, or they inspire
those who are deviating from Dharma, to return to the right Dharma. ||26||
Commentary meaning - Only knowledge is the subject, it is vast, knowledge is not
different from the knower. From this perspective, only knowledge and Mahavira
are not really different. Therefore, Lord Mahavira is called great. The knower
of the lineage, Lord Vardhamana, who is endowed with such knowledge, has
tolerated favorable and unfavorable adversities with tolerance, and has
advocated the right Dharma while giving the advice of renunciation of
Gramdharmas. Those who follow it, abandon the Dharma advocated by other
Tirthankaras, who are the proponents of false doctrines, they are truly
established in restraint, properly established in Dharma. Those sadhakas, by
Nihnavas - by the proponents of false truths, ( 171

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM ) nahIM ho to ye durjeyatA sabake liye lAgU ho jAya  /
durjeya kauna hai ? kahA gayA hai-grAmadharma durjaya hai  /  'zabda' Adi viSaya
evaM abrahmacarya Adi ko grAma dharma kahA gayA hai  /  ataeva AryasudharmA
kahate haiM ki maiMne yaha sunA hai  /  tIrthaMkara aisA pratipAdita karate rahe
haiM ki grAmadharma durjeya hai  /  yaha saba jo pahale pratipAdita huA, nAbhi
ke putra bhagavAna RSabhadeva ne apane putroM ko uddiSTakara nirUpita kiyA thA
/  tatpazcAt zrI sudharmAsvAmI Adi pazcAtavartI gaNadharoM ne apane ziSyoM ko
batalAyA thA  /  isIliye maiMne yaha sunA hai, aisA jo saMketa kiyA hai usameM
koI doSa nahIM hai  /  aisA samajhanA cAhiye  /  yahAM 'jaMsI-yasmin' isa pada
meM karma meM lyap kA lopa hokara paMcamI yA saptamI vibhakti kA prayoga hotA
hai, isake anusAra yahAM yaha abhiprAya hai ki jo puruSa ina grAma dharmoM yA
viSaya bhogoM se nivRtta hai, athavA yahAM paMcamI ke artha meM saptamI hone se
isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki ina grAma dharmoM se jo nivRtta haiM aura saMyama
meM samyak samutthita haiM  /  ve Adi tIrthaMkara bhagavAna RSabhadeva dvArA
saMpravRtta tathA carama tIrthaMkara prabhu mahAvIra dvArA pratipAdita dharma kA
anusaraNa karate haiM  /  isakA yaha Azaya je eya caraMti AhiyaM nAeNaM mahayA
mahe siNA  /  te uTThiya te samuThiyA annonnaM sAraMti dhammao  // 26 //  chAyA
- ya enaM carantyAkhyAtaM, jJAtena mahatA maharSiNA  /  te utthitAste samutthitA
anyo'nyaM sArayanti dharmataH  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa mahAna maharSi-parama
ucca koTi ke dRSTA, jJAtA-sarvadarzI, sarvajJAnI jJAtaputra-jJAtavaMzIya,
kSatriya kula meM utpanna bhagavAna mahAvIra dvArA pratipAdita dharma kA
paripAlana karate haiM ve hI sAdhanA ke mArga meM utthita-uThe hue haiM,
samutthita-samyak usa dizA meM udyamazIla haiM ve hI dharma ke patha se haTane
kI sthiti meM eka dUsare ko dharma meM Tike rahane kI preraNA dete haiM  /
_TIkA - kiJca ye manuSyA enaM prAguktaM dharmaM grAmadharma-viratilakSaNaM
caranti kurvanti AkhyAtaM jJAtena jJAtaputreNa 'mahaye' tti mahAviyasya
jJAnasyAnanya bhUtatvAnmahAn tena
tathA'nukUlapratikUlopasargasahiSNutvAnmaharSiNA zrI vardhamAnasvAminA AkhyAtaM
dharmaM ye carinta taeva saMyamotthAnena kutIrthika parihAreNotthitAH tathA
nihnavAdiparihAreNa taeva samyak kumArgadezanA parityAgenotthitAH samutthitA
iti, nA'nye kuprAvacanikAH jamAlipramRtayazceti bhAvaH ta eva ca
yathoktadharmAnuSThAyinaH anyo'nyaM parasparaM dharmato dharmamAzritya dharmato
vA bhrazyantaM sArayanti codayanti punarapi saddharmepravartayantIti  // 26 //
TIkArtha - kevala jJAna kA viSaya mahAna hai-atyanta vistRta hai, jJAna jJAnI se
bhinna nahIM hotaa| isa apekSA se kevala jJAna aura mahAvIra kI vAstava meM
bhinnatA siddha nahIM hotI  /  ataeva bhagavAna mahAvIra ko mahAna kahA gayA hai
/  aisI jJAnamayI mahattA se yukta anukUla aura pratikUla upasargoM ko
sahiSNutApUrvaka sahana karane vAle jJAtavaMzIya prabhu vardhamAna ne grAma
dharmoM ke parivarjana kA upadeza dete hue saddharma kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai  /
usakA jo anusaraNa karate haiM mithyAsiddhAntoM ke prarUpaka anyatIrthiyoM dvArA
pratipAdita dharma kA tyAga karate haiM ve hI yathArthataH saMyama meM samyak
dharma meM saMpravRtta haiM  /  ve hI sAdhaka ninhavoM dvArA-mithyAtattva
prarUpakoM dvArA ( 171

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that those who follow the wrong path,
the path of false teachings, are far away from the true path. Those who believe
in false teachings, those who preach them, and those who follow other doctrines
like Jamali, are not far from the wrong path. Only those who are engaged in the
true doctrine, the doctrine of **Vitaraga** (free from attachment), practice the
true Dharma. They encourage each other to remain steadfast in Dharma and help
those who have fallen away from Dharma to return to it.  **Verse 27:**
**Original:** मा पेह पुरा पणामए, अभिकंखे उवधिं धूणित्तए । जे दूमण तेहि णो णया,
ते जाणंति समाहि माहियं ॥२७॥  **Translation:** Do not look back at the objects of
the senses that you have experienced in the past. Desire to destroy the
**Upadhi** (limiting factor) which is Maya (illusion) and the eight types of
Karma. Those who are not attached to the objects of the senses that defile the
mind, they know the **Samadhi** (meditation) that is inherent in their true
nature.  **Commentary:**  Those who lead beings to suffering or keep them
wandering in the cycle of birth and death are called **Pranamaka**. The objects
of the senses are called **Pranamaka** because they lead beings to lower realms.
One should not remember the objects of the senses that one has experienced in
the past, because it leads to great harm. One should not desire to experience
them again in the future. One should always contemplate on actions that are
beneficial for self-improvement. Why? The scriptures explain that the **Upadhi**
is what leads the soul to suffering. The **Upadhi** refers to Maya and the eight
types of Karma. The righteous should desire to destroy or eliminate them. Those
who are great souls, those who are strong in their self-power, are not attached
to the objects of the senses that defile the mind, they do not follow the wrong
path, they do not practice the wrong Dharma, and they follow the true path, the
path of **Satya Mala** (true Dharma). They know the **Samadhi** or **Dharma
Dhyana** (meditation on Dharma) that is inherent in their true nature, which is
free from attachment and aversion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kumArga ke upadeza se haTe rahate haiM-dUra rahate haiM
/  kuprAvacanika-mithyAdarzana meM vizvAsa karane vAle, usakA upadeza karane
vAle, jamAlI Adi anya siddhAntavAdI aise asatya pUrNa mArga se haTe hue nahIM
haiM-dUra nahIM haiM  /  uparokta satya siddhAnta meM saMpravRtta puruSa hI
yathokta dharma kA-vItarAgabhASita dharma kA anuSThAna karate haiM, pAlana
karate haiN| ve eka dUsare ko dharma meM-dharmArAdhanA meM susthira bane rahane
kI preraNA dete haiM athavA dharma se haTate hue, girate hue ko punaH dharma meM
pravRtta karate haiM  /  mA peha purA paNAmae, abhikaMkhe uvadhiM dhUNittae  /
je dUmaNa tehi No NayA, te jANaMti samAhi mAhiyaM  // 27 //  chAyA - mA
prekSasva purA praNAmakAn, abhikAMkSed upadhiM dhUnayitum  /  ye durmanasasteSu
no natAste jAnanti samAdhimAkhyAt  //  anuvAda - pahale jina zabdAdi viSayoM kA
bhoga kiyA hai, unheM yAda nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  mAyAchalanA yA pravaJcanA
evaM ATha prakAra ke karmoM ko apanI AtmA se dUra karane kI abhikAMkSA-icchA
karanI caahiye| jo vyakti zabdAdi viSayoM meM jo mana ko dUSita-kutsita banAte
haiM, Asakta nahIM hai, ve apane AtmasvarUpa meM vidyamAna, samAdhi-ujjavala
dhyAnamaya dharma ko jAnate haiN| TIkA - kiJca durgatiM saMsAraM vA praNAmayanti
prahvI kurvanti prANinAM praNAmakAH zabdAdayo viSayAstAn purA pUrva bhuktAn mA
prekSasva mA smara, teSAM smaraNamapi yasmAnmahate anarthAya, 'nAgatAMzca
nodIkSeta nAkAGkSaditi, tathA abhikAGkSat abhilaSedanArataM
cintayedanurupamanuSThAnaM kuryAt kimarthaditi darzayati-upadhIyate Dhaukyate
durgatiM pratyAtmA yenAsAvupadhiHmAyA aSTaprakAraM vA karma tad hananAna
apanayanAyAbhikAGkediti sambandhaH, duSTadharmampratyupanatAH kumArgAnuSThAyina
stIrthikAH yadi vA 'dUmaNa' tti, duSTamanaH kAriNa upatApakAriNo vA zabdAdayo
viSayA steSu ye mahAsattvAH na natAH na prahvIbhUtAH tadAcArAnuSThAyino na
bhavanti te sanmArgAnuSThAyino jAnanti vidatti samAdhi rAgadveSaparityAgarUpaM
dharmadhyAnaJca Ahitam Atmani vyavasthitam, A samantAddhitaM vA ta eva jAnanti
nA'nya iti bhAvaH  // 27 //  TIkArtha - jo prANiyoM ko durgati meM DAlate haiM
yA saMsAra meM bhaTakAte haiM, unheM 'pramANaka' kahA jAtA hai  /  zabdAdiviSaya
praNAmaka kahe gaye haiM, kyoMki ve hI jIvadhAriyoM ko nimnagati meM pahu~cAte
haiM, unhIM ke kAraNa jIvadhArI saMsAra meM cakkara kATate rahate haiM  /  jina
viSayoM kA pahale sevana kiyA ho, unheM yAda nahIM karanA cAhiye kyoMki vaisA
karane se bar3A anartha hotA hai  /  ve bhaviSya meM phira prApta hoM aisI
abhilASA bhI nahIM karanI caahiye| sadaiva anurUpa anuSThAna-Atmonnati meM
upayogI kAryoM kA ciMtana karanA cAhiye  /  aisA kyo ? isa prazna ke samAdhAna
meM AgamakAra pratipAdita karate haiM ki AtmA jisake dvArA duSita gati meM-
nimnagati meM jAtI hai use upadhi kahA jAtA hai  /  upadhi se mAyA yA ATha
karmoM kA saMsUcana hotA hai  /  sAdhu unakA hanana-nAza karane kI yA unheM dUra
karane kI abhikAMkSA kare, unheM miTAnA cAhe  /  jo mahAsatva-Atmabala ke dhanI
uttama puruSa ve daSTa-doSayakta dharma meM, kamArga para calane vAle anya
matavAdiyoM meM mana ko daSita-katsita banAne vAle zabdAdi bhogya viSayoM meM
Asakta nahIM rahate  /  vaise karmoM kA AcaraNa nahIM karate tathA sanmArga kA.
satyamalaka dharma kA paripAlana karate haiM  /  ve hI apanI AtmA meM vidyamAna
rAga dveSa parityAgamUlaka samAdhi yA dharmadhyAna (172

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Vaitaliya Study - Those who understand and experience it as it is, they
alone know what their benefit, welfare or well-being is from all sides - from
everywhere. Others do not know.  **Do not be a storyteller, a questioner, or a
propagator.**  **Knowing the supreme Dharma, one should be a doer of good deeds
and not be possessive.**  **Commentary:**  A restrained, ordained person should
not be a storyteller, especially not one who tells stories about worldly matters
or those that are against Dharma. He should not be a questioner, answering
worldly questions or predicting the future. He should not be a propagator,
suggesting ways to bring rain or earn wealth. What should he do then? The
commentary explains: "Knowing, understanding, having no answer, being
unanswerable, having understood the Dharma of Shruta and Charitra, he should be
a doer of good deeds, avoiding unnecessary talk and engaging in righteous
actions." This is because the fruit of Dharma is to be found in the avoidance of
unnecessary talk and the practice of righteous actions. He should not be
possessive, thinking "This is mine, I am its owner."  **Do not praise the
hidden, do not boast of your knowledge to the ignorant.**  **Those who have
accepted the restraint that destroys the eight karmas, their wisdom is respected
in the world. They are the ones who are engaged in Dharma.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM - ko yathAvata samajhate haiM, anubhava karate haiM  /  ve
hI cAroM ora se-saba ora se apanA hita-zreyasa yA kalyANa kyA hai, ise jAnate
haiM  /  anya nahIM jAnate  /  No kAhie hoja saMjae, pAsaNie Naya saMpasArae  /
NaccA dhammaM aNuttaraM kayaririe NayAvi mAmae  // 28 //  chAyA - no kAthiko
bhavetsaMyataH no prAzriko na ca saMprasArakaH  /  jJAtvA dharma manuttaraM
kRtakriyo na cA'pi mAmakaH  //  anuvAda - saMyata-saMyamArAdhaka puruSa kAthika
na bane-dharma viruddha kathA vArtA na kare  /  vaha prAznika na ho-sAMsArika
praznoM kA uttara na de, bhaviSya vANI na kare  /  saMprasAraka-varSA hone yA
dhana kamAne ke upAya na batAye  /  vaha anuttara-sarvottama dharma ko jAnakara
saMyama kA paripAlana kare, kisI bhI vastu para mamattva na rkhe| TIkA - tathA
saMyataH pravajitaH kathayA caratikAthikaH gocarAdau na bhaved yadi vA viruddhAM
paizUnyApAdanIM strayAdikathAM vA na kuryAt tathA praznena rAjAdikiMvRttarUpeNa
darpaNAdipraznanimittarUpeNa vA caratIti prAzniko na bhavet, nA'pi saMprasArakaH
devavRSTayarthakANDAdisUcakakathAvistArako bhavediti kiM kRtveti darzayati-
jJAtvA avabudhya nAsyottaro vidyata ityanuttarastaM zrutacAritrAkhyaM dharma
samyagavagamya tasya hi dharmasyaitadevaphalaM yaduta vikathAnimittaparihAreNa
samyak kriyAvAn syAditi, taddarzayati kRtA svabhyastA kriyA saMyamAnuSThAnarUpA
yena sa kRtakriyaH tathAbhUtazca na cA'pi mAmako mamedamahamasya svAmItyevaM
parigrahAgrahI bhavediti  // 28 //  TIkArtha - pravrajita-Arhati zramaNa dIkSA
meM dIkSita saMyatAcArI sAdhaka bhikSA Adi ke samaya kathA na kare athavA
paizunya-cugalI Adi asat kathana tathA strI sambandhI-abrahmacarya viSaya
kathopakathana na kare  /  yadi kabhI koI rAjA Adi apane rAjya, deza, Adi ke
saMbaMdha meM prazna kare to eka jyotiSI kI jyoM usake prazna kA phalAdeza na
kaheM  /  devavRSTi-meghoM dvArA kI jAne vAlI varSA tathA dhana prApti ke upAya
bhI eka saMyamI na batalAye  /  vaha zruta evaM cAritradharma ko sarvottama jAne
tathA saMyama kA anuSThAna kare kyoMki lokottara-sarvottamamokSamUlaka dharma ko
jAnane kA yahI phala hai  /  vikathA-nirarthaka evaM viparIta kathA evaM nimitta
bhASaNa-bhaviSyavANI Adi kAryoM kA parityAga kara samyak kriyA-dhArmika yA
AdhyAtmika kriyA ke anusaraNa meM tatpara rahe  /  amuka vastu merI hai, maiM
usakA mAlika hU~, isa taraha kahatA huA parigrahAgrahI-parigraha kA Agraha
rakhane vAlA na bne| channaM ca pasaMsa No karo, naya ukkosapagAsa mAhaNe  /
tesiM suvivega mAhiye paNayA jehiM sujosiyaM dhuyaM  // 29 //  chAyA - channaM
ca prazasyaM ca na kuryyAnacotkarSa prakAzaM mAhanaH  /  teSAM suviveka AhitaH
praNatAH yai sujuSTaM dhutam  //  anuvAda - mAhaNa-ahiMsA pradhAna sAdhaka
krodha, abhimAna, mAyA aura lobha meM pravRtta na ho  /  jina sAdhakoM ne
aSTavidha karmoM kA jisase dhvaMsa hotA hai, aisA saMyama svIkAra kiyA hai,
unhIM kA uttama-zreSTha viveka, jJAna saMsAra meM samAdRta hai  /  ve hI dharma
meM saMlagna haiM  /  . -173)

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Śrī Sūtrakr̥tāṅga Sūtra**  **Commentary:** The word 'chhanna' refers to
Māyā.  Māyā is the act of concealing one's true intentions. A restrained person
should not follow Māyā. The word 'cha' in this verse indicates a collection of
the following items.  Anything that is universally respected without any
objection is called 'praśasya'. This is the name of greed, and one should not be
greedy. The word 'utkarṣa' refers to pride.  Those who have a low nature, a low
intellectual level, are made arrogant by their caste, wealth, or other sources
of pride.  They become like fools. A restrained person should not do this.
'Prakāśa' is the name of anger, because even though it resides within a person,
it manifests through changes in facial expressions, eyes, and eyebrows. A
restrained person should not be angry.  Those great souls who have renounced
these passions, who have abandoned them, are truly devoted to Dharma. They are
the devotees of Dharma.  The true knowledge and understanding of these virtuous
men is well-known and famous in the world, and they are devoted to Dharma.
Those great souls who have diligently practiced the eightfold restraint, which
destroys the eight types of karma, are the devotees of Dharma.  Here, the word
'dhūta' used for karma refers to its being worthy of being dispelled or thrown
away.  **Om Om Om**  **Shadow:**  **Verse 30:**  **Aṇihe sahie susaṁvuḍe
dhammatthī uvahāṇavīrie | viharezza samāhiindaie attahiyam khu duheṇa labbahi ||
30 ||**  **Asnihaḥ sahitaḥ susaṁvṛtaḥ dharmathī upadhāna vīryaḥ | viharet
samāhiteindriyaḥ ātma hitam duḥkhena labhyate ||**  **Translation:** A
restrained person should not have any attachment or affection for anything. He
should always be engaged in those actions that lead to his own welfare and well-
being. He should remain engaged in the practice of Dharma, keeping his senses
and mind free from sin. He should display his inner strength in austerity and
keep his senses under control, progressing in the practice of restraint, because
self-welfare is achieved with great difficulty.  **Commentary:** The word
'sniha' means 'to be attached'. 'Asniha' means 'not attached', meaning free from
egotism everywhere.  Or, 'niha' means 'to be destroyed' by external influences.
'Aniha' means 'not destroyed', meaning not defeated by external influences.
Another reading is 'aṇhe', meaning 'without sin', 'nirāvadya', meaning
'blameless', 'anushṭhāyī', meaning 'practitioner'. 'Sahita' means 'associated
with', 'associated with what is beneficial'. 'Yukta' means 'united', 'united
with knowledge, etc.', 'svhita' means 'beneficial to oneself', 'ātma hita' means
'beneficial to the self'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA kiJca 'channaM' tti mAyA tasyAH
svAbhiprAyapracchAdanarUpatvAt tA na kuryyAt  /  ca zabdaH uttarApekSayA
samuccayArthaH, tathA prazastaye sarvairapyavigAnenAdriyata iti prazasyo
lobhastaM ca na kuryyAt, tathA jAtyAdibhirmadasthAnairlaghuprakRtiM
puruSamutkarSaMyatItyutkarSako mAnastamapi na kuryyAditi saMbaMdha:
tathA'ntarvyavyavasthito'pi mukhadRSTibhrUbhaGgavikArai: prakAzIbhavatIti
prakAzaH krodhastaJca 'mAhaNe' tti sAdhu rna kuryyAt, teSAM kaSAyANaM
yairmahAtmabhiH vivekaH parityAgaH Ahito janati staeva dharmamprati praNatA iti
/  yadi vA teSAmeva satpuruSANAM suSThu vivekaH parijJAnarUpaH AhitaH prathitaH
prasiddhiM gataH ta eva ca dharmaM prati praNatAH yai mahAsatvaiH suSTa juSTaM
sevitaM dhUpate'STaprakAraM karmatadrUpaM saMyamAnuSThAnaM, yadi vA yaiH
sadanuSThAyibhiH 'sujosiaM' tti suSTu kSiptaM dhUnanArhatvAd dhUtaM karmeti  //
29  //  - TIkArtha 'channa' zabda mAyA ke liye hai| apane abhiprAya kA
pracchAdana karanA use chipAnA mAyA hai  /  saMyamI mAyA kA anusaraNa na kare  /
isa gAthA meM AyA huA 'ca' zabda AgAmI padArthoM ke samuccaya ke liye haiM  /
saba loga jisakA avigAna-Apatti ke binA Adara karate haiM, use prazasya kahA
jAtA hai| yaha lobha kA nAma hai, lobha nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  utkarSa zabda
mAna kA vAcaka hai jinakI prakRti choTI hotI hai- vaicArika stara nIcA hotA hai,
use jAti Adi madasthAna matta banA dete haiN| vaha unase pAgala jaisA ho jAtA
hai  /  eka saMyatAcArI muni aisA na kare  /  prakAza lobha kA nAma 'kyoMki vaha
mAnava ke bhItara rahatA huA bhI mukha, dRSTi, bhRkuTI bhaMga Adi vikAroM se
prakAzita hotA hai- vyakta hotA hai| saMyamI krodha na kre| jina mahApuruSoM ne
ina kaSAyoM kA parivarjana kiyA hai, parityAga kiyA hai, ve hI sahI mAne meM
dharma meM pravRtta haiN| dharma ke ArAdhaka haiM  /  unhIM sAtvika puruSoM kA
sadjJAna- viveka saMsAra meM vizruta huA hai- prasiddha huA hai tathA ve hI
dharma meM saMlIna haiM  /  jina mahApuruSoM ne aSTavidha karmoM kA nAza karane
vAle saMyama ko jIvana meM bhalI bhAMti apanAyA hai athavA satkarma meM nirata
jina mahApuruSoM ne ATha prakAra ke karmoM ko bhalIbhAMti apagata kara diyA hai,
ve hI dharma ke ArAdhaka haiN| yahAM karmoM ko jo 'dhuta' kahA gayA hai usakA
tAtparya unake dhUnana yA kSepaNa karane yogya artha ke sAtha jur3A hai  /  OM
OM OM chAyA - aNihe sahie susaMvuDe dhammaTThI uvahANavIrie  /  viharejja
samAhiiMdie attahiyaM khu duheNa labbhai  //  30 //  asnihaH sahitaH susaMvRtaH
dharmArthI upadhAnavIryyaH  /  viharetsamAhitendriyaH AtmahitaM duHkhena
labhyate  //  anuvAda - saMyamI puruSa kisI bhI vastu meM sneha yA Asakti na
rakhe  /  jina kAryoM se apanA zreyasa - kalyANa sadhe unameM sadaiva saMlagna
rahe  /  vaha apanI indriyoM evaM mana ko gupta - pApoM se rahita rakhatA huA
dharma kI sAdhanA meM nirata rahe  /  vaha tapazcaraNa meM apanA Atma parAkrama
prakaTa kare tathA apanI indriyoM ko vaza meM karake saMyamAnuSThAna meM
agrasara rahe kyoMki AtmakalyANa bar3I kaThinAI se sadhatA hai  /  TIkA api ca
snihyata iti sniha: nasniha: asnihaH sarvatra mamattva rahita ityarthaH, yadi vA
parISahopasargairnihanyata iti niha: na niho'niha: upasagairaparAjita ityarthaH,
pAThAntaraM vA 'aNahe' tti nAsyAghamastItyanagho niravadyAnuSThAyItyarthaH saha
hitena vartata iti sahitaH sahito yukto vA jJAnAdibhiH svahitaH Atmahito va 174

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Study of the Vaitaliya  This text discusses the practice of
*sadanuṣṭhāna* (right conduct) and explains that it involves completely shutting
off the senses and the *no-indriyas* (non-sensory faculties) from worldly
desires. This means that the *dharma* (righteousness) based on *śruta*
(scripture) and *cāritra* (conduct) becomes the sole purpose of life. This is
because only the righteous seek *dharma*. A *samyamī* (self-controlled)
practitioner should engage in *tapas* (austerity) with great strength and follow
the path of *samyama* (self-restraint) with controlled senses. Why is this
necessary? Because without *sadanuṣṭhāna*, true happiness cannot be attained in
this world of suffering. As it is said:  "This human birth, like the flickering
light of a firefly, is extremely rare and difficult to obtain. If one falls into
the vast ocean of *saṃsāra* (the cycle of birth and death), it is almost
impossible to be rescued."  Just as it is difficult for a needle and a grain of
rice to meet in the ocean, so too is it difficult to obtain human birth. And
even within this birth, it is even more difficult to be born in an *ārya-kṣetra*
(a land of righteousness). Therefore, it is clear that true happiness is hard to
achieve in this world of suffering.  Furthermore:  1. Among all beings, those
that are mobile are superior. Among them, those with five senses are the best.
And among those with five senses, humans are the most excellent. 2. Among
humans, those born in a good *deśa* (land) are superior. Among those born in a
good *kula* (family) are those of a noble *jāti* (caste). Among those of a noble
*jāti*, those with good *rūpa* (appearance) and *samṛddhi* (wealth) are
superior. Among those with good *rūpa* and *samṛddhi*, those with *bala*
(strength) are the best. 3. Among those with *bala*, those with long *āyuṣka*
(lifespan) are superior. Among those with long *āyuṣka*, those with *vijñāna*
(knowledge) are the best. Among those with *vijñāna*, those with *samyaktva*
(right faith) are superior. And among those with *samyaktva*, those who have
attained *śīla* (good conduct) are the most excellent. 4. This is the summary of
the path to *mokṣa* (liberation). Many have attained it, and some have yet to
attain it. 5. Therefore, strive diligently on the path of *madhumān* (sweetness)
and *anadukta* (unspeakable) by establishing yourself in *samādhi* (meditation).
Abandoning all attachments, perform your duties with righteousness and always
seek the highest good.  **Note:** The term "अणहे" (aṇhe) is a variant reading in
the text. It means "one who is not attached" or "one who is free from
attachments."   **Glossary of Jain Terms:**  * **Sadanuṣṭhāna:** Right conduct *
**No-indriyas:** Non-sensory faculties * **Dharma:** Righteousness * **Śruta:**
Scripture * **Cāritra:** Conduct * **Samyamī:** Self-controlled * **Tapas:**
Austerity * **Samyama:** Self-restraint * **Saṃsāra:** The cycle of birth and
death * **Ārya-kṣetra:** A land of righteousness * **Deśa:** Land * **Kula:**
Family * **Jāti:** Caste * **Rūpa:** Appearance * **Samṛddhi:** Wealth *
**Bala:** Strength * **Āyuṣka:** Lifespan * **Vijñāna:** Knowledge *
**Samyaktva:** Right faith * **Śīla:** Good conduct * **Mokṣa:** Liberation *
**Madhumān:** Sweetness * **Anaduka:** Unspeakable * **Samādhi:** Meditation *
**Aṇhe:** One who is not attached, free from attachments

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM sadanuSThAnapravRtteH, tAmeva darzayati- suSTu saMvRtaH
indriyanoinidrayairvisrotasikArahita ityarthaH tathA dharmaH zrutacAritrAkhyaH
tenA'rthaH prayojanaM sa evArthaH tasyaiva sadbhirarthyamAnatvAd dharmArthaH sa
yasyA'stIti dhamArthI tathA upadhAnaM tapastatra vIryavAn sa evaMbhUto viharet
saMyamAnuSThAnaM kuryAt samAhitendriyaH saMyatendriyaH kuta evaM ? yata
AtmahitaM duH khenAsumatA saMsAre paryyaTatA akRtarmAnuSThAnena labhyate
avApyata iti tathAhi "na punaridamatidurlabhamagAdhasaMsArajaladhivibhraSTam  /
mAnuSyaM khadyotakataDillatAvilasitapratimam  // " tathAhi
yugasamilAdidRSTAntanItyA manuSyabhava eva tAvad durlabhaH
tatrA'pyAryyakSetrAdikaM durApamiti ata AtmahitaM duHkhenAvApyata iti mantavyam
/  api ca - T bhUteSujaGgamatvaM tasmin paJcendriyatvamutkRSTam  /  tasmAdapi
mAnuSyaM mAnuSye'pyArthadezazca  // 1 //  deze kulaM pradhAnaM kule pradhAne
jAti rutkRSTA  /  jAtau rUpa samRddhI rUpe ca balaM viziSTatamam  // 2 //
bhavati bale cAyuSkaM prakRSTamAyuSkato'pi vijJAnam  /  vijJAne samyaktvaM
samyaktve zIlasaMprAptiH  // 3 //  etatpUrvazcAyaM samAsato mokSa sAdhanopAyaH
/  tatra ca bahu samprAptaM bhavadbhiralpaJca saMprApyam ||4|| tatkurutodyama
madhumAnaduktamArge samAdhi mAsthAya  /  tyaktvA saGgamanAryyaM kAryyaM sadbhiH
sadAzreyaH ||5iti||30|| TIkArtha jo puruSa kisI vastu sAtha vizeSa Asakti yA
lagAva rakhatA hai unheM 'sniha' kahA jAtA hai  /  jo kisI vastu ke sAta sneha
nahIM karatA - anAsakta rahatA hai use 'asniha' kahA jAtA hai  /  athavA
parISaha aura upasargoM dvArA jo parAbhUta hotA hai, use 'niha' kahA jAtA hai  /
jo inase parAbhUta yA parAjita nahIM ho sakatA use 'aniha' kahA jAtA hai  /
saMyamIsAdhaka parISahoM evaM upasargoM se kabhI parAjaya prApta na kare  /
unase aparAjita rahe-yahAM aisA Azaya hai  /  isa sthAna para 'aNahe' pAThAntara
bhI pAyA jAtA hai  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki sAdhu pAparjita - niravadya
karmoM kA anuSThAna kare  /  vaha apane Atmahita meM nirata rahe  /  athavA
jJAnAdi se samAyukta rahe athavA satkarmoM ke anusaraNa meM, nirata hokara
AtmakalyANa sampAdita kare-sAdhe  /  sadanuSThAna evaM sadAcaraNa meM pravRtta
hone ke saMdarbha meM AgamakAra kahate haiM ki vaha apanI indriya aura noindriya
dvArA sAMsArika bhogoM kI tRSNA se sarvathA virata rahe arthAt unameM vaisI
tRSNA na vyApe  /  sAdhu zruta aura cAritramUlaka dharma ko hI apane jIvana kA
prayojana samajhe kyoMki satpuruSa ve hI haiM jo saddharma kI abhyarthanA karate
haiM  /  eka saMyamI sAdhaka tapazcaraNa meM Atma parAkrama prakaTa kare  /
apanI indriyoM para niyaMtraNa rakhatA huA, saMyama patha kA anusaraNa kare
kyoMki saMsAra sAgara meM bhaTakate hue prANI ko dharma kI sAdhanA ke binA AtmA
kA hita yA zreyasa prApta nahIM hotA  /  kahA gayA hai - I yaha manuSya bhava-
manuSya yoni meM janma, juganu kI rozanI aura bijalI kI camaka kI taraha atyanta
caMcala hai, asthira hai  /  yadi isa apAra saMsAra sAgara meM koI gira par3A,
calA gayA to phira use pAnA atyanta kaThina hai  /  jaisA yuga samila kA
dRSTAnta saMsAra meM pracalita haiM  /  tadanusAra kIlI aura jueM kA to kabhI na
kabhI paraspara saMyukta honA saMbhava ho jAya kiMtu manuSya bhava duSkara hai|
vaisA ho bhI jAya to AryakSetra meM janma pAnA aura bhI durlabha hai  /  ataH
Atmahita-Atma kalyANa prApta honA bahuta kaThina hai  /  saMsAra ke prANiyoM meM
jaMgama-gatizIla-calane phirane meM sakSama prANI zreSTha hai  /  unameM bhI
paMcendriya uttama hai  /  paMcendriya meM bhI manuSya I 1. samudra meM pahale
kIlI ko pheMka diyA gayA phira jueM ko DAla diyA gayA  /  donoM taraMgoM dvArA
bahAe jAte hue kabhI na kabhI mila jaae| kIlI jueM meM praviSTa ho jaaye| yaha
saMbhava hai kintu puNyahIna dvArA manuSya bhava prApta kiyA jAnA duSkara hai  /
175

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra**  Birth has its own characteristics. Even after
being born in the human realm, it is extremely auspicious to be born in the land
of the Aryas. Even there, the family holds a prominent position. Within that,
the caste has its own characteristics, meaning it is a very high thing to be
born into a noble family and a noble caste. Even with that, it is even more
difficult to attain physical beauty, prosperity, and wealth. If that happens,
then gaining strength is a special characteristic. Strength may be attained, but
if long life is not obtained, then its usefulness is not fulfilled. Therefore,
long life also has its own importance. Within life, the attainment of knowledge
is important. Knowledge - the attainment of right faith within the framework of
specific knowledge is excellent. When that happens, the attainment of character
and the practice of good conduct is excellent. Gradually, attaining these things
is the means to liberation. In short, this should be understood. You have
attained many things from these substances. Now, a little remains to be
attained. Therefore, with a focused mind, you should abandon the company of non-
Aryans, those who are not noble, and those who are unrighteous, and always
engage in actions that lead good people towards their own welfare.  1 **Hi Nuun
Pura Anussutam Aduva Tam Tah No Samutthiyan. Muni Na Samaai Ahiya, Naena
Jagasavvadansi Na.** || 31 || **Chhaya** - **Nahi Nuunam Pura Anushrutam Athava
Tattha Na No Samanushthitam. Munina Samaayakadyakhyatam, Jnatena
Jagatsarvadarshina.** || 31 || **Anuvaad** The omniscient Lord Mahavira, the son
of knowledge, has spoken about Samayik - equality, Samadhi, etc. Undoubtedly, in
the past, the living beings, the animal world, did not listen to it properly,
did not pay attention to it, and did not follow it. **Tikaarth** - **Om Om Om**
**Tika** This shows that this was never attained by living beings before. The
Muni, the son of knowledge, who sees all the states of the world, has spoken
about Samayik, etc. This is definitely certain, that it was not heard by living
beings in the past, it did not come to their ears, or even if it was heard, it
was not practiced as it should be. The alternative reading is 'Avitah', meaning
it was not practiced truthfully, as it should be. The reason for this is that
self-benefit is very difficult to obtain. || 31 || The author of the Agam
discusses the fact that Samayik, etc. was never heard before by living beings.
The omniscient Lord Mahavira, the son of knowledge, who sees all the states of
the world, has spoken about Samayik, etc. It is certain that living beings never
heard it in the past. Even if they heard it, they did not follow it as it should
be. In this verse, the alternative reading 'Avitah' is found. According to that,
the meaning is that living beings did not practice Samayik, etc., as taught by
Lord Mahavira, in its true form, in its proper form, and did not behave
accordingly. This is why self-benefit and self-welfare are said to be difficult
to obtain for living beings. 176

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram janma kI apanI vizeSatA hai  /  manuSya bhava meM Akara
bhI Arya deza meM janma pAnA ati uttama hai  /  vahAM bhI kula kI pradhAnatA hai
/  usameM bhI jAti kI apanI vizeSatA hai arthAt uttama kula, uttama jAti pAnA
bahuta UMcI bAta hai  /  vaisA hone para bhI rUpa daihika sauMdarya, subhagatA
tathA samRddhi prApta karanA aura bhI muzkila hai, vaisA ho jAye to bala-zakti
prApta honA aura vizeSatA liye hue hai| bala to prAptahuA kintu lambA AyuSya
nahIM milA to usakI upayogitA nahIM sadhatI  /  ataH lambe AyuSya kI bhI apanI
mahattA hai| Ayu meM bhI vijJAna kI prApti mahattvapUrNa hai  /  vijJAna -
viziSTa jAnakArI ke antargata samyaktva - satzraddhAna kA prApta honA zreSTha
hai, aisA hone para zIla kI prApti sadAcaraNa kI sAdhanA uttama hai  /  kramazaH
inhIM padArthoM ko prApta karanA mokSa kA sAdhana hai, saMkSepa meM yaha
samajhanA cAhiye  /  Apa logoM ne padArthoM meM se bahuta kucha prApta kara liyA
hai  /  aba thor3A sA prApta karanA avaziSTa rahA hai  /  ataH samAdhiniSTa
hokara anArya - anuttama, adharmiSTa janoM kI saMsarga chor3akara satpuruSoM ko
sadaiva Atmazreyasa kI ora le jAne vAle kArya karane cAhiye  /  1 hi NUNa purA
aNussutaM aduvA taM taha No samuTThiyaM  /  muNiNA sAmAi AhiyaM, nAeNaM
jagasavvadaMsiNA  //  31  //  chAyA - nahi nUnaM purA'nuzrutamathavA tattathA no
samanuSThitam  /  muninA sAmAyakAdyAkhyAtam, jJAtena jagatsarvadarzinA  //
anuvAda jJAtaputra sarvajJa prabhu mahAvIra ne sAmAyika - samatvabhAva, samAdhi
Adi kA kathana kiyA hai| niHsaMdeha pUrva meM jIva ne prANI jagata ne use
yathAvata nahIM sunAyA, sunakara usa para gaura nahIM kiyA usakA anusaraNa nahIM
kiyA  /  TIkArtha hue kahate haiM - - OM OM OM TIkA etacca na prANibhiH
kadAcidavAptapUrva mityetaddarzayitumAha-yadetat muninA jagataH
sarvabhAvadarzinA jJAtaputrIyeNa sAmAyikAdi Ahitam AkhyAtaM tat nUnaM nizcitaM
nahi naiva purA pUrvaM jantubhiH anuzrutaM zravaNapatha mAyAtam athavA zrutamapi
tatsAmAyakAdi yathA'vasthitaM tathA nA'nuSThitaM, pAThAntaraM vA 'avitaha' tti,
avitathaM yathAvannAnuSThita mataH kAraNAdasumatAmAtmahitaM sudurlabha miti  //
31 //  AgamakAra prANiyoM dvArA sAmAyika Adi ke pahale kabhI nahIM sune jAne kI
carcA karate saMsAra ke samagra bhAvoM ke dRSTA-sarvadarzI, sarvajJAnI
jJAtaputra bhagavAna mahAvIra ne jo sAmAyika Adi kA AkhyAna, nirUpaNa kiyA hai
/  nizcaya hI prANiyoM ne use pUrvakAla meM kadApi nahIM sunA  /  yadi sunA bhI
to jisa prakAra usakA anusaraNa kiyA jAnA cAhiye vaisA nahIM kiyA, isa gAthA meM
'avitahaM' aisA pAThAntara pAyA jAtA hai  /  usake anusAra yaha abhiprAya hai ki
prANiyoM ne prabhu mahAvIra dvArA pratipAdita sAmAyika Adi kA avitatha -
satyarUpa meM, yathAvata rUpa meM, anuSThAna nahIM kiyA, tadanusAra AcaraNazIla
nahIM  /  yahI kAraNa hai ki prANiyoM ke liye Atmahita AtmakalyANa durlabha kahA
gayA hai  /  176

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vaitaliya Study. Thus, knowing the great difference, the Dharma, the best of all
Dharmas, is accompanied by many people. Those who follow the Guru's teachings,
those who are free from the great ocean of worldly desires, are called the great
ocean. ||32|| I say. Shadow - Thus, knowing the great difference, the Dharma,
the best of all Dharmas, is accompanied by many people. Those who follow the
Guru's teachings, those who are free from the great ocean of worldly desires,
are called the great ocean. || I say. || Translation - The attainment of self-
welfare is very difficult. In this context, the Dharma formulated by the Arhat-
Tirthankaras is the best of all Dharmas - knowing this, the attainment of self-
welfare is easy, knowing this, those who follow the Guru's commands, those who
walk on the path prescribed by them, those who are free from worldly enjoyments
and desires, have crossed this ocean of the world. I say so. Commentary - Again,
referring to another teaching, he says - Thus, knowing that self-welfare is very
difficult, knowing the great difference of Dharmas, the special Dharma, or the
difference of karma, or if 'Mahantar', knowing the opportunity of human, Arya
Kshetra, etc., knowing this Jain Dharma, Shruta Charitra, accompanied by
welfare, etc., many people, those who are accompanied by knowledge, etc., those
who are light-karmic, those who are devoted to the Guru, Acharya, etc., or the
Tirthankara, those who follow the teachings, those who follow the prescribed
path, those who are free from sinful karmas, those who are spread out, the great
ocean, the endless ocean of the world, is called by me, by you, and by other
Tirthankaras. The word 'iti' is used to indicate the end. 'Bravimi' - I speak.
This is the same as before. ||32|| The second objective of the Vaitaliya is
complete. Commentary - The Agamkar again teaches in another way - As mentioned
earlier, the attainment of self-welfare - the welfare of the soul is very
difficult. Knowing this, those who have understood the mutual difference - the
difference of all Dharmas, and have assimilated the best auspicious Dharma, or
those who have understood the difference of karmas - the different results of
different karmas, and have understood the best conduct worthy of a virtuous
person, the favorable opportunities like Arya Kshetra, etc., have accepted the
Shruta Charitra form, the Dharma propagated by the omniscient. By the practice
of knowledge, etc., knowledge, conduct, they have lightened their karmas.
Following the path shown by their Guru, Acharya, Tirthankaras, they have
renounced sinful karmas, such men have crossed this endless ocean of the world -
crossed it. I have told you this. Other Tirthankaras have also said so. Here,
the word 'iti' is used in the sense of ending. 'Bravimi' - I speak. This is the
same as before, so it should be added. The second objective of the second study
called Vaitaliya is complete. -177

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM  /  evaM mattA mahaM taraM dhammamiNaM sahiyA vahUjaNA  /
guruNo chaMdANuvattagA. virayA tinna mahogha mAhiyaM ||32||ttibemi|| chAyA -
evaM matvA mahadantaraM dharmamenaM sahitAH vahavo janAH  /
gurozchandAnuvartakAH viratA stIrNAH mahogha mAkhyAtam ||iti brviimi|| anuvAda -
AtmakalyANa kI prApti bahuta duSkara hai  /  isa saMdarbha meM arhata-
tIrthaMkara dvArA prarUpita dharma saba dharmoM meM uttama hai-isase Atmahita kI
prApti sukara hai, yaha jAnakara guru kI AjJA kA anuvartana karane vAle, una
dvArA upadiSTa patha para calane vAle, sAMsArika bhogoM evaM vAsanAoM se virata
rahane vAle satpuruSoM ne isa saMsAra sAgara ko pAra kiyA hai  /  aisA maiM
kahatA hU~  /  TIkA - punarapyupadezAntara madhikRtyAha - evam uktarItyA
AtmahittaM sudurlabhaM matvA jJAtvA dharmANAJca mahadantaraM dharmavizeSa
karmaNo vA vivaraM jJAtvA yadi vA 'mahaMtaraM' ti, manuSyAryakSetrAdikamavasaraM
sadanuSThAnasya jJAtvA enaM jainaM dharmaM zrutacAritrAtmakaM saha hitena
vartanta iti sahitAH jJAnAdiyuktA vahavo janAH laghu karmANaH samAzritAH santo
gururAcAryAdestIrthaGkarasya vA chandAnuvartakAsta duktamArgAnuSTAyino viratAH
pApebhyaH karmabhyaH santastIrNAH mahaudhamapAraM saMsArasAgarameva mAkhyAtaM
mayA mavatA maparaizca tIrthakRdbhiranyeSAm iti zabdaH parisamAptyarthaM
vravImItipUrvavat  // 32 //  vaitAlIyasya dvitIyoddezakaH samAptaH  /  TIkArtha
- AgamakAra punaH dUsare prakAra se upadeza dete hue kahate haiM - jaisA pahale
varNita huA hai, Atmahita-AtmA kA kalyANa sAdhanA bahuta kaThina hai  /  yaha
jAnakara jinhoMne saba dharmoM ke pArasparika antara ko-bheda ko samajhate hue
uttama zreyaskara dharma ko AtmasAt kiyA athavA karmoM ke antara ko jAnakara-
vividha karmoM kI vividha phala pradattA ko samajhakara zreSTha AcaraNa yogya
satpuruSa, Arya kSetra jaise anukUla avasaroM ko samajhakara zruta cAritra rUpa,
sarvajJa pratipAdita dharma ko svIkAra kiyA  /  jJAnAdijJAna, AcAra kI sAdhanA
dvArA apane karmoM ko halkA kiyA  /  apane guru, AcArya, tIrthaMkaroM dvArA
batAe hue patha kA anusaraNa karate hue pApa karmoM kI nivRtti kI, aise puruSoM
ne isa apAra saMsAra sAgara ko tIrNa kiyApAra kiyA  /  yaha maiMne Apa logoM ko
kahA hai| anya tIrthaMkaroM ne bhI aisA kahA hai  /  yahAM 'iti' zabda samApti
ke artha meM hai  /  'bravImi'-bolatA hU~  /  yaha pahale kI taraha hai vaise hI
ise yojita kara lenA cAhiye  /  vaitAliya nAmaka dUsare adhyayana kA dUsarA
uddezaka samApta hotA hai| -177

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Kritanga Sutra, Chapter 3: Introduction  **Commentary:** This is the
beginning of the third section of the Vaitaliya study. The second section has
been completed, and now the third section begins. The connection between these
two sections is as follows: In the end of the second section, it was stated that
those who have renounced sins - evil karmas - cross the ocean of existence. Now,
in this section, it will be explained that when a sage encounters trials and
tribulations, they should endure them. This is because enduring them leads to
the destruction of karmas born from ignorance.  The author of this section
states that the purpose of this section is to explain that enduring trials and
tribulations leads to the destruction of karmas born from ignorance. Therefore,
a sage should endure them. This third section is meant to explain this. Its
first sutra is:  **Sutra 1:**  * **Sanskrit:** संवुडकम्मस्स भिक्खुणो, जं दुक्खं
पुढे अबोहिए । ते संजमओऽवचिजई, मरणं हेच्च वयंति पंडिया ॥१॥ * **Shadow:**
संवृत्तकर्मणः भिक्षोः यदुःखं स्पृष्ट मवोधिना । तत्संयमतोऽवचीयते मरणं हित्वा
व्रजन्ति पंडिताः ॥ * **Translation:** The monk who has restrained his karmas -
stopped the influx of the eight types of karmas - experiences suffering due to
ignorance. This suffering, through the practice of restraint, diminishes. Wise
and discerning individuals, having renounced death, proceed towards liberation.
**Commentary:** The monk who has restrained his karmas - stopped the influx of
the eight types of karmas - through the practice of right conduct, wrong views,
non-renunciation, carelessness, passions, and enjoyment, experiences suffering
due to ignorance. This suffering, through the practice of restraint, diminishes.
This means that the karmas bound due to ignorance, through the practice of the
seventeen types of restraint as mentioned by the Tirthankaras, diminish and are
destroyed every moment. This is similar to how water in a pond, with a blocked
entrance, diminishes every day due to the sun's heat. Similarly, the monk who
has restrained his karmas, through the practice of restraint, diminishes the
karmas accumulated due to ignorance over many lifetimes. Those who have
restrained their karmas and practice right conduct, having renounced death - the
nature of death, the characteristics of death, the death of birth, old age, and
sorrow - proceed towards liberation. Wise and discerning individuals, knowing
the difference between right and wrong, say that this is what has been said
before.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram tRtIya. uddezakaH , TIkA - atha vaitAlIyAdhyayanasya
tRtIyoddezakasya prAraMbhaH - ukto dvitIyoddezakaH, sAmprataM tRtIyaH
samArabhyate asya cAyamabhisambandhaH-ihAnantaroddezakAnte viratA ityuktaM,
teSAM ca kadAcitparISahAH samudIyeran ata: tatsahanaM vidheyamiti,
uddezakArthAdhikAro'Si niyuktikAraNAbhihita: yathA'jJAnopacitasya karmaNo'pacayo
bhavatIti, saca parISahasahanAdevetyataH parISahAH soDhavyA ityenena
sambandhenA''yAtasyAsyoddezakasyAdisUtram  /  TIkArtha - vaitAlIya adhyayana kA
tIsarA uddezaka hai  /  dvitIya uddezaka samApta ho cukA hai  /  aba tIsarA
uddezaka zuru kiyA jAtA hai  /  ina donoM kA paraspara saMbaMdha isa prakAra hai
/  dUsare uddezaka ke aMta meM pratipAdita kiyA gayA hai ki pApoM se-azubha
karmoM se virata puruSa saMsAra rUpI samudra ko pAra kara jAte haiM  /  aba isa
uddezaka meM yaha nirUpita kiyA jAyegA ki sAdhu ke samakSa kabhI parISaha aura
upasarga udIrNa ho-upasthita ho to unako sahanA cAhiye kyoMki vaisA karane se hI
ajJAna prasUta karma naSTa hote haiM  /  niyuktikAra isa tRtIya uddezaka kA
adhikAra AkhyAta karate hue kahate haiM ki-parISaha aura upasargoM ko sahane se
ajJAna prasUta karmoM kA apacaya-apagama yA nAza hotA hai  /  ataH sAdhu ko
unheM sahana karanA caahiye| yaha tIsarA uddezaka yahI batAne ke liye haiM  /
isakA pahalA sUtra yaha hai - saMvuDakammassa bhikkhuNo, jaM dukkhaM puDhe
abohie  /  te saMjamao'vacijaI, maraNaM hecca vayaMti paMDiyA  // 1 //  chAyA -
saMvRttakarmaNaH bhikSoH yaduHkhaM spRSTa mavodhinA  /  tatsaMyamato'vacIyate
maraNaM hitvA vrajanti paMDitAH  //  anuvAda - jisa zramaNa ne karmoM ko saMvRta
kara diyA hai-aSTa vidha karmoM kA Agamana rokA diyA hai  /  usake ajJAna ke
kAraNa jo karma baMdhe hue haiM  /  ve saMyama ke avasaraNa se-pAlana se kSINa
ho jAte haiM, vaise paMDita-jJAnI, vivekI puruSa mRtyu ko pAra kara mokSa ko
svAyatta kara lete haiM  /  TIkA - saMvRtAni niruddhAni karmANi anuSThAni
samyaganupayogarUpANivA mithyAdarzanAvirati pramAda kaSAya yogarUpANi vA yasya
bhikSoH sAdhoH sa tathA tasya yad duHkha masavedyaM tadupAdAnaM vA'STaprakAraM
karma spRSTamiti baddhaspRSTa nikAcitamityarthaH taccAtra avodhinA
ajJAnenopacitaMsatsaMyamatomAnIndroktAt saptadazarUpAdanuSThAnAd apacIyate
pratikSaNaM kSaya mupayAti etaduktaM bhavati yathA taTAkodarasaMsthitamudakaM
niruddhAparapravezadvAraM sadAdityakarasamparkAt pratyahamapacIyate evaM
saMvRtAzravadvArasya bhikSorindriya yogakaSAyamprati saMlInatayA saMvRtAtmanaH
sataH saMyamAnuSThAnena cAnekabhavAjJAnopacitaM karma kSIyate, ye ca
saMvRtAtmAnaH sadanuSThAyinazca te hitvA tyaktvA maraNaM maraNa svabhAva
mupalakSaNatvAjAtijarAmaraNa zokAdikaM tyaktvA mokSaM vrajanti paMDitAH
sadasadvivekaH, yadivA paNDitA sarvajJA evaM vadanti yat prAguktamiti  // 1 //
TIkArtha - jisa bhikSu ne-muni ne karmoM kA virodha-saMvaraNa kara diyA hai,
athavA samyak anupayoga rUpa anuSThAna dvArA mithyAdarzana avirati, pramAda,
kaSAya evaM bhoga rUpa karmoM ko roka diyA hai, usa bhikSu ko ( 178

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Study of Vaitalaya  The eight types of karmas, which are accumulated due to
ignorance, causing suffering, non-truth, unfavorable sensations, or pain, are
destroyed moment by moment by following or upholding the seventeen types of
restraint as taught by the Tirthankaras. This means that in a reservoir where
the water inlet is blocked, the accumulated water gradually decreases and dries
up due to the sun's rays. Similarly, the karma accumulated over many lifetimes
due to ignorance in a seeker who has closed the doors of inflow, who is always
vigilant in controlling the tendencies of the senses and passions, is diminished
by the practice of restraint. Seekers who are self-controlled and virtuous
abandon the cycle of death, the human existence, and attain liberation. Here, by
implication, death also includes birth, old age, sorrow, etc., meaning that they
are also abandoned, permanently. Those who have the wisdom or knowledge to
distinguish between truth and falsehood are called wise. These wise ones, the
omniscient, say:  **"Those who are not attached to women are like the liberated
ones. One should know that liberation is attained only after abandoning women,
the desire for sensual pleasures. Those who have considered sensual pleasures as
a disease are like the liberated ones."**  **Commentary:**  These are also not
liberated in this very life. The scripture says about them:  **"Those great
souls who are approached by those seeking sensual pleasures, or those who
approach a sensual man for the same purpose, are called 'vijnāpanā'. 'Vijnāpanā'
refers to women. Those virtuous men who are not served by women, or in other
words, who have not attained destruction through women, are indestructible due
to their non-attachment. They are said to be like liberated men. Although they
have not crossed the ocean of samsara, they are still considered liberated
because they are devoid of possessions and are not attached to worldly objects
like words, etc. Therefore, you should see that liberation is attained after
abandoning women. Those who have considered sensual pleasures as a disease, like
a sickness, are said to be like liberated men. It is also said:**  **"Those who
know the taste of flowers, fruits, wine, meat, and women, are like those who are
attached to worldly pleasures. I bow to those who are free from these."**
**Another reading of the third section is: "Those who consider sensual pleasures
as a disease, like a sickness, are said to be like liberated men."**
**Commentary:**  The scripture says about those men who do not attain liberation
in this very life:  **"Those who are attached to sensual pleasures, who express
their desire to someone, or who express their desire to a sensual man, are
called 'vijnāpanā'. 'Vijnāpanā' refers to women. Those virtuous men who are not
served by women, or in other words, who have not attained destruction through
women, are indestructible due to their non-attachment. They are said to be like
liberated men. Although they have not crossed the ocean of samsara, they are
still considered liberated because they are devoid of possessions and are not
attached to worldly objects like words, etc. Therefore, you should see that
liberation is attained after abandoning women. Those who have considered sensual
pleasures as a disease, like a sickness, are said to be like liberated men."**
**"Those who consider sensual pleasures as a disease, like a sickness, are said
to be like liberated men."**  **Commentary:**  The scripture says about those
men who do not attain liberation in this very life:  **"Those who are attached
to sensual pleasures, who express their desire to someone, or who express their
desire to a sensual man, are called 'vijnāpanā'. 'Vijnāpanā' refers to women.
Those virtuous men who are not served by women, or in other words, who have not
attained destruction through women, are indestructible due to their non-
attachment. They are said to be like liberated men. Although they have not
crossed the ocean of samsara, they are still considered liberated because they
are devoid of possessions and are not attached to worldly objects like words,
etc. Therefore, you should see that liberation is attained after abandoning
women. Those who have considered sensual pleasures as a disease, like a
sickness, are said to be like liberated men."**  **"Those who consider sensual
pleasures as a disease, like a sickness, are said to be like liberated men."**
**Commentary:**  The scripture says about those men who do not attain liberation
in this very life:  **"Those who are attached to sensual pleasures, who express
their desire to someone, or who express their desire to a sensual man, are
called 'vijnāpanā'. 'Vijnāpanā' refers to women. Those virtuous men who are not
served by women, or in other words, who have not attained destruction through
women, are indestructible due to their non-attachment. They are said to be like
liberated men. Although they have not crossed the ocean of samsara, they are
still considered liberated because they are devoid of possessions and are not
attached to worldly objects like words, etc. Therefore, you should see that
liberation is attained after abandoning women. Those who have considered sensual
pleasures as a disease, like a sickness, are said to be like liberated men."**
**"Those who consider sensual pleasures as a disease, like a sickness, are said
to be like liberated men."**  **Commentary:**  The scripture says about those
men who do not attain liberation in this very life:  **"Those who are attached
to sensual pleasures, who express their desire to someone, or who express their
desire to a sensual man, are called 'vijnāpanā'. 'Vijnāpanā' refers to women.
Those virtuous men who are not served by women, or in other words, who have not
attained destruction through women, are indestructible due to their non-
attachment. They are said to be like liberated men. Although they have not
crossed the ocean of samsara, they are still considered liberated because they
are devoid of possessions and are not attached to worldly objects like words,
etc. Therefore, you should see that liberation is attained after abandoning
women. Those who have considered sensual pleasures as a disease, like a
sickness, are said to be like liberated men."**  **"Those who consider sensual
pleasures as a disease, like a sickness, are said to be like liberated men."**
**Commentary:**  The scripture says about those men who do not attain liberation
in this very life:  **"Those who are attached to sensual pleasures, who express
their desire to someone, or who express their desire to a sensual man, are
called 'vijnāpanā'. 'Vijnāpanā' refers to women. Those virtuous men who are not
served by women, or in other words, who have not attained destruction through
women, are indestructible due to their non-attachment. They are said to be like
liberated men. Although they have not crossed the ocean of samsara, they are
still considered liberated because they are devoid of possessions and are not
attached to worldly objects like words, etc. Therefore, you should see that
liberation is attained after abandoning women. Those who have considered sensual
pleasures as a disease, like

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAlaya adhyayanaM ajJAna ke kAraNa jo duHkha-asat vaidya yA pratikUla
vedanIya athavA duHkha ke kAraNa rUpa aSTa vidha karma baddha spRSTa evaM
nikAciMta rUpa se upacita-saMgrahita hue haiM ve tIrthaMkara pratipAdita
saptadazavidha saMyama ke anusaraNa yA pratipAlana meM pratikSaNa naSTa hote
jAte haiM  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jisa sarovara meM pAnI Ane kA nAlA
banda hai usameM pahale se ekatrita jamA huA jala sUrya kI kiraNoM se pratidina
ghaTatA jAtA hai - sUkhatA jAtA hai  /  usI prakAra jisa sAdhaka ne Azrava dvAra
ko saMvRta- avaruddha kara diyA hai| iMdriyoM ke yoga pravRtti tathA kaSAyoM ko
rokane meM jo sadA jAgRta rahatA hai, usa saMvRttAtmA sAdhaka ke aneka janmoM
meM ajJAna dvArA saMcita karma saMyama ke anuSThAna - anusaraNa se kSINa ho jAte
haiN| jo sAdhaka saMvRtAtmA evaM sadAcaraNazIla haiM, ve mRtyu ko -maraNadharmA
manuSya bhava ko chor3akara mokSa prApta kara lete haiN| yahAM upalakSaNa se
maraNa ke sAtha-sAtha jAti, jarA, zoka Adi bhI liye haiM arthAt unako bhI vaha
chor3a jAtA hai  /  sadA ke liye unase chUTa jAtA hai jinameM sat aura asat kA
bheda karane kA viveka yA jJAna hotA hai unheM paMDita kahA jAtA hai  /  ve
paMDita - sarvajJa aisA kahate haiM  /  OM OM OM je vinnaNAhi josiyA,
saMtinnehiM samaM viyAhiyA  /  tamhA uDDhati pAsahA adakkhu kAmAi chAyA ye
vijJApanAbhirjuSTAH saMtIrNaiH samaM vyAkhyAtAH  /  tasmAd UrdhvaM pazyata
adrAkSuH kAmAn rogavat  //  rogavaM  // 2 //  anuvAda jo puruSa striyoM se
juSTa- sevita nahIM haiM, ve mukta puruSoM ke tulya hai  /  strI parityAga -
viSaya vAsanA ke parityAga ke anantara hI mukti prApta hotI hai, yaha jAnanA
cAhiye  /  jisa puruSa ne kAma bhogoM ko roga ke samAna samajhA hai, ve mukta
puruSoM ke samAna haiM  /  - TIkA - ye'pi ca tenaiva bhavena na mokSamApnuvanti
tAnadhikRtyAha - ye mahAsattvAH kAmArthibhi rvijJApyante yAstadarthinyo vA
kAminaM vijJApayanti tA vijJApanAH striya stAbhiH ajuSTA: asevitAH kSayaM vA
avasAyalakSaNamatItAste santIrNe, muktaiH samaM vyAkhyAtAH, atIrNA api saMto
yataste niSkiJcanatayA zabdAdiSu viSayeSvapratibaddhAH saMsArodanvata
staTopAntavartino bhavanti, tasmAd urdhvamiti mokSaM yoSitparityAgAdvordhvaM yad
bhavati tatpazyata yUyam  /  ye ca kAmAn rogavad vyAdhikalpAn adrAkSuH
dRSTavantastesaMtIrNasamAH vyAkhyAtAH tathA coktam - "pupphaphalANaM ca rasaM
surAi maMsasya mahiliyANaM ca  /  jANaMtA je virayA te dukkarakAra vaMde  // 1
// " tRtIyapAdasya pAThAntaraM vA "uDDuM tiriyaM ahe tahA" Urdhvamiti
saudharmAdiSu tiriyamiti tiryagloke, adha iti bhavanapatyAdau ye kAmAstAn
rogavad adrAkSu rye te tIrNakalpAH vyAkhyAtA iti  // 2 //  TIkArtha jo puruSa
isI bhava meM mukti prApta nahIM karate, unake saMbaMdha meM AgamakAra kahate
haiN| - - kAmAsakta puruSa jisake prati apanI kAmanA prakaTa karatA hai yA jo
kAmasevana hetu kisI kAmI puruSa ke samakSa apanA abhiprAya spaSTa karatI hai,
use vijJApanA kahA jAtA hai| vijJApanA kA tAtparya striyoM se hai| jo satpuruSa
striyoM se sevita nahIM hai athavA jo dUsare zabdoM meM striyoM ke mAdhyama se
vinAza svarUpa kSaya ko prApta nahIM haiM-unameM anAsakta hone ke kAraNa
akSayasvarUpa hai, ve mukti prApta puruSoM ke samAna batalAye gaye haiN| yadyapi
saMsAra rUpI sAgara ko pAra nahIM kiyA to bhI ve akiMcana hone ke kAraNa tathA
zabda Adi iMdriya bhogoM 179

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  Having reached the shore of the ocean of the
world, due to not being attached, it is known that liberation is attained only
after the abandonment of sexual intercourse. Those men who have considered
sensual pleasures as disease, are declared to be like liberated men. It is also
said - I bow to those men who have understood the juice of flowers and fruits,
wine, meat and women as the cause of harm and have abandoned them, who have
performed difficult and arduous deeds.  Here, in the third step, the variant
reading 'Uddham Tiriyam Ahethaha' is also found, which means that those men who
consider the sensual pleasures that exist in the upper-heavenly realms, the
intermediate realms, and the lower realms, as equivalent to disease, are like
those men who have crossed the ocean of the world.  1. **Aggaṃ Vaṇiyehiṃ Āhiyaṃ,
Dhāraṃtī Rāiṇiyā Ihaṃ. Evaṃ Paramā Mahāvvaȳā Akkhāyā U Sarāibhoyaṇā. ||3||**
**Translation:** Kings in this world wear the best jewels and clothes brought by
merchants. Similarly, monks wear the five great vows, including the vow of
abstaining from food at night, as declared by the Acharyas (teachers).
**Commentary:**  Further explaining the teachings, it is said that 'Aggaṃ' means
the best, the main, like jewels, clothes, ornaments, etc. These are brought from
other countries by merchants. 'Āhitaṃ' means brought, carried. Kings, like those
who are worthy of such things, wear them in this human world. Similarly, these
great vows, like jewels, are declared, explained, and implemented by the
Acharyas. The virtuous ones wear them, including the vow of abstaining from food
at night. The word 'tu' indicates the special quality of the great vows compared
to the previous jewels. This means that just as kings are the only ones worthy
of the best jewels, similarly, only the great beings, the virtuous ones, are
worthy of the great vows, not others.  **Je Iha Sāyaṇugā Narā Ajjovavannā
Kāmehiṃ Mucchiyā. Kavaṇeṇa Samaṃ Pabbiyā, Na Vi Jāṇanti Samāhimahitam. ||4||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram meM Asakta nahIM hone ke kAraNa saMsAra rUpI samudra ke
kinAre ke nikaTa pahuMca hue haiN| yaha jAnane goya hai ki strI saMsarga ke
parityAga ke pazcAt hI mukti prApta hotI hai| jisa puruSoM ne kAma bhogoM ko
roga ke samAna samajhA hai, ve mukta puruSa ke samAna batalAye gaye haiN| kahA
bhI hai- jinhoMne puSpa tathA phala kA rasa, madirA, mAMsa evaM mahilAoM ko
jAnakara unheM anartha kA hetu samajhakara chor3a diyA hai, una duSkara-kaThora
karma karane vAle puruSoM ko vandana karatA huuN| yahAM tIsare caraNa meM
'uDDhaM tiriyaM ahetahA' aisA pAThAntara bhI pAyA jAtA hai jisakA yaha tAtparya
hai ki urdhva-saudharmAdi-devaloka meM, tiryak loka meM evaM adhaH - bhavanapati
Adi loka meM jo kAma bhoga vidyamAna hai, unheM jo puruSa roga ke tulya
samajhate haiM, ve una puruSoM ke saddaza haiM jinhoMne saMsAra sAgara ko pAra
kara diyA 1 aggaM vaNiehiM AhiyaM, dhAraMtI rAINiyA ihaM  /  evaM paramA
mahavvayA akkhAyA u sarAibhoyaNA  // 3 //  chAyA agraM vaNigbhi rAhitaM
dhArayanti rAjAna iha  /  - evaM paramAni mahAvratAni AkhyAtAni sarAtribhojanAni
//  anuvAda - vaNik janoM - vyApAriyoM dvArA lAye hue uttama ratnoM tathA
vastroM Adi ko nRpati- gaNa dhAraNa karate haiM isI prakAra AcAryoM-guruoM dvArA
AkhyAta - nirUpita rAtri bhojana parityAga sahita pAMca uttama mahAvratoM ko
munigaNa dhAraNa karate haiM- svIkAra karate haiM, pAlana karate haiM  /  TIkA -
punarapyupadezAntaramadhikRtyAha 'agraM' varyaM pradhAnaM
ratnavastrAbharaNAdikaM tadyathA vaNigbhirdezAntarAd 'Ahitam' DhaukitaM
rAjAnastatkalpA IzvarAdayaH 'iha' asminmanuSyaloke ' dhArayanti' vibhrati
evametAnyapi mahAvratAni ranakalpAni AcAryairAkhyAtAni pratipAditAni niyojitAni
'sarAtribhojanAni' rAtribhojana viramaNaSaSThAni sAdhavo vibhrati, tuzabdaH
pUrvaralebhyo mahAvrataratnAnAM vizeSApAdaka iti, idamuktaM bhavati yathA
prAdhAnaratnAnAM rAjAna eva bhAjanamevaM mahAvrata ratnAnAmapi mahAsatvA eMva
sAdhavo bhAjanaM nAnye iti  // 3 //  TIkArtha - AgamakAra Age aura upadeza dete
hue pratipAdita karate haiM - vyApAriyoM dvArA dUsare dezoM se lAye hue
bahumUlya ratna, vastu, alaMkAra Adi ko nRpatigaNa tathA aizvaryazAlI sampanna
jana isa loka meM dhAraNa karate haiM, isI prakAra AcAryoM dvArA AkhyAta
pratipAdita niyojita rAtri bhojana viramaNa sahita pAMca mahAvrata - cha: vrata
dhAraNa karate haiM  /  isa gAthA meM 'tu' zabda pUrvokta ratnoM kI apekSA
mahAvrata rUpI ratnoM kI vizeSatA sUcita karatA hai| 'isakA abhiprAya yaha ki
jaise uttama - bahumUlya ratnoM ke rAjA hI pAtra hote haiM- ve hI dhAraNa karane
yogya hote haiM usI prakAra mahAvrata rUpI ratnoM ke mahAsattva - mahAn Atmabala
ke dhanI sAdhu hI pAtra hote haiM anya nahIM  /  je iha sAyANugA narA
ajjhovavannA kAmehiM mucchiyA  /  kavaNeNa samaM pabbhiyA, na vi jANaMti
samAhimAhitaM  // 4 //  180

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vaitālika Adhyayana Chāyā - These are the men who are attached to the pleasures
here. They are arrogant like the miserly, and do not know the state of samādhi.
Translation:  The men in this world who are followers of the seven pleasures,
who are engrossed in prosperity and grandeur, and who are infatuated with
sensual pleasures, are like the miserly and the weak. They boldly indulge in the
pursuit of sensual desires. Even when advised, they do not comprehend the
importance of spiritual contemplation (dharmādhyāna).  Commentary: The men of
inferior nature in this human world, who are distressed by both worldly and
other-worldly sufferings, keep following the pleasures of this world. They are
attached to the taste of prosperity and grandeur. They are intensely desirous of
sensual pleasures, like the miserly and the weak, who are conquered by the
senses. They boldly indulge in the enjoyment of worldly pleasures. Or, those who
think that not properly observing the vigilance vows (samiti) is a small fault,
and that our restraint cannot be destroyed by that - this is their negligence.
In this way, they defile the spotless restraint, like a jewel-studded courtyard.
Even when advised, such people do not understand the importance of spiritual
contemplation (dharmādhyāna) and the like.  Vāhena yathāvakṣite, abalo bhavati
gavaṃ pracodyate | Sa antaśo alpasthāmā, nātivahaty abalo visīdati || 5 ||
Translation: Just as a weak ox, when prodded by the driver with a whip or goad,
becomes powerless, and being of little strength, is unable to traverse the
difficult path and suffers.  Commentary: Again, explaining another teaching, he
says: "By the driver" - that is, by the hunter - "as" - just as - "the animal" -
such as a deer - "being struck by various snares and traps, even though urged on
by the call of life, becomes powerless" - incapable of moving - "due to the
fatigue that has arisen." Or, "the carrier" - the cart-driver - while
transporting the "ox" - even though prodding it with various goads and whips -
"it becomes powerless" - incapable of traversing the difficult path and the
like. "And he, being of little strength," - being weak - "is unable to bear the
load" - and sinks in the mud and the like at that very place.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana chAyA - ye iha sAtAnugAH narAH adhyupapannAH kAmeSu
mUrchitAH  /  . kRpaNena samaM pragalbhitAH nA'pi jAnanti samAdhimAkhyAtam  //
anuvAda - isa saMsAra meM jo puruSa sAtAnugAmI-sukha ke pIche calane vAle haiM,
samRddhi vaibhavAdi meM adhyupapannaAsakta haiM tathA viSaya bhoga meM mUrcchita
haiM, jo kRpaNa-dayanIya iMdriya bhogoM meM lolupa janoM ke samAna hai ve
dhRSTatApUrvaka viSaya vAsanA ke sevana meM lage rahate haiM  /  aise loga
samajhAye jAne para bhI dharma dhyAna ko AtmasAta nahIM kara pAte  /  TIkA -
kiJca ye narA laghuprakRtayaH 'iha' asmin manuSyaloke sAtaM sukhamanugacchantIti
sAtAnugA sukhazIlA aihikAmuSmikApAyabharavaH samRddhirasasAtAgauraveSu
'adhyupapannA gRddhAH' tathA 'kAmeSu' icchAmadanarUpeSu 'mUrcchitA'
kAmotkaTatRSNAH kRpaNo dIno varAkaka indriyaiH parAjitastena
samA:tadvatkAmAsevane 'pragalbhitAH' dhRSTatAM gatAH, yadi vA kimanena stokena
doSaNAsamyakpratyupekSaNAdirUpeNAsmatsaMyamasya virAdhanaM bhaviSya tyevaM
pramAdavantaH kartavyaSvavasIdantaH samastamapi saMyamaM
paTavanmaNikuTTimavaddhA malinI kurvanti, evambhUtAzca te 'samAdhi'
dharmadhyAnAdikam 'AkhyAtaM' kathita mapi na jAnantIti  // 4 //  TIkArtha - isa
manuSya loka meM jo mAnava laghu prakRti-tuccha yA hIna prakRti yukta hote haiM,
ehika evaM pAralaukika duHkhoM se saMtrasta hote hue bhautika sukhoM ke pIche
calate rahate haiM, jo samRddhi rasa sAtA evaM gaurava meM Asakta rahate haiM-
viSaya bhogoM meM utkaTa, tIvra tRSNAyukta haiM, ve iMdriyoM se parAjita-unake
vazIbhUtadIna Atmabala rahita puruSa ke samAna dhRSTatApUrvaka sAMsArika bhogoM
ke sevana meM lage rahate haiM athavA jo puruSa aisA samajhate haiM ki
pratilekhanAdi samitiyoM kA bhalI bhAMti paripAlana nahIM karanA to eka choTA sA
doSa hai| usase hamArA saMyama kaise naSTa ho sakatA hai, ye unakA pramAda hai
/  ve isa prakAra karate hue ratnoM se khacita prAMgaNa kI jyoM nirmala saMyama
ko malina kara DAlate haiM  /  aise loga kahane para bhI-sAvadhAna kiye jAne
para bhI dharmadhyAna Adi kA mahattva nahIM samajhate vAheNa jahAvavicchae,
abale hoi gavaM pacoie  /  se aMtaso appathAmae, nAivahai abale visIyati  // 5
//  chAyA - vAhena yathAvakSito'balo bhavati gau pracoditaH  /
so'ntaso'lpasthAmA nAtivahatyabalo viSIdati  //  anuvAda - jaise eka gADIvAna
eka kamajora baila ko koDe yA cAbuka se pITakara calane ko prerita karatA hai,
kiMtu vaha baila durbalatA ke kAraNa kaThina mArga ko pAra nahIM kara sakatA  /
vaha alpa zaktiyuktakamajora hone ke kAraNa viSama mArga-kIcar3a Adi meM
phaMsakara duHkha pAtA hai, bhAra vahana nahIM kara sakatA  /  TIkA -
punarapyupadezAntaramadhikRtyAha - 'vyAdhena' lubdhakena 'jahA va' tti yathA
'gava' nti mRgAdipazurvividhamanekaprakAreNa kUTapAzAdinA kSataH para vazIkRtaH
zramaM vA grahitaH prANodito'pyabalo bhavati, jAtazramatvAt gantumasamarthaH,
yadivA vAhayatIti vAhaH zAkaTikastena yathAvadavahan gau vividha pratodAdinA
kSataH pracodito'pyabalo viSamapathAdau gantumasamartho bhavati, 'sacAntazaH'
maraNAntamapi yAvadalpasAmo nAtIva vo, zaknoti, evambhUtazca 'abalo' bhAraM
voDhuma samarthaH tatraiva paGkAdau viSIdatIti  // 5 //  181)

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Sutrakritanga Sutram. Commentary - The author of the scripture, now giving
another discourse on the same subject, says -  When a deer or other animal is
severely wounded, exhausted, and weakened by the use of traps, snares, and other
devices by the hunter, then even though it is urged in various ways, it cannot
move or even make the sound 'vah' due to fatigue. This indicates the state of
the charioteer. Just as a charioteer is unable to properly drive the chariot,
and keeps whipping the ox to make it move forward, similarly, the weakened ox,
due to its debility, cannot traverse the uneven, hilly, and rugged terrain, and
despite its best efforts and anguish, remains incapable of bearing that burden.
It gets stuck in the mud and other difficult places, and becomes distressed.
Evam kamesan.a viru ajasue payahe santhavam. Kami kame n.a kamae laddhevaavi
aladdha kan.hui.  Translation: Thus, the wise should renounce attachment to
sensual desires, even if they are presently enjoyed. The one who is desirous
should not desire the objects of desire, whether obtained or not obtained.
Commentary: The author explains the essence of the previous example. Just as the
wise, skilled person who is engrossed in the pursuit of sense objects cannot
easily renounce them, even if he thinks of doing so someday, and remains weak
like the ox unable to leave the difficult path, similarly, one should not desire
the objects of desire, whether obtained or not obtained. The person of great
fortitude should become indifferent and dispassionate towards the enjoyed sense
objects, just as Jambusavami, Vajrasavami and the awakened young monk.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  TIkArtha - AgamakAra aba isI viSaya meM dUsarA
upadeza dete hue kahate haiM - mRga Adi pazu zikArI dvArA kUTapAza-phaMde Adi ke
prayoga se jaba aneka taraha se ghAyala ho jAtA hai-thaka jAtA hai, durbala ho
jAtA hai taba vaha aneka prakAra se prerita kiye jAne para bhI parizrAMti ke
kAraNa cala nahIM sakatA athavA 'vAha' zabda kA artha vahana karAne vAlA haiM  /
yaha gADIvAna kA bodhaka hai  /  jaise eka gAr3IvAna gAr3I ko yathAvata-
yathAvidhi yA ThIka ThIka nahIM calA rahA ho-cAbuka mAra mAra kara baila ko Age
bar3hane ke liye prerita karatA ho, durbalatA ke kAraNa vaha baila viSama-U~ce
nIce, ubar3a khAbar3a bhAga meM cala nahIM sakatA vaha maraNAnta kaSTa pAkara
bhI-jI jAna lagAkara bhI durbalatA ke kAraNa usa bhAra ko Dhone meM asamartha
rahatA hai  /  vahI kIcar3a Adi viSama sthAnoM meM phaMsa jAtA hai aura viSAda
pAtA hai, duHkhI hotA haiN| evaM kAmesaNaM viU ajasue payaheja saMthavaM  /
kAmI kAme Na kAmae laddhevAvi aladdha kaNhuI  // 6 //  chAyA - evaM kAmeSaNAyAM
vidvAn adyazca prajahyAtsaMstavam  /  kAmI kAmAnna kAmaye llabdhAnvA'pyalabdhAn
kutazcit  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa kAmaiSaNA-viSaya vAsanAmUlaka kAryoM kI khoja
meM catura-cAlAka hotA hai vaha Aja yA kala kAmabhogoM kA parityAga kara de,
mAtra aisA socA jA sakatA hai kintu unakA parityAga nahIM kara sakatA  /  ataH
kAma bhoga kI kAmanA karanI hI nahIM cAhiye  /  jo kAmabhoga prApta haiM unako
aprApta kI jyoM mAnakara unake prati nispRha-nirAkAMkSa ho jAnA cAhiye  /  /
TIkA - dArTAntika mAha - 'evam' ananta roktayA nItyA kAmAnAM zabdA dInAM
viSayANAM yA gaveSaNA prArthanA tasyAM kartavyAyAM 'vidvAna' nipuNaH kAma
prArthanA saktaH zabdAdipaGke magnaH sa caivaMbhUto'dyazvo vA saMstavaM
paricayaM kAma sambandhaM prajahyAt kileti, eva madhyavasAyyeva
sarvadA'vatiSThate na ca tAn kAmAn abalo balIvardavata viSama mArga tyakta
malaM, kiJca-nacaihikAmaSmikApAyadarzitayA kAmIbhatvopanatAnapi kAmAna
zabdAdiviSayAn vairasvAmijambUnAmAdivadvAkAmayeda bhilaSediti, tathA
kSullakakumAravat kuta zcinnimittAt "sujhugAiya" mityAdinA pratibuddho
labdhAnapi prAptAnapi kAmAn alabdhasamAn manyamAno mahAsattvatayA tannispRho
bhavediti  // 6 //  TIkArtha - AgamakAra pUrva varNita dRSTAnta kA sAra batalAte
hue nirUpita karate haiM - jaisA pahale varNana kiyA gayA-jo puruSa zabdAdi
iMdriya saMbaMdhI bhogoM kI gavaiSaNA meM nipuNa-catura yA cAlAka hotA hai
arthAt kAma kI abhyarthanA meM Asakta hotA hai, vaha zabda Adi viSayoM ke
kIcar3a meM phaMsa jAtA hai, vaha Aja yA kala kAma bhoga ko tyAga de-aisA vicAra
mAtra kiyA jA sakatA hai kiMtu kamajora baila jaise viSama mArga ko nahIM chor3a
sakatA, usI prakAra vaha kAma bhogoM kA tyAga nahIM kara sakatA  /
kAmayuktakAmya padArthoM kI suvidhAyukta hokara bhI aihika aura pAralaukika
kaSToM ko dekhatA huA mahAsatva-Atmabalayukta puruSa prApta zabdAdi iMdriya
bhogoM kI usI prakAra icchA na kare jaisA jambUsvAmI evaM vajrasvAmI Adi ne kiyA
thA  /  kisI bhI nimitta se pratibodha prApta chullaka kumAra kI jyoM prApta
viSaya bhogoM ko aprApta ke samAna samajhakara vaha unase nispRha, nirAkAMkSa
rahe-unakI cAha na kare  /  182

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Study of the Vaitaliya  It is so. Lest you fall into evil after death, detach
your soul from worldly pleasures. And teach it that the man who practices evil,
devoid of good means and righteous conduct, grieves greatly, laments, and cries
out. ||7||  **Commentary:**  Why should one renounce worldly desires? To answer
this doubt, the scripture says: "Lest you fall into evil after death or in
another birth due to attachment to worldly pleasures, and suffer the
consequences of evil thoughts and actions." Therefore, detach yourself from
worldly attachments and abandon them. Teach your soul to be disciplined and
follow the path of righteousness. O soul! The one who engages in evil deeds,
such as violence, falsehood, and theft, falls into a terrible state, suffers
greatly, and is tormented by righteous beings. He is born as a bird or animal,
tormented by hunger and other pains, and cries out in agony. He laments and
cries, saying, "Mother! I am dying! There is no one to protect me now. I have
committed many sins. Who will give refuge to this sinner?" Such are the
sufferings of the evil-doer. Therefore, one should not indulge in worldly
pleasures. Teach your soul this lesson. ||7||  ***  This life is fleeting, even
a hundred years pass quickly like a young man. Understand that this life is a
temporary abode, and only greedy fools are intoxicated by worldly pleasures.
||8||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM tA hai| mA paccha asAdhutA bhave, accehI aNusAsa appagaM
/  ahiyaM ca asAhu soyatI se thaNati paridevatI bahu  // 7 //  chAyA - mA
pazcAdasAdhutA bhave datyehyanuzAdhyAtmAnam  /  adhikaJcAsAdhuH zocate sa
stanati paridevatebahu  //  anuvAda - mRtyu ke pazcAt burI gati prApta na ho,
yaha socakara mAnava sAMsArika bhogoM se apanI AtmA ko dUra kara de aura use
yaha zikSA de ki vaisA karane vAlA asAdhu-sAdhanArahita dharmAnuSThAna vivarjita
puruSa bahuta zoka karatA hai-vilApa karatA hai, cillAtA hai  /  TIkA - kimiti
kAma parityAgo vidheya ityAzaGkayAha-mA pazcAt maraNakAle bhavAntare vA
kAmAnuSaGgAd asAdhutA kumatigamanAdirUpAbhavet prApnuyAditi, ato
viSayAsaGgAdAtmAnam atyehi tyAjaya tathA AtmAnaJca anuzAdhi Atmano'nuzAstiM kuru
tathA he jIva ! yo hi asAdhuH asAdhukarmakArI hiMsA'natasteyAdau pravRttaH san
durgatau patitaH adhikamatyarthameva zocati sa ca paramAdhArmikaiH kadImAnaH
tiryakSuvaH kSudhAdivedanAgrasto'tyArtha stanati sazabdaM niHzvasiti tathA
paridevate vilapati Akrandati suMvahviti hA mAtarmiyata iti. trAtA naivA'sti
sAmprataM kazcit kiM zaraNaM me syAdiha duSkRtacaritasya pApasya  /
ityevamAdIni duHkhAnyasAdhukAriNaH prApnuvantItyato viSayAnuSaGgo na vidheya
ityeva mAtmano'nuzAsanaM kurviti sambandhanIyam  // 7 //  TIkArtha - kAma vAsanA
kA parityAga kyoM karanA cAhiye  /  isakA nirAkaraNa karate hue AgamakAra kahate
haiM - kAma bhogoM meM Asakti yukta-tanmaya rahane ke kAraNa maraNakAla meM
tathA dUsare bhava meM durgati na ho, ghora yAtanA na bhoganI par3e, isa hetu
viSaya vAsanAoM se apane ko pRthak rakhanA cAhiye  /  apanI AtmA ko isa prakAra
jAgRta karanA cAhiye ki-he Atman ! jo hiMsA, asatya, corI Adi asat karma karatA
hai vaha asAdhuanAcAra yukta puruSa burI gati meM-naraka meM jAkara
paramAdhArmika devoM dvArA utpIDita kiyA jAtA hai, atyanta zokAnvita hotA hai  /
vaha tiryaJca yoni pAkara bhUkha se vyAkula rahatA huA atyanta kraMdana karatA
hai, tathA rotA huA vilApa karatA huA kahatA hai-mA~ ! maiM mara rahA hU~  /
isa samaya aisA koI nahIM hai jo merI rakSA kareM  /  maiMne bahuta pApa kiyA
hai  /  mujha pApI ko isa samaya kauna zaraNa-trANa de sakatA hai  /  pApakarmA
puruSa isa prakAra atyanta duH ra bhogate haiM  /  ataeva viSaya saMsarga nahIM
karanA cAhiye  /  apanI AtmA ko aisI zikSA do| * * * iha jIviya meva pAsahA,
taruNa evA (NevA) sasayassa tutI  /  itara vAse ya bujjhaha giddhanarA kAmesu
mucchiyA  // 8 //  chAyA - iha jIvitameva pazyata taruNa eva varSazatasya
truTayati  /  itvaravAsaJca budhyadhvaM gRddhanarAH kAmeSu mUrcchinA  //
anuvAda - isa manuSya loka meM apane jIvana kI ora dekho  /  eka manuSya zatAyu
hokara ke bhI yuvAvasthA meM hI TUTa jAtA hai-mara jAtA hai  /  yaha jIvana
thor3e ke samaya kA nivAsa hai, aisA smjho| yaha saba dekhate hue gRddha-atyanta
lolupa kSudra jana hI viSaya bhoga meM mUrcchita-Asakta rahate haiN| 183

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Commentary:**  In this world, what else is there
to speak of? First, look at your own life.  It is the source of all happiness,
yet it is impermanent.  Like the waves of the ocean, which rise and fall
constantly, so too does our lifespan diminish moment by moment.  Even a person
with a lifespan of a hundred years, whether they die of old age or due to some
unforeseen circumstance, will eventually perish.  Compared to the vastness of
time, a hundred years is like a single blink of an eye.  Therefore, understand
that this world is like a temporary dwelling.  Even with such a short lifespan,
people with a low nature are engrossed in sensual pleasures, becoming
intoxicated and attached to them.  As a result, they are destined for the realms
of suffering, such as hell.  ||8||  **Commentary Meaning:**  In this world, what
else is there to speak of? First, look at your own life.  It is the source of
all happiness, yet it is impermanent.  Like the waves of the ocean, which rise
and fall constantly, so too does our lifespan diminish moment by moment.  Even a
person with a lifespan of a hundred years, whether they die of old age or due to
some unforeseen circumstance, will eventually perish.  Compared to the vastness
of time, a hundred years is like a single blink of an eye.  Therefore,
understand that this world is like a temporary dwelling.  Even with such a short
lifespan, people with a low nature are engrossed in sensual pleasures, becoming
intoxicated and attached to them.  As a result, they are destined for the realms
of suffering, such as hell.  ||8||  **Verse:**  Those who are attached to
violence and other harmful actions, who inflict suffering upon themselves and
are cruel to others, will dwell in the realms of suffering for a long time.
Even if they perform some good deeds, they will be reborn as Asuras (demons) or
low-level deities. ||9||  **Commentary:**  There are some who, blinded by
ignorance, are deeply attached to violence and other harmful actions.  They
inflict suffering upon themselves and are cruel to others.  Such individuals
will be reborn in the realms of suffering, such as hell, for a long time.  Even
if they perform some good deeds, they will be reborn as Asuras (demons) or low-
level deities. ||9||  **Commentary Meaning:**  There are some who, blinded by
ignorance, are deeply attached to violence and other harmful actions.  They
inflict suffering upon themselves and are cruel to others.  Such individuals
will be reborn in the realms of suffering, such as hell, for a long time.  Even
if they perform some good deeds, they will be reborn as Asuras (demons) or low-
level deities. ||9||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - kiJca iha asmin saMsAre AstAM
tAvadanyajjIvitameva sakalasukhAspadamanityatAghrAtam AvIcimaraNena pratikSaNaM
vizarArusvabhAvaM, tathA sarvAyuHkSaya eva vA taruNa eva vA yuvaiva
varSazatAyurapyupakramato'dhyasAna nimittAdirupAdAyuSaH truTati pracyavate
yadivA sAmprataM suvavapyAyurvarSazataM tacca tasya tadante truTyati tacca
sAgaropamApekSayA katipayanimeSa prAyatvAt itvaravAsakalpaM vartate
stokanivAsakalpamityevaM budhyadhvaM yUyaM tathaivaMbhUte'pyAyuSi narAH puruSAH
laghuprakRtayaH kAmeSu zabdAdiSu viSayeSu gRddhA adhyupapannAH mUrcchitAH
tatraivAsaktacetaso narakAdiyAtanAsthAna mApnuvantIti zeSaH  // 8 //  TIkArtha
isa jagata meM aura cIjoM kI bAta hI kyA ? pahale apane jIvana kI tarapha dekho|
jo saba sukhoM kA sthAna hai, jisa para sabhI sukha Tike hue haiM, yaha jIvana
anitya hai  /  AvIci maraNavata - samudra kI taraMge jaise pratikSaNa Upara
uThatI jAtI hai, naSTa hotI jAtI hai, usI prakAra pratikSaNa AyuSya naSTa hotA
hai| samagra Ayu kSINa ho jAne para athavA adhyavasAna - nimitta svarUpa
upakaraNa ke kAraNa koI sau varSa kI Ayu vAlA puruSa bhI javAnI meM hI calA jAtA
hai, athavA isa manuSya loka meM sabase dIrgha Ayu sau varSa kI mAnI jAtI hai,
vaha bhI sau varSa bIta jAne para samApta ho jAtI hai| vaha sAgaropamakAla kI
tulanA meM eka nimiSa ke tulya hI hai  /  isaliye yaha saMsAra thor3e dinoM ke
AvAsa ke sadRza hai - aisA smjho| Ayu kI jaba aisI sthiti hai to laghu prakRti
-hIna yA tuccha svabhAvayukta vyakti hI ina zabdAdi iMdriya viSayoM meM
mUrcchita rahate haiM - Asakta rahate haiM  /  phalataH naraka Adi yAtanA
sthAnoM meM durgati meM jAte 1 - je iha AraMbhanissiyA, AtadaMDA (Da)
egaMtalUsagA  /  gaMtA te pAvalogayaM, cirarAyaM AsuriyaM disaM  // 9 //  chAyA
ya iha AraMbhanizritA AtmadaNDA ekAntalUSakAH  /  gaMtAraste pApalokakaM
cirarAtra mAsurIM dizam  //  - anuvAda isa saMsAra meM jo puruSa AraMbha nisRta
hiMsA Adi AraMbha samAraMbha meM Asakta AtmadaNDapApakarmoM dvArA AtmA ke liye
daMDaprada, duHkhaprada tathA ekAntataH jIva hiMsaka haiM, ve cirakAla taka
pApamaya lokoM meM jAte haiM  /  asura athavA (yadi bAla tapa kA AcaraNa kiyA ho
to) deva yoni meM bhI ve asura nAmaka nimna koTi ke devatA hote haiM  /  TIkA
api ca ye kecana mahAmohAkulitacetasaH iha asmin manuSya loke Arambhe hiMsAdi ke
sAvadyAnuSThAnarUpe nizcayena zritAH saMbaddhA adhyapapannAste AtmAnaM
daNDayantItyAtmadaNDakAH tathaikAntenaivajantUnAM lUSakAH hiMsakAH
sadanuSThAnasya vA dhvaMsakAH te evaMbhUtAH gantAro yAsyanti pApaM lokaM
pApakAriNAM yo loko narakAdiH cirarAtram iti prabhUtaM kAlaM tannivAsino
bhavanti tathA bAlatapazcaraNAdinA yadyapi tathAvidhadevatvApattiH tathApi
asurANAmiyamAsurItAM dizaM yAnti aparapreSyAH kilviSikAH devAdhamAH
bhavantItyarthaH  // 9 //  - TIkArtha - mahAmoha se jinakA citta Akulita hai, ve
isa manuSya loka meM sAvadya - pApayukta hiMsA Adi kAryoM meM nizcaya hI Asakta
rahate haiM, ve apanI AtmA ko daNDita karate haiM-asat karmoM dvArA duHkhita
banAte haiM  /  ekAnta rUpeNa ve prANiyoM ke prANa lUTate haiM, hiMsaka haiM  /
sat anuSThAna-uttama kAryoM ke vidhvaMsaka 184

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vaitālikya adhyayana are destructive. They go to the places-worlds of sinful
beings like hell etc. They reside there for a long time. Even if they attain
divinity due to the influence of childish penance-ignorant asceticism etc., they
go only to the demonic direction, i.e., they become low-class mischievous devas
who are servants-attendants of other devas.  "This life is not worth
sanctifying, yet the ignorant people become bold (in committing sins). Seeing
what done in the present, who has come to the other world?" (10)  Commentary:
Further, the omniscient persons have said that this life cannot be sanctified or
made fit for spiritual practice, yet the ignorant people boldly engage in
unrighteous activities. They say that we are only concerned with the pleasures
of the present, and who has seen the other world - who has come here after
seeing the other world.  The meaning is that even though the life of living
beings is so established, the ignorant people, due to lack of discrimination,
engage in unrighteous conduct with audacity, i.e., they become very shameless in
committing sins. And the ignorant person, being prompted by others, replies with
the pride of false scholarship, that the present time alone is meaningful,
because the objects of the past and future are non-existent, the past being
destroyed and the future not yet arisen. Therefore, only this world exists in
reality, not the other world. (Who has come here after seeing the other world?)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana nAzaka haiM  /  ve naraka Adi pApI janoM ke sthAnoM-lokoM
meM jAte haiM  /  ve vahAM dIrghakAla taka nivAsa karate haiN| yadi ve
bAlatapazcaraNa-ajJAnapUrNa tapasyA Adi ke prabhAva se devatva bhI prApta karate
haiM to ve asura viSayaka dizA ko hI jAte haiM arthAt ve anya devoM ke preSya-
naukaroM ke rUpa meM nimna koTi ke kilviSika deva hote haiM  /  Na ya saMkhaya
mAhu jIvitaM tahavi ya bAlajaNo pagabbhaI  /  paccuppannena kAriyaM, ko dardU
paraloya mAgate  // 10 //  chAyA - na ca saMskArya mAhu jIvitaM tathApi ca
bAlajanaH pragalbhate  /  pratyutpanne kArya ko dRSTvA paraloka mAgataH  //  _
anuvAda - jJAniyoM-sarvajJa puruSoM ne batAyA hai ki yaha jIvana saMskAra karane
yogya-sAdhane yogya nahIM hai, phira bhI bAlajana-ajJAnI loga pApa kArya karane
meM pragalbha bane rahate haiM-bar3I dhRSTatA karate haiN| ve aisA kahate haiM
ki hamako to vartamAna ke sukhoM se hI prayojana hai, paraloka ko dekhakara
yahA~ kauna AyA hai-kisane paraloka ko dekhA hai| TIkA - kiJca na ce naiva
truTitaM jIvitamAyuH saMskarte saMdhAtuM zakyate evamAhuH sarvajJAH
tathAhi'daNDakaliyaM' karintA vaccaMti hu rAio ya divasA ya  /  AuM saMvellaMtA
gatA ya Na puNo nivttNti"||1|| tathApi evamapi vyavasthite jIvAnAmAyuSi bAlajano
ajJo loko nirvivekatayA asadanuSThAne pravRtti kurvan pragalbhate dhRSThatAM
yAti asadanuSThAnenA'pi na lajjata ityarthaH sacAjJo janaH pApAni karmANi kurvan
pareNa codito dhRSTatayA alIkapANDityAbhimAnenedamuttaramAha-pratyutpannena
vartamAna kAlabhAvinA paramArthasatA
atItAnAgatayovinaSTAnutpannatvenAvidyamAnatvAt kArya prayojanaM
prekSApUrvakAribhistadeva prayojanasAdhakatvAdAdIyate, evaJca satIhaloka eva
vidyate na paraloka iti darzayati kaH para lokaM dRSTvehAyAtaH tathA cocuH piva
khAda ca sAdhu zobhane !yadatItaM varagAtri ! tanna te| nahi bhIrU !gataM
nivartate samudayamAtramidaM kalevaram  // 1 //  tathA etAvAneva puruSo
yAvAnindriyagocaraH  /  bhadre vRkapadaM pazca yad vadantyabahuzrutAH
||2||iti||10|| TIkArtha - sarvajJa puruSoM ne batalAyA hai ki truTita-TUTI huI
Ayu jor3I nahIM jA sakatI  /  kahA jAtA hai ki-dina aura rAtri, daNDa aura
ghar3I ke pramANa se Ayu ko kSINa karate jAte haiM  /  jo Ayu bIta jAtI hai,
vaha phira lauTakara nahIM AtI  /  yadyapi prANiyoM kI Ayu kI aisI avasthiti
hai, to bhI ajJAna aura aviveka ke kAraNa jIva azubha karmoM ke anuSThAna meM
lagA rahatA hai  /  pragalbhatA pUrvaka-dhRSTatA ke sAtha pApa pUrNa pravRttiyoM
meM lage rahate haiM  /  ve azubha karmoM ko karate hue bhI lajjita nahIM hote
/  vaisA karate unheM jarA bhI saMkoca nahIM hotA  /  una pApa karmA puruSoM ko
vaise pApa kArya karate hue dekhakara yadi koI vyakti unheM vaisA na karane kI
zikSA detA hai to ve apane jhUThe pAMDitya kA ghamaNDa karate hue javAba dete
haiM ki-hamako to vartamAna kAla se matalaba hai kyoMki vartamAna kAla meM jo
padArtha haiM ve hI vAstava meM satya hai  /  bhUta aura bhaviSya ke padArtha
satya nahIM hai  /  bhUtakAla ke padArtha vinaSTa haiM aura bhaviSya ke
anutpanna hai  /  ataH ve donoM hI avidyamAna haiM  /  buddhimAna vyakti
vartamAna ke padArthoM ko hI mAnate haiM kyoMki unhIM se unake prayojana siddha
hote haiM  /  ataeva unakA kathana hai ki yaha loka hI sat hai-vAstava meM isI
kA astittva haiM  /  paraloka ke hone meM koI pramANa nahIM hai  /  kauna ( 185

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The English translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The Shri
Sutrakritanga Sutra has come from the Paraloka (the world beyond). The author
has also recited a verse - "O beautiful one! O one with a lovely body! Consume,
drink, and enjoy the best of substances. What is gone is not yours. O innocent
one! The lost thing does not return, and this body is merely a collection of the
five Mahabhutas (great elements). Therefore, O virtuous one! This person is only
as much as is visible, the Atma (soul), and the Loka (world). But the ignorant
and unlearned people, just as they imagine the footprint of a human on the earth
to be that of a wolf, similarly..."  Adakkhuvadakkhuvahiyam, (tam) saddahasu
adakkhudamsana. Handi hu sunirruddhadamsano mohanijjena kadena kammuna. (11)
Translation: "O one without sight, accept the teachings proclaimed by the All-
Seeing, All-Knowing Bhagavan (Lord). Understand that those who accept the views
of the non-omniscient are obstructed in their right vision by the Karma
(actions) done under the influence of Mohaniya (delusion)."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram paraloka ko dekhakara AyA hai  /  unhoMne zloka bhI
kahA hai-he zobhane ! sundara dehazIle ! uttamottama padArtha khAo, pIo Ananda
karo  /  jo vyatIta ho gayA vaha tumhArA nahIM hai  /  he bholI ! gaI huI vastu
vApasa lauTakara nahIM AtI tathA yaha zarIra bhI pAMca mahAbhUtoM kA samudAya
mAtra hai  /  isaliye he bhadre ! jitanA dRSTigocara hotA hai, utanA hI yaha
puruSa hai, AtmA hai  /  loka hai  /  parantu abahuzruta-ajJAnI loga jisa
prakAra pRthvI para manuSya ke padacihna ko aMkita dekhakara bher3iye ke pada
cihna kI asatya kalpanA karate haiN| adakkhuva dakkhuvAhiyaM, (taM) saddahasu
adakkhudaMsaNA  /  haMdi hu suniruddhadaMsaNo mohaNijeNa kaDeNa kammuNA  // 11
//  chAyA - apazyavat ! pazya vyAhRtaM zradvatsva apazya darzana  /  gRhANa
suniruddha darzanaH mohanIyena kRtena karmaNA  //  anuvAda - he apazyavata-cakSu
rahita aMdhatulya ajJAnI puruSa tuma sarvadRSTA, sarvajJAtA bhagavAna dvArA
pratipAdita siddhAntoM meM zraddhA karo, zraddhAzIla bano, apazyadarzana-
asarvajJa puruSoM dvArA pratipAdita siddhAntoM ko svIkAra karane vAle puruSoM,
apane Apa dvArA kiye gaye karma se jisakI samyak jJAnAtmaka dRSTi avaruddha ho
gaI hai ve sarvajJa pratipAdita darzana-siddhAntoM ko nahIM mAnate, ise samajho
/  TIkA - evamaihikasukhAbhilASiNA paralokaM ninhuvAnena nAstikena abhihite
pratyuttarapradAnAyAha-pazyatIti pazyo na pazyo'pazyo'ndhastena tulyaH kAryakA-
vivecitvAdandhavatta syAmaMtraNaM he'pazyavat andhasaddaza !
pratyakSasyaivaikasyAbhyupagamena kAryAkAryAnabhijJa ! pazyena sarvajJena
vyahatam uktaM sarvajJAnagamaM zraddhatsva pramANIkuru
pratyakSasyaivaikasyAbhyupagamena samastavyavahAra vilopenahanta heto'si, pitR
nibandhana syA'pi vyavahArasyAsiddheriti tathA apazyakasya
asarvajJasyAbhyupagataM darzanaM yenAsAvapazyakadarzanastasyA''mantraNaM
he'pazyakadarzana ! stavo'gdirzI bhavAMstathAvidhadarzanapramANazca san kAryAkA-
vivecitayA andhavadabhaviSyad yadi sarvajJAbhyupagamaM nAkariSyat yadi vA adakSo
vA anipuNo vA dakSo vA nipuNo vA yAdRza stAdRzo vA
acakSurdarzanamasyAsAvacakSurdarzanaH kevaladarzanaH sarvajJastasyAdyadavApyate
hitaM tat zraddhatsva idamuktaM bhavati anipuNena nipuNena vA
sarvajJadarzanoktaM hitaM shrddhaatvym| yadivA he'dRSTa ! he agdirzana ! draSTrA
atItAnAgatavyavahitasUkSmapadArthadarzinA yad vyAhatam abhihitam Agame tat
zraddhatsva he adRSTadarzana ! adakSadarzana ! iti vA asarvajJoktazAsanAnuyAyin
/  tamAtmIyamAgrahaM parityajya sarvajJokte mArge zraddhAnaM kurviti
tAtparyyArtha  /  kimiti sarvajJokte mArge zraddhAnamasumAnna karoti
yenaivamupadizyate? tinnimittamAha-haMdItyevaMgRhANa hu zabdo vAkyAlaGkAre sRSTu
atizayena niruddha mAvRtaM darzanaM samyagavabodharUpaM yasya sa tathA
kenetyAha-mohayatIti mohanIyaM mithyAdarzanAdi jJAnAvaraNAdikaM vA tena
svakRtena karmaNA niruddha darzanaH prANI sarvajJoktaM mAgaM na zraddhate ataH
sanmArga zraddhAnamprati codyata iti  // 11 //  TIkArtha - sAMsArika sukha kI
abhipsA karane vAle tathA paraloka ko asatya kahane vAle nAstikavAdI ke kathana
kA uttara dete hue AgamakAra kahate haiM - jo dekhatA hai, use pazya kahA jAtA
hai  /  jo nahIM dekhatA-andhA hai use apazya kahA jAtA hai  /  jo puruSa kArya-
karane yogya, akArya-na karane yogya ke vivecitva-vicAra yA cintana se zUnya
hai, vaha eka aMdhe -186)

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is similar to the study of Vaitaliya. Such a man is addressed and said, "O
blind man! You who are devoid of the knowledge of action and inaction due to
accepting only direct perception as evidence, become devoted to the Agamas
declared by the omniscient. By accepting only direct perception as evidence, all
conduct disappears, then what will be your own existence? Because by accepting
only direct perception as evidence, even conduct like who is whose father, who
is whose son, cannot stand. You who accept the philosophy stated by the non-
omniscient! First of all, you are only a witness to the material that is in
front of you, and even then you believe in the philosophy that accepts only
direct perception as evidence. In such a situation, if you do not accept the
Agamas declared by the omniscient, you will be devoid of the discrimination of
action and inaction and become like a blind man. Or, O man of faith in other
philosophies! Whether you are unskilled or skilled, or whether you are skilled
or unskilled, you should have faith in the path of benefit and self-welfare
obtained by the man who is the possessor of the philosophy of only direct
perception and only knowledge. The meaning is that whether a man is skilled or
unskilled, he should have faith in the beneficial and welfare-giving philosophy
declared by the omniscient. Or, O one who does not see the past and the future!
Become devoted to what the omniscient, who sees the past, present, future, and
subtle objects, has declared. O one who does not see the unseen! O one who does
not see the unskilled! You who follow the philosophy declared by the non-
omniscient! Abandon your insistence and have faith in the path spoken by the
omniscient. This is the meaning.  It is said, why does a being not have faith in
the path spoken by the omniscient, which you are instructing in this way?
Explaining the reason, the Agamkar says - the word 'hu' in this verse is used in
the sense of a figure of speech. The man whose philosophy, right knowledge, is
completely obstructed is called obstructed philosophy. Then the question arises,
by whom has his knowledge been obstructed? Then the question arises, by whom has
his knowledge been obstructed? Solving it, they say that the being whose
knowledge is obstructed by the false philosophy, etc., and the self-created
karmas of knowledge-obscuring, etc., from which he becomes deluded by
attachment, does not have faith in the path spoken by the omniscient. Therefore,
the Agamkar inspires him to have faith in that path.  Dukhi mohe puno puno,
nivvindej silogpuyanam. Evam sahitahipaase aye atule panehim sanjae. ||12||
Chhaya - Dukhi moham punah punar nivvindet shlokpujanam. Evam sahitahipaseyed
atmatulyan pranan sanjayat. || Anuvaad - Dukhayukt praani punah punah mohamudha
banta hai. Sadhu apne shlok-kirti, stuti, puja-samman ka parityaag kar de. Gyan
adi se yukt sanaytachari sadhu sabhi praniyom ko atmatuly-apne saman samjhe. ||
Tika - Punarapyupadeshantamaha - dukkham asatavedaniyamudayapraptam tatkaranam
va dukkhayatiti dukkham tadasyastiti dukkhi san praani paunah punyena moham yati
sadsadvivekaviklobhavati. Idamuktam bhavati - asatodayaad dukkhamanubhavannaton
187

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana ke samAna hai  /  vaise puruSa ko saMbodhita kara kahA gayA
hai ki he andha tulya puruSa ! ekamAtra pratyakSa ko pramANa mAnane ke kAraNa
kArya aura akArya ke jJAna se rahita puruSa tuma sarvajJa dvArA vyAhata-nirupita
AgamoM meM zraddhAzIla bano  /  ekamAtra pratyakSa ko hI pramANa ke rUpa meM
svIkRta karane se samasta vyavahAra lupta ho jAte haiM phira tumhArA svayaM kA
kyA astitva hogA kyoMki pratyakSa ko hI eka mAtra pramANa svIkAra karane para
kauna kisakA pitA hai, kauna kisakA putra hai ityAdi vyavahAra bhI nahIM Tika
sakatA  /  asarvajJapuruSa dvArA kathita darzana ko svIkAra karane vAle ! pahale
pahala to aisA hai tuma svayaM arvAgadI-mAtra sammukhIna padArtha ko dekhane
vAle hoM, usa para bhI mAtra eka pratyakSa ko hI pramANa rUpa meM svIkAra karane
vAle darzana meM vizvAsa karate ho, aisI sthiti meM yadi tuma sarvajJa dvArA
pratipAdita Agama ko svIkAra nahIM karoge to kArya tathA akArya kI vivecitA-
viveka se rahita hokara netrahIna puruSa ke tulya ho jAoge athavA he anya
darzana meM AsthAzIla puruSa ! cAhe tuma adakSadakSatA yA nipuNatA rahita ho
athavA dakSa-dakSatA yA nipuNatA sahita ho, kaise bhI kyoM na ho, tumako
acakSudarzanakevala darzana evaM kevalya jJAna ke dhanI puruSa dvArA jo hita-
Atma kalyANa kA mArga prApta hai usameM zraddhA karanI cAhiye  /  kahane kA
tAtparya yaha hai ki manuSya nipuNa ho yA anipuNa ho, sarvajJa dvArA prarupita
hitamaya-kalyANaprada darzana meM zraddhA rakhanI cAhiye  /  athavA he adRSTa-
arvAgadarzina ! atIta-bhUta, anAgata-bhaviSya vyavadhAnayukta tathA sUkSma
padArthoM ke dRSTA sarvajJa puruSa ne jo vyAhRta-abhihita kiyA hai usameM
zraddhAzIla bano  /  he adRSTa darzana! he adakSa darzana ! asarvajJoM dvArA
pratipAdita darzana kA anusaraNa karane vAle ! tuma apane Agraha kA parityAga
kara sarvajJa dvArA bhASita mArga meM zraddhA karo  /  yaha tAtparyArtha hai|
kahate haiM prANI sarvajJa dvArA bhASita mArga meM zraddhA kyoM nahIM karatA
jise udiSTakara isa prakAra upadeza kara rahe ho  /  isakA kAraNa batAte hue
AgamakAra kahate haiM-yahAM gAthA meM 'hu' zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke artha meM AyA
hai  /  jisa puruSa kA darzana, samyakjJAna atyanta avaruddha ho gayA hai use
niruddha darzana kahA jAtA hai  /  phira prazna uThAte haiM ki kisake dvArA
usakA jJAna avaruddha ho gayA hai  /  phira prazna uThAte haiM ki kisake dvArA
usakA jJAna avaruddha ho gayA hai  /  usakA samAdhAna karate hue kahate haiM ki
prANI jisase moha mUr3ha banate haiM, usa mithyA darzana Adi tathA
jJAnAvaraNIyAdi svakRta karmoM dvArA jisakA jJAna avaruddha ho gayA vaha
sarvajJa bhASita mArga meM zraddhAzIla nahIM hotA  /  ataH AgamakAra usa mArga
meM zraddhA karane kI preraNA dete haiN| dukkhI mohe puNo puNo, nivviMdeja
silogapUyaNaM  /  evaM sahite'hipAsae Ayatule pANehiM saMjae  // 12 //  chAyA -
duHkhI mohaM punaH punarnirvindeta zlokapUjanam  /  evaM sahito'dhipazyed
AtmatulyAn prANAn saMyataH  //  anuvAda - duHkhayukta prANI punaH punaH
mohamUr3ha banatA hai  /  sAdhu apane zloka-kIrti, stuti, pUjA-sammAna kA
parityAga kara de  /  jJAna Adi se yukta saMyatAcArI sAdhu sabhI prANiyoM ko
Atmatulya-apane samAna samajhe  /  TIkA-punarapyupadezAntaramAha-duHkham
asAtavedanIyamudayaprAptaM tatkAraNaM vA duHkhayatIti duHkhaM tadasyA'stIti
duHkhI san prANI paunaH punyena mohaM yAti sadasadvivekavikalobhavati  /
idamuktaM bhavati-asAtodayAd duHkhamanubhavannAttoM 187

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra:  **Verse 12:**  The one who, due to ignorance,
repeatedly performs actions that lead to suffering and endlessly wanders in the
ocean of Samsara, should abandon such ignorance.  By rising through right
understanding, one should develop aversion, abandon self-praise and flattery,
and also avoid offerings and material gains.  Following this path, one should
live with the well-intentioned, be endowed with knowledge, and be restrained.  A
renunciant, free from harming other beings, should see all living beings as
equal to oneself, experiencing the same joy and sorrow.  One should protect all
beings as equal to oneself.  **Commentary:**  The author of the text explains
further:  Actions that lead to the arising of non-virtuous karma are called
suffering, or the cause of suffering.  What is unpleasant or bad for a being is
considered suffering.  The being who experiences suffering is called a suffering
being.  A suffering being repeatedly becomes deluded by ignorance, lacking the
ability to discern the virtuous and non-virtuous.  This means that a being,
afflicted by the arising of non-virtuous karma, becomes deluded by ignorance and
performs actions that lead to further suffering.  They wander in the endless
ocean of Samsara.  Therefore, a wise person should abandon such ignorance and
rise through right understanding.  By relying on right knowledge, they should
become a practitioner of right conduct, abandoning self-praise, flattery, and
material gains.    Following this path, they should live with the well-
intentioned, be endowed with knowledge, and be restrained.  Such a renunciant
should see all beings as equal to oneself, experiencing the same joy and sorrow.
This means that a renunciant should consider all beings as equal to oneself,
experiencing the same joy and sorrow, and protect them from harm.  **Verse 13:**
Even if one lives in a house, one should gradually become free from harming
living beings.  One should cultivate equanimity towards all beings.  Such a
person of good conduct will attain the realm of the gods.  **Commentary:**  Even
if a person lives in a house, they should gradually embrace the teachings of the
Shramanas and abstain from harming living beings.  They should cultivate
equanimity towards all beings.  Such a person of good conduct will attain the
realm of the gods.    This verse emphasizes that even a householder can attain
liberation by following the path of non-violence and equanimity.  The text
further clarifies that even a householder who practices the five great vows can
attain liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  mUDhastattatkaroti yena punaH punaH duHkhI
saMsArasAgaramanantamabhyeti, tamevaMbhUtaM mohaM parityajya
samyagutthAnenotthAyanirvidyeta jugupsayet pariharedAtmazlAghAM stutirUpAM tathA
pUjanaM vastAdi lAbharUpaM parihared evamanantaroktayA nItyA pravartamAnaH saha
hitena vartata itisahito jJAnAdiyukto vA saMyataH pravrajito'paraprANibhiH
sukhArthibhiH AtmatulAmAtmatulyatAM duHkhApriyatva sukha priyatvarUpAmadhikaM
pazyet, Atma tulyAn sarvAnapi prANinaH pAlayediti  // 12 //  TIkArtha -
zAstrakAra punaH dUsare prakAra se pratipAdita karate haiM - jo asAtAvedanIya
karma udayAvasthA ko prApta hote haiM unheM duHkha kahA jAtA hai athavA usakA
kAraNa duHkha kahA jAtA hai  /  jo prANI ko apriya yA burA lagatA hai, vaha use
duHkha samajhatA hai  /  vaha duHkha jise hotA ho vaha prANI du:khI kahA jAtA
hai  /  duHkhita prANI punaHpunaH mohamUDha banatA hai, vaha sat, asat ke viveka
se rahita hotA hai, kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki asAtavedanIya karma ke udaya
se pIDita hokara moha mUDha jIva aisA karma karatA hai, jisase vaha punaH punaH
duHkha prApta karatA hai  /  jisakA koI aMta nahIM aise saMsAra sAgara ko prApta
karatA hai, usameM bhaTakatA hai  /  ataH vivekazIla puruSa isa prakAra ke moha
kA parityAga kara samyak utthAna se utthita hokara-samyakajJAna ke bala para
saccaryAzIla banakara apanI stavanA-prazaMsA vasrAdi dvArA mAna sammAna Adi kA
parityAga kare  /  /  isa pUrvokta rIti-paddhati se pravRtta hotA huA apane
AtmakalyANa meM lIna rahatA huA jJAnAdi sampanna sAdhu anya sabhI prANiyoM ko
apanI AtmA ke samAna hI sukhapriya lagate haiM tathA duHkha apriya lagate haiM-
aisA samajhe  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki sAdhu sabhI prANiyoM ko apane
tulya hI sukhapriya tathA duHkhadveSI mAne, unakA pAlana kare-hiMsAdi dvArA hAni
na pahu~cAye  /  gAraM pia Avase nare, aNupuvvaM pANehiM saMjae  /  samatA
savvattha suvvate devANaM gacche sa logayaM  // 13 //  chAyA - agAra
mapyAvasannara AnupUrvyA prANeSu saMyataH  /  samatAM sarvatra suvrato devAnAM
gacchetsa lokam  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa agAra-gRha meM nivAsa karatA huA bhI
kramazaH AgAra dharma ko prApta karatA huAzramaNopAsaka ke vratoM ko grahaNa
karatA huA prANiyoM kI hiMsA se pRthak hotA hai, nivRtta hotA hai, vaha sarvatra
samatvabhAva rakhatA hai  /  vaisA uttama vrata yukta paruSa devatAoM ke loka
meM jAtA hai| TIkA - kiJca agAramapi gRhamapyAvasan gRha vAsamapi kurvan naro
manuSyaH anupUrvamiti AnupUrvyA zravaNadharmapratipattyAdilakSaNayA prANiSu
yathA zaktyA samyak yataH saMyata tadupamannivRttaH kimiti ? yataH samatA
svabhAvaH AtmaparatulyatA sarvatra yatau gRhasthe ca yadi vaikendriyAdau
zrUyate'bhidhIyate Arhate pravacane, tAJca kurvan sa gRhastho'pi suvrataH san
devAnAM purandarAdInAM lokaM sthAnaM gacchet, kiM puna ryo mahAsattvatayA
paJcamahAvratadhArI yatiriti  // 13 //  TIkArtha - jo puruSa ghara meM bhI
nivAsa karatA huA-gRhastha jIvana meM bhI rahatA huA kramazaH zrAvaka dharma ko
svIkAra karatA hai, yathAzakti-apane sAmarthya anurUpa prANiyoM kI hiMsA se
virata hotA hai, Ahata pravacanokta 188

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the Vaitaliya, according to the principles laid down by the
omniscient, is one who holds equality and sameness towards all, from the
virtuous householder to the one-sensed beings. Such a man, even while being a
householder, attains the realm of Indra and other gods. What to say of those
virtuous ones who are the keepers of the five great vows, who are the great
possessors of the power of the great soul and self-effort.  **Verse 14**
**Shadow:** Having heard the teachings of the Lord, one should strive for truth
there. **Translation:** Having heard the teachings of the Lord, one should
strive for truth there. **Commentary:** Having heard the teachings of the Lord,
one should strive for truth there.  **Verse 15**  **Shadow:** Knowing all, one
should abide in the strength of dharma and artha. **Translation:** Knowing all,
one should abide in the strength of dharma and artha. **Commentary:** Knowing
all, one should abide in the strength of dharma and artha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayana sarvajJa nirUpita siddhAntAnusAra jo yati-sAdhu gRhastha se
lekara ekeMdriya prANiyoM taka- sabake prati samatA samatva bhAva rakhatA hai
vaha uttama vrata yukta puruSa gRhastha hotA huA bhI indrAdi devoM ke loka meM
jAtA hai  /  phira una sAdhuoM kA to kahanA hI kyA jo paMcamahAvrata pAlaka hai
/  mahAsatva- Atma parAkrama ke mahAna dhanI haiM  /  soccAbhagavANusAsaNaM
sacce tattha karejjuvakkama  /  savvattha viNIyamacchare ucchaM bhikkhu
visuddhamAhare  // 14 //  chAyA - zrutvA bhagavadanuzAsanaM satye tatra
kuryyAdupakramam  /  sarvatra vinItamatsaraH uJchaM bhikSu vizuddha mAharet  //
anuvAda - bhagavAna-sarvajJa prabhu dvArA prarUpita anuzAsana-dharma siddhAnta
zravaNa kara usameM batAye gaye satya saMyama meM upakramazIla-samudyata honA
cAhiye  /  kisI ke sAtha matsara-IrSyA nahIM karanI cAhiye, isa prakAra
vartanazIla sAdhu ko zuddha AhAra grahaNa karanA cAhiye  /  TIkA - api ca
jJAnaizvaryAdiguNasamanvitasya bhagavataH sarvajJasya zAsanam AjJAmAgamaM vA
zrutvA adhigamya tatra tasminnAgame tadukte vA saMyame sadbhyo hite satye
laghukarmA tadupakramaM tatprAptyupAyaM kuryAt, kiMbhUtaH sarvajJApanIto matsaro
yena sa tathA so'raktadviSTaH kSetrava (vA) stUpadhizarIraniSpipAsaH,tathA
ucchaMtti bhaikSyaM vizuddhaM dvicatvAriMzaddoSarahitamAharaM
guhNIyAdabhyavaharediti  // 14 //  TIkArtha - jJAna, aizvarya Adi guNoM se
samanvita-sahita, sarvajJaprabhu ke dvArA upadiSTa Agama yA AjJA kA zravaNa kara
laghu karmI-halukarmI puruSa satpuruSoM ke liye hitaprada usa Agama yA Agamokta
saMyama patha ko aMgIkAra karane kA upakrama-udyata-yA upAya kare  /  yaha
prazna uThAte hue ki kaisA upakrama kare? kahA jAtA hai sabhI padArthoM meM
matsara-IrSyA rahita, kSetra, ghara, upadhi evaM zarIra Adi meM tRSNA vivarjita
evaM samasta padArthoM meM rAgadveSa zUnya hokara saMyama meM udyamazIla bane,
sAdhu bayAlIsa prakAra ke doSoM se rahita zuddha AhAra grahaNa kare sevana kare
/  . savvaM naccA ahiTThae dhammaThThI unahANavIrie  /  /  gutte jutte sadA jae
Ayapare paramAyataTThite  // 15 //  chAyA - sarvaM jJAtvA'dhitiSThet
dharmArthyapadhAnavIryaH  /  gupto yuktaH sadA yatetAtmaparayoH
paramAyatasthitaH  //  anuvAda - sAdhu samagra padArthoM ko jAnakara arhat
prarUpita-sarvasaMvara mUlaka dharma kA Azraya le| dharma ko hI apane jIvana kA
prayojana-parama lakSya mAne  /  tapazcaraNa meM apanI zakti pragaTa kare  /
mAnasika vAcika evaM zArIrika pravRttiyoM ko asat karmoM se bacAye rake  /  vaha
sadaiva svapara kalyANa meM yatnazIla rahe  /  antataH mokSa kI abhilASA rkhe|
TIkA - kiJca sarvamektaddhayamupAdeyaJca jJAtvA sarvajJoktaM mAgaM sarvaM
saMvararUpam adhitiSThet Azrayet dharmeNArtho dharma eva vA'rthaH
paramArthenAnyasyAnartharUpatvAt . dharmArthaH sa vidyate yasyAsau dharmArthI
dharmaprayojanavAn ( 189)

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga is the topic.  The one who has strength in
austerity is called "Ani-guhit Balaviryya" which means "unconcealed strength".
The one who is guarded in mind, speech, and body is called "Supranihit Yoga"
which means "well-directed yoga".  The one who is united with knowledge and the
like, should always strive for the highest good, both for oneself and others.
What is the special characteristic of such a person?  Therefore, it is said that
the highest, the most excellent, the long, the eternal liberation is the goal.
Therefore, the one who desires this goal should be endowed with the
aforementioned special characteristics. ||15||  Commentary:  A virtuous person
should know the objects that are worthy of renunciation and acceptance, and
should embrace the path of Dharma, which is in the form of complete restraint,
as taught by the omniscient ones.  He should consider Dharma as the purpose and
goal of his life, or he should consider Dharma as the only real substance for
life, because everything else besides Dharma is harmful and useless for the
soul.  "Upadhana" is the name of austerity.  A virtuous person should not
diminish his strength in it, but should use his self-effort to the fullest
extent.  He should be guarded in mind, speech, and body.  In other words, he
should maintain his mental, physical, and verbal yogas free from the non-
virtuous and directed towards the virtuous.  He should always strive for the
welfare of himself and others, being united with knowledge and the like.  Asking
a question, it is further said, "How should he do this?"  The one who is the
longest is called "Parmayat", and the one who is present in all times is called
"Parmayat".  That is liberation.  A virtuous person should always desire
liberation and be connected with these characteristics, which have been
mentioned before.  Wealth, livestock, and relatives, the ignorant person
considers them as his refuge.  He thinks that these will protect him from
suffering, that they will protect me, and I will protect them.  But the reality
is that they cannot protect him.  Wealth, livestock, and relatives, the ignorant
person considers them as his refuge.  These cannot protect me, nor is there any
refuge in them.  Commentary:  Again, another teaching is given:  "Wealth" refers
to money, grain, gold, etc.  "Livestock" refers to elephants, horses, cows,
buffaloes, etc.  "Relatives" refers to one's own people, such as parents,
children, spouses, etc.  The ignorant person considers this wealth, livestock,
and relatives as his refuge.  This is what is shown:  "My wealth, livestock, and
relatives will be used for enjoyment.  I will be in them through earning,
maintaining, protecting, and resolving problems."  Thus, the ignorant person
thinks, but he does not know that the purpose for which he desires wealth is his
body, which is perishable.  Moreover, "Wealth, along with its attendants, is
perishable, subject to disease, old age, and decay.  What is the connection of a
perishable body with wealth, which is also perishable?"  Similarly,  "Thousands
of parents, hundreds of sons and daughters, They come and go in every birth, Who
is the mother or father, even?"  This is what is said:  Wealth, etc., cannot
protect in the world in any way.  It does not protect from hell, nor is there
any refuge for the one who is afflicted by attachment, etc. ||16||  Commentary:
Wealth, grain, gold, and silver are called "Vitt".  Elephants, horses, cows,
buffaloes, etc. are called "Pashu".  Parents, children, spouses, etc. are called
"Jnati".  The ignorant creature considers this wealth, grain, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram upadhAnaM tapastatra vIryyaM yasya sa tathA anigUhita
balavIryya ityarthaH tathA manovAkkAyaguptaH supraNihitayoga ityarthaH tathA
yukto jJAnAdibhiH sadA sarvakAlaM yatetA''tyani parasmiMzca  /  kiMviziSTaH san
? ata Aha param utkRSTa Ayato dIrghaH sarvakAlabhavanAnmokSaH tenArthikaH
tadabhilASI pUrvokta vizeSaNaviziSTo bhavediti  // 15 //  TIkArtha - sAdhu heya
- tyAgane yogya upAdeya svIkAra karane yogya padArthoM ko jAnakara sarvasaMvara
rUpa dharma mArga ko grahaNa kare, jo sarvajJoM dvArA upadiSTa hai| vaha dharma
ko hI apane jIvana kA prayojana- dhyeya samajhe athavA vaha dharma ko hI
ekamAtra artha-jIvana ke liye vAstavika padArtha samajhe kyoMki dharma ke
atirikta anya sabhI anartha hai-AtmA ke liye aprayojana bhUta hai  /  upadhAna
tapa kA nAma hai  /  sAdhu usameM apanA parAkrama kama na kare - usameM
adhikAdhika Atma puruSArtha kA upayoga kare  /  vaha mana, vacana aura zarIra se
guptiyukta rahe  /  dUsare zabdoM meM supraNihita yoga- apane mAnasika, kAyika,
vAcika yogoM ko asat se nivRtta tathA sat meM pravRtta banAye rakhe  /  vaha
jJAnAdi se yukta hotA huA sadaiva svapara kalyANa meM yatnazIla rhe| prazna
upasthita karate hue Age kahate haiM ki vaha kaisA hokara yaha kare ? jo sabase
dIrgha hai use paramAyata kahA jAtA hai tathA jo saba kAla meM avasthita rahatA
hai vaha paramAyata hai, vaha mokSa haiM, sAdhu sadA mokSAbhilASI rahatA huA ina
ina vizeSatAoM se jur3A rahe jinakA pahale ullekha huA hai  /  vittaM pasavo ya
nAio taM bAle saraNaM ti mannai  /  ete mama tesuvI ahaM no tANaM saraNaM na
vijjaI  //  16  //  chAyA anuvAda - bAla-ajJAnI puruSa vitta dhana daulata tathA
jJAtijana - pArivArika vRnda ko apanI zaraNa mAnatA hai  /  vaha aisA samajhatA
hai ki ye saba mujhe duHkha se bacA leMge, merI rakSA kareMge  /  tathA maiM
inakI rakSA kruuNgaa| kintu vAstavikatA yaha hai ki usakI rakSA nahIM kara
sakate  /  vittaM pazavaMzca jJAtayastad bAlaH zaraNa miti manyate  /  ete mama
teSvapyahaM no trANaM zaraNaM na vidyate  //  TIkA - punarapyupadezAntaramAha -
'vittaM' dhanadhAnyahiraNyAdi 'pazavaH' karituragagomahiSyAdayo jJAtayaH
svajanAH mAtApitRputrakalatrAdayaH tadeta dvittArikaM bAlaH ajJaH zaraNaM
manyate tadeva darzayati mamaite vittapazujJAtayaH paribhoge upayokSyante teSu
cArjanapAlana saMrakSaNadinA zeSopadravanirAkaraNa dvAreNAhaM bhavAmItyevaM
bAlomanyate na punarjAnIte yadarthaM dhanamicchanti taccharIramazAzcatamiti  /
api ca " riddhI sahAvataralA rogajarAbhaMguraM hayasarIraM  /  dohaMpi
gamaNasIlANa kicciraM hojja saMbaMdho ?" tathA jAtA " mAtApitRsahasrANi
putradArazatAni ca  /  pratijanmani varttente kasya mAtA pitA'pi vA ?" etadevAha
- no naiva vittAdikaM saMsAre kathamapi trANaM bhavati narakAdau patato nA'pi
rAgAdinopadrutasya kvaciccharaNaM vidyata iti  //  16  //  - TIkArtha dhana-
dhAnya, hiraNya evaM svarNa- inheM vitta kahA jAtA hai hasti, azva, gau, mahiSI
Adi ko pazu kahA  /  mAM, bApa, beTA aura patnI Adi svajanavRnda ko jJAti kahA
jAtA hai  /  ajJAnI prANI ina dhanadhAnyAdi hai 190 AgamakAra isa saMbaMdha meM
dUsarA upadeza dene hetu pratipAdita karate haiM - -

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of Vaitaliya considers material things as its refuge.  Illustrating
this point, it says: A being devoid of knowledge thinks that wealth, animals,
and family members will be useful for worldly enjoyment and consumption. I will
earn wealth and support them, eliminating all troubles and destroying them. In
reality, the body for which wealth and prosperity are desired is perishable -
fleeting, the fool does not know this. It is said that wealth and prosperity are
inherently fickle and unstable, and this body is mortal due to illness and old
age - disease and old age destroy it. How long can the relationship between
these two transient things last? Mother and father have been in countless
births. Sons and wives have also been hundreds of times. This happens in every
birth. Who is really whose mother and who is the father? The Agamkar says the
same thing again: In the world, wealth etc. can never protect anyone. When a
being falls into hell, overwhelmed by attachment etc., there is no refuge
anywhere, no one can save him.  **17.  When suffering comes to a being, or when
he is about to die, he goes alone to the next world.  Therefore, the wise do not
consider anyone as their refuge.**  **Commentary:** This is what was said
before: When suffering arises from the ripening of unwholesome karma accumulated
in the past, the being experiences it alone.  Neither relatives nor wealth can
do anything.  Thus, it is said: "A sick person lies in the midst of his family,
but he suffers alone.  Can his family cure his disease or destroy it?"  Or, when
a being's lifespan is about to end due to the causes of death, or when he is
about to die, he goes alone to the next world.  The wise, who know the true
nature of the world, do not consider anyone as their refuge, even for a moment.
Why?  Because no one can truly protect them.  Thus, it is said: "A being's
birth, death, and good and bad destinies in the cycle of existence are all his
own.  Therefore, he must work for his own benefit in the present moment."  "One
alone performs karma, and one alone experiences its fruit.  One alone is born,
one alone dies, and one alone goes to the next world."  The Agamkar explains
this fact.  When suffering comes to a being due to the ripening of unwholesome
karma accumulated in the past, he alone experiences it.  At that time, wealth,
riches, or family members cannot help him in the least.  Therefore, it is said:
"A sick person, afflicted by disease, lies among his family members, but he
suffers alone.  Can his family cure his disease or destroy it?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM padArthoM ko apanI zaraNa mAnatA hai  /  isI bAta kA
digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM- jJAna rahita prANI aisA samajhatA hai ki
dhana pazu tathA svajanavRnda mere paribhoga hetu sAMsArika sukhopabhoga ke
saMdarbha meM upayogI hoNge| maiM upArjanadhana kamA kara inakA pAlana karatA
huA, samasta upadravoM kA nirAkaraNa karUMgA, unheM miTAUMgA  /  vAstava meM
jisa zarIra ke nimitta dhana vaibhava kI kAmanA kI jAtI hai, vaha zarIra
vinazvara hai - kSaNabhaMgura hai, vaha mUrkha isa bAta ko nahIM jAnatA  /  kahA
hai ki Rddhi, dhana sampatti svabhAva se hI caMcala - asthira hai tathA yaha
zarIra bImArI aura bur3hApe dvArA nazvara hai - roga aura vRddhAvasthA ise naSTa
kara dete haiM  /  ina donoM gamanazIla padArthoM kA paraspara saMbaMdha kaba
taka banA raha sakatA hai  /  mAtA evaM pitA vividha janmoM meM sahasroM bAra
hue haiM  /  putra aura patnI bhI saiMkar3oM bAra hue haiM  /  yaha to pratyeka
janma meM hote hI rahate haiM  /  vAstava meM kauna kisakI mAtA hai aura kauna
pitA hai ? AgamakAra isI bAta ko fira kahate haiM ki saMsAra meM dhana Adi kabhI
bhI kisI kI rakSA nahIM kara sakate  /  naraka meM girate hue rAga Adi meM
upadrUta-abhibhUta prANI ke liye kahIM bhI zaraNa nahIM haiuse koI bhI nahIM
bacA sakatA  /   /  , abbhAgamitaMmi vA duhe ahavA ukkamite bhavaMti egassa gatI
ya AgatI, vidumaMtA saraNaM Na mannaI  // 17 //  chAyA - anuvAda jaba kisI prANI
para kisI prakAra kA duHkha AtA hai to vaha akelA hI use .. bhogatA hai athavA
upakramavaza jaba usakA AyuSya naSTa ho jAtA hai, marane lagatA hai, to vaha
ekAkI hI paraloka meM jAtA hai, isaliye vidvAna - jJAnIjana kisI ko apanA zaraNa
nahIM mAnate  /  44 abhyAgate vA duHkhe 'thavotkrAnte bhavAntike  /  ekasya
gatizcAgatiH vidvAn zaraNaM na manyate  //  - TIkA - etadevAha
pUrvopAttAsAtavedanIyodayenAbhyAgate duHkhe satyekAkyeva duHkha manubhavati, na
jJAtivargeNa vittena vA kiJcit kriyate  /  tathA ca 'sayaNassavi majjhagao
rogAbhihato kilissai ihego  /  sayaNoviya se rogaM na viraMcai neva nAsei ?"
athavA upakramakAraNai rupakrAnte svAyuSi sthitikSayeNa vAbhavAntare bhavAntike
vA maraNe samupasthite sati ekasyaivAsumato gatirAgatizca bhavati vidvAna vivekI
yathAvasthitasaMsArasvabhAvasya vettA ISadapi tAvat zaraNaM na manyate kutaH
sarvAtmanA trANamiti tathAhi 44 'ekasya janma maraNe gatayazca zubhAzubhAH
bhavAvarte  /  tasmAdAkAlikAhitamekenaivAtmanaH kAryyam ?" "ekko karei kammaM
phalamavi tassikkao samaNuhavai  /  ekko jAyai marai ya paraloyaM ekkao
jaai?''||17|| TIkArtha AgamakAra isI tathya ko nirUpita karate - - pUrva janma
meM saMcita asAtavedanIya karmoM ke udaya se jaba prANI ke Upara duHkha AtA hai,
taba vaha kA use bhogatA hai  /  usa samaya vitta dhana daulata athavA
jJAtivarga-pArivArika jana usakI jarA bhI sahAyatA nahIM kara sakate  /  ataeva
kahA hai- rogAbhihata - bImArI se pIr3ita jIva apane kuTumbI janoM ke bIca meM
rahatA huA 191

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra states that one suffers alone. Relatives cannot lessen
or eliminate one's suffering. When a being's lifespan is destroyed, fulfilled,
or ends due to the causes of action, and death arrives, one goes to the
afterlife alone. From there, one returns to this world alone. A wise and
discerning person understands the nature of the world as it truly is. They do
not consider wealth or anything else as their protector, let alone a complete
protector. It is said that in this world, birth and death are solitary
experiences. In this cycle of existence, one traverses good and bad paths alone.
Therefore, until death, one should focus on self-benefit and self-welfare. One
performs actions alone and experiences their fruits alone. One is born alone and
dies alone, and one goes to the afterlife alone.  All beings, shaped by their
own actions, are afflicted by unseen suffering. They wander, terrified and
deceitful, driven by birth, old age, and death.  Commentary: All beings dwelling
in the belly-like cavity of the world wander through the world. They are shaped
by their own actions, such as the karma of obscuring knowledge, and are arranged
in subtle and gross, sufficient and insufficient, one-sense, etc., states. They
are afflicted by unseen, unmanifest suffering, such as headaches, which is a
sign of the suffering. They are also afflicted by manifest suffering, which is
unbearable in nature. They wander like a water wheel, terrified and deceitful
due to their wicked actions. They are driven by birth, old age, and death,
suffering from the pain of conception, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram bhI ekAkI hI duHkha bhogatA hai, usake riztedAra usakI
bImArI ko na to ghaTA sakate haiM aura na miTA sakate haiM athavA upakrama ke
kAraNoM se jaba kisI prANI kA AyuSya naSTa ho jAtA hai, pUrNa ho jAtA hai yA
usakA AyuSya apanI avadhi pUrNa hone para samApta ho jAtA hai, yoM jaba
mRtyukAla upasthita ho jAtA hai-vaha maraNa prApta kara letA hai, taba ekAkI hI
paraloka meM jAtA hai  /  vahAM se punaH isa loka meM bhI akelA hI AtA hai  /
vidvAna-vivekazIla puruSa saMsAra ke svabhAva ko yathAvatarUpa meM jAnatA hai-
vAstava meM jaisA vaha hai, use vaisA hI samajhatA hai  /  vaha dhana Adi ko
apanA jarA bhI rakSaka nahIM mAnatA, phira sampUrNataH rakSaka mAnane kI to bAta
hI kahAM ? kahA hai-isa saMsAra meM jIva kA janma aura maraNa akele kA hI hotA
hai  /  isa bhavacakra meM vaha akelA hI zubha azubha gatiyoM meM jAtA hai  /
ataH mRtyu paryanta jIva ko ekAkI hI apane hita sAdhana meM AtmakalyANa meM juTe
rahanA cAhiye  /  jIva akelA hI karma karatA hai aura akelA hI usakA phala bhoga
karatA hai| akelA hI utpanna hotA hai aura akelA hI maratA hai, akelA hI
paraloka jAtA hai| savve sayakammakappiyA aviyatteNa duheNa pANiNo  /  hiMDaMti
bhayAulA sar3hA, jAi jarA maraNehi 'bhidutA  // 18 //  chAyA - sarve
svakakarmakalpitA avyaktena duHkhena prANinaH  /  hiMDaMti bhayAkulAH zaThAH
jAtijarAmaraNairabhidrutAH  //  anuvAda - saMsAra meM samagra prANI apane apane
karmoM ke anusAra bhinna bhinna avasthAoM meM vidyamAna haiM  /  sabhI avyakta-
alakSita duHkha se pIr3ita haiM janma, vRddhAvasthA tathA mRtyu se abhidrUta
hai-AkrAnta hai| ve zaThaajJAnI durjana jIva punaH punaH isa saMsAra meM
bhaTakate haiM  /  _TIkA - anyacca sarve'pi saMsArodaravivaravartinaH prANinaH
saMsAre paryaTantaH svakRtena jJAnAvaraNIyAdinA karmaNA kalpitAH sUkSmavAdara
paryAptakAparyAptakaikendriyAdibhedena vyavasthitAH tathA tenaiva
karmaNaikendriyAdyavasthAyAm avyaktena aparisphuTena ziraH
zUlAdyalakSitasvabhAlavenopalakSaNArthatvAt pravyaktena ca duHkhena
asAtAvedanIyasvabhAvena samanvitAH prANinAH paryaTanti
arahaTTaghaTIyantranyAyena tAsveva yoniSu bhayAkulAH zaTakarmakAritvAt zaThAH
bhramanti jAtijarAmaraNairabhidrutAH garbhAdhAnAdibhirduHkhaiH pIDitA iti  // 18
//  TIkArtha - dUsarI bAta yaha hai ki saMsAra ke udara rUpI vivara-bila yA
guphA meM nivAsa karane vAle prANI isa jagata meM paryaTana karate hue-bhaTakate
hue svakRta jJAnAvaraNIyAdi karmoM ke phalasvarUpa sUkSma, sthUla, paryApta.
aparyApta, ekendriya Adi bhinna bhinna avasthAoM ko prApta karate haiM  /  ina
avasthAoM meM vidyamAna ve prANI ziraH zUla-mastaka pIr3A Adi aparisphuTa-
avyakta duHkhoM se pIDita hote haiM  /  yahAM alakSita duHkha upa lakSaNa hai  /
usakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki ve asAtavedanIya ke udaya ke pariNAmasvarUpa
pravyakta spaSTa rUpa se pratIyamAna daHkhoM se bhI pIDita hote haiM  /  ve
rahaTa kI taraha bAra bAra yoniyoM meM cakkara kATate rahate haiM  /  ve duSTatA
yukta karma karate haiM  /  isaliye zaTha kahe gaye haiM  /  ve bhaya se vyAkula
rahate haiM  /  janma, vRddhAvasthA aura mauta se avidrUta-AkrAnta rahate haiM,
ve bAra bAra garbha meM Ate haiM, saMsAra meM duHkha pAte haiM  /  192

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Study of the Vaitalaya  This very moment, know this, it is not easy to attain
enlightenment. Thus, the Jinas have said, this is the essence. || 19 ||
**Translation:**  The Jinas have said that enlightenment is not easily attained,
even knowing this very moment. Thus, one should contemplate with the knowledge
of self-benefit, that this human life is the only opportunity for the practice
of liberation. The omniscient beings have said that enlightenment - perfect
knowledge - is not easily attained, it is not easily found. The first
Tirthankara, Lord Rishabha, gave this teaching, and the other Tirthankaras also
expounded the same.  **Commentary:**  The word "kincha" here indicates the
immediacy of the situation. Knowing this moment, characterized by the elements
of substance, space, time, and state, one should perform the appropriate
actions. For example, the substance is characterized by being mobile, having
five senses, being born in a good family, and being human. The space is
characterized by the twenty-five and a half Janapadas of the Aryadesha. The time
is characterized by the descending time cycle and the fourth Arka, etc., which
are conducive to attaining Dharma. The state is characterized by listening to
Dharma, developing faith in it, practicing good conduct, the destruction and
cessation of karmas that cover the soul, and the enthusiasm for attaining
liberation. Knowing this moment, this opportunity, and understanding that
enlightenment, characterized by attaining perfect vision, is not easily
attained, one should act accordingly to attain it. For those who have not
practiced Dharma, enlightenment is difficult to attain. As it is said, "Having
obtained enlightenment, you do not act accordingly, and you seek what is not yet
attained. What price will you pay to obtain that other enlightenment?"
Therefore, one who is endowed with knowledge, etc., should contemplate that
enlightenment is very difficult to attain, even after a long period of time
characterized by the reversal of half of the subtle particles. The alternative
reading is "ahiyasaye," which means to patiently endure the trials and
tribulations that arise. The Jinas, the conquerors of attachment and aversion,
have taught this principle to their sons on the Ashtapadi mountain, and other
Jinas have also said the same. || 19 ||  **Commentary on the Commentary:**  The
word "ina" in the verse indicates something that is present and near. Therefore,
understanding this moment, characterized by substance, space, time, and state,
as an opportunity for the practice of liberation, one should perform the
appropriate actions. The substance is characterized by being mobile, having five
senses, being born in a good family, and being human. The space is characterized
by the twenty-five and a half Janapadas of the Aryadesha. The time is
characterized by the descending time cycle and the fourth Arka, etc., which are
conducive to attaining Dharma. The state is characterized by listening to
Dharma, developing faith in it, practicing good conduct, the destruction and
cessation of karmas that cover the soul, and the enthusiasm for attaining
liberation. Knowing this moment, this opportunity, and understanding that
enlightenment, characterized by attaining perfect vision, is not easily
attained, one should act accordingly to attain it. For those who have not
practiced Dharma, enlightenment is difficult to attain. As it is said, "Having
obtained enlightenment, you do not act accordingly, and you seek what is not yet
attained. What price will you pay to obtain that other enlightenment?"
Therefore, one who is endowed with knowledge, etc., should contemplate that
enlightenment is very difficult to attain, even after a long period of time
characterized by the reversal of half of the subtle particles. The alternative
reading is "ahiyasaye," which means to patiently endure the trials and
tribulations that arise. The Jinas, the conquerors of attachment and aversion,
have taught this principle to their sons on the Ashtapadi mountain, and other
Jinas have also said the same. || 19 ||  **Om**  **193**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAlaya adhyayanaM iNameva khaNaM vijANiyA, No sulabhaM bohiM ca AhiyaM  /
evaM sahie'hipAsae Aha jiNo iNameva se gAH  //  19  //  chAyA imameva kSaNaM
vijJAya no sulabhaM bodhiJca AkhyAtam  /  evaM sahito'dhipazyed Aha jina idameva
zeSakAH  //  anuvAda - sahita - Atmahita prada jJAna Adi se yukta muni yaha
ciMtana kare ki mokSa kI sAdhanA kA yaha mAnava jIvana hI eka maukA hai  /
sarvajJa puruSoM ne yaha kahA hai ki bodhi- samyak jJAna prApta karanA sulabha
nahIM hai - vaha AsAnI se nahIM mila pAtA  /  Adi tIrthaMkara bhagavAna RSabha
ne yahI upadeza diyA thA aura dUsare tIrthaMkaroM ne bhI isI kA nirUpaNa kiyA  /
TIkA . 'kiJca' idamaH pratyakSAsannavAcitvAt imaM dravyakSetrakAlabhAvalakSaNaM
kSaNamavasaraM jJAtvA taducitaM vidheyaM, tathAhi dravyaM jaGgamatva
paMcendriyatvasukulotpattimAnuSyalakSaNaM kSetramapyAryyadezArdhaSaviMzati
janapada lakSaNaM kAlo'pyavasarpiNI caturthArakAdiH
dharmapratipattiyogyalakSaNaH bhAvazca dharmazravaNa
tacchraddhAnacAritrAvaraNakarma kSayopazamAhitaviratipratipattyutsAhalakSaNaH
tadevaMvidhaM kSaNam avasaraM parijJAya tathA bodhiJca
samyagdarzanAvAptilakSaNAM no sulabhAmiti evamAkhyAtamavagamya tadavAptau
tadanurupameva kuryyAditi zeSa: akRtadharmANAM punardurlabhA bodhi:, tathAhi"
laddhelliyaM ca vohiM akareMto aNAgayaM ca pattheMto  /  annaM dAI vohiM
labbhisi kayareNa molleNaM ?"
tadevamutkRSTato'pArdhapudgalaparAvarttapramANakAlena punaH sudurlabhA
bodhirityevaM sahito jJAnAdibhiradhipazyet bodhisudarlabhatvaM paryyAlocayet,
pAThAntaraM vA ahiyAsaeti, parISahAnudIrNAn samyag adhisaheta etaccAha
jinorAgadveSajetA nAbheyo'STApade svAn sutAnuddizya, tathA'nye'pi idameva
zeSakAH jinA abhihitavanta iti  // 19 //  I TIkArtha - gAthA meM AyA huA 'iNa'
idaM zabda pratyakSa aura samIpa kA bodhaka hai  /  ataeva isa dravya, kSetra,
kAla tathA bhAva ko mokSa sAdhana kA avasara samajhakara manuSya ko cAhiye ki
vaha ucita - karaNIya kArya kare  /  jaMgama - gatizIla ke rUpa meM paMcendriya
prANI ke rUpa meM honA, uttama - sadAcaraNayukta kula meM paidA honA, manuSyatva
pAnA-yaha dravya hai  /  sAr3he paccIsa janapada parimita Arya deza kSetra hai
/  avasarpiNI kAlacakra tathA caturtha Araka ityAdi dharma prApti ke yogya kAla
hai  /  dharma kA zravaNa, usameM zraddhotpatti - AsthA, dRr3ha vizvAsa tathA
cAritrAvaraNIya karma ke kSayopakSama prasUta virati ko grahaNa karane meM
utsAha - yaha anukUla avasara hai  /  aisA zubha avasara prApta huA hai, yaha
jAnakara tathA samyakdarzana kI prApti AsAna nahIM hai, isa zAstrIya kathana ko
samajhakara vaha sAdhaka jise samyakdarzana prApta hai, tadanurupa
dharmArAdhanAmaya kArya kre| jinhoMne dharma kA anuSThAna nahIM kiyA hai unheM
bodhi prApta honA sulabha nahIM hai kyoMki kahA hai- jo jJAna prApta huA hai
usake anusAra kArya nahIM karate hue tathA jo anAgata- aprApta hai usakI
abhyarthanA karatehue tuma kauna sI kImata cukAkara usa dUsare jJAna ko prApta
karoge  /  ataH jJAna Adi se yukta puruSa ko yaha cintana karanA cAhiye ki
utkRSTa ardha pudgala parAvarta kAla taka punaH bodha prApta karanA kaThina hai|
muni bodha ke durlabhapana ko sadA dhyAna meM rakhe  /  yahAM ahipAsae ke sthAna
para ahiyAsae aisA pAThAntara bhI prApta hotA hai  /  usakA abhiprAya yaha hai
ki sAdhu utpanna hue parISahoM ko bhalIbhAMti - sthiratApUrvaka sahe  /
nAbhinaMdana Adi tIrthaMkara bhagavAna RSabha ne yaha siddhAnta aSTApada parvata
para apane putroM ko udiSTa kara pratipAdita kiye the  /  anya tIrthaMkaroM ne
bhI aisA hI kahA hai| OM 193

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 20:**  "The monks, those who have been in
the past, and those who will come in the future, all these virtuous ones, those
who follow the Dharma of Kashyapa, have spoken of these qualities."
**Commentary:**  "This is what is said: 'O monks, the omniscient one instructs
his disciples, those who have been in the past, the omniscient Jinas, and those
who will come in the future.' He distinguishes them as virtuous ones, those with
good vows. This is said to mean that their Jinaship also comes from their
virtuousness. All of them have spoken of these qualities, which have been
mentioned before. There is no difference of opinion among the omniscient ones.
They are all followers of the Dharma, as practiced by Kashyapa, Rishabha Swami,
or Vardhamana Swami. This shows that there is only one path to liberation, which
is based on right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct."  **Verse 21:**
"One should not kill any living beings, even with mind, speech, or body. One
should be engaged in self-benefit, and not be attached to heaven or other
desires. By following this path, countless beings have attained Siddhatva and
liberation. They exist in the present and will exist in the future."
**Commentary:**  "He mentions the qualities that have been mentioned before. He
says, 'If one kills living beings with mind, speech, or body, or by causing them
to be killed, or by consenting to their killing, then this is the first great
vow.' Because this is a characteristic of the vow, the other vows should also be
understood in this way. 'Self-benefit' means that one should not be attached to
heaven or other desires. 'Unattached' means that one should not be attached to
the senses, mind, speech, or body. One who is like this will surely attain
liberation. This is what is shown."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram abhiviMsu purAvi bhikkhavo AesAvi bhavaMti suvvatA  /
eyAiM guNAI Ahu te kAsavassa aNudhammacAriNo  // 20 //  abhUvan purA'pi
bhikSavaH ! AgAminazca bhaviSyaMti suvratAH  /  etAn guNAn Ahu
kAzyapasyAnudharmacAriNaH  //  anuvAda - jo tIrthaMkara pUrvakAla meM ho cuke
haiM, jo Age hoMge, una sabhI suvrata-uttama vratayukta mahApuruSoM ne tathA
bhagavAn RSabha evaM bhagavAn mahAvIra ke anuyAyiyoM ne inhIM guNoM-siddhAntoM
dvArA mokSa prApta hotA hai siddha hotA hai, prApta hotA hai, aisA batalAyA hai
/  chAyA - TIkA - 'etadAha' - hebhikSavaH sAdhavaH ! sarvajJaH
svaziSyAnevayAmantrayati ye'bhUvan atikrAntAH jinA: sarvajJA: AesAviti,
AgamiSyAzca ye bhaviSyanti tAn vizinaSTi suvratAH zobhanavratAH anenedamuktaM
bhavati teSAmapi jinatvaM suvratatvAdevAyAtamiti te sarve'pyetAn anantaroditAn
guNAn AhuH abhihitavanta: nA'tra sarvajJAnAM kazcinmatabheda ityuktaM bhavati  /
te ca kAzyapasya RSabhasvAmino varddhamAnasvAmino vA
sarve'pyanucIrNadharmacAriNa iti  /  anena ca samyagdarzanajJAnacAritrAtmaka eka
eva mokSamArga ityAveditaM bhavatIti  // 20 //  TIkArtha sarvajJa prabhu apane
antevAsiyoM ko sambodhita kara kahate haiM bhikSuoM ! he sAdhuoM ! atIta meM jo
sarvajJa ho cuke haiM tathA Age hoMge, ve sabhI suvrata - zobhavrataucca koTi ke
vratoM se yukta rahe haiM  /  kahane kA Azaya hai ki unako jo sarvajJatva -
kevala jJAna prApta huA vaha suvratoM - uttama vratoM ke pAlana se hI huA  /
una sarvajJoM ne una guNoM ko jinakA pahale varNana huA hai, mokSa kA sAdhana
batAyA hai  /  isa sambandha meM sarvajJoM meM paraspara koI matabheda nahIM
hai| ve sabhI bhagavAna RSabhadeva tathA kAzyapa gotrIya bhagavAna mahAvIra
dvArA anucIrNa-Acarita dharma kA hI anusaraNa karane vAle the| isase yaha
prakaTa kiyA gayA hai ki samyakjJAna, samyakdarzana, samyakcAritra hI mokSa kA
mArga hai  /  tiviheNavi pANa mAhaNe, Ayahite aNiyANasaMvur3e  /  evaM siddhA
anaMtaso, saMpai je a aNAgayAvare  // 21 //  chAyA - trividhenA'pi prANAn
mAhanyAdAtmahito'nidAnasaMvRtaH  /  evaM siddhA anantazaH saMprati yecAnAgatA
apare  //  anuvAda - mana, vacana aura zarIra se prANiyoM kA hanana - hiMsA
nahIM karanI caahiye| Atmahita meM saMpravRta rahakara svarga Adi kI abhilASA se
haTakara saMyama kA paripAlana karanA cAhiye, aisA karate hue ananta jIvoM
siddhattva prApta kiyA hai ve mukta hue haiN| vartamAna meM bhI hote haiM aura
bhaviSya meM bhI hoMge  /  TIkA abhihitAMzca guNAnuddezata Aha trividhena
manasA, vAcA, kAyena yadi vA kRtakAritAnumati rvA prANino
dazavidhaprANabhAjomAhanyAditi prathamamidaM mahAvratam asya copAlakSaNArthatvAd
evaM zeSANyapi draSTa draSTavyAni tathA Atmane hita AtmahitaH tathA nA'sya
svargAvAptyAdi lakSaNaM nidAna mastItyanidAnaH tathendriya
noindriyamanovAkkAyairvA saMvRta striguptigupta ityarthaH evambhUtazcA'vazyaM
siddhimevApnotItyetaddarzayati- evam 194 -

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of the Vaitaliya  By following the path of the Infinite, countless
Siddhas have become free from all karmas and have attained special places, or
are attaining them in the present time, or will attain them in the future by
following this path. There is no other path to Siddhi. ||21||  **Commentary:**
The Agamkar, referring to the qualities mentioned earlier, says: One should not
kill any of the ten types of living beings through mind, speech, or body, or
through action or approval. This is the first great vow. The remaining four
great vows should also be understood through this characteristic. The one who is
engaged in the welfare of the soul, the one who seeks the welfare of the soul,
should abstain from desires or intentions for attaining heaven, etc. He should
keep his senses, mind, speech, and body hidden and protected from evil deeds.
The one who does this will surely attain Siddhi.  Explaining this, it is said
that by following the aforementioned path, countless beings have destroyed their
karmas and attained Siddhi. In other words, they have gained a unique and
unparalleled place. Even in the present time, those who are eligible to attain
Siddhi attain it through the means mentioned earlier, they attain liberation. In
the future too, countless beings will attain Siddhi by following that path.
There is no other path to Siddhi.  Thus, the Anuttara-nani, the Anuttara-dansi,
the holder of the Anuttara-jnana and Anuttara-darshan, the Arhat, the Jnatputra,
the Bhagavan Mahavira, preached this in the city of Vaishali. This is what I
say.  **Commentary:** This is what Sudharmaswami, Jambuswami, and others, teach
their disciples. Thus, the Rishibhaswami, following the three-fold method
mentioned earlier, has declared this for his sons. There is no higher principle
than this, therefore it is Anuttara. That knowledge is Anuttara-jnana, and he
possesses it, therefore he is Anuttara-jnani. He is also Anuttara-darshi,
because he understands the nature of the general and the specific. To show the
soul as the basis of knowledge, he says, "Anuttara-jnana-darshan-dhara," which
means the basis of knowledge and vision that is different from ordinary
knowledge and vision. The Arhat, the one worthy of worship by Indra and others,
the Jnatputra, the Vardhaman Swami, or the Bhagavan Rishibhaswami, possessing
qualities like wealth, etc., preached this in the city of Vaishali.
Rishibhaswami is called Vaishalik because he was born in the Vaishali clan. It
is also said:  "Whose mother is Vaishali, whose clan is Vaishali, whose speech
is Vaishali, he is the Vaishali Jina."  Thus, this Jina is called Vaishalik. The
word "iti" signifies the end of the statement. The meaning is the same as
before. ||22||  **Commentary:** The Agamkar explains what the Aryas Sudharma,
Sri Jambu, etc., say to their disciples.  "The Bhagavan, the son of the
Nayaputta, preached in Vaishali." ||22|| This is what I say.  Thus, he declared
that he is the Anuttara-jnani, the Anuttara-dansi, the holder of the Anuttara-
jnana and Anuttara-darshan.  The Arhat, the Jnatputra, the Bhagavan Vaishalik,
has declared this. || This is what I say. ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaitAliya adhyayanaM anantaroktamArgAnuSThAnenAnantAH siddhA
azeSakarmakSayabhAjaH saMvRttAH viziSTasthAnabhAjo vA tathA samprati vartamAne
kAle siddhigamanayogye siddhyanti apare vA anAgate kAle etanmArgAnuSThAyina eva
setsyanti, nApara: siddhimArgo'stIti bhAvArtha:  // 21 //  TIkArtha * AgamakAra
pUrva varNita guNoM kA ullekha karate hue kahate haiM- mana, vacana aura zarIra
dvArA athavA kRtakArita aura anumodana dvArA yoM tIna yoga aura tIna karaNa
dvArA dasavidha prANadhAraka prANiyoM kA hanana vyApAdana nahIM karanA cAhiye  /
yaha prathama mahAvrata hai  /  isake upalakSaNa dvArA avaziSTa cAra mahAvratoM
ko bhI jAna lenA cAhiye  /  jo AtmA ke liye hita-kalyANa meM saMlagna hai, vaisA
AtmakalyANArthI anidAna svarga prApti Adi kI abhilASA yA saMkalpa se varjita
puruSa indriya, noindriya, mana, vacana tathA kAyA- inheM gupta rakhe, asat
kAryoM se dUra rakhe-bacAye rahe  /  jo aisA karatA hai vaha avazya hI siddhi ko
prApta karatA hai  /  isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue kahate haiM ki pUvokta-
pahale kahe gaye mArga kA anusaraNa karate hue ananta puruSoM ne apane karmoM kA
kSaya kiyA, siddhatva prApta kiyaa| dUsare zabdoM meM viziSTa - alaukika anupama
sthAna kA lAbha kiyA  /  vartamAna samaya meM bhI siddhi prApta karane yogya
kSetra meM sAdhaka pUrva varNita upAyoM dvArA siddhi prApta karate haiM- mukti
lAbha karate haiM  /  bhaviSyakAla meM bhI usa patha kA anusaraNa karate hue
ananta jIva siddha hoNge| isase alaga koI siddhi kA patha nahIM hai  /  evaM se
udAhu aNuttaranANI aNuttaradaMsI aNutaraNANa daMsaNadhare  /  arahA chAyA 44 -
anuvAda aNuttara jJAnI - sarvottama jJAna ke svAmI, aNuttara darzanI -
sarvottama darzana ke svAmI, uttama jJAna, uttama darzana ke dhAraka, arhat -
devAdhipUjya jJAtaputra bhagavAna mahAvIra ne vaizAlInagarI meM yaha upadeza
diyA thA  /  aisA maiM kahatA hU~  /  TIkA etacca sudharmasvAmI
jambUsvAmiprabhRtibhyaH svaziSyebhyaH pratipAdayatItyAha - ' evaMse' ityAdi,
evam uddezakatrayAbhihitanItyA sa RSabhasvAmI svaputrAnuddizya udAhRtavAn
pratipAditavAn  /  nA'syottaraM pradhAnamastItyanuttaraM tacca tajjJAnaJca
anuttarajJAnaM tadasyA'stItyanuttarajJAnI sa tathA'nutaradarzI, sAmAnya- vizeSa
paricchedakAvavodhasvabhAva iti bauddhamatanirAsadvAreNa jJAnAdhAraM jIvaM
darzayitumAha- anuttarajJAnadarzanadhara iti kathaJcidbhinnajJAnadarzanAdhAra
ityarthaH  /  arhan surendrAdipUjArho jJAtaputro varddhamAna svAmI RSabhasvAmI
vA bhagavAn aizvaryyAdiguNayukto vizAlyAMnagaryAM vardhamAno'smAkamAkhyAtavAn
RSabhasvAmIvA vizAlakulodbhavatvAd vaizAlikaH tathA coktam - 'vizAlA jananI
yasya vizAlaM kulameva vA vizAlaM vacanaM cAsya tena vaizAliko jina: ?" evamasau
jina AkhyAteti  /  iti zabdaH parisamAptyartho bravImIti uktArtho nayAH
pUrvavaditi  // 22 //  TIkArtha Arya sudharmA zrI jambU Adi apane ziSyoM ko jo
kahate haiM, vaha batAne hetu Agama pratipAdita karate haiM - nAyaputte bhagavaM
vesAlie viyAhie  //  22  //  ttibemi  //  evaM sa udAhRtavAnnanutara
jJAnyanuttaradarzI anuttarajJAna darzanadharo  /  arhan jJAtaputro bhagavAn
vaizAlika AkhyAtavAniti  //  iti bravImi  //  - - 195

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra, the first of the three sermons, contains the
teachings given by the first Tirthankara, Lord Rishabhdev, to his sons.  Anuttar
refers to that which is supreme and beyond comparison. Anuttar knowledge is the
highest form of knowledge.  The Lord possessed such Anuttar knowledge, hence he
was an Anuttar Jnani.  Similarly, he was an Anuttar Darshani.  He was Tat-
svabhav, the knowledge that illuminates both the general and the specific.  Now,
to refute Buddhism, we explain that the basis of knowledge is the Jiva, meaning
the Jiva is the holder of knowledge.  The Lord was the holder of Anuttar
knowledge and Darshan.  This implies that the Lord was the basis of knowledge
and Darshan, distinct from himself.  Lord Mahavira, the known son and
representative of Lord Rishabh, who was worshipped by Indra and other gods, gave
us his teachings in the city of Vishala or Vaishali.  Vaishali can also be
written as Vaishalik, meaning born into a great lineage.  It is said that Lord
Mahavira's mother, Trishala, was Vaishala, a woman of supreme good fortune.  Her
lineage was vast and extremely high.  Her words and teachings were vast and
extremely excellent.  Therefore, he is called the Vaishalik (Jin-Jineshwara)
Tirthankara.  Here, the word "iti" signifies completion.  The word "bravimi"
means "I speak" and should be connected with the previous explanation. .  || The
third sermon is complete || || With its completion, the second Vaitaliya study
is complete || 卐卐卐 1960

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram pahale varNita tIna upadezakoM meM jo bAteM kahI gaI
haiM ve Adi tIrthaMkara bhagavAn RSabhadeva dvArA apane putroM ko kahI thI  /
jisase uttama-bar3hakara dUsarA nahIM hotA use anuttara kahA jAtA hai  /  jo
jJAna sabase uttama hotA se anattara jJAna kahA gayA hai| bhagavAna kA vaisA
anutara jJAna thA, ataeva bhagavAna anuttara jJAnI the. usI prakAra ve aNuttara
darzanI the  /  sAmAnya aura vizeSa ko prakAza karane vAlA jo jJAna hai ve
tatsvabhAva rUpa the  /  aba bauddhamata kA nirasana karane kI dRSTi se batalAte
haiM-jJAna kA AdhAra jIva hai-arthAt jIva jJAna kA dhAraka hai  /  bhagavAna
anuttara jJAna aura darzana ke dhAraka the  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki
bhagavAna apane se kathaMcita bhinna jJAna aura darzana ke AdhAra the  /  indra
Adi devoM dvArA pUjanIya bhagavAna RSabha ke pratinidhi svarUpa jJAta putra
bhagavAna mahAvIra ne vizAlA yA vaizAlI nagarI meM hameM upadeza diyA  /
vaizAliya kA eka rUpa vaizAlika bhI hotA hai jisakA tAtparya vizAla kula meM
utpanna honA hai| kahA gayA hai-bhagavAna mahAvIra kI mAtA trizalA vizAlA-parama
saubhAgyazIlA thii| unakA kula vizAla-atyaMta ucca thA  /  unakA vacana-
pravacana vizAla-atyanta uttama thA  /  isaliye vaizAlika (jina-jinezvara)
tIrthaMkara kahalAye  /  yahAM iti zabda pari samApti ke artha meM AyA hai  /
bravImi-bolatA hUM-yaha zabda pUrvokta nirUpaNa ke sAtha jor3anA hai  /  .  //
tRtIya uddezaka samAptam  //   //  usakI samApti ke sAtha usakA dUsarA vaitAliya
adhyayana paripUrNa huA  //  Wan Wan Wan  1960

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Upasargadhyayanam Tṛtīyopasargaparijñādhyayana Prathamoddeśakaḥ Sūraṃ maṇṇai
appāṇaṃ, jāva jeya na passatī. Jujhantaṃ daḍhadhammāṇaṃ, sisuipālo va mahārathaṃ
॥1॥ Chāyā - Śūraṃ manyate ātmānaṃ yāvajjetāraṃ na paśyati. Yudhyantaṃ
dṛḍhadharmāṇaṃ śiśupāla iva mahāratham ॥ Anuvāda - The cowardly person considers
himself a hero as long as he does not see the victorious person. When he sees
the victorious person, he is destroyed just like Śiśupāla, the great warrior,
when he saw Kṛṣṇa. Ṭīkā - Kaścilllaghuprākṛtiḥ saṃgrāme samupasthite śūra
mātmānaṃ manyate-nistoyāmbuda ivātmaślāghā pravaṇo vāgbhirvisphūrjan garjati,
tad yathā-na mat-kalpaḥ parānīke kaścit subhato'stīti, evaṃ tāvad garjati yāvat
puro'vasthitaṃ prodyatāsiṃ jetāraṃ na paśyati, tathā coktam - "tāvad gajaḥ
prastutadānagaṇḍaḥ karoty akālāmbuda-garjitāni. yāvan na siṃhasya guhāstha-līṣu
lāṅgala-visphōṭa-ravaṃ śṛṇoti ॥1॥" na dṛṣṭāntam antarena prāyo lokasyārthāvagamo
bhavat ītyatas tad avagamaye dṛṣṭāntam āha-yathā mādrīsutaḥ śiśupālo vāsudevad
arśanāt prāg ātmaślāghā pradhānaṃ garjitavān, paścāc ca yugyamānaṃ-śastrāṇi
vyāpārayantaṃ dṛḍhaḥ- samartho dharmaḥ svabhāvaḥ saṃgrāmābhaṅgarūpo yasya sa
tathā taṃ mahān ratho'syeti mahārāthaḥ, sa ca prakramād atra nārāyaṇas taṃ
yudhyamānaṃ dṛṣṭvā prāg arjanāḥ pradhāno'pi kṣobhaṃ gataḥ, evaṃmuttaratra
dāntike'pi yojanīyam iti. Bhāvārthas tu kathānakād vaseyaḥ, tac cedaṃ-vasudeva-
susāeṃsuo damaghōṣaṇa-rāhiveṇa maddīe. Jāo caubhuo'bhuyabalakalīo
kalahapaṭṭaṭṭho ॥1॥ datīṇa tao jaṇaṇī caubhuyaṃ puttam abbhuyamaṇagccha.
Bhayaharisa-vimhayamuhī pucchaiṇemittiyaṃ sahāsā ॥2॥ṇemittieṇa muṇīūṇa sāhiyaṃ
tīi haṭṭhahiyadāe. Jaha esa tubbha putto mahābalo dujao samāre ॥3॥ eassa ya jaṃ
daṭṭhaṃ hoi sābhāviyaṃ bhuyājuyalaṃ. Hohī tao ciya bhayaṃ sutassa te natthi
sandēho ॥4॥ sāvi bhayaveviraṃgī puttaṃ daṃsēi jāva kaṇhassa. Tāvacciya tassa
ṭhiyaṃ payaitthaṃ varabhuyājuyalaṃ ॥5॥ to kaṇhassa piucchā. puttaṃ pāḍēi pāya
pīḍhaṃmi. Avarahā khāmaṇatthaṃ sōvi sayaṃ se khamissamī ॥6॥ sisuipālo vi hu
juvvaṇamaeṇa nārāyaṇaṃ asabbhehi. Vayaṇehi bhaṇai sōvihu khamēi khāmāe
samatthōvi ॥7॥ avarahāsae puṇṇe vārijanto ṇa ciṭṭhai jāhe. Kaṇhēṇa tao chinnāṃ
cakkeṇaṃ uttamaṃgaṃ se ॥8॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM tRtIyopasargaparijJAdhyayana prathama uddezakaH sUraM maNNai
appANaM, jAva jeyaM na passatI  /  jujhaMtaM daDhadhammANaM, sisupAlo va
mahArahaM  // 1 //  chAyA - zUraM manyata AtmAnaM yAvajjetAraM na pazyati  /
yudhyantaM dRr3hadharmANaM zizupAla iva mahAratham  //  anuvAda - kAyara puruSa
tabhI taka apane ko zUra-bahAdura mAnatA hai, jaba taka vaha jettA-vijayazIla
puruSa ko nahIM dekhatA  /  jaba vaha vijayazIla puruSa ko dekhatA hai to vaha
vaise hI dhvasta ho uThatA hai jaise dRr3ha dharmA mahArathI kRSNa ko dekhakara
zizupAla ho uThA thA  /  TIkA - kazcillaghuprakRtiH saGgrAme samupasthite zUra
mAtmAnaM manyate-nistoyAmbuda ivAtmazlAghA pravaNo vAgbhirvisphUrjan garjati,
tadyathA-na matkalpaH parAnIke kazcit subhato'stIti, evaM tAvadgarjati yAvat
puro'vasthitaM prodyatAsiM jetAraM na pazyati, tathA coktam - "tAvadgajaH
prastutadAnagaNDaH karotyakAlAmbudagarjitAni  /  yAvanna siMhasya guhAsthalISu
lAGgalavisphoTaravaM zRNoti  // 1 // " na dRSTAntamantareNa prAyo
lokasyArthAvagamo bhavatItyatastadavagataye dRSTAntamAha-yathA mAdrIsutaH
zizupAlo vAsudevadarzanAtprAg AtmazlAghA pradhAnaM garjitavAn, pazcAcca
yugyamAnaM-zastrANi vyApArayantaM dRDhaH-samartho dharmaH svabhAvaH
saGgrAmAbhaGgarUpo yasya sa tathA taM mahAn ratho'syeti mahArathaH, sa ca
prakramAdatra nArAyaNastaM yudhyamAnaM dRSTvA prAgrjanA pradhAno'pi kSobhaM
gataH, evaMmuttaratra dAAntike'pi yojanIyamiti  /  bhAvArthastu kathAnakAda
vaseyaH, taccedam-vasudevasusAe~suo damaghoSaNarAhiveNa maddIe  /  jAo
caubbhuo'bhuyabalakalio kalahapattaTTho  // 1 //  datRRNa tao jaNaNI caubbhuyaM
puttamabbhuyamaNagcha  /  bhayaharisavimhayamuhI pucchaINemittiyaM sahasA
||2||nnemittienn muNiUNa sAhiyaM tIi haTThahiyayAe  /  jaha esa tubbha putto
mahAbalo dujao samare  // 3 //  eyassa ya jaM daTThaNa hoi sAbhAviyaM
bhuyAjuyalaM  /  hohI tao ciya bhayaM sutassa te Natthi saMdeho  // 4 //  sAvi
bhayaveviraMgI puttaM daMsei jAva kaNhassa  /  tAvacciya tasya ThiyaM payaitthaM
varabhuyAjuyalaM  // 5 //  to kaNhassa piucchA. puttaM pADhei pAya pIDhaMmi  /
avarAha khAmaNatthaM sovi sayaM se khamissAmi  // 6 //  sisuvAlo vi hu
juvvaNamaeNa nArAyaNaM asabbhehiM  /  vayaNehiM bhaNaI sovihu khamaI khamAe
samatthovi  // 7 //  avarAhasae puNNe vArijaMto Na ciTThaI jAhe  /  kaNheNa tao
chinnaM cakkeNaM uttamaMgaM se  // 8 //  sAmprataM sarvajana pratItaM
vArtamAnikaM dRSTAnta mAha - TIkArtha - koI laghu pravatti-hIna svabhAvayukta
puruSa saGagrAma kA samaya upasthita hone para apane ko bahAdura mAnatA huA, usI
taraha khUba garjatA hai jaise jala rahita megha gar3agar3AtA hai, vaha kahatA
hai ki zatru kI senA meM mere sadRza koI bhI yoddhA nahIM hai, kintu usakI yaha
garjanA tabhI taka calatI hai, jaba taka khaGga hAtha meM lie kisI vijayI puruSa
ko apane Age khar3A nahIM dekhatA  /  kahA gayA hai-mada jala se jisakA kapola
-197

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra is like a moist land, the elephant roars like a
cloud that arrives out of season, until it hears the roar of the lion from the
cave. Without an example, the common people often do not understand the meaning,
so an example is presented. Shishupala, who was the son of Madri, was roaring
loudly, praising himself before seeing Krishna, but when he saw Narayana - Shri
Krishna, the great warrior, who was steadfast in the Dharma-war, firm in nature,
never broken in battle, and unwavering, he was filled with anger. As it is said
- he was previously engaged in excessive self-praise, he forgot everything.
Similarly, the meaning should be understood from the example to be told further.
The meaning is connected with the further part of the story. That part of the
story is as follows.  -  King Damaghosha's sister Vasudeva gave birth to a son
named Shishupala. He was four-armed, incredibly powerful, and fond of quarrels.
When his mother saw this four-armed, powerful son, she was happy on one hand,
and trembled with fear on the other. She called a fortune teller to know the
future. The fortune teller, after contemplation and discussion, said to Madri,
with a happy heart and a cheerful mind - "Your son will be very powerful and
invincible in battle, but if you see that your son, like everyone else, has only
two arms, then understand that he will be afraid of that man. There is no doubt
in what I say." Hearing this, Madri was very scared. She showed her son to
Krishna, and as soon as Krishna looked at him, he was left with only two arms,
like every other man. Then Krishna's aunt, falling at the feet of her son,
pleaded with him that if he ever committed any offense, he should forgive him.
Krishna promised that he would forgive his hundred offenses. After this,
Shishupala grew up. Filled with the pride of youth, he began to insult Shri
Krishna, to abuse him. Although Shri Krishna was capable of punishing him,
according to his promise, he continued to forgive his offenses. Thus, when
Shishupala had committed a hundred offenses, Krishna tried to reason with him,
to persuade him not to do so again, but he did not stop - he continued to abuse.
Then Shri Krishna cut off his head with his discus. || 1 ||  Krishna payaata
soora rananee-se, sangamammi puttam na yaanai, jeaen maaya chaaya - Prayataah
shuraa ranashirshe sangraama upasthite. Maataa putram na jaanaati jेत्रा
parivikshatah || Baf parivichch || 2 || 198 Translation - When the battle breaks
out, there is also a cowardly man who boasts of his bravery, but in the
unbearable battle, he becomes fearful and confused, he panics. In such a
situation of panic, where even the mother does not recognize her own son falling
into her lap, that cowardly man, wounded and defeated, becomes miserable. The
son who is advancing in the battle is cut down by his conqueror.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram sthala Ardra hai, vaha hAthI akAla megha - asamaya meM
Aye binA mausama ke bAdala kI jyoM tabhI taka garjatA hai, jaba taka vaha guphA
meM se siMha se pUcha phaTakArane ke zabda ko nahIM sunatA  /  dRSTAnta ke binA
sAmAnya jana abhiprAya ko prAya: samajha nahIM pAte, isalie eka dRSTAnta
prastuta kiyA jAtA hai| zizupAla jo mAdrI kA beTA thA, kRSNa ko dekhane se pUrva
apanI bar3hAI karatA huA khUba garaja rahA thA kintu jaba usane zastroM se
prahAra karate hue dRr3hadharmA- yuddha meM dRr3ha svabhAvayukta, saMgrAma meM
kabhI bhagna nahIM hone vAle, aDiga rahane vAle mahArathI nArAyaNa - zrI kRSNa
ko dekhakara kSobha ko prApta huA thaa| jaisA kahA gayA hai - vaha pahale apanI
atyadhika prazaMsA karane meM lagA thA, vaha saba bhUla gyaa| isI prakAra Age
batAye jAne vAle dRSTAnta se isakA Azaya jor3a lenA cAhie  /  Age ke kathA bhAga
se isakA bhAva jur3A huA hai  /  vaha kathA bhAga isa prakAra hai| - damaghoSa
rAjA ke vasudeva kI bahina ke garbha se zizupAla nAmaka putra janmA  /  vaha
cAra bhujA yukta thaa| adbhuta parAkramazIla aura kalahapriya thA  /  usakI mAtA
ne jaba isa cArabhujA yukta balazAlI putra ko dekhA to eka ora harSita huI tathA
dUsarI ora bhaya se kAMpa uThI  /  usane phalAdeza jAnane hetu jyotiSI ko bulAyA
/  jyotiSI ne ciMtana vimarza kara hRSTa hRdayA - prasanna cetasakA mAdrI 'kahA-
tumhArA yaha putra atyadhika zaktizAlI aura yuddha meM aparAjeya hogA, kiMtu
jise dekhakara tumhAre putra kI, jaise ki sAdhAraNataH sabake hotI hai, do hI
bhujAeM raha jAve to samajha lenA usI puruSa se usako bhaya hogaa| maiM jo
kahatA hU~, isameM koI saMdeha nahIM hai  /  yaha sunakara mAdrI bahuta Dara gaI
/  usane apane putra ko kRSNa ko dikhalAyA, jyoM hI kRSNa ne usakI ora dRSTipAta
kiyA usake do hI bhujAeM raha gaI, jaise hara AdamI ke hotI haiM  /  taba kRSNa
kI bhuA ma ne apane putra ko ke caraNoM meM girAkara usase abhyarthanA kI ki
yadi yaha kabhI aparAdha bhI kare to tuma use kSamA karanA  /  kRSNa ne pratijJA
kI ki maiM isake sau aparAdha kSamA karUMgA  /  isake bAda zizupAla yuvA huaa|
vaha yauvana ke garva se unmatta hokara zrIkRSNa ko apazabda kahane lagA, gAlI
dene lagA  /  yadyapi zrIkRSNa usako daNDa dene meM sakSama the, kintu apane
dvArA kI gaI pratijJA ke anusAra ve usake aparAdhoM ko mApha karate ge| yoM jaba
zizupAla sau aparAdha kara cukA taba kRSNa ne use phira aisA na karane hetu
bahuta samajhAyA, manA kiyA kintu vaha rokane para bhI nahIM mAnA - gAliyA~ detA
rahA  /  taba zrIkRSNa ne cakra dvArA usakA zira ucchinna kara DAlA, kATa diyA
//  1  //  kRSNa payAtA sUrA raNaNIse, saMgAmammi puttaM na yANAI, jeeNa mAyA
chAyA - prayAtAH zUrA raNazIrSe saMgrAma upasthite  /  mAtA putraM na jAnAti
jetrA parivikSataH  //  Baf pariviccha  // 2 //  198 anuvAda - yuddha ke chir3a
jAne para zaurya kA abhimAna karane vAlA eka kAyara puruSa bhI hotA hai, kintu
dussaha saMgrAma meM vaha bhaya bhrAnta ho jAtA hai, ghabarA uThatA hai  /
jahA~ mAtA apane goda meM girate hue bhI nahIM jAna pAtI, vaisI har3abaDAhaTa kI
sthiti meM vaha kAyara puruSa, bhinna ghAyala hokara dIna bana jAtA hai  /
yuddha meM agrasara putra ko apanI vijetA dvArA. chinna

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of Adjectives  - The commentary says, "Like a plant that is weak
and unsteady, which is blown about by the wind, so too are those who boast
loudly with their words, and who go to the head of the battle, but when the
battle begins, and the brave soldiers of the enemy army come forward, they are
struck down by their weapons. Then all are troubled and frightened, so much so
that a mother does not even notice her child falling from her lap, who is still
sucking milk. In this way, in the battle, the warriors of the enemy army, with
their chakra, kunta, naraacha, shakti, and other weapons, wound and kill, and
those who are weak and cowardly, are broken and become miserable."  ## The
Commentary Explains  Now, a present-day example is given, which is well-known to
the world. Many men, who consider themselves heroes, praise themselves with
their words, roar loudly, and walk with a fierce gait, and reach the head of the
battle. But when the battle begins, and the brave soldiers of the enemy army
come forward, they begin to strike with their weapons, then all are troubled and
frightened, so much so that a mother does not even notice her child falling from
her lap, who is still sucking milk. In this way, in the battle, the warriors of
the enemy army, with their chakra, kunta, spears, naraacha - sharp arrows, and
shakti, etc., wound and kill, and those who are weak and cowardly, are broken
and become miserable.  ## Thus, He Considers Himself a Hero  **Shadow** 1 -
**Unbeaten,** **A beggar, a fool.** He considers himself a hero, **as long as he
does not practice.** || 3 || - Thus, a novice, who is unskilled in begging, and
who has not been touched by the trials, considers himself a hero, as long as he
does not practice restraint.  ## Commentary  The word "thus" indicates a
comparison. Just as that man, who considers himself a hero, roars like a lion,
and goes to the head of the battle, but then, seeing the victorious Vasudeva, or
another warrior, fighting, becomes miserable, so too, a "student," a newly
ordained monk, who has not been touched by the trials, who is unskilled in
begging, and who is not proficient in other aspects of conduct, considers
himself a hero, like a child who is still sucking milk, as long as he does not
practice "rough" restraint, because he does not have the cause of the
combination of actions. When he attains it, many who are weak and cowardly, are
broken. || 3 ||  ## Commentary Explains  Now, the essence of the example is
explained. The word "thus" in this verse indicates the present meaning. Just as
that man, who considers himself a hero, roars loudly like a lion, and goes to
the head of the battle, but then, seeing someone like Vasudeva, or another
warrior, fighting, becomes miserable, so too, a novice monk, who has not been
touched by the trials, who is unskilled in begging, and who is not proficient in
other aspects of conduct, considers himself a hero, like a child who is still
sucking milk, as long as he does not practice "rough" restraint, because he does
not have the cause of the combination of actions. When he attains it, many who
are weak and cowardly, are broken. || 3 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM - TIkA 'payAyA' ityAdi, yathA vAgbhirvisphUrjantaH prakarSeNa
vikala pAdapAtaM 'raNa zirazi' saMgrAmamUrdhanya grAnI ke yAtA- gatA: ke te ?
'zUrA:' zUraM manyA:- subhaTAH tataH saGgrAme samupasthite
patatparAnIkasubhaTayukta heti saGghAte sati tatra ca sarvasyA kulI bhUtatvAt
'mAtA putraM na jAnAti' kaTIto bhrazyantaM stanandhayamapi na samyak
pratijAgantItyevaM mAtAputrIye saGgrAme parAnIkasubhaTena jetrA cakra
kuntanArAcazaktyAdibhiH pari:-samantAt vividham- aneka prakAraM kSato -
hatazchinno vA yathAkazcidalpasatvo bhaGgabhupayAti dIno bhavatItiyA - vaditi
// 2 //  dAntikamAha TIkArtha aba loka prasiddha eka vartamAna kAlika dRSTAnta
diyA jAtA hai kaI apane ko vIra samajhane vAle puruSa apanI vANI dvArA apanI
prazaMsA karate hue, garajate hue evaM vikaTa cAla calate hue yuddha ke
zIrSaagrabhAga meM pahu~ca jAte haiM, parantu jaba yuddha zuru ho jAtA hai to
sAmane Ate zatru senA ke bahAdura sainika apane zastroM dvArA prahAra karane
lagate haiM, taba sabhI Akula ho uThate haiM, ghabarA uThate haiM, yahAM taka ki
mAtA apanI goda se girate hue dUdha cUzvane vAle zizu taka kA dhyAna nahIM rakha
pAtI, isa taraha saMgrAma meM zatru senA ke yoddhAoM dvArA cakra, kunta-bhAle,
nArAca - tIkSNa bANa tathA zakti Adi taraha-taraha ke zastroM dvArA kSata
vikSata-ghAyala huA vaha alpasattva kAyara puruSa dIna hIna ho jAtA hai  /  evaM
sehevi sUraM maNNati chAyA 1 - appaTTe, bhikkhAyariyAakovie  /  appANaM, jAva
lUhaM na sevae  //  3  //  - evaM ziSyo'pyaspRSTo bhikSAcaryAkovidaH  /  zUraM
manyata AtmAnaM yAvadrkSaM na sevate  //  anuvAda jisa prakAra alpasatva kAyara
puruSa jaba taka zatru senA ke yoddhAoM dvArA kSata vikSata nahIM kiyA jAtA
tabhI taka apane ko vIra mAnatA hai  /  isI prakAra bhikSAcarya meM akuzala,
ayogya tathA parISahoM dvArA aspRSTa apIr3ita navadIkSita sAdhu bhI tabhI taka
apane ko vIra mAnatA hai, jaba taka saMyama kA sevana nahIM krtaa| - TIkA -
'eva' miti prakAntaparAmarzArtha: yathA'sau zUraMmanya utkRSTisiMhanAda pUrvakaM
saGgrAmazisyupasthitaH pazcAjjetAraM vAsudeva manyaM vA yudhyamAnaMdRSTvA dainya
mupayAti, eva 'zaikSakaH' abhinava pravrajitaH parISahaiH  /  acchuptaH : kiM
pravrajyAyAM duSkaramityevaM garjan 'bhikSAcaryAyAM' bhikSATane ' akovidaH '
anipuNaH, upalakSaNArthatvAdanyatrApi sAdhvAcAre'bhinavapravrajitatvAda
pravINaH, sa evambhUta AtmAnaM tAvacchizupAlavat zUraM manyate yAvajjetAramiva
'rUkSaM' saMyamaM karmasaMzleSakAraNAbhAvAt 'na sevate' na bhajata iti,
tatprAptau tu bahavo guru karmANo'lpasattvA bhaGgamupayAnti  // 3 //  TIkArtha.
aba dRSTAnta kA sAra kahA jAtA hai - isa gAthA meM AyA huA ' evaM ' zabda
prastuta artha ko sUcita karatA hai jisa prakAra apane ko bahAdura samajhane
vAlA vaha puruSa jora se siMha nAda-garjana karatA huA yuddha ke agrabhAga meM
pahu~ca jAtA hai parantu vahA~ yuddha karate hue kisI vAsudeva yA anya kisI
yoddhA ko dekhakara dainya ko prApta ho jAtA hai, isI prakAra jisake parISahoM
kA saMsparza nahIM huA hai-jise parISahoM kA sAmanA karane kA avasara nahIM AyA
hai, jo bhikSAcaryA meM anipuNa hai- akuzala hai, yahAM upalakSaNa se yaha
samajhA 199

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra  It should be known that just as a mendicant is
unskilled due to being newly initiated, so too are others unskilled in other
disciplines. Is it difficult to follow the life of a renunciate? Thus, one who
boasts considers himself a hero like Sisupala until he faces restraint like a
victorious man - until he does not partake of restraint. In this verse,
restraint is called "luhan ruksham" because just as nothing sticks to a dry or
dry place, in the same way, karma does not stick where there is restraint in
life. Upon attaining that restraint - when the opportunity to follow that
restraint arises - many gurukarma - beings with heavy karma, of low intellect,
devoid of self-strength - are broken, shattered.  **Verse 4**  Just as in the
winter season - the months of Margashirsha and Pausha - cold pervades all limbs,
at that time, dull, foolish beings experience sorrow like a kingless - dethroned
Kshatriya.  **Commentary**  To explain the harshness of restraint, it is said,
"Jaya Hemante" etc. When, sometimes, in the month of Pausha or Margashirsha, the
"sheeta" - cold with snow and wind - "sprushati" - touches, "tatra" - in that
unbearable cold touch, some "manda" - dull, ignorant, burdened with heavy
gurukarma - "visidanti" - experience sorrow, "rajyaheena" - like dethroned
Kshatriyas.  **Verse 5**  When touched by the heat of summer, the newly
initiated muni becomes dejected and thirsty. At that time, dull, ignorant men
experience sorrow like fish in shallow water.  **Commentary**  When the
scorching heat of summer sets in during the months of Jyeshta and Ashadha, the
newly initiated muni, afflicted by the heat and thirst, becomes dejected. At
that time, dull, ignorant men experience sorrow like fish in shallow water.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram jAnA cAhie ki bhikSAcArI kI taraha anya AcAroM meM bhI
abhinava dIkSita hone ke kAraNa anipuNa hai  /  pravrajita jIvana kA pAlana
karanA kyA kaThina hai, isa prakAra jo garajatA hai vaha apane Apako zizupAla kI
taraha tabhI taka zUravIra mAnatA hai jaba taka usakA vijayI puruSa kI taraha
saMyama se sAmanA nahIM hotA-saMyama kA sevana nahIM karatA  /  isa gAthA meM
saMyama ko lUhaM rUkSaM kahA gayA hai, kyoM ki jaise sUkhe yA sUkhe sthAna para
koI vastu cipakatI nahIM, usI prakAra jahAM jIvana meM saMyama hotA hai vahAM
karma nahIM cipakate  /  usa saMyama kI prApti hone para-usa saMyama kA pAlana
karane kA maukA Ane para bahuta se gurukarmA- bhArI karmoM vAle alpasatva-Atma
bala vihIna prANI bhagna ho jAte haiM, TUTa jAte haiM  /  jayA hemaMta mAsaMmi,
sItaM phusai tattha maMdA visIyaMti, rajjahINA va chAyA  /  - anuvAda - jaise
hemaMta Rtu - mArgazIrSa, pauSa ke mahinoM meM sardI saba aMgoM meM chA jAtI
hai, usa samaya manda mUrkha jIva rAjyahIna - rAjya se cyuta kSatriya kI jyoM
viSAda kA anubhava karate haiM, duHkhita hote haiM  /  - TIkA - saMyamasya
rUkSatvapratipAdanAdyAha- 'jayA hemaMte' ityAdi 'yadA' kadAcit 'hemanta mAse'
pauSAdau 'zItaM' sahimakaNavAtaM ' spRzati' lagati 'tatra' tasminna sahye
zItasparze lagati sati eke 'mandA' jar3A guru karmANo 'viSIdanti' dainyabhAva
mupayAnti 'rAjyahInA' rAjyacyutAH yathA kSatriyA rAjAna iveti  // 4 //
uSNaparISaha mavikRtyAha yadA hemaMtamAse zItaM spRzati sarvAGgam  /  tatra
mandA viSIdanti rAjyahInA iva kSatriyAH  //  TIkArtha - saMyama rUkSa hai, yaha
prakaTa karane ke lie kahA jAtA hai jaba kabhI hemanta Rtu ke pauSa Adi
(mArgazIrSa va pauSa) mAsa meM hima kaNoM se - osa kI bUndoM se yukta pavana ke
sAtha sardI lagane lagatI hai, usa samaya asahya zIta ke sparza se na sahI jA
sakane yogya sardI ke kAraNa katipaya manda-ajJAnI, gurukarmAkarmoM se bhArI
puruSa, isa prakAra dInatA kA anubhava karate haiN| jaise rAjya se cyuta huA
kSatriya rAjA anubhava karatA ho  /   chAyA puTTe gimhAhitAveNaM, vimaNe
supivAsie  /  tattha maMdA visIyaMti, macchA appoddae jahA  // 5 //  - savvagaM
/  khattiyA  // 4 //  spRSTo grISmAbhitApena vimanAH supipAsitaH  /  tatra
mandAH viSIdanti matsyA alpodake yathA  //  anuvAda grISma Rtu ke jyeSTha
ASAr3ha mahinoM meM jaba bhISaNa garmI par3ane lagatI hai, usa samaya usa garmI
ke abhitApa se pIDita pipAsita navadIkSita muni vimanaska - khinna ho jAtA hai,
usa samaya maMda- ajJAnI puruSa isa prakAra viSAda kA - duHkha kA anubhava
karate haiM jaise alpa jala meM machaliyA~ viSaNNa- duHkhita ho jAtI haiM - 200

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Upasargaadhyayanam  **Commentary:**  The intense heat of the months of
Jyeshtha and Ashadha is called 'Griishmaabhithaap'.  A person touched by this
heat, enveloped by it, becomes 'Vimanaska' - dejected, sad, and deeply afflicted
by thirst.  He becomes extremely weak due to the intense thirst.  The sutrakar
(author of the sutra) points out that when this heat arises, those who are weak
and dull, experience great sorrow.  He gives an example:  Just as fish, in
shallow water, become distressed by the heat of summer and die because they
cannot escape, similarly, those with weak souls, even after accepting the path
of conduct, become drenched in sweat and dirt, and are scorched by the external
heat.  They remember cool lakes, streams, sandalwood, and other things that can
alleviate the heat.  Their minds become agitated, and they become dejected in
their practice of restraint.  **Commentary Meaning:**  The intense heat of the
months of Jyeshtha and Ashadha is called 'Griishmaabhithaap'.  A person touched
by this heat, enveloped by it, becomes 'Vimanaska' - dejected, sad, and deeply
afflicted by thirst.  He becomes extremely weak due to the intense thirst.  The
sutrakar (author of the sutra) points out that when this heat arises, those who
are weak and dull, experience great sorrow.  He gives an example:  Just as fish,
in shallow water, become distressed by the heat of summer and die because they
cannot escape, similarly, those with weak souls, even after accepting the path
of conduct, become drenched in sweat and dirt, and are scorched by the external
heat.  They remember cool lakes, streams, sandalwood, and other things that can
alleviate the heat.  Their minds become agitated, and they become dejected in
their practice of restraint.  **Sada Datteshana Dukkha, Jayana Duppanollya.
Puhdojhana. ||6||**  **Cheva,**  **Kammatta** **Dubbhaga** **Icchansu** **Chhaya
Sada Datteshana Dukham Yancha Duspranodya.  Karmartta: Durbhagaschaiveti Aahu:
Prithakjanah. ||**  **Translation:**  The virtuous person always experiences
sorrow from the desire for things given by others, because it is forbidden for
them to accept things that are not given for their own use.  'Yancha' - begging
is also a hardship, which is difficult to bear.  Even so, ordinary people, who
do not understand the importance of restraint, see the virtuous person and say,
"How unfortunate they are, they are suffering the painful results of their past
actions."  **Commentary:**  Now, taking up the hardship of begging, the sutra
says, "Sada Datta" etc.  For the yatis (ascetics), everything given by others,
even for things like cleaning their teeth, is 'eshaniya' - it must be accepted
without any fault of desire for gain, etc.  Therefore, for those who are
suffering from hunger and other afflictions, the desire for things given by
others is a constant source of sorrow.  And even this 'Yancha' - the hardship of
begging, is 'pranodyate' - abandoned with difficulty by those with weak souls.
And it is said:  "Khijjaee Muhalaavanna Vaaya Gholei Kanthamjhami.  Kah Kahkahei
Hiyayan Dehiti Para Bhanantass. ||1|| Chhaya - Kshiyate Mukhalaavanya Vaacha
Gilaate (Dhoornati) Kanthammadhye, Kahkahkahi Hridayam Dehiiti Param Bhavatas.
||1||  Gatibhramsho Mukhe Dainyam Gaatrasvedo Vivarnata.  Marane Yani Chihnani
Tani Chihnani Yachke. ||1||"  And so on.  Thus, those with great souls, who have
abandoned the desire for begging, which is difficult to abandon, follow the path
of the great men, serving them and increasing their knowledge, etc.  The second
half of the verse shows the hardship of begging:  "Prithakjanah" - ordinary
people, who are not noble, are like the uncultured.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM TIkA - 'grISme' jyeSThASADhAkhye abhitApastena 'spaSTa: '
chupto vyAptaH san 'vimanAH' vimanaskaH, suSThu pAtumicchA pipAsA tAM prApto
nitarAM tRr3abhibhUto bAhulyena dainyamupayAtIti darzayati 'tatra'
tasminnuSNaparISahodaye 'mandA' jar3A azaktA 'viSIdanti ' yathA
parAbhaGgamupayAnti, dRSTAntamAha-matsyA alpodake viSIdanti,
gamanAbhAvAnmaraNamupayAnti, evaM sattvAbhAvAtsaMyamAt bhrazyanta iti, idamuktaM
bhavati yathA matsyA alpatvAdudakasya grISmAbhitApena taptA avasIdanti,
evamalpasatvAzcAritrapratipattAvapi jallamalakledaklinnagAtrA bahiruSNAbhitaptAH
zItalAn jalAzrayAn jaladhArAgrahacandanAdInuSNapratikArahetUnanusmarante-
vyAkulitacetasaH saMsamAnuSThAnaM prati viSIdanti  //  TIkArtha - grISma-
jyeSTha va ASADha mAsa meM jo garmI par3atI hai, use grISmAbhitApa kahA jAtA hai
/  usa grISmAbhitApa se spRSTa-vyApta puruSa vimanaska - khinna yA udAsa ho jAtA
hai, tathA pyAsa se atyanta pIr3ita hokara dIna bana jAtA hai  /  sUtrakAra isI
kA digdarzana karAte hue batalAte haiM ki isa taraha garmI ke parISaha ke udita
hone para Atmabala vivarjita mUrkha prANI, bar3e viSAda kA anubhava karate haiM
/  dRSTAnta dekara ise samajhAte haiM kijaise machaliyAM svalpa jala meM
grISmaRtu kI garmI se tapta hokara duHkha ko prApta hotI haiM, kahIM bAhara na
jAne ke kAraNa vahIM mara jAtI haiM, usI prakAra alpasatva - atyadhika nyUna
Atmabala yukta asakta puruSa cAritra svIkAra karake bhI jaba ve mala aura pasIne
se sikta ho jAte haiM, bAhara kI garmI se tapta ho jAte haiM, taba ThaNDe pAnI
ke sarovara yA jala ke phavvAre, candana Adi garmI ko miTAne vAle padArthoM ko
yAda karate haiM  /  unakA citta vyAkula ho uThatA hai ve saMyama kA paripAlana
karane meM viSAda kA anubhava karate haiM  /  sadA dattesaNA dukkhA, jAyaNA
duppaNolliyA  /  puDhojaNA  // 6 //  ceva, kammattA dubbhagA iccAhaMsu chAyA
sadA dattaiSaNA dukhaM yAJcA duSpraNodyA  /  karmArtAH durbhagAzcaivetyAhuH
pRthagjanAH  //  anuvAda - sAdhu ko dUsare dvArA diye jAte padArtha kI eSaNA -
gavaiSaNA karane kA sadA duHkha banA rahatA hai, kyoMki aneSaNIya padArtha lenA
usake lie varjita hai  /  yAJcA - yAcanA bhI parISaha hai, jise sahana karanA
kaThina hai, aisA hote hue bhI pRthak jana-sAdhAraNa loga jo saMyama kA mahatva
nahIM jAnate, sAdhu ko dekhakara kahate haiM ki ye kaise bhAgyahIna hai, apane
pUrvakRta karmoM kA kaSTapUrNa phala bhoga rahe haiM  /  TIkA - sAmprataM
yAJcAparISahamadhikRtyAha-'sadAdatta' ityAdi, yatInAM 'sadA' sarvadA
dantazodhanAdyapi pareNa dattam eSaNIyam -
utpAdAdyeSaNAdoSarahitamupabhoktavyamityataH kSudhAdivedanArttAnAM yAvajjIvaM
paradattaiSaNA duHkhaM bhavati, api ceyaM 'yAJcA'
yAJcAparISaho'lpasatvairduHkhena 'praNodyate' tyajyate, tathA coktam - 'khijjaI
muhalAvaNNaM vAyA gholei kaMThamajjhami  /  kaha kahakahei hiyayaM dehitti paraM
bhaNaMtassa  // 1 //  chAyA-kSIyate mukhalAvaNyaM vAcA gilAte (dhUrNati)
kaNThamadhye, kahakahakahita hRdayaM dehIti prNbhvtH||1|| gatibhraMzo mukhe
dainyaM gAtrasvedo vivarNatA  /  maraNe yAni cihnAni tAni cihnAni yAcake  // 1
// " ityAdi, evaM dustyajaM yAJcAparISahaM parityajya gatAbhimAnA mahAsattvA
jJAnAdyabhivRddhaye mahApuruSasevitaM panthAna manuvrajantIti  /
zlokapazcArdvanA''kroza parISahaM darzayati- "pRthagjanAH ' prAkRta puruSA
anAryakalpA 'ityeva 201

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra says, "They are liberated," as follows: These ascetics,
with bodies covered in dust, with matted hair, afflicted by hunger and other
pains, are suffering from the karmas they have accumulated in the past. They are
experiencing the fruits of their past actions. Or, they are afflicted by karmas
such as agriculture, unable to perform them, and have become ascetics out of
desperation. Thus, these unfortunate ones, abandoned by all, including their
wives and children, have taken to the path of renunciation. ||6||  Commentary:
It is expected of a virtuous person to search for even a toothbrush or a twig
for cleaning teeth given by another. He should seek out what is blameless. For
him, only food free from the faults of production, acquisition, etc., is
acceptable or fit for consumption. Therefore, a virtuous person afflicted by
hunger and other pains has to endure the difficulty of searching for things
given by others throughout his life. Begging for alms is also a kind of
suffering. Those who lack inner strength cannot bear it. Therefore, wise people
have said that the beauty of the face of a man who begs for something, saying,
"Give me this," fades away. His voice gets stuck in his throat. His heart
becomes agitated. His gait becomes distorted. A sense of dejection appears on
his face. He starts sweating. His complexion becomes pale. All the signs that
appear in a man at the time of death are visible in a man who begs. Only those
who are fearless and possess inner strength can endure the suffering of begging,
which is very difficult to bear. They walk on the path that great men have
walked, for the growth of knowledge, etc.  The author of the Sutra, in the
latter part of the present verse, speaks about the suffering of insults.
Ordinary people, whose nature is like that of non-Aryans, seeing the ascetics,
start saying, "These ascetics have dirt all over their bodies, their hair is
matted, they are afflicted by hunger and other pains. Thus, they are suffering
the fruits of the sins they committed in their previous births. They have become
ascetics because they are unable to support themselves through agriculture and
other means of livelihood. These people are unfortunate, deprived of family,
including wives and children, and all other things, and homeless. Therefore,
they have embraced renunciation."  Hearing such insulting words in villages,
cities, or in between, the weak-minded, those lacking discernment, become sad
and sorrowful, like cowardly men in battle. ||7||  Commentary: "Etan" refers to
the aforementioned words of insult, as well as words like "thief" and "rogue."
Those who are unable to bear these words, living in villages, cities, or in
between, become sad and sorrowful when they hear these insults.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram mAhuH' ityeva muktavaMtaH, tadyathA-ye ete yatayaH
jallAviladehA luJcita zirasaH kSudhAdivedanA grastAste eve pUrvAcaritaiH
karmabhirArtAH pUrvasvakRtakarmaNaH phala manubhavanti, yadivA-karmabhiH-
kRSyAdibhirArtAH tatkartumasamarthA udignA santoyatayaH saMvRttA iti, tathaite
durbhagA: sarveNaiva putradArAdinA parityaktA nirgatikAH santaH
pravrajyAmabhyupagatA iti  // 6 //  TIkArtha - sAdhu ke lie yaha apekSita hai ki
vaha kisI anya dvArA pradatta daMtazodhana-datauna Adi vastu kA bhI anveSaNa
kare, vaha nirdoSa ho isakI khoja kare  /  usake lie utpAda eSaNA Adi doSoM se
rahita AhAra hI svIkArya yA sevana karane yogya hai  /  isalie bhUkha Adi kI
vedanA se yukta sAdhu ko anya dvArA pradatta vastu kI gavaiSaNA karane kI
kaThinAI yAvajjIvana jhelanI par3atI hai  /  bhikSA kI yAcanA karanA bhI eka
prakAra se kaSTa hI hai  /  jinameM Atmabala kI kamI hotI hai, vaise jIva use
sahana nahIM kara pAte  /  isalie jJAnI janoM ne kahA hai ki jo puruSa kisI se
kucha yAcanA karatA huA yaha kahe ki mujhe amuka vastu do, usake mukha kA
lAvaNya-AbhA kSINa ho jAtI hai, usakI vANI gale ke bIca meM hI aTaka jAtI hai  /
usakA hRdaya vyAkula ho jAtA hai  /  usakI gati cAla vikRta ho jAtI hai, mukha
para dInatA chA jAtI hai, deha se pasInA chUTane laga jAtA hai  /  usakA varNa
phIkA par3a jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra mRtyu ke samaya meM manuSya meM jo-jo
nizAna dikhAI dete haiM, ve saba yAcanA karane vAle puruSa meM parilakSita hote
haiM  /  yAcanA rUpa parISaha jise saha pAnA bahuta kaThina hai use sahane vAle
nirabhimAna, Atmabala ke dhanI jIva hI jJAnAdi kI vRddhi hetu usa patha para
calate haiM, jisa para mahApuruSa calate rahe haiN| sUtrakAra prastuta gAthA ke
uttarArddha meM Akroza parISaha ke sambandha meM kahate haiM-sAdhAraNa loka
jinakI vRtti anAryoM jaisI hotI hai sAdhu ko dekhakara kahane lagate hai ki ina
sAdhuoM ke zarIra para maila parivyApta hai, mastaka ke keza luMcita hai, bhUkha
Adi kI pIr3A se yukta hai isa prakAra ye apane dvArA pahale-pUrva janma meM kie
gae pApoM kA phala bhoga rahe haiM  /  ye khetI Adi jIvikopArjana ke kAryoM meM
apane ko asamartha pAkara sAdhu ho gae hai, ye loga durbhaga-abhAge haiM, strI
puruSa Adi pArivArika vRnda tathA anya saba padArtho se rahita evaM Azraya
vihIna hone ke kAraNa inhoMne pravrajyA svIkAra kI hai| ete sadde acAyaMtA,
gAmesu Nagaresu vA  /  tattha maMdA . visIyaMti, saMgAmaMmiva bhIrUyA  // 7 //
chAyA - etA~zcchabdAnazaknuvanto grAmeSu nagareSu vA  /  tatra maMdA viSIdanti
saMgrAma iva bhIrUkAH  //  anuvAda - gAMvoM, zaharoM yA unake bIca sthAnoM meM
aise nindApUrNa zabdoM ko sunakara manda-mandabuddhi, viveka rahita sAdhu isa
prakAra vivAda-zoka karane lagate hai, duHkhita ho jAte haiM, jaise yuddha meM
kAyara puruSa hote TIkA - 'etAn' pUrvoktAnAkrozarUpAn tathA caura cArikAdirUpAna
zabdAn soDhuma zakanuvanto grAmanagarAdau tadantarAle vA vyavasthitAH 'tatra'
tasmin Akroze sati 'mandA' ajJA laghu prakRtayo 'viSIdanti' vimanaskA 202)

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those who are weak-minded and of low character, they become disheartened by
hearing words of reproach, theft, adultery, etc., and they fall from the path of
restraint. Just as cowards in battle, overwhelmed by the sight of swords,
spears, axes, arrows, and the din of drums, trumpets, and cymbals, abandon their
courage and flee, seeking only to escape, so too, those of weak spirit, upon
hearing words of anger, become disheartened and abandon restraint. ||7||  Again,
the text says:  A hungry mendicant, bitten by a vicious dog, may become
disheartened. Just as a creature touched by fire becomes distressed, so too, the
weak-minded become disheartened. ||8||  Commentary:  The word "api" in this
verse indicates possibility. A vicious dog, by nature, may bite a hungry
mendicant who is wandering in search of food. When the mendicant is bitten by
the dog, the weak-minded, lacking in wisdom, become distressed and fearful. Just
as creatures touched by fire become distressed and contract their limbs in pain,
so too, the mendicant, attacked by a vicious creature, may fall from restraint.
It is difficult to endure such obstacles in villages. ||8||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM bhavanti saMyamAdvA bhrazyanti, yathA bhIravaH 'saMgrAme'
raNazirasi cakrakuntAsi zakti nArA cAkule ratatpaTahazaGkhajhalla rInAdagambhIre
samAkulAH santaH paurUSaM parityajyAyazaH paTahamaGgIkRtya bhajyante,
evamAkrozAdizabdAkarNanAdalpa sattvAH saMyame viSIdanti  // 7 //  vadha parISaha
mapi kRtyAha - TIkArtha - jo puruSa laghuprakRti-tuccha svabhAva yukta hote
haiM, mUrkha hote hai ve gAMva, zahara yA unake bIca ke bhAga meM pahale kahe
gae nindAmUlaka tathA caurya, vyabhicAra Adi ke Aropa se yukta zabda sunakara
unako sahane meM asamartha, akSama ho jAte haiM, khinna ho jAte haiM, saMyam ke
mArga se patita ho jAte haiM  /  jaise yuddha meM kAyara puruSa cakra, kunta-
bhAle, asi-talavAra zakti-tIkSNa nokayukta, trizUla Adi zastra evaM bANa Adi se
Akula tathA vahA~ bajate hue paTa: Dhola nagAre, zaMkha jhAlara Adi kI
gaDagaDAhaTa se ghabarAkara apane paurUSasAhasa kA parityAga karate hue apakIrti
svIkAra kara bhAga uThate haiM  /  isI prakAra Akroza yukta zabdoM ko sunakara
alpasatva-atyanta nyUna Atma parAkramayukta, sAhasahIna sAdhu saMyam pAlana meM
viSAda karate haiM-ghabarA uThate haiM, use chor3a bhAgate haiN| appege
khudhiyaM bhikkhU, guNI DaMsati lUsae  /  tattha maMdA visAyaMti, teupaTThA va
pANiNo  // 8 //  chAyA - apyekaH kSudhitaM bhikSu sunIdaMzati lUSakaH  /  tatra
maMdAH viSIdaMti tejaspRSTA iva prANinaH  //  anuvAda - kSudhita-bhUkhayukta yA
AhArApekSI sAdhu ko bhikSA hetu ghUmate samaya koI krUra kuttA Adi kATale to usa
samaya manda viveka rahita sAdhu esa prakAra duHkhI ho jAte hai, jaise Aga se
chU jAne para prANI vyAkula ho uThate hai  /  TIkA - 'appege' ityAdi, apiH
saMbhAvane ekaH kazcicchavAdiH lUSayatIti lUSakaH prakRtyaiva krUro bhakSakaH
khudhiyaMti kSudhitaM-bubhukSitaM bhikSAmaTTantaM bhikSu 'dazati' bhakSayati
dazanairaGgAvayavaM vilumpati, 'tatra' tasmin zvadibhakSaNe sati 'maMdA' ajJA
alpasattvatayA 'viSIdanti' dainyaM bhajante, yathA 'tejasA' agninA 'spRSTA'
dahyamAnAH 'prANino' jantavo vedanArtAH santo viSIdanti gAtraM
saMkocayantyArtadhyAnopahatA bhavanti, evaM sAdhurapi krUra sattvairabhidrutaH
saMyamAd bhrazyata iti, duHsahatvAdgrAmakaNTakAnAm  // 8 //  punarapi
tAnAdhikRtyAha - TIkArtha - isa gAthA meM 'api' zabda saMbhAvanA mUlaka hai  /
koI kuttA Adi prANI svabhAva se hI krUra hotA hai  /  vaha bhUkha se yukta
AhArArthI bhikSA ke lie bhramaNa karate hue kisI sAdhu ko kATane lage, apane
dAMtoM se usake aMgoM ko vidIrNa karane lage taba kutte Adi ke dvArA kATe jAte
samaya manda-buddhi viveka zUnya sAdhu dIna ho jAte hai, bhaya se ghabarA jAte
hai  /  jisa prakAra Aga se jalate hue prANI pIr3A se Arta-vyathita hokara zoka
karane lagate haiM, apane aMgoM ko sikor3ate hue ArtadhyAna karate haiM, usI
taraha ve sAdhu bhI nirdaya prANiyoM se abhidrUta-AkrAnta hokara saMyama se
bhraSTa ho jAte haiM, kyoMki gA~voM se aise vighnoM ko sahanA bar3A muzkila hotA
hai  /  203

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Some people say, "These are those who have come to the path of the wicked, who
are opposed to the virtuous. They are those who are suffering the consequences
of their past deeds, as they are living on alms."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram appege paDibhAsaMti, paDipaMthiya mAgatA  /
paDiyAragatA ete, je ete eva jIviNo  // 9 //  chAyA - apyeke pratibhASante
prAtipathikatAmAgatAH  /  pratikAragatA ete ya ete evaM jIvinaH  //  anuvAda -
jisakA sAdhuoM se droha hotA hai-jo sAdhuoM se DAha karate haiM ve unheM
dekhakara kahate haiM ki bhikSA para jIvana calAne vAle ye apane dvArA pahale
kiye gae pApoM kA duSphala bhoga rahe haiM  /  _TIkA - 'api' saMbhAvane, 'eke'
kecanApuSTadharmANa:-apuNyakarmANaH 'pratibhASante' bruvate, pratipatha:
-pratikalatvaM tena caranti prAtipathikA:-sAdhavidreSiNastadbhAvamAgatAH
kathAJcitaprAtipathe vA daSTA anAryA etada bruvate, sambhAvyata etadevaM
vidhAnAM, tadyathA-pratIkAraH-pUrvAcaritasya karmaNo'nu bhavastameke gatAH
prAptAH svakRtakarmaphala bhogino ya ete' yatayaH eva jIvina' iti
paragRhAnyaTanti ato'nta prAntabhojino'dattadAnA luJcitazirasaHsarvabhogavaJcitA
duHkhitaM jIvantIti  // 9 //  TIkArtha - isa gAthA meM 'api' zabda saMbhAvanA ke
artha meM hai kahIM apuSTa dharmA-pApI jana jo sAdhuoM ke viruddha calate haiM,
tathA jo kisI kAraNa vaza unase droha-dveSa karate haiM, athavA jo
asatapathagAmI anArya haiM ve kahate haiM ki ye sAdhu bhikSA ke lie anya logoM
ke gharoM meM bhaTakate haiM, antaprAnta bhojI- bace khuce bhojana kA sevana
karate haiM, dUsare dvArA diyA huA AhAra grahaNa karate haiM mastaka ke bAloM ko
locate haiM, saba prakAra ke bhogoM se rahita haiM, duHkha pUrNa jIvana bitAte
haiM, ye apane dvArA pahale kie hue pApa karmoM kA phala bhogate haiM, anArya
puruSoM dvArA sAdhu ke prati aisA kahA jAnA saMbhava hai  /  appege vaI
juMjaMti, nagiNA piMDolagAhamA  /  muMDA kaMDUviNaTuMgA ujalA asamAhitA  // 10
//  chAyA - apyeke vaco yujanti nagnAH piNDolagA adhamAH  /  muMDAH
kaNDUvinaSTAGgA ujjalA asamAhitAH  //  anuvAda - kaI loga jina kalpa Adi kI
sAdhanA meM nirata muni ko dekhakara kahate haiM-ye nagna haiM parapiNDaprArthI-
dUsaroM dvArA datta AhAra lete haiM ye adhama hai, muNDita-keza rahita haiM,
kaNDu roga-khujalI Adi kI bImArI se inake aMga jarjara haiM, ye maila se bhare
haiM tathA vibhatsa haiM-inheM dekhakara ghRNA AtI hai  /  TIkA - kiJca-apyeke
kecana kusRti prasRtA anAryA vAcaM yuJjanti-bhASante, tadyathA-ete jina
kalpikAdayo nagnAstathA 'piMDolaga'tti parapiNDa prArthakA adhamA:-malAvilatvAt
jugupsitA 'muNDA' luJcitazirasaH, tathA kvacitkaNDU-kRtakSatai rekhAbhirvA
vinaSTAGgA-vikRtazarIrAH, apratikarma zarIratayA vA kvacidroga sambhave
sanatkumAravadvinaSTAGgAstathodgato jallaH zuSkaprasvedo yeSAM te ujjalAH tathA
'asamAhitA' azobhanA bIbhatsA duSTA vA prANi nAma samAdhi mutpAdayantIti  // 10
//  sAmpradametadbhASakANAM vipAkadarzanAyAha - .. TIkArtha - kumArgagAmI kaI
anArya-anAcaraNazIla vyakti aisA kahate haiM ki ye jina kalpI Adi sAdhu nagna
rahate haiM dUsaroM ke piNDa-anna ke prArthI-abhyarthIyA yAcaka haiM, dUsaroM se
mAMgakara khAte haiM, ye maile kucaile haiM, (204)

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Upasargadhyayanam  They are inferior, detestable, and have shaved heads. They
have wounds from diseases like itching, their limbs are deformed due to
scratching, their organs are destroyed like Sanatakumara due to lack of bathing,
washing, etc., and they are very dirty and foul-smelling due to dried sweat on
their body. They are impure and create unrest for living beings.   Evam
vippatipanne, tamo te tamanjanti, Chaya - Appana u ajjana. Manda moheṇa pāuḍā.
Translation: Thus, the deluded ones, devoid of self-knowledge, enveloped by
delusion, go from one darkness to another.  Commentary: 'Evam' - In this way,
'eke' - some sinful persons, 'vippatipanna:' - opposed to the righteous path,
'atmana' - themselves ignorant, not heeding the words of the discerning, 'tama:'
- the superior darkness of ignorance, 'yanti' - go, or descend to even lower
states, because 'manda:' - obstructed by the veil of ignorance, and 'moha' -
delusion, they are 'pravṛta:' - enveloped.  Puṭṭho ya Daṃsamasaehi, Na ye diṭṭhe
pare loe, jai paraṃ Taṇhāphāsamacāiya. Maraṇaṃ siya.  Translation: Stung by
mosquitoes and flies, unable to bear even the touch of grass, if there is the
prospect of death in the other world, what fault is there in me?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM adhama haiM, jugupsita-ghRNAspada haiM, aura luMcita mastaka
haiN| khujalI Adi kI bImArI se kahIM-kahIM inake ghAva haiM, khujalAne se banI
rekhAoM ke kAraNa inake aMga vikRta ho gae haiM, zarIra ke pratikarma-snAna,
prakSAlana Adi na karane se rogoM kI utpatti ke kAraNa sanatkumAra kI taraha
inake aMga naSTa ho gae haiM, apanI deha para sUkhe hue pasIne ke kAraNa ye
bar3e gaMde ghinaune haiN| dUSita haiM, ye prANiyoM ke lie asamAdhi azAMti paidA
karate haiM  /  OM OM OM evaM vippaDivannege, tamAo te tamaMjaMti, chAyA -
appaNA u ajANayA  /  maMdA moheNa pAur3A  // 11 //  AtmanAtvajJAH  /  evaM
vipratipannA eka tamasaste tamo yAMti maMdA: mohena prAvRtAH  //  anuvAda isa
prakAra vipratipanna - saMmArga, dharmamArga yA dhArmika puruSoM ke sAtha droha
karane vAle, svayaM jJAna rahita mohAcchanna ajJAnI vyakti eka ajJAna se
nikalakara dUsare ajJAna meM praviSTa hote jAte haiM  /  TIkA - 'evam'
anantaroktanItyA 'eke' apuNyakarmANo 'vipratipannAH' sAdhu sanmArgadveSiNaH
'AtmanA' svayamajJAH tuzabdAdanyeSAM ca vivekinAM vacana makurvANAH santaste
'tamasaH' ajJAnarUpAdutkRSTaM' tamo 'yAnti' gacchanti yadi vA -
adhastAdapyadhastanIM gatiM gacchanti yato 'mandA' jJAnAvaraNIyenAvaSTabdhAH '
tathA 'moTena' mithyAdarzana rUpeNa 'prAvRtA' AcchAditAH santaH khiGgaprAyAH
sAdhuvidveSitayA kumArgagA bhavanti, tathA coktam " ekaM hi cakSuramalaM sahajaM
vivekastadvadbhireva saha saMvasatirdvitIyam  /  etad dvayaM bhuvi na yasya sa
tattvato'ndhastasyAp mArgacalane khalu ko'parAdha: ? || 1 || 11 ||za parISaha
madhikRtyAha TIkArtha kaI aise apuNya karmA-pApI loga haiM, jo pahale kahe
anusAra sAdhuoM se tathA sanmArga se droha karate haiM, ve svayaM jJAna rahita
haiM  /  isa gAthA meM 'tu' zabda AyA hai, jisakA Azaya yaha hai ki ve anya
jJAniyoM kA kahanA bhI nahIM mAnate, ve avivekI jIva eka ajJAnAtmaka aMdhakAra
se nikalakara usase bhI bhArI ajJAnamaya aMdhakAra ko pAte haiM  /  athavA ve
nimna se nimna gati meM janma lete haiM, kyoMki ve jJAnAvaraNIya karma AvRtta
haiM tathA mithyA darzanAtmaka moha se Achanna haiM  /  ve ajJAnAndha puruSa
sAdhu se droha karane kAraNa kumArga sevI haiM  /  kahA gayA hai sahaja,
svAbhAvika, viveka jJAna eka amal nirmala netra hai  /  viveka yuktajanoM ke
sAtha rahanA unakA saMga karanA netra hai, jisake ye donoM netra nahIM hote, isa
bhUmaNDala para vastutaH vahI andhA - hai  /  vaha yadi apamArga-bure rAste para
calatA hai to usakI kyA galatI hai - puTTho ya daMsamasaehiM, na ye diTThe pare
loe, jai paraM - taNaphAsamacAiyA  /  maraNaM siyA  // 12 //  chAyA spRSTazca
daMzamazakai - stRNasparzamazaknuvantaH 1 na mayA dRSTaH paro lokaH, yadi paraM
maraNaM syAt  //  205 -

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Sūtrakṛtāṅga Sūtra states that
a Sādhu (ascetic), who is afflicted and cannot endure the rough and harsh touch
of the straw bed and grass bedding, starts thinking that though he has not
directly witnessed the afterlife, he is experiencing a pain akin to death or
dying from this distress.  Commentary: In certain regions like Sindhu,
Tāmraliptā, and Koṃkaṇa, there are abundant mosquitoes and flies. A wandering
Sādhu may sometimes be bitten by them and, being devoid of possessions, unable
to bear the harsh touch of the grass bed. In such a situation, he may lose his
composure and think that the austere practices he is undertaking might be
appropriate only if the afterlife exists, as he has not directly perceived it,
nor is it established through inference or other means. If his death were to
occur due to this affliction, that would be the only result, without any other
fruit.  The verse states: "Tormented by the plucking of their hair, defeated in
brahmacarya (celibacy), the dull-witted ones grieve there, like fish pierced in
the net."  Commentary: The dull-minded individuals, tormented by the plucking of
their hair, which causes great pain due to the bleeding, and defeated in the
practice of brahmacarya, grieve in that situation of hair-plucking, just as fish
trapped in a net are helpless and lose their lives.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - DAMsoM aura maccharoM dvArA spRSTa-AkrAMta
hotA huA tathA tRNa zaiyyA-ghAsa phUsa ke bichaune ke rUkhe-kaThora sparza ko
nahIM saha sakatA huA eka sAdhu socane lagatA hai ki maiMne paraloka ko sAkSAt
dekhA nahIM hai kintu isa kaSTa se maraNa yA mRtyu tulya pIDA ko to maiM
pratyakSa hI dekha rahA huuN| TIkA - kvacitsindhuttAmraliptakoGkaNAdike deze
adhikA daMza mazakA bhavanti tatra ca kadAcitsAdhuH paryaTastaiH "spRSTazca"
bhakSitaH tathA niSkiJcanatvAt tRNeSu zayAnastatsparza soDhumazaknuvan ArttaH
san evaM kadAciccinta yet, tadyathA-paralokArtha metaduSkaramanuSThAnaM
kriyamANaM ghaTate, na cAsau mayA paralokaH pratyakSeNopalabdhaH,
apratyakSatvAt, nAppanumAnAdinopalabhyata iti, ato yadi paraM mamAnena
klezAbhitApena maraNaM syAt, nAnyatphalaM kiJcaneti  // 12 //  apica - TIkArtha
- sindhu, tAmralipta, tathA koMkaNa Adi pradezoM meM DAMsa aura macchara
bahutAyata se hote haiN| vahAM viharaNazIla sAdhu kadAcita DAMsoM aura maccharoM
dvArA spRSTa hoM, kATA jAe tathA niSparigrahI hone ke kAraNa ghAsa phUsa ke
bichaune para soyA huA tinakoM ke kaThora sparza ko na saha sake to vaha Arta-
duHkhita dhairya rahita hokara aisA bhI soca sakatA hai ki yaha jo maiM kaThora
karma kara rahA hU~, yaha to tabhI ucita ho sakatA hai, jaba paraloka kA astitva
ho  /  paraloka ko maiMne nahIM dekhA hai, vaha pratyakSa nahIM hai  /  anumAna
Adi anya pramANoM dvArA bhI vaha upalabdha, prApta yA siddha nahIM hotA  /  aisI
sthiti meM yadi merI mRtyu ho jAya to vahI usakA phala hogA usake atirikta anya
koI phala nahIM hogA  /  saMtatA kesa loeNaM, ' baMbhaceraparAiyA  /  tattha
maMdA visIyaMti, macchA viTThA va keyaNe  // 13 //  chAyA - saMtaptAH
kezaluJcanena, brahmacaryaparAjitAH  /  tatra maMdAH viSIdanti matsyAH viddhA
iva ke tane  //  anuvAda - kezoM ke luMcana se saMtapta-duHkhita, pIDita tathA
brahmacarya se parAjita-brahmacarya pAlana meM apane ko asamartha mAnate hue
maMda-ajJAnI puruSa jAla meM phaMsI machaliyoM kI jyoM viSAda kA anubhava karate
haiM  /  TIkA - samantAt taptAH santaptA: kezAnAM 'loca' utpATanaM tena, tathAhi
sarUdhira kezotpATane hi mahatI pIDopapadyate, tayA cAlpasattvAH
vistrotasikobhajante tathA 'brahmacarya' vastinirodhastena ca 'parAjitAH'
parAbhagnAH santaH 'tatra' tasmin kezotpATane'ti durjaya kAmodreke vA sati
'maMdA' jaDA-laghu prakRtayo viSIdanti saMyamAnuSThAnaM prati zItalI bhavanti,
sarvathA saMyamAd vA bhrazyanti, yathA matsyAH 'ketane' matsya bandhane praviSTA
nirgatikAH santo jIvitAd bhrazyanti, evaM te'pi varAkAH sarvaMkaSakAmaparAjitAH
saMyamajIvitAt bhrazyanti  // 13 //  _TIkArtha - kezoM kA utpATana-upAr3anA yA
ukhAr3anA loca kahA jAtA hai  /  kezoM ko ukhAr3ate samaya khUna bhI A jAtA hai,
isalie vaisA karate hue bahuta pIr3A hotI hai  /  ataeva kaI Atmabalarahita.
puruSa kezoM ke luMcana se pIDita hokara dIna bana jAte haiM  /  kAma ke udrega
ko rokanA brahmacarya kahA jAtA hai, usase parAjitausake paripAlana meM
asamartha ochI prakRti vAle ajJAnI puruSa jaba kezoM ke luMcana kA samaya AtA
hai tathA 206)

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When the urge of desire surges, they become cool and relaxed in following
restraint, or they become completely corrupt and degenerate from restraint, like
a fish caught in a net, unable to find a way out, dies in it. In the same way,
those unfortunate ones, defeated by the all-conquering desire, become degenerate
from a life of restraint. Those who follow the path of self-punishment, with
false beliefs, filled with joy and hatred, they are the ones who torment the
righteous. Those who follow the path of self-punishment, with false beliefs,
filled with joy and hatred, they are the ones who torment the righteous. Some
ignorant men, seeing a virtuous monk wandering around the country, tie him up
with ropes, calling him a spy or a thief, and torment him with harsh words full
of anger.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM kAma kA vega umar3atA hai, taba saMyama ke anusaraNa meM
zItala-zithila ho jAte haiM, athavA ve saMyama se sarvathA bhraSTa-patita ho
jAte haiM, jaise jAla meM phaMsI huI machalI usameM se bAhara nikalane kA rAstA
na pAkara usI meM mara jAtI hai  /  usI taraha ve abhAge sarvavijayI-sabako
jItane vAle kAma se parAjita-parAbhUta hokara, hArakara saMyama maya jIvana se
patita ho jAte haiM  /  AyadaMDa samAyAre, micchAsaMThiye bhAvaNA  /  harisappa
o samAvanA, keI lUsaMti'nAriyA  // 14 //  chAyA - AtmadaMDa samAcArAH
mithyAsaMsthita bhAvanAH  /  harSa pradveSa mApannAH ke'pilUSayaMtyanAryAH  //
- anuvAda - jisase AtmA daMDabhAgI-pApatmaka karmoM kA baMdha karane vAlI hotI
hai, aise viparIta AcaraNa ke anugAmI, dharma se viparIta cittavRtti yukta, rAga
dveSa se vikRta kaI anArya puruSa sAdhu ko pIDita karate haiN| TIkA - kiJca-AtmA
daNDyate-khaNDyate hitAt bhrazyate yena sa AtmadaNDaH 'samAcAraH' anuSThAnaM
yeSAmanAryANAM te tathA, tathA mithyA-viparItA saMsthitAsvAgrahArUr3hA bhAvanA-
anta:karaNavRttiryeSAM te mithyAsaMstita bhAvanAmithyAtvopahatadRSTaya ityarthaH
harSazva pradveSazca harSapradveSaM tadApannA rAgadveSasamAkulA iti yAvat, ta
evambhRtA anAryAH-sadAcAraM sAdhuM krIDayA pradveSeNa vA krUrakarmakAritvAt
'lUSayanti' kadarthayanti daNDAdibhirvAgbhi-veti  // 14 //  etadeva
darzayatumAha - TIkArtha - jisase AtmA daMDa kI bhAgI banatI hai, yA apane
kalyANa se bhraSTa hotI hai, dUra haTatI hai, vaise AcAra ko Atma daMDa kahA
jAtA hai  /  jo anArya puruSa aisA karate haiM, ve Atma daNDa samAcAra kahe jAte
haiM, jinakI citta kI vRtti viparIta hai yA apane asat mithyA Agraha meM grasta
hai ve mithyA dRSTi puruSa mithyA saMsthita bhAvanA kahalAte haiM, jo harSa-
prasannatA tathA dveSa-duSTatA se yukta hai, dUsare zabdoM meM jo
rAgadveSasamAkularAga aura dveSa se bhare hue haiM aise anArya puruSa apane
caitasika vinoda ke lie athavA dveSa vaza krUra karmA hone ke kAraNa laTThI Adi
ke prahAra-AghAta dvArA athavA gAlI galauca dvArA sadAcaraNa zIla sAdhu ko kaSTa
dete haiN| appege paliyaMtesiM, cAro corotti suvvayaM  /  .. baMdhaMti
bhikkhuyaM bAlA, kasAyavayaNehi ya  // 15 //  chAyA - apyeke paryaMte corazcaura
iti suvratam  /  bananti bhikSukaM bAlAH kaSAya vacanaizca  //  anuvAda - bAla-
katipaya jJAna zUnya puruSa anArya deza ke AsapAsa viharaNazIla uttama vrata
yukta sAdhu ko yaha guptacara hai yA cora hai, rassI Adi dvArA bA~dha dete haiM,
kaSAya pUrNa-krodha pUrNa kaThora vacana kahakara use duHkhita karate haiN| (207

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  In this verse, the word 'api' is
used to indicate a possibility, i.e., it is possible that some unrighteous
individuals with deluded intellect, overcome by attachment and aversion, seeing
a Sadhu (ascetic) wandering in the unrighteous region, consider him to be a spy
or a thief, and thus torment him.  They bind the Sadhu with ropes, etc. and
afflict him. The ignorant ones, lacking the discrimination between right and
wrong, also revile the Sadhu with wrathful and harsh words, intimidating and
threatening him.  There, in that unrighteous region, the Sadhu, beaten with a
staff, fist, or even a fruit, if he is still immature, remembers his kinsmen,
just as a woman, driven by anger, fleeing from her home, remembers her
relatives.  Further, the verse states that these harsh, cruel, and unbearable
sufferings faced by the Sadhu make him long for the comfort and security of his
home, just as the woman, after being chased by thieves and other miscreants,
becomes remorseful and remembers her family members.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - api saMbhAvane, eke anAryA AtmadaNDa samAcArA
mithyAtvopahata buddhayo rAgadveSaparigatAH sAdhu 'paliyaMtesiM' ti anArya deza
paryante vartamAnaM 'cAro' tti cAro'yaM "cauraH" ayaM stena ityevaM
matvAsuvrataM kadathayanti, tathAhi-'bananti' rajvAdinA saMyamayanti 'bhikSukaM'
bhikSaNa zIlaM 'bAlA' ajJAH sada sadviveka vikalAH tathA 'kaSAya vacanaizca'
krodhapradhAnakaTukavacanai'ca nirbhartsayantIti  // 15 //  TIkArtha - isa gAthA
meM 'api' zabda saMbhAvanArthaka hai, arthAt aisA honA bhI saMbhava hai, yaha
sUcita karane ke lie isakA prayoga huA hai jisase AtmA paraloka meM daNDita hotI
hai, du:kha prApta karatI hai, aise anAcAra sevI mithyAtva se vidhvasta buddhi
yukta rAga dveSa ke vazagata kaI anArya puruSa sAdhu ko anArya deza ke Asa pAsa
viharaNa zIla dekhakara yaha guptacara hai yA cora hai aisA mAnate hue use
utpIDita karate haiM, ve use rassI Adi se bAMdhakara vyathita karate haiM  /
sat aura asat-bhale bure ke viveka se rahita ve ajJajana krodhapUrNa kaTuvacanoM
dvArA sAdhu kI nirbhatsanA karate haiM use DarAte dhamakAte haiM  /  tattha
daMDeNa saMvIte, muTTiNA adu phaleNa vA  /  nAtINaM saratI bAle, itthI vA
kuddhagAmiNI  // 16 //  chAyA - tatra daMDena saMvIto muSTinA'thavA phalena vA
/  jJAtInAM smarati bAlaH strIvat kruddhagAminI  //  anuvAda - usa anArya deza
ke Asa pAsa viharaNa zIla sAdhu anArya janoM dvArA DaMDe se, mukke se yA kisI
bar3e phala se tADita kiyA jAtA hai to vaha apane jJAti janoM ko-pArivArika
bandhubAndhavoM ko usI taraha yAda karane lagatA hai jaise krodhavaza ghara se
bhAgI huI strI apane jJAtijanoM ko smaraNa karatI hai  /  TIkA - api ca-tatra'
tasminnArya dezaparyante vartamAnaH sAdhuranAyaiH 'daNDena' yaSTinA muSTinA vA
'saMvIta:' prahato'thavA 'phalena vA' mAtuliGgAdinA khaGgAdinA vA sa sAdhurevaM
taiH kadaryamAnaH kazcidapariNata: 'bAlaH' ajJo jJAtInAM svajanAnAMsmarati,
tadyathA-yadyatra mama kazcit sambandhIsyAt
nAhamevambhUtAMkadarthanAmavApnuyAmiti dRSTAntamAha-yathA strI kruddhA satI
svagRhAt gamanazIlA nirAzrayA mAMsapezIva sarvaspRhaNIyA taskarAdibhirabhidrutA
satI jAtapazcAtApA jJAtInAM smarati evamasAvapIti  // 16 //  TIkArtha - usa
anArya deza ke AsapAsa vicaraNazIla sAdhu ko jaba anAryajana lAThI, mukke,
mAtuliMga Adi phala tathA khaDga Adi se mArane lagate haiM, taba pIr3A anubhava
karatA huA vaha aparipakva kaccA sAdhu apane pArivArika janoM ko yAda karatA
hai, vaha socane lagatA hai ki yahA~ merA koI sambandhI isa jagaha maujUda hotA
to merI yaha burI hAlata nahIM hotI, isa saMbaMdha meM eka dRSTAnta hai-jaise
eka strI krodha meM Akara apane ghara se nikala par3atI hai, bhAga jAtI hai  /
jisa taraha mAMsa saba logoM ke lobha kA AkarSaNa kA hetu hai, usI taraha cora,
duSTa Adi use spRhaNIya mAnakara usake pIche ho jAte haiM taba vaha pachatAtI
huI apane parivAra ke logoM ko yAda karatI hai, usI prakAra vaha ajJAnI sAdhu
bhI uktasthiti meM apane riztedAra ko yAda karatA hai| ete bho kasiNA phAsA,
pharUsA durahiyAsayA  /  hatthI vA sarasaMvittA, kIvA vasagayA gihaM
||17||ttibemi -208)

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shadow - Prefix Study Oh! All these touches are rough and unbearable. Like an
elephant pierced by arrows, they are weak and have gone back to the house.  I
say this. Translation Students! The prefixes mentioned earlier are unbearable
and painful, overwhelmed by them, cowardly men return to household life. Just as
an elephant wounded by arrows flees the battlefield, so too do men without inner
strength abandon restraint in fear, I say this. - Commentary - To conclude, he
says, "Oh" is an address to the students, those who have been described as
afflictions from the beginning, such as bites of mosquitoes, etc., are
afflictions because they cause pain. "All" means all, in abundance, they are
touched - experienced by the sense of touch, therefore they are called touches.
What kind are they? "Rough" because they are done by the unrefined, they cause
pain, and those with little strength cannot bear them, and some of those with
low character, accepting praise, like an elephant on the battlefield, "pierced
by a net of arrows" - overwhelmed by hundreds of arrows, they suffer defeat,
similarly, "weak" - powerless, "subdued" - under the control of others, bound by
karma, they have gone back to the house, or in another reading, "with intense
speed" - with intense speed, "deceitful" - deceitful in their practices, they
have abandoned restraint and gone to the house, I say this, as before. ||17||
This is the first objective of the study of afflictions. - I Commentary - In the
present verse, the word "Oh" is used to address the students, who have been
described as afflictions from the beginning, such as bites of mosquitoes, etc.,
are afflictions because they cause pain. "All" means all, in abundance, they are
touched - experienced by the sense of touch, therefore they are called touches.
They are all inflicted by unrefined men, they cause pain, and those with little
strength cannot bear them, and some of those with low character, accepting
praise, first accept restraint, but like an elephant wounded by arrows, flees
the battlefield, so too do these men, unable to bear the aforementioned
afflictions, return to household life. They are truly burdened by the heavy
karma of the guru's actions, in some places, "intensely deceitful" - intensely
deceitful, this reading is found. This means that those who are oppressed by
intense, harsh afflictions and are deceitful and wicked, have abandoned
restraint and departed for home, becoming householders again, I say this. The
first objective of the third study, called the knowledge of afflictions, is
complete. 编 209

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chAyA - upasargAdhyayanaM ete bhoH ! kRtsnAH sparzAH paruSAH duradhisahyAH  /
hastina iva zara saMvItA klIvA avazAH gatAH graham  //  iti bravImi  //  anuvAda
ziSyoM ! pahale kahe gae upasarga asahya aura duHkhaprada hai, unase udvelita
hokara kAyara puruSa punaH gRhastha meM A jAte haiN| jaise bANa se Ahata hAthI
yuddha bhUmi ko chor3akara bhAga jAtA hai usI prakAra Atmabala rahita puruSa
ghabarAkara saMyam kA parityAga kara dete haiM, aisA maiM kahatA hU~  /  - TIkA
- upasaMhArArthamAha- bho iti ziSyAmantraNaM, ya eta AditaH prabhRti daMza
mazakAdayaH pIDotpAdakatvena parISA evopasargA abhihitA 'kRtsanA: ' saMpUrNA
bAhulyena spRzyante - sparzendriyeNAnubhUyanta iti sparzAH, kathambhUtAH ?
'paruSAH' paruSairanAryaiH kRtatvAt pIDAkAriNaH, te
cAlpasattvairduHkhenAdhisahyayante tAMzcA sahamAnA laghuprakRtayaH
kecanAzlAghAmaGgIkRtya hastina iva raNazirasi "zarajAla saMvitA: " zarazatAkulA
bhaGgamupayAnti evaM 'klIbA' asamarthA 'avazA:' paravazAH karmAyattA
gurukarmANaH punarapi gRhameva gatAH, pAThAntaraM vA 'tivvasaDDhe 'tti
tIvrarUpasagairabhidrutAH 'zaThAH' zaThAnuSThAnAH saMyamaM parityajya grahaM
gatAH iti bravImIti pUrvavat  // 17 //  upasarga parijJAyAH prathamoddezaka iti
- I TIkArtha prastuta gAthA meM ' bho' zabda ziSyoM ke saMbodhana meM AyA hai,
jo DAMsa macchara Adi pIr3A janaka upasarga varNita kiye gaye haiM, ve sabhI
sparzendriya dvArA anubhava kiye jAte haiM, isalie ve sparza kahalAte haiM  /
ve sabhI kaSTa anArya puruSoM dvArA diye jAte haiM, ve pIr3A utpanna karate
haiM, alpa parAkramI prANI unheM saha nahIM sakate, kaI ochI prakRti ke puruSa
apanI bar3hAI karate hue pahale to saMyama svIkAra kara lete haiM, kintu bANoM
kI coToM se Ahata hAthI jaise yuddha bhUmi se bhAga khar3A hotA hai, usI taraha
ve puruSa bhI pUrva varNita parISahoM ko sahane meM asakta hokara phira gRhastha
meM lauTa Ate haiM ve vAstava meM guru karmoM bhArI karmoM vAle haiM, kahIM
kahIM 'tivvasaDhe' - tIvrazaTha yaha pATha milatA hai  /  isakA tAtparya yaha
hai ki tIvra kaThora upasargoM se utpIDita tathA asata AcaraNazIla zaTha- duSTa
puruSoM ne saMyama kA parityAga kara ghara ko prasthAna kiyA phira gRhastha bana
gaye, yaha maiM kahatA hU~  /  upasarga parijJA saMjJaka tRtIya adhyayana kA
pahalA uddezaka samApta huA  /  Bian  209

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Second Section of the Sutra-Kritanga Sutra  The first section has been
explained. Now, the second section is being started. This second section is
connected to the first section. This is the study of prefixes. The aim is to
explain the nature of prefixes. Prefixes are of two types: unfavorable and
favorable. The unfavorable prefixes were explained in the first section. In this
section, the favorable prefixes are being explained. This is the connection
between this second section and the first. Its first sutra is as follows:
**Ahimsa, sahuma, sanga, bhikkhunam je duruttara. Jaththa ege visiyanti, na
chayanthi javitte.** ||1||  **Commentary:**  These subtle attachments are
difficult for monks to overcome. Some are overwhelmed by them and are unable to
maintain their vows.  **Translation:**  After explaining unfavorable prefixes,
now favorable prefixes are being explained. These are very subtle. Monks can
overcome these prefixes with great difficulty, but many men are overwhelmed by
them and become unable to follow their vows.  **Explanation of the Commentary:**
The word "atha" indicates continuation. After explaining unfavorable prefixes,
favorable prefixes are being explained. This is the aim. The use of the word
"ime" here refers to something that is directly present and nearby, which means
that these favorable prefixes are being taken up, which will be explained later.
The affectionate attachment of family members does not distort the external
body, but rather distorts the mind. Therefore, it is called subtle and internal.
Unfavorable prefixes, on the other hand, distort the body in a visible way, and
are therefore called external. These attachments, such as those to parents, are
difficult for even virtuous monks to overcome. Even though unfavorable prefixes,
such as those caused by obstacles in livelihood, are difficult to overcome,
great men can overcome them by practicing detachment. These favorable prefixes,
however, can also lead to virtue. Therefore, they are difficult to overcome. In
these prefixes, some people, who are of lesser virtue, become disheartened and
abandon their practice altogether. They are unable to maintain their vows.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram dvitIyaH uddezakaH uktaH prathamoddezaka, sAmprataM
dvitIyaH samArabhyate-asya cAyamabhisambandhaH ihopasargaparijJAdhyayane
upasargAH prativipAdayiSitAH te cAnukUlAH pratikUlAzca, tatra prathamoddezake
pratikUlAH pratipAditAH, iha tvanukUlAH pratipAdyanta ityanena
sambandhenAyAtasyAsyoddezakasyA''disUtram - aba tRtIya adhyayana kA dvitIya
uddezaka prArambha kiyA jAtA hai  /  pahalA uddezaka varNita kiyA jA cukA hai,
aba dUsarA uddezaka zuru kiyA jA rahA hai, isa dUsare uddezaka kA pahale
uddezaka ke sAtha saMbaMdha hai  /  yaha upasarga parijJA adhyayana hai  /
isameM upasargoM kA svarUpa batAnA abhipsita hai  /  upasarga do prakAra ke
haiM-pratikUla aura anukUla  /  pratikUla upasargoM kA varNana prathama uddezaka
meM A cukA hai| isa uddezaka meM anakala upasargoM kA varNana kiyA jA rahA hai|
isa dasare uddezaka kA pahale se yahI saMbaMdha hai.  /  isakA prathama sUtra
isa prakAra hai - ahime sahumA saMgA, bhikkhuNaM je duruttarA  /  jattha ege
visIyaMti, Na cayaMti javittae  // 1 //  chAyA - atheme sUkSmAH saGgAH bhikSUNAM
ye duruttarAH  /  ' tatraike viSIdaMti na zaknuvanti yApayitum  //  anuvAda -
pratikUla upasarga kahe jAne ke anantara aba anukUla upasarga pratipAdita kiye
jAte haiN| ye bar3e sUkSma hote haiM  /  bhikSu bar3I kaThinatA se ina upasargoM
ko lAMgha sakate haiM, bardAsta kara sakate haiM, kintu kaI puruSa ina upasargoM
se viSaNNa-vikRta ho jAte haiM, ve apane saMyama jIvana kA pAlana karane meM
asamartha ho jAte haiN| TIkA - 'atha' iti Anantarye,
pratikUlopasargAnantaramanukUlAH pratipAdyanta ityAnantayArthaH te 'ime'
anantaramevAbhidhIya mAnA pratyakSAsannavAcitvAdidamA'bhi dhIyante, te ca
'sUkSmAH' prAyazcetovikArakAritvena nAntarAH, na pratikUlopasargA
ivabAhulyenazarIravikArakAritvena prakaTatayA bAdarA iti, 'saGgA'
mAtApitrAdisambandhAH ya ete "bhikSUNAM' sAdhUnAmapi 'duruttarA' durlakyA-
duratikramaNIyA iti, prayojIvitavighnakarairapi pratikUlopasarga
rUdIrNairmAdhyasthyamavalambayituM mahApuruSaiH zakyam,
etetvanukUlopasargAstAnapyupAyena dharmAcyAvayanti, tato'mI duruttarA iti,
'yatra' yeSUpasargeSu satsa 'eke' alpasatvAH sadanuSThAnaM prati 'viSIdanti'
zItalavihAritvaM bhajante sarvathA vA-saMyamaM tyajanti, naivAtmAnaM
saMyamAnuSThAnena 'yApayituM'-vartayituM tasmin vA vyavasthApayituM zaknuvanti'
samarthA bhavantIti  // 1 //  TIkArtha - prastuta gAthA meM 'atha' zabda
anantara kA artha bodhita karane hetu abhihita huA hai| pratikUla upasarga
kahane ke anantara aba anukUla upasarga kahe jAte haiM  /  yaha batAnA isakA
lakSya hai  /  yahAM 'ime' 'idaM' zabda kA jo prayoga AyA hai, vaha pratyakSa
tathA samIpavartI vastu kA vAcaka hai, jisase ve anukUla upasarga gRhIta kiye
gae haiM, jo Age batAye jAyeMge  /  pArivArika janoM kA snehAtmaka upasarga
bAharI zarIra ko vikRta nahIM karatA varan vaha citta ko vikRta karatA hai,
bigAr3atA hai  /  isalie use sUkSma-Antarika kahA jAtA hai, pratikUla upasarga
jisa prakAra vyakta rUpa (210

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the upsargas distorts the external body, in that way these upsargas
do not distort the external body, therefore they are not gross, here the word
'sangha' has come which is indicative of the relationship of parents etc.
relatives. It is difficult even for virtuous men to cross the relationship of
relatives, adverse upsargas which put life in danger, calamity or difficulty
when they come, here men rich in satva - self-strength accept the mediating
attitude - neutral feeling. They are not affected by them, but it is difficult
to accept neutral feeling when favorable upsargas are present, favorable
upsargas make even great men fall from dharma. Therefore, the Agamkar has called
favorable upsargas as difficult or difficult to cross - which are difficult to
cross. When a favorable upsarga is present, men devoid of self-power become
slack, unstable or loose in the observance of coolness - restraint. Or they
completely abandon restraint, they become unable to live a restrained life. 1
They see you, they cry for the family. They nourish you. You are asked, whose
father are you? Do you laugh? ||1|| Sadhu Translation The relatives of the Sadhu
see him and surround him and start crying - they say to him - Father! Why are
you abandoning us? We have raised you, now you nourish us, raise us. - -
Commentary - To show those subtle relationships, he says - 'Api: ' in the sense
of possibility 'Eke' such 'Jnatavy:' relatives, parents etc. when they see the
one who has renounced the world or the one who has taken initiation, they
surround him and cry, they cry and say with humility as - from childhood you
have been nourished by us, you will be the caretaker of the old, so now "Na:" we
are not your father, "Tat!" son, nourish us, raise us, for whom - for what
reason or by whose strength are you abandoning us? We have no other protector
except you. ||2|| And - Commentary The Agamkar says to reveal those subtle
relationships - in the present verse 'Api' word is used in the sense of
possibility. Its meaning is that what is said in this verse is possible - it
happens, mother father and their similar family members see the renounced -
initiated or the one who has taken initiation, they surround him, start crying,
and with humility and compassion start saying son! We raised you from childhood
so that you would serve us when we are old. Now you raise us. Why or by whose
support are you leaving us. O father! We have no other protector except you. -
Beloved, you are a monk Brother, you are a relative Father! Father! Brother,
what is your brother? 211 These are small. Do you laugh? ||3||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM meM bAhya zarIra ko vikRta karate haiM, usa prakAra ye
upasarga bAharI zarIra ko vikRta nahIM karate, isalie ye sthUla nahIM hai, yahAM
'saMgha' pada AyA hai jo mAtA-pitA Adi riztedAroM ke saMbaMdha kA sUcaka hai|
riztedAroM ke saMbaMdha ko lAMgha pAnA sAdhu puruSoM ke lie bhI kaThina hai,
pratikUla upasarga jo jIvana ko saMkaTa meM, vipatti yA kaThinAI meM DAla dete
haiM jaba Ate haiM to yahA~ satva - Atmabala ke dhanI puruSa madhyastha vRtti -
taTastha bhAva svIkAra kara lete haiN| unase prabhAvita nahIM hote, kintu
anukUla upasargoM ke upasthita hone para taTastha bhAva svIkAranA duSkara hai,
anukUla upasarga mahApuruSoM ko bhI dharma se patita kara dete haiM  /  ataeva
AgamakAra ne anukUla upasargoM ko dustara yA durlaghya- jinheM pArakara pAnA
kaThina hai kahA hai  /  jaba anukUla upasarga upasthita hotA hai to Atma zakti
vihIna puruSa zItala vihArI-saMyama ke paripAlana meM zithila, asthira yA DhIle
ho jAte haiM  /  athavA saMyama kA sarvathA parityAga kara dete haiM, ve
saMyamapUrvaka jIvana nirvAha karane meM asamartha ho jA 1 appege nAyao dissa,
royaMti parivAriyA  /  poSaNe vAya  /  puTTho'si, kassa tAya ! jahAsi Ne ?  // 1
//  chAyA apyeke jJAtayo dRSTvA ruvanti parivAryyaM  /  poSaya nastAta !
poSito'si kasya tAta ! jahAsi naH  //  sAdhu anuvAda sAdhu ke riztedAra ko
dekhakara use ghera lete haiM aura rone lagate haiM - ve use kahate haiM - tAta
! tuma hamArA kyoM parityAga kara rahe ho hamane tumhArA lAlana pAlana kiyA hai,
aba tuma hamArA paripoSaNa karo, pAlana karo  /  - - TIkA - tAneva sUkSmasaGgAn
darzayitumAha-'api : 'saMbhAvane' eke' tathAvidhA' jJAtavya:' svajanA
mAtApitrAdayaH pravrajante pravrajitaM vA 'dRSTvA' upalabhya 'parivArya'
veSTayitvA rudanti rUdanto vadanti ca dInaM yathA - bAlyAt prabhRti tvamasmAbhiH
poSito vRddhAnAM pAlako bhaviSyatIti kRtvAtato'dhunA "naH" asmAnapitvaM 'tAta' !
putra poSaya pAlaya, kasya kRte - kena kAraNena kasya vA balena tAtAsmAn tyajami
? nAsmAkaM bhavantamantareNa kazcitrAtA vidyata iti  // 2 //  kiJca - TIkArtha
AgamakAra una sUkSma saMbaMdhoM ko prakaTa karane ke lie kahate haiM - prastuta
gAthA meM 'api ' zabda saMbhAvanA ke artha meM prayukta huA hai| isakA Azaya
yaha hai ki isa gAthA meM jo bAta kahI gaI hai, vaha saMbhava hai - aisA hotA
hai, mAM bApa tathA unake sadRza pArivArika jana pravrajita - dIkSita hote hue
yA dIkSA grahaNa kiye hue sAdhu ko dekhakara use ghera lete haiM, rone lagate
haiM, aura dInatA dayanItA ke sAtha kahane lagate haiM putra ! hamane bAlyakAla
se hI tumhArA pAlana isalie kiyA ki hamAre bUr3he hone para tuma sevA karoge  /
aba tuma hamArA pAlana kro| tuma kisa kAraNa se yA kisake sahAre hameM chor3a
rahe ho  /  he tAta ! tumhAre atirikta hamArA dUsarA koI rakSaka nahIM hai  /  -
piyA te therao bhAyaro te sagA tAta ! tAta ! sasA te sodarA kiM 211 khuDDiyA imA
/  jahAsi Ne ?  // 3 //

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 1:**  "O Elder, your father is old! Your
sister is young. Your brothers are your own, born of the same womb. Why do you
abandon us?"  **Commentary:**  "O son! Your father is old, he has lived more
than a hundred years. Your sister, standing before you, is young, she has not
yet reached womanhood. These are your brothers, born of the same womb, they are
before you. Why do you abandon us?"  **Verse 2:**  "O son! Nourish your mother
and father. By doing so, your afterlife will be good. This is the way of the
world. People nourish their parents."  **Commentary:**  "O son! Nourish your
mother and father. By doing so, your afterlife will be good. This is the way of
the world. This is the path of the world, to nourish your elderly parents. It is
said:  "Where the elders are revered, where the food is well-prepared, where
there is no strife in speech, there, O Indra, I reside."  **Verse 3:**  "O son!
Be happy, be joyful. Your wife is young, O father! Do not let her go to
another's house."  **Commentary:**  "O son! Be happy, be joyful. Your wife is
young, O father! Do not let her go to another's house."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA pitA te sthavirastAta ! svasA te kSullikeyam  /
bhrAtaraste svakAstAta ! sodarAH kiM jahAsi naH  //  - anuvAda - pArivArika jana
sAdhu se kahate haiM ki tAta ! ye tumhAre pitA vRddha haiM, tumhArI yaha bahina
abhI choTI hai, ye tumhAre sahodara - eka mA~ ke peTa se janme bhAI haiM ! tuma
hamArA kyoM parityAga kara rahe ho  /  TIkA he 'tAta' ! putra ! pitA 'te' tava
'sthaviro' vRddhaH zatAtIkaH 'svasA' ca bhaginI tava 'kSullikA' laghvI
aprAptayauvanA 'imA' purovartinI pratyakSeti, tathA bhrAtaraH 'te' tava svakA
'nijAstAta' ! 'sodarA' ekodarAH kimityasmAn parityajasIti  // 3 //  - TIkArtha -
he tAta ! he putra ! tumhAre pitA vRddha haiM, unakI umra sau varSa se bhI jyAdA
hai  /  tumhArI yaha sAmane khar3I bahina choTI hai, abhI yuvatI nahIM huI hai
/  ye tumhAre sodara eka hI mA~ ke udara se janme hue sage bhAI tumhAre samakSa
haiN| tuma hamArA parityAga kyoM kara rahe ho  /  OM OM OM mAyaraM piyaraM posa,
evaM evaM khu loiyaM tAya !, je chAyA mAtaraM pitaraM poSaya, evaM loko
bhaviSyati  /  evaM khalu laukikaM tAta ! ye pAlayanti ca mAtaram  //  'anuvAda
- he tAta! mAtA pitA kA poSaNa kro| aisA karane se hI tumhArA paraloka sudharegA
/  yahI lokAcAra hai  /  isI taraha loga apane mAM bApa kA pAlana poSaNa karate
haiM  /  wwwwda TIkA tathA 'mAyaramityAdi, 'mAtaraM' jananIM tathA 'pitaraM'
janayitAraM 'puSANa' bibhRhi, evaM ca kRte tavehalokaH paralokazca bhaviSyati,
tAtedameva "laukikaM" lokAcIrNam, ayameva laukikaH panthA
yadutavRddhayormAtApitroH prati pAlamiti, tathA coktam chAyA logo bhavissati  /
pAlaMti ya mAyaraM  // 4 //  - "guravo yatra pUjyante, yatra dhAnyaM susaMskRtam
/  adanta kalaho yatra tatra zakra ! vasAmyaham  // 1 // " iti  //  4  //  api
ca TIkArtha - he putra ! tuma apanI mAM aura bApa kA pAlana kro| mA~ bApa kA
pAlana karane se tumhArA Age kA loka sudharegA  /  he tAta ! apane bUr3he mAM
bApa kA pAlana karanA hI laukika patha hai, lokAcAra hai| kahA gayA hai -
purANoM meM lakSmI aura indra ke saMvAda meM lakSmI indra se kahatI hai, jahAM
gurujanoM kI, bar3oM kI pUjA hotI hai, satkAra hotA hai, tathA saMskAra pUrvaka,
pavitratA pUrvaka anna pakAyA jAtA hai, rasoI banatI hai tathA jahAM vAk kalaha-
bolacAla meM jhagar3A nahIM hotA, he indra ! maiM vahIM nivAsa karatI hU~  /
uttarA mahurullAvA, putrA he tAta ! khuDDayA  /  bhAriyA te NavA tAta ! mA sA
annaM jaNaM game  // 5 //  - putra ! kSudrakAH  /  utarAH madhurAlApAH bhAte
navA tAta ! mA sA'myaM janaM gacchet  //  212

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Upasargaadhyayan Anuvaad - Hey Tat! Your sons, born one after another, are small
and sweet-tongued. Your wife is young, lest she go to another's place. Tika -
'Uttaraah' pradhaanaah uttarottara jaata va madhuro-manojn uallaapah-alaapo
yeshaam te tathaavidaah putraah 'te' tava 'taat' putra! 'Kshullaka' laghavaah
tatha 'bhaarya' patni te 'nava' pratyagrayouvana abhinavoodha va ma asau tvayaa
parityaakta sati anyam janam gacchet-unmaargagaamini syaad, ayam cha mahaan
janaapavaad iti. Tikaarth - Hey Tat! Your sons are very good, or they are born
one after another. They are small. Your wife is young, if she is abandoned by
you, she should not go to another man's place, if she does so by taking the
wrong path, there will be great slander in the world. Vay. Ehi Taay! Gharam
Jaamo, Ma Ya Kamme Saha Vaym. Vitiyampi Taay! Paasaamo, Jaamu Taav Sayam Giham.
||6|| Chhaya - Ehi Taat! Griham Yaamo Ma Tvam Karmasaha Vaym. Dvitiyamp api
Taat! Pasyaamo Yaamostaavatswakam Griham. || Anuvaad - Hey Tat! Come with us,
let's go home. Now you will not have to do any work at home. We will take care
of all your work. Once you left home scared of work, but it will not happen
again. We will do all your work. Go to your home. Tika - Api cha jaaniamo vaym
yathaa tvam karmabhiruustaathaapi 'ehi' aagacch griham 'yaamo' gacchaamah. Ma
tvam kim api saampratam karmakrthaaha, api tu tava karmanyupasthite vaym
sahaayaka bhavisyaamah-sahaayyam karishyaama. Ek vaaram taavad griha
karmabhirbhagnastvaam taat! Punarapi dvitiyam vaaram pasyaamo' drakshyaamo
yadasmaabhihsahaayairbhavatobhavishyatityato 'yaamo' gacchaamah taavat swakam
griham kurvetad asmadvachanam iti. ||6|| Kincha - _Tikaarth - Parivaaric jan
kahate hain-Hey Tat! Ham jaante hain, tum karma bhirhu ho-ghar ke kaam se darte
ho, tathaapi aao, ghar chale. Ab se aage tum koi kaam na karna. Kaarya upasthit
hone par-kaam karne ka avsar aane par ham tumhaare sahaayak honge, sahaayta
karenge. Hey Tat! Ek baar ghar ke kaam se ghabaraakar tum ghar chhod gaye, kintu
dusri baar ham tumhaare sahaayak hone ka-tumhaare kaaryon mein puri madad karne
ka dhyaan rakhenge isliye apne ghar chalo. Hamaara kahana maano. Gantum Taay!
Puno Gacche, N Tesha Samano Sia. Akaamgam Parikkamman, Ko Te Vareumarihati?
||7|| Chhaya - Gatvaa Taat! Punaraagacchenate naashramanah syaah. Akaamkam
parakramamtam kastvaam vaarayitumarihati. || -213)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayana anuvAda - he tAta ! uttarottara-eka ke bAda eka kramazaH janme
hue tumhAre putra choTe-choTe haiM, madhura bhASI haiM  /  tumhArI strI
navayuvatI hai, kahIM aisA na ho vaha kisI dUsare ke yahAM calI jaae| TIkA -
'uttarAH' pradhAnAH uttarottara jAtA vA madhuro-manojJa ullApaH-AlApo yeSAM te
tathAvidhAH putrAH 'te' tava 'tAta' putra ! 'kSullakA' laghavaH tathA 'bhAryA'
patnI te 'navA' pratyagrayauvanA abhinavoDhA vA mA asau tvayA parityaktA satI
anyaM janaM gacchet-unmArgagAminI syAd, ayaM ca mahAn janApavAda iti  /
TIkArtha - he tAta ! tumhAre putra bar3e uttama-acche haiM, athavA eka ke bAda
eka kramazaH utpanna hue haiM  /  ve nanheM nanheM haiM  /  tumhArI patnI
navayuvatI hai tumhAre se parityakta huI-chor3I huI, chor3I gaI vaha kisI anya
puruSa ke yahA~ na calI jAe, yadi vaha unmArga gAminI hokara-ulTA rAstA
apanAkara vaise kara le to saMsAra meM bar3I nindA hogii| vaya  /  ehi tAya !
gharaM jAmo, mA ya kamme sahA vayaM  /  vitiyaMpi tAya ! pAsAmo, jAmu tAva sayaM
gihaM  // 6 //  chAyA - ehi tAta ! gRhaM yAmo mA tvaM karmasahA vayam  /
dvitIyamapi tAta ! pazyAmo yAmastAvatsvakaM gRham  //  anuvAda - he tAt ! hamAre
sAtha Ao, ghara cale  /  aba ghara meM tumheM koI kAma nahIM karanA hogaa|
tumhAre saba kAma hama hI nipaTA deMge  /  eka bAra to kAma se ghabarA kara
ghara chor3a Aye, para dUsarI bAra aisA nahIM hogA  /  tumhAre sAre kArya hama
karate raheMge  /  apane ghara calo  /  /  TIkA - api ca jAnImo vayaM yathA tvaM
karmabhIrUstathApi 'ehi' Agaccha gRhaM 'yAmo' gcchaamH| mA tvaM kimapi sAmprataM
karmakRthAH, api tu tava karmaNyupasthite vayaM sahAyakA bhaviSyAmaH-sAhAyyaM
krissyaam| eka vAraM tAvad gRha karmabhirbhagnastvaM tAta ! punarapi dvitIyaM
vAraM pazyAmo' drakSyAmo yadasmAbhiHsahAyairbhavato bhaviSyatItyato 'yAmo'
gacchAmaH tAvat svakaM gRhaM kurvetadasmadvacanamiti  // 6 //  kiJca - _TIkArtha
- pArivArika jana kahate haiM-he tAt ! hama jAnate haiM, tuma karma bhIrU ho-
ghara ke kAma se Darate ho, tathApi Ao, ghara cale  /  aba se Age tuma koI kAma
na karanA  /  kArya upasthita hone para-kAma karane kA avasara Ane para hama
tumhAre sahAyaka hoMge, sahAyatA kareMge  /  he tAta ! eka bAra ghara ke kAma se
ghabarAkara tuma ghara chor3a gae, kintu dUsarI bAra hama tumhAre sahAyaka hone
kA-tumhAre kAryoM meM pUrI madada karane kA dhyAna rakheMge isalie apane ghara
calo  /  hamArA kahanA maano| gaMtuM tAya ! puNo gacche, Na teSA samaNo siyA  /
akAmagaM parikkammaM, ko te vAreumarihati ?  // 7 //  chAyA - gatvA tAta !
punarAgacchenatenAzramaNaH syAH  /  akAmakaM parAkramantaM kastvAM
vArayitumarhati  //  -213)

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra - Translation  **O Father!** Go home once and then
return. By doing so, you will not become an Ashraman (non-ascetic) - your
Shramanya (asceticism) will not be lost. Again, who can stop you there, while
performing your endeavors with a detached mind, without any desire or attachment
in the house?  **Commentary:** 'Tat' (Father)! Having gone to the house and seen
your family, you return, and by this mere act of going home, you will not become
an Ashraman. 'Akamagan' (without desire) - without desire for household affairs,
'Parakraman' (performing endeavors) - performing your intended actions, who is
worthy to stop you, to forbid you? Or, in old age, when your desires are gone,
who can stop you when you are engaged in the practice of self-restraint?
**Meaning of Commentary:** O Father! Go home, see your family, and then return.
By merely going home, you will not become devoid of Shramanya - your virtue will
not be lost by simply doing that. Who can stop you while being engaged in
household affairs - the duties of a householder - without desire, without
attachment, and according to your own intentions? Or, when old age arrives, and
your desires are gone, who can stop you when you are striving with vigor in the
practice of self-restraint?  **Whatever debt you have, Father, we have settled
it all. We will give you the gold you need for your transactions.**
**Commentary:** Further, 'Tat' (Father)! Whatever debt you had, we have divided
it equally and 'Samikritam' (settled) it. If it was a heavy debt, we have
'Samikritam' (settled) it - arranged for it to be easily paid. Whatever
'Hiranyam' (gold) - wealth - is used in transactions, etc., or in any other way,
we will give it to you. Do not be afraid of being poor.  **Meaning of
Commentary:** O Father! We have settled the debt you had - we have divided it
equally among ourselves and arranged for it. Or, we have made the heavy debt you
had easy to pay. From now on, we will give you whatever money you need for your
personal needs, business, and other activities. Therefore, never fear in your
mind that you are poor. Concluding the topic, we say further:  **Those who are
bound by desires, do not find peace, they are not free from attachment, they are
born of worldly desires. Therefore, abandon the house.**  **-**  **214**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram - anuvAda - he tAta ! eka bAra ghara calakara phira
vApasa lauTa AnA  /  aisA karane se tuma azramaNa nahIM ho jAoge-tumhArA
zrAmaNya miTa nahIM jAyegA  /  punazca ghara meM kAmanA yA Asakti ke binA
ni:saMga bhAva se parAkrama-udyama karate hue tumheM vahA~ kauna roka sakatA
hai| TIkA - 'tAta' putra ! gatvA gRhaM svajanavargaM dRSTvA punarAgantA'si, naca
'tena' etAvatA gRha gamana mAtreNa tvamazramaNo bhaviSyasi, 'akAmagaM' ti
anicchantaM gRhavyApArecchArahitaM 'parAkramantaM' svAbhipretAnuSThAnaM kurvANaM
kaH tvAM bhavantaM vArayituM'niSedhayitum arhati yogyo bhavati,
yadivA-'akAmagaMti vArddhakAvasthAyAMmadanecchAkAmarahitaM saMyamAnuSThAnaM
prati kastvAmavasare prApte karmaNi pravRttaM vArayitumarhatIti  // 7 //
TIkArtha - he tAta ! ghara jAkara, apane pArivArika janoM ko dekhakara phira
lauTa AnA  /  kevala ghara jAne mAtra se tuma zrAmaNya rahita nahIM ho jAoge-
vaisA karane mAtra se tumhArA sAdhutva naSTa nahIM hogaa| gRha vyApAra meM-
gRhastha ke kAryoM meM icchA rahita-anAsakti pUrvaka, apane abhipreta-abhirUci
ke anusAra udyata rahate hue tumheM kauna roka sakatA hai ? athavA vRddhAvasthA
Ane para jaba tumhArI kAma vAsanA apagata ho jAyegI, taba saMyama kI sAdhanA meM
parAkramazIla udyamazIla hote tumheM kauna nivRtta kara sakatA hai| jaM kiMci
aNagaM tAta ! taMpi savvaM samIkataM  /  hiraNNaM vavahArAI, . taMpi dAhAmu te
vayaM  // 8 //  chAyA - yat kiMciddaNaM tAta ! tatsarva samIkRtam  /  hiraNyaM
vyavahArAdi tadapi dAsyAmovayam  //  anuvAda - he tAta tumhAre Upara jo karja
thA, vaha hamane paraspara samIkRta kara liyA hai-bA~Takara le liyA hai aba
tumheM vyavahAra ke lie jitane dhana kI jarUrata hogI vaha hama deMge  /  TIkA -
anyacca-'tAta' putra ! yatkimapi bhavadIyamRNajAtamAsIttatsarvamasmAbhiH
samyavibhajya 'samIkRtaM' samabhAgena vyavasthApitaM,yadi votkaTaMsat samIkRtaM-
sudeyatvena vyavasthApitaM, yatta 'hiraNyaM dravyajAtaM vyavahArAdAvupayujyate,
Adi zabdAt anyena vA prakAreNa tavopayogaM yAsyati tadapi vayaM dAsyAmaH,
nirdhano'hamiti mA kRthA bhayamiti  // 8 //  upasaMhArArthamAha - TIkArtha - he
tAta ! tuma para jo karja thA, hamane vaha samIkRta kara diyA hai-Apasa meM
barAbara-barAbara bA~Takara vyavasthita kara diyA hai  /  athavA jo tuma para
utkaTa-bhArI RNa thA, use hamane sudeya banA diyA hai aisI vyavasthA kara dI hai
ki vaha AsAnI se cukAyA jA sake  /  aba se Age tumheM vaiyaktika AvazyakatA,
vyavasAya Adi anyAnya kAryoM meM upayoga hetu jo dhana apekSita hogA, vaha saba
hama deMge  /  ataH tuma kabhI mana meM yaha Dara na lAnA ki maiM dhana hIna
hU~, prastuta viSaya kA upasaMhAra karate hue Age kahate haiM  /  icceva
vibaddho NaM susehaMti, nAisaMgehi, kAluNIya samuTThiyA  /  . tato'gAraM pahAvai
// 9 //  - 214

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chaya -  The family members, with compassionate feelings arising within
themselves, impart excellent education and make entreaties. Then, the deluded
monk, bound by attachment to his kinsmen, abandons the life of asceticism and
austerity and rushes back home.  Upasargadhyanam Thus, the compassionate ones
instruct him. Bound by the associations of caste, he rushes back to the house.
Commentary - The word 'na' is used as a figure of speech. In this way, the
mother, father, and others, with compassionate and tender words, create
compassion in the mind of the monk, or they themselves are in a state of
humility, and they instruct him, make entreaties to him, and establish their
words in his heart. The immature in dharma - the unripe in dharma, he is the
monk, of little courage - extremely lacking in self-power, and heavy in karmas,
being attached to the affection of his family members such as mother, father,
son, etc., bound by their attachment, rushes back to the house, abandoning the
life of renunciation and getting entangled in the snare of household life.  Just
as a tree born in the forest is bound by a creeper, in the same way, the
kinsmen, in a state of non-equanimity, bind him.  Malaya Chaya - Just as a tree
born in the forest is bound by a creeper, Similarly, the kinsmen, in a state of
non-equanimity, bind him.  Commentary - Furthermore, just as a tree born in the
forest is 'bound' (entwined) by a creeper, in the same way, the kinsmen, with
their lack of equanimity, 'bind' (attach) him. They attract him towards
themselves.  Also,  "The enemy, in the guise of a friend, embraces (him) and
weeps. Do not go to the good destination, both of us shall go to the bad
destination."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chAyA - anuvAda karuNA samutthita-apane meM uThate hue karuNA pUrNa bhAvoM ke
sAtha pArivArika vRnda uttama zikSA dete haiM-Agraha karate haiM  /  taba
svajana varga kI Asakti meM baddha moha mUr3ha vaha sAdhu saMyama maya jIvana ko
tilAMjalI dekara ghara meM calA jAtA hai  /  upasargAdhyayanaM ityeva
suzikSayanti kAruNya samupasthitAH  /  vibaddho jAti saGgaistato'gAraM
pradhAvati  //  - TIkA - Namiti vAkyAlaGkAre' ityeva ' pUrvoktayA nItyA mAtA
pitrAdayaH kAruNikairvacobhiH karuNAmutpAdayantaH svayaM vA dainyamupasthitAH
'taM' pravrajitaM pravrajantaM vA suse haMti tti suSThu zikSayanti
vyudgrAhayanti, sa cApariNata dharmA'lpasattvo gurukarmA jJAti saGgaurvibaddho -
mAtApitRputrakalakatrAdi mohitaH tata: ' agAraM' gRha prati dhAvati - pravrajyAM
parityajya gRhapAzamanubadhnAnIti  //  9  //  TIkArtha - yahA~ NaM zabda
vAkyAlaGkAra ke rUpa meM prayukta hai, jaisA pahale varNita huA, usa prakAra
mA~, bApa Adi riztedAra kAruNika karuNArdra vacanoM dvArA sAdhu ke mana meM
karuNA utpanna karate hue athavA svayaM dainyabhAva yukta hote hue use zikSA
dete haiM, usase Agraha karate haiM, usake hRdaya meM apanI bAta jamAte haiM  /
apariNata dharmA - aparipakva dharmayukta kaccA, vaha sAdhu, alpasatva-
atyadhika AtmabalahIna evaM gurukarmA, karmoM se bhArI hone ke kAraNa apane
mAtA-pitA putra ityAdi ke moha meM yukta pArivArika janoM kI Asakti meM baddha
hokara ghara kI ora daur3a jAtA hai, pravrajita jIvana kA tyAga kara gRhapAza
meM gRhasthI ke phaMde meM baMdha jAtA hai  /  jahA rukkhaM vaNe jAyaM,
paDabaMdhaI  /  eva NaM paDibaMdhaMti, NAtao asamAhiNA  // 10 //  mAluyA chAyA -
- yathA vRkSaM vane jAtaM mAlukA pratibadhnAti  /  evaM pratibadhnaMti
jJAtayo'samAdhinA  //  anuvAda jaise vana meM utpanna vRkSa ko mAlukA - bela
pratibaddha kara letI hai, bA~dha letI hai, usake cAroM ora lipaTa jAtI hai, usI
prakAra pArivArika jana asamAdhi-asthiratA azAMti utpanna kara use bAMdha lete
haiN| apanI ora AkRSTa kara lete haiM  /  - TIkA - kiJcAnyat yathA vRkSaM 'vane'
aTavyAM 'jAtam' utpannaM 'mAluyA' vallI 'pratibadhrAti' veSTayatyevaM 'NaM' iti
vAkyAlaGkAre 'jJAtayaH' svajanAH 'taM' yatiM asamAdhinA pratibadhnanti te
tatkurvante yenAsyA samAdhirUtpadyata iti, tathA coktam "amitro mittaveseNaM,
kaMThe ghettUNaM royai  /  mA pittA ! soggai jAhi, dovi gacchAmu duggaI  // 1 //
api ca chAyA amitraM mitra veSeNa kaNThe gRhitvA roditi, mA mitra
sugatIryAdvAvapigacchAvodugartimTa - TIkArtha isa gAthA meM Na zabda
vAkyAlaGkAra meM AyA hai| jaise vana meM utpanna vRkSa ko vallIlatA pratibaddha
kara letI hai, veSThita kara letI hai, use ghera letI hai usI prakAra pArivArika
jana sAdhu meM mAnasika asthiratA azAMti utpanna kara use pratibaddha kara lete
haiN| ve aisA karate haiM jisase usa sAdhu kA mana azAMta 215

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra says that relatives are not truly friends or
well-wishers. They are enemies - those who do harm. Just as a friend puts his
arm around another's neck and cries, as if to say, "Friend! Do not take a step
towards liberation, towards the highest state, come, let us both go towards the
path of misery." Those bound by kinship, like a newly captured elephant, are
surrounded by their relatives. They follow behind, like a mother cow near her
calf. Commentary: Bound by kinship - enslaved by the ties of parents, etc., they
are bound in various ways. These relatives, by doing everything to please him,
create a sense of security. Like a newly captured elephant, he is treated with
all kinds of things to make him feel secure, such as sugarcane pieces, etc. In
the same way, he is treated with all kinds of things to please him. Another
example is given: Just as a newly delivered cow stays close to her calf and
follows behind, so too do these relatives, thinking of their renounced one as
newly born, follow behind him, becoming followers of his path. These ties are
like a pit for humans, a place of danger. Those who are bound by them are
unconscious.  Commentary: These ties are like a pit for humans, a place of
danger. Those who are bound by them are unconscious.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram asthira ho jAtA hai  /  kahA hai sambandhI jana
vAstava meM mitra yA hitakAraka nahIM haiM  /  ve amitra haiM-ahita karane vAle
haiM  /  kintu mitra kI jyoM gale meM bAMha DAlakara rote haiM, mAno ve kahate
ho ki mitra ! sadgati kI ora, uttama gati kI ora kadama mata rakho, Ao, hama
tuma donoM durgati kI dizA meM bar3ha cle|| vibaddho nAtisaMgehi, hatthIvAvI
navaggahe  /  piTThato parisappaMti, suyagovva adUrae  // 11 //  chAyA -
vibaddho jJAtisaMgairhaktIvA'pi navagrahe  /  pRSThataH parisarpanti
sUtagaurivAdUrapA  //  .. anuvAda - jo puruSa apane pArivArika janoM ke moha meM
baMdhakara saMyamamaya jIvana kA parityAga kara detA hai, punaH apane ghara meM
calA jAtA hai, usake svajana vRnda naye pakar3e hue hAthI ke samAna usakI bar3I
acchI taraha dekhabhAla karate haiM, usake pIche lage rahate haiM, jaise
navaprasUtA gAya apane bachar3e ke najadIka lagI rahatI hai, usI prakAra usake
riztedAra usake najadIka rahate haiM  /  TIkA - vividha baddhaH-paravazIkRtaH
vibaddho jJAtisaGgaiH-mAtApitrAdi sambandhaiH, te ca tasya tasminnavasare
sarvamanukUlamanutiSThanto dhRtimutpAdayanti hastivApi 'navagrahe'
abhinavagrahaNe, (yathA sa) dhRtyutpAdanArthamikSuza kalAdibhirUpacaryate,
evamasAvapi sarvAnukUlarUpAyairUpacaryate, dRSTAntAntaramAha-
yathA'bhinavaprasUtA gaurnijastanandhayasya 'adUragA' samIpavartinI satI
pRSThataH parisarpati, eva te'pi nijA utpravrajitaM punarjAtamiva manyamAnAH
pRSThato'nusarpantitanmArgAnuyAyino bhavantItyarthaH  // 11 //  TIkArtha - mAtA-
pitA Adi ke saMbaMdha se-tadgata Asakti ke kAraNa vaha vividha rUpa meM baMdhA
huA sAdhu paravaza, paratantra ho jAtA hai  /  apane para apanA adhikAra kho
detA hai  /  ve sambandhI jana taba usake prati anukUla-priya vyavahAra karate
hue use parituSTa saMtuSTa karane kA prayAsa karate haiM  /  jisa prakAra naye
pakar3e hue hAthI ko parituSTa karane hetu pakar3ane vAle use ganne ke Tukar3e
Adi mIThI cIjeM khilAkara usakI paricaryA karate hai, usI prakAra pArivArika
gaNa anukUla-usake mana ko bhAne vAle upAyoM dvArA usakI paricaryA karate haiM,
isa saMbaMdha meM eka ora dRSTAnta diyA jA rahA hai-jisa prakAra nava prasUtA
gAya apane bachar3e ke nikaTa rahatI huI usake pIche-pIche daur3atI phiratI hai,
usI prakAra parivAra ke loga bhI saMyama chor3akara Ae hue usa sAdhu ko
navajAta-naye janme hue kI taraha usake pIche pIche phirate haiM  /  vaha jisa
rAste se jAtA hai, usI se ve jAte. haiM-usake anukUla bane rahate haiM  /  ete
saMgA maNUsANaM, pAtAlA va atArimA  /  kIvA jattha ya kissaMti, nAisagehiM
mucchiyA  // 12 //  chAyA - ete saGgAH manuSyANAM pAtAlA ivAtAryAH  /  _ klIbAH
yatra klizyanti jJAti saGgairmUrchitAH  //  (216)

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Upasargadhyayanam  It is as difficult for humans to overcome the attachment
or affection of family members as it is to cross the ocean. Men who are weak,
lacking in self-strength, and overwhelmed by the attachment of their male
relatives, lose their composure and suffer.  ## Commentary  The term "sanga"
refers to the attachments that bind a being, such as the relationships with
parents, etc. These are the causes of karma. Just as humans cannot cross the
vast, bottomless ocean, similarly, beings with weak self-strength cannot
overcome these attachments. Those who are bound by the attachment to their
parents, etc., are weak and suffer. They remain trapped in the cycle of birth
and death. How are they trapped? They are overwhelmed by the relationships with
their children, etc., and are like vultures, greedy and clinging. They do not
reflect on their own suffering in the cycle of birth and death.  ##  Verse 13
The monk, knowing all attachments to be great sources of karma, should not
desire a life of non-restraint after hearing the supreme Dharma.  ## Commentary
The monk should abandon the attachment to family, the main cause of rebirth, by
knowing it and rejecting it. Why? Because all attachments are great gateways for
karma. Therefore, the monk should not desire a life of non-restraint, even when
faced with favorable circumstances. Similarly, the monk should not desire a life
of non-restraint when faced with unfavorable circumstances. The life of a
householder is not conducive to liberation. Why? Because the monk has heard and
understood the Dharma, which is the path of right conduct and right speech.
There is no higher Dharma than this, which is the supreme Dharma taught by the
Arhats.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM anuvAda pArivArika janoM kI Asakti, yA sneha ko lAMgha pAnA
manuSyoM ke lie usI taraha kaThina hai, jisa prakAra samudra ke pAra utaranA  /
klIva - paurUSahIna, Atma balarahita puruSa saMbaMdhiyoM ke moha se mUrcchita
hokara apanA ApA bhUlakara kaSTa pAte haiM  /  - TIkA saGgadoSadarzanAyAha-
'ete' pUrvoktAH sajyanta iti saGgA - mAtR pitrAdisambandhAH karmopAdAna hetavaH,
manuSyaNAM 'pAtAlA iva samudrA ivApratiSThitabhUmitalatvAt te 'atArima' tti
dustarAH, evamete'pi saGgA alpasattvairduHkhenAtilaGghayante, 'yatra ca ' yeSu
saGgeSu 'klIbA' asamarthAH 'klizyanti' klezamanubhavanti, saMsArAntarvartino
bhavantItyarthaH, kiMbhUtAH ? ' jJAtisaGgai ' putrAdisambandhai: 'mUrcchitA'
gRddhA adhyupapannAH santo, na paryAlocayantyAtmAnaM saMsArAntarvartinamevaM
klizyantamiti  //  12  //  apica - - TIkArtha * jo Asakta kara lete haiM, jIva
ko AkRSTa kara lete haiM, bAMdha lete haiM, ve saGga kahe jAte haiM, mAtA pitA
Adi svajanoM ke sAtha rahe saMbaMdha ko saGga kahate haiM  /  vaha jIva ko
karmabaMdhana meM bAMdhane kA hetu hai jaise pAtAla-talarahita agAdha samudra ko
manuSya tairakara pAra nahIM kara sakate, usI prakAra ina AsaktiyoM ko
alpasatva-AtmabalahIna jIva lAMgha nahIM sakate, pAra nahIM kara sakate,
mAtApitA Adi kI Asakti meM baMdhe hue ve klIva- puruSArthahIna vyakti kaSTa
bhogate haiM  /  ve sadA saMsAra meM par3e rahate haiM, punaH ve kaise haiM ?
aisA prazna uThAkara ise spaSTa kiyA jAtA hai, ve putra Adi ke saMbaMdhoM meM
mUrcchita, gRddha lolupa jIva saMsAra meM par3akara kaSTa pAte hue apanI AtmA ke
saMbaMdha meM jarA bhI paryAlocana, cintana, manana Adi na karate hue kleza
bhogate rahate haiM  /  chAyA taM ca bhikkhU parinnAya, savve saMgA mahAsavA  /
jIviyaM nAvakaMkhijjA, soccA dhammamaNuttaraM  // 13 //  taM ca bhikSuH
parijJAya sarve saGgA mahAzravAH  /  jIvite nAvakAGkSeta, zrutvA
dharmamanuttaram  //  . anuvAda saMbaMdhI janoM ke sAtha rahI Asakti ko bhalI
bhAMti jAnakara sAdhu usakA parityAga kara de, kyoMki ye sabhI sambandha
mahAAzrava - karma bAMdhane ke bar3e dvAra hai zrota hai  /  sAdhu anuttara-
sarvottama, arhata prarUpita dharma kA zravaNa kara asaMyama maya jIvana kI
AkAMkSA na kare  /  TIkA 'taM ca ' jJAtisaGgaM saMsAraikahetuM
bhikSurzaparijJayA (jJAtvA ) pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA pariharet  /  kimiti ?, yataH
'sarve'pi' ye kecana saGgAste 'mahAzravA' mahAnti karmaNa - AzravadvArANi
vartante  /  tato'nukUlairUpasargairupasthitairasaMyama jIvitaM gRhAvAsapAzaM
'nAbhikAGkSeta' nAbhilaSet, pratikUlaizcopasagai: sadbhirjIvitAbhilASI na
bhaved, asamaJjasakAritvena bhavajIvitaM nAbhikAGkSet  /  kiM kRtvA ? ' zrutvA'
nizamyAvagamya, kam ? - dharmaM zrutacAritrAravyaM, nAsyottaro'stItyanutaraM
pradhAnaM maunIndramityarthaH  // 13 //  : TIkArtha - svajanoM kI Asakti kA doSa
batAne hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM-'svajana vargoM se saMsarga
rakhanA, unameM Asakta bane rahanA, saMsAra meM AvAgamana kA mukhya hetu hai  /
sAdhu jJa parijJA dvArA use jAne, pratyAkhyAna parijJA dvArA usakA pratyAkhyAna-
parityAga kare kyoMki jitane saMga-saMbaMdha haiM, ve karmoM ke Ane ke bahuta
bar3e AzravadvAra haiM  /  isalie anukUla - priya yA mana ko acche lagane vAle
upasargoM ke Ane para sAdhu saMyama rahita jIvana yA gRha 217

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga**  Do not aspire to be bound by the
fetters of the pāśa (bondage). If adverse and unpleasant afflictions arise, do
not desire life. Face them by risking your life. Do not desire to live a worldly
life while following unrighteous karma. How? By hearing what? It is said that
one should do so by hearing the supreme dharma, the dharma rooted in right
knowledge (śruta-samyak-jñāna) and right conduct (cāritra-samyak-ācāra), which
is spoken by the Tīrthankaras.  **Verse 14**  *Ahiṃe santi āvaṭṭā, kāsaveṇaṃ
paveiyā. Buddā jattāvasappanti, sīyanti abuha jahiṃ.*  **Translation**  These
are the āvartas (cycles) that have been explained by the Kāśyapa (Śramaṇa
Bhagavan Mahāvīra). The enlightened ones (buddhas) stay away from them, while
the unenlightened ones (abuḍḍha) fall into them.  **Commentary**  The word
"athe" indicates the beginning of a new section. Alternatively, the word "aho"
can be used, which signifies wonder or surprise. The word "ime" indicates that
these āvartas are well-known and readily apparent. There are two types of
āvartas: dravyāvarta and bhāvāvarta. The whirlpools of rivers, etc., are
dravyāvarta. The desire for wealth and possessions, which arises from the
intense and overwhelming karmic influence, is bhāvāvarta. The Lord Mahāvīra, who
possessed divine knowledge and omniscience, has explained the nature of āvartas.
Those who are wise and understand the consequences of āvartas remain vigilant
and stay away from them. However, the unenlightened ones, due to their lack of
discernment, become attached to them and suffer greatly.  **Verse 15**  *Rāyaṇo
rāya'macca ya, māhaṇā aduva khattiyā. Nimantiyaṃti bhogehiṃ, bhikkuyaṃ
sāhujīviṇaṃ.*  **Translation**  Kings, ministers, Brahmins, and Kshatriyas
invite the monks (bhikku) who live a virtuous life (sāhujīviṇa) with material
pleasures (bhogehiṃ).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram pAza rUpI phaMde meM baMdhane kI AkAMkSA na kare  /
yadi pratikUla-apriya upasarga Ae to jIvana kI kAmanA na kre| prANoM kI bAjI
lagAkara usakA sAmanA kare  /  vaha asat karma kA anusaraNa karate hue sAMsArika
jIvana jIne kI icchA na rakhe  /  kyA karake ? kyA suna karake ? yaha prazna
uThAte hue kahA jAtA hai ki zruta-samyak-jJAna, cAritra-samyak AcAra mUlaka
dharma jo sarvottama hai, tIrthaMkara bhASita hai, use sunakara vaha aisA kare
/  ahime saMti AvaTTA, kAsaveNaM paveiyA  /  buddhA jatthAvasappaMti, sIyaMti
abuhA jahiM  // 14 //  chAyA - atheme santyAvartAH kAzyapena praveditAH  /
vRddhAH yatrApasarpanti sIdantyabudhAH yatra  //  anuvAda - pUrvokta vivecana ke
anantara aba Avarta-bhaMvara yA cakra varNita hoMge, jo kAzyapa gotrIya zramaNa
bhagavAna mahAvIra dvArA pravedita-prarUpita yA vyAkhyAta hue haiM  /  buddha-
bodha yukta puruSa, jJAnI jana unase dUra rahate haiM  /  abuddha-ajJAnI puruSa
usameM pha~sa jAte haiM aura kaSTa pAte haiN| _TIkA - anyacca-'athe'
tyadhikArAntaradarzanArthaH, pAThAntaraM vA 'aho' iti, tacca vismaye, 'ime' iti
ete pratyAkSAsannAH sarvajanaviditatvAt, 'santi' vipante vakSyamANA Avartayanti-
prANinaM bhramayantItyAvartAH, tatra dratyAvartA: nadyAdeH
bhAvAvartAstUtkaTamohodayApAditaviSayAbhilASasaMpAdakasaMpatprArthanAvizeSAH,
ete cAvartAH 'kAzyapena', zrI manmahAvIravarddhamAnasvAminA utpannadityajJAnena
'A (pra) veditAH' kathitAH pratipAditAH 'yatra' yeSu satsu 'buddhA' avagatattvA
AvartavipAkavedinastebhyaH 'apasarpanti' apramattatayA tadUragAmino bhavanti,
abuddhAstu nirvivekatayA yeSvavasIdanti-AsaktiM kurvantIti  // 14|| tAnevAvartAn
darzayitumAha - TIkArtha - yahAM jo "atha" zabda kA prayoga huA hai, vaha dUsare
adhikAra prakaraNa kA bodha karAne hetu hai  /  'atha' ke sthAna meM pAThAntara
ke rUpa meM "aho" bhI prApta hotA hai  /  aho vismaya yA Azcarya kA dyotaka hai
/  jo prANiyoM ko saMsAra meM Avartita karatA hai-ghUmAtA hai, cakkara kaTavAtA
hai, use Avarta kahA jAtA hai unakA Age vivecana kiyA jAyegA  /  isa gAthA meM
jo "ime" zabda kA prayoga huA hai vaha sUcita karatA hai ki ve Avarta sarva
vidita hai-saba unheM jAnate haiM, ve pratyakSa haiM sannikaTa varti haiM  /
Avarta do prakAra ke haiMdravyAvarta evaM bhAvAvarta  /  nadI Adi kI bhramiyAM-
bhaMvara dravyAvarta haiN| utkaTa-tIvra mahAmohanIya karma ke udaya se ApAdita-
utpanna viSaya bhogoM kI abhilASA ko pUrNa karane vAlI saMpatti kI abhyarthanA
bhAvAvarta hai  /  jinheM divya jJAna-sarvajJatva prApta thA, una prabhu
mahAvIra ne Avarta kA svarUpa Apravedita-AkhyAta kiyA hai  /  tadanusAra jo
buddha-vivekazIla jana AvartoM kI phala niSpatti jAnate haiM, ve unake upasthita
hone para apramatta-pramAda zUnya, jAgarUka rahate haiM, unase dUragAmI ho jAte
haiM-haTa jAte haiM kintu abuddha-atattvavettA avivekavaza unameM Asakta hokara
atyadhika du:kha bhogate haiM  /  una AvoM kA digdarzana karAne hetu sUtrakAra
nirUpita karate haiM - rAyANo rAya'maccA ya, mAhaNA aduva khattiyA  /
nimaMtiyaMti bhogehiM, bhikkhUyaM sAhujIviNaM  // 15 //  (218)

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Upasargaadhyayanam Chhaya - Kings, ministers, Brahmanas, or Kshatriyas
invite the mendicant, the virtuous one, with enjoyments.  **Anuvaad** - The
kings, their ministers, Brahmanas, or Kshatriyas, all invite the Muni, who
follows pure, restrained, and complete conduct in the virtuous life, to return
to a life of enjoyments.  **Teeka** - 'Rajanah' (kings) like Chakravarti,
'Rajamaatyasch' (ministers) like Mantri, Purohit, etc., and Brahmanas or
'Kshatriyas' like those born in the Ikshvaku dynasty, all invite with 'bhogaih'
(enjoyments) like words, etc. They make the mendicant, the 'sadhujeevin', accept
enjoyments and pleasures. 'Sadhujeevin' means one who lives with virtuous
conduct, like the Muni. For example, Chakravarti Brahmadatt invited the Muni
Chitra with various enjoyments. Similarly, others, who are connected in some
way, invite the virtuous one, who possesses qualities like youth, etc., with the
aim of worldly enjoyments.  **Teekaarth** - Chakravarti and other great kings,
ministers, priests, etc., and Brahmanas and Kshatriyas born in the Ikshvaku
dynasty, etc., all invite through words and other means. They request the
acceptance of a life of enjoyments and pleasures. To clarify the subject, they
ask a question: Whom do they invite? They invite the 'sadhujeevin', the
mendicant or Muni, who lives a life of pure conduct and complete virtue. For
example, Chakravarti Brahmadatt invited Muni Chitra with various enjoyments to
enjoy them. Similarly, other men, who are connected in some way, invite a
virtuous man with qualities like youth and beauty, etc., with the aim of worldly
enjoyments.  **Om Om Om Hatthassarahajaneehim, Vihaaragamanehi Ya. Bhujam Bhoge
Ime Sagghe, Maharisie! Poojayamu Tam.**  **Chhaya** - With elephants, horses,
chariots, and journeys for pleasure, enjoy these enjoyments, O great sage! We
worship you.  **Anuvaad** - The kings, etc., address the Muni and say: O great
sage! Ride on elephants, horses, chariots, etc., and go on journeys for
pleasure, wander in gardens, etc. Enjoy these praiseworthy and excellent
enjoyments. Let us worship you, honor you, and pay our respects to you.
**Teeka** - To show this, the sutrakar says: With elephants, horses, chariots,
and 'vihaaragamana' (journeys for pleasure), they invite with things that are
pleasing to the senses. For example, they invite with 'bhujksva bhogan' (enjoy
these enjoyments), 'iman' (these), 'shladhyan' (praiseworthy), 'maharsie' (O
great sage), 'tvam' (you). We worship you with these enjoyments and means.
**Teekaarth** - To express the above sentiment, the sutrakar states: It is
possible that the king, etc., approach the Muni and invite him, requesting him
to ride on elephants, horses, chariots, etc., and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM chAyA - rAjAno rAjamAtyAzca brAhmaNA athavA kSatriyAH  /
nimantrayanti bhogairbhikSukaM sAdhujIvinam  //  anuvAda - nRpati gaNa unake
amAtya - maMtrIvRnda, brAhmaNa athavA kSatriya ye sabhI sAdhujIvi-jIvana meM
zuddha saMyama pUrNa AcAra kA pAlana karane vAle muni ko bhogamaya jIvana meM
pratyAvRnta hone hetu, lauTane hetu AmaMtrita karate haiN| TIkA - 'rAjAnaH'
cakravartyAdayo 'rAjAmAtyAzca' mantripurohitaprabhRtayaH tathA brAhmaNA athavA
'kSatriyA' ikSvAkuvaMzajaprabhRtayaH, ete sarve'pi 'bhaugaiH'
zabdAdibhirviSayaiH 'nimantrayanti' bhogopabhogaM pratyabhyupagamaM kArayanti
kam ? bhikSukaM 'sAdhujIviNami' ti sAdhvAcAreNa jIvituM zIlamasyeti (sAdhujIvI
taM) sAdhujIvimiti, yathA brahmadattacakravartinA
nAnAvidhairbhogaizcitrasAdhurUpAnimantrita iti  /  evamanye'pi kena
citsambandhena vyavasthitA yauvanarUpAdiguNopetaM sAdhuM
viSayoddezenopanimantrayeyuriti  // 15 //  . TIkArtha - cakravartI aura
bar3e-bar3e nRpativRnda, maMtrI, purohita Adi tathA brAhmaNa aura unameM ikSvAku
Adi vaMzoM meM utpanna uttama kSatriya-ye sabhI zabdAdi viSayoM ke mAdhyama se
AmaMtrita karate haiN| bhogopabhogamaya jIvana ko svIkAra karane hetu anurodha
karate haiM  /  viSaya ke spaSTIkaraNa hetu prazna upasthita karate hue kahate
haiM-kise AmaMtrita karate haiM ? sAdhujIvI-zuddha AcAra-AcAra pUrNa jIvana jIne
vAle bhikSu yA muni ko AmaMtrita karate haiM  /  jaise brahmadatta nAmaka
cakravartI ne citra nAmaka muni ko nAnA prakAra ke bhogoM dvArA AkRSTa kara
unheM bhogane hetu AmaMtrita kiyA thA  /  usI prakAra kisI sambaMdhoM meM
vyavasthita-jur3e hue anya puruSa bhI yauvana saundarya Adi guNayukta puruSa ko
sAMsArika bhogoM ke uddezya meM upanimaMtrita-gRhI jIvana meM lauTane hetu
AmaMtrita karate OM OM OM hattha'ssarahajANehiM, vihAragamaNehi ya  /  bhujaM
bhoge ime sagghe, mahArisI ! pUjayAmu taM  // 16 //  chAyA - hastyazvarathayAnai
vihAragamanaizca bhukSva bhogAnimAn zlAdhyAnmaharSe pUjayAmastvAm  //  anuvAda -
pUrva varNita bhUpati Adi muni ko sambodhita kara kahate haiM-he maharSe ! Apa
hAthI, ghor3e, ratha Adi vividha yAnoM para ArUr3ha hokara viharaNa kare-udyAna
Adi meM vicaraNa kare  /  zlAghya-prazaMsanIya uttama bhogoM ko bhoge  /  calie
hama ApakA pUjana-sammAna, satkAra kare  /  TIkA - etadeva darzayitumAha-
hastyazvarathayAnaiH tathA 'vihAragamanaiH' viharaNaM krIDanaM vihArastena
gamanAni vihAragamanAni-udyAnAdau krIDayA gamanAnItyarthaH,
cazabdAdanyaizcendriyAnukUlairviSayairUpanimantrayeyuH tadyathA-bhuDkSva bhogAn'
zabdAdiviSayAn 'imAn' asmAbhiDhauMkitAn pratyakSAsannAn 'zlAdhyAn' prazastAn
anindyAn 'maharSe' sAdho ! vayaM viSayopakaraNaDhaukanena 'tvAM' bhavantaM
'pUjayAmaH' satkArayAma iti  // 16|| kizcAnyat - TIkArtha - uparyukta bhAva ko
abhivyakta karane hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM-yaha saMbhAvita hai ki
rAjA Adi muni ke samIpa Akara unheM AmaMtrita kare, unase Agraha kare ki hAthI,
ghor3e ratha Adi yAnoM para (219)

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga**  Get on a chariot and go for a stroll in
the gardens and parks for the purpose of recreation, entertainment, and to
divert your mind. The word "cha" used here means to enjoy the praiseworthy,
excellent, and unblamable words and other subjects presented by us. O great
sage! We honor and respect you by presenting you with the materials for the
enjoyment of objects and the enjoyment of enjoyment.  **Verse 17**  _Vastra-
gandha-alankara, itthiyo samanaani ya. Bhumjahimaai, bhogaai auso! Pujayamu
tam._  **Translation:**  O long-lived one! Enjoy the clothes, fragrant
substances, ornaments, women, beds, and other enjoyable things. We honor and
respect you.  **Commentary:**  "Vastra" refers to silk, cotton, etc. "Gandha"
refers to fragrant substances like sandalwood paste, etc. "Vastra-gandha" is a
compound word meaning clothes and fragrant substances. "Alankara" refers to
ornaments like necklaces, bracelets, etc. "Itthiyo" refers to young women.
"Sayanaani" refers to beds with mattresses, pillows, and blankets. Enjoy these
enjoyable things that are pleasing to the senses and mind, which have been
presented to you by us. O long-lived one! We honor and respect you.  **Verse
18**  _Jo tume niyamo chinno, bhikku bhavammi suvvaaya. . . Aagaaramavasantas,
savvo sanvijae taha._  **Translation:**  O one who has attained the highest
vows! You have accepted the Arhathood initiation and are engaged in the
observance of the great vows, etc. Even while living in a house, those vows will
remain the same and will continue to be observed.  **Commentary:**  Furthermore,
O one who has attained the highest vows! The great vows, etc., which you have
observed in the past during your renunciation, have been fulfilled by the
restraint of the senses. Even now, while living in a house, you will continue to
observe the householder's life properly. The idea is that good and bad deeds,
once done, do not disappear.  **Verse 19**  (220)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 _zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram savAra hokara Apa bAga bagIcoM meM krIr3A, manovinoda
Adi ke nimitta-citta bahalAne hetu viharaNa kare-ghUmeM  /  yahAM jo ca zabda kA
prayoga huA hai usakA abhiprAya yaha hai hama logoM dvArA upasthApita-arpita
zlAghya-prazasta anindya uttamottama zabdAdi viSayoM kA upabhoga kare  /  he
maharSe ! hama loga viSayopakaraNa-bhogopabhoga kI sAmagrI prastuta karate hue
ApakA sammAna satkAra karate haiM  /  vasthagaMdhamalaMkAraM, itthIo samaNANi ya
/  bhuMjAhimAI, bhogAI Auso ! pUjayAmu taM  // 17 //  chAyA -
vastragandhamalaMkAraM striyaH zayanAsane ca  /  bhukSvemAn bhogAn AyuSman
pUjayAmastvAm  //  anuvAda - he ciraMjIva ! vastra, gaMdha-sugandhita padArtha,
alaMkAra-AbhUSaNa, ramaNiyA~, zayyA Adi bhogya padArthoM kA Apa bhoga kareM  /
hama ApakA sammAna karate haiM, satkAra karate haiM  /  TIkA - 'vastraM'
cInAMzukAdi 'gandhA' koSTapuTapAkAdayaH, vastrANi ca gandhAzca vastragandhamiti
samAhAradvandvaH tathA 'alaGkAram' kaTakakeyUrAdikaM tathA 'striyaH'
pratyagrayauvanAH 'zayanAni' ca paryaGkatUlI pracchadapaTopadhAnayuktAni, imAn
bhogAnindriyamano'nukUlAnasmAbhiDhauMkitAn 'bhukSva' tadupabhogena saphalIkurU,
he AyuSman ! bhavantaM 'pUjayAmaH' satkArayAma iti  // 17 //  TIkArtha - yahAM
vastra aura gaMdha donoM se milakara banA vastra gaMdha pada samAhArArthaka
dvandva samAsa hai| cInAzuka-rezama Adi vastra, gaMdha-koSTa puTapAka Adi
sugandhita padArtha, kaTaka-kaDe, keyUra-bAjUbanda yA bhujabanda Adi gahane,
yauvanavatI ramaNiyAM tathA rUI se bhare bichaune takiyoM Adi se yukta palaMga-
ina bhogoM kA Apa upabhoga kareM, ye indriyoM aura mana ko AlhAdita karane vAle
haiM, hamAre dvArA Apake sammukha upasthApita hai, inakA upayoga kara inheM
saphala banAye  /  he ciraMjIva ! hama ApakA pUjana-satkAra sammAna karate haiN|
jo tume niyamo ciNNo, bhikkhUbhAvaMmi suvvayA  /  . . AgAramAvasaMtassa, savvo
saMvijae tahA  // 18 //  chAyA - yastvayA niyamazcIrNo bhikSubhAve suvrata  /
agAramAvasatastava sarvaH saMvidyate tathA  //  anuvAda - he uttamavrata dhArin
! Apa bhikSu bhAva meM ArhatI dIkSA svIkAra kara jina niyama-mahAvratAdi ke
paripAlana meM lage hue haiM, gRhavAsa-ghara meM rahate hue bhI ve saba usI
taraha se raha pAyeMge, paripAlita hote rheNge| TIkA - api ca-yastvayA pUrvaM
'bhikSubhAve' pravrajyAvasare 'niyamo' mahAvratAdirUpaH 'cIrNaH' anuSThitaH
indriyanoi ndriyopazamagatena he suvrata ! sa sAmpratamapi agAraM' gRham
'AvasataH' gRhasthabhAvaM samyaganupAlayato bhavatastathaiva vidyata iti, na hi
sukRtaduSkRtasyAnucIrNasya nAzo'stIti bhAvaH  // 18 //  kiJca - (220)

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Commentary on the Verse:**  This is an excellent vow for
those who have taken the vow of renunciation. The monks, having received the
initiation of renunciation, have attained peace in their minds and senses. They
will continue to abide by the great vows and other rules, even while living as
householders, because the merits and demerits accumulated by humans are never
destroyed.  **Verse 19:**  **Shadow:** For a long time, you have been practicing
restraint. Now, where is the fault in you? **Translation:** They invite the monk
to enjoy worldly pleasures, just as they entice a pig with rice grains.
**Commentary:** The verse explains that the monk, having practiced restraint for
a long time, is now being tempted by worldly pleasures. The verse uses the
analogy of a pig being lured into a trap with rice grains to illustrate how
easily a monk can be tempted by worldly pleasures.  **Verse 20:**  **Shadow:**
Those who are urged to follow the path of a mendicant, but are unable to bear
it, become disheartened, like weak oxen on a steep path. **Translation:** Those
who are weak and ignorant, having taken the vow of a mendicant, are unable to
follow it. They abandon their vows, just like weak oxen fall on a steep path.
**Commentary:** The verse explains that those who are weak and ignorant, having
taken the vow of a mendicant, are unable to follow it. They abandon their vows,
just like weak oxen fall on a steep path. This verse highlights the importance
of strength and determination in following the path of renunciation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM TIkArtha - he uttama vrata dhArin-munivarya pravrajyA-dIkSA
lekara Apane mana aura indriya meM jo zAMti prApta kI hai, jina mahAvratAdi
niyamoM kA paripAlana karane meM lage haiM, ve gRhastha ke rUpa meM rahate hue
bhI-gRhI jIvana kA anupAlana karate hue bhI ve vaise hI bane raheMge, kyoMki
manuSya dvArA saMcita puNya pApa kabhI naSTa nahIM hote| ciraM vUijamANassa,
doso dANiM kuto tava ?  /  icceva NaM nimaMti, nIvAreNa va sUyaraM  // 19 //
chAyA - ciraM viharataH doSa idAnIM kutastava  /  ityeva nimantrayanti
nIvAreNeva sUkaram  //  anuvAda - munivarya ! Apa cirakAla se-bahuta samaya se
saMyama kA paripAlana karate A rahe haiM, aba bhogamaya jIvana svIkAra karane
para bhI Apako doSa nahIM laga sakatA  /  yoM bhoga bhogane hetu AmaMtrita kara
loga eka muni ko usI taraha sAMsArika jAla meM phaMsA lete haiM, jaise nIvAra-
cAvala ke dAnoM ke lobha se loga suara ko jAla meM phaMsA lete haiM  /  _TIkA -
ciraM 'prabhUtaM kAlaM saMyamAnuSThAne 'dUijjamANassa' tti viharataH sataH
'idAnI' sAmprataM doSaH kutastava ?, naivAstIti bhAvaH, ityevaM
hastyazvarathAdibhirvastragaMdhAlaGkArAdibhizca nAnAvidhairUpabhogopakaraNaiH
karaNabhUtaiH 'Na' miti vAkyAlaGkAre 'taM' bhikSu sAdhujIvinaM 'nimantrayanti'
bhogabuddhiM kArayanti dRSTAntaM darzayati-tathA 'nIvAreNa'
vrIhivizeSakaNadAnena 'sUkaraM' varAhaM . kUTake pravezayanti evaM tamapi
sAdhumiti  // 19 //  TIkArtha - pUrvavarNita rAjA Adi sAdhu se anurodha karate
haiM ki munivarya ! Apa bahuta samaya se saMyama kA anuSThAna-paripAlana karate
hue A rahe haiM  /  aba yadi Apa bhoga bhogeM to koI doSa nahIM hai, yoM kahate
hue ve loga hAthI, ghor3e, ratha Adi yAna vAhanoM tathA vastra, sugaMdhita
padArtha evaM AbhUSaNa Adi taraha taraha ke bhogopayogI sAdhanoM dvArA usa sAdhu
meM bhogamaya bhAvanA-buddhi paidA karate haiM, jo saMyamapUrvaka apanA jIvana
yApana kara rahA hai  /  isa saMbaMdha meM eka dRSTAnta upasthita kiyA hai ki
jaise nIvAra-eka viziSTa jAti ke cAvaloM ke dAnoM kA lobha dikhAkara suara ko
phaMde meM phAMsa liyA jAtA hai, usI taraha sAdhu ko bhI ve loga asaMyama ke
phaMde meM phaMsA lete haiN| coiyA bhikkhacariyAe, acayaMtA javittae  /  tattha
maMdA visIyaMti, ujANaMsi va dubbalA  // 20 //  chAyA - coditAH
bhikSucaryayA'azaknuvanto yApayitum  /  tatra maMdAH viSIdanti udyAna iva
durbalAH  //  anuvAda - ve maMda ajJAnI puruSa jinhoMne sAdhu kA bAnA apanA
rakhA hai, usa sAdhu samAcArI kA pAlana nahIM kara sakate, jisake pAlana hetu
AcArya Adi gurujanoM ne jinheM prerita kiyA  /  phalata: ve usI taraha saMyama
kA parityAga kara dete haiM, jaise U~ce mArga para gamanodyata durbala -
kSatihIna baila gira par3ate haiN| 221

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra with Commentary - Conclusion of the Previously
Mentioned Matters  The commentator states that the text now concludes the
previously mentioned matters.  According to the scriptural method, there are ten
types of Samachari for the wandering Sadhu, which are as sharp and difficult to
bear as the edge of a sword. These are described by terms like "Iccha Miccha"
and are called Bhikṣu-caryā. To follow this Bhikṣu-caryā, the Guru and others
constantly encourage the Sadhu. Or, seeing the Sadhu struggling to follow this
Bhikṣu-caryā, the Acharya and others repeatedly encourage them. However, some
Sadhus, even after receiving such encouragement, find themselves unable to bear
this hardship. Unable to properly sustain their lives by following the
restraints, ignorant men become slack in their observance of these restraints,
which were attained after countless births and are the primary means of
attaining liberation. These dull and ignorant men abandon this restraint, which
is like the Cintamani jewel, an inconceivable and powerful force, and which
great men have practiced.  An example is given: The high part of a path is
called "Udyanam". Just as oxen, burdened with heavy loads and weak, become
exhausted while ascending this high path and lower their necks, unable to bear
the burden they carry, so too, these ignorant men, unable to bear the burden of
the five great vows they have accepted, become disheartened and abandon the
restraint, being overcome by the emotions previously described, such as lust and
greed.  **Verse 21:**  "Achayanta va loohenam, avahaanenam tajia. Tattha mandaa
viseeyanti, ujaansi jaraggava."  **Commentary:**  "Rukṣeṇa" - unable to sustain
themselves by the restraint, "Upadhānena" - being threatened by fasting and
other internal and external austerities, "Tarjitā" - afflicted, these dull men
become disheartened in their restraint. "Udyanaśirasi" - on the high peak,
"Jīrṇa" - like an old ox, even a young ox might become exhausted there, let
alone an old one. This is why the word "Jīrṇa" is used. Even a wise man with
strong determination might become exhausted after a long time, let alone these
dull men who are constantly being tempted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram TIkA - anantaropanyastavArtopasaMhArArthamAha-bhikSUNAM-
sAdhUnAmudhukta vihAriNAM caryA dazavidhacakravAla sAmAcArI icchAmicchetyAdikA
tayA coditAH - preritA yadivA bhikSucaryayA karaNabhUtayA sIdantazcoditAH-
tatkaraNaM pratyAcAryAdikaiH paunaH punyena preritAstaccodanAmazaknuvanta:
saMyamAnuSThAnenAtmAnaM 'yApayituM' vartayitumasamarthAH santa: 'tatra' tasmin
saMyame maukSekagamanahetau bhavakoTizatAvApte 'mandA' jaDA 'viSIdanti'
zItalavihAriNo bhavanti. tamevAcintyacintAmaNikalpaM mahApuruSAnucIrNaM saMyama
parityajanti, dRSTAntamAha-UrdhvaM yAnamudyAnaM-mArgasyonnato bhAga uTTaGka
mityarthaH tasmin udyAnazirasi utkSiptamahAbharA ukSANo'tidurbalA
yathA'vasIdanti-grIvAM pAtayitvA tiSThanti notkSiptabharanirvAhakA
bhavantItyevaM te'pi bhAvamandA utkSiptapaJcamahAvratabhAraM voDhumasamarthAH
pUrvoktabhAvAvataiH parAbhagnA viSIdanti  // 20 //  kiJca - TIkArtha - AgamakAra
aba pUrva varNita bAtoM kA upasaMhAra kara pratipAdita karate haiM - zAstrIya
vidhi ke anusAra vicaraNazIla sAdhu ke lie dasa prakAra kI samAcArI kA vidhAna
hai, jo talavAra kI tejadhAra ke samAna bar3I tIkSNa aura durvaha hai, jisakA
'icchA micchA' ityAdi dvArA nirUpaNa huA hai, use bhikSucaryA kahA jAtA hai  /
usa bhikSAcaryA kA pAlana karane hetu guru Adi prerita karate rahate haiM,
athavA usa bhikSucaryA ke anusaraNa meM sAdhakoM ko kaSTa pAtA dekhakara AcArya
Adi punaH punaH prerita karate haiM, kintu katipaya sAdhu usa prakAra kI preraNA
pAkara bhI usa kaThoratA ko sahana karane meM apane ko asamartha pAte haiM  /
saMyama kA pAlana karate hue sAdhu jIvana kA samyaka nirvAha karane meM
asamartha ajJAnI puruSa usa saMyama ke paripAlana meM zithila ho jAte haiM, jo
karor3oM bhavoM ke pazcAt prApta huA, jo mokSa prApti kA mukhya sAdhana hai  /
ve mandajar3a yA ajJAnI usa saMyama kA parityAga kara dete haiM, jisakA
mahApuruSa AcaraNa karate rahe haiM, jo cintAmaNi ratna ke sadRza acintya
prabhAvayukta hai  /  isa saMbaMdha meM eka dRSTAnta prastuta kiyA jAtA hai-ut +
yAna = udyAnamArga ke ucca bhAga ko udyAna kahA jAtA hai  /  jo baila bhArI
bojha se dabe hue hoM, zaktihIna hoM, usa ucca bhAga kI ora Age bar3hate hue,
hArakara apanI gardana ko nIce kara baiTha jAte haiM  /  apane para lAde hue
bojha ko Dhone meM ve akSama ho jAte haiM, usI prakAra ve ajJAnI vyakti bhI
apane dvArA svIkRta pAMca mahAvratAtmaka bhAra ko Dhone meM-usako lekara sAdhanA
ke uccamArga meM Age bar3hate rahane meM asamartha ho jAte haiM  /  pahale strI
Adi jina bhAvavoM kA varNana huA hai, unase vicalita hokara saMyama kA parityAga
kara dete haiM  /  acayaMtA va lUheNaM, avahANeNa tajiyA  /  tattha maMdA
visIyaMti, ujANaMsi jaraggavA  // 21 //  chAyA - azaknuvanto rUkSeNa, upadhAnena
tarjitAH  /  tatra maMdAH viSIdanti udyAne jaradvAH  /  anuvAda -, tyAga maya
jIvana kA nirvAha karane meM asamartha, tapazcaraNa se tarjita-bhayabhIta,
Darane vAle maMda ajJAnI puruSa saMyama ke ucca patha para Age bar3hate hue usI
taraha viSaNNa yA parizrAnta ho jAte haiM, jaise U~ce rAste para Age bar3hatA
huA vRddha baila  /  TIkA - 'rUkSeNa' saMyamenAtmAnaM yApayitumazaknuvantaH
tathA 'upadhAnena' anazanAdinA sabAhyAbhyantareNa tapasA 'tarjitA' bAdhitAH
santaH tatra saMyame mandA viSIdanti 'udyAnazirasi' udRGkamastake 'jIrNo'
durbalo gauriva, yUno'pi hi tatrAvasIdanaM sambhAvyate kiM punarjaragavasyeti
jIrNagrahaNam, evamAvartamantareNApi dhRtisaMhananopetasya vivekino'pyavasIdanaM
sambhAvyate, kiM punarAvartarUpasargitAnAM mandAnAmiti  // 21 //  2220 -

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Upasargadhyayana Tika-artha - The meaning of 'ruksha' is 'samyama' (restraint).
The general meaning of 'ruksha' is dry or insipid. For those who desire physical
pleasures, even 'samyama' is insipid. Those who are incapable of observing that
'samyama', are afraid of external austerities like fasting, etc. and internal
austerities like svadhyaya (self-study) and dhyana (meditation), they experience
sorrow in progressing on the path of 'samyama', just as a weak old ox
experiences distress while climbing a steep path. Even a young ox is likely to
experience depression and suffering while climbing a steep path. The use of the
words 'jaraggava-jaradva-jirnnapada' here is to illustrate this sentiment. Even
those who are courageous, strong and wise, are afflicted by obstacles and
adversities. Then what to say about those who have been discussed earlier.
Evam nimantanam laddham, mucchiya giddha itthisu. Ajjhuppanna kamehi coijjanta
gaya giham.  Translation - Having obtained an invitation, they became infatuated
and greedy towards women. Attracted by sensual pleasures, they went back to the
household life, even though they were urged by the teacher (guru) to observe
restraint (samyama).  Tika - The verse says that having obtained an invitation
accompanied by the provision of the means for sense enjoyment, they became
extremely attached to those means of sense enjoyment, such as elephants, horses,
chariots, etc. and greedy towards women, their minds being absorbed in sensual
pleasures. Though urged by the teacher (guru) to observe restraint (samyama),
they were unable to make the effort, being weak-willed, and returned to the
household life, abandoning the life of renunciation.  The second objective of
the study of 'Upasargadhyayana' is complete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM TIkArtha - rUkSa kA tAtparya saMyama hai  /  rUkSa kA sAmAnya
artha rUkkhA yA nIrasa hotA hai  /  bhautika sukha cAhane vAloM ke lie saMyama
bhI nIrasa hai  /  jo puruSa usa saMyama kA pAlana karane meM akSama hai,
anazana Adi bAhya tathA svAdhyAya dhyAnAdi Abhyantara vividha tapazcaraNa se
bhaya khAte haiM, Darate hai, ve ajJAnI saMyamapatha para Age bar3hane meM usI
taraha viSAda kA anubhava karate hai jaise U~ce mArga para car3hatA huA kamajora
vRddha baila klezAviSTa hotA hai  /  U~ce mArga para car3hate hue to yuvA baila
ko bhI avasAda- kaSTa honA sambhAvita hai  /  isI bhAva kA digdarzana karAne
hetu yahAM jaraggavA-jaradva-jIrNapada kA prayoga huA hai  /  jo puruSa
dhairyazIla, dRr3hasaMhanana yukta tathA vivekazIla hote hai ve bhI Avarto-
vighnoM dvArA avasanna pIDita ho jAte haiM  /  phira jinakI Upara carcA AI hai,
unakA to kahanA hI kyA  /  . evaM nimaMtaNaM laddhaM, mucchiyA giddha itthIsu  /
ajjhovavannA kAmehiM coijaMtA gayA gihaM ||22||tibemi|| chAyA - evaM nimantraNaM
labdhavA mUrchitAH gRddhAH strISu  /  adhyupapannAH kAmeSu codyamAnAHgatA gRham
//  anuvAda - jaisA pahale varNita huA hai-pArivArika jana Adi dvArA upasthApita
bhoga bhogane kA AmantraNa prApta kara kAma bhoga meM lolupa, striyoM meM
vimugdha-Asakta sAMsArika viSayoM meM adhyupapanna-usa ora AkRSTa puruSa saMyama
pAlana hetu guru Adi dvArA preraNA kiye jAne para bhI ve gRhastha meM cale jAte
haiN| TIkA - 'sarvopasaMhAramAha-evaM' pUrvoktayA nItyA
viSayopabhogopakaraNadAna pUrvaka nimantraNaM' viSayopabhogaM prati prArthanaM
labdhvA' prApya 'teSu' viSayopakaraNeSu hastyazvarathAdiSu 'mUrcchitA'
atyantAsaktAH tathA strISu 'gRddhA' dattAvadhAnA ramaNIrAgamohitAH tathA
'kAmeSu' icchAmadanarUpeSu 'adhyupapannA:' kAmAgatacittA:
saMyame'vasIdanto'pareNodyuktavihAriNA nodyamAnAH-saMyamaM prati protsAhyamAnA
nodanAM soDhumazaknuvantaH santogurukarmANa : pravrajyAM parityAlpasattvA gRhaM
gatAgRhasthIbhUtAH itiH parisamAptau, bravImIti pUrvavat  // 22 //  TIkArtha -
jo jIva karmoM se bhArI hote haiM, jaisA pahale varNana kiyA gayA hai, jaba
unake samakSa hAthI, ghor3e, ratha Adi sAMsArika viSaya bhoga sambandhI sAmagrI
upasthApita karate hue logoM dvArA bhoga bhogane kI abhyarthanA kI jAtI hai,
taba ve unameM atyanta Asakta hote hue striyoM ke prati lolupa bane hue atyanta
kAmAsakta banate hue saMyama ke pAlana meM zithila ho jAte haiM, usa samaya
zAstrIya maryAdApUrvaka saMyama kA paripAlana karane vAle kisI muni dvArA
prerita kiye jAne para bhI ve utsAhita nahIM hote, saMyama pAlana meM samartha
nahIM hote, ve AtmaparAkrama rahita puruSa pravrajita-saMyama meM dIkSita jIvana
kA parityAga kara phira gRhastha bana jAte haiM  /  iti zabda yahA~ samApti kA
sUcaka hai, bravImi bolatA hU~ yaha pUrvavata yahA~ yojanIya hai  /  upasarga
parijJA adhyayana kA dvitIya uddezaka samApta huA  /  (223)

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra ### Third Uddeshaka  The second Uddeshaka in the
Upasarg Parijnaya has been discussed. Now, the third Uddeshaka is being
commenced. Its connection with the previous Uddeshaka is as follows: In the
previous two Uddeshaka, the Upasargas (obstacles) have been described as being
of two types: favorable and unfavorable. It is being explained that these
Upasargas lead to the destruction of Adhyatma (spiritual knowledge and
detachment). This is the connection of this Uddeshaka with the previous ones.
The first Sutra of this Uddeshaka is:  **"Jaha Sangamakalami, Pittato Bhirū
Vehai. Valayam Gahaṇam ṇūmam, Ko Jaṇai Paraajayam? ||1||"**  **Commentary:**
Just as a coward in the time of battle looks for a place of refuge behind him,
so too, who knows the defeat in a deep, covered place?  **Translation:** A
cowardly man, devoid of courage, when the time of battle arrives, looks for a
pit or a hidden place for his own safety. He thinks to himself, "Who knows? In
battle, who will be defeated?" Therefore, in times of danger, one should look
for a place to hide beforehand.  **Tika (Commentary):** By way of example, it is
said that the understanding of the subject matter is easy for those with weak
minds. Therefore, the Sutrakar (author of the Sutra) presents his subject matter
through an example: Just as a coward, who is not prepared for action, in the
time of battle, when the enemy army is present, looks behind him for a place of
refuge, a fort, etc., so too, the Sutrakar shows this: "Valayam" - where water
is situated in a circular shape, or a pit without water, a place difficult to
enter and exit, "Gahaṇam" - a place covered with trees like Dhawa, etc., "ṇūmam"
- a hidden cave in a mountain, etc. Why does he look at such places? Because he
thinks that in such a fierce battle, with a large army of soldiers, who knows
who will be defeated? Because the success of actions is dependent on fate, even
a few can defeat many. ||1||  **Tikaarth (Meaning of the Commentary):** By way
of example, or illustration, it is said that those with weak minds, or those
with weak intellect, easily understand a subject matter. Therefore, the Sutrakar
presents his subject matter through an example: Just as a coward, who is not
prepared for battle, when the enemy army is present, looks behind him for a
place of refuge, a fort, etc., so too, the Sutrakar shows this: "Valayam" - a
place where water is situated in a circular shape, or a pit without water, a
place difficult to enter and exit, "Gahaṇam" - a place covered with trees like
Dhawa, etc., "ṇūmam" - a hidden cave in a mountain, etc. He looks at such
places, asking the question, "Why does he look at these places?" The Sutrakar
answers this question by saying that the coward thinks that in such a fierce
battle, with a large army of soldiers, who knows who will be defeated? Because
the success of actions is dependent on fate, even a few can defeat many. ||1||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram tRtIyaH uddezyakaH upasargaparijJAyAM ukto
dvitIyoddezakaH, sAmprataM tRtIyaH samArabhyate, asya cAyamabhisambandhaH-
ihAnantaroddezakAmyAmupasargA anukUlapratikUlabhedenAbhihitAH,
taizcAdhyAtmaviSIdanaM bhavatIti tadanena pratipAdyata ityanena
sambandhenAyAtasyAsyoddezakasyAdisUtram - aba tRtIya adhyayana kA tRtIya
uddezaka prArambha kiyA jAtA hai  /  upasarga parijJA kA dUsarA adhyayana kahA
jA cukA hai, aba tIsarA adhyayana zuru kiyA jAtA hai  /  isakA pahale ke
uddezakoM ke sAtha saMbaMddha hai, pahale ke do uddezako meM anukUla aura
pratikUla-do prakAra ke upasarga batAye gae haiM, una upasargoM dvArA adhyAtma
viSIdana-jJAna aura vairAgya kA nAza hotA hai  /  isa tRtIya uddezaka meM yaha
batAyA jAyegA  /  tIsare uddezaka ke avataraNa kA yaha kAraNa hai  /  usakA
pahalA sUtra yoM hai - jahA saMgAmakAlaMmi, piTThato bhIrU vehai  /  valayaM
gahaNaM NUmaM, ko jANai parAjayaM ?  // 1 //  chAyA - yathA saMgrAmakAle
pRSThato bhIrUH prekSate  /  valayaM gahana mAcchAdakaM ko jAnAti parAjayam  /
anuvAda - zaurya vihIna-kAyara puruSa saMgrAma kA samaya upasthita ho jAne para
apane bacAva ke lie gaDDhA yA koI gupta sthAna dekhatA hai  /  vaha mana hI mana
socatA hai kauna jAnatA hai ? yuddha meM kisakI parAjaya ho, ataH saMkaTa ke
samaya apane bacAva ke lie pahale se hI chipane kI jagaha dekha lenI caahie|
TIkA - dRSTAntena hi mandamatInAM sukhenaivArthAvagatirbhavatItyata AdAveva
dRSTAntamAha-yathA kazcid 'bhIrU:' akRtakaraNaH 'saMgrAmakAle'
parAnIkayuddhAvasare samupasthite 'pRSTataH prekSate' AdAvevApatpratIkArahetu
bhUtaM durgAdikaM sthAnamavalokayati  /  tadeva darzayati-'valaya' miti
yatrodakaM valayAkAreNa vyavasthitam udaka rahitA vA gartA
duHkhanirgamapravezA,stathA gahanaM' dhavAdivRkSaiHkaTisaMsthAnIyaM NUmaM ti
pracchannaM giriguhAdikaM, kimityasAvevamavalokayati ?, yata evaM manyate-
tatraivambhUte tumulasaGgrAme subhaTasaGkale ko jAnAti kasyAtra parAjayo
bhaviSyatIti? yato daivAyattAH kAryasiddhayaH, stokairapi bahavo jIyanta iti  //
1 //  TIkArtha - dRSTAnta yA udAharaNa se mandamati-kamajora buddhi yukta
puruSoM ko AsAnI se kisI viSaya kA jJAna hotA hai  /  ataH sUtrakAra dRSTAnta
dvArA apanA pratipAdya upasthita karate haiM - jaise yuddha kalA meM aniSNAta
Darapoka puruSa zatru kI phauja ke sAtha yuddha cAlU ho jAne ke pahale bacane ke
lie kisI darga-jahAM kaThinAI se paha~cA jA sake, aise sthAna kI Toha karatA
hai. satrakAra unhIM: kA digdarzana karAte haiM-jahAM valayAkAra yA gola AkAra
meM pAnI TikA hotA hai, vaisA sthAna, jala vihIna gaDDhA Adi sthAna jahAM ghusa
pAnA aura jahAM se nikala pAnA muzkila hotA hai, athavA jo sthAna dhava Adi
vRkSoM se manuSya kI kaTi paryanta AvRtta ho-DhakA ho tathA chipI huI parvata kI
guphA Adi ho  /  isa taraha kI jagaha vaha pahale khojatA hai, dekhatA hai, yaha
prazna uThAte hue ki vaha kyoMki ina sthAnoM ko dekhatA hai.| yaha prazna
upasthita karate hue sUtrakAra yaha samAdhAna dete hai ki vaha Darapoka AdamI
yaha socatA hai ki isa bhayajanaka (224)

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of Precepts  **A large number of valiant warriors have gathered in
the battle, therefore, who knows who will be defeated, because sometimes even a
few men can conquer a large number of people. The success of the task is in the
hands of God.**  **Verse 2:**  **Shadow:**  "In many moments, or in a single
moment, such a moment may arise, which makes victory or defeat possible.
Therefore, the cowardly people look for a place where they can hide if they are
defeated."  **Translation:**  "In many moments, or in a single moment, such a
moment may arise, which makes victory or defeat possible. Therefore, the
cowardly people look for a place where they can hide if they are defeated."
**Commentary:**  "In many moments, or in a single moment, such a moment may
arise, which makes victory or defeat possible. In such a situation, it is
possible that we, the defeated, will 'hide' and perish. Therefore, the cowardly
people look for refuge in the back, to protect themselves from danger."  **The
verse illustrates this point with an example, and then the author summarizes
it.**  **Verse 3:**  **Shadow:**  "Thus, some Shramanas, knowing themselves to
be weak, seeing the future fear, think of this Shruta (scripture) as a means of
protection."  **Translation:**  "Thus, some Shramanas, knowing themselves to be
weak, seeing the future fear, think of this Shruta (scripture) as a means of
protection."  **Commentary:**  "Just as one who wants to enter a battle looks
back and thinks, 'What will be my refuge, my protection, if I am defeated?'
Similarly, some 'Shramanas' (ascetics), who are not firm in their resolve and
are of weak character, knowing themselves to be 'weak' and unable to bear the
burden of restraint for life, seeing the future fear, think, 'What will be my
protection in old age, when I am weak, or in times of famine?' Thus, they think
of livelihood and fear, and 'consider' (contemplate) other Shruta (scripture)
that is beneficial to the world, as a means of protection."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM. yuddha meM bahuta bar3e-bar3e zauryazAlI yoddhA ekatrita
haiM ataeva kauna jAne kisakI isameM parAjaya ho, kyoMki kabhIkabhI aisA hotA
hai ki thor3e puruSa bhI buhasaMkhyaka janoM para vijaya prApta kara lete hai,
kArya kI saphalatA deva ke adhIna hai| muhuttANaM muhuttassa, muhutto hoi tAriso
/  parAjiyA'vasappAmo, iti bhIrU uvehaI  // 2 //  chAyA - muhUrtANAM muhUrtasya
muhUrto bhavati tAdRzaH  /  parAjitA avasAma iti bhIrU rUpekSate  //  anuvAda -
bahuta se muhUrto meM yA koI eka hI muhUrta meM aisI ghar3I A sakatI hai jo jaya
yA parAjaya ko saMbhava banA de  /  isalie hama parAjita hokara jahAM jA sake,
chipa sake, aise sthAna ko bhIrU-kAyara jana pahale se hI dekhe rakhate haiM  /
TIkA - kiJcamuhUrtAnAmekasya vA muhUrtasyAparo 'muhUrta:'
kAlavizeSalakSaNo'vasarastAdRg bhavati yatra jayaH parAjayo vA sambhAvyate,
tatraivaM vyavasthite parAjitA vayam 'avasarpAmo' nazyAma ityetadapi sambhAvyate
asmadvidhAnAmiti bhIrU: pRSThata ApatpratIkArArthaM zaraNamupekSate  // 2 //
iti zlokadvayena dRSTAntaM pradarzya dArTAntikamAha TIkArtha - bahuta se muhUrto
meM athavA kisI eka hI muhUrta meM koI aisA kAla vizeSa-avasara A sakatA hai,
jisameM jaya yA parAjaya saMbhAvita ho jAya-ghaTita ho jAya aisI sthiti meM,
parAjita hokara bhAgakara hameM kahIM chipanA par3e, aisA socakara bhIrU-
Darapoka vyakti pahale hI Age Ane vAlI Apatti kA pratIkAra karane hetu zaraNa-
rakSA yogya sthAna kI gavaiSaNA karatA hai, DhUMDhatA hai  /  ina do dRSTAntoM
ko pradarzita kara sUtrakAra aba unakA sArAMza prakaTa karate haiN| evaM tu
samaNA ege, abalaM naccANa appagaM  /  aNAgayaM bhayaM dissa, * avikappaMtimaM
suyaM  // 3 //  chAyA - evaM tu zramaNA eka abalaM jJAtvA''tmAnam  /  anAgataM
bhayaM dRSTvA'vakalpayantIdaM zrutam  //  anuvAda - kaI zramaNa yaha socakara ki
jIvana paryanta hama saMyama pAlana meM samartha nahIM ho sakeMge, AgAmI kAla
meM saMbhAvita kaSToM se bacane ke lie ve anyazruta lokopayogI zAstroM kA
abhyAsa kara apanI rakSA kA sAdhana banAte haiM  /  TIkA - 'evam' iti yathA
saGgrAmaM praveSTumicchuH pRSThato'valokayati-kimatra mama parAbhagnasya
valayAdikaM zaraNaM trANAya syAditi ?, evayeva 'zramaNAH' pravrajitA 'eke'
kecanAdRDhamatayo'lpasattvA AtmAnam 'abalaM' yAvajIvaM saMyamabhAravahanAkSamaM
jJAtvA anAgatameva bhayaM dRSTvA' utprekSya tadyathA-niSkiJcano'haM kiM mama
vRddhAvasthAyAM glAnAdyavasthAyAM durbhikSe vA trANAya syAdityevamAjIvikA
bhayamutprekSya 'avakalpayanti' parikalpayanti manyante 1225

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is the Sutra of the Sutra-Kritanga. This grammar, mathematics, astrology,
medicine, horoscopy, mantras, etc., which I have heard and studied, may be for
my protection in the beginning. ||3|| And this is what they think, as the
commentator says:  Just as a cowardly man who wants to enter a battle - wants to
participate in the battle as a soldier - first looks to see what kind of ring,
pit, etc., will be useful for his protection after he is defeated. Similarly,
the ascetic whose mind is not steady, who does not have sufficient self-
strength, who considers himself unable to follow restraint throughout his life,
thinks about the possible fears or difficulties in the future, thinking: "I am
destitute, I have nothing, when old age comes, illness, etc., will arise, there
will be a famine, who will protect me?" Thus, out of fear of livelihood, he
thinks that grammar, mathematics, astrology, Ayurveda, horoscopy, mantra-
shastra, etc., which I have studied, will protect me in times of trouble, will
protect me. Those men without self-strength also imagine, as the Sutra-kar says:
Who knows the downfall, from women or water? When asked, we will say, we have
nothing planned. ||4||  Commentary: Those who are weak in spirit, the course of
their actions is diverse, there are many opportunities for carelessness,
therefore, "Who knows?" Who can define "downfall" from a life of restraint? By
whom will I be defeated, so that I will fall from restraint? Is it "from women"
- from association with women, or "from water" - from the desire to use water
for bathing, etc.? Thus, those who are weak imagine, "No," we have nothing
"planned" - any previously earned wealth that will be useful in that situation.
Therefore, "when asked" by others, we will "say" - we will say, we will use -
grammar, etc., which we have heard. Thus, those who are weak in spirit, thinking
this way, strive for the scriptures. But even so, the desired purpose is not
achieved by those who are unfortunate. And so it is said:  "From the seed of
knowledge, the fruit of peace, those who desire wealth, their effort is in vain,
what is surprising in that? The actions of the doer do not have a fixed result,
they are subject to another result, the seed of rice produces sprouts, but never
an anklet." ||1||  To conclude, the commentator says:  Men who are weak in
spirit and unfortunate think that the strength of beings is small, the course of
actions is very diverse, one never knows what will happen, there are many
reasons for carelessness. In such a situation, who can know by what obstacle I
will be defeated and fall from restraint?  (226)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram idaM vyAkaraNaM gaNitaM jotiSkaM vaidyakaM horAzAstraM
mantrAdikaM vA zrutamadhItaM mamAvamAdau trANAya syAditi  // 3 //
etaccaite'vakalpayantItyAha - TIkArtha - jisa prakAra eka kAyara puruSa jo
yuddha meM praviSTa honA cAhatA hai-saMgrAma meM sainika ke rUpa meM bhAga lenA
cAhatA hai to vaha pahale hI dekhatA hai ki hAra jAne ke bAda aisA kaunasA
valaya, gaDDhA Adi sthAna merI rakSA hetu upayogI hogA  /  isI prakAra vaha
sAdhu jisakA citta sthira nahIM hotA, jisameM yatheSTa Atmabala nahIM hotA,
jIvana paryanta saMyama kA pAlana karane meM apane Apako asamartha samajha kara
AgAmI kAla meM saMbhAvita bhaya yA kaThinAIyoM ke viSaya meM socatA hai ki-maiM
niSkiJcana-akiMcana hU~, mere pAsa kucha bhI nahIM hai, jaba bur3hApA AyegA,
rUgNatA Adi glAnAvasthA utpanna hogI, kabhI durbhikSa ho jAyegA to merI kauna
rakSA karegA  /  yoM jIvikA sAdhana ke bhaya se vaha vicAra karatA hai ki
vyAkaraNa, gaNita, jyotiSa, Ayurveda, horAzAstra, maMtrazAstra Adi jo mere dvArA
adhIta hai, saMkaTa ke samaya mujhe trANa deMge, merI rakSA kareMge  /  ve
Atmabala vihIna puruSa aura bhI kalpanA karate haiM, jo sUtrakAra isa prakAra
batalAte haiM  /  ko jANai viUvAtaM, itthIo udagAu vA  /  coijaMtA pavakkhAmo,
Na No atthi pakappiyaM  // 4 //  chAyA - ko jAnAti vyApAtaM strIta udakAdvA  /
codyamAnA pravakSyAmo na no'sti prakalpitam  //  anuvAda - saMyama kA pAlana
karane meM jisakA citta asthira yA vicalita hotA hai, vaha socane lagatA hai ki
kahIM strI ke prasaMga meM maiM saMyama se Diga jAU~ athavA sacitta pAnI ke
prayoga se apane ko roka na pA sakane ke kAraNa sAdhutva se bhraSTa ho jAUM,
yaha kauna jAnatA hai ? mere pAsa kucha saMgrahita dravyAMdi bhI nahIM hai  /
isalie maiMne jo laukika zAstroM kA adhyayana kiyA hai, unhIM ke dvArA saMkaTa
ke samaya meM maiM kisI taraha nirvAha kara sakU~gAM  /  TIkA - alpasattvAH
prANino vicitrA ca karmaNAM gatiH bahuni pramAdasthAnAni vidyante ata: 'ko
jAnAti?' kaH paricchinatti 'vyApAtaM' saMyamajIvitAt bhraMzaM, kena parAjitasya
mama saMyamAd bhraMzaH syAditi, kim 'strItaH' strIpariSahAt uta 'udakAt'
snAnAdyarthamudakAsevanAbhilASAd ?, ityevaM te varAkAH prakalpayanti, na 'na:'
asmAkaM kiJcana 'prakalpitaM' pUrvopArjitadravyajAtamasti
yattasyAmavasthAyAmupayogaM yAsyati,ataH'codyamAnAH pareNa pRcchayamAnA
hastizikSAdhanurvedAdikaM kuTilaviNTalAdikaM vA 'pravakSyAmaH' kathayiSyAmaH
prayokSyAma ityevaM te hInasatvAH sampradhArya vyAkaraNA dau zrute prayatanta
iti, na ca tathApi mandabhAgyAnAmabhipretArthavAptirbhavatIti tathA coktam -
"upazamaphalAdvidyAvIjAtphalaM dhanamicchatAM, bhavati viphalo yadyAyAsastadatra
kimadbhutam ?  /  na niyataphalAH karturbhAvAH phalAntaramIzate, janayati khalu
vrIherbIjaM na jAtu yadAGkaram  // 1 //  iti  /  / 4 //  upasaMhArArthamAha -
TIkArtha - AtmabalavihIna-abhAge puruSa aisA socate haiM ki prANiyoM meM
parAkrama-Atmabala svalpa hotA hai, karmoM kI gati bar3I vicitra hotI hai, na
jAne kaba kyA ghaTita ho jAe, pramAda Ane ke bhI aneka hetu haiM  /  aisI sthiti
meM yaha kauna jAna sakatA hai ki kisa vighna se parAjita hokara maiM saMyama se
bhraSTa ho (226)

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I will go to study grammar. I don't know if my restraint will be lost due to the
company of women or if I will become a fallen soul due to the desire to use
water for bathing etc. Those unwise people think that we don't have any wealth
earned earlier, which can support us in our livelihood if we fall from
restraint. Therefore, when someone asks us, we will tell them the legal
procedure for incorporating the knowledge of elephant training, archery, etc.,
and difficult questions like twisted, crooked, and complex questions. We will
say, we will use it. It is certain that those men with weak character and weak
self-power strive to study grammar etc., they work hard, but the desired purpose
of those unfortunate people is not fulfilled by this. It is said - the seed of
knowledge, which produces the fruit of peace, the effort of the man who wants
the fruit of wealth from it, is futile, proves to be useless, then what is the
wonder in this. The result of substances, actions is fixed, therefore, the
substance cannot give a different result to its doer than its own result. A
barley plant can never be produced from a rice seed. Now the sutrakar concludes
by saying. "Thus they write, the ring writers. Those who are doubtful, and those
who are ignorant of the path." ||5|| Commentary - Just as a coward, when the
opportunity for war arises, thinks of finding a place to hide, in the same way,
a doubtful, ignorant man thinks that worldly knowledge will protect us if we are
corrupted by restraint - we will be able to protect ourselves, we will be able
to make a living. Commentary - 'Ityevami' is for the purpose of referring to the
previous discourse, just as a coward, who wants to enter the war, becomes
negligent towards the ring etc. when danger arises in the battlefield, in the
same way, the renounced, due to their bad luck and weak character, become
negligent towards grammar etc. for the sake of livelihood due to fear of
livelihood. They imagine, what kind of? Doubt - mental confusion - whether we
are able to carry this burden of restraint to the end or not, thus it is said -
"Rough practice, irregular, past time food, tasteless. Earth bed, eye bath,
celibacy." ||1|| They are those who have come to that - they have come, just as
they are 'unskilled' towards the path, whether this path will lead to the
desired land or not, thus they become mentally confused, in the same way, they
are also doubtful about carrying the burden of restraint, they neglect
arithmetic etc. for livelihood. ||5|| Now an example is given of the efforts of
great men - Commentary - Ityevam - this word is for the purpose of indicating
the previous discourse. Just as a cowardly man, who wants to participate in the
war, searches for a pit etc., a secret place to hide, when danger arises in the
battlefield. Similarly, many self-powered renounced-initiated saints, due to
their bad luck, become negligent towards grammar etc. for the sake of livelihood
due to fear of livelihood. (227)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM jAU~  /  na jAne strI parISaha se merA saMyama naSTa ho jAe
athavA snAna Adi ke lie jala sevana kI abhilASA se maiM sAdhutva se patita ho
jAUM  /  ve avivekIjana aisI parikalpanA karate hue socate haiM ki hamAre pAsa
pahale se arjita koI dhana nahIM hai, jo saMyama se gira jAne para hamAre
nirvAha meM hameM sahArA de  /  ata: kinhIM ke pUchane para hama hasti zikSA,
dhanurveda Adi vidyAe~ tathA kuTila viNTala-Ter3e-meDhe kaThina praznoM ko
samAhita karane ke vidhikrama unheM batalAyeMge, kaheMge, prayoga kareMge  /
aisA nizcayakara ve hInasattva-AtmabalavihIna puruSa vyAkaraNa Adi viSayoM ke
adhyayana meM prayatnazIla hote haiM, parizrama karate haiM, kintu una maMda
bhAgyoM-abhAgoM ke abhipsita prayojana kI isase pUrti nahIM hotI  /  kahA hai-
vidyA rUpI bIja, jo upazama-zAMtirUpI phala utpanna karatA hai, usase jo manuSya
dhana rUpI phala cAhatA hai, usakA parizrama Adi viphala ho, vyartha siddha ho
to isameM kaunasA Azcarya hai  /  padArthoM kA, kAryoM kA phala niyata-nizcita
hotA hai, isalie jisa padArtha kA jo phala hai, usase bhinna phala vaha apane
kartA ko nahIM de sakatA  /  cAvala ke bIja se jau kA paudhA kabhI paidA nahIM
ho sktaa| aba sUtrakAra upasaMhAra karate hue kahate haiM  /  icceva
paDilehaMti, valayA paDilehiNo  /  vitigicchasamAvannA, paMthANaM ca akoviyA  //
5 //  chAyA - ityevaM pratilekhaMti, valaya pratilekhinaH  /
vicikitsAsamApannAH pathazcAkovidAH  //  anuvAda - jisa prakAra yuddha kA
avasara Ane para Darapoka vyakti chipane ke sthAna ko khoja lene kA vicAra
karate haiM usI prakAra saMzaya yukta akovida-jJAna zUnya puruSa socate haiM ki
saMyama se bhraSTa ho jAne para laukika vidyAe~ hameM trANa deMgI-una dvArA hama
apanI rakSA kara pAyeMge, jIvana nirvAha kara leMge  /  TIkA - 'ityevami' ti'
pUrvaprakrAnparAmarzArthaH, yathA bhIravaH saGgrAme pravivikSavo valayAdikaM
prati upekSiNo bhavantIti, evaM pravrajitA mandabhAgyatayA alpasatvA
AjIvikAbhayAdvyAkaraNAdikaM jIvanopAyatvena 'pratyupekSante  /  parikalpayanti,
kimbhUtAH ? vicikitsA-cittaviplutiH-kimenaM saMyama bhAramutkSiptamantaM netuM
vayaM samarthAH uta netIvyevambhUtA, tathA coktam - "lukkhamaNuNhamaNiyayaM
kAlAikkaMtabhoyaNaM virasaM  /  bhUmIsayaNaM loo asiNANaM baMbhaceraM ca  // 1
// " chAyA - rukSamanuSThAmaniyataM kAlAtikrAntaM bhojanaM virasam  /
bhUmizayanaM loco'snAnaM brahmacaryaM ca  // 1 //  tAM samApannAH- samAgatAH,
yathA panthAnaM prati 'akovidA' anipuNAH, kimayaM panthA vivakSitaM bhU bhAgaM
yAsyatyuta netItyevaM kRtacittaviplutayo bhavanti, tathA te'pi
saMyamabhAravahanaM prati vicikitsAM samApannA nimittagaNitAdikaM jIvikA)
pratyupekSanta iti  // 5 //  sAmprataM mahApuruSaceSTite dRSTAntamAha - TIkArtha
- icceva-ityevam yaha pada pUrvaprakrAnta-pahale kahI gaI bAta ke saMsUcana hetu
hai  /  jaise Darapoka AdamI, jo yuddha meM hissA lenA cAhate haiM samarAMgaNa
meM saMkaTa upasthita hone para apane chipane ke lie gaDDhA Adi gupta sthAnoM kI
khoja karate haiM, Toha karate haiM  /  isI taraha kaI Atma parAkrama vihIna
pravrajita-dIkSita sAdhu apane manda bhAgya-badakismata ke kAraNa AjIvikA ke
bhaya se jIvana nirvAha kI dRSTi se vyAkaraNa Adi (227)

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra contemplates the concepts of knowledge. They think that
we will be able to make a living through them. What kind of ascetics are they?
While posing this question, they explain - the fickleness of the mind - is
called doubt. These ascetics have doubt in their minds, whether they will be
able to bear the burden of restraint until the end, whether they will be able to
manage it or not? It is said that a monk, first of all, if he gets food, it is
dry, cold, stale, even that is not available sometimes. Sometimes it is received
after the time of eating has passed and that too is tasteless, devoid of taste,
devoid of flavor. The Shraman has to sleep on the ground and has to pluck his
hair, he has to produce them. He never has to bathe throughout his life and has
to observe celibacy. Seeing these difficult and painful activities, many
ascetics become doubtful about being able to carry out their restrained life
till the end, they start doubting. Just as an ignorant traveler walking on the
road doubts whether this road will lead me to where I want to go. Their minds
become unstable, in the same way, many cowardly, weak-willed ascetics doubt
about being able to sustain the burden of their restraint, their desired goal
till the end, and they hope to make a living through the science of destiny,
astrology and mathematics. Now the Sutrakar Mahāpuruṣas narrate an anecdote
through the door of an example regarding their efforts. 1 Naya Those who are
known in the time of war, do not look back, what else Shadow those who are known
in the time of war - Surapurangama. Sia? ||6|| Death Surapurangama. They do not
look back, what else is death? ||6|| Anuvad - Those who are known and famous,
and Surapurangama - valiant, courageous people, who are in the forefront, at the
time of war, at the time of war, do not think that if they are defeated or
distressed, how will we save ourselves, they think that there is nothing greater
than dying in battle. Tika - These are the great souls, the word 'tu' is for the
purpose of specialisation, 'in the time of war' at the time of war with the
enemy, 'known' known to the people, how? 'Surapurangama' those who are in the
forefront of the brave, those who are on the shoulder of the army at the time of
war, those who are like this, entering the war, 'do not look back' do not look
back at the fort etc. for protection from danger, and they are of unwavering
mind, but they think - what will happen to us? If death is the end, then it is a
small matter for us who desire the eternal flow of fame, as it is said - "Even
though they are fickle, they desire the vastness of the imperishable, with the
lives of the brave, if there is fame, what is not enough? ||1|| ||6|| Thus,
having shown the example of the soldier, the Dantika says Tika-arth - In this
verse, the use of the word 'tu' is to indicate the specialness of the valiant
man described in this verse, as opposed to the cowardly man described earlier.
Those who are very valiant, who are famous in the world for fighting with the
enemy army, who are in the forefront of the army when the war breaks out,  228

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram vidyAoM kI parikalpanA karate haiM  /  una dvArA hamArA
gujArA ho sakegA aisA socate haiM  /  ve sAdhu kisa prakAra ke haiM  /  yaha
prazna upasthita karate hue batalAte haiM - citta kI vipluti - caMcalatA ko
vicikitsA kahA jAtA hai| una sAdhuoM ke mana meM vicikitsA saMdeha vidyamAna
rahatA hai ki jo saMyama bhAra hamane le rakhA hai, use aMta taka le jAne meM,
saMbhAla pAne meM hama samartha ho pAyeMge yA nahIM ? kahA hai eka bhikSu ko
pahale to, yadi bhojana milatA hai to vaha rUkhA sUkhA ThaMDA bAsI hotA hai,
vaisA bhI kabhI kabhI nahIM mila pAtA  /  kabhI kabhI khAne kA samaya gujara
jAne ke bAda prApta hotA hai aura vaha bhI virasa - rasa rahita, svAda zUnya  /
zramaNa ko jamIna para sonA par3atA hai tathA apane kezoM kA luJcana karanA hotA
hai unheM utpAdita karanA hotA hai| kabhI bhI jIvana paryanta snAna nahIM karanA
hotA hai aura brahmacarya kA paripAlana karanA hotA haiM  /  isa kaThina-kleza
pUrNa kArya kalApoM ko dekhakara apane saMyama jIvana ko anta taka nibhA sakane
ke saMbaMdha meM kaI sAdhu saMzayApanna ho jAte haiMsaMdeha karane lagate haiM
/  jaise koI ajJa rAhagIra rAha para calatA huA yaha saMdeha karatA hai ki yaha
rAstA jahA~ mujhe jAnA haiM vahA~ jAyegA yA nahIM  /  unakA citta asthira ho
jAtA hai isI prakAra apane saMyama ke bhAra kA, abhISTa kA anta taka nirvAha
kara pAne ke saMdarbha meM kaI kAyara AtmabalahIna sAdhu saMdeha karate haiM
tathA ve nimittazAstra, 'jyotiSavidyA tathA gaNitAdi dvArA apanI jIvikA calA
leMge, aisI AzA karate haiM  /  aba sUtrakAra mahApuruSoM ke ceSTita saMbaMdha
meM dRSTAnta dvAra AkhyAna karate haiM  /  1 nAyA je u saMgAma kAlaMmi, No te
piThThamuvehiMti, kiM paraM chAyA ye tu saMgrAmakAle jJAtAH - sUrapuraMgamA  /
siyA ?  // 6 //  maraNaM zUrapuraGgamAH  /  no te pRSTha mutprekSante kiM paraM
maraNaM syAt  //  anuvAda jJAta-prasiddhi prApta tathA surapuraMgama -
zauryazIla parAkramI janoM meM agragAmI, saMgrAmakAla meM yudadha ke avasara
para aisA nahIM socate ki parAjita yA vipanna ho jAne para hama apanA bacAva
kaise kareMge ve yahI socate haiM ki yuddha meM mara jAne se bar3hakara to ora
koI bAta nahIM hai  /  TIkA- ye punarmahAsattvAH, tuzabdo vizeSaNArtha:
'saGgrAmakAle' parAnIkayuddhAvasare 'jJAtAH' lokaviditAH, katham ?
'zUrapuraGgamAH' zUrANAmagragAmino yuddhAvasare sainyAgraskandhavartina iti, ta
evambhUtAH saGgrAmaM pravizanto 'na pRSThamutprekSante' na durgAdikamApat
trANAya paryAlocayanti te cAbhaGgakRtabuddhayaH, api tvevaM manyante -
kimaparatrAsmAkaM bhaviSyati ? yadi paraM maraNaM syAt, tacca zAzvataM yazaH
pravAhamicchatAmasmAkaM stokaM vartata iti, yathA
coktam"vizarArUbhiravinazvaramapi capalaiH sthAsnu vAJchatAM vizadam  /
prANairyadi zUrANAM bhavati yazaH kiM na paryAptam ?  // 1 //   // 6 //  tadevaM
subhaTadRSTAntaM pradarzya dAntika mAha TIkArtha isa gAthA meM jo 'tu' zabda kA
prayoga huA hai, vaha pUrva varNita bhIrU puruSa kI apekSA isa gAthA meM varNita
kiye jAne vAle zauryazIla puruSa kI viziSTatA batAne hetu hai  /  jo puruSa
atyanta parAkramI haiM, zatrusenA ke sAtha jhuMjhane meM jo loka meM prasiddha
haiM yuddha chir3a jAne para jo senA ke agrabhAga meM rahate haiM ve, 228

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Upasargadhyayanam na agre bhavishyati kincit cintayanti. Sankata samaye yadi
parajaya bhavati, tada apane trana hetu kasyacit durga adi vishaye paryalocana
na karanti, yuddha bhaga cchutane vicara mana me na api avati. Te jananti yat
samara bhumi me yadi adhika hani bhavati, sa mrityuh. Tatas brhikata kincit na
bhavati. Mrityuh asmakam sada satkiiti iccha sahita bhavati, eka tulya atha
naganya vastu. Uktam hai - manushyanam prana nasyara eva astira, tan kurban
avinasyara cirakala sthayee tatha ujjvala yasah svayattam kartumicchatam, tarhi
kim prana deyat adhika mulya vat na asti. Iti subhata-suravira yoddha drstanta
prastauta krtva, atha sara batalyate.  Om Om Om  Evam samutthite bhikkhu,
Arambham Chaya eva samutthitah bhiksuh, vyutsrjya agara bandhanam. Arambham
tiryak krtva, atmattvaya parivrajet.  Anuvada: Jo bhikshu sramana agara bandhan
- grhastha ke bandhan ka tatha arambha - hinsadi savadya karmon ka vyutsarjan -
tyag karke samyam palan me tatpar hua hai, vah atmatva ke liye, paramatma
sakshatkara ke liye athava moksha praptihetu samyam ka palan kare.  Tika: Yatha
subhata jnata namatas kulatah sauryatah siksatascca tatha sannaddha-vaddha-
parikara karagrhita-hetavah pratibhata-samitibhedino na prshtato avalokayanti,
evam 'bhikshurap' sadhur api mahasattva paraloka pratispardhina indriya kasayadi
karim arivargam jetum samyak-samyamotthanena utthitah, tatha coktam - "koham
manam ca mayam ca, loham pancindiyani ca. dujjayam cevam appana, savvam appe jie
jiyam."  Chaya - krodha mana ca maya ca lobhah pancendriyani ca. durjayam caivat
mana sarvam atmani jitejitam.  Kim krtva samutthita iti darsayati - 'vyutsrjya'
tyaktva 'agara bandhanam' grhapadam tatha 'arambham' savadyanusthana rupam
'tiryak krtva' apahastya atmano bhava atmattvam - asesakarmakalankara-rahitatvam
tasmai atmattvaya, yadvai - atmamokhsah samyamo va tad bhavastasmai - tad artham
pari - samantat vrajet - samyananushthanakriyayam dattavadhano bhaved iti
arthah.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM taba Age hone vAlI kisI bAta kA ciMtana nahIM karate  /
saMkaTa ke samaya saMyoga vaza yadi parAjaya ho jAya to apane trANa ke lie kisI
durga Adi ke viSaya meM paryAlocana nahIM karate, yuddha se bhAga chUTane kA
vicAra to unake mana meM AtA hI nahIM  /  ve yaha jAnate haiM ki samarabhUmi meM
yadi adhika se adhika koI hAni ho sakatI hai, to vaha mRtyu hai| usase
bar3hakara kucha nahIM hotA  /  mRtyu hama logoM ke lie sadaiva satkIrti kI
icchA lie rahatI hai, eka tuccha yA nagaNya vastu hai  /  kahA hai-manuSyoM ke
prANa nazvara evaM asthira hai, unheM kurbAna kara avinazvara cirakAla sthAyI
tathA ujjavala yaza svAyatta karane kI jina vIroM ke mana meM abhivAJchA hotI
hai, to kyA yaha prANa de dene kI tulanA meM adhika mUlyavAna nahIM hai| isa
prakAra subhaTa-zUravIra yoddhA kA dRSTAnta prastuta kara aba sAra batalAte haiM
/  OM OM OM evaM samuTThie bhikkhU, AraMbhaM chAyA evaM samutthito bhikSuH,
vyutsRjyAgArabandhanam  /  ArambhaM tiryyak kRtvA, AtmatvAya parivrajet  //  -
vosijjA'gArabaMdhaNaM  /  tiriyaM kaTTu, attattAe parivva  //  7  //  anuvAda jo
bhikSu zramaNa agAra bandhana - gRhastha ke baMdhana kA tathA Arambha-hiMsAdi
sAvadya karmoM kA vyutsarjana-tyAgakara saMyama pAlana meM tatpara huA hai, vaha
Atmatma ke lie, paramAtma sAkSAtkAra ke lie athavA mokSa prApti hetu saMyama kA
pAlana kare  /  - - TIkA yathA subhaTA jJAtA nAmataH kulataH zauryata:
zikSAtazca tathA sannaddhavaddhaparikarAH karagRhItahetayaH
pratibhaTasamitibhedino na pRSThato'valokayanti, evaM 'bhikSurapi' sAdhurapi
mahAsattvaH paralokapratisparddhinamindriya kaSAyAdikamarivargaM jetuM samyak -
saMyamotthAnenotthita:, tathA coktam "kohaM mANaM ca mAyaM ca, lohaM
paMciMdiyANi ya  /  dujjayaM cevamappANaM, savvamappe jie jiyaM  // 1 // " chAyA
- krodha:mAnazca mAyA ca lobhaH paMcendriyANi ca  /  durjayaM caivAtmanAM
sarvamAtmani jitejitam  // 1 //  kiM kRtvA samutthita iti darzayati-'vyutsRjya '
tyaktvA' agAra bandhanaM' gRhapAzaM tathA' ArambhaM 'sAvadyAnuSThAnarUpaM
'tiryakkRtvA apahastya Atmano bhAva Atmatvam - azeSakarmakalaGkarahitatvaM
tasmai AtmatvAya, yadivA - AtmAmokSa: saMyamo vA tadbhAvastasmai-tadarthaM pari
- samantAdvrajet - saMyamAnuSThAnakriyAyAM dattAvadhAno bhave dityarthaH  // 7
//  - TIkA - nAma, vaMza, zaurya aura zikSA- yuddha viSayaka yogyatA dvArA jo
saMsAra meM prasiddha hai, jinhoMne hAthoM meM zastra dhAraNa kara rakhe haiM,
yuddha ke lie kamara kasa rakhI hai vipakSI zatrusenA ko chinnabhinna karane meM
jo tatpara haiM, ve yuddha ke samaya pIche kI ora mur3akara nahIM dekhte| usI
prakAra mahAsattva pracura Atmabala ke dhanI sAdhu , bhI paraloka ko miTAne vAle
janma maraNa se chur3Ane vAle, indriya aura kaSAya Adi zatruoM ko vijita karane
vAle saMyama ke bhAra ko svIkAra kara samutthita hote haiM, saMyama sAdhanA meM
kRta saMkalpa hote haiM udyata hote haiM, taba ve pIche kI ora nahIM dekhate  /
kahA hai krodha, abhimAna, mAyA, pravacanA - lobha tathA pAMca indriyA~ durjeya
haiM  /  inheM jIta pAnA bahuta kaThina hai, para eka AtmA ko jIta lene para ye
sabake saba vijita ho jAte haiM, jIta lie jAte haiM  /  229

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Kritanga Sutra  The Sutra explains the subject matter of the question
raised: What are the Sadhus engaged in? They are engaged in abandoning the bonds
of the household, the snares and traps of worldly life, and transforming their
actions, which are tainted by sin, to follow restraint. The essence of the soul
is called Atmatva. Atmatva is being free from the stains and darkness of all
karmas. For this purpose, the Sadhu should be vigilant and aware. Or, Atmatva is
the name of liberation or restraint, it is indicative. Therefore, the Sadhu
should be engaged in all ways and in all aspects in following restraint for the
attainment of liberation. He should be very vigilant in the actions of following
restraint. This is the meaning:  **I** **Om Om Om** **Tamege** **Paribhasanti,**
**Bhikkhuyam Saahujiviinam. Paribhasanti, Antar Te Samahie.** || 8 || **Evam**
**Chhaya Tameke Paribhasante, Bhiksukam Saadu Jiviinam. Ya Evam Paribhasante,
Antake Te Madheh.**  **Translation:** Many followers make accusations about the
Sadhu who is engaged in his livelihood with the highest restraint, which will be
discussed later, but these accusations are far from the path of Samadhi.
**Commentary:** What has been said in the Niyukti about the despondency of the
mind of a cowardly person, that has been said. Now, the second meaning is being
discussed, regarding the words of the opponents, "Miti Sadhum." Those who have
attained a vision that is devoid of mutual benefit, like iron rods, they are the
followers of the Goshalak doctrine, the Digambara, or the Ajivika. They speak
about the Bhikshu, the Sadhu, the virtuous, the good, the one who lives a life
of benefit to others, "Ye" those who are not well-established in Dharma, "Evam"
what will be said, "Paribhasante" they make accusations against virtuous
conduct, those who are like this, "Antake" until the end, "Samadheh" they are
far from liberation, from right knowledge, or from good practice. || 8 || To
show what they speak, it is said:  **Commentary:** It has been explained in the
Niyukti that after accepting restraint, despondency and sorrow arise in the mind
of a cowardly person. How does this happen? This has been explained in the
previous verses. Now, what accusations do the followers make about the Sadhus,
this is the second meaning. The Agamkar says in this regard: Just as iron rods
do not meet each other, they remain separate, similarly, those who wander
separately, those who believe in a vision where mutual benefit is not
prescribed, some other-worldly, those who have faith in the Ajivika doctrine,
the followers of the Goshalak doctrine, or the Digambara tradition, they speak
accusatory words about the Sadhus who live a virtuous life, full of benefit to
others, which will be said later.  They criticize and condemn the conduct of the
Sadhus. They are far from Samadhi, liberation, right knowledge, or good
practice. The scripture explains about those other followers who speak
accusatory words.  **❀❀❀** **Sambaddhasamakappa U, Annamannesu Gilanasas, Jan
Sareh** **Pindavayam** **230** **Muchhiya. Dalaha Ya.** || 9 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 'sUtrakRtAGga sUtram zrI prazna upasthita kara viSaya ke spaSTIkaraNa hetu
batalAte haiM - ve sAdhu kyA karate hue samutthita haiM ? agAra baMdhana-
gRhastha ke pAza-jhAla yA phaMde kA parityAga kara sAvadya pApayukta kAryoM kA
parivarjana kara saMyama ke pAlana hetu ve samutthita  /  AtmA kA bhAva Atmatva
kahA jAtA hai  /  samagra karmoM ke kalaMka - kAlimA se rahita ho jAnA Atmatva
hai  /  tadartha sAdhu ko sAvadhAna evaM jAgarUka hokara rahanA cAhie athavA
Atmatva mokSa yA saMya kA nAma hai, sUcaka hai  /  ataH sAdhu ko mokSa prApti
hetu saMyama pAlane meM saba ora se saba prakAra se saMpravRtta. rahanA cAhie  /
use saMyamAnusaraNa - kriyA meM atyanta sajaga rahanA cAhie  /  isakA yaha
abhiprAya I OM OM OM tamege paribhAsaMti, bhikkhUyaM sAhujIviNaM  /
paribhAsaMti, aMtara te samAhie  //  8  //  evaM chAyA tameke paribhASante,
bhikSukaM sAdhu jIvinam  /  ya evaM paribhASante, antake te mAdheH  //  - -
anuvAda - uttama saMyatAcAra ke sAtha apane jIvana nirvAha meM saMlagna sAdhu ke
saMbaMdha meM kaI paramatAnuyAyI AkSepa vacana kahate haiM, jinakI Age carcA
hogI, kintu ve AkSepa pUrNa kathana samAdhi mArga se dUravartI haiM  /  TIkA -
niryuktau yadabhihitamadhyAtmaviSIdane taduktam, idAnIM paravAdivacanaM
dvitIyamarthAdhikAramadhikRtyAhata 'miti sAdhum 'eke' ye parasparopakArarahitaM
darzanamApannA ayaH zalAkAkalpAH, te ca gozAlaka matAnusAriNa AjIvikA digambarA
vA, ta evaM vakSyamANaM pari-samantAdbhASante taM bhikSukaM sAdhvAcAraM sAdhu
zobhanaM paropakArapUrvaka jIvituM zIlamasya sa sAdhujIvinamiti, 'ye' te
apuSTadharmANa evaM' vakSyamANaM 'paribhASante' sAdhvAcAranindAM vidadhati ta
evaMbhUtA 'antake' paryante dUre 'samAdheH '
mokSAkhyAtsamyagdhyAnAtsadanuSThAnAt vA vartanta iti  // 8 //  yatte
prabhASantetadarzayitumAha TIkArtha - niyukti meM batAyA jA cukA hai ki saMyama
svIkAra karane ke pazcAt bhIrU puruSa ke citta meM viSIdana-du:kha utpanna hotA
hai, vaha kisa prakAra hotA hai ? yaha pUrvavartI gAthAoM meM pratipAdita kiyA
jA cukA hai  /  aba paramatAnuyAyI sAdhuoM ke saMbaMdha meM kyA-kyA AkSepa
karate haiM, yaha isa dUsare arthAdhikAra meM hai  /  AgamakAra usa saMbaMdha
meM batalAte haiM-jaise ayazalAkAyeM- lohe kI zalAkAyeM paraspara nahIM milatI
pRthakapRthaka rahatI haiM isI taraha alaga-alaga viharaNa karane vAle, aise
darzana meM vizvAsa rakhane vAle, jahA~ eka dUsare kA upakAra karanA avihita
hai, katipaya anyatIrthika, AjIvika darzana meM AsthAzIla gauzAlaka matAnuyAyI
yA digambara paramparAnugata matavAdI uttama AcAra yukta paropakAra pUrNa jIvana
jIne vAle sAdhuoM ke viSaya meM AkSepa pUrNa vacana bolate haiM, jo Age
vakSyamANa-Age kahe jAyeMge  /  ve sAdhuoM ke AcAra kI nindA - bhartsanA karate
haiM  /  ve samAdhi mokSAnugata samyaka dhyAna se yA sat anuSThAna se dUravartI
haiM  /  ve anyamatAnuyAyI jo AkSepa pUrNa vacana bolate haiM, unake viSaya meM
zAstrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM  /   saMbaddhasamakappA u, annamannesu
gilANassa, jaM sAreha piMDavAyaM 230 mucchiyA  /  dalAha ya  // 9 //

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text criticizes Jain ascetics, claiming their conduct is similar to
householders. It uses the term "sambaddha-samakalpa" to describe this, meaning
"bound by similar conduct" to householders. The text argues that ascetics are
attached to each other, like householders are to their families, as evidenced by
their caring for sick ascetics. It then uses the term "saragattha" to describe
ascetics as being "attached to passion," implying they are not truly detached
from worldly desires. This, the text argues, prevents them from achieving
liberation from the cycle of rebirth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM chAyA - sambaddhasamakalpAstu, anyo'nyeSu mUrchitAH  /
piNDapAtaM glAnasya, yatsArayata dadadhvaJca  /  anuvAda - ve anya tIrthika
sAdhuoM para AkSepa lagAte hue kahate haiM ki inakA kalpa-AcAra gRhIjanoM ke
tulya hai  /  jaise gRhastha apane pArivArika janoM meM paraspara mUrcchita
Asakta rahate haiM  /  usI prakAra ye sAdhu haiM  /  tabhI to ye rugNa sAdhu ke
lie bhojana lAkara dete haiM  /  _ TIkA - sam-ekIbhAvena
parasparopakAryopakAritayA ca baddhAH' putrakalatrAdisnehapAzaiH sambaddhA-
gRhasthAstaiH samaH-tulyaH kalpo-vyavahAro'nuSThAnaM yeSAnte sambaddhasamakalpA-
gRhasthAnuSThAnatulyAnuSThAnA ityarthaH tathAhi-yathA gRhasthAH
parasparopakAreNa mAtA putre putro'pi mAtrAdAvityevaM 'mUrcchitA' adhyupapannAH,
evaM bhavanto'pi 'anyo'nyaM' parasparataH
ziSyAcAryAghupakArakriyAkalpanayAmUrcchitAH, tathAhi-gRhasthAnAmayaM nyAyo
yaduta-parasmai dAnAdinopakAra iti na tu yatIno, katha manyo'nyaM mUrcchitA iti
darzayati-piMDapAtaM bhaikSyaM 'glAnasya' aparasya rogiNaH sAdhoH yad-yasmAt
'sAreha' tti anveSayata, tathA 'dalAhya 'tti glAnayogyamAhAramanviSya
tadupakArArthaM dadadhvaM, ca zabdAdAcAryAde vaiyAvRtyakaraNAdyupakAreNa
vartadhvaM, tato gRhastha samakalpA iti  // 9 //  sAmpratamupasaMhAravyAjena
doSa darzanAyAha - TIkArtha - jo paraspara ekIbhAva-upakArya, upakAritA ke rUpa
meM baddha haiM, baMdhe hue haiM, ve saMbaddha kahe jAte haiM  /  gRhastha
putra, strI Adi ke sneha pAza meM-Asakti ke jAla meM baMdhe hue hote haiM  /
isalie ve saMbaddha haiM, una gRhIjanoM ke sadRza jinakA kalpa-AcAra vyavahAra
hai, ve sambaddha-sama kalpa kahe jAte haiN| dUsare zabdoM meM jo gRhasthoM ke
samAna anuSThAna yA kArya karate haiM ve sambaddha samakalpa haiM  /  gRhastha
jisa prakAra pArasparika upakAra dvArA mAtA putra meM tathA putra mAtA Adi meM
Asakta-mohita rahate haiM, usI taraha Apa bhI ziSya AcArya Adi ke prati
upakArapUrNa kAryoM dvArA Apasa meM mUrcchita Asakta rahate haiM  /  yaha
gRhIjanoM jaisA vyavahAra hai  /  ve auroM kA dAna Adi dvArA upakAra karate
haiM, saMyatI puruSoM kA-sAdhuoM kA yaha vyavahAra nahIM hai  /  Apa sAdhu vRnda
kisa prakAra paraspara mUrcchita-Asakta rahate haiM, yaha batalAte hue kahate
haiM Apa loga rugNa sAdhu ke lie AhAra kI gaveSaNA karate haiM, lAte haiM use
dete haiM  /  yahAM ca zabda kA prayoga huA hai  /  usakA tAtparya yaha hai ki
Apa AcArya Adi kA vaiyAvRtya sevA dvArA upakAra karate haiM  /  ataH kalpa yA
AcAra kI dRSTi se gRhasthoM ke samAna haiM  /  aba anya matavAdiyoM dvArA kahe
gaye AkSepa vacanoM ko samApta karate hue sUtrakAra doSa nirupaNArtha kahate
haiN| evaM tubbhe sarAgatthA, anna manna maNuvvasA  /  naTThasappahasabbhAvA,
saMsArassa apAragA  // 10 //  chAyA - evaM yUyaM sarAmasthA, anyo'nyamanuvazAH
/  /  naSTasatpathasadbhAvAH, saMsArasyApAragAH  //  anuvAda - anya matAvalambI
sAdhuoM ke prati AkSepa pUrNa vacana bolate hue kahate haiM ki Apa
sarAgastharAga meM, rAgAtmaka sambandhoM meM avasthita haiM, pArasparika
AsaktiyoM se jur3e haiM, satpatha aura sadbhAva zUnya haiM, zuddha sAdhanA maya
mArga para nahIM calate, Apake bhAva azuddha haiM  /  Apa saMsAra ke bhava cakra
ke apAragAmI haiMuse pAra nahIM kara sakate  /  (231)

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra **Commentary:** "Thus" you, like householders, are
attached to desires - you live with desire, hence you are called "sragastha" -
one who dwells in that nature. You are mutually dependent on each other, which
is not appropriate because the monks of the Jain order are free from
attachments, they are not dependent on anyone. This is the way of householders.
You are also deprived of the true path, the path of righteousness and the
ultimate goal. You are not beyond the cycle of birth and death in the four
realms of existence.  This is the opposing view. To refute it, it is said:
**Commentary:** "Then" the monk, who is a master of liberation, should address
them. What kind of monk? One who is a master of the path of liberation, who is a
guide to the right faith and conduct. "Thus" you, who are speaking in this way,
are indulging in the wrong side, the wrong view, which is based on false claims
and assumptions. You are indulging in both sides - the side of desire and
hatred. Desire arises from the support of your own side, even if it is flawed.
Hatred arises from the criticism of our side, even if it is flawless. Thus, you
are indulging in both sides. For example, householders are called "yatis"
because they are initiated into the order, even though they are engaged in the
activities of sowing seeds, watering, and eating. Thus, you are indulging in
both sides. Or, it could be that you are not practicing the right path yourself,
and you are criticizing those who are practicing it.  **Translation:** "Then"
the monk, who is a master of liberation, should address them. "Thus" you, who
are speaking in this way, are indulging in the wrong side, the wrong view, which
is based on false claims and assumptions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - ' evaM ' parasparokArAdinA yUyaM gRhasthA iva
sarAgasthA:- saha rAgeNa vartata iti sarAgaH-svabhAvastasmin tiSThantIti te
tathA, 'anyonyaM' parasparato vazamupAgatAH - parasparAyattAH, yatayo hi
niHsaGgatayA na kasyacidA yattA bhavanti, yato gRhasthAnAmayaM nyAya iti, tathA
naSTaH- apagataM satyathaH - sadbhAva :- sanmArga paramArto yebhyaste tathA  /
evambhUtAzca yUyaM 'saMsArasya' caturgatibhramaNalakSaNasya 'apAragA'
atIragAmina iti  // 10 //  ayaM tAvatpUrva pUkSaH asya ca dUSaNAyAha TIkArtha -
eka dUsare ke upakArI yA sahayogI Apa gRhasthoM kI jyoM sarAgastha - rAgAtmaka
pravRtti yA vyavahAra meM vartanazIla haiN| jo rAga yukta hotA haiM use sarAga
kahA jAtA hai| vaise svabhAva meM jo sthita hotA hai, vaha sarAgastha hai  /
Apa paraspara eka dUsare ke vazagata rahate haiM, jo samucita nahIM hai kyoMki
saMyati vRnda munigaNa niHsaMga-saMga varjita yA Asakti rahita hote hai  /  ve
kisI ke Ayatta - adhIna nahIM hote| eka dUsare ke vazagata rahanA - adhIna
rahanA gRhasthoM kA vyavahAra hai jIvana paddhati hai  /  Apa satpatha -
adhyAtma mArga aura sadbhAvaparamArtha se apagata haiM, vaMcita haiM  /
saMsAra-cAra gatiyoM meM paribhramaNa ke Apa pAragAmI nahIM haiM ApakA saMsAra
meM janma maraNa - AvAgamana miTa nahIM sakatA  /  yaha pUrva pakSa hai  /
usakA doSa dikhalAte hue kahate haiM aha te paribhAsejjA, bhikkhu tubbhe evaM
chAyA mokkhavisArae  /  pabhAsaMtA, dupakkhaM ceva sevaha  //  11  //  atha tAn
paribhASeta, bhikSu rmokSavizAradaH  /  evaM yUyaM prabhASamANAH duSpakSaJcaiva
sevadhvam  //   anuvAda anya matavAdiyoM dvArA AkSepa yukta vacana kahe jAne
para mokSa vizArada mokSa dharma ke vivecaka, sAdhanA niSNAta muni unase kahate
ki Apa loga isa prakAra AkSepa lagAte hue dupakkha duSpakSa-asatpakSakA sevana
kara rahe haiM, asatya kA pratipAdana kara rahe haiM  /  TIkA- 'atha' anantaraM
'tAn' evaM pratikUlatvenopasthitAn bhikSuH 'paribhASet' brUyAt, kimbhUtaH ?
'mokSa vizArado' mokSamArgasya samyagdarzanacAritrarUpasya prarUpakaH, 'evam'
anantarokta yUyaM prabhASamANAH santaH duSTaH pakSo duSpakSaH
asatpratijJAbhyuptagamastameva sevadhvaM yUyaM yadivA- rAgadveSAtmakaM
pakSadvayaM sevadhvaM yUyaM tathAhisadoSasyApyAtmIyapakSasya samarthanAdrAgo,
niSkalaGkasyApyasmadabhyupagamasya dUSaNAdveSaH, athai (thavai) vaM pakSadvayaM
yUyaM tadyathA vakSyamANanItyA bIjodakoddiSTakRtabhojitvAdgRhasthAH
yatiliGgAbhyupagamAtkila pravrajitAzcetyevaM pakSa dvayAsevanaM bhavatAmiti,
yadivA svato'sadanuSThAnamaparaJca sadanuSThAyinAM nindanamitibhAvaH  // 11 //
TIkArtha- pUrvokta rUpa meM pratikUlatA ke sAtha upasthita hone vAle, vyavahAra
karane vAle anya matavAdiyoM sAdhu yoM kahe  /  mokSa vizArada - mokSa mArga ke
samyak darzana evaM samyak cAritra rUpa mokSa darzana ke prarUpaka - vyAkhyAtA
sAdhu pUrvokta rUpa meM pratikUlatA ke sAtha upasthita - AkSepapUrNa vacana
bhASI anya matavAdiyoM se kahe ki yoM bolane vAle Apa to dupakkha- duSpakSa kA
sevana karate haiM duSTa-doSa yukta pakSa duSpakSa kahA jAtA hai  /  usakA Azaya
asat pratijJA yA siddhAnta kA svIkAra hai  /  232

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of Prefixes  The second meaning of "dukkha" used in the verse, its
Sanskrit shade, according to the two-sided view, also has two sides.
Accordingly, you consume the two sides of raga (attachment) and dvesha
(aversion). Although your side is flawed, you still support it due to the
delusion attached to it. This is your raga towards your own side. Our principle
is flawless and impeccable, yet you label it as flawed. This is your dvesha
towards it. Or, there is also a form of consuming two sides by you people. You
are householders, similar to householders, because you consume the seeds, water,
and food made for your purpose. By wearing the robe of a sadhu, you are similar
to a sadhu. This is the consumption of two sides by you. Or, you yourselves
perform asat anusthana (unrighteous practices) and savadya karma (flawed
actions), and you criticize those who perform sat anusthana (righteous
practices), nirvadya (flawless), papa-rahit (sinless), and uttama karya
(excellent actions). This is also a type of consuming two sides. This is the
meaning.  ❀❀❀  **Verse 12:**  > You eat from vessels, and you bring food for the
sick sadhu from the houses of householders. You consume seeds, water, and food
made for your purpose.  **Shade:**  **Translation:**  > You people eat from
vessels made of bronze and other metals, and you bring food for the sick sadhu
from the houses of householders. You consume seeds, water, and food made for
your purpose.  **Objection:**  > Other tirthankaras say, "You eat from vessels,
and you bring food for the sick sadhu from the houses of householders. You
consume seeds, water, and food made for your purpose."  **Commentary:**  > To
explain the incorrect conduct of the Ajivikas, other tirthankaras, and the
Digambaras, the sutrakara says, "You people claim to be aparigrahi (non-
possessive) and nishkinchana (without possessions). But even while saying and
accepting this, you eat from the vessels of householders, made of bronze and
other metals. By consuming from their vessels, you inevitably incur the fault of
possession. Moreover, you have an attachment to food and other things.
Therefore, how can your claim of being aparigrahi be considered flawless and
impeccable? You also bring food for the sick sadhu, who is unable to beg for
alms, from the houses of householders. Because of the lack of change in the way
of a sadhu, and because of the fault of bringing food from householders, this
fault is inevitable for you. The sutrakara points this out: You consume food
obtained from householders, using seeds, water, and other things as examples.
You consume food made for your purpose, which is inevitably for your
consumption. Therefore, you eat from the houses of householders, using their
vessels, and you also bring food for the sick sadhu from the houses of
householders. Thus, you are inevitably consumers of seeds, water, and food made
for your purpose."  **Further:**  > ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM gAthA meM prayukta dukkha kA dUsarA artha, usakI saMskRta
chAyA - dvipakSa ke anusAra do pakSa bhI hai| tadanusAra rAga aura dveSa rUpa do
pakSoM kA Apa sevana karate haiN| yadyapi ApakA pakSa doSapUrNa hai, phira bhI
usake sAtha saMlagna moha ke kAraNa Apa usakA samarthana karate haiN| yaha ApakA
apane pakSa ke prati rAga haiN| hamArA siddhAnta niSkalaMka nirdoSa hai, phira
bhI Apa use doSa yukta batalAte haiM, yaha ApakA usake prati dveSa hai  /
athavA Apa logoM dvArA do pakSoM ke sevana kA eka ora rUpa bhI hai| Apa loga
vakSyamANa-jo Age kahe jAe~ge sacitta bIja, udaka pAnI, uddizyakRta- Apake
nimitta, Apake nimitta uddezya se banAye gaye bhojana kA sevana karane ke kAraNa
Apa gRhastha haiM, gRhI tulya haiN| sAdhu kA bAnA dhAraNa kiye rahane se sAdhu
sadRza haiM  /  yaha Apa dvArA dvipakSa sevana hai| athavA Apa loga svayaM asat
anuSThAna sAvadya karma karate haiM tathA jo sat anuSThAna - niravadya,
pAparahita uttama kArya karate haiM usakI nindA karate haiM  /  yaha bhI eka
prakAra se dvipakSa sevana hai  /  yaha tAtparya hai  /   tubbhe bhuMjaha pAesu,
gilANo abhihaDaMmi yA  /  taM ca bIodagaM bhoccA, tamuddisAdi jaM kaDaM  // 12
//  chAyA - anuvAda Apa loga pAtroM meM-kAsya Adi dhAtu nirmita bartanoM meM
bhojana karate haiM tathA plAna rugNa sAdhu ke khAne hetu gRhasthoM ke yahAM se
bhogya sAmagrI maMgavAte haiN| bIja, sacita, udaka - jala kA sevana karate haiM
evaM oddezika apane lie banAyA gayA AhAra lete haiM  /  yUyaM bhuGkSvaM pAtreSu
glAna abhyAhRte yat  /  tacca bIjodakaM bhuktvA samuddizyAdiyat kRtam  //
AkSepa lagAte hue anya tIrthI kahate haiM  /  TIkA AjIvikAdInAM paratIrthikAnAM
digambarANAM cAsadAcAranirUpaNAyAha- kila vayamaparigrahatayA niSkiJcanA
evamabhyupagamaM kRtvA yUyaM bhuGdhvaM 'pAtreSu' kAMsyapAtryAdiSu gRhastha
bhAjaneSu, tatparibhogAcca tatparigraho'vazyaMbhAvI, tathA''hArAdiSu mUrcchA
kurudhvamityataH kathaM niSparigrahAbhyupagamo bhavatAmakalaGka iti, anyacca
'glAnasya' bhikSATanaM kartumasamarthasya yadaparairgRhasthairabhyAhRtaM kAryate
bhavadbhiH, yaterAnayanAvikArAbhAvAd gRhasthAnayane ca yo doSasadbhAvaH sa
bhavatAmavazyaMbhAvIti, tameva darzayati-yacca
gRhasthairbIjodakAdyupamadenApAdita mAharaM bhuktvA glAnamuddizyoddezakAdi
'yatkRtaM ' yanniSpAditaM tadavazyaM yuSmat paribhogAyAvatiSThate  /  tadevaM
gRhasthagahe tadbhAjanAdiSu bhuJjAnAstathA glAnasya ca gRhasthairave
vaiyAvRttayaM kArayanto yUyamavazyaM bIjodakAdibhojina
uddezikAdikRtabhojinazceti ||12||kinycaanyt_ - - TIkArtha - AjIvaka Adi para
tIrthika tathA digaMmbara Adi paramparAvartI janoM ke asat - pratikUla AcAra kA
pratipAlana karane hetu unheM sambodhita kara sUtrakAra kahate haiM  /  Apa
logoM kA yaha pratipAdana hai ki hama loga aparigrahI haiM  /  ataeva niSkiMcana
- akiMcana haiM, para aisA kahate hue, svIkAra karate hue bhI Apa loga gRhasthoM
ke kA~sI Adi pAtroM meM bhojana karate haiM unake pAtroM meM bhojana karane ke
kAraNa Apako usa parigraha kA doSa lagatA hai  /  itanA hI nahIM Apa loga
AhArAdi meM mUrcchA Asakti rakhate haiM  /  ataH Apa logoM dvArA apane Apako
niSparigraha - parigraha rahita mAnanA kisa prakAra nirdoSa niSkalaMka kahA jA
sakatA hai  /  bhikSATana 233

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutrakar says that you consume food prepared from seeds and grains, and
water, which is prepared through the process of crushing, grinding, and cooking.
This food is prepared for the sick and ailing monks, and it is also consumed by
you. In this way, you consume food prepared from seeds and grains, and water,
and you also consume food that is prepared for a specific purpose, while eating
in the homes of householders, and while being served by them.  The Sutra says:
"You are bound by intense heat, you are devoid of right understanding, and you
are not in a state of concentration. Scratching a wound too much is not
beneficial, because it causes harm."  The commentary explains that you are bound
by intense heat, which is the result of karma, because you consume food that is
prepared for the sick and ailing monks, and because you hold onto false views,
and because you criticize the monks. You are devoid of right understanding
because you do not carry a begging bowl, and you eat in the homes of
householders, and you consume food that is prepared for a specific purpose. You
are not in a state of concentration because you hate the virtuous monks.  The
commentary further explains that just as scratching a wound too much is not
beneficial, because it causes harm, so too is it not beneficial for you to be
devoid of right understanding, and to claim that you are without possessions,
while abandoning the begging bowl, which is a tool for restraint, and which
protects the six classes of beings. By abandoning the begging bowl, you are
consuming impure food, and this is not beneficial.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram karane meM-bhikSArtha jAne meM asamartha rugNa sAdhu ke
lie Apa gRhasthoM dvArA bhojana maMgavAte haiM  /  sAdhu ko gRhasthoM dvArA
bhojana maMgavAne kA adhikAra nahIM hai  /  isalie gRhasthoM dvArA lAye gaye
AhAra ke sevana se jo doSa hotA hai vaha Apako avazya lagatA hai  /  isI bAta kA
digdarzana karAte hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM bIja sacita dhAnya, sacita jala ke
upamardana - Arambha-samAraMbha dvArA jo AhAra taiyAra karate haiM, usakA Apa
sevana karate haiM, glAna rugNa sAdhu ke nimitta jo auddezika AhAra taiyAra hotA
hai vaha bhI Apa logoM ke paribhoga meM-upabhoga meM AtA hai| isa prakAra
gRhasthoM ke ghara meM, unake pAtra Adi meM bhojana karate hue tathA rugNa sAdhu
kI gRhasthoM dvArA sevA karAte hue Apa avazya bIja-sacita dhAnya udaka-sacita
jala Adi kA sevana karate haiM, auddezika AhAra kA bhojana karate haiN| littA
tivvAbhitAveNaM, ujjhiA asamAhiyA  /  nAtikaMDUiyaM seyaM, aruyassAvarajjhatI
// 13 //  chAyA - liptAH tIvrAbhitApena, ujjhitA asamAhitAH  /  nAtikaNDUyiMta
zreyo'rUSo'parAdhyati  //  anuvAda - Apa tIvra abhitApa se-kaThora karmoM se
lipta-baddha haiM, ujjita hai-viveka rahita haiM, aura asamAhita hai, samAdhi
rahita haiM  /  ghAva ko jyAdA khujalAnA zreyaskara nahIM hotA, kyoMki aisA
karane se usameM doSa paidA ho jAtA hai| TIkA - yo'yaM
SaDjIvanikAyavirAdhanayoddiSTabhojitvenAbhigRhItamithyAdRSTitayA ca
sAdhuparibhASaNena ca tIvro'bhitApaH-karmabandharupastenopaliptAH-saMveSTi
tAstayA 'ujjhiya' tti sadvivekazUnyA bhikSApAtrAdi
tyAgAtparagRhabhojitayoddezakAdibhojitvAttathA
asamAhitA'zubhAdhyavasAyarahitA:satsAdhupradveSitvAt, sAmprataM dRSTAntadvAreNa
punarapi taddoSAbhivitsayA''ha-yathA 'aruSaH' vraNasyAti-kaNDUyitaM-naIvi
lekhanaM na zreyo-na zobhanaM bhavati, api tvaparAdhyati-tatkaNDUyanaM vraNasya
doSamAvahati, evaM bhavanto'pi sadvivekarahitAH vayaM kilaniSkiJcanA ityevaM
niSparigrahatayA SaDjIvanikAya rakSaNabhUtaM bhikSApAtrAdikamapi
saMyamopakaraNaM parihatavantaH, tadabhAvAccAzyaMbhAvI, azuddhAhAraparibhoga
ityevaM dravyakSetrakAlabhAvAna pekSaNena nAtikaNDUyitaM zreyo bhavatIti bhAvaH
// 13 //  TIkArtha - cha: kAyoM ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA-hiMsA dvArA Apa logoM ke
nimitta bhojana taiyAra kiyA jAtA hai, vaha auddezika AhAra hai  /  usakA sevana
karanA, AgrahapUrvaka mithyAdRSTi gRhita kiye rahanA, sAdhuoM kI nindA karanA,
ina dvArA Apa karmabandha ke rUpa meM tIvra abhitApa se-saMtaptatA se lipta
haiM-paribaddha haiM  /  samyakajJAna sesadviveka se rahita hai, kyoMki Apa
bhikSA hetu pAtra nahIM rakhate, auroM ke gharoM meM bhojana kara lete haiM,
auddezika AhAra kA sevana kara lete haiM  /  satsAdhuoM kA-saMyama niyamAnusAra
AcaraNazIla sAdhuoM ke sAtha dveSa karate haiM ataH Apa zubha adhyavasAya rahita
haiM  /  sUtrakAra una anyamatavAdiyoM ke doSa prakaTa karane hetu dRSTAnta
dvArA kahate haiM, jisa prakAra vraNa-ghAva ko jyAdA khujalAnA zreyaskara nahIM
hotA, kyoMki vaisA karane se ghAva meM kharAbI paidA ho jAtI hai, Apa loga
sadjJAna-yathArtha viveka se vivarjita haiM, yaha parUpaNA karate haiM ki hama
parigraha rahita haiM, akiMcana haiM, kahate to aisA hai para cha: kAyA ke jIvoM
kI rakSA ke nimitta sAdhana svarUpa bhikSA pAtra Adi kA bhI jo saMyamamaya
jIvana ke upakaraNa hai, tyAga kara dete haiM, isa taraha saMyamopakaraNoM kA
tyAga karane se azuddha AhAra kA paribhoga (234)

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the prefixes is essential - it must be done. Therefore, without
regard to the substance, space, time, and emotion, just as it is not advisable
to scratch a wound excessively, it is also not advisable to abandon the tools of
restraint. Those who are instructed in the truth, know it without any promise.
This path is not fixed, nor is it a speech without consideration. Translation -
Those who are instructed in the truth - the knower of the true truth, the
explainer, the one who understands the objects to be abandoned and the objects
to be adopted as they are, the right-seeing Muni, while giving good instruction,
says that the path you have made your own is not fixed, just, or proper. The
accusations you make against the virtuous are also all devoid of moment-to-
moment contemplation and deliberation. - Commentary - Moreover - 'By the truth'
- by the ultimate truth, by the intention of the silent ones, by the
representation of the truth as it is, you, the followers of the views of Gosala,
the Ajivikas, etc., or the Botikas, are 'instructed' - you have received
instruction through the perception of the defects of your assumptions. By whom?
- By the one who makes no promise - 'I do not have this promise - even if it is
true, it is worthy of support' - the one who makes no promise - the virtuous one
who is free from attachment and aversion, 'knows' - the meaning is that he is
able to distinguish between the objects to be abandoned and the objects to be
adopted. How are they instructed? - The path that you have adopted, as the
ascetics are free from possessions, therefore they should not have any tools,
nor should there be a feeling of mutual benefit and benefactor - one should not
serve or care for each other. This view of yours is 'not fixed' - not definite,
not logical. Therefore, this speech, as one brings food to a sick person and
gives it to him, they are like householders. This is 'unconsidered - hidden' -
spoken without consideration, as well as the action: 'Your action is also
unconsidered, just as your practice is unconsidered, so it is not excessively
scratched' - this has been explained earlier, and now it is being repeated again
with an example. As promised, he says 235 - Commentary - The truth is what is
actually true, what is in accordance with the intention of the Jina, that is, to
represent a substance as it is, that is the truth. By this, the followers of
Gosala, the Ajivikas, and the Digambaras are instructed - taught. By pointing
out the defects in their views, they are made to understand the true meaning,
they are explained. By whom is the instruction given? This question is raised
and it is said that the instruction is given by the one who makes no promise. A
false meaning is also supported by me, such a feeling is called a promise, the
one who does not have it is called the one who makes no promise. The one who is
free from attachment and aversion is the one who makes no promise, the one who
is able to distinguish between the objects to be abandoned and the objects to be
adopted, the one who is able to recognize them, gives instruction. How is the
instruction given? This is being explained - the principle that you have
accepted, that the ascetic is free from possessions, therefore he should not
have any tools, nor should there be a feeling of mutual benefit and benefactor -
one should not serve or care for each other. This view of yours is not fixed -
definite or logical. What you say, that those who bring food to a sick ascetic
are like householders, is your unconsidered, unthoughtful, or unthoughtful
presentation. The actions you perform are also devoid of consideration and
thought. In the thirteenth verse, 'naatikandu iy seyam' - 'naatikandu itam
shreyam' - what is said by this phrase is explained by an example. The sutrakar
says according to his previous discussion. Om Om Om

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM avazyaMbhAvI hai- avazya karanA hI hotA hai  /  ataH dravya
kSetra kAla tathA bhAva kI apekSA na karate hue vraNa ko atyadhika khujalAne kI
jyoM, saMyama ke upakaraNoM kA bhI parityAga kara denA zreyaskara nahIM hai  /
tatteNa aNusiddhA te Na esa yie magge, asamikkhA apaDineNa chAyA - jANayA  /
vatI kitI  // 14 //  tattvenAnuziSTAste'pratijJena jAnatA 1 na esa niyato
mArgo'samIkSya vAkkRtiH  /  anuvAda - tatvAnuziSTa - yathArtha tatva vettA
vyAkhyAtA, heya aura upAdeya padArthoM ko yathAvat samajhane vAlA
samyakadRSTimuni ko sat zikSA dete hue kahatA hai ki Apa logoM ne jisa mArga ko
svayatta kiyA hai vaha niyata, nyAyasaMgata, ucita nahIM hai Apa jo satsAdhuoM
para AkSepa karate haiM ve bhI sabhI kSaNa ciMtana vivecana se rahita haiM  /  -
TIkA - api ca- 'tattvena' paramArthena maunIndrAbhiprAyeNa yathAvasthitArtha
prarUpaNayA te gozAlakamatAnusAriNa AjIvikAdayaH boTikA vA 'anuzAsitAH '
tadabhyupagamadoSa darzana dvAreNa zikSAM grAhitAH, kena ? - apratijJena ' nAsya
mayedama-sadapi samarthanIyamityevaM pratijJA vidyate ityapratijJo -
rAgadveSarahitaH sAdhustena 'jAnatA' heyopAdeya padArtha pariccheda
kenetyarthaH, kathamanuzAsitA ityAha-yo'yaM bhavadbhirabhyupagato mArgoM yathA
yatInAM niSkiJcanatayopakaraNA bhAvAt parasparata upakAryopakArakabhAva ityeSa
'na niyato' na nizcito na yuktisaGgataH ato yeyaM vAg yathAye piNDapAtaM
glAnasyA''nIya dadati te gRhasthAkalpA ityeSA 'asamIkSyA-nihitA' aparyAlocyoktA,
tathA kRti:' karaNa mapi bhavadIyamasamIkSitameva, yathA cAparyAlocita
karaNatayA bhavati bhavadanuSThAnasya tathA nAtikaNDUyitaM ityanena prAglezataH
pratipAditaM punarapi sadRSTAntaM tadeva pratiNadayati ||14|| yathA
pratijJAtamAha 235 - TIkArtha vAstava meM jo satya hai, jinendra prabhu ke
abhiprAya se anurUpa hai arthAt jo padArtha jaisA *, usako usI taraha se
prarUpita karanA tatva hai, usa dvArA gauzAlakamatAnuyAyI AjIvakoM ko tathA
digambaroM ko anuzAsanA - zikSA dI jAtI hai| unake abhimata meM doSa batalAkara
unheM satya artha grahaNa karAyA jAtA hai, samajhAyA jAtA hai, kisake dvArA
zikSA dI jAtI hai ? yaha prazna upasthita karate hue kahA jAtA hai ki
apratijJapuruSa dvArA zikSA dI jAtI hai  /  mithyAartha bhI mere dvArA
samarthanIya hai, aisI bhAvanA pratijJA kahalAtI hai, jisake vaha nahIM hotI,
use apratijJa kahA jAtA hai| jo rAgadveSa se rahita hai vaha apratijJa hai, jo
heya aura upAdeya padArtho ke paricchedaka hai, pahacAna karane meM sakSama hai,
una dvArA zikSA dI jAtI hai, kaise zikSA dI jAtI hai ? yaha batalAyA jA rahA hai
- Apa logoM ne jo yaha siddhAnta svIkAra kiyA hai ki sAdhu kiSkiMcana hotA hai
isalie use upakaraNa bilkula nahIM rakhane cAhie, na unameM paraspara upakArya
upakAra bhAva hotA hai - eka dUsare kA upakAra sevA yA paricaryA nahIM karanI
caahie| ApakA yaha mantavya niyata - nizcita yA yukti saMgata nahIM hai| Apa jo
yaha kahate hai ki rugNa sAdhu ko jo AhAra lAkara dete haiM ve gRhastha ke
sadRza hote haiN| yaha ApakA aparyAlocita paryAlocana yA ciMtana rahita
pratipAdana hai  /  Apa jo kArya karate haiM ve bhI paryAlocana ciMtana zUnya
hai  /  teharavIM gAthA meM 'nAtikaM DU iya seyaM'-nAtikaNDUyitaM zreyaM' isa
pada dvArA jo kahA gayA hai, use dRSTAnta dvArA batalAyA jAtA hai| sUtrakAra
apane pUrva vivecanopakrama anusAra kahate haiM  /  OM OM OM

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sutrakritanga says: "This kind of speech is like the tip of a
bamboo, weak and useless. It is beneficial for the householder to receive food,
but not for the monk to receive it."  Commentary: This statement is like the tip
of a bamboo, weak and useless, because it is not logical to say that a monk
should not receive food from a sick monk. The author of the Sutra clarifies this
by saying that it is beneficial for the monk to receive food from a householder,
but not from another monk. This statement is weak and useless because the food
received from a householder is often tainted with the suffering of living
beings, while the food received from a monk is free from such taints.  The Sutra
continues: "The Dharma-teaching is the purifier of the worldly, but it is not
something that was established in the past."  Commentary: The Dharma-teaching is
the purifier of the worldly, because it teaches the householder to give to the
monk, but not the other way around. This is because the monk is purified by his
own practice, and does not need to receive gifts from others. The author of the
Sutra argues that this teaching was not established in the past, because it is
not logical to say that the monk should not receive gifts from the householder.
The author argues that the monk should receive gifts from the householder,
because the householder is motivated by compassion and the monk is motivated by
the desire to practice the Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram erisA jA vaI esA, aggaveNu vva karisitA  /  gihiNo
abhihaDaM seyaM , bhuMjiuM Na u bhikkhuNaM  // 15 //  chAyA - IdRzI yA vAgeSA,
agraveNuriva karSitA  /  grahiNo'bhyAhRtaM zreyaH, bhoktuM na tu bhikSUNAm  //
anuvAda - gRhastha dvArA abhyAhRta-lAye hue AhAra kA sevana karanA sAdhu ke lie
zreyaskara hai, kintu sAdhu ke dvArA lAye hue AhAra kA sevana karanA zreyaskara
nahIM hai  /  yaha kathana yuktirahita hai  /  vaha isI prakAra durbala-sAra
rahita hai jaise bAMsa kA Age kA bhAga bahuta patalA va kamajora hotA hai  /
_TIkA - yeyamIdRkSA vAk yathA yatinA glAnasyAnIya na deyamityeSA agre veNuvad
vaMzavat karSitA tanvI yuktyakSamatvAt durbaletyarthaH, tAmeva vAcam
darzayati-'gRhiNAM' gRhasthAnAM yadabhyAhRtaM tadyate ktu 'zreyaH' zreyaskaraM
na tu bhikSUNAM sambandhIti, agretanutvaM cAsyA vAca evaM draSTavyaM-yathA
gRhasthAbhyAhataM jIvopamardaina bhavati, yatInAM tUgamAdidoSarahitA miti  // 15
//  TIkArtha - sAdhu ko kisI glAna-rugNa sAdhu ke lie AhAra lAkara nahIM denA
cAhie, yaha kathana bAMsa ke agrabhAga ke samAna patalA arthAt yukti rahita hone
ke kAraNa durbala sArahIna hai  /  isI vacana kA zAstrAkAra digdarzana karate
hue kahate haiM ki - gRhastha dvArA abhyAhata-lAye hue AhAra kA sevana karanA
sAdhu ke lie zreyaskara hai, kintu sAdhu dvArA lAye hue AhAra kA sevana karanA
zreyaskara nahIM hai  /  yaha vacana bAMsa ke agrabhAga ke samAna kRza durbala
yA sAra rahita hai, kyoMki gRhasthoM dvArA lAyA huA AhAra jIvoM ke upamardana yA
vyApAdana se saMpRkta hotA hai tathA sAdhuoM dvArA lAyA huA AhAra udAma Adi doSa
zUnya hotA hai  /  dhammapannavaNA jA sA, sAraMbhA Na visohiA  /  Na u eyAhiM
diTThIhiM, puvvamAsiM paggappiaM  // 16 //  chAyA - dharma prajJApanA yA sA
sArambhANAM vizodhikA  /  _ na tvetAbhi ISTibhiH pUrva mAsItprakalpitam  //
anuvAda - sAdhuoM kA dAna Adi dvArA upakAra karanA cAhie  /  yaha dharma
prajJApanA-dharmadezanA gRhasthoM ke lie zreyaskara hai, sAdhuoM ke lie nahIM  /
isI kAraNa ise pahale pratipAdita nahIM kiyA gayA  /  TIkA - kiJca-dharmasya
prajJApanA-dezanA yathA yatInAM dAnAdinokartavyamitye vambhUtA yA sA
'sArambhANAM' gRhasthAnAM vizodhikA, yatayastu svAnuSThAnenaiva vizudhyanti, na
tu teSAM dAnAvikAro'stItyetat dUSayituM prakramate'na tu' naivaitAbhiryathA
gRhasthenaiva piNDadAnAdinA yategAnAdyavasthAyAM mupakartavyaM natu yatimireva
parasparamityevambhUtAbhiH yuSmadIyAbhiH 'dRSTibhiH' dharmaprajJApanAbhiH
'pUrvam' Adau sarvajJaiH 'prakalpite' prarUpitaM pratyAkhyApitamAsIditi, yato
nahi sarvajJA evambhUtaM pariphalguprAyamarthaM prarUpayanti yathA-
asaMyataireSaNAdyanupayuktai garlAnAdevaiyAvRttyaM vidheyaM na tUpayuktena
saMyateneti, apica-bhavadbhirapi glAnopakAro'bhyupagata eva, gRhastha
preraNAdanumodanAcca, tato bhavantastatkAriNa statpradveSiNazcetthApannamiti  //
16 //  apica - (236

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the prefix (Upasarga) is for the purpose of commentary (Tika). It
is said that one should benefit the ascetics by giving them donations and other
things. This is a religious injunction (Dharmaprajnapana), a religious
instruction (Dharmopadeśa) for householders (Grihastha) to purify them, not for
the ascetics, because ascetics are purified by their self-restraint based
rituals (Sanyama Mulaka Anushthan). Therefore, they do not have the right to
receive donations. To prove this principle as flawed, the Sutrakar states that
in situations like illness, householders should benefit the ascetics by
providing them with food and other things, and they should take care of them.
However, ascetics should not benefit each other in this way. In accordance with
this view, the omniscient ones (Sarvagya) never preached Dharma in the past,
because the omniscient great men (Sarvagya Mahapurusha) do not elaborate on such
trivial and insignificant matters. For example, only unrestrained men (Asanyata
Purusha) who do not have any use for things like desires (Eshana) would serve
(Vyayavritya) an ill ascetic, but restrained men (Sanyata Purusha) who have use
for such things would not do so. The omniscient ones cannot preach such things.
You people also encourage householders to serve an ill ascetic. By approving
this act in this way, you are accepting the benefitting of an ill ascetic. Thus,
you are both benefiting an ill ascetic and opposing that act.  "All the
arguments (Anuyukti) are unable to establish (Yapayitum) their point of view
(Javittum). Therefore, rejecting (Nirakritva) the argument, they are bold
(Pragalbhitah) again (Bhuyo)." (17)  Commentary (Tika): Those who follow the
teachings of Goshalak (Digambara) are unable to establish themselves (Aatmanam
Yapayitum) in their own point of view (Swapksha) with all the arguments
(Arthānugata Abhiyuktī) and proofs (Hetudrishṭānta) that are in accordance with
the meaning (Arthānugata). Therefore, they reject (Nirakritva) the argument
(Vada) because they are unable to present it (Samarthya Bhavad) with proper
arguments and proofs (Samyag Hetudrishṭānta). They, the Tirthikas, abandon
(Parityaajya) the argument (Vada) and become bold (Pragalbhitah) again (Bhuyo)
even after abandoning the argument (Vada). This is what they say: "The ancient
(Puranam) human (Manava) Dharma, the Veda with its branches (Sanga), and the
medical science (Chikitsitam) are the four things (Chatvari) that are not to be
killed (Hantavya) by arguments (Hetubhih)." (1)  Furthermore, what is the
purpose of this external (Bahiranga) argument (Yukti) based on inference
(Anumana) etc. in the examination (Parikshana) of Dharma? Because, it is evident
(Pratyaksha) that this Dharma is the best (Shreyas) and not another, as it is
accepted by many people (Bahujanasammatatvena) and supported by kings
(Rajadyashrayanacha). Those who argue this way (Evam Vivadante) are told this:
"There is no purpose (Prayojanam) in this (Atra) with many (Bahuna) things that
are devoid of essence (Sararahitena) like knowledge (Jnana) etc." It is said: "A
heap (Rasi) of castor oil wood (Erandakaththara) is like a piece (Pala) of
sandalwood (Gosirsha Chandana). It is not equal (Sarisa) in value (Mulyena) even
if it is counted (Ganijanta) as much (Kiyantmatro)." (1)  "Even though (Tathapi)
the excess (Atirego) in counting (Ganana) is like a heap (Rasi), it is not equal
(Sarisa) to sandalwood (Chandana). Similarly (Tatha), a person (Mahajana) who is
ignorant (Nirvijnana) also speaks (Vinsavayati) about the value (Mulyena)." (2)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM TIkArtha - dAna Adi dekara sAdhuoM kA upakAra karanA cAhie,
yaha dharmaprajJApanA, dharmopadeza gRhasthoM ke lie vizodhaka-unheM pavitra
karane vAlA hai, sAdhuoM ko nahIM, kyoMki sAdhu apane saMyama mUlaka anuSThAnoM
se hI zuddha hote haiM, ataH unheM dAna dene kA adhikAra nahIM hai  /  isa
siddhAnta ko sadoSa batAne ke lie sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM ki rugNatA
Adi kI sthiti meM gRhasthoM ko hI AhAra Adi dvArA sAdhu kA upakAra karanA cAhie,
paricaryA karanI cAhie kintu sAdhuoM ko Apasa meM aisA upakAra nahIM karanA
cAhie  /  Apake isa dRSTi ke anurUpa sarvajJoM ne pUrva samaya meM kabhI dharma
dezanA nahIM kI, kyoMki sarvajJamahApuruSa aise atyanta tuccha nagaNya artha kI
prarUpaNA nahIM karate  /  jaise eSaNA Adi meM upayoga nahIM rakhane vAle
asaMyata puruSa hI rugNa Adi sAdhu kA vaiyAvRtya-sevA paricaryA kare, kintu
upayoga rakhane vAle saMyata puruSa aisA na kare  /  sarvajJoM kI aisI dezanA
nahIM ho sakatI  /  Apa loga bhI gRhastha ko rugNa sAdhu kI sevA paricaryA
karane kI preraNA karate haiM  /  isa kArya kA isa prakAra anumodana karane se
rogI sAdhu kA upakAra karanA Apa svIkRta kara hI lete haiM, yoM Apa rogI sAdhu
kA upakAra karate bhI haiM aura usa kArya kA virodha bhI karate haiN| savvAhiM
aNujuttIhiM, acayaMtA javittae  /  .. tato vAyaM NirAkiccA, te bhujjIvi
pagabbhiyA  // 17 //  chAyA - sarvAbhi ranuyuktibhirazaknuvanto yApayitum  /  /
tato vAde nirAkRtya te bhUyo'pi pragalbhitAH  //  anuvAda - anya matAnuyAyI
sabhI prakAra kI yuktiyoM dvArA jaba apane mantavya ko sthApita karane meM
samartha nahIM hote, taba ve vAda kA nirAkaraNa kara-parityAga kara dUsare
prakAra se apanA pakSa siddha karane kI dhRSTatA karate haiN| TIkA - te
gozAlakamatAnusAriNo digambarA vA sarvAbhirarthAnugatAbhiyuktibhiH savairaiva
hetudRSTAntaiH pramANa  /  bhUtairazaknuvantaH svapakSe AtmAnaM 'yApayitum'
saMsthApayitum 'tataH' tasmAdyuktibhiH pratipAdayitum sAmarthyA bhAvAd
'vAdaMnirAkRtya' samyagahetudRSTAntaioM vAdo-jalpastaM parityajya te tIrthikA
'bhUyaH' punarapi vAda parityAge satyapi 'pragalbhitA' dhRSTatAM gatA idamUcuH
tadyathA - "purANaM mAnavo dharmaH sAGgo vedazcikitsitam  /  AjJAsiddhAni
catvAri, na hantavyAnihetubhiH  // 1 // " anyacca kimanayA bahiraGgayA
yuktyA'numAnAdikayA'tra dharma parIkSaNe vidheye kartavyamasti, yataH pratyakSa
eva bahujanasaMmatatvena rAjAdyAzrayaNAccAyamevAsmadabhipreto dharmaH
zreyannApara ityevaM vivadante, teSAmidamuttaram-na hyatra jJAnAdi sArarahitena
bahunA'pi prayojanamastIti, uktaM ca "airaMDakaTTharAsI jahA ya.
gosIsacaMdanapalassa  /  molle na hoja sariso kittiyametto gaNijaMto  // 1 // "
chAyA - eraNDa kASTha rAziyathA ca gozIrSa candana palasma, mUlyena na bhavet
sadRzaH kiyanmAtro gaNyamAnaH  /  tahavi gaNaNAtirego jaha rAsI so na caMdana
sariccho  /  taha niviNNANamahAjaNovi sojhe visaMvayati  // 2 //  chAyA -
tathApi gaNanAtireko yathA rAzI sa na candana sadRzaH, tathA nirvijJAnamahA
jano'pi mUlye visaMvadate  /  (237)

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra
states: "One who has eyes is better to be seen than many who are blind." (3)
Meaning: One who has vision is better to be seen than many who are blind.
Further, "Thus, even the many who are deluded do not know the measure of the
path. The wandering in the Samsara is crooked, as is the bondage and
liberation." (4) Meaning: Thus, even the many who are deluded do not know the
measure of the path. The wandering in the cycle of rebirth (Samsara) is crooked,
as is the bondage and liberation.  Moreover, when the proponents of the Goshala
school of thought and the followers of the Digambara tradition are unable to
establish their position with appropriate means of knowledge such as valid
reasons and examples, then they abandon the debate and instead boldly assert
that the Puranas, Smritis (scriptures), the Vedas with their Angas, and Ayurveda
(the science of life) are scriptures validated by the command of the Omniscient
Lord. Therefore, they claim, these should not be refuted through reasoning. What
is the need for external means like logic and inference to examine the religion,
since our religion is the best, being accepted by many people and honored by
kings and emperors? Other sects engage in futile debates and make such audacious
claims, which should be responded to in this manner.  Dharmas (religious
practices) devoid of the essence of knowledge are many. Even if accepted by
many, they do not serve any purpose. Just as a large heap of castor oil plant
wood is not worth even a small measure of fragrant sandalwood, similarly, the
multitude of ignorant people, despite their large number, are not equal to the
few who possess knowledge and discrimination.  "Overcome by attachment and
aversion, deluded by false beliefs, they take refuge in abuse, like the
barbarians taking refuge in the mountain." (18) Meaning: Overcome by attachment
and aversion, deluded by false beliefs, when the proponents of other doctrines
are defeated in the discussion of the principles, they take refuge in abuse,
just like the barbarians taking refuge in the mountain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram ekko sacakkhugo jaha aMdhalayANaM saehiM bahuehiM  /
hoi varaM daTThavvo Nahu te bahugA apecchaMtA  // 3 //  chAyA - ekaH sacakSuSko
yathA andhAnAMzatai bahubhirbhavati varaM draSTavyo naiva bahukA
aprekssmaannaaH| evaM bahugAvi mUDhANapamANaM je gaI Na yANaMti  /  saMsAra
gamaNa guvilaM viDaNassa ya baMdhamokkhassa  / 4 // " chAyA - evaM bahukA api
mUr3hA na pramANaM ye gatiM na jAnanti, saMsArA gamanaM vakro
nipuNayorbaMdhamokSayozca  /  ityAdi  // 17 //  apica - TIkArtha- gauzAlaka ke
siddhAntavAdI tathA digambara paramparAnugatavAdI samagra arthAnurUpa-sAdhya
padArthAnuSaGgIyuktiyoM dvArA arthAt pramANabhUta hetu evaM dRSTAntAdi dvArA
jaba apane pakSa meM apane ko saMsthApita-pratiSThita karane meM samartha nahIM
hote, taba vAda kA parityAga kara arthAt samyaka hetu evaM dRSTAntoM para
AdhArita paraspara vAda rUpa jalpa ko chor3akara apanA pakSa sthApita karane kI
dhRSTatA karate haiM, aura aisA kahate haiM ki-purANa, mAnava dharmamanupraNIta
smRti Adi dharmazAstra, sAGgaveda-aMgo sahita veda tathA cikitsA zAstra-
Ayurveda, ye cAra AjJA siddhaIzvarIya AjJA se pramANita zAstra hai  /  isalie
tarka dvArA inakA hanana-khaNDana nahIM karanA caahie| dharma kI parIkSA ke
saMdarbha meM yukti evaM anumAna Adi bAhya sAdhanoM kI kyA AvazyakatA hai,
kyoMki anekAneka logoM dvArA svIkRta tathA rAjA mahArAjAoM dvArA sammAnita hone
se pratyakSa hI hamArA dharma zreSTha hai, dUsarA nhiiN| anya tIrtha | prakAra
vivAda karate haiM  /  dussAhasa pUrvaka kahate haiM  /  unako isa prakAra
uttara denA cAhie  /  jJAnAdi sAra rahita dharma bahuta haiM  /  bahuta logoM
dvArA mAnA jAtA ho to bhI usase koI prayojana siddha nahIM hotA  /  kahA
haieraNDa ke kATha kI rAzi-Dhera cAhe kitanA hI bar3A ho kintu vaha mUlya meM
eka pala parimANa gozIrSa candana ke barAbara bhI nahIM hotA  /  jaise eraNDa ke
kATha kI rAzi gaNanA yA parimANa meM, adhika hone ke bAvajUda thor3e se candana
ke barAbara bhI nahIM hotI, usI taraha vijJAna rahita-ajJAnI puruSa saMkhyA meM
bahuta ho to bhI ve vijJAnayuktavivekayukta thor3e se bhI logoM ke barAbara
nahIM hote  /  jaise netravAna eka puruSa bhI saikar3oM cakSuhIna puruSoM se
uttama hotA hai, usI prakAra jJAnI puruSa eka bhI ho to vaha saikar3oM ajJAnI
janoM se uttama hotA hai  /  jo bandha, mokSa tathA saMsAra kI gati ko nahIM
jAnate ve ajJAnI puruSa saMkhyA meM bahuta adhika hoM to bhI dharma ke saMdarbha
meM pramANabhUta nahIM mAne jA sakate  /  . rAga dosAbhibhUyappA, micchatteNa
abhidradutA  /  /  Ausse saraNaM jaMti, TaMkaNA iva pavvayaM  // 18 //  chAyA -
rAgadveSAbhibhUtAtmAnaH, mithyAtvenAbhidrutAH  /  _ AkrozAn zaraNaM yAnti
TaGkaNa iva parvatam  //  anuvAda - rAgadveSa se jinakI AtmA abhibhUta hai-jo
rAgadveSa se bhare haiM, mithyAtva se abhidrUta- AkrAnta haiM aise anya
siddhAntavAdI jaba tatva carcA meM parAbhUta ho jAte haiM to Akroza, apazabda
mArapITa Adi kA Azraya lete haiM  /  jaise TaMkaNa-parvatoM para nivAsa karane
vAlI anArya jAti ke loga yuddha meM parAjita hokara parvata kI zaraNa lete haiN|
238)

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Study of Prefixes - Commentary  **Raga** is defined as **priti**
(pleasure), and **dvesha** is defined as the opposite of **sad** (good), meaning
**apriti** (displeasure). Those who are overwhelmed by their **atma** (soul) by
**raga** and **dvesha**, and who are **abhidruta** (overwhelmed) by
**mithyatva** (falsehood) and **viparayasta** (inverted) **bodhe**
(understanding), are **vyapta** (permeated) by **tattvadhyavasaya** (firm
conviction in truth). They are unable to engage in **vad** (debate) with
**sadhyuktibhir** (proper arguments). Driven by **krodha** (anger), they resort
to **akroshan** (outbursts) in the form of **asabhyavachana** (unrefined
speech), and even engage in **hanan vyapara** (acts of violence) with
**dandamushtayadibhis** (sticks, fists, etc.).  To illustrate this point, the
sutrakar (author) provides an example: Just as **tankana** (a specific type of
mleccha - non-Aryan) are difficult to conquer, and when they are driven away by
a powerful force with their own army, they are unable to fight with various
weapons and seek refuge in the mountains, similarly, **kutirthika** (those who
follow false doctrines) are defeated in **vad** (debate) and, overwhelmed by
**krodha** (anger), resort to **akrosha** (outbursts), **apshabda** (abusive
language), and other such things. One should not retaliate with insults, just
as:  "**Akko sahaṇaṇa maraṇa dhamma bhamsaṇa bal sulabhaṇa. Labha mannai dhiro
jahuttarana abhava mi.** (1)" (18)  **Shadow:** **Akrosha** (outbursts),
**hanan** (killing), **marana** (death), **dharma bhamsha** (destruction of
dharma), are all **bal sulabha** (easy for the weak), and a wise person
considers it **labha** (benefit) to not engage in them, as they are **abhava**
(absence) of **jahuttarana** (higher qualities).  **Commentary:** **Priti** is
called **raga**. Its opposite, **apriti**, is called **dvesha**. Those whose
**atma** (soul) is overwhelmed by **raga** and **dvesha**, and who are
**abhidruta** (overwhelmed) by **mithyatva** (falsehood) and **viparayasta**
(inverted) **bodhe** (understanding), are **vyapta** (permeated) by
**tattvadhyavasaya** (firm conviction in truth). They are unable to engage in
**vad** (debate) with **sadhyuktibhir** (proper arguments). Driven by **krodha**
(anger), they resort to **akroshan** (outbursts) in the form of
**asabhyavachana** (unrefined speech), and even engage in **hanan vyapara**
(acts of violence) with **dandamushtayadibhis** (sticks, fists, etc.).  To
illustrate this point, the sutrakar (author) provides an example: Just as
**tankana** (a specific type of mleccha - non-Aryan) are difficult to conquer,
and when they are driven away by a powerful force with their own army, they are
unable to fight with various weapons and seek refuge in the mountains,
similarly, **kutirthika** (those who follow false doctrines) are defeated in
**vad** (debate) and, overwhelmed by **krodha** (anger), resort to **akrosha**
(outbursts), **apshabda** (abusive language), and other such things. One should
not retaliate with insults. **Akrosha** (outbursts), **hanan** (killing),
**marana** (death), **dharma bhamsha** (destruction of dharma), are all **bal
sulabha** (easy for the weak), and a wise person considers it **labha**
(benefit) to not engage in them, as they are **abhava** (absence) of
**jahuttarana** (higher qualities).  **Bahugunappgappai, kuja attasamahie...
Jene ane no virujheja, tene tan tan samaya re.** (19)  **Shadow:** **Bahuguna**
(many virtues) should be cultivated by one who is **attasamadhi** (in self-
absorption). One should act in a way that does not provoke others.
**Translation:** When a muni (sage) engages in **vad** (debate) with another
**tirthi** (pilgrim), he should remain in **attasamadhi** (self-absorption),
keeping his **chittavritti** (mental fluctuations) calm. He should present
arguments, examples, and conclusions in a proper manner to establish his own
position and refute the opponent's position. He should engage in conversation in
a way that does not make the other person his opponent.  **Commentary:**
**Bahuguna** (many virtues) such as **svapksha sidhi** (establishment of one's
own position), **paradoshodbhavana** (revealing the opponent's flaws),
**madhyasthya** (mediation), etc., are **prakalpanta** (manifested) in the
**atma** (soul) of one who practices them. These **bahuguna prakalpana**
(manifestations of many virtues) are **prajna** (wisdom) for **pratijna**
(pledge), **drishtanta** (example), **upanaya** (application), **nigamana**
(conclusion), etc., as well as **madhyasthya vachana** (words of mediation).
These practices are **sadhu** (good) during **vadakala** (time of debate) or at
other times. One who cultivates **atma samadi** (self-absorption), which is
**chitta svasthya** (mental well-being), is **vishistyate** (distinguished).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM TIkA - rAgazca-prItilakSaNo dveSazca-
sadviparItalakSaNastAbhyAmabhibhUta AtmA yeSAM paratIrthikAnAM te tathA,
'mithyAtvena' viparyastAva bodhenA tattvAdhyavasAyarUpeNa 'abhidrutA' vyAptAH
sadyuktibhirvAdaM kartumasamarthAH krodhAnugA 'AkrozAn' asabhyavacana
rUpA~stathA daNDamuSTayAdibhizca hanana vyApAraM 'yAnti' auMzrayante  /
asminnevArthe pratipAdye dRSTAntamAha yathA 'TaGkaNA' malecchavizeSA durjayA
yadA pareNa balinA svanIkAdinA'bhidrUyante tadA te
nAnAvidhairapyAyudhairyodhdhumasamarthAH santaH parvataM zaraNa mAzrayanti, evaM
te'pi kutIrthikA vAdaparAjitAH krodhAdyupahatadRSTaya AkrozAdikaM
zaraNamAzrayante, na ca te idamAkalayya pratyAkroSTavyAH, tadyathA -
akkosahaNaNa mAraNadhammabbhaMsANa bAla sulabhANaM  /  lAbhaM mannai dhIro
jahuttarANaM abhAvaMmi  // 1 // "  // 18 //  kiJcAnyat - chAyA - Akrozahanana
mAraNa dharmabhraMzAnAM, bAla sulabhAnAM, lAbhaM manyate dhIro
yathontarANAmabhAve  /  TIkArtha - prIti ko rAga kahA jAtA hai  /  usake
viparIta aprIti ko dveSa kahA jAtA hai  /  rAga aura dveSa se jinakI AtmA
abhibhUta-dabI huI hai jo viparyasta-mithyAavabodha dvArA abhidrUta hai-
parivyApta hai, ve anya matavAdI jaba nyAyapUrNa yuktiyoM dvArA vAda-tatva carcA
karane meM samartha nahIM hote taba asabhya, aziSTa vacana bolane lagate haiM,
tathA daNDoM-mukkoM dvArA mArapITa taka karane ko taiyAra ho jAte haiM  /  isa
bAta ko samajhAne hetu sUtrakAra dRSTAnta dvArA kahate haiM  /  durjeya-bar3I
kaThinAI se jIte jA sakane yogya TaMkaNa nAmaka kisI anArya jAti vizeSa ke loga
jaba kisI prabala puruSa kI senA dvArA bhagA die jAte haiM taba ve bahuta
prakAra ke zastradhAriyoM se lar3ane meM asamartha hokara parvata kI zaraNa lete
haiM  /  isI prakAra ve kutIrthika-kutsita, mithyA siddhAntoM meM vizvAsa karane
vAle itaramatavAdI vAda meM-tattva carcA meM parAjita ho jAte haiM taba ve
krodhAdi se upahRta hokara, gusse meM Akara Akroza, apazabda, gAlI galauca Adi
kI hI zaraNa lete haiM  /  yaha dekhakara unakA gAlI dvArA pratikAra nahIM
karanA cAhie  /  Akroza, hanana, mAranA yA dharma bhraMza ye to bAla sulabha-
baccoM jaise chichale kArya haiM, dhairyazIla puruSa ina bAtoM kA uttara na dene
meM hI lAbha mAnate haiM  /  bahuguNappagappAiM, kujA attsmaahie| . . jeNa'nne
No virUjhejA, teNa taM taM samAyare  // 19 //  chAyA - vaha guNa prakalpAni
kuryAdAtmasamAdhikaH  /  yenA'nyo na virudhyeta tena tattat samAcaret  //
anuvAda - anya tIrthI ke sAtha jaba muni vAda kare-tatvacarcA kare, taba vaha
Atma samAdhi yukta rahe, cittavRtti ko prazAMta banAye rakhe  /  apane pakSa kI
siddhi aura para pakSa kI asiddhi ho, aisI pratijJA hetu ora udAharaNa Adi kA
vidhivat pratipAdana kare  /  vaha aisA sambhASaNa upakrama kare, jisase anya
puruSa apane virodhI na bane  /  TIkA - 'bahavo guNA:' svapakSasiddhi
paradoSodbhAvanAdayo mAdhyasthyAdayo vA prakalpante-prAdurbhavantyAtmani
yeSvanuSThAneSu tAni bahuguNa prakalpAni-pratijJA hetu
dRSTAntopanayanigamanAdIni mAdhyasthyavacana prakArANi vA anuSThAnAni
sAdhurvAdakAle anyadA vA 'kuryAt' vidadhyAt, sa eva viziSyate-AtmanaH 'samAdhiH'
citta svAsthyaM yasya (239

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sutra-Kritanga says: "He who attains self-absorption through
the use of reasons, examples, etc., or through the use of words that are
impartial and do not harm others, should do that. Similarly, he who, by his
actions or words, or by hearing the teachings of the Tirthankaras, causes others
to be inclined towards the Dharma without causing any conflict, should do that
which does not cause conflict with others. He should perform actions or speak
words that are not contrary to the Dharma." (19)  Commentary: Those actions that
lead to the establishment of one's own position and the refutation of the
opposing position, or that lead to impartiality and freedom from bias, are
called "Bahuguna-Prakalpa." This includes the use of affirmations, reasons,
examples, applications, and conclusions, or the use of words that are impartial
and free from bias. Therefore, a virtuous person should act in this way when
engaging in debate or discussion with others, or at other times. The Sutra-kar,
describing the characteristics of such a virtuous person, says: "He whose mind
is serene and tranquil is called 'Atma-Samadhi.'" The meaning is that one should
use reasons, examples, etc., that lead to self-absorption and the establishment
of one's own position, or speak words that are impartial and do not cause any
suffering to others. A virtuous person should act in such a way that others who
are inclined towards the Dharma, or other individuals, are not made hostile by
his actions or words.  This Dharma, taught by Kashyapa, should be followed. A
monk, with a tranquil mind, should serve a sick monk without any aversion. (20)
Shadow: This Dharma, taught by Kashyapa.  Translation: A monk, with a tranquil
mind, should serve a sick monk without any aversion.  Commentary: Thus, refuting
the views of others, the Agama-kar, in the concluding part, establishes his own
position. He says: "This Dharma," which will be described later, "saves beings
from falling into hell." This Dharma was taught by the Lord Mahavira, who,
having attained divine knowledge (Kevala-Jnana), expounded it to the assembly of
gods and humans. The word "cha" (also) in the verse indicates that he refuted
the doctrines of other schools of thought and then expounded the Dharma.
Accepting this Dharma, a monk who observes the vow of begging for alms should
serve another monk who is weak, incapable, and sick. How should he serve him?
This is explained: He should serve him with a tranquil mind, free from aversion,
to the best of his ability. This means that as one's own mind becomes tranquil,
one should not be discouraged by the difficulties that arise from the practice
of yoga. Similarly, as the sick monk's mind becomes tranquil, he should be given
food and other necessities. (20)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram sa bhavatyAtmasamAdhikaH, etaduktaM bhavati-yena
yenopanyastena hetudRSTAntAdinA AtmasamAdhiH-svapakSasiddhilakSaNo mAdhyasthya
vacanAdinA vA parAnupaghAtalakSaNaH samutpadyate tat tat kuryAditi, tathA
yenAnuSThitena vA bhASitena vA anya tIrthiko dharma zravaNAdau vA'nyaHpravRtto
'na virudhyeta' na virodhaM gacchet, tena parAvirodhakAraNena tatta
viruddhamanuSThAnaM vacanaM vA 'samAcaret' kuryAditi  // 19 //  TIkArtha - jina
upakramoM se apane pakSa kI siddhi tathA anya pakSa meM doSotpatti ho, athavA
apane meM mAdhyasthya-pakSapAtarahita taTasthatA Adi utpanna ho, unheM bahuguNa
prakalpa kahA jAtA hai  /  usake antargata pratijJA, hetu, udAharaNa upanaya
aura nigamana Adi hai athavA madhyasthatA yukta vacana prakAra-vANI bolanA
bahuguNa prakalpa kahA jAtA hai  /  ataH sAdhu kisI ke sAtha vAda yA carcA
karate samaya yA anya samaya aisA hI kare, aise sAdhu kI vizeSatA kA pratipAdana
karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM-jisakA citta prasanna prazAMta hotA hai, usa
muni ko AtmasamAdhika kahA jAtA hai  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki jina hetu dRSTAnta
Adi ke upayoga dvArA Atma samAdhi-apane pakSa kI siddhi hotI hai athavA jisa
mAdhyastha bhAvayukta vacana ke kahane se dUsare ke mana meM kisI prakAra kI
pIr3A utpanna na ho sAdhu aisA kare  /  dharma zravaNa Adi karane meM udyata-
pravRtta anya matAvalambI tathA dUsare vyakti jisa upakrama yA bhASaNa se dUsare
apane virodhI na bane sAdhu vaisA hI kare, vaisA hI bole  /  imaM ca
dhammamAdAya, kAsaveNa paveiyaM  /  kujA bhikkhU gilANassa, agilAe samAhie  //
20 //  chAyA - imaJca dharmamAdAya kAzyapena praveditam  /  kuryAd bhikSu
glAnasya aglAnyA samAhitaH  //  anuvAda - kAzyapa gautrIya prabhu mahAvIra dvArA
prarUpita isa dharma ko svIkAra kara muni prazAMta citta hotA huA glAna rugNa
sAdhu kI aglAna bhAva se mana meM jarA bhI glAni yA ghRNA na lAte hue sevA,
paricaryA kare  /  TIkA - tadevaM paramataM nirAkRtyopasaMhAradvAreNa
svamatasthApanAyAha-'ima' miti vakSyamANaM durgatidhAraNAddharmam 'AdAya'
upAdAya gRhItvA 'kAzyapena' zrI manmahAvIravarddhamAnasvAminotpannadivyajJAnena
sadaiva manujAyAM parSadi prakarSaNa yathA vasthitArtha nirUpaNadvAreNa veditaM
praveditaM, ca zabdAtparamataM ca nirAkRtya, bhikSaNazIlo bhikSuH 'glAnasya'
apaToraparasya bhikSovaiyAvRtyAdikaM kuryAt 'kathaM kuryAd ?' etadeva vizinaSTi-
svato'pyaglAnatayA yathA zakti 'samAhitaH' samAdhi prApta iti, ida muktaM
bhavati yathA yathA''tmanaH samAdhirupadyate na tatkAraNena apAravasaMbhavAt
yogA viSIdantIti tathA yathA tasya ca glAnasya samAdhirutpadyate tathA
piNDapAtAdikaM vidheyamiti  // 20 //  TIkArtha - jaisA pUrva meM varNita huA-
itaramatavAdiyoM ke matoM kA khaNDana kara aba AgamakAra samApti ke prasaMga meM
apane pakSa kI sthApanA karane hetu kahate haiM  /  durgati meM patita hote
prANiyoM ko dharma bacAtA hai, yaha Age varNana kiyA jAyegA  /  divyajJAna-
kevalajJAna utpanna hone para bhagavAn mahAvIra ne devoM aura mAnavoM kI pariSad
meM saddharma kI prarupaNA kI thii| yahAM gAthA meM prayukta 'ca' zabda se yaha
sUcita hotA hai, ki itara matavAdiyoM ke siddhAntoM kA khaNDana karake unhoMne
dharma kI prarupaNA kI thii| isa dharma ko aGgIkAra kara bhikSaNazIla-
bhikSopajIvI sAdhu dUsare apaTuH-asamartha, azakta, rugNa sAdhu kA vaiyAvRtta-
sevA paricaryA kare, kaise kare ? yaha batalAte haiMsvayaM aglAna-glAni rahita,
ghRNA rahita samAhita-samAdhiyukta hokara vaisA kare, isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki
jisa 240

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of *upasarga* (obstacles) is a way to generate *samadhi* (meditation)
in one's own soul. If one is unable to do this due to *apatuta* (incompetence)
or *ayogyata* (inability), then the *sadhu* (saint) becomes incapable of doing
it themselves. When this happens, their work does not proceed as it should.
Therefore, just as one should generate *samadhi* in their own soul, one should
also generate *samadhi* in the soul of the sick person, and give them food and
other things accordingly.    ॐ ॐ ॐ    *Sankaaye pesalam dhammam, ditthimang
parinivvuḍe. Uvasagge niyamittā, āmokkaaye parivvajja'asi.* || 21 || *ttibemi.*
*Chāyā sankhā pesalam dharmam, dṛṣṭimān parinirvṛtaḥ.  Upasargān niyamya
āmokṣāya parivrajediti bravīmi.*    Translation: The wise one, the seer of the
true nature of things, the tranquil muni, knowing this excellent Dharma, should
practice restraint, enduring the *upasarga* (obstacles) until he attains
liberation. I say so.    Commentary: To show what is to be done in this dilemma,
the sutra-kāra says: "Knowing what? *Dharma*, the well-defined, distinct *śruta*
and *cāritra* (scripture and conduct) established by the omniscient one, which
is *pesala* (excellent), pleasing to beings due to its practice of non-violence,
etc. What is this? It is explained: *darśana* (vision) is *dṛṣṭi* (sight), which
is the correct vision of the true nature of things. He in whom this exists is
*dṛṣṭimān* (the seer), meaning he who understands the nature of things as they
are. Similarly, *parinirvṛta* (tranquil) is one who is free from attachment and
aversion, and is peaceful. Thus, knowing this excellent Dharma, the seer, the
tranquil muni, should endure the *upasarga* (obstacles), both favorable and
unfavorable, by controlling them, not being overcome by them, and not doing
anything inappropriate. Thus, he should strive for *āmokṣa* (liberation), the
destruction of all karma, until he attains it. *Parivrajed* (he should practice
restraint) means he should be engaged in the practice of restraint. *Bravīmi* (I
say so) is used here to indicate completion, as before. || 21 ||    -
*Upasarga parijñāyāstṛtīyoddeśakaḥ samāptaḥ.* || 3 ||    Commentary: What should
the *sadhu* (saint) do in this way? To show this, the sutra-kāra says: The
*sadhu* should know and assimilate the *śruta* and *cāritra* (scripture and
conduct) established by the omniscient one, knowing that it is well-defined,
well-organized, and defined by vows, etc., and that it is pleasing to beings
because it is inclined towards non-violence, etc., as will be explained later.
What kind of *sadhu* is this? It is explained: To see the true nature of things,
to have faith in it, is *samyak darśana* (right vision), which is called *dṛṣṭi*
(sight). He in whom this exists is called *dṛṣṭimān* (the seer). In other words,
the man who knows the true nature of things is *dṛṣṭimān*. Such a man is called
*parinirvṛta* (tranquil). Thus, knowing the excellent Dharma, the seer, the
tranquil, peaceful muni, should endure the favorable and unfavorable *upasarga*
(obstacles). When there is an obstacle or difficulty in enduring the *upasarga*,
he should not do anything that is not appropriate. Thus, the muni should be
fully engaged in the practice of restraint until he attains liberation, the
result of the destruction of all karma. The word *iti* here is used to indicate
completion. *Bravīmi* should be connected as before.    The third section of the
*Upasarga parijñā* (knowledge of obstacles) is complete.    241

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM prakAra apanI AtmA ko samAdhi utpanna hotI hai, vaisA nahIM
karane apaTutA ayogyatA ke kAraNa sAdhu svayaM asamartha ho jAtA hai  /  aisA
hone se usakA kArya yathAvidhI nahIM cala pAtA  /  ataeva jisa prakAra apanI
AtmA ko samAdhi utpanna ho, rugNa kI AtmA ko samAdhi utpanna ho, usI prakAra
AhArAdi use denA cAhie  /  OM OM OM saMkhAya pesalaM dhammaM, diTThimaM
parinivvuDe  /  uvasagge niyAmittA, AmokkhAe parivvajjA'si  //  21  //  ttibemi
//  chAyA saMkhyA pezalaM dharmaM, dRSTimAn parinirvRtaH  /  upasargAn niyamya
AmokSAya parivrajediti bravImi  //  anuvAda - dRSTimAna - padArtha ke
satyasvarUpa kA draSTA, parinirvRta-prazAMta muni isa pezala - uttama dharma
jAnakara upasargoM ko sahatA huA mokSa prApta karane taka saMyama kA pratipAlana
kare  /  maiM aisA kahatA hU~  /  TIkA kiM kRtvaita dvidheyamiti darzayitumAha-
'saMkhAye 'tyAdi, saMkhyAya - jJAtvA kaM ? ' dharmaM ' sarvajJa praNItaM
zrutacAritrAkhya bhedabhinnaM 'pezalam' iti suzliSTaM prANinAmahiMsAdi pravRttyA
prItikAraNaM, kimbhUtamiti darzayati-darzanaM dRSTiH
sadbhUtapadArthagatAsamyagdarzanamityarthaH sA vidyate yasyAsau dRSTimAn
yathAvasthitapadArtha pariccheda vAnityarthaH, tathA 'parinirvRto' rAgadveSa
virahAcchAntI bhUtastadevaM dharma pezalaM parisaMkhyAya dRSTimAn parinirvRta
upasargAnanukUla pratikUlAnniyamya-saMyamyasoDhA nopasagairUpasargito'samaJjasaM
vidadhyAdityevam' AmokSAya' azeSakarmakSaya prAptiM yAvat pari-samantAt vrajet -
saMyamAnuSThAnodyukto bhavet parivrajed, itiH parisamAptyarthe bravImIti
pUrvavat  // 21 //  - upasarga parijJAyAstRtIyoddezakaH samApta  // 3 //
TIkArtha - kyA karake sAdhu ko isa prakAra karanA caahie| isakA digdarzana
karAne hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM - sAdhu ko, sarvajJa pratipAdita zruta evaM
cAritra rUpa dharma ko jAnakara AtmasAt kare ki vaha sugaThita
suvyavasthitavratAdi paribhASita hai, ahiMsA Adi meM pravRta hone ke kAraNa
prANiyoM ke lie prItiprada hai aisA karanA cAhie jyoM Age batalAyA jA rahA hai,
vaha sAdhu kaisA hai ? yaha batalAte haiM- padArthoM ke yathArtha yA
satyasvarUpa ko dekhanA usameM vizvAsa karanA samyaka darzana hai, use dRSTi
kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha jisameM vidyamAna hai use dRSTimAna kahate hai| dUsare
zabdoM meM jo puruSa padArthoM ke vAstavika svarUpa ko jAnatA hai, vaha
dRSTimAna hai, vaise puruSa ko parinirvRta kahA jAtA hai  /  yoM uttama dharma
ko jAnakara, padArthoM ke yathArtha svarUpa kA draSTA zAMta prazAMta bhAvApanna
muni anukUla evaM pratikUla upasargoM ko sahana kare  /  upasargoM ko sahane meM
bAdhA, kaThinAI utpanna hone para vaha koI aisA kArya na kare jo ucita na ho,
isa prakAra vaha muni jaba taka samasta karmoM ke kSaya ke pariNAma svarUpa
mokSa ko prApta na ho jAya taba taka saMyama ke anuSThAna meM bhalIbhAMti
udyukta tatpara rahe  /  iti zabda yahA~ samApti ke artha meM AyA hai  /
bravImi pahale kI jyoM yojanIya hai  /  upasarga parijJA kA tIsarA uddezaka
samApta huA  /  241 Bian

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Fourth Uddeshaka of Sri
Sutrakritanga Sutram This has a connection with the previous Uddeshaka - in the
previous Uddeshaka, the favorable and unfavorable Parisahas (adversities) were
expounded. It is apprehended that the Sadhu may fall from his Shila (vows) being
afflicted by those Upasargas (adversities). The instruction given by the Sadhu
who has fallen from Shila (vows) is described in this Uddeshaka. This is the
first Sutra of this Uddeshaka presented in this context.  Verse 1: Aaharnsu
Mahapurisaa, Puvvim Tappatapodhana. Udaena Siddhimaavanna, Tattha Mando
Viseedati. Translation: The ignorant and unwise people say that in the past,
there were great ascetics who had performed severe austerities. They attained
Siddhi (spiritual accomplishment) by consuming water, but there the ignorant
person grieves.  Tika (Commentary): Some who are unaware of the ultimate truth
say this. Who are they? The great persons, the principal ascetics like the
Valkala-clad Rishis and others. What did they say? That in the past, they had
performed severe austerities, and by consuming water (as an uplifting practice),
they attained Siddhi (spiritual accomplishment). Hearing this, the ignorant
person, who is afflicted by the consumption of hot water and not bathing,
becomes distressed in the practice of Samyama (self-restraint). Or, he grieves
in the very consumption of cold water, i.e., he gets immersed in it. But he does
not understand that those ascetics had attained Right Vision through some cause,
and their Jnanavaraniyadikarma (knowledge-obscuring karmas) were destroyed, just
as Bharat and others attained Moksha, not merely by consuming cold water.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram caturthaH uddezakaH asya cAyamamisambandhaH,
ihAnantaroddezake anukUlapratikUlopasargAH pratipAditAH taizca kadAcitsAdhuH
zIlAt pracyAvyetattasya ca skhalitazIlasya prajJApanA'nena pratipAdyate iti,
anena sambandhenAyAtasyAsyoddezakasyAdime sUtram isakA pUrva uddezaka ke sAtha
yaha sambandha hai-pichale uddezaka meM anukUla evaM pratikUla pariSahoM kA
pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai  /  una upasargoM se abhidruta hokara sAdhu kA zIla
meM bhraSTa-patita ho jAnA bhI AzaMkita hai  /  zIla se-saMyama se patita sAdhu
jo upadeza detA hai, vaha isa uddezaka meM varNita hai isa sambandha meM
AyAtasamupasthita isa uddezaka kA yaha pahalA sUtra hai  /  AhaMsu mahApurisA,
puvviM tattatavodhaNA  /  udaeNa siddhimAvannA, tattha maMdo visIyati  // 1 //
chAyA - AhurmahApuruSAH pUrva taptatapodhanAH  /  udakena siddhimApannA statra
mando viSIdati  //  anuvAda - katipaya maMda vivekahIna puruSa aisA AkhyAta
karate haiM ki pUrvakAla meM aise tapta tapodhanaugra tapazcaraNazIla mahApuruSa
hue haiM, jinhoMne udaka-sacitta jala kA sevana karate hue siddhi prApta kI  /
yaha sunakara ajJajana sacitta jala ke sevana meM pravRtta ho jAte haiM, aMtataH
duHkhita hote haiN| _TIkA - kecana aviditaparamArthA 'AhuH' uktavantaH kiM
tadityAha-yathA 'mahApuruSAH' pradhAnapuruSA valkalacIritArAgaNarSi prabhRtayaH
'pUrvaM' pUrvasmin kAle taptam-anuSThitaM tapa eva dhanaM yeSAM te
taptatapodhanAHpaJcAgnyAditapovizeSeNa niSTaptadehAH, ta evambhUtAH zItodaka
paribhogena, upalakSaNArtha tvAt kandamUlaphalAdhupa bhogena ca 'siddhimApannAH'
siddhiM gatAH, tatra' evambhUtArthasamAkarNane tadarthasadbhAvAvezAt 'maMdaH'
ajJo'snAnAdityAjitaH prAsukodaka paribhogabhagnaH saMyamAnuSThAne viSIdati,
yadivA tatraiva zItodaka paribhoge viSIdati lagati nimajatItiyAvat, na tvasau
varAka evamava dhArayati, yathA teSAM tApasAdi vratAnuSThAyinAM
kutazcijjAtismaraNAdipratyayAdAvirbhUta samyagdarzanAnAM maunIndra bhAva saMyama
pratipatyA apagata jJAnAvaraNIyAdikarmaNAM bharatAdInAmiva mokSAvAptiH na tuH
zItodaka paribhogAditi  // 1 //  kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha - jinheM paramArtha-parama
tattva vidita nahIM hai, jo use nahIM jAnate, ve ajJAnI haiM  /  ve kyA kahate
haiM, yaha batalAte haiM  /  ve kahate haiM ki pahale ke samaya meM valkala
cIrI, tArAgaNa RSi Adi mahApuruSa hue, jinhoMne tapa rUpa dhana kA arjana kiyA,
paMcAgni Adi tapasyAoM dvArA apane zarIra ko paritapta kiyA  /  unhoMne zItala
jala evaM kanda, mUla, phala Adi kA sevana karate hue siddhi prApta kii| yaha
zravaNa kara, ise satya mAnakara koI puruSa, jo prAsuka-acita, garma jala pIne
se, snAna na karane se Akula ho, ghabarAyA huA ho, saMyama pAlana meM duHkha
anubhava karane lagatA hai, athavA zItalajala Adi upayoga meM lene lagatA hai  /
vaha abhAgA yaha nahIM socatA ki ukta tApasa Adi vratoM kA pAlana karate the  /
kisI kAraNa vaza unheM jAti smaraNa jJAna huA, apanA pUrva janma yAda AyA  /
unhoMne samyaka darzana prApta kiyA  /  sarvajJa prarUpita bhAvasaMyama AtmasAt
kiyaa| unake jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karma naSTa hue  /  phalataH unheM bharata Adi kI
jyoM mokSa prApta huA, zItala jala kA sevana karane se nhiiN| -242)

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 2:**  **Text:**  * **Namivaidehi** did not eat,
**Ramgupta** ate. * **Bahuk** drank cool water, **Narayana** drank water.
**Translation:**  * **Namivaidehi**, the king of the **Videha** country,
attained liberation without eating. * **Ramgupta** attained liberation while
eating. * **Bahuk** attained liberation by drinking cool water. * **Narayana**
attained liberation by drinking water.  **Commentary:**  * Some people who
follow false doctrines try to deceive the virtuous by saying that
**Namivaidehi**, the king of the **Videha** country, attained liberation without
eating. * They also say that **Ramgupta**, a king-sage, attained liberation
while eating. * They also say that **Bahuk** attained liberation by consuming
cool water. * They also say that **Narayana**, a great sage, attained liberation
by consuming water.  **Verse 3:**  **Text:**  * **Asilo**, **Devila**,
**Dvaipayana**, and **Parashara** ate seeds and green plants.  **Translation:**
* **Asilo**, **Devila**, **Dvaipayana**, and **Parashara**, great sages,
attained liberation by consuming cool water, seeds, and green plants.
**Commentary:**  * It is heard that **Asilo**, **Devila**, **Dvaipayana**, and
**Parashara**, great sages, attained liberation by consuming cool water, seeds,
and green plants.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM abhuMjiyA namI videhI, rAmagutte ya bhuMjiA  /  bAhue udagaM
bhoccA, tahA nArAyaNe risI  // 2 //  chAyA - abhuktvA namivaidehI
rAmaguptazcabhuktvA  /  vAhuka udakaM bhuktvA tathA tArAgaNa RSiH  //  anuvAda -
koI ajJajana sAdhu ko sAdhanA patha se vicalita karane ke lie kahatA hai videha
deza ke adhipati namIrAjA ne bhojana na karate hue siddhatva prApta kiyA  /
rAmagupta AhAra kA sevana karate hue mukta huA tathA bAhuka ne zItala-sacitta
jala kA sevana karate hue mukti prApta kI evaM tArAgaNa RSi ne bhI udaka kA
sevana karate hue mokSa pAyA  /  TIkA - kecana kutIrthikAH
sAdhupratAraNArthamevamUcuH, yadivA svavaryAH zItalavihAriNa etad
vakSyamANamuktavantaH, tadyathA-namIrAjA videho nAma janapadastatra bhavA
vaidehA:-tannivAsino lokAste'sya santIti vaidehI, sa evambhUto namI rAjA
azanAdikamabhuktvA siddhimupagataH tathA rAmaguptazca rAjarSirAhAdikaM
'bhuktvaiva' bhuJjAna evasiddhi prApta iti tathA bAhakaHzItodakAdiparibhogaM
kRtvA tathA nArAyaNo nAma maharSiH pariNatodakAdiparibhogAtsiddha iti  // 2 //
apica - TIkArtha - kaI mithyA darzana meM AsthAzIla puruSa sAdhu ko pratArita
karane hetu dhokhA dene ke lie yoM kahate haiM, athavA svavardI-apane hI varga
yA paramparAnugata zithilAcArI vakSyamANa rUpa meM kahate haiM videha nAma kA
eka vizeSa deza-janapada hai  /  usameM jo loga nivAsa karate haiM unheM
'vaideha' kahA jAtA hai  /  ve loga jisake adhIna yA vazagata hai vaha vaidehI
kahA jAtA hai, arthAt videha deza meM rahane vAle logoM ke rAjA namI ne azana
Adi AhAroM kA parityAga kara siddhi prApta kI  /  rAjarSi rAmagupta ne AhAra
karate hue siddhatva paayaa| bAhuka ne zItala jala-sacitta pAnI Adi kA paribhoga
karate hue mukti prApta kI  /  nArAyaNa nAmaka maharSi ne pariNata udaka, acita
pake jala Adi kA sevana karate hue mokSa kI upalabdhi kI  /  3 . Asile devile.
ceva, dIvAyaNa mahArisI  /  pArAsare daMga bhojjA, bIyANi hariyANi ya  // 3 //
chAyA - Asilo devalazcaiva, dvaipAyano mahARSiH  /  parAzara udakaM bhuktvA
bIjAni haritAni ca  /  anuvAda - Asila, devila, dvaipAyana evaM pArAzara nAmaka
bar3e-bar3e RSiyoM ne sacitta jala, bIja evaM harI vanaspatiyoM kA sevana karate
hue siddhatva prApta kiyA  /  TIkA - Asilo nAma maharSistathA devilo
dvaipAyanazca tathA parAzarAkhya ityeva mAdayaH
zItodakabIjaharitAdiparibhogAdeva siddhA iti zrUyate  // 3 //  TIkArtha - Asila
nAmaka maharSi tathA devala, dvaipAyana evaM pArAzara saMjJaka RSi gaNa ne
sacitta jala bIja evaM harI vanaspatiyoM kA upabhoga karate hue siddhi prApta kI
/  aisA sunA jAtA hai| 243)

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra - English Translation  **Verse 4:**  These great men
of the past, are well-known and accepted here. They attained liberation after
consuming seeds and water with consciousness. This is what I have heard.
**Commentary:**  The Sutra-maker says this to show that these great sages, like
Nami, were well-known in the past, in the Treta and Dvapara yugas. They were
known as great men, or principal men, and were famous as Rajarshis. Some of them
are also accepted in the teachings of the Rishis, like the Arhata Pravachana.
This is what the Kutirthikas or their followers say. For example, all of them
attained liberation after consuming seeds, water with consciousness, etc. This
is what I have heard in the Mahabharata and other Puranas.  **Verse 5:**  The
weak-minded are disheartened, like donkeys burdened with heavy loads. They crawl
on their backs, like a cripple who clings to pieces of wood, and tries to follow
others in fear of fire or other dangers, but cannot move.  **Commentary:**  The
Sutra-maker says that in the face of such teachings, the weak-minded, who are
ignorant and unable to understand the various ways to attain liberation, are
disheartened. They are unable to practice restraint. For example, those who have
attained liberation, may have experienced the recollection of their past births,
or the loss of their right knowledge and conduct, like the loss of a garment.
But they will never attain the destruction of karma through the consumption of
cold water and seeds, which is like tormenting the soul. The Sutra-maker gives
an example of a donkey burdened with a heavy load, who is exhausted and unable
to move. Similarly, a cripple who clings to pieces of wood, tries to follow
others in fear of fire or other dangers, but cannot move.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram - ete puvvaM mahApurisA, AhitA iha saMmatA  /  bhoccA
bIodagaM siddhA, iti meyamaNussuaM  // 4 //  chAyA - eve pUrva mahApurisaSA
AkhyAtA iha sammatAH  /  bhuktvA bIjodakaM siddhA iti mayAnuzrutam  //  anuvAda
- pUrvavartI samaya meM ye mahApuruSa vikhyAta the, jainazAstroM meM bhI ye
abhimata haiN| inhoMne bIja aura sacitta jala kA sevana karate hue mukti prApta
kii| TIkA - etadeva darzayitumAha-ete pUrvoktA namyAdayo maharSayaH 'pUrvami' ti
pUrvasminkAle tratAdvAparAdau 'mahApuruSA' iti pradhAnapuruSA A-samantAt khyAtAH
AkhyAtA:-prakhyAtA rAjarSitvena prasiddhimupagatA ihApi Arhate pravacane
RSibhASitAdau kecana 'sammatA' abhipretA ityevaM kutIrthikAH svayathyA vA
procaH, tadyathA-ete sarve'pi bIjodakAdikaM bhuktvA siddhA itmetanmayA
bhAratAdau purANe zrutam  // 4 //  etadupasaMhAradvApareNa parihannAha -
TIkArtha - pahale jo pratipAdita kiyA gayA hai, usI kA digdarzana karAte hue
sUtrakAra kahate haiM "ye pUrvokta namI Adi maharSi tretA, dvApara yugoM meM
mahApuruSoM arthAt pradhAna puruSoM yA ucca puruSoM ke rUpa meM prakhyAta rahe
haiM  /  rAjarSi ke rUpa meM inhoMne prasiddhi prApta kI thI  /  RSibhASita Adi
Aheta pravacana meM bhI inameM se katipaya sammata-abhimata yA svIkRta haiM  /
aisA mithyAdarzanavAdI athavA apane yUtha yA paramparAnuvartI mithyAvAdI kahate
haiM  /  tadanusAra ye sabhI bIja, sacitta jala Adi kA bhoga karate hue siddha
hue, aisA mahAbhArata Adi purANoM meM sunA jAtA hai  /  isakA upasaMhAra karate
hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM  /  tattha maMdA visIaMti, bAhacchinnA va gaddabhA  /
piTThato parisappaMti, piTThasappI ya saMbhame  // 5 //  chAyA - tatra mandAH
visIdanti vAhacchinnA iva gardabhAH  /  pRSThataH parisarpanti pRSThasI ca
saMbhrame  //  anuvAda - mithyAdRSTiyoM dvArA kahI gaI bAtoM kA zravaNakara kaI
maMda-ajJAnI jana saMyama kA pAlana karane meM isa prakAra kaSTa kA anubhava
karate haiM jaise bhArI bojhe se lade hue gadhe usa bhAra ko lekara calane meM
duHkhita hote haiM  /  jaise lakar3I ke Tukar3oM kA sahArA lie pRSTasI-pITha ko
sarakAte sarakAte ghasITateghasITate calane vAlA paMgu puruSa saMbhrama-Aga laga
jAne Adi ke rUpa meM bhaya upasthita hone para bhAgate hue logoM ke pIche-pIche
calane kA udyama karatA hai para cala nahIM pAtA  /  TIkA - 'tatra' tasmin
kuzrutyupasargodaye 'mandA' ajJA nAnAvidhopAyasAdhyaM siddhigamanamavadhArya
visIdanti saMyamAnuSThAne na punaretadvidantyajJAH, tadyathA-yeSAM
siddhigamanamabhUt teSAM kutazcinnimittAt jAtajAtismaraNAdi
pratyAyAnAmavAptasamyagjJAnacAritrANAmeva valkalacIriprabhRtInAmiva
siddhigamanabhUt, na punaH kadAcidapi sarvaviratipariNAmabhAvaliGga mantareNa
zItodakabIjAdhupabhogena jIvopamardaprAyeNa karmakSayo'vApyate viSIdane
dRSTAntamAhavahanaM vAho-bhArodvahanaM tena chinnA:-karSitAstruTitA rAsabhA iva
viSIdanti, yathA rAsabhA gamanapatha eva projjhitabhArAH -244)

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Study of Obstacles  Obstacles arise, and even those who have abandoned
the burden of restraint become cool-minded wanderers.  An example is given: Just
as "back-crawlers" (creatures that crawl backwards), with broken limbs, in the
midst of a fire, with eyes filled with fear, crawl backwards in search of
safety, not leading the way, but perish in the midst of the fire, so too, those
who are cool-minded, though they are inclined towards liberation, do not attain
liberation, but remain in this very world for an infinite period of time. || 5
||  To refute another view, the author presents the opposing argument.
**Commentary:**  Those who hold the view of false vision, who have been taught
by the ignorant and the misguided, when faced with the above-mentioned
obstacles, think, "Liberation is attainable through many means, how can we
become liberated?"  They experience difficulty in following restraint.  These
ignorant ones do not know that the men who attained liberation, due to some
reason, experienced the manifestation of their past lives, such as the
recollection of their caste, which led them to right faith and conduct, through
which they were liberated.  Similarly, those who renounced their outer garments
(Valkalachiri) attained liberation.  Without the renunciation of all
possessions, the ultimate goal of self-transformation, and the restraint of
emotions, liberation through the destruction of karma, which is impossible
without the consumption of water containing living beings, and the use of seeds,
etc., can never be attained.  The author, through an example, explains the state
of those who experience difficulty in following restraint due to the teachings
of those who hold the view of false vision:  Just as a weak donkey experiences
pain while carrying a load, so too, the aforementioned virtuous ones experience
pain while following restraint.  The donkey drops the load on the way and falls
itself.  Similarly, the aforementioned virtuous ones abandon the burden of
restraint and become lax in their conduct.  In this regard, the author gives
another example:  Just as a lame person, when a fire breaks out, becomes
frightened, his eyes become filled with fear, and he tries to escape like those
who are fleeing the fire, but he cannot move forward, and is consumed by the
fire, so too, the lax person, though he is inclined towards the path of
liberation, does not reach it.  He wanders in this world for an infinite period
of time.  "They say that happiness is attained through happiness, they are
ignorant.  Those who abandon the path of the Aryas, which leads to the ultimate
state of meditation, are unwise."  **Commentary:**  To refute another view, the
author presents the opposing argument:  "They" - referring to those who are
considering the path to liberation - "say" - the Shakyas and others, who are
afflicted by their own group or by their eyes, etc.  The word "tu" (also)
emphasizes the point, referring to the enjoyment of cold water, etc.  "They say"
- they speak or think, according to some readings.  What do they say?
"Happiness" - "by happiness" - "it exists" - it becomes.  Thus, they become
speakers of the following:  "All beings are attached to happiness, all beings
arise from suffering.  Therefore, one who desires happiness should give
happiness, the giver of happiness obtains happiness." || 1 ||  245

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM nipatanti, evaM te'pi projhya saMyamabhAraM zItala vihAriNo
bhavanti, dRSTAntAntaramAha - yathA 'pRSThasarpiNo' bhagnagatayo'gnyAdisambhrame
satyudbhrAntananayanAH samAkulAH pranaSTajanasya 'pRSThataH ' pazcAtparisarpanti
nAgragAmino bhavanti, api tu tatraivAnyAdisambhrame vinazyanti, evaM te'pi
zItalavihAriNo mokSaM prati pravRtA api tu na mokSagatayo bhavanti api tu
tasminneva saMsAre anantamapi kAlaM yAvadAsata iti  //  5  //  mAtAntaraM
nirAkartuM pUrvapakSayitumAha TIkArtha - kuzruta-mithyAjJAna upadiSTa karane
vAle mithyAdRSTi vAdiyoM ke uparyukta pratipAdanAtmaka upasarga ke udita
upasthita hone para ajJa jana, mokSa to aneka prakAra ke upAyoM dvArA sAdhya
hai, hama se ve kaise bana paDeMge yoM socakara saMyama kA pAlana karane meM
kaSTa kA anubhava karate haiM  /  ve ajJAnI yaha nahIM jAnate ki jina ukta
puruSoM ne mokSa prApta kiyA, unako kisI kAraNa vaza jAti smaraNa Adi pUrvajanma
ke jJAna ke prakaTa hone se samyak darzana aura cAritra prApta huA, jisase ve
mukta hue  /  valkalacIrI Adi ne isI taraha mokSa prApta kiyA  /  sarvavidita-
sarvatyAga mUlaka- Atma pariNAma evaM bhAva saMyama ke binA jIvoM ke vinAza-
hiMsA se saMyukta sacitta jala ke pAna evaM bIjAdi ke upabhoga se karma
kSayAtmaka mokSa kadApi upalabdha nahIM ho sakatA  /  mithyAdRSTi matavAdiyoM ke
upadeza se saMyama pAlana meM jo kaSTa anubhava karane lagate haiM, una jIvoM ke
saMbaMdha meM zAstrakAra dRSTAnta ke mAdhyama se batalAte haiM 'vAha' bhAra kA
nAma hai use Dhone meM lekara calane meM eka kamajora gadhA jaise pIr3A anubhava
karatA hai, usI prakAra ukta sAdhu saMyama kA paripAlana karane meM
duHkhAnubhUti karatA hai, vaha gadhA rAste meM hI bhAra ko girA DAlatA hai,
khuda bhI gira par3atA hai, usI prakAra ukta sAdhu bhI saMyama ke bhAra kA
parityAga kara zithilAcArI ho jAte haiM, isa saMbaMdha meM sUtrakAra eka ora
dRSTAnta dete haiMjaise bhISaNa agni laga jAne para eka paMgu-laMgar3A ghabarA
uThatA hai, usakI A~khe cuMdhiyA jAtI hai  /  vaha Aga ke Dara se bhAgane vAle
logoM kI taraha udyama karatA hai kintu vaha Age nahIM bar3ha pAtA, vahI agni
Adi dvArA jalakara bhasma ho jAtA hai, naSTa ho jAtA hai  /  usI prakAra
zithilAcArI puruSa mokSa ke mArga para calane hetu udyata hokara bhI vahA~ taka
pahu~ca nahIM pAtA  /  vaha ananta kAla paryanta isa saMsAra meM bhaTakatA
rahatA hai 1 ihamege u bhAsaMti, sAtaM je tattha AriyaM maggaM, chAyA ihaike tu
bhASante sAtaM sAtena vidyata  /  ye tatra Ayya mArgaM paramaJca samAdhikam  //
- sAteNa vijjatI  /  paramaM ca samAhie (yaM )  // 6 //  anuvAda kaI
mithyAdarzanavAdI aisA kahate haiM ki sukha se sukha prApta hotA hai, ve ajJa
haiM  /  parama samAdhijanaka-AdhyAtmika zAMtiprada vItarAga pratipAdita
AryamArga-samyakajJAnadarzana cAritramUlaka mokSa patha kA jo tyAga kara dete
haiM, ve avivekI haiM  /  - TIkA - matAntaraM nirAkartuM pUrvapakSayitumAha-
'ihe 'ti mokSagamanavicAraprastAve 'eke' zAkyAdayaH svayUthyA vA
locAdinopataptAH, tuzabdaH pUrvasmAt zItodakAdiparibhogAdvizeSamAha, 'bhASante'
bruvate manyante vA kvacitpAThaH, kiM tadityAha-'sAtaM' sukhaM 'sAtena'
sukhenaiva 'vidyate' bhavatIti, tathA ca vaktAro bhavanti "sarvANi sattvAni
sukhe sAni sarvANi duHkhAcca samudbhijante  /  tasmAtsukhArthI sukhameva dadyAt,
sukha pradAtA labhate sukhAni  // 1 // " 245

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga states that the effect arises according to
the cause. Just as a sprout of rice arises from a seed of rice, and not a sprout
of barley, so here, from happiness, the happiness of liberation arises, and not
from pain, such as eye disease, etc. Thus, the Agama also states the same:
"Manunna bhoyanam bhocca, manunna samanasanam. Manunnasin agaram si, manunna
jhayaye muni." (1)  Commentary: Having eaten delicious food, the Muni should
meditate in a comfortable bed, in a comfortable house. (2)  Similarly,  "Mridvi
sayya pratarutthaya peya, bhaktam madhye panakam chaparahne. Drakshakhandam
sarkara charrdharatre, mokshaschanthe shakyaputrena drishtah." (1)  Therefore,
from delicious food and recreation, mental health arises, and from mental
health, liberation is attained. Therefore, it is established that happiness is
attained only through happiness, and never through pain, such as eye disease,
etc. Thus, those who are confused, such as the Shakyas, etc., who reject the
path of Jainism, which is the path of liberation, as stated in the Agama, when
faced with the question of liberation, are ignorant and remain within the cycle
of birth and death. For, what they say, that the effect arises according to the
cause, is not absolute. For, an arrow arises from a horn, a scorpion from cow
dung, a worm from a ball of dung, etc. Even though delicious food, etc., is
presented as the cause of happiness, it is also subject to change, as it can
lead to diseases like fever, etc. Moreover, this worldly happiness is merely an
illusion of happiness, as it is a means of overcoming pain. As it is said:
"Dukhatmakeṣu viṣayeṣu sukhabhimānaḥ, saukyātmakeṣu niyamādiṣuduḥkhabuddhiḥ.
Utkiṛṇavarṇapadapanktirivanyarūpā, sārupyamaiti viparītagatiprayogāt." (1)
Therefore, how can this worldly happiness be the cause of the ultimate happiness
of liberation, which is the form of supreme bliss? Even though pain, such as eye
disease, sleep, begging, hunger, thirst, bites, and itching, is presented as the
cause of pain, this is only for those who are of low virtue. For those who are
of great virtue, who are great men, who are devoted to their own interests, and
who are focused on the ultimate truth, all this is for happiness. As it is said:
"Tanasantharaniviṇṇovi munivaro bhattharāgamayamaho. Jam pāvaimuttisūham katto
tam chakkavaṭṭīvi?" (1)  Commentary: Even though the Muni is seated on a bed of
grass, he is free from attachment, anger, and delusion. How can he attain the
happiness of liberation, who is like a king?  "Dukham duṣkṛtasankṣayāya mahatām
kṣānteḥ padam vairinaḥ, kāyasya aśucitā virāgapadavi samvegahetuḥ jarā.
Sarvatyāga mahotsavāya maraṇam jātiḥ suhṛtprītaye, sampadbhiḥ paripūrītam
jagadidaṁ sthānam vipatteḥ kutaḥ?" (1)  Moreover, if happiness were the only
cause of happiness, then there would be no diversity in the cycle of birth and
death. And, those who are in heaven, who are eternally happy, would be reborn
there again, because they experience happiness. Similarly, those who are in hell
would be reborn there again, because they experience pain. There would be no
diversity in the cycle of birth and death, due to different births. And, this is
not seen, nor is it desirable. Therefore, it is refuted.  Commentary: In order
to refute the opposing view, the Sutrakar presents it as the opposing argument,
saying that those who follow the Shakyas, etc., and those who are tormented by
the pain of cutting their hair, etc., and their followers, say that happiness is
attained only through happiness. Here, the word "tu" indicates that the previous
verse describes the characteristics of the consumption of water, etc., with
awareness. According to this, they state that happiness is attained only through
happiness. All beings are attached to happiness and are distressed and troubled
by pain. Therefore, those who seek happiness, who are seeking happiness,  (246)
paraparivhavakṣutpipāsādaṁśamaśakā

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram yuktirapyevameva sthitA, yataH kAraNAnurUpaM
kAryamutpadyate, tadyathA zAlibIjAcchAlyaGkuro jAyate na yavAGkura
ityevamihatyAt sukhAnmuktisukhamupajAyate, na tu locAdirupAt duHkhAditi, tathA
hyAgamo'pyevameva vyavasthita: "maNuNNaM bhoyaNaM bhoccA, maNuNNAM samaNAsaNaM
/  maNuNNaMsi agAraM si, maNuNNaM jhayae muNI  // 1 // " chAyA - manojJaM
bhojanaM bhuktvA manojJe zayanAsane  /  manojJegAre manojJaM dhyAyenmuniH  // 2
//  tathA "mRdvI zayyA prAtarUtthAya peyA, bhaktaM madhye pAnakaM cAparAhne  /
drAkSAkhaNDaM zarkarA cArddharAtre, mokSazcAnte zAkyaputreNa dRSTaH  // 1 //  _
ityato manojJAhAravihArAdezcittasvAsthyaM tataH samAdhirUtpadyate samAdhezca
muktyavAptiH, ataH sthitametatsukhenaiva sukhAvAptiH na punaH kadAcanApi
locAdinA kAyaklezena sukhAvAptiriti sthitaM, ityevaM vyAmUDhamatayo ye kecana
zAkyAdayaH 'tatra' tasminmokSavicAraprastAve samupasthite ArAdyAtaH
sarvaheyadharmebhya ityAryo mArgo jainendrazAsanapratipAdito mokSamArgastaM ye
pariharanti, tathA ca 'paramaM ca samAdhi' jJAnadarzanacAritrAtmakaM ye tyajanti
te'jJAH saMsArAntarvartinaH sadA bhavanti, tathAhi-yattairabhihitaM-
kAraNAnurUpaM kAryamiti, tannAyamekAnto, yataH zRGgAccharo jAyate gomayAvRzciko
golomAvilomAdibhyo dUrveti, yadapi manojJAhArAdikamupanyastaM sukhakAraNatvena
tadapivizUcikAdisaMbhavAd vyabhicArIti, apica-idaM vaiSayikaM sukhaM
duHkhapratIkArahetutvAt sukhAbhAsatayA sukhameva na bhavati, taduktam -
"duHkhAtmakeSu viSayeSu sukhAbhimAnaH,saukhyAtmakeSu niymaadissuduHkhbuddhiH|
utkIrNavarNapada paGktirivAnyarUpA, sArUpyameti viparItagatiprayogAt  // 1 // ".
iti, kutastatparamAnandarUpasyAtyantikasya mokSasukhasya kAraNaM bhavati, yadapi
ca locabhUzayanabhikSATana kSutpipAsAdaMzamazakAdikaM duHkhakAraNatvena
bhavatopanyastaM tadatyantAlpasattvAnAma paramArthadRzAM, mahApuruSANAM tu
svArthAbhyupagamapravRttAnAM paramArthacintaikatAnAnAM mahAsattvatayA
sarvamevaitatsukhAyaiveti tathA coktam - taNasaMthAraniviNNovi munivaro
bhaTTharAgamayamoho  /  jaM pAvaimuttisuhaM katto taM cakkavaTTIvi ? // 1 //
tathA  /  chAyA-tRNa saMstaraniSaNNo'pi munivaro bhrssttraagmdmohH| yatprApnoti
muktisukhaM kutastat cakravartyapitaza  /  /  "dukhaM duSkRtasaMkSayAya mahatAM
kSAnteH padaM vairiNaH, kAyasyAzucitA virAgapadavI saMvegaheturjarA  /
sarvatyAga mahotsavAya maraNaM jAtiH suhRtprItaye, saMpadbhiH paripUritaM
jagadidaM sthAnaM vipatteH kutaH?  // 1 // " iti, apica-ekAntena sukhenaiva
sukhe'bhyupagamyamAnevicitrasaMsArAbhAvaH syAt, tathA svargasthAnAM
nityasukhinAM punarapi sukhAnubhUtestatraivotpattiH syAt, tathA nArakANAM ca
punardu:khAnubhavAttatraivotpatteH, na nAnAgatyA vicitratA saMsArakya syAt,
nacaitat dRSTamiSTaM ceti  // 6 //  atovyapadizyate - TIkArtha - matAntara kA
nirAkaraNa karane hetu sUtrakAra use pUrva pakSa ke rUpa meM upasthita karate
hue kahate haiM-mokSaprApti ke vicAra ke sandarbha meM zAkyAdi matavAdI tathA
keza luMcana Adi ke pariSaha se pIDita svayUthya-apane paraMparAnuvartI janoM kA
kahanA hai  /  yahAM prastuta gAthA meM tu zabda pUrva varNita sacitta jala Adi
ke paribhoga kI vizeSatA batAne kA sUcaka hai  /  tadanusAra ve pratipAdita
karate haiM ki sukha se hI sukha milatA hai  /  sabhI prANI sukha meM abhirata
rahate haiM, duHkha se udvejita hote haiM-vyathita hote haiM  /  isalie
sukhArthI-jo sukha (246) paraparibhavakSutpipAsAdaMzamazakA

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of Precepts  "If you want to study precepts, know that happiness is
only achieved through actions that are in accordance with the divine. Happiness
is only attained by those who give happiness. This is logical because the cause
produces the effect. Just as the seeds of superior rice varieties like Sali and
Vasmati produce rice plants of the same quality, not barley, similarly,
happiness in this world leads to the attainment of liberation-happiness in the
next world. Acts like hair-plucking and fasting do not lead to liberation. The
Agamas state: 'The Muni should meditate on beautiful, pleasant, and delightful
things, and should have a beautiful bed, seat, and house.' It is also said: 'The
Muni should sleep on a soft bed, drink milk and other beverages in the morning,
eat rice in the afternoon, and consume panaka, asava, and madya in the third
part of the day. In the middle of the night, he should consume grapes, raisins,
and sugar. This ultimately leads to liberation.' This has been witnessed and
experienced by the Buddha of the Shakyan lineage.  Pleasant food, entertainment,
etc., create joy in the mind. Joy leads to concentration, and the mind becomes
focused and stable. This leads to liberation. This proves that happiness leads
to happiness. Hair-plucking and other bodily afflictions do not lead to
liberation. Those who propagate such ideas, like the Shakyans and Buddhists,
abandon the path of liberation, which is based on the complete renunciation of
all that is harmful, as taught in the Jain scriptures. They are ignorant and
foolish. They wander endlessly in the cycle of birth and death. Their claim that
the effect is always in accordance with the cause is not absolute, because it is
observed that the plant called Shringa-Song produces the reed called Shar-
Sarakanda. Scorpions are born from dung. Grass grows from the hair of cows and
sheep.  ## The Truth  The claim that pleasant and delicious food is the cause of
happiness is also flawed, because it can lead to diseases like cholera. In
reality, the happiness that arises from worldly pleasures is not true happiness.
It is said: 'To consider painful things as pleasurable and pleasurable vows and
rules as painful is like seeing the letters of an inscription in reverse when
the inscription is turned upside down.' In this way, we must understand the true
nature of happiness and suffering. Therefore, how can painful worldly pleasures
be the cause of liberation-happiness, which is the ultimate, absolute, and
eternal state of bliss?  You have said that hair-plucking, sleeping on the
ground, begging for alms, enduring insults, hunger, thirst, the pain of flies
and mosquitoes, etc., are the causes of suffering. Those who have weak hearts
and are not visionaries of the path of liberation, those who are not great souls
and do not know the ultimate truth, those who are not dedicated to achieving it,
and those who are not engaged in the practice of self-liberation, for them these
things are not suffering. They have immense inner strength, which transforms
these things into means of happiness. It is said: 'The Muni who renounces
attachment, ego, and delusion, even if he sleeps on a bed of straw and grass,
experiences the ultimate bliss of liberation. He can be called a universal
emperor.' It is also said: 'Great souls are not distressed by suffering, but
they are very happy knowing that suffering leads to the destruction of sins.'
Forgiveness and tolerance destroy enmity."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM cAhatA ho, vaha sukha hI deve ke anurUpa hI kArya hotA hai I
/  sukha dene vAle ko hI sukha milatA hai  /  aisA yukti yukta bhI hai kyoMki
kAraNa  /  jaise zAli - vAsamatI Adi uttama koTi ke cAMvaloM ke bIja se vaisA hI
cAMvala kA paudhA aMkurita hotA hai, jau kA nahIM  /  ataH isa loka ke sukha se
paraloka meM mokSa - sukha kI prApti hotI hai  /  keza - luMcana Adi kaSTaprada
kAryoM se mokSa nahIM milatA  /  Agama aisA kahA hai- manojJa-priya, rUcikara
AhAra, manohara zayyA, Asana aura ghara meM muni manojJa - sundara sukhaprada
dhyAna dhyAe  /  aura bhI kahA hai-muni ko mRdvI - mRdula, mulAyama zayyA para
sonA cAhie, prAtaH uThakara dUdha Adi peya padArtha pIne cAhie, madhyAnha meM
cAMvaloM kA bhojana karanA cAhie, aparAhna -tIsare pahara meM pAnaka- Asava,
madya Adi kA pAna karanA caahie| ardharAtri ke samaya drAkSA- dAkha yA kizamiza
aura mizrI kA sevana karanA cAhie  /  isase antataH mokSa prApta hotA hai  /
aisA zAkya vaMzIya buddha ne dekhA hai - sAkSAtkAra kiyA hai  /  manojJa, AhAra,
vihAra Adi se citta meM prasannatA utpanna hotI hai  /  prasannatA ke pariNAma
svarUpa ekAgratA AtI hai, citta ekAgra yA susthira hotA hai  /  usase mukti
prApta hotI hai  /  isase yaha siddha hotA hai ki sukha se hI sukha milatA hai
/  keza luMcana Adi kAya - kleza prada kAryoM se, duHkhoM se mokSa- chuTakArA
nahIM hotA  /  isa prakAra prarUpita karane vAle zAkya - bauddha Adi matavAdI
mokSAtmaka cintana ke saMdarbha meM samagra heya - tyAgane yogya dharmoM se
dUravartI jainendra zAsana meM jaina AmnAya meM se pratipAdita,
paramazAntiprada, samyaka jJAna, darzana evaM cAritra mUlaka mokSamArga kA
parityAga kara dete haiM  /  ve ajJa haiM mUrkha haiM  /  ve sadA bhava cakra
meM bhaTakate rahate haiN| unhoMne jo pratipAdita kiyA ki kAraNa ke anurUpa hI
kArya hotA hai, yaha aikAntika - atyanta nizcita nahIM hai kyoMki aisA dekhA
jAtA hai zRMga-soMga nAmaka vanaspati se zara-sarakaMDA paidA hotA hai  /
gobara se bicchu utpanna hotA hai  /  gAya tathA bher3a ke bAloM se dUba paidA
hotI hai  /  T :-tattvataH manojJa-uttama, svAdiSTa AhAra ko jo sukha kA hetu
batalAyA gayA hai, vaha bhI doSapUrNa - truTipUrNa hai kyoMki usase vizucikA -
haijA Adi roga bhI utpanna ho sakate haiM  /  vAstava meM vaiSayika-sAMsArika
bhoga janita sukha pratIta hotA hai, vaha sukha hai hI nahIM  /  kahA hai-
duHkhAtmaka viSayoM meM sukha mAnanA tathA saukhyAtmaka - ta sukhaprada vrata -
niyama Adi meM duHkha samajhanA usI prakAra viparIta yA ulaTI bAta hai, jaise
utkIrNa-ukere hue, khode hue varNoM-akSaroM va padoM kI anya rUpA - ulaTI paMkti
usa utkIrNa akSaramaya paMkti ko ulaTA rakhane se akSaroM kA rUpa sIdhA dikhAI
detA hai  /  isa taraha yahAM vivakSita sukha-duHkha ko ulaTa kara dekhanA-
samajhanA hogaa| isalie duHkhAtmaka viSaya bhoga paramAnanda svarUpa aikAntika
sarvathA nizcita, Atyantika - saMpUrNatayA avasthita mokSa-sukha kA kAraNa kisa
prakAra ho sakate haiN| keza luMcana, bhUmi para zayana, bhikSA yAcanA, dUsaroM
dvArA kiye gaye apamAna ko sahanA, kSudhA, tRSA, DAMsa, macchara Adi kA kaSTa -
inako Apane jo duHkha ke hetu kahA hai, jinakA hRdaya atyanta durbala hai, jo
paramArtha-mokSa mArga ke draSTA nahIM haiN| jo mahAsatva -mahApuruSa paramArtha
ko jAnate haiM, usakI cintA meM, use prApta karane ke prayatna meM tatpara
rahate haiM, jo Atma kalyANa kI sAdhanA meM pravRtta haiM, unake lie ye saba
duHkha rUpa nahIM haiM, kyoMki unameM bahuta bar3I Atmazakti hotI hai, jinake
prabhAva se ye saba sukha sAdhana kA svarUpa le lete haiM  /  kahA hai rAga,
ahaMkAra tathA moha varjita muni ghAsa phUsa ke bichaune para soyA huA bhI jisa
parama Anandamaya mokSa, sukha kA anubhava karatA hai, cakravartI samrATa bhI
use kahA jA sakatA hai| aura bhI kahA hai - mahApuruSa duHkha se vyathita nahIM
hote kintu ve yaha jAnakara bar3e sukhI hote haiM ki duHkha ke A jAne ke kAraNa
pApoM kA kSaya hotA hai  /  kSamA kSamAzIlatA yA sahanazIlatA se baira 247

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra is peaceful. The impurity and defilement of the
body is the path of detachment, old age is the cause of forbearance, the
renunciation of all things is the great festival for which to die is a great
joy. Birth is only a source of joy for one's friends. For great souls, this
whole world is filled with wealth. Where is there room for misfortune or sorrow?
Happiness arises only from happiness, to believe this, the state of this strange
and diverse world does not come about, because those who dwell in heaven are
eternally happy - they enjoy uninterrupted happiness. Due to the enjoyment of
happiness, their rebirth should be in heaven itself. The beings who dwell in
hell suffer only suffering, therefore their rebirth should be in hell itself.
The beings who dwell in hell suffer only suffering, therefore their rebirth
should be in hell. Therefore, the strangeness of the world, which is the result
of beings going to different destinies according to their own karmas, cannot
happen. This is neither scriptural nor desirable.  Do not despise this - the
true Dharma. Do not be deceived by trivial, insignificant worldly pleasures and
neglect this liberating happiness. If you do not abandon the wrong side, then
abandon heaven etc. and you will regret it like a merchant who takes iron.
Commentary: 'Thus' the path of the Aryas, the teachings of the Jinas, the path
of right faith, knowledge, conduct and liberation, is expounded. Those who are
deluded by the delusion of 'happiness arises only from happiness' etc.,
'despise' it, 'discard' it, 'by trivial' worldly happiness, do not 'destroy'
'much' ultimate happiness, the happiness called liberation. For, by pleasing
food etc., there is an arousal of desire, and from that arousal, there is no
mental health, but rather no concentration. Moreover, if you 'abandon' this
'wrong side' - the acceptance of the wrong side - 'in the absence of
liberation', you will 'regret' yourself like a merchant who takes iron. Just as
he who takes iron, even though he finds silver and gold along the way, does not
abandon it, saying, "I have brought this iron from so far, how can I abandon it
now?" Later, when he reaches his destination and sells the iron, he regrets it.
So too, you will regret it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram zAnta hotA hai| deha kI azucitA-malinatA vairAgya kA
patha hai, jarA-vRddhAvasthA saMvega-titikSA kA hetu hai, samagra padArthoM kA
tyAga vaha mahAn utsava hai jisake lie mara miTanA atyanta Anandaprada hai  /
janma se to kevala apane suhRda janoM ke lie hI prIti prada hai  /  mahApuruSoM
ke lie yaha sArA saMsAra saMpattiyoM se paripUrita hai  /  isameM vipatti yA
du:kha ke lie jagaha hI kahAM hai  /  ekAnta rUpeNa sukha se hI sukha utpanna
hotA hai, yaha mAnane para isa vicitratA pUrNa-vibhinnatAmaya-jagat kI sthiti hI
nahIM banatI kyoMki jo svarga meM nivAsa karate haiM, ve nitya sukhI haiM-
anavarat sukha bhoga karate haiM  /  sukha bhoga ke kAraNa unakI punaH utpatti
svarga meM hI honI cAhie  /  naraka meM nivAsa karane vAle jIva duHkha hI duHkha
bhogate haiM, isa kAraNa unakI puna: utpatti naraka meM hI honI cAhie  /  naraka
meM nivAsa karane vAle jIva duHkha hI duHkha bhogate haiM, isa kAraNa unakI
puna: utpatti narka meM honI cAhie  /  isa kAraNa apaneapane karmoM ke anusAra
jIva ke nAnA gatiyoM meM jAne ke pariNAma svarUpa jagat kI jo vicitratA hai,
vaha ghaTita nahIM ho sakatI  /  aisA honA na to zAstra saMgata hai aura na
abhIpsita hI  /  mA eyaM avamannaMtA, appeNaM lupahA bahuM  /  etassa (u)
amokkhAe, aohArivva jUraha  // 7 //  chAyA - mainamavamanyamAnA alpena lumpatha
bahu  /  etasyatvamokSe ayohArIva jUrayatha  //  anuvAda - tuma isakI-saddharma
kI avamAnanA tiraskAra mata karo  /  tuccha, nagaNya vaiSayika sukha se lubdha
hokara isa mokSa sukha kI upekSA mata karo  /  yadi asatpakSa kA tuma tyAga
nahIM karoge to svarga Adi kA tyAga kara lohA lene vAle vaNik kI jyoM pchtaaoge|
TIkA - 'evam' Arya mArga jainendra pravacanaM
samyagdarzanajJAnacAritramokSamArga pratipAdakaM 'sukhaM sukhenaiva vidyate'
ityAdimohena mohitA 'avamanyamAnAH' pariharantaH 'alpena' vaiSayikeNa sukhena mA
'bahu' paramArthasukhaM mokSAkhyaM 'lumpatha' vidhvaMsatha, tathAhi-
manojJA''hArAdinA kAmodrekaH, tadudrekAcca cittAsvAsthyaM na punaH samAdhiriti,
api ca etasya' asatpakSAbhyupagamasya 'amokSe apatyAge sati 'ayohArivya jaraha
'ti AtmAnaM yUrya kadarthayatha, kevalaM, yathA'sau ayaso-lohasyA''hartA
apAntarAle rUpyAdilAbhe satyapi dUramAnItamitikRtvA nojjhitavAn, pazcAt
svAvasthAnAvAptAvalpalAbhe sati jUritavAn-pazcAttApaM kRtavAn evaM bhavanto'pi
jUrayiSyantIti  // 7 //  TIkArtha- sukha se hI sukha milatA hai, isa mohotpAdaka
mantavya se mohita hokara-vimUr3ha banakara tuma tIrthaMkara prarUpita
samyakadarzana jAna cAritramaya mokSamArga kI avamAnanA-avahelanA karate hae e
tuccha sAMsArika bhogoM ke lobha se mokSa ke pAramArthika-AdhyAtmika Ananda ko
lupta vidhvaMsta mata karo, use mata khoo kyoMki manojJa, AhAra Adi dvArA kAma
kA-bhoga vAsanA kA udveka-ubhAra hotA hai  /  usase caitasika svasthatA miTa
jAtI hai, Atma samAdhi pratihata hotI hai  /  yadi isa asatpakSa mithyA
siddhAnta kA parityAga nahIM karoge to lauha liye calane vAle vaNika kI jyoM
apane ko kevala kadarthita utpIDita karoge-lauha kA bhAra lekara calane vAle
vaNika ne mArga ke bIca cAMdI, sonA Adi milane para bhI yaha kahakara ki maiM
isa lohe kI kitanI dUra se liye A rahA hUM, aba ise kaise tyAga dU~, usane lohe
ko nahIM chor3A  /  bAda meM apane sthAna paha~cakara jaba lohe ko becA -248)

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He became ashamed, started crying loudly and repenting, taking a very low price.
You will also cry and repent in the same way. *Paṇāivaate vatunta, musāvāde
asanjatā.* *Adinnādāṇe vatunta, mehuṇe ya pariggahe.* ||8|| **Chāyā** -
*Prāṇātipāte vartamānāḥ mṛṣāvāde'sanyatāḥ.* *Adattādāne vartamānāḥ maithune ca
pariggrahe.* **Anuvāda** - You commit *prāṇātipāta* (killing of living beings),
speak falsehood, take what is not given (theft), indulge in *abrahmacarya*
(sexual misconduct) and accumulate possessions. Thus, you are not *sanyatācārī*
(practitioner of self-restraint). **Tīkā** - Again, to show the faults of the
*Śākyas* who say "seven by seven", the sūtrakāra says - You are *asanyata*
(unrestrained) because you engage in *prāṇātipāta*, *mṛṣāvāda*, *adattādāna*,
*maithuna* and *pariggraha*. You are *vartamānasukhaiṣī* (desiring present
pleasures) and for the sake of a small amount of worldly pleasure, you are
destroying the true, absolute and ultimate happiness of liberation. Why? Because
you commit *prāṇātipāta* by engaging in activities like cooking and getting food
cooked. The bodies of the beings whose bodies you consume are not given to you
by their owners, so you are engaging in *adattādāna* (theft). By keeping cows,
buffaloes, camels, etc., and enjoying their sexual union, you are indulging in
*abrahmacarya*. You say "We are *pravrajita* (renounced)", but you are engaged
in the practices of householders. This is *mṛṣāvāda* (falsehood) on your part.
You possess wealth, grain, bipeds (two-legged creatures), quadrupeds (four-
legged animals), etc., so you are *pariggraha* (possessor). Now, to show the
faults of other views, the sūtrakāra presents the opposing view. (249)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM to bahuta kama kImata lekara vaha jhUrane lagA-phUTa-
phUTakara rone lagA, pachatAne lagA  /  Apa bhI usI taraha royeMge, pachatAyeMge
/  pANAivAte vaTuMtA, musAvAde asaMjatA  /  adinnAdANe vaTuMtA, mehuNe ya
pariggahe  // 8 //  chAyA - prANAtipAte vartamAnAH mRSAvAde'saMyatAH  /
adattAdAne vartamAnAH maithune ca parigrahe  //  anuvAda - Apa prANAtipAta
jIvadhAriyoM kA prANoccheda-vyApAdana yA hiMsA karate haiM  /  asatya bhASaNa
karate haiM, adatta-binA dI huI vastu kA AdAna-grahaNa karate haiM, jo corI hai
/  abrahmacarya evaM parigraha kA saMcaya karate haiM  /  isa prakAra varNana
karate hue Apa saMyatAcArI nahIM haiN| TIkA - punarapi 'sAtena sAta'
mityevaMvAdinAM zAkyAnAM doSodvibhAvayiSayAha-prANAtipAtamRSAvAdAdattAdAna
maithunaparigraheSu vartamAnA asaMyatA yUyaM vartamAnasukhaiSiNo'lpena
vaiSayikasukhAbhAsena pAramArthikaaikAntAtyAntikaM bahu mokSasukhaM
vilumpatheti, kimiti ? yataH pacanapAcanAdiSu
kriyAsuvartamAnAHsAvadyAnuSThAnArambha tayA prANAtipAtamAcaratha tathA yeSAM
jIvAnAM zarIropabhogo bhavadbhiH kriyate tAni zarIrANi
tatsvAmibhiradattAnItyadattAdAnAcaraNaM tathA
gomahiSyajoSTrAdiparigrahAttanmaithunAnumodanAdabrahmeti tathA pravrajitA
vayamityevamutthAya gRhasthAcaraNAnuSThAnmRSA vAdaH tathA
dhanadhAnyadvipadacatuSpadAdiparigrahAtparigraha iti  // 8 //
sAmpratamatAntaraMdUSaNAya pUrva pakSayitumAha TIkArtha - sukha se hI sukha
prApta hotA hai, isa mata meM vizvAsa rakhane vAle bauddha bhikSuoM ke siddhAnta
meM doSa udvibhAvita karane hetu-batAne hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM-
Apa loga prANAtipAta-jIvoM kI hiMsA, mRSAvAda-asatyabhASaNa adattAdAna-caurya,
maithuna-abrahmacarya evaM parigraha-dhana vaibhava meM vartamAna- saMlagna
rahane ke kAraNa asaMyata-saMyamarahita haiM  /  vartamAna sukhaiSI
vartamAnakAlIna sukhAbhilASA meM abhirata hai  /  tuccha vaiSayika sukha ke lie
jo vastutaH sukha na hokara sukha kA AbhAsa mAtra hai, pAramArthika-
paramArthayukta vAstavika aikAntika evaM Atyantika mokSa-sukha ko vilupta kara
rahe haiM, miTA rahe haiM  /  bhojana pakAnA, pakavAnA Atyantika mokSa sukha ko
vilupta kara rahe haiM, miTA rahe haiM  /  bhojana pakAnA, pakavAnA Adi kriyAoM
meM saMlagna rahakara sAvadha pravRtti se jur3ate hue Apa jIvoM kI hiMsA karate
haiM  /  jina jIvoM ke zarIra kA upabhoga karate haiM, AhAra Adi ke rUpa meM
upayoga karate haiM, ve zarIra unake svAmiyoM-mAlikoM dvArA Apa ko adatta haiM-
nahIM diye gaye haiM, unheM kAma meM lekara Apa adattAdAna-caurya kA AcaraNa
karate haiM  /  Apa para corI kA aparAdha siddha hotA hai  /  gAya, bhaiMsa,
bakarI, U~Ta Adi rakhakara una dvArA sevita abrahmacarya kA anumodana karate
haiM  /  hama pravrajita dIkSita haiM, yoM kahate hue Apa saMyama meM samutthita
haiM-udyata haiM, para gRhasthoM ke AcaraNoM kA anuSThAna karate haiM  /
gRhasthoM kI jyoM AcaraNazIla hai  /  yaha Apa dvArA mRSAvAda-asatya bhASaNa kA
parisevana hai  /  dhana, dhAnya dvipada-do pairoM vAle prANI, dAsa, dAsI Adi,
catuSpada-caupAye pazu Adi ke rUpa meM parigraha rakhate haiM, isalie parigraha
sevI haiM  /  aba anya mata ko sadoSa batAne hetu sUtrakAra pUrvapakSa ke rUpa
meM upasthita karate haiM - (249

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Sutrakritanga Sutram:  Some unrighteous ones who are dwelling by the side
(of the true path), who have fallen away from the Jain doctrine, are attached to
women. They are ignorant youths who have turned away from the Jain doctrine.
Commentary: The word 'tu' is used here to indicate a special distinction from
the previous statement. Some misguided individuals, either those who have
deviated from the true Jain path or those who are separate from their own
community or religious tradition, are attached to women who are weak in
knowledge. They are ignorant youths who have turned away from the Jain doctrine.
These individuals say: "Let there be only the sight of the beloved, what is the
use of other sights? Even with a passionate mind, one attains nirvana through
her." They say this because they are under the control of women and are
afflicted by attachment and aversion. The Jinas (enlightened beings) have
conquered attachment and aversion, but these individuals are averse to the Jain
path and are engrossed in worldly attachments, as described in the upcoming
verses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram evamege u pAsatthA, pannavaMti aNAriyA  /  itthIvasaM
gayA bAlA, jiNasAsaNaparammuhA  // 9 //  chAyA - evameke tu pArzvasthAH
prajJApantyanAr2yAH  /  strIvazaGgatA bAlAH jina zAsanaparAmukhAH  //  anuvAda -
katipaya anArya pArzvastha-saddharma se bahirbhUta athavA apane yUtha yA
dhArmika AmnAya se pRthak bhUta ajJAnI striyoM ke vazagAmI-striyoM meM Asakta
puruSa aisA kahate haiM, jo Age dI gAthAoM meM vakSya mANa hai| TIkA - tu zabdaH
pUrvasmAdvizeSaNArthaH, evami' ti vakSyamANayAnItyA, yadi vA prAktana eva
zloko'trApi sambandhanIyaH, evamiti prANAtipAtAdiSu vartamAnA 'eke' iti
bauddhavizeSA nIla paTAdayo nAthavAdikamaNDalapraviSTA vA zaivavizeSAH
sadanuSThAnAt pArzve tiSThantIti pArzvasthAH, svayUthyA vA pArzvasthAvasanna
kuzIlAdayaH strI parISaha parAjitAH, ta evaM 'prajJApayanti' prarUpayanti
anAryAH anAryakarmakAritvAt, tathAhi te vadanti - "priyAdarzanamevAstu,
kimanyairdarzanAntaraiH ?  /  prapyate yena nirvANaM, sarAgeNApi cetasA  // 1 //
" kimityevaM te'bhidadhatItyAha-'strIvazaMgatAH' yato yuvatInAmAjJAyAM vartante
'bAlA' ajJA rAga dveSopahatacetasa iti, rAgadveSajito jinAsteSAM zAsanam-AjJA
kaSAyamohopazamahetubhUtA tatparAGmukhAH saMsArabhiSvaGgiNo jainamArga
vidveSiNaH 'etad' vakSya mANamUcuriti  // 9 //  _TIkArtha - prastuta gAthA meM
'tu' zabda kA jo prayoga huA hai, vaha pahale kahe gae mata se vizeSatA sUcita
karane hetu hai  /  isake anusAra kaI mithyAdRSTi vakSyamANa nItikA-paddhati kA
Azraya lekara kahate haiM  /  inakA yaha tAtparya hai, athavA pUrvavartI gAthA
kA hI yahA~ sambandha jor3anA cAhie, arthAt prANAtipAta-jIvoM ke vyApAdana Adi
meM abhirata katipaya bauddha matAnuyAyI athavA nIle kapar3e pahanane vAle nAtha
sampradAya se sambaddha viziSTa zaiva jo sad anuSThAna-sad dharma ke AcaraNa se
pRthaka rahane ke kAraNa pArzvastha haiM, ve athavA apanI paramparA se
bahirbhUta avasanna-avasAdayukta, kuzIla-zIla rahita puruSa strI parISaha se
parAbhUta hokara isa prakAra kahate haiM  /  ve anArya-anuttama yA adhamakarma
karane ke kAraNa anArya haiM  /  ve pratipAdita karate haiM hameM to priyApriya
lagane vAlI ramaNI ke darzana hone cAhie  /  dUsare darzanoM se hameM kyA ?
priya-prItimayI ramaNI ke darzana se rAgayukta citta hote hue bhI nirvANa prApta
hotA hai  /  ve aisA kyoM kahate haiM, yaha batalA rahe haiM  /  ve ajJa
rAgadveSa se upahata-utpIDita cittayukta striyoM ke vazagata haiM  /  ataeva ve
navayuvatI striyoM kI AjJA kA anusaraNa karate haiM  /  rAgadveSa vijetA puruSa
ko jina kahA jAtA hai  /  aise jinendra prabhu kI AjJA se jisake dvArA kaSAya
aura moha zAMta hotA hai, vimukha hokara saMsAra meM grasta rahate haiM, jaina
mArga meM vidveSa karate haiM, Age kI gAthAoM meM jaisA kahA gayA hai ve aisI
bAteM karate haiM  /  jahA gaMDaM pilAMga vA, paripIleja muhuttagaM  /  evaM
vinnavaNitthIsu, doSo tattha kao siA ?  // 10 //  chAyA - yathA gaNDaM piTakaM
vA paripIDayeta muhurtakam  /  evaM vIjJApanIstrISu doSastatra kutaH syAt  //
-250)

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Upasargadhyayana Translation - They say that just as relieving and draining the
pus from a boil, carbuncle or abscess provides temporary relief, similarly,
engaging in sexual relations with women who solicit intimacy brings peace from
sorrow. How can there be any fault in this act?  Tika - The purpose of the
example given here is to explain the statement made earlier. 'Just as' refers to
the manner in which a certain person who has a boil, carbuncle or such lesion on
the body, by 'pressing' it, drains out the pus and contaminated blood, and feels
relieved for a moment, without incurring any fault, similarly, in the case of
'solicitation by women' (for sexual relations), how can there be any fault in
the act of sexual intercourse, like the draining of the 'boil'? For, merely by
the alleviation of distress, there would be no fault.  Tika Artha - What has
been suggested by those of other faiths in the previous verse, is being
explained in this verse. The word 'yatha' (just as) here is to provide an
example. Just as a person who has a boil, abscess or such lesion on the body, by
pressing it, drains out the pus and contaminated blood, and experiences relief
for a moment, without incurring any fault, similarly, in the case of engaging in
sexual relations with a young woman who solicits intimacy, how can there be any
fault? Merely by the alleviation of one's distress or sorrow through sexual
intercourse, there would be no fault.  Jha mandhadae naam, thimiam bhanjati
dakam. Evam vinnavanitiisu, doso tattha kao siya? (11) - Just as the sheep named
Mandhadana drinks the still water without disturbing it, in the same way, in the
case of women who solicit, how can there be any fault there?  Tika - There would
be a fault there if there was any harm caused. But since there is no such harm,
the example is given - 'Just as' this is the purpose of the example.
'Mandhadana' is the name of a sheep. The word 'nama' here indicates a
possibility. The meaning is that just as the sheep Mandhadana drinks the still
water without disturbing it, and does not cause any harm to other beings,
similarly, in the case of sexual relations with soliciting women, there is no
harm caused to anyone, and one's own satisfaction is obtained, therefore, how
can there be any fault in this?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayana anuvAda - ve kahate haiM ki jaise gaMDa yA pilAga-phor3e yA
phunsI.ko paripIDita kara-dabAkara usakA mavAda nikAla dene se kucha dera ke lie
sukha milatA hai, isI taraha samparka kI abhyarthatA karane vAlI striyoM ke
sAtha samAgama karane se kheda kI zAMti hotI hai, isa kArya meM doSa kisa
prakAra ho sakatA hai  /  _TIkA - yadUcustadAha-yathetyudAharaNopanyAsArthaH,
'yathA' yena prakAreNa kazcit gaNDI puruSo gaNDaM samutthitaM piTakaM vA
tajjAtIyakameva tadAkUtopazamanArthaM 'paripIDya' pUyarUdhirAdikaM nirmAlya
muhurtamAnaM sukhito bhavati, na ca doSeNAnuSajyate, evamatrApi
'strIvijJApanAyAM' yuvatiprArthanAyAM ramaNIsambandhe gaNDaparipIDana kalpe
doSastatra kutaH syAta ?, na hyetAvatA kledApagamamAtreNa doSo bhavediti  // 10
//  _TIkArtha - pUrvavartI gAthA meM jinakA saMketa kiyA gayA hai una
itaramatavAdiyoM ne jo pratipAdita kiyA hai, isa gAthA dvArA use batalAyA jAtA
hai - yahAM AyA huA 'jahA-yathA' zabda udAharaNa batalAne hetu hai  /  jaise
vaha puruSa jisake zarIra meM koI phor3A phusI yA koI vraNa-ghAva hai, vaha use
dabAkara usakA mavAda tathA vikRta rakta nikAla kara muhurtabhara ke lie sukhita
hotA hai, sukha kA anubhava karatA hai, phor3e ko dabAne meM kisIprakAra kA doSa
nahIM hotA, usI taraha eka navayuvatI dvArA abhyarthanA kie jAne para usake
sAtha phor3e ko dabAne kI jyoM, samAgama karane se doSa kaise ho sakatA hai  /
strI ke samAgama dvArA apane kleza-kheda yA khinnatA ko miTAne mAtra se koI doSa
nahIM lgtaa| jahA maMdhAdae nAma, thimiaM bhaMjatI dagaM  /  evaM
vinnavaNitthIsu, doso tattha kao siyA ?  // 11 //  chAyA - yathA mandhAdano nAma
stimitaM bhuGkte dakam  /  evaM vijJApanIstrISu, doSastatra kutaH syAt  //
anuvAda - ve anya tIrthI aisA kahate haiM ki jaise maMdhAdana-bher3a stimita-
binA hilAye kampAe pAnI pItI hai, jisase kisI jIva kA upaghAta nahIM hotA isI
taraha abhyarthanA karane vAlI striyoM ke sAtha samAgama karane se kisI ko koI
du:kha na hone kAraNa doSa nahIM lgtaa| _TIkA - syAttatra doSo yadi kAcitpIr3A
bhavet, na cAsAvihAstIti dRSTantena darzayati-'yathe'
tyayamudAharaNopanyAsArthaH, 'mandhAdana' iti meSa: nAma zabdaH sambhAvanAyAM
yathA meSa: timitam anAloDayannudakaM pibatyAtmAnaM prINayati, na ca
tathA'nyeSAM kiJcanopaghAtaM vidhatte, evamatrApi strIsambandhe na kAcidanyastra
pIr3A Atmanazca prINanam, ataH kutastatra doSaH syAditi  // 11 //  TIkArtha - ve
anya matavAdI aisA kahate haiM ki samAgama kI abhyarthanA karane vAlI nArI ke
sAtha samAgama karane se yadi kisI ko koI takalIpha hotI to avazya hI usameM
doSa hotA, parantu aisA na hone se isameM koI doSa nahIM hai, isa bAta ko
dRSTAnta dvArA samajhAte haiM-yahAM yathA zabda kA prayoga dRSTAnta ko sUcita
karane ke lie hai  /  'mandhAdana' bher3a kA nAma hai  /  nAma zabda yahA~
sambhAvanA ko sUcita karane ke artha meM hai| kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki
jaise bher3a Alor3ana ke binA-hilAye binA jala pItI hai, tRpta hotI hai, vaha
anya kinhIM jIvoM ko kucha bhI pIr3A nahIM detI, isI prakAra strI saMbaMdha meM
kisI ko pIr3A nahIM hotI, apane ko paritRpti milatI hai, isalie isameM doSa
kaise ho sakatA hai  /  251)

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation preserving Jain terms:  Just as the Pingala bird, a type of
hawk, drinks water calmly without disturbing it, in the same way, there is no
fault in having relations with entreating women, as it does not cause harm to
any living being and they are satisfied.  Commentary: The purpose of providing
this example is to demonstrate that just as the Pingala bird drinks water
without agitating it, in the same way, having relations with entreating women,
without causing harm to any living being and with them being satisfied, there is
no fault in it.   Just as someone, out of wickedness or ignorance, were to cut
off someone's head with a weapon or drink poison, and yet maintain neutrality,
they would not be free from fault. Similarly, in the case of the inevitable and
all-encompassing evil of sexual intercourse, which increases the cycle of
rebirth, how can one be free from fault?  As the great sages have said in the
scriptures: "This (sexual intercourse) is harmful to living beings, like the
entry of a heated iron rod. It is the root of unrighteousness and increases the
cycle of rebirth. Therefore, one who does not wish for sin should avoid this
evil."  This is the meaning conveyed by the three verses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram jahA vihaMgamA piMgA, thimiaM bhuMjatI dagaM  /  evaM
vinnavaNitthisu, doso ta kao siA !  // 12 //  chAyA - yathA vihaGgamA piGgA,
stimitaM bhuGkte dakam  /  _ evaM vijJApanIstrISu doSastatra kutaH syAt  //
anuvAda - jaise piMga nAmaka pakSiNI stimita binA hilAye kampAye pAnI pItI hai,
usake dvArA vaisA kiye jAne se kisI prANI ko kaSTa nahIM hotA ora vaha tRpta ho
jAtI hai, usI prakAra abhyarthatA karane vAlI striyoM ke sAtha sambandha karane
se kisI prANI ko koI duHkha nahIM hotA, isalie isameM doSa kahAM se ho sakatA
TIkA - asminnevAnupaghAtArthe dRSTAntabahutvakhyApanArthaM dRSTAntAntamAha
'yathA' yena prakAreNa vihAyasA gacchItIti vihaMgamA-pakSiNo-piMgeti kapijalA
sA''kAza evaM vartamAnAH 'timitaM' nibhRtamudakamApibati, evamatrApi
darbhapradAMnapUrvikayA kriyayA araktadviSTasya putrAdyartha strIsambandhaM
kurvato'pi kapiJjalAyA iva na tasya doSa iti, sAmpratameteSAM gaNDapIDanatulyaM
strIparibhogaM manyamAnAnAM tathaiDakodakapAnasadRzaM parapIDA'nutpAdakatvena
parAtmanozca sukhotpAdakatvena kila maithunaM jAyata ityadhyavasAyinAM tathA
kapijjalodakapAnaM yathA taDAAgodakAsaMsparzena kila bhavatyemaraktadviSTatayA
darbhAdhuttAraNAt strIgAtrAsaMsparzena putrArthaM na kAmArtha RtubhigAmitayA
zAstrokta vidhAnena maithune'pi na doSAnuSaGga, cocuste - "dharmArthaM
putrakAmasya svadAreSvadhikAriNaH  /  RtukAle vidhAnena, doSastatra na vidhate
// 1 // " iti evamudAsInatvena vyavasthitAnAM dRSTAntenaiva niyuktikAro
gAthAtrayeNottaradAnAyAha - jahaNAma maMDalaggeNa siraM chettU Na kassai maNusso
/  acchejja parAhutto kiMnAma tato Na dhippejjA ? / 53 /  /  jahavA visagaMDUsaM
koI ghettUNa nAma tuNhikko  /  aNNeNa adIsaMto kiM nAma tato na va marejjA !  //
54 //  jahA nAma sirigharAo koi rayaNANi ghettUNaM  /  accheja parAhuto kiM NAma
tato na gheppejjA  // 55 //  yathA [grAgrantham 3010] nAma kazcinmaNDalAgreNa
kasyacicchirazchittvA parAGmukhastiSTheta, kimetAvatodAsIna bhAvAvalambanena 'na
gRhyet' nAparAdhI bhavet ?  /  tathA-tathA kazcidviSagaNDUSaM 'gRhItvA' pItvA
nAma tUSNIMbhAvaM bhajedanyena cAdRzyamAno'sau kiM nAma 'tataH' asAvanyAdarzanAt
na mriyate ?  /  tathA-yathA kazcit zrIgRhAdbhANDAgArAdratnAni mahA_Ni gRhItvA
parAGmukhastiSTheta, kime-tAvatA'sau na gRhyeteti ?  /  atra ca yathA-kazcit
zaThatayA ajJatayA vAzirazchedaviSagaNDuSaratnApahArAkhye satyapi doSatraye
mAdhyasthyamavalambeta, na ca tasya tadavalambane'pi nirdoSateti,
evaMmatrApyavazyaMbhAvirAgakAyeM maithune sarvadoSAspade saMsAravarddhake kuto
nirdoSateti, tathA coktam - "prANinAM bAdhakaM caitacchAstre gItaM maharSibhiH
/  nalikAtaptakaNakpravezajJAtatastathA  // 1 //  mUlaM caitadadharmasya,
bhavabhAvapravardhanam  /  tasmAdviSAnnavattyAjyamidaM pApamanicchatA  // 2 //
iti niyuktigAthAtrayatAtparyArthaH  //  sAmprataM sUtrakAra upasaMhAra tyAjena
gaNDapIDanAdidRSTAntavAdinAM doSodvibhAvayiSayAha - (252

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Upasargadhyayana Tika Artha - There is no fault of Pranimsa (violence against
living beings) in engaging in sexual relations with a woman who is desirous of
union, and many examples are presented here on this subject - Just as the bird
named Kapinjala (Dove) residing in the sky drinks water without moving or
shaking, similarly, a person who engages in sexual relations with a woman, with
a mind devoid of attachment and aversion, for the purpose of procreation of
offspring, is not blameworthy like the Kapinjala bird.   Here, the beliefs of
other Tirthankaras regarding Brahmacharya (celibacy) are mentioned - Some
propound that just as pus or vitiated blood is extracted by pressing a boil,
similarly, sexual relations with a woman are undertaken. Some say that just as a
sheep drinks water without harming others, in the same way, Brahmacharya is
pleasurable for both the man and the woman without causing pain to others.
Similarly, there is a belief that the Kapinjala birds drink water from the lake
without touching it with any part of their body except the beak, in the same
way, a person who engages in sexual relations with his wife during the fertile
period, with a mind devoid of attachment and aversion, for the purpose of
procreation and not for fulfillment of lust, is not blameworthy.  They have said
that a man who has the right over his wife, engaging in sexual relations with
her during the fertile period for the purpose of Dharmic progeny, is a
scriptural injunction, and there is no fault in it.  In this way, to refute the
views of other doctrinal followers who are indifferent and detached from
religious worship, three verses are presented as examples.  The essence of these
three verses is that just as a person cannot escape the crime of beheading
someone, consuming poison, or stealing precious jewels by adopting an
indifferent or detached attitude, similarly, Brahmacharya, which is born out of
passion, is the root cause of all faults, and it increases the cycle of birth
and death. It cannot be considered faultless or blameless in any way. Scholars
have said that Scriptures have described Brahmacharya as the destroyer and
obstructer of living beings, just as placing burning embers inside a pipe
destroys the objects within it, similarly, the practice of Brahmacharya destroys
the spiritual strength. Brahmacharya is the root of unrighteousness and sin, and
it increases the cycle of transmigration in the worldly existence. One who does
not desire sin should renounce food as full of poison.  This is the meaning and
essence of these three verses of Niyukti.  Now, the Sutrakara, while concluding
this chapter, refutes the view of those who consider Brahmacharya pleasurable by
comparing it to extracting pus from a boil.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayana TIkArtha - samAgama kI abhyarthanA karane vAlI strI ke sAtha
saMsarga karane meM koI prANI hiMsA mUlaka doSa nahIM hotA, isa viSaya meM
bahuta dRSTAnta yahA~ upasthita kiye jAte haiM-jisa prakAra AkAza meM
viharaNazIla kapiJjala nAmaka pakSiNI-cir3iyA AkAza meM rahakara binA hilAe
DulAye jala pI letI hai, usI prakAra jo puruSa rAga-dveSa zUnya buddhi se yukta
Adi saMtAna kI utpatti ke lie strI kI deha ko barbAdI se Dhakakara usake pAsa
saMbaMdha karatA hai use usa kapiJjala nAmaka pakSiNI kI taraha doSa nahIM
lagatA  /  yahA~ abrahmacarya ke saMbaMdha meM anya tIrthikoM kI mAnyatAeM kahI
gaI haiM-kaI pratipAdita karate haiM ki jaise phor3e ko dabAkara mavAda yA
vikRta rakta nikAla diyA jAtA hai-usI prakAra strI ke sAtha sambandha kiyA jAtA
hai  /  kaI kahate haiM ki jaise bher3a dUsare ko kaSTa na detI huI jala pItI
hai, usI prakAra anyoM ko pIr3A na dete hue apane tathA dUsare ke lie strI
puruSa donoM ke lie abrahmacarya sukhaprada hai  /  isI prakAra eka mAnyatA yaha
hai ki kapiJjala nAmaka cir3iyA~ apanI coMca ke Age ke hisse ke atirikta apane
anya aMgoM dvArA sarovara ke pAnI ko nahIM chUtI huI use pItI hai, isI prakAra
jo puruSa rAga dveSa zUnya buddhi dvArA strI kI deha ko darbha Adi se r3hakakara
usake gAtra kA sparza na karate hue putra hetu na ki kAmavAsanA pUrti hetu
zAstra vihita niyamAnusAra Rtu kAla meM samAgama karatA hai, usako doSa nahIM
lagatA  /  unhoMne kahA hai apanI strI para apanA adhikAra rakhane vAle, puruSa
dvArA dharma hetu putrotpatti ke lakSya se RtukAla meM samAgama karanA zAstrIya
vidhAna hai, usameM doSa nahIM hotA  /  _ isa prakAra dharmArAdhanA se udAsIna-
virakta rahane vAle anya matavAdiyoM kA niyuktikAra tIna gAthAoM dvArA dRSTAnta
ke rUpa meM nirAkaraNa karane hetu uttara dene ke lie pratipAdita karate haiM -
yadi koI puruSa khaDga dvArA kisI kA mastaka ucchinna kara phira parAGmukha
hokara sthita ho jAya to kyA usa dvArA yoM udAsInatA yA parAGmukhatA ke
avalambana se usakA vaha aparAdha miTa jAtA hai ? jaise koI puruSa jahara kA
cUMTa pI le ora vaha kisI ke dekhe binA cupacApa rahe to kyA auroM dvArA na
dekhe jAne se vaha mara nahIM jAyegA? usI prakAra koI manuSya kisI vaibhavazAlI
dhanI puruSa ke khajAne se bezakImatI javAharAta curAkara parAGmukha ho jAya,
vahA~ se haTa jAya to kyA vaha cora samajhakara giraphtAra nahIM kiyA jAyegA  /
yahA~ kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki yadi koI puruSa zaThatAvaza kisI kA
mastiSka ucchinna kara deM, jahara pI le athavA javAharAta curA le-aisA kara
vaha madhyastha vRtti yA taTasthatA svIkAra kara le to vaha nirdoSaniraparAdha
nahIM ho sakatA, isI prakAra abrahmacarya jo rAga prasUta hai, samasta doSoM kA
hetu hai-saMsAravardhaka haijanma maraNa ke cakra ko bar3hAne vAlA hai, kisI bhI
taraha nirdoSa-doSa rahita nahIM ho sakatA  /  isa sambandha meM vidvAnoM ne
kahA hai ki zAstra meM abrahmacarya ko prANiyoM kA bAdhaka vidhvasaMka batAyA
hai - jaise eka nalI ke bhItara tapI huI Aga ke kaNa DAlane se usake bhItara kI
vastueM naSTa ho jAtI hai, usI prakAra abrahmacarya ke sevana se Atmazakti
vinaSTa ho jAtI hai  /  abrahmacarya sevana adharma-pApa kA mUla hai, saMsAra
meM AvAgamana ko bar3hAtA hai  /  jo puruSa pApa kI icchA nahIM karatA hai use
jahara se pUrNa anna kA jyoM parityAga kara denA caahie| niyukti kI ina tIna
gAthAoM kA yaha tAtparya yA bhAvArtha hai  /  aba sUtrakAra isa prakaraNa kA
upasaMhAra karate hue phor3e se mavAda nikAlane kI jo abrahmacarya ko sukhada
batAne vAle logoM ke mantavya ko doSa yukta sAbita karane hetu kahate haiM  /
253

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The Śrī Sūtrakṛtāṅga
Sūtra says that those who are Pārśvasthās (heretics), Mithyādṛṣṭis (those with
false beliefs), and Anāryās (non-noble ones), are immersed in Kāmas (sensual
pleasures), just like Pūtanā (a demoness) is attached to the young child.  The
commentary explains that those who consider non-celibacy as faultless, are
defeated by the Strīpariṣaha (the affliction of women) and stand apart from the
path of virtue. They are the followers of the Nāthavāda sect. The term 'tu'
(but) indicates that some of their own group also follow this doctrine, though
they have a false and perverted understanding of the truth. They are far removed
from all the condemnable virtues and hence are called Anāryas (non-noble ones)
due to their conduct opposed to Dharma. Such individuals are deeply engrossed in
sinful indulgences in Kāmas (sensual pleasures) or activities driven by Kāmas.
The analogy given is that just as Pūtanā (a demoness) was attached to the young
child, similarly these Anāryas are attached to sensual pleasures. Alternatively,
the term 'Pūyaṇa' refers to a ewe that is excessively attached to its offspring.
In the same way, these individuals are attached to their sense objects.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram eva mege u pAsatthA, micchadiTThI aNAriyA  /
ajjhovavannA kAmehiM, pUyaNA iva taruNae  // 13 //  chAyA - eva meke tu
pArzvasthAH mithyAdRSTayo'nAryAH  /  _ adhyupapannAH kAmeSu pUtanA iva taruNake
//  anuvAda - ve puruSa pArzvastha hai-dharma mArga se vimukha hai, mithyAdRSTi
hai-inakI zraddhA yA AsthA asatya para TikI huI hai, ve anArya hai-adhama
karmayukta hai, kAma bhoga meM adhyupanna-Asakta haiM, jaise pUtanA-DAkaNa bAloM
para Asakta rahatI hai-apanA viSAkta stanapAna karAkara mAra DAlatI hai  /  TIkA
- 'eva' miti gaNDapIDanAdidRSTAntabalena nirdoSaM maithunamiti manyamAnA 'eke'
strIparISaha parAjitAH sadanuSThAnAtpArzve tiSThantIti pArzvasthA
nAthavAdikamaNDalacAriNaH, tuzabdAt svayUthyA vA, tathA mithyA-viparItA
tattvAgrAhiNI dRSTi:-darzanaM yeSAM te yathA, ArAt-dUre yAtA-gatAH
sarvaheyadharmebhya ityAryAH na AryA anAryAH dharmaviruddhAnuSThAnAt, ta
evaMvidhA 'adhyupapannA' gRdhnava icchAmadanarUpeSu kAmeSu kAmairvA
karaNabhUtaiH sAvadyAnuSThAneSviti, atra laukikaM dRSTAntamAha-yathA vA 'pUtanA'
DAkinI 'taruNake' stanandhaye'dhyupapannA, evaM te'pyanAryAH kAmeSviti, yadivA
'pUyaNa'tti gaDDarikA AtmIye'patye'dhyupapannA, evaM te'pIti, kathAnakaM
cAtratathA kila sarvapazUnAmapatyAni nirUdake kUpe'patya snehaparIkSArthaM
kSiptAni, tatra cAparA mAtaraH svakIyastanandhayazabdAkarNa ne'pi kUpataTasthA
rUdantyastiSThanti, urabhrI tvapatyAtisnehenAndhA apAyamanapekSya tatraivAtmAnaM
kSiptavatItyayo'paramazubhyaH svApatye'dhyupapanneti, evaM te'pi  // 13 //
kAmAbhiSvaGgiNAM doSamAviSkurvannAha - _TIkArtha - jo phor3e ko dabAkara usakA
mavAda nikAlane ke samAna abrahmacarya ko nirdoSa mAnate haiM ve dharma vimukha
puruSa strI pariSaha se parAjita haiM-hAra cuke haiM, ve sat anuSThAna-uttama
kArya se dUra haiM  /  ve nAtha Adi zabdoM dvArA abhihita kiye jAne vAle maNDala
meM vicaraNazIla haiM  /  yahAM 'tu' zabda kA jo prayoga huA hai, vaha sUcita
karatA hai ki katipaya svayUthika apane parama parAvRti kintu dharma vimukha
jana isa siddhAnta kA anusaraNa karate haiM  /  unakI dRSTi vastu ke yathArtha
svarUpa ko grahaNa nahIM karatI, viparIta rUpa ko grahaNa karatI hai  /  ve
mithyA dRSTi haiM  /  jo puruSa samasta heya-tyAga yogya dharmoM se dUra rahatA
hai use Arya kahA jAtA hai  /  pahale jina matavAdiyoM kA ullekha huA hai ve
Arya nahIM hai, anArya hai kyoMki ve dharma viruddha AcaraNa karate haiM  /
aise-isa prakAra ke siddhAntoM meM vizvAsa karane vAle puruSa kAma vAsanA evaM
bhoga meM atyanta Asakta haiM, athavA ve kAma bhogoM dvArA pApa pUrNa anuSThAna
yA AcaraNa meM saMlagna haiM, isa sambandha meM eka laukika-loka prasiddha
dRSTAnta hai  /  jaise pUtanA DAkaNa stanapAyI bAlakoM para Asakta rahatI hai
usI taraha ve anAryajana kAma bhogoM meM Asakta rahate haiM, athavA pUtanA
bher3a kA bhI nAma hai  /  jaise eka bher3a apane baccoM para Asakta-vimohita
rahatI hai, usI taraha ve anArya jana viSaya bhogoM meM vimohita rahate haiM  /
bher3a apane baccoM para kisa prakAra Asakta rahatI hai isa sambandha meM eka
kathAnaka hai  /  kisI samaya jAnavaroM ke santati viSayagata prema kI parIkSA
kare hetu una sabhI ke baccoM ko aise kue~ meM rakha diyA gayA jisameM pAnI
nahIM thA usa samaya una baccoM kI mAtAeM kue~ ke taTa para khar3I 254

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the prefix (Upasargaadhyayanam) is like the story of the sheep who,
hearing the cries of her lambs, wept. But blinded by her love for her children,
she jumped into the well, not caring for death. This proves that the sheep has
more love for her children than all other animals. In the same way, the work of
the aforementioned other heretics proves their excessive attachment to
enjoyment.  The Sutrakar explains the fault of men who are infatuated with
pleasure.  "Those who do not see the future suffering, but seek the present
pleasure, they will regret later, when their youth is gone and their life is
waning." (14)  Commentary: "Anagatam" refers to the great suffering in hell and
other places of torment, which arises from the non-abandonment of desires.
"Apshyanta" means those who do not see or consider it. "Pratyutpanna" refers to
the present worldly pleasures, which are merely an illusion of happiness.
"Anveshayanto" means those who seek and desire these pleasures through various
means. They will later regret, when their youth is gone and their life is
waning, and they will be filled with sorrow and remorse. As it is said:
"Striking the sky with fists, and pounding husks without grain, is like the
disrespect shown to the worthy, having obtained human birth." (1)  Also:  "Those
who are adorned with wealth and youth, they act with youthful intoxication. When
age comes, they remember those actions and their hearts are filled with sorrow."
(1.14)  Commentary: Those who are not free from the desire for pleasure, who
have not abandoned it, who do not see the suffering in hell and other places,
who seek present worldly pleasures through various means, they will be filled
with sorrow and regret when their youth is gone and their life is waning. They
will lament and say, "Having obtained human birth, we did not respect the
righteous and virtuous actions. It was our ignorance, as if we were striking the
sky with fists and pounding husks without grain." The pride of wealth and the
intoxication of youth lead to the neglect of good deeds, which are remembered
when age comes, causing great distress to the heart.  "Those who do not regret
later, they are wise and free from bondage, they do not live in vain." (15)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM huyI apane baccoM ke zabda sunakara rotI rahI kintu bher3a
apane baccoM ke pyAra meM aMdhI hokara mauta kI paravAha na karatI huI usa kue~
meM kUda par3I  /  isase sabhI jAnavaroM kI apekSA bher3a kA apane baccoM ke
prati adhika prema hai yaha sAbita huA  /  usI prakAra pUrvokta anya matavAdiyoM
kA kAma bhoga meM atyadhika Asakti bhAva siddha hotA hai| sUtrakAra kAma meM
mohita rahane vAle puruSoM kA doSa batAne hetu pratipAdita karate haiM  /
aNAgayamapassaMtA, pccuppnngvesgaa| te pacchA paritappaMti, khINe AuMbhi jovvaNe
// 14 //  chAyA - anAgatamapazyantaH pratyupannagaveSakAH  /  te pazcAt
paritapyante kSINe AyuSi yauvane  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa anAgata-bhaviSya meM
hone vAle klezoM ko duHkhoM ko nahIM dekhate, usa ora dhyAna nahIM dete  /
pratyutapannA-vartamAna meM hone vAle sukhoM kI gaveSaNa karate haiM-unakI khoja
meM tatpara rahate haiM, ve javAnI ke cale jAne para tathA Ayu ke kSINa hone
para pachatAte haiM  /  TIkA - 'anAgatam' eSyatkAmAnivRttAnAM
narakAdiyAtanAsthAneSu mahat duHkham 'apazyantaH' apalocayantaH, tathA
'pratyutpannaM' vartamAnameva vaiSayikaM sukhAbhAsam 'anveSayanto' mRgayamANA
nAnAvidhairUpAyairbhogAnprArthayantaH te pazcAt kSINe svAyuSi jAtasaMvegA
yauvane vA'pagate 'paritapyante' zocante pazcAttApaM vidadhati, uktaM ca "hataM.
muSTibhirAkAza, tuSANAM kaNDanaM kRtam  /  yanmayA prApya mAnuSyaM, sadarthe
nAdaraH kRtaH  // 1 // " tathA - "visvAvalevanaDiehiM jAI kIrati jovvaNamaeNaM
/  vayapariNAme sariyAI tAI hiae khuddukkNti||1||14|| chAyA -
vibhavAbalepanaTitairyAni va kriyante yauvanamadena  /  vayaH pariNAme smRtAni
tAni hRdayaM vyathante  // 1 //  TIkArtha - jo manuSya kAma bhoga se nivRtta
nahIM haiM, unakA jinhoMne parityAga nahIM kiyA hai, jo narka Adi sthAnoM meM,
jo duHkha sahana karane par3ate haiM una para jinakI nigAha nahIM hai, jo sukha
ke AvAsa mAtra vartamAna kAlIna vaizeSika sukhoM kI bhinna-bhinna upAyoM dvArA
abhyarthanA karate haiM, ve javAnI ke bIta jAne para-Ayu ke kSINa ho jAne para
duHkhita hokara virakta hokara pachatAte haiM, zoka karate haiM, ve kahate haiM
manuSya janma pAkara hamane sata-uttama dhArmika kAryoM kA Adara nahIM kiyA,
vaha hamArA aisA ajJAna pUrNa kArya thA mAnoM hama mukke se AkAza ko tar3ita
karate rahe tathA cA~vala nikAlane hetu dhAnyahIna bhUse ko kUTate rahe  /
dhana ke garva, javAnI ke mada ke kAraNa jo uttama kArya nahIM kiye gaye, umra
bIta jAne para yAda Ate haiM taba hRdaya atyanta udvigna ho uThatA hai| jehiM
kAle parikkaMtaM, na pacchA paritappae  /  te dhIrA baMdhaNummukA, nAvakaMkhaMti
jIviaM  // 15 //  255

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Śrī Sūtrakr̥tāṅga Sūtraṃ**  **Chāyā** - Yaiḥ kāle parākrāntaṃ, na paścāt
paritapyante. Te dhīrā bandhonmuktaḥ, nāvakāṅkṣanti jīvitam.  **Anuvāda** -
Those who have striven at the time when dharma should be striven for, do not
regret afterwards, they do not have to repent, they are free from bondage, they
are men of fortitude and strength, they do not desire a life without restraint.
**Tīkā** - These, being of the highest essence, undertake the effort of
austerity, etc., at the right time, and do not regret afterwards. To show this,
it is said, "Yaiḥ" - by those who are engaged in the welfare of the self, "Kāle"
- at the time of earning dharma, "Parākrāntaṃ" - the effort is made to conquer
the senses and passions, at the time of death or old age, "Paritapyante" - they
do not become sorrowful. The singular number is due to the sūtra being a śloka.
The time for earning dharma is, for the wise, practically all the time, because
the earning of dharma is the main purpose of life. And the main purpose of life
is, practically, always being accomplished. Therefore, those who, from childhood
onwards, have not been in contact with worldly objects, and have been engaged in
austerity, are "Dhīrāḥ" - capable of breaking the bonds of karma, they are free
from the bondage of karma, which is full of attachment, and they do not desire
"Nāvakāṅkṣanti" - a life without restraint. Or, they are indifferent to life and
death, and are devoted to the effort of restraint.  **Anyaccha** -  **Tīkā-
artha** - Those who are of the highest essence, and are very powerful, undertake
the effort of austerity, etc., at the right time. They do not have to regret
afterwards. To show this, the sūtra states, "Yaiḥ" - those who are engaged in
the welfare of the self, "Kāle" - at the time of earning dharma, "Parākrāntaṃ" -
those who have striven to conquer the senses and passions, do not become
sorrowful afterwards, at the time of death or old age. The singular number used
in the word "Paritapyante" is due to the sūtra being a śloka, and should be
understood as an ārya usage. For those who are wise, practically all the time is
the time for earning dharma, because the earning of dharma is the main purpose
of life. Therefore, it is best to be engaged in the effort of the main purpose
of life. Those who, from childhood onwards, have not been in contact with
worldly objects, and have been engaged in austerity, are capable of breaking the
bonds of karma, they are free from the bondage of karma, which is full of
attachment, and they do not desire a life without restraint. Or, they are
indifferent to life and death, and are devoted to the effort of restraint.
**Jha nāī vaneyaraṇī, duttarā iha sammatā. . . eṃ logaṃsi nāriyo, durūttara
amaīmaya.**  **Chāyā** - Yathā nadī Vaitaraṇī dustareha sammatā. Evaṃ loke nāryo
dustarā amatimatā.  **Anuvāda** - Just as the Vaitaraṇī river is difficult to
cross, so too are women difficult to cross for a man who is devoid of wisdom.
**Tīkā** - "Yathā" - the purpose of this is to give an example. Just as the
Vaitaraṇī river is "Dustarā" - difficult to cross, because of its great speed
and uneven banks, "Evaṃ" - so too in this world, women are "Amatimatā" -
difficult to cross for those who are devoid of wisdom and of low essence. For
they make even a learned man a woman by their allurements. And it is said:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA - yaiH kAle parAkrAntaM, na pazcAt paritapyante
/  te dhIrA bandhanonmuktAH, nAvakAGkSanti jIvitam  //  anuvAda - jisa samaya
dharma kI ArAdhanA meM parAkrama-udyama kiyA jAnA cAhie jina puruSoM ne vaisA
kiyA ve bAda meM pazcAtApa nahIM karate, unheM pachatAvA nahIM karanA par3atA,
ve bandhana mukta, dhIra-Atmabala yukta puruSa saMyama rahita jIvana kI AkAMkSA
nahIM karate  /  /  TIkA - ye tUttamasattvatayA anAgatameva
tapazcaraNAdAvudyamaM vidadhati na te pazcAcchocantIti darzayitumAha'yaiH'
AtmahitakartabhiH 'kAle' dharmArjanAvasare 'parAkrAntama'
indriyakaSAyaparAjayAyodyamovihito maraNa kAle vRddhAvasthAyAM vA 'paritapyante'
na zokAkulA bhavanti, ekavacanani zestu sautrazcchAndasatvAditi,
dharmArjanakAlastu vivekinAM prAyazaH sarva eva yasmAtsa eva
pradhAnapuruSArthaH, pradhAna eva ca prAyazaH kriyamANo ghaTAM prAJcati, tatazca
ye bAlyAtprabhRtyakRtaviSayAsaGgatayA kRtatapazcaraNAH te 'dhIrAH' karma
vidAraNa sahiSNavo bandhanena-snehAtmakena karmaNA cod-prAbalyena muktA
nAvakAGkSanti' asaMmajIvitaM, yadivA-jIvite maraNe vA niHspRhAH
saMyamodyamamatayo bhavantIti  // 15 //  anyacca - TIkArtha - jo manuSya uttama
satva-ucca parAkramazIla hote haiM ve pahale hI tapazcaraNa Adi meM udyama
karate haiM  /  unheM bAda meM pachatAnA nahIM par3atA  /  isakA diggadarzana
karAne hetu satra kA pratipAdita karate haiM, AtmahitaAtmakalyANa sAdhita karane
vAle jina puruSoM ne dharma arjita karane kI velA meM indriyoM tathA kaSAyoM ko
jItane hetu udyama kiyA ve bAda meM-marate samaya yA bur3hApe meM paritapta-
zokAkula nahIM hote| yahA~ prayukta paritapya-paritapyante pada meM eka vacana
nirdeza sUtra hone ke kAraNa ArSa prayoga hai, aisA samajhanA cAhie  /  jo
puruSa vivekazIla hai unake lie prAyaH sArA hI samaya dharma arjita karane kA
hai kyoMki dharma kA arjana hI mukhya puruSArtha hai  /  ata: mukhya puruSArtha
ke lie udyata rahanA-prayatnazIla rahanA sarvottama hai| jo mAnava bacapana se
hI sAMsArika viSaya bhogoM ke samparka meM na Ate huye tapa meM pravRtta rahate
haiM ve karmoM ko vidIrNa karane meM-ucchinna kara DAlane meM samartha hote
haiM, unameM vaisA Atmabala hotA hai  /  ve mAnava snehAtmaka-mohayukta baMdhana
se atyanta vimukta rahate haiM, asaMyama maya jIvana kI kAmanA nahIM karate
athavA ve jIvana yA mRtyu meM jarA bhI sprIhA-abhilASA na rakhakara saMyama
pAlana meM dattacitta haiN| jahA naI vaneyaraNI, duttarA iha saMmatA  /  . eM
logaMsi nArIo, durUttarA amaImayA  // 16 //  chAyA - yathA nadI vaitaraNI
dustareha sammatA  /  evaM loke nAryo dustarA amatimatA  //  anuvAda - jaise
vaitaraNI nadI dustara hai use pAra kara jAnA bahuta kaThina hai usI taraha
matihInaviveka rahita puruSa ke lie striyAM dustara hai  /  /  TIkA -
yathetyudAharaNopanyAsArthaH, yathA vaitaraNI nadInAM madhye'tyantavegavAhitvAt
viSamataTatvAcca 'dustarA' durlaGghayA 'evam' asminnapi loke nAryaH 'amatimatA'
nirvivekena hInasattvena duHkhanottIryante tathAhi - tAH hAvabhAvaiH
kRtavidyAnapi strIkurvanti, tathA coktam - (256)

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Upasargaadhyayanam  **Verse 1:**  A man remains on the right path, controls
his senses, and maintains modesty and humility, as long as the blue-feathered
arrows of desire, shot from the bow of the eyebrows, aimed at the ears, do not
strike his heart.   **Commentary:**  Just as the river Vaitarani is difficult to
cross due to its swift current and uneven banks, so too are women difficult to
overcome for men who lack self-control and wisdom. They can easily ensnare even
those who have mastered profound knowledge through their seductive gestures and
desires.   **Verse 17:**  Those men who have renounced the association and
adornments of women, have overcome all obstacles, and remain in deep meditation.
**Commentary:**  Those who are wise and understand the consequences of
associating with women, have abandoned such relationships. They have also
renounced the use of clothing, ornaments, and garlands, which are meant to
attract women. They have overcome all obstacles, including hunger, thirst, and
other distractions, and have dedicated themselves to the path followed by great
men. They remain in a state of deep meditation, their minds undisturbed by the
allure of the world. Others, who are defeated by the temptations of women, are
consumed by the fire of desire, like fish caught in a net and thrown onto
burning coals. They are unable to achieve true meditation.  **Explanation:**
This section highlights the dangers of associating with women and the importance
of self-control and renunciation for achieving spiritual liberation. It uses the
metaphor of the Vaitarani river to illustrate the difficulty of overcoming
worldly temptations. The commentary emphasizes the importance of following the
path of great men and remaining in a state of deep meditation, free from the
distractions of the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM "sanmArge tAvadAste prabhavati puruSastAvadevendriyANAM,
lajjAM tAvadvidhatte vinayamapi samAlambate tAvadeva  /  bhrUcApAkSepamuktAH
zravaNapathajuSo nIla pakSmANa ete, yAvallIlAvatInAM na hRdi dhRtimuSo dRSTi
bANA: patanti  //  1  //  tadevaM vaitaraNInadIvat dustarA nAryo bhavantIti  //
1 //  apic TIkArtha isa gAthA meM jahAM- yathA zabda udAharaNa ko sUcita karane
ke lie prayoga meM AyA hai  /  nadiyoM meM vaitaraNI nadI atyanta vegayukta hai-
bar3I tejI se bahatI hai, viSama taTayukta hai - usake kinAre bar3e viSama yA
ubar3a-khAbar3a hai  /  ataH use lA~gha pAnA bahuta kaSTakara hai| isI prakAra
isa loka meM Atma parAkrama zUnya evaM vivekahIna puruSoM dvArA striyA~ dustara
hai- unako lAMgha pAnA yA unase baca pAnA bahuta muzkila hai  /  ve hAva bhAva-
kAmuka ceSTAoM dvArA kRtavidya - jinhoMne gahana vidyAdhyayana kiyA hai vaise
puruSoM ko bhI apane kAbU meM kara letI haiM, kahA gayA hai ki manuSya tabhI
taka sanmArga para TikA raha sakatA hai, apanI indriyoM para niyaMtraNa banAye
rakha sakatA hai, tabhI taka lajjAzIla banA raha sakatA hai jaba taka lIlAvatI -
vividha lIlAoM meM kuzala striyoM dvArA bhRkuTi rUpI dhanuSa ko kAnoM taka
AkRSTa kara chor3e gaye nIla pakSa yukta nIle yA kAle palaka yukta dRSTi bANa
usa para nahIM girate  /  ataeva striyoM ko lA~gha pAnA unase pAra pAnA usI
taraha dustara kaThina hai jaise vaitaraNI nadI ko pAra kara pAnA dustara hai| -
jehiM nArINa saMjogA, pUyaNA piTThato savvameyaM nirAkiccA, te ThiyA chAyA
yairnArINAM saMyogAH pUjanA pRSThataH kRtA  /  sarvametannirAkRtya te sthitAH
susamAdhinA  //  - - - anuvAda jina puruSoM ne striyoM ke saMyoga-sansarga aura
kAma vibhUSA- kAma zRMgAra chor3a diye haiM. ve hI samagra upasargoM kA
nirAkaraNa kara, tiraskAra kara athavA unheM jItakara uttama samAdhi pUrvaka
rahate haiM  /  katA  /  susamAhie  // 17 //  TIqA - 'yaiH' uttamasattvai:
strIsaGgavipAkavedibhiH paryantakaTavo nArIsaMyogAH parityaktAH, tathA
tatsaGgArthameva vastrAlaGkAramAlyAdibhirAtmanaH 'pUjanA' kAmavibhUSA 'pRSThataH
kRtA' parityaktetyarthaH, 'sarvametat' strI prasaGgAdikaM kSutpipAsAdipratikU
lopasarga kadambakaM ca nirAkRtya ye mahApuruSasevitapanthAnaM prati pravRttAste
susamAdhinAsvasthacittavRttirUpeNa vyavasthitAH,
nopasargeranukUlapratikUlarUpaiH prakSobhyante, anye viSayAbhiSvAGgiNa
stryAdiparISahaparAjitA aGgAroparipatitamInavadrAgAgninA dahyamAnA asamAdhinA
tiSThatIti  // 17 //  - stryAdiparISahaparAjayasya phalaM darzayitumAha TIkArtha
jo puruSa striyoM ke sansarga ke kaTuphala prada vipArka ko jAnate haiN| aisA
kara jinhoMne strI sasaMrga kA parityAga kara diyA hai, strI saMsarga hetu hI
sundara vastra alaMkAra AbhUSaNa tathA puSpamAlA dvArA apane zarIra ko vibhUSita
kiyA jAtA hai, usa kAma vibhUSA kA jinhoMne parityAga kara diyA hai, ve puruSa
saMsarga bhUkha pyAsa Adi anukUla evaM pratikUla upasargoM ko, vighnoM ko
jItakara usa dharma mArga meM pravRtta haiM jo mahApuruSoM dvArA sevita hai  /
unakI citta vRtti svastha prasanna rahatI hai, ve uttama samAdhi yukta rahate
haiM  /  ve anukUla strI I 257

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that those who are **Manapriya** (dear
to the mind) and are not shaken by **favorable and unfavorable circumstances**
(**Praatikul-Apriya Upsargos**) are able to cross the ocean of existence.
Others, who are **Vishay-Lolup** (attached to worldly pleasures) and **defeated
by temptations** (**Stri Adi Parishas**), are like fish on a burning coal,
constantly burning in the fire of **Raga** (attachment) and experiencing
**Ashanti** (restlessness).   To explain the benefits of overcoming these
temptations, the Sutrakar (author of the Sutra) says:  **"These will cross the
ocean, like merchants who cross the sea. Where beings are distressed, they will
be freed by their own actions." (18)**  **Commentary:**  Those who have overcome
favorable and unfavorable circumstances, as described earlier, will cross the
**Ogh** (ocean of existence), which is difficult to cross. This is like a
merchant who crosses the **Samudra** (sea) using a boat. Similarly, **Yatis**
(ascetics) will cross the ocean of existence using the boat of **Samyama**
(self-control). They have already crossed and continue to cross. This **Ogh** is
specifically described as the ocean of existence where beings are distressed due
to attachment to **Stri** (women) and **Vishaya** (objects of desire). They
suffer due to the **Asavendaniya** (unpleasant) results of their **Karma**
(actions).  **The Sutrakar then continues with another teaching:**  **"The monk,
knowing this, should walk the path of virtue. He should avoid false speech and
refrain from taking what is not given." (19)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram manapriyaH tathA pratikUla-apriya upasargoM se kabhI
asthira nahIM banate  /  anya puruSa jo viSayalolupa haiM, strI Adi parISahoM se
parAbhUta ho cuke haiM, ve Aga ke aMgAre para par3I huI machalI kI taraha
rAgAgni meM prajvalita hote hue azAMti meM rahate haiM  /  strI Adi ke parISaha
ko jItane kA kyA phala hotA hai, yaha prakaTa karane ke lie sUtrakAra kahate
haiM  /  ete oghaM tarissaMti, samudaM vavahAriNo  /  jattha pANA visannAsi,
kiccaMti sayakammuNA  // 18 //  chAyA - ete odhaM tariSyanti samudraM
vyavahAriNaH  /  yatra prANAH viSaNNAH kRtyante svakakarmaNA  //  anuvAda -
priya aura apriya upasargoM ko parAbhUta kara, mahApuruSoM dvArA sevita
AdhyAtmika patha para gatizIla, dhIra sthira cettA puruSa usa saMsAra ko pAra
kara jAte haiM jisameM paDe hue jIva apane dvArA AcIrNa karmoM ke prabhAva se
taraha-taraha ke kleza bhogate haiM  /  jaise eka vyavahArI-sAmudrika vyavasAyI
samudra ko pAra kara jAtA hai, vaise hI ve adhyAtma ke pathika janma maraNa ko
lAMgha jAte haiN| TIkA - ya ete anantaroktA anukUlapratikUlopasargajetAra eke
sarve'pi 'oghaM' saMsAraM dustaramapi tariSyanti,
dratyaughadRSTAntamAha-'samudraM' lavaNasAgaramiva yathA 'vyavahAriNaH'
sAMyAtrikA yAnapAtreNa taranti, evaM bhAvaudyamapi saMsAraM saMyamayAnapAtreNa
yatayastariSyanti, tathA tIrNAstaranti ceti, bhAvaughameva vizinaSTi-'yatra'
yasmin bhAvaughe saMsArasAgare 'prANA:' prANinaH strIviSayasaGgAdviSaNNAH santaH
kRtyante' pIDyante 'svakRtena' AtmanA'nuSThitena pApena "karmaNA'
asaveMdanIyodayarUpeNa ti  // 18 //
sAmpratamupasaMhAravyAjenopadezAntaraditsayAha - TIkArtha - pahale jo anukUla
evaM pratikUla upasargoM ko parAbhUta karane vAle puruSoM kA varNana AyA hai, ve
isa augha-dustara-jise pAra karanA kaThina hai, saMsAra ko pAra kara jAyeMge  /
isa sambandha meM dravya auSa kA dRSTAnta kahA jA rahA hai-lavaNa samudra meM
jaise vyavahArI-sAMghayAtrika yA samudrI vyApArI yAna pAtra-jahAja dvArA samudra
ko tairate haiM, usI prakAra bhAva augha-saMsAra rUpI samudra ko saMyamarUpI
jahAja dvArA saMyatigaNa-munivRnda taira jAyeMge, pAra kara deMge, pahale bhI
pAra kiyA hai, tathA aba bhI karate haiM  /  bhAva augha kA vizeSa rUpa se yaha
vivecana hai, jisa bhAva augha rUpa saMsAra sAgara meM prANI strI viSayaka
bhogavilAsa ke kAraNa viSAda yukta hote hue apane dvArA kie gae pApa karma se
asaveMdanIya ke udaya ke kAraNa pIr3A pAte haiM, yAtanA sahate haiM  /  aba
sUtrakAra isa prakaraNa kA upasaMhAra karate hue dUsarA upadeza dete hai  /  .
ca bhikkhU pariNNAya, suvvate samite care  /  musAvAyaM ca vajijjA, adinnAdANaM
ca vosire  // 19 //  chAyA - taJca bhikSuH parijJAya suvrataH samizcaret  /
mRSAvAdaJca varjayedadattAdanaJca vaTutsRjet  //  -258

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 19**  **Study of Prefixes:**  The monk, knowing and
understanding what has been said in the previous verses, should abandon false
speech (mṛṣāvāda) and theft (adattādāna) by being endowed with excellent vows
and samitis.  **Commentary:**  As it has been said before, women are like the
river Vaitaraṇī, difficult to cross. Those who have abandoned them, those who
are in samadhi, cross over the cycle of birth and death. Those who are attached
to women remain trapped in the cycle of birth and death and are tormented by
their own actions. Knowing this, the monk, who is endowed with the vow of
begging, should understand what is to be abandoned and what is to be accepted.
He should practice restraint, being adorned with excellent vows and samitis.
Here, the mention of being adorned with samitis is for the sake of mentioning
the subsequent virtues. Thus, the virtuous monk should abandon false speech
(mṛṣāvāda), which is speech that is not true, and should abandon theft
(adattādāna). He should not even take a single blade of grass without
permission. The word "ādi" here implies the abandonment of sexual misconduct and
other such things. Therefore, for the sake of his own welfare, the monk should
abstain from sexual misconduct and other such things for his entire life.
**Verse 20**  **Non-violence is the fence for other vows:**  The author of the
sutras says this to explain the importance of non-violence.  **Shadow:**  Those
who are moving (tras) and those who are stationary (sthāvara) in the upper,
lower, and horizontal directions.  **Translation:**  One should refrain from
violence towards all beings, whether they are moving (tras) or stationary
(sthāvara) in the upper, lower, and horizontal directions. By doing so, the
being attains peaceful liberation (nirvāṇa), as the scriptures say.
**Commentary:**  The phrase "above, below, and across" encompasses the killing
of beings in all directions. Those who are moving (tras) are those who have two,
three, four, or five senses, and who are different in terms of their ability to
perceive. Those who are stationary (sthāvara) are those who are rooted in the
earth, water, fire, air, and plants, and who are different in terms of their
ability to perceive. This encompasses the killing of beings in all directions.
The phrase "in all places, at all times, and in all states" encompasses the
killing of beings in all directions. Thus, one should refrain from killing
beings in all fourteen realms of existence, whether by action, speech, or
thought. This verse, along with the previous verse, explains the fundamental
virtues of non-violence and other virtues. Now, the author of the sutras
explains the fruit of all these fundamental and subsequent virtues: "Peace"
refers to the cessation of the burning of karma. "Liberation" (nirvāṇa) refers
to the state of liberation, which is the cessation of all duality. This is what
is said to be the state of the virtuous person who practices these virtues.
**Conclusion:**  This is the end of the study of all the verses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasargAdhyayanaM _ anuvAda - pUrvavartI gAthAoM meM jo kahA gayA hai, bhikSu
unheM parijJAta kara jAnakara uttama vrata tathA samiti se yukta hotA huA
mRSAvAd-asatya tathA adattAdAna-caurya kA vyutsarjana kare-tyAga kare  /  TIkA -
tadevadyatprAguktaM yathA-vaitaraNInadIvat dustarA nAryo yaiH parityaktAste
samAdhisthAH saMsAraM taranti, strIsaGginazca saMsArAntargatAH svakRtakarmaNA
kRtyanta iti tadevatsarvaM bhikSaNazIlo bhikSuH 'parijJAya' heyopAdeyatayA
budhdhvA zobhanAni vratAnyasya suvrataH paJcAbhiH samitibhiH samita
ityanenottaraguNAvedanaM kRtamityevaMbhUtaH 'caret' saMyamAnuSThAnaM vidadhyAt,
tathA 'mRSAvAdam' asadbhUtArthabhASaNaM vizeSeNa varjayet, tathA 'adattAdAnaM'
ca vyutsRjed' dantazodhanamAtramapyadattaM na gRhNIyAt, AdigrahaNAnmaithunAdeH
parigraha iti, tacca maithunAdikaM yAvajjIvamAtmahitaM manyamAnaH pariharet  //
19 //  aparavratAnAmahiMsAyA vRttikalpatvAt tatprAdhAnyakhyApanArthamAha -
TIkArtha - pahale aisA varNana AyA hai ki striyA~ vaitaraNI nadI kI taraha
dustara hai-vaitaraNI nadI kI taraha unheM lA~gha pAnA unake vaza meM na AnA
kaThina hai  /  jinhoMne unakA parityAga kara diyA haiM, ve samAdhistha Atma
samAdhi meM lIna puruSa saMsAra ko pAra kara jAte haiM  /  jo striyoM kA saMga
karate haiM-unameM Asakta rahate haiM, ve saMsAra meM rahate hue apane karmoM
dvArA kATe jAte haiM, pIDita kiye jAte haiM  /  ina heya, upAdeya bAtoM ko
jAnakara strI saMsarga ko tyAjya aura saMyama ko AdaraNIya samajhakara uttama
vratoM evaM samitiyoM se samita hotA huA saMyama kI sAdhanA kare  /  yahA~
samitiyoM dvArA samita hone kA ullekha uttara guNoM ke kathana hetu kiyA gayA
hai  /  yoM vartanazIla sAdhu mRSAvAda-asad bhASaNa kA parivarjana kare,
adattAdAna-caurya kA vyutsarjana-tyAga kare, dAMta kuredane ke lie eka tinakA
mAtra bhI binA diyA huA grahaNa na kare  /  yahAM Ae hue Adi zabda se
abrahmacarya Adi kA grahaNa abhipsita hai  /  ata: apane Atma kalyANa hetu sAdhu
jIvana paryanta abrahmacarya Adi kA sevana na kare  /  ahiMsA anya vratoM ke lie
bAr3a ke tulya hai, usakI pradhAnatA batAne ke lie sUtrakAra kahate haiM  /
uDvamahe tiriyaM vA, je keI tasathAvarA  /  /  savvattha viratiM kujjA, saMti
nivvANamAhiyaM  // 20 //  chAyA - Urdhva madha stiya'kSu ye kecit trasasthAvarAH
/  sarvatra viratiM kuryyAt zAntinirvANamAkhyAtam  //  anuvAda - urdhva-Upara,
adha-nIce tathA tiryak-tirache digbhAgoM meM jo trasa-gatizIla tathA
sthAvarasthitizIla-cara, acara prANI sthita hai, unakI hiMsA meM sarvatra,
sarvathA-saba prakAra se nivRta rahanA cAhie, aisA karane se jIva ko zAMtimaya
nirvANa mokSa prApta hotA hai, aisA garvanoM dvArA kahA gayA hai  /  TIkA -
Urdhvamadhastiryazvityanena kSetraprANAtipAto gRhItaH, tatra ye kecana
trasantIti vasA-dvitricatu: paJcendriyA:paryAptAparyAptakabhedabhinnAH,tathA
tiSThantIti sthAvarA:-pRthivyaptejovAyuvanaspataya:
sUkSmabAdaraparyAptakAparyAptaka bhedabhinnA iti, anena ca dravyaprANAtipAto
gRhItaH, sarvatra kAle sarvAsvavasthAsvityanenApi kAlabhAvabhedabhinnaH
prANAtipAta upAtto draSTavyaH tadevaM caturdazasvapi jIvasthAneSu
kRtakAritAnumatibhirmanovAkkAyaiH prANAtipAtaviratiM kuryAdityanena pAdonenApi
zlokadvayena prANAtipAtaviratyAdayo mUlaguNA:khyApitAH,sAmpratameteSAM
sarveSAmeva mUlottaraguNAnAM phalamuddezenAha-'zAntiH' iti
karmadAhopazamastadeva ca 'nirvANa' mokSapadaM yad 'AkhyAtaM' pratipAditaM
sarvadvandvApagamarUpaM tadasyAvazyaM caraNakaraNAnuSThAyinaH sAdhorbhavatIti
// 20 //  samastAdhyayanArthopasaMhArArthamAha (259

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **The Sutra Kritanga Sutra**  **Commentary:** Here, the terms "upward,"
"downward," and "across" are used to encompass the field of violence against
living beings, which is categorized as violence within the field. Those beings
who experience suffering, who appear to be suffering, are called "suffering
beings." They are classified as having two, three, four, or five senses, and are
further divided into those who are fully developed and those who are not fully
developed. Those beings who do not move about, who remain stationary or
immobile, are called "stationary beings." Among these stationary beings, there
are distinctions such as earth, water, fire, air, plants, subtle beings, clouds,
fully developed, and not fully developed. Here, while prohibiting violence
against both suffering and stationary beings, the concept of "dravya pranatipat"
(violence against the substance of life) is embraced. It is stated that one
should not engage in violence against living beings at all times, in all
situations. This is further elaborated by considering the distinctions of time
and intention in relation to "pranatipat." Fourteen realms of existence are
recognized. Within these realms, there are three types of actions: those
committed, those caused, and those approved. Through the three yogas (mind,
speech, and body), one should refrain from violence against living beings, thus
abstaining from "pranatipat." This is explained in two verses, with one less
line, which describe the fundamental virtues and their consequences. To
elaborate on the fruits of these fundamental and consequential virtues, the
fourth chapter states that the alleviation of the burning and scorching caused
by karma is called "peace." This peace is the state of liberation or nirvana,
where all suffering ceases. This state is attained by the virtuous, who
diligently practice the right conduct.  **Summary of the meaning and intention
of the entire study:**  **"Having received this Dharma, let it be known by
Kashyapa. A monk, even when ill, should attend to the needs of another monk who
is ill, without feeling any aversion or disgust." (Verse 21)**  **Shadow:**  + +
+  **"This Dharma has been proclaimed by Kashyapa. A monk, even when ill, should
attend to the needs of another monk who is ill, with a mind free from aversion
or disgust."**  **Translation:** Having embraced this Dharma, proclaimed by the
Lord Mahavira, who belonged to the Kashyapa clan, a monk should remain in a
state of meditation and attend to the needs of an ill monk, without feeling any
aversion or disgust towards their illness.  **Commentary:** The phrase "having
received this Dharma" refers to the fundamental and consequential virtues, as
well as the Shrutacharitra, which is the path to liberation and the avoidance of
suffering. This Dharma is received through the teachings of the Acharya
(spiritual teacher). The commentary then explains the nature of this Dharma: it
was proclaimed by the Lord Mahavira, who possessed divine knowledge and a desire
to liberate all beings. A monk, who has attained this Dharma, should not be
disturbed by external factors or difficulties, and should attend to the needs of
another ill monk. How should they do this? They should do so with a mind free
from aversion or disgust, and with a sense of equanimity, as if they themselves
were not ill. This means that they should not think, "I have already achieved my
goal," and then neglect their duty to care for the other monk.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - yahAM para urdhva, adha aura tiryak kahakara
kSetra prANAtipAtakA kSetragata hiMsA kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai, jo prANI trAsa
pAte haiM, trasta hote pratIta hote haiM ve trasa kahe jAte haiM, dviindriya,
triindriya, caurindriya, paMcendriya paryApta, tathA aparyApta ye unake bheda
haiM, jo prANI calate phirate nahIM, sadA sthira yA aDola rahate haiN| ve
sthAvara kahalAte haiM  /  una stiti zIla prANiyoM meM pRthvI, pAnI, agni, vAyu,
vanaspati, sUkSma, bAdara, paryApta aura aparyApta ke rUpa meM bheda hote haiM,
yahAM trasa aura sthAvara jIvoM kI hiMsA kA pratiSedha karate hue dravya
prANAtipAta kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai, saba samaya meM arthAt sabhI sthitiyoM meM
prANiyoM kI hiMsA nahIM karanI cAhie, aisA pratipAdita kara kAla evaM bhAva ke
bheda se prANAtipAta kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai - cavadaha jIva sthAna mAne gae
haiN| unameM tInakaraNa - kRta kArita aura anumodita, tIna yoga-mana, vacana
tathA kAya dvArA prANAtipAta se jIva hiMsA se nivRtta ho jAnA caahie| aisA
pratipAdita kara eka caraNa kama do gAthAoM dvArA prANAtipAta Adi mUla guNoM kA
nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| una samagra mUlaguNoM aura uttara guNoM kA phala
pratipAdita karane hetu caturthacaraNa meM kahA hai ki karma rUpa dAha-jalana ke
upazama ko zAMti kahA jAtA hai| zAMti hI nirvANa yA mokSa pada haivahAM samasta
duHkha nivRta ho jAte haiM, caraNa karaNa kA samyak cAritra kA paripAlana karane
vAle sAdhu ko vaha avazya hI prApta hotA hai| samasta adhyayana ke artha -
abhiprAya kA upasaMhAra karate hue kahate haiM  /  imaM ca dhammamAdAya,
kAsaveNa veditaM  /  kujjA bhikkhU gilANassa, agilAe samAhie  //  21  //  chAyA
- + + + imaJca dharmamAdAya kAzyapena praveditam  /  kuryyAd
bhikSuglanasyAglAnatayA samAhitaH  //  anuvAda - kAzyapa gautrIya bhagavAna
mahAvIra dvArA pravedita isa dharma ko aMgIkAra kara sAdhu samAdhiyukta rahatA
huA glAna- rugNa sAdhu kI aglAna bhAva mana meM ghRNA yA glAni na lAte hue sevA
kare  /  TIkA 'imaM ca dhammami 'tyAdi, 'ima' miti pUrvoktaM mUlottaraguNa rUpaM
zrutacAritrAkhyaM vA durgatidhAraNAt dharmam 'AdAya' AcAryopadezena gRhItvA
kimbhUtamititadeva vizinaSTi - 'kAzyapena' zrI
manmahAvIravardhamAnasvAminAsamutpannadivyajJAnena
bhavyasattvAbhyuddharaNAbhilASiNA 'praveditam' AkhyAtaM samadhigamya 'bhikSuH '
sAdhuH parISahopasagairatarjito glAnasyAparasya sAdhorvaiyAvRttyaM kuryAt,
kathamiti ? svato'glAnatayA yathAzakti 'samAhita' iti samAdhiM prAptaH,
idamuktaM bhavati - kRtakRtyo'hamiti manyamAno vaiyAvRttyAdikaM kuryAditi  /  -
TIkArtha sAdhu mUla guNAtmaka tathA uttara guNamaya zrutacAritra rUpa tathA
durgati nivAraka dharma ko AcArya guru ke upadeza se grahaNa kara rugNa sAdhu kA
vaiyA vRtya kare  /  vaha dharma kaisA hai ? yaha pratipAdita karane hetu usakI
vizeSatA dikhalAte haiN| jinheM divya jJAna utpanna huA una prabhu mahAvIra,
vardhamAna ne isa dharma ko pravedita kiyA - AkhyAta kiyA, ise samAdhigata
prApta kara sAdhu parISahoM aura upasargoM se vyathita - adhIra na hotA huA anya
rugNa sAdhu kA vaiyAvRtya-sevA kre| kisa prakAra kare ? yaha batalAte haiM-
svayaM aglAna bhAva se svayaM glAna na hote hue, ghRNA na karate hue yathAzakti
samAdhistha - Atmastha hotA huA vaisA kre| kahane kA Azaya yaha 260

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Upasargadhyayanam. The ascetic believes that "I have fulfilled my duty, I am
discharging my responsibility, and I am serving the ailing ascetic."   Sankhaya
pesalam dhammam, ditthi-mam parinivvude. Uvasagge niyamittā, āmokkkhāe
parivvajjāsi ||22|| ti bemi. This is the third chapter on the knowledge of
upasargas (adversities) in the context of right faith.  Translation: The one
with right vision (samyagdrishti), peaceful (pesala), liberated (parinirvrta),
thoroughly understands this dharma. Controlling the upasargas (adversities), he
avoids them until he attains liberation.  Commentary: Having known rightly
through one's own conviction or having heard from others, he embraces the dharma
of scriptural conduct, which is conducive to liberation. Being endowed with
right vision and tranquil due to the subsidence of passions, or being like one
liberated, he patiently endures the favorable and unfavorable upasargas
(adversities) until he attains liberation through the observance of restraint.
The word "iti" here indicates the conclusion. I speak (bravimi), this pada is to
be connected as before. The discussion of the point of view also remains the
same.  The third chapter on the knowledge of upasargas (adversities) in the
context of right faith is completed, and with its completion, this third
adhyayana (study) is also complete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - upasargAdhyayanaM  /  hai ki sAdhu yaha mAnatA hai ki maiM yaha karatA hU~
kRtakRtya hU~, apanA uttaradAyitva nibhA rahA hUM, rugNa sAdhu kI sevA paricaryA
kare  /  saMkhAya pesalaM dhammaM, diTThimaM parinivvuDe  /  uvasagge niyAmittA,
AmokkhAe parivvaejAsi ||22||ttibemi|| iti uvasagga parinnANAmaM taiyaM
ajjhayaNaM sammatte |graathaagrN 256 //  chAyA - saMkhyAya pezalaM dharmaM
dRSTimAn parinirvRtaH  /  upasargAn niyamya AmokSayA parivajet  //  anuvAda -
dRSTimAna-samyagdRSTi, pesala-zAMta, parinirvRta-mokSa, meM anurakta isa dharma
ko bhalI bhAMti samajhakara upasargoM ko niyaMtrita karatA huA-jhelatA huA mokSa
prApta hone taka saMyama kA anusaraNa kare  /  TIkA - 'saMkhyAye' ti samyak
jJAtvA svasammatyA anyato vA-zrutvA 'pezalaM'-ti mokSagamanaM pratyanukUlaM, kiM
tad ?-'dharma' zrutacAritrAkhyaM 'dRSTimAn' samyagdarzanI 'parinirvRta' iti
kaSAyopazamAcchItIbhUtaH parinirvRta kalpo vA 'upasargAn' anukUlapratikUlAn
samyag 'niyamya' atisahya 'AmokSAya' mokSaM yAvat pari-samantAt 'vrajet'
saMyamAnuSThAnena gacchediti, itiH parisamAptyarthe, bravImIti pUrvavat, naya
carcA'pi tathaiveti  // 22 //  TIkArtha - apanI sammati-buddhi yA viveka se
jAnakara yA anya se zravaNa kara mokSAnukUla zrutacAritra mUlaka dharma ko
svAyatta kara, samyagdarzana yukta, kaSAyoM ke upazama se prazAMta athavA
parinirvRkalpa-mukta tulya puruSa priya evaM apriya upasargo ko sahatA huA mokSa
prApta karane taka saMyama kA paripAlana kare  /  iti zabda yahA~ samApti
dyotaka hai, bravImi bolatA hU~, yaha pada pUrvavat yojanIya hai  /  naya carcA
bhI pahale kI jyoM hI upasarga parijJA kA cauthA uddezaka samApta huA, tathA
usakI samApti ke sAtha yaha tIsarA adhyayana pUrA huA  /  . 261 -

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Sutra Kritanga Sutra, Chapter Four, Study of Women**  **First Section**
He who has renounced his former connections with his mother and father, and all
other attachments, will live alone, free from sexual desire, in secluded places.
(1)  **Commentary:**  This section is connected to the previous Sutra, which
states that a renunciant should strive for liberation. This liberation is only
possible for one who has renounced all attachments. Therefore, this section
discusses the renunciation of attachments.  The "he" refers to a virtuous soul
who has renounced his mother, father, siblings, children, and all other past
connections, as well as his in-laws and other future connections. He is free
from all attachments and is devoted to knowledge, insight, and good conduct. He
has vowed to live a life of restraint and will practice this vow in secluded
places, free from women, animals, and eunuchs.  This section highlights the
importance of renouncing all attachments and living a life of restraint. It also
warns against the temptations of women, who may try to lure renunciants away
from their path.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram caturtha strI parijJAdhyayana prathama uddezakaH je
mAyaraM ca piyaraM ca, vippajahAya puvva saMyogaM  /   /  ege sahite carissAmi,
AratamehuNo vivittesu  // 1 //  chAyA - yaH mAtaraM ca pitaraM ca viprahAya
pUrvasaMyogam  /  ekaH sahitazcariSyAmi Aratamaithuno vivikteSu  //  anuvAda -
eka puruSa viraktivaza dIkSA grahaNa karatA hai aura yaha cintana karatA hai ki
maiM mAtA pitA Adi gRhasthagata pUrva saMbaMdhoM kA parityAga kara abrahmacarya
varjita rahatA huA-brahmacarya kA pAlana karatA huA, jJAna darzana aura cAritra
pUrvaka vivikta-ekAMta pavitra sthAna meM vicaraNa karU~gA  /  (striyA~-usako
chala pUrvaka vazagata karane kA prayatna karatI haiM) TIkA - asya
cAyamanantarasUtreNa saha sambandhaH, tadyathA anantarasUtre'bhihitam, AmokSAya
parivrajediti, etaccAzeSAmiSvaGgavarjitasya bhavatItyato'nena
tadabhiSvaGgavarjanamamidhIyate, 'ya:' kazciduttamasattvo 'mAtaraM pitaraM'
jananI janayitAram, etadgrahaNAdanyadapi bhrAtRputrAdikaM pUrvasaMyogaM tathA
zvazrUzvazurAdikaM pazcAtsaMyogaM ca 'viprahAya 'tyaktvA, cakArau samuccayArthI,
'eko' mAtApitrAdyabhiSvaGgavarjitaH kaSAyarahito vA tathA sahito
jJAnadarzanacAritraiH svasmai vA hita: svahitaH-paramArthAnuSThAnavidhAyI
'cariSyAmi' saMyamaM kariSyAmItyevaM kRtapratijJaH, tAmeva pratijJAM
sarvapradhAnabhUtAM lezato darzayati - 'Aratam' uparataM maithunaM-kAmAbhilASo
yasyAsAvAratamaithunaMH, tadevambhUto 'vivikteSu' strIpazupaNDakavarjiteSu
sthAneSu cariSyAmItyevaM samyagutthAnenotthAya viharatIti, kvacitpATho
'vivittesitti' 'viviktaM' strIpaNDakAdirahitaM sthAnaM saMyamAnuparodhyeSituM
zIlamasya tatheti  // 1 //  tasyaivaM kRtapratijJasya sAdhoryadbhavatyaviveki
strIjanAttaddarzayitumAha - TIkArtha - pUrva sUtra ke sAtha isa adhyayana kA
sambandha isa prakAra hai-pUrva sUtra meM varNita huA hai ki sAdhu mokSa prApta
karane taka apane parivrajita-dIkSita jIvana kA paripAlana kare, kintu vaha
mokSa to usa puruSa ko prApta hotA hai, jo samasta abhiSvaGga moha kA parityAga
kara detA hai  /  ataH isa adhyayana meM mohavarjana kA vivecana kiyA jAtA hai|
jo koI uttama sattva-pavitra bhAvanA yukta sAdhu mAtA-pitA, bhrAtA, putra Adi
apane pUrvavartI sambandhiyoM evaM sAsazvasura Adi pazcAtvartI sambandhiyoM kA
parityAga kara, una sabake sambandha meM vivarjita hokara ekAkI athavA kaSAya
rahita, jJAna darzana evaM cAritra sampanna Atmahita yA paramArtha ke anuSThAna
meM abhirata hokara aisI pratijJA kiye hue hai ki saMyama kA pAlana karU~gA,
vaha pratijJA sarvapradhAna sarvottama hai  /  zAstrakAra aMzata: usakA
pratipAdana karate haiM  /  vaha sAdhu jisakI kAmabhilASA-kAma bhoga kI vAsanA
miTa gaI hai, jo 'strI' pazu tathA napuMsaka varjita sthAnoM meM vicaregA, 'aisI
pratijJA kara samyak cAritra kA paripAlana karatA huA vicaraNazIla hai, usake
prati viveka zUnya striyA~ kyA karatI haiM yaha batalAte haiM, yahA~ kahIM
vivittesi aisA pATha prApta hotA (262

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is a study of women, which means that the ascetic investigates the
observance of the vow of solitude, seclusion, or a place without women, animals,
or eunuchs. This is what is said about what unwise women do to such a vowed,
vowed, or self-controlled ascetic. "They approach him subtly, with hidden words,
these foolish women. They also know the means by which some monks become
attached." Commentary: "Suhumeṇam" etc., "tam" the great man, the ascetic,
"sūkṣmeṇa" by means of an indirect statement, "chhalapadena" by means of
deception, "parikramya" approaching him, or "ti" by means of overcoming him with
the ability to fall from virtue, who? - "striyaḥ" like the sand of the
riverbank, etc., skilled in various kinds of deception, like the Mágdha Ganikás,
etc., with various kinds of cleverness, greedy for food, with their minds fixed
on lust alone, devoid of the discrimination between right and wrong, approaching
him, they destroy his virtue. This is what is said: by calling him "brother's
son," they approach the ascetic and cause him to fall from his vow. And so it is
said: "Pīyaputta bhāikidaga ṇattūkidaga ya sayaṇakidaga ya. Ete jovvaṇakidaga
pacchannpaī mahiliyāṇam." Commentary: "Pīyaputta bhāikrīḍaka naptrīḍaka ca
svajanakrīḍakaś ca ete yauvana kṛīḍakaḥ prāptāḥ pracchannpataḥ mahilānām." Or,
"channpaadena" - with a hidden name, as in: "Kāle prasupta sya janārdana kṣya,
meghāndhakārāsu ca śarvarīṣu. Mithyā na bhāṣāmi viśālanetre! Te pratyayā ve
prathamākṣareṣu." etc., those women are full of deceit, they also know the means
of deception - they know it by their innate intelligence, or they are learned in
other texts, as "śliṣyante" even wise ascetics become attached to such women
because of the arising of such actions. Commentary: The great man, the great
ascetic, is approached by women under some pretext, with deceit, and they cause
him to fall from virtue. Or, they make that great man capable of falling from
celibacy and make him fallen. Just as the Mágdha Ganikás, etc., who are skilled
in deceitful and deceptive actions, who are full of lust and desire, who are
devoid of the discrimination between right and wrong, who are foolish and
ignorant, have caused the Tapasas, etc., who are like the sand of the riverbank,
etc., to fall from virtue, from celibacy, in the same way women cause the
ascetics to fall from virtue. The meaning is that women, under the pretext of
being a brother, son, etc., come close to the ascetic and cause him to fall from
his vow. It is said: "Pīyaputra bhāi, nāti, etc., familial, worldly
relationships are a pretext for women to secretly make a husband, they plot with
hidden names, the following verse is an example of this: 263)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - strI parijJAdhyayanaM hai, jisakA yaha abhiprAya hai ki sAdhu vivikta-ekAMta
yA strI, pazu, napuMsaka rahita sthAna kA zIla pAlana hetu anveSaNa karatA hai
/  aise kRta pratijJa-pratijJAzIla yA saMyamonmukha sAdhu ke prati avivekinI
striyoM dvArA kyA kiyA jAtA hai, yaha kahate haiM  /  sahumeNaM taM parikkama,
channapaeNa ithio maMdA  /  uvvAyaMpi tAu jANaMsu jahA lissaMti bhikkhuNo ege
// 2 //  chAyA - sUkSmeNa taM parikramya channapadena striyo mandAH  /
upAyamapi tAH jAnanti yathA zliSyanti bhikSava eke  //  anuvAda - maMda-
vivekazUnya striyA~ kisI bahAne se sAdhu ke samIpa Akara kapaTapUrNa yA rahasya
pUrNa zabda dvArA use saMyama se bhraSTa karane kA prayAsa karatI haiM  /  ve
yaha bhI jAnatI hai ki kisa prakAra koI sAdhu unase kliSTa-unameM Asakta ho
sakatA hai  /  _TIkA - 'suhumeNaM' ityAdi, 'taM' mahApuruSaM sAdhu 'sUkSmeNa'
aparakAryavyapadezabhUtena "chalapadene "tti chadmanA-kapaTajAlena 'parAkramya'
tatsamIpamAgatya, yadivA-pasakramye 'ti zIlaskhalanayogyatApattyA abhibhUya,
kAH?-'striyaH' kUlavAlukAdInAmiva mAgdhagaNikAdyA nAnAvidhakapaTazatakaraNadakSA
vividhavibbokavatyo bhAkSamandAH-kAmendrekavidhAyitayA sadasadvivekavikalA:
samIpamAgatya zIlAd dhvaMsayanti, etaduktaM bhavati-bhrAtRputravyapadezena sAdhu
samIpamAgatya saMyamAd bhraMzayanti, tathA coktam - "piyaputta bhAikiDagA
NattUkiDagA ya sayaNakiDagA ya  /  ete jovvaNakiDagA pacchannapaI mahiliyANaM
// 1 // " chAyA - priyaputrabhAtRkrIDakA naptRkrIDakAca svajanakrIDakAzca ete
yauvanakrIDakAH prAptAH pracchannapatayo mahilAnAM  // 1 //  yadivA-
channapadeneti-guptAbhidhAnena, tadyathA - "kAle prasuptasya janArdanakSya,
meghAndhakArAsu ca zarvarISu  /  mithyA na bhASAmi vizAlanetre ! te pratyayA ve
prathamAkSareSu  // 1 // " ityAdi, tAH striyo mAyApradhAnAH pratAraNopAyamapi
jAnanti-utpannapratibhatayA vidanti, pAThAntaraM vA jJAtavatyaH, yathA
'zliSyante' vivekino'pi sAdhava eke tathAvidhakarmodayAt tAsu saGgamupayAnti  //
2 //  tAneva sUkSma pratAraNopAyAn darzayitumAha - TIkArtha - mahApuruSa-
mahanIya sAdhu kA striyA~ kisI bahAne se-kapaTa se usake pAsa Akara, zIla se
bhraSTa kara detI haiM  /  athavA usa mahApuruSa ko brahmacarya se skhalita hone
yogya banAkara patita kara detI haiN| jaise kapaTa-chalapUrNa kArya karane meM
kuzala aneka prakAra se kAmodvega-kAma vAsanA utpanna karane vAlI sata asata ke
viveka se rahita manda-ajJAnavatI mAgadha gaNikA-magadha dezIya vezyA Adi
nAriyoM ne kula bAluka Adi tApaso ko zIla se-brahmacarya se bhraSTa kara DAlA
thA usI taraha striyA~ sAdhu ko zIla se patita kara DAlatI haiM  /  abhiprAya
yaha hai ki bhAI-putra Adi ke viSa se aurate sAdhu ke nikaTa Akara use saMyama
se girA detI haiM  /  kahA hai-priya putra bhAI, nAtI Adi kauTumbika sAMsArika
sambandhoM kA bahAnA banAkara gupta rUpa se pati ko banAnA striyoM kI rIti hai,
ve gupta nAma dvArA SaDayantra racatI hai nimnAMkita zloka isakA udAharaNa hai -
263)

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:  The Sūtrakṛtāṅga Sūtra states -
"When Janārdana (the Lord) is asleep in the darkness of the clouds and the
nights, I do not speak falsehood, O wide-eyed one! Those are the experiences
which are entangled in the meshes (of delusion)."  The meaning of this verse is
as follows - When Janārdana (the Lord) or the Sun-god has gone to sleep, i.e.,
set, and the sky is covered with dark clouds, in those nights, I, the one with
large eyes (the beloved), do not speak falsehood. The initial letters of each
pada (section) of this verse spell out "Kāmen te", meaning "I desire you."
Skilled in the art of deception, women of a fickle mind know the ways of
cheating, due to which even the discerning ascetics become attached to them
because of the arising of karmic effects.  The verse states - "They sit down
closely by his side, repeatedly put on the garment for nourishing (passion),
display the lower part of the body, and approach him with uplifted arm exposing
the armpit."  Commentary - The women, in order to deceive the ascetic, sit down
very close to him, expressing excessive affection, with the intention of gaining
his trust. Similarly, they repeatedly wear the garment that nourishes (arouses)
passion, i.e., the attractive and seductive clothing, under the pretext of it
being loose or wet. Further, they display the lower part of the body to arouse
passion, and approach the ascetic with uplifted arm, exposing the armpit, in a
manner favorable to him.  Additionally, the verse states - "With intoxicating
substances and seductive means, they invite the solitary one. And he knows
these, the evident and the hidden forms."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram - "kAle prasUptasya janArdanasya, meghAndhakArAsu ca
zarvarISu  /  mithyA na bhASAmi vizAla netre ! te pratyayA ye grathamAjhareSu
//  isa zloka kA artha isa prakAra hai-janArdana-bhagavAna yA sUrya nArAyaNa ke
so jAne para, asta ho jAne para AkAza chAye bAdaloM ke andhakAra se yukta rAtoM
meM ye vizAla netre-bar3I-bar3I A~khoM vAlI priya maiM jhUTha nahIM bolatA  /
isa zloka ke pratyeka caraNa ke zuruAta ke akSara kA + me + mi = kAmen te arthAt
maiM tumhArI kAmanA karatA hU~  /  mAyA pradhAna-chala karane meM nipuNa striyA~
pratyutpannamati hone ke kAraNa pratAraNa karane ke-Thagane ke upAyoM ko jAnatI
haiM jisase vivekazIla sAdhu bhI vaise karmodaya ke kAraNa unameM Asakta ho jAte
haiN| pAse bhisaM NisIyaMti abhikkhaNaM posavatthaM parihiMti  /  kAyaM ahevi
daMsaMti, bAhu uddhaTu kakkhamaNuvvaje  // 3 //  chAyA - pArzve bhRzaM
niSIdanti, abhIkSNaM poSavastraM paridadhati  /  _ kAyamadho'pi darzayati
bAhumuddhRtya kakSAmanuvrajet  //  anuvAda - striyA~ sAdhu ko pratArita karane
hetu unake samIpa bahuta baiThatI haiM tathA kAma vAsanA paidA karane vAle
sundara vastra, gIle hone kA bahAnA banAkara abhIkSaNa-nirantara pahanane kA
upakrama karatI haiM  /  kAmoddIpana hetu zarIra ke nimna bhAga kA pradarzana
karatI hai yA apanI bA~ha U~cI uThAkara kA~kha dikhalAtI huI sAdhu ke samakSa
AtI haiN| TIkA- 'pAzve' samIpe bhRzam'
atyarthamUrUpapIDamatisnehamAviSkurvantayo 'niSIdanti'
vizrambhamApAdayitumupavizantIti, tathA kAmaM puSNAtIti poSaM-kAmotkocakAri
zobhanamityarthaH tacca tadvastraM poSavastraM tad 'abhIkSNaM' anavarataM tena
zithilAdivyapadezena paridadhati,svAbhilASamAvedayantyaHsAdhupratAraNArthaM
paridhAna zithilIkRtya punarnibadhnantIti, tathA 'adha:kAyam'
UrvAdikamanaGgochIpanAya 'darzayanti' prakaTayanti, tathA 'bAhumudhdhRtya'
kakSAmAdarzya 'anukUlaM' sAdhvabhimukhaM vrajet' gacchet  /  sambhAvanAyAM liG,
sambhAvyate etadaGgapratyaGgasandarzakatvaM strINAmiti  // 3 //  apica TIkArtha
- sAdhu ko Thagane hetu striyA~ jo upAya karatI haiM unheM batalAte hue
sUtrakAra kahate haiM - striyA~ apanA atyadhika prema vyakta karane hetu evaM
vizvAsa paidA karane hetu sAdhu ke nikaTa adhika baiThatI haiM  /  jo vastra
kAmavAsanA ko puSTa karatA hai use poza vastra kahA jAtA hai usa kAmottejaka
sundara vastra ko striyA~ zithilaDhIlA Adi kA bahAnA banAkara bAra-bAra pahanatI
haiM  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki apanA kAmuka manobhAva prakaTa karatI huyI sAdhu
ko Thagane hetu apane vastra ko zithila kara bAra-bAra bA~dhatI haiM  /  sAdhu
meM kAma vAsanA jagAne hetu ve apane jaMghA Adi aMgoM kA pradarzana karatI haiM
/  apanI bAheM U~cI kara kAMkha kA pradarzana karate hue sAdhu ke samakSa AtI
haiM  /  yahA~ sambhAvanA ke artha meM liGga lakAra kA prayoga hai  /  usase
yaha saMketita hotA hai ki sambhavatayA striyA~ sAdhu ko apane aMga pratyaMga
dikhlaaye| sayaNAsavehiM jogehiM ithio egatA NimaMtaMti  /  eyANi ceva se jANe,
pasANi virUvarUvANi  // 4 //  -264)

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A woman, knowing the nature of men, invites them to a place with a comfortable
bed and seat. A wise sage should recognize these as various forms of entrapment.
**Commentary:**   The term "shayanasana" refers to a place for lying down, such
as a bed or a couch, while "asana" refers to a place for sitting, such as a
chair or a stool. The word "yogya" means suitable or appropriate. The phrase
"striyo ekada" means women, at some point in time. The word "nimantrayanti"
means they invite.   The sage should understand that these invitations are not
simply offers of comfort, but rather traps set by women to ensnare men. The
phrase "virup रूपान्" means various forms or appearances.   The saying goes,
"Just as a vine climbs the nearest tree, whether it be mango or neem, so too do
women desire the nearest man."   Therefore, a sage should avoid associating with
women, as their allure can be difficult to resist. As the saying goes, "If you
wish to catch something, first catch it with a hook. Once caught in the hook of
desire, one will do both good and bad deeds."   **Note:** The Jain terms
"paasha" (trap) and "virup रूपान्" (various forms) are preserved in the
translation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM chAyA - zayanAsanena yogyena striya ekadA nimantrayanti
/  etAni caiva sa jAnIyAt pAzAn virUparUpAn  //  anuvAda - kabhI striyA~ ekAnta
sthAna meM uttama zayana-uttama palaMga tathA uttama Asana para baiThane hetu
Amantrita karatI haiM  /  tatvadarzI sAdhu ina upakramoM ko nAnA prakAra ke
pArzva-bandhana yA jAla smjhe| TIkA - 'sayaNAsaNe' ityAdi, zayyate'sminniti
zayanaM-paryaGkAdi tathA''syate'sminnityAsanamAsaMdakAdItyevamAdinA 'yogyena'
upabhogAheNa kAlocittena 'striyo' yoSita 'ekadA' iti viviktadezakAlAdau
'nimantrayanti' abhyupagamaM grAhayanti, idamuktaM bhavati-zayanAsanadyupabhogaM
prati sAdhuM prArthayanti, 'etAneva' zayanAsananimantraNarUpAn sa
sAdhurviditavedyaH paramArthadarzI 'jAnIyAd' avabudhyeta strIsambandhakAriNaH
pAzayanti badhnantIti pAzAstAn 'virUparUpAn' nAnAprakArAniti  /  idamuktaM
bhavati-striyo hyAsannagAminyo bhavanti, tathA coktam - _ 'aMbaM' vA rnibaM vA
abbhAsaguNeNa ArUhai vallI  /  evaM itthItovi ya jaM Asannatamicchanti  // 1 //
chAyA - Amra vA nimba bAbhyAsaguNenArohati vallI  /  evaM striyo'pi ya
evAsannastabhicchaMti  // 1 //  tadevambhUtAH striyo jJAtvA na tAbhiH sArdhaM
sAdhuH saGgaM kuryAt, yatastadupacArAdikaH saGgo duSparihAryo bhavati, taduktam
- "jaM icchasi ghettuM je puvviM taM AmiseNa giNhAhi  /  AmisapAsa nibaddho
kAhii kajaM akajje vA  // 1 //   / 4 /  kiJca - chAyA - yAn grahItumicchasi
tAnAbhiSeNa pUrvagRhANa  /  yadAbhiSapAzanibaddhaH kariSyati kAryamakArya vA  //
1 //  TIkArtha - jisake Upara zayana kiyA jAtA hai-soyA jAtA hai use zayana kahA
jAtA hai  /  jisa para baiThate hai use Asana kahate haiM  /  Asandaka-kursI Adi
Asana meM Ate haiM  /  striyA~ ekAnta sthAna tathA anukUla samaya dekhakara ina
upabhogya vastuoM ko grahaNa karane hetu sAdhu se anurodha karatI haiM  /  isakA
abhiprAya yaha hai ki striyA~ inakA upabhoga karane hetu sAdhu se abhyarthanA
karatI haiM kintu viditavedya, jAnane yogya tathyoM kA jJAtA, paramArtha dRSTA
sAdhu yaha samajhe ki yaha Asana zayana Adi ke grahaNa hetu kiye gaye AmantraNa
striyoM ke sAtha pha~sAne vAle nAnA prakAra ke bandhana yA jAla haiM  /  Azaya
yaha hai ki striyA~ AsaMgavRtti-pAsa meM sthita puruSa kI kAmanA karatI haiN|
cAhe Ama kA per3a ho yA nIma kA, bela (latA) svabhAva se hI jo bhI pAsa hogA usa
para car3hatI hai  /  isI prakAra strI jo bhI puruSa pAsa meM ho usakI abhilASA
karatI hai  /  sAdhu yaha samajha kara usakA saMga na kare, sahacarya meM na
rahe  /  striyoM ke dvArA pradarzita sevA paricaryA ke kAraNa unake sAtha jo
Asakti bana jAtI hai, use chor3a pAnA bahuta kaThina hai  /  kahA gayA hai yadi
tuma striyoM ke rUpa meM kucha grahaNa karanA cAhate ho-lenA cAhate ho use
machaliyoM ko pakar3ane hetu phailAye gaye jAla ke kATe meM laTakatI mA~sa kI
boTI ke samAna samajho usake lobha ke jAla meM phaMsakara prANI kArya akArya
saba kucha karane meM tatpara ho jAtA hai  /  no tAsu cakkhu saMdhejA, novi ya
sAhasaM samabhijANe  /  No sahiyaMpi viharejjA, evamappA surakkhio hoi  // 5 //
265

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Śrī Sūtrakrtaṅga Sūtra, Chāyā:**  Do not cast your eyes upon them, nor should
you even consider doing what they request. Even if you are in their company, do
not wander about in this way. Thus, the soul remains protected.  **Anuvāda:**
As mentioned earlier, do not cast your eyes upon virtuous women. Do not dare to
commit the evil deeds they request, and do not wander with them in villages or
other places. By doing so, the soul of the virtuous remains protected and free
from sin.  **Ṭīkā:**  "No" means "not at all." "Tāsu" refers to women who entice
with offers of beds, seats, and other enticements. "Cakṣuḥ" means "eyes."
"Sandadhyāt" means "to fix one's gaze." Do not fix your gaze upon them. If there
is a need to look at them, do so with a slight disdain. As it is said:  "Even if
engaged in a task, a wise man looks at a woman's body with a steady, unattached
gaze, with disdain, even if he is not angry, he appears as if he is angry."
Similarly, do not even consider "sāhasa" - the act of doing what they request.
This is a great act of audacity, for even a sage who has entered the battle of
life and knows the consequences of hell, to engage with a woman is a great sin.
Likewise, do not "viharet" - wander - with women in villages or other places.
The word "api" indicates that you should not be alone with them. This is a great
place of sin for ascetics, to be in the company of women. As it is said:  "Do
not be alone with your mother, sister, or daughter. The senses are very
powerful, even a wise man can be deceived by them."  By avoiding the company of
women in this way, the soul is protected from all places of sin. For, the cause
of all evils is association with women. Therefore, those who seek their own
welfare should avoid their company from afar.  **How are these women like
snares?**  **Ṭīkā-artha:**  Women entice virtuous men by offering them beds,
seats, and other things. This request of theirs is a snare to trap the virtuous.
Do not cast your eyes upon such women. Do not meet their gaze. If you must look
at them, do so with a disdainful gaze. It is said that a wise man, when dealing
with a woman, should look at her body with a detached, unattached gaze, even if
he is not angry, he should appear as if he is angry. Do not agree to commit evil
deeds with a woman at her request. For a sage who has entered the battle of life
and knows the consequences of hell, to engage with a woman is a great act of
audacity and impropriety. Do not wander with women in villages or other places.
The use of the word "api" here indicates that you should not be alone with them.
To be in the company of women, to be in their presence, is a great sin for
ascetics. It is said that you should not be alone with your mother, sister, or
daughter, for the senses are very powerful, even a wise man can be deceived by
them. By avoiding the company of women in this way, the soul is protected from
all places of sin. For, the cause of all evils is association with women.
Therefore, those who seek their own welfare should avoid their company from
afar.  **Āmantiya ussaviyā bhikṣaṁ āyasa nimantanti. Etāṇi ceva se jāṇe, sadāṇi
virūvarūvāṇi.**  These are the things that you should know, they are always
harmful.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA - na tAsu cakSuH saMdadhyAt nA'pi ca sAhasaM
samabhijAnIyAt  /  na sahito'pi viharedevamAtmA surakSito bhavati  //  anuvAda -
jaisA pahale ullekha huA hai sAdhu striyoM para apanI najara na DAle  /  una
dvArA abhyarthita duSkarma karane kA sAhasa na kare tathA unake sAtha gA~va Adi
meM vihAra na kare  /  isa prakAra karate hue sAdhu kI AtmA surakSita rahatI
hai, pApoM se bacI rahatI hai| TIkA - 'no' naiva 'tAsu'
zayanAsanopanimantraNapAzAvapAzikAsu strISu 'cakSuH' netraM 'sandadhyAt'
sandhayedvA na tadRSTau svadRSTiM nivezayet, sati ca prayojane ISadavajJayA
nirIkSeta, tathA coktam - "kArye'pISanmatimAnnirIkSate yoSidaGgamasthirayA
asnigdhayA dRzA'vajJa yA hyakupito'pi kupita iv||1|| tathA nApica sAhasam-
akAryakaraNaMtatprArthanayA samanujAnIyAt' pratipadyet,tathA
hyatisAhasametatsaGgrAmAvataraNa vadyannarakapAtAdivipAkavedino'pi
sAdhoryoSidAsaJjanamiti, tathA naiva strIbhiH sArdhaM grAmAdau 'viharet'
gacchet, apizabdAt na tAniH sArdhaM viviktAsano bhavet, tato mahApApasthAnametat
yatInAM yat strIbhiH sahasAGgatyamiti, tathA coktam - "mAtrA svastrA duhitrA vA,
na viviktAsano bhavet  /  balavAnindriyagrAmaH, paNDito'pyatra muhyati  // 1 //
" evamanena strIsaGgavarjanenAtmA samastApAyasthAnebhyo rakSito bhavati, yataH-
sarvAvA yAnAM strIsambandhaH kAraNam ataH svahitArthI tatsaGgaM dUrataH
pariharediti  // 5 //  kathaM caitAH pAzA iva pAzikA ityAha - TIkArtha - striyA~
sAdhu ko phA~sane ke lie zayyA-Asana Adi svIkAra karane kA usase anurodha karatI
haiM  /  usakA yaha anurodha sAdhu ko pha~sAne kA jAla hai  /  aisI striyoM para
sAdhu apanI najara na ddaaleN| unakI najara se apanI najara na milAye  /  yadi
AvazyakatAvaza unakI ora dekhanA par3e to avajJApUrNa dRSTi se dekhe  /  kahA
hai vivekazIla puruSa strI se kAma par3ane para usake deha para sneha rahita-
taTastha dRSTi se dekhe bhI, krodha na hone para bhI vaha aisA lage mAno
krodhita ho  /  strI ke anurodha para sAdhu usake sAtha kutsita kRtya karanA
aMgIkAra na kare  /  jIvana saMgrAma meM utare, narka rUpI vipAka-phala ke jJAtA
sAdhu kA strI se saMsarga karanA bar3A dussAhasa.pUrNa-anucita kArya hai  /
sAdhu gA~va Adi meM striyoM ke sAtha vihAra na kare  /  yahA~ 'api' zabda kA jo
prayoga AyA hai vaha striyoM ke sAtha ekAnta meM na baiThane kA sUcaka hai  /
striyoM kI saMgati karanA unake samparka meM rahanA sAdhu ke lie atyanta pApa
janaka hai  /  kahA gayA hai apanI mAtA, bahina yA apanI beTI ke sAtha bhI
ekAnta sthAna meM nahIM baiThanA cAhie kyoMki yaha indriya grAma-indriyoM kA
samUha yA indriyAM bar3I zaktizAlI hai  /  paNDita-jJAnI bhI usake vaza meM
hokara vimohita ho jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra striyoM ke saMgasaMsarga kA varjana
karane se AtmA sabhI apApa sthAnoM se-vinAza ke hetu se baca jAtI hai kyoMki
saba prakAra upAyoM kA kAraNa striyoM ke sAtha saMbaMdha jor3anA hI hai  /
isalie svahitArthI-AtmA kA kalyANa cAhane vAlA puruSa dUra se hI usake saMga kA
tyAga kare  /  AmaMtiya ussaviyA bhikkhaM AyasA nimaMtaMti  /  etANi ceva se
jANe, sadANi virUvarUvANi  // 6 //  -266

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Translation preserving Jain terms:  The women engage in the study of the
Parijñādhyayana (knowledge of the world) - inviting and establishing the
bhikkhu, they invite him with their own selves. And he should know these as
well, the words of diverse forms.  Translation - The lustful women give hints to
the sadhu that "we will come to you at a certain place." They create trust in
the sadhu through various kinds of talks. Then they invite the sadhu for
enjoyment. The discerning sadhu should understand such words of the women as
similar to diverse kinds of bondages.  Commentary - The women, by nature, are
inclined towards the improper and invite the sadhu, giving a hint like "I will
come to you at a certain time." Having thus established (the meeting), they
create trust in the sadhu through various pleasant talks, and then invite him
with their own selves for the purpose of enjoyment, making the sadhu agree to
accept them. Or, the women themselves may have said, in order to dispel the fear
of the sadhu, as if asking the husband, "I have come here," and having thus
established (the meeting), they attend to him with actions like feeding, washing
his feet, making him lie down on the bed, and then come to his presence, so that
he, giving up all suspicion about your husband's people, may behave without
fear. In this way, creating trust through various words, they invite the sadhu
for their own enjoyment, tempting him by saying, "This body of mine is fit for
whatever small or great task you may assign to it." But the sadhu, who is aware
of the ultimate truth, should know these "words of diverse forms" as the objects
created by the association with women, which are obstacles on the path of
virtue, leading to a bad state, and through the knowledge of renunciation, he
should avoid them by understanding their evil consequences.  And further,  With
many mental bonds, embracing the gentle and disciplined, Then they speak sweet
words, commanding with diverse talks.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM chAyA - Amantrya saMsthApya bhikSumAtmanA nimantrayanti
/  _etA~zcaiva sa jAnIyAt, zabdAn virUparUpAn  //  anuvAda - kAmuka striyA~
sAdhu ko saMketa karatI haiM ki hama amuka sthAna para Apake pAsa aayeNgii| ve
taraha-taraha kI bAtoM se apane prati sAdhu meM vizvAsa paidA karatI haiM  /
phira ve sAdhu ko bhoga hetu Amantrita karatI haiM  /  vivekazIla sAdhu striyoM
ke vaise zabdoM ko vividha prakAra ke bandhanoM ke tulya samajhe  /  TIkA -
'AmaMtiya' ityAdi, striyo hi svabhAvenaivAkartavya pravaNAH sAdhumAmantrya
yathA'hamamukasyAM velAyAM bhavadantimAgamiSyAmItyevaM saGketaM grAhayitvA tathA
'ussaviya' tti saMsthApyoccAvacairvizrambhajanakairAlApairvizrambhe pAtayitvA
punarakAryakaraNAyAtmanA nimantrayanti, AtmAnopabhogena sAdhumabhyupagamaM
kArayanti  /  yadivA-sAdhorbhayApaharaNArthaM tA eva yoSitaH procuH, tadyathA-
bhartAramAmantryApRcchayAhamihA''yAtA, tathA saMsthApya-
bhojanapAdadhAvanazayanadikayA kriyayopacarya tatastavAntikamAgatetyato bhavatA
sarvA madbhartujanitAmAzaGkA parityajya nirbhayena
bhAvyamityevamAdikavaicobhivizrambhamutpAdya bhikSumAtmanA nimantrayante,
yuSmadIyamidaM zarIrakaM yAdRkSasya kSodiyasogarIyaso vA kAryasya kSama tatraiva
niyojyatAmityevamupapralobhayanti, sa ca bhikSuravagataparamArthaH etAneva
'viruparUpAn' nAnAprakArAn 'zabdAdIn' viSayAn tatsvarUpanirUpaNato jJaparijJayA
jAnIyAt yathaite strIsaMsargApAditAH zabdodayo viSayA durgatigamanaikahetavaH
sanmArgArgalArUpA ityevamavabudhyeta, tathA pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA ca
tadvipAkAvagamena pariharediti  // 6 //  anyacca TIkArtha - striyA~ pAza yA
phande kI jyoM kaise phaMsA letI hai, sUtrakAra yaha pratipAdita karate haiM-
striyoM kA aisA svabhAva hai ki ye akartavya-na karane yogya kArya meM pravaNa-
tatpara rahatI haiM  /  ve sAdhu ko Amantrita karatI haiM amuka samaya maiM
Apake pAsa AU~gI, isa prakAra saMketa dekara vaha U~ce nIce vacanoM dvArA sAdhu
ko apane vizvAsa meM letI haiM phira apane sAtha akArya karane hetu use
Amantrita karatI haiM, use apane sAtha upabhoga karane hetu taiyAra karatI haiM
/  athavA sAdhu ke bhaya kA apaharaNa karane hetu-usakA bhaya dUra karane ke lie
ve kahatI haiM ki maiM apane pati ko pUchakara yahAM AyI huuN| apane pati ko
khAnA khilAkara, unake paira dhokara, unheM bichaune para sulAkara Apake pAsa
AyI hU~ ata: Apa mere pati kI AzaMkA na kara niDara rahe  /  isa prakAra ke
vacanoM dvArA vaha sAdhu ke mana meM vizvAsa paidA kara apane sAtha sambhoga
karane hetu Amantrita karatI haiM  /  ve kahatI haiM merA yaha zarIra ApakA hI
hai  /  jisa kisI choTe-bar3e kAma ke yaha lAyaka ho, use kAma meM le| yaha
kahakara striyA~ sAdhu ko lubhAtI haiM  /  kintu paramArthavettA sAdhu yaha
prajJA-jJAna dvArA strI sambandhI ina bhinna prakAra ke zabdoM ko samajhe ki ye
durgati meM jAne ke hetu haiM uttama mArga meM Age bar3hate hue puruSa ke lie
Agala kI jyoM rukAvaTa hai  /  inakA phala burA hotA hai  /  yaha samajhakara
vaha pratyAkhyAna parijJA-tyAgonmukha viveka dvArA inheM chor3a de|
maNabaMdheNehiM NegehiM, kaluNa viNIyamuvagasittANaM  /  adu maMjulAi bhAsaMti,
ANavayaMti bhinnakahAhiM  // 7 //  chAyA - manobandhanairanekaiH
karuNavinItamupazliSya  /  atha majulAni bhASante, AjJApayanti bhinnakathAbhiH
//  (267)

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Sūtrakṛtāṅga Sūtra states that
women are diligent in attracting the mind of the Sādhu (ascetic). They approach
the Sādhu with compassionate words, humble demeanor, speak in a charming and
sweet manner. Through amorous conversations and dialogues, they try to captivate
the Sādhu.  Commentary - The things that bind the mind are called
"manobandhana". These include speaking in a pleasant manner, affectionate
glances, and revealing the limbs of the body, etc. As it is said, "O Lord, dear
one, beloved, master, deity! You are more dear to me than my own life. I live
because you live, you are the lord of my body."  With such numerous ploys, they
approach the "upagasittāṇaṃ" (the one who has renounced) with compassionate
speech and humility. Then, they speak "manjulāni" (charming, graceful,
confidence-inspiring, and arousing desire) words. As it is said, "With her
limited, sweet speech, playful glances and coy smiles, the doe-eyed one has
covered my heart."  Further, through secret talks about various topics and words
related to sexual union, they lead the Sādhu towards improper actions, either
making him submit to their will or commanding him like a servant.  Just as a
hunter, without fear, ensnares a lion with the lure of flesh, similarly, women
bind the Sādhu, who is single-minded in his spiritual path.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - striyA~ sAdhu ke citta ko AkRSTa karane ke
lie udyamazIla hotI haiM, ve karuNotpAdaka vacana bolakara-vinIta bhAvapUrvaka
sAdhu ke nikaTa AtI haiM, maMjula, madhura, bhASaNa karatI haiM, mIThI bolI
bolatI haiM  /  kAmavAsanA viSayaka AlApa saMlApa dvArA sAdhu ko apanI ora
AkRSTa karatI haiM  /  _TIkA - mano badhyate yaistAni manobandhanAni-
maJjulAlApasnigdhAvalokanAGmapratyaGgaprakaTanAdIni, tathA coktam - _"NAha piya
kaMta sAmiya daiya jiyAo tumaM yaha piotti  /  jIe jIyAmi ahaM pahvasi taM me
sriirss||1||" chAyA - nAtha kAnta priya svAmindayita ! jIvitAdapi tvaM mama
priyaiti  /  jIvati jIvAmi ahaM prabhurasi tvaM me zarIrasya  // 1 //
ityAdibhiranekaiH prapaJcaiH karuNAlApavinayapUrvakaM 'uvagasittANaM 'ti
upasaMzliSyasamIpamAgatya 'atha' tadanaMtaraM 'maJjulAni' pezalAni
vizrambhajanakAni kAmotkocakAni vA bhASante, taduktam - _
"mitamahuraribhiyajaMpullaehi IsIkaDakkhahasiehiM  /  savigArehi varAgaM hiyayaM
pihiyaM mayacchIe  // 1 // " chAyA - mitamadhuraribhitajalpArISatkaTAkSahasitaiH
/  savikArairvarAkaM hRdayaM pihitaM mRgAkSyAH  // 1 //  tathA 'bhinnakathAbhI'
rahasyAlApaimaithunasambanbairvacobhiH sAdhozcittamAdAya tamakAryakaraNaM prati
'AjJApayanti' pravartayanti, svavazaM vA jJAtvA karmakaravadAjJAM kArayantIti
// 7 //  apica - TIkArtha - jinase mana baMdha jAtA hai, AkRSTa ho jAtA hai
unako manobandhana kahA jAtA hai  /  maMjula AlApa-mIThe vacana bolanA, snigdha
avalokana-pyAra bharI najara se dekhanA aura apanI deha ke aMgoM upAMgoM ko
dikhalAnA ityAdi mana ko bA~dhane vAle haiM  /  kahA gayA hai 'nAtha ! priya !
kAnta ! svAmina! daiva ! tuma mujhe mere jIvana se bhI adhika priya ho  /  maiM
tumhAre jIne se jIvita huuN| Apa merI deha ke prabhu-svAmI haiM, ityAdi aneka
pravaMcanA pUrNa vacana tathA karuNAjanaka AlApa aura vinaya ke sAtha ve sAdhu
ke pAsa Akara vizvAsotpAdaka, kAmotpAdaka, madhura bhASaNa karatI hai  /  jaisA
kahA gayA hai mRgAkSI-mRga ke se netroM vAlI strI kA hRdaya parimita-sImita
madhura bhASaNa mIThI bolI se sikta kaTAkSa hAva bhAva tathA manda muskAna yukta
vikAroM se DhakA hotA hai  /  striyA~ rahasyapUrNa AlApa bhoga vAsanA pUrNa
vArtAlApa se sAdhu ke mana ko aparita kara usako apane sAtha duSkarma karane meM
pravRta karatI haiM athavA sAdhu ko apane vaza meM huA jAnakara naukara kI
taraha hukma calAtI haiN| sIhaM jahA va kuNimeNe, nibbhayamegacaraMti pAseNaM  /
evitthiyAu baMdhaMti, saMkuDaM egatiyamaNagAraM  // 8 //  chAyA - siMhaM yathA
mAMsena nirbhayamekacaraM pAzena  /  evaM striyo bandhanti
saMvRtamekatayamanagAram  //  anuvAda - zikArI nirbhIka hokara vicaraNa karane
vAle zera ko AmiSa-mAMsa kA pralobhana dekara pAza meM-jAla meM baddha kara lete
haiM usI prakAra striyA~ mana-vacana zarIra dvArA gupta rahane vAle-pApakRtya se
bacane vAle sAdhu ko apane kAbU meM kara letI haiM  /  (268

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Translation preserving Jain terms:  The commentary on the study of women, 'Sīha
jaha' etc., is for the purpose of illustrating by example, just as those who
know the method of binding, entice the fearless lion with flesh and other bait,
and then bind it with a noose or other restraint, and torment it in various
ways, similarly, women, through various means such as sweet speech, 'entice' a
certain 'anagāra' (ascetic) who is even 'samvuta' (restrained) in mind, speech
and body. And the mention of 'samvuta' is to indicate the power of women, for
even a 'samvuta' ascetic is bound by them, what to speak of one who is
'asamvuta' (unrestrained).  Further, just as a chariot-maker gradually bends the
felly of the wheel, similarly, they (women) bend and incline the ascetic towards
their desired purpose. The deer-like ascetic, though struggling, does not get
released from the snare, just as the ascetic caught in the trap of women cannot
free himself despite efforts.  Thereafter, he (the ascetic) 'anutuappai', i.e.,
repents, and wants to 'bhocca pāyasam va visamissam', i.e., consume a mixture of
milk-pudding. Thus, having taken up 'vivega' (detachment), 'samvāso navi kappae
davie', i.e., living together (with women) is not appropriate for the second
time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM TIkA - 'sIha jahe 'tyAdi, yatheti dRSTantopadarzanArthe
yathA bandhanavidhijJAH siMhaM pizitAdinA''miSeNopa pralobhya 'nirbhaya'
gatabhIkaM nirbhayatvAdeva ekacaraM 'pAzena' galayantrAdinA vandhanti baddhvA ca
bahuprakAraM kadarthayanti, evaM striyonAnAvidhairUpAyaiH pezalabhASaNAdibhiH
'egatiyanti' kaJcana tathAvidham 'anagAraM' sAdhu 'saMvRtamapi'
manovAkkAyaguptamapi 'badhnanti' svavazaM kurvantIti, saMvRtagrahaJca strINAM
sAmopadarzanArthaM, tathAhi-saMvRto'pi tAbhirbadhyate, kiM punarapiro'saMvRta
iti  // 8 //  kiJca - TIkArtha - isa gAthA meM jahAM yathA zabda dRSTAMta ko
sUcita karane ke lie AyA hai, jaise zera ko pakar3ane kA upAya jAnane vAle
puruSa nirbhaya hokara akele ghUmane vAle siMha ko AmiSa-mAMsa Adi kA pralobhana
dekara gale ke phande Adi dvArA baddha kara lete haiM  /  bAMdhakara use bahuta
taraha se kadarthita pIr3ita karate haiM  /  isI prakAra striyA~ taraha-taraha
ke upAyoM evaM mIThI bolI, Adi se sAdhu ko, jo mana vacana evaM zarIra dvArA
apane Apako gupta rakhatA hai-pApoM se bacAe rakhatA hai, apane kAbU meM kara
letI haiM  /  yahA~ saMvuDa-saMvRta pada striyoM kA sAmarthya, sazaktatA batAne
hetu prayukta huA hai  /  arthAt saMvRta-saMvarayukta sAdhu bhI unake dvArA
AkRSTa ho jAtA hai kisI dUsare kI to bAta hI kyA jo asaMvRta-saMvara rahita ho
/  aha tattha puNo NamayaMtI, rahakAro va Nemi ANupuvvIe  /  baddhe mie va
pAseNaM, phaMdaMte vi Na muccae tAhe  // 1 //  chAyA - atha tatra
punarnamayanti, rathakAra iva nemimAnupUrvyA  /  baddho mRga iva pAzena
spandamAno'pi na mucyate tasmAt  //  anuvAda - rathakAra jaise ratha kI nemi ko
kramazaH namra banAtA hai, navAtA hai, jhukAtA hai, usI prakAra striyA~ sAdhu ko
apane vazagata banAkara apanI ora nata karatI haiM, jhukAtI jAtI haiM, jaise
jAla meM baMdhA huA hiraNa duHkha se chaTapaTAtA hai para vaha jAla se chUTa
nahIM sakatA, usI taraha strI ke jAla meM phaMsA huA sAdhu prayatna karane para
bhI usase chuTakArA nahIM pA sakatA  /   /  TIkA - 'atha' iti
svavazIkaraNAnantaraM punastatra-svAbhiprete vastuni 'namayanti' prahUM
kurvanti, yathA'rathakAro' vardhakiH 'nemikASThaM'
cakrabAhyabhramirUpamAnupUrvyA namayati, evaM tA api sAdhu svakAryAnukUlye
pravartayanti, sa ca sAdhurmaMgavat, pAzena baddho mokSArthaM spandamAno'pi
tataH pAzAnnamucyata iti  // 9 //  kiJca - TIkArtha - striyAM sAdhu ko apane
adhIna banAne ke bAda apane abhipreta-apane icchita kArya kI dizA meM jhukA letI
hai  /  rathakAra jaise pahiye ke bAhara ke golAkAra nemi ko kramazaH jhukAtA
hai, navAtA hai, usI prakAra striyA~ bhI sAdhu ko kramazaH apane anukUla banAtI
haiM, apane anukUla priya kAryoM meM pravRtta karatI haiN| strI ke jAla meM
baMdhA huA vaha sAdhu phaMde meM phaMse hue hiraNa kI taraha usase mukta hone kA
prayatna karane para bhI mukta nahIM ho pAtA  /  aha se'NutappaI pacchA, bhoccA
pAyasaM va visamissaM  /  evaM vivegamAdAya, saMvAso navi kappae davie  // 10 //
-(269

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Śrī Sūtrakrtaṅga Sūtra, Chāyā -**   Now, he repents after consuming poison
mixed with milk.  **Anuvāda -** Just as a man repents after consuming poison
mixed with milk, so too does a man repent after being captivated by a woman.
Understanding this, it is inconceivable for a sage who is on the path to
liberation to live in the same place as a woman.  **Tīkā -**  "Atha saḥ" etc.
This sage, bound by the snare of a woman, like a deer fallen into a trap,
suffers day and night for the sake of his family and repents later.  Indeed,
this is certainly possible for those who live in households, as follows:
**Chāyā -** Who is angry? Who is equanimous? How can I subdue him? How can I
give him wealth? Who is the generous one whom I have abandoned? Who is married?
Who is a young man? Thus, the being, with trembling and anxiety, quickly binds
himself with heavy sins.  **Tathā tat -** "For the sake of my family, I have
done terrible deeds. I am alone, suffering because of them. Those who enjoyed
the fruits of my actions have gone."  Thus, in many ways, those who have fallen
into the trap of a family, full of great delusion, repent. The author explains
this with an example, as follows: Just as someone, after consuming food mixed
with poison, repents later, being overwhelmed by the effects of the poison,
thinking, "Why did I, being a sinner, with my present taste for pleasure, taste
such poisonous food?" Similarly, he, being overwhelmed with anxiety about the
food, clothing, ornaments, and the death of his sons, grandsons, daughters,
mothers-in-law, sisters, brothers-in-law, nephews, etc., and having lost his own
bodily duties, and having lost his worldly practices, suffers day and night, his
mind being disturbed by the affairs of his family. Thus, according to the above-
mentioned principle, he obtains the result of his actions, "ādāya," or "viveka"
as some read it.  He takes that result, or that understanding, "ādāya," and
living together with women who are not virtuous, is certainly destructive of
virtuous conduct, even under the name of understanding.  **Tīkā-artha -** Just
as a deer suffers in a trap, snare, or noose, so too does a sage, bound by the
snare of a woman, suffer day and night for the sake of his family, for their
sustenance, and repents later. Such things certainly happen to those who live in
households. For example, who is angry? Who is equanimous? How can I subdue him?
How can I give him wealth? Who is the generous one whom I have abandoned? Who is
married? Who is a young man? Thus, the being, with trembling and anxiety,
quickly binds himself with heavy sins. Then, repenting, he says, "I have done
many terrible, wicked, and base deeds for the sake of my family, to support
them. Because of those evil deeds, I am alone, suffering. Those who enjoyed the
fruits of my actions have gone." Thus, in many ways, he repents, having fallen
into the trap of a family, full of great delusion. The author explains this with
an example: Just as someone, after consuming food mixed with poison, repents
later, being overwhelmed by the effects of the poison, thinking, "Why did I,
being a sinner, with my present taste for pleasure, taste such poisonous food?"
Similarly, he, being overwhelmed with anxiety about the food, clothing,
ornaments, and the death of his sons, grandsons, daughters, mothers-in-law,
sisters, brothers-in-law, nephews, etc., and having lost his own bodily duties,
and having lost his worldly practices, suffers day and night, his mind being
disturbed by the affairs of his family. Thus, according to the above-mentioned
principle, he obtains the result of his actions, "ādāya," or "viveka" as some
read it.  He takes that result, or that understanding, "ādāya," and living
together with women who are not virtuous, is certainly destructive of virtuous
conduct, even under the name of understanding.  **Concluding the discussion of
the faults of association with women, he says:**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA - atha so'nutapyate pazcAt bhuktvA pAyasamiva
viSamizram  /  evaM vivekamAdAya saMvAso nA'pi kalpate dravye  //  anuvAda -
jaise jahara se milI huI khIra khAkara manuSya bAda meM anutapta hotA hai,
pachatAtA hai, isI prakAra manuSya strI ke vazagata hokara bAta meM anutApa
karatA hai, pachatAvA karatA hai  /  isa bAta ko samajhate hue mokSa patha gAmI
sAdhu ke lie nArI ke sAtha eka sthAna meM rahanA akalpya hai  /  TIkA - 'aha se'
ityAdi, athAsau sAdhuH strIpAzAvabaddho mRgavat kuTake patitaH san kuTumbakRte
aharnizaM klizyamAnaH pazcAdanutapyate, tathAhi-gRhAntargatAnAmetadavazyaM
sambhAvyate, tadyathA - koddhayao ko samacittu kAho vaNAhiM kAho dijjau vitta ko
ugghADau parihiyau  /  pariNIyau ko va kumArau paDiyato jIva khaDapphaDehi para
baMdhaI pAvaha bhArao  // 1 //  chAyA - krodhikaH kaH samacittaH kathaM upanaya
kathaM dadAtu vittaM kaH udghATakaH parihataH  /  pariNItaH ko vA kumArakaH
patito jIva khaNDasphaiTeH prabadhnAtipApabhAraM  //  tathA tat - "mayA
parijanasyArthe, kRtaM karma sudArUNam  /  ekAkI tena do'haM, gatAste phala
bhoginaH  // 1 // " ityevaM bahu prakAraM mahAmohAtmake kuTumbakUTake patitA
anutapyante, amumevArthaM dRSTAntena spaSTayatiyathA kazcidviSamizraM bhojanaM
bhuktvA pazcAttatra kRtAvegAkulito'nutapyate, tadyathA-kimetanmayA pApena
sAmpratekSiNA sukharasikatayA vipAkakaTukamevambhUtaM bhojanAmAsvAditamiti,
evamasAvapi putrapautraduhitRjAmAtRsvasRbhrAtRvyabhAgineyAdInAM bhojana pariyanA
laGkArajAtamRtakarmatadvayAvicikitsAcintAkulo'pagatasvazarIrakartavyaHpranaSTaih
i kAmuSmikAnuSThAno'harnizaM tadvayApAravyAkulitamatiH paritapyate, tadevam
anantaroktayA nItyA vipAkaM svAnuSThAnasya " AdAya" prApya, vivekamiti vA
kvacitpAThaH, tadvipAkaM vivekaM vA 'AdAya'-gRhItvA
strIbhizcAritraparipanthinIbhiH sArdhaM saMvAso'vazyaM vivekanAmapi
sadanuSThAnavighAtakArIti  // 10 //  strIsambandhadoSAnupadopasaMharannAha -
TIkArtha - kUTa pAza meM-jAla meM yA phaMde meM baddha mRga jaise kaSTa pAtA
hai, usI taraha nArI ke jAla meM baMdhA huA sAdhu apane kauTumbika janoM ke lie-
unake pAlana poSaNa ke nimitta aharniza-rAta dina kaSTa bhogatA huA anutapta
hotA hai-pachatAtA hai  /  gRhastha meM rahane vAle puruSoM ke sAmane aisI bAteM
avazya AtI hai| jaise kauna krodhI svabhAva kA hai. kisake citta meM samatA hai,
kise kaise apane vaza meM karU~, amuka vyakti mujhe kisa prakAra dhana de, kisa
dAnI ko maiMne chor3a diyA hai, kauna pariNIta-vivAhita hai, kauna kumAra-kuMArA
hai, isa prakAra prANI khaDabaDAhaTa-ghabarAhaTa ke sAtha jaldavAdI AturatA
dikhAtA huA bhArI pApoM kA baMdha karatA hai  /  phira pachatAtA huA kahatA hai
ki maiMne parijana-kuTumba ke lie usakA pAlana poSaNa karane hetu aneka dArUNa,
kutsita, nIca karma kie  /  una asat karmoM ke kAraNa maiM ekAkI jala rahA hU~,
duHkha bhoga rahA huuN| merI kamAI kA phala bhogane vAle na jAne kahA~ cale gae
/  isa prakAra aneka prakAra se vaha mahAmoha se paripUrNa kuTumba ke phaMde meM
par3A huA pachatAtA hai  /  sUtrakAra dRSTAnta dvArA isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate
haiM - jaise koI AdamI jahara se milA huA bhojana khAkara, phira jahara ke Avega
se-jahara kA zarIra meM asara phailane para vyAkula hokara pachatAtA hai ki
vartamAna meM sukha rasika-jihvA lolupa banakara mujha pApI ne aisA (270

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Woman Studies**  Just as one should not eat food that will cause suffering in
the end, similarly, a man bound by the ties of a woman also suffers due to the
needs of his son, grandson, daughter, son-in-law, sister, nephew, niece, etc. He
is burdened with the worries of food, marriage, ornaments, caste ceremonies,
birth celebrations, death rituals, and the treatment of family members who are
ill. He forgets what he should do for his own body and is unable to care for it.
He is devoid of both worldly and otherworldly good deeds and is always
preoccupied and anxious about the upbringing of his family, leading to regret.
Considering the above-mentioned consequences, according to the term "viveka" in
the text, living in the same place as women who hinder virtue is destructive to
the virtuous conduct of wise men, as it undermines their noble and virtuous
actions.  The guide, after pointing out the potential flaws associated with
women, concludes by saying:  **Verse 11:**  * **Original:** तम्हा उ वज्जए इत्थी,
विसलित्तं व कंटगं नच्चा । ओए कुलाणि वसवत्ती, आघाते ण सेवि णिग्गंथे ॥११॥ *
**Transliteration:** Tamhā u vajjae itthī, visalittṁ va kaṇṭaṁ nacca. Oe kulāṇi
vasavattī, āghāte ṇ sevi nigganthē. ||11|| * **Translation:** Therefore, one
should avoid women, knowing them to be like thorns smeared with poison. He who
is subservient to women and goes alone to the homes of householders, is not
truly a liberated one (niggantha).  **Commentary:**  Since contact with women
leads to bitter consequences, one should avoid them. This includes even talking
to them. The verse explains why: "Knowing" them to be like thorns smeared with
poison, one should avoid women. Just as a thorn smeared with poison can cause
harm if it pierces the body, so too can contact with women cause harm. This is
further emphasized by the saying:  * **Original:** "विषस्य विषयाणां च
दूरमत्यन्तमन्तरम् । उपभुक्तं विषं हन्ति, विषयाः स्मरणादपि ॥ १ ॥ " *
**Transliteration:** "Visasya viṣayāṇāṁ ca dūramatyantāntaram. Upabhuktaṁ viṣaṁ
hanti, viṣayāḥ smaraṇādapi. || 1 ||" * **Translation:** "There is a great
distance between poison and objects of desire. Poison kills when consumed, but
objects of desire kill even by mere remembrance."  Similarly, another saying
states:  * **Original:** "वरंविषं जग्धं न विषयसुखं एकशो विषेण म्रियते ।
विषयामिषघातिताः पुनर्नरा नरकेषुपतन्ति ॥ १ ॥” * **Transliteration:** "Varaṁviṣaṁ
jagdhaṁ na viṣayasukhaṁ ekaśo viṣeṇa mriyate. Viṣayāmiṣaghātitāḥ punar narā
narakeṣupatantaḥ. || 1 ||" * **Translation:** "It is better to consume poison
than to indulge in the pleasures of the senses. One who dies by poison dies
alone, but those who are killed by the pleasures of the senses fall into hell."
The verse also states that one who is subservient to women and goes alone to the
homes of householders, is not truly a liberated one (niggantha). This is because
he is under their control and is likely to be influenced by them. He may even be
tempted to engage in forbidden activities, which would lead to harm.  If a woman
is unable to come due to some reason, or if she is old, then one should go alone
to her house, but only if there are no other male companions. One should preach
the Dharma in a way that generates detachment, focusing on the evils of women
and the disgust they inspire. This will help to avoid any potential harm.  The
meaning of the verse is clear from the context and the explanations provided.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM bhojana kyoM kiyA jo pariNAma meM kaSTa dene vAlA hai,
usI prakAra nArI ke baMdhana meM baMdhA huA puruSa bhI beTA, potA, beTI, jAmAtA,
bahina, bhatIjA, bhAMjA Adi ke hetu khAna pAna zAdI vivAha gahane jAta karma-
janmotsava, mRtakarma-maraNopalakSya meM kiye jAne vAle jAtIyakRtya tathA
pArivArika janoM kI bImArI meM ilAja Adi kI cintA se vyathita hokara vaha apane
deha ke lie jo karaNIya hai, vaha bhI bhUla jAtA hai apane zarIra kI bhI cintA
nahIM kara pAtA  /  vaha aihika aura pAralaukika donoM prakAra ke satkArya se
rahita hokara apane parivAra ke pAlana poSaNa ke kArya meM hI sadaiva Akula aura
cintita rahatA huA pazcAtApa karatA hai  /  Upara varNita phala vipAka para
vicAra kara, pAThAntara meM vivegaM viveka pada ke anusAra viveka ko gRhIta kara
cAritra meM vighna karane vAlI nAriyoM ke sAtha eka sthAna meM AvAsa karanA
vivekazIla puruSoM ke saduSThAna - uttama saccAritra mUlaka upakarmo kA
vighAtaka - vinAzaka hotA hai  /  strI ke sambandha meM sambhAvita doSoM kA
digdarzana karAkara sUtradhAra aba unakA upasaMhAra karate hue kahate haiM  /
tamhA u vajjae itthI, visalittaM va kaMTagaM naccA  /  oe kulANi vasavattI,
AghAte Na sevi NiggaMthe  // 11 //  chAyA - tasmAttu varjayet strIH,
viSaliptamiva kaNTakaM jJAtvA  /  ekaH kulAni vazavartI AkhyAti na so'pi
nigranthaH  //  * * * anuvAda - sAdhu striyoM ko jahara se sane hue kAMTe ke
samAna jAnakara dUra se hI unakA parityAga kara de| jo striyoM kA vazavartI
hokara unake caMgula meM phaMsakara gRhasthoM ke ghara akelA jAkara dharmopadeza
karatA hai, vaha vAstava meM nirgrastha-sAdhu nahIM hai  /  - TIkA yasmAt
vipAkakaTuH strIbhiH saha samparkastasmAtkAraNAt striyo varjayet tu
zabdAttadAlApamapi na kuryAt, kiMvadityAha-viSopaliptaM kaNTakamiva 'jJAtvA'
avagamya striyaM vajayediti apica - viSadigdhakaNTakaH zarIrAvayave bhagnaH
sannanarthamA pAdayet striyaktu smaraNAdapi taduktam - " viSasya viSayANAM ca
dUramatyantamantaram  /  upabhuktaM viSaM hanti, viSayAH smaraNAdapi  //  1  //
" tathA 'vari visa khaiyaM na visayasuhu ikkasi visiNa maraMti  /  visayAmisa
puNa ghAriyA nara nara ehi paDaMti  //  1  // " chAyA - varaMviSaM jagdhaM na
viSayasukhaM ekazo viSeNa mriyate  /  viSayAmiSaghAtitAH punarnarA
narakeSupatanti  // 1 //  tathA 'ojaH' eka: asahAya: san 'kulAni ' gRhasthAnAM
gRhANi gatvA strINAM vazavartI tannirdiSTavelAgamanena tadAnukUlyaM bhajamAno
dharmamAkhyAti yo'sAvapi 'na nirgrantho' na samyak pravrajito,
niSiddhAcaraNasevanAdavazyaM tatrApAyasambhavAditi, yadA punaH
kAcitkutazcinnimittAdAgantumasamarthA vRddhA vA bhavettadA'parasahAyasAdhvabhAve
ekAkyapi gatvA aparastrIvRndamadhyagatAyAH puruSasamanvitAyAM vA
strInindAviSayajugupsApradhAnaM vairAgyajananaM vidhinA dharmaM kathayedapIti
||11|| anvayatirekAbhyAmukto'rthaH sugamo bhavatItyabhiprAyavAnAha 271 -

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra **Commentary:** Contact with women, association,
results in bitter and harsh fruits in the outcome. Therefore, one should abandon
association. Here, the word 'tu' used in this verse indicates that one should
not engage in conversation or dialogue with women. How? It is explained by
saying that women should be considered like thorns smeared with poison and
abandoned. A thorn smeared with poison, if it breaks into any part of the body,
causes harm and suffering, but women cause harm simply by being remembered.
Therefore, it is said that there is so much difference between poison and the
object of desire, poison destroys life when eaten, but the object of desire
takes life just by remembering it. It is better to eat poison, but it is not
good to consume the object of desire, because by eating poison, a being suffers
the pain of death only once, but by consuming the object of desire, a human
being falls into hell again and again and suffers torment. A man who is
subservient to a woman and goes to her house alone to please her and narrates
religious stories according to her wishes, is not a true renunciant or a true
saint, because by consuming the actions that have been forbidden, his fall is
possible. If a woman is unable to come to the saint's place for some reason, or
if she is old, then in the absence of other supporting saints, the saint can go
to her alone and preach the religion that generates detachment, which mainly
includes criticism of women and worldly pleasures, there is no objection in
doing so.  **Anvaya:** The meaning explained by this method, where the presence
of one thing leads to the presence of another, and the absence of one thing
leads to the absence of another (Yat Satve Yat Satvam - Anvaya, Yat Asatve, Yat
Asatvam - Vyatireka), becomes easy to understand. With this intention, the
Sutrakar says:  **Eyam Uncham Anugiddha, Annayarah Hunti Kusilanaam.
Suttavassyevi Se Bhikkhu, No Vihare Sah Namitthisu. || 12 ||**  **Shadow:**
**Ye Etad Ancchamanuguddha Anyataraste Bhavanti Kusilanaam. Supatvasvapi Sa
Bhikkhu Na Viharet Sardham Striibhih. ||**  **Translation:** Those men who are
engaged in reprehensible actions like association with women are Kusilas -
devoid of good conduct. Therefore, even if a saint is an excellent ascetic, he
should not engage in association or interaction with women.  **Commentary:** 'Je
Eyam Uncham' etc., 'Ye' those who are of dull intellect, who have performed the
duties of the past, who are present-day observers, they 'Unchanti' despise, the
object of disgust is to be seen here as the association with women, or the
narration of religious stories to a single woman, those who are 'Giddha'
attached to that, who are unconscious, they are 'Kusilanaam' those who are close
to the Kusilas, who are attached to the Kusilas, or they are 'Anyatara' those
who are like the Kusilas, who are spreaders of gossip, who are like the Kusilas,
those who are in the middle of them are also Kusilas, that is the meaning.
Therefore, 'Sutpakvyaapi' even if the saint is of excellent penance, who has
burnt his body with penance, 'Saadhu' the saint, desiring his own welfare,
should not 'Viharet' associate with 'Striibhih' those who are obstacles to
meditation, even for a moment, he should not stay there. The seventh case in the
third meaning, 'Namiti' in the figure of speech, the meaning is that the saint
should avoid women like a burning fire. || 12 ||  **Question:** Which women
should not be associated with?  **Answer:**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - striyoM kA saMparka, saMsarga pariNAma meM
kaTu-kaThora phalaprada hotA hai  /  isalie parivarjana parityAga karanA cAhie
/  yahA~ isa gAthA meM prayukta 'tu' zabda se yaha saMketa kiyA gayA hai ki
striyoM se AlApa, saMlApa - bAtacIta nahIM karanI caahie| kisakI taraha ? ise
spaSTa karate hue batalAte haiM ki striyoM ko jahara se sane hue kAMTe ke samAna
samajhakara unakA parityAga karanA cAhie  /  jahara se sanA huA kAMTA to zarIra
ke kisI aMga meM TUTa jAya to vaha anartha-pIr3A paidA karatA hai kintu striyA~
smaraNa mAtra se hI anartha paidA karatI haiM  /  isalie kahA hai ki viSa aura
viSaya kA Apasa meM itanA antara hai, viSa to khAne para prANoM kA nAza karatA
hai, kintu viSaya yAda karate hI prANoM ko hara letA hai  /  viSa yA jahara
khAnA acchA hai kintu viSaya kA sevana karanA acchA nahIM hai kyoMki viSa khAne
se to prANI eka hI bAra mauta kI pIr3A pAtA hai kintu viSayarUpIM AmiSa-mAMsa kA
sevana karane se manuSya naraka meM bAra-bAra giratA hai aura yAtanAeM bhogatA
hai  /  jo puruSa strI ke adhIna hokara use apane anukula banAne ke lie usake
kathanAnusAra ekAkI usake ghara jAkara dharma kA AkhyAna karatA hai, vaha
nirgrantha-samyak pravrajita yA saccA sAdhu nahIM hai kyoMki jina AcaraNoM kA
niSedha kiyA gayA hai, unakA sevana karane se usakA patita honA saMbhAvita hai|
yadi koI mahilA kisI kAraNavaza sAdhu ke sthAna meM Ane meM asamartha ho, athavA
koI vRddhA ho to dUsare sahayogI sAdhuoM ke na hone para sAdhu ekAkI bhI usake
pAsa jAkara anya striyoM se pariveSTita ghirI huI athavA puruSoM se yukta mahilA
ko vairAgya utpanna karane vAle dharma kA upadeza kare, jisameM strI nindA evaM
sAMsArika bhogoM kI nindA mukhya rUpa se ho aisA karane meM koI Apatti nahIM hai
/  '' anvaya- jisake hone para jisakA honA tathA vyatireka - jisake na hone para
jisakA na honA (yat satve yata satvaM - anvayaH, yat asatve, yat asatvaM -
vyatireka: ) isa paddhati dvArA parikathita artha sugamaAsAna hotA hai, isa
abhiprAya se sUtrakAra kahate haiM  /  eyaM uMchaM aNugiddhA, annayarA huMti
kusIlANaM  /  suttavassievi se bhikkhU, no vihare saha NamitthIsu  //  12  //
chAyA - ya etadaJcchamanuguddhA anyatarAste bhavanti kuzIlAnAm  /  supatasvyapi
sa bhikSuH na viharet sArdhaM strIbhiH  //   anuvAda - jo puruSa strI saMsarga
jaise nindya karma meM saMlagna hai, ve kuzIla hai- sadAcaraNahIna hai| ataH
sAMdhu yadi utkRSTa tapasvI ho to bhI use nAriyoM ke sAtha vihAra-mela milApa
nahIM karanA caahie| TIkA- 'je eyaM uMcha' mityAdi, 'ye' mandamatayaH
pazcAtkRtasadanuSThAnAH sAmpratekSiNa etad-anantaroktam uMchanti jugupsanI gaIM
tadatra strIsambandhAdikaM ekAkistrIdharmakathanAdikaM vA draSTavyaM tadanu-
tatprati ye 'gRddhA' adhyupapannA mUrcchitAH, te hi 'kuzIlAnAM'
pArzvasthAvasannakuzIlasaMsakta yathAcchandarUpA NAmanyatarA bhavanti,
yadivAkAthikapazyakasamprasArakamAmakarUpANAMtra kuzIlAnAmanyatarA bhavanti,
tanmadhyavartina ste'pi kuzIlA bhavantItyarthaH, yata
evamataH'sutapakvyapi'vikRSTataponiSTaptatadeho'Si bhikSu H 'sAdhuH
Atmahitamicchan 'strIbhi:'samAdhiparipanthinIbhiH saha 'na viharet'
kvacidrachennApi santiSThet, tRtIyArthe saptamI, Namiti vAkyAlaGkAre,
jvalitAGkArapuJjavadddvrataH striyo varjayeditibhAvaH ||12|| katamAmiH punaH
strIbhiH sArdhaM na vihartavyamityetadAzaGkayAha 272

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Study of Women  A man who is dull-witted, devoid of intelligence, and
abandons righteous conduct and righteous behavior, fixated on present pleasures,
engages in acts like associating with women, as described earlier, and goes to
the home of a solitary householder to preach Dharma to a woman, and engages in
other such reprehensible acts, is one of the following types of *kushila*:
*pārśvastha*, *avasanna*, *kuśīla*, *sasanka*, or *yatha chanda rūpa kuśīla*.
Alternatively, he is one of the following types of *kushila*: *kāyika*, *pasyaka
samprasāraka*, or *māmaka saṁjñaka*. Or, he is *kushila* due to being in their
midst, and by engaging in reprehensible acts like associating with women, he
becomes a *sadhu kuśīla*.   A *sadhu* who has subjected his body to intense
austerities, even if he desires his own welfare and spiritual liberation, should
not go or stay anywhere with women who are obstacles to or destroyers of
*samādhi*, *charitra*, and *dharma*. Here, the seventh case ending is used in
the sense of the third case ending. The word 'ṇ' indicates a figure of speech in
the sentence. The meaning of this verse is that a *sadhu* should abandon a woman
as he would abandon a pile of burning embers from afar.  To address the concern
of which women should not be associated with, the author of the sutras says:
**Om Om Om**  **Avi dhayarahi suṇhāhiṁ, dhātihiṁ aduv dāsihiṁ. Mahātihi vā
kumārihiṁ, santhavam se na kujjā aṇagāre.** || 13 ||  **Chāyā**  **-**  **-**
**Anuvāda**  Even if she is his daughter, daughter-in-law, *dhātrī* (wet nurse),
*dāsī* (maid), elder woman, or young girl, a *sadhu* should not engage in
*sanstava* (association) with her.  **Api duhitṛbhiḥ snūṣābhiḥ dhātrībhiḥ
rathavā dāsībhiḥ. Mahātibhirvā kumārihiḥ sanstavam sa na kuryyādanagāraḥ.** ||
13 ||  **Tīkā**  The word 'api' is connected to each word. The *sadhu* should
not associate with his daughter, nor should he sit alone with his daughter-in-
law. There are five types of *dhātrī*: those who breastfeed, those who suckle,
those who serve and care for the child, and those who are like mothers. A
*sadhu* should not stay alone with any of them. What to say of other women? Even
with those who are of low caste, who fetch water, a *sadhu* should not associate
with them. Whether she is an elder woman or a young girl, according to the word
'vā' used here, even if she is a *sādhvī* (female ascetic), a *sadhu* should not
engage in *sanstava* (association) with her. Even if a *sadhu* does not
experience a change in his mind while sitting alone with his daughter or
daughter-in-law, there is still a suspicion that others might think ill of him.
Therefore, to dispel this suspicion, association with women should be avoided.
|| 13 ||  To show how such suspicion arises, the author says...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM TIkArtha jo mandamati - buddhihIna puruSa sad anuSThAna -
sad AcaraNa kA parityAga kara vartamAna sukha kI ora TakaTakI lagAe, strI
saMsarga Adi kAryoM meM jo pahale varNita hue haiM, tathA ekAkI gRhastha ke
ghara jAkara kisI nArI ko dharmopadeza denA Adi nindA yogya kAryoM meM jur3e
rahate haiM, ve pArzvastha avasanna kuzIla sasaMkta tathA yathA chaMda rUpa
kuzIloM meM se koI eka hai| athavA kAyika, pazyaka samprasAraka tathA mAmaka
saMjJaMka kuzIloM meM se koI eka hai  /  athavA unake madhya rahane se ve kuzIla
haiM- strI samparka Adi nindA yogya karmoM kA AcaraNa karane se sAdhu kuzIla ho
jAtA hai  /  jisa sAdhu ne utkRSTa tapazcaraNa dvArA apanI deha ko paritapta
kiyA hai, . vaha bhI yadi apanA hita Atma kalyANa cAhatA hai to samAdhi cAritra
dharma kI paripaMthinI - usameM vighna karane vAlI yA usakA nAza karane vAlI
striyoM ke sAtha kahIM na jAe, kahIM na Thahare  /  yahA~ tRtIyA vibhakti ke
artha meM saptamI vibhakti kA prayoga huA hai, 'Na' zabda vAkya ke alaMkAra kA
sUcaka hai  /  sAdhu strI ko jalate hue aMgAroM ke puJja kI jyoM dUra se hI
tyAga de, isa gAthA kA yaha Azaya hai  /  kina striyoM ke sAtha viharaNa nahIM
karanA cAhie, isa AzaMkA ke nirAkaraNa hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiN| OM OM OM avi
dhayarAhi suNhAhiM, dhAtIhiM aduva dAsIhiM  /  mahatIhi vA kumArIhiM, saMthavaM
se na kujjA aNagAre  //  13  //  chAyA - - anuvAda cAhe apanI putrI ho, putra
vadhu ho, dhAtR - baccoM ko dUdha pilAne vAlI dhAya ho, dAsI ho, bar3I strI ho,
choTI kanyA ho to bhI usake sAtha sAdhu ko saMstava paricaya nahIM karanA cAhie
/  api duhitRbhiH snUSAbhiH dhAtrIbhi rathavA dAsIbhiH  /  mahatIbhirvA
kumArIbhiH saMstavaM sa na kuryyAdanagAraH  //  TIkA apizabdaH
pratyekamabhisambadhyate, 'dhUyarAhi' tti duhitRbhirapi sArdhaM navihareta tathA
'snuSAH ' sutabhAryAstAbhirapi sArdhaM na viviktAsanAdausthAtavyaM, tathA
'dhAtryaH' paJcaprakArAH stanyadAdayoM jananI kalpAstAmizca sAkaM na stheyaM,
athavA''satAM tAvadaparA yoSitA ya apyetA 'dAsyo' ghaTayoSitaH
sarvApasadAstAbhirapi saha samparkaM pariharet, tathA mahatIbhi:
kumArIbhirvAzabdAlladhvIbhizca sArdhaM 'saMstavaM' paricayaM pratyAsattirUpaM
so'nagAro na kuryAditi, yadyapi tasyAM duhitarisnuSAdau vA na
cittAnyathAtvamutpadyate tathApi ca tatra viviktAsana dAvaparasya zaGkotpadyate
atastacchaGkAnirAsArthaM strI samparkaH parihartavya iti  // 13 //  aparasya
zaGkA yathotpadyate tathA darzayitumAhaTIkArtha prastuta gAthA meM 'api' zabda
kA pratyeka pada ke sAtha saMbandha hai  /  sAdhu apanI saMsAra kSa putrI ke
sAtha bhI kahIM na jAye  /  putra kI patni snuSA kahI jAtI hai, unake sAtha bhI
ekAnta sthAna Adi meM na baiThe  /  dhAya pAMca prakAra kI hotI hai  /  jinhoMne
zaizavAvasthA meM stanyapAna karAyA ho- dUdha cusavAyA ho, sevA paricaryA kI ho,
jo mAtRtulya hotI hai, unake sAtha bhI sAdhu ekAMta sthAna meM na rahe  /
dUsarI striyoM kI to bAta hI kyA hai ? jo pAnI bharane vAlI nimna koTi kI
mahilAeM haiM unake sAtha bhI sAdhu samparka na rakhe, cAhe bar3I strI ho, cAhe
choTI kanyA ho, yahA~ Aye hue 'vA' zabda ke anusAra koI sAdhvI ho to unake sAtha
bhI sAdhu apanA saMstava - paricaya na kare  /  yadyapi apanI kanyA yA apane
beTe kI bahu ke sAtha ekAMta meM baiThane se sAdhu kA citta vikRta na bhI ho to
bhI anya logoM ko ekAnta meM sAdhu ko mahilA ke sAtha baiThA huA 273 - -

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation preserving Jain terms:  Seeing the Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra,
doubt may arise, therefore, to dispel that doubt, one should renounce the
contact with a woman.  The Shastrakara (author) explains that when a Sadhu
(ascetic) is seen with a woman, it creates doubt in the minds of others.
"Adunainom cha suhinom va, appiyam daddu ekata hoti. Giddha satta kamehi,
rakkhanaposaname manusso'si" (14) - Meaning: Seeing the pure or the
knowledgeable ones, sometimes it becomes unpleasant. The greedy beings, attached
to sensual pleasures, (think) "You are the protector and nourisher (of this
woman)."  Commentary: When a solitary woman is seen with a Nirgrantha (ascetic),
it causes great distress in the minds of her family members and relatives. They
think that just as other common people are engrossed in sensual pleasures,
similarly this ascetic is also greedy and infatuated with desire. Then they say
to him - "You are the man of this (woman), you are associated with her, then why
don't you take care and nourish her?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram dekhakara zaMkA paidA ho sakatI hai, isalie usa zaMkA
ke nirAsa-nivRtti hetu use strI ke samparka kA parihAraparityAga kara denA
caahie| sAdhu ko strI ke sAtha dekhakara dUsare ke mana meM jisa prakAra zaMkA
utpanna hotI hai, usakA digdarzana karAte hue zAstrakAra nirUpaNa karate haiM  /
aduNAiNaM ca suhINaM vA, appiyaM daddU egatA hoti  /  giddhA sattA kAmehiM,
rakkhaNaposaNe maNusso'si  // 14 //  chAyA - atha jJAnInAM suddhadAM vA dRSTvA
ekadA bhavati  /  gRddhAH sattvAH kAmeSu rakSaNapoSaNe manuSyo'si  //  anuvAda -
kisI mahilA ko ekAMta meM sAdhu ke pAsa sthita dekhakara usake pArivArika janoM
evaM sambandhiyoM ke citta meM bar3I pIr3A paidA hotI hai  /  ve socate haiM ki
jisa prakAra dUsare sAmAnya jana kAmAsakta saMlagna rahate haiM, usI taraha ye
sAdhu kAma meM gRddha-mUrcchita haiM  /  phira ve usase yahA~ taka kahate haiM-
tuma isake AdamI ho, isase saMzakta ho, phira isakA pAlana poSaNaM kyoM nahIM
karate  /  TIkA-'aduNAiNam' ityAdi, viviktayoSitA sArdhamanagAramathaikadA
dRSTvA yoSijjAtInAM suhRdAM vA 'apriyaM cittaduHkhAsikA bhavati, evaM ca te
samAzaGkaran, yathA-sattvAH-prANina icchAmadanakAmaiH 'gRddhA' adhyupapannAH,
tathAhievambhUto'pyayaM zramaNaH strIvadanAvalokanAsaktacetAH
parityaktanijavyApAro'nayA sArdhaM nihIMkastiSThati, taduktam - "muNDaM ziro
vadana metadaniSTagandhaM, bhikSAzanena bharaNaM ca hatodarasya  /  gAtraM
malena malinaM gatasarvazobhaM, citraM tathApi manaso madane'sti vAJchA  // 1 //
" tathAtikrodhAdhmAtamAnasAzcaivamUcuryathA-rakSaNaM poSaNaM ceti vigRhya
samAhAradvandvastasmin rakSaNapoSaNe sadA''daraM kuru yatastvamasyAH
'manuSyo'si' manuSyo vartase, yadi vA yadi paraM vayamasyA
rakSaNapoSaNavyApRtAstvameva manuSyo vartase, yatastvayaiva
sArdhamiyamekAkinyaharnizaM parityaktanijavyApArAtiSThatIti  // 14 //  kiJcAnyat
- ' TIkArtha - ekAkinI nArI ke sAtha ekAMta meM avasthita sAdhu ko dekhakara usa
nArI ke svajAtIya jana aura riztedAra mana meM bar3e duHkhita hote haiM  /  ve
yaha AzaMkA karate haiM, saMdeha karate haiM ki jaise anya vyakti kAma bhogoM
meM lubdha hai, usI prakAra yaha sAdhu bhI kAma lolupa hai, kyoMki yaha apane
sabhI kAryoM kA parityAga kara sadaiva isa nArI ke mukha ko nirlajjatA se
dekhatA huA isake sAtha baiThA rahatA hai  /  kahA hai-jisakA sira muMDA huA
hai, jisameM mu~ha se aniSTa gaMdha-badabU AtI hai, bhikSA se prApta anna dvArA
jo apanA peTa bharatA hai, sArA zarIra maila se gaMdA aura zobhArahita hai, to
bhI kitanA bar3A Azcarya hai ki isakI mana kI vAJchA kAma bhoga meM saMzakta hai
/  usa aurata ke jAti ke loga gusse meM Akara kahate haiM tuma isake manuSya ho,
mAlika ho, isakA rUcipUrvaka pAlana poSaNa karo  /  athavA hama to kevala isakI
rakSA tathA pAlana poSaNa vyApta hai-lage haiM tumhIM isake AdamI ho, pati ho-
kyoMki tumhAre hI sAtha yaha apane sAre kArya chor3akara dina rAta akelI baiThI
rahatI hai| -274)

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- Even if a monk is seen to be indifferent, some people get angry. They suspect
the woman of being immoral because she provides him with food.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - strI parijJAMdhyayana samaNaMpi dadAsINaM, tatthavi tAva ege kuppaMti  /
aduvA bhoyaNehiM NatthehiM, itthIdosaM saMkiNo hoti  // 15 //  chAyA -
zramaNamapi dRSTvodAsInaM, tatrApi tAvadeke kupyanti  /  athavA bhojanainyastaiH
strIdoSazaGkino bhavanti  //  anuvAda - udAsIna virakta aura tapasvI sAdhu ko
bhI ekAnta meM kisI nArI ke sAtha dekhakara katipayajana kruddha ho jAte haiM
aura ve usa strI meM doSa kI AzaMkA karane lagate haiM  /  unheM lagatA hai ki
yaha strI sAdhu ko cAhatI hai  /  isalie taraha-taraha ke AhAra use detI hai|
TIkA - zrAmyatIti zramaNaH-sAdhuH api zabdobhinnakramaH tam 'udAsInamapi'
rAgadveSavirahAnmadhyasthamapi dRSTvA, zramaNagrahaNaM tapaH-
khinnadehopalakSaNArthaM, tatraivambhUte'pi viSayadveSiNyapi sAdhau tAvadeke
kecana rahasyastrI jalpanakRtadoSatvAtkupyanti yadi vA pAThAntaraM "samaNaM
DhahNudAsINaM" 'zramaNaM' pravrajite 'udAsInam' parityakta nijavyApAraM striyA
saha jalpantaM 'dRSTvA' upalabhya tatrApyeke kecana tAvat kupyanti, kiM punaH
kRtavikAra mitibhAvaH, athavA strIdoSazanizca te bhavanti, te cAmI strIdoSAH
'bhojanaiH' nAnAvidhairAhAraiH 'nyasteH'sAdhvarthamupakalpitairetadarthameva
saMskRtairiyamenamupacarita tenAyamaharnizamihAgacchatIti, yadi vA bhojanaiH
zvazurAdInAM nyastaiH ardhadattaiH sadbhiH sA vadhUH sAdhvAgamanena
samAkulIbhUtA satyanyasmin dAtavye'nyaddadyAt, tataste strIdoSAzaGkino
bhaveyuryatheyaM duHzIlA'nenaiva sahAsta iti, nidarzanamatra yathA-
kayAciddhadhvA grAmamadhyaprArabdhanaTa-prekSaNaikagatacittayA
patizvazurayorbhojanArthamupaviSTayostaNDulA itikRtvA rAikAH saMskRtA dattAH,
tato'sau zvazureNopalakSitA, nijapatinA kruddhena tADitA,
anyapuruSAgatacittetyAzaGkaya svagRhAnnirdhATiteti  // 15 //  kiJcAnyat -
TIkArtha - jo zrama karatA hai-saMyama mUlaka sAdhanA meM AtmaparAkramI hotA
hai, tapa karatA hai, use zramaNa kahA jAtA hai, arthAt sAdhu ko zramaNa kahate
haiM  /  yahAM 'api' zabda bhinna kuma kA dyotaka hai  /  jo puruSa rAga dveSa
se virahita hai,-madhyastha, taTastha bhAvayukta hai, tapa se jisakA zarIra
khinna parizrAnta hai, jo sAMsArika kAma bhoga maya sukha kA dveSI hai, use burA
mAnatA hai, isa koTi ke sAdhu ko bhI kisI aurata ke sAtha ekAMta meM bAtacIta
karate hue dekhakara kucha loga kupita ho jAte haiM, yahA~ prayukta samaNa-
zramaNa zabda tapasyA se khinna zarIra kA dyotaka hai  /  'samaNa' DhaThUNu
dAsINaM-zramaNaM dRSTvA udAsInaM aisA pAThAntara prApta hotA hai, tadanusAra jo
sAdhu apanA kArya tyAgakara strI ke sAtha AlApa saMlApa karatA hai, use
dekhakara kaI krodhita ho jAte hai, jaba rAga dveSa rahita tapasevI sAdhu ko bhI
aurata ke sAtha ekAMta meM bAteM karate dekhakara loga kupita ho jAte haiM, to
phira jisa sAdhu ke mana meM strI ke saMga se vikRti paidA ho gaI hai, usakI to
bAta hI kyA ? athavA aurata ke sAtha ekAMta meM bAteM karate dekhakara loga usa
aurata meM doSa kI AzaMkA karate haiM  /  ve doSa yoM haiM-yaha strI taraha-
taraha ke bhojya padArtha isa sAdhu ke lie upakalpita kara-banAkara ise detI hai
/  isI kAraNa yaha sAdhu dina rAta yahA~ AtA jAtA hai  /  yaha strI apane
zvasura Adi ko AdhA bhojana parosakara sAdhu ke Ate hI caMcala citta ho jAtI hai
/  zvasura ko jo padArtha parosanA ho, usake badale dUsarA parosa detI hai  /
to loga usa aurata para zaMkA karate haiM ki yaha caritrahIna aurata isa sAdhu
ke sAtha saMbaddha hai  /  isa saMbaMdha meM eka nidarzana-udAharaNa hai-koI
strI khAne baiThe hue apane zvasura evaM pati ko bhojana parosa rahI thI, kintu
usakA mana usa samaya gAMva ke bIca hone vAle naToM ke nRtya khela Adi dekhane
meM lagA thA, isalie usane cAMvaloM ke badale rAI ubAla -275

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The woman, having cooked food with her own hands, served it to her father-in-law
and husband. Her father-in-law understood the whole situation. Her husband,
enraged, beat her and, suspecting her of being attracted to another man, drove
her out of the house.  "Those who are corrupted from samadhi and yoga, they
increase their association with women. Therefore, the Shramanas do not associate
with them, considering it beneficial for their own self." (16)  Commentary:
"Kuvanti" etc., "Taabhi:" - by women - those who are obstacles to the right
path, they increase their association with them, which is in the form of going
to their houses, talking to them, accepting donations from them, looking at
them, and getting acquainted with them. And due to the arising of delusion, they
"kuvanti" - they create, what kind of? - greatly corrupted, fallen from
"samadhiyoga" - samadhi is the meditation on Dharma, and the yogas - mental,
verbal, and bodily activities - are for that purpose, they are those who have
fallen from them, those who are cool-natured. Because association with women
leads to the destruction of samadhi and yoga, therefore, for that reason,
"Shramanas" - the true virtuous ones - "na samenti" - do not go. As if they are
falling into a trap, due to their beauty and the production of happiness, they
are called "nishadya" - the dwelling place of women is called "nishadya",
considering it beneficial for their own self, the virtuous ones do not go there.
And this avoidance of association with women is beneficial for them, as it
protects them from worldly and otherworldly harm. In some places, this is read
as "Tamha Shramanah u jahahi ahitao sannisejjiao" - the meaning of this is -
because association with women is harmful, therefore, O Shramanas! virtuous
ones! - "tu" is for emphasis, especially "sannisejjya" - the dwelling place of
women, or the service and attention shown by them, is to be abandoned for the
sake of self-benefit.  Commentary meaning: Women are obstacles to the right path
- Dharma. They are like the fire that catches on to the doors. Going to their
houses, talking to them, accepting donations from them, looking at them, and
getting acquainted with them, all this happens due to the arising of delusion
about them. What kind of people are those who increase their association with
women? In response to this, it is said that they are corrupted from samadhi and
Dharma yoga, and from the mental, verbal, and bodily activities that are based
on samadhi. They are lax in their conduct. Association with women destroys
samadhi and yoga. Therefore, the virtuous ones of the highest order do not fall
into the trap of women's deception. That which is conducive to happiness, due to
its ability to produce happiness, is called "nishadya" - the dwelling place of
women is called "nishadya". The virtuous ones who desire self-welfare do not go
there. The advice given to abandon association with women is beneficial for the
self, as it protects women from worldly and otherworldly harm. In the latter
part of this verse, there is a variant reading "Tamha Shramanah u jahahi ahitao
sannisejjiao" - the meaning of this is - association with women is harmful,
therefore, O Shramanas! virtuous ones! - "tu" is for emphasis, especially
"sannisejjya" - the dwelling place of women, or the service and attention shown
by them, is to be abandoned for the sake of self-benefit.  Can someone who has
accepted the vows of a Shraman, still associate with women? To this, it is said,
yes, they can.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kara pakAkara apane zvasura tathA pati ko parosa dI  /
zvasura ne sArI bAta samajha lI  /  usake pati ne kupita hokara use pITA tathA
yaha AzaMkA kara ki isakA citta kisI anya puruSa meM lagA hai, use ghara se
nikAla diyA  /  kuvvaMti saMthavaM tAhiM pabbhaTThA samAhijogehiM  /  tamhA
samaNA Na sameMti, AehiyAe saNNisejAo  // 16 //  chAyA - kuvanti saMstavaM
tAbhiH prabhraSTAH samAdhiyogebhyaH  /  tasmAt zramaNAH na saMyanti AtmahitAya
saMniSadyAH  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa samAdhi evaM yoga se bhraSTa hote haiM, ve
hI nAriyoM se saMstava-paricaya bar3hAte haiM, zramaNa-sacce sAdhu apanA
Atmahita socate hue striyoM ke sthAna para nahIM jAte  /  . TIkA-'kuvvaMti
'tyAdi, tAbhi:'strIbhiH-sanmArgArgalAbhiHsaha saMstavaM
tadgRhagamanAlApadAnasamprekSaNAdirUpaM paricayaM tathA vidhamohodayAt
'kurvanti' vidadhati, kimbhUtAH?-prakarSeNa bhraSTAH skhalitAH
'samAdhiyogebhyaH' samAdhiH dharmadhyAnaM tadarthaM tatpradhAnA vA yogA-
manovAkkAyavyApArAstebhyaH pracyutA zItalavihAriNa iti, yasmAt strI
saMstavAtsamAdhiyogaparibhraMzo bhavati tasmAtkAraNAta 'zramaNAH' satsAdhavo 'na
samenti' na gacchanti. sata zobhanA sukhotpAdakatayA'nukUlatvAnnipadyA iva
niSadyA strIbhiH kRtA mAyA, yadivAstrIvasatIriti, 'AtmahitAya' svahitaM
manyamAnAH, etacca strIsambandhapariharaNaM
tAsAmapyahikAmuSmikApAyaparihArAddhitamiti, kvacitpazcAImevaM paThyate"tamhA
samaNA u jahAhi ahitAo sannisejjAo" ayamasyArthaH-yasmAtstrIsambandho'narthAya
bhavati, tasmAt he zramaNa ! sAdho ! tuzabdo vizeSaNArthaH, vizeSeNa saMniSadyA-
strIvasatIstatkRtopacArarUpA vA mAyA AtmahitAdveto: 'jahAhi' parityajeti  // 16
//  kiM kecanAbhyupagabhyApi pravajyAM strIsambandhaM kuryuH ?, yenaivamucyate,
omityAha TIkArtha - striyA~ sanmArga-dharma ke uttama mArga meM bAdhA paidA
karane vAlI haiM  /  ve kapAToM meM lagane vAlI Agala kI jyoM hai  /  unake
AvAsa para jAnA, unake sAtha bAtacIta karanA, unase dAna lenA, unheM dekhanA,
paricaya karanA ye saba tadviSayaka mohodaya ke kAraNa logoM meM hotA hai  /  jo
vyakti striyoM ke sAtha paricaya bar3hAte haiM, ve kisa prakAra ke haiM  /
isakA samAdhAna upasthita karate hue kahate haiM ki ve samAdhi-dharmayoga se
tathA yoga samAdhimUlaka mAnasika, vAcika evaM kAyika vyApAra se bhraSTa haiM,
ve zithila vihArI haiM, nAriyoM ke sAtha paricaya * bar3hAne se samAdhiyoga
vinaSTa ho jAtA hai  /  ataeva uttama koTi ke sAdhu striyoM kI mAyA pravaJcanA
meM nahIM pdd'te| jo sukha utpanna karane ke kAraNa, anukUla hone ke kAraNa,
niSadyA-AvAsa sthAna ke sadRza hai use niSadyA kahA jAtA hai, vaha striyoM kA
AvAsa sthAna niSadyA kahA jAtA hai, Atma kalyANecchu sAdhu vahA~ nahIM jAte  /
nAriyoM ke saMbaMddha tyAga kA jo upadeza diyA gayA hai, vaha striyoM ko bhI
aihika va pAralaukika hAni se bacAne ke kAraNa AtmA kA hita karane vAlA hai  /
isa gAthA ke uttarArddha meM tamhA samaNA u jahAhi ahitAo sanni sejjAo' yaha
pAThAntara hai-jisakA artha yaha hai ki-strI saMbaMddha anartha kA kAraNa hai,
isalie striyoM ke nivAsa sthAna tathA unake dvArA pradarzita sevA paricaryA rUpa
mAyA ko Atmahita ke nimitta tyAga de  /  kyA koI pravrajyA-zramaNa dIkSA svIkAra
kara ke bhI nArI ke sAtha saMbaMddha kara sakate haiM ? jisase aisA kahA jAtA
hai, uttara meM kahA gayA hai ki hA~, kara sakate haiM  /  -(276)

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Many people, even after taking initiation, partially follow the conduct of a
householder and partially that of a monk. They proclaim this mixed conduct as
the path to liberation. The words of those who are deceitful and have a wicked
character are full of strength, not their actions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM bahave gihAI avahaTu, missIbhAvaM patthuyA ya ege  /
dhuvamaggameva pavayaMti, vayA vIriyaM kusIlANaM  // 17 //  chAyA - vahavo
gRhANi avahatya mizrIbhAvaM prastutAzca eke  /  dhruvamArgameva pravadanti vAcA
vIryya kuzIlAnAm  //  anuvAda - bahuta se aise loga hote haiM jo dIkSA lekara
bhI aMzataH gRhastha evaM aMzataH sAdhu ke AcAra kA sevana-pAlana karate haiM  /
ve apane isa mizraNamaya AcAra ko hI mokSa kA patha batalAte haiM  /  kuzIla-
kutsita AcArayukta janoM kI vANI meM hI parAkrama hotA hai. kArya meM nahIM  /
TIkA - 'bahavaH' kecana gRhANi 'apahRtya' parityajya punastathAvidhamohodayAt
mizrIbhAvam iti dravyaliGgamAtrasadbhAvAdbhAvatastu gRhasthasamakalpA
ityevambhUtA mizrIbhAvaM 'prastutAH' samanuprAptA na gRhasthA ekAntato nApi
pravrajitAH, tadevambhatA api santo dhravo-mokSa: saMyamo vA tanmArgameva
pravadanti. tathAhi-te vaktAro bhanti yathA'yamevAsmadArabdho madhyamaH panthAH
zreyAn, tathAhi-anena pravRtAnAM pravrajyAnirvahaNaM bhavatIti, tadetatkuzIlAnAM
vAcA kRtaM vIrya nAnuSThAna kRtaM, tathAhi te dravyaliGgadhAriNo vAGmAtreNaiva
vayaM pravrajitA iti bruvate natu teSAM sAtagauravaviSayasukhapratibaddhAnAM
zItalavihAriNAM sadanuSThAnavRtaM vIryamastIti  // 17 //  apica TIkArtha -
bahuta se aise vyakti haiM, jo gRhastha jIvana kA parityAga karake bhI punaH
tathA vidha mohodaya ke kAraNa ve mizra avasthA ko svIkAra kara lete haiM  /  ve
dravyaliMga-bAhyaveza ko grahaNa karane mAtra se sAdhu haiM tathA gRhastha ke
sadRza AcaraNa karane se gRhastha haiM  /  isa prakAra ve mizra mArga ko svIkAra
kie hue haiM  /  ve na to ekAMtata:-nizcita rUpa meM, pUrNa rUpa meM gRhastha hI
haiM aura na ekAMtataH sAdhu hI haiM  /  aisA hote hue bhI ve apane dvArA
parigRhIta mArga ko hI dhruva-mokSa yA saMyama kA mArga batalAte haiM  /  ve
aisA kathana karate haiM ki madhyamamArga-bIca ke rAste kA anasaraNa karanA zarU
kiyA hai vahI rAstA sabase uttama haiM-kyoMki usa mArga para calane vAle puruSa
ke pravrajita saMyama jIvana kA bhalI bhAMti nirvAha hotA hai, kintu yaha to una
zIla rahita janoM kI vANI kA hI vIrya-parAkrama hai, AcaraNa kA nahIM kyoMki
dravyaliMga dhArI-kevala veza mAtra se sAdhu bane hue puruSa vANI dvArA apane ko
pravrajita batalAte haiM kintu unameM vaisA AcAra nahIM hai  /  ve sAtA gaurava
aura viSaya sukha meM pratibaddha-baMdhe hue haiM, zithila vihArI haiM, unameM
sad anuSThAna-saMyama mUlaka AcAra meM parAkrama dikhAne kA sAmarthya nahIM hai|
0 suddhaM khati parisAe, aha rahassaMmi dukkaDaM kareMti  /  jANaMti, ya NaM
tahAvihA, mAille mahAsaDhe'yaMti  // 18 //  chAyA - zuddhaM rauti pariSadi, atha
rahasi duSkRtaM karoti  /  jAnanti ca tathAvido mayAvI mahAzaTha iti  //
anuvAda - sAdhvAcarita puruSa sabhI meM aisA AkhyAna karatA hai ki maiM zuddha
hU~  /  zuddha saMyama kA pAlana karatA hU~, kintu vaha ekAnta meM chipakara
duSkRt-pApa sevana karatA hai  /  usakI zArIrika ceSTAeM Adi jAnane vAle puruSa
yaha samajhate haiM ki yaha chalI haibar3A zaTha-duSTa, mUrkha hai  /  277)

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra. Commentary - That deceitful person, by mere words,
reveals his lack of strength. He is established in the 'Parsadi' (assembly) and
at the time of Dharma-deshana (religious discourse), he declares himself to be
'Shuddha' (pure), free from faults, and his own conduct. But in secret, he
'Karot' (does) evil, sin, or the cause of sin, which is improper conduct. Even
though he tries to hide his improper conduct, people 'Jananti' (know) it. Who
knows? - Those who know such conduct, i.e., those who are skilled in
understanding gestures and expressions, know it. Or, it may be said that the
omniscient ones know it. Even if someone else does not know their duty, the
omniscient ones know it. Is that knowledge not enough? Or, those who know the
nature of things, know that he is a magician, a great deceiver, and blinded by
attachment. He thinks that no one knows him, but those who know, know him. As it
is said:  "Na ya lonam lonijjai na ya tuppijjai ghayam va tellam va. Kiha sakko
vancheum atta anuhuy kallano ||1||" ||18||  Commentary - That deceitful person,
by mere words, reveals his lack of strength. He is established in the 'Parsadi'
(assembly) and at the time of Dharma-deshana (religious discourse), he declares
himself to be 'Shuddha' (pure), free from faults, and his own conduct. But in
secret, he 'Karot' (does) evil, sin, or the cause of sin, which is improper
conduct. Even though he tries to hide his improper conduct, people 'Jananti'
(know) it. Who knows? - Those who know such conduct, i.e., those who are skilled
in understanding gestures and expressions, know it. Or, it may be said that the
omniscient ones know it. Even if someone else does not know their duty, the
omniscient ones know it. Is that knowledge not enough? Or, those who know the
nature of things, know that he is a magician, a great deceiver, and blinded by
attachment. He thinks that no one knows him, but those who know, know him. As it
is said:  "Salt cannot be hidden, nor can ghee or oil. How can a soul, who has
experienced good, be deceived?"  And further:  "He does not speak of his own
evil deeds, and when asked, he praises himself like a child. Do not ask him
about the Vedas, for when questioned, he becomes dejected."  Commentary - He
does not 'Vadati' (speak) of the evil he has done, which is hidden in his own
nature, even when asked by his teacher or someone else. He does not say, "I am
the doer of this evil." He is a deceitful person with hidden sins, and when he
is 'Adishta' (instructed) by someone else, he praises himself.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  TIkA - sa kuzIlo vAGmAtreNAviSkRtavIryaH 'parSadi'
vyavasthito dharmadezanAvasare satyAtmAnaM 'zuddham'
apagatadoSamAtmAnamAtmIyAnuSThAnaM vA 'rauti' bhASate athAnantaraM 'rahasye'
kAnte 'duSkRtaM pApaM tatkAraNaM vA'sadanuSThAnaM 'karoti' vidadhAti, tacca
tasyAsadanuSThAnaM gopAyato'pi 'jAnanti' vidanti, ke ?-tathArUpamanuSThAnaM
vidantIti tathAvidaH-iGgitAkArakuzalA nipuNAstadvida ityarthaH yadi vA sarvajJAH
etaduktaM bhavati-yadyapyaparaH kazcidakartavyaM teSAM na ve tti tathApi
sarvajJA vidanti, tatparijJAnenaiva kiM na paryAptaM ?, yadi vA-mAyAvI
mahAzaThazvAyamityevaM tathA vidastadvido jAnanti, tathAhi-pracchannAkAryakArI
na mAM kazcijjAnAtyevaM rAgAndho manyate, atha ca taM tadvido vidanti, tathA
coktam - "na ya loNaM loNijjai Na ya tuppijjai ghayaM va tellaM vA  /  kiha
sakko vaMceUM attA aNuhUya kallANo  // 1 // "  // 18 //  kiJcAyat - chAyA - na
ca lavaNaM layaNIyate na mrakSyate ghRtaM catailaM ca  /  kiM zakyo vaMcayituM
mAtmA'nubhUtAkalyANaH  //  TIkArtha - vaha kuzIla-AcArahIna puruSa vANI mAtra se
apanA parAkrama prakaTa karatA hai  /  dharmadezanA ke avasara para vaha apane
ko tathA apane AcaraNa ko zuddha nirdoSa batalAtA hai, parantu vaha ekAMta meM
duSkRtapApa yA pApajanaka asat kArya karatA hai, yadyapi vaha apane asat-
apavitra anuSThAna AcAra ko gopita karatA hai-chipAtA hai, to bhI loga use jAna
jAte haiM  /  kauna jAna pAte haiM ? yaha prazna uThAte hue batalAte haiM ki jo
puruSa AGgika ceSTA evaM AkAra-bhAva bhaGgI ko jAnane meM kuzala hai ve usake
asat AcaraNa ko jAna lete haiM, athavA sarvajJa-sarvajJAtA sarvadraSTA
mahApuruSa use jAnate haiM  /  kahane kA Azaya yaha hai ki usa caritrahIna
puruSa ke dUSita kAryo ko cAhe anya loga na jAne parantu sarvajJa puruSa to jAna
hI lete haiM  /  kyA sarvajJa puruSa jo yaha jAnate haiM, vaha kyA unake asat
anuSThAna ke scana ke lie paryApta nahIM haiM athavA usake svarUpa ko, kArya
kalApa ko jAnane vAle puruSa yaha dekhate haiM ki yaha mAyAvI-chalI prapaJcI
hai, mahAzaTha-bar3A duSTa hai, rAga se andhA banA huA hai, chipa-chipakara bure
kArya karatA hai tathA apane mana meM yaha samajhatA hai ki mujhe koI nahIM
jAnatA, kintu jAnane vAle to jAna hI lete haiN| kahA hai-namaka kI lavaNatA-
khArApana tathA ghRta va tela kI snigdhatAcikanApana chipAyA nahIM jA sakatA  /
usI prakAra duSkarma karane vAlI AtmA ko chipAyA nahIM jA sakatA  /  sayaM
dukkaDaM ca na vadati, AiTThovi pakatthati bAle  /  veyANuvIi mA kAsI, coijaMto
gilAi se bhujo  // 19 //  chAyA - svayaM duSkRtaM ca na vadati, AdiSTo'pi
prakatthate bAlaH  /  vedAnuvIci mA kArSIH codyamAno glAyati sa bhUyaH  //
anuvAda - dravyaliMgI-sAdhu kA bAnA dhAraNa karane vAlA bAla-ajJAnI jana svayaM
apanA duSkRta yA pApa apane AcArya yA guru se nahIM kahatA  /  dUsarA vaisI
preraNA kare to vaha apanI hI tArIpha karane lagatA hai| jaba use gurujana
kahate haiM ki tuma abrahmacarya kA sevana mata karo to vaha glAni pUrNa ho jAtA
hai  /  TIkA - 'svayam' AtmatA pracchannaM yaduSkataM kRtaM tadapareNAcAryAdinA
pRSTo na 'vadati' na kathayati, yathA ahamasyAkAryasya kArIti, sa ca
pracchannapApo mAyAvI svayamavadan yadA pAreNa 'AdiSTaH' codito'pi -278)

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of women is called 'Bala'. An ignorant person, influenced by
attachment and aversion, claims that he is being falsely accused of wrongdoing.
He speaks with arrogance, saying, "How could I possibly do such a wrong thing?"
Similarly, the Veda - the Veda of men - indicates that his 'Anuveechi', his
desire for sexual pleasure, is not conducive to his well-being. When he is
repeatedly advised against it, he becomes 'Glayati' - he experiences dejection.
He ignores the advice, or he speaks with pain, as if pierced by a sharp object.
As it is said:  **Commentary:**  "Even if I am suspected of sin, what harm is
there in me being sinless? Even a non-poisonous snake is greatly feared by
people."  Furthermore, a man of bad character, especially, does not reveal the
sin he has secretly committed when questioned by an Acharya or others. He claims
that he has not done any such wrong deed. He is a hidden sinner - a deceitful
person who secretly commits sins. He himself does not confess, and when someone
else tries to make him confess, he, being ignorant and filled with attachment
and aversion, praises himself and says that the accusation of wrongdoing against
him is false. He speaks with great arrogance and audacity, saying, "How could I
possibly do such a wrong thing?" Here, the word 'Veda' refers to the Veda of
men. His desire for sexual pleasure, in accordance with his nature, is called
'Anuveechi'. Therefore, when a Guru or others tell him not to indulge in illicit
sexual activity, this man of bad character becomes dejected, or he ignores it,
or it deeply affects him, piercing his heart. He becomes distressed and says,
"If I am suspected of sin, what harm is there in me being sinless? Even a non-
poisonous snake is greatly feared by people."  -  **Osiaavi Itthiphossesu,
Purisa Itthiveyakhedanna. Pannasamanita Vege, Narinam Vasan Uvakasanti.**  -
**Chhaya Ushita Api Streeposeshu Purushaah Streevedakhedagnaah. Pragnasamanvita
Eke Narinam Vashamupakashanti.**  -  **Translation:**  Men who have indulged in
the nurturing of women, who have experienced it all, and who know that women are
very deceitful, those who are wise, do not fall under the sway of women.
**Commentary:**  The phrase 'Ushita Api' means 'even though they have been
established' in the practice of nurturing women. 'Purusha' refers to men who
have experienced and enjoyed it all. Similarly, 'Streevedakhedagnaah' means
'those who know that the Veda of women is primarily based on deceit'. Even those
who are skilled and wise, those who are endowed with knowledge of birth, etc.,
those who are 'Eke' - great fools blinded by delusion - fall under the sway of
'Narinam' - women, who are the paths to worldly existence. They are 'Kasanit' -
drawn to them by their proximity and dependence. Even though they are aware of
their nature, they still act according to their desires, whether right or wrong.
They do not understand that these women are of such a nature. As it is said:  -
"These women laugh and cry, they assure men of their intentions, but they do not
keep their promises. Therefore, a man of good character should avoid them like a
cremation ground."  Similarly,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM san 'bAlaH' ajJo rAgadveSakalito vA' prakatthate '
AtmAnaM zlAghamAno'kArya mapalapati, vadati ca yathA'hamevambhUtamakAryaM kathaM
kariSye ityevaM dhATrayAtprakatthate, tathA vedaH - puMvedodayastasya 'anuvIci'
AnukUlyaM maithunAbhilASaM tanmA kArSIrityevaM 'bhUyaH' punaH codyamAno'sau
'glAyati' glAnimupayAti - akarNazruta vidhatte, marmabiddho vA sakhedamiva
bhASate, tathA coktam TIkArtha "sambhAvyamAnapApo'hamapApenApi kiM mayA ?  /
nirviSasyApi sarpasya, bhRzamuddhijate janaH  //  iti  // 19 //
apicacaritrahIna puruSa mukhyataH apane dvArA chipAkara kiyA gayA pApa AcArya
Adi ke pUchane para nahIM batAtA  /  vaha kahatA hai ki maiMne vaisA burA kRtya
nahIM kiyA hai  /  vaha pracchanna pApI - chipakara pApa karane vAlA mAyAvI -
chalI, svayaM to kahatA hI nahIM, jaba anya koI kahane hetu prerita karatA hai
to vaha ajJa, rAgadveSa yukta 'vyakti apanI bar3hAI karatA huA kahatA hai ki
mujha para bure kArya kA Aropa lagAyA jAtA hai vaha mithyA hai  /  vaha bar3I
dhRSTatA DhIThapana ke sAtha kahatA hai ki maiM aisA asat kArya kisa prakAra
kara sakatA hU~  /  yahA~ prayukta veda zabda puruSa veda ke udaya kA sUcaka
hai| usake anurUpa maithuna kI icchA ko anuvIci kahA jAtA hai  /  isalie guru
Adi dvArA yaha kahe jAne para ki tuma abrahmacarya sevana kI vAJchA mata karo,
vaha caritra hIna puruSa glAni yukta ho jAtA hai, athavA isa bAta ko anasunI
kara detA hai, athavA usa bAta kA usake marma sthala para bar3A AghAta sA hotA
hai, vaha bAta usake mana meM cubha jAtI hai  /  vaha khinna ho uThatA hai aura
bolatA hai ki jaba mujhameM pApa kI saMbhAvanA-AzaMkA kI jAtI hai taba apApa
pApa rahita hone se mujhe kyA lAbha kyoMki loga nirviSa sAMpa se bhI bahuta
Darate haiM  /  - osiyAvi itthiposesu, purisA itthiveyakhedannA  /
paNNAsamannitA vege, nArINaM vasaM uvakasaMti  // 20 //  - chAyA uSitA api
strIpoSeSu puruSAH strIvedakhedajJAH  /  prajJAsamanvitA eke nArINAM vazamupa
kaSanti  //  anuvAda jo puruSa striyoM ke pAlana poSaNa kA kArya kara bhukta
bhogI hai, saba dekha parakha cuke haiM, striyA~ bar3I mAyAvanI hotI hai yaha
jAna cuke haiM, jo prajJAzIla haiM ve striyoM ke vazIbhUta nahIM hote  /  - TIkA
striyaM poSayantIti strIpopakA-anuSThAnavizeSAsteSu 'uSitA api' vyavasthitA api
'puruSA' manuSyA bhuktabhogino'pItyarthaH, tathA-'strIvedakhedajJAH sIvedo
mAyApradhAna ityevaM nipuNA api tathA prajJayA autpattikyAdibuddhayA samanvitA -
yuktA api 'ke' mahAmohAndhacetaso 'nArINAM ' strINAMsaMsArAvataraNavIthInAM '
vazaM ' tadAyattamAnupa- sAmIpyena 'kaSanita' brajanti, yaghattAH svapnAyamAnA
api kAryamakAryaM vA bruvate tattatkurvane, na punaretajjAnanti yathaitA
evambhUtA bhavantIti, tadyathA - " etA hasanti ca rudanti ca kArya
hotArvizvAsayanti ca naraM na cavizvasanti  /  tasmAnnareNa kulazIlasamanvitena,
nArmaH zmazAnaghaTikA iva varjanIyAH || 1 || " tathA - 279

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  "Like the waves of the ocean, their nature is
fickle, like the red hues of the evening clouds, their passions are fleeting.
Women, having achieved their purpose, deem men useless, and discard them like a
used piece of lac." (2)  Here, a story is presented to understand the nature of
women. A young man, leaving his home, set out for Pataliputra to study the
Vaisheshika Kamashastra, a treatise on the nature of women. On the way, he
encountered a woman in a village. She said, "Your hands and feet are delicate,
your form is beautiful, where are you going?" He told her the truth. She said,
"After studying the Vaisheshika, come back this way." He agreed. After studying,
he returned, and she treated him well with baths, meals, and various gestures
and glances, captivating his heart. He became enamored with her. When he tried
to take her hand, she cried out loudly. When people gathered, she threw a water
pot on his head, saying, "Just as he is not dead from the water that touched his
neck, so I am not wet by this water." When the crowd dispersed, she asked him,
"Have you learned about the nature of women from your study of the Vaisheshika
Shastra?" Thus, the character of women is difficult to understand, and there is
no reliance to be placed on them. As it is said,  "One thing is spoken, another
is done, one thing is in front, another behind. One thing is yours, another is
mine, everything about women is something else." (1)  Now, to show the
consequences of association with women, it is said:  ...  The actions performed
to nourish a woman are called "Stri Posha" or "Poshaka." Those who are involved
in such actions have come to know their faults. Those who know the nature of
women, the "Stri Vega" - the nature of women, know that women are inherently
full of Maya (illusion). Their nature is deceitful. Those who are skilled in
knowing this, who are "Utpadak" - those who have a mind that is born from the
"Utpad" (creation), and others, are blinded by great delusion. They become
slaves to women, who are the path of coming and going in the world. They do not
know what is right or wrong, and do whatever women tell them to do. Women laugh
to get their work done, they give assurances, but they never trust themselves.
Therefore, men of high lineage and good character should avoid women like a
deserted marketplace. It is said, "Like the waves of the ocean, their nature is
fickle, like the red hues of the evening clouds, their passions are fleeting.
Women, having achieved their purpose, deem men useless, and discard them like a
used piece of lac." (2)  ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram "samudravIcIva calasvabhAvAH, manyAbhrarekhevamuhUrta
rAgAH  /  striyaH kRtArthAH puruSaM nirarthakaM, niSpIDitAlaktakavatyajanti  //
2 //  " atra ca strI svabhAvaparijJAne kathAnakamidam tadyathA - eko yuvA
svagRhAnnirgatyavaizikaM kAmazAstrAmadhyetu pATaliputraM prasthitaH, tadantarAle
anyataragrAmavartinyaikayA yoSitA'bhihitaH, tadyathA-sukumArapANipAda :
zobhanAkRtistvaM kva prasthito'si ?, tenApi yathAsthitameva tasyAH kathitaM tayA
coktam - vaizikaM paThitvA mamamadhyenAgantavyaM, tenApi tathaivAbhyupagatam,
adhItya cAsau madhyenAyAta:, tathA ca snAna bhojanAdinA samyagupacarito
vividhahAvabhAvaizvApahRtahRdayaH saMstAM hastena gRhNAti, tatastayA
mahatAzabdena phUtkRtya janAgamanAvasare mastake vArivardhanikA prakSiptA, tato
lokasya samAkule evamAcaSTe - yathA'yaM gale lagnenodakena manAk na mRtaH, tato
mayodakena sikta iti  /  gate ca loke sA pRSTavatI - kiM tvayA
vaizikazAstropadezena strIsvabhAvAnAM parijJAtamiti ? evaM strIcaritraM
durvijJeyamiti nAtrAsthA kartatyeti, tathA coktam "
hRghanyadvAcyanyatkarmaNyanyatpuro'tha pRSThe'nyat  /  anyattava mama cAnyat
strINAM sarvaM kimapyanvat  // 1 // "  // 20 //  sAmpratamihaloka eva
strIsambandhavipAkaM darzayitumAha - jAte haiM  /  striyA~ sapane meM bhI jo
karate haiM  /  ve striyoM ke svarUpa ko aura kabhI rotI haiN| puruSa ko apane =
TIkArtha strI kA poSaNa karane ke lie jo kArya kiye jAte haiM ve strI poSa yA
poSaka kahe jAte haiN| vaise kAryoM meM jo pravRtta ho cuke haiM ve unake doSoM
ko jAna gaye haiM, jo strI vega-strI jAti kI pravRti ko jAnate haiM arthAt strI
svabhAva se hI mAyA pradhAna hotI hai  /  isakI pravRti chalayukta hotI hai,
aisA jAnane me~ kuzala haiM, jo autpAdika-prati utpannamati Adi se yukta hai,
aise bhI katipaya puruSa atyadhika mahA moha se andha banakara saMsAra meM
AvAgamana ke mArga svarUpa striyoM ke vaza bolatI hai, sat asat jo bhI kArya
karane hetu unase kahatI haiM ve use nahIM jaante| striyA~ kArya hetu apanA kAma
karAne ke lie kabhI haMsatI haiM prati vizvAsa dilAtI haiM kintu khuda kabhI usa
para bharosA nahIM krtii| isalie ucca kula evaM uttama AcArayukta puruSa
sunasAna hATa kI jyoM striyoM kA parivarjana kre| kahA hai samudra kI viciyA~ -
lahareM jisa taraha caMcalaasthira hotI haiM usI taraha striyoM kA svabhAva
caMcala hotA hai| jaise sandhyA ke samaya AkAza gata bAdala meM rAga-lAlimA
rahatI hai usI taraha auratoM kA bhI rAga-anurakti yA prema kucha hI dera rahatA
hai  /  aurateM jaba puruSa se apanA matalaba pUrA karA letI haiM jaise mahAvara
kA raMga nikAlakara rUI ko pheMka diyA jAtA hai usI taraha ve puruSa ko chor3a
detI haiN| strI ke svabhAva ko yahA~ eka kathAnaka dvArA prastuta kiyA jAtA hai|
eka naujavAna se vaizvika kAmazAstra arthAt nArI ke svabhAva ko prakaTa karane
vAle zAstra ke adhyayana ke lie apane ghara nikalA aura pATaliputra kI ora jAne
lagA yAtrA mArga ke bIca Aye kisI gAMva meM vahA~ kI aurata ne unase kahA
tumhAre hAtha paira sukomala hai, tumhArI AkRti bhI khubasUrata hai, tuma kahA~
jA rahe ho, usa naujavAna ne jo bAta thI use batA dI  /  usa aurata ne use kahA
ki kAmazAstra kA adhyayana pUrA kara isI rAste se AnA  /  kAmazAstra kA
adhyayana kara vaha naujavAna usI rAste meM AyA  /  aurata se milA  /  aurata ne
usakA snAna, khAnapAna dvArA bhalIbhA~ti Atithya kiyA, sevA kii| apane hAva
bhAva - nAja nakharoM aura kaTAkSoM-tirachI nigAhoM se usakA mana AkRSTa kara
liyaa| vaha puruSa usa aurata para Asakta ho gayA  /  usa yuvaka ne jaba aurata
kA hAtha pakar3anA cAhA taba vaha jora se cillAyI  /  jaba loga Ane lage taba
usane usa yuvaka para jala se bharA ghar3A 280

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The woman began the
Parijñādhyayana (study of the nature of women). After a large crowd had
gathered, she said that water had entered her throat. An opposite water
consumption-related disease had developed. She was on the verge of death. Seeing
this, I made her bathe in water and poured a pot of water over her.  When the
assembled crowd dispersed, she began to question the young man, asking what
knowledge of the nature of women he had gained from the study of Kāmaśāstra. She
said that truly understanding a woman's character is very difficult. Therefore,
a man should never trust a woman's nature. It is said that women have something
else in their hearts, something else behind, something else on their tongue,
something else in front, and something else behind.  What is something for you
may be something else entirely for me, meaning a woman's mindset is not the same
towards different men. In reality, everything about women is different or else.
The verse states: "Even for the sake of cutting off the hands and feet, or for
the sake of cutting the growing flesh, or for scorching them with fire, or for
pouring saline solutions on them - the women become enraged."  The commentary
explains that men who indulge in relationships with other women have their hands
and feet cut off. Their skin and flesh are also torn off. They are tormented by
fire, and saline solutions are poured on their wounds by the enraged family
members of the woman.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM uMDela diyA  /  isake bAda jaba logoM kI bar3I bhIr3a
ikaTThI ho gayI taba vaha kahane lagI ki isake gale ke bhItara pAnI laga gayA
thA  /  viparIta jala sevana janita doSa-roga paidA ho gayA thA  /  yaha
maraNAsanna thA  /  yaha dekhakara maiMne isako pAnI se snAna karA diyA, isa
para pAnI kA ghar3A uMDela diyA  /  jaba ekatrita bhIr3a chaMTa gaI taba vaha
naujavAna se pUchane lagI ki kAmazAstra kA adhyayana kara tumane nArI ke
svabhAva kA kyA jJAna prApta kiyA, kyA itanA hI sIkhA ? vAstava meM aurata ke
caritra ko jAna pAnA bahuta muzkila hai  /  isalie puruSa ko aurata ke svabhAva
para kabhI bharosA nahIM karanA cAhie  /  kahA gayA hai ki auratoM ke dila meM
kucha aura hotA hai, pIche kucha aura hotA hai, jabAna para kucha aura hotA hai,
sAmane kucha aura hotA hai, pIche kucha aura hotA hai| tumhAre lie kucha anya
mere lie usase bhinna kucha aura hI hotA hai arthAt kinhIM do puruSoM ke prati
usakA eka jaisA mAnasa nahIM hotA  /  vAstava meM auratoM kA saba kucha ora hI
yA bhinna hI hotA hai  /  jAtA hai| avi hatthapAdachedAe, aduvA
vaddhamaMsauktate  /  avi teya sAbhitAvaNANi, tacchiya khArasiMcaNAiM ca  // 21
//  chAyA - api hastapAdacchedAya, athavA vardhamAMsotkarttanam  /  api
tejasA'bhitApanAni takSayitvA kSArasiJcanAnica  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa para
nArI kA sevana karate haiM unake hAtha paira chinna kara diye jAte haiM-kATa
diye jAte haiM  /  unakI camar3I aura mA~sa udher3a diye jAte haiM  /  agni
dvArA unheM paritapta kiyA jAtA hai aura unake aMga kATa kara una ghAvoM para
namaka Adi kA kSAra yukta jala DAlA jAtA hai  /  TIkA - strIsamparko hi rAgiNAM
hastapAdacchedAya bhavati, 'api:' sambhAvane sambhAvyata etanmohAturANAM
strIsambandhAddhastapAdacchedAdikam, athavA vardhamAMsotkartana mapi tejasA,
agninA abhitApanAni' strI sambandhibhirUttejitai rAjapuruSairbhaTitrakANyapi
kriyante pAradArikAH, tathA vAsyAdinA takSayitvA kSArodakasecanAni ca
prApayantIti  // 21 //  apica TIkArtha - parastrI gamana karane vAle rAgayukta
kAmI puruSoM ke hAtha paira kATa die jAte haiM  /  isa gAthA meM api zabda
sambhAvanA ke artha meM prayukta huA hai  /  arthAta parastrI meM mohita, Atura
puruSa ke hAtha pairoM kA kATA jAnA sambhAvita hai  /  athavA para strI lolupa
puruSoM kI camar3I va mA~sa kA chinna-bhinna kiyA jAnA sambhAvita hai  /  strI
ke pArivArika janoM dvArA utprerita rAjapuruSa parastrIgAmiyoM ko bhaTTI Adi
para car3hAkara paritapta karate haiM tathA vasUlA Adi se unakI deha ko
chIlakara usa para kSAra yukta jala chir3akate haiN| adu kaNNaNAsacchedaM,
kaMThacchedaNaM titikkhaMtI  /  /  iti ittha pAvasaMttatA, naya biMti puNo na
kAhiMti  // 22 //  chAyA - atha karNanAsikAcchedaM kaNThacchedanaM titikSanto  /
ityatra pApasantaptAH, na ca bruvate na punaH kariSyAmaH  //  -2810

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra -
Translation - The sin-afflicted person who is tormented by sins endures the
cutting off of their ears, nose, and throat, i.e., their ears, nose, and throat
are cut off. But they do not resolve in their mind that they will not commit
such sinful acts in the future.  Commentary - They "endure" (titikshante) the
cutting off of the ears, nose, and throat due to their own faults, i.e., they
suffer such diverse torments. In this very human birth, they experience
sufferings beyond hell due to their sinful actions, but they do not resolve that
"I will not perform such an act again." Thus, they accept the worldly and other-
worldly suffering and torment, but do not desist from committing sinful and evil
deeds.  Moreover, "It is heard (shrutam) that the nature of women is very bad,"
as it is said. Even after saying this, they (women) either do not do or do the
opposite of what is said.  Commentary - "It is heard" (shrutam) means what has
been obtained from the teacher or from the people, that is, what has been
previously described, such as: the mind of women is difficult to understand, the
result of association with women is dreadful, women are of an unstable nature,
difficult to manage, short-sighted, naturally light, and self-conceited. This is
how "the nature of women is known" (strivedo) through the traditional stories or
the scriptures that reveal the true nature and the consequences of association
with women.  As it is said, "The heart of women is as difficult to grasp as
their speech, and their nature is as uneven as the path of a mountain. The mind
of women does not stay in one place, like the water on a lotus leaf, and they
are nourished by various vices, like creepers by poisonous substances."
Moreover, "They are well-conquered, well-loved, well-conquered, well-loved,
well-conquered, and well-obtained. But in the case of women who are difficult,
there should be no trust."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram - anuvAda - pApa santapta-pApoM se pIr3ita puruSa apane
pApa ke badale apane karNa, nAsikA tathA kaNTha kA chedana sahana karate haiM
arthAt unake kAna, nAka aura galA kATa diye jAte haiM  /  jisa para bhI ve mana
meM aisA nizcaya nahIM karate ki aba Age se aisA pApapUrNa kRtya nahIM kreNge|
TIkA - atha karNanAsikAcchedaM tathA kaNThacchedanaM ca 'titikSante'
svakRtadoSAtsahante iti, evaM bahuvidhAM viDambanAm 'asminneva' mAnuSe ca
janmAni pApena-pApakarmaNA saMtaptA narakAtiriktAM vedanAmabhavantIti na ca
punaretadevambhUtamanuSThAnaM na kariSyAma iti bruvata ityavadhArayantItiyAvat,
tadaivamaihikAmuSmikA duHkha viDambanA apyaGgIkurvanti na punastadakaraNatayA
nivRttiM pratipadyanta iti bhAvaH  // 22 //  kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha - pApAcArI
puruSa apane dvArA kiye gaye pApAcAra ke pariNAmasvarUpa kAna nAka va kaNTha kA
chedana, aisA kaSTa sahana karate haiM  /  ve pApI apane pApa karma se saMvapta
hokara narka ke atirikta isa loka meM bhI aneka taraha kI yAtanAyeM bhogate haiM
kintu ve apane mana meM aisA dRr3ha saMkalpa nahIM kara pAte ki hama Age aisA
duSkarma nahIM kareMge isa prakAra pApI manuSya isa loka meM ora paraloka meM
duHkha tathA viDambanA aura durgati svIkAra karate haiM kintu pApakarma-duSkarma
karane se nivRtta nahIM hote| sutamevamegesiM, itthIvedeti hu suyakkhAyaM  /
eMvapi tA vadittANaM, aduvA kammuNA avakareMti  // 23 //  chAyA -
zrutametadevamekeSAM, strIveda iti hu svAkhyAtam  /  evamapi tAuktvA athavA
karmaNA apakurvanti  //  anuvAda - strI vega-striyoM kI pravRtti bahuta burI
hotI hai aisA sunA hai, loga aisA kahate haiM  /  kAmazAstra bhI aisA kahatA hai
/  una sabake kathanAnusAra striyA~ kahane ko to aisA kaha detI haiM ki hama
aisA nahIM kareMgI kintu ve apakAra karatI haiM  /  TIkA - 'zrutam' upalabdhaM
gurvAdeH sakAzAllokato vA 'etad' iti yatpUrvamAkhyAtaM, tadyathA-durvijJeyaM
strINAM ciMtta dArUNaH strIsambandhavipAkaH tathA calasvabhAvA:striyo
duSparicArA adIrghaprekSiNyaH prakRtyA ladhvyo bhavantyAtmagarvitAzca 'iti'
evamekeSAM svAkhyAtaM bhavati lokazrutiparamparayA cirantanAkhyAyikAsu vA
parijJAtaM bhavati striyaM yathAvasthitasvabhAvatastatsambandhavipAkatazca
vedayati-jJApayatIti strIvedo-vaizikAdikaM strIsvabhAvA virbhAvakaM zAstramiti,
taduktam durgrAhyaM hRdayaM yathaiva vadanaM yadUrpaNAtargataM, bhAvaH
parvatamArgadurgaviSamaH strINAM na vijJAyate  /  citaM puSkarapatratoyataralaM
naikatra santiSThate nAryo nAma viSAGkarairiva latA doSaiH sama vardhitA  // 1
// " apica "suTThavijiyAsu suThuvi piyAsu suTThaviya piyAsu suTThaviya
laddhapasarAsu  /  aDaIsu mahiliyAsu ya vIsaMbho neva kAyavvo  // 1 //  chAyA -
suSThu vijitAsu suSTravapi prItAsu supi ca labdhaprasarAsu  /  aTakISu mahilAsu
ca vizvambho naivakAryaH  //  282

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Study of the Nature of Women
That man who sees the entire world of living beings as equal, even though he
desires a woman, does not attain sorrow. ॥2॥ He raises his finger, that man, in
the entire world of living beings. Though desiring the form of a woman, he does
not do anything more than her shadow with desires.  Verily, these (women) create
discontentment in everyone. But they do not do anything more than what is
sufficient for him who is content with (their) desires. ॥3॥ Further, even after
saying "I will not do the improper," they still "do the opposite" by their
actions. Or, even if they accept (the instructions) in front (of the teacher),
they still do the opposite of the teacher's teachings. ॥23॥ The author himself
explains the nature of that (behavior).  Explanation - What was said earlier, we
have heard from the elders and also from the people. Comprehending the mind of
women is very difficult. The fruit of having contact with them is also very
dreadful and painful. The nature of women is fickle. Serving them is very
difficult. Women are not far-sighted. Their nature is extremely vile and low,
they are very arrogant. Many say so. This is also heard from the traditional
lore. It also appears so from the old stories. The nature of women and the fruit
of their association is called the "Impetuosity of Women" in the science of Kama
(erotics). This science describes the nature of women. It is stated in this
science that the reflection seen on a mirror is distant and cannot be grasped.
Similarly, the heart of women cannot be grasped or understood. The intention of
women is as deep as the difficult path of a mountain, hence cannot be known.
Their mind is as fluid and unstable as a drop of water on a lotus leaf.
Therefore, it does not stay in one place. Just as a poisonous creeper grows from
a poisonous seed, similarly, women are born with defects. One should not trust a
woman who is completely conquered, self-reliant, extremely pleased, very clean,
or extremely familiar with the forest. In this whole world, what man can raise
his finger and say that he has not suffered torment by desiring a woman. The
tendency of women is that they do not only despise the man they desire, but they
also despise and insult all others. Women, even after giving assurance in words
that they will not do such acts in the future, act contrary to their words, or
they accept the words of the teacher in front of him, but later on, they harm
him.  The mind thinks of one thing, the speech says another, and the action does
something else. Therefore, the monk should not have faith in women, knowing them
to be highly deceitful. ॥24॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM ubhe aMgulI so puriso sayalaMbhi jIvaloyammi  /  kAmaM
taeNa nArI jeNa na pattAI dukhAI  // 2 //  urdhvayatu aMguliM sa puruSaH sakale
jIvaloke  /  kAmayatA nArIveMSamapi kurvanti navaraM yasyAlaM chAyA caiva kAmaiH
//  - aha eyANaM pagaI savvassa kareMti vemaNassAIM  /  tassa Na kareMti NavaraM
jassa alaM ceva kAmehiM  // 3 //  " kiJca - akAryamahaM na
kariSyAmItyevamuktvApi vAcA 'aduva' tti tathApi karmaNA-kriyayA 'apakurvanti'
iti virUpamAcaranti, yadi vA agrataH pratipadyApi ca zAsturevApakurvantIti  //
23 //  sUtrakAra eva tatsvabhAvAviSkaraNAyAha TIkArtha - pahale jo kahA gayA hai
vaha saba hamane gurujana Adi se tathA logoM se bhI sunA hai| striyoM - ke citta
ko samajha pAnA bahuta kaThina hai  /  unake sAtha samparka rakhane kA phala bhI
bar3A dArUNa - kaSTaprada hotA hai  /  striyoM kA svabhAva caMcala hotA hai|
unakI sevA kara pAnA bahuta kaThina hai  /  striyA~ dUradarzI nahIM hotI haiN|
unakI prakRti bar3I tuccha nIcI hotI hai, ve bar3I garvAnvita hotI hai  /  aisA
kaI kahate haiN| laukika zruti paramparA se bhI yaha sunA jAtA hai logoM ko aisA
kahate sunate haiM  /  purAnI kathAoM se bhI aisA mAlUma hotA hai  /  striyoM ke
svabhAva aura saMsarga kA phala vivecaka kAmazAstra meM strI vega kahA jAtA hai
/  isa zAstra meM striyoM ke svabhAva kA varNana hai  /  isa zAstra meM batalAyA
gayA hai ki darpaNa para par3A mukha kA pratibimba dUragrAhI hotA hai use
pakar3a pAnA sambhava nahIM hotA  /  usI taraha striyoM ke hRdaya ko bhI pakar3A
nahIM jA sakatA, samajhA nahIM jA sakatA  /  striyoM kA abhiprAya pahAr3a ke
durgama rAste ke samAna gahana hone ke kAraNa jAnA nahIM jA sakatA  /  unakA
citta kamala ke patte para par3I huI pAnI kI bUMda kI taraha bahuta tarala -
caMcala yA asthira hotA hai  /  isalie vaha eka jagaha nahIM TikatA  /  jaise
jahara ke aMkura se jaharIlI bela paidA hotI hai usI taraha aurateM doSoM ke
sAtha paidA huI haiN| acchI taraha vijita-jItI huI, svAyatta kI huI atyanta
prasanna yA sApha sutharI yA atyanta paricita aTavI - vanabhUmi tathA strI meM
vizvAsa nahIM karanA caahie| isa sArI duniyA meM koI AdamI kyA uMgalI uThAkara
yaha kaha sakatA hai ki usane strI kI kAmanA kara yAtanAyeM na bhogI ho  /
striyoM kI aisI pravRtti hai ki ve kevala usa puruSa kA tiraskAra nahIM karatI
haiM jise ve cAhatI haiM  /  bAkI sabakA tiraskAraapamAna kara detI haiN|
striyA~ vacana dvArA aisA AzvAsana dekara ke bhI ve aba Age aise kArya nahIM
karegI, apane vacana ke viparIta vaisA AcaraNa karatI haiM athavA zikSA dene
vAle ke sAmane to ve usakI bAta mAna letI haiM kintu bAda meM usI kA apakAra-
burA karatI haiM  /  annaM maNeNa ciMteti, vAyA annaM ca kammuNA annaM  /  tamhA
Na saha bhikkhU, bahumAyAo itthio NaccA  //  24  //  chAyA anyanmanasA
cintayanti vAcA anyacca karmaNA'nyat  /  tasmAnna zraddadhIta bhikSuH vahumAyAH
striyoH jJAtvA  //   anuvAda - striyAM apane mana meM kucha ora hI socatI hai,
tathA vacana dvArA kucha ora hI bolatI hai| karma dvArA ve kucha ora hI karatI
hai  /  isalie bhikSu (muni) striyoM ko atyadhika mAyAyukta chalapUrNa jAnakara
unameM vizvAsa na kareM  /  283

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Jain monk should not have
faith in women, for they are full of deception. Just as Dattavaisika was not
deceived by the tricks of a courtesan, in the same way, others should also not
have faith in women.  A young woman, adorned with various ornaments and clothes,
may say to the Jain monk, "I have renounced the household life and will follow
the path of asceticism. Please teach me the Dharma, O protector from the fear of
the cycle of birth and death." However, the monk should understand that this is
merely a ploy, as the woman is still attached to worldly pleasures. Therefore,
the monk should not be misled by such deception.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - pAtAlodaragambhIreNa manasA'nyaccintayanti tathA
zrutimAtrapezalayA vipAkadArUNayA vAcA anyadbhASante tathA 'karmaNA'
anuSThAnenAnyanniSpAdayanti, yata evaM bahumAyAH striya iti, evaM jJAtvA
'tasmAt' tAsAM 'bhikSuH' sAdhuH 'na zraddadhIta' tatkRtayA mAyayAtmAnaM
pratArayet. dattAvaizikavata. atra caitatkathAnama-dattAvaizika ekayA gaNikayA
taistaiH prakAraiH pratAryamAno'pi tAM neSTavAn, tatastayoktam-kiM mayA
daurbhAgyakalaGkAGkitayA jIvantyA prayojanam ?, ahaM tvatparityaktA'gniM
pravizAmi, tato'sAvavocat-mAyayA idamapyasti vaizike, tadA'sau pUrvasuraGgAmukhe
kASThasamudayaM kRtvA taM prajvAlya tatrAnupravizya suraGgayA gRhamAgatA,
dattako'pi ca idamapi asti vaizike ityevamasau vilapannapi vAtikaizcitAyAM
prakSiptaH, tathApi nAsau tAsuzraddhAnaM kRtavAn evamanyenApina
shrddhaatvymiti||24|| kiJcAnyat TIkArtha - sUtrakAra striyoM kA svabhAva prakaTa
karane hetu pratipAdita karate haiM  /  striyA~ pAtAla ke udara kI jyoM apane
atyanta gambhIra-gahare mana meM kucha anya socatI hai aura aisI vANI dvArA
sambhASaNa karatI hai, aisA bolatI hai jo sunane meM rUci lagatI hai kintu
pariNAma meM dArUNa va kaSTakara hotI hai  /  ve karma dvArA kucha ora hI karatI
haiM, ve bahuta mAyAvatI-chala pradhAna hotI haiM  /  ataeva sAdhu ko cAhie ki
ve una para vizvAsa na kareM  /  unakI mAyA pravaMcanA dvArA apanI AtmA ko
vaMcita na hone de  /  dhokhe meM na Ane de  /  jaise dattA vaizaka nAmaka
puruSa strI kI mAyA se dhokhe meM nahIM Aye  /  eka kathAnaka hai, dattA vaizaka
nAmaka puruSa ko pratArita karane ke lie-Thagane ke lie eka gaNikA ne taraha-
taraha ke upAya kiye kintu usane usakI kAmanA nahIM kii| usake bAda gaNikA ne
kahA maiM durbhAgya ke kalaMka se aMkita hU~-bar3I abhAginI hU~-badakismata hU~
aba jIvita rahane se mujhe kyA lAbha Apane merA parityAga kiyA mujhe svIkAra
nahIM kiyA  /  ataH maiM agni meM praveza kruuNgii| yaha sunakara dattAvaizaka
bolA ki striyA~ chalapUrvaka Aga meM bhI praveza kara sakatI hai  /  usake bAda
gaNikA ne pahale se banAyI huI suraMga ke dvAra para kASTha rAzi ekatrita kara
citA banavAkara usameM praviSTha hokara Aga lagavA lI va suraMga dvArA apane
ghara pahu~ca gayI isa para dattaka ne kahA ki striyA~ aisI chalanA pravaMcanA
bhI karatI haiM, vaha aisA kaha hI rahA thA ki kucha siraphire dhUrta yA pAgala
usako vizvAsa karAne ke lie use cittA para pheMkane ko udyata hue  /  vaha isa
para vilApa karane lagA, zoka karane lagA, para ve siraphire nahIM mAne usako
citA meM DAla diyA phira bhI usane striyoM para vizvAsa nahIM kiyA isI taraha
oroM ko bhI striyoM para vizvAsa nahIM karanA cAhie  /  juvatI samaNaM bUyA
vicittalaMkAra vatthagANi parihittA  /  virattA carissahaM rukkhaM,
dhammamAikkha Ne bhayaMtAro  // 25 //  chAyA - yuvatiH zramaNaM bUyAd
vicitrAlaGkAravastrakANi paridhAya viratA cariSyAmyahaM rUkSaM dharmamAcakSva
naH bhayatrAtaH  //  anuvAda - koI navayauvanA taraha-taraha ke AvaraNa AbhUSaNa
dhAraNa kara sAdhu se kahe ki Apa saMsAra ke janma maraNa ke bhaya se rakSA
karane vAle hai  /  maiM vairAgyayukta hokara saMyama kA pAlana karUMgI  /  Apa
mujhe dharma sunAyeM, dharmopadeza de  /  TIkA - 'yuvati' abhinava yauvanA strI
vicitravastrAlaGkAravibhUSitazarIrA mAyayA zramaNaM brUyAt, tadyathAviratA ahaM
gRhapAzAt na mamAnukUlo bhartA mahyaM vA'sau na rocate parityaktA vA'haM
tenetyetat 'cariSyAmi' 284

Page #313 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"I will study the knowledge of women. I will practice the restraint called
'ruksha' or perhaps the restraint called 'maun'. There is a saying that the
muni's 'maun' is a restraint. I will practice that restraint. O you who protect
us from fear, teach me the Dharma, so that I may not become a vessel of
suffering."  "And what else?"  Commentary: A young woman, adorned with various
clothes and ornaments, may deceitfully tell a sadhu that she has renounced
worldly life, that her husband is not agreeable to her, that he does not follow
her wishes, or that she does not like him, or that he has abandoned her.
Therefore, she will practice restraint. Sometimes, 'maun' is found in the
scriptures. The muni's feeling is called 'maun', and its meaning is restraint.
That woman says, "I will practice the Dharma of 'maun-samyama'. Therefore, O
sadhu, you who deliver us from the fear of worldly transmigration, teach me the
Dharma, give me the teachings of Dharma, so that I may not become a vessel of
worldly suffering."  "A woman, pretending to be a 'shravaka', comes near a
sadhu, saying, 'I am a 'sadharmini' of the 'shramanas'. Just as a water pot made
of lac melts near a fire, so too, a wise man, a knowledgeable sadhu, becomes
dejected in the company of a woman."  Commentary: Or, by the word 'pravade', it
is meant that a woman, pretending to be a 'sadhvi', approaches a sadhu. By
saying, "I am a 'shravaka' and a 'sadharmini' of your 'shramanas'," she comes
close to him, and like a heap of sand, she corrupts the sadhu from Dharma. This
is what is said: The proximity of a woman is a great harm to a 'brahmacharin'.
And it is also said:  "Knowledge, that knowledge, that austerity, and that
restraint, all are destroyed in a moment, all are destroyed by a woman."  In
this very meaning, the sutrakara gives an example: Just as a pot made of lac,
placed near a fire, melts, so too, a wise man, who knows what is to be known,
becomes dejected in the company of women, and becomes lax in the practice of
Dharma. What to speak of others?  (285

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  strI parijJAdhyayanaM kariSyAmyahaM 'rUkSa' miti saMyama, maunamiti vA
kkacitpAThaH tatra munerayaM maunaH-saMyamastamAcariSyAmi, dharmamAcakSva 'Ne'
tti asmAkaM he bhayatrAtaH !, yathA'hamevaM dukhAnAM bhAjanaM na bhavAmi tathA
dharmamAvedayeti  // 25 //  kiJcAnyat TIkArtha - koI navayuvatI taraha-taraha ke
vastroM aura gahanoM se apanI deha ko sajAkara chala-pUrvaka sAdhu se kahe ki
gRhastha jIvana se mujhe vairAgya ho gayA hai, merA pati mere anukUla nahIM hai-
mere kahe anusAra nahIM calatA athavA maiM use pasanda nahIM karatI athavA usane
merA parityAga kara diyA hai  /  ata: maiM saMyama kA pAlana kruuNgii| kahIM
maunama pATha prApta hotA hai  /  muni ke bhAva ko mauna kahA jAtA hai usakA
Azaya saMyama se hai  /  vaha strI kahatI hai maiM mauna-saMyama kA dharma kA
paripAlana kruuNgii| isalie saMsAra ke AvAgamana ke bhaya se chuTakArA dilAne
vAle sAdhu tuma mujhe dharma sunAo, dharma kI zikSA do jinase maiM sAMsArika
duHkhoM kI bhAjana-pAtra na bana sakU~  /  adu sAviyA pavAeNaM, ahamaMsi
sAhammiNI ya samaNANaM  /  jatukuMbhe jahA uvajjoI saMvAse vidU visIejjA  // 26
//  chAyA - atha zrAvikA pravAdena, ahamassi sAdharmiNI zramaNAnAm  /
jatukummaH yathA upajyoti, saMvAse vidvAn viSIdeta  //  anuvAda - strI zrAvikA-
zramaNikopAsikA hone kA bahAnA banAkara yaha kahakara ki maiM
sAdharmikAsaddharmAcaraNazIlA hU~, sAdhu ke samIpa AtI hai  /  jaise agni ke
pAsa rakhA huA jalakumbha lAkha kA ghar3A gala jAtA hai usI prakAra strI ke
saMga se, sahacarya se vidvAna puruSa bhI, vijJa sAdhu bhI viSAda prApta karatA
hai, apane patha se vicalita ho jAtA hai  /  TIkA - athavAnena "pravAdena"
vyAjeta sAdhvantikaM yoSidupasarpet-yathA'haM zrAviketikRtvA yuSmAkaM zramaNAnAM
sAdharmiNItyevaM prapaJcena nedIyasI bhUtvA kUlavAlukamiva sAdhu
dharmAdbhazayati, etaduktaM bhavati-yoSitsAnnidhyaM brahmacAriNo mahate'naya,
tathA coktam -: "tajjJAnaM, tacca vijJAnaM, tattapaH sa ca saMyamaH  /
sarvamekapade bhraSTaM, sarvathA kimapi striyaH  // 1 // " asminnevArthe
dRSTAntamAha-yathA jAtuSaH kumbho 'jyotiSaH'agneH samIpe vyavasthita
upajyotirvartI vilIyate' dravati, evaM yoSitAM 'saMvAse' sAnnidhye vidvAnapi
AstAM tAvaditaro yo'pi viditavedyo'sAvapi dharmAnuSThAnaM prati 'viSIdeta'
zItalavihArI bhavediti  // 26 //  evaM tAvatstrIsAnnidhye doSAn pradarzyatatsaM
sparzajaM doSaM darzayitumAha TIkArtha - koI strI yaha bahAnA banAkara ki maiM
zrAvikA hU~-zrAvaka vratoM kA pAlana karatI hU~ sAdhuoM ki sAdharmikA hU~, unake
dvArA upadiSTa dharma kA pAlana karatI hU~, sAdhu ke samIpa AtI hai, aisA
prapaMca jAla racakara, vaha sAdhu ke samparka meM Akara kUlavAluki jyoM usako
dharma se bhraSTa, patita kara detI hai  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki strI
kA sAnnidhya samparka brahmacAriyoM ke lie ghora anartha janaka hai  /  kahA bhI
hai striyoM ke samparka meM Ate hI jJAna-vijJAna tapa, saMyama yaha sabhI eka hI
sAtha naSTa ho jAte haiM  /  isa sambandha meM sUtrakAra eka dRSTAnta dekara
batAte haiM-jaise lAkha kA ghar3A Aga ke pAsa rakhe jAne para gala jAtA hai usI
taraha strI ke samavAsa yA sAnidhya meM rahane se vidvAna puruSa bhI jo jAnane
yogya padArthoM ko jAnatA hai, dharmAcaraNa meM, saMyama paripAlana meM zithila
vihArI ho jAtA hai- DhIlA par3a jAtA hai, dUsare kisI kI to bAta hI kyA ? (285

Page #314 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Sutra of Sutrakritanga. In a
lac vessel, hidden in light, when heated, it perishes. Similarly, the Anagara
(ascetics) perish by association with women. ||27||  Explanation - Just as a lac
vessel, hidden in light (fire), when heated on all sides, quickly melts and
perishes, in the same way, the Anagara (ascetic) attains destruction by
association (Samvasa) with women, completely abandoning the austerity of vows,
and falling from the body of self-control.  Commentary - Just as the lac vessel,
covered by 'Jyotisha' (fire), when heated by the fire, facing it, is quickly
'Nashama upayati' (perishes), melting away, in the same way, the Anagaras, by
'Samvasena' (association, enjoyment) with women, attain destruction, completely
abandoning the hardship of vows, falling from the body of self-control.  Some
say, when asked, that they do not commit sins, "This woman is sleeping in my
lap," i.e., she has been sleeping in my lap since childhood. ||28||  Commentary
- Those who are attached to the cycle of rebirth, indulge in 'Papakarmana'
(sinful acts) such as sexual indulgence, when questioned by the preceptor, etc.,
some deluded ones say this, as if - "I, born in such a noble family, will not do
such a sinful, wrong act. This (woman) has been sleeping in my lap like a
daughter, she is acting thus due to her previous habit, not that I, knowing the
nature of the cycle of rebirth, will give up the observance of vows even at the
cost of life."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  jatukuMbhe joiuvagUDhe, Asu'bhitatte NAsamuvayAi  /
evitthiyAhiM aNagArA, saMvAseNa NAsamuvayaMti  // 27 //  chAyA - jatukumbhe
jyotirUpagUDhaH Azvabhitapto nAzamupayAti  /  evaM strIbhiranagArAH saMvAsena
nAzamupayAnti  //  anuvAda - jyoti-agni dvArA upagUDha-AliMgita yA sparza kiyA
huA lAkha kA dhar3A cAroM ora se abhitapta hokara, khUba tapa kara zIghra hI
gala jAtA hai, usI prakAra aNagAra-gRhatyAgI sAdhu striyoM ke saMvAsasamparka
meM Akara zIghra nAza prApta karatA hai, vinaSTa ho jAtA  /  TIkA - yathA
jAtuSaH kumbho 'jyotiSA' agninopagUDhaH-samAliGgito'bhitapto'gninAbhimukhyena
santApitaH kSipraM 'nAzamupayAti' dravIbhUya vinazyati, evaM strIbhiH sArdhaM
'saMvasanena' paribhogenAnagArA nAzamupayAnti, sarvathA jAtuSakumbhavat
vratakAThinyaM parityajya saMyamazarIrAd bhrazyanti  // 27 //  apica - TIkArtha
- isa prakAra strI ke sAnnidhya meM hone vAle doSoM ko pradarzita kara aba usake
saMsparzajasaMsparza se paidA hone vAle doSoM ko pragaTa karane hetu kahate haiM
/  jaise agni dvArA samAliMgita-saMspRSTa lAkha kA ghar3A cAroM ora se agni
dvArA saMtApita kiye jAne para drava ke rUpa meM parivartita hokara-galakara
naSTa ho jAtA hai  /  jisa prakAra lAkha kA ghar3A tapakara apanA kaDApana
chor3a detA hai, vaise hI strI ke saMvAsa se sAdhu vrata kA kAThinya-kaThina
vratoM kA AcaraNa chor3akara saMyama rUpI zarIra se bhraSTa patita ho jAte haiN|
kuvvaMti pAvagaM kammaM puTThA vegevamAhiMsu  /  no'haM karemi pAvaMti, aMke
sAiNA mamesatti  // 28 //  chAyA - kuvanti pApakaM karma, pRSTA eke evamAhuH  /
nA'haM karomi pApamiti aGkezAyinI mamaiSeti  /  anuvAda - kaI patita puruSa jo
duSkarma karate haiM, jaba unase pUchA jAtA hai to kahate haiM ki hama pApa
nahIM karate, yaha strI to merI goda meM sotI rahI hai arthAt bacapana meM merI
godI meM leTatI rahI hai  /  - TIkA - tAsu saMsArAbhiSvaGgiNISvabhiSaktA
avadhIritaihikAmuSmikApAyAH "pApakarma" maithunAsevanAdikaM 'kurvanti'
vidadhati, paribhraSTAH sadanuSThAnAd 'eke' kecanotkaTamohA AcAryAdinA codyamAnA
'evamAhuH' vakSyamANa muktavantaH, tadyathA-nAhamevambhUtakulaprasUtaH etadkArya
pApopAdAnabhUtaMkariSyAmi, mamaiSA duhitRkalpA pUrvam aGkezAyinI AsIt tadeSA
pUrvAbhyAsenaiva mayyevamAcaMrati, na punarahaM viditasaMsArasvabhAvaH
prANAtyaye'pi vrataGgaM vidhAsya iti  // 28 //  kiJca - _TIkArtha - saMsAra meM
phaMsAne vAlI strI meM saMsakta tathA saMyamamUlaka sat anuSThAna se patita
tathA aihika aura pAralaukika patana se abhIta-nahIM Darane vAle, bhraSTa puruSa
duSkarma karate haiM ve utkaTa ghora moha se AcchAdita haiM, jaba AcArya Adi
usase pUchate haiM to ve aisA batalAte haiM ki maiM aise kula meM-nIca kula meM
paidA nahIM huA hU~ ki isa prakAra ke pApajanaka anucita kArya karUM  /  yaha
strI to merI beTI ke samAna hai, yaha bacapana meM merI 286

Page #315 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The woman was sleeping in the lap. Therefore, due to her
previous practice, she behaves this way with me. I know the nature of the world-
substance, even if the living beings are destroyed, I will not break the vow.
The second foolishness of the ignorant child is that he commits sin but does not
acknowledge it. In this way, he commits double the sin. He desires fame and
reputation in the world, thus he wishes for indiscipline - he wants to move
forward in the direction of indiscipline.  Commentary: The one who is afflicted
by attachment and aversion, who is ignorant and does not see the ultimate truth
or liberation, his second foolishness is that on one hand, he commits the wrong
act of breaking the fourth vow of celibacy, and on the other hand, he denies
having done so, he speaks falsehood. The author explains that by such
unrighteous conduct and denial, he commits double the sin. Why does he deny? It
is because he desires honor, respect, and reputation in the world, he wants to
hide his sinful act, thus he wishes for indiscipline, he wants to move towards
the path of indiscipline.  "They said to the ascetic who is worthy of being
looked at, who has attained self-knowledge: 'O protector from the ocean of the
world! Please accept from us the clothes, the bowl, the food, and the drink.'"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM goda meM sotI thI  /  isalie apane pahale ke abhyAsa ke
kAraNa hI mere sAtha isa prakAra AcaraNa karatI hai  /  maiM to saMsAra ke
svarUpa ko-vastutatva ko jAnatA hU~, prANoM kA nAza hone para bhI vrata bhaMga
nahIM karU~gA  /  bAlassa maMdayaM bIyaM, jaM kaDaM avajANaI bhujo| duguNaM
kareI se pAvaM, pUyaNa kAmo visannesI  // 29 //  chAyA - bAlasya mAndyaM
dvitIyaM, yacca kRtamapajAnIte bhUyaH  /  dviguNaM karoti sa pApaM pUjana kAmo
viSaNNaiSI  //  anuvAda - usa bAla-ajJAnI puruSa kI dUsarI maMdatA-mUrkhatA yaha
hai ki vaha pApa karma karatA hai para use svIkAra nahIM karatA, isa prakAra
vaha dugunA pApa karatA hai  /  vaha saMsAra meM apanI kIrti aura pratiSThA kI
kAmanA karatA hai aisA kara vaha mAno asaMyama kI icchA karatA hai-asaMyama kI
dizA meM Age bar3hanA cAhatA hai| TIkA- 'bAlasya' ajJasya rAgadveSA
kulitasyAparamArthadRza etad dvitIya mAncha' ajJatvam ekaM tAvadakAryakaraNena
caturtha vratabhaGgo dvitIyaM tadapalapatenamRSAvAdaH, tadeva darzayati-
yatkRtamasadAcaraNaM bhUyaH'punarapareNa codyamAnaH apajAnIte' apalapati-
naitanmayA kRtamiti, sa evambhUta asadanuSThAnena tadapalapavena ca dviguNaM
pApaM karoti, kimarthamapalapatItyAhapUjanaM-satkArapuraskArastat-kAmaH
tadabhilASI mA me loke avarNavAda syAdityakAryaM pracchAdayati
viSaNNa:asaMyamastameSituM zIlamasyeti viSaNNaiSI  // 29 //  kiJcAnyat -
TIkArtha - jo puruSa rAga dveSa se Akula hai, ajJa-jJAna rahita hai,
aparamArthadarzI paramArtha yA mokSa ko nahIM dekhatA, usakI dUsarI mUrkhatA
yaha hai ki eka ora vaha duSkArya kara caturthavrata brahmacarya kA bhaMga
karatA hai, dUsarI ora vaisA karanA svIkAra nahIM karatA hai, vaha mithyA
bhASaNa karatA hai ki maiMne aisA nahIM kiyA  /  sUtrakAra isa kA digdarzana
karAte hue kahate haiM ki usa ajJAnI puruSa ne jo asat-duSita kArya kiyA, usake
sambandha meM pUche jAne para vaha apalApa karatA hai, inkAra karatA hai ki
maiMne yaha kukRtya nahIM kiyA isa prakAra vaha kutsita karma karane tathA use
svIkAra na karane ke rUpa meM dviguNita pApa karatA hai, vaha pApa karane para
bhI phira asvIkAra kyoM karatA hai ? ise spaSTa karate hue sUtrakAra batalAte
haiM ki-saMsAra meM apanI pUjA-pratiSThA, kIrti kI cAha karatA hai, vaha socatA
hai ki saMsAra meM merI nindA apakIrti na ho, isalie vaha apane kaluSita kArya
kA pracchAdanachipAva karanA cAhatA hai, vaisA karane vAlA asaMyama kI icchA
karatA hai  /  saMlokaNijamaNagAraM, AyagayaM nimaMtaNeNAhaMsu  /   /  vatthaM
ca tAi ! pAyaM vA, annaM pANagaMpaDiggAhe  // 30 //  chAyA - saMlokanIyamanagAra
mAtmagataM nimantraNenAhuH  /  vastraJca trAyin pAtraM vA annaM pAnakaM
pratigRhANa  //  anuvAda - jo sAdhu saMlokanIya-dekhane meM sundara lagatA hai,
AtmajJa-jJAnI hai, striyA~ use apanI ora AkRSTa karane hetu AmaMtrita karane
hetu kahatI haiM, saMsAra sAgara se trANa dene vAle-rakSA karane vAle munivarya
! Apa mere yahA~ se vastra, pAtra, AhAra, peya padArtha grahaNa kareM, svIkAra
kreN| (287

Page #316 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Śrī Sūtra Kṛtāṅga Sūtra** commentary, a collection of verses, describes a
beautiful and virtuous **anagāra** (a monk who has renounced worldly life), who
is self-aware and has attained self-knowledge. Some **śvairīṇī** (women who are
free and unrestrained) invite him, saying, "O **Trāyin** (protector)! We will
give you all that you need, such as clothes, vessels, and drinks. Please come to
our house and accept them." ||30||  The commentary explains that the
**śvairīṇī** women invite the **anagāra** with the intention of tempting him.
The **anagāra** should understand this invitation as a trap, like rice grains
scattered to lure a pig. He should not desire to go to their house, for he is
bound by the **viṣaya** (objects of sense) and will fall into **moha**
(delusion). ||31||  The commentary further explains that the **anagāra** should
not desire to return to the **agāra** (household life), as he is bound by the
**viṣaya** (objects of sense) and will fall into **moha** (delusion). The
**viṣaya** are like ropes that bind the ignorant soul, making him unable to
break free from the bonds of attachment. He becomes confused and bewildered,
unable to discern right from wrong. ||31||  This concludes the first section of
the **Śrī Sūtra Kṛtāṅga Sūtra** commentary on the knowledge of women. ||4-1||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA-saMlokanIyaM-saMdarzanIyamAkRtimantaM kaJcana
'anagAraM' sAdhumAtmani gatamAtmagatam AtmajJamityarthaH tadevambhUtaM kAzcana
svairiNyo 'nimantraNena' nimantraNapura:saram 'AhuH' uktavatyaH, tadyathA-he
trAyin ! sAdhovastraM pAtramanyadvA pAnAdikaM yena kecacidbhavataH prayojanaM
tadahaM bhavate sarvaMdadAmIti madgRhamAgatya pratigRhANa tvamiti  // 30 //
upasaMhArArthamAha - TIkArtha - dekhane meM jo sundara aura uttama AkRti ke
pratIta hote haiM, aise AtmajJAnI sAdhu ko kaI zvairiNIvyabhicAriNI striyA~
AmaMtrita karatI huI kahatI haiM ki he trANa karane vAle ! rakSA karane vAle
munivara ! vastra, pAtra tathA pIne yogya vastueM Adi jo Apako cAhie, ve saba
maiM Apako dUMgI Apa mere ghara Akara unheM grahaNa kreN| NIvAra mevaM bujjheNa,
No icche agAramAgaMtuM  /  baddhe visayapAse hiM , moha mAvajai puNo maMde
||31||ttibemi|| chAyA - nIvArameva budhyeta, necchedagAramAntum  /  baddho
viSayapAzena moha mApadyate punarmandaH  //  iti bravImi  //  _ anuvAda -
pUrvokta rUpa meM die gae pralobhanoM ko sAdhu sUara ko phaMsAne hetu jAla meM
phailAye gae cAvala ke dAnoM ke samAna samajhe, vaha vApasa gRhastha meM Ane kI
icchA na kare  /  viSaya rUpI phaMde meM baMdhA huA ajJAnI puruSa moha ko prApta
ho jAtA hai-moha mUr3ha bana jAtA hai, aisA maiM kahatA hU~  /  TIkA-
etaghoSitAM vastrAdikamAmantraNaM nIvArakalpa budhyeta' jAnIyAt, yathA hi
nIvAreNa kenacidbhakSyavizeSaNa sUkarAdivaMzamAnIyate, evamasAvapitenAmantraNena
vazamAnIyate, atastannecched 'agAraM' gRhaM gantuM, yadivA-gRhamevAvoM
gRhAvartoM gRhabhramastaM 'necchet' nAbhilaSet, kimiti ?, yato 'baddho' vazIkRto
viSayA eva zabdAdayaH 'pAzA' rajjUbandhanAni tairbaddhaH-paravazIkRtaHsneha
pAzAnapatroTayitumasamarthaHsan'mohaM cittavyAkulatvamAgacchati-
kiMkartavyatAmUDho bhavati paunaH punyena 'mandaH' ajJo jaDa itiH parisamAptau
/  bravImIti pUrvavat  // 31 //  iti strIparijJAyAM prathamoddezakaH samAptaH
// 4-1 //  TIkArtha - aba isa uddezaka kA upasaMhAra karate hue sUtrakAra kahate
haiM ki striyoM dvArA vastra pAtra Adi dene ke rUpa meM jo AmantraNa kiyA jAtA
hai, sAdhu use cAvala ke dAne ke samAna samajhe, jaise cAvala ke dAnoM ko
bikhera kara sUara Adi ko vaza meM kiyA jAtA hai, pakar3A jAtA hai, usI prakAra
strI bhI vastra pAtra Adi dene hetu AmaMtrita kara sAdhu ko apane adhIna banA
letI hai  /  isalie sAdhu usa strI ke ghara ja kI icchA na kare athavA ghara
rUpI Avarta meM-jala ke bha~vara meM girane kA abhilASI na bane  /  zabdAdi
viSaya, pAza yA baMdhana ke samAna hai, jinase baddha huA ajJAnI jIva sneha ke
baMdhana ko tor3a pAne meM sakSama nahIM hotA, vaha punaH punaH cintA se vyAkula
hotA hai, kiMkartavyavimUr3ha bana jAtA hai  /  use kyA karanA cAhie, kyA nahIM
karanA cAhie, isakA jJAna nahIM rahatA  /  yahA~ iti zabda samApti ke artha meM
hai, bravImi-bolatA hU~ yaha pahale kI jyoM yojanIya hai| strI parijJA kA pahalA
uddezaka samApta huA  /  Wan  -288)

Page #317 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of Women: Second Objective  The first objective has been discussed.
Now, the second objective is being commenced. Its connection is as follows: In
the previous objective, the downfall of character due to praise, acquaintance,
and contact with women was discussed. The state of a man who has fallen from
virtue, the karmic bondage he incurs, and its description in this world are
being discussed in this objective. With this connection, the initial sutra of
this objective is:  **"Oja should never be attached, but the lustful should
detach. Hear about the enjoyment of the Shramanas, just as some Bhikkhus
enjoy."** (1)  **Commentary:** Ojas, the virtuous and powerful soul, should
never be attached to sensual desires. If, by fate, it happens, then one should
detach oneself with the help of knowledge. Enjoyment is inappropriate for the
virtuous, yet there are some virtuous who indulge in it. This is what you should
hear.  **Explanation:** This sutra is connected to the preceding and succeeding
sutras. The connection is this: The worldly bond of sensual desires leads to
delusion. Therefore, Ojas, free from attachment and aversion, should not develop
attachment towards women. The connection with the preceding sutra is that if a
woman, seeing a renunciate who has renounced the world, tries to deceive him
with food and other things, then Ojas, being present, should not be attached.
Ojas, in essence, is an atom, but in terms of its nature, it is free from
attachment and aversion. Attachment to women, as will be discussed later, leads
to various kinds of deception, which results in karmic bondage. Due to the
ripening of this karma, there is intense suffering in hell and other realms.
Therefore, knowing this, Ojas, being present, should never be attached to women,
who are like mines of evil, at all times. Even if, due to the rise of delusion,
one becomes desirous of enjoyment, one should still detach oneself from them,
considering the dangers of this life and the next. This is what is being said:
Even if the mind is driven by the ripening of karma, one should turn it away
with the lasso of knowledge by considering the harmful consequences. Similarly,
you should hear that even the Shramanas, who are exhausted by austerities, also
indulge in enjoyment. This is what is being said: Just as householders indulge
in enjoyment, so too do the Yatis, but their enjoyment is deceptive. What are
the states that result from this? It has been said: "Shaved head," etc., as
before. Just as some "Bhikkhus," who are not firmly established in Dharma,
indulge in deceptive enjoyment, so too will the greatness of this be shown in
detail in the future, as will be discussed in the sutra of this objective. It
has also been said by others:  **"Lean, one-eyed, lame, deaf, with a broken
tail, hungry, old, with a throat choked by a piece of broken pot, with a body
covered in wounds, pus, and hundreds of worms, even a dead dog is pursued by
lust."** (1)  This, etc., is said to show the deception of those who indulge in
enjoyment.  **Commentary:** This sutra is connected to the preceding and
succeeding sutras. The connection is this: The worldly bond of sensual desires
leads to delusion. Therefore, Ojas, free from attachment and aversion, should
not develop attachment towards women, not be attached.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM . dvitIyaH uddezakaH R uktaH prathamoddazakaH, sAmprataM
dvitIyaH samArabhyate, asya cAyamamisambandhaH-ihAnantaroddezake strI
saMstavAccAritraskhalanamuktaM, skhalitazIlasya yA avasthA ihaiva prAdurbhavati
tatkRtakarmabandhazvatadiha pratipAdyate, ityanena sambandhe
nAyAtasyAsyoddezakasyAdi sUtram - pahale uddezaka kA varNana kiyA jA cukA hai  /
aba dUsarA uddezaka prArambha kiyA jA rahA hai  /  isakA sambandha isa prakAra
hai-pUrva uddezaka meM strI ke saMstava-paricaya evaM samparka se caritra
skhalana kA vivecana kiyA gayA  /  jo zIla se skhalita-bhraSTa yA patita ho jAtA
hai, aise puruSa kI isa loka meM jo avasthA hotI hai, jo karmabaMdha hotA hai,
isa uddezaka meM usakA varNana kiyA jA rahA hai  /  isa sambandha se Agata isa
uddezaka kA yaha Adi sUtra hai - oe sayA Na rajejA, bhoga kAmI puNo virajejjA  /
bhoge samaNANaM suNeha; jaha bhuMjaMti bhikkhuNo ege  // 1 //  chAyA - ojaH sadA
na rajyeta, bhogakAmI punarvirajyeta  /  bhoge zramaNAnAM zRNuta, yathA bhujanti
bhikSava eke  //  anuvAda - ojasvI-Atma parAkrama ke dhanI sAdhu ko bhoga vAsanA
meM apanA citta kabhI nahIM lagAnA cAhie, yadi devayogavaza vaisA ho jAya to use
jJAna ke sahAre apane Apako dUra kara lenA cAhie  /  bhogopabhoga karanA sAdhu
ke lie anucita hai, phira bhI kucha sAdhu aise hote haiM, jo bhoga bhogate haiM,
yaha sune  /  . _TIkA - asya cAnantaraparasparasUtrasambandho vaktavyaH, sa
cAyaM sambandho-viSayapAzermohamAgacchati yato'ta 'oja eko rAgadveSaviyutaH
strISu rAgaM na kuryAt, paramparasUtrasambandhastu saMlokanIyamanagAraM dRSTvA
ca yadi kAcidyoSit sAdhumazanAdinA nIvArakalpena pratArayet tatraujaH sanna
rajyeteti tatraujo dravyataH paramANuH bhAvatastu rAgadveSaviyutaH,
strISurAgAdihaiva vakSyamANanItyA nAnAvidhA viDambanA bhavanti tatkRtazca
karmabandhaH tadvipAkAccAmutra narakAdau tIvrA vedanA bhavanti yato 'ta
etanmatvA bhAvojaHsan 'sadA' sarvakAle tAsvanarthakhaniSu strISu na rajyeta,
tathA tadyapi mohodayAt bhogAbhilASI bhaveta tathApyaihikAmaSmikApAyAna
parigaNayya panastAbhyo virajyeta, etadaktaM bhavati-karmodayAtpravattamapi
citaM heyopodayaparyAlocayanA jJAnAGkazena nivartayediti, tathA zrAmyanti-tapasA
khidyantIti zramaNAsteSAmapi bhogA ityetacchRNuta yUyaM, etaduktaM bhavati-
gRhasthAnAmapi bhoga viDambanAprAyA yatInAM tu bhogA ityetadeva viDambanAprAyaM,
kiM punastatkRtAvasthAH tathA coktam-'muNDaM zira' ityAdi pUrvavat, tathA yathA
ca bhogAn 'eke' apuSTadharmANo "bhikSavo' yatayo viDambanAprAyAn bhujjate
tathoddezakasUtreNaiva vakSyamANenottaratra mahattA prabandhena darzayiSyati
anyairapyuktam "kRzaH kANaH khajaH zravaNarahitaH pucchavikalaH, kSudhAkSAmo
jIrNaH piTharakakapAlArditagalaH  /  vraNaiH pUyakkinnaiH
kRmikulazatairAvilatanuH, zunImanveti zvA hatamapi ca hantyeva madanaH  // 1 //
" ityAdi,  // 1 //  bhogino viDambanAM darzayitumAha - TIkArtha - yaha sUtra Age
pIche ke sUtroM se sambaddha hai, vaha saMbaMdha isa prakAra hai-sAMsArika kAma
bhoga rUpI pAza se manuSya mohamUr3ha banatA hai, ataeva rAgadveSa vivarjita
sAdhu striyoM meM rAga na kare, Asakta na bane, -289

Page #318 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is the connection of this Sutra with the Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra - If a
woman wants to deceive a monk who appears to be a monk by giving him food, etc.,
like grains of rice scattered to lure an animal, then the monk should not be
attached to it, rising above attachment and aversion. There are two types of
strength - material strength and mental strength. Material strength is in the
form of atoms, and mental strength is in the form of a man free from attachment
and aversion. Being attached to women in this life causes various kinds of
suffering, which will be described later. From that attachment, karma-bondage
arises, and due to the result of karma-bondage, one has to suffer severe
torments in hell, etc., in the form of the fruition of karma. Therefore, a monk
should understand this and become endowed with mental strength, free from
attachment and aversion, and should never be attached to women, who are a mine
of misfortune and sorrow. If, due to delusion, a monk develops a desire for
enjoyment, then he should consider the worldly and otherworldly sufferings
arising from contact with women and abstain from them, stay away from them. The
meaning is that if the mind becomes attached to women as a result of the rise of
karma, then the monk should contemplate the nature of the objects that are to be
rejected and the objects that are to be accepted, and remove it from there with
the whip of knowledge. One who is weary and distressed due to austerity is
called a Shraman. Even Shramans of this category fall into enjoyments. Listen to
this. The meaning is that enjoyment is full of irony even for householders, what
to say of Sannyasins or monks? For them, enjoyment is extremely ironic. What to
say about the state of enjoying enjoyment? This has already been described by
the words "Mundam Shirah", etc. Enjoyment is ironic, but still, the way weak-
willed monks enjoy them will be shown in detail by the Sutras of this topic. It
is said - A dog that is thin in body, whose one eye is gouged out, whose leg is
lame, whose ear is cut, whose tail is also cut, who is emaciated from hunger,
who is old, who is suffering from the burning of the iron in his neck, who is
oozing pus from wounds, who has hundreds of worms wriggling on him, who runs
after bitches, Kamadeva seems to kill even the dead. While showing the irony of
those who are attached to enjoyment, it is said... Atha tam tu bhedam apannam,
muchchhitam bhikkham kamam ativarld. Pali bindya nam to paccha, paduddhatu
muddhi pahaanti ||2|| Chhaya - Atha tantu bhadam apannam, muchchhitam bhikkham
kamam ativartam. Paribhidya tat pacchat padavudhyaty mudhni praghnanti ||
Anuvaad - Knowing that the monk, having fallen from restraint, is attached to a
fallen woman, and is unconscious in the enjoyment of lust, the woman strikes his
head with her foot - kicks him on the head. Tika - 'Athe' is the word for
subsequent meaning, 'tu' is the word for qualification, after the contact with
the woman, 'bhikkhu' monk, 'bhedam' breach of conduct, fall from virtue,
'apannam' attained, being, in women, 'muchchhit' intoxicated, engrossed, the
same is explained - in 'kameshu' desires, lust, in the opinion - of the mind -
of the mind, 'varto' - 'vartana' activity, whose this is 'kamam ativarta'
lustful, meaning, the same such 'paribhidya' having been overtaken by
intoxication, knowing that 'shvetakrishnaprapatta' white and black,
'madvashakayi' under my control, thus, if - 'paribhidya' - 'parisaryaatmakritam'
done by oneself, and 'tatkritam' done by others, 'uchcharyeti' should be said,
for example, 'maya' by me, 'luchchit' your head, 'jallamal' pus, 'vilataya' by
oozing, 'durgandhasya' of foul smell, 'jugupsaniya' disgusting,
'kkshaavakshobast' chest, 'stisthanasya' of the place, 'kulasheela' family
conduct, 'maryada' limit (290

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram paramparita sUtra ke sAtha isakA yaha saMbaMdha hai-
dekhane meM pratIta hone vAle kisI sAdhu ko koI strI pazu ko lubhAne ko phailAye
gae cAvala ke dAnoM ke samAna bhojana Adi dekara pratArita karanA cAhe to sAdhu
rAga dveSa se U~cA uThakara usameM anurakta na bane  /  auja do prakAra kA hai-
dravya auja aura bhAva auja  /  dravya auja paramANu rUpa hai, tathA bhAva auja
rAga dveSa vivarjita puruSa rUpa hai  /  strI meM rAgAsakta rahane se isI loka
meM taraha-taraha se kaSTa uThAne par3ate haiM, jinakA Age varNana hogA  /  usa
rAga se karmabandha hotA hai, tathA karmabaMdha ke vipAka sephala niSpatti ke
rUpa meM naraka Adi meM ghora yAtanAeM bhoganI par3atI hai, ataH sAdhu ko cAhie
ki vaha ise samajhakara bhAva aujayukta hokara-rAgadveSa rahita hokara sarvadA
anartha-duHkha kI khAna striyoM meM vaha anurakta na bane  /  yadi kabhI
mohodaya ke kAraNa sAdhu meM bhoga kI utkaNThA utpanna ho to vaha strI saMsarga
se utpanna hone vAle aihika-isa loka ke tathA pAralaukika-paraloka ke duHkhoM kA
vicAra kara striyoM se virata rahe, dUra rhe| kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki
karmodaya ke pariNAmasvarUpa yadi citta strI meM saMsakta ho jAya to heya aura
upAdeya padArthoM ke svarUpa para ciMtana kara sAdhu jJAna rUpI aMkuza dvArA
usako vahA~ se haTA de  /  jo tapazcaraNa dvArA zrAnta hotA hai, khinna hotA
hai, use zramaNa kahA jAtA hai  /  isa koTi ke zramaNa bhI bhogoM meM par3a jAte
haiM  /  yaha sune  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki gRhasthoM ke lie bhI
bhoga viDambanAmaya hai, saMyatiyoM yA sAdhaoM ke lie to kahanA hI kyA ? unake
lie to bhoga atyanta viDambanA mUlaka hai  /  bhoga bhogane meM jaisI avasthA
hotI hai, usakA to kahanA hI kyA ? 'muNDaM ziraH' ityAdi pada dvArA yaha varNana
pahale hI A hI cukA hai| bhoga viDambanA mUlaka hai kintu phira bhI zithila-
AtmabalavihIna sAdhu jisa prakAra unheM bhogate haiM, isa uddezaka ke sUtroM
dvArA vistAra se dikhalAyA jAyegA  /  kahA hai-eka kuttA jo zarIra se dubalA
hai, jisakI eka AMkha phUTI huI hai, paira laMgaDAtA hai, kAna kaTA huA hai,
pUMcha bhI kaTI huI hai, bhUkha se kSINa hai, jIrNa hai, gale meM lage haMDiyA
ke galana ThIkare se pIDita hai, ghAvoM se mavAda nikala rahA hai, una para
saiMkar3oM kIr3e bila-bilA rahe haiM, kuttiyAM ke pIche daur3atA hai, kAmadeva
mAnoM hata-mare hue ko bhI mAratA hai| bhogAsakta janoM kI viDambanA kA
digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM  /  . aha taM tu bhedamAvannaM, mucchitaM
bhikkhaM kAmamativarlDa  /  palibhiMdiyA NaM to pacchA, pAduddhaThu muddhi
pahaNaMti  // 2 //  chAyA - atha tantu bhadamApannaM mUrcchitaM bhikSu
kAmamativartam  /  paribhidya tatpazcAt pAdAvudhyatya mUrdhni praghnanti  //
anuvAda - sAdhu ko, saMyama se patita nArI meM Asakta, kAma bhoga meM
sammUrcchita jAnakara strI usake mastaka para apane paira se prahAra karatI hai-
sira para lAta mAratI hai  /  TIkA - 'athe' tyAnantaryArthaH tuzabdo
vizeSaNArthaH, strIsaMstavAdanantaraM 'bhikSu' sAdhu 'bhedaM' zIla bhedaM
cAritraskhalanam ApannaM prAptaM santaM strISu 'mUrcchita' gRddhamadhyupannaM,
tameva vizinaSTi-kAmeSu icchAmadanarUpeSu mate:-buddhe-manaso vA vartoM-vartanaM
pravRttiryasyAsau kAmamativartaH kAmAbhilASuka ityarthaH, tamevambhUtaM
'paribhidya madabhyupagataH zvetakRSNapratipattA madvazakaityevaM parijJAya
yadivA-paribhidya-parisAryAtmakRtaM tatkRtaM coccAryeti, tadyathAmayA tava
luJcita ziraso jallamalA vilatayA durgandhasya
jugupsanIyakakSAvakSobastisthAnasya kulazIlamaryAdA (290

Page #319 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The woman, after abandoning her
modesty, dharma, and other virtues, says to the ascetic who is engrossed in
sensual pleasures: "You are now reduced to a person of no consequence." Seeing
this, the ascetic, who is infatuated with her, falls at her feet to appease her.
It is said:  "The lions with their thick, large manes, the elephants with their
temples oozing ichor, and the heroic men in battle become the most cowardly in
the presence of women."[1]  Thereafter, realizing that the ascetic is completely
infatuated with the objects of senses, she raises her left foot and strikes it
on his head, thus humiliating him.[2]  Further, the woman says to the ascetic:
"O Bhikkhu! If you are hesitant to stay with a woman having thick hair, then I
shall pluck out my hair here itself. Thereafter, you shall not stay anywhere
else but with me."[3]  Explanation: The woman, using clever and friendly words,
tries to make the ascetic understand that if he is ashamed to stay with a woman
having thick hair, then she is willing to pluck out her hair. However, after
that, he shall not stay anywhere else but with her.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM lajjA dharmAdIn parityajyAtmA dattaH tvaM
punarakiJcitkara ityAdi bhaNitvA, prakRpitAyAH tasyA asau
viSayamUrcchitastatpratyAyanArthaM pAdayornipatati, taduktam
vyAbhinnakesarabRhacchirasazcasiMhA, nAgAzca dAna madarAjikRzaiH kapauleH  /
meghAvinazca puruSAH samare ca zUrAH strIsannidhau paramakApuruSA bhavanti  // 1
//  tato viSayeSvekAntena mUrcchita iti parijJAnAt pazcAt 'pAdaM'
nijavAmacaraNam "uddhRtya " utkSipya 'mUrdhni' zirasi 'pradhnanti' tA'yanti evaM
viDambanA prApayantIti  // 2 //  anyacca - TIkArtha sUtrakAra kAma bhoga meM
saMlagna puruSa kI burI dazA kA digdarzana karAne hetu kahate haiM yahA~ 'atha'
zabda anantara ke artha meM hai 'tu' zabda vizeSaNArthaka hai  /  strI ke sAtha
saMsarga ho jAne se saMyama se patita strI meM Asakta, kAma vAsanA evaM bhoga
meM saMlagnacettA sAdhu ko jaba strI jAna jAtI hai, samajha letI hai ki maiM
jise kAlA yA sapheda jaisA kahU~gI, yaha bhI vaisA hI kahegA, kyoM ki yaha mere
adhIna hai, athavA vaha apane kArya kA sAdhu para kiyA gayA bar3A AbhAra batAtI
huI tathA usake kArya ko nagaNya batAtI huI, use kahatI hai ki tuma luMcita
mastaka ho, tumhArI kAMkha, chAtI tathA vastisthAna durgandha yukta hai, phira
bhI maiMne apanA kula, zIla, pratiSThA, lajjA, dharma Adi sabakA tyAga kara
apanI deha tumheM sauMpI kintu tuma mere lie kucha bhI nahIM karate  /  vaha
bhogAsakta kAma mUrcchita sAdhu jaba usako yoM krodha pUrNa zabdoM meM bolate
hue dekhatA hai, to use prasanna karane hetu usake pairoM para gira par3atA hai|
kahA hai- saghana kesara- gale ke kezoM meM Achanna vizAla, mastaka yukta zera,
madajala se saMsikta kapola yukta hAthI, medhAvI buddhizIla puruSa tathA yuddha
meM zauryazIla jana kA jaba strI se sAmanA hotA hai, to atyanta kAyara - bhIrU
ho jAte haiN| jaba strI yaha samajha letI hai ki yaha sAdhu viSayoM meM ekAnta
rUpeNa mUrcchita hai, taba vaha apanA bAyA~ paira uThAkara usake mastaka para
prahAra karatI hai - lAta mAratI hai  /  yoM vaha usa sAdhu kI viDambanA yA
durdazA karatI hai  /  - jai kesiA NaM mae bhikkhU, No vihare saha NamitthIe  /
kesANaviha luMcissaM, nannattha mae carijjAsi  // 3 //  chAyA yadi kezikayA mayA
bhikSo ! no vihareH saha striyA  /  kezAniha luMciSyAmi tAnyatra mayA careH  //
anuvAda - strI sAdhu se kahatI hai ki mere mastaka para ghane keza hai| kezavAlI
ke sAtha vihAra karane meM yadi tujhe zarma AtI hai to maiM isI sthAna para
apane kezoM kA luMcana kara DAlUMgI, kintu mere sivAya tumheM aura kisI ke yahA~
nahIM jAnA hai| - - * * * . TIkA - kezA vidyante yasyAH sA kezikA Na miti
vAkyAlaGkAre, he bhikSo ! yadi mayA 'striyA' bhAryayA kezavatyA saha no
viharektvaM, sakezayA striyA bhogAn bhujjAno vrIDAM yadi vahasi tataH
kezAnapyahaM tvatsaGgamAkAGkSiNI-- luJciSyAmi' apaneSyAmi, AstAM
tAvadalaGkArAdikamityapizabdArthaH, asya copalakSaNArthatvAdnyadapi yad duSkaraM
videzagamanAdikaM tatsarvamahaM kariSyate, tvaM punarmayA rahito nAnyatra careH,
idamuktaM bhavati- - mayA rahitena bhavatA kSaNamapi na sthAtavyam, etAvadevAhaM
bhavantaM prArthayAmi, ahayapi yadbhavAnadizati tatsarvaM vidhAsya iti  // 3 //
ityevamapipezalairvizrambhajananairApAta bhadrakairAlApairvizrambhayitvA
yatkurvanti taddarzayitumAha 291 -

Page #320 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra with Commentary - English Translation
**Commentary:**  A woman with hair is called a "keshika". In this verse, the
word "ṇam" is used in the sense of a figure of speech. The woman says, "O Muni!
If you cannot go on a journey with me, meaning, if you are ashamed to enjoy
pleasures with a woman who has hair, then I will cut off my hair - I will pluck
it out. What to speak of other ornaments? This is the meaning of the word "api".
Here, the cutting of hair is merely a symbol. I will endure all difficult tasks,
such as going abroad with you, but you must not go anywhere else except with me.
The meaning is that you should not stay even for a moment without me. This is my
request to you. Whatever you command me, I will do it."  **Explanation:** This
is to show how women, with their soft and persuasive nature, create trust
through their initial pleasant interactions and then, through their words and
actions, gain control over men.  **Verse 4:**  **Shadow:**  "Then, when he is
available, they send him to do such tasks."  **Translation:** "When the virtuous
man becomes available - falls under the woman's control - she sends him to do
tasks like a servant. She says, "Bring a knife to cut the gourds, and bring me
the best fruits, carefully selected."  **Commentary:** The word "athe" signifies
continuity. The word "ṇam" is a figure of speech. After the initial pleasantries
and the establishment of trust, when the virtuous man becomes "available" -
recognized by the woman as being under her control through his appearance,
gestures, or actions - then, knowing his intentions, she sends him to do tasks
like a servant. This is to show how women, skilled in deception, use the
virtuous man for menial tasks. The word "alabu" refers to a gourd or pumpkin.
"Alabunchhed" is the knife used to cut it. The woman says, "Bring the knife, so
that the mouth of the vessel can be properly shaped." "Valgu" means beautiful,
and "phala" means fruits. She says, "Bring me beautiful fruits like coconuts and
gourds." Alternatively, "vaakphala" refers to the fruits of speech, like
religious discourses or explanations of grammar. She says, "Bring me the fruits
of speech, or the benefits like clothes and other things."  **Further
Commentary:**  In this verse, the word "ath" is used in the sense of continuity.
The word "ṇam" is a figure of speech. After the initial pleasantries and the
establishment of trust, when the women recognize the virtuous man as being under
their control through his appearance, gestures, or actions, they, skilled in
deception, use him for menial tasks. This is to show how women, with their soft
and persuasive nature, create trust through their initial pleasant interactions
and then, through their words and actions, gain control over men.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - jisake keza hote haiM, use kezikA kahA jAtA
hai  /  isa gAthA meM 'NaM' zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke artha meM AyA hai  /  strI
kahatI hai ki he muni ! yadi mere sAtha tuma viharaNa nahIM kara sakate, arthAt
kezavAlI aurata ke sAtha bhoga bhogane meM unheM zarma AtI hai, to maiM jo
tumhAre saMga-saMsarga kI kAmanA karatI hU~  /  apane kezoM kA luMcana kara
lUMgI-unheM ukhAr3a DAlUMgI, phira dUsare gahanoM kI to bAta hI kyA hai ? yahI
api zabda kA tAtparya hai  /  yahA~ kezoM kA luMcana to upalakSaNa mAtra hai
tumhAre sAtha videza gamana Adi ora bhI jo duSkara kArya haiM, ve saba maiM
sahU~gI, kintu tumheM mere sivAya ora kahIM para nahIM jAnA hai  /  kahane kA
tAtparya yaha hai ki mere binA tuma palabhara bhI na raho, merI tumheM yahI
abhyarthanA hai, tuma jo bhI mujhe Adeza doge, vaha saba maiM kruuNgii| - isa
prakAra atyanta komala, vizvAsotpAdaka, ApAta bhadra-prAraMbha meM acche lagane
vAle, AlApa saMlApoM se vizvAsa paidA kara striyA~ jo karatI haiM, usakA
digdarzana karAne hetu kahate haiM  /  aha NaM se hoI uvaladdho, to pesaMti tahA
bhUehiM  /  /  alAucchedaM pehehi, vagguphalAiM AhArAhitti  // 4 //  chAyA -
atha sa bhavatyupalabdha stataH preSayanti tathA bhUtaiH  /  alAvUcchedaM
prekSasva valguphalAnyAhara iti  //  anuvAda - jaba vaha sAdhu upalabdha ho jAtA
hai-strI ke vaza meM ho jAtA hai, taba vaha naukara kI jyoM kAma karane ke lie
use preSita karatI hai  /  vaha kahatI hai-laukI Adi kATane ke lie churI lAo
mere lie chA~Ta-chA~Takara uttama phala laao| TIkA - 'athe 'tyAnantaryArthaH,
Namiti vAkyAlaGkAre, vizrambhAlApAnantaraM yadA'sau sAdhurmadanurakta ityevam
'upalabdho' bhavati-AkArairiGgitaizceSTayA vA madvazaga ityevaM parijJAto
bhavati tAbhiH strIbhiH, tataH tadabhiprAya parijJAnAduttarakAlaM'
tathAbhUtaiH'karmakaravyApArairapazadai: 'preSayanti'niyojayanti yadivA-
tathAbhUtairitiliGgasthayogyeApAraiH preSayanti, tAneva darzayitumAha-'alAu 'tti
alAbu-tumbaM chipate yena tadalAbuccheda-pippalakAdizastraM 'pehAhi' tti
prekSasva nirUpaya labhasveti, yena pippalakAdinA labdhena pAtrAdermukhAdi
kriyata iti, tathA 'valgUni' zobhanAni 'phalAni' nAlikerAdIni alAbukAni vA tvam
'Ahara' Anayeti, yadi vA-vAkphalAni ca dharmakathArUpAyA *
vyAkaraNAdivyAkhyAnarUpAyA vA vAco yAniphalAni-vastrAdilAbharUpANi tAnyAhareti
// 4 //  apica - TIkArtha - isa gAthA meM 'atha' zabda anantara ke artha meM
prayukta huA hai, 'Na' zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke rUpa meM hai  /  vizrambhAlApa-
vizvAsa utpanna karane vAle, AlApa saMlApa ke bAda jaba striyA~ sAdhu kI AkRti
bhAva mudrA iMgita ceSTA Adi se yaha jAna letI hai ki yaha mere vaza meM A gayA
hai, mere adhIna hai, taba ve jo chala meM nipuNa hotI hai, sAdhu ko naukara ke
samAna nIce se nIce kAma meM niyukta karatI hai, vaise kAryoM kA digdarzana
karAne hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM-jisase tumbA yA laukI kATI jAtI hai, use
alAbuccheda kahate haiM  /  vaha churI Adi ke artha meM hai, vaha aurata usa
sAdhu ko kahatI hai-ki churI Adi zastra lAo, jisase pAtra kA mukha Adi ThIka
kiyA jAya, nAriyala Adi sudUra phala tathA laukI Adi sabjiyA~ lAo, athavA
dharmakathA (292

Page #321 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Woman's Studies And the teaching of grammar, etc., in the form of lectures, the
fruit of speech, i.e., earn money by these and bring clothes, etc. • Bring wood
for cooking vegetables, and a lamp for the night. Dye my clothes, or apply a
paste to my feet. Come and massage my back. - Om Om Om Translation: O Muni!
Bring wood for cooking vegetables and for lighting at night. Dye my clothes, or
apply a paste to my feet. Come and massage my back. Commentary: And 'दारुणि'
means wood, vegetables, etc., leaves, vegetables, etc., for the purpose of
cooking them, sometimes for cooking food. There is a reading 'अन्नपाकाय', in
which case it means to bring wood for cooking rice, etc. 'रात्रौ' means at
night, 'प्रद्योतो वा भविष्यतीति' means that there will be a lamp, therefore,
bring it from the forest. And 'पात्राणि' means vessels, etc., 'रञ्जय' means to
dye, so that I can beg for alms comfortably. Or, it means to dye with a paste
for the feet, etc. Abandoning other work, come here, 'मे' means my, 'पृष्ठम्'
means back, 'उत्त्- प्रावल्येन मर्दय' means to massage vigorously, my body is
aching because I have been sitting for a long time, therefore, massage it, and
then you can do other work. - Om Om Om And my clothes, take care of them, food
and drink, bring them as food. Bring perfume and a broom, and call a barber for
me. - Commentary: 'वस्त्राणि च' means clothes, 'मे' means my, 'जीर्णानि
वर्तन्तेऽतः' means they are old, therefore, 'प्रत्युपेक्षस्व' means replace them
with new ones, or if they are dirty, give them to the washerman, or because of
mice, etc., take care of them. And 'अन्नपानादिकम्' means food and drink, bring
it as food. And 'गन्धं' means a container for perfume, etc., a broom, etc., and
a beautiful broom, and I am unable to do it myself, therefore, 'काश्यपं' means a
barber, 'मच्छिरोमुण्डनाय' means to shave my head, 'श्रमणानुजानीहि' means call
him, so that I can get rid of my long hair. 293

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM tathA vyAkaraNa Adi ke vyAkhyAna zikSaNa rUpa vANI kA
phala arthAt ina dvArA dhana arjita kara vastra Adi lAo  /  * dArUNi sAgapAgAe,
pajjoo vA bhavissatI rAo  /  pAtANi ya me rayAvehi, ehi tA me piTTha omadde  //
5  //  chAyA dArUNi zAkapAkAya, praghoto vA bhaviSyati rAtrau  /  pAtrANi ca me
raJjaya hi tAvanme pRSThaM marddaya  //  - OM OM OM anuvAda he muni ! zAka
pakAne ke lie tathA rAtri meM rozanI karane ke lie kASTha laao| mere ina
vartanoM ko raMgo, athavA mere pairoM ke mahAvara Adi lagAo  /  Ao merI pITha
para mAliza karo  /  TIkA tathA 'dAruNi' kASThAni zAkaM TakkavastulAdikaM
patrazAkaMtatpAkArthaM, kvacid annapAkAyeti pAThaH, tatrAnnam-odanAdikamiti,
'rAtrau' rajanyAM pradyoto vA bhaviSyatItikRtvA, ato aTavItastamAhareti,
tathA[granthAgram 3500] 'pAtrANi' patadgrahAdIni 'raJjaya' lepaya, yena
sukhenaiva bhikSATanamahaM karomi, yadi vA - pAdAvalaktakAdinA raJjayeti, tathA
parityajyAparaM karma tAvad 'ehi' Agaccha 'me' mama pRSTham utt- prAvalyena
mardaya bAdhate mamAGgamupaviSTAyA ataH saMbAdhaya, punaraparaM kAryazeSaM
kariSyasIti  // 5 //  kiJca TIkArtha - he sAdhu ! Takka, vastula- bathuA Adi
pattiyoM ke sAga pakAne ke lie lakar3I laao| kahIM 'annapAkAya' aisA pATha hai
tadanusAra anna cAMvala Adi pakAne ke lie lakar3I lAne kA abhiprAya hai| athavA
rAta meM rozanI karane hetu jaMgala se lakar3I laao| mere vartanoM ko raMga do
jinheM lekara maiM prasannatA pUrvaka bhikSA hetu jAU~gI athavA mere pairoM para
mahAvara kA lepa karo, unheM raMjita karo, dUsare kArya chor3akara yahA~ Ao,
aura merI pITha para acchI taraha mAliza karo  /  baiThe-baiThe mere aMgoM meM
darda ho gayA hai  /  isalie unheM dabAo, kAma phira karanA  /  - OM OM OM
vatthANi ya me paDilehehi, anna pANaM ca AhArAhitti  /  gaMdhaM ca raoharaNaM
ca, kAsavagaM ca me samaNu jANAhi  //  6  //  chAyA vastrANi ca me
pratyupekSasva, annaM pAnaJca Ahara iti  /  gandhaJca rajoharaNaJca kAzyapaJca
me samanujAnIhi  //  anuvAda - he sAdho ! mere vastroM kA paDilehana -
pratilekhana karo, athavA mere vastra purAne ho gae haiM, mujhe nae lAkara do|
mujhe bhojana aura pAnI lAkara do  /  sugandhita padArtha aura rajoharaNa lAkara
do, mere lie nAI ko bulAo, aura usase mere bAla kaTavAo  /  - TIkA - 'vastrANi
ca ' ambarANi 'me' mama jIrNAni vartante'taH 'pratyupekSasva' anyAninirUpaya
yadivAmalinAni rajakasya samarpaya, madupAdha vA
mUSikAdibhayAtpratyupekSasvaiti, tathA annapAnAdikam 'AhAra' Anayati, tathA
'gandhaM' koSThapuTAdikaM granthaM vAhiraNyaM tathA zobhanaM rajoharaNaM tathA
locaM kArayitumaha-mazaktetyataH 'kAzyapaM ' nApitaM macchiromuNDanAya
zramaNAnujAnIhi yenAhaM vRhatkezAnapanayAmIti  //  6  //  kiJcAnyat 293

Page #322 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra Commentary -   My clothes are old and worn, please
bring me new ones. Or, if they are soiled, give them to the washerman to be
cleaned. Or, keep my robes, utensils, etc. safe from rats and other pests. Bring
me food, water, etc. Bring me fragrant substances like koṣṭaputa, gold, and
beautiful rouge. I am unable to trim my hair, so please call the barber and
allow me to get my hair cut so that I can trim my long hair.  **Verse 7:**
**Commentary:** The word "atha" here indicates a change in subject. Previously,
the commentary discussed the equipment and belongings of a male ascetic. Now, it
focuses on the belongings of a householder. The woman says, "Bring me a
container for kohl (anjanika) for my eyes." The verb "prayacchahi" (give) is
connected to the following verse. She also says, "Bring me ornaments like
armlets and necklaces." "Kukkaya" refers to a veena with bells. "Bring me this
veena for me." This way, adorned with all ornaments, I will play the veena and
entertain you. "Lodham ca lodhakusumam ca" means "bring me the fruit and flower
of the lodhra tree." "Veṇupalāsiyām ca" refers to a smooth bamboo stick, which
is held in the left hand and played like a veena with the right hand. "Guliyam
ca" means "bring me a medicinal pill." This way, I will remain youthful and
vibrant.  **Verse 8:**  **Commentary:**  Bring me sandalwood, agarwood, and
camphor. Bring me fragrant oil for my face. Bring me a bamboo flute to keep me
company.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - mere kapar3e jIrNa-purAne ho gae haiM,
isalie mujhe dUsare kapar3e lAkara do, athavA ve malina ho gae haiM, unheM dhone
hetu dhobI ko do, athavA merI upadhi-vastra Adi upakaraNoM ko cUhe Adi ke bhaya
se bacAkara surakSita rakho  /  mere lie bhojana pAnI Adi lAo  /  mere lie
koSTapuTa Adi sugandhita dravya tathA svarNa tathA sundara rajoharaNa lAo  /
maiM apane kezoM kA luMcana karane meM azakta hU~  /  isalie nAI ko bulAo, tathA
mujhe keza kaTavAne kI anujJA do jisase maiM apane bar3e kezoM ko kaTavA lU~  /
ad aMjaNiM alaMkAraM, kukkayayaM me payacchAhi  /  loddhaM ca loddhaM kusumaM
ca, veNupalAsiyaM ca guliyaM ca  // 7 // . chAyA - athAJjanikAmalaGkAra,
khaMkhuNakaM meM prayaccha  /  lodhaJca lodhakusumaJca veNupalAzikAJca gulikAJca
//  anuvAda - jo sAdhu nArI meM Asakta hotA hai use vaha kahatI hai ki mujhako
aMjana, AMkhoM meM DAlane ke kAjala kI DibiyA aura dhuMgharU yukta vINA lAkara
do lodhra kA phala aura puSpa evaM bA~sa kI cikanI lakar3I bAMsurI aura
puSTiprada goliyA~ bhI lAkara do  /  TIkA - atha
zabdo'dhikArAntarapradarzanArthaH pUrva liGgasthopakaraNAnyapikRtyAbhihitam,
adhunA gRhasthopakaraNAnyadhikRtyAmidhIyate, tadyathA-'aMjaNimitti
aJjaNikAMkajjalAdhArabhUtAM nalikAMmama prayacchasvetyuttaratra kriyA, tathA
kaTakakeyUrAdikamalaGkAraM vA, tathA 'kukayayaM' ti khuMkhuNakaM 'me' mama
prayaccha, yenAhaM sarvAlaGkAravibhUSitA vINA vinodena bhavanta vinodayAmi,
tathA lodhaM ca lodhrakusumaM ca, tathA 'veNupalAsiyaM' ti vaMzAtmikA
zlakSNatvak kASThikA, sA dantarvAmahastena pragRhya dakSiNahastena
vINAvadvAdyate, tathauSadhaguTikAM tathAbhUtAmAnaya yenAhaM mavinaSTayauvanA
bhavAmIti  // 7 //  tathA kuSTham - TIkArtha - isa gAthA meM atha zabda adhikAra
batAne ke artha meM hai  /  pahale sAdhu ke veza meM rahane vAle puruSa ke
upakaraNoM-upayoga kI vastuoM ke sambandha meM kahA hai  /  aba gRhasthoM ke
kAma meM Ane vAlI vastuoM ke viSaya meM kahate haiM  /  strI kahatI hai ki mujhe
kAjala rakhane hetu nalI-pAtra lAkara do  /  yahAM para payacchahiprayacchasva,
jo kriyA pada AyA hai vaha Age ke caraNa se sambaddha hai vaha kahatI hai mujhe
kaTaka-kalAI meM pahanane i keyUra-bAjU baMdha, Adi gahane lAkara do  /  mujhe
eka dhuMgharUdAra vINA lAkara do jisase maiM sabhI prakAra ke AbharaNoM se
alaMkRta ho kara vINA vAdana dvArA ApakA manovinoda karUM, Apako prasanna karUM
/  mujhe lodhra kA phala aura puSpa lAkara do cikanI chAla ke bAMsa kI baMzI
lAkara do jo bAyeM hAtha se pakar3akara vINA kI taraha bajAyI jAtI hai  /  mujhe
pauSTika davA kI aisI golI lAkara do jisase merA yauvana-javAnI avinaSTa, kAyama
rhe| ke kar3e kuTuM tagaraM ca agarUM, saMpiTuM samma usireNaM  /  tellaM
muhabhiliMjAe, veNuphalAiM sannidhAnAe  // 8 //  294

Page #323 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shadow - Women's Studies Kustha, agar and tagar, mixed with ushira. Oil for face
massage, and bamboo baskets for storage. Bring oil and cloth etc. in a bamboo
basket. - - Commentary: Kustha, agar and tagar are all fragrant substances.
Kustha etc. become more fragrant when mixed with ushira root. So, mix them with
ushira root. Bring oil, prepared with lodhra, kunkuma etc., for face massage.
This means, bring such oil for face massage, which makes my face glow. Bring
bamboo baskets for storage of clothes etc. - 1 Commentary: Kustha is also called
Kamal Kustha. Agar and tagar are two fragrant substances. Kustha etc. become
more fragrant when mixed with ushira root. So, mix them with ushira root. Bring
oil, prepared with lodhra, kunkuma etc., for face massage. This means, bring
such oil for face massage, which makes my face glow. Bring bamboo baskets for
storage of clothes etc. - Nandi powder, bring it. I know you have an umbrella
and shoes. Bring a knife for cutting vegetables, and dye the cloth blue. Shadow
Bring Nandi powder, I know you have an umbrella and shoes. Bring a knife for
cutting vegetables, and dye the cloth blue. Translation: Bring me Nandi powder
etc. for coloring my lips. Bring an umbrella and shoes. Bring a knife for
cutting vegetables. Bring blue dyed cloth for use. Commentary: 'Nandi powder'
refers to a powder made by mixing various substances for coloring lips. Bring
such powder to me. Bring an umbrella and shoes for protection from sun and rain.
I cannot survive without them, so bring them to me. Bring a knife for cutting
vegetables. Dye the cloth with a dye, so that it becomes slightly blue or
completely blue, or even red, as a symbol. - - Commentary: 'Nandi powder' refers
to a powder made by mixing various substances for coloring lips. Bring such
powder to me. Bring an umbrella and shoes for protection from sun and rain. I
cannot survive without them, so bring them to me. Bring a knife for cutting
vegetables. Dye the cloth with a dye, so that it becomes slightly blue or
completely blue, or even red, as a symbol. 295

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chAyA - strI parijJAdhyayanaM kuSTaM tagaraJcAguruM, sampiSTaM samamuzIreNa  /
tailaM mukhAbhyaGgAya, veNu phalAni sannidhAnAya  //  anuvAda ke lie tela, tathA
vastra Adi rakhane ke lie bAMsa kI peTI lAkara do  /  - - TIkA utpalakuSThaM
tathA'garaM tagaraM ca etedve apigandhikadravye, etatkuSThAdikam 'uzIreNa'
vIraNI mUlena sampiSTaM sugandhi bhavati yatastattathAkuru, tathA 'tailaM'
lodhrakuGkumAdinA saMskRtaM mukhamAzritya 'bhiliMjae' tti abhyaGgAya
Dhaukayasva, eta duktaM bhavati - mukhAbhyaGgArtha tathAvidhaM saMskRtaM
tailamupAhareti, yena kAntyamupetaM me mukhaM jAyate, 'veNuphalAI' ti
veNukAryANi karaNDakapeTukAdIni sannidhiH sannidhAnaM vastrAdervyavasthApanaM
tadarthamAnayeti  // 8 //  kiJca usIra - khasa ke sAtha pIsA huA kuSTa tagara
aura agara lAkara do| mujhe muMha para lagAne - 1 TIkArtha kamala kuSTha ko
kuSTha kahA jAtA hai  /  agara aura tagara ye do sugandhita padArtha haiM  /
kuSTha Adi ye sugandhita padArtha jaba usIra kI jar3a ke sAtha pIse jAte haiM to
aura sugandhita ho jAte haiM  /  isalie tuma inako khasa kI jar3a ke sAtha pIso
/  lodhra ke puSpa Adi dvArA saMskArita tela mu~ha para lagAne hetu lAkara do|
kahane kA Azaya yaha hai ki mujhe mu~ha para lagAne ke lie aisA tela lAkara do
jisase merA ceharA camakatA rahe  /  kapar3e Adi rakhane ke lie mujhe bA~sa kI
peTI, DaliyA lAkara do  /  - naMdI cUNNagAI pAharAhi, chattoMvANahaM ca jANAhi
/  satthaM ca sUvacchejjAe, ANIlaM ca vatthayaM rayAvehi  // 9 //  chAyA
nandIcUrNaM prAhara, chatropAnahau ca jAnIhi  /  zastraJca sUpacchedAya AnIlaJca
vastraM raJjaya  //  anuvAda - mujhe apane oSTha raMgane hetu naMdI curNaka Adi
lAlimAmaya drava lAkara do  /  chAtA, jUte sAga kATane hetu churI lAkara do  /
upayoga hetu nIle vastra raMgAkara lA do  /  TIkA . 'nandI cuNNagAIM 'tti dravya
saMyoganiSpAditoSThamrakSaNacUrNo'bhidhIyate tamevambhUtaM cUrNaM
prakarSeNayenakenacitprakAreNa 'AhAra' Anayeti, tathA''tapasya vRSaTarvA
saMrakSaNAya chatraM tathA upanahau ca mamAnujAnIhi na me zarIramemirvinA
varvate tato davasveti, tathA 'zastraM' dAtrAdikaM 'sUpacchedAya'
patrazAkacchadanArthaM Dhaukayasva, tathA 'vastram' ambaraM paridhAnArthaM
gulikAdinA raJjaya yathA AmIlam - ISannIlaM sAmastyena vA nIlaM bhavati,
upalakSaNArthatvAdraktaM vA yathA bhavatIti  //  9  //  tathA - - TIkArtha
hoMThoM ko raMgane ke lie kaI cIjoM ko milAkara banAye gaye cUrNa ko 'naMdI
cUrNa' kahate haiN| tuma vaha cUrNa mujhe jisa kisI taraha lAkara do  /  Atapa
aura vRSTi se rakSA ke lie, bacAva ke lie chAtA, jUte pahanane kI anujJA do  /
inake binA merA zarIra ThIka nahIM rahatA isalie ye mujhe lA do  /  pattI Adi ke
zAka kATane hetu cAkU lAkara do  /  mere pahanane hetu raMga se kapar3A
raMgakara do, aisA raMgoM kI, vaha kucha-kucha nIlA ho jAye yA pUrA kA pUrA nIlA
ho jAye athavA kucha lAla ho jAye  /  295

Page #324 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bring the following: a sufani (a pot for boiling milk or buttermilk), a vessel
for cooking greens, amla (Indian gooseberry) for bathing and to reduce bile, a
vessel for water, a tilka karani (a stick for applying tilak), a stick for
applying anjan (kohl) to the eyes, and a fan for the summer.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram suphaNiM ca sAga pAgAe, Amala gAiM dagAharaNaM ca  /
tilaga karaNi maMjaNa salAgaM, priMsu me viiNayaM vijANehi  // 10 //  chAyA -
suphaNiJca zAka pAkAya Amala kAtyuda kAharaNaJca  /  tilaka karaNyaJjana zAlAkAM
grISme vidhUnakamapi jAnIhi  //  anuvAda - sAga pakAne ke lie tapelI yA degacI
lAo, AMvale, pAnI rakhane kA bartana, tilaka-lalATa meM biMdiyAM lagAne, AMkhoM
meM aMjana lagAne ke lie salAI aura garmI meM havA karane ke lie paMkhI lAkara
do| TIkA - suSThu sukhena vA phaNyate-kvAthyate takrAdikaM yatra tatsuphaNi-
sthAlIpiTharAdikaM bhAjanamabhidhIyate cchAkapAkArthamAnaya tathA 'AmalakAni'
dhAtrIphalAni snAnArthaM pittopazamanAyAbhyavahArArthaM vA tathodakamAhiyate
yena tadudakAharaNaM-kuTavardhanikAdi, asya copalakSaNArthatvAd
ghRtatailadyAhareNa sarvaM vA gRhopaskaraM Dhaukayasveti, tilakaH kriyate yayA
sA tilakakaraNI-dantamayI suvarNAtmikA vA zalAkA yayA gorocanAdiyuktayA tilaka:
kriyata iti, yadi vA gorocanayA tilakaH kriyate (iti) saiva tilakakaraNItyucyate
tilakA vA kriyantepiSyante vA yatra sA tilakakaraNItyucyate, tathA aJjanaM-
sauvIrakAdi zalAkA-akSNoraJjanArthaM zalAkA taamaahreti| tathA 'grISme'
uSNAbhitApe eti 'me' mama 'vidhanakaM' vyajanakaM vijAnIhi  // 10 //  evaM -
TIkArtha - jisameM suvidhA ke sAtha chAcha Adi padArtha ubAle jAte haiM use
suphaNI kahA jAtA hai  /  degacI-tapelI Adi pAtra isa koTi meM Ate haiM  /  sAga
pakAne ke lie aise baratana lAo  /  nahAne meM upayoga hetu pitta ke upazamana
ke lie A~vale lAo  /  pAnI rakhane ke lie kalaza Adi pAtra laao| yaha upalakSaNa
saMketa ke rUpa meM kahA gayA hai| pAnI ke pAtra ke sAtha-sAtha ghRta tathA tela
raravane ke lie bhI pAtra tathA aura bhI ghara kA sAmAna laao| jisase tilaka
kiyA jAtA hai use tilaka karanI kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha hAthI dA~ta yA sone kI
salAI hotI hai| usase gorocana Adi karake tilaka kiyA jAtA hai  /  gorocanA ko
bhI tilaka karaNI kahA jAtA hai  /  jisameM tilakopayogI padArtha pIse jAte hai
use tilaka karaNI kahA jAtA hai  /  netra meM aMjana lagAne kI kAjala yA suramA
AMjane kI jo salAI hotI hai use aMjana zlAkA kahate haiM  /  ye saba vastue~
mujhe lAkara do  /  garmI ke tApa ke upazamana hetu mujhe paMkhI lAkara do|
saMDAsagaM ca phaNihaM ca, sIhalipAsagaM ca ANAhi  /  AdaMsagaM ca payacchAhi,
daMta pakkhAlaNaM pavesAhi  // 11 //  chAyA - saMDAsikaJca phaNihaM ca, sIhali
pAzakaJcAnaya  /  AdarzakaJca prayaccha danta prakSAlanakaM pravezaya  //
anuvAda - nAka ke bAloM ko ukhAr3ane ke lie saMDAsIka-choTI kaiMcI yA katiyA,
bAla sa~vArane ke lie kaMghI, coTI bA~dhane hetu Una kI banI huI A~TI, mu~ha
dekhane ke lie zIzA aura dA~ta sApha karane hetu dAtauna yA bruza laao| TIkA -
'saMgAsakaM' nAsikAkezotpATanaM 'phaNihaM' kezasaMyamanArthaM kaGkatakaM, tathA
'sIhalipAsagaM' ti veNIsaMyamanArthamUrNAmayaM kaGkaNaM ca 'Anaya' Dhaukayeti,
evam A-samantAdRzyate AtmA yasmin sa eva AdarzakastaM -296

Page #325 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Give me the 'prayaccha' (a tool for cleaning the nose), the 'dantakastha' (a
stick for cleaning teeth), the 'sanḍāsaka' (a tool for plucking nose hair), the
'phaṇihaka' (a comb), the 'sīhalī pāṣaka' (a woolen bracelet for tying hair),
and the 'ādarśaka' (a mirror).  Give me the 'pūga phala' (betel nut), 'tāmbūla'
(betel leaf), 'sūcī' (needle), 'sūtra' (thread), 'kośa' (a small vessel for
urination), 'śūpa' (a strainer), 'ukhal' (a mortar), and 'khāra gālana' (a
vessel for dissolving alkali).  Give me the 'candāla' (a small vessel), 'kara'
(a vessel), 'vaccha gṛha' (a small house), 'sarapāya' (a small vessel for
carrying water), and 'goratha' (a small vessel for carrying milk)."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM 'prayaccha' dadasveti tathA dattAH prakSAlpante-
apagatamalAH kriyante yena taddantaprakSAlanaM-dantakASThaM tanmamAntike
pravezayeti  // 11 //  TIkArtha - jisake dvArA nAka ke bAla ukhAr3e jAte haiM
use saMDAsaka kahA jAtA hai  /  jisa dvArA bAloM ko sa~vArA jAtA hai use
phaNihaka kahA jAtA hai ye kaMghI kA nAma hai  /  coTI bA~dhane ke lie Una se
nirmita kaMkaNa-gola vartRla ko sIhalI pASaka kahA jAtA hai  /  ye saba vastue~
lAkara mujhako do  /  jisameM cAroM ora se apane Apako Adarza yA Adarzaka kahA
jAtA hai yaha darpaNa yA zIze kA nAma hai  /  yaha mujhe lAkara do  /  jisake
dvArA dAMto kA yaila apagata kiyA jAtA hai, dUra kiyA jAtA hai use daMta
prakSAlaka kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha dA~ta sApha karane kI per3a kI TahanI ke
datauna athavA bruza kA nAma hai| pUyaphalaM taMbolayaM, sUI suttagaM ca jANAhi
/  kosaM ca moya mehAe, suppukkhalagaM ca khAragAlaNaM ca  // 12 //  . chAyA -
pUgIphalaM tAmbUlaM, sUtrisUtraJca jAnIhi  /  kozaMca mocamehAya, zUpaukhalaJca
kSAragAlanakam  //  anuvAda - mujhe supArI, pAna, suI-dhAgA, laghu zaMkA karane
hetu bartana, sUpa-chAja, ukhala tathA khAra galAne hetu bartana lAkara do| TIkA
- pUgaphalaM pratItaM 'tAmbUlaM' nAgavallIdataM tathA sUcIM ca sUtraM ca
sUcyarthaM vA sUtraM 'jAnIhi' dadasveti, tathA 'kozam' iti vArakAdibhAjanaM tat
mocamehAya samAhara, tatra mocaH-prastravaNaM kAyiketyarthaH tena meha:-secanaM
tadarthaM bhAjanaM Dhaukaya, etaduktaM bhavati bahirgamanaM kartumahamasamarthA
rAtrau bhayAd, ato mama yathA rAtrau bahirgamanaM na bhavati tathA kuru,
etaccAnyasyApyadhamatamakartavyasyopalakSaNaM draSTavyaM, tathA 'zUrpa'
tandulAdizodhanaM tathodUkhalaM tathA kiJcana kSArasya-
sarjikAdergAlinakamityevamAdikamupakaraNe sarvamapyAnayeti  // 12 //  kiJcAnyat
TIkArtha - pUMgI phala suvidita hai- sabhI jAnate haiM yaha supArI kA nAma hai
/  nAgara bela kA pattA tAmbUlapAna kahA jAtA hai  /  sUI aura sUta athavA sUI
meM pirokara sIne kA dhAgA mujhe lAkara do  /  laghuzaMkA karane kA pAtra koza
kahA jAtA hai, mujhe lAkara do  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki maiM rAta ko
bAhara jAne meM DaratI hU~  /  isalie mujhe rAta ko bAhara na jAnA par3e aisA
karo  /  dUsare bhI sAmAnya kArya ke upayoga meM Ane vAle bartana lAkara do,
aisA bhI isase saMketika hai  /  cAMvala Adi ke zodhana hetu jo upayoga meM AtA
hai use zUrpasUpa kahate haiM  /  mujhe sUpa ukhala aura kSAra-sAjI Adi galAne
hetu bartana Adi lAkara do| caMdAlagaM ca karagaM ca, vaccagharaM ca Auso !
khaNAhi  /  sarapAyayaM ca jAyAe, gorahagaM ca sAmaNerAe  // 13 //  chAyA -
candAlakaJca karakaM vaqagRhaJca AyuSman ! khana  /  zarapAtaJca jAtAya,
gorathakaM zrAmaNaye !  //  (297)

Page #326 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra**  **Translation**  O Venerable One, please bring a
copper vessel for the worship of the gods, a vessel for holding water, and a
similar vessel for holding wine. Build a latrine for me. Bring a bow for my
son's play and a young bull to yoke to his chariot.  **Commentary**  "Chandala"
refers to a copper vessel used for the worship of deities. This is known as
"Chandala" in Mathura. "Karaka" is a water container or a vessel for wine.
Please bring these. "Varchogriha" is a place for defecation. Venerable One,
build one for me. "Sharapat" is a bow used for shooting arrows. Bring this bow
for my son's play. Bring a three-year-old bull to yoke to his chariot.
**Shadow**  A clay pot and a drum, a cloth ball for the young prince. The rainy
season has arrived, so arrange for a dwelling and food.  **Commentary**
"Ghatika" refers to a clay pot, "Dindima" is a type of drum, "Chelgola" is a
cloth ball. Bring these for my young son, the prince, to play with. The rainy
season has arrived, so arrange for a suitable dwelling and food, such as rice,
for this time.  **Om Om Om**  **Translation**  Bring a clay doll, a musical
instrument, and a cloth ball for your son to play with. The rainy season has
arrived, so arrange for a dwelling and food.  **Commentary**  "Ghatika" refers
to a clay doll, "Dindima" is a musical instrument, "Chelgola" is a cloth ball.
Bring these for your son to play with. The rainy season has arrived, so arrange
for a suitable dwelling and food, such as rice, for this time.  **Om Om Om**
**298**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda AyuSman devapUjana hetu tAmra pAtra, pAnI
rakhane ke lie, madirA rakhane ke tadanarUpa pAtra lAkara do| mere lie zauca
gRha khudavAo, banavAo  /  putra kI krIr3A ke lie eka dhanuSa lA do usakI gAr3I
meM jotane ke lie eka taruNa baila lA do  /  - TIkA - 'candAlakam' iti
devatArcanikAdyarthaM tAmramayaM bhAjanaM; etacca mathurAyAM candAlakatvena
pratItamiti, tathA 'karako' jalAdhAro madirAbhAjanaM vA tadAnayeti kriyA, tathA
'varcogRhaM' purISotsarga sthAnaM tadAyuSman ! madarthaM 'khana' saMskuru tathA
zarA - iSavaH pAtyante - kSipyante yena taccharapAtaM dhanuH tat 'jAtAya'
matputrAya kRte Dhaukaya, tathA 'gorahagaMti trihAyaNaM balIvardaM ca
Dhaukayeti, sAmaNerAe 'ti zramaNasthApatya zramaNaputrAya tvatputrAya
gantryAdikRte bhaviSyatIti  // 13 //  TIkArtha - devapUjana ke lie mujhe tAMbe
kA bartana lA do| madhurA meM aisA baratana caMdAlaka kahA jAtA hai  /  jisameM
pAnI rakhA jAtA hai vaha karka athavA karavA kahA jAtA hai  /  madirA kA pAtra
bhI karaka (karka) kahA jAtA hai  /  mujhe yaha lAkara do| jisameM yA jahA~
zauca kiyA jAtA hai usa sthAna ko varcogRha kahA jAtA hai| mere lie vaha
khudavAdoM - banavAdo  /  jisa para rakhakara bANa chor3A jAtA hai use zarapAta
kahA jAtA hai  /  yaha dhanuSa kA nAma hai  /  apane beTe ke krIr3A- manovinoda
Adi ke lie dhanuSa lA do  /  tIna varSa kA eka taruNa baila lA do jo tumhAre
beTe kI gAr3I khIMcane ke upayoga meM Aye  /  chAyA ghaDigaM ca saDiMDimayaM ca,
celagolaM kumAra bhUyAe  /  vAsaM samabhiAvaNNaM, AvasahaM ca jANa bhattaM ca
//  14 //  ghaTikAJca saDimaDimAMca, celagolakaM ca kumArakrIr3Aya, varSaJca
samabhyApanna mAvasathaJca jAnIhi bhaktaJca  //  OM OM OM - anuvAda apane putra
ke khelane ke lie miTTI kI puvalikA - khilaunA bAjA aura kapar3e se mar3hI huI
geMda lAkara do  /  varSA Rtu A gaI hai isalie AvAsa sthAna kA aura anna kA
intajAma karo  /  TIkA tathA ghaTikAM mRnmayakullaDikAM 'DiNDimena'
paTahakAdivAditravizeSeNa saha tathA 'cela golaM' tti vastrAtmakaM kandukaM
'kumArabhUtAya' kSullakarUpAya rAjakumArabhUtAya vA matputrAya
krIDanArthamupAnayeti, tathA varSamiti prAvRTkalo'yam abhyApannaH - abhimukhaM
samApanno'ta 'AvasathaM' gRhaM prAvRTkAlanivAsayogyaM tathA 'bhaktaM ca '
tandulAdikaM tatkAlayogyaM 'jAnIhi ' nirUpaya niSpAdaya, yena sukhe
naivAnAgataparikalpatAvasathAdinA prAvRTkAlo'tivAhyate iti, taduktam
mAsairaSTabhirahvA ca, pUrveNa vayasA''yuSA  /  tatkartavyaM manuSyeNa, yasyAnte
sukha medhate  // 1 //  iti  // 14 //  TIkArtha - rAjakumAra ke samAna mere
nanhe se beTe ke lie miTTI kI putralikA yA gur3iyA, bAjA, kapar3e se mar3hI huI
geMda lAkara do  /  varSA Rtu najadIka hai  /  isalie rahane yogya upayukta
makAna va usa samaya khAne ke lie cAMvala Adi kA intajAma karo jisase sukha
suvidhA ke sAtha varSA Rtu kA samaya bitAyA jA ske| kahA gayA hai varSa ke ATha
mAha meM aisA kArya karanA cAhie jisase barasAta ke cAra mahIne ArAma se raha
ske| dina meM vaha kArya kara lenA cAhie jisase rAta Ananda se bitAyI jA ske|
umra ke pUrva bhAga meM aise kArya karane cAhie jisase anta meM sukha prApta ho
/  OM OM OM 298

Page #327 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Translation preserving Jain terms:  The woman says, "Bring the Asandiya (a small
couch or seat) made of the new Sutra (thread), and the Padullain (sandals) for
walking around. Then, for the sake of the Putradohala (special desire for a
child), the men become like slaves, obeying her commands."  Commentary: The
'Asandiya' refers to a small couch or seat made of new, fresh thread, indicating
its purity and newness. The 'Padullain' are sandals or footwear for walking
around.   The woman, being in the state of Putradohala (special craving or
desire for a child during pregnancy), commands the men like slaves, making them
obey her wishes to fulfill her cravings.  The verse highlights how the pregnant
woman exercises authority over the men, just as masters command their slaves, in
order to satisfy her special desires during pregnancy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM AsaMdiyaM ca navasuttaM, pAullAiM saMkamaTThAe  /  adU
puttadohalaTThAe ANappA habaMti dAsA vA  // 15 //  chAyA - Asinda kAJca
navasUtrAM pAdukAH saMkramaNAya  /  atha putradohanArthAya, AjJaptAH bhavanti
dAsAiva  //  anuvAda - nae sUta se banI huI eka AsandIkA-kharIyA lAo  /  idhara
udhara ghUmane hetu pairoM meM pahanane hetu pAdukA-khar3AU lAo ! maiM
garbhavatI hU~ mujhe dohada vizeSaicchA utpanna huI hai  /  ataH mere lie amuka
vastu lAo  /  aurateM isa taraha naukara kI jyoM puruSa para hukma calAtI haiM
/  TIkA - tathA 'AsaMdiya' mityAdi, AsandikAmupavezanayogyAM maJcikAM tAmeva
vizinaSTi navaMpratyagraM sUtraM valkavalitaM yasyAM sA navasUtrAtAm
upalakSaNArthatvAdvadhracarmAvavaddhA vA nirUpayeti vA evaM ca-mauje
kASThapAduke dAtuMsamartheti, athavA-putre garbhasthe dauhadaHputradauhRdaH-
antarvartI phalAdAvabhilASavizeSastasmai-tatsampAdanyarthaM strINAM
puruSA:svavazIkRtA dAsA iva'krayakrItA iva AjJApyA' AjJApanIyA bhavanti, yathA
dAsA alajjitairyogyatvAdAjJApyante evaM te'pi varAkAH sneha pAzAvapAzitA
viSayArthinaH strIbhiH saMsArAvataraNavIthIbhirAdizyanta iti  // 15 //  anyacca
TIkArtha - baiThane hetu eka choTI khATa yA mA~cA lAo  /  usakI vizeSatA
batalAte hue kahate haiM ki vaha nae sUta se banI ho  /  yahA~ sUta kI khaTiyA
sAMketika hai  /  usase camar3e kI bAda se banI huI khaTiyA bhI grahita hai  /
idhara udhara ghUmane ke lie mUMja se banI huI yA kATha se banI huI pAdukA
khar3AU Adi mere liye laao| kyoMki maiM naMge paira jamIna para eka kadama bhI
nahIM cala sakatI  /  baccA garbha meM hone para aurata ko phala Adi khAne kI jo
icchA paidA hotI hai use dohada kahA jAtA hai| use pUrNa karane ke lie aurateM
puruSoM ko kharIde huye naukaroM kI jyoM hukma detI haiM  /  jaise loga bezarma
hokara naukaroM para hukma calAte haiM usI taraha sneha ke baMdhana meM baMdhe
hue bhoga lolUpa puruSoM para striyA~ AjJAyeM calAtI haiM jo saMsAra ke
paribhramaNa kA mArga hai| jAe phale samuppanne, geNhasu vA NaM ahavA jahAhi  /
ahaM putta posiNo ege, bhAravahA haMvati uTTA vA  // 16 //  chAyA - jAte phale
samutpanne, gRhANaina mathavA jahAhi  /  atha putra poSiNa eke bharavAhAH
bhavanti uSTrA iva  //  anuvAda - putra janma gRhastha kA phala hai  /  usake
utpanna hone para garvoddhata strI puruSa ko, pati ko kahatI hai isa bacce ko
godI meM le lo yA chor3a do  /  kaI putra ke pAlana-poSaNa meM Asakta puruSa
putra ko UMTa kI taraha apanI pITha para baiThAkara calate haiM  /  TIkA -
jAta:-putraH sa eva phalaM gRhasthAnAM, tathAhi-puruSANAM kAmabhogAH phalaM
teSAmapi phalaMpradhAnakArya putrajanmeti, taduktam - "idaM tatsnehasarvasvaM,
sama mADhayadaridrayoH  /  acandanamanauzIraM, hRdayasyAnulepanam  // 1 //
yatacchapaniketyuktaM, bAlenAvyaktabhASiNA  /  hitvA sAMkhyaM ca yogaM ca, tanme
manasi vartate  // 2 // " 299)

Page #328 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  Just as in the world, one's own name is the first
joy, and the second is the joy of one's own self, and so on, in the same way, a
son is the ultimate cause of happiness for men. When a son is born, the various
anxieties that men experience for his sake are described as follows: "Take this
child, you." "I am busy with my karma, I have no time to take him." Or, "Leave
him, abandon him, I don't even want to hear about him." Thus, a woman, filled
with anger, speaks. "I carried this child in my womb for nine months, and you
are afraid to hold him for a little while?" The example of a servant is
applicable here. He obeys his master's orders, not out of his own will, but out
of fear. Similarly, a man, being under the control of a woman, considers it a
favor and is happy to obey her orders. As it is said:  "Whatever pleases me, she
does it. She knows it or not, whatever she does is pleasing to me." (1)  "She
gives her life to a beggar, she kills her own mother for him. What can't she
give, what can't she do for a man who begs her?" (2)  "She gives him water for
purification, she washes his feet. She even takes his phlegm. A man is under the
control of women." (3)  Thus, for the sake of a son, or for any other reason,
men are ordered like servants. And those who are able to raise their sons, they
are the ones who are described as "son-raisers." Because of their obedience to
all orders, some, due to delusion, become like camels, under the control of
women, carrying the burden of their instructions, and thus lose their worldly
and otherworldly happiness. (16)  **Note:** The translation preserves the Jain
terms "karma" and "son-raisers." The numbers in parentheses refer to the verses
quoted from the text.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram yathAM loke putrasu [mu] svaM nAma, dvitIyaM su [mu]
khamAtmanaH 'ityAdi, tadevaM putraH puruSANAM paramAbhyudayakAraNaM tasmin
'samutpanne' jAte taduddezena yA vimbanA puruSANAM bhavanti tA darzayati- amuM
dArakaM gRhANa tvam' ahaM tu karmAkSaNikA na me grahaNAvasaro'sti, athacainaM
'jahAhi parityaja nAhamasya vArtAmapi pRcchAmi evaM kupitA satI brUte, mayA'yaM
nava mAsAnudareNor3haH tvaM punarutsaGgenApyudvahan stokamapi kAlamudvijasa,
iti, dAsadRSTAntastvAdeza dAnenaiva sAmyaM bhajate, nAdezaniSpAdanena, tathAhi -
dAso bhayAdudvijannAdezaM vidhatte, sa tu strIvazago'nugrahaM manya mAno
muditazca tadAdezaM vidhate, tathA coktam " yadaiva rocate mahyaM, tadeva kurute
priyA  /  iti vetti na jAnAti, tatpriyaM yatkarotyasau  // 1 //  dadAti
prArthinaH prANAn, mAtaraM hanti tatkRte  /  kiM na dadyAt na kiM
kuryAtstrIbhirabhyarthi to naraH  // 2 //  dadAti zaucapAnIyaM pAdau
prakSAlayatyapi  /  zleSmANamapi gRhNAti, strINAM vazagato naraH ||3||" tadevaM
putra kimittamanyadvA yatkiJcinnimitamuddizya dAsamivAdizanti, atha te'pi putrAn
poSituM zIlaM yeSAM te putra poSiNa upalakSaNArthatvAccAsya sarvAdezakAriNaH
'eke' kecana mohodaye vartatAnAH strINAM
nirdezavartino'pahastitaihikAmuSmikApAyA uSTrA iva paravazA bhAravAhA bhavantIti
//  16  //  kiJcAnyat TIkArtha putra kA utpanna honA gRhasthoM kA phala hai  /
kAma bhoga meM pravRtta honA puruSoM kA phala hai  /  kAma bhoga kA pradhAna-
mukhya phala putra janma hai  /  kahA hai putra janma sneha kA sarvasva hai  /
vaha dhanI aura nirdhana donoM ke lie samAna hai  /  donoM isase prasanna hote
haiM yaha aisA lepana hai jo candana ora khasa ke binA bhI hRdaya ko zItala
banAtA hai  /  totalI vANI meM bolate hue bAlaka ne zayanikA kahane ke badale
zapanikA kahA vaha zAnta aura yoga ko parihita kara mere hRdaya meM vidyamAna
rahatA hai  /  putra loka meM pahalA sukhaM hai  /  dUsarA apane zarIra kA sukha
svasthatA Adi hai  /  isa prakAra puruSoM ke lie atyanta abhuyadaya - Ananda kA
viSaya hai| 1 putra utpanna hone para puruSoM ko jo kaSTa- Ta- asuvidhAe~
jhelanI par3atI haiM sUtrakAra usakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM  /  strI
puruSa ko kahatI hai priyatam putra ko tuma lo| maiM abhI kAma meM lagI huI
huuN| mujhe isako lene kA samaya nahIM hai  /  yadi tuma ise nahIM lete ho to
mata lo maiM to isakI bAta bhI nahIM karUMgI  /  vaha yoM krodha meM Akara
kahatI hai  /  maiMne nau mahIne taka isa bacce ko peTa meM rakhA kintu tuma ise
thor3I dera goda meM lene se ghabarAte ho  /  jo naukara kA udAharaNa diyA gayA
hai vaha ThIka hI ghaTita hotA hai  /  vaha strI puruSa ko naukara kI taraha
hukma detI hai  /  puruSa usakI AjJA kA pAlana karatA hai| naukara apane mAlika
se Darakara usakA hukma bajAtA hai, vaisA karate usake mana meM koI khuzI nahIM
hotI kintu jo puruSa strI ke vaza meM haiAsakta hai vaha apane para usakI kRpA
mAnatA huA prasannatA pUrvaka usakA pAlana karatA hai  /  kahA hai jo puruSa
strI ke vaza meM hotA hai vaha aisA samajhatA hai merI priyatamA vaha kahatI hai
jo mujhako priya lagatA hai  /  kintu vAstavikatA yaha hai ki vahI usakA priya
karatA hai, jise vaha nahIM jAnatA  /  puruSa strI dvArA abhyarthanA kiye jAne
para apane prANa taka nyauchAvara kara detA hai apanI mA~ kI bhI hatyA kara
DAlatA hai  /  strI kI abhyarthanA para, anurodha para use kyA nahIM de sakatA,
usake lie kyA nahIM kara sakatA arthAt vaha saba kucha de sakatA hai  /  usake
lie saba kucha kara sakatA hai  /  jo puruSa strI ke vazagata - adhIna hai vaha
use zauca hetu pAnI lAkara detA hai, usake pAda prakSAlana karatA hai - usake
paira dhotA hai  /  usakA thUka bhI apanI hathelI para le letA hai  /  isa
prakAra striyA~ putra ke nimitta tathA anyAnya prayojanoM ke lie puruSoM para
naukara kI jyoM hukma calAtI hai 300 - =

Page #329 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Study of Women  Thus, men who nurture their sons and follow all the
commands of the woman signified by this, who are situated in the arising of the
great delusion-producing karma, who are obedient to women of the "woman-
directive" type, and who do not care at all about the ruin of this world and the
next, are like camels who carry burdens.  **Verse 17**  > "Those who are awake
even at night, like a wet nurse, establish the child. Even though they are of a
very modest mind, they become like swans, washing clothes."  **Commentary**  >
Men who are under the control of women, even at night, get up and, like a wet
nurse, comfort the crying child by various kinds of soothing words. They say to
him, "My son, you are the lord of Nakrapur, Hastipatan, Kalpapattan, Simhapura,
a high place, a low place, Kukkhipura, Kanyakubja, the grandfather's mouth, and
Shauryapura." Thus, men who are under the control of women, by various kinds of
playful words and conversations, make the child happy. They do such things that
they become a laughingstock for everyone. Those whose minds are very modest,
even though they are modest, abandon their modesty and do even the most
despicable deeds at the behest of women. The sutra-maker shows this by the parts
of the sutra: "Washers of clothes" - like swans, like washermen, they become.
And because this is a sign, they also do other things like carrying water.
**Verse 18**  > "Thus, many have done this before, those who are devoted to
enjoyment. Like a slave, like a deer, like a beast, he is not, or is he?"
**Commentary**  > Thus, many have done this before, those who are devoted to
enjoyment. Like a slave, like a deer, like a beast, he is not, or is he?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM  /  isa prakAra putra kA pAlana poSaNa tathA isase
upalakSita strI ke sabhI AdezoM kA anuvartana karane vAle, mahAmohanIya karma ke
udaya meM avasthita, strI nirdezavRtti-striyoM ke AjJApAlaka isa loka aura para
loka ke bigar3ane kI jarA bhI paravAha na karane vAle puruSa U~Ta kI jyoM bhAra
Dhone kA kAma karate haiM  /  rAovi uThThiyA saMtA, dAragaM ca saMThavaMti dhAI
vA  /  /  suhirAmaNA vi te saMtA, vatthadhovA havaMti haMsA vA  // 17 //  chAyA
- rAtrAvapyutthitAH santaH dArakaM saMsthApayanti dhAtrIva  /  suhImanaso'pi te
santaH, vastradhAvakA bhavanti haMsAvA  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa strI ke vazagata
hote haiM ve rAta meM bhI uThakara dhAya kI jyoM bacce ko goda meM le lete haiM
ve atyanta lajjAzIla hote hue bhI zarmAte hue bhI strI aura bacce ke kapar3e
dhote haiM  /  TIkA - rAtrAvapyutthitAH santo rudantaM dArakaM dhAtrIvat
saMsthApayantyanekaprakArairullApanaiHsAmiosi Nagarassa ya Nakkaurassa ya
hatthakappagiripaTTaNa sIha purassa ya uNNayassa ninnassa ya kucchipurassa ya
kaNNakuja AyA muhasoriyapurassaya" ityeva mAdibhirasambaddhaiH krIDanakAlApaiH
strIcittAnuvartinaH puruSAstat kurvanti yeno pahAsyatAM sarvasya vrajanti, suSTu
hI:-lajjA tasyAM manaH-anta:karaNaM yeSAM te suhrIMmanaso-lajjAlavo'pi te santo
vihAya lajjA strIvacanAtsarvajaghanyAnyapi karmANi kurvate, tAnyeva
sUtrAvayavena darzayati-'vastradhAvakA' vastraprakSAlakA haMsA iva-rajakA iva
bhavanti, asya copalakSaNArthatvAdanyadapyudakavahanAdikaM kurvanti  // 17 //
kimetatkecana kurvanti yenaivabhidhIyate ?, bADhaM kurvantItyAha - TIkArtha - jo
puruSa strI ke vaza meM hote haiM ve rAta meM bhI uThakara rote hue bacce ko
dhAya kI jyoM taraha-taraha ke lAr3a pyAra ke zabdoM se sAMtvanA dete hue apanI
goda meM rakhate haiM  /  jaise ve use kahate beTA tuma nakrapura hastipatana,
kalpapattana, siMhapura, unnata sthAna, nimnasthAna, kukSipura, kAnyakubja
pItAmaha mukha tathA zauryapura ke svAmI ho, rAjA ho, nArI ke adhIna bane hue
puruSa yoM aneka prakAra se bAlaka ke lie vinoda janaka AlApa saMlApa dvArA use
khilAtA hai  /  isa prakAra ke kArya karate haiM jisase ve sabhI ke lie
upahAsAtmaka banate haiM  /  jinakA mana atyanta lajjAzIla hai, vaise puruSa bhI
lajjA kA parityAga kara strI ke kahane se choTe se choTA kAma kara lete haiM  /
sUtrakAra sUtra ke avayavoM aMgoM dvArA yahI digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM
aise puruSa dhobI ke jyoM kapar3e dhote haiM  /  kapar3e dhonA to yahA~
upalakSaNa hai  /  isase saMketika hai ki ve strI ke lie pAnI lAnA Adi bhI kArya
karate haiM  /  kyA kaI puruSa aisA karate haiM jisase Apa yoM kahate haiM ? hA~
karate haiN| isI bAta ko sUtrakAra batalAte hai| evaM bahuhiM kaya puvvaM,
bhogatthAe je'bhiyAvannA  /  /  dAse miiva pese vA, pasubhUteva se Na vA keI  //
18 //  chAyA - evaM bahubhiH kRtapUrva, bhogArthAya ye'bhyApannAH  /
dAsamRgAviva preSya iva pazUbhUta iva sa na vA kazcit  //  301

Page #330 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation preserving Jain terms:  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra states
that many individuals who have come under the sway of women continue to obey
their commands. The man who is engrossed in sinful activities for the sake of
sensual pleasures is like a deer trapped in a net, a purchased servant, or an
animal - he is the most wretched of all.  Commentary - The statement "thus"
refers to the previous mention of women's commands such as nurturing sons,
washing clothes, etc. These have been performed by many worldly beings in the
past, are being performed in the present, and will be performed in the future.
Those men who, without considering the fear of karmic consequences in this life
and the next, have become inclined towards and engaged in sinful activities -
they perform all the aforementioned tasks. The man who is blinded by passion and
is under the control of women, is assigned by those fearless women not only to
the previously mentioned tasks, but also to many other such works. Just as a
deer trapped in a net is dependent on others, unable to act according to his own
will, and cannot even perform basic functions like eating, similarly the man
under the sway of a woman becomes subservient, unable to carry out actions as
per his own desire. He is employed like a purchased servant in cleaning,
washing, and disposing of excreta and the like. Devoid of the discrimination
between right and wrong conduct, and unaware of what is beneficial or harmful,
he becomes like an animal - just as an animal knows only feeding, fear, and
sexual urges, similarly this man, due to the lack of righteous conduct, is like
an animal. Or, the man under the control of women is even more wretched than a
servant, deer, purchased slave, or animal, as he is bereft of both - he is
neither a renunciant monk due to the lack of righteous conduct, nor a
householder due to the non-consumption of betel and the like, and mere hair-
plucking. He is not among those who perform the duties of this world and the
next, as neither this world nor the next is accomplished for him.  Now the
author concludes this study and instructs the abandonment of association with
women.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - strI ke vaza meM hue aise aneka vyakti usakI
AjJA kA pAlana karate rahe haiM  /  jo puruSa kAma bhoga ke nimitta pApa kAryoM
meM saMsakta hai, vaha jAla meM phaMse hiraNa kI taraha, kharIde hue naukara kI
taraha, yA jAnavara kI taraha arthAt vaha sabase adhama-gayA gujarA hai| TIkA -
'eva' miti pUrvoktaM strINAmAdezakaraNaM putrapoSaNavastradhAvanAdikaM
tadbahubhiH saMsArAbhiSvaGgibhiH pUrvaM kRtaM kRtapUrva tathA pare kurvanti
kariSyanti ca ye 'bhogakRte, kAmabhogArthamaihikAmuSmikApAyabhayamaparyAlocya
Abhimukhyena-bhogAnukUlyena ApannA-vyavasthitA:sAvadyAnuSThAneSu pratipannA
itiyAvat, tathA yo rAgAndhaHstrIbhirvazIkRtaH sa dAsavadazaGkitAbhistAbhiH
pratyapare'pi karmaNi niyojyate, tathA vAgurApatitaH paravazo mRga iva dhAryate,
nAtmavazo bhojanAdikriyA api kartuM labhate, 'preSya iva' karmakara iva
krayakrIta iva varcaHzodhanAdAvapi niyojyate,
tathAkartavyAkartavyavivekarahitatthA hitAhitaprAptiparihAzUnyatvAt pazubhUta
iva, yathA hi pazurAhArabhayamaithunaparigrahAbhijJa eva kevalam, evama sAvapi
sadanuSThAnarahitatvAtpazukalpaH, yadivA-sa strIvazago dAsamRgapreSya
pazubhyo'pya dhamatvAnna kazcit, etaduktaM bhavati-sarvAdhamatvAttasya tattulyaM
nAstyeva yenAsAvupamIyate, athavA-na sa kazciditi, ubhayabhraSTatvAt, tathAhi-na
tAvatpravrajito'sau sadanuSThAnarahitatvAt, nApi gRhasthaH
tAmbUlAdiparibhogarahitatvAllocikAmAtra dhAritvAcca, yadivA
aihikAmuSmikAnuSThAyinAM madhye na kazciditi  // 18 //
sAmpratamutasaMhAradvAreNa strIsaGgaparihAramAha TIkArtha - striyoM kI AjJA
pAlana karanA, putra kA poSaNa karanA, vastra prakSAlana karanA Adi jo pUrva
varNita haiM, ve saba aneka saMsArI jIvoM ne atIta meM kiye haiM, vartamAna meM
karate haiM aura bhaviSya meM kareMge  /  jo puruSa kAmAtmaka viSaya bhogoM ko
prApta karane hetu aihika tathA pAralaukika bhaya ko nahIM socate hue-isa loka
aura paraloka ke bigar3ane para dhyAna nahIM dete hue pApa yukta kAryoM meM
pratipanna-pravRtta rahate haiM, ve una sabhI kAryoM ko karate haiM jinakA
pahale varNana huA hai  /  jo puruSa rAga se andhe ho gae haiM, striyoM ke
adhIna haiM striyA~ nizaMka hokara unheM naukara kI jyoM pUrva varNita kAryoM ke
atirikta aura bhI vaise aneka kAryoM meM niyojita karatI haiM  /  jaise jAla meM
patita mRga paratantra hotA hai, Atmavaza nahIM hotA, bhojanAdi kriyA nahIM kara
sakatA usI taraha strI ke vaza meM AyA huA puruSa paravaza hotA hai, vaha apanI
icchA ke anurUpa bhojana Adi kriyAeM nahIM kara sakatA  /  vaha kharIde hue
naukara kI taraha mala mUtra Adi ke zodhana meM, saphAI meM, unheM phaiMkane Adi
meM lagAyA jAtA hai, strI ke vaza huA puruSa karane yogya aura na karane yogya
kArya ke viveka se rahita hotA hai  /  jaise eka jAnavara apanA hita pAne kI ora
bar3hanA tathA ahita kA tyAga karanA nahIM jAnatA usI taraha vaha puruSa hita
ahita kI upAdeyatA aura heyatA ko nahIM samajhatA  /  athavA strI ke vaza meM
huA manuSya sevaka, hiraNa, kharIde hue dAsa tathA pazu se bhI adhama nIca yA
gayA gujarA hone ke kAraNa kucha bhI nahIM hai, nagaNya hai  /  kahane kA
abhiprAya yaha hai ki vaha puruSa sabase nIca hai  /  usake samAna koI dUsarA
nIca nahIM hai  /  jisase usako upamita kiyA jA sake vaha ubhayabhraSTa hai,
donoM ora se patita hai, sadAcAra se zUnya hone ke kAraNa vaha pravrajita sAdhu
nahIM hai, aura tAmbUla-pAna Adi padArthoM ke paribhoga na karane tathA luMcana
mAtra karane ke kAraNa vaha gRhastha bhI nahIM hai  /  aihika isa loka kA tathA
AmuSmika-paraloka kA sampAdana anuSThAna karane vAle puruSoM meM se vaha koI bhI
nahIM hai, arthAt na usakA yaha loka sadhatA hai, aura na paraloka hii| aba isa
adhyayana kA upasaMhAra karate hue sUtrakAra strI saMga kA tyAga karanA batalAte
hai  /  302

Page #331 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 19:**  * **Jain Terms:**  *taasu*, *vijnnapam*, *sanstavan*, *sanvasam*,
*tajjaatika*, *avadyakara*  **Translation:**  * **Verse:**  "Knowing this, one
should avoid contact, praise, and cohabitation with women. These desires, born
from such contact, are declared by the omniscient ones to be harmful."
**Commentary:**  * **Explanation:**  "This" refers to the previous discussion
about women. The verse advises monks to avoid any interaction with women,
including praise and cohabitation, as such actions lead to harmful desires. The
omniscient ones, like the Tirthankaras, have declared these desires to be
harmful.  **Verse 20:**  * **Jain Terms:** *seyaay*, *appagam*, *nilambhitta*,
*itthi*, *pasu*, *bhikkhu*, *paani*  **Translation:**  * **Verse:** "This fear
is not conducive to liberation. Therefore, a monk should restrain himself, and
not touch a woman, an animal, or even himself with his hands."  **Commentary:**
* **Explanation:**  The verse emphasizes that the fear of falling into harmful
desires is not conducive to liberation. Therefore, a monk should restrain
himself from any contact with women or animals, and even avoid touching himself
with his hands. This emphasizes the importance of complete detachment and self-
control for spiritual progress.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayana evaM khu tAsu vinnappaM, saMthavaM saMvAsaM ca vajejA  /
tajjAtiA ime kAmA, vajjakarA ya evamakkhAe  // 19 //  chAyA - evaM khalu tAsu
vijJaptaM, saMstavaM saMvAsaMca varjayet  /  tajjAtikA ime kAmA avadyakarA
evamAkhyAtAH  //  anuvAda - strI ke sambandha meM pahale jo unakA vivecana kiyA
gayA hai use dhyAna meM rakhate hue sAdhu strI ke sAtha saMstava-paricaya aura
saMvAsa-sahavAsa nahIM kare  /  tajanita-strI ke saMsarga se utpanna hone vAle
kAma bhoga pApotpAdaka haiM, aisA sarvajJoM ne AkhyAta kiyA hai, batalAyA hai  /
TIkA - 'etat' pUrvoktaM khuzabdo vAkyAlaGkAre tAsu yatsthitaM tAsAM vA strINAM
sambandhi yad vijJaptamuktaM, tadyathA-yadi sakezayA mayA saha na ramase
tato'haM kezAnapyapanayAmItyevamAdikaM, tathA strIbhiH sArdhaM 'saMstavaM'
paricayaM tatsaMvAsaM ca strIbhiH sahaikatra nivAsaM cAtmahitamanuvartamAnaH
sarvApAyabhIrU: 'tyajet' jahyAt, yatastAbhyoramaNIbhyo jAti:-utpattiryeSAM te'mI
kAmAstajAtikA-ramaNIsamparkotyAstathA 'avA' pApaM vrajaM vA gurutvAdadhaH
pAtakatvena vApameva tatkaraNazIlA avadhakarA vrajakarA vetyevam 'AkhyAtAH'
tIrthakaragaNadharAdibhiH pratipAditA iti" | // 19 //  sarvopasaMhArArthamAha -
TIkArtha - isa gAthA meM 'khu' zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke rUpa meM AyA hai  /  pahale
striyoM kI rIti kisa prakAra kI hotI hai, yaha varNita huA hai  /  striyA~ sAdhu
se abhyarthanA karatI hai ki mujha kezoM vAlI ke sAtha yadi tuma ramaNa nahIM
karate, aisA tumheM nahIM bhAtA to maiM ina kezoM ko upAr3a DAlUM, yaha saba
kahA jA cukA hai  /  isalie jo puruSa apanI AtmA kA hita kalyANa cAhatA hai,
tathA saba prakAra apAya-vinAza se, patana se DaratA hai, vaha striyoM ke sAtha
paricaya saMstava-samparka na bar3hAye tathA unake sAtha eka sthAna meM nivAsa
na kare, kyoM ki strI ke saMbaMdha se janita kAma bhoga-kAma-vAsanA avadya-pApa
utpanna karatI haiM, jo bhArIpana ke kAraNa adhaH patana karatA hai, vaisA
karane vAle pApa pravaNa hote haiM  /  tIrthaMkara, gaNadhara Adi mahApuruSoM ne
aisA AkhyAta kiyA hai, pratipAdita kiyA hai  /  aba sabakA upasaMhAra karate hue
kahate haiN| eyaM bhayaM Na seyAya, iha se appagaM nilaMbhittA  /  No itthiM No
pasu bhikkhu, No sayaM pANiNo NilijjejA  // 20 //  chAyA - evaM bhayaM na
zreyase, iti sa AtmAnaM nirudhya  /  _no strIM no pazu bhikSuH no svayaM pANinA
nilIyeta  //  anuvAda - strI ke saMsarga se pUrvokta rUpa meM bhayajanaka
sthitiyAM utpanna hotI haiM  /  strI kA samparka Atma kalyANa kA nirodhaka yA
bAdhaka hai  /  isalie sAdhu strI ko yA pazu ko apane hAtha se sparza taka na
kre| TIkA - 'evam' anantaranItyA bhayahetutvAt strIbhirvijJaptaM tathA
saMstavastatsaMvAsazca bhayamityataH strIbhiH sAdhU samparko na zreyase
asadanuSThAnahetutvAttasyetyevaM parijJAyasa bhikSuravagatakAmabhogavipAka
AtmAnaM strI samparkAnnirudhya sanmArge vyavasthApya yatkuryAttadarzayati-na
striyaM narakavIthIprAyAM nApi pazuM 'lIyeta' Azrayeta strIpazubhyAM saha (303

Page #332 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The Sravaka (ascetic) should abandon the company
(samsara) of the Sutrakritanga Sutra, as it is stated that the bed should be
devoid of women, animals, and eunuchs. Similarly, he should not touch his own
genitals with his hand, as that would also corrupt his conduct. Further, he
should not touch women, animals, etc. with his own hand.  The wise, pure-souled
ascetic should renounce all external activities. The ascetic who endures all
sensations - cold, heat, etc. - with his mind, speech, and body is truly a
Anagara (homeless ascetic).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram saMvAsaM parityajet, strIpazupaNDakavivarjitA zayye'
tivacanAt, tathA svakIyena pANinA' hastenAvAcyasya naNilijjeja' tti na
sambAdhanaM kuryAt, yatastadapi hastasambAdhanaM cAritraM zabalIkaroti, yadivA
strIpazvAdikaM svena pANinA na spRzediti  // 20 //  apica - TIkArtha - jaisA
pahale kahA gayA hai- striyoM kI vijJApanA yA abhyarthanA para unake sAtha
saMstavaparicaya bar3hAnA, unake sAtha samparka karanA, rahanA bhaya kA kAraNa
hai  /  ataeva vaha bhaya hai  /  strI samparka asad anuSThAna-azubha karma kA
kAraNa hai  /  isalie vaha azreyaskara-akalyANakArI hai  /  yaha jAnakara kAma
bhoga ke vipAka-klezaprada phala ko jAnane vAle sAdhu ko apane Apako strI ke
samparka se rokakara-dUra haTAkara, sanmArga meM sthApita kara jo kArya karanA
cAhie, sUtrakAra usakA digdarzana karAte haiM-strI naraka ko le jAne kA mArga
hai  /  sAdhu usakA tathA pazu kA Azraya na leve arthAt unake sAtha saMvAsa na
kare  /  sAdhu kI zaiyyA, strI, pazu tathA napuMsaka se rahita honI cAhie, aisA
zAstra kA vacana hai  /  vaha apane hAtha se guhyandriya kA saMvAdhana na kare
/  aisA karane se cAritra vikRta hotA hai  /  vaha strI pazu Adi kA apane hAtha
se saMsparza na kare  /  suvisuddhalese mehAvI, parakiriaM ca vajae nANI  /
maNasA vayasA kAyeNaM savva phAsasahe aNagAre  // 21 //  chAyA -
suvizuddhalezyaH meghAvI parikriyAJca varjayedajJAnI  /  manasA vacasA kAyena
sarva sparza saho'nagAraH  //  anuvAda - vizuddha citta yukta medhAvI-
prajJAzIla, jJAnI viveka yukta sAdhu, mana vacana aura karma dvArA kisI dUsare
kI kriyA kA varjana-parityAga kare, jo puruSa sabhI zIta, uSNa Adi sparzoM ko-
sardI garmI ko sahana karatA hai, vaha sAdhu hai  /  TIkA - suSTu-vizeSeNa
zuddhA-strI samparka parihAra rUpa tayA niSkalaGkA lezyA-anta:karaNavRttiryasya
sa tathA sa evambhUto 'meghAvI' maryAdAvartI parasmaistryAdipadArthAya kriyA
parakriyA-viSayopabhogadvAreNa paropakArakaraNaM pareNa vA''tmanaH
saMbAdhanAdikA kriyA parakriyA tAM ca 'jJAnI' viditavedyo 'varjayet' pariharet,
etaduktaM bhavativiSayopabhogopAdhinA nAnyasya kimapi kuryAnnApyAtmanaH striyA
pAdadhAvanAdikamapi kArayet, etacca parakriyAvarjanaM manasA vacasA kAyena
varjayet, tathAhi-audArikakAmabhogArthaM manasA na gacchati nAnyaM gamayati
gacchantamaparaM nAnujAnIte evaM vAcA kAyena ca, sarve'pyaudArike nava bhedAH,
evaM divye'pi nava bhedAH, tatazcASTAdazabhedabhinnamapi brahma vibhRyAt, yathA
ca strIsparzaparISahaH soDhavya evaM sarvAnapi zItoSNadaMzamazakatRNAdi
sparzAnadhisaheta, evaM ca sarvasparzasaho'nagAraH sAdhurbhavatIti  // 21 //  ka
evamAheti darzayati - TIkArtha - jisake citta kI vRtti strI saMsarga tyAga ke
kAraNa niSkalaMka-doSarahita hai, zuddha hai, jo apanI maryAdAoM meM TikA huA
hai, aisA jJAnavAna puruSa parakriyA na kare  /  strI Adi ke lie jo kriyA kI
jAtI hai, use parakriyA kahate haiM  /  viSaya bhogoM ke sAdhana dekara,
viSayopabhoga karavAkara jo dUsare kA upakAra usake manonukUla kiyA jAtA hai  /
dUsare ke dvArA apanA zarIra Adi dabavAnA bhI parakriyA hai  /  jJAnI puruSa
inakA varjana kare  /  kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki viSayopabhoga kI sAmagrI
dekara jJAnavAna puruSa dUsare ko kucha bhI 304

Page #333 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Study of Women (Stri Parijna Adhyayan)  **I**  Do not cooperate with women,
do not allow them to wash your feet, do not accept such service. A Sadhu should
renounce all actions through mind, speech, and body. Do not even think about
sensual pleasures, do not bring them to mind, and do not consider those who
indulge in them as good. Do not engage in such actions through speech or body.
This is what one should understand. There are nine types of sensual pleasures,
and nine types of divine pleasures. A Sadhu should observe and maintain celibacy
in eighteen ways. Just as a Sadhu endures the touch of a woman, he should also
endure cold, heat, dance, mosquitoes, grass, and all other touches. One who
endures all touches is an An-gaar Sadhu. Who said this? The Digdarshan reveals
it.  **Dhuamohe se Bhikkhu**  **Icchevmaahu se Vire, Dhuarae Tamha
Ajjathavisuddhe, Suvimukke Amokkaae Parivjjaasi || 22 ||**  **Ttibemi
Ityevmaahu: Sa Vire Dhutaraja: Dhutmoha: Sa Bhikkhu.**  **Tasmadaatmavisuddha:
Suvipraamukta: Amokksaya Parivrajediiti || Bravimi ||**  **Shadow**  **Om Om
Om**  **Translation:** These aforementioned words were spoken by the Lord
Mahavira, who has eradicated all karmas, destroyed delusion, and attained the
state of being free from attachment. Therefore, a Sadhu who is Atma-visuddha
(pure in soul), free from all attachments, should remain engaged in the path of
renunciation (Parivrajya) and practice of self-control until he attains
liberation (Amokksha).  **Commentary:** 'Iti' and all that was said before, that
was spoken by the Lord Mahavira, who is born with divine knowledge and dedicated
to the welfare of others. 'Aahu' means he said, 'Dhutam' means cleansed,
'Apanitam Rajah' means removed karma, 'Dhuta Raja' means one who has removed
karma caused by contact with women, 'Dhuta Moha' means one who has overcome
delusion in the form of attachment and aversion. Another interpretation is
'Dhuta' means cleansed, 'Apanita Ragamargo' means one who has abandoned the path
of attachment, 'Ragapantha' means the path of attachment, 'Yasmin' means in
whom, 'Stri Sansthavaadi Parihare' means in the renunciation of contact with
women and other such things. All this was spoken by the Lord Mahavira, who is a
hero. 'Tasmat' means therefore, 'Sa Bhikkhu' means that Sadhu,
'Adhyatmavisuddha' means pure in spirit, 'Suvishuddhantakarana' means one with a
pure mind, 'Sustu Ragadveshatmaken Stri Samparken Mukta' means one who is
completely free from the attachment and aversion associated with contact with
women, 'Amokksaya' means for the sake of liberation, 'Aseha Karmakshayam
Yavatpari' means until all karmas are completely destroyed,
'Samantaatsanyamanusthanena' means by practicing self-control in all aspects,
'Vrajet' means he should go, 'Sanyamodyogavan' means one who is dedicated to
self-control. 'Iti' means thus, 'Bravimi' means I say, as before. || 22 ||  Thus
ends the fourth study of women (Stri Parijna Adhyayan).  **Commentary:** The
description given earlier was spoken by the Lord Mahavira, who is a divine
knower, dedicated to the welfare of others. He had eradicated all karmas that
arise from contact with women and bind one, and he had conquered delusion in the
form of attachment and aversion. There is another interpretation here, according
to which the Lord Mahavira said that one should renounce contact with women,
including praise and familiarity, and should not be attached to them. Therefore,
a Sadhu should remain dedicated to self-control, with a pure mind and completely
free from the attachment and aversion associated with contact with women, until
all karmas are completely destroyed. The word 'Iti' indicates the end. 'Bravimi'
is as before.  Thus ends the fourth study of women (Stri Parijna Adhyayan).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 strI parijJAdhyayanaM I sahayoga na kare, strI Adi dvArA apane pairoM kA
prakSAlana na karavAye, vaisI sevA na le  /  sAdhu mana vacana evaM zarIra tInoM
dvArA parakriyA kA parityAga kare  /  audArika kAma bhoga hetu mana se bhI na
jAye mana meM bhI vaisA na lAye, tathA anya ko bhI mana meM na bheje jAte hue ko
acchA na samajhe, vANI aura deha se bhI vaisA na kare, yaha samajhanA cAhie  /
audArika kAma bhoga ke nau prakAra haiM, divya-deva sambandhI kAma bhoga ke bhI
nau prakAra haiM-sAdhu aThAraha prakAra se brahmacarya dhAraNa kare, pAlana kare
/  sAdhu jisa prakAra strI sparza parISaha ko sahana kare, usI prakAra sardI,
garmI, DAMsa, macchara tathA tRNa Adi sabhI sparzo ko sahana kare  /  isa
prakAra samasta sparzo ko jo sahana karatA hai, vaha anagAra- sAdhu hotA hai  /
kisane yaha kahA- aisA digdarzana karAte haiM  /  dhuamohe se bhikkhU  /
iccevamAhu se vIre, dhuarae tamhA ajjhatthavisuddhe, suvimukke AmokkhAe
parivajjAsi  //  22  //  ttibemi ityevamAhuH sa vIraH dhutarajAH dhutamohaH sa
bhikSuH  /  tasmAdAtmavizuddhaH suvipramuktaH AmokSAya parivrajediti  //
bravImi  //  chAyA - OM OM OM anuvAda - jinhoMne samasta karmoM ko miTA diyA,
moha ko dhvaMsta kara diyA, yoM jo vItarAga avasthA meM saMsthita hue una prabhu
mahAvIra ne ye pUrvokta bAteM kahI hai| isalie Atmavizuddha-zuddha Atma
bhAvayukta suvipramuktaviSayavAsanAdi samasta rAgAtmaka baMdhanoM se chUTA huA
sAdhu jaba taka mokSa prApta ho jAe, taba taka parivrajyA meM, saMyama sAdhanA
meM saMpravRtta rahe  /  TIkA - 'iti' evaM yatpUrvamuktaM tatsarvaM sa vIro
bhagavAnutpannadivyajJAnaH parahitaikarata : 'Aha' uktavAn, yata evamato dhUtam-
apanItaM rajaH - strIsamparkAdikRtaM karma yena sa dhUtarajAH tathA dhUto moho
rAgadveSarUpo yena sa tathA  /  pAThAntaraM vA dhUtaH- apanIto rAgamArgo -
rAgapanthA yasmin strIsaMstavAdiparihAre tattathA tatsarvaM bhagavAn vIra evAha,
yata evaM tasmAt sa bhikSuH adhyAtmavizuddhaH, suvizuddhAntaHkaraNaH suSTu
rAgadveSAtmakena strIsamparkeNa muktaH san 'AmokSAya' azeSa karmakSayaM
yAvatpari - samantAtsaMyamAnuSThAnena 'vrajet' gacchetsaMyamodyogavAn bhavediti,
itiH parisamAptyarthe, bravImIti pUrvavat  // 22 //  iti caturthaM strI
parijJAdhyayanaM parisamAptam  //  TIkArtha - pahale jo varNana kiyA gayA hai,
vaha divya jJAnI, paropakAra, parAyaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra ne kahA hai| unhoMne
strI saMparka Adi se utpanna hone vAle, baMdhane vAle samasta karmoM ko apagata
kara diyA thA, miTA diyA thA, rAgadveSAtmaka moha ko ve jIta cuke the  /  yahA~
pAThAntara bhI hai, tadanusAra bhagavAna mahAvIra ne yaha kahA thA ki strI ke
sAtha saMstava - paricaya Adi kA tyAga kara denA cAhie, usameM rAgAsakta nahIM
honA cAhie  /  isalie sAdhu vizuddha antaHkaraNa yukta tathA rAgAdveSa svarUpa
strI samparka se sarvathA pRthaka hokara jaba taka samasta karma sampUrNa rUpa
se kSINa na ho jAya, saMyama meM udyamazIla rahe  /  yahA~ iti zabda samApti kA
bodhaka hai  /  bravImi yaha pUrvavat hai  /  cauthA strI parIjJA adhyayana
samApta huA  /  Bian  305

Page #334 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra ### Fifth Hell Division Study #### First Uddeshaka
"I, the Kevali, the Great Being, asked the Lord Mahavira, how do beings suffer
in hell? I do not know, O Muni, you know, tell me, how do ignorant beings go to
hell?" ||1||  **Commentary:** Jambuswami asked Sudharmaswami, "O Lord, what are
the hells like? By what karmas are beings born there? What kind of suffering is
there?"   Sudharmaswami replied, "I asked the same question to the Kevali, the
Great Being, the Lord Mahavira, who knows the past, present, and future, the
subtle and the gross, who is a great ascetic, who endures both favorable and
unfavorable circumstances. I asked him, 'How are the hells, filled with
immeasurable suffering?' I do not know, O Muni, you know everything through your
perfect knowledge, tell me, how do ignorant beings, who are unaware of the path
to happiness and the avoidance of suffering, go to hell? What kind of suffering
do they experience there?" ||1||  **Commentary:** Jambuswami asked
Sudharmaswami, "O Lord, what are the hells like? By what karmas are beings born
there? What kind of suffering is there?"   Sudharmaswami replied, "I asked the
same question to the Kevali, the Great Being, the Lord Mahavira, who knows the
past, present, and future, the subtle and the gross, who is a great ascetic, who
endures both favorable and unfavorable circumstances. I asked him, 'How are the
hells, filled with immeasurable suffering?' I do not know, O Muni, you know
everything through your perfect knowledge, tell me, how do ignorant beings, who
are unaware of the path to happiness and the avoidance of suffering, go to hell?
What kind of suffering do they experience there?" ||1||  **...**  "And then, O
Great Being, I asked the Lord Mahavira, who was sitting in the Kasava posture,
to explain this difficult and complex subject." ||2||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram paMcama narakavibhakti adhyayana prathama uddezakaH
pucchissa'haM kevaliyaM mahesiM, kahaM bhitAvANaragA puratthA ?  /  ajANao me
muNi bUhi jANaM, kahiM nu bAlA narayaM uviMti ?  // 1 //  chAyA - pRSTavAnaha
kavAlana mahASa, kathamAbhatApAH narakAH purastAt  /  ajAnato me mune ! brUhi
jAnan, kathaM nu bAlAH narakamupayAnti  //  anuvAda - Arya sudharmA svAmI apane
antevAsI jambU se kahate haiM ki maiMne kevalI-sarvajJa, maharSivItarAga prabhu
mahAvIra se pahale yaha pUchA thA ki naraka meM prANI kisa prakAra pIr3A prApta
karate haiM, prabhu maiM yaha nahIM jAnatA, Apa samyaka jAnate haiM  /  isalie
Apa mujhe yaha batalAye tathA yaha bhI pratipAdita kareM ki ajJa prANI kisa
prakAra naraka ko prApta karate haiN| . TIkA - jambUsvAminA sudharmasvAmI
pRSTaH, tadyathA-bhagavan ! kiMbhUtA narakAH ? kairvA karmabhirasumatAM
teSUtpAdaH ? kIdRzyo vA tatratyA vedanA ? ityevaM pRSTaH sudharmasvAmyAha-
yadetadbhavatA'haM pRSTastadet 'kevalinam'
atItAnAgatavartamAnasUkSmavyavahitapadArthavedinaM 'maharSim'
ugratapazcaraNakAriNamanukUlapratikUlopasargasahiSNuM
'zrImanmahAvIravardhamAnasvAminaM' purastAtpUrvaM pRSTavAnahamasmi, yathA
'kathaM' kimbhUtA amitApAnvitA 'narakA' narakAvAsA bhavantItyetadajAnAto 'me'
mama he mune 'jAnan' sarvameva kevalajJAnenAvagacchan 'brUhi ' kathaya, kathaM
nu' kena prakAreNa kimanuSThAyino nuriti vitakeM 'bAlA' ajJA
hitAhitapraptiparihAravivekarahitAsteSu narakeSUpa-sAmIpyena tadyogya
karmopAdAnatayA 'yAnti' gacchanti kimbhUtAzca tatra gatAnAM vedanAH
prAduSpyantItyetaccAhaM 'pRSTavAni 'tti  // 1 //  TIkArtha - jambU svAmI ne zrI
sudharmAsvAmI se prazna kiyA ki bhagavan ! naraka-nAraka bhUmiyA~ kisa prakAra
kI hotI haiM  /  prANI kina karmoM ke AcaraNa se unameM utpanna hote haiM  /
vahA~ unheM kaisI vedanA-yAtanA bhoganI par3atI hai  /  yo prazna kiye jAne para
zrI sudharmAsvAmI bole ki tumane jo prazna pUchA hai, vaha maiMne bhI kevalI-
atIta, anAgata, vartamAna, sUkSma tathA vyavahita padArthoM ke vettA maharSi-
ugratapazcaraNazIla, anukUla evaM pratikUla upasarga sahiSNu bhagavAna zrI
mahAvIra se pahale pUchA thA  /  maiMne jijJAsA kI thI ki nAraka bhUmiyA~ kisa
prakAra ke duHkhoM se yukta hotI hai, maiM yaha nahIM jAnatA  /  he munIza ! Apa
kevala jJAna se ise jAnate haiM  /  mujhe batalAe~, tathA yaha bhI kaheM ki hita
AtmakalyANa kI prApti aura ahita-Atmapatana ke tyAga ke jJAna se zUnya ajJajIva
kaise karma kara naraka gAmI hote haiM, tathA naraka gata jIvoM ko kaisI
vedanAeM yAtanAeM bhoganI par3atI hai, yaha maiMne pUchA thA  /  03. . evaM mae
puDhe mahANubhAve, iNamo'bbavI kAsave Asupanne  /  pavedaissaM duhamaTThaduggaM,
AdINiyaM duskaDiyaM puratthA  // 2 //  306

Page #335 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shadow Study of the hell division And the great being, asked by me, the
quick-witted Kashyap, said this. I will explain the suffering, the difficult-to-
understand meaning, the evil-doer, in the future.  **Translation** - When asked
by me, the great being - endowed with the glory of many excellences, the quick-
witted - always useful in all things, the Lord Mahavira born in the Kashyap
clan, said that the place of hell is extremely painful. It is unknowable by
ignorant - non-omniscient beings. It is the dwelling place of sinful and lowly
beings. I will explain this further.  **Commentary** - And thus, I, being
humble, approached and asked the great one, who has the greatness of twenty-four
excellences. The time of question and answer is 'this' - what will be spoken, as
in the figure of speech. Knowing everything by omniscience, he answered my
question, 'said'. Who is he? 'Kashyap' - the hero, the Vardhamana Swami, the
quick-witted - because he is always useful everywhere. And thus, asked by me,
the Lord said this - as whatever you have asked, I will 'explain' - tell you in
the future, listen attentively. That is what he said - 'suffering' - hell is the
cause of suffering, because of non-performance of good deeds, or - the dwelling
in hell itself causes suffering, or - because of the arising of non-virtuous
karma, there is intense suffering. This is also in terms of - when considered in
ultimate reality, 'difficult' - deep, uneven, difficult to understand by the
non-omniscient. The meaning is that there is no evidence to prove it. Or -
'difficult to understand' - the meaning is that which is the cause of suffering,
or the purpose of suffering, that is the suffering-meaning - hell. And it is
'difficult' - uneven, because it is difficult to answer. I will explain that.
Again, he distinguishes it - the place where the lowly, the most lowly, reside,
that is the 'lowly-natured' - the dwelling place of extremely lowly beings. And
the evil deed, the sin, or the fruit of sin, the arising of non-virtuous karma,
exists in that, that is the 'evil-doer'. I will explain it 'in the future'. Or,
the alternative reading is 'evil-doer' - those who have evil deeds, they are the
evil-doers - the hell-dwellers. I will explain their related conduct 'in the
future' - in the previous birth, what was done that made them eligible for going
to hell.  **Commentary on the Commentary** - The disciple of Lord Mahavira, Shri
Sudharma Swami, says that I went to the presence of that Lord, who has twenty-
four excellences, and asked this. Then he said this - after asking the question,
the Lord answered in the form of what will be spoken in the future. In this
verse, 'mo' has come in the sense of the figure of speech. Lord Mahavira,
knowing all things by omniscience, answered my question. Who is the Lord? He is
the Lord Vardhamana Swami, born in the Kashyap clan. He is quick-witted, because
he is always useful in all things. When I asked the question, the Lord said this
- whatever you have asked, I will explain in the future, listen attentively. He
says - the land of hell is the cause of suffering, it is painful because it is
the fruit of evil deeds, or - it is painful for beings. Or - because of the
arising of non-virtuous karma, there are intense sufferings in the land of hell.
Therefore, they are in the form of suffering. It is difficult for non-omniscient
beings to know the land of hell, that is, they cannot know, because there is no
evidence that can prove the existence of hell. This is the meaning. Or - the
land of hell is created only for giving suffering, therefore it is suffering-
meaning. It is difficult to cross that land, it is difficult. Therefore, it is
'difficult', I will explain it.  Again, the author explains the characteristic
of the land of hell - the land of hell is such that lowly beings reside all
around, that is, it is the dwelling place of lowly beings, in it, evil deeds,
sin, or the fruit of sin, non-virtuous karma, exists, therefore it is called
'evil-doer'. Its further description...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chAyA narakavibhakti adhyayanaM evaM mayA pRSTo mahAnubhAva, idamabravIt
kAzyapa AzuprajJaH  /  pravedayiSyAmi duHkhamarthadurgamAdInikaM duSkRtikaM
purastAt  //  anuvAda - mere dvArA yoM pUche jAne para mahAnubhAva - atizayoM kI
mahimA se yukta, AzuprajJa - samagra vastuoM meM sadA upayoga yukta, kAzyapa
gautra meM samutpanna bhagavAn mahAvIra ne kahA ki naraka sthAna atyanta
duHkhaprada hai  /  ajJAnI - asarvajJa jIvoM dvArA ajJeya hai| vaha pApiSTha
aura dIna hIna jIvoM kA AvAsa sthAna hai| maiM Age yaha batalAU~gA  /  TIkA -
tathA 'evam' anantaroktaM mayA vineyenopagamya pRSTo
mahAMzcatustriMzadatizayarUpo'nubhAvomAhAtmyaM yasya sa tathA, praznottarakAlaM
ca 'idaM' vakSyamANaM mo iti vAkyAlaGkAre, kevalAlokena parijJAya
matpraznanirvacanam 'abravIt ' uktavAn ko'sau ?' kAzyapo' vIro vardhamAnasvAmI
AzuprajJaH sarvatra sadopayogAt, sa caivaM mayA pRSTo bhagavAnidamAha-yathA
yadetadbhavatA pRSTastadahaM 'pravedayiSyAmi' kathayiSyAmyagrato dattAvadhAna:
zRNviti, tadevAha'duHkham' iti narakaM duHkhahetutvAt asadanuSThAnaM yadivA-
narakAvAsa eva duHkhayatIti duHkhaM athavA asAtAvedanIyodayAt tIvra pIDAtmakaM
duHkhamiti etaccArthataH - paramArthato vicAryamANaM 'durgaM' gahanaM viSamaM
durvijJeyaM asarvajJena, tatpratipAdaka pramANA bhAvAdityabhiprAyaH, yadivA -
'duhamaTThaduggaMti duHkhamevArtho yasmin duHkhanimitto vA duHkhaprayojano vA sa
duHkhArtho - narakaH, sa ca durgo-viSamo duruttaratvAt taM pratipAdayiSye,
punarapi tameva vizinaSTi - AsamantAddInamAdInaM yasmin sa AdInika:-
atyantadInasattvAzrayastathAduSTaM kRtaM duSkRtam asadanuSThAnaM pApaM vA
tatphalaM vA asAtAvedanIyodaya rUpaM tadvidyate yasminsa duSkRtikastaM,
'purastAd' agrataH pratipAdayiSye, pAThAntaraM vA 'dukkaDiNaM' ti duSkRtaM
vidyate yeSAM te duSkRtino - nArakAsteSAM sambandhi caritaM 'purastAt '
pUrvasmin janmani narakagatigamanayogyaM yatkRtaM tatpratipAdayiSya iti  //  2
//  yathApratijJAtamAha - TIkArtha bhagavAna mahAvIra ke ziSya zrI sudharmAsvAmI
kahate haiM ki maiMne una caturviMzati atizaya yukta prabhuvara ke samIpa jAkara
yaha pUchA, taba unhoMne isa prakAra kahA - prazna karane ke anantara bhagavAna
ne vakSyamANa rUpa meM jaisA Age vivakSita hogA, uttara diyA  /  isa gAthA meM
'mo' vAkyalaMkAra ke artha meM AyA hai  /  prabhu mahAvIra ne kevalajJAna dvArA
saba padArthoM ko jAnakara mere prazna kA uttara diyA thA  /  bhagavAn kauna
haiM ? ve kAzyapa gautra meM samutpanna prabhu vardhamAna svAmI haiN| ve
AzuprajJa haiM, kyoMki sadaiva samasta padArthoM meM unakA upayoga rahatA hai|
mere dvArA jaba prazna kiyA gayA taba bhagavAn ne aisA kahA ki tumane jo pUchA
hai, maiM Age batalAU~gA, tuma dattAvadhAna hokara dhyAna dekara zravaNa kro|
vahI kahate haiM- naraka bhUmi duHkha kA kAraNa hai, vaha duSkarmoM kA phala
hone ke kAraNa duHkhAtmaka hai, athavA vaha jIvoM ke lie duHkhaprada hai  /
athavA asAtAvedanIya karma ke udaya ke kAraNa naraka bhUmi meM tIvra pIDAe~
bhoganI hotI hai  /  isalie ve duHkha rUpa haiM  /  asarvajJa prANI naraka bhUmi
ko jAna pAyeM, yaha kaThina hai, arthAt ve nahIM jAna sakate, kyoMki aisA koI
pramANa nahIM hai, jo naraka ke astitva ko siddha kara sake, isakA yaha
abhiprAya hai  /  athavA naraka bhUmi eka mAtra duHkha dene hetu nirmita hai,
isa lie vaha duHkhArtha hai  /  usa bhUmi ko pArakara pAnA durgama hai, kaThina
hai  /  isalie vaha durga hai, maiM use batalAU~gA  /  1 punaH sUtrakAra naraka
bhUmi kI vizeSatA batalAte haiM- naraka bhUmi aisI hai jisameM cAroM ora dIna
hIna jIva nivAsa karate haiM, arthAt vaha dainya yukta prANiyoM kA nivAsa sthAna
hai, usameM duSkarma, pApa athavA pApa kA phala asAta vedanIya vidyamAna rahatA
hai, ataeva duSkRtika kahI jAtI hai  /  isakA Age varNana 307

Page #336 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra I
shall explain. In this context, there is also a variant reading 'dukkadinam',
which means that I shall also describe the sinful karmas acquired in the past
life, which have resulted in the residence of the wicked souls in the hell
realms.  Those few ignorant living beings who, for the sake of protecting their
own lives, commit sinful acts like violence against other living beings, fall
into the extremely terrifying, intensely agonizing Naraka (hell) realms,
enveloped in thick darkness.  Explanation:  These are the ones who have engaged
in sinful activities like great attachment, violence against the five senses,
and flesh-eating, etc. Being 'balas' (ignorant) with intense passions of
attachment and aversion, they are living beings seeking to protect their own
lives in this Samsara. They commit 'raudra' (terrible) acts like violence and
falsehood. Such sinful individuals, immersed in the arising of intense karmas,
fall into the extremely terrifying 'ghorarupe' (horrific) 'tamissandhyare'
(enveloped in thick darkness) Naraka, where even with the eyes, one can barely
perceive, like an owl in the day. As described in the scriptures - "O Gautama!
In the Naraka, how much area can the embodied being perceive with his vision? He
can perceive only a limited area, not a vast area." Similarly, the intense,
unbearable heat like a heap of glowing charcoal is the 'tivvabhitape' (intense
anguish) in that Naraka, where the beings attached to sense pleasures, burdened
by their own karmas, fall and experience various torments.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram karU~gA  /  isa saMdarbha meM 'dukkaDiNaM' aisA
pAThAntara bhI prApta hotA hai, jisakA artha yaha hai ki naraka bhUmi meM jo
pApI jIva nivAsa karate haiM, unhoMne pUrva bhava meM jo naraka bhogane yogya
karma arjita kiye, bAMdhe, vaha bhI maiM batalAU~gA  /   je kei bAlA iha
jIviyaTThI, pAvAiM kammAI karaMti ruddA  /  te ghorarUve tamisaMdhayAre,
tivvAbhitAve narae paDaMti  // 3 //  chAyA anuvAda jo katipaya bAla-ajJAnI jIva
apane prANoM kI rakSA ke lie, dUsare prANiyoM kI hiMsA Adi pApa kRtya karate
haiM, ve atyanta bhayAnaka aMdhakAra pUrNa tIvra abhitApa yukta mahAduHkhaprada
naraka meM par3ate haiM, jAte hai  /  - TIkA ye kecana
mahArambhaparigrahapaJcendriyavadhapizitabhakSaNAdike sAvadyAnuSThAne pravRttAH
'bAlA' ajJA rAgadveSotkaTAstiryagmanuSyA 'iha' asminsaMsAre aMsaya jIvitArthinaH
pApopAdAnabhUtAni karmANi' anuSThAnAni 'raudrA: ' prANinAM bhayotpAdakatvena
bhayAnakAH hiMsAnRtAdIni karmANi kurvanti ta evambhUtAstIvrapApodayavartino
'ghorarUpe' atyantabhayAnake 'tamisaMdhayAre 'tti bahalatamo'ndhakAre yatrAtmApi
nopalabhyate cakSuSA kevalamavadhinApi mandamandamulUkA ivAhnipazyanti tathA
cAgamaH - " kiNhalese NaM bhaMte ! Neraie kiNhalessaM NeraiaM paNihAe ohiNA
savvao samaMtA samabhiloemANe kevaiyaM khettaM jANaI ? kevaiyaM khettaM pAsai ?
goyamA ! No bahuyayaraM khetaM jANai No bahuyayaraM khettaM pAsai, itiriyameva
khettaM jANai itta riyameva khettaM pAsai" ityAdi tathA tIvroduHsahaH
khadirAGgAramahArAzitApAdanantaguNo'bhitApaH santApo yasmin sa tIvrAbhitApaH
tasmin evambhUte narake bahuvedane aparityakta viSayAbhiSvaGgAH
svakRtakarmaguravaH patanti, tatra ca nAnArUpA vedanAH samanubhavanti, tathA
coktam chAyA " acchaDDayavisayasuho paDai avijjhAyasihi sihANi vahe  /
saMsArodahivalayAmuhaMmi dukkhAgare niraha  // 1 //  chAyA- atyaktaviSaya sukhaH
patati avidhyAtazikhizikhAnivahe  /  saMsArodadhivalayAmukhe duHkhAkare
nirye||1|| pApakkaMtoratthalamuhakuharUcchaliyarUhiragaMDUse  /
karavattukkattaduhAvirikkaviviINNadehaddhe  // 2 //  chAyA
pAdAkrAntorasthalamukhakuharocchalitarudhiragaMDUSe  /
karapatrotkRttadvidhIbhAgavidIrNadehArthe  // 1 //
jaMtaMtarabhijjaMtucchalaMtasaMsaddabhariyadisivivareM  /
DajjhaMtupphiDiyasamucchalaMtasIsaTThi saMdhAe  // 3 //
yaMtrAntarbhidyaducchalatsaMzabdabhRtadigvavare  /
dahyamAnotsphiTitocchIrSAsthisaMghAte  // 1 //
muskakkaMdakaDAhukkar3hataMdukkayakayaMtakammaMte  /  sUla
vibhinnukkhittuddhadehaNiTTaMtapabbhAre ||4|| chAyA -
muktAkraMdakaTAhotkahyamAnaduSkRtAnta karmAnte  /
zUlavibhinnotkSiptordhvadehaniSThaprAgbhAre  //  1  //
saddaMdhayAraduggaMdhabaMdhaNAyAraduddharakilese  /
bhinnakaracaraNasaMkararUhiravasAduggamappavahe  // 5 //  chAyA ye ke'pi bAlA
iha jIvitArthinaH pApAni karmANi kurvanti raudrAH  /  te ghora rUpe
tamistrAndhakAre, tIvrAbhitApe narake patanti  //  - - -
zabdAndhakAradurgandhabandhanAgAradurdharaklezo  /
bhinnakaracaraNasaMkararUdhiravasAdurgamapravAhe  // 1 //  308

Page #337 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hellish Torment: A Study  **Verse 6:**   The vultures, with their sharp
beaks, tear at the bound, their heads thrown back in agony. Their bodies are
firmly gripped, their tongues ripped out, their flesh consumed.  **Verse 1:**
The vultures, with their sharp beaks, tear at the bound, their heads thrown back
in agony. Their bodies are firmly gripped, their flesh consumed, their tongues
ripped out.  **Verse 7:**   Their bodies, mangled and torn, are pierced by sharp
thorns, their bones shattered. Even a moment of respite is a rare luxury, their
suffering unending.  **Verse 1:**   Their bodies, mangled and torn, are pierced
by sharp thorns, their bones shattered. Even a moment of respite is a rare
luxury, their suffering unending.  **Verse 8:**   This is the terrifying hell
where countless beings suffer. Only those who have abandoned truth and
accumulated a mountain of sins find themselves in this abyss.  **Verse 1:**
This is the terrifying hell where countless beings suffer. Only those who have
abandoned truth and accumulated a mountain of sins find themselves in this
abyss.  **Commentary:**   Those who are consumed by attachment and aversion, who
engage in grand enterprises and accumulate vast possessions, who kill sentient
beings, consume flesh, and indulge in other sinful acts, who desire a life of
unrestrained indulgence, and who commit acts of violence, deceit, and other
transgressions, will, upon the ripening of their karma, be plunged into the
terrifying darkness of hell.  Here, their bodies are invisible to their own
eyes, their vision clouded like that of an owl in the daytime, despite
possessing the knowledge of clairvoyance.  The scriptures describe this state:
"O Lord, how far can a being in hell, marked by the black karma, see with their
clairvoyance?"  "Gautama, they cannot see very far, only a small area. They can
only see a small area, and their vision is limited."  These beings, burdened by
their heavy karma, are plunged into the fiery depths of hell, where the heat is
more intense than a mountain of burning coals. They are unable to renounce the
pleasures of the senses, and thus they suffer unimaginable torment.  It is said:
"Those who do not renounce the pleasures of the senses will fall into hell,
where flames of fire rage and where suffering reigns supreme."  In hell, the
righteous gods trample upon the chests of the damned, their mouths spewing
blood. They are torn apart by sharp iron saws, their bodies ripped in two. The
cries of the tortured fill the air, their bones crackle and shatter as they are
roasted alive. They are pierced with skewers, their bodies lifted high. This is
a place of terrifying sounds, impenetrable darkness, and foul stench.  The
damned are imprisoned in chains, their bodies mangled and broken, their flesh
dripping with blood and fat. Their heads are severed, their bodies dismembered.
Their tongues are ripped out by burning tongs. Their bodies are torn and
shredded against thorny trees. They are denied even a moment of respite, their
suffering unending.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM giddhamuhaNiddaukkhitta baMdhaNomuddakaMvarikabaMdhe
/  daDhagahiyatattasaMDAsayaggavisamukkhuDI ||6|| chAyA-
gRdhramurarvAnardayotkSiptabandhanyonmUrdhakrandatka bandhe  /
dRDhagRhItataptasaMdazakAgraviSayotpArita jivhe  // 1 //
tikkhaGkusaggakaDDiyakaMTayarukkhaggajajjarasarIre  /
nimisaMtaraMpidullahasokkhe'vakkhe vadukkhami  // 7 //  chAyA -
tIkSNAGkuzAgrakarSitakaMTakavRkSAgra jarjarazarIre  /  nimeSAntaramapi
durlabhasaukhye'vyAkSepaduHkhe  // 1 //  iya bhIsaNaMmi Nirae paMDati je
vivihasattavahanirayA  /  saccabbhaTThA ya narA jayaMti kama pAvasaMghAyA  // 8
//  ityAdi  // 3 //  kiJcAnyat chAyA itibhISavo niraye vividhasattvavadhaniratAH
/  satyabhraSTAzcanarA jagati kRtapApasaMghAtAH  //  1  //  TIkArtha rAga aura
dveSa se yukta jo manuSya evaM tiryaJca prANI mahA Arambha evaM mahAparigraha
meM saMlagna haiM, tathA paMcendriya prANiyoM ke vadha aura amiSa sevana Adi
pApamaya kAryoM meM pravRtta rahate haiM, asaMyamamaya jIvana kI icchA rakhate
hue isa saMsAra meM pApajanaka kArya karate haiM, prANiyoM ke lie bhaya janaka
hone ke kAraNa bhayAvaha banakara jIvoM kI hiMsA, asatya bhASaNa Adi akArya
karate haiM, aise prANI apane tIvra pApoM kA udaya hone para atyanta
bhayotpAdaka tathA apanI A~khoM se jahA~ apanA zarIra bhI dRSTi gocara nahIM
hotA, avadhi jJAna hote hue bhI dina meM ullU pakSI kI taraha jo atyalpa dekha
pAte haiM, aise bhayotpAdaka aMdhakAramaya naraka meM par3ate haiM  /  isa
sambandha meM Agama meM varNana hai| he bhagavan ! kRSNa lezyA yukta nAraka
jIva, kRSNa lezyAmaya anya nAraka jIva ko avadhi jJAna dvArA cAroM ora dekhatA
huA kitane kSetra paryanta jAnatA hai, dekhatA hai ? gautama ! bahutara kSetra
taka nahIM jAnatA tathA nahIM dekhatA kintu itvarika - svalpa kSetra taka jAnatA
hai, aura svalpa hI kSetra taka dekhatA hai  /  vaha nAraka tIvra arthAt
duHsaha-jise sahanA bahuta kaSTakara hotA hai, ravadira ke aMgAra kI mahArAzi se
bhI adhika tApa se yukta hotA hai, jo viSaya bhoga ke surakhoM kA tyAga nahIM
karate, aise bhArI karmI prANI isa prakAra ke atyanta vedanAmaya narakoM meM
girate hai, aura ve vahA~ taraha-taraha kI vedanAe~ bhogate  /  kahA hai - jo
puruSa viSaya sukha kA parityAga nahIM karatA, vaha usa naraka meM giratA hai,
jisameM prajvalita agni kI zikhAeM-lapaTeM vidyamAna haiM jo saMsAra meM duHkha
kA bahuta bar3A sthAna hai| naraka meM paramAdhArmika deva nArakIya jIvoM kI
chAtI ko isa prakAra pairoM se rauMdate haiM, uchAlate haiM ki unake mukha khUna
ke phavvAre chUTane lagate haiM, ve lauha ke tIkSNa Are dvArA unake zarIra ko
cIra kara do bhAga kara dete haiM  /  naraka meM chedana bhedana kie prANiyoM ke
kolAhala se saba dizAeM bharI rahatI haiM, jalate hue nArakIya jIvoM kI
ravopar3iyAM aura asthiyA~ caTakatI huI uchalatI hai  /  pIr3A ke kAraNa
nArakIya jIva atyanta krandana karate haiM  /  unheM kar3Ava bhUnakara unake
pApoM kA phala diyA jAtA hai  /  zUla meM pirokara unake zarIra Upara uThAye
jAte haiM, vaha aisA sthAna hai, jahA~ bar3e bhayAnaka zabda hote haiM, ghora
aMdherA hai tathA bar3I teja badabU AtI hai| nArakIya jIvoM ke baMdhana gRha
haiM, jahA~ unheM asahya kaSTa diyA jAtA hai, kaTe hue hAtha pairoM se risate
ravUna aura carbI kA bhISaNa pravAha, jahA~ nArakIya jIvoM ke siroM ko kATa-
kATakara siroM aura dhar3oM ko alaga-alaga kara pheMkA jAtA hai, jalatI huI
saMDAsI dvArA jahA~ nArakIya jIvoM kI jihvAyeM utpATita kI jAtI haiM, jahA~
tIkSNa kinAroM vAle kAMToM se yukta per3oM ke sAtha nArakIya jIvoM ke zarIra
ragar3akara jarjara kara die jAte haiM, kSata vikSata kara die jAte haiM isa
prakAra jahA~ A~kha kI palaka jhapakane taka ke samaya ke lie bhI prANiyoM ko
sukha prApta nahIM hotA, nirantara duHkha hI duHkha hotA hai  /  309

Page #338 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra states that men who kill various types of living
beings, are liars, and generate a mass of sins, go to terrifying hells.  **Verse
4:**  * **Original:** तिव्वं तसे पाणिगो थावरे य, जे हिसंती आयसुहं पडुच्चा । जे
लूसए होइ अदत्त हारी, ण सिक्खती सेयवियस्स किंचि ॥४॥ छाया - तीवं त्रसान् स्थावरान्
योहिनस्त्यात्मसुखं प्रतीत्य ।  _ योलूषको भवत्यदत्तहारी, न शिक्षते सेवनीयस्य
किञ्चित् ॥ * **Translation:** Those who, for their own comfort and pleasure,
cruelly and mercilessly kill both mobile and immobile beings, oppress them,
cause them suffering, and take the possessions of others without permission, do
not learn even a little about the practice of self-control, which is beneficial
for oneself.  **Verse 5:**  * **Original:** पागब्भि पाणे बहुणं तिवाति,
अतिव्वतेघातमुवेति बाले । णिहो णिसं गच्छति अंतकाले, अहो सिरं कटु उवेइ दुग्गं ॥५॥
छाया - प्रागल्भी प्राणानां बहूनामतिपाती, अनिर्वतो घातमुपैति बालः । न्यग् निशां
गच्छत्यन्तकाले, अधः शिरः कृत्वोपैति दुर्गम् ॥  * **Translation:** The man who is
bold and arrogant in killing many living beings, who is always burning with the
fire of anger, and who is ignorant, goes to hell. At the time of death, he goes
down into darkness, with his head bowed, to a place of great suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram nAnA prakAra ke prANiyoM kA vyApAdana karane vAle,
asatyavAdI tathA pApa rAzi utpanna karane vAle puruSa isa prakAra ke bhayAvaha
narakoM meM jAte haiM - tivvaM tase pANigo thAvare ya, je hisaMtI AyasuhaM
paDuccA  /  je lUsae hoi adatta hArI, Na sikkhatI seyaviyassa kiMci  // 4 //
chAyA - tIvaM trasAn sthAvarAn yohinastyAtmasukhaM pratItya  /  _ yolUSako
bhavatyadattahArI, na zikSate sevanIyasya kiJcit  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa apane
sukha suvidhA hetu trasa evaM sthAvara prANiyoM kI tIvratA-niSkarUNatA ke sAtha
hiMsA karatA hai, unakA upamardana karatA hai, kaSTa detA hai tathA kisI anya
vyakti kI vastu usake binA diye le letA hai, vaha sevanIya-sevana karane yogya
saMyama kA jarA bhI pAlana nahIM karatA  /  TIkA - tathA 'tIvram' atiniranukampa
raudrapariNAmatayA hiMsAyAM pravRtaH, trasyantIti trasAH-dvIndriyAdayastAn tathA
sthAvarAMca' pRthivIkAyAdIn yaH kazcinmahAmohodayavartI hinasti' vyApAdayati
AtmasukhaM pratItya' svazarIrasukhakRte, nAnAvidhairUpAyairyaH prANinAM 'lUSaka'
upamardakArI bhavati, tathA adattamapahartuM zIlamasyA sAvadattahArI-
paradravyApahArakaH tathA 'nazikSate' nAbhyasyati nAdatte 'seyaviyassa' tti
sevanIyasyAtmahitaiSiNA sadanuSTheyasya saMyamasya kiJciditi, etaduktam bhavati-
pApodayAdviratipariNAmaM kAkamAMsAderapi manAgapi na vidhatta iti  // 4 //
tathA - TIkArtha - jo puruSa mahAmohanIya karma ke udita hone para apane sukha
hetu atyanta nirdayatApUrvaka raudra pariNAma-krodhAveza ke sAtha hiMsA meM
saMlagna haiM, dvindriya evaM trasa prANiyoM aura pRthvIkAya Adi sthAvara
prANiyoM kA vinAza karatA evaM unheM taraha-taraha ke upAyoM se kaSTa detA hai
aura binA diye kisI anya kA dravya hara letA hai, vaha Atma kalyANa ke lie
AcaraNa karane yogya saMyama kA jarA bhI sevana nahIM karatA  /  . pAgabbhi pANe
bahuNaM tivAti, ativvateghAtamuveti bAle  /  Niho NisaM gacchati aMtakAle, aho
siraM kaTu uvei duggaM  // 5 //  chAyA - prAgalbhI prANAnAM bahUnAmatipAtI,
anirvato ghAtamupaiti bAlaH  /  nyag nizAM gacchatyantakAle, adhaH ziraH
kRtvopaiti durgam  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa jIvoM ke atipAta-vyApAdana meM bar3A
pragalbha-DhITha hai aura dhRSTatA pUrvaka bahuta se jIvoM ko naSTa karatA hai,
sadA krodha kI Aga se jalatA rahatA hai vaha ajJAnI narka ko prApta karatA hai
/  vaha marakara nIce-adholoka meM andhakAra meM, nIcA sira kiye atyanta
pIr3Aprada sthAna ko prApta karatA hai| TIkA - 'prAgalbhyaM' dhASTaya tadvidyate
yasya sa prAgalbhI, bahUnAM prANinAM prANAnatIva pAtayituM zIlamasya sa
bhavatyati pAtI, etaduktaM bhavati-atipAtyapi prANinaH prANAnatidhArTAdvadati
yathA-vedAbhihitA hiMsA hiMsaiva na bhavati, tathA rAjJAmayaM dharmo yaduta
AkheTabakena vinodakriyA, yadi vA - "na mAMsa bhakSaNe doSo, na madye na ca
maithune  /  pravRttireSA bhUtAnAM, nivRttistu mahAphalA  // 1 // " 310

Page #339 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hellish Torment: A Jain Perspective  **Study of Hellish Torment**  And so,
the cruel, lion-like, serpent-natured, inherently violent being, the "un-freed"
one, who is never pacified by the fire of anger, or perhaps the greedy
fisherman, who is always consumed by the desire to kill, and who never finds
peace, suffers in hell. This is the consequence of his own actions. He is drawn
to hell, to its proximity. Who is this? It is the "child," the ignorant one, who
is ruled by attachment and aversion. At the time of death, he falls down, into
the darkness below. He goes to the darkness below. Thus, with his head bowed
down in shame for his evil deeds, he reaches the "difficult" place, the place of
torment. He falls into hell, head down. || 5 ||  Now, to show what the
inhabitants of hell experience, the text says:  **Commentary:**  Here, boldness
is called "fearlessness" or "confidence." A man who is bold is also called
"fearless." One whose nature is to kill many beings is called "violent." The
point is that a man who commits violence against beings, with arrogance, says
that the violence prescribed in the Vedas is not really violence, or that it is
the duty of kings to hunt for pleasure, and that there is no fault in eating
meat, drinking alcohol, or engaging in sexual misconduct, because these are
natural for beings. To be free from these things, to abandon them, is a great
benefit. The one who is merciless, like a lion or a black snake, who by nature
kills beings, or who makes a living by killing animals or fish, who always has
the intention to kill, who never finds peace, goes to hell. There, he suffers
the consequences of his actions. Who is this? He is ignorant, devoid of wisdom.
He is ruled by attachment and aversion. He dies and goes down, to the lower
realms, to darkness. As a result of his sins, he goes to a terrible place of
torment, with his head bowed down. This means that he falls into hell, head
down.  **Verse 6:**  "Kill, cut, break, burn," they hear the sounds of the
supremely righteous. The inhabitants of hell, their minds shattered by fear,
wonder, "Which direction should we go?" || 6 ||  **Commentary:**  The beings who
have been born in hell, having been previously animals or humans, produce bodies
like those of birds, within a moment. They have reached the point of exhaustion
and hear the terrifying sounds made by the supremely righteous. These sounds are
like, "Kill!" with a hammer, "Cut!" with a sword, "Break!" with a spear, "Burn!"
with a firebrand, and so on. Hearing these terrible sounds, the inhabitants of
hell, with eyes filled with fear, their minds shattered by fear and terror, lose
their senses. They are those whose inner consciousness is lost. They wonder,
"Which direction should we go?" They long for escape from this terrible,
dreadful, and painful suffering. || 6 ||  They are filled with fear and lost in
confusion. To show what they experience, the text says:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM ityAdi tadevaM krUrasiMhakRSNa sarpavat prakRtyaiva
prANAtipAtAnuSThAyI ' anirvRtaH 'kadAcidapyanupazAntaH krodhAgninA dahyamAno
yadi vA lubdhakamatsyAdidhakajIvikAprasaktaH sarvadA
vadhaparimAmapariNato'nupazAnto hanyante prANinaH svakRtakarmavipAkena yasmin sa
ghAto - narakastamupa - sAmIpyenaiti-yAti, ka: ? - 'bAlaH' ajJo
rAgadveSodayavartI saH 'antakAle' maraNakAle 'niho 'tti nyagadhastAt 'NisaMti
andhakAram, adho'ndhakAraM gacchatItyarthaH tathA - svena duzcaritenAdhaH ziraH
kRtvA 'durgaM' viSamaM yAtanAsthAnamupaiti avAkzirA narake patatItyarthaH  //  5
//  sAmprataM punarapi narakAntarvartino nArakA yadanubhavanti taddarzayitumAha
TIkArtha yahAM DhITha pana ko prAgalbha bhaya yA pragalbhatA kahA jAtA hai| jo
puruSa DhITha hotA hai use prAgabhI bhI kahate haiM  /  jisakA svabhAva bahuta
se prANiyoM kA atyanta ghAta yA hanana karane kA hai, vaha atipAti kahA jAtA hai
/  kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki jo puruSa prANiyoM kI hiMsA karatA huA
dhRSTatA ke sAtha kahatA hai ki veda meM vihita hiMsA veda meM jisa hiMsA kA
vidhAna hai, vaha hiMsA vAstava meM hiMsA nahIM hai, athavA rAjAoM kA to yaha
dharma AcAra hai, ve AkheTa dvArA apanA manovinoda karate haiM, mAMsa bhakSaNa,
madirApAna, abrahmacarya sevana meM doSa nahIM hai kyoMki ye kArya jIvoM ke lie
svabhAva siddha hai  /  inase nivRtta - inakA tyAga karane kA mahAn phala hai  /
jo nirdaya zera aura kAle nAga ke samAna svabhAva se hI prANiyoM kA prANAtipAta-
ghAta karatA hai athavA jo pazu vadha, matsyavadha dvArA AjIvikA calAtA hai, jo
sadA vadha pariNAma mArane kI bhAvanA lie rahatA hai, kabhI zAnta nahIM hotA
vaha narka meM jAtA hai| jahA~ apane kiye huye karmoM kA phala bhogane ke rUpa
meM prANiyoM tA hai  /  vaha kauna hai ? vaha ajJa hai - viveka rahita hai|
usake rAga aura dveSa udita haiM  /  vaha marakara nIce - adholoka meM -
andhakAra meM jAtA hai| apane dvArA kiye gaye pApoM ke phala svarUpa nIcA sira
kiye bhayaMkara yAtanApUrNa sthAna ko prApta hotA hai  /  isakA yaha tAtparya
hai ki vaha nIcA sira kiye narka meM giratA hai  /  1 haNa chiMdaha bhiMdaha NaM
daheti, sadde suNiMtA parahammiyANaM  /  te nAragAo bhayabhinnasannA, kaMkhaMti
kannAma disaM vayAmo  //  6  //  chAyA jahi chindhi bhindhi daha iti zabdAn
zrutvA paramAdhArmikANAm  /  nArakAH bhayabhinnasaMjJAH kAMkSanti kAM nAma dizaM
vrajAmaH  //  bhAvArtha paramA dhArmika devoM dvArA kahe gaye mAro, chinna kara
do, kATa DAlo, bhedana karo, jalA do ityAdi zabda sunakara nAraka prANI bhaya se
saMjJAvihIna ho jAte haiM, apanA hoza bhUla jAte haiN| ve cAhate haiM ki hama
kisI dizA meM kahIM bhAga jAye  /  - - TIkA - tiryaGmanuSyabhavAtsattvA
narakeSUtpannA antarmuhUrtena nirlUnANDajasannibhAni zarIrANyutpAdayanti,
paryAptibhAvamAgatAzcAtibhayAnakAn zabdAn paramAdhArmikajanitAn zRNvanti,
tadyathA - 'hata' mudgarAdinA 'chinta' khaGgAdinA 'bhinta' zUlAdinA 'dahata'
murmurAdinA NamitivAkyAlaGkAre, tadevambhUtAn karNAsukhAn zabdAn bhairavAn
zrutvA te tu nArakA bhayodbhrAntalocanA bhayenabhItyA bhinnA - naSTA saMjJA -
antaHkaraNavRttiryeSAM te tathA naSTasaMjJAzca 'kAM dizaM vrajAmaH'
kutragatAnAmasmAkamevambhUtasyAsya mahAghoravadAruNasyaduHkhasya
trANaMsyAdityetatkAGkSantIti  // 6 //  teca bhayodrAntA dikSunaSTA
yadanubhavanti taddarzayitumAha 311

Page #340 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Commentary:** To show how beings born in hell
experience suffering, the Sutrakar says: Creatures born in hell, after leaving
the animal and human realms, are born with bodies like birds that have just
hatched from eggs, without feathers or down.  Then, they experience the feeling
of fullness and hear the terrifying words of the Narada Devas.  These words are
like: "Strike them with a mace, pierce them with a sword, cut them, impale them
with a spear, string them up, burn them with fire, etc."  Here, the word "ṇam"
is used in the sense of a figure of speech.  Hearing these painful and
terrifying words, the hell-bound beings become frightened, their eyes widen, and
their minds tremble.  They want to know in which direction to go, where to go,
to escape these terrible and excruciating sufferings.  **Verse:**  Om Om Om
Ingalaraasim jalayam sajotim tattovaman bhumimanukkamantan. Te dajmana kalunam
thanti, arahassara tattha chiradvitiya. ||7||  **Shadow:**  Angararasim jvalitam
sajyotīḥ tadupamām bhūmim anukrāmantaḥ. Te dahyamānāḥ karuṇam stananti
arahasvarāḥ tatra chirasthitikaḥ. ||  **Translation:** Just as a pile of burning
coals is very hot and the earth with fire is extremely hot, spewing fire, so too
is the hellish earth extremely hot.  Walking on it, the hell-bound beings burn
and cry out loudly.  They dwell there for a long time.  **Commentary:**
"Angararasim" means a pile of burning coals, "jvalitam" means blazing with
flames, and "sajyoti" means existing with light, i.e., with fire.  The earth
that is like this, with fire, is called "sajyotibhumi."  The hell-bound beings,
walking on this earth that is like burning coals, are burning and crying out in
pain.  "Karunam" means pitiful, and "stananti" means they cry out.  Here, it is
said that the earth is like a blazing fire because there is no other fire in
hell.  This is said to show the suffering, otherwise, the suffering of hell
cannot be compared to fire.  The hell-bound beings, burning with a heat greater
than that of a great city fire, are "arahaasvara" - those with loud voices, and
"santan" - they exist, "tatra" - in that hellish abode, "chira" - for a long
time, "stiti" - their dwelling, "avasthanam" - their state.  Thus, they dwell
for a long time, from a minimum of ten thousand years to a maximum of thirty-
three oceans worth of time. ||7||  **Commentary:** There is a pile of burning
coals, and there is the earth with fire.  Walking on that earth, like a pile,
and burning, they cry out and scream.  In hell, there is no "badar" - gross
fire.  **Commentary:** Just as burning "khadir" - "khair" wood is like the
hellish earth, so too are the hell-bound beings like burning coals.  They cry
out in pain, great suffering.  Therefore, the Sutrakar has compared the hellish
earth to "badar" fire, showing that it is similar.  This comparison is only to
show the suffering, because the suffering of hell cannot be compared to fire
here.  Burning with a heat greater than that of a fire in a large city, the
hell-bound beings cry out and make a great noise.  They dwell in hell for a very
long time.  They dwell in hell for a maximum of thirty-three oceans worth of
time and a minimum of ten thousand years.  **Verse:**  Jai  Te suya 'veyarani
bhidugga, nisio jaha khur iv tikkhasoya. Taranti te veyarani bhidugga, ussu
choiya sattisu hammana. ||8||  312

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha naraka meM utpanna prANI jyoM duHkha anubhava
karate haiM unakA digdarzana karAne hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM- tiryaca yoni
aura manuSya yoni chor3akara narka meM paidA hone vAle prANiyoM ke zarIra
antamuhUrta meM aNDe se nikale hue roma aura paMkha rahita pakSI kI taraha
utpanna hote haiN| tatpazcAt ve paryAptI bhAva ko prApta kara atyanta
bhayotpAdaka nArada devoM ke zabda sunate haiM  /  jaise inheM mudgara Adi se
mAro, talavAra Adi se inakA chedana karo- kATo, zUla Adi dvArA inakA vedhana
karo inako unameM piro lo, muramura tusa yAbhuse Adi dvArA inheM jalAo, yahA~
NaM zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke artha meM AyA hai| ve nAraka isa prakAra kAnoM ke lie
kaSTaprada atyanta bhayAnaka zabdoM ko sunakara bhayabhIta ho jAte haiM, unakI
A~kheM cauMdhiyA jAtI haiM tathA citta kA~pa uThatA hai  /  ve cAhate haiM ki
hama kisa dizA meM jAMye, kahA~ jAye jisase ina atyanta ghora tathA dArUNa
duHkhoM se apane ko bacA sake  /  -- OM OM OM iMgAlarAsiM jaliyaM sajotiM
tattovamaM bhUmimaNukkamaMtA  /  te DajmANA kaluNaM thAMti, arahassarA tattha
ciradvitIyA  // 7 //  chAyA - aGgArarAziM jvalitaM sajyotiH tadupamAM
bhUmimanukrAmantaH  /  te dahyamAnAH karuNaM stananti arahasvarA statra
cirasthitikAH  //  anuvAda - jaise jalate huye aMgAroM kI rAzi bahuta tapta
garma hotI hai tathA agni sahita pRthvI atyanta uSNa hotI hai, Aga ugalatI hai,
usI taraha naraka bhUmi atyanta paritapta haiM  /  usa para calate hue naraka ke
prANI jalate rahate haiM tathA bar3e jora se krandana karate haiM  /  ve vahA~
dIrghakAla taka nivAsa karate haiM  /  TIkA 'aGgArarAziM' kharidAGgArapuJja
'jvalitaM' jvAlAkulaM tathA saha jyotiSA - ughotena vartata iti sajyortibhUmi:,
tenopamA yasyAH sA tadupamA tAmaGgArasannibhAM bhUmimAkramantaste nArakA
dandahyamAnAH 'karuNaM' dInaM 'stananti' Akrandanti, tatra
bAdarAgnerabhAvAttadupamAM bhUmimityuktam, etadapi dirzanArthamuktam, anyathA
nArakAtApasyeha tyAgninA nopamA ghaTate, te ca nArakA mahAnagaradAhAdhikena
tApena dahyamAnA 'arahasvarA' prakaTasvarA mahAzabdAH, santaH 'tatra'
tasminnarakAvAse ciraM - prabhUtaM kAlaM stitiH - avasthAnaM yeSAM te tathA
tathAhiutkRSTatastrayastriMzatsAgaropamANi jaghanyato dazavarSasahastrANi
tiSThantIti  // 7 //  - aMgAroM kI rAzi hotI hai, agni sahita pRthvI hotI hai|
Dhera ke sadRza usa bhUmi para calate huye aura jalate huye sAtha cillAte
cIkhate haiN| naraka meM bAdara - sthUla agni TIkArtha - jaise jalate hue
khadIra- khaira ke naraka bhUmi bhI una jaisI hai - upamita hai  /  aMgAroM ke
naraka ke prANI karuNa krandana karate haiM - bar3e duHkha ke nahIM hotI  /
isalie sUtrakAra ne naraka kI bhUmi ko bAdara agni se upamita kiyA hai, usake
samAna batalAyA hai  /  yaha upamA to digdarzana mAtra hai kyoMki naraka ke tApa
ko yahA~ kI agni kI upamA nahIM dI jA sakatI  /  kisI bar3e nagara meM lagI huI
Aga se bhI adhika, paritApa se jalate hue naraka ke prANI bar3A krandana
kolAhala karate haiN| ve naraka meM bahuta samaya taka vAsa karate haiM  /  ve
utkRSTa- adhika se adhika taiMtIsa sAgaropama kAla 1 taka tathA jaghanya kama se
kama dasa sahastra varSo taka naraka meM vAsa karate haiM  /   jai te suyA
'veyaraNI bhiduggA, Nisio jahA khura iva tikkhasoyA  /  taraMti te veyaraNIM
bhiduggAM, usu coiyA sattisu hammamANA  // 8 //  312

Page #341 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shadow - **Translation:** You may have heard about the river Vaitarani, which
has a sharp edge like a razor. That river is very difficult to cross. It is very
difficult to even go near it. The beings of hell, tormented by sharp arrows,
iron thorns, and weapons with sharp points like spears and tridents, jump into
that river in fear. **Study of Hell Divisions** If you have heard about this
Vaitarani, which is difficult to cross and has a current as sharp as a razor.
Those who are tormented by weapons and spears, jump into that difficult to cross
Vaitarani. **Commentary:** Sudharmaswami says to Jambuswami - As the Bhagavan
has said, if you have heard about the river Vaitarani, which is a river of
saline, hot, and blood-like water, and is difficult to cross, and causes
suffering. And, just as a razor is sharp, so are its currents, which are sharp
enough to cut off body parts. Those beings of hell, who have left behind the
earth, which is like burning coals, and are thirsty, jump into that terrifying
Vaitarani to relieve their suffering. How are they? They are tormented by
arrows, spears, and weapons, and they jump into that terrifying Vaitarani. Here,
the seventh case ending is used in the third case. **Commentary Meaning:** Shri
Sudharmaswami says to Jambuswami that the Bhagavan Mahavira has said about the
river Vaitarani, which has saline, hot, and blood-like water. Just as the edge
of a razor is very sharp, so is the current of that river. The beings of hell
suffer greatly when they touch that current. Therefore, it is very difficult to
cross, and it causes suffering. The beings of hell, who are burning and thirsty,
leave behind the earth, which is like burning coals, and jump into that
terrifying river to bathe and relieve their suffering. How are they? They are
tormented by arrows, iron thorns, or spears, and they jump into that terrifying
Vaitarani. Here, the seventh case ending is used in the third case. - - **Om Om
Om** They pierce with nails, those who have done bad deeds, they do not get on
the boat, they are devoid of memory. Others, however, are pierced with spears
and tridents, they are made to suffer by being pierced with long weapons. || 9
|| ## Shadow - They pierce with nails, those who have done good deeds, they do
not get on the boat, they are devoid of memory. Others, however, are pierced
with spears and tridents, they are made to suffer by being pierced with long
weapons. **Translation:** The beings of hell, tormented by the suffering of
Vaitarani, start to get on the boat, then the hellish deities who are already
there pierce the necks of those unfortunate ones with nails. Those who have
already lost their senses due to the suffering of Vaitarani, have lost their
minds. Those beings of hell are further distressed by this suffering. Some other
hellish deities, for their own amusement, pierce the beings of hell with spears
and tridents and throw them on the earth. **Commentary:** Those beings of hell,
who are tormented by the saline, hot, and foul-smelling water of Vaitarani,
approach the boat, which is full of nails. The 'Asadhu Karma' (those who have
done bad deeds), who are very righteous, pierce them in their necks with nails.
Those who are being pierced, tremble and shake. 313

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chAyA - anuvAda - ustare ke samAna teja dhAra se yukta vaitaraNI nadI ke
sambandha meM sambhavatayA tumane sunA hogaa| vaha nadI bar3I durgama hai  /
use pAra karanA usake pAsa jAnA bahuta kaThina hai  /  tIkSNa bANa-bANa jaise
tIkhe lohe kAMTe evaM zakti-zUla Adi tIkhI noMka vAle zastroM hanyamAna mAre
jAte, satAye jAte naraka ke prANI ghabarA kara usa nadI meM kUda par3ate haiM  /
narakavibhakti adhyayanaM yadi te zrutA vaitaraNyamidurgA nizito yathA
kSuraivatIkSNastrotAH  /  taranti te vaitaraNI mabhidurgAmiSu coditAH
zaktisuhanyamAnAH  //  TIkA apica - sudharmasvAmI jambUsvAminaM pratIdamAha-
yathA bhagavatedamAkhyAtaM yadi 'te' tvayA zrutAzravaNapathamupAgatA 'vaitaraNI'
nAma kSAroSNarUdhirAkArajalavAhinInadI Abhimukhyena durgA abhidurgA-
du:khotpAdikA, tathA - nizito yathA kSurastIkSNo bhavatyevaM tIkSaNAni -
zarIrAvayavAnAM kartakAni srotAMsi yasyAH sA tathA, te ca
nArakAstaptAGgArasannibhAM bhUmiM vihAyodakapipAsavo'bhitaptAH
santastApApanodAyAbhiSiSikSavo vA tAM vaitaraNI mabhidurgAM taranti kathambhUtAH
? iSuNA - zareNa pratodeneva coditA:- preritAH zaktibhizca hanyamAnAstAmeva
bhImAM vaitaraNIM taranti tRtIyArthe saptamI  // 8 //  kiJca " TIkArtha - zrI
sudharmA svAmI jambU svAmI se kahate haiM ki bhagavAna mahAvIra ne jisake viSaya
meM AkhyAda kiyA hai - kahA hai usa vaitaraNI nAmaka nadI ke sambandha meM
tumane sunA hogA usa nadI meM aisA pAnI bahatA rahatA hai, jo khArA hai, uSNa
hai aura rakta sadRza hai  /  jaise eka ustare kI dhAra bar3I teja hotI hai usI
taraha usa nadI kI dhArA bar3I tIvra hai  /  usa dhArA ke nAraka jIvoM ke lagane
se nAraka jIvoM ke aMga kaTa jAte haiN| isalie bar3I durgama hai - duHkhotpAdaka
hai  /  usameM jo prANI bahate haiM, vaha unameM bar3A duHkha utpanna karatI
hai, tapta evaM pipAsita naraka ke prANI aMgAroM ke samAna atyanta uSNa naraka
bhUmi kA parityAga kara apanA tApa miTAne hetu snAna karane hetu usa bhayAnaka
nadI meM kUda par3ate haiM  /  ve naraka ke prANI kaise haiM ? mAnoM unake bANa
lohe ke kA~Te athavA zUla - tIkhe akuMza Adi cubhokara unheM pIDita kiyA gayA
ho| vaisI dazA meM ve bhayaMkara vaitaraNI nadI meM kUda jAte haiM tairate haiM,
yahA~ tRtIyA vibhakti ke rUpa meM saptamI vibhakti huI hai  /  - - OM OM OM
kIlehiM vijjhati asAhukammA, nAvaM uviMte sai vippahUNA  /  anne tu sUlAhiM
tisUliyAhiM, dIhAhiM vidhdhUNa ahe karaMti  //  9  //  chAyA - kIleSu vidhyanti,
sAdhukarmANaH nAvamupayataH smRti viprahInAH  /  anye tu ghairvidva'dhaH
kurvanti  //  zUlaistrizUlai anuvAda vaitaraNI ke kleza se utpIr3ita nAraka ke
prANI naukA para car3hane ke lie Ane lagate haiM taba una para pahale se sthita
nAraka deva una abhAgoM kI gardana kIloM se bheda DAlate haiM  /  jo vaitaraNI
ke duHkha se pahale se hI apanA bhAna bhUla cuke haiM, hoza havAza gavA~ cuke
haiN| ve naraka ke jIva isa duHkha se aura adhika vyathita ho uThate haiN| unheM
kahIM dUsare naraka deva apane manovinoda hetu narka gata prANiyoM ko zUloM,
trizUloM meM pirokara pRthvI para paTaka DAlate haiM  /  TIkA tAMzca
nArakAnatyantakSAroSNena durgandhena vaitaraNIjalenAbhiptAnAyasakIlAkulAM
nAvamupagacchataH pUrvArUDhA 'asAdhukarmANaH' paramAdhArmikAH 'kIleSu' kaNTheSu
vidhyanti, te ca vidhyamAnAH lakakalAyamAnena 313

Page #342 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 9:**  Those who follow the path of the
*sarvatra-oto* (all-pervading) are destroyed by the waters of the *Vaitarani*
(river of hell). Even those who have lost their senses are quickly deprived of
their memories and lose their ability to discern their duties. Others are
tormented by the *naraka-pala* (hell guardians) who play with them, piercing
them with tridents, spears, and long rods, and then throw them down to the earth
below.  **Verse 10:**  Some have stones tied around their necks and are plunged
into the deep waters. Others are tossed about in the hot sand and embers, where
they are roasted.  **Commentary:**  The *Vaitarani* is a river of extremely
salty, hot, and foul-smelling water. The tormented beings of hell are forced
onto boats made of iron, studded with sharp nails and thorns. The *naraka-deva*
(hell gods) who are already on these boats pierce the throats of these beings
with sharp nails. As the beings lose their senses in the rushing waters of the
*Vaitarani*, they are further deprived of their memories by the pain of the
sharp thorns. They have no knowledge of their duties. Other *naraka-pala* play
with the beings of hell, impaling them on long tridents and spears, and then
throwing them to the ground.  Some have large stones tied around their necks and
are plunged into the deep waters. Others are dragged and rubbed in the extremely
hot sand and embers. They are tossed about like chickpeas being roasted. Other
*naraka-deva* roast these beings of hell, who are bound by the chains of their
karma, like meat being roasted on a spit.  **Verse 11:**  The *Asuriya* (hell)
is a great and terrible darkness, difficult to escape. It is a place where fire
burns fiercely in all directions.  **Commentary:**  The *Asuriya* is a great and
terrible darkness, difficult to escape. It is a place where fire burns fiercely
in all directions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrakRtAGga sUtram sarvatroto'nuyAyinA vaitaraNIjalena naSTasaMjJA api sutarAM
' smRtayA viprahINA' apagatakartavyavivekAbhavanti, anye punarnarakapAlAnArakaiH
krIDatastAnnaSTAMstrizUlikAbhiH zUlAbhiH 'dIrghikAbhiH ' AyatAbhirvighvA
adhobhUmau kurva  // 9 //  apica - TIkArtha vaitaraNI nadI ke atyanta khAre,
uSNa aura durgandha yukta pAnI se tape huye du:khita becAre nArakIya prANI usa
nadI meM calAyI jAtI lohe ke tIkhe kIloM se yukta-kAMToM se yukta naukA para Ane
lagate haiM, to pahale se hI una naukAoM para baiThe huye nAraka deva una
prANiyoM ke gale meM tIkhe kIle cubhote haiM  /  ve narakagata prANI kala-kala
zabda ke sAtha bahatI huI vaitaraNI ke jala se saMjJAhIna hote hI hai, phira
tIkhe kA~ToM se pIr3A pAte huye aura adhika smRti zUnya ho jAte haiM  /  unheM
apane karttavya kA jarA bhI jJAna nahIM rahatA  /  dUsare naraka pAla-nAraka
deva narakagata jIvoM ke sAtha krIr3A karate hue una saMjJArahita abhAge jIvoM
ko lambe lambe zUloM- trizUloM meM pirokara jamIna para pachAr3a dete haiM  /
kesiM ca baMdhitu gale silAo, udagaMsi bolaMti manalayaMsi  /  kaluMbuyAvAluya
mummure ya lolaMti paccaMti a tattha anne  // 10 //  keSAM ca baddhvA gale
zilAH, udake majjayanti mahAlaye  /  kalambukAbAlukAyAM murmure ca lolayanti
pacati ca tatrA'nye  //  chAyA anuvAda naraka para kaI narakapAla kinhIM
narakagata prANiyoM ke gale meM patthara kI zilA bA~dhakara unheM agAdha jala
meM DUbo dete haiM  /  tathA kaI anya narakapAla atyanta paritapta garma bAlU
meM tathA tuSAgni meM una naraka ke prANiyoM ko idhara udhara ghasITate haiM,
ragar3ate haiM, yA pakAte haiM  /  TIkA - keSAMcinnArakANAM paramAdhArmikA
mahatIM zilAM gale baddhvA mahatyudake 'bolaMti' tti, nimajjayanti, pustataH
samAkRSya vaitaraNInadyAH kalambukAvAlukAyAM murmurAgnai ca 'lolayanti'
atitaptavAlukAyAM caNakAniva samantato gholayanti, tathA anye 'tatra' narakAvAse
svakarmapAzAvapAzitAnnakAran suNThake protakamAMsapezIvat 'pacanti'
bharjayantIti  //  10  //  tathA - : TIkArtha nAraka deva kinhIM narakagata
jIvoM ke gale meM bar3I-bar3I pASANa zilAyeM bA~dha dete haiM aura unheM agAdha
jala meM nimajjita kara dete haiM, Dubo dete haiM, phira ve unako vahA~ se
khIMca lete haiM, aura paritaptauSNatA se lAla banI bAlU meM, tuSAgni meM
DAlakara ghisate haiM, ragar3ate haiN| bahuta tapI huI bAlU meM canoM kI
bhUMjane kI jyoM idhara udhara ghumAte haiM  /  anya paramAdhArmika deva apane
karmoM ke jAla meM grasta una narakagata jIvoM ko zUla meM pirokara pakAye jAne
vAle mAMsa kI taraha pakAte haiM  /  OM aMdhaMtamaM AsUriyaM nAma mahAbhitAvaM,
duppataraM mahaMtaM  /  uDDhaM aheaM tiriyaM disAsu, samAhio jattha'gaNI jhiyAI
// 11 //  chAyA asUryyaM nAma mahAbhitApamandhantamaM duSprataraM mahAntam  /
Urdhva mastiryyagdizAsu samAhito yatrAgniH prajvalati  //  314 -

Page #343 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hell Division Study  **Translation:**  Sinful beings go to such hells where
there is no sun, where there is intense suffering, which are filled with
darkness, which are extremely difficult to cross, which are very vast, where
fire burns everywhere above, below, and in all directions.  **Commentary:**  *
**Asūrya:** A hell where there is no sun, it is filled with dense darkness, and
is shaped like a pot. Or, all hells are called Asūrya. * **Mahāpāpa:** Sinful
beings go to such hells due to the rise of their great sins. These hells are
extremely hot, filled with dense darkness, vast, and difficult to cross. *
**Samāhita:** Fire burns continuously in all directions, above, below, and
sideways. The text also mentions "Samūsiō," which means "rising up." According
to this, sinful beings go to such hells where fire burns with flames rising very
high.  **Om Om Om**  **Translation:**  There is a hell where fire burns in the
form of a cave, where the beings who fall into it are unconscious and burn, they
lose all sense of self. This hell is a place of great sorrow and suffering, it
is extremely painful, one has to go there as a result of sinful actions.
**Commentary:**  * **Jvalane:** The beings who enter the hell shaped like a cave
or a camel, burn in the fire there. They are overwhelmed by pain and lose their
sense of self, they are unaware of their own sins. * **Dharma:** This hell is a
place of sorrow and suffering, it is a place of heat and pain. * **Gāḍha:** This
hell is a place where those who have committed evil deeds go. * **Atidhukkha:**
This hell is characterized by extreme suffering.  **Shadow:**  * **Atidhukkha:**
This hell is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This
hell is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment, in this hell. The inhabitants of hell are
constantly burning day and night.  **Commentary:**  * **Atidhukkha:** This hell
is characterized by extreme suffering. * **Atidhukkha:** This hell is
characterized by extreme suffering.  **Translation:**  There is no respite from
suffering, even for a moment

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM anuvAda pApI jIva aise narakoM meM jAte haiM, jahA~
sUrya nahIM hai, ghora paritApa hai, jo aMdhere meM bhare hue haiM, jinheM pAra
karanA atyanta duSkara hai, jo bahuta vizAla hai, upara nIce aura tiryak dizAoM
meM sarvatra jahA~ Aga jalatI rahatI hai  /  - TIkA na vidyate sUryo yasmin saH
asUryo - narako bahalAndhakAraH kumbhikAkRtiH sarva eva vA narakASAso'sUrya iti
vyapadizyate, tamevambhUtaM mahAbhitAm andhatamasaM 'duSprataraM ' duruttaraM
'mahAntaM' vizAlaM narakaM mahApApodayAdvrajanti, ta, tatra ca narake
Urdhvamadhastiryak sarvata: 'samAhita: ' samyagAhito
vyavasthApito'gnirjvalatIti, paThyate ca 'samUsio jattha'gaNI jhiyAI' yatra
narake samyagUrdhvaM zritaH samucchrito'gniH prajvalita taM tathAbhUtaM narakaM
vArAkAvrajanti iti  //  16  //  kiJcAnyat TIkArtha - sUrya rahita - jisameM
sUrya nahIM rahatA, ghora aMdhakAra maya, kumbhikA ke sadRza AkAra yukta asUrya
nAmaka eka naraka hai  /  athavA sabhI naraka asUrya kahe jAte haiM  /  pApI
prANI apane pApa ke udaya ke pariNAma svarUpa aise atyadhika tApayukta, saghana
aMdhakAra pUrNa, durgama-duHkha se pAra karane yogya vizAla naraka meM jAte haiM
/  vahA~ Upara se nIce tathA sabhI tirachI dizAoM meM agni prajvalita rahatI
hai| yahA~ 'samUsio - samucchrita pATha bhI prApta hotA hai  /  usake anusAra ve
pApI abhAge prANI aise naraka meM jAte haiM, jisameM bahuta Upara taka uThI huI
lapaToM se yukta Aga jalatI rahatI hai  /  OM OM OM jaMsI guhAe jalaNe'tiuTTe,
avijANao ujjhai luttapaNo  /  sayo ya kaluNaM puNa dhammaThANaM, gADhovaNIyaM
atidukkhadhammaM  //  12  //  chAyA anuvAda eka aisI naraka bhUmi hai, jisameM
guphA kI AkRti meM agni sthApita hai- Aga jalatI rahatI hai, jisameM par3e hue
nArakIya jIva AtmavismRta aura saMjJA vihIna hokara jalate haiM, unheM apane
ApakA jarA bhI hoza-havAza nahIM rahatA  /  naraka bhUmi atyanta karuNotpAdaka
aura paritApa pUrNa sthAna hai, atyadhika duHkhaprada hai, pApa karmoM ke
pariNAma svarUpa vahA~ jAnA par3atA hai I - - yasmin guhAyAM
jvalena'tivRtto'vijAnan dahyate, lupta prajJaH  /  sadA ca karuNaM
punardharmasthAnaM gADhopanIta matiduHkhadharmam  //  - TIkA - 'yasmin '
narake'tigato'sumAn 'guhAyA' mityuSTrikAkRtau narake pravezito 'jvalane' agnau
'ativRttaH' atigato vedanAbhibhUtatvAtsvakRtaM duzcaritamajAnan 'luptaprajJaH'
apagatAvadhiviveko dandahyate, tathA 'sadA' sarvakAlaM punaH karuNaprAyaM kRsnaM
vA 'dharmasthAnam' uSNasthAnaM tApasthAnamityarthaH 'gADhaM 'ti atyartham
'upanItaM' DhaukitaM duSkRtakarmakAriNAM yat sthAnaM tatte vrajanti, punarapi
tadeva vizinaSTi - atiduHkharUpo dharmaH svabhAvo yasminniti, idamuktaM bhavati
- akSinimeSamAtramapi kAlaM na tatra duHkhasya vizrAma iti, taduktam
acchiNimIlaNamettaM Natthi suhaM dukkhameva paDibaddhaM  /  Nirae NeraiyANaM
ahoNisaM paccamANANaM  // 1 //   // 12 //  apica chAyA - akSinimIlanamAtraM
nAsti sukhaM duHkhameva prativaddhaM  /  nirayainairayikANAM aharnizaM
pacyamAnAnAm  // 1 //  TIkArtha jisa naraka meM gata prANI guphA ke AkAra meM yA
U~Ta sadRza AkAra meM sthita naraka bhUmi meM praviSTa hokara vahA~ prajvalita
Aga meM jalatA huA vedanA se atyanta vyathita hokara apane pApa ko nahIM jAnatA,
315 - =

Page #344 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra
states that his intellect is destroyed. He becomes devoid of discrimination and
discrimination, and continues to burn excessively. He is pitiable-pity-producing
in all time-present, past and future, or is a completely hot place. He is
attained by sinful living beings, i.e., sinful souls go there. Describing the
speciality of that place, the Sutrakara says - it is extremely painful. The
implication is that even for the twinkling of an eye, there is no relief from
suffering there. It is said - even in the time of the blink of an eye, the
hellish beings do not get respite, they continue to cook in hell, suffering and
experiencing pain.  The four fires are kindled, wherein the cruel-actioned
torment the ignorant. They stand there, tormented, living like fish in the fire.
Tika: In all four directions, the cruel-actioned hell-wardens, having kindled
four fires, torment extremely the ignorant beings who have committed misdeeds in
the past. And those hell-beings, thus tormented, stand there for a long time in
that extremely painful hell, unable to go elsewhere, just as living fish, having
reached the proximity of fire, stand there itself, unable to go elsewhere due to
their inability to bear the heat, and thus great suffering arises for them;
hence the analogy of fish is taken.  Further,   Santacchana (Intense Burning) is
the name of the great torment; there the unrighteous-actioned (beings) are bound
by hands and feet, and are sawed like logs by those with axes in their hands.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram usakI prajJA lupta ho jAtI hai  /  vaha apagata viveka-
viveka zUnya hokara atyadhika jalatA rahatA hai  /  vaha naraka sabhI kAla-
vartamAna, bhUta aura bhaviSya meM karUNaprAyaH-karuNotpAdaka hai, athavA
sampUrNata: USNa sthAna hai  /  pApa karane vAle prANiyoM ko vaha prApta hotA
hai, arthAt pApI jIva usameM jAte haiM  /  usa sthAna kI vizeSatA batAte hue
sUtrakAra kahate haiM-vaha atyanta duHkharUpa hai  /  kahane kA tAtparya yaha
hai ki netranimeSa mAtra bhI samaya vahA~ du:kha se chUTane kA nahIM milatA  /
kahA hai-naitra ke palaka jhapakane ke samaya meM bhI nArakIya jIva surava nahIM
pAte, ve nirantara naraka meM pakate hue, pIDita hote hue kaSTa bhogate rahate
haiN| cattAri agaNIo samArabhittA, jahiMkrUrakammA'bhitaviMti bAlaM  /  te
tattha ciTuMta'bhitappamANA macchA va jIvaMtu va jotipattA  // 13 //  chAyA -
catasRSvagnIn samArabhya, yasmin krUrakarmANo'bhitApayanti bAlam  /  te tatra
tiSThantyabhitapyamAnA matsyA iva jIvanta upajyotiH prAptAH  //  anuvAda -
naraka meM paramAdhAmI deva cAroM dizAoM meM cAra prakAra kI agniyA~ jalAkara
ajJajIvoM ko paritapta karate haiM  /  jaise jIvita machalI ko Aga meM DAla diyA
jAya to vaha vahI paritapta hotI huI, jalatI huI par3I rahatI hai, usI taraha ve
nAraka Aga meM jalate hue par3e rahate haiN| TIkA - catasRSvapi dikSu
caturo'grIn samArabhya 'prajvAlya' yatra yasminnarakAvAse 'krUrakarmANo' naraka
pAlA AbhimukhyenAtyarthaM tApayanti-bhaTitravatpacanti 'bAlam' ajhaM nArakaM
pUrvakRtaduzcaritaM te tu nArakajIvA evam 'abhitapyamAnAH 'kadarthyamAnAH
svakarmagiDitAstatraiva prabhUtaM kAlaM mahAduHkhAkale narake tiSThanti,
dRSTAntamAhayathA jIvanto 'matsyA' mInA 'upajyotiH' agneH samIpe prAptAH
paravazatvAdanyatra gantumasamarthAstatraiva tiSThanti, evaM nArakA api,
matsyAnAM tApAsahiSNutvAdagnAvatyantaM duHkhamutpadyata ityatastadgrahaNamiti
// 13 /  /  kiJcAnyat _TIkArtha - naraka sthAna meM krUra karmA-nirdaya
narakapAla cAroM dizAoM meM cAroM agniyA~ prajvalita kara una ajJAnI nAraka
jIvoM ko jinhoMne pUrvajanma meM pApa kiye, bhaTTI kI taraha atyanta tApa dete
hue pakAte haiM, yoM kadarthita-utpIr3ita hote hue ve nAraka prANI apane
karmapAza meM baMdhe hone ke kAraNa usa atyanta duHkhaprada naraka meM dIrgha
kAla taka par3e rahate haiM  /  isa sambandha meM eka dRSTAnta dete haiM-jaise
eka jIvita machalI agni ke samIpa pahuMcakara usameM par3akara paravaza hone ke
kAraNa anyatra nahIM jA sakatI usI jagaha par3I rahatI hai, nArakIya prANI bhI
usI kI jyoM naraka meM par3e rahate haiM, machalI paritApa nahIM saha sakatI
isalie use agni meM bahuta duHkha hotA hai, isI kAraNa machalI kA dRSTAnta diyA
gayA hai  /  saMtacchaNaM nAma mahAhitAvaM, te nArayA jattha asAhukammA  /
hatthehi pAehi ya baMdhiUNaM, phalagaM va tacchaMti kuhADahatthA  // 14 //
chAyA - saMtakSaNaM nAma mahAbhitApaM te nArakA yatra asAdhukarmANaH  /
hastaizca pAdaizva badhdhavA phalakamiva takSNuvanti kuThArahastAH  //  (316)

Page #345 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hell Division Study - Translation  **Santanaksha** is a hell. It inflicts
great suffering on beings. In it, the cruel **Parmadhami** Devas, holding axes
in their hands, bind the hands and feet of the hellish beings and chop them like
wood.  **Commentary:**  The term **Santanaksha** refers to a place where beings
are chopped with unity. The word **Santanaksha** is used in the sense of
possibility. It is possible that this hell called **Santanaksha** causes great
suffering to all beings. If this is the case, then what? The sutrakar answers
this question by saying that in that hell, the cruel **Parmadhami** Devas, who
are merciless and devoid of compassion, come from their abode with axes in their
hands and bind the hands and feet of the helpless hellish beings, who have no
protector, and chop them like wood.  **Furthermore:**  The **Parmadhami** Devas
extract the blood of the hellish beings, heat it in a cauldron, and then throw
the hellish beings into that blood, cooking them like live fish. The bodies of
these hellish beings are swollen with excrement, and their heads are shattered.
**Commentary:**  The **Parmadhami** Devas throw the hellish beings into a
cauldron of their own boiling blood. The intestines and other organs of these
hellish beings are swollen due to excrement. Their heads are shattered. How are
they cooked? The sutrakar says that they are cooked by turning them over. The
hellish beings, who are lying on their backs, are turned over, and those who are
lying on their stomachs are turned over. The word **"nam"** is used here in the
sense of a figure of speech. The hellish beings, who are being cooked in this
way, are agitated and toss and turn their bodies, writhing in pain. The
**Parmadhami** Devas cook them like live fish in an iron cauldron.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM anuvAda - saMtakSaNa nAmaka eka naraka hai  /  vaha
prANiyoM ko ghora paritApa detA hai  /  usameM krUrakarmA paramAdhAmI deva apane
hAtha meM kulhAr3e lie rahate haiM, ve nArakIya prANiyoM ke hAtha paira bAMdha
dete haiM aura kATha kI taraha kulhAr3e se unakA chedana-bhedana karate hai-
kATate haiN| TIkA - sama-ekIbhAvena takSaNaM santakSaNaM, nAmazabdaH
sambhAvanAyAM, yadetatsaMtakSaNaM tatsarveSAM prANinAM 'mahAbhitApaM'
mahAduHkhotpAdakamityevaM sambhAvyate, yadyevaM tataH kimityAha-te 'nArakA'
narakapAlA 'yatra' narakAvAse svabhavanAdAgatAH 'asAdhu karmANaH' krUrakarmANo
niranukampAH 'kuThArahastAH' parazupANayastAnnArakAnatrANAn hastaiH pAdaizva
'badhdhavA' saMyamya 'phalakamiva' kASThazakalamiva 'takSNuvanti'
chindantItyarthaH  // 14 //  api ca TIkArtha - jo ekI bhAva se prANiyoM ko
kATatA hai, use saMtakSaNa kahate haiM  /  yahA~ nAma zabda sambhAvanA ke artha
meM prayukta hai  /  jo yaha saMtakSaNa nAmaka naraka kahA gayA hai, vaha
samasta prANiyoM ke lie atyanta duH kha utpanna karatA hai, yaha saMbhAvita hai
/  yadi aisA hai to kyA ? isa prazna kA nirAkaraNa karate hue sUtrakAra kahate
haiM ki usa naraka meM krUrakarmA-nirdaya karma karane vAle niranukampa-anukampA
rahita, dayAzUnya narakapAla hAtha meM kulhAr3e lie hue apane bhavana se Akara
una trANa rahita-jinakA koI rakSaka nahIM hai, nArakIya jIvoM ke hAtha paira
bA~dhakara unakA kATha ke samAna chedana-bhedana karate haiM-kATate haiM cIrate
haiM  /  ruhire puNo vaccasamussiaMge, bhinnuttamaMge varivattayaMtA  /  payaMti
NaM Neraie phuraMte, sajIvamacche va ayokavalle  // 15 //  chAyA - rUdhire punaH
varcaH samucchritAGgAn bhinnottAmAGgAn parivartayantaH  /  pacanti nairamikAn
sphurataH sajIvamatsyAnivAya sakalavalyAm  //  anuvAda - narakapAla nArakIya
jIvoM kA khUna nikAlakara, use garma kar3Ahe meM DAlakara usa khUna meM jIvita
machalI ke samAna una nArakoM ko DAla dete haiM aura pakAte haiM  /  jinake
zarIra mala dvArA samucchrita-sUje hue-phUle hue haiM, tathA jinake mastaka
cUra-cUra kiye hue haiM  /  TIkA - te paramAdhArmikAstAnnArakAnsvakIye rUdhire
taptakavalyAM prakSipte punaH pacanti varcaH pradhAnAni
samucchritAnyantraNyaGgAni vA yeSAM te tathA tAn bhinnaM cUrNitam uttamAkaM ziro
yeSAM te tayA tAniti, kathaM pacantItyAha'parivartayantaH' uttAnAnavAGmukhAn vA
kurvantaH Namiti vAkyAlaGkAre tAn-'sphurata' itazcetazca vihvalamAtmAnaM
nikSipataH sajIvamatsyAnivAyasakavalyAmiti  // 15 //  tathA - TIkArtha - ve
paramAdhAmI deva una narakagata jIvoM ko kar3AhI meM ubalate unhIM ke khUna meM
DAlakara pakAte haiM  /  una nArakIya jIvoM kI antar3iyA tathA anya aMga mala ke
kAraNa samucchrita-sUje hue haiM  /  unake mastaka cUra-cUra kie hue haiM  /  ve
kisa taraha pakAye jAte haiM isakA digdarzana karate hue kahate haiM-jo nArakIya
jIva ulTe par3e hue haiM, unako sIdhe karake, jo sIdhe par3e hue haiM, unako
ulTe karake pakAte haiM  /  yahA~ 'NaM' zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke artha meM AyA hai
/  isa prakAra pakAye jAte hue nArakIya jIva vyAkula hokara apane zarIra ko
idhara udhara ulaTate, palaTate hue tar3aphar3Ate haiM  /  narakapAla sajIva
machalI kI jyoM lohe kI kar3AhI meM pakAte jAte haiN| 317

Page #346 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra says: "They do not become ashes in the fire of hell,
nor do they die from the intense torment. They experience the consequences of
their actions, suffering in this world due to their misdeeds." (16)  Commentary:
"These hell beings, even though they are repeatedly burned, do not become ashes
in hell, nor do they die from the torment. The intensity of their suffering
cannot be compared to the pain of a fish thrown into fire. It is a suffering
beyond description. Even though they experience intense torment, they do not die
because they still have to experience the consequences of their actions. They
continue to experience the consequences of their actions, suffering from the
cold and heat, burning, cutting, piercing, scraping, impaling, cooking in a pot,
climbing the salmali tree, and other torments inflicted by the gods. They suffer
from the consequences of their actions, especially the eighteen types of sins,
including violence. They do not find even a moment of respite from their
suffering." (16)  "They go towards the blazing fire to escape the cold, but they
do not find relief. They are tormented by the intense heat of the fire. The gods
further torment them." (17)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram no ceva te tattha masIbhavaMti, Na mijatI
tivvabhiveyaNAe  /  tamANubhAgaM aNuvedayaMtA, dukkhaMti dukkhI iha dukkaDeNaM
// 16 //  chAyA - no caiva te tatra maSIbhavanti, na niyante tIvrAbhivedanayA  /
tamanubhAgamanuvedayantaH duHkhyanti duHkhina iha duSkRtena  //  anuvAda -
nArakIya prANI naraka kI agni meM jalakara bhasma nahIM hote, tathA naraka kI
tIvra yAtanA se ve marate bhI nahIM, kintu apane dvArA kie gae duSkRtoM-pApoM ke
kAraNa naraka kI yAtanA bhogate rahate haiM, duHkhI rahate haiN| TIkA - te ca
nArakA evaM bahuzaH pacyamAnA api 'no' naiva 'tatra' narake pAke vA
narakAnubhAve vA sati 'maSIbhavanti' naiva bhasmAsAdbhavanti, tathA
tattIvrAbhivedanayA nAparamagniprakSiptamatsyAdikamapyasti yanmIyateupamIyate,
ananyasadRzIM tIvrAM vedanAM vAcAmagocarAmanubhavantItyarthaH, yadi vA-
tIvrAbhivedanayA'pyananubhUtasvakRta karmatvAnna mriyanta iti. prabhatamapi
kAlaM yAvattattAdazaM zItoSNavedanAjanitaM tathA dahanacchedanabhedanatakSaNa
trizUlAropaNakumbhI-pAkazAlyalyArohaNAdikaM paramAdhArmikajanitaM
parasparodIraNaniSpAditaM ca 'anubhAgaM' karmaNA vipAkam 'anuvedayantaH'
samanuvedayantaH samanubhavantastiSThanti tathA svakRtena 'duSkRtena' hiMsA
dinA'STAdazapApasthAna rUpeNa satatodIrNaduHkhena duHkhino 'duHkhyanti'
pIDyante, nAkSinimeSamapi kAlaM duHkhena mucyanta iti||16|| kiJcAnyat TIkArtha -
ve nArakIya prANI jaisA pahale varNita huA hai, aneka bAra pakAye jAne para bhI
usa naraka meM jalakara bhasma nahIM ho jAte, tathA ve jaisI ghora vedanA kA
anubhava karate haiM, Aga meM jalatI huI machalI kI vedanA se bhI unakI vedanA
upamita nahIM kI jA sakatI  /  vaha aisI vedanA hai, jisakA varNana nahIM kiyA
jA sakatA, jise ve nAraka bhogate haiM, athavA tIvra vedanA hone ke bAvajUda
apane dvArA kiye gae karmoM kA phala bhoga avaziSTa-bAkI rahane ke kAraNa ve
nArakIya jIva marate nahIM hai  /  ve dIrghakAla paryanta jaisA pahale ullekha
huA hai apane karmoM ke phalasvarUpa sardI garmI Adi se janita pIr3A,
paramAdhAmI devoM dvArA niSpAdita dahanajalAnA, chedana-kATanA, bhedana-alaga-
alaga karanA, takSaNa-chIlanA, trizUla meM pironA, kumbhI meM pakAnA,
zAlmalIvRkSa para car3hAnA Adi evaM Apasa meM eka dUsare dvArA utpAdita duHkhoM
ko vahA~ bhogate hue rahate haiM  /  naraka meM Apatita jIva svakRtahiMsA Adi
aThAraha sthAna rUpa pApoM ke pariNAma svarUpa utpanna duHkhoM se utpIDita hote
rahate haiN| netra ke palaka jhapakane taka ke samaya meM bhI ve duHkha se
chuTakArA nahIM pAte  /  tahiM ca te lolaNa saMpagADhe, gADhaM sutattaM agaNiM
vayaMti  /  na tattha sAyaM lahatI bhidugge, arahiyAbhitAvA tahavI taviMti  //
17 //  chAyA '- tasmiMzca te lolana saMpragADhe, gADhaM sutaptamagniM vrajanti
/  na tatra sAtaM labhante'midurge'rahitAbhitApAn tathApi tApayanti  /  anuvAda
- naraka meM sardI se pIDita nArakIya prANI use dUra karane hetu prajvalita agni
ke samIpa jAte haiM, parantu ve vahA~ sukha nahIM pAte  /  usa bhayAvaha agni se
paritapta hone lagate haiM  /  una paritApa pAte nAraka jIvoM ko paramAdhAmI
deva aura adhika paritapta karate haiM  /  (318

Page #347 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hell Division Study  **Commentary:**  The text 'tasmincha' in the sutra
clearly describes the place of great torment, hell. It is filled with the
commotion of the hell-bound beings. Those who are tormented by extreme cold seek
relief in the intensely hot fire. They are burned in the fiery fortress, finding
no solace. They are constantly consumed by the fire, experiencing great pain.
Even though they are already suffering, the hell-keepers further torment them by
burning them with extremely hot oil and fire. ||17||  **Commentary:**  Hell is a
place of extreme torment. The sutra-maker highlights its characteristics by
saying:  Hell is filled with the commotion of the hell-bound beings. Those who
are tormented by extreme cold seek relief in the intensely hot fire. They are
burned in the fiery fortress, finding no solace. They are constantly consumed by
the fire, experiencing great pain. Even though they are already suffering, the
hell-keepers further torment them by burning them with extremely hot oil and
fire.  **Verse 18:**  **Shadow:**  And it is heard, like the sound of a city
being destroyed, the words of sorrow are uttered there. Those who have ripened
karma, those who have ripened karma, again and again they torment them with
great force.  **Translation:**  When a city is destroyed, there is a great
commotion of the people due to their sorrow. Similarly, in that city, a
commotion is heard, sorrowful words are uttered. Those whose false beliefs,
etc., karma has ripened, who are in the state of experiencing the fruits of
their sinful karma, they, the hell-keepers, torment the hell-bound beings with
great enthusiasm, again and again.  **Commentary:**  The word 'se' in this verse
means 'ath' (then). After that, the terrifying roar of the hell-bound beings,
who are being tormented by the fierce hell-keepers, is heard, like the sound of
a city being destroyed. In hell, words filled with sorrow are uttered, such as
"Oh mother! Father! I am in great distress, I am an orphan, I have no master, I
have come to you for refuge, save me!" etc. Those whose karma of false beliefs,
laughter, and sensual pleasures has ripened, they, the hell-keepers, torment the
hell-bound beings with great enthusiasm, again and again, causing them
unbearable suffering of various kinds. ||18||  **Weeping:**  **Commentary:**  In
this verse, the word 'se' is used in the sense of 'ath' (then). After that, the
terrifying roar of the hell-bound beings, who are being tormented by the fierce
hell-keepers, is heard, like the sound of a city being destroyed. In hell, words
filled with sorrow are uttered, such as "Oh mother! Father! I am in great
distress, I am an orphan, I have no master, I have come to you for refuge, save
me!" etc. Those whose karma of false beliefs, laughter, and sensual pleasures
has ripened, they, the hell-keepers, torment the hell-bound beings with great
enthusiasm, again and again, causing them unbearable suffering of various kinds.
||18||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM TIkA 'tasmiMzca' mahAyAtanAsthAne narake tameva
vizinaSTi - nArakANAM lolanena samyak pragAr3ho - vyApto bhUtaH sa tathA
tasminnarake atizItArtAH santo 'gAr3ham' atyarthaM suSThu taptam agniM vrajanti,
'tatrApi ' agnisthAne'bhidurge dahyamAnAH 'sAtaM' sukhaM manAgapi na labhante,
'arahito' nirantaro'bhitApo - mahAdAho yeSAM te arahitAbhitApAH tathApi
tAnnArakAMste narakApAlAstApayantyatyarthaM taptatailAgninA dahantIti  // 17 //
api caTIkArtha - naraka aisA sthAna hai, jahA~ atyadhika yAtanAe~ haiM  /  usakI
vizeSatA para prakAza DAlate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM - naraka nArakIya jIvoM
ke kolAhala se unakI halacala se bharA huA hai  /  vahA~ atyadhika zIta se Arta
prANI apanI ThaMDaka dUra karane ke lie atyadhika pradIpta- teja jalatI huI agni
ke nikaTa jAte haiM  /  vaha agni atyanta dAhaka hotI hai| usameM ve jalane
lagate haiM, jarA bhI sukha nahIM paate| usa Aga meM ve lagAtAra jalate haiM,
unheM bar3A dAha hotA hai  /  tathApi paramAdhAmI deva khUba garama kiyA huA
tela una para chir3aka kara unheM dagdha karate haiM  /  OM OM 4 se succaI
nagaravahe va sadde, duhovaNIyANi payANi tattha ! udiNNa kammANa udiNNakammA,
puNo puNo te sarahaM durhati  //  18  //  chAyA - atha zrUyate nagaravadhaiva
zabdaH, duHkhopanItAni padAni tatra  /  udIrNa karmaNa udIrNakarmANaH punaH
punaste sarabhasaM duHkhayanti  //  anuvAda * jaba kabhI kisI nagara kA
vidhvaMsa hotA hai, to vahA~ ke logoM kA duHkha vaza bar3A kolAhala hotA hai  /
vaise hI usa nagara meM kolAhala sunAI detA hai, bar3e kArUNika zabda sune jAte
haiM, jinake mithyAtva Adi karma udIrNa- udaya prApta hai, jo pApa karma kA
phala dene kI avasthA meM upasthita haiM, ve paramAdhAmI deva nArakIya jIvoM ko
bar3e utsAha ke sAtha punaH punaH pIr3A dete haiM  /  TIkA - se zabdo'tha
zabdArthe, 'atha' anantaraM teSAM nArakANAM narakapAlai raudraiH
kadarthyamAnAnAM bhayAnako hAhAravapracura Akrandazabdo nagaravadha iva
'zrUyate' samAkarNyate duHkhena pIDayopanItAni - uccAritAni karuNApradhAnAni
yAni padAni hA mAtastAta ! kaSTamanAtho'haM zaraNAgatastava trAyasva
mAmityevamAdInAM pAdAnAM 'tatra' narake zabda: zrUyate, udIrNam-udayaprAptaM
kaTuvipAkaM karma yeSAM te tathA teSAM tathA 'udIrNakarmANo' narakapAlA
mithyAtvahAsyaratyAdInAmudaye vartamAnAH 'punaH punaH' bahuzaste 'sarahaM
(duheM) ti' sarabhasaM-sotsAhaM nArakAn 'duHkhayanti ' atyantamasahyaM
nAnAvidhaiyarUpAyairduHkhamasAtavedanIya mutpAdayantIti  // 18 //  tathA -
rUdana TIkArtha - isa gAthA meM 'se' zabda atha ke artha meM AyA hai, isake
anantara raudra- bhayAvaha paramAdhAmI devoM dvArA kadarthita-utpIDita kiye jAte
una nArakIya jIvoM ke hAhAkAra se paripUrNa bhayAnaka krandana, usa nagara ke
kolAhala kI jyoM pratIta hotA hai, jisakA vinAza ho gayA ho| usa naraka meM
duHkha ke sAtha uccArita kiye jAte hue karuNA pradhAna-karuNA paidA karane vAle
pada- zabda sunAI dete haiM- jaise he mAtA ! tAta ! maiM bar3e kaSTa meM hU~,
anAtha hU~, merA koI svAmI nahIM hai, tumhArA zaraNAgata hU~, mujhe bacAo,
ityAdi zabda usa naraka meM sunAI dete haiM  /  mithyAtva, hAsya, rati Adi ke
udaya meM vidyamAna paramAdhAmI deva nArakIya jIvoM ko. 319

Page #348 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation preserving Jain terms:  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra
repeatedly and enthusiastically inflicts extremely unbearable suffering on those
whose bitter fruits have manifested.  The wicked, ignorant nether world
guardians separate the limbs of the nether world beings. I shall explain to you
the reason for this truthfully. The childlike ones are reminded there by all the
punishments of their past deeds.  Commentary: The word 'na' is a figure of
speech. The sinful nether world guardians disintegrate the body parts of the
nether world beings through methods like cutting, for which the author explains
the reason - I shall expound to you the true cause. The unintelligent nether
world guardians remind them through various punishments, just as you used to
joyfully cut and consume the flesh of other beings, drink their juices, and
indulge in adultery; now, tormented by the fruits of those same deeds, why are
you howling and shrieking? In this way, the nether world guardians inflict
suffering similar to the punishments given by them in the previous birth,
thereby tormenting them.  They, being struck down, fall into the nether world,
in the great torment of the deformed one. There they stand, devourers of the
deformed, satisfied by the worms that have arisen from their karmas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram punaH punaH utsAha ke sAtha vibhinna prakAra se atyanta
asahya duHkha dete haiM, jinake kaTu phalaprada udaya meM Aye hue haiN| pANehi
NaM pAva viojayaMti, taM bhe pavakkhAmi jahAtaheNaM  /  daDehiM tatthA sarayaMti
bAlA, savvehiM daMDehi purAkaehiM  // 19 //  chAyA - prANaiH pApA viyojayanti,
tad bhavambheH pravakSyAmi yAthAtathyena  /  daNDaistatra smarayanti bAlAH
sarveH daNDaiH purAkRtaiH  //  anuvAda - pApI ajJAnI naraka pAla nAraka jIvoM ke
zarIra ke aMgoM ko niyojitakara-kATa kATa kara pRthak-pRthak kara dete haiM  /
isakA kAraNa maiM Apako yathAvata rUpa meM batalAtA hU~  /  una prANiyoM dvArA
apane pUrva bhava meM dUsare prANiyoM ko die gae daNDa ke anusAra hI ve unheM
daNDita kara-pIr3ita kara unake pUrvakRta karmoM ko smaraNa karAte haiN| TIkA-
'Namiti' vAkyAlaGkAre, prANaiH' zarIrendriyAdibhiste pApAH' pApakarmANo
narakapAlA 'viyojayanti' zarIrAvayavAnAM pATanAdibhiH prakAraivikartanAdavayavAn
vizleSayanti, kimarthamevaM te kurvantItyAha-'tad' duHkhakAraNaM 'bhe' yuSmAkaM
'pravakSyAmi yAthAtathyena' avitathaM pratipAdayAmIti, daNDayanti-
pIDAmutpAdayantIti daNDA-duH khavizeSAstai rakANAmApAditaiH 'vAlA' nirvivekA
narakapAlAH pUrvakRtaM smArayanti, tadyathA-tadA hRSTastvaM khAdasi
samutkRtyotkRtya prANinAM mAMsaMtathA pibasi tadrasaMmadyaM ca gacchasi
paradArAn sAmprataM tadvipAkApAditena karmaNA'bhitapyamAnaH kimevaM
rAraTISItyevaM sarvaiH purAkRtaiH 'daNDaiH' du:khavizeSaiH
smArayantastAdRzabhUtameva duHkhavizeSamutpAdayanto narakapAlA: pIDayantIti  //
19 //  kiJca - TIkArtha - isa gAthA meM 'Na' zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke rUpa meM AyA
hai  /  pApakarmA narakapAla nAraka jIvoM ke zarIra ke avayavoM ko kATa kATa
kara alaga kara dete haiM, ve aisA kyoM karate haiM, isakA nirAkaraNa karate hue
sUtrakAra kahate haiM-maiM isakA kAraNa sahI sahI batalAtA hU~  /  vivekazUnya
narakapAla nAraka jIvoM ko bhinnabhinna prakAra se daNDa dekara una dvArA pahale
kiye gae karmoM ko yAda karAte haiM, jaise tuma bar3e hRSTa-prasanna hokara
prANiyoM kA mAMsa kATa kATa kara khAte the  /  usakA rasa pIte the, madyapAna
tathA parastrIgamana karate the, aba unhIM karmoM kA phala bhogate hue tuma isa
prakAra kyoM cIkha rahe ho, cillA rahe ho, isa taraha narakapAla nAraka jIvoM
dvArA pahale ke janma meM dUsare prANiyoM ko die gae daNDa-unheM dI gaI yAtanAoM
ko smaraNa karAte hue unake sadRza hI unheM duHkha dete haiM, pIDita karate haiM
/  te hammANA Narage paDaMti, punne duruvassa mahAmitAve  /  te tattha ciTuMti
duruvabhakkhI, tuTUMti kammovagayA kimI haM  // 20 //  chAyA - te hanya mAnA
narake patanti, pUrNe durUpasya mahAbhitApe  /  te tatra tiSThanti
durupabhakSiNaH, tuTyante karmopagatAH kRmibhiH  //  320

Page #349 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hell Division Study  **Translation:**  In hell, the hellish beings are killed
by the hell guardians, and they jump out of that hell and fall into a place
filled with excrement and urine. There, they dwell for a long time, consuming
excrement and urine. They are constantly bitten by insects.  **Commentary:**
The word "te" refers to the hellish beings, "hannyamana" means being tortured,
"tadyamana" means being beaten, "narakapalebhyo" means by the hell guardians,
"nashtanyasmin" means in another terrible place, "narake" means in hell,
"narakakadeshe" means in a part of hell, "patanti" means they fall, "gachchanti"
means they go, "purne" means filled, "bhrite" means with, "dushtam" means
impure, "rupam" means form, "yasyat" means whose, "tadurupam" means similar to
that, "vishtasrigmansadikalmalam" means excrement, urine, flesh, and other
impurities, "tasyabhrte" means filled with that, "mahaabhihape" means with great
heat, "atisantapopete" means with extreme heat, "te" means those, "naraka" means
hellish beings, "svakarmaavabaddha" means bound by their own karma, "tatra"
means there, "evambhute" means in such, "narake" means hell, "durupabhakṣiṇaḥ"
means those who eat impure things, "ashuchyaadibhakṣaka" means those who eat
impure things, "prabhutam" means a lot, "kalam" means time, "yavattiṣṭhanti"
means they stay, "tatha" means thus, "krimihibhi" means by insects,
"narakapalapaditai" means produced by the hell guardians, "parasparakritai"
means produced by each other, "svakarmopgata" means due to their own karma,
"svakarmadhoukita" means due to their own karma, "tudyante" means they are
tormented, "vyathyante" means they are distressed.  And so the scripture says:
"In the sixth and seventh hells, the hellish beings become a large, bloody worm
called Kunthuru, and they bite each other's bodies, causing great pain." (20)
**Another:**  **Commentary:**  The unfortunate hellish beings are killed and
beaten by the hell guardians, and they fall into another extremely terrible
hell, a part of hell. What is that hell like? It is filled with excrement,
blood, flesh, and other impure, foul substances, and it is filled with extreme
heat. Bound by the web of their own karma, these hellish beings dwell in such a
hell, consuming impure substances for a long time.  They are bitten by insects
produced by the hell guardians and by insects motivated by each other, as a
result of their own karma. The scripture mentions in this regard that in the
sixth and seventh hells, the hellish beings become a very large, bloody worm
called Kunthuru, and they bite each other's bodies, causing great pain. ❀❀
**Shadow:**  -  Always completely the place of dharma, deeply rooted in
suffering dharma. Throwing them into shackles, breaking their bodies, piercing
their heads with a drill, they torment them. (21)  **Translation:**  The
dwelling place of the hellish beings is always completely hot. It is obtained by
them due to their accumulated karma of deceit and greed. By nature, that place
is extremely painful. The hell guardians break and twist the bodies of the
hellish beings, put them in shackles, and pierce their heads with a drill,
torturing them.  **Commentary:**  "Sada" means always, "kritsnam" means
completely, "punah" means again, "tatra" means there, "narake" means in hell,
"dharmapradhanam" means hot, "sthanam" means place, "narakanam" means of the
hellish beings, "bhavathi" means it is, "tatrahi" means there,
"pralayatiriktaagnina" means by fire that is hotter than the fire of
destruction, "vataadiinam" means of wind and others, "atyantoushnarupataat"
means because it is extremely hot, "taccha" means that, "dridhai" means firmly,
"nidhattanikachitaavastai" means by the state of deceit and greed, "karmabhi"
means by karma, "narakanam" means of the hellish beings, "upaneetam" means
obtained, "dhoukitam" means by deceit, "punarapi" means again, "vishinishtthi"
means it is clear, "ativa" means extremely, "dukkham" means suffering,
"asataavedaniya" means unbearable, "dharma" means nature, "yasyat" means whose,
"tattatha" means that is so, "tasmincha" means in that, "evamvidhe" means such,
"sthane" means place, "sthito" means situated, "asuman" means the hellish
beings, "andusshu" means in shackles, "nigadeshu" means in shackles, "deham"
means body, "vihatya" means breaking, "prakshipya" means throwing, "tatha" means
thus, "shirascha" means and the head, "se" means of that, "tasyanaraksya" means
of that hellish being, "vedhena" means by a drill, "randhrottpadane" means by
making a hole, "abhihapeyanti" means they torment, "kilakai" means with nails,
"sarvaanyapi" means all, "anganni" means limbs, "vitatya" means stretching,
"charmavat" means like skin, "kilaeyanti" means they nail. (21)
**Furthermore:**  **Commentary:**  The dwelling place of the hellish beings is
always hot, with an abundance of heat. There, the wind and other elements are
hotter than the fire of destruction. That hellish place is obtained by the
hellish beings due to their karma of deceit and greed. It is also clear that it
is extremely painful, unbearable by nature. In such a place, the hellish beings
are thrown into shackles, their bodies are broken, and their heads are pierced
with a drill, and all their limbs are stretched and nailed like skin. (21)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM anuvAda naraka meM narakapAloM dvArA hanyamAna mAre
jAte hue ve nArakIya jIva usa naraka se nikalakara aise kUdakara gira jAte haiM,
jo mala aura mUtra se bharA huA hai  /  vahA~ ve mala evaM mUtra kA bhakSaNa
karate hue dIrgha kAla paryanta nivAsa karate haiM  /  unheM kIr3e kATate rahate
haiM  /  TIkA 'te' varAkA nArakA 'hanyamAnA: ' tADyamAnA narakapAlebhyo
naSTAanyasmin ghoratare 'narake' narakaikadeze 'patanti' gacchanti narake ? '
pUrNe' bhRte duSTaM rUpaM yasya taddUrUpaM viSThAsRgmAMsAdikalmalaM tasya bhRte
tathA' mahAbhitApe' atisantApopete'te''nArakAH svakarmAvabaddhA:' tatra'
evambhUte narake' durupabhakSiNaH 'azucyAdibhakSakAH prabhUtaM kAlaM
yAvattiSThanti, tathA 'kRmibhiH' naraka pAlApAditai parasparakRtaizca
'svakarmopagatA:' svakarma DhaukitA: ' tudyante' vyathyante iti  /  tathA
cAgamaH - chaTThI sattamAsu NaM puDhavIsu neraiyA pahU mahaMtAIM lohikuMthurUvAI
viuvvittA annamannassa kAryaM samaturaMgemANA aNudhAyamANA aNudhAyamANA ciTThati
// 20 //  kiJcAnyat TIkArtha ve abhAge nArakIya prANI narakapAloM dvArA
hanyamAna - tADyamAna mAre pITe jAte hue dUsare atyanta ghora naraka meM- naraka
ke eka bhAga meM gira jAte haiM, cale jAte haiN| vaha naraka kaisA hai? vaha
mala, rUdhira, mAMsa Adi apavitra, gande padArthoM se paripUrNa hai, tathA
atyanta abhitApa se yukta hai  /  apane karma ke jAla meM paribaddha ve nArakIya
prANI aise naraka meM azuci Adi padArthoM kA bhakSaNa karate hue dIrghakAla taka
rahate haiM  /  naraka pAloM dvArA utpAdita kIDoM se tathA paraspara eka dUsare
ke dvArA prerita kIr3oM se apane karmoM ke phalasvarUpa kATe jAte haiM  /  isa
sambandha meM Agama meM ullekha hai ki chaThI tathA sAtavIM naraka bhUmi meM
nAraka eka bahuta bar3e khUnI kunthu saMjJaka kIr3e kA rUpa banakara eka dUsare
ke zarIra ko kATate hue bar3I pIr3A karate 1  sayA kasiNaM puNa ghammaThANaM,
gADhovaNIyaM atidukkhadhammaM  /  aMdUsu pakkhippa vihattu dehaM veheNa sIsaM
se'bhitAvayaMti  // 21 //  " chAyA - sadA kRtsanaM punardharmasthAnaM,
gADhopanItamatiduHkhadharmam  /  andUSu prakSipya vihRtya dehaM vedhena zIrSaM
tasyAbhi tApayanti  //  anuvAda nArakIya prANiyoM ke AvAsa kA sthAna sadA
sarvathA uSNa rahatA hai  /  vaha unako nidhatta nikAcita Adi svasaMcita karmoM
ke kAraNa prApta huA hai  /  svabhAvataH hI vaha sthAna atyadhika dukhaprada
hai| narakapAla vahA~ nArakIya jIvoM ke zarIra ko tor3a maror3a tathA use ber3I
bandhana Adi meM DAlakara unake mastaka meM chedakara unako yAtanA dete haiM  /
TIkA - 'sadA' sarvakAlaM ' kRtsnaM' saMpUrNaM punaH tatra narake
'dharmapradhAnaM' uSNapradhAnaM sthitiH sthAnaM nArakANAM bhavati, tatrahi
pralayAtiriktAgninA vAtAdInAmatyantoSNarUpatvAt, tacca dRDhai :-
nidhattanikAcitAvasthaiH karmabhirnArakANAm 'upanItaM ' DhaukitaM, punarapi
vizinaSTi atIva duHkham - asAtAvedanIyaM dharmaH svabhAvo yasya tattathA
tasmiMzcaivaMvidhe sthAne sthito'sumAn' andUSu' nigaDeSu dehaM vihatya prakSipya
ca tathA zirazca' se ' tasya nArakasya'vedhena 'randhrotpAdanenAbhitApayanti
kIlakaizca sarvANyapyaGgAni vitatya carmavat kIlayanti iti  //  21 //  apica -
TIkArtha - nArakIya jIvoM ke AvAsa kA sthAna sadaiva uSNa pradhAna-garmI kI
adhikatA lie hotA hai  /  vahA~ para vAyu Adi pralayAgni se bhI adhika uSNa hote
haiM  /  vaha naraka sthAna nArakIya jIvoM ko una dvArA 321

Page #350 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra has
been attained through the state of karma that is accomplished and purified.
Describing the speciality towards the Naraka (hell), it is said that it is
extremely painful, inherently distressing. The Narakapala (guardians of hell) in
such Naraka places, break and twist the bodies of the existing beings, putting
them in shackles and other bindings, and piercing their heads. They stretch out
their limbs like leather and drive nails into them.  "They cut the nose of the
child with a razor, and they also cut both the ears. They pull out his tongue to
the extent of a span, and they torture him with sharp spikes." (Verse 22)
Commentary: They, the extremely righteous ones, reminding of the past misdeeds
of the ignorant, Narakiya (hellish) beings, who are mostly always in the state
of experiencing pain, cut their nose with a razor, and also cut both their ears.
And, pulling out the tongue of those who are desirous of liquor, meat and
tastes, and who speak falsehood, to the extent of a span, they 'torture'
(remove) them with sharp spikes.  "They, being burnt, make sounds like the dry
leaves of the palm tree, day and night, there. They drip with blood and pus-
filled flesh, their limbs being smeared with caustic substances." (Verse 23)
Commentary: They, having their nose, lips and tongue cut, dripping with blood,
where they spend the night and day making sounds like the dry leaves of the palm
tree, the ignorant Narakiya beings, their limbs being smeared with caustic
substances, drip with blood and pus-filled flesh.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kiye huye nidhatta evaM nikAcita avasthA yukta karmoM
dvArA prApta huA hai  /  naraka kI ora vizeSatA batalAte huye kahate haiM ki
vaha atIva duHkharUpa hai, svabhAva se hI kaSTaprada hai  /  narakapAla isa
prakAra ke naraka sthAna meM vidyamAna prANiyoM ke zarIra ko tor3a maror3a kara
ber3I Adi ke bandhana meM DAlakara tathA unake mastiSka meM chedakara unheM
kaSTa dete haiM  /  ve unake aMgoM ko camar3e kI jyoM phailAkara unameM kIleM
ThoMkate haiN| chiMdaMti bAlassa khureNa nakkaM, udvevi chiMdaMti duvevi kaNNe
/  jibbhaM viNikkassa vihatthimittaM, tikkhAhiM sUlAhi'bhitA vayaMti  // 22 //
chAyA - chindanti bAlasya kSureNa nAsikA moSNa ca chidanti dvAvapi kau~  /
jihvAM viniSkAsya vitastimAtrAM tIkSNAbhiH zUlAbhirabhitApayanti  //  anuvAda -
narakapAla ajJAnI nArakIya jIvoM kA nAka, hoMTha, donoM kAna teja ustare dvArA
kATa dete haiM  /  unakI jIbha ko mu~ha se eka bilAta bAhara khIMca kara usameM
tIkSNa zUla cUbho dete haiM, unako isa prakAra pIr3A dete haiM TIkA - te
paramAdhArmikaH pUrvaduzcaritAni smarayitvA 'bAlasya' ajJasyanirvivekasya
prAyazaH sarvadA vedanAsamudghAtopagatasya kSurapreNa nAsikAMchindanti
tathauSThAvapi dvAvapi kau~ chindanti, tathA madyamAMsa
rasAbhilipsoma'SAbhASiNojihvAM vitastimAtrAmAkSipya tIkSNAbhiH zUlAbhiH
'abhitApayanti' apanayanti iti  // 22 //  tathA - TIkArtha - ve paramAdhAmIdeva
sadaiva pIr3Ayukta jJAna zUnya nArakIya jIvoM ko una dvArA pUrvajanma meM kiye
gaye pApoM ko yAda dilAkara ustare se unake nAka kATa lete haiM aura unake
hoMTha tathA donoM kAna bhI kATa lete haiM  /  ve madirA, mA~sa aura rasa ke
lolupa, asatya bhASI una nArakIya jIvoM kI jIbha ko mu~ha se eka bilAta bAhara
nikAlakara tIkSNa zUla dvArA vedha DAlate haiM, unheM pIr3ita karate haiN| te
tippamANA talasaMpuDaMva, rAiMdiyaM tattha 'thaNaMti bAlA  /  galaMti te
soNiapUyamaMsaM, pajoiyA khArapaiddhiyaMgA  // 23 //  chAyA - te tipyamAnA
stAlasaMpuTAiva rAtriMdivaM tatra stananti bAlAH  /  galanti te zoNitapUyamAsaM
pradyotitAH kSArapradigdhAGgA  //  anuvAda - ve jJAnazUnya nArakIya prANI jinake
zarIra ke aMgoM se khUna TapakatA rahatA hai, tAr3a ke sUkhe pattoM kI taraha
rAta-dina zabda karate rahate haiM  /  unako Aga meM dagdha kara unake aMgoM meM
kSAra lagA diyA jAtA hai isalie jisase unake ghAvoM se khUna, mavAda aura mAMsa
jharatA rahatA hai  /  _TIkA - 'te' chinnanAsikoSThajihvAH santaH zoNitaM
'tipyamAnAH' kSaranto yatra-yasmin pradeze rAtriM dinaM gamayanti, tatra 'bAlA'
ajJAH 'tAlasampuTAiva' pavaneritazuSkatAlapatrasaMcayA iva sadA 'stananti' 322

Page #351 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hellish Torment: A Translation  **Verse 23:**  The study of hellish torments:
They cry out with long, drawn-out wails, burning with fire, their bodies smeared
with alkali. Blood, pus, and flesh melt away night and day.  **Verse 24:**
Perhaps you have heard of the hell called "Kumbhi," filled with blood and pus.
There, blood and pus are cooked. The new fire, with its intense heat, is
extremely hot. It is larger than a man in size.  **Verse 25:**  They throw the
children into it, and they cry out in pain. Thirsty, they drink the copper-
heated liquid, and cry out in pain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM dIrghavisvaramAkrandantastiSThanti tathA pradyotitA'
vahninA jvalitAH tathA kSAreNa pradigdhAGgAH zoNitaM pUyaM mAMsaM cAharnizaM
galantIti  //  23  //  kiJca - TIkArtha ve nArakIya prANI, jinake nAka, hoMTha,
jIbha ye saba kATa lie gae haiM, jinake zarIra se khUna Tapaka rahA hai  /  jisa
sthAna meM ve rAteM tathA dina bitAte haiM, vahA~ ve ajJAnI havA dvArA prerita
tAr3a ke sUkhe pattoM kI taraha jora-jora se AvAja karate rahate haiM - rote
rahate haiN| Aga meM jalAye huye aura jale para khAra lagAye huye una nArakIya
jIvoM ke zarIra ke aMgoM se khUna mavAda aura mAMsa cUtA rahatA hai  /  jar3a te
sutA lohitapUapAI, bAlAgaNI teaguNA pareNaM  /  kuMbhI mahaMtAhiyaporasIyA,
samUsitA lohiyapUyapuNNA  //  24  //  chAyA yadi te zrutA lohitapUyapAcinI
bAlAgninA tejoguNA pareNa  /  kumbhI mahatyadhikapaurUSIyA samucchritA
lohitapUyapUrNA  //  anuvAda - khUna aura mavAda se pUrNa kuMbhI nAmaka naraka
bhUmi kadAcit tumane sunI hogI  /  usameM rakta aura mavAda ko pakAyA jAtA hai|
navIna agni tatkAla jalAyI huI Aga ke teja se yukta hone ke kAraNa atyanta tApa
yukta hotI hai  /  vaha vistAra meM puruSa pramANa se bhI adhika hotI hai  /
TIkA punarapi sudharmasvAmI jambUsvAminamuddizya bhagavadvacanamAviSkaroti- yadi
'te' tvayA 'zrutA' AkarNitA-lohitaM rudhiraM pUyaM rUdhirameva pakkaM te dve api
paktuM zIlaM yasyAM sA lohitapUyapAcinI - kumbhI, tAmeva vizinaSTi - ' bAlaH'
abhinavaH pratyagro'gnistena tejaH - abhitApaH sa eva guNo yasyAH sA bAlAgnite
joguNA 'pareNa' prakarSeNa taptetyarthaH punarapi tasyA eva vizeSaNaM 'mahatI'
vRhattarA ahiyaporUsIye 'tti' puruSa prabhaNAdhikA 'samucchritA'
uSTrikAkRtirUrdhvaM vyavasthitA lohitena pUyena ca pUrNA, saivambhUtA kumbhI
samantato'gninA prajvalitA'tIva bIbhatsadarzaneti  // 24 //  tAsu ca yatkriyate
taddarzayitumAha TIkArtha - sudharmA svAmI punaH jambU svAmI ko udiSTa kara
bhagavAna mahAvIra kA vacana prastuta karate haiM | khUna aura mavAda ina donoM
ko pakAnA jisakA svabhAva hai, aisI kuMbhI nAmaka naraka bhUmi ke sambandha meM
sambhavataH tumane sunA hogA  /  usakI vizeSatA batalAte huye kahate haiM navIna
- tatkAla prajvalita agni kA jo teja yA tApa hotA hai, kuMbhI kA vahI guNa hai
arthAt vaha atyanta tApayukta hotI hai  /  punaH usa kuMbhI kI vizeSatA batalAte
haiM, vaha bahuta bar3I hai| vaha vistAra meM puruSa ke pramANa se bhI jyAdA hai
/  usakA AkAra eka U~Ta kI AkRti jaisA hai  /  vaha usakI jyoM U~cI hai  /  vaha
khUna aura mavAda se paripUrNa hai  /  usake cAroM aura Aga jalatI hai  /  vaha
dekhane meM atyanta vIbhatsa - ghRNotpAdaka hai  /  OM OM OM pakkhippa tAsuM
payayaMti bAle, adRssare te kaluNaM rasaMte  /  tahagAiyA te tautaMbatattaM,
pajjijjamANA'TTataraM rasaMti  //  25  //  chAyA - prakSipya tAsu prapacanti
bAlAn, ArttasvarAn tAn karuNaM rasataH  /  tRSNArditAste tAmrataptaM, pAyyamAnA
ArttasvaraM rasanti  //  323

Page #352 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra Translation - The merciful and compassionate divine
beings throw those ignorant and miserable hellish beings into a cauldron filled
with blood and pus, and cook them. They make the thirsty and tormented hellish
beings drink molten lead and copper. Therefore, those hellish beings cry out
even more.  Commentary - They throw the helpless, wailing hellish beings, whose
bodies are filled with the impurities of blood, pus, and foul odor, into the
cauldron that is ablaze like a new fire in the hells. The tormented hellish
beings cry out in anguish. When they, afflicted by extreme thirst, beg for
water, the hell-wardens remind them that they were very fond of liquor, and make
them drink the scorching lead and copper. They cry out in even greater anguish
while drinking it.  Summarizing the topic, it is said: Having deceived others
for the sake of trivial pleasures in this human life, they are reborn hundreds
of thousands of times in the lower realms, like fish-hunters. And then they go
to hell. As were their past actions, so are the burdens they bear.  Commentary -
In this human life, by deceiving others with their own self-interest, they have
abandoned their true self. Having experienced hundreds of thousands of births in
the lower realms like fish-hunters, they now reside in hell. As were the wicked
deeds they committed in their past lives, so are the torments they now endure.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - paramAdhAmI deva Arta svara meM karuNa
krandana karate hue una jJAna zUnya nArakIya prANiyoM ko khUna aura mavAda se
bharI huI kuMbhI meM DAla dete haiM aura pakAte haiM  /  tRSNA-pyAsa se Adita-
pIr3ita una nArakiyoM ko ve sIsA aura tAMbA galAkara pilAte haiM  /  isalie ve
nArakIya prANI aura adhika cillAte haiM  /  TIkA - 'tAsu' pratyagrAgnipradIptAsu
lohitapUyazarIrAvayavakilbiSapUrNAsu durgandhAsu ca 'bAlAn  /
nArakAMstrANarahitAna ArtasvarAna karuNaM-dInaM rasataH prakSipya prapacanti,
'te ca' nArakAstathA kadarthyamAnA birasamAkrandantastRDArtAH salilaM
prArthayanto madyaM te ajIva priyamAsIdityevaM smarayitvA taptaM pAyyante, te ca
taptaM trapu pAyyamAnA ArtataraM 'rasanti' rAraTantIti  // 25 //
uddezakArthopasaMhArArthamAha - TIkArtha - narakapAla navIna agni ke sadRza
pradIpta-dahakatI huI, khUna mavAda aura deha ke aMgoM evaM gaMde padArthoM se
bharI huI, durgandha yukta usa kuMbhI meM Arta svara meM karuNa krandana karate
hue una jJAna zUnya nArakIya prANiyoM ko jinheM vahA~ koI bacAne vAlA nahIM haiM
/  DAlakara pakAte haiM  /  ve nArakIya jIva usa prakAra pIDita kiye jAne para
burI taraha cIkhate cillAte haiM  /  ve jaba trizAkula-pyAsa se pIDita hokara
pAnI mAMgate haiM taba naraka pAla unheM yaha yAda dilAte huye ki tumako madirA
bahuta priya thI, paritapta- galAyA huA sIsA aura tAMbA pilAte haiM  /  ve unheM
pIte hue bar3e jora se Arta svara meM cillAte haiN| isa uddezaka kI viSaya vastu
kA upasaMhAra karate hue kahate haiM  /  appeNa appaM iha vaMcaittA, bhavAhame
pavvasate sahasse  /  ciTuMti tatthA bahukUrakammA, jahA kaDaM kamma tahAsi
bhAre  // 26 //  chAyA - AtmAnA''tmAnamiha vaJcayitvA bhavAdhamAn pUrvaM
zatasahastrazaH  /  tiSThanti tatra bahukrUrakarmANaH, yathAkRtaM karma
tathA'sya bhArAH  //  anuvAda - isa manuSya jIvana meM nagaNya sukha ke lAlaca
meM jo dUsaroM ko vaMcita karate haiM-dhokhA dete haiM, saiMkar3oM hajAra bAra
lugadhaka-AkheTa jIvI jaise nimna sthAnoM meM janma prApta karate haiM, punazca
naraka meM jAte haiM  /  jisane pUrvajanma meM jaise karmoM kA AcaraNa kiyA hai
use Age vaisA hI phala milatA hai  /  TIkA - 'appeNa'ityAdi, 'iha'
asminmanuSyabhave 'AtmanA' paravaJcanapravRttena svata eva paramArthata AtmAnaM
vaJcayitvA 'alpena' stokena paropaghAtasukhenAtmAnaM vaJcayitvA bahuzo bhavAnAM
madhye adhamA. bhavAdhamAH -matsyabandhalubdhakAdInAM bhavAstAn pUrvajanmasu
zatasahastrazaH samanubhUya teSu bhaveSu viSayonmukhatayA sukRtaparAGmukhatvena
cAvApya mahAghorAtidArUNaM narAkAvAsaM 'tatra' tasminmanuSyAH 'krUrakarmANa:'
parasparato duHkhamadIrayantaH prabhUtaM kAlaM yAvattiSThanti, atra kAraNamAha
'yathA' pUrvajanmasa yAhAbhatenAdhyavasAyena jaghanyajaghanya tarAdinA katAni
karmANi 'tathA' tenaiva prakAreNa 'se' tasya nArakajantoH 'bhArA' vedanAH
prAdurbhavanti svataH parata ubhayato veti, tathAhimAMsAdAH
svamAMsAnyevAgnipratApya bhakSyante, tathA mAMsarasapAyino nijapUyarUdhirANi
tapaptatrapUNi ca pAyyante, tathA matsyaghAtakalubdhakAdayastathaiva chidyAnte
bhidyante yAvanmAryanta iti, tathA'nRtabhASiNAM tatsmArayitvA
jihvAzcecchidyante, [granthAnam 4000] tathA pUrvajanmani
parakIyadravyApahariNAmaGgopAGgAyapahinte tathA pAradArikANAM vaSaNacchedaH
zAlmalyupagUhanAdi ca te kAryante evaM mahAparigrahArambhavatAM
krodhamAnamAyAlobhinAM ca janmAMtarasvakRtakrodhAdiduSkRta (324)

Page #353 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Hellish suffering is produced by remembering the study of hellish states, thus
it is well said that the karma of the beings is the burden they bear, as a
result of the fruition of that karma. ||26|| And another thing -  _Commentary -
In this human life, the man who is inclined to cheat others, cheats himself. He
deprives his soul by harming other beings for the sake of a little insignificant
pleasure. As a result, he takes birth in many births, hundreds of thousands of
times, as a fisherman who catches fish, a tiger hunter, and other low castes. In
those births, he is greedy for worldly pleasures. He acts contrary to virtuous
deeds. As a result, he goes to a terrible and very fearful hell. The beings in
hell, suffering from their karma, live for a long time, causing pain to each
other. The sutrakar reveals the reason for this, saying that the being who has
done heinous, hateful, and even more hateful karma in his previous birth, with
such determination, receives the same kind of pain and suffering. That pain is
also self-inflicted. It is also inflicted by others, and it is also both self-
inflicted and inflicted by others. Those who were meat-eaters in their previous
birth are fed their own flesh cooked in fire. Those who drank meat juice in
their previous birth are given their own blood and pus to drink, and they are
also given molten lead to drink. The fish-killers and hunters of previous
births, who killed fish and deer, etc., are killed and cut in the same way.
Those who spoke falsely have their tongues cut off, reminding them of their past
deeds. Those who stole the wealth of others in their previous birth have their
limbs cut off. Those who were adulterers have their testicles cut off and are
made to embrace a thorny tree. Similarly, those who were great accumulators,
great hoarders, angry, proud, and deceitful are given the same kind of torture,
reminding them of all that. Therefore, it is rightly said that one has to suffer
the consequences of one's actions. _Commentary - The unrighteous people, having
earned sins, dwell in hell, which is devoid of desired and beloved things, and
is full of foul smell, bad touch, flesh and blood, etc. _Commentary - The
unrighteous, due to their unrighteous actions, having earned sins through the
doors of violence, falsehood, theft, etc., dwell in a foul-smelling place. What
kind of place is it? - They are devoid of objects of desire, beautiful things,
and various kinds of excellence. They dwell in hell, or they are polluted by
those who pollute them, such as mother and son. 325)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayana smAraNena tAdRgvidhameva du:khamutpAdyate, itikRtvA
suSThUcyate yathA vRttaM karma tAdRgbhUta eva teSAM tatkarmavipAkApAdito bhAra
iti  // 26 //  kiJcAnyat - _TIkArtha - isa manuSya jIvana meM jo puruSa dUsare
ko vaMcita karane meM-dhokhA dene meM pravRtta rahatA hai vaha apane Apako hI
vaMcita karatA hai-dhokhA detA hai  /  vaha thor3e se nagaNya sukha ke lAlaca se
anya prANiyoM kI hiMsA karatA huA apanI AtmA ko vaMcita karatA hai  /  usake
pariNAmasvarUpa vaha anekAneka bhava karatA huA saikar3oM hajAroM bAra machalI
pakar3ane vAle mallAha tathA pazu vadha karane vAle vyAghra-zikArI Adi nIca
jAtiyoM meM janma letA hai  /  una janmoM meM vaha sAMsArika bhoga viSayoM meM
lolupa rahatA hai  /  puNya kAryoM ke viparIta AcaraNa karatA hai  /  phalataH
vaha bar3e ghora aura atyanta bhayapura naraka meM jAtA hai  /  naraka meM
avasthita karmA prANI Apasa meM eka dUsare ke lie duHkha paidA karate haye
dIrghakAla taka nivAsa karate haiM  /  sUtrakAra isakA kAraNa prakaTa karate
huye kahate haiM ki jisa jIva ne pUrvajanma meM jaise adhyavasAya se pariNAma
meM jaghanya, ghRNAspada, tathA jaghanyatara usase bhI adhika ghRNAspada karma
kiye haiM, usa jIva ko isI taraha kI vedanA-pIr3A prApta hotI hai  /  vaha
vedanA svataH apane Apa bhI hotI hai  /  parataH-dUsaroM ke dvArA bhI hotI hai
tathA svataH evaM parataH donoM prakAra se bhI hotI hai  /  jo apane pahale ke
janma meM mA~sa bhakSI the, unako unakA hI mA~sa agni meM pakAkara khilAyA jAtA
hai  /  jo. pUrvajanma meM mA~sa rasa kA pAna karate the, unako unakA hI rakta
aura mavAda pilAyA jAtA hai tathA galAyA huA sIsA bhI pilAyA jAtA hai  /  pUrva
janma ke matsya ghAtImachaliyA~ mArane vAle aura lubdhaka-pazuoM kA zikAra
karane vAle jaise machalI aura hiraNa Adi ko mArate kATate the usI prakAra ve
mAre jAte haiM, kATe jAte haiM  /  jo asatya bhASaNa karate the, unheM vaha yAda
karAkara unakI jihvAeM kATa lI jAtI haiM  /  jo pahale ke janma meM dUsaroM ke
dhana kA apaharaNa karate the, unake aMga-upAMga kATa lie jAte haiM  /  jo
parastrI gAmI hote the, unake aNDakoSa kATa lie jAte haiM tathA unheM zAla
malini-ghora kaMTakAkIrNa vRkSa kA AliMgana karAyA jAtA hai  /  isI prakAra jo
mahA AraMbhi, mahAparigrahI, krodhI, abhimAnI tathA mAyAvI the, unako vaha saba
yAda karAte huye usI prakAra kI yAtanAyeM dI jAtI haiM  /  isalie yaha ThIka hI
kahA hai ki jisane jaisA karma kiyA hai usako vaisA hI phala bhoganA par3atA
hai| samajiNittA kalusaMaNajjA, ilehi kaMtehi ya vippahUNA  /  te dubbhigaMdhe
kasiNe ya phAse, kammovagA kuNime AvasaMti ||27||ttibemi|| chAyA - samA
kaluSamanA- iSTaiH kAntaizca viprahInAH  /  te durabhigandhe kRtsne'sparze
karmopagatA kuNime AvasantIti bravImi  //  anuvAda - anArya jana pApoM kA
upArjana kara unake phalasvarUpa naraka meM nivAsa karate haiM jo iSTaabhipsita
evaM priya padArthoM se rahita haiM, tathA durgandha maya azubha sparzayukta,
mA~sa evaM rakta Adi se pUrNa haiN| _TIkA - anAryA anArya
karmakAritvAddhiMsAnRtasteyAdibhirAzravadvAraiH 'kaluSaM' pApaM 'samaya''
azubhakarmopacayaM kRtvA 'te' krUrakarmANo 'durabhigandhe' AvasantIti saMkaGka,
kimbhUtAH ? - "iSTai" zabdAbhirviSayaiH 'kamanIyaiH' kAntairvividhaM prakarSeNa
hInA vipramuktA narake vasanti, yadivA-tadarthaM kaluSa samarjayanti
tairmAtAputra 325)

Page #354 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  The one who is freed from worldly attachments like
spouse, children, and other objects of desire, becomes solitary and dwells in
the hell called "Durabhigandha," which is more foul-smelling than a decaying
corpse. He is enveloped in complete and utterly inauspicious touch, a place of
constant anxiety and suffering. He is afflicted with the "kunime" (a state of
extreme suffering), his body filled with flesh, blood, pus, intestines, and
other impurities. He is surrounded by the most abominable sights and sounds, his
ears deafened by the cries of "Ha! Ha!" and the constant lamentations of "Oh,
how painful!" He dwells in this most wretched hell, surrounded by thirty-three
oceans, for as long as his lifespan. This is the end of the explanation. I speak
as before. ||27||  **Commentary:**  The unrighteous person indulges in
unrighteous actions. They consume the poisons of violence, falsehood, and theft,
accumulating immense negative karma. As a result, they become cruel and are
condemned to the foul-smelling hell.   How do these hellish beings exist? They
are devoid of all desirable objects, including pleasant sounds and loved ones.
They are separated from their parents, children, spouses, and all those for whom
they committed sins. They are alone, dwelling in a place that is more foul-
smelling than a decaying corpse. They are constantly tormented by the touch of
flesh, fat, blood, pus, intestines, and other impurities. They are surrounded by
the most repulsive sights and sounds, their ears deafened by the cries of "Ha!
Ha!" and the constant lamentations of "Oh, how painful!" They dwell in this most
wretched hell, surrounded by thirty-three oceans, for as long as their lifespan.
The word "iti" signifies the end of the explanation. "Bravimi" means "I speak,"
and it should be understood in the same way as before.  Thus ends the first
explanation of the hellish realm.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kalatrAdibhiH kAntaizca viSayairvipramuktA ekAkinaste
'durabhigandhe' kuthitakalevarAtizAyini narake 'kRtaste '
saMpUrNe'tyantAzubhasparze ekAntoMdvejanIye'zubha karmopagatA: 'kuNime 'tti
mAMsapezIrudhirapUyAntraphipphisakazmalAkule sarvAmedhyAdhame bIbhatsadarzane
hAhAravAkrandena kaSTaM mA tAvadityAdizabdabadhiritadigantarAle paramAdhame
narakAvAse A - samantAdutkRSTatastrayastriMzatsAgaropamANi yAvadyasyAM vA
narakapRthivyAM yAvadAyustAvad 'vasanti' tiSThanti, iti: parisamAptyarthe,
bravImIti pUrvavat  // 27 //  TIkArtha anArya puruSa anArya karmoM kA sevana
karate haiM ve hiMsA, asatya tathA corI Adi Azrava dvAroM kA sevana kara
atyadhika azubha karmo kA upacaya karate haiN| aisA kara ve krUrakarmI jIva
durgandhamaya naraka meM jAte haiM, nivAsa karate haiM  /  ve nArakIya jIva
kaise haiM ? ye batalAte haiM ki ve iSTa zabdAdi abhipsita viSayoM tathA priya-
manojJa padArthoM se rahita hokara naraka meM avasthita hote haiM athavA ve jIva
jina mAtA-pitA, putra-strI Adi ke nimitta pApa arjita karate haiM, unase rahita
hokara akele hI sar3e huye zava se bhI adhika durgandhayukta, atyadhika udvejaka
udvega janaka sparzayukta mA~sa, carabI, rudhira, mavAda - AMtra phiphphisa Adi
apavitra padArthoM se paripUrNa atyanta ghRNAjanaka tathA hAhAkAra zabda se
dizAoM ko baharA banA dene vAle atyanta adhama naraka meM utkRSTa adhika se
adhika taiMtIsa sAgaropam samayAvadhi taka nivAsa karate haiM  /  yahA~ iti
zabda samApti ke artha meM hai, bravImi bolatA hU~, yaha pahale kI jyoM yojanIya
hai  /  isa prakAra naraka vibhakti kA prathama uddezaka samApta huA  /  Bian
Bian Bian  326

Page #355 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second objective of the fifth study is being commenced. The first objective
has been stated. Now, the second objective is being stated. The connection
between them is this: in the subsequent objective, it has been stated what
actions cause beings to be born in hell and what their conditions are like.
Here, the same thing is being stated in a more specific way. Thus, in accordance
with the sūtra of this objective, which has been introduced, the sūtra should be
uttered with qualities like being free from errors, etc. That sūtra is this:
**"Atha avaram sāsayadukkha-dhamma, tam bhe pavakkhāmi jahātaheṇaṁ. Bālā jahā
dukkad-akamma-kārī, vedanti kammaiṁ purekadaiṁ."** (1)  **Commentary:**  "Atha"
means "furthermore" or "in addition to what has been said before." "Avaram"
means "another" or "different." "Sāsayadukkha-dhamma" means "the dharma of
eternal suffering." "Tam" refers to the "sāsayadukkha-dhamma." "Bhe" means "to
you" or "to all of you." "Pavakkhāmi" means "I will explain" or "I will tell
you." "Jahātaheṇaṁ" means "truthfully" or "as it is." "Bālā" means "foolish" or
"ignorant." "Jahā" means "just as" or "in the same way." "Dukkad-akamma-kārī"
means "those who do evil deeds." "Vedanti" means "they experience" or "they
suffer." "Kammaiṁ" means "their actions" or "their karma." "Purekadaiṁ" means
"those done in the past" or "those done in previous lives."  **Translation:**
"Furthermore, I will explain to you truthfully the dharma of eternal suffering.
Just as foolish people who do evil deeds experience the consequences of their
actions done in the past, so too will I explain to you the consequences of your
actions."  **Explanation:**  This verse is a continuation of the previous
discussion about hell. The speaker is now going to explain in detail the nature
of hell and the suffering that those who are born there experience. The speaker
uses the analogy of foolish people who do evil deeds and then suffer the
consequences of their actions. This is to illustrate that those who are born in
hell are also suffering the consequences of their past actions.  The speaker
emphasizes that he will explain the truth about hell without any embellishment
or exaggeration. He will not try to make it sound more pleasant or less painful
than it actually is. He will speak the truth, even if it is unpleasant.  The
speaker also uses the term "sāsayadukkha-dhamma" to describe hell. This term
literally means "the dharma of eternal suffering." This is a very important term
because it highlights the fact that hell is not a temporary state of suffering.
It is a state of eternal suffering.  The speaker is now going to explain in
detail the different types of hell and the suffering that those who are born
there experience. He will also explain how to avoid being born in hell.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  narakavibhakti adhyayanaM . dvitIya uddezakaH uktaH prathamoddezakaH,
sAmprataM dvitIyaH samArambhate-asya cAyamabhisambandhaH, ihAnantaroddezake yaiH
karmabhirjantavo narake pUtpadyante yAdRgavasthAzca bhavantyetatpratipAditam,
ihApi viziSTataraM tadeva pratipAdyate, ityaneva saMbandhe
nAyAtasyAsyoddezakasya sUtrAnugame askhalitAdiguNopetaM sUtramuccAraNIyaM,
taccedam - * pAMcave adhyayana kA dUsarA uddezaka prArambha kiyA jAtA hai  /
pahalA uddezaka kahA jA cukA hai  /  aba usase Age dUsarA uddezaka kahA jAtA hai
/  inakA paraspara sambandha yaha hai ki jina jina karmoM ke AcaraNa se prANI
naraka meM paidA hote haiM, aura vahA~ unakI jo dazA hotI hai, yaha pahale
uddezaka meM kahA gayA hai  /  aba isa dUsare uddezaka meM bhI vahI bAta
viziSTatara adhika vistAra ke sAtha pratipAdita kI jAtI hai  /  isa sambandha se
AyAta isa uddezaka ke sUtrAnugama meM askhalita Adi guNa pUrvaka sUtra kA
uccAraNa kiyA jAnA cAhie  /  vaha sUtra isa prakAra hai| ahAvaraM
sAsayadukkhadhamma, taM bhe pavakkhAmi jahAtaheNaM  /  bAlA jahA
dukkaDakammakArI, vedaMti kammAiM purekaDAiM  // 1 //  chAyA - athAparaM
zAzvaduHkhadharma, taM bhavatAM pravakSyAmi yAthAtathyena  /  bAlA yathA
duSkRtakarmakAriNo, vedayanti karmANi purAkRtAni  /  anuvAda - zrI sudharmA
svAmI, jambusvAmI Adi apane ante:vAsiyoM se kahate haiM aba maiM dUsare naraka
ke sambandha meM, tathA duSkRta karma karane vAle prANI jisa prakAra apane pApoM
kA phala bhogate haiM, isa sambandha meM batalAU~gA  /  TIkA - 'atha'
ityAnantayeM 'aparam' ityuktAdanyadvakSyAmItyuttareNa sambandhaH zazvadbhavatIti
zAzvataMyAvadAyustacca taduHkhaM ca zAzvataduHkhaM taddharmaH-svabhAvo
yasminyasya vA narakasya sa tathAtam, evambhUtaM nityaduH
khasvabhAvamakSinimeSamapi kAlamavidyamAnasukhalezaM 'yAthAtathyena'
yathAvyavasthitaM tathaiva kathayAmi, nAtrau pacAro'rthavAdo vA vidyata
ityarthaH, 'bAlAH' paramArthamajAnAnA viSayasukhalipsavaH sAmpratakSiNaH
karmavipAkamanapekSamANA 'yathA' yena prakAreNa duSTaM kRtaM duSkRtaM tadeva
karma-anuSThAnaM tena vA duSkRtena karma-jJAnAvaraNAdikaM taduSkRtakarma
tatkartuM zIlaM yeSA te duSkRtakarmakAriNaH ta evambhUtAH 'purAkRtAni'
janmAntarArjitAni karmANi yathA vedayanti tathA kathayiSyAmIti  // 12 //  yathA
pratijJAta mAha - TIkArtha - isa gAthA meM atha zabda anantarye-isake pazcAta-
isa artha meM prayukta huA hai  /  jo bAteM pahale kahI jA cukI hai, unase Age
kI dUsarI bAteM aba maiM kahU~gA, aisA sandarbha milA lenA cAhie  /  jo zAzvata
arthAt Ayuparyanta rahatA hai, use zAzvata kahA jAtA hai  /  jo naraka
svabhAvataH Ayuparyanta duHkha detA hai, use zAzvata duHkha dharma kahA jAtA hai
/  vaha narka prANiyoM ko sadaiva kaSTa detA rahatA hai  /  usameM eka
nimeSa:A~kha kI palaka jhapakane taka ke samaya ke lie sukha kA aMza taka bhI
nahIM milatA  /  aise naraka kA yathAvata rUpa meM jaisA vaha hai, vaisA varNana
karU~gA  /  upacAra yA arthavAda ke sAtha jarA bhI ghaTA bar3hAkara nahIM
kahU~gA  /  jo puruSa, bAla, paramArtha se anabhijJa haiM sAMsArika sukha lipsu
haiM, kevala vartamAna ko dekhate haiM, karma vipAka-karmaphala 327)

Page #356 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:  The wretched beings who do not
contemplate on the Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra and indulge in the conduct of the
defiled karmas like Jnanavaraniya, I shall describe how they experience the
fruits of the evil deeds accumulated in their previous births in the Naraka
(hell).  With their hands and feet bound, they disembowel their abdomen with
razor-sharp weapons. Seizing the mutilated body of the child-like ignorant
Narakiya (hellish) beings, they forcefully extract the firm skin from their
backs.  The extremely unrighteous Devas, due to the fruition of such karmas,
bind the hands and feet of those Narakiyas and lacerate their abdomen with
various kinds of weapons. Similarly, they severely beat and injure the bodies of
other ignorant Narakiya beings, who are incapable of any resistance like a
child, and then forcefully peel off the skin from their backs.  Further, they
uproot the arms of those beings from the roots, and insert hot iron balls into
their wide-open mouths. In secrecy, they remind them of their past misdeeds, and
then mercilessly whip their backs, inflicting grievous wounds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram kA vicAra nahIM karate, jJAnAvaraNIya Adi dUSita karmoM
kA AcaraNa karate haiM ve pApiSTha prANI apane pUrva janmoM meM arjita-saMcita
duSkarmoM kA phala jisa prakAra naraka meM bhogate haiM, vaha batalAU~gA  /  /
hatthehi pAehi ya baMdhiUNaM, udaraM vikattaMti khurAsiehiM  /  giNhitu bAlassa
vihattu dehaM, vaddhaM thiraM piTThato uddharaMti  // 2 //  chAyA - hasteSu
pAdeSu ca badhdhavA, udaraM vikarttayanti kSuraprAsibhiH  /  gRhItvA bAlasya
vihataM dehaM badhra sthiraM paSThata uddharanti  //  anuvAda - paramAdhAmI deva
nArakIya jIvoM ke hAtha aura paira bAMdhakara ustare tathA talavAra dvArA unake
peTa cIra DAlate haiM  /  ajJAnamaya nArakIya prANiyoM ke zarIra ko lAThI Adi
prahAroM dvArA burI taraha mArate-pITate haiM  /  phira unheM pakar3akara pITha
kI camar3I ko udher3a DAlate haiN| TIkA - paramAdhArmikAstathAvidhakarmodayAt
krIDAyamAnAH tAnnArakAn hasteSu pAdeSu baddhvodaraM 'kSura
prAsibhiH'nAnAvidhairAyudhavizeSaiH vikartayanti'vidArayanti, tathA parasya
bAlasyevAkiJcitkaratvAdvAlasya lakuTAdibhirvividhaM 'hataM' pIDitaM dehaM
gRhItvA 'vardha' carmazakalaM 'sthiraM' balavat 'pRSThataH' pRSThideze
'uddharanti' vikartayantyevamagrataH pArzvati zceti  // 2 //  apica - TIkArtha -
pUrva gAthA meM jo sUcita kiyA gayA hai tadanusAra yahA~ varNana karate haiM  /
tathAvidha karmodaya ke kAraNa auroM ko kaSTa dene meM krIr3A, evaM manovinoda
kI jyoM sukha mAnane vAle paramAdhAmI deva una nArakIya prANiyoM ke hAtha paira
bAMdhakara teja dhAra yukta ustare evaM talavAra Adi aneka prakAra ke zastroM
dvArA unake peTa cIra DAlate haiM  /  eka bAlaka ke samAna kucha bhI pratikAra
karane meM jo samartha nahIM hai aise anya nArakIya jIvoM ke zarIra ko lAThI Adi
dvArA ve paramAdhAmI deva taraha-taraha se mArate pITate haiM phira unheM
pakar3akara balapUrvaka unakI pITha kI camar3I khIMca lete haiM, udher3a DAlate
haiM  /  isI prakAra pArzvabhAga tathA agra bhAga kI camar3I bhI udher3a DAlate
haiN| bAhU pakattaMti ya mUlato. sa, thUlaM viyAsaM muhe AihaMti  /  ' rahaMsi
juttaM sarayaMti bAlaM, Arusya vijhaMti tudeNa piDhe  // 3 //  chAyA - vAhUn
prakartayanti samUlatastasya, sthUlaM vikAze mukhe Adanti  /  rahasi yuktaM
smarayaMti bAla ArUSya tudena pRSThe vidhyanti  //  anuvAda - narakapAla
nArakIya jIvoM kI bhujAoM ko jar3a se ukhAr3a DAlate haiM tathA unakA mukha
phAr3akara usameM lohe ke tapAye hue garama gole DAlakara unheM jalAte haiM,
pIr3ita karate haiM  /  unheM ve ekAnta meM le jAkara una dvArA pUrvAcarita
karmoM ko smaraNa karAte haiM, tathA una para niSkAraNa krodha karate hue unakI
pITha para cAbuka phaTakArate haiM, ghAyala kara DAlate haiM  /  328

Page #357 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Hell Division Study. • Commentary - 'They' (the Narakas) in the three hellish
earths, the Paramādhmī Devas, and the other Narakas, from the bottom four,
originally, 'cut off' their arms, sever them, and 'in the mouth', with a gaping
mouth, 'throw' large, hot, fiery balls, burning them from all sides. And 'in
secret', alone, 'fittingly', appropriately, according to the suffering they have
created, they remind them of their past lives, 'the child' (the Naraka), for
example, at the time of being given hot lead, they say, "You were a drunkard,"
and at the time of eating their own flesh, they say, "You were a meat-eater,"
thus reminding them of their past actions, they torment them. And 'without
reason', they become 'angry', and with a whip, etc., they strike the Naraka on
the back, making him subject to their will. ||3|| Also - _Commentary Meaning –
In the three hellish earths, the Paramādhmī Devas cut off the arms of the
Narakīya beings from the root, sever them, and the Narakīya beings who live
there also cut off each other's arms from the root, sever them. In the bottom
four hellish earths, the Narakīya beings only cut off each other's arms from the
root, sever them. The Paramādhmī Devas open the mouths of the Narakas and throw
large, hot, fiery balls into them, burning them. They take those Narakīya beings
to a secluded place and remind them of the actions they performed in their past
lives, the results of which they are experiencing, the torments they are
undergoing. When they give them hot lead to drink, they say, "Remember, you used
to drink a lot of alcohol." When they feed them their own flesh, they say,
"Remember, you used to eat a lot of meat." Thus, they remind them of their past
actions, in accordance with their suffering, and torment them. Without any
reason, they become angry and strike those helpless Narakīya beings on their
backs with whips. This, like a burning flame, they walk on the earth. . They are
burning, they cry out in pain, they are driven by arrows, they are bound in the
hot yoke. ||4|| Shadow - This is like a burning flame, they walk on the earth.
They are burning, they cry out in pain, they are driven by arrows, they are
bound in the hot yoke. || Translation - Walking on the earth, flooded with fire,
like a burning ball of iron, with a blazing flame, the Narakīya beings burn,
they cry out in pain. They are driven by whips. Like oxen bound in a hot yoke,
they cry out, they scream. Commentary - Like a hot iron ball, blazing with fire,
they walk on that burning earth, they are burning, they 'cry out in pain', they
roar, and they are bound in hot yokes, like oxen, they are struck with whips,
etc., they cry out. ||4|| Also - Commentary Meaning - Walking on the hellish
earth, like a burning, blazing, fire-flooded earth, like a heated iron ball, the
Narakīya beings burn. They cry out in pain, with a sorrowful, pitiful voice.
Like oxen yoked in a hot yoke, they are driven by whips and cry out, scream. 329

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM. * TIkA - 'se' tasya nArakasya tisRSa narakapRthivISu
paramAdhArmikA aparanArakAzca adhastanacatasRSu cAparanArakA eva mUlata
ArabhyabAhUn 'prakartayanti' chindanti tathA 'mukhe' vikAzaM kRtvA 'sthUlaM'
bRhattaptAyogolAdikaM prakSipanta AsamantAddahanti  /  tathA 'rahasi' ekAkinaM
yuktam' upapannaM yuktiyuktaM svakRtavedanAnurUpaM tatkRtajanmAntarAnuSThAnaM
taM 'bAlam' ajhaM nArakaM smArayanti, tadyathA-taptatrapupAnAvasare
madyapastvamAsIstathA svamAMsabhakSaNAvasare pizitAzItvamAsIrityevaM
duHkhAnurUpamanuSThAnaM smArayantaH kadarthayanti, tathA-niSkAraNameva 'ArUSya'
kopaM kRtvA pratodAdinA pRSThadeze taM nArakaM paravazaM vidhyantIti  // 3 //
tathA - _TIkArtha - tIna naraka bhUmiyoM meM paramAdhAmI deva nArakIya jIvoM kI
bhujAoM ko jar3a se kATa DAlate haiM, chinna bhinna kara DAlate haiM tathA vahA~
rahane vAle nAraka jIva bhI paraspara eka dUsare kI bhujAoM ko jar3a se kATa
dete haiM, chinna bhinna kara dete haiM  /  nIce kI cAra naraka bhUmiyoM meM
rahane vAle nAraka jIva hI paraspara eka dUsare kI bhujAoM ko jar3a se kATate
rahate haiM, chinna bhinna karate rahate haiM  /  paramAdhAmI deva nArakoM ke
mu~ha phADakara unameM tape hue garma lohe ke bar3e-bar3e gole DAlate haiM,
jalAte haiM  /  una nArakIya jIvoM ko ekAMta meM le jAkara una dvArA kiye gae
pUrvajanma ke karmoM ko una ajJAniyoM ko yAda karAte haiM, jinake phalasvarUpa
ve unake lie vedanA utpanna kara rahe haiM, yAtanAeM de rahe haiM  /  ve jaba
unheM garama kiyA huA sIsA pilAte haiM, taba kahate haiM ki yAda karo, tuma
bahuta madyapAna karate the  /  unhIM ke zarIra kA mAMsa unheM khilAte samaya
kahate haiM ki yAda karo, tuma bahuta mAMsa khAte the  /  yoM unake duHkhoM ke
anurUpa una nAraka jIvoM ko pUrvajanma meM una dvArA kiye gae karmoM ko yAda
dilAte hue ve unheM kaSTa dete haiM niSkAraNa hI kruddha hokara una paravaza
nAraka jIvoM kI pITha para kor3e mArate haiM  /  ayaMva tattaM jaliyaMsajoI,
taUvamaM bhUmimaNukkamaMtA  /  . te DajjhamANA kaluNaM thaNaMti, usucoiyA ttatta
jugesu juttA  // 4 //  chAyA - ayaiva jvalitAM sajyotistadupamAM
bhUmimanukrAmantaH  /  te dahyamAnAH karuNaM stananti iSucoditAstaptayugeSu
yuktAH  //  anuvAda - tape hue lohe ke gole ke samAna prajvalita jyotiyukta agni
se AplAvita bhUmi para calate hue nArakIya jIva jalate jAte haiM, karuNa
krandana karate jAte haiM  /  cAbuka mArakara calAye jAte haiM  /  tapta jue meM
jur3e baila kI jyoM ve nArakIya jIva cIkhate, cillAte haiM  /  TIkA -
taptAyogolakasannibhAM jvalitajyotibhUtAMtadevaMrUpAM tadupamA vA bhUmim
'anukrAmantaH' tAM jvalitAM bhUmiM gacchantaste dahyamAnAH 'karuNa' dIvisvaraM
'stanaMti' rAraTanti tathA tapteSu yugeSu yuktA galibalIvardA iva iSuNA
pratodAdirUpeNa vidhyamAnAH stanantIti  // 4 //  anyacca - TIkArtha - paritapta
lohe ke gole ke sadRza jalatI prajvalita, agni AplAvita pRthvI ke tulya naraka
bhUmi para calate hue nArakIya prANI jalate jAte haiM  /  karuNa, dIna svara se
rUdana karate haiM  /  tapta garma jue meM jote hue baila kI jyoM cAbuka mAra-
mAra kara calane ke lie prerita kiye jAte haiM aura rote cIkhate haiN| 329

Page #358 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states:  **Verse 5:**  The **Balas** (souls
devoid of discrimination) are forcibly made to traverse the **Lohpath** (path of
burning iron), a scorching earth, slippery with blood and pus. They are driven
forward like cattle, prodded with sticks, as they approach the **Abhidurg**
(impenetrable fortress).  **Commentary:**  The **Naraka-palas** (hell-keepers)
force the **Balas** to walk on the burning **Lohpath**, a scorching earth,
slippery with blood and pus. They are driven forward like cattle, prodded with
sticks, as they approach the **Abhidurg** (impenetrable fortress). The **Balas**
are unable to move freely and are forced to endure this torment.  **Verse 6:**
Those who enter the **Sampragadh** (intense suffering) are struck by falling
stones. The **Santapini** (hell of torment) is a place of long duration, where
the **Asadhu-karma** (evil deeds) are burned away.  **Commentary:**  The
**Narakas** (hell-bound beings) are unable to move freely in the **Sampragadh**
(intense suffering) and are struck by falling stones. The **Santapini** (hell of
torment) is a place of long duration, where the **Asadhu-karma** (evil deeds)
are burned away. The **Narakas** suffer greatly in this hell, enduring intense
pain for a long time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram bAlA balA bhUmimaNukkamaMtA, pabijjalaM lohapahaM ca
tatraM  /  jaMsI'bhiduggaMsi pavajamANA, peseva daMDehiM purAkaraMti  // 5 //
chAyA - bAlAH balAd bhUmi manukrAmyamANAH picchilAM lohapathamivattaptAm  /  _
yasmin abhidurge prapadyamAnAH preSyAniva daNDaiH puraH kurvanti  //  anuvAda -
paramAdhAmI deva vivekazUnya nArakIya jIvoM ko prajvalita lauhapatha-lohe ke
mArga ke samAna paritapta bhUmi para nArakIya jIvoM ko balapUrvaka calAte haiM
/  khUna aura mavAda jahA~ kIcar3a kI jyoM phaile hue haiM, vahA~ unheM calane
hetu bAdhya karate haiM  /  jahA~ kisI durgama sthAna kI ora jAte hue nArakIya
prANI rukane lagate haiM, taba ve narakapAla baila kI jyoM DaMDe Adi se mArakara
unheM Age calAte haiM  /  TIkA - 'bAlA' nirvivekinaH
prajvalitalohapathamivataptAM bhuvaM 'pavijjalaM' ti rUdhirapUyAdinA picchilAM
balAdanicchantaH 'anukramyamANAH' preryamANAvirasamArasanti, tathA 'yasmin'
abhidurge kumbhIzAlmalyAdau prapadyamAnA narakapAlacoditA na samyaggacchanti,
tataste kupitAH paramAdhArmikAH 'preSyAniva' karmakarAniva balIvardhavadvA
daNDairhatvA pratodanena pratudya 'purataH' agrataH kurvanti, na te svecchayA
gantuM sthAtuM vAlabhanti iti  // 5 //  kiJca - TIkArtha - narakapAla viveka
zUnya nArakIya prANiyoM ko prajavalita lauhamaya patha ke sadRza garma tathA
kIcar3a kI jyoM atyadhika phaile hue khUna aura mavAda se cikanI bhUmi para
nArakoM ko unakI icchA na hote hue balapUrvaka calAte haiM, usa bhUmi para
calate hue nArakIya prANI burI taraha AvAjeM karate haiM, cillAte haiM  /
paramAdhAmI deva atyanta viSama kumbhI aura zAlmalI Adi jisa naraka meM jAne
hetu prerita karate haiM, jaba ve usa bhUmi para acchI taraha nahIM calate haiM,
taba paramAdhAmI deva una para kruddha hokara naukara kI jyoM yA baila kI jyoM
DaMDe va cAbuka mAra-mArakara unheM Age calAte haiM, ve nArakIya na to apanI
icchA se kahIM Age jA pAte haiM aura na kahIM ruka pAte haiN| te saMpagADhaMsi
pavajamANA, silAhi hammaMti nipAtiNIhiM  /  saMtAvaNI nAma ciradvitIyA,
saMtappatI jattha asAhukammA  // 6 //  chAyA - te sampragADhaM prapadyamAnAH
zilAbhirhanyante niyAtinIbhiH  /  saMtApanI nAma cirasthitikA santapyate
yatrAsAdhukarmA  //  anuvAda - atyanta pragADha gaharI pIr3A se yukta narakagata
prANI sAmane se giratI huI patthara kI zilAoM . se Ahata pratihata hote haiM  /
kumbhI nAmaka naraka meM gaye hue jIvoM kI sthiti bahuta lambe samaya kI hotI
hai| pApiSTha jIva cirakAla taka vahA~ rahate hue saMtapta hote rahate haiN|
TIkA 'te' nArakAH 'sampragADha' miti bahuvedanamasahyaM narakaM mArga vA
prapadyamAnA gantuM sthAtuM vA tatrAzaknuvanto'bhimukhapAtinIbhiH
zilAbhirasurairhanyante, tathA santApayatIti santApanI-kumbhI sA ca cirasthitikA
tagato'sumAn prabhUtaM kAlaM yAvadativedanAgrasta Aste yatra ca 'santapyate'
pIDyate'tyartham 'asAdhukarmA' janmAntarakRtAzubhAnuSThAna iti  // 6 //  tathA -
330

Page #359 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Study of Hellish Torments - Commentary  Those who have fallen into the
unbearable, painful hell, or any path leading there, are unable to escape or
endure it. They are struck by stones hurled by Asuras. The torment that afflicts
beings on all sides is called **Santapini**, which is the **Kumbhi hell**. This
state lasts for a long time, meaning that a being who has gone to Kumbhi hell
suffers extreme torment for a long period. A being who has committed sins in a
previous life suffers greatly in Kumbhi hell.  **Verse 7:**  **Text:** *Kandu-su
pakkhipp panayati balam, tato-pi daddha pun uppayant. Te uddhakaehi panjamaana,
avrehi khajanti sanapphaehi.*  **Translation:** They throw the beings into the
Kumbhi hell, which is like a ball, and roast them. Then, they jump up like
roasted chickpeas. The **Drona** crows peck at them from above, and when they
try to escape, lions and tigers devour them.  **Commentary:** The hell guards
throw the unfortunate beings into the Kumbhi hell, which is shaped like a ball,
and roast them. Then, they jump up from the roasting place like roasted
chickpeas. The **Drona** crows with their crooked bodies peck at them from
above. When they try to escape, they are devoured by lions, tigers, and other
beasts.  **Verse 8:**  **Text:** *Samusiyam naam vidhumathaanam, jam
soyattattakaluunam thananti. Ahosiram katu vigattiuunam, ayamva satthehi
samosaventi.*  **Translation:** There is a smokeless fiery place in hell called
**Samusiyam**, where the tormented beings cry out in sorrow. The **Paramatma**
gods lower their heads and cut their bodies into pieces with iron weapons.
**Commentary:** The **Samusiyam** is a place in hell that resembles a pyre. It
is smokeless and fiery. The tormented beings cry out in sorrow when they reach
this place. The **Paramatma** gods lower their heads and cut their bodies into
pieces with iron weapons.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM TIkArtha - atyanta vedanAmaya asahya naraka meM yA
vahA~ ke kisI mArga meM gae hue, vahA~ se haTa pAne meM tathA vahA~ Tika pAne
meM asamartha hote haiM  /  asuroM dvArA sAmane se DAlI jAtI zilAoM se pra hata
hote haiN| jo prANiyoM ko cAroM ora se saMtApa detI hai-saMtapta karatI hai use
santApanI kahA jAtA hai, vaha kumbhI naraka hai, vaha sthiti bar3e samaya kI
hai, arthAta usa kumbhI naraka meM gayA huA prANI dIrghakAla taka vahA~
atyadhika yAtanAeM bhogatA rahatA hai  /  pUrva janma meM jisane pApa kiye ho
vaisA prANI kumbhI naraka meM jAkara atyanta tApa se pIDita hotA rahatA hai  /
kaMdUsu pakkhippa paMyati bAlaM, tatopi daDDhA puNa uppayaMti  /  . te
uDDhakAehiM pakhajamANA, avarehiM khajaMti saNapphaehiM  // 7 //  chAyA -
kandusu prakSipya pacanti bAlaM tato'pi dagdhAH punarutpatanti  /  te
UrdhvakAryaiH prakhAdyamAnA aparaiH khAdyante sanakhapadaiH  //  anuvAda -
narakapAla vivekazUnya nArakIya jIvoM ko kanduka geMda ke se AkAra se yukta
kumbhI nAmaka naraka meM DAla dete haiM, pakAte haiM, phira ve vahA~ se bhUne
jAte hue cane kI taraha uchalakara Upara jAte haiM, jahA~ droNa kAka unheM cocoM
se mAra-mArakara khAte haiM, jaba ve bacane ke lie dUsarI ora jAte haiM to zera
bAgha Adi unheM khAne lagate haiN| _TIkA - taM 'bAlaM' varAkaM nArakaM kunduSu
prakSipya narakapAlAH pacanti, tataH pAkasthAnAt te dahyamAnAzcaNakA iva
bhRjyamAnA UrdhvaM patantyutpatanti, te ca UrdhvamutpatitAH 'uDDhkAehiM' ti
droNaiH kAkairvaikriyaiH 'prakhAdyamAnA' bhakSyamANA anyato naSTAH santo'paraiH
'saNapphaehiM' ti siMhavyAghrAdibhiH 'khAdyante' bhakSyante iti  / 7 /  /  kiJca
TIkArtha - narakapAla vivekazUnya abhAge nArakIya jIva ko kanduka jaise AkAra
yukta naraka meM DAla dete haiM, pakAte haiM, cane ke sadRza vahA~ pakate hue ve
jIva vahA~ se Upara uchala jAte haiM, ve Upara uchale hue vaikriya zarIra yukta
droNa, kAka dvArA khAye jAte haiM  /  vahA~ se bacane hetu jaba dUsarI ora jAte
haiM to zera bAgha Adi jantuoM dvArA ve khAye jAte haiM  /  samUsiyaM nAma
vidhUmaThANaM, jaM soyatattAkaluNaM thaNaMti  /  ahosiraM kaTu vigattiUNaM,
ayaMva satthehi samosaveMti  // 8 //  chAyA - samucchritaM nAmaM vidhUmasthAnaM,
yat zokataptAH karUNaM stananti  /  adhaH ziraH kRtvA vikAyovat zastraiH
khaNDazaH khaNDayanti  //  anuvAda - naraka meM U~cI citA ke sadRza nirdhUma
agnimaya sthAna hai, vahA~ gae hue nAraka.prANI zoka se saMtapta hokara karuNa
krandana karate haiM  /  paramAdhAmI deva unake siroM ko nIcA kara unake zarIra
ko kATate tathA lohe ke zastroM se use chinna-bhinna kara DAlate haiN| TIkA-
samyagucchritaM-citikAkRti, nAmazabdaHsambhAvanAyAM, sambhAvyante evaM vidhAni
narakeSu yAtanAsthAnAni, vidhUmasya-agneH sthAnaM vidhUmasthAnaM yatprApya
zokavitaptAH 'kakaNaM' dInaM 'stananti' AkrandantIti, tathA adhaH 331)

Page #360 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that the body is cut into pieces like a
piece of cloth with weapons, and they are destroyed piece by piece. (8)
**Commentary:** In hell, there is a place of fire without smoke, like a
cremation ground. The word "name" is used here in the sense of possibility. This
indicates that there are places of torture in hell. Having attained this
smokeless fiery place, the beings of hell are tormented with grief and cry out
in sorrow. The hell guardians lower their heads and cut their bodies into pieces
with iron weapons.  **Commentary:** In that hell, the beings with their bodies
torn apart are hung upside down, and they are eaten by birds with iron beaks.
The land of hell is called **Sanjeevani**, because even after suffering death-
like pain, the beings do not die there because their lifespan remains. The
lifespan of those who go to that hell is very long. The sinful beings are
constantly killed and injured there.  **Commentary:** In that hell, the beings
are hung upside down from pillars, with their arms above and their heads below,
like corpses. Their bodies are torn apart, and their skin is removed. These
hanging beings are eaten by crows and vultures with iron beaks. The hell
guardians cut them into pieces, or they cut each other into pieces. They are
boiled and fainted. Even though they experience extreme pain, they do not die.
Therefore, the land of hell is called **Sanjeevani**, like a life-giving
medicine, because a being who goes to hell, even if cut into pieces, does not
die because his lifespan remains. The lifespan of hell is said to be a maximum
of thirty-three oceans. This hell is of long duration. The sinful beings who go
there are killed and injured by maces and other weapons. They want to die from
the pain of hell, but even after being crushed, they do not die. Their bodies
and their pieces merge together like mercury. (332)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram ziraH kRtvA dehaM ca vikAyovat 'zastraiH'
tacchedanAdibhiH 'samosaveMti' tti khaNDazaH khaNDayanti  // 8 //  apica -
TIkArtha - naraka meM citA ke samAna eka dhUma zUnya agnimaya sthAna hai  /
yahAM nAma zabda sambhAvanA ke artha meM prayukta hai  /  isase yaha sUcita hotA
hai ki naraka meM aise yAtanA prada sthAna haiM  /  ukta nirdhUma agnimaya
sthAna ko prApta kara nArakIya jIva zoka se saMtapta ho jAte haiM, karuNa
krandana karate haiM  /  narakapAla unakA sira nIcA kara lohe ke hathiyAroM
dvArA unakI deha ko kATakara TakaDe-TakaDe kara DAlate haiN| samUsiyA tattha
visUNiyaMkA, pakkhIhiM khajaMti aomuhehiM  /  . saMjIvaNI nAma ciradvitIyA,
jaMsI payA hammai pAvaceyA  // 9 //  chAyA - samucchrita statra vizUNitAGgA
pakSibhiH khAdyante'yomukhaiH  /  saMjIvanI nAma cirasthitikA, yasyAM prajAH
hanyante pApacetasaH  //  anuvAda - usa naraka meM nIcA mu~ha karake laTakAe hue
tathA zarIra kI camar3I ukher3e hue nArakIya prANI lauhamaya mukhayukta athavA
lohe jaisI tIkSNa cocoM se yukta pakSiyoM dvArA khAye jAte haiM  /  naraka kI
bhUmi saMjIvanI kahI jAtI hai, kyoMki maraNAntika kaSTa pAkara bhI prANI vahA~
Ayu zeSa rahane ke kAraNa marate nahIM haiM  /  usa naraka meM gaye hue prANiyoM
kA AyuSya bahuta lambA hotA hai  /  pApI jIva vahA~ hata pratihata hote rahate
haiN| TIkA - 'tatra' narake stambhAdau UrdhvavAhavo'dhaH ziraso vA
zvapAkairbastavallambitA santaH 'visUNiyaMga 'tti utkRttAGgA apagatatvacaH
pakSibhiH ayomukhaiH' brajacaJcubhiH kAkagRddhAdibhirbhakSyante tadevaM te
nArakA narakapAlApAditaiH parasparakRtaiH svAbhAvikairvA chinnA-bhinnAH kvathitA
mUrchitAH santo vedanAsamudghAtagatA api santo na mriyante ato vyapadizyate
saJjIvanIvat saJjIvanIjIvitadAtrI narakabhUmiH na tatra gataH khaNDazazchinno'pi
mriyate svAyuSi satIti, sA ca cirasthitikotkRSTatastrayastriMzat
yAvatsAgaropamANi, yasyAM ca prAptAH prajAyanta iti prajAHprANina: pApacetaso
hanyante mudgarAdibhiH, narakAnubhAvAcca mumUrSavo'pyatyantapiSTA apina
mriyante, apitu pAradavanmilantIti  /  /  //  apica - TIkArtha - usa naraka meM
cAMDAla khaMbhe Adi meM Upara bhujAeM evaM nIce mastaka kara murde zarIra kI
taraha laTakA dete haiM, camar3I udher3a dete haiM  /  una laTakate jIvoM ko
bajramaya cauMcayukta kAka aura giddha Adi pakSI khAte haiM  /  narakapAla unakA
chedana-bhedana karate haiM athavA paraspara ve eka dUsare kA chedana-bhedana
karate haiM, UbAle jAte haiM, mUrcchita ho jAte haiM  /  atyadhika vedanA kA
anubhava karate hue bhI unake prANa nahIM chUTate  /  isalie naraka bhUmi
saMjIvanI auSadhi kI taraha jIvanapradA kahI jAtI hai kyoMki naraka meM gayA huA
prANI Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara die jAne para bhI Ayu ke zeSa rahane ke kAraNa prANa
nahIM chor3atA, maratA nahIM  /  naraka kI Ayu utkRSTaadhika se adhika taiMtIsa
sAgaropama kAla parimita kahI gaI hai  /  yo naraka cirakAlika sthiti yukta hai
/  vahA~ gaye hue pApiSTha prANI mudgara Adi dvArA Ahata pratihata kiye jAte
haiM, naraka kI pIr3A se becaina hokara ve maranA cAhate haiM kintu atyadhika
pIsa diye jAne para bhI unheM mauta nahIM AtI  /  ve va unake zarIra ke khaNDa
pArada kI taraha paraspara mila jAte haiM  /  (332

Page #361 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hellish Torment: A Translation of Jain Text  **Verse 10:**  The denizens of
hell are pierced with sharp, fiery spears, like a captured beast. They cry out
in pain, their suffering is twofold, both internal and external.
**Commentary:**  The guardians of hell, with their fiery, ethereal spears,
pierce the souls of the damned. They are like captured animals, helpless and at
the mercy of their tormentors. The damned, though pierced, do not die. They only
cry out in anguish, their suffering is unending. They are devoid of joy, both
within and without, and experience only pain.  **Verse 11:**  There is a place
of torment, always burning, where a fire burns without fuel. The wicked are
bound there, their cries echoing, their suffering prolonged.  **Commentary:**
There is a place of torment, always burning, where a fire burns without fuel.
This place is vast and terrible. The wicked, bound by their past deeds, are
forced to endure this torment. They cry out in anguish, their suffering
unending.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM tikkhAhiM sUlAhi nivAyayaMti, vasogayaM sAvayayaM va
laddhaM  /  te sUlaviddhA kaluNaM thaNaMti, egaMtadukkhaM duhao gilANA  // 10 //
chAyA - tIkSNAbhiH zUlAbhirnipAtayanti vazaMgataM zvApadamiva labdham  /  te
zUlaviddhAH karuNaM stananti, ekAntaduHkhAH dvidhA glAnAH  //  anuvAda -
paramAdhAmI deva adhIna kiye hue jaMgalI jAnavara kI taraha nArakIya jIvoM ko
tIkSNa zUla se bIMdha DAlate haiM  /  bAhya rUpa meM aura bhItarI rUpa meM
sarvathA sukharahita ekAMtata: dukhita nArakIya jIva karuNa krandana karate haiM
/  TIkA - pUrvaduSkRtakAriNaM tIkSNAbhirayomayIbhiH zUlAbhiH narakapAlA
nArakamatipAtayanti kimiva ? vazamupagataM zvApadamiva kAlapRSThazUkarAdikaM
svAtantryeNa labdhavA kadarthayanti, te nArakAH zUlAdibhirviddhA api na
bhriyante, kevalaM 'karuNaM' dInaM stananti, na ca teSAM kazcitrANAyAlaM
tathaikAntena 'ubhayataH' antarbahizca 'glAnA' apagatapramodAH sadA
duHkhamanubhavantIti  // 10 //  tathA - TIkArtha - narakapAla a nArakIya jIvoM
ko jinhoMne pUrvajanma meM pApa kie haiM, tIkSNa lohe ke zUloM se bIMdha DAlate
haiM, kisakI taraha ? basa meM Ae hue-pakar3e hue yA adhIna kie hue hiraNa sUara
Adi kI taraha unheM prApta kara ve cAhe jaisI pIr3A dete haiM  /  zUla Adi dvArA
bIMdha die jAne para bhI nArakIya prANI marate nahIM  /  ve burI taraha cillAte
cIkhate rahate haiM, unheM koI nahIM bacA sktaa| ve bhItara va bAhara donoM ora
se sarvathA sukharahita haiM, sadA duHkha hI duHkha bhogate haiM  /  sayA jalaM
nAma nihaM mahaMtaM, jaMsI jalaMto agaNI akttttho| ciTuMti baddho bahukUrakammA,
arahassarA kei ciradvitIyA  // 11 //  chAyA - sadA jvalannAma nihaM mahat,
yasmin jvalanvanagnirakASThaH  /  tiSThanti baddhAH bahukrUrakarmANaH
arahasvarAH ke'pi cirasthitikAH  //  anuvAda - naraka meM eka aisA prANiyoM kA
ghAta sthAna hai, jo sadA prajjvalita rahatA hai, usameM kASTha ke binA hI
nirantara agni jalatI rahatI hai  /  pApiSThaprANI usameM bAMdha die jAte haiM
/  apane pApoM kA phala bhogane hetu dIrghakAla taka nivAsa karate haiM aura
Arta svara meM nirantara cillAte rahate haiN| TIkA - 'sadA' sarvakAlaM 'jvalat'
dedIpyamAnamuSNarUpatvAt sthAnamasti, nihanyante prANinaH karmavazagA yasmin
tanniham-AghAtasthAnaM tacca mahad'vistIrNaM yatrAkASTho'gnirvvalannAste,
tatraivambhUte sthAne bhavAntare bahukrUrakRtakarmANastadvipAkApAditena pApena
baddhAstiSThantIti, kimbhUtAH ?-'arahasvarA' bRhadAkrandazabdAH 'cirasthitikAH'
prabhUtakAlasthitaya iti  // 11 //  tathA - TIkArtha - eka aisA sthAna hai, jo
uSNa rUpa hone ke kAraNa sadA daidIpyamAna-prajjavalita rahatA hai| karma ke
vaza hue prANI jisameM mAre jAte haiM, use niha kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha prANiyoM
kA ghAta sthAna hai yA vadhya sthala hai  /  vaha atyanta vistRta hai  /  usameM
kASTharahita agni prajjavalita rahatI hai  /  jinhoMne apane pUrva jIvana 333

Page #362 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra, those beings who have committed extremely
cruel and merciless karmas reside there bound to experience the fruits of their
self-created sins. What are these beings like? They cry out loudly, scream and
shout. They scream and shout for a long time.   "Great pyres are kindled, and
they throw the sorrowful and compassionate beings into them. The wicked deeds
revolve there, like ghee falling into a flame." (12)  Commentary: The hell
guardians kindle great pyres and throw the hellish beings, who are sorrowful and
compassionate, into them. The wicked beings, having gone into the pyre, dissolve
there, just as ghee, falling into a flame, melts. Even though they dissolve,
they are not freed from their lives due to the influence of the hell. (12) This
is another type of hellish torment.  "There is always a burning place, a place
of intense suffering, which is obtained as a result of strong karmas. It is
inherently very painful. In that place, the hell guardians bind the hands and
feet of the hellish beings and beat them with clubs, as if they were enemies."
(13)  Commentary: "Always" means at all times. "Entire" means complete. "Place
of Dharma" means a hot place, which is obtained by strong karmas. "Brought
about" means caused, very painful Dharma - nature. In that place of torment,
they bind the hellish beings by their hands and feet and throw them there. They
beat them with clubs, as if they were enemies, in that very state. (13) And...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram meM atyanta krUratA pUrNa-nirdayatApUrNa karma kiye
haiM ve prANI svakRta pApa kA phala bhogane hetu baddha hokara vahA~ nivAsa
karate haiM  /  ve prANI kaise haiM ? ve jora-jora se krandana karate haiM,
cIkhate cillAte haiM  /  ve dIrghakAla paryanta cIkhate cillAte rahate haiN|
ciyA mahaMtIu samArabhittA, chubbhaMti te taM kaluNaM rasaMtaM  /  AvaTTatI
tattha asAhukammA, sappI jahA paDiyaM joimajhe  // 12 //  chAyA - citAH mahatIH
samArabhya, kSipanti te taM karuNaM rasantam  /  Avartate tatrAsAdhukarmA,
sarpiryathA patitaM jyotirmadhye  //  anuvAda - paramAdhAmI deva eka bahuta
bar3I citA banAkara usameM kSubdha aura karuNa krandana karate hue nArakIya
jIvoM ko pheMka dete haiM  /  Aga meM DAlA huA ghI jaise pighala jAtA hai, ve
prANI usameM galakara pAnI se ho jAte haiN| TIkA - mahatIzcitAH samArabhya
narakapAlAH 'taM' nArakaM virasaM 'karuNaM' dInamArasantaM tatra kSipanti, sa
cAsAdhukarmA 'tatra' tasyAM citAyAM gataH san 'Avartate' vilIyate yathA-'sarpiH'
ghRtaM jyotirmadhye patitaM dravIbhavatyevamasAvapi vilIyate, na ca tathApi
bhavAnubhAvAtprANairvimucyate  // 12 /  /  ayamaparonarakayAtanAprakAra TIkArtha
- narakapAla mahattI-vizAla citA banAkara karuNa krandana karate hue, dInatA ke
sAtha rote cIkhate hue nArakIya jIva ko usameM DAla dete haiM  /  vaha
asAdhukarmA pApI usa citA meM jAkara vilIna ho jAtA haigala jAtA hai  /  jaise
agni meM DAlA huA ghRta pighala jAtA hai, usI taraha vaha nArakIya prANI drava
rUpa meM pariNata ho jAtA hai kintu naraka ke prabhAva ke kAraNa vaha prANa
vimukta nahIM hotA-nahIM mrtaa| yaha nArakIya yAtanA kA dUsarA prakAra hai aisA
kahate haiM  /  sadA kasiNaM puNa dhammaThANaM, gADhovaNIyaM ihadukkhadhammaM  /
hatthehiM pAehi ya baMdhiUNaM, sattuvva DaMDehiM samArabhaMti  // 13 //  chAyA -
sadA kRtsnaM punardharmasthAnaM, gADhopanIta matiduHkhadharmam  /  hastaizca
pAdaizca badhdhavA zatru miva daNDaiH samArabhante  //  anuvAda - vahA~ sadA
prajjavalita rahane vAlA eka uSNa sthAna hai jo pragADha karmoM ke phalasvarUpa
prANiyoM ko prApta hotA hai  /  vaha svabhAva se hI atyanta duHkhaprada hai  /
usa sthAna meM nArakapAla nArakIya jIvoM ke hAtha paira bAMdhakara zatru kI jyoM
DaNDoM se unheM pITate haiM  /  TIkA - 'sadA' sarvakAlaM. 'kRtsnaM' sampUrNaM
punaraparaM 'dharmasthAnaM' uSNasthAnaM dRr3hanidhattanikAcittAvasthaiH
karmabhiH 'upanItaM' DhaukitamatIva duHkharUpo dharmaH-svabhAvo
yasmiMstadatiduHkhadharmaM tadaivambhUte yAtanAsthAne tamatrANaM nArakaMhasteSu
pAdeSu ca badhdhvA tatra prakSipanti, tathA tadavasthameva zatrumiva daNDaiH
'samArabhante' tADayanti  // 13 //  kiJca 334

Page #363 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hellish Torment: A Jain Perspective  There exists a place perpetually
engulfed in intense heat. This place, a consequence of accumulated karmic debts,
is bound by strong chains and inherently agonizing. The hell guardians, devoid
of any compassion, bind the tormented souls, who find no refuge, hand and foot,
and cast them into this sorrowful abyss. There, they are mercilessly beaten with
rods, treated like enemies.  They break the backs of the wretched souls with
clubs, and shatter their heads with iron hammers. Their mangled bodies are then
sliced open like planks of wood with heated saws.  The hell guardians, driven by
cruelty, break the backs of the unfortunate souls with clubs, and crush their
heads with iron hammers. The word "api" (also) implies that they also mutilate
other limbs. They then carve open the sides of their bodies with saws, and
further torment them with heated saws and force them to drink molten lead.  The
hell guardians, remembering the wicked deeds of the tormented souls from their
past lives, inflict pain upon them with arrows. They drive them like elephants,
using goads, forcing them to carry burdens. They force one, two, or three other
souls to mount their backs and walk, and in their rage, they strike their vital
points.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayana TIkArtha - vahA~ eka aisA sthAna hai jo sadaiva saba
ora se atyanta uSNa banA rahatA hai  /  vaha dRr3ha bandhana yukta nidhatta,
nikAcita karmoM ke phalasvarUpa prApta hotA hai  /  vaha svabhAva se hI
atyadhika klezaprada hai| narakapAla nArakIya jIvoM ko, jinheM kahIM bhI vahA~
zaraNa nahIM milatI, hAtha paira bAMdhakara aise duHkhapUrNa sthAna meM pheMka
dete haiM, DAla dete haiM aura vahA~ usa avasthA meM unheM duzmana kI taraha
DaNDoM se pITate haiM  /  bhaMjaMti bAlassa vaheNa puTTI, sIsaMpi bhiMdaMti
aoghaNehiM  /  te bhinna dehA phalagaMva tacchA, tattAhiM ArAhiM NiyojayaMti  //
14 //  chAyA - bhaJjanti bAlasya vyathena pRSThaM, zIrSamapi bhindantya
yodhanena  /  te bhinna dehAH phalakamiva taSTA staptAbhirArAbhirniyojyante  //
anuvAda - narakapAla laTThI Adi se mAra mAra kara ajJAnI nArakIya prANI kI pITha
tor3a dete haiM  /  lohe ke hathoDe mAra mAra kara unakA mastaka chinna bhinna
kara dete haiM-phor3a DAlate haiN| unake cUra-cUra hue zarIra ko ve tapAye hue
lohe ke Are se kATha kI taraha cIra DAlate haiN| TIkA - 'bAlasya' varAkasya
nArakasya vyathayatIti vyatho-lakuTAdiprahArastena pRSThaM bhaJjayanti'
moTayanti, tathA ziro'pyayomayena ghanena 'bhidaMnti' cUrNayanti,
apizabdAdanyAnyapyaGgopAGgAni drughaNaghAtaizcUrNayanti 'te' nArakA 'bhinna
dehAH' cUrNitAGgopAGgA phalakamivobhAbhyAM pArvAbhyAM krakacAdinA 'avataSTAH'
tanUkRtAH santastaptAbhirArAbhiH pratudyamAnAstaptatrapupAnAdike karmaNi
'viniyojyante' vyApAryanta iti  // 14 //  kiJca - TIkArtha - narakapAla
pIr3Aprada laTThI Adi ke prahAra dvArA pITa-pITakara abhAge nArakIya prANI kI
kamara tor3a dete haiM  /  lohe ke hathor3e se mAra mArakara usakA sira phor3a
DAlate haiM-cUra-cUra kara dete haiM  /  yahA~ prayukta api zabda dvArA yaha
saMketika hai ki ve nArakIya jIva ke dUsare aMga upAMga bhI chinna-bhinna kara
DAlate haiM  /  Are dvArA unake zarIra ke donoM pArzva cIrakara tarAza diye jAte
haiM phira unheM garma Are dvArA aura pIr3A dI jAtI hai tathA sIsA Adi pIne hetu
majabUra kiyA jAtA hai  /  abhimuMjiyA rUdda asAhukammA, usucoiyA hatthivahaM
vahati  /  eMgaM duruhittu duve tato vA, Arussa vijhaMti kakANao se  // 15 //
chAyA - abhiyojya raudrasAdhukarmaNaH, iSucoditAn hastivahaM vAhayanti  /  _
ekaM samArohya dvau trInvA, AruSya vidhyanti marmANi tasya  //  anuvAda -
narakapAla pApakarmA nArakIya jIvoM ke pUrvajanma meM una dvArA kiye gaye
azubhakarmoM ko yAda karAkara unheM bANa ke prahAra se pIr3ita karate haiM  /
jaise bhAra Dhone ke lie aMkuza mAra-mArakara hAthI ko calAyA jAtA hai vaisA hI
ve unake sAtha karate haiM  /  unakI pITha para eka yA do yA tIna dUsare
nArakIya prANI ko biThAkara unheM calane ko majabUra karate haiM, tathA kruddha
hokara unake marmasthAnoM para coTeM lagAte haiM  /   /  TIkA -
raudrakarmaNyaparanArakahananAdike abhiyujya' vyApArya yadivA janmAntarakRtaM
"raudraM"sattvopaghAtakAryam 'abhiyujya' smArayitvA asAdhUni-azobhanAni
janmAntarakRtAni karmANi-anuSThAnAni yeSAM te tathA tAn (335

Page #364 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Chapter 15**  The Naraka-palas, driven by the
desire to inflict pain, force the Narakas to carry burdens, just as elephants
are used to carry loads. They mount them and make them carry burdens, or they
make them carry heavy loads, just as elephants carry heavy burdens. This is an
example, and the same applies to camels and other animals being used to carry
burdens. The text explains how they make them carry burdens: they mount one,
two, or three Narakas and make them carry the load. If the Narakas are unable to
carry the load due to its weight, the Naraka-palas become angry and beat them
with whips and other instruments. They pierce the Narakas' vital points, causing
them great pain.  **Chapter 16**  The Naraka-palas, driven by their evil deeds,
force the Narakas, who are like helpless children, to walk on slippery, thorny,
and vast land. They bind the Narakas, who are unconscious and have lost their
senses, and tear their bodies apart, throwing them around like offerings to the
city.  **Commentary**  The Naraka-palas force the Narakas, who are like helpless
children, to walk on slippery, thorny, and vast land, which is covered in blood
and other fluids. They force them to walk quickly, even though they are slow and
weak. The Naraka-palas bind the Narakas, who are unconscious and have lost their
senses, in various ways. They are driven by their evil deeds and inflict pain on
the Narakas by tearing their bodies apart and throwing them around like
offerings to the city.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram 'iSucoditAn' zarAbhighAtapreritAn hastivAhaM vAhayanti
narakapAlAH yathA hastI bAhyate samAruhya evaM tamapi vAhayanti, yadivA-yathA
hastI mahAntaM bhAraM vahatyevaM tapami nArakaM vAhayanti, upalakSaNArthatvAda
syoSTravAhaM vAhayantItyAdyapyAyojyaM, kathaM vAhayantIti darzayati tasya
nArakasyopayekaM dvau trIn vA 'samAruhya' samAropya tatastaM vAhayanti,
atibhArAropaNe nAvahantam 'AruSya' krodhaM kRtvA pradAdAdinA 'vidhyanti'
tudanti, 'se' tasya nArakasya 'kakANao' tti marmANi vidhyantItyarthaH ||15||
apica - TIkArtha - narakapAla nArakIya jIvoM ko anya nArakIya jIvoM ke prati
raudrakarma karane meM, unakA ghAtapratighAta karane meM lagAkara athavA una
dvArA pUrvajanma meM kI gaI jIva hiMsA Adi kAryoM ko yAda karAkara janmAntara
meM azubha karma karane vAle una nAraka jIvoM ko zarAbhighAta dvArA - bANoM ke
prahAra dvArA hAthI kI jyoM bhAra Dhone meM pravRtti karate haiM  /  jaise hAthI
para car3hakara loga usase bhAra DhuhAte haiM, usI taraha una nArakIya jIvoM ko
bANoM se Ahata kara hAthI ke samAna unase bhAravAhI kA kAma lete haiN| jaise
hAthI para loga savAriyA~ biThAkara le jAte haiM, usI taraha una nArakoM para
bhI narakapAla savAriyA~ biThAkara bhAra vahana karAte haiM  /  yahA~ para hAthI
dvArA bhAra vahana karAyA jAnA upalakSaNa hai  /  isase U~Ta Adi dvArA bhAra
vahana karAye jAne kI jyoM nArakoM se bhAra DhuvAyA jAnA saMketita hai  /
narakapAla nArakIya jIvoM se kisa prakAra bhAra vahana karAte haiM, zAstrakAra
isakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM ki ve paramAdhAmI deva una nArakIya
jIvoM para eka do yA tIna vyaktiyoM ko biThAkara unako unheM lekara calane ko
majabUra karate haiM  /  atyadhika bhAra ke kAraNa jaba nAraka cala nahIM pAte
taba paramAdhAmI deva kruddha hokara kor3e Adi dvArA unako tAr3ita karate haiM
/  unake marma sthAnoM kA bedha karate haiM  /  bAlA bAlA bhUmi maNukkamaMtA,
pavijjalaM kaMTalaM mahaMtaM  /  vivaddhatappehiM vivaNNacitte, samIriyA
koTTabaliM kariti  //  16  //  - chAyA bAlAH balAd bhUmimanukrAbhyamANAH,
picchilAM kaNTakilAM mahatIm  /  bibaddhatarpAn viSaNNacittAn samIritAH
koTTavaliM kurvanti  //  anuvAda - pApAnuprerita paramAdhAmI deva baccoM ke
samAna parAdhIna abhAge nArakIya jIvoM ko kIcar3a ke kAraNa phisalana yukta
tathA kaNTakAkIrNa vistRta bhUmi para calane ko bAdhita karate haiM  /  ve anya
mUrcchitasaMjJAhIna nArakIya jIvoM ko bAMdha dete haiN| unakI deha ke
Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara idhara udhara pheMka dete haiM  /  TIkA bAlA iva bAlAH
paratantrAH, picchilAM rUdhirAdinA tathA kaNTakAkulAM bhUmimanukrAmanto
mandagatayo balotpreryante, tathA anyAn 'viSaNNacittAn' mUrcchitAMstarpakAkArAn
'vividham' anekadhA baddhava te narakapAlAH 'samIritAH' pApena karmaNA
coditAstAnnArakAn 'kuTTayitvA' khaNDazaH kRtvA 'baliM kariMti', tti
nagarabalivaditazcetazca kSipantItyarthaH, yadi vA koTTabaliM kurvantIti  //  16
//  kiJca - - TIkArtha narakapAla baccoM samAna paratantra nArakIya jIvoM ko
rudhira Adi ke phailane se cikanI, phisalana yukta tathA kaNTakAkIrNa bhUmi para
calane ko bAdhya karate haiM  /  'jaba dhIre-dhIre calate haiM, taba ve unheM
balapUrvaka teja calAte haiM  /  pApAnuprerita narakapAla anya mUrcchita
-saMjJAhIna nArakIya jIvoM ko aneka prakAra se bAMdhakara unake zarIra ke
Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara nagarabali ke samAna idhara udhara pheMka dete haiM athavA
unheM nagara kI karate haiM  /   336 -

Page #365 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hell Division Study - Vetaalie  **Verse 17:**  The Vetaalie, a massive
mountain of stone, created by the gods, hangs in the sky, a place of immense
suffering. There, the tormented souls of hell, who have committed terrible
deeds, are punished for countless muhurtas.  **Commentary:**  The word "name"
here signifies possibility. It is possible that in the sky, there exists a
mountain called Vetaalie, created by the righteous gods. This mountain is vast,
made of a single stone, and is a place of immense suffering and darkness. The
souls of hell, unable to touch it, are tormented by it. They are punished for
their cruel deeds, committed in countless lifetimes. The word "sahasra"
(thousand) signifies a vast amount of time, meaning they are punished for a very
long time.  **Verse 18:**  The sinners, bound and tormented, cry out day and
night. In the vast and terrible hell, they are killed by the cruel, their necks
broken.  **Commentary:**  The sinners, bound and tormented, are those who have
committed great sins. They cry out in pain, day and night. The word "kute"
signifies a place of suffering. In this vast and terrible hell, the fallen souls
are killed by the cruel, their necks broken. The word "hata" signifies that they
are killed, and the word "stananti" signifies that they cry out.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM - vetAlie nAma mahAbhitAve, egAyate
pavvayamaMtalikkhe  /  .. hammati tatthA bahukUrakammA, paraM sahassANa
muhuttagANaM  // 17 //  chAyA - vaikriyo nAma mahAbhitApa ekAyataH
parvato'ntarikSe  /  hanyante tatsthAH bahukrUrakarmANaH paraM sahastrANAM
muhUrttakANAm  //  anuvAda - atyanta tApaprada AkAza meM paramAdhAmI devoM dvArA
nirmita eka atyadhika vizAla zilAmaya parvata hai  /  vahAM rahane vAle nArakIya
prANI sahastroM muhUrtoM se bhI adhika samaya taka paramAdhAmI devoM dvArA
hatapratihata kiye jAte haiN| TIkA - nAma zabdaH sambhAvanAyAM, sambhAvyate
etannarakeSu yathA'ntarikSe 'mahAbhitApe' mahAduHkhaikakArye ekazilAghaTito
dIrghaH 'veyAlie'tti vaikriyaH paramAdhArmikaniSpAditaH parvataH tatra
tamorupatvAnnarakANAmato hasta sparzikayA samArUhanto nArakA 'hanyante'
pIDyante, bahUni krUrANi janmAntaropAttAni karmANi yeSAM te tathA,
sahasrasaMkhyAnAM muhurtAnAM paraM-prakRSTaM kAlaM,
sahastrazabdasyopalakSaNArthatvAtprabhUtaM kAlaM hanyanta iti yaavt||17||
TIkArtha - yahAM nAma zabda sambhAvanA ke artha meM AyA hai  /  usase sUcita
hotA hai ki vahA~ aisA honA saMbhava hai| AkAza meM paramAdhAmI devoM dvArA eka
zilA se racita bar3A parvata hai  /  vaha atyanta tApaprada, ghora dukhadAyI
aura andhakAramaya hai  /  pUrvajanma meM jinhoMne atyanta krUra karma kiye
haiM, ve nArakIya prANI hAtha se chU-chUkara usa parvata para car3hate haiM  /
paramAdhAmI devoM dvArA hajAra muhUrtoM se bhI adhika samaya taka mAre pITe jAte
haiM  /  yahA~ sahastra zabda sAMketika hai  /  usase yaha sUcita hai ki ve
nArakIya jIva dIrghakAlaparyanta vahA~ yAtanA pAte haiN| saMbAhiyA dukkaDiNo
thaNaMti, aho ya rAo paritappamANA  /  eMgata kUDe narae mahaMte, kUDeNa tatthA
visame hatA u  // 18 //  chAyA - saMbAdhitAH duSkRtinaHstananti, ahni ca rAtrau
paritapyamAnAH  /  ekAntakUTe narake mahati kUTena tatsthAH viSame hatAstu  /
anuvAda - sambAdhita-anavarata utpIr3ita kiye jAte pApI prANI rAta-dina rote
cillAte rahate haiM  /  ekAnta duHkhaprada atyanta vistIrNa aura kaThora naraka
meM patita prANI gale meM phAMsI DAlakara mAre jAte haiM, ve rote rahate haiN|
TIkA - tathA sam-ekIbhAvena bAdhitAH pIDitA duSkRtaM-pApaM vidyate yeSAM te
duSkRtino mahApApAH 'aho' ahani tathA rAtrau ca 'paritapyamAnA' atiduHkhena
pIDyamAnAH santa: karuNaM-dInaM 'stananti' Akrandanti, tathaikAntena 'kUTAni'
duHkhotpattisthAnAni yasmin sa tathA tasmin evambhUte narake 'mahati' vistIrNe
patitAH prANinaH tena ca kuTena galayantrapAzAdinA pASANasamUhalakSaNena vA
'tatra' tasminanviSame hatAH tu zabdasyAvadhAraNArthatvAt stanantyeva kevalamiti
// 18 //  apica - _TIkArtha - eka sAtha pIr3ita kiye jAte huye ghora pApI jIva
aharniza kaSTa se vyathita hokara burI taraha rote rahate haiM  /  naraka ekAnta
rUpa se duHkhotpati kA sthAna hai  /  vaha bar3A vistRta hai  /  patita prANI
vahA~ -3370

Page #366 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that in hell, people are hanged by the
neck, beaten with piles of stones, and they can only cry and do nothing. The
word "tu" here is indicative of a concept.  **Verse 19:**  * **Original:**
भंजंति णं पुव्वमरी सरोसं, समुग्गरे ते मुसले गहेतुं । ते भिन्नदेहा रुहिरं वमंता,
ओमुद्धगा धरणितले पडंति ॥१९॥ * **Translation:** The **paramādhāmī** gods, holding
maces and pestles, beat the hellish beings with great anger, as if they were
their enemies from a previous life. These beings, with their bodies torn apart,
vomit blood and fall face down on the ground.  **Commentary:**  * **Original:**
'णम्' इति वाक्यालङ्कारे पुर्वमरय इवारयो जन्मन्तरवैरिण इव परमाधार्मिका
यदिवा-जन्मान्तरापकारिणो नारका अपरेषामङ्गानि 'सरोष' सकोपं समुद्राणि मुसलानि
गृहीत्वा ‘भञ्जन्ति' गाढप्रहारै रामदयन्ति, ते च नारकास्त्राणरहिताः
शस्त्रप्रहारैर्भिन्नदेहा रुधिरमुद्वमन्तोऽधोमुखा धरणितले पतन्तीति ॥१९॥ *
**Translation:** The word "ṇam" in this verse is a figure of speech. The
**paramādhāmī** gods, considering the hellish beings as their enemies from a
previous life, or as those who have wronged them in a previous life, beat them
with great anger, using maces, pestles, and other heavy weapons, breaking their
limbs. These hellish beings, who have no protection, fall to the ground face
down, their bodies torn apart, their heads crushed, and blood flowing from their
mouths.  **Verse 20:**  * **Original:** अणासिया नाम महासियाला, पागब्मिणो तत्थ
सयायकोवा । खजति तत्था बहुकूरकम्मा, अदूरगा संकलियाहि बद्धा ॥२०॥ *
**Translation:** In that hell, there are huge, ferocious, hungry jackals, always
angry. They devour the wicked beings who are bound together by chains, close to
each other.  **Commentary:**  * **Original:** महादेहप्रमाणा महान्तः-शृगाला
नरकपालविकुर्विता 'अनशिता' बुभुक्षिताः, नामशब्दः सम्भावनायां, सम्भाव्यत
एतन्नरकेषु, 'अतिप्रगल्भिता' अतिधृष्टा रौद्ररूपा निर्भया: 'तत्र' तेषु नरकेषु
सम्भवन्ति 'सदावकोपा' नित्यकुपिताः तैरेवम्भूतैः शृगालादिभिस्तत्र व्यवस्थिता
जन्मान्तरकृत बहुक्रूरकर्माणः शृङ्खलादिभिर्बद्धा अयोमयनिगडिता 'अदूरगाः
परस्परसमीपवर्तिनो 'भक्षयन्ते' खण्डशः खाद्यन्त इति ॥२०॥ * **Translation:** In
that hell, there are huge, hungry, very arrogant, fierce, fearless jackals,
created by the **narakapāla** (hell guardians). The word "nāma" in this verse is
used to indicate possibility. It is possible that these jackals exist in hell.
They are always angry and devour the wicked beings who are bound together by
chains, close to each other. These beings have committed many cruel deeds in
their previous lives.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram gale meM phA~sI kA phandA DAlakara mAre jAte haiM  /
pattharoM ke Dhera se ve usa viSama sthAna meM pITe jAte haiM  /  ve vahA~
kevala ro hI sakate haiM aura kucha nahIM kara pAte  /  yahA~ AyA huA 'tu' zabda
avadhAraNA sUcaka hai  /  bhaMjaMti NaM puvvamarI sarosaM, samuggare te musale
gahetuM  /  te bhinnadehA ruhiraM vamaMtA, omuddhagA dharaNitale paDaMti  // 19
//  chAyA - bhaJjanti pUrvArayaH saroSaM samudrANi musalAni gRhItvA  /  te
bhinnadehAH rudhiraM vamanto'dhomukhAH dharaNItale patanti  //  anuvAda -
paramAdhAmI deva apane pahale ke duzmana ke samAna nArakIya prANiyoM ko hAtha
meM mudgara aura mUsala lekara mArate haiM  /  unake zarIra ko chinna bhinna
kara DAlate haiM  /  yoM burI taraha mAre pITe jAte hue ve nArakIya prANI nIcA
mukha kiye bhUmi para gira par3ate haiM  /  unake mu~ha se khUna bahatA rahatA
hai  /  TIkA- 'Nam' iti vAkyAlaGkAre purvamaraya ivArayo janmantaravairiNa iva
paramAdhArmikA yadivA-janmAntarApakAriNo nArakA apareSAmaGgAni 'saroSa' sakopaM
samudrANi musalAni gRhItvA 'bhaJjanti' gADhaprahArai rAmadayanti, te ca
nArakAstrANarahitAH zastraprahArairbhinnadehA rudhiramudvamanto'dhomukhA
dharaNitale patantIti  // 19 //  kiJca - TIkArtha - isa gAthA meM 'NaM' zabda
vAkyAlaMkAra ke rUpa meM AyA hai  /  nArakIya jIvoM ko apane pUrva janma ke
zatru ke samAna mAnate huye paramAdhAmI deva tathA anya janma ke nArakIya jIva
jinakA apakAra kiyA gayA ho, una nArakIya jIvoM ke krodha ke sAtha mudgara,
mUsala Adi kI bhArI coToM dvArA aMga aMga ko tor3a DAlate haiM  /  ve nArakIya
jIva, jinheM vahA~ koI bacA nahIM pAtA, zastroM ke prahAra se jinake mastaka
cUra-cUra ho gaye haiM, muMha se khUna baha rahA hai, nIcA mu~ha kiye bhUmi para
gira par3ate haiM  /  aNAsiyA nAma mahAsiyAlA, pAgabmiNo tattha sayAyakovA  /
khajati tatthA bahukUrakammA, adUragA saMkaliyAhi baddhA  // 20 //  chAyA -
anazitA nAma mahAzRgAlAH pragalbhiNastatra sadA sakopAH  /  khAdyante tatra
bahukUrakarmANaH adUragAH zRGkhalairbaddhAH  //  anuvAda - usa naraka meM
vizAlakAya, sadaiva krodha se tamatamAte, atyanta uddaNDa, bhUkhe gIdar3a nivAsa
karate haiM  /  ve sAMkaloM se baMdhe huye paraspara samIpavartI nArakIya pApI
prANiyoM ko khAte rahate haiM  /  TIkA - mahAdehapramANA mahAntaH-zRgAlA
narakapAlavikurvitA 'anazitA' bubhukSitAH, nAmazabdaH sambhAvanAyAM, sambhAvyata
etannarakeSu, 'atipragalbhitA' atidhRSTA raudrarUpA nirbhayA: 'tatra' teSu
narakeSu sambhavanti 'sadAvakopA' nityakupitAH tairevambhUtaiH zRgAlAdibhistatra
vyavasthitA janmAntarakRta bahukrUrakarmANaH zRGkhalAdibhirbaddhA
ayomayanigaDitA 'adUragAH parasparasamIpavartino 'bhakSayante' khaNDazaH
khAdyanta iti  // 20 //  api ca - - TIkArtha - usa naraka meM narakapAloM dvArA
vikurvita-banAye huye vizAlakAya, bubhukSita, atyanta dhRSTa, bhayAnaka rUpa
yukta, niDara gIdar3a rahate haiM  /  isa gAthA meM 'nAma' zabda sambhAvanA ke
rUpa meM prayukta huA hai jisakA 338

Page #367 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The study of the divisions of hell (Naraka-vibhakti
adhyayana) indicates that such a possibility exists in hell. The jackals are
always enraged, and they continue to eat the sinful Naraka beings who are their
neighbors and bound in iron chains from their previous births, who live in that
hell.  The river named Sadaajala is an extremely difficult (abhidurgaa),
slippery (pavijalana) and molten (loha-viliinatattaa) one. Those who enter into
it, the helpless (ekaa-atranuka) Narakas perform a single (egaaya) upward
movement (utkramana).  These touches (sparshaah) constantly (nirantaram) afflict
the ignorant (baalana) there for a long duration (chira-dvitiiyana). For the one
being tormented (na hanyamaanasya), there is no protection (traana), he himself
(eko svayam) experiences the suffering (paryanuhhavati duhkham).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayanaM Azaya yaha hai ki naraka meM aisA sambhAvita hai  /
ve gIdar3a sadaiva krodhAviSTa rahate haiM ve usa naraka meM nivAsa karane vAle
eka dUsare ke nikaTavartI tathA lohe kI sAMkaloM meM baMdhe huye pUrvajanma ke
pApI nAraka jIvoM ko khAte rahate haiN| sayAjalA nAma nadI bhiduggA, pavijalaM
loha vilINatattA  /  jaMsIbhiduggaMsi pavajamANA, egAya'tANukkamaNaM kareMti  //
21 //  chAyA - sadAjalA nAma nadyabhidurgA, picchilA loha vilInataptA  /
yasyAmabhidurgAyAM prapadyamAnA ekA atrANAH utkramaNaM kurvanti  //  . anuvAda -
naraka meM sadAjalA nAmaka eka nadI hai  /  usameM sadaiva pAnI rahatA hai  /
isalie vaha sadAjalA kahI jAtI hai  /  vaha nadI atyadhika kaSTapradA hai  /
usakA se malina tathA Aga se gale huye lohe ke samAna atyanta garma hai  /
becAre nArakIya prANI jinakA vahA~ koI rakSaka nahIM hai, akele usa nadI meM
bahate rahate haiM  /  . TIkA - sadA-sarvakAlaM jalam-udakaM yasyAM sA tathA
sadAjalAbhidhAnA vA 'nadI' sarid 'abhidurgA' ativiSamA prakarSeNa
vividhamatyuSNaM kSArapUyarUdhirAvilaM jalaM yasyAM sA pravijalA yadivA
'pavijjale' tti rUdhirA vilatvAt picchilA, vistIrNagambhIra jalA vA athavA
pradIptajalA vA etadeva darzayati-agninA taptaM sat 'vilImaM' dravatAM gataM
yalloham-ayastadvattaptA, atitApavilIna loha sadRzajaletyarthaH yasyAM ca
sadAjalAyAm abhidurgAyAM nadyAM prapadyamAnA nArakAH 'egAya' tti ekAkino'trANA
'anukramaNaM' tasyAM gamanaM plavanaM kurvantIti  // 21 //  TIkArtha - jisameM
saba samaya pAnI bharA rahatA hai, use sadAjalA kahA jAtA hai athavA jisakA
sadAjalA nAma hai aisI eka nadI naraka meM hai  /  vaha bar3I viSama-kaSTapradA
hai usakA pAnI atyanta garma, khArA tathA mavAda va khUna se malina rahatA hai
/  athavA rudhira se bharI rahane ke kAraNa vaha bar3I cikanAI liye huye hai
athavA vaha vizAla-bahuta bar3I hai, usakA pAnI gambhIra-bahuta gaharA hai  /
athavA vaha pradIpta jalA-atyanta uSNa jalayukta hai  /  sUtrakAra isI kA
digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM ki Aga se gale hue lohe ke samAna vaha nadI
paritapta hai athavA usakA pAnI atyadhika tApa se tapakara-dravita lohe ke
sadRza uSNa rahatA hai  /  usa sadAjalA nAmaka atyanta vikarAla nadI meM patita
nArakIya prANI jinako vahA~ koI bacAne vAlA nahIM hai, bahate rahate haiN| eyAI
phAsAiM phusaMti bAlaM, niraMtaraM tattha ciradvitIyaM  /  Na hammamANassa u hoi
tANaM, ego sayaM paccaNuhoi dukkhaM  // 22 //  chAyA - ete sparzAH spRzanti
bAlaM nirantaraM tatra cirasthitikam  /  _ na hanyamAnasya tu bhavati trANam,
ekaH svayaM paryyanubhavati duHkham  //  anuvAda - ve duHkha jinakA pahale
varNana huA hai, ajJAnI nArakIya jIva ko nirantara hote rahate haiN| nArakIya
prANI kA AyuSya-umra bhI lambI hotI hai  /  usa duHkha se usakI rakSA nahIM ho
sakatI  /  vaha ekAkI hI unheM bhogatA hai| 339

Page #368 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra with Commentary - Summarizing the Purpose and
Showing the Specific Kinds of Suffering  The Sutra-maker, concluding this
section, again points out the suffering of the hell-bound beings. The "touches"
mentioned in the previous two sections, which are inflicted by the supreme gods,
or by the hell-bound beings themselves, or which are naturally experienced, are
extremely harsh. They are more unbearable than the forms, tastes, smells,
touches, and sounds. They are utterly helpless and constantly torment the hell-
bound beings. They do not get a moment's respite, not even for the blink of an
eye. These hell-bound beings reside in hell for a long time, as the first hell,
called Ratnaprabha, has a maximum duration of a period equal to the ocean. The
second hell, called Sharkaraprabha, has a maximum duration of three periods
equal to the ocean. The third, Baluka, has seven, the fourth, Panka, has ten,
the fifth, Dhumaprabha, has seventeen, the sixth, Tamahprabha, has twenty-two,
the seventh, Mahatamahprabha, has thirty-three periods equal to the ocean. In
these hell realms, those who have gone there, having attained a superior
position due to their past karma, and who are being killed by others, do not
receive any help or protection. For it is heard that even Seetaindra, seeing
Lakshmana suffering in hell, could not protect him from the torment. Thus, this
being, alone, without those for whom he committed the sins, experiences the
suffering resulting from his karma. No one shares his suffering. As it is said:
"For the sake of my family, I have committed very heinous sins. I am alone,
suffering their consequences, while they, the beneficiaries, have left me."  And
further:  "Whatever karma one has done in the past, that same karma one
experiences in the future. Having experienced the suffering of existence alone,
the suffering beings experience infinite suffering."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - sAmpratamuddezakArthamupasaMharan
punarapinArakANAMduHkhavizeSa darzayitumAha-ete' anantaroddezakadvayAbhihitAH
'sparzAH' duHkhavizeSAH paramAdhArmikajanitAH paramparApAditAH svAbhAvikA veti
atikaTavo ruparasagaMdhasparzazabdAH atyaMtaduHsahA bAlamiva 'bAlam' azaraNaM
'spRzanti' duHkhayanti 'nirantaram' avizrAmaM 'acchinimIlaya' mityAdi pUrvavat
'tatra' teSu narakeSu ciraM-prabhUtaM kAlaM sthitiryasya bAlasyAsau
cirasthitikastaM, tathAhiratnaprabhAyA mutkRSTA sthitiH sAgaropamaM, tathA
dvitIyAyAM zarkaraprabhAyAM trINI, tathA bAlukAyAM sapta, paGkAyAM daza,
dhUmaprabhAyAM saptadaza tamaHprabhAyAM dvAviMzatirmahAtamaH prabhAyAM
saptamapRthivyAM trayastriMzatsAgaropamANi utkRSTA sthitiriti, tatra ca gatasya
karmavazApAditotkRSTa sthitikasya parairhanyamAnasya svakRtakarmaphalabhujo na
kiJcitvANaM bhavati, tathAhi-kila sItendreNa lakSmaNasya
narakaduHkhamanubhavatastatrANodyatenApi na trANaM kRtamiti zrutiH,
tadevameka:-asahAyo yadarthaM tatpApaM samarjitaM tairahitastatkarmavipAkajaM
duHkhamanubhavati, na kazcidduHkhasaMvibhAgaM gRhNAtItyarthaH, tathA coktam -
"mayA parijanasyArthe, kRtaM karma sudArUNam  /  ekAkI tena do'haM gatAste
phalabhoginaH  // 1 // " ityAdi  // 22 //  kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha - sUtrakAra isa
uddezaka kA samApana karate hue punaH nArakIya jIvoM kA duHkha batalAne hetu
pratipAdita karate haiM  /  pahale ke do uddezakoM meM jinakA varNana AyA hai,
jo paramAdhAmI devoM dvArA diye jAte haiM athavA nAraka jIva paraspara eka
dUsare ko dete haiM athavA svabhAva se hI jo pratiphalita hote haiM, atyanta
kaTu haiM  /  jo rUpa, rasa, gaMdha, sparza zabda kI apekSA se bar3e duHsaha
haiM  /  zaraNa rahita haiM  /  ve nArakIya prANiyoM ko sadaiva vyathita karate
rahate haiM  /  unako eka palaka jhapakane ke samaya taka bhI unase chuTakArA
nahIM milatA  /  ve nArakIya jIva lambe samaya taka naraka meM nivAsa karate
haiM kyoMki pahalI ratnaprabhA nAmaka naraka bhUmi meM utkRSTaadhika se adhika
sAgaropama kAla taka kI sthiti hai  /  dUsarI zarkarAprabhA nAmaka naraka bhUmi
meM utkRSTa tIna sAgaropama kAla kI sthiti hai  /  tIsarI bAlukA meM sAta,
cauthI paMka meM dasa, pA~cavI dhUmaprabhA meM satraha, chaThI tanaprabhAH meM
bAIsa, sAtavIM mahatamaprabhAH meM taiMtIsa sAgaropama kAla kI utkRSTa sthiti
hai  /  ina nAraka bhUmiyoM meM gaye hue tathA apane kRta karmoM dvArA utkRSTa
sthiti pAye hue, dUsaroM dvArA mAre jAte hue apane kRta karmoM kA phala bhogane
vAle nArakIya jIva ko vahA~ koI bhI trANa nahIM de sakatA-bacA nahIM sakatA
kyoMki aisA sunA jAtA hai ki naraka meM pIr3A pAte hue lakSmaNa ko dekhakara use
duHkha se-nArakIya duHkha se bacAne hetu udyata sItendra bhI rakSA nahIM kara
sake  /  bacA nahIM sake  /  isa prakAra yaha jIva ekAkI arthAt jina logoM ke
nimitta usane pApoM kA upArjana kiyA-pApa karma bA~dhe una logoM se rahita
hokara apane karmoM ke pariNAma svarUpa duHkha bhogatA hai  /  usake duHkha
bhoga meM koI bhI sahabhAgI nahIM bana pAtA  /  kahA hai-maiMne apane parivAra
ke nimitta atyanta dArUNa-kaThora, pApapUrNa karma kiye jinake phalasvarUpa maiM
ekAkI hI duHkha bhoga rahA huuN| karmoM kA phala bhogane vAle mujhako ve sabhI
chor3akara cale gae ityAdi  /  jaM jArisaM puvvamakAsi kamma, tameva Agacchati
saMparAe  /  egaMta dukkhaM bhavamajaNittA, vedaMti dukkhI tamaNaMtadukkhaM  //
23 //  chAyA - yad yAdRzaM pUrvamakArSItkarma, tadevAgacchati samparAye  /
ekAntaduHkhaM bhavamarjayitvA, vedayanti duHkhinastamananta duHkham  //  (340)

Page #369 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hell Division Study Translation  **A being receives the fruits of its actions
in the next birth. One who has performed actions leading to the solitary,
painful hell realm, goes to that endless, sorrowful hell and experiences its
fruits.**  **Commentary:**  The actions (karma) that a being performed in a
previous birth, whether they were of a low, medium, or high nature, will result
in a similar state of being in the next birth. This is to say that the intensity
of the karma, whether strong, weak, or moderate, will result in a similar
intensity of experience in the next birth.  Those who have performed actions
leading to the solitary, painful hell realm, experience endless, unbearable
suffering. This suffering is inescapable and cannot be alleviated by anyone.
**Verse 24:**  **These hells, O wise one, should be contemplated. Do not harm
any being in the entire world. One who has unwavering faith in the true nature
of the soul and is free from attachment, understands the nature of the world and
does not fall under its sway.**  **Commentary:**  Having heard about these
hells, the wise person should not harm any being in the world.  One who has
unwavering faith in the true nature of the soul and is free from attachment,
understands the nature of the world and does not fall under its sway.  This
means that one should not be swayed by the desires of the world and should not
be attached to material possessions.  One should also avoid false speech,
stealing, and sexual misconduct.  One should understand the nature of the world,
which is full of suffering, and should not be attached to it.  **Commentary:**
The author of the sutra, in concluding this section, emphasizes that one should
contemplate the hells and the suffering that they entail.  One should also avoid
harming any being in the world and should strive to live a life of non-
attachment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 narakavibhakti adhyayana anuvAda - jisa prANI ne jaisA karma kiyA hai Age ke
janma meM usako vaisA hI phala milatA hai  /  jisane ekAnta duHkhAtmaka naraka
yoni meM le jAne vAlA karma kiyA hai, vaha ananta duHkhamaya naraka meM jAtA
hai, phala bhogatA hai| _TIkA - 'yat' karma 'yAdRzaM' yadanubhAvaM yAdRk sthitik
vA karma 'pUrva' janmAntare 'akArSIt ' kRtavAMstatrattAhageva
jaghanyamadhyamotkRSTasthityanubhAvabhedaM 'samparAye' saMsAre tathA tenaiva
prakAreNAnugacchati, etaduktaM bhavati
tIvramandamadhyamairbandhAdhyavasAyasthAnairyAddazairyadvaddhaM tattAhageva
tIvramandamadhyameva vipAkam-udayamA gacchatIti, ekAntena-avazyaM
sukhalezarahitaM duHkhameva yasminnarakAdike bhavesa tathA tamekAnta duHkhaM
'bhavamarjayitvA' narakabhavopAdAnabhUtAni karmANyupAdAyaikAntaduHkhinastatpUrva
nirdiSTaM duHkham-asAtavedanIya rUpamanantam-ananyopazamanIya mapratikAraM
'vedayanti' anubhavantIti  // 23|| punarapyupasaMhAravyAjenopadezamAha TIkArtha
- jIvoM ne apane pUrva janma meM jaisI sthitiyukta, jaisA prabhAvApanna karma
kiyA hai vaha vaisA hI jaghanya, madhyama va utkRSTa sthiti yukta tathA jaghanya
madhyama aura utkRSTa prabhAvayukta usI taraha unheM usakA phala prApta hotA hai
/  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki tIvra, manda aura madhyama jaise
adhyavasAyoM-pariNAmoM se jo karma bAMdhA gayA hai usakA tIvra manda aura
madhyama vipAka yukta phala utpanna hotA hai-prApta hotA hai  /  jina jIvoM ne
sukha ke leza se bhI zUnya ekAnta rUpa se duHkhamaya naraka yoni ke kAraNa
svarUpa karmoM kA anuSThAna kiyA hai, ve ekAnta rUpa se duHkhita hokara pUrvokta
asAtAvedanIya rUpa, kaSTa bhogate haiM, jisakA koI anta nahIM hotA  /  jo kisI
ke dvArA upazAnta nahIM kiye jA sakate haiM  /  jisakA koI pratikAra nahIM kiyA
jA sktaa| etANi soccA NaragANi dhIre, na hiMsae kiMcaNa savvaloe  /  egaMta
diTThI apariggahe u, bujhija loyassa vasaM na gacche  // 24 //  chAyA - etAn
zrutvA narakAn dhIro, na hiMsyAtkaJcana sarvaloke  /  ekAnta
dRSTiraparigrahastu, budhyeta lokasya vazaM na gacchet  //  anuvAda - dhIra-
dhairyazIla vijJajana ina narakoM ke sambandha meM sunakara kisI bhI jIva kI
hiMsA na kreN| vaha jIva Adi tatva meM bhalI bhAMti zraddhA rakhatA huA
parigraha rahita hokara loka kA svarUpa jAne  /  TIkA - 'etAn' pUrvoktAnnarakAn
tAsthyAttavyapadeza itikRtvA narakaduHkhavizeSAn 'zrutvA' nizamya
dhI:-buddhistayA rAjata iti dhIro-buddhimAn prAjJaH, etatkuryAditi darzayati-
sarvasminnapi-trasasthAvarabhedabhinne 'loke' prANigaNe na kamapi prAthinaM
'hiMsyAt' na vyApAdayet, tathaikAntena nizcalA jIvAditattveSu dRSTiH-
samyagadarzanaM yasya sa ekAntadRSTiH niSprakampasamyakatva ityarthaH, tathA na
vidyate pari-samantAtsukhArthaM gRhyata iti parigraho yasyAsau aparigrahaH,
tuzabdAdAdyantopAdAnAdvA mRSAvAdAdattAdAnamaithunavarjanamapi draSTavyaM, tathA
lokam' azubhakarmakAriNaM tadvipAkaphalabhujaM vA yadivA-kaSAyalokaM
tatsvarUpato 'budhyeta' jAnIyAt na tu tasya lokasya vazaM gacchediti  // 24 //
etadanantaroktaM du:khavizeSamanyatrApyatidizannAha - TIkArtha - sUtrakAra punaH
isa uddezaka kI samApti ke saMdarbha meM pratipAdana karate haiM  /  jinakA
pahale varNana kiyA gayA hai, una narakoM ko arthAt unameM hone vAle duHkhoM ko
sunakara buddhimAna puruSa aisA kArya kre| 341

Page #370 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The author of the Sutra-Kritanga Sutra, while guiding us, says that one should
not harm any living being, be it a mobile or immobile creature, or any other
kind of being. One should remain steadfast in the principles of soul, etc., and
maintain a firm, unwavering, and right vision. One should renounce attachment,
which people accumulate for the sake of happiness. One should understand the
nature of those who commit evil deeds or experience the fruits of evil deeds, or
the nature of passions, and not be under their control. The word "Tu" in the
verse, or the elements of beginning and end, or the act of taking, also imply
the abandonment of false speech, giving without receiving, and non-chastity.
Thus, in the realm of animals, humans, and gods, the endless consequences of
actions follow. Knowing all this, one should strive to live a life of
righteousness.  Translation: It is said that a sinner goes to hell. Similarly,
one should understand the consequences of actions in the realms of animals,
humans, and gods. In this endless cycle of four realms, one receives the fruits
of one's actions. Therefore, a wise person, understanding this, should practice
restraint throughout life.  Commentary: The phrase "Evam" etc. means that those
who commit evil deeds, even in the realms of animals, humans, and gods,
experience the endless consequences of their actions in the four realms. A wise
person, knowing all this, should strive to live a life of righteousness, and
should look forward to the time of death. This means that those who are caught
in the cycle of the four realms experience only suffering. Therefore, a wise
person should remain engaged in the practice of liberation and restraint
throughout life. The word "iti" indicates the end, and "bravimi" is as before.
Commentary Meaning: To express that the specific sufferings discussed earlier
also occur elsewhere, the author of the Sutra says:  Those who commit evil deeds
experience the consequences of their actions in the realms of animals, humans,
and gods, in the form of endless karmic consequences in the four realms. A wise
person, knowing all this, should follow the path of restraint and look forward
to the time of death. This means that those who are caught in the cycle of the
four realms experience only suffering. Therefore, a wise person should remain
engaged in the practice of liberation and restraint throughout life. The word
"iti" indicates the end, and "bravimi" is as before.  The fifth study, called
"Naraka Vibhakti," is now complete.  Om Om Om  342

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram zAstrakAra usa kArya kA digdarzana karAte hue kahate
haiM ki vaha trasa tathA sthAvara Adi bhedayukta samasta prANiyoM meM kisI bhI
prANI kI hiMsA na kareM  /  vaha jIva Adi tatvoM meM nizcilata, sthira,
avicaladRSTi, samyaka dRSTi dhAraNa karatA huA parigraha kA varjana karatA huA,
jise loga sukha hetu cAroM ora se baTorate rahate haiM, azubhakarma karane vAle
athavA azubha karmoM kA phala bhogane vAle jIvoM ke athavA kaSAyoM ke svarUpa ko
jAne, unake vaza meM na ho  /  gAthA meM Aye tU zabda meM athavA Adi evaM anta
ke upAdAna se-grahaNa se yahA~ mRSAvAda, adattAdAna aura abrahmacarya ke tyAga
kA bhI Azaya hai  /  evaM tirikkhe maNuyAsu (ma) resuM, caturanta'NaMtaM
tayaNuvvivAgaM  /  sa savvameyaM iti vedaittA, kaMkheja kAlaM dhuyamAyareju  //
25 //  ttibemi|| chAyA - evaM tiryakSu, manujAsuresu, caturantamanantaM
tadanuvipAkam  /  .. sa sarvametaditi viditvA kAGkSata kAla dhruvamAcarediti
bravImi  //  anuvAda - pApI puruSa naraka gati meM jAtA hai, aisA kahA gayA hai
/  isI prakAra tiryaMca gati manuSya gati aura devagati ke saMdarbha meM bhI
tadanusAra jAnanA cAhie  /  caturgatiyukta isa ananta saMsAra meM karmAnurUpa
phala prApta hotA hai  /  ataH vijJa puruSa ise samajhakara AjIvana saMyama kA
paripAlana kare  /  /  TIkA - 'evam' ityAdi evamazubhakarmakAriNAmasumatAM
tiryaGmanuSyAmareSvapi 'caturantaM' caturgatikam 'anantam' aparyavasAnaM
tadanurUpaM vipAkaM 'sa' buddhimAn sarvametaditi pUrvoktayA nItyA 'viditvA'
jJAtvA 'dhruvaM' saMyamamAcarana 'kAlaM' mRtyukAlamAkAMkSet, etaduktaM bhavati-
caturgatikasaMsArAntargatAnAmasumatAM duHkhameva kevalaM yato'to dhruvo-mokSaH
saMyamo vA tadanuSThAnarato yAvajjIvaM mRtyukAlaM pratIkSeteti, itiH
parisamAptau bravImIti pUrvavat  // 25 //  TIkArtha - jina vizeSa duHkhoM kI
pUrva meM carcA kI gaI hai, ve anyatra bhI hote haiM, yaha vyakta karane hetu
sUtrakAra kahate haiM - jo prANI azubha karma karate haiM, unako tiryaJca bhava,
manuSyabhava aura devabhava meM hI caturgatika-ananta karma vipAkAnurUpa phala
prApta hote haiM  /  ina sabako pahale kahe anusAra buddhimAna puruSa jAne tathA
saMyama kA anusaraNa karatA huA mRtyukAla kI AkAMkSA kare  /  kahane kA tAtparya
yaha hai ki caturgatika saMsAra meM Apatita prANiyoM ko kevala du:kha hI prApta
hotA hai  /  ataeva buddhimAna yAvajjIvana mokSa-saMyama ke anuSThAna meM
saMlagna rahe, yahA~ iti zabda samApti ke artha kA bodhaka hai, bravImi pahale
kI jyoM hai  /  naraka vibhakti nAmaka pAMcavA adhyayana samApta huA  /  OMOMOM
342

Page #371 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Study** _The Sixth Study of the Virattthui_ Virattthui Study Ask the Samanas,
the Brahmanas, the householders, and the Paratitthikas: Who is the one who
speaks of the Dharma that is beneficial in isolation, unparalleled, and well-
examined? ||1|| Shadow - The Samanas, the Brahmanas, the householders, and the
Paratitthikas. He is the one who speaks of the Dharma that is beneficial in
isolation, unparalleled, and well-examined. Translation - The Samanas, the
Brahmanas, the householders, and the Paratitthikas asked: Who is the one who
speaks of the Dharma that is beneficial in isolation, unparalleled, and well-
examined? Commentary - This Sutra is connected to the next Sutra. In the
previous Sutra, it was said that a wise man should contemplate death while
following the path taught by the Tirthankara. Here, it is asked: Who is the
Tirthankara who taught the path to liberation? The Samanas, the ascetics, etc.,
asked this question. The connection between the Sutras should be understood. It
was said earlier that the being should attain knowledge. The answer that will be
given later should be understood. With this connection, the explanation of this
Sutra is given in the order of the collection, etc., which is as follows: _
After hearing the many different types of hell, the men who were worried about
the cycle of birth and death asked Sri Sudharmaswami: Who has explained this
hell? Here, the word "ṇam" is used in the sense of a figure of speech, or Sri
Jambuswami asks Sri Sudharmaswami: Who has explained the Dharma that is capable
of liberating from the cycle of birth and death? Many people have asked me this
question. The Samanas, the Nirgrantha ascetics, etc., the Brahmanas, those who
are devoted to the practice of celibacy, etc., the householders, the Kshatriyas,
etc., and the Buddhists, etc., the followers of other religions, all asked me
this question. What is it? It shows that he is the one who spoke of this Dharma,
which is beneficial in isolation, which is the holder of the animals that are
spread out in the bad paths, "āha" said, "anīdṛśam" unparalleled, meaning
incomparable, and also - that is a good examination, a good examination, as it
is, the truth, with that, or - a good examination - he spoke in a balanced way.
||1|| Then, to understand his knowledge and other qualities, he asks a question
- Commentary - The connection of this Sutra with the next Sutra is as follows.
In the previous Sutra, it was said that a wise man should contemplate death
while following the path taught by the Tirthankara. Here, it is asked: Who is
the Tirthankara who taught the path to liberation? The Samanas, the ascetics,
etc., asked this question. The connection between the Sutras should be
understood. It was said earlier that the being should attain knowledge. The
answer that will be given later should be understood. With this connection, the
explanation of this Sutra is given in the order of the collection, etc., which
is as follows: _ After hearing the many different types of hell, the men who
were worried about the cycle of birth and death asked Sri Sudharmaswami: Who has
explained this hell? Here, the word "ṇam" is used in the sense of a figure of
speech, or Sri Jambuswami asks Sri Sudharmaswami: Who has explained the Dharma
that is capable of liberating from the cycle of birth and death? Many people
have asked me this question. The Samanas, the Nirgrantha ascetics, etc., the
Brahmanas, those who are devoted to the practice of celibacy, etc., the
householders, the Kshatriyas, etc., and the Buddhists, etc., the followers of
other religions, all asked me this question. What is it? It shows that he is the
one who spoke of this Dharma, which is beneficial in isolation, which is the
holder of the animals that are spread out in the bad paths, "āha" said,
"anīdṛśam" unparalleled, meaning incomparable, and also - that is a good
examination, a good examination, as it is, the truth, with that, or - a good
examination - he spoke in a balanced way. ||1|| Then, to understand his
knowledge and other qualities, he asks a question - -343)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhyayanaM _vIratthuI adhyayanaM SaSTham vIratyuI adhyayana pucchissu NaM samaNA
mAhaNA ya, agAriNo yA paratitthiA ya  /  se kei NegaMtahiyaM dhammamAhu,
aNelisaM sAhu samikkhayAe  // 1 //  chAyA - aprAkSuH zramaNAH brAhmaNAzca,
agAriNo ye paratIrthikAzca  /  sa ka ekAntahitaM dharmamAha, anIdRzaM
sAdhusamIkSayA  //  anuvAda - zramaNa, brAhmaNa, gRhastha tathA paratIrthika
janoM ne pUchA-jijJAsA kI ki ekAnta rUpa se kalyANakArI, anupama jisake sadRza
koI anya na ho, dharma kA jisane bhalI bhA~ti samIkSApUrvaka nirUpaNa kiyA ho,
ve kauna haiM  /  TIkA- asya cAnantarasUtreNa sahAyaM sambandhaH tadyathA-
tIrthakaropadiSTena mArgeNa dhruvamAcaran mRtyukAlamupekSetetyuktaM, tatra
kimbhUto'sau tIrthakRt yenopadiSTo mArga itthetat pRSTavantaH 'zramaNA' yataya
ityAdi, paraspara sUtrasambandhastu buddhayeta yaduktaM prAgiti, etacca
yaduttaratra praznaprativacanaM vakSyate tacca buddhayeteti, anena
sambandhenA''yAtasyAsya sUtrasya saMhitAdikrameNa vyAkhyA pratanyate, sA ceyam-
anantaroktAM bahuvidhAM narakavibhaktiM zrutvA saMsArAdudvignamanasaH keneyaM
pratipAditetyetat sudharmasvAbhinam 'aprAkSuH' pRSThavantaH 'Nam' iti
vAkyAlaGkAre yadivA jambU svAmI sudharmasvAminamevAha-yathA kenaivaMbhUto
dharmaH saMsArottAraNasamarthaH pratipAdita ityetadbahavo mAM pRSTavantaH,
tadyathA'zramaNA' nirgranyAdAyaH tathA 'brAhmaNA' brahmacaryAdyanuSThAnaniratAH
tathA 'agAriNaH' kSatriyAdayo ye ca zAkyAdayaH paratIrthikAste sarve'pi
pRSTavantaH, kiM taditi darzayati-sa ko yo'sAvenaM dhardhaM durgati
prasRtajantudhArakamekAntahitam 'Aha' uktavAn 'anIdRzam' ananyasadRzam
atulamityarthaH, tathA-sAdhvI cAsau samIkSA ca
sAdhusamIkSAyathAvasthitatattvaparicchittistayA, yadivA-sAdhu samIkSayA-
samatayoktavAniti  // 1 //  tathA tasyaiva jJAnAdiguNAvagataye praznamAha -
TIkArtha - isa sUtra kA anantara sUtra ke sAtha sambandha isa prakAra hai  /
pUrva sUtra meM yaha varNita huA hai ki tIrthaMkara dvArA pratipAdita mArga ke
anurUpa saMyama kA pratipAlana karate hue buddhimAna puruSa ko mRtyukAla kI
AkAMkSA karanI cAhie  /  yahA~ yaha jijJAsita hotA hai ki ve tIrthaMkara kaise
hai, jinhoMne mokSa mArga kA nirUpaNa kiyA  /  zramaNa Adi prAznikoM ne yaha
pUchA  /  parampara sUtra ke sAtha yahA~ yaha sambandha hai  /  pahale sUtra meM
kahA hai ki jIva ko bodha prApta karanA cAhie  /  Age calakara jo uttara diyA
jAyegA, use samajhanA cAhie  /  isa sambandha se AyAta isa sUtra kI saMhitA Adi
ke krama se vyAkhyA kI jAtI hai, jo isa prakAra hai - _ pahale jo bahuvidha
aneka prakAra kI naraka vibhakti-narakoM kA vizleSaNa kiyA gayA hai, use
sunakara sAMsArika AvAgamana se ghabarAe hue puruSoM ne zrI sudharmAsvAmI se
prazna kiyA ki yaha naraka vivecana kisake dvArA kiyA gayA hai  /  yahA~ NaM
zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke artha meM AyA hai, athavA zrI jambUsvAmI zrI sudharmA
svAmI se kahate haiM, pUchate haiM ki-jo saMsAra se pAra lagAne meM samartha
hai, vaha dharma kisane pratipAdita kiyA ? yaha prazna bahuta se janoM ne
mujhase pUchA hai  /  zramaNa-nirgrantha muni Adi, brAhmaNa-brahmacarya Adi ke
paripAlana meM tatpara, agArIkSatriya Adi gRhastha tathA bauddha Adi
paramatAnuyAyI ina sabhI ne majhase pachA hai  /  kyA pachA hai ? yaha batalAte
-343)

Page #372 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is the Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga. Who is that man who has described
the true nature of things, the unique and unparalleled Dharma, which is
beneficial for all, in a definitive or impartial way, and who is able to support
and sustain beings who have fallen into the lower realms?  How was his
knowledge, how was his vision, how was his conduct, the son of the knowers? You
know, monk, tell me truthfully, as you have heard, as you have seen, as you have
understood.  Translation: How was the knowledge, vision, and conduct of the Lord
Mahavira, who was born into a noble family? You know this, monk. Tell us as you
have heard, seen, and understood.  Commentary: How did the Lord attain
knowledge? What was the nature of his knowledge, which revealed the special
meaning? What was the nature of his vision, which encompassed the general
meaning? What was his conduct, in the form of the Yamas and Niyamas? The knowers
- the Kshatriyas - were his sons. The Lord Viravardhamana Swami was their son.
He was. This is what I have asked. "Monk!" O Sudharma Swami, you know this, you
understand it completely. This is a figure of speech. You have heard all this,
you have understood it as it is, as you have seen it, tell me all this.  He was
asked this, and Sudharma Swami began to describe the qualities of the Lord
Mahavira.  Commentary: The Lord asks a question to understand the qualities of
the Lord Mahavira. He asks how he attained knowledge, or what was the nature of
his knowledge, which revealed the special meaning, and what was the nature of
his vision, which encompassed the general meaning. What was his conduct, in the
form of the Yamas and Niyamas? How were all these qualities of the Lord
Mahavira, who was born into a noble Kshatriya family? O Lord Sudharma Swami! You
know all this well. Here, the word "nam" is used in the sense of a figure of
speech. Accordingly, tell me what you have heard, what you have understood, what
you have seen - what you have experienced.  He who knows the suffering of the
world, who is skilled in the destruction of the eight karmas, who is omniscient
and all-seeing, who is glorious and stands in the path of the eyes of the world,
know his Dharma and contemplate it with steadfastness.  Translation: Sri
Sudharma Swami, Jambuswami, and others say to their followers: The Lord Mahavira
knew the suffering of all beings in the world - he knew the essence of non-
violence. He was skilled in the destruction of the eight karmas. He was always
wise and useful everywhere. He was the possessor of infinite knowledge and
infinite vision. He was glorious and stood in the path of the eyes of the world.
He was the eyes of the world. Know the Dharma taught by the Lord Mahavira and
contemplate it with steadfastness - mental stability.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram haiM  /  vaha puruSa kauna hai, jisane kugati meM
patita hote prANI ko dhAraNa karane meM, sahArA dene meM, samartha, ekAnta
hitaprada ananyasadRza-anupama dharma kA, padArtha ke yathArtha svarUpa kA
nizcita rUpa meM yA samabhAva meM nirUpaNa kiyA hai| kahaM ca NANaM kaha
daMsaNaM se, sIlaM kahaM nAyasutassa AsI ?  /  jANAsi NaM bhikkhU jahAtaheNaM,
ahAsutaM bUhi jahA NisaMtaM  // 2 //  chAyA - kathaJca jJAnaM kathaM darzanaM
tasya, zIlaM kathaM jJAtaputrasya AsIt  /  jAnAsi bhikSo ! yAthAtathyena,
yathAzrutaM brUhi yathA nizAntam  //  anuvAda - jJAtavaMzIya bhagavAna mahAvIra
kA jJAna darzana aura cAritra kaisA thA ? munivarya Apako yaha jJAta hai  /
jaisA Apane zravaNa kiyA, dekhA evaM nizcaya kiyA vaha hameM batalAye  /  TIkA -
'kathaM' kena prakAreNa bhagavAn jJAnamavAptavAn ?, kimbhUtaM vAtasya bhagavato
jJAna-vizeSAvabodhakaM ?, kimbhUtaM 'se' tasya 'darzanaM'
sAmAnyArthaparicchedakaM ? 'zIlaM ca' yamaniyamarUpaM kIdRk ? jJAtAH
-kSatriyAsteSAM 'putro' bhagavAn vIravardhamAnasvAmI tasya 'asId' abhUditi,
yadetanmayA pRSTaM tat "bhikSo !' sudharmasvAmin yAthAtathyena tvaM 'jAnISe'
samyagavagacchasi 'Nam' iti vAkyAlaGkAre tadetatsarvaM yathAzrutaM tvayA zrutvA
ca yathA 'nizAnta' mityavadhAritaM yathA dRSTaM tathA sarvaM 'brUhi' AcakSveti
// 2 //  sa evaM pRSThaH sudharmasvAmI zrI manmahAvIravardhamAnasvAmiguNAn
kathayitumAha - _TIkArtha - prabhu mahAvIra svAmI ke guNoM kI jAnakArI hetu
prazna karate hue kahate haiM ki unhoMne kisa prakAra jJAna prApta kiyA, athavA
unakA jJAna-viziSTa artha kA prakAzaka bodha kaisA thA, tathA unakA sAmAnya
artha kA nizcAyaka darzana kaisA thA. yamaniyama paripAlana ke rUpa meM unakA
zIla kaisA thA. jAtakSatriya patrakSatriya kulotpanna bhagavAna mahAvIra ke ye
saba guNa kaise the, prabhuvara sudharmA svAmI ! maiMne jo prazna kiyA hai, ve
saba Apa bhalI bhA~ti jAnate haiM  /  yahA~ NaM zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke artha meM
AyA hai  /  tadanusAra jaisA Apane sunA hai, zravaNa kara jo nizcaya kiyA hai,
jaisA dekhA hai-sAkSAtkAra kiyA hai, vaha saba mujhe batalAye  /  kheyannae se
kusalAsupanne (blemahesI), aNaMtanANI ya aNaMtadaMsI  /  jaMsa siNo cakkhupahe
Thiyassa, jANAhi dhammaM ca dhiiM ca pehi  // 3 //  chAyA - khedajJaH sakuzala
AzuprajJa, anantajJAnI cAnantadarzI  /  yazasvinazcakSupathe sthitasya, jAnAsi
dharmaJca dhRtiJca prekSasva  //  anuvAda - zrI sudharmAsvAmI jambUsvAmI Adi
apane aMte vAsiyoM se kahate haiM ki-bhagavAna mahAvIra svAmI khedajJa-saMsAra
ke sabhI jIvoM kA duHkha jAnane vAle the-ahiMsA marmajJa the, kuzala-aSTavidha
karmoM kA nAza karane vAle the, AzuprajJa sadaiva, sarvatra upayoga yukta the,
ananta jJAna aura ananta darzana ke dhanI the  /  yazasvI tathA jagata ke locana
patha meM vidyamAna the  /  jagata ke cakSu rUpa the  /  una bhagavAna mahAvIra
dvArA pratipAdita dharma ko tuma jAno aura dhIratA-mAnasika sthiratA ke sAtha
vicAro  /  (344

Page #373 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the Veeraththu commentary - The Lord is endowed with thirty-four
atiśayas. He knows the suffering caused by the karmic consequences of living
beings in the world, hence he is known as Kheda-jña (knower of suffering). He is
capable of removing suffering by giving teachings. Or, if 'Kshetra-jña' means
'knower of the self' due to the knowledge of the true nature of the self, or if
'Kshetra' means 'space', then he is Kshetra-jña because he knows the nature of
the world and the non-world. He is called 'Kushala' because he destroys the
eight types of karmic forms called 'Bhavakushas'. He is skilled in destroying
the karma of living beings. He is 'Aashu-prajña' because his wisdom is swift. He
is always useful everywhere. He does not know by thinking like a 'Chhadma-stha'
(pretender). Sometimes the reading is 'Maharshi'. He is a great sage because he
is a great sage due to his intense penance and his endurance of countless
hardships and afflictions. He is 'Ananta-jñani' because his knowledge is
infinite, indestructible, and encompasses all things, or because it is the
special recipient of knowledge. He is 'Ananta-darshi' because he is the
determiner of general meaning. Such a Lord is 'Yashasvi' because his fame
surpasses that of humans, gods, and demons. He is the 'Chakshu-pathe' (eye path)
of the world, because he is in the state of 'Bhavastha-kevali'. He is the eye of
the world because he reveals the subtle and obstructed objects of the world.
Know the nature of the Dharma that liberates from the world, which is taught by
him. Know the Dharma called 'Shruta-charitra' which is taught by him. See the
'Dhriti' (steadfastness) of the Lord, which is unwavering and unmoving even when
afflicted by afflictions. See the 'Rati' (delight) in restraint, which is taught
by him. Consider it with your sharp and intelligent mind. Or, the Shramanas and
others asked Sudharmaswami, "Do you know the Dharma of the Lord, who is glorious
and the eye of the world, and his steadfast and intense restraint-filled life?
If so, tell us."  Thus, Sudharmaswami begins to describe his qualities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vIratthuI adhyayanaM TIkA - saH-bhagavAn catustriMzadatizayasametaH khedaM-
saMsArAntarvartinAM prANina karmavipAkajaM duHkhaM jAnAtIti khedajJo
du:khApanodanasamarthopadezadAnAt, yadi vA 'kSetrajJo' yathAvasthitAtmasvarUpa
parijJAnAdAtmajJa iti, athavAkSetram-AkAzaM tajjAnAtIti kSetrajJo
lokAlokasvarUpaparijJAtetyarthaH, tathA bhAvakuzAn-aSTavidhakarma rUpAn
lunAtichinattIti kuzalaH prANinAM karmocchittaye nipuNa ityarthaH, Azu-zIghraM
prajJA yasyA sAvAzuprajJaH, sarvatra sadopayogAd, na chadmastha iva vicintya
jAnAtIti bhAvaH, maharSiriti kvacitpAThaH, mahAMzcAsAvRSizca maharSiH
atyantograta pazcaraNAnuSThAyitvAdatulaparISahopasargasahanAcceti, tathA
anantam-avinAzyanantapadArthaparicchedakaM vA jJAna-vizeSagrAhakaM yasyA
sAvanantajJAnI, evaM sAmAnyArthaparicchedakatvenAnantadarzI, tadevambhUtasya
bhagavato yazo nRsurAsurAtizAyya tulaM vidyate yasya sa yazasvI tasya, lokasya
'cakSuHpathe' locanamArge bhavasthakevalyavasthAyAM sthitasya, lokAnAM
sUkSmavyavahitapadArthAvirbhAvanena cakSurbhUtasya vA jAnIhi' avagaccha dharma
saMsAroddharaNasvabhAvaM, tatpraNItaM vA zrutacAritrAkhyaM, tathA tasyaiva
bhagavatastathopasargitasthApi niSpakampAM cAritrAcalana svabhAvAM 'dhRti'
saMyame ratiM tatpraNItAM vA 'prekSasva' samyakkuzAgrIyayA buddhayA
paryAlocayeti, yadivA-taireva zramaNAdibhiH sudharmasvAmya bhihito yathAtvaM
tasya bhagavato yazasvinazcakSuSpathe vyavasthitasya dharmaM dhRrtiM ca jAnISe
tato'smAkaM 'pehi' tti kathayeti  // 3 //  sAmprataM sudharmasvAmI tadguNAn
kathayitumAha - TIkArtha - isa prakAra prazna kiye jAne para zrI sadharmAsvAmI
bhagavAna mahAvIra ke guNoM kA kathana karate haiM-bhagavAna mahAvIra cautIsa
atizayoM ke dhAraka the  /  ve saMsAra meM nivAsa karane vAle prANiyoM ke karmo
ke phalasvarUpa hone vAle duHkha ko jAnate the  /  ve aisA upadeza karate the jo
unake duHkha ko miTAne meM sakSama thA, athavA bhagavAna kSetrajJa the, ve AtmA
ke yathArtha-satya svarUpa ko jAnane ke kAraNa AtmajJa-AtmavettA the, athavA
kSetra kA AkAza bhI nAma hai, bhagavAna AkAza, loka aloka kA svarUpa jAnate the
/  jo aSTavidha karma rUpa bhAva kuzoM kA chedana karatA hai, use kuzala kahA
jAtA hai  /  bhagavAna prANiyoM ke karmoM kA chedana-nAza yA vidhvaMsa karane
meM catura the  /  catura hone ke kAraNa kuzala the  /  jisakI buddhi zIghra yA
tvaratA yukta hotI hai, use AzuprajJa kahA jAtA hai  /  bhagavAn AzuprajJa the,
kyoMki ve sadA saba jagaha upayoga rakhate the  /  isakA bhAvArtha yaha hai ki
ve chadmastha-asarvajJa kI taraha soca kara nahIM jAnate the  /  kahIM maharSiH-
pATha milatA hai  /  usakA tAtparya yaha hai ki bhagavAn atyanta kaThora
tapazcaraNa karane tathA aparisIma pariSahoM aura upasargoM ko sahana karane se
maharSimahAna RSi the  /  jisakA vizeSa grAhaka jJAna antarahita-avinazvara hotA
hai athavA ananta padArthoM kA nizcAyaka hotA hai, use ananta jJAnI kahate hai
/  bhagavAn anantajJAnI the  /  darzana yA sAmAnya artha kA nizcaya karane ke
kAraNa ve anantadarzI the  /  bhagavAna kA yaza mAnavoM, devoM aura asuroM se
bhI bar3hA car3hA thA  /  ataeva ve yazasvI the  /  bhavastha kevalI avasthA meM
ve jagata ke netra patha meM avasthita the, athavA jagata ke samasta sUkSma
tathA vyavadhAna yukta padArthoM ko prakaTa karane ke kAraNa ve jagata ke netra
svarUpa the  /  una bhagavAna dvArA pratipAdita dharma ko jo saMsAra se uddhAra
karane kA svabhAva lie hue hai, una dvArA prAtipAdita zruta evaM cAritra rUpa
dharma ko jAno  /  upasargoM dvArA bAdhita kiye jAne para bhI niSpakampa,
avicala cAritra rUpa svabhAva tathA avicala dhRti-saMyama meM prIti ko dekho
tathA kuzAgra-tIvra buddhi dvArA una para ciMtana karo  /  sArAMza yaha hai ki
unhIM zramaNa Adi ne zrI sudharmA svAmI se pUchA ki yazasvI aura jagata ke
cakSurUpa bhagavAna mahAvIra ke dharma ko aura unake dhairyazIlautkaTa
saMyamamaya jIvana ko Apa jAnate haiM, isalie Apa yaha saba batalAye  /  saaye|
345

Page #374 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 4:**  **"In the upward, downward, and
horizontal directions, in all the directions, those who tremble, those who are
stationary, and those who are living beings, the wise one, considering them as
both eternal and non-eternal, like a lamp, illuminates the Dharma, the right
path."**  **Translation:**  The wise one, the omniscient Lord Mahavira,
considered all beings, those who tremble (mobile beings), those who are
stationary (immobile beings), and those who are living beings, in all
directions, both in the upward, downward, and horizontal directions, as both
eternal and non-eternal. Like a lamp, he illuminated the Dharma, the right path,
for all beings.  **Commentary:**  In this verse, the Sutra Kritanga Sutra
describes the omniscience of Lord Mahavira and his ability to see the true
nature of all beings. He understands that all beings are both eternal and non-
eternal, and he uses this knowledge to illuminate the Dharma, the right path,
for all beings.  The commentary explains that the "trembling" beings are those
who have a body and can move, while the "stationary" beings are those who are
rooted in the earth, such as plants. The "living beings" are all those who have
life, including both mobile and immobile beings.  The commentary also explains
that Lord Mahavira's knowledge is like a lamp, illuminating the Dharma for all
beings. This means that his knowledge is not limited to a select few, but is
available to all who are willing to learn.  The commentary concludes by stating
that Lord Mahavira's purpose in illuminating the Dharma is not to gain praise or
honor, but to benefit all beings. He is a true compassionate being who wants to
help all beings achieve liberation from suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram uDDhaM aheyaM tiriyaM disAsu, tasA ya je thAvara je ya
pANA  /  se NiccaNiccehiM samikkha panne, dIveva dhammaM samiyaM udAhu  // 4 //
chAyA Urdhva madhastiryyagdizAsu, trasAzca ye sthAvarA ye ca prANAH  /  sa
nityAnityAbhyAM prasamIkSya prajJaH, dIpaiva dharmaM samitamudAha  //  - anuvAda
kevala jJAna sampanna bhagavAn mahAvIra ne Urdhva, adha aura tiryak, dizAoM meM
vidyamAna sa aura sthAvara prANiyoM kI nitya aura anitya donoM prakAra se
samIkSA kara dIpaka ke samAna padArtha ko prakAzita karane vAle dharma kA
pratipAdana kiyA  /  - TIkA UrdhvamadhastiryakSu sarvatraiva
caturdazarajjvAtmake loke ye kecana trasyantIti trasAstejovAyu
rUpavikalendriyapaJcendriyabhedAt tridhA, tathA ye ca 'sthAvarAH'
pRthivyambuvanaspatibhedAt trividhA, ete uccha vAsAdayaH prANA vidyante yeSAM te
prANina iti anena ca zAkyAdimatanirAsena pRthivyAdyekendriyANAmapi
jIvatvamAveditaM bhavati, sa bhagavAMstAn prANina: prakarSeNa kevalajJAnitvAt
jAnAtIti prajJa: (granthAgram 4250 ) sa eva prAjJo nityAnityAbhyAM
dravyArthaparyAyArthAzrayAt 'samIkSya' kevalajJAnenArthAn parijJAya
prajJApanAyogyA nAhetyuttareNa sambandhaH tathA sa prANinAM padArthAvirbhAvanena
dIpavat dIpaH yadivA-saMsArArNava patitAnAM sadupadezapradAnata AzvAsahetutvAt
dvIpa ivadvIpa:, sa evambhUtaH saMsArottAraNa samarthaM 'dharmaM '
zrutacAritrAkhyaM samyak itaM gataMsadanuSThAnatayA rAgadveSarahitatvena
samatayA vA, tathA coktam - " jahAM puNNassa katthai tahA tucchassa katthai "
ityAdi, samaM vA dharmam ut- prAblyena Aha-uktavAn prANinAmanugrahArthaM na
pUjAsatkArArthamiti  // 4 //  kiJcAnyAt TIkArtha I aba zrI sudharmAsvAmI
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke guNoM kA varNana karane hetu kahate haiM- urdhva, adha
tiryak dizAoM meM caturdaza rajju parimita isa loka meM rahane vAle tejo rUpa
aura vAyu rUpa vikalendriya evaM paJcendriya bheda yukta tIna prakAra ke trasa
prANI haiN| pRthvI, jala aura vanaspati ke rUpa meM tIna prakAra ke sthAvara
prANI hai, inake ucchvAsa Adi prANa hote haiM  /  isalie ye prANI kahe jAte haiM
/  isa pratipAdana dvArA zAkya - bauddha Adi siddhAntoM kA khaNDana karate hue
pRthvI Adi eka indriya yukta prANiyoM ko bhI jIva kahA hai  /  kevalajJAnI hone
ke kAraNa bhagavAna ina prANiyoM ko jAnate haiM  /  isalie ve prajJa hai  /  jo
prajJa haiM usI ko prAjJa kahA jAtA hai  /  bhagavAn ne kevala jJAna dvArA
dravyArthika aura paryAyArthika naya kA Azraya lekara samasta padArthoM ko
jAnakara jo prANI sulabha bodhi hai, unako udiSTa kara dharma kA kathana kiyA
hai| yaha Age ke vivecana ke sAtha saMbaddha kara lenA caahie| bhagavAna
prANiyoM ke lie padArthoM kA svarUpa prakaTa - ujAgara karane se dIpaka ke
sadRza haiM  /  isalie ve dIpa haiM  /  unako dIpa ke rUpa meM abhihita kiyA
hai, athavA saMsAra rUpI samudra meM prapatita prANiyoM ko sadjJAna ke upadeza
dvArA vizrAma dete haiM  /  isalie ve samudra meM vidyamAna dvIpa ke samAna
haiM, jo logoM ke lie vizrAma sthala hotA hai| aise viziSTa guNa yukta bhagavAn
ne saMsAra se uddhAra karane meM samasta zruta cAritra mUlaka dharma kA AkhyAna
kiyA hai  /  bhagavAna ne ukta dharma ko sad anuSThAna, tadanurUpa sadudyama
zIla hokara athavA rAga aura dveSa se vivarjita hokara athavA samatva bhAva ke
sAtha bar3A jora dekara kahA hai  /  ataeva kahA gayA hai- jaise puNya -
puNyAtmA dhanI ko dharma kA upadeza kre| usI taraha tuccha nirdhana ko bhI
dharma kA upadeza kare  /  bhagavAn ne prANiyoM para anugraha kara kRpA kara
dharma kA pratipAdana kiyA hai| pUjA satkAra mAna sammAna Adi ke lie nahIM  /
OM OM OM - - 346

Page #375 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the heroic. He, the all-seeing, the conqueror of all knowledge,
stands firm in the state of non-odor. He is the unsurpassed knower in all the
worlds, free from the fetters of the past, fearless, and without lifespan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vIratthuI adhyayanaM  /  se savvadaMsI abhIbhUyanANI, NirAmagaMdhe dhiimaM
ThitappA  /  aNuttare savvajagaMsi vijaM, gaMthA atIte abhae aNAU  // 5 //
chAyA - sa sarvadarzI abhibhUya jJAnI, nirAmagandho dhRtimAMsthitAtmA  /
anuttaraH sarvajagatsu vidvAn granthA datIto'bhayo'nAyuH  /  anuvAda - bhagavAna
mahAvIra samasta padArthoM ke dRSTA kevalajJAnI the  /  ve mUla guNoM evaM
uttara guNoM se parimArjita cAritra ke paripAlaka dhRti mAna aura sthitAtmA the,
Atma svarUpa meM samavasthita the| ve samasta jagata meM anuttara jJAnI-
sarvAdhika jJAnavAna tathA bAhya evaM Abhyantara granthiyoM se atIta nirbhaya
evaM nirAyu the  /  TIkA - 'sa' bhagavAn sarvaM-jagat carAcaraM sAmAnyena
draSTuM zIlamasya sa sarvadarzI, tathA abhibhUya parAjitya matyAdIni catvAryapi
jJAnAni yadvartate jJAnaM kevalAkhyaM tena jJAnena jJAnI, anena
cAparatIrthAdhipAdhikatvamAveditaM bhavati, 'jJAna kriyAbhyAM mokSa' iti
kRtvAtasya bhagavato jJAnaM pradarzya kriyAM darzayitumAha-nirgata:-apagata AmaH
-avizodhikoTyAkhyaH tathA gandho-vizodhikoTirUpo yasmAt sa bhavati
nirAmagandhaH, mUlottaraguNabhedabhinnAMcAritrakriyAM kRtavAnityarthaH,
tathA'sahya parISahopasargAbhidruto'piniSprakampatayA cAritre dhRtimAn tathA-
sthito vyavasthito'zeSa karma vigamAdAtmasvarUpe AtmA yasya sa bhavati
sthitAtmA, etacca jJAna kriyayoH phaladvAreNa vizeSaNaM, tathAnAsyottaraM-
pradhAnaM sarvasyannapi jagati vidyate (yaH) sa tathA, vidvAniti sakala
padArthAnAM karatalAmalakanyAyena vettA, tathA bAhyagranthAt
sacittAdibhedAdAntarAcca karmarupAd 'atIto' atikrAnto granthAtIto-nirgrantha
ityarthaH, tathA na vidyate saptaprakAramapi bhayaM yasyAsAvabhayaH
samastabhayarahita ityarthaH tathA na vidyate caturvidhamapyAyuryakya sa
bhavatyanAyuH, dagdhakarmabIjatvena punarUtpatterasaMbhavAditi  // 5 //  apica -
TIkArtha - bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI sarvadarzI-svabhAvataH samasta carAcara
jagata ko sAmAnya rUpa se dekhane vAle the  /  jo mati Adi cAra jJAnoM ko
parAbhUta kara sarvAgra rUpa meM rahatA hai, use kevala jJAna kahate haiM  /
bhagavAn usase samAyukta the  /  sUtrakAra yahA~ bhagavAna ko kevala jJAnI
batAkara anya matAnuyAyiyoM ke tIrthaMkaroM se unakI vizeSatA prakaTa karate
haiM  /  jJAna tathA kriyA donoM se mokSa hotA hai  /  ataeva sUtrakAra pahale
bhagavAn ke jJAna kA digdarzana karAkara aba unakI kriyA kA nirUpaNa karane hetu
kahate haiM-vizuddha koTi rUpa aura avizuddha koTi rUpa do prakAra ke gandha yA
doSa batalAe gaye haiM  /  jisake ye doSa haTa jAte haiM, use nirAmagaMdha kahA
jAtA hai  /  bhagavAna mahAvIra nirAmagandha the  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki
unhoMne mUlaguNoM aura uttaraguNoM se yukta vizuddha cAritrika kriyA kA
paripAlana kiyA thA  /  asahya parISahoM aura upasargoM ke rUpa meM bAdhAeM
prApta hone para bhI ve niSprakampa-avicala bane rahe  /  cAritra meM sarvathA
dRr3ha rahe  /  samagra karmoM ke apagata ho jAne se bhagavAn AtmasvarUpa meM
avasthita hue  /  AtmasvarUpa meM sthira honA, bhagavAna ke jJAna aura kriyA
sampanna hone kI vizeSatA kA sUcaka hai  /  samasta jagata meM bhagavAna se
adhika koI jJAnI nahIM thA  /  ve hAtha meM rakhe A~vale kI jyoM jagata ke
samasta padArthoM ke vettA-jJAtA the  /  ve sacittAdi rUpa bAhya graMtha tathA
karmarUpa Abhyantara graMtha se atikrAnta the-dUravartI the  /  ataeva nigrantha
the  /  bhagavAna ko sAtoM hI prakAra ke bhaya nahIM the, ata: ve sarvabhayAtIta
the  /  bhagavAna ke cAroM prakAra kA AyuSya nahIM thA (yahA~ vartamAna Ayu kA
apavAda hai)  /  karma rUpa bIja ke jala jAne se AyuSya kI utpatti asaMbhAvita
hai  /  -347

Page #376 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra. He is the one who has attained the highest knowledge,
the one who is free from attachments, the one who is patient, the one who has
infinite vision. He shines like the sun, he illuminates like the fire of
Vaishravana. ||6||  Commentary - The Bhagavan Mahavira is the one who has
attained the highest knowledge, the one who is free from attachments, the one
who is patient, the one who has infinite vision. He shines like the sun, he
illuminates like the fire of Vaishravana.  Explanation - The word "Bhuta" is
used in the sense of growth, auspiciousness, and protection. Therefore, "Bhuta-
prajna" means one who has attained the highest knowledge, one who has infinite
knowledge. Thus, "Bhuta-prajna" means one who has attained the highest
knowledge, one who is the protector of the world, and one who is the source of
all auspiciousness. Similarly, "Aniyata" means unattached, free from
attachments. Therefore, "Aniyata-chari" means one who is free from attachments,
one who is free to move about as he pleases. Similarly, "Oghantara" means one
who has crossed the ocean of samsara, the ocean of worldly existence. Similarly,
"Dhira" means one who is wise, one who is patient, one who is able to endure
hardship. Similarly, "Ananta-chakshu" means one who has infinite vision, one who
has the knowledge of all things, one who is the light of the world. Similarly,
just as the sun shines most brightly, just as there is no one who shines more
brightly than the sun, so too the Bhagavan is the most knowledgeable. Similarly,
just as the fire of Vaishravana, the fire of Indra, illuminates the darkness, so
too the Bhagavan illuminates the darkness of ignorance and reveals the true
nature of things. ||6||  Furthermore,  Explanation - The word "Bhuta" is used in
the sense of knowledge, auspiciousness, and protection. The Bhagavan Mahavira is
the one who has attained the highest knowledge, one who is the protector of the
world, and one who is the source of all auspiciousness. His knowledge is the
source of all auspiciousness. The Bhagavan is free from attachments, one who is
free to move about as he pleases. He has crossed the ocean of samsara, the ocean
of worldly existence. He is wise, patient, and able to endure hardship. He has
infinite vision, one who has the knowledge of all things, one who is the light
of the world. Just as the sun shines most brightly, just as there is no one who
shines more brightly than the sun, so too the Bhagavan is the most
knowledgeable. Just as the fire of Vaishravana, the fire of Indra, illuminates
the darkness, so too the Bhagavan illuminates the darkness of ignorance and
reveals the true nature of things.  The highest Dharma is this, the Dharma of
the Jinas, the leader of the Munis, Kashyapa, the one who is quick to
understand. He is like Indra, the great one among the gods, the leader of
thousands, the one who is unique in the heavens. ||7||  Commentary - The highest
Dharma is this, the Dharma of the Jinas, the leader of the Munis, Kashyapa, the
one who is quick to understand. He is like Indra, the great one among the gods,
the leader of thousands, the one who is unique in the heavens.  -348

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram . se bhUipaNNe aNie acArI, ohaMtare dhIre aNaMta cakkhU
/  aNuttaraM tappati sUrie vA, vairoyaNiMde va tamaM pagAse  // 6 //  chAyA - sa
bhUtiprajJo'niyatAcArI, oghantaro dhIra anantacakSuH  /  anuttaraM tapati sUryya
iva, vairocanendra ivatamaH prakAzayati  //  anuvAda - bhagavAna mahAvIra bhUti
prajJa-anaMta jJAna yukta aniyatAcArI-icchAnusAra vicaraNazIla, saMsAra sAgara
ke pAragAmI dhIra-bar3e buddhizIla, dhairyazIla, kaSTasahiSNu aura aNaMta cakSu,
kevala jJAna sampanna the  /  ve sUrya ke sadRza tapanazIla-jJAnodyota se yukta
the  /  jaise agni aMdhakAra ko naSTa kara detI hai, vaise hI ve ajJAna kA nAza
kara prakAza ke prasAraka the  /  TIkA - bhUti zabdo vRddhau maGgale rakSAyAM ca
vartane, tatra 'bhUtiprajJaH' pravRddhaprajJaH anantajJAnavAnityarthaH tathA-
bhUtiprajJo jagadrakSAbhUtaprajJaH evaM sarvamaGgalabhUtaprajJa iti, tathA
'aniyatam' apratibaddhaM parigrahAyogAccarituM zIlamasyAsAvaniyatacArI
tathaugha-saMsArasamudratarituM zIlamasyA sa tathA, tathA dhI:-buddhistayA
rAjata iti dhIraH parISahopasargAkSobhyo vA dhIraH, tathA anantaM-jJeyAnantatayA
nityatayA vA cakSuriva cakSuH kevalajJAnaM yasyAvantasya vA lokasya
padArthaprakAzakatayA cakSurbhUto yaH sa bhavatyanantanvakSuH, tathA yathA-
sUryaH 'anuttaraM' sarvAdhikaM tapati na tasmAdadhistApena kazcidasti,
evamasAvapi bhagavAn jJAnena sarvottama iti, tathA vairocana: agniH sa eva
prajvalitatvAt indro yathA'sau tamo'panIya prakAzayati, eva masAvapi
bhagavAnajJAnatamo'panIya yathAvasthita padArtha prakAzanaM karoti  // 6 //
kiJca  /  TIkArtha - bhUti zabda buddhi, maMgala aura rakSaNa ke arthoM meM
prayukta hotA hai  /  bhagavAna mahAvIra bhUti prajJa the arthAt jJAna meM bar3e
car3he the, ananta jJAnI the  /  ve jagata kA rakSaNa karane vAlI prajJA se
yukta the  /  sabake lie maMgala prajJa the| unakI prajJA meM sabakA maMgala yA
kalyANa samAyA huA thaa| bhagavAna aniyatAcArI-apratibaddha vihArI the  /  unake
viharaNa yA gati meM koI pratibandha yA avarodha nahIM thA  /  ve saMsAra rUpI
augha ke-jagata pravAha ke pAragAmI the  /  ve buddhizIla the  /  parISahoM aura
upasargoM se vicalita na kiye jAne yogya dhairya se yukta the  /  ve ananta
cakSu the, arthAt jJeya padArthoM kI anantatA aura jJAna kI nityatA ke kAraNa
kevala jJAnAtmaka cakSu rUpa the  /  athavA bhagavAna samagraloka ke pratyeka
padArtha kA yathArtha svarUpa prakAzita karane ke kAraNa ananta cakSu the  /
jisa prakAra sUrya sabase adhika tapatA hai, sarvAdhika jyotirmaya hai, usase
adhika koI nahIM tapatA, usI prakAra bhagavAna bhI jJAna meM sarvottama the  /
prajjavalitatA ke kAraNa indra svarUpa agni andhakAra ko apanIta kara-haTAkara
prakAza kA saMprasAra karatI hai, usI prakAra bhagavAna mahAvIra ajJAna rUpa
aMdhakAra ko apanIta karamiTAkara padArthoM kA yathArthasvarUpa prakAzita karate
the  /  aNutaraM dhammamiNaM jiNANaM, NeyA muNI kAsava Asupanne  /  iMdeva
devANa mahANubhAve, sahassaNetA divi NaM visiTe  // 7 //  chAyA - anuttaraM
dharmamimaM jinAnAM, netA muniH kAzyapa AzuprajJaH  /  _indra iva devAnAM
mahAnubhAvaH sahastranetA divinaM viziSTaH  //  -348

Page #377 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thui Adhyay  **Translation:**  This study (Thui Adhyay)  **Translation of
Ashuprajna:** The swift-minded, Kashyap gotra-born, Lord Mahavira, the leader of
the supreme Dharma (religion) established by Lord Rishabha and other
Tirthankaras, is the preacher in the present age. Just as Indra is the best
among all the gods in the Devaloka (heaven), similarly, Lord Mahavira is the
best in this world.  **Commentary:**  There is no other, superior Dharma than
this, which is related to the Tirthankaras, starting with Rishabha, established
by this Muni (sage), the glorious Vardhamana, who is born in the Kashyap gotra,
is Ashuprajna (swift-minded), Kevalajnani (omniscient), possessing divine
knowledge, and a leader. This is indicated by the sixth case ending in "na"
(e.g., "loka-avyaya-nistha" - not attached to worldly things) in the sutra
(aphorism) "na loka-avyaya-nistha khalartha-trinanam" (P. 2-3-69). Therefore,
the second case ending in "am" is used for "dharma" (religion). Similarly, Indra
is the "mahanubhava" (great and powerful) in the "divi" (heaven) among thousands
of gods. The word "neta" (leader) is used here in the sense of "pranayaka"
(guide) and is distinguished by his form, strength, color, etc., and is the most
important. Similarly, the Lord is also distinguished from all, is the guide, and
is great and powerful. ||7|| Further,  **Commentary Meaning:**  The omniscient,
born in the Kashyap gotra, Lord Mahavira is the leader of the supreme Dharma,
which is unmatched and established by Lord Rishabha and other Tirthankaras. He
is the preacher in the present age. Here, the word "neta" (leader) has the
suffix "trna" which indicates "taachchheelya" (excellence). Therefore, due to
the prohibition of the sixth case ending in "na" by the sutra "na loka-avyaya-
nistha khalartha-trinanam" (not attached to worldly things), the second case
ending in "am" is used for "dharma" (religion).  Just as Indra is the
"mahanubhava" (great and powerful) among thousands of gods in the heaven, is the
leader of all, and is the most important in terms of form, strength, color,
etc., similarly, Lord Mahavira is the best, the leader of all, and the most
powerful. Here, the word "nam" is used in the "vakyalankara" (figure of speech),
which should be known.  **Verse 8:**  Just as the ocean is inexhaustible,
similarly, the Lord is the possessor of inexhaustible, imperishable knowledge.
His knowledge is vast like the self-born, beautiful ocean. Just as the water of
that ocean is pure, similarly, the knowledge of Lord Mahavira is pure and free
from impurities. The Lord is free from the "kashayas" (passions). He is like
Indra, the king of gods, and is very glorious.  **Commentary:**  This Lord is
known as "prajna" (knowledge). His knowledge is "akshaya" (inexhaustible) and
his knowledge is not diminished or destroyed. His knowledge is "kevalajnana"
(omniscient), which is infinite in terms of time, space, and substance. Due to
the lack of a suitable example, it is said that his knowledge is like the
"sagar" (ocean). Since the ocean is vast, deep, and undisturbed, similarly, the
Lord's knowledge is vast, deep, and undisturbed. Just as the ocean is "anavila"
(pure) and has pure water, similarly, the Lord's knowledge is pure and free from
impurities. The "kashayas" (passions) are present in those who are "kashayin"
(passionate), but the Lord is not "kashayin" (passionate) but is "akashayin"
(free from passions). He is free from the "karma-bandhana" (bondage of karma)
like "jnana-avaran" (veil of knowledge). The word "bhikshu" (mendicant) is used
in some texts. Its meaning is: Even though he is free from all obstacles, is
worthy of worship by all, and lives only on alms, he is still a "bhikshu"
(mendicant). He does not live on the wealth obtained from fire sacrifices, etc.
Similarly, he is like "shakra" (Indra), the king of gods, and is "dyutiman"
(glorious). ||8|| Further,  **End of Translation**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 thuI adhyaya anuvAda AzuprajJa - tvarita buddhizIla, kAzyapa gautrIya bhagavAna
zrI mahAvIra, bhagavAna zrI RSabhAdi tIrthaMkaroM ke dvArA praNIta uttama dharma
ke netA - vartamAna yuga meM upadeSTA haiM  /  jaise devaloka meM indra saba
devoM meM zreSTha hai, isI prakAra bhagavAna mahAvIra isa jagata meM
sarvazreSTha haiM  /  - TIkA nAsyontaro'stInyanuttarastamimamanutaraM dharmaM
'jinAnAm' RSabhAditIrthakRtAM sambandhinamayaM 'muniH' zrImAn vardhamAnAkhya:
'kAzyapa' gotreNa' AzuprajJaH 'kevalajJAnI utpannadivyajJAno 'netA' praNeteti,
tAcchIlikastRn tadyoge naM lokAvyayaniSThe ( pA. 2 - 3 - 69) tyAdinA
SaSThIpratiSedhAddharmamityatra karmaNi dvitIyaiva, tathA cendro 'divi ' svarge
devasahastrANAM'mahAnubhAvo 'mahAprabhAvavAn' Nama' iti vAkyAlaGkAre tathA netA'
praNAyako 'viziSTo rUpabalavarNAdibhiH pradhAnaH evaM bhagavAnapi sarvebhyo
viziSTaH praNAyakomahAnubhAvazceti ||7|| apica TIkArtha - kevala jJAna saMpanna,
kAzyapa gautrotpannA bhagavAna mahAvIra anuttara- jisase bar3hakara koI nahIM
hai, sarvottama, bhagavAna RSabha Adi tIrthaMkaroM dvArA praNIta dharma ke netA
haiN| vartamAna yuga meM upadeSTA haiM  /  yahA~ netA zabda meM tAcchIlyArthaka
tRNa pratyaya huA hai  /  ataH usake yoga meM 'na lokAvyaya niSThA
khalarthatRnAm' ityAdi sUtra dvArA SaSThI kA pratiSedha hone se dharma pada meM
karmaNi dvitIyA huI hai  /  svarga loka meM jisa prakAra indra sahastroM devoM
meM mahAnubhAva - mahAprabhAvavAna hai, saba kA netA hai, rUpa parAkrama varNa
Adi meM saba se pradhAna - sarvazreSTha hai  /  usI prakAra bhagavAna mahAvIra
sarvazreSTha, sabake nAyaka, sarvAdhika prabhAvazAlI haiM  /  yahA~ NaM zabda
vAkyAlaMkAra meM AyA hai, yaha jJAtavya hai  /  se pannayA akkhayasAgare vA,
mahodahIvAvianaMtapAre  /  aNAile vA akasAi bhukke, sakkeva devAhiiva juimaM  //
8 //  chAyA sa prajJayA'kSayaH sAgara iva, mahodadhirivAnantapAraH  /  anAvilo
vA akasAyimuktaH, zukraiva devAdhipatirdyutimAn  //  anuvAda bhagavAna sAgara kI
jyoM akSaya-avinazvara prajJA ke dhanI haiM unakI prajJA svayaMbhU ramaNa
samudra ke samAna apAra hai  /  jaise usa samudra kA jala nirmala hai, usI
prakAra bhagavAna mahAvIra kI prajJA nirmala - vikAra rahita hai  /  bhagavAna
kaSAyoM se vimukta haiM  /  ve devatAoM ke adhipati indra ke sadRza haiN| bar3e
ditimAna - pratApazAlI haiM  /  - TIkA asau bhagavAn prajJAyate'nayeti prajJA
tayA 'akSayaH' na tasya jJAtavye'rthebuddhi pratikSIyate pratihanyate vA,
tasyahi buddhiH kevalajJAnAkhyA, sA ca sAdyaparyavasAranAkAlato
dravyakSetrabhAvairapyanantA, sarvasAmyena dRSTAntAbhAvAd, ekadezena tvAha-yathA
'sAgara' iti, asya cAviziSTatvAt vizeSaNamAha-'mahodadhiriva' svayambhUramaNa
ivAnantapAraH yathA'sau vistIrNo gambhIrajalo'kSobhyazca, evaM tasyApi bhagavato
vistIrNA prajJA svayambhUramaNAnantaguNA gambhIrA'kSobhyA ca, yathA ca asau
sAgara: 'anAvila: 'akaluSajala:, evaM bhagavAnapi tathAvidhakarmalezA
bhAvAdakaluSajJAna iti, tathA kaSAyA vidyante yasyAsau kaSAyI na kaSAyI akaSAyI,
tathA jJAnAvaraNIyAdi karmabandhanAdviyukto muktaH bhikSuriti kvacitpAThaH
tasyAyamartha:- satyapi niHzeSAntarAyakSaye sarvalokapUjyatve ca tathApi
bhikSAmAtrajIvitvAt bhikSurevAsau, nAkSINamahAnasAdilabdhimupa jIvatIti, tathA
zakraiva - devAdhipatiH 'dyutimAn ' dIptimAniti  // 8 //  kiJca - 349

Page #378 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra Tikaarth -   **Knowledge (Prajna) is that by which
objects are known. Bhagwan Mahavira is inexhaustible in terms of knowledge. The
object that is knowable, in that, Bhagwan's intellect does not experience decay,
is not obstructed, and is not blocked by anyone. The name of their intellect is
only knowledge - omniscience (Sarvjna). That only knowledge is, in terms of
time, infinite and without end, including the past, present, and future. In
terms of substance, space, and emotion, it is infinite. There is no example of
its equality or equivalence in its entirety. There is no object that is
completely equal to it, by which it can be compared. The Sutrakar gives a local,
partial example. Just as the ocean is filled with inexhaustible water, in the
same way, Bhagwan is filled with inexhaustible knowledge. The word "ocean"
refers to the ordinary sea. Therefore, its qualifier - a particular ocean - is
discussed. Just as the ocean called "Swayambhu Raman" is vast, deep, filled with
very deep water, and unshakable, in the same way, Bhagwan Mahavira's knowledge
is also vast and infinitely deeper than the ocean "Swayambhu Raman", and
unshakable. Just as the water of "Swayambhu Raman" is pure and clear, in the
same way, Bhagwan's knowledge is also pure and free from any impurities due to
the absence of even a trace of karma. Those who have passions are called "Kasai"
or "Kasayavan". But Bhagwan was free from passions. Therefore, they were
"Akasai". Their knowledge-related karma, like "Jnanavarniya", was destroyed,
therefore they were liberated. Somewhere, "Bhikkhu" - "Bhikshu" is found in the
text. Its meaning is that all the obstacles and hindrances of Bhagwan were
destroyed. They were worthy of worship by the entire world. Even though they
were like this, they earned their livelihood through begging. They were capable
of obtaining inexhaustible wealth, food, etc., but they did not use the power of
"Labdhi-Yog Vibhuti". Bhagwan was the lord of the gods, like Indra, and was
"Deetiman" - "Deetiman".**  **"Se" Veeriyena Padipunna Veeriye, Sudansane Va
Nagasavvasethe. Suralae Vasi Mudagare Se, Viraaye Nega Guno Vavee.**  **Chhaya -
Sa Veeriyena Pratipurna Veeryah Sudarsana Iva Nagasavvasresthah. Suralaya
Vasimudagara Sa, Virajate Aneka Gunopyetah.**  **Anuvaad - Bhagwan Mahavira is
full of strength - full of self-power. Just as Mount Sumeru is the best among
mountains, they are the best in the world. They are the source of joy for the
gods, just as they are full of many excellent qualities.**  **Tika - "Sa"
Bhagwan "Veeriyena" - with strength, courage, fortitude, etc., due to the
complete destruction of the obstacles to strength. "Pratipurna Veeryah", and
"Sudarsana" - like Mount Sumeru, the navel of Jambudvipa, just as he is the best
of all mountains, so Bhagwan is also the best in terms of strength and other
qualities. Just as "Suralaya" - heaven, is the "Mudakara" - joy-giving, for its
inhabitants, with qualities like beautiful color, taste, smell, touch, and
radiance, "Virajate" - shines, so Bhagwan also shines with many qualities. Or,
just as the heaven of the gods is "Mudakara" - joy-giving, with many qualities,
so he also shines, and so is Mount Sumeru.**  **Punaarapi Drishtaant
Bhutmeruvarnaanaayaah**  **Tikaarth - Due to the complete destruction of the
karma that obstructs strength, Bhagwan is full of strength, courage, fortitude,
and special bodily structure, etc. Mount Sumeru, which is like the navel of
Jambudvipa. Just as...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - jisake dvArA padArthoM ko jAnA jAtA hai use
prajJA kahA jAtA hai  /  bhagavAna mahAvIra prajJA kI dRSTi se akSaya haiM  /
jo padArtha jJeya hai-jAnane yogya hai, usameM bhagavAna kI buddhi kSaya ko
prApta nahIM hotI, pratihata nahIM hotI  /  kisI ke dvArA avaruddha nahIM hotI
/  unakI buddhi kA nAma kevala jJAna-sarvajJatva hai  /  vaha kevala-jJAna kAla
kI dRSTi se sAdI Adi sahita aura ananta-antarahita hai  /  dravya, kSetra evaM
bhAva kI dRSTi se ananta hai  /  sampUrNa rUpa meM usakI samAnatA yA tulyatA kA
koI udAharaNa nahIM milatA  /  aisA koI padArtha nahIM hai jo sampUrNa rUpa meM
usake samAna ho, jisase use upamita kiyA jA sake  /  sUtrakAra eka dezIya-AMzika
dRSTAnta dete hai  /  samudra jisa prakAra akSaya jala yukta hotA hai usI
prakAra bhagavAna akSaya jJAna yukta haiM  /  samudra zabda sAdhAraNa sAgara kA
bodhaka hai  /  isalie usake vizeSaNa-eka vizeSa samudra kI carcA karate haiM  /
jisa prakAra svayaM bhU ramaNa nAmaka samudra apAra vizAla tathA gambhIra,
atyanta gahare jala se yukta hai tathA akSobhya haikSabdha nahIM kiyA jA sakatA,
usI prakAra bhagavAna mahAvIra kI prajJA-jJAna bhI vistIrNa tathA svayaM bhU
ramaNa samudra se bhI atyanta ananta gunA gambhIra gaharA tathA akSobhya hai  /
jisa prakAra svayaM bhU ramaNa kA jala nirmala-svacca hai usI prakAra bhagavAna
kA jJAna bhI leza mAtra karma ke avaziSTa na rahane ke kAraNa nirmala-nirvikAra
zuddha hai| jisameM kaSAya hote haiM, use kasAI yA kaSAyavAna kahate haiM  /
parantu bhagavAna kaSAya varjita the  /  ata: ve akaSAI the  /  unake
jJAnAvarNIya Adi karmabandha naSTa ho cuke the, isalie ve mukta the  /  kahIM
bhikkhU-bhikSu pATha prApta hotA hai| usakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki bhagavAna ke
sabhI antarAya-bAdhaka heta naSTa ho cake the| ve samagra saMsAra ke pUjya the
/  aisA hote hue bhI bhikSAvRtti dvArA apanA nirvAha karate the ve akSINa
mahAnasAdi-yatheccha bhojyAdi prApta karAne meM sakSama, labdhi-yoga vibhUti kA
upayoga nahIM karate the| bhagavAna indra kI taraha devatAoM ke adhipati the,
dItimAna-dIptimAna the  /  'se' vIrieNaM paDipunnavIrie, sudaMsaNe vA
NagasavvaseThe  /  surAlae vAsimudAgare se, virAyae NegaguNo vavee  // 9 //
chAyA - sa vIryeNa pratipUrNavIryaH sudarzana iva nagasarvazreSThaH  /  surAlayo
vAsimudAkaraH sa, virAjate'nekaguNopayetaH  //  anuvAda - bhagavAn mahAvIra
pUrNa vIrya-sampUrNa Atma parAkrama yukta haiM  /  parvatoM meM jisa prakAra
sumeru parvata sarvazreSTha hai, ve jagata meM sarvazreSTha-uttama haiM  /
devatAoM ke lie harSotpAda svarga kI jyoM ve aneka uttamottama guNoM se yukta
haiN| TIkA - 'sa' bhagavAn 'vIryeNa' aurasena balena dhRtisaMhanavAdibhizca
vIryAntarAyasya ni:zeSataH kSayAt . pratipUrNavIryaH, tathA 'sudarzano'
merujambUdvIpa nAbhibhUtaH sa yathA nagAnAM-parvatAnAM sarveSAM zreSTha:-
pradhAnaH tathA bhagavAnapi vIryeNAnyaizca guNaiH sarvazreSTha iti, tathA yathA
'surAlayaH' svargastannivAsinAM 'mudAkaro' harSajanaka:
prazastavarNarasagandhasparzaprabhAvAdirbhirguNairupeto 'virAjate' zobhate, evaM
bhagavAnapyanekairguNairUpeto virAjata iti, yadivAyathA tridazAlayo
mudAkaro'nekairguNaikapeto virAjata iti evamasAvapi meruriti  /  / 9 /  /
punarapi dRSTAnta bhUtameruvarNanAyAha TIkArtha - vIryAntarAya karma ke sampUrNa
rUpa meM kSINa ho jAne se bhagavAna orasa bala, ghRtI evaM saMhananavizeSa
dehika racanA Adi baloM se paripUrNa haiM  /  sumeru parvata jo jambU dvIpa kI
nAbhi ke sadRza hai  /  jisa prakAra 350)

Page #379 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the Vira-ththu is the best among all the mountains, just as Lord
Mahavira is the best in terms of strength, self-power, and unparalleled
qualities. Heaven, where the gods reside, is joyful for them. It is adorned with
excellent color, taste, smell, touch, and effect, just as the Lord is adorned
with many qualities. Or, just as heaven is pleasant and adorned with many
qualities, so is Mount Sumeru. Describing the Mount Sumeru mentioned in the
example again, it is said:  **Verse 10**  * **Sanskrit:** सयं सहस्साण उ जोयणाणं,
तिकंडगे पंडगवेजयंते । से जोयणे णवणवते सहस्से, उद्धस्सितो हेट्ठ सहस्समेगं ॥१०॥ *
**English:**  Mount Sumeru is one hundred thousand yojanas high. It has three
divisions. The Pandaka forest, situated on its highest part, is adorned like the
Vaidyanti flag, and is high. That Mount Sumeru is ninety-nine thousand yojanas
high and one thousand yojanas deep in the earth.  **Commentary:**  *
**Sanskrit:** टीका - स मेरुयोजनसहस्त्राणां शतमुच्चस्त्वेन, तथा त्रीणि
कण्डान्यस्येति त्रिकण्डः, तद्यथा-भौम जाम्बूनदं वैडूर्यमिति, पुनरप्यसावेव
विशेष्यते-'पण्डकवैजयन्त' इति पण्डकवनं शिरसि व्यवस्थितं वैजयन्तीकल्पंपताकाभूतं
यस्य स तथा, तथाऽसावूर्ध्वमुच्छ्रि तो नवनवतिर्योजनसहस्त्राण्यधोऽपि
सहस्त्रमेकमवगाढ इति ॥१०॥ * **English:**  Mount Sumeru is one hundred thousand
yojanas high, and it has three divisions: (1) Earth, (2) Gold, and (3) Lapis
Lazuli. Again, describing the Mount Sumeru, it is said that the Pandaka forest,
situated on the top of Mount Sumeru, is adorned like a flag. Mount Sumeru is
ninety-nine thousand yojanas high and one thousand yojanas deep in the earth.
**Verse 11**  * **Sanskrit:** पुढे णभे चिट्टइ भूमिवहिए, जं सूरिया अणुपरिवट्टयंति
। से हेमवन्ने बहुनंदणे य, जंसी रतिं वेदयंती महिंदा ॥११॥ * **English:**  That
Mount Sumeru touches the sky and is embedded in the earth. The Sun and the stars
revolve around it. It is golden in color and has many Nandana forests. The great
Indra, endowed with great wealth, enjoys pleasure there.  **Commentary:**  *
**Sanskrit:** टीका - 'नभसि' 'स्पष्टो' लग्नो नभो व्याप्य तिष्ठति तथा भूमिं
चावगाह्य स्थित इति ऊर्ध्वाधस्तिर्यग्लोक संस्पर्शी, तथा 'यं' मेरुं 'सूर्या'
आदित्या ज्योतिष्का 'अनुपरिवर्त्तयन्ति' यस्य पार्श्वतो भ्रमन्तीत्यर्थः, तथाऽसौ *
**English:**  It touches the sky and is embedded in the earth, thus touching the
sky, earth, and all directions. The Sun and the stars revolve around it, meaning
they revolve around it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vIratthuI adhyayanaM vaha samagra parvatoM meM zreSTha hai, usI taraha
bhagavAna mahAvIra, vIrya-AtmaparAkrama tathA anAnya guNoM meM sarvazreSTha haiM
/  svarga jisa para devatA nivAsa karate haiM unake lie harSajanaka hai  /
prazasta varNa, rasa, gaMdha sparza evaM prabhAva Adi guNoM se vibhUSita haiM
usI taraha bhagavAna bhI aneka guNoM se suzobhita haiM athavA jaise svarga
sukhaprada hai, anekAneka guNoM se zobhita hai, usI taraha vaha sumerU parvata
bhI hai  /  dRSTAnta meM kahe gaye sumeru parvata kA punaH vivaraNa karate hue
kahate haiN| sayaM sahassANa u joyaNANaM, tikaMDage paMDagavejayaMte  /  se
joyaNe NavaNavate sahasse, uddhassito heTTha sahassamegaM  // 10 //  chAyA -
zataM sahastrANAntu yojanAnAM, trikaNDakaH paNDakavaijayantaH  /  sa yojane
navanavatisahastrANi, Urdhvamucchrito'dhaH sahastramekam  //  anuvAda - sumeru
parvata sat sahastra-sau hajAra yojana kA U~cA hai  /  usake tIna vibhAga haiM
/  usake sarvocca bhAga para sthita paNDaka vana vaijayantI-patAkA yA dhvajA ke
samAna zobhita hotA hai, U~cA hai  /  vaha sumeru parvata ninyAnaveM hajAra
yojana U~cA uThA huA hai aura eka hajAra yojana bhUmi meM gar3A hai| TIkA - sa
meruyojanasahastrANAM zatamuccastvena, tathA trINi kaNDAnyasyeti trikaNDaH,
tadyathA-bhauma jAmbUnadaM vaiDUryamiti, punarapyasAveva
vizeSyate-'paNDakavaijayanta' iti paNDakavanaM zirasi vyavasthitaM
vaijayantIkalpaMpatAkAbhUtaM yasya sa tathA, tathA'sAvUrdhvamucchri to
navanavatiryojanasahastrANyadho'pi sahastramekamavagADha iti  // 10 //  tathA -
TIkArtha - vaha sumeru parvata sau hajAra yojana U~cA hai, usake tIna vibhAga
hai-(1) bhUmimaya, (2) svarNamaya (3) vaiDUryamaya-maNimaya  /  punaH
sumeruparvata kI vizeSatA batalAte huye kahate haiM  /  usa sumeru parvata ke
mastaka para-sarvocca zikhara para vidyamAna paNDaka vana usakI dhvajA ke samAna
zobhita hotA hai| sumeru ninnAnaveM hajAra yojana U~cA uThA huA hai  /  aura eka
hajAra yoz2ana bhUmi meM gar3A huA hai| puDhe Nabhe ciTTai bhUmivahie, jaM
sUriyA aNuparivaTTayaMti  /  se hemavanne bahunaMdaNe ya, jaMsI ratiM vedayaMtI
mahiMdA  // 11 //  chAyA - spRSTo nabhastiSThati bhUmivartI, yaM sUryyA
anuvarivartayanti  /  sa hemavarNo bahunandanazca yasmin ratiM vedayanti
mahendrAH  //  anuvAda - vaha sumeru parvata AkAza kA sparza karatA huA tathA
bhUmi meM sampraviSTa huA vidyamAna hai  /  Aditya-nakSatra vRnda usakA
anuvartana karate haiM, usake pArzvabhAga se bhramaNa karate haiM, ghUmate haiM
/  usakA raMga svarNa jaisA hai  /  usameM aneka naMdana vana haiM  /  mahendra-
viziSTa Rddhi zAlI mahAna indra gaNa usa para rati-ramaNa krIr3A karate haiN|
TIkA - 'nabhasi' 'spaSTo' lagno nabho vyApya tiSThati tathA bhUmiM cAvagAhya
sthita iti UrdhvAdhastiryagloka saMsparzI, tathA 'yaM' meruM 'sUryA' AdityA
jyotiSkA 'anuparivarttayanti' yasya pArzvato bhramantItyarthaH, tathA'sau (351

Page #380 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states: "He who has four **Nandanavana**
forests is called **Bahunandanavana**. These forests are as follows: (1)
**Bhadrashala** forest on the earth, (2) **Nanda** forest in the **Mekhala**
region, five hundred yojanas above it, (3) **Saumanasa** forest, sixty-two
thousand five hundred yojanas above it, and (4) **Panduka** forest on the peak,
thirty-six thousand yojanas above it. Thus, this **Meru** mountain is adorned
with four **Nandanavana** forests and is a place of diverse and wonderful games.
Even the **Mahendras**, attracted by its beauty, come here from the abode of the
gods and enjoy the pleasures of love and play." ||11||  Furthermore, the
commentary states: "This **Meru** mountain touches the sky, is connected to it,
and is deeply rooted in the earth. It touches the upper, lower, and intermediate
realms. The sun, planets, stars, etc., revolve around this mountain. It is
yellow in color, like heated gold. On top of it are four **Nandanavana**
forests. They are as follows: (1) **Bhadrashala** forest in the earthly region,
(2) **Nanda** forest in the **Mekhala** region, five hundred yojanas above it,
(3) **Saumanasa** forest, sixty-two thousand five hundred yojanas above it, and
(4) **Panduka** forest on the peak, thirty-six thousand yojanas above it. Thus,
this **Meru** mountain is adorned with four **Nandanavana** forests and is a
place of diverse and wonderful games. The **Mahendras**, attracted by its
beauty, come here from the abode of the gods and enjoy the pleasures of love and
play."  "This mountain, known by many names, shines brightly like polished gold.
It is the highest of all mountains, inaccessible and difficult to climb. It is
adorned with jewels, gems, and medicinal herbs, making it appear like a blazing
land." ||12||  The commentary states: "This mountain, known as **Meru**,
**Mandara**, **Sudarshana**, **Suragiri**, etc., is famous and renowned. Its
color is smooth and pure, like gold. There is no other mountain in the world
that is higher than this. It is inaccessible due to its slopes, peaks, and
surrounding mountains. It is difficult for ordinary beings to climb. This great
mountain, adorned with jewels, gems, and medicinal herbs, appears like a blazing
land." ||12||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram 'hemavarNoM' niSTaptajAmbUnadAbhaH tathA bahUni catvAri
nandanavanAni yasya sa bahunandanavanaH, tathAhi-bhUmau bhadrazAla vanaM tataH
paJca yojanazatAnyAruhya mekhalAyAM nandaM tato dviSaSTiyojanasahastrANi
paMcazatAdhikAnyatikramya saumanasaM tataH SaTtriMzatsahastrANyAruhya zikhare
paNDukavanamiti, tadevamasau caturnanandanavanAdyupeto vicitrakrIr3AsthAna
samanvitaH, yasmin mahendrA apyAgatya tridazAlayAdramaNIyataraguNena 'rati'
ramaNakrIDAM 'vedayanti' anubhavantIti  // 11 //  apica - TIkArtha - vaha meru
parvata AkAza kA sparza karatA huA-usase saMlagna tathA pRthvI kA avagAna karatA
huA-usameM sampraviSTa rUpa meM vidyamAna hai  /  vaha urdhvaloka, adholoka
tathA tiryakloka kA saMsparza kiye huye hai  /  Aditya-graha nakSatra Adi usa
parvata ke pArzvabhAga se-taTa-taTa bhAga se bhramaNa karate haiM-ghUmate haiM
/  vaha paritapta svarNa ke samAna pIta varNayukta hai-pIle raMga kA hai  /
usake Upara cAra nandana vane hai  /  ve isa prakAra hai - (1) bhUmimaya vibhAga
meM bhadrazAla vana hai  /  (2) usase Upara pA~ca sau yojana ArohaNa karane para
mekhalApradeza meMmadhya ke DhalAna meM nandana vana hai  /  (3) usase Upara
pA~ca sau bAsaTha hajAra yojana ArohaNa karane para saumanasa vana hai  /  (4)
usase Upara chatIsa hajAra yojana ArohaNa karane para zikhara-coTI para paNDaka
vana hai  /  isa prakAra vaha merU parvata cAra naMdana vanoM se yukta vicitra
vividha krIr3AoM kA sthala hai  /  mahendra gaNa svarNa se bhI adhika ramaNIya
guNa yukta hone ke kAraNa usa parvata para Akara rati-ramaNa krIr3A kA Ananda
lete haiM  /  se pavvae sahamahappagAse, virAyatI kaMcaNamaTTavanne  /  aNuttare
girisu ya pavvadugge, girIvare se jalieva bhome  // 12 //  chAyA - sa parvataH
zabdamahAprakAzo, virAjate kAJcanamRSTavarNaH  /  anuttaro giriSu ca parvadurgo,
girivaro'sau jvalita iva bhaumaH  //  anuvAda - vaha sumeru parvata saMsAra meM
aneka nAmoM se vikhyAta hai, usakA raMga sone ke samAna zuddhaujjavala hai  /
vaha jagata meM samagra parvatoM se anuttara-unnata hai, durgama hai  /  vaha
maNiyoM-ratnoM aura auSadhiyoM se daidipyamAna hone ke kAraNa prajjvalita yA
jyortimaya bhUkhaNDa jaisA pratIta hotA hai  /  TIkA - saH-mervAkhyo'yaM parvato
mandaro meruH sudarzanaH suragirirityevamAdibhiH zabdairmahAn prakAzaH
-prasiddhiryasya sa zabdamahAprakAzo 'virAjate' zobhate, kAJcanasyeva 'mRSTaH'
zlakSNaH zuddho vA varNo yasya sa tathA, evaM na vidyate uttaraH-pradhAno
yasyAsAvanuttaraH, tathA giriSu ca madhye parvabhiH-
mekhalAdibhirdaSTrAparvatairvA 'durgA' viSamaH sAmAnyajantUnAM durAroho
'girivaraH' parvatapradhAnaH tathA'sau maNibhirauSadhUimizca dedIpyamAnatayA
'bhauma iva' bhUdeza iva jvalita iti  // 12 //  kiJca - TIkArtha - vaha sumeru
parvata, mandara, meru, sudarzana evaM suragiri ityAdi aneka nAmoM se prasiddhi
yukta hai-vikhyAta hai  /  usakA varNa-raMga sone kI taraha zlakSNa cikanA
athavA zuddha-svaccha hai  /  jagata meM isase bar3hakara dUsarA koI parvata
nahIM hai  /  vaha mekhalA Adi se-apane DhalAva car3hAva Adi ke tathA
upaparvatoM ke kAraNa durgama hai  /  usa para sAmAnya prANiyoM kA car3ha pAnA
bar3A kaThina hai  /  vaha zreSTha parvata maNiyoM-ratnoM aura auSadhiyoM se
daidipyamAna hone ke kAraNa prajjvalita yA jyotirmaya bhUkhaNDa jaisA pratIta
hotA hai  /  352

Page #381 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The mountain king, Meru, is situated in the middle of the earth, shining with
the brilliance of the sun. He is adorned with many colors and is pleasing to the
mind. He illuminates all directions like the sun.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vIratthuI adhyayana mahIi majhUmi Thite NagiMde, pannAyate sUriyasuddhalese  /
evaM sirie u sa bhUrivanne, maNorame joyai accimAlI  // 13 //  chAyA - mahyAM
madhye sthito nagendraH prajJAyate sUryazuddhalezyaH  /  evaM zriyA tu sa
bhUrivarNaH manoramo dyotayatyarcimAlI  //  anuvAda - vaha nagendra-parvatarAja
pRthvI ke madhyabhAga meM-bIcoM bIca avasthita hai  /  vaha sUrya ke samAna
ujjavala kAMtiyukta hai  /  vaha aneka varNayukta evaM manorama hai  /  vaha
arcimAlI-sUrya ke saddaza saba dizAoM ko udyodita karatA hai| TIkA - 'mahyAM'
ratnaprabhApRthivyAM madhyadeze jambUdvIpastasyApi bahumadhyadeze
saumanasavidyutprabhagandhamAdana mAlyavantadeSTrAparvatacatuSTayopazonitaH
samabhUbhAge dazasahastravistIrNaH zirasi sahastra
mekamadhastAdapidazasahastrANi navatiyojanAni
yojanaikAdazabhAgairdazabhiradhikAni vistIrNaH
catvAriMzadyojanocchritacUDopazobhito 'nagendraH' parvatapradhAno meruH
prakarSeNa loke jJAyate 'sUryavacchuddhalezyaH'-AdityasamAnatejAH, evam' ananta
roktaprakArayAzriyA tuzabdAdviziSTatarayA saH-meruH 'bhUrivarNaH' anekavarNo
anekavarNaratnopazobhitatvAt mana:-anta:karaNaM ramayatIti manoramA 'arcimAlIva'
Aditya iva svatejasAdyotayati dazApi dizaH prakAzayatIti  // 13 //  sAmprataM
merudRSTAntopakSepeNa dASTrAntikaM darzayati TIkArtha - ratna prabhA pRthvI ke
madhya deza meM bIca ke bhAga meM jambUdvIpa hai  /  usake bahumadhya deza meM-
ThIka bIca meM saumanasa, vidyuttaprabha, gandhamAdana tathA mAlyavAna nAmaka
ina cAra upaparvatoM se upazobhita, samabhUbhAga meM dasa sahasra yojana
vistIrNa mastaka para eka sahasra yojana vistIrNa punaH nIce dasasahasra yojana
vistIrNa tathA pratyeka nabbe yojana para, eka yojana ke gyArave bhAga-1/11 kama
vistArayukta bAkI kA yojana ke dasaveM bhAga jitanA vistIrNa meru parvata hai  /
usake mastaka para cAlIsa yojana U~cA zikhara hai  /  giri zreSTha meru sUrya ke
samAna zuddha prakAzayukta hai  /  uparyukta vizeSatAoM se samanvita vaha
parvata aneka prakAra ke ratnoM se zobhita hone ke kAraNa aneka varNa yukta hai
/  vaha mana ko bar3A ramaNIya pratIta hotA hai  /  sUrya kI taraha apane teja
se dizAoM ko udyodita karatA hai| meru parvata kA dRSTAnta batalAkara sUtrakAra
usakA sAra batalAte haiM  /  sudaMsaNasseva jasogirissa, pavuccaI mahato
pavvayassa  /  etovame samaNe nAyaputte, jAtIjasodaMsaNa nANasIle  // 14 //
chAyA - sudarzanasyeva yazogireH procyate mahataH parvatasya  /  etadupamaH
zramaNo jJAtaputraH jAtiyazodarzana jJAnazIlaH  //  anuvAda - parvatoM meM meru
parvata kI yazasvitA kA pUrvokta rUpa meM varNana kiyA gayA hai| bhagavAna
mahAvIra svAmI ko usI parvata se upamita kiyA jAtA hai  /  jaise sumeru apane
guNoM ke kAraNa samagra parvatoM meM zreSTha hai| usI taraha bhagavAna mahAvIra
jAti, yaza, darzana, jJAna aura zIla meM sabase uttama hai| TIkA -
etadanantaroktaM 'yazaH' kIrtanaM sudarzanasya merugireH mahAparvatasya
procyate, sAmpratametadeva bhagavati dArTAntike yojyate-eSA-anantaroktopamA
yasya sa etadupamaH, ko'sau ?-zrAmyatIti zramaNastaponiSTaptadeho jJAtA: 353

Page #382 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 14:**  The son of the Kshatriyas, Sri
Manmahavirvardhamanaswami, is the meaning. He is the best - the chief - among
all beings by birth, by fame among all the famous, by knowledge and insight
among all those with knowledge and insight, and by conduct among all those with
good conduct. The formation of the word is to be done by making a compound of
birth etc., with the suffix "ac" from the sutra "Arshaadi tvad" etc., due to the
exaggeration of the dual compound.  **Verse 15:**  Just as Nishadha is the best
among the long and extended mountains, and Ruchak is the best among the circular
mountains, so too, in the world, among all the monks, they say that the wise
ones call him, the one who has attained the supreme knowledge, the best.
**Verse 16:**  He has attained the supreme Dharma, he has seen the supreme state
of meditation. He is pure, very pure, perfectly pure, pure like a conch shell,
pure like a single point.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram - kSatriyAsteSAM putraH zrI
manmahAvIravarddhamAnasvAmItyarthaH, sa ca jAtyA sarvajAtimadbhyo yazasA
azeSayazasvibhyo darzanajJAnAbhyAM sakaladarzanajJAnibhyaH zIlena
samastazIlavadbhyaH zreSThaH - pradhAnaH, akSaraghaTanA tu jAtyAdInAM kRta
dvandvAnAmatizAyane arzaAditvAdacpratyayavidhAnena vidheyeti  //  14  //
punarapi dRSTAntadvAreNaiva bhagavatovyAvarNayAha TIkArtha - pahale sudarzana -
sumeru giri ke yaza kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| aba usa yazasvitA ko sUtrakAra
bhagavAna mahAvIra se yojita karate hue kahate haiM  /  bhagavAna ko pUrvokta
rUpa meM sumeru kI upamA dI gaI hai  /  ve bhagavAna kaise haiM ? ve tapazcaraNa
meM zramazIla hai - kaThora tapasyAe~ karate haiM arthAt tapa se jinhoMne apane
zarIra ko paritapta kiyA hai, jo jJAta nAmaka kSatriya kula meM utpanna haiM, ve
bhagavAna mahAvIra meru parvata ke sadRza hai| ve jAti meM saba jAti yukta janoM
se zreSTha haiM, yaza-kIrti meM samasta yazasviyoM-kIrtizAlI puruSoM se uttama
haiN| jJAna evaM darzana meM samagra janoM se pradhAna haiM - sarvocca haiM
tathA zIla meM ve samasta zIla yukta janoM se uttama haiN| vyAkaraNa kI dRSTi se
yahA~ zabda yojana isa prakAra karanI caahie| jAti Adi padArthoM meM dvaMdva
samAsa kara arza Adi tvAt sUtra se ac pratyaya kara jAtyAdi pada ko siddha
karanA cAhie  /   girIvare vA nisahA''yayANaM, rUyae va seThThe valayAyatANaM  /
taovame se jagabhUipanne, muNINa majjhe tamuvAhu panne  //  15  //  chAyA
girivara iva niSadhaAyatAnAM, rucaka iva zreSThaH valayAyatAnAm  /  tadupamaH sa
jagadbhUtiprajJaH, munInAM madhye tamudAhuH prajJAH  //  anuvAda jaise Ayata -
pralamba-lambe parvatoM meM niSada parvata zreSTha hai, valayAyata-vartula yA
golAkAra parvatoM meM rucaka parvata uttama hai, usI taraha saMsAra meM sabhI
muniyoM meM bhagavAna mahAvIra anupama, prajJAzIla aura sarvazreSTha haiM, yaha
prAjJajana batalAte haiM  /  TIkArtha yathA 'niSadho' girivaro girINAmAyatAnAM
madhye jambUdvIpe anyeSu vA dvIpeSu dairyeNa ' zreSThaH ' pradhAnaH tathA-
valayAyatAnAM madhye rucakaH parvato'nyebhyo valayAyatatvena yathA pradhAnaH, sa
hi rucakadvIpAntarvartI mAnuSottaraparvata iva vRttAyataH saGkhyeyayojanAni
parikSepeNeti tathA sa bhagavAnapi tadupamaH yathA tAvAya tavRtta tAbhyAM
zreSThau evaM bhagavAnapi jagati saMsAre bhUtiprajJaH prabhUtajJAnaH prajJayA
zreSTha ityarthaH tathA aparamunInAM madhye prakarSeNa jAnAtIti prajJaH evaM
tatsvarUpavidaH 'udAhuH' udAhRtavanta uktavanta ityarthaH  //  15  //  kiJcAnyat
- TIkArtha - jambUdvIpa meM yA anya dvIpoM meM sabhI AyatAkAra - lambe parvatoM
meM niSada parvata zreSTha hai tathA valayAyata-golAkAra parvatoM meM rUcaka
parvata zreSTha hai  /  vaha rUcaka dvIpa ke antaravartI mAnuSottara parvata ke
sadRza vRttAkAra evaM dIrgha hai, usakA vistAra saMkhyeya yojana parimita hai|
bhagavAna mahAvIra bhI aise haiM, arthAt jaise ye do parvata lambAI aura golAI
meM sarvottama, sarvocca hai, isI prakAra bhagavAna mahAvIra bhI saMsAra meM
sabhI prajJAzIla janoM meM uttama haiM, ve sabhI muniyoM meM zreSTha haiN| unake
svarUpa ke jJAtA buddhimAna puruSoM ne aisA kahA hai  /   aNuttaraM
dhammamuIraittA, aNuttaraM jhANavaraM jhiyAI  /  susukka sukkaM apagaMDasukkaM,
saMkhiMduegaMtavadAta sukkaM  //  16  //  354

Page #383 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thui Adhy  **The Great Lord Mahavira, having expounded the unsurpassed,
supreme Dharma, was meditating on the unsurpassed, supreme meditation.**  His
meditation was pure, free from any blemish, like the purest white substance. It
was solitary, pure, and white, like a conch shell and the moon.  **He
meditates.**  **Pure, white, free from blemish, white, solitary, pure, and white
like a conch shell and the moon.**  **Commentary:**  There is no other Dharma
superior to this, hence it is called the unsurpassed Dharma. Having expounded
this supreme Dharma, the Great Lord Mahavira was meditating on the supreme
meditation. Indeed, the Great Lord, having attained knowledge, was meditating on
the third aspect of white meditation, called *sukshmakriya-pratipata*, while
restraining the subtle body yoga in the state of *yoga-nirodha*. When the yogas
were restrained, he was engaged in the fourth aspect of white meditation, called
*vyupara-kriya-nivritta*. This is what is being shown: the meditation is pure,
like the purest white substance, free from blemish, free from impurities, pure,
like pure gold, or like the foam of water, which is pure and free from
impurities. It is solitary, pure, and white, like a conch shell and the moon.
The Great Lord Mahavira was meditating on the two aspects of the unsurpassed
meditation.  ## Chhaya  **The Great Sage, the supreme, having purified all
karmas, attained the supreme liberation, which has a beginning but no end,
through knowledge, conduct, and insight.**  **Commentary:**  The Great Lord,
after attaining the fourth aspect of white meditation, which is established in
the state of *shaileshya*, attained the fifth state, the state of liberation.
The commentary explains the state of liberation: It is unsurpassed, because it
is supreme and because it is the highest state in the world. It is the supreme,
because it is the primary state. The Great Sage, because his body was purified
by intense austerities, purified all karmas, including the *jnana-avaran* (veil
of knowledge), through his unique knowledge, insight, and conduct, and attained
the state of liberation, which is characterized by destruction.  Again, the
commentary praises the Great Lord through an example:  **355**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 thuI adhya chAyA anuttaraM dharmamudIrayitvA'nuttaraM dhyAnavaraM - anuvAda
bhagavAna mahAvIra anuttara- sarvazreSTha dharma udIritakara - vyAkhyAta kara
anuttara- sarvottama dhyAna dhyAte the  /  unakA dhyAna atyanta zukla padArtha
ke tulya doSa rahita-nirmala, zukla thA  /  vaha zaMkha aura candramA ke sadRza
ekAMta rUpa meM avadAta zuddha aura zukla thA  /  dhyAyati  /  suzukla
zuklamapagaNDa zuklaM, zekhenduvadekAntAvadAta zuklam  //  TIkA nAsyottara:-
pradhAno'nyo dharmoM vidyate ityanuttaraH tamevambhUtaM dharmam 'ut' prAbalyena
'IrayitvA' kathayitvA prakAzya 'anuttaraM' pradhAnaM 'dhyAnavaraM'
dhyAnazreSThaM dhyAyati, tathAhi - utpannajJAno bhagavAn yoganirodha sUkSmaM
kAyayogaM nirundhanzukladhyAnasya tRtIyaM bhedaM sUkSmakriyamapratipAtAkhyaM
tathA niruddhayogazcaturthaM zukladhyAnabhedaM vyuparatakriyamanivRttAkhyaM
dhyAyati, etadeva darzayati- suSThu zuklavatzuklaM dhyAnaM tathA apagataM gaNDam
apadravyaM tadapagaNDaM nirdoSArjunasuvarNavat zuklaM yadivA-apagaNDam
udakaphenaM tattulyamiti bhAvaH  /  tathA zaGkhenduvadekAntAvadAtaMzubhraM
zuklaM - zukladhyAnottaraM bhedadvavyaM dhyAyatIti  // 16 //  api TIkArtha -
jisase uttara- bar3hakara yA zreSTha dUsarA dharma nahIM hotA, use anuttara
dharma kahA jAtA hai  /  bhagavAna mahAvIra aise dharma ko bhalI bhA~ti
prarUpita kara, prakAzita kara uttama dhyAna dhyAte the| bhagavAna ko jaba jJAna
utpanna ho gayA, taba ve yoga nirodhakAla meM kAya yoga kA nirodha karate hue
zukla dhyAna kA tRtIya bheda sUkSmakriyApratipAta nAmaka dhyAna meM abhirata
hote the  /  jaba yogoM kA nirodha ho gayA, taba ve zukla dhyAna ke cauthe bheda
vyuparatakriyAnivRta meM saMlagna hote the  /  zAstrakAra isI bAta kA digdarzana
karAte hue kahate hai - jo dhyAna atyanta ujjvala, nirmala, svaccha padArtha kI
taraha, zukla kI taraha, zukla hai, jisase doSa apagata hai, jo nirdoSa hai,
sone ke samAna zukla-nirmala hai athavA jo apagaMDa-apadravya rahita jala ke
phena-jhAga kI jyoM atyanta vizada, nirmala hai, zaMkha tathA candra ke samAna
ekAMta rUpa se avadAta zubhra tathA zukla hai, vaha zukla dhyAna kahA jAtA hai
/  bhagavAna mahAvIra usake ukta do bhedoM kI sAdhanA meM nirata rahate the  /
chAyA aNuttaraggaM paramaM mahesI, asesakammaM sa visohaittA  /  siddhiM gate
sAimaNaMtapatte, nANeNa sIleNa ya daMsaNeNa  // 17 //  - anuttarAgryAM paramAM
maharSirazeSa karmANi sa vizodhya  /  siddhiM gataH sAdimAnantaprajJo, jJAnena
zIlena ca darzanena  //  OM OM OM anuvAda - maharSi - mahAn RSi, mahAn draSTA
jJAna, darzana aura cAritra ke prabhAva se jJAnAvaraNIya Adi samasta karmoM ko
kSINa kara vidhvaMsta kara usa sarvottama mukti rUpI siddhi ko prApta hue,
jisakA Arambha to hai, kintu anta nahIM hai  /  TIkA - tathA'sau bhagavAn
zailezyavasthApAditazukla dhyAna caturthabhedAnantaraM sAdyaparyavasAnAM
sidvigatiM paJcamIM prAptaH, siddhigatimeva vizinaSTi- anuttarA cAsau
sarvottamatvAdagyA ca lokAgravyavasthitatvAdanuttarAgyAM tAM 'paramAM '
pradhAnAM maharSiH asAvatyantogratapovizeSaniSTaptadehatvAd azeSaM karma-
jJAnAvaraNAdikaM 'vizodhya' apanIyaM ca viziSThena jJAnena darzanena zIlena ca
kSAyikena siddhigatiM prApta itimIlanIyam  // 17 //  punarapi dRSTAnta dvAreNa
bhagavata: stutimAha - 355

Page #384 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Commentary:**  The Lord Mahavira, in the fourth
stage of white meditation, which arises in the state of Shaileshi, attained the
self-sufficient, perfected state of Siddha-Gati. This state has a beginning but
no end. The meaning of having no end is that once attained, Siddha-Gati is never
lost. Describing the characteristics of this Siddha-Gati, the Sutrakar says - it
is the best, the most excellent. It is at the forefront of the Aggra Lok, hence
it is the most advanced. Lord Mahavira attained this supreme state. Through
intense austerity, he purified his body and destroyed all karmas, including the
knowledge-obscuring karma, through the unique knowledge, perception, and conduct
of Kshayika. He thus attained Siddhatva. The Sutrakar further describes the
praise of the Lord through an example:  **Om Om Om**  **Verse 18:**  *
**Sanskrit:** रुक्खेसुणाते जह सामली वा, जस्सिं रतिं वेययती सुवन्ना । वणेसु वा
णंदणमाहु सेठ्ठे, नाणेण सीलेण य भूतिपन्ने ॥ १८ ॥ * **Romanized:** Rukkhēsunāte
jah sāmalī vā, jassiṁ ratiṁ veyayatī suvanna. Vaṇēsu vā ṇandaṇamāhu sēṭṭhē,
nāṇeṇa sīlena ya bhūtipanne. || 18 || * **Translation:** Just as the Salmali
tree is renowned and excellent among trees, where the Suparna, the special
deities of the Bhavanapati class, come and engage in love-play, and just as the
Nandan forest is considered the best among forests, similarly, Lord Mahavira is
the best in knowledge and conduct, being a Bhuti-Prajna, a great sage.
**Commentary:**  Just as the Salmali tree, situated in the Devakuru, is renowned
and excellent among trees, being a place for the Bhavanapati deities to play,
where other Suparna, special Bhavanapati deities, come and experience love-play,
and just as the Nandan forest is the main, excellent place for the play of the
deities among forests, similarly, the Lord is the best due to his Kevala
knowledge, which reveals all objects, and his conduct, as described. He is a
Bhuti-Prajna, a sage with profound knowledge.  **Om Om Om**  **Verse 19:**  *
**Sanskrit:** थणियं व सद्दाण अणुत्तरे उ, चंदो व ताराण महाणुभावे । गंधेसु वा चंदण
माहु सेट्ठ, एवं मुणीणं अपडिन्नमाहु ॥ १९ ॥ * **Romanized:** Thaṇiyaṁ va saddāṇa
aṇuttare u, chando va tārāṇa mahāṇubhāve. Gandhēsu vā chandaṇa māhu sēṭṭha, evaṁ
muṇīṇaṁ apaḍinnaṁ āhu. || 19 || * **Translation:** Just as the roar of the
thundercloud is the best among all sounds, and the moon is the most prominent
among all stars, and sandalwood is considered the best among all fragrances,
similarly, Lord Mahavira, the dispassionate and detached, is the best among all
sages.  **Commentary:**  Just as the roar of the thundercloud is the best among
all sounds, and the moon is the most prominent among all stars, and sandalwood
is considered the best among all fragrances, similarly, Lord Mahavira, the
dispassionate and detached, is the best among all sages.  **356**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha bhagavAna mahAvIra zukla dhyAna ke caturtha
bheda ko jo zaileSI avasthA meM utpanna hotA hai, svAyatta kara siddha gati ko
prApta hue| jisakI Adi prArambha to hai kintu aMta nahIM  /  anta na hone kA
tAtparya yaha hai ki siddha gati prApta hone ke bAda kabhI apagata nahIM hotI  /
usa siddhagati kI vizeSatA batAte hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM - vaha sarvottama
hai - sabase zreSTha hai  /  aggra loka ke agra bhAga meM avasthita hone ke
kAraNa sabase Age hai  /  bhagavAna mahAvIra ne vahI paramagati prApta kii|
bhagavAna atyanta ugra tapazcaraNa dvArA apanI deha ko paritapta kara tathA
jJAnAvaraNIyAdi samasta karmoM ko viziSTa kSAyika jJAna, darzana aura cAritra
dvArA kSapita kara siddhatva ko prApta hue  /  sUtrakAra punaH dRSTAnta dvArA
bhagavAna kI stuti kA varNana karate haiM - OM OM OM rukkhesuNAte jaha sAmalI
vA, jassiM ratiM veyayatI suvannA  /  vaNesu vA NaMdaNamAhu seThThe, nANeNa
sIleNa ya bhUtipanne  //  18  //  chAyA - vRkSeSu jJAto yathA zAlmatI vA yasmin
ratiM vedayanti suparNAH  /  vaneSu vA nandanamAhuH zreSThaM, jJAnena zIlena ca
bhUtiprajJaH  //  - anuvAda - vRkSoM meM jaise zAlmalI nAmaka vRkSa suprasiddha
hai, zreSTha hai, jahAM suparNa- bhavanapati jAti ke deva vizeSa Akara rati-
krIr3A karate haiM  /  jaise vanoM meM nandana vana zreSTha hai, usI prakAra
jJAna aura zIla meM bhUti prajJa - mahAn prajJAzIla bhagavAna mahAvIra zreSTha
haiM 1 TIkA - vRkSeSu madhye yathA 'jJAta : ' prasiddho devakuruvyavasthitaH
zAlmalIvRkSaH, sa ca bhavanapatikrIr3AsthAnaM, 'yatra' vyavasthitA
anyatazcAgatya 'suparNA' bhavanapativizeSA 'ratiM' ramaNakrIr3AM 'vedayanti'
anubhavanti, vaneSu ca madhye yathA nandanaM vanaM devAnAM krIDAsthAnaM
pradhAnaM evaM bhagavAnapi 'jJAnena' kevalAkhyena samastapadArthAvirbhAvakena
'zIlena' ca cAritreNa yathAkhyAtena 'zreSTha' pradhAna: 'bhUtiprajJaH'
pravRddhajJAno bhagavAniti  //  18  //  api ca - TIkArtha - jaise vRkSoM meM
devakuru sthita prasiddha zAlmalI vRkSa zreSTha hai, bhavanapati devoM kA krIr3A
sthAna hai, jahA~ anya sthAnoM se Akara suparNa saMjJaka bhavanapati deva rati-
krIr3A kA Ananda lete haiM, vanoM meM jaise devoM kA krIr3A sthala nandanavana
pradhAna- uttama hai  /  isI prakAra bhagavAna mahAvIra bhI samasta padArthoM ke
AvirbhAvaka, prakaTa kartA kevala jJAna tathA yathAkhyAta cAritra dvArA
sarvottama hai  /  ve bhUtiprajJa - pravRddha jJAna hai, arthAt unakA jJAna
bahuta bar3hA car3hA hai  /  OM OM OM thaNiyaM va saddANa aNuttare u, caMdo va
tArANa mahANubhAve  /  gaMdhesu vA caMdaNa mAhu seTTha, evaM muNINaM
apaDinnamAhu  //  19  //  chAyA stanitamiva zabdAnAmanuttarastu candraiva
tArANAM mahAnubhAvaH  /  gandheSu vA candana mAhuH zreSTha mevaM munInAma
pratijJamAhuH  //  anuvAda - jaise samagra zabdoM meM meghastanita-meghaM kA
garjana anuttara- sarvottama hai, saba tArAgaNa meM candra pradhAna hai, samasta
gandhoM meM- gandhayukta padArthoM meM candana kA ucca sthAna hai, usI prakAra
samagra munivRnda meM niSkAma anAsakta bhagavAna mahAvIra pradhAna zreSTha haiM
/  356

Page #385 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 19:**  Just as 'stanitam' (thunder) is the most
prominent among all sounds, and 'tu' (here) is a word that can be used as an
adjective or a conjunction, and just as the moon is the most radiant among all
stars, illuminating and delighting all beings, and just as 'chandana'
(sandalwood) is considered the best among all fragrant substances, whether it be
the 'goshirsha' variety or the 'malaya' variety, similarly, among all 'munis'
(great sages), Bhagavan (Lord) Mahavira is the best, for there is no vow
(pratijna) that can be taken in this world or the next that can equal his
greatness.  **Verse 20:**  Just as the 'svayambhu' (self-born) Raman ocean is
the best among all oceans, and Dharanendra is the best among all Nagas (serpent
kings), and the Ikshu-rasodaka (sugarcane juice) ocean is the best among all
sweet waters, similarly, Bhagavan Mahavira is the best among all those who
practice austerities (tapas).  **Verse 21:**  Just as Eravana is the best among
elephants, and the lion is the best among deer, and the Ganga is the best among
rivers, and Garuda is the best among birds, similarly, among all those who
preach liberation (nirvana), the Nayaputta (son of the leader) is the best.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vIratthuI adhyayanaM TIkA - yathA zabdAnAM madhye 'stanitaM' megha garjitaM tad
'anuttaraM' pradhAnaM, tu zabdo vizeSaNArthaH samuccayArtho vA, 'tArakANAMca'
nakSatrANAM madhye yathA candro mahAnubhAvaH sakalajananirvRttikAriNyA kAntyA
manoramaH zreSThaH, 'gandheSu' iti guNaguNinorabhedAnmatublopAdvAgandhavatsu
madhye yathA 'candanaM' gozIrSakAkhyaM malayajaM vA tajjhAH zreSThamAhuH evaM
'munInAM' maharSINAM madhye bhagavantaM nAsya pratijJA ihalokaparalokAzaMsinI
vidyate ityapratijJastamevambhUtaM zreSThamAhuriti  // 19 /  /  api ca -
TIkArtha - saba prakAra ke zabdoM ke bIca megha kI garjanA-gar3agar3AhaTa
pradhAna-sabase bar3hakara hai, isa gAthA meM 'tu' zabda vizeSaNArthaka yA
samuccayArthaka hai  /  nakSatroM meM parama AbhAmaya candramA pradhAna haiM, jo
apanI kAMti dvArA sabako Ananda pradAna karatA hai  /  guNa guNI ke abheda kI
dRSTi se gandhaM zabda yahA~ gandhavAna padArthoM ke artha meM hai  /
tadanusAra sabhI gandhayukta padArthoM meM gozIrSa yA malaya candana zreSTha
hai, usI prakAra muniyoM yA maharSiyoM ke bIca aihika aura pAralaukika
sukhAbhivAJchA se vivarjita bhagavAna mahAvIra zreSTha kahe jAte haiM  /  jahA
saMyabhU udahINa seDhe, nAgeSu vA dharaNiMdamAhuseTThe  /  khoodae vA
rasavejayaMte, tavovahANe muNi vejayaMte  // 20 //  chAyA - yathA svayambhU
rUdadhInA zreSThaH, nageSu vA dharaNendraM AhuzreSThaM  /  ikSurasodako vA
rasavaijayantaH, tapaupadhAne muni vaijayantaH  //  - anuvAda - jaise samagra
sAgaroM meM svayaMbhU ramaNa sAgara zreSTha hai, nAgoM meM dharaNendra uttama
hai, sabhI sarasa sthaloM meM ikSurasodaka sAgara zreSTha hai, usI prakAra
samasta tapazcaraNa zIla sAdhakoM meM bhagavAna mahAvIra zreSTha haiN| TIkA -
svayaM bhavantIti svayambhuvo-devAH te tatrAgatya ramantIti svayambhUramaNaH
tadevam 'udadhInAM' * samudrANAM madhye yathA svayambhUramaNaH samudraH
samastadvIpa sAgara paryantavartI 'zreSThaH' pradhAnaH 'nAgeSu ca' bhavana
pativizeSeSu 'dharaNendraM' dharaNaM yathA zreSThamAhuH, tathA 'khoodae' iti
ikSurasa ivodakaM yasya sa ikSurasodakaH sa yathA rasamAzritya 'vaijayantaH'
pradhAnaH svaguNaiparasamudrANAM patAkevoparivyavasthitaH evaM 'tapa upadhAnena'
viziSTatapovizeSeNamanute jagatastrikAlavasthAmiti 'muniH' bhagavAn
'vaijayantaH' pradhAnaH, samastalokasya mahAtapasA vaijayantIvopari vyavasthita
iti  // 20 //  TIkArtha - jo svayaM utpanna hote haiM, unheM svayaMbhU kahA jAtA
hai  /  devatA svayaMbhU zabda se abhihita hote haiM  /  ve deva vahAM Akara
ramaNa karate haiM, ataH ve svayaMbhUramaNa kahe jAte haiM  /  svayaMbhUramaNa
samudra sabhI dvIpoM aura samudroM ke anta meM vidyamAna haiM  /  vaha samasta
samudroM meM uttama hai  /  nAgoM meM arthAt bhavanapatiyoM meM dharaNendra
zreSTha haiM  /  ikSu ke rasa ke samAna jisakA jala madhura-mIThA hai  /  vaha
ikSu rasa samudra samasta rasa yukta sthaloM meM pradhAna hai kyoMki vaha apanI
madhuratA ke guNa se saba samudroM kI patAkA-dhvajA ke rUpa meM vidyamAna hai  /
isI prakAra isa jagata kI traikAlika avasthA ke parijJAtA bhagavAn mahAvIra
svAmI apane viziSTa tapazcaraNamaya jIvana ke dvArA samasta loka kI vaijayantI
ke sadRza sarvopari avasthita haiM  /  hatthIsu erAvaNamAhu NAe sIho migANaM
salilANa gaMgA  /  /  pakkhIsu vA garule veNudevo, nivvANavAdINiha NAyaputte  //
21 //  -357

Page #386 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 1**  **Shadow:** Among elephants, they call Airavata, among lions, the
beasts, among waters, the Ganga, among birds, Garuda, the son of Vinudeva, among
those who speak of Nirvana, here, the well-known son.  **Translation:** Just as
Airavata is known, famous, or the main example among elephants, just as the lion
is the main among beasts, just as the Ganga is the main among waters, and just
as Garuda, the son of Vinudeva, is the main among birds, in the same way, among
all those who speak of Nirvana, among those who are seekers of liberation, the
Lord Mahavira is the famous and the best.  **Commentary:** Just as Airavata, the
vehicle of Indra, is known, famous, or the main example among elephants, just as
the lion, Kesari, is the main among beasts, just as the Ganga is the main among
waters, and just as Garuda, the son of Vinudeva, is the main among birds, in the
same way, among those who speak of Nirvana, among those who are seekers of
liberation, the Lord Mahavira is the famous and the best.  **Verse 2**
**Shadow:** Among warriors, they call Vishvasena, among flowers, they call the
lotus. Among Kshatriyas, they call Dantavakya, among sages, they call
Vardhamana.  **Translation:** Just as Vishvasena is the main among warriors,
just as the lotus is called the best among flowers, just as Dantavakya is the
main among Kshatriyas, in the same way, the Lord Vardhamana is the best among
sages.  **Commentary:** Just as Vishvasena, the one who has an army of
elephants, horses, chariots, and foot soldiers, is the main among warriors, just
as the lotus is the main among flowers, just as Dantavakya, the one whose words
pacify enemies, is the best among Kshatriyas, in the same way, the Lord
Vardhamana is the best among sages.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA - hastISvairAvaNamAhujatiM, siMho mRgANAM
salilAnAM gaGgA  /  pakSiSu vA garur3o veNudevo, nirvANavAdinAmiha jJAtaputraH
//  - anuvAda - hastIvRnda meM airAvaNa, jantuoM meM siMha, saritAoM meM gaMgA
tathA pakSiyoM meM veNudeva garur3a jJAta hai-suprasiddha hai, usI prakAra
samasta nirvANa vAdiyoM meM-mokSa vAdI saiddhAntikoM meM bhagavAna mahAvIra
prasiddhazreSTha haiN| TIkA - 'hastiSu' karivareSu madhye yathA airAvaNaM'
zakravAhanaM jJAtaM' prasiddhaM dRSTAntabhUtaM vA pradhAnamAhustajjJAH 'mRgANAM'
ca zvApadAnAM madhye yathA 'siMhaH' kezarI pradhAna tathA bharatakSetrApekSayA
'salilANAM' madhye yathA gaGgAsalile pradhAnabhAva manubhavati, pakSiSu' madhye
yathA garutmAn veNudevAparanAmA prAdhAnyena vyavasthita evaM nirvANaM-
siddhikSetrAkhyaM karmacyutilakSaNaM vA svarUpatastadupAyaprAptihetuto vA
vadituM zIlaM yeSAM te tathA teSAM madhye jJAtA:-kSatriyAsteSAM putraH-apatyaM
jJAtaputraH zrImanmahAvIravardhamAnasvAmI sa pradhAna iti,
ythaavsthitnirvaannaarthvaaditvaadityrthH|21|| TIkArtha - jo buddhimAna puruSa
saMsAra kI mukhya-mukhya vastuoM ko jAnate haiM ve hAthiyoM meM jagatprasiddha
yA dRSTAnta svarUpa indra ke vAhana airAvaNa ko sarvottama kahate haiM, jantuoM
ke madhya kesarI siMha sarvopari hai, bharata kSetra kI apekSA saba jaloM meM
gaMgA kA jala uttama hai, pakSiyoM meM jaise veNudeva saMjJaka garur3a mukhya
hai, usI prakAra mokSavAdI janoM meM-saiddhAntikoM meM bhagavAna mahAvIra
sarvottama haiM  /  nirvANa siddhi kSetra ko kahA jAtA hai| athavA karmacyuti-
karmakSaya kA nAma nirvANa hai  /  usake svarUpa aura sAdhanoMpAya dvArA jo use
pAne kA mArga batAte haiM ve nirvANavAdI kahe jAte haiM  /  unake bIca jJAta
kSatriya kulotpanna bhagavAna mahAvIra vardhamAnasvAmI pradhAna haiM, kyoMki ve
nirvANa-mokSa ke vAstavika svarUpa kA pratipAdana karate haiM  /  johesu NAe
jaha vIsaseNe, pupphesu vA jaha araviMda mAhu  /  khattINa seDhe jaha
daMtavakke, isINa seDhe taha vaddhamANe  // 22 //  chAyA - yodheSu jJAto yathA
vizvasenaH, puSpeSu vA yathA'ravindamAhuH  /  kSatriyANAM zreSTho yathA
dAntavAkyaH, RSINAM zreSThastathA vardhamAnaH  /  anuvAda - jaise yoddhAoM meM
parAkramI janoM meM vizvasena cakravartI pradhAna hai, puSpoM meM aravinda-
kamala ko uttama kahA jAtA hai, kSatriyoM meM dAntavAkya-cakravartI mukhya hai,
uttama hai, usI prakAra RSiyoM-dRSTAoM yA jJAniyoM meM zrI vardhamAna svAmI
uttama haiN| TIkA - yodheSu madhye 'jJAto' vidito dRSTAntabhUto vAvizvA-
hastyazvarathapadAticaturaGgabalasametA senA yasya sa vizvasenaH-cakravatI
yathA'sau pradhAnaH, puSpeSu ca madhye yathA aravindaM pradhAnamAhuH, tathA
kSAtAt trAyanta iti kSatriyAH teSAM madhye dAntA-upazAntA yasya vAkyenaiva
zatravaH sa dAntavAkya:-cakravartI yathA' zreSThaH  /  tadevaM bahana dRSTAntAna
prazastAna pradAdhanA bhagavantaM dAAntikaM svanAmagrAhamAha-tathA RSiNAM madhye
zrImAn vardhamAnasvAmI zreSTha iti  // 22 //  tathA - TIkArtha - hasti, azva,
ratha evaM padAti ina cAra aMgoM se yukta senA ke adhinAyaka suprasiddha athavA
dRSTAntabhUta cakravartI saba yoddhAoM meM zreSTha hai  /  puSpoM meM kamala
sarvazreSTha kahA jAtA hai  /  jo kSata-pIr3A yA (358

Page #387 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The heroes who protect beings from destruction are called Kshatriyas. Among
those Kshatriyas, the one with the powerful words, the Chakravarti, is the
chief, whose words subdue the enemies. In this way, the Sutrakar, presenting
many excellent examples, taking the name of the Lord in the form of an example,
explains that in the same way, among the Rishis, the glorious, supremely
powerful, Sri Vardhaman Swami is the best.  "Among donations, the gift of
fearlessness is the best, and among truths, they say, the impeccable is the
best. Among austerities, celibacy is the best, and among the people of the
world, the Shraman, Jnatputra, is the best." (23)  Commentary: Thus, donation is
of many kinds, given for the benefit of oneself and others. Among them, the gift
of fearlessness is the best, because it protects the lives of beings. It is
said:  "Even if one is dying, one should give a crore of lives, but one should
not take a crore of wealth, for everyone wants to live." (1)  Thus, the meaning
is easily understood through the example of Gopala's wife and others. Therefore,
this story about the importance of the gift of fearlessness is told. In the city
of Vasantpura, there was a king named Aridaman. Once, he was sitting in a window
with his four wives, playing. At that time, a thief, with a garland of skulls
made of red bone, wearing red clothes, smeared with red sandalwood, and carrying
a broken pot, was being taken along the royal road by his wife. Seeing him, the
wives asked, "What has this man done?" One of the king's men informed them that
he had been caught stealing someone else's property, which was against the
king's law. Then, one of the wives told the king, "The boon that you granted me
earlier, let it be given now, so that I can do something for this man." The king
agreed. Then, she had the thief bathed, adorned with ornaments, and given a
thousand dinars, and for five days, she provided him with various pleasures,
such as music and other things. Then, the second wife did the same for the
second day, giving him a hundred thousand dinars. Then, the third wife honored
him for the third day, giving him a crore of dinars. The fourth wife, with the
king's permission, protected him from death by giving him fearlessness. Then,
the other wives laughed at her, saying, "You haven't given him anything." Thus,
there was a dispute among them about who had done the most for him. The king
called the thief and asked him, "Who has done you the greatest favor?" The thief
replied, "I, who was terrified of death, have not enjoyed any pleasure like
bathing, etc." He said, "By hearing the gift of fearlessness, I feel as if I
have been reborn. Therefore, the gift of fearlessness is the best of all gifts."
Similarly, among words, the one that is "impeccable," free from sin, and does
not cause harm to others, is considered the best. Not the truth that causes harm
to others. Truth that is beneficial and free from fear is considered good. It is
said:  "In the world, it is heard that Kaushika fell into hell with intense
suffering because of the truth that was accompanied by killing." (1)  And also:
"Similarly, a blind person should not tell a blind person, a lame person should
not tell a lame person, or a sick person should not tell a sick person.
Therefore, one should not speak falsely." (1)  Just as celibacy, which is
accompanied by the nine types of Brahma-protection, is the best among
austerities, so too, the Shraman, Jnatputra, is the best among all the people of
the world, with his supreme wealth, all-pervading power, knowledge of
destruction, vision, and conduct. (23)  And...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vIratthaI adhyayana nAza se prANiyoM kI rakSA karate haiM, ve kSatriya kahe
jAte haiM  /  una kSatriyoM ke madhya dAnta vAkya cakravartI pradhAna hai jisake
vAkya-dhAka se hI zatru zAMta ho jAte haiM  /  isa prakAra bahuta se prasasta
dRSTAnta upasthita kara sUtrakAra drASrTAnta svarUpa bhagavAna kA nAma grahaNa
karate hue batalAte haiM ki isI prakAra RSiyoM meM zrImAn parama aizvaryazAlI
zrI vardhamAna svAmI uttama haiN| dANANa seTThaM abhayappayANaM, saccesu vA
aNavajaM vayaMti  /  tavesu vA uttama baMbhacere, loguttameM samaNe nAyaputte
// 23 //  chAyA - dAnAnAM zreSThamabhayapradAnaM, satyeSu vA'navadyaM vadanti  /
tapassuvottamaM brahmacaryya, lokottamaH zramaNo jJAtaputraH  //  anuvAda -
abhayadAna-trANa yA zaraNa dAna saba dAnoM meM zreSTha hai  /  satyoM meM vaha
satya zreSTha hai jo anavadyapApavarjita ho  /  tapoM meM brahmacarya uttama hai
/  usI prakAra loka meM jJAtaputra bhagavAna mahAvIra sarvottama hai  /  TIkA -
tathA svaparAnugrahArthamarthine dIyata iti dAnamanekadhA, teSAMmadhye jIvAnAM
jIvitArthinAM trANakAritvAdabhayapradAnaM zreSThaM taduktam - dIyate
mriyamANasya, koTiM jIvitameva vA  /  dhanakoTiM na gRhNIyAt, sarvo
jIvitumicchati  // 1 //  iti, gopAlAGganAdInAM dRSTAnta dvAreNArthobuddhau
sukhenArohatItyataH abhayapradAna prAdhAnyakhyApanArthakathAnakamidaMvasantapure
nagare aridamano nAma rAjA, sa ca kadAciccaturvadhUsameto vAtAyanasthaH
krIr3AyamAnastiSThati, tena kadAciccauro raktakaNavIrakRtamuNDamAlo
raktaparidhAno raktacandanopaliptazca prahatavadhyaDiNDibho rAjamArgeNa
nIyamAnaH sapatnIkena dRSTaH, dRSTvA ca tAbhiH pRSTaM-kimanenAkArIti !,
tAsAmekena rAjapuruSeNA''veditaM yathA-paradravyApahAreNa rAja viruddhamiti,
tata ekayA rAjA vijJapto yathA-yo bhavatA mama prAg varaH pratipannaH
so'dhunAdIyatAM yenAhamasyopakaromi kiJcita, rAjJA'pi pratipannaM tatastayA
snAnAdipuraHsaramalaGkAreNAlaGkRto dInArasahasravyayena paJcavidhAnazabdAdIn
viSayAnekamahaH prApitaH, punardvitIyayA'pitathaiva dvitIyamaho
dInAzatasahasravyayena lAlitaH, tatastRtIyayA tRtIyamaho dInArakoTivyayena
satkAritaH, catujhaM tu rAjAnumatyA maraNAdrakSitaH abhayapradAnena,
tato'sAvanyAbhirhasitA nAsyatvayA kiJcidattamiti, tadevaM tAsAM
parasparabahUpakAra viSaye vivAde rAjJA'sAveva cauraH samAhUya pRSTo yathA kena
tava bapahUpakRtamiti, tenApyabhANi yathA-na mayA maraNa mahAbhayabhItena kiJcit
snAnAdikaM sukhaMvyajJAyIti, abhayapradAnAkarNanena
punarjanmAmivAtmAnamavaimIti, ataH sarvadAnAnAmabhayapradAnaM zreSThamiti
sthitam  /  tathA satyeSu ca vAkyeSu yad 'anavadyam' apApaM parapIDAnutpAdakaM
tat zreSThaM vadanti, na puna : parapIDotpAdakaM satyaM, sadbhayo hita
satyamitikRtvA, tathA coktam "loke'pi zrUyate vAdo, yathA satyena kauzikaH  /
patito vadhayuktena, narake tIvravedane  // 1 // " anyacca - "taheva kANaM
kANatti, paMDagaM paMDagatti vA  /  vAhiyaM vAvi rogitti, teNaM corokti no vade
// 1 // " tapassu madhye yathaivottamaM navavidhabrahmaguptyupetaM brahmacarya
pradhAnaM bhavati tathA sarvalokottamarUpasampadA sarvAtizAyinyA zaktyA
kSAyikajJAnadarzanAbhyAM zIlena ca 'jJAtaputro' bhagavAn zramaNaH pradhAna
iti||23| kiJca (359

Page #388 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Commentary:**  What is given to a needy person or
a petitioner for the benefit of oneself and others is called charity. Charity is
of many kinds.  Abhaya-dana (gift of fearlessness) is the best because it saves
the lives of living beings who desire life. It is said that if a dying person is
offered a choice between crores of rupees and life, he will choose life, because
all beings in the world have an inherent desire to live.  To explain this, an
example is given using cowherds and women, as they understand things quickly.
Therefore, to illustrate the superiority of Abhaya-dana, a story is presented
here:  There was a city called Basantpur.  Aridaman was the king there. He was
sitting in a window with his four queens, enjoying himself.  Then he saw a
thief.  He was wearing a garland of red oleander flowers around his neck. He was
wearing red clothes, and his body was smeared with red sandalwood.  Behind him,
a Dindibha drum was being played, signifying his death sentence.  The Chandala
people were taking him along the royal road.  The king, along with his queens,
saw the thief.  The queens asked him what crime he had committed.  Then a royal
official told them that he had stolen the property of another, which is against
the king's order.  Hearing this, one of the queens requested the king, "You had
promised me a boon earlier, please grant it today, so that I can do some good
for this thief, help him."  The king agreed to the queen's request.  That queen
had the thief bathed, adorned him with fine ornaments, and spent a thousand gold
coins to provide him with the enjoyment of the five senses for a day.  Then the
next day, the second queen spent a lakh gold coins to provide him with all kinds
of pleasures and comforts.  The third queen spent a crore gold coins on the
third day to provide him with all kinds of happiness, joy, and respect.  The
fourth queen, having received the king's order, protected him from death.  She
gave him Abhaya-dana.  Then the three queens began to mock the fourth queen,
saying, "She didn't even give him anything."  The fourth queen said, "I have
done the greatest favor to him.  I have given him life."  Thus, a dispute arose
among the queens about who had done the greatest favor to the thief.  Then the
king called the thief and asked him, "Who has done you the greatest favor?"
Hearing this, the thief said, "I was extremely afraid of the fear of death.
Therefore, I could not experience the pleasures of bathing, etc.  But when I
heard the sound that I had been given Abhaya-dana, I felt as if I had been
reborn.  Therefore, Abhaya-dana is the best of all charities."  This is true.
Among truthful statements, the statement that does not cause pain to others is
considered the best.  But that which causes pain to others is not truly
truthful, because truth is that which is beneficial to good people.  It is said
in the world that Kaushik Muni, by speaking a truth mixed with violence, fell
into a severe, painful hell.  It is also said that one should not call a blind
person blind, a eunuch a eunuch, or a thief a thief.  In austerity, celibacy
with nine secrets is the best.  Similarly, in wealth, power, knowledge, vision,
and conduct, the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira is the best.  Some 360 Om Om Om

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - apane evaM dUsare ke anugraha ke lie arthI-
yAcaka ko jo diyA jAtA hai, use dAna kahA jAtA hai| dAna aneka prakAra kA hotA
hai  /  jIvana kI vAJchA rakhane vAle prANiyoM ke trANakAritva ke kAraNa
abhayadAna sarvazreSTha hai  /  kahA hai kisI mriyamAna maraNonmukha prANI ko
eka ora karor3oM kA dhana diyA jAya tathA dUsarI ora jIvana diyA jAya, donoM meM
se kisI eka ko lene kA kahA jAya to vaha karor3oM ke dhana ko grahaNa na kara
jIvana ko hI cAhegA kyoMki saMsAra ke sabhI prANiyoM meM sahaja rUpa meM
jijIviSA hai, ve jInA cAhate haiM  /  gvAloM aura auratoM Adi ko dRSTAnta dekara
samajhAne meM koI bAta turanta unake samajha meM A jAtI hai  /  isalie
abhayadAna kI zreSThatA ko batAne hetu eka kathAnakaM yahA~ upasthita kiyA jAtA
hai - - basantapura nAmaka nagara thA  /  aridamana vahA~ kA rAjA thaa| vaha
apanI cAra rAniyoM ke sAtha jharokhe meM baiThA huA manovinoda kara rahA thA  /
taba usane eka cora ko dekhA  /  usakI gardana meM lAla kanera kI mAlA pahana
rakhI thI  /  lAla vastra pahanA rakhe the, zarIra para lAla candana lipta thA,
usake pIche-pIche usake mRtyudaNDa kA sUcaka DiNDibha-Dhola baja rahA thA  /
cANDAla loga use rAjamArga se le jA rahe the  /  rAniyoM sahita rAjA ne usa cora
ko dekhA  /  rAniyoM ne use dekhakara prazna kiyA ki isane kyA kasUra kiyA  /
taba eka rAjapuruSa unase kahA ki isane dUsare ke dravya kA apaharaNa corI kI
hai, jo rAjAjJA ke viruddha kArya hai  /  yaha sunakara una rAniyoM meM se eka
rAnI ne rAjA se nivedana kiyA ki Apane pahale mujhe eka varadAna dene kA vAyadA
kiyA thA, vaha Aja de dIjie, jisake dvArA maiM isa cora kA kucha upakAra kara
sakUM, usakI sahAyatA kara sakUM  /  rAjA ne rAnI kA anurodha svIkAra kiyaa| usa
rAnI ne usa cora ko snAna karAkara uttama alaMkAroM se alaMkRta kara eka sahasra
svarNa mudrAoM ke vyaya se use eka dina ke lie zabda Adi pAMca prakAra ke
viSayoM kA bhoga prApta karavAyA  /  tatpazcAt dUsarI rAnI ne bhI agale dina eka
lAkha svarNa mudrAeM kharca kara use saba prakAra ke bhoga, sukha pradAna
karavAye  /  tIsarI rAnI ne tIsare dina eka karor3a svarNa mudrAeM vyaya kara
use saba prakAra ke sukha, Ananda, satkAra Adi prApta karAye  /  cauthI rAnI ne
rAjA kA Adeza prApta kara usakI mRtyu se rakSA kii| use abhaya dAna dilvaayaa|
taba tInoM rAniyA~ cauthI rAnI kA upahAsa karane lagI ki isane isa becAre ko bhI
nahIM diyA  /  cauthI kahane lagI- maineM tuma sabase adhika upakAra kiyA hai|
isa prakAra una rAniyoM meM usa cora kA kisane adhika upakAra kiyA hai isa
saMbaMdha meM vivAda hone lgaa| taba rAjA ne usa cora ko hI bulAyA aura usase
pUchA ki tumhArA adhika upakAra kisane kiyA hai ? yaha sunakara cora bolA ki
maiM mRtyu ke ghora bhaya se atyanta DarA huA thA  /  isalie snAnAdi sukhoM ko
maiM jarA bhI anubhava nahIM kara sakA  /  kintu jaba mere kAna meM yaha AvAja
AI ki mujhe abhayadAna de diyA gayA hai, to ise sunakara maiMne aisA mAnA ki
mAnoM merA nayA janma huA hai  /  ataH dAnoM meM abhayadAna sarvottama hai| yaha
sahI hai  /  satya vAkyoM meM jo vAkya dUsaroM ke mana meM duHkha paidA nahIM
karatA, use zreSTha kahA jAtA hai  /  kintu jisase dUsaroM ko kleza hotA hai
vaha vAstava meM satya nahIM hai kyoMki satya vaha hai jo satpuruSoM ke lie
hitaprada hai  /  kahA hai jagata meM yaha bAta sunI jAtI hai ki kauzika muni
vadhayukta - hiMsA mizrita satya bolakara tIvra vedanAmaya naraka meM patita
hue| aura bhI kahA hai-kANe ko kANA, napuMsaka ko napuMsaka aura cora ko cora
nahIM kahanA caahie| tapo meM nau gupti yukta brahmacarya sarvottama hai  /  isI
prakAra sarvottama rUpa sampatti, sarvotkRSTa zakti, kSAyika jJAna, darzana evaM
zIla meM zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra sarvazreSTha haiM  /  kucha 360 OM OM OM

Page #389 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the heroes. The five Anuttara Vimana-dwelling gods are the best
among those who have attained the state of liberation, just as the Sudharma
Sabha is the best among all assemblies, and just as Nirvana is the best among
all Dharmas, so too is the Jina, the son of the Knower, the best among all
knowers. ||24||  Commentary: Just as the five Anuttara Vimana-dwelling gods are
the best among those who have attained the state of liberation, because they
have seven lavas of lifespan remaining before they attain Siddhi, so too is the
Sudharma Sabha the best among all assemblies, because it has many places for
play. Just as all Dharmas are the best because they lead to liberation, even
those who speak ill of the Dharma ultimately point to liberation as the fruit of
their own vision, so too is there no other knowledge greater than that of the
Jina, the son of the Knower, the omniscient Vira Vardhamana. The Jina is the
most knowledgeable, and his knowledge surpasses all other knowledge. ||24||  The
one who has overcome greed, destroys the karmas, and does not associate with the
wicked. He has crossed the ocean of the great cycle of births and deaths, the
fearless hero with infinite vision. ||25||  Commentary: Just as the earth is the
foundation of all beings, so too is the Jina the foundation of all beings,
because he gives fearlessness and good advice. Or, just as the earth bears all
things, so too does the Jina bear all the afflictions and temptations. He
destroys the karmas, because he is free from greed and attachment. He is quick-
witted and has the sharpest intellect. He is free from the contact of anger and
other passions. He has crossed the ocean of the endless cycle of births and
deaths, and attained liberation. He is fearless and gives fearlessness to all
beings. He is a hero, a man of great strength, and he has infinite knowledge.
||25||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vIratthuI adhyayanaM . ThiINa seTThA lavasattamA vA sabhA suhammA va sabhANa
seTThA  /  nivvANa seTThA jaha savvadhammA, Na NAyaputtA paramatthi nANI  // 24
//  chAyA - sthitInAM zreSThAH lavasaptamA vA, sabhA sudharmA va sabhAnAM
zreSThA  /  nirvANazreSThA yathA sarve dharmAH, na jJAtaputrAt paro'sti jJAnI
//  anuvAda - jisa prakAra sabhI sthiti yuktoM meM pAMca anuttara vimAnavAsI
deva pradhAna-zreSTha haiM, sabhI sabhAoM meM jisa prakAra sudharmA sabhA uttama
hai, sabhI dharmoM meM jaise nirvANa-mokSa zreSTha haiM, usI prakAra jJAniyoM
meM bhagavAna mahAvIra sarvazreSTha hai| TIkA - sthitimatAM madhye yathA
'lavasattamAH' paJcAnuttaravimAnavAsino devAH sarvotkRSTasthitivartinaH
pradhAnAH, yadi kila teSAM sapta lavA AyuSyakarmabhaviSyattataH
siddhigamanamabhaviSyadityato lavasattamAste'bhidhIyante 'sabhAnAM ca' parSadAM
ca madhye yathA saudharmAdhipaparSacchreSThA bahubhiH
krIr3AsthAnairUpetatvAttathA yathA sarve'pi dharmA 'nirvANazreSThAH'
mokSapradhAnA bhavanti kuprAvacanikA api nirvANaphalameva svadarzanaM bruvate
yataH evaM 'jJAtaputrAt' vIravardhamAnasvAminaH sarvajJAt sakAzAt 'paraM'
pradhAnaM anyadvijJAnaM nAsti, sarvathaiva bhagavAnaparajJAnibhyA'dhika jJAno
bhavatIti bhAvaH  // 24 kiJcAnyat - _ TIkArtha - saba sthita yuktoM meM
lavasaptama-pA~ca anuttara vimAnavAsI deva.utkRSTa sthiti lie hote haiM, isalie
ve pradhAna hai kyoMki manuSya bhava meM dharma kA AcaraNa karate hae yadi unakI
Aya sAta lava adhika hotI to ve kevalajJAna prApta kara mokSa meM cale jAte  /
isa kAraNa ve lavasaptam deva kahe jAte haiM  /  sabhAoM meM jisa prakAra indra
kI sabhA, jo sudharmA nAma dvArA abhihita hai, sabase uttama hai kyoMki usameM
aneka krIr3A sthala bane haiM  /  samasta dharmoM meM jisa prakAra mokSa
pradhAna hai kyoMki kuprAvacanika-mithyAmatavAdI bhI apane darzana kA phala
mokSa hI batalAte haiM  /  ina sabakI taraha sabhI jJAniyoM meM bhagavAna
mahAvIra se bar3A car3hA. koI dUsarA jJAnI nahIM hai  /  ve sabase adhika jJAnI
haiM  /  jJAna meM sarvazreSTha haiM  /  puDhovame dhuNai vigayagehI, na
saNNihiM kuvvati Asapanne  /  tariuM samudaM va mahAbhavodhaM, abhayaMkare vIra
aNaMta cakkhU  // 25 //  chAyA - pRthvyupamo dhunAti vigatagRddhiH, na sannidhiM
karotyAzuprajJaH  /  tarItvA samudramiva mahA bhavaugha mabhayaGkaro vIro'nanta
cakSuH  //  anuvAda - pRthvI jaise samagra prANiyoM kA AdhAra hai usI taraha
bhagavAna mahAvIra sabake AdhAra haiM  /  ve apane aSThavidha karmoM kA dhunana-
nAza karane vAle haiM  /  vigata gRddhi-Asakti rahita haiM  /  ve Azu prajJa-
parama prakhara prajJAzIla haiM  /  krodha Adi ke samparka se rahita haiM  /
samudra kI taraha ananta saMsAra ko pAra kara ve mokSagata haiN| ve prANiyoM ke
lie abhayaprada haiM  /  vIra-parama parAkramazAlI haiM aura anantajJAnI haiM  /
TIkA - sa hi bhagavAn yathA pRthivI sakalAdhArA vartate tathA
sarvasattvAnAmabhayapradAnataH sadupadezadAnAdvA sattvAdhAra iti, yadivA-yathA
pRthvI sarvaM sahA evaM bhagavAn parISahopasargAn samyak sahata iti, tathA
'dhunAti' (361 -

Page #390 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Chapter 25**  This verse explains the eight types
of karma that are abandoned (**apnayatyashtprakaram karmeti sesha**). It also
describes the characteristics of the liberated soul:  * **Vigatagriddi:** One
who is free from greed (**gaddharyam abhilasho yasya sa vigatagriddi**). *
**Sannividhi:** One who is free from attachment (**sannihidhanam sanniidhi**).
This includes both material attachment (**dravya sanniidhi**), such as wealth,
possessions, animals, etc., and mental attachment (**bhavasanniidhi**), such as
attachment to emotions like anger, delusion, etc. The liberated soul does not
engage in either type of attachment (**tamu bhayaraapam api sanniidhi na karoti
bhagavan**). * **Ashu prajna:** One who is quick-witted and has immediate
knowledge (**sarvatra sadop yogat na chhadmasthavan manasa paryalochya padartha
parichchitti vidhatte**). They do not need to ponder or analyze things like
those who are ignorant (**chhadmastha**). * **Mahabhavoudha:** One who has
crossed the vast ocean of samsara (**taritva samudram iva aparam
mahabhavoudham**). This ocean is filled with suffering and is characterized by
the four gatis (**chatur gatik samsara sagaram bahu vyasana kulum**). The
liberated soul has attained the highest state of liberation (**sarvottamam
nirvanam asaditavan**). * **Abhayam:** One who is fearless and provides
protection to all beings (**praninam pran raksharoopam svatha parathach
sadupadeshadanaat karotityabhayamkara**). They are fearless because they have
conquered all fear (**abhayamkara**). * **Veer:** One who is a hero and destroys
the eight types of karma (**asht prakaram karma visheshenere yati prerayatiti
veer**). They are a hero because they have conquered their own inner enemies
(**veer**). * **Anant:** One who has infinite knowledge (**anant aparyavasanam
nityam jneyananantatvadva anant chakshuriva chakshu**). Their knowledge is like
an infinite eye (**kevalgyanam yasya sa tatheti**).  **Chapter 26**  This verse
describes the qualities of the liberated soul (**arhan maharishi**):  * They
have conquered the four inner enemies (**kashyaas**): anger (**krodha**), pride
(**mana**), delusion (**maya**), and greed (**lobha**). * They do not create any
negative karma (**paapam na karayati**). * They do not cause others to create
negative karma (**naanyai karayati**).  **Commentary**  The commentary explains
that the liberated soul is free from all inner enemies (**adhyaatmadosha**).
They are a **tirtankara** (**arhan**), a ford-maker, who guides others towards
liberation. They are also a **maharishi** (**mahan rishi**), a great sage,
because they have conquered all inner enemies. They do not create any negative
karma (**paapam**), nor do they cause others to create negative karma (**naanyai
karayati**).  **Om Om Om**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram apanayatyaSThaprakAraM karmeti zeSa:, tathA - 'vigatA'
pralInA sabAhyAbhyantareSu vastuSu 'gRddhi : ' gAddharyamabhilASo yasya sa
vigatagRddhiH, tathA sannidhAnaM sannidhiH, sa ca dravyasannidhiH
dhanadhAnyahiraNyadvipadacatuSpadarUpaH bhAvasannidhistu mAyA krodhAdayo vA
sAmAnyena kaSAyAstamubhayarUpamapi saMnidhi na karoti bhagavAn, tathA
'AzuprajJaH ' sarvatra sadopayogAt na chadmasthavanmanasA paryAlocya
padArthaparicchittiM vidhatte, sa evambhUtaH taritvA samudramivApAraM
'mahAbhavaudhaM' caturgatika saMsArasAgaraM bahuvyasanAkulaM sarvottamaM
nirvANamAsAditavAn punarapi tameva vizinaSTi - ' abhayaM' prANinAM prAN
rakSArUpaM svataH paratazca sadupadezadAnAt karotItyabhayaMkaraH, tathA'STa
prakAraM karma vizeSeNe rayati - prerayatIti vIra:, tathA 'anantam'
aparyavasAnaM nityaM jJeyAnantatvAdvA'nantaM cakSuriva cakSuH- kevalajJAnaM
yasya sa tatheti  /  25 //  kiJcAnyat TIkArtha jaise pRthvI saba prANiyoM kA
AdhAra hai, usI prakAra bhagavAna mahAvIra sabake AdhAra hai kyoMki ve jIvoM ko
abhaya pradAna karate haiM aura sadupadeza dete haiN| jaise pRthvI saba sahana
karatI hai, usI prakAra bhagavAna samagra pariSahoM aura upasargoM ko
bhalIbhAMti sahana karate haiM  /  ve aSTavidha karmoM kA apanayana karate
haiMunheM apane se dUra karate haiM  /  ve bAhya - bAharI tathA Abhyantara
bhItarI vastuoM meM Asakti rahita haiM  /  I 1 - sannidhAna yA naikaTya ko
sannidhi kahA jAtA hai| dhana dhAnya, dvipada-do pairoM vAle prANI manuSya,
catuSpadacAra pairoM vAle prANI- pazu, inakA samparka dravya sannidhi kahA jAtA
hai  /  mAyA chalanA, pravaMcanA, krodha Adi athavA sAmAnya rUpa se saba kaSAyoM
ke samparka ko bhAva sannidhi kahA jAtA hai| bhagavAna ina donoM hI prakAra kI
sannidhiyoM ko nahIM karate ina donoM meM samparka nahIM rkhte| ve AzuprajJa
haiM, kyoMki unakA jJAna sarvatra - saba jagaha vyApta rahatA hai  /  ve
chadmasthoM-asarvajJoM kI jyoM mana dvArA ciMtana kara padArthoM kA nizcaya
nahIM krte| una bhagavAna mahAvIra ne atyanta duHkhapUrNa, cAra gatiyukta
saMsAra rUpI samudra ko pAra kara mokSa ko sarvottama sthAna ko AtmasAta kara
liyA hai  /  unakI vizeSatAe~ batalAte hue kahate hai bhagavAna prANiyoM ko
abhaya ke rUpa meM rakSaNa dete rahe tathA sadUdharma kA upadeza dekara unako
abhaya karate rahe - nirbhIka banAte rahe  /  bhagavAn aSTavidha karmoM ko
vizeSa rUpa se apagata karate haiM- dUra karate haiM  /  ataH ve vIra - Atma
parAkramI haiM  /  kevala jJAna - sarvajJatva unake netra ke samAna hai jisakA
koI anta nahIM hai arthAt jo nitya hai, athavA jJeya padArthoM kI anantatA ke
kAraNa jo ananta haiM  /  isa prakAra bhagavAna ananta cakSu haiM  /  OM OM OM
kohaM ca mANaM ca taheva mAyaM, lobhaM cautthaM ajjhatthadosA  /  eANi vaMtA
arahA mahesI, Na kuvvaI pAva Na kAravei  //  26  //  chAyA krodhaJca mAnaJca
tathaiva mAyAM, lobhaJcaturtha JcAdhyAtmadoSAn  /  pApaM na kArayati  //
vAntvA'rahanmaharSirnakaroti - etAn anuvAda bhagavAna mahAvIra maharSi - mahAn
RSi, draSTA  /  ve krodha, abhimAna, mAyA aura lobha ina cAra kaSAyoM ko
parAbhUta kara na svayaM pApa - azubha karma karate haiM aura na oroM se vaisA
karma karAte haiM  /  - TIkA nidAnocchedena hi nidAnina ucchedo bhavatIM ti
nyAyAt saMsArasthitezca krodhAdayaH kaSAyAH karaNamata etAn
adhyAtmadoSAzcaturo'pi krodhAdIn kaSAyAn 'vAntvA' parityajya asau bhagavAn
'arhan' tIrthakRt jAta:, tathA maharSiH, evaM paramArthato maharSikatvaM bhavati
yadyadhyAtmadoSA na bhavanti, nAnyatheti, tathA na svataH 'pApa'
sAvadyamanuSThAnaM karoti nApyanyaiH kArayatIti  //  26  //  kiJcAnyat 362 -

Page #391 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Tikaartha - The principle of Nyaya Shastra is that when the cause is
destroyed, the effect is also destroyed.  Kshayas like anger, etc., are the
causes of the worldly state and are spiritual defects.  Lord Mahavira attained
the Tirthankara Maharshi position by abandoning these four Kshayas.  In reality,
one becomes a Maharshi only when these four spiritual defects - Kshayas - are
conquered.  If this does not happen, one does not become a Maharshi.  The Lord
himself does not commit Savadya (intentional) sinful karma, nor does he cause
others to do so.  **Verse 27:** **Chhaya:** Kriyakriye Vainayikanuvaayam,
Annyaaninaam Padiyachch Thaanam. Se Savvavaayam iti Veyaitta, Uvatthiye
Sanjamdihiraayam.  **Translation:** The Lord knows the principles of all the
different schools of thought, including those who believe in action (Kriyavadi),
those who believe in inaction (Akriyavadi), those who believe in humility
(Vainayika), and those who believe in ignorance (Agnanika).  He remains engaged
in the practice of restraint throughout his life.  **Tika:** The meaning is that
the Lord accepts the position (Sthanam) of the Kriyavadi, Akriyavadi, Vainayika,
and Agnanika.  Or, the meaning is that he understands their position (Sthanam) -
their path to hell, etc. - by understanding their views (Pratiitya).  We will
explain the nature of these schools of thought in another context.  Here, we
will briefly explain them:  Those who believe that action is the only means to
achieve salvation are called Kriyavadi.  They believe that liberation is
achieved through the initiation (Deeksha) of action.  Those who do not believe
in action are called Akriyavadi.  They are also called Gnanavadi, and they
believe that liberation is achieved through the knowledge of the true nature of
reality.  As it is said:  "He who knows the twenty-five Tattvas, whether he
lives in an Ashram, has matted hair, is shaven-headed, or has a topknot, is
liberated without a doubt."  Those who believe that humility is the path to
liberation are called Vainayika, following the teachings of Gosala.  Those who
believe that ignorance is the cause of worldly existence are called Agnanika.
The Lord, knowing the positions of all these schools of thought, including the
Buddhists, etc., and understanding the true nature of reality, taught them
accordingly (Vedayitva).  He remained engaged in restraint (Sanjama) throughout
his life, unlike others.  As it is said:  "Unlike others who are eloquent
speakers, who have written scriptures, and who are full of pride, you have no
faults of arrogance or disrespect towards your disciples."  The meaning of
"Dirgharatram" is that he remained engaged in restraint throughout his life.
**Tikaartha:** Lord Mahavira, knowing the principles of the Kriyavadi,
Akriyavadi, Vainayika, and Agnanika, or understanding that all these schools of
thought lead to hell, practiced restraint throughout his life.  The nature of
these schools of thought will be explained in detail later.  Here, we will
briefly explain them:  Those who believe that action is the only means to
achieve salvation are called Kriyavadi.  They believe that liberation is
achieved through the initiation (Deeksha) of action.  Those who do not believe
in action are called Akriyavadi.  They are also called Gnanavadi, and they
believe that liberation is achieved through the knowledge of the true nature of
reality.  They say that the person who knows the twenty-five Tattvas, whether he
lives in an Ashram, has matted hair, is shaven-headed, or has a topknot, is
liberated without a doubt.  Those who believe that humility is the path to
liberation are called Vainayika, following the teachings of Gosala.  Those who
believe that ignorance is the cause of worldly existence are called Agnanika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 thuI adhya TIkArtha - nyAya zAstra kA yaha siddhAnta hai ki kAraNa ke naSTa
hone se kArya naSTa hotA hai| krodha Adi kaSAya saMsAra kI sthiti ke kAraNa haiM
adhyAtma doSa haiN| bhagavAna mahAvIra ne ina cAroM kaSAyoM kA parityAga kara
tIrthaMkara maharSi pada prApta kiyA  /  vAstava meM koI maharSi tabhI hotA hai
jaba ye AdhyAtmika doSa-cAra kaSAya vijita ho jAte haiM  /  aisA na hone para
koI maharSi nahIM hotA  /  bhagavAn svayaM sAvadya pApayukta karma na karate
haiM aura na oroM se vaisA karAte haiM  /  kiriyAkiriyaM veNaiyANuvAyaM,
aNNANiyANaM paDiyacca ThANaM  /  se savvavAyaM iti veyaittA, uvaTThie
saMjamadIharAyaM  // 27 //  chAyA kriyAkriye vainayikAnuvAda majJAnikAnAM
pratItya sthAnam  /  sa sarvavAdamiti vedAyitvA, upasthitaH saMyamadIrgharAtram
//  anuvAda bhagavAn kriyAvAdI, akriyAvAdI, vinayavAdI evaM ajJAnavAdI ityAdi
sabhI matavAdiyoM ke siddhAntoM ko jAnakara yAvat jIvana saMyama ke pAlana meM
saMlagna rahe  /  - TIkA - tathA ca bhagavAn kriyAvAdinAmakriyAvAdinAM
vainayikAnAmajJAnikAnAM ca 'sthAnaM' pakSamabhyupagatamityarthaH, yadivA-
sthIyate'sminniti sthAnaM - durgatigamAnAdikaM 'pratItya' paricchidya
samyagavabudhyetyarthaH, eteSAM ca svarUpa muttaratranyakSeNa vyAkhyAsyAmaH,
lezatastvidaM - kriyaiva paralokasAdhanAyAlamityevaM vadituM zIlaM yeSAM te
kriyAvAdinaH, tevAM hi dIkSAta eva kriyArUpAyA mokSa ityevamabhyupagamaH,
akriyavAdinastu jJAnavAdinaH teSAM hi yathAvasthitavastuparijJAnAdevamokSaH,
tathA coktam - " paJcaviMzatitattvajJo, yatra tatrAzrame rataH  /  zikhI muNDI
jaTI vApi, sikraddhayate nAtra saMzayaH  // 1 // " tathA vinayAdeva mokSa
ityevaM gozAlakamatAnusAriNo vinayena carantIti vainayikA vyavasthitA
tathA'jJAnamevaihikAmuSmikAyAlamityevayajJAnikA vyavasthitAH, ityevaM rUpaM
teSAmabhyupagamaM paricchidyasvataH samyagavagamya samyagavabodhena, tathA sa
eva vIravardhamAnasvAmIM sarvamanya mapi bauddhAdikaM yaM kaJcana vAdamaparAn
sattvAn yathAvasthitatattvopadezena 'vedayitvA' parijJApyopasthitaH
samyagutthAnena saMyame vyavasthito na tu yathA anye, taduktam "yathApareSAM
kathakA vidagdhAH, zAstrANi kRtvA laghutAmupetAH  /
ziSyairanujJAmalinopacArairvavattRtvadoSAstvayi te na santi  // 1 //  iti
'dIrgharAtram' iti yAvajjIvaM saMyamotthAnenotthita iti  // 27 //  apica
TIkArtha bhagavAn mahAvIra ne kriyAvAdI, akriyAvAdI, vinayavAdI tathA ajJAnavAdI
- ina matavAdiyoM ke siddhAntoM ko jAnakara athavA ye sabhI matavAdI burI gati
meM jAte haiM, yaha samajhakara AjIvana saMyama kA pAlana kiyA  /  ina
matavAdiyoM kA svarUpa Age vizad rUpa meM batalAyA jAyegA  /  yahA~ aMzataH
thor3A sA batalAte haiM-paraloka kI siddhi hetu kriyA hI paryApta hai jo aisA
pratipAdana karate haiM unheM kriyAvAdI kahA jAtA hai  /  inakA yaha abhimata
hai ki kriyA rUpa dIkSA se hI mokSa prApta hotA hai| akriyAvAdI jo kriyAvAda meM
vizvAsa nahIM karate  /  jo jJAnavAdI haiM, unake matAnusAra padArtha kA
yathArtha svarUpa jAnane se hI mokSa prApta ho jAtA hai| inakA kathana hai ki
vaha puruSa jo paccIsa tatvoM ko jAna letA hai, cAhe vaha kisI Azrama meM rahe,
cAhe jaTA rakhe, cAhe sira muMDAye rakhe, cAhe sira para coTI rakhe, mokSa
prApta kara letA hai| isameM jarA bhI sandeha nahIM hai  /  363

Page #392 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra. The followers of the Goshala school believe that
liberation is attained only through conduct. They conduct themselves with
restraint, hence they are called Vainyaikas. Ignorance is sufficient for the
attainment of this world and the next. It is through ignorance that their
attainment is achieved. This is the principle of the ignorant. Lord Mahavira,
understanding the principles of all these schools of thought, and knowing the
Buddhist and other schools as well, and making beings aware of them, remained
engaged in the proper observance of restraint. He was not like other schools of
thought. A Jain Acharya, praising the Lord who is free from passions, says: "O
Lord! The defects of eloquence that are present in other schools of thought -
defects in speaking, defects in reasoning - are not present in you. Even though
they created scriptures, they only attained smallness, because they and their
disciples, who preach to others, do not themselves act according to their own
principles. But you remained engaged in the observance of restraint throughout
your life."  "He, having renounced women and night meals, was devoted to the
destruction of suffering. Knowing this world and the next, the Lord renounced
all sins at all times." ||28||  Commentary: The Lord, having renounced - what is
that? - "Women" means sexual intercourse with women, "night meals" means living
with night meals, this is an indication, and other things like the prohibition
of killing living beings should also be understood. And "devoted to austerity" -
he who is devoted to austerity - whose body is burnt by austerity, why? - the
commentator shows: "suffering" means suffering - the eight kinds of karma, their
destruction - their disappearance, that is the meaning. And "knowing this world"
- "this" means the world called this world, "the next" means the world called
the next world, or "the other" - the human world, the other - hell, etc.,
knowing their nature and the causes of their attainment, the Lord "renounced all
sins" - many times. This means that he himself observed the prohibition of
killing living beings, etc., and established others in it. For he who is not
established in himself cannot establish others. As it is said:  "Even if one
speaks righteously, but acts contrary to one's own words, no one can subdue
others who are not subdued themselves. Having firmly established this in your
mind, O Lord, you have resolved to subdue yourself, who is not subdued." ||1||
And so on: "The Tirthankaras, the four great ones, are free from the bondage of
the world. They shine everywhere, free from the power of ignorance." ||1|| etc.
||28||  Now, Sudharmaswami, the Tirthankara, tells his disciples about the
qualities of the Tirthankaras.  Commentary: Lord Mahavira renounced women and
night meals. This is merely an indication. It is implied that he also renounced
other sins like killing living beings. He burnt his body with austerity. Why did
he do this? The commentator explains. That which causes suffering to beings is
called suffering. This refers to the eight kinds of karma. He did this to
destroy them. He knew this world and the next, or he knew the nature of the
human world and hell, etc., and the causes of their attainment, and he renounced
all sins that are the root of them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram  /  gauzAlaka matavAdI vinaya dvArA hI mokSa prApta honA
mAnate haiM  /  ve vinaya ke sAtha vicaraNa karate haiM, isalie vainayika
kahalAte haiM  /  ajJAna hI isa loka aura paraloka siddhi hetu paryApta hai  /
usI se unakI siddhi ho jAtI hai  /  yaha ajJAnavAdiyoM kA siddhAnta hai|
bhagavAna mahAvIra ina sabhI matavAdiyoM ke siddhAntoM ko bhalIbhAMti
samajhakara tathA bauddha Adi anya matoM ko bhI jAnakara evaM prANiyoM ko una
sabase avagata karAkara saMyama ke samyak paripAlana meM nirata rhe| ve anya
matavAdiyoM kI taraha nahIM the  /  vItarAga prabhu kA saMstavana karate huye
eka jainAcArya kahate haiM-prabho ! anya matavAdiyoM meM jo vaktRtva doSa haiM-
bolane meM-vivecana karane meM doSa haiM ve Apa meM nahIM haiM  /  ve zAstroM kI
racanA karake bhI laghutA ko hI prApta hue kyoMki ve tathA unake ziSya jo
dUsaroM ko upadeza dete haiM, svayaM apane siddhAntoM ke anusAra AcaraNa nahIM
karate haiM  /  kintu Apa jIvana bhara saMyama ke paripAlana meM nirata rahe  /
se vAriyAitthI sarAibhattaM, uvahANavaM dukkhakhayaTThayAe  /  logaM vidittA
AraM paraM ca, savvaM pabhU vAriya savvavAraM  // 28 //  chAyA - sa vArAyitvA
striyAM sarAtribhaktA mupadhAnavAn duHkhakSayArtham  /  loka viditvA''raM
paraJca sarvaM prabhu ritavAn sarvavAram  //  anutAda - bhagavAna mahAvIra ne
duHkhakSayArtha aSTavidha karmoM ke kSaya hetu strI bhoga tathA rAtri bhojana kA
parityAga kara diyA thA  /  ve sadaiva tapazcaraNa meM pravRta rahe  /  isa loka
aura paraloka ke svarUpa ko jAnakara unhoMne saba prakAra ke pApoM kA
parivarjana kiyA  /  TIkA - sa bhagavAn vArayitvA-pratiSidhya kiM
tadityAha-'striyam' iti strIparibhogaM maithunamityarthaH, saha rAtribhaktena
vartana iti sarAtribhaktaM, upalakSaNArthatvAdasyAnyadapi
prANAtipAtaniSedhAdikaM draSTavyaM, tathA upadhAna-tapastadvidyate yasyAsau
upadhAnavAn-taponiSTaptadehaH, kimarthamiti darzayati-duHkhayatIti duHkham-
aSTaprakAraM karma tasya kSaya:-apagamastadarthaM, kiJca-lokaM viditvA 'Aram'
ihalokAkhyaM 'paraM' paralokAkhyaM yadi vAAraM-manuSyalokaM pAramiti-nArakAdikaM
svarUpatastatprAptihetutazca viditvA sarvametat 'prabhu' bhagavAn 'sarvavAraM'
bahuzo nivAritavAn, etaduktaM bhavati-prANAtipAtaniSedhAdikaM svato'nuSThAya
parAMzca sthApitavAn, na hi svato'sthitaH parAMzca sthApayitumalamityarthaH,
taduktam - "bruvA No'pi nyAyyaM svavacanaviruddhavyavaharan, parAnnAlaM
kazciddamayitumadAntaH svayamiti  /  bhavAnnizcityaivaM manasi jagadAdhAya
sakalaM, svamAtmAnaM tAvaddamayitumadAntaM vyavasitaH  // 1 // " iti,
sathA-"titthayaro caunANI suramahio sijjhiyavyavadhUyaMmi  /  aNigUhiyabalavirao
savvatthAmesu ujjamai 1 //  ityAdi"  // 28 //  sAmprataM
sudharmasvAmItIrthakaraguNAnAkhyAya svaziSyAnAha TIkArtha - bhagavAna mahAvIra
ne nArI bhoga tathA rAtri bhojana kA parityAga kara diyA thA  /  yaha upalakSaNa
mAtra hai  /  isase saMketita hai ki unhoMne prANatipAta-hiMsA Adi anya pApoM kA
bhI parityAga kara diyA thA  /  unhoMne tapazcaraNa se apane zarIra ko tapA DAlA
/  aisA unhoMne kyoM kiyA ? isakA digdarzana karAte hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM  /
jo prANiyoM ko duHkha detA hai use du:kha kahA jAtA hai  /  isakA Azaya ATha
prakAra ke karmoM se hai  /  unakA kSaya karane ke lie bhagavAna ne aisA kiyA  /
unhoMne isa loka aura paraloka ko jAnakara athavA  /  manuSya loka tathA naraka
Adi ke svarUpa evaM unake prApta hone ke kAraNoM ko jAnakara, tanmUlaka samagra
pApoM 364

Page #393 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study was completely abandoned. This means that the Lord himself abandoned
sins like violence and killing, and inspired others to do the same. A man who is
not himself established in Dharma, who does not follow Dharma, cannot establish
others in Dharma. It is said that a man who speaks justly but acts contrary to
his words is himself uncontrolled - he has not been able to control his senses,
he is under their control. He cannot make another victorious over the senses.
Therefore, O Lord, knowing this, you determined the nature of the entire world
and first engaged in controlling yourself. The four omniscient, divine,
Tirthankara Bhagwan Mahavira, using all the strength of their power and self-
power, were engaged in the practice of restraint for the attainment of
liberation. Sudharma Swami Tirthankara, narrating the qualities of the
Tirthankara, now says to his disciples:  "Sochcha ya dhamma arahanta bhasiyam,
samahitham atthapadovasuddham. Tam saddahana ya jana anaau, inda va devahi va
agamissanti tibemi." ||29||  "Cha dharmam adbhasitam samahitham arthapadopa
shuddham. Tam shraddhadhana ashcha jana anayusha indra iva devaadhipha
agamishyanthi iti." || Bravimi ||  Shadow heard:  -  Translation: Those who hear
the Dharma, which is formulated by the Arhat, is collected, has a correct
meaning and words, and have faith in it, attain liberation or become like Indra,
the lord of the gods.  -  Commentary: "Sochchaya" etc., hearing the Dharma,
which is the form of Shruta and Charitra, spoken by the Arhats, is correctly
explained, has correct meanings and words, or is purified by them, is well-
reasoned, has good reasons, or is pure in terms of the words that are to be
spoken, the words that are to be spoken, or the words that are to be spoken.
Those who have faith in such Dharma spoken by the Arhats, and follow it, are
"jana" people, "anayusha" those who have lost their karma, are Siddhas, or those
who have life, are the lords of the gods like Indra. The word "iti" indicates
the end. "Bravimi" I speak, as before. ||29|| Thus ends the sixth study called
Veerasthava.  Commentary: Dharma is said to be that which saves from falling
into hell. It is in the form of Shruta and Charitra. It is spoken by the Arhat-
Tirthankara, correctly explained. It is pure in terms of reason and cause, i.e.,
it is consistent with the best appropriate reason and the best appropriate
cause. It is free from defects in terms of the meaning to be conveyed and the
words that are to be spoken. Those who have faith in such Dharma spoken by the
Arhats, follow its practice. If they are free from karma, they become Siddhas,
and if they have life, they become the lords of the gods like Indra. Here, the
word "iti" indicates the end. "Bravimi" I speak, as before.  The sixth study
called Veerasthuti is complete.  卐卐卐 365 ❀❀

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 are adhyayanaM kA sarvathA parityAga kara diyA thaa| kahane kA abhiprAya yaha
hai ki bhagavAna ne svayaM prANAtipAta-hiMsA Adi pApa tyAgakara dUsaroM ko bhI
vaisA karane meM sthApita kiyA inake tyAga kI preraNA dI  /  jo puruSa svayaM
dharma meM avasthita nahIM hai, dharma kA pAlana nahIM karatA, vaha anya ko
dharma meM sthApita karane meM sakSama nahIM ho sktaa| kahA hai jo manuSya
kahatA to nyAya saMgata hai kintu apane kathana se viparIta calatA hai, aisA
karane vAlA svayaM adAnta hai - apanI indriyoM kA damana nahIM kara sakA hai,
unakA vazagAmI hai  /  vaha dUsare ko indriya jayI nahIM banA sakatA  /  ata: he
bhagavan Apa ise jAnakara samasta jagata svarUpa ko nizcita kara pahale apane
ApakA damana karane meM pravRtta huye  /  cAra jJAna adhipati, devapUjya
tIrthaMkara bhagavAna mahAvIra mokSa prApti hetu balavIrya-AtmaparAkrama kA
samasta bala kA paripUrNa upayoga karate hue saMyama pAlana meM udyata rahe  /
sudharmA svAmI tIrthaMkara ke guNoM kA AkhyAna kara aba apane ziSyoM se kahate
haiM  /  soccA ya dhammaM arahaMtabhAsiyaM, samAhitaM aTThapadovasuddhaM  /  taM
saddahANA ya jaNA aNAU, iMdA va devAhiva AgamissaMti tibemi  // 29 //  ca
dharmamadbhASitaM samAhitamarthapadopazuddham  /  taM zraddadhAnAzca janA
anAyuSa indra iva devAdhipA AgamiSyantIti  //  bravImi  //  chAyA zrutvA -
anuvAda arhata dvArA prarUpita, samAhita- yukti saMgata tathA zuddha artha va
pada yukta dharma kA zravaNa kara jo jana isameM zraddhA karate haiM, ve mokSa
prApta karate haiM athavA indra kI jyoM devAdhipa-devatAoM ke adhipati yA svAmI
hote haiM  /  - TIkA - 'soccAya' ityidi, zrutvA ca durgatidhAraNAddharmaM -
zruta cAritrAkhyamarhadbhirbhASitaM samyagAkhyAtamarthapadAniyuktayo hetavo vA
tairupazuddham avadAtaM sadyuktikaM saddhetakuM vA yadi vA athaiH- abhidheyaiH
padaizca vAcakaiH zabdaiH upa-sAmIpyena zuddhaM nirdoSaM
tamevambhUtamarhadbhirbhASitaM dharmaM zraddadhAnAH, tathA'nutiSThanto 'janA'
lokA 'anAyuSaH ' apagatAyuH karmANaH santaH siddhAH sAyuSazcendrAdyA devAdhipA
AgamiSyantIti  /  iti zabdaH parisamAptau bravImIti pUrvavat  //  29  //  iti
vIrastavAkhyaM SaSThamadhyayanaM parisamAptamiti  //  TIkArtha - jo durgati meM
girane se bacAne kA kAraNa hai use dharma kahA jAtA hai| vaha zruta evaM cAritra
rUpa hai  /  vaha arhaMt-tIrthaMkara dvArA bhASita samyak AkhyAta hai  /  yukti
aura hetu se zuddha hai, arthAt uttama samIcIna yukti tathA uttama samIcIna hetu
saMgata hai| vaha artha - abhidheya tathA pada vAcaka zabdoM kI apekSA se doSa
rahita hai, zuddha hai  /  aise arhata bhASita dharma meM jo jIva zraddhA
rakhate haiM usakA AcaraNa anusaraNa karate haiN| ve yadi Ayukarma se rahita ho
to siddha yukta ho jAte haiM aura yadi Ayu sahita ho to indra Adi ke rUpa meM
devatAoM svAmI hote haiM  /  yahA~ iti zabda samApti kA dyotaka hai  /  bravImi
bolatA hU~ yaha pahale kI jyoM yojanIya hai  /  vIrastuti nAmaka chaThA
adhyayana samApta huA  /  Wan Wan Wan  365

Page #394 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra ### Study of the Seven Kusilas  Earth, water, fire,
air, grass, trees, seeds, and trembling beings, Those born from eggs, those born
from wombs, those born from sweat, and those born from sap. These are the bodies
that have been declared, know these seven and be indifferent. By these bodies,
one receives long punishments, and by these, one experiences reversals.
**Commentary:** The omniscient one has declared earth, water, fire, air, grass,
trees, seeds, and trembling beings, those born from eggs, those born from wombs,
those born from sweat, and those born from sap, as the bodies of living beings.
These bodies desire happiness. Those who destroy these beings with bodies and
accumulate sin, will be reborn again and again in these very beings.
**Explanation:** "Earth" refers to beings with earth bodies. The "cha" (च)
indicates a difference within itself. This difference is that beings with earth
bodies are subtle like mist and gross. Each of these is further divided into two
categories: those with sufficient and insufficient capabilities. Similarly,
beings with water bodies, fire bodies, and air bodies should be understood. The
text then describes beings with plant bodies, differentiating them as "grass"
(like kusha grass), "trees" (like banyan trees), "seeds" (like grains), and
other types of plants like creepers and shrubs. "Trembling beings" are those
with two senses, like insects. "Those born from eggs" are those born from eggs,
like birds and reptiles. "Those born from wombs" are those born from wombs, like
cows, horses, goats, and humans. "Those born from sweat" are those born from
sweat, like lice, fleas, and worms. "Those born from sap" are those born from
sap, like yogurt, sour milk, cheese, and hair.  **Commentary:** The Bhagavan now
explains the different types of living beings and the consequences of harming
them. He says, "These" (earth, water, fire, air, grass, trees, seeds, and
trembling beings) are the "bodies" (life bodies) that have been "declared"
(stated). The neuter gender is used due to the grammatical structure. "In these"
(earth bodies, etc.) "seven" (happiness) should be known. This means that all
beings desire happiness and hate suffering. Knowing this, one should "be
indifferent" (consider with a wise mind). This means that one should understand
that by harming these bodies, one harms oneself. This is because harming these
bodies leads to self-punishment. Alternatively, "long punishments" (long-lasting
punishments) are received by those who harm these bodies. This means that those
who harm these bodies for a long time will suffer for a long time. The text then
explains the consequences of harming these bodies: "They" (those who harm these
bodies) "go" (move) "to these" (earth bodies, etc.) "in various ways" (in many
ways). This means that they will be reborn again and again in these very bodies.
Alternatively, "reversals" (changes) occur. When beings with bodies act for
happiness, they only experience suffering, not happiness. Similarly, if beings
with bodies act for liberation, they only experience rebirth, not liberation.
**Commentary:** Just as those who seek liberation harm these bodies and
experience reversals, leading to rebirth, the text explains this further.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram saptakuzIlaparijJAdhyayana puDhavI ya AU agaNI ya vAU,
taNa rukkha bAyA ya tasA ya pANA  /  je aMDayA je ya jarAu pANA, saMseyayA je
rasayAbhihANA  // 1 //  eyAI kAyAiM paveditatAI, etesu jANe paDileha sAyaM  /
eteNa kaNae ya AyadaMDe, etesu yA vippariyAsuviMti  // 2 //  chAyA - pRthivI
cApazcAgnizca vAyuH, tRNavRkSavIjAzca trasAzca prANAH  /  ye'NDajA ye ca
jarAyujAH prANAH, saMsvedajA ye rasajAbhidhAnAH  //  chAyA - ete kAyAH
praveditA, eteSu jAnIhi pratyupekSasva sAtam  /  etaiH kAyai ye AtmadaNDA eteSu
ca viparyAsamupayAnti  //  anuvAda - sarvajJoM ne pRthvI, jala, agni, vAyu,
tRNa, vRkSa bIja tathA trasa aNDaja, jarAyuja, svedaja evaM rasaja inako jIva kA
zarIra kahA hai  /  inameM sukha kI vA~chA rahatI hai  /  jo vyakti ina zarIra
yukta prANiyoM kA nAza kara pApa saMcita karate haiM ve punaH punaH inhIM
prANiyoM meM janma prApta karate haiM  /  TIkA - 'pRthivI' pRthivIkAyikAH
sattvAH cakAraH svagatabhedasaMsUcanArthaH, sa cAyaM bhedaH-pRthivI kAyikAH
sUkSmA bAdarAzca, te ca pratyekaM paryAptakAparyAptakabhedena dvidhA,
evamapkAyikA api tathA'gnikAyikA vAyukAyikAzca draSTavyAH, vanaspatikAyikAn
bhedan darzayati-tRNAni' kuzAdIni 'vRkSAzca' azvatthAdayo 'bIjAni' zAlyAdIni
evaM vallIgulmAdayo'pi vanaspatibhedA draSTavyAH, trasyantIti 'trasA'
dvIndriyAdayaH 'prANA' prANinaH ye cANDAjAtA aNDajAH-zakunisarIsRpAdayaH 'ye ca-
jarAyujA' jambAlaveSTitAH samutpadyante, te ca gomahiSyajAvika manuSyAdayaH,
tathA saMsvedAjjAtA:saMsvedajA yUkAmatkuNakRmyAdayaH ye carasajAbhidhAnA'
dadhisauvIrakAviSurutapakSmasannibhA iti  // 1 //  bhagavaddhiH nAnAbhedabhinnaM
jIvasaMghAtaM pradAdhunA tadupaghAte doSaM pradarzayitumAha- ete' pRthivyAdayaH
'kAyA' jIvanikAyA 'praveditAH' kathitAH, chAndasatvAnnapuMsakaliGgatA, 'eteSu'
ca pUrvaM pratiSAditeSu pRthivIkAyAdiSu prANiSu 'sAtaM' sukhaM jAnIhi, etaduktaM
bhavati-sarve'pi sattvAH sAtaiSiNo duHkhadviSazceti jJAtvA 'pratyupekSasva'
kuzAgrIyayA buddhayA paryAlocayati, yathaibhiH kAyaiH samArabhyamANaiH
pIDyamAnairAtmA daNDayate, etatsamArambhAdAtmadaNDo bhavatItyarthaH,
athavaibhireva kAyairye 'AyatadaNDA' dIrghadaNDAH, etaduktaM bhavati-etAn kAyAn
ye dIrghakAlaM daNDayantipIDayantIti, teSAM yadbhavati taddarzayati-te eteSveva-
pRthivyAdikAyeSu vividham-anekaprakAraM pari-samantAd AzukSipramupa-sAmIpyena
yAnti-vrajanti, teSveva pRthivyAdikAyeSu vividhamanekaprakAraM bhUyo bhUyaH
samutpadyanta ityarthaH, yadivA-viparyAso-vyatyayaH, sukhArthibhiH
kAyasamArambhaH kriyate tatsamArambheNa ca duHkhamevAvApyate na sukhAmiti, yadi
vA kutIthikA mokSArthametaiH kAyaiA~ kriyAM kurvanti tayA saMsAra eva bhavatIti
// 2 //  yathA cAsAvAyatadaNDo mokSArthI tAn kAyAn samArabhya tadviparyayAt
saMsAramApnoti tathA darzayati TIkArtha - pRthvI kA abhiprAya pRthvIkAya ke jIva
haiM  /  yahA~ cakAra svagata bheda kA sUcaka hai  /  vaha bheda yaha hai ki
pRthvI kAya ke prANI sUkSmatayA bAdara va sthUla do prakAra ke hote haiM  /
unameM se pratyeka ke paryApta -366)

Page #395 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are two types of knowledge, **Kushila** and **Parijna**, and similarly,
there are two types of **Aparyapt**. In the same way, there are living beings
with **Apkay**, **Agnikay**, and **Vayukay**. This should be known. The
**Sutrakara** describes the living beings with **Vanaspati Kay** in different
forms. Trees like **Tern-Kush**, **Ashvastha** or **Peepal**, grains like
**Beej-Chawal**, creepers and bushes are also types of **Vanaspati**. Those who
experience pain are **Dwiindriya** and other beings, birds and snakes born from
eggs, and **Jalayuja-Jambal** born from water, cows, buffaloes, goats, sheep,
and humans born from **Parivishthatajanma**, and bedbugs and worms born from
sweat, and small winged creatures born from yogurt and kanji - all these are
living beings.  By showing the different types of living beings, the
**Sutrakara** now explains the faults in harming them - in violence. The
**Tirthankaras** have called these **Prithvikaay** and other beings as a group
of living beings. Here, due to the **Chandas**, the neuter gender is used. It
should be known that these **Prithvikaay** and other beings desire happiness.
The meaning of saying this is that all these beings desire happiness and hate
suffering. Knowing this, men with sharp intellect - with sharp intellect -
should consider that by oppressing them, their soul becomes punishable, that is,
by harming them, the soul has to suffer. The **Sutrakara** shows the state of
those who harm these beings for a long time, who commit violence against them.
Those who cause suffering to the aforementioned **Prithvikaay** and other
beings, those who torment them, are reborn again and again in these
**Prithvikaay** and other yonis.  Beings start the process of harming other
beings to gain happiness. They harm them, but they only get suffering from it.
They do not get happiness, or the **Kutirthik** and **Mithya Matvadi** who
perform actions through these beings for the sake of liberation, their cycle of
birth and death in the world increases.  Those who desire liberation by
punishing these beings, by harming them, obtain only the world, which is
contrary to liberation, as a result of violence. The **Sutrakara** reveals this.
**Jaaiphaham Anuparivattmane, Tasathavarehim Vinighayameti. Se Jaati Jaatim
Bahukurakame, Jam Kuvvati Mijati Tena Bale. ||3||**  **Chhaya - Jaati
Pathamanuparivartanamanastra-Sasthavareshu Vinighatameti. Sa Jaati Jaatim
Bahukrurkarma, Yat Karoti Mriyate Tena Balah. ||**  **Anuvaad -** One who
punishes beings with one sense and so on, who harms them, is born in those same
yonis with one sense and so on, dies, he is born and destroyed by taking birth
in **Trasas** and **Sthavaras**. He is reborn, performing cruel deeds, and dies
by his own deeds.  **_Teeka -_** **Jaatinaam** - beings with one sense and so
on, **Jaatipath** - the path of birth, **Yadva** - **Jaati** - birth, **Badho**
- death, **Jaati** and **Vadha** are **Jaativaadha**, **Anuparivartanah** -
wandering among beings with one sense and so on, experiencing birth, old age,
and death many times, **Seshu** - in **Tejovaayu Dwiindriya** and so on, in
**Sthavaras** - in **Prithvi Ambu Vanaspati**, born in them, **Kayadanda
Vipakajena Karma** - by the karma of the result of bodily punishment, **Bahusho
Vinighatam** - destruction, **Avatpnoti** - obtains, **Sa** - he, **Ayatadanda
Asumaan** - who has received punishment, **Jaatim Jaatim** - obtains birth,
**Bahuni Krurani Darunani Anusthanani Yasya** - who performs many cruel and
terrible deeds.  (367)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM tathA aparyApta do-do bheda haiM isI prakAra apakAya,
agnikAya tathA vAyukAya ke jIva haiM, yaha jAnanA caahie| vanaspati kAya ke
jIvoM ko bhinna-bhinna rUpa meM sUtrakAra batalAte haiM  /  tRNa-kuza Adi vRkSa,
azvastthA yA pIpala Adi bIja-cAMvala Adi dhAnya, latA tathA jhAr3I Adi bhI
vanaspati ke bheda haiM yaha jAne  /  jo trAsa pAte haiM ve dvIindriya Adi prANI
evaM aNDe se utpanna pakSI aura sarpa Adi tathA jalAyuja-jambAla jara se
pariviSThatajanmane vAle gAya, bhaiMsa, bakarI, bher3a tathA manuSya Adi evaM
sveda-pasIne se paidA hone vAle khaTamala kRmi Adi evaM dahI aura kAMjI Adi se
utpanna sUkSma pakSmayukta-choTe choTe paMkha vAle jIva-ye saba prANI haiM  /
jIvoM ke bheda dikhalAkara aba sUtrakAra unake upaghAta meM-hiMsA meM doSa
batAne hetu pratipAdita karate hai  /  tIrthaMkaroM ne ina pRthvIkAya Adi ko
jIva samUha kahA hai  /  yahA~ chAndasa hone ke kAraNa napuMsaka liMga kA
prayoga hai ina pRthvIkAya Adi jIvoM meM sukha kI vA~chA hotI hai yaha jAnanA
cAhie kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki ye sabhI prANI sukha cAhate hai va duHkha
se dveSa karate hai  /  yaha jAnakara kuzAgra buddhi-tIvra buddhi yukta puruSa
ye vicAra kareM ki inako utpIr3ita karane se apanI AtmA daNDanIya hotI hai,
arthAt inakI hiMsA karane se AtmA ko duHkha bhoganA par3atA hai  /  jo ina
prANiyoM kI dIrghakAla paryanta daNDa dete hai, hiMsA karate hai usake
pariNAmasvarUpa unakI jo dazA hotI hai sUtrakAra usakA digdarzana karAte hai  /
pUrvavarNita pRthvIkAya Adi jIvoM ko kaSTa dene vAle, pIr3ita karane vAle prANI
ina pRthvIkAya Adi yoniyoM meM hI punaH punaH janma prApta karate prANI sukha
pAne ke lie jIvoM kA Arambha samAraMbha karate haiM  /  unakI hiMsA karate haiM
parantu usase duHkha hI prApta hotA hai  /  sukha prApta nahIM hotA, athavA
kutIrthika mithyA matavAdI mokSa ke hetu ina prANiyoM dvArA jo kriyA karate
haiM, isase unakA saMsAra meM AvAgamana kA cakra bar3hatA hai  /  ina prANiyoM
ko daNDa dekara vyAhatkara mokSa kI kAmanA karane vAle puruSa hiMsA ke
pariNAmasvarUpa mokSa ke pratikUla saMsAra ko hI prApta karate haiM  /
sUtrakAra yaha prakaTa karate haiN| jAIpahaM aNuparivaTTamANe, tasathAvarehiM
viNighAyameti  /  se jAti jAtiM bahukUrakamme, jaM kuvvatI mijati teNa bAle  //
3 //  chAyA - jAti pathamanuparivartanamAnastra-sasthAvareSu vinighAtameti  /
sa jAti jAtiM bahukrUrakarmA, yat karoti mriyate tena bAlaH  //  anuvAda -
ekendriya Adi prANiyoM ko jo daNDa detA hai, unakI hiMsA karatA hai, vaha unhIM
ekendriya Adi yoniyoM meM utpanna hotA hai, maratA hai, vaha trasoM evaM
sthAvaroM meM janma lekara paidA hokara naSTa hotA hai| vaha punaH janma letA
huA krUratA pUrNa karma karatA huA, apane hI karma se maratA haiM  /  _TIkA -
jAtInAm-ekendriyAdInAM panthA jAtipathaH, yadivA-jAti:-utpattirbadho-maraNaM
jAtizca vadhazca jAtivadhaM tad 'anuparivartamAnaH' ekendriyAdiSu paryaTan
janmajarAmaraNAni vA bahuzo'nubhavan 'seSu' tejovAyudvIndriyA diSu sthAvareSu'
ca pRthivyambuvanaspatiSu samutpannaH san kAyadaNDavipAkajena karmaNA bahuzo
'vinighAtaM' vinAzametiavApnoti 'sa' AyatadaNDo'sumAn 'jAtiM jAtim'
utpattimavApya bahUni krUrANi-dArUNAnyanuSThAnAni yasya (367

Page #396 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
|| | The Sutra of the Angas of the Sutras says: He who performs many cruel deeds
is thus devoid of discrimination, being devoid of the discrimination of the real
and the unreal, like a child. For whatever deed of tormenting living beings he
performs in the category of one-sense beings and so on, by that very deed he is
'measured', he dies, he is filled. Or, 'he is measured in violence', he is
killed. Or, 'he is measured by many cruel deeds', 'this is a thief', 'this is an
adulterer', and so on, he is measured by that very deed, he is covered. ||3||
Where then is he measured by those deeds? This is shown - - Commentary - The
path of one-sense beings and so on is called the path of the category, or birth
is called the category and death is called killing. These two are called
category-killing. It should be known here that the 'h' that occurs in Prakrit is
changed into both 'th' and 'dh' in Sanskrit. Therefore, here the two forms,
category-path and category-killing, are presented. There, the living being
wanders in the category of one-sense beings and so on. He experiences birth and
death again and again. He is born in fire, air, and two-sense beings and so on,
and in earth, water, plants and so on, and due to the result of the deed of
punishment and violence, he is destroyed again and again. That living being, who
is extremely punishing for living beings and who performs deeds with extreme
cruelty and mercilessness, again and again taking birth, is devoid of the
discrimination of the real and the unreal, like a child is ignorant. In whatever
category of one-sense beings and so on he performs the deed of destroying living
beings, by that very deed he dies, or he is killed as a result of that very
deed, or he is recognized in the world as a man of very cruel deeds, 'this is a
thief', 'this is an adulterer', and so on, as a result of that very deed. Where
does he suffer due to his deeds? The author of the sutras reveals this, saying:
If you go to the other side, or if you are a hundred-pointed arrow, or if you
are otherwise. Those who are afflicted by the cycle of existence, they bind and
torment the evil ones. ||4|| Shadow - Non-violence in the world, or on the other
side, or a hundred-pointed arrow, or otherwise. Those who are afflicted by the
cycle of existence, they bind and torment the evil ones. || Translation - There
is a deed that gives fruit to the doer in this very birth, and there is a deed
that gives fruit in the next birth. Some deeds give fruit in one birth, while
others give fruit in hundreds of births. Some deeds give fruit in the same way
as they are done, while others give fruit in a different way. The wicked men
always wander in the cycle of existence. They suffer the painful fruit of one
deed, and they are tormented by that, which binds them to more deeds. Thus, they
always suffer the fruit of their sins. Commentary - Those deeds that are hasty,
they give fruit in that very birth, or they give fruit in the next birth in hell
and so on. They give intense fruit in one birth, 'a hundred-pointed arrow', in
many births. In whatever way they perform that evil, so it is revealed, and so -
'otherwise', this is said - some deeds give fruit in this very birth, and some
in the next birth, as the suffering fruit of the son of a deer is mentioned in
the Shrutaanga Shruta Skandha, the long-lasting one is known to be in the next
birth, in whatever way, once or many times, or in another way, once or a
thousand times, the cutting off of the head, the cutting off of the hands and
feet, and so on, is experienced. Thus, those who are skilled and those who are
punished by the four paths, having entered the cycle of existence, wander
through the cycle of existence like a potter's wheel, experiencing greater and
greater suffering, and experiencing the deeds done in the past, they are
tormented by one thought. -368)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  | zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram sa bhavati bahukrUrakarmA sa evambhUto nirvivekaH
sadasadvivekazUnyatvAt bAla iva bAlo yasmAmekendriyAdikAyAM jAtau
yatprANyupamardakAri karma kurute sa tenaiva karmaNA 'mIyate' mriyate pUryate
yadivA 'mIG hiMsAyAM' mIyate hiMsyate athavA-bahu krUrakarmeti cauro'yaM
pAradArika iti vA ityevaM tenaiva karmaNA mIyate-paricchadyata iti  // 3 //  kva
punarasau taiH karmabhirmIyate iti darzayati - - TIkArtha - ekendriya Adi
jAtiyoM kA mArga-jAtipatha kahA jAtA hai, athavA utpatti ko jAti kahA jAtA hai
evaM maraNa ko vadha kahA jAtA hai  /  ina donoM ko jAtivadha kahate haiM  /
yahA~ jJAtavya hai ki prAkRta meM AyA huA 'ha' saMskRta meM tha aura dha donoM
meM parivartita ho jAtA hai  /  ataeva yahA~ jAtipatha evaM jAtivadha ye do rUpa
prastuta haiM  /  vahA~ ekendriya Adi jAtiyoM meM jIva paribhramaNa karatA hai
/  bArabAra janma aura mRtyu kA anubhava karatA hai  /  vaha agni, vAyu tathA
dviindriya Adi trasa prANiyoM meM evaM pRthvI, jala, vanaspati Adi sthAvara
prANiyoM meM janma lekara daNDa-hiMsAtmaka karma ke pariNAmasvarUpa bAra-bAra
naSTa hotA hai  /  prANiyoM ke lie atyanta daNDaprada tathA punaH punaH janma
lekara unake sAtha atyanta krUra nirdayatA pUrvaka karma karane vAlA vaha jIva
sat aura asat ke viveka se rahita hone ke kAraNa bAla kI jyoM ajJa hai  /  vaha
jisa ekendriya Adi jAti meM prANI vighAtaka karma karatA hai, usI se vaha mara
jAtA hai, athavA usI karma ke phalasvarUpa mArA jAtA hai, athavA vaha atyanta
krUra karmA puruSa yaha cora hai, pAradArika-parastrIgAmI hai, ityAdi rUpa meM
usI karma ke phalasvarUpa loka meM pahacAnA jAtA hai  /  vaha apane karmoM dvArA
kahA~ duHkha bhogatA hai ? sUtrakAra ise prakaTa karate hue kahate haiN| assiM
caloe aduvA paratthA, sayaggaso vA taha annahA vA  /  saMsArayAvanna paraM paraM
te, baMdhaMti vedaMti ya danniyANi  // 4 //  chAyA - ahiMsazca loke'thavA
parastAt, zatAgrazo vA tathA'nyathAvA  /  saMsAramApannAH paraM parante,
badhnanti vedayanti ca durnItAni  //  anuvAda - koI karma aisA hai, jo karane
vAle ko isI janma meM phala detA hai, tathA koI karma Age ke janma meM phala
detA hai  /  koI karma eka hI janma meM phala detA hai, to koI saiMkar3oM janmoM
meM phala detA jAtA hai  /  koI karma jaise kiyA jAtA hai usI prakAra phala detA
hai  /  to koI karma dUsare prakAra se phala detA hai  /  anAcArI puruSa sadaiva
bhavacakra meM bhaTakate rahate haiM  /  ve eka karma kA duHkhamaya phala
bhogate hue ArtadhyAna karate haiM jisase aura karma baMdhate jAte haiM  /  yoM
ve apane pApoM kA sadaiva phala bhogate jAte haiM  /  TIkA - yAnyAzukArINi
karmANi tAnyastimanneva janmani vipAkaM dadati, athavA parasmin janmani
narakAdau vipAkaM dadati, ekasminneva janmani vipAkaM tIvaM dadati 'zatAgrazo
ve' ti bahuSu jammasu, yenaiva prakAreNa tadazubhamAcaranti tathaivodIryate
tathA-'anyathA veti, idamuktaM bhavati-kiJcitkarma tadbhava eva vipAkaM dadAti
kiJcicca janmAntare, yathA-mRgaputrasya duHkha vipAkAkhye vipAka
zrutAGgazrutaskandhe kathitamiti, dIrghakAla sthitikaM tvaparajanmAntaritaM
vedyate, yena prakAreNa sakRttathaivAnekazo vA, yadivA'nyena prakAreNa
sakRtsahastraso vA ziracchedAdikaM hastapAdacchedAdikaM cAnubhUyata iti, tadevaM
te kuzIlA AyatadaNDAzcaturgatikasaMsAramApannA arahaTTaghaTIyantranyAyena
saMsAraM paryaTantaH paraM paraM' prakRSTaM prakRSTaMduHkhamanubhavanti
anmAntarakRtaM karmAnubhavantazcaikamArtadhyAnopahatA -368)

Page #397 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Kushila Parijnaadhyayanam  The study of Kushila (cruel) individuals.
**Another point:** They bind and torment the wicked, leading them astray. They
believe that evil deeds cannot be destroyed without the destruction of the karma
that created them. As it is said:  "Do not be disheartened, O living being! Do
not be dejected, miserable, and downtrodden. The suffering you have caused in
the past cannot be erased by mere contemplation." (1)  "If you enter the
underworld, the forest, a cave, or the ocean, you cannot escape the consequences
of your past actions, even if you destroy yourself." (2)  Thus, the Kushila have
been explained in detail. Now, the Sutrakar (author of the sutra) speaks about
the heretics, without giving them any importance.  **Commentary:**  Actions that
bear fruit quickly yield their results in this very life. However, there are
many actions that bear fruit in the next life, in hell, etc. Some actions cause
intense suffering as a result of their karmic consequences in a single lifetime,
while others bear fruit over hundreds of lifetimes. Just as a being performs a
wicked action, so too does it receive its fruit, or it may receive it in a
different way. In other words, some actions bear fruit in this life, while
others bear fruit in the next. The Shruta Skandha, under the heading of "Dukkha
Vipaka" (suffering consequences), describes the story of the deer's son. Actions
that are long-lasting bear fruit in the next life. The way in which an action is
performed, it bears fruit for the doer in the same way, either once or multiple
times, or it may bear fruit in a different way, once or thousands of times, in
the form of piercing the body, cutting off hands and feet, etc.  Those who are
unrighteous and cruel, who inflict great pain and suffering on others, wander
endlessly in the cycle of four births (Chaturgati) like a wheel in a well. They
wander in the cycle of birth and death and experience intense and unbearable
suffering. When they are tormented by the consequences of their past actions,
they engage in self-deception, which leads to the binding of new karma and the
suffering of the consequences of their evil deeds. This means that self-created
karma cannot be destroyed without experiencing its consequences. Therefore, it
is said: "O living being! Do not become disheartened, dejected, miserable,
downtrodden, and sorrowful, because the suffering you have caused others in the
past cannot be erased by mere contemplation. Even if you enter the underworld,
the forest, a cave, or the ocean, or even if you commit suicide, you cannot
escape the consequences of your past actions."  Thus, the general
characteristics of Kushila individuals have been explained. Now, the Sutrakar
speaks about the heretics.  "Those who abandon their parents and embrace the
Shraman vow, then engage in the practice of fire worship and harm living beings
for their own comfort, are Kushila Dharma (followers of a cruel path), as the
omniscient ones have said." (5)  **Translation:**  Those who abandon their
parents and embrace the Shraman vow, then engage in the practice of fire worship
and harm living beings for their own comfort, are Kushila Dharma (followers of a
cruel path), as the omniscient ones have said.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM aparaM badhanti vedayanti ca duSTaM nItAni durnItAni -
duSkRtAni na hi svakRtasya karmaNo vinAzo'stItibhAva:, taduktam "mA hohi re
visanno jIva ! tumaM vimaNa dummaNo dINo  /  gahu ciMtieNa phiTTai taM dukkhaM
jaM purA raiyaM  // 1 //  chAyA - mA bhavare viSaNNo jIva ! tvaM vimanA durbhavA
dInaH  /  naiva cintitenaspheTate tadukhaM yatpurAracitaM  //  1  //  jai
pavisasi pAyAlaM aDaviMva dariM guhaM samuddaM vA  /  puvvakayAu na cukkasi
appANaM ghAyase jaivi  // 2 //  chAyA - yadi pravizasi pAtAlaMaTavIM vAdarIM
guhAMsamudraMvA  /  pUrvakRtAnnaiva bhrazyasi AtmAnaM ghAtayasi yadyapi  //  1
//   // 4 //  evaM tAvadoghataH kuzIlAH pratipAditAH, tadadhunA
pASaNDikAnadhikRtyAha - TIkArtha - jo karma zIghra phalaprada hote haiM, ve
karane vAle ko isI janma meM phala dete haiM, athavA kaI karma aise haiM, jo
dUsare janma meM naraka Adi meM apanA phala dete haiN| kaI karma kevala eka hI
janma meM apane karmoM ke tIvra vipAka svarUpa kaSTa dete haiM, athavA
saiMkar3oM janmoM meM apanA phala dete haiM  /  prANI koI eka azubha karma jisa
prakAra karatA hai, vaha usako usI prakAra se phala detA hai, athavA anya
prakAra se bhI detA hai  /  kahane kA tAtparya hai ki koI karma usI janma meM
vipAka - phala utpanna karatA hai, to koI dUsare janma meM vaisA karatA hai  /
vipAka sUtra ke duHkhavipAka nAmaka zruta skandha meM mRgAputra kA varNana AyA
hai| jo karma dIrgha kAlikasthiti lie hotA hai, vaha dUsare janma meM apanA
phala detA hai  /  jisa prakAra vaha karma kiyA gayA hai, vaha karane vAloM ko
usI prakAra eka bAra meM yA ekAdhika bAra meM phala detA hai, athavA vaha anya
prakAra se eka bAra meM yA hajAroM bAra meM vyastaka chedana tathA hAtha pairoM
kA chedana Adi ke rUpa meM phala detA hai| jo anAcArI- kuzIla prANI prANiyoM ko
bahuta daNDa dete haiM, pIr3ita karate haiM ve caturgati maya saMsAra meM rahaTa
kI taraha bAra-bAra ghUmate rahate haiM  /  janma maraNa ke cakra meM bhaTakate
rahate haiM aura prakRSTa- ghorAtighora duHkha bhogate haiM  /  pUrva janma ke
eka karma kA phala bhogate hue jaba ve Arta dhyAna karate haiM to usake parimAma
svarUpa anya karma baMdhate jAte haiM tathA pApa karmoM kA phala bhoganA hotA
hai, isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki svakRta karma phala bhoge binA naSTa nahIM hote
/  isalie kahA gayA hai ki he jIva ! tuma viSaNNa - viSAdayukta, vimana, durmana
udAsa khinna tathA dIna evaM duHkhita citta mata bano kyoMki jo duHkha tumane
pahale auroM ke lie utpanna kiyA hai, vaha cintA karane se miTa nahIM sakatA,
cAhe pAtAla meM praveza kara jAo yA kisI bIhar3a vana meM cale jAo, yA pahAr3a
kI guphA meM chipa jAo, athavA AtmahatyA kara svayaM mara jAo to bhI pUrva janma
ke karmoM se tuma baca nahIM sakate  /  isa prakAra sAmAnya tathA kuzIloM kA
pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai  /  aba sUtrakAra pAkhaNDiyoM ke sambandha meM
batalAte haiM  /  je mAyaraM vA piyaraM ca hiccA, samaNavvae agaNiM samArabhijjA
/  ahAhu se loe kusIla dhamme, bhUtAiM je hiMsati AyasAte  // 5 //  chAyA yo
mAtaraM vA picaraJca hitvA zramaNavrate'gniM samArabheta  /  athAhuH sa kuzIla
dharmA bhUtAni yo hinastyAtmasAte  //  - * - anuvAda * jo puruSa mAtA-pitA kA
parihAra- tyAga kara zramaNa vrata svIkAra kara lete haiM, phira agnikAya kA
Arambha samArambha karate haiM tathA apanI sukha suvidhA ke lie prANiyoM kI
hiMsA karate haiM, ve kuzIla dharmA haiM, adharma sevI hai, sarvajJoM ne aisA
kahA hai  /  369

Page #398 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Commentary on the Sutra
Kritanga Sutra  The meaning is as follows: Those who are not knowers of the
ultimate truth, but have arisen for the sake of religion and virtue, having
abandoned their mother and father, declare that "we have taken up the vow of a
Shramana (ascetic)." However, they initiate and engage in the activity of
Agnikaya (fire-worship), that is, they engage in the activity of Agnikaya by
consuming the prescribed food prepared through cooking, heating, etc., and by
approving of such activities done by others.  These heretical or lay people who
engage in the initiation of Agnikaya are "Kushila" (of corrupt conduct). Here,
the indication of abandoning the mother and father suggests that abandoning them
is very difficult. Therefore, their mention is made. It is also to be understood
that abandoning brothers, sons, etc. is also included here.  So, how can one of
corrupt conduct be "Kushila" (of good conduct)? The author shows that those who
have existed, exist, and will exist, are called "Bhuta" (beings). The term
"Bhuta" refers to living beings. Those who harm living beings for their own
happiness are "Kushila."  The heretical people, through the penance of the five
fires, torment their bodies, and through the rituals of Agnihatra (fire-
oblation), etc., desire to attain heaven. Similarly, the worldly people, by
cooking, getting others to cook, etc., in the form of initiating and engaging in
the activity of Agnikaya, desire happiness. All of them are "Kushila."
Explaining how the destruction of life occurs in the initiation and engagement
of Agnikaya, it is said:  "One who kindles the fire should extinguish the lives,
and one who extinguishes the fire should extinguish the lives. Therefore, the
wise should observe the Dharma and the learned should not initiate the fire."
The meaning is: One who initiates the fire activity (Agnikaya) destroys the
lives of the beings residing in the firewood, etc., and one who extinguishes the
fire also destroys the lives of the beings residing in the fire. Therefore, the
wise person should observe the Dharma and the learned should not initiate the
fire activity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - ye kecanAviditaparamArthA dharmArthamutthitA
mAtaraM pitaraM ca tyaktvA, mAtApitrordustyajatvAt tadupAdAnamanyathA
bhrAtRputrAdikamapi tyaktveti draSTavyaM zramaNavrate kila vayaM samupasthitA
ityevamabhyupagabhyAgnikAryaM samArabhante, pacanapAcanAdiprakAreNa
kRtakAritAnupatyauddezikAdiparibhogAccAgnikAyasamArambhaM kuryurityarthaH,
atheti, vAkyopanyAsArthaH , 'Ahu' riti tIrthakRdgaNadharAdaya evamuktavantaH
yathA so'yaM pASaNDiko loko gRhasthaloko vA'gnikAyasamArambhAt kuzIla :-
kutsitazIlo dharmo yasya sa kuzIladharmA, ayaM kimbhUta iti darzayati abhUvan
bhavanti bhaviSyantIti bhUtAni-prANinastAnyAtmasukhArthaM 'hinasti' vyApAdayati,
tathAhi - paJcAgnitapasA niSTaptadehAstathA'gnihotrAdikayA ca kriyayA pASaNDikAH
svargAvAptimicchantIti, tathA laukikAH pacanapAcanAdiprakAreNAgnikAryaM
samArabhamANAH sukhamabhilaSantIti  // 5 //  agnikAyasamArambhe ca yathA
prANAtipAto bhavati tathA darzayitumAha I TIkArtha jo jIva paramArthavettA nahIM
haiM, dharmAcaraNa meM udyata hote haiM, mAtA-pitA kA parityAga kara hama
zramaNa vrata meM avasthita haiM aisA svIkAra karate haiM  /  kintu agnikAya kA
Arambha samArambha karate haiM arthAt pacana-pAcana Adi dvArA kRtakArita
anumodita dvArA udiSTa AhAra kA upabhoga karane hetu agnikAya kA Arambha karate
haiM  /  ve pAkhaNDI yA sahI mAne meM gRhI loga agnikAya kA Arambha karane se
kuzIla hai  /  yahA~ jo mAtApitA kA tyAga karane kA saMketa kiyA gayA hai, usakA
Azaya yaha hai ki mAtA-pitA ko chor3anA bar3A kaThina hai  /  isalie yahA~ unakA
ullekha hai  /  unake sAtha bhAI putra Adi ko chor3anA bhI yahA~ jJAtavya hai  /
astuH jisake dharma kA svabhAva kutsita hai, vaha kuzIla kaise hai ? sUtrakAra
yaha digdarzana karAte haiM, jo ho cuke haiM, hote haiM evaM jo hoMge, unheM
bhUta kahA jAtA hai  /  bhUta kA Azaya prANiyoM se hai  /  apane sukha ke lie jo
prANiyoM kI hiMsA karate haiM, ve kuzIla hai  /  pAkhaNDI jana paMcAgni ke rUpa
meM tapazcaraNa dvArA apanI deha ko paritapta karate haiM, tathA agni meM havana
Adi kriyAoM dvArA svarga pAne kI abhilASA karate haiN| laukika sAMsArika jana
svayaM bhojana pakAnA, dUsaroM dvArA pakavAnA Adi ke rUpa meM agnikAya kA
Arambha samArambha karate hue sukha kI vAJchA karate haiM, ve saba kuzIla haiN|
agnikAya ke Arambha samArambha meM jisa prakAra prANiyoM kA nAza hotA hai usakA
digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM  /  ujAlo pANa nivAtaejjA, nivvAvao agaNi
nivAyavejjA  /  tamhA u mehAvi samikkha dhammaM, Na paMDie agaNi samArabhijjA
//  6  //  chAyA ujjvAlakaH prANAn nipAtayet, nirvApako'gniM nipAtayet  /
tasmAttu meghAvI samIkSya dharmaM na paNDito'gniM samArabhet  //  anuvAda jo
puruSa Aga jalAtA hai, vaha agnikAya ke jIvoM kA tathA anya jIvoM kA ghAta
karatA hai tathA jo Aga bujhAtA hai, vaha agnikAya ke jIvoM kI ghAta karatA hai
/  ataH medhAvI - prajJAzIla puruSa agnikAya kA Arambha samArambha na kare  /
TIkA tapanatApanaprakAzAdihetuM kASThAdisamArambheNa yo'gnikAyaM samArabhate
so'gnikAyamaparAMzca pRthivyAdyAzritAn sthAvarAMstrasAMzca prANino nipAtayet,
tribhyo vA manovAkkAyebhya Ayurbalendriyebhyo vA pAtayennipAtayet (tripAtayet),
tathA'gnikAyamudakAdinA 'nirvApayan vidhyApaMyastadAzritAnanyAMzca prANino
nipAtayetripAtayedvA tatrojjvAlaka 370

Page #399 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
How does the study of knowledge (**parijñāadhyayanam**) lead to the destruction
of many other bodies (**kāya**)? The one who ignites the fire body
(**agnikāya**) is the cause of the destruction of many other bodies. The
**āgama** says: "O Gautama! Two men engage in the activity of the fire body, one
ignites it and the other extinguishes it. Of these two men, which one commits a
greater offense and which one commits a lesser offense? O Gautama! The one who
ignites the fire body commits a greater offense towards the earth body
(**pṛthvīkāya**), water body (**āpkāya**), air body (**vāyukāya**), plant body
(**vanaśpattikāya**), and the body of the small creatures (**traskāya**). He
commits a lesser offense towards the fire body. The one who extinguishes the
fire body commits a lesser offense towards the earth body, water body, air body,
plant body, and the body of the small creatures. He commits a greater offense
towards the fire body. This is how it is said." It is also said: "There is no
doubt that this is the destruction of beings, the burning of beings."
(**bhūyāṇam esamādhāo, havvavāo ṇ sansao**)    Since this is the case, the wise
(**medhāvī**) who knows the difference between right and wrong
(**sadasadvīvekagña**), who has heard the scriptures (**saśruti**), who has
examined the Dharma and the sins (**samiksya dharma pāpāḍḍīna**), and who is a
learned person (**paṇḍita**) does not engage in the activity of the fire body.
The one who truly is a learned person is the one who refrains from the sin that
arises from the activity of the fire body.   How does the activity of the fire
body lead to the killing of other beings? The author of the sutra explains this
with an example:  "The beings of the earth, the beings of the water, the beings
that are found in wood, they are all destroyed when the fire is ignited."
(**puḍhvīvī jīvā āūvī jīvā, pāṇā ya sampāim sampयंति. sanseya ya kaṭṭhasamassiya
.ya, ete dahe agani samārabhamte**)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kazIla parijJAdhyayanaM nirvApakayoryo'gnikAyamujvalayati sa bahUnAmanyakAyAnAM
samArambhakaH, tathA cAgamaH "do bhaMte ! purisA annamanneNa saddhiM agaNikAyaM
samAbhaMti tattha NaM ege purise agaNikAyaM ujjAlei ege NaM purise agaNikAyaM
nivvavei, tesiM bhaMte ! purisANaM kayare purise mahAkammatarAe kayare vA purise
appakammatarAe ? goyamA ! tattha NaM je se purise agaNikAyaM ujjAlei se NaM
purise bahutarAgaM pur3havikAyaM samArabhati, evaM AukAyaM vAukAyaM
vaNassaikAyaM tasakAyaM appatarAgaM agaNikAyaM samArabhai, tattha NaM je se
purise agaNikAyaM nivvAvei se NaM purise appatarAgaM puDhavikAyaM samArabhai
jAva appatarAgaM tasakAyaM samArabhai jAva apparAgaM tasakAyaM samArabhai
bahutarAgaM agaNikAyaM samArabhai, te eteNaM aTeNaM goyamA ! evaM vuccai"  /
api coktam - "bhUyANaM esamAdhAo, havvavAo Na saMsao" chAyA - bhUtAnAmeSa AghAto
havyamAno na saMzayaH ityAdi  /  yasmAdevaM tasmAt 'medhAvI' sadasadvivekajJaH
sazrutika: samIkSya dharma pApADDInaH paNDitonAgnikArya samAra bhate, sa eva ca
paramArthataH paNDito yo'gnikAyasamArambhakRtAt pApAnnivartata iti  // 6 //
kathamagnikAyasamArambheNAparaprANivadho . bhavatItyAzaGkayAha - TIkArtha - agni
kA tapane tapAne va prakAza karane Adi meM upabhoga hai, vaha inakA kAraNa hai
/  jo puruSa kATha Adi DAlakara Aga jalAtA hai vaha agnikAya ke atirikta pRthvI
Adi para Azrita-vidyamAna sthAvara evaM trasa prANiyoM kA hanana karatA hai.
vaha prANiyoM kA mana, vacana, kAya evaM Ayabala tathA indriya balanAza ke rUpa
meM ghAta karatA hai jo puruSa jala Adi dvArA agnikAya ko bujhAtA hai, zAMta
karatA hai  /  vaha agnikAya ke jIva ko tathA unake Azrita jIvoM kA vinAza
karatA hai  /  jo Aga jalAtA hai aura jo Aga bajhAtA hai. ina donoM meM jalAne
vAlA agnikAya ke atirikta anya kAya ke bahuta jIvoM kA nAza karatA hai  /  isa
sambandha meM Agama meM kahA hai-gautama svAmI bhagavAna mahAvIra se prazna
karate haiM, bhagavan ! do puruSa agnikAya kA Arambha samArambha karate haiM,
eka use jalAtA hai tathA dUsarA use bujhAtA hai  /  ina donoM meM adhika karma
kisako lagatA hai tathA alpakarma kisako lagatA hai, isakA samAdhAna dete hue
bhagavAn mahAvIra kahate haiM ki gautama ! jo puruSa agni ko prajjvalita karatA
hai| vaha pRthvIkAya, apakAya, vAyukAya, vanaspatikAya tathA trasakAya kA adhika
Arambha karatA hai  /  unakI upekSA agnikAya kA kama Arambha karatA hai  /
parantu jo agni kAya ko zAnta karatA hai yA bujhAtA hai vaha pRthvIkAya,
apakAya, vAyukAya vanaspatikAya evaM trasa kAya ke jIvoM kA kama
ArambhaapekSAkRta nyUna hiMsA karatA hai  /  kintu agnikAya ke jIva kA adhika
Arambha-hiMsA karatA hai  /  vaha vastusthiti hai aura bhI kahA hai, isameM jarA
bhI saMdeha nahIM ki agnikAya ke Arambha se jIvoM kA vinAza hotA hai  /  ataH
sat asat viveka sampanna paMDita-vijJajana, dharmatatva kA ciMtana karate hue
agnikAya kA Arambha samArambha nahIM karate  /  jo pApa se nivRta haiM, haTe hue
haiM unheM paNDita kahA jAtA hai  /  ve hI vastutaH paMDita hai jo agnikAya kA
samArambha nahIM karate  /  isa prakAra pApa se nivRta rahate haiM  /  agnikAya
ke samArambha se anya prANiyoM kA vadha kisa prakAra hotA hai ? ise spaSTa
karate hue sUtrakAra batalAte haiM  /  puDhavIvi jIvA AUvi jIvA, pANA ya
saMpAima saMpayaMti  /  saMseyayA kaTThasamassiyA .ya, ete dahe agaNi
samArabhaMte  // 7 //  371)

Page #400 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga. Shadow - The earth is also a living being,
water is also a living being, and the breaths are also those that fall into the
fire. _ Those born of sweat and those who dwell in wood, he burns them when he
starts the fire. Translation - The person who kindles fire, burns the earth body
which is itself a living being, the water body - water, the Sampatimaa - those
who fall into the fire and are consumed, the moths, butterflies etc. - the
sweat-born living beings born from sweat or perspiration, and the living beings
dwelling in wood - he burns all of them. Commentary - Not only the earth-
dwelling two-sensed beings, but also the earth itself, which is characterized by
earth, is a living being, and water, which is characterized by fluidity, is a
living being, and the breaths that dwell in it, the Sampatimaa - moths,
butterflies etc. fall into it, and the Sanswedaja - worms, ants, insects etc. in
fuel like dung etc., and those who dwell in wood etc. - all these stationary and
mobile beings, he burns them, whoever starts the fire, therefore, the starting
of the fire body is a great sin. ||7|| Commentary meaning - In the earth, along
with the two-sensed beings dwelling in it, the earth body in the form of clay or
soil, the water body in the form of fluid water, the beings dwelling in water,
the moths, butterflies etc. that fall into the fire and are consumed, the sweat-
born - worms, ants, insects etc. born in fuel like dung etc., and the beings
dwelling in wood etc. - all these stationary and mobile beings, he burns them,
whoever starts the fire. Thus, the starting of the fire body is highly sinful. .
Green beings are slow, separate from the body of food. He who cuts them for his
own pleasure, destroys many beings with his boldness. ||8|| Shadow - Green
beings are slow, separate from the body of food. He who cuts them for his own
pleasure, destroys many beings with his boldness. Translation - Green grass and
sprouts etc. are also living beings. They dwell separately in the branches and
leaves etc. of trees. He who cuts them for his own pleasure, destroys many
beings with his boldness. Commentary - And so far, the ascetics who start the
fire body, and those who abstain from cooking, like vegetables etc., have been
described. Now, those who are not abstaining from the starting of plants are
being discussed. Thus, it is said - 'Green grass, sprouts etc., these are also
'beings' because they are seen to grow from food, and 'slow' because they are in
the form of living beings, they delay - they hold, for example, a human being
becomes from the stages of embryo, foetus, flesh, muscle, womb, birth, child,
youth, middle age, old age, and so on. Similarly, green things like grains etc.
are born, new, with generated juice, youthful, mature, old, dry, dead, and so
on. Trees are also described as being born in the stage of a sprout, growing
with roots, trunk, branches, sub-branches, young, mature, etc. This is
applicable to the rest of the stages as well. Thus, green things etc. also delay
in the form of living beings. Therefore, these are 'separate' - each one is
dwelling in the places of roots, trunk, branches, leaves, flowers etc., but in
all the roots etc., which are united, there is only one living being. And these
beings are innumerable, infinite, different, dwelling in the plant body, for the
sake of food, for the sake of body maintenance, for the sake of healing body
wounds, or for the sake of 'own pleasure', he cuts them, 'with boldness' - he is
bold, he destroys many beings with his strength, and because of that
destruction, he has no compassion, neither dharma nor self-pleasure, it is said.
||8|| Moreover - 372

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  chAyA - pRthivyapi jIvA Apo'pi jIvAH prANAzca
sampAtimAH sampatanti  /  _ saMsvedajAH kASThasamAzritAzcai, tAn dahedagniM
samArabhamANaH  //  anuvAda - jo vyakti agni jalAtA hai, vaha pRthvI kAya jo
svayaM jIva rUpa hai, apakAya-pAnI, saMpAtimaAga meM girakara jala jAne vAle,
zalabha-pataMge Adi svedaja-sveda yA pasIne se utpanna jIva tathA kATha meM
avasthita jIva-ina sabako jalAtA hai  /  TIkA - na kevalaM pRthivyAzritA
dvIndriyAdayo jIvA yApi ca pRthvI-mallakSaNA asAvapi jIvA, tathA
ApazcadravalakSaNA jIvAstadAzritAzca prANAH 'sampAtimAH' zalabhAdayastatra
sampatanti, tathA 'saMsvedajAH' karISAdiSvindhaneSu ghuNapipIlikAkRmyAdayaH
kASThAdyAzritAzca ye ye kecana 'etAn' sthAvarajaGgamAn prANinaH sa dahet
yo'gnikArya samArabheta, tato'gnikAyasamArambho mahAdoSAyeti  // 7 //  TIkArtha
- pRthvI meM Azrita dvIndriyAdi jIvoM ke sAtha-sAtha mRt yA mRttikA rUpa pRthvI
kAyika jIva, dravalakSaNa-tarala jala rUpa apakAyika jIva, jala meM Azrita jIva,
Aga meM girakara jala jAne vAle zalabha, pataMge Adi jIva, saMsvedaja-kaMDe Adi
IMdhana meM utpanna ghuNa, cIMTI, kIr3e Adi jIva tathA kATha Adi meM avasthita
jIva-ina sabhI sthAvara, jaMgama prANiyoM ko vaha jalAtA hai, jo agni kA AraMbha
karatA hai  /  yoM agnikAya kA samAraMbha atyadhika doSotpAdaka hai  /  .
hariyANi bhUtANi vilaMbagANi, AhAra dehA ya puDho siyAI  /  je chiMdatI AyasuhaM
paDucca, pAgabbhi pANe bahuNaM tivAtI  // 8 //  chAyA - haritAni bhUtAni
vilambakAni, AhAradehAya pRthak bhitAni  /  yacchinattyAtmasukhaM pratItya,
prAgalbhyAt prANAnAM bahunAmatipAtI  //  anuvAda - harita-dUba evaM aMkura Adi
bhI jIva haiM  /  ve vRkSoM kI zAkhAoM evaM pattoM Adi meM pRthakpRthak nivAsa
karate haiM  /  apane sukha ke lie jo unakA chedana-vyApAdana karatA hai, vaha
pragalbhatA-ghRSTatApUrvaka bahuta se prANiyoM kA nAza karatA hai  /  TIkA -
evaM tAvadagnikAyasamArambhakAstApasAH tathA pAkAdanivRttAH zAkyAdayazcApadiSTAH
sAmprataM te cAnye vanaspatisamArambhAdanivRttAH parAmRzyante ityAha-'haritAni
durvAGkarAdInyetAnyapyAhArAdevRddhidarzanAt 'bhUtAni' jIvAH tathA
'vilambakAnIti' jIvAkAraM yAnti vilambanti-dhArayanti, tathAhi-
kalalArbumAMsapezIgarbhaprasava bAlakumArayuvamadhyasthavirAvasthAto manuSyo
bhavati, evaM haritAnyapi zAlyAdIni jAtAnyabhinavAni saMjAtarasAni yauvanavanti
paripakvAni jIrNAni parizuSkA Ni mRtAni tathA vRkSA apyakurAvasthAyAM jAtA
ityupadizyante mUlaskandhazAkhAprazAkhAbhirvizeSaiH parivardhamAnA yuvAnaH potA
ityupadizyanta ityAdi zeSAsvapyavasthAsvAyojyaM, tadevaM haritAdInyapi jIvAkAraM
vilambayanti, tata etAni mUlaskandhazAkhApatrapuSpAdiSu sthAneSu 'pRthak '
pratyekaM zritAni vyavasthitAni, tu mUlAdiSu sarveSvapi samuditeSu eka eva jIvaH
etAni ca bhUtAni saGghayeyAsaGghayeyAnantabhedabhinnAni
vanaspatikAyAzritAnyAhArothaM dehopacaryArtha dehakSatasaMrohaNArthaM
vA''tmasukhaM pratItya' Azritya yacchinattisa prAgalbhyAt' dhASTA
vaSTambhAdvahanAM prANinAmatipAtI bhavati, tadatipAtAcca niranukrozatayA na
dharmo nApyAtmasukhamityuktaM bhavati |8|| kiJca - 372

Page #401 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Study of the Plant Body (Vanaspatikaya)  The principles of those who are
not liberated from the beginning of the plant body are now being examined.
Grass and sprouts, green things are also living beings because it is seen that
they grow by food, etc., and take on the form of a living being. Embryo, bud,
muscle, fetus, birth, child, youth, middle age, and old age, etc., are the
stages of a human being. Similarly, green paddy-rice, etc., also take on the
stages of birth, new, born from sap, juicy, young-mature, old-dry, and dead,
etc. Trees are also born when they sprout. Thus it is said. Then when they begin
to grow in the form of root, trunk, branch, twig, etc., they are called young or
saplings. Similarly, their remaining stages should also be arranged. It should
be known that green grass, etc., also become living beings. In the roots, trunk,
branches, leaves, flowers, etc., of trees, living beings reside separately. From
the root to the leaves, there is not one living being in the whole tree, but
many living beings. These living beings residing in the plant body are of three
types: countable, uncountable, and infinite. Whoever cuts or cuts these living
beings for the sake of food, drink, etc., for the growth of the body, or to heal
a wound in the body, or for any of his own pleasure, destroys many living beings
with arrogance and audacity. To destroy them mercilessly is neither Dharma nor
self-happiness.  **Verse 9:**  > "They destroy the species and growth, the
seeds, unrestrained, self-punishing. They say, in the world, those who are not
of the noble path, those who harm the seeds, they punish themselves."
**Commentary:**  > "Destroying the species, the growth, the seeds, and their
fruits, cutting the green things, the unrestrained householder, or the
renunciate, or the householder who is the doer of that action, he punishes
himself by cutting the green things. For he truly harms himself by harming
others. The word 'they say' is a figure of speech in the sentence. It shows what
they said: 'He who is cruel, who cuts green things, etc., is 'not of the noble
path' in this world.' And who is such a person? He who harms the plant body for
the sake of Dharma, or for his own happiness, because this is a symbol of that.
He is a heretic or someone else who is not of the noble path."  **Now the
ripening of the action of killing and cutting is described.**  **Commentary:**
> "The man who cuts the green plants, he destroys the birth, the sprout, the
leaf, the root, the trunk, the branch, and the twig, the growth of other plants
that come from it."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM _TIkArtha - agnikAya kA samAraMbha karane vAle
tApasa evaM pAka-bhojana pakAne evaM pakavAne Adi se anivRta bauddha Adi
paramatavAdiyoM ke siddhAntoM kA nirAkaraNa kiyA jA cukA hai  /  aba una anya
matavAdiyoM ke jo vanaspati kAya ke samAraMbha se nivRtta nahIM hai, siddhAntoM
ko parAmRSTa kiyA jAtA hai-samIkSApUrvaka unakA varNana kiyA jAtA hai  /  dUba
tathA aMkura, hare padArtha bhI jIva hai kyoMki ye dekhA jAtA hai ki AhAra Adi
dvArA ye bar3hate haiM, jIva kI AkRti dhAraNa karate haiM  /  kalala, abUMda,
mAMsapezI, garbha, prasava, bAla kumAra, taruNa, madhyastha tathA vRddha Adi
manuSya kI avasthAai hotI hai  /  isI prakAra hare zAlI-cAMvala Adi bhI jAta-
utpanna, abhinavanUtana, saMjAtarasA-utpanna rasayukta yuvA-paripakva, jIrNa-
parizuSka evaM mRta Adi dazAoM ko dhAraNa karate haiM  /  vRkSa bhI jaba
aMkurita hote haiM taba ye utpanna hue haiM  /  isa prakAra kahA jAtA hai  /
phira jaba ve mUla, skandha, zAkhA-DAlI, prazAkhA-TahanI, Adi ke rUpa meM
parivarddhita hone lagate haiM, taba ve yuvA athavA podha kahe jAte haiM  /  usI
prakAra unakI zeSa avasthAe bhI Ayojita kara lenI cAhie  /  jAna lenI cAhie yoM
harI dUba Adi bhI jIvAkRti meM pariNita hote haiM  /  vRkSoM ke mUla, skandha,
zAkhA-patra, puSpa Adi sabhI sthAnoM meM jIva pRthakpRthak rahate haiM  /  mUla
se lekara patra paryanta sampUrNa vRkSa meM eka hI jIva nahIM hai kintu aneka
jIva haiM  /  vanaspatikAya meM nivAsa karane vAle ye jIva saMkhyeya, asaMkhyeya
tathA ananta ina tIna prakAra ke hote haiM  /  jo ina jIvoM kA AhAra-khAne pIne
ke Adi nimitta, zarIra kI vRddhi hetu yA zarIra meM lage ghAva ko miTAne ke lie
yA apane kisI bhI sukha ke lie chedana karatA hai yA kATatA hai, vaha dhRSTatA-
uddhatatA ke sAtha bahuta jIvoM kA vidhvaMsa karatA hai  /  nirdayatApUrvaka
inakA nAza karane se na to dharma hI hotA hai aura na Atma sukha hI  /  jAtiM ca
vuddhiM ca viNAsayaMte, bIyAi assaMjJaya AyadaMDe  /  ahAhu se loe~ aNajadhamme,
bIyAi je hiMsati AyasAte  // 9 //  chAyA - jAtiJca, vRddhiJca vinAzayan
bIjAnyasaMyata AtmadaNDaH  /  athAhuH sa loke anAryadharmA, bIjAni yo
hinastyAtmasAte  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa apanI sukha suvidhA hetu bIjoM kA-
vividha annoM kA vidhvaMsa karatA hai, vaha bIja dvArA hone vAle aMkura, zAkhA,
patra, puSpa, phala Adi kI vRddhi kA bhI dhvaMsa karatA hai  /  vAstava meM vaha
puruSa pApa dvArA apanI AtmA ko daNDa yogya banAtA hai  /  tIrthaMkaroM ne aise
puruSa ko anArya dharmA batalAyA hai| TIkA - 'jAtim' utpatiM tathA
aGkarapatramUlaskandhazAkhAprazAkhAbhedena vRddhiM ca vinAzayan bIjAni ca
tatphalAni vinAzayan haritAni chinattIti, asaMyata: gRhastha : pravrajito vA
tatkarmakArI gRhastha eva sa ca haritacchedavidhAyyAtmAnaM daNDayatItyAtmadaNDaH
sa hi paramArthataH paropaghAtenAtmAnamevopahanti, atha zabdo vAkyAlaGkAre
'AhuH' evamuktavantaH, kimuktavanta iti darzayati-yo haritAdicchedako
niranukrozaH 'saH' asmin loke 'anAryadharmAH' krUrakarmakArI bhavatItyarthaH, sa
ca ka evambhUto yo dharmApadezenAtmasukhArthaM vA bIjAni asya
copalakSaNArthatvAt vanaspatikAyaM hinasti sa pASaNDikaloko'nyo vA'nAryadharmA
bhavatIti smbndhH||9||saamprtN haticchedakarmapipAkamAha TIkArtha - jo puruSa
harI vanaspati kA chedana karatA hai-use kATatA chA~gatA hai, vaha usa dvArA
hone vAlI anya vanaspati kI utpatti, aMkura, patra, mUla, skandha, zAkhA tathA
prazAkhA bheda se usake saMvarddhana kA nAza -373)

Page #402 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra states that destroying seeds and fruits is an act of a
householder, not a true ascetic. Even a monk who has renounced the world and
taken vows, if he commits such an act, is still considered a householder. A man
who cuts and breaks green plants punishes his own soul. By destroying another
being, he truly destroys his own soul. In this verse, the word "atha" is used in
the sense of a figure of speech. Regarding such a man, the Tirthankaras and
others have said something. What have they said? Explaining this, the Sutra-kar
states that a man devoid of compassion who cuts green plants is an un-Aryan, a
cruel doer of karma in this world. Identifying such a man, he says that a man
who destroys seeds for his own selfish gain, whether he is a hypocrite or
someone else, is an un-Aryan. Here, the destruction of seeds is a metaphor. It
refers to the destruction of plant life. Now, explaining the karmic consequences
of cutting green plants, the Sutra-kar says:  "Gabbhai mijanti buyaabuyana, nara
pare panchasitha kumara. Juvangaa majjhim theraga ya, (pathantrepourusa ya)
chayanthi te aoukhae palina." ||10||  **Translation:**  Those who cut and break
green plants, many such men perish in their mother's womb. Many die when they
are able to speak clearly. Many die before they reach the age of speaking
clearly. Many die in their childhood, many in their youth, many in middle age,
and many in old age. This means that they die at every stage of life.
**Commentary:**  These men who are like plants, perish in many births, in the
stages of the womb, embryo, fetus, flesh, and muscle. Similarly, those who can
speak clearly and those who cannot, and those who are five-haired children, die.
Similarly, some die in youth, some in middle age, and some in old age. In some
texts, it is written "majjhim pourusa ya," which means that those who cut green
plants die in middle age, some in old age, and some in extreme old age. Thus,
those who cut green plants perish in all stages of life, losing their lifespan.
Similarly, one should understand that those who destroy other stationary and
mobile beings also have an uncertain lifespan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram karatA huA bIja evaM phala kA vidhvaMsa karatA hai  /
aisA karane vAlA sahI mAyane meM sAdhu nahIM hai kintu gRhastha hI hai  /  jo
sAdhu ke rUpa meM pravrajita-dIkSita haiM vaha bhI yadi aisA karma karatA hai to
gRhastha hI hai  /  harI vanaspati kA chedana bhedana karane vAlA puruSa apanI
AtmA ko daNDita karatA hai  /  dUsare prANI kA vinAza kara vaha vAstava meM
apanI AtmA kA hI hanana karatA hai  /  isa gAthA meM atha zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke
artha meM AyA hai  /  usa puruSa ke sambandha meM tIrthaMkara Adi ne yaha kahA
hai  /  kyA kahA hai ? isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue sUtrakAra pratipAdita
karate haiM ki jo niranukoSa-dayA hIna puruSa harI vanaspati ko kATatA hai vaha
isa loka meM anArya dharmA hai, krUra karmakArI hai  /  vaha kauna hai yaha
batalAte huye kahate haiM ki jo puruSa dharma kA nAma lekara apanI sakhasa vidhA
hetu bIja kA nAza karatA hai vaha cAhe pAkhaNDI ho yA anya koI ho, vaha anArya
dharmA hI hai| yahA~ bIja kA nAza upalakSaNa hai  /  usakA tAtparya
vanaspatikAya ke nAza se hai  /  aba harI vanaspati ke chedana kA karma vipAka
batalAte huye sUtrakAra kahate haiM  /  gabbhAi mijaMti buyAbuyANA, NarA pare
paMcasihA kumArA  /  juvANagA majjhima theragA ya, (pAThAMtareporusA ya) cayaMti
te Aukhae palINA  // 10 //  chAyA - garbhe niyante bruvanto'bruvantazca, narAH
pare paJcazikhAH kumArAH  /  yuvAno madhyamAH sthavirAzca, tyajanti te AyuH
kSaye pralInAH  //  * anuvAda - jo harI vanaspati kA chedana bhedana karate
haiM, vaise kaI puruSa apanI mA~ ke garbha meM hI naSTa ho jAte haiM  /  kaI
spaSTa bolane kI avasthA-jaba sApha-sApha bolane lagate haiM, taba mara jAte
haiM  /  kaI spaSTa bolane kI avasthA Ane ke pahale hI mara jAte hai  /  kaI
kumAra avasthA, kaI yuvA avasthA meM, kaI ardhA avasthA meM-adheDa avasthA meM
kaI vaddhAvasthA meM mara jAte haiN| kahane kA artha yaha hai ki ve pratyeka
avasthA meM maraNa prApta karate haiN| _TIkA - iha vanaspatikAyopamaIkA: bahuSu
janmasu garbhAdikAsvavasthAsu kalalArbumAMsapezIrupAsu mriyante, tathA
'bruvanto'bruvatazca' vyaktavAco'vyaktavAcazca tathA pare narAH paJcazikhAH
kumArAH santo mriyante, tathA yuvAno madhyamavayasaH sthavirAzca kvacitpATho
'majjhimaporusA ya' tatra 'madhyamA' madhyamavayasaH 'porusA ya' tti puruSANAM
caramAvasthAM praptA atyantavRddhA evetiyAvat, tadevaM sarvAsvapyavasthAsu
bIjAdInAmupamaIkAH svAyuSaH kSaye pralInAH santo dehaM tyantIti,
evamaparasthAvarajaGgamopamaIkAriNAmapyaniyatAyuSkatvamAyo janIyam  // 10 //
kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha - jo jIva vanaspatikAya kA vinAza karate haiM ve bahuta
janma taka kalala, arbuda mAMsa pezI Adi garbhAvasthAoM meM hI samApta ho jAte
haiM  /  kaI jaba ve sApha-sApha bolane lagate haiM taba, tathA kaI anya jaba
paMcazika-pAMca zikhAyukta yA dhuMgharAle bAloM sahita kumArAvasthA meM hote
haiM tabhI mara jAte hai  /  kaI taruNa hokara, kaI bIca kI Ayu meM, kaI bUr3he
hokara mara jAte haiM  /  kahIM majjhima puruSAya aisA pATha hai usakA tAtparya
yaha hai ki jo harI vanaspati kA chedana karatA hai, vaha puruSa madhyama
avasthA meM, koI antima avasthA meM, atyanta vRddha hokara maratA hai  /  isa
prakAra jo harI vanaspati kA chedana karate haiM ve sabhI avasthAoM meM AyuSya
kA kSaya hone para deha tyAga kara jAte haiM  /  isI prakAra jo puruSa anya
sthAvara-sthitizIla, tathA jaMgama gatizIla prANiyoM kA vinAza karate haiM unakI
Ayu kA bhI anizcita honA jor3a lenA cAhie, jAna lenA cAhie  /  -374

Page #403 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Awake, O beings! Human birth is hard to obtain, seeing the fear in the hellish
and animal realms.  The world, like a feverish man, is filled with suffering,
and through their own actions, beings experience the consequences.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM saMbujjhahA jaMtavo ! mANusattaM, daTuM bhayaM
vAliseNaMalaMbho  /  egaMtadukkhe jarie va loe, sakammuNA vippariyAsuvei  // 11
//  chAyA - saMbudhyadhvaM jantavo ! manuSyatvaM, dRSTvA bhayaM vAlizenAlAbhaH
/  _ ekAntaduHkho gvarita iva lokaH svakarmaNA viparyAsamupaiti  //  anuvAda -
prANI vRnda bodha-jJAna prApta kareM  /  manuSya janma milanA bahuta kaThina hai
/  dekho naraka yoni meM tathA tiryaMca yoni meM kitane kaSTa hote haiM  /  yaha
saba dekhate hue bhI vAliza-vivekazUnya jIva ko bodha prApta nahIM hotA  /
jvara se pIr3ita puruSa kI taraha yaha saMsAra nizcita rUpa meM duHkhamaya hai
/  jIva sukha ke lie pApa karatA hai aura usake pariNAma svarUpa duHkha bhogatA
hai  /  _TIkA - he ! jantavaH prANinaH ! sambudhyadhvaM yUyaM, nahi
kuzIlapASaNDikaloka strANAya bhavati, dharmaM ca sudurlabhatvena sambudhyadhvaM,
tathA coktam - "mANussa khettajAI kularUvAroggamAuyaM buddhI  /
savaNoggahasaddhA saMjamo ya logaMmi dulahAI  // 1 / " chAyA- mAnuSyaMkSaitraM
jAtiH kulaMrUpamArogyayAyuH buddhiH  /  zravaNabhavagrahaH zraddhA saMyamazca
loke durlbhaani||1|| tadevamakRtadharmANAM manuSyatvamatidurlabhamityavagamya
tathA jAtijarAmaraNarogazokAdIni narakatiryakSu ca tIvraduH khatayA bhayaM
dRSTvA tathA 'bAlizena' ajJena sadasadvivekasyAlambha ityetaccAvagamya tathA
nizcayanayamavagamya ekAntaduHkho'yaM jvarita ivaM 'lokaH' saMsAripANigaNaH,
tathA coktam - "jammaM dukkhaM jarA dukkhaM rogA ya maraNANiya  /  aho dukkho hu
saMsAro, jattha kIsaMti pANiNo  // 1 // " chAyA - janmaduHkhaM jarAduHkhaM
rogAzca maraNaM ca  /  aho duHkha eva saMsAraH yatra klizyanti prANiNaH  // 1 //
tathA - "taNhAiyassa pANaM kuro chuhiyassa bhujjae tittI  /
dukkhasayasaMpauttaM jariyamiva jagaM kalayalei  // 1 // " chAyA - tRSNArditasya
pAnaM kUraH kSudhitasya bhuktautRptiH  /  duHkhazatasamprayuktaM jvaritamiva
jagatkalati  // 1 //  iti, atra caivambhUte loke anAryakarmakArI svakarmaNA
'viparyAsamupaiti' sukhAthI prANyupamaI kurvan duHkhaM prApnoti, yadi vA
mokSArthI saMsAraM paryaTatIti  // 11 //  uktaH kuzIlavipAko'dhunA
taddarzanAnyabhidhIyante TIkArtha - prANiyoM tuma bodha-samyak jJAna prApta karo
/  kuzIla, anAcArya, pAkhaNDI mithyAvAdI jana tumheM trANa nahIM de sakate  /
dharma kI prApti bhI sudurlabha hai, ise samajho  /  kahA hai manuSya-manuSya
yoni meM janma, uttama kSetra, jAti, kula, rUpa, Arogya-acchA svAsthya, Ayu,
buddhi, zramaNa-grahaNa, zraddhA, saMyama loka meM durlabha haiM  /  jinhoMne
dharma kA AcaraNa nahIM kiyA unako manuSya yoni meM janma milanA atyanta kaThina
hai  /  ise samajhate huye tathA janma, vRddhAvasthA, mRtyu, roga, zoka tathA
naraka evaM triryaca gati meM utpadyamAna tIvra-duHkhoM ke bhaya ko dekhakara,
ajJa-ajJAnI jIva ko sat evaM asat ko samajhane meM akSama, samajhate huye samyak
bodha prApta kro| yaha bhI samajho ki nizcaya nayAnusAra samagra saMsAra bhaya
se AkrAnta-utpIr3ita puruSa kI jyoM ekAnta rUpa se duHkhamaya hai  /  kahA gayA
hai ki isa saMsAra meM janma, vRddhAvasthA, rugNatA evaM mRtyu-ye saba duHkha hI
duHkha haiN| isalie yaha saMsAra duHkharUpa hai  /  isameM prANI kleza bhogate
rahate haiM  /  pipAsita vyakti ko pAnI pIne se, bubhukSita -375)

Page #404 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that satisfaction comes from obtaining
food. Just as they writhe in distress when they don't get it, so too is the
world filled with hundreds of sorrows, and it writhes like one suffering from
fever. In this world, the un-Aryan worker man obtains sorrow through his karma.
He kills beings for happiness. As a result, he suffers. He wanders through the
world, killing living beings for liberation, wandering.  The **karma vipāka**
(fruits of actions) that **kushila** (noble) men receive has been explained. Now
their **darshan** (philosophical views) are being explained.  * * *  **Ihega
mūḍhā pavayanti mokkhaṁ, āhārasampjjanavajaṇeṇaṁ.** **Ege ya sīodagasevaṇeṇaṁ,
hueṇa ege pavayanti mokkhaṁ.** ||12||  **Chāyā** - Iha eke mūḍhāḥ pravadanti
mokṣaṁ, māhārasampjjanavarjaneṇa. Eke ca śītodakasevaneṇa, hute naike pravadanti
mokṣaṁ. ||  **Anuvāda** - In this world, there are many fools who believe that
giving up salt in food leads to liberation. Many say that liberation is attained
by consuming cold water. Many advocate liberation through fire offerings.
**Tīkā** - 'Ihe' ti manuşyaloke mokṣagamanaadhikāre vā, eke ke cana 'mūḍhā'
ajñānā'ācchāditamatayaḥ paraiśca mohitāḥ prakṣeṇa vadanti pravadanti-
pratipādayanti, kiṁ tat? mokṣaṁ mokṣāvāptiṁ. keneti darśayati-āhiyat
ityāhārodanādi stasya sampad-rasapuṣṭiḥ tāṁ janayati ityāhārasampjjananaṁ-
lavaṇaṁ, tena hyāhārasya rasupuṣṭiḥ kriyate, tasya varjanaṁ
tenā'āhārasampjjananavarjaneṇa-lavaṇarjaneṇa mokṣaṁ vadanti, pāṭhāntaraṁ vā
'āhārasapancayavajaṇeṇa' āhāreṇa saha lavaṇapañcakamāhārasapancakam
lavaṇapañcakam cedam, tadyathā-saindhavaṁ sauvarcalaṁ viḍaṁraumaṁsāmudraṁ ceti,
lavaṇena hi sarva rasānāmabhivyaktirbhavatī, tatha coktaṁ .. .  "Lavaṇāvihūṇā ya
rasā cakkhu vihūṇā ya indriyaggāmā. Dhammo dayāya rahiyo sokkhaṁ santoṣarahiyam
no." ||1||  **Chāyā** - Lavaṇavihīnāśca rasāścakkhurvihīnāścendriyagāmāḥ.
Dharmodayāyarahitaḥ saukhyam santoṣarahitam na. ||1||  Tathā lavaṇaṁ rasānāṁ
tailaṁ snehānāṁ ghṛtaṁ medhyānā 'miti, tadevam bhūtalavaṇaparivarjaneṇa
rasaparityaaga eva kṛto bhavati, tattyāgaśca mokṣāvāptirityevam ke cana mūḍhāḥ
pratipādayanti, pāṭhāntaraṁ vā 'āhārao pañcakavajaṇeṇaṁ' āhārat iti lyablope
karmaṇi pañcamī āhāramāśritya pañcakam varjayanti, tadyathā-lasunaṁ palāṇḍuḥ
karabhīkṣīraṁ gomāṁsaṁ madyaṁ cettyetatpañcakavarjaneṇa mokṣapravadanti,
tathaike vāribhadrakādayo' bhāgavataviśeṣāḥ śītodakasevaneṇa
sacittāpkāyaparibhogena mokṣapravadanti, upapattīṁ ca te abhidadhāti-yathodakam
bāhyamalapanaayati evamāntaram api, vastrādeśca yathodakāśśuddhirūpajāyate evaṁ
bāhyasuddhisāmarthyadarśanāvāntarāpi śuddhirūdakādeveti manyante, tathaike
tāpasabrāhmaṇodayo huteṇa mokṣapratipādayanti, ye kila svargādiphalaṁ nāśaṁsya
samidhā ghṛtādibhirhavyaviśeṣairhatāśanaṁ tarpayanti te mokṣāyāgnihotraṁ
juhvatiśeṣāstvabhyudayāyeti, yuktiṁ cātra te āhuḥ yathā hyagniḥ suvarṇādīnāṁ
malaṁ dahatyevam dahanasāmarthyadarśanādātmano'pyāntaram pāpami ti. ||12|| Teṣām
asambaddhapralāpinām uttaradānāyāha - (376

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram ko bhojana milane se hI tRpti hotI hai  /  inake na
milane se jaise ve chaTapaTAte haiM usI prakAra saikar3oM duHkhoM se ApUrNa hai,
jvara se pIr3ita kI taraha tar3aphar3AtA hai  /  isa jagata meM anArya karmakArI
puruSa apane karma se duHkha prApta karatA hai  /  vaha sukha hetu prANiyoM kA
hanana karatA hai  /  pariNAmasvarUpa kaSTa pAtA hai, mokSa hetu jIva vadha
karatA huA vaha saMsAra meM paryaTana karatA rahatA hai-bhaTakatA rahatA hai  /
kuzIla puruSoM ko jo karma vipAka-apane dvArA kiye gaye karmoM kA phala milatA
hai vaha batalA diyA gayA hai  /  aba unake darzana-saiddhAntika mantavya
batalAye jA rahe haiN| . * * ihega mUDhA pavayaMti mokkhaM,
AhArasaMpajaNavajaNeNaM  /  ege ya sIodagasevaNeNaM, hueNa ege pavayaMti mokkhaM
// 12 //  chAyA - ihaike mUDhAH pravadanti mokSa, mAhArasampajjanavarjanena  /
eke ca zItodakasevanena, hutenaike pravadanti mokSam  //  anuvAda - isa saMsAra
meM kaI aise mUDha-ajJAnI haiM, jo yaha mAnate hai ki bhojana meM namaka khAnA
chor3a dene se mokSa prApta hotA hai  /  kaI aisA kahate haiM ki ThaNDe pAnI ke
sevana se mukti prApta ho jAtI hai  /  kaI havana karane se mokSa milanA
pratipAdita karate haiN| TIkA - 'ihe' ti manuSyaloke mokSagamanAdhikAre vA, eke
kecana 'mUDhA' ajJAnA''cchAditamatayaH paraizca mohitAH prakarSeNa vadanti
pravadanti-pratipAdayanti, kiM tat ? mokSaM mokSAvAptiM. keneti darzayati-
Ahiyata ityAhAra-odanAdistasya sampad-rasapuSTistAM
janayatItyAhArasampajjananaM-lavaNaM, tena hyAhArasya rasapuSTiH kriyate, tasya
varjanaM tenA''hArasampajjananavarjanena-lavaNarjanena mokSaM vadanti,
pAThAntaraM vA 'AhArasapaMcayavajaNeNa' AhAreNa saha
lavaNapaJcakamAhArasapaJcakaM lavaNapaJcakaM cedaM, tadyathA-saiMdhavaM
sauvarcalaM viDaMraumaMsAmudraM ceti, lavaNena hi sarva
rasAnAmabhivyaktirbhavati, tathA coktam .. . "lavaNAvihUNA ya rasA cakkhu vihUNA
ya iMdiyaggAmA  /  dhammo dayAya rahio sokkhaM saMtosarahiyaM no  // 1 // "
chAyA - lavaNavihInAzca rasAzvakSurvihInAzcendriyagAmAH  /  dharmodayayArahitaH
saukhyaM santoSarahitaM na  // 1 //  tathA lavaNaM rasAnAM tailaM snehAnAM
ghRtaM medhyAnA 'miti, tadevambhUtalavaNaparivarjanena rasaparityAga eva kRto
bhavati, tattyAgAcca mokSAvAptirityevaM kecana mUDhAH pratipAdayanti,
pAThAntaraM vA 'AhArao paMcakavajaNeNaM' AhArata iti lyablope karmaNi paJcamI
AhAramAzritya paJcakaM varjayanti, tadyathA-lasunaM palANDuH karabhIkSIraM
gomAMsaM madyaM cetyetatpaJcakavarjanena mokSapravadanti, tathaike
vAribhadrakAdayo' bhAgavatavizeSAH zItodaka sevanena sacittApkAyaparibhogena
mokSapravadanti, upapattiM ca te abhidadhati-yathodakaM bAhyamalamapanayati
evamAntaramapi, vastrAdezca yathodakAcchuddhirUpajAyate evaM
bAhyazuddhisAmarthyadarzanAvAntarApi zuddhirUdakAdeveti manyante, tathaike
tApasabrAhmaNodayo hutena mokSa pratipAdayanti, ye kila svargAdiphalama nAzaMsya
samidhA ghRtAdibhirhavyavizeSairhatAzanaM tarpayanti te mokSAyAgnihotraM
juhvatizeSAstvabhyudayAyeti, yuktiM cAtra te AhuH yathA hyagniH suvarNAdInAM
malaM dahatyevaM dahanasAmarthyadarzanAdAtmano'pyAntaraM pApamiti  //  12 //
teSAmasambaddhapralApinAmuttaradAnAyAha - (376

Page #405 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Kushila Parijnaadhyayanam  **Commentary:** In this human realm, or in the
realm of attaining the right to liberation (moksha), how does one attain
liberation? In this context, those with minds clouded by ignorance, and those
who are deluded and ignorant, misled by others, say that liberation is attained
by giving up the consumption of salt.   **Explanation:**  What is ingested and
consumed is called food (aahar). Cooked rice, etc., is called food. What
nourishes the essence of food is called aahar samapajjana. This refers to salt
(lavan), because it is through salt that the essence of food is nourished and
strengthened. Some people say that liberation is attained by giving up salt.
Here, a different reading is found, "aahar sapannvajjaneṇa". This means that
liberation is attained by giving up the consumption of five types of salt along
with food. These five types of salt are: Saindhava, Sauvarchal, Vidam, Roum, and
Samudra. All tastes are experienced and expressed through salt. It is said that
taste without salt, senses without eyes, dharma without compassion, and
happiness without contentment are not truly happiness. Salt is the best among
all tastes, oil is the best among all oily substances, and ghee is the best
among all nourishing substances. Therefore, giving up salt means giving up all
tastes. And liberation is attained by giving up tastes alone, so say these
ignorant people.  **Another reading:** "Aaharopad panchakavvajjaneṇa" is also
found here. This means that liberation is attained by giving up the consumption
of five things in food. This is the statement of some ignorant people. Here, in
"aaharopad", the fifth case ending is formed by the grammatical rule
"layalopekarmaṇipāñcamī". The five things to be given up in food are: garlic,
onion, camel milk, cow meat, and alcohol. Some ignorant people claim that
liberation is attained by giving up these five things.  **Another perspective:**
Some Bhagavata specialists like Varibhadraka, etc., claim that liberation is
attained by consuming cool water, water that is free from impurities. They
present their reasoning: Just as water removes external impurities, it also
cleanses internal impurities. Clothes, etc., are purified and cleansed by water.
Thus, water has the power to cleanse external impurities. Seeing this, they
believe that water cleanses internal impurities as well.  **Another
perspective:** Some ascetics, those who follow traditional practices, and
Brahmins, etc., claim that liberation is attained by performing fire sacrifices
(havan). They say that a person, without desiring heaven, etc., satisfies the
fire with offerings like fuel, sacrificial wood, and ghee. This fire sacrifice
is for liberation. They attain liberation through this act. Those who perform
fire sacrifices with the desire for heaven, etc., attain progress and elevation
in the form of attaining heaven, etc. They present this reasoning: Fire burns
away the impurities of gold. Thus, the power of fire to burn impurities is
evident. It also burns away the internal impurities of the soul in the form of
sins. This is certain.  **Conclusion:**  Thus, the author of the sutras refutes
these unconnected, inconsistent, rambling, and heterodox views.  **Verse 13:**
**Original:** पाओसिणांणादिसुणत्थि मोक्खो, खारस्स लोणस्स अणासएणं । ते मज्जमंसं
लसुणं च भोच्चा, अनत्थ वासं परिकप्पयंति ॥१३॥  **Translation:**  There is no
liberation in bathing in the morning, etc., or by not eating salt. They eat
marrow, meat, and garlic, and then they think about other things.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM TIkArtha- isa mAnava loka meM athavA mokSa
gamanAdhikAra meM mokSa kaise milatA hai, isa sandarbha meM ajJAna 1 se AvRtta
buddhi yukta tathA auroM dvArA moha meM saMpravezita mUDha ajJa jana isa prakAra
kahate haiM ki namaka khAnA chor3a dene se mokSa prApta ho jAtA hai  /  jo AhRta
kiyA jAtA hai-khAyA jAtA hai use AhAra kahate haiM bhAta - pake hue cAvala Adi
ko AhAra kahA jAtA hai| jisase AhAra kA rasa paripuSTa hotA hai use AhAra
samapajjana kahate haiM  /  usakA tAtparya lavaNa - namaka hai  /  kyoMki khAdya
padArthoM ke rasa kA paripoSaNa, saMvaddhana usI se hotA hai| kaI loga aisA
kahate haiM ki namaka kA tyAga kara dene se mokSa milatA hai  /  yahA~ AhAra
sapanvavajjaNeNa aisA pAThAntara prApta hotA hai  /  isakA Azaya yaha hai ki
bhojana ke sAtha pAMca prakAra ke namakoM ko tyAga dene se mokSa prApta hotA hai
/  saindhava, sauvarcala, viDaM, rauma aura sAmudra-ye pA~ca prakAra ke namaka
haiM  /  samasta rasoM meM namaka se hI unakI abhivyakti- anubhUti hotI haiM  /
kahA gayA hai ki namaka rahita rasa, netra rahita indriya gaNa, dayA rahita
dharma, santoSa rahita sukha vAstava meM sukha nahIM hai| rasoM meM namaka,
snigdha padArthoM meM tela, medhya - zaktivarddhaka padArthoM meM ghRta
sarvottama hai  /  ataH namaka kA tyAga karane se sabhI rasoM kA parityAga ho
jAtA hai  /  aura rasa mAtra ke tyAga se mokSa prApta hotA hai, una ajJajanoM kA
aisA kathana hai  /  'AhArao paMcakavajjaNeNa yahA~ aisA pAThAntara bhI prApta
hotA hai, isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki pAMca vastuoM kA bhojana meM prarivarjana
karane se mokSa prApta hotA hai  /  aisA katipaya ajJa janoM kA kathana hai  /
yahA~ AhAropada meM vyAkaraNa kI dRSTi se 'layalopekarmANipaJcamI' isa sUtra
dvArA paJcamI vibhakti huI hai  /  bhojana meM ukta tyAjya pAMca padArtha isa
prakAra hai-lahasuna, pyAja, U~TanI kA dUdha, gau mAMsa tathA madirA  /  ina
pAMcoM padArthoM kA tyAga kara dene se katipaya ajJAnI jana mokSa prApta honA
pratipAdita karate haiM  /  vArIbhadraka Adi bhAgavata vizeSa, zItala udaka-
sacita apakAya - jala ke paribhoga se mokSa prApta honA nirUpita karate haiN|
isa sambandha meM ve apanI upapattI-yukti prastuta karate haiM, pAnI jaise
bAhara ke maila kA apanayana karatA hai, use dUra karatA hai  /  isI prakAra
vaha bhItara ke mala ko bhI prakSAlita kara detA hai  /  kapar3e Adi kI zuddhi-
svacchatA jala se hotI hai| yoM jala meM bAharI maila ko prakSAlita karane kI
zakti vidyamAna hai| ise dekhate huye ve loga bhItarI mala kI zuddhi-svacchatA
jala se hotI hai aisA mAnate haiM  /  kaI tApasa paramparAlu vRtti jana tathA
brAhmaNa Adi havana karane se mokSa milatA hai, aisA pratipAdita karate haiN| ve
kahate haiM puruSa svarga Adi kI kAmanA na kara samidhA, havanIya kASTha tathA
ghRta Adi havya vizeSa dvArA agni ko tRpta karate haiM, unakA yaha agnihotra
mokSa ke lie hai| isa karma se unheM mokSa prApta hotA hai  /  jo svarga Adi kI
AkAMkSA se havana karate haiM unheM svarga prApti Adi ke rUpa meM abhyudaya-
unnayana prApta hotA hai  /  isa sambandha meM ve yaha yukti upasthita karate
haiN| agni svarNa ke mala ko jalA detI hai| ataH agni meM mala ko jalAne kI
zakti dRSTigocara hotI hai  /  vaha AtmA ke Antarika pApa rUpa mala ko bhI jalA
detI hai| yaha nizcita hai| isa prakAra asambaddha, asaMgata, pralapanazIla,
paramatavAdiyoM ko uttara dene hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM  /
pAosiNAMNAdisuNatthi mokkho, khArassa loNassa aNAsaeNaM  /  te majjamaMsaM
lasuNaM ca bhoccA, anattha vAsaM parikappayaMti  // 13 //  chAyA - prAtaH
snAnAdiSu nAsti mokSaH, kSArasya lavaNasyAnazanena  /  te madyamAsaM lazunaJca
bhuktvA'nyatra vAsaM parikalpayanti  //  377

Page #406 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **The Sutra Kritanga Sutra**  **Translation:**  **Verse:**  Obtaining
liberation does not come from performing morning ablutions. Nor does it come
from abstaining from eating bitter salt. Other misguided individuals consume
alcohol, meat, and garlic, which is contrary to the path of liberation and
Dharma. By doing so, they wander in the cycle of birth and death.
**Commentary:**  Liberation is not attained by performing morning ablutions, as
the term "etc." implies that washing hands, feet, etc., is also included. Using
water causes harm to aquatic life, and liberation cannot be attained through
harming living beings. Water, in itself, is not capable of removing external
impurities. Even if it were, how could it remove internal impurities? Internal
purity comes from purity of thought. If internal purity could be achieved
through water for those without pure thoughts, then even fishermen, who kill
fish for a living, would attain liberation by bathing in water. Similarly,
liberation is not attained by abstaining from consuming five types of salt. It
is illogical to say that liberation is attained by those who abstain from
consuming salt. Salt is not the only source of nourishment for the body, as
milk, sugar, etc., also provide nourishment.  One should ask these misguided
individuals: Is liberation attained by abstaining from salt in a physical sense,
or in a mental sense? If it is in a physical sense, then everyone living in a
region where salt is not produced should naturally attain liberation. This is
not observed, nor is it desirable. If it is in a mental sense, then mental
purity is paramount, and there is no need to abstain from salt. These ignorant
individuals consume alcohol, meat, garlic, etc., and dwell in the world,
wandering without attaining liberation. Their actions and conduct are only fit
for worldly existence. They do not follow the path of liberation, which consists
of right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. Therefore, they dwell in the
world, separate from liberation.  Now, the author of the sutra intends to refute
these principles in detail.  **Om Om Om**  **378**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI 'sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda prAta:kAla snAnAdi karane se mokSa prApta
nahIM hotA  /  kar3ave namaka kA bhojana meM tyAga karane se bhI mokSa nahIM
hotA  /  anya matavAdI madya, mAMsa evaM lahasuna kA sevana karate haiM, jo
mokSa ke mokSa dharma ke viparIta hai  /  aisA kara ve saMsAra meM bhaTakate
haiM  /  TIkA prAtaH snAnAdiSu nAsti mokSa 'iti pratyUSajalAvagAhanena
niHzIlAnAM mokSo na bhavati, Adi grahaNAt hastapAdAdiprakSAlanaM grahyate,
tathAhi udakaparibhogene tadAzritajIvAnAmupamaddaH samupajAyate, na ca
jIvopamardAnmokSAvAptiriti, na cai kAntenodakaM bAhyamalasyApyapanayane
samartham, AthApi sthAttathA pyAntaraM maleM na zodhayati, bhAvazuddhayA
tacchuddheH, atha bhAvarahitasyApi tacchuddhiH syAt tato matsyabandhAdInAmapi
jalAbhiSekeNa muktyavAptiH syAt, tathA 'kSArasya" paJcaprakArasyApi lavaNasya
'anazanena' aparibhogena mokSo nAsti, tathAhi lavaNaparibhoga rahitAnAM mokSo
bhavatItyayuktikametat na cAyamekAnto lavaNameva rasapuSTijanakamiti,
kSIrazarkarAdibhirvyabhicArAt, apicAsau praSTavyaH - kiM dravyato
lavaNavarjanena mokSAvAptiH uta bhAvata: ?, yadidravyatastato lavaNarahita deze
sarveSAM mokSaH syAt, na caivaM dRSTamiSTaM vA, atha bhAvatastato bhAva eva
pradhAnaM kiM lavaNavarjaneneti, tathA 'te' mUDhA madyamAMsaM lazunAdikaM ca
bhuktvA 'anyatra' mokSAdanyatra saMsAre vAsam -
avasthAnaMtathAvidyAnuSThAnasadbhAvAt
samyagdarzanajJAnacAritrarUpamokSamArgasyAnuSThAnAcca 'parikalpayanti'
samantAnniSpAdayantIti  //  13  //  sAmprataM vizeSeNa parijihIrSurA TIkArtha jo
puruSa niHzIla - zIlavarjita haiM, unheM prAta:kAla snAna Adi karane se mokSa
prApta nahIM hotA  /  Adi zabda ke prayoga se hastapAdAdi prakSAlana- hAtha
paira Adi dhone kA bhI yahA~ grahaNa hai  /  jala kA upayoga karane se jalagata
jIvoM kA upadarmana- hanana hotA hai, usase mokSa prApta nahIM ho sakatA  /
jala ekAMta rUpa meM - nizcita rUpa bAharI maila ko bhI dUra karane meM sakSama
nahIM hotA  /  vaha kathaMcit aisA hotA hai, phira vaha Abhyantara mala ke
apanayana meM dUra karane meM samartha kaise ho sakatA hai ? nahIM ho sakatA,
Antarika zuddhi bhAvoM kI zuddhi se hotI hai| yadi bhAva rahita prANI kI bhI
jala dvArA Antarika zuddhi ho to machaliyoM kI hiMsA kara AjIvikA calAne vAle
mallAha Adi kI bhI pAnI meM nahAne se mukti honI caahie| pAMca prakAra kA namaka
chor3ane se bhI mukti nahIM mila sakatI  /  bhojana meM namaka na lene se mukti
mila jAtI hai  /  yaha kathana ayuktiyukta hai, namaka hI ekamAtra rasatva kA
poSaka hai, yaha bhI ekAnta rUpa meM satya nahIM hai kyoMki kSIradUdha, zarkarA
- cInI Adi bhI isa puSTi ke janaka haiM, apane Apa meM rasatva ke paripoSaka
haiM  /  " - - - - uparyukta matavAdI se yaha prazna kiyA jAnA cAhie ki dravya
se namaka kA tyAga karane se mukti prApta hotI hai yA bhAva se  /  yadi dravya
se kahate ho to jisa pradeza meM namaka utpanna nahIM hotA, vahA~ nivAsa karane
vAle sabhI logoM ko sahaja hI mukti prApta ho jAnI caahie| aisA nahIM dekhA jAtA
/  na yaha iSTa- abhipsita yA upayukta hI hai  /  yadi bhAva se kahate ho taba
to phira bhAva kI hI pradhAnatA hai| namaka kA tyAga karane kI kyA AvazyakatA
hai| ve ajJa jana madirA, mAMsa, lahasUna, Adi kA sevana karate hue saMsAra meM
nivAsa karate haiM, bhaTakate hai, mokSa nahIM pAte, kyoMki unake anuSThAna
kArya kalApa saMsAra meM vAsa karane ke hI yogya haiM  /  ve samyagdarzana,
samyagjJAna, samyakcAritra rUpa mokSa mArga kA anusaraNa nahIM karate haiN| ataH
ve mokSa se anyatra saMsAra meM hI vAsa karate haiM  /  aba sUtrakAra ukta
siddhAntoM kA vizeSa rUpa se nirAkaraNa - khaNDana karane ke abhiprAya se kahate
haiM  /  OM OM OM 378

Page #407 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those who claim that attaining liberation is possible by touching water in the
morning and evening are mistaken. If liberation could be achieved by merely
touching water, then many aquatic creatures would have attained liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM udageNa je siddhimudAharaMti, sAyaM ca pAyaM udagaM
phusaMtA  /  udagassa phAseNa siyA ya siddhI, sijjhiMsu pANA bahave dagaMsi  //
14 //  chAyA - udakena ye siddhi mudAharanti, sAyaJca prAtarudakaM spRzantaH  /
udakasya sparzena syAcca siddhiH, sidhyeyuH prANAH bahava udake  //  anuvAda -
kaI aisA batalAte haiM ki prAtaH sAyaM jala sparza karane se mukti prApta hotI
hai, ve mithyAvAdI haiM  /  yadi jala sparza yA pAnI chUne se hI mokSa prApta
hotA ho to pAnI meM rahane vAle bahuta se prANiyoM ko bhI siddhi-mukti prApta
honI cAhie  /  _TIkA - tathA ye kecana mUDhA 'udakena' zItavAriNA' siddhiM'
paralokam 'udAharanti' pratipAdayanti 'sAyam' aparAhne vikAle vA 'prAtazca'
pratyuSasi ca AdyantagrahaNAt madhyAnte ca tadevaM sandhAtraye'pyudakaM
spRzantaH snAnAdikAM kriyAM jalena kurvantaH prANino viziSTAM gatimApnuvantIti
kecanodAharanti, etaccAsamyak yato yAdakasparzamAtreNa siddhiH syAt tata
udakasamAzritA matsyabandhAdayaH krUrakarmANo niranukrozA bahavaH prANinaH
siddhayeyuriti, yadapi tairucyate-bAhyamalApanayanasAmarthyamudakasya dRSTamiti
tadapi vicAryamANaM na caTate, yato yathodakamaniSTamalamapanayatyeva-
mabhimatamadhyaGgarAgaM kuGkamAdikamapanayati, tatazca puNyasyApanayanAdiSTa
vighAtakRdviruddha: syAt, kiJca-yatInAM brahmacAriNAmudakasnAnaM daSAyaiva,
tathA coktam - "snAnaM madadarpakaraM, kAmAGgaM prathamaM smRtam  /  tasmAtkAmaM
parityajya, na te snAnti dame ratAH  // 1 // " apica-nodakaklinnagAtro hi, snAta
ityabhidhIyate  /  sa snAto yo vratasnAtaH, sa bAhyAbhyantaraH shuciH||1||"  //
14 //  kiJca - TIkArtha - jo kaI mUDha-ajJAnI ThaNDe jala se nahAnA Adi dvArA
mukti honA batalAte haiM ve kahate hai ki aparAhna meM tIsare pahara athavA
vikAla meM-saMdhyA ke samaya prAta:kAla evaM grahaNa ke Adi-prArambha,
antaavasAna ke bIca ke samaya meM tathA tInoM saMdhyAoM meM ThaMDe pAnI se
snAnAdi karane vAle prANI viziSTa gatimukti prApta karate haiM unakA aisA kahanA
asamyak-mithyA hai  /  yadi jala ko chUne mAtra se mukti prApta ho to jala ke
Azraya meM rahane vAle matsya baMdha-matsyajIvi, krUra karmA-niSkaruNa mallAha
Adi mokSa ko prApta kara lete ve jo yaha kahate haiM ki bAharI mala kA apanayana
karane kA jala meM sAmarthya hai, vaha bhI cintana karane para sahI pratIta
nahIM hotA, kyoMki jala jaise aniSTa-apriya bure mala kA prakSAlana karatA hai
usI prakAra vaha manonukUla aMgarAga-caMdana Adi tathA kuMkuma Adi ko-prakSAlita
kara DAlatA hai  /  ata: jala dvArA pApa kI taraha puNyoM kA bhI apanayana-
prakSAlana hotA hai  /  jo iSTa abhipsita kA vidhAtaka-virodhI hai, ataeva vaha
ahitakara hai  /  brahmacArI sAdhu ko vAstava meM pAnI meM snAna karane se doSa
lagatA hai, isalie kahA gayA hai-snAna, madaahaMkAra tathA darpa-garva paidA
karatA hai, vaha kAmoddIpana kA mukhya hetu hai  /  ataeva jo puruSa indriyoM ke
damana meM anirata haiM, ve kAma vAsanA se dUra rahate hue snAna nahIM karate  /
yaha bhI kahA hai ki jo puruSa pAnI se klinnagAtraAIzarIra yukta hai, vaha
vAstava meM snAta-snAna kiyA huA nahIM kahA jA sakatA, kintu jo puruSa
vratasnAtavratoM ke jala se nahAyA huA hai vaha hI vAstava meM snAta kahA jAtA
hai, kyoMki vaha bAhya aura Abhyantara donoM hI prakAra se zuddha hai| (379)

Page #408 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 15:**  * **Text:** Shri Sutra Kritanga
Sutra, Maccha ya Kumma ya Sirasiva ya, Maggu ya Uttha (Dṛ) Dagarakkhasa ya.
Atthaanameyam Kusala Vayanti, Udageṇa Je Siddhi Mudaharanthi. ||15|| *
**Translation:**  "Fish, turtles, reptiles, camels, and water demons - if
liberation were achieved by merely touching water, these creatures would be the
first to attain it. But this is not observed. Therefore, those who claim
liberation is achieved through water are mistaken. This is what the wise, the
knowledgeable, say."  **Verse 16:**  * **Text:** Udayam Jai Kammamalam Harejja,
Evam Suham Icchhamittameva. Andham Va Neyaram anusaritta, Paanani Chevam
Vinihamti Manda. ||16|| * **Translation:** "If water were to remove the stain of
karma, then why wouldn't it also remove the stain of good deeds? To believe that
liberation is achieved by touching water is merely wishful thinking. The
foolish, following blind guides, kill living beings through water rituals."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram macchA ya kummA ya sirAsivA ya, maggU ya uTThA (dR)
dagarakkhasA y| aTThANameyaM kusalA vayaMti, udageNa je siddhimudAharaMti  // 15
//  chAyA - matsyAzca kUrmAzca sarIsRpAzca, madvazcoSTrA udakarAkSasAzca  /
asthAna metatkuzalA vadantyudakena ye siddhi mudAharanti  //  anuvAda - yadi
pAnI ko chUne se hI mukti prApta ho to machaliyAM kachave, sarIsRpa tathA
reMgane vAle anya jantu tathA jala meM rahane vAle dUsare vizAlakAya jIva sabase
pahale mukta ho jAte, parantu aisA nahIM hotaa| isalie jo jala ke sparza se
mokSa hone kA pratipAdana karate haiM, vaha yukti saMgata nahIM hai| kuzala-
tatvajJa puruSa aisA kahate haiN| TIkA - yadi jalasamparkAtsiddhiH syAt tato ye
satatamudakAvagAhinomatsyAzca kUrmAzca sarIsRpAzca tathA madgavaH tathoSTrA-
jalacaravizeSAH tathodakarAkSasA jalamAnuSAkRtayo jalacaravizeSA ete prathamaM
siddhayeyuH, na caitadRSTamiSTaM vA tatazca ye udakena siddhimudAharantyetad
'avasthAnam' ayuktam-asAmprataM 'kuzalA' nipuNA mokSamArgAbhijJA vadanti  // 15
//  kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha - yadi jala ke samparka yA saMsparza se mokSa kI prApti
ho to jo nirantara jala meM DubakI lagAte rahate haiM, una machaliyoM, kachavoM,
sarisRpoM, madguvo tathA jaloSTroM, jalarAkSasoM-manuSya kI AkRti ke vizAla
jalacara jIvoM ko sabase pahale mokSa milanA cAhie, kintu aisA dRSTigocara nahIM
hotA aura na yaha iSTa hI hai  /  ataH jo jala ke sparza se mukti milanA
pratipAdita karate haiM, unakA mantavya ayukti yukta hai, mokSa mArga vettA
jJAnI puruSa yaha batalAte haiM  /  udayaM jai kammamalaM harejjA, evaM suhaM
icchAmittameva  /  aMdhaM va NeyAramaNussarittA, pANANi cevaM viNihaMti maMdA
// 16 //  chAyA - udakaM yadi karmamalaM haredevaM zabha micchAmAtra meva  /
andhaJca netAra manusRtya prANinazcaivaM vinighnanti mandAH  //  anuvAda - jala
yadi karmaphala-pApa kA haraNa karatA hai to vaha puNya karmANuoM kA bhI kyoM
nahIM haraNa karegA  /  jala ke chUne se mukti mAnanA icchAmAtra-kevala mana
gaDhaMta hai  /  maMda-buddhi hIna puruSa, jJAna zUnya netA-mArgadarzaka kA
anusaraNa karate hue jala snAna Adi dvArA prANiyoM kI hiMsA karate haiN| TIkA -
yadyadukaM karmamalamapaharedevaM zubhamapi puNyamapaharet, atha puNyaM
nApaharedevaM karmamalamapi nApaharet, ata icchAmAtra mevaitadyaducyate-jalaM
karmApahArIti, evamapi vyasthite ye snAnAdikAH kriyAH smArtamArgamanusaranta:
kurvanti vyate yathA jAtyandhA aparaM jAtyandhameva netAramanusRtya gacchantaH
kupathazritAH bhavanti nAbhipretaM sthAnamabApnuvanti evaM smArtamArgAnusAriNo
jalazaucaparAyaNA 'mandA' ajJAH kartavyAkartavyavivekavikalAH prANina eva
tanmayAn tadAzritaMzca pUtarakAdin 'vinighnatti', vyApAdayanti avazyaM
jalakriyayA prANavyaparopaNasya sambhavAditi  // 16 //  apica - -380

Page #409 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kusila Parijna Adhyayana Tika-artha  If the water washes away the impurities of
karmas, it will also destroy the merit-karmic particles. If it does not destroy
the merit, it will also not destroy the demerit-karmas. Therefore, the statement
that water destroys karmas, washes them away, is merely the speaker's own
desire. In reality, bathing in water does not remove the impurities of karmas.
This is certain. Even then, the person who follows the Smartha path, like the
one born blind from birth, following another blind person, goes on the wrong
path, does not reach his desired destination, in the same way, the ignorant
beings who believe in purity through water, devoid of the discrimination of
right and wrong conduct, commit violence against the water-bodied living beings
and the dependent living beings through water ablution. They are certainly
violent due to the possibility of taking the lives of water-bodied living
beings.  Pavai Kampain Pakuvvato Hi, Siodam Tu Jai Tam Harija. Sijjhinsu Ege
Dagsattadhati, Musam Vayante Jala Siddhimahu || 17 || Prakurvato Hi, Sitodakam
Tu Yadi Tad Dharet. Siddheyur Eke Dakasattvadhatin, Mrsa Vadanto Jala Siddhi
Mahuh ||  Chaya: Papani Karmani Anuvada: If the water washes away the sins of
the sinful, even the fishermen who kill water-bodied living beings may attain
liberation. Therefore, those who claim liberation through water are false
speakers.  Tika: The 'papani' (sins) are the karmas that are the basis of evil
thoughts. The 'karmani' are those that cause harm to living beings. If the water
were to wash away the karma that is accumulated through harming living beings,
then even the most sinful, those who kill water-bodied living beings, would
attain liberation. But this is not observed or desired. Therefore, those who
claim liberation through water immersion are speaking falsely.  Hutena Je Siddhi
Mudaharanti, Sayam Ca Payan Agani Phusanta. Evam Sia Siddhi Have Tamha, Agani
Phusantana Kukammapi || 18 || Hutena Ye Siddhi Mudaharan'ti, Sayanca Pratar
Agnim Sprśantah. Evam Syat Siddhir Bhavettasmad Agnim Sprśatam Kukarmināmapi ||
Those who claim attainment of perfection (siddhi) through oblations, and touch
the fire morning and evening, may also attain perfection. Therefore, even the
evil-doers who touch the fire may attain perfection.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM TIkArtha yadi pAnI karmamala - karmoM ke maila ko miTA
de to vaha puNya karmANuoM kA bhI haraNa kregaa| yadi vaha puNya ko nahIM
miTAyegA to vaha pApa karmoM ko bhI nahIM miTAyegA  /  ataH pAnI karma kA haraNa
karatA haiM, miTAtA hai, yaha kathana vaktA kI kevala apanI icchA hai  /
vAstava meM pAnI meM snAna karane se karmoM kA mala dUra nahIM hotA  /  yaha
sunizcita hai  /  aisA hote hue bhI smArta mArga kA anusaraNa karane vAle jo
puruSa vaisA karate hai eka janmAMdha-janma se aMdhA, dUsare janmAMdha kA
anusaraNa karatA huA kumArga meM viparIta patha meM calA jAtA hai, apane
abhipsita sthAna meM nahIM pahuMcatA, usI taraha jala zaucaparAyaNa - jala dvArA
zuddhi meM vizvAsa karane vAle - smArta mArga kA anusaraNa karane vAle ajJa,
karttavya akarttavya ke viveka se rahita prANI jala snAna dvArA jala kAya ke
jIvoM kA tathA tadAzrita jIvoM kA vyApAdana- hanana karate haiN| ve jala kriyA
prANa vyaparopaNa-prANanAza kI saMbhAvanA se avazya hI hiMsaka haiM  /  pAvAI
kampAiM pakuvvato hi, siodagaM tU jai taM harijjA  /  sijjhiMsu ege
dagasattaghAtI, musaM vayaMte jala siddhimAhu  // 17 //  prakurvatohi,
zItodakantu yadi taddhareta  /  siddhayeyureke dakasattvadhAtino, mRSA vadanto
jalasiddhi mAhuH  //  - chAyA pApAni karmANi - anuvAda pApakarma karane vAle
pApI kA yadi jala pApa miTA de to jala ke jIvoM kA hanana karane : vAle machue
bhI mokSa prApta kara leN| ataH jo jala se mukti honA batalAte haiM, ve
mithyAbhASI haiM  /  - chAyA TIkA 'pApAni' pApopAdAnabhUtAni 'karmANi'
prANyupamardakArINi kurvato'sumato yatkarmopacIyate tatkarma yadyudakamapaharet
yadyevaM syAt tarhi hiH yasmAdarthe yasmAtprANyupamardena karmopAdIyate
jalavagAhanAccApagacchati tasmAdudakasattvaghAtinaH pApabhUyiSThA apyevaM
siddhayeyuH na caitaddRSTamiSTaM vA, tasmAdye jalAvagAhanAtsiddhimAhuH mRSA
vadanti  //  17 //  kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha jIva hiMsA Adi se pApa utpanna hotA hai
/  vaha avazya hotA hai  /  jIva hiMsAdi karane vAle prANI ke jo pApa karma kA
upacaya-saMcaya hotA hai, yadi jala usakA haraNa kara le, yadi aisA hotA to
prANiyoM ke vyApAdana se pApa hotA hai, tathA jala meM avagAhana karane se vaha
miTa jAtA hai, to yaha tathya siddha hotA hai ki aisI sthiti meM jalacara
prANiyoM kA ghAta karane vAle pApa bhUyiSTha - atyadhika pApI machue Adi bhI
mokSa prApta kara lete  /  para aisA dRSTigocara nahIM hotA  /  yaha iSTa-
abhipsita yA upayukta bhI nahIM hai  /  ataH jo jala meM avagAhana karane se
mokSa prApta honA pratipAdita karate hai ve mRSAvAdI haiM  /  OM OM - huteNa je
siddhi mudAharaMti, sAyaM ca pAyaM agaNiM phusaMtA  /  evaM siyA siddhi haveja
tamhA, agaNiM phusaMtANa kukammipi  //  18  //  hutena ye siddhi mudAharanti,
sAyaJca prAtaragniM spRzantaH  /  evaM syAt siddhirbhavettasmAdagniM spRzatAM
kukarmiNAmapi  //  381

Page #410 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra
states that those who claim to attain moksha (liberation) through performing
homa (oblations) in the fire, either in the morning or evening, are propagating
false doctrines. If moksha could be attained merely by contact with fire, then
even the vile-actioned (kukarmi) individuals who handle fire, such as charcoal-
makers, potters, and blacksmiths, should also attain it. Even the mantras and
other rituals performed by them cannot be accepted, as the fire consumes the
impurities of both the vile-actioned and the fire-oblation performers alike.
The sutra then states that those who, without proper examination, declare that
liberation is attained through such means are deluded. One should instead know
the truth through the study of the scriptures and the understanding of the
mobile and immobile beings (trasasthavara).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - prAtaH kAla tathA sAyaM kAla agni kA
saMsparza karate hue-agni meM homa Adi karane se jo mokSa prApta honA batalAte
haiM, ve mithyAvAdI haiM  /  yadi isa prakAra mokSa prApta ho jAya to agni kA
saMsparza karane vAle kutsita karmA janoM ko bhI vaha prApta honA cAhie  /  TIkA
- 'agnihotraM' juhuyAt svargakAma 'ityasmAdvAkyAt' 'ye' kecana mUDhA 'hutena'
agnau havyaprakSepeNa 'siddhiM' sugatigamanAdikAM svargAvAptilakSaNAm
'udAharanti' pratipAdayanti, kathambhUtAH ? - 'sAyam' aparAhne vikAle vA
'prAtazca pratyuSasi agni 'spazantaH' yatheSTairhavyairagniM tarpayantastata eva
yatheSTagatimabhilaSanti, Ahuzcaiva te yathA-agnikAryAtsyAdeva siddhiriti, tatra
ca yadyevamagnisparzena siddhirbhavet tatastasmAdagniM saMspRzatAM 'kukarmiNAm'
aGgAradAhakakumbhakArAyaskArAdInAM siddhiH syAt, yadapi ca mantrapUtAdikaM
tairUdAhiyate tadapi ca nirantarA suhRdaH pratyeSyanti, yataH
kukarmiNAmapyagnikArye bhasmApAdanamagnihotrikAdInAmapi bhasmasAtkAraNa miti
nAtiricyate kukarmibhyo'gnihotrAdikaM karmeti yadapyucyate-agnimukhA vaidevAH,
etadapi yuktivikalatyAvatvAGmAtrameva, viSThAdibhakSaNena cAgnesteSAM bahutara
doSotpatteriti  // 18 //  uktAni pRthak kuzIladarzanAni, ayama parasteSAM
sAmAnyopAlambha ityAha TIkArtha - jo puruSa svarga kI kAmanA kare use agnihotra-
agni meM havana karanA cAhie  /  isa vAkya ke AdhAra para kaI mUDha-ajJAnI
puruSa yaha batalAte haiM ki agni meM havana karane se svarga prApti ke rUpa meM
uttama gati siddha hotI hai, prApta hotI hai, vaha kaise haiM ? ise spaSTa
karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM ki aparAhna-tIsare pahara athavA sAMyakAla
tathA prAta:kAla yatheSTha havya-havanIya sAmagrI dvArA agni ko paritRpta karate
hue ve apane usa karma se abhiSTa gati kI kAmanA karate haiM  /  ve kahate haiM
ki agni kArya-havana karane se avazya siddhi hotI hai, parantu yadi agni ke
sparza mAtra se mukti prApta ho to agni jalAkara koyalA Adi taiyAra kara AjIvikA
calAne vAle, tathA miTTI ke bartana pakAne vAle kumbhakAra-kumhAra tathA lohe kA
kAma karane vAle luhAra Adi nimna karma karane vAloM ko bhI siddhi-mukti prApta
honI cAhie  /  agni sparza se jo siddhi mAnate haiM ve maMtra se pavitra agni ke
sparza se siddhi hotI hai aisA varNana karate haiM  /  ise unake
nirantarasuhRda-mUDhamitra hI svIkAra kara sakate haiM kyoMki kutsita karmA
janoM dvArA apane meM DAlI huI vastu ko agni jaise bhasma kara DAlatI hai, usI
prakAra agni meM havana karane vAle puruSa dvArA DAlI gaI vastu ko bhI vaha
bhasma karatI hai  /  ataH kutsita karmA evaM agnihotrI ke agni saMbaddha kArya
meM eka dUsare se paraspara koI vizeSatA nahIM hai  /  isalie yaha kathana mAtra
hai  /  agni to viSThA ko bhI bhasma kara detI hai  /  ataH uparyukta siddhAnta
ko mAnane se aneka doSa utpanna hote haiM  /  kuzIloM ke darzanoM kA bhinna-
bhinna varNana kiyA gayA hai  /  aba unakA sAmAnya rUpa meM vivecana karate hue
sUtrakAra kahate haiM  /  aparikkha dilR Na hu (eva) siddhI, ehiMti te
ghaaymbujjhmaannaa| . bhUehiM jANaM paDileha sAtaM, vijjaM gahAyaM
tasathAvarehiM  // 19 //  chAyA - aparIkSya dRSTaM naivaivaM siddhi reSyanti te
ghAtamabudhyamAnAH  /  bhUtairjAnIhi pratyupekSya sAtaM, vidyAM gRhItvA
trasasthAvaraiH  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa agni meM havana karane se yA jala meM
avagAhana-snAna Adi se siddhi prApta honA pratipAdita karate haiM ve
aparIkSadarzI haiM  /  parIkSA, vizleSaNa Adi kiye binA dekhane vAle haiM  /
vAstavikatA yaha -382

Page #411 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kusila Parijna-adhyayana. It is that these karmas do not lead to siddhi
(spiritual perfection). Therefore, those whose principles are these are
ignorant, through these karmas they will attain bhava-bhramana (wandering in the
cycle of births and deaths). Therefore, the person who has attained the true
knowledge should not harm the living beings, mobile and immobile, for his own
happiness.  Commentary - Those who are desirous of liberation have declared that
siddhi (spiritual perfection) is attained by contact with water or by agnihotra
(fire ritual). This has been said without examination, how so? Because, indeed,
in this manner, by immersion in water or by agnihotra, there is no siddhi for
the one who is a killer of living beings. And they, not understanding the
ultimate truth, by harming the living beings, do evil, thinking it to be dharma
(righteousness), and are killed-destroyed in various ways, in which the living
being is the slaughter-the cycle of transmigration, they will enter, for by the
undertaking of the watery and fiery bodies, the destruction of the mobile and
immobile beings is certainly inevitable, and in their destruction is only the
cycle of transmigration, not liberation. Therefore, the wise, the discerning of
the real and the unreal, having understood the true nature as it is, should
reflect on how the happiness can be obtained at present by the mobile and
immobile beings, and know-understand this. This is said - "First is knowledge,
then compassion, thus abides every self-restrained one. What will the ignorant
do, or what will they know of the removal of evil?" etc.  Those who, by harming
the living beings, seek happiness, they are without restraint, and the
unrestrained, they experience such a state in the cycle of transmigration.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM  /  hai ki ina karmoM se siddhi prApta nahIM hotI  /
isalie jinake ye siddhAnta haiM ve ajJAnI haiM, ina karmoM dvArA ve bhava
bhramaNa prApta kreNge| ata: yathArtha jJAna prApta kara puruSa trasa-gatizIla,
sthAvara-sthitizIla prANiyoM kI apane sukha ke lie hiMsA na kare  /  TIkA -
yairmumukSubhirUdakasamparkeNAgnihotreNa vA siddhirabhihitA vaiH 'aparIkSya
dRSTametat' yuktivikalamabhihitametat, kimiti ? yato 'nahu' naiva 'evam' anena
prakAreNa jalAvagAhanena agnihotreNa vA prANyumaIkAriNA siddhiriti te ca
paramArthamabuddhayamAnAH prANyupaghAtena pApameva dharmabuddhayA kurvanto
ghAtyante-vyApAdyante nAnAvidhaiH prakArairyasmin prANinaH sa
ghAta:-saMsArastameSyanti, apkAyatejaHkAyasamArambheNa hi trasasthAvarANAM
prANinAmavazyaM bhAvI vinAzastadvinAze ca saMsAra eva na siddhirityabhiprAyaH,
yata evaM tato 'vidvAn' sadasadvivekI yathAvasthita tattvaM gRhItvA trasa
sthAvarairbhUtaiH-jantubhiH kathaM sAmprataM-sukha mavApyata ityetat
pratyupekSya jAnIhi-avabuddhayasva, etaduktaM bhavati-sarve'pyasumantaH
sukhaiSiNo duHkhadvivo na ca teSAM sukhaiSiNAM duHkhotpAdakatvena
sukhAvAptirbhavatIti, yadi vA-'vijaM gahAya' tti vidyAM jJAnaM gRhItvA
vivekamupAdAya trasasthAvarairbhUtaijantubhiH karaNabhUtaiH 'sAtaM' sukhaM
'pratyupekSya' paryAlocya 'jAnIhi' avagaccheti, yata uktam - "paDhamaM nANaM tao
dayA, evaM ciTThai savva saMjae  /  annANi kiM kAhI, kiM vA NAhI heya pAvagaM
// 1 //  chAyA- prathamaM jJAnaM tato dayA evaM tiSThati sarvasaMyateSu  /
ajJAni kiM kariSyati kiM vA jJAsyati chekpaapkN|| ityAdi  // 19 //  ye punaH
prANyupamardaina sAtamabhilaSantItyazIlAH kuzIlAzca te saMsAre evaM vidhA
avasthA anubhavantItyAha - TIkArtha - mokSa kI abhilASA rakhate hue bhI jo loga
jala meM avagAhana snAna Adi tathA agni meM havana Adi dvArA siddhi prApta honA
batalAte haiM, ve yaha dhyAna nahIM dete ki unakA yaha abhimata kitanA yukti
rahita hai, kyoMki jala meM avagAhana aura agni meM havana karane se jIvoM kA
ghAta hotA hai  /  isa jIva hiMsA paraka kriyA se mokSa prApta honA saMbhAvita
nahIM hai  /  vAstava meM ve vastu tatva ke parijJAtA nahIM haiM ataeva ve
dharma mAnakara prANiyoM kI hiMsA karate haiM, pApa karate haiM  /  aise
pApakarma ke sevana ke pariNAma svarUpa ve ghAta ko hI prApta hote haiM, jisameM
prANi bhinna-bhinna prakAra se hatapratihata kiye jAte haiM, use ghAtaka kahate
haiM  /  yahA~ yaha ghAta zabda saMsAra kA dyotaka hai  /  uparyukta siddhAntoM
ko mAnane vAle ve ghAta-saMsAra meM vAsa kareMge, paryaTana kareMge, mokSa nahIM
pAyeMge kyoMki apakAya tathA agnikAya ke Arambha samArambha se trasa tathA
sthAvara prANiyoM kA nizcaya hI dhvaMsa hotA hai, aura unake pariNAma svarUpa
saMsAra-bhava bhramaNa hI prApta hotA hai  /  mukti prApta nahIM hotI  /  ataeva
sat evaM asat ke parijJAtA vivekazIla vidvAna puruSa ko yahI cintana karanA
cAhie ki jaMgama evaM sthAvara prANiyoM ke hanana-hiMsA se jIva ko sukha kaise
ho sakatA hai  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki saMsAra meM sabhI jIva sukha
kI abhipsA karate haiM tathA duHkha ko dveSya-apriya, avAJchanIya mAnate haiM,
sukhAbhilASI prANiyoM ko duHkha, pIr3A dene se sukha kabhI bhI prApta nahIM ho
sakatA  /  ataeva kahA hai pahale vidyA-yathArtha jJAna prApta kara, vivekazIla
bana, puruSa ko yaha jAnanA cAhie  /  trasa evaM sthAvara prANiyoM ko sukha dene
se hI sukha prApta hotA hai  /  inakA svarUpa samajhakara inako trANa dene se
hI-rakSA karane se hI sukha milatA hai  /  ataeva zAstra meM kahA gayA hai ki
pahale jJAnopalabdhi tathA phira dayA-karuNA Adi dhArmika kriyA meM pravRtti kI
jAtI hai  /  jo isa tathya ko nahIM jAnatA, vaha ajJa puruSa kyA kara sakatA hai
/  vaha puNya aura pApa ke svarUpa ko samajha hI nahIM pAtA  /  jo prANiyoM 383

Page #412 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those who desire happiness through oppression and violence, are devoid of good
conduct, devoid of good character, devoid of morality, and are men of evil and
wicked character, filled with immorality. They experience such states in the
world, as the Sutrakar says:  "They cry, they are cut, they tremble, the doers
of karma, separate beings, countless are the monks. Therefore, the wise,
abstaining, self-guarded, seeing them, should restrain himself." (20)
Commentary: Those who are engaged in the violence of the body, who desire
happiness through the violence of beings, go to hell and other destinations, and
are tormented by terrible sufferings. They are consumed by unbearable pain,
their minds are filled with fear, they are helpless, they "cry" - they only cry
out in sorrow. They are "cut" - they are cut by swords and other weapons, and
thus they are "trembling" - they flee. They have karma, therefore they are
"doers of karma" - those who are sinful. "Beings" are separate beings, and
knowing this, the "monk" who is virtuous, is a good man. Because those who
oppress and kill beings are destroyed in the world, therefore the "wise" - the
learned - abstain from sinful actions, and he is "self-guarded" - his mind,
speech, and body are guarded. Seeing the "trembling" - the mobile beings, and
the "stationary" - the immobile beings, he should "restrain himself" - he should
stop from doing actions that harm them. (20)  Now, the wicked ones of their own
group are being described.  "He who enjoys what is obtained by dharma, he who
bathes with a rough cloth, he who runs and adorns his clothes, they say he is
far from nakedness." (21)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram ke upamarda-hiMsA dvArA sukha kI abhilASA karate haiM
ve azIla-zIla rahita sadAcaraNa zUnya tathA kuzIla-kutsitazIla anAcAra yukta
puruSa saMsAra meM aisI avasthAeM anubhava karate haiM, yoM batAte hue sUtrakAra
Age kahate haiM - thaNaMti luppaMti tassaMti kammI, puDho jagA parisaMkhAya
bhikkhU  /  tamhA viU virato Ayagutte, daTuM tase yA paDisaMharejA  // 20 //
chAyA - stananti lupyante trasyanti karmiNa, pRthak jantavaH parisaMkhyAya
bhikSuH  /  tasmAd vidvAn virata Atmagupto dRSTvA tsAMzca pratisaMharet  //
anuvAda - pApa karmA prANI naraka Adi meM yAtanA bhogate haiM pIr3ita hote haiM,
rote cIkhate haiM  /  yaha jAnatA huA pApa se virata, Atmagupta hiMsA Adi se
nivRtta bhikSu-muni trasa tathA sthAvara prANiyoM kA vyApAdanahanana na kreN|
TIkA - tejaH kAyasamArambhiNo bhUtasamArambheNa sukhamabhiSanto narakAdigatiM
gatAstrIvraduH khaiH pIDyamAnA asahyavedanAghrAtamAnasA azaraNAH 'stananti'
rudanti kevalaM karuNamAkrandantItiyAvat tathA 'luppaMtI' ti chidyante
khaDgAdibhirevaM ca kadarthyamAnAH 'trasyanti' prapalAyante, karmANyeSAM santIti
karmiNaH-sapApA ityarthaH, tathA pRthak 'jagA' iti jantava iti, evaM
parisaGghayAya' jJAtvA bhikSaNazIlo 'bhikSuH' sAdhurityarthaH,
yasmAtprANyupamardakAriNaH saMsArAntargatA vilupyante tasmAt 'vidvAn' paNDito
virataH pApAnuSThAnAdAtmA gupto yasya so'yamAtmagupto manovAkkAyagupta
ityarthaH, dRSTvA ca trasAn ca zabdAtsthAvarAMzca 'dRSTvA' parijJAya
tadupaghAtakAriNIM kriyAM 'pratisaMharet' nivartayediti  // 20 //  sAmprataM
svayUthyAH kuzIlA abhidhIyanta ityAha TIkArtha - jo puruSa agnikAya ke
samAraMbha-hiMsA meM pravRta hote haiM, prANiyoM kI hiMsA se sukha pAne kI
abhilASA karate haiM, ve naraka Adi gatiyoM meM jAkara ghora duHkhoM se
utpIr3ita kiye jAte haiM  /  ve asaha vedanA se paritapta hokara karuNa krandana
karate rahate haiM kyoMki vahA~ unheM koI bacAtA nahIM  /  ve talavAra Adi
zastroM se ucchinna kiye jAte haiM-kATe jAte haiM  /  yoM pIr3ita hote hue ve
bhayabhIta hokara bhAgate haiM  /  jo pApayukta karma karate haiM, unheM karmI
kahA jAtA hai  /  pApa sahita puruSa karmI ke rUpa meM abhihita hote hai  /  ina
pApiyoM kI bhinna-bhinna avasthAeM hotI haiN| jo prANiyoM kA upamardana-hanana
karate haiM, ve saMsAra meM rahate hae kaSTa bhogate haiM  /  yaha jAnakara
bhikSu-bhikSAvRtti se svajIvana nirvAhaka vidvAn-vivekazIla pApoM se nivRtta
tathA mana-vacana evaM zarIra dvArA Atmagupta sAdhu trasa evaM sthAvara prANiyoM
ko jAnakara unakI hiMsAtmaka kriyA se nivRtta rhe| aba apanI yUthagata kuzIloM
kI carcA kI jA rahI haiM  /  je dhammaladdhaM viNihAya bhuMje, biyaDeNa sAhaTu
ya je sinnaaii| je dhovatI lUsayatIva vatthaM, AhAhu se NAgaNiyassa dUre  // 21
//  chAyA - yo dharmalabdhaM vinidhAya bhuGkte vikaTena saMhRtya ca yaH snAti  /
yo dhAvati bhUSayati ca vastram athAhuH sa nAgnyasya dUre  //  384

Page #413 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Kushila Parigyaadhyayanam Anuvaad:**  A man who, while
appearing to be a Sadhu, abandons the pure diet obtained through Dharma and
indulges in delicious food, bathes in impure water in an impure place, washes
his clothes and feet for beauty, and alters the size of his clothes for
adornment, is far removed from restraint. This is how the Tirthankaras and
Ganadharas have described it.  **Tika:**  The word "ye" refers to those who,
while appearing to be cool and calm, have obtained Dharma through their actions,
which is free from defects like being obtained through deceit, purchase, or
creation. Such a person, even after obtaining such a diet, abandons it and
consumes food that is not pure. Similarly, those who bathe their entire body in
impure water, in an impure place, and who wash their clothes and alter their
size for beauty, are far removed from the state of being "Naganijassa," which
signifies freedom from attachment and the practice of restraint. They do not
possess restraint. This is what the Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, and others have
said.  **Kamma Parinnaay Dagansi Dhire, Viyadeṇ Jīvija Ya Ādimokkhaṁ:**  A wise
man, understanding that actions are bound by water, should live his life with
impure water until he attains liberation. He should abstain from consuming
seeds, roots, and tubers. He should refrain from bathing and indulging in sexual
activities.  **Chhaya:**  A wise man, understanding that actions are bound by
water, should live his life with impure water until he attains liberation. He
should abstain from consuming seeds, roots, and tubers. He should refrain from
bathing and indulging in sexual activities.  **Anuvaad:**  A wise man, with a
steady mind, understands that actions are bound by water. Therefore, he should
live his life with impure water until he attains liberation. He should abstain
from consuming seeds, roots, and tubers. He should refrain from bathing and
indulging in sexual activities.  **Tika:**  The word "Dhiro" refers to a wise
man, whose mind is clear. The phrase "Udgansi" refers to the use of water, which
leads to the binding of actions. Understanding this, what should a wise man do?
The text says, "Viyadeṇ" - he should sustain his life with impure water, like
rainwater or well water. The word "Jīvyāt" means to sustain life. The word "Ādi"
refers to the beginning, and "Moksha" refers to liberation. Therefore,
"Ādimokkhaṁ" means until liberation, or until the end of the cycle of birth and
death. The text also says that a Sadhu should abstain from consuming seeds,
roots, and tubers. The word "Ādi" implies that fruits and leaves are also
included. He should avoid all unripe food and remain detached. This is what the
text indicates.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM anuvAda - jo sAdhu veza meM vidyamAna puruSa
dharmalabdha-dharmapUrvaka prApta, nirdoSa AhAra kA parityAga kara svAdiSTa
bhojana karatA hai, acita jala se acita sthAna meM apane zarIra ke aMgoM ko
saMkucita kara snAna karatA hai, sundaratA ke lie apane paira kapar3e Adi dhotA
hai, tathA zRMgAra hetu jo choTe vastra ko bar3A aura bar3e vastra ko choTA
karatA hai, vaha saMyama se dUra bahirgata hai  /  tIrthaMkaroM evaM gaNadharoM
ne aisA prarUpita kiyA hai| _TIkA - 'ye' kecanazItalavihAriNo dharmeNa-mudhikayA
labdhaM dharmalabdhaM uddezakakrItakRtAdidoSarahitamityarthaH,
tadevambhUtamapyAhArajAtaM 'vinidhAya' vyavasthApya sannidhiM kRtvA bhuJjante
tathA ye 'vikaTena' prAsukodake nApi saGkocyAGgAni prAsukaeva pradeze
dezasarvasnAnaM kurvanti yo vastraM 'dhAvati' prakSAlayati tathA 'lUSayati'
zobhArthaM dIrghamutpATayitvA hasvaM karoti hasvaM vA sandhAya dIrgha karoti
evaM lUSayati, tadevaM svArthaM parArthaM vA yo vastraM lUSayati, athAsau
'NAgaNiyassa' tti nirgranthabhAvasya saMyamAnuSThAnasya dUre vartate, na tasya
saMyamo bhavatItyevaM tIrthaMkaragaNadharAdaya Ahuriti  // 21 //  uktAH kuzIlAH,
tatpratipakSabhUtAH zIlavantaH pratipAdyanta ityetadAha - TIkArtha - jo zItala
vihArI-dharma pAlana meM zithila puruSa, dharma prApta audezika tathA krIta Adi
doSoM se varjita AhAra kA tyAgakara dUsare doSa yukta AhAra kA sevana karate
haiM tathA prAsuka-acita jala se bhI prAsuka bhUmi meM apane zarIra ke aMgoM ko
saMkucita kara aMzataH yA sampUrNataH snAna karate haiM, apane kapar3e dhote
haiM tathA jo zobhA ke lie bar3e vastra ko kATakara choTA banA lete haiM, choTe
vastra ko saMdhita kara-jor3akara bar3A banA lete haiM, isa prakAra jo apane
nimitta yA anya ke nimitta vastra ko choTA yA bar3A karatA hai, ve nirgrantha,
bhAva sAdhutva se yA saMyama ke anuSThAna se dUravartI haiM, unake saMyama nahIM
hai  /  ve asaMyamI haiM  /  tIrthaMkara evaM gaNadhara Adi aisA kahate haiN|
kuzIloM kA varNana kiyA jA cukA hai  /  aba unake pratipakSa bhUta-viparIta
zIlavAna puruSoM kA varNana kiyA jA rahA hai| kammaM parinnAya dagaMsi dhIre,
viyaDeNa jIvija ya AdimokkhaM  /  se bIyakaMdAi abhuMjamANe, virate siNANAisu
itthiyAsu  // 22 //  chAyA - karma parijJAyodake dhIro vikaTena jIveccAdi mokSam
/  sa vIjakandAn abhujAno virataH snAnAdiSu strISu  //  anuvAda - dhIra-Atma
sthiratAyukta vivekI puruSa jala snAna se karmoM kA baMdha hotA hai, yaha
samajhakara mokSa paryanta-jaba taka mokSa prApta na ho, taba taka acita jala se
apanA jIvana calAye  /  saMyata jIvana kA nirvahana kare vaha bIja tathA kaMda
Adi kA bhojana na kare  /  snAna evaM abrahmacarya ke sevana se nivRtta rahe  /
TIkA - dhiyA rAjate iti dhIro-buddhimAn 'udagaMsi' tti udakasamArambhe sati
karmabandho bhavati, evaM parijJAya kiM kuryAdityAha-'vikaTena' prAsukodakena
sauvIrAdinA 'jIvyAt' prANasaMdhAraNaM kuryAt, ca zabdAt anyenApyAhAreNa
prAsukenaiva prANavRttiM kuryAt, Adi:-saMsArastasmAnmokSa Adi mokSaH (taM)
saMsAravimuktiM yAvaditi, dharmakAraNAnAM vA''dibhUtaM zarIraM tadvimuktiM yAvat
yAvajjIvamityarthaH, kiM cAsau sAdhurbIjakandAdIn abhuJjAnaH, Adi grahaNAt
mUlapatraphalAni gRhyante, etAnyapyapariNatAni pariharan virato bhavati, kRta
iti, darzayati 385

Page #414 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra states that those who engage in actions like bathing,
anointing, and cleansing, or who engage in other actions like medical treatment,
without a pure body, and those who are not celibate, are considered to be bound
by the five types of karma.  Even those who abstain from the five types of karma
are still bound by other types of karma.  However, those who are free from all
types of karma are not affected by the five types of karma and are not bound by
the cycle of birth and death.  Therefore, they do not suffer and are not
afflicted by various types of misfortunes.  ||22||  Again, addressing those who
are not free from the five types of karma, the text says:  Commentary: A person
who is endowed with wisdom and fortitude is called a "Dheer."  "Dheer" means
wise.  Knowing that consuming water that causes harm to living beings leads to
the accumulation of karma, what should such a person do?  The author of the text
states that such a person should sustain their life by consuming water that is
not harmful to living beings.  The use of the word "cha" here indicates that
they should only consume water that is not harmful to living beings.  The world
is called "Adi" (beginning).  Liberation from the world is called "Moksha"
(salvation).  Until Moksha is attained, a virtuous person should sustain their
life by consuming only those things that are not harmful to living beings.  Or,
until the end of this body, which is due to the power of Dharma, they should
sustain their life by consuming only those things that are not harmful to living
beings.  They should not consume seeds, tubers, etc.  The word "Adi" here
includes roots and fruits.  A virtuous person should abstain from consuming
roots, leaves, and fruits that are not harmless to living beings.  Why do they
abstain from these things?  The author of the text explains that a virtuous
person refrains from bathing, anointing their body with oil, and applying
lotions.  They do not adorn their body.  They do not engage in medical
treatment, etc.  They abstain from sexual intercourse with women.  Here, the
word "Vastra Nirodha" (abstinence from clothing) also implies other types of
karma.  A person who lives this way is free from all types of karma.  They are
not affected by the vices of "Kushila" (unwholesome conduct).  Because they are
not affected by these vices, they do not wander in the cycle of birth and death.
Therefore, they do not suffer and are not afflicted by various types of
misfortunes.  Again, addressing those who are not free from the five types of
karma, the text says:  Those who abandon their mother, father, home, children,
animals, and wealth, but who still run after delicious food in homes where such
food is available, are far from the path of a "Shraman" (ascetic).  ||23||
Commentary: Those who have attained perfect knowledge and have abandoned their
mother, father, home, children, animals, and wealth, are considered to have
abandoned their family.  Therefore, it should be understood that they have also
abandoned their brothers, sisters, etc.  Similarly, "Aagar" (home) refers to the
house, "Putra" (son) refers to offspring, "Pashu" (animal) refers to elephants,
horses, chariots, cows, buffaloes, etc., and "Dhan" (wealth) refers to wealth.
Having abandoned all of these things, they have taken the vow of renunciation
and have taken upon themselves the burden of the five great vows.  They have
become pure and virtuous.  But, if they still crave delicious food and run after
homes where such food is available, they are far from the path of a "Shraman"
(ascetic).  This is what the Tirthankaras and their followers have said.  ||23||
To further clarify this point, the text says: (Granthamram 4750) 386

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram snAnAbhyaGgodvartanAdiSu kriyAsu
niSpratikarmazarIratayA'nyAsu ca cikitsAdikriyAsu na vartane, tathA strISu ca
virataH vastinirodhagrahaNAt anye'pyAzravA gRhyante, yazcaivambhUtaH
sarvebhyo'pyAzravadvArebhyo virato nAsau kuzIladoSairyujyate tadayogAcca na
saMsAre bambhramIti, tatazca na duHkhitaH stanati nApi
nAnAvidhairapAyairvilupyata iti  // 22 //  punarapikuzIlAnevAdhikRtyAha -
TIkArtha - jo puruSa dhIra-buddhi se rAjita-zobhita hotA hai use dhIra kahA jAtA
hai  /  dhIra kA tAtparya buddhimAna se hai  /  vaisA puruSa jala ke Arambha-
hiMsA se karma baMdhate haiM, yaha jAnakara kyA kare ? isa sambandha meM
zAstrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM ki vaha prAsuka-acita jala se apanA prANa
dhAraNa kareM-jIvana nirvAha kareM  /  yahA~ jo 'ca' zabda kA prayoga huA hai
usase yaha sUcita hai ki vaha prAsuka Ahara se hI apane prANoM kI rakSA kre|
saMsAra ko Adi kahA jAtA hai  /  usase mukta honA, chUTanA Adi mokSa kahalAtA
hai  /  vaha jaba taka prApta na ho jAye taba taka sAdhu prAsuka padArthoM se
jIvana nirvAha kreN| athavA dharma ke kAraNa bhUta isa deha kA jaba taka mokSa-
samApana na ho jAye arthAt jIvanaparyanta sAdhu prAsuka padArthoM ke dvArA hI
apanA nirvAha kare  /  vaha bIja evaM kanda Adi kA bhI sevana na kare  /  yahA~
Adi zabda se mUla, phala nihita hai  /  jo mUla patra evaM phala prAsuka nahIM
haiM unakA bhI virata-saMyamI puruSa parityAga kara dete haiM  /  ve aisA
kisalie kara dete haiM ? sUtrakAra isakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM ki
saMyata puruSa snAna, zarIra ke aMgoM para tela mAliza, piTTI Adi kA lepana Adi
kriyAoM se pRthak rahate haiM  /  zarIra kI sajjA nahIM karate  /  cikitsA Adi
kriyAoM dvArA bhI isakI pUrti nahIM karate abrahmacarya-nArI bhoga se nivRta
rahate haiM  /  yahA~ vastra nirodha se dUsare Azrava bhI nihita hote haiM  /
jo puruSa yoM apanA jIvana vyavatIta karatA hai, vaha samasta AzravoM se nivRtta
hai  /  vaha kuzIla-kutsita AcaraNa ke doSoM se lipta nahIM hotA  /  unase lipta
na hone ke kAraNa vaha punaH punaH isa saMsAra meM bhramaNa nahIM karatA-
bhaTakatA nahIM, ataeva vaha duHkhita hokara rotA nahIM tathA nAnA prakAra ke
duHkhoM se utpir3ita nahIM hotA  /  punaH kuzIloM ko uddiSTa kara kahate haiM  /
je mAyaraM ca piyaraM ca hiccA, gAraM tahA puttapasuM dhaNaM ca  /  kulAI je
ghAvai sAugAI, ahAhu se sAmaNiyassa dUre  // 23 //  chAyA - yo mAtaraJca
pittaraJca hitvA'gAraM tathA putrapazUn dhanaJca  /  . kulAni yo dhAvati
svAdukAni, athAhuH sa zrAmaNyasya dUre  //  _ anuvAda - jo puruSa mAtA-pitA,
gRha, putra, pazu-gAya, bhaiMsa, azva Adi pazu dhana, dhana-vaibhava, sampatti
kA tyAgakara dIkSA grahaNa karatA hai kintu vaisA karake bhI svAdiSTa bhojana kI
lolupatA vaza vaise gharoM meM jahA~ susvAdaM bhojana milanA sambhAvita ho
daur3atA huA jAtA hai  /  vaha zrAmaNya-sAdhuttva se dUravartI hai, tIrthaMkaroM
ne aisA kahA hai| TIkA - ye kecanApariNatasamyagdharmANastyaktvA mAtaraM ca
pitaraM ca, mAtApitroda'styajatvAdupAdAnaM, ato
bhrAtRduhitrAdikamapityakatvetyetadapi draSTavyaM, tathA 'agAraM' gRhaM 'putram'
apatyaM 'pazuM' hastyazvarathagomahiSyAdikaM dhanaM ca tyaktvA samyak
pravrajyotthAnenotthAya-paJcamahAvratabhArasya skandhaM dattvA punIMnasattvatayA
rasasAtAdigauravagRddho yaH 'kulAni' gRhANi 'svAdukAni' svAdubhojanavanti
'dhAvati' gacchati, athAsau 'zrAmaNyasya' zramaNabhAvasya dUre vartate
evamAhustIrthaMkaragaNadharAdaya iti  // 23 //  etadeva vizeSeNa darzayitumAha
-(granthAmram 4750) 386

Page #415 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Kuśīla Pariññādhyayana  The one who is not fully mature in dharma - whose
devotion to dharma is not completely ripe, he is mainly attached to mother,
father, home, children, family, animals like elephants, horses, chariots, cows,
buffaloes, and wealth and property. Renouncing all these, he properly accepts
the vow of initiation and bears the burden of the five great vows on his
shoulders. Being devoid of noble character and spiritual strength, he becomes
greedy for taste, delicious food, and material pleasures, and runs towards those
houses where he is likely to get such food. He is far from the spirit of
asceticism - saintliness, as the Tirthankaras and Ganadhars have said. Here, the
mention of the renunciation of parents implies that it is very difficult to
leave them. Therefore, one should understand the renunciation of brothers,
daughters, etc. along with the parents.  Explaining the subject matter in
detail, it is said:  The one who runs towards sweet-smelling houses, being
greedy for the belly, he preaches dharma there, and praises his own qualities to
obtain food. He is not even one-hundredth part of the virtues of the Acharyas -
he is not even one percent correct. The Tirthankaras have said so.  Leaving the
poor, he runs towards the rich for food, being greedy for the belly. They say
that he is not even one-hundredth part of the virtues of the Acharyas, who would
speak for the sake of obtaining food.  Commentary: The one who 'runs towards'
(dhāvati) the houses with delicious food, and going there, 'explains' (ākhyāti)
the dharma, or entered for the purpose of begging, and explains whatever
narrative is pleasing to him - what kind of person is he? He is 'greedy for the
belly' (udara-anugṛddha), i.e., engrossed in filling the belly, intent on
rubbing the belly. This means - the one who, for the sake of food or other
means, goes to the houses of charitable faith and narrates stories, he is called
a kuśīla (unvirtuous). And he is not even one-hundredth part of the virtues of
the Acharyas or the noble ones, the statement of 'one-hundredth' is an
indication, he is even less than one-thousandth part. The one who 'would speak'
(ālapayed) the qualities of himself for the sake of food or other means, he too
is not even one-thousandth part of the noble qualities, what to say of the one
who himself proclaims his own praise.  Leaving the poor, he runs towards the
rich for food, being greedy for the belly. They say that he is not even one-
hundredth part of the virtues of the Acharyas, who would speak for the sake of
obtaining food.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM TIkArtha jo apariNita dharma hai - jinakI dharma
bhAvanA samyak paripakva nahIM hai, ve mukhyataH mAtApitA, ghara putrAdi,
parivAra, pazu-hAthI, ghor3e, ratha, gAya, bhaiMsa Adi tathA dhana sampatti kA
tyAga kara samyak pravajyA svIkAra kara yathAvidhi dIkSita hokara, pAMca
mahAvrata rUpI bhAra ko apane kandhe para dhAraNa karatA hai  /
hInasatvaAtmazakti vihIna hone ke kAraNa vaha rasa, svAdiSTa bhojana, bhautika
sukha prazasti Adi meM lolupa banakara vaise gharoM kI ora svAdiSTa bhojana hetu
daur3a jAtA hai jahA~ vaha milanA sambhAvita ho  /  vaha zrAmaNya bhAva se -
sAdhuttva dUra hai, yaha tIrthaMkaroM tathA gaNadharoM ne kahA hai  /  yahA~
mAtA-pitA ke tyAga kA jo ullekha AyA hai usaka Azaya yaha hai ki unheM chor3a
pAnA bahuta kaThina hai  /  ataH yahA~ mAtA-pitA ke sAtha-sAtha bhAI, putrI Adi
ke tyAga ko bhI samajha lenA cAhie  /  prastuta viSaya kA vizeSa rUpa se
digdarzana karAte huye kahate haiM  /  - kulAI je dhAvai sAugAI, AghAti dhammaM
udarANugiddhe  /  ahAhu se AyariyANA sayaMse, je lAvaejjA asaNassa heU  // 24 //
chAyA - anuvAda jo udarAnugRddha-peTa lolupa, bhojanalolupa puruSa svAdiSTa
bhojana hetu jina gharoM meM vaisA milanA sambhAvita ho usa ora dauDa jAtA hai,
vahA~ jAkara dharmakathA - dharmopadeza sunAtA hai, bhojana prApta karane hetu
apanI vizeSatAoM kA bakhAna karatA hai, vaha AryaguNoM meM sauveM bhAga jitanA
nahIM hai- eka pratizata bhI sahI nahIM hai  /  tIrthaMkaroM ne aisA kahA hai  /
- kulAni yo dhAvati svAdukAni, AkhyAti dharmamudarAnugRddhaH  /  athAhuH sa
AcAryANAM zatAMze ya AlApayedazanasya hetoH  //  - TIkA yaH kulAni
svAdubhojanavanti 'dhAvati' iyarti tathA gatvA dharmamAkhyAti bhikSArthaM vA
praviSTo yadyasmai rocate kathAnakasambandhaM tattasyAkhyAti, kimbhUta iti
darzayati- udare'nugRddha udarAnugRddhaH-udarabharaNavyagrastundaparimRja
ityarthaH, idamuktaM bhavati-yo hyudaragRddha AhArAdinimittaM dAna
zraddhakAkhyAni kulAni gatvA''khyAyikAH kathayati sa kuzIla iti,
athAsAvAcAryaguNAnAmAryaguNAnAM vA zatAMze vartate zatagrahaNamupalakSaNaM
sahasrAMzAderapyadhovarttate iti yo hyannasya hetuM -
bhojananimittamaparavastrAdimittaM vA AtmaguNAnapareNa 'AlApayet' bhANayet,
asAvapyAryaguNAnAM sahasrAMze vartate kimaGga punaryaH svata evA''tmaprazaMsAM
vidadhAtIti  //  24  //  kiJca TIkArtha jo sAdhu veza meM vidyamAna puruSa
susvAda bhojana ke lie una gharoM meM jAtA hai, jahA~ vaha mila sake, aura
jAkara vahA~ dharmakathA - dharmacarcA karatA hai athavA jo jise rucikara lageM
aisI kathA kahatA haivaha kaisA hotA hai ? isakA digdarzana karAte huye
sUtrakAra kahate haiM vaha udarAnugRddha hai  /  arthAt vaha apanA udarapeTa
bharane meM hI lolupa - Asakta hai  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jo
udarAsakta puruSa dAna dene meM zraddhAzIla gharoM meM AhAra Adi ke nimitta
jAkara dharmakathA karatA hai, vaha kuzIla - anAcArI hai| vaha AcArya yA Arya
puruSa ke sauveM aMza meM bhI ginane yogya nahIM hai  /  yahA~ zata kA grahaNa
upalakSaNa hai isase yaha saMketita hai ki vaha hajAraveM aMza meM bhI ginane
yogya nahIM hai| phira jo svayaM apane mukha se apanI prazaMsA karatA hai usakA
to kahanA hI kyA ? 1 Nikkhamma dINe parabhoyaNaMmi, muhamaMgalIe udarANugiddhe
/  nIvAragiddheva mahAvarAhe, adUrae ehii ghAtameva  // 25 //  387

Page #416 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shadow Translation: The man who abandons his home and becomes a renunciant, yet
still praises others like a flatterer, seeking food from others, is like a large
pig attached to rice grains, eager only to fill his belly. He quickly meets
destruction - his restraint is corrupted. Commentary: This man, having abandoned
his own wealth, grain, gold, etc., and having gone out, becomes 'deen' (humble)
in the matter of food from others, and being controlled by his tongue, becomes
'mukhamangalik' (a flatterer) like a bard, speaking auspicious words with his
mouth - words of praise like "you are such and such", "you are like this", etc.
He speaks in a humble manner. It is said: "He is the one whose qualities are
spread in all ten directions. I used to hear about him only in stories, but
today I have seen you in person. You are the same."  Being greedy for such
praise, he is well-suited for what? 'Neevar' is a type of food for pigs and
other animals. He is attached to it, and taking his own herd with him, the
'mahavaraha' (large pig) becomes very eager for food, and entering into great
distress, he will quickly meet 'ghaat' (destruction). The 'eva' (indeed)
emphasizes that his destruction is certain, there is no other path. Thus, this
man, who is also greedy for food, will repeatedly meet destruction in the womb
of the world. Commentary: The man who abandons his wealth, grain, and
possessions, leaves home, and then becomes attached to food obtained from
others, is like a bard who flatters others with his words. He speaks words of
praise like "you are such and such", "you are like this", etc. He is like a
large pig attached to rice grains, eager only to fill his belly. He quickly
meets destruction - his restraint is corrupted. Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra Having
gone out, being humble in the matter of food from others, being a flatterer,
being attached to his belly. Like a pig attached to 'neevar', the large pig will
quickly meet destruction. The food and drink of this worldly man, he speaks
pleasingly to those who serve him. He is also a companion and a good man, but he
is empty like chaff. Shadow - The food and drink of this worldly man, he speaks
pleasingly to those who serve him. He is also a companion and a good man, but he
is empty like chaff. Translation: Commentary: The good man speaks pleasingly to
those who serve him, whether it be for food, drink, or worldly things like
clothes, etc. If something is pleasing to him, he speaks to him, he speaks to
him in return, like a parrot, or like a servant, he follows the words of the
king, etc. This is the meaning. He is the same... - - who 388

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chAyA anuvAda jo puruSa apanA ghara tyAga kara dIkSita ho jAtA hai, phira bhI
dUsare ke bhojana ke lie mukhamAMgalika parastuti jIvI - bhATa kI jyoM oroM kI
prazaMsA karatA hai, vaha cAMvala ke dAnoM meM Asakta bar3e sUara kI taraha
udara lolupa hai, peTa bharane meM hI tatpara hai  /  vaha tvarita hI nAza ko
prApta hotA hai-saMyama bhraSTa ho jAtA hai  /  TIkA yo hyAtmIyaM
dhanadhAnyahiraNyAdikaM tyaktvA niSkrAnto niSkramya ca 'parabhojane'
parAhAraviSaye 'dIno' dainyamupagato jihvendriyavazArto vandivat
'mukhamAGgaliko' bhavati mukhena maGgalAni - prazaMsAvAkyAni IdRza
stAdRzastvamityevaM dainyabhAvamupagato vakti, uktaM ca- so eso jassa guNA
viyaraMtanivAriyA dasadisAsu  /  iharA kahAsu succasi paccakkhaM ajja diTTho'si
// 1 // " ityevamaudaryaM prati gRddhaH adhyupapannaH kimiva ? 'nIvAraH'
sUkarAdimRgabhakSyavizeSastasmin gRddha-AsaktamanA gRhItvA ca svayUthaM
'mahAvarAho' mahAkAya : sUkaraH sa cAhAramAtragRddho'tisaMkaTe praviSTaH san '
adUra eva' zIghrameva 'ghAtaM ' vinAzam ' eSyati' prApsyati, evakAro'vadhAraNe,
avazyaM tasya vinAza eva nAparA gatirastIti, evayasAvapi kuzIla
AhAramAtragRddhaH saMsArodare paunaH punyena vinAzamevaiti  // 25 //  kiMcAnyat
- - TIkArtha jo puruSa dhana dhAnya sampatti kA parityAga kara ghara se nikala
gayA hai, yoM gRha tyAga kara dUsare se prApya bhojana meM dInatApUrNa Asakti
lie rahatA hai, vaha jihvA kA vazavRtti hokara bandI- bhATa kI taraha apane
mu~ha se dUsare ke maMgala vAkya, prazasAMtmaka vacana bolatA hai, Apa aise
haiM, Apa vaise haiM ityAdi ke rUpa meM prazasti pUrNa bAteM kahatA hai, jaise
Apa vahI hai, jisake guNa dasoM dizAoM meM vyApta hai  /  pahale maiM kevala
kathAoM meM bAtoM ke prasaMgoM meM yaha sunatA thA kintu Aja Apako pratyakSa
dekha rahA hU~, Apa vaise hI haiN| vaha puruSa mAtra apanA udara bharane meM
Asakta rahatA hai  /  kisake samAna ? yaha prakaTa karate huye sUtrakAra kahate
haiM jaise mahAvarAha - vizAla zarIra yukta sUara, nivAra- sUara Adi pazuoM ke
khAne yogya dhAnya vizeSa meM gRddha-Asakta hokara apane yUtha-TolI ko sAtha
lekara use pAne ke lobha bhArI saMkaTa meM par3a jAtA hai zIghra hI nAza ko
prApta hotA hai usI prakAra apanA udara bharane meM Asakta vaha zIla hIna puruSa
bhI punaH punaH nAza ko prApta hotA hai  /  isa gAthA 'AyA huA eva zabda
avadhAraNArthaka hai  /  usakA Azaya yaha hai ki avazya hI usakA nAza hotA hai,
koI dUsarI gati nahIM hotI  /  zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram niSkramya dInaH
parabhojane, mukhamAGgalika udarAnugRddhaH  /  nIvAragRddha iva mahAvarAha adUra
eSyati ghAtameva  //  annassa pANassihaloiyassa, aNuppiyaM bhAsati sevamANe  /
pAsatthayaM ceva kuzIlayaM ca, nissAie hoi jahA pulAe  //  26  //  chAyA -
annassa pAnasyaihalaukikasyAtlupriyaM bhASate sevamAnaH  /  pArzvasthatAJcaiva
kuzIlatAJca niHsAro bhavati yathA pulAkaH  //  puruSa bhojana, pAnI, vastra Adi
ke lAlaca meM dAtA puruSa kI ruci ke anurUpa teM karatA hai, vaha pArzvastha
evaM kuzIla hai  /  usakA saMyama bhUse ke samAna nissAra hai  /  anuvAda TIkA
kuzIlosnnasya pAnasya vA kRte'nyasya vaihikArthasya vastrAdeH kRte anupriyaM
bhAsate yadyasya priyaM tattasya vadato'nu-pazcAdbhASate anubhASaMte,
pratizabdakavat sevakavadvA rAjAdyuktamanutradatItyarthaH, tameva - - jo 388

Page #417 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A **kushila** is one who, for the sake of receiving food, drink, clothing, and
other worldly possessions, speaks in a way that is pleasing to the giver, even
if it means flattering them. They are like a servant of a king or a flatterer
who agrees with everything the king says. They are **gṛddha** (greedy) for food
and do all this for the sake of their own desires. Such a person is **sadācāra-
bhraṣṭa** (corrupted in good conduct) and falls into **pārśvastha-bhāva** (a
state of being on the side, not fully committed to the path). They are
**niḥsāra** (without essence), like chaff after the grain has been removed. They
are **pulāka** (like a husk) and have no real **samyamāna-uṣṭhāna** (practice of
self-control). Such a person is **liṅgamātra-avaseṣa** (only a shell of a being)
and is despised by their own community. In the afterlife, they will receive
**nikṛṣṭa-yātanā-sthāna** (the lowest levels of hell).  This is the description
of a **kushila**. Now, to describe their opposite, the **suśīla** (those of good
character), the text says:  **A person should sustain themselves with food that
is unknown, free from any defects, and not seek praise or honor through
austerity. They should remain detached from all worldly desires, including
sounds, forms, and tastes.**  The **ti̇kā** (commentary) explains that the food
should be **ajñāta** (unknown) and **anta-prānta** (obtained from the edges of
society). It also says that one should not be **daitya** (proud) if they receive
something good, nor should they perform **tapa** (austerity) for the sake of
praise or honor. Even if one performs great austerity, it should not be done for
the sake of **mukti** (liberation) but for the sake of **sarva-sarva** (the
ultimate reality).  The text also says that one should not be **gṛddha**
(greedy) for **rasa** (taste), nor for **śabda** (sound) or any other worldly
desire. One should not be **asajja** (attached) to **veṇu-vīṇā** (flutes and
lutes) or other instruments, nor should they be **karkaśa** (harsh) towards
those who are not pleasing to them. One should not be **rāga-dveṣa** (attached
to pleasure and aversion) towards **rūpa** (forms) that are not pleasing to
them. In short, one should be **vinīya** (detached) from all **kāma** (desires).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM dAtAramanusevamAna AhAramAtragRddhaH
sarvametatkarotItyarthaH, sa caivambhUtaH sadAcArabhraSTaH pArzvasthabhAvameva
vrajati kuzIlatAM ca gacchati, tathA nirgataH - apagataH sAra:- cAritrokhyo
yasya sa niHsAraH, yadivA - nirgataH sAro niHsAraH sa vidyate yasyAsau
niHsAravAn, pulAka iva niSkaNo bhavati yathA evamasau saMyamAnuSThAnaM
niHsArIkaroti, evaMbhUtazcAsau liGgamAtrAvazeSo bahUnAM svayUthyAnAM
tiraskAratadavImavApnoti, paraloke ca nikRSTAni yAtanAsthAnAnyavApnoti  // 26 //
uktAH kuzIlAH, tatpratipakSabhUtAn suzIlAn pratipAdayitumAha TIkArtha - jo
puruSa bhojya, peya padArtha, vastra Adi sAMsArika padArthoM ko pAne hetu
anupriya - sammukhina puruSa ko priya lage, usake lie prItikara ho, aisA bhASaNa
karatA hai. vaha kuzIla hai| jaise rAjA kA sevaka athavA usakI hA~ meM hA~
milAne vAlA khuzAmadI manuSya rAjA ke vacana ke pIche-pIche bolatA hai, usI
taraha vaha kuzIla dAtA ko khuza karane ke lie usakI hA~ meM hA~ milAtA hai  /
vaha AhAra mAtra meM gRddha khAdyalolupa hotA huA yaha saba karatA hai, jo
puruSa sat AcAra se bhraSTa patita hai  /  vaha pArzvasthabhAva ko prApta hotA
hai| tathA kuzIlatA ko pAtA hai  /  vaha puruSa cAritra rUpa sAra se virahita
hone ke kAraNa nissAra-sArahIna hai  /  jaise anna ke dAne nikAla lie jAne para
bhUsA nissAra ho jAtA hai, usI taraha vaha puruSa saMyama rUpa sAra ke apagata
ho jAne se nissAra hai  /  usane kevala sAdhu kA bAnA dhAraNa kara rakhA hai,
saMyama se rahita hai  /  ataH vaha svayUthyaapane yUtha yA samudAya sAdhuoM ke
tiraskAra yA apamAna kA bhAjana hotA hai  /  vaha paraloka meM nikRSTaatyanta
nimna yAtanA sthAna prApta karatA hai  /  kuzIloM kA varNana kiyA jA cukA hai|
aba unake pratipakSa bhUta- unake pratipakSI suzIloM-uttama AcAra zIla puruSoM
kA varNana karate hue kahate haiM  /   aNNAta piMDeNa'hiyAsaejjA, No pUyaNaM
tavasA AvahejA  /  saddehiM rUvehiM asajjamANaM, savvehi kAmehi viNIya gehiM  //
27 //  chAyA ajJAta piNDenAdhisahet, na pUjanaM tapasA''vahet  /  zabdaiH rUpai
rasajan, sarvebhyaH kAmebhyo vinIya gRddhim  //  - anuvAda sAdhu ko ajJAta AhAra
kA - jisake saMbaMdha meM pahale se jJAna nahIM hai, jo audezika Adi doSa se
vivarjita hai, usa dvArA apanA nirvAha karanA caahie| tapazcaraNa dvArA pUjA
evaM satkAra kI kAmanA nahIM karanI cAhie  /  use zabda, rUpa Adi saba prakAra
sAMsArika bhogoM se pRthak hote hue zuddha saMyama kA paripAlana karanA cAhie  /
TIkA ajJAtazcasau piNDazcAtapiNDaH antaprAntaH ityarthaH, ajJAtebhyo vA
pUrvAparAsaMstutebhyo vA piNDo'jJAtapiNDo'jJAtoJchavRttyA labdhastenAtmAnam
'adhisahet' vartayet pAlayet etaduktaM bhavati - antaprAntena labdhenAlabdhena
vA na daityaM kuryAt, nApyutkRSTena labdhena madaM vidadhyAt nApi tapasA
pUjanasatkAranimittaM tapaH kuryAdityarthaH, yadi vA pUjAsatkAranimittatvena
tathAvidyArthitvena vA mahatApi kenacittapo muktihetukaM na niH sAraM kuryAt,
taduktam " paraM lokAdhikaM dhAma, tapaH zrutamiti dvayam  /
tadevArthitvanirluptasAraM tRNalavAyate  // 1 //  - - yathA ca raseSu gRddhiM na
kuryAt, evaM zabdAdiSvapIti darzayati- " zabdaiH ' veNuvINAdibhirAkSiptaH
saMsteSu 'asajan' Asaktimakurvan karkazeSu na dveSamagacchat tathA rUpairapi
manojJetarai rAgadveSamakurvan evaM sarvairapi 389

Page #418 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **"Kamai:"** One should restrain all desires,
including those arising from lust, by practicing self-control. One should not
develop attachment or aversion to any object that is pleasing to the senses. As
it is said:  **"Sadde-su ya bhaddayapavaesu, soyavisa-yamuvagaesu. Tutt-ena va
rutth-ena va, sam-an-ena saya na hoyavvam. ||1||"**  **Translation:**  Even when
hearing pleasant or unpleasant sounds, a monk should not be pleased or
displeased. ||1||  **"Ruve-su ya bhaddayapavaesu, chakkhuvisa-yamuvagaesu. Tutt-
ena va rutth-ena va sam-an-ena saya na hoyavvam. ||2||"**  **Translation:**
Even when seeing pleasant or unpleasant sights, a monk should not be pleased or
displeased. ||2||  **"Gandhe ya bhaddayapavasu, ghanavisa-yamuvagaesu. Tutt-ena
va rudv-ena va sam-an-ena saya na hoyavve. ||3||"**  **Translation:**  Even when
smelling pleasant or unpleasant scents, a monk should not be pleased or
displeased. ||3||  **"Bhakhe-su ya bhaddayapavasu, rasanavisa-yamuvagaesu. Tutt-
ena va rudv-ena va sam-an-ena saya na hoyavvam. ||4||"**  **Translation:**  Even
when tasting pleasant or unpleasant flavors, a monk should not be pleased or
displeased. ||4||  **"Pha-se-su ya bhaddayapavaesu, phasavisa-yamuvagaesu. Tutt-
ena va rudv-ena va sam-an-ena saya na hoyavvam. ||5||"**  **Translation:**  Even
when experiencing pleasant or unpleasant touch, a monk should not be pleased or
displeased. ||5||  **"||27||"**  Just as the restraint of the senses is
necessary, so too is the restraint of other attachments.  **Commentary:**  An
unknown object is one that has no connection to the past or future. A monk
should live by consuming such unknown objects. This means that a monk should not
feel dejected if they receive little food, nor should they feel proud if they
receive good food. They should not perform austerities for the sake of honor or
respect, nor should they perform austerities for the sake of liberation. They
should not consider their past austerities as useless or meaningless. It is said
that austerity and scripture are the two things that lead to the highest place
in the afterlife. When one desires worldly things, these two become as useless
as a piece of straw. A monk should not be greedy or attached to taste.
Similarly, they should not be attached to sounds, sights, smells, or touch. The
author of the sutra states that a monk should not be attached to the sounds of
flutes, veenas, etc., nor should they feel aversion to harsh, unpleasant words.
Similarly, they should not feel attachment or aversion to beautiful or ugly
forms. They should practice self-control by abandoning attachment to all sensual
pleasures. They should not feel attachment or aversion to beautiful or ugly
objects.  **Translation:**  Even when hearing pleasant or unpleasant sounds, a
monk should not be pleased or displeased. Even when seeing pleasant or
unpleasant sights, a monk should not be pleased or displeased. Even when
smelling pleasant or unpleasant scents, a monk should not be pleased or
displeased. Even when tasting pleasant or unpleasant flavors, a monk should not
be pleased or displeased. Even when experiencing pleasant or unpleasant touch, a
monk should not be pleased or displeased.  **"Just as the restraint of the
senses is necessary, so too is the restraint of other attachments."**  **"Om Om
Om"**  **"Savvai sangai aiccha dhire, savvai dukkhai-n titikkhamane. Akhile
agiddhe jani-eyachari, abhayankare bhikku-anavilappa. ||28||"**
**Translation:**  "He who is patient in all associations, he who endures all
suffering, he who is free from greed, he who is a true follower of the path, he
who is fearless, he is the monk who is free from attachment." ||28||  **390**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram 'kAmai:' icchAmadanarUpaiH sarvebhyo vA kAmebhyo
gRddhiM 'vinIya' apanIya saMyamamanupAlayediti, sarvathA manojJetareSu viSayeSu
rAgadveSaM na kuryAt tathA coktama - "saddesu ya bhaddayapAvaesu,
soyavisayamuvagaesu  /  tuTTeNa va ruTTheNa va, samaNeNa sayA Na hoyavvaM  // 1
//  chAyA - zabdeSu ca bhadrakApApakeSu zrotraviSayamupagateSu  /  tuSTena vA
ruSTena vA zramaNena sadA na bhavitavyaM  // 1 //  ruvesu ya bhaddayapAvaesu,
cakkhuvisaya muvagaesu  /  tuTTeNa va ruTTheNa va samaNeNa sayA Na hoyavvaM  //
2 //  gaMdhe ya bhaddayapAvasu, ghANavisaya muva gaesu  /  tuTTeNa va rudveNa va
samaNeNa sayA Na hoyavve  // 3 //  bhakkhesu ya bhaddayapAvasu,
rasaNavisayamuvagaesu  /  tuTTeNa va rudveNa va samaNeNa sayA Na hoyavvaM  // 4
//  phAsesu ya bhaddayapAvaesu, phAsavisayamuvagaesu  /  tuTTheNa va rudveNa va
samaNeNa sayA Na hoyavvaM  // 5 // "  // 27 //  yathA cendriyanirodho vidheya
evamaparasaGganirodho'pi kArya iti darzayati TIkArtha ajJAta-jo nahIM jAnA huA
ho, vaisA piNDa anna pAnI yA AhAra arthAt jisake sAtha : pUrvavartI aura
pazcAtavartI paricaya nahIM jur3A huA ho vaha AhAra ajJAta piNDa hai  /  usake
dvArA sAdhu ko apanA jIvana calAnA cAhie  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki
antaprAnta yatkiMcita AhAra prApta ho yA na ho sAdhu ko dInatA kA anubhava nahIM
karanA caahie| isI prakAra uttama AhAra prApta hone para use mada-abhimAna nahIM
karanA caahie| use tapazcaraNa kara satkAra, sammAna kI abhilASA nahIM rakhanI
cAhie arthAt vaha tadartha tapazcaraNa na kare  /  pUjA satkAra hetu athavA
tathAvidha anya prakAra kI kisI abhilASA ke nimitta, sAdhu ko mukti hetu mokSa
ke kAraNa, bhUta tapazcaraNa ko ni:sAra-sArahIna yA vyartha nahIM karanA caahie|
kahA hai- paraloka meM parama uttama sthAna prApta karAne vAle tapa evaM zruta
ye hI do haiM  /  inake dvArA sAMsArika padArthoM kI kAmanA karane para yaha
tRNalava-tRNa ke Tukar3e kI jyoM ni:sAra-sArahIna ho jAte haiM  /  sAdhu rasa
meM- AsvAda meM gRddhi-lolupatA yA Asakti na rkhe| isI prakAra zabda Adi viSayoM
meM bhI Asakti na rakhe  /  sUtrakAra yaha vyakta karate haiM  /  veNu - bAMsurI
tathA vINA Adi ke zabda sunakara sAdhu unameM saMsakta na ho tathA karkaza
kaThora, apriya vacana sunakara vaha dveSa na kare  /  isI prakAra vaha sundara
va asundara rUpa meM rAga tathA dveSa bhAva na rakhe  /  vaha samagra kAmabhoga
meM Asakti chor3akara saMyama kA anupAlana kare  /  vaha sundara tathA asundara
viSayoM se rAga tathA dveSa na kare, kahA hai| = - zabda bhadra-sundara yA
pApaka- asundara yA kharAba jaisA bhI kAna meM par3e to sAdhu usase prasannatA
yA aprasannatA kA anubhava na kare  /  sundara yA asundara jo bhI rUpa naitroM
ke sAmane Aye to vaha usase prasanna yA aprasanna na ho  /  gandhaM uttama-
sugaMdha, adhama-durgandha jaise bhI rUpa meM ghrANendriya meM Aye to sAdhu
usase tuSTa yA atuSTa na hI  /  bhojana svAdiSTa yA asvAdiSTa mukha ke sAmane
Aye to sAdhu paritoSa yA aparitoSa anubhava na kre| sparza priya yA apriya jaisA
bhI deha kA prApta ho, sAdhu usase tuSTi yA atuSTi kI anubhUti na kare  /  .
jisa prakAra indriyoM kA nirodha kiyA jAnA cAhie, usI prakAra anya AsaktiyoM kA
bhI nirodha kiyA jAnA cAhie, isakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM  /  OM OM
OM savvAI saMgAI aicca dhIre, savvaI dukkhAiM titikkhamANe  /  akhile agiddhe
jaNieyacArI, abhayaMkare bhikkhuaNAvilappA  //  28  //  390

Page #419 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shadow - **Translation:** The wise and intelligent Sadhu, renouncing all
attachments, endures all kinds of suffering, and is endowed with knowledge,
vision, and character. He is not bound to any subject. He is an unbound
wanderer. He gives refuge to all beings, remaining detached and unattached to
objects and passions. He follows the discipline of restraint as it should be. 1
**Kushila Parigyaadhyaayanam:** Renouncing all attachments, the wise and
intelligent Sadhu endures all kinds of suffering. He is complete with knowledge,
vision, and character, unbound and wandering. He is a monk who gives refuge to
all beings, with a mind free from objects and passions. - - **Commentary:** All
'attachments' are internal, like affection, and external, like material
possessions. Renouncing both, the wise and intelligent man, endowed with
knowledge and wisdom, renounces all 'suffering', both physical and mental, and
endures the suffering caused by trials and tribulations. He is complete with
knowledge, vision, and character. He is not attached to desires, and is unbound
and wandering. He is a monk who gives refuge to all beings, with a mind free
from objects and passions. He follows the discipline of restraint as it should
be. - 1 ❀❀ **Bhaarasya Jaata Muni Bhumjaeja, Kankheja Paavassa Vivega Bhikkhu.
Dukkena Putthe Dhuyamaieja, Sangamaseese Va Param Dameja.** **Shadow:** The
Muni, for the journey of restraint, should eat, and the monk should desire the
separation of his past sins. When touched by suffering, he should take refuge in
restraint, and like a warrior on the battlefield, he should subdue the enemy.
**Translation:** The Muni, for the journey of restraint, should eat, and the
monk should desire the separation of his past sins. When touched by suffering,
he should take refuge in restraint, and like a warrior on the battlefield, he
should subdue the enemy. **Commentary:** For the journey of the burden of
restraint - the burden of the five great vows - the 'Muni', the knower of the
three times, should 'eat', take food, and should desire the 'separation' of the
'sin', the past karma, the 'monk', the Sadhu. And so, when suffering, the pain
caused by trials and tribulations, touches him, he should 'take refuge' in
restraint, in liberation. Just as a warrior on the battlefield, attacked by
enemies, subdues the 'enemy', so too, he should subdue the enemy of karma, even
when attacked by trials and tribulations. = **Commentary:** The Muni, the knower
of the three times - past, present, and future - should eat for the sake of
carrying the burden of the five great vows, and should desire the destruction of
his past karma. That which gives pain, that which causes suffering, is called
suffering. It is born from trials and tribulations. When the Sadhu is touched by
it, he should take refuge in restraint, in liberation. Just as a warrior on the
battlefield, attacked by enemies, subdues the 'enemy', so too, he should subdue
the enemy of karma, even when attacked by trials and tribulations. 391

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chAyA - anuvAda dhIra-buddhimAna sAdhu saba saMga - AsaktiyoM kA tyAga kara
saba prakAra ke kaSToM ko sahana karatA huA jJAna darzana tathA cAritra se yukta
hotA hai  /  vaha kisI bhI viSaya meM pratibaddha nahIM hotA  /  vaha
apratibaddha vihArI hotA hai  /  vaha sabhI prANiyoM ko abhaya detA huA viSayoM
tathA kaSAyoM se alipta-anAsakta rahatA hai| yathAvatha saMyama kA pAlana karatA
hai 1 kuzIla parijJAdhyayanaM sarvAn saGgAnatItyadhIraH, sarvANi duHkhAni
titikSamANaH  /  akhilogRddho'niyatacArI, abhayaGkaro bhikSuranAvilAtmA  //  - -
TIkA sarvAn 'saGgAn' saMbandhAn AntarAn snehalakSaNAn bAhyAMzca
dravyaparigrahalakSaNAn' 'atItya ' tyaktvA 'dhIro' vivekI sarvANi 'duHkhAni '
zArIramAnasAni tyaktvA parISahopasargajanitAni 'titikSamANaH ' adhisahan
'akhilo' jJAnadarzanacAritraiH sampUrNaH tathA kAmeSvagRddhastathA '
aniyatacArI' apratibaddhavihArI tathA jIvA nAmabhayaMkaro bhikSaNazIlo bhikSuH-
sAdhuH evam 'anAvilo' viSayakaSAyairanAkula AtmA yasyAsAvanAvilAtmA
'saMyamamanuvarttata iti  //  28  //  kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha - saMbaMdha do
prakAra ke hai- Antara saMbaMdha tathA bAhya sambandha  /  sneha Antarika
saMbaMdha hai, tathA dravya parigraha bAhya saMbaMdha hai  /  ina donoM kA
parityAga kara dhIra - prajJA sampanna vivekI puruSa daihika aura mAnasika
duHkhoM kA tyAga kara tathA parISaha aura upasargoM se janita duHkhoM ko sahana
karatA huA, jJAnadarzana evaM caritra se sampUrNa sampanna hotA hai| vaha
kAmavAsanA meM agRddha- alolupa, anAsakta rahatA huA apratibaddha vihArI hotA
hai  /  vaha samagra jIvoM ko abhayadAna detA huA viSayoM evaM kaSAyoM se alipta
anAkula rahatA hai  /  yathAvidhi - samyak saMyama kA paripAlana karatA hai  /
- 1  bhArassa jAtA muNi bhuMjaejjA, kaMkhejja pAvassa vivega bhikkhU  /
dukkheNa puTThe dhuyamAiejjA, saMgAmasIse va paraM damejjA  //  29 //  chAyA
bhArasya yAtrAyai munirbhuJjIva, kAGkSet pApasya vivekaM bhikSuH  /  duHkhena
spRSTo dhUtamAdadIta, saGgrAmazIrSa iva paraM damayet  //  anuvAda - muni bhAra
yAtrA - saMyama yAtrA ke nirvAha hetu bhojana grahaNa kare tathA apane
pUrvAcarita pApoM kA apanayana karane kI icchA rkhe| jaba usa para parISahoM
aura upasargoM kA duHkha Aye to vaha saMyama meM dhyAnAvasthita ho - ekamAtra
usa ora hI dhyAna rkhe| jaise samara bhUmi meM yoddhA zatruoM kA damana karatA
hai, vaha usI taraha karma rUpI zatruoM kA damana- dhvaMsa kare  /  TIkA -
saMyamabhArasya yAtrArthaM - paJca mahAvrata bhAranirvAhaNArthaM 'muniH'
kAlatrayavettA 'bhuJjIta' AhAragrahaNaM kurvIta, tathA 'pApasya' karmaNaH
pUrvAcaritasya 'vivekaM' pRthagbhAvaM vinAzamAkAGkSet 'bhikSuH' sAdhuriti,
tathAduHkhayatIti duHkhaM parISahopasargajanitA pIr3A tena 'spRSTo' vyAptaH san
' dhUtaM ' saMyamaM mokSaM vA 'AdadIta ' gRhNIyAt, yathA subhaTaH kazcit
saGgrAmazirasi zatrubhirabhidrutaH paraM' zatruM damayati evaM paraM karmazatruM
parISahopasargAbhidruto'pi damayediti  //  29  //  apica = TIkArtha - vartamAna,
bhUta evaM bhaviSya tInoM kAloM kA vettA muni, paMca mahAvrata rUpa bhAra ke
nirvAha hetu AhAra kA grahaNa kare, tathA apane pUrvAcarita pApa karma ke vinAza
kI AkAMkSA- abhilASA rakhe  /  jo duHkha detA . hai, pIr3ita karatA hai, use
duHkha kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha parISahoM evaM upasargoM se paidA hotA haiM  /
jaba sAdhu usase 391

Page #420 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- If one is oppressed, they should focus their attention on restraint or
liberation. Just as a valiant warrior in the battlefield, oppressed by the
valiant warriors and soldiers of the opposing side, suppresses and destroys
those enemy soldiers, in the same way, a sage, afflicted by trials and
tribulations, should suppress and destroy the enemy in the form of karma. Even
if one is being killed, they should desire the arrival of death. By destroying
karma, one does not enter the cycle of existence, just as a chariot does not
move when the axle is broken. Commentary: Even if one is being killed by trials
and tribulations, they should endure it properly. How? Just as a wooden plank,
being chipped away from both sides, does not become attached to either side, in
the same way, a sage, whose body is weakened and emaciated by external and
internal austerities, does not become attached to either attachment or aversion,
but desires the arrival of death. In this way, by destroying the eight types of
karma, they do not return to the cycle of existence, which is full of birth, old
age, death, disease, sorrow, etc., like a puppet show. The example is given:
Just as a chariot does not move when the axle is broken, because it is without
support on a level or uneven path, in the same way, a sage, by destroying the
eight types of karma, does not return to the cycle of existence. The commentary
ends. The meaning is the same as before. The word "bravimi" means "I say" and
should be understood as before. The seventh study, called "Kushila Paribhasa",
is complete. 卐卐卐 392

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram utpIr3ita ho to vaha saMyama yA mokSa meM apanA
dhyAna jor3e rakhe  /  koI vIra yoddhA saMgrAma bhUmi meM pratipakSI ke vIroM-
sainikoM dvArA pIr3ita kiyA jAtA huA una zatru sainikoM kA damana kara DAlatA
hai, unheM dhvasta kara detA hai, usI prakAra sAdhu parISahoM, evaM upasargoM se
AkrAnta, pIDita hotA huA bhI karmarUpI zatru kA damana-vinAza kre| avi hammamANe
phalagAvataTThI, samAgamaM kaMkhati aMtakassa  /  NidhUya kammaM Na pavaMcuvei,
akkhakkhae vA sagaDaM tibemi  // 30 //  chAyA - api hanyamAnaH phalakAvataSTI,
samAgamaM kAGkSatyantakasya  /  nirdhUya karma na prapaJcamupaiti, akSakSaya iva
zakaTamiti bravImi  //  . anuvAda - parISahoM tathA upasargoM dvArA hanyamAna-
pIr3ita, pratihata hotA huA bhI donoM ora se chIle jAte hue kASThaphalaka-kATha
ke phATake kI jyoM kaSTa pAtA huA bhI sAdhu rAga dveSa na kare, maraNa kI
pratIkSA kare  /  isa taraha apanA karmakSaya kara vaha saMsAra ko prApta nahIM
karatA-bhavacakra meM nahIM bhaTakatA, jaise dhUrI ke TUTa jAne se gAr3I nahIM
calatI  /  TIkA - parISahopasagairhanyamAno'pi-pIDyamAno'pi samyak sahate,
kimiva ? phalakavadavakRSTaH yathAphalakamubhAbhyAmapi pArvAbhyAM taSTaM-
ghaTTitaM sattanu bhavati araktadviSTaM vA saMbhavatyevamasAvapi sAdhuH sa
bAhyAbhyantareNa tapasA niSTaptadehastanuH-durbalazarIro'rakta dviSTazca,
antakasya-mRtyoH 'samAgama' prAptim 'AkAGkSati' abhilaSati, evaM cASTaprakAraM
karma 'nirdhUya' apanIya na punaH 'prapaJcaM' jAtijarAmaraNarogazokAdikaM
prapaJcyante bahudhA naTavadyasmin sa prapaJcaH-saMsArastaM 'naupaiti' na yAti,
dRSTAntamAha-yathA akSasya 'kSaye' vinAze sati 'zakaTaM' gantryAdikaM samaviSama
patharUpaMprapaJcamupaSTambhakAraNAbhAvAnnopayAti,evamasAvapisAdhuraSTaprakArasy
a karmaNa:saMsAraprapaJcaMnopayAtIti, gato'nugamo nayAH pUrvavad iti zabdaH
parisamAptyarthe bravImIti pUrvavat  // 30 //  samAptaM ca kuzIlaparibhASAkhyaM
saptamamadhyayanaM  //  TIkArtha - sAdhu parISahoM aura upasargoM dvArA
hanyamAna-pIDyamAna hotA huA bhI kaSTa ko samyak sahana karatA hai, kisa prakAra
? isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM, jaise kASTaphalaka-kATha
kA phATakA donoM ora se chIlA jAtA huA bhI, patalA kiyA jAtA huA bhI rAga dveSa
nahIM karatA, usI prakAra sAdhu bAhya aura Abhyantara tapazcaraNa dvArA deha ke
paritapta aura durbala hone para bhI rAga dveSa nahIM karatA kintu mRtyu ke Ane
kI pratIkSA karatA hai  /  vaha sAdhu isa prakAra aSTavidha karmoM ko apanIta
kara-dUrakara phira janma, vRddhatva, mRtyu, roga tathA zoka Adi aneka prakAra
ke prapaJca yukta naTa ke sadRza isa saMsAra ko prApta na isa saMbaMdha meM
dRSTAnta upasthita kiyA jAtA hai-jaise akSa-dhurI ke bhagna ho jAne para gAr3I
sama-samAna, viSamaasamAna mArga meM AdhAra rahita hone ke kAraNa nahIM cltii|
isI taraha vaha sAdhu aSTa vidha karmoM ke kSINa ho jAne se saMsAra prapaJca
nahIM karatA-saMsAra ke jhaMjhaTa meM, gorakhadhandhe meM nahIM pdd'taa|
_anugama samApta huA, naya pUrvavata hai, iti zabda samApti ke artha meM
prayukta hai  /  bravImi bolatA hU~, pUrvavat yojanIya hai  /   //  kuzIla
paribhASA nAmaka saptama adhyayana samApta huA  //  Wan Wan Wan  392

Page #421 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter of the Shri Veeryadhyayan  **Verse 1:**  > Two types of
Veerya are explained, what is the Veerya of a Veera? How is he called a Veera?
**Commentary:**  > The omniscient ones have explained two types of Veerya. What
is the Veerya of a Veera? Why is he called a Veera? This question is to be
discussed.  **Explanation:**  > The word "dvividha" (two types) indicates that
there are two types of Veerya. The word "idam" refers to what is being explained
further. The Tirthankaras and others have explained these two types of Veerya.
The word "va" is used for the sake of beauty in the sentence. According to the
sutra "Eer-Gati-Pree-ranayo", the root "Eer" means "to move" or "to inspire".
The word "Veerya" is derived from the root "Eer". The one who specifically
removes evil is called Veerya. Veerya is a special power of the soul. Here, the
question arises: What is the Veerya of a warrior? And how is he called a Veera?
The word "nu" in this verse indicates a question. Here, the question arises:
What is that Veerya? What is the nature of the Veerya of a Veera?  > The author
explains the nature of Veerya through its two types.  **Verse 2:**  > Some say
that Karma is Veerya, while others say that Akarma is Veerya. These two are the
places where all mortals are seen.  **Commentary:**  > Shri Sudharma Swami,
Jambu Swami, and other disciples are addressed: "O virtuous practitioners! Some
say that Karma is Veerya, while others say that Akarma is Veerya. These two are
the places where all mortals are seen."  **Explanation:**  > Shri Sudharma
Swami, Jambu Swami, and other disciples are addressed: "O virtuous
practitioners! Some say that Karma is Veerya, while others say that Akarma is
Veerya. These two are the places where all mortals are seen."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  zrI vIryAdhyayanaM . aSTamaM zrI vIyadhyiyana duhA veyaM suyakkhAyaM,
vIriyaMti pabuccaI  /  kiM nu vIrassa vIrattaM kahaM ceyaM evuccaI ?  // 1 //
chAyA - dvidhA vedaM svAkhyAtaM vIryamiti procyate  /  kiM nu vIrasya vIratvaM
kathaJcedaM procyate  //  anuvAda - sarvajJoM ne vIrya do prakAra kA AkhyAta
kiyA hai-batalAyA hai  /  vIra puruSa kA vIratvavIratA kyA hai ? vaha vIra kyoM
kahA jAtA hai ? yaha prazna vivecya hai  /  TIkA - dve vidhe-prakArAvasyeti
dvividha-dviprakAraM, pratyakSAsannavAcitvAt idamo yadanantaraM prakarSeNocyate
procyate vIryaM taddivabhedaM suSThvAkhyAtaM svAkhyAtaM tIrthakarAdibhiH, vA
vAkyAlaGkAre, tatra 'Ira gatipreraNa yoH' vizeSeNa Irayati-prerayati ahitaM yena
tadvIryaM jIvasya zaktivizeSa ityarthaH, tatra, kiM nu 'vIrasya' subhaTasya
vIratyaM ?, kena vA kAraNenAsau vIra ityabhidhIyate, nuzabdoM vitarkavAcI,
ekadvitarkayati kiM tadvIrya ?, vIrasya vA kiM tavIratvamiti  // 1 //  tatra
bhedadvAreNavIryasvarUpamAcikhyAsurAha - TIkArtha - jisake do bheda hote hai,
use dvividha kahA jAtA hai  /  idaM zabda pratyakSa tathA Asanna-samIpastha kA
vAcaka hai  /  ataH Age jo prakarSa ke sAtha-vistAra ke sAtha vizada rUpa meM
vakSyamANa hai, vaha vIrya do prakAra kA hai  /  tIrthaMkara Adi ne aisA samyak
AkhyAta kiyA hai  /  yahA~ 'vA' zabda vAkyAlaMkAra ke artha meM-vAkya kI zobhA
hetu prayukta huA hai  /  'Iragati preraNayoH" sUtra ke anusAra Ira-dhAtugati
ora preraNA ke artha meM hai  /  vipUrvaka Ira dhAtuH se vIrya zabda niSpanna
hai  /  jo vizeSa rUpa se ahita ko dUra karatA hai, vaha vIrya kahalAtA hai  /
vIrya AtmA kI vizeSa zakti hai  /  yahA~ yaha prazna upasthita hotA hai ki
subhaTa-yoddhA kI vIratA kyA hai? tathA vaha kisa prakAra vIra kahA jAtA hai ?
isa gAthA meM 'nu' zabda vitarka artha kA sUcaka hai  /  yahA~ yaha
vitarkaprazna upasthita hotA hai ki vaha vIrya kyA hai? vIryayukta puruSa-vIra
puruSa kI vIratA kA kyA svarUpa hai  /  sUtrakAra bhedapUrvaka vIrya ke svarUpa
kI vyAkhyA karane hetu pratipAdita karate haiM  /  kammamege pavedeti, akammaM
vAvi suvvayA  /  . .. etehiM dohi ThANehiM, jehiM dIsaMti macciyA  // 2 //
chAyA - kamaike pravedayantyakarmANaM vA'pi suvratAH  /  AbhyAM dvAbhyAM
sthAnAbhyAM, yAmyAM dRzyante mAH  //  anuvAda - zrI sudharmA svAmI jambUsvAmI
Adi ziSyoM ko saMbodhita kara kahate haiM ki he vratazIla sAdhakoM! kaI karma ko
vIrya ke rUpa meM pratipAdita karate haiM tathA kaI anya akarma ko vIrya ke nAma
se abhihita karate haiM  /  isa taraha usake do bheda haiM  /  isa martyaloka ke
sabhI prANI ina do bhedoM ke antargata dRSTigocara hote haiM  /  3930

Page #422 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra **Commentary:** Some say that the performance of
actions (karma) is itself viriya (energy). Others say that the eight types of
karma, due to their role in causing effects, are viriya. As it is said: Karma is
born from the arising of a state (audayika bhaava). And the arising state is
also born from the arising of karma. This is called balaviriya (child-like
energy). The second type is called akarma (non-karma), which is the innate
energy of the jiva (soul) born from the destruction of the obstacle to viriya.
This is the meaning of the word "cha" (and). The energy born from the
destruction of the obstacles to charitra (conduct) and mohaniya (delusion) is
called panditaviriya (wise energy). O Suvrata! Know this panditaviriya. Viriya
is established through these two types: balaviriya and panditaviriya, which are
further divided into karma-based and non-karma-based. Those who are established
in these two types are called "dissanta" (seen) in the world of mortals. As it
is said: When a mortal is seen performing various actions with enthusiasm and
strength, he is called "viriyavan" (energetic). And when the obstacle to viriya
is destroyed, he is called "ananta balayukta" (possessing infinite strength).
**Commentary:** The performance of actions, giving them a concrete form, is
viriya. Many say so. Many others, while explaining the role of karma in causing
effects, call the eight types of karma as viriya. That which is born from the
arising of a state (audayika bhaava) is called karma. The arising state is also
born from the arising of karma. This is called balaviriya (child-like energy).
The second type is called akarma (non-karma), which is the innate energy of the
jiva (soul) born from the destruction of the obstacle to viriya. The use of the
word "cha" (and) here indicates that the energy born from the destruction of the
obstacles to charitra (conduct) and mohaniya (delusion) is called panditaviriya
(wise energy). O virtuous ones! Know this panditaviriya. Viriya is established
through these two types: balaviriya and panditaviriya, which are further divided
into karma-based and non-karma-based. Thus, viriya is described as having two
types. All beings in the mortal world are divided into these two types. This is
seen and described. Because when a man is seen performing various actions with
enthusiasm and strength, people say, "This man is energetic." And when the
obstacle to viriya is destroyed, it is said, "This man is possessing infinite
strength."  Here, the sutrakar (author of the sutra) has called karma as
balaviriya, explaining the role of karma in causing effects. Now, explaining the
role of karma in causing effects, the sutrakar describes pramada (negligence) as
karma, saying:  **Pramaayam kammamaahansu, tabbhaavaadeso vaavi, Chhaya
pramaadam kammamaahurapramaadam Appmaayam Baalam - Tahaa'varam. Va ||3||
Pandiyameva Tathaa'param. Tadbhaavaadeshato vaa'pi baalam pandiyameva va ||**
**Translation:** Pramada (negligence) is called karma and apramaada (non-
negligence) is called akarma. Therefore, balaviriya arises from the presence of
pramada and panditaviriya arises from the presence of apramaada.
**Commentary:** Those who are negligent (pramadyanti) are those who do not
perform their duties properly. This pramada is like intoxication, etc. As it is
said:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - karmma- kriyAnuSThAnamityetadeke vIryamiti
pravedayanti, yadi vA karmASTaprakAraM kAraNe kAryopacArAt tadeva vIryamiti
pravedayanti, tathAhi - audayika bhAvaniSpannaM karmetyupadizyate, audayiko'pi
ca bhAvaH karmodaya niSpanna evaM bAlavIryaM dvitIyabheda stvayaM na vidyate
karmAsyetyakarmA-vIryAntarAyakSayajanitaM jIvassya sahajaM vIryamityarthaH ca
zabdAt cAritramohanIyopazamakSayopazamajanitaM ca, he suvratA ! evambhUtaM
paNDitavIryaM jAnIta yUyaM  /  AbhyAmeva dvAbhyAM sthAnAbhyAM
sakarmakAkarmakApAditabAlapaNDitavIryAbhyAM vyavasthitaM vIryamityucyate,
yakAbhyAM ca yayorvA vyavasthitA martyeSu bhavA martyAH 'dissaMta' iti
dRzyante'padizyante vA, tathAhi - nAnAvidhAsu kriyAsu
pravartamAnamutsAhabalasaMpannaM martyaM dRSTvA vIryavAnayaM martya
ityevamapadizyate tathA tadAvArakakarmaNaH kSayA danantabalayukto'thaM martya
ityevamapadizyate dRzyate ceti  // 2 //  yaha balavIryaM kAraNe
kAryopacArAtkarmaiva vIryatvenAbhihitaM sAmprataM kAraNe kAryopacArAdeva
pramAdaM karmatvenApadizannAha TIkArtha - kriyA kA anuSThAna karanA use mUrta
rUpa denA vIrya hai  /  aisA kaI pratipAdita karate haiM  /  kaI kAraNa meM
kArya kA upacAra karate hue aSTavidha karmoM ko hI vIrya ke nAma se abhihita
karate haiM  /  jo udaya prApta bhAva se - audayika bhAva se niSpanna hotA hai
use karma kahA jAtA hai  /  audayika bhAva bhI karmodaya niSpanna hai, vaha
bAlavIrya haiM  /  dUsarA bheda yaha hai ki jisameM karma nahIM hote, use akarmA
kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha vIryAntarAya nAmaka karma ke kSINa hone se paidA hone
vAlA jIva kA svAbhAvika-svabhAvagata vIrya hai  /  yahA~ ca zabda kA jo prayoga
huA hai, tadanusAra cAritramohanIya ke upazama yA kSayopazama se utpanna
nirmala, nirdoSa cAritra vIrya hai  /  he vrataniSTha sAdhakoM ! vahI paNDita
vIrya hai, ise Apa jAne  /  sakarmaka karmasahita tathA akarmaka-karmarahita
nAmaka vIrya ke do bheda nirUpita hue haiM  /  inhIM ke dvArA bAla vIrya aura
paNDita vIrya vyavasthita vyAkhyAta hai  /  yoM vIrya do bheda yukta abhihita
huA hai  /  martyaloka meM jitane bhI prANI haiM, ve inhIM do bhedoM meM
vibhakta haiM  /  yaha dekhA jAtA hai  /  apadiSTa kiyA jAtA hai- batAyA jAtA
hai  /  kyoMki bhinna-bhinna prakAra kI kriyAoM meM utsAha evaM bala sampanna
puruSa ko dekhakara loga kahate haiM, yaha vIryavAna puruSa hai  /  tathA
vIryAntarAya karma ke kSINa hone se yaha kahA jAtA hai ki yaha ananta balayukta
puruSa hai  /  yahA~ kAraNa meM kArya kA upacAra kara sUtrakAra ne karma ko hI
bAlavIrya kahA hai| aba kAraNa meM kArya kA upacAra kara sUtrakAra pramAda ko
karma ke rUpa meM vyAkhyAta karate hue kahate haiM  /  pamAyaM kammamAhaMsu,
tabbhAvAdesao vAvi, chAyA pramAdaM karmamAhurapramAdaM appamAyaM bAlaM -
tahA'varaM  /  vA  // 3 //  paMDiyameva tathA'param  /  tadbhAvAdezato vA'pi
bAlaM paNDitameva vA  //   anuvAda pramAda ko karma tathA apramAda ko akarma
kahA gayA hai  /  ataH pramAda ke sadbhAva se hone se bAlavIrya tathA apramAda
ke hone se paNDitavIrya ghaTita hotA hai  /  TIkA pramAdyanti-sadanuSThAnarahitA
bhavanti prANino yena sa pramAdo-madyAdiH, tathA coktam 394

Page #423 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Sri Viryaadhyayanam.    **Verse 1:**   "The five things that are said to be
the causes of delusion are: intoxication, sense objects, passions, sleep, and
idle talk. This delusion, which is the cause of karma, is described by the
liberated ones."  **Commentary:**   "The Tirthankaras and others have said that
this delusion is the cause of karma, and that freedom from delusion is the
absence of karma. This means that a deluded being is bound by karma, and the
actions of such a being are called 'balaviryam' (childish strength). A non-
deluded being is free from karma, and his actions are called 'panditviryam'
(wise strength).    **Verse 3:**   "Therefore, the actions of a deluded being
are called 'balaviryam', and the actions of a non-deluded being are called
'panditviryam'.  The existence of both 'balaviryam' and 'panditviryam' is the
reason for the respective actions of the child and the wise.    **Commentary:**
"The 'balaviryam' of an abhyavi (non-liberated being) is without beginning and
without end, while the 'balaviryam' of a bhavi (liberated being) is without
beginning but has an end.  The 'panditviryam' of a bhavi is always with a
beginning and an end.    **Verse 4:**   "Some learn the art of warfare to kill
living beings, and some learn mantras that destroy life."  **Commentary:**
"Some people learn the art of warfare, such as archery and swordsmanship, to
kill living beings.  They learn these skills with great enthusiasm, and they use
them to destroy life.  They are taught how to kill living beings with weapons,
and they are told that this is the way to achieve victory."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI vIryAdhyayanaM . majaM visayakasAyA NiddA vigahA ya paMcamI bhaNiyA  /  esa
pamAyapamAo niddiTTho vIyarAgehiM  // 1 // " chAyA - madyaM viSayAkaSAyA vikathA
nidrA capaMcamI bhaNitA  /  eSa pramAdapramAdo nirdiSTo vItarAgaiH  /  /
tamevambhUtaM pramAdaM karmopAdAnabhUtaM karma AhuH' uktavantastIrthakarAdayaH,
apramAdaM ca tathA'paramakarmakamAhuriti, etaduktaM bhavati-pramAdopahatasya
karma badhyate, sakarmaNazca yatkriyAnuSThAnaM tadvAlavIrya, tathA'pramattasya
karmAbhAvo bhavati, evaMvidhasya ca paNDitavIryaM bhavati, etacca bAlavIryaM
paNDitavIryamiti vA pramAdavataH sakarmaNo bAlavIryamapramattasyAkarmaNaH
paNDitavIryamityeva mAyojyaM, 'tabbhAvAdesao vAvI' ti tasya-bAlavIryasya
karmaNazca paNDitavIryasya vA bhAvaH sattA sa tadbhAvastenA''dezo-vyapadezaH
tataH, tadyathA-bAlavIryamabhavyAnAmanAdi aparyavasitaM bhavyAnAmanAdi
saparyavasitaM vA sAdisaparyavaveti, paNDitavIryaM tu sAdisaparyavasitameveti
// 3 //  tatra pramAdopahatasya sakarmaNo yadvAlavIryaM tadarzayitu mAha -
TIkArtha - prANI jisake dvArA sat anuSThAna se-uttama AcAra se rahita hote haiM,
use pramAda kahA jAtA hai, vaha madya Adi hai  /  kahA hai-vItarAga tIrthaMkaroM
ne madya, viSaya, kaSAya, nIMda tathA vikathA ina pA~coM ko pramAda kahA hai  /
vaha-pramAda karmoM kA upAdAna bhUta kA kAraNa rUpa hai  /  apramAda ko akarma
kahA gayA hai  /  pramAda ko karma tathA apramAda ko akarma kahe jAne kA yaha
abhiprAya hai ki pramAdohata-pramAda ke kAraNa bebhAna jIva karma baMdha karatA
hai| use sakarma-karmasahita jIva kA jo kriyAtmaka anuSThAna hotA hai, use
bAlavIrya kahA jAtA hai| jo puruSa apramatta-pramAda rahita hotA hai, usake
karttavya meM karma kA abhAva hai  /  ataH usa puruSa kA kArya.paMDita vIrya
kahA jAtA hai  /  yoM jo puruSa pramAdayukta aura karmayukta hai, usakA vIrya
bAlavIrya tathA jo pramAda zUnya evaM karmarahita usakA vIrya paNDita vIrya hai,
yaha jAnanA cAhie  /  bAlavIrya evaM paNDita vIrya ina donoM kI sattA yA
sadbhAva ke kAraNa-donoM ke hone se kramazaH bAla evaM paNDita kA vyavahAra hotA
hai| inameM una jIvoM kA jo abhavya hai, bAlavIrya anAdi Adi rahita tathA
ananta-antarahita hotA hai, tathA bhavya jIvoM kA anAdi-Adirahita tathA zAMta-
antasahita hotA hai, tathA sAdi-Adi sahita evaM zAnta-antasahita bhI hotA hai,
kintu paNDita vIrya, sAdi-Adi sahita tathA zAMta anta sahita hI hotA hai  /
pramAdopahata-pramAda se mUDha sakarmA-karmasahita puruSa kA jo bAla vIrya hotA
hai usakA digdarzana karAne hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM satthamege tu
sikkhaMtA, ativAyAya pANiNaM  /  ege maMte ahijaMti, pANabhUya viheDiNo  // 4 //
chAyA - zAstrameke tu zikSante, 'tipAtAya prANinAm  /  _eke mantrAnadhIyate
prANabhUtaviheThakAn  //  anuvAda - kaI ajJAnI jIva prANiyoM kA vinAza karane
hetu zastra vidyA kA abhyAsa karate haiM tathA kaI prANiyoM ke vidhvasaMka
mantroM kA adhyayana-sAdhana karate haiM  /  TIkA - zastraM-khaDgAdipraharaNaM
zAstraM vA dhanurvedAyurvedikaM prANyupamaIkAri tat suSThusAtagaurava gRddhA
'eke' kecana 'zikSante' udyamena gRhNanti, tacca zikSitaM sat 'prANinAM'
jantUnAM vinAzAya bhavati, tathAhi-tatropadizyate, evaM
vidhamAlIDhapratyAlIDhAdibhirjIve vyApAdayitavye sthAnaM vidheyaM, taduktam -
-395)

Page #424 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra states, "Cover the target with your fist, place
your sight on the fist. If your head does not tremble, know that the target has
been hit." (1) Thus, a special type of liquor called Abhayaniṣṭa should be given
to a person suffering from consumption, and a punishment like piercing with a
spear should be given to a thief. According to Chanakya, one should deceive
another for the sake of acquiring wealth. Thus, the Kama Shastra and other such
scriptures are studied by those who are of a wicked disposition. The practice of
weapons, archery, and other scriptures is all balavīrya, which means it is a
waste of energy. Some people study the Atharva Veda mantras for the purpose of
performing Ashvamedha, Naramedha, Sarvamedha, and other sacrifices, which are
destructive to beings. What kind of mantras are these? The Sutrakar explains
that those who are of a wicked disposition recite the mantras of the Rig Veda,
which cause suffering to beings with two senses or more, and to the earth and
other elements. In this regard, it is said: "Six hundred are employed, in the
middle of the day for animals. The words of the Ashvamedha are less than three
animals." (1) etc. (4) Now, the Sutrakar explains the word "saththa" in the
Sutra, which is used in the context of weapons. Commentary: Many men, driven by
the desire for pleasure and fame, learn the use of swords and other weapons, and
the scriptures of archery, with great effort and dedication. The knowledge they
acquire is for the destruction of animals, because these scriptures teach how to
kill living beings by aiming at specific points on the body, and by moving the
feet and hands in specific ways. It is said that the target should be covered
with the fist, and the sight should be placed on the fist. If the head does not
tremble while releasing the arrow, then the target is considered to be hit. In
the science of medicine, it is said that the juice of the Lavaka bird should be
given to a patient suffering from consumption. He should also be given
Abhayariṣṭa, which is a type of liquor. Chanakya's Arthashastra states that one
should deceive another for the sake of acquiring wealth. Therefore, these
scriptures, and the Kama Shastra, are studied by those who are of a wicked
disposition. The study of weapons, archery, and other scriptures is balavīrya,
which means it is a waste of energy. Some people study the Atharva Veda mantras
for the purpose of performing Ashvamedha, Naramedha, Sarvamedha, and other
sacrifices, which are destructive to beings. These mantras are of a wicked
nature. The Sutrakar explains that those who are of a wicked disposition recite
the mantras of the Rig Veda, which cause suffering to beings with two senses or
more, and to the earth and other elements. In this regard, it is said: "Six
hundred are employed, in the middle of the day for animals. The words of the
Ashvamedha are less than three animals." (1) etc. (4) Now, the Sutrakar explains
the word "saththa" in the Sutra, which is used in the context of weapons.
Commentary: Weapons, such as swords, are created by divine action, which is
guided by knowledge and mantras. There are five types of weapons: earthly,
watery, fiery, aerial, and mixed.  (396)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram "muSTinA''cchAdayellakSyaM, muSTau dRSTiM nivezayet
/  hataM lakSyaM vijJAnIyAdyadi mUrdhA na kampate  // 1 // " tathA evaM
lAvakarasaH kSayiNe deyo'bhayAniSTAkhyo madyavizeSazceti, tathA evaM zaurAdeH
zUlAropaNAdiko daNDo vidheyaH tathA cANakyAbhiprAyeNa paro
vaJcayitavyo'rthopAdAnArthaM tathA kAmazAstrAdikaM  /  mAdhyavasAyino'dhIyate,
tadevaM zastrasya dhanurvedAdeH zAstrasya vA yadabhyasanaM tatsarvaM, bAlavIrya,
kiJca eke kecana pApodayAt mantrAnabhicArakAnA (te)
tharvaNArazcameghapuruSameghasaMrvameghAdiyAgArthamadhIyate, kimbhUtAniti
darzayati-prANA' dvIndriyAdayaH 'bhUtAni' pRthivyAdIni teSAM 'vividham' aneka
prakAraM 'heTakAn' bAdhakAn RksaMsthAnIyAn mantrAn paThantIti, tathA coktam -
"SaT zatAni niyujyante, pazUnAM madhyame'hani  /  azvameghasya vacanAnyUnAni
pazubhistribhiH  // 1 // " ityAdi  // 4 //  adhunA 'sattha' mityetatsUtrapadaM
sUtrasparzikayA niyuktikAraH spaSTayitumAha - TIkArtha - kaI sukha aura
yazolipsA-lolupa puruSa-prANiyoM kA upamardana-vidhvaMsa vAle talavAra Adi
zastroM kA tathA dhanurveda Adi zAstroM kA bar3e udyama-lagana ke sAtha zikSaNa
prApta karate haiM  /  ina dvArA zikSitasIkhI huI vaha vidyA jaMtuoM ke vinAza-
hanana ke lie hotI hai kyoMki usa vidyA meM yaha upadeza diyA jAtA hai, sikhAyA
jAtA hai ki jIva ko mArane ke lie isa prakAra AlIr3a-pratyAlIr3a-nizAnA lagAne
kI viziSTa sthitiyoM meM hokara pairoM evaM hAthoM ko vizeSa rUpa meM Age pIche
kara sthita honA cAhie  /  kahA gayA hai ki lakSya-jahA~ nizAnA lagAnA ho yA
jisa para lagAnA ho, use apanI muTThI meM AcchAdita karanA cAhie-usake sAmane
apanI muTThI bAMdhakara avasthita honA cAhie  /  baMdhI huI muTThI para apanI
najara rakhanI cAhie  /  yoM usa para bANa chor3ate hue yadi apanA mastaka na
hileM to lakSita puruSa ko hat-marA huA mAnanA cAhie  /  vaidyaka zAstra meM
kahA gayA hai ki lAvaka-lave nAmaka pakSI kA rasa yakSmA-thArasisa ke rogI ko
denA cAhie  /  use abhayAriSTa jo eka prakAra kA madya hai vaha bhI denA cAhie
/  cANakya ke arthazAstra meM pratipAdita huA hai ki arthopAdAna hetu, dhana
prApti ke lie dUsare kI isa prakAra vaMcanA karanI cAhie-ThaganA cAhie  /  ata:
ina zAstroM ko aura kAmazAstra ko azubha adhavyasAya-dUSita pariNAmayukta puruSa
hI par3hate haiM  /  isa prakAra zastravidyA, hathiyAra calAne kI vidyA tathA
dhanurveda Adi zAstroM kA adhyayana bAla vIrya hai, yaha samajhanA cAhiye  /
kaI puruSa azubha karmoM ke udaya ke pariNAmasvarUpa azvamedha, naramedha,
sarvamedha Adi yajJoM ke uddezya se prANiyoM ke vinAzakArI atharvaveda ke
maMtroM ko par3hate haiM  /  ve mantra kisa prakAra ke haiM  /  sUtrakAra yaha
digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM-dvIndriya Adi prANiyoM tathA pRthvI Adi bhUtoM
ko vividha prakAra se klezotpAdaka Rgveda ke mantroM ko azubha vicArayukta
vyakti par3hate haiM  /  isa sambandha meM kahA gayA hai ki azvamedha yajJa ke
niyamAnusAra madhyAnha meM tIna kama chaH sau-pA~ca sau sattAnave pazuoM kA
niyojan-vyApAdana kiyA jAtA hai  /  niyuktikAra ne zastrazabda kI jo vyAkhyA kI
hai, tadviSayaka gAthA dvArA sUtra meM Aye zastra zabda ko spaSTa karane hetu
sUtrakAra yahA~ kahate haiM - satthaM asimAdIye vijAmaMte ya deva kammakayaM  /
patthivavAruNa aggeya vAU taha mIsagaM ceva  //  TIkA - zastraM-praharaNaMtacca
asiH-khaGgastadAdikaM, tathA vidyAdhiSThitaM, mantrAdhiSThitaM
devakarmakRtaMdivyakriyAniSpAditaM. tacca paJcavidhaM, tadyathA-pArthivaM vAruNa
mAgneyaM vayavyaM tathaivavyAdi mizraM yeti  /  kiJcAnyat  /  - (396)

Page #425 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation preserving Jain terms:  The Shri Viryaadhyayan Anuvad - The
weapon with which an attack is made is called a Shastra-hathiyaar. This includes
swords and other such weapons. When empowered by Vidya (spiritual knowledge),
Mantra (sacred formulas), Deva Karmakrit (divine actions), or Divya Kriya
(divine activities), it becomes an Astra. It is of five types - Parthiv
(earthly), Varuna (aquatic), Agneya (fiery), Vayavya (aerial), or a combination
of any two of these.  Maino katta maaya ya, kaambhoge samaarambhe. Hanta chetta
pagavibhatta, 'aayasaayaanugaamino' ||5||  Translation - The deceitful and
crafty people, through the use of Maya (illusion/deception), engage in sensual
pleasures. They are the killers, cutters, and mutilators - following their own
selfish interests.  Commentary - 'Maya' refers to the intellect involved in
deceiving and cheating others. Those who possess this Maya are called Mayavins
(deceitful). By creating deceptions and frauds, they, being prone to anger, ego,
and greed, indulge in the objects of senses (Kaambhoga) such as sound, touch,
etc. Alternatively, the phrase 'aarambhaaya tivattai' suggests that these
sensual-pleasure-seeking individuals engage in acts of violence, binding,
destroying, and commanding others for the sake of their own enjoyment and wealth
acquisition. Being desirous of their own happiness and averse to suffering, they
are polluted by passions and become killers, cutters of body parts like ears,
nose, etc., and mutilators.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI vIryAdhyayana anuvAda - praharaNa jisase prahAra kiyA jAtA hai, use zastra-
hathiyAra kahate haiM  /  talavAra Adi kA unameM samAveza hai  /
vidyAdhiSThita, mantrAdhiSThita, deva karmakRta tathA divya kriyA se niSpaMda
hotA hai, taba astra hotA hai| vaha pArthiva, vAruNa, Agneya, vAyavya tathA
inameM se kinhIM do se mizrita yoM pA~ca prakAra kA hotA hai  /  mAiNo kaTTa
mAyA ya, kAmabhoge samArabhe  /  haMtA chettA pagabibhattA, ' AyasAyANugAmiNo
// 5 //  chAyA - mAyinaH kRtvA mAyAzca, kAmabhogAn samArambhante  /
hantAracchettAraH prakarttayitAra AtmasAtAnugAminaH  //  anuvAda - mAyAvI-chalI
puruSa, mAyA-chalakapaTa dvArA dUsaroM kA dhana Adi haraNa kara kAma bhogoM kA
sevana karate haiM  /  apanA sukha cAhane vAle ve, prANiyoM kA hanana-mAranA,
chedana-chinna bhinna karanA, karatanakATanA, cIranA Adi karate haiM  /  TIkA -
'mAyA' paravaJcanAdi(tmi)kA buddhiH sA vidyate yeSAM te mAyAvinasta evambhUtA
mAyAH - paravaJcanAni kRtvA eka grahaNe tajjAtIyagrahaNAdeva krodhino mAnino
lobhinaH santaH 'kAmAn' icchArupAn tathA bhogAMzca zabdAdi viSayarUpAn
'samArabhante' sevante pAThAntaraM vA 'AraMbhAya tivaTTai' tribhiH
manovAkkAyairArambhArthaM vartate, bahUn jIvAn vyApAdayan badhnan apadhvaMsayan
AjJApayan bhogArthI vittopArjanArthaM pravartata ityarthaH, tadevam
'AtmasAtAnugAminaH' svasukhalipsavo duHkhalipsavo duHkhadviSo viSayeSu gRddhAH
kaSAya kaluSitAntarAtmAnaH santa evambhUtA bhavanti, tadyathA-'hantAraH'
prANityApAdayitArastathA chettAraH karNanAsikAdestathA prakartayitAraH
pRSThAdarA deriti  // 5 //  tadetatkathamityAha - TIkArtha - vaha buddhi jisase
pravaMcanA kI jAtI hai, dUsaroM ko ThagA jAtA hai, mAyA kahI jAtI hai| jinameM
vaha hotI hai ve puruSa mAyAvI-chalI yA kapaTI kahalAte haiM  /  mAyA dvArA
anyoM ko Thagakara vaise kapaTI puruSa sAMsArika bhogoM kA sevana karate haiM  /
eka ke grahaNa se tajjAtIya-usase sambaddha ora bhI gRhita ho jAte haiM isalie
yahA~ mAyAvI ke sAtha-sAtha krodhI, mAnI-abhimAna yukta, lobhI-dhanAdi ke lobha
meM grasta jIva bhI A jAte haiM ve pUrvokta rUpa meM zabdAdi viSayoM kA sevana
karate haiM  /  aisA samajha lenA cAhie  /  ve AraMbhAya tivaTTai aisA
pAThAntara bhI prApta hotA hai, jisakA yaha tAtparya hai ki bhogArthI viSaya
bhoga ko cAhane vAlA puruSa mana, vacana tathA zarIra ina tInoM dvArA Arambha,
hiMsA Adi meM vartanazIla rahatA-lagA rahatA hai  /  vaha bahuta se prANiyoM ko
mAratA huA, bAMdhatA huA, unakA apadhvaMsa-vinAza karatA huA, unako apanI AjJA
meM pravRtta karatA huA-unase manacAhe kAma letA huA, dhanopArjana meM pravRtta-
tatpara rahatA hai  /  apanI sukha suvidhA ke abhilASI, duHkha kleza ke dveSI
viSaya gRddha-bhoga lolUpa tathA kaSAyoM se kaluSita anta:karaNa yukta puruSa
isa prakAra pApa karma karate haiM ve prANiyoM kA vyApAdana karate haiM  /
unake kAna, nAsikA Adi kA chedana karate haiM, kATa dete haiM unake peTa pITha
Adi ko cIra DAlate haiN| ve ye saba kisa prakAra karate haiM sUtrakAra
pratipAdana kara rahe haiM  /  . 397

Page #426 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 6**  **Text:**  * श्री सूत्रकृताङ्ग
सूत्रम् * मनसा वयसा चेव, कायसा चेव परमो वावि, दुहावि य * आरओ * छाया * - * - *
अनुवाद असयंत-संयत रहित पुरुष मन द्वारा, वाणी द्वारा, शरीर द्वारा तथा यदि शरीर
में सामर्थ्य न हो तो, मन-वचन द्वारा इस लोक एवं परलोक के निमित्त प्राणियों का हनन
करते हैं । औरों द्वारा वैसा * करवाते हैं । * टीका तदेतत्प्राण्युपमर्दनं मनसा
वाचा कायेन कृतकारितानुमतिभिश्च 'अन्तशः ' कायेनाशक्तोऽपि तन्दुलमत्स्यवन्मनसैव
पापानुष्ठानुमत्या कर्मबध्नातीति, तथा आरतः परतश्चेति लौकिकी वाचो युक्ति रित्येवं
पर्यालोच्य माना ऐहिकामुष्मिकयो:‘द्विधापि' स्वयंकरणेन परकरणेन
चासंयताजीवोपघातकारिण इत्यर्थः ॥६॥ साम्प्रतं जीवोपघात विपाकदर्शनार्थमाह * - *
मनसा वचसा चैव कायेन चवान्तशः । आरतः परतोवाऽपि द्विधाऽपि चासंयताः ॥ * - * अंतसो ।
* असंजया ॥ ६ ॥ * टीकार्थ – असंयत पुरुष मन से, वचन से, तथा काया से कृत-स्वयं
करना, कारित- औरों से कराना तथा अनुमति-करते हुये का अनुमोदन करना, यों प्राणियों
का उपमर्दन - नाश करते हैं । शरीर का सामर्थ्य न रहने पर तन्दूल मत्स्य की ज्यों मन
द्वारा ही अशुभ कर्म बाँध लेते हैं । यह केवल लौकिक शास्त्रों की युक्ति या
प्रतिपत्ति है । ऐसा पर्यालोचित कर-विचार कर वे असंयत पुरुष इस लोक और परलोक के
निमित्त स्वयं प्राणियों का घात करते हैं, औरों से करवाते हैं । इस प्रकार ये
जीवोपघातकारी प्राणियों का उपघात करने वाले हैं । अब जीवोपघात -जीव हिंसा करने के
फल का दिग्दर्शन कराने हेतु सूत्रकार कहते हैं 1 * - * वनेराइं कुव्वई वेरी, तओ
वेरेहिं रज्जती । पावोवगा य आरंभा, दुक्खफासा य अंतसो ॥७॥ * छाया वैराणि करोति
वैरी, ततो वैरै रज्यते । * पापोपगा आरम्भाः, दुःखस्पर्शा अन्तशः ॥ * अनुवाद - जो
पुरुष किसी जीव की हिंसा करता है, वह उसके साथ अनेक जन्मों के लिए शत्रुता बाँधता
है । आरम्भ-जीवों की हिंसा पाप उत्पन्न करती है और उसका फल दुःखमय होता है । * टीका
वैरमस्यास्तीति वैरी, स जीवोपमर्द्दकारी जन्मशतानुबन्धीनि वैराणि करोति, ततोऽपि च
वैरादपैरवैरैरनुरज्यते-संबध्यते, वैरपरम्परानुषङ्गीभवतीत्यर्थः किमिति ?, यथः पापं
उप-सामीप्येन गच्छन्तीति पापोपगाः, कएते ? आरम्भाः' सावद्यानुष्ठानरूपाः 'अन्तशो
'विपाककाले दुःखं स्पृशन्तीति दुःख स्पर्शा - असातोदय विपाकिनो भवन्तीति ॥७॥
किञ्चान्यत् * - * टीकार्थ - जिसके वैर होता है या जो वैरयुक्त होता है, उसे वैरी
कहा जाता है । वैसा जीवों का उपमर्दन करने वाला पुरुष सैकड़ों जन्मों तक के लिए
अनुबद्ध रहने वाला वैर-शत्रुभाव उत्पन्न करता है । उस एक वैर-शत्रुत्व के कारण वह
अनेक वैरों में सम्बद्ध-परिग्रहित हो जाता है अर्थात् वह वैर एक परम्परा पकड़ * 398
**Translation:**  **The Sutra Kritanga Sutra**  **Verse 6**  **Text:**  * The
Sutra Kritanga Sutra * By mind, speech, and body, or even by mind and speech if
the body is unable, the unrestrained person destroys beings in this world and
the next. They also cause others to do so. * Commentary: This destruction of
beings by mind, speech, and body, by doing, causing to do, and approving, is
called "Antasha." Even if the body is unable, like a grain of rice and a fish,
they bind karma by the mind alone, by approving of evil deeds. Thus, it is said
in the worldly scriptures that they are "Arahant" and "Parata." Considering
this, the unrestrained person, by doing it themselves and causing others to do
it, is a destroyer of beings in both this world and the next. This is the
meaning. ||6|| Now, to show the result of destroying beings, the Sutra-maker
says: * - * By mind, speech, and body, or even by mind and speech if the body is
unable, the unrestrained person destroys beings in this world and the next. They
also cause others to do so. * - * Antasha. * Unrestrained. ||6|| * Commentary:
The unrestrained person destroys beings by mind, speech, and body, by doing it
themselves, causing others to do it, and approving of it. Even if the body is
unable, like a grain of rice and a fish, they bind karma by the mind alone, by
approving of evil deeds. This is just a worldly scripture's logic or
understanding. Considering this, the unrestrained person, by doing it themselves
and causing others to do it, is a destroyer of beings in both this world and the
next. Thus, they are destroyers of beings. Now, to show the result of destroying
beings, the Sutra-maker says: * - * The enemy creates enmity, and then is ruled
by enmity. The beginnings of evil deeds are the cause of suffering, and they
touch within. ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram maNasA vayasA ceva, kAyasA ceva paramo vAvi, duhAvi ya
Arao chAyA - - anuvAda asayaMta-saMyata rahita puruSa mana dvArA, vANI dvArA,
zarIra dvArA tathA yadi zarIra meM sAmarthya na ho to, mana-vacana dvArA isa
loka evaM paraloka ke nimitta prANiyoM kA hanana karate haiM  /  auroM dvArA
vaisA karavAte haiM  /  TIkA tadetatprANyupamardanaM manasA vAcA kAyena
kRtakAritAnumatibhizca 'antazaH ' kAyenAzakto'pi tandulamatsyavanmanasaiva
pApAnuSThAnumatyA karmabadhnAtIti, tathA ArataH paratazceti laukikI vAco yukti
rityevaM paryAlocya mAnA aihikAmuSmikayo:'dvidhApi' svayaMkaraNena parakaraNena
cAsaMyatAjIvopaghAtakAriNa ityarthaH  // 6 //  sAmprataM jIvopaghAta
vipAkadarzanArthamAha - manasA vacasA caiva kAyena caivAntazaH  /  ArataH
paratovA'pi dvidhA'pi cAsaMyatAH  //  - aMtaso  /  asaMjayA  //  6  //  TIkArtha
- asaMyata puruSa mana se, vacana se, tathA kAyA se kRta-svayaM karanA, kArita-
auroM se karAnA tathA anumati-karate huye kA anumodana karanA, yoM prANiyoM kA
upamardana - nAza karate haiM  /  zarIra kA sAmarthya na rahane para tandUla
matsya kI jyoM mana dvArA hI azubha karma bA~dha lete haiM  /  yaha kevala
laukika zAstroM kI yukti yA pratipatti hai  /  aisA paryAlocita kara-vicAra kara
ve asaMyata puruSa isa loka aura paraloka ke nimitta svayaM prANiyoM kA ghAta
karate haiM, auroM se karavAte haiM  /  isa prakAra ye jIvopaghAtakArI prANiyoM
kA upaghAta karane vAle haiM  /  aba jIvopaghAta -jIva hiMsA karane ke phala kA
digdarzana karAne hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM 1 - vanerAiM kuvvaI verI, tao
verehiM rajjatI  /  pAvovagA ya AraMbhA, dukkhaphAsA ya aMtaso  // 7 //  chAyA
vairANi karoti vairI, tato vairai rajyate  /  pApopagA ArambhAH, duHkhasparzA
antazaH  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa kisI jIva kI hiMsA karatA hai, vaha usake sAtha
aneka janmoM ke lie zatrutA bA~dhatA hai  /  Arambha-jIvoM kI hiMsA pApa utpanna
karatI hai aura usakA phala duHkhamaya hotA hai  /  TIkA vairamasyAstIti vairI,
sa jIvopamarddakArI janmazatAnubandhIni vairANi karoti, tato'pi ca
vairAdapairavairairanurajyate-saMbadhyate, vairaparamparAnuSaGgIbhavatItyarthaH
kimiti ?, yathaH pApaM upa-sAmIpyena gacchantIti pApopagAH, kaete ? ArambhAH'
sAvadyAnuSThAnarUpAH 'antazo 'vipAkakAle duHkhaM spRzantIti duHkha sparzA -
asAtodaya vipAkino bhavantIti  // 7 //  kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha - jisake vaira hotA
hai yA jo vairayukta hotA hai, use vairI kahA jAtA hai  /  vaisA jIvoM kA
upamardana karane vAlA puruSa saikar3oM janmoM taka ke lie anubaddha rahane vAlA
vaira-zatrubhAva utpanna karatA hai  /  usa eka vaira-zatrutva ke kAraNa vaha
aneka vairoM meM sambaddha-parigrahita ho jAtA hai arthAt vaha vaira eka
paramparA pakar3a 398

Page #427 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Sri Viryaadhyayanam  **This is because the sins, the sins that walk with the
sins, the sins that are connected with the sins, the Saavady Anushthan - the
Ashubhkarma, when they mature, when the time comes for them to bear fruit, then
they produce suffering, that is, their Vipaak-Paripaak manifests as
Asataavedaniya - in the form of suffering.**  **I**  **Samparayam**
**Niyachchanti, Antadukkadakarino. Raagadosassya Bala, Paavam Kuvvamti Te Bahu.
||8||**  **Chhaya Samparayam Niyachchantyatmadushkrit Karino. Raagadveshasrita
Bala, Paapam Kurvanti Te Bahu. ||**  **Anuvaad**  **Aatma Dushkritkari - The
beings who perform their own corrupt actions - sinful actions, bind the
Saamparayik Karma. Raagadveshasrita - The ignorant ones who are attached to
attachment and aversion, bind many sins.**  **Teeka - 'Samparayam Niyachchanti'
etc., there are two types of Karma - Iryapath and Saamparayik. There,
Saamparayik is derived from Baadarakashayas. Because it is oppressive to the
being, it is connected with enmity, 'Aatmadushkritkarino' - those who are the
creators of their own sins, 'Niyachchanti' - bind them. It is further specified
- 'Raagadveshasrita' - those who are polluted by the Kashayas, their inner
selves are like children, because they are devoid of the discrimination between
the good and the bad. Such ignorant people 'Paapam' - do many 'Bahus' - infinite
'Kurvanti' - actions.**  **Thus, the Sutrakar, desiring to show the strength of
the child, says - 'Evam Balaviryam' - 'Iryapath' and 'Saamparayik' are two types
of Karma. The meaning of 'Samparay' is the Baadarastahul Kashayas. The evil
deeds that arise from it, because they are connected with enmity, lead to the
violence of beings. Thus, the beings bind this Karma. While describing the
characteristics of those who perform sinful actions, it is stated that those who
are attached to attachment and aversion - those who are filled with attachment
and aversion, whose inner selves are polluted by the Kashayas, are ignorant like
children, because they are devoid of the knowledge of the good and the bad. Such
ignorant people commit infinite sins. Thus, the Sutrakar, showing the strength
of the child and concluding it, says - 'Evam Itto'.**  **Chhaya**
**Sakarmaviriy, Balanan Akarmaviriy, Pandiyanam**  **-**  **Tu**  **Etath
Sakarmaviriy, Balanan Tu Praveditam. Ato'karmaviriy Pandithanam Shrunuta Me.
||**  **Anuvaad - The Sakarmaviriy of the children - the ignorant ones, has been
discussed. Now, from here, listen to me about the Akarmaviriy of the Panditas -
the wise ones.**  **Praveditam. Suneh Me. ||9||**  **Teeka - 'Etath' - what was
shown earlier, for example, some people learn weapons or scriptures for the
purpose of killing beings, others learn mantras that harm beings, and others,
who are magicians, perform various kinds of magic for the sake of enjoyment. **

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI vIryAdhyayanaM letA hai kyoMki pApoM paga- pApa ke sAtha calane vAle pApoM
se jur3e hue sAvadya anuSThAna - azubhakarma jaba paripakva hote haiM, unake
phala dene kA samaya AtA hai, taba ve duHkha utpanna karate haiM arthAt unakA
vipAka-paripAka asAtAvedanIya ke rUpa meM-du:kha ke rUpa meM udita prakaTita
hotA hai  /  I saMparAyaM NiyacchaMti, antadukkaDakAriNo  /  rAgadosassiyA bAlA,
pAvaM kuvvaMti te bahuM  // 8 //  chAyA samparAyaM niyacchantyAtmaduSkRta
kAriNaH  /  rAgadveSAzritA bAlAH, pApaM kurvanti te bahu  //  anuvAda Atma
duSkRtakArI - svayaM dUSita kArya-pApa kArya karane vAle jIva sAmparAyik karma
bA~dhate rAga dveSAzrita- rAga evaM dveSa meM saMlagna bAla ajJajana bahuta
pApoM kA baMdha karate haiM  /  TIkA- 'samparAyaM NiyacchaMtI 'tyAdi, dvividhaM
karma - IryApathaM sAmparAyikaM ca, tatra samparAyA-bAdarakaSAyAstebhya AgataM
sAmparayikaM tat jIvopamarddakatvena vairAnuSaGgitayA 'AtmaduSkRtakAriNaH '
svapApavidhAyinaH santo 'niyacchanti' badhnanti tAneva vizinaSTi -
'rAgadveSAzritAH ' kaSAyakaluSi tAntarAtmAnaH sadasadvivekavikalatvAt bAlA iva
bAlAH, te caivambhUtAH 'pApam' asadvedyaM 'bahu' anantaM 'kurvanti' vidadhati
// 8 //  evaM bAlavIryaM pradaryopasaMjighRkSurAhaTIkArtha - iryA patha evaM
sAmparAyika ke rUpa meM karma ke do prakAra haiN| samparAya kA Azaya
bAdarasthUla kaSAya se hai, usase jo duSkRt hotA hai, vairAnusaMgItA zatrubhAva
se sambaddha hone ke kAraNa jo jIvoM kI hiMsA hotI hai, usase prANI isa karma kA
baMdha karate haiN| vaise pApI vidhAyI - pApa karma karane vAle puruSoM kI
vizeSatA batAte hue pratipAdana karate haiM ki rAga tathA dveSa se Azrita -
sagamaya tathA dveSamaya bhAvoM se ApUrNa, kaSAya se kaluSita antaHkaraNa yukta
puruSa sat aura asat ke jJAna se zUnya hone ke kAraNa eka bAlaka kI jyoM ajJa
haiN| aise jJAna vivarjita jana ananta pApa karate haiN| isa prakAra bAlavIrya
vIrya ko pradarzita kara usakA upasaMhAra karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM evaM
itto chAyA sakammavIriyaM, bAlANaM akammaviriyaM, paMDiyANaM - tu etat
sakarmavIryyaM, bAlAnAntu praveditam  /  ato'karmavIryyaM paNDitAnAM zRNuta me
//  anuvAda - bAlakoM-ajJAnI janoM ke sakarma vIrya kA pravedana vivecana kiyA
gayA hai| aba yahA~ se paNDitoM- jJAnI janoM ke akarma vIrya kA vivecana mujhase
suno| paveditaM  /  suNeha me  // 9 //  TIkA 'etat ' yat prAk pradarzitaM,
tadyathA prANinAmatipAtArthaM zastraM zAstraM vA kecana zikSante tathA pare
vidyAmantrAn prANibAdhakAnadhIyate tathA'nye mAyAvino nAnAprakArAMmAyAM kRtvA
kAmabhogArthamArambhAn kurvate 399

Page #428 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra states that some people, driven by enmity,
engage in actions that perpetuate animosity. For example, Jamadagni destroyed
Kartavirya in retaliation for his wife's mistreatment. Kartavirya's son then
killed Jamadagni, leading to Jamadagni's son, Parashurama, making the earth
devoid of Kshatriyas seven times. Subsequently, Kartavirya's son, Subhume,
killed Brahmanas twenty-one times. As it is said: "A powerful man is not
satisfied with an act of retaliation equal to the offense. He desires to inflict
greater pain on his enemy and strives to eradicate him completely." (1)  Thus,
beings under the influence of passions engage in actions that perpetuate
animosity, extending to their children and grandchildren. This is the strength
of those who engage in actions, the ignorant and the careless. It has been
explained and elaborated upon.  Now, I will describe the strength of those who
do not engage in actions, the wise. Listen to me. As promised, the Sutrakar
says:  "Free from material attachments, completely liberated from all bonds, he
destroys the evil karma, like fire consuming fuel, from within." (10)
Commentary: "Dravya" refers to a being worthy of liberation. "Dravya cha bhavye"
(material possessions belong to the worthy) indicates that he is free from
passions, devoid of attachment and aversion. Alternatively, it could mean that
he is like a liberated being, with minimal passions. As it is said:  -400

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kecana punarapare vairiNastatkurvanti yena
vairarainubadhyante (te) tathAhi-jamadagninA svabhAryA'kAryavyatikAre kRtavIryo
vinAzitaH, tatputreNa tu kArtavIryeNa punarjamadagniH, jamadagnisutena
parazurAmeNa saptavArAn niHkSatrApRthivIkRtA, punaH kArtavIryasutena tu
subhUmena tri:saptakRtvo brAhmaNA vyApAditAH, tathA coktam - "apakArasamena
karmaNA na * narastuSTi mupaiti zaktimAn  /  adhikAM kuru vai (te') riyAtanAM
dviSatAM jAtama zeSa muddharet  // 1 // " tadevaM kaSAyavazagAH
prANinastakurvanti yena putrapautrAdiSvapi vairAnubandho bhavati,
tadetatsakarmaNAM bAlAnAM vIryaM tuzabdAtpramAdavatAM ca prakarSeNa veditaM
praveditaM pratipAditamiti yAvat, ata UrdhvamakarmaNAM-paNDitAnAM yadvIrya
tanme-mama kathayataH zRNuta yUyamiti  // 9 //  yathA pratijJAtamevAha -
TIkArtha - jaisA pahale vivecana kiyA gayA hai, prANiyoM kA atipAta-nAza karane
hetu kaI loga zastravidyA tathA zAstra vidyA kA abhyAsa karate haiM evaM kaI
anya loga aisI vidyAoM aura maMtroM kA sAdhana karate haiM jinase dUsaroM ko
kaSTa diyA jA sake  /  katipaya, kapaTI, mAyAvI, chala prapaMca kara kAma bhoga
ke nimitta hiMsA karate haiM, tathA kitane hI aise karma karate haiM jisase
zatrutA kI paramparA anubaddha hotI hai  /  udAharaNa hai-jamadagni ne apanI
bhAryA ke sAtha kakarma karane ke pratikAra ke rUpa meM katavIrya kA nAza kara
DAlA thA  /  isa vaira ke kAraNa usake putra kArtavIrya ne jamadagni kA vadha
kara DAlA  /  phira jamadagni ke putra parazurAma ne sAta bAra isa bhUmi ko
niHkSatriya-kSatriya vihIna kara diyA  /  tatpazcAt kAtavIrya ke putra subhuma
ne ikkIsa bAra brAhmaNoM kA vyApAdanavinAza kiyA kahA hai  /  apakAra kA-apane
prati kiye gae viruddhAcaraNa kA usI ke sadRza apakAra yA viruddhAcaraNa kara
zakti zAlI puruSa santuSTa nahIM hotA vaha to zatru ko adhika se adhika pIr3A
denA cAhatA hai aura prayatna karatA hai ki usakA mUloccheda ho jAya  /  isa
prakAra kaSAya ke vazagAmI-adhIna hokara prANI aise kArya karate haiM jisase
putra-pautra paryanta vaha vaira calatA rahatA hai  /  isa prakAra sakarma-
karmayukta bala ajJAnI janoM kA vIrya pravedita-viSada rUpa meM pratipAdita kiyA
gayA hai  /  yahA~ tU zabda se pramAda yukta janoM kA bhI grahaNa hai  /  isase
Age akarmA-karma rahita, paNDita-jJAnIjanoM ke vIrya kA maiM varNana karatA hU~
/  tuma loga suno  /  jaisA pratijJAta-saMsUcita kiyA hai tadnusAra sUtrakAra
kahate davvie baMdhaNummukke, savvao chinnabaMdhaNe  /  paNolla pAvakaM kamma,
sallaM kaMtati aMtaso  // 10 //  chAyA - dravyo bandhanAnmuktaH, sarvatazchinna
bandhanaH  /  praNudya pApakaM karma, zalyaM kRntatyantazaH  //  anuvAda -
bhavya-mukti prApta karane yogya puruSa saba prakAra ke bandhanoM ko uchinna
kara-kATakara evaM unase chUTakara, pApa kRtya kA parihAra kara aSTavidha karmoM
ko naSTa kara DAlatA hai  /  TIkA - 'dravyo' bhavyo muktigamanayogyaH 'dravyaM
ca bhavye' iti vacanAt rAgadveSavirahAdvA dravya bhUto'kaSAyItyarthaH, yadi vA
vItarAga iva vItarAgo'lpakaSAya ityarthaH, tathA coktam - -400

Page #429 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vitaraga - **Shri Veeryadhyayana.** "Can anyone be said to be free from
passions (kashaya) while dwelling in the realm of passions? Even one who
restrains passions is similar to one who has passions." (1) **Shadow:** "Can it
be said that anyone is free from passions while dwelling in the realm of
passions? Even one who restrains passions is similar to one who has passions."
(2)  What is the nature of such a person? The text explains: "Free from bondage"
- free from passions, which are the essence of bondage. Bondage arises from
passions being the cause of karmic existence. As it is said, "Bondage is due to
passions." Or, one who is free from bondage is like one who is free from
bondage. Similarly, "in all ways" - subtle and gross - "cut off" - eliminated -
"bondage" - passions - one who has cut off bondage, "drives away" - propels -
"sin" - karmic causes - and, like a surgeon removing a thorn, removes the
remaining karma, destroys it completely, without any residue. Another reading is
"he cuts off the thorn from himself." (10)  To show what he uses to remove the
thorn, the text says:  **Commentary:** A person who is fit for liberation is
called a "bhavy." He is also called a "dravya." The use of the word "dravya" in
the sense of "bhavy" is established by the sutra "dravya-ncha-bhavy-e" in
Panini's grammar. Or, a person who is free from passions, which are the essence
of "dravya," is a "dravya." Or, a person who has few passions is called a
"dravya." It is said that no one is free from passions while dwelling in the
sixth and seventh stages of the realm of passions. Can this be said? The answer
is that even one who has passions, but restrains them from arising, is similar
to one who is free from passions. In that sense, he is free from passions. What
is the nature of such a person? The text explains that he is free from the
bondage of passions, because passions are the cause of bondage only when they
lead to karmic existence. It is said that the state of karmic bondage is due to
passions.  Or, he is free from bondage because he is like one who is free from
bondage. He is "cut off from bondage" because he eliminates subtle and gross
passions. His bondage is cut off. He removes the karmic influx, which is the
cause of sin, like a surgeon removing a thorn, and destroys the remaining karma
completely. Here, another reading is "he cuts off the thorn from himself."  This
means that he cuts off and destroys the eight types of karma, which are like
thorns clinging to his soul.  The text then shows what he uses to remove the
karmic thorns:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vItarAga - zrI vIryAdhyayanaM . 'kiM sakkA vottuM je sarAgadhammaMmi koi
akasAyI  /  saMtevi jo kasAe nigiNhai so'vi tattullo  // 1 //  chAyA- kiM
zakyAvaktuM yatsarAgadharme ko'pya kssaayH| sato'pi yaH kaSAyAnnigRNhAti so'pi
tttulyH||2|| sa ca kimbhUto bhavatIti darzayati-bandhanAt-kaSAyAtmakAnmukto
bandhanonmuktaH, bandhanatvaM tu kasAyANAM karmasthiti hetutvAt, tathA
coktam-"baMdhaTThiI kasAyavasA" kaSAyavazAt iti, yadivA bandhanonmukta iva
bandhanonmuktaH tathA'para : 'sarvata:' sarvaprakAreNa sUkSmabAdararUpaM
'chinnam' apanItaM 'bandhana' kaSAyAtmakaM yena sa chinnabandhanaH, tathA
'praNudya' prerya 'pApaM' karmakAraNabhUtAnvA'' zravAnapanIya zalyavacchalyaM-
zeSakaM karma tat kRntatiapanayati antazo-niravazeSato vighaTayati, pAThAntaraM
vA 'sallaM kaMtaI appaNo' tti zalyabhUtaM yadaSTaprakAraM karma tadAtmanaH
sambandhi kRntati-chinattItyarthaH  // 10 //
yadupAdAyazalyamapanayatitaddarzayitumAha - TIkArtha - jo puruSa mukti prApta
karane meM yogya hotA hai, vaha bhavya kahalAtA hai  /  use dravya bhI kahate
haiM  /  pANIniya vyAkaraNa meM Aye 'dravyaMca-bhavye' satra dvArA bhavya ke
artha meM dravya pada kA prayoga siddha hai athavA virahita-pRthak hone ke
kAraNa jo puruSa dravyabhUta-kaSAya rahita hai, vaha dravya hai| athavA jo
puruSa  /  alpakaSAya hai, vaha dravya kahA jAtA hai  /  kahA gayA hai sarAga
dharma meM avasthita-chaThe, sAtaveM gaNa sthAna meM vidyamAna vidyamAna koI
puruSa kaSAya rahita hai  /  kyA aisA kahA jA sakatA hai ? uttara meM batalAyA
gayA hai ki kaSAya ke hone para bhI jo puruSa unako udaya meM Ane se roke rahatA
hai vaha bhI vItarAga ke sadaza hI hai  /  usa apekSA se kaSAya rahita hai  /
vaha puruSa kaisA hotA hai ? isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM
ki vaha puruSa kaSAyAtmaka bandhana se mukta hai kyoMki kaSAyoM kA bandhanatva
tabhI hotA hai jaba ve karmasthiti ke hetu hoM  /  kahA gayA hai ki karmoM ke
bandhana kI sthiti kaSAya ke vaza meM hai  /  athavA vaha puruSa bandhana mukta
puruSa ke sadRza hone ke kAraNa bandhana mukta-bandhana se chUTA huA hai  /
vaha dUsare sUkSma evaM sthUla kaSAyoM kA chedanaapanayana karane ke kAraNa
chinna bandhana hai  /  usake bandhana chinna bandhana haiM  /  pApoM ke kAraNa
bhUta AzravoM kA apanayana kA zalya-kAMTe kI jyoM avaziSTa karmoM ko nizeSa rUpa
meM kATa DAlatA hai, sampUrNata: naSTa kara detA hai  /  yahA~ 'sallaM kantai
appaNo' zalyaM kintati AtmanaH aisA pAThAntaraM prApta hotA hai  /  isakA
abhiprAya yaha hai ki vaha puruSa lage hue zalya-kAMTe kI taraha apanI AtmA ke
sAtha saMzliSTa aSTavidha karmoM ko chinna naSTa kara DAlatA hai  /  jisakA
Azraya lekara vaha puruSa zalya rUpa karmoM kA apanayana karatA hai, usakA
digdarzana karAte hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM - neyAuyaM suyakkhAyaM, uvAdAya
samIhae  /  bhujo bhujo duhAvAsaM, asuhatta tahA tahA  // 11 //  chAyA - netAraM
svAkhyAta, mupAdAya samIhate  /  bhUyo bhUyo duHkhAvAsa, mazubhatvaM tathA tathA
//  anuvAda - tIrthaMkaroM ne mokSa kI ora le jAne vAle mArga kA-samyak darzana
jJAnacAritrAtmaka patha kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai  /  ataeva buddhizIla puruSa inheM
svIkAra kara mokSapatha kI ora gamanodyata ho  /  bAlavIrya 1401)

Page #430 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states: Ignorance-based vigor repeatedly
causes suffering and pain to the soul. As the soul experiences suffering, its
inauspicious consequences increase.  **Commentary:** A **Nayanashila** leader is
one who guides towards liberation. Here, the term "leader" is derived from the
root "ni" with the suffix "trin" according to the **Taachchhelika-trin**
grammar. One who leads or guides towards the right path is called a leader or
guide. Here, the **Samyak**, **Jnana**, **Darshan**, and **Charitra**-based path
to liberation is referred to as the leader, or the **Shruta** and
**Charitra**-based Dharma is considered the leader, as it guides the soul
towards liberation. The **Tirthankaras** have explained this path as the leader
of liberation. Therefore, wise individuals embrace this path and strive through
meditation, study, and other efforts. The Sutrakar encourages the soul to ascend
the path of meditation, stating that **Balaviry** is rooted in endless births,
both past, present, and future, meaning that those with **Balaviry** repeatedly
wander through places of suffering like hell, and due to their inauspicious
actions and consequences, their inauspiciousness increases. Thus, those who
contemplate the suffering nature of the world are drawn towards Dharma and
meditation.  **Thanee:** Various abodes exist, but the world is not permanent.
This abode is impermanent, there is no happiness here.  **Shadow:** The
inhabitants of various abodes will surely abandon them. This abode is
impermanent, even with relatives and friends.  **Translation:** The rulers of
various abodes will inevitably be removed from their positions. The
companionship of relatives and friends is also impermanent.  **Commentary:**
Now, addressing the concept of permanence, the text states that those who have
abodes are the inhabitants, such as Indra in the celestial realm, the thirty
companions of Trayastrimsa, and in humans, the Chakravarti, Baladeva, Vasudeva,
and Mahamandala leaders. Similarly, in the animal realm, there are various
abodes like the **Yani** and **Chidi** realms, and these abodes are all diverse,
ranging from the highest to the lowest and the middle. These inhabitants will
surely abandon their abodes, there is no doubt about it. As it is said:  "All
abodes, both in heaven and here, are impermanent. The happiness of gods, demons,
and humans is also impermanent."  Similarly, the companionship with relatives,
friends, and allies is also impermanent. As it is said:  (402

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  ajJAna mUlaka parAkrama jIva ko punaH punaH kaSTa
detA hai, duHkha detA hai  /  jIva jyoM jyoM duHkha bhogatA hai usake azubha
pariNAma bar3hate jAte haiN| TIkA - nayanazIlo netA, nayatestAcchIlikastRn, sa
cAtra samyagdarzana jJAnacAritrAtmako mokSamArgaH zrutacAritrarUpo vA dharmo
mokSanayanazIlatvAt gRhyate, taM mArga dharma vA mokSaM prati netAraM suSThu
tIrthakarAdibhivAkhyAtaM svAkhyAtaM tam 'upAdAya' gRhItvA 'samyak' 'mokSAya
Ihate-ceSTate dhyAnAdhyayanAdAvudyamaM vidhatte, dharmadhyAnarohaNA
lambanAhAya-'bhUyo bhUyaH' paunaH punyena yadvAlavIryaM tadatItAnAgatAnanta
bhava grahaNe-(gra. 5000) bu duHkha mAvAsayatIti duHkhAvAsaM vartate, yathA-
yathA ca bAlavIryavAn narakAdiSu duHkhAvAseSu paryaTati tathA tathA
cAsyAzubhAdhyavasAyitvAdazubhameva pravardhate ityevaM saMsAra
svarUpamanuprekSamANasya dharmadhyAnaM pravartata iti  // 21 //  TIkArtha -
nayanazIla netA kahA jAtA hai  /  yahA~ netA pada meM tAcchIlika-tRna ke anusAra
'nI' dhAtu ke sAtha tRn pratyaya lagA hai  /  jo le jAtA hai-sanmArga para
agrasara karatA hai, vaha netA yA nAyaka kahA jAtA hai  /  yahA~ samyak, jJAna,
darzana evaM cAritra mUlaka mokSamArga ko netA ke rUpa meM abhihita kiyA gayA
hai, athavA zruta evaM cAritra mUlaka dharma yahA~ netA pada se gRhIta hotA hai,
kyoMki vaha jIva ko mokSa kI ora le jAtA hai  /  tIrthaMkaroM ne usI patha ko
mokSa kA netA batAyA  /  ataH buddhizIla puruSa use grahaNa kara dhyAna,
adhyayana Adi meM udyamazIla hote haiM  /  sUtrakAra jIva ko dhyAna ke patha
para ArohaNa karane meM-upara car3hAne meM prerita karane hetu kahate haiM-ki
bAlavIrya atIta-bhUta, anAgata-bhaviSya meM ananta bhavoM meM punaH punaH
duHkhAvAsa mUlaka hai, arthAt bAlavIrya yukta puruSa jyoM jyoM naraka Adi yAtanA
sthAnoM meM paryaTana karatA hai, tyoM tyoM apane azubha-doSa yukta yA sAvadya
adhyavasAya-pariNAma hone ke kAraNa azubha kI hI vRddhi karatA hai  /  yoM jo
puruSa saMsAra ke duHkhamaya svarUpa kI anuprekSaNa ciMtana karatA hai, dharma
dhyAna meM usakA citta pravRtta hotA hai, lagatA hai| ThANI vivihaThANANi,
caissaMti Na saMsao  /  aNiyate ayaM vAse, NAya ehi suhIhi ya  // 12 //  chAyA -
sthAnino vividhasthAnAni tyakSyanti na saMzayaH  /  anityo'yaM vAsaH, jJAtibhiH
suhRdbhizca  //  anuvAda - vividha sthAnoM ke sthAnI-adhipati yA adhinAyaka eka
dina avazya hI apane sthAnoM se cyuta hoMge  /  jJAtijanoM evaM mitroM kA
saMvAsa-sAhacarya bhI anitya hai  /  _TIkA - sAmpratam nityabhAvanAmadhikRtyAha-
sthAnAni vidyante yeSAM te sthAninaH tadyathA-devaloke
indrastatsAmAnikatrAyastriMzatpArSadyAdIni manuSyeSvapi
cakravartibaladevavAsudevamahAmaNDalikAdIni tiryakSvapi yAnikAnicidiSTAni
bhogabhUmyAdau sthAnAni tAni sarvANyapi vividhAni-nAnA
prakArANyuttamAdhamamadhyamAni te sthAninastyakSyanti, nAtra saMzayo vidheya
iti, tathA coktam - "azAzvatAni sthAnAni sarvANi divi ceha ca  /  devAsura
manuSyANAmRddhayazca sukhAni ca  // 1 // " tathA'yaM 'jJAtibhiH' bandhubhiH
sArdhaM sahAyaizca mitraiH suhRdbhiryaH saMvAsaH so'nityo'zAzvata iti, tathA
coktam - (402

Page #431 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sri Viryaadhyayanam**  "For a long time, having enjoyed with relatives,
separation from them occurs. Even after enjoying for a long time, there is no
satisfaction in worldly pleasures. Even a well-nourished body perishes after a
long time. By contemplating for a long time, Dharma alone is the helper." ||1||
Thus, the two "cha"s (in the verse) are used to indicate the impermanence of
wealth, grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, body, etc., and to remind of the twelve
reflections (including the reflection of being without refuge) and to indicate
the meaning of the unsaid. ||12||  Furthermore,  **Commentary:**  Now, the
author of the scripture, having indicated the impermanence, says: Those who are
in a position or high position are called "sthani" (holders of a position). For
example, Indra and his thirty-three companions in heaven are "sthani".
Similarly, among humans, Chakravarti, Baldev, Vasudev, Mahamandalik (ruler of a
large mandala or vast kingdom), etc., are "sthani" - those who hold high
positions. Similarly, one should understand in the context of the Tiryanch (non-
human) beings. All the positions in this realm of enjoyment are of different
types, superior, medium, and inferior. Their "sthani" - the rulers - will surely
abandon them one day, there is no doubt about it. It is said that all the
positions - high positions - in heaven and in the mortal world are impermanent,
temporary, or for a short time. Similarly, the prosperity, wealth, and happiness
of gods, demons, and humans are also impermanent, short-lived. The association
and companionship with relatives, family members, and affectionate friends are
also impermanent, impermanent. It is said that after living with relatives for a
long time, separation from them occurs. Even after enjoying worldly pleasures
for a long time, there is no satisfaction. The body, which has been nourished
for a long time, also perishes. But if one contemplates Dharma, assimilates it,
then it becomes a helper in this world and in the next.  In the present verse,
the "cha" is used twice. Its meaning is that there should be a feeling of
impermanence in worldly wealth and possessions, such as wealth, grain, bipeds,
and quadrupeds. One should understand that they are impermanent. One should
practice the twelve reflections, including the reflection of being without
refuge. The word "cha" also indicates that one should also know what is not said
here.  Thus, the wise one, having understood this, should abandon his greed. He
should embrace the noble Dharma, free from all other false doctrines. ||13||
**Shadow:**  Thus, the wise one, having understood this, should abandon his
greed. He should embrace the noble Dharma, free from all other false doctrines.
||13||  **Translation:**  Having understood that all the positions mentioned
earlier are impermanent and perishable, the wise man should abandon his greed or
desire. He should embrace the noble Dharma, free from the influence of other
false doctrines.  **Commentary:**  Having understood that all the positions are
impermanent, the wise man, who is established in the right conduct, should
abandon his greed, his attachment to possessions, his sense of "mine". He should
not have any sense of "mine" anywhere. Thus, he should avoid all harmful
doctrines. The path to liberation is based on right faith, right knowledge, and
right conduct. This is the noble path of the Aryas (the enlightened ones), such
as the Tirthankaras. He should embrace this path, follow it, and take refuge in
it. What kind of path is it? It is free from all false doctrines.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI vIryAdhyayanaM "sucirataramuSitvA bAndhavairviprayogaH, suciramapi hi
rantvA nAsti bhogeSu tRptiH  /  /  sucira mapi supuSTaM yAti nAzaM zarIraM,
suciramapi vicintyo dharmaH ekaH sahAyaH  // 1 // " iti, cakArau dhanadhAnya
dvipadacatuSpada zarIrAdyanityatva bhAvanAoM (rtha) azaraNAzcazeSabhAvanArtha
vAnuktasamuccayArthamupAntAviti  // 12 //  apica - TIkArtha - aba anitya ko
udiSTa kara AgamakAra kahate haiM-jo sthAna yA ucca pada yukta hote haiM, inako
sthAnI kahA jAtA hai  /  jaise svarga meM indra evaM unake sAmAnika taiMtIsa
pArSadya Adi sthAnI haiM  /  isI prakAra mAnavoM meM cakravartI, baladeva,
vAsudeva, mahAmANDalika-bar3e maNDala yA vizAla rAjya kA svAmI Adi sthAnI-
uccapada yukta hai  /  isI prakAra tiryaJca prANiyoM ke saMdarbha meM bhI
samajhanA cAhie  /  isa bhoga bhUmi meM jo bhI sthAna haiM, ve saba bhinna-
bhinna prakAra se uttama, madhyama evaM adhama koTike haiM  /  unake sthAnI-
adhipati eka dina nizcaya hI unakA tyAga kara deMge, isameM jarA bhI saMdeha
nahIM hai  /  kahA hai jitane sthAna-ucca pada svarga loka meM tathA martyaloka
meM hai, sabhI azAzvata-asthAyI yA svalpakAla ke lie haiM  /  isI prakAra devoM
. asuroM evaM mAnavoM kI Rddhi-vaibhava evaM sukha bhI azAzvata, svalpa kAlika
hai  /  jJAtijanoM, kuTumbIvRnda tathA snehazIla mitroM ke sAtha jo saMvAsa-
sAhacarya hai, vaha bhI anitya hai  /  azAzvata hai  /  kahA hai bahuta samaya
taka bandhu bAndhavoM ke sAtha rahakara aMta meM unase viprayoga-viyoga ho jAtA
hai, bahuta samaya taka ramaNa-sAMsArika bhoga sevana karane para bhI tRpti
nahIM hotI  /  jisa zarIra ko cirakAla se puSTa karate rahe, vaha bhI naSTa ho
jAtA hai  /  kintu yadi dharma kA saccintana kiyA, use AtmasAt kiyA to vahI isa
loka meM, aura paraloka meM sahAyaka banatA hai  /  prastuta gAthA meM 'ca' kA
do bAra prayoga huA hai  /  usakA Azaya yaha hai ki dhana-dhAnya dvipada evaM
catuSpada Adi sAMsArika vaibhava evaM parigraha meM anityatva kI bhAvanA rahanI
cAhie  /  ve anitya haiM aisA hRdayaMgama karanA cAhie  /  azaraNa Adi bAraha
bhAvanAoM kA abhyAsa karanA cAhie  /  'ca' zabda se yaha bhI sUcita hai ki jo
bAta yahA~ anukta-nahIM kahI gaI ho. usa ko bhI jAna lenA cAhie  /  evamAdAya
mehAvI, appaNo giddhimuddhare  /  AriyaM uvasaMpajje, savva dhammamakovi (500)
yaM  // 13 //  chAyA - evamAdaya meghAvI, Atmano gRddhimuddharet  /  Aryya
mupasaMpadyeta, sarva dharmarakopitam  //  anuvAda - pahale jo varNita hue haiM,
ve sabhI U~ce pada anitya-nazvara haiM  /  yaha jAnakara vivekazIla puruSa apanI
gRddhi-Asakti yA lolupatA ko tyAga de  /  anya kutIrthika janoM ke dharmoM se
adUSita aprabhAvitaavikRta Arya-uttama dharma ko AtmasAt kareM  /  TIkA -
anityAni sarvANyapi sthAnAnItyevam AdAya' avadhArya meghAvI' maryAdAvyavasthitaH
sadasadvivekI vA AtmanaH sambandhinIM 'gRddhiM' gAddharyaM mamatvam 'uddhared'
apanayet, mamedamahamasya svAmItyevaM mamatvaM kvacidapi na kurthAt tathA
ArAghAtaH, sarvaheyadharmebhyaityArtho-mokSamArgaH
samyagdarzanajJAnacAritrAtmakaH, AryANAM vAtIrthakRdAdInAmayamAryo-mArgastam
'upasampadyeta' aditiSThet samAzrayediti, kimbhUtaM mArgamityAha-sarvaiH
kutIrthika -403)

Page #432 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The Dharma of the Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra is "Akopito" (unstained), because
it is impossible to stain it with its own glory, and it is established in the
Angas (that is), or because it is manifested by all Dharmas, its nature, and its
practices, being free from any blameworthy duty. ||13|| Commentary: The wise
man, contemplating that all things are impermanent, whether they are within his
own limits or are the objects of discrimination between the good and the bad,
should abandon greed, possessiveness, or attachment towards them. He should
never think that this thing is mine, I am its owner. That which is free from all
blameworthy Dharmas, from false thinking and conduct, is called the Arya Dharma.
It is the Dharma of liberation based on right faith, right knowledge, and right
conduct, or it is called Arya, the path of the Tirthankaras and other Arya men.
The wise man should embrace it, accept it. What is that path? Explaining this,
the Sutrakar says that it is unstained, uncorrupted, unaffected by all the false
Dharmas of the Kutirthikas, the doctrines of the false believers. It is so
glorious and dignified that it cannot be stained by the doctrines of the
Kutirthikas, or it is unstained, untouched by any other doctrines or their
actions. It is manifested in its pure form, because there is no harmony of any
blameworthy duty or action. Together, with right understanding, listen to the
essence of Dharma. The one who has renounced the world, having attained the
right understanding, will be liberated. ||14|| Shadow: Knowing with right
understanding, or having heard the essence of Dharma. The one who has renounced
the world, having rejected sin, is present. || Translation: The virtuous man,
engaged in the acquisition of knowledge, etc., in the advancement of the self,
having heard from the Guru, etc., with his pure intellect, the essence of
Dharma, the true nature of Dharma, should abandon sin. Commentary: To show how
the knowledge of good Dharma comes about, the Sutrakar says: The essence of
Dharma, the ultimate truth, is the essence of Dharma. Knowing it, with
understanding, how? He shows: With right understanding, with one's own
understanding, with specific, insightful knowledge, with knowledge gained
through hearing, with knowledge gained through perception, because knowledge is
the means of understanding oneself and others, with that, knowing the essence of
Dharma, that is the meaning. Or, having heard from the Tirthankaras, Ganadharas,
Acharyas, etc., like Ilaputra, or from others, like Chilata Putra, a man knows
the essence of Dharma. Or, the essence of Dharma is conduct, he accepts it,
adopts it. Having adopted conduct, for the purpose of destroying the karma
accumulated in the past, the wise man, endowed with strength, free from
attachment, etc., without childish strength, for the sake of increasing virtues,
the one who has renounced the world, is present, the increasing result, the
rejected sin, the form of sinful conduct, by which he has become the one who has
rejected sin. ||14|| And another thing: Commentary: The Sutrakar explains how a
man comes to know good Dharma. The essence of Dharma, or the true nature of
Dharma, is the ultimate truth. How is it known? He says: It is known through
intellect, or through one's own specific, insightful knowledge, one's own
specific, intellectual knowledge, or through knowledge gained through hearing,
through knowledge gained through perception, the essence of Dharma is known,
that is the meaning. Or, having heard from the Tirthankaras, Ganadharas,
Acharyas, etc., like Ilaputra, or from others, like Chilata Putra, a man knows
the essence of Dharma. Or, the essence of Dharma is conduct, he accepts it,
adopts it. Having adopted conduct, for the purpose of destroying the karma
accumulated in the past, the wise man, endowed with strength, free from
attachment, etc., without childish strength, for the sake of increasing virtues,
the one who has renounced the world, is present, the increasing result, the
rejected sin, the form of sinful conduct, by which he has become the one who has
rejected sin. ||14|| (404)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram dharma: 'akopito' adUSitaH
svamahimnaivadUSayitumazakyatvAt pratiSThAMgataH (taM), yadi vA-sarvairdhamaiH-
svabhAvairanuSThAna rUpaigopitaMkutsitakartavyAbhAvAt prakaTamityarthaH  // 13
//  TIkArtha - medhAvI-apanI maryAdA meM vidyamAna athavA sat-asat ke viveka
yukta puruSa sabhI sthAna para anitya hai, aisA cintana kara unake prati gRddhi-
mamatva yA Asakti kA tyAga kara de  /  vaha kabhI bhI aisA na soce ki yaha vastu
merI hai, maiM isakA mAlika hU~  /  jo sabhI heya-tyAgane yogya dharmo se-asat
ciMtana aura AcaraNa se dUravartI hai, use Arya dharma kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha
samyaka darzana, samyaka jJAna aura samyak cAritra mUlaka mokSadharma hai,
athavA-tIrthaMkara Adi Arya puruSoM kA jo mArga hai, use Arya kahate haiM  /
medhAvI puruSa use samAzrita kare-grahaNa kare  /  vaha mArga kaisA hai ? ise
spaSTa karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM ki vaha sabhI kutIrthikoM dharmoM dvArA
mithyAvAdI janoM ke siddhAntoM dvArA adUSita-avikRta hai, aprabhAvita hai  /
vaha itanI mahimA evaM garimAmaya hai ki kutIrthikoM ke siddhAntoM dvArA dUSita
nahIM kiyA jA sakatA, athavA vaha sabhI dharmoM itara siddhAntoM yA unakI
kriyAoM se agopita hai-aspRSTa hai  /  kisI bhI kutsita karttavya yA kriyA kA
sadbhAva na hone se yaha apane zuddha svarUpa meM prakaTa hai  /  saha saMmaie
NaccA, dhammasAraM suNettu vA  /  samuvaTThie u aNagAre, paccakkhAya pAvae  //
14 //  chAyA - saha sanmatyA jJAtvA, dharmasAraM zrutvA vA  /
samupasthitastvanagAraH pratyAkhyAtapApakaH  //  anuvAda - samupasthita-jJAnAdi
guNoM ke upArjana meM, Atmonnati meM saMpravRttasAdhu sanmati-apanI nirmala
buddhi dvArA guru Adi se zravaNakara dharma ke sAra-satyasvarUpa ko avagata kara
pApa kA parityAga kare  /  TIkA - sudharmaparijJAnaM ca yathA bhavati
taddarzayitumAha-dharmasya sAraH-paramArtho dharmasArastaM jJAtvA' avabuddhaya,
kathamiti darzayati-saha san-matyA svamatyA-viziSTAbhinirbodhakajJAnena
zrutajJAnenAvadhijJAnena vA, svaparAvabodhakatvAt jJAnasya, tena saha, dharmasya
sAraM jJAtvetyarthaH, anyebhyo vA-tIrthaMkaragaNadharAcAryAdibhyaH ilAputravat
zrutvA cilAtaputravadvA dharmasAramupagacchati, dharmasya vA sAraM-cAritraM
tatpratipadyate, tatpratipatau ca pUrvopAttakarmakSayArtha paNDitavIryasampano
rAgAdibandhanavimukto bAlavIryarahita uttarottaraguNasampattaye
samupasthito'nagAraH pravardhamAna pariNAmaH pratyAkhyAtaMnirAkRtaM pApakaM-
sAvadyAnuSThAnarUpaM yenAsau pratyAkhyAtapApako bhavatIti  // 14 //  kiJcAnyat -
TIkArtha - sudharma-uttama dharma kA manuSya ko parijJAna jisa prakAra ho, use
batAne hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM - . dharma kA sAra yA saccA
svarUpa paramArtha hai  /  vaha kisa prakAra jAnA jAe, ise avagata karAne hetu
kahate haiM ki-ise buddhi dvArA yA apane viziSTa amini bodhika jJAna-
apanIviziSTa matijJAna pravaNa buddhi dvArA yA zruta jJAna dvArA, avadhijJAna
dvArA dharma ke sAra ko jAne, isakA yaha tAtparya hai  /  athavA tIrthaMkara,
gaNadhara, AcArya Adi se ilAputra kI jyoM yA dUsare se zravaNa kara cilAta putra
kI jyoM dharma kA sAra vaisA puruSa jAnatA hai  /  athavA dharma kA sAra cAritra
hai, use pratipannasvAyatta karatA hai  /  cAritra ko prApta kara pUrvabaddha
karmoM ko kSINa (404)

Page #433 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
To perform the virtuous study, the virtuous seeker, free from the bonds of
attachment, etc., and devoid of childish vigor, progresses towards his
excellence, increasing his virtues, and through the results, rejects and
abandons sins, becoming pure, sinless, and immaculate.  "Whoever knows the end
of his life span, let him learn the teachings quickly." (15)  Commentary: If a
wise man knows the time of the end of his life span, he should take up the
teachings of Sanlekhana before that time, and proceed on the path of Sanlekhana.
Commentary: The word "upkrama" refers to the decline of life span. If a virtuous
person knows about the decline of his life span, he should know the time of his
death and before that time, he should be free from anxiety and desire for life,
and should take up the teachings of Sanlekhana, Bhaktaparijna (knowledge of the
soul), giving up food and water, or giving up both food and water, and
Ingitmarana (death by indication), staying in a limited space, and giving up
food and water except for physical service. He should learn the method of death
through the teachings of "grahana" (acceptance) and practice it according to the
teachings of "sevana" (service).  Just as a tortoise gathers its limbs into its
body, so too, a wise man gathers his sins through spiritual contemplation. (16)
Commentary: This is an example. Just as a tortoise gathers its limbs, head,
etc., into its body, so too, a wise man, a person of good conduct and wisdom,
should gather his sins, i.e., keep them under control and not let them affect
him.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI vIryAdhyayanaM karane hetu vaha paMDitavIrya yukta sAdhaka rAga Adi ke
bandhanoM se vimukta aura bAlavIrya rahita hotA huA uttarottara guNa vRddhi hetu
apane utkarSa kI ora bar3hate hue pariNAmoM se pApoM kA pratyAkhyAna vivarjana
kara nirmala, niSpApa vizuddha hotA hai| jaM kiMcuvakkama jANe, Aukkhemassa
appaNo  /  tasseva aMtarA khippaM, sikkhaM sikkheja paMDie  // 15 //  " chAyA -
yaM kaJcidupakramaM jAnIyA dAyuHkSemasyAtmanaH  /  _ tasyaivAntarA kSipraM zikSA
zikSet paNDitaH  //  anuvAda - paMDita-jJAnI puruSa ko yadi kisI prakAra apane
AyuSya kSara kA samaya jJAta ho jAe to vaha usase pUrva hI saMlekhanA mUlaka
zikSA grahaNa kare-saMlekhanA ke patha para agrasara ho  /  TIkA - upakramyate-
saMvaya'te kSayamupanIyate Ayuryena sa upanamastaM ya kaJcana jAnIyAt
kasya?'AyuHkSemasya' svAyuSaiti, idamuktaM bhavati-svAyuSkasya
yenakenacitprakAreNopakramo bhatrI yasmin vA kAle tatparijJAya tasyopakramasya
kAlasya vA antarAle kSipramevAnAkulo jIvitAnAzaMsI 'paNito' vivekI
saMlekhanArUpAM zikSAM bhaktaparikSeGgitamaraNAdikAM vA zikSet, tatra
grahaNazikSayA yathAvanmaraNavidhiM vijJAyA''sevanAzikSayAtvAseveteti  // 15 //
TIkArtha - jisase AyuSya kSaya ko prApta hotA hai, use upakrama kahA jatA hai  /
yadi sAdhu ko kisI prakAra apane AyuSya ke upakrama-kSaya ke saMdarbha meM jJAta
ho jAe to vaha apane mAyuSya kA jisa prakAra jisa samaya samApana hone vAlA ho,
use jAnakara usa samaya ke Ane se pUrva hI, vaha anakula tathA jIne kI abhilASA
se rahita hotA huA, saMlekhanA bhaktaparijJA-anna tyAga yA anna pAnI donoM ke
yAga evaM iMgitamaraNa-maryAdita sthAna meM rahate hue, zArIrika sevA ke apavAda
ke sAtha anna pAnI kA tyAga nAdi zikSA ko grahaNa kare  /  grahaNa zikSA-
tadviSayaka parijJAna dvArA maraNa kI vidhi ko bhalI-bhA~ti avagata ka A sevanA
zikSA se yathAvata AcAra vidhi se usakA sevana kare  /  jahA kumme saaMgAI, sae
dehe samAhare  /  evaM pAvAiM medhAvI, ajjhappeNa samahare  // 16 //  chAyA -
yathA kUrmaH svAGgAni, svake dehe samAharet  /  evaM pApAni medhAvI, adhyAtmanA
samAharet  //  anuvAda - jaise kacchapa apane aMgoM ko apane zarIra meM sikor3a
letA hai, usI prakAra medhAvI-prajJAzIla puruSa, adhyAtma bhAvanA se apane pApoM
ko upasaMhata kare-unheM saMkucita kara Ane se pRthak kara de  /  TIkA -
kiJcAnyat-'yathe' tyudAharaNa pradarzanArthaH yathA 'kUrmaH' kacchayaH
svAnyaGgAni-zirodharAdIni svake dehe 'samAhared' gopayed-avyApArANikuryAd 'evam'
anayaiva prakriyayA 'medhavI' maryAdAvAn sahasadvivekI (405

Page #434 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra:  **Verse 16:**  "The Sutra Kritanga Sutra says:
'Papanni' (paap-aani), meaning actions that are sinful, 'Adhyatmana' (adhyaat-
ma-na), meaning through meditation on the right path, 'Samaharet' (sama-ha-ret),
meaning one should gather them together, and at the time of death, one should
gather oneself together through Samyak Sanlekhana (sam-yak san-le-kha-na), and
through the death of a wise person, one should gather oneself together."
**Commentary:**  This verse uses the word 'Yatha' (ya-tha) to give an example.
Just as a tortoise gathers its neck and other limbs into its body, hiding them
and ceasing all activity, similarly, a wise, virtuous, and discerning seeker
should abandon their sinful actions, becoming absorbed in spirituality. When the
time of death arrives, they should purify their body through Sanlekhana and then
abandon it, following the path of a wise person's death.  **Verse 17:**  "Sahare
hatthapae ya, manam panchendriyaani ya. Paavakam cha parinaamam, bhaasaadosam
cha taarisaam."  **Shadow:**  "Sanharedhastapadanch, manah panchendriyaanich.
Papakamcha parinaamam, bhaashaadosamcha taadrusham."  **Translation:**  A
virtuous person should keep their hands, feet, mind, and five senses under
control. They should refrain from engaging with worldly objects. They should not
allow sinful consequences to arise in their mind and should also avoid any flaws
in their speech.  **Commentary:**  When a tree is cut down, it becomes devoid of
activity, and similarly, a seeker, during the time of Ingini Marana (in-gi-ni
ma-ra-na), a period of limited activity, or during the time of Anashan (a-na-
shan), a period of fasting, should, like a tortoise, contract their hands and
feet, refraining from any actions that cause harm to living beings. They should
also withdraw their mind from harmful activities and negative thoughts. They
should abandon attachment and aversion towards pleasant and unpleasant sounds
and other objects, and control their five senses, including hearing. The word
'cha' (cha) here signifies a collective meaning. They should also abandon the
sinful consequences of their actions, both in this life and the next, and avoid
any flaws in their speech. A virtuous person, remaining silent in mind, speech,
and body, should attain the rare state of true restraint and follow the path of
a wise person's death, seeking the complete destruction of their karma.  **Verse
18:**  "Anumaanam cha maayam cha, tam padinnaay pandie. Saataagaaravanihue,
uvasante nihe chare."  **Translation:**  A wise person, who has conquered their
ego and attachment, should remain steadfast in their practice, like a merchant
who has reached his destination, and should continue to live in a state of
detachment.  **Commentary:**  This verse emphasizes the importance of remaining
steadfast in one's practice, even after achieving a certain level of spiritual
progress. Just as a merchant who has reached his destination continues to manage
his business, a wise person should continue to practice their spiritual
disciplines, remaining detached from the world and its allurements.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram  /  vA 'pApAni' pAparupANyanuSThAnAni 'adhyAtmanA'
samyagdharmadhyAnAdibhAvanayA 'samAharet' upasaMharet, maraNakAle copasthite
samyak saMlekhanayA saMlikhitakAyaH paNDitamaraNenAtmAnaM samAharediti  // 16 //
saMharaNaprakAramAha - TIkArtha - isa gAthA meM 'yathA' zabda udAharaNa
pradarzita karane hetu AyA hai  /  jaise eka kacchapa apanI gardana Adi aMgoM ko
apanI deha meM samAhata kara letA hai-chipA letA hai, vyApAra zUnya kara detA
hai, usI taraha medhAvI, maryAdAzIla, sad asad viveka zIla sAdhaka apane
pApamUlaka anuSThAnoM ko adhyAtma rata hotA huA tyAga de, tathA mRtyu kA samaya
Ane para saMlekhanA dvArA apanI deha ko zuddha banAkara paMDitamaraNapUrvaka use
tyAga de  /  sAhare hatthapAe ya, maNaM paMceMdiyANi ya  /  pAvakaM ca
parINAmaM, bhAsAdosaM ca tArisaM  // 17 //  chAyA - saMhareddhastapAdaJca, manaH
paJcendriyANica  /  pApakaJca pariNAma, bhASAdoSaJca tAdRzam  //  anuvAda -
sAdhu apane hAtha, paira, mana tathA pAMcoM indriyoM ko saMhata rakhe-niyantrita
rakhe  /  unako viSayoM se nivRtta rakhe  /  vaha pApapUrNa pariNAma-bhAva mana
meM na Ane de tathA bhASA viSayaka doSoM kA bhI parivarjana kre| TIkA -
pAdapopagamAne iGginImaraNe bhaktaparijJAyAM zeSakAle vA kUrmavaddhastau pAdau
ca 'saMhared'vyApArAnnivartayet, tathA 'mana:' anta:karaNaM
tanvAkuzalavyApArebhyo nivartayet tathA zabdAdi viSayebhyo'nukUlebhyo'rakta
dviSTatayA zrotrendriyAdIni paJcApIndriyANi ca zabdaH samuccaye tathA pApakaM
pariNAmamaihikAmuSmikAzaMsArUpaM saMharedityevaM bhASAdoSaM catAdRzaM' pAparUpaM
saMhareta, manovAkkAyaguptaH sana darlabhaM satsaMyamamavApya paNDitamaraNaM
vA'zeSakarmakSayArthaM samyaganupAlayediti  // 127 //  _TIkArtha - kaTe hue
vRkSa kI jyoM ceSTA rahita hokara sevA tathA annapAna ke tyAga rUpa anAna meM
evaM iMgitamaraNa-maryAdita kSetra meM sevA ke apavAda ke sAtha, annajala tyAga
rUpa anazana meM, zeSakAla meM apane hAtha pairoM ko kacchapa kI jyoM saMkucita
kare, arthAt una dvArA prANiyoM ke lie duHkhaprada vyApAra-kriyAdi na kare, evaM
mana ko akuzala vyApAroM-duHsaMkalpoM se nivRtta kare  /  anukUla evaM pratikUla
zabda Adi viSayoM meM raktatA-anurAga bhAva, dviSTatA-dvaiSa bhAva chor3akara
apanI zrautrendriya Adi pA~coM indriyoM ko saMkucita kare  /  yahAM 'ca' zabda
samuccaya ke artha meM AyA hai  /  vaha aihika aura AbhuSmika AzaMsA-isa loka
aura paraloka meM sukha pAne kI kAmanA ke paapmy| pariNAma ko evaM pApapUrNa
bhASA doSa kA parivarjana kare  /  sAdhu mana-vacana aura kAya se gupta,
pApanivRtta durlabha sat saMyama meM samavasthita rahatA huA karmakSaya hetu
paMDita maraNa kI anupAlanA kare, pratIkSA kare  /  aNumANaM ca mAyaM ca, taM
paDinnAya paMDie  /  sAtAgAravaNihue, uvasaMte Nihe care  // 18 //  -406

Page #435 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sri Viryaadhyayanam** (Shadow) - A wise person should know and avoid pride,
arrogance, and illusion.  **Translation** - A wise and virtuous person should
not indulge in pride, arrogance, and illusion. These have great negative
consequences. Knowing this, he should stay away from them, not desire worldly
pleasures, and remain calm by abandoning anger and other vices. **Commentary** -
If someone invites a virtuous person who is striving for self-control with
offerings and respect, the author says that he should not show off his
greatness.  Even if a person is honored by a Chakravarti or others, he should
not have even a little pride. What to speak of more? Even if a person is facing
death, has a body scorched by severe austerities, and thinks, "Oh, I am great,"
he should not have even a little pride. Similarly, even a little illusion is not
acceptable, what to speak of a lot? In the same way, anger and greed should also
be avoided. Knowing the poisons and their consequences through knowledge and
rejection, he should abstain from them.  Another reading is "Aimaanam cha Maayam
cha, Tam parinnaaya pandie." Knowing that excessive pride is painful, like that
of a Subhumi Chakravarti, he should avoid it. This means that even if a person
with attachment sometimes experiences pride, he should make it fruitless. The
same applies to illusion.  Another reading is "Suyam me ihamegesi, Eyam veerasya
veeriyam." The strength with which a great warrior defeats the enemy army in the
midst of a fierce battle is not true strength. True strength is the power with
which one conquers lust, anger, and other vices. This is the strength of a great
man. I have heard this saying from the Tirthankaras and others in this very
world, in this human birth.  Another reading is "Ayatatam suadaaya, Evam
veerasya veeriyam." The goal of liberation is vast and unending. Having grasped
this goal, the path of right faith, knowledge, and conduct, he strives with the
strength of fortitude to conquer lust, anger, and other vices. This is the
strength of a hero. It was said, "What is the heroism of a hero?" This is how it
is explained.  Furthermore, the term "Saataagauravam" refers to the quality of
being comfortable with suffering. He is not attached to it. He is calm, having
conquered the fire of anger. He is indifferent to sounds and other objects, both
favorable and unfavorable. He is free from attachment and aversion. He is free
from illusion, which is the cause of suffering in the world. He is also free
from pride and greed. Such a person should practice self-control.  Therefore, a
wise and courageous person who is engaged in the great vows should be like this,
even at the time of death or at any other time. To emphasize the importance of
non-violence, the author says: "Uddhamahe tiriyam va je paana tasathaavara.
Savvatha niratim kujja, Santi nivvaana mahiya." (3) This verse is not found in
the Sutras or the commentaries. It is written here because it is found in the
commentary. This is the meaning. (18) **Commentary on the Commentary** - A
virtuous person who is striving for self-control, who is enthusiastic and eager,
is invited by someone with offerings and respect. The author says that he should
not show off his greatness there.  Even if a person is honored by a Chakravarti
or others, he should not have even a little pride. What to speak of more? Even
if a person is facing death, has a body scorched by severe austerities, and
thinks, "Oh, I am great," he should not have even a little pride. Similarly,
even a little illusion is not acceptable, what to speak of a lot? In the same
way, he should not indulge in anger and greed. He should abstain from the
poisons and their consequences by knowing them through knowledge and rejection.
Here, another reading is "Aimaanam cha Maayam cha, Tam parinnaaya pandie." This
means, "O wise and intelligent person, excessive pride is painful, like that of
a Subhumi Chakravarti."  (407)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI vIryAdhyayanaM ) chAyA - aNuM mAnaJca mAyAJca, tatparijJAya paNDitaH  /
sAtAgauravanibhRta upazAnto'nihazcaret  //  anuvAda - paMDita-prajJAsampanna
sAdhu jarA bhI mAna abhimAna aura mAyA chala prapaMca na kare  /  inakA bar3A
duSphala hotA hai  /  yaha jAnakara vaha unase dUra rahatA huA sAMsArika sukha
bhoga kI tRSNA na rakhe, tathA krodhAdi kA parityAga kara upazAMta bhAva se rahe
/  TIkA - taM ca saMyame parAkramamANaM kazcit pUjA satkArAdinA nimantrayet,
tatrAtmotkarSoM na kArya iti darzayitumAha-cakravartyAdinA satkArAdinA
pUjyamAnena 'aNurapi' stoko'pi 'mAna' ahaGkAroM na vidheyaH , kimuta mahAn ?
yadivottamamaraNopasthitenogrataponiSTaptadehena vA aho'hamityevaMrUpaH stoko'pi
garvo na vidheyaH , tathA paNDurAryayeva stokA'pi mAyA na vidheyA, kimuta mahatI
?, ityevaM krodhalobhAvapi na vidheyAviti, evaM dvividhayApi parijJayA
kaSAyAMstadvipAkAMzca parijJAya tebhyo nivRttiM kuryAditi, pAThAntaraM vA
'aimANaM ca mAyaM ca, taM pariNNAya paMDie' atIva mAno'timAnaH subhUmAdInAmiva
taM duHkhAvahamityevaM jJAtvA pariharet, idamuktaM bhavati-yadyapi sarAgasya
kadAcintamAnodayaH syAttathApyudayaprAptasya viphalIkaraNaM kuryAdityevaM,
mAyAyAmapyAyojyaM, pAThAntaraM vA 'suyaM me ihamegesiM, eyaM vIrasya vIriyaM'
yena balena saGgAmazirasi mahati subhaTa saMkaTe parAnIkaM vijayate
tatparamArthato vIryaM na bhavati, api tu yena kAma krodhAdIn vijayate
tadvIrasya-mahApuruSasya vIryam 'ihaiva' asminneva saMsAre manuSyajanmani
vaikeSAM tIrthakarAdInAM sambandhi vAkyaM mayA zrutaM, pAThAntaraM vA 'AyataTuM
suAdAya, evaM vIrassa vIriyaM' Ayato-mokSo'paryavasitAvasthAnatvAt sa
cAsAvarthazca tadartho vA-tatprayojano vA samyagdarzanajJAnacAritramArgaH sa
AyatArthastaM suSThvAdAya-gRhItvA yo dhRtibalena kAmakrodhAdijayAya ca
parAkramate etadvIrasya vIryasthiti, taduktamAsIt kiM nu vIrassa vIratvamiti
tadyathA bhavati tathAvyAkhyAtaM, kiJcAnyatsAtAgauravaMnAmasukhazIlatA tatra
nibhRta:-tadarthamanudyukta ityarthaH, tathA krodhAgnijayAdupazAnta:-zItIbhUtaH
zabdAdiviSayebhyo'pyanukUlapratikUlebhyo'raktadviSTatayopazAnto
jitendriyatvAttebhyo nivRtta iti, tathA nihanyante prANinaH saMsAre yayA sA
nihA-mAyA na vidyatte sA yasyAsAvaniho mAyAprapaJcarahita ityarthaH tathA
mAnarahito lobhavarjita ityapi draSTavyaM, sa caivambhUtaH saMyamAnuSThAnaM
'caret' kuryAditi, tadevaM maraNakAle'nyadA vA paNDitavIryavAn mahAvrateSUdyataH
syAt  /  tatrApi prANAtipAta viratideva garIyasItikRtvA tatpratipAdanArthamAha
"uDDhamahe tiriyaM vA je pANA tasathAvarA  /  savvattha niratiM kujjA, saMti
nivvANa mAhiyaM  // 3 // " ayaM ca zlokoM na sUtrAdarzeSu dRSTaH, TIkAyAM tu
dRSTa iti kRtvAlikhitaH, ittAnArthazceti  // 18 //  kiJca TIkArtha - saMyama meM
parAkramamANa-parAkramazIla sotsAha udyata kisI sAdhu ko pUjA satkAra Adi dvArA
nimantrita kare, to vaha sAdhu vahA~ apanA bar3appana na dikhAye, isakA
digdarzana karAte hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM - cakravartI Adi dvArA sAdhu Adi
satkRt evaM pUjIta ho-sammAnita ho to use thor3A bhI ahaMkAra nahIM karanA cAhie
/  phira adhika kI to bAta hI kyA ? athavA maiM uttama maraNa meM upasthita
hU~-jIvana kI bAjI lagAkara apane mahAna lakSya kI pUrti meM lagA dUM, ghora
tapa dvArA merA tapa paritapta hai, yaha socakara vaha thor3A bhI garva na kare
/  paNDurA AryA kI taraha thor3I bhI mAyA na kare  /  adhika kI to bAta hI kyA ?
isI prakAra vaha krodha evaM lobha bhI na kare  /  vaha jJaparijJA evaM
pratyAkhyAna parijJA dvArA kaSAya evaM unake vipAka-duSphala ko jAnakara unakA
varjana kare, yahA~ para 'aimANaM ca mAyaMca taM pariNNAyaMpaDie' yahAM yaha
pAThAntara prApta hotA hai  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki he paMDita buddhimAna
puruSa ! atyanta mAna duHkhadAyI hai  /  jaisA subhUma cakravartI (407)

Page #436 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Knowing that this happened with the Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra, abandon it. This
means that if pride arises in a state of attachment and restraint, immediately
defeat it, that is, suppress it. Similarly, suppress Maya, etc. The text
"Suyamme Ihamegesiṁ Eyaṁ Virasyā Viriyam" is found here. This means that it is
not true valor to conquer the enemy army with the army in the midst of the
battle, in the front. The true valor of a man, a great man, is the self-control
by which lust, anger, etc. are conquered. I have heard this in this world, or in
human birth, from the words of Tirthankaras and other great men. Or, "Ayataṭuṁ
Suādāya, Evaṁ Virassā Viriyam" is found here as a variant reading. Its meaning
is that Ayata is indicative of liberation. Because there is no end to its
dwelling, its abode. That liberating meaning, or the path of liberation, which
is right faith, knowledge, and conduct, is called Ayata. The man who, having
grasped this well, displays the valor to conquer lust, anger, etc., with the
strength of fortitude and courage, is the true valor of that hero. The question
that was asked earlier, what is the valor of a valiant man, has been explained
in this way. Desire or craving for pleasure and enjoyment is called Satagaurava.
A virtuous person should not strive for it. He should conquer the fire of anger
and remain cool and calm. That is, if favorable or unfavorable words, etc., come
before him, he should not be attached to them, nor should he hate them, but
because he is self-controlled, he should remain aloof from them. That by which
the animal kingdom is killed is called Niha. It is Maya. A virtuous person
should remain separate from Maya, illusion. Similarly, one should know that a
virtuous person is free from pride and devoid of greed. In this way, he should
follow restraint. At the time of death, or at any other time, a virtuous and
wise person should be full of valor and devoted to the great vows. He should be
absorbed in their observance. Of these five great vows, non-violence is very
important. Therefore, to expound it, the Sutrakar says, "Udamehe Adi." This
verse is not found in the Sutra Darshanas, the manuscripts of the Sutra, but it
is found in the commentary. Therefore, it is mentioned here. Its meaning is
clear. "Paṇe Ya ṇaivaāejjā, Adinnapi Ya ṇādaē. Sādiyāṁ ṇ Musāṁ Būyā, Es Dhammē
Busīmaō ||19||" Chāyā - "Prāṇāñca Nātipatayet, Adattaṁ Pi Ca Nādādit. Sādikaṁ Nā
Mṛṣā Brūyā Deṣa Dharmō Vaśyasya ||" Anuvāda - "This is the dharma of a Vasy, a
self-controlled man, that he should not kill any living beings. Nor should he
take anything that has not been given. He should not speak falsely, nor should
he deceive." Tīkā - "Prāṇapriyāṇāṁ Prāṇināṁ Prāṇānnātipatayet, Tathā
Pareṇādattaṁ Dantaśodhanamātraṁ Api 'Nādāriṭ' Na Gṛhṇīyāt, Tathā-Sahādinā-Māyayā
Vartata Iti Sādikaṁ-Samāyāṁ Mṛṣāvādaṁn Brūyāt, Tathāhi-
Paravañcanārthaṁmṛṣāvādau'dhikṛiyate. Sa Ca Nā Māyāmantereṇa Bhavatītyato
Mṛṣāvādasya Māyā Ādibhūtā Varttate, Idamuktaṁ Bhavatī-Yo Hi Paravañcanārthaṁ
Samāyo Mṛṣāvādaḥ Sa Parihiyate, Yastu Samyama Guptyarthaṁ Na Mayā Mṛgā
Upablabdhā Ityādikaḥ Sa Na Doṣāyeti, Eṣa Yaḥ Prāk Nidṛṣṭo Dharmaḥ-Śruta
Cāritrākhhyaḥ Svabhāvo Vā 'Vusīmaō' Tti Chāntasattvāt, Nirdeśārthaṁ Tvam-Vastūni
Jñānādīni Tadvato Jñānādimati Ityarthaḥ, Yadi Vā-Busīmaōtti Vaśyasya-
Ātmavśagasya-Vaśyendriyasyeṭyarthaḥ ||19||" -408

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram ke sAtha ghaTita huA, yaha jAnakara usakA parityAgA
kara de  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki sarAga, saMyama dazA meM kabhI mAna kA
udaya ho to vaha use turanta viphala-niSphala kara de arthAt dabA de  /  isI
taraha mAyA Adi kA bhI damana kare, 'suyaMme ihamegesiM eyaM vIrasya vIriyaM'
yaha pAThAntara yahA~ prApta hotA hai  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki saMgrAma
ke mastaka meM-agrabhAga meM bar3e-bar3e yoddhAoM dvArA upasthApita saMkaTa-
kaThinAI meM jisa senA dvArA zatra senA ko vijita kiyA jAtA hai vaisA karanA
vAstava meM vIrya nahIM hai| jisa AtmaparAkrama dvArA kAma krodha Adi vijita
kiye jAte haiM, vahI puruSa kA-mahApuruSa kA vAstavika vIrya-saccA zaurya hai  /
yaha maiMne isa saMsAra meM athavA manuSya janma meM tIrthaMkara Adi mahApuruSoM
ke vacana sune haiM  /  athavA 'AyataTuM suAdAya, evaM vIrassa vIriyaM' aisA
yahAM pAThAntara prApta hotA hai| usakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki Ayata-
mokSakAvAcaka hai. kyoMki usake avasthAna kA nivAsa kA paryavasAna-anta nahIM
hai. usa mokSAtmaka artha ko athavA mokSaprada-samyaka darzana jJAna evaM
cAritra rUpa mokSa mArga ko AyatArtha kahA jAtA hai  /  use bhalI bhA~ti grahaNa
kara jo puruSa dhRtibaladhairya kI zakti se kAma krodha Adi ko jItane ke lie jo
parAkrama prakaTa karatA hai, vahI usa vIra kA vAstavika vIrya hai  /  pahale jo
prazna kiyA gayA thA ki vIra puruSa kA vIratva kyA hai, vaha isa rUpa meM
vyAkhyAta huA hai  /  sukha bhoga meM lipsA yA tRSNA sAtAgaurava kahA jAtA hai
/  sAdhu usake lie udyama na kare  /  vaha krodhAgni ko vijita kara zItala-zAMta
rahe arthAt anukUla yA pratikUla zabdAdi viSaya yadi usake sammukha Aye to vaha
unameM raktatA-anurAga bhAva, dviSTatA-dveSa bhAva na karatA huA jitendriya hone
ke kAraNa unase nivRtta-dUra rahe  /  prANI varga jisake dvArA nihata kiye jAte
haiM, use nihA kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha mAyA hai  /  sAdhu mAyA, prapaMca se
pRthak rahe  /  isI prakAra sAdhu mAna rahita evaM lobha varjita rahe yaha
jAnanA cAhie  /  isa prakAra vaha saMyama kA anusaraNa kare  /  mRtyukAla meM
athavA anyakAla meM sAdhu-paMDita vIryayukta tathA mahAvratoM meM udyata rahe  /
unake pAlana meM tallIna rahe  /  ina pAMca mahAvratoM meM prANAtipAta-hiMsA meM
virati bar3A mahatvapUrNa hai  /  isalie ise pratipAdita karane hetu sUtrakAra
kahate haiM-'uDamahe Adi  /  yaha zloka sUtrAdarzoM meM-sUtra kI pANDulipiyoM
meM prApta nahIM hotA kintu TIkA meM milatA hai  /  isalie yahA~ isakA ullekha
kiyA hai-isakA artha spaSTa hai  /  pANe ya NAivAejjA, adinnapi ya NAdae  /
sAdiyaM Na musaM bUyA, esa dhamme busImao  // 19 //  chAyA - prANAJca
nAtipAtayet, adattaM pi ca nAdadIta  /  sAdikaM nA mRSA brUyA deSa dharmo
vazyasya  //  anuvAda - vazya-jitendrIya puruSa kA yahI dharma hai ki vaha
prANiyoM kA atipAta-hiMsA na kreN| na hI dI huI kisI kI vastu na le  /  mAyA-
chalakapaTa na kare aura asatya na bole  /  TIkA - prANapriyANAM prANinAM
prANAnnAtipAtayet, tathA pareNAdattaM dantazodhanamAtramapi 'nAdarIta' na
gRhNIyAt, tathA-sahAdinA-mAyayA vartata iti sAdikaM-samAyaM mRSAvAdaMna brUyAt,
tathAhi-paravaJcanArthaMmRSAvAdau'dhikriyate. sa ca na mAyAmantareNa
bhavatItyato mRSAvAdasya mAyA AdibhUtA varttate, idamuktaM bhavati-yo hi
paravaJcanArthaM samAyo mRSAvAdaH sa parihiyate, yastu saMyama guptyarthaM na
mayA mRgA upalabdhA ityAdikaH sa na doSAyeti, eSa yaH prAk nidRSTo dharmaH-zruta
cAritrAkhyaH svabhAvo vA 'vusImau' tti chAntasatvAt, nirdezArthastvayaM-vastUni
jJAnAdIni tadvato jJAnAdimata ityarthaH, yadi vA-busImautti vazyasya-
Atmavazagasya-vazyendriyasyetyarthaH  // 19 //  -408

Page #437 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shri Veeryadhyayanam - Commentary  **All beings cherish their lives.
Therefore, a virtuous person should not harm any living being. They should not
even accept a blade of grass used for cleaning teeth that was not given by
another. They should not speak falsely with deceit, because false speech is used
to deceive others. Therefore, it cannot exist without deceit and trickery. Thus,
deceit is the root cause of falsehood. The meaning is that the Sutra-maker
prohibits deceitful false speech that is used to deceive others. However, they
do not prohibit falsehood spoken to protect the secrecy of restraint. For
example, when asked by a hunter if they have seen any deer, it is not considered
blameworthy to say that they have not seen any deer. The aforementioned Sutra-
charitra-based nature is Dharma. Here, "Vusimao" is a Chandas usage, indicating
knowledge, etc., and those who possess it. Or, it signifies "Vashya-Atmavashga-
Jiteindriya," one who is self-controlled and has conquered their senses, and is
connected to Dharma.**  **Verse 20:**  **Chhaya:** "Atikramanthu Vacha,
Manasaapi na Prarthayet. Sarvatah Samvrito Danta Aadanam Susamaharet."
**Translation:** A virtuous person, who is completely restrained and has
conquered their senses, should not desire to cause pain to any living being
through speech or mind. They should carefully observe the restraint they have
adopted.  **Commentary:** "Apicha - causing harm to living beings is a violation
of the Mahavratas. A virtuous person should not desire such a violation, nor
should they despise others due to pride. By prohibiting both speech and mind,
the prohibition of bodily violation becomes natural. Thus, a virtuous person
should not commit any sin like killing, etc., through actions, words, or
approval. They should be completely restrained, both externally and internally,
with conquered senses and self-discipline. They should adopt the 'Aadanam' - the
means to liberation - which is based on right understanding, etc., and should be
well-established, free from vices, and should 'Ahare' - accept and embrace it."
**Commentary:** "The violation of living beings - causing them pain - is a
violation of the Mahavratas. A virtuous person should not commit such a
violation, nor should they despise others due to pride, neither through speech
nor through mind. By prohibiting both speech and mind, the prohibition of bodily
violation becomes natural. Thus, a virtuous person should not commit any sin
like killing, etc., through actions, words, or approval. They should be
completely restrained, both externally and internally, with conquered senses and
self-discipline. They should adopt the 'Aadanam' - the means to liberation -
which is based on right understanding, etc., and should be well-established,
free from vices, and should 'Ahare' - accept and embrace it."  **Verse 21:**
**Chhaya:** "Kritancha Kriyamanacha, Agamishyaccha Papakam. Sarvam
Tannaanujaanantyatmaguptaa Jiteindriyaah."  **Translation:** Those who are self-
controlled and have conquered their senses do not approve of any evil, whether
it is done, being done, or will be done.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI vIryAdhyayanaM _TIkArtha - sabhI prANiyoM ko apane prANa priya lagate haiM
/  ata: sAdhu kisI bhI prANI kA atipAtahiMsA na kare  /  dUsare dvArA nahIM diyA
gayA dAMtoM ko kuredane kA tinakA taka na le  /  mAyA sahita mRSAvAda asatya
bhASaNa na kare  /  kyoMki auroM ko Thagane ke lie asatya bhASaNa kiyA jAtA hai
/  ataeva mAyA-chala kapaTa ke binA vaha nahIM hotA  /  isa prakAra asatya kA
mUla kAraNa mAyA hI hai  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki dUsaroM kI
pravaMcanA hetu jo kapaTapUrNa asatya bhASaNa kiyA jAtA hai, sUtrakAra yahA~ usI
kA niSedha karate haiM  /  kintu saMyama kI gupti-rakSaNa ke lie jo asatya bolA
jAtA hai usakA niSedha nahIM karate  /  jaise AkheTaka dvArA pUche jAne para ki
kyA Apane mRgoM ko dekhA hai, yaha kahanA ki mRgoM ko nahIM dekhA  /  yoM asatya
kahane para bhI doSajanaka nahIM hai  /  pUrvakathita sUtra-cAritra mUlaka
svabhAva hI dharma hai  /  yahA~ vusImao yaha chAMdasa prayoga hai, yaha jJAna
Adi vastuoM tathA tadayukta janoM kI ora saMketa hai  /  athavA vazya-
Atmavazaga-jitendrIya kA dyotaka hai  /  jo dharma se sambaddha hai|
atikkammaMti vAyAe, maNasA vi na patthae  /  savvao saMvuDe daMte, AyANaM
susamAhare  // 20 //  chAyA - atikramantu vAcA, manasA'pi na prArthayet  /
sarvataH saMvRto dAnta AdAnaM susamAharet  //  anuvAda - sarvataH saMvRta-
sarvathA saMvara yukta tathA dAnta-damanazIla indriyavijetA sAdhu vacana se yA
mana se kisI prANI ko pIr3A dene kI icchA na rakhe  /  vaha bhalIbhAMti AdAna-
grahaNa kiye hue saMvara kA pAlana kre| TIkA - apica-prANinAmatikrama-pIDAtmakaM
mahAvratAtikramaM vA mano'vaSTabdhatayA paratiraskAraM vA ityevambhUtamatikramaM
vAcA manasA'pi ca na prArthayet etaddvayaniSedhe ca kAyAtikramo dUrata eva
niSiddho bhavati, tadevaM manovAkkAyaiH kRtakAritAnumatibhizca navakena
bhedanAtikramaM na kuryAt, tathA sarvata:sabAhyAbhyantarataH saMvRtoguptaH tathA
indriyadamena tapasA vAdAntaH san mokSasya 'AdAnam' upAdAnaM samyagdarzanAdikaM
suSTUdyuktaH samyagvisrota sikArahitaH 'Aharet' AdadIta-gRhNIyAdityarthaH  // 20
//  kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha - prANiyoM kA atikrama-unheM pIr3A denA mahAvratoM kA
ullaMghana hai  /  sAdhu aisA atikrama tathA ahaMkAra vaza auroM kA tiraskAra na
vANI dvArA aura na mana dvArA hI kare  /  ina donoM-vANI aura mana dvArA
atikrama kA niSedha kiye jAne se, kAya dvArA atikrama kiye jAne kA pratiSedha
sahaja hI ho jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra sAdhu mana, vacana evaM zarIra dvArA
kratakArita aura anumodita pUrvaka jIva hiMsA Adi pApa na kare  /  saba prakAra
se bAhya aura Abhyantara rUpa se saMvRta-saMvarayukta-jitendrIya tathA tapa se
dAnta-damanazIla sAdhu samyak darzana Adi kA, jo mokSaprada hai, visrotisikA-
durvasanA kA tyAga kara saMyama kA samyak pAlana kreN| kaDaM ca kajjamANaM ca,
AMgamissaM ca pAvagaM savvaM taM pANu jANaMti, AyaguttA jiiMdiyA  // 21 //
chAyA - kRtaJca kriyamANaJca, AgamiSyacca pApakam  /  sarva
tannAnujAnantyAtmaguptAH jitendriyAH  //  -409)

Page #438 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra - Translation  **The men who keep their souls pure
from sinful actions and who have conquered their senses, do not approve of the
sins committed, being committed, or to be committed by others.**
**Commentary:**   Those who are virtuous, do not approve of the sinful actions
committed by others, who are like uncivilized people, whether those actions were
committed in the past, are being committed now, or will be committed in the
future. They do not approve of these actions with their mind, speech, or body.
They do not partake in the enjoyment of the fruits of these actions. Even if
others commit sinful actions for their own benefit, such as beheading an enemy,
or killing a thief, the virtuous do not approve of these actions. They do not
consider them to be praiseworthy. If someone offers them impure food, they do
not accept it.   **Who are these men?** The Sutra explains: Those who have kept
their souls pure by restraining their minds, speech, and bodies from unskillful
actions, and who have conquered their senses, such as hearing, are the ones who
do not approve of sinful actions.  **Verse 22:**  **Those who are great,
valiant, and have not seen the truth of the Dharma, their actions are impure and
will bear fruit in all ways.**  **Commentary:**  Some people may be considered
learned, but they have not truly understood the Dharma. They may be skilled in
grammar and logic, but they have not attained true knowledge. True knowledge is
not merely about grammar and logic. It is about understanding the true nature of
reality.   The Sutra says:   "Even if someone is deeply immersed in the study of
scriptures, they will not attain the true nature of reality if they are not
wise. Just as a person may be skilled in tasting different flavors, but they may
not be able to taste the true flavor of a substance for a long time."  Even if
someone is valiant and powerful, if they are not wise, their actions will be
impure and will lead to suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - Atmagupta-apanI AtmA ko pApa pUrNa kAryoM se
bacAye rakhane vAle tathA jitendrIya-indriyoM ko vaza meM rakhane vAle puruSa
kisI dvArA kiye gaye, kiye jAte, bhaviSya meM kiye jAne vAle pApa kA
anumodanasamarthana nahIM karate  /  _TIkA - sAdhUddezena
yadaparairanAryakalpaiH kRtamanuSThitaM pApakaM karma tathA vartamAne ca kAle
kriyamANaM tathA''gAmini ca kAle yatkariSyate tatsarvaM manovAkkAyakarmabhiH
'nAnujAnanti' nAnumodante, tadupabhoga parihAreNeti bhAvaH, yadapyAtmArthaM
pApakaM karma paraiH kRtaM kriyate kariSyate vA, tadyathA-zatroH zirazchinnaM
chidyate, chetsyate vA tathA cauro hato hanyate haniSyate vA ityAdikaM
parAnuSThAnaM 'nAnujAnanti' na ca bahumanyante, tathA yadi paraH
kazcidzuddhenAhAreNopanimantrayettamapinAnumanyanta iti,ka evambhUtA bhavantIti
darzayati-AtmA'kuzalamanovAkkAyanirodhena gupto yeSAM te tathA, jitAni-
vazIkRtAni indriyANi-zrotrAdIni yaiste tathA, evambhUtAH pApakarma nAnujAnantIti
sthitam  // 21 //  TIkArtha - sAdhuoM ko uddiSTa kara anAryoM jaise puruSoM ne
jo pApa kiye, vartamAna meM ve jo karate hoM tathA bhaviSya meM jo kareMge,
sAdhu mAnasika, vAcika evaM kAyika rUpa se unakA anumodana nahIM karate  /  usa
pApamaya padArtha kA upabhoga nahIM karate  /  dUsaroM ne apane svArtha hetu jo
pApa karma kiye hoM jo ve karate hoM, kareMge jaise zatru kA mastaka chinna kara
DAlA gayA, chinna kiyA jA rahA hai yA chinna kiyA jAyegA tathA cora ko mAra DAlA
gayA, vaha mArA jA rahA hai yA mAra DAlA jAyegA ityAdi kAryoM kA sAdhu anumodana
nahIM karate dUsarA koI azuddha bhojana taiyAra kara sAdhu ko Amantrita kareM to
sAdhu use svIkAra nahIM karate  /  aise puruSa kauna haiM, yaha digdarzana
karAne hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM ki akuzala-sAvadya yA pApapUrNa mana, vacana
evaM zarIra ko-unakI pravRttiyoM kA avarodha kara jinhoMne apane Apako gupta
pApayukta banA rakhA ho tathA zrotra-kAna Adi indriyoM ko apane vaza meM kiyA
ho-jItA ho, aise puruSa pahale kahe gaye pApoM kA anumodana-samarthana nahIM
krte| je yAbuddhA mahAbhAgA, vIrA asamattadaMsiNo  /  asuddhaM tesi parakvaMtaM,
saphalaM hoi saptaso  // 22 //  chAyA - ye cAbuddhA mahAbhAgA vIrA
asamyaktvadarzinaH  /  azuddhaM teSAM parAkrAntaM, saphalaM bhavati sarvazaH  //
anuvAda - jo mahAbhAga-logoM dvArA mAnanIya haiM, vIra-zauryazAlI hai para yadi
ve dharma ke yathArtha tattva ko nahIM jAnane vAle asamyak dRSTi-mithyA dRSTi
haiM to unakA parAkrama-una dvArA kiye gaye puNya kArya azuddha haiM, ve karma
baMdha lie haiM  /  TIkA - anyacca-yekecana 'avuddhA' dharmaM
pratyavijJAtaparamArthAvyAkaraNazuSkatarkAdiparijJAnena jAtAvalepAH
paNDitamAnino'pi paramArthavastutattvA nava bodhAd buddhA ityuktaM, na ca
vyAkaraNa parijJAna mAtreNa samyaktvavyatirekeNa tattvA va bodhA bhavatIti,
tathA coktam - "zAstrAvagAhaparighaTTanatatparo'pi, nainAbudhaH samabhigacchati
vastutattvam  /  nAnAprakArarasabhAvagatA'pidavI, svAdaM rasasya sucirAdapi
naiva vetti ,  // 2 // " yadi vA'buddhA iva bAlavIryavantaH, tathA mahAntazca te
bhAgAzca mahAbhAgAH, bhAga zabdaH pUjAvacana:, tatazca mahApUjyA ityarthaH,
lokavizrutA iti, tathA 'vIrAH' parAnIkabhedinaH subhaTA iti, idamuktaM bhavati-
paNDitA 410)

Page #439 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Sri Viryaadhyayanam  This verse shows that even though some people are
revered by the world due to their qualities like renunciation, and even though
they are valiant warriors, they are still deficient in the true knowledge of the
principles. This is because they are not truly right, their state is not right,
and they lack the ability to see the right. This means they are of false vision.
Any effort they make in austerities, donations, study, restraint, and rules is
impure, impure-making, and actually leads to the bondage of karma. This is
because their intention is not pure and it is motivated by desire for results.
This is like the treatment of an incompetent physician, which does not cure the
disease but only aggravates it. Their efforts are accompanied by their fruit -
the bondage of karma. Thus, all their actions, austerities, and practices are
only for the bondage of karma. ||22||  Now, the author speaks about the virtuous
and valiant.  **Commentary:** Those who do not know the secrets or essence of
the Buddha Dharma, and who consider themselves very arrogant and learned based
on their knowledge of dry grammatical arguments, are devoid of the true
knowledge of the ultimate reality. Therefore, they are called ignorant and
unwise. Mere knowledge of grammar without rightness does not lead to the
understanding of the true nature of things. It is said that even though a person
is proficient in delving deep into the scriptures and explaining them, he still
does not know the true nature of things. Just like a proud person, or a spoon,
even though it remains immersed in various delicious substances for a long time,
it does not know the taste of their essence. Or, a person with childish strength
is called unwise. The word "bhaga" denotes worship or respect. Those who are
worthy of worship and respect by people are called "maha-bhaga". They are
renowned in the world. Those who are capable of breaking through the enemy's
forces and defeating them are called "su-ghada".  The meaning is that many
people are learned in grammar and other subjects, and are worthy of respect in
the world due to their qualities like renunciation, and are also valiant
warriors, but they do not know the true nature of things. The author expresses
this. What is not truly right is called "asamyak". The state or nature of
"asamyak" is called "asamyaktva". Those who are possessed by "asamyaktva" are of
false vision. They are childish - ignorant in terms of religion. The effort made
by these people of false vision in austerities, donations, study, restraint, and
rules, is impure, impure-making, and actually leads to the bondage of karma.
This is because it is devoid of the right intention and is motivated by desire
for results. Just like the treatment of an incompetent physician does not cure
the disease but only aggravates it, similarly, the efforts of these ignorant
people are accompanied by the bondage of karma. Thus, all the actions,
austerities, and practices performed by those of false vision are only for the
bondage of karma. Now, the author speaks about the virtuous and valiant.  1.
**Je ya buddha maha-bhaga, vira sammatta-dansino. Sudham tesim parakkantam,
aphalam hoi savvaso.** ||23||  **Shadow:** **Ye cha buddha maha-bhaga vira
samyaktva-darsinah. Sudham tesham parakrantam aphalam bhavati sarvashah.**
**Translation:** Those who are Buddhas - knowers of the true nature of things,
maha-bhaga - worthy of respect, and vira - capable of breaking the bonds of
karma, and who have right vision, their austerities and other actions are pure.
They are for the destruction of karma and for the attainment of liberation.
**Commentary:** These are some self-enlightened ones, like the Tirthankaras and
their disciples, or those who have been enlightened by the Buddhas, like the
Ganadharas and others. They are "maha-bhaga" - worthy of great respect, "vira" -
valiant, capable of breaking the bonds of karma, and they shine with qualities
like knowledge. They are also "samyaktva-darsinah" - knowers of the ultimate
reality.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI vIryAdhyayanaM api tyAgAdibhirguNairlokapUjyA api tathA subhaTavAdaM
vahanto'pi samyak tattvaparijJAna vikalAH kecana bhavantIti darzayati na
samyagasamyak tadbhAvo'samyaktvaM taddraSTuM zIlaM yeSAM te tathA, mithyAdRSTaya
ityarthaH, teSAM ca bAlAnAM yatkimapi tapodAnAdhyayana yamaniyamAdiSu
parAkrAntamudyamakRtaM tadazuddhaM avizuddhikAri pratyuta karmabandhAya, bhAvo
pahatatvAt sanidAnatvAdveti kuvaidyacikitsAvaddhi parItAnubandhIti, tacca teSAM
parAkrAntaM saha phalena - karma bandhena vartata iti saphalaM 'sarvaza' iti
sarvA'pi tatkriyA tapo'nuSThAnAdikA karmabandhoyaiveti  // 22 //  sAmprataM
paNDitavIryiNo'dhikRtyAha TIkArtha - jo puruSa buddha dharma ke rahasya yA sAra
ko nahIM jAnate, vyAkaraNa ke zuSka tarkoM ke jJAna ke bala para apane ko
atyanta ahaMkArI, paNDita mAnate haiM, ve paramArtha vastu tatva - yathArtha
jJAna se rahita haiM  /  isalie unako abuddha-ajJa kahA gayA hai  /  samyaktva
ke binA kevala vyAkaraNa ke parijJAna se padArtha ke satyasvarUpa kA avabodha
nahIM hotA  /  kahA gayA hai ki zAstroM meM avagAhana - gaharAI taka praviSTa
tathA unakI vyAkhyA karane meM tatpara - kuzala hote huye bhI ajJa puruSa
vastutatva - vastu ke yathArtha svarUpa ko nahIM jAna pAtA  /  jaise garvI-
kucha yA cammaca taraha taraha ke sarasa padArthoM meM cirakAla paryanta par3A
rahatA huA bhI unake rasa ke svAda ko nahIM jAna pAtA  /  athavA bAlavIrya yukta
puruSa ko abuddha kahA jAtA hai| bhAga zabda pUjA yA satkAra dyotaka hai  /  jo
logoM dvArA pUjanIya va mAnanIya hote haiM ve mahAbhAga kaheM jAte haiN| ve loka
vizruta hote haiN| jo zatru kI senAoM kA bhedana karane meM, unheM chinna-bhinna
karane meM sakSama hote haiM, ve sughar3a kahe jAte haiM  /  kahane kA tAtparya
yaha hai ki kaI puruSa paNDita vyAkaraNa Adi viSayoM ke vidvAn tathA tyAga Adi
vizeSatAoM ke kAraNa loka meM pUjya - satkAra yogya tathA subhaTa-yuddha meM
zauryazAlI hote huye bhI vastu ke satya svarUpa ko nahIM jAnate haiM, sUtrakAra
aisA abhivyakta karate haiM  /  jo samyak yathArtha - ThIka nahIM hai, use
asamyak kahA jAtA hai| asamyak bhAva yA svarUpa asamyaktva kahalAtA hai  /  jo
asamyaktva yukta hote haiM ve mithyA dRSTi haiM  /  ve bAla- dhArmika dRSTi se
ajJa haiM  /  ina mithyAdRSTi puruSoM kA tapa, dAna, adhyayana, yama evaM niyama
Adi meM tanmUlaka sAdhanA meM kiyA gayA parAkrama-udyama azuddha hai
avizuddhikArI hai| isalie vaha karmabaMdha kA hetu hai  /  kyoMki vaha samyaktva
bhAva se rahita hai - tathA phalAbhikAMkSA yukta hai| jaise kuvaidya-ayogya
cikitsaka kI cikitsA se roga naSTa nahIM hotA kintu vaha bar3hatA hI hai, usI
prakAra una ajJa janoM kA parAkrama udyama yA kriyA kalApa karma baMdha sahita
hotA hai  /  isa prakAra mithyAtvI dvArA niSpAdita tapazcaraNa Adi sabhI
kriyAyeM karma baMdha ke lie hI hotI haiM  /  aba paNDita vIrya yukta puruSoM ke
sambandha meM sUtrakAra kahate haiM  /  1 je ya buddhA mahAbhAgA, vIrA
sammattadaMsiNo  /  suddhaM tesiM parakkaMtaM, aphalaM hoi savvaso  // 23 //
chAyA ye ca buddhAH mahAbhAgAH vIrAH samyaktvadarzinaH  /  zuddhaM teSAM
parAkrAnta maphalaM bhavati sarvazaH  //  anuvAda jo buddha - vastutvavettA,
mahAbhAga padapUjanIya tathA karmoM ke vidAraNa meM samartha samyak dRSTi haiM
unake tapazcaraNa Adi kArya zuddha hote haiM  /  karmoM ke nAza hetu, mokSa
prApti hetu hote haiM  /  TIkA - ye kecana svayambuddhAstIrthakarAdyAstIcchiSyA
vA buddhabodhitA gaNadharA dayo 'mahAbhAga' mahApUjAbhAjo 'vIrAH 'karma vidAraNa
sahiSNavo jJAnAdibhirvA guNairvirAjanta iti vIrAH, tathA 'samyaktvadarzina: '
paramArtha tatvavedinasteSo 411

Page #440 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga, which is the supreme effort of the
Bhagavans, is pure, free from obstacles, and fruitless in relation to the
bondage of karma, as it is dedicated to the eradication of karma. This is
because the effort of the Samyak Drishtis is primarily focused on restraint and
austerity, and restraint is the form of non-attachment, while austerity bears
the fruit of karma eradication. Thus, it is said: "Restraint leads to the
cessation of inflow, and austerity bears the fruit of knowledge."  Commentary:
Those who are self-enlightened, like the Tirthankaras, and their disciples, like
the Ganadharas, who have attained enlightenment through the knowledge of the
enlightened, are worthy of great reverence. They are capable of destroying
karma, and are adorned with qualities like knowledge. They are the knowers of
the true nature of things, and their efforts in austerity, study, restraint, and
rules are pure. This means that they are not tainted by the blemishes of
desires, anger, and other afflictions. Therefore, they are fruitless in relation
to the bondage of karma, and are only for the eradication of karma. This is
because all the efforts of the Samyak Drishtis are primarily focused on
restraint and austerity. Restraint is the form of non-attachment, and austerity
bears the fruit of karma eradication. Therefore, the scripture says: "Restraint
leads to the cessation of inflow, and austerity bears the fruit of knowledge."
Those who have renounced the world, even if they are born into a great family,
are not pure in their austerity if they seek praise or honor for it. A virtuous
person should keep their austerity secret so that others who are inclined to
give charity do not know about it. They should never boast about it.
Commentary: It is also said that those who are born into great families, like
the Ikshvaku dynasty, who are renowned in the world for their valor and other
qualities, and whose fame is widespread, are not pure in their austerity if they
perform it for the sake of praise, honor, or recognition. Similarly, any
austerity that is performed but is not known to others, such as those who are
inclined to give charity, should be kept secret by the seeker of liberation.
Therefore, they should not boast about themselves, as in saying, "I am born into
a noble family, and I am now engaged in austerity to purify my body." By
revealing themselves in this way, they do not make their practice fruitful.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram bhagavatAM yatparAkrAntaM-tapo'dhyayanayamaniyamA
dAvanuSThitaM tacchuddham -avadAtaM niruparodhaM sAta gaurava
zalyakaSAyAdidoSAkalaGkitaM karmabandhaM prati aphalaM bhavati-tanniranubandha,
nirjarArthameva bhavatItyarthaH, tathA ha-samyagdRSTiInA sarvamapi saMyamatapaH
pradhAnamanuSThAnaM bhavati, saMyamasya cAnAzravakapatvAt tapasazva
nirjarAphalatvAditi, tathA. ca paThayatesaMyame aNaNdhyaphale tave bodANa phale
iti  // 23 //  TIkArtha - jo svayaM buddha-apane Apa bodha prApta tIrthaMkara
Adi haiM, unake ziSya athavA buddha bodhitajJAnI dvArA bodha prApta gaNadhara
Adi haiM, jo mahA pUjanIya haiM karmoM ke vidAraNa-ucchedana yA vinAza meM
sakSama haiM athavA jo jJAnAdi guNoM se suzobhita haiM, paramArtha tattva vedI-
padArthoM ke satya svarUpa ko jAnane vAle haiM una mahApuruSoM kA tapa,
adhyayana, yama evaM niyama Adi meM anuSThita udyama zuddha hai arthAt vaha
sukha kI anivAMcha krodhAdi zalya, kaSAya rUpa doSoM se kalaMkita dUSita nahIM
haiM  /  isalie vaha karmabaMdha kI dRSTi se niSphala haiMnirUpabaMdha hai  /
vaha kevala nirjarA-karma nirajaraNa ke lie hotA hai  /  kyoMki samyak dRSTi
puruSoM ke sabhI udyama saMyama evaM tapa pradhAna hote haiN| saMyama anAzrava
rUpa-saMvara rUpa hai tathA tapa kA phala nirjarA-karmakSaya hai| ataeva yaha
zAstra pATha hai ki saMyama se Azrava kA nirodha hotA hai tathA tapazcaraNa se
nirjarA phalita hotI hai| tesiMpi tavo Na suddho, nikkhaMtA je mahAkulA  /
janne vanne viyANaMti, na silogaM pavvejae  // 24 //  chAyA - teSAmapi tapo na
zuddha, niSkrAntA ye mahAkulAH  /  yannaivA'nye vijAnanti, nazlokaM pravedayet
//  anuvAda - jo mahAkula-uccakula meM utpanna hai, pravarjita hai, ve yadi
apane tapa kI prazasti karate haiM athavA satkAra, sammAna hetu tapazcaraNa
karate haiM to unakA vaha udyama azuddha hai  /  sAdhu apane tapa ko isa prakAra
gupta rakhe jisase anya-dAna dene meM zraddhAzIla puruSa use jAna na pAye  /
apane mu~ha se kabhI vaha apanI prazaMsA na kare  /  TIkA - kiJcAnyat-
mahatkulam-ikSvAkAdikaM yeSAM te mahAkulA lokavizrutAH
zauryAdibhirguNairvistIrNa yazasasteSAmapi pUjAsatkArAdyarthamutkIrtanena vA
yattapastadazuddhaM bhavati, yacca kriyamANa mapi tapo naivAnye dAnazrAddhAdayo
jAnanti tattathAbhUtamAtmArthinA vidheyam, ato naivAtmazlAghAM 'pravehayet'
prakAzayet, tadyathA ahamuttamakulIna ibhyo vA''saM sAmprataM punastaponiSTa
ptadeha iti, evaM svayamAviSkaraNena na svakIyamanuSThAnaM phalgunAmApAdayediti
// 24 //  TIkArtha - jo ikSvAku Adi ucca kuloM meM utpanna haiM tathA zaurya
parAkrama Adi ke kAraNa jagata meM jinakI kIrti vyApta hai, una dvArA yadi pUjA
satkAra-mAna pratiSThA pAne kI abhilASA se tapa kiyA gayA ho athavA ve apane
tapa kI prazaMsA karate hoM, to vaha azuddha hai, adhyAtma kI dRSTi se nirdoSa
nahIM hai  /  ata: AtmArthI sAdhaka prayatnazIla rahe ki ve puruSa usake tapa ko
na jAna sake  /  jo dAna meM zraddhA rakhane vAle haiM, vaha svayaM apanI
prazaMsA bhI na kare ki maiM uttama kula meM utpanna huA  /  dhana, vaibhava
sampanna rahA tathA aba tapazcaraNa dvArA apanI deha ko paritapta karane vAlA
tapasvI hU~  /  isa prakAra vaha svayaM apane tapomaya anuSThAna ko prakaTa
karatA huA, use ni:sAra na banAye  /  412

Page #441 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(Shri Veeryadhyayanam - Alp Pindasi Panami, Appam Bhasej Suvvae.
Khante'abhinivvude Dante, Vitagiddhi Sada Jae. ||25|| Chhaya - Alp Pindashi
Panashi, Alpam Bhaset Suvrata. Kshanto'abhinirvrto Dante Vitagrddih Sada Yateta.
|| Anvad - Savrata-uttama vrata yukta sadhu udar nirvah hetu alp bhojan kare.
Alp jal piye. Alp bhashan kare, kshamasheel rahe, lobha adi se dur rahe. Apni
indriyon ko apne vash mein rakhe. Vishay bhog mein grdh-lolub-aaskat na rahe
tatha sadaiv sanayam palan mein udyat rahe. _Teeka - Apich-alpam-stokan pindam
ashitum shelam asya savalp pindashi yatkinchnashiti bhavah, evam pane'apyoyam,
tatha chagam: 'He' jamvatam va asiya jaththa va tattha va suhovagay niddo. Jene
va tene (va) santuttha veer! Munio'si te apa. ||1|| Chhaya - Yadvatadvaasila
yatra tatra va sukhapagatnidrah. Yena tena va santushtah he veer! Tvaayatma
jnatasthi. ||1|| Tatha "Atthadukkudianda g mettpaman kaval ahare pane appahare
duvalaskalavalehi avaddhomoyariya sol sahim dubhagepatte chauvinsan omodariya
tinsan pamanapatte battisam kavala sampurnnahare" iti, ata ekak kavala
hanyadinono darata vidheya, evam pane upakaran chono daratam viddhyaditi, tatha
choktam - "Thova haro thovabhanio a jo hoi thov niddho a. Thovovahi upakarano
tassa hu devani pan manti. ||1||" Chhaya - Stoka harah stokabhanitah
stokanidrascha yo bhavati. Stokopadikopkaranastamai chadeva api pranamanti. ||
Tatha 'Suvrata' sadhu alpam parimitam hitam cha bhaset, sarvada vikatharahito
bhavedityarthah, bhava avmaudaryam adhikritya ahavatah krodhadyupashamat
'Kshanta' kshantipra dhanah tatha abhinito' lobhaadijayanniratur, tatha indriya
noindriyadamanat 'Dante' jiteindriyah, tatha choktam - "Kashaya yasya
nochchhinna, yasya natmavasham manah. Indriyani na guptani, pravrajya tasya
jivanam. ||1||" Evam vigata grddir visyeshu yasya sa vigatagriddih-ashamsa dosha
rahitah 'Sada' sarvakalam sanayam anusthan 'Yateta' yatnam kuryad iti. ||25||
Teekaarth - Sadhu svabhav se hi svlap bhoji-thoda bhojan karne wala tatha svlap
jal pine wala ho. Aagam mein kaha gaya hai ki veer-atmabal ke dhani purush tum
ko jo kuchh prapt hota hai, use khakar jis kisi sthana par tum sukh se sote ho,
jo kuchh milta hai, usi se santusht hokar vichar te ho. Tumne apni atma ko, apne
aap ko pahchan liya hai. Aur bhi kaha hai jo murgi ke ande ke saman aath kaval-
gras bhojan karta hai, vah alpahar kaha jata hai. Jo barah gras bhojan karta hai
vah aparadh-adhe se nyan ya avmodary kaha jata hai. Soulh kaval ahar karna svlap
avmodary hai. Chaubis kaval ahar karna usse ardha hai-usse adha hai. Tis kaval
bhojan karna praman ahar hai. Battis kaval bhojan karna 1413

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ( zrI vIryAdhyayanaM - appa piMDAsi pANAmi, appaM bhAseja suvvae  /
khaMte'bhinivvuDe daMte, vItagiddhI sadA jae  // 25 //  chAyA - alpa piNDAzI
pAnAzI, alpaM bhASeta suvrataH  /  kSAnto'bhinirvRto dAnto vItagRddhiH sadA
yateta  //  anavAda - savrata-uttama vrata yukta sAdha udara nirvAha heta alpa
bhojana kare. alpa jala pIye. alpa bhASaNa kare, kSamAzIla rahe, lobha Adi se
dUra rahe  /  apanI indriyoM ko apane vaza meM rakhe  /  viSaya bhoga meM
gRddha-lolupa-Asakta na rahe tathA sadaiva saMyama pAlana meM udyata rahe  /
_TIkA - apica-alpaM-stokaM piNDamazituM zIlamasyAsAvalpapiNDAzI yatkiJcanAzIti
bhAvaH, evaM pAne'pyAyojyaM, tathA cAgam: 'he' jaMvataM va AsIya jattha va
tattha va suhovagaya niddo  /  jeNa va teNa (va) saMtuTTha vIra ! muNio'si te
ApA  // 1 //  chAyA - yadvAtadvAazilA yatra tatra vA sukhApagatanidraH  /  yena
tena vA santuSTaH he vIra ! tvAyAtmA jJAto'sti  // 1 //  tathA
"aTThadukkuDiaMDaga mettappamANe kavale AhAre pANe appAhAre duvAlasakalavalehi
avaDDhomoyariyA sola sahiM dubhAgepatte cauvIsaM omodariyA tIsaM pamANapatte
battIsaM kavalA saMpuNNAhAre" iti, ata ekaika kavala hAnyAdinonodaratA vidheyA,
evaM pAne upakaraNe conodaratAM vidadhyAditi, tathA coktam - "thovA hAro
thovabhaNio a jo hoi thovaniddo a  /  thovovahi upakaraNo tassa hu devANi paNa
maMti  // 1 // " chAyA - stokAhAraH stokabhaNitaH stokanidrazca yo bhavati  /
stokopadhikopakaraNastasmai cadevA api praNamanti  //  tathA 'suvrataH'sAdhuH
alpaM parimitaM hitaM cabhASeta,sarvadA vikathArahito bhavedityarthaH,
bhAvAvamaudaryamadhikRtyAhabhAvataH krodhAdyupazamAt 'kSAntaH' kSAntipradhAnaH
tathA abhinito' lobhAdijayAnnirAturaH, tathA indriya noindriyadamanAt 'dAnto'
jitendriyaH, tathA coktam - "kaSAyA yasya nocchinnA, yasya nAtmavazaM manaH  /
indriyANi na guptAni, pravrajyA tasya jIvanam  // 1 // " evaM vigatA
gRddhirviSayeSu yasya sa vigatagRddhiH-AzaMsA doSa rahitaH 'sadA' sarvakAlaM
saMyamAnuSThAne 'yateta' yatnaM kuryAditi  // 25 //  TIkArtha - sAdhu svabhAva
se hI svalpa bhojI-thor3A bhojana karane vAlA tathA svalpa jala pIne vAlA ho  /
Agama meM kahA gayA hai ki vIra-Atmabala ke dhanI puruSa tuma ko jo kucha prApta
hotA hai, use khAkara jisa kisI sthAna para tuma sukha se sote ho, jo kucha
milatA hai, usI se saMtuSTa hokara vicarate ho  /  tumane apanI AtmA ko, apane
Apa ko pahacAna liyA hai  /  aura bhI kahA hai jo murgI ke aNDe ke samAna ATha
kaMvala-grAsa bhojana karatA hai, vaha alpAhAra kahA jAtA hai  /  jo bAraha
grAsa bhojana karatA hai vaha apArdha-Adhe se nyana yA avamodarya kahA jAtA hai
/  saulaha kavala AhAra karanA svalpa avamodarya hai| caubIsa kavala AhAra
karanA usase ardha hai-usase AdhA hai  /  tIsa kavala bhojana karanA pramANa
AhAra hai  /  battIsa kavala bhojana karanA 1413

Page #442 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** is a complete guide to diet. A sadhu should
practice reducing their food intake by one mouthful at a time. They should eat
less than their hunger. Similarly, they should practice **avomodary**
(moderation) in their consumption of drinks, and other utensils. It is said that
those who eat little, speak little, sleep little, and possess few possessions
are even worshipped by the gods. A virtuous sadhu should speak little and only
speak what is beneficial. They should never speak **viktha** (words that could
lead to the corruption of their character).  Now the Sutrakar explains the
meaning of **avayodary** (moderation). A sadhu should calm their anger and other
passions and become forgiving. They should conquer their greed and other desires
and become **anatur** (free from anxiety). They should control their senses and
mind and become **jiteindriya** (master of their senses). Therefore, it is said
that the **pravrajya** (renunciation) of one who has not destroyed their
**kashayas** (passions) and whose mind is not under their control is only for
the sake of survival or to fill their stomach. Therefore, a sadhu should always
strive to follow **sanayam** (self-control) and be free from **griddhi**
(worldly attachments).  **Jhan Jogam Samahat, Kayam Viusej Savvaso. Titikkham
Parmam Naccha, Ayokkhaae Parivvaejjassi Ttibemi. ||26||**  **Shadow:**
Meditation, yoga, and concentration, completely abandon all actions. Knowing
that forbearance is supreme, I say that one should renounce for liberation.
**Translation:** A sadhu should accept meditation, yoga, and concentration as
their practice and restrain their mind, speech, and body from all evil actions.
It is beneficial to endure trials and tribulations. Knowing this, one should
follow **sanayam** until they attain liberation.  **Commentary:** The words
"Jhan Jogam" etc. refer to meditation, which is characterized by the restraint
of the mind, such as contemplation of dharma. Yoga is the specific activity of
the mind, speech, and body in that meditation. Having properly adopted this
meditation yoga, one should abandon the body, which is prone to unskillful
actions. One should abandon all actions, including those of the hands, feet,
etc., that cause suffering to others. One should know that forbearance, which is
the endurance of trials and tribulations, is supreme and the most important for
self-welfare. One should follow **sanayam** until all karmas are destroyed. This
is what I say. The word "iti" signifies the end of the verse. The word "bravimi"
(I say) is to be understood as in the previous verses.  **Commentary:**
Restraining the mind from evil objects and contemplating dharma is called
meditation. In that meditation, the specific engagement of the mind, speech, and
body is called meditation yoga. Having properly adopted this meditation yoga,
one should restrain the body from engaging in unskillful actions. One should not
allow the body to engage in such actions. One should not allow their hands,
feet, etc., to engage in actions that cause suffering to others. One should
understand that forbearance, which is the endurance of trials and tribulations,
is supreme and the most important for self-welfare. One should follow
**sanayam** until all karmas are destroyed. This is what I say. The word "iti"
signifies the end of the verse. The word "bravimi" (I say) is to be understood
as in the previous verses.  The eighth study, called **Virya**, is complete.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram sampUrNa AhAra hai  /  sAdhu ko cAhiye ki AhAra meM eka
kavala-grAsa kama karate jAne kA abhyAsa kare  /  avamodaryaunodari kare  /
bhUkha se kama khAye  /  isI prakAra pAna-peya padArthoM meM tathA anya
upakaraNoM meM bhI avamodarya karanA cAhie  /  kahA gayA hai ki jo stoka-thor3A
khAtA hai  /  thor3A bhASaNa karatA hai, thor3I nIMda letA hai, thor3I
upadhiupakaraNa rakhatA hai, use deva bhI namaskAra karate haiM  /  uttama vrata
yukta sAdhu thor3A bole, hitaprada bole  /  vaha sadaiva vikathA-jisase cAritra
dUSita hone kI AzaMkA ho, vaisI bAta na kare  /  aba sUtrakAra bhAva avayodarya
ke sambandha meM batalAte haiM  /  sAdhu krodha Adi ko zAnta kara kSamAzIla bane
/  lobha Adi ko jItakara anAtura-AturatA rahita bane  /  indriya aura mana kA
damana kara jitendrIya bane  /  ataeva kahA hai ki jisane apane kaSAyoM kA nAza
nahIM kiyA tathA jisakA mana apane niyantraNa meM nahIM hai, usakI pravrajyA
kevala jIvana calAne ke lie yA peTa bharane ke lie hai  /  ataH sAdhu griddhi-
vaiyika AsaktatA se pRthak hokara sadaiva saMyama kA anupAlana karane meM
yatnazIla rahe  /  jhANa jogaM samAhaTTa , kAyaM viuseja savvaso  /  titikkhaM
paramaM NaccA, AyokkhAe parivvaejjAsi ttibemi  // 26 //  chAyA - dhyAna yogaM
samAhRtya, kAyaM vyutsRjetsarvazaH  /  titikSAM paramAM jJAtvA''mokSAya
parivrajediti bravImi  //  anuvAda - sAdhu dhyAna yoga-dhyAnAtmaka sAdhanA ko
svIkAra samagra asata kAryoM se mana vacana evaM zarIra kA nirodha kare,-ina
dvArA vaisA na kare  /  parISaha aura upasarga ko sahana karanA zreyaskara hai|
yaha jAnakara jaba taka mokSa prApta na ho jAe saMyama kA anupAlana kare  /
TIkA - apica-'jhANajogam' ityAdi, dhyAnaM-cittanirodhalakSaNaM dharmadhyAnAdikaM
tatra yogo viziSTa manovAkkAya vyApArastaM dhyAnayogaM 'samAhRtya'
samyagupAdAyaM 'kAya' dehamakuzalayogapravRttaM 'vyutsRjeta' parityajet
'sarvataH sarveNApi prakAreNA, hastapAdAdikamapiparapIr3AkArinavyApArayet tathA
titikSAM' kSAntiparISahopasargasahanarUpAM 'paramAM' pradhAnAM jJAtvA 'AmokSAya'
azeSa karmakSayaM yAvat 'parivrajeri' ti saMmAnuSThAnaM kuryAstvamiti  /  itiH
parisamAptyarthe  /  bravImIti pUrvavat  // 26 //  samAptaM cASTamaM
vIryAkhyamadhyayanamiti  //  TIkArtha - citta kA nirodha karanA-asat viSayoM se
use rokanA, dharma kA anucintana karanA Adi dhyAna kahA jAtA hai  /  usameM-
dhyAna meM mana, vacana evaM zarIra dvArA vizeSa rUpa se saMlagna honA usase
jur3anA dhyAna yoga hai  /  dhyAna yoga kA acchI taraha upAdAna kara-grahaNa
kara akuzala-azubha yoga meM, pravRttiyoM meM jAtI huI deha kA nirodha karo,
zarIra ko usa ora na jAne do  /  apane hAtha paira Adi aMgoM ko bhI para
pIDAkArI-anya prANiyoM ke lie pIr3A utpanna karane vAle kAryoM meM saMlagna na
hone do  /  pariSaha evaM upasarga ko parama pradhAna Atma kalyANa hetu ati
uttama samajho  /  jaba taka samasta karmoM kA kSaya na ho jAe, saMyama kA
anusaraNa karo, yaha maiM kahatA hU~  /  iti zabda samApti ke artha meM hai,
bravImi bolatA hU~. yaha pUrvavat yojanIya hai  /  vIrya nAmaka AThavAM
adhyayana samApta huA  /  414

Page #443 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Religious Studies** **Ninth Religious Study**  What Dharma was declared by the
wise Mahamahan? Listen to me, the Dharma of the Jinas, which is free from
deceit. ||1||  **Commentary:** Which Dharma was declared by the wise Mahamahan?
Listen to me, the Dharma of the Jinas, which is straight and true. ||
**Translation:**  Jambuswami, along with others, asks Sudharmaswami: "What
Dharma was declared by the wise Mahamahan, who teaches non-violence towards all
living beings?" Sudharmaswami replies: "Listen to me, the Dharma of the Jinas,
which is straight and true, free from deceit."  **Commentary:** Jambuswami
addresses Sudharmaswami, saying: "What Dharma, characterized by the avoidance of
evil deeds and leading to liberation, was declared by the Mahamahan, who teaches
non-violence towards all living beings?" He then clarifies: "The Mahamahan, the
wise and omniscient Lord Mahavira, who possesses the knowledge of the three
worlds and the three times, declared this Dharma."  Sudharmaswami responds:
"Listen to me, the Dharma of the Jinas, who have conquered attachment and
aversion, is straight and true, free from deceit and illusion. It is as it is,
not as others have declared it."  **Commentary:** Jambuswami addresses
Sudharmaswami, saying: "What Dharma, characterized by the avoidance of evil
deeds and leading to liberation, was declared by the Mahamahan, who teaches non-
violence towards all living beings?" He then clarifies: "The Mahamahan, the wise
and omniscient Lord Mahavira, who possesses the knowledge of the three worlds
and the three times, declared this Dharma."  Sudharmaswami responds: "Listen to
me, the Dharma of the Jinas, who have conquered attachment and aversion, is
straight and true, free from deceit and illusion. It is as it is, not as others
have declared it."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayana navamaM dharmamAdhyayana kayare dhamme akkhAe, mAhaNeNa
matImatA ?  /  ajuM dhammaM jahAtaccaM, jiNANaM taM suNeha me  // 1 //  chAyA -
kataro dharma AkhyAtaH, mAhanena matimatA  /  Rju dharma yathAtathyaM, jinAnAM
taM zRNuta me  //  anuvAda - mAhaNa-jIvoM kA hanana na karane kA upadeza dene
vAle, tathA matimAna prajJAzIla-sarvajJa bhagavAna mahAvIra svAmI ne kauna se
dharma kA AkhyAna-pratipAdana kiyA ? jambU svAmI Adi kA vaha prazna zravaNa kara
sudharmA svAmI kahate haiM ki jinezvaroM dvArA pratipAdita usa Rju-sarala dharma
ko yathAvat rUpa meM mujhase suno  /  TIkA -
jambUsvAmIsudharmasvAminamuddizyedamAha-tadyathA-'kataraH' kimbhRto
durgatigamanadharaNalakSaNo dharmaH 'AkhyAtaH' pratipAdito 'mAhaNeNaM' ti mA
jantUn vyApAdayetyevaM vineyeSu vAk pravRttiryasyAsau 'mAhano' bhagavAn
vIravardhamAnasvAmI tena ?, tameva vizinaSTi-manute-avagacchati jagatrayaM
kAlatrayopetaM yayA sA kevalajJAnAkhyA matiH sA asyAstrIsti matimAn tena-
utpannakevalajJAnena bhagavatA, iti pRSTe sudharmasvAmyAha-rAgadveSajito
jinAsteSAM sambandhitaM dharmaM 'aMjum' iti 'Rju mAyA prapaJcarahitatpAdavakraM
tathA-'jahAtacvaM me' iti yathAvasthitaM mama kathayata: zRNuta yUyaM, na tu
yathA'nyaistIrthikairdambhapradhAno dharmo'bhihitastathA bhagavatA'pIti
pAThAntaraM vA 'jaNagA taM suNeha me' jAyanta iti janA-lokAsta eva
janakAsteSAmAmantraNaM he janakAH  /  taM dharma zRNuta yUyamiti  // 1 //
TIkArtha - jambU svAmI zrI sudharmA svAmI ko udiSTa kara kahate haiM ki prANiyoM
kA vyApAdana mata karo? isa prakAra ziSyoM ko upadeza dene vAle bhagavAn zrI
mahAvIra ne prANiyoM ko durgati meM girane se bacAne meM samartha kauna sA
dharma pratipAdita kiyA ? ve prabhu mahAvIra kaise haiM ? bhagavAna kI
vizeSatAeM batalAte hue isa prakAra pratipAdata karate haiM  /  bhUta-bIte hae,
bhaviSyat, Age Ane vAle tathA vartamAna-ho rahe, ina tInoM kAloM sahita ina
tInoM lokoM ko jisase jAnA jAtA hai use mati kahate haiM  /  vaha kevala jJAna
rUpa hai  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI aise the jinheM kevala jJAna utpanna thA  /
zrI sudharmAsvAmI kahate haiM ki jinhoMne rAga aura dveSa ko jIta liyA, jo rAga
aura dveSa se atIta ho gae, U~ce uTha gae unheM jina kahate haiM  /  unakA
dharma mAyA-chalanA prapaMca Adi se varjita hone ke kAraNa Rju hai-sIdhA hai  /
Apa logoM ko maiM vaha dharma yathAvata rUpa meM kahatA hU~  /  Apa zravaNa kare
/  jaise anya dharmoM ke tathAkathita tIrthaMkaroM ne mAyA pradhAna dharma kahA
hai, bhagavAna mahAvIra ne vaisA nahIM kahA  /  'jaNagAtaM suNeha' meM aisA
pAThAntara prApta hotA hai  /  jo utpanna hote haiM, janmate haiM, unheM jana
kahA jAtA hai  /  jana ke hI sAtha meM ka pratyaya hone ke kAraNa janaka rUpa
hai  /  unheM jana samudAya ko sambodhita karate hue kahate haiM ki Apa loga usa
dharma kA zravaNa karo  /  415

Page #444 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra says: Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, Chandala, and
Vokkas, Esika, Vaishya, and Shudra, these are the four types of beings who are
attached to the beginning (Aaram bha).   Those who are attached to possessions
(Parigrah) have increasing enmity towards other beings.  Those who are attached
to desires (Kama) that are born from the beginning (Aaram bha) are not
liberators from suffering (Dukkha).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram mAhaNA khattiyA vessA, caMDAlA adu boksA  /  esiyA
vesiyA suddA, je ya AraMbhaNissiyA  // 2 //  pariggahaniviTThANaM, veraM tesiM
pavaDDhaI  /  AraMbhasaMbhiyA kAmA, na te dukkhavimoyagA  // 3 //  chAyA -
brAhmaNAH kSatriyAH vaizyA, cANDAlA atha voksAH  /  eSikA, vaizikAH zUdrAH, ye
cArambhanizritAH  //  parigrahaniniSThAnAM, vairaM teSAM pravardhate  /
ArambhasambhRtAH kAmA, na te duHkhavimocakAH  //  anuvAda - brAhmaNa, kSatriya,
vaizya, cANDAla, vokkasa, eSika, vaizika, zUdra Adi prANI jo ArambhahiMsA Adi
meM Asakta hai, parigrahAniviSTa-parigraha meM sanniviSTa-saMlagna hai, unakA
anya jIvoM ke sAtha ananta kAla vartI vaira bar3hatA hai Arambha se saMbhRta,
bhoga lolupa ve prANI duHkhoM kA janaka-duHkhajanaka karmoM kA tyAga nahIM kara
pAte  /  TIkA - anvaya vyatirekAbhyAmukto'rthaH sUkto bhavatItyato
yathoddiSTadharmapratipakSabhUto'dharmastadAzritAMstAvaddazayitumAha-brAhmaNAH
kSatriyA vaizyAstathA cANDAlAH atha bokkasA-avAntarajAtIyAH, tadyathA-brAhmaNena
zUdyAM jAto niSAdo brAhmaNenava vaizyAryA jAto'mbaSThaH tathA niSAdenAmbaSTayAM
jAto bokkasaH, tathA eSituM zIlame SAmiti eSikA-mRgalubdhakAhastitApasAsca
mAMsaheto{gAn hastinazca eSanti, tathA kandamUlaphalAdikaM ca, tathA ye cAnye
pAkhaNDikA nAnAvidhairUpAyairbhakSyameSantyanyAni vA viSayasAdhanAni te
sarve'pyeSikA ityucyante, tathA 'vaizikA' vaNijo mAyApradhAnAH kalopajIvinaH,
tathA zUdrAH kRSIvalAdayaH AbhIrajAtIyAH, kiyanto vA vakSyanta iti darzayati-ye
cAnye vApasadA nAnArUpasAvadya 'Arambha (mbhe) nizritA' yantrapIDananilaJchina
karmAGgAradAhAdibhiH kriyAvizeSairjIvopamarddakAriNaH teSAM sarveSAmeva
jIvApakAriNAM vairameva pravardhata ityuttarazloke kriyeti  // 2 //  TIkA -
kiJca-pari-samantAt gRhyata iti parigraho-
dvipadacatuSpadadhanadhAnyahiraNyasuvarNAdiSu mamIkArastatra 'niviSTAnAm'
adhyupapannAnAM gAddharyaM gatAnAM 'pApam' asAtavedanIyAdikaM teSAM'
prAguktAnAmArambhanizritAnAM parigrahe niviSTAnAM prakarSeNa 'varddhate'
vRddhimupayAti janmAntarazateSvapi durmocaM bhavati, kvacitpAThaH 'veraM tesiM
pavaDar3hai' tti tatra yena yasya yathA prANina upamardaH kriyate sa tathaiva
saMsArAntarvartI zatazo duHkhabhAk bhavatIti, jamadagni kRtavIryAdInAmiva
putrapautrAnugaM vairaM pravarddhata iti bhAvaH, kimityevaM ? yataste kAmeSu
pravRtAH, kAmAzcArambhaiH samyag bhRtAH saMmRtA ArambhapuSTA ArambhAzca
jIvopamardakAriNaH ato na te kAmasambhRtA ArambhanizritAH parigrahe niviSTAH
duHkhayatIti duHkham-aSTaprakAraM karma tadvimocakA bhavanti-tasyApanetAro na
bhavantItyarthaH  // 3 //  TIkArtha - jo artha anvaya tathA vyatireka dvArA
pratipAdita kiyA jAtA hai, vaha sUkta-samIcIna rUpa meM kahA huA mAnA jAtA hai
/  pahale jo dharma varNita huA hai usakA pratipakSa adharma hai  /  jo prANI
usa adharma kA Azraya lie hue haiM, usa para Tike hue haiM unakA digdarzana
karAne hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM-brAhmaNa, kSatriya, vaizya, cANDAla, bokkasa
Adi jo vividha prakAra ke ArambhoM meM hiMsA Adi asat karmoM meM Asakta rahate
hai, yantra pIDana, nirlAJchana, aMgAradAha-agni jalAkara koyale banAnA Adi
kriyAyoM dvArA jIvoM kA upamarda -416

Page #445 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Religious studies cause violence, they are harmful and destructive to all living
beings. Therefore, their animosity towards living beings increases. This is the
action part of the next story. A Brahmin born from a Shudra woman is called a
Nishad. A Brahmin born from a Vaishya woman is called an Ambashtha. A Nishad
born from an Ambashtha woman is called a Vokkas. Those who hunt and search for
deer and elephants for meat are called Vyagra and Hastitapas Aishik. Or those
who search for roots and tubers for their food, or those who, by various means,
search for food and drink, objects of enjoyment, and means of enjoyment, are all
called Aishik. Kalopjivi - those who make a living through the arts, are called
Maya Pradhan Vaishya or Shudra, those who farm and those of the Ahirs caste are
called by different names. ||2||: Whatever is taken from all sides, is called
parigraha. Having attachment to bipeds, quadrupeds, wealth, grain, gold and
silver etc. is parigraha. Those beings who are engrossed in or greedy for
parigraha, who are attached to the beginning and the end, as mentioned in the
previous story, their sinful and unbearable karma increases greatly. They cannot
destroy those karmas even in hundreds of births, 'Veram Tesim Pavatu' is found
in some places. This means that whoever oppresses or destroys any being, suffers
in the world for hundreds of times in the same way. Just as the enmity of
Jamdagni and Kritavirya etc. increases to their sons and grandsons. Why does
this happen? While solving this, it is said - they are attached to the enjoyment
of the senses, the beginning and the end, the killing etc. of the beings who are
attached to the beginning and the end. Therefore, such beings who are attached
to the objects of enjoyment, who are attached to the beginning and the end, who
are bound by parigraha, cannot escape the eight types of karmas that cause
suffering. ||3|| Aaghay Kicchamaheum, Naiyo Visaesino. Anne Haranti Tam Vittam
Kammi Kammehim Kicchati ||4|| Chhaya - Aaghatakrityamadhaatum, Jnatayo
Visyaeshina. Anye Haranti Tad Vittam, Karmi Karmabhih Krityate || Anuvaad -
Relatives, family members, and family groups are greedy for worldly pleasures
and wealth. After the death rites of their deceased family members, they take
away their wealth. The man who has accumulated wealth by sinful karma, suffers
the fruits of his sins alone. Teeka - Kinchanayat - Ahannyante - Apanyante
Vinaashyante Praninaam Dasha Prakara Api Pranaa Yasmin Sa Aaghato - Maranam
Tasmai Tatra Va Krtam - Agnisanskarajalanjali Pradhan Pitripindaadikam
Aaghatakrityam Tadaadhaatum - Aaghay Krityaapaschat 'Jnatayah' Swajanah
Putrakalatra Bhratrvyaadayah, Kimbhutaah? - Visyaananveshtum Sheelam Yesham Te
Anye Api Visyaeshkaah Santasyasya Duhkharjitam 'Vittam' Dravyajaatam
'Apaharanti' Swikurvanti, Tatha Choktam - "Tat Stenarjitairdravyairadaar Shcha
Parirkshitai. Kridantyanye Nara Rajan! Hrishtastuishta Hyalankrita ||1." Sa Tu
Dratyarjanaparayanah Savadyanusthanavan Karmavan Papi Swakritai Karmabhih
Sansare 'Krityate' Chidyate Pidyata Itiyaavat ||4|| Swajanashcha
Tadvyopjeevinastratraanaaya Na Bhavantiiti Darshayitum Aah - 417)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayanaM hiMsA karate haiM, ve sabhI jIvoM ke upakArI-apakAra, nAza
karane vAle haiM  /  ataH jIvoM ke sAtha unakA vaira bar3hatA hai  /  yaha Age
kI gAthA kA kriyA pada hai  /  brAhmaNa se jo zUdra strI meM utpanna hotA hai,
vaha niSAda kahA jAtA hai  /  brAhmaNa se vaizya strI meM jo paidA hotA hai use
ambaSTha kahA jAtA hai  /  niSAda se ambaSTha jAti kI strI meM jo utpanna hotA
hai, use vokkasa kahA jAtA hai| mAMsa hetu jo mRga evaM hAthI kI eSaNA karate
haiM DhUMDhate hai, ve vyAghra evaM hastitApasa aiSika kahalAte haiM  /  athavA
jo apane AhAra hetu kanda mUla Adi DhUMDhate haiM, athavA jo dUsare pAkhaNDI
jana nAnA prakAra ke upAyoM se bhakSya-bhojya padArtha tathA viSaya sAdhana,
bhoga ke upakaraNa DhUMDhate haiM, ve saba aiSika kahe jAte haiM  /  kalopajIvi-
jo kalAoM dvArA apanI jIvikA calAte haiM, ve mAyA pradhAna vaizya yA zUdra, kRSi
karane vAle evaM ahIra jAti ke loga pRthaka-pRthaka nAmoM se pukAre jAte haiM
// 2 //  : jo cAroM ora se grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai, liyA jAtA hai vaha parigraha
kahalAtA hai  /  dvipada, catuSpada, dhana, dhAnya, hiraNya tathA svarNa Adi meM
mamatva rakhanA parigraha hai  /  jo prANI parigraha meM niviSTa yA lolupa hote
haiM, Arambha samArambha meM Asakta rahate haiM, jisake sambandha meM pUrva
gAthA meM ullekha huA hai, unake pApa-asAtAvedanIya karma kI atyanta vRddhi hotI
hai  /  ve saiMkar3oM janmoM meM bhI una karmoM kA nAza nahIM kara pAte, 'veraM
tesiM pavaTuMi' kahIM kahIM aisA pATha milatA hai  /  isakA Azaya yaha hai ki jo
jisa prakAra, jisa prANI kA upamarda-vyApAdana karatA hai, vaha usI taraha
saikar3oM bAra saMsAra meM duHkha bhogatA hai  /  jamadagni aura kRtavIryya Adi
kI jyoM putrapautroM taka unakA vaira bar3hatA jAtA hai  /  aisA kyoM hotA hai ?
isakA samAdhAna karate hue kahate haiM-ve kAma pravRttabhoga lolupa, Arambha
puSTa-jIvoM ke Arambha samArambha, ghAta Adi meM saMlagna hai  /  ataH eva ve
kAma sambhRtaviSayAsakta tathA Arambhamizrita-Arambha samArambha saMlagna
parigraha saMniviSTa-parigraha se baddha jIva duHkha janaka aSTa vidha karmoM kA
apagama nahIM kara sakate  // 3 //  AghAya kiccamAheuM, nAio visaesiNo  /  anne
haraMti taM vittaM kammI kammehiM kiccatI  // 4 //  chAyA - AghAtakRtyamAdhAtuM,
jJAtayo viSayaiSiNaH  /  anye haranti tad vittaM, karmI karmabhiH kRtyate  //
anuvAda - jJAtijana-svajana-pArivArika vRnda, viSayaiSI-sAMsArika sukha evaM
dhana ke lobhI hote haiM, ve apane mRta pArivArika ke dAha saMskAra Adi maraNa
kriyA karane ke anantara usakA dhana hara lete haiM  /  pApa karma pUrvaka
jisane dhana kA saMcaya kiyA vaha mRta puruSa ekAkI apane pApa kA phala bhogatA
hai| TIkA - kiJcAnyat-Ahanyante-apanIyante vinAzyante prANinAM daza prakArA api
prANA yasmin sa AghAto-maraNaM tasmai tatra vA kRtam-
agnisaMskArajalAJjalipradAnapitRpiNDAdikamAghAtakRtyaM tadAdhAtum-AdhAya
kRtvApazcAt 'jJAtayaH' svajanAH putrakalatrabhrAtRvyAdayaH,
kimbhUtAH?-viSayAnanveSTuM zIlaM yeSAM te'nye'pi viSayaiSikAH santasyasya
duHkhArjitaM 'vittaM' dravyajAtam 'apaharanti' svIkurvanti, tathA coktam - "tata
stenArjitairdravyaidAra zca parirakSitaiH  /  krIDantyanye narA rAjana !
hRSTAstuSTA hyalaGkRtA  // 1 / " sa tu dratyArjanaparAyaNaH
sAvadyAnuSThAnavAnkarmavAn pApI svakRtaiH karmabhiH saMsAre 'kRtyate' chidyate
pIDyata itiyAvat  // 4 //  svajanAzca tadvyopajIvinastatrANAya na bhavantIti
darzayitumAha - 417)

Page #446 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra with Commentary - English Translation
**Commentary:**  The act of killing or destroying any of the ten types of living
beings is called *Aghāt* (violence). It is death. The rituals performed after
death, such as cremation, offering water, and ancestral offerings, are called
*Aghāt Kṛtya* (acts of violence). Those who perform these rituals, the son,
wife, nephew, etc., who are attached to worldly pleasures, take away the wealth
earned by the deceased with great difficulty. As a Guru once instructed a king:
"O King! Those who have earned wealth, married wives, and protected them, after
their death, others rejoice, are satisfied, and adorned with ornaments, play
with their wealth and wives. But the deceased sinner, who earned wealth through
*Sāvadya* (sinful) and *Pāpa* (evil) actions, is tormented in the world due to
the fruits of his actions, suffering various tortures in the form of cutting,
piercing, etc." ||4||  **Commentary:** The Sutrakar (author of the Sutra) points
out that those who enjoy the deceased's wealth are not his refuge.   **Verse
5:** *Māyā pitā bahusā bhāyā, bhaja putrā ya orasā. Nālam te tava tāṇāya,
luppantasas sakammunā.* ||5||  **Shadow Verse:** *Chāyā - Mātā, pitā, snuṣā
bhrātā, bhāryā putrāścaura sāḥ. Nālam te tava trāṇāya, lapyamānasya svakarmaṇā.*
**Translation:**  When a being is suffering and tormented due to the
consequences of his own sins, neither his mother, father, daughter-in-law,
brother, wife, nor children can provide him with refuge.  **Commentary:**
"Mātā" (mother) refers to the mother, "Pitā" (father) refers to the father,
"Snuṣā" (daughter-in-law) refers to the son's wife, "Bhrātā" (brother) refers to
the sibling, "Bhāryā" (wife) refers to the spouse, and "Putrāścaura sāḥ"
(children) refers to the children. All these, including the mother, father, and
others like the father-in-law, are not capable of providing refuge to the one
who is being tormented by his own actions in the cycle of Samsara (world). If
they cannot provide refuge in this world, how can they provide refuge in the
next? There is an example of this: A butcher named Kāla Saukarika had a son
named Sulasa. He was a friend of Abhayakumar. His family members pleaded with
him to kill animals, but he did not harm any living being. Instead, he struck
his own hand with an axe. ||5||  **Commentary:** The mother, father, daughter-
in-law, brother, wife, and children, as well as all other relatives, are not
able to provide refuge to the one who is suffering in the world due to his own
actions. They cannot save him from suffering in this world, so how can they hope
to provide refuge in the next world? This is illustrated by the example of
Sulasa, the son of a butcher named Kāla Saukarika. He was a friend of
Abhayakumar. His family members begged him to kill animals, but he did not harm
any living being. Instead, he struck his own hand with an axe.  **Verse 6:**
*Eyam aṭuṁ nimmamo Sapehāe, nirahaṁkāro, Paramāṇu gāmiyam. Carebhikkhū
jiṇāhiyam.* ||6|| 418  **Translation:** This is the path of non-violence, Free
from attachment and ego, Walking the path of the atom, Following the teachings
of the Jina. ||6|| 418

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - jisameM prANiyoM ke dasa prakAra ke prANoM
kA Ahanana yA vinAza hotA hai, use AghAta kahate haiM  /  vaha maraNa hai  /
usake hone ke anantara jo agni saMskAra, jalAjaMlI pradAna tathA pitRpiNDa Adi
kArya kie jAte haiM, unheM AghAta kRtya kahA jAtA hai  /  unheM kara usake
putra, stra strI, bhatIje Adi pArivArika jana jo sAMsArika sukha lipsu hote.
haiM, kaSTapUrvaka usa dvArA arjita kie hue dhana ko hara lete haiM  /  jaisA
kisI guru dvArA kisI rAjA ko udiSTa kara kahA gayA hai ki-he rAjan ! jisane
dhana kA arjana kiyA, striyoM se vivAha kiyA, jinakA parirakSaNa kiyA, usake
mara jAne ke bAda dUsare loga harSita parituSTa tathA AbhUSaNoM se susajjita
hokara usake dhana va striyoM ke sAtha krIr3A karate haiM  /  kintu sAvadya-
pApayukta karma dvArA dhana kA arjana karane vAlA vaha mRta pApI puruSa apane
kie hue karmoM ke phalasvarUpa saMsAra meM kATA jAtA hai, chedana-bhedana Adi ke
rUpa meM taraha-taraha se yAtanAeM pAtA hai  /   // 4 //  usake dravya kA bhoga
karane vAle puruSa usake lie zaraNaprada nahIM hote  /  aisA digdarzana karAte
hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM  /  mAyA pitA bahusA bhAyA, bhajA putrA ya orasA  /
nAlaM te tava tANAya, luppaMtassa sakammuNA  // 5 //  chAyA - mAtA, pitA, snuSA
bhrAtA, bhAryA putrAzcaurasAH  /  . nAlaM te tava trANAya, lapyamAnasya
svakarmaNA  //  anuvAda - apane dvArA kRta pApoM ke pariNAma svarUpa lupyamAna-
pIDyamAna kaSTa pAte hue prANI ko usake mAtA-pitA patohu-putra vadhU, bhAI,
bhAryA aura saputra Adi koI bhI trANa nahIM de sakate  /  TIkA - 'mAtA' jananIM
'pitA' janakaH 'snuSA' putravadhUH 'bhrAtAH' sahodaraH tathA 'bhAryA' kalatraM
putrAzcaurasAH -svaniSpAditA ete sarve'pi mAtrAdayo ye cAnye zvazurAdayaste tava
saMsAracakravAle svakarmabhirvilupyamAnasya trANAya 'nAlaM' na
samarthAbhavantIti, ihApi tAvanneme trANAya kimutAmutreti, dRSTAntazcAtra kAla
saukarika sutaH sulasanAmA abhayakumArasya sakhA, tena mahAsattvena
svajanAbhyarthitenApi na prANiSvapakRtam, api tyAtmanyeveti  // 5 //  TIkArtha -
janma dene vAlI mAtA-pitA, putra vadhU, sagA bhAI, apanI patnI evaM apane aura
suputra ye sabhI tathA zvasura Adi anya sabhI saMbaMdhI apane dvArA kRta karmoM
se saMsAra meM pIr3ita hote hue tumheM saMsAra meM trANa de sakane meM, tumhArI
rakSA karane meM samartha nahIM haiM  /  jaba ve isa loka meM bhI tumheM duHkha
se trANa nahIM de sakate, bacA nahIM sakate to paraloka meM trANa dene kI AzA hI
kahA~ hai  /  isa viSaya meM kAla saukarika nAmaka kasAI ke putra sulasa kA
dRSTAnta hai  /  vaha abhayakumAra kA sakhA-mitra thA  /  usake pArivArika janoM
ne prANI vadha hetu usakI bahuta abhyarthanA kI, jora diyA, kintu usane prANiyoM
kA jarA bhI apakAra nahIM kiyA, hiMsA nahIM kI, kintu apane hI hAtha para
kulhAr3I se prahAra kara liyA  /  eyamaTuM nimmamo sapehAe, nirahaMkAro,
paramANu gAmiyaM  /  carebhikkhU jiNAhiyaM  // 6 //  418

Page #447 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shadow:** This is to be observed, it is in accordance with the ultimate goal.
_ The monk, free from attachment and ego, should follow the path prescribed by
the Jinas. _ **Translation:** Understanding the above statement, right faith,
knowledge, and conduct are the path to liberation. Knowing this, the monk, free
from attachment and ego, should follow the path of Dharma, characterized by
detachment. **Commentary:**  Furthermore, those who are devoid of Dharma, being
tormented by their own actions, have no refuge in this world or the next. This
has been stated before.  The wise man, understanding this, and knowing that
right faith, knowledge, and conduct are the cause of the ultimate goal -
liberation or self-control - should follow them.  Discarding all this, and
because the word ending in "ktva" implies an action in the past, it requires
another action. Therefore, it is said:  He is free from attachment because he
has renounced attachment to external and internal objects. He is free from ego
because he has renounced ego, which arises from past wealth, birth, etc., or
from austerity, study, and gain.  Therefore, he is free from attachment and
aversion.  Such a monk should follow the path prescribed by the Jinas, the path
that is related to the Jinas, the path that is prescribed by them. **Commentary
Meaning:**  Those who are devoid of Dharma, being tormented by their own
actions, have no refuge in this world or the next. This has been stated before.
The wise man, understanding this, and knowing that right faith, knowledge, and
conduct are the cause of the ultimate goal - liberation or self-control - should
follow them.  He should not have attachment to external and internal objects.
Grammatically, the word ending in "ktva" implies an action in the past,
therefore it requires another action.  Therefore, the author has stated it in
this way.  The virtuous person should not have ego arising from past wealth,
birth, etc., or from austerity, study, and gain, but should be free from
attachment and aversion.  Living in this way, he should follow the path
prescribed by the Tirthankaras. **Shadow:**  Giving up wealth, sons, relatives,
and possessions. Giving up internal sorrow, he should wander without attachment.
**Translation:**  A person should give up wealth, sons, relatives, possessions,
and internal sorrow, and wander without attachment, free from all desires and
attachments. **Commentary:**  Furthermore, the mind that has understood the
nature of the world, knowing what is to be known, should give up what?  Giving
up wealth, material possessions, and sons.  The word "sons" is used because
there is greater affection for them.  Giving up relatives, and giving up
possessions, which are the form of attachment and ego.  In the figure of speech,
"anta" means "ending," so "antanga" means "difficult to give up" or
"destructive."  "Antaka" means "destructive" or "going within oneself."  Giving
up such sorrow, such distress.  Giving up the stream of karma, which is
characterized by delusion, non-restraint, negligence, and passions, and which is
the door to karma.  Another reading is "chichcha na nantaga soyam," which means
"going within."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayana chAyA - etadarthaM sa prekSya, paramArthAnugAmukam  /  _
nirmamo nirahaGkAraH, cared bhikSurjinAhitam  //  anuvAda - uparyukta kathana ko
samajhatA huA, samyak darzana, jJAna evaM cAritra hI mokSa kA mArga hai| yaha
jAnakara nirmama-mamatvarahita, nirahaMkAra-abhimAna varjita bhikSu vItarAga
prarUpita dharma kA anusaraNa kare  /  TIkA- kiJcAnyat-
dharmarahitAnAMsvakRtakarmavilupyamAnAnAmaihikAmuSmikayorna kazcitrANAyeti enaM
pUrvoktamarthaM sa prekSApUrvakArI 'pratyupekSya' vicAryAvagamya ca paramaH-
pradhAnabhUto ('rtho) mokSaH saMyamo vA tamanugacchatIti tacchIlaca
paramArthAnugAmukaH-samyagdarzanAdistaM ca pratyupekSya, ktvApratyayAntasya
pUrvakAlavAcitayA kriyAntara savyapekSatvAt tadAha-nirgataM mamatvaM
bAhyAbhyantareSu vastuSu yasmAdasau nirmama:tathA nirgato'haGkAraH-abhimAnaH
pUrvaizvaryajAtyadimadajanitastathA tapaH svAdhyAyalAbhAdijanito vA yasmAdasau
nirahaGkAro-rAgadveSarahita ityarthaH, sa evambhUto
bhikSurjinairAhita:pratipAdito'nuSThito vA yo mArgo jinAnAM vA sambandhI
yo'bhihito mArgastaM 'cared' anutiSThediti  // 6 //  TIkArtha - apane dvArA kie
hue karmoM dvArA vilupyamAna-pIDyamAna duHkha bhogate hue dharmarahita prANI ko
isa loka yA paraloka meM koI bhI trANa nahIM de sakatA  /  yaha pahale kahA jA
cukA hai  /  buddhimAna puruSa yaha jAnakara tathA samyak darzana, jJAna evaM
cAritra hI paramArtha-mokSa yA saMyama kA kAraNa hai  /  yaha vicArakara bAhya
evaM AbhyAntara vastuoM meM mamatva na rakhe  /  vyAkaraNa kI dRSTi se ktvA
pratyayAnta zabda parvakAlika artha  //  lie rahatA hai  /  isalie vaha anya
kriyA kI apekSA rakhatA hai| ataeva zAstrakAra ne isI rUpa meM yahA~ batalAyA
hai  /  sAdhu apane pahale aizvarya tathA jAti ke mada se janita tapazcaraNa,
svAdhyAya evaM lAbha Adi se utpanna ahaMkAra-abhimAna bhI na kare kintu vaha
rAga dveSa rahita hokara vartanazIla rahe  /  isa prakAra rahatA huA
tIrthaMkaroM dvArA pratipAdita anuSThita-Acarita mArga kA anusaraNa kare  /
ciccA vitaM ca putte ya, NAio ya pariggahaM  /  ciccA Na NaMtagaM soyaM, *
niravekkho parivvae  // 7 //  chAyA - tyatkvA vittaJca putrAMzca, jJAtIMzca
parigraham  /  tyaktvA'ntagaM zokaM, nirapekSaH parivrajet  //  anuvAda -
manuSya vitta-dhana sampatti, putra jJAti-svajAti jana tathA parigraha evaM
Antarika zokaazAMta bhAva kA parityAga kara nirapekSa sabhI apekSAoM, AsaktiyoM
se vivarjita hokara parivrajyA kAsaMyama kA pAlana kare  /  TIkA - apica-
saMsArasvabhAvaparijJAnaparikarmitamatirviditavedyaH samyak 'tyastvA' parityajya
kiM tada?vittaM dravyajAtaMputrAMzca tyaktvA, puDheSvadhikaH sneho bhavatIti
putragrahaNaM, tathA 'jJAtIn' svajanAMzca tyaktvA tathA 'parigrahaM'
cAntaramamatvarUpaMNakAro vAkyAlaGkAre antaM gacchatItyantago duSparityaja
ityartha: antako vA vinAzakArItyarthaH Atmani vA gacchatItyAtmaga Antara
ityarthaH taM tathAbhUtaM 'zokaM' saMtApaM 'tyaktvA' parityajya zroto
vAmithyAtvAviratipramAdakaSAyAtmakaM karmAzravadvArabhUtaM parityajya
pAThAntaraM vA 'ciccA NaNaMtagaM soyaM' anta gacchatItyantaga -419)

Page #448 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra states that one should abandon sorrow and
attachment to the world, becoming "nirapeksha" (free from attachment) to sons,
wives, wealth, grain, gold, etc., and strive for liberation (amoksha) by
practicing restraint (samyama) in all directions. It is also said:  "Those who
are attached to possessions are deceived, but those who are free from attachment
cross the ocean of samsara without hindrance. Therefore, one should be free from
attachment in all matters." (1)  "Those who are attached to pleasures fall into
the terrible ocean of samsara, but those who are free from attachment cross the
terrible forest of samsara." (2)  Commentary:  A person who is pure in
understanding the nature of samsara, who knows the objects of knowledge (vedya),
and who is aware of the nature of things, should abandon the attachment to
material possessions, wealth, and family, which are sources of suffering and
destruction. They should also abandon the inner torment of ego (mamta) and the
karmic inflows of false beliefs (mithyatva), non-restraint (avirati),
carelessness (pramada), and passions (kashaya). According to another reading,
they should also abandon the inner sorrow (shrota) or grief. Such a person
should not even desire sons, wives, wealth, grain, or gold, and should strive
for liberation through the practice of restraint until they attain it.  Humans
have a strong attachment to their children, so the example of a son is used
here. The word "na" (ण) is used here in the sense of a figure of speech.  It is
said that those who are attached to possessions are deceived, but those who are
free from attachment cross the ocean of samsara without hindrance. Therefore, a
person who understands the essence of the teachings (pravachana) should be
completely free from attachment.  Those who are attached to pleasures fall into
the terrible ocean of samsara, but those who are free from attachment cross the
terrible forest of samsara.  Earth, fire, air, grass, trees, seeds, egg-born,
womb-born, moisture-born, sweat-born, and sprout-born are all living beings.
Commentary:  A person who has renounced the world (pravrajita) and has a pure
mind (suvrata) should strive to practice the vows of non-violence (ahimsa), etc.
The verse "Pudhvi u" etc. is meant to explain the concept of non-violence.
Earth-bodied beings (prithvi kayika) are of different types, such as subtle,
coarse, large, and small. Fire-bodied, air-bodied, and water-bodied beings are
also of different types. Plant-bodied beings (vanaspati kayika) are of many
types, such as grass (trina) like kusha, and trees (vriksha) like mango and
ashoka, which bear seeds (beeja). Seeds include rice, wheat, and barley. These
are all one-sensed beings (ekendriya).  Egg-born (motaja) beings include
elephants, rhinoceroses, etc. Womb-born (jarayuja) beings include cows, humans,
etc. Moisture-born (rasaja) beings are born from milk, butter, etc. Sweat-born
(sansweda ja) beings include flies, mosquitoes, etc. Sprout-born (udbhija)
beings include creepers, etc.  Since beings of unknown types are difficult to
protect from harm, they are described in detail here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram na antagamanantagaM zrotaH zokaM vA parityajya
'nirapekSaH' putradAradhanadhAnyahiraNyAdikamanapekSamANaH san AmokSAya pari-
samantAt saMyamAnuSThAne 'vrajet' parivrajediti, tathA coktama - "chaliyA
avayakkhaMtA nirAvayakkhA gayA aviggheNaM  /  tamhA pavayaNa sAre nivAyakSeNa
hoyatvaM  // 1 //  chAyA - chalitA apekSamANA nirapekSamANAgatA avighnena  /
tasmAtpravacAhAre nirapekSeNa bhavitavyam  // 1 //  bhoge avayakkhaMtA paDati
saMsArasAgare dhore  /  bhogehi niravayakkhA taraMti saMsAra kaMtAraM  // 2 //
iti  // 7 //  chAyA - bhogAnapekSamANAH patanti saMsArasAgare ghore  /  bhogeSu
nirapekSAstaranti saMsArakAntAraM  // 1 //  TIkArtha - saMsAra ke svabhAva ke
parijJAna se zuddha, buddhiyukta-vidita vedya-jAnane yogya padArthoM kA
parijJAtA puruSa dravyajAta-dravyasamUha-vipula dhana, vaibhava kA tathA putroM
kA, svajana varga kA Abhyantara mamatva rUpa parigraha kA duHkha se chor3ane
yogya athavA vinAzaprada athavA AtmA ke antaravartI saMtApa ko chor3akara
mithyAtva avirati pramAda evaM kaSAya rUpa karma ke AzravadvAroM ko chor3akara
athavA 'cijjA NaNaMtagaM soyaM' isa pAThAntara ke anusAra antarahita zrota yA
zoka ko chor3akara sAdhu putra, strI, dhana-dhAnya tathA hiraNya Adi kI jarA bhI
apekSA na rakhatA huA, jaba taka mokSa prApta na ho jAya, saMyama kI sAdhanA meM
udyata rahe  /  putroM meM manuSya kA adhika sneha hotA hai  /  isalie isa
prasaMga meM putra kA grahaNa vizeSa rUpa meM kiyA gayA hai  /  yahA~ Na zabda
vAkyAlaMkAra ke artha meM AyA hai  /  astu kahA gayA hai ki-jinhoMne parigraha
Adi meM mamatva rakhA, unameM Asakta rahe ve AdhyAtmika dRSTi se chale gae,
Thage gae, kintu jo inase nirapekSa rahe, ve binA kisI vighna bAdhA ke isa
saMsAra samudra ko lAMgha gae, pAra kara gae  /  ataeva pravacana sArajJa-
bhagavAna dvArA nirUpita siddhAnta vettA puruSa sarvathA nirapekSa rheN| jo
bhogoM meM Asakta rahate haiM, ve ghora saMsAra sAgara meM patita hote haiM  /
jo bhogoM meM nirapekSa anAsakta hote haiM ve saMsAra rUpI bhayAnaka vana ko
lAMgha jAte haiM  /  pur3havI u agaNI vAU, taNarukkha sabIyagA  /  aMDayA
poyajarAU, rasasaMseyaubbhiyA  // 8 //  chAyA - pRthivItvarnivAyu stRNavRkSAH
sabIjakAH  /  aNDajAH potajarAyujAH, rasasaMsvedIdbhijjAH  //  anuvAda - pRthvI,
agni, vAyu, tRNa, vRkSa, bIja, aNDaja, potaja, jarAyuja, rasaja, svedaja,
udbhijja ye samasta jIva haiN| TIkA - sa evaM pravrajitaH
suvratAvasthitAtmA'hiMsAdiSu vrateSu prayateta,
tatrAhiMsAprasiddhayarthamAha-'puDhavI u' ityAdi zlokadvayaM, tatra
pRthivIkAyikAH sUkSmabAdaraparyAptakAparyAptakabhedabhinnAH tathA'pkAyikA
agnikAyikA vAyukAyikAzcaivambhUtA eva, vanaspatikAyikAnlezataHsabhedAmAha-
tRNAni'kuzavaccakAdIni 'vRkSAH' cUtAzokAdikAH saha bIjaivartante iti sabIjAH,
bIjAni tu zAligodhUmayavAdIni, ete ekendriyAH paJcApi kAyAH tathA potA eva jAtAH
motajA-hastizarabhAdayaH tathA jarAyujA ye jambAlaveSTitAH samutpadyante
gomanuSyAdayaH tathA rasAtdadhisauvIrakAderjAtA rasajAstathA saMsvedAjAtAH
saMsvedajA-nyUkAmatkuNAdayaH 'udbhijAH' ||khnyjriittkdrduraady iti, ajJAtabhedA
hi duHkhena rakSyanta ityato bhedenopanyAsa iti  // 8 //  420)

Page #449 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dharma Study Commentary -   A renunciate-initiated Sadhu, dwelling in the
highest vows, should strive in the practice of the great vows of non-violence,
etc. To illustrate the fame and expression of non-violence, the Sutra-maker says
two verses, beginning with "Puḍhavīu".   The beings of the earth element are
diverse, differing in their subtle-gross, sufficient-insufficient, and
insufficient-insufficient categories. Similarly, the beings of the water
element, fire element, and air element are also diverse, like the beings of the
earth element.   The Sutra-maker now briefly explains the diversity of beings of
the plant element: Kusha and Vacchaka, etc., grasses, mango and Ashoka, etc.,
trees, rice, wheat, and barley, etc., seeds - all these five are one-sensed
beings.   Now, the scholar explains the sixth, the animal element: Birds like
the Shakun and the Baz, the house-cuckoo, and reptiles that crawl are oviparous.
Elephants, Sarabha, etc., born as babies are viviparous. Cows and humans, etc.,
born wrapped in the womb are uterine. Beings born from curd, sour-gruel, etc.,
are rasa-born. Lice, bedbugs, etc., born from sweat are sweat-born.
Grasshoppers, frogs, etc., are born from moisture.   It is very difficult to
protect these beings without knowing their differences. Therefore, their
differences have been explained here.   **Verse 9:**  **Shadow:** "From these
six elements, the wise should know. With mind, body, and speech, one should not
begin, nor take possession."  **Translation:** The wise and discerning person
should understand these six elements as beings and should not begin, nor take
possession of them with mind, speech, and body.  **Commentary:** "By these" -
the aforementioned six elements, including the mobile, immobile, subtle, gross,
sufficient, and insufficient categories - one should not begin, nor take
possession. This is the connection. The wise, with their knowledge and
understanding, should recognize these and, with their knowledge of rejection,
should avoid beginning and taking possession of beings with mind, speech, and
body, which are harmful to life.  **Verse 10:**  **Shadow:** "False speech,
sexual intercourse, and taking what is not given. Weapons, etc., in the world,
the wise should know."  **Translation:** The wise should know that false speech,
sexual intercourse, and taking what is not given, as well as weapons, etc., in
the world, are all harmful.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayanaM TIkArtha - pravarjita-dIkSita sAdhu uttama vratoM meM sthita
hotA huA ahiMsAdi mahAvratoM kI sAdhanA meM prayatnazIla rahe  /  ahiMsA kI
prasiddhi-abhivyakti hetu sUtrakAra 'pur3havIu' ityAdi do zloka kahate haiM  /
pRthvIkAya ke jIvasUkSma bAdara, sthUla, paryApta-paryApti sahita evaM
aparyApta-paryApti rahita bheda se bhinna-bhinna haiM  /  isI prakAra apakAya
ke, agnikAya ke tathA vAyukAya ke jIva bhI pRthvI kAya ke jIvoM ke sadRza hI
bhedayukta hai| sUtrakAra aba saMkSipta rUpa meM vanaspati kAya ke jIvoM ke
bheda jJApita karate hai-kuza aura vaccaka Adi, tRNa, Ama evaM azoka Adi vRkSa,
zAli-cAvala, gehU~ aura yava-jau Adi bIja meM ye pAMcoM hI jIvakAya ekendriya
haiM  /  aba zAstrakAra chaThe trasakAya kA nirUpaNa karate hue batalAte haiM-
aNDe se utpanna hone vAle zakuni-bAja, gRha-kokila tathA sarisRpa-reMgakara
calane vAle prANI aNDaja haiM  /  baccoM ke rUpa meM utpanna hone vAle hAthI,
sarabha Adi potaja haiM  /  jambAlajara se veSTita lipaTe hue hokara paidA hone
vAle gAya tathA manuSya Adi jarAyuja haiM  /  dahI, sauvIra-kAMjI Adi se utpanna
hone vAle jIva rasaja haiM  /  sveda pasIne se paidA hone vAle yUka-jUM,
khaTamala Adi prANI svedaja haiM  /  khaJjarITa-TiDDI, mer3haka Adi prANI
udabhijja haiM  /  inake bheda jJAta kie binAjAne binA inakI rakSA kara pAnA
bar3A kaThina hai  /  ataH yahA~ inake bhedoM kA upanyAsa-kathana kiyA gayA hai|
etehiM chahiM kAehiM, taM vijaM parijANiyA  /  maNasA kAyavakkeNaM, NAraMbhI Na
pariggahI  // 9 //  chAyA - etaiH SaDbhiH kAyaistad vidvAn parijAnIyAt  /
manasA kAya vAkyena nArambhI na parigrahI  //  anuvAda - vidvAna-vivekazIla
puruSa ina cha: kAryoM ko jIva samajhakara mana, vacana tathA zarIra dvArA,
inakA Arambha na kare, parigraha na kare  /  TIkA-'ebhiH' pUrvoktaiH SaDbhirapi
kAyaiH' trasasthAvara rUpaiH
sUkSmabAdaraparyAptakAparyAptakabhedabhinanairnArambhI nApi parigrahI syAditi
sambandhaH, tadetad 'vidvAn' suzrutiko jJaparijJayA parijJAya
pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA manovAkkAyakarmabhirjIvopamardakAriNa mArambhaM parigrahaM
ca pariharediti  // 9 //  TIkArtha - ye pahale kahe gae cha: kAya ke jIva jo
trasa, sthAvara-sUkSma, bAdara-sthUla paryApta evaM aparyApta bheda yukta hai,
inakA na to Arambha-atipAta aura na parigraha hI kare  /  vivekazIla puruSa
jJaparijJA dvArA inheM parijJAta kara tathA pratyAkhAna parijJA dvArA tathA
mana, vacana evaM zarIra dvArA inake hiMsA mUlaka Arambha samArambha tathA
parigraha kA varjana kare  /  musAvAyaM bahiddhaM ca, uggahaM ca ajAiyA  /
satthAdANAiM logaMsi, taM vijaM parijANiyA  // 10 //  chAyA - mRSAvAdaM
maithunaJcA, vagrahaJcAyAcitam  /  zastrANyAdAnAni loke, tadvidvAn parijAnIyAt
//  421

Page #450 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Translation:**  Speaking falsehood (Mṛṣāvāda),
engaging in sexual misconduct (Abrahmacarya), attachment (Parigraha), and taking
what is not given (Adattādāna) are all like weapons in the world and are the
cause of karmic bondage. Therefore, wise and discerning monks should know these
through the knowledge of discernment (Jñā-parijñā).  **Commentary:**  The Sutra-
maker now speaks about the remaining vows. Speaking what is not true is called
Mṛṣāvāda. Wise and knowledgeable ascetics should abandon these through the
knowledge of rejection (Pratyākyāna-parijñā). Sexual misconduct is called
"Bahirdh", attachment is called "Avagraha", and taking what is not given is
called "Ayācita". Or, the word "Bahirdh" encompasses both sexual misconduct and
attachment. The terms "Avagraha" and "Ayācita" refer to taking what is not
given. These, like falsehood, etc., are like weapons because they cause
suffering to living beings and are the cause of eightfold karmic bondage.
Therefore, wise and discerning men should know these through the knowledge of
discernment and abandon them through the knowledge of rejection.  **Om Om**
**Translation:**  Deception (Palikunjan), greed (Bhajan), anger (Sthandila), and
pride (Ucchāyana) are the causes of karmic bondage in the world. Wise and
discerning monks should abandon these after knowing their nature.
**Commentary:**  Furthermore, the Sutra-maker shows that even the observance of
the five great vows is futile for one who is attached to passions (Kṣāya).
Therefore, to make these vows fruitful, the suppression of passions is
necessary. "Palikunjan" is the practice of deception, where actions are twisted
and distorted. "Bhajan" is greed, where one desires everything. "Sthandila" is
anger, where one becomes confused and unable to distinguish between right and
wrong. "Ucchāyana" is pride, where one becomes arrogant due to birth, etc. The
plural form is used because there are many types of pride, such as pride in
birth, etc. The "ca" (च) indicates the different types of passions or their
collective nature. Each of these passions should be abandoned. For example, one
should abandon deception (Palikunjan), greed (Bhajan), anger (Sthandila), and
pride (Ucchāyana). The order of the Sutra is not a fault, as it is due to the
complexity of the subject. Or, it could be that deception is the root of greed,
and greed is the root of anger, etc. Therefore, the Sutra emphasizes the
abandonment of passions. The Sutra-maker further states that these passions
(Palikunjan, etc.) are the causes of karmic bondage in the world. Therefore,
wise and discerning monks should know these through the knowledge of discernment
and abandon them through the knowledge of rejection.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda mRSAvAda-asatya bhASaNa karanA, abrahmacarya
sevana karanA, parigraha rakhanA evaM adattAdAnakisI dvArA nahIM dI gaI vastu
apane Apa le lenA ye saba loka meM zastra ke tulya haiM tathA karmabaMdha ke
kAraNa haiM  /  ataH vidvAn vivekazIla muni inheM jJeya parIjJA dvArA jAne  /
TIkA zeSavratAnyadhikRtyAha - mRSA asadbhUto vAdo mRSAvAdastaM vidvAn
pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA pariharet tathA 'bahirddha' ti maithunaM 'avagrahaM'
parigrahamayAcitam - adattAdAnaM, (graM. 5250) yadivA bahiddhamiti -
maithunaparigrahau avagrahamayAcitamityanenAdattAdAnaM gRhItaM, etAni ca
mRSAvAdAdIni prANyupatApakAritvAt zastrANIva zastrANi vartante  /
tathA''dAyate-gRhyate'STaprakAraM karmaibhiriti (AdAnAni )
karmopAdAnakAraNAnyasmin loke, tadetatsarvaM vidvAn jJaparijJayA parijJAya
pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA pariharediti  // 10 //  - TIkArtha - sUtrakAra aba bAkI ke
vratoM ke sambandha meM pratipAdita karate haiN| jo jaisA nahIM hai use vaisA
kahanA mRSAvAda kahalAtA hai  /  vidvAn jJAnI sAdhu pratyAkhyAna parijJA se
inakA tyAga kare  /  maithuna ko 'bahiddha' kahA jAtA hai tathA parigraha ko
avagraha evaM adattAdAna ko ayAcita kahA jAtA hai  /  athavA 'bahiddha' zabda se
abrahmacarya tathA parigraha donoM kA grahaNa hotA hai  /  avagraha evaM ayAcita
pada se adattAdAna liyA jAtA hai| asatya bhASaNa Adi prANiyoM ke lie duHkha
utpanna karane ke kAraNa zastra ke sadRza haiM tathA aSTavidha karma baMdha hetu
haiM  /  vivekazIla puruSa yaha jJaparijJA dvArA inheM jAnakara pratyAkhyAna
parijJA dvArA inakA parityAga kare  /  OM OM paliuMcaNaM ca bhayaNaM ca,
thaMDillussayaNANi yA  /  dhUNAdANAI logaMsi, taM vijjaM parijANiyA  //  11  //
chAyA - palikuJjanaJca bhajaJca, sthaNDilocchayaNANi ca  /  dhUnayAdAnAti loke,
tadvidvAn pari jAnIyAt  //  anuvAda - parikuJcana - mAyA, bhajana-lobha,
zadrila-krodha tathA ucchayana-mAna ye loka meM karma baMdhana ke kAraNa haiM  /
vivekazIla muni inake svarUpa ko jAnakara inakA parityAga kareM  /  TIkA
kiJcAnyat paJcamahAvratadhAraNamapi kaSAyiNo niSphalaM
syAdatastatsAphalyApAdanArthaM kaSAya nirodho vidheya iti darzayati-pari-
samantAt kuJcyante vakratAmApAdyante kriyA yena mAyAnuSThAne tatpalikuJcanaM
mAyeti bhaNyate, tathA bhajyate sarvatrAtmA prahvIkriyate yena sa bhajano -
lobhastaM, tathA yadudayena hyAtmA sadasadviveka vikalatvAt sthaNDilavadbhavati
sa sthaNDilaH- krodhaH, yasmiMzca satyUrdhvaM zrayati jAtyAdinA darpAdhmAtaH
puruSa uttAnI bhavati sa ucchrAyo-mAnaH, chAndasatvAnnapuMsakaliGgatA, jAtyAdi
madasthAnAnAM bahutvAt tatkAryasyApi mAnasya bahutvamato bahuvacanaM, cakArAH
svagatabhedasaMsUcanArthAH samuccayArthA vA dhUnayeti pratyekaM kriyA yojanIyA,
tadyathA-palikuJcanaMmAyAM dhUnaya dhUnIhi vA, tathA bhajanaM- lobhaM tathA
sthaNDilaM-krodhaM tathA ucchrAyaM-mAnaM, vicitratvAt sUtrasya kraMmollaGghanena
nirdezo na doSAyeti, yadi vA rAgasya dustyajatvAt lobhasya ca
mAyApUrvakatvAdityAdAveva mAyAlo bhayorUpanyAsa iti, kaSAyaparityAge vidheye
punaraparaM kAraNamAha - etAni palikuJcanAdIni asmin loke AdAnAni varttante,
tadevAdvidvAn jJaparijJayAparijJAya pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA pratyAkSI  // 11 //
422

Page #451 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Study of Dharma Commentary - For a human being, the five great vows are futile
and useless if they have passions present. Therefore, to make the five great
vows successful and meaningful, one should restrain and obstruct passions. The
sutra-maker shows the way. That by which a human being's actions become crooked
and twisted, abandoning simplicity and becoming full of cunning, is called
*palikunchana*. This is the name of illusion. That by which the soul is
attracted everywhere, is called *bhajan*. This is the indicator of greed, upon
the arising of which the soul becomes devoid of the discrimination of good and
bad, and becomes like a *sthaḍiṁla*, becoming impure. That is called
*sthaḍiṁla*. This is the name of anger, by which the soul becomes arrogant due
to caste, etc., and becomes *uttāna*. It becomes arrogant due to ego. That is
called *ucchaya*. This is the indicator of pride. The word *mana* is masculine
according to grammar, but due to the use of *chāndasa* or *ārṣa*, it is used
here in the neuter gender. There are many places of *mada* like caste, etc.,
therefore the plural is used here. The *chākara* used here is for the purpose of
indicating the internal difference, or it is in the sense of a collection. Here,
*dhūnaya-dhūna* (throw away, finish, or abandon) should be combined with each,
should be joined. For example, *dhūna* the illusion, abandon it, abandon greed,
etc. Here, the order of illusion, greed, anger, and pride is not in order. The
reason for this is not a fault due to the peculiarity, diversity, or specialness
of the sutra, or because attachment is difficult to abandon, and greed happens
only with illusion - first there is illusion, then there is greed. Therefore,
illusion or greed is described first. The sutra-maker also tells about the
abandonment of passions. According to that, in the world, there is bondage due
to actions like illusion, etc. Knowing this, a wise person should abandon them.
*Dhoyaṇam rayaṇam ceva, batthīkammam virayeṇa. Vamaṇanjana palīmantham, tam
vijam parijāṇiya.* ||12|| *Chāyā* - *Dhāvanaṁ rañcanañcaiva, bastikarma
virecanam. Vamanāñjanaṁ palīmantham, tadvidvān parijāṇiyāt.* || Translation -
Washing of hands, feet, etc., dyeing, *bastikarma*, *virecana*, vomiting, and
eye-ointment, etc., all these actions destroy restraint. Therefore, a wise
person should abandon them knowing this. Commentary - Again, mentioning the
subsequent qualities, he says - *dhāvanaṁ* - washing of hands, feet, clothes,
etc., *rañjanaṁ* - dyeing, also of the same, the *chākara* is for the purpose of
collection, the *evakāra* is for the purpose of holding, similarly *bastikarma*
- enema, *virecana* - purgative, *vamanaṁ* - vomiting, *añjanaṁ* - eye-ointment,
etc., all these, even the body-care, etc., which are *sanayama-palīmanthakārī*
(destroyers of restraint), are in the form of a hindrance to restraint, a wise
person should know their nature and their consequences, and reject them. ||12||
Also - ...  Commentary - Again, the sutra-maker, mentioning the subsequent
qualities, says that washing of hands, feet, clothes, etc., dyeing, *bastikarma*
- taking an enema, *virecana* - taking a purgative, *vamana* - vomiting after
taking medicine, *añjana*  (423

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayana TIkArtha - jisa manuSya meM kaSAya vidyamAna rahate haiM usakA
paMca mahAvrata dhAraNa karanA niSphala-vyartha hai  /  ataH paMca mahAvrata ko
saphala-sArthaka banAne hetu kaSAya kA nirodha-avarodha karanA cAhie  /
sUtrakAra isakA digdarzana karAte haiM  /  jisa dvArA manuSya kI kriyA vakratA-
TeDhApana prApta karatI hai, saralatA ko chor3akara kuTilatA pUrNa bana jAtI
hai, use palikuncana kahate haiM  /  yaha mAyA kA nAma hai  /  jisa dvArA AtmA
sarvatra jhuka jAtI hai, AkRSTa ho jAtI hai, yaha bhajana kahA jAtA hai  /  yaha
lobha kA vAcaka hai jisake udita hone para AtmA sat asat ke viveka se vivarjita
hokara sthaDiMla ke sadRza ho jAtI hai, malina ho jAtI hai, vaha sthaDiMla kahA
jAtA hai  /  ye krodha kA nAma hai jisake hone se AtmA jAti Adi ke darpa se
uddhata hokara uttAna hotI hai| ahaMkAra se uddhata bana jAtI hai  /  use
ucchAya kahA jAtA hai  /  yaha mAna kA sUcaka hai  /  mAna zabda vyAkaraNa ke
anusAra pulliMga meM hai kintu chAMdasa yA ArSa prayoga hone ke kAraNa yahA~
napuMsaka liMga meM AyA hai  /  mada ke jAti Adi bahuta se sthAna hai isalie
yahA~ bahuvacana kA prayoga huA hai  /  yahA~ AyA huA cakAra svagata bheda ke
sarAMcaka hetu hai athavA vaha samucya ke artha meM hai  /  yahA~ dhUnaya-dhUna
DAlo, samApta kara DAlo, yA tyAga do, isa kriyA kA pratyeka ke sAtha yojana
karanA cAhie, jor3anA cAhie  /  jaise mAyA kA dhUnana karo, use tyAgo, lobha ko
tyAgo ityAdi  /  yahA~ mAyA, lobha, krodha aura mAna isa prakAra jo
kramolaMghana huA hai-ye yathAkrama nahIM Aye haiM isakA kAraNa sUtra kI apanI
vicitratA, vividhatA yA vizeSatA ke kAraNa doSa nahIM hai, athavA rAga duStyAjya
hai-use chor3anA bahuta kaThina hai tathA lobha mAyA pUrvaka hI hotA hai-pahale
mAyA hotI hai| phira lobha hotA hai  /  ataH zuru meM mAyA yA lobha kA upanyAsa-
nirdeza kiyA gayA hai  /  kaSAyoM ke tyAma ke sandarbha meM sUtrakAra bhI
batalAte haiM  /  tadanusAra saMsAra meM mAyA Adi karmoM ke baMdha ke kAraNa hai
/  vivekI puruSa ye jAnakara inakA parityAga kreN| dhoyaNaM rayaNaM ceva,
batthIkammaM virayeNa  /  vamaNaMjaNa palImaMthaM, taM vijaM parijANiyA  // 12
//  chAyA - dhAvanaM raJcanaJcaiva, bastikarma virecanam  /  vamanAJjanaM
palimanthaM, tadvidvAn parijAnIyAt  //  anuvAda - hAtha, paira Adi kA
prakSAlana, raMjana, vastikarma, viraMcana vAmana tathA netrAjaMna Adi ye saba
kArya saMyama ko naSTa kara DAlate haiM  /  ataH jJAnI puruSa ye jAnakara inakA
tyAga kare  /  TIkA - punarapyuttaraguNAdhikRtyAha-dhAvanaM-prakSAlanaM
hastapAdavastrAde raJjanamapi tasyaiva, cakAraH samuccayArthaH, evakAro'va
dhAraNe, tathA vastikarma-anuvAsanA rUpaM tayA 'virecanaM'
niruhAtmakamadhovireko vA vamanam-UrdhvavirekastathA'JjanaM nayanayoH,
ityevamAdikamatyadapi zarIrasaMskArAdikaM yat 'saMyamapalimanthakAri'
saMyamopadhAtarupaM tadetaddhidvAn svarUpatasyadvipAkatazca parijJAya
pratyAcakSIt  // 12 //  apica - . TIkArtha - punaHzca sUtrakAra uttara guNoM ko
udiSTa kara kahate haiM ki hAtha paira vastra Adi kA prakSAlanadhonA, raMjana-
raMganA, bastIkarma-enImA lenA, virecana-julAba lenA, vAmana-auSadhi Adi lekara
ulTI karanA aMjana (423

Page #452 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra states that applying surma (kohl) to the eyes, as well
as other bodily adornments and rituals, are detrimental to restraint. Wise
monks, knowing their nature and consequences, should abandon them.  The use of
fragrant substances on the body, garlands of flowers, bathing, teeth cleaning,
possessions, and engaging in worldly activities are all causes of sin. Wise
monks, knowing this, should remain separate from them and abandon them.  The
commentary explains that fragrant substances include kohl, garlands include
those made of jasmine, bathing refers to washing parts or the whole body, teeth
cleaning refers to using a twig of kadamba wood, possessions refer to accepting
things with attachment, and worldly activities include engaging in sexual
misconduct with women of divine, human, or animal realms. All these actions are
causes of bondage and lead to the cycle of birth and death. Wise monks, knowing
this, should abandon them.  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra also states that food
offered with a specific purpose, purchased food, food borrowed from others, food
brought by householders, impure food contaminated by half-ascetics, and food
that is unsuitable for any reason are all causes of worldly attachment. Wise
monks, knowing this, should abandon them.  The commentary explains that food
offered with a specific purpose refers to food prepared for donation to monks,
purchased food refers to food bought and received, food borrowed from others
refers to food taken for the sake of monks, food brought by householders refers
to food brought by householders for monks, impure food refers to food
contaminated by half-ascetics, and unsuitable food refers to food that is impure
for any reason. Wise monks, knowing this, should abandon all these types of food
and remain detached from the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram A~kha meM suramA Adi DAlanA, tathA anya bhI zarIra
saMskAra, deha sajjA Adi saMyama ke upadyAtaka-vinAzaka haiM  /  vivekazIla muni
unake svarUpa tathA vipAka - phala ko jAnakara unakA parityAga kareM  /
gaMdhamallasiNANaM ca daMta pakkhAlaNaM pariggahitthikammaM ca, taM vijjaM chAyA
gandhamAlyasnAnAni danta prakSAlanaM tathA  /  parigrahastrIkarmANi tad vidvAn
parijAnIyAt  //  - tahA  /  parijANiyA  //  13 //  anuvAda - gaMdha-zarIra meM
sugandhita padArtha lagAnA, mAlya- puSpa mAlA dhAraNa karanA, snAna karanA,
daMta prakSAlana karanA, parigraha rakhanA hasta karma karanA - ye pApa ke
kAraNa haiM  /  vivekazIla muni ye jAnakara inase pRthak rahe, inakA tyAga kareM
/  TIkA 'gandhAH' koSThapuTAdayaH 'mAlyaM' jAtyAdikaM 'snAnaM ca '
zarIraprakSAlanaM dezataH sarvatazca, tathA 'dantaprakSAlanaM' kadambakASThAdinA
tathA 'parigrahaH' sacittAdeH svIkaraNaM tathA striyo- divyamAnuSatairazcayaH
tathA 'karma' karmAnuSThAnaM vA tadetatsarvaM karmopAdAnatayA saMsArakAraNatvena
parijJAya vidvAna parityajediti  // 13 //  - TIkArtha - koSTapUTa Adi sugandhita
padArtha, camelI Adi ke puSpoM kI mAlA, snAna - zarIra ke kucha bhAga ko yA sAre
ko prakSAlita karanA-dhonA kadamba Adi kI TahanI se dAtoM kA prakSAlana karanA,
sacitta padArthagrahaNa, svIkAra karanA, deva, mAnava yA tiryaMca jAti kI
striyoM ke sAtha abrahmacarya sevana karanA tathA hastakarma karanA athavA ora
bhI jo sAvadya pApayukta anuSThAna kArya haiM unheM karanA, ye saba karma baMdha
ke kAraNa haiM  /  inase saMsAra meM janma maraNa kA cakra calatA rahatA hai|
vivekazIla muni yaha jAnakara inakA parityAga kare  /  uddesiyaM kIyagaDaM,
pAmiccaM ceva pUyaM aNesaNijjaM ca, taM vijjaM -- AhaDaM  /  parijANiyA  //  14
//  chAyA uddezikaM krItakrItaM pAmityaM caivAhRtam  /  pUya maneSaNIyaJca
tadvidvAn parijAnIyAt  //  anuvAda - uddezika- sAdhu ko dene hetu jo AhAra -
bhojana Adi taiyAra kiyA gayA hai jo krIta, kraya kiyA gayA hai, kharIdA gayA
hai, pAmitya - sAdhu ko dene hetu jo anya kisI se udhAra liyA gayA ho, AhRtajo
gRhasthoM dvArA lAyA gayA ho pUya-azuddha jo AdhAkarmI AhAra se mizrita ho tathA
aneSaNIya- kisI bhI kAraNa se doSayukta yA azuddha ho, vivekazIla sAdhu use
saMsAra bar3hane kA kAraNa jAnakara tyAgeM  /  TIkA - kiJcAnyat -
sAdhvAdyuddezena yaddAnAya vyavasthApyate taduddezikaM, tathA krItaM krayastena
krItaM gRhItaM krItakrItaM 'pAmicvaM 'tti sAdhvarthamanyata udyatakaM yadgRhyate
tattaducyate cakAraH samuccayArthaH evakAro'vadhAraNArthaH, sAdhvarthaM
yadgRhasthenAnIyate tadAhRtaM, tathA 'pUya' miti AdhAkarmAvayavasampRktaM
zuddhamapyAhArajAtaM pUtibhavati, kiM bahunoktena ? yat kenaciddoSeNAneSalIyam -
azuddhaM tatsarvaM vidvAn parijJAya saMsArakAraNatayA nispRhaH san
pratyAcakSIteti  // 14 //  424

Page #453 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dharma Study  **Commentary:**  The food, drink, etc. that is arranged for the
Sadhu is called **Uddeshik**. The food that is purchased for the Sadhu is called
**Krit**. The food that is borrowed from someone else for the Sadhu is called
**Pamity**. Here, the "cha" is in the sense of a collection, and the "eva" is in
the sense of a concept. The food that the householder brings for the Sadhu is
called **Ahat**. If the **Adhakarm** comes into contact with even a particle of
impure food, the pure food becomes impure. Such food is called **Pray** or
**Purti**. What more can be said? If the food is impure due to any fault, it is
**Aneshniya** (inedible) and **Agrahi** (unacceptable). A wise Muni, free from
desire, knowing that this is the cause of birth and death in the world, should
abandon it.  **Verse 15:**  "Aasuni Makshiragam cha, Gidduvadhayakammagam.
Uccholana cha Kakkam cha, Tam Vijjam Parijaneya."  **Translation:**  "The
consumption of Aasuni, the desire for beauty, the attachment to pleasing objects
like sounds, the act of harming living beings, the careless washing of hands and
feet with cold water, and the rubbing of the body with powders, are all causes
of worldly increase. Knowing this, the Sadhu should abandon them."
**Commentary:**  The consumption of ghee or other special foods, or the use of
Rasayana (rejuvenating substances), which makes a person strong and healthy, is
called **Aasuni**. Or, **Aasuni** can also refer to praise, because a person of
low character becomes puffed up with pride when they hear praise. The
consumption of **Aasuni**, the application of collyrium (eye-paint) for beauty,
the indulgence in pleasures like sounds and tastes, the act of harming living
beings, the act of causing harm or injury to others, and the careless washing of
hands and feet with cold water, and the rubbing of the body with powders, are
all causes of bondage. A wise Muni, knowing this, should abandon them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayanaM TIkArtha - sAdhu ko dene hetu jo AhAra bhojana Adi
vyavasthApita kiyA jAtA hai- rakhA jAtA hai, use uddezika kahate haiM  /  jo
AhAra sAdhu ke lie kraya kiyA jAtA kharIdA jAtA hai use krIta kahA jAtA hai|
sAdhu ko dene hetu jo AhAra anya kisI se udhAra liyA jAtA hai use pAmitya kahA
jAtA hai  /  yahA~ cakAra samuccaya ke artha meM hai  /  tathA evakAra
avadhAraNA ke artha meM hai  /  sAdhu ko dene hetu gRhastha jo AhAra lAtA hai,
vaha ahatta kahA jAtA hai| AdhAkarmI sadoSa AhAra ke eka kaNa se bhI sapraMtta
hone para zuddha AhAra azuddha ho jAtA hai  /  aise AhAra ko praya yA pUrti kahA
jAtA hai  /  aura adhika kyA kahA jAye, kisI bhI doSa se AhAra azuddha aneSaNIya
- agrAhI ho to nispRha AkAMkSA rahita vivekazIla muni usako saMsAra kA janma-
maraNa kA kAraNa jAnakara tyAga deM  /  AsUNimakkhirAgaM ca,
giddhuvadhAyakammagaM  /  uccholaNaM ca kakkaM ca taM vijjaM parijANiyA  // 15
//  chAyA AzUna makSirAgaJca, gRddhayupaghAtakarmakam  /  uccholanaJca kalkaJca
tadvidvAn parijAnIyAt  //  anuvAda rasAyana Adi kA sevana karanA, sundaratA ke
lie A~khoM meM aMjana lagAnA, zabda Adi prItijanaka viSayoM meM Asakta rahanA,
jIva hiMsA maya karma karanA jaise zItala sacita jala se ayatnapUrvaka hAtha
paira Adi kA prakSAlana karanA, zarIra meM piTThI Adi malanA, ye saMsAra
bar3hAne ke kAraNa haiN| sAdhu yaha jAnakara inakA parityAga kareM  /  - - TIkA
kiJca yena ghRtapAnAdinA AhAravizeSena rasAyanakriyayA vA azUnaH san A -
samantAt zUnI bhavati - balavAnupajAyate  /  tadAzUnItyucyate, yadivA AsUNiti -
zlAghayA kriyamANayA A-samantAt zUnavacchUno laghuprakRtiH kazciddarpAdhmAtatvAt
stabdho bhavati, tathA akSNAM 'rAgo' raJjanaM sauvIrAdikamaJjanamiti yAvat, evaM
raseSu zabdAdiSu viSayeSu vA 'gRddhiM' gAddharyaM tAtparyamAsevA,
tathopaghAtakarma-aparApakArakriyA yena kena citkarmaNA pareSAM jantUnAmupaghAto
bhavati tadupaghAtakarmetyucyate, tadeva lezato darzayati- 'uccholanaM 'tti
ayatanayA zItodakAdinA hastapAdAdiprakSAlanaM tathA 'kalkaM'
loghrAdidravyasamudAyena zarIrodvartanakaM tadetatsarvaM karmabandhanAye tyevaM
'vidvAn' paNDito jJaparijJayA parijJAya pratyAkhyAnaparijJayApariharediti  // 15
//  TIkArtha ghRtapAna, athavA rasAyana kA sevana yA jisa AhAra vizeSa ke sevana
manuSya baliSTha yA puSTha hotA hai, use AzUnI kahA jAtA hai athavA prazaMsA ko
bhI AzUnI kahA jAtA hai kyoMki ochI pravRtti kA vyakti apanI tArIpha sunakara
ahaMkAra se cUra ho jAtA hai  /  AzUnI kA sevana karanA, sundaratA ke lie netroM
meM sauvIraka Adi kA aMjana lagAnA, rasoM meM athavA zabdAdi priya viSayoM meM
lolupa bananA, prANiyoM ke upaghAtaka, upaghAta-vyApAdana karane vAle tathA
unake apakAraka- apakAra yA burA karane vAle karma karanA, inake saMkSipta
spaSTIkaraNa ke rUpa meM ayatna pUrvaka zItala sacita jala se hAtha paira Adi
prakSAlita karanA tathA lodra Adi padArthoM kI pITThI banAkara usakA zarIra para
udvartana karanA, masalanA, ye sabhI karmabaMdha ke hetu haiN| vivekazIla muni
yaha jAnakara inakA parityAga kareM  /  - 425

Page #454 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 16:**  * **Sāmpasārikayakirīye,** * **Pariṇāyatṇāṇi** *
**Ya.** * **Sāgāriyam ca piṇḍa ca taṁ vijjaṁ parijāṇiyā.** || 16 || * **Chāyā**
* **Sāmprasārī**  **Translation:**  * **Sāmpasārikayakirīye,** (Talking about
worldly matters with the unchaste) * **Pariṇāyatṇāṇi** (Praising the actions of
the unchaste) * **Ya.** (And) * **Sāgāriyam ca piṇḍa ca taṁ vijjaṁ parijāṇiyā.**
(Knowing that taking food from the house of a householder, who is a "Sāgārika"
(one who provides lodging), is a cause of worldly wandering, a wise ascetic
should abandon it.) || 16 || * **Chāyā** (Shadow) * **Sāmprasārī** (Expansion)
**Commentary:**  * **Sāmpasārikayakirīye:** This refers to engaging in
conversations about worldly matters with those who are not practicing self-
restraint. * **Pariṇāyatṇāṇi:** This refers to praising the actions of those who
are not practicing self-restraint. * **Sāgāriyam ca piṇḍa ca:** This refers to
taking food from the house of a householder who provides lodging. * **taṁ vijjaṁ
parijāṇiyā:** This means that a wise ascetic should know that these actions are
causes of worldly wandering and should abandon them.  **Verse 17:**  *
**Aṣṭāpadam na sikkhījjā, vehāīyaṁ caṇo vae.** * **Hatthakammaṁ vivāyaṁ ca taṁ
vijjaṁ parijāṇiyā.** || 17 || * **Chāyā** * **Sāmprasārī**  **Translation:**  *
**Aṣṭāpadam na sikkhījjā, vehāīyaṁ caṇo vae.** (One should not learn the
Aṣṭāpada (a type of fast-paced music) or speak words that are beyond the
Dharma.) * **Hatthakammaṁ vivāyaṁ ca taṁ vijjaṁ parijāṇiyā.** (Knowing that
manual labor and disputes are causes of worldly wandering, a wise ascetic should
abandon them.) || 17 || * **Chāyā** (Shadow) * **Sāmprasārī** (Expansion)
**Commentary:**  * **Aṣṭāpadam na sikkhījjā:** This refers to not learning the
Aṣṭāpada, a type of fast-paced music that is considered to be a distraction from
spiritual practice. * **vehāīyaṁ caṇo vae:** This refers to not speaking words
that are beyond the Dharma, or that are harmful or disrespectful. *
**Hatthakammaṁ vivāyaṁ ca:** This refers to manual labor and disputes, which are
considered to be causes of worldly wandering. * **taṁ vijjaṁ parijāṇiyā:** This
means that a wise ascetic should know that these actions are causes of worldly
wandering and should abandon them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMpasArIkayakirie, pariNAyataNANi ya  /  sAgAriyaM ca piMDa ca taM vijjaM
parijANiyA  //  16 //  chAyA samprasArI - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kRtakriyaH
praznAyatanAni ca  /  sAgArikaJca piNDaJca tadvidvAn parijAnIyAt  //  chAyA
anuvAda - asaMyamI janoM ke sAtha sAMsArika viSayoM para bAtacIta karanA,
asaMyama pUrNa kArya kI tArIpha karanA, jyotiSa ke savAloM kA javAba denA tathA
zaiyyA tara kA jisake bhavana meM ruke ho usake svAmI kA AhAra lenA - usake
yahAM se bhikSA lenA, yaha saMsAra bhramaNa ke kAraNa haiN| inheM jAnakara
vivekazIla sAdhu inakA tyAga kareM  /  - " TIkA - apica - asaMyatai sArdhaM
samprasAraNaM paryAlocanaM pariharediti vAkyazeSaH evamasaMyamAnuSThAnaM
pratyupadezadAnaM, tathA 'kayakirio' nAma kRtA zobhanA gRhakaraNAdikA kriyA yena
sa kRtakriya ityevamasaMyamAnuSThAna prazaMsanaM, tathA praznasya- Adarzapra
zrAdaiH 'Ayatanam' AviSkaraNaM kathanaM yathAvivakSitapraznanirNayanAni, yadivA
- praznAyatanAni laukikAnAM parasparavyavahAre mithyAzAstragatasaMzaye vA prazre
sati yathAvasthitArthakathanadvAreNAyatanAni-nirNayanAnIti, tathA
'sAgArikaH'zayyAtarastasya piNDam AhAraM, yadivA- sAgArikapiNDamiti
sUtakagRhapiNDaM jugupsitaM varNApasapiNDa vA, cazabdaH samuccaye, tadetatsarvaM
vidvAn jJaparijJayA parijJAya pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA pariharediti  //  16  //
kiJcAnyatTIkArtha saMyama hIna puruSoM ke sAtha laukika viSayoM kI bAteM karanA,
vicAra vimarza karanA sAdhu ko tyAga denA cAhie  /  use asaMyama ke anuSThAna
AcaraNa kA upadeza nahIM karanA caahie| jisa puruSa ne apane bhavana Adi kI
zobhA sajjA, sajAvaTa kI hai sAdhu ko usake rasa asaMyama mUlaka kArya kI
prazaMsA nahIM karanI cAhie  /  use jyotiSa sambandhI savAloM kA javAba nahIM
denA cAhie  /  athavA laukika puruSoM kA ApasI vyavahAra meM, unake mithyAtva
mUlaka zAstroM ke sambandha meM unheM saMzaya hone para athavA una dvArA prazna
kiye jAne para sAdhu ko usa zAstra ke yathArtha mantavya prakaTa kara nirNaya
nahIM karanA caahie| zaiyyAtara ke yahA~ se, athavA sUtaka yukta ghara se, nIca
ke ghara se sAdhu piNDa AhAra na le  /  sAdhu jJaparijJA se inako jAnakara inakA
parityAga kare  /  - aTThAvayaM na sikkhijjA, vehAIyaM caNo vae  /  hatthakammaM
vivAyaM ca taM vijjaM parijANiyA  //  17 //  aSTApadaM na zikSeta vedhAtItaJca
no vadet  /  hastakarma vivAdaJca tat vidvAn parijAnIyAt  //  anuvAda - sAdhu
arthapada - arthazAstra kA adhyayana na kare athavA aSTApada - drutakrIr3A kA
abhyAsa na kare tathA adharma pUrNa vacana na bole  /  vaha hastakarma va vivAda
na kre| vivekazIla puruSa inako bhava bhramaNa kA hetu mAnakara inakA parityAga
kare  /  426

Page #455 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Study of Dharma Commentary - That which is earned is called wealth. It is
wealth, grain, gold, etc. That which is attained, by which wealth is attained,
is called the word of wealth, or the scripture that is for the purpose of
attaining wealth, is called the word of wealth. Chanakya's Arthashastra is the
word of wealth. A virtuous person should not study it. He should not study other
scriptures that teach violence against living beings. In the verse, the word
Ashtapaad is used. In Sanskrit, Ashtapaad also refers to gambling. Gambling is
called Ashtapaad. A virtuous person should not learn it. He should not learn it,
and if he has already learned gambling, he should not practice it. Violation of
Dharma is called Vedha. A virtuous person should not speak words that violate
Dharma. Or, Vedha also refers to cloth-piercing. Cloth-piercing is a type of
gambling. A virtuous person should not speak words about it. Then what to say
about gambling or playing games. Handwork, or hand-action, mutual fighting with
each other, using hands, fists, etc., is the cause of conflict and opposing
arguments, dry, meaningless arguments, etc. The word 'cha' is used in the sense
of collection. Knowing all this, a virtuous person should reject it with the
knowledge of rejection. ||17||  Commentary - Wearing shoes, holding an umbrella,
playing dice, using a fan made of peacock feathers, etc., are all actions that
are rooted in violence. Knowing that these are the causes of karma-bandha, a
wise muni should abandon them. ||18||  Commentary - And, wooden sandals, and an
umbrella to protect from the sun and rain, and 'nalika' - a specific type of
gambling, and a fan made of peacock feathers, and actions related to others -
mutual actions, one doing something for another, and another doing something for
the first, etc. The word 'cha' is used in the sense of collection. Knowing all
this, a wise person should abandon it with the knowledge of rejection, knowing
that it is the cause of karma-bandha. ||18||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayana TIkA - aryate ityartho-dhanadhAnyahiraNyAdikaH padyate-gamyate
yenArthastatpadaM zAstraM arthArthaM paramarthapadaM cANAkyAdikamarthazAstraM
tanna 'zikSet' nAbhyasyet nApyaparaM prANyupamardakAri zAstraM zikSayet,
yadivA-'aSTApadaM dyutakrIDAvizeSastaM na zikSeta, nApi
pUrvazikSitamanuzIlayediti, tathA vedho' dharmAnuvedhastasmAdatItaM
saddharmAnuvedhAtItamadharmapradhAnaM vaco no vadet yadivA-vedha iti vastravedho
dyUtavizeSastagataM vacanamapi novaded AstAM tAvatkrIDanamiti, hastakarma
pratItaM, yadi vA-'hastakarma' hastakriyA parasparaM hastavyApArapradhAnaH
kalahastaM, tathA viruddhavAdaM vivAdaM zuSkavAdamityarthaH, caH samuccaye,
tadetatsarvaM saMsArabhramaNakAraNaM jJaparijJayA parijJAya pratyAkhyAna
parijJayA pratyAcakSIt  // 17 //  TIkArtha - jo arjita kiyA jAtA hai use artha
kahate haiM  /  vaha dhana, dhAnya tathA hiraNya Adi hai| vaha artha jisake
dvArA upalabdha hotA hai, milatA hai use arthapada kahate haiM athavA artha yA
dhana arjita karane ke lie jo zAstra hai, use arthapada kahA jAtA hai  /
cANakya dvArA racita arthazAstra arthapada hai  /  sAdhu usakA abhyAsa-adhyayana
na kare  /  una dUsare zAstroM kA bhI abhyAsa na kare, jo prANiyoM kI hiMsA kI
zikSA dete haiN| gAthA meM Aye aTThAvaya pada kA saMskRta meM aSTApad bhI hotA
hai  /  dyUtakrIr3A ko aSTApada kahA jAtA hai  /  sAdhu usakA zikSaNa na le  /
use na sIkhe tathA yadi usane pahale dyUta-jUe kA zikSaNa pAyA ho to usakA
anuzIlana na kare  /  dharma kA ullaMghana vedha kahA jAtA hai  /  jisa dvArA
dharma kA ullaMghana ho aisA adharmamaya vacana sAdhu na kahe  /  athavA vedha,
vastra vedha kA bhI bodhaka hai  /  vastra vedha dyUta kA eka prakAra hai  /
sAdhu tadviSayaka vacana bhI na bole phira dyata krIDA yA jaA khelane kI to bAta
hI kyA  /  hastakarma athavA hastakriyA paraspara Apasa meM eka dUsare ko hAthoM
se-mukkoM Adi se mArane pITane ke rUpa meM kalaha tathA viruddha vAda, zuSka
nirarthakavAdavivAda Adi saMsAra bhramaNa ke kAraNa haiM  /  yaha jAnakara sAdhu
unakA parityAga kare  /  yahA~ caya zabda samuccaya ke artha meM prayukta huA
hai| pANahAo ya chattaM ca, NAlIyaM vAlavIyaNaM  /  parakiriyaM annamannaM ca,
taM vijaM parijANiyA  // 18 //  chAyA - upAnahI ca chatraJca, nAlikaM
bAlavyajanam  /  parikriyAJcA'nyo'nyaM, tadvidvAn parijAnIyAt  //  anuvAda -
upAnaha-jUte khaDAU pahananA, chatra-chAtA rakhanA, nAlika-dyuta krIr3A karanA,
vAla vyajanapaMkhe se havA lenA hiMsAdi mUlaka parIkriyA-pArasparika kriyA inako
karma baMdhA kA hetu jAnakara vivekazIla muni inakA parityAga kare  /  /  TIkA -
kiJca upAnahau-kASThapAduke ca tathA AtapAdinivAraNAya chatraM tathA 'nAlikA'
dyUtakrIr3A vizeSastathA vAlaiH mayUrapicchairvA vyajanakaM tathA pareSAM
sambandhinI kriyAmanyo'nyaM-parasparato'nyaniSpAdyAmanyaH karotyaparaniSpAdyAM
cApara iti, caH samuccaye, tadetatsarvaM vidvAn' paNDitaH karmopAdAnakAraNatvena
jJaparijJayA parijJAya pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA pariharediti  // 18 //  (427)

Page #456 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra ### Commentary - Wearing sandals made of the wood
of the Upanaha tree, using an umbrella to avoid the sun's heat, playing dice
games, using a fan made of peacock feathers to get air, and engaging in violent
interactions are all causes of worldly wandering and movement. Knowing this, the
ascetic should abandon them. - **Verse:** Pasavanam, hariyesu na kare muni.
Viyaden vavi sahu, navamjje (yamejja) kavaivi. || 19 || - **Translation:** The
ascetic should not perform the act of defecation in a place where there are
green plants. Even after removing seeds, he should not perform ablutions with
impure water. - **Commentary:** The ascetic should not perform the act of
defecation, ablutions, etc., in a place where there are green plants, seeds, or
bones. He should not even use impure water to wash away seeds or green plants.
This is because even impure water can be a source of violence. || 19 || ❀❀
**Commentary:** A wise ascetic should not defecate or urinate in an
inappropriate place where there are green plants or seeds. He should not do so
even after removing the seeds and green plants. He should not perform ablutions
with impure water. - **Verse:** Paramatte. Paravttham Annapanam, achelo'vi " Na
bhunjeja kayaiv. Tam vijam parijania. || 20 || - **Translation:** The ascetic
should not eat or drink from another householder's vessel. Even if he is without
clothes, he should not wear another householder's clothes. A wise ascetic should
know this. - **Commentary:** The ascetic should not eat or drink from another
householder's vessel. This is because there is a risk of contamination, loss, or
theft. Even if the ascetic is without clothes, he should not wear another
householder's clothes. This is because there is a risk of contamination or
theft. A wise ascetic should know this and avoid these actions. || 20 || -
**Explanation:** The ascetic should not eat or drink from another householder's
vessel because there is a risk of contamination, loss, or theft. This is because
the vessel may have been used for impure purposes or may be contaminated with
harmful substances. The ascetic should also not wear another householder's
clothes because there is a risk of contamination or theft. This is because the
clothes may have been used for impure purposes or may be contaminated with
harmful substances. A wise ascetic should know this and avoid these actions. ||
20 || - **Note:** The term "Upanaha" refers to a specific type of tree. The term
"Pasavanam" refers to the act of defecation. The term "Hariyesu" refers to green
plants. The term "Paramatte" refers to another householder's vessel. The term
"Paravttham" refers to another householder's clothes. The term "Achelo" refers
to being without clothes. The term "Vijam" refers to knowledge. - **Further
Explanation:** The text emphasizes the importance of non-violence and the
avoidance of actions that could lead to harm. The ascetic is expected to be
mindful of his actions and to avoid causing harm to himself or others. The text
also highlights the importance of self-control and the avoidance of worldly
attachments. The ascetic is expected to be detached from material possessions
and to focus on spiritual development. - **Conclusion:** The text provides
guidance on how to live a virtuous life and to avoid actions that could lead to
suffering. The ascetic is expected to be mindful of his actions and to strive
for spiritual liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - upAnaha-kASTapAdukA dhAraNa karanA, dhUpa ke
Atapa Adi ke nivAraNa hetu dhUpa se bacane ke lie chAtA lagAnA, nAlikA dyUta
krIDA karanA, mora ke paMkha Adi se bane hue paMkhe se havA lo evaM hiMsA janaka
pArasparika kriyA Adi meM saMlagna rahanA, ye saba saMsAra bhramaNa - AvAgamana
ke kAraNa haiN| yaha jAnakara sAdhu inakA tyAga kare  /  - chAyA uccAraM
pAsavaNaM, hariesu Na kare muNI  /  viyaDeNa vAvi sAhu, NAvamajje (yamejjA )
kavAivi  //  19  //  - uccAraM prastravaNaM hariteSu na kuryyAnmuniH  /
vikaTena vA'pi saMhRtya, nAcameta kadAcidapi  //  - anuvAda - muni harI
vanaspati yukta sthAna meM mala prazravaNa tyAga rUpa zauca kriyA na kare  /
bIja Adi ko dUrakara acita jala se bhI Acamana na kare  /  - TIkA tathA
uccArapratraNAdikAM kriyAM hariteSUpari bIjeSu vA asthiNDile vA 'muniH'
sAdhurnakuryAt, tathA 'vikaTena' vigatajIvenApyudakena 'saMhRtya' apanIya bIjAni
haritAni vA 'nAcameta' na nirlepanaM kuryAt, kimutAvikaTe netibhAvaH  //  19  //
TIkArtha vivekazIla muni harI vanaspati tathA bIja Adi ke Upara anupayukta
sthAna meM mala mUtra kA tyAga na kare  /  bIja harI vanaspati Adi haTAkara bhI
vaha vaisA na kare  /  acita jala se bhI Acamana na kare  /  paramatte .
paravatthaM annapANaM, acelo'vi " Na bhuMjeja kayAivi  /  taM vijaM parijANiyA
// 20 //  chAyA parAmatre 'nnapAnaM, na bhuJjIta kadAcidapi  /  paravastra
macelo'pi tadvidvAn parijAnIyAt  //  anuvAda - muni parAmatra - dUsare ke
gRhastha ke pAtra meM AhAra na kare, na jala kA sevana kare  /  vastra na bhI
hoM to vaha gRhastha ke vastra na pahane  /  ye saba munittva ke muni dharmaM ke
pratikUla haiM  /  vivekazIla muni yaha jAnate hue isakA parityAga kare  /  TIkA
- kiJca parasya gRhasthAsyAmatraM - bhAjanaM parAmatraM tatra puraH
karmapazcAtkarmabhayAt hRtanaSTAdidoSasambhAvAcca annaM pAnaM ca munirna
kadAcidapi bhuJjIta, yadivA - patadgrahadhAriNazchidrapANe : pANipAtraM
parapAtraM, yadivA - pANipAtrasyAcchidrapANerjinakalpikAdeH patadgrahaH
parapAtraM tatra saMyatavirAdhanAbhayAnna bhuJjIta tathA parasya gRhasthasya
vastraM paravastraM tatsAdhuracelo'pisan pazcAtkarmAdidoSabhayAt hRtana -
STAdidoSasambhavAcca na bibhRyAt, yadivA - jinakalpikAdiko'celo bhUtvA sarvamapi
vastraM paravastramiti kRtvA na bibhRyAd, tadetatsarvaM parapAtrabhojanAdikaM
saMyamavirAdhakatvena jJaparijJAya pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA pariharediti  // 20 //
tathA 428

Page #457 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dharma Study Commentary - Here, the meaning of "parapatra" is the vessel of a
householder. A muni should not eat or drink water from that vessel because there
is a fear that the vessel may be washed with water containing past or future
karma, that it may be stolen, destroyed, or broken by falling from the hand.
Alternatively, it is prescribed for the stable, contemplative sadhus to keep
vessels. Therefore, they keep vessels because their cupped hands are porous.
Hence, even the vessel of the stable muni's hand is a "parapatra". He should not
eat from it, nor drink water from it. Alternatively, the Jina-kalpi and other
munis do not keep vessels. Their cupped hands or "anjali" are their vessels.
Their hands or "anjali", which are free from holes and tightly closed, are their
vessels. For the Jina-kalpi muni, all other vessels are "parapatra". They
consider them to be against their vows of restraint. Therefore, out of fear of
breaking their vows, they should not eat or drink water from such vessels. Even
though sadhus are without clothes, they should not wear the clothes of a
householder out of fear of past or future karma, or the fear of being washed
with impure water, being stolen, or being destroyed. Alternatively, the Jina-
kalpi muni is without clothes, for them all clothes are "paravastra". Therefore,
they should not wear clothes. Thus, in summary, it is against the vows of
restraint for a sadhu to eat from a "parapatra", etc. Knowing this through
knowledge and understanding, he should abandon it through the knowledge of
rejection.  **Verse 21:**  "Aasandi, Paliyanke ya, Nisijancha gihatare.
Sampucchaanam saranam va, tam vijam parijaaniya."  **Commentary:**  "Aasandi,
Paliyanke, and Nisijancha in the house of a householder. Sampucchaanam, Saranam
va, the wise one should know and abandon these."  **Translation:**  A sadhu
should not sit on an "Aasandi" (a type of seat) or a "Paliyanke" (a type of
bed). He should not sleep on a bed. He should not sit in a narrow alley between
two houses or inside a householder's house. He should not inquire about the
well-being of a householder, nor should he remember his past playful activities
during his life as a householder. All these things are distractions in the
world. Knowing this, he should abandon them.  **Commentary:**  "Aasandi" is a
specific type of seat, and because of its general nature, it encompasses all
types of seating arrangements. Similarly, "Paliyanke" is a specific type of bed.
Also, he should avoid sitting in the middle of a house or between two houses, or
sitting on a seat, out of fear of violating his vows of restraint. As it is
said:  "Deep holes are these, difficult to cross for the living beings. Lack of
secrecy is a violation of celibacy, women are also a cause of doubt."  And so
on. Also, in the house of a householder, he should not inquire about their well-
being, nor should he inquire about his own body parts (Sampucchaanam), nor
should he remember his past playful activities. The "vidvan" (the wise one)
should know and abandon these things through knowledge and understanding, and
through the knowledge of rejection.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayana TIkArtha - yahA~ parAmatra kA artha gRhastha kA pAtra hai  /
usa pAtra meM muni bhojana na kare aura pAnI bhI na pIye kyoMki usa pAtra meM
Age yA pIche ke karma kA-sacita pAnI se dhoye jAne kA, hRta hone kA, corI cale
jAne kA, naSTa hone kA, hAtha se girakara TUTa jAne kA bhaya banA rahatA hai  /
athavA sthavira kalpI sAdhuoM ke lie pAtra rakhanA vihita hai  /  ataH ve pAtra
rakhate haiM, kyoMki unakI aMjali chidrayukta hotI hai  /  isalie sthavira muni
kA hAtha kA pAtra bhI parapAtra hai| usameM vaha AhAra na kareM, tathA usa dvArA
jala na pIye  /  athavA jinakalpI Adi muni pAtra nahIM rakhate  /  unakA pANI-
pAtha yA aMjali hI pAtra hai| unakA achidra-chidra rahitakhUba saTAyA huA hAtha
yA aMjali hI unakA pAtra hai  /  jinakalpI muni ke lie dUsare sabhI pAtra para
pAtra haiN| unameM ve saMyama kI virAdhanA mAnate haiM  /  ata: saMyama TUTane
ke bhaya se ve vaise pAtra meM bhojana na kare, pAnI na pIye  /  sAdhu vastra
rahita hote hue bhI pahale yA pIche karmAdi doSa ke bhaya se acitta jala se
dhoye jAne tathA corI ho jAne tathA naSTa ho jAne Adi ke bhaya se gRhastha kA
vastra dhAraNa na kare, athavA jinakalpI muni vastra rahita hote haiM, unake lie
sabhI vastra mAtra hI paravastra haiM  /  isIlie unheM vastra dhAraNa nahIM
karanA cAhie  /  isa prakAra sArAMza yaha hai ki sAdhu dvArA parapAtra meM
bhojana karanA Adi saMyama kA virAdhaka hai  /  jJaparijJA dvArA yaha jAnakara
pratyAkhyAna parijJA dvArA usakA parityAga kare  /  AsaMdI paliyaMke ya, NisijaM
ca gihatare  /  saMpucchaNaM saraNaM vA, taM vijaM parijANiyA  // 21 //  chAyA -
AsandI, paryaGkaJca, niSadyAJca gRhAntare  /  saMpraznaM smaraNaM vApi,
tadvidvAn parijAnIyAt  //  anuvAda - sAdhu AsaMdI-maMca yA kursI para na baiThe
/  vaha palaMga para zayana na kare  /  gRhastha ke ghara ke andara yA do gharoM
ke madhya meM jo saMkar3I galI ho, usameM na baiThe  /  vaha gRhastha kA kuzala
kSema na pUche tathA parvajIvana meM kI haI apanI krIDA kA smaraNa na kare  /
ye sabhI bAteM saMsAra meM bhaTakAne vAlI haiN| yaha jAnakara vaha unakA
parityAga kare  /  TIkA - 'AsandI' tyAsanavizeSaH, asya
copalakSaNArthatvAtsarvo'pyAsanavidhirgRhItaH, tathA 'paryaMkaH' zayanavizeSaH,
tathA gRhasyAntarmadhye gRhayorvA madhye niSadyAM vA''sanaM vA
saMyamavirAdhanAbhayAtpariharet, tathA coktam - "gabhIra jhusirA ete, pANA
duppaDilehagA  /  aguttI baMbhacerassa, ittIo vAvi saMkaNA  // 1 // " chAyA -
gambhIracchidrANi prANA duSprati lekhyAH  /  agupti brahmacaryasya striyo vApi
zaMkanaM  // 2 //  ityAdi, tathA tatra gRhasthagRhe kuzalAdipracchanaM AtmIya
zarIrAvayavapraccha (puJcha) naM vA tathA pUrva krIDitasmaraNaM 'vidvAn'
viditavedyaH sannanAyeti jJaparijJayAparijJAya pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA pariharet
// 21 //  TIkArtha - Asana vizeSa ko AsaMdI kahA jAtA hai, yaha upalakSaNa hai
/  isase saba prakAra kI Asana vidhi-Asana viSayaka upakrama gRhIta hote haiM  /
zayana-vizeSa vizeSa rUpa se jisakA zayana karane meM upayoga 429

Page #458 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  It is said that a bed or a cot is called a
*paryanka* or *palang*. Sleeping or sitting in a narrow space within a
householder's house or between two houses is a cause of violation of restraint.
Therefore, a monk should abandon these. It is said that *gambiramance* or *khat*
etc. have deep holes, therefore living beings are not visible in them, but their
presence is suspected. Their transcription is not possible and being located
within a householder's house or between two houses, the protection of celibacy
is not possible. There is also a suspicion of female contact there. Asking about
the well-being of the family of the householder, wiping the limbs of one's body,
and remembering the previous games and enjoyed objects of enjoyment - all these
are for the sake of evil, for the downfall of the soul. Therefore, the wise
monk, knowing the truth of the matter, should abandon all these by the knowledge
of rejection. ||21||  **Vanda-puyana**  Just as there are desires in this world
and in all the worlds, a wise monk should know them. ||22||  **Translation:**
Fame, glory, praise, respect, and all worldly pleasures are the cause of worldly
wandering. Knowing this, a wise monk should abandon them.  **Commentary:**
Furthermore, fame is the characteristic of bravery in carrying out many battles
and conflicts, glory is achieved through giving, praise is born from high birth,
austerity, and hearing scriptures, and respect is given by the kings of gods and
demons, emperors, powerful kings, Vasudeva, etc., and the same respect is given
by them in the form of clothes, etc. Knowing all this, a wise monk should
abandon fame, glory (praise, etc.) by understanding their true nature. ||22||
**Commentary Meaning:** The fame or reputation that arises in the world from
winning a battle in a very large war is called fame. The fame that is obtained
by giving a lot of charity is called glory. The fame that is obtained in the
world by being born in a high caste, by practicing austerity, and by studying
scriptures is called praise. The respect that is given by Indra, the king of the
demons, the emperor, Balarama, Vasudeva, etc., in the form of bowing,
salutation, clothes, etc., and all the worldly desires - a monk should abandon
all these by knowing their true nature and by understanding their true nature.
**The monk who carries out his duties**  The monk who carries out his duties,
food and drink, and the same, should know that the giving of food to others is
the cause of worldly wandering. ||23||  **Shadow**  A wise monk should know
this. ||23||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram hotA hai, use paryaMka yA palaMga kahate haiM  /
gRhastha ke ghara ke bhItara yA do gharoM ke bIca ke saMkar3e sthAna meM zayana
karanA yA baiThanA saMyama kI virAdhanA kA hetu hai| ataH sAdhu inakA parityAga
kare  /  kahA gayA hai-gambhIramAMce yA khATa Adi AsanoM meM gambhIra - gahare
chidra hote haiM, isalie unameM jIva sAkSAt dikhalAI nahIM par3ate, para unameM
unakA honA AzaMkita hai  /  unakA pratilekhana nahIM ho sakatA tathA gRhastha ke
ghara ke bhItara yA do gharoM ke bIca sthita hone se brahmacarya kI gupti -
rakSA saMbhava nahIM hai  /  vahA~ strI saMsarga kI bhI zaMkA banI rahatI hai  /
gRhastha ke ghara ke parivAra ke kuzala kSema viSayaka samAcAra pUchanA, apanI
deha ke aMgoM ko poMchanA tathA pahale kI huI krIr3AoM - bhoge hue viSaya bhogoM
ko yAda karanA - ye saba anartha ke, AtmA ke adha: patana ke lie haiM  /  ataeva
vidita vaidya-vastutatvavettA vivekazIla muni jJaparijJA dvArA ina sabako
jAnakara pratyAkhyAna parijJA dvArA inakA parityAga kare  // 21 //  vaMdapUyaNA
/  jasaM kitiM saloyaM ca, jA savvaloyaMsi je kAmA, taM vijjaM parijANiyA  // 22
//  chAyA yazaH kIrtiH zlokazca yA ca vandanA pUjanA  /  sarvaloke ye kAmA stad
vidvAn parijAnIyAt  //  anuvAda - yazasvitA, kIrti, prazasti, vandana, satkAra
tathA samasta sAMsArika bhoga saMsAra bhramaNa ke kAraNa haiM, yaha jAnakara
vivekazIla muni inakA tyAga kara de  /  TIkA - apica
bahusamarasaGghaTTanirvahaNazauryalakSaNaM yazaH dAnasAdhyA kIrti:
jAtitapovAhuzrutyAdijanitAzlAghA, tathA yA ca
surAsurAdhipaticakravartibaladevavAsudevAdibhirvandanA tathA taireva
satkArapUrvikA vastrAdinA pUjanA tathA sarvasminnApi loke icchAmadanarUpA ye
kecana kAmAstadetatsarvaM yazaH kIrti (zlokAdika :) mapakAritayA parijJAya
pariharediti  // 22 //  TIkArtha bahuta bar3e saMgrAma meM yuddha kara vijaya
prApta karane se saMsAra meM jo zaurya kI prasiddhi yA khyAti hotI hai, use yaza
kahate haiM  /  atyadhika dAna dene kI jo prasiddhi prApta hotI hai, use kIrti
kahA jAtA hai  /  ucca jAti meM janmane, tapazvacaraNa karane tathA
zAstrAdhyayana karane se jo jagata meM khyAti milatI hai use zlAghA kahate haiM
/  devendra, asurendra, cakravatI, baladeva, vAsudeva Adi dvArA jo vandana
namaskAra, vastrAdi dvArA satkAra evaM sammAna kiyA jAtA hai, vaha tathA samagra
loka ke kAmabhoga-ina sabhI kI yaza, kIrti, prazasti Adi ko parijJAta kara -
inake vAstavika svarUpa ko AtmasAt kara sAdhu inakA parityAga kare  /  jeNehaM
Nivvahe bhikkhU, annapANaM tahAvihaM  /  aNuppayANamannesiM, yeneha nirvahed
bhikSu rannapAnaM tathAvidham  /  anupradAna manyeSAM tad vidvAn parijAnIyAt  //
430 chAyA - taM vijjaM parijANiyA  // 23 //

Page #459 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Translation:**  **Dharma Study Translation -** A monk should not give to
another monk any food or water that would cause his restraint to become
corrupted or destroyed. It increases transmigration. A wise muni, knowing this,
should abandon it.  **Commentary -**  "Kinchanyat" -  "Yena" - by which food or
water, or by which means, "Tathavidhena" -  by which means, "Iha" - in this
world, a monk would perform or sustain his restraint, famine, disease, fear,
etc., "Tathavidham" -  "Shuddha" - pure, "Dravyakshetrakalabhaavaapekshaya" -
in relation to substance, field, time, and condition, "Anupridanam" - giving,
"Anyasmai Sadhave" - to another monk, "Samyamayatra Nirvahanasamarttham" -
capable of performing restraint, "Yadva" - or, "Iman" - this, "Nirvaheyat" - he
would perform, "Nirvahayet" - he would sustain, "Asarataamaapaadayet" - he would
cause it to become worthless, "Tathavidham Asanam Panam Va Anyadva" - such food,
water, or anything else, "Tathavidham Anusthanam" - such practice, "Na Kuryaat"
- he should not do, "Anupridanam" - giving, "Grihasthanam" - to householders,
"Paratirithikanam" - to those who have gone to other religions, "Swayuthyanam
Va" - or to those of his own group, "Samyamopaghatakam" - harmful to restraint,
"Na Anushilayet" - he should not practice, "Tadevat Sarvam Jnaparijnayaya Jnatva
Samyak Parihareyat" - knowing all this by knowledge and understanding, he should
properly abandon it. ||23||  **Commentary Meaning -**  A monk should take food
and water that is pure and appropriate in relation to substance, field, time,
and condition, in normal circumstances. He should also give such pure and
appropriate food and water to other monks for the performance of restraint.
However, he should not give food or water that would cause his restraint to
become worthless, corrupted, or destroyed. He should also not perform any other
actions that would destroy restraint. He should not give such impure food, etc.,
to any householders, those who have gone to other religions, or those of his own
group. A monk should abandon these things, considering them to be harmful to
restraint.  **Evam Udaha Nigganthe, Mahavir Mahamuni.** **Anant Nanadansi Se,
Dhamma Desitavam Suttam.** ||24||  **Shadow -**  Thus spoke Nigrantha, the great
muni, Mahavira. _ He who has infinite knowledge and vision, has preached this
Dharma. _  **Translation -**  Nigrantha - free from external and internal bonds,
Mahavira, the great muni, who possesses infinite knowledge and vision, has
preached this Dharma - conduct and knowledge.  **Commentary -**
"Yadupadeshenaitat Sarvam Kuryaat Tam Darshayitumanah - Evam" - thus, "Udaha" -
spoke, "Nigrantha" - free from external and internal bonds, "Mahavira" - the
great muni, "Mahamuni" - the great muni, "Anantam Jnanadarshanam Cha Yasya Asau
Anantajnanadarshani Sa Bhagavan" - he who has infinite knowledge and vision,
"Dharma" - conduct, "Charitralakshanam" - characteristics of conduct,
"Samsaroottaranasamarttham" - capable of liberating from the cycle of birth and
death, "Tatha Shrutam Cha" - and knowledge, "Jeevaadipadarthasamsoochakam" -
indicating the nature of living beings and other objects, "Desitavan" -
preached. ||24|| "Kinchanyat" -  **Commentary Meaning -**  To show the great
person whose teachings should be followed, the author says - Mahavira, the great
muni, who is free from both external and internal bonds and who possesses
infinite knowledge and vision, has preached Dharma, which is in the form of
conduct and knowledge, which indicates the nature of living beings and other
objects.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayanaM anuvAda - isa saMsAra meM jisa anna, jala ke sevana karane se
sAdhu kA saMyama vikRta ho jAtA hai, naSTa ho jAtA hai, vaisA anna pAnI Adi
sAdhu kisI anya sAdhu ko na de  /  vaha AvAgamana ko bar3hAtA hai| vivekazIla
muni yaha jAnatA huA isakA parityAga kare  /  TIkA - kiJcAnyat-'yena' annena
pAnena vA tathAvidheneti suparizuddhena kAraNApekSayAtvazuddhena vA 'iha' asmin
loke idaM saMyamayAtrAdikaM durbhikSarogAtaGkAdikaM vA bhikSuH nirvahet
nirvAhayedvA tadannaM pAnaM vA 'tathAvidhaM' dravyakSetrakAlabhAvApekSayA
'zuddha' kalpaM gRhNIyAttathaiteSAm-annAdInAmanupradAnamanyasmai sAdhave
saMyamayAtrA nirvahaNasamarthamanutiSThet, yadivA-yena kenacidanuSThitena
'imaM'saMyama nirvahet'nirvAhayed asAratAmApAdayettathAvidhamazanaM pAnaM
vA'nyadvA tathAvidhamanuSThAnaM na kuryAt tathaiteSAmazanAdInAm 'anupradAnaM'
gRhasthAnAM paratIrthikAnAM svayUthyAnAM vA saMyamopaghAtakaM nAnuzIlayediti,
tadevatsarvaM jJaparijJayA jJAtvA samyak pariharediti  // 23 //  TIkArtha - jisa
suparizuddha anna jala se athavA kAraNa kI apekSA se jisa azuddha anna jala se
sAdhu isa jagata meM apanI saMyama yAtrA kA, durbhikSa-akAla, roga, AtaMka kA
nirvAha karatA hai, aise samayoM meM jIvana calAtA hai, vaha sAdhu sAmAnya
avasthA meM dravyakSetra kAla evaM bhAva kI apekSA se zuddha evaM kalpanIya anna
jala grahaNa kare  /  tathA vaisA hI zuddha kalpanIya anna jala saMyama ke
nirvahaNa hetu anya sAdhu ko de  /  athavA jo kArya karane se sAdhu kA saMyama
asAra banatA hai, vikRta yA naSTa hotA hai, vaisA bhojana tathA pAnI use na de
/  vaise anya kArya bhI na kare, jisase saMyama naSTa hotA hai  /  vaisA azuddha
bhojana Adi vaha kinhIM gRhasthoM ko, paratIrthikoM ko-paramatavAdiyoM ko athavA
svayUthiko ko na de  /  sAdhu ina bAtoM ko saMyamopaghAtakasaMyama kA upaghAta
karane vAlI mAnakara inakA parityANa kare  /  evaM udAha niggaMthe, mahAvIre
mahAmuNI  /  aNaMta nANadaMsI se, dhamma desitavaM sutaM  // 24 //  chAyA -
evamudAhRtavAn nigrantho, mahAvIro mahAmuniH  /  _ anantajJAnadarzanI sa, dharma
dezitavAn zrutam  //  anuvAda - nirgrantha-bAhya aura Abhyantara graMthiyoM se
vimukta, anaMta jJAna, darzana ke dhanI bhagavAna mahAvIra ne isa dharma-cAritra
evaM zruta-jJAna kA upadeza diyA hai  /  TIkA - yadupadezenaitatsarvaM kuryAttaM
darzayitumAha-evam' anantaroktayA nItyA uddezakAderArabhya 'urAhu' tti
udAhRtavAnuktavAn nirgataH sabAhyAbhyantaro grantho yasmAtsa nirgrantho
'mahAvIra' iti zrImadvardhamAnasvAmI mahAMzcAsau munizca mahAmuniH anantaM
jJAnadarzanaM ca yasyAsAvanantajJAnadarzanI sa bhagavAn 'dharma' cAritralakSaNaM
saMsArottAraNasamarthaM tathA 'zrutaM ca' jIvAdipadArtha saMsUcakaM 'dezitavAn'
prakAzitavAn  // 24 //  kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha - pUrvavarNita zikSAoM kA, jinake
upadeza se anusaraNa karanA cAhie, usa mahApuruSa kA digdarzana karAne hetu
sUtrakAra kahate haiM-jinakI bAhya aura Abhyantara donoM prakAra kI graMthiyAM
naSTa ho gaI haiM, jo ananta jJAna evaM darzana se yukta haiM aise bhagavAna
mahAvIra svAmI ne cAritra rUpa tathA zruta-jIvAdi padArtha saMsUcaka jJAna rUpa
dharma kI dezanA dI hai  /  431

Page #460 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 25:**  He who speaks, does not speak, nor
does he desire to speak what is harmful. He avoids speaking what is deceptive,
and speaks only after careful consideration.  **Commentary:**  A Muni who is
skilled in the art of speech, even while delivering a discourse on Dharma, is
like one who does not speak. He does not utter words that cause pain or sorrow
to anyone. He does not speak deceitfully. He speaks only after careful thought
and consideration.  **Explanation:**  The verse emphasizes the importance of
mindful speech in Jainism. A true practitioner of Dharma should avoid speaking
words that are harmful, deceptive, or motivated by self-interest. Instead, they
should speak with careful consideration, ensuring that their words are
beneficial and truthful.  **Further Explanation:**  The commentary elaborates on
the verse, explaining that a Muni who is skilled in speech should avoid speaking
in a way that:  * **Causes pain or sorrow:** They should not utter words that
hurt others' feelings or cause them distress. * **Is deceptive:** They should
not speak with the intention to deceive or mislead others. * **Is motivated by
self-interest:** They should not speak in a way that benefits themselves at the
expense of others.  Instead, they should speak with the intention of promoting
Dharma and helping others. They should carefully consider the impact of their
words before speaking, ensuring that they are beneficial and truthful.  **The
commentary also highlights the importance of avoiding:**  * **Speaking when
someone else is speaking:** A Muni should not interrupt or try to overshadow
others' speech. * **Speaking with arrogance:** They should not boast about their
knowledge or wisdom. * **Speaking with the intention to deceive:** They should
not use their words to manipulate or exploit others.  The commentary concludes
by emphasizing the importance of careful consideration before speaking. A Muni
should always think about the potential consequences of their words before
uttering them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram bhAsamANo na bhAsejjA, Neva vaMphejja mammayaM  /
mAtiTThANaM vivajjejjA, aNuciMtiya viyAgare  // 25 //  chAyA bhASamANo na
bhASeta, naivAbhilapenmarmagam  /  mAtRsthAnaM vivarjayed, anucintya vyAgRNIyAt
//  - anuvAda jo muni bhASAsamita bhASA samiti se yukta hai, vaha dharma kA
abhibhASaNa karatA huA bhI, upadeza karatA huA bhI na bolane vAle ke sadRza hai|
jisase kisI ke hRdaya ko coTa pahu~ce, duHkha ho, sAdhu aisA vAkya na bole  /
vaha kapaTapUrNa vacana nahIM bole  /  jo bhI bole soca vicAra kara bole  /
TIkA yo hi bhASAsamitaH sa bhASamANo'pi dharmakathAsambandhamabhASaka evasyAt,
uktaM ca"vayaNavihattIkusalovaogayaM bahuvihaM viyANaMto  /  divasaMpi bhAsamANo
sAhU vaya guttayaM patto  //  1  //  " chAyA - vacanavibhakti kuzalo vacogataM
bahuvidhaM vijAnam  /  divasamapi bhASamANaH sAdhurvacanaguptisamprAtaH  //  1
//  yadi vA yatrAnyaH kazcidratnAdhiko bhASamANastatrAntara eva
sazrutiko'hamityevamabhimAnavAnnabhASeta, tathA marma gacchatIti marmagaM vaco
na 'vaphejja' tti nAbhilaSet, yadvacanamucyamAnaM tathyamatathyaM vA sadyasya
kasyacinmanaH pIDAmAdhatte tadvivekI na bhASeteti bhAvaH yadivA 'mAmakaM'
mamIkAraH pakSapAtastaM bhASamANo'nyadA vA 'na vaMphejjati' nAbhilaSet, tathA
'mAtRsthAnaM' mAyApradhAnaM vaco vivarjayet, idamuktaM bhavati -
paravaJcanabuddhayA gUDhacArapradhAno bhASamANo'bhASamANo vA'nyadA vA
mAtRsthAnaM na kuryAditi, yadA tu vaktukAmo bhavati tadA naitadvacaH
parAtmanorubhayorvA bAdhakamityevaM prAgvicintya vacanamudAharet, taduktam
"pRvviM buddhIe pehittA, pacchA vakkamudAhare" ityAdi  //  25  //  chAyA pUrvaM
buddhayAprekSayitvA pazcAd vAkyamudAhareta  /  TIkArtha - jo sAdhu bhASAsamita
hai-bhASA samiti kA pAlana karatA hai, vaha dharmakathA kA - dhArmika siddhAntoM
kA upadeza karatA huA bhI abhASaka nahIM bolane vAle ke samAna hI hai| jaise
kahA gayA hai-jo sAdhu vacanavibhakti meM kuzala hai, vANI ke saMdarbha meM
sUkSmatayA vizeSa jJAtA hai, vaha dinabhara bolatA huA bhI vacana gupti se yukta
hI hai  /  athavA jahA~ koI ratnAdhika-saMyama jIvitavya meM variSTha puruSa
bola rahA ho, usake bIca meM hI, "maiM sazrutika- uttama vidvAna hU~, isa
abhimAna se yukta hokara sAdhu bhASaNa na kare  /  vaha aisA na bole, jo
marmAntaka ho, marma ko pIr3ita karane vAlA ho  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai
ki asatya ho yA satya ho, jisa vacana ke bolane se kisI ke mana meM pIr3A paidA
ho, vivekayukta puruSa vaisA na bole  /  athavA sAdhu bhASaNa karatA huAbolatA
huA pakSapAtapUrNa-kisI eka kA pakSa lete hue vANI na bole  /  vaha kapaTa evaM
chalayukta bhASaNa na kre| kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki dUsare kI vaJcanA
karane kI buddhi se, use Thagane ke irAde se vaha gUDhAcAra pradhAnatathya ko
chipAkara bAta na kare  /  - - vaha bolate samaya yA anya samaya mAyA, kapaTa yA
chalapUrNa vyavahAra na kre| jaba sAdhu bolanA cAhe, to yaha mana meM uhApoha
kare, cintana kare ki yaha vacana apane yA anya ke yA donoM ke lie bAdhaka
bAdhAjanaka 432

Page #461 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Dharma study is not something that causes suffering." He said this after
thinking. Therefore, it is said that a sadhu should first observe with their
intellect, understand thoughtfully, and then speak.   "That speech which, when
spoken, causes regret, should not be spoken. That which is hidden should not be
spoken. This is the command of the Nirgrantha." (26)  Commentary: There are four
types of speech: (1) truth, (2) falsehood, (3) truth mixed with falsehood, and
(4) falsehood mixed with truth. Of these, the third type of speech, truth mixed
with falsehood, is one that is partly true and partly false. For example,
someone might say, "Ten children were born or died in this village." It is
possible that the number of children born or died could be less or more than
ten. Therefore, due to the discrepancy in the number, this statement is both
true and false.   A sadhu should not speak in such a way that, due to the fault
arising from that speech, they suffer in future births, or experience regret
later, thinking, "Why did I speak like that?"   The point is that even the third
type of speech, mixed with falsehood, is harmful. What then to say of the second
type of speech, falsehood, which contradicts the entire meaning? Even the first
type of speech, truth, is not to be spoken if it causes suffering to beings, as
it is connected to fault. The fourth type of speech, falsehood mixed with truth,
is not used by the wise, and therefore should not be spoken.   Even truth can
sometimes cause harm. The author says, "For example, 'Kill him, he is a thief,'
'Cut the crops,' 'Subdue the oxen of the chariot,' etc. These are true
statements, but they cause harm."   Or, "That which is hidden, that which is
concealed by people with great effort, even if it is true, should not be
spoken."   "This command" - this teaching - is of the Nirgrantha Bhagwan
Mahavira. (26)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayanaM yA pIDotpAdaka to nahIM hai  /  yaha socane ke bAda hI vaha
bole  /  isalie kahA hai ki sAdhu pahale buddhi dvArA prekSaNa kare, vicAra
pUrvaka samajhe, tatpazcAt vaha vacana bole  /  /  tatthimA taiyA bhAsA jaM
vadittA'NatappatI  /  jaM channaM taM na vattavvaM, esA ANA NiyaMThiyA  // 26 //
chAyA - tatreyaM tRtIyA bhASA yAmuktvA'nutapyate  /  yat channaM ttannavaktavyam
esA''jJA naitthikI  //  anuvAda - bhASA ke cAra bheda mAne gae haiM  /  unameM
asatya se mizrita bhASA tIsarA bheda hai  /  sAdhu vaisI bhASA na bole  /  vaha
aisA bhI vacana na bole jisake bolane se use anutApa-pazcAtApa karanA par3e  /
jise saba channa-gupta rakhanA cAhate haiM, chipAte haiM sAdhu vaisA bhI na bole
/  nirgrantha bhagavAna mahAvIra kI yaha AjJA hai  /  TIkA - apica-satyA
asatyAsatyAmRSA asatyAmRSetyevarupAsucatasRSu bhASAsumadhye
tatreyaMsatyAmRSetyedabhidhAnA tRtIyA bhASA, sA ca kiJcinmRSA kiJcitsatyA
ityevaMrupA, tadyathA-daza dvArakA asminnagare jAtA mRtA vA, tadatra nyUnAdhika
sambhavesati saGghayAyA vyabhicArAtsatyA mRSAtvamiti,yAM caivaMrUpAM
bhASAmuditvAanu-pazcAdbhASaNAjanmAntare vA tajanitena doSeNa 'tapyate' pIDyate
kaleza bhAgbhavati, yadi vA-anutapyate kiM mamaivambhUtena bhASitenetyevaM
pazcAttApaM vidhatte, tatazcedamuktaM bhavati-mizrApi bhASA doSAya kiM
punarasatyA dvitIyA bhASA samastArtha visaMvAdinI?, tathA prathamApi bhASA satyA
yA prANyupatApena doSAnuSaGgiNI sA na vAcyA, caturthyapya satyAmRSA bhASA yA
budhairanAcIrNA sA na vaktatyeti, satyAyA api doSAnuSaGgitvamadhikRtyAha-
yaddhacaH 'channati' kSaNu hiMsAyAM hiMsA pradhAnaM, taMdyathAvadhyatAM
cauro'yaM lUyantAM kedArAH damyaMttAM gorathakA ityAdi, yadi vA-'channanti'
pracchannaM yallokairapi yatnataH pracchAdyate tatsatyamapi na vaktavyamiti,
'eSA''jJA' ayamupadezo nigrantho-bhagavAMstasyeti  // 26 //  TIkArtha - bhASA ke
cAra bheda mAne gae haiM, (1) satyA, (2) asatyA, (3) satyAmRSA (4) astyaamRssaa|
inameM satyAmRSA tIsarI bhASA hai  /  vaha kucha satya hotI hai, aura kucha
asatya hotI hai  /  jaise kisI ne kahA ki isa gA~va meM dasa bAlaka utpanna hue
haiM, yA mare haiM  /  yahA~ dasa se nyUna yA adhika bAlakoM kA utpanna honA yA
maranA bhI saMbhAvita hai  /  isalie saMkhyA meM vyabhicAra doSa yA antara ho ke
kAraNa yaha vacana satya evaM asatya donoM hI hai  /  jisa vacana ko kahakara
jIva janmAntara meM tajjanita doSa ke kAraNa paritapta dotA hai, pIr3ita hotA
hai, kleza pAtA hai, pazcAtApa karatA hai ki maiMne kyoM aisA bhASaNa kiyA,
maiMne aisA kyoM bolA  /  sAdhu aisA vacana bhI na bole  /  kahane kA abhiprAya
yaha hai ki asatya se mizrita tIsarI bhASA bhI doSotpAdaka hai  /  phira samasta
artha kI visaMvAdinI-viparIta batAne vAlI dUsarI asatya bhASA kA to kahanA hI
kyA ? yadyapi pahalI bhASA sarvathA satya hai, kintu yadi usase prANiyoM ko
upatApa hotA hai-pIr3A utpanna hotI hai, to vaha doSAnuSaGgiNI hai -doSa se
anuSakta yA prasakta hai  /  sAdhu ko vaha nahIM bolanI cAhie  /  cauthI bhASA
na satya hai, aura na asatya hai  /  vaha bhI vidvAnoM dvArA anAcIrNa-asevita
hai  /  vidvAna usakA prayoga nahIM karate  /  isalie nahIM bolanI caahie| kahIM
kahIM satya bhASA bhI doSa utpanna karatI hai  /  satrakAra yaha batalAe hae
kahate haiM-jaise isakA vadha karo yaha cora hai, kyAriyoM ko kATo, ratha ke
bailoM kA damana karo, niyantraNa karo, ityAdi ye satya paraka to haiM, -433

Page #462 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **But violence is the main thing, it is the
producer of faults. Even if something is true, it should not be said if people
try hard to conceal it - keep it hidden. This is the command of the Nirgrantha
Prabhu, it is his teaching.**  **Holavaayam, Sahivaayam, Tumum Tumanti
Amanunnam**  **Translation:** A Sadhu should not address anyone with harsh or
degrading words, nor should they address anyone as a friend, etc. They should
not address anyone by their gotra, such as "O Vasishtha Gotriya!" or "O Kashyap
Gotriya!" to please them. They should not address someone older than them as
"you" or "thou". A Sadhu should never speak words that are unpleasant,
displeasing, or offensive to others.  **Commentary:**  "Hola" is a type of
speech called "Holavaad", similarly, "Sakhe" is a type of speech called
"Sakhivaad", and addressing someone by their gotra is called "Gotravaad", such
as "Kashyap Gotriya" or "Vasishtha Gotriya". A Sadhu should not speak in this
manner. Similarly, "Tumum Tumanti" is a disrespectful singular pronoun used for
a plural subject, and "Amanunnam" refers to words that are unpleasant to the
mind, or any such words that are humiliating. A Sadhu should never speak such
words.  **Goyavaayam Cha No Savvaso Tam Na**  **Holavaade Sakhivaadam,
Gotravaadancha Nee Vaadet.**  **Tvam Tvamiti Amanunnam Sarvasha Stanna
Vartate.**  **Translation:** A Sadhu should not speak in a way that is
disrespectful, nor should they use the words "you" or "thou" for someone who
deserves a plural pronoun. They should never speak words that are unpleasant to
others.  **Commentary:** Addressing someone with a degrading term is called
"Holavaad". Addressing someone as "O friend!" is called "Sakhivaad". Addressing
someone by their gotra to please them, such as "O Vasishtha Gotriya!" or "O
Kashyap Gotriya!" is called "Gotravaad". A Sadhu should not speak in this
manner. They should not use disrespectful words like "you" or "thou" for someone
who deserves a plural pronoun. A Sadhu should never speak words that are
unpleasant to others.  **Akusilae**  **Suhruvaa**  **Commentary:** A Sadhu
should always remain "Akusilae" - free from bad conduct, and should not
associate with "Kusilae" - those who have bad conduct, because they have
"Suharupa" - pleasant but harmful influences. A wise Sadhu should be aware of
this and remain vigilant.  **Bhaye. Viuu.**  **Commentary:** As stated in the
previous verse, "Pasatthosanna Kusilae Santhavo Na Kil Vattae Kaum" - those who
associate with bad people will not be good. Therefore, a Sadhu should always
remain "Akusilae" - free from bad conduct, and should not associate with
"Kusilae" - those who have bad conduct, because they have "Suharupa" - pleasant
but harmful influences. A wise Sadhu should be aware of this and remain
vigilant.  **Sayabhikkhu, Neva Samsaggiyam Thathuvassagga, Padibujheej**
**Akusilah Sada Bhikkhu Naiva Samsargitam Bhajet.**  **Sukharupaa
Statropasargaah Pratibudhyet Tadvidwaan.**  **Translation:** A Sadhu should
always remain "Akusilae" - free from bad conduct, and should not associate with
"Kusilae" - those who have bad conduct, because they have "Suharupa" - pleasant
but harmful influences. A wise Sadhu should be aware of this and remain
vigilant.  **Commentary:** As stated in the previous verse, "Pasatthosanna
Kusilae Santhavo Na Kil Vattae Kaum" - those who associate with bad people will
not be good. Therefore, a Sadhu should always remain "Akusilae" - free from bad
conduct, and should not associate with "Kusilae" - those who have bad conduct,
because they have "Suharupa" - pleasant but harmful influences. A wise Sadhu
should be aware of this and remain vigilant.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kintu hiMsA pradhAna haiM, doSotpAdaka haiM  /  jisa
bAta ko loga bar3e prayatna ke sAtha pracchAdita karate haiM-chipAye rakhate
hai, vaha satya ho to bhI nahIM kahanI cAhie  /  yaha nirgrantha prabhu kI AjJA
hai, upadeza hai  /  holAvAyaM, sahIvAyaM, tumaM tumaMti amaNunnaM chAyA anuvAda
sAdhu kisI ko niSThura yA nIca zabda dvArA sambodhita kara na bulAye tathA kisI
ko mitra Adi ke rUpa meM udiSTa kara na bole tathA kisI ko prasanna karane hetu
he vAziSTa gautrIyA ! he kAzyapa gautrIya ! ityAdi gotroM kA nAma lekara kisI ko
na bulaaye| jo apane se bar3A ho use tU yA tuma kahakara na bulAve  /  jo vacana
dUsaroM ko amanojJa, aprItikara yA apriya lage sAdhu sarvathA vaisA na bole  /
- TIkA kiJca - holetyevaM vAdo holAvAda:, tathA sakhetyevaM vAdaH sakhivAdaH,
tathA gotrodghATanena vAdogotravAdo yathA kAzyapasamotra vaziSThasagotra veti,
ityevaMrUpaM vAdaM sAdhunoM vadet, tathA 'tumaM tumaM' tti
tiraskArapradhAnamekavacanAntaM bahuvacanoccAraNayogye 'amanojJaM' manaH
pratikUla rUpa manyadapyevambhUtamapamAnApAdakaM 'sarvaza: ' sarvathA
tatsAdhUnAM vaktuM na vartata iti  // 27 //  chAyA goyAvAyaM ca no savvaso taM
Na holAvAde sakhivAdaM, gotravAdaJca nI vadet  /  tvaM tvamityamanojJaM sarvaza
stanna vartate  //  akusIle suharUvA TIkArtha - kisI vyakti ko nIca sambodhana
se bulAnA holAvAda kahalAtA hai  /  he sakhA ! isa prakAra . ke sambodhana se
AhUta karanA sakhIvAda hai| kisI ko prasanna karane hetu usake gautra kA nAma
lekara he vAziSTa gotrIya ! he kAzyapa gotrIya ! ityAdi zabdoM dvArA sambodhita
karanA gautravAna hai| sAdhu isa prakAra vacana na bole| bahuvacana dvArA
uccAraNa karane yogya - sambodhita karane, yogya uttama puruSa ke liye tU, tuma
jaise tiskArapUrNa zabdoM kA upayoga na kre| dUsaroM ke liye apamAnajanaka vAkya
sAdhu kadApi na bole| jo mana ko burA lage  /  OM OM - - vade  /  vattae  // 27
//  sayAbhikkhU, Neva saMsaggiyaM tatthuvassaggA, paDibujjheja akuzIlaH sadA
bhikSu naiva saMsargitAM bhajet  /  sukharUpA statropasargAH pratibudhyeta
tadvidvAn  //  anuvAda - sAdhu svayaM sadA akuzIla rahe- akutsitazIla yukta
rahe- ucca AcAravAna rahe, kuzIloM kI saMgati na kare, kyoMki usameM sukhAtmaka
upasarga vidyamAna rahate haiN| vivekazIla sAdhu isa ora pratibaddha rahe  /
ise jAnakara apane Apa meM jAgarUka banA rahe  /  bhae  /  viU  // 28 //  TIkA
yadazrityoktaM niyukti kAreNa tadyathA - "pAsatthosaNNa kusIla saMthavo Na kila
vaTTae kAuM" tadidamityAha - kutsitaM zIlamasyeti kuzIlaH sa ca
pArzvasthAdInAmanyatamaH na kuzIlo'kuzIlaH 'sadA' sarvakAlaM 434

Page #463 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A monk who is devoted to the study of Dharma and has good conduct should not
become a *kushila*, nor should he associate with *kushila*s. The association
with *kushila*s leads to two types of harm: 1) *sukhrupa* (desire for pleasure)
and 2) *gauravasvabhava* (pride). These harms are detrimental to *samyama*
(self-control) and lead to *upasarga* (obstacles).   *Kushila*s often say things
like, "What harm is there in washing one's hands, feet, and teeth with impure
water?" or "Dharma does not exist without a body." Therefore, one should protect
the body, which is the foundation of Dharma, by any means necessary, including
taking *ardhakarma* (food with minor impurities), wearing shoes and an umbrella,
etc. It is said, "Even if a small amount of harm brings great benefit, one
should accept it. This is the mark of a wise person."   It is also said, "The
body is united with Dharma, and it should be protected with great effort. Just
as water flows from a mountain, so too does Dharma flow from the body."   When a
*kushila* says things like, "Nowadays, people have weak bodies and little
patience for *samyama*," those with weak minds are influenced by their words.
Therefore, a wise and discerning person should understand this and avoid the
association of *kushila*s, which is harmful to the spiritual path.  It is also
said, "Do not stay in another's house when there is an obstacle. A monk should
not laugh excessively at the play of a village girl."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayana bhikSaNazIlo bhikSuH kuzIlo na bhavet, na cApi kuzIlaiH
sArdhaM 'saMsarga sAGgatyaMbhajeta' seveta, tatsaMsargadoSo
dvibhAvamiSayA''ha-"sukharUpAH' sAta gauravasvabhAvAH 'tatra' tasmin
kuzIlasaMsarge saMyamopaghAtakAriNa upasargAH prAduSyanti, tathAhi-te kuzIlA
vaktAro bhavanti-kaH kila prAsukodakena hastapAdadantAdike prakSAlyamAne doSaH
syAt ?, tathA nAzarIro dharmo bhavati ityato yena kenacitprakAreNArdhA karma
sAnnidhyAdinA tathA upAnacchatrAdinA ca zarIraM dharmAdhAraM vartayet, uktaM ca
- "appeNa bahumesejA, eyaM paDiyalakkhaNaM" .... chAyA - alpena bahueSayet evaM
paMDita lakSaNaM  /  /  iti tathA "zarIraM dharma saMyuktaM, rakSaNIyaM
prayatnataH  /  zarIrAt sravate dharmaH parvatAtsalilaM yathA  // 1 // " tathA
sAmpratamalpAni saMhananAni alpaghRtayazca saMyamejantava ityevamAdikuzIloktaM
zrutvA alpasattvAstatrAnuSajantIti 'vidvAn' vivekI 'pratibudhyeta' jAnIyAt
buddhavA cApAyarupaM kuzIla saMsarga pariharediti  // 28 //  kiJcAnyat -
TIkArtha - niyuktikAra dvArA pahale jo isa prakAra kahA gayA hai ki pArzvastha
aprasanna tathA kuzIla ke sAtha kabhI paricaya nahIM karanA cAhiye usa sambandha
meM sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM ki jisakA zIla yA AcaraNa kutsita-asat yA
burA hotA hai, use kuzIla kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha ina pArzvasya Adi meM koI bhI
hai arthAt ye pArzvastha kuzIla meM Ate haiM jo kuzIla nahIM haiM unheM akuzIla
kahA jAtA hai  /  bhikSaNazIla bhikSopajIvIbhikSAvRtti se jIvana nirvAha karane
vAlA sAdhu kabhI kuzIla na bane tathA vaha kuzIloM ke sAtha saMsarga-sAGgatya yA
saMgati bhI na kare, kuzIloM ke saMsarga se doSoM kA udvibhAva-utpatti hotI hai
/  AgamakAra aisA batalAte haiM  /  kuzIloM kI saMgati sukhAtmaka bhogoM kI
icchA ke rUpa meM upasarga utpanna hote haiM, jo saMyama ko naSTa karate haiM
kyoMki kuzIla puruSa kahate haiM ki prAsuka-acita jala se hAtha paira tathA
danta Adi prakSAlita karane meM kyA doSa hai ? zarIra ke sahAre ke binA dharma
nahIM hotA  /  isaliye AdhAkarma-sadoSa AhAra kA sevana kara, khar3AU, jUte
tathA chAtA dhAraNa kara jisa kisI prakAra se dharma ke AdhArabhUta isa zarIra
kI rakSA karanI cAhiye  /  kahA hai ki-yadi alpa-thor3e se doSa se adhika lAbha
prApta hotA hai, to use le lenA cAhiye  /  yaha vidvAn kA lakSaNa hai  /
buddhimatA kA takAjA hai  /  zarIra dharma saMyukta hai  /  ataH yatnapUrvaka
vaha rakSaNIya hai  /  jaise parvata se jalasrava hotA hai- pAnI nikalatA hai,
usI taraha zarIra se dharmasrava hotA hai  /  kuzIla vyakti kahatA hai ki
Ajakala alpa-kamazaktiyut saMhanana-daihika saMsthAna hai, zarIrAvasthA hai
tathA saMyama meM jIva alpadhRti-thor3A dhairya rakhane vAle haiM  /  kuzIla
vyakti kA isa rUpa meM kathana zravaNa kara alpasatva-alpa Atmabalayukta jIva
usake kathana meM anupajita-saMsakta ho jAte haiM  /  ataH viveka yukta puruSa
yaha jAnakara apAyAtmaka-AdhyAtmika dRSTi se vinAzakArI kuzIla saMsarga kA
anAcaraNa yukta puruSoM kI saMgati kA parityAga kare  /  nannattha aMtarAyaNaM,
paragehe Na NisIyae  /  gAmakumAriyaM kihuM nAtivelaM hase muNI  // 29 //  chAyA
- nAnyatrAntarAyeNa pa ragehe na niSIdet  /  grAma kumArikA krIDAM, nAtibelaM
hasenmuniH  //  -435) -

Page #464 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra Translation - A Sadhu should not sit in the house of a
householder without any hindrance, without any unavoidable cause like illness,
etc., and should not play the corrupt games of village boys. He should not laugh
immoderately. Commentary - There, the Sadhu, having entered a village, etc., for
the purpose of begging, etc., should not sit in the house of a householder, that
is, in a stranger's house. This is the rule. The Sutrakar now shows an exception
to this - 'not by any hindrance', that is, hindrance is the lack of ability, and
that may be due to old age, illness, or fear. If there is such a hindrance, then
there is no fault in sitting there. Or, if someone is a seeker of liberation,
has a good companion, and has been authorized by the Guru, and if the Guru has
given permission to do so, and if it is necessary to give religious instruction
to someone, then there is no fault in sitting in the householder's house. The
games of the village boys are called 'grama-kumarika'. The Sadhu should not
engage in laughter, amorous gestures, touching, embracing, etc., or play games
like marbles, etc. He should not laugh excessively, exceeding the limit. The
Sadhu, fearing the bondage of the eight types of karma, including knowledge-
obscuring karma, should not laugh, exceeding the limit. And the Agama says - "O
Lord! How many karmic bonds does a being make when he laughs or is curious?"
Gautama asked this question to Lord Mahavira. In reply, the Lord said -
"Gautama! He makes seven or eight karmic bonds." The Sadhu should not be curious
about things that are pleasant, beautiful, and desirable, such as the sounds,
etc., of the Cakravati kings, or the pleasures of the senses, clothes,
ornaments, songs, Gandharvas, vehicles, etc., or the wealth of the gods, etc. He
should be diligent in the observance of restraint. He should be free from
negligence in his conduct, such as begging, etc., and should endure even when
afflicted by persecutions and afflictions. Commentary - And 'urala' are those
who are generous, beautiful, and pleasing, such as the sounds, etc., of the
Cakravati kings, or the pleasures of the senses, clothes, ornaments, songs,
Gandharvas, vehicles, etc., or the wealth of the gods, etc. The Sadhu should not
be curious about these things, whether he has seen them or heard about them.
Another reading -  (-436)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - sAdhu binA kisI antarAya ke, roga Adi
anivArya kAraNa ke binA, gRhastha ke ghara meM na baiThe tathA grAmakumArikA-
gAMva ke lar3akoM ke dUSita manovinoda paraka khela na khele  /  amaryAdita
hokara hAsya na kre| TIkA - tatra sAdhurbhikSAdinimattaM grAmAdau praviSTaH
sanparo-gRhasthastasyagRhaM paragRhaM tatra 'na niSIdet' nopavizet utsargataH,
asyApavAdaM darzayati-nAnyatra 'antarAyeNe'tti antarAyaH zaktyabhAvaH, sa ca
jarasA rogAtaGkAbhyAM, syAt, tasmiMzcAntarAye satyupavizet yadi vA
upazamalabdhimAn kazcitsusahAyo gurvanujJAtaH kasyacittathAvidhasya dharmadezanA
nimitta mupavizedapi, tathA grAme kumArakA grAma kumArakAsteSAmiyaM
grAmakumArikA kA'sau ? 'krIr3A' hAsyakandarpahasta saMsparzanAliGganAdikA yadivA
vaTTakandukAdikA tAM muninakuryAt, tathA velA maryAdA matikrAntamativelaM na
haset, maryAdAmatikramya 'muniH' sAdhuH jJAnavaraNIyAdyaSTa
vidhakarmabandhanabhayAnnahaset, tathA cAgamaH- jIve NaM bhaMte ! hasa mANe (cA)
ussUyamANe vA kai kammapagaDIo baMdhai ?, goyamA !, sattavihabaMdhae vA
aTThavihabaMdhae vA" ityAdi  // 29 //  TIkArtha - bhikSA Adi ke nimitta gAMva
Adi meM praviSTa hokara sAdhu gRhastha ke ghara meM na baiThe  /  yaha utsarga
mArga hai  /  aba sUtrakAra isakA apavAda prakaTa karate hue kahate haiM-zakti
kA abhAva antarAya kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha vRddha rugNatA evaM durumaya yadi aisI
antarAyAtmaka sthitiyoM hoM, to vahAM baiThane meM koI doSa nahIM mAnA jAtA  /
athavA koI sAdhu upazayalabdhi mAna ho, sAtha meM acchA sahayogI ho, guru se
AjJapta ho, guru ne vaisA karane kI AjJA dI ho tathA kisI ko dharma dezanA
nimitta upadeza denA Avazyaka ho to, yadi vaha gRhastha meM baiThe to koI doSa
nahIM hai  /  grAma nivAsI kumAroM kI-lar3akoM kI krIr3A grAma-kumArikA kahI
jAtI hai  /  hAsya, kAmukaceSTA, hastasparza, AliMgana Adi ke rUpa meM vaha hai
sAdhu vaisA na kare athavA gAMva ke lar3ake gullI DaMDe yA geMda Adi se khelate
haiM  /  sAdhu vaisA na kare vaha jJAnAvaraNIya Adi aSTavidhakarmoM ke baMdhana
ke bhaya se maryAdA kA parityAga kara na haMse  /  Agama meM kahA hai-he
bhagavAn ! haMsatA huA tathA utsuka hotA huA prANI kitanI karma pravRttiyoM kA
baMdhana karatA hai ? gautama ne bhagavAn mahAvIra se aisA prazna kiyA ? jisake
uttara meM bhagavAna ne batalAyA ki gautama ! vaha sAta yA ATha karmoM
prakRtiyoM kA vandha karatA hai| aNussao urAlesu, jayamANo parivvae  /  cariyAe
appamatto, puTTho tattha'hiyAsae  // 30 //  chAyA - anutsuka udAreSu, yatamAnaH
parivrajet  /  ca-yA mapramattaH, spRSTa statrAdhiSahet  //  anuvAda - sAdhu,
udAra-manogya, priya zabdAdi viSayoM meM anusUkha rahe-utsukatA na rakhe  /
vaha saMyama ke paripAlana meM yatnazIla rahe  /  caryA-bhikSAcarI Adi kriyAoM
meM apramajJa-pramAdazUnya rahe tathA parisahoM aura upasargoM se AkrAnta hotA
huA bhI unheM sahana kare  /  TIkA - kiJca 'urAlA' udArAH zobhanA manojJA ye
cakravAdInAM zabdAdiSu viSayeSu kAmabhogA
vastrAbharaNagItagandharvayAnavAhanAdayastathA AjaizvaryAdayazca eteSUdAreSu
dRSTeSu zruteSu vA notsukaH syAt, pAThAntaraM -436)

Page #465 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Dharma Study  **30.**  A person who is not attached to anything, who is not
bound by anything, should strive to attain self-control. They should practice
self-control diligently, focusing on the fundamental and secondary virtues. They
should be diligent in their conduct, such as begging for alms, and not be
attached to food or other pleasures. When faced with insults and hardships, they
should endure them with equanimity, knowing that they are a means to purify
karma.  **31.**  When someone is struck, they should not become angry. When
someone speaks harshly, they should not become agitated. They should endure it
with a peaceful mind and not create any disturbance.  **32.**  When a desire is
fulfilled, one should not become attached to it. One should remain detached and
mindful. One should strive to learn from the wise and follow the teachings of
the Buddhas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayanaM vA na nizrito'nizrita:-apratibaddhAH syAt, yata mAnazca -
saMyamAnuSThAne pari-samantAnmUlottaraguNeSu udyamaM kurvan'vrajet' saMyamaM
gacchet tathA 'caryAyAM' bhikSAdikAyAM 'aprapattaH syAt' nAhArAdiSurasagArdhyaM
vidadhyAditi, tathA 'spRSTazca' abhidrutazca parISaho pasargaista
trAdInamanaskaH karmanirjarAM manyamAno 'viSahet' samyak sahyAditi  // 30 //
TIkArtha sundara aura priya viSaya jo mana ko AkRSTa karate haiM unheM udAra
kahA jAtA hai| zabdAdi viSayoM meM cakravartI samrATa Adi ke kAma bhoga, vastra,
alaMkAra, gIta, gaMdharva - nRtyAdi manovinoda janaka lalita kalAtmaka kArya,
yAna- car3hane kI savAriyA~, vAhana sAmAna Dhone ke gAr3e gAr3iyAM, AjJApAlaka -
sevaka vRnda, aizvarya Adi udAra - manogya yA sundara hote  /  unheM dekhakara
yA unake sambandha meM sunakara sAdhu unameM utsuka na bane, utkaNThA na rakhe
athavA pAThAntara ke anusAra sAdhu unameM anizrita- apratibaddha rahe  /  vaha
mUla guNa aura uttara guNoM meM udyamazIla rahatA huA saMyama kA prayatna
pUrvaka paripAlana kare  /  vaha bhikSAcArI Adi sAdhu kI caryAyoM meM
apramattapramAda rahita rahe  /  vaha bhojana Adi meM lolupatA na rakhe  /
pariSahoM aura upasargoM se abhidbhuta AkrAnta pIr3ita hotA huA vaha apane mana
meM dInatA na lAye kintu inase karmoM kI nirjarA hotI hai, karma kaTate haiM,
yoM mAnatA huA unheM bhalI-bhA~ti sahana kare  /  hammamANo Na kuppejja,
vuccamANo na saMjale  /  sumaNe ahiyA sijjA, Na ya kolAhalaM kare  //  31  //
chAyA hanya mAno na kupyet, ucyamAno na saMjvalet  /  sumanA adhiSaheta, na ca
kolAhalaM kuryyAt  //  anuvAda - yadi koI sAdhu ko hatapratihata kareM-mAre,
pITe, gAlI Adi ke rUpa meM apazabda kahe to sAdhu saMjvalita- uttejita na ho
kintu prasannatA ke sAtha inheM sahana kare  /  kolAhala na kare  /  - TIkA -
parISahopasargAdhisahanamevAdhikRtyAha-' hanya mAno' yaSTi muSTilakuTAdibhirapi
hatazca 'na kupyet' na kopavazago bhavet, tathA durvacanAni 'ucyamAnaH'
AkruzyamAno nirbhartsyamAno 'na saMjvalet' na pratIpaM vadet, na manAgapi
mano'nyathAtvaM vidadhyAt kiMtu sumanAH sarvaM kolAhalamakurvannadhiheteti  //
31 //  TIkArtha - sUtrakAra pratisahoM aura upasargoM ko sahane ke sandarbha meM
kahate haiM yadi koI sAdhu ko lAThI, mukke, DaNDe Adi se hat-tADita kare to
sAdhu usa para kruddha na ho| koI use durvacana- kaThora vacana kahe  /  usake
sAtha gAlI galauca na kre| usakI nirbhatsanA - tiraskAra kare to vaha pratikUla
vacana na kahe tathA apane mana meM anyathA bhAva-bure vicAra na lAye, kintu
prazAnta mana rahe  /  kolAhala na karatA huA, yaha saba sahana kare  /  laddhe
kAme Na patthejjA, vivege evamAhie  /  AyariyAI sikkhejjA, buddhANaM aMtie sayA
// 32 //  437

Page #466 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Śrī Sūtra Kṛtāṅga Sūtra**  **Chāyā** - Labdhān kāmān na prārthayet, viveka eva
mākyātaḥ. Āṇi śikṣet, buddhānām antike sadā.  **Anuvāda** - Sādhu, prāpta-jo mil
rahe ho aise kām bhogōn kī vāñchā na kare. Aisa karne vāle ke bhāv viveka-śuddha
bhāv utpann hotā hai. Aisa kahā jātā hai. Sādhu, ācārya ādi jñānī puruṣōn ke
sānnidhya meṁ rahtā huā āryaguṇa-jñānadarśan evaṁ cāritra kī śikṣā grahaṇ kartā
rahe.  **Tīkā** - Kiñcānyat-labdhān prāptān api kāmān' icchāmadanarūpān
gandhālaṅkāravastraādirūpān vā vairās vāmi vat 'na prārthayet' nānumannyet na
gṛhṇīyādit yārthaḥ. Yadi vā-yatra kāmāvasāmitayā gamanaādilabbhirūpān
kāmānstapoviśeṣa labdhān api nopājīvyāt, nāpyanāgatān brahmadattavatprārthayed,
evaṁ ca kurvato bhāvaviwekaḥ 'ākyāta' āvirbhāvito bhavati, tatha 'āryāṇi'
āryāṇām kartavyaani anārya kārttvya parihāreṇa yadi vā ācāryāṇi-mumukṣuṇā
yānyācaranī yāni jñāna darśana cāritrāṇi tāni 'buddhānām' ācāryāṇām 'antike'
samīpe 'sadā' sarvakālam śikṣet 'abhyasyediti, anena hi śīlavataṁ nityaṁ
gurukulavās āsevanīya ityāveditaṁ bhavatīti. ||32|| Yadu ktaṁ buddhānām antike
śikṣet tatsavarūpa nirūpaṇāyāhā -  **Tīkārtha** - Sādhu prāpta hote hue bhi
icchānurupa viṣaya bhogōn ko athavā sugandhita padārtha, ābhūṣaṇa tatha vastra
ādi ko vairās vāmi kī tarah svīkār na kare, grahaṇ na kare athavā apne viśiṣṭa
tapascaraṇa ke prabhāv svarūpa niṣpann gamanaādilabbhi jisake dvārā sādhu jahāṁ
cāhe vahāṁ jākar viṣaya prāpta karne meṁ sakṣama hotā hai, kām vivarjita hone ke
kāraṇa vah usakā upyōga na kare. Jo bhogya padārtha aprāpta hai, unakī bhī
brahadatta ke samān abhyarthana na kare-unheṁ na cāhe. Jo aisa kartā hai usake
bhāv viveka-utkṛṣṭa jñānapūrṇa ucca bhāv utpann hote hain. Sādhu anārya-anuttama
karmōṁ, adhama karmōṁ kā tyāga kar ārya-uttama gunōṁ kā ācarana kare athavā
mumukṣu jan dvārā ācarana karne yogya jñāna, darśana evaṁ cāritra kā ācārya ādi
jñānī puruṣōn ke sānnidhya meṁ rahtā huā nitya abhyās kare. Isase yah prakat hai
ki śīla yukta puruṣa sadā gurukulavās meṁ guru kī sannidhi meṁ rahtā huā nitya
abhyās kare. Isase yah prakat hai ki śīlayukta puruṣa ko sadā gurukula vās meṁ
guru kī sannidhi meṁ rahnā cāhie.  Jñānī puruṣōn kī sannidhi meṁ śikṣā pānī
cāhie, aisa jo kahā hai usake svarūpa kā nirūpaṇa karte hue sūtrakara kahate
hain.  **Sussū samāṇo uvāsejjā, suppannaṁ sutavassīyaṁ. Vīrā je atta panneśī,
dhitimantā jiindiyā. ||33||**  **Chāyā** - Śuśrūṣamāṇa upāsīt, suprajñaṁ
sutapāsvīnam. Vīrā ye āptaprīṣiṇaḥ, dhṛtimantō jiteindriyāḥ.  **Anuvāda** -
Suprajña-uttama prajñāśīla apne darśana tatha anya darśana ke vettā, sutapāsvī
utkṛṣṭa tapascaraṇa yukta guru kī suśrūṣā kartā huā, un dvārā batāye jate
tatvajñāna kā śravaṇa kartā huā sādhu unakī upāsana  (438

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA - labdhAn kAmAn na prArthayet, viveka eva
mAkhyAtaH  /  AANi zikSet, buddhAnAmantike sadA  //  anuvAda - sAdhu prApta-jo
mila rahe ho aise kAma bhogoM kI vAMchA na kare  /  aisA karane vAle ke bhAva
viveka-zuddha bhAva utpanna hotA hai  /  aisA kahA jAtA hai  /  sAdhu, AcArya
Adi jJAnI puruSoM ke sAnnidhya meM rahatA huA AryaguNa-jJAnadarzana evaM cAritra
kI zikSA grahaNa karatA rahe  /  TIkA- kiJcAnyat-labdhAn prAptAnapi kAmAn'
icchAmadanarupAn gandhAlaGkAravastrAdirUpAnvA vairasvAmivat 'na prArthayet'
nAnumanyeta na gRhNIyAdityarthaH yadi vA-yatra kAmAvasAmitayA
gamanAdilabdhirupAn kAmAMstapovizeSa labdhAnapi nopajIvyAta, nApya nAgatAn
brahmadattavatprArthayed, evaM ca kurvato bhAvavivekaH 'AkhyAta' AvirbhAvito
bhavati, tathA 'AryANi' AryANAM kartavyAni anArya karttavyaparihAreNa yadi vA
AcaryANi-mumukSuNA yAnyAcaraNI yAni jJAna darzana cAritrANi tAni 'buddhAnAm'
AcAryANAm 'antike' samIpe 'sadA' sarvakAlaM zikSeta 'abhyasyediti, anena hi
zIlavatA nityaM gurukulavAsa AsevanIya ityAveditaM bhavatIti  // 32 //  yaduktaM
buddhAnAmantike zikSettatsavarUpa nirUpaNAyAha - TIkArtha - sAdhu prApta hote
hue bhI icchAnurupa viSaya bhogoM ko athavA sugandhita padArtha, AbhUSaNa tathA
vastra Adi ko vairasvAmI kI taraha svIkAra na kare, grahaNa na kareM athavA
apane viziSTa tapazcaraNa ke prabhAva svarUpa niSpanna gamanAdi labdhi jisake
dvArA sAdhu jahA~ cAhe vahA~ jAkara viSaya prApta karane meM sakSama hotA hai,
kAma vivarjita hone ke kAraNa vaha usakA upayoga na kare  /  jo bhogya padArtha
aprApta hai, unakI bhI brahadatta ke samAna abhyarthanA na kare-unheM na cAhe  /
jo aisA karatA hai usake bhAva viveka-utkRSTa jJAnapUrNa ucca bhAva utpanna hote
haiM  /  sAdhu anArya-anuttama karmoM, adhama karmoM kA tyAga kara Arya-uttama
guNoM kA AcaraNa kare athavA mumukSu jana dvArA AcaraNa karane yogya jJAna,
darzana evaM cAritra kA AcArya Adi jJAnI puruSoM ke sAnnidhya meM rahatA huA
nitya abhyAsa kare  /  isase yaha prakaTa hai ki zIla yukta puruSa sadA
gurukulavAsa meM guru kI sannidhi meM rahatA huA nitya abhyAsa kare  /  isase
yaha prakaTa hai ki zIlayukta puruSa ko sadA gurukula vAsa meM guru kI sannidhi
meM rahanA caahie| jJAnI puruSoM kI sannidhi meM zikSA pAnI cAhie, aisA jo kahA
hai usake svarUpa kA nirUpaNa karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiN| sussU samANo
uvAsejjA, suppannaM sutavassiyaM  /  vIrA je atta pannesI, dhitimantA jiiMdiyA
// 33 //  chAyA - zuzrUSamANa upAsIt, suprajJaM sutapasvinam  /  vIrA ye
AptaprISiNaH, dhRtimanto jitendriyAH  //  anuvAda - suprajJa-uttama prajJAzIla
apane darzana tathA anya darzana ke vettA, sutapasvI utkRSTa tapazcaraNa yukta
guru kI suzruSA karatA huA, una dvArA batAye jAte tatvajJAna kA zravaNa karatA
huA sAdhu unakI upAsanA (438

Page #467 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Study the Dharma. Those who are capable of eradicating the roots of karmic
actions, who are seekers of the perfect knowledge (Kevala Jnana), who are
courageous, patient, and have conquered their senses, do so.  Commentary: The
desire to listen to the teachings of the Guru, or the service to the Guru, is
called Shushrusha. One who performs this service should serve the Guru. The
Sutra-kar describes the two main qualities of the Guru: He is Su-prajna
(possessing excellent wisdom), meaning he is knowledgeable about his own
philosophical principles (Swa-samaya) and the principles of others (Para-
samaya), and is a scholar of the scriptures (Geetarth). He is also Su-tapaswi
(possessing excellent austerity), meaning he practices both external and
internal austerities. A seeker of liberation (Paraloka-arthi) should serve such
a knowledgeable and righteous Guru. As it is said:  "One becomes a partaker of
knowledge, firm in vision and conduct. Those who are fortunate do not abandon
the Guru's abode."  The Sutra-kar describes those who follow this path: They are
"Veera" (heroes), meaning they are capable of destroying karmic actions, are
tolerant of hardships, are patient, and are not disturbed by afflictions. They
are "Dhira" (steadfast), meaning they are guided by wisdom and are on the path
to liberation. They are "Aapt-prajna-anveshi" (seekers of perfect knowledge),
meaning they are free from attachment and aversion and seek the perfect
knowledge (Kevala Jnana) as taught by the omniscient. They are also seekers of
self-knowledge (Aatma-prajna-anveshi), meaning they seek the knowledge of the
self and the welfare of the self. They are "Dhritiman" (possessing fortitude),
meaning they have a love for restraint and are able to bear the burden of the
five great vows due to their fortitude. Their austerity leads them to a good
path (Su-gati). As it is said:  "He who has fortitude, has austerity; he who has
austerity, has a good path. Those who have fortitude, austerity is indeed
difficult for them."  They are also "Jita-indriya" (those who have conquered
their senses), meaning they have conquered their senses through the victory over
attachment and aversion. Such disciples or Gurus who serve others are
distinguished by these qualities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayana kare  /  jo puruSa vIra karmoM ke nirmUlana meM sakSama Apta
prajJeSI-Apta prajJA yA kevala jJAna ke anveSTA ghRtimAna, dhairyazIla tathA
jitendriya haiM ve aisA karate haiN| TIkA - gurorA dezaM prati zrotumicchA
zuzrUSA gurvAdevaiyAvRtyamityarthaH tAM kurvANo gurum 'upAsIta' sevet, tasyaiva
pradhAna guNadvayadvAreNa vizeSaNamAha-suSThu zobhanA vA prajJA'syeti suprajJaH
svasamayaparasamaya vedI gItArtha ityarthaH, tathA suSThu zobhanaM vA
sabAhyAbhyantaraM tapo'syAstIti sutapasvI, tamevambhUtaM jJAninaM
samyakcAritravantaM guruM paralokArthI seveta, tathA coktam - "nANase hoibhAgI,
thiracarao daMsaNe caritte ya  /  dhannA AvakahAe gurukula vAsaM na muMcaMti  //
1 // " chAyA - jJAnasya bhavati bhAgI sthirataro darzane cAritre ca  /  dhanyA
yAvat kathaM gurukula vAsaM na muJcanti  /  ya evaM kurvanti tAn darzayati-
yadivA ke jJAninasrapasvino vetyAha-vIrAH' karma vidAharaNa sahiSNavo dhIrAvA
parISaho pasargAkSobhyAH,dhiyA buddhyA rAjantIti vA dhIrA ye kecanAsannasiddhi
gamanAH,Apto-rAgAdivipramuktastasya prajJA-kevala jJAnAkhyA tAmanveSTuM zIlaM
yeSAM te Apta prajJAnveSiNaH sarvajJoktAnveSiNa itiyAvat, yadi vA
AtmaprajJAnveSiNa AtmanaH prajJA-jJAnamAtmaprajJA tadanveSiNAH AtmajJatvA
(prajJA) nveSiNa Atma hitAnveSiNa ityarthaH tathA dhRtiH -saMyame ratiH sA
vidyate yeSAM te dhRtimantaH, saMyamadhRtyA hi paJca mahAvrata bhArodvahanaM
susAdhyaM bhavatIti, tapaH sAdhyA ca sugatirhasta prApteti, taduktam - "jassa
dhiI tassatapojassa tavo tassa suggaI sulahA  /  je adhiimaMta purisA tavo'vi
khalu dullaho tesiM  // 1 // " chAyA - yasyadhRtistasyatapo yasyatapastasya
sugatissulamA  /  ye dhRti manta puruSAstapopikhalu durlabhaM teSAm  /  /  tathA
jitAni-vazI kRtAni svaviSaya rAgadveSa vijayenendriyANi-sparzanAdIni yaiste
jitendriyAH zuzrUSamANAH ziSyA guravo vA zuzrUSamANA yathokta vizeSaNa viziSTA
bhavantItyartha -  // 33 //  TIkArtha - guru kA Adeza-AjJA yA zikSA zravaNa
karane kI icchA, athavAgurujana Adi kI vaiyAvRtyasevA ko suzruSA kahA jAtA hai
/  sAdhu vaisA karatA huA guru kI upAsanA kare  /  guru ke pramukha do guNoM kI
vizeSatA batalAte huye sUtrakAra kahate haiM-zobhana prajJAzIla arthAt
svasamaya-apane dArzanika siddhAntoM, parasamayadUsaroM ke siddhAntoM kA vettA,
gItArtha-vidvAna sAdhu suprajJa kahA jAtA hai  /  jo bAhya tathA Abhyantara tapa
kA AcaraNa karatA hai, vaha sutapasvI kahA jAtA hai  /  paralokArthI-apane
paraloka ko sudhArane kA icchuka puruSa aise jJAnavAna tathA samyak cAritravAna
guru kI upAsanA-sevA kare-kahA hai guru kI sevA karane se puruSa jJAna kA bhAgI-
vidyA kA pAtra hotA hai  /  vaha darzana, zraddhA tathA cAritra caryA meM
atyanta sthira-sudRr3ha hotA hai  /  ataeva ve dhanya haiM jo jIvana paryanta
gurukula vAsa kA tyAga nahIM karate  /  jo aisA karate haiM sUtrakAra unake
sambandha meM batalAte haiM  /  jo puruSa karmoM ko vidIrNa-ucchinna karane meM
sakSama hai, jo pariSahoM aura upasargoM se Ahata hone para bhI kSubdha-vyathita
nahIM hote jo dhIra-sadbuddhi zIla sthiracettA haiM, Asanna-nikaTa bhaviSya meM
mokSagAmI hai, rAgadveSa vivarjita-Apta sarvajJa puruSa kI kevala jJAnarUpa
prajJA ke anveSTa haiM, sarvajJa pratipAdita vacana kA anveSaNa karate hai,
athavA AtmajJAna yA Atmahita ke gaveSaka haiM, saMyama meM rati-prItirUpa,
dhIratA se yukta haiM, tatpariNAma svarUpa jinake lie pA~ca mahAvratoM ke bhAra
kA vahana susAdhya hai, tapazcaraNa ke pariNAma svarUpa sugati-uttamagati jinake
(439)

Page #468 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation preserving Jain terms:  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra is like
a Jain scripture in hand. Those who control the attachment and aversion towards
sensual objects and are Jitendriya (conquerors of the senses) reside in the
Gurukula (preceptor's abode) and serve the Gurujan (preceptors). Or, they
possess the same characteristics as mentioned above about the Guru.  The present
discourse explains the specialty of Dhrti (fortitude). It is said that the one
who possesses Dhrti, their Tapashcharana (spiritual austerities) succeeds. The
one who practices Tapa (austerities) attains the highest state. The one who
lacks Dhrti finds it difficult to succeed in their Tapa.  Gihe divamapasanta,
purisadaniyanaraḥ | Te vira bandhanummukkā, navakankshanti jiviyaṃ || 34 ||
Translation: The persons who do not see the lamp (of knowledge) in the house,
they are the ones who accept Pravrajya (renunciation). They are the brave ones,
liberated from bondages, and do not desire the life of non-restraint.
Commentary: Those who possess the aforementioned qualities, the scripture
explains about them. 'Gihe' means in the household life, or in the bondage of
the household. 'Divam' means the lamp, i.e., the attainment of scriptural
knowledge, or the island (dvipa) that provides solace in the ocean of Samsara,
i.e., the attainment of the Charitra (right conduct) preached by the Omniscient.
'Apasanta' means those who do not obtain or see this lamp or island. They are
the 'Naraḥ', the persons, who, due to their superior nature of Dharma, are
worthy of being accepted (adaniya) by the Mumukshus (aspirants of liberation).
Or, 'adaniya' means those who seek the welfare, i.e., the path of right faith,
knowledge, and conduct, for the liberation of these persons. Such persons, who
are thus characterized, are specifically called 'Vira', the brave ones, as they
are liberated from the bondage of attachment to son, wife, etc., and 'na
avakankshanti jiviyaṃ', they do not desire the life of non-restraint.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram hastagata jaisI hai  /  bhoga viSayagata rAgadveSa ko
niyaMtrita kara jo jitendrIya haiM vahI ziSya gurukula meM nivAsa kara gurujana
kI sevA karate haiM  /  athavA vaise hI guru jaisA Upara kahA gayA hai, vaisI
vizeSatAoM se yukta hote haiN| prastuta vivecana meM dhRti kI vizeSatA batalAte
hue kahA gayA hai ki jisameM dhRti hotI hai usI kA tapazcaraNa sadhatA hai  /
jo tapa ko sAdhatA hai use zreSTha gati prApta hotI hai  /  jo vyakti drati se
rahita hai usake tapa kA sad pAnA kaThina hai| gihe dIvamapAsaMtA,
purisAdANiyAnarA  /  te vIrA baMdhaNummukkA, nAvakaMkhaMti jIviyaM  // 34 //
chAyA - gRhe dIpa (dvIpa) mapazyantaH puruSAdAnIyA narAH  /  te vIrA
bandhanonmuktAH, nAvakAMkSanti jIvitam  //  anuvAda - ghara meM gRhastha, jIvana
meM dIpa-jJAna kI jyoti kA lAbha nahIM ho sakatA, yaha socakara jo puruSa
pravrajyA svIkAra kara lete haiM, saMyamamUlaka guNoM kI vRddhi karate jAte
haiM, ve hI vIra-Atmabala ke dhanI puruSa bandhana mukta hote haiM  /  karma
bandhana se chUTakara muktigAmI hote haiM  /  ve asaMyama maya jIvana kI
kAMkSAabhilASA nahIM karate  /  TIkA - yadbhi saMdhAyinaH
pUrvoktavizeSaNaviziSTA bhavanti tadabhidhitsurAha 'gRhe'-gRhavAse gRhapAze vA
gRhastha bhAva iti yAvat 'dIvaM'ti 'dIpI dIptau' dIpayati-prakAzayatIti dIpaH sa
ca bhAvadvIpaH zrutajJAna lAbhaH yadivA-dvIpaH samudrAdau prANinAmAzvAsabhUtaH
sa ca bhAvadvIpaH saMsAra samudre sarvajJokta cAritralAbhastadevambhUtaM dIpaM
dvIpaM vA gRhasthabhAve 'apazyantaH' aprApnuvantaH santaH samayk
pravrajyotthAnenotthitA uttarottara guNa lAbhenaivambhUtA bhavantIti
darzayati-'narAH' paruSAH puruSottamattvAddharmasya naropAdAnama, anyathA
strINAmapyetadagaNabhAktvaM bhavati athavA devAdivyudAsArthamiti, mumukSUNAM
puruSANAmAdAnIyA-AsrayaNIyAH puruSAdAnIyA mahato'pi mahIyAMso bhavanti, yadi vA-
AdAnIyo-hitaiSiNAM mokSastanmArgoM vA samyagdarzananAdikaH puruSANAM-
manuSyANAmAdAnIyaH puruSAdAnIya sa vidyate yeSA miti vigahya
matvarthItho'rzaAdibhyo'jiti, tathA ya evaM bhUtAste vizeSeNerayanti aSTa
prakAraM karmeti vIrAH, tathA bandhanena sabAhyAbhyantareNa putra
kalatrAdisneharUpeNot-prAbalyena muktA bandhanonmuktAH santo 'jIvitam' asaMyama
jIvitaM prANadhAraNaM vA 'nAbhikAGkSanti' nAbhilaSantIti  // 34 //  TIkArtha -
jisa tathya ke abhisaMdhAna meM-anusaMdhAna meM udyata puruSa jJAna yukta evaM
tapazIla hote haiM, usa saMbaMdha meM prakAza DAlane hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdana
karate haiM  /  gRhavAsa-pAza yA jAla ke sadRza bandhana hai usameM rahate hue
puruSa dIpaka ke sadRzya prakAza karane vAle zruta jJAnamaya bhAva pradIpa ko
prApta nahIM kara sakate  /  gAkSa meM Aye dIva zabda ko dIpa ke artha meM lete
hue TIkAkAra vivecana karate hai ki samudra Adi meM prANiyoM ke vizrAma dene ke
liye jaise dvIpa hotA hai, vaise hI sarvajJa pratipAdita caritra, dharmamUlaka
bhAva dvIpa saMsAra samudra meM bahate huye prANiyoM ko vizrAma detA hai  /
vaha gRhavAsa meM prApta nahIM hotA  /  isa tathya ke svAyatta kara jo puruSa
pravraNyA-saMyama mUlaka dIkSA svIkAra karate haiM  /  Age se Age apane guNoM kI
vRddhi karate jAte haiM, ve mumukSu puruSoM ke liye AdaraNIya-AzrayanIya, Azraya
lene yogya ho jAte haiM  /  sUtrakAra isa saMbaMdha meM yaha vyakta karate haiM
ki dharma ke puruSoM kI mukhyatA hai  /  isalie yahA~ puruSavAcaka nara zabda kA
grahaNa hai  /  anyathA striyAM bhI 440

Page #469 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This study is characterized by these qualities, or the separation - distinction
- elimination of gods, etc. Here, the word "male" is used for the sake of
distinction. It is not used for the distinction of women. The meaning of "male-
given" used here is that the path to liberation, which is the form of liberation
or right description, knowledge or character, is "male-given" because it is
accepted by men who are desirous of their own welfare. It is accepted by men. It
is in the form of liberation or the path to liberation. Therefore, the word
"male-given" is appropriate here. According to grammar, the word "male-given"
has the "ac" suffix with the meaning of "male". Those who are of this nature,
they alone destroy their eightfold karma, are heroes, and are free from the
seductive attachments of sons, wives, etc., and from internal bonds. They do not
desire a life of unrestraint or the desire to sustain life.  ❀❀❀  **Agiriddha**
**Savvam** **Chhaya** - **Saddaphāse** **Ārambeṣu** **Tam Samyayātitaṁ,
Jametaṁ** **Agiriddhaḥ śabda sparśeṣvārāmbeṣu aniśritaḥ.** **Sarvaṁ tat-
samyayātitaṁ yadetallapitaṁ bahu.** **Aniśśie.** **Laviyaṁ** **Bahū ||35||**
The translation is good. The word, sound, taste, smell, and touch-based sensory
enjoyments should be free from greed - not greedy, and he should be unattached -
not attached to the practices that are full of sin, such as initiation -
violence, etc. What is said at the beginning of this study, that it is forbidden
because it is against the principles laid down by the omniscient ones, is
forbidden, but what is in accordance with the principles of the omniscient ones
is not forbidden. 441  **Tīkā - Kiñcānyat- 'Agiriddhaḥ' anadhyupapanno'mūrccitaḥ
ka? - Śabda sparśeṣu manojñeṣu ādyantagrahaṇānmadhya grahaṇa mato manojñeṣu
rūpeṣu gandheṣu raseṣu vā agṛddha iti draṣṭavyaṁ tathetareṣu vā'dviṣṭa ityapi
vācyaṁ, tathā 'ārāmbeṣu' sāvadhyānuṣṭhāna rūpeṣu' aniśritaḥ' asambandho'pravṛtta
ityārtha, upasaṁhārtukaṁ āha-'sarvaṁ etad' adhyayanāderābhya pratiṣedhyatvena
yat lapitam uktaṁ mayā bahu tat 'samyayād' ārhatādāgamādātīta matikrānta
mitikr̥tvā pratiṣiddhaṁ, yadapi ca vidhidvāreṇoktaṁ tadetatsarvaṁ
kutsitasamyayātitaṁ lokoत्तरं pradhānaṁ vartate, yadapi ca taiḥ ku tīrthikaiḥ
bahulapitam tadetatsarvaṁ samyayā m iti kr̥tvā nānustheyam iti. || 35 ||**
**Tīkārtha -** Here, in the context of sensory objects, the word comes first and
touch comes last. Therefore, from the acceptance of these two, the intervening
objects should also be considered accepted here. Do not be greedy for words,
forms, smells, tastes, and touches that are pleasing to the virtuous mind, and
do not hate those objects that are unpleasant to the mind. He should not be
involved in sinful practices. From the beginning of this study, the things that
have been told in the form of prohibitions are forbidden - prohibited because
they are contrary to the principles of the omniscient ones. Those that have been
ordained are contrary to the principles of the heretics - the false-believers,
and therefore are transcendental - excellent, superior dharma - dharma-approved.
What the false-believers have said a lot in their principles should not be
followed because it is contrary to the principles of the omniscient ones.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dharma adhyayanaM ina guNoM se yukta hotI haiM athavA deva Adi kI vyAvRti -
pRthakatA - apAkaraNa ke liye yahAM nara zabda kA kathana hai| striyoM kI
vyAvRtti hetu nahIM  /  yahAM prayukta puruSAdAnIya kA tAtparya yaha hai ki Atma
hitecchu puruSa jinakA AdAna-grahaNa karate haiM vaha mokSa yA samyak varNana,
jJAna yA caritra rUpa mokSa mArga puruSAdAnIya haiN| vaha puruSoM dvArA AdAna
grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| mokSarUpa yA mokSa mArga svarUpa hai  /  ataH
puruSAdAnIya zabda kI yahA~ saMgati hai| vyAkaraNa ke anusAra puruSAdAnIya zabda
meM matvarthIya ac pratyaya huA hai| jo puruSa isa prakAra ke hote haiM, ve hI
apane aSTavidha rUpa karma kA kSaya karate haiM, vIra haiM, tathA putra, strI
Adi ke mohAtmaka bAdya tathA Antarika bandhanoM se mukta  /  ve asaMyamamaya
jIvana yA prANa dhAraNa kI AkAMkSA-kAmanA nahIM karate  /   agiddhe savvaM chAyA
- saddaphAse AraMbhesu taM samayAtItaM, jametaM agRddhaH zabda
sparzeSvArambheSvanizritaH  /  sarvaM tatsamayAtItaM yadetallapitaM bahu  //
aNissie  /  laviyaM bahu ||35|| anuvAda sAdhu zabda rUpa, rasa, gaMdha evaM
sparza mUlaka indriya bhogoM meM agRdha- alolupa rahe tathA vaha Arambha-hiMsA
Adi pApa yukta anuSThAnoM meM anizrita - asaMlagna rahe  /  isa adhyayana ke Adi
meM jo kahA gayA hai ki sarvajJoM dvArA prarUpita siddhAntoM ke viruddha hone ke
kAraNa niSiddha hai, usakA niSedha kiyA gayA kintu jo sarvajJa siddhAntoM ke
anurUpa hai usakA niSedha nahIM 1 441 TIkA - kiJcAnyat- 'agRddhaH'
anadhyupapanno'mUrcchitaH ka ? - zabdasparzesu manojJeSu AdyantagrahaNAnmadhya
grahaNa mato manojJeSu rupeSu gandheSu raseSu vA agRddha iti draSTavyaM
tathetareSu vA'dviSTa ityapi vAcyaM, tathA 'ArambheSu' sAvadyAnuSThAna rupeSu'
anizritaH' asambandho'pravRtta ityartha, upasaMhartukAma Aha-'sarvametad'
adhyayanAderAbhya pratiSedhyatvena yat lapitam uktaM mayA bahu tat 'samayAd'
ArhatAdAgamAdatIta matikrAntamitikRtvA pratiSiddhaM, yadapi ca vidhidvAreNoktaM
tadetatsarvaM kutsitasamayAtItaM lokottaraM pradhAnaM vartate, yadapi ca taiH
kutIrthikairbahulapitaM tadetatsarvaM samayAtI miti kRtvA nAnuSTheyamiti  //  35
//  TIkArtha - yahA~ indriya viSayoM ke sandarbha meM zabda prArambha meM AtA
hai aura sparza anta meM AtA hai| isalie ina donoM ke grahaNa se inake
madhyavartI viSayoM ko bhI yahAM grahita samajhanA caahie| sAdhu mana ko lubhAne
vAle zabda, rUpa, gandha, rasa tathA sparza meM lolupa na bane evaM mana ko
apriya lagane vAle viSayoM meM vaha dveSa na kare  /  vaha sAvadya - pApa yukta
anuSThAna meM pravRtta na ho  /  prastuta adhyayana ke zuruAta se lekara niSedha
rUpa meM jo bAteM batalAyI gaI haiM, ve sarvajJa siddhAnta se viparIta hone ke
kAraNa niSiddha-varjita hai, jinakA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai ve kutIrthikoM -
mithyAtvI matavAdiyoM ke siddhAntoM ke pratikUla hone ke kAraNa lokottara -
uttama zreSTha dharma hai-dharmAnumodita hai  /  mithyAtvI matavAdiyoM ne apane
siddhAntoM meM jo bahuta kucha kahA hai, sarvajJa siddhAnta se viparIta mAnakara
usakA AcaraNa anusaraNa nahIM karanA cAhie  /

Page #470 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The *Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra* says: "Excessive pride and illusion, the wise
one should know them. All the objects of desire, the Muni should seek
liberation." ||36|| Commentary: - The wise Muni, knowing excessive pride,
excessive ego, illusion, deceit, worldly pleasures, should renounce them and
seek liberation. Explanation: - The Sutra-maker, through the prohibition of the
main objects of prohibition, speaks of the desire for liberation. Excessive
pride, great pride, and the word "cha" (also) indicates its companion, anger,
and illusion, and the word "cha" (also) indicates its effect, greed. The wise
man, knowing all this, should renounce it through the knowledge of renunciation.
Similarly, knowing all the "objects of desire" - wealth, taste, and beauty - as
the cause of the world, he should renounce them. Renouncing them, the "Muni"
(saint) should seek "liberation" - the destruction of all karma, or the specific
region of space. Thus, the meaning of the end, "I say" is as before. ||36|| The
ninth study of Dharma is complete. 卐卐卐 442

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram aimANaM ca mAyaM ca, taM pariNNAya paMDie  /
gAravANi ya savvANi NivvANaM saMdhae muNi |ttibemi  // 36 //  chAyA - ati
mAnaJca mAyAJca, tat parijJAya paNDitaH  /  gauravANi ca sarvANi, nirvANaM
saMdhayenmuniH  //  anuvAda - vidvAn vivekazIla muni atimAna-atyadhika ahaMkAra,
tathA mAyA, chala, prapaMca aura sAMsArika bhogoM ko jAnakara unakA parityAga
kara mokSa kI prArthanA, AkAMkSA kare  /  TIkA -
pratiSedhyapradhAnaniSedhadvAreNa mokSAbhisandhAnenAha-atimAno mahAmAnastaM, ca
zabdAttatsahacaritaM krodhaM ca, tathA mAyAM ca zabdAttatkAryabhUtaM lobhaM ca,
tadetatsarvaM 'paNDito' vivekI jJaparijJayA parijJAya pratyAkhyAna parijJayA
pariharet, tathA sarvANi 'gAravANi' Rddhi rasasAta rupANi samyag jJAtvA
saMsArakAraNatvena pariharet, parihatya ca 'muniH' sAdhuH 'nirvANam' azeSa
karmakSayarUpaM. viziSTAkAzadezaM vA 'sandhayet' abhisandadhyAt prArthaye diti
yAvat  /  itiH parisamAptyarthe, bravImIti pUrvavat  // 36 //  samAptaM
dharmAravyaM navamamadhyayanamiti  /  TIkArtha - pratisedhya-pratisedha karane
yogya vastuoM meM jo pradhAna-mukhya hai, unakA niSedha karate hue sUtrakAra
mokSa prApti ke sandarbha meM batalAte haiM  /  atimAna mahAn mAna yA atyadhika
ahaMkAra, ca zabda se saMketita usake sahacArI krodha tathA mAyA aura ca zabda
se sUcita mAyA kA lobha inako vivekazIla puruSa jJeya parijJA dvArA jAnakara,
pratyAkhyAna parijJA dvArA inakA parityAga kare  /  Rddhi, rasa tathA sukharUpa
abhipsita padArthoM ko saMsAra kA kAraNa-janma maraNa kA hetu jAnakara sAdhu
inheM tyAga de  /  samasta karmoM ke kSaya rUpa athavA lokAkAza ke viziSTa bhAga
svarUpa jo nirvANa-mokSa patha hai usakI kAmanA kre| yahA~ iti zabda samApti ke
artha meM hai  /  bravImi-bolatA hU~ yaha pahale kI jyoM yojanIya hai| dharma
nAmaka navam adhyayana samApta huA  /  Wan Wan Wan  442

Page #471 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Great Meditation The tenth Great Meditation, listen to this human Dharma,
this meditation, O monks! The unpledged monk, having attained meditation, should
wander among beings without attachment. ||1|| Commentary - The wise one, having
contemplated the Dharma, listens to this meditation, which is straight and leads
to liberation. The unpledged monk, having attained meditation, should wander
among beings without attachment. Translation - The great possessor of wisdom and
knowledge, the omniscient Lord Mahavira, has declared the Dharma, which is
straight, simple, and leads to liberation through meditation. O disciples!
Listen to it. The unpledged monk, who has no desire for the fruits of his
austerities, having attained meditation, should practice pure restraint, free
from violence. Commentary - This verse is connected with the previous verse,
which states that one should strive for liberation by abandoning all worldly
attachments (Grantha 5500). The Lord, who has attained divine knowledge, has
declared this, and this is what will be explained now. Who is the one who has
declared this? - 'The wise one' - 'mati' means contemplation, knowledge of all
things, and the one who possesses this is the wise one, the omniscient one.
Here, the use of the special epithet 'matimaan' refers to the Tirthankara, and
by implication, it also refers to the Veer Vardhaman Swami. What has he
declared? - 'Dharma' - the Dharma of the scriptures and conduct. How? - 'Having
contemplated' - having known through omniscience, he speaks of the Dharma based
on things worthy of being explained. Or, having contemplated the listener, he
asks, "For whose sake is this worthy of being understood? What kind of person is
this? From where has he come? What kind of vision has he attained?" Thus, having
considered all this, the devotees of the Dharma think that the Lord speaks of
the Dharma, considering each person's point of view, so that everyone can
understand it in their own language and doubts can be removed. What kind of
Dharma does he speak of? - 'Straight' - not crooked, describing the true nature
of things as they are. Not like the Sakyas, who, fearing the fault of creating
destruction and attachment, have accepted the impermanence of everything and
have accepted the existence of beings. Similarly, they accept plants as
inanimate and do not cut them themselves, but they teach others to cut them.
Similarly, they do not touch gold and silver themselves, but they buy and sell
it through others. Similarly, the Sankhyas, fearing the fault of bondage to
karma and the absence of liberation, accept everything as unchanging, uncreated,
stable, and eternal, and they rely on the absence of birth and death. Thus, the
Lord has declared the Dharma, free from all such cunning and deceit. Similarly,
it is understood correctly - liberation, the path to it, or the self, is made
suitable, established by this Dharma. This is the Dharma that he has declared.
Or, he has declared the Dharma, and that meditation, which is the meditation on
the Dharma, etc. Sudharmaswami says, "Listen to this Dharma, or meditation,
which has been taught by the Lord." For example, the one who is unpledged has no
desire for worldly or otherworldly rewards, and he performs austerities without
any desire. The monk who is a mendicant, who is a seeker of the truth, is the
one who is truly virtuous. He is the one who has attained the Dharma and the
meditation on the Dharma. Similarly, the one who is unattached has no attachment
to beings, and he wanders among them without any attachment. Or, the one who is
unattached, who is free from the flow of karma, who is free from the cause of
karma, should wander well, should wander perfectly. Or, he should wander among
those things that are unattached, that are like unattached things, such as
knowledge, etc. Or, the cause, the reason, the suffering, is unattached, and he
should practice restraint, striving for the highest good, without causing
suffering to anyone. ||1|| Commentary - This verse is connected with the
previous verse, which states that the virtuous should abandon all worldly
pleasures and engage in the practice of liberation. The omniscient Lord
Mahavira, as will be explained further, has declared the Dharma. Now, we will
explain this. Inquiring about the qualities of Lord Mahavira Swami, one asks,
"How is the Lord?"  443

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samAdhyayanaM dazamaM zrI samAdhyayana AghaM maimaM maNuvIya dhammaM, aMjU
samAhiM tamiNaM suNeha  /  apaDinna bhikkhU u samAhipatte, aNiyANa
bhUtesuparivvaejjA  // 1 //  chAyA - AkhyAtavAna matimAna, anuvicintya dharmam
RjuM samAdhiM tamiyaM zRNuta  /  apratijJabhikSustu, samAdhiprApto'nidAno
bhUteSu parivrajet  //  anuvAda - matimAna-prajJA ke mahAna dhanI, sarvajJa
prabhu mahAvIra ne Rju-sarala tathA samAdhimaya-mokSaprada dharma AkhyAta kiyA
hai  /  ziSya vRnda ! usakA tuma zravaNa karo  /  apratijJa-apane tapazcaraNa ke
phala kA anabhilASI samAdhi prApta-samAdhiyukta prANI hiMsA vivarjita sAdhu
parivrajyA-zuddha saMyama kA pAlana kare  /  TIkA - asya cAyamanantarasUtreNa
saha sambandhaH, tadyathAazeSagAravaparihAreNa mu (graM. 5500)
nirnivANamanusandhayedityetadbhagavAnutpannadivyajJAna:samAkhyAtavAn etacca
vakSyamANamAkhyAtavAniti, Agha'tti AkhyAtavAn ko'sau ? - 'matimAn' mananaM
matiH-samastapadArthaparijJAnaM tadvidyate yasyAsau matimAn kevalajJAnItyarthaH,
tatrAsAdhAraNavizeSaNopAdAnAttIrthakRda gRhate, asAvapi
pratyAsattervIravardhamAnasvAmI gRhyate, kimAkhyAtavAna ? - 'dharma'
zrutacAritrAkhyaM, katham ? - 'anuvicintya' kevalajJAnena jJAtvA
prajJApanAyogyAn padArthAnAzritya dharmaM bhASate, yadivA-grAhakamanuvicintya
kasyArthasyAyaM grahaNasamarthaH ? tathA ko'yaMpuruSaH ? kaJcanataH ? kiM vA
darzanamApanna? ityevaM paryAlocya, dharmazuzrUSavo vA manyante-yathA
pratyekamasmadabhiprAyamanuvicintya bhagavAn dharma bhASate, yugapatsarveSAM
svabhASApariNatyA saMzayApagamAditi, kiMbhUtaM dharmabhASate ? - 'Rjuma' avakraM
yathAvasthitavastusvarUpaMnirUpaNato, na yathA zAkyAH sarvaM
kSaNikamabhyupagamya kRtanAzA kRtAbhyAgamadoSabhayAtsantAnAbhyupagamaM
kRtavantaH tathA vanaspatimacetanatvenAbhyupagamya svayaM na chindanti
tacchedanAdAvupadezaM tu dadati tathA kArSApaNAdikaM hiraNyaM svato naspRzanti
apareNa tu tatparigrahataHkrayavikrayaMkArayanti,tathA sAGghayA
sarvamapracyutAnutpannasthiraikasvabhAvaM nityamabhyupagamya
karmabandhamokSAbhAvaprasaMgadoSabhayAdAvirbhAvati-robhAvAvAzritavanta ityAdi
kauTilyabhAvaparihAreNA varRtathyaM dharmamAkhyAtavAn, tathA samyagAdhIyate-
mokSaM tanmArga vA pratyAtmA yogyaH kriyate vyavasthApyeta yena dharmeNAsau
dharmaH samAdhistaM samAkhyAtavAn, yadivA-dharmamAkhyAtavAMstatsamAdhiM ca
dharmadhyAnAdika miti  /  sudharmasvAmyAha-tamima-dharmaM samAdhi vA
bhagavadupadiSTaM zRNuta yUyaM, tadyathA-na vidyate aihikAmuSmikarupA pratijJA-
AkAGkSA tapo'nuSThAnaM kurvato yasyAsAvapratijJo, bhikSaNazIlo bhikSuH
turvizeSaNe bhAvabhikSuH, asAveva paramArthataH sAdhuH, dharmaM dharmasamAdhiM
ca prApto'sAveveti, tathA na vidyate nidAnamArabhmarupaM bhUteSu' jantuSu,
yasyAsAvanidAnaH sa evaMmbhUtaH sAvadyAnuSThAna rahitaH pari-
samantAtsaMyamAnuSThAne vrajed' gacchediti, yadivA-anidAnabhUtaH anAzravabhUtaH
karmopAdAnarahitaH suSThu parivrajet suparivrajet, yadivAanidAnabhUtAni-
anidAnakalpAni jJAnAdIni teSu parivrajet, athavA nidAnaM hetu-kAraNaM
duHkhasyAto'nidAnabhUtaH kasyacidduHkhamanupapAdayan saMyame parAkrameteti  // 1
//  TIkArtha - prastuta sUtra kA pUrvatan sUtra ke sAtha yaha saMbaMdha hai,
navam adhyAya kI antima gAthA meM pratipAdita huA hai ki sAdhu samasta sAMsArika
sukha bhogoM kA parityAga kara mokSa kI sAdhanA meM saMlagna bne| sarvajJa
bhagavAna mahAvIra ne, jaisA Age samupavarNita hogA-dharma kA AkhyAna kiyA  /
aba yaha batalAte haiM  /  bhagavAna mahAvIra svAmI kI vizeSatAoM ke sambandha
meM jijJAsA karate hue pUchate haiM ki bhagavAna kaise haiM ? 443

Page #472 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that the Lord is **matiśālī** (wise).
**Mati** is the knowledge of all substances, and those who possess such
knowledge are called **sarvajña** (omniscient) or **kevalajñānavan** (possessing
perfect knowledge), **matimaan** (wise) or **matiśālī** (wise). Although there
have been many **kevalajñāna** (omniscient) holders, the epithet **matimaan** is
used here with an extraordinary meaning, denoting a **tīrthankara**. Among the
**tīrthankaras**, Lord Mahavira is the most recent. Therefore, this epithet
refers to him here. Lord Mahavira narrated the **śrutacāritramūlaka dharma**
(religion based on scriptures and conduct).  How did he do it? In response, it
is said that he, knowing the nature of the substances of the world through
**kevalajñāna** (omniscience), took from them the substances worthy of being
taught and narrated the religion. The Lord, addressing the first man to hear the
religion, said that this man could be capable of accepting which substance. Who
is he? To which deity or guru is he devoted? In whom does he have faith? What
philosophical doctrine does he follow? Having determined these facts, he
narrated the religion.  Alternatively, it is the opinion of those who practice
religion that the Lord addressed each of us individually when he narrated the
religion. The religious teachings given by the Lord are transformed into the
language of all beings at the same time.  What kind of religion does the Lord
preach? In response, it is stated that the Lord preaches a **ṛju-avakra**
(straight, not crooked), simple religion, i.e., he describes the true nature of
things as they are. He does not preach like the Buddhists and other proponents
of other doctrines. Buddhists accept all substances as **kṣaṇika** (momentary),
which leads to two flaws in their doctrine: **kṛtanāśakīya** (destruction of
what has been done) and **akṛtābhyāgama** (arrival of what has not been done).
Therefore, they accept the doctrine of **santānavāda** (theory of continuity).
They consider plants to be **acetan** (inanimate), **chetana-rahit** (without
consciousness), and **prāṇa-rahit** (without life). They do not cut them
themselves, but they preach about cutting them, etc. Although they themselves do
not touch **kāṛṣāpaṇa** (copper coin), **rupaya** (silver coin), **paisa**
(coin), **hiraṇya** (gold), **suvarna** (gold), etc., precious metals, they have
them collected by others and have them bought and sold.  Similarly, **sāṅkhya**
proponents consider all substances to be **apracyuta** (indestructible),
**vināśa-rahit** (without destruction), **anutpanna** (unborn), **utpatti-
rahit** (without birth), **sthira** (stable) in nature, and **nitya** (eternal).
By believing this, **karma** (action) does not bind, and **mokṣa** (liberation)
is not achieved. Fearing such a flaw, they believe that all substances appear or
disappear. This belief is **kauṭilya-bhāva-kuṭilita** (deceitful). Lord
Mahavira, avoiding such deceitful sentiment, narrated a religion that is
**avakra** (straight), **sarala** (simple), **tathya** (true), and **satya**
(truthful), by which the soul is **samyak** (properly) established in **mokṣa**
(liberation) or the path to **mokṣa** (liberation), made fit to progress towards
it. That is called **dharma** (religion). Alternatively, the Lord narrated the
**dharma** (religion) and its **samādhi** (concentration), i.e., **dharma-
dhyāna** (meditation on religion), etc.  **Shri Sudharma Swami** says to his
followers: "You people listen to the **dharma** (religion) or **samādhi-
sādhanā** (practice of concentration) that Lord Mahavira taught. The man who
does not desire worldly and otherworldly happiness as the fruit of his
**tapascaraṇa** (austerity) is truly a **bhikṣu-upajīvī-bhāva-bhikṣu** (true
ascetic). He is the one who...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram uttara meM batalAyA jAtA hai ki bhagavAna matizAlI haiM
/  samagra padArthoM kA jJAna mati kahalAtA hai, vaisA jJAna jinameM hotA hai,
ve sarvajJa yA kevalajJAnavAna mahApuruSa matimAna yA matizAlI kahe jAte haiM  /
yadyapi kevalajJAna ke dhAraka-sarvajJa aneka hue haiM kintu yahAM matimAna
vizeSaNa asAdhAraNa artha ke sAtha prayukta hai jo tIrthaMkara kA dyotaka hai  /
tIrthaMkaroM meM bhagavAna mahAvIra sarvAdhika AsannavartI hai  /  ataH isa
vizeSaNa se yahAM ve hI gRhIta hote haiM  /  bhagavAna mahAvIra ne
zrutacAritramUlaka dharma kA AkhyAna kiyA  /  vaisA kisa prakAra kiyA ? isake
uttara meM kahA jAtA hai ki unhoMne kevalajJAna-sarvajJatva ke mAdhyama se
jagata ke padArthoM kA svarUpa jAnate hue unameM se upadeSTavya-upadeza dene
yogya padArthoM ko gRhIta kara dharma kA AkhyAna kiyA  /  bhagavAna ne pahale
dharma kA zravaNa karane vAle puruSa ko lakSita kara kahA thA ki yaha puruSa
kisa padArtha ko grahaNa karane meM sakSama ho sakatAhai  /  yaha kauna hai ?
kisa deva yA guru ke pratipraNata haiM ? kisameM AsthA rakhatA hai ? yaha kisa
dArzanika-siddhAnta kA anuyAyI hai ityAdi tattvoM ko nizcita kara unhoMne dharma
kA AkhyAna kiyA  /  athavA dharma kI upAsanA karane vAle puruSoM kA aisA
abhimata hai ki bhagavAna ne hama logoM meM se pratyeka ko abhilakSita kara
dharma kA abhibhASaNa kiyA  /  bhagavAna dvArA diyA gayA dharmopadeza eka hI
samaya meM samasta prANiyoM kI bhASA meM parivartita ho _bhagavAna kisa prakAra
ke dharma kA upadeza karate haiM ? isake uttara meM pratipAdita kiyA jAtA hai ki
bhagavAna Rju-avakra, TeDhepanarahita sarala dharma kA upadeza karate haiM
arthAt yathAvasthita vastu kA yathAvata svarUpa nirUpita karate haiM jo vastu
jaisI hai, usakA vaisA hI svarUpa pratipAdita karate haiM  /  boddha Adi anya
matavAdiyoM kI taraha upadeza nahIM karate  /  bauddha sabhI padArthoM ko
kSaNika svIkAra karate haiM jisase unake siddhAnta meM kRtanAzakie hue kA
dhvaMsa-miTanA tathA akRtAbhyAgama-nahIM kie hue kA Agamana-AnA, ye doSa
upasthita hote haiN| ataeva ve santAnavAda kA siddhAnta svIkAra karate haiM  /
ve vanaspati ko acetana-cetanArahita, prANarahita mAnate haiM  /  ve usakA
svayaM chedana nahIM karate kintu usake chedana Adi kA upadeza karate haiM  /
yadyapi ve svayaM kArSApaNarupaye paise Adi sikke hiraNya svarNa AdibahumUlya
dhAtueM Adi nahIM chUte kintu anya ke dvArA unakA saMgraha karavAkara, kharIda
bikrI karavAte haiM  /  isI prakAra sAMkhya matavAdI sabhI padArthoM ko
apracyuta-vinAza rahita, anutpanna-utpatti rahita sthira svabhAva tathA nitya
mAnate haiM  /  aisA mAnane se karmoM kA baMdha ghaTita nahIM hotA hai aura na
mokSa hI siddha hotA hai  /  aisA doSa Ane ke bhaya se ve sabhI padArthoM kA
AvirbhAva-prAkaTya yA tirobhAvalaya mAnate haiM  /  yaha mAnyatA
kauTilyabhAvakuTilatA yukta hai  /  bhagavAna mahAvIra ne aise kuTilatApUrNa
bhAva kA parihAra karate hue avakra-sarala tathya-satya siddhAnta yukta dharma
kA AkhyAna kiyA, jisake dvArA AtmA samyaka-bhalI bhAMti mokSa yA mokSa ke mArga
meM TikAyI jAtI hai, sthApita kI jAtI hai  /  usa ora bar3hane yogya kI jAtI
hai, use dharma kahA jAtA hai  /  athavA bhagavAna ne dharma kA aura usakI
samAdhi kA arthAt dharmadhyAna Adi kA AkhyAna kiyA  /  zrI sudharmAsvAmI apane
aMtevAsiyoM se kahate haiM-tuma loga usa dharma yA samAdhi-sAdhanA ke saMbaMdha
meM zravaNa karo, jise bhagavAna mahAvIra ne upadiSTa kiyA  /  jo puruSa apane
tapazcaraNa ke phala ke rUpa meM aihika aura pAralaukika sukha kI AkAMkSA nahIM
rakhatA vahI vAstava meM bhikSopajIvibhAvabhikSu-saccA sAdhu hai  /  usI (444

Page #473 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sri Samadhyayan has assimilated the fundamental principle of Dharma Samadhi-
Dharma, which is the practice of Dharma. It is free from the root cause of
karma. Conduct that is based on the root cause of violence towards beings is
called nidana, and it is free from nidana because it is free from violence
towards beings. It is free from the practice of savadya-sinful rituals. It is
always engaged in the practice of complete restraint, or one meaning of anidana-
bhuta is anashrava-bhuta or free from asrava. Thus, it is free from the causes
of virtuous actions. It is constantly striving in that direction. Or, one
meaning of anidana-bhuta is anidana-sad-dasha-jnanadi, in which it is engaged in
virtuous endeavors. One meaning of nidana is the cause or reason for suffering.
It is free from the cause of suffering. It does not cause suffering for anyone.
It is always engaged in restraint.  **Verse 2:**  **Original:**  उड्ढे अहेयं
तिरियं दिसासु, तसा य जेथावर जे य पाणा। हत्थेहिं पाएहिं य संजमित्ता,
अदिन्नमन्नेसु य णो गहेजा ॥२॥ छाया - ऊर्ध्वमस्तिय॑ग्दिशासु, त्रसाश्च ये स्थावरा
ये च प्राणाः । हस्तैः पादैश्च संयम्य, अदत्त मन्यैश्च न गृह्णीयात् ॥
**Translation:**  In the upward, downward, and sideways directions, and in all
other directions, those who are trembling and those who are stationary beings,
one should not cause them suffering by controlling one's hands, feet, etc. One
should not take what has not been given by others.  **Commentary:**  The acts of
violence towards beings, etc., are the causes of karma. Violence towards beings
is of four types, based on the differences in substance, field, time, and
feeling. Here, the field of violence towards beings is being discussed. It is
said that all violence towards beings, when performed, is done in the upward,
downward, and sideways directions, depending on the knowledge of the performer.
Or, it is done in the three realms of the upward, downward, and sideways
directions, and in the eastern, etc., directions, and in the intermediate
directions. Substance-based violence towards beings is as follows: those beings
who tremble, who are perceived as trembling, are those with two senses, etc.
Those who are stationary are the earth, etc., stationary beings. The "cha" here
is used to indicate the difference in their own nature. Or, it indicates time-
based violence towards beings. It is done during the day or night. "Pranas" are
beings. Feeling-based violence towards beings is as follows: one should not
cause suffering to these aforementioned beings by binding them with one's hands
and feet, as this is a symbolic representation. Or, one should not cause them
suffering by deceiving them. If one were to bind the hands and feet of these
beings and harm them while their body is restrained, one should be restrained in
all mental, verbal, and physical actions, including breathing, exhaling,
coughing, sneezing, yawning, and natural functions, and should maintain mental
concentration. One should not take what has not been given by others. This is
the explanation of the third vow. Because of the prohibition against taking what
has not been given, the acquisition of possessions is prohibited. The
prohibition against sexual intercourse is also useless, because it is not
acquired without being taken. Because of the instruction to practice all vows
perfectly, false speech is also eliminated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samAdhyayanaM ne dharma samAdhi-dharma ke sAdhanA mUlaka tattva ko AtmasAt
kiyA hai  /  vaha anidAnabhUta hai  /  prANiyoM ke prati AraMbha-hiMsA mUlaka
vyavahAra nidAna kahA jAtA hai aura vaha prANI hiMsA se dUra rahane ke kAraNa
anidAna hai| sAvadya-pApapUrNa anuSThAna rahita hai  /  vaha sarvathA saMyama ke
AcaraNa meM gatizIla rahe athavA anidAnabhUtakA eka artha anAzravabhUta yA
Azravarahita hai  /  yoM vaha sAdhu karmoM ke upAdAna se vivarjita hai  /  usa
dizA meM vaha satat udyata rahe  /  athavA anidAnabhUta kA artha anidAna saddaza
jJAnAdi hai, unameM sAdhu udyamazIla rahe  /  nidAna kA eka artha duHkha kA hetu
yA kAraNa hai  /  vaha sAdhu duHkha kA anidAna bhUta hai  /  kisI ke liye duHkha
upapanautpanna nahIM karatA  /  vaha sadaiva saMyama meM parAkramazIla rhe| .
uDDhe aheyaM tiriyaM disAsu, tasA ya jethAvara je ya paannaa| hatthehiM pAehiM
ya saMjamittA, adinnamannesu ya No gahejA  // 2 //  chAyA -
Urdhvamastiya'gdizAsu, trasAzca ye sthAvarA ye ca prANAH  /  hastaiH pAdaizca
saMyamya, adatta manyaizca na gRhNIyAt  //  anuvAda - urdhva-Upara kI dizA meM,
adha:-nIce kI dizA meM tiryak-tirachI dizA meM, tathA anya dizAoM meM jo trasa
evaM sthAvara prANI rahate haiM, apane hAtha paira Adi ko niyaMtrita rakhate hue
unheM kaSTa nahIM denA cAhiye  /  dUsaroM ke dvArA nahIM dI gaI vastu lenI nahIM
cAhiye  /  TIkA - prANAtipAtAdIni tu karmaNo nidAnAni vartante, prANAtipAto'pi
dravyakSetrakAlabhAvabhedAccaturdhA, tatra kSetraprANAtipAtamadhikRtyAhasarvo'pi
prANAtipAtaH kriyamANaH prajJApakApekSayordhvamadhastiryak kriyate,
yadivAUrdhvAdhastiryagrUpeSu triSu lokeSu tathA prAcyAdiSu dikSu vidikSu ceti,
dravyaprANAtipAtastvayaM-trasyantIti trasAdvIndriyAdayo ye ca 'sthAvarAH'
pRthivyAdayaH, cakAraH svagatabhedasaMsUcanArthaH, kAlaprANAtipAta saMsUcanArtho
vA divA rAtrau vA, 'prANAH' prANinaH bhAvaprANatipAtaM tvAha-etAn prAguktAn
prANino hastapAdAbhyAM "saMyamya" vaddhavA upalakSaNArthatvAda syAnyathA vA
kadartha yitvA yatteSAM duHkhotpAdanaM tannakuryAt, yadi vaitAn prANino hastau
pAdau ca saMyamya saMyatakAyaH sanna hiMsyAt, ca
zabdAducchvAsanizvAsakAsitakSutavAtanisargAdiSu sarvatra manovAkkAyakarmasu
saMyato bhavan bhAvasamAdhimanupAlayet, tathA parairadattaM na gRhNIyAditi
tRtIyavratopanyAsaH, adattAdAnaniSedhAccArthataH parigraho niSiddho
bhavati,nAparigRhItamAsevyataiti
maithunaniSedho'payuktaHsamastavratasamyakpAlanopadezAcca mRSAvAdo'pyarthato
nirasta iti  // 2 //  TIkArtha - prANAtipAdAdi karma ke nidAna yA baMdha ke hetu
haiM  /  dravya, kSetra, kAla tathA bhAva kI dRSTi se prANAtipAta ke cAra bheda
haiM  /  inameM kSetra prANAtipAta ko adhikRta kara kahA gayAhai  /  kriyamANa-
kiye jAte sabhI prANAtipAta prajJApaka-jJApita karane vAle kI apekSA se Urdhva
adhaH tathA tiryaka kSetroM meM kiye jAte haiM athavA Urdhva, adhaH tiryak rUpa
tInoM lokoM meM kiye jAte haiM tathA pUrva Adi dizAoM meM tathA vidizAoM meM
kiye jAte haiM  /  ve taba kSetra prANAtipAta ke antargata Ate haiM  /  dravya
prANAtipAta isa prakAra hai-jo prANI trAsa pAte haiM-trasta hote hue pratIta
hote haiM ve dviindriyAdi prANI haiM  /  jo sthitizIla haiM, ve pRthvI Adi
sthAvara prANI haiN| yahAM ca'kAra kA prayoga svagata bheda ke sUcana hetu hai
/  athavA vaha kAla prANAtipAta ko sUcita karatA hai| dina -445)

Page #474 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra, causing pain to living beings at night is
called Kala Pranatipat. Bhava Pranatipat is as follows: binding the hands and
feet of these aforementioned living beings or causing them pain in any other way
falls under this. One should not harm these living beings while keeping one's
hands, feet, and body restrained. The word 'cha' used here indicates that one
should follow the Bhava Samadhi with restraint in all of these: inhalation,
exhalation, coughing, sneezing, passing of wind, and mental, verbal, and
physical actions. One should not accept things that are not given by others.
This is the explanation and teaching of the third vow. Here, the prohibition of
accepting things not given (Adattadan) also implies the prohibition of
possession (Parigraha). Without the feeling of possession (Aparigrahitha Bhava),
one cannot enjoy any object. Therefore, the prohibition of possession here also
implies the prohibition of non-chastity (Abrahmacharya). Due to the teaching of
the proper observance of all vows, the prohibition of false speech (Asat
Bhashan) also naturally arises here.  **Verse 3:**  **Chhaya:** One who has
transcended doubt in the well-explained Dharma (Suyakkhaya Dhamme Vitigicchati),
and who is like a self-controlled person (Laadhe Chare Ayatule Payasu) among
living beings (Prajasu).  **Translation:** One who has transcended doubt in the
well-explained Dharma, which is based on the scriptures and conduct, and who is
like a self-controlled person among living beings, should not engage in actions
that lead to the accumulation of karma (Ayam Na Kujja Iha Jiviyatthi), nor
should a well-practiced monk (Sutavassi Bhikkhu) engage in the accumulation of
possessions (Chayam Na Kujja).  **Commentary:**  The verse explains the
importance of knowledge, vision, and meditation (Jnana Darshan Samadhi). The
well-explained Dharma, based on the scriptures and conduct, is known by the
virtuous (Suyakkhaya Dhamme). This indicates the knowledge and meditation
mentioned earlier, as the well-explained Dharma cannot be understood without
specific knowledge. The one who has transcended doubt (Vitigicchati) is free
from confusion and doubt, and has no desire for worldly things. This indicates
the vision and meditation mentioned earlier. The one who sustains the body with
proper food (Laadhe Chare Ayatule Payasu) is a well-practiced monk who has
renounced worldly desires. Such a monk should follow restraint (Chare) and
consider all living beings as equal to himself (Atmatulya). This is the essence
of the verse.  The verse also mentions that one should not engage in actions
that lead to the accumulation of karma (Ayam Na Kujja Iha Jiviyatthi). This
refers to the accumulation of karma through actions, thoughts, and words. The
verse also mentions that one should not engage in the accumulation of
possessions (Chayam Na Kujja). This refers to the accumulation of wealth,
possessions, and material things.  The verse concludes by saying that a well-
practiced monk (Sutavassi Bhikkhu) should not engage in the accumulation of
possessions (Chayam Na Kujja). This is because the accumulation of possessions
leads to attachment and suffering.  **Chhaya:** Just as I do not like suffering
(Jah Mama Na Piyam Dukkha), so too do all living beings (Eameva Savvajivaanam).
One who does not kill (Na Hanai) or cause harm (Na Hanavei) and who considers
all beings equal (Samamanai) is a true monk (Te Na Samano).  **Translation:**
Just as I do not like suffering, so too do all living beings. One who does not
kill or cause harm and who considers all beings equal is a true monk.
**Commentary:**  This verse emphasizes the importance of compassion and non-
violence. It states that just as we do not like suffering, so too do all living
beings. Therefore, we should not kill or cause harm to any living being. We
should consider all beings equal and treat them with kindness and compassion.
This is the true path of a monk.  The verse concludes by saying that one who
does not kill or cause harm and who considers all beings equal is a true monk
(Te Na Samano). This is because such a person has developed true compassion and
has transcended the cycle of birth and death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram meM yA rAta meM prANiyoM ko pIr3A denA kAla prANAtipAta
hai  /  bhAva prANAtipAta isa prakAra hai-ina pahale kahe gaye prANiyoM ke hAtha
paira bAMdhakara athavA anya kisI prakAra se pIr3A denA isake antargata AtA hai
/  apane hAtha paira aura deha ko saMyata rakhate hue ina prANiyoM kI hiMsA
nahIM karanI cAhiye  /  yahAM Aye hue 'ca' zabda se sUcita hotA hai ki
ucchavAsa, ni:zvAsa, kAsa-khAMsI kSuta-chIMka, vAtanisarga-adho vAyu kA
nissaraNa tathA mAnasika, vAcika evaM zArIrika karma ina sabameM-sarvatra
saMyata hote hue bhAva samAdhi kA anupAlana karanA caahiye| dUsaroM dvArA
adatta-nahIM diye padArtha ko grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  yaha tRtIya vrata
kA upanyAsa-upadeza hai  /  yahAM adattAdAna ke niSedha se prasaMgataH parigraha
kA bhI niSedha ho jAtA hai  /  aparigrahIta bhAva-parigraha kiye binA kisI bhI
vastu kA Asevana nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  ataH yahAM parigraha ke niSedha ke
kAraNa abrahmacarya kA niSedha bhI prasaMgataH ho jAtA hai  /  samasta vratoM ke
samyak paripAlana ke upadeza ke kAraNa asat bhASaNa kA bhI yahAM sahaja hI
niSedha ho jAtA hai| suyakkhAya dhamme vitigicchatiNNe, lADhe care Ayatule
payAsu  /  AyaM na kujjA iha jIviyaTThI, cayaM na kujjA sutavassi bhikkhU  // 3
//  chAyA - svAkhyAtadharmA vicikitsAtIrNaH, lADhazcaredAtmatulyaH prajAsu  /
_AyaM na kuryyAdiha jIvitArthI, cayaM na kuryAt sutapasvI bhikSuH  //  anuvAda -
svAkhyAta dharmA-zruta cAritra mUlaka dharma kA sundara rUpa meM AkhyAta karane
vAlA sarvajJa prarUpita dharma meM vicikitsA-zaMkA rahita acitta, eSaNIya AhAra
dvArA deha nirvAhaka sutapasvI-uttama tapazcaraNa zIla sAdhu samasta prANiyoM ko
Atmatulya samajhatA huA saMyama kA paripAlana kare  /  saMyata jIvana pUrvaka
cirakAla paryanta jIne kI icchA liye vaha AzravoM kA sevana na kare  /  anAgata
hetu saMcaya-dhana dhAnyAdi kA saMgraha na kare  /  TIkA-
jJAnadarzanasamAdhimadhikRtyAha-suSTvAkhyAtaH zrutacAritrAkhyo dharmo yena
sAdhunA'sau svAkhyAtadharmA, anena jJAnasamAdhirukto bhavati, na hi
viziSTaparijJAnamantareNa svAkhyAtadharmatvamupapadyata iti bhAvaH tathA
vicikitsAcittaviplutirvidvajjugupsA vA tAM '[vi] tIrNaH'-atikrAntaH 'tadeva ca
niHzaMka yajjinaiH pravedita mityevaM niH zaMkatayA na kvaciccitaviplutiM
vidhatta ityanena darzanasamAdhiHpratipAdito bhavati, yena kena
citprAsukrAhAropakaraNAdigatena vidhinA''tmAnaM yApayatipAlayatIti lADhaH, sa
evambhUtaH saMyamAnuSThAnaM 'caredU' anutiSTet, tathA prajAyanta iti
prajA:-pRthivyAdayo jantavastAsvAtmatulyaH, AtmavatsarvaprANinaH pazyatItyartha,
evambhUta eva bhAvasAdhurbhavatIti, tathA coktam - "jaha mama Na piyaM dukkhaM,
pANiya emeva savvajIvANaM  /  Na haNai Na haNAvei ya samamaNaI teNa so samaNo
// 1 // " chayA - yathA mama na priyaM duHkhaM jJAtvA evameva sarvasattvAnAM  /
na hanti, na ghAtayati ca samaMmanyate te na sa shrmnnH||1|| yathA ca
mamA''kruzyamAnasyAbhyAkhyAyamAnasya vA duHkhamutpadyate evamanyeSAmapItyevaM
matvA prajAsvAtmasamo bhavati, tathA ihAsaMyamajIvitArthI prabhUtaM kAlaM
sukhena jIviSyAmItyetadadhyavasAyI vA 'Aya' karmAzravalakSaNaM na kuryAt tathA
'cayam' upacayamAhAropakaraNAderdhanadhAnyadvipada catuSpadAdervA
parigrahalakSaNaM saMcayamAyatyartha suSThu tapasvI sutapasvI
vikRSTataponiSTaptadeho bhikSurna kuryAditi  // 3 //  446

Page #475 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Commentary  A **Sadhu** is known as **Swakhyatadharma** who teaches the true
Dharma, which is the right knowledge (Shruta-Samyakgyan) and right conduct
(Charitra-Samyakachar), in a proper and well-understood manner. This epithet
reveals the Sadhu's knowledge and Samadhi, because without specific knowledge,
one cannot present Dharma beautifully.  **Vichkikitsa** is the wavering of the
mind, mental doubts, or the disgust and condemnation of the learned. Overcoming
this, one should believe that whatever the **Jineshwara Deva** has said is true,
and with this faith, one should remain free from doubt in the mind. One should
practice restraint, living only on what is available and necessary, whether it
be food or other required materials.  Those who are born again and again are
called **Praja**. Earth and other beings are included in Praja. One who
considers them equal to their own soul is called a **Bhavasadhu**. It is said
that just as I do not find suffering pleasant or good, in the same way, it is
not pleasant for all beings. Knowing this, one who does not harm any beings,
does not cause others to harm them, and treats them with equality, is called a
**Shraman**. He experiences that just as I feel pain when someone is angry with
me, scares me, or blames me, in the same way, other beings also feel pain.
Understanding this, the Sadhu considers all Praja-beings as equal to himself.
The Sadhu should not become attached to the life of unrestrained indulgence in
this world. He should not accumulate karma by desiring to live a long time with
pleasure, or by developing such a determination or outcome in his mind. A
**Sutapasvi**, a Sadhu with excellent austerity or one who is burning with
intense austerity, should not accumulate wealth, grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, or
other forms of wealth.  ## Sri Samadhyayanam  The Sutrakar, acknowledging
knowledge, vision, and Samadhi, says:  ## Chhaya  "All senses are withdrawn from
the Praja, the Muni should walk free from all bonds. See, even individual
beings, afflicted by suffering, are tormented."  ## Translation  The Muni should
control all his senses in relation to the Praja - women. He should practice pure
restraint, being free from all bonds, both external and internal. He should see
that in this world, individual beings are afflicted by suffering and tormented.
## Commentary  "All those senses, including touch, etc., are withdrawn from
them. The meaning is that he is **Samvritendriya** (with senses controlled) and
**Jiteindriya** (with senses conquered). Why? Because in women, there are five
types of objects, starting with sound. It is said:  "The beautiful words of the
charming women, the pleasant ones, the ones that are seen, the beautiful
pictures, the beautiful women, the taste, the smell, and the kisses."
Therefore, since there are five sense objects in women, one should be
**Samvritendriya** (with senses controlled) in relation to them. This is what is
shown by the word "**Charet**" - he should practice restraint. "**Muni**" - the
Sadhu. "**Sarvata:**" - free from attachment, both external and internal,
especially free from attachment. The Muni is **Nisanka** (without attachment)
and **Nishkinchan** (without possessions). Being free from all bonds, he should
"**Pashya**" - see, observe, in individual bodies, such as earth, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 TIkArtha jo zruta-samyagjJAna tathA cAritra - samyak AcAra rUpa dharma kA
suSThu rIti se bhalIbhAMti upadeza karatA hai vaha sAdhu svAkhyAtadharmA kahA
jAtA hai  /  isa vizeSaNa dvArA sAdhu kI jJAna samAdhi prakaTa kI gaI hai kyoMki
viziSTa parijJAna ke binA koI dharma ko suMdara rUpa meM pratipAdita nahIM kara
sakatA  /  citta vipluti - caitasika zaMkA yA vidvAnoM kI jugupsA - nindA ko
vicikitsA kahA jAtA hai  /  usako atikrAnta kara jinezvara deva ne jo kahA hai,
vahI satya hai, yaha mAnakara, vizvAsa kara citta meM saMdeha rahita hotA huA
tathA jo kucha prAsukaaiSaNIya AhAra yA anya apekSita sAmagrI prApta ho usI se
apanA nirvAha karatA huA saMyama kA paripAlana kre| jo bAra - bAra janma lete
haiM, unheM prajA kahA jAtA hai| pRthvI Adi prANI prajA ke antargata haiN| inako
jo apanI AtmA ke tulya mAnatA hai vaha bhAva sAdhu kahA jAtA hai| kahA gayA hai
ki jaise mujhe duHkha prItikara nahIM lagatAacchA nahIM lagatA isI taraha vaha
sabhI prANiyoM ke liye prItikara nahIM hai, yaha jAnakara jo prANiyoM kA hanana
nahIM karatA auroM se unakA hanana nahIM karavAtA, unako samAnabhAva se mAnatA
hai, dekhatA hai vaha zramaNa kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha yaha anubhava karatA hai ki
jaise mujha para koI Akroza karatA hai, mujhe DarAtA hai, mujha para kalaMkadoSa
lagAtA hai to mujhe duHkha hotA hai usI prakAra anya prANiyoM ko bhI duHkha hotA
hai, yaha mAnatA huA - samajhatA huA sAdhu samasta prajA - prANiyoM ko Atmasama-
apane samAna samajhatA hai| sAdhu isa loka meM asaMyamamaya jIvana kA arthI-
icchuka na bane  /  athavA maiM cirakAla taka sukha ke sAtha jIvita rahUM, mana
meM aisA adhyavasAya - bhAva yA pariNAma lAkara karmAzrava kA sevana na kare-
karma na bAMdhe  /  sutapasvI - uttama tapazcaraNa zIla athavA kaThora tapa se
saMtapta yukta sAdhu dhana, dhAnya, dvipada, catuSpada Adi dhana kA saMcaya na
kare  /  - zrI samAdhyayanaM sUtrakAra jJAnadarzana tathA samAdhi ko adhikRta
kara kahate haiN| - savviMdiyAbhinivvuDe payAsu, care muNI suvvato vippabhukke
/  pAsAhi pANe ya puDhovi satte, dukkheNa aTTe paritapyamANe  // 4 //  chAyA -
sarvendriyAbhinirvRtaH prajAsu, carenmuniH sarvatovipramuktaH  /  pazya prANazca
pRthagapi sattvAn, duHkhenArttAn paritapyamAnAn  //  anuvAda - muni prajA -
striyoM ke saMdarbha meM apanI samasta indriyoM ko niyantrita rakhe  /  saba
prakAra ke baMdhanoM se vipramukta-unmukta hotA huA zuddha saMyama kA paripAlana
kare, isa saMsAra meM pRthak-pRthak prANI duHkhoM se A hai - paritapta hai, yaha
dekhe  /  - TIkA kiJcAnyat-sarvANi ca tAni indriyANi ca sparzanAdIni
tairabhinirvRtaH saMvRtendriyo jitendriya ityarthaH, kka ? 'prajAsu' strISu tAsu
hi paMcaprakArA api zabdAdayo viSayo vidyante, tathA coktam "kalAni vAkyAni
vilAsinInAM gatAni ramyANyavalokitAni  /  ratAni citrANi ca sundarI'NAM raso'pi
gaMdho'pi ca cumbanAni  // 1 // " tadevaM strISu paJcendriya
viSayasambhavAttadviSaye saMvRtasarvendriyeNa bhAvyam, etadeva darzayati- 'caret
' saMyamAnuSThAnamanutiSThet 'muniH' sAdhuH 'sarvata: ' sabAhyAyabhyantarAt
saGgAdvizeSeNa pramuktau vipramukto nisaGgo muniH niSkiJcanazcetyarthaH, sa
evambhUtaH sarvabandhanavipramuktaH san 'pazya' avalokaya pRthak pRthak
pRthivyAdiSu kAyeSu 447

Page #476 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra Observe
the living beings (sattva) that are subtle, gross, complete, and incomplete,
different in nature, who have come to oneness from the word 'api' (also)
indicating the vegetable kingdom. What are they like? - They are afflicted by
suffering, arising from the arising of unpleasant feelings, or they torment
(duhkham) with the eight types of karma. They are being cooked (paripacyamanah)
in the cauldron of the cycle of rebirth with the fuel of their own actions, or
they are distressed (artaddhyanopagatan) by their wrongly directed senses,
tormented by their mind, speech, and body.  In these (beings), the ignorant one
(bala), while committing, revolves in the evil karmas. Committing evil deeds
excessively, he also makes others commit evil deeds.  Explanation: The ignorant
being, through acts of violence, oppression, and harassment towards the earth-
bodied and other living beings, extensively commits evil deeds. And by
instigating others, he also causes them to commit evil deeds. Thus, he
experiences suffering both here and hereafter due to the ripening of those evil
karmas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram sUkSmabAdara paryAptakAparyAptaka bhedabhinnAn 'satvAn'
prANinaH apizabdAdvanaspatikAye sAdhAraNa zarIriNo'nantAnapyekatvamAgatAn pazya,
kiMbhUtAn ? - duHkhena asAtavedanIyodayarUpeNa duHkhayatIti vA duHkhamaSTa
prakAraM karma tenArttAn - pIDitAn pari-samantAtsaMsArakaTAhodare
svakRtenendhanena 'paripacyamAnAn'
yadivAduSpraNihitendriyAnArtadhyAnopagatAnmanovAkkAyaiH paritapyamAnAn pazyeti
sambandho laganIya iti  // 4 //  TIkArtha - sAdhu sparzana Adi sabhI indriyoM ko
apane adhIna kara niyantrita kara jitendriya bane  /  kinake saMdarbha meM ?
inake uttara meM kahate haiM ki striyoM ke saMdarbha meM, pAMcoM hI zabdAdi
viSaya vidyamAna hai  /  kahA~ hai? striyoM ke vAkya zravaNa karane meM bar3e
madhura-priya lagate haiN| unakA calanA, dekhanA ramya pratIta hote haiM, unake
sAtha ramaNa karanA Azcarya janaka sukhaprada hai unake mukhAdi kA cumbana
rasamaya evaM sugandhamaya hai  /  isa prakAra striyoM meM pAMcoM hI viSaya hone
ke kAraNa sAdhu ko unake saMdarbha meM apanI sabhI indriyoM ko saMvRta -
niyantrita yA apane adhIna rakhanA cAhiye  /  isI kA digdarzana karAte hue
kahate haiM- sAdhu bAhya aura Abhyantara donoM hI prakAra ke saMga-saMsarga se
vipramukta vizeSa rUpa se mukta, pRthak, niHsaMga, niSkiMcana-akiMcana muni
saMyama kA anusaraNa kare  /  vaha pRthvI Adi kAyoM meM pRthak pRthak rahane
vAle sUkSma, sthUla, paryApta, aparyApta bhedayukta prANiyoM tathA api zabda se,
sUcita vanaspati kAyika sAdhAraNa zarIrayukta prANiyoM ko dekhe  /  ve prANI
kaise haiM ? isake uttara meM kahate haiM-ve asAta vedanIya ke udaya ke
pariNAmasvarUpa duHkhita haiN| ATha prakAra ke karmoM se ArtapIDita haiM  /  ve
saMsAra rUpI kar3Aha meM apane dvArA Acarita karmarUpI IMdhana se pakAye jA rahe
haiM athavA duSpraNihIta iMdriyayukta haiM- unakI indriyAM duSkRtyoM meM
saMlagna hai  /  ve ArttadhyAna se Akula haiN| mAnasika, vAcika evaM kAyika
dRSTi se paritApa kA anubhava karate haiM  /  yaha dekhe | etesu bAle ya
pakuvvamANe, AvaTTatI kammasu pAvasu  /  ativAyato kIriti pAvakammaM, niuMjamANe
u karei kammaM  // 5 //  chAyA eteSu bAlazca prakurvANaH, Avartate karmasu
pApakeSu  /  atipAtataH kriyate pApakarma, niyojayaMstu karoti karma  //
anuvAda ajJa jIva pRthvI kAya Adi prANiyoM ko pIr3A detA huA pApa karma karatA
hai  /  una pApa karmoM kA phala bhogane hetu vaha punaH punaH pRthvIkAya Adi
prANiyoM meM utpanna hotA hai| khuda jIvoM kI hiMsA karane aura dUsaroM dvArA
vaisA karAne se pApa baMdha hotA hai  /  TIkA - 'eteSu' prAGgirdiSTeSu pratyeka
sAdhAraNa prakAreSUpatApa kriyayA bAlavat 'bAla: ' ajJazcazabdAditaro'pi
saGghaTTanaparitApanApadrAvaNAdikenAnuSThAnena 'pApAni karmANi prakarSeNa
kurvANasteSu ca pApeSu karmasu satsu eteSu vA pRthivyAdijantuSu gataH
saMstenaiva saMghaTTanAdinA prakAreNAnantazaH 'Avartyate' pIDyate
duHkhabhAgbhavatIti, pAThAntaraM vA' evaM tu bAle' evamityupapradarzane yathA
cauraH pAradAriko vA asadanuSThAnena hastapAdacchedAn
bandhavadhAdIMzcehAvApnotyevaM sAmAnya dRSTenAnumAnenAnyo'pi pApakarmakArI
ihAmutra ca duHkhabhAgbhavati, 'AuTTati' tti kvacitpAThaH, tatrAzubhAn
karmavipAkAn dRSTvA zrutvA jJAtvA vA tebhyo'sadanuSThAnebhya 'AuTTati' tti
nivartate, kAni punaH pApasthAnAni yebhyaH punaH pravartate nivartate vA
ityAzaGkaya tAni darzayati-'atipAtata: ' prANAtipAtata:
prANavyaparopaNAddhetostaccAzubhaM 448

Page #477 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The act of Samadhyayana, Jnanaavaran, etc. is performed, and by employing
servants and others in acts of violence, etc., one commits sinful karma. By
speaking falsely, etc., and causing others to do so, one accumulates sinful
karma. ||5||  Commentary: The ignorant person who inflicts pain on any other
person, indicated by the word 'cha', on each and every one of the two types of
plant bodies, namely, the specific and the general, by breaking, cutting,
burning, melting, dissolving, and by causing suffering in any other way,
indicated by the word 'aādi', earns great sin. He is born again and again in
these beings, such as earth, etc., to experience the fruits of his sin, and is
tormented and suffers for an infinite period of time. Here, the reading 'evam tu
bale' is also found. The word 'evam' used here is for indicating demonstration
or example. Just as a thief or a man who goes to another's wife commits a
corrupt act and suffers in this world in the form of having his hands and feet
cut off, being bound, and being killed, in the same way, other men who commit
sinful acts also suffer in this world and the next. This is proved by general
observation and inference. In some places, the reading 'auttati' is found. Its
meaning is that a wise man, seeing, hearing, or knowing the consequences of evil
deeds, refrains from them.  What are the bases of sin? In which do beings
engage? And from which do they refrain? In answer to this, it is said: By
killing living beings, a man binds himself to the evil karma of Jnanaavaran,
etc. And he who employs his servants and other men in acts of violence, engages
in sinful conduct. The word 'tu' used here indicates that he speaks falsely,
etc., and causes others to do so. By doing so, he accumulates sin.  "Even those
who live by begging, etc., commit sin. The Tirthankaras have described the state
of complete absorption in the mind. A man who is wise, stable in his mind, and
devoted to meditation, remains free from violence." ||6||  Commentary: Another
point: He who lives by begging, etc., out of compassion for the poor, is called
a 'dīna-karuṇāspada'. Even such a person commits sinful karma. Another reading
is 'ādinabhojyapi pāpam karoti'. It is said:  "Even a beggar who is wicked does
not escape hell."  A beggar, even if he is wicked, does not escape hell. He may
sometimes get a good meal, but due to his ignorance, he may become angry and
fall into the seventh hell. For example, a beggar who lives by begging may be
going out of the city of Rajagriha to attend a festival, and due to fate, he may
fall from a mountain and be killed. Thus, even a beggar, like a 'piṇḍolaka',
etc., commits sinful karma. Having understood this, the Tirthankaras have
described the state of complete absorption in the mind, which is the highest
state of meditation, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samAdhyayana jJAnAvaraNAdikaM karma 'kriyate' samAdIyate, tathA parAMzca
bhRtyAdIn prANAtipAtAdau 'niyojayan' vyApArayan pApaM karma karoti,
tuzabdAnmRSAvAdAdikaM ca kurvan kArayaMzca pApakaM karma samuccinotIti  // 5 //
TIkArtha - pahale banaspati kAya ke pratyeka tathA sAdhAraNa jo do bheda
batalAye gaye haiM unako jo ajJa puruSa 'ca' zabda se sUcita koI anya puruSa
pIr3A detA hai arthAt vaha inheM toDatA hai, kATatA hai, paritapta karatA hai,
dravita karatA hai, galAtA hai evaM 'Adi' zabda se vaha sUcita hai ki kisI anya
prakAra se kaSTa detA hai, vaha puruSa atyanta pApArjana karatA hai  /  vaha
apane pApa ke phala bhoga hetu inhIM pRthvI Adi prANiyoM meM punaH punaH janma
letA hai tathA ananta kAla paryanta pIDita kiyA jAtA hai, kaSTabhAgI hotA hai  /
yahAM 'evaM tu bAle' aisA pAThAntara bhI prApta hotA hai  /  yahAM prayukta
'evaM' zabda upadarzana yA udAharaNa sUcita karane hetu hai  /  jaise cora yA
parastrIgAmI puruSa dUSita karma kara isa loka meM hastapAda chedana-hAtha paira
kATA jAnA tathA baMdha-vadha kiyA jAnA Adi ke rUpa meM yAtanA prApta karatA hai
isI prakAra anya pApa karmakArI puruSa bhI isa loka meM aura paraloka meM
duHkhoM ke bhAgI banate haiM  /  yaha sAmAnyatodRSTa anumAna dvArA sAbita hotA
hai  /  kahIM 'AuTTati' pATha prApta hotA hai  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki
vivekI puruSa azubha karmoM ke vipAka-phala dekhakara zravaNa kara yA jJAta kara
karmoM se nivRtta ho jAtA hai  /  ve kauna kauna se pApa ke adhiSThAna haiM ?
jinameM prANI pravRtta hote haiM ? aura jinase nivRtta hote haiM? isake uttara
meM kahate haiM-puruSa prANiyoM ke prANoM kA atipAta-prANavpaparopaNa karane se
jJAnAvaraNIya Adi azubha karmoM kA baMdha karatA hai tathA jo apane bhRtya Adi
anya puruSoM ko prANAtipAta hiMsA karane meM niyojita karatA hai, vyAvRta karatA
hai, vaha pApa kA AcaraNa karatA hai  /  yahAM Ae 'tu' zabda se sUcita hai ki
vaha asatya bhASaNa Adi karatA hai tathA auroM se vaisA karavAtA hai  /  yoM
karatA huA vaha pApa saMcita karatA hai| AdINavittIva kareti pAvaM, maMtA u
egaMta samAhimAhu  / ' buddhe samAhIya rate vivege, pANAtivAtA virate ThiyappA
// 6 //  chAyA - AdInavRttirapi karoti pApaM, matvAtvekAntasamAdhi mAhuH  /
baddhaH samAdhau ca rato viveke, prANAtipAtAda virata: sthitAtmA  //  anuvAda -
jo puruSa dInatA dikhalAkara bhIkha Adi dvArA gujArA karane vAle kI jyoM apanI
AjIvikA calAtA hai, vaha bhI pApa karatA hai  /  yaha mAnakara tIrthaMkaroM ne
bhAva samAdhi kA nirUpaNa-pratipAdana kiyA  /  buddhajJAnayukta vivekazIla
sthiracetA puruSa samAdhi meM abhirata hotA huA hiMsA se nivRtta rhe| TIkA -
kiJcAnyat-A-samantAddInA-karuNAspadA vRttiH-anuSThAnaM yasya kRpaNavanIpakAdeH
sa bhavatyAdInavRttiH, evambhUto'pi pApaM karma karoti, pAThAntaraM vA
AdInabhojyapi pApaM karotIti, uktaM ca "piMDolageva dussIle, NaragAo Na muccai"
chAyA - piNDAvalagako'pi duHzIlo narakAnna mucyate, sa
kadAcicchobhanamAhAramalabhamAno'jJatvAdAta raudradhyAnopagato'dhaH
saptamyAmapyutpadyeta, tadyathA-asAveva rAjagRhanagarotsavanirgatajanasamUha
vaibhAra giri zilApAta nodyataHsa daivAtsvayaM patitaH piNDopajIvIti,
tadevamAdInabhojyapi piNDolakAdivajjanaH pApaM karma karotItyevaM 'matvA'
avadhArya ekAntenAtyantena ca yo bhAvarUpo jJAnAdisamAdhistamAhuH 449)

Page #478 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra, for the liberation from the cycle of birth and
death, the Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, etc., are the embodiments of the Dravya
Samadhis, which are producers of pleasure from touch, etc., are Anekantika and
Anatyantika, and ultimately produce Samadhi. Thus it is said: "Although the
objects of the mind, which are to be avoided, are pleasing, they are like the
Kimpaka fruit, which is pleasant at first, but later becomes very difficult to
digest." ||1|| And so on. Thus, the 'Buddha', who has realized the truth, is
devoted to the four types of knowledge, etc., and is established in 'Viveka', or
is devoted to the Dravya Bhava, which is the abandonment of food, utensils, and
passions. Such a person is free from the ten types of destruction of life, etc.
Therefore, he is established in the right path, the soul of whom is established
in the 'Thiyacci', or is endowed with a pure, stable, and radiant Leshya. ||6||
Commentary: One who engages in a livelihood that is compassionate and pitiful is
called a beggar, etc., and he also commits sin. In some places, the reading
'Adin Bhoji' is found. Its meaning is that a man who earns his livelihood with
great difficulty also commits sin. It is said that a man who wanders about for a
piece of bread, who is wicked and immoral, does not escape hell. Such an
ignorant creature, if he does not get a good, pleasant meal, may become
distressed and angry, and may even be born in the seventh hell. For example, in
the city of Rajagriha, a monk, not getting alms from the people who had come out
for a festival, became angry with them and was about to climb Mount Vaibhar to
throw stones at them. He started climbing, but by chance his foot slipped. He
fell and died. Therefore, one who earns his livelihood with the sorrow of a
beggar also commits sin. Knowing this, the Tirthankaras and Ganadharas, etc.,
have preached and expounded the knowledge, etc., in the form of Bhava Samadhi,
which is liberating from the ocean of the world, which is Anekantika and
Anatyantika, and which is conducive to the welfare of the soul. Dravya Samadhi
produces physical pleasures from touch, etc., but it is not Anekantika or
Anatyantika. The pleasures obtained from them are uncertain and short-lived, and
ultimately they produce Asamadhi and suffering. It is said: Just as the Kimpaka
fruit is very pleasing to eat, but later proves to be very painful. In the same
way, worldly enjoyments also please the mind when they are enjoyed, but later
become very painful. Therefore, a wise and knowledgeable man should remain
devoted to the four types of knowledge, etc., Samadhi. Or he should abandon
food, utensils, and passions, and engage in Dravya Bhava Samadhi. By doing so,
he will be free from the ten types of destruction of life, etc., and will keep
his soul firmly established in the right path, the path of right practice. Or,
according to the reading 'Thiyacci', the saint should be endowed with a pure,
stable, and radiant Leshya. All the world should be seen with equanimity, one
should not do anything that is pleasant or unpleasant to anyone. ||7||
Commentary: The saint should see the whole world with equanimity, he should not
do anything that is pleasant or unpleasant to anyone. Or he should not consider
anyone to be pleasant or unpleasant. There are many who, having risen up, having
taken vows,  450

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram saMsArottaraNAya tIrthaMkaragaNadharAdayaH
dravyasamAdhayo hi sparzAdisukhotpAdakA anekAntikA anAtyantikAzca bhavanti ante
cAvazyama samAdhimutpAdayanti, tathA coktam - "yadyapi niSevyamANA manasaH
parituSTikArakA vissyaaH| kimpAkaphalAdanavadbhavanti pazcAdatidurantAH  // 1 //
" ityAdi, tadevaM 'buddhaH' avagata tattvaH sa caturvidhe'pi jJAnAdike rato-
vyavasthito 'viveke vA' AhAropa karaNakaSAya
parityAgarUpedravyabhAvAtmakerataHsannevaMbhUtazcasyAdityAha-
pramAnAMdazaprakArANAmapyatipAto-vinAzastasmAdvirataH sthitaH samyagmArgeSu AtmA
yasya saH pAThAntaraM vA 'Thiyacci' tti sthitA zuddhasvabhAvAtmanA arciH-lezyA
yasya sa bhavati sthitArciH-suvizuddhasthiralezya ityarthaH  // 6 //  TIkArtha -
jo karuNAspada-dayanIya vRtti-AjIvikA karatA hai vaha kaMgalA-bhikhArI Adi
AdInavRtti kahA jAtA hai vaha bhI pApa kA AcaraNa karatA hai  /  kahIM 'AdIna
bhojI' pATha prApta hotA hai  /  usakA tAtparya yaha hai ki jo puruSa bar3I
kaThinAI se peTa pAlatA hai vaha bhI pApa karatA hai  /  kahA hai-roTI ke
Tukar3e ke liye bhaTakatA huA dazIla-durAcaraNa yukta puruSa naraka se
nahIM.chuTa pAtA  /  vaha ajJa prANI kabhI zobhana-uttama, priya AhAra na milane
se Arta evaM raudra dhyAna kara sAtavIM naraka bhUmi meM bhI paidA ho sakatA hai
/  udAharaNArtha-rAjagRha nagara meM eka utsava ke avasara para bAhara nikale
hue logoM se bhikSA na milane para una para kruddha hokara eka bhikSu una para
zilA girAne hetu vaibhAra parvata para car3hane ko udyata huA-car3hane lagA
kintu saMyoga se usakA paira phisala gyaa| vaha gira gayA aura mara gayA  /
ataH jo dInatApUrvaka bhikhArI kI jyoM du:kha se peTa pAlatA hai vaha bhI
duSkarma karatA hai  /  yaha jAnakara tIrthaMkara tathA gaNadhara Adi
mahAparuSoM ne saMsAra sAgara se pAra utarane ke liye bhAva rUpa jJAnAdi samAdhi
kA AkhyAna kiyA-pratipAdana kiyA jo ekAntika aura Atyantika rUpa meM
AtmakalyANakArI hai  /  dravya samAdhi sparza gata bhautika sukhoM ko utpanna
karatI hai kintu vaha ekAntika va Atyantika nahIM hai - unase prApta sukha
anizcita evaM svalpakAlika hote haiM, anta meM ve asamAdhi-duHkha paidA karate
haiM  /  kahA hai - jaise kiMpAka nAmaka phala khAte samaya bar3A hI
parituSTikAraka hotA hai kintu bAda meM atyanta dukha janaka siddha hotA hai  /
usI prakAra sAMsArika bhoga bhI sevana karate samaya mana ko parituSTa karate
haiM kintu bAda meM atyanta duHkhotpAdaka hote haiM  /  ataH tatvajJa-jJAnI
puruSa caturvidha jJAnAdi samAdhi meM rata-avasthita rhe| athavA AhAra upakaraNa
kaSAya kA parityAga kara dravya-bhAvAtmaka samAdhi meM saMlagna rahe  /  aisA
kara vaha dasa vidha prANa vinAza se-hiMsA se virata rahe  /  AtmA ko samyak
mArga meM samyak sAdhanA patha para susthira banAye rakhe  /  athavA 'Dhiyacci'
pAThAntara ke anusAra sAdhu vizuddha sthira lezyAyukta rahe  /  savvaM jagaM tU
samayANupehI, piyamappiyaM kassai No karejA  /  uTThAya dINo ya puNo visanno,
saMpUyaNaM cevasiloya kAmI  // 7 //  chAyA - sarvaM jagattu samatAnuprekSI,
priyamapriyaM kasyacinna kuryAt  /  utthAya dInazca punarviSaNNaH saMpUjana
Jcaiva zloka kAmI  //  anuvAda - sAdhu samagra jagata samatA se-samAna bhAva se
dekhe vaha kisI kA na priya kare aura na apriya hI athavA na kisI ko priya
samajhe aura na apriya hI  /  kaI aise hote haiM jo utthita hokara-pravrajyA
dhAraNa 450

Page #479 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Jain term "Samadhyayan" refers to the practice of deep meditation and
contemplation. When faced with hardships and obstacles, some individuals become
disheartened and weak, abandoning their virtuous life and falling into sin. Many
become obsessed with receiving praise, respect, and recognition through verses
and accolades.  **Commentary:**  The term "Jagat" refers to the entire universe,
encompassing all living beings. A true Jain practitioner should view all beings
with equanimity, without any attachment or aversion. They should not consider
anyone as an object of love or hate. As the saying goes, "There is no one who is
hateful or lovable among all living beings." Similarly, a Jain should not engage
in actions that bring pleasure or displeasure to others. They should live a life
free from attachments and desires.  However, some individuals, despite attaining
a state of deep meditation, may become discouraged by hardships and obstacles.
They may succumb to despair and seek solace in worldly pleasures. Others may
become attached to material possessions and seek recognition through praise and
respect. Some may even resort to begging for clothes and other necessities.
Others may pursue knowledge in subjects like grammar, mathematics, astrology,
and omens, seeking fame and recognition.  **Verse 8:**  The verse describes
individuals who are driven by desires and attachments. It speaks of those who
are obsessed with food and seek it out relentlessly, those who are attached to
women and seek to acquire wealth and possessions to attract them, and those who
are attached to children and seek to accumulate wealth for their sake. All these
actions are considered to be sinful and lead to further suffering.
**Commentary:**  The term "Ahadakarma" refers to the practice of performing
actions with the intention of receiving something in return. The verse
criticizes those who are driven by desires and seek to acquire things for their
own benefit. It also criticizes those who are attached to worldly pleasures and
seek to accumulate wealth and possessions. These actions are considered to be
harmful and lead to suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samAdhyayanaM kara parisahoM aura upasargoM ke Ane para dIna durbala ho
jAte haiM aura sAdhu jIvana kA tyAga kara patita ho jAte haiM  /  kaI apane
saMpUjana-satkAra evaM zloka-yaza ke AkAMkSI bana jAte haiM  /  TIkA -
kiJca-'sarva' carAcaraM 'jagata' prANisamUhaM samatayA prekSituM zIlamasya sa
samatAnuprekSI samatApazya ko vA, na kazcitpriyo nApi dveSya ityarthaH, tathA
coktam-"natthi ya si koi visso pio va savvesu ceva jIvesu"- chAyA - nAsti tasya
ko'pi dveSyaH priyazca sarveSu caiva jIveSu-tathA "jaha mama Na piyaM dukkhami'
tyAdi, samatopetazca na kasyacitpriyamapriyaM vA kuryAnniHsaGgatayA vihared, eM
hi sampUrNabhAva samAdhiyukto bhavati, kazcitu bhAva samAdhinA
samyagutthAnenotthAya parISahopasargastarjito dInabhAvamupagamya punarviSaNNo
bhavati viSayArthI vA kazcidgArhasthyamapyavalambate rasasAtA gauravagRddho vA
pUjAsatkArAbhilASI syAt tadabhAve dInaH san pArzvasthAdibhAvena vA viSaNNo
bhavati, kazcittathA sampUjanaM vastrapAtrAdinA prArthayet 'zlokakAmI ca'
zlAghAbhilASI ca vyAkaraNa gaNita jyotiSa nimitta zAstrANyadhIte kazciditi  // 7
//  TIkArtha - sAdhu sabhI cara-jaMgama, acara-sthAvara prANI samUhoM ko
samatApUrvaka dekhe  /  kisI ko priyaprItijanaka, tathA apriya-aprItijanaka na
mAne  /  kahA hai-samagra prANiyoM meM sAdhu kA na koI dveSya-dveSa karane yogya
yA dveSa kA pAtra hai aura na koI priya-prItipAtra hai  /  ataeva sAdhu yaha
ciMtana karatA hai ki jaise mujhe duHkha priya nahIM lagatA usI prakAra dUsare
prANiyoM ko bhI vaha priya nahIM hai  /  yoM samabhAva se samanvita hokara vaha
na kisI kA priya kare aura na apriya hI  /  varan niHsaMga-Asakti vivarjita
hokara viharaNa kare  /  jo sAdhu isa prakAra karatA hai vaha sarvathA bhAva
samAdhiyukta hotA hai kintu koI puruSa bhAva samAdhi se samyak samutthitutsAhita
hokara-dIkSita hokara bhI pariSahoM aura upasargoM se tarjita-AkrAnta, vyathita
ho jAtA hai, dainya bhAva apanA letA hai  /  viSanna-viSAdayukta bana jAtA hai
/  koI viSayArthI-sAMsArika bhoga meM lolupa bana kara gRhastha bana jAtA hai
athavA rasa madhura svAdiSTa padArtha aura sukha suvidhA meM Asakta hokara pUjA-
prazasti evaM satkAra kA AkAMkSI ho jAtA hai  /  jaba vaisA nahIM milatA taba
vahI dIna-Atmabala vihIna hotA huA pArzvastha Adi ho jAtA hai  /  koI vastra
pAtra Adi kI abhyarthanA karatA hai tathA koI apanI zilAdhA-prazaMsA yA kIrti
hetu vyAkaraNa, gaNita, jyotiSa tathA nimitta zAstra kA adhyayana karatA hai  /
AhAkaDaM ceva nikAmamINe, niyAmacArI ya visaNNamesI  /  itthIsu satte ya puDho
ya bAle, pariggahaM ceva pakuvvamANe  // 8 //  chAyA - AdhAkRtaJcaiva
nikAmamINo, nikAma cArI ca viSaNNeSI  /  strISu saktazca pRthak ca bAlaH
parigrahaJcaiva prakurvANaH  //  anuvAda - jo pravrajita puruSa AdhAkarmI AhAra-
sAdhu ko uddiSTa kara banAye gaye bhojana kI AkAMkSA karatA hai  /  use lene
hetu bahuta ghUmatA phiratA hai vaha anAcaraNazIla hai  /  jo striyoM meM Asakta
hotA huA unake hAva bhAvoM meM mohita rahatA hai tathA unheM prApta karane hetu
parigraha-dhanAdi kA saMgraha karatA hai vaha apanA pApa bar3hAtA hai  /  TIkA -
kiJcAnyat-sAdhunAdhAya-uddizya kRtaM niSpAditamAdhAkarmetyarthaH,
tadevambhUtamahAropa karaNAdikaM nikAmam-atyartha yaH prArthayate sa
nikAmamINetyucyate  /  tathA 'nikAmam' atyarthaM AdhA karmAdIni tannimittaM 451)

Page #480 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation preserving Jain terms:  The person who is attached to the
Asakta (sensual pleasures) of women, who is immersed in their speech, laughter,
and bodily limbs like a child devoid of discrimination between right and wrong,
and who, due to this attachment, cannot obtain them without wealth, accumulates
sin by any means to acquire that wealth-property which is the means (for
obtaining them).   Such a person, being afflicted with sorrow in the endeavor of
self-restraint (Samyama-udyoga) of the Parshvasthavasanna-kushila (those who
have fallen from the path while living near the ascetic), indulges in the
unrighteous conduct, becomes lax in righteous conduct, and thus sinks in the
mire of the worldly existence.  The one who is driven by hatred (Vairanugiddha)
accumulates karmic matter, and upon death, he attains the difficult-to-cross
(Durgam) state of suffering (in hell, etc.). Therefore, the wise (Medhavi)
person, after carefully examining the Dharma, should practice (Chare) as a Muni
(ascetic), completely freed (Vippamukte) from all attachments.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram nimantraNAdIni vA sarati-carati tacchIlazca sa tathA,
evambhUtaH pArzvasthAvasannakuzIlAnAM saMyamodyoge viSaNNAnAM
viSaNNabhAvabheSate, sadanuSThAna viSaNNatayA saMsArapaGkAvasanno
bhavatItiyAvat, apica 'strISu' ramaNISu 'AsaktaH' adhyupapannaH pRthak pRthak
tadbhASitahasitadivvokazarIrAvayaveSviti, bAlavad 'bAla' ajJaH
sadasadvivekavikalaH, tadavasaktatayA ca nAnyathAdravyamantareNa
tatsamprAptirbhavatItyato yena kenacidupAyena tadupAyabhUtaM parigrahameva
prakarSeNa kurvANaH pApaM karma samuccinotIti  // 8 //  TIkArtha - jo AhAra-
bhojya padArtha Adi sAdhu ko udiSTa kara niSpAdita kiyA jAtA hai use AdhA karma
kahate haiM  /  usa AdhA karma-AhAra athavA upakaraNa-upayogI sAmagrI kI jo
atyadhika abhyarthanA-AkAMkSA karatA hai use nikAmamINa kahA jAtA hai  /  jo
AdhA karma AhAra Adi ke nimitta AmantraNa-AbhUta kiyA jAnAbulAyA jAnA Adi kI
atyadhika icchA liye rahatA hai vaha puruSa saMyama ke udyoga meM-pAlana meM
viSAdayukta pArzvastha avasanna Adi kuzIla anAcaraNayukta janoM ke dharma kA-
asat anuSThAna kA sevana karatA hai  /  vaha sat anuSThAna meM-saMyama ke
AcaraNa meM zithila hokara saMsAra ke kIcar3a meM phaMsa jAtA hai aura vaha
striyoM meM Asakta hotA huA unakI bolI-haMsI aura hAva bhAva tathA unake zarIra
ke aMgoM meM anurakta hokara bAlaka kI jyoM sat asat ke viveka se zUnya ho jAtA
hai  /  _dhana ke binA striyoM kI prApti nahIM hotI  /  isaliye vaha jisa kisI
prakAra se parigraha-dhana kA saMcaya karatA hai vaha puruSa vaisA karatA huA
pApa kA hI saMcaya karatA hai  /  verANugiddhe NicayaM kareti, io cute sa
ihamaTThaduggaM  /  tamhA u medhAvisamikkha dhammaM, care muNI savvau vippamukke
// 9 //  chAyA - vairAnugaddho nicayaM karoti, itazcyutaH sa ida marthadurgam  /
tasmAttu medhAvI samIkSya dharma carenmuniH sarvatovipramuktaH  //  anuvAda - jo
puruSa prANiyoM ke sAtha vaira zatrubhAva rakhatA hai vaha pApa kI vRddhi karatA
hai  /  marakara vaha naraka Adi kI yAtanAeM bhogatA hai  /  ataH medhAvI-
prajJAzIla-vivekazIla muni dharma kA samIkSaNa kara saba prakAra ke anarthoM se
pRthaka rahe  /  saMyama kA pAlana kre| TIkA - yena kena karmaNA-
paropatAparUpeNa vairamanubadhyate janmAntara zatAnuyAyi bhavati tatra gRddho
vairAnugRddhaH, pAThAntaraM vA 'AraMbhasatto' tti Arambhe sAvadyAnuSThAnarUpe
sakto-lagno niranukampo 'nicayaM' dravyopacayaM tannimittApAdita karma nicayaM
vA 'karoti' upAdatte 'sa' evambhUta upAttavairaH kRtakarmopacaya 'ita:'
asmAtsthAnAt. 'cyuto' janmAntaraM gataH san duHkhayatIti duHkhaM
narakAdiyAtanAsthAnamarthataH-paramArthato 'durga-viSamaM duruttaramupaiti, yata
evaM tattasmAt 'meghAvI' vivekI maryAdAvAn vA sampUrNasamAdhiguNaM jAnAno
'dharma' zrutacAritrAkhyaM 'samIkSya' AlocyAGgIkRtya 'muniH' sAdhuH 'sarvataH'
sabAhyAbhyantarAtsaGgAt 'vipramuktaH' apagataH saMyamAnuSThAnaM muktigamanai
kahetubhUtaM 'cared' anutiSThet stryArambhAdi saGgAdvipramukto'nizritabhAvena
vihareditiyAvat  // 9 //  TIkArtha - jina kamoM ke karane se prANiyoM ko duHkha
utpanna hotA hai aura unake sAtha saiMkar3oM janmoM taka ke liye zatru bhAva
banatA hai vaise karma meM jo Asakta hai athavA 'Arambhasatto' pAThAntara ke
anusAra jo (452

Page #481 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The one who is engaged in the act of acquiring wealth, who is devoid of
compassion and mercy, who accumulates wealth through such actions or accumulates
karma for the purpose of accumulating wealth, binds karma. Due to enmity with
beings and due to the accumulation of sin, he is expelled from this existence,
dies, and is reborn in the next life, being born in hell, etc., and suffers
terrible torment. Therefore, the wise, the discerning, the disciplined, the
virtuous, the knower of all the qualities of samadhi, should review, criticize,
contemplate, and discuss the scriptures and the dharma based on conduct, and
accept it. He should renounce external and internal attachments and practice
restraint, the only means to attain liberation. He should be completely free
from women and the beginning of violence, etc., and wander without attachment,
with an uncertain mind.  "He should not do this for the sake of life, nor should
he wander about attached. He should not speak in a way that is not conducive to
harmony, nor should he speak of greed, nor should he speak of violence." (10)
Commentary: "He should not do this for the sake of life" - the word "this"
refers to the acquisition of wealth, or the acquisition of the eight types of
karma that are acquired as a result of the acquisition of wealth. "In this
world" - meaning in this world. "A non-restrained person who lives for the sake
of enjoyment" - meaning a person who lives for the sake of enjoyment.
Alternatively, he should not accumulate wealth out of fear of livelihood.
Another reading is "He should not desire" - meaning he should not desire the
objects of the senses. "He should not be attached" - meaning he should not be
attached to his home, children, wife, etc. "He should wander" - meaning he
should be a wandering ascetic. "He should not speak in a way that is not
conducive to harmony" - meaning he should speak after listening and considering.
"He should not speak of greed" - meaning he should not be greedy for words, etc.
"He should not speak of violence" - meaning he should not speak of violence,
which is the oppression of beings. He should not speak of anything that is
harmful to himself or others. For example, he should not speak of things like
"drink, eat, enjoy, kill, cut, strike, cook," which are the causes of sin. (10)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samAdhyayanaM AraMbha-sAvadha karma meM saMlagna haiM niranukaMpa-anukampA
rahita hai, aise kArya dvArA dravya kA saMgraha karatA hai athavA dravya
saMgraha hetu karmoM kA nicaya-saMcaya karatA hai, karma bAMdhatA hai vaha
prANiyoM ke sAtha zatruttva ke kAraNa tathA pApa saMcaya ke kAraNa isa bhava se
cyuta hokara-marakara janmAMtara ko prApta hokara narka Adi meM utpanna hokara
ghora yAtanA jhelatA hai  /  isaliye medhAvI, vivekavAn, maryAdAvAna, sampUrNa
samAdhiguNa vettA sAdhu zruta tathA cAritramUlaka dharma kI samIkSA, AlocanA,
cintana, vimarza kara use svIkAra kre| vaha bAharI aura bhItarI AsaktiyoM kA
tyAga kara mokSa prApti ke ekamAtra hetu saMyama kA AcaraNa kre| vaha strI tathA
Arambha-hiMsA Adi se vipramuktaatyanta vimukta sarvathA pRthak hokara anizcita
bhAva-anAsakti pUrvaka vicaraNa kre| AyaM Na kujjA iha jIviyaTTI, asajjamANo ya
parivvaejjA  /  NisammabhAsI ya viNIya giddhiM, hiMsanniyaM vA Na kahaM karejA
// 10 //  chAyA - AyaM na kuryyAdiha jIvitArthI, asajamAnazca parivrajet  /
nizamyabhASI ca vinIya gRddhiM hiMsAnvitAM nA na kathAM kuryAt  //  anuvAda -
sAdhu isa saMsAra meM jIvitArthI cirakAla taka jIne kI icchA karate hue dravya
kA arjana na kare  /  vaha Asakti se dUra rahatA huA saMyama meM pravRtta rahe
/  vaha sunakara, vicArakara saMbhASaNa kare  /  zabdAdi viSayoM meM lolupa na
rahatA huA hiMsAnvita-hiMsAmUlaka kathA na kare vaisA - AlApa saMlApa ne kare  /
TIkA - kiJcAnyata-AgacchatItyAyo-
dravyAderlAbhastannimittApAdito'STaprakArakarmalAbho vA tam 'iha' asmin saMsAre
'asaMyama jIvitArthI' bhogapradhAnajIvitArthItyarthaH, yadivA-AjIvikAbhayAt
dravyasaJcayaM na kuryAt, pAThAntaraM vA chandaNaM kujjA ityAdi, chandaH-
prArthanA'bhilASa indriyANAM svaviSayAbhilASo vA tat na karyAt tathA
'asajamAnaH' saGgamakurvana gRhaputra-kalatrAdiSu 'parivrajet' udyukta bihArI
bhavet tathA 'gRddhiM' gAyaM viSayeSu zabdAdiSu vinIya' apanAya 'nizamya'
avagamya pUrvottareNa paryAlocya bhASako bhavet, tadeva darzayati-
hiMsayAprANyupamardarupayA anvitAM yuktAM kathAM na kuryAt, na tat brUyAt
yatparAtmanoH ubhayorvA bAdhakaM vaca iti bhAvaH tadyathA-anIta pivata khAdata
modata hata chinta praharata pacatetyAdikathAM pApopAdAnabhUtAM na kuryAditi  //
10 //  TIkArtha - jo AtA hai, milatA hai, use Aya kahA jAtA hai  /  yahA~ Aya
zabda dravya lAbha ke artha meM hai athavA dravya lAbha ke sandarbha meM jo
aSTavidha karmoM kI prApti hotI hai, use Aya kahA jAtA hai  /  sAdhu isa loka
meM saMyamamaya jIvana kI abhilASA se athavA bhogamaya jIvana jIne kI kAmanA se
Aya-dravya saMgraha na kare athavA vaha AjIvikA ke bhaya se-jIvana nirvAha kaise
ho pAyegA isa AzaMkA se dravya-dhana saMcita na kare  /  athavA 'chaMdaNaM
kujjA' pAThAntara ke anusAra sAdhu indriya viSaya ke bhoga kI kAmanA na kare  /
ghara, putra stri Adi meM anAsakta rahatA haA viharaNa kare  /  vaha zabdAdi
bhogoM se Asakti yA lolapatA miTAkara Age pIche kA ciMnata kara bhASaNa kare  /
sUtrakAra isakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM-sAdhu prANiyoM ke
upamardanavyApAdana mUlaka hiMsA se yukta kathA na kare tathA vaha aisA vacana
na bole jo apane tathA auroM ke liye duH khotpAdaka ho  /  tathA azana karo,
pAna karo, bhojana karo, pramoda karo, mAro, kATo, prahAra karo, pakAo ityAdi ke
rUpa meM pApajanaka kathA - AlApa saMlApa na kare  /  (453

Page #482 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra
states: "One should not desire the Aahaarakanda (food prepared for the ascetic),
nor should one praise those who desire it. One should perform austerities,
emaciate the body, and abandon grief without being attached to it."
Explanation: - The ascetic should not desire the Aahaarakanda, i.e., the food
prepared for him.  - One who desires such food should not be praised or
associated with. - The ascetic should perform Dhuni (austerities) to emaciate
the body for the purpose of Nirjara (shedding of karmic matter). - He should
abandon grief without being attached to it, i.e., remain equanimous.  The text
further states: "One should aspire for Ekatva (singleness, oneness), for that is
the true Pramoksha (liberation). This Pramoksha is indeed the best, for one who
is free from anger, steadfast in truth, and engaged in austerities."
Explanation: - The ascetic should aspire for the state of Ekatva, i.e., oneness,
non-attachment. - This state of Ekatva is the true Pramoksha, the highest
liberation. - One who is free from anger (Akrodhana), steadfast in truth
(Satyarata), and engaged in austerities (Tapasvi) is the best.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram AhAkaDaM vA Na NikAmaejA, NikAmayaMte ya Na sNdhvejaa|
dhuNe urAlaM aNuvehamANe, ciccA Na soyaM aNavekkhamANo  // 11 //  chAyA -
AdhAkRtaM vA na nikAmayet, nikAmayatazca na saMstuyAt  /
dhunIyAdudAramanuprekSamANaH, tyaktvA ca zokamanapekSamANaH  //  anuvAda - sAdhu
AdhA karma-auddezika AhAra kI kAmanA na kare jo vaisI kAmanA karatA hai, usake
sAtha saMstava-paricaya na kare, nirjarA hetu zarIra kA dhunana kare-tapazcaraNa
dvArA use kRza bnaaye| deha kI paravAha na karatA huA zokAtIta bana saMyama kA
paripAlana kare  /  TIkA - apica-sAdhUnAdhAya
kRtamAdhAkRtamaudezikamAdhAkarmetyarthaH, tadevambhUtamAhAra jAtaM nizcayenaiva
'na kAmayet' nAbhilaSet tathA vidhAhArAdikaM ca 'nikAmayata:'
nizcayenAbhilaSataH
pArzvasthAdIMstatsamparkadAnapratigrahasaMvAsasambhASaNAdibhiH na saMsthApayeta-
nopavRMhayet tairvA sAdhu saMstavaM na kuryAditi, kiJca-'urAlaM' ti audArikaM
zarIraM vikRSTatapasA karmanirjarAmanupekSamANo dhunIyAt' kRzaM kuryAt, yadivA
'urAlaM'ti bahujanmAntarasaJcitaM karma tadudAraM-mokSamanupekSamANo 'dhunIyAd'
apanayet, tasmiMzca tapasA dhUyamAne kRzIbhavati zarIrake kadAcit zokaH syAt taM
tyaktvA yAcitopakaraNavadanuprekSamANaH zarIrakaM dhunIyAditi sambandhaH  // 11
//  TIkArtha - jo AhAra sAdhu ke liye taiyAra kiyA jAtA hai, use AdhA karma
kahetahaiM  /  aise AhAra kI sAdhu kadApi kAmanA-abhilASA na kare  /  pArzvastha
Adi asamyaktvI matavAdI jo vaisai AhAra kI kAmanA abhipsA karate haiM, unake
sAtha dAna-denA, pratigraha-lenA, saMvAsa-sAtha rahanA, saMbhASaNa-vArtAlApa
karanA ityAdi ke rUpa meM sAdhu paricaya na kare, samparka na jor3e  /  karma
nirjaraNa hetu vikRSTa-ghora tapa dvArA zarIra kA dhunana kare, use kRza banAye
/  athavA sAdhu aneka janma janmAntaroM se saMcita karma kA mokSa prApti ke
abhiprAya se dhunana kare, nAza kare  /  tapazcaraNa dvArA karma kSaya karate
hue zarIra kI kRzatA ho jAne se sAdhu ke mana meM yadi udvega ho to vaha yAcita
upakaraNa kI taraha-mAMgakara lAI huI vastu ke samAna jAnakara udvigna na bane
varan zarIra ke maila ke samAna karmoM kA dhunana-apagama yA nAza kre|
egattameyaM abhipatthaejjA, evaM pamokkho na musaMti pAsaM  /  esappamokkho
amuse varevi, akohaNe saccarate tavassI  // 12 //  chAyA -
ekatvametadabhiprArthayedevaM pramokSo na mRSeti pazya  /  eSa pramokSo'mRSA
varo'pi, akrodhanaH satyaratastapasvI  //  anuvAda - sAdhu ekattva kI bhAvanA
abhiprArthita kare-ekatva bhAvanA kA anucintana kare  /  usI se pramokSa-
anAsaktatA prApta hotI hai  /  ekatva kI bhAvanA hI pramokSa-prakRSTa yA uttama
mokSa hai  /  jo isase bhAvita hokara krodha nahIM karatA, satya meM tatpara
rahatA hai, tapazcaraNa karatA hai, vahI zreSTha hai  /  TIkA-kiJcApekSetetyAha-
ekatvam-asahAyatvamabhiprArthayedaekatvAdhyavasAyI syAt, tathAhi-
janmajarAmaraNaroga zokAkule saMsAre svakRtakarmaNA vilupyamAnAnAmasumatAM na
kazcittrANasamarthaH sahAyaH syAt tathA coktam - 454

Page #483 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shri Samadhyayanam**  "Ego me sasao appa, naanadansanasanjuo. Sesha me bahira
bhava, savve sangyogalakkhana." ||1||  **Shadow:** One is my eternal soul,
united with knowledge and vision. The rest are external things, all marked by
association. ||1||  **Commentary:** One should cultivate the feeling of oneness.
By being imbued with the feeling of oneness, one should not desire the help of
others. Because in this world, which is afflicted by birth, old age, death,
sickness, and sorrow, no one is capable of saving or protecting a being who is
suffering from the fruits of his own actions. Therefore, it is said: "My own
soul, united with knowledge and vision, is eternal. All remaining things are
external, they are marked by association, obtained through association." Thus,
the virtuous should always cultivate the feeling of oneness. By cultivating this
feeling of oneness, one attains liberation - freedom from all attachments. There
is not even a little bit of falsehood in this. See this. Consider. The aim of
the feeling of oneness is liberation, which is true. This is the best - the main
or the supreme. This is the state of meditative absorption, or whoever is an
ascetic, whose body is purified by austerity, who is free from anger, who is
free from pride, delusion, and greed, who is devoted to truth, that man is
liberated. Truly, he is the best or the supreme.  **Verse 13:**  "Itthi ya araya
mehunao, pariggaham cheva akuvva mane. Ucchavasu visasu tai, nissansayam bhikku
samahipatte." ||13||  **Shadow:** He who does not engage in sexual misconduct
with women, nor accumulates possessions, and remains unattached to pleasures of
all kinds, high and low, is a monk who has attained meditative absorption,
without a doubt.  **Commentary:** He who does not engage in sexual misconduct
with divine women, human women, and animal women - in these three types of
women, who are objects of desire - "sexual misconduct" means he is not attached
to them. The word "tu" indicates that he is also free from killing, etc. And he
who does not accumulate possessions - that which is acquired from all sides -
wealth, grain, bipeds, and quadrupeds, and does not establish his ego in them,
and who remains unattached to pleasures of all kinds, high and low - he is a
protector of others, a giver of special teachings, and he has attained
meditative absorption, without a doubt. He is a virtuous man, endowed with the
qualities of the root and the branches. No one else is like him. He who has
attained meditative absorption in pleasures of all kinds, does not become
attached to them. He does not become attached to pleasures of all kinds.
**Commentary:** He who does not engage in sexual misconduct with divine women,
human women, and animal women - in these three types of women, who are objects
of desire - "sexual misconduct" means he is not attached to them. The word "tu"
indicates that he is also free from killing, etc. And he who does not accumulate
possessions - that which is acquired from all sides - wealth, grain, bipeds, and
quadrupeds, and does not establish his ego in them, and who remains unattached
to pleasures of all kinds, high and low - he is a protector of others, a giver
of special teachings, and he has attained meditative absorption, without a
doubt. He is a virtuous man, endowed with the qualities of the root and the
branches. No one else is like him. He who has attained meditative absorption in
pleasures of all kinds, does not become attached to them. He does not become
attached to pleasures of all kinds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samAdhyayanaM " ego me sAsao appA, NANadaMsaNasaMjuo  /  sesA me bAhirA
bhAvA, savve saMyogalakkhaNA  // 1 // " chAyA - eko me zAzvata AtmA jJAnadarzana
saMyutaH  /  zeSA me bAhyA bhAvAH sarve saMyoga lakSaNAH  //  1  //  ityAdi
kAmekatvabhAvanAM bhAvayed evamanayaikatvabhAvanayA prakarSeNa mokSaH pramokSo -
vipramuktasaGgatA, na 'mRSA' alokametadbhavatItyevaM pazya, eSa
evaikatvabhAvanAbhiprAyaH pramokSovartate, amRSArUpaH - satyazcAyameva  /  tathA
'varo'pi ' pradhAno'ppayameva bhAvasamAdhirvA, yadivA yaH 'tapasvI'
taponiSTaptadeho'krodhanaH, upalakSaNArthatvAdasyAmAno nirmAyo nirlobhaH
satyaratazca eSa eva pramokSa 'amRSA' satyo 'varaH' pradhAnazca vartata iti  //
12  //  kiJcAnyat TIkArtha - sAdhu ekatva - asahAyatva kI abhiprArthanA kare  /
ekatvabhAvanA se anubhAvita ho, anya kI sahAyatA kI kAmanA na kare kyoMki janma,
vRddhAvasthA, mRtyu, rugNatA tathA zoka se Akula isa jagata meM svakRta karma ke
phalasvarUpa duHkhoM se pIDita hote prANI ko trANa dene meM, unase bacAne meM
koI bhI samartha nahIM hai  /  ataeva kahA gayAhai-jJAna, darzana samAyukta merI
apanI AtmA hI zAzvata hai  /  sabhI avaziSTa padArtha bAhyabhAva haiM, ve
saMyoga lakSaNa haiM, saMyogavaza prApta hai| yoM sAdhu sadaiva ekatva kI
bhAvanA bhAvita kre| isa ekatva bhAvanA anubhAvana se pramokSa-pramuktatA -
samasta AsaktiyoM se unmukti prApta ho jAtI  /  isameM jarA bhI asatya nahIM
hai, aisA dekho  /  vicAra karo  /  ekatva bhAvanA kA abhiprAya-lakSya mokSa hai
jo satya hai  /  yahI vara - pradhAna yA zreSTha hai  /  yahI bhAva samAdhi hai
athavA jo tapasvI hai jisakA zarIra tapa se paritapta hai, jo krodha vivarjita
hai, upalakSaNa se krodha ke sAtha sAtha mAna mAyA aura lobha se rahita hai,
satya meM abhirata hai, vahI puruSa pramukta hai  /  sacamuca sabase zreSTha yA
pradhAna hai  /  itthI yA Araya mehuNAo, pariggahaM ceva akuvva mANe  /
uccAvasu visasu tAI, nissaMsayaM bhikkhU samAhipatte  // 13 //  chAyA
strISucAratamaithunastu parigrahaJcaivAkurvANaH 1 uccAvaceSu viSayeSu trAyI,
niHsaMzayaM bhikSuH samAdhiM prAptaH  //  anuvAda jo puruSa striyoM ke sAtha
abrahmacarya sevana nahIM karatA, parigraha nahIM rakhatA, uccAvacaUMce nIce
taraha taraha ke sukha bhogoM meM alipta rahatA hai, jIvoM kA trANa- rakSaNa
karatA hai, hiMsA nahIM karatA, vaha nizcaya hI samAdhi ko prApta hai  /  - TIkA
divyamAnuSatiryagrUpAsu trividhAsvapi strISu viSayabhUtAsu yat " maithunam "
abrahma tasmAda A-samantAnnarataH-arato nivRtta ityarthaH,
tuzabdAtprANAtipAtAdinivRtazca tathA pari-samantAdgRhyate iti parigraho
dhanadhAnyadvipada catuSpadAdisaMgraha tathA AtmA''tmIyagrahastaM caivAkurvANaH
sannuccAvaceSu - nAnArUpeSu viSayeSu yadivoccAutkRSTA avacA-
jaghanyAsteSvaraktadviSTaH 'trAyI' apareSAM ca trANabhUto viziSTopadezadAnato
'niHsaMzayaM ' nizcayena paramArthato 'bhikSuH' sAdhurevambhUto
mUlottaraguNasamanvito bhAvasamAdhiM prApto bhavati, nApara: kazciditi,
uccAvaceSu vA viSayeSu bhAva samAdhiM prApto bhikSurna saMzrayaM yAti nAnArUpAn
viSayAn na saMzrayatItyarthaH  // 13 //  TIkArtha jo devAMganA, manuSyAMganA
aura tiryak strI rUpA -ina tInoM meM abrahmacarya kA sevana nahIM karatA, 'tu'
zabda dvArA saMketita prANAtipAta-hiMsAdi se nivRtta rahatA hai, tathA jo
parigraha cAroM ora se jo gRhIta hotA hai - tanmUlaka, dhana-dhAnya, dvipada,
evaM catuSpadoM kA saMgraha nahIM karatA hai, unameM apanA mamatva sthApana
nahIM 455 -

Page #484 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that a **Sadhu** who is not attached to
worldly pleasures, who is not swayed by the allure of material possessions, and
who is compassionate towards all living beings, is endowed with the **Mula
Guna** and **Uttara Guna**. Such a **Sadhu** attains **Bhaava Samadhi**. One who
does not possess these qualities cannot attain **Bhaava Samadhi**. A **Sadhu**
who has attained **Bhaava Samadhi** does not indulge in worldly pleasures.
**Verse 14:**  **Text:** "A **Bhikshu** who has overcome attachment and
aversion, endures the touch of grass, cold, heat, bites, and mosquitoes, as well
as pleasant and unpleasant smells."  **Translation:** A **Sadhu** should
overcome attachment to worldly pleasures and aversion to hardships. They should
endure the touch of grass, cold, heat, bites, and mosquitoes, as well as
pleasant and unpleasant smells.  **Commentary:** The **Sutrakar** explains how a
**Sadhu** attains **Bhaava Samadhi** without indulging in worldly pleasures. A
**Bhaava Bhikshu**, who is a seeker of truth, is detached from the body and
desires only liberation. They overcome attachment to worldly pleasures and
aversion to hardships. For example, they endure the touch of grass, cold, heat,
bites, and mosquitoes, as well as pleasant and unpleasant smells. They do this
with equanimity and without any desire for personal gain.  **Verse 15:**
**Text:** "A **Sadhu** who is silent and has attained **Samadhi** should wander
with a pure heart. They should not build a house or allow others to build one
for them. They should renounce all attachments to women."  **Translation:** A
**Sadhu** who is silent and has attained **Samadhi** should wander with a pure
heart. They should not build a house or allow others to build one for them. They
should renounce all attachments to women.  **Commentary:** The **Sutrakar**
explains that a **Sadhu** who has attained **Samadhi** should be silent and have
a pure heart. They should not build a house or allow others to build one for
them. They should renounce all attachments to women. This is because these
things are distractions from the path of liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram karatA hai tathA bhinna bhinna prakAra ke sAMsArika
sukha bhogoM meM lolupa nahIM hotA hai, athavA uccAvaca-utkRSTa jaghanya viSayoM
meM rAga dveSa yukta nahIM hotA hai, anya prANiyoM kA trANa bhUta hotA hai, vaha
mUla guNa tathA uttara guNa sampanna sAdhu nizcaya hI bhAva samAdhi ko prApta
kara letA hai, jo vaisA nahIM hotA, use bhAva samAdhi prApta nahIM hotI  /
uccAvaca viSayoM meM bhAva samAdhi prApta sAdhu vividha prakAra ke viSayoM kA
saMzraya nahIM karatA-sevana nahIM karatA  /  araI raiM ca abhibhUya bhikkhU,
taNAiphAsaM taha sIyaphAsaM  /  /  uNhaM ca daMsaM ca'hiyAsaejA, subbhiM va
dubbhiM va titikkhaejA  // 14 //  chAyA - aratiM ratiJcAbhibhUya bhikSu
stRNAdisparza tathA zItasparzam  /  uSNaJca daMzaJcAdhisaheta, surabhiJcA
durabhiJca titikSayet  //  anuvAda - sAdhu saMyama meM arati-khinnatA tathA
asaMyama meM rati-anuraktatA kA parityAga kara tRNa, sardI, garmI, DAMsa,
macchara tathA sugandha, durgandha sabako sahana kare  /  /  TIkA -
viSayAnanAzrayan kathaM bhAvasamAdhipnuyAdityAha-sa bhAvabhikSuH paramArthadarzI
zarIrAdau nispRho mokSagamanaikapravaNazca yA saMyame'ratirasaMyame ca ratirvA
tAmabhimUyaetadadhisaheta, tadyathA niSkiJcanatayA tRNAdikAn
sparzAnAdigrahaNAnninonnatabhUpradezasparzAzca samyagadhisaheta, tathA
zItoSNadaMzamazakakSutpipAsAdikAn parISahAnakSobhyatayA nirjarArtham
'adhyAsayed' adhisaheta tathA gaMdhaMsurabhimitaraM ca samyak 'titikSayet'
sahyAt, ca zabdAdAkrozavadhAdikAMzca pariSahAnmumukSustitikSayediti  // 14 //
TIkArtha - sUtrakAra yahAM yaha batalAte haiM ki viSayoM kA sevana na karatA huA
sAdhu kisa taraha bhAva samAdhi svAyatta karatA hai  /  jo deha Adi meM spRhA
rahita, mokSagamanodyata hokara saMyama meM khinnatA aura asaMyama meM
anuraktatA kA parityAga kara Age varNita kiye jAne vAle duHkhoM ko sahatA hai,
vaha bhAva sAdhu paramArthadarzI hai  /  akiMcana-aparigrahI hone ke kAraNa tRNa
Adi ke sparza tathA nimna-nIce, unnata-UMce bhU pradeza ke sparza ko samyak-
bhalIbhAMti sahana karatA hai, sardI, garmI, DAMsa, macchara, bhUkha, pyAsa, Adi
parISahoM ko nirjarA hetu akSubdha hotA huA sahana karatA hai  /  tathA sugandha
durgandha Adi ko bardAzta karatA hai, 'ca' zabda se Akrozatarjana, vadha-hanana
pratihanana Adi duHkhoM ko jhelatA hai, vahI puruSa vAstava meM mumukSu hai,
vahI sahiSNu hai  /  gutto vaIe ya samAhipatto, lesaM samAhalU parivaejjA  /
gihaM na chAe Navi chAyaejjA, saMmissabhAvaM payahe payAsu  // 15 //  chAyA -
gupto vAcA ca samAdhi prApto, lezyAM samAhRtya parivrajet  /  gRhaM na
chAdayennA'pi chAdaye tsaMmizrabhAvaM prajahyAtprajAsu  //  anuvAda - jo sAdhu
vANI se gupta hai - asat vacana se parivarjita hai, vaha bhAva samAdhi ko prApta
hai  /  sAdhu zuddha lezyA-doSa rahita aMtaH pariNati svIkAra kara parivrajyA
kA-saMyama dharma kA pAlana kare, vaha khuda ghara kA chAdana na kare-chata Adi
na banAye tathA anya dvArA bhI vaisA na karavAye  /  strI saMsarga kA tyAga kare
/  (4560

Page #485 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Sri Samadhyayanam Teeka -    **A person who remains silent, or speaks only
after careful consideration of the subject matter, attains a state of Samadhi.
He should then absorb the pure Leshyas like Tejas, etc., and discard the impure
ones like Krishna, etc. He should then practice restraint in all directions.  **
**Furthermore, he should not build a house or have one built for him, as this
would imply attachment.  Just as a snake does not build its own burrow but lives
in one built by another, so too should a sage not build a house or decorate it.
**  **The scripture further states that one who desires to renounce worldly
duties should avoid actions that lead to mingling with those who are born again
and again.  This means that even a renunciate who cooks or causes others to
cook, engages in mingling with householders.  Similarly, a renunciate should
avoid mingling with women, as this would hinder his unwavering restraint. **
**Commentary:**  A person who remains silent or speaks only after careful
consideration of the subject matter, attains a state of Samadhi. He should then
absorb the pure Leshyas like Tejas, etc., and discard the impure ones like
Krishna, etc. He should then practice restraint in all directions.    A sage
should not build a house or have one built for him, as this would imply
attachment.  Just as a snake does not build its own burrow but lives in one
built by another, so too should a sage not build a house or decorate it.    The
scripture further states that one who desires to renounce worldly duties should
avoid actions that lead to mingling with those who are born again and again.
This means that even a renunciate who cooks or causes others to cook, engages in
mingling with householders.  Similarly, a renunciate should avoid mingling with
women, as this would hinder his unwavering restraint.   **Chhaya:**  Some people
in this world, when asked about the nature of the soul, declare it to be
inactive.   **Anuvaad:**  Those in this world who believe that the soul is
inactive and who, when asked, prescribe liberation, are attached to existence.
They are greedy and attached to the beginning of actions like violence, etc.
They do not know the Dharma which is the cause of liberation.   **Teeka:**
Furthermore, those in this world who accept the Sankhya philosophy, which holds
that the soul is inactive, believe that the soul is inactive because it is all-
pervading.  As it is said, "The soul is inactive, without qualities, and the
enjoyer, as per the Kapila Darshan."  This statement clarifies that the soul is
understood to be inactive due to its formlessness and pervasiveness.  These
proponents of the inactive soul, believing that bondage and liberation do not
occur when the soul is inactive, when asked about the existence of liberation,
even while presenting the inactive soul philosophy, prescribe liberation and its
absence.  They are attached to the beginning of actions like cooking, bathing,
etc., and are greedy for worldly pleasures.  They do not know the Dharma, which
is the cause of liberation, and are therefore misguided.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samAdhyayanaM TIkA - kiJcAnyata-vAci vAcA vA gupto vAggupto-maunavratI
suparyAlocitadharmasambandhamASI vetyevaM bhAvasamAdhi prApto bhavati, tathA
zuddhAM 'lezyAM' tejasyAdikAM 'samAhRtya' upAdAya azuddhAM ca kRSNAdikAmapahRtya
pari-samantAtsaMyamAnuSThAne 'vrajet ' gacche diti, kiJcAnyat -gRham-AvasathaM
svato'nyena vA na chAdayedupalakSaNArthatvAdasyAparamapi
gRhAderuragavatparakRtabilanivAsitvAtsaMskAraM na kuryAt, anyadapi
gRhasthakarttavyaM parijihIrSurAha-prajAyanta iti prajAstAsu-tadviSaye yena
kRtena sammizrabhAvo bhavati tatprajahyAt, etaduktaM bhavatipravrajito'pi san
pacanapAcanAdikAM kriyA kurvan kArayaJca gRhasthaiH sammizrabhAvaM bhajate,
yadivA-prajAH-striyastAsu tAbhirvA ya sammizrIbhAvastamavikalasaMyamArthI
'prajahyAt' parityajediti  // 15 //  TIkArtha - jo sAdhu vANI se gupta rahatA
hai-maunavratI hotA hai yA bhalIbhAMti paryAlonA kara, cintana vimarza kara
dharma viSayaka bAta kahatA hai. vaha bhAvasamAdhi ko prApta hai. vaha tejasa
Adi zaddha lezyAeM AtmasAta | Adi azuddha lezyAoM kA apahAra-parihAra yA tyAga
kara saMyama kA sarvathA AcaraNa kare  /  sAdhu ghara kA chAdana na kare tathA
na dUsare dvArA hI vaisA karavAve  /  jaise sAMpa apane liye bila nahIM banAtA
kintu dUsare dvArA banAye bila meM nivAsa karatA hai usI prakAra sAdhu dUsare ke
ghara meM nivAsa karatA huA sajjA saphAI Adi na kare  /  zAstrakAra gRhastha ke
anya kAryoM kA parihAra karane hetu pratipAdita karate haiM  /  jo bAra bAra
janmate haiM, utpanna hote haiM, unheM prajA kahA jAtA hai  /  jisa kArya se
unake sAtha sAdhu kA sammizra bhAva-mela jola ho, use vaha na kare  /  athavA
striyoM ko prajA kahA jAtA hai  /  avicchinna rUpa meM saMyama kA pAlana karane
vAlA sAdhu unake sAtha mela milApa kA sampUrNataH parivarjana kare  /  je kei
logaMmi u akiriya AyA, anneNa puTThA dhuyamAdisati  /  AraMbha sattA gaDhitA ya
loe, dhammaM Na jANaMti vimukkhaheuM  // 16 //  chAyA - ye ke'pi
loketvakriyAtmAno'nyena pRSTAH dhutamAdizanti  /  AraMbhasaktAH gRddhAzca loke,
dharmaM na jAnanti vimokSa hetum  //  anuvAda - isa loka meM jo yaha mAnate haiM
ki AtmA akriya hai-kriyArahita hai tathA kisI anya dvArA prazna kiye jAne para
ve mokSa kA Adeza-vidhAna karate haiM, astitva svIkAra karate haiM  /  ve hiMsA
Adi Arambha samArambha meM saMsakta hai, bhogoM meM lipta hai  /  mokSa jo
dharma kA kAraNa hai, use ve nahIM jAnate  /  TIkA - apica-ye ke cana asmin loke
akriya AtmA yeSAmabhyupagame te'kriyAtmAna:sAGkhyAH, teSAM hi sarvavyApitvAdAtmA
niSkriyaH paThyate, tathA coktam-'akartA nirguNo bhoktA, AtmA kapiladarzane" iti
tu zabdo vizaSaNe, sa caitadvizinaSTi -amUrtatvavyApitvAbhyAmAtmano'kri
yatvameva budhyate, te cAkriyAtmavAdino'nyenAkriyatve sati bandhamokSau na
ghaTete ityabhiprAyavatA mokSasadbhAvaM pRSTAH santo'kriyAvAda darzane'pi
'dhUtaM' mokSaM tadabhAvam (ca) 'Adizanti' pratipAdayanti, te tu
pacanapAcanAdike snAnArthaM jalAvagAhanarUpe vA 'Arambhe' sAvadye 'saktA'
adhyupapannA gRddhAstu loke mokSaikahetubhUtaM 'dharmaM zrutacAritrAkhyaM' 'na
jAnanti' kumArgagrAhiNo na samyagavagacchantIti  // 16 //  kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha
- isa loka meM sAMkhya Adi darzana vAdI AtmA ko akriya-kriyAzUnya svIkAra karate
haiN| ve AtmA ko sarvavyApI mAnate haiM  /  isaliye use niSkriya batalAte haiM
/  kahA hai-kapiladarzana meM kapila dvArA 457)

Page #486 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
According to the principles of Sankhya, as propounded in the Shri Sutra Kritanga
Sutra, the soul is not the doer. It is devoid of qualities (nirguna) and
experiences the fruits of actions (karma). Here, the word "tu" is used in the
sense of a qualifier, indicating a characteristic of the soul. Sankhya
philosophers argue that due to its abstract nature and pervasiveness, the soul
is inactive. This is proven. According to the theory of inaction (akriyatmavada)
in Sankhya, bondage and liberation are not possible in an inactive soul.
However, when questioned, they argue that bondage and liberation do occur even
within their theory of inaction. Sankhya followers engage in activities like
digestion, cooking food, getting food cooked by others, and immersing themselves
in water for bathing. Thus, they remain involved in actions that are both
initiated and accompanied by faults. They do not understand the true nature of
Dharma, which is the sole means of liberation, based on past scriptures and
conduct. They follow the wrong path and lack true knowledge of Dharma.  Further,
these humans are divided in their views, some believing in action and some in
inaction. Just as a newborn child's body is cut up for pleasure, so too does the
unrestrained man increase enmity through his actions.  Commentary: There are
diverse opinions in this human world. The word "tu" here signifies a specific
point. The author, while presenting these diverse opinions, states that action
and inaction are distinct. Therefore, some believe in action and some in
inaction. The proponents of action believe that action is the only means to
achieve results, for how can a man experience pleasure simply by knowing about
women and food? Thus, they believe that action is the only way to achieve
results and adhere to the theory of action. Conversely, those who believe in
inaction adhere to the theory of inaction. The nature of both these theories
will be discussed in detail later. These humans with diverse opinions, who
believe in action and inaction, and who do not understand Dharma as the means to
liberation, remain attached to the beginning of actions, are controlled by their
senses, and desire pleasure and wealth. They do this by cutting up the body of a
newborn child, who is ignorant and unable to distinguish between right and
wrong, for their own pleasure. Thus, the unrestrained man, who engages in such
harmful actions and is not restrained in any way, increases enmity towards
others, which is rooted in past lives and intensifies through mutual oppression.
Alternatively, the boldness of a child who is ignorant and engages in harmful
actions like violence, and who is devoid of compassion, increases enmity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram praNIta sAMkhya siddhAntAnusAra AtmA akartA hai  /
vaha nirguNa-guNarahita hai evaM bhoktA-karmoM ke phala bhogane vAlA hai  /
yahAM 'tu' zabda vizeSaNa ke artha meM prayukta huA hai  /  vaha AtmA kI
vizeSatA kA sUcaka hai  /  sAMkhyavAdiyoM kA aisA pratipAdana hai ki amUrtatva
evaM vyApitva ke kAraNa AtmA akriya hai  /  aisA siddha hotA hai  /
akriyAtmavAdI sAMkhya ke siddhAntAnusAra kriyArahita AtmA meM baMdha aura mokSa
siddha nahIM hote  /  kintu kisI ke aisA pUchane para ve apane akriyAvAdI
siddhAnta meM bhI baMdha aura mokSa hote haiM aisA pratipAdita karate haiM  /
sAMkhyAvAdI pacana pAcana-bhojana pakAnA, dUsare dvArA pakavAnA, snAna hetu jala
meM avagAhana karanA-ye saba karate haiM  /  isa prakAra ve Arambha-sAvadya
kArya meM adhyupanna-lipta rahate haiM  /  mokSa ke ekamAtra hetu bhUta
zrutacAritramUlaka dharma ko nahIM jAnate  /  ve kumArga ko grahaNa kiye
rahatehaiM  /  unheM dharma kA samyak jJAna nahIM hai  /  puDho ya chaMdA iha
mANavA u, kiriyAkirIyaM ca puDho ya vAyaM  /  jAyassa bAlassa pakuvva dehaM,
pavaDDhatI veramasaMjatassa  // 17 //  chAyA - pRthak chaMdA iha mAnavAstu,
kriyA'kriyaM pRthagvAdam  /  jAtasya bAlasya prakRtya dehaM, pravardhate
vairamasaMyatasya  //  anuvAda - manuSyoM kI bhinna-bhinna prakAra kI abhirUci
yA pasaMda hotI hai  /  ataeva kaI kriyAvAda aura kaI akriyAvAda meM vizvAsa
karate haiM  /  kaI aise haiM jo sadya jAta bAlaka kI deha ko kATakara
sukhAnubhava karate haiM  /  asaMyata puruSa apane kRtyoM dvArA prANiyoM ke
sAtha vaira kI vRddhi karatA hai| TIkA - pRthak nAnA chaMda:-abhiprAyo yeSAM te
pRthakchaMdA 'iha' asminmanuSyaloke 'mAnavA' manuSyAH turavadhAraNe, tameva
nAnAbhiprAyamAha-kriyA'kriyayoH pRthaktvena kriyAvAdamakriyAvAdaM ca samAzritAH,
tadyathA "kriyeva phaladA puMsAM, na jJAnaM phaladaM matam  /  yataH
strIbhakSyabhogajJo, na jJAnAtsukhito bhaveta  // 1 // " ityevaM
kriyaivaphaladAyitvenAbhyupagatA, kriyAvAdamAzritAH evametadviparyayeNAkriyA
vAdamAzritAH, etayozcottaratra svarUpaM nyakSeNa vakSyate, te ca nAnAbhiprAyA
mAnavAH kriyAkriyAdikaM pRthagvAdamAzritA mokSa hetuM dharmamajAnAnA ArambheSu
saktA iMdriyavazagA rasasAtAgauravAbhilASiNa etatkurvanti, tadyathA-'jAtasya'
utpannasya 'bAlasya' ajJasya sadasadvivekavikalasya sukhaiSiNo 'dehaM' zarIraM
'pakuvva' tti khaNDazaH kRtvA''tmanaH sukhamutpAdayanti, tadevaM
parApaghAtakriyAM kurvato'saMyatasya kuto'pyanivRttasya janmAntarazatAnubandhi
bairaM parasparopamardakAri prakarSeNa vardhate, pAThAntaraM vA-jAyAe~ bAlassa
pagabbhaNAye-'bAlasya' ajJasya hiMsAdiSu karmasu pravRttasya niranukampasya yA
jAtA 'pragalbhatA' dhASTarya tayA vairameva pravardhata iti sambandhaH  // 17 //
TIkArtha - yaha manuSya loka aisA hai, jisameM bhinna-bhinna manuSyoM kI apanI
bhinna-bhinna ruciyAM hotI hai  /  yahAM 'tu' zabda avadhAraNA ke artha meM AyA
hai  /  sUtrakAra bhinna bhinna ruciyoM kA pratipAdana karate hue kahate haiM-
kriyA evaM akriyA pRthak pRthak haiM-bhinna bhinna hai  /  ataH kaI kriyAvAda
meM vizvAsa karate haiM tathA kaI akriyAvAda meM  /  kriyAvAdiyoM kA kathana hai
ki manuSyoM ke liye kriyA hI phalaprada hotI hai kyoMki strI aura khAne yogya
padArthoM ko jAnane mAtra se kyA puruSa unakA sukha anubhava kara sakatA hai  /
isa prakAra kriyA hI phalapradA hai  /  aisA mAnate hue ve kriyAvAda para Azrita
haiM-Tike hue haiM  /  isase pratikUla akriyAvAdI kriyA 458)

Page #487 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sri Samadhyayana is considered meaningless. Further, a detailed analysis of its
nature will be done. The point is that people with different opinions, according
to their liking, are resorting to and relying on action and inaction. They do
not know the Dharma which is the cause of liberation. They are engrossed in
violence and other beginnings, and being under the control of the senses, they
desire delicious food, comfort, etc. They even go so far as to consider the body
of a newly born child, devoid of knowledge or naive and devoid of the
discrimination of good and bad, as a source of pleasure for themselves. Thus,
one who engages in actions that are harmful to others, causing pain, is
unrestrained, not free from sin, and cultivates a feeling of enmity towards
beings, which is a factor of mutual oppression and destruction that lasts for
hundreds of births. Here, the reading "Jayae Balass Pagabbhanae" is obtained.
Its meaning is that the boldness of the ignorant being who is engaged in violent
deeds, devoid of compassion and mercy, is ruthless. This increases his enmity
towards beings. Aukkhayan Cheva Abujjhamane, Mamaati Se Saahasakari Mande. Aho
Ya Rao Parittapamane, Adrusu Moode Ajaramereva. ||18|| Shadow - Ayukkshayam
Chaivaabudhyamana, Mamatvaan Sa Saahasakari Mande. Ahni Cha Ratrau Cha
Paritapyamana, Artheshu Moodo'jaramara Iva. || Translation - The being who is
attached to the beginning of the above-mentioned category does not know that his
life is waning. His attachment to material things remains. He is not afraid of
sin. Considering himself free from old age and death, he is constantly worried
about wealth. Commentary - Apich - Ayusho - Jeevanalaksanasya Kshaya
Ayukkshakayastamarabhyapravritta Chinhhradamatsyavadudakkshaye Sati
Abujhyamano'teeva 'Mamaai' Tti Mamatvaan Idam Me Aham Asya Swaamityevam Sa
Mandah Agnas Saahasam Kartum Shelamasyeti Saahasakariti, Tadyathaakachidvanig
Mahata Kleshena Maha_ni Ratnani Samasadyonjayinya Vahiraavasita, Sa Cha Raj
Chauradaayadabhayadratrau Ratnanyevamevam Cha Praveshayishyaamityevam
Paryalocana Kulo Rajanikshayam Na Jnatavan, Anyeva Ratnani Pravesayan
Rajapurushairatnebyaschyavita Iti, Evamanayo'pi Kinkarttavyatakula
Swaayushakkshayam Abujhyamana Parigrahepyaarambheshu Cha Pravartamana
Saahasakari Syadity, Tatha Kamabhogatrishito'hni Ratrau Cha Pari Samantaat
Dravyarthi Paritapyamana Mammanavanigvadartadhyayi Kayenaapi Klisyate, Tatha
Choktam - "Ajaramaraavadvala, Klisyate Dhanakamyaya. Sasvatam Jeevitam Chaiva,
Manyamano Dhanani Cha. ||1||" Tadevamartadhyanophata 'Kaiya Vacchai Sattho? Kim
Bhandam Kattha Kittiya Bhoomi' Tyad, Shadow - Kada Vrajati Sartha Ki Bhandam Kva
Cha Kiyati Bhoomi. Tatha 'Ukkhanai Khanai Nihanah Rati Na Suyai Diyavi Ya
Sansako' Shadow - Utkhanti Khanati Nihanti Ratrau Na Swapiti Divaapi Cha
Sanshankah. Ityadi Chittasankleshatsushtu
Moodo'jaramaraavanigvadajaramaraavadatmanam
Manyamano'pagatasubhaadyavasayo'harinishmaarambhe Pravartata Iti. ||18||
Commentary - The being who is engaged in violent beginnings does not know that
his life is waning. He is like the fish that does not know the water flowing out
when the dam of the lake breaks. (459

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samAdhyayanaM ko nirarthaka batalAte haiM  /  Age inake svarUpa kA vizada
vizleSaNa kiyA jAyagA  /  kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki bhinna-bhinna abhiprAya
yukta manuSya yathA ruci kriyAvAda tathA akriyAvAda kA Azraya liye hue haiM-una
para Tike hue haiM  /  dharma jo mokSa kA kAraNa hai, use ve nahIM jAnate  /  ve
hiMsA Adi ArambhoM se pralipta tathA indriyoM ke adhIna hokara rasa-svAdiSTa
padArtha sukha-suvidhA Adi ke abhilASI aisA-yahAM taka karate haiM ki
ajJajJAnarahita yA bhole sad asad viveka se varjita sukhAbhilASI sadya utpanna
zizu ke zarIra ko Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara apane liye sukha mAnate haiN| isa prakAra
jo dUsaroM ke liye upaghAta kriyA-pIDotpAdaka kriyA karatA hai, asaMyata hai,
pApa se anivRtta hai vaha prANiyoM ke sAtha saiMkar3oM janmoM taka calane vAle
pArasparika upamardana kAraka-vinAzakAraka zatru bhAva kA saMvarddhana karatA
hai  /  yahAM 'jAyAe bAlassa pagabbhaNAe, aisA pAThAntara prApta hotA hai  /
usakA abhiprAya hai ki hiMsAdi karmoM meM pravRtta-niranukampa-anukampArahita
nirdaya ajJa jIva kI jo pragalbhatA hai- hiMsAmUlaka dhRSTatA hai  /  usase
prANiyoM ke sAtha usakA zatrubhAva pravardhita hotA hai  /  AukkhayaM ceva
abujjhamANe, mamAti se sAhasakAri maMde  /  aho ya rAo paritappamANe, adRsu
mUDhe ajarAmarevva  // 18 //  chAyA - AyuHkSayaM caivAbudhyamAnaH, mamatvavAn sa
sAhasakArimaMdaH  /  ahani ca rAtrau ca paritapyamAnaH, artheSu mUDho'jarAmara
iva  //  anuvAda - vaisA-uparyukta koTi kA AraMbha se saMsakta prANI yaha nahIM
jAnatA ki usakI Ayu kSINa hotI jA rahI hai  /  padArthoM meM usakA mamatva banA
rahatA hai  /  vaha pApa karate DaratA nahIM  /  vaha apane ko ajaravRddhattva
rahita tathA amara-mRtyu rahita mAnatA huA aharniza dhana kI cintA meM paritapta
rahatA hai  /  TIkA - apica-AyuSo-jIvanalakSaNasya kSaya
AyuSkakSayastamArabhyapravRttaH chinnahradamatsyavadudakakSaye sati
abudhyamAno'tIva 'mamAi' tti mamatvavAn idaM me ahamasya svAmItyevaM sa mandaH
ajJaH sAhasaM kartuM zIlamasyeti sAhasakArIti, tadyathAkazcidvaNig mahatA
klezena mahA_Ni ratnAni samAsAdyoJjayinyA vahirAvAsitaH, sa ca rAja
cauradAyAdabhayAdrAtrau ratnAnyevamevaM ca pravezayiSyAmItyevaM paryAlocanA kulo
rajanIkSayaM na jJAtavAn, anyeva ratnAni pravezayan rAjapuruSairatnebhyazcyAvita
iti, evamanyo'pi kiMkarttavyatAkulaH svAyuSaHkSayamabudhyamAnaH
parigrahepyArambheSu ca prarvatamAnaH sAhasakArI syAditi, tathA
kAmabhogatRSito'hni rAtrau ca pari samantAt dravyArthI paritapyamAno
mammaNavaNigvadArtadhyAyI kAyenApi klizyate, tathA coktam -
"ajarAmaravadvAlaH,klizyate dhnkaamyyaa|shaashvtN jIvitaM caiva,manyamAnodhanAni
ca ||1||"tdevmaartdhyaanophtH 'kaiyA vaccai sattho ? kiM bhaMDaM kattha kittiyA
bhUmI' tyAdi, chAyA - kadA vrajati sArthaH ki bhANDaM kva ca kiyatI bhUmiH  /
tathA 'ukkhaNai khaNai NihaNaha ratiM na suyai diyAvi ya saMsako' chAyA -
utkhanita khanati nihanti rAtrau na svapiti divApi ca sazaMkaH  /  ityAdi
cittasaMklezAtsuSThu mUDho'jarAmaravaNigvadajarAmaravadAtmAnaM
manyamAno'pagatazubhAdyavasAyo'harnizamArambhe pravartata iti  // 18 //
TIkArtha - hiMsAdI Arambha meM tatpara jIva yaha nahIM jAnatA ki usakI Ayu kSINa
hotI jA rahI hai| vaha usa machalI kI jyoM hai, jo sarovara kA bAMdha TUTa jAne
para bhI usase bAhara nikalate jala ko nahIM jaantii| (459

Page #488 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra says: A being who is attached to the idea of "mine"
thinks, "This object is mine, I am its owner."  Becoming attached in this way,
he acts with audacity, with inappropriate and bold behavior. There is an
illustration of this: A merchant, after enduring great hardship, acquired a very
valuable gem and stayed outside the city of Ujjain. He spent the whole night
worrying that the king, thieves, or even his own family might take his gems. He
thought, "How can I keep these gems safe?"  The entire night passed in this way.
He did not realize that the night was passing. Later, when the day dawned, he
began to hide his gems in a secret place. The king's men saw him and took the
gems from him. In the same way, a person, bewildered by indecision, thinks,
"What should I do?"  He does not realize that his life is passing away. He
becomes attached to possessions and, driven by his initial impulses, commits
sinful acts of audacity. He remains thirsty and greedy for sensual pleasures,
and like the tormented merchant who is attached to his possessions, he spends
his days and nights consumed by the desire for wealth. He torments his body. It
is said: An ignorant being, believing himself to be immortal, thinks, "I will
never grow old, nor will I ever die."  Driven by his desire for wealth, he
suffers. He thinks, "My life and my wealth will last forever."  Thus, tormented
by anxious thoughts, he wonders, "When will the caravan of merchants leave? When
will they depart from here? What goods are they carrying? How far will they go?"
To protect his wealth, he sometimes digs into mountains or other high places,
sometimes digs into the earth, and sometimes looks for other places. He cannot
sleep at night and is constantly suspicious during the day. In this way, he
becomes confused by the pain of the four mental afflictions and, like the
merchant who believes himself to be immortal, he is devoid of good intentions
and pure outcomes. He engages in violence and other harmful actions day and
night.  **Verse 19:**  "Abandon wealth, livestock, and all possessions.
Relatives, loved ones, and friends are of no real help. Even though a person
laments and mourns for them, and is attached to them, others will take his
wealth when he dies."  **Commentary:**  "Wealth" refers to all kinds of material
possessions, and "livestock" refers to cows, buffaloes, and all other animals.
Do not become attached to them. "Relatives" include parents, in-laws, and all
those who are related by blood or marriage. "Loved ones and friends" include
those who play together and share common interests. These parents, in-laws, and
friends do not truly help a person. Yet, he laments and mourns for them, and
becomes attached to his wealth, livestock, relatives, and friends. For example,
he cries out, "Oh, Mother! Oh, Father!" and becomes consumed by grief and
sorrow. He becomes attached to his possessions and falls into delusion. Even
though he is handsome, he is like a skeleton; even though he is wealthy, he is
like a merchant attached to his possessions; even though he has grain, he is
like a wealthy merchant who hoards his wealth. He loses his composure and
becomes confused. The wealth that he has acquired through great hardship and by
oppressing others will be taken away by others, either while he is alive or
after he dies. He will only experience suffering and the bondage of karma.
Knowing this, one should abandon sinful actions and practice austerities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram vaha mamattvavAn prANI amuka vastu merI hai, maiM usakA
svAmI hU~  /  isa prakAra Asakta hotA huA dussAhasa pUrNaanucita sAhasayukta
kArya karatA hai  /  isa saMbaMdha meM eka dRSTAnta hai - koI vaNika atyanta
kaSTa sahakara bahumUlya ratna arjita kara ujjainI nagarI ke bAhara ThaharA  /
vaha rAta bhara cintana karatA rahA ki kahIM aisA na ho ki mere ratnoM ko rAjA,
cora Adi tathA pArivArika jana hI le le  /  isaliye ina ratnoM ko maiM isa
prakAra surakSita rakhU, yoM socate-socate samagra rAtri vyatIta ho gii| usane
yaha nahIM jAnA ki rAta bIta rahI hai  /  bAda meM dina meMdina uga jAne para
apane ratnoM ko kisI gupta sthAna para chipAne lagA  /  rAjapuruSoM ne use dekha
liyA aura usase ratna hathiyA liye  /  usI prakAra eka vyakti
kiMkartavyavimUr3ha hokara-maiM kyA karUM? yaha socatA socatA apanI Ayu kSaya ko
nahIM jAnatA  /  vaha parigraha tathA AraMbha meM pravRtta hotA huA dussAhasa-
pApa kArya karatA hai  /  vaha kAma bhoga meM tRSita-lubdha rahatA huA rAta-dina
dhana kI cAha meM saMlagna paritapyamAna mammaNa vaNika kI taraha Arta dhyAna
karatA hai| zarIra ko kaSTa detA hai| kahA hai- ajJa jIva apane ko ajara-amara
mAnatA haAmaiM na kabhI vRddha hUMgA aura na kabhI marUMgA  /  yaha socatA huA
dhana kI kAmanA se kaSTa bhogatA hai  /  vaha yaha socatA hai ki merA jIvana
tathA dhana zAzvata rahegA  /  yoM Arta dhyAna se upahata hotA huA vaha socatA
hai ki sArtha-vyApAriyoM kA saMgha yA samudAya kaba nikalegA - yahA~ se kaba
nikalegA  /  isameM kyA-kyA mAla bharA hai| yaha kitanI dUra jAyegA  /  vaha
apane dhana kI surakSA hetu kabhI parvata Adi UMce sthAnoM ko khodatA hai, kabhI
bhUmi ko khodatA hai, kabhI aura kisI sthAna ko dekhatA hai  /  rAta meM so taka
nahIM pAtA  /  dina meM bhI sazaMka rahatA hai  /  isa prakAra caitAsika
saMkleza-pIr3A se mUr3ha banA huA vaha puruSa ajarAmara nAmaka vaNika kI jyoM
apane ko ajara-amara mAnatA huA zubha adhyavasAya-pavitra pariNAmoM se rahita
hokara rAta dina hiMsA Adi Arambha meM pravRtta rahatA hai  /  jahAhi vittaM
pasavo ya savvaM, je baMdhavA je ya piyA ya mittA  /  . lAlappatI se'vi ya ei
mohaM, anne jaNA taMsi haraMti vittaM  // 19 //  chAyA - jahAhi vitaJca payU~zca
sarvAn, ye bAMdhavA ye ca priyAzca mitrANi  /  lAlapyate so'pi caiti mohamanye
janAstasya haranti vittama  //  anuvAda - vitta-dhana sampatti tathA pazu Adi
samasta padArthoM kA parityAga karo  /  pArivArika jana tathA prItiyukta
mitragaNa kucha bhI upakAra nahIM karate  /  to bhI manuSya inake liye vilApa
karatA hai-rotA hai tathA mohasakta hotA hai  /  jaba vaha prANI mRtyugAmI ho
jAtA hai taba dUsare loga usake arjita dhana kA haraNa kara lete hai-usa para
adhikAra kara lete haiM  /  TIkA - kiJcAnyat - 'vittaM' dravyajAtaM tathA
'pazavo' gomahiSyAdayasyAn sarvAn 'jahAhi' parityajateSumamatvaM mA kRthAH, ye
bAndhavA' mAtApitrAdayaH zvasurAdayAzca pUrvAparasaMstutA ye ca priyA mitrANi'
sahapAMsukrIDitAdayaste ete mAtApitrAdayo na kiJcittasya paramArthataH kurvanti,
so'ti ca vittapazubAMdhava mitrArthI atyarthaM punaH punarvA lapati lAlapyate,
tadyathA-he mAta ! he pitarityevaM tadarthaM zokAkulaH pralapati,
tadarjanaparazca mohamupaiti, rUpavAnapi kaNDarIkavat dhanavAnapi
mammaNavaNigvat dhAnyavAnapi tilaka zreSThivad ityevamasAvapyasamAdhimAn muhyate
(ti), yacca tena mahatA klezenAparaprANyupamardainopArjittaM vittaM tadanye
janAH 'se' tasyApaharanti jIvata eva mRtasya vA tasya ca kleza eva kevalaM
pApabaMdha zcetyevaM matvA pApAni karmANi parityajettapazcarediti  // 19 //
(460)

Page #489 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sri Samadhyayanam Teekaarth** - Abandon all kinds of wealth and riches, as
well as cattle like cows and buffaloes. Do not have the feeling of "mine" - that
they belong to you.  Parents and other relatives known from before, and in-laws
and others known later, are family members. And those childhood friends who
played in the mud together in their youth, cannot do anything for you. But the
reality is that humans cry again and again for wealth, animals, family members,
and friends. They lament, "Alas, mother! Alas, father!" and become grief-
stricken for them. They become infatuated, accumulating wealth for them. Even a
man with a handsome physique like a Kandarik, wealthy like a Mamman Vanik, and
prosperous with grains like a Tilaka Shreshthi, remains infatuated without
Samadhi. He earns wealth through the oppression and violence of other beings,
which is extremely painful.  This wealth is taken away by others either during
his lifetime or after his death. He only experiences suffering and accumulates
karmic bonds. Knowing this, a human should abandon sinful actions and practice
austerities.  **Siham Jaha Khudumiga Charanta, Dure Charanti Parisankamana. Evam
Tu Mehavi Samikkha Dhamma, Duren Pavam Parivajejja ||20||**  **Chhaya** - Just
as deer and other small animals, fearing the lion, roam far away, similarly, a
wise person, after examining Dharma, should avoid evil from afar.  **Anuvaad** -
Just as deer and other small animals, fearing the lion, roam far away,
similarly, a wise person, after examining Dharma, should avoid evil from afar.
**Teeka** - The author speaks about the means of austerity - Just as small
animals, like deer, roam in the forest, fearing the lion or tiger, which can
harm them, and avoid those places where they might be, similarly, a wise person,
who is disciplined, after examining Dharma, should avoid evil from afar, through
mind, speech, and body, and engage in restraint and austerity. Or, just as a
deer, seeking its own good, avoids the lion, similarly, a person seeking self-
welfare should avoid sinful actions, which are the cause of evil, from afar.
**Sambujjhamne U Nare Matiyam, Pavau Apyana Nivattaeja. Hinsappasuyai Duhai
Matta, Veranu Bandhini Mahabbhayani ||21||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samAdhyayanaM TIkArtha - dravyajAta-vividha prakAra ke dhana vaibhava kA
tathA gAya bhaiMsa Adi pazudhana kA parityAga kara do  /  unameM mamattva-ye
mere haiM aisA bhAva mata rakho  /  mAtA pitA Adi jo pUrva paricita yA sambaddha
hai tathA zvasura Adi pazcAt paricita yA saMbaddha hai-ye pArivArika jana tathA
ve bAlamitra-jo zaizava meM eka sAtha miTTI meM khele hoM, kucha bhI upakAra
nahIM kara sakate kintu sthiti yaha hai ki manuSya dhana pazu pArivArika jana
tathA mitravRnda ke liye punaH punaH rotA hai  /  hAya mAtA ! hAya pitA ityAdi
pralApa karatA huA unake liye zokAkula hotaahai| unake liye dhanArjana karatA
huA mohamUr3ha banA rahatA hai  /  kaNDarIka ke samAna surupa tathA mammaNa
vaNika kI taraha dhana sampanna evaM tilaka zreSThI kI taraha dhAnyAdi
samRddhiyukta puruSa bhI samAdhi ke binA mohagrasta banA rahatA hai atyanta
kaSTapUrvaka apara prANiyoM ke upamardana-hiMsAdi dvArA jo usane dhanArjana kiyA
use usake jIte jI athavA mRtyu prApta ho jAne para anya loga haraNa kara lete
haiM  /  usako kevala kaSTa hI milatA hai tathA karmabaMdha hI hotA hai  /
manuSya yaha jAnakara pApa pUrNa kAryoM kA parityAga kare tathA tapazcaraNa kare
/  sIhaM jahA khuDumigA caraMtA, dUre caraMtI parisaMkamANA  /  evaM tu mehAvi
samikkha dhamma, dUreNa pAvaM parivajaejjA  // 20 //  chAyA - siMha yathA
kSudramRgAzcaranto dUre caraMti parizaGkamAnAH  /  evaM tu medhAvI samIkSya
dharmaM dUreNa pApaM parivarjayet  //  anuvAda - jaise hiraNa Adi kSudra prANI-
choTe choTe jIva siMha kI zaMkA se dUra hI vicaraNa karate haiM usI prakAra
medhAvI-prajJAzIla puruSa dharma kI samIkSA kara pApa ko dUra se parivarjita
kare  /  TIkA- tapazcaraNopAya madhikRtyAha-yathA kSudramRgA' kSudrATavyapazavo
hariNajAtyAdyAH carantaH' aTavyAmaTantaH sarvato vibhyataH parizaMkamAnAH siMha
vyAghraM vA AtmopadravakAriNaM dUreNa parihatya 'caranti' 'viharanti, evaM
'medhAvI' maryAdAvAn, turvizeSaNe, sutarAM dharmaM 'samIkSya' paryAlocya 'pApaM'
karma asadanuSThAnaM dUreNa manovAkkAyakarmabhiH parihatya pari-samantAdbrajet
saMyamAnuSThAnI tapazcArI ca bhavediti, dUreNa vA pApaM-pApahetu
tvAtsAvadyAnuSThAnaM siMha miva mRgaH svahitamicchan parivarjayeta-parityajediti
// 20 //  apica. TIkArtha - sUtrakAra tapazcaraNa ke upAya ke sambandha meM
kahate haiM - jaise mRga Adi choTe-choTe vana ke jantu vahAM vicarate hue siMha
kI zaMkA se bhayabhIta hote hue AtmopadravakArI-apane ko nukasAna pahuMcAne vAle
zera yA bAgha ko dUra se hI chor3akara arthAt jahA~ unake hone kI AzaMkA hotI
hai usa sthAna ko parivarjita kara dUra hI ghUmate haiM usI prakAra maryAdAvAna-
saMyama kI maryAdA meM avasthita medhAvI muni dharma kA paryAlocana kara mana,
vacana evaM zarIra se pApa kA dUra se hI varjana kara saMyama evaM tapazcaraNa
meM lIna rahe athavA jaise apanA hita cAhane vAlA mRga siMha ko dUra hI chor3a
detA hai - usake sthAna kA dUra se hI parityAga karatA hai usI prakAra Atma
kalyANa cAhane vAlA puruSa pApa kA hetu hone ke kAraNa sAvadha kArya kA dUra se
hI parityAga kre| saMbujjhamANe u Nare matIyaM, pAvAu apyANa nivaTTaejA  /
hiMsappasUyAiM duhAI mattA, verANubaMdhINi mahabbhayANi  // 21 //  -461

Page #490 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The wise man, knowing the truth, should turn away from sin. Violence gives rise
to suffering, and it is the cause of enmity, which is a great fear.
**Commentary:**  The wise man is one whose intellect is beautiful and
praiseworthy. The wise man, desiring liberation, should engage in the practices
prescribed by the scriptures and abandon those that are forbidden. The wise man
should turn away from sin, such as violence, falsehood, etc., because the
destruction of the cause leads to the destruction of the effect. Therefore, the
wise man who desires the destruction of all karma should first block the doors
of the inflow.   Violence, which is the taking of life, gives rise to evil
karma, which leads to suffering in hell and other places of torment. It also
creates enmity, which binds one for hundreds of thousands of years. Therefore,
it is a great fear. Knowing this, the wise man should turn away from sin.
There is also a variant reading: "He should turn away from the world of
liberation." This means that just as a warrior who has returned from battle is
no longer engaged in war and does not harm anyone, so too should a virtuous
person, free from sinful actions, remain on the path of restraint.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA - saMbudhyamAnastu naro matimAn pApAtvAtmAnaM
nivartayet  /  hiMsA prasUtAni duHkhAni mattvA vairAnubandhIni mahAbhayAni  //
anuvAda - matimAna-prajJAzIla, dharmatattva vettA puruSa hiMsa-hiMsA prasUta
karma baira kA anubandhana karane vAle haiM, atyaMta bhayaprada tathA
duHkhotpAdaka hai-yaha jAnakara pApa se AtmanivRtta rakhe  /  TIkA - mananaM
matiH sA zobhanA yasyAstyasau matimAna, prazaMsAyAM matup, tadevaM
zobhanamatiyukto mumukSurnaraH samyakzrutacAritrAkhyaM dharma bhAvasamAdhi vA
'budhyamAnastu' vihitAnuSThAne pravRttiM kurvANastu pUrva
tAvanniSiddhAcaraNAnnivarteta atastat darzayati-'pApAt' hiMsAnRtAdi rUpAtkarmaNa
AtmAnaM-nivartayet nidAnocchedena hi nidAnina ucchedo-
bhavatItyato'zeSakarmakSayamicchannAdAveva AzravadvArANi
nirandhyAdityabhiprAyaH, kiM cAnyathiMsA-prANivyaparopaNaM tayA tato vA
prasUtAni-jAtAni yAnyazubhAni karmANi tAnyatyantaM narakAdiSu yAtanAsthAneSu
duHkhAni-duHkhotpAdakAni vartante, tathA vairamanubandhanti tacchIlAni ca
bairAnubandhInI-janmazata sahanadurmocAni, ata eva mahadbhayaM yebhyaH
sakAzAttAni mahAbhayAnIti, evaM ca matvA matimAnAtmAnaM pApAnnivartayediti,
pAThAntaraM vA 'nivvANabhUe va parivvaejjA' asyAyamartha:-yathA hi nivRto
nirvyApAratvAtkasyacidupaghAte na vartate evaM sAdhurapi sAvadyAnuSThAnarahitaH
parisamantAd vrajediti  // 21 //  TIkArtha - matimAna use kahA jAtA hai jisakI
buddhizobhana-uttama yA prazaMsanIya hotI hai  /  matimAna pada meM vyAkaraNa ke
anusAra prazaMsA ke artha meM 'matup' pratyaya kA prayoga huA hai  /
zobhanamatiyukta-uttama prajJAzIla mokSAbhilASI puruSa samyakzruta athavA
cAritramUlaka dharma ko yA bhAvasamAdhi ko samajhatA huA zAstroM meM jina karmoM
ke karane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai, unameM pravRtti kare tathA zAstroM meM
jinakarmoM kA pratiSedha kiyA gayA ho, unakA parivarjana kare  /  sUtrakAra isa
saMbaMdha meM digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM-prajJAzIla puruSa hiMsA
anRtaasatya Adi karmoM se pahale apane Apa ko nivRta kare kyoMki nidAna-kAraNa
ke uccheda-nAza se hI kArya kA uccheda hotA hai  /  ataH jo puruSa samasta
karmoM kA kSaya cAhatA hai. vaha Azrava ke dvAroM kA avarodha ka sUtrakAra kA
aisA abhiprAya hai  /  prANiyoM ke prANa vyapa ropaNa hiMsA se jo azubha karma-
pApa utpanna hote haiM ve jIva ko naraka Adi yAtanApUrNa-ghora duHkhaprada
sthAnoM meM le jAte haiM tathA saiMkar3oM hajAroM varSoM taka nahIM chUTane vAle
baira kA anubandha karate haiN| ataeva ve atyanta bhayaprada haiM  /  yaha
mAnakara-jAnakara medhAvI puruSa apane ApakA pApa karmoM se nivartana kare  /
yahAM 'nivvANa bhUvva parivaejjA' aisA pATha bhI prApta hotA hai  /  isakA
abhiprAya yaha hai ki yuddha se lauTA huA puruSa nirvyApAra-yuddha kArya se
rahita hokara phira kisI ke upaghAta-hiMsA meM vartanazIla nahIM hotA-kisI
prakAra kI hiMsA nahIM karatA, usI prakAra sAvadya anuSThAna se-pApapUrNa kAryoM
se vivarjita puruSa saMyama ke patha para gatizIla rhe| OM OM OM musaM na bUyA
muNi attagAmI, NivvANameyaM kasiNaM samAhiM  /  sayaM na kujjA naya kAravejA,
karaMtamannapi ya NANujANe  // 22 //  chAyA - mRSA na brUyAnmunirAptagAmI,
nirvANametatkRtsnaM samAdhim  /  svayaM na kuryyAnna ca kAraye
tkurvantamanyamapi ca nAnujAnIyAt  //  -462

Page #491 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shri Samadhyayanam  **Translation:**  The **Āpta-gāmi** - the virtuous one
who is progressing on the path laid out by the omniscient - does not speak
falsely. The complete abandonment of falsehood is called **samādhi** or
liberation. Similarly, he does not consume falsehood himself, nor does he cause
others to do so, nor does he approve of those who do so.  **Commentary and
Āpta:**  The path to liberation is called **Āpta**. One who walks on this path
is called **Āpta-gāmi** or **Ātma-hita-gāmi**. Alternatively, one whose
passions, hatred, anger, pride, etc. are destroyed is called **Āpta**. He is
omniscient. The person who walks on the path laid out by him is called **Āpta-
gāmi**. Such an **Āpta-gāmi** virtuous person does not speak **mṛṣā-vāda** -
falsehood or untruth. Even if it is true, he does not speak a word that harms
living beings - killing, pain, etc. The abandonment of falsehood is the complete
**samādhi** and liberation - so say the wise. The worldly **samādhi** arising
from bathing, eating, etc. and the enjoyment of words and other objects are
**anekāntīka** - uncertain and **anātyantīka** - not ultimate - not complete. It
is only a means of counteracting suffering. Therefore, it is incomplete.
Therefore, the virtuous person does not consume falsehood himself, nor does he
cause others to do so, nor does he approve of those who do so with his mind,
speech, and body.  **❀❀**  **Translation:**  The pure one should not be
contaminated by others, nor should he be deluded by the allure of the world. The
steadfast and liberated one does not seek praise, nor does he wander in the path
of worldly desires.  **Commentary:**  **Chāyā:**  The virtuous one should not
contaminate his character with passion and hatred when he receives pure food,
free from the defects of origin and production. It is said: "O living being, do
not be deceitful in the midst of the dense forest of forty-two kinds of defects!
If you are not deceitful while eating, then it is useless."  **Translation:**
The virtuous one should not be contaminated by others, nor should he be deluded
by the allure of the world. The steadfast and liberated one does not seek
praise, nor does he wander in the path of worldly desires.  **Commentary:**
**Chāyā:**  The virtuous one should not contaminate his character with passion
and hatred when he receives pure food, free from the defects of origin and
production. It is said: "O living being, do not be deceitful in the midst of the
dense forest of forty-two kinds of defects! If you are not deceitful while
eating, then it is useless."  **463**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samAdhyayanaM anuvAda AptagAmI - sarvajJa prarUpita patha para gamanazIla
sAdhu asatya bhASaNa na kare  /  asatya kA sarvathA parityAga, sampUrNa samAdhi
yA mokSakahA gayA hai| isI prakAra vaha asatyAdi kA na svayaM sevana kare, na
dUsare dvArA karavAye tathA na vaisA karane vAle kA anumodana hI kare  /  - TIkA
tathA Apto - mokSamArgastagAmI- tadramanazIla AtmahitagAmI vA Apto vA
prakSINadoSaH sarvajJasta dupadiSTamArgagAmI 'muniH' sAdhuH 'mRSAvAdam'
anRtamayathArthaM na brUyAt satyamapi prANyupaghAtakamiti, 'etadeva'
mRSAvAdavarjanaM 'kRtsnaM' sampUrNa bhAva samAdhi nirvANaM cAhuH sAMsArikA hi
samAdhayaH snAnabhojanAdijanitA: zabdAdiviSayasaMpAditA vA
anaikAntikAnAtyantikatvena duHkha pratIkArarUpatvena vA asaMpUrNA vartante  /
tadevaM mRSAvAdamenyeSAM vA vratAnAmaticAraM svayamAtmanA na kuryAnnAppareNa
kArayettathA kurvantamapyaparaM manovAkkAyakarmabhirnAnumanyeta iti  // 22 //  -
TIkArtha - mokSa ke mArga ko Apta kahA jAtA hai| usa para calane vAlA AptagAmI
yA AtmahitagAmI kahA jAtA hai  /  athavA jisake rAga, dveSa, krodha, mAna Adi
doSa naSTa ho gaye haiM, use Apta kahA jAtA hai| vaha sarvajJa hai  /  una dvArA
upadiSTa mArga para calane vAlA puruSa AptagAmI kahA jAtA hai| vaisA AptagAmI
sAdhu mRSAvAda-asatya yA ayathA jo jaisA nahIM ho vaisA bhASaNa na kare  /
satya hote hue bhI jisa vacana dvArA prANiyoM kA upaghAta- badha, pIDA Adi ho
vaisA satya bhI na bole  /  asatya kA varjana hI samagrabhAva samAdhi aura mokSa
hai - aisA jJAnI jana kahate haiM  /  snAna, bhojana Adi tathA zabda Adi anukUla
evaM priya viSayoM ke sevana se jo sAMsArika- bhautika samAdhi utpanna hotI hai
vaha anekAntika- anizcita hai tathA anAtyantika- Atyantika nahI hai -
sampUrNatAyukta nahIM hai, vaha mAtra duHkha pratikArAtmaka hai  /  isaliye
asampUrNa hai  /  ataH sAdhu asatya bhASaNa athavA anya vratoM ke aticAra kA
viruddhAcaraNa kA svayaM sevana na kare, auroM se bhI vaisA na karAye tathA
sevana karate hue vyakti kA mAnasika, vAcika evaM kAyika karma dvArA anumodana -
samarthana na kare  /   suddhe siyA jAe na dUsaejjA, amucchie Naya ajjhovavanne
/  dhitimaM vimukke Na pUyaNaTThI, na siloyagAmI ya parivvajjA  // 23 //  chAyA
zuddhesyAjjAte na dUSayet, amUrcchito na cAdhyupapannaH  /  dhRtimAn vimukto na
ca zlokagAmI ca parivrajet  //  anuvAda zuddha - udgama Adi doSa rahita bhojana
prApta hone para sAdhu rAga Adi dvArA apane cAritra ko dUSita na kre| uttama
bhojana meM lolupa na bane aura na usakI abhilASA hI kare  /  sAdhu dhRtimAna-
dhairyazIla tathA vimukta-parigraha se mukta rahe  /  vaha apanI pUjA satkAra
tathA yaza kI kAmanA na | apane pravrajita jIvana kA - zuddha saMyama kA pAlana
kare  /  - - TIkA uttaraguNAnadhikRtyAha-udgamotpAdanaiSANAbhiH 'zuddhe' nirdoSe
'syAta' kadAcit 'jAte' prApte piNDe sati sAdhU rAgadveSAbhyAM na dUSayet, uktaM
ca - "bAyAlIse saNasaMkaDaMmi gahaNaMmi jIva ! nahu chalio  /  ihiM jaha na
chaliJjasi bhuMjaMto rAgadosehiM  // 1 //  " chAyA -
dvicatvArizadeSaNAdoSasaMkaTe gahane jIva ! naiva chalitaH  /  idAnIM yadi na
chalyase bhuJjan rAgadveSAbhyA ( tadAsaphalaM tat )  // 1 //  463

Page #492 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  There, to explain the predominance of attachment,
it is said: "Not fainting, not fainting" - even if one obtains a beautiful meal,
one should eat without greed, and even if one is not eligible, one should not
desire that same food again and again, but should eat only for the sake of
maintaining the path of restraint.  Generally, even for a wise person, excessive
desire arises in the presence of special food. Therefore, the two prohibitions,
"not fainting" and "not eligible," are stated. It is said:  > "The one who has
enjoyed pleasures in the past, who is a scholar of the scriptures, and who is
always mindful of the Self, even he becomes quickly desirous of good food." (1)
**Commentary:** The Sutrakar now points out the opposite qualities, saying: If a
virtuous person obtains food free from the faults of origin, production, and
desire, then he will not defile his character through attachment and aversion.
It is said: "O being! You have not been deceived by the forty-one faults, the
deep troubles, the darkness. But now, if you are not deceived while eating, you
will be successful." There too, attachment is the main thing among attachment
and aversion. To explain this, the Sutrakar says: A virtuous person, even when
obtaining beautiful, excellent, delicious food, should eat without being even
slightly attached to it. He should not desire that same food again and again,
but should eat only for the sake of maintaining the path of restraint.
Generally, even in the mind of a wise person, intense desire arises when
special, excellent food is available. Therefore, it is prohibited twice. It is
said: "The one who has enjoyed pleasures in the past, who is a scholar of the
scriptures, and who is always mindful of the Self, even he becomes quickly
desirous of good food."  The virtuous person should be steadfast in restraint,
patient, and stable. He should be free from external and internal attachments.
He should not desire to be honored or respected through clothes, vessels, etc.
He should not desire praise or fame. He should not perform any action for the
sake of fame.  > "Having left the household, he should be desireless, he should
abandon his body, having cut off the root cause. He should not desire life, nor
should he desire death. The monk should walk free from the cycle of existence."
(24)  **Commentary:** Having left the household, the initiated virtuous person
should be desireless, free from attachment, and should abandon his body, having
cut off the root cause. He should not be attached to his body. He should not
desire the fruits of his austerities. In this way, he should be free from the
desire for life and death, and should remain separate from the worldly cycle,
engaged in the practice of restraint.  **Translation:** Having left the
household, the initiated virtuous person should be desireless, free from
attachment, and should abandon his body, having cut off the root cause. He
should not be attached to his body. He should not desire the fruits of his
austerities. In this way, he should be free from the desire for life and death,
and should remain separate from the worldly cycle, engaged in the practice of
restraint.  **Commentary:** The one who desires to study asks: "Having left the
household, even after becoming an initiate, he should be desireless in life, he
should abandon his body, he should not perform any action, such as treatment,
etc., with a sense of attachment, he should be free from the root cause, and he
should not desire life, nor should he desire death."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram tatrApi rAgasya prAdhAnyakhyApanAyAha-
namUrchito'mUrchitaH-sakRdapi zobhanAhAralAbhe sati gRddhimakurvannAhArayati,
tathA anadhyupapannastamevAhAraM pauna:punyenAnabhilaSamANaH
kevalaMsaMyamayAtrApAlanArthamAhAramAhArayet, prAyo viditavedyasyApi
viziSTAhArasannidhAvabhilASAtireko jAyata ityato'mUrchito'nadhyupapanna iti ca
pratiSedhadvayamuktam, uktaM ca bhuttabhogo purA jo'vi, gIyattho'vi va bhAvio  /
saMtesAhAramAIsu, so'vi khippaM tu khubbhai  // 1 //  chAyA - bhuktabhogaH
purAyopi gItArtho'pi ca bhAvitaH satsvAhArAdiSu so'pi kSiprameva kSubhyati  // 1
//  tathA saMyame dhRtiryasyAsau dhRtimAn tathA sabAhyAbhyantareNa granthena
vimuktaH tathA pUjanaM vastrapAtrAdinA tenArthaH pUjanArthaH sa vidyate yasyAsau
pUjanArthI tadevaMbhUto na bhavet, tathA zloka:-zlAghA kIrti stadgAmI na
tadabhilASukaH parivrajediti, kIrtyarthI na kAJcana kriyAM kuryAdityarthaH  //
23 //  _TIkArtha - sUtrakAra aba uttara guNoM ko udiSTa kara kahate haiM - yadi
sAdhu ko udgama, utpAdana tathA eSaNA ina doSoM se varjita-doSa rahita bhojana
prApta ho to vaha rAga dveSa dvArA apane cAritra ko daSita na banAve  /  kahA
gayA hai he prANI ! bayAlIsa doSa rUpa gahana saMkaTa meM tama nahIM chale gaye
- tamane dhokhA nahIM khAyA kintu aba yadi tuma bhojana karate samaya nahIM
chale jAoge, dhokhA nahIM khAoge taba tuma saphala ho  /  vahAM bhI rAga tathA
dveSa ke bIca rAga mukhya hai, yaha nirUpita karane hetu sUtrakAra batalAte haiM
- sAdhu zobhana-uttama svAdiSvaTa bhojana milane para usameM jarA bhI mUrchita-
Asakta na rahatA huA AhAra kare  /  punaH punaH vahI bhojana mile aisI abhilASA
na kare kintu saMyama yAtrA ke pAlana heta hI vaha AhAra kA sevana kare  /
viziSTa zreSTha AhAra milane para prAyaH vijJa puruSa ke mana meM bhI tIvra
abhilASA jAga uThatI hai  /  isaliye do bAra usakA pratiSedha kiyA gayA hai  /
kahA hai jo bhukta bhogI hai-jisane pahale bhoga bhoge haiM, gItArtha hai-
zAstroM kA gahana adhyetA hai tathA sadA AtmAnubhAvita hai, vaha puruSa bhI
uttama bhojana milane para zIghra hI usakA AkAMkSI ho jAtA hai  /  sAdhu saMyama
meM dhRtimAna-dhairyazIla-susthira rahe  /  vaha bAharI tathA bhItarI parigraha
se mukta rahe  /  vaha vastra pAtra Adi dvArA apanI pUjA, satkAra kA abhilASI na
bane evaM vaha prazaMsA aura yazasvitA kA icchuka bhI na bane  /  vahI kIrti-
bar3hAI hetu koI kriyA prayatna na kare  /  nikkhamma gehA u nirAvakaMkhI, kAyaM
viuseja niyANa chinne  /  No jIviyaM No maraNAbhikaMkhI, careja bhikkhU valayA
vimukke ||24||ttibemi  //  chAyA - niSkramya gehAttu niravakAMkSI kAyaM
vyutsRjecchinnanidAnaH  /  _no jIvitaM no maraNamavakAGkSI, carebhikSurvalayAd
vimuktaH ||iti brviimi|| anuvAda - gRha se niSkrAnta-ghara chor3akara dIkSita
sAdhu apane jIvana se niravakAMkSI-AkAMkSA rahita nirapekSa hokara apane zarIra
kA vyutsarjana kare  /  usa para moha-mamatva na rakhe  /  vaha apane
tapazcaraNa ke phala kI kAmanA bhI na kare  /  isa prakAra vaha jIvana tathA
mRtyu kI AkAMkSA se vimukta hokara sAMsArika cakra se pRthak rahatA huA saMyama
ke anuSThAna meM udyamazIla rahe  /  TIkA - adhyayanArthamupasaMjighRkSurAha-
gehAnniHsRtya 'niSkamya ca' pravrajito'pi bhUtvA jIvite'pi nirAkAMkSI
'kArya'zarIraM vyutsRjya niSpratikarmatayA cikitsAdikamakurvan chinnanidAno
bhavet, tathA na jIvitaM nApi maraNamabhikAGkSat (464)

Page #493 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Samadhyayanam 'Bhikshuḥ' Sadhuḥ ‘Valayat' Samsaravalayat Karmabandhanadva
Vipramuktaḥ Samyamanusthanam Charet, Itiḥ Parisamaptyarthe, Bravimīti Pūrvavat
||24|| || Iti Samadhyakhyam Dashamamadhyayanam Samaptam || Tīkārttha - In this
study, concluding the subject matter presented, the Sutrakar says - The man who
has left home and become a Sadhu should remain without desire-desireless in
life. Leaving the attachment of the body, he should not adorn, decorate, or use
medicine, liquor, etc., and become a Chhinna Nidana. The Nidana - the cause of
birth and death - should be cut off - destroyed. He should neither desire to
live nor to die. He should be free from the Samsara Valaya - the cycle of
Samsara or the bondage of Karma - and engage in the practice of restraint. Here
the word Iti is indicative of completion. Bravimī - I speak, this is as before.
The tenth study called 'Samadhi' is complete.  %%% 1465

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samAdhyayanaM 'bhikSuH' sAdhuH 'valayAt' saMsAravalayAtkarmabandhanAdvA
vipramuktaH saMyamAnuSThAnaM caret, itiH parisamAptyarthe, bravImIti pUrvavat
// 24 //   //  iti samAdhyAkhyaM dazamamadhyayanaM samAptaM  //  TIkArtha - isa
adhyanana meM pratipAdita viSaya kA upasaMhAra karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM-
jo puruSa gRha se niSkrAnta hokara sAdhu bana gayA ho vaha jIvana meM
nirAkAMkSa-AkAMkSA rahita rahe  /  deha kA moha chor3akara usakI sajjA, sajAvaTa
tathA davA, dArU Adi na karatA huA chinna nidAna bane  /  nidAna kA-janma maraNa
ke kAraNa kA chedana kare-use naSTa kare  /  vaha na jIne kI kAmanA kare aura na
marane kii| vaha saMsAra valaya-saMsAra cakra yA karma baMdha se vimukta hokara
saMyama ke anuSThAna meM saMlagna rahe  /  yahAM iti zabda parisamApti kA
dyotaka hai  /  bravImi-bolatA hU~ yaha pUrvavat haiM  /  'samAdhi' nAmaka
dasavAM adhyayana samApta huA  /  %%% 1465

Page #494 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra of the Sutra-Creator  **Eleventh**  **In what way, O Mahaan, is the
path of liberation explained by the wise?**  **The path that is straight and
pure, by which one crosses the insurmountable ocean.** (1)  **Commentary:**
What path is declared by the wise Mahaan, the one who knows all? The path that
is straight, by which one crosses the insurmountable ocean.  **Translation:**
The wise and omniscient Mahaan, the teacher of non-violence, the Lord Mahavira,
has revealed what is the simple path to liberation. By attaining this path, a
being can cross the ocean of the world, which is difficult to cross.
**Commentary:**  This Sutra is initiated by a questioner from the future, due to
the unique and timeless nature of the Sutra. Therefore, Jambuswami asks
Sudharmaswami, "What kind of path is this, which is capable of attaining
liberation in this three-world realm? What path is declared by the Lord, who is
capable of liberating the three worlds, who is the ultimate well-wisher, who
teaches non-violence?" He is the Mahaan, the Tirthankara. The one who knows all,
the one who has the knowledge of the subtle, the obstructed, the distant, the
past, the present, and the future, the one who illuminates all things in the
world and beyond, is the wise one. The path that is declared by him is the path
of liberation, which is straight and pure, because it reveals the true nature of
things. It is straight because it relies on the twelve principles of Syadvada,
which explain the general, the particular, the eternal, and the non-eternal. By
attaining this path, which is composed of right faith, right knowledge, and
right conduct, a being who is trapped in the belly of the world, who is equipped
with all the necessary resources, crosses the ocean of existence, which is
extremely difficult to cross, because it is difficult to obtain the resources
necessary to cross it.  **As it is said:**  **"Human birth, family, lineage,
beauty, health, lifespan, intellect, hearing, understanding, faith, and
restraint are all rare in the world."** (1)  **Commentary:**  The Sutra is
unique and special in its composition. It takes into account the present, the
past, and the future. Therefore, this Sutra is initiated by a questioner from
the future. Jambuswami asks Sudharmaswami, "O Lord! The Tirthankara Mahavira,
who is capable of liberating the three worlds, who is the ultimate well-wisher,
who teaches non-violence, what path has he revealed that is capable of attaining
liberation in the three worlds?" He describes the qualities of the Lord, saying,
"He is wise and great, full of knowledge." Wisdom is that which illuminates all
things in the world and beyond, including the subtle, the obstructed, the
distant, the past, the present, and the future. It is the form of omniscience or
perfect knowledge. It is present in the Lord, therefore, the Lord is wise. The
path of liberation that he has revealed is the path of auspiciousness. It
reveals the true nature of things. Therefore, it is a straight path to
liberation, without any twists or turns. It is straight because it relies on the
twelve principles of Syadvada, which explain the general, the particular, the
eternal, and the non-eternal. It is composed of right faith, right knowledge,
and right conduct. By attaining this path, a being who is trapped in the belly
of the world, who is in the cave of the world, who is within the world, who is
equipped with all the necessary resources, crosses the ocean of existence, which
is extremely difficult to cross, because it is difficult to obtain the resources
necessary to cross it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram ekAdazaM zrImAgAdhyayana kayare magge akkhAe, mAhaNeNaM
maImattA ?  /  jaM maggaM ujju pAvittA, ohaM tarati duttaraM  // 1 //  chAyA -
kataro mArga AkhyAto mAhanena matimatA  /  . yaM mArgamajuM prApya, oghaM tarati
dustaram  //  anuvAda - matimAna-sarvajJAtA, mahANa-ahiMsA ke upadeSTA bhagavAna
mahAvIra ne mokSa kA kauna sA sarala mArga batalAyA hai jise prApta kara prANI
dustara-kaThinAI se pAra kiye jA sakane yogya saMsAra sAgara ko lAMgha sakatA
hai| TIkA - vicitratvAtrikAlaviSayatvAcca sUtrasyAgAmukaM pracchakamAzritya
sUtramidaM pravRttam, ato jambUsvAmI sudharmasvAminamidamAha, tadyathA-'kataraH'
kiMbhUto 'mArgaH' apavargAvAptisamartho'syAM trilokyAm 'AkhyAtaH'pratipAdito
bhagavatA trailokyoddharaNasamarthenaikAntahitaiSiNA mA
hanetyevamupadezapravRttiryasyAsau mAhana:-tIrthakRttena, tameva
vizinaSTimati:-lokAlokAntargatasUkSmavyavahitaviprakRSTAtI
tAnAgatavartamAnapadArthAvirbhAvikA kevala jJAnAkhyA yasyAstyasau matimAMstena,
yaM prazastaMbhAvamArga mokSagamanaM prati 'Rju' praguNaM
yathAvasthitapadArthasvarUpanirUpaNadvAreNAvaLaM sAmAnya
vizeSanityAnityAdisyAdvAdasamAzrayaNAt, tadevaMbhUtaM mArga jJAnadarzana
tapazcAritrAtmakaM prApya' labdhvA saMsArodara vivaravartI prANI
samagrasAmagrIkaH 'ogha' miti bhavaughaM saMsArasamudraM taratyantantadustaraM
taduttaraNasAmagrayA eva duSprApatvAt, taduktam -
mANussakhettajAIkularuvArogamAuyaM buddhI  /  savaNoggahasaddhAsaJjamo ya
loyaMmi dulahAI  // 1 //  chAyA-manuSyaM kSetraM jAti: kulaM rupamArogyamAyuH
buddhi zravaNamavagraha zraddhA saMyamazca loke durlabhAni ityaadi|||1||
TIkArtha - sUtra kI racanA meM apanI vicitratA-vizeSatA hotI hai  /  vaha
vartamAna, bhUta, bhaviSya-tInoM kAloM ko dRSTi meM rakhakara kI jAtI hai  /
ataeva AgAmI kAla ke pracchaka-prazna kartA ko Azrita kara isa sUtra kI racanA
huI hai  /  jambU svAmI zrI sudharmA svAmI se prazna karate haiM ki bhagavan !
tInoM lokoM kA uddhAra karane meM sakSama, sabakA ekAnta rUpa se hita cAhane
vAle, kisI bhI prANI ko mata mAro ! aisA upadeza dene vAle, tIrthaMkara
bhagavAna mahAvIra ne aisA kaunasA mArga batAyA hai, jo trailokya-tInoM lokoM
meM apavarga-mokSa prApta karAne meM samartha hai  /  bhagavAna kI vizeSatAeM
batalAte hue kahate haiM-ve matimAna-mahAn prajJAzIla the  /  mati use kahA jAtA
hai jo loka evaM aloka meM vidyamAna sUkSma, vyavahita-vyavadhAnayukta,
viprakRSTa-dUravartI atIta-bhUta, anAgata-bhaviSya aura vartamAna ke sabhI
padArthoM ko prakAzita karatI hai  /  vaha kevalajJAna yA sarvajJatva rUpa hai|
vaha bhagavAna meM vidyamAna hai ataH bhagavAna matimAna hai  /  una dvArA
nirUpita mokSa mArga prazasta bhAva mArga hai  /  vaha vastu tatva kA yathArtha
svarUpa batalAtA hai  /  ataeva mokSa prApti kA avakra-vakratA rahita yA
saralamArga hai| vastu ke sAmAnya vizeSAtmaka tathA nitya nityAtma svarUpa ko
pratipAdita karate hue syAdvAda kA Azraya lene ke kAraNa vaha mArgavakra-TeDhA
na hokara Rju-sarala hai  /  vaha samyak darzana samyak jJAna tathA samyak
cAritra rUpa hai  /  use prApta kara saMsAra ke udara-vivara meM vartanazIla-
saMsAra ke udara kI guphA meM-saMsAra ke antargata vidyamAna (4660

Page #495 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The material related to the liberation of beings, which is the subject of the
path of knowledge, makes one cross this extremely difficult ocean of the world.
In fact, the material that makes one cross the ocean of the world is very
difficult to obtain - it is obtained with great difficulty. It is said that
human birth, the Aryan field, the best caste, the best family, the best form, a
healthy body, longevity and intelligence, the opportunity to hear the Dharma,
faith in the Dharma and restraint - pure character, obtaining these is very
rare. "That path is the best, pure, liberating from all suffering. Do you know,
O monks! Tell us, O great sage." ||2|| Commentary - The same questioner asks
again - the path that is beneficial to all beings, which was taught by the
omniscient, is free from all deceit and crookedness, that path is the best - the
main one, hence it is the best, it is pure - free from defects, because it is
free from the defects of contradiction and harm, and because it is free from the
teaching of sinful conduct. Thus, it liberates from all - all the sufferings
that have been accumulated over many births, because they are the cause of
suffering - karma. O monks! O great sage! Just as you know, "na" in the sentence
structure, so tell us that path, which was taught by the omniscient. ||2||
_Meaning of the Commentary - The one who asked before, asks again - the path
that the omniscient Lord Mahavira taught for the benefit of all beings, is
complete - perfect, free from any deficiency, definitely free from crookedness.
There is no path better than that path, hence it is the best - free from
defects. It does not speak contradictory things. It does not teach sinful
actions. It liberates from the karmas that are the cause of suffering, which are
accumulated over many births. O monks! O great sage! Tell us that best -
supreme, pure and destroyer of all suffering path, just as you know. If anyone
asks us, gods or humans. Which path should we tell them? Tell us. ||3||
Commentary - If anyone asks us, gods or humans. Which path should we tell them?
Tell us. ||3|| Translation - Jambuswami said to Sudharmaswami, if any god or
human asks us, which path of liberation should we tell them, you tell us. 467

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayana prANI mokSa viSayaka samasta sAmagrI svAyatta kara isa
atyanta duStara saMsAra sAgara ko pAra kara jAtAhai  /  vAstava meM saMsAra
sAgara ko pAra karane kI sAmagrI hI duSprApya hai-bar3I kaThinAI se prApta hotI
hai  /  kahA jAtA haimanuSya janma, AryakSetra, uttama jAti, uttama kula, uttama
rUpa, svastha zarIra, Ayu evaM buddhi dharma zravaNa kA avasara, dharma para
zraddhA evaM saMyama-zuddha cAritra inakA prApta honA bar3A durlabha hai| taM
maggaM NuttaraM suddhaM, savvadukkhavimokkhaNaM  /  jANAsi NaM jahA bhikkhU !
taM No bUhi mahAmuNI  // 2 //  chAyA - taM mArgamanuttaraM zuddhaM
sarvaduHkhavimokSaNam  /  jAnAsi vai yathA bhikSo ! taM no brUhi mahAmune  //
anuvAda - jambU svAmI zrI sudharmA svAmI se nivedita karate hai ki mahAmune !
Apa anuttara-sabase uttama-saba duHkhoM se vimukta karAne vAle mArga ko jise
bhagavAna mahAvIra ne udiSTa kiyA, jAnate haiM, hameM vaha batalAye  /  TIkA -
sa eva pracchakaH punarapyAha-yo'sau mArgaH sattvahitAya
sarvajJenopadiSTo'zeSaikAntakauTilyavakra (tA) rahitastaM mArga nAsyottaraH-
pradhAno'stItyanuttarastaM zuddhaH-avadAto nirdoSaH
pUrvAparavyAhatidoSApagamAtsAvadyAnuSThAnopadezAbhAvAdvA tamiti, tathA sarvANi-
azeSANi bahubhirbhavairUpacitAni duHkhakAraNatvAduHkhAni-karmANi tebhyo
'vimokSaNaM'-vimocakaM tamevaMbhUtaM mArgamanuttaraM nirdoSa sarva
duHkhakSayakAraNaM he bhikSo ! yathA tvaM jAnISe 'Na' miti vAkyAlaGkAre tathA
taM mArga sarvajJa praNItaM 'naH' asmAkaM he mahAmune ! 'brUhi' kathayeti  // 2
//  _TIkArtha - jinhoMne pahale pUchA, ve hI phira pUchate haiM-kevalajJAnI
bhagavAna mahAvIra ne saba prANiyoM ke hita ke liye jo mArga batalAyA vaha
sampUrNa-paripUrNa yA kisI bhI kamI se rahita hai, nizcita rUpa se vakratA
varjita hai  /  usa mArga se uttara-bar3hakara koI mArga nahIM hai, isaliye vaha
anuttara hai-doSa rahita hai  /  vaha pUrvA para-Age pIche kI paraspara viruddha
bAta nahIM kahatA  /  vaha sAvadya-pApayukta kAryoM kA upadeza nahIM detA  /
aneka janmoM ke upacita-saMcita duHkhotpAdaka, duHkha rUpa jokarma hai unase
chuTakArA dilAtA hai  /  he bhikSo ! he mahAmune! jaisA-jisa prakAra Apa jAnate
haiM, usI taraha usa anuttara-sarvottama, nirdoSa evaM sarvaduHkha nAzaka mArga
ko hameM batalAveM  /  jai No kei pucchijjA, devA aduva mANusA  /  tesiM tu
kayaraM maggaM, Aikkheja ? kahANi No  // 3 //  chAyA - yadi naH ke'pi pRccheyu
devA athavA manuSyAH  /  teSAntu kataraM mArgamAkhyAsye kathana naH  //  anuvAda
- jambU svAmI ne sudharmA svAmI se kahA ki yadi koI deva yA manuSya hamase
prazna kareM to hama unheM mokSa kA kauna sA mArga batalAye, Apa kaheM  /  467

Page #496 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra Tika**  - Although our conduct is based on your
belief due to our perception of your extraordinary qualities, how should we
explain the path to others? With this intention, he says: When someone, some
beings, who are troubled by the cycle of birth and death, ask us about the right
path, who are they? - The gods of the four categories and humans, and since the
question is likely to come from them, we should take them as the basis. When
they ask, which path should I explain? You know this, so tell me. ||3||
**Tikaarth**  - Although we accept your belief due to your extraordinary
qualities, how should we explain it to others? With this intention, Jambu Swami
says: Lord! If some beings, who are troubled by the cycle of birth and death,
ask us about the right path, which path should we tell them? Regarding those who
ask, he says, who are they? While answering the question, he says: The gods of
the four categories and humans, and since the question is likely to come from
them, we should take them as the basis. You know this, so tell me.  - If someone
asks, gods or humans, You should tell them, listen to my essence of the path.
||4||  **Chhaya**  - If someone asks you, gods or humans, You should tell them,
listen to my essence of the path. ||4||  **Anuvaad**  - Sri Sudharma Swami says
to Jambu Swami: If any god or human asks about liberation, you should tell them
what I am saying, listen to it.  **Tika**  - Thus, when asked, Sudharma Swami
says: If someone, some gods or humans, who are lost in the cycle of birth and
death, ask about the right path, you should tell them the path that is described
as the protection of the six categories of beings, the essence of the path,
which you will explain to others, listen to me. Another reading is: "You should
tell them this path, listen to me." This is the meaning. ||4||  Again, praising
the path, Sudharma Swami says:  **Tikaarth**  - Thus, when asked, Sudharma Swami
says: If some gods or humans, who are lost in the cycle of birth and death, ask
about the right path, you should tell them the path that is described as the
protection of the six categories of beings, the essence of the path, which you
will explain to others, listen to me. Another reading is: "You should tell them
this path, listen to me." This is the meaning. ||4||  Again, praising the path,
Sudharma Swami says:  - **Anupuvvena jamadaaya** - **Mahaghooram, kasaveena io
puvvam, samudam** - **-468)** - **Paveiyam. Vavhariino. ||5||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA -
yadyapyasmAkamasAdhAraNaguNopalabdheryuSmatpratyayenaiva pravRttiH syAt
tathApyenyeSAM mArgaH kiMbhUto mayA''khyeya ityabhiprAyavAnAha-yadA kadAcit
'naH' asmAn 'kecana' sulabha bodhayaH saMsArodvignAH samyagmArga pRccheyuH, ke
te ? - 'devAH' caturnikAyAH tathA manuSyAH pratItAH bAhulyena tayoreva prazna
sadbhAvAttadupAdAnaM, teSAM pRcchatAM kataraM mArgamaham 'AkhyAsye' kathayiSye,
tadetadasmAkaM tvaM jAnAnaH kathayeti  // 3 //  TIkArtha - yadyapi hama to ApakI
asAmAnya guNoM yA labdhi ke kAraNa-Apake anuttara guNoM ko jAnane ke kAraNa
Apake pratyaya-vizvAsa se hI mAna lete haiM, kintu anya logoM ko hama kisa
prakAra AkhyAta kareMsamajhAve  /  isa abhiprAya se jambU svAmI nivedita karate
haiM-bhagavan ! kaI sulabha bodhI-saMsAra se udvigna jana hamase samyak mArga-
sahI mArga pUche to hama unheM kauna sA mArga batalAye  /  pUchane vAloM ke
sambandha meM kahate haiM ve kauna ? prazna kA samAdhAna karate hue batalAte
haiM-cAra nikAyoM ke deva tathA manuSya bahulatA se devoM aura manuSyoM dvArA hI
prazna pUchA jAnA saMbhAvita hai  /  Apa ye jAnate haiM  /  isaliye hameM kaheM
/  - jai vo kei pucchijA, devA aduva mANusA  /  tesimaM paDisAhijjA, maggasAraM
suNeha me  // 4 //  chAyA - yadi vaH ke'pi pRccheyu devA athavA manuSyAH  /
teSAmimaM pratikathayemArgasAraM zRNuta me  //  anuvAda - zrI sudharmA svAmI
jambU svAmI se kahate haiM ki yadi koI deva yA mAnava mokSa ke saMbaMdha meM
prazna kare to tuma unheM vaha batalAnA jo maiM kaha rahA hUM, use suno| TIkA-
evaM pRSTaH sudharmasvAmyAha-yadi kadAcit vaH' yuSmAna kecana devA manuSyA vA
saMsArabhrAntiparAmagnAH samyagmArga pRccheyusteSAM 'ima' miti
vakSyamANalakSaNaM SaDjIvanikAyapratipAdanagarbha tadrakSApravaNaM mArga
'paDisAhije' ti pratikathayet, 'mArgasAram' mArgaparamArthaM yaM bhavanto'nyeSAM
pratipAdayiSyanti tat 'me' mama kathayataH zRNuta yUyamiti, pAThAntaraM vA
"tesiM tu imaM maggaM Aikkheja suNeha me' tti uttAnArtham  // 4 //  punarapi
mArgAbhiSTavaM kurvansudharmasvAmyAha - TIkArtha - yoM pUche jAne para sudharmA
svAmI pratipAdita karate haiM ki yadi saMsAra ke bhramaNa se parikhinna deva yA
mAnava samyak mArga-mokSa kA sahI patha pUche to tuma unase chaH kAyoM ke jIvoM
kI rakSA kA upadeza dene vAle mArga kA pratipAdana karanA  /  tuma jo zreSTha
mArga auroM ko pratipAdita karoge vaha maiM batalAtA hU~  /  zravaNa karo  /
yahAM 'tesiM tu imaM maggaM Aikkheja suNeha me' yaha pAThAntara bhI prApta hotA
hai  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki tuma unase Age kahe jAne vAle mArga kA
AkhyAna karanA  /  vaha mujhase suno  /  sudharmA svAmI punaH mArga ko abhistuta
karate hue kahate haiM  /  aNupuvveNa jamAdAya mahAghoraM, kAsaveNa io puvvaM,
samudaM -468) paveiyaM  /  vavahAriNo  // 5 //

Page #497 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Path of Guidance**  **Verse:**  The path, as revealed by the great Lord
Mahavira, I will explain in detail. Listen! Just as merchants and traders cross
the ocean, so too have many beings crossed the ocean of existence by taking
refuge in this path.  **Commentary:**  As I explain this path in detail, listen
carefully. The path is attained through gradual practice, as follows:  *
**First, the arising of the twelve karmas.** * **Then, the destruction or
pacification of the twelve karmas through yoga.** * **This leads to the
attainment of good conduct.**  And so on, until the four supreme limbs are
attained.  What is this path? It is described as "great and terrible" because it
is difficult to understand, just as a battlefield is difficult to enter for a
coward. This path was revealed by Mahavira, the great Lord Vardhamana. I will
explain it to you. This indicates that I am not speaking from my own intellect
or imagination.  By embracing this pure path, many great beings have crossed the
ocean of existence. Here is an analogy:  Merchants and traders who engage in
buying and selling are called "vyavaharis." They travel to different cities
seeking profit, and they cross even the most difficult oceans in their ships.
Similarly, those who seek true and lasting happiness, who are free from
attachment and obstacles, cross the ocean of existence through the path of right
faith, right knowledge, and right conduct, guided by the Jinas.  **Verse:**
Some have crossed, others will cross, and I will explain this path to you.
Listen to me, beings!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayanaM . chAyA - AnupUrvyA mahAghoraM, kAzyapena praveditam  /
yamAdAyetaH pUrva samudraM vyavahAriNaH  //  anuvAda - bhagavAna mahAvIra dvArA
pravedita-parijJApita mArga, maiM anupUrvI pUrvaka-kramazaH batalAtA huuN| use
suno  /  jaise vyavahArI-sAmudrika vyApArI yA sArthavAha samudra ko pAra kara
jAte haiM usI prakAra isa mArga kA Azraya lekara aneka jIvoM ne saMsAra sAgara
ko pAra kiyA hai| TIkA - yathA'ham 'anupUrveNa' anuparipATyA kathayAmi tathA
zRNuta, yadivA yathA cAnupUrvyA sAmagyA vA mArgo'vApyate tacchRNuta,
tadyathA-'paDhamillugANa udae' ityAdi tAvadyAvat "bArasavihe kasAe khavie
uvasAmie va jogehiM  /  labbhai carittalaMbho"- chAyA - prAthamikAnAmudaye-
dvAdazavidheSu kaSAyeSu kSapiteSUpazamiteSu vA yogaiH| labhate cAritralAbhaM  //
ityAdi, tathA "cattAri paramaMgANo'tyAdi-catvAri paramAGgAni-  /  kibhUtaM
mArga? tameva vizinaSTi-kApuruSaiH saMgrAmapravezavat duradhyavaseyatvAt
'mahAghoraM' mahAbhayAnakaM 'kAzyapo' mahAvIra vardhamAna svAmI tena
'praveditaM' praNItaM mArga kathayiSyAmIti, anena svamanISikAparihAramAha, yaM
zuddhaM mArgam 'upAdAya' gRhItvA 'ita' iti sanmArgopAdAnAt 'pUrvam'
AdAvevAnuSThitatvAhustaraM saMsAraM mahApuruSAstaranti, asminnevArthe
dRSTAntamAha-vyavahAraH-paNyakrayavikrayalakSaNo vidyate yeSAM te vyavahAriNa-
sAMyAtrikAH, yathA te viziSTalAbhArthinaH kiJcinnagaraM yiyAsavo yAnapAtreNa
dustaramapisamudraM taranti evaM
sAdhavo'pyAtyantikaikAntikAbAdhasukhaiSiNaHsamyagdarzanAdinA mArgeNa mokSaM
jinabhiSavo dustaraM bhavaughaM tarantIti  / 5 /  TIkArtha - maiM anuparipATi-
anukramapUrvaka yA kramazaH jaisA batalAtA hU~ use zravaNa karo  /  cAra kaSAya
jaba udita hote haiM taba jIva samyaktva prApta nahIM karatA  /  ataH bAraha
prakAra ke kaSAyoM ke kSaya yA upazaya karane para jIva ko cAritra kA lAbha hotA
hai  /  manuSya janma, dharma zravaNa, zraddhA tathA saMyama meM parAkrama-ye
cAra bAteM jaba prApta hotI haiM tabhI mokSa prApta hotA hai  /  prazna
upasthita karate hue kahate haiM vaha mArga kaunasA hai ? prazna kA uttara
batalAte hue kahate haiM ki jaise kAyara puruSoM ke liye saMgrAma bhUmi meM
praveza karanA bahuta kaThina hai-usake liye atyanta bhayaprada hai, usI prakAra
hIna Atma bala yukta puruSoM ke liye yaha mArga atyanta bhayAnaka hai  /
bhagavAna mahAvIra ne isakA nirUpaNa kiyA hai  /  vaha maiM tumako batalAtA
huuN| isase yaha saMketita hai ki maiM apanI buddhi yA kalpanA se nahIM kahatA
hU~  /  jise maiM batalAne jA rahA hU~ usa zuddha mArga ko aMgIkAra kara aneka
mahApuruSoM ne isa duztara saMsAra sAgara ko pAra kiyA  /  isa saMbaMdha meM eka
dRSTAnta kahate haiM  /  mAla kI kharIda-bikrI ko vyavahAra kahA jAtA hai  /  jo
vyavahAra karate haiM unheM vyavahArI kahA jAtA hai  /  ve sAMyAtrikasArthavAha
viziSTa-atyadhika lAbha pAne hetu kisI nagara ko jAte hue jaise yAnapAtra-jahAja
para savAra hokara dustara samudra ko pAra kara jAte haiM  /  usI taraha
Atyantika, ekAntika tathA bAdhA rahita sacce sukha kI abhilASA rakhane vAle
sAdhu samyakdarzana Adi yukta mArga dvArA mokSa jAne kI abhilASA liye hue
duztara saMsAra sAgara ko pAra kara jAte haiN| aNAgayA  /  suNeha me  // 6 //
atarisu taraMtege, tarissaMti taM soccA paDivakkhAmi, jaMtavo taM chAyA -
atArdAstarantyeke tariSyantya nAgatAH  /  taM zrutvA prativakSyAmi, jantavastaM
zRNuta me  /  (469

Page #498 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Sutra Kritanga Sutra**  **Translation:**  Sri Sudharma Swami says to his
followers: "Many men have crossed the ocean of the world by embracing this path.
They do so in the present and will continue to do so in the future. I have heard
this path from Lord Mahavira, and I will tell it to you. Listen carefully."
**Commentary:**  The author of the sutra explains the characteristics of the
path: "This path has been followed by great men. They have walked on it, and it
is certainly conducive to liberation. By relying on it, countless beings from
the beginning of time have been freed from the defilement of karma and crossed
the ocean of the world. Even in the present time, there are countless beings who
are equipped with all the necessary means for liberation and are crossing the
ocean of the world. The existence of Siddhas in Mahavideha and other realms is
eternal, and their state of liberation is always present. Therefore, it is not
contradictory to speak of liberation in the present time. In the infinite
future, countless beings will follow this path and cross the ocean of the world.
Thus, this path is the means of liberation from the ocean of the world in all
three times. It is the only path to liberation, the path of noble conduct. It
was taught by the Tirthankaras, who have attained divine knowledge, omniscience.
I have heard this path well and understood it. You are eager to listen, and
knowing this, I will explain it. Sri Sudharma Swami, relying on Jambuswami, says
this to all beings. Therefore, to make this clear, the author of the sutra says:
"Beings, listen attentively to this path of conduct that I am speaking. This
discourse is intended to generate the utmost respect for the ultimate truth."
**Verse 7:**  **Translation:**  "The earth itself is a living being. There are
many other living beings that dwell on the earth. Water and fire are living
beings, and there are separate living beings of the air, those with air bodies.
Stalks, trees, and seeds are also living beings."  **Commentary:**  "Because the
path of conduct is based on refraining from harming living beings, and because
this requires knowledge of living beings, the author says: "The earth itself is
a living being, and those who dwell on the earth are also living beings, earth-
beings. Because they have individual bodies, they are to be understood as
'separate beings.' Water is also a living being, and so are those with fire
bodies. And there are other air-beings. Thus, there are separate beings who
dwell on the four great elements."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - zrI sudharmA svAmI apane antevAsiyoM se
kahate haiM ki usa mArga ko grahaNa kara aneka puruSoM ne saMsAra sAgara ko pAra
kiyA hai  /  vartamAna meM karate haiM aura Ane vAle samaya meM bhI karate
rheNge| maiMne bhagavAna mahAvIra se vaha mArga sunA hai, maiM use kahUMgA  /
tuma loga zravaNa kro| TIkA - mArga vizeSaNAyAha-yaM mArga pUrvaM
mahApuruSAcIrNamavyabhicAriNamAzritya pUrvasminnanAdike kAle bahavo'nantAH
sattvA azeSakarmakacavara vipramuktA bhavaugha-saMsAram 'atAe:'-sAmpratamapyeke
samagrasAmagrIkAH saMkhyeyAH sattvAstaranti, mahAvidehAdau sarvadA
siddhisadbhAvAdvartamAnatvaM na virudhyate, tathA'nAgate ca kAle
aparyavasAnAtmake'nantA eva jIvAstariSyanti  /  tadevaM kAlatraye'pi saMsAra
samudro tArakaM mokSagamanaika kAraNaM prazastaM bhAvamArga mutpanna
divyajJAnaistIrthakaddhirUpadiSTaM taM cAhaM samyaka zrutvA'vadhArya ca yaSmAkaM
zazraSaNAM 'prativakSyAmi' pratipAda sudharmasvAmI jambUsvAminaM
nizrIkRtyAnyeSAmapi jantUnAM kathayatItyetaddarzayitumAha he
jantavo'bhimukhIbhUya taM cAritramArga mama kathayataH zRNuta yUyaM,
paramArtakathane'tyantamAdarotpAdanArthamevamupanyAsa iti  // 6 //  TIkArtha -
sUtrakAra mArga kI vizeSatA parijJApita karane hetu kahate haiM-usa mArga kA
mahApuruSoM ne AcaraNa kiyA hai| ve usa para cale haiM, vaha nizcita rUpa se
mokSaprada hai| usakA avalambana kara anAdi kAla se ananta jIvoM ne karmamala se
vipramukta hokara saMsAra sAgara ko pAra kiyA hai  /  vartamAna kAla meM bhI
samagra sAmagrI yuktamokSopayogI samasta sAdhana sampanna saMkhyAta puruSa Aja
bhI saMsAra sAgara ko pAra karate haiM  /  mahAvideha Adi kSetroM meM sadA
siddhi kara sadbhAva rahatA hai-mokSa prApta hone kI sthiti hai  /  ataeva
vartamAna kAla meM mokSa prApti kI bAta kahanA siddhAnta viruddha nahIM hai  /
anaMta anAMgata bhaviSya kAla meM ananta jIva usa mArga kA anusaraNa kara
saMsAra sAgara ko tairate jAyeMge  /  isa prakAra tInoM samayoM meM yaha mArga
saMsAra sAgara se tAraka-pAra lagAne vAlA hai-mokSa gamana kA eka mAtra hetu
hai, prazasta bhAva mArga hai  /  jinheM divya jJAna-sarvajJatva utpanna huA  /
una tIrthaMkaroM ne ise upadiSTa kiyaa| usa mArga ko maiMne bhalI bhAMti sunA
hai  /  usakI avadhAraNA kI hai  /  tuma loga sunane kI utkaMThA liye hue ho  /
yaha jAnakara pratipAdita karUMgA  /  zrI sudharmAsvAmI jambUsvAmI ko Azrita
kara samasta prANiyoM se yaha kahate haiM  /  ataH isakA digdarzana karAne hetu
sUtrakAra batalAte haiM-prANivRnda ! tuma abhimukha hokara-sAvadhAna hokara usa
cAritra mArga kA anusaraNa karo jo maiM kaha rahA hU~  /  paramArtha kathana
meMparama tatva ke nirUpaNa meM atyanta Adara utpanna karane hetu isa prakAra
kahA gayA hai  /  puDhavIjIvA puDho sattA, AujIvA tahA'gaNI  /  vAujIvA puDho
sattA, taNarukkhA sabIyagA  // 7 //  chAyA - pRthivI jIvAH pRthak satvAH, Apo
jIvAstathA'gniH  /  vAyu jIvAH pRthak sattvA stRNavRkSasabIjakAH  //  anuvAda -
pRthvI svayaM jIva hai  /  pRthvI ke Azraya meM Tike hue aura bhI aneka jIva
haiM  /  jala aura agni jIva haiM tathA vAyu ke-vAyu kAya ke bhI pRthak-pRthak
jIva hai  /  tinake, per3a tathA bIja bhI jIva haiN| TIkA - cAritramArgasya
prANAtipAta viramaNamUlatvAttasya ca tatparijJAnapUrvakatvAdato
jIvasvarUpanirUpaNArthamAhapRthivyeva pRthivyAzritA vA jIvAH pRthvIjIvAH, teca
pratyekazarIratvAt 'pRthak ' pratyekaM 'sattvA' jantavo'vagantavyAH tathA Apazca
jIvAH, evamagnikAyAzca, tathA'pare vAyujIvAH, tadevaM caturmahAbhUtasamAzritAH
pRthak sattvAH pratyeka -4700

Page #499 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The essence of the path of liberation for a being is to understand that all
beings are dependent on earth, water, fire, and air. Each being has a distinct
body, but plants are considered to have a common body, and therefore, their
individual bodies are not distinct. This is why the term "beings" is used in
this verse. The subtle body of a plant is of the form of a "nigoda," while the
"badara" plant is both common and uncommon. To explain the different types of
uncommon bodies, the verse mentions examples like grass, darbha, virana, trees
like mango and ashoka, and seeds like rice and wheat. All these are considered
to be beings with plant bodies. This understanding refutes the views of
Buddhists and others. The fact that these beings, including earth, water, fire,
and air, are indeed living beings is explained in detail in the first chapter of
the Acharanga Sutra, titled "Shastraparijna." Therefore, it is not elaborated
upon here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayanaM zarIriNo'vagantavyAH eta eva pRthivyaptejovAyu samAzritAH
sattvAH pratyekazarIriNaH, vakSyamANavanaspatestu sAdhAraNa
zarIratvenApRthaktvamapyastItyasyArthasya darzanAya punaH pRthaksatvagrahaNamiti
/  vanaspatikAyastu yaH sUkSmaH sa sarvo'pi nigodarUpaHsAdhAraNo bAdarastu
sAdhAraNo'sAdhAraNazceti, tatra pratyeka zarIraNio'sAdhAraNasya
katicidbhedAnnirdidikSurAhatatra tRNAni-darbha vIraNAdIni vRkSAH-cUtAzokAdayaH
saha bIjaiH-zAligodhUmAdibhirvartanta iti sabIjakAH, ete sarve'pi vanaspatikAyAH
sattvA avagantavyAH anena ca bauddhAdimatanirAsaH kRto'vagantavya iti  /  eteSA
ca pRthivyAdInAM jIvAnAM jIvatvena prasiddhisvarUpa nirUpaNamAcAre
prathamAdhyayane zastraparijJAkhye nyakSeNa pratipAditamiti nehapratanyate  // 7
//  TIkArtha - cAritra mArga kA hetu prANAtipAta se viramaNa-hiMsA se nivRtta
honA hai  /  jIvoM ke saMbaMdha meM jJAna hone para hI aisA ho sakatA hai  /
ataH zAstrakAra jIvoM kA svarUpa batAne hetu kahate haiM-'pRthvI svayaM jIva
hai, pRthvI meM Azrita anya aneka jIva haiM, una meM se pratyeka jIva kA zarIra
bhinna bhinna hai  /  isase yoM samajhanA cAhiye ki inameM bhinna bhinna zarIra
yukta jIva hai  /  isI bhAMti pAnI bhI jIva hai, agni bhI jIva hai tathA vAyu
bhI jIva hai  /  ina cAra mahAbhUtoM meM samAzrita-unameM vidyamAna pRthak
pRthak zarIra yukta jIva haiM  /  yaha avagata karanA cAhiye  /  yoM pRthvI,
pAnI, agni aura vAyu ke AzrayavAsI bhinna bhinna dehayukta jIva vidyamAna hai  /
vanaspati jo Age vakSyamANa-batAI jAne vAlI hai, sAdhAraNa zarIra ke nAma se
abhihita hai  /  ataH usake jIva pRthak pRthak nahIM bhI hote haiM  /  isa bAta
kA saMketa dene hetu prastuta gAthA meM "sattva" zabda kA prayoga huA hai  /  jo
sukSma banaspatikAya hai vaha nigodha rUpa hai  /  bAdara banaspati sAdhAraNa
evaM asAdhAraNa do bhedoM meM vibhakta hai jinameM pratyeka zarIrI-pRthak pRthak
zarIra yukta asAdhAraNa banaspati ke kaI bheda batAye gaye haiM  /  jaise tRNa-
DAbha yA kuza tathA vIraNa Adi, vRkSa-Amra, azoka Adi tathA bIja-zAli-cAMvala
vizeSa tathA gehUM Adi ye saba banaspati kAya ke jIva hai  /  aisA avagatakaranA
cAhiye  /  isa nirUpaNa se bauddha Adi matoM kA nirAkaraNa yA khaNDana jAnanA
cAhiye  /  ina pRthvI Adi jIvoM kI jIvatva ke rUpa meM prasiddhi tathA inake
svarUpa kA nirUpaNa AcArAMga sUtra ke zAstraparijJA nAmaka prathama adhyayana
meM spaSTa rUpa meM pratipAdita kiyA gyaahai| ata: yahAM vistAra pUrvaka varNana
nahIM kiyA jA rahA hai| ahAvarA tasA pANA, evaM chakkAya AhiyA  /  etAvae
jIvakAe, NAvare koi vijaI  // 8 //  chAyA - athA'pare trasAH prANAH, evaM
SaTakAyA AkhyAtAH  /  etAvAn jIvakAyaH nAparaH kazcidvidyate  //  anuvAda -
pahale batAe gaye pAMca tathA chaDe trasakAya yukta jIva hote haiM  /  yoM jIvoM
ke chaH bheda batalAye gaye haiM  /  isa prakAra jIva itane hI hai, inase bhinna
koI anya jIva nahIM hai| TIkA - SaSThajIvanikAyapratipAdanAyAha-tatra
pRthivyaptejovAyuvanaspataya ekendriyA:sUkSmabAdaraparyAptAparyAptakabhedena
pratyekaM caturvidhAH, 'atha' anantaram 'apare' anye trasyantIti
trasA:-dvitricatuSpaJcendriyAH kRmipipIlikAbhramaramanuSyAdayaH, tatra
dvitricaturindriyA: pratyekaM paryAptakAparyAptaka bhedAtSaDvidhAH,
paMcendriyAstu saMzyasaMjJiparyAptakAparyApta (471)

Page #500 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra states that there are four types of Kshetra-bheda
(divisions of the universe).  Following this, the Tirthankaras and Ganadharas
have explained the six Jivanikaayas (categories of living beings) as consisting
of fourteen types of Bhuta-graamas (groups of elements).  In short, this is the
extent of the Jivanikaaya, the living beings.  There is no other category of
living beings besides these, including the Andaja (egg-born), Udbhijj (plant-
born), and Samsvedaja (sweat-born). ||8||  Having thus explained the six
Jivanikaayas, the Sutra-kar (author of the Sutra) now explains what should be
done in relation to them:  _Commentary:_ The Sutra-kar now speaks of the sixth
Jivanikaaya, the category of living beings, in order to explain the six types of
beings.  Earth, water, fire, air, and plants are all one-sensed beings.  They
are of four types: subtle, coarse, sufficient, and insufficient.  Those who are
frightened or appear to be frightened are called "Trasa" (fearful).  These are
two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed beings.  They include
worms, insects, ants, bees, and humans.  Each of these two-sensed, three-sensed,
and four-sensed beings are of six types, based on the distinction of sufficient
and insufficient.  The five-sensed beings are of four types: Samanask
(conscious), Asamnjni (unconscious), sufficient, and insufficient.  The
Tirthankaras and Ganadharas have explained the six Jivanikaayas as consisting of
fourteen types.  In short, this is the extent of the Jivanikaaya, the living
beings, with all these distinctions.  The Andaja, Udbhijj, Samsvedaja, etc., are
all included within these.  Therefore, there is no other category of living
beings besides these.  Thus, having shown the six Jivanikaayas, the Sutra-kar
explains what should be done in relation to them:  "All beings are endowed with
life, and they are all subject to suffering.  Therefore, one should not harm any
of them." ||9||  _Commentary:_ The wise person, with all the arguments and
reasoning, should recognize the existence of all beings, knowing that they are
all subject to suffering.  They do not desire suffering; they do not want it.
Therefore, one should not harm any of them, or any one of them.  _Commentary:_
All the arguments that are in accordance with the truth, such as the arguments
for the existence of living beings in the categories of earth, water, fire, air,
and plants, are valid.  These arguments are based on the principle of non-
contradiction, and they are supported by the fact that the existence of these
beings is not contradicted by any other evidence.  The wise person, with all
these arguments, should recognize the existence of all beings in the categories
of earth, water, fire, air, and plants, and should know that they are all
subject to suffering.  They do not desire suffering; they do not want it.
Therefore, one should not harm any of them, or any one of them.  The arguments
for the existence of living beings in the categories of earth, water, fire, air,
and plants are as follows:  * Earth:  The existence of living beings in the
category of earth is supported by the fact that earth is composed of the same
elements as the bodies of living beings, such as coral, salt, and precious
stones.  This is similar to the fact that the body of a living being is composed
of the same elements as the food that it eats. * Water:  The existence of living
beings in the category of water is supported by the fact that water is conscious
and can be affected by external stimuli, such as digging in the ground.  This is
similar to the fact that a frog can be affected by external stimuli. * Fire:
The existence of living beings in the category of fire is supported by the fact
that fire can grow and increase in size when it is fed with fuel.  This is
similar to the fact that a child can grow and increase in size when it is fed
with food. * Air:  The existence of living beings in the category of air is
supported by the fact that air can be moved and directed by external forces,
such as wind.  This is similar to the fact that a cow can be moved and directed
by external forces. * Plants:  The existence of living beings in the category of
plants is supported by the fact that plants are born, grow old, die, and suffer
from diseases.  This is similar to the fact that a woman is born, grows old,
dies, and suffers from diseases.  The fact that plants can be wounded, can be
nourished by food, can be milked, can be touched, can contract, can grow, can
sleep, can wake up, can be approached, and can be affected by external stimuli,
all point to the fact that plants are conscious.  The existence of living beings
in the categories of two-sensed, three-sensed, and four-sensed beings is clear
from the fact that these beings are capable of experiencing pain.  Their pain is
caused by external stimuli, and it is natural and spontaneous.  This pain can be
caused by the actions of the mind, speech, and body, and it can be prevented by
avoiding actions that cause pain.  Therefore, one should avoid actions that
cause pain to these beings. ||9|| (472

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kabhedAccaturvidhAH  /  tadevamanantaroktayA nItyA
caturdazabhUtagrAmAtmakatayA SaT jIvanikAyA
vyAkhyAtAstIrthaMkaragaNadharAdibhiH, 'etAvAn' etadbhedAtmaka eva saMkSepato
'jIvanikAyo' jIvarAzirbhavati, aNDajodbhijjasaMsvedajAderatraivAntarbhAvAnnAparo
jIvarAzividyate kazciditi  // 8 //  tadevaM SaDjIvanikAyaM pradarzya
yattatravidheyaM taddarzayitumAha _TIkArtha - sUtrakAra aba SaSTha jIva nikAya
ke pratipAdana hetu-chaTThI koTi ke jIvoM ko batAne ke liye kahate haiM -
pRthvI, apa, teja, vAyu tathA banaspati-ye ekendriya jIva haiM  /  sUkSma,
bAdara, paryApta evaM aparyApta ke rUpa meM ye cAra cAra taraha ke haiM  /  jo
trasta hote haiM yA trAsa pAte hue pratIta hote haiM ve trasa kahe jAte haiN| ye
dvIndriya, teindriya, caturIndriya evaM paMcendriya hote haiN| ve kRmi-kITANu,
pipIlikA-cIMTI, bhramara-bhaMvarA, tathA manuSya Adi hai  /  ina dvi indriya,
ti-indriya, caturIndriya jIvoM meM pratyeka paryApta aura aparyApta bheda se
chaH taraha ke haiM  /  paMcendriya-saMjJI samanaska, asaMjJI-amanaska paryApta
aura aparyApta rUpa meM cAra taraha ke haiM  /  tIrthaMkaroM evaM gaNadharoM Adi
ne cavadaha prakAra ke cha: nikAya vyAkhyAta kiye haiM  /  saMkSepa meM ina
bhedoM se yukta itanA hI jIvanikAya-jIva rAzi hai  /  aNDaja, udbhijja,
saMsvedaja, Adi kA inhIM meM antarbhAva-samAveza ho jAtA hai  /  ataH inase
bhinna koI apara jIva rAzi nahIM hai| . isa prakAra chaH jIva nikAya kA
digdarzana karAkara vahAM kyA karaNIya hai, yaha batAne hetu sUtrakAra kahate
savvAhiM aNujuttIhiM, matimaM paDilehiyA  /  savve akkaMtadukkhA ya, ato savve
ahiMsayA  // 9 //  chAyA - sarvAbhiranuyuktibhi maMtimAn pratilekhya  /
sarve'kAntaduHkhAzcAtaH sarvAnna hiMsyAt  //  anuvAda - matimAna-medhAvI puruSa
saba anuyuktiyoM se-nyAya evaM tarka dvArA ina jIvoM kA jIvatva siddhakara yaha
jAne ki ye sabhI prANI akAMta duHkha hai, inheM duHkha kAMta yA priya nahIM
lagatA-ve use nahIM cAhate  /  ataH una sabakI yA unameM se kisI kI bhI vaha
hiMsA na kare  /  TIkA - sarvA yAH kAJcanAnurUpA:-pRthivyAdi jIva
nikAyasAdhanatvenAnukUlA yuktayaH-sAdhanAni, yadivA asiddha viruddhAnekAntika
parihAreNa pakSadharmatvasapakSasattvavipakSavyAvRttirupatayA yukti saMgatA
yukta yaH anuyuktayastAbhiranuyuktibhiH 'matimAn' sadvivekI
pRthivyAdijIvanikAyAn 'pratyupekSya' paryAlocya jIvatvena prasAdhya tathA
sarve'pi prANinaH 'akAntaduHkhA' duHkhadviSaH sukhalipsavazca manvAno matimAn
sarvAnapi prANino na hiNsyaaditi| yuktayazca tatprasAdhikAH saMkSepeNemA
itisAtmikA pRthivI, tadAtmanAM vidrumalavaNopalAdInAM
samAnajAtIyAGkarasadbhAvAd, arthovikArAGkaravat  /  tathA sacetanamambhaH
bhUmikhananAdavikRta svabhAvasaMbhavAd drdurvt| tathA sAtmakaM tejaH
tadyogyAhAravRddhayA vRddhayupalabdhaH, bAlakavat  /  tathA sAtmako vAyuH
aparApreritaniyatatirazcInagatimattvAt, govt| tathA sacetanA vanaspatayaH,
janmajarAmaraNarogAdInAM samuditAnAM sadbhAvAt, strIvata, tathA
kSatasaMrohaNAhAropAdAnadohadasadbhAvasparzasaMkoca
sAyAhrasvApaprabodhAzrayopasarpaNA dibhyo hetubhyo vanaspatezcaitanya siddhiH  /
dvIndriyAdInAM tu punaH kRmyAdInAM spaSTameva caityaM, tadvedanAzcaupakramikA:
svAbhAvikAzca samupalamba manovAkkAyaiH kRtakAritAnumatibhizca navakena bhedena
tatpIr3AkAriNa upamardAnnivartitavyamiti  // 9 //  (472

Page #501 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The essence of knowledge for a wise person is that they do not harm any living
being. The principle of non-violence is connected to this very idea, one should
know this.**  **Commentary:**  **This very thing is being affirmed here - the
word "khu" is used for emphasis or as a figure of speech. This very thing, the
cessation of the killing of living beings, is the "essence" of a wise person,
one who knows the true nature of life and the bondage of actions that lead to
death. This is being said again for emphasis and to show respect - that which
does not harm any living being, which does not inflict unwanted pain and desires
happiness, this is the most essential knowledge for even the most knowledgeable
wise person. This is because the cessation of harming others is the most
essential knowledge. And as it has been said:  **"What is the use of all that
learning, even if it is as vast as a mountain of straw? Where there is no
knowledge of this, that one should not inflict pain on others, that learning is
useless."**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayanaM TIkArtha - jo pRthvI Adi jIva nikAya kA jIvatva siddha
karane meM anukUla yA sakSama hai, aisI yuktiyoM dvArA buddhimAna puruSa pRthvI
Adi kA jIvatva siddha kare athavA asiddha viruddha aura anekAntika saMjJaka
hetvAbhASoM ko chor3akara jo hetu pakSa meM vidyamAna rahatehaiM tathA sapakSa
meM bhI avasthita rahatehaiM evaM vipakSa meM nahIM rahate  /  una tarka saMgata
sadhetuoM se pRthvI Adi jIvoM kA jIvatva siddha kareM  /  vaisA kara ina sabhI
prANiyoM ke liye du:kha akAMta-apriya hai, ye duHkha nahIM cAhate haiM, sukha
cAhate haiM  /  yaha jAnakara kisI kI bhI hiMsA na kre| pRthvI Adi padArthoM kA
jIvatva siddha karane vAlI yuktiyAM saMkSepa meM isa prakAra hai  /  pRthvI
sAtmikA-AtmA yA jIva sahita hai kyoMki pRthvI rUpa vidruma-mUMgA, lavaNa-namaka,
uppala-pASANa Adi apane samAne jAti ke aMkura utpanna karate hue dRSTigocara
hote haiM jaise arza-bavAsIra apane vikAramaya aMkura paidA karatA hai  /  pAnI
sacetana-cetanAyukta hai kyoMki pRthvI kA khanana karane se-use khodane se,
usake svabhAva meM koI vikAra yA parivartana nahIM AtA  /  jaise mer3haka ke
svabhAva meM koI vikRti utpanna nahIM hotI  /  agni bhI AtmA se yukta hai kyoMki
svayogya-apane anukUla AhAra prApta hone para vaha vRddhi prApta karatIhai jaise
eka baccA AhAra milate rahane se bar3hatA jAtAhai  /  vAyu bhI jIvatva yukta hai
kyoMki vaha gAyakI jyoM kisI kI preraNA ke binA hI niyamataH tiryaka gati karatI
hai-tirachA calatI hai, bahatI hai  /  banaspatiyAM caitanyayuktahai kyoMki strI
ke taraha janma, vRddhAvasthA, mRtyu, rugNatA Adi sabhI usameM dRSTigocara hote
haiM  /  koI banaspati kATakara upta karane se ugatI hai  /  vaha AhAra letI hai
/  usako dohada bhI hotA hai  /  koI banaspati chUne para sikuDa jAtI hai  /
rAta meM zayana karatI hai, dina meM jAgRta hotI hai  /  Azraya prApta kara
bar3hatI hai  /  ina kAraNoM ko dekhate hue banaspati kA jIvatva siddha hotA hai
/  dvIndriya kRmi Adi meM caitanya hai  /  yaha spaSTa dikhAI detA hai  /  ina
prANiyoM meM svabhAvotpanna tathA upakrama janita vedanA ko jAnakara vyakti
mana, vacana tathA kAya dvArA kRtakArita evaM anumoditapUrvaka nau prakAra se
inakI hiMsA, inako pIr3A dene se nivRtta rahe  /  eyaM khu NANiNo sAraM, jaM na
hiMsati kNcnn| ahiMsA samayaM ceva, etAvaMtaM vijANiyA  // 10 //  chAyA - evaM
khalu jJAninaH sAraM yanna hinasti kaJcana  /  _ahiMsA samaya Jcaiva, etAvantaM
vijANiyA  //  anuvAda - jJAnI puruSa ke jJAna kA yahI sAra-phalavattA hai ki
vaha kisI kI hiMsA nahIM krtaa| ahiMsA kA siddhAnta isI Azaya se jur3A hai, yaha
jAnanA cAhiye  /  TIkA - etadeva samarthayannAha-khuzabdo vAkyA
laGkAre'vadhAraNe vA, etadeva' anantaroktaM prANAtipAtanivartanaM 'jJAnino'
jIvasvarUpatadvadhakarmabandhavedinaH 'sAraM' paramArthataH pradhAnaM,
punarapyAdarakhyApanArthametadevAha-yatkaJcana prANinamaniSTaduHkhaM sukhaiSiNaM
na hinasti, prabhUtavedino'pi jJAnina etadeva sArataraM jJAnaM
yatprANAtipAtanivartanamiti, jJAnamapi tadeva paramArtha to yatparapIDAto
nivartanaM tathA coktam - "kiM tAe paDhiyAe ? payakoDIe palAlabhUyAe  /
jatthittiyaM Na NAyaM parassa pIDA na kAyavvA  // 1 // " chAyA - kintayA
paThitayA padakoTyApi palAlabhUtayA  /  yatraitAvanna jJAta parasya pIDA na
karttavyA  // 1 //  1473

Page #502 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sutra-Kritanga, this is the essence of the Samaya-Agam, the
indication, or the word, the form, thus, this non-violence Samaya, this much is
known, what else is there to know? With this much knowledge, the seeker of
liberation, the completion of the desired work, therefore, one should not harm
anyone. Commentary: In support of non-violence, the Sutra-kar states: Here, the
word "khu" is used in the sense of ornamentation or affirmation of the sentence.
The cessation of the killing of living beings, as described earlier, is the true
nature of the knower, the essence of the knower who knows the karmic bondage
that results from their killing, this is the main duty. In order to show respect
for non-violence, the same thing is said again: Those who consider suffering to
be undesirable, who desire happiness, not killing them is the essence of the
knowledge of the wise man, his success or meaningfulness. In other words, to be
free from the killing of living beings is the essence of the knowledge of the
knower. To refrain from harming other beings is true knowledge. Therefore, it is
said: What is the use of reading millions of words like straw and chaff? The one
who reads them has not even understood that one should not cause suffering to
anyone else. This is the indication, the teaching of the Agam or scripture,
which is based on non-violence. Knowing this much is sufficient. What will be
achieved by knowing many things through other diverse knowledge? Because the
desired purpose of the seeker of liberation, the seeker of liberation, is
fulfilled by this much. Therefore, one should not harm any living being. Urdu: O
you who are in the sky, who are on the earth, who are in the air. Refrain from
all, peace is said to be liberation. ||11|| Shadow: Those who are above, below,
and sideways, who are stationary. One should refrain from all, peace is said to
be liberation. Translation: Those who live in the sky, below, or sideways, who
are stationary, one should refrain from harming them all. From this, one attains
peaceful liberation. It is said so. Commentary: Now, referring to the killing of
beings in the field, it is said: Those who are above, below, and sideways, who
are stationary: those who are fire, air, and two-sensed, and those who are
stationary: earth, etc., what more need be said? One should know, one should
refrain from killing all living beings, whether they are stationary, subtle, or
of the nature of a cloud. He who does so is truly a knower. This cessation of
killing is the cause of peace for others and for oneself, because one who
refrains from killing does not fear others, nor does he fear anyone else in any
future life. Moreover, since the cessation of killing is the sole cause of
liberation, liberation is also the cessation of killing, or peace, tranquility,
cessation, liberation, and the cessation of anger and delusion, which are the
causes of peace, are also the causes of liberation. ||11|| Commentary: The
Sutra-kar now states in the context of the killing of beings in the field: Those
who live in the sky, below, and sideways, who are fire, air, and two-sensed, and
those who are stationary, earth, etc., what more need be said? One should
refrain from killing all living beings, whether they are stationary, subtle, or
of the nature of a cloud. He who does so is truly a knower. This cessation of
killing is the cause of peace for others and for oneself, because one who
refrains from killing does not fear others, nor does he fear anyone else in any
future life. Moreover, since the cessation of killing is the sole cause of
liberation, liberation is also the cessation of killing, or peace, tranquility,
cessation, liberation, and the cessation of anger and delusion, which are the
causes of peace, are also the causes of liberation. ||11|| Commentary: The
Sutra-kar now states in the context of the killing of beings in the field: Those
who live in the sky, below, and sideways, who are fire, air, and two-sensed, and
those who are stationary, earth, etc., what more need be said? One should
refrain from killing all living beings, whether they are stationary, subtle, or
of the nature of a cloud. He who does so is truly a knower. This cessation of
killing is the cause of peace for others and for oneself, because one who
refrains from killing does not fear others, nor does he fear anyone else in any
future life. Moreover, since the cessation of killing is the sole cause of
liberation, liberation is also the cessation of killing, or peace, tranquility,
cessation, liberation, and the cessation of anger and delusion, which are the
causes of peace, are also the causes of liberation. ||11|| Commentary: The
Sutra-kar now states in the context of the killing of beings in the field: Those
who live in the sky, below, and sideways, who are fire, air, and two-sensed, and
those who are stationary, earth, etc., what more need be said? One should
refrain from killing all living beings, whether they are stationary, subtle, or
of the nature of a cloud. He who does so is truly a knower. This cessation of
killing is the cause of peace for others and for oneself, because one who
refrains from killing does not fear others, nor does he fear anyone else in any
future life. Moreover, since the cessation of killing is the sole cause of
liberation, liberation is also the cessation of killing, or peace, tranquility,
cessation, liberation, and the cessation of anger and delusion, which are the
causes of peace, are also the causes of liberation. ||11|| Commentary: The
Sutra-kar now states in the context of the killing of beings in the field: Those
who live in the sky, below, and sideways, who are fire, air, and two-sensed, and
those who are stationary, earth, etc., what more need be said? One should
refrain from killing all living beings, whether they are stationary, subtle, or
of the nature of a cloud. He who does so is truly a knower. This cessation of
killing is the cause of peace for others and for oneself, because one who
refrains from killing does not fear others, nor does he fear anyone else in any
future life. Moreover, since the cessation of killing is the sole cause of
liberation, liberation is also the cessation of killing, or peace, tranquility,
cessation, liberation, and the cessation of anger and delusion, which are the
causes of peace, are also the causes of liberation. ||11|| Commentary: The
Sutra-kar now states in the context of the killing of beings in the field: Those
who live in the sky, below, and sideways, who are fire, air, and two-sensed, and
those who are stationary, earth, etc., what more need be said? One should
refrain from killing all living beings, whether they are stationary,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram tadevamahiMsApradhAnaH samaya-AgamaH saMketo vo pade
zarUpastamevaMbhUtamahiMsAsamayametAvantameva vijJAya kimanyena bahunA
parijJAnena ? etAvataiva parijJAnena mumukSoviMvakSitakAryaparisamApterato na
hiMsyAtkaJcaneti  /  TIkArtha- ahiMsA kA samarthana karate hue sUtrakAra
pratipAdita karate haiM-yahAM 'khu' zabda vAkya ke alaMkaraNasuMdaratA athavA
avadhAraNA ke artha meM prayukta huA hai  /  pahale varNita jIvoM ke prANipAta-
hiMsA se nivartana hI jJAnI kA-jIva kA yathArtha svarUpa hai tathA usake vadha
ke phalasvarUpa hone vAle karmabandha ko jAnane vAle jJAnI kA yaha sAra hai-
mukhya karttavya hai| ahiMsA ke prati Adara khyApana heta pana: yahI bAta kahate
haiM ki jo prANI duHkha ko aniSTa-apriya mAnate haiM, sukha kI eSaNA-vAJchA
rakhate haiM, unheM na mAranA hI jJAnavAna puruSa ke jJAna kA sAra hai-sAphalya
yA sArthakya hai  /  dUsare zabdoM meM jIvahiMsA se nivRtta-pRthak rahanA hI
jJAnI ke jJAna kI sAravantA-yathArthatA hai  /  itara prANI ko pIDA dene se
apane Apa kA nivartana karanA-usase nivatta rahanA hI yathArtha jJAna hai  /
isaliye kahA hai-palAla-ghAsa phUsa ke saddaza karor3oM padoM ke par3hane se kyA
banA  /  unheM par3hane vAle ne itanA bhI nahIM jAnA ki anya kisI ke liye pIr3A
utpanna nahIM karanI cAhiye  /  ahiMsA pradhAna Agama yA zAstra kA yahI saMketa
hai-upadeza hai  /  itanA hI jAna lenA yatheSTa hai  /  anya bahuvidha parijJAna
se bahuta bAtoM ko jAnane se kyA sadhegA  /  kyoMki mumukSu-mokSa ke abhilASI
puruSa ke abhipsita prayojana kI siddhi to itane se hI ho jAtIhai  /  ata: kisI
bhI prANI kI hiMsA nahIM karanI cAhiye  /  urdU ahe ya tiriyaM, je kei
tasathAvarA  /  savvattha viratiM kujA, saMti nivvANamAhiyaM  // 11 //  chAyA -
Urdhva madha stiryak ye kecit trasasthAvarAH  /  _ sarvatra viratiM kuryyAt
zAMti nirvANa mAkhyAtam  //  anuvAda - Urdhva-UMce yA Upara, adhaH nIce,
tiryaka-tirache sthAna meM yA dik bhAga meM jo trasa yA sthAvara prANI rahate
haiM, una sabake prati virata-hiMsA nivRtta rahanA cAhiye  /  usI se zAMtimaya
mokSa prApta hotA hai  /  aisA kahA gayA hai| TIkA - sAmprataM
kSetraprANAtipAtamadhikRtyAha-Urdhvamadhastiryak ca ye kecana
trasA:-tejovAyudvIndriyAdayaH tathAsthAvarA:-pRthivyAdayaH, kiMbahunoktena?,
sarvatra' prANini trasa sthAvarasUkSma bAdarabhedabhinne virati'
prANAtipAtanivRttiM 'vijAnIyAt' kuryAt, paramArthata evamevAsau jJAtA bhavati
yadi samyak kriyata iti, eSaiva ca prANAtipAtanivRttiH pareSAmAtmanazca
zAMtihetutvAcchAntirvartate, yato viratimato nAnye kecana vibhyati, nApyasau
bhavAntare'pi kutazcidvibheti, apica-nirvANapradhAnaika kAraNatvAnnivaNimapi
prANAtipAta nivRttireva, yadivA zAMti:-upazAntatA nirvatiH-nirvANaM
viratimAMzcAtaraudradhyAnAbhAvAdupazAMtirUpo nirvRtibhUtazca bhavati  // 11 //
TIkArtha - sUtrakAra aba kSetra prANAtipAta ke saMdarbha meM pratipAdita karate
haiM - Urdhva, adha: aura tiryak kSetra meM jo koI trasa-agni vAyu aura
dvIndriya Adi prANI rahate haiM tathA sthAvarapRthvI Adi prANI hai, adhika kyA
kahA jAye, una sabhI trasa, sthAvara, sUkSma evaM bAdara prANiyoM kI hiMsA se
virata rahanA cAhiye  /  unakI hiMsA nahIM karanI cAhiye  /  jo puruSa aisA
karatA hai, vahI pAramArthika rUpa meM jJAtA (474

Page #503 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The wise one who follows the path is knowledgeable. To refrain from harming
living beings is the cause of peace for oneself and others - it is the form of
peace. Those who refrain from violence are not feared by others. They are also
not afraid of anyone in the next life - in another birth. Refraining from
harming living beings is the main cause of attaining liberation. Therefore, it
is the form of liberation or the cessation of peace, anger, etc., detachment or
nirvana. A man who refrains from harming living beings does not have agitated or
angry thoughts, he is peaceful and happy. He experiences true peace and
happiness.  The Lord, having rejected faults, does not oppose anyone. Neither in
thought, word, nor deed, forever. - 12  Commentary: The Lord is one who has
conquered his senses, or one who is capable of protecting the path to liberation
by overcoming the obstacles of restraint. Such a Lord, having rejected faults -
falsehood, non-restraint, carelessness, passions, and their combinations - does
not oppose any living being. He does not engage in conflict with anyone, in any
of the three ways - through thought, word, or deed, for the rest of his life. He
does not oppose anyone by harming them. - 12  The wise one who is restrained,
patient, and accepts only what is given to him, should avoid what is not given.
He should always be content with what is given and avoid what is not given. - 13

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayana jJAnI hai  /  jIvahiMsA se nivRtta rahanA hI apane liye tathA
anya kisI ke liye zAMti kA kAraNahai-zAMtirUpa hai  /  jo hiMsA se virata rahatA
hai unase anya koI bhayabhIta nahIM hote  /  vaha bhI bhavAntara meM-dUsare
janma meM kisI se bhayabhIta nahIM hotA  /  jIva hiMsA se nivRtti mokSa prApti
kA pradhAna kAraNa hai  /  ata: vaha mokSarUpa hai athavA zAMti-krodhAdi kI
upazAntatA, nirvRtti yA nirvANa hai  /  jo puruSa jIva hiMsA se virata haiM use
Artta evaM raudra dhyAna nahIM hotA, vaha zAMti rUpa evaM sukha rUpa hotA hai  /
use saccI zAMti evaM sukha kI anubhUti hotI hai  /  pabhU dose nirAkiccA, Na
virujjheja keNaI  /  maNasA vayasA ceva, kAyasA ceva aMta so  // 12 //  chAyA -
prabhurdoSaM nirAkRtya, na virudhyeta kenacit  /  manasA vacasA caiva, kAyena
caivAntazaH  //  anuvAda - prabhu-indriya jetA puruSa doSoM ko nirAkRta kara-
haTAkara mAnasika, vAcika tathA kAyika rUpa meM AjIvana kisI ke bhI sAtha
virodha na kare  /  TIkA - kiJcAnyat-iMdriyANAM prabhavatIti prabhurvazyendriya
ityarthaH, yadivA saMyamAbArakANi karmANyabhibhUya mokSamArge pAlayitavye
prabhuH-samarthaH, sa evaMbhUtaH prabhuH dUSayantIti doSA-mithyAtvAvirati
pramAda kaSAyayogAstAn 'nirAkRtya' apanIya kenApi prANinAsArdhaM 'na
virudhyeta'. na kenacitsaha virodhaM kuryAt, trividhenApi yogeneti manasA, vAcA,
kAyena caivAntazoyAvajjIvaM, parAkArakriyayA na virodhaM kuryAditi  // 12 /  /
uttaraguNAnadhikatyAha TIkArtha - jisane apanI indriyA~ jIta lI hai use prabhu
kahA jAtAhai athavA saMyama ke vAraka yA avarodhaka karmoM ko abhibhUta kara jo
mokSa mArga ke paripAlana meM samarthahai, use prabhu kahA jAtA hai| vaisA
puruSa mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya aura yoga rUpa doSoM kA nirAkaraNa-
apanayana kara unheM haTAkara kisI bhI prANI ke sAtha virodha na kare  /  vaha
tInoM yogoM dvArA-mana, vacana, kAya dvArA yAvajjIvana dUsaroM kA apakAra-ahita
kara kisI ke sAtha virodha-zatru bhAva na rakhe  /  zAstrakAra uttaraguNoM ko
adhikRta kara nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  saMvuDe se mahApanne, dhIre dattesaNaM
care  /  esaNAsanie NiccaM, vajayaMte aNesaNaM  // 13 //  chAyA - saMvRttaH sa
mahAprAjJo dhIro dattaiSaNAzcaret  /  eSaNA samito nityaM varjayanto'neSaNAm  //
anuvAda - jo sAdhu sadA anya dvArA diyA huA eSaNIya-nirdoSa AhAra Adi grahaNa
karatA hai tathA eSaNA samiti se yukta rahatA huA, aneSaNIya-doSayukta AhAra kA
varjana karatA hai vaha vAstava meM bahuta hI prajJAzIla aura dhairyazIla hai  /
475

Page #504 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra Commentary - The monk who is restrained by the
cessation of the inflow and the restraint of the senses, is endowed with great
wisdom. This is the meaning of "Mahapragna" (great wisdom) and "Vipulabuddhi"
(vast intellect). By this, he knows the nature of the soul and non-soul. It is
said, "Dhira" (steadfast) is not disturbed by hunger, thirst, and other
afflictions. This is what the Sutra shows - when food, clothing, bedding, etc.,
are given by their owner or by someone instructed by their owner, he examines
them and accepts only what is "Eshaniya" (blameless). He is well-versed in the
three types of "Eshana" (seeking, investigation, and taking), and being always
engaged in "Eshana", he avoids "Aneshana" (non-seeking) and practices restraint.
This is to be understood as being in accordance with the other "Samiti"
(principles) like "Irya Samiti" (principle of walking), etc., as they are
indicative of the same principle. ||13||  Commentary - The virtuous person who
is restrained from sins by the cessation of the inflow and the restraint of the
senses, is endowed with great wisdom. He is the knower of the soul, non-soul,
and other entities. He is not disturbed by hunger, thirst, and other
afflictions. The Sutra-maker explains this by saying that he accepts food,
clothing, bedding, etc., only after examining them, when they are given by their
owner or by someone instructed by their owner. The virtuous person who is well-
versed in the three types of "Eshana" (seeking, investigation, and taking), and
being always engaged in "Eshana", avoids "Aneshana" (non-seeking) and practices
restraint. He is also in accordance with the other "Samiti" (principles) like
"Irya Samiti" (principle of walking), etc., as they are indicative of the same
principle. This is to be known.  "Bhuyaim cha samarabham, tamuhissa ya jam
kadam. Tarisan tu na ginheja, annapanam susanjae." ||14||  Shadow - "Bhutani cha
samarabham, tamuddisyacha. Yat kritam. Tadrisan tu na grhniyad annapanam
susanyata."  Translation - The virtuous person who is restrained should not
accept food and drink that has been prepared for them by those who have caused
harm to living beings.  Commentary - The Sutra-maker now speaks about the
avoidance of food that is "Aneshaniya" (blameless). Those who were in the past,
are in the present, and will be in the future are called "Bhut" (beings). They
are living beings. The food and other things that are prepared for the virtuous
person by those who have caused harm to living beings through their "Samarabham"
(actions), "Samarabham" (actions), and "Aarabham" (actions) are contaminated by
the "Adha Karma" (evil karma) of their intention. Therefore, the virtuous person
who is engaged in the highest austerity should not consume such food and drink.
The word "Tu" here means "only". This means that the virtuous person should
never consume such food. By doing so, he follows the path of liberation - he
perfectly follows the path of liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - AzravadvArANAM rodhenendriyanirodhena ca
saMvRtaH sa bhikSurmahatI prajJA yasyAsau mahAprajJovipulabuddhirityarthaH,
tadanena jIvAjIvAdi padArthAbhijJatAveditA. bhavati, 'dhIraH' akSobhyaH
kSutpipAsAdiparISahairna kSobhyate, tadeva darzayati-AhAropadhizayyAdike
svasvAminA tatsaMdiSTena vA datte satyeSaNAM carati eSaNIyaM gRhNAtItyarthaH,
eSaNAyA eSaNAyAM vA gaveSaNagrahaNagrAsarupAyAM trividhAyA mapi samyagitaH
samitaH,sasAdhurnityameSaNAsamitaHsannaneSaNAM varjayan'
parityajansaMcamamanupAlayet, upalakSaNArthatvAdasya zeSAbhirapIryAsamityAdibhiH
samito draSTavya iti  // 13 //  TIkArtha - Azrava dvAroM kA tathA indriyoM kA
avarodha kara pApoM se saMvRtta-bacA huA vaha sAdhu bar3A hI prajJAzIla hai  /
jIva-ajIva Adi padArthoM kA vettA haiM, jo bhUkha pyAsa Adi pariSahoM se
kSubdha-vicalita nahIM hotA  /  sUtrakAra isakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate
haiM ki vaha bhojana, upadhi-sAdhu jIvanopayogI sAmagrI tathA zaiyyA Adi unake
mAlika dvArA yA unake mAlika se saMdiSTa-AdiSTa yA niyukta dUsare vyakti ke dene
para hI unheM parIkSA kara eSaNIya-nirdoSa hI grahaNa karatA hai  /  jo sAdhu
eSaNA gaveSaNA tathA grAsa rUpa meM grahaNa ina tInoM meM samyak-bhalIbhAMti
samita-samitiyukta rahatA hai vaha nitya eSaNAyukta hotA huA aneSaNA kA varjana
karatA huA saMyama kA pAlana kare  /  upalakSaNa se-saMketa rUpa meM IryA samiti
Adi se bhI vaha yukta rahe  /  yaha dRSTavya-jJAtavya hai| bhUyAiM ca
samAraMbha, tamuhissA ya jaM kaDaM  /  tArisaM tu Na giNhejA, annapANaM susaMjae
// 14 //  chAyA - bhUtAni ca samArambha, tamuddizyaca. yatkRtam  /  tAdRzantu na
gRhNIyAdannapAnaM susaMyata  //  anuvAda - jo bhojana bhUtoM-prANiyoM ke
Arambha-hiMsAmUlaka upakrama dvArA sAdhuoM ko dene hetu taiyAra kiyA gayA ho,
saMyamI sAdhu use grahaNa na kare  /  TIkA - aneSaNIyaparihAramadhikRtyAha-
abhUvan bhavanti bhaviSyanti ca prANinastAni bhUtAni prANinaH
'samAramya'saMrambhasamArambhArambhairUpatApya taM sAdhum uddizya' sAdhvarthaM
yatkRtaM tadupakalpitamAhAropakaraNAdikaM tAdazam' AdhAkarmadoSaduSTaM
'susaMyataH' sutapasvI tadannaM pAnakaM vA na bhuJjIta,
tuzabdasyaivakArArthatvAnnaivAbhyavahared, evaM tena mArgo'nupAlito bhavati  //
14 //  TIkArtha - sUtrakAra aba aneSaNIya-doSayukta padArtha ke tyAga ke
sambandha meM kahate haiM  /  jo pUrva meMatIta meM the, vartamAna meM hai tathA
bhaviSya meM hoMge unheM bhUta kahA jAtA hai  /  ve prANI haiM, unake saMrambha,
samAraMbha tathA Arambha dvArA unheM utapta kara-pIDita kara tathA sAdhu ko dAna
dene hetu jo bhojana tathA anya upakaraNa vastueM taiyAra kI jAtI hai ve AdhA
karma rUpa-auddezika doSa se dUSita hotIhai  /  ataH uttama tapazcaraNazIla
sAdhu vaise khAdya peya padArthoM kA sevana na kare  /  yahAM AyA haA 'ta' zabda
eva-hI ke artha meM hai jisakA abhiprAya hai ki isa prakAra ke bhojana kA sAdhu
kadApi sevana na kre| aisA karane se hI usa sAdhu dvArA mokSa kA mArga anupAlita
hotA hai-vaha mokSa mArga kA samyak paripAlana karatA hai  /  -476)

Page #505 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Jain should not partake in any food that has even a single particle of food
that is contaminated with the five great sins (Ahimsa, Satya, Asteya,
Brahmacharya, Aparigraha). This is the dharma of the one who is truly
restrained. Even if there is doubt about the purity of the food, the Jain should
not accept it.  The Jain should not allow any living being to be harmed in the
places where they reside, whether it be in villages, towns, or cities. The Jain
who is truly restrained, who has conquered their senses, and who is pure in
thought, word, and deed, will not allow such an act.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayanaM pUIkammaM na sevijA, esa dhamme vusImao  /  jaM kiMci
abhikaMkhejA, savvaso taM na kappae  // 15 //  chAyA - pUrtikarma na seveta,
eSadharmaH saMyamavataH  /  . yatkiJcidabhikAGkSata, sarvazastanna kalpate  /
anuvAda - jisa AhAra meM AdhAkarma-doSayukta AhAra kA eka kaNa bhI milA huA ho,
sAdhu use grahaNa na kare  /  saMyamazIla sAdhu kA yahI dharma hai  /  yadi
zuddha AhAra meM aisI zaMkA ho jAya ki vaha vAstava meM zuddha nahIM hai to bhI
sAdhu use svIkAra na kare  /  . TIkA - kiJca-AdhAkarmAdya
vizuddhakoTyavayavenApi saMpRktaM pUrtikarma, tadevaMbhUtamAhArAdikaM 'na
seveta' nopabhuJjIta, eSaH-anantarokto dharmaH kalpaH svabhAvaH-'busImao' tti
samyaksaMyama vato'yamevAnuSThAnakalpo yadutAzuddhamAhArAdikaM pariharatIti,
kiJcayadapya zuddhatvenAbhikAGkSat-zuddhamapyazuddhatvenAbhizaGketa
kiJcidapyAhArAdikaM tat 'sarvazaH' sarvaprakAramapyAhAropakaraNapUrtikarma
bhoktaM na kalpata iti  // 15 //  TIkArtha - jo AhAra AdhA karma Adiavizuddha
koTi ke-azuddhatApUrNa AhAra ke eka kaNa se bhI saMpRkta-sammizrita ho use pUti
karma kahA jAtA hai  /  sAdhu isa prakAra ke AhAra kA upabhoga-sevana na kare  /
saMyama kA samyak pAlana karane vAle sAdhu kA yahI dharma hai-svabhAva hai
athavA anuSThAna hai  /  vaha azuddha AhAra Adi kA parihAra-parivarjana karatA
hai  /  zuddha hote hue bhI jisa AhAra meM azuddhatA kI AzaMkA ho sAdhu ke liye
vaha AhAra tathA sarvavidha AhAropakaraNa jo pUti karma meM Ate haiM kalpanIya-
sevana karane yogya nahIM hai| haNaMtaM NANujANejA, Ayagutte jiiMdie  /  ThANAiM
saMti saDDhINaM, gAmesu nagare su vA  // 16 //  chAyA - jantaM
nAnujonIyAdAtmagupto jitendriyaH  /  sthAnAni santi zraddhAvatAM grAmeSu
nagareSuvA  //  anuvAda - sAdhu ko gAMvoM aura nagaroM meM apane zraddhAvAna
upAsakoM ke sthAna AvAsa hetu prApta hote haiM  /  vahAM yadi koI jIva
hiMsAtmaka kArya kare to Atmagupta-pApa nivRtta, jitendriya sAdhu usakI anumati
na de| TIkA - kiJcAnyat-dharma zraddhAvatAM grAmeSu nagareSu vA kheTakarbaTAdiSu
vA 'sthAnAni' AzrayAH 'santi' vidyante, tatra tatsthAnAzritaH
kazciddharmopadezena kila dharmazraddhAlutayA prANyupamardakAriNIM
dharmabuddhayA kUpataDAgakhananaprapAsatrAdikAM kriyAM kuryAt tena ca tathA
bhUta kriyAyAH kartA kimatra dharmo'sti nAstItyevaM pRSTo'pRSTo vA
taduparodhAdbhAyAdvA taM prANino ghnantaM nAnujAnIyAt, kiMbhUtaH san ? -
'AtmanA' manovAkkAyarUpeNa gupta AtmaguptaH tathA 'jitendriyo' vazyendriyaH
sAvadyAnuSThAnaM nAnumanyeta  // 16 //  sAvadyAnuSThAnAnumatiM parihartukAma Aha
TIkArtha - dharma meM zraddhAzIla janoM-zramaNoM, upAsakoM ke gAMvoM, nagaroM,
upanagaroM tathA AsapAsa ke AvAsa sthAnoM meM sAdhuoM ko rahane hetu sthAna
prApta hotA hai  /  vahAM rahane vAlA koI puruSa dharma zraddhAlutA ke kAraNa
dharmopadeza se prerita hokara dharma buddhi se vaisI kriyAeM jinameM prANiyoM
kA upamardana-vyAghAta hotA hai (477)

Page #506 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra states that if someone desires to dig a well, build a
pond, construct a water fountain, or run a food distribution center, and
inquires of a Sadhu whether there is merit in such actions, or even if they do
not inquire, the Sadhu should not permit such actions to a person who is engaged
in violence against living beings.  When the question arises, "How should it
be?" the solution is given as follows: A Sadhu who is free from the sins of
self-concealment in thought, word, and deed, and who has conquered the senses,
should not permit such actions.  The Sutra further states that one should avoid
giving permission for such actions.  "Even if someone starts to dig a well, do
not say that there is merit in it. Or, if there is no merit, do not say so. This
is a great fear."  The commentary explains that if a king or someone else asks a
Sadhu whether there is merit in digging a well or running a food distribution
center, the Sadhu, upon hearing such words, should not agree to either of the
answers, "There is merit" or "There is no merit," because both are fraught with
great fear and fault.  "Those who are killed for the sake of giving food and
water, whether they are mobile or immobile, are killed for their protection.
Therefore, do not say that there is merit in such actions."  The commentary
explains that the Sadhu should not agree to such actions because they involve
the killing of mobile and immobile beings for the sake of providing food and
water. The Sadhu, being self-controlled and having conquered the senses, should
not say that there is merit in such actions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram jaise kuAM khudavAnA, tAlAba khudavAnA, pyAU lagavAnA,
anna kSetra calAnA Adi karanA cAhe aura vaha sAdhu se jijJAsita kare ki isameM
dharma hai yA nahIM hai athavA vaisA vaha jijJAsita na bhI kare to sAdhu usake
lihAja se prANiyoM kI hiMsA meM udyata puruSa ko vaisA karane kI anujJA na de  /
prazna upasthita karate hue kahA jAtA hai ki kaisA hote hue ? uttara ke rUpa meM
samAdhAna kiyA jAtA hai-mana, vacana evaM deha se Atmagupta-pApa nivRtta tathA
jitendriya hotA huA vaha sAdhu isa kArya kI anujJA na de jo sAvadha hai| sAvadya
kArya kI anumati kA parihAra-pratiSedha karate hue kahate haiM  /  tahA giraM
samArabbha, atthi puNNaMti No vae  /  ahavANatthi puNNaMti, evameyaM mahabbhayaM
// 17 //  chAyA - tathA giraM samArabhya, asti puNyamiti no vadet  /  athavA
nAsti puNya mityevametad mahAbhayam  //  anuvAda - yadi koI puruSa vaisA kArya
karanA cAhatA huA sAdhu se prazna kare ki mere dvArA kiye jAte kArya meM puNya
hai athavA puNya nahIM hai, to usa para sAdhu puNya hai, aisA na kahe tathA
puNya nahIM hai aisA kahanA bhI atyanta bhaya kA-doSa kA hetu hai isaliye vaisA
bhI na bole  /  TIkA - kenacidrAjAdinA kUpakhananasatradAnAdipravRttena pRSTaH
sAdhu:-kimasmadanuSThAne asti paNyamAhosvinnAstIti ? evaM bhatAM giraM
'samArabhya' nizamyAzritya asti paNyaM nAsti vetyevamabhayathApi mahAbhayamiti
matvA doSahetutvena nAnumanyeta  // 17 //  TIkArtha - kuA~ khudavAnA yA
annakSetra calAnA Adi kArya hetu udyat koI rAjA Adi sAdhu se prazna kare ki mere
isa kArya meM puNya hai athavA puNya nahIM hai to sAdhu usakI isa prakAra kI
vANI sunakara puNya hai athavA puNya nahIM hai-ina donoM hI prakAra ke uttara
meM atyanta bhaya-doSa dekhatA huA donoM meM se kisI kA bhI anumodana na kare  /
dANaTThayA ya je pANA, hammati tasathAvarA  /  tesiM sArakkhaNaDhAe, tamhA
atthitti No vae  // 18 //  chAyA - dAnArthaJca ye prANAH hanyante trasa
sthAvarAH  /  teSAM saMrakSaNArthAya tasmAdastIti no vadet  //  anuvAda -
annadAna evaM jaladAna karane hetu jo trasa yA sthAvara prANI hata pratihata
kiye jAte hai unake saMrakSaNa ke dRSTikoNa se sAdhu vaisA karane meM puNya hotA
hai, yaha na kahe  /  TIkA- kimarthaM nAnubhanyeta ityAha-annapAnadAnArtha-
mAhAramudakaMca pacanapAcanAdikayA kriyayAkUpakhananAdikayA copakalpayet, tatra
yasmAd 'hanyante' vyApAdyante trasAH sthAvarAzca jantavaH tasmAtteSAM
'rakSANArthaM' rakSA nimittaM sAdhurAtmagupto jitendriyo'tra bhavadIyAnuSThAne
puNyamityevaM no vadediti  // 18 //  (478

Page #507 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Commentary on the Text:**  Why should one not approve of
this? The solution is that food is prepared through actions like cooking and
baking for the purpose of feeding, and digging wells, etc., are necessary for
providing water. In these actions, many stationary and mobile beings are killed
and destroyed. Therefore, for the sake of their protection, a self-controlled,
restrained ascetic should not say that there is merit in your actions.  **Verse
19:**  **Verse:** Those who provide food and water in this way, they are causing
harm to those who benefit from it. Therefore, one should not say that there is
no merit in it.  **Commentary:** Even if one were to say that there is no merit,
one should not say that either. The verse says, "Those" beings, for whom "that"
food and water, etc., are provided by those who are wise in Dharma, they produce
this kind of food and water, which is tainted by the fault of harming living
beings. Because of the prohibition of this, "their" (those who seek food and
water) "benefit is obstructed" (they are harmed). In the absence of this, they
would suffer. Therefore, one should not say that there is no merit in digging
wells, performing sacrifices, etc.  **Commentary on the Text:**  One should say
that there is no merit, but one should not say that. In this way, the
explanation of what is said is as follows: Those who, with a sense of Dharma,
provide food and water, etc., to living beings, their actions are tainted by the
fault of harming living beings. By prohibiting this, there is an obstruction or
hindrance to the benefit of those who desire food and water. In the absence of
this, they would suffer. Therefore, one should not say that there is no merit in
digging wells, running farms, etc.  **Verse 20:**  **Verse:** Those who praise
giving, they desire the killing of beings. Those who oppose giving, they destroy
the livelihood of beings.  **Commentary:** To explain this same meaning more
concisely and clearly, the verse says: Those who praise giving, like sacrifices,
etc., because it benefits many beings, they are praising it. Those who are truly
knowledgeable, they desire the killing of beings through the praise of giving,
because giving cannot exist without killing. Those who think, "We are subtle-
minded," and are ignorant of the true nature of the scriptures, they destroy the
livelihood of beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayanaM TIkArtha - aisA kyoM nahIM anumodana kare ? isakA samAdhAna
karate haiM ki annadAna, khAdya padArtha dene hetu pacana-pakAnA, pAcana-
pakavAnA Adi kriyAoM ke mAdhyama se bhojana taiyAra kiyA jAtA hai tathA jaladAna
hetu kUpakhanana Adi kriyAeM karanI par3atI haiM, inameM trasa sthAvara prANI
vyApAdita hote haiM, naSTa hote haiM  /  ataH unake rakSaNa ke abhiprAya se
Atmagupta jitendriya sAdhu aisA na bole ki Apake isa kArya meM puNya hai| jesiM
taM uvakappaMti, annapANaM tahAvihaM  /  tesiM lAbhaMtarAyaMti, tamhA Nasthiti
No vae  // 19 //  chAyA - yeSAntadupakalpayantyannapAnaM tathAvidham  /  teSAM
lAbhAntarAya iti, tasmAnnAstIti no vadet  //  anuvAda - jina prANiyoM ko dene
hetu khAdya padArtha taiyAra kiye jAte haiM, pAnI kI vyavasthA kI jAtI hai, una
prANiyoM ko inake milane meM antarAya-bAdhA utpanna na ho isa hetu sAdhu aisA
bhI na bole ki isameM puNya nahIM hai| TIkA - yadyevaM nAsti puNyamiti brUyAt,
tadetadapi na brUyAdityAha-'yeSAM' jantUnAM kRte 'tad' annapAnAdikaM kila dharma
buddhayA upakalpayanti tathAvidhaM prANyupamardadoSaduSTaM niSpAdayanti,
tanniSedhe cayasmAt teSAm'AhArapAnArthinAM tat 'lAbhAntarAyo' vighno bhavet,
tadabhAvena tu te pIDayeran, tasmAtkUpakhananasatrAdike karmaNi nAsti
puNyamityetadapi no vadediti  // 19 //  TIkArtha - puNya nahIM hai yoM bolanA
cAhiye kintu vaisA na bole  /  isa prakAra jo kahA-isa saMbaMdha meM
spaSTIkaraNa karate hue kahate haiM-jina prANiyoM ko dharma buddhi se annapAna
Adi kA dAna denA upakalpita karate haiM, vaisA karane meM prANiyoM ke
upamardana-hiMsA ke doSa se vaha kArya dUSita hotA hai| usakA niSedha karane
para anna jala ke icchuka prANiyoM ke lAbha meM antarAya yA vighna hotA hai  /
usake abhAva meM ve pIDita hote haiM  /  ataH kuA~ khodanA anna kSetra calAnA
Adi kAryoM meM puNya nahIM hai, aisA bhI nahIM kahanA cAhiye  /  je ya dANaM
pasaMsaMti, vahamicchaMti pANiNaM  /  /  je ya NaM paDisehaMti, vitticcheyaM
karaMti te  // 20 //  chAyA - ye ca dAnaM prazaMsanti vadhamicchanti prANinAm  /
ye ca taM pratiSedhanti, vRtticchedaM kurvanti te  //  anuvAda - jo dAna kI
prazasti karate haiM-use acchA batalAte haiM, ve prANiyoM ke vadha-nAza kI icchA
karate haiM tathA jo dAna kA pratirodha karate haiM ve prANiyoM kI vRtti-AjIvikA
kA cheda-hanana yA nAza karate haiN| TIkA - enamevArthaM punarapi samAsataH
spaSTataraM vibhaNiSurAha-ye kecana prapAsatrAdikaM dAnaM bahUnAM
jantUnAmupakArItikRtvA prazaMsanti zlAghante te'
paramArthanabhijJAHprabhUtataraprANinAMtatprazaMsAdvAreNa
vadha'prANAtipAtamicchanti, tadAnasya prANAtipAtamantareNAnupapatteH, ye'pi ca
kila sUkSmadhiyo vayamityevaM manyamAnA AgamasadbhAvAnabhijJAH -479

Page #508 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:  The Sutrakritanga
Sutra states, "They prohibit and forbid, but they too are ignorant of the true
meaning. They obstruct the livelihood (vrittichhedaṃ) and means of subsistence
of living beings." (20)  Thus, the king or another wealthy person, who is
engaged in digging wells, ponds, performing yajnas, running agricultural fields,
etc. for the purpose of acquiring merit, asks the mumukṣus (aspirants for
liberation) about the merit in these activities. In response, the Sutrakara
(author of the Sutras) explains what should be done and said.  "They do not
speak in either way, whether there is or there is not merit again. Abandoning
the impurity of karma, they attain nirvāṇa." (21)  Commentary: The monks do not
say whether there is merit in food-related or water-related donations or not.
They, the faultless speakers, having abandoned the impurity of karma, attain
nirvāṇa.  If the monks were to say that there is merit, then it would imply that
the destruction of infinite subtle and gross living beings is always there, and
only a few get temporary satisfaction. Therefore, they do not say "there is
merit" or "there is no merit." This is because if they negate the merit, it
would create an obstacle for those who desire it.  Thus, the monks remain silent
on this matter. Our diet, free from the forty-two faults, is appropriate for the
aspirants of liberation, as it is said:  "Drinking the cool water, white as the
rays of the moon, from the wells and ponds, the groups of living beings become
delighted in mind, their thirst completely quenched. When the flood of water is
dried up by the rays of the sun, the endless (living beings) go to destruction.
Therefore, the group of monks remains indifferent towards the wells and ponds,
etc." (1)  In this way, in both cases, by remaining silent, they abandon the
impurity of karma and attain nirvāṇa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 _ zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram 'pratiSedhanti' niSedhayanti te'pyagItArthAH prANinAM
'vRtticchedaM' vartanopAyavighnaM kurvantIti  // 20 //  tadevaM rAjJA anyena
vezvareNa kUpataDAgayAgasatradAnAdyudyatena puNyasadbhAvaM
pRSTairmumukSubhiryadvidheyaM taddarzapitumAha - _TIkArtha - sUtrakAra isI bAta
ko saMkSipta rUpa meM spaSTa karane hetu pratipAdita karate haiM-pyAU lagAnA,
anna kSetra calAnA Adi dAnamUlaka kAryoM ko yaha jAnakara ki inase bahuta se
jIvoM kA upakAra sadhatA hai, ' jo inakI zlAghA-bar3AI karate haiM ve paramArtha
se-satya tattva se anabhijJa haiM, vAstavikatA nahIM jAnate  /  ve una kAryoM kI
zlAghA dvArA aneka prANiyoM ke prANAtipAta-hiMsA kI icchA rakhate haiM kyoMki
prANiyoM ke atipAtanAza ke binA ye kArya upapana nahIM ho sakate-sadha nahIM
sakate  /  hama sUkSma buddhi ke dhanI haiM, yoM mAnate hue Agamika siddhAnta se
anabhijJa puruSa ina dAna kAryoM kA niSedha karate haiM ve bhI agItArtha haiM-
zAstra ke rahasya se anabhijJa haiM, kyoMki niSedha kiye jAne se prANiyoM kI
jIvikA kA-AjIvikA kA viccheda hotAhai  /  usameM vighna hotA hai| rAjA athavA
anya kisI vaibhavazAlI puruSa dvArA kuA~ khudavAnA, tAlAba khudavAnA, yajJa
karanA, annakSetra calAnA Adi kArya karane hetu udyata hokara sAdhu se ina
kAryoM meM kyA puNya hotA hai ? yaha pUche jAne para mokSArthI sAdhu dvArA jo
kiyA jAnA cAhiye, kahA jAnA cAhiye, yaha digdarzana karAne hetu sUtrakAra
batalAte haiM  /  duhaovi te Na bhAsaMti, atthi vA natthi vA puNo  /  AyaM
rayassa heccA NaM nivvANaM pAuNaMti te  // 21 //  chAyA - dvidhA'pi te na
bhASante, asti vA nAsti vA punaH  /  AyaM rajaso hitvA, nirvANaM prApnuvanti te
//  anuvAda - sAdhu anna viSayaka tathA jala viSayaka dAna meM puNya hotA hai yA
puNya nahIM hotA hai, ye donoM hI bAta nahIM kahate  /  ve karmaraja kA Agamana
tyAgakara Azrava nirodha kara mokSa prApta karate haiN| , TIkA - yadyasti
puNyamityevamUcustato'nantAnAM sattvAnAM sUkSmabAdarANAM sarvadA prANatyAga evaM
svAta prINanamAtraM tu punaH svalpAnAM svalpakAlIyamato'stIti na vaktavyaM nAsti
puNyamityevaM pratiSedhe'pi tadarthinAmantarAya: syAdityato 'dvidhApi' asti
nAsti vA paNya mityeva 'te' mamakSavaH sAdhavaH panarna bhASante. kiMta paSTai
sadimaunaM samAzrayaNIyaM, nirbandhe tvasmAkaM dvicatvAriMzaddoSavarjita AhAraH
kalpate, evaMvidhaviSaye mumukSuNAmadhikAra eva nAstIti, uktaM ca -
"satyaMvapreSu zItaM zazikaradhavalaM vAri pItvA prakAmaM, vyucchinnAzeSatRSNAH
pramuditamanasaH prANi sArthA bhvnti| zoSaM nIte jalaughe dinakara
kiraNairyAntyanantA vinAzaM, tenodAsInabhAvaM vrajati munigaNaH kUpavaprAdikAyeM
// 1 // " tadevamubhayathApi bhASite 'rajasaH' karmaNa 'Ayo' lAbho
bhavatItyatastamAyaM rajaso maunenAnavadyabhASaNena vA 'hitvA' tyaktvA 'te'
anavadyabhASiNo 'nirvANaM' mokSaM prApnuvantIti  // 21 //  TIkArtha -
annakSetra, jala prapA Adi ke nirmANa yA saMcAlana Adi meM puNya hotAhai-yadi
sAdhu yoM kahe to usake samakSa yaha sthiti utpanna hotI hai ki ina kAryoM meM
ananta sUkSma aura sthUla jIvoM kA sadA vinAza hotA hai aura thor3e se jIvoM ko
svalpakAla takatRpti milatI hai  /  ata: yaha vicArate hue ina dAna kAryoM -4800

Page #509 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shri Margadhyayanam**  Do not state that there is merit in this.  There is no
merit in these acts of charity - when such a prohibitive statement is made, it
creates an obstacle or hindrance for those who benefit from the charity.
Therefore, seekers aspiring for liberation do not say that there is merit, nor
do they say that there is sin. When asked by anyone, they take refuge in
silence. If someone insists excessively, the sage should only say, "For us,
forty-two faults are considered forbidden food." We, the seekers of liberation,
have no right to speak on such matters.  It is said that creatures quench their
thirst by freely drinking the cool, pure water of lakes, like the rays of the
moon. They are happy in their minds. This is true. But when the water of the
lake dries up due to the rays of the sun, countless creatures perish. Therefore,
the monks remain indifferent and neutral in matters of wells, lakes, etc.
Knowing that speaking in both ways creates karmic bondage, the sage avoids
karmic bondage by remaining silent in this regard or by speaking without fault,
without sin, and thus attains liberation.  **Nirvana is the supreme, like the
moon among the stars. Therefore, the sage, always restrained, should strive for
Nirvana.**  **Commentary:**  Nirvana, the state of liberation, is the supreme,
the most important for those who are seeking liberation, the Buddhas. They are
the Buddhas, the ones who are primarily focused on Nirvana. This is illustrated
by the example of the moon: just as the moon is the most prominent among the
stars, like Ashwini, due to its auspiciousness, its ability to measure, and its
illumination, so too, among those who seek liberation, the Buddhas, those who
have renounced the desire for heavenly realms and the position of a universal
monarch, and who are engaged in the practice of Nirvana, the complete
destruction of karma, are the most prominent, not others. Or, just as the moon
is the most prominent among the stars, so too, the Buddhas, who have realized
the truth, declare that Nirvana is the supreme, the most important in the world.
Since Nirvana is the most important, therefore, the sage, always, at all times,
with effort, with restraint of the senses, should strive for Nirvana.
**Commentary on the Commentary:**  Nirvana is called liberation, the state of
peace. Those who seek liberation, the Buddhas, who are knowledgeable about the
truth, are the most prominent, the best, or the most excellent, because they
consider Nirvana to be the most important, the most excellent, and because they
are advocates of Nirvana. The author of the sutra presents this by way of an
example: just as the moon is the most prominent among the stars, like Ashwini,
due to its auspiciousness, its ability to measure, and its illumination, so too,
among those who seek liberation, the enlightened ones, those who have renounced
the desire for heavenly realms and the position of a universal monarch, and who
are engaged in the practice of liberation, the complete destruction of karma,
are the most excellent, not others. Or, just as the moon is the most prominent
among the stars, so too, the Buddhas, who have realized the truth, declare that
liberation is the supreme, the most important in the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayanaM . meM puNya hotA hai aisA pratipAdita na kare  /  ina dAna
kAryoM meM puNya nahIM hotA hai-aisA pratiSedhAtmaka vacana kahane para usa dAna
se lAbhAnvita hone vAloM ke antarAya yA vighna hotA hai| ataH mokSAbhilASI
sAdhaka ina donoM meM-na puNya kahatehaiM aura na pApa kahate haiM  /  kinhIM
dvArA pUchane para ve mauna kA Azraya lete haiM  /  kinhIM dvArA nirbandha-
atyadhika Agraha kiye jAne para sAdhu ko itanA mAtra hI bolanA cAhiye ki-hamAre
liye bayAlIsa doSa varjita AhAra kalpanIya hai  /  aise viSayoM meM kucha bolane
kA hama mumukSuoM ko adhikAra nahIM hai  /  kahA haisarovaroM meM zItala tathA
caMdra kiraNoM ke saddaza nirmala jala kA yatheccha pAna kara prANI samUha apanI
pipAsA ko bhalI bhAMti vicchinna karate haiM-miTAte haiM  /  vaisA kara ve mana
meM pramudita hote haiM  /  yaha saca hai  /  kintu sUrya kI kiraNoM dvArA
sarovara kA pAnI jaba sUkha jAtA hai to ananta prANI vinaSTa ho jAte haiM-mara
jAte haiM  /  ataH munivRnda kue~, sarovara Adi kAryoM meM udAsIna-taTastha
bhAva liye rahate haiM  /  donoM hI taraha se saMbhASaNa karane para-kahane para
karmabaMdha hotA hai yaha jAnakara sAdhu isa saMbaMdha meM mauna rahakara athavA
anavadya-doSa rahita, pAparahita saMbhASaNa dvArA karmabaMdha kA parihAra kara
mokSa prApta karate haiN| nivvANaM paramaM buddhA, NakkhattANa va caMdimA  /
tamhA sadA jae daMte, nivvANaM saMdhae muNI  // 22 //  chAyA - nirvANaM paramaM
buddhAH nakSatrANAmiva candramAH  /  tasmAt sadA yato dAnta nirvANaM
sAdhayenmuni  //  anuvAda - jisa prakAra samagra nakSatroM meM caMdramA uttama
hai usI prakAra mokSa jagata meM sabase uttama hai| jo puruSa yaha jAnatA hai
vaha sarvazreSTha hai  /  ataH sAdhu sadaiva saMyama meM samudyata aura
jitendriya hokara mokSa kI sAdhanA meM Age bddh'e| TIkA - apica-nivRtirnivANaM
tatparamaM-pradhAnaM yeSAM paralokArthinAM buddhAnAM te tathA tAneva buddhAn
nirvANavAditvena pradhAnAnityetadRSTAntena darzayati-yathA 'nakSatrANAm'
azvinyAdInAM saumyatvapramANaprakAzakatvairadhikazcandramAH, evaM
paralokArthinAM buddhAnAM madhye ye
svargacakravartisaMpannidAnaparityAgenAzeSakarmakSayarUpaM nirvANa
mevAbhisaMdhaya pravRttAsta evapradhAnA nApara iti, yadivA yathA nakSatrANAM
candramAH pradhAnabhAvamanubhavati evaM lokasya nirvANaM paramaM
pradhAnamityevaM 'buddhA' avagata tattvAH pratipAdayantIti, yasmAcca nirvANaM
pradhAnaM tasmAtkAraNAt 'sadA' sarvakAlaM 'yataH' prayata prayatnavA (graM.
6000) na indiyanoindriyadamanena dAnto 'muni' sAdhu: 'nirvANamabhisaMghayet'
nirvANArthaM sarvAH kriyAH kuryAdityarthaH  // 22 //  TIkArtha - nirvRtti-
prazAMtabhAva ko nirvANa kahA jAtA hai  /  usako sabase pradhAna-uttama mAnane
vAle paralokArthI-apane paraloka ko sudhArane meM samudyata, buddha-tattvajJa
puruSa nirvANavAditva ke kAraNa-nirvANavAdI hone ke kAraNa sabase pradhAna hai-
zreSTha yA utkRSTa hai  /  sUtrakAra dRSTAnta dvArA ise prastuta karate hue
kahate haiM-jaise azvinI Adi nakSatroM meM saumyatA, pramANa, prakAzakartA Adi
guNoM ke kAraNa caMdramA, sarvapradhAna-sarvotkRSTa hai, usI prakAra
paralokArthI prabuddha janoM meM svarga tathA cakravartI ke vaibhava pAne ke
nidAna-abhipsA kA parityAga kara samasta karmoM ke kSayasvarUpa mokSa kI sAdhanA
meM saMpravRtta haiM, ve hI sarvottama haiM-anya nahIM  /  athavA jisa prakAra
nakSatroM ke 4811

Page #510 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Just as the moon is the best among the celestial bodies, so too is liberation
the best and most excellent. This is what the wise say. Embracing the supreme
excellence of liberation, the virtuous should always remain steadfast in their
restraint, controlling their senses and mind, and performing all the necessary
actions for liberation.  "Those who are being carried away by the currents of
the ocean of existence, by the streams of false belief, passions, and
negligence, and who are being dragged towards that, and who are being degraded
by the ripening of their own karmas, and who are without refuge, and who are
without good thoughts, for them, the Tīrthankaras, or other compassionate
Ganadharas, out of their boundless compassion, declare a beautiful island, a
place of refuge. Just as, in the ocean, a creature that has fallen into the
water, and who is being tossed about by the waves, and who is exhausted and
about to die, is told by a compassionate person to take refuge in an island, so
too, for those who are exhausted from wandering in the world, the Tīrthankaras,
etc., declare the island of right faith, etc., as a place of rest from the
wandering of the world, which has never been declared before by others. And by
doing so, they establish the foundation for liberation, which is characterized
by the cessation of wandering in the world, and which is attained by the
attainment of right faith, etc., and which is declared by the wise to be the
most excellent."  "Those who are self-controlled, always restrained, with their
karmic currents cut off, and who are free from the flow of karma, and who
declare the pure Dharma, and who consider it to be complete, are truly
liberated."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram madhya caMdramA zreSTha hai usI prakAra mokSa sabase
zreSTha-uttama hai  /  tattvajJa puruSa aisA kahate haiM  /  mokSa kI
sarvottamatA ko AtmasAt karate hue sAdhu saMyama meM sadA samudyata rahate hue
indriyoM evaM mana ko vazagata karate hue mokSa hetu sabhI apekSita
sAdhanAmUlaka kriyAeM karate rahe  /  bujjhamANANa pANANaM, kiccaMtANa sakammuNA
/  AghAti sAhu taM dIvaM, patiDhesA pavuccaI  // 23 //  chAyA - uhyamAnAnaM
prANAnAM, kRtyamAnAnAM svakarmaNA  /  AkhyAti sAdhu tadvIpaM, pratiSThaiSA
procyate  //  anuvAda - bhagavAna mahAvIra Adi tIrthaMkaroM, gaNadharoM ne usa
dharma kA-mokSa mArga kA AkhyAna kiyA, jo mithyAtva kaSAya Adi kI dhArA meM
bahate jA rahe tathA apane karmoM ke phalasvarUpa kaSTa pA rahe prANiyoM ke liye
uttama dvIpa rUpa-Azraya sthAna svarUpa hai  /  TIkA-kiJcAnyat-saMsArasAgara
strotobhirmithyAtva-kaSAyapramAdAdikaiH uhyamAnAnAM tadabhimukhaM nIyamAnAnAM
tathA svakarmodayena nikRtyamAnAnAmazaraNAnAmasumatAM
parihitaikarato'kAraNavatsalastIrthakRdanyo vA
gaNadharAcAryAdikasteSAmAzvAsabhUtaM sAdhuM' zobhanaM dvIpamAkhyAti, yathA
samudrAntaH patitasya jantorjalakallolAkulitasya mumUrSorratizrAntasya vizrAma
hetuM dvIpaM kAzcitsAdhurvatsalatayA samAkhyAti, evaM taM tathAbhUtaM "dvIpa"
samyakdarzanAdikaM saMsAra bhramaNa vizrAma hetuM
paratIrthikairanAkhyAtapUrvamAkhyAti, evaM ca kRtvA pratiSThAnaM pratiSThA-
saMsArabhramaNa virati lakSaNaiSA samyagdarzanAdyavAptisAdhyA mokSa prAptiH
prakarSeNa tattvajJaiH 'ucyate procyata iti  // 23 //  TIkArtha - mithyAtva
kaSAya evaM pramAda Adi dvArA jo saMsAra rUpI sAgara ke srota haiM, bahAye jA
rahesaMsAra kI ora le jAye jA rahe tathA apane karmoM ke udaya se kaSTa bhoga
rahe  /  trANa rahita prANiyoM ke vizrAmaavalaMbana hetu parahita parAyaNa
akAraNa vAtsalyamaya-kRpAzIla tIrthaMkara, gaNadhara evaM AcArya Adi sundara
dvIpa ke AzrayabhUta samyakdarzana Adi kA AkhyAna karate haiM-jaise samudra meM
patita koI prANI pAnI kI laharoM se Akula-atyanta parizrAnta tathA maraNAsanna
ho rahA ho to use vizrAma dene hetu koI satpuruSa vAtsalyatA-dayApUrvaka dvIpa
kA sahArA lene kA kathana karatA hai, usI prakAra saMsAra meM bhaTakate rahane
se parizrAnta bane prANiyoM ke vizrAma hetu tIrthaMkara Adi samyakdarzana Adi kA
upadeza dete haiM  /  jaisA anya matavAdiyoM ne na kabhI pahale kiyA aura na
karate haiM  /  tattvadRSTA puruSa pratipAdita karate haiM ki samyak darzana Adi
se hI prANI pratiSThA-bhava bhramaNa se chuTakArA-mokSa prApta karate haiN|
Ayagutte sayA daMte, chinnasoe aNAsave  /  je dhammaM suddhamakkhAti,
paDipunnamaNelisaM  // 24 //  chAyA - AtmaguptaH sadA dAnta cchinnasrotA
anAzravaH  /  _yo dharma zuddha mAkhyAti pratipUrNa manIdRzam  //  482

Page #511 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Translation:**  **Chapter 24**  The holy path of knowledge (Margaadhyayanam)
teaches the pure and unparalleled Dharma, which is always self-guarded
(Aatmagupta), with subdued senses (Daant-Jiteindriya), and free from the sources
of false beliefs (Chinnasrot Mithyaatva), and free from the inflow of karmas
(Aashrava).  **Commentary:**  What is this island of peace (Aashvaasadweepa)?
Who is the person who teaches about it? The sutrakar says: The one whose soul is
free from mental, verbal, and physical misconduct (Aatmagupta), who always
controls the senses and mind (Daant-Jiteindriya), who is devoted to Dharma and
meditation, who has destroyed the sources of the worldly cycle (Chinnasrot), and
whose inflow of karmas (Aashrava) like violence (Praanaatipaata) etc. has
ceased, such a person teaches the pure Dharma, free from all defects.  What kind
of Dharma is it? It is complete (Pratipoorna), free from all parts
(Niravayavata), free from all falsehoods (Sarvaviryata), the only cause for
liberation (Mokshagamanaikahetu), and unparalleled (Aneedrisham).  **Chapter
25**  Those who do not know this Dharma, who are unwise (Abuddha) but think they
are wise (Buddhmaanino), are far away from the true understanding (Samadhi).
**Commentary:**  Those who do not know this pure, complete, and unparalleled
Dharma, who are devoid of wisdom (Aprabuddha), who think they are wise
(Panditmaanino), and who believe that they are the only ones who know the truth
of Dharma, are far away from the true understanding (Samadhi) which is based on
right perception (Samyagdarshan). All such people are to be considered as
belonging to other religions (Parateerthika).  **Chapter 26**  Those who eat
(Bhocca), meditate (Jhaana), and sleep (Jhiyaayamti) without understanding this
Dharma, are not in true understanding (Samadhi).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayanaM anuvAda - sadA Atmagupta, dAMta-jiteMdriya tathA chinnasrota
mithyAttva Adi ke srota kA ucchedaka tathA Azrava rahita puruSa pratipUrNa
zuddha evaM anupama dharma kA upadeza karatA hai  /  _TIkA -
kiMbhUto'sAvAzvAsadvIpo bhavati ? kI dRgvidhena vA'sAvAkhyAyata
ityetadAhamanovAkkAyairAtmA gupto yasya sa AtmaguptaH tathA 'sadA'
sarvakAlamindriyanoindriyadamanena dAnto-vazeyandriyo dharmadhyAnadhyAyI
vetyarthaH, tathA chinnAni-troTitAni saMsArasrotAMsi yena sa tathA, etadeva
spaSTataramAha-nirgata AzravaH-prANAtipAtAdikaH karmapravezadvArarUpo yasmAtsa
nirAzravo ya evaMbhUtaH sa 'zuddha' samastadoSApetaM dharmamAkhyAti, kiMbhUtaM
dharma ? - 'pratipUrNa' niravayavatayA sarvaviratyAkhyaM mokSagamanaikahetum
'anIdRzam' ananyasaddazam dvitiiymitiyaavt||24|| evaMbhUtadharmavyatirekiNAM
doSAbhidhitsayA''ha - TIkArtha - vaha dvIpa jo prANiyoM ke vizrAma kA heta
bhUtahai, kaisA hai ? kaisA puruSa usakA AkhyAnaupadeza karatA hai ? yaha
prakaTa karane hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM-jisakI AtmA mAnasika, vAcika tathA
kAyika asadAcaraNa se mukta hai, jo sadaiva indriya tathA mana kA damana kara
dAMta-jitendriya hai, dharmadhyAna meM abhirata hai, jisane saMsAra ke srotoM ko
ucchinna kara DAlA hai-naSTa kara DAlA hai, karmapraveza ke dvAra rUpa
prANAtipAta Adi Azrava jisake nirgata-apagata ho gaye haiM, vaisA puruSa zuddha-
samagra doSa rahita dharma kA AkhyAna karatA hai, upadeza karatA hai  /  prazna
upasthita karate hue kahate haiM vaha dharma kisa prakAra kA hai ? uttara meM
nirAkaraNa karatehue kahA jAtA hai-vaha pratipUrNa hai, apane Apa meM saMpUrNatA
liye hue haiM  /  saba prakAra ke asat viramaNa se yukta hai, mokSa gamana kA
ekamAtra hetu hai, anupama hai-jisake sadRza dUsarA koI nahIM hai  /  jo aise
dharma meM vizvAsa nahIM karate, unake doSa prakaTa karane hetu sUtrakAra kahate
haiN| tameva avijANaMtA, abuddhA buddhamANiNo  /  buddhA motti ya mannaMtA, aMta
ete samAhie  // 25 //  chAyA - tamevAvijAnAnA abuddhAH buddhamAninaH  /  buddhA
smeti manyamAnA antaete samAdheH  //  anuvAda - jo dharma ke zuddha svarUpa ko
nahIM jAnate, jo aviveka yukta haiM hama hI tattvavettA haiM aisA samajhate haiM
ve anyamatavAdI samAdhI se dUra haiN| TIkA - tamevaMbhUtaM zuddhaM
paripUrNamanIdRzaM dharmamajAnAnA 'aprabuddhA' avivekinaH 'paNDitamAnino'
vayameva pratibuddhA dharmatattvamityevaM manyamAnA bhAva samAdheH-
samyagdarzanAkhyAdante-paryante'tidUre vartanta iti, te ca sarve'pi paratIrthikA
draSTavyA iti  // 25 //  _TIkArtha - pahale jisakA ullekha huA hai, ve aise
zuddha paripUrNa anidRza-apratima dharma ko jo nahIM jAnate, jo vivekazUnya
haiM, hama hI pratibaddha haiM-dharmatattva ke jJAtA haiM, aisA mAnate haiM
kintu ve samyakdarzana mUlaka bhAva samAdhi se dUra hai| te ya bIodagaM ceva,
tamuhissA ya jaM kaDaM  /  bhoccA jhANaM jhiyAyaMti, akheyannA' (a) samAhiyA  //
26 //  -483)

Page #512 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra
states - They who have consumed the food consisting of seeds, water, and that
which is dedicated to them, practice Arta-dhyana (meditation on pain and
suffering), being devoid of equanimity and unsteady in mind.  Commentary - Why
do these Tirthikas (followers of other faiths) remain far from the path of true
spiritual contemplation? Apprehending this, the author says - "They" (referring
to the Shavaka, Bauddha, etc.) who are ignorant of the true nature of Jiva
(living beings) and Ajiva (non-living substances), have consumed the food
consisting of "Bijas" (grains like rice, wheat, etc.), "Shitodaka" (cold water),
and that which is prepared and dedicated to them by their followers. Having
consumed this, they engage in Arta-dhyana (meditation on pain and suffering),
being attached to the feelings of pleasure, pride, honor, etc., and not in
Dharma-dhyana (meditation on righteousness) like those who desire worldly
pleasures and are possessed of servants, slaves, wealth, grains, etc. As it is
said - "Where there is possession of a village, field, house, cows, servants,
etc., how can there be auspicious meditation?" And also - "Attachment is the
abode of delusion, the diminution of fortitude, the adversary of peace, the
friend of wickedness, the dwelling of sin, the source of sorrow, the destruction
of happiness, the enemy of meditation, and even for the wise, possession is like
a disease, leading to affliction or destruction."  Thus, for those engaged in
activities like cooking, serving, etc., and contemplating on the same, how can
there be the arising of auspicious meditation? Furthermore, these Tirthikas are
"Akheda-jnah" (unskilled) in the discrimination of righteousness and
unrighteousness. The Shavaka, etc. consider even the enjoyment of delicious
food, comfortable dwelling, and luxurious seats as conducive to auspicious
meditation, and thus teach the consumption of meat, etc., taking refuge in
different designations, and consider the undertaking of activities as faultless,
as it is said - "The child, having given up meat-eating, consumes this 'Kalka'
(meat-substitute), and thus, abandoning the undertaking, performs it under the
pretext of others."  However, this does not make it faultless, for just as the
change of designation from 'Luta' (poison) to 'Shitalika' (something cooling)
does not make it different, nor does the designation of 'Madhu' (honey) make
poison sweet, similarly, the lack of skill in the manifestation and
disappearance of terms like Kapila, etc. for other substances is evident. Thus,
these wretched Shavaka, etc., being possessed of attachments, engaged in Arta-
dhyana, and being far from the state of equanimous spiritual contemplation,
remain distant from the path of liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA - te ca bIjodakaM caiva tamuddizya ca yatkRtam
/  bhuktavA dhyAnaM dhyAyanti, akhedajJA asamAhitAH  //  anuvAda - bIja-anna
kaNa, udaka-sacita jala tathA apane ko uddiSTa kara banAye hue AhAra kA sevana
karane vAle ve paramatavAdI dhyAna-ArtadhyAna dhyAte haiM-usameM lage rahate
haiM  /  ve bhAva samAdhi se dUra hai| TIkA - kimiti te tIthikA
bhAvamArgarUpAtsamArdUre vartanta ityAzaGkayAha-'te ca' zAkyAdayo
jIvAjIvAnabhijJatayA 'bIjAni' zAligodhUmAdIni, tathA 'zItodakam' aprAsukodakaM,
tAMzcoddizya tadbhaktairyadAhArAdikaM 'kRtaM' niSpAditaM tatsarvamavivekitayA te
zAkyAdayo 'bhuktvA' abhyavahRtya punaH sAtarddhirasagauratAsaktamanasaH
saMghabhaktAdikriyayA tadavAptikRte ArtaM dhyAnaM dhyAyanti, na
baihikasukhaiSiNAM dAsIdAsadhanadhAnyAdi parigrahavatAM dharmadhyAnaM bhavatIti,
tathA coktam - "grAmakSetragRhAdInAM, gavAM preSyajanasya ca  /  yasminparigraho
dRSTo, dhyAnaM tatra kutaH zubham ?  // 1 // " iti, tathA - "mohasyAyatanaM
dhRterapacayaH zAnteH pratIpo vidhiAkSepasya suhRnmadasya bhavanaM pApasya vAso
nijaH  /  duHkhasya prabhavaH sukhasya nidhanaM dhyAnasya kaSToripuH,
prAjJasyApi parigraho graha iva klezAya nAzAya va  // 1 // " tadevaM
pacanapAcanAdikriyApravRttAnAM tadeva cAnuprekSamANAnA kutaH zubhadhyAnasya
saMbhavaH ? iti  /  apicate tIthikA dharmAdharma viveke kartavye akhedajJA'
anipuNAH, tathAhizAkyA manojJAhAra vasatizayyAsanAdikaM rAgakAraNamapi
zubhadhyAna nimitta tvenAdhyavasyanti, tathA coktammaNuNNaM bhoyaNaM bhucce
'tyAdi, tathA mAMsaM kalkikamityupadizya saMjJAntara samAzrayaNAnnideSi
manyante, buddhasaMvAdinimitaM cArambhaM nirdoSamiti, taduktam - "maMsanivattiM
kA uM sevai daMtikkagaMti dhaNibheyA  /  iya caiUNAraMbhaM paravavaesA kuNai
bAlo  // 1 // " chAyA- mAMsanivRtiM kRtvA sevate idaM kalkimiti dhvanibhedAdevaM
tyaktvArambhaM paravyapadezAtkaroti baalH||1|| na caitAvatA tannirdoSatA, na hi
lUtAdikaM zItalikAdyabhidhAnAntaramAtreNAnyathAtvaM bhajate, viSaM vA madhura
kAbhidhAne neti, evamanyeSAmapikApilAdInAmAvirbhAvatiromAvAbhidhAnAbhyAM
vinaashotpaadaavbhiddhtaamnaipunnymaavisskrnniiy| tadevaM te varAkAHzAkyAdayo
manojJoddiSTabhojinaHsaparigrahatayA''rtadhyAyino'samAhitA
mokSamArgAkhyAdbhAvasamAdherasaMvRttatayA dUreNa vartanta ityarthaH  // 26 //
TIkArtha - ve paramatavAdI bhAvAtmaka samAdhi se kyoM dUra haiM ? yaha prazna
upasthita karate hue sUtrakAra usakA nirAkaraNa karatehue kahate haiM  /  ve
bauddha Adi anya matavAdI jIva ajIva Adi tattvoM ko nahIM jAnate haiM  /  ataH
zAli-cAMvala vizeSa, gehU~ Adi anna, sacita jala tathA unako dene hetu unake
upAsakoM dvArA taiyAra kiye gaye bhojana kA ajJAnavaza sevana karate haiM evaM
sakha. samaddhi. rasa. gaurava. mAna. pratiSThA meM Asata haiM  /  apane dharma
saMgha ke liye AhAra Adi taiyAra karavAne evaM use prApta karane hetu ArtadhyAna
meM lIna rahate haiM  /  jo loga aihika sukha cAhate haiM tathA dAsI, dAsa,
dhana, dhAnya Adi parigraha yukta hai unako dharmadhyAna nahIM hotA  /  kahA hai
- jisameM gAMva, kSetra, ghara, gAyeM, naukara, cAkara Adi kA parigraha
dRSTigocara hotA hai jo etanmUlaka parigraha se yukta hai usako zubha dhyAna
kahAM se sadhegA  /  aura bhI kahA hai-parigraha, moha kA Ayatana-AvAsa sthAna
hai, dhIratA kA apacaya hai-nAza karatA hai-zAMti kA pratIpa-bAdhaka hai citta
ko vyAkSipta-caMcala banAtA 484)

Page #513 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Margadhyayanam is the friend of ego and pride, the abode of sin, the cause
of the origin of sorrow, the destroyer of happiness, and a painful enemy for
meditation. It torments even the learned like the planets. Therefore, how can
auspicious meditation be possible for those who are engaged in activities like
cooking, serving food, etc. and are absorbed in the same? They are unskilled in
discerning other religious and non-religious doctrines, because they consider
the pleasant, delicious food, dwelling, bedding, etc., which are actually
passion-producing, as the cause of auspicious meditation. As they say,
auspicious meditation is attained by the consumption of dear, delicious food,
etc. They give the term "Kalkika" to meat and consider it innocent. They
consider the acts of violence, etc. undertaken for the sake of the Buddhist
Sangha as innocent. It is said that the ignorant, while refraining from meat,
still consume it by giving it the name "Kalkika." They abandon the beginning (of
violence) and do the same under the pretext of others, such as the Sangha, etc.
But by merely changing the name, the fault is not removed. Just as calling the
excessive heat of summer as "coolness" does not change its quality, or calling
poison as nectar does not make it nectar, similarly, it should be known that
this is the ineptitude of the Kapila doctrine followers, the Sankhyas, who
expound the terms "manifestation" and "disappearance" for origination and
destruction. The unrestrained Buddhists and others, who indulge in pleasant,
delightful, and recommended food, remain far from the samadhi leading to the
path of liberation due to the lack of restraint and impurity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayanaM hai, mada-ahaMkAra kA mitra hai, pApa kA bhavana-ghara hai,
duHkha kA prabhava-utpatti hetu hai, sukha kA vidhvaMsaka hai, dhyAna ke liye
kaSTaprada zatru hai  /  vaha vidvAna ko bhI graha kI jyoM kaSTa detA hai-naSTa
kara DAlatA hai  /  ataH bhojana pakAnA pakavAnA Adi kriyAoM meM saMlagna rahane
vAle aura usI kI phikra meM juTe hue puruSoM ke liye zubha dhyAna kahAM se
saMbhAvitahai  /  ve anya matavAdI dharma adharma ke viveka meM-unake bIca bheda
karane meM akuzala hai kyoMki ve zAkya-bauddha manojJa-mana ke liye prItikara
AhAra, vasati-AvAsa sthAna, zaiyyA Asana Adi jo vAstava meM rAgotpAdaka haiM,
unheM zubha dhyAna kA kAraNa mAnate haiM  /  jaisA ve kahate haiM priya svAdiSTa
bhojana Adi ke sevana se zubhadhyAna hotA hai  /  ve mAMsa ko kalkika nAmAMtara
dekara use nirdoSa mAnate haiM  /  buddha saMgha ke nimitta kiye jAne vAle
Arambha-hiMsA Adi upakramoM ko nirdoSa kahatehaiM  /  kahA gayAhai ki ajJAnI
mAMsa nivRtti karaapane Apako mAMsa se nivRtta batalAkara bhI mAMsa ko kalkika
nAma dekara usakA sevana karate haiM  /  Arambha ko chor3akara para vipadeza se-
saMgha Adi auroM ke nAma se vaisA karate haiM  /  kiMtu aisA karane se-nAma
parivartana karane se doSa nahIM miTatA  /  jaise lUtA-grISma Rtu meM atyadhika
tApa ko zItalikA-ThaMDaka nAma dene se usake guNa meM viparItatA nahIM AtI
athavA viSa ko amRta nAma dene se vaha amRta nahIM bana jAtA  /  usI taraha
utpAda aura vinAza ko AvirbhAva evaM tirobhAva zabda dvArA pratipAdita karane
vAle kapila siddhAnta vAdiyoM-sAMkhyo kI bhI yaha anipuNatA hai, aisA jAnanA
cAhiye  /  mana ke liye priya-prItijanaka evaM udiSTa AhAra kA sevana karane
vAle parigraha rakhane ke kAraNa Arta dhyAna meM saMlagna rahane vAle asamAhita
bauddha Adi to asaMvRtatA-azubha ke saMvaraNa se rahita hone se mokSa
mArgamUlaka samAdhi se dUra hI rahate haiM  /  jahA DhaMkA ya kaMkA ya, kulalA
maggukA sihii| macchesaNaM jhiyAyaMti, jhANaM te kalusAdhamaM  // 27 //  evaM tu
samaNA ege, micchaddiTThI aNAriyA  /  visaesaNaM jhiyAyaMti, kaMkA vA kalusAhamA
// 28 //  chAyA - yathA DhAca kaGkAzca kurarA mudgukAH sidhAH  /  matsyaiSaNaM
dhyAyanti, dhyAnaM tat kaluSAdhamam  //  evaM tu zramaNA eke
mithyAdRSTayo'nAr2yAH  /  viSayaiSaNaM dhyAyanti, dhyAnantat kaluSAdhamam  //
anuvAda - jaise DhaMka, kaMka, kurara, jalamurga evaM zikhI nAmaka jala meM
rahane vAle pakSI sadaiva machaliyAM pakar3ane kI phirAka meM rahate haiM usI
taraha katipaya mithyAdRSTi anArya zramaNa tathA kathita sAdhu sadA kaluSita
adhama viSaya prAptimUlaka dhyAna dhyAte rahate haiM  /  TIkA - yathA caite
rasasAtAgauravatayA''rtadhyAyinobhavanti tathA dRSTAntadvAreNa darzayitumAha-
yathetyudAharaNopanyAsArthaH 'yathA' yena prakAreNa 'DhaGkAdayaH' pakSivizeSA
jalAzayAzrayA AmiSajIvino matsyaprAptiM dhyAvanti, evaMbhUtaM ca
dhyAnamArtaraudradhyAnarUpatayA'tyantakaluSamadhamaM ca bhavatIti  // 27 //
dArTAntikaM darzayitumAha-'eva' miti yathA DhaGkAdayo matsyAnveSaNaparaM dhyAnaM
dhyAyanti taddhyAyinazca kaluSAdhamA bhavanti evameva mithyAdRSTayaH zramaNA
'eke' zAkyAdayo'nAryakarmakAritvAsArambhaparigrahatayA anAryAH santo viSayANAM-
zabdAdInAM prAptiM dhyAyanti taddhayAyinazca kaGkA iva kaluSAmA bhavantIti  //
28 //  kiJca - (485

Page #514 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra with Commentary - English Translation
**Commentary:** The first ones described are those who are attached to the other
doctrines, being filled with the taste of the tongue, pleasure and pride, and
are engaged in the thought of suffering. To explain this by an example, the
Sutrakar states. Here, the word 'Yatha' is used to indicate an example. In a
reservoir, various birds like the Dhak, etc., who are dependent on the water,
are always engaged in the thought of catching fish, which is very polluted and
low, and is characterized by suffering and anger.  **Explanation of the
example:** Just as the Dhak, etc., birds are engaged in the thought of catching
fish, similarly, some Buddhists, etc., who are of false vision, are called
Shramanas, but are un-Aryan and low, due to their un-Aryan and low actions, and
due to being engrossed in the beginning and acquisition, are always engaged in
the thought of obtaining objects like words, etc., and enjoyments. They are
polluted and low, just like the Dhak birds.  **Sutra:**  > "**Sudham maggam
virahitta, ihamege u dummati. Ummagagata dukkham, ghayamesanti tam taha.**" (29)
**Commentary:**  > "**Shuddham marg viradhya, iha eke tu durmatayah. Ummarg gata
dukkham ghatameshyanti, tat tatha.**"  **Translation:** In this world, some who
are of false vision, with corrupted minds, or those who are engrossed in
falsehood, reject the pure and faultless path of liberation, and are engaged in
the path of error, and thus they attain suffering and destruction.
**Commentary:** 'Shuddham' means faultless, 'marg' means the path of liberation,
which is based on right vision, etc. By rejecting the path of liberation and
adopting the path of error, 'iha' in this world, in the context of the
presentation of the path of liberation, 'eke' like the Shakyas, etc., are those
whose minds are corrupted by excessive delusion due to their attachment to their
own vision, and due to the acceptance of evil means, their minds are corrupted.
They are engaged in the path of error, which leads to the descent into the
world. 'Ummarg gata' means those who are engaged in the path of error, 'dukkham'
means suffering, which is in the form of the eight types of karma, or the
suffering of birth, etc. 'Ghatam' means destruction, and 'eshanta' means they
seek, they desire, meaning they seek suffering and death hundreds of times.
**Commentary:** The path of liberation is free from faults, and is based on
right vision, etc. The Shakyas, etc., reject this path by presenting the path of
error, which is evil and false. In this world, in the context of presenting the
path of liberation, their hearts are corrupted by excessive delusion due to
their attachment to their own vision, and due to the acceptance of evil means,
their minds are corrupted. They walk on the path that leads to the descent into
the world, they are engaged in the path of error, which leads to the binding of
the eight types of karma. They suffer due to the arising of the unbearable
karma. They desire to continue on the path of error, rejecting the path of
liberation. They seek suffering and death hundreds of times, and they obtain it
due to their actions.  **Sutra:** > "**Jaha asavini nam, jai andho duruhiya.
Icchai parama gantu, antara ya visiyati.**" (30)  **Sutra:** > "**Evam tu samana
ege, micchaditthi anariya. Soyam kasina mavanna, agantaro mahabbhayam.**" (31)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - pahale jinakA varNana kiyA gayA hai ve anya
matavAdI jIbha ke svAda, sukha tathA abhimAna se yukta hote hue ArtadhyAna meM
saMlagna rahate haiM  /  dRSTAnta dvArA ise samajhAne hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdita
karate haiN| yahAM 'yathA' zabda udAharaNa ko sUcita karane hetu prayukta huA
hai  /  jalAzaya meM Azrita AmiSajIvI DhaMka Adi bhinnabhinna pakSI sadaiva
machaliyAM pakar3ane ke dhyAna meM saMlagna rahate haiM, jo Arta raudra rUpa
liye hue hotA hai atyanta kaluSita va adhama hotA hai  /  udAharaNa kA sAra
batalAte hue kahate haiM ki jaise DhaMka Adi pakSI machaliyoM ko pakar3ane kI
phirAka meM dhyAna lagAye rahatehaiM vaisA dhyAna karate hue ve kaluSita evaM
adhama haiM usI prakAra katipaya bauddha Adi mithyA dRSTi zramaNa tathAkathita
sAdhu anArya-adhama karma karane ke kAraNa evaM Arambha va parigraha meM grasta
hone ke kAraNa sadaiva zabdAdi viSayoM-bhogoM kI prApti kA dhyAna karate haiM  /
ve kaMka pakSiyoM kI jyoM kaluSita evaM adhama haiN| suddhaM maggaM virAhittA,
ihamege u dummatI  /  ummaggagatA dukkhaM, ghAyamesaMti taM tahA  // 29 //
chAyA - zuddhaM mArga virAdhya, ihaike tu durmatayaH  /  . unmArgagatAH duHkhaM
ghAtameSyanti, tattathA  //  anuvAda - isa saMsAra meM zuddha-nirdoSa mokSa
mArga kI virAdhanA kara unmArga-doSapUrNa mArga meM pravRtta katipaya durmati-
duSita buddhiyukta athavA mithyAtvagrasta anya matavAdI duHkha tathA vinAza ko
prApta karate haiM  /  TIkA - 'zuddham' avadAtaM nirdoSaM 'mArga'
samyagdarzanAdikaM mokSamArga kumArgaprarupaNayA 'virAdhya' dUSayitvA 'iha'
asminsaMsAre mokSamArgaprarUpaNaprastAve vA 'eke' zAkyAdayaH svadarzanAnurAgeNa
mahAmohAkulitAntarAtmAno daSTA pApopAdAnatayA matiryeSAM te daSTamatayaH santa
unmArgeNasaMsArAvataraNarUpeNa gatAH-pravattA unmArgagatA da:khayatIti duHkham-
aSTa prakAraM karmAsAtodayarUpaM vA taduHkhaM ghAtaM cAntazaste
tathAsanmArgavirAdhanayA unmArgagamanaM ca 'eSante', anveSayanti, duHkhamaraNe
zatazaH prArthayantItyarthaH  // 29 //  TIkArtha - doSa vivarjita samyakdarzana
Adi mokSa mArga hai  /  zAkya Adi kumArga-kutsita yA mithyA mArga kA pratipAdana
kara usakI virAdhanA karate haiM  /  isa saMsAra meM mokSamArga kI prarupaNA
karane ke saMdarbha meM unakA hRdaya apane darzana ke prati anurAga-Asakta bhAva
ke kAraNa atyadhika moha se dUSita hai tathA pApa ke upAdAnagrahaNa yA svIkAra
ke kAraNa unakI buddhi duSita hai  /  ve usa mArga para calate haiM jo saMsAra
meM utAratA hai, le jAtA hai, ve unmArga-viparItapathagAmI hai, jisase ve anta
meM aSTavidha karma bAMdhate haiM  /  asAtAvedanIya karma ke udaya se duHkha
pAte haiM  /  ve sanmArga kI virAdhanA karate hue unmArga meM calate rahane kI
abhipsA liye rahate haiN| ve saiMkar3oM bAra duHkha evaM maraNa kI abhyarthanA
karate haiM  /  apane karmoM ke kAraNa inheM prApta karate haiM  /  jahA
AsAviNiM nAvaM, jAiaMdho duruhiyA  /  icchaI pAramAgaMtuM, aMtarA ya visIyati
// 30 //  evaM tu samaNA ege, micchadiTThI aNAriyA  /  soyaM kasiNamAvannA,
AgaMtAro mahabbhayaM  // 31 //  486

Page #515 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shadow:** Just as a blind man, who has boarded a leaky boat, desires to cross
the river, but sinks in the middle, so too, some Shramanas, who are of false
views and un-Aryan, having taken in all the Asravas, attain great fear.
**Translation:** Just as a man blind from birth, who boards a leaky boat,
desires to cross the river, but sinks in the middle, so too, some Shramanas, who
are of false views and un-Aryan, having taken in all the Asravas, attain great
fear.  **Commentary:** To show the downfall of the Shakyas and others, the
Sutra-maker says: Just as a blind man from birth, having boarded a leaky boat
with hundreds of holes, desires to cross the river, but because of the holes, he
cannot cross, what then? He sinks in the middle.  **Commentary:** The Dartantika
says: In the same way, some Shramanas, the Shakyas and others, who are of false
views and un-Aryan, having taken in all the Asravas, which are in the form of
karma, attain great fear. They become those who come to the great fear, which is
the suffering of hell and other states, due to repeated wandering in the cycle
of existence. They do not have the crossing of the ocean of existence, like
those who have a boat that is not leaky.  **Commentary:** To show the downfall
or destruction of the Shakyas and others, the Sutra-maker explains through an
example: A man blind from birth, having boarded a boat with hundreds of holes,
desires to cross the river, but because of the holes in the boat, he cannot
cross, and sinks in the middle.  **Commentary:** Explaining the essence of this
example, the Sutra-maker says: In the same way, Shramanas who are of false views
and un-Aryan, like the Buddhists, who are completely immersed in the source of
the Asravas, which are the karmic inflows, wander repeatedly in the cycle of
existence and experience the suffering of hell and other states. Just as those
who are on a leaky boat cannot cross the ocean of existence.  **Shadow:** Having
taken this Dharma, which was preached by Kashyapa, one should cross this
terrible flow, and should strive for self-preservation.  **Translation:** Having
taken this Dharma, which was preached by Kashyapa, one should cross this
terrible flow, and should strive for self-preservation.  **Commentary:** Because
the Shramanas, like the Shakyas, are of false views and un-Aryan, and have taken
in all the Asravas, they become those who come to great fear. Therefore, this is
advised: "This" refers to what is immediately present, and what is to be
explained later. This is a characteristic that is manifest to all beings, and is
beautiful because it prevents downfall and establishes good conduct. The word
"Dharma" refers to the teachings and conduct, and it shows a difference from
what was said before. Because those who do not take in the Dharma of purity and
renunciation of the Asravas, become those who come to great fear, one should
take in this Dharma, which was preached by Kashyapa, the glorious...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayanaM chAyA - yathA''strAviNI nAvaM, jAtyantho duruhya  /  icchati
pAra mAgantu mantarA ca viSIdati  // 30 //  evantu zramaNA eke
mithyAdRSTayo'nAryAH  /  strota: kRtsnamApannA AgantAro mahAbhayam  // 31 //
anuvAda - janma se cakSuhIna puruSa jisa prakAra eka chidra yukta naukA para
ArUr3ha hokara nadI ko pAra karanA cAhatA hai, kintu vaha bIca meM hI DUba jAtA
hai, usI prakAra kaI mithyAdRSTi anArya-adhama zramaNa-tathAkathita sAdhu jo
sampUrNa rUpa meM AzravoM kA sevana karate haiM, ve atyanta bhaya ko prApta
karate haiM  /  TIkA - zAkyAdInAM cApAyaM didarzayiSustAvadRSTAtamAha-yathA
jAtyandha AsrAviNIM' zatacchidrAM nAvamAruhya pAramAgantumicchati, na cAsau
sacchidratayA pAragAmI bhavati, kiM tahiM ? antarAla eva-
viSIdatinimajjatItyarthaH  //  dArTAntikamAha-evameva zramaNA 'eke' zAkyAdayo
mithyAdRSTayo'nAryA bhAvanotaH-karmAzravarUpaM kRtsnaM' sampUrNamApannAH
santaste 'mahAbhayaM' paunaHpunyena saMsAra-paryaTanayA nArakAdisvabhAvaM
duHkham 'AgantAraH' AgamanazIlA bhavanti, na teSAM saMsArodadherAsrAviNI' nAvaM
vyavasthitAnAmivottaraNaM bhavatIti bhAvaH  // 30 // 31 //  TIkArtha - zAkya Adi
ke apAya-vinAza yA adhaHpatana ko batAne hetu sUtrakAra dRSTAnta dvArA
pratipAdita karate haiM-eka janma se andhA manuSya saiMkar3oM chidra yukta naukA
para ArUr3ha hokara nadI ko pAra karanA cAhatA hai kintu sachidra-chidra sahita
naukA hone ke kAraNa vaha pAra nahIM jA sakatA, bIca meM hI pAnI meM DUba jAtA
hai  /  isa dRSTAnta kA sAra batAte hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM-isI prakAra
mithyAdRSTiyukta anArya-bauddha Adi zramaNa jo sampUrNata: karmoM ke Azrava-
karmAgama srota meM saMpRkta hote haiM ve punaH punaH saMsAra meM bhaTakate hue
naraka Adi ke duHkhoM ko bhogate haiM  /  chidrayukta naukA para baiThe hue
janoM kI jyoM ve saMsAra rUpI sAgara ko pAra nahIM kara sakate  /  * * * imaM ca
dhammamAdAya, kAsaveNa paveditaM  /  tare soyaM mahAghora, AttattAe parivvae  //
32 //  chAyA - imaJca dharmamAdAya, kAzyapena praveditam  /  taretssroto
mahAghora mAtmatrANAya parivrajet  //  anuvAda - kAzyapa gautrIya bhagavAna
mahAvIra dvArA pravedita-prarUpita isa dharma ko AtmasAt kara medhAvI puruSa
mahAghora-atyanta kaSTaprada saMsAra ke pravAha ko pAra kare  /  tathA
AtmatrANa-AtmotthAna hetu apane pravrajita jIvana kA-saMyama kA samyak
paripAlana kre| TIkA - yataH zAkyAdayaH zramaNAH mithyAdRSTayo'nAryAH kRtsnaM
srotaH samApannAH mahAbhayamAgantAro bhavanti tata idamupadizyate-'ima' miti
pratyakSAsannavAcitvAdidamo'nantaraM vakSyamANa lakSaNaM sarvaloka prakaTaM ca
durgati-niSedhena zobhanagatidhAraNAt 'dharma' zrutacAritrAkhyaM cazabdaH punaH
zabdArthe, sa ca pUrvasmAdvayatirekaM darzayati,
yasmAcchauddhodanipraNatidharmasyAdAtAro mahAbhayaM gantAro bhavanti, imaM
punardharmam 'AdAya' gRhItvA 'kAzyapena' zrI 4870

Page #516 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra, revealed by Vardhamana Swami, explains how to cross
the stream of emotions, the nature of worldly wandering. It describes this world
as "mahaghora," extremely terrifying due to its difficulty to overcome, and its
inhabitants, who experience endless suffering, moving from womb to womb, birth
to birth, death to death, and pain to pain, like a wheel constantly turning.
Therefore, the Dharma revealed by Kashyap provides protection for the soul. To
achieve this self-protection, one should embrace the path of restraint, becoming
a practitioner of self-control. In some versions, the second half of the verse
reads, "Kujja bhikkhu gilanas, agilae samahie," meaning that a virtuous monk
should care for a sick monk with unwavering dedication, bringing peace and
tranquility to the sick one's mind.  The text then explains how to practice
restraint:  "Virae gamadhammehi, je kei jagai jaga. Tesim attuvamayae, tham
kuvvam parivvae."  This translates to: "A virtuous person, abstaining from
worldly desires, should consider all beings as equal to themselves and practice
restraint with determination."  The commentary explains that worldly desires are
like objects of the senses, and those who are attached to them are like those
who are trapped in the world. They experience suffering and hatred, and a
virtuous person should not create more suffering for them but instead strive to
protect them. By practicing restraint, they can achieve this goal.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram vardhamAnasvAminA 'praveditaM' praNItaM 'taret'
laGghayedbhAvasrotaH saMsAraparyaTanasvabhAvaM, tadeva vizinaSTi-'mahAghoraM'
duruttaratvAnmahAbhayAnakaM , tathAhitadantarvartino jantavo. garbhAdgarbha
janmato janma maraNAnmaraNaM duHkhAdduH
khamityevamaraghaTTaghaTInyAyenAnubhavanto'nantamapi kAlamAsate  /  tadevaM
kAzyapa praNIta dharmAdAnena satA AtmanastrANaMnadakAdirakSA tasmai AtmatrANAya
pariH-samantA (haje) tparivrajetsaMyamAnuSThAyI bhavedityarthaH
kvacitpazcArdhasyAnyathA pAThaH-'kujjA bhikkhU gilANassa, agilAe samAhie'
"bhikSuH' sAdhuH glAnasya vaiyAvRtyam 'aglAnaH' aparizrAntaH
kuryAtsamyaksamAdhinAglAnasya vA samAdhimutpAdayanniti  // 32 //  kathaM
saMyamAnuSThAne parivraje dityAha - _TIkArtha - mithyAdRSTi anArya,-bauddha Adi
paramatavAdI isa saMsAra sAgara meM sarvathA vinimagna hote hue atyanta duHkha
prApta karate haiM  /  ataH sUtrakAra upadiSTa karate haiM  /  yahAM prayukta
'idaM' zabda pratyakSa evaM AsannavartI padArtha kA bodhaka hai  /  isake
anusAra jisakA svarUpa vakSyamANa hai-Age kahA jAne vAlA hai, jo samagra loka
meM prakaTa-prasiddha hai tathA jo jIva ko durgati meM jAne se rokatA hai
zobhana-uttama gati meM dhAraNa karatA hai-le jAtA hai vaha zruta evaM
cAritramUlaka dharma sabameM zreSTha hai  /  yahAM 'ca' zabda punaH ke artha meM
prayukta huA hai  /  vaha pahale batalAye gaye zAkya dharma se isake zruta aura
cAritra kI viziSTatA sUcita karatA hai  /  sauddhodani-buddha dvArA praNIta-
prarUpita dharma ko grahaNa karane vAle, mAnane vAle atyanta bhaya ko prApta
hotehaiM kintu kAzyapa gotrIya zrI vardhamAna svAmI dvArA pravedita-prajJApita
dharma ko aMgIkAra kara bhAva srotaH svarUpa saMsAra samudra ko pAra kara jAte
haiM  /  aba usakI-saMsAra kI vizeSatA batAte hue kahate haiM vaha saMsAra
mahAghora-duruttara hone se atyanta bhayAnaka hai  /  usake antarvartI jantu eka
garbha se dUsare garbha meM, eka janma se dUsare janma meM, eka maraNa se dUsare
maraNa meM tathA eka duHkha se dUsare duHkha meM rahaTa para lagI ghaTikAoM kI
taraha ghUmate hue ananta kAla duHkha prApta karate haiM  /  isa saMsAra sAgara
se rakSA pAne hetu jIva ko cAhiye ki vaha bhagavAna mahAvIra dvArA prarUpita
dharma ko svIkAra kara saMyama kA anuSThAna kare  /  kahIM-kahIMgAthA ke
uttarArddha kA pATha 'kujjA bhikkha gilANassa agilAe samAhie' yoM prApta hotA
hai arthAt sAdhu glAna-rUgNa sAdhu kA aglAnabhAva se aparizrAnta rUpa meM bhalI
bhAMti samAdhipUrvaka sevA kare  /  rUgNa ke mana meM samAdhi zAMti utpanna kare
/  sAdhu saMyama ke paripAlana meM kisa prakAra gatizIla rahe, yaha batalAte hue
zAstrakAra kahate haiM virae gAmadhammehiM, je keI jagaI jagA  /  tesiM
attuvamAyAe, thAmaM kuvvaM parivvae  // 33 //  chAyA - viratogrAmadharmebhyaH,
ye kecid jagati jagAH  /  teSAmAtmopamayA, sthAmaM kurvan parivrajet  //
anuvAda - sAdhu grAma dharmoM-zabdAdi indriya viSayoM se virata hokara jAgatika
prANiyoM ko Atmopamaapane saddaza samajhatA huA parAkrama pUrvaka saMyama kA
paripAlana kare  /  TIkA - grAmadharmaH zabdAdayo viSayAstebhyo viratA
manojJetareSvaraktadviSTAH santyeke kecana 'jagati' pRthivyAM saMsArodare 'jagA'
iti jantavo jIvitArthinasteSAM duHkha dviSAmAtmopamayA duHkhamanutpAdayan
tadrakSaNe sAmarthya kuryAt kurvazca saMyamAnuSThAne parivrajediti  // 33 //
1488

Page #517 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shri Margadhyayanam**  The words, objects of the senses, and the rules of
conduct are called the objects of study. There are some ascetics who are
detached and withdrawn from them. That is, they do not have attachment to
pleasing objects like words, etc., for the mind, nor aversion to painful
objects. Those beings who live in the belly of the world are all living beings -
they live for the sake of living. They hate suffering - they do not want
suffering. Therefore, understanding those beings as equal to oneself, the
ascetic should not cause them suffering, but should manifest his strength and
power for their protection and practice restraint. Om Om Om  **Chhaya**
**Anuvaad Pandit** - The wise ascetic, understanding the nature of pride and
illusion, and abandoning them, should be devoted to the practice of liberation.
**Pandit. Muni ||34||**  **Atimaanachcha Maayaaschcha Tatparijnaaya Panditah.
Sarvametanniraakrutya, Nirvaanam Sandhayenmunih.**  **Tika** - To remove the
obstacles to restraint, the sutrakar says - One who transgresses and destroys
the code of conduct due to excessive pride is called atimaan. The word 'cha'
used here also includes anger. Atimaaya and the word 'cha' include excessive
greed. This kshaya is the enemy, the opponent of restraint. Therefore, the wise,
discerning muni should abandon these kshayas, which are the cause of the world,
and seek liberation. With the presence of kshayas, restraint cannot be fully
successful. It is said:  "Saamannamanucharantaassa, Kasaaya Jassa Ukkadaa Honti.
Mannaami Ucchupupham Va, Nishphalam Tassa Saamannam. ||1||"  **Chhaya** - The
asceticism of one whose kshayas are strong is like the flower of sugarcane,
useless.  **Tannishphalatve Cha Na Moksha Sambhav, Tathaacho Ktam**
"Sansaraadapalaayana Prati Bhuvo Raagadayo Me Sthitaastrishna
Bandhanabadhyamaanam Akhilam Kim Vetsi Nedam Jagat? | Mrityo! Munja Jaraakarena
Parusham Kesheshuu Maa Maa Grahirehi Tyadar Mantrena Bhavatha Kim Naagamiishyami
Aham? ||1||"  And so on. Therefore, the abandonment of such kshayas and the
contemplation of noble qualities is the best way to seek liberation. ||34||
**Tikaarth** - To remove the defects that create obstacles in restraint, the
sutrakar says -  One who transgresses and destroys the code of conduct due to
excessive pride is called atimaan. The word 'cha' used here also includes anger.
Atimaaya and the word 'cha' include excessive greed. This kshaya is the enemy,
the opponent of restraint. Therefore, the wise, discerning muni should abandon
these kshayas, which are the cause of the world, and seek liberation. He should
be devoted to the path of liberation. With the presence of kshayas, restraint
cannot be fully successful. Therefore, it is said:  The asceticism, the life of
a shraman, the practice of restraint, of one whose kshayas are strong and
persistent, is like the flower of sugarcane, useless. With the failure of
asceticism, liberation is not possible. Therefore, it is said - O Death! The
attachment, etc., that prevent me from escaping the world are present in me.
489

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayanaM TIkArtha zabda Adi indriya viSaya grAmadharma kahalAte haiN|
aise katipaya sAdhu haiM jo unase virata, nivRtta hote haiM  /  arthAt manojJa-
mana ke liye prItiprada zabdAdi viSayoM meM anurAga tathA amanojJa - duHkhaprada
viSayoM meM dveSa nahIM karate  /  saMsAra ke udara meM bhItara rahane vAle jo
prANI haiM, ve sabhI jIvitArthI haiM- jIne kI kAmanA liye rahate haiM  /  ve
du:kha se dveSa karate haiM - duHkha nahIM cAhate  /  ataH una prANiyoM ko
Atmopama samajhakara sAdhu unako duHkha na detA huA unake trANa hetu sAmarthya-
parAkrama prakaTa karatA huA saMyama kA anuSThAna kare  /  OM OM OM - aimANaM ca
mAyaM ca, taM parinnAya savvameyaM NirAkiccA, NivvANaM saMdhae chAyA - - anuvAda
paMDita - jJAnayukta sAdhu abhimAna tathA mAyA yA pravaJcanA kA svarUpa
samajhakara tathA unakA parityAga kara mokSa kI sAdhanA meM tatpara rahe  /  -
paMDie  /  muNI ||34|| atimAnaJca mAyAzca tatparijJAya paNDitaH  /
sarvametannirAkRtya, nirvANaM saMdhayenmuniH  //  TIkA - saMyama
vighnakAriNAmapanayanArthamAha-atIva mAno'timAnazcAritramatikramya yo vartate
cakArAdetaddezya: krodho'pi parigRhyate, evamatimAyAM cazabdAdatilobhaM ca,
tamevaMbhUtaM kaSAyavrAtaM saMyamaparipanthinaM 'paNDito' vivekI parijJAya
sarvamenaM saMsArakAraNabhUtaM kaSAyasamUhaM nirAkRtya nirvANamanusaMdhayet,
sati ca kaSAyakadambake na samyak saMyamaH saphalatAM pratipadyate, taduktam
"sAmaNNamaNucaraMtassa, kasAyA jassa ukkaDA hoMti  /  maNNAmi ucchupupphaM va,
niSphalaM tassa sAmaNNaM  // 1 // " chAyA - zrAmaNyamanucarataH kaSAyA
yasyotkaTA bhavaMti  /  manye ikSupuSpamiva niSphalaM tasya zrAmaNyaM  // 1 //
tanniSphalatve ca na mokSa saMbhava:, tathA coktam "saMsArAdapalAyana prati
bhuvo rAgAdayo meM sthitAstRSNA bandhanabadhyamAnamakhilaM kiM vetsi nedaM jagat
?  /  mRtyo ! muJja jarAkareNa paruSaM kezeSu mA mA grahIrehI tyAdara mantareNa
bhavataH kiM nAgamiSyAmyaham ?  // 1 // " ityAdi  /  tadevamevaMbhUtakaSAya
parityAgAdacchinna prazasta bhAvAnusaMdhanayA nirvANAnusaMdhAnameva zreya iti
||34|| TIkArtha saMyama meM vighna upasthita karane vAle doSoM kA apanayana
karane hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM - jo mAna yA ahaMkAra cAritra ko atikrAnta
karatA hai dhvasta karatA hai, use atimAna kahA jAtA hai| yahAM prayukta 'ca'
zabda se isI prakAra krodha kA bhI grahaNa hai  /  atimAyA aura 'ca' zabda se
atilobha gRhIta hai  /  yaha kaSAya saMyama ke paripanthI - virodhI, zatru haiN|
ataH paMDita - vivekI muni saMsAra ke kAraNabhUta ina kaSAyoM kA nirAkaraNa kara
inakA tyAga kara nirvANa kA anusaMdhAna kre| mokSa ke mArga para gamanodyata
rahe  /  kaSAyoM ke rahate hue saMyama kA bhalIbhAMti - saphalatApUrvaka pAlana
nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  ataeva kahA hai zrAmaNyazramaNa jIvana kA, saMyama
kA anucaraNa-anupAlana karate hue jisa puruSa ke kaSAya utkaTa - prabala bane
rahate haiM, usakA zrAmaNya ikSu ke puSpa kI jyoM nirarthaka hai  /  zrAmaNya ke
niSphala hone para mokSa prApta honA saMbhava nahIM hai  /  ataeva kahA hai-hai
mRtyu ! saMsAra se palAyana kara anyatra na jAne dene vAle rAga Adi mujhameM
vidyamAna haiN| 489 -

Page #518 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that this entire world is bound by the
chains of **trishna** (desire). Do you not know this? Therefore, do not grab my
hair with the hand of old age. Leave them, come - even without being called
respectfully, will I not come to you? Therefore, a **sadhu** (holy person)
should be eager to engage in the practice of **moksha** (liberation) with a
**chinn-paripurna** (unbroken and complete) and **prashasta** (excellent)
attitude, abandoning **kashayas** (passions). This is the best course for them.
**Sandhaye sahadhammam cha, pavadhammam nirakare. Uvanaviriye bhikkhu, koham
manam na patthae.** ||35||  **Translation:** The **bhikkhu** (monk) should
cultivate **sadhu dharma** (virtuous conduct) like **kshanta** (patience) and
other excellent virtues, and abandon sinful actions. The **bhikkhu** who is
strong in **upadhana** (effort) should abandon **krodha** (anger) and **mana**
(pride).  **Commentary:** The **sadhu**'s dharma is **kshanta** (patience) and
other virtues, or it is **samyak darshan** (right faith), **samyak jnana**
(right knowledge), and **samyak charitra** (right conduct). The **sadhu** should
cultivate it, increase it. They should increase their knowledge by acquiring new
knowledge every moment, and by eliminating defects like doubt, they should
acquire **samyak jiva** (right understanding of the soul) and other objects of
knowledge, and thus increase their **samyak darshan**. They should cultivate
**charitra** by fully observing the **mula guna** (root virtues) and **uttar
guna** (secondary virtues) without any deviation, and by accepting new
**abhigraha** (vows) every day. There is another reading, "**Saddhe sadhu
dhammam cha**". This means that the **sadhu** should have faith in the **sadhu
dharma** described above, which is the path to **moksha**, and should accept it
without doubt. According to the word "**cha**" used here, they should follow
that dharma correctly. They should abandon the dharma that is the cause of
**papa** (sin), which is based on the oppression and violence of living beings.
The **bhikkhu** who is strong in **upadhana** (effort) should not desire or
cultivate **krodha** (anger) and **mana** (pride).  **Commentary meaning:** The
**sadhu** has ten types of dharma, such as **kshanta** (patience) and **kshama**
(forgiveness), or their dharma is **samyak darshan** (right faith), **samyak
jnana** (right knowledge), and **samyak charitra** (right conduct). The
**sadhu** should cultivate it, increase it. They should increase their knowledge
by acquiring new knowledge every moment, and by eliminating defects like doubt,
they should acquire **samyak jiva** (right understanding of the soul) and other
objects of knowledge, and thus increase their **samyak darshan**. They should
cultivate **charitra** by fully observing the **mula guna** (root virtues) and
**uttar guna** (secondary virtues) without any deviation, and by accepting new
**abhigraha** (vows) every day. There is another reading, "**Saddhe sadhu
dhammam cha**". This means that the **sadhu** should have faith in the **sadhu
dharma** described above, which is the path to **moksha**, and should accept it
without doubt. According to the word "**cha**" used here, they should follow
that dharma correctly. They should abandon the dharma that is the cause of
**papa** (sin), which is based on the oppression and violence of living beings.
The **bhikkhu** who is strong in **upadhana** (effort) should not desire or
cultivate **krodha** (anger) and **mana** (pride).  **Je ya buddha atikkanta, je
ya buddha anagaya. Santi tesim paittanam, bhuyanam jagati jaha.** ||36||
**Translation:** Those **buddhas** (enlightened ones) who have passed away, and
those **buddhas** who are yet to come, their foundation is peace, just as it is
for all beings in the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram yaha samasta jagata tRSNA rUpI baMdhana meM baMdhA huA
hai  /  kyA tuma yaha nahIM jAnate  /  isaliye vRddhattva rUpI hAtha dvArA mere
bAloM ko kaThoratA ke sAtha mata pakar3oM  /  inheM chor3a do, A jAo-yoM
AdarapUrvaka bulAye binA bhI kyA maiM Apake pAsa nahIM AU~gA  /  isaliye sAdhu
ko kaSAyoM kA parityAga kara achinna-paripUrNa prazasta bhAvapUrvaka mokSa ke
anusaMdhAna-sAdhanA meM tatpara rahanA cAhiye  /  yahI usake liye zreyaskara hai
/  saMdhae sAhadhammaM ca, pAvadhammaM NirAkare  /  uvANavIrie bhikkhU, kohaM
mANaM Na patthae  // 35 //  chAyA - saMdhayetsAhu dharmaJca, pApadharma
nirAkuryAt  /  /  upadhAnavIryoM bhikSuH, krodhaM mAnaJca varjayet  //  anuvAda
- bhikSu sAdhudharma-kSAMti Adi uttama dharma kA saMdhAna kare, vRddhi kare
tathA pApamaya kRtyoM kA parityAga kare  /  tapazcaraNa meM parAkrama zIla sAdhu
krodha aura mAna kA parivarjana kare  /  TIkA - kiJca-sAdhUnAM dharmaH
kSAntyAdiko dazavidhaH samyagdarzana jJAnacAritrAkhyo vA tam 'anusaMdhayet'
vRddhimApAdayet, tadyathA-pratikSaNamapUrvajJAna grahaNena jJAnaM tathA
zaGkAdidoSaparihAreNa samyagjIvAdipadArthAdhigamena ca samyagdarzanam
askhalitamUlottaraguNa saMpUrNapAlanena pratyahamapUrvAbhigrahagrahaNena (ca)
cAritraM (ca) vRddhimA pAdayediti, pAThAntaraM vA 'saddahe sAdhudhammaM ca'
pUrvokta vizeSaNaviziSTaM sAdhudharmaM mokSamArgatvena zraddadhIta-niHzaGkatayA
gRhNIyAt ca zabdAtsamyaganupAlayecca, tathA pApaM-pApopAdAnakAraNaM dharmaM
prANyupamardaina pravRttaM nirAkuryAt, tathopadhAnaM-tapastatra yathAzaktyA
vIryaM yasya sa bhavatyupadhAnavIryaH, tadevaMbhUto bhikSuH krodhaM mAnaM ca na
prArthayeta na vardhayedveti  // 35 //  TIkArtha - kSAMti-kSamAzIlatA Adi
sAdhuoM kA dasa prakAra kA dharma hai athavA samyakdarzana, samyakjJAna evaM
samyakcAritra unakA dharma hai  /  sAdhu usakI vRddhi kare-use bar3hAtA jAye  /
vaha pratikSaNa apUrva abhinava jJAna kA grahaNa kara use bar3hAye tathA zaMkA
Adi doSoM kA parihAra kara jIvAdi padArthoM ko bhalIbhAMti adhigata kara
samyakdarzana kA abhivarddhana kare, unnayana kare  /  askhalita-aticAra rahita
mUlaguNoM tathA uttaraguNoM kA pUrNarUpa se pAlana kara pratidina nava-nava
abhigraha svIkaraNa dvArA cAritra kI vRddhi kare  /  yahA~ 'saddahe sAdhu
dhammaMca' aisA pAThAntara prApta hotA hai  /  usakA yaha tAtparya hai ki
pUrvokta vizeSa-viziSTa vizeSatAoM se yukta sAdhu dharma ko zraddhApUrvaka mokSa
kA mArga samajhe tathA nizaMka hokara use grahaNa kare  /  yahAM prayukta 'ca'
zabda ke anusAra usa dharma kA samyak anupAlana kare  /  jo dharma prANiyoM ke
upamarda-hiMsA se yukta hai, pApa kA hetu bhUta hai  /  usakA parityAga kare  /
tapazcaraNa meM yathAzakti saMlagna rahe  /  krodha aura mAna ko apane meM na
Ane de  /  na unheM bar3hane de| je ya buddhA atikkaMtA, je ya buddhA aNAgayA  /
saMti tesiM paiTTANaM, bhUyANaM jagatI jahA  // 36 //  chAyA - ye ca buddhA
atikrAntA ye ca buddhA anAgatAH  /  zAMtisteSAM pratiSThAnaM bhUtAnAM jagatI
yathA  //  490

Page #519 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Shri Margadhyayan Translation**  The foundation or basis of all the
Tirthankaras who have been in the past and who will be in the future is peace.
Just as this world is the basis of beings.  **Commentary**  Is this path of
peace only taught by Vardhamana Swami or by other Tirthankaras as well? To
address this doubt, the sutrakar says:  In the beginningless past, countless
Tirthankaras have passed away, all of them have expounded this path of peace.
Similarly, in the future, countless Tirthankaras will also expound this path of
peace. The word "cha" indicates that the Tirthankaras present in the current
time also expound this path.  They have not only expounded this path but also
practiced it in their lives. The sutrakar points this out by saying:  Shaman,
the pacification of passions, is peace. That is the path of peace. It is the
foundation or basis of the Tirthankaras of the past, present, and future.
Because without it, Buddhahood cannot be attained. Or, if peace is liberation,
which is the foundation or basis of all Tirthankaras, then it is attained
through this path of peace. Therefore, all Tirthankaras have spoken of this path
of peace and practiced it.  To illustrate the foundation of peace, the sutrakar
says:  Just as the three worlds are the foundation of beings, similarly, peace
is the foundation of all Tirthankaras.  To show what should be done by one who
has accepted the path of peace, the sutrakar says:  **Commentary**  If a sadhu
who has accepted vows is touched by high and low, various kinds of trials and
tribulations, then just as a great mountain does not fall from the wind,
similarly, the sadhu should not be disturbed by restraint.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayana anuvAda - atIta meM jo tIrthaMkara ho cuke haiM tathA
anAgata-bhaviSya meM jo hoMge una sabakA zAMti hI pratiSThAna-AdhAra yA
pRSThabhUmi hai  /  jaise yaha jagata prANiyoM kA AdhAra hai  /  TIkA -
athaivaMbhUtaM bhAvamArga kiM vardhamAnasvAmyevopadiSTavAn utAnye'pItyeta
dAzaGkAyAha ye buddhAH -tIrthakRto'tIte'nAdike kAle'nantAH samatikrAntAH te
sarve'pyevaMbhUtaM bhAvamArgamupanyastavantaH, tathA ye cAnAgatA
bhaviSyadanantakAlabhAvino'nantA eva te'pyeva mevopanyasiSyanti, ca zabdA
dvartamAna kAla bhAvinazca saMkhyeyA iti| na kevalamupanyastavanto'nuSThita
vaMtazcetyetaddarzayati zamanaM zAntiH-
bhAvamArgasteSAmatItAnAgatavartamAnakAlabhAvinAM buddhAnAM pratiSThAnam-AdhAro
buddhatvasyAnyathAnupapatteH, yadivA zAntiH-mokSaH sa teSA pratiSThAnam-AdhAraH,
tatastadavAptizca bhAvamArgamantareNa na bhavatItyataste sarve'pyenaM
bhAvamArgamuktavanto'nuSThitavantazca (iti) gamyate  /  zAntipratiSThAnatve
dRSTAntamAha-'bhUtAnAM' sthAvarajaGgamAnAM yathA 'jagatI' trilokIpratiSThAnaM
evaM te sarve'pi buddhAH zAnti pratiSThAnA iti  // 36 //  pratipannabhAvamArgeNa
ca yadvidheyaM taddarzayitumAha - TIkArtha - isa bhAvamArga kA upadeza kyA
kevala vardhamAna svAmI-bhagavAna mahAvIra ne hI kiyA athavA anya tIrthaMkaroM
ne bhI ? yaha prazna upasthita kara sUtrakAra isakA samAdhAna dete hue kahate
haiM - anAdi-jisakA koI Adi yA prAraMbha nahIM hai usa kAla meM jo anaMta
tIrthaMkara atikrAMta ho cuke haiM una sabane isI bhAvamArga kA upanyAsa kiyA-
nirUpaNa kiyA tathA anAgata-bhAvI anantakAla meM jo ananta tIrthaMkara hoMge, ve
bhI isa bhAvamArga kA upanyAsa-upadeza kareMge  /  yahAM prayukta 'ca' zabda ke
anusAra vartamAna kAla meM jo saMkhyAta tIrthaMkara vidyamAna haiM, ve bhI isI
mArga kA pratipAdana karate haiM  /  una mahApuruSoM ne isa mArga kA kevala
nirUpaNa hI nahIM kiyA varan isakA apane jIvana meM anuSThAna bhI kiyA  /
sUtrakAra isakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM-zamana-kaSAyoM kA zamana
karanA zAMti kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha bhAva mArga hai  /  vahI bhUtakAlIna,
bhaviSyakAlIna tathA vartamAnakAlIna tIrthaMkaroM kA pratiSThAna-AdhAra hai  /
kyoMki usake binA buddhatva utpanna-prApta nahIM hotA haiM  /  athavA mokSa ko
zAMti kahA jAtA hai, jo sabhI tIrthaMkaroM kA pratiSThAna yA AdhAra haiN| usI se
zAMti prApta hotI hai  /  bhAvamArga ke svIkAra ke binA vaha prApta nahIM hotI
/  ataeva sabhI tIrthaMkaroM ne bhAvamArga kA AkhyAna kiyA hai-anuSThAna kiyA
hai, AcaraNa kiyA hai  /  zAMti hI tIrthaMkaroM kA pratiSThAna-AdhAra hai  /
isa saMbaMdha meM dRSTAnta dvArA batalAte haiM-jaise jIvoM kA AdhAra trailokya.
hai, usI taraha tIrthaMkaroM kA AdhAra zAMti hai  /  jisane bhAva mArga svIkAra
kiyA hai, aise sAdhu ko jo karanA cAhiye, usakA digdarzana karAne hetu kahate
aha NaM vayamAvannaM, phAsA uccAvayA phuse  /  Na tesu viNihaNNejA, vAeNa va
mahAgirI  // 37 //  chAyA - atha vai vratamApannaM sparzA uccAvacAH spRzeyuH  /
na teSu vinihanyAd vAteneva mahAgiriH  //  anuvAda - vrata Apanna-jisane vrata
svIkAra kie haiM, aise sAdhu ko yadi uccAvacca-bar3e yA choTe taraha taraha ke
parISaha evaM upasarga sparza kare-use unakA sAmanA karanA par3e to jaise mahAn
parvata havA ke jhoke se DigatA nahIM, usI prakAra sAdha saMyama se vicalita na
bane  /  (491)

Page #520 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra with Commentary - Chapter 37  **Commentary:** After
attaining the path of liberation, a virtuous person who has taken vows may be
afflicted by various types of small and large **parishahas** and **upsargas**.
He should endure them, keeping in mind the nature of the world and the
destruction of karma. He should not be swayed by these favorable or unfavorable
**upsargas** in his practice of **samyama**.  Just as the great mountain Meru is
not shaken by the mighty wind, so too should he remain unshaken.  He should
gradually practice overcoming **parishahas** and **upsargas**, for even
difficult tasks become easy with practice.  Here is an example:  A cowherd lifts
a calf born that day and brings it near the cow, and then takes it back.  In
this way, he continues to lift and bring the calf back, even as it grows larger
day by day, until it is two years old and then three years old.  Similarly, a
virtuous person, through constant practice, gradually overcomes **parishahas**
and **upsargas**.  ## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra with Commentary - Chapter 38
**Verse:**  > संवुडे से महापन्ने, धीरे दत्तेसणं चरे । निव्वुडे कालमाकंखी, एवं
(यं) केवलिणो मयं ॥३८॥त्तिबेमि॥   **Shadow:**  > संवृत्तः स महाप्राज्ञः, धीरो
दत्तैषणां चरेत् । > निवृतः कालमाकाङ्क्ष देवं केवलिनो मतम् ॥इति ब्रवीमि॥
**Translation:**  > The wise and restrained one, with great wisdom, should
patiently accept the food and other things given by others.  He should be calm
and desire the time of death.  This is the opinion of the omniscient one.
**Commentary:**  Continuing the discussion, the text says:  This virtuous
person, with his senses restrained, is wise and has great knowledge.  He is
patient and calm, and he should accept the food and other things given by
others, while remaining committed to **samyama**.  He should be calm and desire
the time of death.  This is the opinion of the omniscient one, the
**Tirthankara**.  This is said by Sudharma Swami, addressing Jambuswami.  What
you have learned about the path is not my own opinion, but the opinion of the
omniscient one.  Therefore, you should accept it as such.  This concludes the
discussion.  **End of the Eleventh Study of the Path**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - 'atha' bhAvamArgapratipattyanantaraM sAdhuM
pratipannavrataM santaM sparzA:-parISahopasargarUpAH 'uccAvacA' gurulaghavo
nAnArUpA vA 'spRzeyuH' abhidraveyuH, sa ca sAdhustairabhidrutaH
saMsArasvabhAvamapekSamANaH karma nirjarAM ca na tairanukUlapratikUlairvihanyAt,
naiva saMyamAnuSThAnAnmanAgapi vicalet, kimiva ?, mahAvaiteneva
mahAgiriHmeruriti  /  parISahopasargajayazcAbhyAsakrameNa vidheyaH,
abhyAsavazena hi duSkaramapi sukaraM bhavati, atra ca dRSTAntaH, tadyathA-
kazcidgopastadaharjAtaM tarNakamutkSipya gavAntikaM nayatyAnayati ca
tato'sAvanenaiva ca krameNa pratyahaM pravarddhamAnamapi
vatsamutkSipannabhyAsavazAvihAyanaM trihAyaNamapyutkSipati, evaM
sAdhurapyabhyAsAt zanaiH zanaiH paripahopasargajayaM vidhatta iti  // 37 //
TIkArtha - bhAvamArga kI pratipatti-svIkaraNa ke anantara vrata pratipanna-
vratadhAraka sAdhu bhinna bhinna prakAra ke choTe bar3e parISahoM evaM upasargoM
se abhidrUpa ho-bAdhita ho, to vaha saMsAra kA svabhAva tathA karma nirjarA kA
cintana karatA huA unheM sahana kare  /  vaha anukUla-priya tathA pratikUla-
apriya upasargoM dvArA saMyama ke anuSThAna meM jarA bhI vicalita na bane  /
kisakI jyoM ? mahAvAta-prabala vAyu se jisa prakAra mahAgiri-merU parvata
vicalita nahIM hotA hai, vaise hI vaha avicalita rahe  /  sAdhu parISahoM aura
upasargoM ko jItane kA kramazaH abhyAsa karatA jAe kyoMki duSkara-kaThina kArya
bhI abhyAsa dvArA sukara-sarala ho jAtA hai  /  yahA~ eka dRSTAnta upasthita
kiyA jAtA hai  /  koI gvAlA usI dina janme hue gAya ke bachar3e ko uThAkara gAya
ke samIpa le jAtA hai, vApasa le AtA hai-yoM vaha isI krama se hara roja
bar3hate jAte bachar3e ko nirantara gatizIla abhyAsa dvArA usake do varSa ke
evaM Age tIna varSa taka ke hone para bhI lAnA, le jAnA cAlU rakhatA hai  /  isI
prakAra sAdhu bhI dhIre dhIre abhyAsarata rahatA huA parISahoM evaM upasargoM ko
jIta letA hai  /  saMvuDe se mahApanne, dhIre dattesaNaM care  /  nivvuDe
kAlamAkaMkhI, evaM (yaM) kevaliNo mayaM ||38||ttibemi|| chAyA - saMvRttaH sa
mahAprAjJaH, dhIro dattaiSaNAM caret  /  nivRtaH kAlamAkAGkSa devaM kevalino
matam ||iti brviimi|| anuvAda - saMvRta-saMvarayukta mahAprAjJa-atyanta
vivekazIla, dhairyazIla sAdhu anya dvArA diyA huA eSaNIyakalpanIya AhAra Adi
grahaNa kare  /  vaha nirvRtta-prazAMtabhAva yukta hokara maraNa kAla kI AkAMkSA
kare  /  yaha kevalajJAnI bhagavAna kA abhimata-mantavya yA upadeza hai  /  TIkA
- sAmpratamadhyayanArthamupasaMjihIrSuruktazeSamadhikRtyAha-sa sAdhuH evaM
saMvRtAzravadvAratayA saMvarasaMvRto mahatI prajJA yasyAsau mahAprajJaH-
samyagdarzanajJAnavAn, tathA dhI:-buddhistayA rAjata iti dhIraH
parISahopasargAkSobhyo vA sa evaMbhUtaH san pareNa datte satyAhArAdike eSaNAM
caretrividhayApyeSaNayA yuktaH san saMyamamanupAlayet, tathA nirvRta 'iva
nirvRtaH kaSAyopazamAcchItIbhUtaH 'kAlaM' mRtyukAlaM yAvadabhikAGkSat 'etat' yat
mayA prAk pratipAditaM tat 'kevalinaH' sarvajJasya tIrthakRto mataM  /  etacca
jambUsvAminamuddizya sudharmasvAmyAha  /  tadetadyatvayA mArgasvarUpaM prazritaM
tanmayA na svamanISikayA kathitaM, kiM tahiM ?, kevalino matametadityevaM
bhavatA grAhyaM  /  itiH parisamAptyarthe, bravImIti pUrvavat  // 38 //   //
iti mArgAkhyamekAdazamadhyayanaM samAptam  //  -492)

Page #521 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Margadhyayanam Teekaarth - The Sutrakar now tells the remaining things to
be said to complete this study - accept only the food that is worthy of being
eaten, given by a virtuous person who is free from fear, calm, patient, or
unperturbed by obstacles and afflictions, who has restrained the *ashrava*
doors, and who is endowed with *samvara*, great wisdom, *samyakdarshan* and
knowledge. He should observe restraint, being filled with various *eshana*.
Having become calm due to the pacification of the *kashya*, that virtuous person
should desire the time of death. What I have said before is the opinion of the
Kevali Bhagavan. This is what Shri Sudharmaswami tells Shri Jambuswami. The
answer to your question about the nature of the path, I have not given from my
own mind - I have not said it from my own side, but have stated the opinion of
the Kevali Bhagavan. Accept this. Here, the word *iti* means completion.
*Bravimi* - I speak - is as before.  The eleventh study, named *Marg*, is
complete. 493

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI mArgAdhyayanaM TIkArtha - sUtrakAra aba isa adhyayana ko parisamApta karane
hetu zeSa kathya batalAte haiM-AzravadvAroM kA avarodha kara saMvarayukta
mahAprAjJa-samyakdarzana evaM jJAna samanvita dhIra-medhAzIla, dhairyazIla
athavA parISahoM evaM upasargoM se akSubdha-ghabarAhaTa rahita sAdhu anya dvArA
diyA huA eSaNIya AhAra hI svIkAra kare  /  vaha vividha eSaNAoM se yukta hokara
saMyama kA paripAlana kare  /  kaSAyoM ke upazAnta ho jAne se zAMta banA huA
vaha sAdhu maraNa kAla kI abhikAMkSA kare  /  maiMne jo yaha pahale kahA hai
vahI kevalI bhagavAna kA abhimata hai  /  yaha zrI sudharmAsvAmI zrI jambUsvAmI
ko abhihita karate haiM  /  tumane jo mujhase mArga kA svarUpa pUchA usakA
uttara maiMne apanI manISA-mana:kalpanA dvArA nahIM diyA hai-apanI ora se nahIM
kahA hai kintu kevalI bhagavAna ke mata-abhimata kA kathana kiyAhai  /  ise
grahaNa karo  /  yahAM iti zabda parisamApti ke artha meM hai  /  bravImi-bolatA
hUM-pUrvavat hai  /  mArga nAmaka gyArahavA~ adhyayana samApta huaa| 493

Page #522 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra, The Study of the Four
Samvasaranas  **Four Samvasaranas are there, which the Pravadukas speak of
separately. They are Kriyavada, Akriyavada, Vinayavada, and the fourth is
Ajnanavada.**  **Commentary:** This chapter is connected to the previous
chapter, which states that a Sadhu who has attained the path of liberation
should recognize and avoid the Pravadukas who follow the wrong path. This
chapter explains their nature. This chapter is also connected to the next
chapter, which states that a Samvrita (one who has controlled his senses),
Mahaprajna (one with great wisdom), Vira (a hero), should accept food and other
things offered by others without any fault, and should be free from passions and
desires, and should desire the time of death. This is the statement of the
Kevali (the omniscient one). He should also avoid other Tirthankaras. This is
also the opinion of the Kevali. Therefore, to avoid them, their nature is being
explained here. The word "Chatvari" (four) is used to exclude other numbers. The
Pravadukas speak of four types of Samvasaranas, which are the principles
accepted by other Tirthankaras. These are described by the Sutrakar using names
that are synonymous with their meaning. For example, those who say that only
action exists are called Kriyavadins. Those who say that action does not exist
are called Akriyavadins. The third are the Vinayikas, and the fourth are the
Ajnanikas.  **Those who are not good are not considered good, and they do not
understand the truth. They are called Akaviyas by the Akaviyas, and they speak
falsehood.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram dvAdazaM zrIsamavasaraNAdhyayana cattAri
samosaraNANimANi, pAvAduyA jAiM puDho vayaMti  /  kiriyaM akiriyaM viNiyaMti
taiyaM, annANamAhaMsu cautthameva  // 1 //  chAyA - catvAri samavasaraNAnImAni,
prAvAdukAH yAni pRthagvadanti  /  kriyA makriyAM vinayamiti tRtIya
majJAnamAhuzcaturthameva  //  anuvAda - prAvAduka-anya darzanavAdI jina cAra
samosaraNoM ko-siddhAntoM ko ekAntararUpa se pratipAdita karate haiM ve
kriyAvAda, akriyAvAda, vinayavAda evaM cauthA ajJAnavAda hai| TIkA - asya ca
prAktanAdhyayanena sahAyaM saMbandhaH, tadyathA-sAdhunA pratipannAbhAvamArgeNa
kumAzritAH paravAdinaH samyak parijJAya parihartavyAH, tatsvarUpAviSkaraNaM
cAnenAdhyayanenopadizyate iti, anantarasUtrasyAnena sUtreNa saha
saMbandho'yaM,tadyathA-saMvRto mahAprajJo vIro-dattaiSaNAMcarannabhinirvRtaHsan
mRtyukAlamabhikAGkSad etatkevalino bhASitaM, tathA paratIrthikaparihAraM ca
kuryAt etacca kevalino matam, atastatparihArthaM tatsvarUpaNanirupaNamanena
kriyte| 'catvArI" ti saMkhyApadamaparasaMkhyAnivRtyarthaM 'samavasaraNAni'
paratIrthikAbhyupagamasamUharUpANi yAni prAvAdukAH pRthak pRthagvadanti, tAni
cAmUni anvarthAbhidhAyibhiH saMjJApadainirdizyante, tadyathA-kriyAm-astItyAdikAM
vadituM zIlaM yeSAM te kriyAvAdinaH, tathA'kriyAM-nAstItyAdikAM vadituM zIlaM
yeSAM te'kriyAvAdinaH, tathA tRtIyA vainayikAzcaturthAstvajJAnikA iti  // 1 //
TIkArtha - isa adhyayana kA pahale ke-gyArahaveM adhyayana ke sAtha yaha
sambandha hai  /  gyArahave adhyayana meM batalAyA gayA hai ki bhAvamArga ko
prApta sAdhu kumArgAzrita paravAdiyoM ko bhalI bhAMti jAnakara tyAga de  /  ataH
isa adhyayana meM unakA svarUpa nirUpita kiyA jA rahA hai  /  pUrva sUtra ke
sAtha isa sUtra kA yaha sambandha hai| usameM kahA gayA hai ki saMvRta-
saMvarayukta mahAprajJa-paramamedhAvI vIra AtmaparAkramazIla sAdhu anya dvArA
diye gaye eSaNIya-doSa rahita AhAra Adi grahaNa karatA huA nirvRta-prazAnta
bhAva yukta yA kaSAya rahita hokara mRtyu kAla kI abhikAMkSA kare  /  yaha
kevalI bhagavAna kA bhASita hai-mantavya hai  /  vaha anya tIrthaMkaroM kA
parihAra-parityAga kare  /  yaha bhI kevalI prabhu kA abhimata hai  /  unake
parihAra-parityAga hetu unake svarUpa kA varNana kiyA jA rahA hai  /  yahAM cAra
saMkhyAvacaka pada kA prayoga anya saMkhyAoM kI nivRtti ke liye hai  /
paratIrthikoM dvArA svIkRta siddhAnta cAra prakAra ke haiM jinheM ve alaga-alaga
AkhyAta karate haiM  /  unake anavarthaka-artha ke anurUpa nAmoM dvArA sUtrakAra
nirdeza karate haiM  /  ve jo isa prakAra hai-kriyA kA hI astitva hai yoM
pratipAdita karane vAle kriyAvAdI kahalAte haiM  /  kriyA nahIM hai-aisA kahane
vAle akriyAvAdI haiM  /  tIsare vainaSika-vinayavAdI tathA cauthe
ajJAnikaajJAnavAdI haiN| aNNANiyA tA kusalAvi saMtA, asaMthuyA No
vitigicchatinnA  /  akoviyA Ahu akoviyehiM, aNANuvIittu musaM vayaMti  // 2 //
-494)

Page #523 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The study of the Shri Samavasharan
reveals that the ignorant, although they consider themselves skilled, are
partially untruthful, immersed in doubt and uncertainty, ignorant, and instruct
the ignorant students. They speak falsehoods without contemplating the true
reality.  Commentary: Thus, the author first generally criticizes the proponents
of action, inaction, and ignorance, and then proceeds to present their viewpoint
in order to refute it. He says that those who are ignorant, i.e., the Ajnanikās,
are completely incoherent in their statements. Therefore, he first introduces
them as those in whom there is ignorance, i.e., the Ajnanikās or the ignorant
ones, who act out of ignorance.   These Ajnanikās, although claiming to be
skilled, are 'Asamstutas', i.e., incoherent, as they consider ignorance as the
highest good. Due to this incoherence, they are 'Vichikitsachittaviplutih',
i.e., afflicted by the disturbance of doubt and uncertainty in their minds. The
Jnanis (the wise) contradict each other, as some say the self is all-pervasive,
while others say it is not all-pervasive; some say it is the size of a thumb,
while others say it is as small as a mustard seed; some say it is material,
others say it is immaterial and situated in the heart. Thus, there is no
unanimity among them, and there is no one who can be considered the supreme
knower whose words can be taken as authoritative, as it is said that the
omniscient one cannot know the omniscient.  Therefore, true knowledge alone is
the highest good, as even if an ignorant person were to strike his head with his
foot, he would not incur such faults as one afflicted by the disturbance of the
mind. Thus, these proponents of ignorance are incoherent and have not crossed
the ocean of doubt and uncertainty.  These Ajnanikās are 'Akovidah', i.e.,
unskilled, lacking in true understanding. What they have said, that the Jnanis
contradict each other and are not speaking the truth, is not correct. The
proponents of the acceptance of the scriptures revealed by the omniscient do not
contradict each other, as their acceptance of the omniscient's teachings
precludes any mutual contradiction, since the omniscience of the omniscient
cannot be refuted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM chAyA - AjJAnikAste kuzalA api santo'saMstutA: no
vicikitsAtIrNAH  /  akovidA Ahurakovidebhyo'nanuvicintya tu mRSA vadanti  //
anuvAda - ajJAnavAdI yadyapi apane ko kuzala-yogya mAnate haiM kintu ve aMzataH
mithyAbhASI haiM, vicikitsA-saMzaya meM nimagna haiM, bhrAMta-akovida, ajJAnI
haiM tathA ajJAnI ziSyoM ko upadeza karate haiM  /  ve satya tattva kA
anucintana na kara mithyA bhASaNa karate haiN| TIkA - tadevaM
kriyA'kriyAvainaSikAjJAnavAdinaH sAmAnyena pradAdhunA tadUSaNArtha-
tanmatopanyAsaM pazcA nupUrvyapyastItyata:-pazcAnupUvyAM kartumAha,
yadivaitesAmajJAnikA eva sarvApalApitayA'tyantamasaMbaddhA-
atastAnevAdAvAhaajJAnaM vidyateyeSAmajJAnena vA carantItyajJAnikAH AjJAnikA vA
tAvatpradarzyante, te cAjJAnikAH kila vayaM kuzalA ityevaMvAdino'pi santaH
'asaMstutA' ajJAnameva zreya ityevaMvAditayA asaMbaddhAH, asaMstutatvAdeva
vicikitsAcittaviplutizcittabhrAntiH saMzItistAM na tIrNAnAti-krAntAH, tathAhi te
UcuH-ya ete jJAninaste parasparaviruddhavAditayA na yathArthavAdino bhavanti,
tathAhieke sarvagatamAtmAnaM vadanti tathA'nye asarvagatam apare
aMguSThaparvamAnaM kecana zyAmAkataNDulamAtramanye mUrtamamUrtaM
hRdayamadhyavartinaM lalATavyavasthitanityAdyAtmapadArtha eva sarvapadArthapuraH
sare teSAM naikavAkyatA, na cAtizayajJAnI kazcidasti yadvAkyaM pramANIkriyet, na
cAsau vidyamAno'pyupalakSyate'gdirzinA, 'nAsarvajJaH sarvajJaM jAnAtI' ti
vacanAta, tathA coktam "sarvajJo'sAviti hyotattatkAle'pi bubhutsubhiH  /
tajjJAnajJeyavijJAnazUnyairvijJAyate kathama ?  // 1 // " na ca tasya samyak
tadupAyaparijJAnAbhAvAtsaMbhavaH, saMbhavAbhAvazcetaretarAzrayatvAt, tathAhi-na
viziSTaparijJAnamRte tadavAptyupAyaparijJAnamupAyamantareNa ca nopeyasya viziSTa
parijJAnasyAvAptiriti, na ca jJAnaM jJeyasya svarUpaM paricchettumalaM, tathAhi-
yatkimapyupalabhyate tasyArvAgmadhyaparabhAgairbhAvyaM,
tatrArbAgbhAgasyaivopavabdhirnetarayoH, tenaiva vyavahitatvAt, arvAgbhAgasyApi
bhAgatrayakalpanAttatsarvArAtIyabhAga parikalpanayA paramANu paryavasAnatA,
paramANozca svabhAvavipraka STatvAdagdarzaninAM nopalabdhiriti, tadevaM
sarvajJasyAbhAvAdasarvajJasya ca yathAvasthitavastusvarUpA-
piricchedAtsarvavAdinAM ca parasparavirodhena padArthasvarUpAbhyupagamAt
yathottaraparijJAninAM pramAdavatAM bahutaradoSasaMbhavAda jJAnameva zreyaH;
tathAhiyadyajJAnavAn kathaJcitpAdena zirasi hanyAt tathApi cittazuddharna
tathAvidha doSAnuSaGgI syAdityevamajJAnina evaMvAdinaH santo'saMbaddhAH, na
caivaMvidhAM cittaviplutiM vitIrNA iti  /  tatraivaMvAdinaste ajJAnikA 'akovidA'
anipuNAH samyakaparijJAnavikalA ityavagantavyAH, tathAhiyattairabhihitaM
'jJAnavAdinaH paraspara viruddhArthavAditayA na yathArthavAdina' iti,
tadbhavatvasarvajJapraNItAgamAbhyupagamavAdi nAmayathArtha vAditvaM, na
cAbhyupagamavAdA eva bAdhAyai prakalpyante, sarvajJapraNItAgamAbhyupagamavAdinAM
tu na kacitparasparato virodhaH, sarvajJatvAnyathAnupapatteriti tathAhi-
prakSINAzeSAvaraNatayA rAgadveSamohAnAnRtakAraNAnAmabhAvAnna
tadvAkyamayathArthamityevaM tatpraNItAgamavatAM na virodhvaaditvmiti| nanu ca
syAdetad yadi sarvajJaH kazcitsyAta, na cAsau saMbhavatItyuktaM prAk,
satyamuktamayuktaM tUktaM, tathAhi-yattAvaduktaM 'na cAsau
vidyamAno'pyupalakSyate'gdirzineti' tayuktaM, yato yadyapi paracetovRttInAM
duranvayatvAtsarAgA vItarAgA iva ceSTante vItarAgAH sarAgA ivetyataH
pratyakSaNAnupalabdhiH, tathApi saMbhavAnumAnasya
sadbhAvAttadvAdhakapramANAbhAvAcca tadastitvamanivArya, saMbhavAnumAnaM tvidaM-
vyAkaraNAdinA zAstrAbhyAsena saMskriyamANAyAH prajJAyA jJAnAtizayo jJeyAvagamaM
pratyupalabdhaH, tadatra kazcittathAbhUtAbhyAsa vazAtsarvajJo'pi syAditi, na ca
tadabhAva sAdhakaM pramANamasti, tathAhina tAvadagdirzipratyakSeNa
sarvajJAbhAvaH sAdhayituM zakyaH, tasyA hi tajjJAnajJeyavijJAna zUnyatvAda,
azUnyatvAbhyupagame ca srvjnytvaapttiriti| nApyanumAnena,
tadavyabhicAriliGgAbhAvAditi  /  nApyupamAnena sarvajJAbhAvaH sAdhyate, tasya
495

Page #524 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The English translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The Shri
Sutrakritanga Sutra has arisen due to the power of similarity, but there is no
such similarity by which it could be established in the absence of omniscience.
Nor is it through arthapatti (implication), as that too is based on pratyaksha
(direct perception) and other pramanas (valid means of knowledge), and the
pramanas themselves do not establish it. Nor is it through agama (scriptural
testimony), as that too is seen to establish omniscience. Nor does the absence
of the panchaka pramanas (five valid means of knowledge) establish the absence
of omniscience, because it is not possible to say that there is no pramana that
can grasp it everywhere and at all times. For, the knowledge of persons remote
in place and time can be grasped, and grasping that would lead to their
omniscience, and the knowledge of the ordinary people does not negate
omniscience as it is not all-pervasive, and the negation of the non-all-
pervasive does not lead to the negation of the object. Nor is the absence in the
form of the knowledge of another substance sufficient to establish the absence
of omniscience, as there is no obstruction to the contact of omniscience with
another substance. Thus, since there is no counter-evidence and the possibility
of the existence of the Sarvagya (Omniscient) has been established, and since
the acceptance of the agamas (scriptures) propounded by him, the fault of
difference of opinion is far removed. Thus, according to the proponents of the
agamas accepted by him, the Jiva (soul) that is bound in the Samsara (cycle of
birth and death) is only body-pervading, and the knowledge of its attributes is
obtained there itself. And the fallacy of mutual dependence also does not arise
here, because the extraordinary knowledge observed in the cultivated intellect
is also seen in one's own self, and what is observed cannot be said to be
unreal. And what has been said, that "knowledge is not able to comprehend the
nature of the knowable, due to the obstruction everywhere by division", this is
mere verbosity, because there is no possibility of obstruction in the knowledge
that grasps even the things separated by place and time, and even the knowledge
of the ordinary people has obstruction through the doors of the limbs, for the
limbed does not get obstructed by its own limbs. And as for the statement
"ignorance alone is the best", is this a prasajya-pratishedha (simple negation)
or a paryudasa (exclusive negation)? If ignorance is other than knowledge, then
by the paryudasa method, another knowledge would be resorted to, not the
doctrine of ignorance. And if there is no knowledge, then ignorance being empty,
formless, and devoid of all potency, how can it be the best? And by the
prasajya-pratishedha of "ignorance is the best", a negation of the action of
knowledge being the best would be made, which is contradicted by direct
perception, because the one who acts with right knowledge does not contradict
the desired result. Moreover, even by accepting that ignorance is the best, just
as in the case of a small defect in touching the head with the foot, it is
recognized, so here too the contradiction with the acceptance would be direct,
not inferential. Thus, these ignorance-advocates, being incompetent themselves,
have taught the doctrine of ignorance to their own incompetent disciples, and
the use of the singular number in the sutra is due to the calmness of mind. Even
the Shramanas are mostly ignorant, as they accept that the karma (action)
accumulated without knowledge does not lead to bondage, and those who consider
the unclear consciousness of the child, the intoxicated, and the sleeping as
non-binding, they all should be seen as incompetent. And due to the adoption of
the ignorance standpoint, without deliberation, they always speak falsely,
because deliberation occurs in the presence of knowledge, and truth-speaking is
preceded by it, so the absence of deliberation due to the non-acceptance of
knowledge, and the absence of that leads to their falsehood.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram sAdRzyabalenapravRtteH, na ca sarvajJAbhAve sAdhye
tAdRgvidhaM sAdRzyamasti yenAsau sidhyatIti  /  nApyarthApattyA, tasyAH
pratyakSAdi pramANa pUrvakatvena pravRtteH, pratyakSAdInAM ca
tatsAdhakatvenApravartanAt tasyA apyapravRttiH  /  nApyAgomana, tasya
sarvajJasAdhakatvenApi darzanAt, nApi pramANapaJcakAbhAva rUpeNAbhAvena
sarvajJAbhAvaH sidhyati, tathAhi-sarvatra sarvadA na saMbhavati tadagrAhakaM
pramANamityeta darvAgdarzino vaktuM na yujyate, tena hi dezakAla-viprakRSTAnAM
puruSANAM yadvijJAnaM tasya grahItum zakyatvAt, tadgrahaNe vA tasyaiva
sarvajJatvApatteH, na cArvAgdarzinAM jJAnaM nivartamAnaM sarvajJAbhAvaM sAdhyati
tasyAvyApakatvAt, na cAvyApaka vyAvRttyA padArthavyAvRttiyukteti, na ca
vastvantaravijJAnarUpo'bhAvaH sarvajJAbhAvasAdhanAyAlaM,
vastvantarasarvajJayorekajJAnasaMsargapratibandhAbhAvAt  /  tadevaM
bAdhakapramANAbhAvAtsaMbhavAnupAnasya ca pratipAditatvAdasti sarvajJaH,
tatpraNItAgamAbhyupagamAcca matabheda doSo dUrApAsta iti,
tathAhitatpraNItAgamAbhyupagamavAdinAmekavAkyatayA zarIramAtravyApI
saMsAryAtmA'sti, tatraiva tadguNopalabdheriti, itaretarAzrayadoSazcAtra
nAvataratyeva, yato'bhyasyamAnAyAH prajJAyA jJAnAtizayaH svAtmanyapi dRSTo, na
ca dRSTe'nupapannaM nAmeti  /  yadapyabhihitaM tadyathA 'na ca jJAnaM jJeyasya
svarUpaM paricchetumalaM, sarvatrAvagbhiAgena vyavadhAnAt, sarvArAtIyabhAgasya
ca - paramANurUpatayA'tIndriyattvA 'diti, etadapi vAGmAtrameva, yata: jJAnasya
dezakAlasvabhAvavyavahitAnAmapi grahaNAnnAstivyavadhAna saMbhava:,
agdirzijJAnasyApyavayabadvAreNAvayavini pravRtte sti vyavadhAnaM, na hyavayavI
svAvayavairvyavadhIyata iti yuktisaMgatam, apicaajJAnameva zreya
ityatrAjJAnamiti kimayaM paryudAsa AhosvitprasajyapratiSedhaH ? tatra yadi
jJAnAdanyadajJAnamiti tataH paryudAsavRttyA jJAnAntarameva  /  samAzritaM syAt
nAjJAnavAda iti, atha jJAnaM na bhavatItyajJAnaM tuccho nIrUpo jJAnAbhAvaH sa ca
sarvasAmarthyarahita iti kathaM zreyAniti ?  /  apicaajJAnaM zreya iti
prasajyapratiSedhena jJAnaM zreyo na bhavatIti kriyApratiSedha eva kRtaH syAd,
etaccAdhyakSabAdhitaM, yataH samyagjJAnAdarthaM paricchidya
pravartamAno'rthakriyArthI na visaMvAdyata iti  /  kiMca-ajJAnapramAdavadbhiH
pAdena zira: sparzane'pisvalpadoSatAM parijJAyaivAjJAnaM zreya
ityabhyupagamyate, evaM ca sati pratyakSa eva syAdabhyupagamavirodho, nAnumAna
pramANamiti  /  tathA tedavaM sarvathA te ajJAnavAdinaH 'akovidA' dharmopadezaM
pratyanipuNAH svato'kovidebhya eva svaziSyebhya 'AhuH' kathitavantaH,
chAntasatvAccaikavacanaM sUtre kRtamiti  /  zAkyA api prAyazo'jJAnikAH,
avijJopacitaM karma bandhaM na yAtItyevaM yataste'bhyupagamayanti, tathA ye ca
bAlamattasuptAdayo'spaSTavijJAnA abandha kA ityevamabhyupagamaM kurvanti, te
sarve'pyakovidA dRSTavyA iti  /  tathA'jJAnapakSasamAzrayaNAccAnanuvicintya
bhASaNAnmRthA te sadA vdnti| anuvicintya bhASaNaM yato jJAne sati bhavati,
tatpUrvakatvAcca satyavAdasya ato jJAnAnabhyupagamAdanuvicintya bhASaNAbhAva,
tadabhAvAcca teSAM mRSAvAditvamiti  // 2 //  TIkArtha - kriyAvAdiyoM,
akriyAvAdiyoM, vainayiko tathA ajJAnavAdiyoM kA sAdhAraNatayA varNana kara aba
unake siddhAntoM ke doSa batAne hetu pIche ke kramAnusAra unake mantavya prakaTa
karate haiM kyoMki pUrva krama kI jyoM pIche kA krama bhI grahita hotA hai
athavA ina cAroM matavAdiyoM meM ajJAnavAdI hI atyanta apalApIviparItabhASI hai
/  atyanta asaMbaddha hai  /  ataH prArambha meM unhIM ko lekara sUtrakAra
vivecana karate haiM  /  . jinameM ajJAna vidyamAna hai athavA jo ajJAna ko
lekara hI AcaraNazIla hai, ve ajJAnika kahe jAte haiM  /  unakA svarUpa
pradarzita kiyA jAtA hai  /  ve ajJAnika-ajJAnavAdI hama hI kuzala-suyogya haiM-
yaha kahate hue ajJAna hI zreyasa kA hetu hai isa prakAra pratipAdita karate
haiM, ve asaMbaddha bhASI hai  /  vicikitsA-cittavipluti yA bhrAMti se rahita
nahIM haiM, saMzayagrasta haiN| ve kahate haiM ye sabhI jJAnavAdI paraspara
viruddhabhASI haiM  /  ataH ve yathArthavAdI nahIM haiM  /  unameM se kaI AtmA
ko sarvagata-sarvavyApI mAnate haiM  /  kaI asarvagata mAnate haiM  /  kaI
kahate haiM ki -496

Page #525 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The soul, the object of study in Samvasarana, is like the joint of the thumb.
Many consider it to be as small as a grain of rice from the Shyamaka variety.
Some consider it to be concrete, while others consider it to be abstract. Some
say that the soul resides in the middle of the heart, while others say that it
resides in the forehead. Thus, even regarding the soul, which is the most
prominent of all substances, there is no single opinion or statement among the
knowers. There is no one in the world who is exceptionally knowledgeable or
extraordinarily wise whose words can be considered as proof. Even if there is
someone who is exceptionally knowledgeable, they cannot be known by a person of
limited knowledge, because it is said that one who is not omniscient cannot know
the omniscient. Even if there is an omniscient, how can one who does not have
knowledge equal to the omniscient, who is devoid of such knowledge, know the
omniscient? They, being non-omniscient, cannot even know the means of knowing
the omniscient. Therefore, due to the mutual dependence of the means and the
object in knowing the omniscient, knowledge of the omniscient is not possible.
For example, the omniscient can be known only if the means of knowing them is
known, and the means of knowing the omniscient can be known only if one is
omniscient oneself. Therefore, due to the mutual dependence of the knowledge of
the means and the knowledge of the omniscient, it is completely impossible to
know the omniscient through the means. Knowledge cannot fully explain the nature
of the object of knowledge.  The object that is available and can be seen also
has a middle part and a back part, but they are not visible because the middle
part and the back part are obstructed by the front part, which is visible. Even
if we imagine the middle part and the back part of the visible front part, and
then imagine the parts adjacent to them, and so on, these imaginations will
ultimately end at the atom, which is inherently very distant. Therefore, a non-
omniscient person cannot know it. Without knowing it, the true knowledge of the
object is also not available. Thus, due to the absence of an omniscient person,
and due to the non-omniscient person's lack of knowledge of the true nature of
the object, and due to the contradictory nature of the objects according to the
principles of all knowers, and due to the increase in error with the increase in
knowledge, ignorance is more beneficial. If an ignorant person hits someone on
the head with their foot due to lack of knowledge, they are not considered to be
as guilty because their mind is pure. Thus, the proponents of ignorance are
incoherent and devoid of right knowledge. They are afflicted with mental
confusion and doubt. Their objection that knowers are not correct because they
present contradictory principles to each other is correct, because those who
present contradictory principles believe in scriptures that are from non-
omniscients, that are composed by non-omniscients. The contradictory principles
they present do not invalidate all principles, because there is no contradiction
in the statements of those who believe in the scriptures revealed by the
omniscient, because omniscience cannot be established without it. The
explanation is as follows: When the veil over knowledge is completely removed,
there is no desire, aversion, or delusion, which is caused by false speech, and
therefore the word of the omniscient is true. It cannot be called false. It is
clear that those who have faith in the scriptures composed by the omniscient do
not express contradictory meanings or intentions.  The skeptic raises a doubt,
saying that if there is an omniscient, then this might be possible, but that is
not the case, as has been said before. In response, they provide a solution,
saying...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayana AtmA aMgUThe ke parva-pora ke samAna hai  /  kaI use
zyAmAka jAti ke taMdula-cAvala ke jitanA mAnate haiM  /  kaI use mUrta aura kaI
amUrta kahatehaiM  /  kaI kahate haiM ki AtmA hRdaya ke madhya meM vidyamAna hai
/  kaiyoM kA kathana hai ki lalATa meM avasthita hai  /  isa prakAra samasta
padArthoM meM puraHsara-pramukhatama AtmA ke sambandha meM bhI jJAnavAdiyoM kI
eka vAdyatA-eka sA vacana pratipAdana nahIM hai  /  jagata meM koI atizaya
jJAnI-asAdhAraNa jJAnavAna bhI nahIM hai jisakA vAkya pramANabhUta mAnA jAye  /
yadi koI atizaya jJAnI haiM bhI to vaha alpajJa vyakti dvArA jAnA nahIM jA
sakatA kyoMki jo asarvajJa hai vaha sarvajJa ko jAna nahIM sakatA-aisA kahA jAtA
hai arthAt sarvajJa hoM to bhI jisako sarvajJa ke tulya utkRSTa-ucca jJAna nahIM
hai, jo vaise jJAnajJeya vijJAna se zUnya hai, vaha sarvajJa ko kaise jAna
sakatA hai  /  vaha asarvajJa, sarvajJoM ko jAnane kA upAya bhI to nahIM jAna
sakatA  /  ataH upAya dvArA sarvajJa ko jAnane meM itaretarAzraya-anyAnyazraya
doSa Ane se sarvajJa kA jJAna saMbhava nahIM hai  /  jaise sarvajJa ko jAnane kA
upAya parijJAta hone se vaha jAnA jA sakatAhai tathA svayaM sarvajJa hone kI
sthiti meM hI sarvajJa ko jAnane kA upAya jAnA jA sakatA hai  /  ata: upAya
jJAna va sarvajJa jJAna meM itaretarAzraya hone ke kAraNa upAya dvArA sarvajJa
kA jJAna honA sarvathA asaMbhava hai  /  jJAna jJeya-jAnane yogya padArtha ke
svarUpa ko pUrNataH nahIM batA sakatA  /  jo padArtha upalabdha hotA hai-dekhA
jA sakatA hai, usakA bIca kA bhAga tathA pIche kA bhAga bhI hai kintu vaha
dikhAI nahIM detA kyoMki bIca kA bhAga va pIche kA bhAga sAmane ke bhAga se
vyavahita-vyavadhAnayakta hote haiM jo sAmane kA bhAga dRSTigocara hotA hai
usake bhI bIca kA bhAga va pIche ke bhAga kI parikalpanA karane para tathA phira
unake sannikaTavartI bhAgoM meM bhI ye tInoM parikalpanAeM karate jAne para
antataH ve kalpanAeM paramANu meM jAkara samApta hogI paramANu svabhAvataH
vipraSTha-ati dUravartI hai  /  ataH asarvajJa puruSa ko usakA jJAna nahIM ho
sakatA  /  usakA jJAna na hone para padArtha kA yathArtha jJAna bhI upalabdha
nahIM hotA  /  isa prakAra sarvajJa puruSa ke abhAva se tathA asarvajJa puruSa
ko padArtha ke yathArtha svarUpa kA jJAna na hone se evaM sabhI jJAnavAdiyoM ke
siddhAnta ke anusAra padArthoM kA Apasa meM viparIta svarUpa mAne jAne se aura
jyoM-jyoM adhika jJAna hotA hai tyoM-tyoM pramAda hone para adhika doSa samajhe
jAne se ajJAna hI zreyaskara hai  /  yadi koI ajJAnI jJAna na hone se kisI ke
mastaka parapaira se AghAta karatA hai to vaha utanA bar3A doSa bhAgI nahIM mAnA
jAtA kyoMki usakA citta vizuddha hai  /  isa prakAra pratipAdita karane vAle
ajJAnavAdI asaMbaddha hai-samyakjJAna se rahita hai  /  ve cittaviplutisaMzaya
sandeha meM grasta hai  /  ve jo ye AkSepa karate haiM ki jJAnavAdI Apasa meM
eka dUsare ke pratikUla siddhAnta batAne ke kAraNa sahI nahIM hai  /  yaha ThIka
hai kyoMki ve eka dUsare ke viparIta siddhAnta pratipAdita karane vAle loga una
AgamoM meM vizvAsa karate haiM jo aMsarvajJoM ke haiM-asarvajJoM dvArA praNIta
haiM  /  ve jo paraspara viparIta siddhAnta prakaTa karate haiM  /  usase
samasta siddhAnta bAdhita nahIM hote kyoMki sarvajJa dvArA prativedita Agama meM
vizvAsa karane vAle vAdiyoM ke vacanoM meM kahIM bhI Apasa meM pratikUlatA nahIM
AtI kyoMki aisA hue binA sarvajJatA siddha hI nahIM hotii| isakA spaSTIkaraNa
yoM hai-jJAna para AyA huA AvaraNa sampUrNa rUpa se kSINa ho jAne se rAga-dveSa
tathA moha kA, jo ayathArtha bhASaNa ke kAraNa hai, kA abhAva hone se sarvajJa
kA vacana satya hai  /  use ayathArtha-mithyA nahIM kaha sakate  /  sarvajJa
dvArA praNIta AgamoM meM AsthAzIla puruSa Apasa meM viparItapratikUla artha-
abhiprAya prakaTa nahIM karate yaha spaSTa hai  /  ajJAnavAdI kI ora se zaMkA
uThAte hue kahate haiM yadi kisI sarvajJa kA astitva ho taba to yaha bAta
saMbhava ho sakatI hai para vaisA nahIM hai jo pahale kahA jA cukA hai  /  isake
uttara meM samAdhAna dete hue kahate -4970

Page #526 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra states: "What you are saying is not logical. Even
if the existence of the omniscient is true, it cannot be known by the non-
omniscient or the limited knower. Your statement is not logical. Although the
thoughts of others cannot be known, men with attachment and passion are found to
behave like those without attachment and passion, and vice versa. Therefore, the
omniscient cannot be attained by direct evidence, but because of the possibility
and inference evidence, and the absence of contradictory evidence, the existence
of the omniscient cannot be ruled out. The possibility and inference are as
follows: Through the study of grammar and other scriptures, the mind imbued with
impressions sees knowable objects with great clarity. It is observed that a
person who has studied grammar understands more than an ignorant person.
Similarly, as a result of the practice of special meditation and other
practices, a person with special knowledge can only be an omniscient person who
knows all things. There is no contradictory evidence of omniscience, such as
"there cannot be an omniscient," because a limited knower is not capable of
proving the absence of omniscience by direct evidence, because his knowledge is
limited. He is devoid of the knowledge and knowable knowledge of the omniscient.
If he knows the knowledge and knowable of the omniscient by his own knowledge,
then he himself becomes omniscient. Then where is the question of not being
omniscient? Inference evidence also cannot contradict the omniscient. Because
there is no invariable and faultless reason for the absence of the omniscient.
The absence of the omniscient cannot be proved by analogy evidence, because the
basis of analogy is similarity. The tendency of analogy is with the same, but
there is no similarity with the absence of the omniscient. Therefore, as said
before, the absence of the omniscient cannot be proved by analogy evidence. The
absence of the omniscient cannot be proved by implication evidence either,
because the tendency of implication is only from direct evidence, etc., which
has been stated before. Implication is based on direct evidence, etc. Therefore,
when the absence of the omniscient is not proved by direct evidence, etc., it
cannot be proved by implication either. The absence or non-existence of the
omniscient does not occur by scriptural evidence either, because scriptures
state the existence or non-existence of the omniscient. If you say that the
existence of the omniscient is not proved by the five evidences of direct
knowledge, analogy, implication, and possibility, then it is decided that there
is no omniscient. This is not true, because there is no evidence available that
makes the omniscient known in all places and at all times. A limited knower is
not entitled to say so, because a person who is very far away from the place and
time cannot be known by a limited knower. If he is able to know them, then he
himself becomes omniscient. Then how can it be said that there is no omniscient
person? The knowledge of a person who sees gross objects does not reach the
omniscient. The knowledge of a person who sees gross objects is not
comprehensive. Therefore, the absence of the omniscient cannot be shown by him.
If an object cannot reach the vicinity of another object due to its non-
comprehensiveness, then the absence of that object cannot be said. If it is said
that the omniscient is not known by the knowledge by which other objects are
known, then it is proved that there is no omniscient. This is not true, because
there is no rule that the omniscient should be known by the knowledge by which
other objects are known. Therefore, no evidence is obtained that obstructs the
existence of the omniscient, and there is evidence of possibility and inference
that proves it. Therefore, the existence of the omniscient is proved. By
accepting the scriptures formulated by the omniscient, no fault arises in the
form of differences or different opinions. The scriptures formulated by the
omniscient..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram haiM-jo tuma yaha bAta kahate ho vaha yuktisaMgata
nahIM hai  /  tumane jo kahA hai sarvajJa kA astittva ho to bhI vaha asarvajJa-
alpajJa dvArA jAnA nahIM jA sakatA  /  tumhArA yaha kathana yuktisaMgata nahIM
hai  /  yadyapi dUsare kI cittavRtti ko nahIM jAnA jA sakatA  /  sarAga-rAga
sahita puruSa vItarAga-rAga rahita kI jyoM, vItarAga sarAga kI jyoM ceSTA karate
hue pAye jAte haiM  /  isaliye pratyakSa pramANa dvArA sarvajJa kI upalabdhi
nahIM hotI kintu saMbhava tathA anumAna pramANa ke hone se evaM bAdhaka pramANa
ke avidyamAna hone ke kAraNa sarvajJa kA astitva vilupta nahIM ho sakatA  /
saMbhava aura anumAna isa prakAra hai  /  vyAkaraNa Adi zAstroM ke abhyAsa se
saMskArayukta buddhi jJeya padArthoM ko atizaya ke sAtha dekhatI hai  /  aisA
dekhA jAtA hai-ajJAnI kI apekSA vyAkaraNa kA adhyayana kiyA huA manuSya adhika
samajhatA hai  /  usI prakAra vizeSa abhyAsa-dhyAna Adi kI sAdhanA ke pariNAma
svarUpa viziSTa jJAnavAnasamasta padArthoM kA jJAtA koI sarvajJa puruSa hI ho
sakatA hai  /  sarvajJa nahIM ho sakatA isa prakAra kA-sarvajJatva kA koI
bAdhaka pramANa nahIM hai kyoMki alpajJa puruSa pratyakSa pramANa dvArA
sarvajJatva kA abhAva siddha karane meM sakSama nahIM hotA kyoMki usakA jJAna
svalpa hai  /  vaha sarvajJa ke jJAna va jJeya vijJAna se virahita hai| yadi
vaha apane jJAna dvArA sarvajJa ke jJAna va jJeya ko jAnatA hai to vaha svayaM
sarvajJa siddha ho jAtA hai  /  phira sarvajJa na hone kI bAta hI kahAM rahI
anumAna pramANa se bhI sarvajJa kA pratirodha nahIM ho sakatA  /  kyoMki
sarvajJa ke abhAva ke sAtha koI avyabhicArI-nirdoSa hetu nahIM hai  /  upamAna
pramANa dvArA bhI sarvajJa kA abhAva pramANita nahIM kiyA jA sakatA kyoMki
upamAna kA AdhAra sadRzatA-samAnatA hai  /  usI ke sAtha upamAna kI pravRtti
hotI hai kintu sarvajJa ke abhAva ke sAtha kisI kA sAdRzya-samAnatA nahIM hai  /
ataH pahale jaisA kahA gayA hai upamAna pramANa dvArA sarvajJa kA abhAva sAbita
nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  arthA patti pramANa dvArA bhI sarvajJa kA abhAva sAbita
nahIM hotA kyoMki arthApatti kI pravRtti pratyakSa Adi pUrvaktatA se hI hotI
hai, arthApatti pratyakSa Adi ko AdhAra mAna kara hI kI jAtI hai  /  ataH
pratyakSa Adi pramANoM se jaba sarvajJa kA abhAva siddha nahIM hotA to aApatti
ke dvArA bhI vaha pramANita nahIM ho sktaa| Agama pramANa dvArA bhI sarvajJa kA
abhAva-nAstitva ghaTita nahIM hotA kyoMki Agama sarvajJa kA sadbhAva yA astitva
pratipAdita karate haiM  /  yadi aisA kaho ki pratyakSa jJAna, upamAna,
arthApatti tathA saMbhava ina pAMcoM pramANoM se sarvajJa kA astitva siddha
nahIM hotA, ataH yaha nirNIta hotA hai ki koI sarvajJa nahIM hai| yaha kahanA
yathArtha nahIM hai kyoMki saba sthAnoM tathA saba samayoM meM sarvajJa kA bodha
karAne vAlA koI pramANa upalabdha nahIM hai  /  aisA eka alpajJa puruSa kahane
kA adhikArI nahIM hai kyoMki deza kI apekSA se, kAla kI apekSA se jo puruSa
atyanta viprapRSTha-dUra hai alpajJa puruSa unheM nahIM jAna sktaa| yadi vaha
unheM jAna pAtA ho to khuda sarvajJa siddha ho jAtA hai taba yaha kaise kahA jA
sakatAhai ki koI puruSa sarvajJa nahIM hai  /  sthUladarzI-sthUla padArthoM ko
dekhane vAle puruSa kA vijJAna sarvajJa taka nahIM pahu~ca pAtA, sthUladRSTA
vyakti kA jJAna vyApaka nahIM hotaa| isa kAraNa usa dvArA sarvajJa kA abhAva
nahIM batalAyA jA sakatA  /  yadi koI padArtha avyApaka hone ke kAraNa kisI
bhanya padArtha ke sannikaTa nahIM pahu~ca sake to usa padArtha kA abhAva nahIM
kahA jA sakatA yadi yoM kahA jAya ki jisa jJAna dvArA anya padArtha parijJAta
hote haiM-jAne jAte haiM, usase sarvajJa kA parijJAna nahIM hotA, ataH sarvajJa
nahIM hai yaha sAbita hotA hai  /  yaha kahanA yathArtha nahIM hai kyoMki jisa
jJAna dvArA anya padArtha jAne jAte haiM, usa jJAna se sarvajJa bhI jAnA jAye
aisI koI niyAmakatA nahIM hai| ataH sarvajJa ke astitva meM bAdhA upasthita
karane vAlA koI pramANa prApta nahIM hotA tathA use siddha karane vAle saMbhava
anumAna pramANa prApta hai  /  ataH sarvajJa kA astitva siddha hotA hai  /
sarvajJa dvArA praNIta-prarUpita Agama ko aMgIkAra karane se matabheda-bhinna
bhinna mantavyoM ke rUpa meM kisI bhI doSa kA udbhava nahIM hotA  /  sarvajJa
praNIta Agama -498)

Page #527 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  All those who have
faith in the study of the Shri Samavasharan (the divine assembly hall of the
Tirthankara) unanimously accept that the soul (atma) is all-pervasive, not just
the body, because the quality of consciousness (chaitanya) is present in the
body itself. Earlier, the Ajnanavadi (the proponent of ignorance) discussed the
fallacy of mutual dependence (itaretarashraya-anyonyashraya), but that is also
not possible here because through the study of scriptures and the like, the
intellect (buddhi) attains extraordinary and special knowledge. This is attained
and known in one's own soul (atma). Therefore, there is no inconsistency or
obstruction in what is directly perceived.  The Ajnanavadi who propound that
knowledge is not capable of fully comprehending the nature of the knowable
(jneya) because everywhere the posterior part of the substance (vastu) remains
covered or obscured by the anterior part, and the ultimate part of the object is
the atom (paramanu) which is imperceptible and cannot be grasped by the senses -
this is merely a statement, because even the substances obscured by time, place,
and nature are apprehended by the knowledge of the Omniscient (Sarvajna).
Therefore, there is no possibility of obstruction in the knowledge of the
Omniscient. Even the knowledge of an ordinary knowledgeable person operates in
the whole through the part, in the integral through the component; therefore,
there is no obstruction in it. The integral (avayavi) becomes obscured by its
own parts (avayava); this is not logically sound. Ignorance (ajnana) alone is
beneficial. In your statement, the term 'ajnana' either implies negation
(paryudasa) of knowledge or absolute denial (prasajya-pratishedha) of knowledge.
If you consider it as negation and call some other knowledge as 'ajnana', then
you have accepted that other knowledge as the means of well-being, and thus the
doctrine of Ajnanavada is not established. If you accept it as absolute denial,
then the absence of knowledge is trivial and devoid of existence, bereft of all
potency; how can it then be the means of well-being? If it is said that 'ajnana'
is the means of well-being, and this statement is taken as absolute denial, then
knowledge, which is the opposite of 'ajnana', is not the means of well-being -
this would mean that the attainment of well-being is denied through knowledge,
which is contrary to direct experience, because a person endowed with right
knowledge (samyag-jnana), who has comprehended the true nature of the object,
engages in the activity and accomplishes the task, which is directly observable.
Therefore, knowledge cannot be called false or meaningless.  The Ajnanavadi,
even if someone's head is accidentally touched by someone's foot due to
ignorance or carelessness, considering it as a minor fault, still proclaim
ignorance as beneficial. This is directly contradictory to the principle. Here,
the validity of inference is not required, nor is it necessary. The Ajnanavadi
are unskilled and incompetent in imparting religious instruction, yet they teach
the same dharma to their equally unskilled and incompetent disciples. Here, the
plural number has been used in a poetic manner instead of the singular. Even the
Buddhists mostly fall under the category of Ajnanavadi, because they believe
that the karma bound by the ignorant, the unwise, the unknowing, does not bind,
and they claim that children, the intoxicated, and the sleeping person are
devoid of clear knowledge, and therefore, their karma does not bind.  All these
proponents should be understood as endowed with ignorance. They speak without
deliberation and reflection, relying on ignorance; therefore, they are false
speakers, because speech with knowledge involves contemplation and deliberation.
This is in reference to the words 'kiriyam akkiriyam' (action and non-action)
appearing in the third pada of the first verse.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM meM zraddhA rakhane vAle sabhI loga ekamata se
svIkAra karate haiM ki AtmA zarIra mAtra vyApI hai kyoMki zarIra meM hI AtmA kA
guNa caitanya upalabdha hotA hai  /  pahale ajJAnavAdI ne itaretarAzraya-
anyonyAzraya doSa hone kI carcA kI hai, vaha bhI yahAM sambhAvita nahIM hai
kyoMki zAstra Adi ke abhyAsa se buddhi meM atizaya-adhika yA viziSTa jJAna hotA
hai  /  aisA apanI AtmA meM prApta hotA hai-jJAta hotA hai  /  ataH jo vastu
pratyakSa dekhI jAtI ho, usameM koI anupapatti-bAdhA upasthita nahIM hotI  /
ajJAnavAdI jo yaha pratipAdita karate haiM ki jJAna jJeya ke svarUpa ko svAyatta
karane meM-bhalI bhAMti jAnane meM samartha nahIM hotA kyoMki sarvatra padArtha
ke Age ke hisse se pIche kA hissA vyavahita rahatA hai-AvRtta yA DhakA rahatA
hai tathA vastu kA sabase antima bhAga paramANu hai jo atIndriya hai-iMdriyoM
dvArA gRhIta nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  yaha kevala kahane mAtra kI bAta hai
kyoMki deza kAla aura svabhAva se vyavahita padArtha bhI sarvajJa ke jJAna dvArA
abhigata hote haiM  /  isaliye sarvajJa ke jJAna meM AvaraNa saMbhAvita nahIM
hai  /  jo puruSa sAmAnya jJAnavAna hai, unakA jJAna bhI avayava ke mAdhyama se
avayavI meM-aMga dvArA aMgI meM pravRtta hotA hai  /  isaliye usameM vyavadhAna
nahIM hai  /  avayavI apane avayava dvArA vyavahita-AvRtta ho jAtA hai  /  yaha
bAta nyAya saMgata nahIM hai  /  ajJAna hI zreyaskara hai  /  tumhAre isa
kathana meM jo ajJAna pada AyA hai usameM naya paryudAsa hai yA prasajya
pratiSedha hai  /  yadi use paryudAsa mAnakara eka jJAna se bhinna kisI anya
jJAna ko tuma ajJAna kahate ho, taba to tumane usa anya jJAna ko hI kalyANa kA
sAdhana svIkAra kiyA  /  isase ajJAnavAda siddha hI nahIM hotA  /  yadi prasajya
/  pratiSedha ko svIkAra kara jJAna ke abhAva ko tuma ajJAna kahate ho to vaha
jJAnAbhAva abhAva rUpa hai-tuccha hai usakA koI astitva nahIM hai,
sarvasAmarthya virahita hai  /  isaliye vaha kisa prakAra zreyas kA sAdhana ho
sakatA hai  /  ajJAna kalyANa kA sAdhana hai, aisA kahA jAya aura isa vacana meM
prasajya pratiSedha mAnA jAya to ajJAna ke viparIta jJAna kalyANa kA sAdhana
nahIM haiM-yaha artha hotA hai-jJAna se zreyas prApti kA pratiSedha hotA hai jo
pratyakSa se viruddha hai kyoMki samyakjJAna-yathArtha jJAna dvArA padArtha ke
svarUpa ko adhigata kara kArya meM pravRtta hone vAlA puruSa apanA kArya siddha
karatA hai| yaha pratyakSa dRSTigocara hotA hai  /  ataH jJAna ko asatya-
anarthaka nahIM kahA jA sakatA  /  ajJAnavAdI kisI dvArA ajJAna tathA
pramAdavaza usake paira se kisI ke mastaka kA sparza ho jAne para bhI alpadoSa
jAnakara ajJAna ko zreyaskara kahate haiM  /  yaha bAta pratyakSa rUpa se hI
siddhAnta virodhI hai  /  yahAM anumAna kI prAmANikatA nahIM hai, AvazyakatA
nahIM hai  /  ajJAnavAdI isa prakAra dharmopadeza meM anipuNa-akuzala hai kintu
apane anipuNa-ayogya ziSyoM ko vaise hI dharma kA upadeza karate haiM  /  yahAM
chAndasa prayoga ke rUpa meM bahuvacana ke sthAna para eka vacana kA prayoga huA
hai  /  bauddha bhI prAyaH ajJAnavAdiyoM meM hI Ate haiM kyoMki ve mAnate haiM
ki avijJopacita-avijJa, ajJAnI dvArA upacita-kRta karma bandha nahIM hotA, unakA
kathana hai ki bAlaka, matta tathA supta puruSa vizada jJAnayukta nahIM hote  /
isaliye unake karmabandha nahIM hotA  /  ina sabhI vAdiyoM ko ajJAnayukta
samajhanA cAhiye  /  ye ajJAna kA Azraya liye, binA vicAra vimarza bolate rahate
haiM  /  ata: mRSAbhASI haiM kyoMki jJAna hone para hI cintana-vimarzapUrvaka
bolA jAtA hai| satyavAda-satyabhASaNa 1. yaha saMketa prathamagAthA ke tIsare
caraNa meM Aye hue kiriyaM akiriyaM padoM ke sambandha meM hai  /  499)

Page #528 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga is based on contemplation. It depends on
contemplation. They do not speak without contemplation because they reject
knowledge. Because they do not speak without contemplation, they are false
speakers, this is proven.  "They contemplate what is true and what is false, and
they declare what is good and what is bad. Just as many people, when asked, have
expressed their opinion." (3)  Commentary: "They contemplate what is true and
what is false, and they declare what is good and what is bad. Just as many
people, when asked, have expressed their opinion." (3)  Translation: The
Vainyaikas (those who follow the path of humility) declare truth as falsehood
and good as bad. When asked, they only advocate humility as the path to
liberation.  Commentary: The author of the Sutra now proceeds to refute the
Vainyaika doctrine. What is beneficial to all, what is auspicious for all, what
is the true nature of reality, what is the true nature of things, what is
liberation, what is restraint, that is truth. The Vainyaikas consider that truth
to be falsehood, and falsehood to be truth. For example, the path to liberation,
which is right faith and right conduct, is truth. The Vainyaikas consider it to
be falsehood, and they believe that liberation is only through humility. They
also consider the wicked, who do not perform specific virtuous actions, to be
good simply because they perform acts of humility such as bowing down. They are
not true examiners of dharma, because they believe that dharma arises only from
humility, which is not logical. Who are these people? The author explains:
"These people" are those who are known by their intellect, who are like ordinary
people, who follow the path of humility, who believe that liberation and heaven
are attained only through humility. There are thirty-two different types of
them, and they are many. When a seeker of dharma asks them, or even without
being asked, they express their opinion, their true nature, saying that
liberation and heaven are attained only through humility. They are always
humble, and they have accepted humility for the benefit of all. The word "name"
indicates possibility, and it is possible that one's work is accomplished
through humility. As it is said, "Therefore, humility is the receptacle of all
good things." (3)  Commentary: The author of the Sutra begins to refute the
Vainyaika doctrine. What is beneficial to all, what is auspicious for all, what
is the true nature of reality, what is the true nature of things, what is
liberation, what is restraint, that is truth. The Vainyaikas consider that truth
to be falsehood, and falsehood to be truth. For example, the path to liberation,
which is right faith and right conduct, is truth. The Vainyaikas consider it to
be falsehood, and they believe that liberation is only through humility. They
also consider the wicked, who do not perform specific virtuous actions, to be
good simply because they perform acts of humility such as bowing down. They are
not true examiners of dharma, because they believe that dharma arises only from
humility, which is not logical. Who are these people? The author explains:
"These people" are those who are known by their intellect, who are like ordinary
people, who follow the path of humility, who believe that liberation and heaven
are attained only through humility. There are thirty-two different types of
them, and they are many. When a seeker of dharma asks them, or even without
being asked, they express their opinion, their true nature, saying that
liberation and heaven are attained only through humility. They are always
humble, and they have accepted humility for the benefit of all. The word "name"
indicates possibility, and it is possible that one's work is accomplished
through humility. As it is said, "Therefore, humility is the receptacle of all
good things." (3)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram vicAra pUrvaka hI hotA hai-vaha vicAra para hI nirbhara
hai  /  jJAna ko asvIkAra karane ke kAraNa ye anucintana pUrvaka nahIM bolate  /
anucintana pUrvaka na bolane ke kAraNa ve mithyAvAdI haiM, yaha pramANita hotA
hai  /  saccaM asaccaM iti ciMtayaMtA, asAhu sAhutti udaahrNtaa|  /  jeme jaNA
veNaiyA aNege, puTThAvi bhAvaM viNaiMsu NAma  // 3 //  chAyA - satyamasatyamiti
cintayitvA, asAdhu sAdhvityudAharantaH  /  ya ime janAH vainayikA aneke pRSTA
api bhAvaM vyanaiSurnAma  //  anuvAda - vainayika-vinayavAdI satya ko asatya
tathA sAdhu ko asAdhu batalAte haiM  /  pUchane para ve kevala vinaya ko hI
mokSa kA mArga pratipAdita karate haiM  /  _TIkA - sAmprataM vainayikavAda
nirAcikIrSuH prakramate-sadbhayo hitaM 'satyaM' paramArtho yathAvasthita
padArtha nirUpaNaM vA mokSo vA saMyamaH satyaM tadasatyam 'iti' evaM
'vicintayanto' manyamAnAH, evamasatyamapi satyamiti manyamAnAH, tathAhi-
samyagdarzanacAritrAkhyo mokSamArgaH satyastamasatyatvena cintayanto vinayAdeva
mokSa ityetadasatyamapi satyatvena manyamAnAH, tathA
asAdhumapyaviziSTakarmakAriNaM vandanAdikayA vinayapratipattyA sAdhum 'iti' evam
'udAharantaH pratipAdayanto na samyagyathAvasthitadharmasya parIkSakAH,
yuktivikalaM vinayAdeva dharma ityevamamyupagamAt, ka ete ityetadAha-ye 'ime'
buddhayA pratyakSAsannIkRtA 'janAiva' prAkRtapuruSA iva janA vinayena caranti
vainayikAvinayAdeva kevalAtsvargamokSAvAptirityevaMvAdinaH 'aneke bahavo
dvAtriMzadbhedabhinnatvAtteSAM, te ca vinayacAriNaH kena ciddharmArthinA
pRSTAHsanto'pizabdAdapRSTA vA bhAvaM' paramArthaM yathArthopalabdhaM
svAbhiprAyaM vA vinayAdeva svargamokSAvAptirityevaM 'vyanaiSuH' vinItavantaH
sarvadA sarvasya sarvasiddhaye vinayaM grAhitavantaH, nAmazabdaH saMbhAvanAyAM,
saMbhAvyata eva vinayAtsvakAryasiddhiriti, taduktam-"tasmAtkalyANAnAM sarveSAM
bhAjanaM vinaya' iti  // 3 //  TIkArtha - sUtrakAra vainayikavAda kA nirAkaraNa
karane kA upakrama karate haiM-jo saba kA hitaprada hotA hai-sabake liye
zreyaskara hotA hai, paramArtha-vastu ke yathAvasthita svarUpa kA nirUpaNa-
pratipAdana hotA hai use satya kahA jAtA hai| athavA mokSa yA saMyama ko satya
kahA jAtA hai  /  vinayavAdI usa satya ko asatya tathA asatya ko satya mAnate
haiM  /  samyakdarzana tathA cAritra mokSa kA mArga hai, vinayavAdI use asatya
kahate haiM  /  kevala vinaya se mokSa prApta nahIM hotA para ve usI se mokSa
mAnate hue asatya ko satya ke rUpa meM sthApita karate haiM  /  jo puruSa
viziSTa karma-sAdhu jIvanocita kriyAzIla nahIM hai-asAdhu hai, use bhI ve kevala
vaMdana Adi vinayayukta kriyA karane mAtra se sAdhu svIkAra karate haiM  /  ve
dharma ke yathArthataH parIkSaka nahIM hai kyoMki ve kevala vinaya se hI dharma
kI niSpatti mAnate haiM jo yukti yukta nahIM hai  /  ve kauna haiM ? isakA
spaSTIkaraNa karate hue kahate haiM-jo sAdhAraNataH buddhi pratyakSa hai-
jAnakArI meM Ate haiM-aise sAmAnya janoM ke samAna vinayavAdI hai, kevala vinaya
ko apanAe phirate haiM, usI se svarga tathA mokSa prApta honA kahate haiM unake
battIsa bheda mAne gaye haiM  /  yoM ve aneka prakAra ke haiM  /  jaba koI
dharmArthI-dharma jijJAsu puruSa unase pUchatA hai, api zabda ke saMketa ke
anusAra nahIM bhI pUchatA haiM  /  taba ve apanA bhAva-abhiprAya paramArtha
batalAte hue kahate haiM ki kevala vinaya dvArA hI vainayikoM ne-vinayavAdiyoM
ne svarga tathA mokSa kI prApti batalAI hai  /  unhoMne sabako sarvasiddhi hetu
vinaya -500

Page #529 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text discusses the teachings of the Jain tradition, specifically focusing on
the concept of "Vinaaya" (humility) and its role in achieving spiritual
liberation.   The text states that those who believe in the power of "Vinaaya"
believe that it leads to the attainment of all good things. They argue that
humility is the key to achieving liberation.   The text then contrasts this view
with that of the "Akriyaavadi" (non-actionists), who believe that actions have
no real effect and that the present moment is not truly real. They argue that
the past and future determine the present, making actions irrelevant.   The text
criticizes both the "Vinaayaavadi" and the "Akriyaavadi" for their limited
understanding of reality. It argues that both groups are misled by their own
biases and fail to grasp the true nature of things.   The text then goes on to
discuss the views of the "Lokayatika" (materialists) and the "Bauddha"
(Buddhists), who are also considered "Akriyaavadi" in their belief that actions
have no lasting effect. The text argues that these groups are ultimately
nihilistic, denying the existence of a soul and the possibility of true
liberation.   The text concludes by emphasizing the importance of true knowledge
and understanding in achieving spiritual liberation. It argues that only through
a deep understanding of reality can one truly escape the cycle of birth and
death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM kI zikSA dI hai  /  yahAM nAma zabdasambhAvanA ke
artha meM hai, jisakA artha yaha hai ki ve vinaya se apane kArya kI siddhi hotI
hai, aisA sambhAvita mAnate haiM  /  ataeva unakI ukti hai ki samasta kalyANa kA
bhAjana vinaya hai-vinaya se sarvavidha kalyANa siddha hotA hai  /  aNovasaMkhA
iti te udAhU, adve sa obhAsai amha evaM  /  lavAvasaMkI ya aNAgaehiM, No
kiriyamAhaMsu akiriyavAdI  // 4 //  chAyA - anupasaMkhyayeti te udAhRtavantaH
arthaH svo'vabhAsate'smAka mevam  /  lavAvazaGkinazcAnAgatai!
kriyAmAhurakriyAvAdinaH  //  anuvAda - vinayavAdI pratipAdita karate haiM ki
hameM apane prayojana yA lakSya kI siddhi vinaya se hI prApta hotI dikhAI detI
hai  /  vAstava meM ve yathArtha tattva ko nahIM samajhate hue aisA kahate haiN|
isI prakAra karmabaMdha meM AzaMkAzIla akriyAvAdI bhUta aura bhaviSya dvArA
vartamAna ko asiddha mAnakara kriyA kA niSedha karate haiN| TIkA - kiMcAnyat-
saMkhyAnaM saMkhyA-paricchedaH upa sAmIpyena saMkhyA upasaMkhyA-
samyagyathAvasthitArthaparijJAnaM nopasaMkhyA'nupasaMkhyA tayA'nupasaMkhyayA-
aparijJAnena vyAmUr3hamatayaste vainayikAH svAgrahagrastA iti etad-yathA
vinayAdeva kevalAtsvargamokSAvAptirityudAhRtavantaH, etacca te mahAmohAcchAditA
'udAhuH' udAhRtavantaH, - yathaivaM sarvasya vinayapratipattyA svo'rthaH-
svargamokSAdikaH asmAkam avabhAsate' Avirbhavati prApyate itiyAvat,
anupasaMkhyodAhRtizca teSAmevamavagantavyA, tadyathA-jJAna kriyAbhyAM
mokSasadbhAve sati tadapAsya vinayAdevaikasmAttadavAptyabhyupadamAditi
yadapyuktaM 'sarvakalyANabhAjanaM' tadApi samyagdarzanAdisaMbhave sati vinayasya
kalyANabhAktvaM bhavati naikakasyeti, tadrahito hi vinayopetaHsarvasya
prahvatayA nyatkAramevApAdayati, tatazca
vivakSitArthAvabhAsanAbhAvAtteSAmevaMvAdinAmajJAvRtatvamevAvaziSyate,
naabhipretaarthaavaaptirityuktaa:vainyikaaH||saamprtmkriyaavaadidrshnN
nirAcikIrSuH pazcArdhamAhalavaM-karma tasmAdapazaGkitumapasartuM zIlaM yeSAM te
lavApazaGkino-lokAyatikAH zAkyAdayazca, teSAmAtmaiva nAsti kutastatkriyA
tajanito vA karmabandha iti, upacAramAtreNa tvasti bandhaH tadyathA
'baddhAmuktAzca kathyante, muSTigranthikapotakAH  /  na cAnye dravyataH santi,
muSTi granthikapotakAH  // 1 //  tathAhi-bauddhAnAmayamabhyupagamo,
yathA-'kSaNikA:sarvasaMskArA' iti asthitAnAM (ca) kutaH kriye tyakriyAvAditvaM,
yo'pi skandhapaJcakAmyupagamasteSAM so'pi saMvRtimAtreNa na paramArthena,
yatasteSAmayamabhyupagamaH, tadyathA-vicAryamANAH padArthA na
kathaJcidapyAtmAnaM nijJAnena samarpayitumalaM, tathAhi-avayavI
tattvAnyatvAbhyAM vicAryamANo na ghaTAM prAJcati, nApyavayavAH
paramANuparyavasAnatayA'tisUkSmatvAjjJAnagocaratAM pratipadyante, vijJAnamapi
jJeyAbhAvenAmUrtasya nirAkAratayA na svarUpaM bibharti, tathA coktam - ' "yathA
yathA'zcintyante, vivicyante. tathA tathA  /  yudyetatsvayamarthebhyo, rocate
tatra ke vayam ?  // 1 // " iti, pracchannalokAyatikA hi bauddhAH tatrAnAgataiH
kSaNaiH, cazabdAdatItaizca vartamAnakSaNasyAsaMgaterna kriyA, nApi ca tajanitaH
karmabandha iti  /  tadevamakriyAvAdino nAstikavAdinaH sarvApalApitayA
lavAvazaGkinaH santo na kriyAmAhuH, tathA akriya AtmA yeSAM sarvavyApitayA
te'pyakriyAvAdinaH sAMkhyA: tadevaM te lokAyatikabauddhasAMkhyA anupasaMkhyayA-
aparijJAneneti-etat pUrvoktamudAhRtavantaH tathaitattvajJAnenaivodAhRta-
vantaHtadyathAasmAkamevamabhyupagame'rtho'va

Page #530 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra states: "It is appropriate to be a Yujamaana." Thus,
the first half of the verse should be applied even to the Kriya-vadi view,
according to the Kakaakshi-golaka-nyaya. ||4|| Now, to show the ignorance of the
Kriya-vadis, the author says:  Commentary: Knowledge of a thing by its number is
called Sankhya, and the correct knowledge of the true nature of a thing is
called Upsankhya. Without it, that is, without the knowledge of the true nature
of the object, the Vainayikas, who are confused and attached to their own views,
preach only about attaining heaven and liberation through humility. They say,
"By being humble to everyone, we will attain heaven and liberation." But their
statement is devoid of any thought. Liberation is attained only through the
harmony of knowledge and action. Abandoning this, they preach that only humility
leads to heaven and liberation. Their statement here is that humility is the
cause of all good. Humility is the cause of good only when there is right faith,
right knowledge, etc. It is not the sole cause. One who is devoid of right
faith, right knowledge, etc., even if he is humble, is deserving of contempt and
rejection by all. The intended meaning is that heaven or liberation is not
attained only through humility. Therefore, those who preach that only humility
leads to heaven and liberation are Vinaya-vadis, who are covered in ignorance.
They do not achieve their intended or desired meaning.  The Vinaya-vadis have
been described. The Sutra-kara, in order to refute the views of the Akriya-
vadis, says in the second half of the verse: "Love" is called Karma. Those who
doubt it or are averse to it are called Lava-avashanki. The Lokayatikas and
Buddhists, etc., fall into this category. According to their doctrines, there is
no soul. Then where does its action originate, and how can Karma-bandha, which
is generated by that action, occur? Therefore, according to their doctrines,
there is no real bondage, but only an imputation. The same thing is expressed
when it is said: "Just as it is said in the world, 'I have tied my fist, I have
untied my fist,' it is not actually tied or untied by a rope, etc. It is only
the folded hands that are tied and untied like a knot. In reality, nothing is
tied or untied. This is an imputed practice. Similarly, one should understand
the practice of being bound and liberated in the world." This is the doctrine of
the Buddhists that all things are momentary, but action cannot occur in
momentary things. Therefore, they are Akriya-vadis. Although the Buddhists do
not accept the five skandhas, they believe that they are only imputations. They
do not accept their real form. Their view is that no object is capable of
expressing its own nature through knowledge, that is, the nature of objects
cannot be known through knowledge. Because an object composed of parts does not
occur or become known when considered by both the real and the unreal.
Similarly, even the parts, when considered down to the atom, do not become the
object of knowledge due to their extreme subtlety. Knowledge also does not take
form due to the formlessness of the abstract, because of the absence of the
knowable. It is said: "The more the objects are contemplated, the more their
analysis increases." If it is pleasing to us to continue the analysis of
objects, what can we do? Buddhists who believe in this kind of doctrine are
secretly Lokayatikas, atheists. In the Buddhist view, the present moment does
not coincide with the future moments and the past moments.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram bhAsate-yujyamAnako bhavatIti, tadevaM zlokapUrvAddhaM
kAkAkSigolakanyAyenA kriyAvAdimate'pyAyojyamiti  // 4 //  sAmpratamakriyA
vAdinAmajJAnavijRmbhitaM darzayitumAha - TIkArtha - saMkhyAna yA vastu kA jJAna
saMkhyA kahA jAtA hai tathA samyak-bhalI bhAMti vastu ke yathArtha svarUpa kA
parijJAna upasaMkhyA hai  /  usake binA hI arthAt padArtha ke yathArtha svarUpa
ke parijJAna ke binA hI vyAmUDhamati-Agrahagrasta vainayika kevala vinaya se
svarga evaM mokSa kI prApti batalAte haiM ve mahAmoha-atyanta ghora moha se
Acchanna hokara aisA kahate haiM ki sabake prati vinaya karane se hI hameM
svarga aura mokSa prAptaho jAyegA kintu unakA yaha kathama vicArazUnya hai  /
jJAna aura kriyA donoM ke sadbhAva se hI hone se mokSa hotA hai  /  isa bAta kA
parityAgakara ve kevala ekamAtra vinaya se hI svarga aura mokSa prApta honA
batalAte haiM  /  unakI yahAM yaha ukti hai ki vinaya samasta kalyANa kA
bhAjana-kAraNa hai vinaya to samyakdarzana Adi ke hone para hI kalyANa kA kAraNa
hotA hai, kevala akelA nahIM hotA, jo samyak darzana Adi se virahita hai, vaha
vinayayukta hotA huA bhI sabake nyatkAra-tiraskAra kA pAtra hotA hai  /
vivakSita artha-svarga yA mokSa kA avasa bhAsanaprAkaTya yA prApti kevala binaya
se nahIM hotI  /  ataH jo kevala vinaya se hI svarga tathA mokSa kA prApta honA
pratipAdita karate haiM, ve vinayavAdI ajJAna se AvRtta haiN| unako abhipreta-
abhipsita yA icchita artha kI prApti nahIM hotii| vinayavAdiyoM kA varNana ho
cukA hai  /  sUtrakAra akriyAvAdiyoM ke darzana kA nirAkaraNa karane hetu gAthA
kA uttarArddha kahate haiM-'lava' karma ko kahA jAtA hai  /  usakI jo zaMkA
karate haiM athavA usase jo apasRta hote haiM unheM lavAvazaGkI kahA jAtA hai  /
lokAyatika tathA bauddha Adi usa koTi meM Ate haiM  /  una donoM ke
siddhAntAnusAra AtmA kA astitva hI nahIM hai  /  phira usakI kriyA kahA~ se
niSpanna hotI hai tathA usa kriyA se janita karma baMdha bhI kahAM se ho sakatA
hai  /  ataeva inake siddhAntAnusAra vAstava meM baMdha nahIM hai, kintu Aropa
mAtra hai  /  usI bAta ko prakaTa karate hue kahatehaiM-jaise loka meM kahA jAtA
hai ki maiMne "muSThikA bAMdha dI, muSThikA khola dI" vAstava meM rajju Adi se
vaha na bAMdhI jAtI hai aura na kholI jAtI hai  /  kevala aMjali ko hI graMthi
kI jyoM bAMdhA kholA jAtA hai  /  vAstava meM na kucha bAMdhA jAtA hai, na kholA
jAtA hai  /  yaha eka Aropita vyavahAra hai  /  isI prakAra saMsAra meM baddha-
baMdhe hue aura mukta-chUTe hue kA vyavahAra samajhanA caahiye| bauddhoM kA yaha
siddhAnta hai ki sabhI padArtha kSaNika haiM parantu kSaNika padArthoM meM kriyA
kA ghaTita honA saMbhAvita nahIM haiM  /  ata: ve akriyAvAdI hai  /  yadyapi
bauddha pAMca skandhoM ko svIkAra na karate haiM kintu vaha bhI AropamAtra haiM,
aisA ve mAnate haiM, unakA pAramArthika rUpa svIkAra nahIM karate  /  unakA yaha
abhimata hai ki koI bhI padArtha vijJAna dvArA apane svarUpa ko vyakta karane
meM sakSama nahIM hai arthAt vijJAna dvArA padArthoM kA svarUpa parijJAta nahIM
kiyA jA sakatA kyoMki avayava yukta padArtha tattva evaM atatva donoM bhedoM
dvArA vicArita karane para ghaTita nahIM hotA, jJAta nahIM hotA  /  isI prakAra
avayava bhI paramANu paryanta vicAra karane para atyanta sUkSma hone ke kAraNa
jJAna gocara nahIM banatA , jJAna kA viSaya nahIM hotA  /  vijJAna bhI jJeya ke
abhAva se amUrta kI nirAkAratA ke kAraNa svarUpa dhAraNa nahIM karatA  /  kahA
hai-jyo jyo padArthoM kA cintana kiyA jAtA hai  /  unakA vivecana bar3hatA hI
jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra yadi padArthoM ko apanA vivecana bar3hAte jAnA rUcikara
lagatA hai-acchA lagatA to hama kyA kara sakate haiM ? isa prakAra ke siddhAnta
meM AsthAzIla bauddha chipe hue rUpa meM lokAyatika-nAstika haiM  /  bauddhoM ke
mata meM anAgatA kSaNoM tathA atIta kSaNoM ke sAtha vartamAna kSaNoM kI saMgati
ghaTita nahIM hotI  /  15020

Page #531 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the Samvasarana is not performed, therefore karma-bandha does not
occur. Those who believe in akriya-vada are therefore atheists. They deny all
substances and prohibit action due to the fear of karma-bandha. Those who
believe in the Sankhya philosophy consider the soul to be all-pervasive.
Therefore, they also do not accept action. They are akriya-vadis. Lokayatika,
Buddhist, and Sankhya thinkers, without proper understanding, advocate this
principle. They claim that the nature of substances is truly defined and
manifested according to our principles. This is ignorant. Thus, the first part
of this verse should be explained using the example of the eye-ball of a crow
(kakaakshi golak nyaya) to illustrate the view of the akriya-vadis. Now, the
sutra-kara, to explain the ignorant approach of the akriya-vadis, says:
"Sammisrabhavam cha gira ghahie, se mummui hoi anaanuwai. Iman dupakhan
immegpakhan, ahansu chalaayanam cha kamma." ||5||  Commentary: "Sammisrabhavam
cha gira grihite, sa mukamuko bhavati ananuvadi. Idam dvipakha midamekapakha
mahu chalaayatanam cha kamma." ||5||  Translation: The aforementioned thinkers,
by accepting substances through their words, deny them by accepting
sammisrabhava - the existence and non-existence of substances. They are unable
to respond to the words of those who believe in syadvada, becoming silent. They
consider their own view as without opposition and the views of others as having
opposition. They use deceitful language to refute the principles of syadvadis.
Commentary: By accepting their own words, they deny the meaning of those words.
When the meaning is accepted, they deny it through their words. Thus, Lokayatika
and others accept sammisrabhava - the existence and non-existence of substances.
The word "va" indicates that they only accept existence in their denial. For
example, Lokayatika, while teaching their disciples, would necessarily accept
the existence of the soul, the doer, and the scriptures as the cause, and the
disciples as the recipients of karma. If everything were void, then these three
would not exist, and there would be no mixture or contradiction. Buddhists also
accept sammisrabhava in the same way. For example:  "There is no traveler, nor
are there six paths mentioned in the Buddhist scriptures. If there were a path
to be traveled, how could the Buddhist teachings be considered beautiful?" ||1||
Similarly, "There is no karma, but there is fruit. There is fruit, but there is
no self as the doer." How can there be six paths if there is no self as the
doer? Since the stream of knowledge is relative and momentary, and action does
not exist, there is no possibility of different paths. They present all actions
as bonds, accepting their own view. Similarly, the five Jataka stories of the
Buddha teach:  "Those who kill their mother and father, produce blood in the
body of the Buddha, kill an Arhat, and break a stupa, these five..." ||1||
"...will go to Avici hell." If everything were void, then this teaching would be
unreasonable. Similarly, there would be no birth, old age, death, disease,
sorrow, or distinctions of high, medium, and low. This very karma-vipaka reveals
the existence of the soul, its agency, and the existence of karma. Similarly,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM isaliye kriyA niSpanna nahIM hotI  /  tajjanita
karmabandha bhI nahIM hotA  /  isa prakAra jo akriyAvAda meM vizvAsa karate haiM
ve nAstikavAdI haiM  /  ve saba padArthoM kA apalApa-khaNDana karate hue
karmabandha kI AzaMkA se kriyA kA pratiSedha karate haiM  /  sAMkhya darzana meM
vizvAsa karane vAle AtmA ko sarvavyApaka mAnate haiM  /  ataH ve bhI kriyA ko
svIkAra nahIM karate  /  ve akriyAvAdI haiN| lokAyatika, bauddha tathA sAMkhya
matavAdI vicAra-vimarza binA ajJAnapUrvaka isa siddhAnta ko pratipAdita karate
haiM  /  ve aisA nirUpita karate haiM ki hamAre siddhAntoM ke anusAra hI
padArthoM kA svarUpa yathArthataH avabhASita hotA hai-ghaTita hotA hai  /  aisA
kahanA ajJAna pUrNa hai  /  isa prakAra isa zloka ke pUrvArddha ko kauve kI
A~khoM ke-golaka-kaninIkA (kAkAkSi golaka nyAya) ke udAharaNa se akriyAvAdI ke
mata meM Ayojita karanA cAhiye  /  aba sUtrakAra akriyAvAdiyoM ke ajJAnamUlaka
upakrama ko batAne hetu kahate sammissabhAvaM ca girA gahIe, se mummuI hoi
aNANuvAI  /  imaM dupakkhaM imamegapakkhaM, AhaMsu chalAyataNaM ca kammaM  // 5
//  chAyA - sammizrabhAvaJca girA gRhIte, sa mUkamUkobhavatyananuvAdI  /  idaM
dvipakSa midamekapakSa mAhucchalAyatanaJca karma  //  anuvAda - pahale jinakA
varNana huA hai ve matavAdI apanI vANI dvArA svIkRta padArthoM kA niSedha karate
hue sammizrabhAva ko-padArtha kI sattA tathA asattA donoM ko svIkAra karate haiM
/  ve syAdvAda meM vizvAsa rakhane vAle vAdiyoM ke vacanoM kA anuvAda karane
meM-pratiuttara dene meM asamartha hokara mUka-cupa ho jAte haiM  /  ve apane
vAda ko pratipakSa rahita tathA dUsaroM ke vAda ko pratipakSa sahita mAnate haiM
/  ve syAdvAdiyoM ke siddhAntoM kA khaMDana karane hetu chalapUrNa vANI kA
prayoga karate haiM  /  TIkA - svakIyayA girA-vAcA svAbhyupagamenaiva 'gRhIte'
tasminnarthe nAntarIyakatayA vA samAgate sati tasyA''yAtasyArthasya girA
pratiSedhaM kurvANAH 'sammisrIbhAvam' astitvanAstitvAbhyupagamaM te
lokAyatikAdayaH karvanti. vAzabdAtpratiSedhe pratipAdye'stitvameva
pratipAdayanti. tathAhi-lokAyatikAstAvatsvaziSyebhyo jIvAdyabhAvapratipAdakaM,
zAstraM pratipAdayanto nAntarIkatayA''tmAnaM kartAraM kAraNaM ca zAstraM
karmatApannAMzca ziSyAnavazyamabhyupagaccheyu, sarvazUnyatve tvasya
tritayasyAbhAvAnmizrIbhAvo vyatyayo vA  /  bauddhA api mizrIbhAvamevamupagatAH,
tadyathA - "gantA canAsti kazcidgatayaH SaD bauddhazAsaneproktAH gamyata iti ca
gatiH syAcchutiH kathaM zobhanA bauddhii?||1|| tathA-'karma (ca) nAsti phalaM
cAstI phalaM cAstI'tyasaticAtmani kArake kathaM SaGgatayaH? jJAnasantAnasyApi
saMtAni vyatirekeNa saMvRtimattvAt kSaNasya cAsthitatvena kriyA'bhAvAnna
nAnAgatisaMbhavaH sarvANyapi karmANyabandhanAni prarUpayanti svAgame, tathA
paJca jAtaka zatAni ca buddhasyopadizanti, tathA - "mAtA pitarau hatvA buddha
zarIre ca rudhiramutpAdya  /  arhadvadhaM ca kRtvA stUpaM bhittvA ca paJcaite
// 1 //  AvIcinarakaM yAnti  / " evamAdikasyAgamasya sarvazUnyatve
praNayanamayuktisaMgataM syAt, tathA
jAtijarAmaraNarogazokottamamadhyamAdhamatvAni ca na syuH, eSa eva ca
nAnAvidhakarmavipAko jIvAstitvaM kartRtvaM karmavattvaM cAvedayati, tathA (503)

Page #532 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  "Like the city of Gandharva, like a dream, like a
cloud of illusions, like a mirage, like water in a desert, like the moon in the
sky, like a wheel." (1)  From this statement, it is clear that the Buddhists
accept the doctrine of mixed existence. Or, if they accept the doctrine of the
effects of various actions, then their view is contradictory. As it is said:
"If your view of emptiness is a hindrance to my view, how can it be? Or, if you
think it is not empty, then it is still my view." (1)  And so, the Buddhists, by
the above-mentioned method, while trying to prove the non-existence of mixed
existence, actually prove its existence.  Similarly, the Samkhyas, by accepting
the existence of an inactive self that pervades everything, and by proving the
existence of liberation through separation from nature, also prove the bondage
and liberation of the self through their own words. Therefore, while accepting
the existence of bondage and liberation, they accept the mixed existence of the
self through their own words, because bondage and liberation cannot occur
without action. Or, if inactivity is proved by words, then their own words
contradict their view of inactivity.  Thus, the Lokayatikas, by accepting the
doctrine of complete non-existence, prove the non-existence of action. The
Buddhists, by accepting the doctrine of momentariness and complete emptiness,
also accept the non-existence of action. They are motivated by their own
scriptures and accept mixed existence through their own words. Similarly, the
Samkhyas, by accepting the inactive self and the existence of bondage and
liberation, accept mixed existence through their own view, and this
contradiction has been explained.  Or, if a Buddhist or any other debater is
confused by proper arguments and is able to give a proper answer, he becomes
speechless, uttering only "Mummu-i hoi" (I am confused) in a stammering voice.
Or, this meaning should be understood in a natural way, due to the silence of
the person. Just as a mute person becomes mute even when speaking to another
mute person, this shows that the debater is unable to refute the argument of the
Syadvada. He is unable to refute the argument because he is unable to follow the
argument, and he remains silent because his mind is confused by valid arguments.
He does not speak and refutes the argument of the opponent without corrupting
his own view. For example, he says, "This is one side of our view." This means
that our view is one-sided, not two-sided, and it is not contradictory, because
it is not opposed by any other view. And even though this is the case, he says,
"This has two sides." This means that our view is two-sided, it is opposed by
another view, and it is contradictory because it is opposed by another view. As
it has been shown earlier, this is how their view is contradictory. Or, if this
view has two sides, then it is two-sided because it accepts the destruction of
the bondage of karma by relying on two opposing views. This reliance on two
opposing views leads to suffering in this world and the next, like thieves,
adulterers, and others. They experience the consequences of their actions in
this world, such as the cutting of their hands, feet, noses, etc., which is like
a flower, and they experience the consequences of their actions in the next
world, such as hell, etc. Similarly, other actions are also accepted as being
experienced in both worlds. This is like the previous example, "The being knows
the being." This is one side of the view, because it is experienced in this
life. This is like the example, "The unlearned, the learned, the wrong path, the
dream-like."  Thus, those who are accused by the Syadvada prove their own view
by the method mentioned above. They also mention the deception of the Syadvada,
such as the deception of the six sense organs, the deception of the new blanket,
Devadatta, etc. They say, "They say," and they mention other deceptions, such as
the deception of action, one side, two sides, etc. Or, they say, "The six sense
organs are the causes of attachment, the doors of inflow, the ear, the eye, etc.
The karma that has these six sense organs is called karma." (5)  ## Commentary
The words of other schools of thought, i.e., their accepted principles, prove
the existence of objects. Or, their principles cannot be established without
accepting the existence of objects. In such a situation, the object becomes
self-evident. In such a situation, while denying the existence of the object
through words, they accept the mixed existence of the Lokayatikas, the
Charvakas, etc., i.e., they accept a view that is a mixture of both. The word
"or" here should be understood as meaning that while denying the existence of
the object, the Lokayatikas and the Charvakas actually prove its existence. This
can be understood as follows:  The Charvakas teach their disciples about the
non-existence of the soul, etc. Here, they must accept the existence of the
teacher, the scripture that is the means of teaching, and the disciple who is
being taught. Without accepting these, teaching is not possible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram 'gAndharvanagaratulyA mAyAsvapnopapAtaghanasadRzAH  /
mRgatRSNAnIhArAmbucandrikAlAtacakrasamAH  // 1 // ' iti bhASaNAcca spaSTameva
mizrIbhAvopagamanaM bauddhAnAmiti  /  yadivA
nAnAvidhakarmavipAkAbhyupagamAtteSAM vyatyaya eveti, tathA coktam 'yadi
zUnyastava pakSo matpakSanivArakaH kathaM bhavati ?  /  atha manyase na
zUnyastathApi matpakSa evAsau  //  1  //  ' ityAdi, tadevaM bauddhAH pUrvoktayA
nItyA mizrIbhAvamupagatA nAstitvaM pratipAdayanto'stitvameva pratipAdayanti  //
tathA sAMkhyA api sarvavyApitayA akriyamAtmAnamabhyupagamya
prakRtiviyogAnmokSasadbhAvaM pratipAdayantuste'pyAtmano bandhaM mokSaM ca
svavAcA pratipAdayanti, tatazca baMdhamokSasadbhAve sati svakIyayA girA
sakriyatve gRhIte satyAtmana: sammizrIbhAvaM vrajanti, yato na kriyAmantareNa
baMdhamokSau ghaTete, vA zabdAdakriyatve pratipAdye vyatyaya eva sakriyatva
teSAM svavAcA pratipadyate  /  tadevaM lokAyatikAH sarvAbhAvAbhyupagamena
kriyA'bhAvaM pratipAdayanti bauddhAzca
kSaNikatvAtsarvazUnyatvAccAkriyAmevAbhyupagamayantaH svakIyAgamapraNayanena
coditAH santaH sammizrIbhAvaM svavAcaiva pratipadyante, tathA
sAMkhyAzcAkrimAtmAnamabhyupagacchanto baMdhamokSasadbhAvaM ca svabhyupagamenaiva
sammizrIbhAvaM vrajanti vyatyayaM ca etatpratipAditaM  /  yadivA bauddhAdiH
kazcitsyAdvAdinA samyagghetudRSTAntai rvyAkulInkriyamANaH san samyaguttaraM
dAnuyasamartho yatkiJcanabhASitayA 'mummuI hoi' tti gadgadabhASitvenAvyaktabhASI
bhavati, yadivA prAkRtazailyA chAntasatvAccAyamartho draSTavyaH, tadyathA -
mUkAdapi mUko mUkamUko bhavati etadeva darzayati- syAdvAdinoktaM
sAdhanamanuvadituM zIlamasyetyanuvAdI tatpratiSedhAdananuvAdI,
saddhetubhirvyAkulitamanA maunameva pratipadyata iti bhAvaH, ananubhASya ca
pratipakSasAdhanaM tathA'dUSayitvA ca svapakSaM pratipAdayanti tadyathA-' idam'
asmadabhyupagataM darzanameka: pakSo'syeti ekapakSamapratipakSatayaikAnti-
kamaviruddhArthAbhidhAdhitayA niSpratibAdhaM pUrvAparAviruddhamityarthaH, idaM
caivaMbhUtamapi sadi (tkami) tyAha- dvau pakSAvasyeti dvipakSaM -
sapratipakSamanai kAntikaM pUrvAparaviruddhArthAbhidhAyitayA virodhivacana
mityarthaH, yathA ca virodhivacanatvaM teSAM tathA prAgdarzitameva,
yadivedamasyadIyaM darzanaM dvau pakSAvasyeti dvipakSaM karmabandhanirjaraNaM
pratipakSadvayasamAzrayaNAt tatsamAzrayaNaM cehAmutra ca vedanAM
caurapAradArikAdInAmiva te hi karacaraNanAsikAdicchedAdikAmihaiva puSpakalpAM
svakarmaNo viDambanAmanubhavanti amutra ca narakAdau tatphalabhUtAM vedanAM
samanubhavantIti, evamanyadapi karmobhayavedyamabhyupagamyate taccedaM 'prANI
prANijJAna' mityAdi pUrvavat, tathedameka: pakSo-syetyeka pakSaM ihaiva janmani
tasya vedyatvAt, taccedam-avijJopacitaM parijJopacitamIryApathaM svapnAntikaM
ceti  /  tadevaM syAdvAdinA'bhiyuktAH svadarzanamevamanantaroktayA nItyA
pratipAdayanti tathA svAdvAdisAdhanoktau chalAyatanaMchalaM navakambalo
devadatta ityAdikaM 'AhuH' uktavantaH, ca zabdAdanyacca dUSaNAbhAsAdikaM, tathA
karma ca eka pakSadvipakSAdikaM pratipAditavanta iti, yadivA SaDAyatanAni
upAdAnakAraNAni AzravadvArANi zrotrendriyAdIni yasya karmaNastatSaDAyatanaM
karmetyevamAhuriti  // 5 //  TIkA - pUrva varNita anya matavAdiyoM kI vANI dvArA
hI arthAt unake svIkRta siddhAnta se hI padArtha kA astittva siddha ho jAtA hai
athavA padArtha kA astittva mAne binA unakA siddhAnta siddha hI nahIM hotA  /
aisA hone se vaha padArtha svayaM siddha ho jAtA hai  /  vaisI sthiti meM vacana
dvArA usa padArtha kA pratiSedha karate hue ve lokAyatika- cArvAka Adi ina donoM
se mizrita - Apasa meM mile hue isa siddhAnta ko aMgIkAra karate haiN| yahAM
prayukta 'vA' zabda se yaha jAnanA cAhiye ki padArtha kA niSedha karate hue
lokAyatika cArvAka eka prakAra se usakA astittva hI pratipAdita karate haiN| ise
yoM samajhA jA sakatA hai  /  cArvAka matavAdI apane ziSyoM ko jIva Adi tattvoM
ke abhAva pratipAdaka zAstroM kA upadeza karate haiN| yahAM ve zAstra praNetA
AtmA, upadeza ke sAdhanabhUta zAstra, upadIsyamAna ziSya inako to ve avazya hI
svIkAra karate haiM  /  inheM mAne binA upadeza 504

Page #533 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The three principles of Samvasarana, Adhyayana, and the third one, do not occur.
In the principle of Sarva Sunyata, or nihilism, these three principles are not
present. Thus, they take refuge in the mixed view, or the mixed side, meaning
they both assert that there is no substance and also accept its existence.
Despite denying the existence of substance, they acknowledge its reality.
Buddhists also embrace this mixed view, adopting contradictory mixed sides. It
is said that in a principle where there is no one who moves or goes, how can six
types of motion be established? Movement is called motion. How can this
statement, heard through the tradition of scriptures, be consistent with
Buddhist doctrine? Karma does not exist, yet its results occur. How is this
possible? If there is no soul to move, how can its six types of motion occur?
The concept of Jins Jnana Sansthana, imagined by Buddhists, is also not
different from knowledge; it is imposed. Each moment of knowledge, occurring in
each moment, is momentary and perishes in the next moment. Therefore, it is not
stable. Therefore, due to the non-existence of action, the existence of various
types of motion is never consistent according to their doctrine. Buddhists
declare all actions to be unbound and free from bondage in their scriptures. But
they also assert that Buddha took birth five hundred times. They also say that
by killing parents, extracting blood from Buddha's body, killing an Arhat,
killing them, and destroying the Dharma Stupa, a person goes to the hell called
Avichi. When there is no bondage of karma, and everything is void, then the
creation of such scriptures becomes illogical. If there is no bondage from
karma, then how can birth, old age, death, sickness, suffering, the best, the
superior, the middle, and the inferior occur? How can karma have different types
of results? This proves that the soul must exist, it is an agent, it performs
actions. Karma also has its own existence. Despite this, they say that all
worldly substances are false, like the vision of a mythical city in the sky,
Gandharva Nagar. They are mere illusions, like Maya, dreams, clouds, mirages,
dew, moonlight, and the circles of sparks from a fire. This makes it clear that
Buddhists accept the mixed view, or they contradict their nihilism by accepting
the diverse results of karma. Therefore, it is said that if your side is void,
non-existent, then how can it refute or disprove my side? If you do not consider
it void, then the side you accept is mine. Thus, Buddhists accept the mixed view
in the aforementioned manner. They assert the non-existence of substances while
narrating their existence, which is contrary to it.  Samkhya philosophers also
consider the soul to be all-pervasive and accept it as inactive, and they accept
its liberation from the separation of nature. Thus, they themselves accept the
bondage and liberation of the soul through their own words. If the bondage and
liberation of the soul occur in this way, then their own words give rise to the
soul's activity and action. Thus, Samkhya philosophers also accept the mixed
view because bondage and liberation do not occur without action. The word "va"
here indicates that Samkhya philosophers, while proving the soul to be inactive,
make it active and action-oriented through their own words.  Lokayata-Charvaka
thinkers accept the absence or non-existence of all substances. Accordingly,
they declare the absence of action. Buddhist thinkers accept the momentariness
and voidness of all substances and declare action.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayana Adi tInoM hI ghaTita nahIM hote  /  sarva zUnyatva-
sabako zUnya mAnane ke siddhAnta meM yA zUnyavAda meM ye tInoM hI tattva nahIM
haiM  /  isa prakAra ve mizrIbhAva kA-mizra pakSa kA Azraya lete haiM arthAt
padArtha nahIM hai-aisA bhI pratipAdita karate haiM tathA usakA astittva bhI
mAnate haiM  /  padArtha kA niSedha karane ke bAvajUda ve usakI sattA svIkAra
karatehaiM  /  bauddha bhI isI prakAra mizrIbhAva ko upagata hai-paraspara
viparIta mizrapakSa ko apanAye hue haiM  /  kahA hai jisa siddhAnta meM koI
gantA-gati karane vAlA yA jAne vAlA hI nahIM hai usameM chaH gatiyAM kisa
prakAra pratipAdita kI gaI haiM  /  gamana karanA gati khlaataahai| yaha zruti
paramparA se sunI jAtI huI bAta bauddha siddhAnta meM kisa prakAra saMgata ho
sakatI hai  /  karma kA to astittva hai hI nahIM kiMtu usakI phala niSpatti hotI
hai  /  yaha kaise saMbhava hai  /  jaba gati karane vAlI AtmA hI nahIM hai to
usakI chaH gatiyAM kaise ghaTita hoNgii| bauddhoM ne jiMsa jJAna saMsthAna kI
kalpanA kI hai vaha bhI jJAna se bhinna nahIM hai-Aropita hai  /  pratyeka
jJAna-kSaNa kSaNa meM hone vAlA jJAna, kSaNa vinAzI hai-agale kSaNa vinaSTa ho
jAtA hai  /  ata: sthira nahIM hai  /  ataeva kriyA kA astitva na hone ke kAraNa
nAnAgatiyoM kA honA inake matAnusAra kabhI bhI saMgata nahIM hai  /  bauddha
apane Agama meM-zAstra meM sabhI karmoM ko abaMdhana-baMdhana rahita batalAte
haiM  /  kintu ve yaha bhI to pratipAdita karate haiM ki buddha ne pAMca sau
bAra janma liyA  /  yaha bhI kahate haiM ki mAtApitA kI hatyA kara, buddha ke
zarIra se rudhira nikAla kara, arhad kA vadha kara unheM mArakara, dharma stUpa
ko chinna bhinna kara-tor3akara vyakti avici nAmaka narka meM jAtA hai  /  jaba
karma kA bandhana nahIM hotA, sarvazUnyajaba saba kucha zUnya hai taba aise
zAstroM kA praNayana ayuktisaMgata ho jAtA hai  /  yadi karma se baMdhana nahIM
hotA to janma, vRddhAvasthA, mRtyu, rugNatA, duHkha, uttama, zreSTha, madhyama-
bIca kA, adhama-nimna, yaha saba kisa prakAra ghaTita ho sakate haiM  /  karma
kA bhinna bhinna prakAra kA vipAka-phala kisa prakAra hote haiM  /  isase yaha
sAbita hotA hai ki avazya hI jIva kA astitva hai, usakA kRtvatva hai-vaha karma
karatA hai  /  karma kA bhI apanA astittva hai  /  aisA hone ke bAvajUda ve jo
yaha kahatehaiM ki sabhI sAMsArika padArtha gaMdharva nagara-AkAza meM kAlpanika
nagara ke dRzya ke samAna asatya hai  /  ve mAyA, svapna, megha, mRgatRSNA,
nihAra-osa kI bUMda, cAMdanI, arAtacakraciMgAriyoM ke ghere ke samAna kevala
mAtra AbhAsa haiN| isase yaha spaSTa hai ki bauddha mizrIbhAva ko svIkAra haiM
athavA ve karmoM kA nAnAvidha-bhinna bhinna prakAra kA phala mAnakara apane
zUnyavAda ke pratikUla pratipAdana karate haiM  /  ataeva kahA hai ki yadi
tumhArA pakSa zUnya hai-astittva hIna hai to vaha mere pakSa kA nivAraNa-
nirAkaraNa yA khaNDana kaise kara sakatA hai  /  yadi tuma use zUnya nahIM
mAnate to tumhAre dvArA svIkRta pakSa merA hI to huA  /  isa prakAra bauddha
pUrvokta rIti se mizra bhAva ko hI svIkAra kiye hue haiM  /  ve padArthoM ke
nAstittva kA pratipAdana karate hue usase viparIta astittva kA hI AkhyAna karate
haiM  /  sAMkhya darzanavAdI bhI AtmA ko sarvavyApI mAnate hue use kriyA rahita
svIkAra karate haiM aura prakRti ke viyoga se usakA mokSa svIkAra karate haiM  /
yoM ve svayaM apanI vANI se hI AtmA kA baMdha aura mokSa mAna lete haiM  /  isa
prakAra AtmA kA baMdha aura mokSa hotA hai taba unhIM kI vANI se AtmA kI
sakriyatA-kriyA yuktatA utpanna ho jAtI hai  /  isa prakAra sAMkhya darzanavAdI
bhI sammizrI bhAva ko svIkAra kiye hue hai kyoMki kriyA ke binA baMdha aura
mokSa nahIM hote  /  'vA' zabda se yahAM prakaTa kiyA gayA hai ki sAMkhyavAdI
AtmA ko akriya sAbita karate hue apanI hI vANI se use sakriya-kriyAvAna
pratipAdita karate haiM  /  lokAyatika-cArvAka matavAdI saba padArthoM kA
abhAva-nAstitva svIkAra karate haiM  /  tadanusAra ve kriyA kA abhAva batalAte
haiM  /  bauddha matavAdI saba padArthoM kA kSaNikatva evaM zUnyatva svIkAra
kara kriyA -505

Page #534 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The authors of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra believe in non-existence, but when asked
why and how they create the Agamas if all substances do not exist, they accept
the mixed state through their speech. Similarly, the Sankhya philosophers, while
considering the soul to be inactive, also advocate its bondage and liberation,
thereby accepting it as active and capable of action. Thus, they resort to the
mixed state.  It has been explained that all other philosophers who believe in
the aforementioned inaction, while proving their own side, also prove the
opposing action, which is not their side. When a Syadvadi, who believes in
Syadvada or Anekantavada, refutes the doctrines of the Buddhists, etc., using
proper reasons, examples, and illustrations, they are unable to give a proper
answer. They start mumbling in an unclear way, as if their mind is wandering, or
because of the use of Chandas in the style of Prakrit, one should understand its
meaning. When asked the aforementioned questions by the Syadvadi, the Buddhists,
etc., become speechless - they become mute - they become completely silent -
they are stunned. The Sutrakar, while advocating this, says that the Syadvadi
cannot translate the proper reasons, etc., presented - they cannot understand
and answer. They become anxious and silent - they remain silent. When the
Syadvadi presents reasons and examples against the Buddhists, etc., they start
to adorn their own doctrine without translating them - without giving a counter-
argument. They start saying that our philosophy is free from the opposing side.
It is the only side. And because it is mutually non-contradictory and has the
same meaning, it is free from obstacles - it is free from contradictions. Their
statement is not true. This has been said before. (Jain philosophers say) Our
philosophy is two-sided - it has two sides. It is with an opposing side. It is
Anekantic - it is based on Anekantavada. The statement that expresses the
contradictory meaning of the previous and the subsequent is called a
contradictory statement. Such contradictory and non-contradictory statements
have a place in it from a relative perspective, as has been said before. Or, in
another way, our philosophy is two-sided. Our philosophy is two-sided from the
perspective of karma-bondage and liberation. Just as a being receives the fruits
of its karma, like a thief, a womanizer, etc., in this world and in the next
world - in both worlds. The thief and the womanizer have their hands, feet,
nose, etc., cut off, causing them suffering, which is like the effect of their
karma, like a flower, and in the next world, they suffer hellish torments, which
are like the fruit of their karma, like the fruit of their karma. Just as the
fruits of these karmas have to be suffered in both worlds, similarly, other good
deeds, bad deeds, and sins also have to be suffered in both worlds. Jain
philosophy is two-sided because of this belief, but the Buddhists, etc., are
one-sided. They say that the fruits of karma are received in this birth, not in
another. As has been said before in the form of "Praani Praani Gyaanam". They
say that Avgyopacit, Parigyopacit, E-path, Swapnantic, the bondage of karma is
only a touch. The mere touch of bondage has no fruit in the next world -
therefore, they are one-sided. When a man who believes in Syadvada starts
pointing out flaws in their doctrine, they resort to the fully described policy-
method, claiming their philosophy to be superior, and use deception in the
proper reasons presented by the Syadvadi. For example, Devadatta's blanket is
new. This sentence "Navakambalo Devadatta" is said with this meaning. The word
"nava" is ambiguous - it denotes both new and nine. The word "nava" used here
has the numerical meaning of nine.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kA abhAva mAnate haiM kintu jaba unase yaha jijJAsita
kiyA jAtA hai ki sabhI padArthoM kA astitva nahIM hai to tuma Agama kI racanA
kyoM aura kaise karate ho  /  taba ve apanI vANI se sammizrabhAva svIkAra kara
lete haiM  /  isI prakAra sAMkhya matavAdI AtmA ko akriya mAnate hue bhI usakA
baMdha aura mokSa pratipAdita kara use sakriya-kriyAvAna aMgIkAra kara lete haiM
/  yoM ve mizrabhAva kA Azraya lete haiM  /  isa prakAra pUrva varNita sabhI
akriyAvAda meM vizvAsa karane vAle anya matavAdI apane pakSa ko pramANita karate
hue, usake pratikUla kriyAvAda ko bhI jo unakA pakSa nahIM hai, pramANita kara
dete haiM, yaha batalAyA jA cukA haiM  /  yadi koI syAdvAdI-syAdvAda yA
anekAntavAda meM vizvAsa karane vAlA samyak hetu-kAraNa dRSTAnta Adi dvArA jaba
bauddha Adi ke siddhAntoM kA khaNDana karatA hai taba ve samucita uttara dene
meM asamartha ho jAte haiM  /  asaMbaddha-jaisA mana meM Aye vaisA pralApa
karate hue avyaktarUpa meM bar3abar3Ane lagate haiM, athavA prAkRta kI zailI se
chAMdasa prayoga hone ke kAraNa isakA yaha abhiprAya jAnanA cAhiye  /  syAdvAdI
dvArA pUrvokta meM pUche jAne para ve bauddha Adi mUka se vimUka ho jAte haiM-
mUkamUka ho jAte haiM-bilkula cupa ho jAte haiM-hakke bakke raha jAte haiM  /
sUtrakAra isI kA pratipAdana karate hue kahate haiM ki syAdvAdI dvArA prastuta
samyak hetu Adi kA anuvAda nahIM kara sakate-samajha kara uttara nahIM de sakate
/  ve vyAkula hokara mauna ho jAte haiM-cuppI sAdha lete haiM  /  syAdavAdI
dvArA bauddha Adi ke pratikUla hetu va dRSTAnta prastuta kiye jAne para unakA
anuvAda kiye binA hI-prati uttara diye binA hI apane siddhAnta kA maNDana karane
lagate haiM  /  ve kahane lagate haiM ki hamArA darzana viruddha pakSa se
vivarjita hai  /  vaha ekamAtra pakSa rUpa hai  /  evaM paraspara aviruddha
arthAbhidAyI hone ke kAraNaparaspara viruddha artha na batAne ke kAraNa vaha
pratibAdhA rahita hai-pUrvApara virodha rahita hai  /  unakA yaha kahanA
yathArtha nahIM hai  /  yaha pahale kahA jA cukA hai  /  (jaina matavAdI kahate
haiM) hamArA darzana dvipakSa-do pakSa yukta hai| vaha sapratipakSa hai.
anekAntika hai-anekAntavAda para TikA haA hai| parvApara viruddha artha kA jo
abhidhAna karatA hai use virodhI vacana kahA jAtA hai  /  aise virodhI avirodhI-
aise donoM vacanoM kA isameM ApekSika dRSTi se sthAna hai, yaha pahale kahA jA
cukA hai  /  athavA yoM eka anya prakAra se bhI hamArA darzana do pakSa yukta
hai| hamArA darzana karmabaMdha va nirjaraNa kI dRSTi se do pakSa yukta hai  /
jaise jIva apane karma kA phala, cora, para strIgAmI Adi ke samAna isa loka meM
aura paraloka meM-donoM hI loka meM prApta karatA hai  /  cora evaM parastrI
gAmI ke hAtha-paira, nAka Adi kA chedana kiyA jAtA hai jisase ve kaSTa pAte haiM
jo mAnoM unake karma kA prabhAva puSpavata hai aura paraloka meM ve nArakIya
yAtanAeM jhelate haiM jo unake karmoM kA vipAka phala ke samAna hai jaise ina
karmoM ke phala donoM lokoM meM bhugatane par3ate haiN| usI taraha anya zubha-
puNya, azubha-pApa bhI donoM lokoM meM hI bhugatane par3ate haiM  /  jaina
darzana aisI mAnyatA ke kAraNa dvipakSa yukta hai kintu bauddha Adi eka pakSIya
hai  /  unakA kathana hai ki karma kA phala isI janma meM prApta hotA hai,
dUsare meM nahIM  /  'prANI prANi jJAnaM' ke rUpa meM pahale kahA jA cukA hai  /
ve kahate haiM ki avajJopacita, parijJopacita, I-patha, svapnAntika, karmoM kA
baMdha kevala sparza mAtra hai  /  sparzamAtra bandhana kA paraloka meM koI
phala nahIM hotA-isaliye ve eka pakSIya haiM  /  syAdvAda meM AsthAvAna puruSa
jaba unake siddhAnta meM doSa dikhalAne lagatA hai taba ve pUrNavarNita nIti-
paddhati kA avalambana lekara apane darzana ko hI uttama-zreSTha batAte haiM
aura syAdvAdI dvArA prastuta samyak hetu meM chala prayoga karate haiM  /
udAharaNArtha devadatta kA kambala nava-navIna hai  /  isa abhiprAya se
'navakambalodevadattaH' yaha vAkya kahA gayA hai  /  nava zabda dvayarthaka hai-
navIna kA bhI dyotaka hai aura nau kA bhI  /  isameM Aye 'nava' zabda kA
saMkhyAparaka nau artha kara 506

Page #535 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Study of Samvasarana  Someone prohibits it. It means the opposite of
new. In the same way, Buddhist and other philosophers have used deception in the
true reasons established by the Jains - in the real causes. The word 'ch' used
here also indicates other unreasonable faults. Buddhists have accepted karma in
their philosophy as one side and two sides, etc. Or they call karma as
ṣaḍāyatana. The senses like hearing, etc., which are the material causes - the
doors of inflow, are called ṣaḍāyatana. According to Buddhists, there is such a
belief about karma as ṣaḍāyatana.  **Verse 6:**  They thus speak, not
understanding, proponents of various false doctrines. Taking them on, many
people wander in the world, without any true understanding.  **Commentary:**
The author of the sutra says, "They" - the Cārvāka, Buddhists, etc., who are
proponents of inaction, speak thus. They do not understand the true nature of
things, their hearts are covered with the veil of falsehood. They present
various kinds of scriptures, such as:  "By giving, one obtains great pleasures,
and the heaven of the gods, by virtue. By meditation, one attains liberation, by
austerity, all things are achieved."  And, "There are only four elements: earth,
water, fire, and air. There is no other self, the experiencer of pleasure and
pain. If these are also not real, then everything is like a dream, a magic show,
a mirage, a double moon, etc."  And, "Everything is momentary and without self.
Liberation is the realization of emptiness, the rest are just thoughts."  Thus,
they present various kinds of scriptures, being proponents of inaction, who are
themselves inactive. They, not understanding the true nature of things, take on
their philosophy, and many people wander in the world, without any true
understanding, like a rat in a cage. For example, there is no proof for the
Lokāyata's claim that everything is void. As it is said:  "The truths are
submerged, without reason, they cannot be established. If it exists, then it is
not the truth, if it is established, then everything must be true."  Nor is
perception the only proof, because the past and future are not directly
perceived, and the validity of the relationship with the father is not
established. Therefore, all social interaction would be destroyed. Also, the
Buddhists' claim that everything is momentary leads to the absence of reality.
For example, whatever is the cause of action is truly real. But a moment does
not cause action gradually, because of its momentary nature. Nor does it cause
action collectively, because all actions would occur in the same moment. This is
not desirable, nor is it the basis of knowledge. Without a self, a knower, there
is no possibility of the perception of a collection of qualities. This has been
said before. And what is said, "By giving, one obtains great pleasures," etc.,
is also desirable in some way. But these are not accepted as objections.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM . koI usakA niSedha karatA hai  /  navIna kA viparIta
artha karatA hai  /  usI prakAra bauddha Adi dArzanikoM ne jainoM dvArA
upasthApita sat hetuoM meM-yathArtha kAraNoM meM chala kA prayoga kiyA hai  /
yahAM prayukta 'ca' zabda se dUsare bhI ayuktiyukta doSa sUcita hai  /  bauddhoM
ne apane darzana meM karma ko eka pakSa tathA dvipakSa Adi ke rUpa meM svIkAra
kiyA hai  /  athavA ve bauddha Adi karma ko SaDAyatana ke rUpa meM abhihita
karate haiM  /  zrota Adi iMdriyAM jinake upAdAna kAraNa haiM-AzravadvAra haiM,
unheM SaDAyatana kahA jAtA hai  /  bauddhoM ke anusAra karma kI SaDAyatana ke
rUpa meM aisI mAnyatA hai  /  te evamakkhaMti abujhamANA, viruvaruvANi
akiriyvaaii| je mAyaittA bahave maNUsA, bhamaMti saMsAra maNovadaggaM  // 6 //
chAyA - ta evamAcakSate'budhyamAnAH viruparupANyakriyAvAdinaH  /  yamAdAya
vahavo manuSyAH bhramanti saMsAramanavadagram  //  anuvAda - jo vastu ke
yathArtha svarUpa ko nahIM jAnate ve akriyAvAdI taraha taraha ke siddhAntoM kA-
zAstroM kA pratipAdana karate haiM jinakA avalambana lekara bahuta se loga
ananta kAla taka saMsAra meM bhaTakate rahate haiN| TIkA -
sAmpratametaduSaNAyAha-'te' cArvAka bauddhAdayo'kriyAvAdina evamAcakSate'
sadbhAvamabudhyamAnA: mithyAmalapaTa lAvRtAtmAnaH paramAtmAnaM ca vyudgrAhayanto
'viruparupANi' nAnAprakArANi zAstrANi prarupayanti, tadyathA "dAnena
mahAbhogAzca dehinAM suragatizca zIlena  /  bhAvanayA ca vimuktistapasA sarvANi
sidhyanti  // 1 // " tathA pRthivyApastejo vAyurityetAnyeva catvAri bhUtAni
vidyante, nAparaH kazcitsukhaduHkhabhAgAtmA vidyate, yadi
vaitAnyapyAvicAritaramaNIyAni na paramArthataH santIti
svapnendrajAlamarumarIcikAnicayadvicandrAdipratibhAsarUpatvAtsarvasyeti  /
tathA 'sarvaM kSaNikaM nirAtmakaM' 'muktistu zUnyatAdRSTestadarthAH zeSabhAvanA'
ityAdIni nAnAvidhAni zAstrANi vyudgrAhayantyakriyAtmAno'kriyAvAdina iti  /  te
ca paramArthamabudhyamAnA yaddarzanam 'AdAya' gRhItvA vahavo manuSyAH saMsAram
'anavadagram' aparyavasAnamarahaTTaghaTInyAyena 'bhramanti' paryaTanti, tathAhi-
lokAyatikAnAM sarvazUnyatve pratipAdye na pramANamasti, tathA coktam -
"tattvAnyupaplutAnIti, yuktyabhAve na sidhyati  /  sA'sti cetsaiva nastattvaM,
tatsiddhausarvamastusat  // 1 //  naca pratyakSamevaikaM pramANam,
atItAnAgatabhAvatayA pitRnibandhanasyApi
vyavahArasyAsiddheHtataHsarvasaMvyavahArocchedaH syAditi  /
bauddhAnAmapyatyantakSaNikatvena vastutvAbhAvaH prasajati, tathAhi-
yadevArthakriyAkAri tadeva paramArthataH sat, na ca kSaNaH krameNArtha kriyAM
karoti, kSaNikatvahAneH, nApi yogapadyena, [tatkAryANAM] ekasminneva kSaNe
sarvakAryApatteH, na caitadadRSTamiSTaM vA, na ca jJAnAdhAramAtmAnaM
guNinamantareNa guNabhUtasya saMkalanApratyayasya sadbhAva ityetacca prAgukta
prAyaM, yaccoktaM-'dAnena mahAbhogA' ityAdi tadArhatairapi kathaJci diSyata
eveti, na cAbhyupagamA eva bAdhAyai prakalpyanta iti  // 6 //  TIkArtha - isa
mata ke doSa prakaTa karane hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM-cArvAka evaM bauddha Adi
akriyAvAdI jaisA pahale varNita kiyA gayA hai-akriyAvAda kA AkhyAna karate haiM
/  ve vAstava meM sahI tattva ko nahIM jAnate, unakA hRdaya mithyAttva ke
malapaTala se-maila ke samUha se AvRta hai  /  ve apanA siddhAnta auroM ko tathA
apane -507

Page #536 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra, while explaining the principles of various
scriptures, emphasizes the importance of giving, stating that it leads to great
enjoyments. It also asserts that following ethical conduct leads to divine
status, while contemplation leads to liberation, and austerity leads to the
attainment of all virtues.   The Sutra further states that earth, water, fire,
and air are the four elements. There is no soul, a substance that experiences
pleasure and pain, beyond these elements. These elements appear beautiful due to
their lack of contemplation, their inherent nature remaining unexplored.
However, in reality, they are not real, as they are mere appearances, like
dreams, illusions, mirages, and double moons. All substances are transient,
devoid of self, and without a soul. Liberation is attained through the
perspective of emptiness. Other emotions are experienced to achieve this
liberation.   Thus, the Akriyavadis, who believe in the inactivity of the soul,
explain their principles in various ways. They do not understand the true nature
of things. Therefore, those who follow these principles keep revolving in the
cycle of existence like a water wheel.   The Lokayatika-Charvaka school believes
in complete nihilism, but there is no proof for it. The Jainas argue that all
substances are unreal, which can be proven through logic. However, if logic
itself is unreal, how can the unreality of substances be proven? If you accept
logic as true, then our belief is proven, because just as logic is true, so are
all substances.   The Charvaka school accepts only direct perception as
evidence, but this is not logical. This is because the relationship between a
father and his son in the past and the future cannot be understood by accepting
only direct perception as evidence. The past and the future are not objects of
direct perception. Accepting only direct perception as evidence would negate all
worldly interactions. Therefore, other forms of evidence, such as inference, are
also acceptable.   Similarly, those who believe in Buddhism accept all
substances as transient. However, if substances are transient, their existence
cannot be proven. This is because substances are related to action and
causation. The one who acts is truly real. If substances are transient, they
cannot perform actions sequentially, as sequential action contradicts
transience. If all actions are performed in a single moment, then all actions
should be performed in that single moment. However, this is not observed,
desired, or possible.   The basis of all knowledge is a soul with qualities.
Without this belief, knowledge like "I have known all five sense objects" cannot
be attained, as it is a perception arising from the combination of perceptions.
This has been explained earlier.   The Buddhists say that "giving leads to the
attainment of great enjoyments." This is partially accepted by the Arhat Jains.
Therefore, this belief does not pose any obstacle for us.  "Neither does it rise
nor set, nor does the moon wax or wane. Waters do not flow, nor do winds blow,
the whole world is barren."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram Apako hRdayaMgama karAte hue taraha taraha zAstroM kA-
siddhAntoM kA nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  ve kahate haiM ki dAna dene se bahuta
bar3e bhoga prApta hote haiM  /  tathA zIla kA paripAlana karane se deva gati
milatI hai  /  bhAvanA se vimukti prApta hotI hai evaM tapazcaraNa se saba
siddha ho jAtA hai  /  aura bhI ve kahate haiM-pRthvI, jala, agni aura vAyu ye
cAra hI bhUta haiM  /  inake atirikta sukha evaM duHkha kA anubhava-bhoga karane
vAlA koI AtmA saMjJaka padArtha nahIM hai  /  ve padArtha bhI avicArita ramaNIya
hai-vicAra na karane se hI-tAttvika gaharAI meM na jAne se hI sundara pratIta
hote haiM kintu pAramArthika rUpa meM ye nahIM hai-asatya hai kyoMki sabhI
padArtha svapna, indrajAla marumarIcikA, do candra Adi ke sadRza pratibhAsa
mAtra hai-kevala pratibhASita hote haiM  /  sabhI padArtha kSaNika hai-nirAtmaka
hai, Atmarahita hai  /  zUnyatva kI dRSTi se hI mukti prApta hotIhai  /  usI
mukti ko prApta karane hetu zeSa bhAvanAeM anubhAvita hotI hai  /  isa prakAra
AtmA ko kriyAzUnya mAnane vAle akriyAvAdI bhinna bhinna prakAra se apane apane
siddhAntoM kA AkhyAna karate haiM  /  ye vastu ke yathArtha svarUpa ko nahIM
jAnate  /  ataeva jo ina siddhAntoM kA avalambana karate haiM, ve rahaTa kI
taraha ananta kAla paryanta saMsAra meM cakkara lagAte rahate haiM  /
lokAyatikacArvAka siddhAntavAdI sarvazUnyatva meM vizvAsa karate haiM kintu
usakI siddhi meM koI pramANa nahIM hai  /  (jainoM dvArA) kahA gayA hai-tattva
arthAt padArtha saba asat hai yukti bala se-tarka dvArA yaha siddha kiyA jA
sakatA hai kintu vaha yukti-tarka bhI asat hai to kisake sahAre padArthoM kI
asattA pramANita kI jA skegii| yadi tuma yukti ko satya svIkAra karate ho to
hamArI hI mAnyatA sAbita hotI hai kyoMki jaise yukti satya hai, usI kI jyoM
samagra padArtha satya hai  /  cArvAka matavAdI ekamAtra pratyakSa ko hI pramANa
svIkAra karate haiM kintu aisA mAnanA yuktisaMgata nahIM hai  /  isakA kAraNa
yaha hai ki bhUtakAla ke sAtha pitA kA tathA bhaviSya kAla ke sAtha putra kA
loka meM jo vyavahAra dRSTigocara hotAhai vaha kevala pratyakSa ko hI pramANa
svIkAra karane para sadha nahIM sktaa| kyoMki atIta aura anAgata pratyakSa ke
viSaya nahIM hai  /  ekamAtra pratyakSa ko hI pramANa svIkAra karane para sabhI
jAgatika vyavahAra ucchinna ho jAyeMge  /  ataH anumAna Adi pramANa bhI mAnane
yogya haiM  /  una pramANoM ko svIkAra karanA ajJAna janita hai  /  isI taraha
bauddha darzana meM vizvAsa karane vAle samagra padArthoM ko kSaNika svIkAra
karate haiM kintu padArthoM kA kSaNikatva mAnane para unakA astittva bhI
pramANita nahIM ho sakatA kyoMki padArtha kA kriyA kAritva ke sAtha saMbaMdha
hai  /  jo kriyA karatA hai vAstava meM vahI sat hai  /  yadi padArtha kSaNika-
kSaNavartI ho to vaha kramazaH kriyAeM niSpAdita nahIM kara sakatA kyoMki
kramabaddha kriyAkAritA hone se kSaNikatva nahIM Tika sktaa| yadi eka hI kSaNa
meM saba kAryoM kA kiyA jAnA mAnA jAya to ve sabake saba eka hI kSaNa meM
niSpAdita ho jAne cAhiye kintu aisA na dRSTa hai-na dikhAI detA hai aura na
ISTa-abhipsita hai  /  samagra jJAnoM kA AdhAra eka guNI AtmA hai  /  aisA mAne
binA "maiMne pAMcoM hI indriya viSayoM ko jAnA" aisA saMkalanA pratyaya-
saMkalanA se pratIta hone vAlA jJAna bhI nahIM ho sakatA  /  yaha pahale batAyA
jA cukA hai  /  bauddha matAnuyAyiyoM ne jo yaha kahA ki 'dAna dene se atyAdhika
bhogoM kI upalabdhi hotI hai yaha to kathaJcita-eka apekSA se Arhat jaina bhI
mAnate haiM  /  isaliye aisI mAnyatA hamAre liye koI bAdhA janaka nahIM hai|
Noicco uei Na atthameti, Na caMdimA vaDDhatihAyatIvA  /  salilA Na saMdaMti Na
vaMti vAyA, vaMjho Niyato kasiNehuloe  // 7 //  chAyA - nAdipya udeti nAstameti,
na candramA vardhate hIyate vA  /  salilAni na syandante, na pAnti vAtAH
banyoniyataH kRtsnolokaH  /  /  1508

Page #537 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Samvāsaraṇā Study Translation -** Those who believe in
nihilism say that the sun does not rise or set. The moon does not wax or wane.
Water does not flow, wind does not blow, this entire world is barren, false, and
non-existent.  **Commentary -** Again, the nihilistic view is expressed: "All
nihilists are also inactive, and they deny all actions, even the rising and
setting of the sun." This is because the sun is perceived by all as the light of
the world, the divider of time into days, etc. But according to them, it does
not exist. How then can it rise or set? And what is seen as a blazing ball of
fire is merely an illusion, like a mirage or a double moon, for those who are
deluded. Similarly, the moon does not wax in the bright fortnight, nor does it
wane daily in the dark fortnight. Likewise, water does not "flow" from mountain
springs. And the winds, which are constantly moving, do not blow. What more need
be said? This entire world is "barren," devoid of meaning, "fixed," and non-
existent. Everything that is perceived is like an illusion, a dream, or a
magician's trick. ||7||  **Commentary Meaning -** The author of the sutras
presents the principle of universal nihilism. Nihilists and inactive ones deny
the actions of the sun's rising and setting, which are true and directly
perceived. Everyone sees them, but they deny them. The author explains that the
sun is directly perceived by everyone, everyone sees it. It is like a lamp for
the world. It divides time into days, etc. But according to nihilists, it does
not exist. Then what about its rising and setting? What is seen as a blazing
ball of fire in the sky is an illusion for those who are deluded, like a double
moon or a mirage. Deluded people believe this. The moon does not grow in the
bright fortnight, nor does it decrease in the dark fortnight. Springs do not
flow from mountains. The constantly moving wind does not blow either. What more
can be said? This entire world is barren, meaningless, and definitively non-
existent. Whatever is available in this world is false, like an illusion, a
dream, or a magician's trick.  **Just as the blind, even with a lamp, do not see
forms, so too those with obstructed wisdom, even though actions exist, do not
see them. ||8||**  **Shadow -** Just as a blind man, even with a lamp, does not
see forms, because he has poor eyesight.  **Translation -** Just as a blind man,
even with a lamp, cannot see objects because he has poor eyesight, so too those
who are inactive, whose wisdom is obstructed, cannot see actions even though
they exist.  **Commentary -** To refute this, the author says: "Just as a blind
man, born blind or later blinded, with poor eyesight, does not see objects like
pots and pans, even when they are present with a lamp, so too those who are
inactive do not see objects like pots and pans, or actions like existence,
movement, etc. Why? Because their wisdom is obstructed by a veil of ignorance.
Those whose wisdom is thus obstructed are like those who cannot see a lamp, a
woman, or a cow, even though they are present.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM anuvAda - jo zUnyavAda meM vizvAsa rakhate haiM,
unakA kahanA hai ki Aditya-sUryanaudita hotA hai aura na asta hotA hai  /
candramA na vardhita hotA hai aura na hrasita hotA hai  /  pAnI nahIM bahatA,
havA nahIM calatI, yaha samasta loka bandhya-asatya hai, abhAva rUpa hai  /  /
TIkA - punarapi zUnyamatAvirbhAvanAyAha-sarvazUnyavAdino hyakriyAvAdinaH
sarvAdhyakSAmAdityodgamanAdikAmeva kriyAM tAvannirundhantIti darzayati-Adityohi
sarvajanapratIto jagatpradIpa kalpo divasAdikAlavibhAgakArI sa eva tAvanna
vidyate, kutastasyogamanamastamayanaM vA ? yacca jAjvalyamAnaM tejomaNDalaM
dRzyate tad bhrAntamatInAM dvicandrAdipratimAsamRgatRSNikAkalpaM vartato  /
tathA na candramA vardhate zuklapakSe, nApyaparapakSe pratidinamapahIyate, tathA
'na salilAni' udakAni 'spandante' parvatanirjharebhyo na sravanti  /  tathA
vAtAH satatagatayo na vAnti  /  kiM bahunoktena ?, kRtsno'pyayaM loko 'vandhyaH'
arthazUnyo 'niyato' nizcita: abhAvarUpa itiyAvat, sarvamidaM yadupalabhyate
tanmAyAsvapnendra jAlakalpamiti  // 7 //  TIkArtha - sUtrakAra sarvazUnyatva
vAda kA siddhAnta prakaTa karane hetu pratipAdita karate haiM-sarvazUnyavAdI
tathA akriyAvAdI sUrya ke udagamana-udaya tathA astagamana-asta hone kI kriyAeM
satya pratyakSa hai  /  saba dekhate haiM kintu ve unakA bhI niSedha karate haiM
/  zAstrakAra isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue batalAte haiM ki sUrya saba logoM ke
liye pratyakSa hai, saba use sAkSAt dekhate haiM  /  vaha saMsAra ke liye
pradIpa ke sadRza hai |divasAdi ke kAla kA vibhAgakArI hai-vibhAjaka haiM kintu
sarvazUnyatvavAdI ke anusAra usakA bhI astittva nahIM hai  /  taba usake
udgamana evaM astagamana kI to bAta hI kyA ? jo jAjvalyamAna-jalatA huA AkAza
meM tejomaMDala dRSTigocara hotA hai vaha bhrAntabuddhiyukta janoM ke liye
dikhAI detA huA bhI do candra tathA mRgatRSNA Adi kI taraha kAlpita hai-mithyA
hai  /  vibhrAnta puruSa aisA mAnate haiM  /  candramA zukla pakSa meM vRddhi
nahIM pAtA, kRSNa pakSa meM ghaTatA nhiiN| parvatoM se nirjhara-jharane girate
nahIM, bahate nahIM  /  nirantara gatizIla vAyu bhI calatI nahIM  /  adhika kyA
kahA jAya, yaha samasta loka vandhya-arthazUnya aura nizcita rUpa meM
abhAvAtmaka hai  /  isa jagata meM jo bhI vastu upalabdha hotI hai, vaha saba
mAyA, svapna aura indrajAla-jAdUgara ke khela kI taraha asat-asatya hai| jahAhi
aMdhe saha jotiNAvi, rUvAi No passati hINaNette  /  saMtaMpi te evamakiriya vAI,
kiriyaM Na passaMti niruddhapannA  // 8 //  chAyA - yathA hyandhaH saha
jyotiSA'pi rUpANi na pazyati hInanetraH  /  satImapi te evamakriyAvAdinaH kriyAM
na pazyanti niruddhaprajJAH  /  anuvAda - jaise eka netrahIna puruSa dIpaka liye
hue bhI padArthoM ko nahIM dekha pAtA, usI taraha jinake jJAna cakSuoM para
AvaraNa par3A huA hai aise prajJAvihIna akriyavAdI, hotI huI kriyAoM ko bhI
nahIM dekha paate| TIkA - etatparihartukAma Aha-yathA hyandho-jAtyandhaH
pazcAdvA 'hInanetraH' apagata cakSuH 'rUpANi' ghaTapaTAdIni 'jyotiSApi'
pradIpAdinApi saha vartamAno 'na pazyati' nopalabhate, evaM te'pyakriyAvAdinaH
sadapi ghaTaghaTAdikaM vastu takriyAM cAstitvAdikAM parispandAdikAM vA (kriyAM)
na pazyanti  /  kimiti ?, yato niruddhAAcchAditA jJAnAvaraNAdinA karmaNA prajJA-
jJAnaM yeSAM te tathA, tathAhi-AgopAlAGganAdipratItaH samastAndhakArakSayakArI
(509)

Page #538 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states: The rising of the sun, which is
observed daily, is marked by the opening of lotuses and the beginning of the
day. This action is also inferred from the movement of Devadatta and others from
one place to another. Similarly, the moon, which wanes daily, reaches its
complete depletion and then grows again with its phases, until it reaches its
full state, which is observed by everyone. Likewise, rivers flow with waves of
water during the rainy season. The wind is inferred from the breaking of trees,
tremors, and other phenomena.   You say that all this is like illusion, a dream,
or magic. This is not true, because if everything were non-existent, then there
would be no truth to any illusory form, and thus illusion itself would be non-
existent. And who would be the one to establish illusion, and what would be
established if everything were void?   Similarly, dreams are established in the
state of wakefulness, which is true. If wakefulness were non-existent, then
dreams would also be non-existent. Therefore, by accepting dreams, you must also
accept the state of wakefulness, which follows them. By accepting this, the
concept of universal voidness is negated. Dreams are not simply non-existent,
because they are experienced and have real effects. As it is said:
"**Anuhuyadiṭṭhacintiya chāyapayaiviyāradevayā'ṇūyā. Sumina'ssa nimittā'ī puṇṇaṁ
pāvaṁ ca ṇābhāvo. ||1||**" (Shadow - experienced, seen, thought, heard, nature,
change, divine forms. The causes of dreams are merit and demerit, not non-
existence. ||1||)  Magic, too, is established in the presence of truth. If it
were non-existent, then who would establish magic for whom? The appearance of
two moons in the night also occurs when there is a single moon, which is
perceived as real. This is not possible if everything were void. Nor is there
any absolute non-existence of anything. The non-existence of things like the
horns of a rabbit, the hair of a tortoise, the lotus in the sky, etc., is well-
known. This refers to the non-existence of the meaning of the whole, not the
meaning of each individual word. For example, the rabbit exists, and the horn
exists, but it is stated that the horn that is connected to the head of the
rabbit does not exist. Thus, only the connection is negated, not the absolute
non-existence of the object. This should be understood in other contexts as
well.  Those who are ignorant of the truth, the **Tirthikas**, cling to the
doctrine of inaction, even though action exists.   Those who are wise, however,
understand the truth as it is. For example, those who have attained **Kevala
Jnana**, the perfect knowledge, see all objects in the three worlds as clearly
as a fruit in the palm of their hand. Those who have complete knowledge of the
scriptures understand past and future events through the scriptures. Others, who
are skilled in the eightfold means of knowing, understand the nature of the soul
and other objects through the power of these means. As it is said:
**Commentary:** To refute the doctrine of universal voidness, the Sutrakar
states: Just as a blind person from birth, or one who became blind after birth,
cannot see objects like pots, cloths, etc., even when they are in the presence
of light from a lamp, etc., similarly, those who believe in inaction cannot see
the existence of pots, cloths, etc., and the actions of moving, shaking, etc.
Why can't they see these things? Because their knowledge is covered by karmas
like **Jnana Avaraniya**, etc.   The rising of the sun is known to everyone,
from cowherds to women. The sun destroys all darkness and opens lotuses. It is
observed rising every day, just as Devadatta and others move from one place to
another. Similarly, the sun also moves from one place to another.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  kamalAkarodghATanapaTIyAnAdityodgamaH
pratyahaMbhavannupalakSyate, tatkriyA ca dezAddezAntarAvAptyA'nyatra
devadattAdau prtiitaa'numiiyte| candramAzca pratyahaM kSIyamANaH samasta kSayaM
yAvatpunaH kalAbhi vRddhayA pravardhamAnaH saMpUrNAvasthA (sthAM) yAM
yaavddhykssennaivoplkssyte| tathA saritazca prAvRSi jalakallolAvilAH syandamAnA
dRzyante  /  vAyavazca vAnto vRkSabhaGga kampAdibhiranumIyante yaccoktaM
bhavatA-sarvabhidaM mAyA svapnendrajAlakalpamiti, tadasat, yataH sarvAbhAve
kasyacidamAyArUpasya satyasyAbhAvAnbhAyAyA evAbhAvaH syAt, yazca mAyAM
pratipAdayet yasya ca pratipAdyate sarvazUnyatve
tayorevAmAvAtkutastadvayavasthitiriti? tathA svapno'pi jAgradavasthAyAM satyAM
vvasthApyate tasyA abhAva tasyApyabhAvaH syAttataH svapnamabhyupagacchatA
bhavatA tannAntarIyakatayA jAgradavasthA'vazyamabhyupagatA bhavati,
tadabhyupagame ca sarvazUnyatvahAniH, na ca svapno'pyabhAvarUpa eva,
svapne'pyanubhUtAdeH sadbhAvAt, tathA coktam - "aNuhuyadiTThaciMtiya
chayapayaiviyAradevayA'NUyA  /  sumiNassa nimittAI puNNaM pAvaM ca NAbhAvo  // 1
// " chAyA - anubhUtadRSTacintita zrutaprakRti vikAra devatAnUpAH  /  svapnasya
nimittAni puNyaM pApaM na nAbhAvaH  // 1 //
indrajAlavyavyasthA'thaparasatyateva sati bhavati, tadabhAve tu kena kasya
cendrajAlaM vyavasthApyeta ?, dvicandrapratibhAso'pi rAtrau satyAmekasmiMzca
candramasyupalaMbhakasadbhAve ca ghaTate na sarvazUnyatve, na cAbhAvaH
kasyacidapyatyantatuccharUpo'sti, zazaviSANa
kUrmaromagaganAravindAdInAmatyantAbhAvaprasiddhAnAM samAsa
pratipAdyasyaivArthasyAbhAvo na pratyekapadavAcyArthasyeti, tathAhi-zazo'pyasti
viSANamapyasti kiM tvatrazazamastakasamavAyi viSANaM nAstItyetatpratipAdyate,
tadevaM saMbaMdhamAtramaya niSidhyate nAtyantiko vastvabhAva iti, evamanyatrApi
drssttvymiti| tideva(vidyamAnAyAmapyastItyAdikAyAM kriyAyAM
niruddhaprajJAstIrthikA akriyAvAdamAzritA iti  // 8 //  aniruddhaprajJAstu
yathAvasthitArthaM vedino bhavanti, tathAhi-
avadhimana:paryAyakevalajJAninastrailokyodaravivaravartinaH padArthAn
karatalAmalakanyAyena pazyanti,samasta zrutajJAnino'pi
AgamavalenAtItAnAgatAnarthAn vidanti, ye'pyanye'STAGganimittapagaragAste'pi
nimittabalena jIvAdipadArthaparicchedaM vidadhati, tadAha - TIkArtha - sarva
zUnyatva vAdI ke siddhAnta kA khaNDana karane hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate
haiM-jaise eka janma se aMdhA vyakti yA janma ke bAda aMdhA banA vyakti dIpaka
Adi ke prakAza ke sAtha hotA huA bhI ghar3A, kapar3A Adi padArthoM ko dekha
nahIM pAtA, isI prakAra akriyAvAdI bhI vidyamAna ghaTa-paTAdi padArthoM ke
astittva ko tathA spandana-hilanA DulanA Adi kriyAoM ko dekha nahIM sakate  /
kyoM nahIM dekha sakate ? kyoMki unakA jJAna jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karma se
AcchAdita-DhakA huA hai  /  sUrya kA udaya gvAloM, striyoM Adi se lekara sabhI
meM prasiddha hai-sabhI jAnate haiM  /  sUrya samagra aMdhakAra kA kSaya karatA
hai  /  kamaloM ko udghATitavikasita karatA hai  /  vaha pratidina udita hotA
huA upalakSita hotA hai, jaise devadatta Adi gati karatehue eka deza se-eka
sthAna se dUsare sthAna meM jAte haiM, usI prakAra sUrya bhI gati dvArA eka
sthAna se dUsare sthAna meM jAtA hai  /  caMdramA bhI pratidina kSINa hotA huA
sampUrNataH kSaya ko prApta kara letA hai  /  phira vaha apanI kalAbhivRddhi
dvArA abhivarddhita hotA huA sampUrNAvasthA pA letA hai-paripUrNa rUpa meM
vRddhigata ho jAtA hai, aisA pratyakSa upalakSita hotA hai  /  nadiyAM pAvasa
meM-varSA Rtu meM jala kI kalloloM se-taraMgoM se laharAtI huI bahatI hai  /
aisA pratyakSa dekhA jAtA hai |vRkssoN kA bhaMga-TUTanA, kampana-hilanA Adi
dvArA vAyu ke bahane kA bhI anumAna hotA hai  /  jo Apa ina samasta vastuoM ko
mAyA svapna tathA indrajAla ke samAna kalpita yA mithyA batalAte haiM  /  yaha
samucita nahIM hai kyoMki samasta vastu kA abhAva svIkAra karane para amAyA rUpa
kisI bhI satya vastu kA astitva na hone se mAyA kA bhI astitva Tika nahIM
pAyegA, usakA bhI abhAva siddha hogA  /  jo mAyA kA pratipAdana ( 510

Page #539 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of Samvasarana  How can the state of Maya persist when both the
study of Samvasarana and the object to which Maya is attributed are absent? Just
as a dream occurs only when the state of wakefulness exists, so too, accepting
the dream necessitates accepting the state of wakefulness.  Accepting or proving
the state of wakefulness leads to the loss of all-emptiness - all-emptiness
cannot persist.  A dream is not non-existent because the objects experienced and
seen in a dream have existence in the world. Therefore, it is said that
experienced, seen, thought, and heard nature-modifications, divine influence,
merit, and demerit are the causes of a dream. However, non-existence is not the
cause of a dream.  The arrangement of magic is also done only when another
object is true - it is merely an artificial form of truth. But when there is no
true object in the world, who will create magic for whom? The illusion of two
moons is also possible only when the night is true and when the one moon that
creates the illusion is true. This cannot happen in a state of all-emptiness.
There is no absence of the extremely subtle form of any object.  The absence of
the extremely subtle form is expressed in terms like "hare's horn," "tortoise
hair," and "lotus in the sky," which are famous as examples of the absence of
the meaning of the combined words, not the absence of the meaning of each word
in the compound.  Because a hare exists in this world and horns also exist, the
negation here is of the horn existing on the hare's head through the relation of
inherence.  Thus, only the relation is negated here.  There is no absence of the
object itself.  It should be understood in the same way elsewhere.  Even when
actions like "exists" etc. are present, those who are devoid of wisdom and
follow other doctrines resort to and believe in the doctrine of inaction.  Those
whose wisdom is unhindered, not covered by karma like knowledge-obscuring karma,
know the true nature of an object as it is.  Just as the clairvoyant, the mind-
penetrator, and the omniscient see the objects existing in the three worlds like
a myrobalan fruit held in the palm of the hand, so too, the fully scriptural
knower knows the meaning and objects related to the past and future with the
help of the scriptures.  The eight-fold cause-knower, other men, also
understand, recognize, and know the living beings and other objects through the
medium of causes.  "Many people in the world know the future by studying the
eight-fold scriptures, which include astrology, dream interpretation, omens,
bodily signs, causes, meteors, and celestial fires."  **Commentary:**
"Samvatsara" refers to astrology, "dream" refers to the book on dream
interpretation, "omens" refer to things like the Srivatsa mark, "causes" refer
to auspicious words, good omens, etc., "bodily signs" refer to those found on
the body, like moles and birthmarks, "meteors" refer to celestial events like
meteors, celestial fires, eclipses, earthquakes, and tremors, and "eight-fold"
refers to the study of all these causes.  For example, the earth, meteors,
dreams, the sky, and limbs are all causes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM karatA hai aura jisako udiSTa kara mAyA kA
pratipAdana kiyAjAtA hai, ina donoM kA abhAva hone se phira mAyA avasthiti kaise
Tika sakatI hai| svapna bhI jAgrata avasthA kI sthiti hone para hI hotA hai  /
ataH svapna ko svIkAra karate haiM isase jAgrata avasthA avazya hI svIkRta ho
jAtI hai  /  jAgrata avasthA ke svIkRta yA siddha hone para sarvazUnyattva kI
hAni hotI hai - sarvazUnyattva Tika nahIM pAtA  /  svapna bhI abhAvAtmaka nahIM
hai kyoMki svapna meM bhI anubhUta - dRSTa padArthoM kA loka meM astittva hotA
hai  /  ataeva kahA gayA hai ki anubhUta, dRSTa, cintita, zruta prakRti vikAra,
devaprabhAva, puNya evaM pApa svapna ke hetu hote haiM  /  kintu abhAva svapna
kA hetu nahIM hotA  /  indrajAla kI vyavasthA bhI to anya vastu ke satya hone
para hI kI jAtI hai - vaha satya kA kRtrima rUpa hI to hai kintu jaba loka meM
koI padArtha satya hai hI nahIM taba kauna kise udiSTa kara indrajAla racegA ?
do candroM kA jo AbhAsa hotA hai vaha bhI rAtri ke satya hone para hI evaM unakA
AbhAsa karAne vAle eka caMdra ke satya hone para hI saMbhAvita hai  /
sarvazUnyatva hone kI sthiti meM yaha ghaTita nahIM ho sakatA  /  kisI bhI vastu
ke atyanta sUkSma rUpa kA abhAva nahIM hotA  /  atyanta abhAva ke rUpa meM
zazaviSANa- kharagoza ke sIMga, kUrma roma - kachue ke bAla tathA gaganAravinda
- AkAza meM kamala ityAdi ke rUpa meM jo prasiddha hai unake samAsayukta padoM
ke vAcya artha kA hI abhAva haiM, samAsagata pratyeka pada ke vAcya artha kA
abhAva nahIM hotA kyoMki isa loka meM kharagoza bhI prApta hai tathA sIMga bhI
prApta hai| isaliye yahAM kharagoza ke sira para samavAya saMbaMdha se vidyamAna
sIMga kA hI niSedha pratipAdita kiyA jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra yahAM kevala
saMbaMdha kA niSedha hai  /  vastupadArtha kA atyanta abhAva nahIM hai| anyatra
bhI aisA jAnanA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra asti ityAdi kriyA ke vidyamAna hone para
bhI prajJAzUnya itara matAvalambI akriyAvAda kA Azraya lete haiM- usameM vizvAsa
karate haiM  /  jinakI prajJA - buddhi aniruddha hai, jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karmoM
se AvRtta nahIM hai ve padArtha ke yathAvasthitajaisA vaha hai, usa svarUpa ko
jAnate haiN| jaise avadhi jJAnI, manaHparyava jJAnI tathA kevalajJAnI tInoM
lokoM meM vidyamAna padArthoM ko hathelI meM rakhe hue AMvale kI taraha dekhate
haiM tathA samagra zrutagAmI bhI Agama ke sahAre bhUta tathA bhaviSya se
sambaddha artha - padArthoM ko jAnate haiM  /  aSTAMga nimittavettA anya puruSa
bhI nimitta ke mAdhyama se jIva Adi padArthoM kA pariccheda karate haiM-
pahacAna karate haiM- jAnate haiM  /  " saMvaccharaM suviNaM lakkhaNaM ca
nimittadehaM ca aTThagameyaM bahave ahittA, logaMsi jANaMti uppAiyaM ca  /
aNAgatAI  // 9 //  chAyA saMvatsaraM svapnaM lakSaNaJca nimittaM
dehaJcautpAtikaJca  /  aSTAMgametad bahavo'dhItya loke jAnantyanAgatAni  //  -
anuvAda - saMsAra meM aise bahuta se vyakti haiM jo jyotiSa zAstra,
svapnazAstra, lakSaNazAstra, dehagata cinhoM kA jJAna sUcaka zAstra, nimitta
zAstra, ulkApAta tathA digdAha Adi ke phala pratipAdana karane vAle aSTAMga
zAstroM kA adhyayana kara anAgata kAla kI bAteM batAte haiM  /  TIkA -
'sAMvatsara' miti jyotiSaM svapnapratipAdako granthaH svapnastamadhItya
'lakSaNaM' zrIvatsAdikaM, ca zabdAdAntarabAhyabhedabhinnaM, 'nimittaM'
vAkprazastazakunAdikaM dehe bhavaM daihaM-maSakatilakAdi, utpAte
bhavamautpAtikamulkApAtadigdAhanighatimUbhikampAdikaM, tathA aSTAMga ca
nimittamadhItya, tadyathA - bhomamutpAtaM svapnamAntarikSamAMgaM 511

Page #540 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra, which describes the characteristics of sounds,
consonants, and other elements, is derived from the third chapter of the ninth
section of the Acharavastu. It reveals the causes and effects of happiness,
suffering, life, death, gain, loss, and other things. By studying this, people
in this world can understand past and future events. This is not possible in the
theories of nihilism and others. Therefore, what they say is not based on
evidence. ||9|| Commentary - Astrology is called "Samvatsar". The interpretation
of events seen in dreams is called "Swapna" or "Swapnashashtra". Special signs
like Srivatsa etc. are called "Lakshana". It is of two types - external and
internal. The interpretation of the sounds of speech, birds, auspicious omens,
and the presence of insects, flies, and moles in the body is called "Nimitta
Shastra". The study of the science of omens like meteor showers, fire in the
sky, thunder, earthquakes, and the eight-limbed Nimitta Shastra helps people
understand future events. The eight limbs of Nimitta Shastra are: 1. Bhoum, 2.
Utpat, 3. Swapna, 4. Antariksh, 5. Ang, 6. Swar, 7. Lakshana, 8. Vyanjan. The
study of the Nimitta Shastra, which is derived from the third chapter of the
ninth section of the fourteenth "Purva", reveals the causes and effects of
happiness, suffering, life, death, gain, loss, etc. By studying this, people in
this world can understand past and future events. However, this is not possible
if one accepts nihilism. Therefore, what the Lokayatikas and others say is not
based on evidence. Some omens are true, but some people's knowledge about them
is wrong. Those who do not understand the knowledge of omens say that it is
better to abandon it. ||10|| Commentary - As explained above, it is said that
even the scriptures are sometimes found to be contradictory. For example, the
scriptures mention that even the six-fold path is subject to the fourteen
"Purva". What then about those who know the eight-limbed Nimitta Shastra? The
scriptures mention that the Nimitta Shastra without the limbs has thirteen and a
half thousand sutras, and the commentary on it is as many lakhs. The limbs have
thirteen and a half thousand sutras, and the commentary on them is countless,
and the commentaries are countless. Thus, even those who know the eight-limbed
Nimitta Shastra are subject to the six-fold path. This is what is said here -
"Kei" etc. Due to the use of the Chandas style or the Prakrit style, there is a
change in the meaning. Some omens are true, but some omens or those who know
omens have a distorted understanding due to their mental deficiency, and
therefore their knowledge of omens is wrong. Even the Arhats are subject to the
contradiction of omens. What then about the Tirthikas? Thus, seeing the
contradiction in the Nimitta Shastra, those who do not believe in action, "Vidya
Sadbhavam", do not study the knowledge of omens, and believing that omens can be
both true and false, they say, "Ahansu Vijapalimokkhameva", that is, they say
that it is better to abandon the knowledge of omens due to its contradiction.
Or, they say that liberation, which is the cessation of all actions, is achieved
through knowledge alone, due to the absence of action. In some places, the last
chapter says this... 512

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram svaraM lakSaNaM
vyaJjanapriyevaMrUpaMnavamapUrvatRtIyAcAravastuvinirgataM sukhaduHkha
jIvitamaraNa lAbhAlAbhAdisaMsUcakaM nimittamadhItya loke'sminnatItAni vastUni
anAgatAni ca 'jAnanti' paricchindanti, na ca zUnyAdivAdeSvetad ghaTate,
tasmAdapramANakameva tairabhidhIyata iti  // 9 //  TIkArtha - jyotiSa zAstra ko
'saMvatsara' kahA jAtA hai  /  sapane meM dekhI huI ghaTanAoM kA jo phala batAtA
hai use svapna yA svapnazAstra kahA jAtA hai-zrIvatsa Adi cinha vizeSa ko
lakSaNa kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha bAharI aura bhItarI do prakAra kA hotA hai  /
vANI-manuSya yA pakSI kI AvAja, uttama zakuna evaM zarIra meM vidyamAna maSaka-
massA, tathA tila Adi kA jo phala sUcita karatA hai, use nimitta zAstra kahA
jAtA hai  /  ulkApAta, digdAha, meghagarjana tathA bhUkampa Adi phala jJApaka
zAstra tathA aSTAMgayukta nimitta zAstroM kA adhyayana kara puruSa anAgata kAla
kI ghaTanAoM ko jAnate haiM  /  nimitta zAstra ke ATha aMga ye haiM - 1. bhauma,
2. utpAta, 3. svapna, 4. AntarikSa, 5. AMga, 6. svara, 7. lakSaNa, 8. vyaMjana
/  caturdaza pUrvo ke antargata navama pUrva ke tRtIya AcAra vastu prakaraNa se
vinirgita-uddhRta sukha, duHkha, jIvana, mRtyu, lAbha, alAbha Adi ke saMsUcaka
nimitta zAstra kA adhyayana kara isa loka meM atIta, anAgata, bAtoM ko-ghaTanAoM
ko loga jAna lete haiM, kintu zUnyavAda ko svIkAra karane para yaha saMbhava
nahIM hotA  /  isaliye lokAyatika Adi jo kahate haiM vaha apramANa-pramANa zUnya
haiN| keI nimittA, tahiyA bhavaMti, kesiMci taM vippaDieti NANaM  /  te
vijabhAvaM aNahijamANA, AhaMsu vijAparimokkhameva  // 10 //  chAyA -
kAnicinnimittAni satyAni bhavanti, keSAJcittat viparyeti jJAnam  /  te
vidyAbhAvamanadhIyAnA AhurvidyApArimokSameva  //  anuvAda - kaI nimitta-nimitta
ke AdhAra para upasthApita tathya saca hote haiM tathA kinhIM nimittavAdiyoM kA
jJAna viparIta hotA hai-jaisA ve batAte haiM, vaisA nahIM milatA  /  yaha
dekhakara akriyAvAdI vidyA kA adhyayana na karate hue usake tyAga ko hI
zreyaskara batAte haiN| TIkA - evaM vyAkhyAte sati Aha para: nanu vyabhicAryapi
zrutamupalabhyate, tathAhi-caturdazapUrvavidhAmapi SaTsthAnapatitvamAgama
uddeSyate kiM punaraSTAGganimittazAstravidAm ? atra cAGgavarjitAnAM
nimittazAstrANAmAnuSTumena chandasA'rdhatrayodaza zatAni sUtraM tAvantyeva
sahasrANi vRttistAvatpramANalakSA paribhASeti, aGgasya
tvardhatrayodazasahastrANi sUtraM, tatparimANalakSA vRtiraparimitaM vArtikamiti,
tadevamaSTAGganimittavedinAmapi parasparataH SaTsthAnapamitatvena.
vyabhicAritvamata idamAha- keI 'tyAdi, chAndasatvAtprAkRtazailyA vA
liGgavyatyayaH, kAnicinnimittAni 'tathyAni' satyAni bhavanti, keSAJcittu
nimittAnAM nimittavedinAM vA buddhivaikalyAttathAvidhakSayopazamAbhAvena tat
nimitta jJAnaM'viparyAsaM' vyatyayameti ArhatAnAmapi nimitta vyabhicAraH
samupalabhyate, kiM punastIthikAnAM ? tadevaM nimittazAstrasya
vyabhicAramupalabhya 'te' akriyAvAdino 'vidyAsadbhAvaM' vidyAmanadhIyAnAH santo
nimittaM tathA cAnyathA ca bhavatIti matvA te 'AhaMsu vijApalimokkhameva'
vidyAyAH-zrutasya vyabhicAreNa tasya parimokSaM-parityAgamAhu:uktavantaH,
yadivA-kriyAyA abhAvAdvidyayA-jJAnenaiva mokSaM-sarvakarmacyutilakSaNamAhuriti
/  kvaciccaramapAdasyaivaM 512

Page #541 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text of the Samvāsaraṇā study says, "Know that people are slow." Those who
are ignorant say, "We know the world and its affairs by ourselves, without
studying the scriptures. We are slow." But this is not true. The fact that a
cause is real is evident from the fact that the effect is seen even when someone
sneezes. Therefore, the statement of those who say that the cause is not real is
false. This is not true, for there is no contradiction in the meaning of the
scriptures that have been properly studied. Even though it is said that the six
places of falling are present, this is not a reason to doubt the validity of the
right knowledge, because it is dependent on the person and the destruction and
cessation of the karmas. For example, if a mirage is mistaken for water, does
that mean that the perception of water is also false? Similarly, if a person who
is carrying a lamp is mistaken for fire, does that mean that the smoke is also
false? A well-examined effect does not contradict its cause. Therefore, the
fault lies with the knower, not with the knowledge. Similarly, a well-examined
cause, as described in the scriptures, does not contradict the effect. The doubt
that arises from the fact that the effect is seen even when someone sneezes is
unfounded. For the success of the action that is seen even when someone sneezes
is due to the power of other auspicious causes that are present in the interval.
Even when an auspicious cause is present, the action may be hindered by the
power of other causes. The scriptures say that the Buddha once told his
disciples, "There will be a famine for twelve years. Therefore, go to other
countries." They went according to his words, but were then forbidden by him,
saying, "Do not go. A virtuous great being has been born here today. Due to his
influence, there will be plenty." Thus, the doubt about the contradiction arises
because of the presence of other causes. ॥१०॥  Commentary: This is how the
opponent argues in support of the theory of action. He says that scriptural
knowledge is contradictory and faulty because even the great men who know the
fourteen previous existences fall into the six places of falling. This is stated
in the scriptures. What to speak of those who know the eight-fold causes? The
science of causes, which is separate from the angas, is limited to twelve
hundred and fifty anustup verses. There are twelve thousand five hundred verses
of commentary on these verses. There are twelve thousand five hundred verses of
definition on that. There are twelve thousand five hundred sutras of the angas,
and there are twelve lakh five hundred thousand verses of commentary on them.
There are unlimited commentaries on that. Thus, the knowledge of those who know
the eight-fold causes is also faulty because they fall into the six places of
falling. It is said that many causes are true, and due to the weakness of the
intellect of those who know the causes, and the absence of that kind of
destruction and cessation of karmas, there is a contradiction in their knowledge
of causes, and a contradiction is seen in their statements. The words "kei" etc.
are used in the masculine gender instead of the neuter gender because they are
in the Chandas style. The knowledge of the Jain scholars about the causes is
also contradictory. It is not surprising that the knowledge of the other schools
of thought about the causes is also contradictory. Thus, by showing that the
knowledge of the science of causes is contradictory, the non-actionists advise
against studying the scriptures and accepting the mixed scriptures as both true
and false, or they say that by abandoning the knowledge of the scriptures, one
can be freed from all karmas and attain liberation by mere knowledge, without
any action. In some places, the fourth line of this verse is found as "Jaṇāsu
logaṃsi vayaṃti manda." This means that the non-actionists believe that we know
the world and its affairs by ourselves, without studying the scriptures. They
are ignorant. They do not consider the science of causes to be true. They say
that even if someone sneezes while walking, the success of his action is seen,
and there is a man who is going with an auspicious omen, but his success is
uncertain. Therefore, the astrologers who predict the future based on the causes
are false.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM pAThaH, 'jANAsu logaMsi vayaMti maMda' tti.
vidyAmanadhItyaiva svayameva lokamasmin vA lokebhAvAn svayaM jAnImaH, evaM
maMdAH' jar3A vadanti, na ca nimittasya tathyatA, tathAhikasyacitkvacitkSute'pi
gacchata: kAryasiddhidarzanAda, ato nimittavalenAdezavidhAyinAM mRSAvAda eva
kevalamiti, naitadasti, na hi samyagadhItasya zrutasyArthe visaMvAdo'sti, yadapi
SaTsthAnapatitatvamudaghoSyate tadapi puruSAzrita kSayopazamavazena na ca
pramANAbhAsavyabhicAre samyakpramANavyabhicArAzaGkA kartuM yujyate, tathAhi-
marumarIcikAnicaye jalagrAhi pratyakSaM vyabhicaratItikRtvA kiM satya jala
grAhiNo'pi pratyakSasya vyabhicAro yuktisaMgato bhavati ? na hi
mazakavartiragnisiddhAvupadizyamAnA vyabhicAriNIti satyadhUmasyApi vyabhicAro,
na hi suvivecitaM kAryaM kAraNaM vyabhicaratIti, tatazca pramAturayamaparAdho na
pramANasya, evaM suvivecitaM nimitta zrutamapi na vyabhicaratIti, yazca kSute'pi
kAryasiddhidarzanena vyabhicAraH zaGkayate so'nupapannaH, tathAhi-kAryAkUtAt
kSute'pi gacchato yA kAryasiddhiH sA'pAntarAle
itarazobhananimitabalAtsaMjAtetyevamavagantavyaM,
zobhananimittaprasthitasyApItaranimittabalA-tkAryavyAghAta iti, tathA ca
zruti:-kila buddhaH svaziSyAnAdbrayoktavAn, yathA-'dvAdazavArSikamatra dubhikSaM
bhaviSyatItyato dezAntarANi gacchata yUyaM' te tadvacanAdgacchantastenaiva
pratiSiddhAH, yathA 'mA gacchata yUyam, ihAdyaiva puNyavAn mahAsattvaH
saMjAtastatprabhAvAtsubhikSaM bhaviSyati'
tadevamantarA'paranimittasadbhAvAttavyabhicArazaGketi sthitam  // 10 //
TIkArtha - isa prakAra vyAkhyAta karane para-kriyAvAda kA samarthana karane para
paramatavAdI pratipAdita karatA hai  /  zrutajJAna, vyabhicArI-doSayukta yA
viparIta bhI upalabdha hotA hai kyoMki caturdaza pUrvadhara-caudaha pUrvo ke
jJAtA mahApuruSa bhI cha: sthAnoM paraskhalita hote haiM-bhUla karate haiM  /
aisA zAstra meM udghoSita-kahA gayA hai| phira aSTAMga nimitta vettAoM kI to
bAta hI kyA ? aMga varjita-aMgoM se pRthak nimitta zAstra bAraha sau pacAsa
anuSTup zloka parimita hai  /  una zlokoM para sAr3he bAraha hajAra zloka
parimita vRtti haiM  /  usa para sAr3he bAraha hajAra zloka parimita paribhASA
hai  /  aMgoM ke sUtra sAr3he bAraha hajAra haiM tathA una para sAr3he bAraha
lAkha zloka parimita vRtti hai  /  usa para aparimita-parimANa rahita vArtika
hai  /  isa prakAra aSTAMga nimitta vettAoM ke bhI paraspara chaH sthAnoM para
skhalita hone se unakA jJAna sadoSa hai  /  kahA gayA hai ki kaI nimitta tathya
pUrNa hote haiM tathA nimitta vettAoM ke buddhi vaikalya-medhA kI nyUnatA tathA
usa prakAra ke kSayopazama ke abhAva se unake nimitta jJAna meM viparyAsa-
viparItatA, unake kathana se pratikUlatA dRSTigocara hotI hai  /  yahAM keI
ityAdi pada chAMdasa hone se prAkRta kI zailI-paddhati dvArA napusaMka liMga ke
sthAna para pulliMga meM prayukta haiM  /  Ahato-jaina vettAoM ke nimitta jJAna
meM bhI vyabhicAra-doSa yA antara upalabdha hotA hai  /  phira anya matavAdiyoM
ke nimitta jJAna meM vyabhicAra-doSa honA koI Azcarya kI bAta nahIM hai  /  isa
prakAra nimitta zAstra ke jJAna meM vyabhicAra-doSa upalabdha kara akriyAvAdI
vidyA kA adhyayana na karate hae mizra zAstra ko saca va jhaThA donoM hI prakAra
kA mAnate hae vidyA-zratajJAna ke tyAga kA upadeza dete haiM athavA ve kriyA ke
abhAva se-kriyA ko nirarthaka mAnakara mAtra jJAna se hI saba karmacyuta-naSTa
ho jAte haiM, mokSa prApta ho jAtA hai, aisA kahate haiM  /  kahIM kahIM isa
gAthA ke cauthe caraNa kA pATha 'jANAsu logaMsi vayaMti maMdA' aisA prApta hotA
hai  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki akriyAvAdI aisA mAnate haiM ki vidyAdhyayana
kiye binA hI hama loka-lokagata padArthoM ko jAnate haiM  /  ve maMda-ajJAnI
haiN| ve nimitta zAstra ko tathyapUrNa nahIM mAnate  /  unakA kathana hai ki koI
jA rahA ho aura chIMka ho jAye to bhI usake kArya kI saphalatA dRSTigocara hotI
hai tathA eka aisA puruSa hai jo zubha zakuna ke sAtha jA rahA ho phira bhI
usakI saphalatA anizcita dikhAI detI hai  /  ataH nimitta ke AdhAra para jo
naimittika-jyotiSI phalAdeza kahate haiM (513

Page #542 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is their false speech, untrue speech. On this, the Jain philosophers say
that this is not the reality. If one has studied the scriptures properly, then
there is no contradiction in their statement. The six places where degeneration
is mentioned are based on the intensity of the human being's decay and growth.
It is not appropriate to suspect a defect in the correct evidence due to a
defect in the apparent evidence. The perception of water in a mirage in the
desert is a defect of perception. There is no water there, but on this basis, it
is not reasonable to call the actual perception of water where it is, as false
or deceptive. If smoke is filled in a mosquito and taken somewhere and its mouth
is opened, then the smoke coming out of it cannot prove fire in it. Seeing this,
it cannot be said that the smoke coming out of the fire where it is, is
incapable of proving the fire. In this way, there is never any defect in the
work done after proper deliberation. Therefore, if something is not proved due
to the fault or ignorance of the person who proves it, then it is not
appropriate to attribute the defect to the evidence. Similarly, there is no
defect of deception in the science of cause and effect, which is established
after careful consideration and proper reasoning. Those who doubt the science of
cause and effect by saying that the work of a person who sneezes while going is
proved, are unreasonable. Because it is seen that the work of a man who goes
while sneezing in a hurry is accomplished due to the good causes that have
arisen in the meantime. This should be understood. It should be known that the
work of a man who sets out with a good omen is seen to be unsuccessful due to
other inauspicious omens that come in between. It is heard that Buddha called
his disciples and said that there will be a twelve-year famine here, so you
people go to another country. When they were about to go, hearing his words,
Buddha stopped them and said, "You people don't go. A virtuous great being has
been born here today. Therefore, due to his influence, there will be prosperity.
This shows that the other omen that came in between, the auspicious omen,
produces an effect opposite to the previous omen. Thus, the people who have come
together, the monks and the Brahmins, say so. They say that suffering is self-
inflicted, not inflicted by others. They say that liberation is attained through
knowledge and action. Commentary: Now, refuting the view of those who advocate
action, he reveals their view, saying, "They who desire liberation, which is
characterized by initiation, etc., independent of knowledge, say so, such as,
'There is a mother and father, there is a fruit of good deeds.' What is done?
(514)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram vaha unakA mRSAvAda hai, asatya bhASaNa hai  /  isa
para jaina dArzanikoM kA yaha kathana hai ki vAstavikatA yaha nahIM haiM  /
samyak-bhalIbhAMti zAstra kA abhyAsa kiyA ho to usake kathana meM visaMvAda-
viparItatA dikhAI nahIM detii| jo chaH sthAnoM para patitva-skhalana kI bAta
kahI gayI hai vaha manuSya ke kSayopazaya kI taratamatA-nyUnAdhikatA ke AdhAra
para hai| pramANAbhAsa meM doSa Ane se samyaka pramANa meM doSa kI AzaMkA karanA
samucita nahIM hai| registAna meM maru marIcikA meM jala kA pratyakSIkaraNa
vyabhicAra-doSayukta hai  /  vahAM jala nahIM hotA kintu isake AdhAra para
sacamuca jahAM jala hai taviSayaka pratyakSa ko vyabhicarit yA asatya kahanA
yuktiyukta nahIM ho sktaa| mazaka meM dhuMA bhara kara kahIM le jAkara usakA
muMha khola de to usameM se nikalatA huA dhuMA usameM agni sAbita karane meM
sakSama nahIM hotA  /  yaha dekhate hue sacamuca jahAM Aga se nikalatA huA dhuMA
haiM vahAM vaha agni siddha karane meM akSama nahIM batalAyA jA sakatA  /  isa
prakAra samyak vivecanapUrvaka jo kArya kiyA jAtA hai usameM kadApi doSa-antara
nahIM AtA  /  isaliye pramAtA-pramANita karane vAle puruSa ke aparAdha yA ajJAna
se yadi kucha pramANita nahIM hotA to pramANa meM doSa nirUpita karanA ucita
nahIM hai  /  isI prakAra suvivecita vicArita paryAlocita kara pratipAdita kiye
jAne vAle nimitta zAstra meM bhI vyabhicAra-doSa-antara nahIM AtA  /  chIMka ho
jAne para bhI jAne vAle vyakti ke kArya siddha hone kI bAta kaha kara jo nimitta
zAstra ko doSayukta hone kI zaMkA karate haiM  /  vaha anupapanna-anupayukta hai
/  kyoMki kArya kI jaldI meM chIMka hone para bhI jAte hue puruSa kA kArya
siddha hotA huA dRSTigocara hotA hai vaisA antarAla meM-bIca meM niSpanna
zobhana-uttama nimittoM ke kAraNa huA hai  /  yaha avagata karanA cAhiye  /
uttama nimitta-zakuna ko lekara prasthAna karane vAle puruSa kA kArya
asiddhaasaphala dekhA jAtA hai  /  vaha bhI bIca meM Aye anya azubha nimitto ke
kAraNa hotA hai, yaha jAnanA cAhiye  /  aisA sunA jAtA hai ki buddha ne apane
ziSyoM ko AhUta kara-bulAkara kahA ki yahAM dvAdaza varSIya durbhikSa hogA ataH
tuma loga dezAntara-anya deza meM cale jAo unakA yaha vacana sunakara jaba ve
jAne ko udyata hue tabhI buddha ne unheM rokA aura kahA tuma loga mata jAo  /
Aja hI yahAM eka puNyavAn mahAsatva-uttama puruSa kA janma huA hai  /  isaliye
unake prabhAva se subhikSa hogA-acchA jamAnA hogA  /  isase yaha pratIta hotA
hai ki bIca meM AyA huA anya nimitta-zubha zakuna: pahale ke viparIta zakuna se
pratikUla-usase ulTA prabhAva utpanna karatA hai| te evamakkhaMti samicca loga,
tahA tahA (gayA) samaNA mAhaNA ya  /  sayaM kaDaM NannakaDaM ca dukkhaM, AhaMsu
vijAcaraNaM pamokkhaM  // 11 //  chAyA - ta evamAkhyAnti sametya lokaM tathA
tathA (gatA) zramaNAmAhanAzca  /  svayaM kRtaM nA'nyakRtaJca duHkham
AhurvidyAcaraNaJca mokSam  //  - anuvAda - zramaNa-bauddha bhikSu tathA mAhaNa-
brAhmaNa paramparAnugata puruSa apane apane siddhAntoM ke anusAra loka ko
jAnakara pratipAdita karate haiM ki kriyAnusAra hI phala hotA hai  /  ve yaha
bhI kahate haiM ki duHkha apane dvArA hI kRta hai  /  dUsare ke dvArA nahIM  /
kintu sarvajJa tIrthaMkara aisA prarUpita karate haiM ki jJAna tathA kriyA se hI
mokSa prApta hotA hai| TIkA-sAmprataM
kriyAvAdimataMdudUSayiSustanmatamAviSkurvannAha-te kriyAta eva jJAnanirapekSAyAH
dIkSAdilakSaNAyA mokSamicchanti te evamAkhyAnti, tadyathA-'asti mAtA pitA asti
sucIrNasya karmaNaH phala' miti, kiM kRtvA (514)

Page #543 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They say that all is accomplished by action. With the idea that "all is
accomplished by action," they declare that all exists, having known the "world"
as consisting of the stationary and the mobile, and assuming that we are knowers
of the existing things as they are. How do they say that it is not in any way
non-existent? "Thus, thus," in that way, as action is, so is the fruit, such as
heaven, hell, etc. And those ascetics, Tirthankaras, Brahmanas, etc., desire
accomplishment by action. But whatever suffering and happiness there is in the
world, all that is done by the self alone, not by another, such as time, Lord,
etc. And this does not hold true in the theory of inaction, for there, due to
inaction of the self, happiness and suffering would be uncreated, and thus there
would be no coming and going of the created and the destroyed. Here it is said,
"It is true that there is happiness, suffering, etc., of the self, but it is not
so." For if it is said that it is so, then it follows that it is not in any way
non-existent. And if that is the case, then everything would become all-
pervading, and thus there would be an end to the conduct of all the world. And
there is no accomplishment of action without knowledge, due to the absence of
knowledge of the means. And without the means, the object is not attained. It is
understood that all actions are fruitful only when they are done with knowledge.
And it is said:  "First is knowledge, then compassion, thus stands the well-
controlled. What will the ignorant do, or know, the cutting of evil?"
Therefore, the importance of knowledge is not denied. And accomplishment is not
possible without knowledge, for knowledge without action is like a cripple,
unable to accomplish anything. Considering this, it is said, "They said,
'Knowledge and conduct are the liberation.'" There is no accomplishment of
action without knowledge, like a blind man, nor is there accomplishment of
knowledge without action, like a cripple. Understanding this, they said, "They
said, the Tirthankara-group, the Dharas, etc., what did they say? Liberation.
How? Knowledge and conduct, these two are the causes, for whom? Having
understood this, they said, 'This knowledge and conduct is liberation,
accomplished by knowledge and action.' They declare this liberation, thus
accomplished. If it is otherwise, then what are these Samvaranas declared by the
Patanikas? And what is said, and what will be said, with this doubt, it is said,
"They are thus, with unhindered..." Those who have unhindered, never-faltering,
knowledge, the Tirthankaras, they are of unhindered knowledge. They thus, by the
process described, declare, "The world," consisting of fourteen realms, or the
stationary and the mobile, "having known," by the knowledge of the self, like
the dust on the palm of the hand, the Tathagatas, "not having attained the
Tirthankarahood, the perfect knowledge," the ascetics, "the virtuous, the
Brahmanas," the restrained and the unrestrained, what is the nature of the Koka-
speech, the words? They thus declare. Or, there is a reading, "Thus, thus," as
the path of meditation is established, so they declare. And they also declare,
"As whatever suffering there is in the world, which is not of the nature of
arising, that which is opposite to it, happiness, which is of the nature of
arising, that is done by the self alone, not by another, such as time, Lord,
etc." And it is said:  "All experience the fruit, the result, of their past
actions. In faults and virtues, the other is only the cause."  And they, the
Tirthankara-group, the Dharas, etc., say, "Knowledge, conduct, action, these are
the main things, liberation. They said, not independent of each other, knowledge
and action." And it is said:  "Action without knowledge is fruitless, knowledge
without action is wealth without understanding. Rejecting the mass of
afflictions for the sake of peace, you have written down this path, which is
auspicious."  The author of the sutras reveals the fault of the theory of the
actionists, in order to refute them. (Those who accept that liberation is
attained only by action, such as renunciation, etc., without knowledge. Their
declaration is that there are parents, and there is also the fruit of good
action, which is well performed. What do they want to say by this? Raising this
question, the author of the sutras states. All actions are accomplished by
action.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM ta evaM kathayanti ?-kriyAta eva sarva sidhyatIti
svAbhiprAyeNa 'lokaM' sthAvarajaGgamAtmakaM 'sametya' jJAtvA, kila vayaM
yathAvasthitavastuno jJAtAra ityevamabhyupagamya sarvamastyevetyevaM sAvadhAraNa
pratipAdayanti, na kathaJcinnAstIti, kathamAkhyAnti ?-' tathA tathA' tena (tena)
prakAreNa, yathA yathA kriyA tathA tathA svarganarakAdikaM phalamiti/ te ca
zramaNAstIrthikA brAhmaNA vA kriyAta eva siddhimicchanti, kiJca yat kimapi
saMsAre duHkhaM tathA surkha ca tatsarvaM svayamevAtmanA kRtaM, nAnyena
kAlezvarAdinA, na caitadakriyAvAde ghaTate, tatra hyakriyatvAdAtmano'kRtayoreva
sukhaduHkhayo saMbhavaH syAt, evaM ca kRtanAzAkRtAbhyAgamau syAtAm, atrocyate,
satyamastyAtmasukhaduHkhAdikaM, na tvastyeva, tathAhi-yadyastyeva ityevaM
sAvadhAraNamucyate tatazca na kathaJcinnAstItyApannam,evaM casati sarvaM
sarvAtmakamApadyeta, tathA ca sarvalokasya vyavahArocchedaH syAt, na ca
jJAnarahitAyAH kriyAyAH siddhiH, tadupAyaparijJAnAbhAvAt, na
copAyamantareNopeyamavApyata iti pratItaM, sarvA hi kriyAH jJAnavatyeva
phalavatyupalakSyate, uktaJca - "paDhamaM nANaM tao dayA, evaM ciTThati
savvasaMjae  /  annANI kiM kAhI, kiM vA nAhI cheyapAvayaM  // 1 // " chAyA-
prathamaM jJAnaM tato dayA evaM tisstthtisrvsNytH| ajJAnI kiM kariSyati kiMvA
jJAsyati cheka paapkN||1|| ityato jJAnasya prAdhAnyaM nApi jJAnAdeva siddhi
kriyA rahitasya jJAnasya paGgoriva kAryasiddharanupapatterityAlocyAha'AhaMsu
vijjAcaraNaM pamokkhaM' tti, na jJAnanirapekSAyAH kriyAyAH siddhiH, andhasyeva,
nApi kriyAvikalasya jJAnasya paGgoriva, ityevamavagamya 'AhuH uktavantaH,
tIrthakaragaNa-dharAdayaH, kamAhuH ?, mokSaM, kathaM ?, vidyA ca-jJAnaM caraNaM
ca kriyA te dve api vidyete kAraNatvena yasyeti vigRhyArzaAditvAnmatvarthIyo'ca,
asau vidyAcaraNomokSaH-jJAnakriyAsAdhya ityarthaH, tamevaMsAdhyaM-mokSaM
pratipAdayanti  /  yadivA'nyathA pAtanikA, kenaitAni samavasaraNAni
pratipAditAni ? yaccoktaM yacca vakSyate ityetadAzaGkayAha-'te
evamakkhaMtI'tyAdi, aniruddhA-kvacidapyaskhalitA prajJAyate'nayeti prajJAjJAnaM
yeSAM tIrthakRtAM te'niruddhaprajJAH, ta evam' anantaroktayA prakriyayA
samyagAkhyAnti-pratipAdayanti 'lokaM' caturdazarajvAtmakaM sthAvarajaGgamAkhyaM
vA 'sametya' kevalajJAnena karatalAmalakanyAyena jJAtvA tathAgatAH
-tIrthakaratvaM kevalajJAnaM na gatAH, zramaNAH' sAdhavo 'brAhmaNAH'
saMyatAsaMyatAH, kaukikI vA vAcoyuktiH kimbhUtAsta evamAkhyAntIti sambandhaH,
tathA tatheti vA kkacitpAThaH yathA yathA samAdhimArgo vyavasthitastathA tathA
kathayanti, etacca kathayanti-yathA yatkiJcitsaMsArAntargatAnAmasumatAMdu:kham-
asAtodayasvabhAvaM, tatpratipakSabhUtaM ca sAtodayApAditaM sukhaM, tatsvayam-
AtmanA kRtaM, nAnyena kAlezvarAdinA kRtamiti, tathA coktam - "savvo puvvakayANaM
kammANaM pAvae phala vivAgaM  /  avarAhesu guNesu ya NimittamittaM paro hoi  //
1 // " chAyA - sarvaH pUrvakRtAnAM karmaNAM prApnoti phala vipAkaM  /
aparAdheSu guNeSu ca nimittamAtraM parobhavati  // 1 //
etaccAhustIrthakaragaNadharAdayaH, tadyathA-vidyA-jJAnaM caraNaM-cAritraM kriyA
tatpradhAno mokSastamuktavanto na jJAnakriyAbhyAM parasparanirapekSAbhyAmiti,
tathA coktama - kriyAM ca sajjJAnaviyoga niSphalAM, kriyAvihInAM ca
vivodhasampadam  /  nirasyatA klezasamUhazAntaye, tvayA zivAyAlikhiteva
paddhatiH  // 1 // 11 //  TIkArtha kriyAvAdiyoM ke siddhAnta kA doSa batAne hetu
sUtrakAra unakA mantavya prakaTa karate haiM  /  ((jo jJAna nirapekSa-jJAna
rahita kevala pravrajyA Adi kriyA dvArA hI mokSa prApta honA svIkAra karate haiM
/  unakA pratipAdana hai ki mAtA-pitA hai tathA suSThu rUpa meM Acarita karma
kA-zubha karma kA phala bhI hai  /  ve kyA cAhakara ke aisA kahate haiM ? yaha
prazna uThAte hue sUtrakAra abhihita karate haiM  /  ve saba kArya kriyA se hI
siddha ho ( 515

Page #544 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that by knowing the stationary and
mobile realms, the categories of beings within them, and the groups of
substances, according to their own principles, we know the true nature of
things. They declare that all things exist and all substances are harmonious,
but they do not say that substances are in any way dependent. They say that a
being experiences the fruits of its actions, such as heaven and hell, in
accordance with its actions. The **Shramanas**, **Atyarthikas**, and
**Brahmanas** believe that only action leads to liberation. They explain that
all suffering and happiness in this world are self-created, not caused by time
or by God. These things do not occur in the doctrines of those who do not
believe in the theory of action, because without action, it is impossible to
experience happiness, suffering, etc. If happiness and suffering could be
experienced without action, then the destruction of what is done
(**Kritanashakya**) and the arrival of what is not done (**Akritabhyagama**)
would both be faults. In this context, the **Jains** state that what you say is
true. The soul, happiness, suffering, etc., certainly exist, but they are not
entirely independent. If their existence is stated in a definitive way, then it
cannot be said that they are in any way dependent, because if that were not the
case, everything would become all-encompassing, and all activity in the world
would cease. Knowledge without action does not achieve anything, because there
is no knowledge of the means to achieve that action, and without knowledge of
the means, the desired object cannot be obtained. This is universally known. All
action is fruitful only when it is guided by knowledge. Therefore, it is said
that knowledge comes first, followed by compassion and its practice. Therefore,
all **Samyami** (self-controlled) persons first acquire knowledge about beings,
because an ignorant person, who does not have knowledge of the soul and other
principles, what will he do? How will he progress correctly in the field of
karma? How will he know what is good and what is bad? Therefore, knowledge is
also paramount. But liberation cannot be achieved by knowledge alone, because
knowledge without action, without karma, is like a cripple. The **Sutrakaras**
(authors of the Sutras) have declared that the **Tirthankaras**, **Ganadharas**,
etc., have said this in this regard. They ask, "Who is liberated? How is
liberation attained? What is said about it?" In answering these questions, they
say that liberation is attained by one who possesses both knowledge and action.
Here, the word "**Jnana**" (knowledge) and "**Kriya**" (action) are used
together, and the suffix "**acha**" is added according to the rule "**Arsha
Adityanmatvarthayo'cha**". According to this, liberation is achieved through
knowledge and action. The meaning is that the **Tirthankaras** and
**Ganadharas**, etc., declare that liberation is attained through knowledge and
action. This verse can also be interpreted in another way. It is asked, "Who has
established these **Samavasaranas** (assemblies) that you have mentioned before
and will mention later?" Doubting this, the **Sutrakaras** say that **Prajna**
(wisdom) is the name of knowledge, which is the means of knowing the nature of
things. Those whose wisdom is never obstructed or faltered are called
**Aniruddha Prajna** (unobstructed wisdom), and they are the **Tirthankaras**.
They declare the nature of things as explained earlier. They are liberated by
knowledge alone, just as they know the fourteen **Rajjus** (ropes) and the
finite stationary and mobile realms, like a myrobalan fruit held in the hand.
The **Shramanas**, **Sadhus** (holy men), **Samyatis** (self-controlled), and
**Brahmanas** narrate this through their righteous and logical speech. They
explain how they are. Sometimes, the reading "**Tatha Tayeti Va**" is found.
This means that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram jAte haiM, isa prakAra apane siddhAnta ke anusAra
sthAvara aura jaMgama loka ko-tadgata prANI varga ko-padArtha samUha ko jAnakara
hama hI vastu ke yathAvasthita svarUpa ko jAnate haiM, aisA prakaTa karate hue
sabakA astitva haisaba padArtha sadbhAvayukta haiM, aisA avadhAraNA ke sAtha-
nizcaya ke sAtha pratipAdita karate haiM, kintu padArtha kathaMcitkisI apekSA se
nahIM bhI haiM  /  aisA ve nahIM kahate  /  unakA kathana hai ki jIva jaisI
jaisI kriyAeM karatAhai, vaha vaisA hI svarga tathA naraka Adi ke rUpa meM phala
pAtA hai ve zramaNa-anyatIrthika tathA brAhmaNa aisA mAnate haiM ki ekamAtra
kriyA se hI siddhi prApta hotI hai  /  ve aisA batalAte haiM ki isaloka meM
kaSTa yA sukha suvidhA jo bhI hai vaha saba svakRta hai, na kAlakRta hai aura na
IzvarAdikRta hI hai  /  jo kriyAvAda meM vizvAsa nahIM karate, unake siddhAnta
meM ye bAteM ghaTita nahIM hotI kyoMki AtmA ke kriyA rahita hone para binA kiye
sukha duHkha Adi kA prApta honA saMbhava nahIM hai  /  yadi binA kiye hI sukha
duHkha kA milanA saMbhava ho to kRtanAzakiye hue kA vinAza tathA akRtAbhyAgama-
binA kiye hue kA Agamana-ye donoM doSa lAgU hoMge  /  isa saMdarbha meM jainoM
kA pratipAdana hai ki tuma jo kahate ho vaha satya hai  /  AtmA, sukha, duHkha
Adi kA avazya hI astittva hai kintu ve sarvathA haiM hI aisA nahIM hai kyoMki
yadi ve haiM hI isa prakAra nizcaya kI bhASA meM unakA astittva kahA jAtA hai to
ve kathaMcit nahIM hai-kisI apekSA se unakA astittva nahIM hai, yaha nahIM kahA
jA sakatA, aisA na hone para saba kucha sarvAtmakatA le legA, isa prakAra jagata
me samasta vyavahAra ucchinna ho jAyeMge-miTa jAveMge tathA jJAnazUnya kriyA
dvArA koI kArya siddha nahIM hotA, kyoMki vahAM usa kArya ke upAya kA parijJAna
nahIM hotA tathA upAya kA parijJAna na hone se upeya-prApta karane yogya
padArtha kI avApti nahIM hotI  /  yaha sarvatra pratIta-prasiddha hai  /
samasta kriyA jJAnavatI hokara hI phalavatI hotI hai-phala pradAna karatI hai,
aisA prApta hotA hai  /  ataeva kahA hai ki-pahale jJAna hotA hai-usake bAda
dayA-tadanuSThAna kA anusaraNa yA paripAlana hotA hai| ataH samasta saMyamI
puruSa pahale jIvoM ke saMbaMdha meM jJAna prApta karate haiM kyoMki ajJAnI-jise
jIvAdi tattvoM kA jJAna nahIM hai vaha kyA karegA, vaha karma ke kSetra meM
kaise samyak agrasara hogA, vaha zreya-puNya aura pApa ko kaise jAna pAyegA  /
isaliye jJAna kA bhI prAdhAnya-pradhAnatA hai kiMtu ekamAtra jJAna se hI siddhi
prApta nahIM hotI kyoMki kriyA vikala karma rahita jJAna paMga ke samAna hai|
yaha avagata kara-jAnakara satrakAra jJApi haiM ki tIrthaMkara, gaNadhara Adi ne
isa saMbaMdha meM yoM kahA  /  prazna uThAte hue kahate haiM kisako kahAM ?
mokSa kaise milatA hai ? isa para kyA kahA ? ina praznoM kA samAdhAna karate hue
kahate haiM ki vidyA-jJAna tathA caraNakriyA ye donoM jisake hote haiM use mokSa
prApta hotA hai  /  yahAM 'jJAnaM ca kriyA ca' aisA vigraha kara arza
AditvAnmatvarthIyo'ca keanasAra aca pratyaya kiyA gayA hai| tadanasAra mokSa
jJAna evaM kriyA dvArA sAdhya hai| abhiprAya yaha hai ki tIrthaMkara aura
gaNadhara Adi jJAna evaM kriyA dvArA hI mokSa prApta honA pratipAdita karate
haiM athavA isa gAthA kI vyAkhyA eka ora prakAra se bhI kI jAtI hai  /  prazna
upasthita karate hue kahA jAtA hai ki ina samavasaraNo kA kisane pratipAdana
kiyA jo tumane pahale batalAyA hai, aura Age batalAoge  /  yaha zaGkA kara
sUtrakAra kahate haiM-jisake dvArA padArtha kA svarUpa jAnA jAtA hai use prajJA
kahate haiM  /  prajJA jJAna kA nAma hai  /  jinakI prajJA kahIM bhI niruddha-
skhalita nahIM hotI unheM aniruddha prajJa kahA jAtA hai, ve tIrthaMkara haiN|
ve jaisA pahale batAyA gayA hai vastu kA svarUpa pratipAdana karate haiM  /  ve
kevala jJAna dvArA caturdaza rajju parimita sthAvara jaMgamAtmaka isa loka ko
hAtha meM rakhe AMvale kI jyoM parijJAta kara tIrthaMkara pada ko kevala jJAna
ko prApta haiM  /  zramaNa sAdhu yA saMyati tathA brAhmaNa saMyatAsaMyata-
yuktiyukta vANI dvArA aisA AkhyAna karate haiM  /  ve kaise haiM yaha batalAte
haiM kahIM kahIM 'tathA tayeti vA' aisA pATha prApta hotA hai  /  isakA yaha
abhiprAya hai ki -516

Page #545 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tirthankaras expound the path of Samavasarana study in the same way that the
path of Samadhi and the path of liberation are organized. They state that the
suffering experienced by beings in the world as a result of the arising of
Asatavedaniya (non-perceivable) and the happiness experienced as a result of the
arising of Satavedaniya (perceivable) is done by the soul itself. It is not done
by time, God, or any other entity. It is said that all beings experience the
results (vipaka) of their past actions. In offenses, evil deeds, or wickedness,
and in virtues, good deeds, or goodness, another is merely an instrument. The
Tirthankaras and Ganadharas say that liberation is achieved through both
knowledge and conduct. Liberation cannot be attained through action without
knowledge or knowledge without action. It is said, "O Lord! You have shown the
world the path of welfare by eliminating the useless action without knowledge
and the wealth of knowledge without action, which are destructive to the peace
of the group of afflictions, and by declaring them useless."  Those who are the
eyes of this world, they are the leaders, they teach the path of benefit for the
people. Thus, thus, they say in this world, "O people! You are deeply
entangled." (12)  Commentary: "Those" - the Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, etc., who
are extremely knowledgeable, are like eyes in this world. Just as the eyes
perceive objects that are situated in a suitable place, so too do they cause the
perception of objects in the world as they are. Thus, they are leaders in this
world - the main ones. The word "tu" is a qualifier, meaning "leaders" because
of their giving good advice. This is what is meant by "path" - knowledge, etc.,
the path of liberation, "teach" - they say, "people" - beings, for whom?
"Benefit" - that which leads to good fortune and prevents harm. And - in the
world that is made up of fourteen realms, or in the world that is made up of
five categories of existence, whatever is eternal in the sense of the existence
of substance and the intention of the path, "thus they say" - they have said.
Or, this world, this group of beings, which is within the cycle of existence, is
eternal as it is, thus they say. For example, as the growth of false views
increases, so too does the world become eternal. For, in that case, all the
Tirthankaras and their followers are likely to be bound by karma. And, also,
because of the four stages, beginning with the great effort, the souls do not
cease from the cycle of existence until they have exhausted their hellish
lifespan. Or, they say that as the growth of attachment and aversion increases,
so too does the cycle of existence become eternal. They say that as the amount
of karma increases, so too does the cycle of existence increase. The increase in
the cycle of existence is to be understood as the increase in evil mind, speech,
and body. Thus, the cycle of existence increases. "In which" - in the cycle of
existence, "beings" - creatures, "O people!" - since humans are primarily worthy
of instruction, the word "human" is used. "Deeply entangled" - firmly
established in the distinctions of right, hell, animal, and god. (12)  By
showing the difference between beings in a small way, he explains the purpose of
that pilgrimage.  Commentary: Those who are extremely knowledgeable - those who
possess special knowledge - the Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, etc., are like eyes in
this world. Just as the eyes illuminate an object that is situated in a suitable
place, so too do they illuminate the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM jaise jaise samAdhi mArga-mokSa mArga vyavasthita hai
vaise vaise usa prakAra se ve-tIrthaMkara pratipAdana karate haiM  /  unakA
kathana hai ki saMsAra meM vidyamAna prANiyoM ko asAtAvedanIya ke udaya ke
pariNAmasvarUpa jo duHkha prApta hotA hai tathA usake viparIta sAtAvedanIya ke
udaya ke pariNAmasvarUpa jo sukha prApta hotA hai vaha svayaM AtmA dvArA kiyA
huA hai  /  kAla tathA Izvara Adi kisI anya dvArA kiyA huA nahIM hai  /  kahA
gayA hai ki sabhI prANI apane dvArA pahale kiye gaye karmoM kA phala vipAka
prApta karate haiM  /  aparAdhoM meM-bure kRtyoM meM yA burAI meM tathA guNoM
meM-satkRtyoM meM yA bhalAI meM dUsarA kevala nimitta banatA hai  /  tIrthaMkara
evaM gaNadhara Adi aisA kahate haiM ki vidyA-jJAna aura caraNa-cAritra yA kriyA
ina donoM se hI mokSa phalita hotA hai  /  jJAnanirapekSa-jJAna rahita kriyA
tathA kriyA nirapekSa-kriyA rahita jJAna se mokSa prApta nahIM hotA hai  /  kahA
hai-bhagavan ! jJAna rahita niSphala kriyA ko tathA kriyA rahita jJAna sampadA
kA kleza samUha kI zAMti hetu nirsana karate hue unheM nirarthaka batAte hue
Apane jagata ko kalyANa kA rAstA dikhAyA hai| te cakkhu logaMsihaNAyagA u,
maggANusAsaMti hitaM payANaM  /  tahA tahA sAsayamAhu loe, jaMsI payAmANava !
saMpagADhA  // 12 //  chAyA - te cakSurlokasyeha nAyakAstu mArgamanuzAsati hitaM
prajAnAm  /  tathA tathA zAzvata mAhurloka masmin prajAH mAnava saMpragADhAH  //
anuvAda - tIrthaMkara Adi mahApuruSa isa loka ke cakSu ke samAna hai-udyotakara
haiM, ve nAyaka haiM-sarvazreSTha haiM  /  prajAoM-logoM ko zreyasa ke mArga kI
zikSA dete haiM  /  ve pratipAdita karate haiM ki jyoM jyoM mithyAtva kI vRddhi
hotI hai tyoM tyoM saMsAra zAzvata-cira sthAyI banatA jAtA hai, jisameM loga
nivAsa karate haiM  /  _TIkA - kiJca-'te'
tIrthakaragaNadharAdayo'tizayajJAnino'smin loke cakSuriva cakSurvartante, yathA
hi cakSuryogyadezAvasthitAn padArthAn paricchinatti evaM te'pi lokasya
yathAvasthitapadArthAviSkaraNaM kArayanti, tathA'smin loke te nAyakAH-pradhAnAH,
tuzabdo vizeSaNe, sadupadezadAnato nAyakA iti, etadevAha-'mArga' jJAnAdikaM
mokSamArga 'anuzAsati' kathayanti prajanA-prajAyanta iti prajAH prANinasteSAM,
kimbhUtaM ? hitaM, sadgatiprApakamanarthanivArakaM ca, kiJca-caturdazarajvAtmake
loke paJcAstikAyAtmake vA yena yena prakAreNa dravyAstika nayAbhiprAyeNa
yadvastu zAzvataM tattathA 'ta AhuH' uktavantaH, yadivA loko'yaM prANigaNaH
saMsArAntarvartI yathA yathA zAzvato bhavati tathA tathaivAhuH, tadyathA-yathA
yathA mithyAdarzanAbhivRddhistathA tathA zAzvato lokaH, tathAhi-tatra
tIrthaMkarAhArakavAH sarva eva karmabandhAH sambhAvyanta iti, tathA ca
mahArambhAdibhizcaturbhiH sthAnairjIvA narakAyuSkaM yAvannivartayanti
tAvatsaMsArAnuccheda iti, athavA yathA yathA rAgadveSAdivRddhistathA tathA
saMsAro'pi zAzvata ityAhuH, yathA yathA ca karmopacayamAtrA tathA tathaiva
saMsArAbhivRddhiriti  /  duSTamanovAkkAyAbhivRddhau vA
saMsArAbhivRddhiravagantavyA, tadevaM saMsArasyAbhi vRddhirbhavati  /
'yasmizca' saMsAre, prajAyanta iti 'prajAH' jantavaH, he mAnava ! manuSyANAmeva
prAyaza upadezArhatvAnmAnavagrahaNaM, samyag nArakatiryaGnarAmarabhedena
'pragADhA:' prakarSeNa vyavasthitA iti  // 12 //  lezato
jantubhedapradarzanadvAreNa tatparyaTanamAha - TIkArtha - atizaya jJAnI-viziSTa
jJAna ke dhanI tIrthaMkara gaNadhara Adi isa loka ke cakSu ke sadRzya haiM  /
jaise yogya deza meM ucita sthAna meM vidyamAna vastu ko netra prakAzita karatA
hai usI prakAra ve bhI loka -517

Page #546 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The _Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra_ reveals the true nature of things. They are the
heroes, the leaders, the best in this world. The word "tu" here is used in the
sense of an adjective. According to it, they are the best because they give good
advice - this is the meaning. They show beings the path to liberation. What is
that path? They explain that it leads to good fortune, to the highest state, and
prevents misfortune, prevents bad rebirth. They narrate, according to the
Dravyastikaya Nay, the eternal nature of things in this world, which is limited
by the fourteen ropes and has five Astikayas. Or, they also explain how beings
in this world are eternally bound to the cycle of rebirth. According to them, as
false views increase, the cycle of rebirth becomes more stable, because the
Tirthankaras and the Aharakas, who are free from karma, are all possible in it.
Because the beings, through the four places of Mahaarambha, etc., bind
themselves to the hellish lifespan. Until then, the cycle of rebirth does not
end. Or, as attachment and aversion increase, the cycle of rebirth becomes more
stable. This is how the Tirthankaras have described it. Therefore, as karma
accumulates, binds, or increases, the cycle of rebirth also increases. It should
be understood that the cycle of rebirth increases when the mind, speech, and
body become corrupt, when they engage in evil actions. Those who are born in the
cycle of rebirth are called "praja". All animals or beings are included in
"praja". They are especially found in the four states of hell, animal, human,
and god. Among them, humans are mostly worthy of instruction. Therefore, it is
said here, addressing humans, that you should know this. The Sutrakar, briefly
explaining the different types of beings, explains how they wander in the cycle
of rebirth. Those who are Rakshasas, or those who are Yamaloka, or those who are
Suragandhavas, or those who are Kaya, or those who are Akashagami, or those who
are Prithivyashrita, all of them wander again and again in different states.
Commentary: "Ye" are some of the Rakshasa beings of the Vyantara category.
Because of the non-grasping of that, all the Vyantaras are included here. And
those who are Yamaloka beings, like Amba, Ambarisha, etc., because of their
characteristic, all the Bhavanapatis are included here. And those who are
"Sura", like Saudharma, etc., who are Vaimanika, because of the "cha" word, the
Jyotishkas, like Surya, etc., are included here. And those who are "Gandharva",
like the Vidyadharas, who are a special type of Vyantara, because of the
grasping of that, the importance is explained. And "Kaya", like the Prithvi
Kaya, etc., all six are included here. Again, wanting to grasp the beings in
another way, he says: "Ye" are some who are "Akashagami", who have attained the
ability to fly in the sky, and those who have not attained it, the four types of
Devas, the Vidyadharas, the birds, and the animals. And those who are
"Prithivyashrita", who are the earth, fire, plants, and the two, three, four,
and five-sense beings, all of them, because of their own actions, wander again
and again in different ways, in many ways, in a roundabout way, in a way that is
like a wheel, in a way that is close to each other, they go, they wander.
Commentary: Here, the Rakshasas, who are included in the Vyantara category, are
grasped. Because of this, all the Vyantaras are included here. Amba, Ambarisha,
etc., are the beings who live in the Yamaloka. Because of their characteristic,
all the Bhavanapatis are included here.  518)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 _ zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram ke padArthoM kA saccA svarUpa prakAzita karate haiM
/  ve isa jagata meM nAyaka-pradhAna yA sarvazreSTha haiM  /  yahAM AyA huA tu
zabda vizeSaNa ke artha meM hai  /  usake anusAra sadupadeza dene ke kAraNa ve
sarvazreSTha haiM-yaha abhiprAya hai  /  ve prANiyoM ko mokSa mArga batalAte
haiM  /  vaha mArga kaisA hai ? yaha spaSTa karate hue kahate haiM ki vaha
sadgati ko-uttama gati ko prApta karAtA hai tathA anartha kA-durgati kA nivAraNa
karatA hai  /  ve caturdaza rajju parimita pAMca astikAya yukta isa loka meM
jisa jisa prakAra se dravyAstika naya ke anusAra jo vastu zAzvata hai, use usI
rUpa meM AkhyAna karate haiM  /  athavA isa loka meM prANIvRnda jisa jisa
prakAra se saMsAra meM zAzvata hote jAte haiM  /  vaisA bhI ve batalAte haiM  /
unake kathanAnusAra jyoM jyoM mithyAdarzana bar3hatA jAtA hai tyoM tyoM saMsAra
zAzvatasthira hotA jAtA hai kyoMki tIrthaMkara aura AhAraka nAma karma varjita
sabhI karmabaMdha usameM saMbhAvita haiM  /  kyoMki mahA AraMbha Adi cAra
sthAnoM dvArA jIva narakAyuSya kA nirvatana-baMdha karate haiM  /  taba taka
saMsAra kA ucchedanAza nahIM hotA athavA jyoM jyoM rAga-dveSa Adi kI vRddhi hotI
jAtI hai tyoM tyoM saMsAra bhI susthira hotA jAtA hai  /  aisA tIrthaMkaroM ne
prarUpita kiyA hai  /  isaliye jyoM jyoM karmoM kA upacaya saMcaya yA baMdha
hotA jAtA hai tyoM tyoM saMsAra bar3hatA jAtA hai  /  duSTa-dUSita mana vacana
tathA zarIra kI abhivRddhi hone para-mana, vacana, zarIra ke asat kAryoM meM
pravRtta hone para saMsAra bar3hatA jAtA hai, aisA jAnanA cAhiye  /  saMsAra meM
jo utpanna hote haiM unheM prajA kahA jAtA hai  /  sabhI jaMtu yA prANI prajA ke
antargata haiM  /  ve nAraka, tiryaJca, manuSya evaM deva ina cAra gatiyoM meM
vizeSa rUpa se avasthita hai  /  unameM upadeza ke yogya prAyaH manuSya hI hai|
ata: yahAM mAnava ko saMbodhita kara yaha kahA gayA hai ki tuma yaha jAno  /
sUtrakAra saMkSepa meM prANiyoM ke bheda batalAkara ve saMsAra meM kisa prakAra
paryaTana karate haiM, yaha pratipAdita karate haiM  /  je rakkhasA vA jamaloiyA
vA, je vA surAgaMdhavvA ya kAyA  /  AgAsagAmI ya puDhosiyA je, puNo puNo
vippariyAsurveti  // 13 //  chAyA - ye rAkSasA vA yamalaukikA vA, ye vAsurAH
gandharvAzca kAyAH  /  _ AkAzagAminazca pRthivyAzritAzca, punaH puno
viparyAsamupayAnti  //  anuvAda - rAkSasa saMjJaka vyaMtara yamalokavartI jIva,
deva, gaMdharva, gaganavihArI tathA pRthvI nivAsI prANIye sabhI punaH punaH
vividha gatiyoM meM paryaTana karate haiN| TIkA - 'ye' kecana vyantarabhedA
rAkSasAtmAnaH, tadagrahaNAcca sarve'pi vyantarA gRhante tathA yamalaukikAtmAnaH,
a (mbAmba) mbAdayastadupalakSaNAtsarve bhavanapatayaH tathA ye ca 'surAH'
saudharmAdivaimAnikAH, cazabdAjyotiSkAH, sUryAdayaH, tathA ye 'gAndharvA'
vidyAdharA vyantaravizeSA vA, tadgrahaNaM ca prAdhAnyakhyApanArthaM, tathA
'kAyAH' pRthivIkAyAdayaH SaDapi gRhyanta iti  /  punaranyeva prakAreNa
sattvAnsaMjighRkSurAha-ye kecana 'AkAzagAminaH'
saMprAptAkAzagamanalabdhayazcatuvirdhadeva nikAya vidyAdharapakSivAyavaH, tathA
ye ca 'pRthivyAzritAH' pRthivyaptejovanaspatidvitricatuSpaJcendriyAste sarve'pi
svakRtakarmabhiH punaH punarvividham-anekaprakAraM
paryAsaMparikSepamarahaTTaghaTInyAyena paribhramaNamupa-sAmIpyena yAnti-
gacchantIti  // 13 //  TIkArtha - yahAM vyantara jAti ke antargata jo rAkSasa
haiM unako grahaNa kiyA gayA hai jisase sabhI vyantara yahAM gRhIta hote haiM  /
aMba, ambarISa Adi yamalokavAsI jIva haiM  /  unake upalakSaNa se yahAM samasta
bhavanapatiyoM 518)

Page #547 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the Samvasarana is being undertaken here. The term "Sur" refers to
the Vaimanika Devas like Saudharma, etc. The term "Ch" refers to the celestial
Devas like the Sun, etc. The term "Gandharva" refers to the Vidyadharas or a
specific Vyantara. The term "Kaya" refers to the six Kayas like the Prithvi
Kaya, etc.  The Sutrakar further divides the beings into different categories,
saying that those who are aerial, who have the ability to fly in the sky, are of
four types: Devas, Vidyadharas, birds, and wind. Those who are earth-bound,
including terrestrial, aquatic, fiery, vegetal, two-sensed, three-sensed, four-
sensed, and five-sensed beings, all wander in various forms according to their
actions, like the spokes of a wheel in the world.  "Oh, I know the boundless
ocean of existence, the difficult liberation. Those who are attached to sensual
pleasures wander in the world, again and again." (14)  Commentary: The
Tirthankara Devas have described this world as boundless, like the ocean of the
self-existent Raman. Therefore, consider this deep world as difficult to escape
from. Beings who are attached to worldly pleasures and women wander in this
world, again and again, in the forms of stationary and mobile beings.
Commentary: Further, the Tirthankara Ganadharas and others who know this, have
said, "This is the ocean of existence." How do they say this? It is boundless,
like the ocean of the self-existent Raman. Just as the ocean of the self-
existent Raman cannot be crossed by any aquatic or terrestrial being, similarly,
this ocean of existence cannot be crossed without right faith. Understand this.
This ocean of existence, with its eighty-four lakhs of births, is endless and
full of suffering. It is difficult to escape from, even for the non-believers,
let alone the atheists. Further, the Sutrakar explains the world, which is
symbolized by the ocean of existence. In this world, those who perform sinful
actions, who are fallen from the right path, who do not understand the true
Samvasarana, are attached to worldly pleasures and women. They are controlled by
these pleasures and women, and they are always engaged in sinful activities.
They are attached to this mire of worldly pleasures and women, and they wander
in the sky and on the earth, or in the forms of stationary and mobile beings.
They wander in the world, driven by their actions, which are based on the
fourteen types of karma. (14)  Commentary: The Tirthankara Ganadharas and others
who know the nature of the world have explained the nature of the ocean of
existence. What is its nature? Answering this question, they say that this world
is boundless, like the ocean of the self-existent Raman. Just as the ocean of
the self-existent Raman cannot be crossed by any aquatic or terrestrial being,
similarly, this ocean of existence cannot be crossed without right faith.
Understand this. Here, the word "Nam" is a figure of speech. This ocean of
existence, with its eighty-four lakhs of births, is endless and full of
suffering. It is difficult to escape from, even for the non-believers, let alone
the atheists. Further, the Sutrakar explains the world, which is symbolized by
the ocean of existence. In this world, those who perform sinful actions, who are
fallen from the right path, who do not understand the true Samvasarana, are
attached to worldly pleasures and women. They are controlled by these pleasures
and women, and they are always engaged in sinful activities. They are attached
to this mire of worldly pleasures and women, and they wander in the sky and on
the earth, or in the forms of stationary and mobile beings. They wander in the
world, driven by their actions, which are based on the fourteen types of karma.
(14)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM kA grahaNa hotA hai  /  yahAM prayukta sura zabda se
saudharma Adi vaimAnika deva gRhIta haiN| 'ca' zabda se sUraja Adi jyotiSka deva
liye gaye haiM  /  tathA gaMdharva zabda se vidyAdhara yA vyaMtara vizeSa kA
grahaNa hai  /  kAya zabda se pRthvIkAya Adi chahoM kAya liye gaye haiN|
sUtrakAra phiraeka anya prakAra se jIvoM kA vibhAjana karate hue kahate haiM-jo
AkAzagAmI haiM, jinameM AkAza meM gamana kI-ur3ane kI labdhizakti hai ve cAra
prakAra ke deva, vidyAdhara, pakSI aura vAyu haiM  /  pRthvI para Azrita jo
pArthiva, jalIya, tejasa, vAnaspatika, dvi-indriya, triindriya, caturIndriya
evaM paMcendriya prANI haiN| ve sabhI apane dvArA kiye hue karmoM ke anusAra
aneka rUpoM meM arahaTa ghaTikAoM-rahaTTa kI jyoM jagata meM paryaTana karate
haiM-bhaTakate haiN| jamAhu ohaM salilaM apAragaM, jANAhi NaM bhavagahaNaM
damokkhaM  /  . jaMsI visannA visayaMgaNAhiM, duhao'vi loyaM aNusaMcaraMti  //
14 //  chAyA - yamAhurodhaM salilamapAragaM, jAnIhi bhavagahanaM durmokSam  /
yasmin viSaNNAH viSayAGganAbhirdidhA'pi lokamanusazcaranti.  // ' anuvAda -
tIrthaMkara deva ne isa jagata ko svayambhUramaNa samudra ke samAna apAra kahA
hai  /  ataH ise gahana saMsAra ko durmokSa bar3I kaThinatA se chUTane yogya
samajho  /  sAMsArika bhogoM aura aMganAoM meM viSaNNaviSama tathA Asakta prANI
isa saMsAra meM punaH punaH sthAvara evaM jaMgama yoniyoM meM anusaMcaraNa
karate haiM-jAte rahate TIkA - kiJcAnyat-'yaM' saMsAra sAgaram AhuH-
uktavantastIrthakaragaNadharAdayastadvidaH, kathamAhuH
?svayambhuramaNasalilaughavadapAraM, yathA svayambhUramaNasalilaugho na
kenacijjalacareNa sthalacareNa vA lavayituM zakyate evamayamapi saMsArasAgaraH
samyagdarzanamantareNa lavayitu na zakyata iti darzayati-'jAnIhi' avagaccha
Namiti vAkyAlaGkAre, bhavagahanamidaM-caturazItiyonilakSapramANaM yathAsambhavaM
saGghayeyAsaGghayeyAnanta sthitikaM duHkhena mucyata iti
durmokSaMduruttaramastivAdinAmapi, kiM punarnAstikAnAm ?, punarapi
bhavagahanopalakSitaM saMsArameva vizinaSTi 'yatra' yasmin saMsAre
sAvadyakarmAnuSThAyinaH kumArgapatitA asatsamavasaraNagrAhiNo 'viSaNNA' avasaktA
viSayapradhAnA aGganA viSayAGganAstAbhiH, yadivA viSayAzcAGganAzca
viSayAGganAstAbhirvazIkRtAHsarvatra sadanuSThAne'vasIdanti,ta evaM
viSayAGganAdike paGke viSaNNA 'dvidhA'pi' AkAzAzritaM pRthivyAzritaM ca lokaM,
yadivA sthAvarajaGgamalokaM 'anusaMcaranti' gacchanti, yadivA-'dvidhA'pi' iti
liGgamAtrapravrajyayA'viratyA (ca) rAgadveSAbhyAM vA lokaM-caturdazarajjvAtmakaM
svakRtakarmapreritA 'anusaJcaranti' bambhramyanta iti  // 14 //  TIkArtha - loka
ke svarUpa vettA tIrthaMkara gaNadhara Adi ne saMsAra sAgara ke svarUpa kA
vivecana kiyA hai  /  usakA svarUpa kaisA hai ? usa prazna kA samAdhAna karate
hue kahate haiM-yaha saMsAra svayambhU ramaNa samudra ke jalaugha-jala samUha ke
sadRzya apAra hai  /  jisa prakAra svayambhUramaNa samudra ke jalogha ko koI bhI
jalacarapAnI meM rahane vAle prANI tathA sthalacara-jamIna para rahane vAle
prANI lAMgha nahIM sakate, usI prakAra samyakdarzana ke binA isa saMsAra sAgara
ko lAMghA nahIM jA sakatA, aisA samajho  /  yahAM 'NaM' zabda vAkya alaMkAra-
vAkya 519

Page #548 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra is
used for the arrangement of this. This Bhava-gahana-samsara (profound worldly
existence) is like a forest of eighty-four lakh (8.4 million) yonis (life-
forms). And here, as far as possible, there are innumerable, countless, and
infinite temporal states. This can be crossed with great difficulty even by the
faithful souls in the Astika (theistic) religion. Then, what to say of the
Nastika (atheistic) ones? The Sutrakara (author of the Sutra), while further
revealing the speciality of this Bhavayuta (existence-bound) Samsara (worldly
existence), say that those who perform Savadya (sinful) and Papayukta (sin-
filled) Karmas (actions) in this Samsara have fallen into the despicable path.
They have embraced Asat (false) doctrines. They are subjugated by Bhoga-pradhana
(sensual pleasure-oriented) Anganas (women). Or, being under the sway of worldly
pleasures, they never observe the practice of Sat (truth) and Uttama-acharan
(supreme conduct). Immersed in the mire of worldly pleasures and the Angana
(woman) form, they wander and take birth repeatedly in the Deva-loka (celestial
realms), Manushya-loka (human realm), Naraka-loka (hell realms), or Sthavara-
jangama (stationary and mobile) realms. Or, merely by the garb of Pravrajya
(renunciation) and not observing the Virata-vrata (vow of detachment), and due
to Raga-dvesa (attachment and aversion), they keep wandering in this
Chaturdasha-rajju (fourteen-yojana) limited world due to the result of their own
Karmas.  The verse states that the foolish ones do not destroy their Karmas
through Karmas, while the wise destroy their Karmas through non-action. The
intelligent ones, who have transcended greed, are content and do not commit sin.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kI sajjA hetu prayukta hai  /  yaha bhava- gahana -
saMsAra rUpI vana caurAsI lAkha yoni parimita hai - isameM caurAsI lAkha yoniyAM
haiM  /  tathA yahAM yathAsaMbhava saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta aura ananta kAlika
sthiti yukta hai  /  yaha Astikadharma meM zraddhAvAna jIvoM dvArA bhI bar3I
kaThinAI se pAra kiyA jA sakatA hai| phira nAstikoM kI to bAta hI kyA ?
sUtrakAra-gahana bhavayuta saMsAra kI punaH vizeSatA pragaTa karate hue kahate
haiM - isa saMsAra meM jo sAvadya - pApayukta karmoM kA anuSThAna karate haiM,
ve kutsita mArga meM patita haiM  /  asat siddhAntoM ko grahaNa kiye hue haiN|
bhoga pradhAna aMganAoM-nAriyoM dvArA vazIkRta hai  /  athavA sAMsArika bhogoM
ke AdhIna hokara ve kabhI bhI sat anuSThAna-uttama AcaraNa kA pAlana nahIM
karate  /  ve sAMsArika bhoga tathA aMganA rUpI paMka kIcar3a meM grasta hote
hue AkAza Azrita lokoM meM devalokoM meM tathA pRthvI Azrita lokoM meM manuSya
loka, nAraka loka meM athavA sthAvara jaMgamAtmaka loka meM bAra bAra saMcaraNa
karate haiM janma lete haiM aura marate haiM  /  athavA liMga mAtra veza mAtra
se pravrajyA dhArI - pravrajita sAdhu hone se tathA virati vrata pAlana na
karane se evaM rAga dveSa yukta hone ke kAraNa apane dvArA kRta karmoM ke
pariNAmasvarUpa caturdaza rajju parimita isa loka meM anusaMcaraNa karate haiM-
punaH punaH bhaTakate 1 haiM 1  /  na kammuNA kamma khaveMtibAlA, akampuNA kamma
khati medhAviNo lobhamayAvatItA, saMtosiNo no pakareMti pAvaM  // 15 //  chAyA
na karmaNA karma kSapayanti bAlA akarmaNA karma kSapayanti dhIrAH  /  medhAvino
lobhamayAdatItAH saMtoSiNo na prakurvanti pApam  //  anuvAda bAla yA ajJAnI jIva
azubha karmoM dvArA apane pApoM kA kSaya nahIM kara sakate  /  dhIradhairyazIla
puruSa akarma dvArA- azubha karmoM ke tyAga dvArA pApa kA nirodha tathA kSapaNa
karate haiM  /  medhAvI - prajJAzIla puruSa lobha se atIta hote haiM  /  ve
saMtoSayukta hote haiM  /  pApa karma nahIM karate  /  1 - - TIkA - kiJcAnyat -
te evamasatsamavasaraNAzritA mithyAtvAdibhirdoSairabhibhUtAH
sAvadyetaravizeSAnabhijJA: santaH karmakSapaNArthamabhyudyatA nirvivekatayA
sAvadyameva karma kurvate, na ca 'karmaNA' sAvadyArambheNa 'karma' pApaM '
kSapayanti' vyapanayanti, ajJAnatvAdvA bAlA iva bAlAsta iti, yathA ca karma
kSipyate tathA darzayati- 'akarmaNA tu' Azravanirodhena tu antazaH
zailezyavasthAyAM karma kSapayanti dhIrAH' mahAsattvA sadvaidyA iva
cikitsayA''mayAniti  /  medhA - prajJA sA vidyate yeSAM te medhAvina:-
hitAhitaprAptiparihArAbhijJA lobhamayaM parigrahamevAtItAH
parigrahAtikramAllobhAtItAvItarAgA ityarthaH, 'santoSiNaH ' yena kinacitsantuSTA
avItarAgA apIti, yadivA yata evAtItalobhA ataeva saMtoSiNa iti, ta evaMbhUtA
bhagavantaH 'pApam' asadanuSThAnApAditaM karma na kurvanti' nAdadati,
kvacitpAThaH, 'lobhabhayAdatItA' lobhazca bhayaM ca samAhAradvandvaH, lobhAdvA
bhayaM tasmAdatItAH santoSiNa iti, na punaruktAzaGkA vidheyeti, ato (
vidheyA'tra yato ) lobhAtItatvena pratiSedhAMzo darzitaH, saMtoSiNa ityanena ca
vidhyaMza iti, yadivA lobhAtItagrahaNena samastalobhAbhAvaH saMtoSiNa ityenena
tu satyapyavItarAgatve notkaTalobhA iti lobhAbhAvaM darzayannaparakaSAyebhyo
lobhasya prAdhAnyamAha, ye ca lobhAtItAste'vazyaM pApaM na kurvanti iti sthitam
// 15 //  TIkArtha asat darzana-galata siddhAntoM para Azrita Tike hue mithyAtva
Adi doSoM se abhibhUta sAvadya evaM nirbaMdha karmoM ke bheda se anabhijJa
ajJAnI prANI karmakSaya hetu udyata hote hue nirvivekatA-vivekazUnyatA ke 520 -

Page #549 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the Samavasarana. The cause is that they are bound by the karmas of
the careful. Due to the beginning of the wrong conduct, they cannot destroy
their sins. Due to ignorance, they are like children. The sutrakara expounds to
show how the karmas are destroyed. By the destruction of the inflow through non-
action, they finally attain the state of the Shaileshi. Just as the great
physicians, like Dhira, Mahasattva, and Mahapurusha, destroy diseases by their
treatment, they destroy the karmas in the same way. Those who have intelligence,
wisdom, or intellect are called intelligent. They know the benefit of the self
and the attainment of the good, and the avoidance of the harm of the self and
the avoidance of the bad. They are free from greed-filled possessions. They are
free from attachment. Or, even if they are not free from attachment, they are
content with what they have. Or, they have overcome greed. Therefore, they are
content. Such great men do not perform sinful karmas, which are acquired and
produced by wrong practices and bad conduct. Somewhere, the reading
"lobhabhayadatiita:" is found. Here, "lobhasya bhayam cha" is the analysis. In
the summary, there is a compound of duality. Therefore, there is a compound of
duality here. Or, "lobhad bhayam" is also a possible analysis. Its meaning is
that great men are beyond greed. They are content. By interpreting it in this
way, there is no fear of redundancy, because by saying that they are beyond
greed, the negation of the negation is expressed, and by saying that they are
content, the positive aspect is presented. That is, by accepting the one who is
beyond greed, the absence of all greed is indicated here, and by saying that
they are content, it is stated that even if they are not free from attachment,
they do not have intense greed. The sutrakara, while describing the absence of
greed, shows the importance of greed among other passions. Its essence is that
those who become beyond greed certainly do not commit sins.  They, the ones who
have overcome the past, present, and future, know the world as it is. These
leaders are not led by others, they are themselves Buddhas, the enders of the
cycle of birth and death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM  /  kAraNa sAvadha karma hI karate haiM  /  sAvadya-
AraMbha-pravRti ke kAraNa ve apane pApoM kA kSaya nahIM kara sakate haiN| ajJAna
ke kAraNa ve bAlaka ke samAna haiM  /  jisa prakAra karmoM kA kSaya hotA haiM
usakA digdarzana karAne hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM  /  akarma dvArA-
Azrava ke nirodha dvArA anta meM zaileSI avasthA prApta kara ve dhIra,
mahAsatva, mahApuruSa jaise uttama vaidya cikitsA dvArA rogoM ko miTAte haiM
vaise hI karmoM kA kSaya karate haiM  /  jinameM medhA-prajJA yA buddhi hotI hai
ve medhAvI kahe jAte haiM  /  ve hita-AtmA ke zreyas kI prApti tathA ahita-AtmA
ke azreyas ke parihAra-nivRtti se abhijJa hote haiM-jAnate haiM  /  lobhamaya
parigraha se atIta hote haiM  /  vItarAga hote haiM  /  athavA vItarAga na hone
para bhI jo kucha prApta hai usameM parituSTa hote haiM  /  athavA ve lobha ko
lAMgha cuke haiM  /  ataH saMtoSayukta haiM  /  aise mahApuruSa, asat anuSThAna-
azubha AcaraNa se ApAdita-niSpanna pApayukta karma nahIM karate  /  kahIM
'lobhabhayAdatItA:'-aisA pATha prApta hotA hai  /  yahAM 'lobhasya bhayazca-yaha
vigraha hotA hai  /  samAhAra meM dvandva samAsa hotA hai  /  ata: yahAM dvandva
samAsa hai  /  athavA "lobhAd bhayaM" aisA vigraha bhI saMbhAvita hai  /  isakA
abhiprAya yaha hai ki mahApuruSa lobha se atIta hote haiM  /  ve saMtoSI hote
haiM  /  isa prakAra artha karane se punaruktattA kI AzaMkA nahIM rahatI kyoMki
lobha ke atIta se-lobha kA ullaMghana karanA kahakara usakA pratiSedhAniSedha
pakSa prakaTa kiyA gayA hai tathA saMtoSI kaha kara usakA vidhyaMza-vidhipakSa
upasthita kiyA gayA hai  /  arthAt lobhAtIta ke grahaNa se yahAM samagra lobhoM
kA abhAva batalAyA gayA hai tathA saMtoSI kahakara vItarAgatva ke na hone para
bhI utkaTa-lobha kA na honA pratipAdita kiyA gayA hai  /  sUtrakAra lobha kA
abhAva nirUpita karate hue anya kaSAyoM se lobha kA prAdhAnya prakaTa karate
haiM  /  isakA sAra yaha hai ki jo puruSa lobhAtIta ho jAte haiM ve nisandeha
pApa nahIM karate  /  te tIya uppannamaNAgayAiM, logassa jANaMti tahAgayAiM  /
NetAro annesi aNannaNeyA, buddhA hute aMtakaDA bhavaMti  // 16 //  chAyA -
te'tItotpannAnAgatAni lokassa jAnanti tathAgatAni  /  /
netAro'nyeSAmananyaneyAH, buddhAzcate'ntakarA bhavanti  //  anuvAda - ve
vItarAga-rAga dveSa vijetA mahApuruSa prANiyoM ke atIta, vartamAna aura anAgata-
tInoM kAloM ke vRtAntoM ko yathAvat rUpa meM jAnate haiM  /  ve anya jIvoM ke
netA-mArgadarzaka haiM kintu unakA koI netA nahIM hai  /  ve svayaM buddha haiM
/  ve buddha-svayaMbuddha, saMsAra ke AvAgamana kA aMta karate haiM  /  TIkA -
ye ca lobhAtItAste kimbhUtA bhavanti ityAha-'te' vItarAgA alpakaSAyA vA
'lokassa' paJcAstikAyAtmakasya prANilokasya vA'tItAni-anya janmAcaritAni
utpannAni-vartamAnAvasthAyIni anAgatAnica bhavAntarabhAvIni sukhadu:khAdIni
'tathAgatAni' yathaiva sthitAni tathaiva avitathaM jAnanti, na vibhaGgajJAnina
iva viparItaM pazyanti, yathAhyAgamaH "aNagAre NaM bhaMte ! mAI micchAdiTThI
rAyagihe Nayare samohae vANArasIe nayarIe rUvAI jANai pAsai ?, jAva se se
daMsaNe vivajjAse bhavatI" chAyA - anagAro bhadanta ! mAyI mithyAdRSTiH rAjagRhe
nagare samavahataH vArANasyAM nagaryA rUpANi jAnAti pazyati ? yAvatsa tasya
darzanaviparyAsobhavati  /  521

Page #550 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  The great souls who are free from greed, what are
they like? The Sutrakar reveals that they are free from attachment, or have very
little attachment, or attachment that is almost non-existent. They know the joys
and sorrows of the beings of the five-astakaya world, in their past, present,
and future lives, as they truly are, without any distortion. They do not see
things in a distorted way, like the Vibhangajnanis. The Agamas say: "Bante! A
man who is attached to Maya and has a false vision, who has renounced the world
and lives in the city of Rajagriha, does he know the forms of the city of
Varanasi, the material objects, or does he see them?" The answer is: "He sees
them, but he sees them with some distortion." And so on. But those who know the
past, present, and future, the direct knowers, the Kevala-Jnani, and the
fourteen-previous-life-knowers, the indirect knowers, lead the Bhavyas, who
desire to cross the cycle of birth and death, towards liberation. They give them
good advice. They are self-enlightened. Therefore, no one else can enlighten
them. That is, no one else guides them. In terms of attaining what is beneficial
and avoiding what is harmful, no one else is their leader or guide. They are
self-enlightened, Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, etc., who end the karmas that are
the cause of the cycle of birth and death. Here, the word "hu" is used in the
sense of the word "cha" or as an adjective, as has been explained before.  As
long as these great souls do not end the cycle of birth and death, the Sutrakar
says that they show them what they should not do.  They do not do it, nor do
they cause it to be done, being disgusted by the fear of harming beings. The
wise, who are always vigilant, avoid wrong conduct, and some become wise through
knowledge.  **Commentary:**  The direct knowers and indirect knowers, who are
worthy of being known, are disgusted by the sinful karma of harming beings, and
therefore they do not do it themselves, nor do they cause it to be done by
others. They do not even approve of others doing it. Similarly, they do not
themselves speak falsehoods, nor do they cause others to speak falsehoods, nor
do they approve of others speaking falsehoods. And so on, with all the other
great vows. Therefore, "always" means at all times.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram tyAdi, te cAtItAnAgata vartamAnajJAnina:
pratyakSajAninazcaturdazapUrvavido vA parokSa jJAninaH' anyeSAM
'saMsArottitIrSUNAM bhavyArnA mokSaM prati netAraH sadupadezaM vA
pratyupadeSTAro bhavanti, na ca te svayambuddhatvAdanyena nIyante ( dhavantaH
kriya) nta ityananyaneyAH, hitAhitaprAptiparihAraM prati nAnyasteSAM netA
vidyataiti bhAvaH  /  te ca 'buddhAH 'svayaMbuddhAstIrthakaragaNadharAdayaH,
huzabdazcazabdArthe vizeSaNe vA tathA ca pradarzita eva, te ca bhavAntakarAH
saMsAropAdAnabhUtasya vA karmaNo'ntakarA bhavantIti  //  16  //  yAvadadyApi
bhavAntaM na kurvanti tAvatpratiSedhyamaMza darzayitumAha TIkArtha - jo
mahApuruSa lobha se atIta haiM ve kisa prakAra ke hote haiM sUtrakAra yaha
prakaTa karate haiMve vItarAga hote haiM athavA alpa kaSAya-atinyUna kaSAya
yukta hote haiN| ve paMcAstikAyAtmaka loka ke prANiyoM pUrva janma ke, vartamAna
ke evaM bhaviSya ke sukhoM evaM duHkhoM ko yathAvasthita rUpa meM-jyoM ke tyoM
satya - satya jAnate haiM  /  vibhaMga jJAnI kI jyoM viparIta rUpa meM nahIM
dekhte| Agama meM kahA hai- bhaMte! mAyAyukta mithyA dRSTi aNagAra-gRha tyAgI
puruSa rAjagRha nagara meM avasthita hotA huA, kyA vArANasI nagarI ke rUpoM ko
mUrta padArthoM ko jAnatA hai yA dekhatA hai ? uttara meM kahA jAtA hai ki
dekhatA to hai kiMtu kucha viparyAsa ke sAtha dekhatA hai ityAdi  /  kintu
atIta, anAgata aura vartamAna ke vettA, pratyakSa jJAnI, kevala jJAnI tathA
caturdaza pUrvadhara parokSa jJAnI saMsAra ko pAra karane ke icchuka bhavya
jIvoM ko mokSa kI ora le jAte haiM  /  unheM sadupadeza dete haiM  /  ve svayaM
buddha hote haiM  /  isaliye kisI anya dvArA unheM tattvAvabodha nahIM karAyA
jAtA  /  arthAt anya kisI ke dvArA unheM mArgadarzana nahIM diyA jAtA  /  hita
kI prApti aura ahita kI nivRtti ke saMdarbha meM koI dUsarA unakA netA-
mArgadarzaka nahIM hotA  /  ve svayaM buddha tIrthaMkara, gaNadhara Adi bhava kA
saMsAra ke upAdAna kAraNa rUpa karmoM kA anta - nAza karane vAle hote haiN|
yahAM 'hu' zabda 'ca' zabda ke artha meM yA vizeSaNa ke artha meM AyA hai jo
pahale batAyA jA cukA hai I jaba taka ve mahApuruSa bhava kA aMta nahIM karate
mokSa prApta nahIM karate taba taka ve unheM jo nahIM karanA cAhiye, usakA
digdarzana karAne hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM  /  te va kuvvaMti Na kAravaMti,
bhUtAhisaMkAi durguchamANA  /  sayA jatA vippaNamaMti dhIrA, viNNatti (NNAya)
dhIrA ya havaMtiege  // 17 //  chAyA - naiva kurvanti na kArayanti,
bhUtAbhizaGkayA jugupsamAnAH  /  sadAyatAH vipraNamanti dhIrAH, vijJaptidhIrAzca
bhavantyeke  //  anuvAda - prANiyoM kI hiMsA se ghRNA karane vAle tIrthaMkara
evaM gaNadhara Adi mahApuruSa na svayaM hiMsA Adi karate haiM aura na auroM
dvArA karavAte haiN| vijJapti dhIra - prajJAzIla evaM Atma parAkramI - saMyama
pAlana meM samudyata ve asad anuSThAna se nivRttarahatehue saMyama kA anuzIlana
karate haiN| jabaki anya darzanavAdI mAtra jJAna se hI apane Apako parAkramI
siddha karane kA pradarzana karate haiM, karma dvArA nahIM  /  TIkA - 'te'
pratyakSajJAninaH parokSajJAnino vA viditavedyAH sAvadyamanuSThAnaM
bhUtopamardAbhizaGkayA pApaM karma jugupsamAnAH santo na svataH kurvanti,
nApyanyena kArayanti, kurvantamapyaparaM nAnumanyante  /  tathA svato na
mRSAvAdaM jalpanti nAnyena jalpayanti nApyaparaM jalpantamanujAnanti
evamanyAnyapi mahAvratAnyAyojyAnIti  /  tadevaM 'sadA' sarvakAlaM 522

Page #551 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The 'Yatas' who are restrained from sinful actions and bow down to various
practices of restraint, become great. Who are they? - They are the 'Dhira' great
men. Similarly, some knowing the object of renunciation and acceptance, and
knowing it correctly from the word 'api', become fearless, knowing that what the
Jinas have preached is the only path to liberation, and thus become determined
to destroy karma. Or, there is another reading, 'Vinnatti Vira Ya Bhavanti Ege',
'Eke' - some are those who are heavy with karma, of little strength, who call
themselves heroes by mere knowledge, not by practice. And liberation is not
achieved by knowledge alone. For, "Having studied the scriptures, many become
fools, but he who is active is a wise man. Consider the medicine for the sick,
not just knowledge, cures the disease." ||1.17||  Commentary - Those who abhor
sinful acts and know the objects of knowledge, do not themselves commit sins,
nor cause others to do so, nor approve of those who are engaged in sinful acts,
out of fear of oppression and violence against sentient beings, both seen and
unseen. They do not themselves speak falsehoods, nor cause others to do so, nor
approve of those who do so. Similarly, this sequence should be applied to other
great vows. Thus, they remain always restrained, free from sinful actions, and
engaged in various forms of religious practices. Who are they? In answer to this
question, it is said that they are the 'Dhira', the patient, great men. And
there are many such virtuous men who, knowing the object of renunciation and
acceptance, and knowing it correctly, according to the meaning of the word 'api'
used here, become fearless, knowing that what the Tirthankaras have preached is
the only path to liberation, and thus become determined to destroy karma. Or,
they conquer the trials and tribulations. Thus, they are 'Vira', valiant. Here,
the reading 'Vinnatti Vira Ya Bhavanti Ege' is also found. This means that some
who are burdened with heavy karma, of little strength, call themselves heroes by
mere knowledge, not by practice. But liberation is not achieved by knowledge
alone. Therefore, it is said - Even after studying the scriptures, many remain
fools, devoid of wisdom. In reality, the wise man is he who practices the
actions or conduct described in the scriptures. Because mere contemplation of
medicine does not cure the disease.  "Small bodies and large bodies, all these
he sees as himself. The enlightened one, free from delusion, should enter the
order in this great world." ||1.18||  Shadow - Small bodies and large bodies,
all these he sees as himself. The enlightened one, free from delusion, should
enter the order in this great world.  Translation - In this world, there are
beings with small bodies and beings with large bodies. Knowing all these as
equal to himself, the enlightened one, the observer of the truth, should enter
the order in the presence of the restrained, virtuous ones.  Commentary - What
are those beings? Out of fear, he says - Some are 'Dahre', small, slow, subtle,
or whatever, all these are beings. And those who are 'Vuddha', with large
bodies, all these he sees as equal to himself.  (523)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM 'yatAH' saMyatA pApAnuSThAnAnnivRttA
vividhaMsaMyamAnuSThAnaM prati 'praNamanti' prahvIbhavanti  /  ke te ?-'dhIrA'
mahApuruSA iti  /  tathaike kecana heyopAdeyaM vijJAyApizabdAtsamyakparijJAya
tadeva ni:zaGkaM yajjinaiH praveditamityevaMkRta nizcayAH karmaNi vidArayitavye
vIrA bhavanti, yadivA parISahopasargAnIkavijayAdvIrA iti pAThAntaraM vA
'viNNattivIrA ya bhavanti ege' 'eke' ke cana gurukarmANo'lpasattvAH
vijJapti:-jJAnaM, tanmAtreNaiva vIrA nAnuSThAnena, na ca
jJAnAdevAbhilaSitArthAvAptirUpajAyate, tathAhi - "adhItya zAstrANi bhavanti
mUrkhA, yastu kriyAvAna puruSa vidvAna  /  saM cintyatAmauSadhamAturaM hi, na
jJAnamAtreNa karotyarogam  // 1 // "  // 17 //  TIkArtha - jo pApapUrNa kRtyoM
se ghRNA karate haiM tathA jJeya padArthoM ko jAnate haiM, ve pratyakSa dRSTA
tathA parokSa dRSTA puruSa prANiyoM ke upamardana-hiMsA kI zaMkA se-bhaya se na
svayaM pApAcaraNa karate haiM, na anyoM se karavAte haiM aura na pApacaraNa meM
udyata janoM kA anumodana hI karate haiM  /  ve na svayaM mRSAvAda-asatya
bhASaNa karate haiM, na auroM se vaisA karavAte haiM  /  tathA na vaisA karane
vAloM kA anumodana hI karate haiM  /  isI prakAra anyAnya mahAvratoM meM bhI isI
krama ko jor3anA cAhiye  /  ve isa prakAra sarvadA saMyata-pApanuSThAna se
nivRtta rahate hue vividha rUpa meM dharmArAdhanAmUlaka upakramoM meM lIna
rahate haiM  /  ve kauna haiM ? isa prazna kA samAdhAna karate hue kahate haiMve
dhIra-dhairyazIla mahApuruSa haiM tathA kaI aise satpuruSa haiM jo heya-tyAgane
yogya tathA upAdeya-grahaNa karane yogya vastu ko jAnakara-yahAM prayukta api
zabda ke saMketAnusAra samyaka parijJAta kara, jo tIrthaMkaroM ne pratipAdita
kiyA hai, vahIM ni:zaMka-zaMkA vivarjita mokSa mArga hai, yaha nizcaya kara
karmoM ko vidIrNa karane meM-naSTa karane meM parAkramazIla hotehaiM athavA
parISahoM aura upasargoM ko jIta lete haiM  /  isa prakAra ve vIra-zauryazAlI
haiM  /  yahAM 'viNNatti vIrA ya bhavaMtiege' aisA pATha bhI prApta hotA hai  /
isakA abhiprAya yaha hai ki koI guru karmA-bhArI karma yukta alpaparAkramayukta
jIva vijJaptimAtra se-jJAna mAtra se apane Apa ko vIra kahate haiM  /  anuSThAna
yA AcaraNa se nahIM kintu mAtra jJAna se abhipsita prayojana kI upalabdhi nahIM
hotI  /  ataeva kahA hai-zAstroM kA adhyayana karake bhI kaI loga mUrkha-
vivekazUnya raha jAte haiM  /  vAstava meM vidvAn vahI hai jo zAstroM meM batAI
gaI kriyA yA AcAra kA anuSThAnaanusaraNa karatA hai kyoMki auSadhi kA samyak
cintana karane mAtra se rugNatA nivRtta nahIM ho jAtI-miTa nahIM jAtI  /  Dahare
ya pANe vuDDhe ya pANe, te Attao pAsai savvaloe  /  uvvehatI logamiNaM mahaMtaM,
buddhe'pamattesu parivvaejA  // 18 //  chAyA - daharAzca prANAH vRddhAzca prANA
stAnAtmavat pazyati sarvaloke  /  utprekSate lokamimaM mahAntaM
buddho'pramatteSu parivrajet  /  anuvAda - isa saMsAra meM choTI choTI kAyAvAle
prANI haiM aura bar3I bar3I kAyA ke prANI bhI haiM  /  ina sabhI ko apane sadRza
jAnakara buddha-tatva dRSTA puruSa saMyama paripAlaka sAdhuoM kI sannidhi meM
pravrajyA svIkAra kare  /  _TIkA - kAni punastAni bhUtAni ?
yacchaGkayA''rambhaMjugupsanti santa ityetadAzaGkayAha-ye kecana 'Dahare' ni
laghavaH kunthvAdayaH sUkSmA vA, te sarve'pi prANA:-prANinaH ye ca vRddhAH-
bAdarazarIriNastAnsarvAnapyAtmatulyAn (523)

Page #552 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga says, "One should see all beings in the
world as oneself. Just as my life is finite, so too are the lives of all other
beings, including the Kuntha. Just as I experience suffering, so too do all
other beings. They are distressed by suffering. The Agamas say, 'O Bhanta! How
does a being with an earth body experience suffering when it is afflicted?'"
Therefore, one should not attack or harm any being.  Whoever sees this, truly
sees.   Thus, one should contemplate the vastness of this world. It is vast
because it is filled with beings of six types, from the most subtle to the most
gross. Or, it is vast because it is without beginning or end.  Even though some
beings may never attain liberation, the world is still vast because it is
composed of six substances and extends to fourteen regions.  However, it is also
vast in terms of time and existence, because it is without beginning or end, and
because it is infinite in terms of its cycles of existence.  Thus, one should
contemplate the world in this way.  A wise person who has realized the truth
understands that all beings are impermanent and that there is no happiness in
this world of suffering.  Therefore, such a person should live among the
"unmindful" (those who are not practicing restraint) and practice restraint.
Or, if they are wise, they should live among the "mindful" (those who are
practicing restraint) and practice restraint.   (Verse 18)  **Commentary:**  Who
are the beings that one should not harm?  The Sutrakar says that even the
smallest beings, such as the Kuntha, and other subtle beings, are all living
beings.  Those with a monkey body are also living beings.  A person who sees the
truth sees all beings as equal to themselves.  They understand that all beings
have the same amount of life, just as their own life is finite.  Just as they
experience suffering, so too do all other beings.  They are distressed by
suffering.  Therefore, the Agamas say, "O Bhanta! How does a being with an earth
body experience suffering when it is afflicted?"  One should not attack or harm
any being, because they are all living beings.  Whoever sees this, truly sees.
A person who sees the truth understands the vastness of this world.  It is vast
because it is filled with beings of six types, from the most subtle to the most
gross.  Or, it is vast because it is without beginning or end.  Even though some
beings may never attain liberation, the world is still vast because it is
composed of six substances and extends to fourteen regions.  However, it is also
vast in terms of time and existence, because it is without beginning or end, and
because it is infinite in terms of its cycles of existence.  Thus, one should
contemplate the world in this way.  A wise person who has realized the truth
understands that all beings are impermanent and that there is no happiness in
this world of suffering.  Therefore, such a person should live among the
"unmindful" (those who are not practicing restraint) and practice restraint.
Or, if they are wise, they should live among the "mindful" (those who are
practicing restraint) and practice restraint.   (Verse 19)  **Shadow:**  He who
knows the truth of himself and others, is free from himself and others.  He who
is like a light, should always dwell with those who are seeking the truth.
**Translation:**  He who knows the Dharma, whether through his own efforts or
through the efforts of others, and teaches it, is able to protect himself and
others from evil.  He who contemplates the Dharma again and again, should always
dwell with those who are seeking the truth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram Atmavatpazyati sarvasminnapi loke yAvatpramANaM mama
tAvadeva kunthorapi, yathA vA mama duHkhamanabhimatamevaM sarvalokasyApi
sarveSAmaNi prANinAM duHkhamutpadyate duHkhAtodvijanti tathA cAgamaH-"puDhavikAe
NaM bhaMte ! akkaMte samANe kerisayaM veyaNaM veei !" ityAdyAH sUtrAlApakAH, iti
matvA te'pi nAkramitavyA na saMghaTTanIyAH, ityeva yaH pazyati sa pazyati  /
tathA lokamimaM mahAntamutprekSate, SaDjIva
sUkSmabAdarabhedairAkuntvAlamahAntaM, yadivA'nAdyanidhanatvAnmahAn lokaH,
tathAhi-bhavyA api kecana sarveNApi kAlena na setsyantIti, yadyapi dravyataH
SaDdravyAtmakatvAt kSetratazcaturdazarajjupramANatayA sAvadhiko lokastathApi
kAlato bhAvatazcAnAdyanidhanatvAtparyAyANAM jAnantatvAnmahAn lokastumatprekSata
iti  /  evaM ca lokamutprekSamANo buddhaH avagatatattvaH sarvANi
prANisthAnAnyazAzvatAni, tathA nAtrApasade saMsAre sukhalezo'pyastItyevaM
manyamAnaH 'apramatteSu' saMyamAnuSThAyiSu yatiSu madhye tathAbhUta eva pariH
-samantAdbrajet parivrajet yadivAbuddhaH san 'pramatteSu' gRhastheSu apramattaH
san saMyamAnuSThAne privrjediti||18|| _TIkArtha - ve bhUta-prANI kauna haiM ?
jinakI hiMsA kI AzaMkA se sAdhu Arambha samArambha nahIM krte| yaha zaMkA
upasthita karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM-laghukAya yukta kunthu Adi evaM jo
anya sUkSma jantu haiM ve sabhI prANoM ko dhAraNa karate haiM, jo bAdara zarIra
yukta haiM ve bhI prANadhArI haiM tattvadRSTA puruSa una sabako apane saddaza
mAnate haiM  /  ve aisA samajhate haiM ki samagra loka meM merA jIva yAvat
pramANa hai-jitanA parimita hai, pramANayukta hai kunthu Adi anyAnya prANiyoM ke
jIva bhI utane hI haiM  /  jisa prakAra mujhe duHkha hotA hai, usI taraha anya
prANiyoM ko bhI duHkha hotA hai  /  duHkha se ve udvejita-pIr3ita hote haiM  /
ataeva Agama meM kahA hai-bhaMte ! pRthvIkAyika jIva AkrAnta hokara-duHkha se
utpIr3ita hokara kisa prakAra kI vedanA anubhava karatA hai (saMkSepa meM yahI
uttara hai ki hamArI taraha hI vaha dInatApUrvaka vedanA anubhava karatA hai)  /
ityAdi sUtroM ke AlApaka-kathanoM ko mAnatehue kisI bhI jIva para AkramaNa-
hiMsaka upakrama nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  jo aisA dekhatA hai-samajhatA hai, vahI
vAstava meM dekhatA hai satyadarzI hai| tattvadRSTA isa loka kI mahAnatA-
vizAlatA ko jAnatA hai  /  yaha loka chaH prakAra ke sUkSma bAdara bhedayukta
jIvoM se paripUrNa hone ke kAraNa mahAna-vizAla hai athavA anAdi anidhana-ananta
hone ke kAraNa mahAna hai kyoMki kaI bhavya prANI saba kAloM meM siddhattva
nahIM pAte  /  dravya dRSTi se yaha loka SaDadravyAtmaka hai| kSetra kI dRSTi se
caturdazarajju parimita hai| yoM vaha sAvadhika-avadhi yA sImA sahita hai kintu
kAla tathA bhAva kI apekSA se yaha anAdi evaM ananta hai  /  paryAyoM kI apekSA
se yaha ananta hai  /  ataH yaha mahAna hai  /  tattvadRSTA ise isa rUpa meM
dekhate haiM  /  loka kA isa prakAra utprekSaNa karatA huA-dekhatA huA
tattvajJapurupa sabhI prANiyoM ke sthAna azAzvata-anitya hai  /  isa apasada-
duHkhapUrNa saMsAra meM sukha kA aMza mAtra bhI nahIM hai yoM mAnatA huA-
anubhava karatA huA saMyama paripAlaka sAdhuoM ke madhya-unake sAnnidhya meM
jAkara parivrajyA svIkAra kare athavA vaha pramatta-gRhastha meM apramatta
rahatA huA saMyama ke anuSThAna meM saMlagna rhe| je Ayao parao vAvi NaccA,
alamappaNo hoti alaM paresiM  /  taM joibhUtaM ca sayAvasejA, je pAukujjA
aNuvIti dhammaM  // 19 //  chAyA - ya AtmanaH paratovA'pi
jJAtvA'lamAtmanobhavatyalaM pareSAm  /  taM jyotirbhUtazca sadA vased ye
prAduSkuryyaranuvicintya dharmam  //  anuvAda - jo apane dvArA yA anya ke dvArA
dharma ko parijJAta kara usakA upadeza karatA hai, vaha apanI tathA anya kI
rakSA karane meM, asat se bacAne meM samartha hai  /  jo anuvicintana kara-punaH
punaH ciMtana vimarza 524)

Page #553 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Study of Samvasarana**  One should always reside in the presence of the
luminous, wise, and knowledgeable Muni, who embodies the essence of Dharma.
**Commentary:**  The one who is omniscient, who knows all the objects in the
three worlds, and who teaches others about them, is worthy of respect.
Similarly, the one who is a Ganadhara, who knows the objects from the
Tirthankaras and others, and teaches them to others, is also worthy of respect.
Such a person, who knows what is right and wrong, is capable of saving himself
from the cycle of birth and death, and also saving others through his teachings.
One should always serve such a luminous being, who is omniscient and knows
everything, and who is a Tirthankara or a Ganadhara. Such a person is like the
moon, the sun, and a lamp, illuminating the path to liberation. One who desires
his own welfare and is troubled by the suffering of the world should consider
himself fortunate to be in the presence of such a being.  It is said: "One who
is devoted to knowledge, who is steadfast in his faith and conduct, and who does
not abandon the company of his Guru, is truly blessed."  **Who should do this?**
The text explains that those who contemplate the fruits of their actions, who
understand the value of human life, the path of righteousness, and the ten
virtues of a virtuous person, and who practice these virtues, should always
reside in the company of their Guru.  Alternatively, those who always serve the
luminous and wise Acharya are the ones who understand the scriptures and who
teach others about the world, which is comprised of five elements and fourteen
realms.  **Verse 20:**  "One who knows oneself, who knows the world, who knows
the past and the future, who knows birth and death, is truly wise."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM kara dharma ko abhivyakta karatA hai, usa jyotirmaya
- sadjJAna ke prakAzapuMja muni ke sAnnidhya meM sadaiva nivAsa karanA cAhiye  /
TIkA kicca- 'yaH' svayaM sarvajJa Atmanastrailokyodara vivaravarti padArtha
darzI yathA'vasthitaM lokaM jJAtvA tathA yazca gaNadharAdikaH 'parata:'
tIrthaMkarAderjIvAdIn padArthAn viditvA parebhya upadizati sa evaMbhUto
heyopAdeyavedI 'AtmanastrAtumalaM' AtmAnaM saMsArAvaTAtpAlayituM samartho
bhavati, tathA pareSAM ca sadupadezadAnatastrAtA jAyate, 'taM' sarvajJaM svata
eva sarvavedinaM tIrthaMkarAdikaM paratovedinaM ca gaNadharAdikaM 'jyotirbhUtaM'
padArthaprakAzatayA candrAdityapradIpakalpamAtmahitamicchan saMsAraduHkhodvignaH
kRtArthamAtmAnaM bhAvayan 'satatam' anavaratam 'Avaset' seveta, gurvantika eva
yAvajjIvaM vaset, tathA coktam " nANasya hoi bhAgI thirayarao daMsaNe caritte ya
/  dhannA AvakahAe gurukulavAsaM Na muMcati  // 9 // " chAyA - jJAnasyabhavati
bhAgI sthirataro darzana cAritre ca  /  dhanyA yAvatkathaM gurukulavAsaM na
muJcanti  // 1 //  ka evaM kuryuH ? iti darzayati-ye karmapariNatimanuvicintya
"mANussakhetta jAi" ityAdinA durlabhAM casaddharmAvAptiM saddharmaM vA
zrutacAritrAkhyaM kSAntyAdidazavidhasAdhudharmaM zrAvakadharmaM vA 'anuvicintya'
paryAlocya jJAtvA vA tameva dharmaM yathoktAnuSThAnataH 'prAduSkuryuH'
prakaTayeyu te gurukulavAsaM yAvajjIvamAsevanta iti, yadivA ye
jyotirbhUtamAcAryaM satatamAsevanti ta evAgamajJA dharmamanuvicintya 'lokaM'
paJcAstikAyAtmakaM caturdazarajvAtmakaM vA prAduSkuryuriti kriyA  // 19 //
TIkArtha jo svayaM sarvajJa haiM, gaNadhara Adi padAdhiSThita haiM, ve trailokya
meM vidyamAna samagra padArthoM ko jisa rUpa meM ve avasthita haiM vaise svayaM
jAnakara athavA tIrthaMkara Adi se padArthoM ko avagata kara dUsaroM ko upadeza
karate haiM, ve heya, upAdeya vettA saMsAra rUpIgahana vana apanA tathA
sadupadeza dvArA auroM kA trANa karane sakSama hote haiN| ve svayaM samagra
padArthoM ke jJAtA tIrthaMkara Adi tathA anya se padArthoM ko jJAta karane vAle
gaNadhara Adi jyotirmaya mahApuruSa haiN| ve padArthoM ke prakAzaka- tadviSayaka
jJAna ke udbhASaka hone ke kAraNa candra tathA sUrya evaM dIpaka ke saddaza
haiN| ataH Atmahitecchu, saMsAra ke duHkhoM se udvigna apane ko kRtArtha -
dhanya anubhava karatA huA unake sAnnidhya meM nirantara AvAsa kare arthAt guru
kI sannidhi meM hI jIvana paryanta rahe  /  kahA gayA hai - jo gurukula meM
nivAsa karatA hai vaha jJAna kA bhAgI adhikArI hotA hai| darzana aura cAritra
meM sthiratara-atyadhika dRr3ha hotA hai  /  isaliye ve puruSa dhanya haiM jo
yAvajjIvana gurukulavAsa kA tyAga nahIM krte| kauna aisA kare ? isa prazna kA
spaSTIkaraNa karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM- jo jIva karmoM kI pariNati
pariNAma yA phala kA anucintana kara tathA mAnava jIvana, AryakSetra, uttama
jAti tathA zrutacAritramUlaka kSAMti Adi se yukta dazavidha sAdhu dharma tathA
zrAvaka dharma kA anucintana-paryAlocana karausakA yathAvidhi anuSThAna -
paripAlana karate hue auroM ke samakSa use prakaTa karate haiM - batAte haiM, ve
puruSa yAvajjIvana gurukula kA Asevana karate haiM  /  athavA jo jyotirmaya-
prakAzapuMja AcArya kI sevA meM sadA rahate haiM ve hI AgamavettA puruSa dharma
kA anuvicintana kara paMcAstikAyAtmaka caturdazarajju parimita isa loka kA auroM
ko jJAna karAte haiM  /  attANa jo jANati jo ya logaM, gaI ca jo jANai NAgaiMca
/  jo sAsayaM jANa asAsayaM ca, jAtiM (ca) maraNaM ca jaNovavAyaM  // 20 //  525

Page #554 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 21:**  Oh, the one who knows the **āsrava**
(influx of karma), **samvara** (restriction of influx), **duḥkha** (suffering),
and **nirjarā** (cessation of karma), is worthy of speaking about **kriyāvāda**
(the doctrine of action).  **Verse 20:**  The one who knows the **ātman**
(soul), the **loka** (world), the **gati** (path of transmigration), the
**anāgati** (non-transmigration), the **śāśvata** (eternal), the **aśāśvata**
(non-eternal), the **jāti** (birth), the **maraṇa** (death), and the
**janoppapāta** (rebirth), is worthy of speaking about **kriyāvāda**.
**Commentary:**  The one who knows the **ātman** (soul) as distinct from the
body, the source of happiness and suffering, and who acts for the benefit of the
soul, is truly knowledgeable about the **ātman**. The one who knows the **loka**
(world) in its entirety, including the animate and inanimate, the realms of the
gods, humans, and animals, and the infinite space, is truly knowledgeable about
the **loka**. The one who knows the **gati** (path of transmigration) of beings,
how they come to be in the realms of hell, animals, humans, and gods, and the
**anāgati** (non-transmigration), the cessation of transmigration, which is
achieved through right faith, knowledge, and conduct, is truly knowledgeable
about the **gati** and **anāgati**. The one who knows the **śāśvata** (eternal),
which is the eternal nature of the soul, and the **aśāśvata** (non-eternal),
which is the impermanent nature of the world, is truly knowledgeable about the
**śāśvata** and **aśāśvata**. The one who knows the **jāti** (birth), the
process of birth in the realms of hell, animals, humans, and gods, and the
**maraṇa** (death), the process of death, and the **janoppapāta** (rebirth), the
process of rebirth, is truly knowledgeable about the **jāti**, **maraṇa**, and
**janoppapāta**. The one who knows the **vikuṭṭana** (torments) of beings in the
lower realms, the **āsrava** (influx of karma), the **samvara** (restriction of
influx), the **duḥkha** (suffering), and the **nirjarā** (cessation of karma),
is truly knowledgeable about the **kriyāvāda**.  **Explanation:**  The
**kriyāvāda** is the doctrine of action, which explains the relationship between
karma and rebirth. It is based on the understanding that all beings are subject
to the law of karma, which dictates their rebirth in accordance with their
actions. The **kriyāvāda** also explains the path to liberation from the cycle
of rebirth, which is achieved through the practice of right faith, knowledge,
and conduct.  **Note:**  The terms in bold are Jain terms that have been
preserved in the translation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram aho'vi sattANa viuTTaNaM ca, jo AsavaM jANati saMvaraM
ca  /  dukkhaM ca jo jANati nijjaraM ca, so bhAsiumarihai kiriyavAdaM  //  21
//  chAyA AtmAnaM yo jAnAti yazca lokaM gatiM yo jAnAtyanAgatiJca  /  yaH
zAzvataM jAnAtyazAzvataJca, jAtiJca maraNaJca janopapAtam  // 20 //  - adho'pi
sattvAnAM vikuTTanAJca ya AsravaM jAnAtisaMvaraJca  /  duHkhaJca yo jAnAti
nirjarAJca, sabhASitumarhati kriyAvAdam  // 21 //  anuvAda jo AtmA ko jAnatA
hai| loka-loka ke svarUpa evaM lokAntaravartI padArthoM ko jAnatA hai, jo
zAzvata - mokSa, azAzvata - saMsAra ko jAnatA hai, jo janma mRtyu tathA gati
evaM Agati - vibhinna gatiyoM meM AvAgamana ko jAnatA hai  /  adhogati meM
narakAdi meM prANiyoM ke vi kuTTaNa - pIr3AoM, aura yAtanAoM ko jAnatA hai, jo
Azrava saMvara duHkha evaM nirjarA ko jAnatA hai, vahI yathArthataH kriyAvAda kA
nirUpaNa kara sakatA hai  /  TIkA - kiMcAnyat- yo hyAtmAnaM paralokayAyinaM
zarIrAdvyatiriktaM sukhaduHkhAdhAraM jAnAti yazcAtmahiteSu pravartate sa AtmajJo
bhavati  /  yena cAtmA yathAvasthitasvarUpo'haMpratyayagrAhyo nirjJAto bhavati
tenaivAyaM sarvo'pi lokaH pravRttinivRttirUpo vidito bhavati, sa eva
cAtmajJo'stItyAdikriyAvAdaM bhASitumarhatIti dvitIyavRttasyAnte kriyA  /  yazca
'lokaM' carAcaraM vaizAkhasthAnastha kaTisthakarayugmapuruSAkAraM cazabdAdalokaM
cAnantAkAzAstikAyamAtraM jAnAti, yazca jIvAnAm ' Agatim ' AgamanaM kutaH
samAgatA nArakAstiryaJco manuSyA devAH ? kairvA karmabhirnArikAditvenotpadyante
? evaM yo jAnAti, tathA 'anAgatiM ca' anAgamanaM ca kutra gatAnAM nAgamanaM
bhavati ? cakArAttadgamanopAyaM ca samyagdarzanajJAnacAritrAtmakaM yo jAnAti,
tatrAnAgatiH - siddhirazeSakarmacyutirUpA lokAgrAkAzadezasthAnarUpA, vA grAhyA
sA ca sAdiraparyavasAnA  /  yazca 'zAzvataM ' nityaM sarvavastujJAtaM
dravyAstikanayAzrayAd 'azAzvataM ' vA'nityaM pratikSaNa vinAzarUpaM
paryAyanayAzrayaNAt cakArAnnityAnityaM cobhayAkAraM sarvamapi vastujAtaM yo
jAnAti, tathA hyagamaH " NeraiyA davvaTTayAe sAsayA bhAva TThayAe asAsayA "
chAyA - nairayikA dravyArthatayAzAzvatA bhAvArthatayA azAzvatAH  /  evamanye'pi
tiryagAdayo draSTavyAH  /  athavA nirvANaMzAzvataM saMsAra:- azAzvatastadgatAnAM
saMsAriNAM svakRtakarmavazagAnAmitazcetazca gamanAditi  /  tathA 'jAtim'
utpattiM nArakatiryaJcamanuSyAmarajanmalakSaNAM 'maraNaM ca'
AyuSkakSayalakSaNaM, tathA jAyanta iti janAH-sattvAsteSAmupapAtaM yo jAnAti, sa
ca nArakadevayorbhavatIti, atraca janmacintAyAmasumatAmutpattisthAnaM
yonirbhaNanIyA, sA ca sacitA'cittA mizrA ca tathA zItA uSNA mizrA ca tathA
saMvRtA vivRttA mizrA cetyevaM saptaviMzatividheti  /  maraNaM -
punastiryaGmanuSyayoH, cyavanaM jyotiSkavaimAnikAnAm udvartanA-
bhavanapativyantaranArakANAmiti  // 20 //  kiJca sattvAnAM
svakRtakarmaphalabhujAmadhastAnnArakAdau duSkRtakarmakAriNAM vividhAM virupAM vA
kuTTanAMjAtijarAmaraNarogazokakRtAM zarIrapIr3AM, cazabdAttadabhAvopAyaM yo
jAnAti, idamuktaM bhavati - sarvArthasiddhAdArato'ghaH - saptamIM narakabhuvaM
yAvadasumantaH svakarmANo vivartante, tatrApi ye gurutara karmANaste'pratiSThAna
narakayAyino bhavantItyevaM yo jAnIte  /  tathA AzravatyaSTaprakAraM karma yena
sa AzravaH sa ca prANAtipAtarUpo rAgadveSarUpo vA mithyAdarzanAdiko vedi taM
tathA 'saMvaram' AzravanirodharUpaM yAvadazeSayoganirodhasvabhAvaM -
cakArAtpuNyapApe ca yo jAnIte tathA 526

Page #555 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Study of the Samvasarana  **The Sorrow** is the arising of the non-
existent, and its cause, whoever knows, and **the Happiness** which is the
opposite of that, whoever knows, by penance, whoever is purified, this is said -
whoever knows the causes of the bondage of karma and the causes of its opposite
equally, thus:  "As many are the types, the causes of the bondage of the world,
so many are the opposites of those, the causes of the liberation of Nirvana."
||1||  He alone truly deserves to speak, what is that? He says - the **Action-
Theory**, that there is a soul, there is merit, there is sin, and there is the
fruit of past actions, such a theory. Thus - the soul, non-soul, restraint of
inflow, bondage, merit, sin, purification, liberation - these nine substances
are included in two verses. There, by "whoever knows himself", the substance of
the soul is understood, by "world", the substance of the soul is understood, and
by "going, not going, eternal, etc.", the nature of these two is shown.
Similarly, inflow and restraint are included in their own form. By "sorrow",
however, bondage, merit, and sin are taken, because sorrow is inseparable from
them. Purification, however, is not included in its own definition, but the
fruit of that, liberation, should be understood. Thus, these are the substances,
and by accepting them, the Action-Theory is accepted.  Whoever "knows", accepts,
he truly knows the Action-Theory. But, is the rightness of the theory not
established by the knowledge of the substances mentioned by other schools? Why
is it not accepted? Because the names of the substances mentioned are not
established. Thus, in the Nyaya school, sixteen substances are mentioned -
**proof, object of proof, doubt, purpose, example, principle, constituent,
reasoning, determination, debate, quibbling, fallacy, deception, category,
refutation, and position**. There, the **object of proof** is that by which the
delimitation of the substance is done, in the form of **avoidance** and
**acceptance** (restraint and activity). And that is **proof**, which is of four
types - **perception, inference, comparison, and verbal testimony**. There, the
knowledge arising from the contact of the sense organ with the object is
**perception**, which is **unnameable**, **invariable**, and **determinative**.
That is, the knowledge arising from the relation between the sense organ and the
object, not the manifested knowledge, not happiness, etc., is **unnameable**,
because it is nameable by verbal testimony; and because it is **invariable**, it
is not variable like the knowledge of two moons. **Determinative** means that it
is **certain**. There, its perceptibility is not appropriate, because where the
self is directly present for the grasping of the object, that is perception. And
that is only **attention**, **mind**, and **self**. And this is also through
another **condition**. Inference is **indirect** like the inference of activity.
**Conventional perception** may be there, but convention is not relevant in the
investigation of truth. Inference is also of three types - **from the cause**,
**from the effect**, and **from the general**. There, **inference from the
cause** is like the previous, **inference from the effect** is like the
remainder, and **inference from the general** is like seeing a single blooming
flower and concluding that all flowers are blooming, or seeing the movement of
Devadatta from one place to another and inferring movement in the sun. There,
also, **incompatibility** is the means of inference, not the cause, etc.,
because without it, there is variability in the relation between the cause and
the effect. Where it exists, there, the relation between the cause and the
effect, etc., is seen as the inferred and the means of inference. For example,
"There will be a chariot rising from the sight of the constellation Krittika."
It is said:  "Incompatibility, where it is, what is the use of the three?
Incompatibility, where it is, what is the use of the three?" ||1||  Moreover, if
perception is not authoritative, then inference preceding it is authoritative.
**Comparison** is the well-known means of proving the object to be proved, like
"A cow is like a bull." Here, the meaning of comparison is the understanding of
the relation between the similar and the dissimilar. Here, also, it is
established that it is a type of inference, because it is included in the
established incompatibility, and therefore, its separate authority is not
established. If there is no incompatibility, then there is variability, and
therefore, comparison is not authoritative. **Verbal testimony** is also not all
authoritative. What then? Only the **scripture** composed by the
**knowledgeable** is authoritative. And it is not reasonable that there is
another knowledgeable person besides the omniscient. This is also discussed
elsewhere. Further, all this proof is the knowledge of the self, and knowledge
is a quality of the self. If it is a separate substance, then there is a
contradiction. If they are dependent on the sense organ and the object for the
grasping of the object of proof, then they are dependent, but not reasonable.
Thus, because they are absent without substance, and because their grasping is
established in the grasping of that, it is not reasonable to accept them
separately. The **object of proof**, however, is the self, body, sense organ,
object, intellect, mind, activity, fault, death, absence, fruit, sorrow, and
liberation. There, the self is the perceiver and enjoyer of all, and it is
inferred from hatred, effort, happiness, sorrow, and knowledge. And it is
accepted as the substance of the soul. The body is the place of its enjoyment,
the sense organs are the instruments of enjoyment, and the objects of the sense
organs are the objects of enjoyment. This body, etc., is also mentioned by us in
the understanding of the soul and non-soul. Enjoyment is intellect, and this is
a special type of knowledge. And it is accepted as a quality of the soul, and
therefore, it is accepted as the soul.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 citA zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM  /  'du:khama' asAtodayarUpaM tatkAraNaM ca yo
jAnAti 'sukhaM' ca tadviparyayabhUtaM yo jAnAti, tapasA yo nirjarAM ca idamuktaM
bhavati-yaH karmabandhahetUn tadviparyAsahetUMzca tulyatayA jAnAti tathAhi -
"yathA prakArA yAvantaH, saMsArAvezahetavaH  /  tAvantastadviparyAsA,
nirvANAveza hetavaH  // 1 // " sa eva paramArthato 'bhASituM vaktumarhati, kiM
tad ? ityAha-kriyAvAdam, asti jIvo'sti puNyamasti pApamasti ca pUrvAcaritasya
karmaNaH phalamityevaMrUpaM vAdamiti  /  tathAhi-
jIvAjIvAstravasaMvarabandhapuNyapApanirjarA mokSarUpA navApi padArthAH
zlokadvayenopAttAH, tatra ya AtmAnaM jAnAtItyanena jIvapadArthaH, loka mityanenA
jIvapadArthaH tathA gatyanAgatiH zAzvatetyAdinA'nayoreva svabhAvopadarzanaM
kRtaM, tathA''zravasaMvarau svarUpeNaivopAttau duHkhamityanena tu
bandhapuNyapApAni gRhItAniM, tadavinAbhAvitvAduHkhasya, nirjarAyAstu svAbhidhAne
naivApAdAnaM, tatphalabhUtasya ca mokSasyopAdAna draSTavyamiti, tadevametAvanta
eva padArthAstadabhyupagamena cAstItyAdikaH kriyAvAdo'bhyupagato bhavatIti, ni
'jAnAti' abhyapagacchati sa paramArthataH kriyAvAdaM jAnAti  /  nana
cAparadarzanokta padArthaparijJAnena samyagvAditvaM  /  kasmAnnAbhyupagamyate ?
taduktapadArthanAmevAghaTamAnatvAt, tathAhi-naiyAyikadarzanena
tAvatpramANaprameyasaMzaya prayojanadRSTAntasiddhAntAvayavatarkanirNayavAda
jalpavitaNDAhetvAbhAsacchalajAti nigrahasthAnAnItyete SoDaza padArthA abhihitAH,
tatra heyopAdeya (nivRtti) pravRttirUpatayA yena padArthaparicchitti, kriyate
tatpramIyate'neneti pramANaM, tacca
pratyakSAnumAnopamAnazAbdabhedAccaturkI,tatrendriyArthasaMnikarpotpannaM
jJAnamavyapadezyamavyabhicAri vyavasAyAtmakaM pratyakSaM, tadevendriyArthayoryaH
saMbandhastasmAttadutpannaM, nAbhivyaktaM jJAnaM, na sukhAdikam, avyapadezyamiti
vyadezyatvezAbdaprApte; avyabhicArItAddhidvicandra jJAnavat vyabhicaratIti,
vyavasAyAtmakamiti nizcayAtmakaM pratyakSaM, tatrAsya pratyakSatA na budhya
(yujya) te, tathAhiyatrAtmA'rthagrahaNaM prati sAkSAvyApriyate tadeva
pratyakSaM, taccAvadhimanaHparyAyakevalAtmakam, etaccAparopAdhidvAreNa  /
pravRtteranumAnavatparokSamiti, upacArapratyakSaM tu syAt, na
copacArastattvacintAyAM vyApriyata iti  /  anumAnamapi
pUrvavaccheSavatsAmAnyatodRSTamiti tridhA, tatra kAraNAtkAryAnumAnaM pUrvavat
kAryAtkAraNAnumAnaM zeSavat sAmAnyatodRSTaM tu cUtamekaM vikasitaM dRSTvA
puSpitAzcutA jagatItiyadivA devadattAdau gatipUrvikAM sthAnAt sthAnAntarAvAptiM
dRSTvA''ditye'pi gatyanumAnamiti, tatrApyanyathAnupapattireva gamikA, na
kAraNAdikaM, tayA binA kAraNasya kArya prati vyabhicArAt, yatra tu sA vidyate
tatra kAryakAraNAdivyatirekeNApi gamyagamakabhAvau dRSTaH, tadyathA-bhaviSyati
zakaTodayaH kRttikAdarzanAditi, taduktam - "anyathA'nupapannatvaM, yatra tatra
trayeNa kim ?  /  nAnyathA'nupannatvaM, yatra yatra trayeNa kim ?  // 1 // "
apica-pratyakSasyAprAmANye tatpUrvakasyAnumAnasyA prAmANyamiti  /
prasiddhasAdhAtsAdhyasAdhanamupamAnaM, yathA gaurgavayastathA, atra ca
saJjAsaJjisambandhapratipattirUpamAnArthaH atrApi
siddhAyAmanyathA'nupapattAvanumAnalakSaNatvena
tatraivAntarbhAvAtpRthakpramANatva manupapannameva, atha nAstyanupapattistato
vyabhicArAdapramANatopamAnasya  /  zAbdamapi na sarvaM pramANaM, kiM tarhi ?
AptapraNItasyaivAgamasya prAmANyaM, na cAhadvayAtirekeNAparasyAptatA
yuktiyukteti, etaccAnyatra nirloThitamiti  /  kiJca-sarvamapyetatpramANamAtmano
jJAnaM jJAnaM cAtmano guNaH (guNazca) pRthakpadArthatA''patteH, atha
prameyagrahaNenendriyArthatayA te'pyAzritA, satyamAzritAH, na tu yuktiyuktAH,
tathAhi-dravyavyatirekeNa teSAmabhAvAt tadgrahaNe ca teSAmapi grahaNaM
siddhameveti na yuktaM pRthagupAdAnam  /  prameyaM
tvAtmazarIrendriyArthabuddhimanaH-pravRttidoSapretyabhAvaphala duHkhApavargAH,
tatrAtmA sarvasya draSTopabhoktA ce (sa ce)
cchAdveSaprayatnasukhaduHkhajJAnAnumeyaH, sa ca jIvapadArthatayA gRhIta
evasyAbhiriti, zarIraM tu tasya bhogAyatanaM, bhogAyatananAnIndriyANi bhoktavyA
indriyArthAH, etadapi zarIrAdikaM jIvAjIvagrahaNenoktamasmAbhiriti  /  upabhogo
buddhirityetacca jJAnavizeSaH, sa ca jIvaguNatayA jIvopAdAna tayo 527

Page #556 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra (Neno)** states that the mind is the internal
organ of all objects, and it is the sign of the simultaneous arising of
knowledge. The mind is also a substance, and it is grasped by the non-living
substance (pudgala) through its own grasping. The mind as a state is a quality
of the soul, and it is grasped by the soul through its own grasping.  The cause
of the soul's experience of pleasure and pain is **pravritti** (activity). It is
not appropriate to consider it as a separate entity, because **pravritti** is
the desire of the soul, and it is a quality of the soul. The soul, through its
own intention, is a special kind of knowledge. The soul's defilement is called
**dosha** (fault). For example, the soul's belief that this body is not eternal,
because it is not without beginning, and it is not without end, because its
lineage is infinite, is a **dosha**. This belief, whether it is about the body
being without beginning or without end, is a **dosha**. **Raga** (attachment),
**dvesha** (aversion), **moha** (delusion), etc., are also **doshas**. These
**doshas** are also included in the soul's intention, and therefore they are not
to be spoken of separately.  The state of non-existence after death, or the
existence of the afterlife, is also grasped by the soul through its own grasping
of the living and non-living substances. The fruit of this grasping is the
experience of pleasure and pain. This experience is also included in the
qualities of the soul, and therefore it is not to be spoken of separately. The
word "suffering" also refers to various types of obstacles, and therefore it
does not go beyond the fruit. **Moksha** (liberation) is the cessation of the
cycle of birth and death, and it is characterized by the elimination of all
suffering. We have grasped this **moksha** through our own understanding.
**Sanskaya** (doubt) is a perception that is not definitive. It is also a
quality of the soul, like definitive knowledge. The **prayojana** (purpose) is
that which is used to motivate action. It is also a quality of the soul, because
it is a special kind of desire. **Drishtanta** (example) is a statement that is
free from contradiction. It is either a living or non-living substance. However,
it is not appropriate to consider it as a separate entity, because it would lead
to an infinite regress, and it would be grasped again in the future through the
grasping of its parts.  There are four types of **siddhantas** (principles):  1.
**Sarvatantra Siddhanta** (principle that is not contradicted by any other
principle and has the most meaning): For example, the sense organs, such as
touch, etc., grasp the objects of the senses, such as touch, etc., through the
means of knowledge. 2. **Samanatantra Siddha** (principle that is established by
the same principle): For example, the Sankhyas believe that the soul is not
born, and it is not destroyed. As it is said, "From non-existence, existence
does not arise, and from existence, non-existence does not arise." 3.
**Adhikarana Siddhanta** (principle that is established by the dependence on
another principle): For example, the soul, which is different from the sense
organs, exists, because it grasps the same object through sight and touch. The
dependent principles are: 1) the existence of the object, 2) the diversity of
the sense organs, 3) the sense organs having fixed objects, 4) the signs of
grasping their objects, 5) the sense organs being the means of knowledge for the
knower, 6) the substance that is different from the qualities of touch, etc., 7)
the locus of the qualities, 8) the conscious beings having fixed objects. These
principles are established by the establishment of the previous principle. The
previous principle cannot exist without these principles. 4. **Abhyupagam
Siddhanta** (principle that is established by the assumption of an unexamined
object): For example, when someone asks, "What is sound?", someone might say,
"Sound is a substance." Then they might ask, "Is it eternal or non-eternal?"
This is an example of this type of principle. All four types of principles do
not go beyond special knowledge. Special knowledge is a quality of the soul, and
qualities are grasped through the grasping of their locus. Therefore, they are
not to be considered separately.  The **avayavas** (parts) of an argument are:
**pratijna** (statement), **hetu** (reason), **udaharana** (example),
**upanaya** (application), and **nigamana** (conclusion). The **pratijna** is
the statement of the proposition, such as "Sound is eternal or non-eternal." The
**hetu** is the reason that supports the proposition, such as "Because it is the
nature of sound to be produced." The **udaharana** is the example that
illustrates the proposition, such as "A pot." The **upanaya** is the application
of the reason to the proposition, such as "Sound is non-eternal because it is
created, just like a pot." The **nigamana** is the conclusion that restates the
proposition and the reason, such as "Therefore, sound is non-eternal."  If these
five parts are only words, then they are grasped by the non-living substance
(pudgala) through its own grasping, because the words are made of pudgalas. If
they are knowledge, then they are grasped by the soul through its own grasping,
because knowledge is a quality of the soul. If we assume that special knowledge
is a separate entity, then there would be an infinite number of entities,
because there are many types of special knowledge.  **Tarka** (reasoning) is a
perception that is based on the possibility of something happening, and it is
characterized by a critical examination of the meaning. For example, "It is
possible that a man will stand here." This is also a special kind of knowledge.
Scholars do not accept the idea that special knowledge is a separate entity from
the knower, because they are not different.  **Nirnaya** (decision) is a
perception that is definitive, and it arises after doubt and reasoning. It is
also not different from knowledge. Furthermore, it is not appropriate to
consider it separately, because it is included in the means of knowledge, such
as perception, etc., because it is definitive.  There are three types of
**katha** (discourse): **vada** (debate), **jalpa** (wrangling), and **vitanda**
(sophistry). **Vada** is a debate that is based on the means of knowledge,
reasoning, and the use of arguments. It is not contradictory to the principles,
and it is supported by the five parts of an argument. It involves the

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram (neno) pAtta eva  /  sarvaviSayamanta:karaNaM
yugapajjJAnAnutpattiliGgaM manaH, tadapi dravyamanaH paugalikamajIvagrahaNena
gRhItaM, bhAvamanastvAtmaguNatvAjjIvagrahaNeneti |aatmnHsukhduHkhsNvednaanaaN
nirvartanakAraNaM pravRttiH,sApi pRthakpadArthatayA nAbhyupagantuM yuktA,
tathAhi-pravRttirityAtmecchA, sA cAtmaguNa eva, AtmA'bhiprAyatayA
jJAnavizeSatvAd, AtmAnaM dUSayatIti doSaH, tadyathA-asyAtmano
nedaMzarIramapUrvam,anAditvAdasya, nApyanuttaram, anantatvAtsantateriti,
(zarIre'pUrvatayA sAntatayA vA) yo'yamAtmano'dhyavasAyaH sa doSo,
rAgadveSamohAdiko vA doSaH, ayamapi doSo jIvAbhiprAyatayA tadantarbhAvIti na
pRthagvAcyaH  /  pretyabhAvaH-paralokasadbhAvo'yamapi sasAdhano
jIvAjIvagrahaNenopAttaH, phalamapisukhaduHkhopabhogAtmakaM, tadapi jIvaguNa
evAntarbhavatIti na pRthagupadeSTavyamiti, duHkhamityetadapi vividhabAdhana
yogarUpamiti na phalAdatiricyate, janmamaraNaprabandhocchedarUpatayA
sarvaduHkhaprahANalakSaNo mokSaH, sa cAsmAbhirUpAtta eveti  /
kimityanavadhAraNAtmakaH pratyayaH saMzayaH, asAvapi nirNayajJAnavadAtmaguNa
eveti, yena prayuktaH, pravartatte tatprayojanaM, tadapIcchAvizeSa tvAdAtmaguNa
eva,avipratipattiviSayApanno'rtho dRSTAntaH,asAvapijIvAjIvayoranyataraHna
caitAvatA'sya pRthakpadArthatA yuktA, atiprasaMgAd, avayavagrahaNena ca
tasyottaratra grahaNAditi  /  siddhAntazcaturvidhaH tadyathA -
sarvatantrAviruddhastantre'dhikato'rthaH sarvataMtrasiddhAntaH ! yathA
sparzanAdInIndriyANi sparzAdaya indriyArthAH pramANaiH prameyasya grahaNamiti !,
samAnatantrasiddhaH parata-trA siddhaH pratitantrasiddhAnto yathA sAGkhayAnAM
nAsata AtmalAbho na ca sataH sarvathA vinAza iti, tathA coktam-"nAsato jAyate
bhAvo, nAbhAvo jAyate sataH" iti2, yatsiddhAvanyasyArthasyAnuSaGgeNa
siddhiHso'dhikaraNasiddhAntaH3, yathendriyavyatirikto jJAtA''tmA'sti
darzanasparzanAbhyAmekArtha grahaNAditi,tatrAnuSaGgiNo'rthA 1, indriyanAnAtvaM 2
niyataviSayANIndriyANi 3 svaviSayagrahaNaliGgAni ca 4 jJAturjJAnasAdhanAni 5
sparzAdiguNavyatiriktaM dravyaM 6 guNAdhikaraNa 7 maniyata viSayAzcetanAH 8 iti,
pUrvArtha siddhAvete'rthAH sidhyanti, naitairvinA pUrvArthaH saMbhavatIti 3,
aparIkSitArthAbhyupagamAttadvizeSaparIkSaNamabhyupagamasiddhAntaH 4, tadyathA,
kiM zabda iti vicAre kazcidAha-astu dravyaM zabdaH, sa tu kiM nityo'thAnityaH ?,
ityevaM vicAraH sa cAyaM caturvidho'pi siddhAnto na jJAnavizeSAdatiricyate,
jJAna vizeSasyAtmaguNatvAdguNasya ca guNigrahaNena grahaNAd na pRthagupAdAnamiti
4  /  athAvayavAH-pratijJAhetUdAharaNopanayanigamanAni, tatra sAdhyanirdezaH
pratijJA, yathA nityaH zabdo'nityo veti, hinotigamayati pratijJAtamarthamiti
hetuH, tadyathA-utpattidharmakatvAt, sAdhyasAdharmyavaidharmyabhAvI dRSTAntaH
udAharaNaM, yathA ghaTa iti, vaidhyodaahrnnN yadanityaM na bhavati
tadutpattimadapi na bhavati yathA''kAzamiti, tathA na tatheti vA
pakSadharmopasaMhAra upanayaH, tadyathA-anityaH zabdaH kRtakatvAd ghaTavattathA
cAyaM, anityatvAbhAve kRtakatvamapi na bhavatyAkAzavat na tathA'mamiti,
pratijJAhetvoH punarvacanaM nigamanaM, tasmAdanitya iti, te cAmI paJcApyavayavA
yadi zabdamAtraM tataH zabdasya paudgilakatvAtpudgalAnAM cAjIvagrahaNena
grahaNAnna pRthagupAdAnaM nyAyyam, atha tajjaM jJAnaM tato jIvaguNatvAt
jIvagrahaNenaivopAdAnamiti, jJAna vizeSapadArthatA'bhyupagame ca padArtha
bahutvaMsyAd, anekaprakAratvAjjJAna vizeSANAmiti  /  saMzayAdUrdhvaM
bhavitavyatApratyayaH sadarthaparyAlocanAtmakastarkaH yathA bhavitavyamatra
sthANunA puruSeNa veta, ayamapi jhana vizeSa eva, na ca jJAnavizeSANA
jJAturabhinnAnAM pRthak padArthaparikalpanaM samanujAnatevidvAMsaH  /
saMzayatarkAbhyAmuttarakAlabhAvI nizcayAtmaka pratyayo nirNayaH, ayamapi
prAgvanna jJAnAdatiricyate, kiJca-asya nizcayAtmakatayA
pratyakSAdipramANAntarbhAvAnna pRthag nirdezonyAyya iti  /  tisraH kathA:-vAdo
jalpo vitaNDA ceti, tatra pramANatarkasAdhanopAlambhaH siddhAntAviruddhaH
paJcAvayavopapannaH pakSapratipakSaparigraho vAdaH, sa ca tatvajJAnArthaM
ziSyAcAryayorbhavati, sa eva vijigISuNA sArdhaM chalajAti
nigrahasthAnasAdhanopAlambho jalpaH, sa eva pratipakSasthApanA hIno vitaNDeti,
tatrAsAM tisRNAmapi kathAnAM bheda eva nopapadyate, yatastattvacintAyAM
tattvanirNayArthaM vAdo vidheyo, 528)

Page #557 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Study of Samvasarana. Truth cannot be understood through deceit, trickery,
etc., because deceit, etc., is used to deceive others, and it does not lead to
the understanding of truth. Even though there is a difference, these things are
not meaningful, because whatever truly exists in reality is what should be
accepted as true. Arguments, however, are based on the will of the individual
and are therefore inconsistent. Therefore, they are not meaningful. Moreover,
arguments that follow the will of the individual can also be found in things
like cockfighting and gambling, where there is a taking of sides and opposing
sides. Therefore, they would also lead to the attainment of truth, which is not
desirable.  Invalid, absolute, and contradictory fallacies are called fallacies
because they appear to be arguments. In this case, even valid arguments do not
establish truth, let alone fallacies. For example, whatever is definite and real
deserves to be considered truth. Arguments, however, are not definite, as they
are sometimes valid and sometimes invalid in relation to the object of the
argument.  Now, deceit is the distortion of meaning or the possibility of
alternative meanings. In this case, when a specific meaning is intended and
stated, the speaker's intention is to create an alternative meaning, which is
verbal deceit. For example, "This new blanket is Devadatta's." Here, the
speaker's intention is that the blanket is new, and there is a difference in the
meaning of the compound word and the expanded form. In this case, the deceiver
would say, "You said that this is a new blanket." And the other person would
deny it, saying, "No, I did not." In this case, the statement is meaningless. If
it is not deceit, then it is truth. And if it is not truth, then it is deceit,
because truth is the form of reality. Therefore, the statement "deceit is truth"
is an unnecessary use of language.  Fallacious criticisms are types of
criticisms. In this case, even valid criticism does not establish truth, because
it is not definite. The indefiniteness is that what is valid criticism in one
case is a fallacious criticism in another case. And because criticism is based
on the ability of the individual, the indefiniteness of the establishment of
criticism and counter-criticism is why there are types of fallacious criticisms.
This is because they are not real.  During an argument, the point at which the
arguer or the opponent is refuted is called the point of refutation. This is the
statement of the arguer's weakness, and the opponent's refutation of it.
Anything else that is said by the logicians is mere chatter. This includes the
denial of the proposition, the substitution of a different proposition, the
contradiction of the proposition, etc. When examined, these things do not
deserve to be considered points of refutation. You are also capable of making a
mistake, but this does not deserve to be considered truth. The speaker's virtues
and faults are considered in relation to the object, inference, and the subject
matter, but not in relation to truth. Therefore, what the logicians say should
not be considered truth. Their statements are flawed.  Nor is the truth as
stated by the Vaisheshikas. For example, substance, quality, action, generality,
particularity, and inherence are considered truth. In this case, there are nine
substances: earth, water, fire, air, space, time, direction, soul, and mind. In
this case, the distinct substantiality of earth, water, and fire is not
established. For example, the same atoms, through experimentation and
observation, transform into earth, etc., but they do not abandon their own
substantiality. And the difference in state does not justify the difference in
substance, because it leads to an absurd conclusion. We also accept the
substantiality of space and time. However, the substantiality of directions as
parts of space is not established, because it leads to an absurd conclusion. The
substantiality of the soul is also accepted, as it is characterized by its use
in relation to the body alone. And the mind is included in the substance of
matter, as a particular type of matter (like an atom). And the mind and its
states are included in the soul, because they are qualities of the soul.  Even
though they say that earth is earth because of the quality of earthness, this is
just their own process. For there is no separate earthness from earth, so that
earth would be earth because of its connection to earthness. Rather, everything
that exists is characterized by generality and particularity, and has the nature
of both Narasimha and the lion. As it is said:  "There is no connection, because
of difference, nor is there difference, because of connection. A pot is
different from clay, because of the connection of two types of clay." (1)  And:
"A man is not a lion because of lionhood, nor is a lion a man because of
manhood. Because of difference, there is a difference in kind between the
objects of sound and knowledge." (1)  And so on.  Now, the qualities of form,
taste, smell, and touch are qualities that are particular to substances. And
number, quantity, separateness, conjunction, disjunction, otherness, and non-
otherness are general qualities, because they apply to all substances. And
intellect, happiness, sorrow, desire, aversion, effort, virtue, vice, and
impressions are qualities of the soul. Heaviness is a quality of earth and
water. Wetness is a quality of earth, water, and fire. The quality of oiliness
is a quality of water, like the quality of speed. The quality of sound is a
quality of space, and it is embodied in the impressions of substances.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM. na chalajalpAdinA tattvAvagamaH kartuM pAryate,
chalAdikaM hi paravaJcanArthamupanyasyate, na ca tena tattvAvagatiH iti satyapi
bhede naivAsAM padArthatA, yato yadeva paramArthato vastuvRtyAvastvasti tadeva
paramArthatayA'bhyupagantuM yuktam, vAdAstu puruSecchAvazena bhavanto'niyatA
vartante (tat) na teSAM padArthateti, kiJca-puruSecchAnuvidhAyino vAdAH
kukkuTalAvakAdiSvapi pakSapratipakSaparigraheNa bhavantyatasteSAmapi tattva
prAptiH syAnnacaitadiSyata iti  /  asiddhAnaikAntikaviruddhA hetvAbhAsAH,
hetuvadAbhAsanta iti hetvAbhAsAH, tatra samyagghetUnAmapi na tattvavyavasthitiH
kiM punastadAbhAsAnAM ? tathAhi-iha yanniyataM vastvasti tadeva tattvaM
bhaktuimarhati, hetavastu kacidvastuni sAdhye hetavaH kvacidahetava
ityaniyatAsta iti  /  atha chalam' arthavighAto'rthavikalpopapattyeti tatrArtha
vizeSe vivakSite'bhihite vakturabhiprAyAdarthAntarakalpanA vAkchalaM, yathA
navakambalo'yaM devadattaH atra ca navaH kambalo'syeti vakturabhiprAyo vigrahe
ca vizeSo na samAse, tatrAyaM chalavAdI nava
kambalAasyetyetadbhavatA'bhihitamiti kalpayati, na cAyaM tathetyevaM
pratiSedhayati, tatra chalamityasadarthAbhidhAnaM, tadyadi chalaMna tarhi
tattvaM, tattva cenna tarhi chalaM, paramArtharUpatvAttattvasyeti, tadartha
chalaM tattvamityatiriktA vAcoyuktiH  /  dUSaNAbhAsAstu jAtayaH, tatra
samyagdUSaNasyApi na tattvavyavasthitiH, anira tatvAt, aniyatattvaM ca
yadevaikasminasamyagdRSaNaM tadevAnyatra dUSaNAbhAsaM, puruSazaktyavekSatvAcca
dUSaNadUSaNAmAsavyavasthiteraniyatatvamiti kutaH punardUSaNAbhAsarUpANAM jAtInAm
? avAstavattvAttAsAmiti  /  vAdakAle vAdI prativAdI vA yena nigRhyate
tannigrahasthAnaM, taccavAdino'sAdhanAGgavacanaM prativAdinastaddo (zca tattado)
SodbhAvanaM vihAya yadanyadabhidhIyate naiyAyikaistatpralApamAtramiti, tacca
pratijJAhAniH, pratijJAntaraM, pratijJAvirodha ityAdikam, etacca vicAryamANaM na
nigrahasthAnaM bhavitumarhati, bhavadapi ca puruSasyaivAparAdhaM kartumalaM, na
tveta tattvaM bhavitumarhati vaktRguNadoSau hi padArthe'numAne'dhikriyete na tu
tattvamiti, tadeva na naiyAyikoktaM tattvaM tattvenAyituM yujyate, tasyoktanItyA
sadoSatvAditi  //  nApi vaizeSikoktaM tattvamiti, tathAhi-
dravyaguNakarmasAmAnyavizeSa samavAyAstattvamiti, tatra pRthivyaptejovAyurAkAzaM
kAlo digAtmA mana iti nava dravyANi, tadatra pRthityapUtejovAyUnAM
pRthagdravyatvamanupapannaM, tathAhi-ta eva paramANavaH prayogavisrasAbhyAM
pRthivyAditvena pariNamanto'pi na svakIyaM dravyatvaM tyajanti, na
cAvasthAbhedena dravyabhedo yuktaH, atiprasaMgAditi  /  AkAzakAlayozcAsmAbhirapi
dravyatvamabhyupagatameva, dizastvAkAzAvayavabhUtAyA anupapannaM
pRthagdravyatvamati prasaMgadoSAdeva, Atmanazca svazarIramAtravyApina
upayogalakSaNasyAbhyupagatameva dravyatvamiti, manasazca pudgalavizeSatayA
pudgaladravye'ntarbhAva iti (paramANuvat), bhAvamanasazca
jIvaguNatvAdAtmanyantarbhAva iti  /  yadapi tairabhidhIyate, yathA
pRthivItvayogAtpRthivIti tadapi svaprakriyAmAtrameva, yato na hi pRthivyAH
pRthagbhUtaM pRthivItvamapi yena tadyogAtpRthivI bhaved, apitu sarvamapi yadasti
tatsAmAnyavizeSAtmakaM narasiMhAkAramubhayasvabhAvamiti, tathA coktam -
"nAnvayaH sa hi bhedatvAnna bhedo'nvayavRttitaH  /  mRdbhedadvayasaMsargavRttijA
(rjA) tyantaraM ghaTaH  // 1 // " tathA - "na naraH siMharUpatvAnna siMho
nararUpataH  /  zabdavijJAnakAryANAM, bhedAjjAtyantaraM hi saH  // 1 // " ityAdi
/  atha rUparasagaMdhasparzA rUpidravyavRttervizeSaguNAH, tathA
saGkhayAparimANAni pRthaktvaM saMyogavibhAgau paratvAparatve ityete sAmAnyaguNAH
sarvadravyavRttitvAt, tathA
buddhisukhaduHkhecchAdveSaprayatnadharmAdharmasaMskArA AtmaguNAH, gurutvaM
pRthivyudakayovatvaM pRthivyudakAgniSu sneho'mbhasyeva vegAkhyaH
saMskAromUrtadravyeSveva AkAzaguNaH zabda iti  /  529

Page #558 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga, in which numbers and other general
qualities are not qualities because they are dependent on the nature of
substances like form, etc., and are not qualities because they are dependent on
the nature of substances like form, etc. Even if they were, there would still be
no separate arrangement of qualities, because the destruction of the nature of
the substance would result in the absence of separate existence. Therefore, it
is appropriate to grasp the substance by grasping the substance, as it is said,
"The substance is the synonym of the quality" (Tattvartha. A. 5 Sutra).
Therefore, there is no separate existence. Moreover, its existence is called its
essence, and the perception of existence is that of the quality, because the
insertion of the word in the substance due to the existence of the quality is
done by the word "tvatala". For example, a pot is red, the water is its food,
and it is called a pot by all these qualities. Here, the existence of the pot is
potness, the existence of red is redness, the existence of the food is foodness,
and the existence of the water is waterness. Therefore, due to the existence of
the qualities of the pot, the general red quality, action, and substance, the
word "kutaka", which is a large, round, water-holding, etc., is inserted in the
substance, and that is the "tvatala". But what is the quality called "red"? What
is its existence? And what is the substance in which the word is inserted, so
that there is a perception of existence? Now, should the existence of red be
redness? It should be, by convention. For example, the word "red" is
conventionally used as a substance, and its general existence is redness. But
convention is not used in the consideration of essence, because it is fulfilled
in the establishment of the word. And the word is not a quality of space,
because it is material, and space is immaterial. The rest is just a process, not
a part of the defect of the means. And action is also inseparable from the
substance, and it is not appropriate to consider it as a separate quality with a
different support. Now, what about the general? It is of two kinds: the ultimate
and the penultimate. The ultimate is called "maha-satta", which pervades
substances like the earth, etc. And it is said, "Because of the word 'sat',
there is that existence in substances, qualities, and actions." The penultimate
is the essence of substance, quality, and action. Now, the separate existence of
"maha-satta" is not appropriate, because the perception of "sat" in it, is it
dependent on another existence or is it self-existent? If it is dependent on
another existence, then there is the same dilemma, and therefore, there is no
end. If it is self-existent, then there will be a self-existent perception of
"sat" in substances, etc., and what about the existence of another existence,
like the horn of a rabbit? Is it hypothetical? Moreover, is the perception of
"sat" in substances, etc., due to their existence or due to their being
existent? If the perception of "sat" is self-existent in the existent, then what
about it? But in the case of the non-existent, there would be a perception of
"sat" in the existence of the horn of a rabbit, etc., because of the existence
of "sat" in them. And it is said, "Things are self-existent, but what about the
existence of the existent? It would not be so in the non-existent, because it
would be a universal implication." And so on. This same defect is applicable to
the penultimate general, because the conditions and results are the same.
Moreover, we also accept that the object is of the form of the general and the
particular, and because it is inseparable from it in some way, it is grasped by
grasping the substance. Now, what about the particulars? They are dependent on
others because they are the cause of the perception of complete difference.
Here, it is to be considered that the perception of particularity in them is not
caused by another particularity, because of the fear of endlessness. And if it
is self-dependent, then there would be a perception of particularity in
substances, etc., as well, because of the particularities that are different
from substances, etc.? But the particularities that are not different from
substances are also dependent on us, because everything is of the nature of the
general and the particular. This is just a process, just as the ultimate
particulars are the eternal substances, and the eternal substances are of four
kinds: atoms, liberated souls, liberated minds, and liberated bodies. Because of
their being appointed, they should be discarded. Now, what about "samavaya"? It
is called "samavaya" which is the perception of the support and the supported,
which are not self-existent. It is also eternal and one, and it is dependent on
others. Because of its eternality, the "samavaya" is also eternal, and if it is
non-eternal, then it would also be non-eternal, because it is the support. And
because of its oneness, there would be oneness of all the "samavaya"s, but it is
not one. Moreover, this "samavaya" is a relation, and because it is two-fold, it
is self-existent. Just as the stick and the stick-holder, and the destruction of
the form of the "chakra" in the birth of the "chakra" and the birth of the form
of the "chakra" in the destruction of the "chakra", and the arrangement of the
form of the "chakra" in the form of the "chakra", just as the milk and the curd,
and so on. Even in the Vaisheshika view, the arrangement of the objects is not
correct. Now, the exposition of the essence in the Samkhya view is being
undertaken. There, creation arises from the union of nature and the self. And
nature is the state of the three qualities: sattva, rajas, and tamas. From that,
arises the great, from the great arises the ego, from the ego arises the eleven
senses, from the senses arise the five subtle elements, and from the subtle
elements arise the five gross elements. Consciousness is the nature of the self,
and it is the doer, without qualities, and the enjoyer. Now, the qualities like
sattva, etc., which are mutually contradictory, cannot exist together in nature
and the self without a controller and a possessor, just as the qualities like
black and white, etc. And it is not  1530

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram tatra saGkhyAdayaH sAmAnyaguNA rUpAdivadravyasvabhA
(vAbhA) vatvena paropAdhikatvAdguNA eva na bhavanti, athApi syustathApi na
guNAnAMpRthaktvavyavasthA, tRtpRthaktvabhAve dravyasvarUpahAneH
'guNaparyAyavadravya' (tattvA. a. 5 sU.) mitikRtvA ato nAntarIyakatayA
dravyagrahaNainaiva grahaNaM nyAyyamiti na pRthagbhAvaH  /  kiJca tasya
bhAvastattvamityucyate, bhAvapratyayazca yasya guNasya hi bhAvAd dravye
zabdanivezastadabhidhAne 'tvatalA' vityanena bhavati, tatra ghaTo rakta
udakasyAhArako jalavAn savaireva ghaTa ucyate, atra ca ghaTasya bhAvo ghaTatvaM
raktasya bhAvo raktatvaM AhArakasya bhAva AhArakatvaM jalavato bhAvo
jalavattvamityatra ghaTasAmAnyaraktaguNakriyAdravyasaMbandharUpANAM guNAnAM
sadbhAvAt dravye pRthubudhnAkAra udakAdyAharaNakSamekuTakAkhye zabdasya
ghaTAderabhinivezastatra tvatalau, iha ca raktAkhyaH ko guNo ? yada sadbhAvAt,
kataracca tad dravyaM yatra zabdanivezo yena bhAvapratyayaH syAditi ?  /
kimidAnI raktasya bhAvo raktatvamiti na bhavitavyaM ?, bhavitavyamupacAreNa,
tathAhi-rakta ityetadrvyatvenopacarya tasya sAmAnyaM bhAva iti raktatvamiti, na
copacArastattvacintAyAmupayujyate, zabdasiddhAveva tasya kRtArthatvAditi  /
zabdazcAkAzasya guNa eva na bhavati, tasya paudgalikatvAd, AkAzasya
cAmUrtatvAditi  /  zeSaM tu prakriyAmAtraM na saadhnduussnnyornggm| kriyA'pi
dravyasamavAyinI guNavatpRthagAzrayituM na yukteti  /  atha sAmAnyaM, tadvidhA-
paramaparaM ca, tatra paraM mahAsattAkhyaM dravyAdipadArthavyApi, tathA
coktam-"saditi yato dravyaguNakarmasu sA sattA" aparaM ca
dravyatvaguNatvakarmatvAtmakaM, tatra na tAvanmahAsattAyAH pRthakpadArthatA
yujyate, yatastasyAM yaH saditi pratyayaH sa kimaparasattAnibandhana uta svata
eva ? tat yadyaparasattAnibandhanastatrApyayameva vikalpo'to'navasthA, atha
svata eva tatastadvada dravyAdiSvapi svata eva satpratyayo bhaviSyatIti
kimaparasattA'jAgalastanakalpayA  /  vikalpitayA ?, kiJca-dravyAdInAM kiM satAM
sattayA satpratyaya utAsatAM ?, tat yadi satAM svata eva satpratyayo bhaviSyati
kiM tayA ? asatpakSe tu zazaviSANAdiSvapi sattAyogAtsatpratyaya: syAditi, tathA
coktam - "svato'rthAH santu sattAvatsattayA kiM sadAtmanAm ?  /  asadAtmasu
naiSA syAtsarvathA'tiprasaGgataH  // 1 // " ityAdi  /  etadeva
dUSaNamaparasAmAnye'pyAyojyaM, tulyayogakSematvAt  /  kiJca-asmAbhirapi
sAmAnyavizeSarUpatvAdvastunaH kathaJcittadiSyata eveti, tasya ca
kathaJcittadavyatirekAd dravyagrahaNenaiva grhnnmiti| atha vizeSAH, te
cAtyantavyAvRttibuddhi hetutvena parairAzrIyante, tatredaM cintyate-yA teSu
vizeSabuddhiH sA nAparavizeSahetukA''zrayitatvA, anavasthAbhayAt, svataH
samAzrayaNe ca tadvad dravyAdiSvapi vizeSabuddhiH syAtkiM
dravyAdivyatiriktairvizeSairiti ?, dravyAvyatiriktAstu vizeSA
asmAbhirapyAzrIyante, sarvasya saamaanyvishessaatmktvaaditi| etattu
prakriyAmAtraM, tadyathA-nityadravyavRttayo'ntyA vizeSAH, nityadravyANi ca
caturvidhAH paramANavo muktAtmAno muktamanAMsi ca, iti  /
niyuktikatvAdapakarNayitavyamiti  /  samavAyastu-
ayutasiddhAnAmAdhArAdheyabhUtAnAM ya iha pratyayahe tuH sa samavAya ityucyate,
asAvapi nityazcaikazcAzrIyate, tasya ca nityatvAtsamavAyino'pi nityA Aporan
tadanityatve ca tasyApyAnityavApattiH, tadAdhArarUpatvAttasya, tadekatvAcca
sarveSAM samavAyinAmekatvApattiH, tasya cAnekatvamiti  /  kiJca-ayaM samavAyaH
saMbandhaH, tasya ca dviSThatvAd yutsiddhtvmev| daNDadaNDinoriva,vIraNAnAM
cakaTotpattau tadrUpatayA vinAza:kaTarUpatayotpattiranvayarUpatayA
vyavasthAnamiti dugdhadanorivetyevaM vaizeSikamate'pi na samyak
padArthAvasthitiriti  //  sAmprataM sAGghayadarzane tattvanirUpaNaM prakramyate-
tatra prakRtyAtmasaMyogAtsRSTirUpajAyate, prakRtizca
sattvarajastamasAMsAmyAvasthA tato mahAnmahato'haMkAraHahaGkArAdekAMdazendriyANi
paJca tanmAtrANi tanmAtrebhyaH paJca bhUtAnIti, caitanyaM puruSasya svarUpaM, sa
cAkartA nirguNo bhokteti  /  tatra parasparaviruddhAnAM sattvAdInAM guNAnAM
prakRtyAtmanAM niyAmakaM guNinamantareNaikatrAvasthAnaM na yujyate,
kRSNasitAdiguNAnAmiva, na ca 1530

Page #559 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the Samvara (universal principle) is a great cause for the
production of the differences in nature, which are born from the great and other
transformations.  Since there is no acceptance of any other object besides this,
and since the soul is inactive and incapable of doing anything, the acceptance
of differences in nature would lead to the conclusion that there would always be
existence or non-existence.  It is said: "Existence and non-existence are always
without a cause, because they do not depend on anything else.  For things that
depend on something else, there is the possibility of being sometimes and
sometimes not."  Furthermore, we see that the Great and the Ego are not
different from sensation.  For example, the intellect, determination, and ego
are all perceptions of the form "I am happy," "I am unhappy," etc.  These are
qualities of the soul because of their nature as consciousness, not because of
their nature as matter.  These two are transformations of nature.  Furthermore,
the origin of the elements from the subtle elements is not logical.  For
example, earth from the subtle element of smell, water from the subtle element
of taste, fire from the subtle element of form, air from the subtle element of
touch, and space from the subtle element of sound.  This is not logical because
if it is said that this happens because of an external object, then it is not
logical because they always exist, and they do not create a world like this.  Or
if it is said that this happens because of the dependence on each body, then it
is not logical because in that case, earth would be characterized by skin,
bones, and hardness, water would be characterized by phlegm and blood, fire
would be characterized by heat, air would be characterized by breath and
exhalation, and space would be characterized by dryness.  This is also not
logical because even in the case of some bodies, the origin is from semen and
blood, and there is no smell of the subtle elements there.  The existence of the
unseen is also inferred.  If we accept the cause, then there would be too much
inference.  The origin of eggs, plants, and animals is also inferred to be from
something else.  Therefore, the origin of the primary, the Great, the Ego, etc.,
which is accepted by the Samkhya school in their own way, is accepted by them
only because of their attachment to their own view, and it is not logical.  If
we accept that the soul is inactive, then it would be destroyed and never
created, and there would be no bondage or liberation.  And if it is without
qualities, then it would be devoid of knowledge.  Therefore, this is just
childish talk.  And since nature is inanimate, it is illogical for it to act for
the sake of the soul.  Now, the Buddhist view is examined.  According to them,
there are twelve sense spheres, namely: the five senses, the five objects of the
senses, the sphere of sound, and the sphere of dharma.  The dharmas are the
twelve sense spheres, which are happiness, etc.  There are only two means of
knowledge: perception and inference.  The five senses (the physical senses) are
not involved in the perception of the soul, but the mental senses are involved
in the perception of the soul.  The five objects of the senses are not involved
in the perception of the non-soul, and they should not be perceived separately.
The sphere of sound is perceived by the soul because of its material nature, and
it is not logical for it to be a separate object for each individual.  The
sphere of dharma, which is happiness and suffering, is either a form of pleasure
or pain, and therefore, because of its nature as a quality of the soul, it is
included in the soul.  And if its cause is karma, then because of its material
nature, it is a non-soul.  The Buddhists consider perception to be non-
conceptual, and because of its uncertain nature, it does not lead to action or
inaction.  Therefore, it is not a valid means of knowledge.  And because of its
invalidity, inference, which is based on it, is also invalid.  The rest is the
refutation of objections, which is discussed elsewhere, and it is not discussed
here.  In this way, the refutation of the views of the Mimamsa school, which are
stated in their own texts, should be done with one's own intelligence.  Since
their objects are completely contrary to the world, they are not directly
discussed here.  Therefore, the nine or seven objects, which are established by
the remaining evidence, are true, and the knowledge of them is the cause of
action, not the knowledge of other objects. Commentary:  The person who knows
that the soul is transmigratory, different from the body, and the basis of
happiness and suffering, and who acts for the benefit of the soul, is the knower
of the soul.  The person who knows the soul in its true form through the
perception of "I am," is the knower of the entire world in its form of action
and inaction.  That knower of the soul is the person who is able to speak and
discuss this theory of action, which is the soul, etc.  Here, at the end of the
second verse or stanza, there is action, meaning that the two words are a pair.
Like a man standing in a theater with both hands on his waist, he knows the
world that is united with the body and the infinite space that is indicated by
the word "cha," which is limited and not a world.  And he knows the coming and
going of beings, i.e., he knows where the hellish beings, animals, humans, and
gods have come from.  He knows how they are born as hellish beings, etc.,
because of their karma.  He knows where they go so that they do not return
again.  The word "cha" indicates the right faith, knowledge, and conduct, which
are the means to it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM mahadAdivikAre janye prakRtivaiSamyotpAdane
kazciddhetuH, tadvayAtiriktavastvantarAnabhyupagamAda,
AtmanazcAkartRtvenAkiJcitkaratvAd svabhAvavaiSamyAbhyupagame tu
nirhetukatvApatternityaM sattvamasattvaM vA syAditi, uktaM ca - . "nityaM
sattvamasattvaM vA'hetoranyAnapekSaNAt  /  apekSAto hi bhAvAnAM,
kAdAcitkatvasaMbhava  // 1 // " apica-mahadahaGkArau saMvedanAdabhinnau
pazyAmaH, tathAhi-buddhiradhyavasAyo'haGkArazcAhaM sukhyahaM duHkhItyevamAtmakaH
pratyayaH tayozcidrUpatayA''tmaguNatvaM, na jdd'ruupaayaaH|
prakRtervikArAvetAviti  /  apica-yeyaM tanmAtrebhyo bhUtotpattiriSyate,
tadyathA-gaMdhatanmAtrAtpRthivI rasatanmAtrAdApaH rUpatanmAtrAttejaH
sparzatanmAtrAdvAyuH zabdatanmAtrAdAkAzamiti, sA'pi na yuktikSamA, yato yadi
bAhyabhUtAzrayeNaitadabhidhIyate, tadayuktaM, teSAM sarvadA bhAvAt, na
kadAcidanIdRzaM jagaditikRtvA, atha pratizarIrAzrayaNAdetaducyate, tatra kila
tvagasthikaThinalakSaNA pRthvI zleSmAsRg dravalakSaNA ApaH paktilakSaNaM
tejaHprANApAnalakSaNo vAyuHzuSiralakSaNamAkAzamiti,tadapi na yujyate, yato'trApi
keSAJciccharIrANAMzukrAsRkprabhavotpattiH na tatra tanmAtrANAM gaMdho'pi
|smuplkssyte adRssttsyaapi| kAraNatvakalpane'tiprasaGga syAt,
aNDajodbhijjAGkarAdInAmapyanyata evotpattirbhavantI samupalakSyate, tadeva
vyavasthite pradhAnamahadahaGkArAdikotpattiryA sAMkhyaiH
svaprakriyayA''bhyupagamyate
tattairniyuktikamevasavadarzanAnurAgeNAbhyupagamyata iti|
AtmanazcAkartRtvAbhyupagamekRtanAzo'kRtAgamazcasyAt bandhamokSAbhAvazca,
nirguNatve ca jJAnazUnyatApattirityato bAlapralApamAtraM, prakRtezcAcetanAyA
AtmArthaM pravRttiyukti vikaleti  /  atha bauddhamataM nirUpyate-tatra hi
padArthA dvAdazAyatanAni, tadyathA-cakSurAdIni paJca rUpAdayazca viSayAH paJca
zabdAyatanaM dharmAyatanaM ca, dharmAH-sukhAdayo dvAdazAyatanaparicchedake
pratyakSAnumAne dve eva pramANe, tatra cakSurAdI (didravye) ndriyANyajIvagrahaNe
naivopAttAni, bhAvendriyANi tu jIvagrahaNeneti, rUpAdayazca viSayA ajIvopAdAne
nopAttA na pRthagupAdAtavyAH,zabdAyatanaM tu
paudgalikakatvAcchAbdasyAjIvagrahaNena gRhItaM,na ca prativyakti
pRthakpadArthatA yuktisaMgateti, dharmAtmakaM sukhaM duHkhaM ca yadyasA (tAsA)
todayarUpaM tato jIvaguNatvAjjIve'ntarbhAvaH, atha tatkAraNaM karma tataH
paudgalikatvAdajIva iti  /  pratyakSaM ca tairnirvikalpakamiSyate,
taccAnizcayAtmakatayA pravRttinivRtyora naGgamityapramANameva tadaprAmANye
tatpUrvakatvAdanumAnamapIti, zeSastvAkSepaparihAro'nyatra suvicArita iti neha
pratanyata ityanayA dizA mImAMsakalokAyatamatAbhihitatatvanirAkaraNaM
svabuddhayA vidheyaM, tayoratyantalokaviruddhapadArthAnAM zrayaNAnna
sAkSAdupanyAsaH kRta iti  /  tasmAtpArizeSyasiddhA arhaduktA nava sapta vA
padArthAH satyAH tatparijJAnaM ca kriyAvAdehetuH nAparapadArthaparijJAnamiti  //
21 //  TIkArtha - jo puruSa yaha jAnatA hai ki AtmA paralokayAyi-paralokagAmI
hai, zarIra se vyatiriktabhinna hai, vaha sukha evaM duHkha kA AdhAra hai tathA
jo Atmahita meM pravRtta hotA hai, vahI AtmajJa-AtmavettA hai| jo maiM hU~ isa
pratyaya se-anubhava se grAhya AtmA ko usake yathArtha rUpa meM jAnatA hai vahI
pravRtti rUpa evaM nivRtti rUpa samasta loka ko jAnatA hai  /  vahI AtmajJAnI
paruSa asti-jIvAdi padArtha hai, isa kriyAvAda kA bhASaNavivecana karane meM
samartha hai  /  yahAM dUsare vRtta-chaMda yA gAthA ke aMta meM kriyA hai arthAt
donoM pada yugmaka hai| nATyazAlA meM kamara para donoM hAtha rakhakara khar3e
hue puruSa ke sadRza Akara yukta loka ko tathA ca zabda dvArA saMketita anaMta
AkAzAstikAya parimita aloka ko jAnatA hai evaM jo jIvoM kI Agati-Agamana ko
jAnatA hai arthAta nAraka. tiryaJca manaSya evaM deva kahAM se Aye haiM ? kina
karmoM dvArA nAraka Adi ke rUpa meM utpanna hote haiM ? yaha jAnatA hai evaM
kahAM jAne para phira punaH Agamana nahIM hotA, yaha jAnatA hai  /  cakAra zabda
se sUcita samyakdarzana, jJAna, cAritra rUpa usake upAya ko jAnatA hai  /  -531

Page #560 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  Here, the meaning of Anagati is Siddhi. It is
attained by the complete and total shedding of all karmas. It is located in a
specific place in the sky, at the forefront of the universe. It is eternal and
without any internal divisions. According to the Dravyarthic Nay, all substances
are eternal or permanent, and according to the Paryayarthic Nay, all are
impermanent, non-eternal, and constantly perishable. He who knows this. The word
'cha' used here refers to one who knows all substances as both eternal and non-
eternal, and both simultaneously. The Agamas state that the Nairyik-Narak Jiva
is eternal according to the Dravyarthic Nay and non-eternal according to the
Paryayarthic Nay. Similarly, one should know the same about other Tiryanch etc.
Alternatively, Nirvana is called eternal and Samsara is called impermanent
because the beings in Samsara move around due to the results of their own
actions. He who knows the origin of the four castes - Narak, Tiryanch, Manushya,
and Deva - and the death caused by the depletion of lifespan, is called Jan. He
knows the rebirth of the Jivas, their Satvas. While contemplating birth, one
should mention the place of origin of the Jivas, their Yoni. That Yoni is with
consciousness, without consciousness, mixed, cold, hot, mixed, closed, open, and
mixed. Thus, it is divided into twenty-seven categories. Tiryanch and Manushya
die. The Jyotishka and Vaimanika Devas undergo Chyaavan. And the Bhavanpati,
Vyantar, and Narakas undergo Udvartana. He knows those who are born. Rebirth
happens in Narakas and Devas.  ||20||  Sattva-beings experience the fruits of
their own actions. The Duskrut Karmakari - sinners - experience various types of
bodily pain in the lower realms like Naraka, etc., caused by birth, old age,
death, illness, and sorrow. He who knows this. The word 'cha' indicates that he
knows the means of eliminating pain. The implication is that all living beings
from the Sarvarth Siddha Devaloka to the seventh Naraka are bound by karmas.
Even there, those who have the heaviest karmas go to the Naraka called
Apratisthan. He who knows this. The eight types of karmas are Ashravit - they
enter the soul, become attached to it, and are called Ashrava. He who knows
whether it is in the form of Pranatipat - violence - or whether it is based on
Raga-Dvesha or Mithyadarshan. He who knows the Nirodha of Ashravas - the
restraint of all mental, verbal, and physical activities, which is called
Samvara. The word 'cha' indicates that he knows the Puny and Papa. He knows the
suffering that arises as a result of the unbearable Uday and its cause, and he
knows the happiness that is its opposite. He knows that it is destroyed by
Tapas. The meaning is that he knows the causes of Karma-bandha and the causes of
the destruction of karmas, which are opposite to bandha. It has been said that
just as there are as many causes for the attachment to Samsara, there are also
as many causes for attaining Moksha. He who knows this can truly and accurately
explain it. Who can explain it? In answering this question, it is said that he
can explain Kriyavad. The existence of the Jiva, Puny, Papa, and the fruits of
past actions is called Kriyavad. Through the above two verses, the nine
substances - Jiva, Ajiv, Ashrava, Samvara, Bandha, Puny, Papa, Nirjara, and
Moksha - have been grasped. By saying 'he who knows the soul', the Jiva
substance has been explained. By mentioning the universe, the Ajiv substance has
been explained. And by mentioning motion, Anagati, and eternity, their nature
has been explained. Ashrava and Samvara have been explained along with their own
nature. And by mentioning suffering, Bandha, Puny, and Papa have been grasped,
because they are inseparable from suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram yahA~ anAgati kA artha siddhi hai  /  vaha azeSa-
samagra karmoM ke cyuta kSINa hone se niSpanna hotI hai| vaha loka ke agrabhAga
meM AkAza ke eka vizeSa sthAna ke rUpa meM hai  /  vaha Adi sahita hai tathA
aMtarahita hai  /  dravyArthika naya ke anusAra samasta padArtha zAzvata yA
nitya hai tathA paryAyArthika naya ke anusAra saba azAzvata - anitya tathA
pratikSaNa vinazvara hai, jo yaha jAnatA hai| yahAM prayukta 'ca' zabda se jo
samagra padArthoM ko nitya ke evaM anitya tathA ubhayarUpa jAnatA hai| Agama meM
kahA gayA hai - nairayika- nAraka jIva dravyArthika naya anusAra nitya hai tathA
paryAyArthika naya ke anusAra anitya hai| isI prakAra anya tiryaJca Adi ko bhI
jAnanA cAhiye  /  athavA nirvANa ko zAzvata kahA jAtA hai tathA saMsAra ko
azAzvata kahA jAtA hai kyoMki tadgata- sAMsArika prANI apane dvArA kRta karmoM
ke pariNAmasvarUpa idhara udhara jAte haiM  /  jo jAti ko - nAraka, tiryaJca,
manuSya evaM devoM kI utpatti ko jAnatA hai tathA AyuSya ke kSaya se janita
mRtyu jana kahA jAtA hai  /  unake satvoM ke, jIvoM ke upapAta ko jAnatA hai hai
/  yahAM janma kA cintana karate samaya jIvoM ke utpatti sthAna yoni kA kathana
karanA cAhiye  /  vaha yoni sacitta, acitta, mizra evaM zIta, uSNa, mizra tathA
saMvRta, vivRta, mizra hotI hai  /  isa prakAra vaha sattAIsa bhedoM meM
vibhakta hai| tiryaJcoM evaM manuSyoM kI mRtyu hotI hai  /  jyotiSka evaM
vaimAnika devoM kA cyavana hotA hai  /  tathA bhavanapati, vyaMtara tathA
nArakoM kA udvartana hotA hai jAnatA hai  /  jo utpanna hote haiM unheM  /
upapAta nArakoM aura devoM meM hotA  // 20 //  satva-prANI apane dvArA kRta
karmoM kA phala bhogate haiN| duSkRta karmakArI- pApIjana nIce narakAdi sthAnoM
meM janma, vRddhatva, mRtyu, rugNatA evaM zoka se janita vividha prakAra kI
daihika pIr3A ko bhogate haiM, jo yaha jAnatA hai  /  'ca' zabda se saMketika
pIr3A ke abhAva - nAza ke upAya ko jAnatA hai  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki sarvArtha
siddha devaloka se lekara sAtavIM naraka taka jitane prANadhArI haiM ve saba
karmoM se yukta haiM vahA~ bhI jo sabase adhika bhArI karmayukta hai, ve
apratiSThAna nAmaka naraka meM jAte haiM jo yaha jAnatA hai  /  aSTavidha karma
Azravita hote haiM- AtmA meM Ate haiM, saMzliSTa hote use Azrava kahA jAtA hai
/  vaha prANAtipAta - hiMsA rUpa haiM athavA rAga dveSAtmaka hai yA
mithyAdarzana mUlaka hai, use jo jAnatA hai tathA AzravoM ke nirodha- samasta
yogoM-mAnasika, vAcaka evaM kAyika pravRttiyoM ke avarodha rUpa saMvara ko
jAnatA hai  /  'ca' zabda se saMketita puNya pApa ko jAnatA hai| asAtAvedanIya
udaya ke pariNAmasvarUpa niSpanna duHkha ko evaM usake kAraNa ko jAnatA hai
tathA usake viparyayabhUta sukha ko jAnatA hai  /  tapa dvArA nirjarA hotI hai
yaha jAnatA hai  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jo karma baMdha ke hetuoM ko
jAnatA hai tathA baMdha ke viparIta karmoM ke kSaya ke hetuoM ko samAna rUpa se
jAnatA hai  /  kahA hai - jisa prakAra jitane padArtha saMsAra ke Aveza prApta
hone ke kAraNa hai - hetu haiM, utane hI unase viparIta - mokSa prApta karane ke
bhI kAraNa haiM ityAdi jo jAnatA hai vahI paramArthataH - yathAvat rUpa meM
AkhyAta kara sakatA hai| kise AkhyAta kara sakatA haiM ? isa prazna ke samAdhAna
meM kahate haiM ki kriyAvAda ko AkhyAta kara sakatA hai  /  jIva kA astitva hai,
puNya, pApa tathA pUrvAcarita karmaphala kA astitva hai, inakA pratipAdana
kriyAvAda kahA jAtA hai  /  ukta do gAthAoM dvArA jIva, ajIva, Azrava, saMvara,
baMdha, puNya, pApa, nirjarA va mokSa-yeM nau padArtha upAtta hai - gRhIta haiM
/  jo AtmA ko jAnatA hai-yo kahane se jIva padArtha pratipAdita huA hai| loka kA
kathana kara ajIva padArtha kA pratipAdana kiyA hai tathA gati, Agati tathA
zAzvata ityAdi kA kathana kara inhIM kA svarUpa pratipAdita kiyA gayA hai|
Azrava aura saMvara apane apane svarUpa ke sAtha kahe gaye haiM  /  tathA duHkha
kA nAma lekara baMdha, puNya tathA pApa gRhIta kahe gaye haiM kyoMki duHkha ke
sAtha inakA avinAbhAvitva 532

Page #561 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of Samvasarana is an inseparable relationship, without which suffering
does not arise. Nirjara has been mentioned with its own name and its fruit,
Moksha, has also been accepted. Thus, only these substances are useful in
attaining Moksha. Therefore, the acceptance of their existence is the acceptance
of Kriyavada. One who knows and accepts these substances is truly the knower of
Kriyavada. It is said that why do you not accept as a Samyakvadi one who knows
the substances propounded in other philosophies? In response to this, it is said
that in Nyaya philosophy, Pramana, Prameya, Sanshaya, Prayojana, Drishtaanta,
Siddhanta, Avayava, Tarka, Nirnaya, Vada, Jalapa, Vitanda, Hetvabhasa, Chala,
Jati and Nigraha Sthana - these sixteen substances are accepted. Among these,
the substance that determines the nature of the substances due to the
renunciation of the substances that are to be abandoned and the inclination
towards the substances that are to be adopted is called Pramana. Pramana is that
by which substances are measured, tested and known in the right way. There are
four types of Pramana: Pratyaksha, Anumana, Upamana and Shabda. The knowledge
that arises from the proximity of the sense organ and the object, is
inexpressible by words, free from defects and decisive in nature is Pratyaksha.
This means that which arises from the relationship of the sense organ and the
object but is not expressed. Which is not in the form of happiness etc. but is
knowledge. It is not expressed by words because the knowledge that is obtained
by words is expressible. In Nyaya philosophy, that which is not contradictory,
defective or illusory, which is decisive, like the knowledge of two moons, is
called Pratyaksha, but this form of Pratyaksha is not logical. Because here, the
soul is self-pervasive in grasping the meaning - without depending on anything
else, the senses do not do so, that knowledge of the soul is called Pratyaksha.
Avadhijnana, Manahparyaya Jnana and Kevala Jnana are Pratyaksha, but the
knowledge that occurs through the indirect sense organ, which Nyaya philosophy
calls Pratyaksha, is indirect like Anumana etc., not Pratyaksha. It can be
called Pratyaksha in a formal sense, but where there is a context of true
thinking, formality does not prevail. According to Nyaya philosophy, Purvavat,
Seshavat and Samanyatodrishta - these are the three types of Anumana. Where the
cause is inferred from the effect, it is called Purvavat. Where the cause is
inferred from the effect, it is called Seshavat. Seeing mangoes on a mango tree,
it is inferred that all mango trees in the world have mangoes. This type of
inference is called Samanyatodrishta. Or, seeing a person like Devadatta moving
from one place to another, inferring motion in the sun is called
Samanyatodrishta, but this principle propounded in Nyaya Shastra is illogical
because otherwise, non-occurrence is the reason for inference. Cause etc. are
not because otherwise, without non-occurrence, the defect of contradiction of
the cause towards the effect is visible. But where there is non-occurrence, the
relationship of the object and the object is visible even in the absence of the
cause-effect relationship. For example, it is said that the chariot, the star
(Mrigashira) constellation will rise because the Krittika constellation is
visible. It has been said that where there is non-occurrence, what is the use of
Purvavat, Seshavat and Samanyatodrishta, i.e. they have no use. Where there is
no non-occurrence, what will be achieved by these three? It is also true that
when Pratyaksha Pramana, accepted in Nyaya Shastra, does not even come under its
category, then the Anumana that occurs before it is also not authentic - it is
also not Pramana. 1533

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM avinAbhAva sambandha hai, inake binA duHkha utpanna
nahIM hotA  /  nirjarA kA usake apane nAma ke sAtha ullekha huA hai tathA usake
phalabhUta mokSa kA bhI upAdAna-grahaNa kiyA gayA hai  /  isa prakAra itane hI
padArtha mokSa ke abhyupagama-prApti meM upayogI haiM  /  ataH inakA astitva
mAnane se hI kriyAvAda abhyupagat-svIkRta hotA hai| jo ina padArthoM ko jAnatA
hai, svIkAra karatA hai vahI vAstava meM kriyAvAda kA vettA hai  /  kahate haiM
ki anya darzanoM meM pratipAdita padArthoM ko jo jAnatA hai use Apa samyakvAdI
kyoM nahIM svIkAra karate haiM ? isake uttara meM batAte haiM ki nyAya darzana
meM pramANa, prameya, saMzaya, prayojana, dRSTAnta, siddhAnta, avayava, tarka,
nirNaya, vAda, jalpa, vitaNDA, hetvAbhAsa, chala, jAti tathA nigraha sthAna-ye
solaha padArtha svIkAra haiM  /  inameM heya-tyAgane yogya padArthoM se nivRtti-
haTanA tathA upAdeya padArthoM meM pravRtti-pravRtta honA inake kAraNa jo
padArthoM ke svarUpa kA nizcaya karAtA hai use pramANa kahA jAtA hai  /  jisake
dvArA padArtha mApe jAte haiM-samyak rUpa meM parakhe jAte aura jAne jAte haiM
vaha pramANa hai  /  pratyakSa, anumAna, upamAna tathA zabda-pramANa ke cAra
bheda haiM  /  jo jJAna indriya tathA padArtha ke sannikaTa se niSpanna hotA
hai,zabdadvArA vyapadezya-akathana yogya tathA avyabhicArI-doSarahita aura
vyavasAyAtmakanizcayAtmaka hotA hai vaha pratyakSa hai  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha
hai ki jo iMdriya tathA padArtha ke sambandha se niSpanna hotA hai kiMtu
abhivyakta nahIM hotA  /  jo sukha Adi rUpa nahIM hai varan jJAna hai  /  vaha
zabda dvArA vyapadiSTa nahIM hotA kyoMki zabda dvArA jo jJAna prApta hotA hai
vahI vyapadezya hai  /  do candramAoM ke jJAna kI taraha jo vyabhicAra yukta-
doSa yukta yA bhrama yukta nahIM hai, jo nizcayAtmaka hai, nyAya darzana meM use
pratyakSa kahA jAtA hai kintu pratyakSa kA yaha svarUpa yuktiyukta nahIM hai  /
kyoMki yahAM artha ko grahaNa karane-svAyatta karane meM AtmAsAkSAta-binA kisI
anya kI apekSA liye svayaM vyApta hotI hai-indriyoM dvArA vaisA nahIM karatI,
AtmA kA vaha jJAna pratyakSa kahA jAtA hai  /  avadhijJAna manaHparyAya jJAna
tathA kevala jJAna pratyakSa haiM kintu aparaupadhi-iMdriya dvArA hone vAlA
jJAna jise nyAya darzana pratyakSa kahatA hai vaha anumAna Adi ke sadaza parokSa
hai. pratyakSa nahIM hai. aupacArika meM use pratyakSa kahA jA sakatA hai kintu
jahA tattva cintana kA prasaMga ho vahAM aupacArikatA vyApta nahIM hotI hai  /
nyAya darzana ke anusAra pUrvavat, zeSavat tathA sAmAnyatodRSTa-ye anumAna ke
tIna bheda haiM  /  kArya se jahAM kAraNa kA anumAna kiyA jAtA hai use pUrvavat
kahA jAtA hai  /  kArya se jahAM kAraNa kA anumAna hotA jAtA hai use zeSavat
kahA jAtA hai  /  Ama ke eka per3a para maMjariyAM lagI huI dekhakara yaha
anumAna kiyA jAtA hai ki saMsAra meM sabhI AmoM ke per3oM meM maMjariyAM laga
gaI hai  /  isa prakAra kA anumAna karanA sAmAnyatodRSTa kahA jAtA hai  /
athavA gatipUrvakA devadatta Adi vyakti ko eka sthAna se anya sthAna meM
dekhakara, sUrya meM gati kA anumAna karanA sAmAnyatodRSTa kahA jAtA hai kiMtu
nyAya zAstra meM pratipAdita yaha siddhAnta ayuktiyukta haiM kyoMki anyathA
anupapatti hI-anya prakAra se utpanna na honA hI anumiti kA hetu hai  /  kAraNa
Adi nahIM haiM kyoMki anyathA anupapatti ke binA kAraNa kA kArya ke prati
vyabhicAra-doSa dRSTigata hotA hai  /  kintu jahAM anyathAnupapatti hai vahAM
kArya kAraNa bhAva vidyamAna na hone ke bAvajUda gamyagamaka bhAva dRSTigocara
hotA hai  /  jaise kahA jAtA hai zakaTa, tArA (mRgazira) nakSatra udita hogA
kyoMki kRtikA nakSatra kA darzana hotA hai-vaha dikhAI detA hai  /  kahA gayA
hai jahAM anyathA anupapannatva-anyathAnupapanatva hai. vahAM pUrvavata zeSavata
tathA sAmAnyatodaSTa se kyA prayojana hai arthAt inakA koI prayojana nahIM hai
jahAM anyathAnupapatti nahIM vahAM bhI ina tInoM se kyA sadhegA  /  aisA bhI hai
jaba nyAya zAstra meM svIkRta pratyakSa pramANa kI koTi meM AtA hI nahIM to
tatpUrvaka hone vAlA anumAna kA bhI aprAmANya hai-vaha bhI pramANa nahIM hai|
1533

Page #562 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that in the context of **Upamana**
(analogy), the **Nyaya Darshan** (philosophy) says that proving an unknown
object by comparing it to a known object is called **Upamana Praman** (proof by
analogy). For example, just as a cow is, so is a bull. The purpose of this proof
is to understand the relationship between the object and its name. However,
accepting **Upamana** as a separate proof is not logical because it can be
proven by **Anupatti** (non-existence of the opposite). Therefore, **Upamana**
is included in **Anumana** (inference). Hence, **Upamana** does not arise as a
separate proof. If it is said that **Anupatti** does not occur in the context of
**Upamana**, then **Upamana** would be invalid due to the **Vyabhichar**
(inconsistency) defect.  Similarly, **Shabda Agama** (scriptural evidence) is
not all proof, but only those scriptures written by **Aapta Purush** (reliable
person) are valid. **Arhan** (omniscient), **Tirthankar** (spiritual leader) are
the only **Aapta Purush**. It is not logical to consider anyone else as
**Aapta**. This has been explained elsewhere. All these proofs are in the form
of knowledge of the **Atma** (soul). Knowledge is a quality of the **Atma**.
Therefore, it is not logical to consider it as a separate entity from the
**Atma**. If we do so, then we would have to consider qualities like **Roop**
(form), **Ras** (taste), etc., as separate entities from the objects possessing
them. If it is said that **Roop**, **Ras**, etc., are the objects of the senses,
then you can accept them as separate entities, but it is not logical because
they do not exist independently of the substance. Therefore, they are also
included in the perception of the substance. Hence, it is not appropriate to
accept them as separate entities.  Similarly, the **Nyaya Darshan** considers
**Atma**, **Sharira** (body), **Indriyaarth** (objects of senses), **Buddhi**
(intellect), **Man** (mind), **Pravritti** (action), **Dosha** (defect),
**Pretyaabhav** (afterlife), **Phal** (fruit), **Dukha** (suffering), and
**Apavarga** (liberation) as **Pramaya** (objects of knowledge). Among these,
**Atma** is considered to be the **Sarvadrishta** (all-seeing), **Sarvabhokta**
(all-experiencing). It is said to be inferable through **Ichcha** (desire),
**Dvesha** (aversion), **Prayatna** (effort), **Sukha** (pleasure), **Dukha**
(suffering), and **Jnana** (knowledge). We, the Jains, have also considered it
as the **Jiva** (living being). The **Sharira** is the **Bhogayatan** (object of
enjoyment) of the **Atma**, and the **Indriya** (senses) are also
**Bhogayatan**. The objects of the senses are **Bhogya** (enjoyable) for the
**Atma**. We, the Jains, have also accepted this **Sharira**, etc., as
**Jivaajiva** (living and non-living). **Upayoga** (use) is called **Buddhi**.
It is a type of **Jnana**. Therefore, it is a quality of the **Jiva**. It is
also included in the perception of the **Jiva**. The **Antahkaran** (inner
organ) is that which perceives all objects. It is called **Man**. According to
the **Nyaya Darshan**, the knowledge of all senses does not arise
simultaneously. The **Man** has a collective knowledge of them. From the Jain
perspective, it is the **Dravya Man** (substance mind) and is **Paudgalik**
(made of **Pudgala**). It is included in the **Ajiva** (non-living). The **Bhav
Man** (mental state) is a quality of the **Atma**. It is included in the
perception of the **Jiva**. **Pravritti** is the cause of the **Atma's**
experience of pleasure and pain. The **Nyaya Darshan** considers it as a
separate entity from the **Atma**, which is not logical because **Pravritti** is
called **Atmeccha** (desire of the **Atma**). Therefore, it is a quality of the
**Atma**. Being in the form of the **Atma's** intention, it is a type of special
knowledge. That which contaminates the **Atma** is called **Dosha** (defect).
For example, this **Sharira** of the **Atma** is not new, it has been existing
since the beginning because it is **Anadi** (beginningless). It is also not the
end because it is **Anant** (infinite) from the perspective of the flow of birth
and death. Considering this **Sharira** as **Aparva** (new) and **Shant**
(peaceful) is also a **Adhyavasaya Dosha** (defect of wrong belief). Or,
**Raga** (attachment), **Dvesha** (aversion), and **Moha** (delusion), etc., are
called **Dosha**. These **Dosha** are also the specific intention of the
**Jiva**. Therefore, they are included in the **Jiva**. Hence, they cannot be
called separate entities. The existence of the afterlife is **Pretyaabhav**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram upamAna ke saMbaMdha meM nyAya darzana meM kahA jAtA
hai-prasiddha padArtha kI samAnatA se sAdhya-aprasiddha padArtha kA sAdhana
karanA-use siddha karanA upamAna pramANa kahA jAtA hai  /  yathA jaisI gAya hotI
hai vaisA hI gavayaroja hotA hai| saMjJA ke sAtha saMjJI-saMjJA dvArA sacita
padArtha ke saMbaMdha kI pratipatti-bodha honA isa pramANa kA artha-phala yA
prayojana hai kiMtu upamAna ko pRthaka pramANa ke rUpa meM svIkRta karanA
yuktisaMgata nahIM hai kyoMki yahA bhI anyathA anupapatti se hI yaha siddha ho
jAtA hai-saMjJA va saMjJI ke saMbaMdha kA jJAna ho jAtA hai  /  ata: yahA~
anumAna kA bhI lakSaNa ghaTita hotA hai  /  anumAna meM hI isakA antarbhAva-
samAveza ho jAtA hai  /  isaliye upamAna pRthaka pramANa ke rUpa meM utpanna
nahIM hotA-siddha nahIM hotA  /  yadi kahA jAya ki upamAna ke saMdarbha meM
anupapatti ghaTita nahIM hotI taba to vyabhicAra-doSa Ane ke kAraNa upamAna kI
aprAmANikatA spaSTa hai  /  isI prakAra zAbda-Agama bhI saba pramANa nahIM hai
kintu jo Apta puruSa dvArA praNIta haiM ve hI-unhIM AgamoM kA prAmANya hai-
prAmANikatA hai  /  arhan-sarvajJAtA, tIrthaMkara hI Apta puruSa haiM  /  unase
bhinna anya kisI ko Apta mAnanA yuktisaMgata nahIM hai  /  yaha anyatra batalAyA
jA cukA hai| yaha samasta pramANa AtmA ke jJAna rUpa hai  /  jJAna AtmA kA guNa
hai  /  ataH use AtmA se bhinna padArtha mAnanA yuktiyukta nahIM hai  /  vaisA
mAnane para rUpa, rasa Adi guNoM ko bhI tattad guNavAna padArthoM se pRthak
padArtha mAnanA hogaa| yadi kahA jAya rUpa, rasa Adi iMdriyoM ke artha haiM  /
ata: inako prameyoM ke rUpa meM bhinna padArtha svIkAra kiyA gayA hai, ThIka hai
Apa svIkAra kara sakate haiM kiMtu aisA karanA yukti saMgata nahIM hai kyoMki
dravya se pRthak unakA astitva nahIM hai  /  ataH dravya ke grahaNa se ve bhI
gRhita ho jAte haiM, aisA siddha hai  /  ataH unakA pRthak padArthoM ke rUpa meM
svIkAra karanA upayukta nahIM hai  /  isI prakAra nyAya darzana meM AtmA,
zarIra, indriyArtha, buddhi, mana, pravRtti, doSa, pretyabhAva, phala, duHkha
evaM apavarga-inheM prameya kahA gayA hai  /  inameM AtmA ko sarvadRSTA, sarva
bhoktA mAnA gayA hai, use icchA, dveSa, prayatna, sukha, duHkha tathA jJAna
dvArA anumeya batalAyA gayA hai  /  use hamane jainoM ne bhI jIva padArtha ke
rUpa meM gahIta kiyA hai| zarIra usa AtmA kA bhogAyatana hai tathA iMdriyAM bhI
bhogAyatana hai  /  iMdriyoM ke artha viSaya usake bhogya-bhoge jAne ke yogya
haiM  /  yaha zarIra Adi bhI hama jainoM dvArA jIvAjIva ke rUpa meM svIkAra kiye
gaye haiM  /  upayoga ko buddhi kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha jJAna kA eka bheda hai  /
ataH vaha jIva kA-AtmA kA guNa hai  /  jIva ke grahaNa karane se yaha bhI gRhIta
ho jAtA hai  /  samasta padArthoM ko jo gRhIta karatA hai vaha anta:karaNa hai
/  use mana kahA jAtA hai  /  nyAya darzana ke anusAra yugapata-eka sAtha
samasta iMdriyoM ke jJAna anutpanna hai  /  mana dvArA unakA saMkalanAtmaka
jJAna rahatA hai-adhigata hotA hai  /  jaina dRSTi se vaha dravya mana hai tathA
paudgalika-pudgalamaya hai  /  jo ajIva ke grahaNa se gRhIta ho jAtA hai-ajIva
ke antargata A jAtA hai| bhAva mana to AtmA kA guNa hai  /  vaha jIva ke grahaNa
se gRhIta ho jAtA hai  /  AtmA ke sukhaduHkhAtmaka saMvedana kI niSpatti kA
kAraNa pravRtti hai  /  nyAya darzana meM ise AtmA se pRthak padArtha mAnA gayA
hai jo yuktiyukta nahIM hai kyoMki AtmecchA-AtmA kI abhilASA yA vAJchA ko
pravRtti kahA gayA hai  /  isaliye vaha AtmA kA hI guNa hai  /  AtmA ke
abhiprAya kA rUpa liye hone ke kAraNa vaha eka prakAra se jJAna vizeSa hI hai  /
jo AtmA ko dUSita-vikRta karatA hai, use dApa kara jAtA hai  /  jaise isa AtmA
kA yaha zarIra apUrva nahIM hai, pahale se calA A rahA hai kyoMki yaha anAdi
haiM yaha antima bhI nahIM haiM, kyoMki saMtati-janma maraNa ke pravAha kI dRSTi
se yaha ananta hai  /  isa zarIra ko aparva tathA zAMta mAnane kA bhI
adhyavasAya doSa hai| athavA rAga dveSa tathA moha Adi doSa kahe jAte haiM, ye
doSa bhI jIva kA viziSTa abhiprAya hai  /  isaliye yaha jIva meM hI
antarbhUtasamAviSTa ho jAtA hai, ataH ise pRthak padArtha nahIM kahA jA sakatA
/  paraloka kA sadbhAva-astittva pretyabhAva 534

Page #563 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of Samvasarana is also acquired through the perception of the living
and non-living, along with its means. Experiencing happiness and suffering is
called fruit, which is also a category of the living being, hence it falls under
the living being. It should not be considered as a separate substance. Suffering
takes the form of various obstacles, hence it is also not different from the
fruit. That which is the severance of the tradition of birth and death and the
destroyer of all suffering is called liberation. We Jains accept it in this
form. What is this? Such indeterminate-uncertain knowledge is called doubt. It
is also a quality of the soul, just like the knowledge of decision. That which
is used, for the sake of which meaning a person is inclined, is called purpose,
it is also a special form of desire, hence it is a quality of the soul. That
meaning in which there is no difference of opinion between the opponent and the
supporter is called an example, it is also other than the living and non-living
- it is one, it is connected to one, hence its separate substantiality is not
logical because believing so will lead to irrelevance? In Nyaya Darshan, it is
later accepted by the perception of the components. There are four types of
principles - such as (1) that meaning of one's own scripture which is not
contradictory or unfavorable to all other scriptures, or is consistent, is
called the universal principle. For example, touch etc. are senses and there are
objects of touch etc. senses. The perception of the object by evidence is
knowledge, these are universal principles. (2) The principle which is accepted
in one scripture but not in other scriptures is called the relative principle,
such as those who believe in Sankhya Darshan do not believe in the benefit of
the self of the non-existent - the existence of the non-existent substance and
the complete destruction of the existent substance. It has been said that the
non-existent - the non-existent substance does not have existence and the
absence of the existent substance is not non-existence. This principle is not
accepted by other philosophies. (3) That which, when proved, proves other
substances in a relevant way, is called the principle of argument. For example,
there is a knower-knowing soul, different from the senses, because one meaning
is perceived from sight and touch, there many meanings are perceived in a
relevant way, such as the senses are different, they perceive their own definite
objects. The perception of their own objects is the identification of their
existence, they are the means of knowledge of the knower-soul The substance
which is the argument-support of those categories, different from the individual
from the categories, is the substance. Consciousness is not fixed in its object,
it does not have any fixed object, it is present in all objects. Here, after the
first meaning is proved, all these meanings are proved on their own because
without them, the first meaning is not possible, hence this is the principle of
argument. (4) Accepting a meaning without examination-examination and then
examining its characteristics is the principle of assumption, such as - in the
context of the consideration of the word, someone says - the word may be a
substance, but is it eternal or non-eternal? Considering in this way is the
principle of assumption. These four principles accepted in Nyaya Darshan are not
different from any particular knowledge - they are special forms of knowledge,
therefore accepting them separately is illogical. Now the components are
described. Promise, reason, example, application and conclusion - these are the
five components. The indication of the object - telling the meaning of the
object is the promise. For example, saying that the word is eternal and saying
that the word is non-eternal is a promise. That which makes the meaning
contained in the promise known - makes it independent, is called the reason,
such as the word is non-eternal because being born is its nature, here the
nature of the word being born is the reason.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM hai, yaha bhI apane sAdhanoM ke sAtha jIva evaM ajIva
ke grahaNa se upAtta hai  /  sukha tathA duHkha bhoganA phala kahA yaha bhI jIva
kA hI gaNa hai, ataH jIva ke antargata A jAtA hai| isako eka pRthaka padArtha ke
rUpa meM nahIM batAnA cAhiye  /  duHkha vividha prakAra kI bAdhAoM kA rUpa liye
hue hai, ataH vaha bhI phala se atirikta-bhinna nahIM hai  /  jo janma aura
matya ke prabaMdha-paramparA kA vicchedana tathA samagra da:khoM kA vinAzaka hai
use mokSa kahA jAtA hai  /  hama jainoM dvArA vaha isI rUpa meM upAtta-svIkRta
hai  /  yaha kyA hai ? isa prakAra kA anavadhAraNAtmaka-anizcayAtmaka jJAna
saMzaya kahA jAtA hai  /  yaha bhI nirNaya jJAna kI jyoM AtmA kA hI guNa hai  /
jisase prayukta hokara-jisa artha ke nimitta manuSya pravRtta hotA hai use
prayojana kahate haiM, yaha bhI icchA kA hI eka vizeSa rUpa hai, ataH AtmA kA hI
guNa hai  /  jisa artha meM vipratipatti-vAdI evaM prativAdI kA koI matAntara
nahIM hotA use dRSTAnta kahA jAtA hai, vaha bhI jIva tathA ajIva meM se
anyattara hai-koI eka hai, kisI eka se saMbaddha hai, ata: usakI pRthak
padArthatA yuktiyukta nahIM hai kyoMki aisA mAnane se atiprasaMgaaprAsAMgikatA
hogI? nyAyadarzana meM Age calakara avayavoM ke grahaNa dvArA use gRhIta kiyA
gayA hai  /  siddhAMta ke cAra bheda haiM-jaise (1) apane zAstra kA vaha artha
jo anya sabhI zAstroM se aviruddha-apratikUla yA saMgata ho, vaha sarvatantra
siddhAnta kahalAtA hai  /  udAharaNArtha-sparzana Adi iMdriyAM haiM tathA sparza
Adi iMdriyoM ke viSaya hai  /  pramANoM dvArA prameya kA grahaNa parijJAna hotA
hai, ye sarvatantra siddhAnta hai  /  (2) jo siddhAnta kisI eka zAstra meM mAnA
jAtA hai kintu anya zAstroM meM nahIM mAnA jAtA vaha pratitantra siddhAnta kahA
jAtA hai jaise sAMkhya darzana meM vizvAsa karane vAle asat kA Atma lAbha-asat
padArtha kI sattA aura sat padArtha kA sarvathA vinAza nahIM mAnate  /  kahA
gayA hai, asat kA-asat padArtha kA bhAva sattA nahIM hotI aura sat padArtha kA
abhAvaasattA nahIM hotii| yaha siddhAnta anya darzanoM dvArA svIkRta nahIM hai
/  (3) jisake siddha hone para anya padArtha prAsAMgika rUpa meM siddha ho jAte
haiM, use adhikaraNa siddhAnta kahA jAtA hai  /  jaise iMdriya vyatirikta-
iMdriyoM se bhinna jJAtA-jAnane vAlI AtmA hai kyoMki darzana se tathA sparza se
eka artha gRhIta hotA hai vahAM prAsAMgika rUpa meM aneka artha gRhIta ho jAte
haiM jaise indriyAM bhinnabhinna hai, ve niyata-apane apane nizcita viSaya ko
gRhIta karatI hai  /  apane apane viSayoM kA grahaNa unake astitva kI pahacAna
hai, ve jJAtA-AtmA ke jJAna kI sAdhana gaNoM se vyakti bhinna una gaNoM kA
adhikaraNa-Azraya dravya hai| cetanA aniyata viSayaka haiusake koI niyata viSaya
nahIM hai, vaha saba viSayoM meM vyApta hai  /  yahAM pahale artha ke siddha ho
jAne para ye saba artha apane Apa siddha ho jAte haiM kyoMki unake binA pahale
kA artha saMbhava hI nahIM hotA, ataH yaha adhikaraNa siddhAnta hai  /  (4)
aparIkSita-parIkSA kiye binA hI kisI artha ko abhyupagata kara-svIkAra kara
usakI vizeSatAoM kA parIkSaNa karanA abhyupagama siddhAnta hai jaise-zabda ke
vicAra ke prasaMga meM koI kahatA hai-zabda dravya bhale hI ho para kyA vaha
nitya hai yA anitya hai ? isa rUpa meM vicAra karanA abhyupagama siddhAnta hai
/  nyAya darzana meM svIkRta ye cAroM hI siddhAnta jJAna vizeSa se kucha bhinna
nahIM hai-jJAna ke hI vizeSa rUpa hai, isaliye inheM pRthak svIkAra karanA
ayuktiyukta hai  /  aba avayavoM kA varNana kiyA jAtA hai  /  pratijJA, hetu,
udAharaNa, upanaya evaM nigamana-ye pAMca avayava hai  /  sAdhya kA nirdeza-
sAdhya artha ko batAnA pratijJA hai  /  jaise zabda nitya hai yaha kahanA tathA
zabda anitya hai, yaha kahanA pratijJA hai  /  pratijJA meM nihita artha ko jo
prati jJAta karAtA hai-svAyatta karAtA hai, use hetu kahA jAtA hai jaise zabda
anitya hai kyoMki utpanna honA usakA svabhAva hai, yahAM zabda kI
utpattidharmakattva hetu hai| 535)

Page #564 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The *Sutrakritanga Sutra* provides examples to illustrate similarity or
dissimilarity. For example, a pot is an example of similarity. An example of
dissimilarity is the sky, which is not impermanent and therefore not created.
This is an example of how to conclude a point by stating that something is or is
not like something else. For example, a word is impermanent because it is
created. Just as a pot is created, so too is a word. If something is not
impermanent, it is permanent and not created, like the sky. A word is not like
the sky.   The repetition of the proposition and reason is called *nigamana*.
For example, "A word is impermanent because it is created." If these five
components are merely words, they are *poudgalika* and are absorbed by the non-
living. Therefore, it is not logical to consider them as separate substances. If
the five components are considered to be the knowledge generated by the word,
then it is a quality of the living being and is absorbed by the living being. If
different types of knowledge are considered to be separate substances, then
there will be an abundance of substances because there are many types of
knowledge.   After doubt, the perception of a substance is called *tarka*. For
example, "There must be a post or a man here." *Tarka* is also a specific type
of knowledge. Knowledge is inseparable from the knower. Therefore, it is not
wise to consider its different aspects as separate substances. The definitive
knowledge that comes after doubt and *tarka* is called *nirnaya*. This is also
not different from previous knowledge. It is definitive. Therefore, it is
included in the evidence of perception, etc. It is not logical to consider it as
a separate substance.   There are three types of stories: *vad*, *jalpa*, and
*vitanda*. *Vad* is where one's own point is proven and the opponent's point is
refuted using evidence and logic. It is consistent with principles, arises from
the five components, and considers both sides. It takes place between a student
and a teacher with the goal of understanding the truth. *Jalpa* is where one
tries to win by using deception, caste, and suppression to support one's own
side and refute the other side. *Vitanda* is where there is no establishment of
the opponent's side.   Jains say that these three types of stories are not
proven. In the context of contemplating the truth, only *vad* should be used to
determine the truth. Deception, *jalpa*, etc. do not lead to understanding. They
are used to deceive others and do not lead to knowledge of the truth. Even if
there are differences, their substantiality is not proven. It is logical to
accept as a substance what is truly real. *Vad* is subject to human desire and
therefore impermanent. Its substantiality is not proven. *Vad* is subject to
human desire. It also occurs between chickens and doves, so it should also be
accepted as a substance, which you do not want.   In Nyaya philosophy, there are
three types of fallacious reasons: *asiddha*, *anekantika*, and *viruddha*.
Those that appear similar to reasons are called fallacious reasons. Here is the
Jain perspective on this:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram sAdhya ke sAdharmya-samAnatA athavA vaidharmya-
asamAnatA ko lete hue dRSTAnta denA udAharaNa hai, jaise ghaTa, yaha sAdharmya
udAharaNa hai  /  vaidharmya mUlaka udAharaNa yaha hai-jaise jo anitya nahIM
hotA vaha utpatti mAna-utpattiyukta bhI nahIM hotA jaise AkAza  /  yaha tathA-
vaisA hai, usa prakAra kA hai athavA vaisA nahIM hai, usa prakAra kA nahIM hai
yoM pakSa meM dharma kA upasaMhAra karanA-sannihita karanA upanaya hai  /  jaise
zabda anitya hai kyoMki usameM kRtakatva haivaha kisI dvArA kRta-kiyA huA hai  /
jaise ghaTa, usI kI jyoM yaha bhI hai athavA anityatva kA abhAva hone para-
anitya na hone para kRtakRtva bhI nahIM hotA, jo anitya nahIM hai, nitya hai,
vaha kisI ke dvArA banAyA haA nahIM hotA, jaise AkAza  /  zabda aisA AkAza jaisA
nahIM hai  /  pratijJA tathA heta kA punarvacana-unheM phira daM nigamana kahA
jAtA hai jaise-vaisA hone ke kAraNa-kRtaka hone ke kAraNa zabda anitya hai  /
ye pAMca avayava yadi kevala zabda mAtra hai. to paudgalika hai tathA ajIva ke
grahaNa se pudgaloM kA grahaNa ho jAtA hai, ve ajIva ke antargata A jAte haiM
isaliye unakA pRthak padArtha ke rUpa meM upAdAna-svIkaraNa nyAyasaMgata nahIM
hai  /  yadi tajjanitazabda janitajJAna ko pAMca avayava kahA jAe to vaha-jJAna
jIva kA guNa hai, ata: jIva ke grahaNa se usakA upAdAna-grahaNa ho jAtA hai  /
yadi jJAna vizeSa kI padArthatA mAnI jAya-jJAna ke bhinna bhinna bhedoM yA rUpoM
ko pRthak pRthak padArtha mAnA jAya taba padArthoM kA bAhulya hogA kyoMki jJAna
ke aneka prakAra haiN| saMzaya hone ke anantara kisI padArtha ke hone kI
pratIti-paryAlocanA tarka kahA jAtA hai, jaise-yahAM sthANuDhU~Tha yA puruSa
honA caahiye| tarka bhI eka vizeSa prakAra kA jJAna hI hai  /  jJAna jJAtA se
abhinna hotA hai  /  ataH usake bhedoM kI pRthak padArthoM ke rUpa meM
parikalpanA karanA, vidvat sammata nahIM hai  /  saMzaya aura tarka kA
uttarakAlavartIunake pazcAt hone vAlA nizcayAtmaka jJAna nirNaya kahA jAtA hai
/  yaha bhI pahale kI jyoM jJAna se atirikta yA bhinna nahIM hai  /  yaha
nizcayAtmaka hai  /  isaliye pratyakSAdi pramANoM meM isakA aMtarabhAva ho jAtA
hai  /  isako pRthak padArtha ke rUpa meM nirdeza karanA nyAyasaMgata nahIM hai
/  kathAoM ke tIna bheda haiM-vAda, jalpa evaM vitnnddaa| pramANa tathA tarka
dvArA jahAM apane pakSa ko siddha kiyA jAtA hai tathA prativAdI ke pakSa ko
nirasta kiyA jAtA hai, jo siddhAnta se aviruddha-apratikUla yA anukUla hotA hai,
pAMca avayavoM se upapanna hotA hai, pakSa aura pratipakSa ko parigRhIta karatA
hai use vAda kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha tattva jJAna ke hetu-tAttvika vicAra
maMthana evaM nirNaya kA lakSya liye ziSya tathA AcArya ke madhya hotA hai; yadi
vijigISA-prativAdI ko jItane kI icchA se chala jAti tathA nigrahasthAna dvArA
apane pakSa ke sAdhana tathA para pakSa ke nirasana-khaNDana sahita hotA hai to
vaha jalpa kahalAtA hai| vaha yadi pratipakSa kI sthApanA se rahita hotA hai to
vitaNDA kahA jAtA hai  /  isa para jainoM kA kathana haiina tIna kathAoM ke
bheda niSpanna-siddha hI nahIM hote, kyoMki tattva ciMtana ke prasaMga meM
tattva kA nirNaya karane hetu vAda hI kiyA jAnA cAhiye  /  chala, jalpa Adi
dvArA avagama-nizcaya nahIM hotA, ve to paravaJcanA hetudUsaroM ko Thagane hetu
prayoga meM liye jAte haiM, unase tatvAvagati-tattvabodha nahIM hotA  /  yadi
bheda ho to bhI inakI padArthatA siddha nahIM hotI, kyoMki jo vAstava meM
paramArtha rUpa meM vastu hai, usI ko tattvata: vastu svIkAra karanA yuktiyukta
hai  /  vAda to manuSya kI icchA ke vazagata hai, ata: ve aniyata hai  /  unakI
padArthatA asiddha hai  /  vAda puruSa kI icchA ke anuvidhAyI hai-icchAnusAra
hote haiM  /  kukkuTa-murge tathA lAvaka-lave pakSiyoM ke bIca bhI pakSa aura
pratipakSa ko lekara vaha hotA hai, phira to use bhI padArtha ke rUpa meM
svIkAra karanA cAhiye jo Apako abhISTa nahIM hai| . nyAyadarzana meM asiddha,
anekAntika aura viruddha ye tIna hetvAbhAsa mAne gaye haiM  /  jo hetu ke sadRza
AbhAsita hote haiM, lagate haiM unheM hetvAbhAsa kahA jAtA hai  /  yahAM jaina
darzana kA yaha cintana hai -536)

Page #565 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of Samvāsaraṇa, which is the correct and true reason, is not accepted
as a principle. Then, how can Hetvābhāsa be considered a principle? Only that
which is fixed and certain can be a principle, but reasons are related to a
particular object and become non-reasons in relation to another object.
Therefore, they are uncertain.  Now, the topic of deception arises. When there
is a possibility of an alternative meaning, or when there is a difference in
meaning, to distort the meaning of the speaker's statement, to kill its meaning,
to change its meaning, is deception. When a speaker uses a word with a
particular meaning, with a particular intention, to imagine a different meaning
from his intended meaning is verbal deception. For example, a speaker says,
"Nava kumbalo'yam Devadattaḥ," meaning Devadatta has a new blanket. Here,
according to the speaker's intention, the analysis is "Nava kumbalo'sya,"
meaning his blanket is new. In this context, the difference or peculiarity lies
in the analysis, not in the compound word. "Navaḥ kumbalo'sya," meaning he has
nine blankets, is what the deceiver imagines. He says that Devadatta has nine
blankets. You said this, but he doesn't have nine blankets. Therefore, your
statement is not logical.  In this regard, the Jain view is that to state what
is not true is deception. If it is deception, then it is not a principle. If it
is a principle, then it is not deception. Because a principle is the ultimate
truth. Therefore, to call deception a principle is illogical.  Dūṣaṇābhāsa, the
appearance of a fault, is called a category. The Jains say that what is truly a
fault is not established as a principle, it is not considered a principle
because it is uncertain. What is well established as a fault in one place
becomes Dūṣaṇābhāsa in another place. The establishment of Dūṣaṇa and
Dūṣaṇābhāsa depends on the power and ability of the person. Therefore, it is
uncertain. It is not a principle. Then, how can a category, which takes the form
of Dūṣaṇābhāsa, be a principle, because they are unreal, they do not exist.
During a debate, the point where the speaker or the opponent is captured is
called the point of capture. For example, if the speaker uses a statement that
does not prove his intended meaning and the opponent captures its fault, then
the speaker is captured, he is caught, this is the point of capture. In
addition, other things stated in the Nyāya Darshan are mere talk. For example,
प्रतिज्ञा, हानि, प्रतिज्ञान्तर, and प्रतिज्ञा विरोध, etc. If we think about it,
this cannot be the point of capture. Even if it is called the point of capture,
it is a mistake, a fault of the person. It cannot be a principle. The qualities
and faults of the speaker are authorized only in the experience of the object.
They are not established as principles. Thus, the principles stated in the Nyāya
Darshan are not worthy of being considered as principles.  The principles
established by those who believe in the Vaisheshika Darshan are also not worthy
of being considered as principles. According to them, substance, quality,
action, genus, species, and inherence are the six principles. Among these,
earth, water, fire, air, space, time, direction, soul, and mind are the nine
substances. To accept earth, water, fire, and air separately is inappropriate
because they themselves, through the use of atoms and natural combination,
become earth, etc. Therefore, they do not abandon their substance-hood, they
only change their states.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayana ki-jo samyak-yathArtha hetu hai, vaha bhI tattva ke
rUpa meM svIkRta nahIM hai  /  phira hetvAbhAsa ko tattva mAnane kI to bAta hI
kahAM? jo vastu niyata hai-nizcita hai, vahI tattva ho sakatI hai kintu hetu
kisI sAdhya vastu ke prati hote haiM aura ve hI anya vastu ke prati ahetu bana
jAte haiM  /  ataH ve aniyata _ aba chala kA prasaMga AtA hai  /  artha ke
vikalpa kI upapatti hone se-artha kA bheda ho sakane se vAdI ke vacana kA artha
kA vighAta karanA-hanana karanA usake artha ko parivartita kara denA chala hai|
vaktA ne kisI artha vizeSa meM-kisI vizeSa abhiprAya se zabda kA prayoga kiyA
vahAM usake abhIpsita artha ke bhinna artha kI parikalpanA karanA vAk chala hai
/  jaise eka vAdI kahatA hai 'nava kambalo'yaM devadattaH' arthAt devadatta
nUtana kambala yukta hai  /  yahAM vaktA ke abhiprAya ke anusAra isakA
'navaMkambalo'sya'-isakA kambala nayA hai yaha vigraha hotA hai  /  isa prasaMga
meM vigraha meM hI vizeSatA yA bhinnatA hai, samAsa meM nahIM hai  /  "navaH
kambalo'sya" isake pAsa nau kambala hai, chalavAdI aisI kalpanA karatA hai  /
kahatA hai ki devadatta ke pAsa nau. kambala hai| yaha Apane kahA hai kintu
usake pAsa nau kambale nahIM hai| ataH ApakA kathana yukti saMgata nahIM hai  /
isa saMbaMdha meM jainoM kA kathana hai ki jo vAstava meM nahIM hai usakA
kathana karanA chala hai  /  yadi vaha chala hai to tattva nahIM hai  /  yadi
vaha tattva hai to chala nahIM hai  /  kyoMki tattvaparamArtha rUpa-satya hotA
hai  /  ataH chala ko tattva kahanA yukti viruddha hai| - dUSaNAbhAsa-doSa kA
bhAsa jAti kahA jAtA hai  /  jainoM kA kahanA hai ki jo sahI mAne meM doSa hai
vaha tattva ke rUpa meM vyavasthita nahIM hotA, tattva nahIM mAnA jAtA kyoMki
vaha aniyata hotA hai  /  jo eka jagaha bhalI bhAMti doSa ke rUpa meM vidyamAna
hai, vahI dUsarI jagaha dUSaNAbhAsa ho jAtA hai  /  dUSaNa evaM dUSaNAbhAsa kI
vyavasthiti puruSa kI zakti-sAmarthya kI apekSA rakhatI hai  /  ataH vaha
aniyata hotI hai  /  vaha tattva nahIM hai  /  phira jAti jo dUSaNAbhAsa kA rUpa
liye hue hai vaha tattva kaise ho sakatI hai kyoMki ve to avAstavika hai unakA
astitva hai nahIM  /  vAda ke samaya vAdI athavA prativAdI jisake dvArA nigRhIta
kara liye jAte haiM vaha nigraha sthAna kahA jAtA hai  /  jaise yadi vAdI apanA
aisA vacana prayoga kare jo usake sAdhya artha ko siddha nahIM karatA ho aura
prativAdI usake doSa ko nigRhIta kara le, to vAdI kA nigraha ho jAtA hai-vaha
pakar3a liyA jAtA hai, yaha nigraha sthAna hai  /  isake atirikta nyAyadarzana
meM jo anya bAteM pratipAdita haiM ve saba pralApa mAtra hai  /  jaise pratijJA,
hAni, pratijJAntara tathA pratijJA virodha ityAdi  /  yadi cintana kiyA jAye to
yaha nigraha sthAna nahIM ho sakatA  /  phira bhI yadi ise nigraha sthAna kahA
jAya to yaha puruSa kI truTi hai-doSa hai  /  yaha tattva nahIM ho sakatA  /
vaktA ke guNa evaM doSa padArthAnubhASa meM hI adhikRta kiye jAte haiM  /  ve
tattva rUpa meM nirUpita nahIM hote  /  isa prakAra nyAya darzana meM
pratipAdita tattva tattvarUpa meM Azrita kiye jAne yogya-mAne jAne yogya nahIM
hai| vaizeSikoM-vaizeSika darzana meM AsthAzIla logoM dvArA nirUpita tattva bhI
tattva ke rUpa meM mAnane yogya nahIM hai  /  unake anusAra dravya, guNa, karma,
sAmAnya, vizeSa evaM samavAya ye cha: tattva haiM  /  inameM pRthvI, apapAnI,
teja-agni, vAyu, AkAza, kAla, dizA, AtmA tathA mana ye nau dravya haiM  /
inameM pRthvI, pAnI, agni tathA vAyu ko pRthak pRthak svIkAra karanA anupapanna-
anupayukta hai kyoMki ve hI paramANu prayoga tathA svabhAva-prAkRtika saMyoga se
pRthvI Adi ke rUpa meM pariNita hote haiM  /  ataH ve dravyatva kA parityAga
nahIM karate, mAtra avasthAoM (537)

Page #566 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The question is about the distinction between the **Shree Sutra Kritanga Sutra**
and the **Dravya Bhed** (distinction of substances). It argues that considering
**Dravya Bhed** is irrelevant.   Jains accept **Aakash** (space) and **Kaal**
(time) as substances. **Disha** (direction) is a component of **Aakash**, so it
cannot be considered a separate substance.   The **Atma** (soul) is pervasive
and its characteristic is **Upayog** (use). Jains accept it as a substance.
**Man** (mind) is a specific form of **Pudgal** (matter). Therefore, it is
included in the **Pudgal Dravya** (matter substance) like an atom. **Bhav**
(emotion) is a quality of the **Jeev** (living being) and is therefore inherent
in the **Atma**.  **Vaisheshik** philosophers argue that **Prithvi** (earth)
exists due to the presence of **Prithvitva** (earthness). This is just their
interpretation. There is no separate entity called **Prithvitva** that creates
**Prithvi Dravya** (earth substance).  Everything in the world is a combination
of **Samaanya** (general) and **Vishesh** (specific). For example, **Narasimha**
(half-man, half-lion) has the characteristics of both **Manav** (human) and
**Singh** (lion). Therefore, a **Ghata** (pot) is not completely identical to
**Mrittika** (clay) because there is a clear distinction between them. However,
they are not completely different either because the **Ghata** contains
**Mrittika**. Therefore, the **Ghata** is partially different and partially
identical to **Mrittika**. It is a substance of a different category. Similarly,
**Narasimha** is not just a **Manav** because it also has the form of a
**Singh**. It is also not a **Singh** because it has the form of a **Manav**.
Therefore, due to the difference in **Shabd** (word), **Vishesh Gyan** (specific
knowledge), and **Kary** (function), **Narasimha** is a substance of a different
category.  **Vaisheshiks** believe that **Roop** (form), **Ras** (taste),
**Gandh** (smell), and **Sparsh** (touch) are qualities of **Roop-Moort Dravya**
(concrete substances). **Sankhya** (number), **Pariman** (quantity),
**Prithaktva** (separateness), **Sanyog** (combination), **Vibhag** (division),
**Paratva** (externality), and **Aparatva** (internality) are general qualities
because they are present in all substances. **Buddhi** (intellect), **Sukha**
(happiness), **Dukha** (suffering), **Ichchha** (desire), **Dvesh** (hatred),
**Prayatna** (effort), **Dharma** (righteousness), **Adharma**
(unrighteousness), and **Sanskar** (impressions) are qualities of the **Atma**.
**Prithvi** and **Udk** (water) have **Gurutva** (gravity). **Prithvi**, **Jal**
(water), and **Tej** (fire) have **Dravyatva** (substance). **Sneha**
(smoothness) is only present in **Jal**. **Veg** (speed) is a **Sanskar**
present in concrete substances. **Shabd** is a quality of **Aakash**.  Jains
argue that **Sankhya** etc., which are general qualities, are not inherent
qualities of **Roop** etc., but are **Upaadhi** (attributes) of other things.
Therefore, they are not qualities. Even if they are considered qualities, they
cannot be separated from substances. If they are separated, the very nature of
the substance will cease to exist. According to the **Tattvarth Sutra** (Chapter
5), a substance is that which has qualities and **Paryaya** (modifications). A
substance cannot exist without qualities. Therefore, by accepting a substance,
one accepts its qualities. This is logical. It is not necessary to consider them
as separate entities.  "**Tasyabhavastatvam**" - The essence of a substance is
its **Bhav** (nature), **Dharma** (characteristic), or **Swaroop** (form). The
quality that allows a substance to have **Shabd** is called **Shabd** according
to the **Tattvatatvou** Sutra. A **Ghata** is **Rakta** (red) in color. **Jal**
is **Aaharaka** (nourishing). All substances that have these qualities are
called **Ghata**. Here, the **Bhav** of **Ghata** is **Ghatatva**, the **Bhav**
of **Rakta** is **Raktatva**, the **Bhav** of **Aahar** is **Aaharakatva**, and
the **Bhav** of **Jalavan** is **Jalavatva**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kA bheda hotA hai  /  isase dravya bheda mAnanA
aprAsaMgika hai  /  AkAza, kAla ko to hamane bhI (jainoM ne bhI) dravya rUpa meM
svIkAra kiyA hai  /  dizA AkAza ke avayava kA rUpa liye hue haiM  /  ataH use
bhI pRthak dravya svIkAra nahIM kiyA jA sakatA kyoMki aisA karanA aprAsaMgika
hogA  /  AtmA jo svazarIra vyApI hai tathA jisakA lakSaNa-svabhAva upayoga hai
usakA dravyatva to hamane bhI svIkAra kiyA hai  /  mana pudgala vizeSa kA rUpa
liye hue hai  /  ataH usakA paramANu kI jyoM pudgala dravya meM hI antarabhAva-
samAveza ho jAtA hai  /  bhAva mana jIva kA guNa hai  /  isaliye vaha AtmA meM
hI antarabhUta hai  /  vaizeSika matavAdI yoM abhihita karate haiM ki pRthvItva
ke yoga se pRthvI hai-pRthvI kA astitva hai ityAdi  /  yaha bhI apanI prakriyA
mAtra-apane darzana kI vyAkhyA mAtra hai kyoMki pRthvI se pRthak pRthvItva koI
tattva-koI padArtha nahIM hai jisake yoga se pRthvI dravya niSpanna ho  /
saMsAra meM jo bhI dekhA jAtA hai vaha saba sAmAnya vizeSAtmaka hai  /
udAharaNArtha jaise narasiMha kA AkAra ubhaya-svabhAva mAnava evaM siMha donoM
kA rUpa liye hue haiM  /  ata: kahA gayA hai ghar3e kA mRtikA ke sAtha ekAnta
rUpa meM abheda-abhinnatA nahIM hai kyoMki inameM spaSTatayA bheda kI pratIti
hotI hai  /  ekAntataH bheda bhI nahIM hai, kyoMki ghaTa meM mRttikA kA saMsarga
hai-ghaTa meM mRttikA vidyamAna hai  /  ataH ghaTa jo mRttikA ke sAtha kathaJcit
bheda yukta tathA kathaJcit abheda yukta hai  /  vaha eka anya jAti kA padArtha
hai tathA narasiMha mAtra nara-manuSya nahIM hai kyoMki isameM siMha rupatva bhI
vidyamAna hai-usameM siMha kA rUpa dRSTigata hotA hai, evaM vaha siMha bhI nahIM
hai kyoMki usameM manuSya kA rUpa bhI hai  /  ataH zabda, viziSTa jJAna tathA
kArya kI bhinnatA hone ke kAraNa narasiMha eka bhinna jAtIya padArtha hai,
ityAdi  /  vaizeSikoM kI yaha mAnyatA hai ki rUpa, rasa, gaMdha tathA sparza-
yaha rUpI-mUrta dravyoM meM rahate haiN| isaliye yaha unake vizeSa guNa hai,
aura saMkhyA, parimANa, pRthakatva, saMyoga vibhAga, paratva evaM aparatva-ye
sAmAnya guNa hai kyoMki inakI vRtti sabhI dravyoM meM hai-ye sabhI dravyoM meM
prApta hote haiM  /  buddhi, sukha, duHkha, icchA, dveSa, prayatna, dharma,
adharma aura saMskAra-ye Atma guNa haiM  /  pRthvI aura udka-jala meM gurutva
hai  /  pRthvI, jala evaM teja-agni meM dravyatva hai  /  sneha-cikanApana
kevala jala meM hI hai  /  vega nAmaka saMskAra mUrta dravyoM meM hI avasthita
hai| zabda AkAza kA guNa hai| isa saMbaMdha meM jainoM kA kathana hai ki saMkhyA
Adi jo sAmAnya guNa hai ve rUpa Adi kI jyoM dravyoM ke svabhAva nahIM hai  /
apitu ve para-anyoM ke upAdhi rUpa hote haiM  /  ataH ve guNa nahIM hote haiN|
yadi unheM guNa kahA jAya to bhI unako dravyoM se pRthak vyavasthita nahIM kiyA
jA sakatA-nahIM mAnA jA sakatA, kyoMki unako dravyoM se pRthak svIkAra karane
para dravya ke svarUpa kA bhI astitva nahIM rahegA  /  (tattvArthasUtra adhyAya
5 sUtra ke) anusAra jo guNoM aura paryAyoM se yukta hotA hai, use dravya kahA
jAtA hai, guNoM ke binA dravya nahIM hotA, ataH dravya ke grahaNa se guNa gRhIta
ho jAte haiM  /  yaha yuktisaMgata hai  /  unakA pRthakabhAva-unheM pRthak
padArtha mAnanA Avazyaka nahIM hai| "tasyabhAvastatvam"-jisa padArtha kA jo
bhAva-dharma yA svarUpa hotA hai use tatva kahate haiM  /  jisa guNa ke hone se
dravya meM zabda kA niveza-praveza yA prayoga hotA hai, usa guNa ko batAne hetu
"tattvatatvau" sUtra ke anusAra zabda ke sAtha bhAva pratyaya hotA hai  /
ghaTa-ghar3A, rakta-lAla raMga kA hai  /  jala kA AhAraka-lAne vAlA hai,
jalavAna hai-apane meM jala ko sthApita rakhatA hai-sabhI dvArA aise padArtha-
vastu ko ghaTa kahA jAtA hai  /  yahAM ghaTa kA bhAva ghaTattva, rakta kA bhAva
raktatva, AhAra kA bhAva AhArakatva tathA jalavAna kA bhAva jalavatva kahA 538)

Page #567 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the Samvasarana is being undertaken. Here, the relationship of the
general from the gross to the specific from the subtle, of the blood quality
from the blood essence, of the nourishing action from the nourishment, and of
the water substance from the water quality is indicated. In the water vessel
called Kutka, which is capable of holding the gross, round, and watery
substance, the word "Ghata" is used. Therefore, the suffixes "tva" and "tal" are
used with the word "Ghata" to indicate these qualities. To clarify this, a
question is raised: "What is the quality called 'Rakt' that makes the pot
'Rakt'?" What is the substance that the word is inserted into, with which the
भाव (भाव) suffix is used? Is it "Raktasyā bhāvo raktatvam" - the essence of
blood - redness is raktatva - redness? This should be the case. In response, it
is said: "It should be the case, but it can be so formally, because just as
blood can be considered a substance formally, its general essence can be called
raktatva. However, the element of formality has no use in the context of
contemplation. The word's efficacy lies only in its means - its usefulness lies
only in its being a means. The word is not a quality of space because the word
is नौद्गलिक (naudgalik) - concrete, and space is अमूर्त (amurt) - abstract. The
rest of the substances described in the Vaisheshika philosophy are merely
explanations of its process. Therefore, they are neither instrumental in any
purpose nor are they its corrupt form or obstacle. It is reasonable to assume
that the action that resides in the substance through the relationship of समवाय
(samavāya) is not a separate element like the quality. Now, let's discuss the
general. According to the Vaisheshikas, there are two types of general: पर
(para) and अपर (apara). The great power that pervades substances like dravya,
etc., is called परसामान्य (parasamanya). It has been said: "The existence that
is perceived in dravya, guna, and karma is that existence." Dravyatva, gunatva,
and karmatva are अपर सामान्य (apara samanya). The Jains say that it is not
reasonable to accept the great power as a separate substance because the
existence that is perceived in that power is just like the perception of
existence. Is it bound by another existence? Does it exist because of another,
or does it exist on its own? If it is said that it exists because of the binding
of another existence, then it will be a choice whether the perception of
existence in this other existence comes from something else. This choice will
continue further. Thus, the अनवस्था (anavastā) fault will arise. If you say that
the perception of existence in the great power exists on its own, not from any
other thing, then the perception of existence in dravya, etc., will exist on its
own. Then, why should another existence be imagined, like the udder of a goat's
neck, which is useless? The second point is this: you accept the perception of
existence in dravya, etc., through existence, considering them to be existent,
or do you consider them to be non-existent? If you consider them to be existent,
then the perception of existence will be on its own. Then, what will be the need
for existence for the perception of existence? If you accept the perception of
existence in dravya, etc., through existence, considering them to be non-
existent, then it is possible to perceive existence in the horns of a rabbit,
etc., through the combination of existence. Therefore, it has been said:
"Substances are themselves existent - their own existence is that which is
सदात्मक (sadātmaka), what need do they have for existence? Substances that are
असदात्मक (asadātmaka) - non-existent, do not have existence, and if they do,
then it will also be relevant in the case of the horns of a rabbit, etc., which
is अतिप्रसंग (atiprasanga) - irrelevant. The same faults that apply here in the
context of the great power are also applicable in the case of dravyatva, etc.,
अपर सामान्य (apara samanya), because their existence is the same. We also accept
things as general and specific from some perspective. The general is not
different from dravya, therefore, it is also included in the acceptance of
dravya. Now, the specifics are discussed. In the Vaisheshika philosophy, a
substance called विशेष (visesha) is considered. The Vaisheshikas say that it is
the विशेष (visesha) that is the reason for the extreme exclusion of knowledge in
dravya, etc. - through it (539

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayana jAtA hai  /  yahAM ghaTatva se ghaTa sAmAnya kA
raktattva se rakta guNa kA tathA AhArakatva se AhArana kriyA kA jalavatva se
jala dravya kA sambandha sUcita hai  /  ina guNoM se yukta moTe golAkAra
jatalAne meM samartha kuTakAkhya saMjJaka jalapAtra meM ghaTa saMjJaka zabda kA
abhiniveSa-praveza yA prayoga hotA hai  /  isaliye ina guNoM ko jJApita karane
hetu ghaTa zabda ke sAtha tva aura tal pratyaya hote haiM  /  isake spaSTIkaraNa
hetu prazna uThAte hue kahA jAtA hai-rakta nAmaka maha kaunasA guNa hai jisake
hone se ghar3A rakta kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha kauna sA dravya hai, jisase zabda
sanniveza hotA hai, jisake sAtha bhAva pratyaya hotA hai, kyA "raktasya bhAvo
raktatvam"-rakta kA-lAla kA bhAva raktatvalAlimA hotA hai  /  aisA honA cAhiye
/  uttara meM kahA jAtA hai-honA cAhiye kiMtu upacAra se-aupacArika rUpa meM
aisA ho sakatA hai kyoMki jaise rakta ko upacAra se dravya mAnakara usake
sAmAnya bhAva ko raktatva kahA jA sakatA hai kintu upacAra kA tatva ciMtana ke
prasaMga meM koI upayoga nahIM hai  /  zabda siddhi meM hI-zabda ke sAdhana
mAtra meM hI usakI kRtArthatA-upayogitA hai  /  zabda AkAza kA guNa hotA hI
nahIM kyoMki zabda naudgalika hai-mUrta hai tathA AkAza amUrta hai-vaizeSika
darzana meM nirUpita bAkI ke padArtha kevala usakI prakriyA mAtravyAkhyA mAtra
hai  /  isaliye ve na kisI prayojana ke sAdhaka hai tathA na usake dUSaNa rUpa
yA bAdhaka hI haiM  /  dravya meM samavAya saMbaMdha se rahane vAlI kriyA bhI
guNa kI jyoM pRthak tatva nahIM hai-yoM mAnanA yuktisaMgata hai  /  aba sAmAnya
kI carcA karate haiM  /  vaizeSikoM ke anusAra para evaM apara ke rUpa meM
sAmAnya ke do bheda haiM  /  dravya Adi padArthoM meM vyApta mahAsattA ko
parasAmAnya kahA jAtA hai  /  kahA gayA hai-dravya guNa tathA karma meM jo sattA
kI-astitva kI pratIti hotI hai vaha sattA hai  /  dravyatva, guNatva evaM
karmatva apara sAmAnya haiM  /  jainoM kA kathana hai ki mahAsattA ko pRthak
padArtha svIkAra karanA yuktisaMgata nahIM hai kyoMki usa sattA meM sat hone
kIastitva kI jyoM pratIti hotI hai  /  vaha kyA kisI apara-anya sattA se
nibaddha hai ? anya ke hone se hotI hai athavA svataH hotI hai  /  yadi yaha
kahA jAya ki apara sattA ke nibandhana se vaha hotI hai to phira yaha vikalpa
hogA ki isa aparasattA meM sat hone kI pratIti kisase hotI hai  /  yaha vikalpa
Age se Age calegA  /  yoM anavasthA doSa upasthita hogA  /  yadi kaho ki
mahAsattA meM svataH hI sat hone kI-astitva kI pratIti hotI hai, kisI anya vastu
se nahIM to phira dravya Adi meM svataH hI sat pratyaya-sattA kI pratIti hogI  /
phira ajA ke galastana-bakarI ke gale ke stana ke samAna nirarthaka hI eka anya
sattA kI kalpanA kyoM kI jAya  /  dUsarI bAta yaha hai-dravya Adi jo sat hai
unheM vaisA mAnakara unameM Apa sattA ke dvArA sat kI pratIti svIkAra karate
haiM, yA unako asat mAnakara  /  yadi unheM sat mAnate ho taba to svayaM hI sat
kI pratIti hogI  /  phira sat kI pratIti hetu sattA kI kyA AvazyakatA rahegI ?
yadi dravya Adi asat mAnate hue unameM sattA dvArA sat kI pratIti svIkAra karate
ho, taba ko zazaviSANa-kharagoza ke sIMga Adi meM bhI sattA ke yoga se sat kI
pratIti saMbhAvita hai  /  ataeva kahA gayA hai-padArtha svayaM hI sat hai-
svayaM unakA astitva hai jo sadAtmaka hai, unheM sattA kI kyA AvazyakatA hai  /
jo padArtha asadAtmaka-asat hai, astitvahIna hai, unameM sattA svIkAra hI nahIM
kI jA sakatI, kI jAya to zazaviSANa Adi meM bhI usakA prasaMga banegA  /  jo
atiprasaMga-aprAsAMgika hai  /  yahI doSa jo yahAM mahAsattA ke saMdarbha meM
lAgU hote haiM  /  dravyatva Adi apara sAmAnya meM bhI AyojanIya hai, kyoMki ina
donoM kA yogakSema-TikAva eka hI hai  /  hama bhI kathaMcita-kisI apekSA se
vastu ko sAmAnya vizeSAtmaka svIkAra karate haiM  /  sAmAnya dravya se kiJcit
avyatirikta-abhinna hai, ataH dravya ke grahaNa se vaha bhI gRhIta ho jAtA hai
/  aba vizeSoM kI carcA kI jAtI hai  /  vaizeSika darzana meM vizeSa nAma kA eka
padArtha mAnA jAtA hai  /  vaizeSika aisA kahate haiM ki dravyAdi meM vizeSa hI
atyanta vyAvRtti buddhi ke hetu hai-usa dvArA (539

Page #568 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Sri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that a substance is identified by its
distinctness from other substances. In this regard, we consider whether the
special qualities that possess specific intelligence are dependent on any other
special quality. If they are dependent on another special quality, it cannot be
said so because this dependence will continue indefinitely, leading to the
fallacy of infinite regress. Therefore, just as special qualities possess
specific intelligence without other special qualities, similarly, specific
intelligence can be attributed to substances like dravya (matter). Then why
should a separate substance called "special quality" be considered besides
dravya? We also accept that special qualities are not distinct from dravya,
because all substances are generally characterized by special qualities. The
Vaisheshika school believes that special qualities are eternal and reside in
dravya, and they are also final, residing in everything. There are four types of
eternal dravya: atoms, liberated souls, and liberated minds. Special qualities
exist in these. This statement is arbitrary, illogical, and incomprehensible. It
is merely an explanation given by them. In Vaisheshika philosophy, a substance
called "samavaya" (inherence) is considered. It is said that "samavaya" is the
cause of perception in substances that are mutually dependent and inseparable.
It is eternal and one. Considering it eternal would make all the inherents
eternal. If the inherents are considered non-eternal, then "samavaya" would also
be non-eternal because the inherents are its basis. Due to the oneness of
"samavaya," all inherents would be considered one, which would create a
difficulty. If the inherents are considered many, then "samavaya" would also be
many.  In Vaisheshika philosophy, "samavaya" is accepted as a relation. Relation
is dualistic, existing in two. Therefore, due to the difference between a stick
and the one holding the stick, the substances that are its basis are considered
to be mutually dependent and not independent. When a mat is created from long
grass, the form of the grass is destroyed and the form of the mat is produced.
This is similar to the transformation of milk into curd. Thus, the arrangement
of substances accepted by Vaisheshika philosophy is not properly established.
Now, the principles of Sankhya philosophy are presented. According to Sankhya
philosophy, creation arises from the union of prakriti (nature) and atma (soul)
or purusha (consciousness). The state of equilibrium of sattva guna (quality of
goodness), rajo guna (quality of passion), and tamo guna (quality of darkness)
is called prakriti. From prakriti, mahat (intellect) is produced. From mahat,
ahamkara (ego) is produced, and from ahamkara, eleven senses and five tanmatras
(subtle elements) are produced. From the five tanmatras, five mahabhutas (gross
elements) are produced. The nature of purusha-atma is consciousness. It is not
an agent, it is devoid of qualities, and it is the experiencer. According to
Jain philosophy, sattva and other qualities, which are mutually contradictory,
are inherent in prakriti and cannot exist together without a regulating quality.
Just as black and white colors cannot exist together without a regulator,
similarly, mahat and other modifications cannot be produced from prakriti
without a cause for the production of heterogeneity. Therefore, in Sankhya
philosophy, there is no cause for the production of heterogeneity in prakriti.
Hence, nothing other than itself can be produced from prakriti, and
heterogeneity cannot arise. Due to the non-agency of the soul, it is incapable
of doing anything. If it is assumed that there is inherent heterogeneity in
prakriti, then it would be without a cause. In such a situation, sattva-
substance would either be eternal or non-eternal. It is said that if
heterogeneity is accepted to arise in prakriti without any other cause, then all
substances would be either real or unreal because substances are real or unreal
depending on the cause. Mahat and ahamkara are not different from sensation
because the knowledge "I am happy," "I am unhappy" is the same as intellect,
determination, or ego. Intellect and ego are attributes of the soul because they
are like holes. They are not modifications of inert prakriti. (540)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram eka padArtha kI anya padArthoM se vyAvRtti-alaga
pahacAna prApta hotI hai  /  usa saMbaMdha meM vicAra karate haiM-una vizeSoM
meM jo vizeSAtmaka buddhi hotI hai vaha kyA kisI anya vizeSa para TikI huI hai
/  yadi vaha apara vizeSakisI anya vizeSa para Azrita hai, aisA nahIM kahA jA
sakatA kyoMki Age se Age yaha AzritatA kA prasaMga calatA rahegA jisase
anavasthA doSa upasthita hogA  /  isaliye jaise anya vizeSoM ke binA bhI vizeSoM
meM vizeSa buddhi hotI hai, usI prakAra dravyAdi meM bhI vizeSa buddhi mAnI jA
sakatI hai  /  phira dravyAdi ke atirikta vizeSanAmaka pRthak padArtha kyoM mAnA
jAya  /  dravyoM se avyatirikta-apRthak vizeSa to hama bhI svIkAra karate haiM,
kyoMki sabhI padArtha sAmAnya vizeSAtmaka hai  /  vaizeSika jo yaha mAnate haiM
ki vizeSa to nitya dravya vRtti hai-sadA dravya meM rahate haiM tathA antya hai-
sabake aMta meM rahate haiM  /  nitya dravya cAra prakAra ke haiM-paramANu,
muktAtmA aura muktamana  /  inameM vizeSa vidyamAna rahatA hai  /  yaha kathana
niyuktika hai-yuktizUnya hai  /  apakarNayitva-azravaNIya hai aura kevala una
dvArA kI gaI vyAkhyA hai  /  vaizeSika darzana meM samavAyanAmaka eka padArtha
mAnA gayA hai  /  vahAM kahA jAtA hai ki ayuktasiddha-paraspara eka dUsare ke
binA nahIM rahane vAle AdhAra AdheyabhUta jo padArtha hai, unameM jo pratIti kA
hetu hai, unakI jo pratIti karAtA hai vaha samavAya hai  /  vaha nitya hai, eka
hai  /  usako nitya mAnane se jitane samavAyI haiM ve sabhI nitya mAne jAyeMge
/  yadi samavAyiyoM ko anitya mAnA jAya to samavAya bhI anitya siddha hogA
kyoMki samavAyI hI usakA AdhAra hai| samavAya ke ekatva ke kAraNa-samavAya eka
hai  /  aisA mAnA jAne se sabhI samavAyI bhI eka mAne jAyeMge-yaha kaThinAI
paidA hogI  /  yadi samavAyiyoM ko aneka kahA jAya to samavAya bhI aneka hoMge
/  vaizeSika darzana meM samavAya ko saMbaMdha svIkAra kiyA gayA hai  /
saMbaMdha dviSTha hotA hai-do meM rahatA hai| ataH daNDa aura daNDI-daNDadhArI
kI taraha bhinna bhinna hone se usake AzrayabhUta padArthayuta siddha hote haiM-
donoM milakara siddha hote haiM, ve ayuta siddha nahIM hote  /  vIraNoM se-lambe
tRNa Adi se kaTa-caTAI kI utpatti hone para vIraNa rUpa ko nAza aura kaTa rUpa
se utpAda hotA hai  /  dUdha aura dahI ke anvita hone kI taraha yaha hai| isa
prakAra vaizeSika darzana meM usa dvArA svIkRta padArthoM kI vyavasthA samyak
ghaTita nahIM hotii| aba sAMkhya darzana ke tattvoM kA nirUpaNa kiyA jAtA hai  /
sAMkhya darzana ke anusAra prakRti tathA AtmA yA puruSa ke saMyoga se sRSTi kI
utpatti hotI hai  /  satvaguNa, rajoguNa tathA tamoguNa kI sAmyAvasthA ko
prakRti kahA jAtA hai  /  prakRti se mahat-buddhi kI utpatti hotI hai  /  mahat
se ahaMkAra, ahaMkAra se ekAdaza indriya evaM pAMcatanmAtrAeM tathA pAMca
tanmAtrAoM se pAMca mahAbhUtoM kI utpatti hotI hai  /  puruSa-AtmA kA svarUpa
caitanya hai  /  vaha akartA-kartRtvayukta nahIM hai  /  nirguNa-guNarahita hai
tathA bhoktA hai  /  jaina darzana ke anusAra kahate haiMsattva Adi guNa jo
paraspara viruddha haiM, prakRtyAtmaka hai, kisI niyAmaka guNI ke binA ekatra
nahIM ho skte| jaise kRSNa zveta Adi guNa niyAmaka ke binA ekatra nahIM hote|
mahat Adi vikAroM ke janya hone para prakRti meM viSamatA utpAdana hetu
sAMkhyadarzana meM koI hetu nahIM mAnA gayA hai  /  isaliye usameM-prakRti meM
apane atirikta anya vastu kI utpatti nahIM ho sakatI-viSamatA niSpanna nahIM ho
sakatI  /  AtmA kA akartRtva mAnane ke kAraNa vaha akiJcita kara hai-kucha nahIM
kara sakatA  /  yadi prakRti meM svabhAvataH vaiSamya hai, yoM mAnA jAya to vaha
nirhetaka hogaa| aisI sthiti meM satva-padArtha yA to nitya hoMge athavA asatva-
anitya hoNge| kahA hai-yadi ki anya hetu ke binA hI prakRti meM viSamatA kA
utpanna honA svIkAra kiyA jAya to sabhI padArtha sat hoMge yA asat hoMge kyoMki
hetu kI apekSA se hI padArtha sat hote haiM tathA kabhI sat nahIM hote haiM  /
mahat tathA ahaMkAra saMvedana se bhinna nahIM hai kyoMki maiM sukhI hUM, maiM
du:khI hU~ aisA jo jJAna hai vahI buddhi adhyavasAya yA aha~kAra hai  /  ve-
buddhi evaM ahaMkAra cidrUpa hone ke kAraNa AtmaguNa haiM  /  ve jar3a prakRti
ke vikAra nahIM hai-usase utpanna (540)

Page #569 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Samvāsaraṇa studies have not been done. It is believed that the Bhūtas are
born from the Tanmātrās. Just as the Earth is born from the Gandha Tanmātrā,
water from the Rasa Tanmātrā, fire from the Rūpa Tanmātrā, air from the Sparśa
Tanmātrā, and space from the Śabda Tanmātrā. This belief of the Sāṃkhya
philosophy is illogical because if you say that it is based on external Bhūtas,
then it is not correct because they have always existed. It is not true that
this whole world has never been like this before - it has been different. If you
say that the Bhūtas residing in each body are born from the five Tanmātrās, then
this is also not true. Because there are skin and bones in the body. They are
hard and are part of the Earth, and phlegm, mucus, and blood are liquid forms of
water, then fire digests food. Prāṇa and Apāna are air. The empty space in the
body is space. It is also not correct to believe that such a body is born from
Tanmātrās. Because some bodies are born from semen and blood. Therefore, the
smell of Tanmātrās is not even perceived in them. It is irrelevant to imagine
something that is unseen - not visible as a cause. It is also observed that
eggs, plants, sprouts, etc. are born from something else. Therefore, the
creation that the Sāṃkhya philosophers describe according to their process - the
order of creation, from Pradhāna to Mahat and from Mahat to Ahamkāra, etc., is
illogical. They say this because they are attached to their doctrines. Accepting
the Akṛtitva of the soul leads to the fault of Kṛta Nāśa and Akṛtābhyāgama. This
also results in the absence of bondage and liberation. Accepting the Nirguṇatva
of the soul leads to the objection that it is devoid of knowledge - it is proven
to be ignorant. Thus, the doctrine of the Sāṃkhya philosophers is like the
babbling of a child - it is meaningless. Prakṛti is unconscious - devoid of
consciousness. It is inclined towards the soul. This statement is also
illogical.  Now the Buddhist doctrine is described - there, matter is accepted
in the form of twelve Āyatanas. Like the five senses, such as eyes, etc., the
five sense objects, such as form, etc., Śabda Āyatana and Dharma Āyatana.
Sukhādi is called Dharma. The delimitation - determination of these twelve
Āyatanas is through direct perception and inference - these two proofs. In this
context, the Jains say that the senses like eyes, etc., have been taken by us
from the Ajiva. Bhāvendriya is taken from the perception of the Jiva. The
objects like form, etc., have also been taken from the Ajiva. Therefore, they
should not be considered separate. Śabda is Paudgalik. Therefore, Śabda Āyatana
also comes under the Ajiva from its perception. Therefore, it is not logical to
accept each one as a separate substance. Sukha and Duḥkha, which are called
Dharma Āyatana. If they are in the form of the rise of Sātavedaniya and
Asātavedaniya, then they are the qualities of the Jiva. Therefore, they are
included in the Jiva itself. If they are the cause - the form of Sukha Duḥkha,
Karma, then being Paudgalik, they come under the Ajiva. Buddhists call direct
perception Nirvikalpaka. Nirvikalpaka is in the form of uncertainty. Therefore,
it is not a part or cause of inclination and disinclination. Its authenticity -
being a proof is not proven. In this way, if direct perception is not authentic,
then inference cannot be a proof either because it is based on direct
perception. The avoidance of other objections - accusations has been considered
thoughtfully elsewhere, therefore, they are not being refuted in detail here.
One should refute the principles stated - propounded in the Mīmāṃsaka and
Lokāyata Cārvāka philosophies with one's own intellect. They accept very
worldly-opposed substances. Therefore, they have not been presented here
directly. In this way, the nine or seven substances remaining from all these -
the separate Tīrthaṅkara, are the only truths. Their knowledge is the cause in
Kriyāvāda. The knowledge of the substances accepted by other doctrines is not
the cause in Kriyāvāda.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI samavasaraNAdhyayanaM nahIM hue haiM  /  tanmAtroM se bhUtoM kI utpatti
mAnI jAtI hai  /  jaise gaMdha tanmAtrA se pRthvI kI, rasa tanmAtrA se jala kI,
rUpa tanmAtrA se teja yA agni kI, sparza tanmAtrA se vAyu kI tathA zabda
tanmAtrA se AkAza kI utpatti hotI hai  /  sAMkhya darzana kI yaha mAnyatA
ayuktiyukta hai kyoMki yadi bAhyabhUtoM ke Azraya se-aisA kahate ho to vaha
ThIka nahIM hai kyoMki ve to sadA se vidyamAna hai| yaha sArA jagata kabhI aisA
na rahA hoM-anya prakAra kA rahA ho yaha bAta nahIM hai  /  yadi pratyeka zarIra
meM AzritabhUtoM kI utpatti paMca tanmAtrAoM se huI ho, aisA kaho to yaha bhI
yathArtha nahIM hai  /  kyoMki zarIra meM tvaka-camar3I tathA asthi-haDDiyAM
haiM  /  ve kaThina svarUpa yukta pRthvI ke aMza hai tathA zleSma-kapha aura
rakta drava rUpa jala hai to agni anna kA paripAka karatI hai vaha  /  prANa
evaM apAna vAyu hai  /  zarIra meM jo zuSira-rikta sthAna hai vaha AkAza hai  /
isa prakAra kA zarIra tanmAtroM se utpanna hotA hai-yaha mAnanA bhI sahI nahIM
hai  /  kyoMki katipaya zarIra, vIrya tathA rakta se utpanna hote haiM  /  ataH
unameM tanmAtroM kI gaMdha taka upalakSita nahIM hotI  /  jo vastu adRSTa hai-
dRSTigocara nahIM hotI usakI kAraNa rUpa meM kalpanA karanA aprAsaMgika hai  /
aMDaja, udbhija, aMkura Adi bhI kisI anya se utpanna hote haiM, aisA
samulapakSita hotA hai  /  ataH sAMkhyadarzana meM vizvAsa karane vAle apanI
prakriyA-utpatti krama ke anusAra pradhAna se mahat tathA mahat se ahaMkAra
ityAdi kI jo sRSTi batalAte haiM vaha yukti rahita hai  /  ve apane siddhAntoM
meM anurakta-Asakta hone ke kAraNa aisA kahate haiM  /  AtmA kA akRtitva svIkAra
karane para kRta nAza evaM akRtAbhyAgama kA doSa AtA hai  /  isase baMdha tathA
mokSa kA bhI abhAva phalita hotA hai  /  AtmA kA nirguNatva svIkAra karane para
usameM jJAnazUnya hone kI Apatti AtI hai-vaha jJAnarahita siddha hotI hai  /
isa prakAra sAMkhyamatavAdiyoM kA pratipAdita kevala eka bacce ke pralApa ke
samAna hai-nirarthaka hai| prakati acetana-caitanya rahita hai| vaha AtmA ke
liye pravRtta hotI hai  /  yaha kathana bhI yukti vivarjita hai| aba bauddha
mata kA nirUpaNa kiyA jAtA hai-vahAM bAraha AyatanoM ke rUpa meM padArtha
svIkAra kiye gaye haiM  /  jaise netra Adi pAMca indriya, rUpa Adi pAMca indriya
viSaya, zabdAyatana evaM dharmAyatana  /  sukhAdi ko dharma kahA jAtA hai  /
ina bAraha AyatanoM kA pariccheda-nizcaya pratyakSa evaM anumAna-ina do pramANoM
dvArA hotA hai  /  isa saMdarbha meM jainoM kA kathana hai ki cakSu Adi indriyA~
hamAre dvArA ajIva ke grahaNa se gRhIta kI gaI hai| bhAvendriya jIva ke grahaNa
se gRhIta hai  /  rUpa Adi viSaya bhI ajIva ke grahaNa se le liye gaye haiM  /
ataH ve bhI pRthak nahIM mAne jAne cAhiye  /  zabda paudgalika hai  /  ataH
zabdAyatana bhI ajIva ke grahaNa se usake antargata A jAte haiM  /  isaliye
pratyeka ko pRthak pRthak padArtha svIkAra karanA yuktisaMgata nahIM hai  /
sukha evaM duHkha jinheM dharmAyatana kahA jAtA hai  /  yadi sAtAvedanIya aura
asAtAvedanIya ke udaya svarUpa hai to ve jIva ke hI guNa haiM  /  ataH unakA
jIva meM hI antarbhAva ho jAtA hai  /  yadi ve sukha duHkha ke kAraNa-svarUpa
hai, karma hai taba paudgalika hone ke kAraNa ve ajIva ke antargata A jAte haiM
/  bauddhoM dvArA pratyakSa ko nirvikalpaka kahA jAtA hai  /  nirvikalpaka
anizcaya rUpa hotA hai  /  ataH vaha pravRtti aura nivRtti kA aMga yA kAraNa
nahIM hai  /  usakA prAmANya-pramANa honA siddha nahIM hotA  /  isa taraha
pratyakSa kA aprAmANya hone para anumAna bhI pramANa nahIM ho sakatA kyoMki vaha
pratyakSa pUrvaka hotA hai  /  anya AkSepoM-AropoM kA parihAra anyatra bhalI
bhAMti vicAra pUrvaka kiyA gayA hai isaliye unakA yahAM vistAra se nirAkaraNa
nahIM kiyA jA rahA hai  /  mImAMsaka tathA lokAyatacArvAka darzana meM abhihita-
pratipAdita tattvoM kA nirAkaraNa apanI buddhi dvArA kara lenA caahiye| ve
atyanta loka viruddha padArthoM ko svIkAra karate haiM  /  ataH unako yahAM
sAkSAt upanyasta-prakaTa nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  isa taraha ina saba se
pariziSTa-bace hue yA pRthak tIrthaMkara nirUpita nau yA sAta padArtha hI satya
haiM  /  unakA parijJAna hI kriyAvAda meM hetu hai  /  anya matavAdiyoM dvArA
svIkRta padArthoM kA parijJAna kriyAvAda meM hetu nahIM hai| 541

Page #570 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He who is not attached to sounds and forms, who does not dislike smells and
tastes, who does not desire life nor death, who is free from the fetters of
*āyāna* and *gupta*, I say, is liberated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram sahesu rUvesu asajamANo, gaMdhesu rasesu adussamANe  /
No jIvitaM No maraNAhikaMkhI, AyANagutte valayA vimukke  // 22 //  ttibemi||
chAyA - zabdeSu rUpeSvasajjamAno gaMdheSu raseSu cAdviSan  /  no jIvitaM no
maraNAvakAMkSI, AdAnaguptovalayAd vimukta iti bravImi  //  anuvAda - sAdhu
manojJa-prItipada zabda, rUpa, gaMdha tathA rasa meM anAsakta rahe  /  vaha
amanojJa-aprItikara zabda rUpa gaMdha evaM rasa meM dveSa na kareM unheM burA na
mAneM  /  vaha jIvana tathA mRtyu kI AkAMkSA na kre| vaha AdAna gupta-
saMyamayukta tathA valayavimukta-mAyA rahita hokara vicaraNa kare  /  maiM aisA
kahatA hU~  /  TIkA - sAmpratamadhyayanArthamupasaMjihIrghaHsamyagvAdaparijJAnap
halamAdarzayannAha-'zabdeSu'veNuvINAdiSu zrutisukhadeSu 'rUpeSu ca'
nayanAnandakAriSu 'AsaGgamakurvan' gAya'makurvANaH, anena rAgo gRhItaH, tathA
'gaMdheSu' kuthitakalevarAdiSu 'raseSu ca' antaprAntAzanAdiSu
aduSyamANo'manojJeSu dveSamakurvan, idamuktaM bhavati-zabdAdiSvindriyaviSayeSu
manojJetareSu rAgadveSAbhyAmanapadizyamAno 'jIvitam' asaMyamajIvataM
nAbhikAGkSat, nApi parISahopasagairabhidruto maraNamabhikAGkSat, yadivA
jIvitamaraNayoranabhilASI saMyamamanupAlayediti  /  tathA mokSArthinA''dIyate
gRhyata ityAdAnaMsaMyamastena tasminvA sati gupto, yadivA-mithyAtvAdinA''dIyate
ityAdAnam-aSTaprakAraM karma tasminnAdAtavyemanovAkkAyairguptaH samitazca, tathA
bhAvavalayaM-mAyA tayA vimukto mAyAmuktaH  /  itiH parisamAptyarthe  /
bravImIti puurvvt| nayAH pUrvavadeva  // 22 //   //  samAptaM samavasaraNAkhyaM
dvAdazamadhyayanamiti  //  TIkArtha - aba sUtrakAra isa adhyayana kA upasaMhAra
karane kI icchA liye samyakavAd ke parijJAna kA phala batAne hetu pratipAdita
karate haiM  /  sAdhu zruti sukhada-karNapriya, veNu tathA vINA Adi ke zabdoM
meM nayanAnandakArI AMkhoM ke liye Anandaprada rUpoM meM mohAsakta na baneM  /
unameM gRddhi-lolupatA na rkhe| yoM kahakara rAga ko gRhIta kiyA gayA hai-rAga
ke parityAga kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai  /  sAdhu kathita kalevara Adi ke sar3e
gale zarIra Adi ke apriya gaMdha meM tathA aMta prAMta AhArAdi ke apriya rasa
meM dveSa na kare  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki sAdhu manojJa evaM
amanojJa zabda Adi indriya viSayoM meM rAga dveSa se dUra rahatA huA
asaMyamamaya jIvana kI abhiMkAMkSA na kare  /  vaha parISahoM evaM upasargoM se
abhidruta-udvejita hokara mRtyu kI abhikAMkSA na kare  /  sAdhu jIvana evaM
mRtyu kI abhilASA na karatA huA saMyama kA anupAlana kare  /  mumukSu puruSa
jise grahaNa karatA hai, use AdAna kahA jAtA hai, vaha saMyama hai  /  sAdhu usa
dvArA gupta hokara-AtmarakSita hokara rahe  /  athavA mithyAtva Adi dvArA jo
apanAyA jAtA hai vaha AdAna kahA jAtA hai, vaha aSTavidhakarma hai  /  usake
AdAtavya-grAhyatva meM yA grahaNa karane meM vaha mana, vacana, zarIra dvArA
gupta rahe-mAnasika, vAcika tathA kAyika guptiyoM kA pAlana kare  /  evaM
samitiyoM se yuta rahe  /  vaha bhAvavalaya-mAyA se vimukta rahe  /  yahAM iti
zabda samApti ke artha meM hai  /  bravImi pahale kI jyoM hai  /  tathA naya bhI
pahale kI jyoM hai|  //  samavasaraNa nAmaka bArahavAM adhyayana samApta huA  /
-542

Page #571 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Study of Truth ### Thirteenth Chapter of the Study of Truth  I will
reveal the nature of knowledge, born in a man. I will reveal the true Dharma,
the true conduct, peace and unrest.  ||1||  **Commentary:** This sutra is
connected to the previous one, which states that the virtuous are free from the
cycle of illusion. Here, the cycle of illusion is attachment and aversion. Only
those who are free from these attain the truth. This sutra explains this
connection.   The true nature of things is called truth. This truth is the
ultimate reality. Contemplating this ultimate reality leads to right knowledge
and so on. The sutra-author reveals this, saying "the nature of knowledge." The
word "nature" refers to the primary meaning. The word "primary" includes right
faith and right conduct. Right faith includes the stages of the path: the
initial, the intermediate, and the final. Right conduct includes the observance
of vows, the protection of the community, and the control of passions.   I will
reveal this right knowledge, which is born in a man. The word "tu" emphasizes
that I will reveal the flaws of those who are deceitful and those who are not
virtuous. I will reveal the diverse nature of man, both the good and the bad.
I will reveal the diverse nature and the consequences. I will reveal the Dharma
of the virtuous, those who are well-behaved, those who have right faith and
right conduct. I will reveal their conduct, which is characterized by the
avoidance of the paths to hell. I will reveal their conduct, which is
characterized by their noble behavior. I will reveal their peace, which is
characterized by the cessation of all actions.   I will also reveal the Adharma
of the non-virtuous, those who are not well-behaved, those who are householders
or those who are not Jain. I will reveal their conduct, which is characterized
by sin. I will reveal their conduct, which is characterized by their evil
behavior. I will reveal their unrest, which is characterized by the cycle of
rebirth.   Here, the arrangement of the words is such that I will reveal the
Dharma, conduct, and peace of the virtuous, and the Adharma, evil conduct, and
unrest of the non-virtuous. The word "cha" (and) is used to emphasize the
contrast. ||1||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI yAtAthyAdhyayanaM trayodazaM zrIyAtAyAdhyayana AhattahIyaM tu paveyaissaM,
nANappakAraM purisassa jAtaM  /  . sao a dhammaM asao asIlaM, saMtiM asaMtiM
karissAmi pAuM  // 1 //  chAyA - yAthAtathyantu pravedayiSyAmi, jJAnaprakAraM
puruSasyajAtam  /  satazca dharma masatazcA zIlaM zAntimazAntiJca kariSyAmi
prAduH  //  anuvAda - zrI sudharmA svAmI pratipAdita karate haiM-maiM yAthA
tathya-satya tattva pravedita kruuNgaa-btlaauuNgaa| jJAna ke prakAra-bheda,
unakA sAra kahU~gA  /  jIvoM ke sat asat guNoM kA varNana kruuNgaa| uttama
sAdhuoM ke zIlapavitra AcaraNa tathA asAdhuoM kA kuzIla-kutsita AcaraNa batAUMgA
/  zAMti-mokSa tathA azAMti-saMsAra kA svarUpa vyAkhyAta karUMgA  /  TIkA - asya
cAnantarasUtreNa sahAyaM saMbandhaH, tadyathAvalayAvimuktetyabhihitaM, bhAva
valayaM rAgadveSau' tAbhyAM vinirmuktasyaiva yAthAtathyaM bhavatItyanena
saMbaMdhenAyAtatasyAsya sUtrasya vyAkhyApratanyate-yathAtathAbhAvo
yAthAtathyaMtattvaM paramArthaH, tacca paramArthacintAyAM samyagjJAnAdikaM,
tadevadarzayati-'jJAnaprakAra' miti prakAra zabda Adyarthe, AdigrahaNAcca
samyagdarzanacAritre gRhyete, tatra samyagdarzanam-
aupazamikakSAyikakSAyopazamikaM gRhyate, cAritraM tu vratasamitikaSAyANaM
dhAraNarakSaNanigrahAdikaM gRhyate, etatsamyagjJAnAdikaM 'puruSasya'
jantoryajjAtam-utpannaM tadahaM 'pravedayiSyAmi' kathayiSyAmi, tuzabdo vizeSaNe,
vitathA cAriNastadoSAMzcAvirbhAvayiSyAmi, 'nAnAprakAraM' vA vicitraM puruSasya
svabhAvam-uccAvacaM prazastAprazastarUpaM pravedayiSyAmi  /  nAnAprakAraM
svabhAvaM phalaM ca pazcArthena darzayati'sataH' satpuruSasya zobhanasya
sadanuSThAyinaH samyagdarzanajJAna cAritravato 'dharma' zrutacAritrAkhyaM
durgatigamanadharaNa lakSaNaM vA tathA 'zIlam' udyuktavihAritvaM tathA 'zAMti'
nivRttimazeSakarmakSayalakSaNAM karissAmi pAu' tti prAduSkariSye prakaTayiSyAmi
yathAvad udbhAvayiSyAmi, [granthAgraM. 7000] tathA 'asataH' azobhanasya
paratIrthikasya gRhasthasya vA pArzvasthAdervA, cazabdasamuccitamadharma-pApaM
tathA 'azIlaM' kutsitazIlamazAMtiM ca-anirvANarUpAM saMsRtiM
praadurbhaavyissyaamiiti| atra ca satodharma zIlaM zAntiM ca prAduSkariSyAmi,
asatazcAdharmamazIlamazAntiM cetyevaM padaghaTanA yojanIyA, anupAttasya (ca) ca
zabdenAkSepo draSTavya iti  // 1 //  TIkArtha - isa sUtra kA pahale ke sUtra ke
sAtha isa prakAra saMbaMdha hai  /  pahale ke adhyayana ke AkhirI sUtra meM
batalAyA gayA hai ki sAdhu valaya-mAyA se vimukta rahe  /  yahA~ rAga aura
dveSabhAva valaya hai, unase vinirmukta hokara-chUTakara jo rahatA hai, usI ko
yAthAtathya-yathArthatattva yA satyatattva prApta hotA hai  /  isa saMbaMdha se
Aye hue isa sUtra kI vyAkhyA kI jAtI hai  /  jo jaisA hai-satya sattva hai usako
yAthAtathya kahA jAtA hai  /  arthAt paramArtha hI yAthAtathya hai  /  usakA
cintana karane para samyagjJAna Adi isa koTi meM haiM, sUtrakAra usI kA
digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM  /  "jJAna prakAram" prakAra zabda Adi ke
artha meM hai  /  Adi se yahAM samyakdarzana, samyak cAritra kA grahaNa hotA hai
/  usake antargata samyakdarzana ke aupazamika, kSAyika evaM kSAyopazamika rUpa
gRhIta kiye jAte haiM  /  cAritra meM vratoM kA dhAraNa, samitiyoM kA rakSaNa
tathA kaSAyoM kA nigraha gRhIta kiyA jAtA hai| puruSa ko jo yaha samyak jJAna
Adi utpanna hote haiM, maiM unako pravedita karUMgA-kahU~gA  /  yahA~ prayukta
'tu' zabda (543)

Page #572 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The *Sutrakritanga Sutra* is used here in the sense of an epithet. It indicates
that I will also reveal the faults of those who are *vitathachari* - those who
have false or contrary conduct. The nature of men is of various kinds - diverse.
It is both high and praiseworthy, as well as low and unpraiseworthy. I will
explain it. The nature of men and its fruits are of different kinds. This is
explained in the latter half of this verse. Those who are *sattvik*, who have
noble and pure conduct, and who are endowed with *samyakdarshan*, *samyakgyan*,
and *samyakcharitra*, and who properly observe the *shruta charitra* dharma,
which is an obstacle to going to hell, as a result of which they attain peace
due to the depletion of all karmas, I will explain about them. I will discuss
the *adharma* - sin, the evil conduct, and the unrest that causes wandering in
the world of those who are *asat* - those who do not have good conduct, those
who are of other faiths, householders, and *parshvastha* etc. Here, I will
expound the *dharma*, good conduct, and peace of the good man, and I will
expound the *adharma* - bad conduct, and unrest of the bad man. Thus, the word
should be used. In this verse, what is not said should be understood by the word
'cha'. "Oh, those who have risen in the day and night, having obtained the
*dharma* from the *tathagatas*, they speak harshly to the *shastras* in this
way, saying that they are not interested in *samadhi*." **Commentary:** The
author of the sutra has previously stated that I will narrate the nature of
beings, which is of various kinds in terms of qualities, defects, etc. He
reveals this through this verse: Those who are engaged in the proper conduct of
*samyak* in day and night, who have obtained the *shruta charitra* dharma, which
is the means of crossing the world, from the *shruta* people and the
*tirthankaras*, even after obtaining it, due to their karma and bad luck,
*jamali* etc. do not follow the *samadhi* - the path to liberation - which is
explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. here in this world. They do not follow the
path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not
follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc.
They do not follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the
*tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation, which is
explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation,
which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of
liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the
path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not
follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc.
They do not follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the
*tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation, which is
explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation,
which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of
liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the
path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not
follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc.
They do not follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the
*tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation, which is
explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation,
which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of
liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the
path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not
follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc.
They do not follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the
*tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation, which is
explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation,
which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of
liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the
path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not
follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc.
They do not follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the
*tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation, which is
explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation,
which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of
liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the
path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not
follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc.
They do not follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the
*tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation, which is
explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation,
which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of
liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the
path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not
follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc.
They do not follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the
*tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation, which is
explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation,
which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of
liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the
path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not
follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc.
They do not follow the path of liberation, which is explained by the
*tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation, which is
explained by the *tirthankaras* etc. They do not follow the path of liberation,
which is explained by the *tirthankaras* etc

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram vizeSaNa ke artha meM hai  /  jisase sUcita hai-
vitathAcArI-asat yA viparIta AcAravAna puruSoM ke doSa bhI AvirbhUta karUMgA-
vyakta karUMgA  /  puruSoM kA svabhAva taraha taraha kA-vicitra prakAra kA hotA
hai  /  vaha ucca-prazasta tathA avaca-aprazasta donoM hI taraha kA hotA hai  /
use maiM pravedita karUMgA-kahUMgA  /  puruSoM ke svabhAva evaM usake phala
bhinna-bhinna prakAra ke hote haiM  /  yaha isa gAthA ke Age ke Adhe bhAga meM
batalAyA gayA hai  /  jo puruSa sAttvika hote haiM, zobhana-uttama yA pavitra
AcaraNa karate haiM tathA samyakdarzana, samyakajJAna evaM samyakadarzana se
yukta, durgati gamana meM avarodhaka zruta cAritra rUpa dharma kA samucita-
yathAvidhi pAlana karate haiM, usake phalasvarUpa samasta karmoM ke kSINa hone
se jo zAMti prApta hotI hai inake saMbaMdha meM maiM nirUpita karUMgA  /  asat
sadAcaraNa rahita anya matavAdI, gRhastha evaM pArzvastha Adi ke adharma-pApa,
kutsita AcAra tathA saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karAne vAlI azAMti kA vivecana
karUMgA  /  yahAM-satpuruSa ke dharma, sadAcaraNa tathA zAMti kA pratipAdana
karUMgA evaM asat puruSa ke adharma-anAcaraNa tathA azAMti kA pratipAdana
kruuNgaa| isa taraha pada yojanIya hai  /  isa gAthA meM jo anupAtta hai-nahIM
kahA gayA hai usako 'ca' zabda se gRhIta karanA cAhiye  /  aho ya rAo a
samuTThiehi, tahAgaehiM paDilabbha dhammaM  /  samAhimAghAtamajosayaMtA,
satthAramevaM pharusaM vayaMti  // 2 //  chAyA - ahani ca rAtrau ca
samutthitebhya stathAgatebhyaH pratilabhya dharmam  /  samAdhimAkhyAta
majoSayantaH zAstAramevaM paruSaM vadanti  //  anuvAda - aharniza samutthita-
uttama dharmAcaraNa meM samudyata tIrthaMkaroM se dharma kA pratilAbha karake
bhI una dvArA pratipAdita samAdhi mArga kA-mokSamArga kA anusaraNa na karate hue
nihnava zAstA-tIrthaMkara ke prati paruSakaThora yA niMdAtmaka vacana bolate
haiN| TIkA - jantorguNadoSarUpaM nAnAprakAraM svabhAvaM pravedayiSyAmItyuktaM
taddarzayitukAma Aha-'ahorAtram' aharnizaM samyagutthitAH samutthitA
sadanuSThAnavantastebhyaH zrutadharebhyaH, tathA 'tathAgatebhyo' vA
tIrthakRdbhyo 'dharma' zrutacAritrAkhyaM pratilabhyAsaMsArani:saraNopAyaM
dharmamavApyApi karmodayAnmandabhAgyatayA jamAliprabhRtaya
ihAtmotkarSAttIrthakRdAdyAkhyAtaM 'samAdhi' samyagdarzanAdikaM mokSapaddhatim
'ajoSayantaH' asevantaH  /  samyaggurvANA nihavA boTikAzca
svarUciviracitavyAkhyAprakAreNa nirdoSa sarvajJapraNIta
mArgavidhvaMsayantikumArgaM prarUpayanti, bruvate ca asau sarvajJa eva na
bhavati yaH kriyamANaMkRtamityadhyakSaviruddha prarUpayati' tathA yaH pAtrAdi
parigrahAnmokSamArgamAvirbhAvayati, evaM sarvajJokta mazraddadhAnA: zraddhAnaM
kurvanto'pyapare dhRtisaMhananadurbalatayA tathA''ropitaM saMyamabhAraM
voDhumasamarthAH kacidviSIdanto'pareNAcAryAdinA vatsalatayA coditAH santastaM
'zAstAram' anuzAsitAraM codakaM puruSaM vadanti 'karkazaM' niSThuraM pratIpaM
codayantIti  // 2 //  TIkArtha - sUtrakAra ne pUrva meM yaha sUcita kiyA hai ki-
maiM prANiyoM ke svabhAva kA AkhyAna karUMgA, jo guNa doSa Adi kI dRSTi se nAnA
prakAra kA hai  /  vaha isa gAthA dvArA prakaTa karate haiM-aharniza samyak
samutthitasadanuSThAna meM saMpravRta zrRtajanoM se tathA tIrthaMkaroM se
zrutacAritramUlaka dharma kA jo saMsAra ko pAra karane kA upAya hai, pratilAbha
karake bhI apane karmodaya tathA durbhAgya ke kAraNa jamAlI Adi ne yahAM-isa
jagata meM tIrthaMkara dvArA 544

Page #573 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those who do not accept the path to liberation based on right faith, as
formulated by the omniscient, due to their ego or prejudice, and who, out of
their own interest, destroy the faultless path to liberation propounded by the
omniscient, based on the principles formulated by the Nihnath and Digambar, and
formulate a wrong path, are wrong. They say that one who calls an action that is
being performed as done, is directly contradicting the formulation, and is not
omniscient. One who, while holding possessions like vessels, etc., still
describes the attainment of liberation, cannot be omniscient. Thus, they do not
have faith in the principles that describe liberation in the path to liberation
as spoken by the omniscient. There are many who, while having faith in the
principles taught by the omniscient, are not able to bear the burden of the
restraints, which are accepted as they are, due to weakness in fortitude,
patience, endurance, physical condition, etc., and are not able to maintain the
restraints. There are many who become disheartened, slack, or unstable in
observing the restraints, and even when they are encouraged to observe the
restraints with affection by the Acharya, etc., they speak harsh, rough, or
cruel words to those who give advice or discipline.  "They speak falsely, those
who are engrossed in their own self-interest. Those who speak falsely out of
doubt about knowledge, become unworthy of many virtues." (3)  **Commentary:**
Even though the path formulated by the Vitaraga is purified and free from all
faults, they, the Nihnath, speak falsely about its faults - they accuse it of
faults. They follow a tradition that suits their own interests. They engage in
discussions and arguments that are different from the right view, which they
have received from tradition. They are unworthy of the best qualities.
**Explanation:**  The purified path to liberation, which is free from faults, is
formulated by the omniscient, and is based on right faith, knowledge, and
conduct. This path is purified by removing the formulation of the wrong path
through various means. The group of people who are obsessed with their own
interests, speak falsely about this path, following the formulation of the
Acharya. Those who are deluded by their own self-interest and the way they
interpret the scriptures, and who misinterpret the meaning of the scriptures,
even though they have been received from the Acharya's tradition, are engrossed
in their own self-interest. They are unable to properly understand the deep
meaning of the scriptures, the meaning of karma, and the consequences of
actions, and they present a superficial understanding. This shows that
interpreting the scriptures based on one's own self-interest leads to great
harm. Such a person, due to his own attachment, becomes unworthy of many
virtues, such as knowledge. These virtues are:  "He serves, he asks questions,
he listens, he accepts, he desires. He then rejects, or he maintains, or he acts
correctly." (1)  If one attains right knowledge through serving the Guru, etc.,
then one follows the right conduct, and then one attains liberation, which is
characterized by the destruction of all karma. Such a person becomes unworthy of
these virtues. Some readings say "They become unworthy of many attachments." The
meaning of this is that such a person becomes unworthy of right knowledge, etc.,
because he is attached to many things that are harmful.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI yAtAdhyAdhyayanaM prarUpita samyakdarzana mUlaka mokSamArga kA apane
ahaGkAra yA durAgraha ke kAraNa svIkAra nahIM karate hue niva tathA digambara
apanI rUci nahIM karate hue nihnava tathA digambara apanI rUci dvArA racita
siddhAntoM ke AdhAra para nirdoSa sarvajJa pratipAdita mokSa mArga kA vidhvaMsa
karate haiM, kumArga kI prarUpaNA karate haiM  /  unakA kathana hai ki jo
kriyamAna-kiye jAte hue kArya ko kRt- kiyA huA kahatA hai vaha pratyakSa
viruddha prarUpaNa karatA hai, sarvajJa nahIM hotA  /  jo pAtra Adi parigraha
rakhate hue bhI mokSa prApta hone kA nirUpaNa karatA vaha sarvajJa nahIM ho
sakatA  /  isa prakAra sarvajJokta mokSa mArga meM mokSa nirUpaka siddhAntoM meM
zraddhA nahIM krte| kaI aise haiM jo sarvajJa dvArA upadiSTa siddhAntoM meM
vizvAsa rakhate hue bhI yathAvata svIkAra kiye saMyamarUpI bhAra ko dhRti-
dhairya saMhanana-daihika sthiti Adi kI durbalatA ke kAraNa vahana karane meM
saMyama kA nirvAha karane meM sakSama nahIM hote  /  kaI aise haiM jo saMyama
pAlana meM viSaNNa-zithila yA asthira hone lagate haiM, taba AcArya Adi dvArA
vAtsalyapUrvaka saMyama pAlana meM prerita kiye jAne para bhI upadeza yA
anuzAsana karane vAloM meM prati paruSa, karkaza yA niSThura, pratIpa - viparIta
vacana bolate haiM  /  visohiyaM te aNukAhayaMte, je AtabhAveNa viyAgarejjA  /
aTThANie hoi bahUguNANaM, je NANasaMkAi musaM vadejjA  // 3 //  vizodhitante
'nukathayanti ye AtmabhAvena vyAgRNIyuH  /  asthAniko bhavati bahuguNAnAM ye
jJAnazaGkayA mRSA vadeyuH  //  chAyA anuvAda - vItarAga prarUpita mArga
vizodhita - samagra doSarahita hai to bhI ve nihmava ahaMkAra ke usake doSoM kA
anukathana karate haiM-doSAropaNa karate haiM  /  ve apanI rUci ke anurUpa
paramparA prApta karate haiN| apanI rUci ke anurUpa paramparA prApta saddarzana
se bhinna vivecana apalApa karate haiN| ve uttama guNoM ke asthAnikaapAtra haiM
/  - TIkA - kiJca - vividham- anekakAraM zodhitaH
kumArgaprarUpaNApanayanadvAreNa nirdoSitAM nIto vizodhitaH
samyagdarzanajJAnacAritrAkhyo mokSamArgastamevaMbhUtaM mokSamArgaM ' te '
svAgrahagrahagrastA goSThAmAhilavadanu-pazcAdAcAryaprarUpaNAtaH kathayaMti-
anukathayanti  /  ye caivaMbhUtA AtmotkarSAtsvarUciviracita vyAkhyAprakAra
vyAmohitA 'AtmabhAvena' svAbhiprAyeNAcAryapAramparyeNAyAtamapyarthaM
vyudasyAnyathA 'vyAgRNIyuH' vyAkhyAnayeSuH, te hi gaMbhIrAbhiprAyaM sUtrArthaM
karmodayAtpUrvApareNa yathAvatpariNAmayitumasamarthAH paMDitamAnina utsUtraM
pratipAdayanti  /  AtmabhAvavyAkaraNaM ca mahate'narthAyeti darzayati-'sa'
evaMbhUtaH svakIyAbhinivezAd 'asthAnikaH' anAdhAro bahUnAM
jJAnAdiguNAnAmabhAjanaM bhavatIti, te cAmI guNAH "sussUsai paDipucchai suNei
geNhai ya Ihae Avi  /  tatto apohae vA dhArei karei vA sammaM  // 1 //  chAyA -
zuzrUSate pratipRcchati zRNoti gRhNAti IhatecApi  /  tato'pohate vA dhArayati
karoti vA samyak  // 1 //  yadivA guruzuzruSAdinA samyagjJAnAvagamastataH
samyaganuSThAnamataH sakalakarmakSaya lakSaNo mokSa ityevaMbhUtAnAM
guNAnAmanAyatanamasau bhavati, kkacitpATha: 'aTTANie hoMti bahUNivesa'- tti
asyAyamarthaH asthAnam-abhAjanamapAtramasau bhavati samyagjJAnAdInAM guNAnAM
kiMbhUto ? bahu: anarthasaMpAdakatvenAsadabhinivezo yasya sa 545

Page #574 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Sutrakritanga Sutra Translation:  Those who are disfigured by ignorance,
who are smeared with a little knowledge or learning, and who have doubts about
scriptural knowledge (shrutajnana) and knowledge (jnana), and who speak
falsehoods - they cast doubt on the scriptures revealed by the Omniscient
(Sarvajna). They say that this (scripture) is not composed by the Omniscient, or
that its meaning is different. Or out of the pride of their scholarship, they
speak falsehoods, saying that what I say is alone correct, and not otherwise.
Those who, when questioned, twist (the meaning) and truly deceive (the
questioner) regarding the true purport - they, though appearing as ascetics
here, are in fact deceitful and will go to endless destruction.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram bahuniveza:, yadivAguNAnAmasthAnika:- anAdhAro bahunAM
doSANAM ca nivezaH-sthAnam Azraya iti, kiMbhUtAH punarevaM bhavantIti darzayati-
ye kecana durgRhItajJAna lavAvalepino jJAnezrutajJAne zaMkA jJAna zaMkA tathA
mRSAvAdaM vadeyuH, etaduktaM bhavati sarvajJapraNIte Agame zaMkA kurvanti, ayaM
tatpraNIta eva na bhaved anyathA vA'syArthaH syAt, yadivA jJAnazaGkayA,
pAMDityAbhimAnena mRSAvAdaM vadeyuryathA'haM bravIbhi tathaiva yujyate
nAnyatheti  //  3  //  TIkArtha - jo taraha taraha se parizodhita hai,
mithyAmArga kI prarUpaNA apanayana se jo nirdoSa banAyA gayA hai, vaha vizodhita
mArga kahA jAtA hai, jo samyagdarzana, samyakjJAna, tathA samyagcAritra mUlaka
mokSa kA patha hai kintu apane Agraha rUpI graha dvArA grasta-durAgrahayukta
goSThAmAhila kI taraha AcArya paramparAgata dharmopadeza se pratikUla kathana-
anukathana karate haiM jo aise loga AtmokarSa - apane ahaMkAra ke kAraNa apanI
rUci ke anurUpa racita vyAkhyA meM vyAmUr3ha hote hue AcAryoM kI paramparA se
AyAta -samAgata artha kA parityAga kara usake viruddha artha kI vivecanA karate
haiM ve sUtra ke gaMbhIra abhiprAya Azaya ko karmodaya ke kAraNa pUrvA para
saMdarbha ke anusAra AtmasAt karane meM asamartha haiM  /  ve apane Apako
paMDita - jJAnI mAnate haiM tathA utsUtra - sUtra viruddha pratipAdana karate
haiN| AtmabhAva - apanI abhirUci ke anusAra sUtra kA vyAkaraNa - vyAkhyAna
karanA atyanta anartha kA hetu hai  /  sUtrakAra yaha vyakta karate haiM jo
puruSa apane abhiniveza - durAgraha ke kAraNa aisA karatA hai, vaha jJAna Adi
guNoM kA sthAna- AdhAra yA pAtra nahIM hotaa| ve guNa ye haiM- vyakti pahale
guru se jJAna sunanA cAhatA hai, pratipRcchA karatA hai, grahaNa karatA hai, IhA
- tarka karatA hai, apoha - uhApoha karatA hai, samAdhAna hone para dhAraNa
karatA hai, bhalI bhAMti use kriyAnvita karatA hai  /  athavA guru kI zuzruSA
Adi dvArA samyakjJAna kA avagama-bodha prApta hotA hai taba samyak AcaraNa
phalita hotA hai aura usase samasta karma kSINa hone ke pariNAmasvarUpa mokSa
prApta hai  /  vaha nihnava ina guNoM kA Ayatana - bhAjana nahIM hotA  /  kahIM
kahIM 'aTThANie hoMti bahUNivesa' aisA pATha prApta hotA hai| usakA Azaya yaha
hai ki vaha puruSa samyagjJAna Adi guNoM kA asthAna abhAjana yA apAtra hotA hai
/  prazna karate hue kahA jAtA hai ki vaha kaisA hotA hai ? kauna hai ? uttara
ke rUpa meM samAdhAna dete hue pratipAdita kiyA jAtA hai ki jyoM atyadhika
anarthoM kA sampAdaka-niSpAdaka hote hue durAgrahI hai athavA vaha puruSa guNoM
kA pAtra nahIM hotA kiMtu bahuta se doSoM kA niveza - sthAna yA Azraya hotA hai|
aise puruSa kauna se hote haiM, yaha digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM-jo puruSa
jJAnalava-thor3A sA jJAna yA vidyA prApta kara avalepa- abhimAna karate hue
zrutajJAna meM - sarvajJanirUpita Agama meM zaMkA karate hue mithyAbhASaNa
karate haiM  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jyoM sarvajJa praNati Agama meM
zaMkA karate haiM ki yaha sarvajJa praNIta ho hI nahIM sakatA  /  yA yoM kahate
haiM ki isakA artha bhinna hai athavA usameM zaMkA karate hue apane pAMDitya -
vidvatA ke ghamaMDa se asatya bhASaNa karate haiM aura kahate haiM ki jaisA maiM
bolatA hU~ vahI yukta upayukta yA sahI hai| usase anyathA - anya prakAra se sahI
nahIM hai  /  je yAvi puTThA paliuMcayaMti, AyANamaTTaM khalu vaMcayittA ( yanti
)  /  asAhuNo te iha sAhumANI, mAyaNNi esaMti ataghAtaM  // 4 //  chAyA - yecApi
pRSTAH parikuJcayanti, AdAnamarthaM khalu vaJcayanti  /  asAdhavaste iha
sAdhumAnino mAyAnvitA eSyantyanantaghAtam  //  546

Page #575 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sri Yatathayadhyayana Anuvada - Those who hide their Guru's name when asked,
deprive themselves of Moksha. They are truly Asadhu, but consider themselves
Sadhu. These Maya-anvit, deceitful, or boastful men experience the suffering of
the world countless times.**  **Tika - Some, who do not know the true meaning of
things, become arrogant with a little knowledge. When asked by others, "From
which Acharya did you learn and hear this?", they hide their own Acharya's name
out of pride in their knowledge. They may say, "I have discovered this myself,"
or "I have learned this from a famous Acharya," thus hiding their Guru's name.
Or, if they have made a mistake or forgotten something, they may hide the truth
out of fear of being criticized by their Acharya, just like a child hides the
truth from its mother out of fear of being scolded. Such men, who hide their
Guru's name, deprive themselves of knowledge, Moksha, and its purpose. The word
"Khalu" here means certainty, so they definitely deprive themselves. Such men
are truly Asadhu, but they boast of being Sadhu in this world. They are Maya-
anvit, deceitful, and not truly Sadhu. They will experience destruction
countless times and wander in the dense forest of Samsara. They are guilty of
two faults: they are themselves Asadhu, and they boast of being Sadhu. It is
said, "One who commits a sin and claims to be pure, commits double the sin. This
is the second foolishness of a child." Thus, by their pride, they destroy their
own understanding and become subject to endless Samsara. This is the truth.**
**The author now explains the consequences of pride and introduces the faults of
Kshaya like anger, etc.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI yAtAthyAdhyayana anuvAda - jo pUche jAne para apane guru kA nAma chipAte
haiM, ve apane ko mokSa se vaMcita karate haiN| ve vAstava meM asAdhu haiM  /
kintu apane ko sAdhu mAne hue haiM  /  ve mAyAnvita-chalanA yA pravaJcanA se
yukta puruSa ananta bAra saMsAra ke duHkha pAte haiN| TIkA - kiJcAnyat-ye
kecinAviditaparamArtha:svalpatayA samutsekino'pareNa pRSTAH-
kasmAdAcAryAtsakAzAdadhItaM zrutaM bhavadbhiriti, te tu svakIyamAcAryaM
jJAnAvalepena nihanuvAnA aparaM prasiddha pratipAdayanti, yadivA
mayaivaitatsvata utprekSitamityevaM jJAnAvale pAt 'paliuMcayaMtti' tti niha
nuvate, yadivA-sadapi pramAdaskhalitamAcAryAdinA''locanAdike avasare pRSTAHsanto
maatRsthaanenaavrnnvaadbhyaannihnuvte|t evaM parikuJcakAnihavaM kurvANA AdIyata
ityAdAnaM-jJAnAdikaM mokSovA tamarthaM vaJcayanti-bhraMzayantyAtmanaH,
khaluravadhAraNevaJcayantyeva  /  evamanuSThAyinazcAsAdhavaste paramArtha
tastattvacintAyAm 'iha' asmin jagati sAdhuvicAre vA 'sAdhumAnina' AtmotkarSAt
sadanuSThAnamAnino mAyAnvitAste 'eSyanti' yAsyanti 'anantazo' bahuzo 'ghAtaM'
vinAzaM saMsAraM vA anavadagraM saMsArakAntAramanuparivartayisyantIti,
doSadvayavuSTatvAtteSAm, ekaM tAvatsvayamasAdhavo dvitIyaM sAdhumAninaH, uktaMca
"pAvaM kAUNa sayaM appANaM suddhameva bAharai  /  duguNaM karei pAvaM bIyaM
bAlassa maMdattaM  // 1 // " chAyA - pApaM kRtvA svayaM AtmAnaM zuddhameva
vyAharati  /  dviguNaM karoti pApaM dvitIyaM bAlasya maMdatvam  // 1 //
tadevamAtmotkarSadoSArodhilAbhamapyu pahatyAnantasaMsAra bhAjo bhavantyasumanta
iti sthitam  // 4 //  mAnavipAkamupadAdhunA krodhAdikaSAyadoSamudbhAvayitumAha -
TIkArtha - jo puruSa paramArtha-yathArtha tattva ko-satya ko nahIM jAnate ve
thor3I sI vidyA pAkara atyanta samutseka-abhimAna se bhara jAte haiM  /  kisI
dvArA yaha pUche jAne para ki 'Apane kina AcArya se zAstrAdhyayana to ve
jAnAvalepa-apanI vidyA ke garva ke kAraNa apane AcArya kA nAma nihanata karate
haiM-chipAte haiM tathA kinhIM dUsare prasiddha AcArya kA nAma batA dete haiM
athavA maiMne to khuda hI ina zAstroM ko utprekSita kiyA hai-inakA adhyayana-
anuzIlana kiyA hai  / " yaha kahakara apanI vidyA ke ghamaMDa se guru kA nAma
chipA lete haiM athavA pramAdavaza skhalana ho jAya-bhUla ho jAya to ve AlocanA
Adi ke avasara para AcArya dvArA pUche jAne para isa bhaya se ki 'isase-batAne
se merI nindA hogI' vAstavikatA ko chipAte haiM  /  isa prakAra ve apane AcArya
kA nAma chipAne vAle puruSa apane Apako jJAna Adi se, mokSa se vaMcita karate
haiM  /  yahAM prayukta 'khalu' zabda nizcaya ke artha meM hai, tadanusAra ve
avazya hI apane ko vaMcita karate haiM-bhraSTa karate haiM, yaha abhiprAya hai
/  isa prakAra AcaraNa karane vAle ve tatvataH asAdhu hai  /  ve isa jagata meM
sAdhutva kI carcA ke prasaMga para abhimAna ke kAraNa apane Apako sAdhu kahane
kA dambha karate haiM  /  parantu ve mAyAvI hai-chalaprapaMca meM lagna hai,
sAdhu nahIM hai  /  ve anantakAla paryanta vinAza ko prApta kareMge  /  saMsAra
rUpI gahana vana meM bhaTakeMge  /  ve do prakAra se doSalipta hai  /  eka to ve
svayaM asAdhu haiM tathA dUsare sAdhu hone kA dambha karate haiM  /  isaliye
kahA hai ki jo svayaM pApa karake bhI apane Apako zuddha-niSpApa batalAtA hai,
vaha dugunA pApa karatA hai  /  yaha bAla-ajJAnI prANI kI dUsarI mandatA-
mUrkhatA hai  /  isa prakAra nihnava apane ahaMkAra ke kAraNa bodhilAbha ko bhI
upahatavinaSTa kara dete haiM tathA ve ananta saMsAra bhAgI hote haiM-ananta
bAra saMsAra meM AvAgamana karate haiM  /  yaha vastu sthiti hai| abhimAna
karane para vipAka-phala upadarzita kara aba sUtrakAra krodha Adi kaSAyoM ke
doSoM kI udbhAvanA karane hetu kahate haiM - kiyA hai 547)

Page #576 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Śrī Sūtrakrtaṅga Sūtra**  Whoever is a **krodhano** (prone to anger), a
**jagadarthabhāṣī** (one who speaks about the faults of others), and
**udirāyeja** (rekindles extinguished conflict), is a **papakarmā** (doer of
evil deeds). He dwells in the **daṇḍapatha** (narrow path) like a blind man, and
suffers.  **Commentary:**  A person who is **krodhano** by nature, due to the
**vipaka** (result) of **kaṣāya** (passions), and who is also a
**jagadarthabhāṣī**, speaks about the faults of others. For example, he might
call a Brahmin a **ḍoda** (fool), a merchant a **kirāṭa** (barbarian), a
**śūdra** an **ābhira** (herdsman), a **śvapāka** a **caṇḍāla** (outcast), a
blind person **kāṇa**, a lame person **khaja**, a hunchback **kubja**, a deaf
person **vau bham**, a leper **kuṣṭhina**, a consumptive **kṣayina**, etc. He
speaks harshly and rudely about the faults of others. He is called a
**jagadarthabhāṣī** because he speaks about the faults of the world. Or, he
might be a **jayarthabhāṣī** (one who speaks for victory), who speaks falsely to
achieve victory. He wants to win by any means, even by speaking untruthfully.
**Viyosiyam** means to rekindle extinguished conflict. He rekindles the
**dvandva** (dualism) and **kalaha** (conflict) that has been settled. This is
like when people who have been fighting and have apologized to each other, but
then someone says something that makes them angry again.  The sūtra then
describes the **vipaka** (result) of this action. Just as a blind man, who is
**daṇḍapatha** (on a narrow path), stumbles and falls because he cannot see, so
too does this person, who is **aviosie** (unreconciled) and **papakarmā** (doer
of evil deeds), suffer in the **caturgaṭika** (four realms of existence) due to
his **karma** (actions). He is constantly tormented in the **yātanāsthāna**
(places of torment).  **Commentary on the Commentary:**  A person who is not
aware of the **vipaka** of **kaṣāya** and who is **krodhano** by nature, speaks
harshly about the faults of others. He speaks about the world as it is, without
any filter. He is called a **jagadarthabhāṣī** because he speaks about the
faults of the world. Or, he might be a **jayarthabhāṣī** (one who speaks for
victory), who speaks falsely to achieve victory. He wants to win by any means,
even by speaking untruthfully.  He rekindles extinguished conflict. This is like
when people who have been fighting and have apologized to each other, but then
someone says something that makes them angry again.  The sūtra then describes
the **vipaka** (result) of this action. Just as a blind man, who is
**daṇḍapatha** (on a narrow path), stumbles and falls because he cannot see, so
too does this person, who is **aviosie** (unreconciled) and **papakarmā** (doer
of evil deeds), suffer in the **caturgaṭika** (four realms of existence) due to
his **karma** (actions). He is constantly tormented in the **yātanāsthāna**
(places of torment).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram je kohaNe hoi jagabhAsI, viosiyaM je u udIraejA  /
aMdhe vase daMDapahaM gahAya, avi osie dhAsatipAvakammI  // 5 //  chAyA - yaH
krodhano bhavati, jagadarthabhASI vyavasitaMyastUdIrayet  /  andha ivAsau
daNDapathaM gRhItvA'vyavasito dhRSyatepApakarmA  //  anuvAda - jo puruSa
krodhana-krodhapUrNa hotA hai-krodha karatA hai, dUsaroM ke doSoM ko bakhAnatA
hai, zAMta hue saMgharSa ko phira jAgarita karatA hai-jagAtA hai, vaha pApa
karmakArI hai  /  sadA saMgharSa-kalaha Adi meM grasta rahatA hai  /
daNDapatha-sakar3e yA choTe mArga meM jAte hue aMdhe kI taraha dharSita hotA
hai-kaSTa pAtA hai  /  TIkA - yo hyavidita kaSAya vipAkaH prakRtyaiva krodhano
bhavati tathA 'jagadarthabhASI' yazca bhavati, jagatyarthA jagadarthA ye yathA
vyavasthitAH padArthAstAnAbhASituM zIlamasya jagadarthabhAsI tadyathA-brAhmaNa
DoDamiti brUyAttathA vaNijaM kirATamiti zudramAbhIramiti zvapAkaMcANDAlamityAdi
tathA kANaM kANamiti tathA khajaM kubjaM vau bhamittyAdi tathA kuSThinaM
kSayiNamityAdi yo yasya doSastaM tena kharaparuSaM brUyAt yaH sa
jagadarthabhASI, yadivA jayArthabhASI yathaivA''tmano jayo bhavati
tathaivAvidyamAnamapyarthaM bhASate tacchIlazca-yena
kenacitprakAreNAsadarthabhASaNenApyAtmano jayamicchatItyarthaH  /  'viosiyaM'
tti vividhamavasitaM-paryavasitamupazAMtaM dvandva-kalahaM yaH punarapyudArayet,
etaduktaM bhavatikalahakAribhimithyAduSkRtAdinA parasparaM kSAmite'pi tattad
brUyAdyena punarapiteSAMkrodhodayo bhvti|saamprtmetdvipaakN darzayati-yathA
hyandhaH-cakSurvikalo 'daNDapatha' godaNDamArga (laghumArga) pramukhojjvalaM
'gRhItvA' Azritya vrajan samyagakovidatayA dhRSyate'kaNTakazvApadAdibhiH
pIDyate,evamasAvapi kevalaMliGgadhAryanupazAntakrodhaHkarkazabhASyadhi
karaNoddIpakaH, tathA 'aviosie' tti anupazAntadvandvaH pApam-anAryaM karma-
anuSThAnaM yasyAsau pApakarmAdhaSyate caturgatike saMsAre yAtanAsthAnagataH
paunaHpunyena pIDayata iti  // 5 //  TIkArtha - jo puruSa kaSAyoM ke vipAka-
pariNAma kA vettA nahIM hai, jo prakRti se hI krodhI hai, jo jagata meM jaisA
hai use vaise hI khule zabdoM-apriya zabdoM meM kahatA hai  /  jaise brAhmaNa ko
DoDa, baniye ko kirATa, zudra ko AbhIra, zvapAka ko cANDAla, kAne ko kAnA,
khaja-laMgar3e ko laMgar3A, kubja ko kubja, badhira ko badhira, koDhI ko koDhI,
kSayI ko kSayI-isa prakAra jisakA doSa-hInatva hai use khara paruSa-tIkhe
kaThora zabdoM meM kahatA hai  /  vaha yahA~ jagadarthabhASI kahA gayA hai
athavA jaisA kahane se apanI vijaya hotI hai, vaisA na hote hue bhI-mithyAbhASI
jo kahatA hai, vaisA jayArthabhASI bhI isakA abhiprAya hai  /  isakA tAtparya
yaha hai ki vaha jisa kisI prakAra se-asada bhASaNa dvArA bhI apanI jaya cAhatA
hai jo sarvathA upazAMta-dvandva yA kalaha ko punaH udIrNa karatA hai-utpanna
karatA hai jaise Apasa meM jhagar3ane vAle 'micchAmidukkaDaM' kahakara paraspara
kSAmita ho jAte haiM-eka dUsare ko kSamA pradAna kara zAMta ho jAte haiM to bhI
jo aisI bAteM kahatA haiM jinase unake krodha Adi punaH bhar3aka jAye  /  usa
puruSa ke karma vipAka kA-phala kA digdarzana karAne hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdana
karate haiM-jaise eka cakSurvikala-naitrahIna puruSa choTI pagaDaMDI se jAtA huA
mArga ko bhalI bhAMti na jAnane ke kAraNa jhAr3a jhaMkhAr3a tathA vana ke
jantuoM Adi se utpIDita-klezAnvita hotA hai, usI taraha jo kevala sAdhu ke
liMgaveza ko dhAraNa karatA hai, jisane krodha ko upazAMta nahIM kiyA hai, jo
karkaza bhASI hai tathA kalaha Adi kA uddIpaka hai, vaha pApa karmA-pApAcArI
puruSa caturgatimaya saMsAra meM yAtanAsthAnoM ko-narakAdi duHkhoM ko prApta
hotA hai, punaH punaH pIr3ita hotA hai  /  -548)

Page #577 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The one who engages in strife and speaks unjustly, does not attain samatva - he
does not develop equanimity. He does not become free from afflictions. The one
who follows the Guru's instructions, is ashamed of committing sins, and has
faith in the principles, is free from maya (illusion).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI yAtAthyAdhyayanaM je viggahIe annAyabhAsI, na se same hoi ajhaMjhapatte  /
u (o) vAyakArI ya harImaNe, ya egaMtadiTThI ya amAirUve  // 6 //  chAyA - yo
vigrahiko'nyAyabhASI na saH samI bhavatyajhaMjhAprAptaH  /  upapAtakArI ca
hImanAca, ekAntadRSTizcAmAyirUpaH  //  anuvAda - jo vigraha-jhagar3A karatA hai
tathA anyAyapUrNa bhASaNa karatA hai, vaha samattva ko prApta nahIM hotA-usameM
samatAbhAva nahIM panapatA  /  vaha kleza rahita nahIM hotA  /  jo guru kI AjJA
kA pAlana karatA hai, pApa karane meM lajjita hotA hai tathA tattvoM meM niSThA
rakhatA hai vahI amAyI-mAyA rahita hai| TIkA - kiJcAnyat-yaH
kazcidaviditaparamArtho vigraho-yuddhaM sa vidyate yasyAsau vigrahiko yadyapi
pratyupekSaNAdikAH kriyA vidhatte tathApi yuddhapriyaH kazcidbhavati
tathA'nyAyyaM bhASituM zIlamasya so'na yatkiJcanabhASyasthAnabhASI
gurvAdyadhikSepakaro vA yazcaivaMbhUto nAsau 'samo' raktadviSTatayA madhyastho
bhavati, tathA nApyajhaJjhAM prAptaH-akalahaprApto vA na bhavatyamAyAprApto vA,
yadivA ajhaJjhAprAptaiH-akalahaprAptaiH samyagdRSTibhirasau samo na bhavati
yataH ato naivaMvidhena bhAvyam, api tvakrodhanenAkarkazabhASiNA
copazAntayuddhAnudIrakeNa nyAyyabhASiNA'jhaJjhAprAptena madhyasthena ca
bhAvyamiti  /  evamanantaroddiSTadoSavarjI
sannupapAtakArIAcAryanirdezakArIyathopadezaM kriyAsu pravRttaH yadivA
'upAyakAri'tti sUtropadezaMpravartakaH, tathAhI: lajjA saMyamo
mUlottaraguNabhedabhinnastatra mano yasyAsau-hrImanAH, yadivA-anAcAraM
kurvannAcAryAdibhyo lajjate sa evamucyate tathaikAntena tattveSujIvAdiSu
padArtheSudRSTiryasyAsAvekAntadRSTiH, pAThAntaraM vA 'egaMtasaDDhi' tti ekAntena
zraddhAvAna maunIndroktamArge ekAntena zraddhAlurityarthaH cakAraH
pUrvoktadoSaviparyastaguNasamuccayArthaH, tadyathA-jJAnApalikuJcako'krodhItyAdi
tAvadajhaJjhAprApta iti, svata evAha-'amAirUve'tti amAyino rUpaM
yasyAsAvamAyirUpo'zeSacchadyarahita ityarthaH,na gurvAdIn chadmanopacarati
nApyanyena kena citsArdhaM chadmavyavahAraM vidhatta iti  // 6 //  _TIkArtha -
jo paramArtha ko nahIM jAnatA, vigraha-jhagar3A karatA hai, yadyapi pratikramaNa
Adi kriyAeM sampAdita karatA hai, kintu yuddhapriya-jhagaDAlU hotA hai, anyAya
pUrNa bhASaNa karatA hai, cAhe jo bola uThatA hai, asthAnabhASI hotA hai-
prasaMga ke binA hI bolatA hai, guru Adi para adhikSepa karatA hai, vaha
raktatA-rAga dviSTatA-dveSa se yukta hone ke kAraNa madhyastha-taTastha nahIM
hotA  /  kalahazUnya tathA mAyAvarjita nahIM hotA  /  kalahazUnya evaM
samyakdRSTi prApta puruSoM ke sadRza nahIM hotA  /  use aisA nahIM honA caahiye|
use akrodhana-krodharahita, akarkazabhASI, upazAnta yuddha-kalaha kA anuddIraka,
nyAyabhASI, kalaha varjita evaM madhyastha rahanA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra pUrva
sUcita doSoM kA varjana kara jo AcArya ke nirdeza kA pAlana karatA hai, unake
upadeza ko kriyAnvita karatA hai vaha sUtra meM dI gaI zikSA ke anusAra pravRtti
karatA hai  /  mUlaguNa tathA uttaraguNa yukta saMyama ke paripAlana meM usakA
mana saMlagna rahatA hai  /  athavA vaha anAcAra-doSa yukta AcaraNa karatA huA
guru Adi ke samakSa lajjA anubhava karatA hai  /  vaha jIva Adi padArthoM meM
ekAnta dRSTi rakhatA hai-unameM dRr3ha AsthA rakhatA hai  /  yahA~
'egaMtasaDDhi' yaha pAThAntara prApta hotA hai| tadanusAra maunIndra-tIrthaMkara
dvArA pratipAdita.mArga meM ekAMtarUpa se zraddhAvAn hotA hai  /  yahAM prayukta
cakAra pahale kahe gaye doSoM ke viruddha guNasamuccaya kA jJApaka hai  /  jaise
jo apane AcArya kA nAma nahIM chipAtAkrodhAviSTa nahIM hotA tathA yuddhapriya
nahIM hotA vahI puruSa mAyA rahita-chalaprapaMca varjita hotA hai  /  vaha
chadma-chala kapaTa ke sAtha guru kI sevA nahIM karatA tathA anya kisI ke sAtha
chadma pUrNa vyavahAra nahIM karatA  /  (549

Page #578 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Verse 7:**  He who, even when instructed,
remains unperturbed in his mind when faults arise, and is taught by the Acharya
and others, is **pesal**, endowed with humility and other virtues, a seer of
subtle meaning, and a hero of the self. He is a noble soul, observing restraint,
and imbued with equanimity and **ujjuchare** - straightforward conduct.  **Verse
8:**  He who, with little wisdom, considers himself wise, is like a conch shell,
empty and hollow. He is like a fool who, clinging to his own opinion, sees the
world as a mere reflection.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram se pesale suhume purisajAe, jaccannie ceva bahupi
aNusAsie je tahaccA, same hu se hoi suujjuyAre  /  ajhaMjhapatte  // 7 //  chAyA
sa pezala: sUkSmaH puruSajAtaH jAtyanvitazcaiva suRjvAcAraH  /
vahvapyanuzAsyamAno yastathArcaH samaH sa bhavatyajhaMjhAprAptaH  //  - anuvAda
- jo sAdhu anuzAsita hone para bhI - truTi hone para AcArya Adi dvArA zikSA diye
jAne para apane citta ko avikRta rakhatA hai vahI pesala vinayAdiguNoM se yukta,
sUkSma artha kA dRSTA aura Atma parAkramazIla hotA hai, vahI kulIna hotA hai  /
saMyama kA pAlana karatA hai tathA samatva bhAva aura Rju AcAra- sarala AcAra se
anvita hai  /  TIkA punarapi sadguNotkIrtanAyAha-yo hi kaTusaMsArodvignaH
kvacatpramAdaskhalite satyAcAryAdinA bahvapi 'anuzAsyamAnaH' caudyamAnastathaiva
- sanmArgAnusAriNyarcAlezyA cittavRttiryasya sa bhavati tathArca:, yazca zikSAM
grAhyamANo'pi tathAceM bhavati sa 'pezalo' miSTavAkyo vinayAdiguNasamanvitaH
'sUkSmaH' sUkSmadarzitvAtsUkSmabhASi (vi) tvAdvA sUkSmaH sa eva puruSajAta: ' sa
eva paramArthataH puruSArthakArI nAparo yo'nAyudhatapasvijanaparAjitenApi
krodhena jIyate, tathA'sAveva 'jAtyanvita: ' sukulotpannaH, sacchIlAnvito hi
kulIna ityucyate, na sukulotpattimAtreNa, tathA sa eva suSThu-atizayena RjuH-
saMyamastatkaraNazIlaH - RjukaraH, yadivA 'ujjucAre' tti pathopadezaM yaH
pravartate na tu punarvakratayA'cAryAdivacanaM vilomayati- pratikUlayati, yazca
tathArca: pezala: sUkSmabhASI jAtyAdiguNAnvitaH kvacidavakraH 'samo' madhyastho
nindAyAM pUjAyAM ca na ruSyati nApi tuSyati tathA ajhaMjhA-akrodho'mAyA vA tAM
prApto'jhaMjhAprAptaH, yadivA'jhaMjhAprAptaiH - vItarAgaiH 'samaH' tulyo
bhavatIti  // 7 //  TIkArtha sUtrakAra sadguNoM kA utkIrtana karane hetu kahate
haiM- jo puruSa kaTu-kaThora duHkhamaya saMsAra se udvigna haiM, pramAdavaza
kahIM skhalita ho jAtA hai, vaisA hone para AcArya Adi dvArA bhalIbhAMti jaba
vaha anuzAsita kiyA jAtA hai, pahale kI jyoM apane citta vRtti ko sanmArga meM
lagA detA hai arthAt AcArya dvArA zikSA diye jAne para apane citta ko zuddha
banA letA hai vaha pesala - madhurabhASI tathA vinayAdi guNoM se yukta hotA hai|
sUkSmagaMbhIra artha kA dRSTA hotA hai  /  athavA usakA vaktA hotA hai  /
athavA svayaM sUkSma - gaharA hotA hai vaha vAstava meM puruSArthazIla hai -
AtmA parAkramodyata hotA hai| jo puruSa Ayudha rahita, tapasvIjanoM se parAjita
krodha ke vazIbhUta ho jAtA hai vaha puruSArthazIla nahIM hotA  /  jo sat zIla
se pavitra AcaraNa se yukta hotA hai vahI ucca kula utpanna yA kulIna kahA jAtA
hai  /  kevala uttama kula meM utpanna hone se koI kulIna nahIM hotA  /  vahI
pavitra AcaraNa yukta hI saMyama kA paripAlaka hotA hai  /  athavA Rju AcAra
meM, saMyama meM yathopadeza guru ke upadeza ke anusAra pravartanazIla hotA hai|
jo vakratA se guru ke vacana ke viruddha nahIM calatA evaM apane citta ko
nirmala rakhatA hai- sUkSmArtha bhASI hotA hai, jAti Adi guNoM se yukta hotA
hai, athavA avakra - samatva yukta, madhyastha hotA hai, nindA hone para ruSTa
nahIM hotA tathA pUjA satkAra hone para tuSTa nahIM hotA  /  krodha aura mAyA se
avyApta rahatA hai vaha krodha tathA mAyAvihIna vItarAga mahApuruSoM ke tulya
hotA hai  /  - je Avi appaM va sumati yattA, saMkhAya vAyaM aparikkha kujjA  /
taveNa vAhaM sahiutti mattA, aNNaMjaNaM passati biMbabhUyaM  // 8 //  550

Page #579 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Study of Conduct. He wanders through the world, clinging to delusion, not
finding a place in the lineage of the silent ones. He who, seeking honor, exalts
himself, not understanding the true nature of things. ||1|| Commentary - He who,
considering himself to be a vessel of virtue and knowledge, without examination,
without understanding his true nature, praises himself, thinking, "I am a
practitioner of austerity," sees other men as insignificant, like the reflection
of the moon in water. ||8|| He, the proud man, wanders through the world,
clinging to delusion, not finding a place in the lineage of the silent ones. He
who, seeking honor, exalts himself, not understanding the true nature of things.
||9|| Commentary - It is common for ascetics to be proud of their knowledge and
austerity. Therefore, the author of the text addresses this issue: "He who,
being of a low nature, considers himself to be a vessel of virtue, and, thinking
that austerity is the true wealth, considers himself to be a practitioner of
austerity, thinking, 'I am the one who truly upholds the fundamental and
secondary virtues, there is no one else like me,' and who, considering himself
to be knowledgeable, counts and defines the elements of existence, without
examining the true nature of things, is proud of his own excellence, sees other
men, the virtuous or the householders, as insignificant, like the reflection of
the moon in water, or like a counterfeit coin, a mere form, a mere human shape."
||8|| Further - Just as a deer, bound by a snare, is trapped by a snare and
suffers greatly, so too does this man, bound by the snare of attachment, wander
through the cycle of existence, or is completely absorbed in it. He wanders
through the world in many ways, deluded by desire and other attachments. He who
is like this does not find a place among the silent ones. This silence, this
path, is the path of the silent ones, the path of austerity, the path of the
omniscient. He does not find a place in the path laid down by the omniscient. He
who, seeking honor, exalts himself, not understanding the true nature of things.
||9|| Commentary - Ascetics often become proud of their knowledge and austerity.
Therefore, the author of the text addresses this issue: "He who, being of a low
nature, considers himself to be a vessel of virtue, and, thinking that austerity
is the true wealth, considers himself to be a practitioner of austerity,
thinking, 'I am the one who truly upholds the fundamental and secondary virtues,
there is no one else like me,' and who, considering himself to be knowledgeable,
counts and defines the elements of existence, without examining the true nature
of things, is proud of his own excellence, sees other men, the virtuous or the
householders, as insignificant, like the reflection of the moon in water, or
like a counterfeit coin, a mere form, a mere human shape." ||8|| Further - Just
as a deer, bound by a snare, is trapped by a snare and suffers greatly, so too
does this man, bound by the snare of attachment, wander through the cycle of
existence, or is completely absorbed in it. He wanders through the world in many
ways, deluded by desire and other attachments. He who is like this does not find
a place among the silent ones. This silence, this path, is the path of the
silent ones, the path of austerity, the path of the omniscient. He does not find
a place in the path laid down by the omniscient. He who, seeking honor, exalts
himself, not understanding the true nature of things. ||9||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI yAtAthyAdhyayanaM. egaMtakUDeNa u se palei, Na vijatImoNapayaMsigotte  /
.. je mANaNaTeNa viukkasejA, vasumannatareNa abujjhamANe  // 1 //  chAyA -
yazcA'pyAtmAnaM vasumantaM mattvA, saMkhyAvantaM vAdmaparIkSyakuryAt  /
tapasAvAhaM sahita iti mattvA'nyaM janaM pazyati bimbabhUtam  // 8 //
ekAntakUTena tu sa paryeti, na vidyate maunapade gotre  /  yo mananArthena
vyutkarSayet vasumadanyatareNAbudhyamAnaH  // 9 //  anuvAda - jo apane Apa ko
saMyamI aura jJAnI mAna kara binA parIkSA kiye-apane vAstavika svarUpa ko binA
samajhe apanI prazaMsA karatA hai-maiM tapaHzcaraNazIla hUM, yaha socakara anya
puruSa ko jala meM dikhAI dete candramA ke pratibimba ke samAna tuccha yA
nirarthaka dekhatA hai  /  vaha abhimAnI puruSa ekAntataH moha meM grasta hokara
saMsAra meM paryaTana karatA hai  /  vaha sarvajJa dvArA prarUpita patha kA
anugAmI nahIM hai  /  jo sammAna tathA prazasti pAkara madonmatta ho jAtA hai,
saMyamI hotA huA bhI jJAnAdi kA garva karatA hai, vaha paramArtha ko nahIM
jAnatA  // 8 // 9 //  TIkA- prAyastapasvinAM jJAnatapo'valepo
bhavatItyatastamadhikRtyAha-yazcApikazcillaghuprakRtiralpatayA''tmAnaM vasu-
dravyaM tacca paramArthacintAyAM saMyamastadvantamAtmAnaM matvA'hamevAtra
saMyamavAn mUlottaraguNAnAM samyagvidhAyI nAparaH kazcinmattulyo'stIti, tathA
saMkhyAyanteparicchidyante jIvAdayaH padArthA yena tajjJAnaM saMkhyetyucyate
tadvantamAtmAnaM matvA tathA samyak-paramArthamaparIkSyAtmotkarSAbhimAnIti
'anyaM janaM' sAdhulokaM gRhasthalokaM vA 'bimbabhUtaM'
jalacandravattadarthazUnyaM kUTakArSApaNavadvA liMgamAtradhAriNaM
puruSAkRtimAtraM vA 'pazyati' avamanyate  /  tadevaM yadyanmadasthAnaMjAtyAdikaM
tattadAtmanyevAropyAparamavadhUtaM pazyatIti  // 8 //  kiJcAnyat - _
kUTavatkUTaM yathA kUTena mRgAdirbaddhaH paravazaH sannekAntaduHkhabhAgbhati
evaM bhAvakUTena snehamayenaikAntatA'sau saMsAra cakravAlaM paryeti tatra vA
prakarSeNa lIyate pralIyate-aneka prakAraM saMsAra baMbhramIti, tuzabdAtkAmAdinA
vA mohena mohito bahuvedane saMsAre pralIyate, yazcaivaMbhUto'sau 'na vidyate'
na kadAcana saMbhavati munInAmidaM maunaM tacca tatpadaM ca maunapadaM-
saMyamastatra maunIndre vA pade-sarvajJapraNItamArge nAsau vidyate,
sarvajJamatameva vizinaSTigAM-vAcaM trAyate-arthAvisaMvAdanataHpAlayatIti gotraM
tasmin samastAgamAdhArabhUta ityarthaH, uccairgotre vA
vartamAnastadabhimAnagrahagrasto maunIndra pade na vartate, yazca mAnanaM-
pUjanaM satkArastenArthaH-prayojanaM tena mAnanArthena
vividhamutkarSayedAtmAnaM, yo hi mAnanArthena-lAbhapUjAsatkArAdinA madaM
kuryAnnAsau sarvajJa pade vidyataH iti pUrveNa saMbandhaH, tathA vasu-dravyaM
tacceha saMyamastamAdAya tathA'nyatareNa jJAnAdinA madasthAnena
paramArthamabudhyamAno mAdyati paThannapi sarvazAstrANi tadarthaM
vAvagacchannapi nAsau sarvajJamataM paramArthato jAnAtIti  // 9 //  TIkArtha -
tapasvI janoM ko apane jJAna tathA tapazcaraNa kA prAyaH avalepa-abhimAna hotA
hai, ataH zAstrakAra isa viSaya ko adhikRta kara pratipAdana karate haiM-jo koI
laghuprakRti-oche svabhAva se yukta puruSa apane ko vasumAna-dravya yA
sampannatA yukta mAnatA hai, tAtparyataH saMyama hI pAramArthika vaibhava hai,
apane Apako uttama saMyama tapazcaraNazIla mAnakara aisA socatA haiM ki maiM hI
mUla guNoM evaM uttaraguNoM kA bhalI bhA~ti paripAlana karane vAlA saMyamI hU~,
koI aura mere tulya nahIM hai  /  jisake dvArA jIva Adi tatvoM kA saMkhyAna-
pariccheda 551)

Page #580 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The knowledge that is attained through the study of the Shri Sutra Kritanga
Sutra is called "Jnana Sankhya". A tapasvi who considers himself to be a knower
of this knowledge, but does not properly examine the ultimate truth, becomes
arrogant and proud. He sees other sadhus and righteous householders as mere
appearances, like reflections in water or counterfeit coins, and he despises
them. He also attributes qualities like caste to himself, considering himself to
be superior, and looks down upon others. Such a person is devoid of wisdom.
"Kuta" is like a snare or trap, which binds animals like deer and makes them
subservient. Similarly, a sadhu who is bound by the snare of affection and
attachment wanders in the cycle of samsara. He becomes deeply engrossed in the
world and keeps getting reborn and dying, trapped in the cycle of birth and
death. The word "tu" here indicates that he is deluded by desires and
attachments and is immersed in the painful world.  The arrogant person mentioned
earlier does not follow the path of "Moun" (silence) in his life. The conduct or
dharma associated with monks is called "Moun". Its place or position is "Samyam"
(self-control). Alternatively, the path established by the omniscient
"Mounindra" is called "Mounindra Pad". He does not follow this path.  The
characteristics of the omniscient are described as follows: One who protects the
"Go-vani" (true speech) by speaking truthfully and consistently, without
contradicting himself, is called "Gotr". The omniscient's teachings are the
"Gotr", the foundation of all scriptures. Alternatively, one who is born into a
high caste and takes pride in it does not follow the path of the omniscient. One
who seeks honor, respect, and praise, and becomes proud upon receiving them, is
also not on the path of the omniscient.  "Vas" means wealth or material
possessions. Here, it refers to "Samyam" (self-control). One who possesses
"Samyam" but is engrossed in pride due to knowledge and other such qualities,
and does not understand the ultimate truth, is deluded. Even though he may read
all the scriptures and understand their meaning, he does not truly understand
the teachings of the omniscient.  "A Brahmin, a Kshatriya, an Ugraputra, or a
Lichchhavi, who has renounced the world and accepts food given by others, and
does not take pride in his high lineage, follows the path of the omniscient."
**Commentary:**  The text explains that pride arises from various sources,
including caste pride. It emphasizes that a person who is truly on the path of
the omniscient does not consider himself superior based on his birth or lineage.
The examples of Brahmin, Kshatriya, Ugraputra, and Lichchhavi are given to
illustrate that a person's caste does not determine his spiritual progress. The
text highlights that true spiritual growth comes from renouncing worldly
attachments and following the path of self-control and wisdom.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram nizcaya kiyA jAtA hai, vaha jJAna saMkhyA kahalAtA hai
/  vaha tapasvI apane Apako vaisA jJAnI mAnakara paramArtha kA samyak parIkSaNa
na kara AtmAbhimAnI-garvAnvita hotA huA, anya sAdhu janoM ko saddharmazIla
gRhasthavRnda ko pAnI meM jala ke pratibimba kI jyoM yA khoTe sikke kI jyoM
nirarthaka kevala vezadhArI yA puruSAkRti mAtra dekhatA hai, avamAnanA karatA
hai, tathA jAti Adi madasthAnoM kA apane ApameM Aropakara-apane ko ucca yA
utkRSTa jAti Adi vizeSatAoM se yuktamAnakara dUsare ko tiraskAra yA avahelanA kI
dRSTi se dekhatA hai, vaha vivekazUnya hai| jo kUTa yA pAza-phaMde ke sadRza
hotA hai use kUTa kahA jAtA hai jaise hiraNa Adi pazu pAzabaddha hokara
paravaza-parAdhIna ho jAte haiM tathA ekAnta rUpa meM duHkhabhAgI hote haiM  /
usI prakAra vaha sAdhu snehamaya bhAvAtmaka pAza meM baddha hokara saMsAra cakra
meM bhaTakatA hai athavA vaha saMsAra meM pralIna-atyanta Asakta hotA huA bahuta
taraha-punaH punaH saMsAra meM janma maraNa rUpa AvAgamana meM cakkara lagAtA
hai  /  yahAM Aye hue 'tu' zabda se yaha prakaTa kiyA gayA hai ki vaha kAma Adi
dvArA yA moha dvArA vimUr3ha hokara atyanta yAtanAmaya saMsAra meM pralIna hotA
haiM-nimagna rahatA hai  /  jo puruSa jaisA pahale kahA gayA abhimAnI hotA hai
vaha mauna pada meM-sAdhu jIvana meM vartanazIla nahIM hotA  /  muniyoM se
saMbaddha AcAra yA dharma mauna kahalAtA hai  /  usakA pada yA sthAna saMyama
hai  /  athavA maunindra-sarvajJa dvArA prarUpita pada-mArga maunindra pada hai
/  vaha usakA anusaraNa nahIM karatA  /  sarvajJa mata kI vizeSatA batalAte hue
kahate haiM-jo go-vANI kA trANa karatA hai-avisaMvAdi-aviruddha yA satya artha
kA nirUpaNa kara vANI kA rakSaNa karatA hai, use gotra kahA jAtA hai  /
sarvajJa mata gotra hai, vaha samagra AgamoM kA AdhAra hai  /  athavA jo ucca
gotra meM-uttama kula meM janma lekara usakA garva karatA hai, vaha sarvajJa ke
mArga meM vartanazIla nahIM hai  /  jo mAnana-pUjana, satkAra kA arthI-icchuka
banA rahatA hai, use pAkara taraha-taraha se garva karatA hai, garva kA
pradarzana karatA hai vaha bhI sarvajJa ke mArga meM vidyamAna nahIM hai  /
vasu kA artha dravya hai  /  vaha yahAM saMyama ke rUpa meM gRhIta hai  /  use-
saMyama ko grahaNa kara jo vyakti jJAna Adi mada sthAnoM meM grasta hokara
paramArtha ko nahIM jAnatA huA madonmata hotA hai, samasta zAstroM ko par3hatA
huA, unakA artha jAnatA huA bhI vAstava meM sarvajJa kA mata-siddhAntaM nahIM
jaantaa| je mAhaNo khattiyajAyae vA, tahuggaputte taha lecchaI vA  /  je pavvaIe
paradattabhoI, gotte Na je thabbhati (thaMbhi) mANabaddhe  // 10 //  chAyA - yo
brAhmaNaH kSatriyajAtako vA tathograputrastathA lecchako vA  /  /  yaH
pravajitaH paradattabhojI gotre na yaH stabhnAtyabhimAnabaddhe  //  anuvAda -
brAhmaNa, kSatriya, ugraputra tathA licchivi vaMzIya jo pravarjita hai anya
dvArA diye hue AhAra kA sevana karatA hai  /  apane ucca kula se stabdha nahIM
hai-garvoddhata nahIM hai, vaha sarvajJa ke mArga kA anusaraNa karatA hai| TIkA
- sarveSAM madasthAnAnAmutpatterArabhya jAtimado bAhyanimitta-nirapekSo yato
bhavatyastamadhikRtyAhayo hi jAtyA brAhmaNo bhavati kSatriyo vA-
ikSvAkuvaMzAdikaH, tadbhedameva darzayati-'ugraputraH' kSatriyavizeSajAtIyaH
tathA 'lecchai' tti kSatriya vizeSa eva, tadevamAdiviziSTakulodbhUto
yathAvasthitasaMsArasvabhAvaveditayA yaH 552

Page #581 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of the Path  "The renunciate," having abandoned the bonds of
kingdom and home, is one who partakes of what is given by others - a partaker of
food given by others, a practitioner of perfect restraint. Even though born in a
high lineage, in a lineage like the Harivaṃśa, he should not entertain pride,
the 'pillar' of pride. In what kind of lineage? - In a lineage bound by pride, a
source of pride. This is what is said: Even though he is worthy of respect by
all people due to his special lineage, how can a renunciate, having shaved his
head and beard, wandering from house to house for alms, entertain pride, which
is laughable? He should not entertain pride at all. This is the meaning. ||10||
**Commentary:** Among all the sources of pride, pride in one's lineage is the
most prominent. Because it is not based on external causes, it arises simply
from birth. Therefore, the sutra-kāra emphasizes it, saying: The man who is born
in the Brāhmaṇa lineage, in the Ikshvāku dynasty, in the noble lineage of the
Ugrakula, the Lichchhavi, or other Kshatriya lineages, having been born in such
a special lineage, understands the true nature of the world, recognizes the
kingdom and other things as causes of bondage, and renounces them, becoming a
renunciate. He partakes of food and other things given by others. He practices
pure restraint. Even though born in a high lineage like the Harivaṃśa, he should
not entertain pride, the 'pillar' of pride. In what kind of lineage? Explaining
this, he says: In a lineage that is bound by pride, or is a source of pride, a
cause for generating pride. The meaning is this: Because of being born in a
special lineage, he who was worthy of respect by all people, having become a
renunciate, shaved his head and beard, accepting the path of a renunciate, when
he goes to other people's houses for alms, why should he be proud? Doing so is
laughable for him. The meaning is that he should never entertain pride.  **Om Om
Om**  Neither his lineage nor his family can protect him, nor can any other
well-refined knowledge and conduct. Having renounced, he serves the duties of a
householder, he does not become a transmigrant for liberation. ||11||
**Shadow:** Neither his lineage nor his family can protect him, nor can any
other well-refined knowledge and conduct. Having renounced, he serves the duties
of a householder, he does not become a transmigrant for liberation.
**Translation:** Lineage and family cannot protect a person from misfortune.
They cannot save him from it. Apart from well-refined knowledge and conduct,
nothing else can save a person from misfortune and suffering. The man who,
having renounced, having been initiated, still serves the duties of a
householder, does not become capable of liberating his actions, of diminishing
them.  **Commentary:** He does not entertain pride, because it is not conducive
to virtue. This is what is shown: For a person of low nature, who is agitated by
pride, neither pride in lineage nor pride in family, while wandering in the
world, can be a protection. For pride in lineage, etc., is not beneficial for
worldly or otherworldly virtues. Here, lineage is born from the mother, family
is born from the father. This is also a characteristic. There is no other source
of pride that can protect from the world. What is capable of protecting, of
being a means of liberation from the world, is shown: Knowledge and conduct,
knowledge and conduct. Apart from this, there is no hope of liberation from the
world. This, being strengthened by right faith, well-refined, liberates from the
world. "Liberation is through knowledge and action," according to the saying.
Even though such a person is on the path of liberation, even though he has taken
renunciation, if he is of weak virtue, he is inclined towards the world, he
"serves" the duties of householders, he practices them, he performs them
repeatedly, he makes the source of pride in lineage, etc., a part of the duties
of householders. Another reading is "agārikarma," the duties of householders, he
practices them, he performs them, he makes the source of pride in lineage, etc.,
a part of them. He who serves the duties of householders does not become a
transmigrant for the liberation of all actions, he does not become a destroyer
of all actions. This is the meaning. Liberation from the world, however, arises
for all those who are well-intentioned, every moment. ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI yAtAthyAdhyayanaM 'pravrajitaH' tyaktarAjyAdigRhapAzabandhanaH parairdattaM
bhoktuM zIlamasya paradattabhojI - samyaksaMyamAnuSThAyI 'gotre' uccairgotre
harivaMzasthAnIye samutpanno'pi naiva 'stambhaM' garvamupeyAditi, kiMbhUte gotre
? - " abhimAna baddhe" abhimAnAspade iti, etaduktaM bhavati-viziSTajAtIyatayA
sarvalokAbhimAnyo'pi pravrajitaH san kRtazirastuNDamuNDano bhikSArthaM
paragRhANyaTan kathaM hAsyAspadaM garvaM kuryAt ? naivAsau mAnaM kuryAditi
tAtparyArthaH  // 10 //  TIkArtha - jitane mada ke abhimAna ke sthAna - AdhAra
haiM una sabhI meM jAti kA mada mukhya hai| kyoMki vaha bAhya kAraNa para TikA
huA nahIM hai, janma lene mAtra se hotA hai  /  ataeva sUtrakAra use adhikRta
kara kahate haiM- jo puruSa brAhmaNa jAti meM, IkSvAku vaMza ugra kula -
licchivi Adi kSatriya jAti meM utpanna huA hai  /  isa prakAra viziSTa kula meM
utpanna hokara jo saMsAra ke vAstavika svarUpa ko samajhakara rAjyAdi ko
baMdhana kA hetu jAnakara unakA parityAga kara prabrajita ho gayA hai  /  anya
dvArA datta - diye gaye AhAra Adi kA sevana karatA hai  /  zuddha saMyama kA
paripAlana karatA hai  /  harivaMza ke tulya ucca gotra meM samutpanna hotA huA
bhI vaha stambhagarva na kre| kisa prakAra ke gotra meM ? isakA spaSTIkaraNa
karate hue kahate haiM ki vaise gotra meM jo anabhimAna se baddha hai athavA
abhimAnAspada hai- garva utpanna karane kA hetu hai  /  isakA abhiprAya yaha hai
ki viziSTa jAti meM janma hone ke kAraNa jo saba logoM ke liye sammAnanIya rahA,
pravrajita hokara mastaka aura mu~ha ke bAla muMDAkara sAdhutva svIkAra kara
jaba bhikSA ke liye auroM ke ghara jAtA hai taba vaha kyoM garva kare ? vaisA
karanA usake liye hAsyAspada hai  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki vaha kabhI bhI
abhimAna na kare  /  OM OM OM na tassa jAI va kulaM va tANaM, NaNNattha
vijjAcaraNaM suciNaM  /  Nikkhamma se sevai'gAri kammaM, Na se pArae hoi
vimoyaNA  //  11  //  chAyA na tasya jAtizca kulaM na trANaM, nA'nyatra
vidyAcaraNaM sucIrNam  /  niSkramya sa sevate'gArikarma, na sa pArago bhavati
vimocanAya  //  anuvAda - jAti tathA kula mAnava ko durgati se trANa nahIM de
sakate  /  ve use usase nahIM bacA skte| bhalIbhAMti sAdhita vidyA-jJAna tathA
caraNa cAritra ke atirikta aura koI bhI manuSya ko durgati se duHkha se nahIM
bacA sakatA  /  jo puruSa ghara se niSkramaNa kara-dIkSita hokara bhI gRhastha
ke karmoM kA sevana karatA hai - anusaraNa karatA hai vaha apane karmoM ke
vimocana meM unheM kSINa karane meM sakSama nahIM hotA  /  TIkA - na cAsau mAna:
kriyamANo guNAyetidarzayitumAha-na hi 'tasya' laghuprakRterabhimAnoddhurasya
jAtimadaH kulamado vA kriyamANaH saMsAre paryaTatastrANaM bhavati, na hyabhimAno
jAtyAdika aihikAmuSmikaguNayorUpakArIti, iha ca mAtRsamutthA jAti: pitRsamutthaM
kulam, etaccopalakSaNam, anyadapi madasthAnaM na saMsAratrANAyeti, yatpunaH
saMsArottArakatvena trANasamarthaM taddarzayati-jJAnaM ca caraNaM ca
jJAnacaraNaM tasmAdanyatra saMsArottAraNatrANAzA na vidyate, etacca
samyaktvopavRMhitaM sat suSThu cIrNaM saMsArAduttArayati, 'jJAnakriyAbhyAM
mokSa' iti vacanAt evaMbhUte satyapi mokSamArge 'niSkramyApi' pravrajyAM
gRhItvApi kazcidapuSTadharmA saMsAronmukhaH 'sevate' anutiSThatyabhyasyati
paunaHpunyena vidhatte agAriNAM-gRhasthAnAmaGgaMkAraNaM jAtyAdika madasthAnaM,
pAThAntaraM vA 'agArikammaM' tti aMgAriNAM karma anuSThAnaM sAvadyamArambhaM
jAtimadAdikaM vA sevate, na cAsAvagArikarmaNAM sevako'zeSAkarmamocanAya pArago
bhavati, niHzeSakarmakSayakArI na bhavatIti bhAvaH  /  deza mocanA tu prAyazaH
sarveSAmevAsumatAM pratikSaNamupajAyata iti  // 11 //  553

Page #582 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra ## Commentary  **Meaning:** Pride does not arise
from virtue, nor does it bring any benefit. The Sutrakar (author of the sutra)
points out that a man of low nature and base character, who becomes arrogant and
tyrannical due to pride, cannot be saved from the cycle of birth and death by
his lineage or family pride. It cannot protect him. It does not benefit him in
this world or the next. Lineage is "matrisamuttha" - born from the mother, and
family is "pitrisamuttha" - born from the father. Here, lineage and family are
merely signs. This indicates that other forms of pride are also incapable of
saving one from the cycle of birth and death.  The Sutrakar points out what can
truly save one from the cycle of birth and death: knowledge and conduct. There
is no hope of liberation from the cycle of birth and death through anything
else. When knowledge and conduct are strengthened, embraced, and cultivated
through right faith, they liberate one from the cycle of birth and death. It is
said that liberation is attained through knowledge and action.  Even so, a man
who is not firmly rooted in Dharma (righteousness), who is attached to the
world, and who, even after renouncing the world, continues to indulge in pride
associated with lineage and other worldly things, or who engages in "agarikamma"
(according to this interpretation, the practice of sinful karma), or who
indulges in pride of lineage, cannot be liberated from all his karmas.
Liberation from the world (deshmochan) - the partial destruction of karmas -
happens to almost all beings every moment.  **Sutra:**  - णिक्किंचणे भिक्खू
सुलूहजीवी, जे गारवं होइ सलोगगामी । आजीवमेयं तु अबुज्झमाणो, पुणो पुणो
विप्परियासुवेंति ॥११॥  **Translation:**  - A monk who is devoid of possessions
(nikkinchana), who lives on simple food (surukshajivi), and who is proud
(garava) and seeks worldly praise (salogagami), is ignorant of the true nature
of his livelihood (ajivameyam). He repeatedly falls into the cycle of birth and
death (vippariyasuventi).  **Commentary:**  The commentary further explains the
emergence of the fault of pride: Even though a monk is devoid of external
possessions (nikkinchana) and follows the rules of begging for food (bhikshana
shila), and lives on simple food (surukshajivi), if he is proud (gauravapriya)
and seeks praise (shlokakami), he is ignorant of the true meaning of life
(paramartham abudhyamana). He considers his simple life (surukshajivi) and his
lack of possessions (nikkinchana) as means to achieve worldly praise (ajivam).
He continues to fall into the cycle of birth, death, old age, disease, sorrow,
and suffering (vippariyasam). He strives to overcome these things, but only
sinks deeper into them. This is the cycle of birth and death (vippariyas).
**Meaning:**  The Sutrakar explains the faults of pride. A man who does not
possess any external material possessions (akinchana), who earns his livelihood
by accepting alms from others, who lives on simple food (antpraant), and who,
despite this, is proud (gauravapriya) and seeks praise (shlokakami), is ignorant
of the true meaning of life (paramartham abudhyamana). He considers his simple
life (surukshajivi) and his lack of possessions (nikkinchana) as means to
achieve worldly praise (ajivam). He continues to fall into the cycle of birth,
death, old age, disease, sorrow, and suffering (vippariyasam). He strives to
overcome these things, but only sinks deeper into them. This is the cycle of
birth and death (vippariyas).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha mAna - garva karanA, guNa ke liye nahIM hotA
usase koI lAbha nahIM hotA, sUtrakAra isakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM -
jo laghu prakRti-ochI vRtti se yukta puruSa garva se uddhata yA niraMkuza bana
jAtA hai usakA jAti yA kula jur3A huA abhimAna saMsAra meM paryaTana karane se
use trANa nahIM de sakatA usase usakI rakSA nahIM kara sakatA  /  vaha na isa
loka meM aura na paraloka meM hI usakA koI upakAra karatA hai 1 jAti
'mAtRsamutthA' mAtA se utpanna hotI hai tathA kula 'pitRsamuttha' pitA se
utpanna hotA hai  /  yahAM jAti tathA kula upalakSaNa hai  /  inase yaha sUcita
hai ki mada ke anya sthAna bhI saMsAra se trANa dene meM sakSama nahIM hai  /
saMsAra se pAra lagAne meM jo samartha hai, sUtrakAra usakA digdarzana karAte
hue kahate haiM - jJAna evaM cAritra saMsAra se trANa- rakSaNa karate haiM  /
inake atirikta aura kisI se saMsAra se pAra karAne kI, trANa dene kI AzA nahIM
hai  /  jJAna tathA cAritra samyaktva se upabRMhita- samAzrita, saMvardhita
hokara jaba bhalI bhAMti Acarita kiye jAte haiM, ve saMsAra se pAra lagA dete
haiM  /  kahA gayA hai jJAna tathA kriyA se mokSa prApta hotA hai  /  aisA hote
hue bhI koI apuSTadharmA -dhArmika dRr3hatA se rahita saMsAronmukha - saMsAra
meM racA pacA puruSa pravarjita hokara bhI gRhasthoM se jur3e jAti Adi se
saMbaddha mada sthAna kA punaH punaH sevana karatA hai- abhimAna karatA hai
athavA 'agArikamma' isa pAThAntara ke anusAra sAvadya - pApamaya karma kA
AcaraNa karatA hai athavA jAti mada kA sevana karatA hai, vaha apane samasta
karmoM mocana - unakA kSaya karane meM pAragAmI samartha nahIM hotA  /
dezamocana - AMzika rUpa se karmoM kA kSaya to prAya samasta prANiyoM ke
pratikSaNa hotA rahatA hai  /  1 - NikkiMcaNe bhikkhU sulUhajIvI, je gAravaM hoi
salogagAmI  /  AjIvameyaM tu abujjhamANo, puNo puNo vippariyAsuveMti  // 11 //
chAyA niSkiJcano bhikSuH surukSajIvI yo gauravo bhavati zlokakAmI  /
AjIvametattvabudhyamAnaH punaH no viparyyAsamupaiti  //  - anuvAda - niSkiMcana
- dravyAdi parigraha rahita, surukSajIvI - rUkhe sUkhe bhikSAnna se jIvana
nirvAhaka bhikSu yaza kI AkAMkSA karatA huA yadi abhimAna karatA hai to ye guNa
mAtra usakI AjIvikA ke sAdhana hai  /  vaha viveka zUnya sAdhu punaH punaH
viparyAsa-saMsAra ke janma maraNa ke cakra meM bhaTakatA hai-kleza bhogatA hai
/  TIkA punarapyabhimAnadoSAvirbhAvanAyAha-bAhyenArthena niSkiJcano'pi
bhikSaNazIlo bhikSuH- paradatta bhojI tathA suSThu rUkSam-anta prAntaM
vallacaNakAdi tena jIvituMprANadhAraNaM kartuM zIlamasya sa surukSajIvIevaM
bhUto'pi yaH kazcidgauravapriyobhavati tathA " zloka kAmI" AtmazlAghobhilASI
bhavati, sacaivaMbhUtaH paramArthamabudhyamAnaH etadevA kiJcanatvaM surukSa
jIvitvaM vA''tmazlAghAtatparatayA AjIvam-AjIvikAmAtmavartanopAyaM kurvANaH punaH
punaH saMsArakAntAre viparyAsaM-jAtijarAmaraNarogazokopadravamupaiti - gacchati,
taduttaraNAyAbhyudyato vA tatraiva nimajjatItyayaM viparyAsa iti  // 12 //
yasmAdamI doSAH samAdhimAkhyAtamasevamAnAnAmAcAryaparibhASiNAM vA tasmAdamIbhiH
ziSyaguNairbhAvyamityAha - TIkArtha sUtrakAra abhimAna ke doSoM ko abhivyakti
karane hetu kahate haiM jo puruSa kisI bhI prakAra ke bAhya padArtha nahIM
rakhatA - akiMcana hai, dUsare dvArA pradatta bhikSA ke sahAre AjIvikA calAtA
hai- rUkhe sUkhe antaprAnta-bace khuce AhAra dvArA jIvana nirvAha karatA hai,
aisA hote hue bhI vaha yadi gauravapriya, zloka kAmI 554 -

Page #583 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
If someone is seeking fame and self-praise, then they do not know the ultimate
truth. Their life is sustained by the means of renunciation, non-possession, and
simple, dry food. These become mere means of livelihood, self-sustenance, or
survival. Therefore, they are repeatedly born, grow old, die, suffer illness,
grief, and other afflictions in this world, which is like a vast, dense forest.
Even though they are eager to transcend the world, they become immersed in it
and drown. This becomes a contradiction.  Those who are learned but do not
practice the pure path of Samadhi and liberation should learn and understand how
to eliminate these faults.  A monk who speaks well, is virtuous, and has insight
is wise and learned. He who has profound wisdom and a pure heart will surpass
others with his wisdom.  Commentary: A monk who is skilled in the art of
language, speaks well, and is virtuous, is a true sage. He who speaks in a way
that is good, beautiful, beneficial, moderate, and pleasing, is a virtuous
speaker. This means that he speaks like milk and honey. He who has insight, has
the qualities of intellect, understanding, and wisdom. He is able to respond
immediately to any accusation or criticism. He is also knowledgeable and able to
explain various aspects of the Dharma. He who has profound wisdom, has a deep
understanding of the ultimate truth and is devoted to it. He who has a pure
heart, is filled with the essence of Dharma. Such a monk is truly virtuous.
However, if he becomes arrogant because of these qualities, such as thinking, "I
am the only one who knows the art of language, I am the only one who is
virtuous, there is no one like me who has insight, no one is as knowledgeable as
I am in the scriptures, no one has profound wisdom, and no one has a pure
heart," then he is not truly virtuous. Such a person will despise others with
his wisdom. For what good is a person who is arrogant, stubborn, and full of
pride? Such a person will not be able to participate in any gathering or
discussion of the Dharma. Therefore, he should be humble and avoid arrogance. As
it is said:  "Those who are arrogant and boastful about their own achievements
will eventually be consumed by their own pride."  Commentary: A monk who is
skilled in the art of language, speaks well, and is virtuous, is a true sage. He
who speaks in a way that is good, beautiful, beneficial, moderate, and pleasing,
is a virtuous speaker. This means that he speaks like milk and honey. He who has
insight, has the qualities of intellect, understanding, and wisdom. He is able
to respond immediately to any accusation or criticism. He is also knowledgeable
and able to explain various aspects of the Dharma. He who has profound wisdom,
has a deep understanding of the ultimate truth and is devoted to it. He who has
a pure heart, is filled with the essence of Dharma. Such a monk is truly
virtuous. However, if he becomes arrogant because of these qualities, such as
thinking, "I am the only one who knows the art of language, I am the only one
who is virtuous, there is no one like me who has insight, no one is as
knowledgeable as I am in the scriptures, no one has profound wisdom, and no one
has a pure heart," then he is not truly virtuous. Such a person will despise
others with his wisdom. For what good is a person who is arrogant, stubborn, and
full of pride? Such a person will not be able to participate in any gathering or
discussion of the Dharma. Therefore, he should be humble and avoid arrogance. As
it is said:  "Those who are arrogant and boastful about their own achievements
will eventually be consumed by their own pride."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI yAtAthyAdhyayanaM kIrtikAMkSI tathA AtmaprazaMsA kA abhilASI hotA hai to
vaha paramArtha ko nahIM jAnatA  /  usakI akiMcanatAparigrahazUnyatA tathA rUkhe
sUkhe bhojana ke sahAre jIvana nirvAha-ye usakI jIvikA-Atmavartana yA jIvana
calAne ke mAtra sAdhana ho jAte haiM  /  ataH vaha isa saMsAra rUpI kAntAra-
gahana vana meM punaH punaH janma, vRddhAvasthA, mRtyu, rugNatA, zoka Adi
upadravoM-duHkhoM ko prApta karatA hai  /  saMsAra ke pAra jAne-use lAMghane meM
abhyudyata-tatpara hotA huA bhI usI meM nimajjita ho jAtA hai-DUba jAtA hai  /
yo viparIta bAta bana jAtI hai| _AcArya padavartI kintu vizuddha samAdhi-mokSa
mArga kA sevana nahIM karane vAle janoM ke ye doSa jisa prakAra miTe, unheM
vaisA sIkhanA cAhiye, samajhanA cAhiye  /  je bhAsavaM bhikkhu susAhuvAdI,
paDihANavaM hoi visarae ya  /  AgADhapaNNe suvibhAviyappA, annaM jaNaM pannayA
parihavejA  // 13 //  chAyA - yobhASAvAn bhikSuH susAdhuvAdI, pratibhAnavAn
bhavati vizAradazca  /  AgADhaprajJaH suvibhAvitAtmA'nyaMjanaM
prajJayA'bhibhavet  //  anuvAda - jo sAdhu bhASAvAn-bhASA ke guNoM kA vettA,
susAdhurUpI-madhura saMbhASaNazIla, pratibhAvAnprajAzIla. vizArada-zAstra ke
artha meM pravINa, AgADhaprajJa-tatvagrahaNa meM pragAr3ha pratibhAzIla tathA
subhAktiAtmA-jisakA hRdaya dharma bhAvanA se anubhAvita hai, vahI vAstava meM
sAdhu hai  /  jo apanI prajJA-buddhi tathA guNoM kA garva karatA hai anya kI
avahelanA karatA hai, vaha sAdhu nahIM hai  /  TIkA - bhASAguNadoSajJatayA
zobhanabhASAyukto bhASAvAn 'bhikSuH' sAdhuH, tathA suSThu sAdhu-zobhanaM hitaM
mitaM priyaM vadituM zIlamasyetyasau susAdhuvAdI, kSIramadhvAzravavAdItyarthaH
tathA pratibhA pratibhAnam - autpattikyAdibuddhiguNasamanvitatve notpanna
pratibhatvaM tatprati bhAnaM vidyate yasyAsau pratibhAnavAn -
apareNAkSiptastadanantaramevottaradAna samarthaH yadivA dharmakathAvasare ko'yaM
puruSAH kaM ca devatAvizeSa praNata: kataradvA darzanamAzrita
ityevamAsannapratibhatayA ('vetya) yathAyogamAcaSTace, tathA vizAradaH'
arthagrahaNasamartho bahu prakArArthakathanasamartho vA, ca zabdAcca
zrotrabhiprAyajJaH, tathA AgAr3hA-avagAr3hA. paramArthaparya va sitA tattvaniSTA
prajJAbuddhiryasyAsAvAgADhaprajJaH tathA saSThavividhaMbhAvito-dharmavAsanayA
vAsita AtmA yasyAsausavibhAvitAtmA. tadevamebhiHsatyabhASAdibhirgaNaiH zobhana:
sAdhurbhavati, yazcebhireva nirjarA hetubhUtairapi madaM kuryAt, tadyathA-
ahameva bhASAvidhijJastathA sAdhuvAdyahameva ca na mattulyaH pratibhAnavAnasti
nApi ca matsamAno'laukika: lokottarazAstrArthavizArado'vagADhaprajJaH
subhAvitAtmetica, evamAtmotkarSavAnanyaM janaM svakIyayAM prajJayA 'paribhavet'
avamanyeta, tathAhi-kimanena vAk kuNThena durdurUDhena kuNDitAkApasikalpena
khasUcinA kAryamasti ? kvacitsabhAyAM dharma kathAvasare veti, evamAtmotkarSavAn
bhavati, tathA coktam - anyaiH svecchAracitAnartha vizeSAna zrameNa vijAya  /
kRtsnaM vAGmayamita iti khAdatyaGgAni darpaNa  // 1 //  ityAdi  // 13 //
_TIkArtha - bhASA ke guNoM aura doSoM ko jAnane ke kAraNa jo sAdhu zobhana
bhASAyukta hai-jo suSThusundara-prItikara, hitakara, parimita aura madhura
bhASaNa karatA hai  /  dUdha tathA madhu kI jyoM mIThA bolatA hai, autpAtikI Adi
buddhi ke guNoM se samanvita hai, dUsare dvArA kiye gaye AkSepa-Aropa kA
tadanantara-tatkSaNa hI jo uttara de 555

Page #584 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:  The Shri
Sutrakritanga Sutra states, who is this person in the context of the Dharma
discourse? What is he like? In which particular deity does he have faith? In
which philosophy does he believe? Knowing his imminent brilliance and quick
intellect, he speaks, gives instructions, and is capable of grasping,
assimilating, and understanding substances, or is adept at expounding various
principles, and with the word 'cha' he comprehends the intention of the
listener, whose intellect is immersed in the supreme truth, whose heart is
imbued with the sentiment of Dharma, such a Sadhu is excellent and praiseworthy
due to these true qualities of speech, etc. However, the Sadhu who takes pride
in these qualities that are the cause of his Nirjara (spiritual purification) -
"I am the knower of the science of speech, I am the best orator, there is no
other as talented as me, no one else is as proficient in the esoteric scriptures
as I am, and I alone have an intellect that has delved deep into the
investigation of the principles" - such a self-aggrandizing person, through his
intellect, belittles and disrespects others. As if in an assembly, during the
discourse on Dharma, this person, with his stammering, sluggish, and empty
speech, like cotton placed in a pot, what business does he have here, one might
say. In this way, he considers himself as arrogant and haughty. Therefore, it is
said - the person who, having diligently learned some scriptures or subjects
created by others, proudly thinks that the entire body of literature and all the
scriptures are just this much, and no more, he is like the monk who exalts
himself, or the one who is intoxicated by gains, who criticizes another person
of inferior intellect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram detA hai, jo dharma kathA prasaMga meM yaha puruSa
kauna hai ? kaisA hai ? kisa devatA vizeSa meM zraddhA rakhatA hai ? kisa
darzana meM isakA vizvAsa hai ? apanI Asanna pratibhA-pratyutpannamati ke kAraNa
jAnakara jaisA samucita hotA hai, bolatA hai, upadeza detA hai tathA jo
padArthoM ko grahaNa karane meM-AtmasAta karane meM-samajhane meM samartha hotA
hai athavA jo siddhAntoM kI aneka prakAra kI vyAkhyA karane meM nipuNa hotA hai
tathA 'ca' zabda se sUcita jo zravaNakartA ke Azaya ko jAna letA hai, jisakI
buddhi paramArtha meM-satya tattva meM sanniviSTa hotI hai, dharma kI bhAvanA se
jisakA hRdaya anubhAvita hotA hai, vaha sAdhu ina satya bhASAdi guNoM se yukta
hone ke kAraNa zobhana-zreSTha sAdhu haiM  /  kintu jo sAdhu nirjarA ke
kAraNabhUta ina guNoM ke kAraNa garva karatA hai jaise "maiM hI bhASAvidhi kA
vettA hUM" sAdhuvAdI-uttama vaktA hUM  /  mere sadRza dUsarA pratibhA sampanna
nahIM hai  /  mere samAna anya alaukika-zAstroM ke viziSTa-vizada jJAna meM
vizArada nipuNa nahIM hai tathA maiM hI aisA hUM jisakI buddhi avagAr3ha-
tattvAnveSaNa meM gaharI paiThI huI hai  /  mere samakakSa koI saMbhAvitAtmA-
dharma kI bhAvanA se bhAvita uttama puruSa nahIM hai  /  yoM AtmotkarSaabhimAna
yA garva karatA huA apanI prajJA dvArA dUsare kA paribhava yA avamAnanA kare  /
jaise kahIM sabhA meM dharmakathAdharma carcA ke prasaMga meM isa vAkkuNTha-
kuNThita vANI yukta, durdurUr3ha-jar3a, kuNDikA-kuNDI meM rakhI hue kapAsa ke
samAna isa nissAra tathA AkAMza ke samAna zUnya puruSa kA yahAM kyA kAma hai,
aisA bole  /  isa prakAra vaha apane ko garvonmatta mAnatA hai isaliye kahA gayA
hai-anyoM dvArA svecchA se praNIta katipaya zAstroM ko-viSayoM ko
parizramapUrvaka jAnakara abhimAnI puruSa darpapUrvaka yaha samajhatA hai ki
samasta vAGmaya-sAre zAstra itane hI evaM Na se hoi samAhipatte, je pannavaM
bhikkhu viukksejaa| ahavA'vi je lAbhamayAvalitte, annaM jaNaM khiMsati bAlapanne
// 14 //  chAyA - evaM na sa bhavati samAdhiprAptaH, yaH prajJAvAn
bhikSuryukaret  /  athavA'pi yo lAbhamadAvaliptaH anyaM janaM nindati
bAlaprajJaH  //  anuvAda - jo sAdhu prajJAvAna-medhAzIla hokara garva karatA
hai, athavA jo lAbha ke mada se avalipta hokara-apanI upalabdhiyoM se garvAnvita
hokara anya kI nindA karatA hai, vaha bAlaprajJa hai-bacce kI sI buddhi bAlA yA
ajJAnI hai  /  vaha samAdhi ko prApta nahIM karatA hai| TIkA -
sAmpratametaddoSAbhidhitsayA''ha-'evam' anantaroktayA prakriyayA
paraparibhavapura:saramAtmotkarSa kurvannazeSazAstrArthavizArado'pi
tattvArthAvagADhaprajJo'pyasau 'samAdhiM' mokSamArga jJAnadarzanacAritra rUpaM
dharmadhyAnAkhyaM vA na prApto bhavati, uparyevAsau paramArthodanvata: plavate,
ka evaMbhUto bhavatIti darzayati-yo hyaviditaparamArthatayA''tmAnaM
sacchemuSIkaM manyamAnaH svaprajJayA bhikSuH 'utkarSeda' garva kuryAta, nAsau
samAdhi prApto bhavatIti prAktanena saMbaMdha, anyadapi
madasthAnamudghaTTayati-'athave' tti pakSAntare, yo hyalpAntarAyo
labdhimAnAtmakRta parasmai copakaraNAdikamutpAdayitumalaM sa laghuprakRtitayA
lAbhamadAvalipto bhavati, tadavaliptazca samAdhimaprApto bhavati, sa
caivaMbhUto'nyaM janaM karmodayAdalabdhimantaM 'khiMsai' tti nindati
paribhavati, vakti ca-na mattulyaH sarva
sAdhAraNazayyAsaMstArakAdyupakaraNotpAdako vidyate, kimanyaiH
svodarabharaNavyagratayA kAkaprAyaiH kRtyamastItyevaM 'bAlaprajJo'
mUrkhaprAyo'parajanApavAdaM vidadhyAditi  // 14 //  (556

Page #585 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Commentary on the Sutra:**  The Sutra-maker, while explaining
the consequences of the fault mentioned earlier, says: "One who, by belittling
others (paraparivhava) and displaying his own excellence (atmotkarsha), acts in
the manner described earlier (ananta-rokt), even though he is proficient in the
meaning of all scriptures and deeply knowledgeable in the essence of knowledge
(tattva-gyan), does not attain the path of liberation (moksha-marg) through
knowledge, vision, and character, or the path of Dharma-dhyan. He merely floats
(plavan) on the surface of the ocean of ultimate reality (paramarth-rupi
samudra). Who is such a man? The Sutra-maker provides insight: "The man who, due
to not knowing the ultimate truth (paramarth), considers himself superior in
knowledge and takes pride in his intellect, does not attain the path of samadhi
and liberation." This is connected to the previous explanation.  The Sutra-maker
now begins the second section of the text, saying: "The word 'ahva' (or) used in
the verse signifies a shift in perspective (pakshanta). A man who has few
obstacles (alpa-antaraya), possesses special powers and yogic abilities
(labdhiman), and is capable of creating tools and resources for himself and
others (upakarna), but is of a low nature (laghu-prakriti), becomes intoxicated
with pride due to his gains (avalipta-garv-uddhta). Such a person does not
attain samadhi. A man who is devoid of gains (labdhi-rahita) due to the rise of
karma (karm-oday) criticizes and belittles others, saying: "No one is equal to
me in creating and establishing tools and resources for the common good (sarva-
sadharan hetu shayya-sanstarak). Others are merely busy filling their bellies
like crows (kauva). So what is their purpose here?" In this way, he criticizes
and belittles others who are foolish (bal-pragya).  **Verse 15:**  "Pannamayam
cha eva tav-omayam cha, ninn-amaye go-y-amayam cha bhikkhu. Aajiv-agam cha eva
chauth-thamaahu, se pandie uttam-poggale se."  **Shadow:**  "Pragya-mad-ancha
eva tapo-mad-ancha, nir-namaye-d gotr-amad-ancha bhikkhu. Aajiv-agam cha eva
chauth-thamaahu, sa pandi-t uttam-pudgale sa."  **Translation:**  "A monk should
not be proud of his knowledge, his practice of austerities, his lineage, or his
livelihood. He who is wise (pandi-t) and pure of soul (uttam-pudgale) is free
from such pride."  **Commentary:**  "Thus, when a man, intoxicated with pride in
his knowledge, criticizes others, he appears foolish. Therefore, a virtuous
person should not be proud of his knowledge. Not only pride in knowledge, but
also any other form of pride should be avoided by one who desires to conquer the
world. To show this, the Sutra says: "One should not be proud of his knowledge
(pragya-mad), his practice of austerities (tapo-mad), or his lineage (gotr-
amad). One should not be proud of his knowledge, thinking, 'I am the only one
who knows the true meaning of the scriptures,' or of his austerities, thinking,
'I am the only one who practices austerities in the right way, and I never
become weary of them.' Similarly, one should not be proud of his lineage,
thinking, 'I am born of a noble lineage like the Ikshvaku or Hari-vamsa.' One
should also not be proud of his livelihood (aajiv-agam), thinking, 'I am the
only one who has accumulated wealth.' The word 'cha' (and) indicates that one
should not be proud of any other form of pride. He who is free from such pride
is a 'pandi-t' (wise) and a 'uttam-pudgale' (pure of soul). The word 'pudgale'
refers to the soul, and the word 'uttam' means 'the best.' Therefore, the
meaning is: 'He is the best of the best, even greater than the greatest.'"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  zrI yAtAthyAdhyayanaM TIkArtha - sUtrakAra pahale kahe gaye doSa kA phala
batAte hue kahate haiM-jo anantarokta-pahale kahe gaye prakAra se paraparibhava-
dUsare kA apamAna kara AtmotkarSa-apanI utkRSTatA dikhAtA hai-baDappana batAtA
hai, vaha samagra zAstroM ke artha meM niSNAta evaM tattvajJAna meM
avagADhaprajJa-gahana prajJAzIla hokara bhI jJAna darzana cAritra rUpa
mokSamArga kI athavA dharmadhyAna kI prApti nahIM karatA, vaha paramArtharUpI
samudra ke Upara hI plavana karatA hai-tairatA hai| aisA puruSa kauna hotA hai ?
sUtrakAra yaha digdarzana karAte haiM-jo puruSa paramArtha ko-parama satya ko na
jAnane ke kAraNa apane ko zreSTha prajJAzIla mAnatA huA apanI prajJA kA garva
karatA hai, vaha samAdhi-mokSa mArga ko nahIM pAtA  /  pahale ke varNana ke
sAtha isakA sambandha hai  /  sUtrakAra aba dUsare mada sthAna kA udghATana
karate hue kahate haiM-gAthA meM prayukta 'ahavA'-athavA zabda pakSAntara-dUsare
pakSa ke Azaya meM hai  /  jo puruSa alpAntarAya hai-jisakA lAbhAntarAya nyUna
hai, labdhimAna-viziSTa zakti-yogavibhUti yukta hai, vaha apane tathA anya ke
liye upakaraNa-jIvanopayogI sAmagrI utpanna karane meM sakSama hotA hai kintu
vaha yadi laghu prakRti yukta hai-ucca svabhAva kA nahIM hai to vaha apane lAbha
ke mada se avaliptagarvoddhata hotA hai  /  isa taraha kA samAdhi ko prApta
nahIM kara pAtA  /  karmodaya se jo puruSa labdhirahita hai vaise anya puruSa kI
nindA karatA hai, tiraskAra karatA hai, vaha kahatA hai-sarva sAdhAraNa hetu
zayyA saMstAraka-AstaraNa Adi upakaraNa utpanna karane meM-upa sthApita karane
meM mere samAna koI bhI nahIM hai  /  dUsare to kevala kauoM kI jyoM peTa
bharane meM hI vyagra-vyAkulatApUrvaka udyata rahate haiM  /  ataH unakA yahAM
kyA kArya hai  /  isa prakAra vaha bAlaprajJa-mUrkhaprAya anya janoM kA apavAda-
apabhASaNa yA niMdA karatA hai| pannAmayaM ceva tavomayaM ca, NinnAmae goyamayaM
ca bhikkhU  /  AjIvagaM ceva cautthamAhu, se paMDie uttamapoggale se  // 15 //
chAyA - prajJAmadaJcaiva tapomadaJca, nirnAmayed gotramadaJca bhikSuH  /
AjIvagaJcaiva caturthamAhuH sa paMDita uttama pudgalaH sa  //  anuvAda - sAdhu
apanI prajJA, tapazcaraNa, gautra tathA AjIvikA kA abhimAna na kare  /  vahIM
paMDitavivekazIla hai tathA vahI uttama pudgala-pavitrAtmA hai  /  TIkA -
tadevaM prajJAmadAvalepAdanyasmin jane nindyamAne bAlasaddazairbhUyate yato'taH
prajJAmado na vidheyo, na kevalamayameva na vidheyaH anyadapi madasthAnaM
saMsArajihIrSuNA na vidheyamiti taddarzayitumAha-prajJayA-tIkSNabuddhayA madaH
prajJAmadastaM ca, tapomadaM ca nizcayena nAmayennirnAmayed-apanayed, ahameva
yathAvidhazAstrArthasya vettA tathA'hameva vikRSTa tapovidhAyI nApi ca tapaso
glAnimupagacchAmItyevaMrUpaM madaM na kuryAt, tathA uccairgotre
ikSvAkuvaMzaharivaMzAdike saMbhUto'hamityevamAtmakaM gotramadaM ca nAmayediti  /
A-samantAjIvantyanenetyAjIvaH-arthanicayastaM
gacchatiAzrayatyasAvAjIvaga:-arthamadastaM ca caturthaM nAmayet, ca
zabdAccheSAnapi madAnnAmayet tannAmanAccAsau 'paMDitaH' tattvavettA bhavati,
tathA'sAveva samasta padApanodaka uttamaH pudgala-AtmA bhavati, pradhAnavAcI vA
pudgalazabdaH, tatazcAyamarthaH-uttamottamomahato'pi mahIyAn bhavatItyarthaH  //
15 //  _TIkArtha - apanI prajJA ke mada se avalipta hokara jo puruSa dUsare kI
nindA karatA hai vaha eka bacce ke saddaza ajJAnI hai  /  ataeva sAdhu ko cAhiye
ki vaha apanI prajJA kA abhimAna na kare  /  kevala prajJA kA 557)

Page #586 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra of the Sutra-Kritanga  **This is not for me, but for those who
desire to cross the ocean of existence, they should not indulge in other types
of pride.**  They should not indulge in other types of pride or arrogance. The
Sutra-kara, guiding us, says: The pride that arises from a sharp intellect is
called **Prajna-mada**. The virtuous should abandon **Prajna-mada** and **Tapa-
mada** - they should eradicate them.  Meaning, "I alone am the true knower of
the meaning and secrets of the scriptures." "I alone am the practitioner of the
highest austerities." The virtuous should not be proud of their austerities, nor
should they be weary or disheartened by them.  "I am born into the noble lineage
of the Ikshvaku dynasty, the Hari dynasty, etc."  They should also eradicate
this **Gautr-mada** (pride in lineage).  **Ajiva** is that by which a being
lives, sustains itself. It is the accumulation of wealth, the collection of
objects, the tools and means for living. The virtuous should not be proud of
these either. The word "cha" used here indicates that the virtuous should also
avoid other types of pride.  Only by abandoning pride can one become a learned,
wise person.  They become a pure soul, a renunciator, an abandoner of all pride.
The word "pudgala" is the main word here.  It means that such a person is the
best of the best, the greatest of the great, greater than the great.  **Those
who are wise, do not indulge in these, nor do they serve them, those who are
virtuous and wise.** They have transcended all lineages, they are great sages,
they go to the highest, lineage-less state. (16)  **Commentary:**  These wise
men, having understood the nature of these pride-inducing states, should
separate them from themselves, abandon them.  Those who are wise and virtuous,
those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice of dharma,
do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who are wise and
virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice
of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who
are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in
the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?
Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of
dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who
are these?  Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the
knowledge of dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of
lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are
established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not
indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who are wise and
virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice
of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who
are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in
the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?
Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of
dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who
are these?  Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the
knowledge of dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of
lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are
established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not
indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who are wise and
virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice
of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who
are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in
the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?
Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of
dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who
are these?  Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the
knowledge of dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of
lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are
established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not
indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who are wise and
virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice
of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who
are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in
the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?
Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of
dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who
are these?  Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the
knowledge of dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of
lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are
established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not
indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who are wise and
virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice
of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who
are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in
the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?
Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of
dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who
are these?  Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the
knowledge of dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of
lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who are wise and virtuous, those who are
established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice of dharma, do not
indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who are wise and
virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice
of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.  Who are these?  Those who
are wise and virtuous, those who are established in the knowledge of dharma, in
the practice of dharma, do not indulge in pride of lineage, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram mada hI nahIM kiMtu jo saMsAra ko pAra karane kI
abhikAMkSA liye ho, vaha anya prakAra ke madasthAnoM kA sevana na kare-anya
prakAra ke garva yA abhimAna bhI na kare  /  sUtrakAra isI kA digdarzana karAte
hue kahate haiM-buddhi tIkSNa hone se jo mada hotA hai use prajJAmada kahate
haiM  /  sAdhu prajJAmada evaM tapomada kA apanayana kare-unheM miTA de  /
arthAt maiM hI zAstra ke artha-rahasya kA yathAvata vettA hUM  /  maiM hI
utkRSTa tapazcaraNa vidhAyI hUM  /  tapa se kabhI glAna-parizrAnta yA khinna
nahIM hotA, sAdhu aisA garva na kare tathA maiM ikSvAkuvaMza harivaMza Adi
uttama gautroM meM sambhUta hUM-paidA puA hUM  /  isa prakAra gautramada kA bhI
vaha uccheda kare  /  jisake dvArA prANI jIvita rahate haiMjIvana nirvAha karate
haiM use AjIva kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha arthanicaya-padArtha samuccaya hai-
jIvanopayogI upakaraNa evaM sAdhana hai  /  sAdhu unakA bhI mada na kare  /
yahAM prayukta 'ca' zabda se sUcita anya madoM kA bhI sAdhu parihAra kare  /
madoM kA parityAga karane se hI vaha paMDita-tattvavettA hotA hai  /  vaha
samasta madoM kA apanodaka-parihAra kArI yA parityAgI pavitrAtmA hotA hai  /
yahAM pudgala zabda pradhAnavAcI hai  /  isakA yaha abhiprAya hai ki vahI puruSa
uttamottama-sarvottama-mahAna se bhI mahAna hotA hai  /  eyAiM mayAiM vigiMca
dhIrA, Na tANi sevaMti sudhIradhammA  /  te savvagottAvagayA mahesI, uccaM
agottaM ca gatiM vayaMti  // 16 //  chAyA - etAn madAn pRthakkuQrdhIrAH, na tAn
sevante sudhIradharmANaH  /  te sarvagotrApagatA maharSiNa, uccAmagautrAJca
gatiM brajanti  //  anuvAda - dhIra puruSa ina pUrva pratipAdita madasthAnoM ko
pRthak kare-apane se dUra rakhe  /  sudhIra dharmAjJAnadarzana evaM cAritra
sampanna dharmAcaraNazIla puruSa gautrAdikA abhimAna nahIM karate  /  ve saba
prakAra ke gautroM se apagata-atIta maharSi-mahAsattva yA mahApuruSa sarvottama
gati-mokSa ko svAyatta karate haiN| . TIkA - sAmprataM
madasthAnAnAmakaraNIyatvamupadorapasaMjihIrSurAha-'etAni' prajJAdIni
madasthAnAni saMsArakAraNatvena samyakparijJAya 'vigiMca' tti
pRthakkuryAdAtmano'panayeditiyAvat, dhI:-buddhistayA rAjanta iti
dhIrAviditavedyA naitAni jAtyAdIni madasthAnAni sevanti-anutiSThanti, ke ete
?-ye sudhIraH supratiSThito dharma:zrutacAritrAkhyo yeSAM te sudhIradharmANaH,
te caivaMbhUtAH parityakta sarvamadasthAnA maharSayastapovizeSazoSita kalpaSAH
sarvasmAduccairgotrAderapagatA:gautrApagatA:santa uccAMmokSAkhyAM sarvottamAM vA
gatiM brajanti-gacchanti, cazabdAtpaJcamahAvimAneSu kalpAtIteSu vA brajanti,
agotropalakSaNAccAnyadapi nAmakarmAyuSkAdikaM tatra na vidyata iti draSTavyam
// 16 //  kiJca - TIkArtha - mada sthAnoM kI akaraNIyatA ko upadarzita kara-
AkhyAta kara aba sUtrakAra isa viSaya kA upasaMhAra karate hue kahate haiM-
prajJA Adi ke mada saMsAra ke kAraNa haiM yaha bhalIbhAMti parijJAta kara sAdhu
unakA apane se apanayana kare-unheM haTAye  /  jo dhI:-buddhi dvArA zobhita hote
haiM unheM dhIra kahA jAtA hai  /  vaise dhIravidita vedya-jinhoMne jAnane yogya
tattvoM ko jAnA hai  /  ve jAti Adi mada sthAnoM kA sevana nahIM karate-
tanmUlaka garva nahIM karate  /  ve kauna hai ? kaise hai ? isakA samAdhAna
karate hue kahate haiM jinake jIvana meM zruta evaM cAritramUlaka dharma
supratiSThita haiM-samyak vyApta hai, ve puruSa abhimAna nahIM karate  /  isa
prakAra jinhoMne samasta mada sthAnoM (558

Page #587 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The one who has abandoned the study of the scriptures, who has destroyed sins
through specific austerities, who is free from pride arising from noble lineage,
etc., attains the highest and supreme liberation.** The word 'cha' indicates
that they are born in the five great celestial realms or the timeless gods. The
term 'agotra' signifies that there is no name, karma, lifespan, etc., in the
path of liberation. This should be understood.  **The monk, being thus endowed
with excellent luster and having seen the Dharma, enters villages and cities.**
He, knowing what is desirable and what is undesirable, does not indulge in food
and drink.  **Translation:** The virtuous monk, endowed with excellent luster
and a knower of the Dharma, enters villages or cities, considering what is
desirable and undesirable, remaining vigilant, and not indulging in food and
drink, accepting pure alms.  **Commentary:** Such a monk, free from pride, is a
practitioner of the vow of begging. He is called 'mritarch' because his body,
devoid of rituals like bathing, applying sandalwood paste, etc., is like a
corpse. Or, he is called 'mudarch' because he has beautiful and auspicious
'archa' (body) with lotus-like luster. He is endowed with excellent luster. He
knows the Dharma, which is based on scriptures and conduct. Such a monk,
entering villages, cities, or settlements like 'mandamb' for alms, is endowed
with excellent fortitude, patience, and composure. He fully understands what is
desirable, such as seeking and accepting alms, and what is undesirable, such as
the faults of origin, their remedies, and the consequences of their acceptance.
He does not indulge in food and drink, and he practices correctly. Thus, the
elders of the 'kalpa' tradition accept alms free from forty-two faults, while
the 'jina-kalpa' tradition accepts five 'abhigrahas' and two 'grahas'. These
are:  **Those who are attached and unattached, who are uplifted, who are of
little attachment, who have taken and accepted, who have abandoned the Dharma,
are the seventh.**  **Or, the one who has taken something, that is his desire,
and the other is undesirable. Knowing what is desirable and undesirable, he
enters, and when he is unconscious, he should accept pure alms.**
**Commentary:** As described earlier, the virtuous monk remains free from pride.
He earns his livelihood through alms. Describing his characteristics, it is said
that he is 'mritarch'. He is called 'mritarch' because his body, devoid of
rituals like bathing, applying sandalwood paste, etc., is like a corpse. Or, he
is called 'mudarch' because he has beautiful and auspicious 'archa' (body) with
lotus-like luster. He is endowed with excellent luster. He knows the Dharma,
which is based on scriptures and conduct. Such a monk, entering villages,
cities, or settlements like 'mandamb' for alms, is endowed with excellent
fortitude, patience, and composure. He fully understands what is desirable, such
as seeking and accepting alms, and what is undesirable, such as the faults of
origin, their remedies, and the consequences of their acceptance. He does not
indulge in food and drink, and he practices correctly. Thus, the elders of the
'kalpa' tradition accept alms free from forty-two faults, while the 'jina-kalpa'
tradition accepts five 'abhigrahas' and two 'grahas'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI yAtAthyAdhyayanaM kA parityAga kara diyA hai jinhoMne viziSTa tapa dvArA
pApoM ko zoSita kara diyA hai-sukhA diyA hai, jalA diyA hai ve uttama gautra Adi
se-Adi ke mada se vivarjita hokara ucca-sarvottama mokSagati ko upalabdha karate
haiM  /  'ca' zabda se sUcita karate hai ki ve paMcamahA vimAna yA kalpAtIta
devoM meM utpanna hote haiM  /  agautra se yaha upalakSita hai ki mokSa gati meM
nAma, karma, AyuSya Adi nahIM hote  /  yaha samajha lenA caahiye| bhikkhU
muyacce taha diTThadhamme, gAmaM ca NagaraM ca aNuppavissA  /  . se esaNaM
jANamaNesaNaM ca, annassa pANassa aNANugiddhe  // 17 //  chAyA - bhikSurmudarca
stathA dRSTadharmA, grAmaJca nagaraJcAnupravizya  /  . sa eSaNAM
jAnannaneSaNAJca, annasya pAnasyAnanugRddhaH  //  anuvAda - uttama lezyAyukta
tathA dRSTadharmA-dharmatattva vettA sAdhu bhikSA hetu gAMva yA zahara meM
anupraviSTa hokara aiSaNA evaM anaiSaNA kA vicAra karatA huA-usa ora jAgarUka
rahatA huA annapAna meM-AhAra, pAnI meM Asakta na hokara zuddha bhikSA grahaNa
kare  /  TIkA - sa evaM madasthAna rahito bhikSaNazIlo bhikSuH, taM vizinaSTi-
mRteva snAnavilepanAdisaMskArAbhAvA darcAtanuH zarIraM yasya sa mRtArcaH yadivA
modanaM mut tadbhUtA zobhanA'rcA-padmAdikA lezyA yasya sa bhavati mudarcaH
prazastalezyaH, tathA dRSTaH-avagato yathAvasthito dharmaH-zrutacAritrAkhyo yena
sa tathA, sa caivaMbhUtaH cidavasare grAmanagara manyadvA
maDambAdikamanupravizya bhikSArthamasAvuttamatisaMhananopapannaHsanneSaNAM-
gaveSaNagrahaNaiSaNAdikAM jAnan' samyagavagacchannaneSaNAM ca-udgamadoSAdikAM
tatparihAraM vipAkaM, ca samyagavagacchan annasya pAnasya vA 'ananugRddhaH'
anadhyupapannaHsamyagviharet, tathAhiM-sthavira kalpikA
dvicatvAriMzaddoSarahitAM bhikSAM gRhNIyuH, jinakalpikAnAM tu paJcasvabhigraho
dvayorgrahaH, tAzcemAH "saMsadvamasaMsaTThA uddhaDa tai hoti appalevA ya  /
uggahiyApaggahiyA ujjhiyadhammA ya sattamiyA  // 1 // " chAyA- saMsRSTA'saMsRSTA
uddhRttA tathA bhavatyalpalepAcca  /  udgRhItA pragRhItA ujjhitadharmA ca
sptmikaa||1|| athavA yo yasyAbhigrahaHsA tasyaiSaNA aparA
tvaneSaNetyocameSaNAniSaNAbhijJaHkvacitpraviSTaHsamAhArAdAvamUrchitaH samyak
zuddhA bhikSAM gRhNIyAditi  // 17 //  TIkArtha - pahale jaisA varNana kiyA gayA
hai, sAdhu mada sthAnoM se vivarjita rahatA hai  /  bhikSA dvArA jIvana nirvAha
karatA hai  /  usakI vizeSatA batAte hue kahate haiM ki vaha mRtArca hotA hai  /
snAna, candana kA lepa Adi saMskAra ke na hone se jisakI arcA-zarIra mRta jaisA
hai vaha mRtArca kahalAtA hai| athavA jisake mut-zobhanasuMdara arcA-padma Adi
lezyA hai use mudarca kahA jAtA hai  /  arthAt vaha prazasta lezyAyukta hotA hai
/  vaha zruta cAritramUlaka dharma ko yathAvat jAnatA hai, aisA sAdhu kisI
avasara para bhikSA hetu grAma, nagara tathA maDamba-nagara ke pAsa kI bastI Adi
meM praviSTa hokara uttama dhRti-dhairya tathA saMhanana se utpanna-yukta hotA
huA gaveSaNA tathA grahaNaiSaNA Adi ko bhalI bhAMti avagata karatA huA-unakI ora
dhyAna rakhatA huA udgama Adi doSa tathA unake parihAra evaM grahaNa kA vipAka-
phala jAnatA huA AhArapAnI meM anAsakta hokara samyaka viharaNazIla rahe  /
sthavira kalpI sAdhu 42 doSa varjita bhikSA svIkAra kare tathA jina kalpI sAdhu
pAMca abhigraha tathA do graha svIkAra kare  /  ve isa prakAra haiM - 559)

Page #588 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **The Sutra Kritanga Sutra (1)**  (1) **Sanskrit:** संसृष्टि - जिस पदार्थ से
हाथ लिप्त हो वही पदार्थ लेना ।  **English:** **Sansrusti** - To take only that
which has come into contact with the hand.  (2) **Sanskrit:** असंसृष्टि - जिस
पदार्थ से हाथ लिप्त न होता हो तो वस्तुएं लेना । **English:** **Asansrusti** - To
take only that which has not come into contact with the hand.  (3) **Sanskrit:**
उद्धृत - गृहस्थ ने अपने खाने हेतु जो आहार पात्र में रखा हो उसी को लेना ।
**English:** **Udhrut** - To take only that which a householder has placed in a
vessel for their own consumption.  (4) **Sanskrit:** अल्प लेप - जिस आहार में घी
या तेल आदि का थोड़ा लेप हो वही लेना । **English:** **Alp Lep** - To take only
that food which has a slight coating of ghee or oil.  (5) **Sanskrit:** उद्गृहीत
- जो आहार परोसने हेतु उद्ग्रहित किया गया हो-निकाला गया हो वही लेना ।
**English:** **Udgrit** - To take only that food which has been taken out for
serving.  (6) **Sanskrit:** प्रगृहीत - परोसने से अवशिष्ट-बचा हुआ ही लेना ।
**English:** **Pragrit** - To take only that which is left over after serving.
(7) **Sanskrit:** उज्झितधर्म - जो आहार फेंक देने योग्य हो वह लेना । **English:**
**Ujjhitdharma** - To take only that food which is fit to be discarded.  **Of
these, only the last two are acceptable to a Jain ascetic.**  Or, whatever is
the nature of one's **abhigraha** (attachment), that is their **aishana**
(desire), and the rest is **aneshana** (non-desire).  Thus, if a **Jina-kalpi**
ascetic has gone out to beg, they should remain **alolup** (non-greedy) and
accept only pure alms.  **Verse 18:**  **Sanskrit:** अरतिं रतिं च अभिभूय भिक्खू,
बहुजणे वा तह एगचारी । एगंत मोणेण वियागरेजा, एगस्स जंतो गतिरागती य ॥१८॥ छाया -
अरतिं रतिञ्चाभिभूय भिक्षु बहुजनो वा तथैकचारी । एकान्तमौनेन व्यागृणीयात्, एकस्य
जन्तोर्गतिरागतिश्च ॥  **English:** **Aarti** (displeasure) and **rati**
(pleasure) should be overcome by the **bhikkhu** (ascetic), whether they live
among many or alone. They should engage in **ekanta mauna** (absolute silence)
and remember that a being comes alone and departs alone.  **Commentary:**  Thus,
even if a **bhikkhu** finds something that is agreeable to them, they should not
be attached to it. They should consider everything as **drisht** (seen) and
**adrisht** (unseen), **shruta** (heard) and **ashruta** (unheard). They should
be aware of the **mrutkalpadeha** (dead body) and the **sudrishtdharma** (well-
observed dharma). They should be aware of **aishana** and **aneshana** and not
be overwhelmed by them. When they enter a village or city, they should not be
attached to **asanyama** (non-restraint) and should not be overcome by **rati**
(pleasure) in **sanyama** (restraint).  The **mahamuni** (great sage) says that
even a **bhikkhu** who is **asnat** (cleansed), **malavilsya** (free from
impurities), **antpraantavallchanaka** (one who eats only at the end of the
day), and **adibhojini** (one who eats only a little), may sometimes be overcome
by **arati** (displeasure) due to **karmodaya** (arising of karma). This
**arati** may arise in **sanyama** (restraint). The **bhikkhu** should overcome
this **arati** by considering the nature of the world and the suffering of
**tiryangnaraka** (animals and hell beings). They should also remember that the
life of a **samsari** (worldly being) is short.  The **bhikkhu** should engage
in **ekanta mauna** (absolute silence) and overcome **rati** (pleasure) in
**asanyama** (non-restraint). This **rati** arises from **avadyaanusthan**
(wrong practices) and **anadibhavas** (innate tendencies). The **bhikkhu**
should overcome this **rati** and engage in **sanyama** (restraint).  The
**bhikkhu** may be **bahujana** (one who lives among many) or **ekachari** (one
who lives alone). The **bahujana** is one who lives in a **sangha** (community)
and has the support of **sanyama** (restraint). The **ekachari** is one who
lives alone and is **shil** (virtuous). They may be a **pratibha** (one who has
realized the truth) or a **pratipanna** (one who has attained the path). They
may be a **jinkalpi** (one who follows the path of the Jinas) or a **vihari**
(one who lives in the world).  The **bhikkhu** should engage in **ekanta mauna**
(absolute silence) when asked or not asked. They should engage in **sanyama**
(restraint) and speak only about **dharma** (righteousness). They should not
speak about anything that would hinder **sanyama** (restraint).  The **bhikkhu**
should remember that a **janta** (being) comes alone and departs alone. They
should remember that a **janta** (being) is **ashay** (without support) and that
their **gati** (path) is determined by their **shubhashubhashay** (good and bad
karma).  The **bhikkhu** should remember that **ekah** (one) performs **karma**
(action) and **ekah** (one) enjoys the **phala** (fruit) of that **karma**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram (1) saMsRSTi - jisa padArtha se hAtha lipta ho vahI
padArtha lenA  /  (2) asaMsRSTi - jisa padArtha se hAtha lipta na hotA ho to
vastueM lenA  /  (3) uddhRta - gRhastha ne apane khAne hetu jo AhAra pAtra meM
rakhA ho usI ko lenA  /  (4) alpa lepa - jisa AhAra meM ghI yA tela Adi kA
thor3A lepa ho vahI lenA  /  (5) udgRhIta - jo AhAra parosane hetu udgrahita
kiyA gayA ho-nikAlA gayA ho vahI lenA  /  (6) pragRhIta - parosane se avaziSTa-
bacA huA hI lenA  /  .. (7) ujjhitadharma - jo AhAra pheMka dene yogya ho vaha
lenA  /  inameM jina kalpI sAdhu ke liye anta ke do hI grAhya hai-kalpanIya hai.
athavA jisakA jaisA abhigraha ho usake liye vahI aiSaNA hai tathA anya aneSaNA
hai  /  yoM aiSaNA evaM aneSaNA se abhijJa sAdhu bhikSA hetu kahIM gayA ho to
vaha AhAra meM alolupa rahatA huA zuddha bhikSA grahaNa kare  /  aratiM ratiM ca
abhibhUya bhikkhU, bahujaNe vA taha egacArI  /  egaMta moNeNa viyAgarejA, egassa
jaMto gatirAgatI ya  // 18 //  chAyA - aratiM ratiJcAbhibhUya bhikSu bahujano vA
tathaikacArI  /  ekAntamaunena vyAgRNIyAt, ekasya jantorgatirAgatizca  //
anuvAda - sAdhu saMyama meM arati-aprIti tathA asaMyama meM rati-prIti na rakhe,
vaha saMgha meM aneka sAdhuoM ke sAtha rahatA ho yA ekAkI rahatA ho. aisA vacana
na bole jo saMyama meM bAdhA upasthita kre| vaha yaha dhyAna meM rakhe ki
saMsAra meM jIva ekAkI hI AtA hai tathA ekAkI hI calA jAtA hai  /  TIkA -
tadevaM bhikSoranukUlaviSayopalabdhimato'pyaraktadviSTatayA tathA
dRSTamapyadRSTaM zrutamapyazrutamityevaMbhAvayuktatayA ca mRtakalpadehasya
sudRSTadharmaNa eSaNAneSaNAbhijJasyAnnapAnAdAvamUrchitasya sataH kvacid
grAmanagarAdau praviSTasyAsaMyame ratiraratizca saMyame kadAcitprAduSpyAt sA
cApane tavyetyetadAhamahAmunerapyasnAnatayA malAvilasyAntaprAntavallacaNakAdibho
jinaHkadAcitkarmodayAdarati;saMyamesamutpadyate tAMcotpannAmasau
bhikSuHsaMsArasvabhAvaM parigaNayya tiryaGnArakAdiduHkhaM
cotprekSamANa,svalpaMcasaMsAriNAmAyurityevaM vicintyAbhibhaved, abhibhUya
cAsAvekAntamaunena vyAgRNIyAdityuttareNa saMbandha, tathA ratiM ca 'asaMyame'
sAvadyAnuSThAne anAdibhavAbhyAsAdutpannAmabhibhavedabhibhUya ca saMyamodyukto
bhavediti  /  punaH sAdhumeva vizinaSTi bahavo janAH-sAdhavogacchavAsitayA
saMyamasahAyA yasya sa bahujanaH, tathaika eva carati tacchIlazcaikacArI, sa ca
pratibhApratipanna ekallavihArI jinakalpAdirvA syAt, sa ca bahujana ekAkI vA
kena citpRSTo'pRSTo vaikAntamaunena-saMyamena karaNabhUtena vyAgRNIyAt
dharmakathAvasare, anyadA saMyamabAdhayA kiJciddharmasaMbaddhaM brUyAt, kiM
parigaNayyaitatkuryAdityAha, yadivA kimasau brUyAditi darzayati'ekasya'
asahAyasya jantoHzubhAzubhasahAyasya gatiH'gamanaM paraloke bhavati, tathA
Agati:-AgamanaM bhavAntarAdupajAyate karmasahAyasyaiveti, uktaM ca'ekaH
prakurute karma, bhunaktyekazcatatphalam  /  jAyate mriyate caika, eko yAti
bhavAntaram  // 1 // " -560)

Page #589 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of the Path  And so on. Thus, in the world, truly, there is no
helper other than Dharma. Considering this, the Muni, remaining silent,
restrained, should speak only what is conducive to Dharma. ||18||
**Commentary:** The virtuous one, as described earlier, does not experience
attachment or aversion upon receiving pleasant objects. He considers what he
sees as unseen, and what he hears as unheard. He does not adorn his body as if
it were a corpse. He keeps Dharma firmly in his sight, remaining indifferent to
desires and aversions, and unattached to food, water, etc. If, upon entering a
village or city, he develops an inclination towards non-restraint and aversion
towards restraint, he should abandon it, keeping it away from himself. In this
regard, the Sutra-kar states that if a great saint, whose body is covered in
dirt due to not bathing, and who sustains life through coarse, dry chickpeas,
etc., develops a dislike for restraint due to the arising of karmas, he should
consider the nature of the world, knowing it as it is. He should contemplate the
suffering of hell and animal realms, and considering the short lifespan of
worldly beings, he should abandon this aversion towards restraint. Doing so, he
should speak words conducive to restraint in solitude. This passage is connected
to the following. If, due to past practices, this virtuous one develops an
inclination towards non-restraint, towards sinful conduct, he should overcome
it, suppressing it, and strive to uphold restraint.  Again, the Sutra-kar
describes the qualities of the virtuous one. The virtuous one who resides in a
Gachchha, in a Sangha, has many virtuous ones who support his restraint. Whether
he is a solitary wanderer, a pratima-pratipanna, a pratima-dhari, or a Jina-
kalpi, whether he wanders alone or with many virtuous ones, if someone asks him
or not, he should speak in a way that is conducive to restraint, that does not
hinder restraint, and that is connected to Dharma. What should the virtuous one
do, considering this? Or what should he speak? In this context, the Sutra-kar
says: A being goes alone to the next world, carrying his own good and bad
karmas. No one helps him. He comes from another existence, from another bhava,
with his own karmas. Therefore, it is said: A being acts alone, experiences the
fruits of his actions alone, is born alone, attains death alone, and goes to
another existence alone, and so on. Therefore, in this world, there is truly no
helper other than Dharma. Considering this, the virtuous one should speak words
inspired by restraint.  Om Om Om  **Self-reflection, or hearing from others, one
should speak Dharma beneficial to the people. Those who are condemned, who are
used for the purpose of obtaining results, are not served by the wise, the
virtuous.** ||19||  **Translation:** The virtuous one should teach Dharma,
knowing it from religious principles, or hearing it from others, in a way that
is beneficial to the people. Those actions that are condemned, that are bad, and
that are done for the purpose of obtaining results, are not performed by the
wise, the virtuous, the self-powerful.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI yAtAthyAdhyayanaM ityAdi  /  tadevaM saMsAre paramArthato na kazcitsahAyo
dharmamekaM vihAya, etadvigaNayya munInAmayaM maunaH - saMyamastena tatpradhAnaM
vA brUyAditi  // 18 //  TIkArtha jo sAdhu, jinakA pahale varNana huA hai una
anukUla priya viSayoM kI prApti hone para na rAga karatA hai na dveSa karatA hai
/  dekhe hue ko anadekhe ke samAna, tathA sune hue ko anasune ke samAna
samajhatA hai  /  tathA mRtadeha ke samAna apane zarIra kA saMskAra-sajjA nahIM
karatA  /  dharma ko bhalI bhAMti dRSTi meM rakhatA hai, aiSaNA aura anaiSaNA se
abhijJa tathA AhAra pAnI Adi meM anAsakta rahatA hai, kisI gAMva yA zahara meM
jAne para yadi usakI asaMyama meM rati tathA saMyama meM arati paidA ho to vaha
usakA apanayana kare, use apane se dUra kare  /  isa saMbaMdha meM sUtrakAra
pratipAdita karate haiM ki snAna na karane se jisakA zarIra maila se yukta hai,
jo anta prAnta - rUkhe sUkhe cane Adi ke AhAra se jIvana nirvAha karatA hai
vaise mahAna saMta ko yadi karmoM ke udaya se saMyama meM aprIti - aruci paidA
ho vaha muni saMsAra ke svabhAva kA parigaNana kara use yathAvat jAnakara naraka
tiryak yoni ke duHkhoM ko utpreSita kara - dekhakara yA vicAra kara ki saMsArI
jIvoM kA AyuSya svalpa hotA hai-yaha socakara use-saMyama meM AI huI aruci ko
tyAga de  /  vaisA kara vaha ekAnta rUpa se saMyamAnukUla vANI bole  /  isa
prasaMga kA Age ke sAtha saMbaMdha hai  /  usa sAdhu ko anAdi kAla ke abhyAsa ke
kAraNa yadi asaMyama meM - pApayukta AcaraNa meM rati rUci paidA ho to vaha
usako abhibhUta kara - dabAkara saMyama ke pAlana meM udyata rahe  /  punaH
sUtrakAra sAdhu kI vizeSatA batalAte hue kahate haiM  /  sAdhu jo gaccha meM
saMgha meM vAsa karatA hai to bahuta se sAdhu usake saMyama meM sahayogI hote
haiN| koI aisA sAdhu ho athavA pratimApratipanna - pratimAdhArI ekAkI
viharaNazIla ho- akelA vicaratA ho yA jinakalpI Adi ho, vaha bahuta se sAdhuoM
ke sAtha yA akelA vicaratA ho, usase koI pUche yA na pUche to vaha dharmakathA -
pravacana ke avasara para athavA anya samaya aisA bole jo saMyamAnukUla ho,
jisase saMyama meM bAdhA na ho, jo dharma se saMbaddha ho  /  kyA parigaNana
kara - ciMtana kara sAdhu aisA kare  /  athavA vaha kyA bole ? isa saMdarbha meM
sUtrakAra kahate haiM- jIva ekAkI hI apane zubha azubha karmoM ko lekara
paraloka meM jAtA hai| koI usakA sahAyaka nahIM hotaa| vaha apane karmoM ke
sAtha hI bhavAntara seanya bhava se AtA hai  /  isaliye kahA gayA hai-jIva akelA
hI karma karatA hai, unakA phala bhI akelA hI bhogatA hai, akelA hI utpanna hotA
hai aura akelA hI mRtyu ko prApta karatA hai, tathA akelA hI anya bhava meM
gamana karatA hai - ityAdi  /  isaliye isa saMsAra meM ekamAtra dharma ke
atirikta anya koI bhI vAstava meM sahAyaka nahIM hai  /  yaha vicAra kara sAdhu
saMyamAnuprANita vacana bole  /  OM OM OM sayaM sameccA aduvA'vi soccA, bhAsejja
dhammaM hiyayaM payANaM  /  je garahiyA saNiyANappaogA, Na tANi sevaMti
sudhIradhammA  //  19  //  chAyA svayaM sametyA'thavA'pi zrutvA bhASeta dharmaM
hitakaM prajAnAm  /  ye garhitAH sanidAnaprayogAH na tAn sevante
sudhIradharmANa:  //  anuvAda - sAdhu dharma ko dhArmika siddhAntoM ko svayaM
jAnakara athavA anya zravaNa kara aisA upadeza kare jo logoM ke liye hitakara ho
/  jo kAryagarhita-nindita yA bure haiM tathA jo sanidAna phala pAne hetu kiye
jAte haiM dhIra - medhAvI, AtmaparAkramI sAdhu unheM nahIM karate  /  561 -

Page #590 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra **Commentary:**  Another point:  Knowing the four
paths of existence (Chaturgati) and their causes (Mithyatva, Aviriti, Pramada,
Kshaya, Yoga) through self-reflection or by learning from others, and
understanding the nature of liberation (Moksha) as the complete destruction of
karma and its causes (Samyak Darshan, Samyak Gyan, Samyak Charitra), one should
teach this to others seeking liberation (Mumukshu). What kind of teaching should
be given?    The beings who are born (Praja) - stationary (Sthavar) and mobile
(Jangama) - should be taught the Dharma that is beneficial to them.    Having
shown what is to be adopted (Upadaya), the commentary now reveals what is to be
avoided (Heya).    Those who are condemned (Garhita) and repulsive (Jugupsita) -
Mithyatva, Aviriti, Pramada, Kshaya, Yoga - are the causes of karmic bondage.
These are used with a motive (Sani Dana).    The use of words (Prayoga) -
actions (Vyaapara) - Dharma stories (Dharma Katha Prabandha) - are done with the
motive of gaining something like worship, benefit, or respect.    The wise and
righteous (Sudhir Dharma) - great sages (Maharishi) - do not engage (Na Sevante)
in these actions, which are obstacles to righteous conduct (Charitra).    Or,
those who are condemned (Garhita) and have a motive (Sani Dana) - such as those
who are deceitful (Kutirthika), engaged in sinful practices (Savadya Anushthan
Rata), lacking in good conduct (Nishil Nirvrata), and those who are useless
(Kuntal Ventala Kari) - the wise and righteous (Sudhir Dharma) - who pierce the
heart (Maramavedi) - do not engage (Na Sevante) in such words, which are thorns
(Vak Kantaka).   **Verse 20:**  **Commentary:**  Another point:  Some people
with wrong views (Mithyatva Drishti) - those who are deceitful (Kutirthika) -
who are attached to their own views (Svadarshan Agrahi) -  through reasoning
(Tarka) - by examining their own opinions (Svamati Paryalocana) - do not
understand the intention (Bhav) - the nature of their actions (Karanavritti).
Some righteous person (Sadhu) or listener (Shravaka) - with the desire to
establish their own Dharma - may teach them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - kiJcAnyat - 'svayam' AtmanAparopadezamantareNa
'sametya' jJAtvA caturgatikaM saMsAraM tatkAraNAni
camithyAtvAviratipramAdakaSAyayogarUpANi tathA'zeSakarmakSayalakSaNaM mokSaM
tatkAraNAni ca samyagdarzana jJAnacAritrANyetatsarvaM svata
evAvabudhyAnyasmAdvA''cAryAMde, sakAzAcchrutvA'nyasmai mumukSave 'dharmaM '
zrutacAritrAkhyaM bhASeta, kiMbhUtaM ?prajAyanta iti prajAH-sthAvarajaGgamAH
jantavastebhyo hitaM sadupadezadAnataH sadopakAriNaM dharmaM brUyAditi  /
upAdeyaM pradarzya heyaM pradarzayati-ye 'garhitA' jugupsitA
mithyAtvAviratipramAdakaSAyayogAH karmabandha hetavaH sahanidAnena vartanta iti
sanidAnAH prayujyanta iti prayogA-vyApArA dharmakathAprabandhA vA
mamAsmAtsakAzAtkiJcit pUjAlAbhasatkArAdikaM
bhaviSyatItyevaMbhUtanidAnA''zaMsArUpAstAMzcAritravighnabhUtAn maharSayaH
sudhIradharmANo 'na sevante' nAnutiSThanti  /  yadivA ye garhitAH sanidAnA
vAkprayogAH, tadyathA-kutIrthikAH sAvadyAnuSThAnaratA niHzIlAnirvratAH
kuNTalaveNTalakAriNa ityevaMbhUtAn paradoSodghaTTanayA marmavedhinaH sudhIra
dharmANo vAkkaNTakAn 'na sevante' na bruvata iti  // 19 //  TIkArtha saMsAra
cAra gatiyukta hai  /  mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda kaSAya, yoga saMsAra ke
AvAgamana ke kAraNa haiM evaM azeSa-samagra karmoM ke kSaya se mokSa prApta hotA
hai  /  samyakdarzana, samyakjJAna aura samyakcAritra usake hetu haiM  /  sAdhu
inheM svayaM apane Apa jAnakara athavA anya se- AcAryAdi se zravaNa kara anya
mumukSumokSArthI puruSa ko zruta evaM cAritra mUlaka dharma kA upadeza kare  /
kisa prakAra ke dharma kA upadeza kare isa saMbaMdha meM batalAte hai - jo
utpanna hote haiM, unheM prajA kahA jAtA hai, sthAvara evaM jaMgama prANI prajA
ke antargata Ate hai unako usa dharma kA upadeza kare jo unake liye sadaiva
hitakara ho  /  upAdeya ko pradarzita kara heya ko prakaTa karate haiM  /  jo
garhita- jugupsita yA ghRNA yogya hai, karma baMdha ke hetu haiM jaise
mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya tathA yoga inako tathA dharma kathA Adi
prayoga-kArya jo nidAna - phala kI AkAMkSA ke sAtha kiye jAte haiM  /  jaise
mujhe inase pUjA-lAbha satkAra Adi prApta hote hoMge  /  isa AzaMsA kAmanA se
yukta hote hue jo cAritra meM vighna bhUta-bAdhaka haiM inako sudhIra dharmA-
dharma meM atyanta dRr3ha, maharSi - mahAna saMta, sevana anusaraNa nahIM krte|
athavA jo garhita-nindita hai tathA sanidAna - phalAbhikAMkSA yukta hai jaise -
kutIrthika pApapUrNa kAryoM meM saMlagna rahate haiM, ve ni:zIla hai, vratazUnya
hai, bekAra hai aise anyoM ke doSoM kA udghATana karane vAle marmavedI-
marmasthAna ko * pIr3A dene vAle vacanoM kA sudhIra dharmA saMta sevana nahIM
karate- vaise vacana nahIM bolate  /  - kesiMci takkAi abujjha bhAvaM, khuddapi
gacchejja asahANe  /  . Aussa kAlAiyAraM vaghAe, laddhANumANe ya paresu aTTe  //
20 //  chAyA - keSAJcittarkayA buddhvA bhAvaM, kSudratvamapi
gacchedazraddadhAnaH  /  AyuSaH kAlAticAraM vyAghAtaM labdhAnumAnaH pareSvarthAn
//  anuvAda - buddhi dvArA anya kA Azaya na jAnakara dharmopadeza karane se vaha
anya puruSa azraddhA karatA huA kSudratva- krodha Adi ochepana ko bhI apanA
sakatA hai  /  vaha upadeza dene vAle sAdhu kA hanana bhI kara sakatA hai  /
isaliye sAdhu anumAna dvArA anya kA abhiprAya samajhe tathA phira use dharma kA
upadeza de  /  TIkA' - kiJcAnyat- keSAJcinmithyAdRSTInAM kutIrthika bhAvitAnAM
svadarzanA''grahiNAM 'tarkayA' vitarkeNa svamatiparyAlocanena 'bhAvam' abhiprAya
duSTAntaH karaNavRttitvamabuddhavA kazcitsAdhuH zrAvako vA
svadharmasthApanecchayA 562

Page #591 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- A person influenced by non-Jain beliefs, who is insistent on his own
doctrines, has a corrupted mind and inner feelings. Without understanding him
properly, a monk or a lay follower, with the desire to establish his own
religion, may speak insulting words to him. The non-Jain, not believing in the
monk's words, will show his displeasure, consider the words harsh, and become
angry, even resorting to low acts. He may even harm the monk, like the way
Skanda Acharya was harmed by his guardian priest. This shows how he can descend
to such a low level.   Seeing this, it is said that the anger of the non-Jain,
provoked by the insulting words about his religion, can lead to the destruction
of the monk's long life. This means that one should preach Dharma
(righteousness) only after knowing the person well. For example, who is this
person, a king or someone else? To which deity is he devoted? Which philosophy
does he follow, and is he attached to it or not? After knowing all this, one
should preach Dharma accordingly. If someone, without knowing this, speaks words
that oppose the other person's beliefs, he may even cause the other person's
death or harm him in such a way that the monk or lay follower suffers in this
life and the next. Therefore, by understanding the other person's intentions,
one should preach the principles of true Dharma, the essence of the soul, etc.,
in a way that benefits both oneself and others.  **20**  Furthermore,
**Commentary:** A wise person should understand the actions and intentions of
those to whom he is preaching Dharma. He should try to eliminate their false
beliefs. He should explain to them that beauty, women, etc., are dangerous.
Those who are attached to them will be destroyed. Therefore, a wise person,
understanding the intentions of others, should preach in such a way that it
benefits both mobile and immobile beings.  **21**  **Shadow:** A wise person
should understand the actions and intentions of those to whom he is preaching
Dharma. He should try to eliminate their false beliefs. He should explain to
them that beauty, women, etc., are dangerous. Those who are attached to them
will be destroyed. Therefore, a wise person, understanding the intentions of
others, should preach in such a way that it benefits both mobile and immobile
beings.  **Translation:** A wise person should understand the actions and
intentions of those to whom he is preaching Dharma. He should try to eliminate
their false beliefs. He should explain to them that beauty, women, etc., are
dangerous. Those who are attached to them will be destroyed. Therefore, a wise
person, understanding the intentions of others, should preach in such a way that
it benefits both mobile and immobile beings.  **563**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI yAtAthyAdhyayanaM tIrthikatiraskAraprAyaM vaco brUyAt, sa ca
tIrthikastadvacaH 'azraddadhAnaH' arocayannapratipadyamAno'tikaTukaM bhAvayan
'kSudratvamapi gacched' tadvirupamapi kuryAt pAlakapurohitavat
skandakAcAryasyeti  /  kSudratvagamanameva darzayatisa nindAvacanakupito
vakturyadAyustasyAyuSo vyAghAtarUpaM paripekSasvabhAvaM kAlAticAraM-
dIrghasthitikamapyAyuHsaMvartayet, etaduktaM bhavati-dharmadezanA hi puruSa
vizeSa jJAtvA vidheyA, tadyathA-ko'yaM puruSo rAjAdiH ? kaM ca devatAvizeSa
nataH ? kataradvA darzanayAzrito'bhigRhIto'nabhigRhIto vA'yamityevaM samyak
parijJAya yathArha dharmadezanA vidheyA, yazcaitabuvA kiJciddharmadezanAdvAreNa
para virodhakRddhaco brUyAt sa parasmAdaihikAmuSmikayomaraNAdikamapakAraM
prApnuyAditi, yata evaM tato labdhamanumAnaM yena parAbhiprAya parijJAne sa
labdhAnumAnaH 'pareSu pratipAdyeSu yathAyogaM yathAhapratipattyA 'arthAn'
saddharmaprarUpaNAdikAn jIvAdIn vA svaparopakArAya brUyAditi  // 20 //  api ca -
TIkArtha - jo kutIrthikoM se prabhAvita hai, apane siddhAntoM meM Agrahayukta
hai  /  aise mithyAdRSTi puruSa kI anta:karaNavRtti-antarabhAvanA duSTa-dUSita
hotI hai use apanI buddhi dvArA paryAlocita kara samajhe binA koI sAdhu athavA
zrAvaka apane dharma kI sthApanA kI icchA se-apanA dharma samajhAne kI bhAvanA
se kutIrthikoM ko apamAnapUrNa vacana kahatA hai to vaha usa sAdhu yA zrAvakaM
ke kathana meM zraddhA na karatA huA, aruci dikhAtA huA usake vacana ko atyaMta
kaThora mAnakara krodha Adi ochepana taka pahuMca sakatA hai  /  krodhavaza usa
sAdhu ko virupa-aMka vihIna, kSata-vikSata bhI kara sakatA hai  /  jaise
skandAcArya ko pAlaka purohita ne kara DAlA thA  /  vaha kisa prakAra kSudratva
taka pahuMca sakatA hai  /  isakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM  /  vaha
puruSa apane dharma ke viSaya meM kahe gaye nindA yukta vacana se kruddha hokara
usa sAdhu ke dIrgha sthiti yukta-lambe AyuSya kA saMvaraNa-vinAza bhI kara
sakatA hai-jAna bhI le sakatA hai  /  kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki puruSa
vizeSa ko jAnakara-vyakti ko pahacAna kara dharma dezanA-dharma zikSA denI
cAhiye  /  jaise yaha rAjA Adi puruSa jise upadeza denA hai kauna hai ? yaha
kisa deva ke prati bhaktimAna hai ? kisa darzana meM AsthAzIla hai ? tathA yaha
kisa mata meM abhigRhIta-Agrahayukta hai ? anabhigRhIta-AgrahazUnya hai ? yaha
bhalI bhAMti parijJAta kara jaisA yogya ho dharma dezanA denI cAhiye  /  jo yaha
na jAnakara dharma dezanA ke antargata aisA vacana bolatA hai jisameM dUsare kA
virodha ho to vaha dUsarA vyakti usake prANa taka le sakatA hai yA aisA apakAra
kara sakatA hai jisase upadeza vAle sAdhu yA zrAvaka ko yaha loka yA paraloka
donoM apakRta ho jAte haiM-bigar3a jAte haiM  /  isaliye anuma dvArA dUsare ke
bhAva ko parijJAta kara jisa prakAra ucita ho usa prakAra saddharma ke
pratipAlaka siddhAntoM kAjIvAdi tattvoM kA apane aura anya ke upakAra hetu
nirUpaNa karanA cAhiye  /  kammaM ca chaMdaM ca vigiMca dhIre, viNaijja u savvao
(hA) AyabhAvaM  /  rUvehiM luppaMti bhayAvahe hiM, vijaM gahAyA tasathAvarehiM
// 21 //  chAyA - karma ca chandazca vivecayeddhIraH vinayettu sarvata
AtmabhAvam  /  rUpailRpyante bhayAvahaiH vidvAn gRhItvA sasthAvarebhyaH  //  -
anuvAda - dhIra puruSa jinheM dharma dezanA denI ho, unake karma evaM bhAva ko
samajha kara upadeza de  /  unake mithyAtva kA nAza kare  /  unheM samajhAe ki
rUpa-nArI sauMdaryAdi bhayaprada hai  /  jo unameM lubdha rahatA hailolupa
rahatA hai, vaha vinAza prApta karatA hai  /  isaliye jJAnI puruSa dUsaroM ke
abhiprAya ko samajha kara u. vaisA upadeza de jisase jaMgama evaM sthAvara
prANiyoM kA hita sadhe  /  563

Page #592 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Sutra Kritanga Sutra with Commentary - 'Dheer'**  A man who is unshakeable
('akshobhya'), adorned with good understanding ('sadbuddhyalankrito'), and
present at a discourse, should understand the 'karma' (actions) of the listener,
whether they are of a 'guru' (heavy) or 'laghu' (light) nature, and their
'chanda' (intention). He should correctly 'vivechya' (analyze) and understand
this. Knowing this, the speaker should deliver the Dharma discourse in a way
that is appropriate for the audience, ensuring that the listener gains
understanding of the 'jiva' (soul) and other 'padartha' (objects), and their
mind is not corrupted but instead experiences joy. With this intention, the
Sutra says, "He should especially 'naya' (guide) and 'apanaya' (remove) the
'papa bhava' (evil tendencies) of the audience." The word 'tu' indicates that he
should instill good qualities in them. Some texts read 'ayabhava', which means
'atma bhava' (egoistic tendencies), which are ingrained from time immemorial due
to 'mithyatva' (false beliefs) and other such things. He should remove these.
Alternatively, 'atma bhava' can also refer to attachment to worldly pleasures,
which should also be removed. The Sutra further explains, "He should not 'naya'
(guide) them with 'rupa' (forms) that are attractive to the mind, such as the
sight of women's limbs, half-glances, etc., which can lead to the downfall of
those with weak 'sattva' (strength) from the path of Dharma." What kind of
'rupa' (forms) should be avoided? The answer is, "Those that are 'bhayaavhai'
(fearful)." These are forms that induce fear. In this life, those who are
attached to sensual pleasures are condemned by the virtuous. They face various
forms of ridicule, such as having their ears and noses cut off. In future lives,
they are born in hell and other realms of suffering, where they experience pain
due to their attachment to sensual pleasures. Thus, a wise and learned 'pandita'
(scholar) who is knowledgeable in Dharma discourse, should understand the true
intention of the audience and reveal the Dharma that is beneficial to both
'tras' (mobile beings) and 'sthavara' (immobile beings).  **Commentary:**
'Dheer' - unshakeable, not agitated. 'Sadbuddhyalankrito' - adorned with good
understanding, possessing excellent intellect. 'Karma' - actions, conduct.
'Guru' - heavy, significant. 'Laghu' - light, insignificant. 'Chanda' -
intention, desire. 'Vivechya' - to analyze, to understand. 'Papa bhava' - evil
tendencies, negative thoughts. 'Naya' - to guide, to lead. 'Apanaya' - to
remove, to eliminate. 'Tu' - indicates the addition of a quality. 'Ayabhava' -
egoistic tendencies, attachment to self. 'Atma bhava' - egoistic tendencies,
attachment to self. 'Mithyatva' - false beliefs, wrong understanding. 'Rupa' -
forms, appearances. 'Bhayaavhai' - fearful, inducing fear. 'Tras' - mobile
beings, animals. 'Sthavara' - immobile beings, plants.  **Verse 22:**  "Neither
should one seek praise nor be a lover of verses, nor should one do what is
pleasing or displeasing to anyone. A monk who is free from all evil,
unperturbed, and free from attachments is truly a monk."  **Commentary:**  This
verse emphasizes the importance of detachment, humility, and equanimity in the
life of a monk. A true monk should not seek praise or recognition, nor should
they be swayed by the opinions of others. They should strive to be free from all
evil, unperturbed by external circumstances, and free from attachments to
worldly things.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - 'dhIraH' akSobhyaH sadbuddhayalaGakRto vA
dezanAvasare dharmakathAzrotuH 'karma' anuSThAnaM gurulaghu karmabhAvaMtAtathA
'chanda' abhiprAyaM samyak 'vivecayet' jAnIyAt, jJAtvA ca parSadanurUpAmeva
dharmakathiko dharma dezanAM kuryAt sarvathA yathA tasya
zroturjIvAdipadArthAvagamo bhavati yathA ca mano na dUSyate, api tu prasannatAM
vrajati, etadabhisaMdhimAnAha-vizeSeNa nayed-apanayet parSadaH pApabhavam'
azuddhamanta:karaNaM, tuzabdAdviziSTaguNAropaNa ca kuryAt, 'AyabhAvaM ti
kvacitpAThaH, tasyAyamarthaH-'AtmabhAvaMH' anAdibhavAbhyasto
mithyAtvAdikastamapanayet, yadivA''tmabhAvoviSayagRghnutA'tastamapanayediti  /
etaddarzayati-'rUpaiH' naya na manohAribhiH
strINAmaGgapratyaGgArddhakaTAkSanirIkSaNAdibhiralpasattvA 'vilupyante'
saddharmAdvAdhyante, kiMbhUtai rUpaiH ? 'bhayAvahai:' bhayamAvahanti
bhayAvahAni, ihaiva tAvadrUpAdiviSayAsaktasya sAdhujanajugupsA nAnAvidhAzca
karNanAsikAvikartanAdikA viDambanAH prAdurbhavanti janmAntare ca
tiryaGnarakAdike yAtanAsthAne prANino viSayAsaktA vedanAmanubhavantItyevaM
vidvAn' paNDito dharmadezanAbhijJo gRhItvA parAbhiprAyaM-samyagavagamya parSadaM
trasasthAvarebhyo hitaM dharmamAvirbhAvayet  // 21 //  TIkArtha - dhIra-
akSobhya-kSubdha nahIM hone vAlA, sadbuddhi se alaMkRta-zreSTha buddhi se
suzobhita puruSa dharmadezanA ke avasara para dharmopadeza sunane vAle puruSa ke
karma-AcaraNa athavA usake guru laghu karma bhAva-yaha puruSa guru karmA hai yA
laghu karmA hai, usakA bhAva kaisA hai-yaha bhalI bhAMti jAne, jAnakara parISad-
dharmasabhA ke anurupa dharma kA kathana kare-dharma dezanA de  /  jisase zrotA
ko jIvAdi padArthoM kA avagama-bodha ho tathA unakA mana dUSita-vikRta yA
vyathita na ho kiMtu prasannatA pAe  /  isakI abhisaMdhi-abhiprAya prakaTa
karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM-pariSada ke zrotAoM ke anta:karaNa ke azuddha
bhAva ko apanIta-dUra kare  /  yahAM Aye hue 'tu' zabda se yaha sUcita hai ki
usameM viziSTa guNoM kA AropaNa-saMsthApana kre| kahIM 'AyabhAvaM' aisA pATha
prApta hotA hai  /  usa kA yaha Azaya hai ki anAdi kAla se abhyasta-mithyAtva
Adi AtmabhAva jise apanA rakhA hai, sAdhu upadeza dvArA dUra kare  /  athavA
viSayoM meM-bhogoM meM AsaktiyAM lolupatA ko AtmabhAva kahA jAtA hai  /  sAdhu
use dUra kare  /  zAstrakAra isakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM-striyoM ke
nayana-manohara netroM ko tathA mana ko AkRSTa karane vAle aMga pratyaMga,
arddha kaTAkSa nirIkSaNa-TeDhI nigAhoM se avalokana Adi dvArA alpa satva-alpa
Atma parAkrama vihIna jIva, dharma se vilupta-patita ho jAte haiM  /  kisa
prakAra ke rUpoM dvArA ? uttara meM kahA jAtA hai-bhayAvaha rUpoM dvArA  /  jo
bhaya kA AhvAna karate haiM-bhaya utpanna karate haiM unheM bhayAvaha kahA jAtA
hai  /  strI ke rUpa Adi viSayoM meM jo Asakta-lolupa hotA hai isa loka meM vaha
satapuruSoM dvArA nindita hotA hai  /  vaha kAna nAka Adi kATa liye jAne taka kI
viDambanAeM-yAtanAeM prApta karatA hai  /  janmAntara-Age ke janma meM vaha
naraka evaM tiryaMca Adi yAtanA sthAnoM meM utpanna hokara kaSTa bhogatA hai  /
dharma dezanA dene meM kuzala vidvAn puruSa dUsare ke abhiprAya-antarbhAva ko
bhalIbhAMti avagata kara dharma kA upadeza kare jo trasa evaM sthAvara prANiyoM
ke liye hitaprada hai  /  na pUyaNaM ceva siloyakAmI, piyamappiyaM kassai No
karejA  /   /  savve aNaDhe parivajayaMte, aNAule yA akasAi bhikkhU  // 22 //
chAyA - na pUjanaJcaiva zloka kAmI, priyamapriyaM kasyApinokuryyAt  /  sarvAn
anarthAn parivarjayan anAkulazcAkaSAyI bhikSuH  //  -564)

Page #593 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of Truth  **Translation:** A Sadhu should not seek praise or glory
through his teachings. He should not say anything that is pleasing to some and
displeasing to others. He should renounce all evil deeds and teach Dharma with a
pure heart, free from passions.  **Commentary:** The Sutra means that a Sadhu
should perform all religious practices, such as austerities, without seeking any
reward, such as praise, respect, or material possessions. This is especially
true when teaching Dharma. A Sadhu should not desire praise or fame for his
teachings. He should not tell stories that are pleasing to some and displeasing
to others, such as tales of kings, gossip, or deceitful stories. He should not
criticize deities that are worshipped by others. He should be free from
attachment and aversion, and should consider the needs of his listeners. He
should teach Dharma in a way that is appropriate for them. The Sutra concludes
by saying that a Sadhu should renounce all evil deeds, both those he has
committed himself and those committed by others, and should teach Dharma with a
pure heart, free from passions.  **Verse 23:**  **Translation:** A Sadhu, seeing
the truth, should renounce all violence towards all beings. He should not desire
life or death, and should renounce the world, free from the bonds of Maya.
**Commentary:** This verse concludes the discussion of the study of truth. It
says that a Sadhu should see the truth of Dharma and renounce all violence
towards all beings, both large and small. He should not desire life or death,
but should renounce the world and be free from the bonds of Maya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI yAtAthyAdhyayanaM anuvAda - sAdhu dharmopadeza dvArA apanI pUjA-pratiSThA
tathA zloka - yaza kI kAmanA na kare  /  vaha aisA kucha na kare jo kisI ko
priya-prItikara lagatA ho aura kisI ko apriya - aprItikara pratIta hotA ho  /
vaha samasta anarthoM kA-duSkAryoM kA varjana karatA huA anAkula- kaSAya zUnya
hokara dharma kA upadeza kare  /  TIkA - pUjAsatkArAdinirapekSaNa ca sarvameva
tapazcaraNAdikaM vidheyaM vizeSato
dharmadezanetyetadabhiprAyavAnAhasAdhurdezanAM vidadhAno na pUjanaM - vastra -
pAtrAdilA bharUpamabhikAGkSennApi zlokaM - zlAghAM kIrtim AtmaprazaMsA'kAmayed'
abhilaSet tathA zroturyatpriyaM rAjakathAvikathAdikaM chalitakathAdikaM ca
tathA'priyaM ca tatsamAzritadevatA vizeSa nindAdikaM na kathayed,
araktadviSTatayA zroturabhiprAyamabhisamIkSya yathAvasthitaM dharmaM
samyagdarzanAdikaM kathayet,upasaMhAramAha'sarvAnanarthAn'
pUjAsatkAralAbhAbhiprAyeNa svakRtAn paradUSaNatayA ca parakRtAn 'varjayan'
pariharan kathayed 'anAkula: ' sUtrArthAdanuttaran akaSAyI bhikSurbhavediti  //
22 //  TIkArtha - sAdhu pUjA-pratiSThA, satkAra-sammAna Adi se nirapekSa-
nirAkAMkSa hokara tapazcaraNAdi dhArmika kRtya kare  /  dharmadezanA to
vizeSataH aisI sthiti meM hotA huA kare, isa abhiprAya - Azaya ko uddiSTa kara
sUtrakAra kahate haiM-dharma dezanA karatA huA - upadeza detA huA sAdhu vastra
tathA pAtra Adi ke lAbha ke rUpa meM satkAra sammAna kI kAmanA na kare aura na
vaha apanI prazasti kI abhilASA rkhe| zrotA ko jo priya-prItiprada lage, aisI
rAjakathA, vikathA tathA chalita kathA Adi tathA zrotA ke liye apane aprItiprada
usa dvArA samAzrita abhi devatva kI nindA Adi na kare  /  vaha arakta adRSTa-
rAga dveSa rahita hokara zravaNa karane ke bhAva kA abhisamikSaNa kara-bhalI
bhAMti samajha kara yathAvasthita dharma-satya dharma jo samyakdarzana Adi rUpa
hai kA kathana - pratipAdana kare  /  upasaMhAra karate hue-sAra saMkSepa
batalAte hue kahate haiM sAdhu sabhI anarthoM kA - pUjA, satkAra tathA lAbha
pAne hetu apane dvArA kiye gaye paradUSaNatA - auroM para doSAropaNa karane ke
kAraNa dUsaroM dvArA kiye gaye anarthoM kA varjanaparihAra karate hue vaha
upadeza kare  /  dharma dezanA de anAkula- AkulatA rahita Atmasthira hotA huA,
sUtra ke artha se nahIM haTatA huA kaSAya rahita hokara bhASaNa kare  /
AhattahIyaM samupehamANe savvehiM pANehiM NihAya daMDaM  /  No jIviyaM No
maraNAhikaMkhI, parivvajjA valayAvimukke (mehAvI valayavippamukke)  //  23  //
tibemi  //  chAyA yAthAtathyaM samutprekSamANaH sarveSu prANiSu nidhAya daNDam
/  no jIvitaM no maraNAvakAGkSI, parivrajed balayAd vimukta  /  iti bravImi  //
anuvAda - sAdhu yAthAtathya - yathArtha yA satya dharma ko samutprekSita karatA
huA bhalI bhAMti dekhatA huAsvAyatta karatA huA samasta prANiyoM kI hiMsA kA
parivarjana kara jIvana tathA mRtyu se nirAMkAkSa hokara mAyA kA parityAga kare
- viharaNa kare  /  TIkA saMrvAdhyayanopasaMhArArthamAha' AhAttIya' mityAdi,
yathAtathAbhAvo yAthAtathyaM dharmamArgasamavasaraNAkhyAdhyayana
troyaktArthatattvaM sUtrAnugataM samyaktvaM cAritraM vA tatava' prekSamANAH'
paryAlocayan sUtrArthaM sadanuSThAnato'bhyasyan 'sarveSu' sthAvarajaGgameSu
sUkSmabAdarabhedabhinneSu pRthivI kAyAdiSu daNDayante prANino yena sa daNDaH
prANavyaparopaNavidhistaM 565

Page #594 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that one should not transgress the
truth even in the face of death, abandoning the 'Nidhaya' (the act of killing).
This is further explained: A virtuous person should not desire a long life
through the suffering of stationary and mobile beings, nor should they desire a
life of unrestrained indulgence. Even when defeated by hardship, overwhelmed by
pain, and unable to bear it, they should not seek death by drowning, burning, or
being killed by a predator. Thus, with a focus on truth, they should refrain
from harming all beings, be indifferent to life and death, and practice
restraint. They should be a wise person, living within the boundaries of the
scriptures, knowledgeable, and free from the captivating karma of Maya. The word
'iti' here signifies completion. I speak as before.  This concludes the
thirteenth study, known as 'Yathatatya'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram 'nidhAya' parityajya, prANAtyaye'pi yAthAtathyaM dharma
nollaGghayediti  /  etadeva darzayati-'jIvitam' asaMyamajIvitaM dIrghAyuSkaM vA
sthAvarajaGgamajantudaNDena nAbhikAMkSI syA (kSe) t parISahaparAjito
vedanAsamudghAta (samava) hato vA tadvedanAma (bhi) sahamAno
jalAnalasaMpAtApAditajantUpamardaina nApi maraNAbhikAGkSI syAt  /  tadevaM
yAthAtathyamutprekSamANaH sarveSu prANiSuparatadaNDo jIvitamaraNAnapekSI
saMyamAnuSThAnaM careda-udyuktavihArI bhavet 'medhAvI' maryAdAvyavasthito
viditavedyo vA valayena-mAyArUpeNa mohanIya-karmaNA vA vividhaM prakarSeNa mukto
vipramukta iti  /  /  itiH parisamAptyarthe bravImIti pUrvavat  // 23 //
samAptaM ca yAthAtathyaM trayodazamadhyayanamiti  //  TIkArtha - zAstrakAra
samagra adhyayana kA upasaMhAra karate hue kahate haiM-jo jaisA hai, usakA vaisA
bhAva yAthAtathya kahA jAtA hai  /  sAdhu dharma, mArga tathA samosaraNa nAmaka
tIna adhyayanoM meM varNita tattva samyaktva evaM cAritra kA sUtrAnugata-
sUtrAnurUpa prekSaNa-paryAlocana karatA huA uttama anuSThAna-udyama dvArA sUtra
kA abhyAsa karatA huA, sthAvara evaM jaMgama tathA sUkSma aura bAdara bhedayukta
pRthvIkAya Adi prANiyoM kA jisase nAza ho, usa daNDa-prANavyayaropaNa rUpahiMsA
kA tyAga kara prANa cale jAne kI sthiti A jAye to bhI satya dharma kA laMghana
na kare  /  zAstrakAra isI bAta kA digdarzana karAte haiM-sAdhu asaMyama jIvana-
asaMyama ke sAtha jIne kI tathA sthAvara evaM jaMgama prANiyoM kI hiMsA ke sAtha
dIrgha jIvana kI abhikAMkSA na kare  /  vaha parISaha se parAjita-parizrAnta
hokara aneka vedanAoM-pIr3AoM se abhihata hokara unheM sahane meM apane ko
akSama mAnatA huA pAnI meM DUbakara, agni meM jalakara athavA kisI hiMsaka jantu
dvArA apanA upamarda-vyApAdana karAkara mRtyu kI AkAMkSA na kre| isa prakAra
vaha satyadharma kA utprekSaNa karatA huA-usa para dRSTi rakhatA huA, saba
prANiyoM kI hiMsA se uparata tathA jIvana evaM mRtyu se nirapekSa-apekSA rahita
hokara saMyama kA anusaraNa kare-saMyama ke paripAlana meM udyata rahe  /
medhAvI-zAstrIya maryAdAoM ke anurUpa-vyavasthita viharaNazIla tathA
viditavedya-jAnane yogya padArthoM kA vettA sAdhu mAyA rUpAtmaka mohanIya karma
se vipramukta-sarvathA vimukta hokara vicaraNa zIla rahe  /  yahAM 'iti' zabda
samApti ke artha meM hai  /  bravImi-bolatA hUM yaha pahale kI jyoM hai  /  yaha
yAthAtathya nAmaka terahavAM adhyayana samApta huA  /  566)

Page #595 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Study of the Text** **Fourth Study of the Text**  Abandoning the world, the
student, having risen, should dwell in good celibacy. He should learn well the
discipline of the teacher, and the skillful one should not be negligent in his
restraint. || 1 ||  **Translation**  Abandoning the world, the student, having
risen, should dwell in good celibacy. He should learn well the discipline of the
teacher, and the skillful one should not be negligent in his restraint. || 1 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmakaM adhyayanaM granthanAmakaM caturthazamadhyayanaM gaMthaM vihAya
iNa sikkhamANo, uTThAya subaMbhaceraM vasejjA  /  ovAyakArI viNayaM susikkhe, je
cheya vippamAyaM na kujjA  //  1  //  chAyA granthaM vihAyeha zikSamANaH,
utthAya subrahmacaryyaM vaset  /  avapAtakArI vinayaM suzikSet, yacchekA
pramAdaM na kuryyAt  //  - anuvAda grantha-parigraha kA parityAga kara zikSA
prApta karatA huA puruSa utthita dIkSita hokara bhalI bhAMti brahmacarya-saMyama
kA pAlana kare  /  vaha AcArya ke Adeza kA paripAlana karatA huA vinaya kI zikSA
le| cheka - vijJa yA nipuNa puruSa saMyama meM kabhI pramAda na kare  /  TIkA
'iha' pravacane jJAtasaMsArasvabhAvaH san samyagutthAnenotthito grathyate AtmA
yena sa grantho - dhanadhAnya- hiraNyadvipadacatuSpadAdi 'vihAya' tyaktvA
pravrajitaH san sadutthAnenotthAya ca grahaNarUpAmAsevanArUpAM ca zikSAM (ca)
kurvANaH- samyagAsevamAnaH suSThu - zobhanaM
navabhirbrahmacaryaguptibhirguptamAzritya brahmacarya 'vaset' tiSThet
'subrahmacarya' miti saMyamastam Avaset taM samyaM kuryAt AcAryAntike yAvajjIvaM
vasamAno yAvadabhyudyatavihAraM na pratipadyate tAvadAcAryavacanasyAvapAto-
nirdezastatkAryavapAtakArIvacana nirdezakArI sadA''jJAvidhAyI, vinIyateapanIyate
karma yena sa vinayastaM suSThu zikSed - vidadhyAt grahaNAsevanAbhyAM vinayaM
samyak paripAlayediti  /  tathA yaH 'cheko' nipuNaH sa saMyamAnuSThAne
sadAcAryopadeze vA vividhaM pramAdaM na kuryAt, yathA hi AturaH
samyagvaidyopadezaM kurvan zlAghAM lAbhate rogopazamaM ca evaM sAdhurapi
sAvadyagranthaparihArI pApakarmabheSajasthAnabhUtAnyAcAryavacanAni
vidadhadaparasAdhubhyaH sAdhukAra ma zeSa karmakSayaM cAvApnotIti  //  1  //
TIkArtha - jisane jagata ke svabhAva ko parijJAta kiyA hai-jAna liyA hai, vaha
puruSa samyak utthAnaAtmakalyANa hetu utthita - samudyata hokara dhana, dhAnya,
suvarNa, dvipada, catuSpada Adi parigraha kA jisase AtmAgrathitasaMsAra ke jAla
meM baddha hotI hai-gUMthI jAtI hai, parityAga kare  /  vaha pravrajita hokara
AtmotthAna ke patha para agrasara hokara grahaNa rUpa evaM Asevana rUpa zikSA kA
samyak paripAlana karatA huA, nava guptiyoM se gupta - abhirakSita uttama
brahmacarya kA pAlana kare athavA saMyama ko subrahmacarya kahA jAtA hai  /
usakA vaha bhalI bhAMti anusaraNa kare  /  yaha yAvajjIvana AcArya ke sAnnidhya
meM nivAsa karatA huA, jaba taka vaha abhyudyata vihAraekAkI vihAra kI pratimA
svIkAra na kare taba taka AcArya ke nirdeza-vacana nirdeza kA anusaraNa kare,
unakI AjJAnusAra kArya kare, jisase karma vinIta yA apanIta hotA hai - haTAyA
jAtA hai dUra kiyA jAtA hai use vinaya kahA jAtA hai| usakA vaha bhalI bhAMti
zikSaNa prApta kre| grahaNa zikSA evaM Asevana zikSA dvArA usakA
samyakparipAlana kare  /  isa prakAra jo puruSa cheka - kuzala yA vijJa hai,
vaha saMyama ke anupAlana meM tathA AcArya ke upadeza meMupadezAnusAra calane
meM kabhI bhI kisI prakAra kA pramAda na kare  /  jaise rugNa puruSa vaidya ke
upadeza - nirdeza kA pAlana karatA huA prazaMsita hotA hai- rogamukta hotA hai,
isI prakAra sAdhu sAvadyakAryoM kA parihAra kara pApa karma ke liye auSadhi ke
tulya AcArya ke vacanoM kA pAlana karatA huA anya sAdhuoM ke dvArA sAdhukAra-
sAdhuvAda kA pAtra hotA hai aura vaha mokSa prApta karatA hai jo samasta karmoM
ke kSaya kA pariNAma hai  /  567

Page #596 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Just as a young bird, without feathers, wants to fly away from its nest but is
unable to, and is thus hunted by predators like hawks, so too a Jain who wanders
alone without the guidance of a teacher is vulnerable and will be destroyed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jahA zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram diyApotamapattajAtaM, sAvAsagA paviuM mannamANaM
/  tamacAiyaM taruNamapattajAtaM, DhaMkAi avvattagamaM harejjA  // 2 //  chAyA
yathA dvijapota mapatrajAtaM svAvAsa kAt plavituM manyamAnam  /  tamazaknuvantaM
taruNamapatrajAtaM DhaGkAdayo'vyaktagamaM hareyuH  //  anuvAda apatrajAta-jisake
abhI paMkha nahIM nikale haiM, aisA dvijapota- pakSI kA baccA jaise ur3akara
apane ghoMsale se dUra jAnA cAhatA hai, ur3ane meM sazakta nahIM hotA, vyartha
hI paMkhoM ko phaDaphaDAtA hai, vaha DhaMka Adi AmiSabhakSI pakSiyoM dvArA mAra
DAlA jAtA hai  /  isI prakAra jo sAdhu AcArya ke Adeza binA ekAkI vicaraNazIla
hotA hai, vaha naSTa ho jAtA hai  /  - TIkA ya punarAcAryaupadezamantareNa
svacchandataMyA gacchAnnirgatya ekAkivihAritAM pratipadyate sa ca bahudoSabhAg
bhavatItyasyArthasya dRSTAntamAvirbhAvayannAha - ' yathe 'tti
dRSTAntopradarzanArthaH 'yathA' yena prakAreNa 'dvijapota' pakSizizuravyaktaH,
tameva vizinaSTi - patanti - gacchanti yeneti patraM - pakSapuTaM na vidyate
patrajAtaM - pakSodbhavo yasyAsAvapatrajAtastaM tathA svakIyAdAvAsakAt -
svanIDAt plavitum - utpatituM manyamAnaM tatra tatra patantamupalabhya taM
dvijapotaM 'acAiyaM' ti pakSAbhAvAdgantumasamarthamapatrajAtamitikRtvA mAMsapezI
kalpaM 'DhaGkAdayaH' kSudrasatvAH pizitAzina: 'avyaktagamaM' gamanAbhAve
naMSTumasamarthaM hareyuH ' caJcvAdinotkSipya nayeyurvyApAdayeyuriti  // 2 //
TIkA sAdhu AcArya ke upadeza ke binA - anujJA ke binA svacchandatApUrvaka saMgha
se nirgata hokara ekAkI viharaNazIla hotA hai, vaha aneka doSoM kA bhAgI banatA
hai  /  isa saMbaMdha meM dRSTAnta upasthita karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM -
yahAM prayukta 'yathA' zabda dRSTAnta ko sUcita karane hetu hai  /  jisa prakAra
eka pakSI kA baccA jo avyakta- avikasita, ur3ane meM ayogya hai, usakI vizeSatA
batalAte hue kahate haiM- jisa dvArA pakSI ur3ate haiM use patra - pakSapuTa yA
paMkha kahA jAtA hai  /  jisake aba taka paMkha nahIM nikale haiM vaha pakSI kA
baccA apane AvAsa se ghoMsale se ur3ane kA upakrama karatA hai, usako ur3ate
huegirate par3ate dekhakara tathA paMkhoM ke na nikalane ke kAraNa bhalI bhAMti
ur3ane meM asamartha jAnakara usako mAMsapezI-mAMsa ke lothar3e ke samAna
samajhakara DhaMka Adi mAMsa bhakSI zudra prANI, vaha daur3akara chipa nahIM
pAtA ataH usakA haraNa kara lete haiM  /  use coMca Adi dvArA uThAkara le jAte
haiM aura mAra DAlate haiN| OM OM OM - evaM tu sehaMpi apuTudhammaM, nissAriyaM
diyassa chAyaM va apattajAyaM, hariMsu NaM chAyA - busimaM mannamANA  /
pAvadhammA age ||3|| evantu ziSyamapyapuSTadharmANaM, niHsAritaM vazyaM
manyamAnAH  /  dvijasya zAvamivApatrajAtaM hareyuH pApadharmANo'neke  //
anuvAda - jaise paMkha vihIna pakSI ke bacce ko r3haMka Adi hiMsaka pakSI hara
lete haiM- mAra DAlate haiM, usI prakAra jo ziSya dharma meM apuSTa - aparipakva
hai ni:sArita hokara ekAkI vicaraNa karatA hai, use bahuta se pAkhaNDI apane
vaza meM kara bahakA-phusalAkara dharma se bhraSTa kara DAlate haiM  /  568

Page #597 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  The study of the text Presenting
the commentary and illustration, it is said to show the patient one (dāntika) -
'Thus' the word indicates a special distinction from the previous one. For, in
the previous verse, the undeveloped state (avyaktatā) was expounded, but here
the special feature is the imperfection (apuṣṭadharmatā) or immaturity of the
dharma. Just as the fledglings, who have not yet developed their wings, are
destroyed by the wicked creatures, similarly, the newly initiated disciple, who
has not yet grasped the meaning of the sūtra, is deceived by many heretical
(pāṣaṇḍika) people. They lure him away from the Saṃgha (ocean) and make him
inclined towards sensual pleasures, free from the fear of the next world. Or
thinking that his conduct is worthless due to improper practice, they snatch him
away like the fledglings, these sinful people with minds polluted by false
beliefs, non-restraint, negligence and passions - whether they are heretics,
one's own people, kings, or many others - have taken away and will continue to
take away (such a disciple).  Here, the past tense is used to denote the three
time periods. The heretics thus deceive the disciple who has not grasped the
meaning (agītārtha). They say that in your doctrine, there are no practices like
kindling fire, removing poison, or cutting the crest, and there is also no
attainment of the eight supernatural powers like Aṇimā. It is also not supported
by many, including the kings. Even the non-violence that is expounded in your
scriptures is difficult to accomplish in this world full of living beings. Nor
do you have the bodily purity of bathing and cleanliness, and with such
deceitful and illusory speeches, they delude the innocent people. Even their own
people thus delude him, saying, "Venerable one! Without you, we have no one to
support or be supported by. You alone are our everything, without you,
everything appears void." Thus, they make him fall away from the true dharma and
the enjoyment of sense objects.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmakaM adhyayanaM TIkA evaM dRSTAntaM pradarzya dAntikaM
pradarzayitumAha-' eva' nityuktaprakAreNa tu zabdaH pUrvasmAdvizeSaM darzayati,
pUrva hyasaMjAta pakSatvAdavyaktatA pratipAditA iha tvapuSTadharmatayetyayaM
vizeSo, yathA dvijapotamasaMjAtapakSaM svanIDAnnirgataM kSudrasattvA vinAzayanti
evaM zikSamabhinavapravrajitaM sUtrArthAniSpannamagItArtham 'apuSTadharmANaM'
samyagapariNatadharmaparamArthaM santamaneke pApadharmANa: pASaNDikAH
pratArayanti, pratArya ca gacchasamudrAnniHsArayanti, niHsAritaM ca saMtaM
viSayonmukhatAmApAditamapagataparalokabhayamasmAkaM vasyamityeva manyamAnAH
yadivA 'busima 'nti cAritraM tad asadanuSThAnato niHsAraM manyamAnA ajAtapakSaM
'dvijazAvamiva' pakSipotamiva DhaGkAdayaH pApadharmANo
mithyAtvAviratipramAdakaSAyakaluSitAntarAtmAnaH kutIrthikAH svajanA rAjAdayo
vA'neke bahavo hRtavanto harati hariSyanti ceti, kAlatrayopalakSaNArthaM
bhUtanirdeza iti, tathAhi - pASaNDikA evamagItArthaM pratArayanti, tadyathA -
yuSmaddarzane nAgniprajvAlanaviSApahArazikhAcchedAdikAH pratyayA dRzyante
tathA'NimAdyaSTaguNamaizvaryaM ca nAsti, tathA na rAjAdibhirbahubhirAzritaM,
yA'pyahiMsocyate bhavadAgame sA'pi jIvAkulatvAllokasya duHsAdhyA, nApi bhavatAM
snAnAdikaM zaucamastItyAdikAbhiH zaThoktibhirindrajAlakalpAbhirmugdhajanaM
pratArayanti, svajanAdayazcaivaM vipralambhayanti, tadyathAAyuSman ! na
bhavantamantareNAsmAkaM kazcidasti poSakaH poSyo vA tvamevAsmAkaM sarvasvaM
tvayA vinA sarvaM zUnyamAbhAti, tathA zabdAdiviSayopabhogAmantraNena
saddharmAccyAvayanti, evaM rAjAdayo'pi dRSTavyAH, tadevamapuSTadharmANamekAkinaM
bahubhiH prakAraiH pratAryApareyuriti  // 3 //  - TIkArtha isa prakAra dRSTAnta
upasthita kara aba usakA sAra batalAte hue kahate haiM - yahAM 'tu' zabda pahale
kI apekSA vizeSatA ko prakaTa karane ke artha meM hai| pahale kI gAthA meM
paMkha na nikalane ke kAraNa avyaktatAavikasitatA yA asamarthatA batalAI gaI hai
/  isa gAthA meM apuSTa dharmatA-dharma meM apuSTatA yA aparipakvatA ke kAraNa
asamarthatA batalAI gaI hai  /  yaha vizeSatA hai  /  jaise apane ghoMsale se
nirgata nikale hue paMkha rahita pakSI bacce ko zUdra prANI-hiMsaka jIva vinaSTa
kara dete haiM, mAra DAlate haiM, usI prakAra sUtra ke artha meM
aniSpannaaniSNAta, agItArtha-dharma tattva ke avettA navazikSita navadIkSita
ziSya ko bahuta se pAkhaNDI - paramatavAdI pratArita karate haiM- pravaJcita
karate haiM, Thagate haiN| saMgha rUpI samudra se bAhara khIMca lete haiN|
bAhara khiMce hue, nikAle hue usa nava dIkSita sAdhu ko ve viSayonmukha banA
dete haiM tathA paraloka ke bhaya se rahita kara dete haiN| tatpazcAta vaha use
vazagata mAnate hue athavA asad anuSThAna meM nirata hone ke kAraNa cAritra ko
niHsAra mAnate hue paMkha rahita pakSI ke bacce ko jisa prakAra DhaMka Adi hara
lete haiM ve pApadharmA - pApiSThajana mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda tathA kaSAya
se kaluSitAtmA anya tIrthika apane pArivArika jana, rAjA Adi yA aneka dUsare
loga vaise vyakti kA haraNa karate rahe haiM aura karate rheNge| yahAM tInoM
kAloM ko upalakSita karane hetu bhUtakAla kA prayoga huA hai  /  pAkhaNDI puruSa
dharma meM agItArtha akuzala sAdhu ko pravaJcita karate haiM- dhokhA dete haiM
/  ve kahate haiM ki tumhAre siddhAnta meM agni prajvAlana, viSApaharaNa tathA
zikhAccheda Adi pratyaya-upakrama dRSTigocara nahIM hote  /  tathA aNimA Adi
ATha vidha aizvarya siddhiyoM kA bhI pratipAdana nahIM hai  /  rAjA Adi bahuta
se logoM dvArA vaha anAzrita hai  /  Apake Agama meM jo ahiMsA kA nirUpaNa hai,
vaha bhI isa jIvAkula- jIvoM se paripUrNa saMsAra meM duHsAdhya hai-kaThinAI se
sadhane yogya hai arthAt asAdhyavat haiM  /  snAna, zauca daihika zuddhi bhI
nahIM hai, isa prakAra ve indrajAla ke samAna zaThatApUrNa mUrkhatAyukta -
duSTatAyukta vacanoM se bhole bhAle logoM ko dhokhA dete haiMThagate haiM  /
unake pArivArika jana use isa prakAra vipralabdha karate haiM-Thagate haiM ki
'AyuSmAna ! tumhAre binA hamArA kauna poSaka-parilAbhaka hai athavA hamArA kauna
pauSya hai- hama kisakA poSaNa kareM tuma hI hamAre sarvasva 569 -

Page #598 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga  Ho! Without you, everything appears to
us as void - it seems that by inviting us to enjoy objects of sense, they lead
us away from the true Dharma. In the same way, kings also do this, one should
understand. In this way, they deceive and corrupt the solitary, immature sadhu
in many ways.  **Osaṇamicche maṇue samahiṁ, aṇosiē ṇantkariṁti ṇacca. Obhāsamāṇe
daviyassa vittaṁ, ṇ ṇikkase bahiya āsunō. ||4||**  **Chāyā** Avasānam icchēd
manujaḥ samādhi manushito nāntakara iti jñātvā. Avabhāsayan dravyasya vṛttaṁ, na
niṣkasedv ahirāśu prajñaḥ. ||  **Om Om Om**  • The sadhu who does not reside in
the guru-kula cannot sever the karmas. Knowing this -  **Anuvāda** He should
always reside in the guru-kula and have the aspiration to follow the supreme
restraint of samādhi. He should accept the conduct by which the sadhu attains
liberation. He should not go outside the gaccha.  **Tīkā** - Thus, many faults
arise in a solitary sadhu, therefore, he should always remain at the feet of the
guru. To show this, the sutra says, "Avasānam" - the place near the guru,
"samādhiṁ" - the practice of the right path, "icchēd" - he should desire,
"manujo" - the human being, meaning the sadhu. He is truly a human being who
fulfills his vows, and this is fulfilled by always remaining near the guru and
practicing samādhi. This is shown by the fact that he is "anuṣitaḥ" - not
established, acting according to his own will, near the guru, he does not become
"nāntakara" - one who does not fulfill the vows of samādhi, the practice of the
right conduct. Knowing this, he should always reside in the guru-kula, for one
who does not do so, his knowledge will be ridiculed. It is said:  "Na hi bhavati
nirvigopākamanupāsita gurukulasya vijñānam. Prakatitapaścādbhāgam paśyata nṛtyam
mayūrasya. ||1||"  Similarly, seeing the sand stuck to the neck of a peacock, a
person who has not served a guru, struck the queen with his heel, causing her
neck to swell. Thus, there are many faults of one who has not served a guru,
such as increasing samsara. Understanding this, one should remain near the guru.
"Avabhāsayan" - illuminating, practicing correctly, "dravyasya" - the conduct of
the true sadhu, free from attachment and aversion, omniscient, or the practice
of the right conduct. He should illuminate this practice, or the dharma-kathāka
should illuminate it by speaking. Thus, since residing in the guru-kula is the
foundation of many virtues, "na niṣkaset" - he should not go out, from the
gaccha, or from the presence of the guru, he should not become self-willed, "āśu
prajñaḥ" - quick-witted, residing near him, knowing that he is being overcome by
the objects of sense and passions, he quickly "nivartayati" - turns back,
establishes himself in the right samādhi, either by the guru's instruction or by
his own effort. ||4||  Thus, in the practice of renunciation, one should always
reside in the guru-kula, and be useful in all matters, such as place, bed, and
seat. Explaining the virtues of one who is useful, I say...  **Tīkā-rtha** - As
explained earlier, many faults arise in a solitary sadhu, therefore, he should
always remain at the feet of the guru - in the shelter of his feet. The sutra-
kāra shows this, saying - a human being should always reside in the presence of
the guru and aspire to follow the practice of the supreme path of liberation. He
is truly a human being - a sadhu - who fulfills his vows as promised. He is
truly...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAMGga sUtram ho  /  tumhAre binA hamako saba zUnyavat AbhAsita hotA
hai - pratIta hotA hai zabdAdi viSayoM-bhogya padArthoM ke upabhoga hetu
AmaMtrita karate hue ve use saddharma se cyuta kara dete haiM  /  isI prakAra
rAjA bhI karate haiM, yaha samajha lenA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra dharma se
aparipakva ekAkI viharaNazIla sAdhu ko aneka prakAra se pratArita kara ve hara
lete haiM, bhraSTa kara dete haiM I osANamicche maNue samAhiM, aNosie
NaMtakariMti NaccA  /  obhAsamANe daviyassa vittaM, Na Nikkase bahiyA Asuno  //
4 //  chAyA avasAnamicchenmanujaH samAdhi manuSito nAntakara iti jJAtvA  /
avabhAsayan dravyasya vRttaM, na niSkasedvahirAzuprajJaH  //  OM OM OM * jo
sAdhu gurukula meM nivAsa nahIM karatA, vaha karmoM kA uccheda nahIM kara sktaa|
yaha jAnakara - anuvAda use cAhiye ki vaha sadaiva gurukula meM nivAsa kare
tathA samAdhi ke uttama saMyama ke paripAlana kI bhAvanA liye rahe  /  vaha usa
AcAra ko svIkAra kare jisake sahAre sAdhaka mukti prApta karatA hai| vaha gaccha
se vahirgata na ho  /  TIkA - tadevamekAkinaH sAdhauryato bahavo doSAH
prAdurbhavanti ataH sadA gurupAdamUle sthAtavyamityetaddarzayitumAha'avasAnaM'
gurorantike sthAnaM tadyAvajjIvaM 'samAdhiM' sanmArgAnuSThAnarUpam 'icched'
abhilaSet 'manujo' manuSyaH sAdhurityarthaH, sa eva ca paramArthato manuSyo yo
yathApratijJAtaMnirvAhayati, tacca sadA gurorantike vyavasthitena
sadanuSThAnarUpaM samAdhimanupAlayatA nirvAhyate, nAnyathetyetaddarzayati-
gurorantike 'anuSitaH ' avyavasthitaH svacchandavidhAyI samAdheH
sadanuSThAnurUpasya karmaNo yathApratijJAtasya vA nAntakaro bhavatItyevaM jJAtvA
sadA gurukulavAso'nusartavyaH, tadrahitasya vijJAnamupahAsyaprAyaM bhavatIti,
uktaM ca - " na hi bhavati nirvigopakamanupAsitagurukulasya vijJAnam  /
prakaTitapazcAdbhAgaM pazyata nRtyaM mayUrasya  // 1 // " tathA'jAM
galavilagnavAlukAM pArSNiprahAreNa praguNAM dRSTvA'paro'nupAsitagururajJo rAjJIM
saMjAtagalagaNDAM pArSNiprahAreNa vyApAditavAn, ityAdayaH anupAsitagurorbahavo
doSAH saMsAravardhanAdyA bhavantItyavagamyAnayA maryAdayA guroranti
sthAtavyamiti darzayati-' avabhAsayan' udbhAsayan samyaganutiSThan 'dravyasya'
muktigamanayogyasya satsAdho rAgadveSarahitasya sarvajJasya vA vRttam-
anuSThAnaM tatsadanuSThAnato'vabhAsayed, dharmakathikaH kathanato vodbhAsayediti
/  tadevaM yato gurukulavAso bahUnAM guNAnAmAdhAro bhavatyato 'na niSkaset' na
nirgacchet gacchAdgurvantikAdvA vahi:, svecchAcArI na bhaved, 'AzuprajJa' iti
kSipraprajJaH, tadantike nivasan viSayakaSAyAbhyAmAtmAnaM hiyamANaM . jJAtvA
kSipramevAcAryopadezAtsvata eva vA 'nivartayati' satsamAdhau vyavasthApayatIti
// 4 //  tadevaM pravrajyAmabhi udyo nityaM gurukulavAsamAvasan sarvatra
sthAnazayanAsanAdAvupayukto bhavati tadupayuktasya ca guNamudbhAvayannAhaM
TIkArtha - jaisA pahale batAyA gayA hai ki ekAMkI sAdhu meM aneka doSa
prAdurbhUta ho jAte haiM, isaliye use sadaiva guru ke pAdamUla meM - caraNoM ke
Azraya meM hI rahanA cAhiye  /  sUtrakAra yaha digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM
- mAnava yAvajjIvana guru kI sannidhi meM nivAsa aura uttama mokSa mArga kA
anuSThAna anusaraNa karane kI abhilASA rakhe  /  vahI vAstava meM mAnava hai-
sAdhu hai jo jaisI pratijJA kI hai, usakA yathAvat nirvAha karatA hai  /  vaha
vAstava 570

Page #599 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the study of scriptures, the true human being resides. The vow to always
dwell in the presence of the Guru and to follow the path of liberation through
virtuous Samadhi can only be fulfilled, not otherwise.  Illustrating this, it is
said: "One who does not reside near the Guru is disorganized, lacking in order,
and acts according to their own whims. They are not capable of fulfilling the
vow, the excellent conduct-based karma, the well-established practice. Knowing
this, one should always reside in the Guru's abode. One should follow the
righteous path. The knowledge of one who is devoid of it is laughable. It is
said: "The knowledge of one who has not worshipped the Guru's abode is not truly
protected, for without the Guru's teachings, the peacock's rear end is exposed
while dancing. Seeing the sand clinging to the goat's neck fall off with a kick,
another ignorant man, who has not been engaged in the worship of the Guru,
killed the queen with his kick, whose neck had a knot." Many faults arise in one
who has not worshipped the Guru, which increase worldly attachments. Knowing
this, one should reside near the Guru with this stated conduct. The Sutrakar,
expressing this, says: "One should understand the conduct, the practice, or the
excellent conduct of the liberated, the supreme sage, the knower of all, who is
free from attachment and aversion, the explainer of Dharma." Residing in the
Guru's abode brings many virtues. Therefore, the sage should not leave their
lineage or the Guru's presence, and should not become self-willed. When the
sage, endowed with sharp intellect, residing near the Guru, experiences that
objects and passions are consuming, overwhelming their soul, they should remove
themselves from that situation, following the Acharya's instructions or their
own soul, and establish themselves in Samadhi.  Thus, the sage, engaged in the
development of their renounced life, always resides in the Guru's abode,
conducting themselves appropriately in all places, sleeping, sitting, etc.
Highlighting the qualities gained by the sage engaged in this, the Sutrakar
says:  "Those who are well-behaved in their place, sleeping, and sitting, and in
their efforts, are well-versed in assemblies and secrets, and speak separately."
Translation: The sage who resides in the Guru's abode is engaged in the best way
in matters related to place, sleeping, sitting, and effort-restraint. They are
well-versed in assemblies and secrets, and follow them. They teach others.
Commentary: "He who is renounced from the world, and is engaged in renunciation,
always resides in the Guru's abode, 'in place,' taking refuge in a place, and
'in sleeping,' taking refuge in sleeping, and 'in sitting,' taking refuge in
sitting. The first 'ca' indicates a collection, the second 'ca' indicates an
unmentioned collection, and 'in effort,' taking refuge in going and coming, and
in the practice of austerities. 'Well-behaved' - those whose conduct is like
that of the engaged sage. 'Well-behaved' - where the place is - the body's
relaxation, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmaka adhyayana meM saccA mAnava hai  /  vaha pratijJA sadaiva guru ke
sAnnidhya meM nivAsa karane aura sadAcaraNamaya samAdhi kA-mokSa mArga kA
anusaraNa karane se nibha pAtI hai-anyathA nahIM  /  isakA digdarzana karAte hue
kahate haiM-jo guru ke samIpa nivAsa nahIM karatA, vaha avyavasthita-
vyavasthAvihIna hotA hai, svachandatAcArI hotA hai  /  vaha pratijJAta-pratijJA
kiye hue sadanuSThAna rUpa uttama AcAramUlaka karma ko pAra lagAne meM-bhalI
bhAMti nibhA pAne meM samartha nahIM hotaa| yaha jAnakara sadaiva gurukula meM
vAsa karanA cAhiye  /  sanmArga kA anusaraNa karanA cAhiye jo usase rahita hotA
hai usakA vijJAna-vidyA hAsyAspada hotI hai  /  kahA gayA hai-jisane gurukula kI
upAsanA nahIM kI hai usakA vijJAna-usakA nirvigopaka-nizcaya hI saMrakSaka nahIM
hotA kyoMki guru ke zikSaNa ke binA nRtya karate hue mayUra kI deha kA pIche kA
bhAga prakaTita-udghATita rahatA hai  /  bakare ke gale meM lagI huI bAlukA ko
eDI ke prahAra se jhar3I huI dekhakara eka anya ajJa-avivekI puruSa ne jo guru
kI upAsanA meM vartanazIla nahIM rahA apanI eDI ke prahAra se usa rANI ko mAra
DAlA jisake gale meM gAMTha ho gaI thI ityAdi  /  guru kI upAsanA jisane nahIM
kI usameM bahuta se doSa utpanna ho jAte haiM, jinase saMsAra bar3hatA hai  /
yaha jAnakara isa vakSyamANa maryAdA ke sAtha guru ke samIpa nivAsa karanA
cAhiye  /  sUtrakAra yaha vyakta karate hue kahate haiM-dharma kA vyAkhyAtA
mukti gamana yogya uttama sAdhu ke yA rAga dvaiSa vivarjita sarvajJa ke vRta-
anuSThAna yA uttama AcaraNa kA avabhAsanaprakAzana karanA cAhiye  /  gurukula
meM nivAsa karane se anekAneka guNa Ate haiM  /  ataH sAdhu ko cAhiye ki vaha
apane gaccha se yA guru ke pAsa se bAhara na jAye, svecchAcArI na bane  /  vaha
AzuprajJa-tIvra meghA kA dhanI guru ke samIpa rahatA huA jaba yaha anubhava kare
ki viSaya aura kaSAya usakI AtmA kA haraNa kara rahe haiMabhibhUta kara rahe
haiM to vaha AcArya ke Adeza yA svayaM AtmA ko, apane Apako udhara se haTA letA
hai tathA samAdhi meM vyavasthApita-saMsthita kara letA hai| isa prakAra apane
pravrajita jIvana meM-usake vikAsa meM udyata-tatpara sAdhu nitya guru kulavAsa
meM rahatA huA sarvatra sthAna, zayana, Asana Adi meM upayukta-upayoga sahita
vartatA hai  /  - usa ora udyata sAdhu ko jo guNa prApta hote haiM unheM
udbhAvita karate hue sUtrakAra kahate haiN| je ThANao ya sayaNAsaNe ya,
parakkame yAvi susAhajutte  /  samitIsu guttIsu ya Ayapanne, viyAgarite ya puDho
vaejA  // 5 //  chAyA - yaH sthAnatazca zayanAsanAbhyAJca parAkramatazca
susAdhuyuktaH  /  samitiSu guptiSu cAvagataprajJaH, vyAkurvazca pRthag vadet  //
. anuvAda - gurukula vAsI sAdhu sthAna, zayana, Asana evaM parAkrama-saMyama
viSayaka udyama meM uttama sAdhu ke sadRza saMlagna rahatA hai  /  vaha
samitiyoM evaM guptiyoM kA samyak jJAtA hotA hai, pAlana karatA hai  /  vaha
anya janoM ko unakA upadeza detA hai| TIkA - yo hi nirviNNasaMsAratayA
pravrajyAmabhi udyato nityaM gurukulavAsataH 'sthAnatazca' sthAnamAzritya tathA
zayanata AsanataH, ekazcakAraH samuccaye dvitIyo'nuktasamuccayArthaH
cakArAdgamanamAzrityAgamanaM ca tathA tapazcaraNAdau parAkramatazca, (su)
sAdhoH-udyuktavihAriNo yesamAcArAstai:samAyuktaHsusAdhuyuktaHsusAdhurhi yatra
sthAnaM-kAyotsargAdikaM -571) -

Page #600 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra prescribes the actions of proper disregard, etc. It
prescribes the shedding of the body like a mountain, without any tremor, and
without any attachment to the body. Similarly, while sleeping, one should
disregard the bed, the ground, and the body, and sleep only when permitted by
the Guru at the time of the prescribed action. Even while sleeping, one should
not be completely unconscious, like when awake. Similarly, while sitting, etc.,
one should remain as before, with a contracted body, devoted to study and
meditation, and become a good Sadhu. Thus, a resident of the Guru's house, who
performs such good actions, becomes a good Sadhu. Moreover, while residing in
the Guru's house, one should be aware of the five Samitis, such as walking,
etc., and the three Guptis, which are of the form of contemplation and non-
contemplation. The knowledge that arises from these becomes the knowledge of the
one who has come, and the one who has arisen, and the one who has developed the
discernment of duty. One should also explain to others, separately and
individually, the grace of the Guru, the nature of the Samitis and Guptis, and
their proper observance, and the benefits thereof. ||5||  Commentary: A
renunciate, who is disillusioned and detached from the world, always resides in
the Guru's house, and is diligent in his actions, such as standing, sleeping,
sitting, and performing austerities, and conducts himself like a good Sadhu. A
good Sadhu, when performing the shedding of the body, etc., does so after
properly observing and cleaning the place. In the shedding of the body, he
remains steady like a mountain, without any desire or longing in the body. At
the time of sleep, he properly observes the bed, the ground, and his own body,
and sleeps only when permitted by the Guru at the time prescribed by the
scriptures. Even while sleeping, he remains like one who is awake, not
unconscious. Similarly, when sitting, etc., he sits with his body contracted and
properly folded, and remains devoted to study and meditation. A resident of the
Guru's house, who performs such good actions, becomes a good Sadhu. While
residing in the Guru's house, he becomes aware of the five Samitis, such as
walking, etc., and the three Guptis, which are of the form of contemplation and
non-contemplation, and develops the discernment of duty. By the grace and favor
of the Guru, he comes to know the nature of the Samitis and Guptis, and observes
them properly, and teaches others about their benefits.  The one who is free
from Asrava, who is endowed with the Samitis, such as walking, etc., and the
Guptis, should listen to sweet and pleasant sounds, such as those of the flute
and the lute, and also to fearful and harsh sounds, without attachment or
aversion. He should not indulge in sleep-induced carelessness, and if he has any
doubts about anything, he should ask the Guru and get clarification. ||6||
Shadow: Having heard the sounds, the one who is free from Asrava should wander
among them. The monk should not indulge in carelessness due to sleep, and how
can he be free from doubts?  Translation: The one who is free from Asrava, who
is endowed with the Samitis, such as walking, etc., and the Guptis, should
listen to sweet and pleasant sounds, such as those of the flute and the lute,
and also to fearful and harsh sounds, without attachment or aversion. He should
not indulge in sleep-induced carelessness, and if he has any doubts about
anything, he should ask the Guru and get clarification.  Commentary: To show
what should be done by the one who is endowed with the Samitis, such as walking,
etc., it is said: "Having heard" the sweet and pleasant sounds, such as those of
the flute and the lute, or "fearful" sounds, such as those that are harsh to the
ears, the one who is free from Asrava, who is neither attached nor averse to
them, should wander among them, i.e., he should remain steadfast in his practice
of restraint. Similarly, the "monk" should not indulge in "sleep-induced
carelessness," because it is a form of carelessness. This means that
carelessness due to listening to sounds is prohibited, and carelessness due to
sleep is also prohibited. And carelessness due to other things, such as idle
talk, etc., is also prohibited. (572

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram vidhatte tatra samyak pratyupekSaNAdikAM kriyAM karoti,
kAyotsargaM ca meruriva niSprakampaH zarIra niHspRho vidhatte, tathA zayanaM ca
kurvan pratyupekSya saMstArakaM tadbhuvaM kArya coditakAle gururbhiranujJAtaH
svapet, tatrApi jAgradiva nAtyantaM ni:saha iti  /  evamAsanAdiSvati tiSThatA
pUrvavatsaMkucitagAtreNa svAdhyAyadhyAnaparAyaNena,susAdhunA bhavitavyAmiti,
tadevamAdisusAdhukriyAyukto gurukula nivAsI susAdhurbhavatIti sthitam  /  apica-
gurukulavAse nivasan paJcasu samitiSvIryAsamityAdiSu pravicArarupAsu tathA
tisRSu ca guptiSu pravicArApravicArarUpAsu AgatA-utpannA prajJA
yasyAsAvAgataprajJaH-saMjAtakarttavyavivekaH svato bhavati, parasyApi ca
'vyAkurvan' kathayan pRthak pRthagguroH prasAdAtAparijJAtasvarUpaH
samitiguptInAM yathAvasthitasvarUpapratipAlanaM tatpalaM ca 'vadet'
pratipAdayediti  // 5 //  TIkArtha - saMsAra se nirviNNa-virakta hokara
pravrajita puruSa sadA gurukula meM vAsa karane se sthAna, zayana, Asana tathA
parAkrama-tapazcaraNa meM samyak yatnazIla rahatA huA uttama sAdhu ke sadRza
AcaraNa karatA hai  /  zreSTha sAdhu jahAM kAyotsarga Adi karatA hai usa sthAna
ko vaha bhalI bhAMti dekhakara-pramArjita kara kAyotsarga karatA hai  /
kAyotsarga meM vaha meru ke sadRza niSprakampa rahatA hai  /  zarIra meM spRhA-
AkAMkSA nahIM rakhatA  /  zayana belA meM vaha bhalI bhAMti pratyupekSaNA kara-
AstaraNa, bhUmi tathA apane zarIra kA samIkSaNa kara guru kI anujJA se zAstra
pratipAdita samaya meM sotA hai  /  sotA huA bhI vaha jAgRta ke sadRza rahatA
hai, bebhAna nahIM hotA  /  isI prakAra AsanAdi para jo baiThatA hai to vaha
apane zarIra ko saMkucita kara bhalI bhAMti sikoDa kara baiThatA hai, svAdhyAya
va dhyAna meM parAyaNa rahatA hai  /  gurukula meM nivAsa karane vAlA sAdhu isa
prakAra zreSTha sAdhu kI kriyA meM samAyukta hotA hai  /  gurukula meM rahatA
huA vaha IryA Adi pravicAra rUpa pAMca samitiyoM meM tathA pravicAra-apravicAra
rUpa tIna guptiyoM meM karttavya viveka yukta hotA hai  /  guru ke prasAda-
anugraha se samitiyoM aura guptiyoM ke svarUpa ko bhalI bhAMti jAna letA hai|
unakA yathAvata rUpa meM-yathAvidhi paripAlana karatA hai evaM unake phala kA-
lAbha kA auroM ko upadeza detA hai  /  sahANi soccA adu bheravANi, aNAsave tesu
parivvaejjA  /  .. nidaM ca bhikkhU na pamAya kujA, kahaM kahaM vA
vitigicchatinne  // 6 //  chAyA - zabdAn zrutvA'thabhairavAn anAzravasteSu
parivrajet  /  nidrAJcabhikSurna pramAdaM kuryyAt, kathaM kathaM vA
vicikitsAtIrNaH  //  anuvAda - anAzrava-Azrava rahita, IryA Adi samitiyoM tathA
guptiyoM se yukta sAdhu madhura-karNa priya tathA bhairava-bhayaMkara zabdoM kA
zravaNa kara rAga-dveSa na kare  /  vaha nidrAmUlaka pramAda kA sevana na kare
tathA yadi kisI viSaya meM vicikitsA-zaMkA utpanna ho to guru se pUcha kara
samAdhAna prApta kre| TIkA - IryA samitityAdyupetena yadvidheyaM
taddarzayitumAha-'zabdAn' veNuvINAdikAn madhurAn zrutipezalAn 'zrutvA'
samAkAthavA 'bhairavAn' bhayAvahAn karNakaTUnAkarNya zabdAn Azravati tAn
zobhanatvena vA gRhNAtItyAzravo nAzravo'nAzravaH, teSvanukUleSu pratikUleSu
zravaNa pathamupagateSu zabdeSvanAzravo-madhyastho rAgadveSarahito bhUtvA
parisamantAd vrajet-saMyamAnuSThAyI bhavet, tathA 'nidrAMca' nidrApramAdaM ca
'bhikSuH' satsAdhuH pramAdAGgatvAnna kuryAt, etaduktaM bhavati-
zabdAzravanirodhena viSayapramAdo niSiddho nidrAnirodhena ca nidrApramAdaH, ca
zabdAdanyamapi pramAdaM vikathA (572

Page #601 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A student should not engage in activities that lead to passions and other such
things. Thus, a wise person who has resided in a guru's abode, and who has
attained knowledge in matters of place, sleep, posture, assembly, and secrecy,
and who has renounced all carelessness, will, through the guru's teachings,
somehow overcome doubt and mental disturbance. Or, if he thinks, "This burden of
the five great vows is too heavy, how can I possibly bear it to the end?" he
will, through the guru's grace, overcome such doubt. Or, if he experiences any
mental disturbance, he will, while residing in the guru's abode, overcome it
completely and will also be able to help others overcome their disturbances.
||6||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmakaM adhyayana kaSAyAdikaM na vidadhyAt  /  tadevaM gurukulavAsAt
sthAnazayanAsanasamitiguptiSvAgataprajJaH pratiSiddhasarvapramAdaH san
gurorupadezAdeva kathaMkathamapi vicikitsAM-cittaviplutirupAM (vi) tIrNaH-
atikrAnto bhavati, yadivA madgRhIto'yaM paJcamahAvratabhAro'tidurvahaH, kathaM
kathamapyantaM gacched ? ityevaMbhUtAM vicikitsAM guruprasAdAdvitIrNo bhavati,
athavA yAM kAJciccittaviplutiM dezasarvagatAM tAM kRtsanAM gurvantike vasan
vitIrNo bhavati anyeSAmapi tadapanayanasamarthaH syAditi  // 6 //  TIkArtha -
IryAAdi samitiyoM se upeta-yukta sAdhu ko jo karanA cAhiye usakA digdarzana
karAte hue kahate haiM  /  vINA tathA bAMsurI Adi ke madhura, karNa priya zabdoM
kA athavA bhairava-bhayAvaha, karNakaTu. zabdoM kA zravaNa kara sAdhu unameM
Azrava na kareM  /  vastu ko zobhana aura azobhana rUpa se jo grahaNa karatA hai
use Azrava kahA jAtA hai  /  Azrava kA na honA anAzrava hai  /  kAnoM meM par3e
hue anukUla aura pratikUla zabdoM meM vaha anAva bhAva se rahe  /  madhyastha
tathA rAga-dveSa se rahita hokara saMyama ke anuSThAna meM saMlagna rahe  /
zreSTha sAdhu nidrA pramAda na kare  /  yahAM zabdAzrava kA nirodha batalAkara
viSaya pramAda kA pratiSedha kiyA hai tathA nidrA ke nirodha kA kathana kara
nidrAmUlaka pramAda kA pratiSedha kiyA hai  /  yahAM Aye hue 'ca' zabda se
vikathA aura kaSAya Adi pramAda na karane kA upadeza diyA hai  /  isa prakAra
sAdhu gurukula meM vAsa karane se sthAna, zayana, Asana samiti aura gupti-inameM
AgataprajJaH-vivekazIla rahatA hai tathA samasta pramAdoM kA pratiSedha-
parityAga karatA huA guru ke upadeza se vicikitsA-citta vilapti yA zaMkA ko
atikrAnta kara jAtA hai-lAMgha jAtA hai, athavA yadi sAdhu ke mana meM yaha
cintA ho ki pAMca mahAvratoM kA yaha davaha bhAra. kisI taraha-baDI kaThinAI se
pAra lagAyA jA sake to acchA ho  /  isa prakAra kI zaMkA ko vaha guru kRpA se
vitiraNa kara jAtA hai-lAMgha jAtA hai athavA yadi kucha zaMkA utpanna hotI hai
to vaha use svayaM sarvathA pAra kara jAtA hai evaM dUsaroM kI zaMkA kA bhI
apanayana karane meM sakSama hotA hai| DahareNa vuDDheNa'NusAsie u, rAtiNieNAvi
samavvaeNaM  /  sammaM tayaM thirato NAbhigacche, NijaMtae vAvi apArae se  // 7
//  chAyA - dahareNa vRddhanAnuzAsistu ratnAdhikenApi samavayasA  /  samyaktayA
sthirato nAbhigacchennIyamAno vApyapAragaH saH  //  anuvAda - yadi kabhI
pramAdavaza skhalanA-bhUla ho jAya to apane se bar3e yA choTe athavA dIkSA meM
bar3e yA apane samavayaska-samAna umra vAle sAdhu dvArA anuzAsita kiyA jAya-
truTi sudhArane hetu kahA jAya to sAdhu use na mAnakara kupita hotA hai, vaha
jagata ke pravAha meM bahatA rahatA hai  /  saMsAra-sAgara ko pAra nahIM kara
paataa| TIkA - kiJcAnyata-sa gurvantike nivasan kvacitpramAdaskhalitaH san vayaH
paryAyAbhyAM kSullakena-laghunA, 'coditaH' pramAdAcaraNaM prati niSiddhaH, tathA
vRddhena vA' vayo'dhikena zrutAdhikena vA 'anuzAsitaH' abhihitaH,
tadyathAbhavadvidhAnAmidamIddak pramAdAcaraNamAsevitumayuktaM, tathA
ratnAdhikena vA' pravajyAparyAyA-dhikenazrutAdhikena yA samavayasA, vA
'anuzAsitaH' pramAdaskhalitApacaraNaM prati coditaH kupyati tathA ahamapyanena
dramaka prAyeNottama kulaprasUtaH sarvajana saMmata ityevaM codita
ityevamanuzAsyamAno, na mithyAduSkataM dadAti na samyagutthAnenottiSThati nApi
tadanuzAsanaM samyak -(573)

Page #602 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Chapter 7**  A sadhu who is constantly being
guided towards non-repetition (apunahakarana) should accept the guidance and
respond to it. If he does not accept it properly, he is considered to be carried
away by the stream of samsara, being dragged along and disciplined. He becomes
angry and does not become a crosser of the ocean of samsara. Even if he is being
guided towards liberation by the teachings of an Acharya or others, and he is
being prevented from falling into carelessness, he still does not become a
crosser of the ocean of samsara because he does not follow the guidance.
**Commentary:**  If a sadhu, while staying in the presence of a guru, makes a
mistake due to carelessness, then a younger sadhu, either in age or in the stage
of initiation, will prevent him from making that mistake. Or, a sadhu who is
older in knowledge of the scriptures or in age will stop him from doing so,
disciplining him and saying that such careless conduct is not appropriate for a
person like him. Or, a sadhu who is senior in the stage of Ratnaadhika-
pravrajya, or who is distinguished in knowledge of the scriptures, or who is of
the same age, will discipline him and encourage him not to be careless. If, upon
being disciplined, the sadhu becomes angry at the one who is disciplining him
and says, "I am born into a noble family. I am respected by everyone. This
insignificant being is disciplining me, teaching me," then he does not say
"micchami dukkadam" for his conduct, and he does not rise properly, he does not
come back to his true nature as a sadhu, and he does not remain steadfast in the
discipline given. He does not accept, "I will not do that again." He gives a
counter-response to the one who is guiding him and starts teaching him. Then
that sadhu flows in the stream of samsara. He becomes angry at being
disciplined, and therefore he cannot cross the ocean of samsara. Or, if an
Acharya or others try to guide him towards liberation by giving him good
teachings and encouraging him not to fall into carelessness, but he does not
follow their discipline, then he cannot cross the ocean of samsara.  **Chapter
8**  **Verse:**  Viutthitenam samayaanusivve, daharena vuddhena u coie ya.
Accuttiyae ghaddasiae va, agarinam va samayaasi.  **Shadow:**  Vyutthitenam
samayaanusisto daharena vuddhena tu coditha ca. Atyutthitaya ghatadasyaava
agarinam va samayaanusista.  **Translation:**  Even if a sadhu is guided towards
good conduct by a householder who is opposed to the teachings, or by someone
younger or older, or even by a lowly servant girl who performs menial tasks, he
should not become angry.  **Commentary:**  Now, after discussing the
encouragement of one's own side, the commentary discusses the encouragement of
the other side. It says, "Vyutthita" - one who has risen in opposition, a
householder who is a non-Jain, or one who holds a wrong view. He is guided by
his own time, for example, "Such conduct is not established for you, you are
inclined towards this." Or, "Vyutthita" - one who has fallen from restraint,
another sadhu who has made a mistake and is disciplined by his own time,
according to the teachings established by the Arhats, for example, "This is not
allowed for you, such as fast travel." Or, he is guided by someone else who
holds a wrong view, or by someone who is "kshullka" - small, younger, or older,
who has a bad character, and the word "tu" indicates that he is of the same age.
Or, "Atyutthita" - those who have risen in opposition to performing even the
smallest tasks, or "dasya" - a servant girl, who is very lowly, and the
commentary clarifies this by saying "ghatadasya" - a water carrier. Even if he
is guided by her, he should not...  **[The text continues, but the translation
ends here as the provided text is incomplete.]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram meM sthirataH - apunaHkaraNatayA'bhigacchet-
pratipadyeta, coditazca praticodayed, asamyak pratipadyamAnazcAsau
saMsArasrotasA 'nIyamAna' uhyamAno'nuzAsyamAnaH kupito'sau na saMsArArNavasya
pArago bhavati  /  yadivA''cAryAdinA sadupadezadAnataH
pramAdaskhalitanivartanato mokSaM prati nIyamAno'pyasau saMsAra samudrasya
tadakaraNano'pAraga eva bhavatIti  // 7 //  TIkArtha guru ke sAnnidhya meM
rahatA huA sAdhu yadi kisI viSaya meM pramAda ke kAraNa skhalanAbhUla kare to
usase vaya meM athavA dIkSAparyAya meM choTA sAdhu pramAda karane kA pratiSedha
karatA hai athavA zruta zAstra jJAna meM yA umra meM bar3A sAdhu use vaisA
karane se rokatA hai, use anuzAsita karatA hai kahatA hai ki Apa jaise puruSa ke
liye aisA pramAdapUrNa AcaraNa karanA ucita nahIM hai athavA ratnAdhika-
pravrajyA ke paryyAya meM jyeSTha yA zAstra jJAna meM viziSTa athavA samavayaska
- samAna Ayu kA sAdhu use anuzAsita karatA hai, pramAda na karane ko prerita
karatA hai to vaisA kiye jAne para vaha sAdhu yadi anuzAsita karane vAle para
krodha karatA hai aura kahatA hai - maiM uttama kula meM utpanna huA hUM  /
saba logoM dvArA sammAnita hUM mujha jaise ko yaha tuccha prANI isa prakAra
anuzAsita kara rahA hai- sIkha de rahA hai| isa prakAra anuzAsita kiye jAne para
vaha apane AcaraNa ke liye micchAmidukkaDaM nahIM kahatA tathA samyak utthAna se
ucita nahIM hotA- apane vAstavika - sAdhutvAnukUla svarUpa meM nahIM AtA, diye
gaye anuzAsana meM sthira nahIM hotaa| maiM phira vaisA nahIM karUMgA, aisA
svIkAra nahIM karatA  /  preraNA dene vAle ko pratipreraNA detA hai zikSA dene
lagatA hai to vaha sAdhu saMsAra ke srota meM bahatA jAtA haianuzAsita karane
para kupita hotA hai  /  ataH vaha saMsAra samudra ko pAra nahIM kara sakatA
athavA AcArya Adi use uttama upadeza dvArA pramAdavaza skhalanA na karane kI
preraNA dekara mokSa kI ora le jAne kA upakrama karate haiM kintu vaha unake
anuzAsana ke anurUpa nahIM calatA  /  ataH saMsAra samudra ko vaha pAra nahIM
kara pAtA  /   viuTThiteNaM samayANusidve, DahareNa vuDDheNa u coie ya  /
accuTTiyAe ghaDadAsie vA, agAriNaM vA samayAsi  // 8 //  chAyA - vyutthitena
samayAnuziSTo dahareNa vRddhena tu coditazca  /  atyutthitayA
ghaTadAsyAvA'gAriNAM vA samayAnuziSTaH  //  anuvAda - vyutthita-zAstra pratikUla
kAryakArI gRhastha Adi dvArA, avasthA meM choTe yA bar3e dvArA athavA atyanta
choTe kArya karane vAlI ghaTa dAsI- panihArina taka dvArA yadi sAdhu ko sad
AcaraNa kI preraNA dI jAya to bhI use krodha nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  TIkA
sAmprataM svapakSacoMdanAnantarata: (raM) svaparacodanAmadhikRtyAha-
viruddhotthAnenotthito vyutthitaH - paratIrthiko gRhastho vA midhyAdRSTistena
pramAdaskhalite coditaH svasamayena tadyathA - naivaMvidhamanuSThAnaM
bhavatAmAga vyavasthitaM yenAbhipravRtto'si yadivA vyutthitaH -
saMyamAdbhaSTastenAparaH sAdhuH skhalitaH san
svasamayenaarhatpraNItAgamAnusAreNAnuzAsito mUlottaraguNAcaraNe skhalitaH san
'codita' AgamaM pradarzyAbhihitaH, tadyathAnaitattvaritagamanAdikaM
bhavatAmanujJAtamiti, tathA anyena vA mithyAdRSTyAdinA 'kSullakena' laghutareNa
vayasA vRddhena vA kutsitAcArapravRttazcoditaH, tuzabdAtsamAnavayasA vA tathA
atIvAkAryakaraNaM prati utthitA atyutthitAH, yadi vA - dAsItvena atyantamutthitA
dAsyA api dAsIti, tAmeva vizinaSTi - 'ghaTadAsyA' jalavAhinyApi codito na 574

Page #603 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of scriptures should not lead to anger. This is said because even when
someone is extremely agitated and provoked, believing it to be in their own best
interest, a virtuous person should not be angry, let alone someone else.
Similarly, when a householder is being disciplined according to the rules of
conduct for householders, even if they are being told that what they are doing
is not appropriate for householders, they should not be angry. Even if they are
being provoked by their own mind, believing that this is for their own good,
they should not let their mind be corrupted. ||8||  This is the meaning of the
commentary: After explaining the discipline given by virtuous people on their
own side, the author of the sutras speaks about the discipline given by both
those on their own side and those on the other side. Those who are opposed to
the teachings of the scriptures are called "viruddhotthapena utthita". These
include those who are against the teachings, householders, and those with false
beliefs. When a virtuous person makes a mistake due to carelessness, they should
be guided by a virtuous person of their own time, according to the teachings
accepted by them. They should be told that their scriptures do not prescribe the
rituals and conduct they are engaging in. Or, if a virtuous person who has
fallen from restraint is trying to guide another virtuous person who is slipping
in their observance of vows, they should guide them according to the teachings
of the Tirthankaras, based on the principles of the original and subsequent
qualities. They should quote the scriptures and say that actions like running
fast are not permitted or approved by the scriptures. Similarly, if a person
with false beliefs, whether younger or older, sees a virtuous person engaging in
disgraceful, inauspicious, or condemned conduct, they should guide them towards
righteous conduct. Here, the word "tu" refers to a person of the same age, who
should also guide them. If someone sees another person engaging in extremely
inappropriate actions and tries to guide them, or if a servant, being very eager
to do their duty, is very insistent in trying to get someone to stop doing
inappropriate and trivial things, even a maid, water-carrier, or servant should
guide them towards righteous conduct. The virtuous person should not be angry.
The point is that even if a maid, seeing someone engaging in unrighteous
conduct, becomes extremely angry and guides them towards righteous conduct, the
virtuous person should not be angry, considering it to be in their own best
interest. Then, what to speak of being angry when someone else gives them
advice? If a householder is being disciplined according to the rules of conduct
for householders, or according to the traditions of their time, and they are
told that what they are doing is not appropriate for householders, even if they
are being told this with disdain, they should not be angry. They should
understand that this is for their own good and not let any negativity arise in
their mind. This is further explained as follows:  "They should not be angry,
nor should they be distressed, nor should they speak harshly. They should
promise to do so, knowing that this is for their own good, and not be careless."
||9||  Commentary: "Tesh" refers to those who are on their own side or the other
side, who are trying to guide them. They should not be angry, believing it to be
in their own best interest. Nor should they be angry when someone else speaks
harshly to them. They should think:  "When someone is angry, their mind should
be directed towards understanding the truth. If it is true, why be angry? If it
is false, why be angry?" ||1||  575

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmaka adhyayana krodhaM kuryAta, etaduktaM bhavati
atyutthitayA'tikupitayA'pi coditaH svahitaM manyamAnaH susAdhurna kupyet, kiM
punaranyeneti ? tathA 'agAriNAM' gRhasthAnAMyaH 'samayaH anuSThAnaM
tatsamayenAnuzAsito, gRhasthAnAmapi etanna yujyate kartuM yadArabdha
bhavatetyeyavamAtmAvamenApi codito mamaivaitacchreya ityevaMmanyamAno manAgapi
na mano duussyediti||8|| etadevAha_TIkArtha - apane pakSavartI sAdhuoM dvArA
pradatta anuzAsana kA pratipAdana karane ke pazcAt apane tathA sare pakSavartI
janoM dvArA diye jAne vAle anuzAsana ke sambandha meM sUtrakAra kahate haiM-
viruddhotthApenotthita-zAstra viruddha kAryakArI vyutthita kahalAte haiM  /
paratIrthI, gRhastha aura mithyAdRSTi inameM Ate haiM  /  ve sAdhu dvArA
pramAdavaza bhUla ho jAne para use svasamaya-sAdhu dvArA svIkRta darzana ke
anusAra preraNA de tathA kahe ki Apake AgamazAstra meM aise anuSThAna-AcaraNa kA
vidhAna nahIM hai jo Apa kara rahe haiM athavA saMyama ke patita koI sAdhu kisI
dUsare sAdhu ko jo vrata pAlana meM skhalita ho rahA ho, tIrthaMkara praNIta
AgamoM ke anusAra mUla guNoM evaM uttara guNoM ke AcaraNa se vicalita usa sAdhu
ko preraNA de  /  Agama ko uddhRta kara kahe ki-teja gati se calanA Adi AcaraNa
Apake lie anujJAta-zAstra anumodita nahIM hai| tathA dUsarA koI mithyA dRSTi,
vaya meM kaniSTha athavA jyeSTha puruSa kutsita-azubha yA nindita AcAra meM
pravRtta sAdhu ko sadAcaraNa kI preraNA de| yahAM 'tu' zabda dvArA sUcita
samavayaska-apane samAna umra kA puruSa bhI preraNA de-atIva akArya karate hue
dekhakara preraNA dene hetu udyata athavA dAsI hone ke nAte atyanta utthita
kArya karane meM behada utAvalI, atIva akArya evaM tuccha kArya karane meM
nirata ghaTa dAsI-jalavAhinI yA panihArina bhI use sadAcaraNa kI preraNA de to
vaha sAdhu krodha na kare  /  kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki vaha dAsI bhI yadi
use anAcaraNazIla dekha atyanta kupita hokara sadAcaraNa kI preraNA de to vaha
sAdhu use apane liye hitaprada mAnatA huA, kupita na ho, phira anya kisI ke
dvArA to upadeza diye jAne para kupita hone kI bAta hI kyA hai  /  gRhasthoM ke
samaya-paramparA yA sadvyavahAra ke anusAra use koI anuzAsita karatA huA kahe ki
jo Apa kara rahe hai, vaha to gRhasthoM ke liye bhI samucita nahIM hotA  /  isa
prakAra tiraskAra ke sAtha bhI yadi use sadAcAra kI ora prerita kiyA jAye to
vaha yaha samajhatA huA ki mere liye yaha zreyaskara hai, mana meM jarA bhI
vikAra na lAye  /  isI bAta ko aura kahate haiM - Na tesa kujjhe Naya pavvahejA,
Na yAvi kiMcI pharusaM vdejaa| tahA karissaMti paDissuNejA, seyaM khu meyaM Na
pamAya kujjA  // 9 //  .. chAyA - na teSu krudhyenna ca pravyathayenna cA'pi
kiJcitparuSaM vadet  /  _ tathA kariSyAmIti pratizRNuyAt, zreyaH khalumamedaM na
pramAdaM kuryAt  //  anuvAda - pahale kahe anusAra jo sAdhu ko prerita kare,
zikSA de, una para vaha krodha na kre| unheM vyathA-pIr3A na de tathA paruSa-
kaThora vacana na kahe  /  maiM aisA hI karUMgA, aisI pratijJA kare, isI meM
merA zreyakalyANa hai, yaha socakara vaha pramAda na kare-asAvadhAnI na barate
/  TIkA - 'teSu' svaparapakSeSu skhalita codakeSvAtmahitaM manyamAno na krudhyed
anyasmin vA durvacane'bhihite na kupyed evaM ca cintayet 'AkruSTena matimatA
tattvArthavicAraNe matiH kAryA  /  yadi satyaM kaH kopaH ? syAdanRtaM kiM nu
kopena ?  // 1 //  575

Page #604 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  If a virtuous person's conduct slips, and both
those on his side and those on the opposing side point out his slip and speak
harshly to him, he should not be angry with those who point it out. He should
think, "I should contemplate the truth of what this angry, wise person has said.
If his anger is true, then what is there to be angry about? If it is false, then
what good is anger?"  Even if a person of lower standing than himself, guided by
the path of the Arhat, or following the customs of the world, advises him, the
virtuous person should contemplate the ultimate truth and not cause distress or
pain to the advisor. He should not speak harshly or cause him pain. Instead, he
should say, "This is my fault, for I am engaged in improper conduct, and this is
why he is advising me. If the advisor says, 'You should not engage in such
improper conduct, but rather follow the conduct of the ancient sages,' the
virtuous person should contemplate with a neutral mind and vow, 'I will do so
from now on.' He should also repent for his past misdeeds, thinking, 'May my
misdeeds be false and not affect my life again.' He should think, 'The advice I
have received is for my own good. By not following it, I will harm myself.'
Thus, he should be afraid of himself and not be careless. He should not engage
in improper conduct.  ## Commentary  The commentary explains that the virtuous
person should not be angry with those who point out his mistakes, but should
instead contemplate the truth of their words. He should also repent for his past
misdeeds and vow to do better in the future. The commentary also emphasizes the
importance of following the path of the Arhat and the conduct of the ancient
sages.  ## Verse 10  **Original:** वणंसि मूढस्स जहा अमूढा, मग्गाणुसासंति हितं
पयाणं । तणेव (तेणावि) मज्झं इणमेव सेयं, जं मे बुहा समणुसासयति ॥१०॥
**Translation:** Just as in a forest, the ignorant are guided by the wise, who
show them the right path for their benefit, so too, I consider it beneficial for
me to be guided by the wise.  **Commentary:** This verse uses the analogy of a
lost person in a forest being guided by the wise to illustrate the importance of
following the guidance of the wise. The virtuous person should be happy to be
guided by the wise, as it is for his own benefit.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram tathA nApyapareNa svato'dhamenApi
codito'rhanmArgAnusAreNa lokAcAragatyA vA'bhihitaH paramArthaM paryAlocya taM
codakaM prakarSeNa-- vyathet'daNDAdiprahAreNa pIDayet na cApi kiJcitparuSaM
tatpIr3AkAri' vadet' brUyAt, mamaivAyamasadnuSThAyino doSo yenAyamapi mAmevaM
codayati, coditazcaivaMvidhaM bhavatA asadAcaraNaM na vidheyamevaMvidhaM ca
pUrvarSibhiranuSThitamanuSTheyamityevaMvidhaM vAkyaM tathA
kariSyAduSkRtAdinAnivarteta, yadetaccodanaM nAmaitanmamava zreyo, yata
etadbhayAtkvacitpunaH pramAdaM na kuryAnnaivAsadAcaraNa manutiSThediti  // 9 //
TIkArtha - AcAra skhalita hone para sAdhu ko yadi svapakSavartI tathA para
pakSavartI usakI skhalanA batAye va use durvacana - kaThora vacana bhI kahe, to
vaha unameM apanI AtmA kA zreyasa samajhakara batAne vAle para krodha na kare  /
vaha 'cintana kare ki Akrozayukta buddhizIla puruSa ne jo kahA hai mujhe usakI
vAstavikatA para cintanamanana karanA cAhiye  /  yadi satya -usakA Akroza satya
hai to krodha kI kyA bAta hai ? yadi asatya hai to krodha se lAbha kyA hai ?
yadi apane se adhama- nimna koTiya puruSa bhI yadi tIrthaMkara prarUpita mArga
ke anurUpa preraNA de, athavA loka vyavahAra kI paramparA ke anusAra kathana
kare to sAdhu paramArtha kI paryAlocanA karatA huA usa preraka puruSa ko
vyathita pIDita na kare tathA kaThora vacana kahakara use duHkhita na kare,
parantu vaha aisA kahe ki maiM asat anuSThAna-anAcaraNIya kArya meM saMlagna
hUM, yaha merA hI doSa hai, ataeva mujhe yaha prerita karatA hai  /  yadi
preraNA dene vAlA use yoM kahe ki Apako aisA asat AcaraNa nahIM karanA cAhiye,
varan Apako to pahale RSiyoM ne-satpuruSoM ne jaisA AcaraNa kiyA hai, vaisA
karanA cAhiye, isa para sAdhu madhyastha vRtti setaTastha bhAvanA se cintana
kara yaha pratijJA kare ki maiM aba aisA hI karUMgA tathA apane dvArA Acarita
duSkarmoM ke liye vaha apane ko micchAbhiM dukkaDaM de, mere dvArA kiyA gayA
duSkRta mithyA ho, punaH mere jIvana meM na vyApe, aisI bhAvanA lAye  /  vaha
soce ki mujhe jo preraNA dI gaI hai usameM merA hI zreyasa nihita hai  /  sAdhu
isake bhaya se aisA na karane se merA ahita hogA  /  yoM AtmabhItipUrvaka
pramAda na kre| asad AcaraNa kA anuSThAna na kare  /  OM OM OM vaNaMsi mUDhassa
jahA amUr3hA, maggANusAsaMti hitaM payANaM  /  taNeva (teNAvi) majjhaM iNameva
seyaM, jaM me buhA samaNusAsayati  // 10 //  chAyA vane mUDhasya yathA'mUDhAH,
mArgamanuzAsati hitaM prajAnAm  /  tenApi mahyamidameva zreyaH yanme vRddhAH
samyaganuzAsati  //  anuvAda - jaise vana meM bhaTakA huA - khoyA huA puruSa
mArgavettAoM dvArA batAye jAne para prasanna hotA hai aura yaha anubhava karatA
hai ki isase merA hita sadhegA  /  isI prakAra jo jJAnIjana uttama mArga
batalAte ho, sAdhu yaha socakara prasannatA kA anubhava kare ki ye mujhe
zreyaskara mArga batA rahe hai, merA yahI isameM kalyANa hai  /  TIkA -
asyArthasya dRSTAntaM darzayitumAha-'vane ' gahane mahATavyAMdigbhrameNa
kasyacidvyAkulitamaternaSTasatpathasya yathA kecida pare kRpAkRSTamAnasA'
amUDhAH'sadasanmArgajJAH kumArgaparihAreNa prajAnAM hitam'
azeSApAyarahitamIpsitasthAna prApakaM 'mArga' panthAnam ' anuzAsati'
pratipAdayanti, sa ca taiH sadasadvivekibhiH sanmArgAvataraNamanuzAsita AtmanaH
576

Page #605 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of scriptures is considered to be the best. Even if one is urged by
someone who has not followed the right path, one should not be angry, but should
think, "This is a favor to me." For what the enlightened ones teach and guide
one towards the right path, like a father to his son, is for my own good. ||10||
The commentator, explaining the sutra, says: In a dense forest, if someone is
lost and confused, and is afraid, having lost the right path, then some other
men, who know the right and wrong paths, out of compassion, will guide him away
from the wrong path and show him the path that is free from all obstacles and
leads to the desired destination. He considers himself fortunate to be guided by
those men who know the right and wrong. Similarly, if the aforementioned man,
who is not following the right path, is urged by someone, he should not be angry
with them. He should think, "This is a favor to me." Just as a father guides his
son, teaches him the right things, and brings him to the right path, similarly,
the teachings given to me by the Jina-knowers are also for my good.  He, the
ignorant one, should worship the enlightened one with special reverence. This is
the simile given there by the hero, who correctly explains the meaning. ||11||
**Commentary:** To further strengthen this meaning, the commentator says: Here,
the word "atha" is used to indicate what follows, or to begin a sentence. For
example, the ignorant man, who has been brought to the right path, should
consider it a great favor to be taught the right path by the enlightened one,
like Pulinda, and should worship him with special reverence. Thus, the hero, the
Tirthankara or some other Ganadhara, has "explained" this simile, "following"
the meaning, the ultimate truth, the urging, the great favor, and applying it to
himself. For example, I have been saved from the many troubles of birth, old
age, death, and false beliefs by this one who gives good advice. Therefore, I
should worship this one who has done me a great favor, with respect, humility,
etc. There are many examples of this, such as:  "Just as a house is engulfed in
flames, and someone is burning, whoever wakes up the sleeping one is that
person's best friend. ||1|| Just as a dish mixed with poison is offered to
someone who wants to eat, whoever points out the fault is that person's best
friend. ||2||"  **Commentary:** To strengthen this meaning, the commentator
says: Here, the word "atha" is used to indicate what follows, or to begin a
sentence. For example, the ignorant man, who has been brought to the right path,
should consider it a great favor to be taught the right path by the enlightened
one, like Pulinda, and should worship him with special reverence. Thus, the
hero, the Tirthankara or some other Ganadhara, has "explained" this simile,
"following" the meaning, the ultimate truth, the urging, the great favor, and
applying it to himself. For example, I have been saved from the many troubles of
birth, old age, death, and false beliefs by this one who gives good advice.
Therefore, I should worship this one who has done me a great favor, with
respect, humility, etc. There are many examples of this, such as:  "Just as a
house is engulfed in flames, and someone is burning, whoever wakes up the
sleeping one is that person's best friend. ||1|| Just as a dish mixed with
poison is offered to someone who wants to eat, whoever points out the fault is
that person's best friend. ||2||" ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmakaM adhyayanaM zreyo manyate, evaM tenApyasadanuSThAyinA coditena na
kupitavyam, apitu mamAyamanugraha ityevaM mantavyaM, yadetad buddhAH
samyaganuzAsayanti sanmArge'vatArayanti putramiva pitaraH tanmamaiva zreya iti
mantavyam  // 10 //  TIkArtha sUtrakAra isI tathya ko dRSTAnta dvArA prakaTa
karate hue kahate haiM-ghora aTavI meM - bhayAnaka jaMgala meM digbhrama ho jAne
se koI vyAkulitamati ho gayA ho - ghabarA uThA ho sahI rAstA bhUla gayA ho, taba
katipaya anya puruSa jo sat asat-ThIka beThIka mArga ko jAnate hoM dayA se
AkRSTa hokara use kumArga se haTAkara vaha rAstA batalAye jo samagra vighnoM se
rahita tathA abhipsita sthAna taka pahuMcAne vAlA ho| vaha una sat asat kA
viveka rakhane vAle puruSoM dvArA sanmArga para pahuMcA diye jAne para apanA
kalyANa mAnatA hai  /  isa prakAra asad AcaraNazIla pUrvokta puruSa yadi kisI
dvArA prerita kiyA jAye to use una para krodha nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  isane
mujha para anugraha kiyA hai, yaha mAnanA cAhiye  /  jisa prakAra pitA putra ko
samyak anuzAsita karate haiM, sat zikSA pradAna karate haiM, sanmArga para lAte
haiM, isI prakAra jina jJAnIjanoM dvArA mujhe zikSA dI gaI usameM bhI merA
kalyANa hai  /  aha teNa mUDheNa amUDhagassa kAyavva pUyA savisesajuttA  /
eovamaM tattha udAhu vIre, aNugamma atthaM uvaNeti sammaM  //  11  //  chAyA *
atha tena mUr3henAmUr3hassa karttavyA pUjA savizeSayuktA  /  etAmupamAM tatro
dAhRtavAn vIraH, anugamyArthamupanayati samyak  //  anuvAda - mUr3ha -
mArgabhraSTa puruSa amUDha-mArga batAne vAle vijJajana kI vizeSa rUpa se pUjA-
satkAra karatA hai  /  usI prakAra sanmArga batAne vAle puruSa kA vaha sAdhu jo
saMyama meM cyuta ho rahA thA vizeSa rUpa se satkAra kare  /  usake upadeza kA
anugamana karatA huA usakA upakAra mAne  /  bhagavAna mahAvIra ne isa saMdarbha
meM yaha upamA-dRSTAnta udAhRta kiyA- upasthApita kiyA  /  - - TIkA -
punarapyasyArthasya puSTyarthamAha- 'athe' tyAnantaryArthe vAkyopanyAsArthe vA,
yathA 'tena' mUr3hena sanmArgAvatAritena tadanantaraM tasya 'amUDhasya'
satpathopadeSTuH pulindAderapi paramupakAraM manyamAnena pUjA vizeSayuktA
karttavyA, evametAmupamAm 'udAhRtavAn' abhihitavAn vIraH tIrthaMkaro'nyo vA
gaNadharAdikaH 'anugamya' buddhavA 'artha' paramArthaM codanAkRtaM paramopakAraM
samyagAtmanyupanayati, tadyathA - ahamanena
mithyAtvanAjjanmajarAmaraNAdyanekopadravabahulAtsadupadezadAnenottAritaH, tato
mayA'sya paramopakAriNo'bhyutthAnavinayAdibhiH pUjA vidheyeti  /  asminnatha
bahavo dRSTAntAH santi, tadyathA - ''gehaMmi agnijAlAulaMmi jaha NAma
DajjhamANaMmi  /  jo bohei suyaMtaM so tassa jaNo paramabaMdhU  // 1 //  jaha vA
visasaMjuttaM bhattaM niddhamiha bhotukAmassa  /  jo vi sadosaM sAhai so tassa
jaNo parama baMdhU  // 2 //  " chAyA - gRhe'gni jvAlAkule yathA nAma dahyamAne
/  yo bodhayati suptaM sa tasya janaH parama bAndhavaH  //  1  //  yathA
viSasaMyuktabhaktaMsnigdhaMiha mauktukAmasya yo'pi sadoSaM sAdhayati se tasya
parama bandhurjanaH  // 2 //   // 11 //  TIkArtha - isI artha kI paripuSTi -
dRr3hatA hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM - yahAM 'atha' zabda kA prayoga pazcAt ke
artha meM yA vAkya ke upanyAsa- prAraMbha ke artha meM AyA hai| jaise sanmArga
meM avatArita - lAye gaye ajJa puruSa 577

Page #606 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra Kritanga Sutra, which is the guide to the right path, should be
especially honored by considering the great benefit of the Pulinda, Kirata,
etc., who show the right path. Bhagwan Mahavira or the Ganadharas have presented
this analogy or example in this regard. By following it, understanding its
essence or secret, the Sadhu establishes the benefit given by inspiration in his
soul. Just as I have been freed from the forest of falsehood, which is full of
many troubles like birth, old age, death, etc., by the advice of this man.
Therefore, I should worship this supremely benevolent man by standing in front
of him when he comes, with respect, humility, etc. There are many examples in
this regard. For example, the one who wakes up a sleeping man in a house burning
with fire is his closest relative and benefactor. And the one who tells a man
who is about to eat sweet food mixed with poison that the food is faulty and
prevents him from eating it is his closest relative and well-wisher.  Just as a
guide cannot know the way in a dark night, not seeing, he knows the way when the
sun rises, illuminated.  Commentary: This is another example given by the Sutra.
Just as a guide, even though he is familiar with the area, cannot know the way
in a dark night covered by heavy clouds, because the way is covered by darkness,
he cannot see his own hands, etc., he does not know it properly. The same guide,
when the sun rises, the darkness is removed, and the sky is illuminated, he
knows the way, which is marked by stones, caves, high and low places, etc., he
sees the desired place, he understands it properly by considering its defects
and qualities.  Thus, the Sutra presents an example and then explains its
essence.  Similarly, a person who is not firm in Dharma, does not know Dharma,
not understanding. He, when he gets angry, does not see the Dharma, like the
eyes see when the sun rises.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram ko satpatha ke upadeSTA-sanmArga batAne vAle puliMda-
kirAta Adi kA bhI parama upakAra mAnakara vizeSa rUpa se satkAra karanA cAhiye
/  bhagavAna mahAvIra ne athavA gaNadharoM ne isa saMbaMdha meM yaha upamA yA
udAharaNa prastuta kiyA hai  /  use anugatakara-usake tattva yA rahasya ko
samajhakara preraNA dvArA pradatta upakAra ko sAdhu apanI AtmA meM bhalI bhAMti
upanyasta karatA hai-sthApita karatA hai  /  jaise maiM isa puruSa dvArA janma,
vRddhAvasthA, maraNa Adi aneka upadravoM se parivyApta mithyAtva rUpI vana se
sadupadeza dvArA nikAla diyA gayA huuN| ata: mujhe isa parama upakArI puruSa kA
abhyutthAna-Ane para sAmane khar3e hokara satkAra vinaya Adi dvArA pUjA
saMpratiSThA karanI cAhiye  /  isa saMbaMdha meM bahuta se dRSTAnta haiM  /
jaise Aga se jalate hue ghara meM supta puruSa ko jo jagAtA hai, vaha usakA
paramabandhuparamopakArI hotA hai  /  tathA jahara se mile hue madhura bhojana
ko khAne hetu udyata puruSa ko usa bhojana ko doSayukta batAkara khAne se haTAtA
hai-dUra karatA hai vaha usakA parama baMdhu-parama hitaiSI hai| NetA jahA
aMdhakAraMsi rAo, maggaM Na jANAti apassamANe  /  se sUriassa abbhuggameNaM,
maggaM viyANAi pagAsiyaMsi  // 12 //  chAyA - netA yathA'nthakArAyAM rAtrau,
mArga na jAnAtyapazyan  /  sa sUryyasyAbhyudgamena, mArga vijAnAti prakAzite  //
anuvAda - jaise netA-pathadarzaka puruSa aMdhakArapUrNa rAtri meM na dekha pAne
ke kAraNa rAstA nahIM jAna sakatA, kintu sUrya uga jAne ke pazcAt-rozanI ho jAne
para vaha mArga jAna letA hai| _TIkA - ayamaparaH sUtreNaiva
dRSTAnto'bhidhIyate-yathA hi sajala jala dharAcchAditabahalAndhakArAyAM rAtrau
'netA' nAyako'TavyAdau svabhyastapradezo'pi 'mArga'
panthAnamandhakArAvRtatvAtsvahastAdikamapazyanna jAnAtiH -na samyak
paricchinatti  /  sa eva praNetA sUryasya' AdityasyAbhyudgamenApanIte tamasi
prakAzite dikcakre samyagArvibhUte pASANadarInimnonnatAdike mArga jAnAti-
vivakSitapradezaprApakaM panthAnamabhivyakta cakSuH
paricchinattidoSaguNavicAraNataH samyagavagacchatIti  // 12 //  evaM dRSTAntaM
pradarzya dArTAntikamadhikRtyAha - TIkArtha - sUtrakAra isa sUtra dvArA ukta
viSaya meM dUsarA dRSTAnta abhihita karate haiM  /  vana Adi ke pradezoM-sthAnoM
ko bhalI bhAMti jAnatA huA bhI koI puruSa sajala meghoM se AcchAdita ghora
aMdhakAramaya rAtri meM aMdhakAra ke AvaraNa se jahA~ hAtha se hAtha nahIM
dIkhatA, vaha mArga ko bhalIbhAMti nahIM jAna pAtA  /  vahI patha pradarzaka
sUrya ke udita ho jAne para, aMdhakAra ke naSTa ho jAne aura digmaNDala ke
prakAzita ho jAne para patharIle-guphAoM se yukta U~ce nIce sthAna dikhalAI dene
lagate haiM, taba vaha-usakI naitra zakti abhivyakta ho jAtI hai  /  aura vaha
jahAM abhipsita sthAna ko pahuMcAne vAle rAste ko, usake guNa doSa jAnatA huA
pahacAna letA hai, nizcita kara letA hai| yoM, dRSTAnta upasthita kara sUtrakAra
unakA sAra batalAte haiM  /  evaM tu sehevi apuTudhamme, dhammaM na jANAi
abujjhamANe  /  se kovie jiNavayaNe Na pacchA, sUrodae pAsati cabhkhuNeva  // 13
//  -578)

Page #607 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shadow  **Study of the Text**  Even if a student is not well-established in
Dharma, and does not know Dharma because he is not aware of it, he becomes a
*kovida* (expert) in the words of the Jinas and sees everything like the eye
after sunrise.  **Translation**  A student who is not well-established in
Dharma, who is not nourished by Dharma, and who is ignorant of the meaning of
the sutras, does not know Dharma. But when he becomes a *kovida* (expert) in the
words of the Jinas, he sees everything like the eye after sunrise.
**Commentary**  Just as a traveler in a dense forest, covered in darkness,
cannot find his way, but after sunrise, when the darkness is gone, he finds his
way, so too, a newly initiated student, who is not well-versed in the meaning of
the sutras, does not know Dharma, which is based on the scriptures and conduct,
and which is capable of saving a being from hell. This newly initiated student
is not *agita* (one who has understood the meaning of the scriptures), he is
ignorant of the meaning of the sutras, and therefore does not understand Dharma.
But later, after living in the *gurukul* (monastery), he becomes a *kovida*
(expert) in the words of the Jinas, having studied the scriptures written by the
omniscient ones. He becomes skilled and sees all beings and objects as they are,
just like the eye after the darkness is gone. This is what is being said: just
as objects like pots and cloths are clearly perceived through the contact of the
senses, so too, through the scriptures written by the omniscient ones, subtle,
hidden, and distant things like heaven, liberation, and deities are clearly
perceived without any doubt. Moreover, sometimes the eye perceives an object
differently from what it is, for example, a mirage in the desert is perceived as
water, and a cluster of *kinshuka* flowers is perceived as fire. But there is no
error in the scriptures written by the omniscient ones, because if there were,
it would mean that they are not omniscient, and it is impossible for an
omniscient being to make a mistake.  **Verse 14**  **Om Om Om**  **Uddham aheyam
tiriyam disasu, tasa ya je thavara je ya pana. Saya jae tesu parivvajjā,
manappaosam avicampamāne.**  **Translation**  Above, below, and in all
directions, whether they are stationary or moving, all beings are worthy of
compassion. Therefore, one should practice non-violence towards all beings, with
a mind that is unshakable.  **Commentary**  This verse emphasizes the importance
of non-violence and compassion towards all beings, regardless of their form or
movement. It also highlights the importance of cultivating a mind that is
unshakable in its commitment to non-violence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chAyA granthanAmakaM adhyayanaM evantu ziSyo'pyapuSTadharmA, dharmaM na
jAnAtyabudhyamAnaH  /  sa kovido jinavacanena pazcAt sUryodaye pazyati cakSuSeva
//  anuvAda - jo apuSTa dharmA-dharma meM aparipoSita ziSya sUtrArtha se
anabhijJa hone ke kAraNa dharma ko nahIM jAna pAtA, vahI jina vacana meM kovida
- niSNAta hokara sUryodaya hone para jaise netra vyakta ho jAte haiM - saba
kucha dekhane lagate haiM, usI prakAra dharma ko jAna letA hai  /  TIkA yathA
hyasAvandhakArAvRtAyAM rajanyAmatigahanAyAmaTavyAM mArgaM na jAnAti
sUryodgamenApanIte tamasi pazcAjjAnAti evaM tu 'ziSyakaH' abhinavapravrajito'pi
sUtrArthAniSpannaH apuSTa :- apuSkala samyagaparijJAto dharmaH-zrutacAritrAkhyo
durgatiprasRtaja-tudharaNasvabhAvo yenAsAdapuSTadharmA, sa cAgItArtha :-
sUtrArthAnabhijJatvAdabudhyamAno dharmaM na jAnAtIti na samyak paricchinatti, sa
eva tu pazcAdagurukulavAsAjjinavacanena 'kovidaH '
abhyastasarvajJapraNItAgamatvAnnipuNaH sUryodaye'pagatAvaraNazcakSuSeva
yathAvasthitAn jIvAdIn padArthAn pazyati, idamuktaM bhavati - yathAhi
indriyArtha saMparkAtsAkSAtkAritayA parisphuTA ghaTapaTAdayaH padArthAH
pratIyante evaM sarvajJa praNItAgamenApi
sUkSmavyavahitaviprakRSTasvargApavargadevatAdayaH parisphuTA niHzaGkaM
pratIyanta iti  /  apica kadAciccakSuSA'nyathAbhUto'pyartho'nyathA
paricchidyate, tadyathA-marumarIcikAnicayo jalabhrAntyA
kiMzukanicayo'gnyAkAreNApIti  /  naca sarvajJapraNItasyAgamasya kvacidapi
vyabhicAraH tadavyabhicAre hi sarvajJatvahAniprasaGgAt, tatsaMbhavasya
cAsarvajJena praviSeddhumazakyatvAditi  //  13  //  - TIkArtha - jaise eka
pathika aMdhakArAvRta - aMdhere se r3hakI rAta meM atyanta ghane jaMgala meM
rAste ko nahIM jAna pAtA, kiMtu sUraja ke uga jAne para jaba aMdherA haTa jAtA
hai to vaha rAstA jAna letA hai  /  usI prakAra abhinava pravrajita-navadIkSita
ziSya bhI sUtra ke artha meM aniSpanna- aniSNAta hone ke kAraNa zruta
cAritramUlaka dharma ko bhalI bhAMti nahIM jAna pAtA, jo durgati meM jAte hue
jIva ko dhAraNa karane meM use bacAne meM samartha hai  /  vaha navadIkSita
ziSya agItArtha - gItArtha nahIM hotA, sUtrArtha ko tadgata rahasya ko jAnane
meM akSama hotA hai| ataH vaha dharma kA svarUpa bhalI bhAMti samajha nahIM pAtA
parantu vahI ziSya gurukula vAsa meM arhat praNIta AgamoM kA adhyayana-abhyAsa
kara tatva niSNAta ho jAtA hai, tathA jIvAdi padArthoM ko yathAvasthita rUpa meM
jAnatA hai| kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jaise indriyoM aura padArthoM ke
saMyoga se, sAkSAtkAritA se ghaTa ghar3A, paTa- kapar3A, Adi padArtha sApha
sApha pratIta hone lagate haiM - dikhAI dene lagate haiM, usI prakAra sarvajJa
prarUpita Agama dvArAunake adhyayana dvArA bhI sUkSma vyavahita-
vyavadhAnayukta, viprakRSTa-dUraMgata, svarga, mokSa, deva Adi sabhI
parisphuTavizada rUpa meM ni:zaMka asaMdigdha rUpa meM pratIta anubhUta hote
haiM  /  yadyapi kabhI kabhI cakSu dvArA anyathAbhUtaanya prakAra kA padArtha
kisI aura hI rUpa meM pratIta hone lagatA hai  /  jaise maru marIcikAnicaya -
marusthala meM sUrya kI kiraNeM pAnI ke rUpa meM dRSTigocara hotI hai tathA
palAza ke phUla agni ke rUpa meM parijJAta hote haiM, ' para sarvajJa prarUpita
Agama meM kahIM bhI vyabhicAra - doSa yA antara nahIM AtA  /  antara Ane para
sarvajJatva ghaTita nahIM hotA  /  sarvajJa dvArA pratipAdita padArthoM-tattvoM
kA asarvajJa pratiSedha karane meM sakSama nahIM hotA vaha vaisA nahIM T kara
sakatA  /  OM OM OM uDDhaM aheyaM tiriyaM disAsu, tasA ya je thAvarA je ya pANA
/  sayA jAe tesu parivvajjA, maNappaosaM avikaMpamANe  // 14 //  579

Page #608 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Sutra Kritanga Sutra**  **Shadow:** In the upward, downward, and
horizontal directions, and in all directions, those who are trembling and those
who are stationary, all beings. **Translation:** The virtuous one should always
be mindful of all beings in the upward, downward, and horizontal directions, and
in all directions, those who are trembling and those who are stationary. He
should remain steadfast in his practice, without any hatred towards them.
**Commentary:** The student, having resided in the Guru's house, becomes
knowledgeable of the words of the Jinas, and being learned, knows the root
virtues and the subsequent virtues. The Sutra-maker, taking the root virtues as
the subject, says: "In the upward, downward, and horizontal directions, and in
all directions," by this, the area of non-violence towards beings is
established. In terms of substance, he shows: "Those who tremble" - these are
the beings of fire, air, and those with two senses, etc. And those who are
stationary - those who are born with the stationary karma, such as earth, water,
and plants, and those who are subtle, coarse, sufficient, insufficient, and all
ten types of beings who have life, are called beings. "Always" - at all times.
By this, the non-violence towards beings is established in terms of time. "He
should wander" - he should wander around, practicing restraint. He shows non-
violence towards beings in terms of feeling: "He should not harbor hatred in his
mind towards stationary and mobile beings, whether they do him harm or good."
Even if they harm him, he should not even think ill of them. "Unwavering" - he
should always abide by good conduct, without wavering from his restraint. Thus,
he should abide by non-violence towards beings in terms of substance, area,
time, and feeling, through the three yogas and the three karmas, being free from
attachment and aversion. In the same way, he should abide by the remaining great
vows and the subsequent virtues, being equipped with the teachings of
acceptance, consumption, and education.  **Verse 15:** **Shadow:** With a tail
of black, he is restrained in his desires, seeking the wealth of the enemy. The
wise one should lead him forward, and this is the only way to be liberated.
**Translation:** With a tail of black, he is restrained in his desires, seeking
the wealth of the enemy. The wise one should lead him forward, and this is the
only way to be liberated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA - UrdhvamadhastiryagdizAsu, trasAzca ye sthAvarA
ye ca prANAH  /  sadA yatasteSu parivrajet manAk pradveSamavikampamAnaH  //
anuvAda - Urdhva, adhastAta, tathA tiryak dizAoM meM jo trasa evaM sthAvara
prANI vidyamAna haiMrahate haiM sAdhu sadaiva unakA dhyAna rakhatA huA saMyama
pAlana meM udyata rahe  /  vaha unake prati jarA bhI dveSa na karatA huA, apanI
sAdhanA meM avicala rahe  /  _TIkA - zikSako hi gurukulavAsitayA
jinavacanAbhijJo bhavati, tatkovidazca samyakmUlottaraguNAn jAnAti, tatra
mUlaguNAnadhikRtyAha-Urdhvamadhastiryag dikSu vidikSu cetyanena kSetramaGgIkRta
prANAtipAta viratirabhihitA, dravyatastu darzayati-trasyantIti trasA:-tejo vAyU
dvIndriyAdayazca, tathA ye ca sthAvarAH-sthAvara nAmakarmodayavartinaH
pRthivyavvanaspatayaH, tathA ye caitadbhedAH sUkSmabAdaraparyAptakA paryAptaka
rUpA dazavidhaprANadhAraNAtprANinasteSu, 'sadA' sarvakAlam, anena tu
kAlamadhikRtya viratirabhihitA, yataH parivrajet-parisamantAd vrajet
saMyamAnuSThAyI bhavet, bhAvaprANAtipAtaviratiM darzayati sthAvarajaGgameSu
prANiSu tadapakAre upakAre vA manAgapi manasA pradveSaM na
gacchedAstAMtAvadurvacanadaNDaprahArAdikaM, teSvapakAriSvapi manasA'pi
nAmaGgalaM cintayed, 'avikampamAnaH' saMyamAdacalan sadAcAra manupAlayediti,
tadevaM yogatrikakaraNatrikeNa dravyakSetra kAlabhAvarUpAM prANAtipAtaviratiM
samyagaraktadviSTatayA'nupAlayed, evaM zeSANyapi mahAvratAnyuttaraguNAMzca
grahaNAsevanAzikSAsamanvitaH samyaganupAlayediti  // 14 //  TIkArtha - ziSya
gurukula meM nivAsa karane se jinavacanoM vacanoM se-jinendra kI vANI se abhijJa
ho jAtA hai-jJAtA ho jAtA hai, vaisA hokara vaha mUla guNoM aura uttara guNoM ko
bhalI bhAMti jAna letA hai  /  vahAM mUla guNoM ko adhikRta kara sUtrakAra
pratipAdita karate haiM-yahAM para urdhva, adhastAt tathA tiryak dizAoM evaM
vidizAoM meM sthita prANiyoM ke prANAtipAta-hiMsA se virata hone kA, hiMsA kA
parityAga karane kA abhidhAna kiyA hai-upadeza diyA hai, yaha kSetra ko aMgIkRta
kara kahA gayA hai  /  aba dravya kI dRSTi se prANAtipAta se virata hone kA
digdarzana karAte haiM  /  jo trasta hote haiM-bhayabhIta hote hai, unheM trasa
kahA jAtA hai  /  ve agni, vAyu tathA dvIindriya Adi prANI haiM tathA jo
sthAvara nAma karma ke udayavartI haiM jaise pRthvI, jala tathA vanaspati evaM
sUkSma, bAdara, paryApta, aparyApta ke rUpa meM unake bheda sthAvara kahalAte
haiM-yedazavidha prANadhAraNa karane se prANI kahalAte haiM  /  unake prati
sadaiva saMyamAcaraNazIla rahe, unako pIr3A na de  /  yahAM kAla ko adhikRta
kara virati kA upadeza diyA hai  /  bhAva prANAtipAta se virata hone kI dRSTi se
kahate haiM-sthAvara tathA jaMgama prANI upakAra kare-bhalA kare athavA apakAra
kare-burA kare, lAbha pahuMcAve yA hAni pahuMcAve kiMtu sAdhu unake prati jarA
bhI apane mana meM dveSa na lAve  /  phira unheM durvacana-kaThora vacana kahanA
aura DaMDe se pITanA Adi kI to bAta hI kyA hai  /  ve yadi burA bhI kare to mana
se bhI unakA amaMgala-azubha yA burA na soce  /  isa prakAra saMyama meM
avicalita rahatA huA sAdhu sadAcAra kA anupAlana kare evaM pUrvokta rUpa se
mana, vacana, kAya rUpa tIna yoga tathA kRtakArita evaM anumodita rUpa tIna
karaNa dvArA dravya, kSetra va kAla evaM bhAva mUlaka prANAtipAta virati kA
sAdhu rAga tathA dveSa se atIta hokara paripAlana kare  /  grahaNa evaM Asevana
zikSA se yukta hokara vaha bAkI ke mahAvratoM kA evaM uttara guNoM kA vaha
samyak anupAlana kre| kAleNa pucche samiyaM payAsu, AikkhamANo daviyassa vittaM
/  taM soyakArI puDho pavese, saMkhA imaM kevaliyaM samAhiM  // 15 //  580

Page #609 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shadow Study of the text called Granthanāmaka One should ask questions about the
people, knowing the right time, from the Samita, who is well-versed in conduct
and ethics. The listener should separately internalize this, the Kaivalika
samadhi. Translation - Knowing the right time, one should ask questions about
the people, from the Samita, who is well-versed in conduct and ethics. One
should respect the Acharya, the teacher of the Sarvajñokta Āgama, and
internalize their teachings. Commentary - The author of the sutra is teaching
humility to the disciple who lives with the Guru. The meaning of the sutra, or
both, should be asked from the Acharya, knowing the right time to ask. The word
"praja" refers to living beings, and the question should be about the fourteen
types of beings. One should ask the Acharya, who is well-versed in conduct and
ethics, about the living beings. The Acharya, when asked, should be listened to
with respect. When the Acharya speaks, they show the path to liberation. The
"dravya" is the one who is worthy of liberation, or the one who is free from
attachment and aversion. The Acharya, who speaks well about the "dravya", their
conduct, restraint, knowledge, or the Āgama that they have formulated, should be
respected. How? The author of the sutra says, "tad" - the teachings given by the
Acharya should be heard with attention. The listener should internalize it
separately, with respect, in their heart. The author of the sutra shows what
should be internalized. "Samkhyāy" - knowing well, "ima" - as will be said, this
Kaivalika - the Kaivalika samadhi, the path to liberation, the teachings of the
Acharya, should be internalized separately, in the heart. Commentary - The
author of the sutra is teaching humility to the disciple who lives with the
Guru. The disciple should ask questions about the people, or the fourteen types
of beings, from the Acharya, who is well-versed in conduct and ethics, knowing
the right time to ask. The living beings are called "praja". When asked, the
disciple should listen to the Acharya with respect. The Acharya, when they
speak, show the path to liberation. The "dravya" is the one who is worthy of
liberation, or the one who is free from attachment and aversion. The disciple
should respect the Acharya, who speaks well about the "dravya", their conduct,
restraint, knowledge, or the Āgama that they have formulated. How? The author of
the sutra says, "tad" - the teachings given by the Acharya should be heard with
attention. The listener should internalize it separately, with respect, in their
heart. The author of the sutra shows what should be internalized. "Samkhyāy" -
knowing well, "ima" - as will be said, this Kaivalika - the Kaivalika samadhi,
the path to liberation, the teachings of the Acharya, should be internalized
separately, in the heart. You are well established in three ways, these are the
ones who have peace and restraint. They are the ones who see the three worlds,
they do not indulge in carelessness. Shadow You are well established in three
ways, these are the ones who have peace and restraint. They are the ones who see
the three worlds, they do not indulge in carelessness. 581 - ❀❀❀

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chAyA granthanAmakaM adhyayanaM kAlena pRcchetsamitaM prajAsu, AcakSamANo
dravyasya vittam  /  tacchrotrakArI pRthak pravezayet, saMkhyAyemaM kaivalikaM
samAdhim  //  anuvAda - sAdhu anukUla avasara jAnakara samita- sadAcaraNa zIla
AcArya se prajA - prANiyoM ke saMbaMdha meM prazna kare  /  sarvajJokta Agama ke
upadeSTA AcArya kA sammAna kare tathA unake upadeza ko hRdaya meM pratiSThApita
kare  /  TIkA - gurorantike vasato vinayamAha - sUtramarthaM tadubhayaM vA
viziSTena - praSRvyakAlenAcAryAderavasaraM jJAtvA prajAmanta iti prajA -
jantavastAsu prajAsu-jantuviSaye caturdazabhUtagrAmasaMbaMddhaM
kaJcidAcAryAdikaM samyagitaM sadAcArAnuSThAyinaM samyak vA samantAdvA jantugataM
pRcchediti  /  sa ca tena pRSTa AcAryAdirAcakSANaH zuzruyitavyo bhavati,
yadAcakSANastadRrzayatimuktigamanayogyo bhavyo dravyaM rAgadveSavirahAdvAdravyaM
tasya dravyasya vItarAgasya vA vRttam- anuSThAnaM saMyamaM jJAnaM vA
tatpraNItamAgamaM vA samyagAcakSANaH saparyayA'yaM mAnanIyo bhavati  /
kathamityAha - ' tad' AcAryAdinA kaMthitaM zrotrekarNe kartuM zIlamasya
zrotrakArI - yathopadezakArI AjJAvidhAyI san pRthak pRthagupanyastamAdareNa
hRdaye pravezayet - cetasi vyavasthApayet, vyavasthApanIyaM darzayati-
'saMkhyAya' samyak jJAtvA 'ima' miti vakSyamANaM kevalina idaM kaivalikaM-
kevalinA kathitaM samAdhiM-sanmArgaM samyagjJAnAdikaM mokSamArgamAcAryAdinA
kathitaM yathopadezaM pravarttakaH pRthag viviktaM hRdaye
pRthagvyavasthApayediti  // 15 //  TIkArtha aba sUtrakAra guru ke samIpa vAsa
karane vAle ziSya ko vinaya kI zikSA dete hue kahate haiM- ziSya praSTavyakAla -
prazna karane ke ucita samaya ko dekhakara prajA - prANiyoM ke saMbaMdha meM yA
caudaha prakAra ke bhUtoM ke saMbaMdha meM sadAcAra parAyaNa AcArya Adi se sUtra
evaM artha donoM hI ko lekara ke prazna kre| jo utpanna hote haiM ve jIva prajA
kahalAte haiN| pUche jAne para uttara dete hue AcArya kA kathana ziSya
sammAnapUrvaka zravaNa kare  /  AcArya jo AkhyAta karate haiM-upadeza dete haiM,
sUtrakAra usakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM- bhavya jana jo mokSa prApta
karane kI yogyatA liye hotA hai, dravya kahA jAtA hai athavA jo rAga evaM dveSa
rahita hotA hai use dravya kahA jAtA hai aise vItarAga tIrthaMkara ke saMyama yA
jJAna yA una dvArA prarUpita Agama kA bhalIbhAMti upadeza karane vAle AcArya kA
vaha ziSya sammAna satkAra kare  /  kisa prakAra kare ? yaha batalAte hue
sUtrakAra kahate haiM-AcArya Adi dvArA dI gaI zikSA ko vaha kAnoM meM dhAraNa
kare - dhyAna se sune tadanusAra AcaraNa kre| unake Adeza kA anusaraNa kare
tathA Adara ke sAtha use apane hRdaya meM upanyasta kare- pratiSThApita kare  /
aba hRdaya meM vyavasthApanIya-pratiSThita karane yogya viSaya kA sUtrakAra
digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM - sarvajJa dvArA prarUpita samyakjJAnAdimUlaka
mokSa mArga ko, jo Age kahA jAyegA, AcArya Adi se zravaNa kara tadnusAra pravRta
hotA huA sAdhu use viveka pUrvaka apane hRdaya meM pratiSThApita kare  /  assiM
suThiccA tiviheNa tAyI, eesu yA saMti nirohamA  /  te evamakkhaMti tilogadaMsI,
Na bhujjayeyaMti pamAyasaMgaM  // 16 //  chAyA asmin susthAya trividhena trAyI,
eteSuca zAntiM nirodhamAhuH  /  taeva mAcakSate trilokadarzinaH na bhUya etantu
pramAdasaMGgam  //  581 -

Page #610 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Sutra Kritanga Sutra**  Translation - According to the teachings of the
Guru, a virtuous Sadhu should protect and save all beings through their mind,
speech, and body. By following the principles of Samiti and Gupti, one can
achieve Karma Nirodha (cessation of Karma) and Karma Kshaya (destruction of
Karma). This is what the omniscient beings have declared. They are the Triloka
Darshi (seers of the three worlds), the great souls who say that a Sadhu should
never indulge in Pramada (negligence).  Commentary -  Furthermore, while
residing in the Guru's abode, the disciple, having heard and understood the
teachings, should firmly establish them in their heart. By remaining steadfast
in this state of Samadhi (meditation) and on the path of liberation, they should
protect themselves through their mind, speech, and body, and through actions,
instigated actions, and approvals. They should also protect others by giving
good advice. Such a Sadhu, who protects themselves and others, and who remains
in the state of Samadhi and on the path of liberation, following the principles
of Samiti and Gupti, will attain peace. All their dualities (conflicts) will be
eliminated, and their Karma will be completely destroyed. The wise ones have
declared this. Who are these wise ones? The Sutrakar (author of the Sutra)
reveals that they are the Triloka Darshi, the Tirthankaras (omniscient beings)
who see the beings of the three worlds (heaven, earth, and hell). As mentioned
earlier, they see all beings with their Kevala Jnana (omniscient knowledge) and
preach accordingly. These Triloka Darshi have declared that the path of Samiti,
Gupti, etc., is the path to liberation from the cycle of birth and death. They
have not declared that Pramada, indulgence in alcohol, sensual pleasures, etc.,
is a path to liberation.  **Verse 17**  **Translation** - Having heard the
teachings, the monk becomes insightful and knowledgeable, seeking the desired
goal. By accepting the teachings, practicing austerities, and maintaining
silence, he attains liberation through pure conduct.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram anuvAda - guru dvArA pradatta upadeza ke anusAra
vartanazIla sAdhu mana, vANI evaM zarIra dvArA prANiyoM kA trANa-rakSaNa kare  /
isa prakAra-samitiyoM tathA guptiyoM kA pAlana karane se hI karma nirodha-karma
kSaya hotA hai  /  yaha sarvajJoM ne batalAyA hai  /  ve trilokadarzI-tIna lokoM
ko dekhane vAle mahApuruSa aisA AkhyAta karate haiM ki sAdhu kabhI pramAda kA
sevana na kre| TIkA- kiJcAnyat-'asmin ' gurukulavAse nivasatA yacchrutaM zrutvA
ca samyak hRdayavyavasthApanadvAreNAvadhAritaM tasmin samAdhibhUte mokSamArge
suSThu sthitvA 'trividhene' tti manovAkkAyakarmabhiH
kRtakAritAnumatibhirvA''tmAnaM trAtuM zIlamasyeti trAyI jantunAM
sadupadezadAnatastrANakaraNazIlo vA tasya svaparatrAyiNaH, eteSu ca
samitiguptyAdiSu samAdhimArgeSu sthitasya zAntirbhavati-azeSadvandvoparamo
bhavati tathA nirodham-azeSakarmakSayarUpam 'AhuH' tadvidaH pratipAditavantaH,
ka evamAhurityAha trilokabhU-urdhvAdhastiryaglakSaNaM draSTuM zIlaM yeSAM te
trilokadarzina:-tIrthakRtaH sarvajJAste 'evam' anantaroktayA nItyA sarvabhAvAn
kevalAlokena dRSTvA 'AcakSate' pratipAdayantIti  /  etadeva samitiguptyAdikaM
saMsArottAraNasamarthaM te trilokadarzinaH kathitavanto na punarbhUya etaM (naM)
'pramAdasaGga' madyaviSayAdikaM saMbandhaM, 'vidheyatvena pratipAditavantaH  //
16 //  kiJcAnyat - TIkArtha - gurukulavAsa meM rahate hue ziSya ne jo zravaNa
kiyA, zravaNa kara apane hRdaya meM bhalI bhAMti sthApita kiyA, avadhArita kiyA
/  vaha usa samAdhimulaka mokSamArga meM acchI taraha sthita hokara mana, vANI
aura zarIra dvArA tathA kRta, kArita evaM anumodita rUpa tIna karaNoM dvArA AtmA
kA trANa kare-rakSaNa kare athavA sadupadeza dekara auroM kA trANa kare  /  isa
prakAra jo sAdhu apanI AtmA kA tathA anyoM kA trANa karatA hai, samiti tathA
gupti pUrvaka samAdhi mArga-mokSa mArga meM avasthita rahatA hai, vaha zAMti
prApta karatA hai  /  usake sabhI dvandva-jhaMjhaTa miTa jAte haiM  /  tathA
usake samagrakarma kSINa ho jAte haiM  /  jJAnI puruSa aisA batalAte haiM ve
jJAnI puruSa kauna haiM ? sUtrakAra yaha prakaTa karate hue kahate haiM-jo
puruSa urdhva, adhaH evaM tiryaka vartI padArthoM ko dekhate haiM ve
trilokadarzI-tInoM lokoM ko dekhane vAle tIrthaMkara sarvajJa, jaisA pahale kahA
gayA hai kevala darzana dvArA samasta bhAvoM ko-padArthoM ko dekhakara
pratipAdana karate haiM, upadeza dete haiM  /  una trilokadarzI mahApuruSoM ne
samiti, gupti Adi se yukta mArga ko hI saMsAra se pAra lagAne vAlA batAyA hai  /
unhoMne pramAda se jur3e hue madya sevana, viSaya sevana Adi ko vaisA nahIM kahA
hai  /  nisamma se bhikkhu samIhiyaTuM, paDibhANavaM hoi visAraeya  /
AyANaaTThI vodANamoNaM, uvecca suddheNa uveti mokkhaM  // 17 //  chAyA - nizamya
sa bhikSuH samIhitArthaM, pratibhAnavAn bhavati vizAradazca  /  _ AdAnArthI
vyavadAmauna mupetya zuddhenopaiti mokSam  //  anuvAda - gurukulavAsI ziSya
sAdhu ke AcAra ko zravaNa kara apane abhipsita artha-mokSa ko jAnakara
pratibhAzAlI tathA vizArada-dharma siddhAnta kA AkhyAtA-vaktA ho jAtA hai  /
vaha samyakjJAna Adi kA hI prayojana liye rahatA hai  /  vyavadAna-tapa evaM
mauna-saMyama ko prApta kara zuddha AhAra Adi kA sevana karatA huA mokSa prApta
karatA hai| -582)

Page #611 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of scriptures, commentary - The monk residing in the gurukul, having
'heard' and understood the essence of the substance, knowing for himself the
desired purpose - the purpose of liberation, and having correctly known the
objects to be abandoned and the objects to be adopted, becomes 'brilliant' with
innate brilliance due to his constant residence in the gurukul. Thus, due to his
correct knowledge of his own principles, he becomes 'expert' in explaining the
true nature of things to the listeners. What is taken by the seeker of
liberation is called 'aadana', which is correct knowledge, etc. He considers
that as his purpose - goal, and being thus endowed with the benefit of
knowledge, etc., he adopts the twelve types of austerities and the restraint
that is the form of the restraint of inflow. Having attained these austerities
and restraints through the two-fold education of learning and practice, he is
free from all negligence, brilliant and expert. He sustains himself with pure,
unconditioned food, free from the defects of origin, etc., and attains
liberation, which is the characteristic of the destruction of the remaining
karmas. 'He does not go to Mara' - this is the reading in some places. Many
beings die under the control of their own karmas. That Mara - the cycle of
existence - is full of birth, old age, death, disease, and sorrow. The monk who
walks on the pure path, who is engaged in restraint, does not go to that cycle
of existence. Or, if death - the characteristic of the giving up of life - is
called Mara, he does not go to that many times. For, being endowed with non-
falling right faith, he dies at most in seven or eight existences, not more.
||17||  Commentary - The monk residing in the gurukul, having heard the virtuous
conduct that is useful for liberation through the substance, understands his own
desired purpose, and having correctly known the objects to be abandoned and the
objects to be adopted, becomes brilliant due to his constant residence in the
gurukul. Due to his knowledge of his own principles, he becomes skilled or
proficient in explaining the true nature of things to the listeners. What is
taken by the seeker of liberation is called 'aadana', which is correct
knowledge, etc. Considering that as his purpose - goal, he adopts the twelve
types of austerities and the restraint that is the form of the restraint of
inflow. Having attained these austerities and restraints through the two-fold
education of learning and practice, he sustains himself with pure, unconditioned
food, free from the defects of origin, etc., and destroys all karmas, attaining
liberation. "He does not go to Mara" - this reading is found in some places.
This means that the cycle of existence, in which beings repeatedly die due to
the results of their own karmas, is called Mara. The monk who walks on the pure
path, who is engaged in restraint, does not go to that cycle of existence. The
one who is afflicted with birth, old age, death, disease, and sorrow, or the
giving up of life is called Mara. He does not go to that - death - repeatedly,
because being endowed with non-falling right faith, he dies at most in seven or
eight existences, not more.  They explain the Dharma with numbers, the Buddhas
are their destroyers of death. They are the crossers of both, for liberation,
they give the answer to the question after investigation. ||18||  Shadow - They
explain the Dharma with numbers, the Buddhas are their destroyers of death. They
are the crossers of both, for liberation, they give the answer to the question
after investigation. ||  Translation - The seeker residing in the gurukul,
through his good intellect, makes the Dharma his own and teaches it to others.
Such wise Buddhas destroy karmas. They liberate themselves and others from the
bondage of karmas and cross the ocean of existence. Such great men give the
answer to the question after investigation and deliberation.  Commentary - Thus,
the one who resides in the gurukul, who is well-established in Dharma, who is
well-versed, brilliant, and expert in meaning, does what he does. To show that,
he says - the number-wisdom, by which Dharma is correctly known - understood, by
that, knowing Dharma for himself, he explains it to others as it is. 'Dharma' -
-583

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmakaM adhyayanaM TIkA - sa gurukulavAsI bhikSuH dravyasya vRttaM
'nizamya' avagamya svataH samIhitaM cArtha-mokSArthaM buddhavA heyopAdeyaM
samyak parijJAya nityaM gurukulavAsataH 'pratibhAnavAn' utpannapratibho bhavati
/  tathA samyak svasiddhAntaparijJAnAcchrotRNAM yathAvasthitArthAnAM 'vizArado
bhavati' pratipAdakobhavati  /  mokSArthinA''dIyata ityAdAnaM samyagjJAnAdikaM
tenArthaH sa eva vA'rthaH AdAnArthaH sa vidyate yasyAsAvAdAnArthI, sa evaMbhUto
jJAnAdiprayoz2anavAn vyavadAnaM-dvAdazaprakAraMtapo maunaM-saMyama
AzravanirodharUpastadevametau tapa:saMyamAvupetya-prApya grahaNAsevanarupayA
dvividhayApi zikSayA samanvitaH sarvatra pramAdarahitaH pratibhAnavAn
vizAradazca 'zuddhena' nirupAdhinA udgamAdidoSazuddhena cAhAreNAtmAnaM
yApannazeSa karmakSayalakSaNaM mokSamupaiti 'na uveimAra' ti kvacitpAThaH,
bahuzo mriyante svakarmaparavazA:prANino yasmin sa mAra:-saMsArastaM
jAtijarAmaraNarogazokAkulaM zuddhena mArgeNAtmAnaM vartayan, na upaiti, yadivA
maraNaM-prANatyAgalakSaNaM mArastaM bahuzonaupaiti, tathAhi-
apratipatitasamyaktva utkRSTataH saptASTau vA bhavAn mriyate nordhvamiti  // 17
//  TIkArtha - gurukulavAsI bhikSu dravyakRta-mokSopayogI sAdhvAcAra kA zravaNa
kara evaM apane abhipsita prayojana ko samajhakara tathA heya evaM upAdeya
padArthoM ko samyak parijJAta kara sadA gurukula meM rahane ke kAraNa
pratibhAzIla ho jAtA hai  /  vaha apane siddhAnta ke parijJAna ke kAraNa zrotAoM
ko yathArtha vastu svarUpa samajhAne meM kuzala yA pravINa ho jAtA hai  /
mokSArthI dvArA jo grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai use AdAna kahA jAtA hai, vaha
samyakjJAna Adi hai  /  usako hI apanA prayojana-lakSya mAnatA huA vaha sAdhu
bAraha prakAra ke tapa tathA Azrava nirodhAtmaka saMyama ko adhigata kara
grahaNa zikSA tathA AsevanA zikSA dvArA tapazcaraNa evaM saMyama se anvita
hokara udgama Adi doSoM se varjita AhAra dvArA apanA jIvana nirvAha karatA huA,
samagra karmoM kA kSaya karatA hai, mokSa prApta karatA hai  /  "na uvei mAraM"
kahIM kahIM aisA pATha prApta hotA hai  /  isakA yaha tAtparya hai ki jisameM
prANI apane karmoM ke pariNAma svarUpa bAra-bAra mRtyu prApta karate haiM, use
mAra kahA jAtA hai, vaha saMsAra hai  /  zuddha mArga kA avalaMbana karatA huA
jo sAdhu calatA hai, saMyama meM vartanazIla rahatA hai, vaha isa saMsAra ko
prApta nahIM krtaa| jo janma, vRddhAvasthA, mRtyu, roga tathA zoka se Akula hai-
pIr3ita hai, athavA prANa tyAga ko mAra kahA jAtA hai| vaha bAra bAra use-mRtyu
ko prApta nahIM karatA kyoMki apratipAti samyaktva se yukta hone ke kAraNa vaha
adhika se adhika sAta, ATha bhava meM hI maraNa ko prApta hotA hai, usase adhika
nahIM  /  saMkhAi dhammaM ca viyAgaraMti, buddhA hu te aMtakarA bhavaMti  /  te
pAragA doNhavi moyaNAe, saMsodhitaM paNhamudAharaMti  // 18 //  chAyA -
saMkhyayA dharma vyAgRNanti, buddhAhi te'ntakarAbhavanti  /  te pAragA dvayorapi
mocanayA, saMzodhitaM prazna mudAharanti  //  anuvAda - gurukula vAsI sAdhaka
sadbuddhi dvArA dharma ko svAyata kara dUsaroM ko usakA upadeza karate haiM  /
vaise buddha-jJAnI puruSa karmoM kA anta-nAza karate haiM  /  ve apane ko tathA
anyoM ko karma pAza se mukta kara saMsAra sAgara ko pAra kara jAte haiM  /
vaise mahApuruSa saMzodhana pUrvaka-soca vicAra kara prazna kA uttara dete haiM
/  _TIkA - tadevaM gurukulanivAsitayA dharme susthitA bahuzrutAH
pratibhAvananto'rthavizAradAzca santo yatkurvanti tadarzayitumAha-samyaka
khyAyate-parijJAyate yayA sA saMkhyAsabuddhistayA svato dharmaM
parijJAyApareSAMyathAvasthitaM 'dharma' -583

Page #612 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra of the Sutrakritanga ## Chapter on the Shrutacharitra  This chapter
explains how those who are able to teach the Dharma do so. They understand their
own abilities and the abilities of the audience, and they clearly understand the
meaning of what they are teaching. These are the Buddhas, who know the three
times (past, present, and future) and who are able to destroy the karmas
accumulated from past lives. They are also able to help others destroy their
karmas. They are the ones who truly understand the Dharma and are able to
liberate themselves and others from the bonds of karma and attachment. They are
able to cross the ocean of samsara.  These Buddhas are careful in their speech.
They examine their words before speaking, considering the person they are
speaking to and the meaning they are trying to convey. They also carefully
consider any questions they are asked and give appropriate answers. As it is
said:  "**A person who has understood the meaning from the Acharya, and who
remembers it well, can speak easily and successfully in the midst of the
Sangha.**"  Therefore, those who teach the Dharma in this way are able to
liberate themselves and others.  ## Commentary  The Sutrakar explains that the
ability to understand the Dharma is called "knowledge." This knowledge is gained
through good understanding and the study of the Shrutacharitra. Those who have
this knowledge are able to teach the Dharma effectively. They understand their
own abilities and the abilities of others, and they are able to clearly explain
the Dharma to the audience. These Buddhas are able to destroy their own karmas
and help others destroy theirs. They are able to liberate themselves and others
from the bonds of karma and attachment. They are able to cross the ocean of
samsara.  These Buddhas are careful in their speech. They examine their words
before speaking, considering the person they are speaking to and the meaning
they are trying to convey. They also carefully consider any questions they are
asked and give appropriate answers. As it is said:  "**A person who has
understood the meaning from the Acharya, and who remembers it well, can speak
easily and successfully in the midst of the Sangha.**"  Therefore, those who
teach the Dharma in this way are able to liberate themselves and others.  ##
Verse 19  **Do not cover up, do not flatter, do not serve the ego, do not seek
praise. A wise person does not engage in frivolous talk, nor does he boast about
his blessings.**  This verse emphasizes the importance of humility and sincerity
in teaching the Dharma. A true teacher does not seek to impress others or gain
praise. They are focused on sharing the Dharma in a way that is beneficial to
others.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram zrutacAritrAkhyaM 'vyAgRNanti' pratipAdayanti yadivA
svaparazaktiM parijJAya parSadaM vA pratipAdyaM cArthaM samyagavabudhya dharmaM
pratipAdayanti  /  te caivaMvidhA buddhA: - kAlatrayavedino janmAntarasaMcitAnAM
karmaNAmantakarA bhavanti anyeSAM ca 'karmApanayanasamarthA bhavantIti darzayati
- te yathAvasthitadharmaprarUpakA 'dvayorapi' parAtmanoH karmapAzavimocanayA
snehAdinigaDavimocanayA vA karaNabhUtayA saMsArasamudrasya pAragA bhavanti  /
te caivaMbhUtAH ? 'samyak zodhitaM ' pUrvottara viruddhaM ' praznaM'
zabdamudAharanti, tathAhi pUrvaM buddhyA paryAlocya ko'yaM puruSaH kasya
cArthasya grahaNasamartho'haM vAkiMbhUtArthapratipAdanazakta ityevaM samyak
parIkSya vyAkuryAditi, athavA pareNa kaJcidarthaM pRSTastaM praznaM samyag
parIkSyodAharet-samyugattaraM dadyAditi, tathA coktam " AyariyasayAsA va
dhArieNa attheNa jhariyamuNieNaM  /  to saMghamajjhayAre vavahariDaM je suhaM
hoMti  //  1 // " chAyA - AcAryasakAzAd avadhAritenArthena smArakeNa jJAtrA ca
tataH saMghamadhye vyavahartuM sukhaM bhavati  //  1  //  tadevaM te gItArthA
yathAvasthitaM dharmaM kathayantaH svaparatArakA bhavantIti  //  18  //
TIkArtha isa prakAra gurukula meM nivAsa karane ke kAraNa dharma meM susthita
sudRr3ha, bahuzruta - pratibhAvAna, buddhizAlI evaM artha vizArada aura padArtha
jJAna meM kuzala yA niSNAta hokara jaisA karate haiM jo kArya karate haiM usakA
dikdarzana karAne hetu sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate hai ki jisake dvArA padArtha
parijJAta hotA hai use saMkhyA kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha sadbuddhi hai  /  sAdhu
sadbuddhi dvArA zruta cAritra mUlaka dharma ke vAstavika svarUpa ko parijJAta
kara-bhalI bhAMti jAnakara pratipAdita karatA hai athavA sadbuddhi dvArA vaha
sAdhu apanI aura auroM kI yogyatA jAnakara athavA dharma sabhA kI yogyatA jAnatA
huA pariSad ko pratipAdya artha yA viSaya ko bhalI bhAMti samajha kara dharma kA
pratipAdana karate haiN| isa prakAra ve buddha- trikAlavettA puruSa pUrva janma
ke saMcita karmoM kA vinAza karate haiM aura dUsaroM ke karmoM kA apanayana
karane meM sakSama hote haiM  /  sUtrakAra isakA digdarzana karAte hue kahate
haiM - dharma ke satya svarUpa ke prarUpaka - vyAkhyAtA ve mahApuruSa apane
tathA auroM ke karmapAza ko vimocita kara athavA sneha rUpI nigaDa- sAMkala yA
ber3I se chUTakara - auroM ko chur3Akara saMsAra sAgara ko pAra kara jAte haiN|
ve mahApuruSa bhalI bhAMti zodhita kara - pariSkRta kara pUrvottara - pahale
aura pIche se aviruddha-apratikUla zabdoM ko bolate haiM  /  ve pahale hI apanI
buddhi dvArA yaha paryAlocita kara ki yaha puruSa kauna hai kisa artha padArtha
ko grahaNa karane meM sakSama ho sakatA hai tathA maiM kisa prakAra ke artha ko
pratipAdita karane meM sazakta hU~  /  inako samyak parIkSita kara ve vyAkhyA -
vivecana karate haiM athavA koI puruSa yadi sAdhu se kisI viSaya meM pUche to
sAdhu usa prazna kA bhalI bhAMti parIkSaNa kara, use samajhakara phira usakA
uttara de  /  kahA gayA hai- AcArya ke sakAza-pAsa jisane artha ko dhAraNa kiyA
hai, unase samajhakara nizcita kiyA hai vaha smRtizAlI puruSa saMgha yA jana
samUha ke bIca meM sukhapUrvaka saphalatA ke sAtha padArtha kI vyAkhyA kara
sakatA hai| isa prakAra gItArtha-dharma siddhAntoM ke gambhIravettA dharma ke
sacce svarUpa ko batalAte hue apane Apako tathA auroM ko saMsAra sAgara se pAra
karate haiM  /  1 - chAyA -  No chAya Naviya lUsaejjA, mANaM Na sevejja
pagAsaNaM ca  /  Na yAvi panne parihAsa kujjA, Na yA''siyAvAya viyAgarejjA  //
19  //  - no chAdaye nnApica lUsayenmAnaM na seveta prakAzanaJca  /  na cA'pi
prAjJaH parihAsaM kuryyAnna cApyAzIrvAdaM vyAgRNIyAt  //  584

Page #613 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Study of the text - When a Sadhu answers a question, he should not cover up the
answer from the scriptures, nor hide it, nor interpret the scriptures based on
an incorrect principle. He should not be proud, thinking of himself as a great
scholar and ascetic. He should not boast about his virtues. If the listener does
not understand the meaning he has explained, he should not ridicule him, and a
Sadhu should not give blessings to anyone. Commentary - Since the questioner may
sometimes ask a question in a different way, the sutrakar prohibits this by
saying - "Sa" - the questioner, being the refuge of all meanings, is like a
casket of jewels, or like a market where all the goods of the three worlds are
available, or he is an extraordinary scholar who knows everything, or he is one
of the fourteen previous houses, or he is a brilliant scholar, knowledgeable in
the meaning of things, due to some reason, even if he is angry with the
listener, he should not cover up the meaning of the sutra, he should not explain
it otherwise, nor should he speak ill of his teacher. While explaining the
Dharma, he should not cover up the meaning of others' virtues, nor should he
taint them, nor should he ridicule them, nor should he explain the meaning of
the scriptures based on an incorrect principle. He should not be proud, thinking
of himself as a knower of all scriptures, known to all, the destroyer of all
doubts, there is no one like me who can explain the meaning of things with logic
and reasoning. He should not boast about his vast knowledge and asceticism. The
word "cha" indicates that he should avoid other forms of prestige, respect, and
honor. A wise and learned Sadhu should not make jokes or fun. If for some reason
the listener does not understand something, he should not ridicule him. He
should not give blessings like "May you have many sons, may you have much
wealth, may you have much virtue, may you live long". He should be consistent
with his language and meaning. Shadow - Being disgusted by the fear of ghosts,
he should not perform the ritual of naming a child. Human beings should not
desire anything in the world, they should not speak of evil deeds. (5850

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmakaM adhyayana anuvAda - sAdhu jaba kisI ke prazna kA uttara de to
vaha zAstra ke uttara ko AcchAdita na kare, chipAve nahIM tathA apasiddhAnta ko
Azrita kara zAstra kI vyAkhyA na kare  /  apane ko bar3A vidvAna tathA
tapazcaraNazIla mAnatA huA abhimAna na kare  /  apane guNoM kA prakAzana na kare
/  yadi sunane vAlA vyakti usa dvArA nirUpita artha ko samajha nahIM pAye to
usakA parihAsa na kare evaM sAdhu kisI ko AzIrvAda na de  /  TIkA - sa ca
praznamudAharan kadAcidanyathApi brUyAdatastatpratiSedhArthamAha-'sa'
praznasyodAhartA sarvArthAzrayatvAdratnakaraNDakalpaH kutrikApaNakalpo vA
caturdazapUrviNAmanyataro vA kazcidAcAryA dibhiH pratibhAnavAnartha
vizAradastadevaMbhUtaH kutazcinnimittAt zrotuH kupito'pi sUtrArthaM 'na
chAdayet' nAnyathA vyAkhyAnayet svAcArya vA nApalapet dharmakathAM vA
kurvannArthaM chAdayed AtmaguNotkarSAbhiprAyeNa vA paraguNAnna chAdayet tathA
paraguNAnna lUSayet-na viDambayet zAstrArthaMvA nApasiddhAntena vyAkhyAnayet
tathA samastazAstravettA'haM sarvalokaviditaHsamastasaMzayApanetA na
mattulyohetuyuktibhirarthapratipAdayite tyevamAtmakaM mAnam-abhimAnaM garvaM na
seveta, nApyAtmano bahuzrutatvena tapasvitvena vA prakAzanaM kuryAt, ca
zabdAdanyadapi pUjAsatkArAdikaM pariharet, tathA na cApi 'prajJAvAna' sazrutikaH
'parihAsaM' keliprAyaM brUyAd yadivA kathaJcidabudhyamAne
zrotaritadupahAsaprAyaM parihAsaMna vidadhyAt tathA nApi cAzIrvAdaM bahuputro
bahudhano (bahudharmo) dIrghAyustvaM bhUyA ityAdi vyAgRNIyAt, bhASAsamitiyuktena
bhAvyamiti  // 19 //  TIkArtha - prazna kA uttara dete hue sAdhu kabhI anyathA-
pratikUla uttara na de  /  isa hetu usakA niSedha karate hue sUtrakAra
pratipAdita karate haiM-prazna kA uttara dene vAlA sAdhu samasta padArthoM kA
Azraya-vijJAtA hone ke kAraNa cAhe ratnapUrNa maMjUSA ke tulya ho athavA
kutrikApaNa-jisa bAjAra meM tInoM lokoM ke padArtha prApta hote hoM, usake
samAna vaha saba kucha jAnane vAlA asAdhAraNa jJAnI ho, athavA
caturdazapUrvagharoM meM se koI eka ho athavA AcArya Adi kI, zikSA se
pratibhAzAlI ho-viziSTa prajJAyukta ho, padArthoM ke jJAna meM vizAradanipuNa yA
niSNAta ho, use yadi kisI kAraNavaza zravaNa kartA para krodha Aye to bhI vaha
sUtra ke artha ko chAdita na kare-use na chipAye, usakI anyathA vyAkhyA na kare
/  athavA vaha vyAkhyA karate samaya apane AcArya kA apalApa na kare  /
dharmakathA-dharmopadeza karatA huA vaha apane guNoM kI utkRSTatA-vizeSatA
jJApita karane ke abhiprAya se anya ke guNoM ko chAdita na kare-dUSita na kare,
viDambita na kare apasiddhAnta dvArA zAstra ke artha kI vyAkhyA na kare  /
"maiM samasta zAstroM kA vettA hUM, sarvaloka vidita hUM, samasta saMdehoM kA
apanetAnAzaka hUM, mere tulya tarka yukti pUrvaka tattvoM kI vyAkhyA karane vAlA
dUsarA nahIM hai" aisA abhimAna yA garva na kare  /  vaha apane Apako bahuzruta
ke rUpa meM tathA tapazcaraNazIla ke rUpa meM prakAzita-khyApita na kare  /
'ca' zabda se yaha sUcita hai ki anya prakAra ke pratiSThA, satkAra, sammAna Adi
kA vaha parihAra kare  /  prajJAvAnasazrutika, zAstrajJAnI sAdhu parihAsa yA
majAka pUrNa bAteM na kare  /  kisI kAraNavaza sunane vAlA puruSa yadi kisI
padArtha-tattva ko na samajha pAye to vaha usakA upahAsa na kare  /  tathA
tamhAre bahata se patra hoM. tamhArA dhana baDhe. tumhArI Ayu lambI ho, isa
prakAra vaha kisI ko AzIrvAda na de  /  vaha bhASA-samiti se anvita rahe  /
bhUtAbhisaMkAi duguMchamANe, Na Nivvahe maMtapadeNa goyaM  /  /  Na kiMci micche
maNue payAsuM, asAhudhammANi Na saMvaejjA  // 20 //  chAyA - bhUtAbhizaMkayA
jugupsamAno, na nirvahenmantrapadena gotram  /  na kiJcidicchenmanujAH prajAsu,
asAdhudharmAnna saMvadet  //  (5850

Page #614 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra:  **Verse 20:**  A virtuous person should not give
blessings to anyone out of fear of causing harm to living beings. They should
not use mantras to make their restraint meaningless or distorted. They should
not desire to obtain anything from people. They should not preach the religion
of the wicked.  **Commentary:**  Why should a virtuous person not give
blessings? The author of the sutra explains that a virtuous person, abhorring
evil and sin, should not give blessings out of fear of causing harm to living
beings. The term "Go-vani" refers to one who protects speech. Silence or
restraint of speech is considered "Go-tra". A virtuous person should not make
their restraint of speech meaningless or distorted by using mantras for the
purpose of acquiring knowledge. Or, the term "Go-tra" can also refer to the life
of living beings. A virtuous person should not use mantras, secret language, or
advice to harm the life of living beings. This means that a virtuous person
should not use mantras to harm living beings, even if it is done by a king or
someone else. Similarly, a virtuous person should not desire any benefit,
praise, or respect while preaching Dharma to people. They should not preach the
religion of the wicked, which includes giving gifts, offering water, etc. They
should not engage in conversations with those who preach wicked religions. They
should not seek fame or praise for themselves while preaching Dharma. They
should not desire their own praise or glory.  **Verse 21:**  A virtuous person
should not engage in speech or bodily actions that cause laughter or make them
appear ridiculous to others. A virtuous person should not speak of sinful Dharma
even in jest, which causes suffering to others. A virtuous person, free from
attachment and aversion, should not speak in a way that seeks praise or respect.
They should remain free from the passions.  **Commentary:**  A virtuous person
should not engage in speech or bodily actions that cause laughter or make them
appear ridiculous to others. For example, they should not say things like "cut
this" or "break this". They should not use words that are likely to cause
laughter. For example, they should not say things like "your vows are
beautiful". A virtuous person should not speak of sinful Dharma even in jest,
which causes suffering to others. A virtuous person, free from attachment and
aversion, should not speak in a way that seeks praise or respect. They should
remain free from the passions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  anuvAda - pApa ko jugupsita-ghRNita mAnatA huA
sAdhu prANiyoM ke vinAza kI abhizaMkA se kisI ko AzIrvAda na de  /  vaha mantra
prayoga dvArA apane saMyama ko sArahIna-vikRta na banAye  /  vaha logoM se kisI
vastu ko pAne kI cAha na kare  /  vaha asAdhu janocita dharma kA upadeza na de|
TIkA - kiMnimittamAzIrvAdo na vidheya ityAha-bhUteSu-jantuSUpamardazaGkA
tayA''zIrvAda 'sAvA' sapApaM jugupsamAno na brUyAta tathA gAstrAyata iti gotraM-
maunaM vAksaMyamastaM 'maMtrapadena' vidyApamArjanavidhinA 'na nirvAhayet' na
niHsAra kuryAt  /  yadivA gotraM-jantUnAM jIvitaM 'maMtrapadena'
rAjAdiguptabhASaNapadena rAjAdInAmupadezadAnato 'na nirvAhayet' nApanayet,
etaduktaM bhavati-na rAjAdinA sAdhU jantujIvitopamardakaM mantraM kuryAt, tathA
prajAyanta iti prajAH-jantavastAsu prajAsu 'manujo' manuSyo vyAkhyAnaM kurvan
dharmakathAM vA na 'kimapi' lAbhapUjA satkArAdikam 'icched' abhilaSet, tathA
kutsitAnAm-asAdhUnAM dharmAn-vastudAnatarpaNAdikAn 'na saMvadet' na brUyAd
yadivA nAsAdhudharmAn brUvan saMvAdayet athavA dharmakathAM vyAkhyAnaM vA
kurvana prajAsvAtmazlAghArUpAM kIrti necchediti  // 20 //  kiJcAnyat - _TIkArtha
- sAdhu kisa kAraNa AthIrvAda na de ? ise spaSTa karate hue sUtrakAra
pratipAdita karate haiMprANiyoM ke upamarda-nAza kI AzaMkA se sAdhu sAvadya-
pApayukta kAryoM se ghRNA karatA huA kisI ko AzIrvAda na de  /  go-vANI kA jo
trANa karatA hai, use gotra kahA jAtA hai  /  mauna yA vAksaMyama gautra hai  /
sAdhu vidyA ke apamArjana kI vidhi se durupayoga dvArA apane vAksaMyama ko
sArahIna na kare-use vikArayukta na banAye athavA prANiyoM kA jIvana gautra
kahalAtA hai  /  sAdhu, rAjA Adi ke sAtha sAvadha gupta bhASaNa Adi dvArA use
tadviSayaka upadeza dAna dvArA vAk saMyama kA apanayana na kare  /  kahane kA
abhiprAya yaha hai ki rAjA Adi ke sAtha aisA mantra-vicAra vimarza yA parAmarza
Adi na kare jisase prANiyoM kA upamardana ho  /  jo utpanna hote haiM unheM
prajA kahA jAtA hai, ve jantu haiM  /  unake bIca dharmakathA karatA huA-
vyAkhyAna karatA huA sAdhu unase lAbha, pratiSThA, sammAna Adi pAne kI abhilASA
na kre| vastudAna tathA tarpaNa Adi kA jo asAdhujana svIkRta dharma hai, upadeza
na kare athavA jo asAdhu dharmoM kA AkhyAna karatA ho usakA saMvAdana-samarthana
na kare athavA dharmakathA-dharma pravacana karatA huA vaha logoM meM
AtmazlAghAtmaka kIrti kI kAmanA na kare  /  apanI bar3hAI evaM yaza na caahe| *
* * hAsaM pi No saMdhati pAvadhamme, oe tahIyaM pharusaM viyANe  /  /  No
tucchae No ya vikaMthaijjA, aNAile yA akasAibhikkhU  // 21 //  chAyA - hAsamapi
na saMdhayetpApadharmAn, ojastathyaM paruSaM vijAnIyAt  /  na tuccho na sa
vikatthayedanA kulovA'kaSAyI bhikSuH  //  anuvAda - sAdhu aisA vacana na bole
tathA daihika ceSTA na kare jisase hAsa utpanna hotA ho, jisase vaha logoM meM
upahAsAspada pratIta hotA ho  /  sAdhu haMsI meM bhI pApapUrNa dharma kA kathana
na kare jisase anya ko duHkha hotA ho  /  rAga dveSa se UMcA uThA huA sAdhu
vaisA vacana bhI na kahe  /  vaha pratiSThA sammAna Adi pAkara bhI abhimAna evaM
Atma prazaMsA na kare  /  vaha kaSAyoM se anAvila-nirmala rahe  /  TIkA - yathA
parAtmanosyimutpadyate tathA zabdAdikaM zarIrAvayavamanyAn vA pApadharmAn
sAvadyAnmanovAkkAyavyApArAn 'na saMdhayet' na vidadhyAt, tadyathA-idaM chinddhi
bhinddhi, tathA kuprAvacanikAn hAsyaprAyaM notprAsayet, tadyathA-zobhanaM-
bhavadIyaM vrataM, tadyathA 586

Page #615 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Study of the scriptures - "A soft bed, a drink in the morning, food in the
middle of the day, a drink in the afternoon, grapes and sugar at midnight,
liberation at the end, as seen by the Sakya son." [1] Such statements, which are
prone to fault-finding and are binding to sin, should not be spoken even in
jest. Similarly, a 'Oja' (one who is free from attachment and aversion) should
know, through the knowledge of knowing, that even though a statement is true in
its essence, it is harsh if it disturbs the minds of others, and should discard
it through the knowledge of rejection. Alternatively, a 'Oja' (one who is free
from attachment and aversion) should know that 'Tathya' (truth) is truly real,
unartificial, and not deceptive, and that 'Parusha' (harsh) is difficult to
practice by those with little virtue due to the absence of karma-association,
selflessness, or due to the consumption of food at the edge of the mouth. He
should understand this 'Parusha-Samyama' (harsh restraint) through its practice.
Similarly, knowing a particular meaning himself, or receiving honor and respect,
he should not become 'Tuccha' (trivial) or go mad. He should not 'Vikaththayet'
(boast) or praise himself, and not 'Vikaththayet' (boast) or excessively flatter
others, not knowing them well. He should be 'Anakulo' (unperturbed) during the
time of explanation or religious discourse, free from agitation, expectation of
gain, etc., and always 'Akashaya' (free from passions). He is a 'Bhikshu' (monk)
who is virtuous. [21] Commentary - A monk should not speak any word that causes
laughter to himself or others, that appears ridiculous to himself and others. He
should not make the parts of his body engage in sinful activities. He should not
make the activities of his mind, speech, and body careless. For example, he
should not speak words like "cut this", "break this", etc. He should not mock
the wrong speakers or those who hold different views. For example, he should not
say, "Your vow is so beautiful", "Sleeping on a soft bed", "Drinking milk, etc.,
in the morning", "Eating rice, etc., at noon", "Drinking pan, asava, sharbat,
thandai, etc., in the afternoon", "Eating grapes and mishri at midnight", "The
Sakya son - Buddha - has shown such a good form of liberation", etc. He should
not speak such things even in jest, knowing that they are binding to sin, as
they expose the faults of others. A monk, free from attachment and aversion,
should discard the external and internal knots, and even though a statement is
true in its essence, it is harsh if it disturbs the minds of others, he should
know it through the knowledge of knowing and discard it through the knowledge of
rejection. Alternatively, a monk should accept the 'Oja' (virtue) being free
from attachment and aversion. He should know that 'Tathya' (truth) is truly
real, unartificial, and not deceptive, and that 'Parusha' (harsh) is difficult
to practice by those with little virtue due to the absence of karma-association,
selflessness, or due to the consumption of food at the edge of the mouth. He
should understand this 'Parusha-Samyama' (harsh restraint) through its practice.
A monk should not become 'Tuccha' (trivial) or go mad, knowing a particular
meaning himself, or receiving honor and respect. He should not praise himself or
excessively flatter others, not knowing them well. He should be 'Anakulo'
(unperturbed) during the time of explanation or religious discourse, free from
agitation, expectation of gain, etc., and always 'Akashaya' (free from
passions). He is a 'Bhikshu' (monk) who is virtuous. [21] Commentary - A monk
should be free from doubt and fear, and should speak in a way that is impartial.
He should speak both languages, arising from Dharma, with impartiality and
wisdom. [22] Shadow - A monk should be free from doubt and fear, and should
speak in a way that is impartial. He should speak both languages, arising from
Dharma, with impartiality and wisdom. [22] (587)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmakaM adhyayanaM - "mRdvI zayyA prAtarutthAya peyA, madhye bhaktaM
pAnakaMcAparAhne  /  drAkSAkhaNDaM zarkarAcArdharAtre, mokSazcAnte
zAkyaputreNadRSTaH  // 1 // " ityAdikaM paradoSAdbhAvanaprAyaM
pApabandhakamitikRtvA hAsyenApi na vaktavyaM  /  tathA 'ojo' rAga dveSarahitaH
sabAhyAbhyantaragranthatyAgAdvA niSkiJcanaH san 'tathya' miti paramArthataH
satyamapi paruSaM vaco'paracetovikAri jJaparijJayA
vijAnIyAtpratyAkhyAnaparijJayA ca pariharet, yadivA rAgadveSavirahAdojAH
'tathyaM' paramArthabhUtamakRtrimamapratArakaM 'paruSa'
karmasaMzleSAbhAvAnnirmamatvAdalpasattvairduranuSTheyatvAdvA
karkazamantaprAntAhAropabhogAdvA paruSa-saMyama vijAnIyAt' tadanuSThAnataH
samyagavagacchet, tathA svataH kaJcidarthavizeSaM parijJAya pUjAsatkArAdikaM
vA'vApya 'na tucchA bhavet' nonmAda gacchet, tathA 'na vikatthayet' nAtmAnaM
zlAghayet paraM vA samyaganavabudhyamAnaH 'no vikatthayet' nAtyantaM
camar3hayet, tathA anAkulo' vyAkhyAnAvasare dharmakathAvasare
vA'nAvilolAbhAdinirapekSo bhavet tathA sarvadA akaSAyaH kaSAyarahito bhaved
"bhikSuH' sAdhuriti  // 21 //  TIkArtha - jisase apane Apako yA dUsare ko hAsya
utpanna hotA ho-jo apane ko tathA auroM ko upahAsajanaka pratIta hotA hai, aisA
koI bhI zabda sAdhu na bole  /  tathA apane zarIra ke avayavoM ko pApapUrNa
ceSTA yukta na banAye  /  mana, vacana evaM kAya ke vyApAro-kAryoM ko sAvadha na
banAye  /  jaise-ise chinna karokATo, ise bhinna karo-tor3o, ityAdi vAlya sAdhu
na bole  /  vaha kuprAvacaniko-mithyAttvI anya matavAdiyoM kA parihAsa na kare
/  jaise ApakA vrata kitanA sundara hai, mRdu-komala zaiyyA para sonA,
prAta:kAla uThakara dugdha Adi peya padArtha sevana karanA, madhyAnha meM bhAta
Adi kA bhojana karanA, aparAhna-tIsare pahara meM pAna-Asava, zarabata, .
ThaMDAI Adi pInA, arddha rAtri meM dAkheM aura mizrI khAnA-zAkyaputra ne-buddha
ne mokSa kA kaisA acchA rUpa dikhAyA hai ityAdi  /  dUsaroM ke doSoM ko
udbhASita-prakaTa karane vAlI bAteM pApabandhaka hai, yaha mAnakara majAka meM
bhI vaisA na kahe  /  rAga tathA dveSa se vivarjita bAhya evaM Abhyantara
graMthi ke parityAga ke kAraNa niSkiJcana-parigraha zUnya-parigraha rahita sAdhu
jo bAta yadyapi satyahai, para anya ke citta ko vikRta-duHkhita karatI hai, use
jJaparijJA dvArA jJAta kara tathA pratyAkhyAna-parijJA dvArA tyAga de  /  athavA
sAdhu rAga dveSa vivarjita hokara ojasvitA svIkAra kare  /  jo vAstava meM
tathya-paramArthabhUta akRtrima-svAbhAvika, apratAraka-pratAraNArahita karma
saMzleSa-karmasaMbandha ke abhAva ke kAraNa nirmamatva ke kAraNa
AtmaparAkramavihIna prANiyoM dvArA duHsAdhya hai, paruSa-karkaza hai, antaprAMta
AhAra ke upabhoga ke kAraNa jo kaThina hai, usa saMyama ko vaha jAne  /
kriyAnvayana dvArA vaha bhalI bhAMti svAyatta kare  /  sAdhu kisI viziSTa artha
ko svayaM jAnakara athavA pratiSThA sammAna Adi prApta kara tuccha na bane-
unmatta na bane  /  AtmazlAghA na kare  /  athavA dUsare ko bhalI bhAMti na
samajhatA huA usakI atyadhika prazaMsA na kre| vaha vyAkhyAna yA dharma kathA ke
avasara para anAvila-nirbhala, lAbhAdi kI apekSA se vivarjita rahe tathA sadA
kaSAya rahita rahe  /  saMkeja yA'saMkitabhAva bhikkhU, vibhajavAyaM ca
viyaagrejaa| bhAsAduyaM dhammasamuTThitehiM, viyAgarejA samayA supanne  // 22 //
chAyA - zaGketa cAzaGkitabhAvo bhikSu, vibhajyavAdaJcavyAgRNIyAt  /
_bhASAdvayaM dharmasamutthitai AgRNIyAtsamatayA suprajJaH  //  (587)

Page #616 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra Translation - Even if one has no doubt regarding the
sutra and its meaning, one should speak in a way that suggests doubt. When
speaking about Dharma, one should use language based on the principles of
Vibhajya-vada (analysis) and Syadvada (conditionalism). While associating with
virtuous individuals who are engaged in Dharma, one should use two types of
language: Satya-bhasa (truthful language) and Amithya-bhasa (non-false
language). One should teach Dharma equally to both the wealthy and the poor.
Commentary - The author now discusses the method of discourse. A virtuous
individual, while delivering a discourse, even if certain about the meaning,
should speak in a way that suggests doubt due to the possibility of
misunderstanding. One should avoid arrogance and not claim to be the sole knower
of the truth. Instead, one should explain the subject matter with a sense of
doubt. Even if the meaning is clear and certain, one should not speak in a way
that creates doubt in the listener's mind. One should explain things using
Vibhajya-vada, which involves analyzing and explaining things separately.
Vibhajya-vada is synonymous with Syadvada, which is a universal principle that
is never contradicted by worldly experience. It is universally applicable and
validated by personal experience. One should use this principle in discourse.
Alternatively, one should explain things clearly and separately. For example,
one should explain the concept of permanence (nitya-vada) from the perspective
of the substance (dravya) and the concept of impermanence (anitya-vada) from the
perspective of the category (paryaya). All things exist from the perspective of
their own substance, field, time, and mode, but they do not exist from the
perspective of other substances, fields, times, and modes. As it is said:  "Who
would not accept that everything is real from the perspective of its own nature
and the four categories? It is only through misinterpretation that things appear
unreal. Otherwise, they would not exist."  Thus, one should speak using
Vibhajya-vada. One should also explain Vibhajya-vada using two types of
language. The author states that one should use both truthful and non-false
language. When asked or not asked, one should use these two types of language
during Dharma discussions or at other times. What kind of person should one be?
One should be a virtuous individual who is engaged in the practice of right
conduct and not a hypocrite who is merely pretending to be virtuous. One should
associate with virtuous individuals who are truly engaged in Dharma and not with
those who are merely pretending. One should be like a righteous king or a
virtuous person, free from attachment and aversion, and use both types of
language while teaching Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram anuvAda - sUtra evaM artha ke saMbaMdha meM svayaM ko
zaMkA na bhI ho to vaha saMkita vata vacana kahe  /  dharma kathA yA vyAkhyAna
Adi ke avasara para vaha vibhajyavAda-syAdvAda ke AdhAra para vacana prayoga
kare  /  dharma samutthita-dharmAcaraNa meM saMpravRtta sAdhuoM ke sAtha
viharaNazIla hotA huA vaha bhASAdvaya-satyabhASA tathA asatya virahita, amithyA
(vyavahAra) bhASA kA prayoga kare  /  vibhava sampanna evaM vibhavahIna donoM ko
samAna rUpa meM dharma kA upadeza de  /  TIkA - sAmprataM
vyAkhyAnavidhimadhikRtyAha-'bhikSuH' sAdhurvyAkhyAnaM
kurvannarvAgdarzitvAdarthanirNaya prati azaMkita-bhAvo'pi 'zaGketa' auddhatyaM
pariharannahamevArthasya vettA nAparaH kazcidityevaM garvaM na kurvIta kiMtu
viSayamarthaM prarupayan sAzaGkameva kathayed, yadivA
parisphuTamapyazaMGkitabhAvamapyarthaM na tathA kathayet yathA paraH zaMketa,
tathA vibhajyavAdaM-pRthagarthanirNayavAdaM vyAgRNIyAt yadivA
vibhajyavAdaHsyAdvAdastaM sarvatrAskhalitaM lokavyavahArAvisaMvAditayA
sarvavyApinaM svAnubhavasiddhaM vaded, athavA samyagarthAn vibhajya-pRthakkRtvA
tadvAdaM vadet tadyathA nityavAdaMdravyArthatayA paryAyArthatvanityavAdaM vadet,
tathA svadravyakSetrakAlabhAvaiH sarve'pi padArthAH santi paradravyAdibhistu na
santi, tathA coktam - "sadaiva sarvaM ko necchetsvarUpAdicatuSTayAt ?  /
asadeva viparyAsAnnacenna vyavatiSThate  // 1 // " ityAdikaM vibhajyavAdaM
vadediti  /  vibhajyavAdamapi bhASAdvitayenaiva brUyAdityAha-bhASayoH
AdyacaramayoH satyAsatyAmRSayordvikaM bhASAdvikaM tadbhASAdvayaM
kkacitpRSTo'pRSTo vA dharmakathAvasare'nyadA vA sadA vA 'vyAgRNIyAt' bhASeta,
kiM bhUtaH san ? samyak satsaMyamAnuSThAne notthitAH samutthitA:-satsAdhava
udyukta vihAriNo na punarudAyinRpamArakavatkRtrimAstaiH samyagutthitaiH saha
viharan cakravartidramakayoH samatayA rAgadveSarahito vA zobhanaprajJo
bhASAdvayopetaH samyagdharmaH vyAgRNIyAditi  // 22 //  TIkArtha - sUtrakAra aba
vyAkhyAna vidhi ke saMdarbha meM pratipAdita karate haiM-dharma kA vyAkhyAna-
vivecana karatA huA sAdhu artha kA nirNaya karane meM ni:zaMka hotA huA bhI
arvAkdarzitA-sthUladarzitA ke kAraNa zaMkitavat vacana bole  /  vaha apane
auddhatya-udaNDatA kA parihAra karatA huA yaha ghamaMDa na kare ki maiM hI isa
tattva kA vettA-vijJa hUM, anya dUsarA vaisA nahIM hai  /  vaha viSama-kaThina
artha kI prarUpaNA karatA huA, zaMkA ke sAtha hI kathana kare athavA jyoM vastu
atyanta pAreSphuTa-sApha ho jisameM kisI zaMkA kI guMjAiza na ho, sAdhu use isa
prakAra na kahe jisase zravaNa karane vAle ke mana meM zaMkA paidA ho, padArthoM
ko vibhajyavAda pUrvaka kahe-pRthak pRthak vivecana ke sAtha AkhyAta kare  /
vibhajyavAda kA tAtparya syAdvAda se hai syAdvAda kahIM bhI skhalitavyAhata
nahIM hotA vaha loka vyavahAra se avisaMvAditA-anukUlatA liye hue haiM  /
isaliye vaha sarvavyApI hai tathA svAnubhava siddha hai  /  sAdhu usakA Azraya
lekara saMbhASaNa kare athavA padArthoM ko samyak-bhalIbhAMti se pRthak pRthak
vyAkhyAta kara batAye  /  jaise vaha dravyArthika naya kI apekSA se nityavAda kI
vyAkhyA kare tathA paryAyArthika naya kI apekSA se anityavAda kA vivecana kare
/  apane apane dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhAva kI dRSTi se sabhI padArtha apanA
apanA astittva liye hue haiM tathA ve anya dravya anya kSetra anya kAla evaM
anya bhAva kI dRSTi se nAstittva liye hue haiM  /  ataeva kahA hai-samasta
padArtha apane-apane svarUpa Adi cAra vikalpoM kI dRSTi se sat hai tathA para
rUpa Adi cAra kI apekSA se asat hai  /  aisA kauna nahIM cAhatA ? kauna nahIM
mAnatA ? aisA nahIM mAnane se padArthoM kI vyavasthA hI ghaTita nahIM hotI  /
isa prakAra sAdhu vibhajyavAda kA saMbhASaNa kre| vibhajyavAda ko bhI vaha do
prakAra kI bhASAoM meM vyAkhyAta kare  /  sUtrakAra yaha pratipAdita karate haiM
/  kisI (588)

Page #617 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When asked, or not asked, or during a religious story or discourse, or at any
other time, the sadhu should use the two languages of truth and untruth, and the
two languages of amr̥ṣā (conduct). How should the sadhu do this? The sūtra-kāra
says in this context: The sadhu, who is established in sat-samyama, the highest
practice of restraint, who is udya-t, diligent, who is udya-t vihāra-śīla,
diligent in his conduct, who is udāyī, like a king who is a māra-ka, a
destroyer, who is not like a deceitful or cunning person, who is vihāra-śīla
with the munis, who is free from attachment and aversion, who is endowed with
excellent wisdom, should, relying on the two languages mentioned above, teach
the cakravartī and the pauper equally.  "When one follows the wrong path, one
should know it, and the sadhu should speak gently. He should not speak a
language that is hurtful, nor should he speak in a way that is too long or too
short." (23)  Commentary: When the sadhu speaks in these two languages, some
intelligent people understand the meaning of what the ācārya and others have
said, but others, because of their dull intellect, understand it differently.
The sadhu should try to make those who understand it differently understand it
correctly, using gentle words, and not using harsh words like "You are a fool,"
"You are stubborn," etc. He should not speak in a way that is disrespectful,
with angry expressions on his face, hands, mouth, or eyes, which would cause
pain to the person in front of him. He should not criticize the language of the
questioner. He should not explain a short meaning in a long way.  "The meaning
should be spoken in a few words. If a few words are spoken in many words, it
becomes meaningless." (1)  The sūtra is short and the meaning is small, etc. In
the four-fold classification, the one that is short and has a great meaning is
praised here. (23)  Commentary: The author of the scripture says that when he
speaks in the two languages mentioned above, some people, because of their
intelligence, understand the meaning of what the ācārya and others have said,
but others, because of their dull intellect, understand it differently. The
sadhu should try to make those who understand it differently understand it
correctly, using appropriate reasons, examples, and arguments, so that they
understand, but not by calling them a fool, stubborn, or dull. He should not
speak in a way that is disrespectful, with angry expressions on his face, hands,
mouth, or eyes, which would cause pain to the person in front of him. He should
not criticize the language of the questioner. He should not explain a short
meaning in a long way.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmakaM adhyayanaM dvArA pUche jAne para yA na pUche jAne para athavA
dharmakathA-dharmapravacana ke avasara athavA anya samaya meM sAdhu prathama
aura antima satya tathA asatya amRSA (vyavahAra) ina do bhASAoM kA prayoga kare
/  sAdhu kisa prakAra hotA huA yaha kare ? sUtrakAra isa saMdarbha meM batalAte
haiM-satsaMyama-utkRSTa saMyama sAdhanA meM utthita, udyata-prayatnazIla, udyata
viharaNazIla, udAyI rAjA ke mAraka-saMhAraka kI jyoM jo kRtrima-kapaTI yA chalI
nahIM hai, vaise muniyoM ke sAtha vihAraNa zIla, rAga dveSa rahita hotA huA
uttama prajJAvAna sAdhu pUrvokta do bhASAoM kA Azraya letA huA cakravartI evaM
kaMgAla ko samAna rUpa se upadeza de  /  aNugacchamANe vitahaM vijANe, tahA tahA
sAhu akakkaseNaM  /  Na katthaI bhAsa vihiMsaijA, niruddhagaM vAvi na dIha ijA
// 23 //  chAyA - anugacchan vitathaM vijAnIyAt, tathA tathA sAdhurakarkazena  /
na kathayedbhASAM vihiMsyAnniruddhaM vA'pi na dIrghayet  //  anuvAda - pUrva
sUcita bhASAdvaya kA avalambana lekara dharma kI vyAkhyA karate hue sAdhu ke
vivecana ko koI buddhizIla puruSa yathAvat rUpa meM samajha letA hai, koI buddhi
kI mandatA ke kAraNa viparIta samajhatA hai  /  vaisA samajhane vAle
mandamatijanoM ko sAdhu akarkaza-komala zabdoM dvArA jJApita karane kA prayAsa
kare  /  vaha aisI anAdarapUrNa bhASA na bole jisase sammukhIna jana kA hRdaya
duHkhe  /  prAznika kI bhASA kI nindA na kre| saMkSipta artha ko vistAra se
vyAkhyAta na kare  /   /  _TIkA- kiJcAnyat-tasyaivaM bhASAdvayena kathayataH
kazcinmedhAvitayA tathaiva tamarthamAcAryAdinA kathitamanugacchan
samyagavabudhyate, aparastu mandamedhAvitayA vitatham-anyathaivAbhijAnIyAt, taM
ca samyaganavabudhyamAnaM tathA tathAtena tena
hetudAharaNasadyuktiprakaTanaprakAreNa mUrkhastvamasi tathA durdurUr3haH
khasUcirityAdinA karkazavacanenAnirbhartsayan yathA yathA'sau budhyate tathA
tathA 'sAdhuH' suSThu bodhayet na
kutracitkruddhamukhahastauSThanetravikArairanAdareNa kathayan
mana:pIDAmutpAdayet, tathA praznayatastadbhASAmapa zabdAdidoSaduSTAmapi dhig
mUrkhAsaMskRtamate ! kiM tavAnena saMskRtena pUrvottaravyAhatena voccArite
netyevaM 'na vihiMsyAt' na tiraskuryAd asaMbaddhodghaTTanatastaM praznayitAraM
na viddmbyediti| tathA niruddham-arthastokaM dIrghavAkyairmahatA zabdadardurda
reNArkaviTapikASTikAnyAyena na kathayet niruddhaM vA stokakAlInaM vyAkhyAnaM
vyAkaraNatarkAdipravezanadvAreNa prasaktyAnuprasaktyA 'na dIrghayet' na
dIrghakAlikaM kuryAt tathA coktam "so atthovattabbo jo bhaNNai akkharehiM
thovehiM  /  jo puNa thovo bahuakkherahiM so hoi nissAro  // 1 // " chAyA -
so'rtho vaktavyo yo bhaNyate'kSaraiH staukaiH  /  ya punaH stoko
bahubhirakSaraiH sa bhavati nissAraH  // 1 //  tathA
kiMcitsUtramalpAkSaramalpArthaM vA ityAdi caturbhaGgikA, tatra yadalpAkSaraM
mahArthaM tadiha prazasyata iti  // 23 //  TIkArtha - pUrvokta do bhASAoM dvArA
zAstrakAra vivecana karate hue kahate haiM AcArya Adi ke kathana ko koI puruSa
medhAvitA-buddhimattA ke kAraNa yathAvata rUpa meM samajha letA hai kiMtu koI
anya mandamedhA ke kAraNa use anyathA-viparIta yA ulTA jAna letA hai  /  yoM
viparIta samajhane vAle puruSa ko sAdhu samucita hetu udAharaNa evaM yukti dvArA
isa prakAra samajhAve jisase vaha samajha jAya kiMtu tuma mUrkha ho, tuma jar3a
ho, tuma AkAza kI 589

Page #618 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Do not criticize him with harsh and severe words like "He is like zero" etc.
Explain it to him in a suitable way as he can understand. He should not insult
him with gestures of anger, hands, lips and eyes. The virtuous person should not
cause pain in the mind of that person. If the language of that questioner is
contaminated with defects like abusive words etc., do not despise him by saying
"You are a fool, uncultured, you are cursed, uncultured, and zero in the past
and future, what is the benefit of your statement?" etc. And do not ridicule the
questioner by accusing him of incoherent speech. And do not explain a small or
concise meaning with long, long sentences full of wordy embellishments like "ark
vitapikaasthika" instead of calling it "a piece of wood". Do not make a short
lecture or discussion long by introducing grammar, logic, etc., by obtaining or
not obtaining. It has been said - "That which can be said in a few words is the
right thing to say." If a meaning is small but is expressed in many words, it is
useless and devoid of essence. Some sutras are short and some are small in
meaning. In this regard, there is a four-fold classification. The one which is
short in words and great in meaning is commendable. Samalaveja padipunnabhaasi,
nisamia samiaatthadansi. . Aanaai suddhaṁ vayaṇam bhiunje, abhisandhae
paavaviveg bhikkhu. ||24|| Shadow - Samalepetpratipurnabhaasi, nisamya
samyagarthadarsi. Aagnaashuddham vachanam abhiyunjit, abhisandhayetpaapavivekam
bhikshuh. || Translation - If a meaning cannot be expressed in a few words, the
virtuous person should explain it in detail. He should listen to the truth from
the guru, make it his own, and use pure words. He should speak words that are
free from defects, keeping in mind the discrimination of sin. Commentary - Apich
- Yattpunarativishamtvadalpaakshairaina samyagavabudhyate tat samyag-shobhenena
prakaarena samantaatparyaayashabdouccaranato bhaavarthakathanatachaalapeed-
bhaashet samalepet, naalpairevaakshairairuktvakritartho bhaved, apitu
jneyagahanarthabhaashane sadadhetuyuktvaadibhih shrotaram apekshya
pratipurnabhaasi syad-askhalitaamilitaheenakshaararthavaadi bhavediti.
Tathaa'aachaaryaadeh shakaashaadyathaavadartham shrutavaa nisamya avagamyacha
samyagayathaavasthitam artham yathaa guru shakaashaadavadhaaritam
arthapratipaadyam drastum sheelamasya sa bhavati samyagarthadarsi, sa evambhutah
sanstiirthakaraagnyaya-sarvajnapranitaagamaanusarena 'shuddham' avadatam
purvaaparaaviruddham niravadhyam vachanam abhiyunjitootsargavishaye sati
utsargam apavaad vishaye chaapavaadam tathaa svarparasamayayoryathaasvam:
vachanam abhivaded. Evam chaabhiyunjann bhikshuh paapavivekam
laabhasatkaraadinirapekshatayaa kaankhmaano nirdosham vachanam abhisandhayediti.
||24|| Punarapi bhaasha vidhimadhikrityaah - Commentary - If the truth is very
complex and cannot be explained properly in a few words, it should be explained
in a beautiful way by pronouncing synonyms or by explaining its meaning. One
should not consider oneself to have fulfilled one's duty by explaining such a
meaning in a few words. One should not think so. 590

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
  /  zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram jyoM zUnya ho ityAdi karkaza-kaThora vAkyoM dvArA
usakI bhartsanA na kare  /  jisa prakAra vaha samajha sake vaise samIcIna rUpa
meM use samajhAve, kruddhamukha, hAtha, oSTha tathA netra vikAra-ina aMgoM dvArA
apamAna pUrNa saMketa karatA  /  huA vaha sAdhu usa vyakti ke mana meM pIr3A
utpAdita na kare  /  usa prAznika-prazna karane vAle kI bhASA yadi apazabda Adi
ke doSa se dUSita hoM to mUrkha, asaMskRtamati, tumheM dhikkAra hai,
saMskArahIna tathA pahale aura. Age ke saMdarbha meM zUnya, tumhAre isa kathana
se kyA lAbha hai ityAdi dvArA usakA tiraskAra na kare  /  tathA asambaddha
vaktRtA kA doSa lagAkara praznakartA kI viDambanA na kare  /  tathA jo artha
stoka choTA yA saMkSipta hai use Aka kI lakar3I kahane ke badale 'arka
viTapikASThikA' jaise prayoga sadRza jaTila zabdADambara maya lambe lambe vAkyoM
dvArA sAdha kathana na kare  /  jo vyAkhyAna-vivecana alpakAlIna ho use
vyAkaraNa, tarka Adi ke pravezana dvArA, prApti anaprApti dvArA dIrghakAlIka-
lambA na banAye  /  kahA gayA hai-vaisA hI artha vaktavya hai-kahane yogya hai
jo thor3e akSaroM meM kahA jA sake  /  lo artha thor3A hote hue bhI bahuta se
akSaroM dvArA pratipAdita kiyA jAtA hai, vaha nissAra sAra vivarjita hotA hai  /
koI sUtra alpAkSara-alpa akSara yukta tathA koI alpArthaka-alpa arthayukta hotA
hai, isa saMbaMdha meM eka caubhaMgI hai, usameM jo artha alpa akSarayukta tathA
mahAn arthayukta hotA hai, vahI prazaMsanIya hai| samAlavejA paDipunnabhAsI,
nisAmiyA samiyAaTThadaMsI  /  . ANAi suddhaM vayaNaM bhiuMje, abhisaMdhae
pAvavivega bhikkhU  // 24 //  chAyA - samAlapetpratipUrNabhASI, nizamya
samyagarthadarzI  /  AjJAzuddhaM vacana mabhiyuJjIta, abhisandhayetpApavivekaM
bhikSuH  //  anuvAda - jo artha thor3e zabdoM meM kahe jAne yogya nahIM hai,
sAdhu use vistIrNa zabdoM meM smjhaaye| vaha guru se tattva kA zravaNa kara use
bhalI bhAMti svAyatta kara zuddha vacana kA prayoga kare  /  vaha pApa kA viveka
rakhatA huA aisA vacana bole jo doSa rahita ho  /  TIkA - apica-
yatpunarativiSamatvAdalpAkSarairna samyagavabudhyate tatsamyag-zobhanena
prakAreNa samantAtparyAyazabdoccAraNato bhAvArthakathanatazcAlaped-bhASeta
samAlapet, nAlpairevAkSarairuktvA kRtArtho bhaved, apitu jJeyagahanArthabhASaNe
saddhetuyuktyAdibhiH zrotAramapekSya pratipUrNabhASI syAd-
askhalitAmilitAhInAkSarArthavAdI bhvediti| tathA''cAryAdeH zakAzAdyathAvadarthaM
zrutvA nizamya avagamya ca samyagayathAvasthitamarthaM yathA guru
sakAzAdavadhAritamarthapratipAdyaM draSTuM zIlamasya sa bhavati
samyagarthadarzI, sa evaMbhUtaH saMstIrthakarAjJayA-sarvajJapraNItAgamAnusAreNa
'zuddham' avadAtaM pUrvAparAviruddhaM niravadyaM vacanamabhiyuJjItotsargaviSaye
sati utsargamapavAda viSaye cApavAdaM tathA svaparasamayayoryathAsvaM :
vacanamabhivadet  /  evaM cAbhiyuJjan bhikSuH pApavivekaM
lAbhasatkArAdinirapekSatayA kAGkhamANo nirdoSaM vacanamabhisandhayediti  // 24
//  punarapi bhASA vidhimadhikRtyAha - TIkArtha - jo tattva atyanta viSama-
dilaSTa hone ke kAraNa thor3e akSaroM dvArA bhalIbhAMti samajhAyA nahIM jA
sakatA, use zobhana prakAra se bhalIbhAMti paryAyavAcI zabdoM kA uccAraNa karate
hue athavA usakA bhAvArtha batalAte hue samajhAye  /  aise artha ko alpAkSaroM
meM AkhyAta kara sAdhu apane ko kRtakRtya na mAne aisA na samajhe 590

Page #619 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of scriptures, I have done my duty, but to explain the profound
meaning worthy of knowing, according to the listener's ability, with the best
purpose and reasoning, etc., should be explained completely.  A sadhu, while
imparting such a subject, should speak clearly, without any hesitation or slip-
ups, distinctly, without mixing or separating, without omitting any letter, and
should be a complete speaker of the meaning, explaining the meaning in detail.
Having heard the substance and essence from the Acharya, etc., and having
understood its meaning correctly, knowing the meaning received and understood
from the Guru well, he should use pure words, according to the Agamas ordained
by the omniscient, without contradiction, without opposition, without fault,
without sin, and without any flaw.  He should speak words according to the
principle of renunciation and the subject of exceptions, according to the
principle of exceptions, and according to his own principles and the principles
of others.  Thus, while using speech with awareness of sin, the sadhu should not
desire gain, honor, etc., and should have the intention of speaking faultless
words.  Then, authorizing the method of language, the Sutrakar says:
**Ahabhuiai susikkhaejja, jaijjaaya naativelam vadejja. Se dittthimang dittthi
na luusaejja, se jaanai bhaasiuung tam samahim.** ||25||  **Shadow:**
Yathoktani: Sushikset, yatet naativelam vadet. Sa drishtiman drishtim na
looshayet, sa janatibhasitum tam samadim. ||  **Translation:**  The sadhu should
always practice the words of the Tirthankaras and the Ganadharas, etc., great
men, and should be conduct-oriented accordingly.  He should not speak
excessively, transgressing the limits.  The right vision should not corrupt or
taint the right vision, the right perception.  He knows the state of samadhi,
the path to liberation, as taught by the omniscient Tirthankaras.
**Commentary:**  Yathoktani, those spoken by the Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, etc.,
should be practiced by the sadhu day and night.  He should correctly grasp the
Agamas ordained by the omniscient through the teaching of grasping.  Through the
teaching of practice, he should be engaged in virtuous conduct and practice.  He
should also teach others in the same way.  To avoid the characteristics of
excessive attachment, it is advised that he should always strive for the
teaching of grasping and practice.  Even though he is always striving, he should
not speak excessively, exceeding the time for his duty or the time for study.
He should not exceed the limits of study and duty.  He should proceed towards
the ten observances.  He should perform all actions according to the occasion,
without hindering each other.  Such a virtuous person, who speaks according to
the time and acts according to the time, is a "Samyak Drishtiman," who has faith
in the established objects, and while giving a discourse or explanation, he
should not corrupt or taint "Drishti," the right perception.  This is said:
Knowing the particular person, he should speak accordingly, avoiding the
teaching of false doctrines, so that the listener's rightness is established,
and not corrupted by the generation of doubts.  And such a person "knows,"
understands, "to speak," to formulate, "samadhi," the right perception,
knowledge, and conduct, or the right mental state, the samadhi spoken by the
omniscient. ||25||  **Commentary Meaning:**  The sadhu should diligently
practice the words taught by the Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, etc., great men.  He
should correctly grasp and assimilate the Agamas ordained by the omniscient
through the teaching of grasping.  Through the teaching of practice, he should
strive to observe restraint.  He should also teach others the Agamas.
Inappropriate, undesirable...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmakaM adhyayanaM ki maiMne apanA kArya kara diyA hai kiMtu
zravaNakartA kI yogyatA kI apekSA se jAnane yogya gahana artha ko uttama hetu
tathA yukti Adi dvArA pUrI taraha vyAkhyAta kare  /  aise viSaya ko jJApita
karAtA huA sAdhu askhalita-skhalana rahita, spaSTa amilita-pRthak pRthak, ahIna-
kisI akSara ko chor3e binA artha kA pratipUrNabhASI bane-vistAra se artha kA
abhibhASaNa kare  /  AcArya Adi se padArtha-tattva zravaNa kara usakA artha sahI
rUpa meM bhalI bhAMti avagata kara vaha guru ke pAsa se gRhIta-avadhArita artha
ko bhalI bhAMti jAnatA huA vaha sarvajJa praNIta AgamoM ke anusAra zuddha, Age
pIche ke saMdarbha se aviruddha apratikUla niravadya-nirdoSa pApa rahita vacana
kA prayoga kre| utsargamUlaka tathA apavAda ke viSaya meM apavAdamUlaka tathA
apane siddhAnta tathA dUsaroM ke siddhAnta jaise haiM tadanurupa vacana bole  /
isa prakAra pApa kA viveka rakhate hue vANI kA prayoga karatA huA sAdhu lAbha
sammAna Adi pAne kI AkAMkSA na rakhe tathA nirdoSa vacana bolane kI bhAvanA liye
rhe| phira bhASA vidhi ko adhikRta kara sUtrakAra kahate haiM ahAbuiyAI
susikkhaejjA, jaijjAyA NAtivelaM vadejjA  /  se diTThimaM diTThi Na lUsaejA, se
jANaI bhAsiuM taM samAhiM  // 25 //  chAyA - yathoktAni : suzikSeta, yateta
nAtibelaM vadet  /  sa dRSTimAn dRSTiM na lUSayet, sa jAnAtibhASituM taM
samAdhim  //  anuvAda - sAdhu tIrthaMkara tathA gaNadhara Adi mahApuruSoM ke
vacanoM kA sadA anuzIlana kare, tadanusAra AcaraNazIla rahe  /  vaha maryAdA kA
atikramaNa kara adhika bhASaNa na kare  /  samyak dRSTi sAdhu dRSTi ko, samyak
darzana ko lUSita-dUSita yA doSapUrNa na banAye  /  vahI sarvajJa-tIrthaMkara
pratipAdita bhAva samAdhi ko-mokSamUlaka sAdhanA ko jAnatA hai  /  prApta karatA
hai  /  .. TIkA - yathoktAni tIrthakaragaNadharAdibhistAnyaharnizaM 'saSTha
zikSeta' grahaNa zikSayA sarvajJoktamAgamaM samyaga gahnIyAd AsevanAzikSayA
tvana varatamudyuktavihAritayA''seveta, anyeSAM ca tathaiva pratipAdayed,
atiprasaktalakSaNanivRttaye tvapadizyate, sadA grahaNAsevanAzikSayodezanAyAM
yateta, sadA yatamAno'pi yo yasya karttavyasya kAlo'dhyayanakAlo vA tAM
velAmatilaGghaya nAtibelaM vaded-adhyayana karttavya maryAdA nAtilavayetsa
(dasa) danuSThAnaM prati vrajedvA, yathAvasaraM parasparAbAdhayA sarvAH kriyAH
kuryAdityarthaH  /  sa evaM guNajAtIyo yathAkAlavAdI yathAkAlacArI ca
'samyagdRSTimAn' yathA vasthitAn padArthAn zraddadhAno dezanAM vyAkhyAnaM vA
kurvan 'dRSTiM' samyagdarzanaM 'na lUSayet' na duSayet, idamuktaM bhavati-
puruSavizeSaM jJAtvA tathA tathA kathanIyamapasiddhAntadezanAparihAreNa yathA
yathA zrotuH samyaktvaM sthirIbhavati, na punaH zaGkotpAdanato dUSyate,
yazcaivaMvidhaH sa 'jAnAti' avabudhyate 'bhASituM' prarUpayituM 'samAdhi'
samyagdarzanajJAnacAritrAkhyaM samyacittavyavasthAnAkhyaM vA taM sarvajJoktaM
samAdhiM samyagavagacchatIti  // 25 //  TIkArtha - tIrthaMkara, gaNadhara Adi
mahApuruSoM dvArA pratipAdita vacanoM kA sAdhu aharniza bhalIbhAMti abhyAsa kare
/  vaha grahaNa zikSA dvArA sarvajJa praNIta Agama ko samyak gRhIta kare-
AtmasAta kre| AsevanA zikSA dvArA saMyama ke paripAlana meM prayatnazIla rahe  /
vaha dUsare logoM ko bhI Agama kA upadeza de  /  anucita-avAMchita 5910

Page #620 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
- The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga. To eliminate the characteristics, one
should do this. He should always be diligent in preaching Dharma, being endowed
with the teachings of acceptance and service. While making such an effort, he
should not violate the time for that work or the time for study. He should not
transgress the limits of study and duty, but remain engaged in good conduct.
There should be no mutual hindrance. He should act keeping this in mind. He
should perform all actions according to the occasion. A sage who speaks or acts
according to time or occasion, has right faith, i.e., he has faith in the true
nature of things. While preaching Dharma or giving lectures, he should not
corrupt right faith. This means that knowing the particular person, seeing his
ability, he should avoid wrong doctrines and preach in such a way that the
listener's right faith remains stable, but he should not preach in such a way
that it creates doubt in the listener's mind and corrupts his right faith. One
who knows how to preach in this way, knows well the right faith, knowledge,
conduct, and the state of samadhi, which is the right mind, established by the
omniscient. Alusae no pacchannbhaasi, no suttammattham ca karej taai.
Sattharabhatti anuvee vaayam, suyam ca samm padivaayamti ||26|| Chhaya - Alusako
no prachchannbhaasi, na sutramartham ca kuryat traayi.
Shaastribhaktya'nuvichintyaavad, shrutan ca samyak pratipadayet || Anuvaad - A
sage should not corrupt the meaning of the scriptures with defects. He should
not conceal the doctrines of the scriptures. A sage, the protector of the three
worlds, should not misinterpret the scriptures and their meaning. He should not
speak words contrary to them. Contemplating the devotion to the teacher, the one
who gives teachings, he should speak thoughtfully. He should present the
teachings as he heard them from the teacher. Teeka - Kinchanayat-'Alusae'
ityādi, sarvajñoktamaagamam kathayan 'no lūshayet'
nanyatha'pasiddhantavyaakhyanena dūshayet, tatha 'na prachchannbhaasi bhavet'
siddhantharthamaviruddhamavadatam sarvajaniinam tatprachchannbhaashanena na
gopayet, yadiva prachchannam va'arthamaparinataya na bhaaset, tadhi
siddhantrarahasyamaparinata shishyavidhvamsanena doshayaiva sampadyate, tatha
cokatam "Aprashaantamau shaastrasadbhavapratipadanam. Doshayaabhinavodiine,
shamaniyamava jvare ||1||" ityadi, na ca sutramanyat evamaitivikalpanatah
svaraparatraayi kurviitaanyatha va sutram tadartham va
sansaarattaayiitraanasheelo jantuunaam na vidhidheet, kimityanyatha sutram na
karttavyamityaaha-parahitaikaratat shaasta tasmin. Shaastariya vyavasthita
bhakti-bahumaanastaya tadbhaktya anuvichintyamamaane noktena na
kadaachidagamabaadha syaadityevam paryaalocya vaadam vadet, tatha
yachchhrutmaachaaryadibhyah sakashaattanthaiva
samyaktvaraadhanamanuvartamaano'nyebhyh rinamoksham pratipadyamana
'pratipadayet' prarūpayenna sukhasheelataam manyamano yathakathaanchittisthediti
||26|| Teekaarth - A sage, while explaining the scriptures revealed by the
omniscient, should not corrupt the scriptures by presenting doctrines contrary
to them. He should not conceal the doctrines that are not contradictory to the
scriptures, are pure, and are meant for the public, by speaking in a veiled
manner. Or, he should not speak about a secret doctrine to an unprepared person,
for that would lead to the destruction of the unprepared disciple and would only
be harmful. And it has been said: "The presentation of the truth of the
scriptures to a mind that is not calm. It is like a new fire in a disease, which
needs to be calmed down. ||1||" etc. And he should not make himself or others a
protector of the scriptures or their meaning by making a different
interpretation. Or, he should not do anything that would make the beings who are
seeking liberation from the cycle of birth and death, a protector of the
scriptures or their meaning. Why? Because it is not right to do anything other
than the scriptures. He says, "For the sake of others, the teacher, in whom
there is devotion to the scriptures, which is established by the scriptures,
should contemplate that devotion with respect, and should not speak in such a
way that it would ever contradict the scriptures. Thus, after considering
everything, he should speak. And whatever he has heard from the teachers, he
should present it in the same way, following the path of right faith, and
liberating others from their debts. He should not think that it is easy to
present the teachings, and should not remain indifferent in any way. ||26||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  lakSaNa kI nivRtti hetu aisA kare  /  vaha sadA
grahaNa zikSA tathA AsevanA zikSA se yukta hotA huA dharma dezanA meM yatna zIla
rahe  /  vaisA yatna karatA huA, jo jisa kArya kA samaya hai athavA adhyayana kA
samaya hai usakA ullaGghana na kare  /  vaha adhyayana evaM karttavya kI maryAdA
ko na lAMghe kiMtu uttama AcaraNa meM saMlagna rahe  /  paraspara bAdhA na Aye
/  ise dhyAna meM rakhate hue kriyAeM kare  /  vaha avasara ke anurUpa saba
kriyAeM kare  /  jo sAdhu aisA hai arthAta kAla yA samaya ke anusAra bolatA hai,
yA AcaraNa karatA hai vaha samyaka dRSi arthAt vaha padArthoM ke satya svarUpa
meM zraddhA rakhatA hai vaha dharma dezanA yA vyAkhyAna detA huA samyakadarzana
ko dUSita na kare  /  isakA yaha abhiprAya hai ki puruSa vizeSa ko jAnakara
usakI yogyatA dekhakara apasiddhAMta kA parihAra kara jaise jaise sunane vAle kA
samyaktva sthira bane aisA upadeza kare, kiMtu aisA upadeza na kare jisase
sunane vAle ke mana meM zaMkA paidA ho jAya usakA samyaktva dUSita ho jAya  /
jo isa prakAra prarUpaNA karanA-upadeza denA jAnatA hai vaha samyakdarzana jJAna
cAritra mUlaka athavA sarvajJa pratipAdita samyakcitta vyavasthA rUpa samAdhi ko
bhalIbhAMti jAnatA hai| alUsae No pacchannabhAsI, No suttamatthaM ca kareja
taaii| satthArabhattI aNuvIi vAyaM, suyaM ca samma paDivAyayaMti  // 26 //
chAyA - alUSako no pracchannabhASI, na sUtramarthaJca kuryAt trAyI  /
zAstRbhaktyA'nuvicintyavAda, zrutaJca samyak pratipAdayet  //  anuvAda - sAdhu
Agama ke artha ko lUsita-doSayukta na kare  /  zAstra-siddhAnta ko pracchanna na
rakhechipAve nahIM  /  trAyI-prANiyoM kA trAtA-rakSaka sAdhu sUtra evaM artha ko
anyathA na kare  /  unake viparIta vacana na bole  /  zAstA-zikSA dene vAle guru
kI bhakti kA anucintana karatA huA vaha vicAra pUrvaka vacana kahe  /  guru se
jaisA zravaNa kiyA vaisA hI vaha samyak pratipAdana kare-vivecana kare  /  TIkA-
kiMcAnyat-'alUsae' ityAdi,sarvajJoktamAgamaM kathayan 'no lUSayet'
nAnyathA'pasiddhAntavyAkhyAnena dUSayet, tathA 'na pracchannabhASI bhavet'
siddhAntArthamaviruddhamavadAtaM sArvajanInaM tatprachannabhASaNena na gopayet,
yadivA pracchannaM vA'rthamapariNatAya na bhASeta, taddhi
siddhAntarahasyamapariNata ziSyavidhvaMsanena doSAyaiva saMpadyate, tathA coktam
"aprazAntamatau zAstrasadbhAvapratipAdanam  /  doSAyAbhinavodINe, zamanIyamiva
jvare  // 1 // " ityAdi, na ca sUtramanyat evamativikalpanataH svaparatrAyI
kurvItAnyathA vA sUtraM tadarthaM vA saMsArAttrAyItrANazIlo jantUnAM na
vidadhIta, kimityanyathA sUtraM na karttavyamityAha-parahitaikarataH zAstA
tasmin. zAstariyA vyavasthitA bhaktiH-bahumAnastayA tadbhaktyA
anuvicintyamamAnenoktena na kadAcidAgamabAdhA syAdityevaM paryAlocya vAdaM
vadet, tathA yacchrutamAcAryadibhyaH sakAzAttantathaiva
samyaktvArAdhanAmanuvartamAno'nyebhya RNamokSaM pratipadyamAnaH 'pratipAdayet'
prarUpayenna sukhazIlatAM manyamAno yathAkathaMcittiSThediti  // 26 //  TIkArtha
- sAdhu sarvajJa pratipAdita Agama kA vivacena karatA huA apa siddhAnta-viparIta
siddhAnta kA nirUpaNa kara Agama ko dUSita na banAye-doSayukta na kare  /  jo
siddhAnta zAstra se aviruddha-anukUla, avadAttanirmala evaM sArvajanIna hai use
prachanna bhASaNa-aspaSTa pratipAdana dvArA na chipAve athavA jo siddhAMta
pracchanna-gopanIya (592

Page #621 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study of the text, should not be given to an uninitiated, immature man,
because revealing the secrets of the principles to such a man will corrupt and
distort him. Therefore, it is said that it is a fault to reveal the harmony and
excellence of the scriptures to one whose mind is restless - especially not
peaceful. Just as it is a fault to give medicine to stop fever to someone who
has a new fever - who has just developed a fever, etc. The virtuous, who are
self-reliant and protect others, or who protect beings, should not distort the
sutra and its meaning by arbitrary imagination - should not make it contrary.
Why should he not distort the sutra? Explaining this, the sutra-maker says that
the virtuous, who are engaged in the welfare of others, should contemplate the
devotion and respect they have for the teacher, the preacher, and think that my
statement does not create any obstacle in the scriptures. Then he should speak
his words. He should follow the practice of the worship of rightness according
to what he has heard from the Acharya, etc., and make the same representation to
be free from the debt of the guru. He should not think of his own comfort and
convenience, and should not speak in any way that he likes. He should not speak
as his mind desires. From the pure sutra, the challenge and the dharma, whoever
finds it, there and there. The skillful, clear, introductory statement, he
deserves to speak that concentration. ||27|| I say. Shadow - He who finds the
pure sutra, the vow, and the dharma, there and there. , The skillful, clear,
introductory statement, he deserves to speak that concentration. || I say. ||
Translation - The virtuous who pronounce the pure sutra, who perform the
austerities prescribed by the scriptures, who adopt the dharma based on
renunciation in place of renunciation, and the dharma based on exception in
place of exception, are the introductory statement. His words are to be accepted
- thus, the skillful and clear-thinking virtuous, omniscient, who are active in
the meaning of the scriptures, can expound the concentration of the feeling, as
conceived by the omniscient. Commentary - To conclude the study, it is said -
'He' who is the creator of the scriptures as they are, who speaks after
contemplation, who does not corrupt the right view, who presents the objects as
they are, who has the pure sutra, the pure pronunciation, the vow, the
performance of austerities, which is prescribed for the sutra, if it exists in
the scriptures, he is the vow-taker, and 'dharma' - the dharma called the heard
conduct, whoever knows it correctly, or finds it correctly, obtains it, 'there
and there' - the meaning which is to be accepted by command, should be accepted
by command only. The reason is that if the meaning is established in one's own
time, it should be established in one's own time, and if the meaning is
established in another's time, it should be established in another's time, or
the meaning established in renunciation and exception should be presented
accordingly. He who is endowed with these qualities is the 'introductory
statement' - the acceptable statement. Similarly, 'skillful' - skilled in
presenting the scriptures and in performing them correctly, 'clear' - clear, not
a doubter, and whoever is endowed with these qualities is 'worthy' - fit to
'speak' - to expound 'that' - the omniscient's words, knowledge, etc., or the
concentration of feeling, and no one else. Thus, for the purpose of concluding,
I say, as before, the path is followed, the principles are to be explained as
before. ||27|| ॥ The study called the fourteenth text is complete. ॥ Commentary
- The sutra-maker concludes this study by saying - the virtuous who do not
corrupt the right view, who present the meaning of the scriptures as they are,
who speak after contemplation, 593

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 granthanAmakaM adhyayanaM hai, use kisI apariNIta- aparipakva puruSa ko na kahe
kyoMki vaise puruSa ke Age siddhAnta kA rahasya prakaTa karane se vaha dUSita-
vikRta ho jAtA hai  /  isaliye kahA gayA hai ki jisakI buddhi aprazAnta hai -
vizeSa rUpa se zAMta nahIM hai, usako zAstra kA sadbhAva- zreSTha siddhAnta
batalAnA doSa hetu hotA hai| jaise jisako nayA bukhAra hai-abhI bukhAra car3hA
hai use bukhAra ko rokane kI auSadhi denA doSajanaka hai ityAdi  /
svaparatrAyI-apanA tathA anya kA trANa karane vAlA athavA prANiyoM kA rakSaNa
karane vAlA sAdhu manamAnI kalpanA dvArA sUtra evaM usake artha ko anyathA na
kare - viparIta na banAve  /  vaha sUtra ko anyathA kyoM nahIM kare ? isakA
spaSTIkaraNa karate * hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM parahita - logoM ke hita meM
rata, saMlagna zAstA - upadeSTA sAdhu, AcArya meM jo apanI bhakti hai, jo
bahumAna hai usakA anucintana karatA huA soce ki mere isa kathana se Agama meM
koI bAdhA to upasthita nahIM hotI hai  /  tat pazcAt vaha apanA vaktavya kahe  /
AcArya Adi se jo sunA ho tadanusAra vaha samyaktva kI ArAdhanA kA anuvartana
karatA huA guru ke RNa se mukta hone hetu vaisI hI prarUpaNA kare  /  apanI
sukhazIlatAsuvidhA nahIM socatA huA jisa kisI prakAra se na khe| jaisA mana meM
Ave vaisA na bole  /  se suddhasutte avahANavaM ca, dhammaM ca je viMdati tattha
tattha  /  Adejjavakke kusale viyatte, sa arihai bhAsiuM taM samAhiM  // 27 //
tibemi  //  chAyA - sa zuddhasUtra upadhAnavAMzca dharmaJca yo vindati tatra
tatra  /  , AdeyavAkyaH kuzalo vyaktaH so'rhati bhASituM taM samAdhim  //  iti
bravImi  //  anuvAda - jo sAdhu sUtra kA zuddha uccAraNa karatA hai, jo zAstra
vihIta tapazcaraNa karatA hai, jo utsarga ke sthAna para utsarga mUlaka dharma
ko tathA apavAda ke sthAna para apavAdamUlaka dharma ko apanAtA hai vahI Adeya
vAkya hai  /  usI kA vacana grAhya hai - isa prakAra zAstra ke artha meM kuzala
tathA vyakta-vicArapUrvaka kAryazIla sAdhusarvajJa praNIta bhAva samAdhi kA
abhibhASaNa pratipAdana kara sakatA hai  /  TIkA -
adhyayanopasaMhArArthamAha-'sa' samyagdarzanasyAlUSako yathAvasthitAgamasya
praNetA'nuvicintyabhASakaH zuddham-avadAtaM
yathAvasthitavastuprarUpaNo'dhyayanatazca sUtrapravacanaM yasyAsau zuddhasUtra:,
tathopadhAnaM tapazcaraNaM yadyasya sUtrasyAbhihitamAgametadvidyate
masyAsAvupadhAnavAn, tathA 'dharmaM ' zrutacAritrAkhyaM yaH samyak vetti vindate
vA samyag labhate 'tatra tatre' ti ya AjJAgrAhyo'rthaH sa AjJayaiva
pratipattavyo hetukastu samyagghetunA yadivA svasamayasiddho'rthaH svasamaya
vyavasthApanIyaH para (samaya) siddhazca parasmin
athavotsargApavAdayorvyavasthito'rthastAbhyAmeva yathAsvaM pratipAdayitavyaH,
etadguNasaMpannazca 'AdeyavAkyo' grAhyavAkyo bhavati, tathA 'kuzalo' nipuNaH
AgamapratipAdane sadanuSThAne ca 'vyaktaH' parisphuTo nAsamIkSyakArI,
yazcaitadguNasamanvitaH so'rhati - yogyo bhavati 'taM' sarvajJoktaM jJAnAdikaM
vA bhAvasamAdhiM 'bhASituM' pratipAdayituM, nAparaH kazciditi  /  iti
parisamAptyarthe, bravImIti pUrvavat, gato'nugamA, nayAH prAgvadvayAkhyeyAH
||27||  //  samAptaM caturdazaM granthAkhyamadhyayanamiti  //  TIkArtha -
sUtrakAra isa adhyayana kA upasaMhAra karate hue kahate haiM - jo sAdhu
samyakdarzana ko doSayuktavikRta nahIM karatA, Agama ke yathAvasthita artha kA
praNayana karatA hai - prakaTana karatA hai, anucintanapUrvaka bhASaNa 593

Page #622 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra states that the essence of a substance is its pure
form, as it is. One who recites and expounds the Sutra with study and
contemplation, who performs the austerities prescribed by the scriptures, who
diligently observes the pure, character-based Dharma, who accepts the meaning
that is to be understood by command, simply by command, who accepts the meaning
that is to be understood by reason, with reason, who establishes what is proven
in one's own doctrine within one's own doctrine, and who establishes what is
proven in another doctrine within another doctrine. One who establishes the
meaning based on the general principle in the general form and the meaning based
on the exception in the exceptional form. One who possesses these qualities, who
is endowed with these characteristics, is the one whose words are worthy of
acceptance. One who is proficient in the exposition of the scriptures and in
virtuous conduct, who does not act without careful consideration and review, who
is endowed with these qualities, is the only one who can speak and discuss the
knowledge, etc., as exemplified by the omniscient, or the state of meditative
absorption. Here, the word "iti" signifies completion. I speak, as before. The
commentary is complete. The Nay is to be explained as before. The fourteenth
chapter of the study is complete. 594

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram karatA hai, padArtha kA zuddha-jaisA vaha hai, vaisA
svarUpa prarUpita karatA hai, adhyayana pUrvaka-cintana pUrvaka jo sUtra kA
zuddha uccAraNa evaM pravacana karatA hai  /  jo zAstra vihita tapazcaraNa
karatA hai, jo zuddha cAritramUlaka dharma kA bhalI bhAMti pAlana karatA hai, jo
artha AjJAgrAhya hai use AjJA mAtra se pratipanna karatA hai, grahaNa karatA
hai, jo artha hetu grAhya hai, use hetupUrvaka grahaNa karatA hai, svasiddhAnta
meM jo siddha hai use sva siddhAnta meM hI sthApita karatA hai, para siddhAnta
meM jo siddha hai, use para siddhAnta meM hI sthApita karatA hai  /
utsargamUlaka artha ko utsarga rUpa meM aura apavAda mUlaka artha ko apavAda
rUpa meM sthApita karatA hai  /  jo ina guNoM se yukta hai vizeSatAoM se yukta
hai vahI Adeya vAkya yA grAhya vAkya hotA hai-usakI bAta mAnane yogya hotI hai
/  jo zAstra pratipAdana meM tathA sat anuSThAna meM-uttama AcaraNa meM vyakta-
parisphuTa yA nipuNa hotA hai, jo samIkSA kiye binA bhalI bhAMti vicAre binA
kArya nahIM karatA-aise guNoM se samanvita hotA hai vahI sarvajJa prarUpita
jJAnAdi kA athavA bhAva samAdhi kA bhASaNa-vivecana kara sakatA hai, anya koI
vaisA nahIM kara sakatA  /  yahAM iti zabda parisamApti ke artha meM hai  /
bravImi bolatA hUM, pUrvavat hai  /  anugamaM samApta huA  /  naya pUrvavat
Akhyeya hai  /  caudahavAM granthAdhyayana samApta huA  /  594

Page #623 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
All that is, was, and will be, Shadow - - - Study named Aadaan Fifteenth study
named Aadaan Is understood, thinks The translation: Those who have destroyed the
karma of Darshanavaran, who are the protectors of all beings, and who are the
guides of all, know all that has been, is, and will be. They know what is to
come. Therefore, they have destroyed the Darshanavaran. ||1|| - The leader knows
all that has been, is, and will be. He is the protector, the destroyer of the
Darshanavaran. || Commentary: This sutra is related to the previous sutra. The
previous sutra says that the man who is Adeyavakya, skillful, and articulate, is
worthy of speaking about Samadhi, and that only he who knows all that has been,
is, and will be is worthy of speaking, not anyone else. The relationship with
the previous sutra is that the one who knows the three times of past, present,
and future is the knower of all bonds and the destroyer of them. This should be
understood. Similarly, the relationship with other sutras should be established
by one's own intelligence. The explanation of this sutra, whose relationship has
been established, is presented. Whatever kind of substance is in the past,
whatever is present, and whatever is in the future - the future time - he is the
'leader' of all of them, the one who knows their true nature. The knowledge of
the true nature of things is possible only when there is knowledge. Therefore,
the sutra says that he knows all, the past, present, and future, the four
substances, and the substance-related and synonymous naya. He knows,
understands, and understands all this. Knowing this, he is the protector of all
beings, the one who saves them from the cycle of birth and death, by giving
special instructions. The word 'trayi' comes from the root 'tay', which means
'to protect'. He is the one who protects all beings. He knows all the paths, all
the knowledge. He is the one who knows everything, the one who sees everything.
And, no effect can happen without a cause. Therefore, the sutra says that he is
the destroyer of the karma of Darshanavaran. It should be understood that he is
not the destroyer of the four types of karma. ||1|| Commentary: This sutra is
related to the previous sutra. The previous sutra says that the man who is
Adeyavakya, skillful, and articulate, is worthy of speaking about Samadhi, and
that only he who knows all that has been, is, and will be is worthy of speaking,
not anyone else. The relationship with the previous sutra is that the one who
knows the three times of past, present, and future is the knower of all bonds
and the destroyer of them. This should be understood. Similarly, the
relationship with other sutras should be established by one's own intelligence.
The explanation of this sutra, whose relationship has been established, is
presented. Whatever kind of substance is in the past, whatever is present, and
whatever is in the future - the future time - he is the 'leader' of all of them,
the one who knows their true nature. The knowledge of the true nature of things
is possible only when there is knowledge. Therefore, the sutra says that he
knows all, the past, present, and future, the four substances, and the
substance-related and synonymous naya. He knows, understands, and understands
all this. Knowing this, he is the protector of all beings, the one who saves
them from the cycle of birth and death, by giving special instructions. The word
'trayi' comes from the root 'tay', which means 'to protect'. He is the one who
protects all beings. He knows all the paths, all the knowledge. He is the one
who knows everything, the one who sees everything. And, no effect can happen
without a cause. Therefore, the sutra says that he is the destroyer of the karma
of Darshanavaran. It should be understood that he is not the destroyer of the
four types of karma. ||1|| 595

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jamatItaM savvaM chAyA - - - AdAnanAmakaM adhyayanaM AdAnanAmakaM
paJcadazamadhyayanaM paDupannaM, mannati anuvAda atIta-jo padArtha ho cuke haiM,
pratyutpanna - jo vidyamAna haiM tathA jo AgamiSyat - Ane vAle haiM- bhaviSya
meM hone vAle haiM una saba ko ve jAnate haiM jinhoMne darzanAvaraNIya karma kA
kSaya kara diyA hai, jo saba jIvoM ke trAyI - trAtA yA rakSaka haiM tathA nAyaka
sabake mArgadarzaka haiM  /  AgamissaM ca NAyao  /  taM tAI, daMsaNAvaraNaMta
// 1 //  - yadatItaM pratyutpanna mAgamiSyacca nAyakaH  /  sarvaM manyate tat
trAyI darzanAvaraNAntakaH  //  TIkA asya cAnantara sUtreNa saMbandho vaktavyaH,
sa cAyaM tadyathA-AdeyavAkya:, kuzalo vyakto'rhati tathoktaM samAdhi bhASituM,
yazca madatItaM pratyutpannamAgAmi ca sarvamavagacchati sa eva bhASitumarhati
nAnya iti  /  paramparasUtrasaMbandhastu ya evAtItAnAgatavartamAnakAlatrayavedI
sa evAzeSabandhanAnAM parijJAtA troTayitA vetyetadbudhyetetyAdikaH
saMbandha'parasUtrairapi svabuddhayA laganIyA iti  /  tadeva pratipAdita
saMbandhasyAsya sUtrasya vyAkhyA prastUyate yatkimapi dravyajAtamatItaM yacca
pratyutpannaM yaccAnAgatam - eSyatkAlabhAvi tasyAsau sarvasyApi
yathAvasthitasvarUpa nirUpaNato 'nAyaka' praNetA,
yathAvasthitavastusvarUpapraNetRtvaM ca parijJAne sati bhavatyatastadupadizyate
- 'sarvam' atItAnAgata vartamAnakAlatrayabhAvato dravyAdicatuSkasvarUpato
dravyaparyAyanirUpaNa tazca manute - asau jAnAti samyak paricchinatti
tatsarvamavabudhyate, jAnAnazca viziSTopadezadAnena saMsArottAraNataH
sarvaprANinAM trAyyasau - trANakaraNazIlaH, yadivA'ayavayapayamayacayatayaNaya
gatA' vityasya dhAtorghaJpratyaH tayanaM tAyaH sa vidyate yasyAsau tAyI, 'sarve
gatyarthA jJAnArthA' itikRtvA sAmAnyasya paricchedako manute ityanena vizeSasya,
tadanena sarvajJaH sarvadarzI cetyuktaM bhavati, na ca kAraNamantareNa kAryaM
bhavatItyata idamapadizyate-darzanAvaraNIyasya karmaNo'ntakaH, madhyagrahaNe
(na) tu ghAticatuSTayasyAntakRd draSTavya iti  //  1  //  TIkArtha isa sUtra ke
pahale ke sUtra ke sAtha saMbaMdha vyaktavya hai, vaha isa prakAra hai| pahale
ke sUtra meM kahA gayA hai ki jo puruSa AdeyavAkya hai, kuzala nipuNa hai,
vyakta vicArapUrvaka kAryazIla hai, vahIM zAstrokta samAdhI kA pratipAlana kara
sakatA haiM anya nahIM  /  sUtra ke paramparAnuvartI saMbaMdha ke anusAra jo
puruSa atIta, vartamAna evaM anAgata tInoM kAloM ko tadgata padArthoM kA vettA
hai, vahI samasta baMdhanoM kA parijJAtA athavA troTayatAtoDane vAlA hai, aisA
jAnanA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra anya sUtroM ke sAtha bhI svabuddhi dvArA saMbaMdha
jor3a lenA caahiye| jisa sUtra kA saMbandha pratipAdita kiyA jA cukA hai  /
usakI vyAkhyA prastuta kI jAtI hai| jo padArtha atIta meM ho cuke haiM jo
vartamAna meM haiM tathA bhaviSya meM hoMge unake yathAvasthita svarUpa kA
nirUpaNa - vivecana karane ke kAraNa vaha puruSa nAyaka - praNetA hai| parijJAna
hone para hI vastu ke yathAvat svarUpa kA praNetRtva ho sakatA hai  /  ataH
sUtrakAra upadiSTa karate haiM ki vaha puruSa bhUta, bhaviSya tathA vartamAna
tInoM kAloM ke padArthoM ko dravyAdidravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva kI apekSA se
tathA dravyArthika evaM paryAyArthika naya kI dRSTi se jAnatA hai, bhalI bhAMti
pahacAnatA hai, avabodhita karatA hai| yoM jAnatA huA vaha viziSTa upadeza
pradAna kara samasta prANiyoM ko saMsAra 595

Page #624 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** takes one across the ocean of worldly
existence. Therefore, it is the savior of all, the protector of all. According
to grammar, the word "tayanam" is formed by adding the suffix "ghan" to the root
"tay" which means "traan" (salvation). The one who provides salvation is called
"trayi" (savior). According to the principle "Sarvegatyartha jnanartha", all
verbs that denote motion also denote knowledge. Knowledge leads to the
delimitation of the general. The word "manutte" refers to a specific person who
is the knower of all, the omniscient, the all-seeing. Without a cause, an effect
cannot be produced. Therefore, the author of the sutra states that this person
is the destroyer of the "darshanavaraneya karma" (karma that obscures
perception). It should be understood that through the destruction of
"darshanavaraneya karma", he destroys the four types of "ghati karma" (karma
that leads to rebirth).  1. **Antae vitigicchaae, se jaanati aneli-sam. Aneli-
sass akkhaaya, na se hoi tahim tahim.** ||2|| **Chhaya antako vichikit-saayaah,
sa jaanatyaneedrusham. Aneedrusha-syaakhyata, sa na bhavati tatra tatra.** || -
**Translation:** The one who is the destroyer of doubt, the one who is not
doubtful, is the "aneedrusha" (unparalleled) knower. Such a commentator, the
explainer of the truth of things, does not exist in other philosophies.
**Commentary:** The one who is the destroyer of the four types of "ghati karma"
is described as follows: "Vitigicchaa" refers to mental confusion, doubt, and
uncertainty. The one who destroys this is the one who has destroyed the veil of
perception, and thus has no doubt, delusion, or false knowledge. This is stated
because the destruction of the veil of perception is mentioned, and it is stated
that "darshan" (philosophy) is different from knowledge. Therefore, the
assumption that there is only one knowledge of the omniscient, which is capable
of delimiting both the general and the specific, is refuted by the separate
mention of the destruction of the veil. The one who destroys "ghati karma" and
has knowledge that transcends doubt, etc., is "aneedrusha" (unparalleled). There
is no one equal to him in delimiting the general and the specific aspects of the
objects of knowledge. This is stated because his knowledge is not equal to the
knowledge of others. Therefore, what the Mimamsakas say - that if it is assumed
that the omniscient is the delimiter of all objects, then he would also have to
experience the delimitation of touch, taste, smell, color, and sound, and thus
would also have to experience the taste of the desired object - is refuted by
this. Also, it is said that even if the omniscient exists in general, the
absence of other causes would not lead to the proper understanding of the
object. Thus, it is said:  "Arha (ruha) n yadisarvagno, buddho netyatra ka
prabha? | Athobhava-pi sarvagnau, matabhedastayo: katham? ||1||"  And so on. To
refute this, it is said: "Aneedrusha-sya" (unparalleled) - the one who is the
delimiter of this, is not found in "tatra tatra" (there and there) - in
philosophies like Buddhism, etc. This is because they do not accept the
existence of substance and its modifications. For example, Shakyamuni believes
that everything is momentary and accepts only modifications, not substance. If
there is no substance, then the absence of modifications would follow, because
they are seedless. Therefore, even if one does not accept modifications, one
must accept the substance that is the basis of modifications. Since they do not
accept this, they are not omniscient. Similarly, Kapila is not omniscient
because he accepts only one substance, which is unchanging, unproduced, and
stable, and does not accept modifications, which are active and capable of
action because they are dependent on the substance. Similarly, Uluka is not
omniscient because he accepts the difference between substance and modification,
like milk and water, which are not different. Since they are not omniscient,
there is no one among the other "tirthankaras" who is "aneedrusha"
(unparalleled) - the one who is the delimiter of both substance and
modification. Therefore, only the "arhan" (the liberated one) is the knower of
the substance, which exists in all three times - past, present, and future.
Therefore, he is not found "tatra tatra" (there and there). ||2|| 596

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 I zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram sAgara se pAra utAratA hai  /  isaliye vaha saba kA
trAyI- trANakaraNazIla hai, rakSaka haiN| vyAkaraNa ke anusAra " aya vaya paya
maya caya taya Naya gatau " isa sUtra yahAM taya dhAtu meM ghaJ pratyaya huA hai
jisase tayanaM rUpa banatA hai jisakA artha trANa hai jo trANa karatA hai use
'tAyI' trAyI kahA jAtA hai  /  " sarvegatyarthA jJAnArthA" ke anusAra ve sabhI
dhAtueM jo gati ke artha meM hai jJAna ke bhI artha meM hai| jJAna se sAmAnya kA
pariccheda hotA hai  /  manutte pada vaha puruSa vizeSa artha kA jJAtA hai,
sarvajJa hai, sarvadarzI hai, yaha kahA gayA hai| kAraNa ke abhAva meM kArya
niSpanna nahIM hotA, ataH sUtrakAra yahAM batalAte haiM ki vaha puruSa
darzanAvaraNIya karma kA antaka- anta karane vAlA hai  /  darzanAvaraNIya karma
ke mAdhyama se usake grahaNa se cAra prakAra ke ghAtI karmoM kA vaha antaka-
anta yA nAza karane vAlA hai, aisA samajhanA cAhiye  /  1 antae vitigicchAe, se
jANati aNelisaM  /  aNelisassa akkhAyA, Na se hoi tahiM tahiM  // 2 //  chAyA
antako vicikitsAyAH sa jAnAtyanIdRzam  /  anIdRzasyAkhyAtA, sa na bhavati tatra
tatra  //  - anuvAda - jo vicikitsA saMzaya kA antaka vinAzaka hotA hai,
saMzayagrasta nahIM hotA, vaha anIdRzaapratima vettA - jJAnI hotA hai  /  vaisA
vivecaka - vastu tattva kA vyAkhyAtA anya darzanoM meM nahIM hai  /  TIkA yazca
ghAticatuSTayAntakRtsa IdRgbhavatItyAha - vicikitsA - cittaviplutiH
saMzayajJAnaM tasyAsau tadAvaraNakSayAdaMtakRta
saMzayaviparyayamithyAjJAnAnAmaviparItArtha paricchedAdante vartate idamuktaM
bhavati tatra darzanAvaraNakSayapratipAdanAt jJAnAd bhinnaM darzanamityuktaM
bhavati, tatazca yeSAmekameva sarvajJasya jJAnaM vastugatayoH
sAmAnyavizeSayoracintyazaktyupetatvAtparicchadakamityeSo'bhyupagamaH so'nena
pRthagAvaraNakSayapratipAdanena nirasto bhavatIti, yazca ghAtikarmAntakRdati
krAntasaMzayAdijJAnaH saH 'anIdRzam' ananyasadRzaM jAnIte na tattulyo
vastugatasAmAnya vizeSAMzaparicchedaka ubhayarUpeNaiva vijJAnena vidyata iti,
idamuktaM bhavati na tajjJAnamitarajanajJAnatulyam, ato yaduktaM mImAMsakai :-
sarvajJasya sarvapadArthaparicchedakatve'bhyupagamyamAne sarvadA
sparzarUparasagandhavarNazabda paricchedAdanabhimatadravyarasAsvAdanamapi
prApnoti, tadanena vyudastaM draSTavyaM, yadapyucyate-sAmAnyena
sarvajJasadbhAve'pi zeSahetorabhAvAdarhatyeva saMpratyayo nopapadyate, tathA
coktam - "arha (rUha) n yadisarvajJo, buddho netyatra kA prabhA ?  /
athobhAvapi sarvajJau, matabhedastayoH katham ?  // 1 // " ityAdi,
etatparihArArthamAha- 'anIdRzasya' ananyasadRzasya yaH paricchedaka AkhyAtA ca
nAsau 'tatra tatra' darzane bauddhAdike bhavati, teSAM
dravyaparyAyayoranabhyupagamAditi, tathAhi zAkyamuniH sarvaM kSaNikamicchan
paryAyAnevecchati na dravyaM dravyAmantareNa ca nirbIjatvAt paryAyANAmapyabhAvaH
prApnotyata: paryAyAnicchatA'vasyamakAmenApi tadAdhArabhUtaM pariNAmi
dravyameSTavyaM, tadanabhyupagamAcca nAsau sarvajJa iti, tathA
apracyutAnutpannasthiraikasvabhAvasya
dravyasyaivaikasyAbhyupagamAdadhyakSAdhyavasIyamAnAnAmartha kriyAsamarthAnAM
paryAyANAmanabhyupagamAnniSparyAyasya dravyasyApyabhAvAtkapilo'pi na sarvajJa
iti, tathA kSIrodakavadabhinnayordravyaparyAyo bhedenAbhyupagamAdulukasyApi na
sarvajJatvam  /  asarvajJatvAcca tIrthAntarIyANAM madhye na kazcidapyanIdRzasya-
ananyasadRzasyArthasyadravyaparyAyobhayarUpasyAkhyAtA
bhavatItyarhannevAtItAnAgatavartamAnatrikAla vartino'rthasya svAkhyAteti na
tatra tatreti sthitam  // 2 //  596

Page #625 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study called Adana is a commentary on the sutra - the one who is the
destroyer of the four types of karmas is of this nature - this is what the
sutra-maker states. The instability or doubtful knowledge of the mind is called
vichikittsa. The one who destroys doubt due to the weakening of the karmas that
cover it, is present in the end of doubt, viparyaya and mithya-jnana, because he
knows them in their true form. This means that the destruction of
darshanavaraneya karma is being stated here. Therefore, it is clear that darshan
is different from knowledge. Those who believe that the knowledge of the
omniscient is one and is endowed with inconceivable power. Therefore, he is the
determiner of both the general and the specific aspects of matter. It should be
known that by stating the separate destruction of darshanavaraneya, the
aforementioned opinion is refuted. The one who has destroyed the karmas, has
overcome doubt etc., is the unparalleled knower of things. No one else is the
knower of both the general and the specific aspects of things. The meaning is
that the knowledge of that person is not like the knowledge of others.
Therefore, what the Mimamsakas have said, that the omniscient has the knowledge
of all things, should also have the knowledge of the taste of an unaccepted
object, because the knowledge of touch, taste, smell, color and sound remains.
This is refuted by this statement - it should be known. They have said so. Even
if the omniscient is proven in general, there is no reason to prove that only he
is the omniscient. Therefore, this statement does not create understanding. They
have also said - if the Arhat is omniscient, the Buddha is not omniscient, what
is the proof? If both the Arhat and the Buddha are omniscient, then why is there
a difference in their principles? While refuting this accusation, they say - the
Arhat is the narrator or presenter of things in an unparalleled way, the Buddha
is not like that because in Buddhism and other philosophies, both dravya and
paryaya are not accepted. Shakyamuni Buddha considers all things to be
momentary, accordingly they accept only paryaya. They do not accept dravya, but
without dravya there is no seedlessness - dravya is the seed form of paryaya,
without them, paryaya cannot exist. Therefore, those who believe in paryaya must
accept the underlying, changing dravya of paryaya. Buddha does not accept this.
Therefore, they are not omniscient. Kapil accepts only the unchanging,
indestructible, uncreated, unproduced, stable, one-natured dravya. They do not
believe in the directly experienced, meaning-action-capable paryaya, but
paryaya-less dravya cannot exist. Therefore, Kapil is also not omniscient. Just
as milk and water are inseparable as dravya and paryaya. The omniscience of the
owl, who considers them completely different, is also not proven. Thus, due to
being non-omniscient, none of the other philosophers are the narrator or
presenter of the dravya-paryaya-filled matter, like the unparalleled Arhat.
Therefore, it is proven that only the Arhat is the best narrator, the best
explainer of the past, future and present - trikala things, in their true form.
Therefore, therefore, you should speak well, you should speak truly. Being
endowed with truth, you should make friends with many. ||3|| -597

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AdAnanAmaka adhyayana TIkArtha - jo puruSa caturvidha ghAtikarmoM kA antakRta-
vinAzaka hai vaha isa prakAra kA hotA hai-yaha sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM
/  citta kI vipluti-asthiratA yA saMzayAtmaka jJAna ko vicikitsA kahA jAtA hai|
usake Avaraka-use DhaMkane vAle karmoM ko kSINa karane ke kAraNa jo puruSa
saMzaya kA anta-nAza kara detA hai, vaha saMzaya, viparyaya tathA mithyAjJAna ko
aviparIta-yathAvata rUpa meM jAnane ke kAraNa inake anta meM vartamAna hotA hai-
nivAsa karatA hai  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki yahAM darzanAvaraNIya karma ke
kSaya kA pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai  /  isaliye darzana jJAna se bhinna hai yaha
prakaTa hotA hai  /  jinakA yaha mantavya hai ki sarvajJa kA eka hI jJAna
acintya zakti se yukta hotA hai  /  ataH padArtha ke sAmAnya tathA vizeSa donoM
bhAvoM kA vaha paricchedaka-nizcAyaka hai  /  yahAM darzanAvaraNIya ke pRthak
kSINa hone kA pratipAdana karane se ukta mata khaNDita ho jAtA hai-nirasta ho
jAtA hai, yaha jAnanA cAhiye  /  jo puruSa ghAti karmoM kA nAza kara cukA hai,
saMzaya Adi kA ullaMghana kara cukA hai vaha ananya sadRza-apratima-jisake
sadRza dUsarA koI nahIM, padArthoM kA jJAtA hai  /  vastugata sAmAnya aura
vizeSa donoM hI bhAvoM kA parijJAtA aura koI nahIM hai  /  kahane kA abhiprAya
yaha hai ki usa puruSa kA jJAna-anya janoM ke jJAna ke sadRza nahIM hai  /
isaliye mImAMsakoM ne jo yaha kahA hai ki sarvajJa meM saba padArthoM kA
paricchedakatva-saba padArthoM kA jJAna abhyapagata hai-vidyamAna hai to use
sparza rUpa rasa gaMdha varNa zabda kA pariccheda-jJAna bane rahane se
anabhimata-asvIkRta vastu ke rasAsvAda kA jJAna bhI honA cAhiye  /  yaha isa
kathana se nirasta ho jAtA hai-yaha jAnanA cAhiye  /  unhoMne aisA kahA hai  /
sAmAnya rUpa se sarvajJa ke siddha ho jAne para bhI aha~n hI sarvajJa hai, yaha
siddha karane meM koI hetu prApta nahIM hai  /  isaliye isa kathana meM
sampratyaya-pratIti ghaTita nahIM hotI  /  unhoMne aura bhI kahA hai-yadi arhat
sarvajJa hai, buddha sarvajJa nahIM, isameM kyA pramANa hai  /  yadi arhat aura
buddha donoM hI sarvajJa haiM to una donoM ke siddhAntoM meM antara kyoM haiM ?
isa Aropa kA parihAra karate hue kahate haiM-arhat jisa prakAra ananya sadRza
padArthoM kA paricchedaka hai-AkhyAtA yA pratipAdaka hai, vaisA vaha buddha
nahIM hai kyoMki vahAM-bauddha Adi darzanoM meM dravya evaM paryAya donoM kA
abhyupagama svIkAra nahIM hai  /  zAkyamunibuddha saba padArthoM ko kSaNika
mAnate haiM tadanusAra ve kevala paryAya ko hI svIkAra karate haiM  /  dravya ko
svIkAra nahIM karate parantu dravya ke binA nirbIjatva hotA hai-dravya paryAyoM
ke bIjarUpa hai, unake na hone se paryAya bhI nahIM ho sakate  /  ataH jo
paryAyoM ko mAnate haiM unheM paryAyoM ke AdhArabhUta pariNamanazIla dravya ko
avazya svIkAra karanA cAhiye  /  buddha aisA svIkAra nahIM karate  /  isaliye ve
sarvajJa nahIM hai| kapila apracyuta-vinAza rahita anutpannautpatti rahita,
sthira-ekasvabhAva-eka svabhAva meM sthita dravya ko hI svIkAra karate haiM  /
pratyakSa rUpa meM anubhUta hone vAle artha kriyA samartha paryAyoM ko nahIM
mAnate kiMtu niSparyAya-paryAyarahita dravya ho nahIM sakatA  /  ataH kapila bhI
sarvajJa nahIM hai  /  dUdha tathA pAnI kI jyoM dravya evaM paryAya abhinna haiM
/  unheM,sarvathA bhinna mAnane vAle ulUka kA bhI sarvajJatva siddha nahIM
hotaa| yoM asarvajJa hone ke kAraNa anya matavAdiyoM meM koI bhI ananya
sadRzaapratima arhat ke tulya ubhayavida-dravya paryAyayukta padArtha kA
AkhyAtA-vaktA yA pratipAdaka nahIM hai  /  ata: ekamAtra arhat hI atIta anAgata
tathA vartamAna-trikAla padArthoM ke suAkhyAtA-suSTurUpa meM, yathAvasthita rUpa
meM vivecaka hai, aisA siddha hotA hai  /  tahiM tahiM suyakkhAyaM, se ya sacce
suaahie| sayA sacceNa saMpanne, mittiM bhUehi~ kappae  // 3 //  -597

Page #626 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Sutra of the Sutra-Kritanga**  **Shadow:** It has been declared in various
places, and that which is declared is truth. **Translation:** The omniscient
Tirthankaras have declared the principles of the soul and other entities in
different places and contexts. Their correct analysis and explanation is eternal
truth. Therefore, humans should always be filled with this truth and cultivate
compassion towards all beings.  **Commentary:** The present verse aims to
demonstrate the omniscience of the Arhats, as it is possible. The word "tatra
tatra" (there, there) is used in a sense of emphasis. The Arhats have explained
the nature of the soul, non-soul, and other entities, as well as the causes of
bondage, such as false belief, non-restraint, carelessness, and passions. They
have also explained the path to liberation, which consists of right faith, right
knowledge, and right conduct. All of this is consistent and logical, and
therefore it is declared as truth. The teachings of other sects, however, are
not true. They say, "Do not harm living beings," but they also permit actions
that lead to the oppression and harm of living beings. Their teachings are
contradictory. Therefore, their teachings are not true. The truth is that which
is declared by those who know the true nature of things. Passions are the cause
of falsehood, and they are absent in the omniscient. Therefore, due to the
absence of the cause, there is no effect. Their words are the true
representation of reality. As it is said:  "The omniscient are free from
passions, they do not speak falsehood. Therefore, their words are the true
representation of reality."  **Objection:** Even without omniscience, one can
still speak the truth by knowing only what is beneficial and harmful. As it is
said:  "Whether one sees everything or not, one should see what is beneficial.
What is the use of knowing the number of insects?"  **Answer:** The verse says,
"Always" (sada) filled with "truth" (satyena), meaning always speaking the
truth. This is possible only with omniscience, not otherwise. If one does not
know the number of insects, then one may doubt their knowledge of everything. As
it is said:  "If there is a possibility of contradiction in similar things, then
the characteristic itself is faulty."  Therefore, one should believe in the
omniscience of the Tirthankaras. Otherwise, their words would not always be
true. The Tirthankaras are always filled with truth and restraint. They are
compassionate towards all living beings. Therefore, they cultivate compassion
towards all beings. This is what is meant by the verse:  "The omniscient, who
sees the truth, cultivates compassion towards all beings."  As it is said:  "One
who sees all beings as oneself, sees truly."  **Commentary:** Those who hold
other views are not omniscient. Omniscience is present only in the Arhats. The
author of the sutra explains this logically. The word "tatra tatra" (there,
there) is used twice in the verse for emphasis. According to this, the
Tirthankaras have explained the nature of the soul, non-soul, and other
entities. They have also explained the causes of bondage, such as false belief,
non-restraint, carelessness, and passions. They have also explained the path to
liberation, which consists of right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct.
All of this is consistent and logical, and therefore it is declared as truth.
Other sects, however, say, "Do not harm living beings," but they also permit
actions that lead to the oppression and harm of living beings. Their teachings
are contradictory. Therefore, their teachings are not true. The truth is that
which is declared by those who know the true nature of things. Passions are the
cause of falsehood, and they are absent in the omniscient. Therefore, due to the
absence of the cause, there is no effect. Their words are the true
representation of reality. As it is said:  "The omniscient are free from
passions, they do not speak falsehood. Therefore, their words are the true
representation of reality."  **Objection:** Even without omniscience, one can
still speak the truth by knowing only what is beneficial and harmful. As it is
said:  "Whether one sees everything or not, one should see what is beneficial.
What is the use of knowing the number of insects?"  **Answer:** The verse says,
"Always" (sada) filled with "truth" (satyena), meaning always speaking the
truth. This is possible only with omniscience, not otherwise. If one does not
know the number of insects, then one may doubt their knowledge of everything. As
it is said:  "If there is a possibility of contradiction in similar things, then
the characteristic itself is faulty."  Therefore, one should believe in the
omniscience of the Tirthankaras. Otherwise, their words would not always be
true. The Tirthankaras are always filled with truth and restraint. They are
compassionate towards all living beings. Therefore, they cultivate compassion
towards all beings. This is what is meant by the verse:  "The omniscient, who
sees the truth, cultivates compassion towards all beings."  As it is said:  "One
who sees all beings as oneself, sees truly."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram chAyA - tatra tatra svAkhyAtaM, tacca satyaM svAkhyAtam
/  sadA satyena sampanno maitrI bhUteSu kalpayet  //  anuvAda - sarvajJa-
tIrthaMkaroM ne bhinna bhinna sthAnoM-prasaMgoM para jIva Adi tatvoM ko
svAkhyAta kiyA hai-unakA samyak vivecana-vizleSaNa kiyA hai, vahI zAzvata satya
hai, ataH mAnava ko sadaiva usa satya se samAhita hokara maitrI bhAva rakhanA
cAhiye  /  . TIkA - sAmpratametadeva kutIthikAnAma sarvajJatvamarhatazca
sarvajJatvaM yathA bhavati tathA sopapattikaM darzayitumiAhatatra tatreti
vIpsApadaM yadyattenArhatA jIvAjIvAdikaM padArthajAtaM tathA
mithyAtvAviratipramAdakaSAyayogA bandhahetava itikRtvA saMsArakAraNatvena tathA
samyagdarzana jJAna cAritrANi mokSamArga iti mokSAGgatayetyetatsarvaM pUrvottarA
virodhitayA yuktibhirUpapannatayA ca suSTvAkhyAtaM-svAkhyAtaM, tIrthikavacanaM
tu 'na hiMsyAdbhUtAnAM' ti bhaNitvA tadupamardakArambhAbhyanujJAnAtpUrvottara
virodhitayA tatra tatra cintyamAnaM niyuktikatvAnna svAkhyAtaM
bhavati,sacAviruddhArthasyAkhyAtA rAgadveSamohAnAmanRtakAraNAnAma saMbhavAt
sadbhyo hitatvAcca satyaH 'svAkhyAtaH' tatsvarUpavidbhiH pratipAditAH  /
rAgAdayo hyanRtakAraNaM te ca tasya na santi ataH kAraNAbhAvAtkAryAbhAva
itikRtvA tadvaco bhUtArthapratipAdakaM, tathA coktam - "vItarAgA hi sarvajJA,
mithyA na brUvate vacaH  /  yasmAttasmAdvacasteSAM, tathyaM bhUtArtha darzanam
// " nanu ca sarvajJatvamantareNApi heyopAdeyamAtraparijJAnAdapi satyatA
bhavatyeva, tathA coktam - "sarvaM pazyatu vA mA vA, tattvamiSTaM tu pazyatu  /
kITasaMkhyAparijJAnaM, tasya naH kvopayujyate ?  // 1 //  ityAzaGkayAha-'sadA'
sarvakAlaM 'satyena' avitathabhASaNatvena saMpanno'so avitathabhASaNatvaM ca
sarvajJatve sati bhavati, nAnyathA, tathAhi-kITa saMkhyAparijJAnAsaMbhave
sarvatrAparijJAnamAzaGkayeta, tathA coktam - "sadRze bAdhAsaMbhave
tallakSaNameva dUSitaM syAd" iti sarvatrAnAzvAsaH, tasmAtsarvajJatvaM tasya
bhagavata eSTavyam, anyathA tadvacasaH sadA satyatA na syAd, satyo vA saMyamaH
santaH-prANinastebhyo hitatvAd atastena tapaHpradhAnena saMyamena
bhUtArthahitakAriNA 'sadA' sarvakAlaM 'saMpanno' yuktaH, etadguNasaMpannazcAsau
'bhUteSu' jantuSu 'maitrI' tadrakSaNaparatayA bhUtadayAM 'kalpayet' kuryAt,
idamuktaM bhavati paramArthataH sa sarvajJastattvadarzitayA yo bhUteSu maitrI
kalpayet, tathA coktam - ["mAtRvatparadArANi, paradravyANi loSTavat  / ]
AtmavatsarvabhUtAni, yaH pazyati sa pazyati  // 1 // " // 3 //  TIkArtha -
anyamatavAdI sarvajJa nahIM haiM  /  arhat meM hI sarvajJatva vidyamAna hai  /
yaha jisa prakAra saMbhAvita hai, sUtrakAra yuktipUrvaka use prakaTa karate haiM
/  prastuta gAthA meM 'tahiM tahiM-tatra tatra' yaha pada vIpsA meM dvirukta huA
hai, tadanusAra tIrthaMkara deva ne jIva evaM ajIva Adi jo padArtha pratipAdita
kiye haiM tathA unhoMne mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya evaM yoga ko bandha
hetu kahakara saMsAra kA kAraNa batalAyA hai evaM samyakdarzana, samyakjJAna
evaM samyakcAritra ko mokSamArga ke rUpa meM nirUpita kiyA hai  /  vaha saba
mokSa ke aMgabhUta hai  /  pahale aura Age se aviruddha-saMgata evaM yuktiyukta
haiM  /  ataeva ve svAkhyAta haiM-samyak nirUpita haiM  /  anya matavAdiyoM ne
jIva kI hiMsA nahIM karanI cAhiye, aisA kahakara sthAna-sthAna para jIvoM ke
upamardaka-hiMsA kAraka ArambhoM-kAryo kI anujJA dI hai-unheM vihita batAyA hai
/  ataH unake siddhAnta pUrvApara virodhI hai  /  cintana karane para yukti (598

Page #627 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study called "Adana" is absent in the Siddhas. Therefore, their statement is
not well-explained, proper, or faultless. The Tirthankara Devas are the
explainers of the right Dharma, which is free from contradictions, because they
are free from attachment, aversion, and delusion, which are the causes of false
speech. What is beneficial to all is called truth, and that is well-explained.
Those who know its nature have established it. Attachment, etc., are the causes
of false speech, and they do not exist in the Tirthankara Devas. Therefore, in
the absence of the cause, there is an absence of the effect. Therefore, their
words are the indicators of the true nature of the object, the explainer of the
past reality. It is said, "The Vitaragas are omniscient, they do not speak
falsely." Therefore, their words are the indicators and explainers of the true
nature of the truth and the object. Here, a doubt arises: even without
omniscience, truth is established merely by the knowledge of the object that is
to be abandoned and the object that is to be taken. Therefore, it is said,
"Whether a man sees everything or not, but if he sees the desired meaning, that
is sufficient." What is the use of knowing the number of insects for them and
for us? To this, the Sutrakar says, "The Tirthankaras are always endowed with
truthful speech - they speak the truth." Omniscience is the only way to have
truthful speech, otherwise it is not possible. That is, only omniscients can
speak the truth, because if there is ignorance of the number of insects - lack
of knowledge - then there is a fear of ignorance - lack of knowledge - in all
objects everywhere. Therefore, it is said, "Just as knowledge is obstructed in
one place, it can be obstructed in other places as well." In this way,
truthfulness everywhere will be unreliable, it will not be reliable anywhere.
Therefore, only the omniscience of the Tirthankara Devas is acceptable,
otherwise, if it is not accepted, their words cannot always be true. Or, the
meaning of truth is also restraint. The word "Sat" also refers to a being, and
what is beneficial to them is truth. In this way, the Tirthankara Devas, who are
always endowed with restraint, which is beneficial to such beings who are
primarily engaged in penance, establish friendship among beings. Due to their
protection of beings, they inspire compassion for all beings - they give such
teachings. The point is that they are truly omniscient, who, due to their
insight into reality, create the concept of friendship among beings. Therefore,
it is said, "He who considers other women as mothers, the wealth of others as
stones, and all beings as equal to himself, is truly the one who sees reality."
"They do not oppose beings, this is the Dharma of the virtuous. The virtuous one
knows the nature of the world, he has the feeling of life in him." Translation:
"One should not have opposition or enmity towards beings - creatures. This is
the Dharma of the virtuous. He knows the nature of the world and is imbued with
the feeling of pure Dharma." Commentary: "Just as he experiences complete
friendship towards beings, and to show that, he says, 'They do not oppose
beings' - stationary and mobile beings - 'they should not do anything that harms
them', 'they should avoid the cause of opposition to them from afar', that is
the meaning. 'This' - the one mentioned later - 'Dharma' - nature or virtue -
'Busimao' - this is the Tirthankara, who is endowed with good restraint. And the
virtuous Tirthankara, who is endowed with good restraint..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AdAnanAmakaM adhyayanaM rahita siddha hote haiM  /  ataH unakA kathana
svAkhyAta-suSThu yA nirdoSa nahIM hai  /  zrI tIrthaMkara deva aviruddha-pUrva
para saMgata dharma ke vyAkhyAtA hai kyoMki rAga dveSa tathA moha unameM nahIM
hai jo asatya bhASaNa ke kAraNa haiM  /  jo sabake liye hitakara hotA hai, use
satya kahA jAtA hai vahI svAkhyAta hai  /  usake svarUpa vettAoM ne usakA
pratipAdana kiyA hai  /  rAga Adi asatya bhASaNa ke kAraNa hai, tIrthaMkara deva
meM ve vidyamAna nahIM hai  /  ataH kAraNa ke abhAva meM kArya kA abhAva hotA
hai  /  isaliye unakA vacana bhUtArtha pratipAdaka-padArtha ke yathArtha svarUpa
kA parijJApaka hai, kahA gayA hai, vItarAga sarvajJa hote haiM, ve mithyA
bhASaNa nahIM karate  /  ataeva unakA vacana tathya evaM padArtha ke vAstavika
svarUpa kA darzaka-bodhaka hotA hai  /  yahAM eka zaMkA upasthita kI jAtI hai-
sarvajJatva ke binA bhI heya-choDane yogya tathA upAdeya-lene yogya padArtha ke
parijJAna mAtra se satyatA siddha hotI hai  /  ataeva kahA hai ki, koI puruSa
sabako dekhe yA nahIM dekhe kiMtu abhipsita artha ko dekhe, yaha yatheSTa hai  /
kIDoMkI saMkhyA ke parijJAna kI, unake liye aura hamAre liye kyA upayogitA hai
/  isa para sUtrakAra kahate haiM-tIrthaMkara sadAsarvakAla satya bhASaNa se
sampanna hote haiM-satya bolate haiM  /  sarvajJatva hone para hI satya
bhASaNattva ho sakatA hai anyathA nahIM ho sakatA arthAt sarvajJa hI satya
bhASaNa kara sakate haiM kyoMki kIDoM kI saMkhyA kA yadi aparijJAna hai-jJAna
nahIM hai to sarvatra-saba jagaha padArthoM meM aparijJAna-jJAna na honA
AzaMkita hai  /  isaliye kahA hai-jaise eka sthAna meM yadi jJAna bAdhita ho to
vaha usI ke samAna anyatra bhI bAdhita ho sakatA hai| isa prakAra sarvatra
satyavAditA anAzvasta hogI, kahIM bhI vizvasanIya nahIM rahegI  /  ataH
tIrthaMkara deva kI hI sarvajJatA mAnane yogya hai, anyathA aisA na mAnA jAye to
unakA vacana sadA satya nahIM ho sktaa| athavA satya kA artha saMyama bhI hai  /
sat zabda prANIvAcaka bhI hai jo unake liye hitakara hotA hai, vaha satya hai  /
isa prakAra ke tapazcaraNa pradhAna prANiyoM ke liye hitaprada saMyama se
sarvadA sampanna-inaguNoM se yukta tIrthaMkara deva prANiyoM meM maitrI kI
pratiSThApanA karate haiM  /  jIvoM kI rakSaNa parAyaNatA ke kAraNa ve bhUta
dayA-saba prANiyoM para anukampAzIla hone kI preraNA dete haiM, vaisA upadeza
dete haiM  /  kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki vAstava meM ve hI sarvajJa hai, jo
tattvadarzitA ke kAraNa prANiyoM meM maitrI kI kalpanA-saMpratiSThA karate haiM
/  isaliye kahA gayA hai ki jo para striyoM ko mAtA ke sadRza, dUsaroM ke dhana
ko patthara ke samAna tathA samasta prANiyoM ko Atmatulya samajhatA hai, vahI
vAstava meM yathArtha dRSTA bhUehiM na virujjhejA, esa dhamme vusiimo| vusimaM
jagaM parinnAya, assiM jIvitabhAvaNA  // 4 //  chAyA - bhUtairna viruddhayetaiSa
dharmaH sAdhoH  /  .. sAdhurjagatparijJAyA, smin jIvitabhAvanA  //  anuvAda -
bhUtoM-prANiyoM ke sAtha virodha-zatrubhAva nahIM rakhanA cAhiye  /  yaha sAdhu
kA dharma hai| vaha jagata ke svarUpa ko parijJAta kara zuddha dharma kI bhAvanA
se anubhAvita rahe  /  TIkA - yathA bhUteSu maitrI saMpUrNabhAvamanubhavati
tathA darzayitumAha-'bhUtaiH' sthAvarajaGgamai saha 'virodhaM na kuryAt'
tadupaghAtakAriNamArambhaM tadvirodhakAraNaM dUrataH parivarjayedityarthaH sa
'eSaH' anantarokto bhUtAvirodhakArI 'dharmaH' svabhAvaH puNyAkhyo vA 'busImao '
tti tIrthakRto'yaM satsaMyamavato veti  /  tathA satsaMyamavAn sAdhustIrthakRtA
(599)

Page #628 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra:  **The 'Jagat'**, a collection of all living and
non-living beings, is fully understood through the **Kevala Jnana**
(omniscience) of the **Sarvagna** (omniscient). By understanding this 'Jagat'
through the **Gama Parijnana** (knowledge of the scriptures) or by **Parijnaya**
(direct knowledge), one should cultivate the **twenty-five types of Dharma
Bhavanas** (virtuous thoughts) or the **twelve types of Bhavanas** which are
**Jivit Bhavanas** (life-sustaining), **Jiva Samadhan Karini** (soul-
liberating), **Sat Samyama Angataya** (parts of right restraint), and **Moksha
Karini** (liberation-producing). ||4||  **To explain the state of one who has
cultivated these virtuous thoughts, the Sutrakar says:**  **Commentary:**  The
Sutrakar explains that one should cultivate **Maitri Bhava** (loving-kindness)
towards all beings. One should avoid any actions that cause harm or violence
towards living beings. One should avoid any actions that lead to conflict with
other beings. This is the pure and holy nature of the **Tirthankara** (liberated
soul) or the conduct of a **Susanyami Sadhu** (perfectly restrained sage).  A
**Susanyami Sadhu** or a **Tirthankara**, through **Kevala Jnana** or
**Sarvagna**-revealed **Agam Jnana** (scriptural knowledge), fully understands
the **Jagat** (universe) of living and non-living beings. In this world, they
cultivate the **twenty-five** or **twelve types of Bhavanas** which are **Jivit
Bhavanas**, **Jiva Samadhan Karini**, **Sat Samyama Angataya**, and **Moksha
Karini**.  **To show the state of a person who has cultivated these virtuous
thoughts, the Sutrakar says:**  **Bhavanajogasuddhapya, jale nava va ahiya. Nava
va tirasampanna, savvadukkha tiutt'ai. ||5||**  **Chhaya:**
**Bhavanayogasuddhatma, jale naurivahita. Nauriva tira sampanna, sarvadukhat
trutayati. ||5||**  **Translation:**  The soul purified by the **Bhavanayoga**
(yoga of virtuous thoughts) is like a boat in water. Just as a boat reaches the
shore and finds rest, so too does this person become free from all suffering.
**Commentary:**  **Bhavanayoga** is the practice of cultivating virtuous
thoughts with **Samyak Pranidhana** (right resolve). The soul of one who has
purified their inner self through **Bhavanayoga** is like a boat on water,
having renounced the worldly desires. Just as a boat never sinks in water, so
too does this person never sink in the ocean of Samsara (cycle of birth and
death). Just as a boat, guided by a skilled navigator and propelled by favorable
winds, reaches the shore after overcoming all obstacles, so too does a person
with **Ayata Charitra** (right conduct), guided by the **Agam** (scriptural
teachings) and propelled by the wind of **Tapa** (austerity), reaches the shore
of **Moksha** (liberation) after overcoming all suffering. ||5||  **(600)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram 'jagat' carAcarabhUtagrAmAkhyaM kevalAlokena sarvajJa
praNItA gama parijJAnena vA 'parijJAya' samyagavabudhya 'asmin' jagati maunIndre
vA dharma bhAvanAH paJcaviMzatirUpA dvAdazaprakArAvA yA abhimatAstA
jIvitabhAvanA' jIvasamAdhAnakAriNI: satsaMyamAGgatayA mokSakAriNIrbhAvayediti
// 4 //  sadbhAvanAbhAvitasya yadbhavati taddarzayitumAha - TIkArtha - isa
prakAra samagra prANiyoM ke sAtha maitrI bhAva kI anubhUti ho, yaha batAne hetu
sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM-sAdhu bhUta-sthAvara evaM jaMgama saba prakAra
ke jIvoM ke sAtha virodha na kare  /  prANiyoM ke upaghAta-hiMsA mUlaka upakrama
ko jo virodha kA kAraNa hai, dUra se hI parivarjita kare  /  prANiyoM ke sAtha
virodha nahIM karane vAlA anantarokta-jo pahale kahA gayA hai, vahI tIrthaMkara
kA pavitra-pAvana svabhAva hai  /  athavA yaha susaMyamI sAdhu kA AcAra hai  /
isa prakAra uttama saMyamazIla sAdhu athavA tIrthaMkara cara, acara-jaMgama
sthAvara jagata ko kevalajJAna dvArA athavA sarvajJa prarUpita Agama jJAna dvArA
bhalI bhAMti parijJAta kara isa saMsAra meM tIrthaMkara praNIta dharma meM
svIkRta paccIsa prakAra kI yA bAraha prakAra kI bhAvanAoM ko, jo jIva ke liye
samAdhAnaprada, uttama saMyama kI aMgabhUta tathA mokSa kI kAraNabhUta hai,
bhAvita kare  /  sadbhAvanA-uttama bhAvanA dvArA bhAvita puruSa kI jo sthiti
hotI hai, usakA digdarzana karAne hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM -
bhAvaNAjogasuddhapyA, jale NAvA va AhiyA  /  nAvA va tIrasaMpannA, savvadukkhA
tiuTTai  // 5 //  chAyA - bhAvanAyogazuddhAtmA, jale naurivAhitaH  /  nauriva
tIra sampannaH sarvaduHkhAt truTayati  //  anuvAda - bhAvanA yoga dvArA jisakI
AtmA zuddha ho gaI hai, vaha puruSa jala meM sthita naukA se upamita kiyA gayA
hai  /  naukA jaise taTa ko prApta kara vizrAnta hotI hai, usI prakAra vaha
samagra duHkhoM se mukta ho jAtA TIkA - bhAvanAbhiryogaH-samyak
praNidhAnalakSaNo bhAvanAyogastena zuddha AtmA-antarAtmA yasya sa tathA, sa ca
bhAvanAyoga zuddhAtmA san parityakta saMsAra-svabhAvo nauriva
jaloparyavatiSThate saMsArodanvata iti, nauryathAjale'nimajjanatvena prakhyAtA
evamasAvapi saMsArodanvati na nimajjatIti  /  yathA cAsau
niryAmakAdhiSThitA'nukUlavAteritA samasta
dvandvApagamAttIramAskandatyevamAyatacAritravAn jIva potaH
sadAgamakarNadhArAdhiSThitastapomArutavazAtsarvaduH khAtmakAtsaMsArAt
'truTayati' apagacchati mokSAkhyaM tIraM sarva dvandvoparamarUpamavApnotIti  //
5 //  TIkArtha - bhAvanAoM dvArA jo samyak praNidhAna-vizuddha pariNAmoM evaM
bhAvoM kA upapAdana hotA hai, use bhAvanAyoga kahA jAtA hai  /  usake dvArA
jisakI antarAtmA zuddha hai vaha puruSa saMsAra ke svabhAva-bhautika sukhoM kI
abhipsA kA tyAga kara jala ke Upara vidyamAna naukA kI jyoM saMsAra sAgara ke
jala ke Upara rahatA hai, jaise naukA jala meM kabhI nimajjita nahIM hotI yaha
suvidita hai, usI prakAra vaha puruSa saMsAra rUpI sAgara meM nimajjita nahIM
hotA-nahIM DUbatA  /  jaise niryAmaka-paricAlaka dvArA adhiSThita anukUla vAyu
dvArA prerita naukA samasta dvandvoM-vighnoM ke apagata ho jAne para tIra ko pA
letI hai, usI prakAra saccAritra yukta AtmArUpI naukA (600)

Page #629 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study called Adana, guided by the supreme Agamas and propelled by the wind
of austerity, escapes - departs - from the world of suffering. It attains the
arrow of liberation where all dualities and sorrows cease - end - or are absent.
❀❀❀ Tiuttae Tuttanti Shadow - The wise man in the world knows sin. Sins are
destroyed by those who do not create new karma. He, the wise, the sinful deeds,
Translation - The wise man in the world who knows sin, that wise - intelligent
man breaks - destroys - sinful deeds - evil bonds and does not bind new karma. -
Knowing the people, the fire. Do not make new karma. || 6 || Commentary - He,
whose soul is pure by virtue of the yoga of contemplation, like a boat in water,
while moving in the world, escapes from the three evil deeds of mind, speech and
body, or he escapes from all bonds, is liberated, transcends the world. The
'wise' man, abiding in the limits, discerning the true and the false, in this
'world', the world of beings, consisting of fourteen realms, knows any 'sinful
deed', the act of performing a sinful deed, or the eight types of karma, by
knowing and understanding, and by knowing and rejecting, he avoids their
adoption, and thus escapes from them. Thus, knowing the world or karma, he does
not create new karma, and for him, whose doors of inflow are closed, who has
performed excellent austerity, the previously accumulated karma is destroyed, or
ceases, and by not creating new karma, all karma is destroyed. || 6 || : Shadow
Commentary - The man whose soul is pure by virtue of the yoga of contemplation,
like a boat in water, while living in the world, escapes from the three evil
deeds of mind, speech and body, from sins. Or he is always liberated from all
kinds of bonds. He crosses the ocean of the world. The wise - intelligent man,
abiding in the limits, discerning the true and the false, in this 'world', the
world of beings, consisting of fourteen realms, knows any 'sinful deed', the act
of performing a sinful deed, or the eight types of karma, by knowing and
understanding, and by knowing and rejecting, he avoids their adoption, and thus
escapes from them. Thus, he knows the world or karma, he does not create new
karma, he does not bind new karma. He stops them by the inflow, and performs
excellent austerity. His previously accumulated - previously bound - sinful
karma is destroyed, is destroyed. He does not create new karma. Thus, all his
karma is destroyed. Akuvvao Navam Natthi, Karma Naam Vijanai. Vinnay Se
Mahavira, Jen Jai - Akuvvatonavam nasti, karma naam vijanati. Vijnaya sa
Mahavira, yena jati na mriyate || He who does not do karma, does not have new
karma. He knows the eight types of karma Translation - He who does not do karma,
does not have new karma. He knows the eight types of karma. He, the self-heroic
man, knowing them, makes such an effort that he does not have to be born in this
world, nor does he have to die. Na Mijjai || 7 || 601

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AdAnanAmakaM adhyayanaM zreSTha Agama rUpa karNadhAra se anvita evaM
tapazcaraNa rUpa pavana se prerita hokara sarva duHkhAtmaka jagata se chUTa jAtI
hai - haTa jAtI hai  /  mokSa rUpa tIra ko prApta kara letI hai jahAM samasta
dvandvoM-duHkhoM kA uparama-samApana yA abhAva ho jAtA hai  /   tiuTTaI tuTTaMti
chAyA - truTati tu medhAvI jAnan loke pApakam  /  truTyanti pApakarmANi navaM
karmAkurvataH  //  u medhAvI, pAvakammANi, anuvAda jo loka meM pApa karma ko
jAnatA hai, vaha medhAvI - prajJAzIla puruSa pApakarmoM-azubhabandhanoM ko tor3a
detA hai - naSTa kara detA hai aura naye karma nahIM bAMdhatA  /  - jANaM
logaMsi pAvagaM  /  navaM kammamakuvva  //  6  //  TIkA apica-sa hi
bhAvanAyogazuddhAtmA nauriva jale saMsAre
parivartamAnastribhyomanovAkkAyebhyo'zubhebhyastruTyati, yadivA atIva
sarvabandhanebhyastruTyati-mucyate atitruTayati-saMsArAdativartate 'medhAvI'
maryAdAvyasthitaH sadasadvivekI vA'smin 'loke' caturdazarajvAtmake bhUtagrAma
loke vA yatkimapi 'pApakaM karma sAvadyAnuSThAnarUpaM tatkAryaM vA aSTa prakAraM
karma tat jJaparijJayA jAnan pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA ca tadupAdAnaM pariharan
tatastruTayati, tasyaivaM lokaM karma vA jAnato navAni karmANya kurvato
niruddhAzravadvArasya vikRSTatapazcaraNavataH pUrva saMcitAni karmANi truTyanti
nivartante vA navaM ca karmAkurvato'zeSakarmakSayo bhavatIti  // 6 //  : chAyA
TIkArtha * bhAvanA yoga se jisakI AtmA zuddha hai vaha puruSa jala meM naukA kI
jyoM saMsAra meM rahatA huA mana vacana aura kAyA tInoM yogoM dvArA azubha
karmoM se pApoM se chUTa jAtA hai  /  athavA vaha saba prakAra ke baMdhanoM se
sarvadA vimukta ho jAtA hai  /  vaha saMsAra sAgara ko pAra kara jAtA hai|
medhAvI - prajJAzIla maryAdAoM meM TikA huA, sata evaM asat kA viveka rakhane
vAlA puruSa caudaha rajju parimita vividha prANiyoM se yukta loka meM sAvadha -
pApayukta kArya athavA ATha prakAra ke karmoM ko jJaparijJA dvArA jAnakara tathA
pratyAkhAna parijJA dvArA unakA parihAra kara unase chUTa jAtA hai  /  isa
taraha vaha loka athavA karma ko jAnatA hai-naye karma nahIM karatAnahIM
bAMdhatA  /  Azrava dvArA unako rokatA hai tathA uttama tapazcaraNa karatA hai
/  usake pUrva saMcita- pahale baMdhe hue pApa karma TUTa jAte haiM naSTa ho
jAte haiN| vaha naye karma nahIM karatA  /  isa prakAra usake samasta karma
kSINa ho jAte haiM  /  akuvvao NavaM Natthi, kammaM nAma vijANai  /  vinnAya se
mahAvIre, jeNa jAI - akurvato navaM nAsti, karma nAma vijAnAti  /  vijJAya sa
mahAvIro, yena yAti na mriyate  //  jo karma nahIM karatA usake naye karma nahIM
baMdhate  /  vaha ATha prakAra ke karmoM ko jAnatA anuvAda hai  /  vaha Atma
zauryazAlI puruSa unheM jAnakara vaisA udyama karatA hai jisase na usako isa
saMsAra meM janma lenA hotA hai aura na maranA hI hotA hai  /  Na mijjaI  // 7
//  601

Page #630 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra  **Commentary:** Some argue that even after the
complete destruction of karma and attainment of liberation, one may return to
the cycle of birth and death upon witnessing the rejection of their own Tirtha
(religious sect). To address this doubt, the Sutra-kar (author of the Sutra)
states:  The liberated soul, devoid of all actions, has no cause for any new
karma to arise, such as knowledge-obscuring karma, etc. This is because the
absence of a cause leads to the absence of an effect. Without karma, how can
there be a return to the cycle of birth and death? Samsara (the cycle of birth
and death) is the effect of karma. Since the liberated soul is free from all
dualities, there is no possibility of attachment or aversion, and hence no
inclination towards rejecting their own Tirtha. Such a liberated soul
understands the eight types of karma, their causes, and their effects. They also
understand the destruction of karma and the nature of karma-destroying actions.
They understand the difference between karma and its name, as well as the
nature, state, experience, and domain of karma. The term "name" here refers to
the possibility of understanding karma. Knowing the knowledge of karma, its
bondage, and the means of its destruction, the Mahavir (the great hero) is
capable of destroying karma. By doing so, they are not reborn in the cycle of
birth and death, and hence do not die. They are not defined as belonging to a
particular hell or animal realm. This is because the absence of a cause leads to
the absence of samsara.  Therefore, the statement "He possesses unwavering
knowledge, detachment, power, and righteousness, all four being inherently
present in the Lord of the world" is refuted. This is because the liberated
soul, having understood the nature of samsara, eliminates it. There is no
inherent, self-existent being. This is because there is no logical argument to
support such a claim.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA keSAJcitsatyAmapi karmakSayAnantaraM mokSAvAptau (
tathApi ) svatIrtha nikAradarzanataH punarapi saMsArAbhigamanaM bhavatI (to)
damAzaGkayAha-tasyAzeSakriyArahitasya yogapratyayAmAvAtkimapyakurvato'pi 'navaM'
pratyagraM karma jJAnAvaraNIyAdikaM 'nAsti' na bhavati, kAraNAbhAvAtkAryAbhAva
itikRtvA, karmAbhAve ca kutaH saMsArAbhigamanaM ?, karmakAryatvAtsaMsArasya,
tasya coparatAzeSa dvandvasya svaparakalpanA'bhAvAdrAgadveSarahitatayA
svadarzananikArAbhinivezo'pi na bhavatyeva, sa caitadguNopetaH karmASTa
prakAramapi kAraNatastadvipAkatazca jAnAti, namanaM nAma-karma nirjaraNaM tacca
samyak jAnAti, yadivA karma jAnAti tannAma ca asya copalakSaNArthatvAdbhedAMzca
prakRtisthityanubhAvapradezarUpAn samyagavabudhyate, saMbhAvanAyAM vA
nAmazabdaH, saMbhAvyate cAsya bhagavata: karmaparijJAnaM vijJAya ca karmabandhaM
tatsaMvaraNa nirjaraNopAyaM cAsau 'mahAvIra : ' karmadAraNasahiSNustatkaroti
yena kRtenAsmin saMsArodare na punarjAyate tadabhAvAcca nApi mriyate, yadivA -
jAtyA nArako'yaM tiryagyoniko'yamityevaM na mriyate na paricchidyate anena ca
kAraNAbhAvAtsaMsArAbhAvAvirbhAvanena yatkaizciducyate - "jJAnamapratighaM yasya,
vairAgyaM ca jagatpateH  /  aizvaryaM caiva dharmaJca sahasiddhaM catuSTayam  //
2 // " ityetadapi vyudastaM bhavati, saMsArasvarUpaM vijJAya tadabhAvaH kriyate,
na punaH sAMsiddhikaH kazcidanAdisiddho'sti, tatpratipAdikAyA
yukterasaMbhavAditi  // 7 //  TIkArtha kaI matavAdiyoM kA yaha siddhAnta hai ki
karmoM ke kSINa ho jAne ke anantara jinako mokSa prApta ho gayA ve bhI apane
tIrtha-dharma sampradAya kA nikAra - tiraskAra dekhate haiM to punaH saMsAra meM
abhigamana karate haiM  /  isa zaMkA kA samAdhAna karate hue sUtrakAra kahate
haiM ki vaha puruSa jo mokSa pA cukA hai, saba prakAra kI kriyAoM se varjita
hotA hai  /  usake yoga mUlaka pravRti rUpa kAraNa kA abhAva hotA hai  /
isaliye vaha kucha bhI kArya nahIM karatA  /  ataH usake jJAnAvaraNIya Adi naye
karma nahIM baMdhate  /  kAraNa ke abhAva kArya nahIM hotA  /  jaba karmoM kA
abhAva ho jAtA hai to phira saMsAra meM abhigamana kaise ho sakatA hai ? kyoMki
karma hI saMsAra rUpI kArya kA kAraNa hai  /  vAstava meM mokSagata jIva ke
samasta dvandva-prapaMca, sAMsArika jhaMjhaTa uparata-zAMta ho jAte haiM  /
usako apanI tathA anya kI kalpanA hI nahIM hotI  /  vaha rAga dveSa zUnya hotA
hai  /  isaliye apane dharma sampradAya ke tiraskAra kI ora usakA dhyAna hI
nahIM jAtA  /  vaha isa prakAra ke guNoM se maMDita hotA hai  /  ATha prakAra ke
karmoM ke kAraNa ko unake vipAka - phalaniSpatti ko tathA karma nirjaraNa-karmoM
ke nAza ko bhI bhalI bhAMti jAnatA hai athavA vaha karmoM ko aura nAmoM ko bhI
jAnatA hai  /  isase yaha upalakSita hai vaha karmoM ke bheda, prakRti, sthiti,
anubhAva evaM pradeza- inheM bhI samyak jAnatA hai athavA nAma zabda yahAM
saMbhAvanA ke artha meM hai  /  tadnusAra una bhagavAna dvArA nirUpita karma
vijJAna, karma baMdha tathA karmoM ke nirodha aura nAza ke upAya ko jAnakara
vaha mahAvIra - AtmayoddhA karmoM ke vidIrNa karane meM naSTa karane meM sakSama
hotA hai  /  vaisA karane se vaha phira saMsAra meM utpanna nahIM hotA utpanna
na hone se usakI mRtyu bhI nahIM hotI hai  /  athavA vaha jAti dvArA yaha nAraka
hai, yaha triryaJka yonigata hai isa prakAra parichinna nahIM hotA-jAnA nahIM
jaataa| yahAM kAraNa kA abhAva hone se saMsAra kA abhAva batalAyA gayA hai|
isaliye jo kahate haiM ki isa jagata pati -saMsAra ke svAmI parama puruSa
paramAtmA ke apratigha- avinazvara jJAna, vairAgya, aizvarya aura dharma ye
cAroM sAtha hI siddha haiMsvabhAva siddha hai  /  yaha bhI Upara nirUpaNa se
vyudasta - khaNDita ho jAtA hai| kyoMki saMsAra ke svarUpa ko vijJAta kara -
bhalI bhAMti jAnakara usakA abhAva kiyA jAtA hai  /  vaha sAMsiddhika- svayaM
siddha nahIM hotA  /  koI anAdi siddha puruSa nahIM hai  /  kyoMki usakA
pratipAdana karane vAlI yukti prApta nahIM hotI  /  - 602

Page #631 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study called "Adana" does not apply to the great Mahavira, for whom there is
no past karma. Just as the wind transcends the flames of fire, so too does this
powerful soul transcend the allure of women in the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AdAnanAmakaM adhyayana Na mijaI mahAvIre, jassa natthi purekaDaM  /  vAuvva
jAlamacceti, piyA logaM si ithio  // 8 //  chAyA - na mriyate mahAvIro, yasya
nAsti purAkRtaM  /  vAyuriva jvAlAmatyeti, priyA lokeSu striyaH  //  anuvAda -
jisake purAkRta-pahale ke kie hue karma nahIM hai, vaha puruSa na janma letA hai
aura na mRtyu ko prApta hotA hai jaise pavana, Aga kI jvAlA ko atikrAMta kara
jAtA hai-lAMgha jAtA hai, usI prakAra vaha Atma parAkramI puruSa priya-lubhAvinI
striyoM ko atikrAMta kara jAtA hai, unake vaza meM nahIM hotaa| TIkA - kiM punaH
kAraNamasau na jAtyAdinA mIyate ityAzaGkayAha-asau mahAvIraH parityaktAzeSa
karmA na jAtyAdinAM 'mIyate' paricchidyate. na bhriyate vA, jAti jarA maraNa
roga zokairvA saMsAra cakravAle paryaTan na bhriyate-na pUryate, kimiti ?
yatastasyaiva jAtyAdikaM bhavati yasya puraskR (rAkR) taM janmazatopAttaM karma
vidyate, yasya tu bhagavato mahAvIrasya niruddhAzravadvArasya 'nAsti' na vidyate
puraskR (rAkR) taM, puraskR (rAkR) takarmopAdAnAbhAvAcca na tasya
jAtijarAmaraNairbharaNaM saMbhAvyate, tadAzravadvAranirodhAd, AzravANAM ca
pradhAnaH strIprasaGgastamadhikRtyAha-vAyuryathA satata gatirapratiskhalitatayA
'agnijvAlAM' dahanAtmikAmapyatyeti-atikrAmati parAbhavati,na tayA
parAbhUyate,evaM loke 'manuSya loke hAvabhAvapradhAnatvAt 'priyA'
dayitAstatpriyatvAcca duratikramaNIyAstA atyeti-atikrAmati na tAbhirjIyate,
tatsvarUpAvagamAt tajjayavipAkadarzanAcceti, tathA coktam - "smitena bhAvena
madena lajayA, parAGmukhairardhakaTAkSavIkSitaiH  /  vacobhirIAkalahenalIlayA,
samastabhAvaiH khalu baMdhanaM striyaH  // 1 //  tathA-strINAM kRte
bhrAtRyugasya bhedaH, saMbandhibhede striya eva mUlam  /  aprAptakAmA bahavo
narendrA, nArIbhirUtsAditarAjavaMzAH  // 2 // " ityevaM tatsvarUpaM parijJAya
tajjayaM vidhatte, naitAbhirjIvata iti sthitm| atha kiM punaH kAraNa
strIprasaGgAzravadvAreNa zeSAzravadvAropalakSaNaM kriyate na prANAtipAtAdineti ?
atrocyate, keSAJcidarzaninAmaGganopabhoga Azrava dvArameva na bhavati, tathA
cocuH - "na mAMsabhakSaNe doSo, na madye na ca maithune  /  pravRttireSA
bhUtAnAM, nivRttistu mahAphalA  // 1 // " _ ityAdi,
tanmatavyudAsArthamevamupanyastamiti, yadivA madhyama tIrthaMkRtAM caturyAM eva
dharmaH, iha tu paMcayAmo dharma ityasyArthasvAvirbhAvanAyAnenopalakSaNamakAri,
athavA parANi vratAni sApavAdAni idaM tu nirapavAda mityasyArthasya
prakaTanAyaivamakAri athavA sarvANyapi vratAni tulyAni, ekakhaNDane
sarvavirAdhana mitikRtvA yena kena cinnirdezo na dorSAyeti  // 8 //  adhunA strI
prasaGgAzravanirodhaphalamAviyaviyannAha - . TIkArtha - vaha puruSa jAti Adi
dvArA pariNIta sImita nahIM hotA  /  isakA kyA kAraNa hai ? yaha batalAte hue
sUtrakAra kahate haiM-jisane azeSa-samagra karmoM kA parityAga kara diyA hai,
vaha AtmabalI puruSa jAti Adi dvArA parichinna nahIM hotA  /  usakI vaisI
pahacAna vilupta ho jAtI hai  /  vaha maraNa se atIta ho jAtA hai athavA vaha
puruSa saMsAra cakra meM paribhramaNa karatA huA jAti, vRddhAvasthA, mRtyu,
rugNatA aura duHkha ke dvArA 603

Page #632 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra - Freed from the Bondage of Desire  **The one who is
filled with the fruits of his actions is forever freed from them.** For birth,
old age, and death are only for those who have accumulated karma over hundreds
of births. But the soul who has conquered himself, who has blocked the doors of
inflow, and who has no remaining karma, is not subject to birth, old age, or
death. He is forever free because he has stopped the inflow.  **Among the
inflows, the most prominent is the attachment to women.** Therefore, the
Sutrakar emphasizes it, saying: Just as the wind, constantly moving, flowing
without stopping, overcomes the flames of fire, so too does the soul who has
conquered himself overcome women in the human world. He is not bound by them
because he understands their nature and knows the fruit of conquering them.
**It is said that women bind men through their smiles, gestures, glances,
coquetry, pride, shyness, averted gazes, half-glances, speech, jealousy,
quarrels, and playful banter.** They cause division between brothers and
relatives. Many kings, driven by insatiable desire, have waged wars for women,
leading to the destruction of their dynasties.  **By understanding the nature of
women, the soul who has conquered himself overcomes them.** He is not conquered
by them.  **Here, a doubt arises: Why is the inflow of attachment to women
emphasized, and not the other inflows like violence? Why are the other inflows
not indicated through the example of violence?**  **The answer is:** Some
philosophers do not consider sexual indulgence to be an inflow. They argue that
eating meat, drinking alcohol, and sexual indulgence are natural tendencies, but
abstaining from them is highly beneficial. To refute this view, the inflow of
attachment to women is presented. It indicates all other inflows.
**Alternatively, the religion of the Tirthankaras between the first and last
Tirthankara was based on the four vows, but in the time of Mahavira, the
religion is based on the five vows.** This is why the attachment to women is
mentioned here.  **Or, the other vows are flawed, but this vow is flawless.**
This is why the attachment to women, the fourth inflow, is taken as an example.
**Or, all vows are equal.** If one is refuted, all are refuted. Therefore, there
is no fault in taking any one as an example.  **To show the fruit of stopping
the inflow of attachment to women, the Sutrakar says:**  **"Those who do not
indulge in women, they are the ones who are liberated. They are free from
bondage and do not desire life."** (Sutra Kritanga Sutra 9)  **Commentary:**
Those who do not indulge in women, they are the ones who are liberated. They are
free from bondage and do not desire life.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram - bhRta-pUrita nahIM hotA-inase vaha sadA ke liye chUTa
jAtA hai  /  kyoMki janma Adi usI ke hote haiM jisake saiMkar3oM janmoM ke
upAtta-saMcita karma vidyamAna hote haiM kiMtu jisa Atma parAkramI puruSa ne
apane Azrava dvAroM ko avaruddha kara diyA evaM jisake pUrvakRta karma bhI
avaziSTa nahIM hai  /  usakA janma vRddhAvasthA tathA maraNa saMbhAvita nahIM
hai-kabhI hotA nahIM kyoMki usane apane Azrava dvAroM kA nirodha kara diyA hai
/  AzravoM meM strI prasaGga pramukha hai  /  ataH sUtrakAra use adhikRta kara
kahate haiM jaise satat gatizIla-nirantara bahane vAlI, apratiskhalita-kahIM
nahIM rukane vAlI havA dahanAtmaka-agni jvAlA ko atikrAMta kara jAtI hai-lAMgha
jAtI hai  /  usa dvArA-agni jvAlA dvArA vaha parAbhUta nahIM hotI hai  /  usI
prakAra Atma parAkramI puruSa manuSya loka meM striyoM ko jinameM hAva bhAva Adi
kI vizeSatAeM haiM jo bahuta hI priya hai, duratikramaNIya hai, atikrAMta kara
jAtA hai  /  unake AdhIna nahIM hotA kyoMki vaha unake svarUpa ko pahacAnatA hai
aura vaha yaha bhI jAnatA hai ki striyoM ko jItane kA kyA phala hai ? kahA gayA
hai ki striyAM smita-maMda muskAna, hAva-bhAva, kaTAkSa Adi nAja, nakhare, mada,
lajA, ulTA mukha kara, ardha kaTAkSa-Ter3hI nigAha se vIkSaNa-dekhanA, vANI,
IrSyA, kalaha, lIlA vinoda-ina dvArA striyAM paruSoM ko bAMdha letI hai-AkaSTa
kara letI hai| striyoM ke liye do bhAiyoM meM bheda paDa jAtA hai-phaTa paDa
jAtI hai  /  sambandhiyoM meM bhI bheda par3ane meM striyAM hI kAraNa hotI hai
tathA aneka rAjAoM ne kAmanAvaza-atRpta vAsanAvaza striyoM hetu yuddha kara
rAjavaMzoM kA vinAza kiyA hai  /  isa prakAra striyoM kA svarUpa parijJAta kara
Atma parAkramI puruSa unheM jIta letA hai| una dvArA jItA nahIM jAtA yaha vastu
sthiti hai| yahAM yaha zaMkA upasthita kI jAtI hai ki strI. prasaMgAtmaka Azrava
dvAra kA kathana kara usa dvArA hI zeSa Azrava dvAroM ko kyoM upalakSita karAyA
gayA hai  /  prANAtipAta-hiMsAdi Azrava dvAroM ko pratipAdita kara una dvArA
bAkI ke AzravoM ko kyoM nahIM saMketita kiyA gayA ? isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki
katipaya dArzanika aMganopayoga-strI sevana ko Azrava dvAra nahIM mAnate  /
unakA kathana hai ki Amisa bhojana, madirApAna aura abrahmacarya sevana ye to
prANiyoM kI sahaja pravRttiyA~ hai kintu inakI nivRtti-inase haTanA atyanta
phaladAyaka hai  /  aise mantavya ke khaNDana hetu hI strI prasaGga ko Azrava
dvAra upanyasta-pratipAdita kiyA gayA hai  /  usake dvArA zeSa AzravoM ko
upalakSita-saMketita kiyA gayA hai  /  athavA prathama tathA aMtima tIrthaMkara
ke bIca ke tIrthaMkaroM kA dharma caturyAma mUlaka rahA hai kiMtu bhagavAna
mahAvIra ke zAsana meM paMcayAma yA paMca mahAvrata mUlaka dharma kA aMgIkAra
hai  /  isa abhiprAya ko vyakta karane hetu yahAM isakA-strI prasaMga kA ullekha
huA hai  /  athavA dUsare vrata sApavAda haiapavAda yukta hai kiMtu yaha vrata
nirapavAda-apavAda rahita hai  /  isa tathya ko prakaTa karane hetu yahAM strI
prasaMga kA-cauthe Azrava dvAra kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai  /  athavA sabhI vrata
tulya-samAna haiM  /  yadi eka kA khaNDanavirAdhanA ho to sabhI kI virAdhanA ho
jAtI hai  /  ataH cAhe jisa kisI kA nirdeza-grahaNa kiyA jAya koI doSa nahIM
hai| strI sevana rUpa Azrava ke nirodha kA phala prakaTa karane hetu sUtrakAra
kahate haiN| ithio je Na sevaMti, AimokkhA hu te jaNA  /  te jaNA
baMdhaNummukkA, * nAvakaMkhaMti jIviyaM  // 9 //  chAyA - striyo yena sevante,
AdimokSA hi te janAH  /  te janAH bandhanonmuktAH nAvakAGkSanti jIvitam  //  604

Page #633 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Adananamaka Study Translation - Those men who do not engage with women, who are
Brahmachari, are the first to attain liberation (Adimoksha). Those who are free
from bondage do not desire a life of non-restraint (Asanyama).  Commentary -
These great souls (Mahasattva) understand that engaging with women is a cause of
bitter consequences (katuvipaka). Women are obstacles (argala) on the path to
liberation, they are the cause of wandering in the world (sansaravithi). They
are the capitals of unrestraint (avinya), filled with hundreds of deceitful
traps (kapatajala). They possess great power to enchant (mahamohanshakti).
Therefore, those who do not desire to engage with them are superior to others.
They are virtuous (sadhu) and attain liberation first (adimoksha). They are free
from all dualities (dwandva). Here, the word 'hu' is used in the sense of
understanding. Accordingly, such men should be understood as those who attain
liberation first (adimoksha). This means that those who have abandoned all forms
of unrestraint (avinya) and the cause of such unrestraint, which is engaging
with women, are dedicated to achieving the ultimate goal of liberation (moksha).
Here, the word 'adi' signifies the primary (pradhana). Accordingly, these men
are not only dedicated but also free from the bondage of women
(stripaashabandhana) and therefore free from all karmic bondage (karmabandhana).
They do not desire a life of non-restraint (asanyama) or anything else like
possessions (parigraha). Or, they have abandoned the desire for worldly
pleasures and are dedicated to virtuous conduct (sadanushthana). These men, who
are absorbed in liberation (moksha), do not desire to live for a long time
(dirghakala).  Life (jivitam) is a burden (piththo), they attain the end of
karma (kammuna). Those who are confronted with karma (kammuna) are guided by the
path (maggamanusasai).  Shadow - Having made life (jivitam) secondary
(piththata), they attain the end of karma (kammuna). Those who are confronted
with karma (kammuna) are guided by the path (maggamanusasai).  Translation -
Virtuous men (satpurusha) remain detached from life (jivitam) and destroy karma
(karma) like the veil of knowledge (jnaanavaran). Through their pure conduct
(pavitra acharana), they are face-to-face with liberation (moksha) and are
practitioners of liberation (moksha sadhaka). They discipline (anusasana) and
teach (shiksha) the path to liberation (moksha marg).  Commentary - Another
point - They disregard (anadrutya) life (jivitam) which is a life of non-
restraint (asanyama) or disregard life (jivitam) which is the characteristic of
maintaining the breath (pranadharana). They are dedicated to virtuous conduct
(sadanushthana) and attain the end (anta) of karma (karma) like the veil of
knowledge (jnaanavaran) etc. Or, they attain the end (anta) of karma (karma) -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AdAnanAmakaM adhyayana anuvAda - jo puruSa strI sevana nahIM karate, brahmacArI
hote haiM, ve Adi mokSa-sabase pahale mokSagAmI hote haiM  /  jo baMdhana se
unmukta haiM ve asaMyama-saMyama rahita jIvana kI kAMkSA-abhilASA nahIM karate
/  TIkA - ye mahAsattvAH kaTuvipAko'yaM strI prasaMga ityavamavadhAraNa (ta) yA
striyaH sugatimArgArgalAH saMsAravIthIbhUtAH sarvAvinayarAjadhAnyaH kapaTa jAla
zatAkulA mahAmohanazaktayo 'na sevante' na tatprasaMgamabhilaSanti ta evaMbhUtA
janA itarajanAtItAH sAdhava Adau-prathamaM mokSa:-azeSadvandvoparamarUpo yeSAM
te AdimokSAH, huravadhAraNe, AdimokSA eva te'vagantavyAH, idamuktaM bhavati-
sarvAvinayAspadabhUtaH strIprasaMgo yaiH parityaktasta evAdimokSAH - pradhAnaM
bhUtamokSAkhyapuruSArthodyatAH, Adi zabdasya pradhAnavAcitvAt, na ke
valamudyatAste janAH strIpAzabandhanonmuktatayA'zeSakarmabandhanonmuktAH, santo
'nAvakAGkSanti' nAbhilaSanti asaMyamajIvitam aparamapi parigrahAdikaM
nAbhilaSante, yadivA parityaktaviSayecchAH sadanuSThAnaparAyaNA mokSaikatAnA
'jIvitaM' dIrghakAlajIvitaM nAbhikAGkSantIti  // 9 //  TIkArtha - mahAsatva-
atyanta Atma parAkramazIla puruSa yaha nizcita mAnate haiM ki strI prasaMga kaTu
vipAkakaThora yA duHkhada phalayukta hotA hai  /  striyAM uttama gati ke mArga
meM argalA-Agala yA vighna rUpa hai, ve.saMsAra meM bhaTakane hetu vIthIbhUta-
mArgarUpa hai  /  ve avinaya-vinayahInatA yA ucchRkhalatA kI rAjadhAniyAM haiM
/  saiMkar3oM chala-jAloM se Akula hai-vyApta hai  /  ve atyadhika mohanazakti
se samanvita hai| isaliye jo unake prasaMga-saMsarga kI abhilASA nahIM karate ve
anya logoM se utkRSTa hai yA U~ce haiM  /  ve sAdhu haiM, ve sabase pahale mokSa
ko prApta karate haiM  /  jahAM samasta dvandva upadrava uparata-zAMta yA
nivRtta ho jAte haiM  /  yahAM 'hu' zabda avadhAraNA ke artha meM hai  /
tadanusAra vaise puruSoM ko Adi mokSa-sabase pahale mokSagAmI jAnanA cAhiye  /
kahane kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki jinhoMne saba prakAra ke avinayo-vinaya rahita
ucchRkhala AspadabhUta kAraNa rUpa strI prasaMga kA parityAga kara diyA hai ve
mokSa saMjJaka mukhya puruSArtha ko sAdhane meM udyamazIla hai  /  yahAM Adi
zabda pradhAna-mukhya kA bodhaka hai  /  tadanusAra ve puruSa kevala udyata-
udyamazIla hI nahIM kintu strI mUlaka pAza baMdhana se-jAla se unmukta, chUTe
hue hone ke kAraNa samagra karmoM ke baMdhana se vimukta haiM  /  ve asaMyama
jIvita-saMyama rahita jIvana kI AkAMkSAabhilASA nahIM krte| parigrahAdi anya kI
bhI vAMchA nahIM karate  /  athavA ve sAMsArika bhogoM kI lipsA kA parityAga
kara uttama AcaraNa meM saMlagna rahate haiM  /  ekamAtra mokSa meM tanmaya
puruSa lambe samaya taka jIne kI kAmanA nahIM karate  /  jIvitaM piTThao kiccA,
aMtaM pAvaMti kammuNaM  /  kammuNA saMmuhIbhUtA, je maggamaNusAsaI  // 10 //
chAyA - jIvitaM pRSThataH kRtvA'ntaM prApnuvanti karmaNAm  /  _karmaNA
sammukhIbhUtA, ye mArgamanuzAsati  //  anuvAda - satapuruSa jIvana se nirapekSa
rahakara jJAnAvaraNIya Adi karmoM ko nAza karate haiM  /  ve apane pavitra
AcaraNa dvArA mokSa ke sanmukha-mokSa ke sAdhaka haiM  /  mokSa mArga kA
anuzAsana karate haiM-zikSA dete haiN| TIkA - kiMcAnyat-'jIvitam'
asaMyamajIvitaM 'pRSThataH' 'kRtvA' anAdRtya prANadhAraNa lakSaNaM vA
jIvitamanAdRtya sadanuSThAnaparAyaNAH 'karmaNA' jJAnavaraNAdInAm 'antaM'
paryavasAnaM prApnuvanti, athavA 'karmaNA' -605)

Page #634 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra. Those who live by the principles of the Sutra,
free from worldly desires, attain the end of all dualities, known as liberation.
Those who have not attained liberation, but through their specific practices,
are close to liberation, and through the destruction of the four types of
karmas, they attain divine knowledge and are on the path to eternal liberation.
Who are these people? The Sutra says: Those whose Tirthankara name karma is
ripening, who have attained divine knowledge, and who teach the path of
liberation, which is based on right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct,
for the benefit of all beings, and who themselves follow this path. ||10||
Commentary: Those who disregard the life of non-restraint and live a life of
restraint, engaged in virtuous conduct, they end the karmas that obscure
knowledge. Or, they are free from worldly desires, engaged in virtuous conduct.
They end the ocean of samsara and reach the other shore, where all dualities and
suffering cease. They attain liberation. Those who have not attained liberation,
through their specific practices, are close to liberation. They destroy the four
types of karmas, attain divine knowledge, and are on the path to liberation. Who
are these people? The Sutra explains: Those whose Tirthankara name karma is
ripening, who have attained divine knowledge, who teach the path of liberation,
which is based on right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct, for the
benefit of all beings, and who themselves follow this path. They are on the path
to liberation.  The teachings are spread among all beings, like water and earth.
Those who are free from desires, who have conquered their senses, who are firm
in their vows, and who are free from sexual desires, are on the path to
liberation. ||11||  Commentary: The Sutra explains the nature of the teachings:
The teachings are spread among all beings, like water and earth. Those who are
free from desires, who have conquered their senses, who are firm in their vows,
and who are free from sexual desires, are on the path to liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram  /  sadanuSThAnena jIvitanirapekSA:saMsArodanvato'ntaM-
sarvadvandvoparamarUpaM mokSAkhyamApnuvanti,sarvaduHkhavimokSalakSaNaM
mokSamaprAptA api karmaNA-viziSTAnuSThAnena mokSasya
saMsukhIbhUtAghAticatuSTayakSayakriyayA utpannadivyajJAnAH
zAzvatapadasyAbhimukhIbhUtAH,ka evaMbhUtA ityAha-ye
vipacyamAnatIrthakRnnAmakarmANa:samAsAditadivyajJAnA'mArga'mokSamArga
jJAnadarzanacAritrarUpam 'anuzAsati' sattvahitAya prANinAM pratipAdayanti
svatazcAnutiSThantIti  // 10 //  . TIkArtha - jo puruSa asaMyama jIvana-
saMyamarahita kevala prANadhAraNa rUpa jIvana ko anAdRta-upekSita kara uttama
AcaraNa meM saMlagna rahate haiM  /  ve jJAnAvaraNIya karmoM kA paryavasAna-anta
kara DAlate haiM  /  athavA bhautika jIvana se nirapekSa-apekSA rahita, AkAMkSA
rahita hokara sad AcaraNa meM saMlagna rahate haiM  /  ve saMsAra sAgara kA anta
kara dete haiM  /  usake pAra pahuMca jAte haiM jahAM samasta dvandva-duHkha
prapaMca uparata ho jAte haiM-miTa jAte haiN| ve mokSa prApta kara lete haiM  /
jahAM samasta duHkha chUTa jAte haiM, usa mokSa ko jo prApta nahIM kara pAte ve
apane viziSTa AcaraNa dvArA mokSa ke sammukhIna hote haiM  /  ve cAra prakAra ke
ghAtI karmoM ko kSINa kara divya jJAna prApta kara lete haiM  /  ve mokSa ke
abhimukha hote haiM  /  aise mahApuruSa kauna haiM ? isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate
hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM-jinakA tIrthaMkara nAma karma vipacyamAna-vipakva ho
rahA hai  /  jinheM divya-utkRSTa jJAna adhigata ho gayA hai, jo jIvoM ke
kalyANa ke liye samyakjJAna, samyakdarzana tathA samyak cAritra mUlaka
mokSamArga kA anuzAsana karate haiM-zikSA dete haiM  /  svayaM usakA anuSThAna
karate haiM-anusaraNa karate haiM  /  ve mahApuruSa mokSa ke abhimukha-sammukha
hai| aNusAsaNaM puDho pANI, vasumaM pUyaNAsu (sa) te  /  aNAsae jate daMte,
daDhe ArayamehuNe  // 11 //  chAyA - anuzAsanaM pRthak prANiSu, vasumAn
pUjanAsvAdakaH  /  anAzayo yato dAnto dRr3ha AratamaithunaH  //  anuvAda -
anuzAsana-dharma kA upadeza pRthak pRthak prANiyoM meM pRthak pRthak rUpa meM
pariNata hotA hai  /  saMyama paripAlaka devAdi se prApta pUjA satkAra meM rUci
rahita, indriya vijetA sAdhanA meM sudRr3ha dAMta-damanazIla tathA maithuna
rahita puruSa mokSa ke abhimukha yA sanmukha haiN| TIkA-
anuzAsanaprakAramadhikRtyAha-anuzAsyante-sanmArge'vatAryante
sadasadvivekataHprANino yena tadanuzAsanaMdharmadezanayA sanmArgAvatAraNaM
tatpRthak pRthak bhavyA-bhavyAdiSu prANisu kSityudakavat svAzayavazAdanekadhA
bhavati yadyapi ca abhavyeSu tadanuzAsanaM na samyak pariNamati tathApi
sarvopAyajJasyApi na sarvajJasya doSaH, teSAmeva svabhAvapariNatiriyaM yayA
tadvAkyamamRtabhUtamekAntapathyaM samastadvandvopaghAtakAri na yathAvat
pariNamati, tathA coktam "saddharmabIjavapanAnaghakauzalasya, yalloka bAndhava !
tavApi khilAnyabhUvan  /  tannAdbhutaM khagakuleSviha tAmaseSu, sUryAMzavo
madhukarIcaraNAvadAtAH  // 1 // " kiMbhUto'sAvanuzAsaka ityAha-vasu-dravyaM sa
ca mokSaM prati pravRttasya saMyamaH tadvidyate yasyAsau vasumAn, pUjanaM-
devAdikRtamazokAdikamAsvAdayati-upabhuGkta iti pUjanAsvAdakaH, nanu cAdhAkarmaNo
devAdi kRtasya samavasaraNAderUpabhogAtkathamasau satsaMyamavAnityAzaGkayAha-na
vidyate AzayaH pUjAbhiprAyo yasyAsAvanAzayaH, yadivA -606)

Page #635 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Adaanamaanakam adhyayana dravyato vidyamaane'pi samavasaranadike
bhaavato'naasvaadako'sau, tadgatagaarbhaabhavaaat, satyapyupabhoge 'yatah'
prayatah satsanyamavaaneevaasaavekantena sanyamaparaayanatvaat, kuto? yata
indriyanoi'ndriyaabhyaam daantah, etadgunopi kathamityaahadriddhah sanyame,
aaratam-uparatamapagatam maithunnam yasya sa aaratamaithunaah-
apagatechchhaamadanakaamah, ichchhaamadanakaamaabaavaacca sanyame dridho'sau
bhavati, aayataacaaritratvaacca daanto'sau bhavati, i'ndriyanoindriyadamaacca
prayatah prayatnavattvaacca devaadipuujanaanaasvaadakah, tadanaasvaadanaacca
satyapi dravyatah paribhoge satsanyamavaaneevaasaaviti.  Translation:  Although
he is engaged in the study of the Adaanamaanaka (a Jain text) and is present in
the samavasharan (Jain assembly) and other such activities in terms of substance
(dravya), he is devoid of relishing or enjoying them in terms of the state of
being (bhava). This is because he is free from any attachment or desire towards
them. Even though he engages in their enjoyment, he is ever vigilant and firmly
established in true restraint (satsanyama). How is this so? Because he has
conquered his senses and mind. This quality of his is firm in restraint. He has
abandoned and renounced sexual intercourse (mithuna), and is free from the
desire for sensual pleasures. Due to the absence of such desires, he is
steadfast in restraint. He possesses extensive and flawless conduct
(aayataacaaritratva), and is therefore controlled (daanta) in his senses and
mind. Because of this control over the senses and his diligent efforts, he does
not relish the worship and honor offered by the devas (celestial beings) and
others. Due to this lack of relishing, even though he engages in the enjoyment
of substances (dravya), he remains firmly established in true restraint.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AdAnanAmakaM adhyayana dravyato vidyamAne'pi samavasaraNAdike
bhAvato'nAsvAdako'sau, tadgatagAAbhAvAt, satyapyupabhoge 'yataH' prayata:
satsaMyamavAnevAsAvekAntena saMyamaparAyaNatvAt, kuto ? yata
iMdriyanoindriyAbhyAM dAntaH, etadguNo'pi kathamityAhadRr3haH saMyame, Aratam-
uparatamapagataM maithunaM yasya sa Aratamaithuna:-apagatecchAmadanakAmaH,
icchAmadanakAmAbhAvAcca saMyame dRDho'sau bhavati, AyatacAritratvAcca dAnto'sau
bhavati, indriyanoindriyadamAcca prayataH prayatnavattvAcca
devAdipUjanAnAsvAdakaH, tadanAsvAdanAcca satyapi dravyataH paribhoge
satsaMyamavAnevAsAviti  // 11 //  . TIkArtha - sUtrakAra anuzAsana-upadeza yA
zikSA ke prakAra, bheda batAne hetu kahate haiM-jisake dvArA prANI sanmArga meM
lAye jAte haiM  /  sata-acche, asat-bure ke bheda kA jisase bodha karAyA jAtA
hai, use anuzAsana kara jAtA hai  /  vaha dharma dezanA hai  /  usa dvArA prANI
sanmArga meM avatIrNa kiye jAte haiM-lAye jAte haiM  /  kiMtu vaha
sanmArgAvataraNa-uttama mArga meM lAye jAne kA upakrama prANiyoM ke bhavya-
abhavya Adi bhedoM ke anusAra aneka prakAra kA hotA hai  /  jaise eka hI jala
bhinna bhinna pRthvI ke bhAgoM va khaNDoM meM giratA hai to bhinna bhinna rUpa
meM vaha phalAnvita hotA hai  /  yadyapi abhavya-mokSagamana kI yogyatA se
vihIna prANiyoM meM sarvajJa kA anuzAsana samyak pariNata nahIM hotA-ucita
phalanahIM lAtA, to bhI sarva upAya vettA sarvajJa kA isameM doSa yA unakI koI
kamI nahI hai kyoMki una abhavya prANiyoM ke svabhAva kA parigamana hI aisA hai
jisase sarvajJa kA amRtabhUtaekAnta hitaprada samasta dvandvoM ko nAza karane
vAlA vacana bhI usameM yathAvata pariNAma nahIM lAtA, prabhAva nahIM karatA  /
ataeva kahA hai-he loka bAndhava ! sarva kalyANakArin  /  yadyapi saddhaNeM
bIjavapana meM-bIja bone meM ApakA anagha-doSa rahita adbhuta kauzala-naipuNya
hai, to bhI ApakA prayAsa kahIM jo asaphala rahA, isameM koI acaraja nahIM
kyoMki pakSiyoM meM ullU Adi tAmasa koTi ke jIvoM ko sUrya kI kirameM madhukarI-
bhramarI ke pairoM kI taraha kAlI pratIta hotI hai  /  anuzAsaka-dharmopadezaka
puruSa kaise haiM ? yaha sUtrakAra prakaTa karate haiM-dravya ko vasu kahA jAtA
hai, jo puruSa mokSa kI ora gatizIla hai, saMyama hI usake liye dravya-dhana hai
/  jisake pAsa vaha-vasu vidyamAna hotA hai, use vasumAna kahA jAtA hai  /  deva
Adi dvArA azoka vRkSa Adi ke prastutIkaraNa ke rUpa meM jo pUjana satkAra kiyA
jAtA hai, usakA jo AsvAdana-upabhoga yA sevana karatA hai vaha pUjanA
svAdakasatkAropabhogI kahA jAtA hai  /  prazna upasthita hotA hai ki deva Adi
dvArA AdhAkarma ke rUpa meM upasthApita samavasaraNa Adi kA upabhoga-sevana
karane ke kAraNa ve uttama saMyama yukta kaise ho sakate haiM ? isa AzaMkA kA
samAdhAna karate hue kahA jAtA hai-ve usameM anAzaya-abhiprAya yA abhirUci
rahita hai  /  yadyapi dravya rUpa meM samavasaraNa Adi kA upabhoga-sevana
karane ke kAraNa ve uttama saMyama yukta kaise ho sakate haiM  /  isa AzaMkA kA
samAdhAna karate hue kahA jAtA hai, ve usameM anAzaya-abhiprAya yA abhirUci
rahita hai  /  yadyapi dravya rUpa meM samavasaraNa Adi meM vidyamAna hote hue
bhI ve bhAva rUpa meM anAsvAdaka hai-AsvAda-rUci yA Asakti rahita hai| usameM
unakA gArthya-marchA nahIM hai| unakA upabhoga sevana karate hae bhI ve prayata
hai-uttama saMyama meM tatpara hai| ekAMta rUpa se saMyama parAyaNa hai| yaha
kisa prakAra hai ? isakA samAdhAna karate hae satrakAra kahate haiMbhagavAna
indriyoM evaM mana kA damana kara cuke haiM-jIta cuke haiM  /  ye guNa usameM
kaise ghaTita haiM ? isakA samAdhAna karate hue kahate haiM-ve saMyama meM
dRr3ha hai  /  maithuna-abrahmacarya ko apagata-varjita kiye hue haiM, kAma
vAsanA se ve atIta haiM  /  vaisA hone se ve saMyama meM dRr3ha hai  /  ve
Ayata-vizAla paripUrNa yA nirdoSa cAritrayukta haiM, dAMta haiM, indriya aura
mana ke vijetA haiM  /  isa kAraNa ve devAdi dvArA kiye gaye sammAna satkAra ke
upabhoktA nahIM hai kyoMki unameM AsvAdana yA abhirUci kA abhAva hai  /  dravya
kI dRSTi se paribhoga yA sevana hone ke bAvajUda ve satsaMyamavAna haiN| 607

Page #636 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga says: Just as a pig is not attracted to
rice, so too, a sage who has cut off the flow of the karmic currents, and is
free from the defilements of attachment and aversion, does not get entangled in
worldly attractions. He, who is always free from the enjoyment of objects, and
is a conqueror of the self, attains the unparalleled state of liberation.
Commentary: The Sutra asks why a sage abstains from sexual indulgence. It
explains that just as a pig is lured to its death by rice, so too, a man is
lured to suffering by sexual indulgence. Just as the pig is subjected to various
tortures after being lured to its death by rice, so too, a man suffers various
torments after being lured by sexual indulgence. Therefore, a sage, knowing the
truth, does not engage in sexual indulgence.  The Sutra further explains that a
sage who has cut off the flow of the karmic currents, and is free from the
defilements of attachment and aversion, does not get entangled in worldly
attractions. He, who is always free from the enjoyment of objects, and is a
conqueror of the self, attains the unparalleled state of liberation.
Commentary: The Sutra explains that a sage who has cut off the flow of the
karmic currents, and is free from the defilements of attachment and aversion,
does not get entangled in worldly attractions. He, who is always free from the
enjoyment of objects, and is a conqueror of the self, attains the unparalleled
state of liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a sage who has cut off the
flow of the karmic currents, and is free from the defilements of attachment and
aversion, does not get entangled in worldly attractions. He, who is always free
from the enjoyment of objects, and is a conqueror of the self, attains the
unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a sage who
has cut off the flow of the karmic currents, and is free from the defilements of
attachment and aversion, does not get entangled in worldly attractions. He, who
is always free from the enjoyment of objects, and is a conqueror of the self,
attains the unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a
sage who has cut off the flow of the karmic currents, and is free from the
defilements of attachment and aversion, does not get entangled in worldly
attractions. He, who is always free from the enjoyment of objects, and is a
conqueror of the self, attains the unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra
further explains that a sage who has cut off the flow of the karmic currents,
and is free from the defilements of attachment and aversion, does not get
entangled in worldly attractions. He, who is always free from the enjoyment of
objects, and is a conqueror of the self, attains the unparalleled state of
liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a sage who has cut off the flow of
the karmic currents, and is free from the defilements of attachment and
aversion, does not get entangled in worldly attractions. He, who is always free
from the enjoyment of objects, and is a conqueror of the self, attains the
unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a sage who
has cut off the flow of the karmic currents, and is free from the defilements of
attachment and aversion, does not get entangled in worldly attractions. He, who
is always free from the enjoyment of objects, and is a conqueror of the self,
attains the unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a
sage who has cut off the flow of the karmic currents, and is free from the
defilements of attachment and aversion, does not get entangled in worldly
attractions. He, who is always free from the enjoyment of objects, and is a
conqueror of the self, attains the unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra
further explains that a sage who has cut off the flow of the karmic currents,
and is free from the defilements of attachment and aversion, does not get
entangled in worldly attractions. He, who is always free from the enjoyment of
objects, and is a conqueror of the self, attains the unparalleled state of
liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a sage who has cut off the flow of
the karmic currents, and is free from the defilements of attachment and
aversion, does not get entangled in worldly attractions. He, who is always free
from the enjoyment of objects, and is a conqueror of the self, attains the
unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a sage who
has cut off the flow of the karmic currents, and is free from the defilements of
attachment and aversion, does not get entangled in worldly attractions. He, who
is always free from the enjoyment of objects, and is a conqueror of the self,
attains the unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a
sage who has cut off the flow of the karmic currents, and is free from the
defilements of attachment and aversion, does not get entangled in worldly
attractions. He, who is always free from the enjoyment of objects, and is a
conqueror of the self, attains the unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra
further explains that a sage who has cut off the flow of the karmic currents,
and is free from the defilements of attachment and aversion, does not get
entangled in worldly attractions. He, who is always free from the enjoyment of
objects, and is a conqueror of the self, attains the unparalleled state of
liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a sage who has cut off the flow of
the karmic currents, and is free from the defilements of attachment and
aversion, does not get entangled in worldly attractions. He, who is always free
from the enjoyment of objects, and is a conqueror of the self, attains the
unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a sage who
has cut off the flow of the karmic currents, and is free from the defilements of
attachment and aversion, does not get entangled in worldly attractions. He, who
is always free from the enjoyment of objects, and is a conqueror of the self,
attains the unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a
sage who has cut off the flow of the karmic currents, and is free from the
defilements of attachment and aversion, does not get entangled in worldly
attractions. He, who is always free from the enjoyment of objects, and is a
conqueror of the self, attains the unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra
further explains that a sage who has cut off the flow of the karmic currents,
and is free from the defilements of attachment and aversion, does not get
entangled in worldly attractions. He, who is always free from the enjoyment of
objects, and is a conqueror of the self, attains the unparalleled state of
liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a sage who has cut off the flow of
the karmic currents, and is free from the defilements of attachment and
aversion, does not get entangled in worldly attractions. He, who is always free
from the enjoyment of objects, and is a conqueror of the self, attains the
unparalleled state of liberation.  The Sutra further explains that a sage who
has cut off the flow of the karmic currents, and is free from the defilements of
attachment and aversion, does not get entangled in worldly attractions. He, who
is always free

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram NIvAreva Na lIejjA, chinnasoe aNAvile  /  aNAile sayA
daMte, saMdhiM patte aNelisaM  // 12 //  chAyA - nIvAra iva na lIyeta,
chinnasrotA anAvilaH  /  anAvilaH sadAdAntaH sandhiM prApto'nIdRzam  //  anuvAda
- chinna srota-Azrava nirodhI, anAvila-rAga, dveSa ke mada se zUnya sAdhu
nIvAra-cAvala vizeSa ke lobha se AkRSTa sUara Adi prANiyoM kI taraha sAMsArika
AkarSaNoM meM lIna na ho  /  vaha sadA viSaya bhoga se alipta rahatA huA
damanazIla-Atma vijetA puruSa anIdRza-apratima yA anupama bhAva saMdhi ko prApta
karatA TIkA - atha kimityasAvuparatamaithuna ityAzaGkayAha-nIvAra:-sUkarAdInAM
pazUnAM vadhyasthAnapravezanabhUto bhakSyavizestatkalpamaitanmaithunaM, yathA hi
asau pazubhavAreNa pralobhya vadhyasthAnamabhinIya nAnAprakArA vedanAH prApyate
evamasAvapyasumAn nIvArakalpenAnena strIpraGgena vazIkRto bahuprakArA yAtanAH
prApnoti, ato nIvAraprAyametanmaithunamavagamya satasmin jJAtatattvo nalIyeta'na
strIprasaGgaMkuryAt, kiMbhUtaHsannityAha-chinnAni-apanItAnisrotAMsi-
saMsArAvataraNadvArANi yathA viSayamindriyapravartanAni prANAtipAtAdIni vA
AzravadvArANi yena sa chinna srotAH, tathA 'anAvilaH' akaluSo
rAgadveSAsaMpRktatayA malarahito'nAkulo vA-viSayApravRtteH svasthacetA
evaMbhUtazcAnAvilo'nAkulo vA 'sadA' sarvakAlapi mindriyanoindriyAbhyAM dAnto
bhavati, IdRgvidhazca karmavivaralakSaNaM bhAvasaMdhima 'anIdRzama' ananyatulyaM
prApto bhavatIti  // 12 //  kiJca - TIkArtha - vaha abrahmacarya se uparata kyoM
hotA hai-isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue sUtrakAra vyakta karate haiM, nIvAra-eka
dhAnya vizeSa hai jisake dAnoM ko bikherakara sUara Adi prANiyoM ko vadhyasthAna
meM pravRSTa hone hetu AkRSTa kiyA jAtA hai  /  strI prasaMga bhI vaisA hI hai
/  jaise sUara Adi ko cAvala ke dAnoM se lubhAkara vadhyasthAna meM le jAkara
taraha-taraha kI yAtanAeM dI jAtI hai, usI prakAra nIvAra sadRza strI prasaMga
se AkRSTa hokara taraha-taraha kI pIr3AeM pAtA hai  /  ataeva tattvavettA-
satyadRSTA puruSa abrahmacarya ko nIvAra dhAnya kI jyoM jAnakara strI prasaMga
meM lIna-saMlagna na ho  /  kaisA hote hue bhI vaha lIna na ho ? isakA samAdhAna
karate hue kahate haiM-viSayAnurUpa iMdriyoM kI pravRtti athavA prANApiAta-hiMsA
Adi AzravadvAra saMsAra meM avatIrNa hone-utarane yA Ane ke mArga hai-srota haiM
/  jisane inako chinna-naSTa kiyA hai vaha chinna srota kahA jAtA hai  /  jo
rAga evaM dveSa se asaMpRkta hone ke kAraNa mala rahita hai, anAkula hai athavA
viSayoM meM apravRtta hone ke kAraNa svasthacitta hai, aisA anAvila-nirmala
anAkula-AkulatArahita puruSa indriya evaM mana ko sadA apane niyantraNa meM
rakhatA hai  /  vaha karma vivarAtmaka-karma vidAraNamUlaka anupama bhAvasaMdhi
ko prApta hotA hai| aNelisassa kheyanne, Na virujhija keNai  /  maNasA vayasA
ceva, kAyasA, ceva cakkhamaM  // 13 //  chAyA - anIdRzasya khedajJo na
virudhyeta kenA'pi  /  manasA vacasA caiva kAyena caiva cakSuSmAn  //  (608

Page #637 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Study of Adana - Translation  **Verse 13:**  The study of Adana - The man
who is engaged in the path of restraint as exemplified by the Tirthankaras, does
not oppose or harbor animosity towards any living being in thought, word, or
deed. He is truly the one with vision, the one with eyes, the one who sees the
ultimate truth.  **Commentary:**  The term "Anidrisha" refers to something that
is unparalleled, unique. This refers to the restraint or the Dharma as taught by
the Mauniendras (Tirthankaras). The man who is skilled or proficient in this
restraint, does not oppose or harbor animosity towards any living being. He
cultivates friendship towards all beings. This is achieved through the three
yogas of mind, speech, and body, and the three karmas of action, reaction, and
approval. The commentator explains that this man is peaceful in mind, speaks
truthfully and beneficially, and controls all harmful bodily actions. He walks
with awareness, observing the ground carefully. Thus, he is truly the one with
vision, the one with eyes, the one who sees the ultimate truth.  **Verse 14:**
Those who are free from desires, who are the end of all desires, are like eyes
for all people. Just as the end of a razor or a wheel is the part that moves,
similarly, the end of the binding karma is the destruction of the cycle of birth
and death.  **Commentary:**  The word "Hu" in the verse signifies "possession".
The one who has attained the destruction of karma, who has broken the bonds of
karma, is the one who is proficient in the unparalleled restraint or the Dharma
as taught by the Tirthankaras. This man is like an eye for the aspiring souls,
revealing the true nature of things. He is the one who has ended all desires,
all cravings for worldly pleasures. The commentator uses the example of a razor
and a wheel to illustrate this point. Just as the end of a razor or a wheel is
the part that moves, similarly, the end of the binding karma is the destruction
of the cycle of birth and death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AdAnanAmakaM adhyayanaM anuvAda - jo puruSa tIrthaMkara prarUpita saMyama mArga
meM nirata hai, vaha mana vacana tathA zarIra se kisI bhI prANI ke sAtha
virodha, zatrubhAva na kare, vahI vAstava meM cakSuSmAna-netrayukta yA
paramArtha dRSTA haiM  /  TIkA-'anIdRzaH' ananyasadRzaHsaMyamo maunIndradharmo
vA tasya tasmin vA khedajJo'nipuNaH, anIdRzakhedajJazca kenacitsAdhaM na
virodhaM kurvIta, sarveSu prANiSu maitrI bhAvayedityarthaH,
yogatrikakaraNatrikeNeti darzayati-'manasA' anta:karaNena prazAntamanAH, tathA
'vAcA' hitamitabhASI tathA kAyena niruddhaduSpraNihitasarvakAya ceSTo
dRSTipUtapAdacArI san paramArthatazcakSuSmAn bhavatIti  // 13 //  TIkArtha -
jisake sadRza aura koI padArtha nahIM hotA use ananyasadRza kahA jAtA hai, vaha
saMyama hai athavA maunIndra-tIrthaMkara pratipAdita dharma hai  /  usameM jo
puruSa khedajJa-kuzala yA niSNAta hai, vaha kisI bhI prANI ke sAtha virodha,
zatrubhAva na kare  /  saba prANiyoM ke sAtha maitrI bhAva rakhe, vaha mana,
vacana, kAya, rUpa tIna yogoM tathA kRtakArita anumodita tIna karaNoM dvArA kisI
ke sAtha zatrutA na rakhe, zAstrakAra yaha prakaTa karate haiM  /  vaha mana
dvArA prazAnta ho, vANI dvArA hita evaM parimita bhASI ho tathA kAya dvArA
samasta dUSita-doSayukta samagra zArIrika ceSTAoM kA nirodhaka ho  /  dRSTi
dvArA bhalI bhAMti bhUmi kA avalokana kara pAdacArI ho-calane vAlA ho  /  isa
prakAra jo pAramArthika dRSTi liye pravRtta hotA hai, vaha vAstava meM
cakSuSmAna-netravAna yA dRSTA hai  /  se hu cakkhU maNussANaM, je kaMkhAe ya
aMtae  /  aMteNa khuro vahatI, cakkaM aMteNa lor3hatI  // 14 // . chAyA - sahi
cakSurmanuSyANAM, yaH kAGkSAyAzcAntakaH  /  antena kSuro vahati cakramantena
luThati  //  anuvAda - jo kAMkSA-vaiSayika tRSNAkA anantaka-anta karane vAlA
hai, jo bhoga vAsanA se atIta haiM vahI saba logoM ke lie naitra ke samAna
uttama mArga darzaka haiM  /  jaise ustarekA evaM cakra kA-pahiye kA anta hI
antima bhAga hI calatA hai-usItaraha mohanIya karma kA anta hI saMsAra kA kSaya
karatA hai  /  TIkA - apica-hukhadhAraNe, sa eva prAptakarmavivaro'nIdRzasya
khedajJo bhavyamanuSyANAM cakSuHsadasatpadArthAvirbhAvAnAnnetrabhUto vartate,
kiMbhUto'sau ? yaH 'kAGkSAyAH' bhogecchAyA anta ko viSayatRSNAyAH pryntvrtii|
kimantavartIti vivakSitamarthaM sAdhayati ? sAdhayatyevetyamumarthaM dRSTAntena
sAdhayannAha-'antena' paryantena 'kSuro' nApitopakaraNaM tadantena vahati, tathA
cakramapirathAGgamantenaiva mArge pravartate, idamuktaM bhavati-yathA kSurAdinAM
paryanta evArthakriyAkArI evaM viSayakaSAyAtmaka mohanIyAnta
evApasadasaMsArakSayakArIti  // 14 //  TIkArtha - gAthA meM 'hu' zabda
avadhAraNa ke artha meM prayukta huA hai, jisane karma vivara ko prApta kiyA
hai, karmoM ko vidIrNa kiyA hai, vahI anupama-sarvottama saMyama meM athavA
tIrthaMkara pratipAdita dharma meM niSNAta hai vahI puruSa sat asat padArthoM ke
AvirbhAvana prakaTIkaraNa ke kAraNa bhavya janoM ke liye netra ke sadRza hai|
vaha puruSa kisa prakAra kA hai ? isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue sUtrakAra kahate
haiM-jo kAMkSA bhogecchA kA aMtaka hai-viSayavAsanA kA paryaMtavartI hai  /
unake anta meM avasthita hai-unakA anta yA nAza kara cukA hai; vahI cakSu ke
tulya hai  /  kyA vaha vAsanAoM ke anta meM vartanazIla hotA huA vivakSita-
abhipsita artha-lakSya ko siddha (609)

Page #638 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra-Kritanga Sutra says, "Who takes hold of the end?"  The solution is,
"He certainly obtains it."  We will explain this with an example:  Just as a
barber's razor, the tool for cutting hair, moves from its end, from the edge
that exists at its end, so too does the wheel of a chariot move on the path from
its end.  The meaning is that just as the end of the razor, etc., is the part
that performs the action, that accomplishes the task, in the same way, the end
of worldly enjoyment and the karmas of attachment and delusion, which are
attractive, is what destroys this miserable, sorrowful world.  The wise ones
practice the end, therefore they are the destroyers of the end here.  Here in
the human realm, people worship Dharma.  ||15||  Commentary:  The Sutra-kar,
explaining the meaning of the previous verse, says, "The wise ones, the great
souls, who are free from the desire for worldly pleasures, practice the end, the
end of the objects of desire, the passions, and the thirst for them, and the end
of the karmas related to them, the end of gardens, etc., and the end of food,
etc."  By practicing the end, by practicing the end of the objects of desire,
they become "destroyers of the end," destroyers of the world, or destroyers of
the karmas that are the cause of the world.  "Here" means in the human realm, in
the realm of the Aryas.  Not only the Tirthankaras, etc., but also other beings
who have attained a place in this human realm, worship Dharma, which is
characterized by right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct.  These
"people," these humans, who are born in the womb of the karmic field, with a
lifespan of countless years, obtain the materials for righteous conduct, and
become "those who have attained their goal," free from all dualities.  ||15||
The gods have declared that the self is the only thing to be known, Or, this
self is the northern direction.  It is not so among non-humans.  ||16||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram kara letA hai ? isakA samAdhAna karate hue kahate haiM-
vaha nizcaya hI use prApta kara letA hai  /  dRSTAnta dvArA ise siddha karate
hue batalAte haiM-nAI kA bAla kATane kA upakaraNa ustarA anta se-unake anta meM
vidyamAna dhAra se calatA hai vaise hI ratha kA pahiyA bhI apane antima bhAga se
rAste para pravRtta hotA hai, calatA hai  /  abhiprAya yaha hai ki jaise ustare
Adi kA anta kA hissA hI artha kriyAkArI hai-kArya ko sAdhatA hai, usI prakAra
viSaya-sAMsArika bhoga tathA kaSAyAtmaka mohanIya karma kA anta hI isa apasad-
du:khamaya saMsAra kA kSaya karatA aMtANi dhIrA sevaMti, teNa aMtakarA iha  /
iha mANussae ThANe, dhammamArAhiuM NarA  // 15 //  chAyA - antAn dhIrAH sevante
tenAntakarA iha  /  iha mAnuSyake sthAne, dharmamArAdhayituM narAH  //  anuvAda
- dhIra-dharmodyata puruSa antaprAnta-bace khuce yA ati sAmAnya AhAra kA sevana
kara saMsAra kA-AvAgamana kA anta karate haiM  /  isa manuSya loka meM dharma kI
ArAdhanA karate hue jIva apanA lakSya sAdha lete haiM-saMsAra sAgara ko pAra
kara jAte haiM  /  TIkA - amumevArthamAvirbhAvayannAha-'antAn' paryantAn
viSayakaSAyatRSNAyAstatparikarmaNArthamudyAnAdInAmAhArasya vA'ntaprAntAdIni
dhIrAH' mahAsattvA viSayasukhaniHspRhAH 'sevante' abhyasyanti
tenacAntaprAntAbhyasanena "antakarA" saMsArasya tatkAraNasya vA karmaNaH
kSayakAriNo bhavanti, 'ihe' ti manuSyaloke, AryakSetre vA, na kevalaM ta eva
tIrthaMkarAdayaH anya'pIha mAnuSyaloke sthAna prAptAH
samyagdarzanajJAnacAritrAtmakaM dharmamArAdhya 'narAH' manuSyAH
karmabhUmigarbhabyutkrAntijasaMkhyeyavarSAyuSaH santaH
sadanuSThAnasAmagrImavApya 'niSThitArthA' uparatasarvadvandvA bhavati  // 15 //
TIkArtha - pUrvavartI gAthA meM vyakta artha kA AvirbhAva-spaSTIkaraNa karate
hue sUtrakAra kahate haiM-jo puruSa sAMsArika bhogamaya sukha, krodhAdi kaSAya
tRSNA ke paryantavartI haiM-unakA anta kara cuke haiM athavA unakeviSayakaSAyAdi
ke zodhana-pariSkaraNa hetu udyAna Adi ke tathA AhAra ke anta prAnta kA sevana
karate haiM, usa prAnta ke abhyAsa-titikSAmaya caryA ke kAraNa saMsAra kA athavA
karma kA jo usakA kAraNa hai, nAza karate haiM  /  isa manuSya loka meM kevala
tIrthaMkara Adi hI nahIM apitu anya jIva bhI samyak darzana, samyagjJAna, evaM
samyak cAritra mUlaka dharma kI ArAdhanA kara karmabhUmi meM saMkhyeya varSoM kI
Ayu yukta garbhotpanna jIvoM ke rUpa meM utpanna hote haiM  /  uttama
dharmAnukUla AcaraNa kI sAmagrI prApta kara tadanukUla saMyama ArAdhanA pUrvaka
saba dvandvoM-jAgatika prapaMcoM yA bandhanoM se vimukta ho jAte haiM  /
NiTThiyaTThA va devA suyaM ca meyamegesiM, vA, uttarIe iyaM suyaM  /  .
amaNussesu No tahA  // 16 //  610

Page #639 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This study, known as _Adananamaka_, states that only humans, not gods, can
attain liberation by eliminating karma. This is what I have heard from the
Tirthankaras. I have heard this from some, but not from others.
**Translation:** The _Uttariya-lokoत्तर_ teachings, or _Agamas_, state that only
humans can attain liberation by eliminating karma and becoming a _Siddha_ or a
god. I have heard this from the Tirthankaras. Non-human beings cannot attain
liberation.  **Commentary:** This means that those who have fulfilled their
purpose ( _niṣṭhitārthāḥ_ ) become liberated. Some, due to an abundance of
karma, even with the attainment of right faith ( _samyaktva_ ) and other
qualities, do not attain liberation in the same life but become gods in the
_Saudharmā_ or other higher celestial realms. This is what is stated in the
_lokoत्तर_ teachings, or _Agamas_.    The _Sudharma Swami_ or _Jambū Swami_
said, "I have heard this from the supreme Tirthankaras in the _lokoत्तर_ realm.
A person who has attained right faith and other qualities can become a _Siddha_
or a celestial being." This is only possible in the human realm, not elsewhere.
To emphasize this, the text says, "I have heard this from the Tirthankaras."
The _Gaṇadhara_ said to some of his disciples, "I have heard from the
Tirthankaras that only humans can attain liberation by eliminating all karma."
There are no other beings besides humans who can attain liberation. This refutes
the Buddhist claim that only gods can attain liberation by eliminating all
karma.    Because non-human beings in the three realms ( _gati_ ) cannot attain
right conduct ( _samyaktva_ ), they cannot attain liberation like humans.
This is also stated in the text using the author's own name.  **Commentary:**
Humans, as described above, become liberated by fulfilling their purpose (
_niṣṭhitārthāḥ_ ) and attaining liberation. However, many do not attain
liberation in the same life due to an abundance of karma, even with the
attainment of right faith ( _samyaktva_ ) and other qualities. Instead, they
become gods in the _Saudharmā_ or other higher celestial realms. This is stated
in the _lokoत्तर_ teachings, or _Agamas_.    The _Sudharma Swami_ or _Jambū
Swami_ said, "I have heard this from the supreme Tirthankaras in the _lokoत्तर_
realm. A person who has attained right faith and other qualities can become a
_Siddha_ or a celestial being." This is only possible in the human realm, not
elsewhere. To emphasize this, the text says, "I have heard this from the
Tirthankaras."    The _Gaṇadhara_ said to some of his disciples, "I have heard
from the Tirthankaras that only humans can attain liberation by eliminating all
karma." There are no other beings besides humans who can attain liberation. This
refutes the Buddhist claim that only gods can attain liberation by eliminating
all karma.    Because non-human beings in the three realms ( _gati_ ) cannot
attain right conduct ( _samyaktva_ ), they cannot attain liberation like humans.
This is also stated in the text using the author's own name.  **End of the
suffering:**  The great ones ( _dakkhaṇam_ ) have stated that only humans can
end suffering.    **The rarity of the human birth:**  Some have also stated that
the human birth ( _samucchaya_ ) is very rare.   **Translation:** The
_Gaṇadhara_ and other great ones have stated that only humans can end all
suffering, not other beings. Some have also stated that the human birth is very
rare.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 _AdAnanAmakaM adhyayanaM chAyA - niSThitArthAzca devA vA, uttarIye idaM zrutam
/  zrutaJca me ida mekeSA, mamanuSyeSu no tathA  //  anuvAda - uttarIya-
lokottara pravacana yA Agama meM yaha pratipAdita hai ki manuSya hI karmoM ko
kSINa kara siddhattva prApta karate haiM yA deva hote haiM  /  maiMne
tIrthaMkara deva se yaha zravaNa kiyA hai  /  manuSyetara gativartI prANI siddhi
prApta nahIM karate  /  TIkA - idamevAha-'niSThitArthAH' kRtakRtyA bhavanti,
kecana pracurakarmatayA satyAmapi samyaktvAdikAyAM sAmaNyAM na tadbhava eva
mokSamAskandanti apitu saudharmAdyAH paJco (JcAnu) ttaravimAnAvasAnA devA
bhavantIti, etallokottarIye pravacane zrutam-AgamaH evaMbhUtaH sudharmasvAmI vA
jambUsvAminamuddizyaivamAhayathA mayaitallokottarIye bhagavatyarhatyupalabdhaM,
tadyathA-avAptasamyaktvAdisAmagrIkaM: sidhyati vaimAniko vA bhavatIti  /
manuSyagatamevaitannAnyoti darzayitumAha-'suyaM meM ityAdi pazcAI, tacca mayA
tIrthakarAntike zrutam' avagataM, gaNadhara:svaziSyANAmekeSAmidamAhayathA
manuSya evAzeSakarmakSayAtsiddhigatibhAgbhavati nAmanuSya iti, etena
yacchAkyairabhihitaM, tadyathA-deva evAzeSakarmaprahANaM kRtvA mokSabhAgbhavati,
tadapAstaM bhavati, na hyamanuSyeSu gatitrayavartiSu
saccAritrapariNAmAbhAvAdyathA manuSyANAM tathA mokSAvAptiriti  // 16 //  idameva
svanAmagrAhamAha - TIkArtha - manuSya uparyukta rUpa meM niSThitArtha-mokSa
prApta kara kRtakRtya hote haiM, kiMtu kaI aise hote haiM jo karmoM kI pracuratA
ke kAraNa samyaktva Adi sAmagrI ke prApta hone ke bAvajUda usI bhava meM mokSa
prApta nahIM karate kiMtu saudharmAdi anuttara vimAnavAsI deva hote haiM  /
yaha lokottara pravacana meM pratipAdita hai-Agama vacana hai  /  sudharmAsvAmI
jambUsvAmI ko uddiSTa kara kahate haiM ki maiMne lokottara-loka meM sarvottama
tIrthaMkara deva se yaha prApta kiyA hai, sunA hai ki samyaktva Adi sAmagrI ko
prApta kara manuSya siddhattva prApta karatA hai yA vaimAnika deva hotA hai  /
yaha manuSyagata hI hai-manuSya yoni meM hI hotA hai, anyatra nahIM hotA hai  /
isakA digdarzana karAne hetu sUtrakAra kahate haiM-gaNadhara Adi apane kinhIM
ziSyoM ko sambodhita kara batalAte haiM ki maiMne tIrthaMkara deva se yaha
zravaNa kiyA hai ki manuSya hI samasta karmoM ko kSINakara siddhi gati kA bhAgI
hotA hai  /  amanuSyamanuSyoM ke sivAya anya nahIM hote  /  isase bauddhoM kA
yaha kathana ki samagra karmoM kA prahANa-nAza kara deva hI mokSa bhAgI hotA
hai, apAsta-khaNDita ho jAtA hai kyoMki manuSyoM ke atirikta jo tIna gatiyAM
haiM, unameM samyakcAritra kI pariNati-upalabdhi na hone ke kAraNa manuSya kI
taraha mokSa kI prApti saMbhava nahIM hai| isI ko apane nAma grahaNa ke sAtha
abhihita karate haiM  /  aMtaM karaMti dakkhANaM, ihamegesi AhiyaM  /  AghAyaM
puNa egesiM, dullabhe'yaM samussae  // 17 //  chAyA - antaM kurvanti duHkhAnA
milkeSAmAkhyAtam  /  AkhyAtaM punarekeSAM durlabho'yaM samucchrayaH  //  anuvAda
- gaNadhara Adi mahApuruSoM dvArA yaha AkhyAta huA haiM ki manuSya hI samasta
duHkhoM kA nAza karane meM samartha haiM, anya prANI nahIM  /  punazca kinhIM kA
yaha pratipAdana haiM ki samucchya-mAnavadeha yA mAnavabhava prApta karanA bar3A
durlabha haiN| (611)

Page #640 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Sutra Kritanga Sutra with Commentary -    **Commentary:** Those who are
not human beings are not capable of ending all their suffering, because they do
not have the necessary resources. Some other schools of thought have stated that
deities ascend to higher and higher realms, thereby eliminating all their
afflictions. However, this is not the case in the teachings of the Tirthankaras.
Gana-dhara and other great beings have told their disciples that this human body
is obtained with great difficulty, like the rare meeting of two pieces of wood
drifting apart in a vast ocean, due to the karmic dissolution. For those who
have not practiced Dharma, this body is as difficult to obtain as a jewel lost
in the ocean. It is said:  "Indeed, this human body is extremely rare, like a
lightning flash in the vast ocean of existence. It is like a fleeting glimpse of
a firefly." (1)  **Commentary:**  A being who has lost this human body and is
wandering in other realms of existence, finds it difficult to attain
enlightenment. It is difficult to obtain the Archa-leshya, the state of right
faith, for those who engage in Dharma.   **Commentary:**  Furthermore, for a
being who has lost this human body or the true Dharma, and who has not
accumulated merit, it is extremely difficult to attain enlightenment, or the
attainment of right faith, in this world. This is because it takes a long time
for the subtle particles of matter to change. Similarly, it is difficult to
obtain the Archa-leshya, the state of right faith, which is the inner
transformation of the mind, for those who have not practiced Dharma. Or, even
the Archa-human body, which is characterized by the seeds of good karma, the
birth in a noble family, the possession of all senses, and so on, is difficult
to obtain. Those who explain the Dharma, and who are capable of understanding
the Dharma, find it difficult to attain the Archa-leshya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - na hyamanuSyA azeSaduHkhAnAmantaM kurvanti,
tathAvidhasAmagyabhAvAt, yathaikeSAM vAdinAmAkhyAtaM, tadyathA-devA
evottarottaraM sthAnamAskandanto'zeSaklezaprahANaM kurvanti, na tatheha-Arhate
pravacane iti  /  idamanyat punare keSAM gaNadharAdInAM svaziSyANAM vA
gaNadharAdibhirAkhyAtaM, tadyathA-yugasamilAdinyAyAvAptakathaJcitkarmavivarAt
yo'yaM zarIrasamucchrayaH
sau'kRtadharmopAyairasumadbhirmahAsamudraprabhraSTaratnavatpunardurlabho
bhavati, tathA coktam - "nanu punaridamati
durlabhamagAdhasaMsArajaladhivibhraSTam  /  mAnuSyaM
khadyotakataDillatAvilasitapratimam  // 1 // " ityAdi  // 17 //  TIkArtha - jo
manuSya nahIM hai ve apane azeSa-samasta duHkhoM kA anta karane meM samartha
nahIM hote kyoMki unheM usa prakAra kI sAmagrI prApta nahIM hai  /  isa
saMdarbha meM kinhIM-anya matavAdiyoM kA yaha abhimata hai ki devatA hI
uttarottara uttama sthAnoM ko upalabdha karate hue samasta klezoM-duHkhoM kA
prahANa-kSaya yA vinAza karate haiM kintu tIrthaMkara prarupita siddhAnta meM
aisA nahIM hai  /  gaNadhara Adi mahApuruSoM ne apane ziSyoM se kahA hai kiyaha
manuSya zarIra yugasamila nyAya-jala meM patita bhinna bhinna dizAvartI do
kASTha khaNDoM kA jaise kabhI cirakAlAnantara anAyAsa milana ho jAtA hai-donoM
mila jAte haiM usI taraha karma vidAraNa ke pariNAmasvarUpa bar3I kaThinAI se
prApta hotA hai  /  jinhoMne dharmopAya-dharmArAdhanA nahIM kI, una prANiyoM ke
liye mahAsAgara meM gire hue ra taraha yaha zarIra darlabha hai| kahA hai-yaha
manaSya zarIra jagana ke prakAza tathA vidyata kI camaka ke samAna atyanta
caMcala-asthira hai  /  apAra saMsAra samudra meM vibhraSTa ho gayA ho, kho gayA
ho vibhinna yoniyoM meM bhaTaka rahA 'ho to ise punaH prApta karanA atyanta
kaThina hai| io viddhaMsammaNassa, puNo saMbohi dullabhA  /  dullahAo tahaccAo,
je dhammaTuM viyAgare  // 18 //  chAyA - ito vidhvaMsamAnasya, punaH sambodhi
durlabhA  /  durlabhA tathArcA, ye dharmArtha vyAgRNAnti  //  anuvAda - isa
manuSya zarIra se jo jIva vibhraSTa ho gayA ho-itara yoniyoM meM, saMsAra meM
bhaTakane lage ho to usako phira bodhi prApta honA kaThina hai  /  samyakdarzana
ke anurUpa arcA-bhAvanA kI prApti kaThina hai, jo jIva dharma kA AkhyAna karate
haiM-pratipAdana karate haiM tathA dharma prApti ke yogya hai  /  vaisI
anta:pariNati yA lezyA prApta karanA bahuta kaThina hai| TIkA - apica-'itaH'
amuSmAt manuSyabhavAtsaddharmata vA vidhvaMsamAnasyA kRtapuNyasya punarasmin
saMsAre paryaTato 'bodhiH' samyagdarzanAvAptiH sudurlabhA utkRSTataH
apArdhapudgalaparAvartakAlena yato bhavati, tathA 'durlabhA' durApA tathAbhUtA-
samyagdarzanaprAptiyogyA 'arcA' lezyA'ntaH-karaNapariNatirakRtadharmaNAmiti,
yadivA'rcA-manuSyazarIraM tadapyakRtadharma
bIjAnAmAryakSetrasukulotpattisakalendriyasAmagyAdirUpaM durlabhaM bhavati,
jantUnAM ye dharmarUpamarthaM vyAkurvanti, ye dharmapratipattiyogyA ityarthaH,
teSAM tathAbhUtArcA sudurlabhA bhavatIti  // 18 //  TIkArtha - akRta puNya-
jisane puNyAtmaka kArya nahIM kiye ho, vaha jIva isa manuSya bhava se yA
saddharma se vidhvasta-vibhraSTa hokara isa saMsAra meM paryaTana karatA hai,
use phira samyakdarzana prApta honA bahuta kaThina hai (612

Page #641 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The study called Adana can be attained again in the form of Samyaktva after the
half-pudgala-paravarta-kala. For a man who has not practiced Dharma, it is very
difficult to attain Samyakdarshan, or to be independent of the internal results
of Archa-leshya, Antahparinat, or Aantaric parinam. Or, the human body is called
Archa. He who has not sown the seed of Dharma, does not attain it. It is very
difficult to get the Aryan field, birth in a noble family, all the material in
the form of senses, healthy and capable senses, etc. Among beings, those who
contemplate the meaning of Dharma, are worthy of Dharma-pratipatti. It is very
rare to attain such leshya. Those who declare the pure Dharma, complete and
unparalleled. Where is the place of the unparalleled, how is their birth story?
Commentary - Those great men who are free from attachment, who see the whole
world like a myrobalan in the palm of their hand, who are devoted to the welfare
of others, declare the pure Dharma, which is free from all limitations, and they
themselves practice it. They declare the Dharma which is complete, full of good
qualities, and unparalleled, and they follow it. Thus, where is the place of the
unparalleled, the one who has attained knowledge and conduct, who is free from
all dualities and troubles? How can there be a story of his birth? How can there
be a story of his birth and death, even in a dream, because he has no karma
seeds? It is said: "Just as a seed that is completely burnt, does not sprout. So
too, when the karma seed is burnt, the sprout of existence does not grow."
Commentary - Those great men who are free from attachment, who see the whole
world like a myrobalan in the palm of their hand, and who are devoted to the
welfare of others, declare the pure Dharma, which is free from all limitations,
and they themselves practice it. They declare the Dharma which is complete, full
of good qualities, and unparalleled, and they follow it. They attain the place
of the one who has knowledge and conduct, who is free from all dualities and
troubles. How can they be born again in this world? It is not possible to say
that they were born and died, even in a dream, because they have no karma seeds.
Therefore, how can there be birth and death? It is said: "Just as a seed that is
completely burnt, does not sprout. So too, when the karma seed is burnt, the
sprout of existence does not grow." How does the wise one arise, he arises
there, gone. Gone there, unstained, the eyes of the highest beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AdAnanAmakaM adhyayana kyoMki utkRSTa rUpa meM arddha pudgalaparAvartakAla ke
pazcAt punaH samyaktva prApta ho sakatA hai  /  vaise puruSa ko jisane
dharmAcaraNa nahIM kiyA hai, samyakdarzana kI prApti yoga arcA-lezyA,
antaHpariNati yA Antarika pariNAmoM kA svAyatta honA bahuta kaThina hai  /
athavA manuSya zarIra arcA kahA jAtA hai| jisane dharmarUpI bIja kA vapana nahIM
kiyA hai use vaha upalabdha nahIM hotA  /  Arya kSetra, uttama kula meM janma,
samasta indriya rUpa sAmagrI, svastha sakSama iMdriya, ityAdi kA milanA atyanta
kaThina hai  /  prANiyoM meM jo dharma rUpa artha kA vivecana karate haiM,
dharma pratipatti ke yogya hai  /  una jaisI lezyA prApta karanA atyanta
durlabha hai| je dhammaM suddhamakkhaMti, paDipunnamaNelisaM  /  aNelisassa jaM
ThANaM, tassa jammakahA kao  // 19 //  . . chAyA - ye dharma zuddha mAkhyAnti,
pratipUrNa manIdRzam  /  anIdRzasya yat sthAnaM, tasya janma kathA kutaH  //
anuvAda - jo puruSa pratipUrNa-samagra anIdRza-sarvottama evaM zuddha dharma kA
AkhyAna karate haiM-svayaM AcaraNa karate haiM  /  ve sarvottama puruSa kA
sthAna-pada prApta karate haiM  /  phira unakA janma nahIM hotA-ve janma maraNa
se chUTa jAte haiN| TIkA - kiJcAnyat-ye mahApuruSA
vItarAgAHkaratalAmalakavatsakalajagaddaSTAraHta evaMbhUtAH parahitaikaratAH
'zuddham' avadAtaM sarvopAdhivizuddhaM dharmam 'AkhyAnti' pratipAdayanti svataH
samAcaranti ca 'pratipUrNam' AyAtacAritra sadbhAvAtsaMpUrNa
yathAkhyAtacAritrarUpaM vA 'anIdRzam' ananya-sadRzaM dharmam AkhyAnti
anutiSThanti (ca)  /  tadevam 'anIdRzasya' ananyasadRzasya jJAnacAritropetasya
yat sthAnaM-sarva dvandvoparamarUpaM tadavAptasya tasya kuto janmakathA? jAto
mRto vetyevaMrUpA kathA svapnAntare'pi tasya karmabIjAbhAvAt kutA vidyata ? iti,
tathoktam - "dagdhe bIje yathA'tyantaM, prAdurbhavati naangkrH| karmabIje tathA
dagdhe, na rohati bhavAGkura ||1||''ityaadi  // 19 //  TIkArtha - jo mahApuruSa
vItarAga-rAgazUnya hote haiM  /  hathelI meM rakhe AMvale kI jyoM samagra
saMsAra ko dekhate haiM tathA jo para hita parAyaNa hai  /  jo samasta upAdhiyoM
se rahita zaddha dharma kA AkhyAna karate haiM. svayaM pAlana karate haiM  /
Ayata-cAritra ke sadbhAva se jo dharma pratipUrNa hai athavA yathAkhyAta cAritra
rUpa tathA jo anupamasarvazreSTha hai, ve usakA AkhyAna karate haiM-upadeza
karate haiM tathA svayaM usakA anusaraNa karate haiM  /  ve usa sthAna ko prApta
karate haiM jo jJAna evaM cAritra yukta puruSa kA hai-jJAna cAritra yukta puruSa
ko prApta hotA hai  /  jo dvandvoMsaMkaToM aura jhaMjhaToM se vimukta hai  /
unake punaH isa jagata meM janma lene kI to bAta hI kahA~ ? ve janme, mare aisA
kahanA sapane meM bhI saMbhava nahIM hai kyoMki unake karmoM ke bIjoM kA abhAva
ho gayA hai, isaliye janma maraNa kahAM se ho  /  kahA hai jaise bIja ke atyanta
dagdha ho jAne para bilkula jala jAne para aMkura kA prAdurbhAva nahIM hotA,
paudhA nahIM ugatA  /  usI prakAra karma rUpI bIja ke dagdha ho jAne para
saMsAra rUpI aMkura paidA. nahIM hotaa| kao kayAi medhAvI, uppajati tahA gayA  /
tahA gayA appaDinnA, cakkhU logassaNuttarA  // 20 // . 16130

Page #642 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shadow - In Translation - Tathagata - The wise and knowledgeable great sage who
has attained liberation, who will not be trapped in the cycle of birth and death
in this world, how can they come back to this world? Unpromised diagnosis
prohibited - The Tirthankaras and Ganadharas, etc., who are free from the desire
for worldly benefits, are the supreme eyes of the world. Shri Sutrakritanga
Sutra Kutaḥ kadācinmedhāvī, utpadyante tathagatāḥ | Tathagatā apratijñā cakṣu
ṛlokasyaanuttarāḥ || Commentary - Kincan yat - Due to the absence of karma
seeds, 'kutaḥ' from where, even once, 'medhāvino' those who are knowledgeable,
Tathagatas who have gone beyond rebirth, are born again in this impure world of
conception? Not at all, they are not born due to the absence of karma as an
instrument, that is the meaning. Also, 'Tathagatas' Tirthankaras, Ganadharas,
etc., do not have a promise - a bond of diagnosis, those who are free from
promises, without diagnosis, without hope, dedicated to the welfare of beings,
are supreme due to their supreme knowledge, 'lokasya' of the group of beings,
because they are the eyes of the world, they are the cause of the identification
of the true and false meaning, they are the Tathagatas who are omniscient, they
do good and avoid harm, they are the eyes of the whole world. ||20|| Kincan yat
Commentary meaning - Medhavi - a wise man who, due to the absence of karma
seeds, has destroyed all karmas and attained liberation. Where, after going,
there is no return to the cycle of rebirth, how can they be born again in this
impure world of conception? Due to the absence of karma as an instrument, they
are never born again in the world in any way. Free from the bond of promise and
diagnosis, free from hope or desire, dedicated to the welfare of beings,
unparalleled due to their supreme knowledge, unparalleled, they are the eyes of
beings, because they are the cause of the identification of the true and false
meaning, omniscient Tirthankaras and Ganadharas, etc., are the eyes of the
world. They are omniscient Tirthankaras and great men who bring about the
attainment of good for all and the avoidance of harm. They are like eyes for
everyone. Anuttare ya ṭhāṇe se, jaṁ kicca, ṇivvuḍā ege, Shadow Anuttarāñca
sthānaṁ tat, - - - pavedite. Kāsaveṇa niṭṭaṁ pāvanti paṇḍiyā ||21|| Kāśyapa by
praveditam. Yat kṛtvā nirvṛtā eke, niṣṭhāṁ prāpnuvanti paṇḍitāḥ || Translation -
The place - the path of practice based on restraint, the best, as propounded by
Bhagavan Mahavira born in the Kashyap lineage. Pandits - wise people, by
following it, attain nirvana liberation. They end the world, the coming and
going. Commentary - There is no answer - the main one, because the supreme
place, that is, that restraint, 'Kāśyapa by' by the Kashyap lineage, Shri
Manmahavirvardhamanaswami, 'praveditam' declared, showing its supremacy, he says
- 'yad' supreme restraint place, 'eke' great beings, those who follow it,
'kṛtvā' by following, 'nirvṛtāḥ' attained nirvana, those who are liberated, the
end of the cycle of the world, 'niṣṭhāṁ' the end, 'paṇḍitāḥ' those who are free
from sin, attain, so the restraint place, as propounded by Kashyap, those who
follow it attain perfection, that is the meaning. ||21|| Commentary meaning -
That which has no other or superior place is called Anuttar. That is restraint.
Shri Vardhaman Swami, born in the Kashyap lineage, Bhagavan Shri Mahavira, has
declared this restraint. 614

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chAyA - meM anuvAda - tathAgata - isa jagata punaH nahIM Ane vAle janma maraNa
ke cakra meM nahIM phaMsane vAle medhAvIprajJA sampanna mahAn jJAnI puruSa jo
mokSagata hai, ve puna: isa jagata meM kisa prakAra A sakate haiM ?
apratijJanidAna varjita - parAphalAbhikAMkSA rahita tIrthaMkara evaM gaNadhara
Adi mahApuruSa loka ke anuttara - sarvazreSTha netra haiN| zrI sUtrakRtAGga
sUtram kutaH kadAcinmedhAvI, utpadyante tathAgatAH  /  tathAgatA apratijJA cakSu
rlokasyAnuttarAH  //  TIkA - kiMcAnyat-karmabIjAbhAvAt 'kutaH ' kasmAtkadAcidapi
'medhAvino' jJAnAtmakA: tathAapunarAvRttyA gatAstathAgatAH punarasmin
saMsAre'zucini garbhAdhAne samutpadyante ? na
kathaJcitkadAcitkarmopAdAnAbhAvAdutpadyanta ityarthaH, tathA 'tathAgatAH'
tIrthakRdgaNadharAdayo na vidyate pratijJA - nidAnabandhanarUpAM yeSAM
te'pratijJA-anidAnA nirAzaMsAH sattvahitakaraNodyatA anuttarajJAnatvAdanuttarA
'lokasya' jantugaNasya sadasadarthanirUpaNakAraNatazcakSurbhUtA
hitAhitaprAptiparihAraM kurvantaH sakalalokalocanabhUtAstathAgatAH sarvajJA
bhavantIti  // 20 //  kiJcAnyat TIkArtha - medhAvI - prajJAvAna puruSa jo karma
rUpa bIja ke abhAva se samasta karmoM ko kSINa karane ke kAraNa mokSagata hai|
jahAM jAne para phira kabhI punarAvRtti-saMsAra meM punaH Agamana nahIM hotA, ve
phira isa azuciapavitra garbhAdhAnamUlaka jagata meM kaise samutapanna ho sakate
haiM ? karma ke upAdAna ke abhAva se ve phira kabhI kisI bhI taraha saMsAra meM
utpanna nahIM hote  /  pratijJA nidAnarUpI baMdhana se rahita, nirAzaMsa-AzaMsA
yA kAmanA se varjita - prANiyoM kA hita sAdhane meM samudyata, anuttara-
sarvazreSTha jJAna hone se anupama, prANiyoM ke lie sat asat artha kA nirUpaNa
karane ke kAraNa sarvajJa tIrthaMkara tathA gaNadhara Adi mahApuruSa cakSubhUta
haiM  /  ve sarvajJa tIrthaMkara tathA mahApuruSa sabako hita kI prApti karAte
haiM tathA ahita kA parihAra karate haiM  /  ve sabake liye locana tulya hai  /
aNuttare ya ThANe se, jaM kiccA, NivvuDA ege, chAyA anuttaraJca sthAnaM tat, - -
- pavedite  /  kAsaveNa niTTaM pAvaMti paMDiyA  // 21 //  kAzyapena praveditam
/  yat kRtvA nirvRtA eke, niSThAM prApnuvanti paNDitAH  //  anuvAda -
kAzyapagotrotpanna bhagavAna mahAvIra dvArA pratipAdita sthAna- saMyamamUlaka
sAdhanA patha sarvottama hai  /  paMDita - jJAnIjana isakA paripAlana kara
nirvANa mokSa prApta karate haiN| ve saMsAra kA, AvAgamana kA aMta karate haiM
/  TIkA na vidyate uttaraM - pradhAnaM yasmAdanuttaraM sthAnaM tacca
tatsaMyamAkhyaM 'kAzyapena' kAzyapa gotreNa zrI manmahAvIravardhamAnasvAminA
'praveditam' AkhyAtaM, tasya cAnuttaratvamAvirbhAvayannAha - 'yada' anuttaraM
saMyamasthAnaM 'eke' mahAsattvAH sadanuSThAyina: 'kRtvA' anupAlya 'nirvRtAH'
nirvANamanuprAptAH, nirvRtAzca santaH saMsAracakravAlasya 'niSThAM' paryavasAnaM
'paMDitA:' pApADDInAH prApnuvanti, tadevaMbhUtaM saMyamasthAnaM kAzyapena
praveditaM yadanuSThAyinaH santaH siddhiM prApnuvantIti tAtparyArthaH  //  21
//  TIkArtha jisase anuttara yA zreSTha dUsarA sthAna nahIM hotA use anuttara
kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha saMyama hai| kAzyapa gotra meM janme zrIvardhamAna svAmI
ne bhagavAna zrI mahAvIra ne isako saMyama ko pravedita-vyAkhyAta 614

Page #643 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I have studied the Adan text. To explain its excellence and the ultimate goal,
the sutrakar says: Those who are virtuous, have excellent conduct, are great
souls, and follow the path of restraint, attain liberation. They are free from
the cycle of birth and death, wise, free from sin, and knowledgeable. They end
the cycle of birth and death. This is the path of restraint that Lord Mahavira
established. By following this path, people attain liberation.  **Pundit**
**Viryam ghune puvvakadam kammam navam vaa avi na kuvvatti ||22||** **Laddhum
nigghayaaya** **Pavattagam.** **"** **Chhaya Panditah Viriyam labdhva nirghatay
pravartakam.** **Dhuniyaat purvakritam karma navam vaa api na karoti ||** **-**
**Anuvaad - Pandit - Gyaani purush karma ka vinash karne mein sakshta, virya -
atmaparakram prapt kar purvakrit karma ka dhunan - nash kare tatha nav - naya
karma na bandhe.** **Avaapy,** **Teeka apich - 'Panditah' sadsadvivekgyo
'viriyam' karmoudalanasamartham satsanyamviriyam tapoviriyam vaa 'labdhva' tadev
viriyam vishinasti - nihshesh karmano 'nighataya' nirjaranaya pravartakam
panditviriyam tacch bahubhavashatatdurlabham kathinchitkarmavivaradavaapy
'dhuniyaad' apanayet purvabhaveshv anekeshu yatkrtam - upattam
karmaashtaprakaram tatpanditviriyen dhuniyaat 'navam cha' abhinavam
chaashravanirodhan na karotyasaaviti ||22||** **-** **Teekaarth - Pandit - sat
evam asat ka bhed karne mein sakshma viveksheel purush karmon ka uddalan - nash
karne mein samarth sat sanyam tatha tapascharan mein viriya - parakram prapt
karta hai. Uski visheshta batlate hue kahte hain - jo samasht karmon ke
nirjharan - nash mein sampravritt hota hai, vah pandit viriya kaha jata hai.
Sainkadon janmon mein jiska prapt hona bada kathin hai, gyaani purush karmon ka
vidaran - nash kar use avaapt - prapt karta hai. Use chahiye ki vah anekaaneka
purv janmon mein sanchit aath prakar ke karmon ka pandit viriya dwara dhunan -
nash kare. Tatha vah ashrav ka nirodh kar abhinav - naye karma na kare.**
**Chhaya** **Na** **Raysa** **-** **Kuvvatti Mahavire, anupuuvvakadam
sammuhibhuta, kammam hecchaan jan** **Na karoti Mahavirah anupuuryaa kritam
rayah.** **Rajasa sammukhibhutaah karma hitva yanmatam ||** **-** **Om Om Om**
**Anuvaad anya purush mithyatvadhi ke karan kramshah jo pap karte hain, Mahavira
- karmakshay mein sakshma purush vaisa nahin karta kyonki vah pap karma apne
dwara pahle kiye gaye ashubh karmon se prabhavit hote hain unke prabhavwash kiye
jate hain kintu vah mahaan atma parakrami purush ashtvidh karmon ka kshay kar
moksh ke sammukhina hain.** **615** **Rayam. Mayam ||23||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AdAnanAmakaM adhyayanaM kiyA hai| usakI anuttaratA- sarvazreSThatA batAne hetu
sUtrakAra kahate haiM-sat anuSThAna uttama AcaraNa yukta mahAsatvamahApuruSa
saMyama kA anupAlana kara nirvANa prApta karate haiM  /  ve nivRtta-nirvANa
yukta, paNDita - pApa rahita, jJAnI puruSa saMsAra cakra kA janmamaraNa kA
paryavasAna- aMta karate haiN| isa prakAra ke saMyama sthAna kA bhagavAna
mahAvIra ne pratipAdana kiyA, jisakA anuSThAna anusaraNa karate hue puruSa
siddhi-mukti prApta kara lete haiM  /  paMDie vIriyaM ghuNe puvvakaDaM kammaM
NavaM vA'vi Na kuvvatI  // 22 //  laddhuM nigghAyAya pavattagaM  /  " chAyA
paNDitaH vIryyaM labdhvA nirghAtAya pravartakam  /  dhunIyAt pUrvakRtaM karma
navaM vA'pi na karoti  //  - anuvAda - paMDita - jJAnI puruSa karma kA vinAza
karane meM sazakta, vIrya - AtmaparAkrama prApta kara pUrvakRta karma kA
dhunana- nAza kare tathA nava-nayA karma na bAMdhe  /  avApya, TIkA
apica-'paNDitaH' sadasadvivekajJo 'vIryaM' karmoddalanasamarthaM
satsaMyamavIryaM tapovIryaM vA 'labdhvA' tadeva vIryaM vizinaSTi - niHzeSa
karmaNo 'nighAtAya ' nirjaraNAya pravartakaM paNDitavIryaM tacca
bahubhavazatadurlabhaM kathaJcitkarmavivarAdavApya 'dhunIyAd' apanayet
pUrvabhaveSvanekeSu yatkRtam - upAttaM karmASTaprakAraM tatpaNDitavIryeNa
dhunIyAt 'navaM ca' abhinavaM cAzravanirodhAnna karotyasAviti  // 22 //  -
TIkArtha - paMDita-sat evaM asat kA bheda karane meM sakSama vivekazIla puruSa
karmoM kA uddalana -nAza karane meM samartha sat saMyama tathA tapazcaraNa meM
vIrya - parAkrama prApta karatA hai  /  usakI vizeSatA batalAte hue kahate haiM-
jo samasta karmoM ke nirjharaNa-nAza meM saMpravRtta hotA hai, vaha paNDita
vIrya kahA jAtA hai| saiMkar3oM janmoM meM jisakA prApta honA bar3A kaThina hai,
jJAnI puruSa karmoM kA vidAraNa- nAza kara use avApta - prApta karatA hai  /
use cAhiye ki vaha anekAneka pUrva janmoM meM saMcita ATha prakAra ke karmoM kA
paNDita vIrya dvArA dhunana- nAza kre| tathA vaha Azrava kA nirodha kara
abhinava -naye karma na kare  /  chAyA Na rayasA - kuvvatI mahAvIre,
aNupuvvakaDaM saMmuhIbhUtA, kammaM heccANa jaM na karoti mahAvIraH AnupUrvyA
kRtaM rayaH  /  rajasA sammukhIbhUtAH karma hitvA yanmatam  //  - OM OM OM
anuvAda anya puruSa mithyAtvAdi ke kAraNa kramazaH jo pApa karate haiM, mahAvIra
- karmakSaya meM sakSama puruSa vaisA nahIM karatA kyoMki vaha pApa karma apane
dvArA pahale kiye gaye azubha karmoM se prabhAvita hote haiMunake prabhAvavaza
kiye jAte haiM kiMtu vaha mahAn Atma parAkramI puruSa aSTavidha karmoM kA kSaya
kara mokSa ke sammukhIna haiM  /  615 rayaM  /  mayaM  // 23 //

Page #644 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Śrī Sūtrakr̥tāṅga Sūtra  **Commentary:**  -  "Mahāvīra:"  being tolerant of
the destruction of karma, does not do what other beings do due to their
sequential engagement in falsehood, non-restraint, carelessness, passions, and
their combinations.  This is because he is only affected by the dust (karma)
accumulated in his previous lives.  He, having taken hold of his previous karma,
faces it with perfect restraint.  Having faced it, he abandons all eight types
of karma, becoming face-to-face with liberation or perfect restraint. ||23||
**Commentary Meaning:**  A man capable of destroying karma does not perform
those sinful actions that other beings perform sequentially through falsehood,
non-restraint, carelessness, passions, and their combinations.  Because those
sinful actions are performed only due to the dust (karma) accumulated in
previous lives.  The aforementioned strong-souled man, accepting and
assimilating perfect restraint, destroys the karma he has performed in the past,
becoming liberated.  In other words, he abandons and avoids the eight types of
karma, becoming face-to-face with liberation or perfect restraint, and is
dedicated to practicing restraint.  -  **Mayam Sallagattan:** What is accepted
by all the virtuous, that is the cutting of the arrow (karma), Having achieved
it, they have crossed over, they have become gods. ||24||  **Shadow:**  What is
the opinion of all the virtuous, that opinion is the cutting of the arrow
(karma). Having achieved it, they have crossed over, they have become gods.  -
**Om Om Om**  **Translation:**  The restraint accepted by all virtuous people
cuts away the arrow (karma) of sin.  Beings, having achieved it, have crossed
over the ocean of the world, attained liberation, or become gods, and have gone
to the heavenly realm.  -  **Commentary:**  -  And again, "Jammay" etc., what is
the "opinion" of all the virtuous, that is this place of perfect restraint.  It
cuts away the arrow (karma) - the performance of sin or the karma arising from
it.  That cutting of the arrow (karma) is the perfect practice.  Many, having
achieved it, having properly worshipped, have crossed over the wilderness of the
world.  Others, due to the lack of destruction of all karma, have become gods.
They, having attained perfect knowledge and being of good conduct, have
attained, attain, and will attain the status of celestial beings. ||24||
**Commentary Meaning:**  The place of restraint is accepted, considered, and
approved by all virtuous people.  Describing its characteristics, the author of
the sutra states that this place of restraint cuts away the arrow (karma) - the
performance of sinful actions or the karma arising from them.  According to the
scriptures, many men, walking on the path of righteousness, have achieved it,
properly worshipped it, and crossed over the terrifying and dreadful forest of
the world.  And others, who have not been able to destroy all karma, have become
gods, and have gone to the realm of the gods.  Men of perfect knowledge and good
conduct have become, are, and will be celestial beings.  Om Om Om  **Abhīṃsu
Purā Dhī (Vī) Rā, Āgamiśśāvi Suvvatā.  Dhunnibohasssa Maggassa, Antam Pāuka Karā
Tinne.  Tībemi. ||25||**  616

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkA - kiJca - 'mahAvIra : ' karmavidAraNasahiSNuH
sannAnupUrvyeNa mithyAtvAvirati pramAda kaSAyayogairyatkRtaM
rajo'parajantubhistadasau ' na karoti' na vidhatte,
yatastatprAktanopAttarajasaivopAdIyate, sa ca tatprAktanaM karmAvaSTabhya
satsaMyamAtsaMmukhIbhUtaH, tadabhimukhIbhUtazca yanmatamaSTaprakAraM karma
tatsarvaM 'hitvA' tyaktvA mokSasya satsaMyamasya vA sammukhIbhUto'sAviti  // 23
//  TIkArtha karmoM ko vidIrNa karane meM sakSama puruSa una pApa karmoM ko
nahIM karatA jinheM anya jIva kramazaH mithyAtva, avirati, pramAda, kaSAya tathA
yoga dvArA karate haiM  /  kyoMki vaha pApa karma prAktana - pahale ke yA pUrva
bhavoM meM saMcita azubha karmoM dvArA hI kiyA jAtA hai  /  pUrvokta Atma balI
puruSa uttama saMyama ko svIkAra kara - AtmasAt kara apane dvArA pahale ke kiye
gaye karmoM ko nirjIrNa-kSINa kara vaha mokSAbhimukha hotA hai  /  dUsare zabdoM
meM ATha prakAra ke karmoM kA tyAga kara - parihAra kara mokSa yA uttama saMyama
ke sammukha hai- saMyama pAlana udyata hotA hai  /  - mayaM sallagattaNaM  /
jaM mayaM savvasAhUNaM, taM sAhaittANa taM tinnA, devA vA abhaviMsu te  // 24 //
chAyA yanmataM sarvasAdhUnAM tanmataM zalyakarttanam  /  sAdhayitvA tattIrNAH
devA vA abhUva~ste  //  - OM OM OM anuvAda samasta sAdhu janoM dvArA sammata
saMyama zalya- pApa kA karttana- nAza karatA hai  /  prANiyoM ne usakI sAdhanA
kara saMsAra samudra ko pAra kiyA hai-mokSa prApta kiyA hai athavA devattva pAyA
hai- devaloka meM gaye haiM  /  - TIkA - anyacca-'jammaya' mityAdi,
sarvasAdhUnAM yat 'matam' abhipretaM tadetatsatsaMyamasthAnaM,
tadvizinaSTizalyaM - pApAnuSThAnaM tajjanitaM vA karma tatkartayati-chinnatti
yattacchalyakartanaM tacca sadanuSThAna udyuktavihAriNaH 'sAdhayitvA'
samyagArAdhya bahavaH saMsArakAntAraM tIrNAH, apare tu sarvakarmakSayAbhAvAt
devA abhUvan, te cAptasamyaktvA saccAritriNo vaimAnikatvamavApuH prApnuvanti
prApsyanti ceti ||24|| TIkArtha - saMyama sthAna sabhI sAdhu janoM ko abhipreta
hai - mAnya hai - svIkRta hai  /  usakI vizeSatA kA - varNana karate hue
sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM - vaha saMyama sthAna zalya- pApamayAnuSThAna
athavA tajjanita karma kA kartana-cheda yA nAza karatA hai  /  zAstrAnusAra
dharma patha para vicaraNazIla bahuta se puruSa use sAdhakara - bhalI bhAMti
usakI ArAdhanA kara saMsAra rUpa bhayAnaka ghora vana ko pAra kara cuke haiN|
tathA anya jo samagra karmoM kA kSaya nahIM kara sake haiM ve deva hue haiM-
devayoni meM gaye haiM  /  samyaktva yukta saccAritrazIla puruSa vaimAnika deva
hue haiM - hote haiM evaM bhaviSya meM bhI hoMge  /  OM OM OM abhaviMsu purA dhI
(vI) rA, AgamissAvi suvvatA  /  dunnibohassa maggassa, aMtaM pAukarA tinne  //
tibemi  //  25  //  616

Page #645 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This study, known as Adana, is a shadow of the past - for there were many
valiant and strong souls in the past, and there will be many virtuous ones in
the future. They, the great souls, have illuminated the path of the difficult-
to-understand, the path of right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct, and
have crossed the ocean of existence.  Commentary: The author concludes by
saying, "In the past, many great souls, capable of destroying karma, existed.
Similarly, in the present, such souls exist on the field of karma, and in the
infinite future, such souls, who practice restraint, will exist. What have they
done, what do they do, and what will they do?" The author explains, "They, the
great souls, have reached the ultimate goal of the difficult-to-understand path
of right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct, and have illuminated that
path for others. They are themselves on that path, and they have crossed, are
crossing, and will cross the ocean of existence." The past has been followed,
now the present is the focus, and it should be viewed in the same way as the
past. The word "iti" marks the end of the study. "Bravimi" means "I speak," and
it is used here as it was before.  This is the end of the fifteenth study, known
as Adaniya.  Commentary: The author concludes this study by saying, "Many great
heroes, capable of destroying karma, have existed since time immemorial.
Similarly, many such great souls exist in the present on the field of karma, and
in the infinite future, many such great souls who practice restraint will exist.
What have they done? What do they do? And what will they do?" The author
explains, "These great souls have reached the ultimate goal of the difficult-to-
understand path of right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct, and have
illuminated that path for others. They themselves are on that path, and they
have crossed, are crossing, and will cross the ocean of existence." The past has
been followed, now the present is the focus, and it should be viewed in the same
way as the past. The word "iti" marks the end of the study. "Bravimi" means "I
speak," and it is used here as it was before.  This is the end of the fifteenth
study, known as Adaniya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AdAnanAmakaM adhyayana chAyA - abhUvan purA dhIrA, AgAminyapi suvratAH  /
durnibodhasya mArgasyAntaM, prAduSkarAstIrNAH ||iti brviimi|| anuvAda -
pUrvakAla meM bahuta se dhIra yA vIra Atma balI puruSa hue haiM  /  bhaviSya
kAla meM bhI bahuta se suvrata-uttama vratadhArI puruSa hoNge| vaise mahApuruSoM
ne durnibodha-jise prApta karanA bar3A kaThina hai, usa samyakdarzana,
samyakjJAna, tathA samyak cAritra mUlaka mArga kA anusaraNa kara use prakAzita
kara saMsAra sAgara se pAra hue haiN| TIkA - sarvopasaMhArArthamAha-'purA'
pUrvasminnanAdike kAle bahavo 'mahAvIrA' karmavidAraNasahiSNavaH 'abhUvan'
bhUtAH, tathA vartamAne ca kAle karmabhUmau tathAbhUtA bhavanti tathA''gAmini
cAnante kAletathAbhUtAH satsaMyamAnuSThAyino bhaviSyanti, ye kiM kRtavantaH
kurvanti kariSyanti cetyAha-yasya durnibodhasya-atIva duSprApasya (mArgasya)
jJAnadarzana cAritrAkhyasya 'antaM' paramakASThAmavApya tasyaiva mArgasya
'prAduH' prakAzyaM tatkaraNazIlA: prAduSkarAH svataH sanmArgAnuSThAyino'nyeSAM
ca prAdurbhAvakAH santaH saMsArArNavaM tIrNAstaranti tariSyanti ceti  /
gato'nugamaH, sAmprataM nayAH, te ca prAgvata dRSTavyAH  /
itiradhyayanaparisamApto, bravImIti pUrvavat  // 25 //   //  iti AdAnIyAkhyaM
paJcadazAdhyayanaM samAptam  //  TIkArtha - sUtrakAra isa adhyayana kA
upasaMhAra karate hue kahate haiM-karmoM ko vidIrNa-kSINa karane meM sakSama
aneka mahAn vIra-parama parAkramI anAdi kAla se hote rahe haiM  /  vartamAna
kAla meM bhI karmabhUmi meM vaise bahuta se mahApuruSa hote haiM tathA AgAmI-Ane
vAle ananta bhaviSya kAla meM bhI saMyama kA pAlana karane vAle vaise aneka
mahApuruSa hoMge  /  unhoMne kyA kiyA ? ve kyA karate haiM ? evaM kyA kareMge ?
isa saMdarbha meM sUtrakAra pratipAdita karate haiM-ve mahApuruSa durnibodha-
atIva duSprApya-bar3I kaThinAI se prApta hone yogya samyak jJAna, darzana tathA
cAritramUlaka mokSamArga kI parAkASThA-AkhirI sImA-maMjila para pahuMca kara
auroM ke liye usa mArga kAmokSAnugAmI patha kA prakAzana karate hue svayaM usa
para gatizIla rahate hue saMsAra sAgara ko pAra kara cuke haiM, pAra kara rahe
haiM tathA pAra kareMge  /  .. anugama samApta huA  /  aba yahAM naya pUrvavat
dRSTavya hai-dekhane yogya yA samajhane yogya hai  /  iti zabda adhyayana kI
pari samApti hetu prayukta huA hai  /  bravImi-bolatA hUM yaha pUrvavat-pahale
kI jyoM hai| AdAnIya nAmaka paMcadaza-pandrahavAM adhyayana samApta huA  /  %%%
617

Page #646 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixteenth chapter of the Sutra Kritanga Sutra, the Sri Gathadhyayana.  The
Blessed One said: "Thus, that person who is restrained, who has abandoned the
body, is to be called a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha."  The
disciple asked: "Venerable one, how is that person who is restrained, who has
abandoned the body, to be called a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha?
Please tell us, Great Muni!"  The Blessed One said: "He who is free from all
evil deeds, who has abandoned attachment, aversion, strife, slander, envy,
backbiting, aversion, attraction, illusion, falsehood, and wrong views, who is
united, who is committed, who is always devoted, who does not get angry, who
does not become proud, is to be called a Mahan."  Commentary: The word "atha"
indicates the end of a section and the beginning of a new one. It signifies that
the entire scripture is auspicious, as it begins and ends with auspiciousness.
The word "atha" also indicates continuity, as this sixteenth chapter follows the
previous fifteen chapters.  The Blessed One, who has attained divine knowledge,
speaks to the assembly of gods and humans. He says: "Thus, that person who is
endowed with the meaning of the fifteen chapters, who is virtuous, who has
restrained his senses and mind, who has abandoned the body, who is fit for
liberation, is to be called a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha."  The
disciple asked: "Venerable one, how is that person who is restrained, who has
abandoned the body, to be called a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha?
Please tell us, Great Muni!"  The Blessed One said: "He who is free from all
evil deeds, who has abandoned attachment, aversion, strife, slander, envy,
backbiting, aversion, attraction, illusion, falsehood, and wrong views, who is
united, who is committed, who is always devoted, who does not get angry, who
does not become proud, is to be called a Mahan."  The word "atha" indicates the
end of a section and the beginning of a new one. It signifies that the entire
scripture is auspicious, as it begins and ends with auspiciousness. The word
"atha" also indicates continuity, as this sixteenth chapter follows the previous
fifteen chapters.  The Blessed One, who has attained divine knowledge, speaks to
the assembly of gods and humans. He says: "Thus, that person who is endowed with
the meaning of the fifteen chapters, who is virtuous, who has restrained his
senses and mind, who has abandoned the body, who is fit for liberation, is to be
called a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha."  The disciple asked:
"Venerable one, how is that person who is restrained, who has abandoned the
body, to be called a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha? Please tell
us, Great Muni!"  The Blessed One said: "He who is free from all evil deeds, who
has abandoned attachment, aversion, strife, slander, envy, backbiting, aversion,
attraction, illusion, falsehood, and wrong views, who is united, who is
committed, who is always devoted, who does not get angry, who does not become
proud, is to be called a Mahan."  The word "atha" indicates the end of a section
and the beginning of a new one. It signifies that the entire scripture is
auspicious, as it begins and ends with auspiciousness. The word "atha" also
indicates continuity, as this sixteenth chapter follows the previous fifteen
chapters.  The Blessed One, who has attained divine knowledge, speaks to the
assembly of gods and humans. He says: "Thus, that person who is endowed with the
meaning of the fifteen chapters, who is virtuous, who has restrained his senses
and mind, who has abandoned the body, who is fit for liberation, is to be called
a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha."  The disciple asked: "Venerable
one, how is that person who is restrained, who has abandoned the body, to be
called a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha? Please tell us, Great
Muni!"  The Blessed One said: "He who is free from all evil deeds, who has
abandoned attachment, aversion, strife, slander, envy, backbiting, aversion,
attraction, illusion, falsehood, and wrong views, who is united, who is
committed, who is always devoted, who does not get angry, who does not become
proud, is to be called a Mahan."  The word "atha" indicates the end of a section
and the beginning of a new one. It signifies that the entire scripture is
auspicious, as it begins and ends with auspiciousness. The word "atha" also
indicates continuity, as this sixteenth chapter follows the previous fifteen
chapters.  The Blessed One, who has attained divine knowledge, speaks to the
assembly of gods and humans. He says: "Thus, that person who is endowed with the
meaning of the fifteen chapters, who is virtuous, who has restrained his senses
and mind, who has abandoned the body, who is fit for liberation, is to be called
a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha."  The disciple asked: "Venerable
one, how is that person who is restrained, who has abandoned the body, to be
called a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha? Please tell us, Great
Muni!"  The Blessed One said: "He who is free from all evil deeds, who has
abandoned attachment, aversion, strife, slander, envy, backbiting, aversion,
attraction, illusion, falsehood, and wrong views, who is united, who is
committed, who is always devoted, who does not get angry, who does not become
proud, is to be called a Mahan."  The word "atha" indicates the end of a section
and the beginning of a new one. It signifies that the entire scripture is
auspicious, as it begins and ends with auspiciousness. The word "atha" also
indicates continuity, as this sixteenth chapter follows the previous fifteen
chapters.  The Blessed One, who has attained divine knowledge, speaks to the
assembly of gods and humans. He says: "Thus, that person who is endowed with the
meaning of the fifteen chapters, who is virtuous, who has restrained his senses
and mind, who has abandoned the body, who is fit for liberation, is to be called
a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha."  The disciple asked: "Venerable
one, how is that person who is restrained, who has abandoned the body, to be
called a Mahan, a Shraman, a Bhikshu, or a Nigrantha? Please tell us, Great
Muni!"  The Blessed One said: "He who is free from all evil deeds, who has
abandoned attachment, aversion, strife, slander, envy, back

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram SoDazaM zrI gAthAdhyayana ahAha bhagavaM-evaM se daMte
davie vosaTThakAetti vacce mAhaNetti vA . samaNetti vA bhikkhUtti vA,
NiggaMthetti vA, paDiAha-bhaMte ! kahaM nadaMtedavie vosaTTakAetti vacce
mAhaNetti vA samaNetti vA bhikkhatti vA NiggaMthetti vA ? taM no bUhi mahAmuNI !
//  itivirae savvapAva kammehiM pijadosakalaha0 abbhakkhANa0 pesunna0
paraparivAya0 aratirati0 mAyAmosa0 micchAdasaNasallavirae sahie samie sayA jae
No kujjhe No mANI mAhaNetti vacce  // 1 //  chAyA - athAha bhagavAn-evaM sa
dAnto dravyaH vyutsRSTakAya, iti vAcyaH mAhana iti vA zramaNa iti vA bhikSuriti
vA nigrantha iti vA  /  pratyAha bhadanta  /  kathaM nu dAnto dravyaH
vyutsRSTakAya iti vAcyaH mAhana iti vA zramaNa iti vA bhikSu riti vA nigrantha
iti vA ? tanno brahi mahAmane !  /  itivirataH sarvapApakarmabhyaH
premadveSakalahAbhyAkhyAna
paizanyaparaparIvAdAratiratimAyAmRSAmithyAdarzanazalya virataH samitaH sahitaH
sadA yataH na krudhyenno mAnI mAhana iti vAcyaH  /  anuvAda - isake bAda
bhagavAna ne kahA ki pandraha adhyAyoM meM varNita artha se yukta jo puruSa
dAMtadamanazIla hai, indriya evaM mana kA vijetA hai, vyutsRSTakAya-jisane deha
kA, daihika Asakti kA vyutsarga-visarjana kara diyA hai, use mAhana, zramaNa,
bhikSu yA nirgrantha zabda se abhihita kiyA jAtA hai  /  ziSya ne prazna kiyA-
bhagavan ! vaha jo damanazIla hai, daihika Asakti vivarjita hai, vaha mAhana,
zramaNa, bhikSu athavA nirgrantha zabda dvArA kyoM saMbodhita kiyA jAnA cAhiye ?
he mahAmuni ! hameM Apa yaha batalAye  /  jo saba pApoM se virata hai, rAga,
dveSa, kalaha abhyAkhyAna, paizUnya, para parivAda, arati, rati, mAyA, mRSA
tathA mithyAdarzana zalya kA parihAra-parityAga kara cukA hai  /  sahita-sva
para kalyANa meM nirata hai, samita-jo pAMca samitiyoM se yukta hai ata: jo
saMyama meM udyata hai, jo krodha nahIM karatA, mAna nahIM karatA vaha mAhana
zabda dvArA vAcya hai  /  _TIkA - 'athe' tyayaM zabdo'vasAnamaGgalArthaH,
AdimaMgalaM tu budhyetetyanenAbhihitaM, ata AdyantayormaGgalatvAtsarvo'pi
zrutaskandho maGgalamityetadanenAveditaM bhavati  /  Anantarye vA'thazabdaH,
paJcadazAdhyayanAnantaraM tadarthasaMgrAhIdaM SoDazamadhyayanaM prArambhate  /
athAnantaramAha-'bhagavAna' utpanna divyajJAnaH sadevamanujAyAM parSadIdaM
vakSyamANamAha, tadyathA-evamasau paJcadazAdhyayanoktArthayuktaH sa sAdhudanti
indriyanoindriya damanena dravyabhUto muktigamanayogyatvAt 'dravyaM ca bhavye'
iti vacanAt rAga dveSa kAli kApadravyarahitatvAdvA jAtyasuvarNavat
zuddhadravyabhUtastathA vyutsRSTo niSpratikarmazarIratayA kAya:-zarIraM yena sa
bhavati vyutsRSTakAyaH, tadevaMbhUtaH san pUrvoktAdhyayanArtheSu vartamAnaH
prANinaH sthAvarajaGgamasUkSmabAdaraparyAptakAparyAptakabhedabhinnAn mA haNatti
pravRttiryasyAsau mAhano navabrahmacaryaguptigupto 6180

Page #647 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Gatha-adhyayana, brahmacharya-dharanadvaa, brahmana ityanantorokta-guna-
kambakayuktah, sadhur-hino brahmana [granthagra 8000] iti vaa vachyah, tatha
shramyati tapasa khidyata itikritva shramano vachyo'thava sama-tulyam
mitraadishu manah-antahkaranam yasya sa sammanah sarvatra vasi-chandana-kalpa
ityarthah, tatha chokta- "natthi ya si koi veso" (chaya - nasti tasya
ko'padveshyah.) ityadi. tadevaṃ purvoktaguṇa-kalitah shramanaḥ san sammanaa vaa
ityevaṃ vachyah sadhur-iti. tatha bhikshaṇa-shilo bhikshuḥ bhinatti
va'shtaprakaraṃ karmeti bhikshu sa sadhur-dantadi-guṇopetobhikshuritiva chyah.
tatha sabahyabhyantara-granthabhavaannirgranthaḥ. tadevamanantaroktaṃ
pañchadashadhyayanoktarthanushthaayi danto dravyabhuto vyutsrishtakayashcha (sa)
nirgranthaiti vachya iti. evam bhagavatokte sati pratyaha tacchhishyah-bhagavan!
bhadanta! bhayanta! bhavanta! iti va yo'sau danto dravyabhuto vyutsrishtakayah
san brahmanaḥ shramano bhikshu-nirgranthaiti vachyah tadetat katham?
yadbhagavatoktam brahmanadishabdavachyatvam sadhoritietan na:-asmakam 'bruhi'
avedhaya 'mahamune!' yathavasthatrikalavedhin ॥1॥ ityevam prishtobhagavan
brahmanadeenam chaturṇamapyabhidhanaanaam kathanchidbbhedaad bbhinnaanaam
yathaakramam pravrittirnimittamaha-'iti' evam purvoktadhyayanarthavrittih san
'virato' nivritta sarvebhyah papakarmebhyah-savadyanushthanaruupebhyah sa tatha,
tatha prema-raagaabhishvanga lakshaṇam dveshaḥ apreetilakshaṇaḥ kalaho-
dvandvaadhi-karaṇam-asadabhiyogaḥ paishunya (karṇejaptvam) paraguṇasahanataya
taddoshoddhahanamitiyvat parasya parivadaḥ kaakva paradoshaappadanam
arati:-chittodvegalakshaṇa taya kuṭilamatermushavadaḥ-asadarthabhi-dhaanam
gaamashvam bruvato bhavati, mithyadarshanam-atattve tattvabhiniveshas-tattve
vaa'tattvamiti, yatha- natthi ṇa ṇiccho ṇa kuṇai kayam ṇa veṇai natthi ṇivvaṇam.
natthi ya mokkhovaaṇo chhammicchatthassa ṭhaṇaai ॥1॥ chaya-nastiniryo na karoti
krtam na vedayati nasti nirvanam. nasti na mokshopaayah shatmithyatvasya
sthanani ॥1॥ ityadi, etadevaśalyam tasmistato va virata iti, tatha samyagitaḥ
samita ityarthah, tatha saha hitenaparamartha-bhutena vartata iti sahitaḥ,
yadiva sahito-yuktah jnanaadibhiḥ tatha 'sada' sarvakala 'yataḥ' prayatah
satsaṃyamanushṭhane, tadanushṭhanamapi na kshayairniḥsarikuryad-ityaha-
kasyachidapyapakarinoapikrudhyet-akrushtah sannaakrodha-vashago bhuyaat, naapi
maani bhaved-utkrishta-tapoyukto'pi na garvam vidhdhyat, tatha chokta- "jai
so'vi ṇijjara-mao paḍisiddho aṭṭhamāṇa-mahaṇehim. avasesamaya-ṭṭhāṇā
parihariyavvā payatteṇam ॥1॥" chaya-yadi so'pi nirjara-madaḥ
pratishiddho'shtamaana-mathanaiḥ. avasheshani mada-sthanaani pariharttavyani
prayatnena॥1॥ asya choppalakshyarthatvad-rago'pi mayaloka-tmako na
vidheyaityadi-guṇa-kalitaḥ sadhur-mahima iti niḥ-shanka vachya iti ॥1॥ sampratam
shramaṇa-shabdasya pravrittirnimittam-udbhavayan naha-  Translation:  The one
endowed with the qualities mentioned earlier, such as Shri Gatha-adhyayana,
brahmacharya-dharana, etc., is to be called a virtuous Brahmana [Granthagra
8000] or a Shramana who is fatigued by austerities. Or, the one whose mind is
equanimous towards friends and others is called a Sammanah, like a sandalwood
tree. As it is said, "There is no one who is his enemy." Thus, the Shramana
endowed with the aforementioned qualities or the one with an equanimous mind is
to be called a Sadhu. Similarly, the one with the habit of begging is a Bhikshu,
as he destroys the eight types of karma. He is to be called a virtuous Bhikshu
endowed with qualities like self-control. He is Nirgranth, without external or
internal scriptures. He is the one who follows the teachings of the Fifteen Anga
and is danta (self-controlled), dravyabhuta (embodied), and vyutsrishtakaya
(relinquished body), and is thus to be called a Nirgranth. When this is stated
by the Bhagavan, the disciple asks - "O Bhagavan! O Bhadanta! O Bhayanta! O
Bhavanta! How can the one who is danta, dravyabhuta, vyutsrishtakaya, be called
a Brahmana, Shramana, Bhikshu, and Nirgranth?" In response, the Bhagavan
explains the different connotations of these terms and their respective grounds
for application. The Shramana, being established in the meaning of the earlier
teachings, is 'virata' (abstained) from all sinful actions and observances. He
is free from attachment, aversion, delusion, dispute, false accusation, slander,
and intolerance of others' virtues. He does not get angry even when provoked and
does not have pride even if endowed with superior austerities. As it is said,
"If he too is free from the intoxication of pride, he should renounce the
remaining causes of pride through effort." Due to the figurative meaning, even
attachment arising from delusion and greed should not be indulged in. Thus, the
greatness of the virtuous Sadhu is to be stated without any doubt.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI gAthAdhyayana brahmacaryadhAraNAdvA brAhmaNa
ityanantaroktaguNakadambakayuktaH sAdhuhino brAhmaNa [graMthAgrama 8000] iti vA
vAcyaH, tathA zrAmyati tapasA khidyata itikRtvA zramaNo vAcyo'thavA sama-tulyaM
mitrAdiSu mana:-antaHkaraNaM yasya sa samamanAH sarvatra vAsIcandana-kalpa
ityarthaH, tathA coktam - "Natthi ya si koi veso" (chAyA - nAsti tasya
ko'pidveSyaH  / ) ityAdi  /  tadevaM pUrvokta guNa kalitaH zramaNaH san samamanA
vA ityevaM vAcyaH sAdhuriti  /  tathA bhikSaNazIlo bhikSurbhinatti
vA'STaprakAraM karmeti bhikSu sa sAdhurdAntAdiguNopeto bhikSuriti vAcyaH  /
tathA sabAhyAbhyantaragranthAbhAvAnnirgranthaH  /  tadeva manantaroktaM
paJcadazAdhyayanoktArthAnuSThAyI dAnto dravyabhUto vyutsRSTakAyazca (sa)
nirgrantha iti vAcya iti  /  evaM bhagavatokte sati pratyAha tacchiSyaH-bhagavan
! bhadanta ! bhayAnta ! bhavAnta ! iti vA yo'sau dAnto dravyabhUto
vyutsRSTakAyaH san brAhmaNaH zramaNo bhikSunirgrantha iti vAcyaH tadetatkathaM ?
yadbhagavatoktaM brAhmaNAdizabdavAcyatvaM sAdhoriti, etanna:-asmAkaM 'brUhi'
Avedaya 'mahAmune !' yathAvasthitatrikAlavedin  // 1 //  ityevaM pRSTo bhagavAn
brAhmaNAdInAM caturNAmapyabhidhAnAnAM kathaJcidbhedAdbhinnAnAM yathAkramaM
pravRttinimittamAha-'iti' evaM pUrvoktAdhyayanArthavRttiH san 'virato' nivRttaH
sarvebhyaH pApakarmebhyaH-sAvadyAnuSThAnarUpebhya:sa tathA, tathA prema-
rAgAbhiSvaGga lakSaNaM dveSaH aprItilakSaNaH kalaho-
dvandvAdhikaraNamabhyAkhyAnam-asadabhiyogaH paizunyaM (karNejapatvaM)
paraguNAsahanatayA taddoSoddhahanamitiyAvat parasya parivAdaH kAkvA
paradoSApAdanaM arati:-cittodvegalakSaNA tayA kuTilamatema'SAvAdaH-
asadarthAbhidhAnaM gAmazvaM bruvato bhavati, mithyAdarzanam-atattve
tattvAbhinivezastattve vA'tattvamiti, yathA - Natthi Na Nicco Na kuNai kayaM Na
veei Natthi NivvANaM  /  Natthi ya mokkhovAo chammicchattassa ThANAI  // 1 //
chAyA-nAstinityotakaroti na kRtaM vedayati nAsti nirvANaM  /  nAsti na
mokSopAyaH SaNmithyAtvasya sthAnAni  // 1 //  ityAdi, etadeva zalyaM tasmistato
vA virata iti, tathA samyagitaH samita ityarthaH, tathA saha
hitenaparamArthabhUtenavartata iti sahitaH, yadivA sahito-yukto jJAnAdibhiH
tathA 'sadA' sarvakAla 'yataH' prayataH satsaMyamAnuSThAne, tadanuSThAnamapi na
kaSAyaini:sArIkuryAdityAha-kasyacidapyapakAriNo'pi na krudhyeta-AkruSTaH sanna
krodhavazago bhUyAt, nApi mAnI bhavedutkRSTatapoyukto'pi na garvaM vidadhyAt,
tathA coktam - "jai so'vi nijaramao paDisiddho aTThamANamahaNehiM  /
avasesamayaTThANA parihariyavvA payatteNaM  // 1 // " chAyA-yadi so'pi
nirjarAmadaH prtissiddho'ssttmaanmthnaiH| avazeSANi madasthAnAni pariharttavyAni
prytnen||1|| asya copalakSaNArthatvAdrAgo'pi mAyAlobhAtmako na vidheya
ityAdiguNakalitaH sAdhumahina iti niH zaGka vAcya iti  // 1 //  sAmprataM
zramaNazabdasya pravRtinimittamudbhAvayannAha - TIkArtha - yahAM prayukta 'atha'
zabda avasAna maMgalArthaka hai-graMtha ke aMta meM maMgala dyotaka hai  /  Adi
maMgala to bujjhijjA-budhyeta isa pada dvArA abhihita huA hai, yoM Adi aura aMta
ke maMgalatva se-donoM sthAnoM para maMgala hone se samasta zrutaskandha
maMgalamaya hai, yaha Avedita-parijJApita yA sUcita hotA hai  /  athavA 'Aya'
zabda kA prayoga Anantarya-anantaratA ke artha meM hai  /  pandraha adhyayanoM
ke bAda unake arthoM kA saMgrAhaka-upasaMhAraka yaha solahavAM adhyayana
prAraMbha kiyA jAtA hai  /  isake anantara divya jJAna yukta-sarvajJa bhagavAna
mahAvIra devoM aura manuSyoM se yukta pariSad-dharma sabhA meM vakSyamANa-Age
kahA jAne vAlA prasaMga batalAte haiM  /  vaha isa prakAra haipandraha
adhyayanoM meM jo artha-mantavya yA siddhAnta pratipAdita kiye gaye haiM unake
anusAra AcaraNazIla sAdhu dAMtaindriya aura mana kA niyaMtraka-niyAmaka hai,
damanazIla hai  /  vaha mokSa prApta karane ke yogya hai, ataH dravyabhUta 619)

Page #648 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** is. The word "dravya" is also used in the
sense of "bhavy". Accordingly, because it is free from the "apdravya-vikara"
(imperfections) that occur in the state of being possessed by "rag"
(attachment), "dvesha" (aversion), and "kalik-rag" (temporal attachment) and
"dvesha" (aversion), it is like pure gold, a pure "dravya" (substance), and
perfectly holy, following the path of "samyama" (self-restraint). Because it is
free from "prati karma" (karmic reactions), "daihik" (physical) "saj"
(ornaments) and "saja" (decorations), it is free from the attachment to the
"vyutsrisht-kaya" (liberated body) and "daihik" (physical). Thus, in the
meanings described in previous studies, in the actions of "dharmacharan"
(righteous conduct), in the activities, the "sadhu" (saint) does not kill or
harm any living beings, whether they are stationary, mobile, subtle, gross,
sufficient, or insufficient. It is called "mahan" (great). Or, the one who is
protected by the nine "gupta" (secret) "vritti" (activities) and "bad" (fences)
of "brahmacharya" (celibacy), and who is a follower of unbroken "brahmacharya"
(celibacy), and who possesses the qualities described earlier, is called "mahan"
or "brahman" (a person who has realized the Brahman). The one who is "shranta"
(tired), who is "khinn" (distressed) by "tap" (austerity), is called "shraman"
(ascetic). Or, the one whose mind is the same everywhere, in enemies, friends,
etc., is "samamana" (equanimous). He is like a sandalwood tree, which has no
aversion or enmity towards the axe or the woodcutter who cuts it. Similarly, he
has no aversion towards his "apkari" (wrongdoer). Therefore, it is said that
there is no one who is "dveshya" (worthy of aversion) for him. Thus, the "sadhu"
(saint) who is adorned with the qualities mentioned earlier is called "shraman"
(ascetic) or "samamana" (equanimous). "Bhikshu" (mendicant) refers to a "sadhu"
(saint) who is "bhikshanashila" (one who lives on alms) and "bhikshopajibi" (one
who lives on alms). Or, the one who destroys the eight types of "karma"
(actions) by separating them, is a "bhikshu" (mendicant). That is, the "sadhu"
(saint) who is endowed with qualities like "damanshilata" (self-control),
"jitendriyata" (control over senses), etc., is called a "bhikshu" (mendicant).
Because he is free from external and internal "granthi" (knots), he is called
"nirgranth" (free from knots). That is, the "sadhu" (saint) who follows the
meanings expounded in the previous fifteen chapters, who is "dant" (free from
attachment), "dravya-bhoot" (pure substance), and "vyutsrisht-kaya" (liberated
body), is worthy of being called "nirgranth" (free from knots).  When the Lord
said this, the disciple asked, "O Lord! O "Bhadant" (venerable sir)! O "bhayant"
(fear-destroyer), O "bhav-ant-bhav-nashak" (destroyer of the cycle of birth and
death), who is "dant" (free from attachment), "dravya-bhoot" (pure substance),
and "vyutsrisht-kaya" (liberated body), why is he called "brahman" (a person who
has realized the Brahman), "shraman" (ascetic), "bhikshu" (mendicant), and
"nirgranth" (free from knots)? As you have expounded, the words "brahman" etc.
are used to refer to the "sadhu" (saint). O "Mahamune" (great sage)! O
"yatharth-vetta" (knower of the truth of the three times)! Please explain this
to us!" When asked thus, the Lord explained the reasons for the use of the four
appellations "brahman" etc., which are different from each other in some
respects, and how they are used in practice. In the meanings described in the
previous study, the one who is "vritti-yukt" (engaged in activities) and
"vartan-shila" (conducts himself) is free from all "papakarma" (sinful actions)
and "savadya" (defective) "anushtan" (practices). He is free from "prem-rag-
moolak-aaskti" (attachment based on love and attachment), "dvesha-apriti"
(aversion and dislike), "kalah-dvandva-adhikaran" (quarrels and disputes),
"sangarsh" (struggle), "jhagada" (fight), "abhyakhyan-asat-abhiyog" (false
accusations), "paishunya-chugali" (backbiting and gossip), "par-guna-
asahishnuta" (intolerance towards the qualities of others), "dosh-ka-udghatan"
(revealing the faults of others), "par-parivad" (slander), "kaku-vikrut-kanth-
dhvani" (speaking in a distorted voice to accuse others), "arati-samyam-me-
chitt-ki-udvignta" (anxiety in self-restraint), "rati-sansarik-vishayon-me-
aaskti" (attachment to worldly objects), "maya-parvanchana" (deceiving others),
"dhokha-dena" (cheating), "maya-dwara-kutil-buddhi-purvak-asaty-bhashan"
(speaking falsely with a cunning mind), "asat-arth-ka-abhidhan-kathn" (speaking
falsely, like calling a cow a horse), "mithya-darshan-atatva-me-tatva-
abhinivesh" (insisting on the truth of what is not true, or believing in the
untruth of what is true). For example, there is no soul, it is not eternal, it
does not do anything, it does not experience the fruits of its actions, there is
no liberation, and there is no way to liberation. These are the six "mithyatva"
(falsehood) "sthan" (

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram hai  /  dravya zabda bhavya ke artha meM bhI prayukta
hai  /  tadanusAra rAga dveSa kAlika-rAga dveSa yukta avasthA meM hone vAle
apadravya-vikAroM se rahita hone ke kAraNa vaha uttama koTi ke svarNa kI jyoM
zuddha dravyabhUta, parama pavitra saMyamAnugata hai  /  pratikarma-daihika sAja
sajA Adi se rahita hone ke kAraNa jo vyutsRSTakAya-daihika Asakti se vimukta hai
/  isa prakAra pUrva adhyayanoM meM varNita arthoM me-dharmAcaraNamaya kAryoM
meM-pravRttiyoM meM vidyamAna sAdhu sthAvara, jaMgama, sUkSma, bAdara, paryApta
aparyApta bheda yukta prANiyoM kA hanana-vyApAdana nahIM karatA  /  vaha mAhama
zabda dvArA abhidheya hai  /  athavA jo brahmacarya kI nau guptiyoM-vRttiyoM,
bAr3oM se rakSita-akhaMDa brahmacarya pAlaka pUrva varNita guNa gaNa yukta hai
vaha mAhana yA brAhmaNa zabda se vAcya hai  /  jo zrAnta hotA hai-tapa dvArA
khinna hotA hai, vaha zramaNa zabda dvArA vAcya hai, athavA jisakA mana zatru
mitra Adi meM saba jagaha eka jaisA hotA hai, vaha samamanA hai  /  vaha bAsI
candana ke sadRza hotA hai-kATane vAle vasUle yA kuThAra ke sAtha candana ke
vRkSa kA koI dveSa yA zatrubhAva nahIM hotA, vaise hI usakA apakArI ke prati
dveSa nahIM hotA  /  ataeva kahA gayA hai, usake liye koI bhI dveSya-dveSa
karane yogya nahIM hotA  /  isa prakAra pahale jina guNoM kA kathana huA hai,
una guNoM se zobhita hotA huA sAdhu zramaNa yA samamanA kahA jAtA hai  /  bhikSu
kA tAtparya bhikSaNazIla-bhikSopajIvI sAdhu hai  /  athavA jo ATha prakAra ke
karmoM ko bhinna-chinna bhinna karatA hai, naSTa kara DAlatA hai, vaha bhikSu
hai arthAt damanazIlatAjitendriyatA Adi guNoM se yukta sAdhu bhikSu kahA jAtA
hai  /  vaha bAharI tathA bhItarI graMthiyoM ke abhAva ke kAraNaunako miTA dene
ke kAraNa nirgrantha kahA jAtA hai arthAt jo sAdhu pUrvavartI pandraha adhyAyoM
meM pratipAdita arthoM kA anusaraNa karatA hai-dAMta, dravyabhUta tathA
vyutsRSTa kAya hai, vaha nirgrantha kahe jAne yogya hai  /  bhagavAna dvArA yoM
kahe jAne para ziSya prazna karatA hai-bhagavan ! bhadanta, bhayAnta-bhaya
nAzaka, bhavAntabhava nAzaka jo dAMta dravyabhUta tathA vyutsRSTa kAya hai, vaha
brAhmaNa, zramaNa, bhikSu evaM nirgrantha kyoM kahA jAtA hai ? jaisA bhagavAna
ne-Apane pratipAdita kiyA ki brAhmaNa Adi zabda sAdhu ke vAcaka hai  /  he
mahAmune ! he tInoM kAloM ke yathArtha vettA ! hameM Apa yaha batalAye-samajhAeM
! yoM pUche jAne para bhagavAna ne brAhmaNa Adi cAroM abhidhAnoM-nAmoM ke jo
kathaJcit-kinhIM apekSAoM se bhinna bhinna haiM kramazaH unake pravRtta-prayukta
hone ke kAraNa batalAte haiM  /  pUrvavartI adhyayana meM kahe gaye arthoM meM
vRttiyukta-vartanazIla hotA huA vaha samasta pApakarmoMsAvadya anuSThAnoM se
virata-nivRtta rahatA hai tathA prema-rAgamUlaka Asakti, dveSa-aprIti, kalaha-
dvandvAdhikaraNa, saMgharSa, jhagar3A, abhyAkhyAna-asat abhiyoga, paizUnya-
cugalI, para guNAsahanatA-auroM ke guNoM ke prati asahiSNutA usake doSoM kA
udghATana, para parivAda, kAkU-vikRta kaNThadhvani dvArA dUsare para doSAropaNa,
arati-saMyama meM citta kI udvignatA, rati-sAMsArika viSayoM meM Asakti, mAyA-
paravaJcanA-auroM ko ThaganA, dhokhA denA, mAyA dvArA kuTila buddhi pUrvaka
asatyabhASaNa, asat artha kA abhidhAna-kathana jaise gAya ko ghor3A kahanA,
mithyAdarzana-atattva meM tattvAbhiniveSa-atattva ko tattva mAnane kA Agraha
athavA tattva meM atattva kI mAnyatA  /  jaise AtmA nahIM hai, vaha nitya nahIM
hai, vaha kucha bhI nahIM karatI, kRta kA phalavedana nahIM karatI  /  mokSa
nahIM hai tathA mokSa kA upAya nahIM hai| ye mithyAtva ke chaH sthAna hai,
ityAdi  /  yaha saba zalya haiM  /  AtmA meM kAMTe kI bhAMti cubhane vAle haiM-
pIr3A dene vAle haiM  /  vaha ina sabase prathak rahatA hai  /  IryA Adi
samitiyoM ko samyak anvita hotA haisamita hotA hai  /  vaha paramArthamUlaka
hita ke sAtha vartana zIla hai ! ataH sahita hai  /  athavA jJAna Adi se yukta
hone ke kAraNa vaha sahita hai tathA vaha sarvadA yat-saMyama ke AcaraNa meM
yatnazIla rahatA hai| use cAhiye ki vaha apane isa sadAcaraNa ko kaSAyoM dvArA
nissAra-sArahIna na banAye  /  kisI apakArI-burA karane vAle ke -620)

Page #649 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Do not be angry or become controlled by anger even when engaged in the study of
the sacred scriptures. Even when engaged in excellent and supreme austerities,
do not be proud or arrogant. It has been said that the great men who churned the
eight types of pride also prohibited the pride of asceticism and austerity. One
should diligently avoid the remaining places of pride. One should also not be
attached to the delusion of greed. A sage adorned with such qualities is
undoubtedly called a "Mahan" (great). Now, to reveal the reason for using the
term "Shraman" (ascetic), it is said:  Here, an ascetic is one who is free from
attachment, free from the desire for worldly pleasures, free from taking, free
from violence, free from falsehood, free from sexual misconduct, free from
anger, free from pride, free from delusion, free from greed, free from love, and
free from hatred. Whoever is free from taking, whoever is the cause of hatred
for the self, whoever is free from taking, whoever is free from violence,
whoever is subdued, whoever is free from the body, is called an ascetic.
Commentary: Here, the ascetic who is present in the group of qualities like
renunciation, etc., mentioned earlier, is also called an ascetic. It is said
that even those who are endowed with these qualities are called ascetics. There
is no excess in this statement. "Shrita" means attached, "Anishrita" means not
attached. One who is not attached to the body, etc., is called "Anishrita".
Similarly, "Nidan" means the cause, "Anidan" means without a cause. One who is
free from the desire for worldly pleasures, who is free from the desire for the
destruction of all karmas, and who is engaged in the practice of self-control is
called "Anidan". "Adan" means to take, to accept, to perform the eight types of
karmas. It is the attachment to the passions, the attachment to possessions, or
the performance of actions with attachment. "Atipat" means violence, which means
killing. One should know this violence through knowledge and understanding, and
should avoid it through the knowledge of rejection. Similarly, the action should
be applied in other cases as well. "Mrushavad" means false speech. One should
know this false speech and avoid it. "Bahiddha" means sexual misconduct and
attachment to possessions. One should know these two things properly and avoid
them. These are the basic qualities. Now, describing the other qualities, it is
said that anger is characterized by displeasure, pride is characterized by
arrogance, delusion is characterized by deception, greed is characterized by
selfishness, love is characterized by attachment, and hatred is characterized by
the destruction of oneself and others. One should know these things properly and
avoid them, as they are the path to the cycle of birth and death and the
destruction of the path to liberation. Similarly, one should avoid any other
action that leads to the accumulation of karma, which causes harm in this world
and the next, and which is the cause of hatred for the self. One should avoid
these actions, even before they occur, because they are the cause of harm. One
should avoid all actions that are the cause of harm in both worlds, and should
strive to be free from the performance of actions with attachment. One who is
thus subdued, pure, free from the body, free from karmas, and free from the body
is called an ascetic.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI gAthAdhyayanaM prati bhI Akroza yukta hokara krodha na kare-krodha ke
vazIbhUta na ho  /  utkRSTa-uttama tapazcaraNa se yukta hotA huA bhI vaha mAna-
garva na kare  /  kahA hai-ATha prakAra ke mada kA maMthana karane vAle
mahApuruSoM ne nirjarA evaM tapasyA ke mada kA bhI pratiSedha kiyA hai  /
avaziSTa-bAkI ke mada sthAnoM kA prayatnapUrvaka parihAra karanA caahiye| isake
upalakSaNa se mAyA lobhAtmaka rAga bhI nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  ityAdi guNoM se
suzobhita sAdhu nissaMdeha mAhana zabda dvArA vAcya hai  /  aba zramaNa zabda ke
prayoga kA hetu prakaTa karate hue kahate haiM  /  etthavi samaNe aNissie
aNiyANe AdANaM ca ativAyaM ca musAvAyaM ca bahiddhaM ca kohaM ca mANaM ca mAyaM
ca lohaM ca pijjaM ca dosaM ca . icceva jao jao AdANaM appaNo padosaheU tao tao
AdANAto puvvaM paDivirate pANAivAyA siAdate davie vosaTTakAe samaNetti vacce  //
2 //  chAyA - atrApi zramaNo'nizrito'nidAnaH AdAnazcAtipAtaJca mRSAvAdaJca
bahiddhasya krodhaJca, mAnaJca, mAyAJca lomaJca prema ca ityeva yato yata AdAna
mAtmanaH pradveSahetun tatastata AdAnAt pUrvaM prativirataH prANAtipAtAt syAd
dAntaH dravyaH vyutsRSTakAyAH zramaNa iti - vAcyaH  /  anuvAda - jo sAdhu
anizrita-daihika Asakti rahita, anidAna-sAMsArika sukhamaya phala kI kAmanA se
zUnya hai, prANAtipAta, mRSAvAda, abrahmacarya, tathA parigraha, krodha, mAna,
mAyA, lobha, prema-rAga, dveSa nahIM karatA tathA jina jina se AdAna-karmabaMdha
hotA hai, AtmA-pradveSa hetu dveSa kA kAraNa yA pAtra banatA hai  /  una kAryoM
se pratinivRtta hokara-haTakara dAMta-indriya vijetA mokSa pathagAmI tathA
dehAtIta bana jAtA hai vaha zramaNa zabda se vAcya hai| TIkA - atrApyanantarokte
viratyAdike guNasamUhe vartamAnaH zramaNo'pi vAcyaH
etadguNayuktenApibhAvyamityAhanizcaye nAdhikyena vA "zrito' nizritaH na
nizrito'nizrita:-kvaciccharIrAdAvapyapratibaddhaH, tathA na vidyate
nidAnamasyetyanidAnonirAkAGkho'zeSakarmakSayArthI saMyamAnuSThAne pravarteta,
tathA''dIyatesvIkriyate'STaprakAraM karma yena tadAdAnaM-kaSAyAH parigrahaH
sAvadyAnuSThAnaM vA, tathA'tipAtanamatipAtaH, prANAtipAta ityarthaH, taM ca
prANAtipAtaM jJaparijJayA jJAtvA pratyAkhyAnaparijJayA parihared, evamanyatrApi
kriyA yojanIyA  /  tathA mRSA-alI ko vAdo mRSAvAdastaM ca, tathA 'bahiddhaM ti
maithunaparigrahau tau ca samyak parijJAya pariharet  /  uktA mUlaguNAH, uttara
guNAnadhikRtyAhakrodham-aprItilakSaNaM mAnaM-stambhAtmakaM mAyAM ca
paravaJcanAtmikAM lobhaM-mU svabhAvaM tathA prema-abhiSvaGgalakSaNaM tathA
dveSa-svaparAtmanorbAdhArUpamityAdikaM saMsArAvataraNamArga
mokSAdhvano'padhvaMsakaM samyak parijJAya prihrediti| evamanyasmAdapi yato yataH
karmopAdAnAd-ihAmutra cAnarthahetorAtmano'pAyaM pazyati pradveSahetUzca
tatastataH prANAtipAtAdikAnarthadaNDAdAdAnAt pUrvamevaanAgatamevAtmahitamicchan
prati viratobhavet-sarvasmAdanarthahetubhUtAdubhaya loka virudvAdvA
sAvadyAnuSThAnAnmumukSuviraMtiM kuryAt  /  yazcaivaMbhUto. dAntaH zuddho
dravyabhUto niSpratikarmatayA vyutsRSTakAyaH sa zramaNo vAcyaH  // 2 //  621

Page #650 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sutra Kritanga Sutra Commentary - English Translation  The term "Sadhu
Shraman" refers to a virtuous individual possessing the qualities of "Virati"
(non-attachment) and others as described earlier. It is expected that such a
Shraman is associated with a group of Shramans.  The commentators explain that a
person who is firmly attached to a particular object or substance is called
"Nishrit" (attached). One who is free from attachment to the body and other
things is called "Anishrit" (unattached). A person who does not desire the cause
and effect of actions is called "Nidan" (unattached to results). Such a person,
free from desires, strives to practice restraint with the goal of destroying all
karmas.  Those who acquire or bind eight types of karmas are called "Nidan"
(attached to results). "Kashaya" (passions), "Parigraha" (attachment), and
"Savadhan Anushthan" (careless practices) fall under the category of "Nidan".
"Atipatana" or "Atipat" (violence) is called "Pranatipat" (violence against
life). It should be recognized through "Jnana Parijna" (knowledge) and abandoned
through "Pratyakhyan Parijna" (rejection). Similarly, other actions should be
dealt with accordingly.  Speaking falsehood is called "Mrishvad" (false speech).
"Abrahmacharya" (sexual misconduct) and "Parigraha" (attachment) are called
"Bahiddha" (external). These should be recognized and abandoned.  The "Mula
Guna" (root qualities) have been discussed. Now, the "Uttara Guna" (secondary
qualities) are explained. "Aapriti" (displeasure) is called "Krodha" (anger),
"Stambh-Ghamanda" (pride) is called "Man" (ego), "Pravanchana" (deception) is
called "Maya" (illusion), "Murcha" (fainting) is called "Lobha" (greed),
"Anurag" (attachment) is called "Prem" (love), and the obstacles created for
oneself and others are called "Desha" (defects). These are the paths leading to
rebirth in the world. They are destructive to the path of liberation. Therefore,
they should be recognized and abandoned.  Similarly, other factors that
contribute to the binding of karmas, causing harm in this world and the next,
are detrimental to the soul, causing obstacles and suffering. These are the
causes of "Pradesh" (defects). The soul should recognize and avoid these
actions, which are harmful, pointless, and filled with sin.  The soul, desiring
its own welfare, should avoid these actions from the beginning. A person seeking
liberation should stay away from these harmful actions, which are against the
principles of this world and the next. Such a person, who is self-controlled,
pure, follows the path of restraint, and is free from external adornments and
attachment to the body, is called a "Shraman".  Here, the monk, who is humble,
virtuous, self-controlled, free from attachment to material possessions,
practices restraint, endures various hardships and obstacles, is pure and
cleansed through spiritual practice, is stable in his mind, and lives on alms
given by others, is called a "Bhikshu".  The commentary explains that the term
"Bhikshu" is used here because the qualities mentioned earlier, like "Virati"
(non-attachment) and others, are also applicable to the term "Bhikshu". These
qualities, along with others like "Anunnat" (humble), "Vinit" (virtuous),
"Jitendiya" (self-controlled), "Sanayam Pathangata" (following the path of
restraint), and "Dehasakti Viheen" (free from attachment to the body), are the
characteristics of a "Bhikshu". He endures various hardships and obstacles, is
purified through spiritual practice, is stable in his mind, and lives on alms
given by others. He is called a "Bhikshu".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram TIkArtha - pahale varNita virati Adi guNa samUhaM se
yukta sAdhu zramaNa zabda dvArA vAcya hai  /  vaha zramaNa ke gaNoM se yakta ho
yaha apekSita hai  /  satrakAra isa saMdarbha meM pratipAdita karate haiM, jo
kisI meM-kisI padArtha meM nizcita rUpa se-adhikatA se zrita-TikA hotA hai,
avasthita hotA hai use nizrita kahA jAtA hai  /  jo zarIra Adi meM apratibaddha-
anAsakta hotA hai use anizrita kahA jAtA hai  /  jisake nidAna-phala kI abhilASA
nahIM hotI hai vaha anidAna kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha nirAkAMkSa-AkAMkSA rahita
hotA huA samagra karmoM ke kSaya kA uddezya liye saMyama ke anuSThAna anasaraNa
meM pravatta rahe  /  jisase ATha prakAra ke karma grahaNa kiye jAte haiM kiye
jAte haiM yA bAMdhe jAte haiM, use nidAna kahA jAtA hai  /  kaSAya, parigraha
athavA sAvadha anuSThAna-pApAcaraNa nidAna ke antargata haiM  /  atipAtana yA
atipAta-hiMsA ko prANAtipAta kahA jAtA hai  /  usako jJaparijJA dvArA jAnakara
pratyAkhyAna parijJA dvArA chor3anA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra anyatra bhI kriyAoM
ko yojita karanA cAhiye  /  asatya bolanA mRSAvAda hai  /  abrahmacarya tathA
parigraha ko 'bahiddha' kahA jAtA hai, inheM samyak parijJAta kara tyAga denA
cAhiye  /  mUla guNa kahe jA cuke haiM  /  aba uttara guNoM ko adhikRta kara
kahA jAtA hai  /  aprIti ko krodha, stambha-ghamaNDa ko mAna, pravaJcanA ko
mAyA, mUrchA ko lobha tathA anurAga ko prema evaM apane tathA anya ke liye
upasthApita bAdhA ko deSa kahA jAtA hai| ye saMsAra meM avatIrNa hone ke-utarane
yA Ane ke mArga haiN| mokSa mArga ke apadhvaMsaka-nAzaka hai  /  isaliye inheM
samyak parijJAta kara chor3a denA cAhiye  /  isI prakAra anya bhI jo jo karmoM
ke upAdAna haiM-karma baMdhane ke kAraNa haiM, isa loka meM aura paraloka meM,
anartha ke hetu haiM  /  AtmA ke liye apAya vighna yA kaSTakara haiM evaM
pradeSa ke kAraNa haiN| unheM vaha dekhatA hai-samajhatA hai  /  tathA pAta Adi
anartha daNDa-nirarthaka pApa yukta kArya haiM  /  AtmA kA hita-kalyANa cAhate
hue use unase pahale hI prativRtta ho jAnA cAhiye-haTa jAnA cAhiye  /  isa loka
evaM paraloka donoM ke viruddha sAvadha pApa yukta kArya rUpa anartha daNDa se
mokSAbhilASI puruSa ko dUra haTa jAnA cAhiye  /  aisA dAnta, zuddha
saMyamAnugata tathA bAhya sAja sajjA se rahita dehAtIta puruSa zramaNa zabda
dvArA vAcya hai| etthavi bhikkhU aNunnae viNIe nAmae daMte davie vosaTThakAe
saMvidhuNIya viruvaruve parIsahovasagge ajjhappajogasuddhAdANe uvaTThie ThiappA
saMkhAe paradattabhoI bhikkhUtti vacce  // 3 //  chAyA - atrApi bhikSuranunnato
vinIto nAmako dAnto dravyo vyutsRSTakAyaH saMvidhUya viruparupAnparISahopasargAn
adhyAtmayogazuddhAdAna upasthitaH sthitAtmA saMkhyAya paradattabhojI bhikSuriti
vAcyaH  /  anudAna - jo sAdhu anunnata-abhimAna rahita, pUrvokta guNa sahita
vinIta, namratAyukta, jitendriya, saMyama pathAnugata, dehAsaktivihIna hotA hai,
vaha bhinna bhinna prakAra ke parISahoM evaM upasargoM ko sahana karatA hai  /
adhyAtma yoga dvArA zuddha evaM nirmala hotA hai, sthitAtmA-Atma bhAva meM
sthita hotA hai, vaha saMsAra kA svarUpa jAnakara anya dvArA dI gaI bhikSA mAtra
se apanA jIvana calAtA hai  /  vaha bhikSu zabda dvArA vAcya hai  /  /  TIkA -
sAmprataM bhikSuzabdasya pravRttinimittamadhikRtyAha-'atrApI' ti, ye te
pUrvamuktAH pApakarNa viratyAdayo mAhana zabda pravRttihetavo'trApi
bhikSuzabdasya pravRtti-nimitte ta evAvagantavyAH, amIcAnye, tadyathA-na unna
(622

Page #651 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The one who is not elevated or arrogant is called *anunnata*. There are two
types of elevation: elevation of substance (*dravyaunnata*) and elevation of
feeling (*bhavoonnata*). The one who is elevated by the body is *dravyaunnata*,
and the one who is elevated by feeling or is attached to the feeling of
arrogance is *bhavoonnata*. This is being negated here. This implies that he
does not have arrogance towards austerity (*tapa*) and liberation (*nirjara*).
He is humble and has a good disposition. He is the one who is a *bhiksu*. The
sutra-kara states that the one who is adorned with humility, who is humble when
being instructed by the guru or at other times, i.e., who is always humble
towards the guru and other venerable persons, or who humbles the eight types of
karma through humility, and who, being devoted to service, destroys all sins, is
a *bhiksu*. He conquers the senses and the mind. He dwells with a pure feeling
in his soul. He transcends the body by abandoning external adornments. He
endures various types of favorable and unfavorable, pleasant and unpleasant,
high and low, twenty-two *parisahas* and divine and other afflictions. He
destroys them. He is not defeated by them, i.e., he destroys the *parisahas* and
afflictions through *adhyatma yoga*, by having a well-controlled mind, by
practicing *dharma dhyana*, and by maintaining pure conduct. He is
*shuddhadana*. He is elevated by good conduct (*samyak utthana*) and is
established in the path of liberation (*moksha dhwani*). He is not arrogant
towards *parisahas* and afflictions and remains stable in his soul. He knows the
impermanence of the world, the difficulty of attaining enlightenment in the
realm of karma, and the rarity of knowledge. He obtains all the resources for
crossing the world and is devoted to the practice of perfect restraint
(*samyama*). He eats food given by others, i.e., he eats food prepared by
householders for their own use. The one who is adorned with these qualities is
called a *bhiksu*. The one who dwells in these qualities is called *nirgrantha*.
There are some other qualities that are required for him. They are as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI gAthAdhyayana to'nunnataH, tatra dravyonnataH zarIreNocchritaH
bhAvonnatastvabhimAnagrahagrastaH, tatpratiSedhAttaponirjarAmadamapi na vidhatte
/  vinItAtmatayA prazrayavAn yataH, etadevAha-vinayAlaGkRto
gurvAdAvAdezadAnodyate'nyadA vA''tmAnaM nAmayatI ti nAmakaH-sadA gurvAdau prahvo
bhavati, vinayena vA'STaprakAraM karma nAmayati, vaiyAvRttyodyato'zeSaM
pApamapanayatItyarthaH  /  tathA 'dAntaH' indriyanoindriyAbhyAM, tathA
'zuddhAtmA' zuddhadravyabhUto niSpratikarmatayA 'vyutsRSTakAyazca'
parityaktadehazca yatkaroti taddarzayati-samyak 'vidhUya' apanIya 'viruparUpAn'
nAnArUpAnanukulapratikUlAn-uccAvacAn dvAviMzatiparISahAn tathA
divyAdikAnupasargAzceti, tadvidhUnanaM tu yatteSAM samyak sahanaM-
tairaparAjitatA, parISahopasargAzca vidhUyAdhyAtmayogena-supraNihitAntaH
karaNatayA dharmadhyAnena zuddham-avadAtamAdAnaMcAritraM yasya sa zuddhAdAno
bhavati  /  tathA samyagutthAnena-saccAritrodyamenotthitaH tathA sthito-
mokSAdhvani vyavasthitaH parISahopasagairapyadhRSya AtmA yasya sa sthitAtmA,
tathA 'saMkhyAya' parijJAyAsAratAM saMsArasya duSprApatAM karmabhUmerbodheH
sudurlabhatvaM cAvApya ca sakalAM saMsArottaraNasAmagrI satsaMyamakaraNodyataH
paraiH-gRhasthairAtmArthaM nirvatitamAhArajAtaM tairdattaM bhoktuM zIlamasya
paradattabhojI, sa evaMguNakalito bhikSuriti vAcyaH  // 3 //  tathA'trApi
guNagaNe vartamAno nirgrantha iti vAcyaH, amI cAnye apadizyante, tadyathA -
TIkArtha - aba bhikSu zabda kI pravRtti kA nimitta kAraNa batalAte hue sUtrakAra
kahate haiM - mahAn zabda kI pravRtti yA prayoga ke hetu bhUta jina pApa karma
virati Adi vizeSatAoM kI carcA kI gaI hai  /  ve sabhI bhikSu zabda kI pravRtti
ke bhI kAraNa haiM yaha jAnanA cAhiye  /  tathA inake atirikta aura bhI guNa
haiM, ve isa prakAra hai  /  jo unnata-udyata yA abhimAna yukta nahIM hotA hai
use anunnata kahA jAtA hai  /  dravyonnata tathA bhAvonnatA ke rUpa meM vaha do
prakAra kA hotA hai  /  jo zarIra se ucchrita-udyata hotA hai vaha dravyonnata
hai, jo bhAva se udyata yA abhimAna ke graha se grasta hai-abhimAnI haiM vaha
bhAvonnata hai  /  isakA yahAM niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  isase yaha phalita hotA
hai ki tapasyA tathA nirjarA kA bhI vaha abhimAna nahIM karatA  /  vaha
vinayazIla prazrayavAna hotA hai  /  vahI bhikSu hai  /  sUtrakAra pratipAdita
karate haiM ki jo vinaya se alaMkRta suzobhita hotA hai, guru Adi dvArA Adeza
dete samaya yA anya samaya vinamra rahatA hai arthAt guru Adi pUjya janoM ke
prati sadA namratApUrNa vyavahAra karatA hai athavA vinaya dvArA ATha prakAra ke
karmoM namra karatA hai-miTAtA hai tathA sevA meM udyata rahatA huA samasta pApa
kSINa karatA hai  /  vaha indriya va mana ko jIta letA hai  /  AtmA meM zuddha
bhAva liye rahatA hai  /  bAharI sAja sajjA kA tyAga karatA huA dehAtIta hotA
hai  /  vaha vividha prakAra ke anukUlapriya, apriya-pratikUla-apriyApriya-U~ce
nIce bAIsa pariSahoM ko tathA devAdikRta upasargoM ko sahana karatA hai| unakA
vidhUnana-nAza karatA hai  /  unase parAjita nahIM hotA arthAt pariSahoM
upasargoM ko adhyAtma yoga dvArA, dharma dhyAna dvArA miTA detA hai aura zuddha
cAritra kA paripAlana karatA hai  /  vaha samyak utthAna-uttama cAritra dvArA
dharmodhita hotA hai tathA mokSa ke mArga meM vyavasthita hotA hai  /  vaha
pariSahoM aura upasargoM ko dharSita-tiraskRta kara Atma bhAva meM sthira rahatA
hai  /  vaha saMsAra kI asAratA-sArahInatA ko evaM karmabhUmi meM bodhi kI-
samyakdarzana kI duSprApyatA ko jAnakara saMsAra ko pAra karane kI samagra
dharmopayogI sAmagrI ko prApta kara uttama saMyama kI sAdhanA meM samudyata hotA
hai  /  gRhasthoM dvArA apane liye taiyAra kiye gaye bhojana meM se dI gaI
bhikSA ke AdhAra para vaha nirvAha karatA hai  /  isa prakAra jo guNoM se
kalita-zobhita hotA hai, vaha bhikSu zabda dvArA abhidheya hai  /  jo ina guNoM
meM vartamAna rahatA hai-inase yukta hotA hai, vaha nirgrantha zabda se vAcya
hai  /  usake liye apekSita kucha anya guNa bhI batAye jAte hai  /  ve isa
prakAra haiM - 623

Page #652 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sutra of the Sri Sutra Kritanga says: In this way, a Niggrantha, who is a
single-minded Buddha, with his stream of karma cut off, well-controlled, well-
balanced, and well-established in equanimity, having attained the knowledge of
the Self, is a scholar who has cut off both types of streams of karma, and is
not seeking worship, respect, or gain. He is a devotee of Dharma, a knower of
Dharma, and has attained the path of liberation. He walks with equanimity, is
subdued, is a follower of the path of virtue, and has abandoned attachment to
the body. He is called a Niggrantha. Know this to be true, for I am the savior
from fear. Thus ends the sixteenth chapter of the Gatha. Thus ends the first
chapter of the Suyagandha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGga sUtram etthavi NiggaMthe ege egaviU buddhe saMchinnasoe
susaMjate susamite susAmAie AyavAyapatte viu duhaovi soyapalicchinne No
pUyAsakkAra lAbhaTThI dhammaTThI dhammaviU NiyAgapaDivanne sami (ma) yaM care
daMte davie vosaTThakAe niggaMthetti vacce se evameva jANaha jamahaM bhayaM tAro
tibemi|| iti solasamaM gAhAnAmajjhayaNaM samattaM ||pddh'mo suakkhaMdho samatto
// 1 //  chAyA - atrA'pi nigranthaH ekaH ekavid buddhaH saMchinnasrotAH
susaMyataH susamitaH susAmAyikaH AtmavAdaprAptaH vidvAn dvidhA'pi srotaH
paricchinnaH no pUjA satkAra lAbhArthI dharmavid niyAgapratipannaH samatAM cared
dAntaH dravyaH vyutsRSTakAyaH nigrantha iti vAcyaH tadevameva jAnIta yadahaM
bhayatrAtAraH ||iti brviimi|| anuvAda - yahAM pUrvokta bhikSu ke guNa nirgrantha
meM apekSita hai-unake atirikta anya guNa isa prakAra haiM, jo eka-ekAkI akelA
yA rAgadveSa rahita hai, ekavid-AtmA akelI hI jAtI hai, vaha jAnatA hai  /
buddhajo vastu svarUpa kA parijJAtA hai, saMchinnasrota-jisane AzravoM ke srota-
dvAra, avaruddha kara diye haiM, susaMyatazreSTha, uttama, saMyamayukta hai,
susamita-jo pAMca samiti yukta hai, susAmAyaka-jo samatva bhAva saMvalita hai,
AtmavAda prApta-AtmA ke satyasvarUpa kA jJAtA hai, vidvAn-samasta padArthoM ke
svabhAva kA dRSTA hai, jisameM dravya evaM bhAva donoM hI prakAra ke srota-karma
Agamana ke dvAroM kA uccheda kara diyA hai, jo sammAna satkAra evaM lAbha kA
icchuka nahIM hai  /  varan ekamAtra dharmArthI-dharma kA arthI, icchuka hai,
dharmavid-dharma ke svarUpa ko jAnatA hai, niyAga pratipanna-jo mokSa ke mArga
ko prApta kara cukA hai, jo samabhAva se vicaraNazIla haiM, jo dAMta-indriya
vijetA dravyabhUta-yukti mArgAnuyAyI, vyutsRSTakAya-daihika Asakti se atIta hotA
hai  /  vaha nirgrantha pada se vAcya hai  /  tuma ise isI prakAra jAno, AtmasAt
karo, jo maiMne kahA hai kyoMki vaha bhayatrAtA-sAMsArika prANiyo ko janma
maraNa ke bhaya se rakSA karane vAle sarvajJa tIrthaMkara anyathA bhASaNa nahIM
karate  /  maiM aisA kahatA huuN| TIkA - 'eko rAgadveSarahitatayA ojAH,
yadivA'smin saMsAracakravAle paryaTannasumAn svakRtasukha
duHkhaphalabhAktvenaikasyaiva paralokagamanatayA sadaikaka eva bhavati  /
tatrodyatavihArI dravya to'pyeka ko bhAvato'pi, gacchAntargatastu kAraNiko
dravyato bhAjyo bhAvatastvekaka eva bhavati  /  tathaivamevAtmAnaM
paralokagAminaM vettItyekavit, me kazciduHkhaparitrANakArI sahAyo'rUpItyevameva
vit yadivaikAntavid-ekAntena vidita saMsAra svabhAvatayA maunIndrameva zAsanaM
tathyaM nAnyadityevaM vettItyekAntavit, athavaiko-mokSaH saMyamo vA taM vettIti,
tathA buddhaH -avagatatattvaHsamyakchinnAni apanItAni
bhAvasrotAMsisaMvRtatvAtkarmAzravadvarANi yena sa
tathA,suSThusaMyataHkUrmavatsaMyatagAtro nirarthakakAyakriyArahitaH susaMyataH,
tathA suSThu paMcabhiH samitibhiH samyagita:-prApto jJAnAdikaM mokSamArgamasau
susamitaH, tathA suSThu samabhAvatayA sAmAyikaM-samazatrumitrabhAvo yasya sa
susAmAyikaH  /  tathA''tmanaH-upayoga lakSaNasya jIvasyAsaMkhyeya-
pradezAtmakasya saMkocavikAzabhAjaHsvakRtaphalabhujaHpratyeka
sAdhAraNazarIratayA vyavasthitasya dravyaparyAyatayA nityAnityAdyananta
dharmAtmaka sya vA vAda AtmavA dastaM prApta AtmavAdaprAptaH,
samyagyathAvasthitAtmasvatattvavedItyarthaH  /  tathA 'vidvAna'
avagatasarvapadArthasvabhAvI na vyatyayena padArthAnavacchati  /  624)

Page #653 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Chapter 16: The Gatha**  Then, some may say, "The study of
the Gatha is as follows: The soul is one, pervading the entire universe, the
nature of all things, the size of a black sesame seed, or the size of a thumb
joint, etc." Such a false assumption is to be rejected, as there is no evidence
to support the existence of such a soul.  The meaning is this: "There are two
aspects, namely, substance and mode. In substance, there are streams of
substance, such as the senses, which are directed towards their respective
objects. In mode, there are streams of mode, such as sound, etc., which are
favorable or unfavorable, arising from attachment and aversion. These streams of
mode are also limited, due to the covering of the senses and the absence of
attachment and aversion. Thus, he is one with limited streams. He does not
perform actions for the sake of worship, respect, or gain, but for the sake of
liberation. This is what is shown by the term 'Dharma' - the meaning of which is
'Shrutacharitra' (the practice of the scriptures). This is the same meaning as
'Dharma-artha' (the purpose of Dharma). He who is a Dharma-arthi (one who seeks
Dharma) exists. This is what is said: 'He does not engage in actions for the
sake of worship, etc., but for the sake of Dharma.' Why? Because he knows Dharma
and its fruits, such as the attainment of heaven, correctly. He who knows Dharma
correctly, does what he does. This is shown by the term 'Niyaga' - the path of
liberation, or perfect restraint. He who has fully embraced this Niyaga, in both
substance and mode, is like a Niyaga-padi (one who has attained liberation).
What should such a person do? He should 'Sam (b) yam' - practice equality, or
equanimity, like sandalwood. What kind of person is he? He is 'Dant' - free from
attachment, and 'Vyutsrishta-kaya' - one who has renounced the body. He is
endowed with these qualities, and is a 'Shraman-bhikshu' (a mendicant monk) as
described earlier. He is also free from attachments, as the term 'Shraman-
bhikshu' implies. These terms, such as 'Mahana', etc., are not separate from the
term 'Nirgrantha' (one who is free from attachments). All these terms, even
though they have different meanings, are ultimately one in meaning."
**Conclusion**  Now, to conclude, the author says, addressing Sudharma Swami,
Jambuswami, etc., "You should know what I have said as it is. There is no other
interpretation to be made of my words, because I speak with the knowledge of the
omniscient. The omniscient ones do not speak otherwise out of fear of harming
others, because they are free from attachment, aversion, and delusion, which are
the root causes of harm. Therefore, you should understand what I have said from
the beginning as it is."  Thus, the conclusion is reached. The author says, "I
speak" as before.  Now, the Nayas (principles of interpretation) are explained.
There are seven Nayas, namely:  1. **Naigama:** This is the general principle,
which encompasses both the general and the particular. 2. **Sangraha:** This is
the principle of collection, which is a part of Naigama. 3. **Vyavahara:** This
is the principle of practical application, which is also a part of Naigama. 4.
**Rju-sutra:** This is the principle of the straight thread, which is a part of
Naigama and Vyavahara. 5. **Shabda:** This is the principle of words, which is a
part of Naigama, Sangraha, and Vyavahara. 6. **Dravya-astika:** This is the
principle of the existence of substance, which is a part of Naigama, Sangraha,
Vyavahara, Rju-sutra, and Shabda. 7. **Paryaya-astika:** This is the principle
of the existence of synonyms, which is a part of Naigama, Sangraha, Vyavahara,
Rju-sutra, Shabda, and Dravya-astika.  There are two Nayas within Dravya-astika
and Paryaya-astika, namely:  1. **Jnana-naya:** This is the principle of
knowledge, which is the primary principle. 2. **Kriya-naya:** This is the
principle of action, which is also a part of Jnana-naya.  There are also two
Nayas within Jnana-naya and Kriya-naya, namely:  1. **Jnana-naya:** This is the
principle of knowledge, which is the primary principle. 2. **Kriya-naya:** This
is the principle of action, which is also a part of Jnana-naya.  Each of the
Nayas is based on a relative truth, and both knowledge and action are essential
for liberation. Both are important, and both are achieved through right action.
**Gatha**  "In what is to be taken and what is not to be taken, in what is to be
striven for, that instruction is called Naya."  **Gatha**  "Having heard the
various ways of all the Nayas, he who is established in the qualities of
conduct, is pure in all the Nayas, is the virtuous one."  Thus ends the Gatha,
the sixteenth chapter. With its completion, the first Skandha of the Shruta is
also completed.  **Commentary**  The person who is free from attachment and
aversion is alone, or solitary. Or, the being who wanders in this cycle of
existence, experiences the fruits of his actions in the form of pleasure and
pain, and goes alone to the next world, is always alone. The virtuous one, who
is excellent in the practice of restraint, is alone in both substance and mode.
While he is a part of the Gachcha-sangha (community of monks) due to
circumstances, he is a part of the sangha in terms of substance, but alone in
terms of mode. Similarly, he who knows that the soul goes alone to the next
world is an 'Ekavit' (one who knows the oneness of the soul). Or, he who knows
that there is no one to protect or save him from suffering is an 'Ekavit'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI gAthAdhyayanaM tato yat kaizcidabhidhIyate, tadyathA - eka evAtmA
sarvapadArthasvabhAvatayA vizvavyApI zyAmAkataNDulamAtro'GguSThaparvaparimANo
vetyAdiko'sadbhUtAbhyupagamaH parihRto bhavati,
tathAvidhAtmasadbhAvapratipAdakasya pramANasyAbhAvAdityabhiprAyaH  /
'dvidhA'pIti dravyato bhAvatazca tatra dravyasrotAMsi srotAMsi yathAsvaM
viSayeSvindriya pravRttayaH bhAvasrotAMsitu zabdAdiSvevAnukUlapratikUleSu
rAgadveSobhavAstAnyumayarupANyApistrotAMsi saMvRtendriyatayA rAgadveSAbhAvAcca
paricchinnAni yena sa paricchinnasrotAH, tathA no pUjAsatkAralAbhArthI kintu
nirjarApekSI sarvAstapazcaraNAdikAH kriyA vidadhAti, etadeva darzayati-dharmaH -
zrutacAritrAkhyastenArthaH sa eva vA'rtho dharmArthaH sa vidyate yasyAsau
dharmArthIti, idamuktaM bhavati-na pUjAdyarthaM kriyAsu pravartate apitu
dharmArthIti  /  kimiti ? yato dharmaM yathAvattatphalAni ca
svargAvAptilakSANani samyak vetti, dharmaM ca samyag jAnAno yatkaroti
taddarzayati - niyAgo - mokSamArgaH satsaMyamo vA taM sarvAtmanA bhAvataH
pratipanna niyAgapaDivannetti, tathA vidhazca yatkuryAt tadAha - 'sami (bha)
yaM' ti samatAM samabhAvarUpAM vAsIcandanakalpAM 'caret'satatamanutiSThet  /
kiMbhUta san ? Aha- dAnto dravyabhUto vyutsRSTakAyazca, etadguNasamanvitaH san
pUrvoktamAhana zramaNabhikSu zabdAnAM yat pravRttinimittaM tatsamanvitazca
nirgrantha iti vAcyaH  /  te'pi mAhanAdayaH zabdA nirgranthazabda
pravRttinimittAvinAbhAvino bhavanti, sarve'pyete bhinnavyaJjanA api
kathaJcidekArthA iti  // 5 //  sAmpratamupasaMhArArthamAha-sudharmasvAmI
jambUsvAmiprabhRtInuddizyedamAha-' se ' iti tadyanmayA kathitamevameva jAnIta
yUyaM, nAnyo madvacasi vikalpo vidheyaH yasmAdahaM sarvajJAjJayA bravImi  /  na
ca sarvajJA bhagavantaH parahitaikaratA bhayAttrAtAro
rAgadveSamohAnyatarakAraNAbhAvAdanyathA bruvate, ato yanmayA''ditaH prabhRti
kathitaM tadevame vaavgcchteti| iti: prismaaptyrthe|brviimiiti pUrvavat  /
ukto'nugamaH sAmprataM nayAH, te ca naigamAdayaH sapta, naigamasya
sAmAnyavizeSAtmakatayA saMgrahavyavahArapravezAtsaMgrAhadayaH SaTH
samabhirUr3hetthaMbhUtayoH zabdanayapravezAnnaigama-
saMgrahavyavahArarjusUtrazabdAH paJcaH naigamasyApyantarbhAvAccatvAro,
vyavahArasyApi sAmAnya vizeSarUpatayA sAmAnya vizeSAtmanoH saMgraharjusUtrayo
rantarbhAvAtsaMgraharjusUtrazabdAstrayaH, te ca dravyAstika
paryAyAstikAntarbhAvAddravyAstikaparyAyAstikAbhidhAnau dvau nayau, yadivA
sarveSAmeva jJAnakriyayorantarbhAvAt jJAnakriyAbhidhAnau dvau tatrApi jJAnanayo
jJAnameva pradhAnamAha kriyAnayazca kriyAmiti  /  nayAnAM ca pratyekaM
mithyAdRSTitvAjjJAnakriyayozca parasparApekSitayA mokSAGgatvAdubhayamatra
pradhAnaM, taccobhayaM satkriyopete sAdhau bhavatIti, tathA coktam " NAyammi
gihiyavve agihiyavyaMmi ce va atthaMmi  /  jaiyavvameva iti jo uvaeso so nao
nAma  // 1 // " chAyA jJAte grahItavye'grahItavye caivArthe yatitavyameveti ya
upadezaH sa nayo nAma  // 1 //  chAyA " savvesiMpi NayANaM vahuvihavattavvayaM
NisAmettA  /  taM savvanayavisuddhaM jaM caraNa guNaTThio sAhU  // 2 //
sarveSAmapi nayAnAM bahuvidhAM vaktavyatAM nizamyata tsarvanayavizuddhaM
yaccaraNaguNasthitaH sAdhuH  // 2 //  tti, samAptaM ca gAthAkhyaM
SoDazamadhyayanaM, tatsamAptau ca samAptaH prathamaH zrutaskandha iti  //  (
granthAgram 8106) TIkArtha jo puruSa rAga dveSa se varjita hone ke kAraNa ekAkI
akelA haiM athavA isa saMsAra cakra meM paryaTana karatA huA prANI apane dvArA
kiye gaye karmoM ke sukha duHkha rUpa phala ko akelA hI bhogane ke kAraNa, akelA
hI paraloka meM jAne ke kAraNa vaha sadA ekAkI yA akelA hI hai  /  jo sAdhu
saMyamAcaraNa meM utkRSTa bhAva se viharaNazIla hai, vaha dravya aura bhAva
donoM hI dRSTiyoM se ekAkI hai  /  kAraNavaza gacchasaMgha ke bhItara rahate hue
vaha dravya dRSTi se bhAjya hai-saMgha kA eka bhAga auroM ke sAtha hai kiMtu
bhAvadRSTi se vaha akelA hI hotA hai  /  isI prakAra jo yaha jAnatA hai ki AtmA
ekAkI hI paraloka meM jAtI hai vaha ekavit hai  /  athavA duHkha se merA koI
paritrANa- rakSaNa karane vAlA sahAyaka nahIM hai, aisA jo jAnatA hai, vaha -
625

Page #654 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Shri Sutra Kritanga Sutra** states that a **Ekantvit** is one who knows
with certainty the nature of the world and the path to liberation, as taught by
the **Tirthankaras**. They believe that this path is the only truth, and there
is no other. A **Ekantvit** is also one who knows only liberation or restraint.
They are **bound** (having understood and acquired the principles), **Sanchhinna
Srot** (having closed the doors of inflow of karma), **Susanyat** (restrained
like a tortoise, free from useless bodily actions), **Susamit** (united with the
five samitis, having attained the path of liberation), **Susamayak** (well-
established in equanimity, seeing the same in friend and foe), and **Atmavad
Prapt** (having attained the knowledge of the self). They know the true nature
of the soul, which is characterized by its use, is infinite in its extent,
capable of contraction and expansion, experiences the fruits of its actions,
exists in every body, and is eternal, impermanent, and possesses infinite
qualities. A **Vidvan** is one who knows the true nature of all things, not the
opposite. For example, some say that the soul is one and pervades the universe
because it is the nature of all things. Others believe it is the size of a grain
of rice. Still others consider it to be the size of a finger joint. Such beliefs
are rejected because they are not supported by evidence. A **Parichhinna Srot**
is one who has closed the doors of inflow of karma, which are of two types:
**Dravyasrot** and **Bhavasrot**. The former refers to the activities of the
senses in their respective objects, while the latter refers to the arising of
attachment and aversion when one encounters something favorable or unfavorable
in the world of sound, etc. By restraining the senses and preventing attachment
and aversion, one closes both types of doors. A **Poojasatkara Labharthi** is
one who performs all austerities and other actions only for the sake of
liberation, without desiring praise, honor, or benefit. This is why they are
called **Dharmarthi**, because their goal is the **Shruta Charitra**-based
dharma. They are not motivated by praise or honor, but by dharma, because they
understand dharma and its fruits, such as attaining heaven. They are said to
have **Niyag** (the path of liberation) or **Uttama Sanayam** (the highest
restraint) in their entirety. Such a person is like **Vasi Chandan**
(sandalwood), always following equanimity. They are **Dant-Damansheel** (having
conquered the senses), **Mokshanugat** (following the path of liberation), and
free from attachment to the body. They possess the qualities of **Mahan**,
**Shraman**, and **Bhikshu**, which are all synonymous with **Nirgranth**. All
these words, though different in form, have the same meaning. In conclusion, the
**Sutrakar** says that **Shri Sudharmaswami** told **Jambu Swami** and others to
understand and accept what he has said. He emphasizes that there should be no
doubt or alternative interpretation, as he has spoken according to the teachings
of the **Sarvagya Bhagwan**, who is always engaged in the welfare of others.
They liberate beings from the fear of the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI sUtrakRtAGgasUtram ekavit hai athavA jo ekAnta vit hai-ekAnta rUpa se
sunizcita rUpa se saMsAra ke svarUpa ko jAnatA huA tIrthaMkara kA zAsana-una
dvArA pravartita dharma yA mokSa mArga hI satya hai, anya nahIM, aisA jo jAnatA
hai vaha ekAntavit hai athavA jo eka mAtra mokSa yA saMyama ko jAnatA hai. vaha
ekAnta vita hai| baddha-jisane tattvoM ko avagataadhigata kiyA hai  /
saMchinnasrota-jisane karma Ane ke pravAha-AzravadvAra saMvRta-apanIta kara diye
haiM, roka diye hai  /  susaMyata-jo kachave kI taraha apane aMgoM ko simeTe hue
hai arthAt nirarthaka-niSprayojaka kAyika kriyAoM se vivarjita hai  /  susamita-
jo pAMco samitiyoM se saMyukta hai, jJAnAdika mokSamArga ko prApta hai  /
susAmAyakajo suSThu tathA samabhAva meM samavasthita hai-zatru evaM mitra meM jo
samAna hai, AtmavAda prApta-jo AtmavAda ko prApta kiye hue haiM, vaha AtmA ke
yathAvata svarUpa ko jAnatA hai  /  AtmA kA lakSaNa upayoga hai, vaha asaMkhyeya
pradezAtmaka hai, saMkoca vikAsa yukta hai, apane dvArA kiye gaye phaloM kI
bhoktA hai, pratyeka evaM sAdhAraNa zarIra ke rUpa meM vyavasthita hai, dravya
paryAya nitya anitya Adi ananta dharmAtmaka hai  /  vidvAna-jo samasta padArthoM
ke svarUpa ko yathAvat jAnatA hai, viparIta nahIM jAnatA  /  jaise kaiyoM kA
yaha kathana hai ki AtmA eka hI hai, sarvapadArtha svabhAva hone se vaha vizva
vyApI hai  /  kaiyoM kA yaha mata hai ki vaha zyAmAka-cAvala jitanA AkAra liye
hue haiM  /  kaI use aMgUThe ke parva-paura jitanA parimANa mAnate haiM  /
ityAdi ayathArtha svarUpa kA svIkAra parihata-khaMDita ho jAtA hai, tarka yukti
saMgata nahIM hai kyoMki vaisI AtmA ke astitva kA pratipAdaka pramANa kA abhAva
hai-vaisA pramANa prApta nahIM hotA  /  parichinna srota-usane karma Agamana ke
srota-dvAra parichinna-avaruddha kara diye haiM : dravyasrota evaM bhAvasrota ke
rUpa meM ve do prakAra ke haiM, indriyoM kI apane-apane viSaya meM pravRttiyAM
dravya srota hai  /  zabda Adi meM anukUla pratikUla hone para rAga dveSa kA
utpanna honA bhAvasrota hai  /  una donoM prakAra ke srotoM ko indriyoM kA
saMvaraNa kara, nirodha kara rAga dveSa ke abhAva se, pariccheda-avarodha kara
diyA hai  /  pUjasatkAra lAbhArthI-pUjA, prazasti, satkAra, sammAna tathA lAbha
kA anicchuka hote hue jo kevala nirjarA kI apekSA se samasta tapazcaraNa Adi
kriyAeM karatA hai  /  isI kA digdarzana karAte hue kahate haiM-vaha dharmArthI
hai-zruta cAritra mUlaka dharma hI usakA artha-prayojana yA lakSya hai  /  isakA
tAtparya yaha hai ki vaha prazasti sammAna Adi ke nimitta kriyAoM meM pravRtta
nahIM hotA kiMtu dharma hetu hotA hai, aisA kyoM ? kyoMki vaha dharma ko tathA
svarga prApti Adi usake phaloM ko bhalI bhAMti jAnatA hai  /  dharma ko samyak
jAnatA huA vaha jo karatA hai, use dikhalAte hue kahate haiM, vaha niyAga-mokSa
mArga yA uttama saMyama ko sarvAtma bhAva se-uttama rUpa se svIkAra kiye rahatA
hai  /  vaisA puruSa jo karatA hai, usakA pratipAdana karate hue kahate haiM,
vaha vAsI caMdana ke tulya samatA yA samabhAva kA satata anusaraNa karatA hai,
kaisA hokara? isa saMbaMdha meM batalAte haiM  /  dAMta-damanazIla yA jitendriya
mokSAnugata tathA daihika Asakti vimukta hotA huA vaha pahale batalAye gaye
mAhana, zramaNa tathA bhikSu zabdoM kI pravRtti ke jo hetu haiM-guNa haiM, unase
samanvita-yukta hotA hai  /  vaha nirgrantha zabda se vAcya-abhidheya hai  /  ve
mAhana Adi zabda bhI nirgrantha zabda kI pravRtti ke nimittoM ke sAtha
avinAbhAva sambandha se jur3e hue haiM, ye sabhI zabda rUpa meM bhinna hai kintu
artha rUpa meM eka hI hai| _ aba isa adhyayana kA upasaMhAra karate hue
sUtrakAra kahate haiM-zrI sudharmasvAmI ne jambUsvAmI Adi ko uddiSTa kara kahA-
jo maiMne tumheM kahA hai, use jAno !- mAno ! mere vacana meM-kathana meM kisI
prakAra ke vikalpasaMdeha Adi kI parikalpanA mata karo kyoMki maiMne sarvajJa
bhagavAna ke Adeza-upadeza ke anusAra hI yaha kahA hai sarvajJa prabhu sadA
dUsaroM kA kalyANa sAdhane meM nirata rahate haiM  /  ve prANiyoM ko saMsAra ke
bhaya se trANa dete -626)

Page #655 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This is the study of the Shri Gatha. It reveals the right path and saves people
from going to hell. They are free from attachment, aversion, and delusion.
Therefore, they do not speak or teach anything contrary to reality. Therefore,
you should understand everything I have said from the beginning until now in the
same way. Here, the word "iti" means "end". "Bravimi" means "I speak" - it is as
before. The exposition of "Anugam" is complete. Now we will discuss the "Nayas".
There are seven "Nayas" including "Naigam". The "Naigam" "Naya" is general and
specific. Therefore, it is included in "Sangrah" and "Vyavahar". Therefore,
there are six "Nayas". The "Samasabhirudha" and "Itthambhut" "Nayas" are
included in the word "Naya", leaving "Naigam", "Sangrah", "Vyavahar", "Riju
Sutra", and "Shabda" as the five "Nayas". "Naigam" is also included in
"Vyavahar". Therefore, there are four "Nayas". "Vyavahar" is also general and
specific, so from the general point of view, it is included in "Sangrah", and
from the specific point of view, it is included in "Riju Sutra". Thus,
"Sangrah", "Riju Sutra", and "Shabda" remain as the three "Nayas". Including
them in "Dravyastik" and "Paryayastik" results in two "Nayas", or including all
"Nayas" in knowledge and action results in two "Nayas" called "Jnana" and
"Kriya". The "Jnana" "Naya" considers knowledge as primary, and the "Kriya"
"Naya" considers action as primary. Holding onto only one "Naya" separately is a
false view. Both knowledge and action are mutually dependent - correct knowledge
followed by correct action or good conduct is the part of liberation, and that
is the main thing. Both of these are found in a virtuous person who is endowed
with good actions and good conduct - restraint. It has been said that after
knowing the objects that are to be taken and those that are not to be taken, one
should strive for the practice that is beneficial to oneself. This is the
teaching, and it is the "Naya". By listening to the various ways of expressing
all the "Nayas" - the many ways of using words - the one who is established in
the virtue of pure conduct of all "Nayas" is the virtuous person.  || The
sixteenth study called "Gatha" is complete. With its completion, the first
"Shruta Skandha" of the "Sutrakritanga Sutra" is complete. || 卐ज卐 627

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI gAthAdhyayanaM haiM  /  sanmArga kA nirUpaNa kara durgati meM jAne se unheM
bacAte haiM  /  rAga dveSa tathA moha meM se koI bhI unameM vidyamAna nahIM hai
/  isaliye ve anyathA-yathArtha ke viparIta nahIM bolate-upadeza nahIM dete  /
isaliye maiMne zuru se lekara aba taka jo kahA hai, use tuma loga ThIka usI
taraha samajho  /  yahAM iti zabda pari samApti ke artha meM AyA hai  /
bravImi-bolatA hUM-pUrvavat hai  /  anugama kA pratipAdana ho cukA hai  /  aba
nayoM kA nirUpaNa karate haiM  /  naigama Adi sAta naya hai  /  naigama naya
sAmAnya vizeSAtmaka hai  /  isaliye vaha saMgraha aura vyavahAra meM samAhita ho
jAtA hai  /  ataH cha: naya hai  /  samabhirUr3ha evaM itthaMbhUta naya kA zabda
naya meM samAveza ho jAne se naigama, saMgraha, vyavahAra, RjusUtra tathA zabda
ye pAMca naya rahate haiM  /  naigama kA bhI vyavahAra meM antarbhAva ho jAtA
hai  /  isaliye naya cAra ho jAte haiM  /  vyavahAra bhI sAmAnya vizeSAtmaka
hone se sAmAnya kI dRSTi se saMgraha meM aura vizeSa kI dRSTi se RjusUtra meM
antarbhUta ho jAtA haiM  /  isa prakAra saMgraha RjusUtra evaM zabda ye tIna
naya rahate haiM  /  inakA dravyAstika evaM paryAyAstika meM antarbhAva karane
se do naya hote haiM athavA sabhI nayoM kA jJAna aura kriyA meM samAveza karane
se jJAna evaM kriyA saMjJaka do naya hote haiM  /  unameM jJAna naya jJAna ko
tathA kriyA naya kriyA ko pradhAna mAnatA hai  /  pRthaka pRthaka naya-mAtra eka
naya ko pakar3akara calanA mithyA dRSTitva hai  /  jJAna tathA kriyA donoM kA
paraspara apekSita rUpa-samyak jJAna pUrvaka, samyak kriyA athavA sadAcaraNa
mokSa kA aMga hai vahI mukhya hai, ye donoM satkriyopeta-uttama AcaraNa-
saMyamayukta sAdhu meM prApta hote haiN| kahA hai, gRhItavya-grahaNa karane
yogya tathA agRhItavyagrahaNa nahIM karane yogya padArthoM ke jAnane ke bAda
prayojanabhUta-AtmopayogI anuSThAna meM hI yatnazIla honA cAhiye  /  aisA jo
upadeza hai, vahI naya hai sabhI nayoM kI bahuvidha vaktavyatA-aneka prakAra
devacana prayogoM ko sunate hA sarvanaya vizuddha sadA AcaraNa rUpa guNa meM jo
avasthita hai, vahI sAdhu hai  /   //  gAthA nAmaka solahavAM adhyayana samApta
huA  /  isake samApta hone para sUtrakRtAGga sUtra kA prathama zruta skandha
samApta huA  //  Wan jaWan  627

Page #656 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #657 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Translator and commentator, eloquent speaker, revered Priyadarshan Muni On the
12th day of the bright fortnight of the month of Paush, Vikram Samvat 2030, in
the village of Rata, Shri Manakchandji, son of Shri Jivrajji Sa. Kummat, was
born, making the womb of the devout mother, Shrimati Badambaiji, successful.
Shri Manakchandji, endowed with sharp intellect, was engrossed in receiving good
education and good manners from his childhood. Even then, while living in the
world, he remained detached in his mind, a devotee of humility, wisdom, and
gentleness. He flourished and blossomed under the guidance of the revered
Acharya Pravara Shri Sohनलालजी M. Sa., receiving the religious teachings given
by his parents. In Vikram Samvat 2044, on the 10th day of the bright fortnight
of the month of Magh, he took the Arhati Diksha in Bijayanagar and became Muni
Priyadarshan, becoming a carrier of the path to liberation. He studied Hindi,
Sanskrit, Prakrit, and other languages, and became engaged in acquiring profound
knowledge of Nyaya, Darshan, Agam, and literature. He earned the title of
"Ojaswi Vakta" while continuously moving like water on the great path of Samyak
Sanjamaradhana. The personality of the auspicious-sighted, auspicious-spoken,
auspicious-doer, revered Priyadarshan Muni Maharaj, was a symbol of harmony,
tolerance, and sincerity. He made the saying "Yatha Anto Tatha Bahi" meaningful
through his life and conduct. He has given new dimensions to his creativity as
the successful author of the novel "Punyak Ke Path Par," while he has presented
the life-memories of the revered Acharya Pravara Shri Sohनलालजी M. Sa. in the
form of "Atit Ki Smritiyaan," expressing his devotion at the feet of his revered
deity. Dr. Chaganlalji Shastri. M.A. (Tri) Ph.D. Kavya Tirth, Vidya Mahodadhi,
Nimbashan. Professor Dr. Chaganlalji Shastri, a renowned connoisseur of Indian
literature, Jain philosophy, and literature, is a learned and enlightened sage
whose every moment of life has been dedicated to Saraswat Aradhana for the past
five decades. Dr. Shastriji has served as a distinguished professor at
prestigious institutions of higher learning such as the "Research Institute of
Prakrit Jainology and Ahimsa, Vaishali, and Madras University, Chennai," and has
nurtured a competent team of young scholars who are working in the cultural and
educational fields in various parts of the country. Many sadhus and sadhvis have
also received guidance from Dr. Shastriji in their studies and research,
demonstrating his extraordinary scholarship. Dr. Shastriji's literary work is
well-known through the nearly three dozen books he has edited, translated, and
explained. The present work is a significant addition to this series.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 TIkAnuvAdaka evaM vivecaka ojasvIvaktA zraddheya priyadarzana munijI 0 pauSa
sudI 1ra vi.saM. 2030 ko rAtAko grAma meM zrImAn jIvarAjajI sA. kUmaTa ke Atmaja
zra mANakacandajI ne janma lekara dharmAnurAgiNI mAtA zrImata bAdAmabAI jI kI
ratnaprasavinI kukSi ko saphala banAyA 0 prakhara pratibhA ke dhanI zrI
mANakacandajI bAlyakAla meM suzikSA, susaMskAroM ko grahaNa karane meM tallIna
rhe| tabhI se saMsAra meM rahate hura bhI mana se virakta ve vinaya-viveka-
vinamratA ke upAsaka bane rahe mAtA-pitA dvArA die gae dhArmika saMskAra
zraddheya AcAra pravara zrI sohanalAlajI ma. sA. kA sAnnidhya pAkara pallavita,
puSpita hue evaM vi. saM. 2044 meM mAghasudI 10 ko bijayanagara meM ArhatI dIkSA
aMgIkAra kara muni priyadarzana' banakara mokSamArga ke sArthavAha bana ge| 0
hindI, saMskRta, prAkRta Adi bhASAoM kA adhyayana kara nyAya, darzana, Agama,
sAhitya-zAstra kA talasparzI jJAna prApta karane meM saMlagna ho gae  /  samyaga
saMyamArAdhanA ke mahApatha para nIra sadRza nirantara gatizIla rahate hue
'ojasvIvaktA' kA yazopArjana kiyA  /  0zubhadRSTA, zubhasraSTA, zubhakartA
zraddheya priyadarzana munijI mahArAja kA vyaktitva sauhArdratA, sahiSNutA va
nizchalatA kA pratIka rahA  /  'yathA aMto tathA bahiH' kI ukti ko apane jIvana-
vyavahAra se sArthaka kiyaa| 'puNya ke patha para' upanyAsa ke yazasvI
racanAkAra ke rUpa meM apane kRtitva ko nae AyAma die haiM, vahIM 'atIta kI
smRtiyA~' ke rUpa meM zraddheya AcArya pravara zrI sohanalAlajI ma. sA. ke
jIvana-saMsmaraNa prastutakara apane ArAdhyadeva ke caraNoM meM zraddhA-
abhivyakta kI hai| DaoN. chaganalAlajI shaastrii| ema. e. (traya) pI.eca.DI
kAvyatIrtha, vidyAmahodadhi, nimbASaNa  /  bhAratIya vAGmaya, Ahata darzana aura
Ahitya ke rASTravizruta marmajJa pro. DaoN. chaganalAlajI zAstrA eka aise
vidyAvyAsaMgI prabuddha manISI haiM, jinake jIvana kA kSaNakSaNa vigata pA~ca
dazAbda se sArasvatArAdhanA meM saMlagna haiM  /  DaoN. zAstrI jI ne 'risarca
insTITyUTa oNpha prAkRta jainolaoNjI evaM ahiMsA, vaizAlI tathA madrAsa
vizvavidyAlaya cainnaI jaise uccatama zikSaNa kendroM meM yazasvI prAdhyApaka ke
rUpa meM apanI sevAe~ dete hue yuvA vidvAnoM kI eka sakSama TIma taiyAra kI hai
jo deza ke vibhinna bhAga meM sAMskRtika evaM zaikSaNika kSetra meM kAryazIla
haiN| sAtha hI sAtha aneka sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ne bhI DaoN. zAstrIjI se adhyayana
evaM zodhakArya meM mArgadarzana prApta kA asAdhAraNa vidvattA samarjita kI hai
/  /  DaoN. zAstrIjI kA sAhitya kRtitva, una dvAra saMpAdita, anUdita evaM
vyAkhyAta lagabhaga tIna darjana pustakoM ke rUpa meM suvidita haiM  /  prastuta
kRti isa zrRMkhalA meM eka mahanIya abhinnati hai|

Page #658 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The world is full of joy and sorrow, both are present. All are inherently
suffering, therefore all should be non-violent. (Sutra 1/4/84) The world (in its
stages of childhood, youth, old age, etc.) is full of gross, material senses,
and all are inherently unpleasant.  (Sutra 1/4/84)  Those who are attached to
worldly pleasures (like desires for sensual gratification) and to their loved
ones (like parents, spouses, etc.) are like birds trapped in a cage. When the
time comes for them to experience the fruits of their karma, they suffer and
die, just like a ripe date falls from the palm tree when its bond is broken.
(Sutra 1/4/84)  The wise seeker transcends all attachments, patiently endures
all physical and mental suffering caused by trials and tribulations. (Sutra
7/408)  He can only follow the path of pure conduct when he is complete (in
knowledge, vision, and character), unattached (to worldly pleasures), free from
fixed routines, fearless (both for himself and others), and whose soul is free
from the defilement of passions. (Sutra 7/408)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
urAlaM jagao joyaM, viparIyAsaM paleMti ya / savve akkaMta dukkhAya, ato savve
ahiMsiyA // sUtra. 1/4/84 (audArika trasa-sthAvara jIva rUpa) jagat kA (bAlya,
yauvana, vRddhatva Adi) saMyogaavasthAviprotra azA goga dAra-sthUla hai-indriya
hote haiM tathA sabhI akAntaapriya hai nhiiN-haiN| kAma-bhogoM (kI tRSNA) meM
aura mAtA-pitA, strI-puruSa Adi) paricita janoM meM gRddha-Asakta prANI (karma
vipAka ke samaya) avasara Ane para apane karma kA phala bhogate hue AyuSya kA
kSaya hone para aise TUTate (mara jAte) haiM, jaise bandha se chUTA huA
tAlaphala (tAr3a kA phala) nIce gira jAtA hai / / savvAiM saMgAiM aicca dhIre,
savvAi dukkhAI titikkhamANe / akhile agiddhe aNieyacArI, abhayaMkare bhikkhU
aNAvilappA // sUtra. 7/408 dhIra sAdhaka sarvara sabhI-AsaktipUrNa saMbaMdhoM)
se atIta (pare) hokara sabhI parISahopasargajanita zArIrika, mAnasika duHkhoM ko
(samabhAvapUrvaka) sahana karatA huA (vizuddha saMgama kA tabhI pAlana kara
sakatA hai jaba vaha akhila (jJAna, darzana, cAritra se pUrNa) ho, agRddha
(viSayabhogoM meM anAsakta) ho, aniyatacArI (apritabaddhavihArI) aura
abhayaMkara (jo na svayaM bhayabhIta ho aura na dUsaroM ko bhayabhIta kare)
tathA jisakI AtmA viSayakaSAyoM se anAvila (anAkula) ho /
fotmuta19269lq.boravileon oogtgrodbine MICROGADARinanelamsuuNAGOR-3201001
madraka nio' ajameraBARATAAJTTER

