Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/034695/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namo Namo Nimmaladansanas, Bal Brahmachari Shri Neminaathay Namah. Pujya Anand-
Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar-Guru-bhyo Namah. Aagam-28 Tandulavaichaarik
Aagam Sutra Hindi Anuvaad. Anuvaadak evam Sampadak Aagam Diwaakar Muni
Diparatnasagarji [M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi] Aagam Hindi-Anuvaad-Shreni
Pushp-28

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 namo namo nimmaladaMsaNassa bAla brahmacArI zrI neminAthAya nama: pUjya Ananda-
kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara-gurUbhyo namaH Agama-28 taMdulavaicArika
AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda anuvAdaka evaM sampAdaka Agama dIvAkara muni
dIparatnasAgarajI [ M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi] Agama hindI-anuvAda-zreNI
puSpa-28

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 28, Payanna Sutra-5, 'Tandulavaicharik' Sutra Agam Sutra-28-
'Tandulavaicharik' Payanna Sutra-5- Hindi Translation Where to see what? Order
Subject Page Order Subject Page 05 | 5 | Body aggregation and food etc. 13 ...
Mangal and Dvar Nirupan Garbhaprakaran Praniki Das Dashayen | Dharma Upadesh
Evam Fal Kalpraman Anityatva-Ashuchitvadhi Prarupana Upadesh Evam Upsanhar 14
Muni Diparatnasagar Krit " (Tandulavaicharik) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page
2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtra AgamasUtra-28-
'taMdulavaicArika' payannAsUtra-5- hindI anuvAda kahAM kyA dekhe? krama viSaya
pRSTha krama viSaya pRSTha 05 | 5 | deha saMhanana aura AhAra Adi 13 h h h
maMgala aura dvAra nirupaNa garbhaprakaraNa prANIkI daza dazAeM | dharma upadeza
evaM fala kAlapramANa anityatva-azucitvAdi prarupaNA upadeza evaM upasaMhAra 14
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 2

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 28, Payanna Sutra-5, 'Tandulavaicharik' **Sutra** 45 Agam
Classification **Sutra Order** **Order** **Agam Name** **Agam Name** **Sutra**
Ang Sutra-1 25 | Aturpratyakhyan Payanna Sutra-2 01 Achar 02 Sutrakrit Ang
Sutra-2 26 03 Sthan Ang Sutra-3 27 | Mahapratyakhyan Bhaktaparijna |
Tandulavaicharik Samstarak Payanna Sutra-3 Payanna Sutra-4 Payanna Sutra-5 04
Samavay Ang Sutra-4 28 05 Ang Sutra-5 29 Payanna Sutra-6 Bhagavati
Jnatadharmakatha 06 | Ang Sutra-6 Payanna Sutra-7 Upasakadasha Ang Sutra-7
Payanna Sutra-7 Antakrit Dasha 09 Anuttaroppapatikadasha Ang Sutra-8 Ang Sutra-9
30.1 | Gachhachar 30.2 Chandravedhyak 31 | Ganividya Devendrastav Virastav
Payanna Sutra-8 Payanna Sutra-9 32 10 Prashnavyakaranadasha Ang Sutra-10 33 Ang
Sutra-11 34 | Nishit 11 Vipakshrut 12 Aupapatik Payanna Sutra-10 Chhed Sutra-1
Chhed Sutra-2 Upang Sutra-1 Brihatkalp Vyavahar Rajapraschiy Upang Sutra-2 Chhed
Sutra-3 14 Jivajivabhigam Upang Sutra-3 37 Upang Sutra-4 Upang Sutra-5 Upang
Sutra-6 Chhed Sutra-4 Chhed Sutra-5 Chhed Sutra-6 40 Upang Sutra-7
Dashashrutaskandh 38 Jitakalp 39 Mahanishit Aavashyak 41.1 Oghanuyukti 41.2 |
Pindanuyukti 42 | Dashavaikalik 43 Uttaradhyayyan 44 Nandi Anuyogdwar Mul
Sutra-1 Mul Sutra-2 Mul Sutra-2 15 Prajnapana 16 Suryaprajnapti 17
Chandraprajnapti | Jambudvipaprajnapti 19 Nirayavalika Kalpavatamsika 21 |
Pushpika | Pushpachoolika 23 Vrishnidasha 24 Chatuhsharan Upang Sutra-8 Upang
Sutra-9 Upang Sutra-10 Upang Sutra-11 Upang Sutra-12 Payanna Sutra-1 Mul Sutra-3
Mul Sutra-4 Chulika Sutra-1 Chulika Sutra-2 Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "
(Tandulavaicharik) Agam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad Page 3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtra 45 Agama vargIkaraNa
sUtra krama krama Agama kA nAma Agama kA nAma sUtra aMgasUtra-1 25 |
AturapratyAkhyAna payannAsUtra-2 01 AcAra 02 sUtrakRt aMgasUtra-2 26 03 sthAna
aMgasUtra-3 27 | mahApratyAkhyAna bhaktaparijJA | taMdulavaicArika saMstAraka
payannAsUtra-3 payannAsUtra-4 payannAsUtra-5 04 samavAya aMgasUtra-4 28 05
aMgasUtra-5 29 payannAsUtra-6 bhagavatI jJAtAdharmakathA 06  /  aMgasUtra-6
payannAsUtra-7 upAsakadazA aMgasUtra-7 payannAsUtra-7 aMtakRt dazA 09
anuttaropapAtikadazA aMgasUtra-8 aMgasUtra-9 30.1 | gacchAcAra 30.2
candravedhyaka 31 | gaNividyA devendrastava vIrastava payannAsUtra-8
payannAsUtra-9 32 10 praznavyAkaraNadazA aMgasUtra-10 33 aMgasUtra-11 34 |
nizItha 11 vipAkazruta 12 aupapAtika payannAsUtra-10 chedasUtra-1 chedasUtra-2
upAMgasUtra-1 bRhatkalpa vyavahAra rAjaprazciya upAMgasUtra-2 chedasUtra-3 14
jIvAjIvAbhigama upAgasUtra-3 37 upAMgasUtra-4 upAMgasUtra-5 upAMgasUtra-6
chedasUtra-4 chedasUtra-5 chedasUtra-6 40 upAMgasUtra-7 dazAzrutaskandha 38
jItakalpa 39 mahAnizItha Avazyaka 41.1 oghaniyukti 41.2 | piMDaniyukti 42 |
dazavaikAlika 43 uttarAdhyayana 44 nandI anuyogadvAra mUlasUtra-1 mUlasUtra-2
mUlasUtra-2 15 prajJApanA 16 sUryaprajJapti 17 candraprajJapti |
jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti 19 nirayAvalikA kalpavataMsikA 21 | puSpikA | puSpacUlikA 23
vRSNidazA 24 catu:zaraNa upAgasUtra-8 upAMgasUtra-9 upAMgasUtra-10
upAMgasUtra-11 upAMgasUtra-12 payannAsUtra-1 mUlasUtra-3 mUlasUtra-4
cUlikAsUtra-1 cUlikAsUtra-2 muni dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 3

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Aagam Sutra 28, Payannasutra-5, 'Tandulavaichaarik' Sutra Box 10 06 02 01 13 05
04 09 Muni Diparatnasagarji Published Literature Aagam Literature Aagam
Literature Literature Name Box Order Literature Name Original Aagam Literature:
147 6 | Aagam Other Literature:1-1- Aagamsuuttaani-Moolam print [49] -1- Maaraam
Thaanuyoag -2- Aagamsuuttaani-Moolam Net [45] -2- Aagam Sambandhi Saahitya -3-
Aagammanjooasha (Moola Prat) [53] -3- Rishibhaashit Sutraani | Aagam Anuvaad
Saahitya: 165 -4- Aagamiya Sooktaavali 01 -1- Aagamsootra Gujarati Anuvaad [47]
| Aagam Saahitya- Kul Pustak 516 -2- Aagamsootra Hindi Anuvaad Net: [47] | -3-
Aagamsootra English Trans. | [11] | -4- Saamsutra Sati 42raati Manuvaah [48] -5-
Aagamsootra Hindi Anuvaad print [12] Other Literature:3 Aagam Vivechan Saahitya:
171 Tattvabhyaas Saahitya-1- Aagamsootra Satikam [46] 2 Sootraabhyaas Saahitya
06 1-2- Aagamsootraani Satikam Prataakar-1 / Vyakaran Saahitya| -3-
Aagamsootraani Satikam Prataakar-2 Vyakhyaan Saahitya. -4- Aagam Churni Saahitya
[09] 5 Unalat Saahitya|-5- Savruttik Aagamsootraani-1 [40] 6 V Saahitya 04 -6-
Savruttik Aagamsootraani-2 [08] 7 Maaraadhana Saahitya 03 |-7- Sachurnik
Aagamsuuttaani. [08] 8 Pariyay Saahitya 04 Aagam Kosh Saahitya: Poojan
Saahitya-1- Aagam Saddakoso [04] 10 | Tirthankar Sanksipt Darshan -2- Aagam
Kahaakoso [01] | 11hi Saahitya-3- Aagam-Sagar-Kosh: [05] 12 Diparatnasagarna
Laghushodhanibandh 05 -4- Aagam-Shabdadhi-Sangrah (Pra-San-Gu) [04] Aagam
Siwayanu Saahitya Kool Pustak 5 Aagam Anukram Saahitya: 09 -1-
Saagamvishayanoomub- (Bhoog) | 1-Aagam Saahitya (Kul Pustak) | 516 -2- Aagam
Vishayanoomukram (Satikam) 04 2-Aagametar Saahitya (Kul 085 -3- Aagam Sutra-
Gaatha Anukram Diparatnasagarji ke Kul Prakashan | 601 A
AAEmunihiparatnasagarunu Saahitya | Bhunitiparatnasagarunu Aagam Saahitya [
Pust8 516] Teja Paana [98,300] 2 Bhunitiparatnasagarunu Manay Saahitya [Hut
Pust8 85] Tana Hus Paana [09,270] Munihiparatnasagar Sanshatit
Tattvarthsootra'ni Vishisht DVD Tenal Paana [27,930] | Saba. Praashanohula 50рез +
Vishisht DVD Hul Paana 1,35,500 02 25 05 02 | 03 Muni Diparatnasagar Krit "
(Tandulavaichaarik) Aagam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad Page 4

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtra baksa 10 06 02 01 13
05 04 09 muni dIparatnasAgarajI prakAzita sAhitya Agama sAhitya Agama sAhitya
sAhitya nAma baksa krama sAhitya nAma mUla Agama sAhitya: 147 6 | Agama anya
sAhitya:1-1- AgamasuttANi-mUlaM print [49] -1- mArAma thAnuyoga -2-
AgamasuttANi-mUlaM Net [45] -2- Agama saMbaMdhI sAhitya -3- AgamamaJjUSA (mUla
prata) [53] -3- RSibhASita sUtrANi | Agama anuvAda sAhitya: 165 -4- Agamiya
sUktAvalI 01 -1- AgamasUtra gujarAtI anuvAda [47] | Agama sAhitya- kula pustaka
516 -2- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda Net: [47] | -3- Aagamsootra English Trans. |
[11] | -4- sAmasUtra saTI 42rAtI manuvAH [48] -5- AgamasUtra hindI anuvAda print
[12] anya sAhitya:3 Agama vivecana sAhitya: 171 tattvAbhyAsa sAhitya-1-
AgamasUtra saTIkaM [46] 2 sUtrAbhyAsa sAhitya 06 1-2- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM
pratAkAra-1 / vyAkaraNa sAhitya| -3- AgamasUtrANi saTIkaM pratAkAra-2 vyAkhyAna
sAhitya. -4- Agama cUrNi sAhitya [09] 5 unalata sAhitya|-5- savRttika
AgamasUtrANi-1 [40] 6 va sAhitya 04 -6- savRttika AgamasUtrANi-2 [08] 7
mArAdhanA sAhitya 03 |-7- sacUrNika AgamasuttANi  /  [08] 8 pariyaya sAhitya 04
Agama koSa sAhitya: pUjana sAhitya-1- Agama saddakoso [04] 10 | tIrthakara
saMkSipta darzana -2- Agama kahAkoso [01] | 11hI sAhitya-3- Agama-sAgara-koSa:
[05] 12 dIparatnasAgaranA laghuzodhanibaMdha 05 -4- Agama-zabdAdi-saMgraha (prA-
saM-gu) [04] Agama sivAyanuM sAhitya kUla pustaka 5 Agama anukrama sAhitya: 09
-1- sAgamaviSayAnubha- (bhUga) | 1-Agama sAhitya (kula pustaka) | 516 -2- Agama
viSayAnukrama (saTIka) 04 2-Agametara sAhitya (kula 085 -3- Agama sUtra-gAthA
anukrama dIparatnasAgarajI ke kula prakAzana | 601 A AAEmunihIparatnasAgaranuM
sAhitya | bhuniTIparatnasAgaranu Agama sAhitya [ pusta8 516] tejA pAnA [98,300]
2 bhuniTIparatnasAgaranuM manya sAhitya [huta pusta8 85] tanA husa pAnA [09,270]
munihIparatnasAgara saMzatita tatvArthasUtra'nI viziSTa DVD tenAla pAnA [27,930]
| sbhaa| prAzanohulA 501 + viziSTa DVD hula pAnA 1,35,500 02 25 05 02 | 03 muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 4

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 28, Payanna Sutra-5, 'Tandulavaicharik'  **Sutra** [28] This
'Tandula Veyali' Payanna, I will speak, after paying homage to the Jineswar
Mahavir, who is free from old age and death.  **Sutra-1** [28] This 'Tandula
Veyali' Payanna, I will speak, after paying homage to the Jineswar Mahavir, who
is free from old age and death.  **Sutra-2** Human lifespan is considered to be
100 years, which is divided into ten parts. The time period before these 100
years is called 'Garbhavas' (gestation).  **Sutra-3** The 'Ahar Vidhi' (diet
regimen) refers to the time spent in the womb, including the days, nights,
Muhurta (a unit of time), and breaths taken by the Jiva (living being) during
gestation.  **Sutra-4** A Jiva stays in the womb for 270 full days and nights,
and half a day. This is the standard time for a Jiva to remain in gestation.
**Sutra-5** However, due to 'Upghat' (adverse conditions), the birth can occur
earlier or later than this standard time.  **Sutra-6** Normally, a Jiva stays in
the womb for 8325 Muhurta, but there can be variations in this duration.
**Sutra-7** A Jiva takes 31410225 breaths in the womb, but this number can be
less or more.  **Sutra-9** O Ayushman! Below the navel of a woman, there are two
veins like the stem of a flower.  **Sutra-10** Below these veins, there is a
Yoni (vagina) shaped like an inverted lotus, resembling a sword sheath.
**Sutra-11** Inside this Yoni, there is a fleshy mass like an 'Am' (mango)
fruit. During menstruation, it bursts and releases blood particles. When this
inverted lotus-shaped Yoni mixes with Shukra (semen), it becomes capable of
producing a Jiva. This is what the Jinenndra has said.  **Sutra-12** In a Yoni
capable of producing a Jiva, more than a lakh of separate Jivas reside for 12
Muhurta. Later, they perish.  **Sutra-13** After 55 years, a woman's Yoni
becomes incapable of conceiving, and after 75 years, a man usually becomes
devoid of Shukra (semen).  **Muni Diparatnasagar Krit " (Tandulavaicharik) Agam
Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad** Page 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtra [28] tandulavaicArika
payannAsUtra-5-hindI anuvAda sUtra-1 jarA-maraNa se mukta hue aise jinezvara
mahAvIra ko praNAma kara ke yaha 'tandula veyAliya' payannA ko maiM khuuNgaa|
sUtra-2 ginane meM mAnava kA Ayu sau sAla mAnakara use dasa-dasa meM vibhAjita
kiyA jAtA hai  /  una sau sAla ke Ayu ke alAvA jo kAla hai use garbhAvAsa kahate
haiN| sUtra-3 usa garbhakAla aura jitane dina, rAta, muhUrta aura zvAsocchvAsa-
jIva garbhAvAsameM rahe usa kI AhAra vidhi kahate haiN| sUtra-4 jIva 270 pUrNa
rAta-dina aura AdhA dina garbha meM rahatA hai  /  niyama se jIva ko itane dina-
rAta garbhavAsameM lagatA hai| sUtra-5 lekina upaghAta kI vajaha se usa se kama
yA jyAdA dina meM bhI janma le sakatA hai| sUtra-6 niyama se jIva 8325 muhUrta
taka garbha meM rahatA hai, phira bhI usameM hAni-vRddhi bhI ho sakatI hai|
sUtra-7 jIva ko garbha meM-31410225 zvAsa-ucchvAsa hote haiM  /  lekina usa se
kama-jyAdA bhI ho sakate haiN| sUtra -9 he AyuSmAn ! strI kI nAbhi ke nIce
puSpaDaMThala jaisI do sirA hotI hai| sUtra-10 usa ke nIce ulaTe kie hae kamala
ke AkAra kI yoni hotI hai  /  jo talavAra kI myAna jaisI hotI hai| sUtra-11 use
yoni ke bhItara meM Ama kI pezI jaisI mAMsapiMr3a hotI hai vo RtukAla meM
phUTakara lahU ke kaNa chor3atI hai  /  ulaTe kie hue kamala ke AkAra kI vo yoni
jaba zukra mizrita hotI hai, taba vo jIva utpanna karane lAyaka hotI hai  /
aisA jinendra ne kahA hai| sUtra - 12 garbha utpatti ke lAyaka yonimeM 12
muhUrta taka lAkha pRthaktva se adhika jIva rahatA hai  /  bAda ve naSTa hote
haiM sUtra-13 55 sAla ke bAda strI kI yoni garbhadhAraNa ke lAyaka nahIM rahatI
aura 75 sAla bAda puruSa prAyaH zukrANu rahita ho jAtA hai| muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 5

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 28, Payannasutra-5, 'Tandulavaicharik' Sutra Sutra-14 A being has
a lifespan of 100 years multiplied by a koti (10 million). After half of this
lifespan, a woman becomes incapable of producing offspring. And when 20% of the
lifespan remains, a man becomes devoid of sperm. Sutra-15 The womb of a woman
with abundant blood is capable of producing a lakh (100,000) distinct beings as
offspring in 12 muhurts (48 minutes). In a maximum gestation period of 12 years,
a being can have a maximum of shat (200 to 900) distinct fathers. Sutra-16 The
right side of the womb is the dwelling place of a male being, and the left side
is the dwelling place of a female being. A being dwelling in the middle is a
eunuch. In the case of a Tiryanch (non-human) womb, the ideal gestation period
is considered to be eight years. Sutra-17 Certainly, this being is born in the
womb from the union of the mother and father. It first feeds on the mother's
menstrual blood and the father's semen, along with their impurities and sins.
Sutra-18 In the first week, the being is in the form of a liquid, in the second
week it is like solidified yogurt, then it becomes like flexible muscle, and
then it becomes solid. Sutra-19 After that, in the first month, it is like
swollen flesh, and in the second month, it becomes dense like a lump of flesh.
In the third month, it causes the mother to have cravings. In the fourth month,
it nourishes the mother's breasts. In the fifth month, the five limbs - hands,
feet, and head - are formed. In the sixth month, bile and blood are formed. And
then the remaining limbs and organs are formed. In the seventh month, 700 veins,
500 muscles, nine arteries, and 99 lakh (9.9 million) pores for hair are formed,
except for the head and mouth. Three and a half crore (35 million) hair
follicles are formed, including the hair on the head and beard. In the eighth
month, it is almost complete. Sutra-20 O Bhagavan! Does the fetus have
excrement, urine, phlegm, mucus, vomit, bile, semen, or blood? This meaning is
not appropriate, i.e., it does not happen. O Bhagavan! Why do you say that the
fetus does not have excrement, etc., blood? Gautama! The fetus feeds on the
mother's body. It is transformed into bones, marrow, hair, mustache, hair, and
nails as the senses of sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch. Therefore, it is
said that the fetus does not have excrement, etc., blood. Sutra-21 O Bhagavan!
Is the fetus capable of taking food through its mouth? O Gautama! This meaning
is not appropriate. O Bhagavan! Why do you say so? O Gautama! The fetus takes
food from all sides. It is transformed from all sides. It breathes in and out
from all sides. It continuously takes food and is transformed. It always
breathes in and out. The being takes food and is transformed quickly. It
breathes in and out quickly. There is a vein connected to the mother's body that
touches the son's body, which is the receiver of the mother's body's essence and
the collector of the son's life essence. Therefore, as it takes food, it is
transformed. The son's...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtrasUtra-14 100 sAla se
pUrvakoTI jitanA Ayu hotA hai  /  usa ke Adhe hisse ke bAda strI saMtAna utpanna
karane meM asamartha ho jAtI hai  /  aura Ayu kA 20 pratizata bhAga bAkI rahate
puruSa zukrANu rahita ho jAte haiN| sUtra -15 _ raktotkaTa strI kI yoni 12
muhUrtameM utkRSTa se lAkha pRthaktva jIvoM ko saMtAna ke rUpameM utpanna karane
meM samartha hotI hai  /  12 sAlameM adhikatama garbhakAlameM eka jIva ke jyAdA
se jyAdA zata pRthaktva (200 se 900) pitA ho sakate haiN| sUtra - 16 dA~yI kukSI
puruSa kI aura bA~I kukSI strI ke nivAsa kI jagaha hotI hai  /  jo donoM kI
madhyameM nivAsa karatA hai vo napuMsaka jIva hotA hai| tiryaMca yoni meM garbha
kI utkRSTa sthiti ATha sAla kI mAnI jAtI hai| sUtra-17 nizcaya se yaha jIva mAtA
pitA ke saMyoga se garbha meM utpanna hotA hai  /  vo pahale mAtA kI raja aura
pitA ke zukra ke kaluSa aura kilbiSa kA AhAra kara ke rahatA hai| sUtra - 18
pahale saptAhameM jIva tarala padArtha ke rUpa meM, dUsare saptAhameM dahIM
jaise jame hue, usa ke bAda lacIlI mA~sapezI jaisA aura phira Thosa ho jAtA hai|
sUtra-19 _ usa ke bAda pahale mAsa meM vo phUle hue mA~sa jaisA, dUsare
mahinemeM mA~sapiMr3a jaisA ghanIbhUta hotA hai  /  tIsare mahinemeM vo mAtA ko
IcchA utpanna karavAtA hai  /  cauthe mahinemeM mAtA ke stana ko puSTa karatA
hai  /  pA~cave mahinemeM hAtha, pA~va, sara yaha pA~ca aMga taiyAra hote haiM
/  chaThe mahine pitta aura lahU kA nirmANa hotA hai  /  aura phira bAkI aMga-
upAMga banate haiM  /  sAtaveM mahinemeM 700 nasa, 500 mA~sa-pezI, nau dhamanI
aura sira evaM mu~ha ke alAvA bAkI bAla ke 99 lAkha romachidra banate haiM  /
sira aura dAr3hI ke bAla sahita sADhe tIna karor3a romakUpa utpanna hote haiM  /
AThaveM mahine meM prAyaH pUrNatA prApta karatA hai| sUtra - 20 he bhagavan !
kyA garbhastha jIva ko mala-mUtra, kapha, zleSma, vamana, pitta, vIrya yA lahU
hote haiM ? yaha artha ucita nahIM hai arthAt aisA nahIM hotA  /  he bhagavan !
kisa vajaha se Apa aisA kaha rahe ho ki garbhastha jIva ko mala, yAvat lahU
nahIM hotA  /  gautama ! garbhastha jIva mAtA ke zarIra se AhAra karatA hai| use
netra, cakSu, ghrANa, rasa ke aura sparzana indriya ke rUpa meM haDDiyA~, majjA,
keza, mUMcha, roma aura nAkhUna ke rUpa meM pariNamatA hai  /  isa vajaha se
aisA kahA hai ki garbhastha jIva ko mala yAvat laha nahIM hotaa| sUtra - 21 he
bhagavan ! garbhastha jIva mukha se kavala AhAra karane ke lie samartha hai kyA
? he gautama ! yaha artha ucita nahIM hai  /  he bhagavan ! aisA kyoM kahate ho?
he gautama ! garbhastha jIva sabhI ora se AhAra karatA hai  /  sabhI ora se
pariNamita karatA hai  /  sabhI ora se sA~sa letA hai aura chor3atA hai  /
nirantara AhAra karatA hai aura pariNamatA hai| hamezA sA~sa letA hai aura
bAhara nIkAlatA hai  /  vo jIva jalda AhAra karatA hai aura pariNamatA hai|
jalda sA~sa letA hai aura chor3atA hai  /  mA~ ke zarIra se jur3e hue putra ke
zarIra ko chUtI eka nAr3I hotI hai jo mA~ ke zarIra rasa kI grAhaka aura putra
ke jIvana rasa kI saMgrAhaka hotI hai  /  isalie vo jaise AhAra grahaNa karatA
hai vaisA hI pariNAtA hai  /  putra ke muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "
(taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 6

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra  **Aagam Sutra 28, Payannasutra-5, 'Tandulavaicharik'**  There is a
vein connected to the body of the 'Tandulavaicharik' fetus and touching the
mother's body. The fetus, capable of being in the womb, does not take food
through the mouth. Sutra - 22  O Bhagavan! What kind of food does the fetus
consume? O Gautam! The fetus consumes the essence of whatever the mother eats,
like various kinds of sweet, bitter, spicy, and sour substances. The fetus has a
navel like the stalk of a fruit or the stem of a lotus. The vein that absorbs
the essence is connected to the mother's navel. The fetus consumes the essence
through this vein and grows, eventually being born. Sutra - 23  O Bhagavan! How
many maternal organs are there in the womb? And how many paternal organs? O
Gautam! Three maternal organs are mentioned: flesh, blood, and head. Three
paternal organs are: bones, marrow, and beard, mustache, hair, and nails. Sutra
- 24  O Bhagavan! Will a fetus that dies in the womb be born in hell? O Gautam!
A conscious fetus with five senses and all the necessary faculties, upon hearing
the news of the approaching enemy army through the knowledge of the
disintegration of semen, will think, "I will take my soul out of this place."
Then, by creating a four-pronged army, it will fight the enemy army. If it dies
at that time, desiring wealth, kingdom, enjoyment, and love, thirsty for wealth,
etc., with the same mind, attachment, and determination, restless for wealth,
etc., acting for it, motivated by it, then it will be born in hell. Therefore, O
Gautam! It is said that a fetus can be born in hell. There is no other being.
Sutra - 25  O Bhagavan! Is a fetus born in heaven? O Gautam! Some fetuses are
born in heaven, and some are not. O Bhagavan! Why do you say that? O Gautam! A
conscious fetus with five senses and all the necessary faculties, upon hearing a
single word of righteousness and religion from a Shraman or Brahmin through the
knowledge of the disintegration of semen and clairvoyance, will accept it and be
born quickly with intense emotion. It will be attached to the intense love of
righteousness. It will desire righteousness, virtue, heaven, and liberation,
desiring righteousness, etc., thirsty for it, with the same mind, attachment,
and determination, striving for righteousness, etc., eager for it, dedicated to
it, acting for it, motivated by it, if it dies at that time, then it will be
born in heaven. Therefore, some fetuses are born in heaven, and some are not.
Sutra - 26  O Bhagavan! Does the fetus sleep on its back, on its side, or in a
curved position? Does it stand or sit? Does it sleep or wake? Does it sleep when
the mother sleeps and wake when the mother wakes? Does it feel happy when the
mother is happy and sad when the mother is sad? O Gautam! The fetus sleeps on
its back, and it feels sad when the mother is sad. Sutra - 27  The mother of a
stable fetus protects it, nurtures it properly, and carries it. She keeps it
straight and protects it in this way, both the fetus and herself. Sutra - 28.
The fetus sleeps when the mother sleeps, wakes when the mother wakes, feels
happy when the mother is happy, and sad when the mother is sad.  Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit " (Tandulavaicharik) Aagam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' zarIra ke sAtha jur3I
huI aura mAtA ke zarIra ko chUnevAlI ora eka nAr3I hotI hai  /  usameM samartha
garbhastha jIva mukha se kavala-AhAra grahaNa nahIM krtaa| sUtra - 22 he
bhagavan ! garbhastha jIva kauna-sA AhAra karegA? he gautama ! usakI mA~ jo
taraha-taraha kI rasavigaIkaDuA, tIkhA, khaTTA dravya khAe usake hI AMzika rUpa
meM ojAhAra karatA hai  /  usa jIva kI phala ke biMTa jaisI kamala kI nAla jaisI
nAbhi hotI hai  /  vo rasa grAhaka nAr3a mAtA kI nAbhi ke sAtha jur3I hotI hai
/  vo nAr3a se garbhastha jIva ojAhAra karatA hai aura vRddhi prApta karake
utpanna hotA hai| sUtra - 23 he bhagavan ! garbha ke mAtR aMga kitane haiM ?
aura pitR aMga kitane haiM ? he gautama ! mAtA ke tIna aMga batAe gae haiM  /
mA~sa, lahU aura mastaka, pitA ke tIna aMga haiM-haDDIyA~, majjA aura dAr3hI-
mUMcha, roma evaM nAkhUna  /  sUtra-24 he bhagavan ! kyA garbha meM rahA jIva
(garbha meM hI marake) narakameM utpanna hogA? he gautama ! koI garbha meM rahA
saMjJI paMcendriya aura sabhI paryAptivAlA jIva vIrya-vibhaMgajJAna-vaikriya
labdhi dvArA zatrusenA ko AI haI sUnakara soce ki maiM Atma pradeza bAhara
nIkAlatA huuN| phira vaikriya samudghAta karake caturaMgiNI senA kI saMracanA
karatA huuN| zatru senA ke sAtha yuddha karatA huuN| vo artha-rAjya-bhoga aura
kAma kA AkAMkSI, artha Adi kA pyAsI, usI cittamana-lezyA aura adhyavasAyavAlA,
arthAdi ke lie becaina, usake lie hI kriyA karanevAlA, usI bhAvanA se bhAvita,
usI kAla meM mara jAe to naraka meM utpanna hogA  /  isalie he gautama ! aisA
kahA jAtA hai ki garbhastha koI jIva naraka meM utpanna hotA hai| koI jIva nahIM
hotaa| sUtra-25 he bhagavan ! kyA garbhastha jIva devalokameM utpanna hotA hai ?
he gautama ! koI jIva utpanna hotA hai aura koI jIva nahIM hotA  /  he bhagavan
! aisA kyoM kahate ho? he gautama ! garbhameM sthita saMjJI paMcendriya aura
sabhI paryAptivAlA jIva vaikriya-vIrya aura avadhijJAna labdhi dvArA vaise
zramaNa yA brAhmaNa ke pAsa eka bhI Arya aura dhArmika vacana sUnakara dhAraNa
kara ke zIghratayA saMvega se utpanna hae tIvra-dharmAnurAga se anurakta ho  /
vo dharma puNya-svarga-mokSa kA kAmI, dharmAdi kI AkAMkSAvAlA, pIpAsAvAlA,
usameM hI citta-mana, lezyA aura adhyavasAyavAlA, dharmAdi ke lie koziza
karanevAlA, usameM hI tatpara, usa ke prati samarpita ho kara kriyA karanevAlA,
usI bhAvanA se hokara usI samayameM mara jAe to devaloka meM utpanna hotA hai|
isalie koI jIva devaloka meM utpanna hotA hai, koI jIva nahIM hotaa| sUtra - 26
he bhagavan ! garbhameM rahA jIva ulTA sotA hai, bagalameM sotA hai yA vakrAkAra
? khar3A hotA hai yA baiThA ? sotA hai yA jAgatA hai ? mAtA soe taba sotA hai
aura jage taba jagatA hai ? mAtA ke sukha se sukhI aura duHkha se duHkhI rahatA
hai ? he gautama ! garbhastha jIva ulTA sotA hai-yAvata mAtA ke duHkha se duHkhI
hotA hai| sUtra-27 sthira rahanevAle garbha kI mA~ rakSA karatI hai, samyak
tarIke se paripAlana karatI hai, vahana karatI hai| use sIdhA rakha ke aura usa
prakAra se garbha kI aura apanI rakSA karatI hai| sUtra-28 _ mAtA ke sone para
soe, jagane para jage, mAtA ke sukhI ho taba sukhI, duHkhI hone para duHkhI hotA
hai  /  muni dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda
Page 7

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## ─Аgama S┼лtra 28, Payann─Бs┼лtra-5, тАШTandulavaic─БrikтАЩ S┼лtras┼лtra - 29 It does not
have excrement, urine, phlegm, or nasal mucus. And food is transformed into
bone, marrow, nails, hair, beard, and mustache. S┼лtra - 30 Food transformation
and respiration all occur within the body region. And it does not consume the
Kavala food. S┼лtra - 31 In this way, the suffering being obtains a body in the
womb and resides in the impure region. S┼лtra - 32 O ─Аyushm─Бn! Then, in nine
months, the mother gives birth to the fetus she carries in one of four forms. It
is born as a woman, a man, a eunuch, or a mass of flesh. S┼лtra - 33 If the semen
is less and the menstrual fluid is more, then a woman is born. And if the
menstrual fluid is less and the semen is more, then a man is born. S┼лtra - 34 If
both menstrual fluid and semen are in equal amounts, then a eunuch is born. And
if only the menstrual fluid is stable, then a mass of flesh is born. S┼лtra - 35
At the time of birth, the child comes out headfirst or feet first. If it comes
out straight, then it is born safely. But if it comes out crooked, then it dies.
S┼лtra - 36 A sinful being, born impure and residing in an impure form in the
womb, lives for 12 years at the most. S┼лtra - 37 At the time of birth and death,
the being experiences suffering and, being bewildered by it, cannot remember its
previous birth. S┼лtra - 38 Then, crying and causing pain to its mother's body,
it comes out of the vaginal opening. S┼лtra - 39 In the womb, beings are born in
an impure place like the Kuс╣Бbhip─Бk Naraka, filled with excrement, feces, and
urine. S┼лtra - 40 Just as worms are born in excrement, so too is a being born in
the midst of the man's bile, phlegm, semen, blood, and urine. S┼лtra - 41 How can
that being be purified, whose origin is in the collection of semen and blood?
S┼лtra - 42 Born from impurity, always filled with the stench of excrement, and
constantly expecting purity, how can one be proud of such a body? Muni
D─лparatnas─Бgar Kс╣Ыt " (Tandulavaic─Бrik) ─Аgama S┼лtra - Hindi Anuv─Бd Page 8

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtrasUtra - 29 use viSThA,
mUtra, kapha, nAka kA maila nahIM hote  /  aura AhAra asthi, majjA, nAkhUna,
keza, dAr3hI-mUMcha ke roma ke rUpa meM pariNamita hote haiN| sUtra - 30 AhAra
pariNamana aura zvAsocchvAsa saba kucha zarIra pradeza se hotA hai  /  aura vo
kavalAhAra nahIM krtaa| sUtra-31 isa taraha duHkhI jIva garbha meM zarIra prApta
kara ke azuci pradeza meM nivAsa karatA hai| sUtra - 32 he AyuSmAn ! taba nau
mahine meM mA~ usa ke dvArA utpanna honevAle garbha ko cAra meM se kisI eka rUpa
meM janma detI hai  /  vo isa taraha se strI, puruSa, napuMsaka yA maaNspiNdd'|
sUtra - 33 yadI zukra kama aura raja jyAdA ho to strI, aura yadI raja kama aura
zukra jyAdA ho to puruSa, sUtra - 34 raja aura zukra-donoM samAna mAtrA meM ho
to napuMsaka utpanna hotA hai aura kevala strI raja kI sthiratA ho to mA~sapiMDa
utpanna hotA hai| sUtra - 35 prasava ke samaya baccA sara yA pA~va se nIkalatA
hai| yadi vo sIdhA bAhara nIkale to sakuzala utpanna hotA hai lekina yadi vo
tIrchA ho jAe to mara jAtA hai| sUtra-36 _ koI pApAtmA azuci prasUta aura azuci
rUpa garbhavAsa meM utkRSTa se 12 sAla taka rahatA hai  /  sUtra - 37 janma aura
mauta ke samaya jIva jo duHkha pAtA hai usa se vimUr3ha honevAlA jIva apane
pUrvajanma kA smaraNa nahIM kara sktaa| sUtra-38 taba rote hue ora apanI mAtA ke
zarIra ko pIr3A dete hue yoni mukha se bAhara nIkalatA hai  /  sUtra - 39
garbhagRhameM jIva kuMbhIpAka naraka kI taraha viSThA, mala-mUtra Adi azuci
sthAna meM utpanna hote haiN| sUtra-40 jisa taraha viSThAmeM kRmi utpanna hote
haiM usI taraha puruSa kA pitta, kapha, vIrya, lahU aura mUtra ke bIca jIva
utpanna hotA hai| sUtra-41 _ usa jIva kA zuddhikaraNa kisa taraha ho jisa kI
utpatti hI zukra aura lahU ke samUha meM huI ho  /  sUtra-42 azuci se utpanna
aura hamezA durgandhavAle viSThA se bhare, nitya zuci kI apekSA karanevAle
zarIra para garva kaisA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama
sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 8

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## ─Аgama S┼лtra 28, Payann─Б S┼лtra-5, тАШTandulavaic─БrikтАЩ **S┼лtra** **S┼лtra-43** O
─Аyushm─Бn! The ten stages of a being born in this way have been described in
order. They are as follows: **S┼лtra-44** B─Бl─Б, Kr─лс╕Н─Б, Mand─Б, Bal─Б, Praj├▒─Б,
H─Бyin─л, Prapanc─Б, Pragbh─Бr─Б, Munmukhi and ┼Ъ─Бyin─л are the ten stages of life.
**S┼лtra-45** At birth, the being attains the first stage. Due to ignorance, it
does not know pleasure, pain, or hunger. **S┼лtra-46** In the second stage, it
engages in various forms of play, and its mind is not sharp in its enjoyment of
worldly pleasures. **S┼лtra-47** In the third stage, it becomes capable of
experiencing five types of worldly pleasures. **S┼лtra-48** In the fourth stage,
called Bal─Б, the human being is capable of demonstrating its strength even when
there is no need. **S┼лtra-49** In the fifth stage, it becomes capable of
acquiring wealth and family. **S┼лtra-50** In the sixth stage, called H─Бyin─л, due
to a decline in the senses, it becomes detached from worldly pleasures.
**S┼лtra-51** In the seventh stage, called Prapanc─Б, it coughs, producing phlegm
and mucus. **S┼лtra-52** In the eighth stage, with a contracted abdomen and
wrinkled skin, it becomes unattractive to women and enters old age. **S┼лtra-53**
In the ninth stage, called Munmukhi, the body becomes weak due to old age and is
devoid of sexual desire. **S┼лtra-54** In the tenth stage, its voice becomes
weak, its tone changes. It becomes weak, with a confused mind, a deluded
intellect, and experiences a state of sorrow and suffering. **S┼лtra-55** Ten
years of age is for physical development, twenty years for acquiring knowledge,
thirty years for worldly pleasures, and forty years for acquiring specialized
knowledge. **S┼лtra-56** At fifty, eyesight weakens, at sixty, physical strength
declines, and at seventy, self-awareness weakens. **Muni D─лparatnas─Бgar Kс╣Ыt "
(Tandulavaic─Бrik) ─Аgama S┼лtra-Hindi Anuv─Бda** **Page 9**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtra sUtra-43 he AyuSmAn !
isa prakAra utpanna honevAle jIva kI krama se daza avasthAeM batAI gaI hai  /
vo isa prakAra haisUtra-44 bAlA, krIDA, maMdA, balA, prajJA, hAyanI, prapaMcA,
pragbhArA, munmukhI aura zAyanI jIvanakAla kI yaha dasa avasthA batAI gaI hai|
sUtra-45 janma hote hI vaha jIva prathama avasthA ko prApta hotA hai| usameM
ajJAnatA vaza vaha sukha-duHkha aura bhUkha ko nahIM jaantaa| sUtra-46 dUsarI
avasthAmeM vaha vividha krIr3A karatA hai, usakI kAmabhogameM tIvra mati nahIM
hotii| sUtra - 47 tIsarI avasthAmeM vaha pA~ca tarIke ke bhoga bhugatane ko
nizce samartha hotA hai  /  sUtra-48 cauthI balA nAma kI avasthAmeM mAnava kisI
parezAnI na ho to bhI apanA bala pradarzana karane meM samartha hotA hai| sUtra
- 49 pA~cavI avasthA meM vo dhana kI phIka ke lie samartha hotA hai aura
parivAra pAtA hai| sUtra-50 chaThI 'hAyanI' avasthA meM vo indriya meM zithilatA
Ane se kAmabhoga prati virakta hotA hai| sUtra - 51 sAtavI prapaMca dazA meM vo
snigdha aura kapha pAr3atA huA khA~satA rahatA hai  /  sUtra - 52 saMkucita huI
peTa kI tvacAvAlI AThavI avasthA meM vo striyoM ko apriya hotA hai aura
vRddhAvasthA meM badalatA hai| sUtra-53 munmukha dazAmeM zarIra bur3hApe se
kSINa hotA hai aura kAmavAsanA se rahita hotA hai  /  sUtra - 54 dasavIM dazA
meM usakI vANI kSINa ho jAtI hai, svara badala jAtA hai  /  vo dIna, viparIta
buddhi, bhrAntacitta, durbala aura duHkhada avasthA pAtA hai| sUtra - 55 daza
sAla kI Ayu daihika vikAsa kI, bIsa sAla kI umra vidyA prApti kI, tIsa taka
viSaya sukha aura cAlIsa sAla taka kI umra viziSTa jJAna kI hotI hai| sUtra-56
pacAsa ko A~kha kI dRSTi kamajora hotI hai, sATha meM bAhubala kama hotA hai,
azI kI umra meM Atma cetanA kamajora hotI hai| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "
(taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 9

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## ─Аgama S┼лtra 28, Payann─Бs┼лtra-5, 'Tandulavaic─Бrik' S┼лtras┼лtra-57 The body
bends by the age of ninety and life is complete by one hundred. How much
happiness and how much sorrow is there in this? S┼лtra-58 For those who live for
100 years with happiness and enjoy worldly pleasures, even for them, the
practice of Jina-bhashit Dharma is auspicious. S┼лtra-59 What is best for those
who always live in sorrow and painful circumstances? For them, it is their duty
to follow the superior Dharma preached by the Jina. S┼лtra-60 While enjoying
worldly pleasures, one should practice Dharma with the thought that they will
attain superior happiness in the next life. One who is sorrowful should practice
Dharma with the thought that they will not attain sorrow in the next life.
S┼лtra-61 Neither caste, wealth, knowledge, nor good education can liberate a man
or woman from the cycle of birth and death. All these things are only enhanced
by good karma. S┼лtra-62 When good karma (punya) weakens, so does one's strength.
When good karma increases, so does one's strength. S┼лtra-63 O ─Аyushm─Бn! By
performing virtuous deeds, one's joy increases. There is an increase in praise,
wealth, and fame. Therefore, O ─Аyushm─Бn! One should never think that they have
enough time, ─Бvalik─Б, moments, breaths, stoka, lava, muh┼лrta, days, nights,
fortnights, months, ayana, years, yugas, hundreds of years, thousands of years,
lakhs, crores, or kroс╕Нa-kroс╕Нa years to live. Where we will remain steadfast by
adopting many vows, virtues, restraints, rejections, medicinal fasts, etc. O
─Аyushm─Бn! Why not think that this life is certainly full of obstacles? In it,
various diseases like v─Бta, pitta, ┼Ыleс╣гma, sannip─Бta, etc., harm life? S┼лtra-64
O ─Аyushm─Бn! In the past, the Yugalik, Arihant, Cakravart─л, Baldev, Vasudev,
C─Бran, and Vidy─Бdhara, etc., humans lived for lakhs of years without any
disease. They were very gentle, beautiful in form, enjoyed excellent pleasures,
had excellent qualities, and had beautiful bodies. Their hands and feet were
like red lotus petals and soft. Their fingers were also soft. They had excellent
and auspicious signs like mountains, cities, crocodiles, oceans, and wheels,
etc. Their feet were well-established and stable like a tortoise's, their thighs
were like the deer and kuruvinda named grass, their knees were like the joint of
a round box and its lid, their thighs were like an elephant's trunk, their gait
was like a mad elephant, full of vigour and luxury, their private parts were
like a superior horse of a good breed, their waist was rounder than a lion's
waist, the middle part of their body was like a three-legged stool, a mace, a
mirror, and a sword made of pure gold, their navel was like the swirling and
circumambulating Ganges, like a group of waves, like a lotus spread by the rays
of the sun, deep and profound, their body hair was beautiful, their nature was
beautiful, thin, black, smooth, well-proportioned, beautiful, and veryтАж

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtrasUtra-57 nabbe kI umra
taka zarIra jhuka jAtA hai aura sau taka jIvana pUrNa hotA hai  /  isameM sukha
kitanA aura duHkha kitanA? sUtra-58 jo sukha se 100 sAla jItA hai aura bhoga ko
bhugatatA hai  /  unake lie bhI jinabhASita dharma kA sevana zreyaskara hai|
sUtra- 59 jo hamezA duHkhI aura kaSTadAyaka hAlAta meM hI jIvana jItA hai una ke
lie kyA uttama ? usa ke lie jinendra dvArA upadezita zreSThatara dharma kA
pAlana karanA hI kartavya hai| sUtra-60 sAMsArika sukha bhugatatA huA vo aise
socate hue dharma AcaraNa karatA rahatA hai ki mujhe bhavAntara meM uttama sukha
prApta hogA  /  duHkhI aise socakara dharma AcaraNa karatA hai ki mujhe
bhavAntara meM duHkha prApta na ho| sUtra - 61 nara yA nArI ko jAti, phala,
vidyA aura suzikSA bhI saMsAra se pAra nahIM utAratI  /  yaha saba to zubha
karma se hI vRddhi pAtA hai| sUtra-62 zubha karma (puNya) kamajora hote hI
pauruSa bhI kamajora hotA hai  /  zubha karma kI vRddhi hone se pauruSa bhI
vRddhi pAtA hai| sUtra - 63 he AyuSmAn ! puNya kRtya karane se prIti meM vRddhi
hotI hai  /  prazaMsA, dhana aura yaza meM vRddhi hotI hai  /  isalie he AyuSmAn
! aisA kabhI nahIM socanA cAhie ki yahA~ kAphI samaya, AvalikA, kSaNa,
zvAsocchvAsa, stoka, lava, muhUrta, dina, AhorAtra, pakSa, mAsa, ayana,
saMvatsara, yuga, zatavarSa, sahasra varSa, lAkha karor3a yA kror3A kror3a sAla
jInA hai  /  jahA~ hamane kaIM zIla, vrata, guNaviramaNa, pratyAkhyAna,
pauSadhopavAsa, apanA kara sthira rheNge| he AyuSmAn ! taba aisA cintana kyoM
nahIM karatA ki nizcaya se yaha jIvana kaIM bAdhA se yukta hai| usameM kaIM
vAta, pitta, zleSma, sannipAta Adi taraha-taraha ke rogAMtaka jIvana ko chatI
hai ? sUtra-64 he AyuSmAn ! pUrvakAla meM yugalika, arihaMta cakravartI,
baladeva, vAsudeva cAraNa aura vidyAdhara Adi mAnava roga rahita hone se lAkhoM
sAla taka jIvana jIte the  /  vo kAphI saumya, sundara rUpavAle, uttama bhoga-
bhugatanevAlA, uttama lakSaNavAle, sarvAMga sundara zarIravAle the  /  una ke
hAtha aura pA~va ke tAlave lAla kamala patra jaise aura komala the| aMgulIyA~
bhI komala thI  /  parvata, nagara, magaramaccha, sAgara evam cakra Adi uttama
aura maMgala cinhoM se yukta the  /  pA~va kachue kI taraha-supratiSThita aura
susthita, jA~gha hIranI aura kuruvinda nAma ke tRNa kI taraha vRttAkAra gor3haNa
Dibbe aura usake Dhakkana kI sandhi jaise, sA~thala hAthI kI soMr3ha kI jaisI,
gati uttama madonmatta hAthI jaisI vikrama aura vilAsa yukta, guhya pradeza
uttama jAta ke zreSTha ghor3e jaisA, kamara zera kI kamara se bhI jyAdA gola,
zarIra kA madhya hissA sameTI huI tIna-pAI, mUsala, darpaNa aura zuddha kie gae
uttama sone ke bane hue khaDga kI mUr3ha aura vajra jaise valayAkAra, nAbhi
gaMgA ke Avartta aura pradakSiNAvartta, taraMga samUha jaisI, sUraja kI kiraNoM
se phailI huI kamala jaisI gambhIra aura gUDha, romarAjI ramaNIya, sundara
svAbhAvika patalI, kAlI, snigdha, prazasta, lAvaNyayukta ati muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 10

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## ─Аgama S┼лtra 28, Payann─Бs┼лtra-5, 'Tandulavaic─Бrik'  The early humans had a
body that was soft, delicate, with a belly like a fish or bird, broad and smooth
like a lotus, and a slightly bent back, with little hair. Their bones were not
visible through the flesh, and they were pure like gold, beautiful in form, free
from disease and affliction, and possessed all 32 auspicious marks.  Their chest
was bright like a golden stone, broad, flat, strong, vast, and marked with the
┼Ъr─лvatsa symbol. Their arms were round like the doorposts of a city, their
biceps were like the powerful body of a serpent king, and their elbows were like
the hanging doorposts of a city. Their joints were well-connected, their muscles
were strong, their bodies were well-built, their veins were tight and strong,
their limbs were straight, round, smooth, beautiful, and firm. Their hands were
like the palms of a lotus, strong, soft, fleshy, beautiful, and broad. Their
fingers were strong, without holes, soft, and excellent. Their nails were thin,
clear, lustrous, beautiful, and smooth, with a copper-like color. The lines on
their hands were auspicious, like the moon, sun, conch, wheel, and swastika, and
well-formed. Their legs were like the legs of a buffalo, boar, lion, tiger,
deer, or elephant, strong, full, raised, and soft. Their necks were four angulas
in length and beautiful like a conch. Their beards and mustaches were well-
formed and clean. Their chins were strong, fleshy, beautiful, and broad like a
tiger's. Their lips were pure, red like a deer or a bimba fruit. Their teeth
were like a row of pearls, pure, white like a conch, the foam of cow's milk, a
kunda flower, a water drop, or a lotus stalk. Their teeth were unbroken, well-
proportioned, smooth, beautiful, and even. The soles of their feet and the
bottom of their tongues were like pure gold heated in fire. Their voice was
sweet like a s─Бrasa bird, deep like the roar of a fresh cloud, and resonant like
the sound of a kro├▒ca bird and a kettledrum. Their noses were long, straight,
and raised, like the beak of a garuс╕Нa. Their faces were like a blooming lotus.
Their eyes were like blooming lotus flowers, clear like white lotus petals,
their eyebrows were slightly bent like a bow, beautiful, and in a straight line,
black like dark clouds, of appropriate length, and beautiful. Their ears were
slightly attached to their bodies, well-proportioned, round, and fleshy around
the edges. Their foreheads were like a crescent moon. Their faces were like a
full moon, gentle, and their heads were like an umbrella, raised. The front of
their heads was like a mace, strong, well-connected, raised, and with a raised
peak. The skin of their heads was red like pure gold heated in fire. Their hair
was thick like the fruit of a ┼Ы─Бlmal─л tree, well-proportioned, fine, soft,
beautiful, pure, smooth, well-formed, fragrant, black like the jewels of a king,
sapphire, and kohl, and curly, like a swarm of happy bees, turning to the right.
They were full of auspicious marks, good qualities, and virtues, well-
proportioned, with a good reputation, beautiful in every way, gentle in form
like the moon, pleasing to look at, naturally beautiful, worthy of being seen,
beautiful, and perfect.  The voice of these humans was like the sound of
letters, like clouds, like swans, like kro├▒ca birds, like the sound of a bull,
like the sound of a lion, like the sound of a direction-guarding deity, like the
sound of a conch of the ocean-guarding deity. They were swift like the wind,
with the nature of a pigeon, pure like a ┼Ыakuni bird, with a clean anus, well-
formed on both sides of their backs and bellies, with well-proportioned thighs,
fragrant like a lotus or a blue lotus, strong, healthy, excellent, well-formed,
very white, without any blemishes, dirt, sweat, or mucus, very clean, and
radiant. They were of the Vrajс╣Ыс╣гabhan─Бr─Бca-saс╣Бghaс╣Зa, with a square shape, and
six thousand dhanuс╣гas in height.  O ─Аyusm─Бn ┼Ъramaс╣Зa! These humans were said to
have 256 bones. These humans were naturally simple, humble in nature, free from
vices, with little anger, pride, delusion, or greed, gentle, and compassionate.
They were absorbed, simple, humble, with few desires, with little accumulation,
and peaceful in nature. They were free from agriculture and trade, lived in the
branches of trees like houses, desired only what was necessary, and ate the
fruits and flowers of the Kalpavс╣Ыkс╣гa.  S┼лtra-65  O ─Аyusm─Бn ┼Ъramaс╣Зa! In the past,
there were six types of human bodies: Vrajс╣Ыс╣гabhan─Бr─Бca, с╣Ъс╣гabhan─Бr─Бca,
Arddhan─Бr─Бca, K─лlik─Б, and Sev─Бrtta. In the present time, humans only have the
Sev─Бrtta body. O ─Аyusm─Бn! In the past, there were six types of human forms:
Samacaturasra, Nyagrodhaparimandala, S─Бdika, ...  Muni D─лparatnas─Бgara Kс╣Ыt "
(Tandulavaic─Бrik) ─Аgama S┼лtra-Hindi Anuv─Бda Page 11

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtrakomala, mRdu, kukSi,
matsya aura paMchI kI taraha unnata, udara kamala samAna vistIrNa snigdha aura
jhuke hue pIThavAlA, alparoma yukta aise deha ko pahale ke mAnava dhAraNa karate
haiM  /  jisakI haDDiyA~ mA~sayukta najara nahIM AtI, vaha sone jaisI nirmala,
sundara racanAvAle, roga Adi upasarga rahita aura prazasta battIsa lakSaNa se
yukta hote haiN| _vakSasthala sone kI zilA jaise ujjvala, prazasta, samatala,
puSTa, vizAla aura zrIvatsa cihnavAle, bhUjA nagara ke daravAje kI argalA ke
samAna gola, bAhu bhujaMgezvara ke vipula zarIra aura apanI sthAna se
nIkalanevAle argale kI jaisI laTakI huI, sandhi muga joDa jaise, mA~sa-gUDha,
hRSTa-puSTa-saMsthita-sugaThita-subaddha-nAr3I se kase hue-Thosa, sIdhe, gola,
suzliSTa, sundara aura dRDha, hAtha hathelIvAle, puSTa komala-mAMsala sundara
bane hue-prazasta lakSaNavAle, aMgulI puSTa-chidrarahita-komala aura uttama,
nAkhUna-tAmra jaise raMga ke patale-svaccha-kAntivAle sundara aura snigdha,
hAtha kI rekhAeM candramA sUrya-zaMkha-cakra aura svastika Adi zubha lakSaNavAlI
aura suviracita, khaMbhe uttama bheMsa, suvara, zera, vAgha, sA~la, hAthI ke
khaMbhe jaise vipula-paripUrNa-unnata aura mRdu, galA cAra AMgala suparimita
aura zaMkha jaisI uttama, dAr3hI-mUMcha avasthita aura sApha, Dor3hI puSTa,
mAMsala, sundara aura vAgha jaisI vistIrNa, hoTha zuddha, mRgA aura bimba ke
phala jaise lAla raMga ke, danta paMkti candramA jaisI nirmala-zaMkha-gAya ke
dUdha ke phINa, kundapuSpa, jalakaNa aura mRNAlanAla kI taraha zveta, dA~ta
akhaMDa suDola, avirala ati snigdha aura sundara, eka samAna, talave aura jihvA
kA tala agni meM tape hue svaccha sone jaisA, svara sArasa paMchI jaisA madhura,
navIna megha kI dahAr3a jaisA gambhIra aura kroMca paMchI ke AvAja jaisI-
dundubhi yukta, nAka garur3a kI coMca jaisA lambA, sIdhA aura unnata, mukha
vikasita kamala jaisA A~kha padma kamala jaisI vikasita dhavala-kamalapatra
jaisI svaccha, bha~vara thor3e se jhuke hue dhanuSa jaisI, sundara paMkti yukta
kAle megha jaisI-ucita mAtrA meM lambI aura sundara-kAna kucha hada taka zarIra
ko cipakakara pramANa yukta gola aura AsapAsa kA hissA mA~sala yukta aura puSTa,
lalATa ardha candramA jaisA saMsthita, mukha paripUrNa candramA jaisA, saumya,
mastaka chatra jaisA ubharatA, sira kA agrabhAga mudgara jaisA, sudRDha nADI se
baddha-unnata lakSaNa se yukta aura unnata zikhara yukta, sira kI camar3I agni
meM tape hue svaccha sone jaisI lAla, sira ke bAla zAlmalI per3a ke phala jaise
ghane, pramANopeta, bArIka, komala, sundara, nirmala, snigdha, prazasta
lakSaNavAle, khuzabUdAra, bhuja-bhojaka ratna, nIlamaNI aura kAjala jaise kAle
harSita bhramara ke jhuMDa ke samUha kI taraha, dhuMgharAle dakSiNAvartta hote
haiM  /  vo uttama lakSaNa, vyaMjana, gaNa se paripUrNa-pramANopeta mAna-unmAna,
sarvAMga sundara, candramA samAna saumya AkRtivAle, priyadarzI svAbhAvika
zRMgAra se sundaratAyukta, dekhane ke lAyaka, darzanIya, abhirUpa aura pratirUpa
hote haiN| yaha mAnava kA svara akSarita, megha samAna, haMsa samAna, kroMca
paMchI, naMdI-naMdIghoSa, siMha-siMhaghoSa, dizAkumAra deva kA ghaMTa-udadhi
kumAra deva kA ghaMTa, ina sabake samAna svara hote haiM  /  zarIra meM vAyu ke
anukUla vegavAle kabUtara jaise svabhAvavAle, zakuni paMchI jaise nirlepa mala
dvAravAle, pITha aura peTa ke nIce sugaThita donoM pArzvabhAga evaM pariNAmopeta
jaMghAvAle padmakamala yA nIlakamala jaise sugaMdhita mukhavAle, tejayukta,
nirogI, uttama prazasta, ati zveta, anupama jala-mala-dAga, pasInA aura
rajarahita zarIravAle ati svaccha aura udyotiyukta zarIravAle,
vrajaRSabhanArAca-saMghayaNavAle, samacaturasra saMsthAna se saMsthita aura cha
hajAra dhanuSa UMcAIvAle batAe gae haiM  /  he AyuSmAn zramaNa ! vo mAnava 256
pRSTha haDDiyA~ vAle batAe haiM  /  yaha mAnava svabhAva se sarala prakRti se
vinIta, vikAra rahita, alpa krodha-mAna, mAyA-lobhavAle, mRdu aura mArdavatA
yukta, tallIna, sarala, vinita, alpa IcchAvAle, alpa saMgrahI, zAnta svabhAvI  /
asimasi-kRSi vyApArarahita, gRhAkAra per3a kI zAkhA pe nivAsa karanevAle,
Icchita viSayAbhilAsI, kalpavRkSa ke pRthvI phala aura puSpa kA AhAra karate
haiM  /  sUtra-65 he AyuSmAn zramaNa ! pUrvakAla meM mAnava ke chaha prakAra ke
saMhanana the vo isa prakAra-vajraRSabhanArAca, RSabhanArAca, arddhanArAca,
kIlikA aura sevArtta, vartamAna kAla meM mAnava ko sevArtta saMhanana hI hotA
hai  /  he AyuSmAn ! pUrvakAla meM mAnava ko chaha prakAra ke saMsthAna the vo
isa prakAra-samacaturasra, nyagrodhaparimaMDala, sAdika, muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 11

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## ─Аgama S┼лtra 28, Payann─Бs┼лtra-5, 'Tandulavaic─Бrika'  S┼лtrakubja, V─Бmana and
Huс╣Зс╕Нaka. O ─Аyushm─Бn! In the present time, only the Huс╣Зс╕Нaka institution exists.
S┼лtra-66  Due to the decline of the time, the human body's consolidation,
institution, height, and lifespan gradually diminish. S┼лtra-67  Anger, pride,
deceit, greed, and the act of false weights and measures, all these vices
increase. S┼лtra-68  Scales and measures in the country are uneven. Royal
families and years are uneven. S┼лtra-69  In an uneven year, the potency of
medicine decreases. In this time, due to the weakness of medicine, lifespan also
decreases. S┼лtra-70  In this way, like the waning moon in the dark fortnight,
those humans who are devoted to Dharma live well. S┼лtra-71  O ─Аyushm─Бn! A man,
regardless of his name, who bathes, worships the gods, performs auspicious
rituals and atonement, bathes his head, wears a garland around his neck, adorns
himself with gems and gold ornaments, wears new and expensive clothes, has a
body smeared with sandalwood paste, is adorned with a pure garland and fragrant
unguents, beautiful necklaces, half-necklaces, three-string necklaces, and a
chest-piece, has a beautiful ring on his finger, is adorned with various gem-
studded bracelets on his arms, is extremely beautiful, has a face illuminated by
earrings, a head adorned with a crown, a chest adorned with a wide necklace,
wears a long and beautiful upper garment, has a yellow-colored finger adorned
with a ring, wears various gem-studded, pure, priceless, luminous, well-made,
unique, beautiful, charming, and heroic-indicating bracelets, what more can be
said?  Like a Kalpavriksha, adorned, decorated, and pure, he prostrates to his
parents and says, "O son! Live for a hundred years." But if his lifespan is a
hundred years, how much longer will the being live? He who lives for a hundred
years lives for twenty yugas. That means he lives for 200 ayanas, or 600
seasons, or 1200 months, or 2400 fortnights, or 36,000 nights and days, or
1,080,000 muh┼лrtas, or 4,074,840,000 breaths. O Bhagavan! How does he consume
twelve and a half 'tandulav─Бha'? O Gautama! A 'prastha' is twelve and a half
'pala' of rice that is pounded with a pestle, sifted through a sieve, free from
chaff and husk, unbroken and complete, as prepared by a weak woman. That
'prastha' is also called 'm─Бgadha'.  (Generally) they eat one 'prastha' of rice
in the morning and one 'prastha' in the evening, twice a day. One 'prastha'
contains 64,000 grains of rice. A man's daily intake is 32 'kavala' of 2,000
grains of rice, a woman's intake is 28 'kavala', and a eunuch's intake is 24
'kavala'. This is the calculation: two 'asati' make one 'prasс╣Ыti', two 'prasс╣Ыti'
make one 'setik─Б', four 'setik─Б' make one 'kuс╕Нava', four 'kuс╕Нava' make one
'prasthaka', four 'prasthaka' make one '─Бс╕Нhaka', sixty '─Бс╕Нhaka' make one
'jighnya kumbha', eighty '─Бс╕Нhaka' make one 'madhyama kumbha', one hundred
'─Бс╕Нhaka' make one 'utkс╣Ыс╣гс╣нa kumbha', and 500 '─Бс╕Нhaka' make one 'v─Бha'. According
to this 'v─Бha', they consume twelve and a half 'v─Бha' of rice. According to that
calculation, S┼лtra-72  It is said that there are 460 crore, 80 lakh grains of
rice.  Muni D─лparatnas─Бgara Kс╣Ыt " (Tandulavaic─Бrika) ─Аgama S┼лtra-Hindi Anuv─Бda
Page 12

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtrakubja, vAmana aura
huMDaka  /  he AyuSmAn ! vartamAnakAla meM kevala huMDaka saMsthAna hI hotA hai
/  sUtra-66 mAnava ke saMhanana, saMsthAna, UMcAI, Ayu avasarpiNI kAladoSa kI
vajaha se dhIre-dhIre kSINa hote jAte haiM sUtra-67 krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha
aura jhUThe tola-nApa kI kriyA Adi saba avaguNa bar3hate haiM  /  sUtra-68
tarAju aura janapada meM nApa tola viSama hote haiM  /  rAjakula aura varSa
viSama hote haiM  /  sUtra-69 viSama varSa meM auSadhi kI tAkata kama ho jAtI
hai  /  isa samaya meM auSadhi kI kamajorI kI vajaha se Ayu bhI kama hotA hai|
sUtra-70 isa taraha kRSNa pakSa ke candramA kI taraha hrAsamAna loga meM jo
dharma meM anurakta mAnava hai vo acchI taraha se jIvana jItA hai| sUtra-71 he
AyuSmAn ! jo kisI bhI nAma kA puruSa snAna kara ke, devapUjA kara ke, kautuka
maMgala aura prAyazcitta karake, sira para snAna kara ke, galemeM mAlA
pahanakara, maNI aura sone ke AbhUSaNa dhAraNa karake, nae aura kImatI vastra
pahanakara, candana ke lepavAle zarIra se, zuddha mAlA aura vilepana yukta,
sundara hAra, arddhahAra-trisarohAra, kandore se zobhAyamAna hokara, vakSasthala
para graiveyaka, aMgulI meM khUbasUrana aMguThI, bAhu para kaI taraha ke maNI
aura ratnajar3ita bAjubandha se vibhUSita, atyadhika zobhAyukta, kuMDala se
prakAzita mukhavAle, mugaTa se dIpe hue mastaka vAle, vistRta hAra se zobhita
vakSasthala, lambe sundara vastra ke uttarIya ko dhAraNa karake, aMguThI se pIle
varNa kI aMgulIvAle, taraha-taraha ke maNI-suvarNa vizuddha ratnayukta, anamola
prakAzayukta, suzliSTa, viziSTa, manohara, ramaNIya aura vIratva ke sUcaka kar3e
dhAraNa kara le  /  jyAdA kitanA kahanA ? kalpavRkSa jaise, alaMkRta vibhUSita
aura pavitra hokara apane mA~-bApa ko praNAma kare taba vo isa prakAra kaheMge,
he putra ! sau sAla kA bana  /  lekina usakA Ayu 100 sAla ho to jIva anyathA
jyAdA kitanA jIegA? sau sAla jInevAlA vo bIsa yuga jItA hai  /  arthAt vo 200
ayana yA 600 Rtu yA 1200 mahine yA 2400 pakSa yA 36000 rAta-dina yA 1080000
muhUrta yA 4074840000 sA~se jItanA jI letA hai  /  he bhagavan ! vo sAr3e bAIsa
'taMdulavAha' kisa taraha khAtA hai ? he gautama ! kamajora strI dvArA sUpar3e
se char3e gae, kharamUsala se kUTe gae, bhUse aura rahita karake akhaMDita aura
paripUrNa cAvala ke sAr3e bAraha pala' kA eka prastha hotA hai  /  usa prastha
ko 'mAgadha' bhI (sAmAnyataH) pratidina subaha eka prastha aura zAma ko eka
prastha aise do samaya cAvala khAte haiM  /  eka prasthaka meM 64000 cAvala hote
haiM  /  2000 cAvala ke dAne kA eka kavala se puruSa kA AhAra 32 kavala strI kA
AhAra 28 kavala aura napuMsaka ke 24 kavala hote haiM  /  yaha ginatI isa taraha
hai  /  do asatI kI prasRti, do prasRti kA eka setikA, cAra setikA kA eka
kuDava, cAra kuDava kA eka prasthaka, cAra prasthaka kA eka ADhaka, sATha ADhaka
kA eka jaghanya kumbha, assI ADhaka kA eka madhyamakumbha, sau ADhaka kA eka
utkRSTa kumbha aura 500 ADhaka kA eka vAha hotA hai  /  isa vAha ke mutAbika
sAr3e bAIsa vAha tAMdula khAte haiM  /  usa ginatI ke mutAbikasUtra - 72 460
karor3a, 80 lAkha cAvala ke dAne hote haiM vaisA kahA hai| muni dIparatnasAgara
kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 12

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Hс╣Ыс╣гс╣нapuс╣нa ─Аgama S┼лtra 28, Payann─Бs┼лtra-5, 'Tandulavaic─Бrika' S┼лtras┼лtra - 73
This way, one who eats 22 and a half vahas of rice eats 5 and a half kumbhas of
mung beans. Meaning, he eats 2400 ─Бс╕Нhakas of ghee and oil or 36,000 palas of
salt. He changes clothes after two months, wearing 600 dhotis. If he changes
clothes every month, he wears 1200 dhotis. This way, O ─Аyuс╣гman! This is the
count or measurement of oil, ghee, salt, food, and clothes of a human being who
lives for 100 years. This count of quantity has also been stated by the Mahс╣Ыс╣гi
in two ways. Having counted those who have all this, what is there to count for
those who have nothing? S┼лtra - 74 First, the count of practical behavior was
seen, now one should know the subtle and certain count. If it is not this way,
then one should know the count as uneven. S┼лtra - 75 The most subtle time, which
cannot be divided, should be known as 'time'. There are countless times in one
breath. S┼лtra - 76 The one breath of a hс╣Ыс╣гс╣нapuс╣гс╣нa, free from debility and
suffering, is called pr─Бс╣Зa. S┼лtra - 77 Seven pr─Бс╣Зas make one stoka, seven stokas
make one lava, 77 lavas make one muh┼лrta. S┼лtra - 78 O Bhagavan! How many
breaths are there in one muh┼лrta? O Gautama! S┼лtra - 79 There are 3773 breaths.
All the infinite knowers have stated this muh┼лrta-quantity. S┼лtra - 80 Two palas
make one muh┼лrta, 60 palas make one ahotraatra, 15 ahotraatras make one pakс╣гa, 2
pakс╣гas make 1 month. S┼лtra - 81-82 A clock made of iron in the shape of a
pomegranate flower should be made, with a hole in its bottom. The hole of the
clock should be like the 96 hairs of a three-year-old calf's tail, which are
straight and not bent. S┼лtra - 83 Or, the hole of the clock should be like the
hairs of a two-year-old elephant calf's tail, which are not broken. S┼лtra - 84
There should be a hole of four angulas in a four-m─Б┼Ыa gold bowl and a hard
needle. S┼лtra - 85 The quantity of water in that clock should be two ─Бс╕Нhakas,
and that water should be used after filtering it through cloth. S┼лtra - 86 The
water should be like the clear water of a cloud or the water of a mountain river
in the autumn season. S┼лtra - 87 One year has 12 months, one year has 24 pakс╣гas
and 360 nights and days. Muni D─лparatnas─Бgara Kс╣Ыt " (Tandulavaic─Бrika) ─Аgama
S┼лtra - Hindi Anuv─Бda Page 13 Page 13

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 haSTapuTa Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtrasUtra - 73
isa taraha sAr3e bAIsa vAha tAMdula khAnevAlA vaha sAr3e pA~ca kumbha mu~ga
khAtA hai  /  matalaba 2400 ADhaka ghI aura tela yA 36 hajAra pala namaka khAtA
hai  /  vo do mahine ke bAda kapar3e badalatA hai, 600 dhotI pahanatA hai  /
eka mahine para badalane se 1200 dhotI pahanatA hai  /  isa taraha he AyuSman !
100 sAla kI AyuvAle mAnava ke tela, ghI, namaka, khAnA aura kapar3e kI ginatI yA
tola-nApa hai, yaha ginatI parimANa bhI maharSi ne do taraha se kahA hai  /
jinake pAsa yaha saba kucha hai usakI gaNanA karake, jinake pAsa yaha kucha bhI
nahIM hai usakI kyA gaNanA karanA? sUtra - 74 pahale vyavahAra ginatI dekhI aba
sUkSma aura nizcayagata ginatI jAnanI cAhie  /  yadi isa taraha se na ho to
gaNanA viSama jAnanI caahie| sUtra - 75 sarvAdhika sUkSmakAla, jisakA vibhAjana
na ho sake use 'samaya' jAnanA cAhie  /  eka sA~sa meM anaginata samaya hotA
hai| sUtra-76 hRSTapuSTa glAni rahita aura kaSTarahita puruSa kI jo eka sA~sa
hotI hai use prANa kahate haiN| sUtra - 77 sAta prANa kA eka stoka, sAta stoka
kA eka lava, 77 lava kA eka muhUrta kahA hai| sUtra-78 he bhagavan ! eka muhUrta
meM kitane ucchvAsa batAe haiM ? he gautama ! sUtra - 79 3773 ucchvAsa hote haiM
/  sabhI anantajJAnIone isI muhUrtta-parimANa batAyA hai| sUtra-80 do pala kA
eka muhUrta-60 pala kA eka ahorAtra, 15 ahorAtra kA eka pakSa, 2 pakSa kA 1
mahinA hotA hai sUtra-81-82 dAr3ama ke puSpa kI AkRtivAlI lohe kI ghar3I
banAkara usake talave meM chidra kiyA jAe, tIna sAla ke gAya ke bacce kI pU~cha
ke-96 bAla jo sIdhe hote haiM aura mur3e hue na ho vaisI taraha ghar3I kA chidra
honA caahie| sUtra -83 yA phira do sAla ke hAthI ke bacce kI pU~cha ke bAla jo
TUTe hue na ho aisI taraha ghar3I yA chidra honA caahie| sUtra - 84 cAra mAsA
sone kI eka gaula aura kaThina sUI jisa kA parimANa cAra aMgula ho vaisA chidra
honA cAhie  /  sUtra - 85 usa ghar3ImeM pAnI kA parimANa do Ar3haka honA cAhie,
usa pAnI ko kapar3e se chAnakara prayoga karanA caahie| sUtra-86 megha kA sApha
pAnI aura zaradakAlIna parvatIya nadI jaisA hI pAnI lenA caahie| sUtra - 87 12
mAsa kA eka sAla, eka sAla ke 24 pakSa aura 360 rAta-dina hote haiN| muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 13 Page
13

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 28, Payannasutra-5, 'Tandulavaicharik' Sutra Sutra - 88 There are
1,13,900 breaths in one night and day. Sutra - 89 There are 33,55,700 breaths in
one month. Sutra - 90 There are 40,74,84,000 breaths in one year. Sutra - 91
There are 40,74,54,00,000 breaths in a lifespan of 100 years. Sutra - 92 Now,
observe the decay of lifespan due to the waning of night and day. (Listen) Sutra
- 93 Thirty Muhurtas are lost in a night and day, and 900 Muhurtas are lost in a
month. But the ignorant do not know this. Sutra - 94 In the Hemant season, the
sun destroys 3600 Muhurtas of lifespan. Similarly, it happens in the summer and
rainy seasons. One should know this. Sutra - 95 In this world, 50 years of
lifespan are lost in sleep in a normal lifespan of 100 years. Similarly, 20
years are lost in childhood and old age. Sutra - 96, 97 The remaining 15 years
are lost due to cold, heat, travel, hunger, thirst, fear, sorrow, and various
kinds of diseases. Thus, 85 years are lost. Those who live for 100 years live
for only 15 years, and not everyone lives for 100 years. Sutra - 98 In this way,
in a fleeting human life, those who do not follow the fourfold path of Dharma,
will have to regret it later. Sutra - 99 Even after being born in this land of
karma, a human being, under the influence of attachment, does not know the
supreme path and the nature of the self, as taught by the Jinas. Sutra - 100
This life is as fleeting as the flow of a river, as fading as a blooming flower,
and even happiness is impermanent. All three are quickly consumed. Sutra - 101
Just as a net traps a group of deer, similarly, the net of old age and death
traps humans. Yet, blinded by the net of attachment, you cannot see all this.
Sutra - 102 O Auspicious one! This body is dear, beloved, beautiful, pleasing,
attractive, delightful, strong, trustworthy, approved, desired, Muni
Diparatnasagar Krit " (Tandulavaicharik) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtrasUtra -88 eka rAtri-
dina meM 1,13,900 ucchvAsa hote haiM  /  sUtra - 89 eka mahine meM 3355700
ucchvAsa hote haiN| sUtra- 90 eka sAla meM 4074840000 ucchavAsa hote haiM  /
sUtra - 91 100 sAla ke Ayu meM 4074540000 ucchvAsa hote haiN| sUtra - 92 aba
rAta dina kSINa hone se Ayu kA kSaya dekho  /  (sUno) sUtra-93 rAta-dina meM
tIsa aura mahine meM 900 muhUrta pramAdi ke naSTa hote haiM  /  lekina ajJAnI
use nahIM jAnate  /  sUtra-94 hemaMtaRtumeM sUraja pUre 3600 muhUrta Ayu ko
naSTa karate haiM  /  usI taraha grISma aura varSA meM bhI hotA hai aisA jAnanA
caahie| sUtra-95 isa loka meM sAmAnya se sau sAla ke Ayu meM 50 sAla nidrAmeM
naSTa hote haiM  /  usI taraha 20 sAla bacapana aura bur3hApe meM naSTa hote
haiN| sUtra - 96, 97 bAkI ke 15 sAla zardI, garmI, mArgagamana, bhUkha, pyAsa,
bhaya, zoka aura vividha prakAra kI bImArI hotI hai| aise 85 sAla naSTa hote
haiM  /  jo sau sAla jInevAle hote haiM vo 15 sAla jIte haiM aura 100 sAla
jInevAle bhI sabhI nahIM hote| sUtra - 98 isa taraha vyatIta honevAle niHssAra
mAnavajIvana meM sAmane Ae hae cAritra dharma kA pAlana nahIM karate use pIche
se pachatAvA karanA pdd'egaa| sUtra- 99 isa karmabhUmi meM utpanna hokara bhI
kisI mAnava moha se vaza hokara jinendra ke dvArA pratipAdita dharmatIrtha
samAna zreSTha mArga aura AtmasvarUpa ko nahIM jaantaa| sUtra-100 yaha jIvana
nadI ke vega jaisA capala, yauvana phUla jaisA mujhAnevAlA aura sukha bhI
azAzvata hai  /  yaha tInoM zIghra bhogya haiN| sUtra-101 jisa taraha mRga ke
samUha ko jAla sameTa letI hai usI taraha mAnava ko jarAmaraNa samAna jAla
sameTa letI hai| to bhI mohajAla se mUr3ha bane hue tuma yaha saba nahIM dekha
skte| sUtra - 102 he AyuSmAn ! yaha zarIra iSTa, priya, kAMta, manojJa,
manohara, manAbhirAma, dRDha, vizvAsanIya, saMmata, abhISTa, muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 14

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Agam Sutra 28, Payannasutra-5, 'Tandulavaicharik'  This Sutra, praiseworthy
and valuable like a jewel casket, is well-guarded like a cloth chest and an oil
vessel. It is considered worthy of protection from the touch of cold, heat,
hunger, thirst, thieves, bites, mosquitoes, wind, bile, phlegm, fever, and other
diseases. But truly, this body is impermanent, imperishable, non-eternal,
subject to growth and decay, and destined for destruction. Therefore, it must be
abandoned sooner or later.  O Ayushman! In this body, there are 18 joints in the
backbone. There are twelve rib bones in the shape of a casket. Six bones only
surround the side part, which is called Kadah. The human abdomen is one Vitasthi
(12-finger measurement) in size, and the neck is four fingers in size. The
tongue is four Palas, and the eye is two Palas.  The head is made up of four
sections of bone. It contains 32 teeth, a tongue seven fingers long, a heart of
three and a half Palas, and a liver of 25 Palas. There are two intestines, which
are called five Vamas. The two intestines are the large and the small. The large
intestine expels feces, and the small intestine expels urine. Two sides are
mentioned, one left and one right. The right side is associated with happiness,
and the left side is associated with sorrow.  O Ayushman! There are 160 joints
in this body, 107 vital points, 300 bones connected to each other, 900 nerves,
700 veins, 500 muscles, 9 arteries, 99 lakh hair follicles except for beard and
mustache hair, and three and a half crore hair follicles including beard and
mustache. O Ayushman! In this body, 160 veins originate from the navel and go
towards the brain. They are called Rasaharani. Ascending, these veins activate
the eyes, ears, nose, and tongue. And their damage destroys the functioning of
the eyes, ears, nose, and tongue. O Ayushman! In this body, 160 veins originate
from the navel and reach the soles of the feet. They provide the functioning of
the shanks. The damage to these veins causes headache, hemiplegia, head pain,
and blindness.  O Ayushman! In this body, 160 veins originate from the navel and
reach the palms of the hands. They provide the functioning of the arms. And
their damage causes pain in the armpit, back pain, abdominal pain, and O
Ayushman! 160 veins originate from the navel and go downwards to meet the Gunda.
And their damage causes the wind to be in the right amount. And damage causes
the blockage of feces, urine, and wind, making the human being disturbed and
causing a disease called Pandu. O Ayushman! There are 25 veins that hold phlegm,
25 veins that hold bile, and 10 veins that hold semen. A man has 700 veins, a
woman has 670 veins, and a eunuch has 680 veins.  O Ayushman! In this human
body, the weight of blood is one Adhak, fat is half an Adhak, Mastuling is one
Prastha, urine is one Adhak, feces is one Prastha, bile is one Kudava, phlegm is
one Kudava, and semen is half a Kudava. In those who are afflicted with doshas,
these quantities are less. A man has five chambers in his body, and a woman has
six. A man has nine sources, and a woman has eleven. A man has 500 muscles, a
woman has 470 muscles, and a eunuch has 480 muscles. Sutra - 103  If perhaps the
flesh inside the body is transformed and expelled, then even the mother would
feel disgust at seeing that impurity. Sutra - 104  The human body is impure due
to flesh, semen, and bones. But it is adorned by clothing, fragrance, and
garlands.  Muni Diparatnasagar Krit " (Tandulavaicharik) Agam Sutra - Hindi
Translation Page 15

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtraprazaMsanIya, AbhUSaNa
aura ratna karaMDaka samAna acchI taraha se gopanIya, kapar3e kI peTI aura
telapAtra kI taraha acchI taraha se rakSita, zardI, garmI, bhUkha, pyAsa, cora,
daMza, mazaka, vAta, pitta, kapha, sannipAta, Adi bImArI ke saMsparza se bacAne
ke yogya mAnA jAtA hai  /  lekina vAkaI meM yaha zarIra ? adhruva, anitya,
azAzvata, vRddhi aura hAnI pAnevAlA, vinAzazIla hai  /  isalie pahale yA bAda
meM usakA avazya parityAga karanA pdd'egaa| he AyuSmAn ! isa zarIra meM pRSTha
hisse kI haDDI meM kramazaH 18 saMdhi hotI hai  /  usameM karaMDaka AkAra kI
bAraha pasalI kI haDDiyA~ hotI hai  /  cha haDDI kevala bagala ke hisse ko
gheratI hai use kaDAha kahate haiM  /  mAnava kI kukSi eka vitasthi (12-aMgula
pramANa) parimANa yukta aura garadana cAra aMgula parimANa kI hai  /  jIbha cAra
pala aura A~kha do pala hai| haDDI ke cAra khaMr3a se yukta sira kA hissA hai|
usameM 32 dA~ta, sAta aMgula pramANa jIbha, sAr3he tIna pala kA hRdaya, 25 pala
kA kalejA hotA hai| do Anta hote haiN| jo pA~ca vAma parimANa ko kahate haiN| do
Anta isa taraha se hai-sthUla aura patalI  /  usameM jo sthUla Anta hai usameM
se mala nIkalatA hai aura jo sUkSma Anta hai usameM se mUtra nIkalatA hai  /  do
pArzvabhAga batAe haiM  /  eka bA~yA dUsarA dA~yA  /  jisameM dA~yA pArzvabhAga
hai vo sukha pariNAmavAlA hotA hai  /  jo bA~yA pArzvabhAga hai vo duHkha
pariNAmavAlA hotA hai| he AyuSmAn ! isa zarIra meM 160 jor3a hai  /  107
marmasthAna hai, eka dUsare se jur3I 300 haDDiyA~ hai, 900 snAyu, 700 zirA, 500
mA~sapezI, 9 dhamanI, dAr3hI-mUMcha ke roma ke sivA 99 lAkha romakUpa, dAr3hI-
mUMcha sahita sAr3e tIna karor3a romakUpa hote haiM  /  he AyuSmAn ! isa zarIra
meM 160 zirA nAbhi se nIkalakara mastiSka kI ora jAtI hai  /  use rasaharaNI
kahate haiM  /  Urdhvagamana karatI huI yaha zirA cakSu, zrotra, ghrANa aura
jihvA ko kriyAzIlatA detI hai  /  aura usake upaghAta se cakSu, netra, ghrANa
aura jihvA kI kriyAzIlatA naSTa hotI hai  /  he AyuSmAn ! isa zarIra meM 160
zirA nAbhi se nIkalakara nIce pA~va ke talave taka pahu~catI hai| usase jaMghA
kI kriyAzIlatA prApta hotI hai| yaha zirA ke upaghAta se mastakapIr3A, AdhAzIzI,
mastaka zUla aura A~kha kA aMdhApana AtA hai| he AyuSmAn ! isa zarIra meM 160
zirA nAbhi se nIkalakara tirthI hAtha ke talave taka pahu~catI hai  /  usase
bAhu ko kriyAzIlatA milatI hai| aura usake upaghAta se bagala meM darda, pRSTha
darda, kukSipiDA aura kudhi he AyuSmAn ! 160 zirA nAbhise nIkalakara nIce kI ora
jAkara guMdA ko milatI hai| aura usa ke nirupaghAta se vAya ucita mAtrA meM hote
haiN| aura upaghAta se mala, matra, vAya kA nirodha hone se mAnava kSabdha hotA
hai aura paMDu nAma kI bImArI hotI hai| he AyuSmAn ! kapha dhAraka 25 zirA
pittadhAraka 25 zirA aura vIryadhAraka 10 zirA hotI hai  /  puruSa ko 700 zirA,
strI ko 670 zirA aura napuMsaka ko 680 zirA hotI hai| he AyuSmAn ! yaha mAnava
zarIra meM lahU kA vajana eka ADhaka, vasA kA AdhA ADhaka, mastuliMga kA eka
prastha, mUtra kA eka ADhaka, purIsa kA eka prasta, pitta kA eka kur3ava, kapha
kA eka kur3ava, zukra kA AdhA kur3ava parimANa hotA hai  /  usameM jo doSayukta
hotA hai usameM vo parimANa alpa hotA hai  /  puruSa ke zarIra meM pA~ca aura
strI ke zarIra meM cha koThe hote haiM  /  puruSa ko nau srota aura strI ko 11
srota hote haiM  /  puruSa ko 500 pezI, strI ko 470 pezI aura napuMsaka ko 480
pezI hotI hai| sUtra - 103 yadi zAyada zarIra ke bhItara kA mA~sa parivartana
karake bAhara kara diyA jAe to usa azuci ko dekhakara mA~ bhI dhRNA karegIsUtra
- 104 manuSya kA zarIra mA~sa, zukra, haDDiyA~ se apavitra hai| lekina yaha
vastra, gandha aura mAlA se AcchAdita hone se zobhAyamAna hai| muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 15

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  Sutra Agam Sutra 28,
Paryannas┼лtra-5, 'Tandulavaic─Бrik─Б' Sutra-105 This body, the skull, the marrow,
the flesh, the bones, the brain, the blood, the phlegm, the skin, the nasal
mucus, and the excrement is the abode. This skull, the eyes, the ears, the lips,
the forehead, the soles, etc. are unpleasant excretory substances. The lips are
made slippery by excessive saliva, the mouth is sweaty, the teeth are stained by
excrement, and it appears repulsive to see. The hands, fingers, thumbs, and
nails are connected by joints. It is the abode of many liquid secretions. This
body is bound by the veins of the pillar, many blood vessels, and numerous
joints. On the forehead, it is like a cracked pot; the belly is like the hollow
of a dried tree; the hairy, unsightly abdominal region; the bones and the mass
of blood vessels - from all these and from all the pores, impure and foul-
smelling sweat is naturally oozing out. In it, there are the hidden fleshy
masses of the liver, the bile, the heart, the lungs, the spleen, the stomach,
etc., and the nine orifices that discharge impurities. In it, there is the heart
that makes a throbbing sound. It is the abode of the foul-smelling bile, phlegm,
urine, and medicines. The thigh, the leg, and the feet are connected by joints;
the flesh is impure and perishable due to its foul odor. Thus, thinking and
seeing the form, one should know that this body is impermanent, transitory, non-
eternal, subject to decay and destruction, and is sure to perish sooner or
later. Such is the body of all human beings. Sutra - 106 In the mother's womb,
it lives for nine months, drinking the impure fluid generated from the semen and
blood. Sutra - 107 How can this body, which is naturally impure and full of
excrement, be cleansed after it has come out of the vulva and grown by sucking
the breast? Sutra - 108 Alas! Born in impurity and from where that human being
came out. It indulges in sensual pleasures in that very impure vulva. Sutra -
109 Then, why do thousands of poets ceaselessly describe the impure vulva of a
woman? They become foolish out of self-interest. Sutra - 110 The poor fellows,
due to attachment, do not know that this vulva is a mass of impure excrement.
Therefore, they describe it as being like a fully blossomed blue lotus. Sutra -
111 How much more can be said? One should not be attached to the body, which is
full of abundant fat, extremely impure excrement, and is worthy of disgust.
Sutra - 112 Attain dispassion towards this body, which is infested with hundreds
of worms, pervaded by impure excrement, impure, non-eternal, devoid of essence,
foul-smelling, and stained by sweat and excrement. Sutra - 113 This body is full
of the dirt of the teeth, ears, nose, and abundant saliva in the mouth - such a
repulsive and detestable body, how can one be attached to it? Sutra - 114 Who
will desire a body that is subject to decay, putrefaction, destruction, and
annihilation, and is painful like a rotten piece of wood?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtra-105 yaha zarIra,
khoparI, majjA, mA~sa, haDDiyA~, mastuliMga, lahU, vAluMDaka, carmakoza, nAka kA
maila aura viSThA kA ghara hai  /  yaha khoparI, netra, kAna, hoTha, lalATa,
talavA Adi amanojJa mala vastu hai  /  hoTha kA gherAva ati lAra se cIkanA,
mu~ha pasInAvAlA, dA~ta mala se malina, dekhane meM bibhatsa hai  /  hAtha-
aMgulI, aMgUThe, nAkhUna ke sandhi se jur3e hue haiM  /  yaha kaI tarala-srAva
kA ghara hai  /  yaha zarIra, khaMbhe kI nasa, kaIM zirA aura kAphI sandhi se
ba~dhA huA hai  /  zarIra meM phUTe ghar3e jaisA lalATa, sUkhe per3a kI koTara
jaisA peTa, bAlavAlA azobhanIya kukSipradeza, haDDiyA~ aura zirA ke samUha se
yukta usameM sarvatra aura cAroM ora romakUpa meM se svabhAva se hI apavitra
aura badabU yukta pasInA nIkala rahA hai  /  usameM kalejA, pitta, hRdaya,
phephar3e, plIhA, phupphusa, udara Adi gupta mA~sapiMr3a aura malasrAvaka nau
chidra haiN| usameM dhakadhaka AvAja karanevAlA hRdaya hai  /  vo badaba yakta
pitta, kapha, matra aura auSadhi kA nivAsasthAna hai| gahA pradeza gaMThaNa,
jaMghA aura pA~va ko joDoM se jaDe, mA~sa gandha se yukta apavitra aura nazvara
hai  /  isa taraha socate aura rUpa dekhakara yaha jAnanA cAhie ki yaha zarIra
adhrava, anitya, azAzvata, saDana-galana aura vinAzadharmI, evaM pahale yA bAda
meM avazya naSTa honevAlA hai| sabhI mAnava kA deha aisA hI hai| sUtra - 106
mAtA kI kukSi meM zukra aura zoNita meM utpanna usI apavitra rasa ko pIkara nau
mAsa garbha meM rahatA hai| sUtra - 107 yonimukha se bAhara nIkalA, stanapAna se
vRddhi pAkara, svabhAva se hI azuci aura mala yukta aise isa zarIra ko kisa
taraha dhonA mumakIna hai ? sUtra - 108 are ! azuci meM utpanna hue aura jahA~
se vo mAnava bAhara nIkalA hai  /  kAma-krIr3A kI Asakti se hI usI azuci yoni
meM ramaNa karatA hai| sUtra - 109 phira azuci se yukta strI ke kaTibhAga ko
hajAroM kavi dvArA azrAnta bhAva se bayAna kyoM kiyA jAtA hai ? vo isa taraha
svArthavaza mUr3ha banate haiN| sUtra -110 vo becAre rAga kI vajaha se yaha
kaTibhAga apavitra mala kI thI hai yaha nahIM jAnate  /  isIlie hI use vikasita
nIlakamala ke samaha samAna mAnakara usakA varNana karate haiN| sUtra - 111
jyAdA kitanA kahA jAe ? pracura meda yukta, parama apavitra viSThA kI rAzi aura
dhRNA yogya zarIra meM moha nahIM karanA caahie| sUtra - 112 seMkar3oM kRmi
samUha yukta, apavitra mala se vyApta, azuddha, azAzvata, sArarahita,
durgandhayukta, pasInA aura mala se malina isa zarIra se tuma nirveda paao|
sUtra - 113 yaha zarIra dA~ta, kAna, nAka kA maila, mukha kI pracura lAra yukta
hai aise bibhatsa va dhRNita zarIra prati rAga kaisA sUtra - 114 sar3ana,
galana, vinAza, vidhvaMsana duHkhaka, maraNadharmI, sar3e hue lakar3e samAna
zarIrakI abhilASA kauna kare? muni dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika)
Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 16

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 28, Payannasutra-5, 'Tandulavaicharik' Sutrasutra - 115 This body is
food for crows, dogs, worms, insects, fish, and scavengers like jackals, and is
prone to disease. Who would be attached to such a body? Sutra - 116 Know that
this body is filled with impure excrement, a house of flesh and bones, a source
of waste, born from semen and menstrual blood, with nine orifices, and
impermanent. Sutra - 117 You see a girl adorned with tilak, with beautiful lips.
Sutra - 118 You see the external form, but you do not see the foul-smelling
excrement within. Sutra - 119 Deluded by attachment, you dance and drink the
impure juice of the forehead (through kissing). Sutra - 120 The juice that
arises from the forehead, which you yourself spit out and despise, is the same
juice you are attached to and drink with great passion. The forehead is impure,
the nose, various limbs, orifices, and cavities are also impure. The body is
also covered with impure skin. Sutra - 121 A woman with eyes adorned with kohl,
cleansed by bathing and scrubbing, adorned with soft flowers, and with a
beautiful head of hair, causes attachment in the ignorant. Sutra - 122 The
ignorant one who calls flowers an ornament for the head is only a flower. Not an
ornament for the head. Listen! Sutra - 123 Fat, grease, juice, phlegm, mucus,
and fat are all ornaments of the head. They are subject to the body. Sutra - 124
This body is not fit to be adorned. It is a house of excrement. It has two feet
and nine orifices. It is filled with a strong stench. The ignorant human is
extremely deluded in it. Sutra - 125 Stained by lust, you reveal your private
parts and drink the foul-smelling excrement of your teeth and the pus that comes
out of your skull. Sutra - 126 The tusks of an elephant, the teeth of a rabbit,
and the flesh of a deer, the hide of a cow, the hair of a cheetah, and the nails
are taken from their bodies. Sutra - 127 (What is the use of the human body?)
You fool! That body is foul-smelling and subject to death. Why are you attached
to it, trusting it constantly? Muni Diparatnasagar Krit " (Tandulavaicharik)
Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 17

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtrasUtra - 115 yaha zarIra
kaue, kutte, kIr3I, makor3e, matsya aura murdAghara meM rahate gidhaDa Adi kA
bhojya aura vyAdhi se grasta hai  /  usa zarIra se kauna rAga karegA? sUtra -
116 apavitra viSThA pUrita, mA~sa aura haDDI kA ghara, malasrAvi, raja-vIrya se
utpanna nau chidrayukta azAzvata jAnanA sUtra - 117 tilakayukta, vizeSa rakta
hoMThavAlI lar3akI ko dekhata ho  /  sUtra - 118 bAharI rUpa ko dekhate ho
lekina bhItara ke durgaMdhayukta mala ko nahIM dekhate  /  sUtra - 119 moha se
grasita hokara nAca uThate ho aura lalATa ke apavitra rasa ko (cuMbana se) pIte
ho  /  sUtra-120 lalATa se utpanna huA rasa jise svayaM thUkate ho, ghRNA karate
ho aura usameM hI anurakta hokara ati Asakti se pIte ho| lalATa apavitra hai,
nAka vividha aMga, chidra, vichidra bhI apavitra hai  /  zarIra bhI apavitra
camar3e se DhaMkA huA; sUtra-121 aMjana se nirmala, snAna-udvartana se
saMskArita, sukumAla puSpa se suzobhita kezarAzi yukta strI kA mukha ajJAnI ko
rAga utpanna karatA hai| sUtra-122 ajJAna buddhivAlA jo phUloM ko mastaka kA
AbhUSaNa kahatA hai vo kevala phUla hI hai  /  mastaka kA AbhUSaNa nahIM  /
sUno ! sUtra - 123 carabI, vasA, rasi, kapha, zleSma, meda yaha saba sira ke
bhUSaNa haiM yaha apane zarIra ke svAdhIna hai| sUtra - 124 yaha zarIra bhUSita
hone ke lie ucita nahIM hai  /  viSThA kA ghara hai  /  do pA~va aura nau
chidroM se yukta hai  /  tIvra badabU se bharA hai| usameM ajJAnI mAnava ati
mUrchita hotA hai  /  sUtra - 125 kAmarAga se raMge hue tuma gupta aMga ko
prakaTa karake dA~ta ke cIkane mala aura khoparI meM se nIkalanevAlI kAMjI
arthAt vikRta rasa ko pIte ho| sUtra - 126 hAthI ke danta mUsala-sasA aura mRga
kA mA~sa, camarI gau ke bAla aura citte kA camar3A aura nAkhUna ke lie unakA
zarIra grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| sUtra-127 (manuSya zarIra kisa kAma kA hai ?) he
mUrkha ! vaha zarIra durgaMdha yukta aura maraNa ke svabhAvavAlA hai  /  usameM
nitya bharosA karake tuma kyoM Asakta muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "
(taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 17

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 28, Payannasutra-5, 'Tandulavaicharik' What is the Sutra? Tell me its
nature. Sutra - 128 Teeth are of no use; long hair is hateful. The skin is also
repulsive. Now tell me what you are attached to? Sutra - 129 Phlegm, bile,
urine, feces, fat, beard, etc., what is the attachment to these? Sutra - 130
There is a thigh bone, on it is the hip, above the hip is the back. There are 18
bones in the back. Sutra - 131 There are two eye bones and sixteen neck bones.
There are twelve ribs in the back. Sutra - 132 This framework of hard bones
bound by veins and nerves, is wrapped in flesh and skin. Sutra - 133 This body
is a house of excrement, who will be attached to such a cesspool? Just as crows
fly near a well of excrement. There is a sul-sul sound made by worms in it and a
stench comes out of the source. (The same is the case with a dead body) Sutra -
134 Birds peck at the eyes of a dead body with their beaks. The hands spread out
like rags. They take out the intestines and the skull looks terrifying. Sutra -
135 Flies buzz around a dead body. There is a sul-sul sound from the rotten
flesh. The group of worms that have arisen in it make a mis-mis sound. There is
a thiv-thiv sound from the intestines. In this way, it looks quite repulsive.
Sutra - 136 Know the state of the terrifying body with exposed ribs, devoid of
consciousness, with dry limbs. Sutra - 137 Consider this body like a leaking,
raw pot, which expels impurities through nine doors, with a feeling of
detachment. Sutra - 138 Two hands, two feet and the head, are joined to the
torso. They are the storehouse of dirty excrement. Why do you carry this
excrement around? Sutra - 139 You are happy to see this body with its form
walking on the royal path and you consider the fragrance of perfumes to be your
own fragrance. Sutra - 140 You are happy to consider the smell of roses, champa,
jasmine, agar, sandalwood and tarusk as your own fragrance. Muni Diparatnasagar
Krit " (Tandulavaicharik) Agam Sutra - Hindi Translation Page 18

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtrahote ho? unakA svabhAva
to btaao| sUtra - 128 dA~ta kisI kAma ke nahIM; lambe bAla napharata ke lAyaka
haiM  /  camar3I bhI bibhatsa hai aba batAo ki tuma kisameM rAga rakhate ho?
sUtra-129 kapha, pitta, mUtra, viSThA, vasA, dA~r3ha Adi kisakA rAga hai ? sUtra
- 130 jaMghA kI haDDI para sAMthala hai, usa para kaTibhAga hai, kaTi ke Upara
pRSTha hissA hai  /  pRSTha hissemeM 18 haDDiyA~ hai sUtra - 131 do A~kha kI
haDDI aura solaha garadana kI haDDI hai  /  pITha meM bAraha pasalI hai  /
sUtra-132 zirA aura snAyu se ba~dhe kaThina haDDiyoM kA yaha DhA~cA, mA~sa aura
camar3e meM lipaTA huA hai  /  sUtra - 133 _ yaha zarIra viSThA kA ghara hai,
aise malagRha meM kauna rAga karegA ? jaise viSThA ne kue kI najadIka kaue
phirate haiN| usameM kRmi dvArA sula-sula zabda huA karate haiM aura srota se
badabU nIkalatI hai  /  (mRta zarIra ke bhI yahI hAlAta sUtra - 134 mRta zarIra
ke netra ko paMchI coMca se khudate haiM  /  lattA kI taraha hAtha phaila jAte
haiM  /  AMta bAhara nIkAla lete haiM aura khoparI bhayAnaka dikhatI hai| sUtra
- 135 mRta zarIra para makkhI baNa-baNa karatI hai  /  sar3e hue mA~sa meM se
sula-sula AvAjha AtI hai  /  usameM utpanna hue kRmi samUha misa-misa AvAja
karate haiN| AMta meM se thiva-thiva hotA hai| isa taraha yaha kAphI bibhatsa
lagatA hai sUtra - 136 prakaTa pasalIvAlA bhayAnaka, sUkhe joroM se yukta
cetanArahita zarIra kI avasthA jAna lo  /  sUtra-137 nau dvAra se azuci ko
nIkAlanevAle jharate hue kacce ghar3e kI taraha yaha zarIra prati nirveda bhAva
dhAraNa kara lo| sUtra-138 do hAtha, do pA~va aura mastaka, dhar3a ke sAtha
jur3e hue haiM  /  vo malina mala kA koSThAgAra haiM  /  isa viSThA ko tuma kyoM
uThAkara phirate ho? sUtra - 139 _ isa rUpavAle zarIra ko rAjapatha para ghUmate
dekhakara khuza ho rahe ho aura paragandha se sugaMdhita ko tumhArI sugandha
mAnate haiN| sUtra-140 gulAba, caMpA, camelI, agara, candana aura tarUSka kI
badabU ko apanI khuzabU mAnakara khuza hote ho| muni dIparatnasAgara kRt "
(taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 18

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Sutra 28, Paryannas┼лtra-5, 'Tandulavaic─Бrika' S┼лtra-141 Your mouth is
fragrant with mouth freshener, your limbs are fragrant with perfumed substances,
and your hair is fragrant with scented liquids during bathing, etc. So, what is
your own natural fragrance? S┼лtra-142 O man! The dirt of the eyes, ears, nose,
phlegm, impurities, and urine - this is your own natural odor. S┼лtra-143 Desire,
attachment, and delusion - through various types of ropes, a lot has been said
in praise of these women by numerous excellent poets. In reality, their nature
is as follows: Women are by nature crooked, addicted to sweet speech, as winding
as a mountain river in loving, mistress of a thousand faults, causing sorrow,
destroying hair, a slaughterhouse for men, destroying modesty, a mass of
impropriety, a home of sin, a mine of enmity, a home of sorrow, violating
propriety, a home of passion, the abode of the wicked, the mother of
infatuation, destroying knowledge, destroying celibacy, an obstacle to religion,
the enemy of the ascetic, a blemish for the virtuous, a resting place for
passion, an obstruction on the path of liberation, the abode of poverty - when
angry, like a venomous snake; when under the influence of lust, like an
intoxicated elephant; due to an evil heart, like a tigress; with a blackened
heart, like a well covered with grass; binding through hundreds of magical
treatments, like a magician; despite being difficult to understand, like an
ideal image; in burning the moral character, like the fire of a forest; unstable
in mind, like an uneven mountain path; crooked like an internal wound;
unreliable like the black snake of the heart.  Deceitful and hypocritical, like
the deluge; loving for a moment like the redness of dusk; fickle in nature like
the waves of the ocean; hard to transform like a fish; in fickleness, like a
monkey; leaving nothing behind like death; deadly like time; having hands like
the noose of Varuna; following the lower, like water; miserly, with hands turned
upside down; as terrifying as hell; ill-mannered like a donkey; untamable like
an evil horse; happy for a moment and angry the next, like a child; hard to
enter, like the darkness; an inappropriate refuge, like the poison creeper;
diving into the well with anger, like an evil crocodile; displaced; unfit for
praise, like the rich; first appearing pleasant, but later giving bitter fruit,
like the Kimp─Бka fruit; alluring like an empty fist without substance; causing
disturbance like seizing the flesh; with unshakable pride and burnt morality,
like a bundle of burnt grass; foul-smelling like Ariс╣гс╣нa; cheating on morality
like a counterfeit coin; protected from suffering like an angry person;
extremely sorrowful; condemned; mischievous; shallow; untrustworthy; unstable;
protected from sorrow; unpleasant; harsh; punitive; intoxicated with beauty and
fortune; crooked-hearted like the movement of a snake; causing fear like a
journey in the forest; creating discord in the family and among friends;
exposing the faults of others.  Ungrateful, destroying virility, abducting in
solitude like a Kol, fickle, producing passion with red lips like a pot heated
by fire, with a broken heart within, a bondage without a rope, a forest without
a tree, a home of fire, an invisible Vaitaraс╣З─л, an incurable disease, raving
without separation, an unexpressed affliction, confusing the mind in sexual
play, burning the whole body, thundering without clouds, like a waterless stream
and constantly roaring like the ocean - this is a woman. In this way, many names
are assigned to women. Through countless methods and in various ways, they
increase the lust of men and make them the object of bondage and slaughter. No
other enemy of man is like a woman. Therefore, 'woman', through various actions
and arts, enchants and intoxicates men, and thus creates great conflict. This is
the 'Tandulavaic─Бrika' Agam Sutra, translated into Hindi by Muni Deepratan
Sagara.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtrasUtra-141 tumhArA mu~ha
mukhavAsa se, aMga-pratyaMga agara se, keza snAna Adi ke samaya meM lage hue
khuzabUdAra dravya se khuzabUdAra haiM  /  to isameM tumhArI apanI khuzabU kyA
hai ? sUtra - 142 he puruSa ! A~kha, kAna, nAka kA maila aura zleSma, azuci aura
mUtra yahI to tumhArI apanI gandha hai| sUtra-143 kAma, rAga aura moha samAna
taraha-taraha kI rassI se ba~dhe hajAroM zreSTha kavi dvArA ina striyoM kI
tArIpha meM kAphI kucha kahA gayA hai  /  vastutaH unakA svarUpa isa prakAra hai
/  strI svabhAva se kuTIla, priyavacana kI lattA, prema karane meM pahAr3a kI
nadI kI taraha kuTIla, hajAra aparAdha kI svAminI, zoka utpanna karavAnevAlI,
bAla kA vinAza karanevAlI, marda ke lie vadhasthAna, lajjA ko naSTa karanevAlI,
avinayakI rAzi, pApakhaMr3a kA ghara, zatrutA kI khAna, zoka kA ghara, maryAdA
tor3a denevAlI, rAga kA ghara, durAcArI kA nivAsa sthAna, saMmohana kI mAtA,
jJAna ko naSTa karanevAlI, brahmacarya ko naSTa karanevAlI, dharma meM vighna
samAna, sAdhu kI zatru, AcAra saMpanna ke lie kalaMka samAna, raja kA
vizrAmagRha, mokSamArga meM vighnabhUta, daridratA kA AvAsa-kopAyamAna ho taba
jhaharIle sA~pa jaisI, kAma se vaza hone para madonmatta hAthI jaisI, duSTa
hRdayA hone se vAghaNa jaisI, kAlimAM vAle dila kI hone se tRNa AcchAdita kUe
samAna, jAdUgara kI taraha seMkar3oM upacAra se Abaddha karanevAlI, durgrAhya
sadbhAva hone ke bAvajUda Adarza kI pratimA, zIla ko jalAne meM vanakhaMDa kI
agni jaisI, asthira citta hone se parvata mArga kI taraha anavasthita, antaraMga
vraNa kI taraha kuTIla, hRdaya kAle sarpa kI taraha avizvAsanIya  /  chala
chadma yukta hone se pralaya jaisI, saMdhyA kI lAlImA kI taraha palabhara kA
prema karanevAlI, sAgara kI lahara kI taraha capala svabhAvavAlI, machalI kI
taraha duSparivartanIya, caMcalatA meM bandara kI taraha, mauta kI taraha kucha
bAkI na rakhanevAlI, kAla kI taraha ghAtakI, varuNa kI taraha kAmapAza samAna
hAthavAlI, pAnI kI taraha nimnaanugAminI, kRpaNa kI taraha ulTe hAthavAlI,
naraka samAna bhayAnaka, gardabha kI taraha duHzIlA, duSTa ghor3e kI taraha
durdamanIya, bacce kI taraha pala meM khuza aura pala meM roSAyamAna honevAlI,
aMdhere kI taraha duSpraveza viSa latA kI taraha Azraya ko anucita, kUe meM
Akroza se avagAhana karanevAle duSTa magaramaccha jaisI, sthAnabhraSTa,
aizvaryavAna kI taraha prazaMsA ke lie anucita kiMpAka phala kI taraha pahale
acchI laganevAlI lekina bAda meM kaTu phala denevAlI, bacce ko lubhAnevAlI khAlI
muThThI jaisI sAra ke binA, mA~sapiMr3a ko grahaNa karane kI taraha upadrava
utpanna karanevAlI, jale hue ghAsa ke pUle kI taraha na chUTanevAle mAna aura
jale hue zIlavAlI, ariSTa kI taraha badabUvAlI, khoTe sikke kI taraha zIla ko
ThaganevAlI, krodhI kI taraha kaSTa se rakSita, ati viSAdavAlI, niMdita,
durupacArA, agambhIra, avizvasanIya, anavasthita, daHkha se rakSita, aratikara,
karkaza, daMDa vairavAlI, rUpa aura saubhAgya se unmatta, sA~pa kI gati kI
taraha kuTIla hRdayA, aTavI meM yAtrA kI taraha bhaya utpanna karanevAlI, kala-
parivAra aura mitra meM phUTa utpanna karanevAlI, dUsaroM ke doSa prakAzita
krnevaalii| kRtaghna, vIryanAza karanevAlI, kola kI taraha ekAnta meM haraNa
karanevAlI, caMcala, agni se lAla honevAle ghar3e kI taraha lAla hoTha se rAga
utpanna karanevAlI, aMtaraMga meM bhagnazata hRdayA, rassI binA kA ba~dhana,
binA per3a kA jaMgala, agninilaya, adRzya vaitaraNI, asAdhya bImArI, binA viyoga
se pralApa karanevAlI, anabhivyakta upasarga, ratikrIr3A meM citta vibhrama
karanevAlI, sarvAMga jalAnevAlI binA megha ke vajrapAta karanevAlI, jalazUnya
pravAha aura sAgara samAna nirantara garjana karanevAlI, yaha strI hotI hai  /
isa taraha striyA~ kI kaIM nAma niyukti kI jAtI hai| lAkha upAya se aura alaga-
alaga taraha se marda kI kAmAsakti bar3hAtI hai aura usako vadha bandhana kA
bhAjana banAnevAlI nArI samAna marda kA dUsarA koI zatru nahIM hai, isalie
'nArI' taraha-taraha ke karma aura zilpa se mardo ko mohita karake moha
'mahilA', mardo ko matta karate haiM isalie pramadA', mahAna kalaha ko utpanna
karatI hai isalie muni dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-
hindI anuvAda Page 19

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## ─Аgama S┼лtra 28, Payann─Бs┼лtra-5, 'Tandulavaic─Бrik'  **S┼лtra 'Mahilik─Б'**: She
delights men with her gestures, hence 'Ram─Б'; she attracts men to her body,
hence 'Angan─Б'; she involves men in various kinds of battles, conflicts, wars,
forest excursions, taking loans without purpose, suffering from cold and heat,
and causing distress, hence 'Lalana'; she controls men through yoga and niyoga,
hence 'Yoс╣гit'; and she excites men's desires through various emotions, hence
'Vanit─Б'.  **S┼лtra 144**: Some women behave like those who are intoxicated, some
like those who are infatuated, and some like those who are suffering from
respiratory ailments. Some are like enemies, and some prostrate themselves with
tears. Some praise, some look with wonder, laughter, and glances. Some attract
men with sweet words, some with playful gestures, some with embraces, some with
words of reproach, some with displays of domesticity, some by writing or marking
on the ground, some by dancing on a bamboo pole, some by embracing children,
some by touching with fingers, massaging breasts, and pressing the hips. This
woman is like a net in obstructing, like mud in trapping, like death in killing,
like fire in burning, and like a sword in cutting to pieces.  **S┼лtra 145**:
This woman is sharp like a dagger, dark like ink, confusing like a dense forest,
binding like a cupboard and a prison, and frightening like a deep, flowing
river.  **S┼лtra 146**: This woman is a vessel of hundreds of faults, a spreader
of various kinds of disgrace, with a crooked heart, and deceitful thoughts.
**S┼лtra 147, 148**: These women are engaged with one, play with another,
exchange glances with another, and stay by the side of another. Even the wise
cannot know her nature.  **S┼лtra 149**: The grains of the Ganges, the water of
the ocean, the size of the Himalayas, the fruit of intense penance, the child
born from the womb, the hair on the back of a lion, the substance that remains
in the stomach, the sound of a horse running - perhaps a wise human can know
these, but not the heart of a woman.  **S┼лtra 150**: Possessing such qualities,
this woman is fickle-minded like a monkey and not worthy of trust in the world.
**S┼лtra 151**: Just as a winnowing basket without grain, a garden without
flowers, a cow without milk, and a pan without oil are useless, so too is a
woman without happiness.  **S┼лtra 152**: In the time it takes to close and open
an eye, a woman's heart and mind become agitated a thousand times.  **S┼лtra
153**: Advice is useless for the foolish, the old, those devoid of special
knowledge, and those with a low nature like a pig in the indiscriminate world.
**S┼лtra 154**: What is the use of a son, a father, and wealth accumulated
through hard work, if they cannot provide any support at the time of death?
**S┼лtra 155**: At the time of death, sons, friends, and wives leave, but well-
earned Dharma does not leave.  **Muni D─лparatnas─Бgar Kс╣Ыt " (Tandulavaic─Бrik)
─Аgama S┼лtra - Hindi Anuv─Бda** Page 20

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtra'mahilikA', marda ko
hAvabhAva se ramaNa karavAtI hai isalie 'ramA', mardo ko apane aMga meM rAga
karavAtI hai isalie 'aMganA', kaI taraha ke yuddha-kalaha-saMgrAma-aTavI meM
bhramaNa, binA prayojana karja lenA, zardI, garmI kA duHkha aura kleza khar3e
karane ke Adi kArya meM vo marda ko pravRtta karatI hai isalie lalanA', yoga-
niyoga dvArA puruSa ko basa meM karatI hai isalie yoSit' evaM vividha bhAva
dvArA puruSa kI vAsanA uddIpta karatI hai isalie vanitA kahalAtI hai| kisI strI
pramattabhAva ko, kisI praNaya vibhrama ko aura kisI zvAsa ke rogI kI taraha
zabda-vyavahAra karate haiM  /  koI zatru jaisI hotI hai aura koI ro-ro kara
pA~va para praNAma karatI haiM  /  koI stuti karatI hai  /  koI Azcarya, hAsya
aura kaTAkSa se dekhatI hai  /  koI vilAsayukta madhura vacana se, koI hAsya
ceSTA se, koI AliMgana se, koI sItkAra ke zabda se, koI gRhayoga ke pradarzana
se, koI bhUmi para likhakara yA cihna karake, koI vAMsa para car3akara natya
dvArA, koI bacce ke AliMgana dvArA, koI aMgalI ke TacAke, stana mardana aura
kaTitaTa pIDana Adi se puruSa ko AkRSTa karatI hai  /  yaha strI vighna karane
meM jAla kI taraha, phA~sane meM kIcar3a kI taraha, mArane meM mauta kI taraha,
jalAne meM agni kI taraha aura chinna-bhinna karane meM talavAra jaisI hotI hai|
sUtra- 144 strI kaTArI jaisI tIkSNa, zyAhI jaisI kAlimA, gahana vana jaisI
bhramita karanevAlI, alamArI aura kArAgAra jaisI ba~dhanakAraka, pravAhazIla
agAdha jala kI taraha bhayadAyaka hotI hai| sUtra-145 yaha strI seMkar3oM doSa
kI gagarI, kaIM taraha apayaza phailAnevAlI kuTIla hRdayA, chalapUrNa socavAlI
hotI hai sUtra - 146 yaha striyA~ ekameM rata hotI haiM, anya ke sAtha krIr3A
karatI haiM, anya ke sAtha nayana lar3AtI haiM aura anya ke pArzva meM jAkara
ThaharatI hai  /  usake svabhAva ko buddhimAna bhI nahIM jAna sakate  /  sUtra -
147, 148 gaMgA ke bAlukaNa, sAgara kA jala, himavat kA parimANa, ugratapa kA
phala, garbha se utpanna honevAlA baccA; zera kI pITha ke bAla, peTa meM rahA
padArtha, ghor3e ko calane kI AvAja use zAyada buddhimAna mAnava jAna zake
lekina strI ke dila ko nahIM jAna sktaa| sUtra - 149 isa taraha ke guNa se yukta
yaha strI baMdara jaisI caMcala manavAlI aura saMsArameM bharosA karane ke
lAyaka nahIM hai| sUtra - 150 loka meM jaise dhAnya vihina khala, puSparahita
bagIcA, dUdha rahita gAya, tela rahita tala nirarthaka haiM vaise strI bhI
sukhahIna hone se nirarthaka hai| sUtra-151 jitane samayameM A~kha banda karake
kholI jAtI hai utane samaya meM strI kA dila aura citta hajAra bAra vyAkula ho
jAtA hai| sUtra - 152 mUrakha, buDhe, viziSTa jJAna se hIna, nirvizeSa saMsAra
meM zUkara jaisI nIca pravRttivAle ko upadeza nirarthaka hai  /  sUtra - 153
putra, pitA aura kAphI-saMgraha kie gae dhana se kyA phAyadA? jo marate samaya
kucha bhI sahArA na de sake ? sUtra - 154 mauta hone se putra, mitra, patnI bhI
sAtha chor3a detI haiM magara suupArjita dharma hI maraNa samaya sAtha nahIM
chor3atA muni dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda
Page 20

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra **Agam Sutra 28, Payanna Sutra-5, 'Tandulavaicharik' Sutra - 155**
Dharma is the protector. Dharma is the refuge, Dharma is the path and the
foundation. By practicing Dharma well, one attains the immortal abode. Sutra-156
Dharma is pleasing, fame-giving, illuminating, glory-giving, love-giving,
fearless, liberating and helpful in attaining liberation. Sutra-157 Only through
good Dharma does a human being obtain the unparalleled form, enjoyment, wealth
and knowledge of the supreme deity. Sutra-158 Devaendra, Chakra-pad, kingdom,
desired enjoyment, up to Nirvana, all this is the fruit of Dharma practice.
Sutra-159 Here, the food, breath, joints, veins, hair, blood, and semen of a
human being with a lifespan of one hundred years have been counted. Sutra-160 By
counting these, the meaning of this body has been revealed. Knowing this, strive
for the lotus of liberation, which has a thousand petals like Samyaktv.
Sutra-161 This body is like a chariot filled with birth, old age, death, and
pain. Having obtained it, one should do that which liberates one from all
suffering. | (28) Tandulavaicharik- Payanna Sutra-5 Hindi Translation | Complete
Muni Diparatnasagar Krit " (Tandulavaicharik) Agam Sutra-Hindi Translation Page
21

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtra - 155 dharma
rakSaka hai| dharma zaraNa hai, dharma hI gati aura AdhAra hai  /  dharma kA
acchI taraha se AcaraNa karane se ajara amara sthAna kI prApti hotI hai|
sUtra-156 dharma prItikara-kIrtikara-dIptikara-yazakara-ratikara-abhayakara-
nivRttikara aura mokSa prApti meM sahAyaka hai| sUtra- 157 sukRtadharma se hI
mAnava ko zreSTha devatA ke anupama rUpa-bhogopabhoga, Rddhi aura vijJAna kA
lAbha prApta hotA hai| sUtra - 158 devendra, cakrIpada, rAjya, Icchita bhoga se
lekara nirvANa paryanta yaha saba dharma AcaraNa kA hI phala hai  /  sUtra-159
yahA~ sau sAla ke AyuvAle mAnava kA AhAra, ucchvAsa, saMdhi, zirA, romaphala,
lahU, vIrya kI ginatI kI dRSTi se parigaNanA kI gaI hai| sUtra - 160 jisa kI
ginatI dvArA artha prakaTa kiyA gayA hai aise zarIra ke varSoM ko sUnakara tuma
mokSa samAna kamala ke lie koziza kara lo jisake samyaktva samAna hajAra
paMkhar3iyA~ haiN| sUtra - 161 yaha zarIra janma, jarA, maraNa, darda se bharI
gAr3I jaisA hai  /  use pA kara vahI karanA cAhie jisa se saba duHkha se
chUTakArA pA skeN| | (28) taMdulavaicArika- payannAsUtra-5 hindI anuvAda | pUrNa
muni dIparatnasAgara kRt " (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda Page 21

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Aagam Sutra 28, Payannasutra-5, 'Tandulavaicharik' Sutra Namo Namo
Nimmaladansanas  Poojyapal Shri Anand-Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-Sudharmasagar Guru
Bhyo Nam: OOXXXXXXX 28 +HHATH AAR HOOD SH Tandulavaicharik Aagam Sutra Hindi
Anuvaad [Anuvaadak Evam Sampadak] Aagam Deepaakar Muni Deepa Ratna Sagarji
[M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. Shruta Maharshi] 21188:- (1) (2) deepratnasagar.in Bhela
Bhedress:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com Bhola 09825967397 Muni Deepa Ratna
Sagar Krit (Tandulavaicharik) Aagam Sutra-Hindi Anuvaad" Page 22

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Agama sUtra 28, payannAsUtra-5, 'tandulavaicArika' sUtra namo namo
nimmaladaMsaNassa pUjyapAla zrI AnaMda-kSamA-lalita-suzIla-sudharmasAgara
gurUbhyo nama: OOXXXXXXX 28 +HHATH AAR HOOD SH taMdulavaicArika AgamasUtra hindI
anuvAda [anuvAdaka evaM saMpAdaka] Agama dIvAkara muni dIparatnasAgarajI [
M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D. zruta maharSi ] 21188:- (1) (2) deepratnasagar.in bhelA
bheDresa:- jainmunideepratnasagar@gmail.com bholA 09825967397 muni
dIparatnasAgara kRt (taMdulavaicArika) Agama sUtra-hindI anuvAda" Page 22

