Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003447/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In memory of  Sw. Pujya Gurudev Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, organized by
Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni and BAS Uvasagadsaos [Original - Translation -
Interpretation - Notes - Appendix included]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ti sva. pUjya gurUdeva zrI jorAvaramala jI mahArAja kI smRti meM Ayojita
yuvAcArya zrI madhukara muni e BAS uvAsagadasAo [mUla- anuvAda-vivecana-
TippaNa-pariziSTa yukta]

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 3 Om Arha [ Organized in the auspicious memory of
the most revered Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj ] Pancham Ganadhar
Bhagavatsudharma - Swami-Praneet Saptam Ang Upasakadashang Sutra [ Original
Text, Hindi Translation, Commentary, Appendix Included ] Inspiration (Sw.) Up-
Pravartak Shasansevi Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj Aadyasanyojak Tatha Pradhan
Sampadak (Sw.) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator -
Commentator - Editor Dr. Chaganlal Shastri, M.A. (Hindi, Sanskrit, Prakrit,
Jainology) P-H.D. Kavya Tirth, Vidya Mahodadhi Publisher Shri Agam Prakashan
Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka 3 OM arha [ paramazraddheya gurudeva pUjya
zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja kI puNya smRti meM Ayojita ] paMcama gaNadhara
bhagavatsudharma - svAmi-praNIta saptama aMga upAsakadazAMga sUtra [ mUlapATha,
hindI anuvAda, vivecana, pariziSTa yukta ] preraNA (sva.) upapravarttaka
zAsanasevI svAmI zrI brajalAlajI mahArAja AdyasaMyojaka tathA pradhAna sampAdaka
(sva.) yuvAcArya zrI mizrImalajI mahArAja 'madhukara' anuvAdaka - vivecaka -
sampAdaka DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI, ema. e. (hindI, saMskRta, prAkRta,
jainolojI) pI-eca. DI. kAvyatIrtha, vidyAmahodadhi prakAzaka zrI Agama prakAzana
samiti, byAvara (rAjasthAna )

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 3 Nirdéshan Adhyatmayogini Vidushi Mahasati Shri
Umravkunvarji M.Sa. 'Archana' Sampadakmandal (Sw.) Acharya Shri Devendramaniji
M.Sa. 'Shastri' (Sw.) Anuyogpravartak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M.Sa. 'Kamal'
Vaanibhushan Shri Ratnamuni Ji M. Sa. (Sw.) Pandit Shri Shobhachandrji Bharill
Samprerak U. Pr. Muni Shri Vinaykumarji 'Bheem' Chaturth Sanskaran July, 2006 E.
Vikram Samvat 2063 Prakashk Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti
Bhavan Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar (Rajasthan) Byawar - 305901 Phone: 250087 Mudrak
Mehta Offset 29, Somnath Colony, College Road, Byawar-305901. Phone:
01462-253990 3 Muly: 65/- Rupees

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jinAgama-granthamAlA : granthAGka 3 nirdezana AdhyAtmayoginI viduSI mahAsatI
zrI umarAvakuMvarajI ma.sA. 'arcanA' sampAdakamaNDala (sva.) AcArya zrI
devendramani jI ma.sA. 'zAstrI' (sva.) anuyogapravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI
ma.sA. 'kamala' vANIbhUSaNa zrI ratanamuni jI ma. sA. (sva.) paMDita zrI
zobhAcandrajI bhArilla saMpreraka u. pra.muni zrI vinayakamArajI 'bhIma'
caturtha saMskaraNa julAI, 2006 I. vikrama saMvat 2063 prakAzaka zrI Agama
prakAzana samiti zrI braja-madhukara smRti bhavana pIpaliyA bAjAra, byAvara
(rAjasthAna) byAvara - 305901 phona : 250087 mudraka mehatA oNphaseTa 29,
somanAtha kaoNlonI, kaoNleja ror3a, byAvara-305901. phona : 01462-253990 3 mUlya
: 65/- rupaye

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published on the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj Fifth Ganadhar Sudharma Swami Compiled Seventh Anga UPASAKADASANGA SUTRA
[Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes, Annotation and Appendices etc.) Inspiring
Soul Up-pravartaka Shasansevi (Late) Swami Shri Brijlalji Maharaj Shri Beligger
en stor Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj
Madhukar' Editor & Annotator Dr. ChhaganlalShastri, M.A., Ph. D. Publishers Shri
Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Published on the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj Fifth Ganadhar Sudharma Swami Compiled Seventh Anga UPASAKADASANGA SUTRA
[Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes, Annotation and Appendices etc.) Inspiring
Soul Up-pravartaka Shasansevi (Late) Swami Shri Brijlalji Maharaj Shri Beligger
en stor Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj
Madhukar' Editor & Annotator Dr. ChhaganlalShastri, M.A., Ph. D. Publishers Shri
Agam Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 3 Direction Mahasati Shri Umravkunwarji M.
Sa. "Archana" Board of Editors (Late) Achrya Shri Devendra Muni Ji 'Shastri
Anuyogapravartaka Muni shri Kanhaiyalal Ji 'Kamal' Vaani Bhushan Shri Ratan Muni
Ji (Late) Pt. Shri Shobhachandra Ji Bharilla 0 Promotor Muni Shri Vinay Kumar Ji
"Bhim" Fourth Edition Vikram Samvat 2063 July 2006 Publishers Shri Agam
Prakashan Samiti, Shri Brij-Madhukar Smriti Bhawan Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.)
[India] Pin - 305 901 Phone : 250087 0 Printer Mehta Offset 29, Somnath Colony
College Road, BEAWAR 305901 Phone : 01462 - 253990 o Price : Rs. 65/

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 3 Direction Mahasati Shri Umravkunwarji M.
Sa. "Archana" Board of Editors (Late) Achrya Shri Devendra Muni Ji 'Shastri
Anuyogapravartaka Muni shri Kanhaiyalal Ji 'Kamal' Vaani Bhushan Shri Ratan Muni
Ji (Late) Pt. Shri Shobhachandra Ji Bharilla 0 Promotor Muni Shri Vinay Kumar Ji
"Bhim" Fourth Edition Vikram Samvat 2063 July 2006 Publishers Shri Agam
Prakashan Samiti, Shri Brij-Madhukar Smriti Bhawan Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.)
[India] Pin - 305 901 Phone : 250087 0 Printer Mehta Offset 29, Somnath Colony
College Road, BEAWAR 305901 Phone : 01462 - 253990 o Price : Rs. 65/

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
卐 The Great Mantra ॥  Namo Arihantanam, Namo Siddhanam, Namo Ayariyanam, Namo
Uvvajhayanam, Namo Loesavva Sahunam, Eso Panch Namo-kkaro, Savpaavapanasana ॥
Mangalanam cha Savesim, Padham Havai Mangalam ॥ Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muniji
M. Sa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Wan  mahAmaMtra  //  Namo arihaMtANaM, Namo siddhANaM, Namo AyariyANaM, Namo
uvajjhAyANaM, Namo loesavva sAhUNaM, eso paMca NamokkAro, svpaavpnnaasnno||
maMgalANaM ca savesiM, paDhamaM havai maMgalaM  //  yuvAcArya zrI madhukara
munijI ma. sA.

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. Ahimsa (non-violence) 2. Satya
(truthfulness) 3. Asteya (non-stealing) 4. Brahmacharya (continence) 5.
Aparigraha (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
G0200 Dedication To the one whose heart is overflowing with divine sweetness,
whose speech possesses extraordinary power, whose ability to perform duty is
unique, to Shri Vardhaman Sthanakvasi Jain Shraman Sangh's pillar, Shraman
Surya, poet, great elder, Marudhar Kesari, founder, Muni Shri Mishrimalji
Maharaj at the lotus feet of whom, with humble respect and devotion. 0 Madhukar
Muni (From the first edition)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 G0200 samarpaNa jinakA hRdaya alaukika mAdhurya se AplAvita hai, jinakI vANI
meM adabhuta oja hai, jinakI kartavya-kSamatA anUThI hai, unhI zrI varddhamAna
sthAnakavAsI jaina zramaNasaMgha ke AdhArastambha zramaNasUrya kavivarya
mahAsthavira marudharakesarI pravartakavaya muni zrI mizrImalajI mahArAja ke
karakamaloM me sAdara savinaya aura sbhkti| 0 madhukara muni (prathama
saMskaraNa se)

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Light of Illumination**  A new wave of enthusiasm for literary publication
arose on the auspicious occasion of the 25th Nirvana Shatabdi of Shraman Bhagwan
Mahavir. Almost every prestigious publishing house in India published literature
related to Bhagwan Mahavir, according to their own resources and time. Thus, at
that time, a vast amount of literature related to Jain Dharma Darshan and the
extraordinary life of Bhagwan Mahavir and his benevolent teachings was created
and published.  On this occasion, a noble feeling arose in the mind of the late
scholar-gem, Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji M. 'Madhukar', that abundant literature
related to Bhagwan Mahavir was being published. This is fine, but our connection
with Shraman Bhagwan Mahavir today is through his world-purifying words, about
which it is said:  "Savvajgajeevarakkhanadayattayaaye pavayanam bhagavayaa
sukahyam."  That is, Bhagwan's Dharma-Deshana was manifested for the protection
and compassion of all beings in the world. Therefore, to propagate and spread
this Bhagavadvani is an act of compassion for all beings. There can be no
greater work for world welfare than this. Therefore, the original and sacred
words of Bhagwan, which are contained in the Agamas, should be made accessible
to all.  Yuvacharya Shriji presented his feelings to some senior Agama-loving
Shravaks and scholars. Gradually, Yuvacharya Shriji's feeling and the discussion
of editing and publishing the Agamas gained momentum. The wise and literary-
loving Shraman and Shravak class appreciated and approved of this most sacred
work.  Thus, when the idea of Agama publication received sufficient support from
all sides, a meeting of the leading Shravaks and scholars of the society was
organized in Yuvacharya Shriji's V.S. 2035 Byaver Chaturmas, and the framework
of publication was discussed. After long deliberation and contemplation on every
aspect of the plan, on Vaishakh Shukla 10, which was the auspicious day of
Bhagwan Mahavir's Keval Gyan Kalyanak, the publication of Agama Battisi was
announced and the work was started.  The expected cooperation of the scholarly
class was received for the success of the work. Scholars are always eager to do
such work and feel a sense of self-satisfaction by doing such work, but the
Shravak class also expressed their willingness to cooperate with body, mind, and
wealth, and established an institution called 'Shri Agama Prakashan Samiti' in
Byaver for the systematic operation of the work and arranged the necessary
funds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra kI 25vIM nirvANa zatAbdI ke pAvana
prasaMga para sAhitya prakAzana kI eka naI utsAhapUrNa lahara utthii| bhArata kI
prAyaH pratyeka pratiSThita prakAzana saMsthAoM ne apane-apane sAdhanoM aura
samaya ke anurUpa bhagavAn mahAvIra se sambandhita sAhitya prakAzita kiyaa| isa
prakAra usa samaya jainadharmadarzana aura bhagavAn mahAvIra ke lokottara jIvana
aura unakI kalyANakArI zikSAoM se saMbaMdhita vipula sAhitya kA sajRna va
prakAzana huaa| isI prasaMga para svargIya vidvadratna yuvAcArya zrI mizrImalajI
ma. 'madhukara' ke mana meM eka udAtta bhAvanA jAgRta huI ki bhagavAn mahAvIra
se sambandhita prabhUta sAhitya prakAzita ho rahA hai| yaha to ThIka kintu
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke sAtha Aja hamArA jo samparka hai, vaha unakI
jagata-pAvana vANI ke mAdhyama se hai, jisake sambandha meM kahA gayA hai
"savvajagajIvarakkhaNadayaTThayAe pAvayaNaM bhagavayA sukahiyaM  / " arthAta
jagat ke samasta prANiyoM kI rakSA aura dayA ke lie hI bhagavAn kI dharma-dezanA
prasphuTita huI thii| ataeva isa bhagavadvANI kA pracAra va prasAra karanA
prANimAtra kI dayA kA hI kArya hai| vizvakalyANa ke lie isase adhika zreSTha
anya koI kArya nahIM ho sakatA hai| isalie unakI mUla evaM pavitra vANI jina
AgamoM meM haiM, una AgamoM ko sarvasAdhAraNa ke lie sulabha karAyA jaaye|
yuvAcAryazrI jI ne katipaya variSTha AgamapremI zrAvakoM tathA vidvAnoM ke
samakSa apanI bhAvanA prastuta kii| dhIre-dhIre yuvAcArya zrI jI kI bhAvanA aura
AgamoM ke saMpAdana-prakAzana kI carcA bala pakar3atI gii| vivekazIla aura
sAhityAnurAgI zramaNa va zrAvaka varga ne isa pavitratama kArya kI sarAhanA aura
anumodanA kii| isa prakAra jaba AgamaprakAzana ke vicAra ko sabhI ora se
paryApta samarthana milA taba yuvAcArya zrI jI ke vi. saM. 2035 ke byAvara
cAturmAsa meM samAja ke agragaNya zrAvakoM evaM vidvAnoM kI eka baiThaka Ayojita
kI gaI aura prakAzana kI rUparekhA para vicAra kiyA gyaa| yojanA ke pratyeka
pahalU ke bAre meM sudIrgha cintana-manana ke pazcAt vaizAkha zuklA 10 ko jo
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke kevala jJAna kalyANaka kA zubha dina thA, AgamabattIsI ke
prakAzana kI ghoSaNA kara dI aura kArya prArambha kara diyA gyaa| kArya kI
saphalatA ke lie vidvadvarga kA apekSita sahayoga prApta huaa| vidvajjana to
aise kAryoM ko karane ke lie tatpara rahate hI haiM aura aise kAryoM ko karake
AtmaparitoSa kI anubhUti karate haiM, kintu zrAvaka varga ne bhI tana-mana-dhana
se sahayoga dene kI tatparatA vyakta kara vyavasthita kArya saMcAlana ke lie
byAvara meM 'zrI Agama prakAzana samiti' ke nAma se saMsthA sthApita kara
Avazyaka dhanarAzi kI vyavasthA kara dii| [7]

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Initially, it was planned to publish the scriptures in the order of *Acharanga*
etc., but it was realized that the editing and translation of a vast *Agam* like
*Bhagavati* would take a long time, and keeping the publication of other *Agams*
on hold until then would also take more time. The objective of initiating the
plan to impart theoretical knowledge to the readership would also be delayed,
and the auspicious work should be completed as soon as possible. Therefore, it
was decided that whatever scriptures are available should be published.  As the
*Agam* texts were published, the readership also expanded, and these texts were
also included in the curricula of many universities. Therefore, it was decided
again that the fourth edition should be published when the first three editions
become unavailable, so that all readers have access to the complete
*Agambattisi* forever. This fourth edition is being published in accordance with
this decision.  We are grateful to the many enlightened saints, scholars, and
the community for their appreciation of the present publications, which has
boosted our enthusiasm and provided support. We expect the readers to study the
*Agam* literature and become collaborators in the propagation of *Jinavani*.
With this hope and belief, Ratanchand Modi, Working President Gyanchand
Binaykia, Minister Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byaver [8]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prArambha meM AcArAMga Adi nAmakramAnusAra zAstroM ko prakAzita karane kA
vicAra kiyA gayA thA, kintu aisA anubhava huA ki bhagavatI jaise vizAla Agama kA
saMpAdana anuvAda hone Adi meM bahuta samaya lagegA aura taba taka anya AgamoM
ke prakAzana ko roka rakhane se samaya bhI adhika lagegA aura pAThakavarga ko
saiddhAntika bodha karAne ke lie yojanA prArambha kI hai, vaha uddezya bhI pUrA
hone meM vilamba hogA tathA yathAzIghra zubha kArya ko sampanna karanA caahie|
ata: yaha nirNaya huA ki jo-jo zAstra hote jAyeM, unheM hI prakAzita kara diyA
jaaye| _ jaise-jaise Agama grantha prakAzita hote gaye, vaise-vaise pAThakavarga
bhI vistRta hotA gayA evaM aneka vizvavidyAlayoM ke pAThyakramoM meM bhI ina
granthoM ko nirdhArita kiyA gyaa| ataH punaH yaha nizcaya kiyA gayA ki prathama
tIna saMskaraNo ke aprApya ho jAne para caturtha saMskaraNa prakAzita kiyA
jAveM, jisase sabhI pAThakoM ko pUrI AgamabattIsI sadaiva upalabdha hotI rahe  /
etadartha isa nirNayAnusAra caturtha saMskaraNa prakAzita ho rahA hai| _aneka
prabuddha saMtoM, vidvAnoM aura samAja ne prastuta prakAzanoM kI prazaMsA karake
hamAre utsAha kA saMvardhana kiyA hai aura sahayoga diyA hai, usake lie AbhArI
haiM tathA pAThakoM se apekSA hai ki Agama sAhitya kA adhyayana karake jinavANI
ke pracAra-prasAra meM sahayogI bneN| isI AzA aura vizvAsa ke sAtha ratanacaMda
modI kAryAdhyakSa jJAnacanda binAyakiyA mantrI zrI Agama prakAzana-samiti,
byAvara [8]

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction (From the First Edition)  The fundamental basis of Jainism,
philosophy, and culture is the word of the Vitaraga Sarvagna. Sarvagna means the
one who sees the self. Only those who see the self completely can see the entire
universe. Those who know the whole can truly explain the knowledge of the
elements. They can truly preach the path to liberation, which is beneficial to
all.  The knowledge of the elements, self-knowledge, and proper conduct as
stated by the Sarvagnas are known as 'Agam', 'Shastra', or 'Sutra'. The word of
the Tirthankaras is like a shower of free flowers. Great wise Ganadharas compile
it in the form of Sutras and give it the form of a systematic 'Agam'.  What we
call 'Agam' today was called 'Ganipitaka' in ancient times. 'Ganipitaka'
includes the entire Dvadasanga. Later, its parts, sub-parts, roots, holes, etc.
were divided into many categories.  There was no tradition of writing, so the
Agams were preserved based on memory or through the Guru-Parampara. For almost a
thousand years after Bhagwan Mahavira, the 'Agam' followed the tradition of
memory. Due to weakness of memory, the breakdown of the Guru-Parampara, and many
other reasons, the knowledge of the Agam gradually disappeared. The water of the
great lake dried up, leaving only a small puddle. Then, Devarddigni
Kshamashraman called a meeting of the Shramans and, with the holy purpose of
preserving the knowledge of the Agam, which was disappearing due to memory
errors, and preserving the word of the Jinas, made the historic effort to write
it down. He made the word of the Jinas into a book and did an indescribable
favor to future generations. This was an amazing undertaking to keep the stream
of Jainism, philosophy, and culture flowing. This first compilation of the Agams
was completed 980 or 993 years after the Nirvana of the Veer.  After being
written down, the form of the Jain Agams was basically preserved. However, due
to the defects of time, external attacks, internal differences of opinion,
conflict, weakness of memory, and negligence, the pure stream of Agam knowledge
and the proper Guru-Parampara of understanding gradually weakened. Many
important references, words, and hidden meanings of the Agams became fragmented.
The Agams that were written were: 1. "Attham Bhasai Araha Suttam Ganthanthi
Ganahara Niunam." [9]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Amukha (prathama saMskaraNa se ) jainadharma, darzana va saMskRti kA mUla
AdhAra vItarAga sarvajJa kI vANI hai  /  sarvajJa arthAt AtmadraSTA  /  sampUrNa
rUpa se Atmadarzana karane vAle hI vizva kA samagra darzana kara sakate haiN| jo
samagra ko jAnate haiM, ve hI tatvajJAna kA yathArtha nirUpaNa kara sakate haiM
/  paramahitakArI niHzreyas kA yathArtha upadeza kara sakate haiN| sarvajJoM
dvArA kathita tatvajJAna, AtmajJAna tathA AcAra-vyavahAra kA samyak paribodha
'Agama', zAstra yA sUtra ke nAma se prasiddha 1 tIrthaMkaroM kI vANI mukta
sumanoM kI vRSTi ke samAna hotI hai, mahAn prajJAvAn gaNadhara use sUtra rUpa
meM grathita karake vyavasthita 'Agama' kA rUpa de dete haiM  /  Aja jise hama
'Agama' nAma se abhihita karate haiM, prAcIna samaya meM ve 'gaNipiTaka'
kahalAte the| 'gaNipiTaka' meM samagra dvAdazAMgI kA samAveza ho jAtA hai  /
pazcAdvartI kAla meM isake aMga, upAMga, mUla, cheda, Adi aneka bheda kiye gaye
/  yaha likhane kI paramparA nahIM thI, taba AgamoM ko smRti ke AdhAra para yA
guru-paramparA se surakSita rakhA jAtA thA  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra ke bAda
lagabhaga eka hajAra varSa taka ' Agama' smRti - paramparA para hI cale Aye the
/  smRtidurbalatA, guru paramparA kA viccheda tathA aneka kAraNoM se dhIre-dhIre
AgamajJAna bhI lupta hotA gayA mahAsarovara kA jala sUkhatA - sUkhatA goSpada
mAtra hI raha gayA  /  taba devarddhigaNI kSamAzramaNa ne zramaNoM kA sammelana
bulAkara smRti - doSa se lupta hote AgamajJAna ko, jinavANI ko surakSita rakhane
ke pavitra uddezya se lipibaddha karane kA aitihAsika prayAsa kiyA aura jinavANI
ko pustakArUr3ha karake Ane vAlI pIr3hI para avarNanIya upakAra kiyA  /  yaha
jaina dharma, darzana evaM saMskRti kI dhArA ko pravahamAna rakhane kA adbhuta
upakrama thA  /  AgamoM kA yaha prathama sampAdana vIra - nirvANa ke 980 yA 993
varSa pazcAt sampanna huA  /  pustakArUDha hone ke bAda jaina AgamoM kA svarUpa
mUla rUpa se to surakSita ho gayA, kintu kAladoSa, bAharI AkramaNa, Antarika
matabheda, vigraha, smRti - durbalatA evaM pramAda Adi kAraNoM se AgamajJAna kI
zuddha dhArA, arthabodha kI samyak guru-paramparA dhIre-dhIre kSINa hone se
nahIM ruukii| AgamoM ke aneka mahatvapUrNa sandarbha, pada tathA gUDha artha
chinna-vicchinna hote cale ge| jo Agama likhe jAte the, 1. atthaM bhAsai arahA
suttaM gaMthaMti gaNaharA niuNaM  /  [9]

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They were not completely pure either. Those who could impart the true meaning of
the scriptures were also rare. Due to many other reasons, the stream of Agamic
knowledge became constricted. In the sixteenth century Vikram era, Lokashah made
a revolutionary effort. A bold attempt to expound the pure and true meaning of
the Agamas was revived. But after some time, obstacles arose again. Communal
hatred, doctrinal disputes, and the lack of linguistic knowledge of the scribes
became a major obstacle to the attainment of the Agamas and their proper
understanding. In the early nineteenth century, when the tradition of printing
the Agamas began, readers found some relief. When the ancient commentaries,
churni, and niyukti of the Agamas were published and the simple and clear
meaning of the Agamas was made available to the readers in print based on them,
the study of Agamic knowledge naturally increased, hundreds of inquisitive
people developed a tendency towards Agamic self-study, and Jain and non-Jain
scholars from India and abroad also began to study the Agamas. It is difficult
to mention the names of all the scholars and wise monks who made historical
contributions to the work of publishing, editing, and printing the Agamas due to
the lack of sufficient material. However, I will definitely mention the names of
some great monks of the Sthanakvasi tradition. Reverend Shri Amolkarishiji
Maharaj was a great courageous and determined monk of the Sthanakvasi tradition,
who, despite limited resources, translated all thirty-two sutras into Hindi,
making them accessible to the masses. The editing and publication of the entire
thirty-two was a historical work, which benefited the entire Sthanakvasi and
Terapanthi society. A resolution of Gurudev Pujya Swami Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj: When I was studying the Agamas under the guidance of Gurudev Late Swami
Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, some Agamas published by the Agamoday Samiti were
available. Gurudev used to make me study based on them. Seeing them, Gurudev
felt that this edition, although quite laborious and also quite pure among the
editions available so far, still has many unclear places. There is also a
difference somewhere in the original text and its commentary, somewhere the
commentary is very brief. Gurudev Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj himself was a
profound scholar of Jain sutras. His intellect was very sharp and argumentative.
Seeing this state of Agamic literature, he was very pained and expressed many
times that if there was a pure, beautiful, and universally useful publication of
the Agamas, it would benefit many people. Due to some circumstances, his
resolution remained limited to just a feeling. Meanwhile, Acharya Shri
Jawaharlalji Maharaj, Jain Dharma Divakar Acharya Shri Atmaramji Maharaj, Pujya
Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj, etc. learned monks gave beautiful explanations and
commentaries on the Agamas. [१०]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ve bhI pUrNa zuddha nahIM hote the| unakA samyak artha-jJAna dene vAle bhI
virale hI rhe| anya bhI aneka kAraNoM se Agama-jJAna kI dhArA saMkucita hotI
gyii| vikrama kI solahavIM zatAbdI meM lokAzAha ne eka krAMtikArI prayatna
kiyaa| AgamoM ke zuddha aura yathArtha artha-jJAna ko nirUpita karane kA eka
sAhasika upakrama puna: cAlU huaa| kintu kucha kAla bAda punaH usameM bhI
vyavadhAna A ge| sAmpradAyika dveSa, saiddhAntika vigraha tathA lipikAroM kI
bhASAviSayaka alpajJatA AgamoM kI upalabdhi tathA unake samyak arthabodha meM
bahuta bar3A vighna bana ge| _ unnIsavIM zatAbdI ke prathama caraNa meM jaba
Agama-mudraNa kI paramparA calI to pAThakoM ko kucha suvidhA huii| AgamoM kI
prAcIna TIkAe~, cUrNi va niyukti jaba prakAzita huI tathA unake AdhAra para
AgamoM kA sarala va spaSTa bhAvabodha mudrita hokara pAThakoM ko sulabha huA to
AgamajJAna kA paThana-pAThana svabhAvata: bar3hA, saikar3oM jijJAsuoM meM Agama-
svAdhyAya kI pravRtti jagI va jainetara dezI-videzI vidvAn bhI AgamoM kA
anuzIlana karane lge| AgamoM ke prakAzana-sampAdana-mudraNa ke kArya meM jina
vidvAnoM tathA manISI zramaNoM ne aitihAsika kArya kiyA, paryApta sAmagrI ke
abhAva meM Aja una sabakA nAmollekha kara pAnA kaThina hai| phira ' sthAnakavAsI
paramparA ke kucha mahAn muniyoM kA nAma grahaNa avazya hI kruuNgaa| pUjya zrI
amolakaRSijI mahArAja sthAnakavAsI paramparA ke mahAn sAhasI va dRr3ha
saMkalpabalI muni the, jinhoMne alpa sAdhanoM ke bala para bhI pUre battIsa
sUtroM ko hindI meM anUdita karake jana-jana ko sulabha banA diyaa| pUrI battIsI
kA sampAdana, prakAzana eka aitihAsika kArya thA, jisase sampUrNa sthAnakavAsI
va terApaMthI samAja upakRta huaa| gurudeva pUjya svAmI zrI jorAvaramalajI
mahArAja kA eka saMkalpa : maiM jaba gurudeva sva. svAmI zrI jorAvaramalajI
mahArAja ke tatvAvadhAna meM AgamoM kA adhyayana kara rahA thA taba Agamodaya
samiti dvArA prakAzita kucha Agama upalabdha the| unhIM ke AdhAra para gurudeva
mujhe adhyayana karAte the| unako dekhakara gurudeva ko lagatA thA ki yaha
saMskaraNa yadyapi kAphI zrama-sAdhya hai, evaM aba taka ke upalabdha
saMskaraNoM meM kAphI zuddha bhI hai, phira bhI aneka sthala aspaSTa haiM  /
mUla pATha meM evaM usakI vRtti meM kahIM-kahIM antara bhI hai, kahIM vRtti
bahuta saMkSipta hai| gurudeva svAmI zrI jorAvaramalajI mahArAja svayaM jaina
sUtroM ke prakANDa paNDita the| unakI meghA bar3I vyutpanna va tarkaNApradhAna
thii| AgamasAhitya kI yaha sthiti dekhakara unheM bahuta pIr3A hotI aura kaI
bAra unhoMne vyakta bhI kiyA ki AgamoM kA zuddha, sundara va sarvopayogI
prakAzana ho to bahuta logoM kA kalyANa hogA, kucha paristhitiyoM ke kAraNa
unakA saMkalpa, mAtra bhAvanA taka sImita rhaa| isI bIca AcArya zrI
javAharalAlajI mahArAja, jaina dharma divAkara AcArya zrI AtmArAmajI mahArAja,
pUjya zrI ghAsIlAlajI mahArAja Adi vidvAn muniyoM ne AgamoM kI sundara vyAkhyAeM
va TIkAe~ [10]

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He has completed this deficiency by writing or having it written under his
supervision. Currently, Acharya Shri Tulsi of the Terapanth sect has also
started this Herculean effort and their Agam work is progressing well. Muni Shri
Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' is making a unique and important effort to classify the
pronouncements of the Agams into Anuyogs. The learned Shraman, late Muni Shri
Punyavijayji of the Svetambar Murtipujak tradition, had started a very
systematic and excellent work in the direction of Agam editing. After his
demise, this beautiful effort is continuing under the supervision of Muni Shri
Jambuvijayji. After observing all these works in a panoramic view, a resolve
arose in my mind. Today, somewhere the original text of the Agams is being
published and somewhere extensive commentaries on the Agams are being written.
One is incomprehensible to the reader, while the other is complex. There should
be an effort that follows the middle path, revealing the essence of Agamvani,
which is both easy to understand, simple, concise, but comprehensive and easy.
Gurudev wanted the same. Keeping that sentiment in mind, I started thinking
about this subject 4-5 years ago. After long contemplation, on V.S. 2036,
Vaishakh Shukla 10, Mahavir Kaivalya Divas, I made a firm decision and started
the editing and commentary work of Agam-Battisi, and now the Agam texts are
gradually reaching the hands of the readers, I am very happy about it. This
historical work of Agam editing has been organized in the memory of our revered
Gurudev. Today, his auspicious memory is making my mind joyful. Along with this,
the inspirations of my venerable Guru-brother, revered Swami Shri Hazarimlalji
Maharaj - his Agam devotion and profound knowledge of Agam, ancient beliefs,
have been my support. Therefore, I am overwhelmed in the memory of both those
heavenly souls. The guidance of Shasansevi Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj, the
encouragement of enthusiasm, the companionship-strength of the service-minded
disciple Muni Vinaykumar, service-cooperation, and the humble inspirations of
Mahasati Shri Kanakunwarji, Mahasati Shri Jhankarkunwarji, Paramvidushi Mahasati
Shri Umraovkunwarji, M.Sa. Archana - have always been helpful in keeping me
motivated and dedicated to my work. I have firm faith that I will continue to
receive full cooperation from all my colleagues, listeners and scholars in
completing this long and arduous task of editing Agam-vani, and I will remain
dynamic in achieving my goal. With this hope..... - Muni Mishrimal 'Madhukar'
[11]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 likhakara athavA apane tatvAvadhAna meM likhavAkara isI kamI ko pUrA kiyA hai|
vartamAna meM terApaMtha sampradAya ke AcArya zrI tulasI ne bhI yaha bhagIratha
prayatna prArambha kiyA hai aura acche stara se unakA Agama-kArya cala rahA hai|
muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala' AgamoM kI vaktavyatA ko anuyogoM meM vargIkRta
karane kA maulika evaM mahatvapUrNa prayAsa kara rahe haiN| zvetAmbara
mUrtipUjaka paramparA ke vidvAn zramaNa sva. muni zrI puNyavijayajI ne Agama
sampAdana kI dizA meM bahuta hI vyavasthita va uttama koTi kA kArya prArambha
kiyA thaa| unake svargavAsa ke pazcAt muni zrI jambUvijayajI ke tatvAvadhAna meM
yaha sundara prayatna cala rahA hai| ukta sabhI kAryoM kA vihaMgama avalokana
karane ke bAda mere mana meM eka saMkalpa utthaa| Aja kahIM to AgamoM kA mUla
mAtra prakAzita ho rahA hai aura kahIM AgamoM kI vizAla vyAkhyAe~ kI jA rahI
haiN| eka, pAThaka ke lie durbodha hai to dUsarI jttil| madhyama mArga kA
anusaraNa kara AgamavANI kA bhAvodghATana karane vAlA aisA prayatna honA cAhie
jo subodha bhI hI, sarala bhI ho, saMkSipta ho para sArapUrNa va sugama ho|
gurudeva aisA hI cAhate the| usI bhAvanA ko lakSya meM rakhakara maiMne 4-5
varSa pUrva isa viSaya meM cintana prArambha kiyaa| sudIrgha cintana ke pazcAt
vi. saM. 2036 vaizAkha zuklA 10 mahAvIra kaivalyadivasa ko dRr3ha nirNaya karake
Agama-battIsI kA sampAdana-vivecana kArya prArambha kara diyA aura aba pAThakoM
ke hAthoM meM Agama-grantha kramaza: pahu~ca rahe haiM, isakI mujhe atyadhika
prasannatA hai| Agama-sampAdana kA yaha aitihAsika kArya pUjya gurudeva kI
puNyasmRti meM Ayojita kiyA gayA hai| Aja unakA puNya smaraNa mere mana ko
ullasita kara rahA hai| sAtha hI mere vandanIya guru-bhrAtA pUjya svAmI zrI
hajArImalajI mahArAja kI preraNAe~-unakI Agama-bhakti tathA Agama sambandhI
talasparzI jJAna, prAcIna dhAraNAe~, merA sambala banI hai| ataH maiM una donoM
svargIya AtmAoM kI puNyasmRti meM vibhora huuN| zAsanasevI svAmIjI zrI
brajalAlajI mahArAja kA mArgadarzana, utsAha-saMvarddhana, sevAbhAvI ziSya muni
vinayakumAra kA sAhacarya-bala, sevA-sahayoga tathA mahAsatI zrI kAnaku~varajI,
mahAsatI zrI jhaNakAraku~varajI, paramaviduSI mahAsatI zrI umarAvaku~varajI,
ma.sA. arcanA- kI vinamra preraNAe~ mujhe sadA protsAhita tathA kAryaniSTha
banAye rakhane meM sahAyaka rahI haiN| _ mujhe dRr3ha vizvAsa hai ki Agama-vANI
ke sampAdana kA yaha sudIrgha prayatna-sAdhya kArya sampanna karane meM mujhe
sabhI sahayogiyoM, zrAvakoM va vidvAnoM kA pUrNa sahakAra milatA rahegA aura
maiM apane lakSya taka pahu~cane meM gatizIla banA rhuuNgaa| isI AzA ke
sAtha..... -muni mizrImala 'madhukara' [11]

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Edition's Meaningful Collaborator Late Shri Seth Pukharajji Sheesodia
(Life-Line)  Seth Pukharajji Sa. Sheesodia's personality is unique. His vision
is so sharp and comprehensive that he acts as a kind of conductor and advisor to
the society around him. Perhaps he is as concerned about his domestic affairs as
he is about other matters. Looking at Shri Sheesodia's life, one is immediately
reminded of the public life of those ancient Shravakas from whom every person in
society received advice and protection.  Sheesodia was born in Samvat 1968 on
the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of Margashirsha in Byawar. His father's
name was Shri Hiralalji. Your father's financial situation was ordinary.
Education was also limited to the commercial field. In those days, there were
not as many resources available for education as there are today. Your father
passed away during your childhood. Due to all these reasons, Sheesodia did not
get the opportunity to receive higher education. But the fruit of education, the
ability to acquire, and the development of physical, mental and intellectual
powers, he possesses those abilities and powers in abundance. He has an innate
talent. The scope of his talent is very wide. The success you have achieved in
the business field and in other social and religious fields is due to your
talent as well as other unique qualities of your personality.  It is not
difficult to imagine how miserable the situation of someone who has a normal
financial situation and is deprived of his father's protection in childhood can
be. But one also sees rare noble souls who, without anyone's support, without
anyone's cooperation and without anyone's help, only by the strength of their
own personality, by their own efforts and prowess, and by their own
intelligence, crush all the obstacles that come in the way of their life's
development and keep moving forward and reach the pinnacle of success.  Your
father passed away in Samvat 1980. At that time, your family consisted of your
grandfather, mother and sister. After your father's passing, all directions were
filled with darkness for Sheesodia. But feelings of helplessness, compulsion,
humility and inferiority could not even come near him. Not only that, the
adversity of circumstances made your courage, determination and morale even
stronger and you stepped into the field of karmabhoomi. At the tender age of
twelve, you started a simple business with a loan of two hundred rupees. How
much effort and how much caution must have been taken to increase that small
capital, and how much labor must have been done, it is difficult to even guess.
But with strong willpower and [12]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama saMskaraNa ke artha sahayogI sva. zrImAn seTha pukharAjajI zIzodiyA
(jIvana-rekhA ) seTha pukharAjajI sA. zIzodiyA ke vyaktitva meM anUThApana hai|
unakI dRSTi itanI painI aura vyApaka hai ki ve apane AsapAsa ke samAja ke eka
prakAra se saMcAlana aura parAmarzadAtA hokara rahate haiN| saMbhavataH unheM
jitanI cintA apane gArhasthika kAryoM kI rahatI hai utanI hI dUsare kAryoM kI
bhii| zrI zIzodiyAjI ke jIvana ko dekhakara sahasA hI prAcIna kAla ke una
zrAvakoM kI sArvajanikatA kA smaraNa ho AtA hai jinase samAja kA hara vyakti
salAha va saMrakSaNa pAtA thA  /  zIzodiyAjI kA janma saM0 1968 meM mArgazIrSa
kRSNapakSa kI caturdazI ke dina byAvara meM huaa| pitAjI kA nAma zrI hIrAlAlajI
thA  /  Apake pitAjI kI Arthika sthiti sAdhAraNa thii| zikSA bhI vANijya kSetra
taka sImita thii| una dinoM zikSA ke Aja kI taraha pracura sAdhana bhI upalabdha
nahIM the| pitAjI Apake bAlyakAla meM hI svargavAsI ho gye| ina saba kAraNoM se
zIzodiyAjI ko uccazikSA prApta karane kA avasara prApta nahIM ho skaa| kintu
zikSA kA phala jisa yogyatA ko prApta karanA hai, aura jina zArIrika, mAnasika
evaM bauddhika zaktiyoM kA vikAsa karanA haiM, vaha yogyatA aura ve zaktiyAM
unheM pracura mAtrA meM prApta haiN| unameM janmajAta pratibhA hai| unakI
pratibhA kI paridhi bahuta vistRta hai| vyApArika kSetra meM tathA anya sAmAjika
aura dhArmika kSetroM meM Apako jo saphalatA prApta huI hai usameM Apake
vyaktitva kI anyAnya viziSTatAoM ke sAtha ApakI pratibhA kA vaiziSTya bhI kAraNa
haiN| jisakI Arthika sthiti sAmAnya ho aura bAlyAvasthA meM hI jo pitA ke
saMrakSaNa se vaMcita ho jAya, usakI sthiti kitanI dayanIya ho sakatI hai, yaha
kalpanA karanA kaThina nahIM hai  /  kintu aise virala narapuMgava bhI dekhe
jAte haiM jo binA kisI ke sahAre, binA kisI ke sahayoga aura binA kisI kI
sahAyatA ke kevala mAtra apane hI vyaktitva ke bala para apane purUSArtha aura
parAkrama se aura apane hI buddhikauzala se jIvana - vikAsa patha meM Ane vAlI
samasta bAdhAoM ko kucalate hue Age se Age hI bar3hate jAte haiM aura saphalatA
ke zikhara para jA pahu~cate haiN| Apake pitAjI kA svargavAsa saMvat 1980 meM
huaa| usa vakta Apake parivAra meM dAdAjI, mAtAjI va bahina thii| pitAjI ke
svargavAsa ke pazcAt zIzodiyAjI ke liye sabhI dizAe~ andhakAra se vyApta ho gii|
magara lAcArI, vivazatA, dInatA aura hInatA kI bhAvanA unake nikaTa bhI nahI
phaTaka skii| yahI nahIM paristhitiyoM kI pratikUlatA ne Apake sAhasa, saMkalpa
aura manobala ko adhika sudRr3ha kiyA aura Apa karmabhUmi ke kSetra meM utara
pdd'e| mAtra bAraha varSa kI umra meM Apane 200, do sau rUpayA RNa lekara
sAdhAraNa vyavasAya prAraMbha kiyA  /  svalpa-sI pUMjI aura vaha bhI parAI,
kitanI lagana aura kitanI sAvadhAnI use bar3hAne ke lie baratanI par3I hogI aura
kitanA zrama karanA par3A hogA, yaha anumAna karanA bhI kaThina hai| magara
prabala icchAzakti aura [12]

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The year is [year]. Sheeshiodiya ji is a living example of the truth that all
adversity is overcome in the face of *purushartha* and the gates of success
open. Today, Sheeshiodiya ji is a great *lakshadhish* and among the dignitaries
of the city. Byawar city is the main center of your business. You have three
shops in different markets of Byawar. One shop is in Ajmer. You have also had
shops in Kishangarh-Madanganj, Vijayanagar and Sojat Road. You primarily deal in
*aadh* business. Your business area is most of India. Sheeshiodiya ji's business
work is so well-organized and smooth that the partners and *munims* working in
your shop also gain value in the city. Working for you is considered a great
qualification for a person. All the partners or *munims* who have separated from
your firms are today running their own good business with great pride and
qualification. They have also made a name for themselves in business. In such a
situation, it is natural for your sons to be business-savvy. They have taken
over a lot of your responsibility. This is why you get time for public,
religious and social work. You are associated with many institutions of the
city. You are serving as president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer,
advisor and member of some institutions. You have served many institutions. But
the special thing is that you handle the work of the institution with full
interest and dedication. You are the main pillar of Shri Marudharakesari Sahitya
Prakashan Samiti, Muni Shri Hazarimala Smriti Prakashan, Aagam Prakashan Samiti,
Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Veer Sangh. You are also giving full
contribution to other institutions of the city like Gosala, Chamber Sarrafan
etc. In this way, Sheeshiodiya ji is a completely self-made and self-respected
gentleman. You have earned lakhs of wealth through your own ability and
determination. But you have not been satisfied with just earning wealth, but you
are also using it for social and religious work. You have established a
charitable trust with one lakh rupees. Besides this, no one ever goes empty-
handed from you. You have helped many institutions a lot. You are the pillar of
Aagam Prakashan Samiti and you are running it as the acting president. The
entire cost of publication of the present 'Upasakdashaang' sutra has been borne
by the acting president of the committee, Shri Sheeshiodiya ji, who has made a
significant contribution. The committee is indebted to you for this generous
support. [13]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 varSa hai| purUSArtha ke sAmane sArI pratikUlatAeM samApta ho jAtI hai aura
saphalatA kA siMhadvAra khula jAtA hai, isa satya ke pratyakSa udAharaNa
zIzodiyAjI haiN| Aja zIzodiyAjI bar3e lakSAdhIza hai aura nagara ke gaNamAnya
vyaktiyoM meM haiN| byAvara nagara Apake vyavasAya kA mukhya kendra hai| byAvara
ke alaga-alaga bAjAroM meM tIna dukAneM haiN| eka dukAna ajamera meM hai|
kizanagar3ha-madanagaMja, vijayanagara aura sojata roDa meM bhI ApakI dukAneM
raha cukI haiN| pramukha rUpa se Apa Ar3hata kA hI dhaMdhA karate hai| ApakA
vyApArika kSetra adhikAMza bhAratavarSa hai| zIzodiyAjI kA vyApArika kArya itanA
suvyavasthita aura sucArU rahatA hai ki ApakI dukAna para kAma karane vAle
bhAgIdAroM tathA munImoM kI bhI nagara meM kImata bar3ha jAtI hai| Apake yahA~
kArya karanA vyakti kI eka bar3I yogyatA (qualification)samajhI jAtI hai| ApakI
pharmoM se jo bhI pArTanara yA munIma alaga hue haiM, ve Aja bar3I zAna va
yogyatA se apanA acchA vyavasAya calA rahe haiN| unhoMne bhI vyavasAya meM nAma
kamAyA hai| aisI sthiti meM Apake suputra bhI yadi vyApAraniSNAta hoM to yaha
svAbhAvika hI hai| unhoMne ApakA bahuta-sA uttaradAyitva saMbhAla liyA hai| isI
kAraNa Apako sArvajanika, dhArmika evaM sAmAjika kAryoM ke liye avakAza mila
jAtA hai| nagara kI aneka saMsthAoM se Apa jur3e hue haiN| kisI adhyakSa, kisI
ke kAryAdhyakSa, kisI ke upAdhyakSa, kisI ke maMtrI, kisI ke koSAdhyakSa, kisI
ke salAhakAra va sadasya Adi padoM para raha kara sevA kara rahe haiM tathA
anekoM saMsthAoM kI sevA kI hai| magara vizeSatA yaha hai ki jisa saMsthA kA
kAryabhAra Apa saMbhAlate hai use pUrI rUci aura lagana ke sAtha sampanna karate
haiN| zrI marUdharakesarI sAhitya prakAzana samiti, muni zrI hajArImala smRti
prakAzana, Agama prakAzana samiti, zrI vardhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina vIra saMgha
ke to Apa pramukha AdhAra hai| nagara kI anya gozAlA, cembara sarrAphAna Adi
saMsthAoM ko bhI pUrA yogadAna de rahe haiN| isa prakAra zIzodiyAjI pUrNarUpa se
Atmanirmita evaM AtmapratiSThita sajjana haiN| apanI hI yogyatA aura adhyavasAya
ke bala para Apane lAkhoM kI sampatti upArjita kI hai| magara sampatti upArjita
karake hI Apane santoSa nahIM mAnA, varana usakA sAmAjika evaM dhArmika kAryoM
meM sadupayoga bhI kara rahe haiN| eka lAkha rUpayoM se Apane eka pAramArthika
TrasTa kI sthApanA kI hai| isake atirikta Apake pAsa se kabhI koI khAlI hAtha
nahIM jaataa| Apane kaI saMsthAoM kI acchI khAsI sahAyatA kI hai| Agama
prakAzana samiti ke Apa mahAstambha haiM aura kAryavAhaka adhyakSa kI haisiyata
se ApahI usakA saMcAlana kara rahe haiN| prastuta 'upAsakadazAMga' sUtra ke
prakAzana kA sampUrNa vyayabhAra samiti ke kAryavAhaka adhyakSa zrI zIzodiyAjI
ne hI vahana karake mahattvapUrNa yoga diyA hai| samiti isa udAra sahayoga ke
liye ApakI RNI hai| [13]

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction (From the First Edition) **The Main Foundation of Religion** The
foundation of the eternal life of any religion is its scripture. The scripture
safeguards the principles upon which the edifice of religion stands. Leaving
aside the branches and sub-branches, the main religions in India are Vedic,
Buddhist, and Jain. The Vedic religion's primary literature is the Vedas, the
Buddhist religion's is the Pitaka, and similarly, the Jain religion's primary
literature is available in the form of Agamas.  **Agamas** Agamas are indicative
of specific knowledge, connected to direct or similar understanding. In other
words, it can be said that the collection of principles expounded by Aapta
Purushas (perfect beings) whose knowledge became completely pure and
unblemished, free from doubt, due to the removal of hindering causes or karmas,
is called Agama.  The primary literature that we have today in the form of
Agamas was spoken by the last Tirthankara, Bhagwan Mahavira, and compiled by his
chief disciples, the Ganadharas.  Acharya Bhadrabahu has written: "The Arhat
(perfect being) speaks the meaning. The Ganadharas, for the benefit of the
Dharma-shasana (religious teachings) or the Dharma-sangha (religious community),
skillfully compile it in the form of Sutras. Thus, the Sutra is established."
This means that the sentiments expressed by Bhagwan Mahavira in his teachings
were put into words by the Ganadharas.  **The Language of Agamas** The language
of the Vedas is ancient Sanskrit, which is called Chandas or Vedic. The Buddhist
Pitaka is in Pali, which is based on Magadhi Prakrit. The language of the Jain
Agamas is Ardhamagadhi Prakrit. The Arhat delivers his religious teachings in
this language.  The Samavayanga Sutra states: "The Bhagwan narrates the Dharma
in the Ardhamagadhi language." The Ardhamagadhi spoken by the Bhagwan...  1.
Aapta-vachanad-aavirbhutam-artha-sanvedanam-agamah. Upacarad-aapta-vachanam cha.
Praman-nay-tatva-alok 4.1, 2. 2. Attham bhasai arhaha, suttam ganthati ganahara
niunam. Sasanas-sa hiyatthae, tao suttam pavattehi.  Aavashyak Nirukti 92. [14]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA (prathama saMskaraNa se ) dharma kA mukhya AdhAra kisI bhI dharma ke
cira jIvana kA mUla AdhAra usakA vAG maya hai| vAG maya meM ve siddhAnta
surakSita hote haiM, jina para dharma kA prAsAda avasthita rahatA hai| zAkhA
prazAkhAoM kI bAta ko chor3a deM, bhAratIya dharmoM meM vaidika, bauddha aura
jaina mukhya haiM  /  vaidikadharma kA mUla sAhitya veda hai, bauddhadharma kA
piTaka hai, usI prakAra jainadharma kA mUla sAhitya AgamoM ke rUpa meM upalabdha
hai| Agama Agama viziSTa jJAna ke sUcaka hai, jo pratyakSa yA tatsadRza bodha se
jur3A  /  dUsare zabdoM meM yoM kahA jA sakatA hai - Avaraka hetuoM yA karmoM ke
apagama se jinakA jJAna sarvathA nirmala evaM zuddha ho gayA, avisaMvAdI ho
gayA, aise Apta purUSoM dvArA pratipAdita siddhAntoM kA saMkalana Agama hai  / "
AgamoM ke rUpa meM jo pramukha sAhitya hameM Aja prApta haiM, vaha antima
tIrthakara bhagavAn mahAvIra dvArA bhASita aura unake pramukha ziSyoM -
gaNadharoM dvArA saMgrathita haiM  /  AcArya bhadrabAhu ne likhA hai ": 'arhat
artha bhASita karate haiN| gaNadhara dharmazAsana yA dharmasaMgha ke hitArtha
nipuNatApUrvaka sUtrarUpa meM usakA grathana karate haiN| yoM sUtra kA
pravartana hotA hai  /  2 isakA tAtparya yaha huA ki bhagavAn mahAvIra ne jo
bhAva apanI dezanA meM vyakta kiye, ve gaNadharoM dvArA zabdabaddha kiye gaye  /
AgamoM kI bhASA vedoM kI bhASA prAcIna saMskRta hai, jise chandas yA vaidikI
kahA jAtA hai| bauddhapiTaka pAlI meM haiM, jo mAgadhI prAkRta para AdhRta hai|
jaina AgamoM kI bhASA arddhamAgadhI prAkRta hai| arhat isI meM apanI
dharmadezanA dete haiM  /  samavAyAMga sUtra meM likhA hai 'bhagavAn
arddhamAgadhI bhASA meM dharma kA AkhyAna karate haiM  /  bhagavAn dvArA bhASita
arddhamAgadhI 44 1. AptavacanAdAvirbhUtamarthasaMvedanamAgamaH  /
upacArAdAptavacanaM caM  //  pramANanayatattvAloka 4.. 1, 2  /  2. atthaM bhAsai
arahA, suttaM gaMthati gaNaharA niuNaM  /  sAsaNassa hiyaTThAe, tao suttaM
pavattei  //  Avazyaka niryukti 92  /  [14]

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Language transforms into the language of all, whether Aryan, non-Aryan, bipeds,
quadrupeds, deer, animals, birds, reptiles, and so on; it becomes beneficial,
auspicious, and conducive to their happiness. The Acharanga Churni also mentions
this same sentiment. It states that the great souls, compassionate towards all
beings, including women, children, the elderly, and the illiterate, preached the
principles in the Ardhamagadhi language. _Ardhamagadhi is a dialect of Prakrit.
The Dashavaikalika Vritti, while mentioning that the Lord's teachings were in
Prakrit, expresses a similar sentiment as above: "For the benefit of children,
women, the elderly, and the foolish-illiterate-all those who desire good
conduct, the enlightened ones composed the principles in Prakrit."2 Ardhamagadhi
The time of Lord Mahavira was a period when various kinds of rigidities were
prevalent in the religious world. One of them was the rigidity of language.
Sanskrit was considered the language of religious discourse. Sanskrit was not
prevalent among the common people. Ordinary people could not understand it. In
everyday speech, Prakrit languages were prevalent. There were many varieties of
these, depending on the region, of which Magadhi, Ardhamagadhi, Shaurseni,
Paisachi, and Maharashtri were prominent. Ardhamagadhi and Magadhi were
prevalent in eastern India, while Shaurseni was prevalent in the west. Paisachi
was the language of the northwest. Maharashtri was used in the central region.
Ardhamagadhi was prevalent in the region between Shaurseni and Magadhi. Thus,
Ardhamagadhi proves to be a language between Magadhi and Shaurseni. That is,
some of its forms are like Magadhi and some are like Shaurseni. This is probably
why it got the name Ardhamagadhi. Magadhi has three main characteristics. There,
only the palatal 'sh' is used for 'sh', 'sh', and 's'. 'l' comes in place of
'r'. In the first case of nouns ending in 'a', the 'e' ending is used. In
Ardhamagadhi, about half of these three characteristics are found. The palatal
'sh' is not used there at all. In nouns ending in 'a', 'e' is used in the first
case most of the time. 'l' is used in place of 'r' in some places. There is
another peculiarity in the declensional structure of Ardhamagadhi. There, in the
seventh case, along with 'e' and 'mmi', the suffix 'ansi' is also used, such as
- nayare nayarammi, nayaransi. 1. Bhagavan cha nam Ardhamaghiye bhasaye
dhammamaikkhai. Savi ya nam Ardhamaghi bhasa bhasijjamaani tesim savvesim
ariyamanaariyaanm dupppay-chaupppay-miy-pasu-sarisivaanm appano hiy-siv
suhaybhasattaye parinamahi. -Samavayangasutra 34. 22. 23. 2.
Balastrivruddhamurkhaanam nrinam charitrakankshinam. Anugraharthe tatvagnaih
siddantah prakrtah krtah. -Dashavaikalika Vritti page 223. [15]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhASA Arya, anArya, dvipada, catuSpada, mRga, pazu, pakSI, sarIsRpa-reMgane
vAle jIva Adi sabhI kI bhASA meM pariNata ho jAtI hai; unake lie hitakara,
kalyANakara tathA sukhakara hotI hai| AcArAMgacUrNi meM bhI isI Azaya kA ullekha
hai| vahA~ kahA gayA hai ki strI, bAlaka, vRddha, anapaDha-sabhI para kRpA kara
saba prANiyoM ke prati samadarzI mahApurUSoM ne arddhamAgadhI bhASA meM
siddhAntoM kA upadeza kiyaa| _arddhamAgadhI prAkRta kA eka bheda hai|
dazavaikAlika vRtti meM bhagavAn ke upadeza kA prAkRta meM hone kA ullekha
karate hue pUrvokta jaisA hI bhAva vyakta kiyA gayA hai "cAritra kI kAmanA
karane vAle bAlaka, strI, vRddha, mUrkha-anapar3ha-sabhI logoM para anugraha
karane ke liAye tatvadraSTAoM ne siddhAnta kI racanA prAkRta meM kii|"2
arddhamAgadhI bhagavAna mahAvIra kA yuga eka aisA samaya thA jaba dhArmika jagat
meM aneka prakAra ke Agraha baddhamUla the| unameM bhASA kA Agraha bhI eka thaa|
saMskRta dharma nirUpaNa kI bhASA mAnI jAtI thii| saMskRta kA jana-sAdhAraNa meM
pracalana nahI thaa| sAmAnya jana use samajha nahIM sakate the| sAdhAraNa samaya
bolacAla meM prAkRtoM kA pracalana thaa| deza bheda se unake kaI prakAra the,
jinameM mAgadhI, arddhamAgadhI, zaurasenI, paizAcI tathA mahArASTrI pramukha
thii| pUrva bhArata meM arddhamAgadhI aura mAgadhI tathA pazcima meM zaurasenI
kA pracalana thaa| uttara pazcima paizAcI kA kSetra thaa| madhya deza meM
mahArASTrI kA prayoga hAtA thaa| zaurasenI aura mAgadhI ke bIca ke kSetra meM
arddhamAgadhI kA pracalana thaa| yoM addhamAgadhI, mAgadhI aura zaurasenI ka
bIca kI bhASA siddha hotI hai| arthAt isakA kucha rUpa mAgadhI jaisA aura kucha
zaurasenI jaisA hai, arddhamAgadhI aisA nAma par3ane meM sambhavataH yahI kAraNa
rahA ho| mAgadhI ke tIna mukhya lakSaNa hai| vahA~ za, Sa, sa-tInoM ke lie
kevala tAlavya za kA prayoga hotA hai  /  ra ke sthAna para la AtA hai| akArAnta
saMjJAoM meM prathamA eka vacana meM e vibhakti kA upayoga hotA hai|
arddhamAgadhI meM ina tIna meM lagabhaga Adhe lakSaNa milate haiN| tAlavya za kA
vahA~ bilakula prayoga nahIM hotaa| akArAnta saMjJAoM meM prathamA eka vacana
meMe kA prayoga adhikAMza hotA hai| ra ke sthAna para la kA prayoga kahIM-kahIM
hotA hai| arddhamAgadhI kI vibhakti-racanA meM eka vizeSatA aura hai, vahA~
saptamI vibhakti meM e aura mmi ke sAtha-sAtha aMsi pratyaya kA bhI prayoga hotA
hai jaise-nayare nayarammi, nyrNsi| 1. bhagavaM ca NaM addhamAgahIe bhAsAe
dhmmmaaikkhi| sAvi ya NaM addhamAgahI bhAsA bhAsijjamANI tesiM savvesiM
AriyamaNAriyANaM duppaya-cauppaya-miya-pasu-sarIsivANaM appaNo hiya-siva
suhayabhAsattAe prinnmi| -samavAyAMgasUtra 34. 22. 23  /  2.
bAlastrIvRddhamUrkhANAM nRNAM caaritrkaaNkssinnaam| anugrahArtha tatvajJaiH
siddhAntaH prAkRtaH kRtH|| -dazavaikAlika vRtti pRSTha 223  /  [15]

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Navangi commentator Acharya Abhaydeva Suri, in the *Aupapatik Sutra*, while
describing the language of Lord Mahavira's teachings, has described Ardhamagadhi
as a language that uses the sounds 'l' and 'sh' sometimes, as they are used in
Magadhi, and mostly uses Prakrit. In the commentary on the *Vyakhyaprajnapti
Sutra*, he has also mentioned that Ardhamagadhi has some characteristics of
Magadhi and some of Prakrit. Acharya Abhaydeva has probably used the term
Prakrit here for Shauraseni. Shauraseni Prakrit may have been more prevalent in
his time. Acharya Hemachandra, in his *Prakrit Vyakaran*, has called
Ardhamagadhi *Aarsh* (the language of the Rishis). He has written that all the
rules of grammar do not apply to the *Aarsh* language, because it has many
variations. This means that Ardhamagadhi is a mixture of other Prakrits. Another
Prakrit grammarian, Markandeya, has mentioned about Ardhamagadhi that it is very
close to Shauraseni, meaning that it has many characteristics of Shauraseni.
This also means that it is called Ardhamagadhi because it has many
characteristics of Shauraseni and some of Magadhi. Kramadisvara has mentioned
that Ardhamagadhi is a mixture of Magadhi and Maharashtri. This also implies
that Ardhamagadhi is a mixture of Magadhi, Shauraseni and Maharashtri. In the
*Nishitchurni*, it is mentioned about Ardhamagadhi that it was the language
spoken in half of Magadha and it was a mixture of twenty-eight regional
languages. From these descriptions, it appears that Ardhamagadhi was used as a
*lingua franca* in the Prakrit region at that time, which continued for some
centuries later. According to some scholars, this was the original language of
the Ashokan inscriptions, which was transformed into local forms. Lord Mahavira
used such a language as the medium of his teachings, which was accessible to the
common people.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navAMgI TIkAkAra AcArya abhayadeva sUri ne aupapAtikasUtra meM jahA~ bhagavAn
mahAvIra kI dezanA ke varNana ke prasaMga meM arddhamAgadhI bhASA kA ullekha huA
hai, vahA~ arddhamAgadhI ko aisI bhASA ke rUpa meM vyAkhyAta kiyA hai, jisameM
mAgadhI meM prayukta hone vAle la aura za kA kahIM-kahIM prayoga tathA prAkRta
kA adhikAMzataH prayoga thaa| _ vyAkhyAprajJapti sUtra kI TIkA meM bhI unhoneM
isI prakAra ullekha kiyA hai ki arddhamAgadhI meM kucha mAgadhI ke tathA kucha
prAkRta ke lakSaNa pAye jAte haiN| AcArya abhayadeva ne prAkRta kA yahA~
sambhavataH zaurasenI ke lie prayoga kiyA hai| unake samaya meM zaurasenI
prAkRta kA adhika pracalana rahA ho| AcArya hemacandra ne apane prAkRtavyAkaraNa
meM arddhamAgadhI ko ArSa [RSiyoM kI bhASA] kahA hai| unhoMne likhA hai ki
ArSabhASA para vyAkaraNa ke saba niyama lAgU nahIM hote, kyoMki usameM bahuta se
vikalpa hai| isakA tAtparya yaha yaha huA ki arddhamAgadhI meM dUsarI prAkRtoM
kA bhI mizraNa hai| eka dUsare prAkRta vaiyAkaraNa mArkaNDeya ne arddhamAgadhI
ke sambandha meM ullekha kiyA hai ki vaha zaurasenI ke bahuta nikaTa hai arthAt
usameM zaurasenI ke bahuta lakSaNa prApta hote haiM  /  isakA bhI yahI Azaya hai
ki bahuta se lakSaNa zaurasenI ke tathA kucha lakSaNa mAgadhI ke milane se yaha
arddhamAgadhI khlaaii| kramadIzvara ne aisA ullekha kiyA hai ki arddhamAgadhI
meM mAgadhI aura mahArASTrI kA mizraNa hai| isakA bhI aisA hI phalita nikalatA
hai ki arddhamAgadhI meM mAgadhI ke atirikta zaurasenI kA bhI mizraNa rahA hai
aura mahArASTrI kA bhI rahA hai| nizIthacUrNi meM arddhamAgadhI ke sambandha meM
ullekha hai ki vaha magadha ke Adhe bhAga meM bolI jAne vAlI bhASA thI tathA
usameM aTThAIsa dezI bhASAoM kA mizraNa thaa| ina varNanoM se aisA pratIta hotA
hai ki arddhamAgadhI usa samaya prAkRta-kSetra kI samparka-bhASA (Lingua-Franca)
ke rUpa meM prayukta thI, jo bAda meM bhI kucha zatAbdiyoM taka calatI rhii|
kucha vidvAnoM ke anusAra azoka ke abhilekhoM kI mUla bhASA yahI thI, jisako
sthAnIya rUpoM meM rUpAntarita kiyA gayA thaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ne apane
upadeza kA mAdhyama aisI hI bhASA ko liyA, jisa taka jana 1. addhamAgahAe bhAsAe
tti rasorlazau mAgadhyAmityAdi yanmAgadhabhASAlakSaNaM tenAparipUrNA
prAkRtabhASAlakSaNabahulA arddhmaagdhiityucyte| -uvavAI sUtra saTIka pRSTha
224-25  /   /  (zrIyukta rAya dhanapatisiMha bahAdura Agama saMgraha jaina buka
sosAyaTI, kalakattA dvArA prakAzita) 2. aarss-Rssiinnaamidmaarssm| ArSa prAkRtaM
bahulaM bhvti| . tadapi yathAsthAnaM drshyissyaamH| ArSe hi sarve vidhayo
viklpynte||-siddhhemshbdaanushaasn 8.1.3 /  3. bhASAvijJAna : DaoN. bholAnAtha
tivArI pRSTha 178  /  (prakAzaka-kitAba mahala, ilAhAbAda 1961 I.) [16]

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The simple should be easily accessible. This was the case in Ardhamagadhi.
Children, elders, women, educated and uneducated people from the Prakrit-
speaking regions could all understand it. The Anga-literature, the teachings of
the Lord as compiled by the Ganadharas, were collected in the following twelve
Angas:  1. Achar, 2. Sutra-krit, 3. Sthan, 4. Samavay, 5. Vyakhya-prajnapti, 6.
Jnatri-dharma-katha, 7. Upasaka-dasha, 8. Antakrid-dasha, 9. Anattaraupapatik-
dasha, 10. Prasna-vyakaran, 11. Vipak, 12. Drishti-vad. In ancient times, there
was a tradition of memorizing scriptural knowledge. The Vedas, Pitakas, and
Agamas all followed the tradition of memorization. At that time, people had
excellent memory, physical strength, and stamina.  **Agam-Sankalan: The First
Attempt** For almost 560 years after the Nirvana of Lord Mahavira, the tradition
of Agam-knowledge continued as it was. Then there was a setback. A twelve-year
famine struck Magadh. This happened during the reign of Chandragupta Maurya.
Jain monks scattered far and wide. Many perished. The Jain Sangha was concerned
about the safety of Agam-knowledge. After the famine ended, a conference of Jain
monks was held in Pataliputra under the leadership of Sthulabhadra to organize
the Agamas. Eleven Angas were compiled in this conference. The twelfth Anga,
Drishti-vad, was not remembered by anyone. Only Bhadra-bahu knew Drishti-vad. He
was engaged in the practice of Maha-pran-dhyan in Nepal at that time. An attempt
was made to obtain that knowledge from him. Sthulabhadra was able to obtain the
knowledge of the meaning of ten Purvas out of the fourteen Purvas of Drishti-
vad. He only received the text of the remaining four Purvas. This was the first
attempt to compile the Agamas. It is called the first reading or Pataliputra-
vachana of the Agamas. Thus, the Agamas were compiled, but the method of
preserving them remained the same - memorization. It is important to note here
that the Vedas were written in Sanskrit, which is a grammar-based language,
while the Jain Agamas were written in the vernacular language, which was not
bound by the strict rules of grammar. Therefore, over time, some changes began
to occur in the language of the Agamas. This was not possible in the Vedas.
There was another reason for this. To preserve the word structure of the Vedas
in their original form, five forms were established: Samhita-path, Pada-path,
Krama-path, Jata-path. These forms ensured that not a single word of any mantra
could be changed. This was not possible with the Agamas.  **The Second Attempt**
Between 827-840 years after the Nirvana of Lord Mahavira, an attempt was made to
organize the Agamas in a more systematic way. [17]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAdhAraNa kI sIdhI pahu~ca ho| arddhamAgadhI meM yaha bAta thii| prAkRtabhASI
kSetroM ke bacce, bUr3he, striyA~, zikSita, azikSita-sabhI use samajha sakate
the| aMga-sAhitya gaNadharoM dvArA bhagavAn kA upadeza nimnAMkita bAraha aMgoM
ke rUpa meM saMgrathita huA 1. AcAra, 2. sUtrakRt, 3. sthAna, 4. samavAya, 5.
vyAkhyAprajJapti, 6. jJAtRdharmakathA, 7. upAsakadazA, 6. antakRddazA, 9.
anattaraupapAtikadazA, 10. praznavyAkaraNa, 11. vipAka, 12. dRssttivaad|
prAcInakAla meM zAstra-jJAna ko kaNThastha rakhane kI paramparA thii| veda,
piTaka aura Agama-ye tInoM hI kaNThastha-paramparA se calate rahe  /  usa samaya
logoM kI smaraNazakti, daihika saMhanana, bala utkRSTa thaa| Agama-saMkalana :
prathama prayAsa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke nirvANa ke lagabhaga 560 varSa pazcAt taka
Agama-jJAna kI paramparA yathAvat rUpa meM gatizIla rhii| usake bAda eka vighna
huaa| magadha meM bAraha varSa kA duSkAla pdd'aa| yaha candragupta maurya ke
zAsana-kAla kI ghaTanA hai| jaina zramaNa idhara-udhara bikhara gye| aneka kAla-
kavalita ho gye| jaina saMgha ko Agama-jJAna kI surakSA kI cintA huii| durbhikSa
samApta hone para pATaliputra meM AgamoM ko vyavasthita karane hetu sthUlabhadra
ke netRtva meM jaina sAdhuoM kA eka sammelana Ayojita huaa| isameM gyAraha aMgoM
kA saMkalana kiyA gyaa| bArahavAM aMga dRSTivAda kisI ko bhI smaraNa nahIM thaa|
dRSTivAda ke jJAtA kevala bhadrabAhu the| ve usa samaya nepAla meM
mahAprANadhyAna kI sAdhanA meM lage hue the| unase vaha jJAna prApta karane kA
prayAsa kiyA gyaa| dRSTivAda ke cavadaha pUrvo meM se dasa pUrva taka kA artha
jJAna sthUlabhadra prApta kara ske| cAra pUrvo kA kevala pATha unheM prApta
huaa| AgamoM ke saMkalana kA yaha pahalA prayAsa thaa| ise AgamoM kI prathama
vAcanA yA pATaliputravAcanA kahA jAtA haiN| yoM AgamoM kA saMkalana to kara liyA
gayA para unheM surakSita banAye rakhane kA krama vahI kaNThAgratA kA hI rhaa|
yahA~ yaha jJAtavya hai ki veda yahA~ vyAkaraNaniSTha saMskRta meM nibaddha the,
jaina Agama loka-bhASA meM nirmita the, jo vyAkaraNa ke kaThina niyamoM se nahIM
bandhI thI, isalie Ane vAle samaya ke sAtha-sAtha unameM bhASA kI dRSTi se
kucha-kucha parivartana bhI sthAna pAne lgaa| vedoM meM aisA sambhava nahIM ho
skaa| isakA eka kAraNa aura thA, vedoM kI zabda-racanA ko yathAvat rUpa meM
banAye rakhane ke lie usameM pATha ke saMhitApATha, padapATha, kramapATha,
jaTApATha-ye pA~ca rUpa rakhe gaye, jinake kAraNa kisI bhI mantra kA eka bhI
zabda idhara se udhara nahIM ho sktaa| AgAmoM ke sAtha aisI bAta sambhava nahIM
thii| dvitIya prayAsa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke nirvANa ke 827-840 varSa ke madhya
AgamoM ko suvyavasthita karane kA [17]

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Another attempt was made. At that time too, a terrible famine like the previous
one had fallen, in which many Jain monks passed away due to lack of alms. The
practice of the Agamas did not continue in its usual form. Therefore, they began
to be forgotten. After the famine ended, a gathering of monks was held in
Mathura under the leadership of Arya Skandil. The Agamas were compiled in an
orderly manner, collecting whatever was remembered by each monk. This is called
the Mathuri Vachana. This was the second attempt at compiling the Agamas.
Around the same time, a similar gathering of monks took place in Vallabhi, under
the leadership of Nagarjuna Suri, in the region of Saurashtra, where an attempt
was made to compile the Agamas. This falls under the second attempt or Vachana
mentioned above. However, it is also called the first Vachana of Vallabhi.  The
third attempt:  Until now, the same memorized order had continued. Further, some
difficulties began to be experienced in this. People's memory became weaker than
before, and their physical strength was not the same. Therefore, it seemed
difficult to keep such vast knowledge in memory. The Agamas began to be
forgotten. Therefore, after the aforementioned second attempt, 980 or 993 years
after the Nirvana of Bhagwan Mahavira, a gathering of monks was held again in
Vallabhi under the leadership of Devardhigani Kshamasraman. The context of the
previous two Vachanas was present before the monks present at the gathering. In
that context, they compiled the Agamas according to their memory. They took the
Mathuri Vachana as the main basis. They coordinated the variations in readings,
differences in Vachanas, etc., that were prevalent in different monk groups. In
this gathering, the Agamas were written down, so that a definite form of them
would be available to everyone in the future. Despite the effort, where the
readings could not be coordinated, a reference to the alternative Vachana was
made. The twelfth Anga, Drishtivad, could not be compiled, because it was not
present with the monks. Therefore, its severance was declared. This was the
third or final Vachana in the attempt to compile the Jain Agamas. It is also
called the second Vallabhi Vachana. The Jain Agamas available today are in the
form of the Agamas compiled in this Vachana.  The available Agamas are accepted
by the Shvetambar tradition of Jainism. Their authenticity is not accepted in
the Digambar tradition. There, it is believed that the Anga literature was lost
683 years after the Nirvana of Bhagwan Mahavira. They do not accept any text as
a direct word-by-word concordance of the principles spoken by Mahavira.
According to their belief, in the early centuries AD, an Acharya named Dharasen
had a portion of the text preceding the Drishtivad Anga. He lived in the
Chandragupta cave on Mount Girnar. There, he had two knowledgeable monks,
Pushpadant and Bhootbali, write down his knowledge. This is known as the
Shatkhandagama. It is revered as an Agama in the Digambar tradition. The two
monks presented the written Shatkhandagama to the assembly on the fifth day of
the bright half of the month of Jyeshtha. That day was considered an important
day for the coming to light of the Shruta. It became famous as Shruta Panchami.
Shruta Panchami is an important religious festival of the Digambar sect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 eka aura prayatna huaa| usa samaya bhI pahale jaisA eka bhayAnaka duSkAla par3A
thA, jisameM bhikSA na milane ke kAraNa aneka jaina muni paralokavAsI ho gye|
AgamoM ke abhyAsa kA krama yathAvat rUpa meM cAlU nahIM rhaa| isalie ve vismRta
hone lge| durbhikSa samApta hone para Arya skandila ke netRtva meM mathurA meM
sAdhuoM kA sammelana huaa| jina jina ko jaisA smaraNa thA, saMkalita kara Agama
suvyavasthita kiye gye| ise mAthurI vAcanA kahA jAtA hai| Agama-saMkalana kA
yaha dUsarA prayAsa thaa| isI samaya ke AsapAsa saurASTra ke antargata valabhI
meM nAgArjuna sUri ke netRtva meM bhI sAdhuoM kA vaisA hI sammelana huA, jisameM
Agama-saMkalana kA prayAsa huaa| yaha uparyukta dUsare prayatna yA vAcanA ke
antargata hI AtA hai| vaise ise valabhI kI prathama vAcanA bhI kahA jAtA hai|
tRtIya prayAsa _ aba taka vahI kaNThastha krama hI calatA rahA thaa| Age, isameM
kucha kaThinAI anubhava hone lgii| logoM kI smRti pahale se durbala ho gaI,
daihika saMhanana bhI vaisA nahIM rhaa| ata: utane vizAla jJAna ko smRti meM
banAye rakhanA kaThina pratIta hone lgaa| Agama visamRta hone lge| ataH pUrvokta
dUsare prayatna ke pazcAt bhagavAn mahAvIra ke nirvANa ke 980 yA 993 varSa bAda
valabhI meM devardhigaNi kSamAzramaNa ke netRtva meM punaH zramaNoM kA sammelana
huaa| sammelana meM upasthita zramaNoM ke samakSa pichalI do vAcanAoM kA
sandarbha vidyamAna thaa| usa paripArzva meM unhoMne apanI smRti ke anusAra
AgamoM kA saMkalana kiyaa| mukhya AdhAra ke rUpa meM unhoMne mAthurI vAcanA ko
rkhaa| vibhinna zramaNa-saMghoM meM pravRtta pAThAntara. vAcanA-bheda Adi kA
samanvaya kiyaa| isa sammelana meM AgamoM ko lipibaddha kiyA gayA, tAki Age
unakA eka sunizcita rUpa sabako prApta rhe| prayatna ke bAvajUda jina pAThoM kA
samanvaya saMbhava nahIM huA, vahA~ vAcanAntara kA saMketa kiyA gyaa| bArahavAM
aMga dRSTivAda saMkalita nahIM kiyA jA sakA, kyoMki vaha zramaNoM ko upasthita
nahIM thaa| isalie usakA viccheda ghoSita kara diyA gyaa| jaina AgamoM ke
saMkalana ke prayAsa meM yaha tIsarI yA antima vAcanA thii| ise dvitIya valabhI
vAcanA bhI kahA jAtA hai| vartamAna meM upalabdha jaina Agama isI vAcanA meM
saMkalita AgamoM kA rUpa haiN| upalabdha Agama jainoM kI zvetAmbara-paramparA
dvArA mAnya haiN| digambara-paramparA meM inakI prAmANikatA svIkRta nahIM hai|
vahA~ aisI mAnyatA hai ki bhagavAn mahAvIra ke nirvANa ke 683 varSa pazcAt aMga-
sAhitya kA vilopa ho gyaa| mahAvIra-bhASita siddhAntoM ke sIdhe zabda-samavAya
ke rUpa meM ve kisI grantha ko svIkAra nahIM krte| unakI mAnyatAnusAra IsA
prAraMbhika zatI meM dharasena nAmaka AcArya ko dRSTivAda aMga ke pUrvagata
grantha kA kucha aMza upasthita thaa| ve giranAra parvata kI candraguphA meM
rahate the| unhoMne vahA~ do prajJAzIla muni puSpadanta aura bhUtabali ko apanA
jJAna lipibaddha karA diyaa| yaha SaTkhaNDAgama ke nAma se prasiddha hai|
digambara-paramparA meM inakA Agamavat Adara hai| donoM muniyoM ne lipibaddha
SaTkhaNDAgama jyeSTha zuklA paJcamI ko saMgha ke samakSa prastuta kiye| usa dina
ko zruta ke prakAza meM Ane kA mahattvapUrNa dina mAnA gyaa| usakI zruta paJcamI
ke nAma se prasiddhi ho gii| zruta-paJcamI digambarasampradAya kA eka
mahattvapUrNa dhArmika parva hai| [18]

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  In the context of the
Jain Agamas discussed above, there is no unanimity in the Svetambara tradition
regarding their number. Three different counts of 84, 45, and 32 are considered.
The Svetambara Mandir-Mārgi sect recognizes the counts of 84 and 45 in different
forms. The Svetambara Sthanakvasi and Terapanthi sects, which are amurti-
worshipping traditions, accept the count of 32, which is as follows:  Vipāka. 11
Aṅga - Ācārāṅga, Sūtrakṛtāṅga, Sthānāṅga, Samavāyāṅga, Vyākhyāprajñapti,
Jñātṛdharmakathā, Upāsakadaśā, Antakṛddaśā, Anuttaraupapātikadaśā,
Praśnavyākaraṇa. 12 Upāṅga - Aupapātika, Rājapraśnīya, Jīvājīvābhigama,
Prajñāpanā, Sūryaprajñapti, Jambudvīpaprajñapti, Candraprajñapti, Nirayāvalī,
Kalpāvataṃsikā, Puṣpikā, Puṣpacūlikā, Vṛṣṇidaśā. 4 Cheda - Vyavahāra,
Bṛhatkalpā, Niśītha, Daśāśrutaskandha. 4 Mūla - Daśavaikālika, Uttarādhyayana,
Nandī, Anuyogadvāra. 1 Āvaśyaka. Total 32.  Thus, there are 11 Aṅgas and 21
Aṅgabāhya, totaling 32.  Four Anuyogas Ārya Rakṣita Sūri has classified the
Agamas into four divisions called Anuyogas, based on the method of explanation,
subject matter, and other distinctions. These are:  1. Caraṇakaraṇānuyoga - This
includes the discussion of the fundamental virtues of self-development, such as
conduct, vows, right knowledge, right faith, character, restraint, service,
celibacy, austerity, and subduing passions, as well as the subsequent virtues
like purity of the body, vigilance, contemplation, vows, sense control,
recitation, restraint, and acceptance.  2. Dharmakathānuyoga - This includes the
discussion of the aspects of religion, such as compassion, charity, morality,
forgiveness, straightforwardness, and gentleness, primarily based on narratives
or stories.  3. Gaṇitānuyoga - This emphasizes the description related to or
based on mathematics.  4. Dravyānuyoga - This includes the detailed and subtle
analysis of the six substances (jīva, ajīva, etc.) or the nine principles.  The
aforementioned 32 Agamas can be categorized into these 4 Anuyogas as follows:
Caraṇakaraṇānuyoga includes two Aṅgasūtras - Ācārāṅga and Praśnavyākaraṇa, one
Mūlasūtra - Daśavaikālika, four Chedasūtras - Niśītha, Vyavahāra, Bṛhatkalpā,
and Daśāśrutaskandha, and the Āvaśyaka, totaling eight sūtras.
Dharmakathānuyoga includes five Aṅgasūtras - Jñātṛdharmakathā, Upāsakadaśā,
Antakṛddaśā, Anuttaraupapātikadaśā, and Vipāka, as well as seven Upāṅgas -
Aupapātika, Rājapraśnīya, Nirayāvalī, Kalpāvataṃsikā, Puṣpikā, Puṣpacūlikā, and
Vṛṣṇidaśā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Upara jina AgamoM ke sandarbha meM vivecana kiyA gayA hai, zvetAmbara -
paramparA meM unakI saMkhyA ke sambandha meM aikamatya nahIM hai| unakI 84, 45
tathA 32 - yoM tIna prakAra kI saMkhyAeM mAnI jAtI haiN| zvetAmbara mandira -
mArgI sampradAya meM 84 aura 45 kI saMkhyA kI bhinna-bhinna rUpa meM mAnyatA hai
/  zvetAmbara sthAnakavAsI tathA terApaMthI jo amUrtipUjaka sampradAya haiM, meM
32 kI saMkhyA svIkRta hai, jo isa prakAra hai: vipAka  /  11 aMga- AcAra,
sUtrakRt, sthAna, samavAya, vyAkhyAprajJapti, jJAtRdharmakathA, upAsakadazA,
antakRddazA, anuttaraupapAtikadazA, praznavyAkaraNa, 12 upAMga-aupapAtika,
rAjaprazrIya, jIvAjIvAbhigama, prajJApanA, sUryaprajJapti, jambUdvIpa-prajJapti,
candraprajJapti, nirayAvalI, kalpAvataMsikA, puSpikA, puSpacUlikA, vRSNidazA  /
4 cheda-vyavahAra, vRhatkalpa, nizItha, dazAzrutaskandha  /  4 mUla -
dazavaikAlika, uttarAdhyayana, nandI, anuyogadvAra  /  1 Avazyaka  /  kula 32
yoM gyAraha aMga tathA ikkIsa aMgabAhya kula battIsa hote haiM  /  cAra anuyoga
vyAkhyAkrama, viSayagata bheda Adi kI dRSTi se AryarakSita sUri ne AgamoM ko
cAra bhAgoM meM vargIkRta kiyA, jo anuyoga kahalAte haiM  /  ye isa prakAra hai-
1. caraNakaraNAnuyoga- isameM AtmavikAsa ke mUlaguNa-AcAra, vrata samyak jJAna,
darzana, cAritra, saMyama, vaiyAvRtya, brahmacarya, tapa, kaSAya- nigraha Adi
tathA uttaraguNa-piNDavizuddhi, samiti, bhAvanA, pratimA, indriya - nigraha,
pratilekhana, gupti tathA abhigraha Adi kA vivecana hai  /  2.
dharmakathAnuyoga- isameM dayA, dAna, zIla, kSamA, Arjava, mArdava Adi dharma ke
aMgoM kA vivecana hai  /  isake lie vizeSa rUpa se AkhyAnoM yA kathAnakoM kA
AdhAra liyA gayA hai| 3. gaNitAnuyoga - isameM gaNitasambandhI yA gaNita para
AdhRta varNana kI mukhyatA hai  /  4. dravyAnuyoga-isameM jIva, ajIva Adi chaha
dravyoM yA nau tattvoM kA vistRta va sukSma vivecanavizleSaNa hai  /  pUrvokta
32 AgamoM kA ina 4 anuyogoM meM isa prakAra samAveza kiyA jA sakatA hai:
caraNakaraNAnapuyoga meM AcArAMga tathA praznavyAkaraNa ye do aMgasUtra,
dazavaikAlika-yaha eka mUlasUtra, nizItha, vyavahAra, bRhatkalpa evaM
dazAzrutaskaMdha ye cAra chedasUtra tathA Avazyaka yoM kula ATha sUtra Ate haiM
/  dharmakathAnuyoga meM jJAtRdharmakathA, upAsakadazA, antakRddazA,
anuttaraupapAtikadazA tathA vipAkaye pAMca aMgasutra, aupapAtika, rAjapraznIya,
nirayAvalI, kalpAvataMsikA, puSpikA, puSpacUlikA va vRSNidazA [19]

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
These seven Upanga Sutras and Uttaradhyayanas - this is one Mula Sutra, thus a
total of thirteen Sutras come. In Ganitanuyoga, Jambudvipaprajnapti,
Chandraprajnapti and Suryaprajnapti - these three Upanga Sutras come. In
Dravyanuyoga, Sutrakrut, Sthan, Samavay and Vyakhyaprajnapti - these four Anga
Sutras, Jivajivabhigam, Prajnapana - these two Upanga Sutras and Nandi and
Anuyogadwar, these two Mula Sutras - thus a total of eight Sutras come.
Upasakadasha In the context of the present discussion, Upasakadasha is a part of
Dharmakathaanuyoga. As its name suggests, it contains the stories of Upasakas or
Shravakas. In Jainism, from the perspective of sadhana, there is a division into
two types: Shraman-Sangha and Shramanopasaka-Dharma. The word Shraman is used in
the sense of a Sadhu or a renunciant. For a Shraman, self-realization is
everything. The maintenance of physical life is one thing, but a Shraman cannot
do it at the cost of sadhana. He accepts that his body may perish, but he does
not accept even a slight harm to his sadhana under any circumstances. This is
why there is no room for alternatives in his observance of vows, worship and
restraint. On the day he enters Shraman-life, he comes with the resolve, "Savvam
savajan jogam pacchakkhami", meaning from today I renounce all Savadya-
papasamhit yogas - mental, verbal and physical activities. He becomes completely
free from violence, falsehood, theft, adultery and attachment through these
three yogas of mind, speech, body and these three karmas of done, caused and
approved. He never does violence, nor causes it, nor approves of it. He does not
think so in his mind, nor speaks so with his words. This same order applies to
all the vows. Since there is no exception or alternative, here the vows are
called Mahavrata. Maharshi Patanjali has also called those yamas or vows, which
have no limits of caste, country, time, etc., which are universal - to be
observed in all situations, i.e., where no exception is allowed, Mahavrata. '
The sadhana-krama of a Grihi Upasaka _ The complete, perfect or flawless
observance of Mahavrata is not possible for everyone. Only a few steadfast,
strong-willed and cultured men are capable of achieving it. There is another
path, lighter and easier than the sadhana of Mahavrata, in which the sadhaka
accepts vows in a limited form according to his capacity. For such a sadhaka,
the Jain scriptures use the term Shramanopasaka. There are two words in it:
Shraman and Upasaka. The literal meaning of Upasaka is one who sits near. One
who sits in the presence of a Shraman, i.e., accepts good knowledge and vows
from a Shraman, 1. Jati-desha-kala-samaya-anavachchhinnaah sarvabhauma
mahavrata. Patanjali Yogadarshan Sadhanapad 31 1. Up-samepe, aste-ityupasaka.
[20]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ye sAta upAMgasUtra evaM uttarAdhyayana-yaha eka mUlasUtra yoM kula teraha
sUtra Ate haiN| gaNitAnuyoga meM jambUdvIpaprajJapti, candrapajJapti tathA
sUryapajJapti-ye tIna upAMgasUtra Ate haiN| dravyAnuyoga meM sUtrakRt, sthAna,
samavAya tathA vyAkhyAprajJapti-ye cAra aMgasUtra, jIvAjIvAbhigama, prajJApanA-
ye do upAMgasUtra evaM nandI va anuyogadvAra, ye do mUlasUtra-yoM kula ATha
sUtra Ate haiN| upAsakadazA prastuta vivecana ke paripArzva meM upAsakadazA
dharmakathAnuyoga kA bhAga hai| isake nAma se prakaTa hai, isameM upAsakoM yA
zrAvakoM ke kathAnaka haiN| jainadharma meM sAdhanA kI dRSTi se zramaNa-saMgha
tathA zramaNopAsaka-dharma ke rUpa meM do prakAra se vibhAjana kiyA gayA hai|
zramaNa zabda sAdhu yA sarvatyAgI saMyamI ke artha meM prayukta hai| zramaNa ke
lie AtmasAdhanA hI sarvasva hai| daihika jIvana kA nirvAha hotA hai, yaha eka
bAta hai para sAdhanA kI kImata para zramaNa vaisA nahIM kara sktaa| zarIra calA
jAe, yaha use svIkAra hotA hai para sAdhanA meM jarA bhI AMca Ae, yaha saba kisI
bhI dazA meM svIkAra nahIM krtaa| yahI kAraNa hai ki usakI
vratArAdhanAsaMyamapAlana meM vikalpa kA sthAna nahIM hai  /  jisa dina vaha
zramaNa-jIvana meM AtA hai, "savvaM sAvajaM jogaM paccakkhAmi" arthAt Aja se
sabhI sAvadya-pApasahita yogoM-mAnasika, vAcika va kAyika pravRttiyoM kA tyAga
karatA hU~, isa saMkalpa ke sAtha AtA hai| vaha mana, vacana, kAya-ina tInoM
yogoM tathA kRta, kArita, anumodita-ina tInoM karaNoM dvArA hiMsA, asatya,
caurya, abrahmacarya evaM parigraha se sarvathA virata ho jAtA hai| vaha na
kabhI hiMsA karatA hai, na karavAtA hai, na anamodana karatA hai| aisA vaha mana
se socatA nahIM. vacana se bolatA nhiiN| sabhI vratoM para yahI krama lAgU hotA
hai  /  apavAda yA vikalpazUnya hone se yahA~ vrata * mahAvratoM kI saMjJA le
lete haiN| maharSi pataJjali ne bhI una yamoM yA vratoM ko jinameM jAti, deza,
kAla, samaya Adi kI sImA nahIM hotI, jo sArvabhauma-saba avasthAoM meM pAlana
karane-yogya hote haiM arthAt jahA~ kisI bhI prakAra kA apavAda svIkRta nahIM
hai, mahAvrata kahA hai|' gRhI upAsaka kA sAdhanAkrama _ mahAvratoM kI samagra,
paripUrNa yA nirapavAda ArAdhanA hara kisI ke lie zakya nahIM hai| kucha hI
dRDhacetA, AtmabalI aura saMskArI pUrUSa aise hote haiM, jo ise sAdha sakane meM
samartha hoN| mahAvratoM kI sAdhanA kI apekSA halakA, sukara eka aura mArga hai,
jisameM sAdhaka apanI zakti ke anusAra sasIma rUpa meM vrata svIkAra karatA hai|
aise sAdhaka ke lie jaina zAstroM meM zramaNopAsaka zabda kA vyavahAra hai|
zramaNa aura upAsaka-ye do zabda isameM haiM  /  upAsaka kA zabdika artha upa-
samIpa baiThane vAlA 2 hai| jo zramaNa kI sannidhi meM baiThatA hai arthAt
zramaNa se sad jJAna tathA vrata svIkAra karatA hai, 1.
jAtidezakAlasamayAnavacchinnAH sArvabhaumA mahAvratam  /  pAtaJjalayogadarzana
sAdhanApAda 31 1. upa-samIpe, aaste-ityupaaskH| [20]

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In his life dedicated to the great vows, he himself is inspired and ascends the
path of sadhana or worship, he is a Shramanopasak. This is the way to achieve
worship or adoration. It is not possible for life to change just by reading or
listening. The proximity of a life filled with sadhana, great vows, and high
sadhana creates a zeal and a desire in the mind of the individual to move
towards it. Therefore, the use of the word Shramanopasak for a householder
sadhak is truly meaningful.  In the same context, there is a beautiful
explanation in the Chandogya Upanishad. It is written there: "When the power is
awakened in the person who is engaged in sadhana, he rises, that is, he makes
internal preparations. Rising, he serves, he moves towards it with his inner
strength. Then he sits near the Guru, observes his life, listens to him [about
the principles of Dharma], contemplates what he has heard, becomes enlightened,
and conducts himself accordingly in life. When this happens, he is called a
knower, a special knower, having practiced what he knows."  The Upanishad writer
has analyzed the fruition of sadhana from a psychological perspective in a very
beautiful way. The role of a Shramanopasak is also almost the same. He does not
become a Shramanopasak just by sitting near a Shraman, nor does he become so
just by listening. The true implementation of Shramanopasaktva happens when he
renounces the false and is devoted to the true. In Jain terminology, he rejects
Samyak Savadhana and accepts vows.  Another word for Shramanopasak is Shravak.
This word is derived from the root 'shru'. The meaning of Shravak is a listener.
Here, Shravak - listener is a figurative word. By listening to the teachings of
the Shraman, he becomes a listener, but not a Shravak. He receives the
designation of Shravak only when he accepts the vows. The vows of a Shravak are
a psychological process.  In Jainism, the process of accepting vows by a
Shramanopasak or Shravak is also very scientific. He accepts non-violence,
truth, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-possession, but in a limited way. That
is, he accepts these vows with some exceptions, according to the inner strength
and ability he is able to gather. Thus, the vows accepted by a Shravak are less
or smaller than the vows of a Shraman in terms of observance, therefore they are
called Anuvratas. The vow itself is not great or small. The adjectives great or
small are applied to the vow due to the ability or capacity of the observer. As
mentioned above, where the sadhak does not see any deficiency or lack in his
inner strength, he fully, completely observes the vow. 1.  "When he becomes
strong, then he rises, rising he serves, serving he sits near, sitting near he
sees, he contemplates, he understands, he acts, he knows." - Chandogya Upanishad
7.8.1 [21]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isake mahAvratamaya jIvana meM anuprANita hAkara svayaM bhI sAdhanA yA upAsanA
ke patha para ArUDha hotA hai, vaha zramaNopAsaka hai| upAsanA yA ArAdhanA ke
sadhane kA mArga yahI hai| kevala kucha par3ha lene se, suna lene se jIvana
badala jAya, yaha saMbhava nahIM hotaa| sAdhanAmaya, mahAvratamaya-ucca
sAdhanAmaya jIvana kA sAnnidhya, darzana-vyakti ke mana meM eka lagana aura TIsa
paidA karate haiM, usa ora bar3hane kii| ataH gRhI sAdhaka ke lie jo
zramaNopAsaka zabda kA prayoga huA, vaha vAstava meM bar3A arthapUrNa hai| aise
hI sandarbha meM chAndogyopaniSad meM bar3I sundara vyAkhyA hai| vahA~ likhA hai
"sAdhanodyata vyakti meM jaba bala jAgarita hotA hai, vaha uThatA hai arthAt
bhItarI taiyArI karatA hai| uThakara paricaraNa karatA hai-Atmabala saMjokara
usa ora gatimAn hotA hai| phira vaha gurU ke samIpa baiThatA hai, unakA jIvana
dekhatA hai, unase [dharma-tattva kA] zravaNa karatA hai, sune hue para manana
karatA hai, udbuddha hotA hai aura jIvana meM tadanurUpa AcaraNa karatA hai,
aisA hone para jJAta ko Acarita kara vaha vijJAtA-viziSTa jJAtA kahA jAtA hai|"
upaniSatkAra ne sAdhanA ke phalita hone kA manovaijJAnika daSTi se bahata hI
sandara vizleSaNa kiyA hai| zramaNopAsaka kI bhI bhUmikA lagabhaga aisI hI hotI
hai| kevala zramaNa ke pAsa baiThane se vaha zramaNopAsaka nahIM bana jAtA, na
vaha sunane mAtra se hI vaisA ho jAtA hai, zramaNopAsakatva kA to yathArtha
kiyAnvayana taba hotA hai, jaba vaha asat se virata hotA hai, sat meM anurata
hotA hai| jaina pAribhASika zabdAvalI meM vaha samyak sAvadha kA pratyAkhyAna
karatA hai, vrata svIkAra karatA hai| zramaNopAsaka ke lie eka dUsarA zabda
zrAvaka hai  /  vaha zabda 'zru' dhAtu se banA hai| zrAvaka kA artha sunane vAlA
hai| yahA~ zrAvaka-sunanevAlA lAkSaNika zabda hai| zramaNa kA upadeza suna lene
se vaha zrotA to hotA hai para zrAvaka nahIM ho jaataa| use zrAvaka saMjJA tabhI
prApta hotI hai, jaba vaha vrata aMgIkAra karatA hai| zrAvaka ke vrataH eka
manovaijJAnika krama jainadharma meM zramaNopAsaka yA zrAvaka ke vrata-svIkAra
kA krama bhI bar3A vaijJAnika hai| vaha ahiMsA, satya, asteya, brahmacarya tathA
apiragraha kA svIkAra to karatA hai para sImita rUpa meN| arthAt apane meM
jitanA Atmabala aura sAmarthya saMjo pAtA hai, tadanurUpa kucha apavAdoM ke
sAtha vaha ina vratoM ko grahaNa karatA hai| yoM zrAvaka dvArA svIkAra kiye jAne
vAle vrata zramaNa ke vratoM se paripAlana kI dRSTi se nyUna yA choTe hote haiM,
isalie unheM aNuvrata kahA jAtA hai| vrata apane ApameM mahat yA aNu nahIM
hotaa| mahat yA aNu vizeSaNa vrata ke sAtha pAlaka kI kSamatA yA sAmarthya ke
kAraNa lagate haiN| jaisA Upara kahA gayA hai, jahA~ sAdhaka apane Atmabala meM
kamI yA nyUnatA nahI dekhatA, vaha sampUrNa rUpa meM, sarvathA vrata 1. sa yadA
balI bhavati, atha utthAtA bhavati, uttiSThan paricaritA bhavati, paricaran
upasattA bhavati, upasIdan draSTA bhavita, mantA bhavati, boddhA bhavita, kartA
bhavita, vijJAtA bhvti| -chAndogyopaniSada 7.8.1 [21]

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He is diligent in observing it. It is a great task. That is why his vows are
called **mahavrata**. Where the practitioner observes the vow with limits and
exceptions, his observance of the vow is less or small, for that reason **anu**
is added to the vow.   A very big feature of Jainism is that there is no fixed
form of exceptions in the vows of the **Shravakas**. The same vow of non-
violence can be accepted by many devotees with many kinds of exceptions. The
abilities and strengths of different individuals are of different types.
Enthusiasm, self-strength, and courage are not the same. In countless
individuals, it can be of countless types according to their own
**kshayopashama**. Therefore, the individual has his own freedom in accepting
exceptions. Exceptions cannot be forcibly imposed on him. This gives an
opportunity to come into practice to individuals who are eager for resources of
all kinds, less, more - all kinds of power. Then gradually the practitioner
increases his strength and moves forward. He reduces the exceptions. Doing so,
he can become a **Shramanopasaka** in the role of a **Shramanabhoot-
Shramanasadrish**. This is a profound scientific fact. To move forward, to
progress, as it is achieved from an uncommitted, primordial mind, it cannot be
achieved from a committed and suppressed mind. It is no exaggeration to say that
this method of Jainism in household practice is undoubtedly unparalleled. By
**atichaar-varjan** etc., its psychology becomes deeper, due to which the life
of the vow-taker gets a universal sacred form. **Upasakadasha**: Inspiring
subject matter . **Upasakadasha** is the only sutra in the **Angasutras** which
discusses the entire life of a **Shramanopasaka** or **Shravaka**. It depicts
the lives of ten **Shramanopasakas** - Anand, Kamadeva, Chulnipita, Suradeva,
Chullashatak, Kundakaul, Sakadalputra, Mahashatak, Nandinipita and Salihipita -
who were contemporaries of Lord Mahavira. These were the main **Shravakas** of
Lord Mahavira. Prosperous life: Both worldly and otherworldly The first study of
**Upasakadasha** gives an account of the devotional life of a **Shravaka** named
Anand. It is clear from the descriptions given in various contexts that the
economic condition of India was very good at that time. The figures given for
the wealth of Anand and other **Shravakas** mentioned in the present sutra seem
to be fabricated, but the reality is not so. In fact, due to vast land, large
livestock, and relatively small population, there were also some such special
wealthy people. The value of money was often measured in gold coins. It seems
that the minds of the wealthy people of that time did not want to lose their
peace of mind in the desire to keep increasing their wealth. They did not have
faith in such growth, which would one day destroy everything. Therefore, the
capital of the ten **Shramanopasakas** mentioned here was kept separate as a
**reserve fund**. Daily for the use of the family at home [२२]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAlana meM udyata rahatA hai| vaha mahAn kArya hai| isIlie usake vrata
mahAvrata kI saMjJA pA lete haiN| sImA aura apavAdoM ke sAtha jahA~ sAdhaka
vrata kA pAlana karatA hai, vahA~ usa dvArA vrata kA pAlana-anusaraNa nyUna yA
choTA hai, usa kAraNa vrata ke sAtha aNu jur3a jAtA hai| eka bahuta bar3I
vizeSatA jainadharma kI yaha hai ki zrAvakoM ke vratoM meM apavAdoM kA koI
itthaMbhUta eka rUpa nahIM hai| eka hI ahiMsAvrata aneka ArAdhakoM dvArA aneka
prakAra ke apavAdoM ke sAtha svIkAra kiyA jA sakatA haiM  /  vibhinna vyaktiyoM
kI kSamatAeM, sAmarthya vividha prakAra kA hotA hai| utsAha, Atmabala, parAkrama
eka jaisA nahIM hotaa| anaginata vyaktiyoM meM vaha apane-apane kSayopazama ke
anurUpa anaginata prakAra kA ho sakatA hai| ataeva apavAda svIkAra karane meM
vyakti kA apanA svAtantrya hai| usa para apavAda balAt Aropita nahIM kiye jA
skte| isase kama, adhika-sabhI taraha kI zakti vAle sAdhanotsuka vyaktiyoM ko
sAdhanA meM Ane kA avasara mila jAtA hai| phira dhIre-dhIre sAdhaka apanI zakti
ko bar3hAtA huA Age bar3hatA jAtA hai| apavAdoM ko kama karatA jAtA hai| vaisA
karate-karate vaha zramaNopAsaka kI bhUmikA meM zramaNabhUta-zramaNasadRza taka
bana sakatA hai| yaha gaharA vaijJAnika tathya hai| Age baDhanA. pragati karanA
jaisA apratibaddha Adi nindra mAnasa se sadhatA haiM. vaisA pratibaddha aura
nigRhIta mAnasa se nahIM sadha sktaa| yaha atizayokti nahIM hai ki gRhI sAdhanA
meM jaina dharma kI yaha paddhati niHsandeha bejor3a hai| aticAra-varjana Adi
dvArA usakI manovaijJAnikatA aura gaharI ho jAtI hai, jisase vratI jIvana kA eka
sArvajanIna pavitra rUpa nikhAra pAtA hai| upAsakadazA : preraka viSayavastu .
upAsakadazA aMgasUtroM meM ekamAtra aisA sUtra hai, jisameM sampUrNatA
zramaNopAsaka yA zrAvakajIvana kI carcA hai  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
samasAmayika Ananda, kAmadeva, culanIpitA, surAdeva, cullazataka, kuMDakaulika,
sakaDAlaputra, mahAzataka, nandinIpitA tathA zAlihIpitA-ina dasa zramaNopAsakoM
ke jIvana kA isameM citraNa hai| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke ye pramukha zrAvaka the|
samRddha jIvanaH aihika bhI : pAralaukika bhI upAsakadazA ke pahale adhyayana
meM Ananda nAmaka zrAvaka ke upAsanAmaya jIvana kA lekhAjokhA hai| vividha
prasaMgoM meM Aye varNana se spaSTa hai ki taba bhArata kI Arthika sthiti bahuta
acchI thii| Ananda tathA prastuta sUtra meM varNita anya zrAvakoM ke vaibhava ke
jo A~kar3e diye haiM, ve sahasA kapolakalpitase lagate haiM para vastusthiti
vaisI nahIM hai| vAstava meM vizAlabhUmi, vRhat pazudhana, apekSAkRta kama
janasaMkhyA Adi ke kAraNa 'kucha eka' vaise viziSTa dhanI bhI hote the| dhana kI
mUlyavatA aksara svarNamudrAoM meM AMkI jAtI thii| aisA lagatA hai, usa samaya
ke samRddhizAlI janoM kA mAnasa uttarottara sampatti bar3hAte rahane kI lAlasA
meM apanI nizcintatA khonA nahIM cAhatA thaa| aisI vRddhi meM unakA vizvAsa
nahIM thA, jo kabhI saba kucha hI vilupta kara de| isalie yahA~ varNita dasoM
zramaNopAsakoM ke surakSita nidhi (Reserve fund) ke rUpa meM unakI pUMjI kA
tRtIyAMza pRthak rakhA rahatA thaa| ghara ke parivAra ke upayoga hetu dainandina
[22]

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. They would also invest a third of their wealth in goods, resources, and
materials. There was also a sense of utility, convenience, and grandeur or
prestige. They were aware of the three movements of giving, enjoying, and
destroying wealth, so they were also interested in proper enjoyment. A third of
their wealth was invested in business. Even if there was a loss in business, or
even if all the capital was lost, their well-established and well-established
system would not break down. Therefore, there was a sense of peace and
tranquility in their lives. Only then was it possible for them to receive the
benefit of the vision and presence of the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira and turn
their lives from enjoyment to renunciation. When a person, inspired by self-
motivation, accepts a life of renunciation, he begins to find joy in
renunciation, just as he found joy in enjoyment, and the special thing is that
this joy is pure, healthy, and beneficial. It is surprising to see the joy and
the very prosperous and comfortable life of other Shraman Upasakas on the one
hand, and on the other hand, when they move forward on the path of renunciation,
they become so engrossed in it that enjoyment itself fades away. The body
becomes a skeleton, but they remain supremely satisfied and joyful. This is
never possible without the experience of the taste of renunciation. An amazing
event: The dignity of truth One event in the life of Anand is very important. As
a result of penance and practice, Anand becomes an Avadhijnani by the
destruction of the Avadhijnana Avarana. In a conversation with Gautam, the chief
Antavasis of Bhagwan Mahavira, about the limits of Avadhijnana, a controversial
issue arises. Bhagwan Mahavira explains Anand's point of view correctly. Gautam
goes to Anand and apologizes. This is a very inspiring incident. Anand was a
householder practitioner. Gautam was the most important of the eleven Ganadharas
of Bhagwan Mahavira. But, how much righteousness and lack of ego there was in
them. They happily apologize to their follower, their worshiper. This is how
high the ideal of Jainism is, the individual is great. Everyone should be
committed to truth. This results in and emerges, a householder can also advance
very far on the path of practice because the basis of the excellence of practice
is the purity of self-transformations. The more one practices, the higher one
can ascend. The test of practice Shreyansin Bahuvighanani - There are many
obstacles in auspicious works, we often see and read this. Out of the ten
Upasakas of the present Agam, six faced upsargas or obstacles in their lives.
Four of them were ultimately disturbed by the obstacles, but they immediately
recovered. Two remained completely unshakable and steadfast. Upsargas are of
both favorable-unfavorable or alluring-destructive types. Another study is the
case of Shraman Upasak Kamdev, who was engaged in practice in the Poshadshala. A
god, in order to distract him, tore his body into pieces. He killed his sons
brutally. [23]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 sAmAna, sAdhana, sAmagrI Adi meM bhI apanI sampatti kA tRtIyAMza ve lagAye
rahate the  /  vahA~ upayogitA, suvidhA tathA zAna yA pratiSThA kA bhAva bhI thA
/  dAna, bhoga aura nAza-dhana kI ina tInoM gatiyoM se ve abhijJa the, isalie
samucita bhoga meM bhI unakI rUci thI  /  tRtIyAMza vyApAra meM lagA rahatA thA
/  vyApAra meM kadAcit hAni bhI ho jAe, sArI pUMjI calI jAe to bhI unakA
prazasta evaM pratiSThApanna vyavasthAkrama TUTatA nahIM thaa| isalie unake
jIvana meM eka nizcintatA aura anAkulatA kA bhAva thA  /  tabhI yaha sambhava ho
sakA ki unhoMne zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke darzana aura sAnnidhya kA lAbha
prApta kara apanA jIvana bhoga se tyAga kI ora mor3a diyA  /  AtmapreraNA se
anuprANita hokara vyakti jaba tyAgamaya jIvana svIkAra karatA hai to use jaise
bhoga meM Ananda AtA thA, tyAga meM Ananda Ane lagatA hai aura vizeSatA yaha hai
ki yaha Ananda pavitra, svastha evaM zreyaskara hotA hai  /  sahasA Azcarya hotA
hai, Ananda tathA dUsare zramaNopAsaka ke atyanta samRti aura sukhasuvidhAmaya
jIvana ko eka ora dekhate haiM, dUsarI ora yaha dekhate haiM, jaba ve tyAga ke
patha para Age bar3hate haiM to udhara itane tanmaya ho jAte hai ki bhoga svayaM
chUTate jAte haiM  /  deha asthi-kaMkAla bana jAtA hai, para ve parama parituSTa
aura prahRSTa rahate haiM  /  tyAga ke rasa kI anubhUti ke binA yaha kabhI
sambhava nahIM ho pAtA  /  eka adbhuta ghaTanA : satya kI garimA Ananda ke
jIvana kI eka ghaTanA bahuta hI mahattvapUrNa hai  /  tapazcaraNa evaM sAdhanA
ke phalasvarUpa avadhijJAnAvaraNa ke kSayopazama se Annada avadhijJAnI ho jAtA
hai  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pramukha antevAsI gautama se avadhijJAna kI sImA ke
sambandha meM hue vArtAlApa meM eka vivAdAspada prasaMga bana jAtA hai  /
bhagavAn mahAvIra Ananda ke mantavya ko ThIka batalAte haiN| gautama Ananda ke
pAsa Akara kSamA-yAcanA karate haiN| bar3A udbodhaka prasaMga yaha hai  /
Ananda eka gRhI sAdhaka thA  /  gautama bhagavAn mahAvIra ke gyAraha gaNadharoM
meM sabase mukhya the| para, kitanI RjutA aura ahaMkAra-zUnyatA kA bhAva unameM
thA  /  ve prasannatApUrvaka apane anuyAyI- apane upAsaka se kSamA mAMgate haiN|
jainadarzana kA kitanA U~cA Adarza yaha hai, vyakti bar3A hai| satya ke prati
hara kisI ko abhinata honA hI caahie| isase phalita aura nikalatA hai, sAdhanA
ke mArga meM eka gRhI bhI bahuta Age bar3ha sakatA hai kyoMki sAdhanA ke utkarSa
kA AdhAra AtmapariNAmoM kI vizuddhatA hai  /  use jo jitanA sAdha le, vaha utanA
hI Urdhvagamana kara sakatA 1 | sAdhanA kI kasauTI zreyAMsi bahuvighnAni-
zreyaskara kAryoM meM aneka vighna Ate hI hai, aksara yaha dekhate haiM,
par3hate haiN| prastuta Agama ke dasa upAsakoM meM se chaha ke jIvana meM
upasarga yA vighna aaye| unameM cAra antataH vighnoM se vicalita hue para
tatkAla samhala gaye  /  do sarvathA avicala aura aDola rahe  /  upasarga
anukUla-pratikUla yA mohaka - dhvaMsaka - donoM prakAra ke hI hote haiM  /
dUsare adhyayana kA prasaMga hai, zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva poSadhazAlA meM
sAdhanArata thaa| eka deva ne use vicalita karane ke lie usake zarIra ke
Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara ddaale| usake putroM kI nRzaMsa hatyA kara [23]

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
On the branch, that steadfast devotee did not waver even a single sesame seed.
Although it was the reaction-inducing illusion of the god, it appeared real to
Kamadeva. A human can remain steadfast in any task until the fear of death comes
before him. But, Kamadeva did not care for bodily destruction. Then, the god
touched the most tender part of his heart. A father loves letters very much.
Those who do not have a son, they yearn for him. In front of Kamadeva, his three
sons were murdered before his very eyes, but that strong-willed ascetic remained
unmoved. That is why Lord Mahavira presented him as an example before the sadhus
and sadhvis. Whoever remains steadfast in religion despite terrible obstacles,
he is certainly an ideal for others.  The third study is about Chulnipita.
Chulnipita also faced such an obstacle. He remained unmoved by the murder of his
sons, but when the god threatened to kill his revered mother, he was shaken. He
could not overcome his affection for his mother. He was in the high practice of
spirituality, where such affection should not be an obstacle, but it became one.
Chulnipita atoned for his mistake and became pure.  The fourth study is about
the story of the Shramanopasaka Suradeva. An obstacle came in his practice. When
the god who caused the misfortune saw him unaffected by the murder of his sons,
he threatened to inflict sixteen terrible diseases on his body. A human can
accept death, but a body ravaged by extremely terrible diseases becomes more
terrifying for him than death. The same happened with Suradeva. His vow was
broken. He introspected.  In the fifth study, Chullashatak was broken from his
vow by the threat of the destruction of his wealth. For some people, wealth is
dearer than sons, mother, life - all of them. They can bear everything else, but
the fear of the destruction of wealth makes them very anxious and restless.
Chullashatak remained silent even after the murder of his three sons, but he
trembled at the thought of his wealth being scattered in the streets of Alambika
[city].  The seventh study is about the story of Sakdalputra. He too remained
unmoved until the murder of his sons, but when the threat of killing his wife
Agni Mitra, who was not only the mistress of the house but also a unique
collaborator in his religious life, came to the fore, he lost his courage.  One
thing is particularly important here. If a person, due to some weakness in his
mind, is displaced once and then introspects, atones, becomes pure and becomes
dedicated to his goal, then that mistake does not happen again. It is not
impossible to make a mistake, but to understand it after making a mistake, to
feel remorse for it, and then to move forward on one's accepted path of practice
- this is a sign of great excellence. The stories of the mistakes of the six
devotees are of this kind. Due to the remaining affection, attachment, etc. in
them, there was a deviation, but it did not last.  In the eighth study, a
strange favorable obstacle comes before the Shramanopasaka Mahashatak. His main
wife Revati, who was deeply addicted to alcohol, meat, gluttony and lust, was in
the food hall and was eating food and [24]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 DAlI para vaha dRr3hacetA upAsaka tilamAtra bhI vicalita nahIM huaa| yadyapi
yaha deva kI vikriyAjanya mAyA thI para kAmadeva ko to yathArtha bhAsita ho rahI
thii| manuSya kisI bhI kArya meM taba taka sudRDha raha sakatA hai, jaba taka
usake sAmane mauta kA bhaya na aae| para, kAmadeva ne daihika vidhvaMsa kI
paravAha nahIM kii| taba deva ne usake hRdaya ke komalatama aMza kA saMsparza
kiyaa| pitA ko patroM se bahuta pyAra hotA hai| jinake putra nahIM hotA, ve
usake lie tar3aphate rahate haiM  /  kAmadeva ke sAmane usake dekhate-dekhate
tInoM putroM kI hatyA kara dI gaI para vaha AtmabalI sAdhaka niSprakampa rhaa|
tabhI to bhagavAn mahAvIra ne sAdhusAdhviyoM ke samakSa eka udAharaNa ke rUpa
meM use prastuta kiyaa| jo bhISaNa vighna-bAdhAoM ke bAvajUda dharma meM sudRDha
banA rahatA hai, vaha nizcaya hI auroM ke lie Adarza hai| tIsare adhyayana meM
culanIpitA kA prasaMga hai| culanIpitA ko bhI aise hI vighna kA sAmanA karanA
pdd'aa| putroM kI hatyA se to vaha avicala rahA para deva ne jaba usakI pUjanIyA
mA~ kI hatyA kI dhamakI dI to vaha vicalita ho gyaa| mA~ ke prati rahI apanI
mamatA vaha jIta nahIM skaa| vaha to adhyAtma kI U~cI sAdhanA meM thA, jahA~
aisI mamatA bAdhA nahIM bananI cAhie, para bnii| culanIpitA bhUla kA prAyazcitta
kara zuddha huaa| cauthe adhyayana meM zramaNopAsaka surAdeva kA kathAnaka hai|
unakI sAdhanA meM bhI vighna aayaa| putroM kI hatyA se upasargakArI deva ne jaba
use aprabhAvita dekhA to usane zarIra meM bhISaNa solaha roga utpanna kara dene
kI dhamakI dii| manuSya mauta ko svIkAra kara sakatA hai, para atyanta bhayAnaka
rogoM se jarjara deha usake lie mauta se kahIM adhika bhayAvaha bana jAtI hai,
surAdeva ke sAtha bhI yahI ghaTita huaa| usakA vrata bhagna ho gyaa| usane Atma-
pariSkAra kiyaa| pAMcave adhyayana meM cullazataka sampatti-nAza kI dhamakI se
vrata-cyuta huaa| kucha logoM ke lie dhana putra, mAtA, prANa-ina sabase pyArA
hotA hai| ve aura saba saha lete haiM para dhana ke vinAza kI AzaMkA unheM
atyanta Atura tathA Akula banA detI hai| cullazataka tInoM putroM kI hatyA taka
cupa rahA para AlabhikA [nagarI] kI galI-galI meM usakI sampatti bikhera dene kI
bAta se vaha kAMpa gyaa| sAtaveM adhyayana meM sakaDAlaputra kA kathAnaka hai|
vaha bhI putroM kI hatyA taka to avicala rahA para usakI patnI agnimitrA jo na
kevala gRhasvAminI thI, usake dhArmika jIvana meM ananya sahayoginI bhI thI, kI
hatyA kI dhamakI jaba sAmane AI to vaha himmata chor3a baitthaa| yahA~ eka bAta
vizeSa mahattvapUrNa hai| vyakti apane mana meM rahI kisI durbalatA ke kAraNa
eka bAra sthAnacyuta hokara punaH AtmapariSkAra kara, prAyazcita kara, zuddha
hokara dhyeyaniSTha bana jAya to vaha bhUla phira nahIM rhtii| bhUla honA
asaMbhava nahIM hai para bhUla ho jAne para use samajha lenA, usake lie antara-
kheda anubhava karanA, phira apane svIkRta sAdhanA-patha para gatimAn ho jAnA-
yaha vyA uccatA kA cihna hai  /  chaoM upAsakoM ke bhUla ke prasaMga isI prakAra
ke haiM  /  jIvana meM avaziSTa rahI mamatA, Asakti Adi ke kAraNa unameM
vicalana to AyA para vaha Tika nahIM paayaa| AThaveM adhyayana meM zramaNopAsaka
mahAzataka ke sAmane eka vicitra anukUla vighna AtA hai| usakI pramukha patnI
revatI, jo ghora madya-mAMsa-lolupatA-aura kAmuka thI, poSadhazAlA meM poSadha
aura [24]

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
She wanted to distract the husband who was in meditation. On one side was the
intense, radiant sun of renunciation, on the other, the darkness of sin. The
darkness tried to engulf the light of renunciation, but it was completely
unsuccessful. It could not shake the Maha Shatak. But a small mistake made the
Maha Shatak fall from grace. Due to Revati's evil intentions, anger arose in his
mind. He had clairvoyance. Using his clairvoyance, he predicted that Revati
would die within seven days, with severe illness, pain, and suffering. It is not
desirable to explicitly state the fear of death. The speaker must be
particularly thoughtful and hesitant to speak what is true but causes fear and
terror in the minds of others. Therefore, Lord Mahavira sent his chief disciple,
Gautam, to warn the Maha Shatak. The Maha Shatak regained his composure.  The
hero of the sixth study, Kundakaulik, is depicted as a knowledgeable devotee. A
god is rendered speechless by destiny in a conversation with Kundakaulik. Lord
Mahavira presents the wise Kundakaulik as an example to the monks and nuns.
Kundakaulik's life is an inspiring example for devotees to advance in the field
of knowledge.  **The Inclination Towards Reality**  The heroes of the ten
studies of the devotee stage had very comfortable worldly lives. They had
abundant and sufficient access to all material comforts. If this were the only
attainable life, there would be nothing left for them to do. Why would they
reduce their acquired pleasures to the point of complete annihilation? But they
were wise. They knew the impermanence of material pleasures. Therefore, the true
attainable of life, which, without attaining it, everything else attained is
nothing more than irony, there is an unspoken yearning in man to attain it,
which awakens instantly in all of them as soon as they receive the presence of
Lord Mahavira. When the awakened yearning moved forward on the path of
implementation, it continued to grow, and a time came in the lives of those
seekers when they seemed to have completely forgotten bodily pleasures. They
lost themselves so much in renunciation, in the learning of the self, that they
did not even care about their own bodies, which were becoming increasingly thin
and weak. This was the pleasant culmination of the renunciation of enjoyment. It
is generally very difficult to find such a state in life. A human being raised
in an environment of comfort and convenience panics at the mere thought of
giving them up. But that is the talk of weak-minded men. The sage of the
Upanishads said, "Nayamatma balahinen labhyah," which is very poignant. A weak-
minded person, one without inner strength, cannot attain the soul. But a strong-
minded, internally powerful man can easily do all that makes the weak tremble.
**Freedom from Social Responsibility: Leisure**  A man spends his entire life
engaged in fulfilling his family, social, and worldly responsibilities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dhyAna meM sthita pati ko vicalita karanA cAhatI hai| eka ora tyAga kA tIvra
jyAtirmaya sUrya thA, dUsarI ora pApa kI kAlimAmayI tmistraa| tyAga kI jyoti ko
grasane ke lie kAlimA khUba jhapaTI para vaha sarvathA akRtakArya rhii| revatI
mahAzataka ko nahIM DigA skii| para, eka choTI-sI bhUla mahAzataka se taba bnii|
revatI kI duzceSTaoM se usake mana meM krodha kA bhAva paidA huaa| use
avadhijJAna prApta thaa| revatI kI sAta dina ke bhItara bhISaNa roga, pIDA evaM
vedanA ke sAtha hone vAlI mRtyu kI bhaviSyavANI usane apanI avadhijJAna ke
sahAre kara dii| mRtyu ke bhaya se revatI atyanta vyakakta kiyA jAe, yaha
vAMchanIya nahIM hai| jo satya dusaroM ke mana meM bhaya aura AtaMka utpanna
kara de, vaktA ko vaha bolane meM vizeSa vicAra tathA saMkoca karanA hotA hai|
isalie bhagavAn mahAvIra ne apane pramukha antevAsI gautama ko bhejakara
mahAzataka ko sAvadhAna kiyaa| mahAzataka punaH Atmastha huaa| _ chaThe
adhyayana kA caritanAyaka kuNDakaulika eka tattvaniSNAta zrAvaka ke rUpa meM
citrita kiyA gayA hai| eka deva aura kuNDakaulika ke bIca niyativAda se deva
nirUttara ho jAtA hai| bhagavAn mahAvIra vijJa kuNDakaulika kA nAma zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM ke samakSa eka udAharaNa ke rUpa meM upasthita karate haiN|
kuNDakaulika kA jIvana zrAvaka-zrAvikAoM ke lie tattvajJAna ke kSetra meM Age
bar3hane hetu eka preraNAspada udAharaNa hai| yathArtha kI ora rUjhAna
upAsakadazA ke dasoM adhyayanoM ke caritanAyakoM kA laukika jIvana atyanta
sukhamaya thaa| unheM sabhI bhautika sukha-suvidhAe~ pracura aura paryApta rUpa
se prApta thii| yadi yahI jIvana kA prApya hotA to unake lie aura kucha karaNIya
raha hI nahIM jaataa| kyoM ve apane prApta sukhoM ko ghaTAte-ghaTAte bilakula
miTA dete? para ve vivekazIla the| bhautika sukhoM kI nazvaratA ko jAnate the|
ata: jIvana kA yathArtha prApya. jise pAe binA aura saba kacha pA lene
antarviDambanA ke atirikta aura kucha hote nahIM, ko prApta karane kI mAnava meM
to eka avyakta utkaNThA hotI hai, vaha una sabameM tatkSaNa jAga uThatI hai,
jyoM hI unheM bhagavAn mahAvIra kA sAnnidhya prApta hotA hai| jAgarita utkaNThA
jaba kriyAnviti ke mArga para Age bar3hI to uttarottara bar3hatI hI gaIaura una
sAdhakoM ke jIvana meM eka aisA samaya AyA, jaba ve dehasukha ko mAno sarvathA
bhUla gye| tyAga meM, AtmasvarUpa ke adhigama meM apane Apako unhoMne itanA kho
diyA ki atyanta kRza aura kSINa hote jAte apane zarIra kI bhI unheM cintA nahIM
rhii| bhoga kA tyAga meM yaha sukhada paryavasAna thaa| sAdhAraNatayA jIvana meM
aisA sadha pAnA bahuta kaThina lagatA hai| sukha-suvidhA aura anukUlatA ke
vAtAvaraNa meM palA mAnava unheM chor3ane kI bAta sunate hI ghabarA uThatA hai|
para, vaha durbalacetA purUSoM kI bAta hai| upaniSad ke RSi ne 'nAyamAtmA
balahInena labhyaH' yaha jo kahA hai, bar3A mArmika hai| balahIna-
antarbalarahita vyakti AtmA ko upalabdha nahIM kara sktaa| para,
balazIlaantaHparAkramazAlI purUSa vaha saba sahaja hI kara DAlatA hai, jisase
durbala jana kA~pa uThate haiN| sAmAjika dAyitva se mukti : avakAza manuSya
jIvana bhara apane pArivArika, sAmAjika tathA laukika dAyitvoM ke nirvAha meM hI
lagA [25]

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is not accepted in Indian thought that a person should spend the last part of
their life in contemplation, meditation, and practice of the soul when they are
capable of fulfilling their duties to their family, society, and home. In Vedic
Dharma, there are four stages of life: Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vanaprastha, and
Sannyasa. Brahmacharya is the time for studying and acquiring skills. Grihastha
is the time for fulfilling worldly responsibilities. Vanaprastha is the time
between Grihastha and Sannyasa, where a person gradually detaches themselves
from worldly attachments and strives to reach Sannyasa. The Vedic scripture
says, "One should repay the three debts and then dedicate their mind to
liberation." This means that after fulfilling the debt to the Rishis
(Brahmacharya), the debt to the ancestors (Grihastha), and the debt to the gods
(Vanaprastha), a person should dedicate their life to liberation. This means
completely detaching oneself from worldly desires and dedicating one's life to
the pursuit of liberation.  While Jainism does not have such an Ashrama system,
it does have a well-organized path for Shravakas to progress towards liberation.
Shravaka-Pratimas are one form of this, where a householder gradually progresses
towards liberation, forbearance, and a restrained lifestyle.  The ten Shravakas
of Lord Mahavira were wise. They did not just listen to what they received from
the Lord, as evidenced by their immediate acceptance of the Shravaka vows. They
also held the intention to dedicate themselves to Dharma, free from worldly
responsibilities, relationships, and attachments, when the time was right. The
account of Ananda mentions that after receiving the vows from Lord Mahavira, he
progressed towards liberation for fourteen years. In the fifteenth year, one
night, he thought that his sons were now capable and he should take a break from
his family and social responsibilities.  People in those times were very
determined. They did not delay in implementing their good thoughts. Ananda did
not delay either. The next day, he hosted a feast for his family, friends, and
citizens, informed them of his decision, and in their presence, entrusted his
eldest son with his family and social responsibilities. Hosting a feast for many
people was not just a show of display. There was a psychological reason behind
it. Entrusting responsibilities in the presence of respected and influential
members of society held significance. The son accepting the responsibility in
their presence was also important. This way, the son would not go back on his
word. The respect for those people, the reverence for them, and the pleasant
relationships with them would continue to inspire him to fulfill his
responsibilities.  Just as Ananda did, the other nine Shramanopasakas did the
same. They also appointed their sons to their respective positions in the
management of social and family affairs in the presence of many influential
people, after a collective feast. Their thoughts and actions were very
beautiful. From this perspective, ancient India was truly excellent and
desirable. The great poet Kalidasa, in his famous epic Raghuvansha, describes
the Suryavanshi kings, the ancestors of Lord Rama, writing: [26]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rahe, bhAratIya cintanadhArA meM yaha svIkRta nahIM hai  /  vahA~ yaha
vAJchanIya hai ki jaba putra ghara kA, parivAra kA, sAmAjika sambandhoM kA
dAyitva nibhAne yogya ho jAe~, vyakti apane jIvana kA antima bhAga AtmA ke
cintana, manana, anuzIlana Adi meM lagAe  /  vaidikadharma meM isake lie
brahmacarya, gRhastha, vAnaprastha, saMnyAsa-yoM cAra AzramoM kA krama  /
brahmacaryAzrama vidyAdhyayana aura yogyatA - saMpAdana kA kAla hai  /
gRhasthAzrama sAMsArika uttaradAyitva - nirvAha kA samaya hai  /
vAnaprasthAzrama gRhastha aura saMnyAsa ke bIca kA kAla hai, jahA~ vyakti
laukika Asakti se kramazaH dUra hotA huA sanyAsa ke nikaTa pahu~cane kA prayAsa
karatA hai|'Rnnaani trINyapAkRtya mano mokSe nivezayet' aisA vaidikadharma meM
jo zAstra - vacana hai, usakA Azaya brahmacaryAzrama dvArA RSiRNa dvArA pitRRNa
tathA vAnaprasthAzrama dvArA devaRNa apAkRta kara cukAkara manuSya apanA mana
mokSa meM lagAe  /  arthAt sAMsArika vAJchAoM se sarvathA pRthak hokara apanA
jIvana mokSa kI ArAdhanA meM lagA de| jainadharma meM aisI Azrama vyavasthA to
nahIM hai para zrAvaka-jIvana meM kramazaH mokSa kI ora Age baDhane kA
suvyavasthita mArga hai| zrAvaka - pratimAe~ isakA eka rUpa hai, jahA~ gRhI
sAdhaka uttarottara mokSonmukhatA, titikSA aura saMyata jIvana-caryA meM gatimAn
rahatA hai  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra ke ye dasoM zrAvaka vivekazIla the  /  bhagavAn
se unhoMne jo pAyA, use sunane taka hI sImita nahIM rakhA, jo una saba dvArA
tatkAla zrAvaka - vrata svIkAra kara lene se prakaTa hai| unhoMne mana hI mana
yaha bhAva bhI saMjoe rakhA ki yathAsamaya laukika dAyitvoM, sambandhoM aura
AsaktiyoM se mukta hokara ve adhikAMzataH dharma kI ArAdhanA meM apane ko jor3a
deM  /  Ananda ke varNana meM ullekha hai ki bhagavAn mahAvIra se vrata grahaNa
kara vaha 14 varSa taka usa ora uttarottara pragati karatA gayA  /  15 veM varSa
meM eka rAta usake mana meM vicAra AyA ki aba usake putra yogya ho gaye haiM  /
aba use pArivArika aura sAmAjika dAyitvoM se avakAza le lenA caahie| usa samaya
ke loga bar3e dRDhanizcayI the  /  sad vicAra ko kriyAnvita karane meM ve
vilamba nahIM karate the| Ananda ne bhI vilamba nahI kiyA dUsare dina usane
apane pArivArikoM, mitroM tathA nAgarikoM ko dAvata dI, apane vicAra se saba ko
avagata karAyA aura una saba ke sAkSya meM apane bar3e putra ko pArivArika evaM
sAmAjika dAyitva sauNpaa| bahuta se logoM ko dAvata dene meM pradarzana kI bAta
nahI thI  /  usake pIche eka manovaijJAnika tathya hai| samAja ke mAnya tathA
sambhrAnta vyaktiyoM ke bIca uttaradAyitva sauMpane kA eka mahattva thA  /  una
sabakI upasthiti meM putra dvArA dAyitva svIkAra karanA bhI mahattvapUrNa thA  /
yoM vidhivat dAyitva svIkAra karane vAlA usase mukaratA nhiiN| bahuta logoM kA
lihAja, unake prati rahI zraddhA, unake sAtha ke sukhada sambandha use dAyitva -
nirvAha kI preraNA dete rahate haiM  /  jaisA Ananda ne kiyA, vaisA hI anya nau
zramaNopAsakoM ne kiyA  /  arthAt unhoMne bhI sAmuhika bhoja ke sAtha aneka
sambhrAnta janoM kI upasthiti meM apane-apane putroM ko sAmAjika va pArivArika
kAryoM ke saMvahana meM apane-apane sthAna para niyukta kiyaa| bahuta sundara
cintana tathA tadanurUpa AcaraNa unakA thaa| isa dRSTi se bhArata kA prAcIna
kAla bahuta hI uttama aura spRhaNIya thaa| mahAkavi kAlidAsa ne apane
suprasiddha mahAkAvya raghuvaMza meM bhagavAn rAma ke pUrvaja sUryavaMzI rAjAoM
kA varNana karate hue likhA hai- [26]

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"The Sun Dynasty king studied in his childhood, enjoyed worldly pleasures in his
youth, embraced the path of monasticism and liberation in old age, and finally
relinquished his body through yoga or samadhi. Wisdom demands that a person
should not die like an animal or an ordinary person. He should die through yoga
or samadhi. He is not an animal, but a thoughtful human being. These ten
devotees did the same. The death of these ten, samadhi-death, was a sacred and
excellent death. There, death does not become sorrow, but a festival.
Relinquishing the body through samadhi is definitely a death-festival. But, only
those who are strong in self, whose life turns from potential to nature, are
eligible for it. Social situation The ten Shraman Upasakas had an abundance of
cattle. This reveals that cattle rearing was quite prevalent in India in those
days. One who keeps so many cows must also have agricultural land in the same
proportion. The agricultural land of Ananda is said to be 500 ploughs in
quantity. The cow was a beast of use for milk, curd and ghee, but its calves
were used as oxen for farming, carrying goods and pulling vehicles like
chariots. In the life of the people of that time, the cow and the ox had a great
importance. In those days, people's lives were very organized. Every task had
its own legal order and system. When the occasion arises for Shivananda etc. to
go to see Lord Mahavira, there is mention of a religious superior vehicle, which
is pulled by oxen. It was a special chariot, which was used for riding for
religious purposes. The quantity of food, drink, clothing, enjoyment,
consumption etc. that Ananda did while accepting the Shravak-vrat throws light
on the living conditions of that time. The quantity of abhyanga-vidhi mentions
shatapaka and sahasrapaka oils. This reveals that Ayurveda was quite developed
then. Many types of beneficial, valuable oils were prepared from medicines.
Food, living conditions etc. were very refined. Ananda quantifies green licorice
for datun; milky gooseberry for washing the head, hair etc. and quantifies flour
prepared by mixing fragrant substances with wheat flour etc. in ubtans. Special
people also applied sandalwood, saffron etc. on their bodies. People also had a
taste for wearing ornaments. Big people wore less in number but more valuable
ornaments. There was a special custom of wearing rings among men. Ananda had
quantified ornaments in the form of his named ring. Even the oxen that pulled
the chariot were adorned with gold and silver ornaments by the big people.  1.
Those who studied in childhood, those who were desirous of objects in youth.
Those who were monastic in old age, relinquished their bodies through yoga in
the end. Raghuvansha Sarg 1 [27]"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 'sUryavaMzI rAjA bacapana meM vidyAdhyayana karate the, yauvana meM sAMsArika
sukha bhogate the, vRddhAvasthA meM munivRtti-mokSamArga kA avalambana karate
the aura anta meM yoga yA samAdhipUrvaka dehatyAga karate the| viveka kA takAjA
hai, vyakti eka pazu yA sAdhAraNa jana kI mauta kyoM mre| use yoga yA
samAdhipUrvaka maranA caahie| vaha pazu nahI ha~, mananazIla mAnava hai  /  ina
dasoM upAsakoM ne aisA hI kiyaa| ina dasoM kI mRtyu-samAdhiyama mRtyu pavitra
aura uttama mRtyu thii| vahA~ maraNa zoka nahI, mahotsava bana jAtA hai|
samAdhipUrvaka deha-tyAga nizcita hI maraNa-mahotsava hai| para, isake adhikArI
AtmabalI purUSa hI hote hai, jinakA jIvana vibhAva se svabhAva kI ora mur3a jAtA
hai| sAmAjika sthiti dasoM zramaNopAsakoM ke pAsa godhanoM kA prAcurya thaa|
isase prakaTa hai ki gopAlana kA una dinoM bhArata meM kAphI pracalana thaa|
itanI gAye rakhane vAle ke pAsa kRSibhUmi bhI usI anupAta meM honI caahie|
Ananda kI kRSibhUmi 500 hala parimANa batalAI gaI hai| gAya dUdha, dahI tathA
ghRta ke upayoga kA pazu to thA hI, usake bachaDe bailoM ke rUpa meM khetI ke,
sAmAna Dhone ke tathA ratha Adi savAriyoM ke vAhana khIMcane ke upayoga meM Ate
the| usa samaya ke jana-jIvana meM vAstava meM gAya aura baila kA bar3A mahattva
thaa| una dinoM logoM kA jIvana bar3A vyavasthita thaa| hara kArya kA apanA
vidhikrama aura vyavasthAkrama thaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke darzana hetu zivanandA
adi ke jAne kA jaba prasaMga AtA hai, vahA~ dhArmika uttama yAna kA ullekha hai,
jo bailoM dvArA khIMcA jAtA thaa| vaha eka vizeSa ratha thA, jisakI dhArmika
kAryoM hetu jAne meM savArI ke lie upayoga hotA thaa| Ananda ne zrAvaka-vrata
grahaNa karate samaya khAdya, peya paridheya, bhoga, upabhoga Adi kA jo parimANa
kiyA, usase usa samaya ke rahana-sahana para kAphI prakAza par3atA hai|
abhyaMgana-vidhi ke parimANa meM zatapAka evaM sahastrapAka tailoM kA ullekha
hai| isase yaha prakaTa hotA hai ki taba Ayarveda kAphI vikasita thaa|
auSadhiyoM se bahuta prakAra ke guNakArI, bahumUlya taila taiyAra kiye jAte the|
khAnapAna, rahana-sahana Adi bahuta parimArjita the| Ananda datauna ke lie harI
mulaiThI kA parimANa karatA hai; mastaka, keza Adi dhone ke lie dUdhiyA AMvale
kA aura ubaTanoM meM gehUM Adi ke ATe ke sAtha sugandhita padArtha milAkara
taiyAra kI gaI pIThI kA parimANa karatA hai| viziSTi loga deha para candana,
kuMkama Adi kA lepa bhI karate the| logoM meM AbhUSaNa dhAraNa karane kI bhI
rUci thii| bar3e loga saMkhyA meM kama para bahumUlya AbhUSaNa pahanate the|
purUSoM meM aMgUThI pahanane kA vizeSa rivAja thaa| Ananda ne apanI nAmAMkita
aMgUThI ke rUpa meM AbhUSaNa-parimANa kiyA thaa| ratha meM jutane vAle bailoM ko
bhI bar3e loga sone, cAMdI ke gahane 1. zaizave'bhyastavidyAnAM yauvane
viSayaiSiNAm  /  vArdhakye munivRttInAM yogenAnte tanutyajAn  //  raghuvaMza
sarga 1 [27]

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They wore ornaments. They wore silver bells around their necks. They adorned
themselves beautifully. This is revealed in the seventh study, where the
religious vehicle of Amitra is described. After meals, people also had a
tendency to consume betel nut, betel leaf, and betel leaf spices. Of the ten
Shravakas described in this text, nine had one wife each. The Mahashataka had
thirteen wives. This reveals that polygyny was also prevalent in some places at
that time. On the occasion of marriage, daughters from their paternal homes were
given movable and immovable property as gifts in prosperous families, over which
they [daughters] had rights. All the wives of the Mahashataka received such
property. Where there were many wives, there was also jealousy among co-wives,
which is evident from the character of Revati, the main wife of the Mahashataka.
She had all her co-wives murdered and seized their share of the property. Almost
every city had a garden outside where saints and sages stayed. Such gardens were
for public use by the people. The sixth and seventh studies mention the
Sahasramravan garden. It appears that such gardens also existed in those days,
where there were thousands of mango trees. This is also possible because the
regions in question have a plentiful yield of mangoes, even today. A peaceful
place is needed for meditation, contemplation, reflection, and worship.
Therefore, Shraman Upasakas used Poshadshalas for special worship. In addition,
they also kept their own peaceful and quiet places in the form of gardens for
meditation and worship. The sixth and seventh studies mention Kundakaul and
Sakdalputra going to their Ashoka gardens to perform religious practices. In the
context of the vow of joy, there is a description of 15 karmadans under the
transgressions of consumption-consumption-quantity vows, which are unrighteous
for a Shravak. There, the fifth karmadan is called "explosion-karma". This
includes digging mines, breaking stones, etc. This reveals that the mineral
business was prevalent in those days. Rich merchants may have taken contracts
for such work, and they may have arranged to have it done. The trade of ivory,
bone, leather, etc. was also prevalent then, which is expressed in the sixth
karmadan called "dental-commerce". The practice of slavery was prevalent in
India then. The tenth karmadan, "hair-commerce", is indicative of this. -
Commerce included the buying and selling of living creatures such as cows,
buffaloes, goats, sheep, camels, horses, etc., as well as the buying and selling
of slaves. Property included four-legged creatures as well as two-legged
creatures. Two-legged creatures mainly included slaves. The intention of
accepting this work as a karmadan is that a Shravak should not engage in the
evil practice of slavery. [28]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pahanAte the| cAMdI kI ghaMTiyAM gale meM bAMdhate the  /  unheM sundara rUpa
meM sajAte the| sAtaveM adhyayana meM amitrA ke dhArmika yAna kA yahA~ varNana
AyA hai, usase yaha prakaTa hotA hai  /  bhojana ke bAda supArI, pAna, pAna ke
masAle Adi sevana karane kI bhI logoM meM pravRtti thI  /  prastuta gantha meM
varNita dasa zrAvakoM meM se nau ke eka-eka patnI thI  /  mahAzataka ke teraha
pattriyAM thii| usase yaha prakaTa hotA hai ki usa samaya bahupatnIprathA kA bhI
kahIM kahIM pracalana thA  /  pitRgRha se kanyAoM kA vivAha ke avasara para
sampanna gharAnoM meM upahAra ke rUpa meM cala, acala sampatti dene kA rivAja
thA, jisa para unhI [ putriyoM ] kA adhikAra rahatA  /  mahAzataka kI sabhI
patniyoM ko vaisI sampatti prApta thI  /  jahA~ aneka patniyA~ hotI, vahA~
sautiyAM DAha bhI hotA, jo mahAzataka kI pramukha patnI revatI ke caritra se
prakaTa hai| usane apanI sabhI sautoM kI hatyA karavA DAlI aura unake hisse kI
sampatti har3apa lI  /  prAyaH pratyeka nagara ke bAhara udyAna hotA jahA~ santa
mahAtmA Thaharate  /  aise udyAna logoM ke sArvajanika upayoga ke lie hote|
chaThe aura sAtaveM adhyayana meM sahastrAmravana - udyAna kA ullekha hai| aisA
pratIta hotA hai, aise udyAna bhI una dinoM rahe hoM, jahA~ Ama ke hajAra per3a
lage hoN| yaha sambhava bhI hai kyoMki jina pradazoM kA prasaMga hai, vahA~ Ama
kI bahutAyata se paidAvAra hotI thI, Aja bhI hotI hai  /  dhyAna, cintana,
manana tathA ArAdhanA ke lie zAnta sthAna cAhie  /  ataH zramaNopAsaka vizeSa
upAsanA hetu poSadhazAlAoM kA upayoga karate  /  isake atirikta dhyAna evaM
upAsanA ke lie ve vATikAoM ke rUpa meM apane vyaktigata zAnta vAtAvaraNamaya
sthAna bhI rakhate  /  chaThe aura sAtaveM adhyayanaH meM kuNDakaulika aura
sakaDAlaputra dvArA apanI azoka vATikAoM meM jAkara dharmopAsanA karane kA
ullekha hai  /  zramaNopAsaka Ananda ke vratagrahaNa ke sandarbha meM upabhoga -
paribhoga- parimANavrata ke aticAroM ke antargata 15 karmadAnoM kA varNana hai,
jo zrAvaka ke lie anAcaraNIya haiN| vahA~ jina kAmoM kA karmAdAnoM meM pA~cavA~
sphoTana - karma hai| isameM khAneM khodanA, patthara phor3anA Adi kA samAveza
hai  /  isase prakaTa hotA hai ki khanija vyavasAya una dinoM pracalita thA  /
samRddha vyApArI aise kAryo ke Theke lete rahe hoM, unheM karavAne kI vyavasthA
karate rahe hoM  /  hAthI-dA~ta, haDDI, camar3e Adi kA vyApAra bhI taba calatA
thA, jo danta - vANijyasaMjJaka chaThe karmAdAna meM vyakta hai  /  dAsa-prathA
kA taba bhArata meM pracalana thA  /  dasavA~ karmAdAna keza-vANijya isakA
sUcaka hai| - vANijya meM gAya, bhaiMsa, bakarI, bher3a, U~Ta, ghor3e Adi jIvita
prANiyoM kI kharIda-bikrI ke sAthasAtha dAsa-dAsiyoM kI kharIda-bikI kA dhandhA
bhI zAmila thA  /  sampatti meM catuSpada prANiyoM ke sAthasAtha dvipada
prANiyoM kI bhI ginatI hotI thI  /  dvipadoM meM mukhyataH dAsa-dAsI Ate the|
isa kAma ko karmAdAna ke rUpa meM svIkAra karane kA yaha Azaya hai ki eka
zrAvaka dAsa prathA ke kutsita kAma se [28]

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Do not buy or sell humans." This also implies that the Jain tradition was
against slavery.  The above description makes it clear that the Jain Agamas are
not only necessary to read for the knowledge of Jain principles, conduct,
rituals, ethics, etc., but also their study is necessary and useful from the
perspective of a comprehensive study of Indian society from two and a half
thousand years ago. In fact, the Prakrit Jain Agamas and the Pali Tripitaka are
the only such literature related to that period, which describes and discusses
all aspects of people's lives. This is not a literature in which only the
Kshatriya class or the aristocracy is praised or glorified. It depicts a
realistic picture of all the big and small classes of society, including
farmers, laborers, shepherds, merchants, masters, servants, kings, ministers,
officials, etc.  As mentioned above, the Jain Agamas are in Ardhamagadhi
Prakrit, which is heavily influenced by Maharashtri. Therefore, Dr. Hermann
Jacobi even called the language of the Jain Agamas Jain Maharashtri, but it did
not gain acceptance. In the Ardhamagadhi used in Upasakadasha, the 'y' sound of
Maharashtri is used extensively, for example, both 'Savag' and 'Savay' forms are
found in it. The language is simple, straightforward and flowing. The
description is lively. Many descriptions are very poignant and touching. For
example, in the second study, there is a description of the Dev who is a
tormentor to distract the Shraman Upasak Kamadeva. The description of the Dev's
Pisach form there presents a vivid picture of wonder, fear and disgust. There is
a mention that there were mongooses hanging in place of earrings in his ears, he
was wearing a garland of chameleons and mice, he had wrapped snakes around his
body like a shawl, his body was covered with multi-colored hair of five colors.
What a strange imagination it is. There are many more amazing adjectives there.
As is the style of the Agamas, the same thing is repeated many times. For
example, if someone heard something from someone, if he has to tell it
elsewhere, he will repeat the whole thing. This has happened in many places in
the present Agamas.  To avoid unnecessary over-extension, the Agamas use 'Jav'
and 'Vann'o' to indicate common descriptions, according to which this
description is taken from other Agamas. This seemed necessary to preserve the
Agamas by the method of memorization for centuries. Generally, the description
of the king, the best, the caravan leader, the city, the garden, the stupa, the
lake, etc. is almost the same. Therefore, a special form (Standard) of
description was adopted for them, which was generally used for all kings, best,
caravan leaders, cities, gardens, stupas, lakes, etc. The same has happened in
the present Agamas.  Publication of Agamas with Hindi translation: In India, the
original and accurate form of some Jain Agamas has been published from time to
time. [29]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bace, manuSyoM kA kraya-vikraya na kre| isase yaha bhI dhvanita hotA hai, jaina
paramparA dAsa-prathA ke virUddha thii| uparyukta varNana se spaSTa hai ki jaina
Agama na kevala jainadharma ke siddhAnta, AcAra, rIti nIti Adi ke jJAna hetu hI
par3hane Avazyaka haiM varan aba se DhAI hajAra varSa pUrva ke bhAratIya samAja
ke vyApaka adhyayana kI dRSTi se bhI unakA anuzIlana Avazyaka aura upayogI hai|
vAstava meM prAkRta jaina Agama tathA pAli tripiTaka hI usa kAla se sambaddha
aisA sAhitya hai, jisameM jana-jIvana ke sabhI aMgoM kA varNana, vivecana huaa|
yaha aisA sAhitya nahIM hai, jisameM kevala rAjanyavarga yA abhijAtyavarga kA
stavana yA guNakIrtana huA ho| isameM kisAna, majadUra, caravAhe, vyApArI,
svAmI, sevaka, rAjA, mantrI, adhikArI Adi samAja ke sabhI choTe-bar3e vargoM kA
yathArtha citraNa huA hai| bhASA, zailI jaisA Upara sUcita kiyA gayA hai, jaina
Agama arddhamAgadhI prAkRta meM haiM, jisa para mahArASTrI kA kAphI prabhAva
hai| isalie DaoN. harmana jaikobI ne to jaina AgamoM kI bhASA ko jaina
mahArASTrI kI saMjJA bhI de dI thI para use mAnyatA pApta nahIM huii|
upAsakadazA meM vyavahRta arddhamAgadhI meM mahArASTrI kI 'ya' zruti kA kAphI
prayoga dekhA jAtA hai, jaise udAharaNArtha isameM 'sAvaga' aura 'sAvaya' ye
donoM prakAra ke rUpa Aye haiN| bhASA sarala, prAJjala aura pravAhamaya hai|
varNana meM sajIvatA hai| kaI varNana to bar3e hI mArmika aura anta:sparzI haiM
/  udAharaNArtha dUsare adhyayana meM zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ko vicalita karane
ke lie upasargakArI deva kA varNana hai| deva ke pizAca-rUpa kA jo varNana vahA~
huA hai; vaha Azcarya, bhaya aura jugupsAtInoM kA sajIva citra upasthita karatA
hai| vahA~ ullekha hai, usake kAnoM meM kuNDaloM ke sthAna para nevale laTaka
rahe the, vaha giragiToM aura cUhoM kI mAlA pahane thA, usane apanI deha para
dupaTTe kI taraha sAMpoM ko lapeTa rakhA thA, usakA zarIra pA~ca raMgoM ke
bahuvidha kezoM se DhaMkA thaa| kitanI vicitra kalpanA yaha hai  /  aura bhI
vismayakara aneka vizeSaNa vahA~ haiN| jaisI ki AgamoM kI zailI hai, eka hI bAta
kaI bAra punarAvRtta hotI rahatI hai| jaise kisI ne kisI se kucha sunA, yadi use
anyatra ise kahanA ho to yaha sArI kI sArI bAta duhraayegaa| prastuta Agama meM
aneka sthAnoM para aisA huA hai| anAvazyaka ati vistAra se bacane ke lie AgamoM
meM sarvasAmAnya varNanoM ke lie 'jAva' aura 'vaNNao' dvArA saMketa kara diyA
jAtA hai, jisake anusAra anya AgamoM se yaha varNana le liyA jAtA hai|
zatAbdiyoM taka kaNThAgra-vidhi se AgamoM ko surakSita rakhane ke lie aisA
karanA Avazyaka pratIta haa| sAmAnyataH rAjA. zreSThI. sArthavAha, nagara.
udyAna. caitya. sarovara Adi kA varNana prAyaH eka jaisA hotA hai| ataH inake
lie varNana kA eka vizeSa svarUpa (Standard) mAna liyA gayA, jise sAdhAraNatayA
sabhI rAjAoM, zreSThiyoM, sArthavAhoM, nagaroM, udyAnoM, caityoM, sarovaroM Adi
ke lie upayoga meM liyA jAtA rhaa| prastuta Agama meM bhI aisA hI huA hai| hindI
anuvAda sahita AgamaprakAzana : bhArata meM katipaya jaina AgamoM kA mUla tathA
saTIka rUpa meM samaya-samaya para prakAzana hotA rahA hai| [29]

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first publication of the thirty-two Agamas with Hindi translation took place
in South Hyderabad almost six decades ago. The editing and translation were done
by the renowned Agama scholar, the venerable Muni Shri Amolakrishiji Maharaj.
Considering the time and situation then, this was certainly a significant work.
Prior to this, Hindi-speaking people did not have the opportunity to read the
Agamas. These Agamas were used by all Jain sects, monks and lay people. This was
truly a commendable act of Shruta-seva. Today, those Agamas are out of print.
The second attempt to edit, translate and publish the thirty-two Agamas was made
almost two decades later by Jain Shastracharya Pujya Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj
from Karachi. After years of hard work, it was completed in Ahmedabad. He edited
them with his own Sanskrit commentary and Hindi and Hindi-Gujarati translations.
They are also not fully available today. The work of publishing Agamas in parts
has generally been active. The first Acharya of the Vardhaman Sthanakvasi Jain
Shraman Sangh, a great scholar of Agamas, the enlightened sage Pujya Atmaramji
Maharaj, edited some Agamas with Sanskrit shadow, Hindi translation and
commentary, which proved to be very useful. Today, all those Agamas are also not
available. The Jain Shwetamber Terapanth is also working on the publication of
Agamas. Some Agamas have been published with detailed discussions, commentaries,
etc. All the efforts that have been made and are being made are commendable.
Today's need  For years, there has been a need in the Hindi world for the
publication of Agamas with Hindi translation in today's simple language and
modern style. The Hindi-speaking region of the country is very vast. To give any
literature in Hindi language means to reach it to millions of people.  Jain
Agamas are not just for scholars, they have great utility for everyone. In
today's complex age, when man needs a path to peace, they are even more useful.
For them to be useful to everyone, the publication of Agamas with original-based
emotional translations and, where necessary, simple summaries, is a pressing
need for the Hindi world today. It is a pressing need for the Jain world today.
The renowned scholar and writer of the Jain world, Panditratna, the young
Acharya of the Vardhaman Sthanakvasi Jain Shraman Sangh, Pujya Shri Madhukar
Muniji Maharaj, had this thought in his mind for a long time. This is the result
of his spiritual inspiration that the editing and translation of Agamas is
moving rapidly in Byawar [Rajasthan]. Participation  For the past few years, I
have had a respectful and cordial relationship with the venerable young Acharya
Shri Madhukar Muniji Maharaj. His pure, clear, simple personality has left an
impression on my mind. He is not only a senior scholar, but also a great
respecter of scholars and virtuous people. I consider it my good fortune that I
have his [३०]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rASTrabhASA hindI meM anuvAda ke sAtha battIsoM AgamoM kA sabase pahalA
prakAzana aba se lagabhaga chaha dazaka pUrva dakSiNa haidarAbAda meM huaa|
inakA saMpAdana tathA anuvAda labdhapratiSTha Agama-vidvAn samAdaraNIya muni zrI
amolakaRSijI mahArAja ne kiyaa| taba ke samaya aura sthiti ko dekhate hue
nizcaya hI yaha eka mahattvapUrNa kArya thaa| tabase pUrva hindI bhASI janoM ko
Agama par3hane kA avasara hI prApta nahIM thaa| ina AgamoM kA sabhI jaina
sampradAyoM muniyoM aura zrAvakoM ne upayoga kiyaa| zruta-sevA kA vAstava meM
yaha eka zlAghanIya kArya thaa| Aja ve Agama aprApya (Out of Print) haiN|
battIsoM AgamoM ke saMpAdana, anuvAda evaM prakAzana kA dUsarA prayAsa
lagabhaga, usake do dazaka bAda jaina zAstrAcArya pajya zrI ghAsIlAla jI
mahArAja dvArA karAMcI se cAla haa| varSoM ke parizrama se vaha ahamadAbAda meM
sampanna huaa| unhoMne svaracita saMskRta TIkA tathA hindI tathA hindI evaM
gujarAtI anuvAda ke sAtha sampAdana kiyaa| ve bhI Aja sampUrNa rUpa meM prApta
nahIM haiN| phuTakara rUpa meM Agama-prakAzana kArya sAmAnyataH gatizIla rhaa|
vardhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina zramaNa saMgha ke prathama AcArya Agama-bAG maya
ke mahAn adhyetA, prabuddha manISI pUjya AtmArAma jI mahArAja dvArA katipaya
AgamoM kA saMskRta-chAyA, hindI anuvAda tathA vyAkhyA ke sAtha sampAdana kiyA
gayA, jo vAstava meM bar3A upayogI siddha huaa| Aja ve saba Agama bhI prApta
nahIM haiM  /  jaina zvetAmbara terApaMtha kI ora se bhI AgamaprakAzana kA kArya
cala rahA hai| vistRta vivecanA, TippaNI Adi ke sAtha katipaya Agama prakAza meM
AyeM hai| sabhI prayAsa jo hue haiM, ho rahe haiM, abhinandanIya haiN| Aja kI
AvazyakatA hindI jAgat meM varSoM se Aja kI prAMjala bhASA tathA adhunAtana
zailI meM hindI anuvAda ke sAtha Agama prakAzana kI AvazyakatA anubhava kI jA
rahI thii| deza kA hindI-bhASI kSetra bahuta vizAla hai| hindI - bhASA meM koI
sAhitya dene kA artha hai koTi-koTi mAnavoM taka use phuNcaanaa| jaina Agama
kevala vidvadbhogya nahIM haiM, jana-jana ke lie unakI mahanIya upayogitA hai|
Aja ke samasyAsaMkula yuga meM, jaba mAnava ko zAnti kA mArga cAhie, ve aura bhI
upayogI haiN| jana-jana ke lie ve upayogI ho sakeM, isa hetu mUlagrAhI
bhAvabodhaka anuvAda aura jahA~ apekSita ho, sarala rUpa meM saMkSipta vivecana
ke sAtha AgamoM kA prakAzana hindI-jagat ke lie Aja kI anupekSaNIya AvazyakatA
hai| jaina jagat ke lie Aja kI anupekSaNIya AvazyakatA hai| jaina jagat ke
suprasiddha vidvAn evaM lekhaka, paNDitaratna, vardhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina
zramaNasaMgha ke yuvAcArya pUjya zrI madhukara munijI mahArAja ke mana meM
bahuta samaya se yaha bAta thii| unhIM kI AdhyAtmika preraNA kI yaha phala-
niSpatti hai ki byAvara [rAjasthAna] meM Agama-saMpAdana, anuvAda tvarApUrvaka
gatizIla hai| sahabhAgitva pichale kucha varSoM se zraddheya yuvAcArya zrI
madhukara munijI mahArAja se merA zraddhA evaM sauhArdapUrNa sambandha hai|
unake nizchala, nirmala, sarala vyaktitva kI mere mana para eka chApa hai| ve
variSTha vidvAn to haiM hI, sAtha hI sAtha vidvAnoM evaM guNiyoM kA bar3A Adara
karate haiN| maiM ise apanA saubhAgya mAnatA hU~ ki mujhe unakA [30]

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I have received your heartfelt grace and sattvic affection. For the past thirty
years, I have been working in the field of Indian studies (Indology) and
especially in the field of Prakrit and Jainology (Jainology) in terms of study,
research, writing, teaching, etc. This is a matter of my inner interest, not a
profession. Therefore, I felt happy. My close friend, young sadhak and literary
enthusiast, Shri Jatanrajji Mehta, a resident of Merta, who was appointed as the
General Secretary of the Agam Prakashan Samiti, also inspired me especially.
Knowing this beautiful opportunity to serve the Shruti, I showed enthusiasm. The
work of the seventh Anga Upasakadasha came to me. I took up the work of
Upasakadasha. Editing, translation, discussion The first task was text editing.
I obtained the following editions of Upasakadasha: 1. Upasakadasha Sutra -
Editor, Dr. M.A. Rudolf Hornle. Publisher - Bengal Asiatic Society Calcutta.
First Edition: 1890 AD 2. Shrimad Abhaydevacharyavihitavivaranyutam Shrimad
Upasakadasangam. Publisher - Agamoday Samiti, Mehsana, First Edition 1920 AD 3.
Upasakadasangasutram - Vritirachita - Jainshastracharya Pujya Shri Ghasilalji
Maharaj. Publisher - Shri Shwetamber Sthanakwasi Jain Sangh, Karachi. First
Edition: 1936 AD 4. Shri Upasakadasangasutra - Translator - Jain Dharmadiwakar
Acharya Shri Atmaramji Maharaj. Publisher - Acharya Shri Atmaram Jain Prakashan
Samiti, Ludhiana. First Edition: 1964 AD. 5. Upasakadasangasutram - Translation
- V. Ghisulal Pitlia. Publisher - A.B. Sadhumarg Jain Sanskriti Rakshak Sangh,
Sailana [Madhya Pradesh]. First Edition: 1977 AD. 6. Uvasgadasaao - Shrimad
Abhaydev Suri Virachit Mul Ane Teekaana Anuvaad Sahit [Lipi- Devanagari, Bhasha-
Gujarati] Translator and Publisher - Pan. Bhagwandas Harshchandra. First
Edition: VS 1992 AD, Jainanand Pustakalaya, Gopipura, Surat. 7. Angasuttani - 3.
Editor - Muni Nathmalji. Publisher - Jain Vishwa Bharati, Ladnun. First Edition:
San. 2031 AD. Upasakadasang - Translator, Editor - Dr. Jivraj Ghelabhai Doshy,
Ahmedabad [Devanagari script, Gujarati language]. 9. Upasakadasha Sutra -
Editor, Translator - Bal-Brahmachari Pan. Shri Amolakrishiji Maharaj. Publisher
Hyderabad-Secunderabad Jain Sangh, Hyderabad [South]. Virabad 2442-2446 AD. By
comparing all these copies, an attempt has been made to obtain an error-free and
authentic text by using the useful complementarity of different copies. In terms
of serial number, paragraph, punctuation marks, etc. [31]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hArdika anugraha eva sAttvika sneha prApta hai| pichale tIsa varSoM se
bhAratIya vidyA (Indology) aura vizeSataH prAkRta tathA jaina vidhA (Jainology)
ke kSetra meM adhyayana, anusandhAna, lekhana, adhyApana Adi ke sandarbha meM
kAryarata rahA huuN| yaha merI Antarika abhirUci kA viSaya hai, vyavasAya nhiiN|
ata: mujhe prasannatA kA anubhava huaa| mer3atA nivAsI mere ananya mitra yuvA
sAdhaka evaM sAhityasevI zrImAn jatanarAjajI mehatA, jo Agama prakAzana samiti
ke mahAmantrI manonIta hue, ne bhI mujhe vizeSa rUpa se prerita kiyaa| zruta kI
sevA kA sundara avasara jAna, maiMne udhara utsAha dikhaayaa| sAtaveM aMga
upAsakadazA kA kArya mere jimme aayaa| maiMne upAsakadazA kA kArya hAtha meM
liyaa| sampAdana, anuvAda, vivecana pahalA kArya pATha-sampAdana kA thaa| maiMne
upAsakadazA ke nimnAGkita saMskaraNa hastagata kiye1. upAsakadazAsUtram-
sampAdaka, DaoN0 ema0e0 rUDolpha haarnle| prakAzaka-baMgAla eziyATika sosAyaTI
klkttaa| prathama saMskaraNa : 1890 I0 2. zrImad
abhayadevAcAryavihitavivaraNayutaM zrImad upaaskdshaaNgm| prakAzaka-Agamodaya
samiti, mahesANA, prathama saMskaraNa 1920 I0 3. upAsakadazAMgasUtram-
vRtiracayitA-jainazAstrAcArya pUjya zrI ghAsIlAlajI mhaaraaj| prakAzaka-zrI
zvetAmbara sthAnakavAsI jaina saMgha, kraacii| prathama saMskaraNaH 1936 I0 4.
zrI upAsakadazAMgasUtra-anuvAdaka-jainadharmadivAkara AcArya zrI AtmArAmajI
mahArAja  /  prakAzaka-AcArya zrI AtmArAma jaina prakAzana samiti, ludhiyaanaa|
prathama saMskaraNa : 1964 I0  /  5. upAsakadazAMgasUtrama-anuvAda-vI0 ghIsUlAla
pitliyaa| prakAzaka-a0 bhA0 sAdhumArgI jaina saMskRti _rakSaka saMgha, sailAnA
[madhyapradeza]  /  prathama saMskaraNa : 1977 ii0| 6. uvAsagadasAo-zrImad
abhayadeva sUri viracita mUla ane TIkAnA anuvAda sahita [lipi-devanAgarI, bhASA-
gujarAtI] anuvAdaka ane prakAzaka-paM0 bhagavAnadAsa harSacandra  /  prathama
saMskaraNa : vi0 saM0 1992 I0, jainAnanda pustakAlaya, gopIpurA, suurt| 7.
aMgasuttANi-3.sampAdaka-muni nthmljii| prakAzaka-jaina vizva bhAratI, laaddnuuN|
prathama saMskaraNa : saM0 2031 ii0| upAsakadazAMga-anuvAdaka, sampAdaka-DaoN0
jIvarAja ghelAbhAI dozI, ahamadAbAda [devanAgarI lipi, gujarAtI bhASA]  /  9.
upAsakadazAsUtra-sampAdaka, anuvAdaka-bAla-brahmacArI paM0 zrI amolakaRSijI
mhaaraaj| prakAzakahaidArAbAda-sikaMndarAbAda jaina saMgha, haidarAbAda
[dakSiNa]  /  vIrAbda 2442-2446 I0  /  ina saba pratiyoM kA milAna kara, bhinna-
bhinna pratiyoM kI upayogI pUrakatA kA upayoga kara truTirahita evaM pramANika
pATha grahaNa karane kA prayAsa kiyA gayA hai| saMkhyAkrama, pairegrApha,
virAmacihna Adi ke rUpa meM [31]

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The division has been made with full attention to a well-organized presentation.
Prakrit was the living language of its time. In a living language, it is
possible for a single word to have multiple pronunciations due to various local
accents, such as 'nayar' and 'ṇayar' for the word 'nagar'. Both forms are found
in ancient manuscripts. Thus, all words with multiple forms have been retained
in the same form based on the authenticity of the available manuscripts.
Regarding the texts indicated by 'jav', the following order has been followed:
The text indicated by 'jav' has been given in brackets in its original form,
first from the relevant supplementary Agam. Further, wherever the 'jav'
indicating the same text appears, a footnote has been added referring to the
previous sutra where that text is quoted. In most published editions, the text
indicated by 'jav' has not been quoted in brackets etc. This may have been done
to avoid expansion. It is desirable to avoid excessive expansion, but it is also
essential that the reader be aware of the description of the particular subject
intended by 'jav'. Without presenting it, readers cannot gain complete knowledge
of the subject matter. Therefore, the text indicated by 'jav' should not be
completely ignored. However, it is certainly not desirable to give the text of
the same 'jav' in all the places where it appears. This unnecessarily increases
the bulk of the text. The text indicated by 'jav' becomes so extensive that
readers find it difficult to follow the original text while reading. The order
of the language in the Hindi translation has been kept in such a way that even
if the reader reads it independently without the original text, a similar flow
is maintained. At the beginning of each study, its essence has been given in
brief, which includes a brief description of the subject of the study. The
topics discussed in the sutras that required special explanation have been given
in the discussion. It has been ensured that the discussion is not unnecessarily
lengthy and that essential points are not missed. This is the outcome of the
labor of eight months of continuous reading, editing, translating, and
discussing the present Agam. During this time, I have continuously received
inspiring guidance from the most revered Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muniji Maharaj
and the venerable and knowledgeable sage, the learned Pandit Shobhachandji
Bharill, which has greatly increased my enthusiasm. I am grateful from the
heart. From the beginning of this work, my literary colleague, the accomplished
literary enthusiast Shri Shankarlalji Parikh, Ladnu, has been a collaborator
until the completion of the work. He has been fully supportive in preparing the
manuscripts for the press. [32]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vibhAjana, suvyavasthita upasthApana kA pUrA dhyAna rakhA gayA hai| prAkRta
apane yuga kI jIvita bhASA thii| jIvita bhASA meM vividha sthAnIya uccAraNa-
bheda se eka hI zabda ke ekAdhika uccAraNa bolacAla meM rahane saMbhAvita hai,
jaise nagara ke lie nayara, Nayara-donoM hI rUpa sambhava haiN| prAcIna pratiyoM
meM bhI donoM hI prakAra ke rUpa milate haiN| yoM jina-jina zabdoM ke ekAdhika
rUpa haiM, unako upalabdha pratiyoM kI prAmANikatA ke AdhAra para usI rUpa meM
rakhA gayA hai| 'jAva' se sUcita pAThoM ke sambandha meM aisA krama rakhA gayA
hai 'jAva' se saMketita pATha ko pahalI bAra to sambaddha pUraka Agama se lekara
yathAvat rUpa meM koSThaka meM de diyA gayA haiM, Age usI pATha kA sUcaka 'jAva'
jahA~-jahA~ AyA hai, vahA~ pAda-TippaNa meM usa pichale sUtra kA saMketa kara
diyA gayA haiM, jahA~ vaha pATha uddhRta hai| prAyaH prakAzita saMskaraNoM meM
'jAva' se sUcita pATha ko koSThaka Adi meM uddhRta karane kA krama nahIM rahA
hai| vistAra se bacane ke lie saMbhata: aisA kiyA gayA ho| adhika vistAra na ho,
yaha to vAJchita hai para yaha bhI Avazyaka hai ki 'jAva' dvArA amukha viSaya kA
jo varNana abhIpsita hai, usase pAThaka avagata hoN| use upasthita kiye binA
pAThakoM ko paThanIya viSaya kA parA jJAna nahIM ho paataa| ataH 'jAva' se
sUcita pATha kI sarvathA upekSA nahIM kI jAnI caahie| hA~, itanA avazya hai, eka
hI 'jAva' ke pATha ko jitane sthAnoM para vaha AyA ho, sarvatra denA vAJchita
nahIM hai| isase grantha kA anAvazyaka kalevara bar3ha jAtA hai| jAva' se sUcita
pATha itanA adhika ho jAtA hai ki par3hate samaya pAThakoM ko mUla pATha
svAyatta karane meM bhI kaThinAI hotI haiN| hindI anuvAda meM bhASA kA krama
aisA rakhA gayA hai, jisase pAThaka mUla pATha ke binA bhI usako svatantra rUpa
se par3he to eka jaisA pravAha banA rhe| pratyeka adhyayana ke prArambha meM
usakA sAra-saMkSepa meM diyA gayA hai, jisameM adhyayanagata viSaya kA saMkSipta
vivaraNa hai| jina sUtroM meM varNita viSayoM kI vizeSa vyAkhyA apekSita huI,
use vivecana meM diyA gayA hai| yaha dhyAna rakhA gayA haiM, vivecana meM
anAvazyaka vistAra na ho, Avazyaka bAta chUTe nhiiN| _ prastuta Agama ke
sampAdana, anuvAda evaM vivecana meM aharniza pATha ATha mAsa taka ke kiye gaye
zrama kI yaha phalaniSpatti hai| isa bIca parama zraddheya yuvAcArya zrI
madhukara munijI mahArAja tathA vayovRddha evaM jJAnavRddha manISI vidvadvara
paM0 zobhAcandrajI bhArilla kI ora se mujhe satata sphUrtiprada preraNAeM prApta
hotI rahIM, jisase merA utsAha sarvathA vRddhigata hotA rhaa| maiM hRdaya se
AbhArI huuN| isa kArya meM prArambha se hI mere sAhityika sahakarmI prabaddha
sAhityasevI zrI zaMkaralAlajI pArIka, lADanU kArya ke samApana paryanta sahayogI
rahe haiN| presa ke lie pANDulipiyA~ taiyAra karane meM unakA pUrA sAtha rhaa|
[32]

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A devotee of the Agam scriptures, interested in spirituality and self-control, a
curious and learned person who is inquisitive about Indian life from millennia
ago, if they benefit in any way from this present text, I will consider my labor
worthwhile.  : Kailashdham, Sardarshahar [Rajasthan] Date 9-4-80 -Dr. Chaganlal
Shastri M.A. [Hindi Sanskrit, Prakrit and Jainology] Ph.D. Kavya Tirth, Vidya
Mahodadhi Bh.P. Lecturer - - Institute of Prakrit, Jainology and Ahimsa,
Vaishali [Bihar] HO 卐 [33] 7.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Agam-vADmaya ke anurAgI, adhyAtma va saMyama meM abhirUcizIla, sahastrAbdiyoM
pUrva ke bhAratIya jIvana ke jijJAsu sudhI jana yadi prastuta grantha se kucha
bhI lAbhAnvita hue to maiM apanA zrama sArthaka mAnUMgA  /  : kaivalyadhAma,
saradArazahara [rAjasthAna ] dinAMka 9-4-80 -DaoN0 chaganalAla zAstrI ema0 e0
[hindI saMskRta, prAkRta tathA jainolojI ] pI-eca0 DI0 kAvyatIrtha,
vidyAmahodadhi bhU0 pU0 pravaktA - - insTITyUTa oNpha prAkRta, jainolojI eNDa
ahiMsA, vaizAlI [bihAra ] HO Wan  [33] 7.

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents **Chapter One Title**  **Summary:** 2. Jambu's Curiosity:
Sudharma's Answer Anand Gathapati Vaibhava Social Prestige Shivananda Kollak
Sannivesh Bhagwan Mahavir's Samavasaran Vandana by Anand Dharma-Deshana Anand's
Reaction Vratagrahan [a] Ahimsa-vrat [b] Satya-vrat [c] Asteya-vrat [d] Swadar-
Santosh [e] Ichcha-Pariman [f] Upbhog-Paribhog-Pariman [g] Anarth-Dand-Viraman
Atichaar [a] Samyaktva ke Atichaar [b] Ahimsa-vrat ke Atichaar [c] Satya-vrat ke
Atichaar [d] Asteya-vrat ke Atichaar [e] Swadar-Santosh-vrat ke Atichaar [f]
Ichcha-Pariman-vrat ke Atichaar [g] Digvrat ke Atichaar [h] Upbhog-Paribhog-
Pariman-vrat ke Atichaar 3. [34]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anukramaNikA pahalA adhyAya zIrSaka sAra : saMkSepa 2. jambU kI jijJAsA :
sudharmA kA uttara Ananda gAthApati vaibhava sAmAjika pratiSThA zivanandA
kollAka sanniveza bhagavAn mahAvIra kA samavasaraNa Ananda dvArA vandanA dharma-
dezanA Ananda kI pratikriyA vratagrahaNa [ka] ahiMsAvrata [kha] satya-vrata [ga]
asteya-vrata [gha] svadAra-santoSa [6] icchA-parimANa [ca] upabhoga-paribhoga-
parimANa [cha] anartha-daNDa-viramaNa aticAra [ka] samyaktva ke aticAra [kha]
ahiMsA-vrata ke aticAra [ga] satya-vrata ke aticAra [gha] asteya-vrata ke
aticAra [Ga] svadArasantoSa-vrata ke aticAra [ca] icchA-parimANa-vrata ke
aticAra [cha] digvrata ke aticAra [ja] upabhoga-paribhoga-parimANa-vrata ke
aticAra 3. [34]

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[jh] Anarthadanda-viraman's excess [ ] Samayik-vrat's excess [t] Deshavakashik-
vrat's excess [th] Poshadhopavas-vrat's excess [d] Yathasanvibhag-vrat's excess
[dh] Marnanatik Sanlekhana's excess. Ananda by abhigraha Ananda's future Ananda:
Avadhigyan 14. Second Chapter Summary: Briefly Shramanopasak Kamadeva Deva by
Pisach as an upsarg Elephant as an upsarg Serpent as an upsarg Deva's defeat:
Violence over non-violence's victory Bhagwan Mahavira's arrival: Kamadeva by
vandan-naman Bhagwan by vardhapana Kamadeva: Swargarohan 100 102 107 108 110
Third Study 359 Summary: Briefly 2. Shramanopasak Chulnipita - Upsargkari Deva:
Pradurbhav   Son's death's threat Chulnipita's fearlessness Elder son's murder
7. Middle and younger son's murder Mother's death's threat Chulnipita's kshobh:
Kolahal . Mother's arrival: Jijnasa 112 115 116 116 117 117 117 118 120 120 [35]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [jha] anarthadaNDa-viramaNa ke aticAra [] sAmAyika-vrata ke aticAra [Ta]
dezAvakAzika-vrata ke aticAra [Tha] poSadhopavAsa-vrata ke aticAra [Da]
yathAsaMvibhAga-vrata ke aticAra [Dha] maraNAntika saMlekhanA ke aticAra  /
Ananda dvArA abhigraha Ananda kA bhaviSya Ananda : avadhijJAna 14. dUsarA
adhyAya sAra : sakSepa zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva deva dvArA pizAca ke rUpa meM
upasarga hAthI ke rUpa meM upasarga sarpa ke rUpa meM upasarga deva kA parAbhava
: hiMsA para ahiMsA kI vijaya bhagavAn mahAvIra kA padArpaNa : kAmadeva dvArA
vandana-namana bhagavAn dvArA kAmadeva kI vardhApanA kAmadeva : svargArohaNa 100
102 107 108 110 tIsarA adhyayana 359 sAra : saMkSepa 2. zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA
- upasargakArI deva : prAdurbhAva putra vadha kI dhamakI culanIpitA kI
nirbhIkatA bar3e putra kI hatyA 7. maMjhale va choTe putra kI hatyA mAtRvadha kI
dhamakI culanIpitA kA kSobha : kolAhala . mAtA kA Agamana : jijJAsA 112 115 116
116 117 117 117 118 120 120 [35]

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 12.  ## 11. The Culmination of the Penance Life of the Culmination Father
through Worship ## 13.   **N**  ## 1.  ## 2.  ## 3.  ## 5.  ## 1.  ## 2.  ## 3.
## 4.  ## 5.  ## 6.  ## 1.  ## 2.  ## 3.  ## 4.  ## 5.  ## 6.  ## 7.  ## 8.  ##
9.  ## 10.   **Summary: In Brief**  * **Shramanopasaka Suradeva** * **Murder of
sons by Devas** * **Threat of terrible diseases** * **Suradeva's distress** *
**Conclusion of life**  **Summary: In Brief**  * **Shramanopasaka
Chullashataka** * **Devas' request** * **Threat of destruction of wealth** *
**Deviation: Penance** * **Divine motion**  **Summary: In Brief**  *
**Shramanopasaka Kundakaulika** * **Meditation in Ashoka Garden** * **Devas'
proposition of determinism** * **Kundakaulika's question** * **Devas' answer** *
**Kundakaulika's refutation** * **Devas' defeat**  **Fourth Study** **Fifth
Study** **Sixth Study**  * **Praise of Kundakaulika by the Lord: Inspiration for
Shraman-Nirgranthas** * **Peaceful death**  **[36]**  **121** **123** **125**
**126** **128** **128** **129** **130** **131** **133** **135** **135** **136**
**137** **138** **139** **x x x x x x x x x x** **142** **143** **148**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12. 11. culanIpitA kA uttara culanIpitA dvArA prAyazcitta jIvana kA upAsanAmaya
anta 13. n 1. 2. 3. 5. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. sAra:
saMkSepa zramaNopAsaka surAdeva deva dvArA putroM kI hatyA bhISaNa vyAdhiyoM kI
dhamakI * surAdeva kA kSobha jIvana kA upasaMhAra sAra: saMkSepa zramaNopAsaka
cullazataka deva dvArA vina sampatti vinAza kI dhamakI vicalana : prAyazcitta
divya gati sAra: saMkSepa zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika azoka vATikA meM dhyAna -
nirata deva dvArA niyativAda kA pratipAdana kuMDakaulika kA prazna deva kA
uttara kuDakaulika dvArA khaNDana deva kI parAjaya cauthA adhyayana pAMcavAM
adhyayana chaThA adhyayana bhagavAn dvArA kuMDakaulika kI prazaMsA : zramaNa-
nirgranthoM ko preraNA zAntimaya dehAvasAna [ 36 ] 121 123 125 126 128 128 129
130 131 133 135 135 136 137 138 139 x x x x x x x x x x 142 143 148

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study 149 153 154 155 159 160 161 162 162 Summary: In brief, the Ajivika
Sakdalputra, wealth: profession, information by the Dev, Sakdalputra's
imagination, the presence of Bhagwan Mahavira, the effect on Sakdalputra,
Bhagwan's arrival in the potter's house, discussion on determinism,
enlightenment Sakdalputra and Agni Mitra's acceptance of vows 12. Bhagwan's
departure Arrival of Goshalak 14. Neglect by Sakdalputra Goshalak's praise of
Bhagwan's group Goshalak's arrival in the potter's house 17. Disappointing
journey 18. Divine affliction 19. Inner purification: worship: end 164 11. 165
169 169 13. 170 15. 170 6. 176 177 177 179 Eighth Study 181 185 188 188 359
Summary: In brief, the Shraman Upasak Mahashatak, wives: their wealth,
Mahashatak's practice of vows, Revati's greed, Revati's fondness for meat and
alcohol, Mahashatak: towards spirituality, Revati's sensual attempt to distract
Mahashatak, Mahashatak's increasing practice, death by fasting 189 190 192 193
9. 194 194 [37]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana 149 153 154 155 159 160 161 162 162 sAra : saMkSepa
AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra sampatti : vyavasAya deva dvArA sUcanA sakaDAlaputra
kI kalpanA bhagavAn mahAvIra kA sAnnidhya sakaDAlaputra para prabhAva bhagavAn
kA kuMbhakArApaNa meM padArpaNa niyativAda para carcA bodhilAbha sakaDAlaputra
evaM agnimitrA dvArA vrata-grahaNa 12. bhagavAn kA prasthAna gozAlaka kA Agamana
14. sakaDAlaputra dvArA upekSA gozAlaka dvArA bhagavAna kA gaNa-kIrtana gozAlaka
kA kabhaMkArApaNa meM Agamana 17. nirAzApUrNa gamana 18. devakRta upasarga 19.
antaHzuddhi : ArAdhanA : anta 164 11. 165 169 169 13. 170 15. 170 6. 176 177 177
179 AThavAM adhyayana 181 185 188 188 359 sAra : saMkSepa zramaNopAsaka
mahAzataka patniyAM : unakI sampatti mahAzataka dvArA vratasAdhanA revatI kI
durlAlasA revatI kI mAMsa-madya-lolupatA mahAzataka : adhyAtma kI dizA meM
mahAzataka ko DigAne hetu revatI kA kAmuka upakrama mahAzataka kI uttarottara
bar3hatI sAdhanA AmaraNa anazana 189 190 192 193 9. 194 194 [37]

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
194 11. Emergence of Avadhijnana 12. Revati's Repeated Unsuccessful Attempts 13.
MahaShataka's Prediction of Revati's Downfall 14. Revati's Sorrowful End 15.
Gautam's Inspirational Message to the Lord 16. MahaShataka's Atonement 195 195
197 197 200 Ninth Study Summary: Brief Gaathapati Nandini's Father Vrata-
Aradhana Sadhana-filled Life: Demise 203 204 Tenth Study Summary: Brief
Gaathapati Salihi's Father Successful Sadhana Conclusion Collection-Gaathaas
Appendix 1: Word List Appendix 2: Used-Text-List 205 206 206 208 209 214 240
[38]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 194 11. avadhijJAna kA prAdurbhAva 12. revatI dvArA punaH asaphala kuceSTA 13.
mahAzataka dvArA revatI kA durgatimaya bhaviSya-kathana 14. revatI kA duHkhamaya
anta 15. gautama dvArA bhagavAn kA preraNA-sandeza 16. mahAzataka dvArA
prAyazcitta 195 195 197 197 200 nauvAM adhyayana sAra : saMkSepa gAthApati
nandinIpitA vrata-ArAdhanA sAdhanAmaya jIvana : avasAna 203 204 dasavAM
adhyayana sAra : saMkSepa gAthApati sAlihIpitA saphala sAdhanA upasaMhAra
saMgraha-gAthAeM pariziSTa 1 : zabdasUcI pariziSTa 2 : prayukta-grantha-sUcI 205
206 206 208 209 214 240 [38]

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Panchamagana-Sirisuhammsami-viraiyam Sattamam Angam Uvasagadasao  Panchamagana-
Srimatsudharmaswami-viracitam Saptamam Angam Upasakadasha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMcamagaNahara-sirisuhammasAmiviraiyaM sattamaM aMgaM uvAsagadasAo
paMcamagaNadhara-zrImatsudharmasvAmi-viracitaM saptamam aGgama upAsakadazA

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are: 1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence) 2. **Satya**
(truthfulness) 3. **Asteya** (non-stealing) 4. **Brahmacharya** (continence) 5.
**Aparigraha** (non-attachment)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Upasakadasanga Sutra ## First Study ## Summary  This event took place
during the time when Lord Mahavira was physically present, spreading
spirituality through his teachings. In a part of North Bihar, where the
Lichchhavi republic was located, there was a city called Vanijyagram. It was
near the Lichchhavi capital, Vaishali. Even today, a village called "Baniya-
Gaon" exists in that region. It is likely a remnant of Vanijyagram.  In
Vanijyagram, a righteous householder named Anand resided. He was very wealthy,
prosperous, and opulent. In Jain scriptures, the term "Gaathapati" is used for
such individuals. Anand possessed immense wealth, including crores of gold
coins, riches, money, grain, land, and cattle. Based on today's valuation, he
would be considered a billionaire. Agriculture was his primary occupation. He
had four cattle farms, each with ten thousand cows.  Gaathapati Anand, besides
being prosperous, was highly respected in society and honored by people from all
walks of life. He was intelligent, skilled in social interactions, and sociable.
Therefore, people sought his advice in their matters. Everyone had immense faith
in him, and no one hesitated to reveal their secrets to him. Thus, he lived a
life of happiness, prosperity, wealth, and prestige.  His wife's name was
Shivananda. She was beautiful, virtuous, and devoted to her husband. She had
immense love, devotion, and dedication towards him. Anand's family members were
also prosperous and happy. Everyone respected and honored Anand.  A new turn
came in Anand's life. By chance, the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in
Vanijyagram during his foot journey. The king of that place, Jitashatru, went to
see the Bhagwan with his ministers, officials, and family members. Other
prominent citizens and devout people also arrived. Anand also came to know about
this. He felt a desire to see the Bhagwan. He went to the Koollaka Sannivesh,
where the Bhagwan was seated, located in the suburb of Vanijyagram. Anand
respectfully bowed to the Bhagwan.  The Bhagwan gave his teachings. He imparted
knowledge about the principles of Jiva, Ajeeva, etc., and explained the path of
the Asanga Shraman Dharma and the Agaar Grihi Dharma or Shravak Dharma.  Anand
was impressed. He requested the Bhagwan to teach him the five Anuvratas and the
seven Shikshavrata - the twelve vows of a Shravak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upAsakadazAMgasUtra prathama adhyayana sAra-saMkSepa ghaTanA taba kI hai, jaba
bhagavAn mahAvIra sadeha vidyamAna the, apanI dharma dezanA se jana-mAnasa meM
adhyAtma kA saMcAra kara rahe the  /  uttara bihAra ke eka bhAga meM, jahA~
licchaviyoM kA gaNarAjya thA, vANijyagrAma nAmaka nagara thA  /  vaha
licchaviyoM kI rAjadhAnI vaizAlI ke pAsa hI thA  /  baniyA- gA~va nAmaka Aja bhI
eka gA~va bhUmi meM hai| sambhavataH vANijyagrAma kA hI vaha avazeSa ho  /
vANijyagrAma meM Ananda nAmaka eka sadgRhastha nivAsa karatA thA  /  vaha bahuta
sampanna, samRddha aura vaibhavazAlI thA  /  aise janoM ke lie jaina Agama -
sAhitya meM gAthApati zabda kA prayoga huA hai| karor3oM suvarNamudrAoM meM
sampatti, dhana, dhAnya, bhUmi, godhana ityAdi kI jo pracuratA Ananda ke yahA~
thI, usake AdhAra para Aja ke mulyAMkana meM vaha arabapati kI sthiti meM
pahu~catA thA  /  kRSi usakA mukhya vyavasAya thA  /  usake yahA~ dasadasa
hajAra gAyoM ke cAra gokula the| gAthApati Ananda samRddhizAlI hone ke sAtha-
sAtha samAja meM bahuta pratiSThita thA, sabhI varga ke logoM dvArA sammAnita
thaa| bahuta baddhimAn thA, vyavahAra kuzala thA, milanasAra thA, isalie sabhI
loga apane kAryoM meM usase parAmarza lete the| sabhI kA usameM atyadhika
vizvAsa thA, isalie apanI gopanIya bAta bhI usake sAmane prakaTa karane meM kisI
ko saMkoca nahIM hotA thaa| yoM vaha sukha, samRddhi, sampannatA aura pratiSThA
kA jIvana jI rahA thaa| usakI dharmapatnI kA nAma zivanandA thaa| vaha rUpavatI,
guNavatI evaM pati-parAyaNa thii| apane pati ke prati usameM asIma anurAga,
zraddhA aura samarpaNa thA  /  Ananda ke parivArika jana bhI sampanna aura sukhI
the  /  saba Ananda ko Adara aura sammAna dete the  /  Ananda ke jIvana meM eka
nayA mor3a aayaa| saMyogavaza zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra apane pAda - vihAra ke
bIca vANijyagrAma pdhaare| vahA~ kA rAjA jitazatru apane sAmantoM, adhikAriyoM
aura pArivArikoM ke sAtha bhagavAn ke darzana ke lie gayA  /  anyAnya sambhrAnta
nAgarika aura dharmAnurAgI jana bhI pahu~ce  /  Ananda ko bhI vidita huA  /
usake mana meM bhI bhagavAn ke darzana kI utsukatA jAgI  /  vaha kollAka
sanniveza - sthita dUtIpalAza caitya meM pahu~cA, jahA~ bhagavAn virAjita the  /
kollAka sanniveza vANijyagrAma kA upanagara thA  /  Ananda ne bhaktipUrvaka .
bhagavAn ko vandana - namana kiyaa| bhagavAn ne dharma dezanA dii| jIva, ajIva
Adi tattvoM kA bodha pradAna kiyA, anagAra- zramaNa-dharma tathA agAra-gRhi-
dharma yA zrAvaka-dharma kI vyAkhyA kii| Ananda prabhAvita huaa| usane bhagavAn
se pA~ca aNuvrata tathA sAta zikSAvrata-yoM zrAvaka ke bAraha vrata

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Upasakadasanga Sutra  The Upasakadasanga Sutra was accepted. Until now,
life had been unrestrained in terms of violence, indulgence, and attachment. He
made it restrained and limited. He regulated and controlled his boundless
desires and cravings. As a result, his food, clothing, and enjoyment of
pleasures all became much more limited and simple than before. Anand was a wise
and determined man. He readily enjoyed this simple, straightforward, and self-
controlled life.  Anand thought, "I have gained enlightenment in life and have
molded my conduct accordingly. It would be good if my wife, Shivananda, would do
the same." He came home and said to his wife, "Devanupriye! You too should see
the Lord, worship him. It would be very good if you accept the householder's
dharma."  Anand understood the value of individual freedom, so he did not
pressure his wife, only requesting her.  Shivananda liked her husband's request.
She went to the service of Lord Mahavira and listened to the dharma. With great
faith and enthusiasm, she accepted the Shravaka vows. After some time, Lord
Mahavira left from there.  Anand's life was now even more peaceful. He continued
to work with devotion to the dharma. Fourteen years passed. One day, Anand was
sleeping. His sleep was broken in the last watch of the night. Thinking about
the dharma, he began to think, "In the social situation I am in, I am connected
to many distinguished people, and I cannot devote enough time to the worship of
the dharma. It would be good if I were to free myself from social and worldly
responsibilities and devote my life more and more to the worship of the dharma."
His thought turned into a decision. The next day, he organized a feast. He
invited all his family members, fed them, and honored them. He revealed his
decision to everyone. He entrusted the burden of his family to his elder
brother, taught him how to fulfill his social responsibilities and relationships
properly. He specifically told those present that they should not ask him for
anything related to household matters. Thus, Anand happily separated himself
from family and social life. He became eager to live a life like a monk.  Anand
began to worship the dharma in the Poshadshala located in the Kollak Sannivesh.
He gradually worshipped the eleven images of the Shravaka with the utmost purity
and devotion. Due to his intense, austere life, his body became thin, to the
point that the veins of his body became visible.  One day, in the last watch of
the night, while thinking about the dharma, Anand thought, "Although I still
have no lack of self-strength, courage, faith, and emotion, I have become weak
and emaciated physically. It is best for me to accept the final, fatal
Sanlekhana in the presence of Lord Mahavira. I will give up food and water for
the rest of my life, and without desiring death, I will spend my last days with
a peaceful mind."  Anand was a resolute man. Whatever he thought, it was with
wisdom and the call of his soul. He did not delay in turning it into action. As
he had thought, as soon as morning came, he began the Amaran...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra svIkAra kie| aba taka jIvana hiMsA, bhoga evaM parigraha
Adi kI dRSTi se amaryAdita thA, usane use maryAdita evaM sImita bnaayaa| asIma
lAlasA aura tRSNA ko niyamita, niyantrita kiyaa| phalataH usakA khAna-pAna,
rahana-sahana. stra. bhogopabhoga sabhI pahale kI apekSA bahata sImita, sAde ho
ge| Ananda eka vivekazIla aura adhyavasAyI purUSa thaa| vaise sAde, sarala aura
saMyamonmukha jIvana meM vaha sahaja bhAva se rama gyaa| Ananda ne socA, maiMne
jIvana meM jo udbodha prApta kiyA hai, apane AcAra ko tadanurUpa DhAlA hai,
acchA ho, merI sahadharmiNI zivanandA bhI vaisA kre| usane ghara Akara apanI
patnI se kahA-devAnupriye! tuma bhI bhagavAn ke darzana karo, vandana karo,
bahuta acchA ho, gRhi-dharma svIkAra kro| Ananda vyakti kI svatantratA kA mUlya
samajhatA thA, isalie usane apanI patnI para koI dabAva nahIM DAlA,
anurodhamAtra kiyaa| zivanandA ko apane pati kA anurodha acchA lgaa| vaha
bhagavAn mahAvIra kI sevA meM upasthita huI, dharma sunaa| usane bhI bar3I
zraddhA aura utsAha ke sAtha zrAvaka-vrata svIkAra kie| bhagavAn mahAvIra kucha
samaya bAda vahA~ se vihAra kara ge| Ananda kA jIvana aba aura bhI sakhI thaa|
vaha dharmArAdhanAparvaka apane kArya meM lagA rhaa| caudaha varSa vyatIta ho
ge| eka bAra kI bAta hai, Ananda soyA thA, rAta ke antima pahara meM usakI nIMda
ttuuttii| dharma-cintana karate hue vaha socane lagA-jisa sAmAjika sthiti meM
maiM hU~, aneka viziSTa janoM se sambandhita hone ke ka dharmArAdhanA meM
yatheSTa samaya de nahIM paataa| acchA ho, aba maiM sAmAjika aura laukika
dAyitvoM se mukti le lUM aura apanA jIvana dharma kI ArAdhanA meM adhika se
adhika lgaauuN| usakA vicAra nizcaya meM badala gyaa| dUsare dina usane eka
bhoja Ayojita kiyaa| sabhI pArivArika janoM ko Amantrita kiyA, bhojana karAyA,
satkAra kiyaa| apanA nizcaya sabake sAmane prakaTa kiyaa| apane bar3e patra ko
kaTumba kA bhAra sauMpA, sAmAjika dAyitva evaM sambandhoM ko bhalI bhA~ti
nibhAne kI zikSA dii| usane vizeSa rUpa se usa samaya upasthita janoM se kahA ki
aba ve use gRhastha-sambandhI kisI bhI kAma meM kucha bhI na puuche| yoM Ananda
ne saharSa kauTumbika aura sAmAjika jIvana se apane ko pRthak kara liyaa| vaha
sAdhu jaisA jIvana bitAne ko udyata ho gyaa| Ananda kollAka sanniveza meM sthita
poSadhazAlA meM dharmopAsanA karane lgaa| usane kramazaH zrAvaka kI gyAraha
pratimAoM kI uttama evaM pavitra bhAvapUrvaka ArAdhanA kii| ugra tapomaya jIvana
vyatIta karane se usakA zarIra sUkha gayA, yahA~ taka ki zarIra kI nAr3iyA~
dikhAI dene lgiiN| eka bAra kI bAta hai, rAtri ke antima pahara meM dharma-
cintana karate hue Ananda ke mana meM vicAra AyA-yadyapi aba bhI mujha meM Atma-
bala, parAkrama, zraddhA aura saMvega kI koI kamI nahIM, para zArIrika dRSTi se
maiM kRza eva nirbala ho gayA huuN| mere lie zreyaskara hai, maiM abhI bhagavAn
mahAvIra kI vidyamAnatA meM antima mAraNAntika saMlekhanA svIkAra kara lU~  /
jIvana bhara ke lie anna-jala kA tyAga kara dU~, mRtyu kI kAmanA na karate hue
zAnta citta se apanA antima samaya vyatIta kruuN| Ananda eka dRDhacetA purUSa
thaa| jo bhI socatA, usameM viveka hotA, AtmA kI pukAra hotii| phira use kArya-
rUpa meM pariNata karane meM vaha vilamba nahIM krtaa| usane jaisA socA,
tadanusAra saberA hote hI AmaraNa

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Summary  [Ananda] accepted [the] fast. He rose above all kinds
of desires and attractions of worldly life. He became past the desire for both
life and death and became absorbed in self-reflection.  Due to the auspicious
and bright results of joy in the profound contemplation and worship of religion,
the karma of [avadhijnana] was destroyed, he gained [avadhijnana].  The Lord
Mahavira arrived while traveling, he stayed in the Duutipaalasha Chaitya outside
the commercial town. People started to gain religious benefit. The Lord's chief
disciple Gautam was then continuously doing penance day and night. One day he
went to the commercial town for alms. When he reached near the Koollaka
Sannivesha, he heard about Ananda's joyful fast unto death. He thought, "It
would be good if I go there." He came to the dining hall near Ananda. Ananda's
body had become very weak. It was not possible for him to move around from his
place. He requested Aryagautam to come near him so that he could properly pay
his respects. Gautam came near. Ananda paid his respects with devotion and also
asked a question - "Bhanta! Can a householder gain [avadhijnana]?" Gautam said,
"Ananda! It is possible." Then Ananda said, "Bhagavan! I am in the role of a
householder-disciple, I have also gained [avadhijnana]. Through it, I know and
see up to five hundred yojanas towards the east in the salt sea and down to the
Loloupachyuta Naraka in the lower world." On this, Gautam said, "Ananda! A
householder can gain [avadhijnana], but not so vast. You have spoken untruth,
criticize yourself, do penance."  Ananda said, "Bhagavan! Is there criticism
even for the Jina-preachings and for the true meanings?" Gautam said, "Ananda!
That does not happen." Then Ananda said, "Bhagavan! If there is no criticism of
truth and true meanings in the Jina-preachings, then you criticize in this
regard. That is, what I have said is not untrue." Gautam was lost in thought. He
decided to ask the Lord about this. He went to the Lord. He told him the whole
story and asked who is the one who should criticize and do penance?  The Lord
said, "Gautam! You criticize and also seek forgiveness from Ananda. Ananda has
spoken correctly."  Gautam was a pure and simple-minded seeker. He accepted the
Lord Mahavira's statement with humility and with a simple heart, he criticized
his fault and sought forgiveness from Ananda.  Ananda became increasingly firm
and firmer in his bright self-results. After one month of [sanlekhana], he
attained [samadhi-maran]. After leaving his body, he was born in the form of a
god in the Arun Vimana, located in the northeast corner of the
Soudharmavatansaka Maha Vimana of the Soudharma Devaloka.  This is the brief
summary of the first study.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : sAra saMkSepa] anazana svIkAra kara liyaa| aihika jIvana
kI saba prakAra kI icchAoM aura AkarSaNoM se vaha sarvathA U~cA uTha gyaa|
jIvana aura maraNa donoM kI AkAMkSA se atIta bana vaha Atma-cintana meM lIna ho
gyaa| dharma ke nigUDha cintana aura ArAdhana meM saMlagna Ananda ke zubha evaM
ujjavala pariNAmoM ke kAraNa avadhijJAnAvaraNakarma kA kSayopazama huA, usako
avadhijJAna utpanna ho gyaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra vihAra karate hue padhAre,
vANijyagrAma kebAhara dUtIpalAza caitya meM tthhre| loga dharmalAbha lene lge|
bhagavAn ke pramukha ziSya gautama taba nirantara bele-bele kA tapa kara rahe
the| ve eka dina bhikSA ke lie vANijyagrAma meM ge| jaba ve kollAka sanniveza ke
pAsa pahu~ce, unhoMne Ananda ke AmaraNa anazana ke sambandha meM snaa| unhoMne
socA. acchA ho maiM bhI udhara ho aauuN| ve poSadhazAlA meM Ananda ke pAsa aae|
Ananda kA zarIra bahuta kSINa ho cukA thaa| apane sthAna se idhara-udhara honA
usake lie zakya nahIM thaa| usane Arya gautama se apane nikaTa padhArane kI
prArthanA kI, jisase vaha yathAvidhi unheM vandana kara ske| gautama nikaTa aae|
Ananda ne sabhakti vandanA kiyA aura eka prazna bhI kiyA- bhante! kyA gRhastha
ko avadhijJAna utpanna ho sakatA hai? gautama ne kahA-Ananda! ho sakatA hai|
taba Ananda bolA-bhagavan ! maiM eka gRhi-zrAvaka kI bhUmikA meM hUM, mujhe bhI
avadhijJAna huA hai| mai usake dvArA pUrva kI ora lavaNasamudra meM pAMca sau
yojana taka tathA adholoka meM lolupAcyuta naraka taka jAnatA hU~, dekhatA huuN|
isa para gautama bole-Ananda! gRhastha ko avadhijJAna ho sakatA hai, para itanA
vizAla nhiiN| tuma se jo yaha asatya bhASaNa ho gayA hai, usakI AlocanA karo,
prAyazcita kro| Ananda bolA-bhagavan ! kyA jina-pravacana meM aura yathArtha
bhAvoM ke lie bhI AlocanA kI jAtI hai? gautama ne kahA-Ananda! aisA nahIM hotaa|
taba Ananda bolA- bhagavan ! jina-pravacana meM yadi satya aura yathArtha bhAvoM
kI AlocanA nahIM hotI to Apa hI isa sambandha meM AlocanA kiijiye| arthAt maiMne
jo kahA hai, vaha asatya nahIM hai| gautama vicAra meM par3a ge| isa sambandha
meM bhagavAn se pUchane kA nizcaya kiyaa| ve bhagavAn ke pAsa aae| unheM sArA
vRttAnta sunAyA aura pUchA ki AlocanA aura prAyazcitta kA bhAgI kauna hai?
bhagavAn ne kahA-gautama ! tuma hI AlocanA karo aura Ananda se kSamA yAcanA
bhii| Ananda ne ThIka kahA hai| gautama pavitra evaM saralacetA sAdhaka the|
unhoMne bhagavAn mahAvIra kA kathana vinayapUrvaka svIkAra kiyA aura sarala
bhAva se apane doSa kI AlocanA kI, Ananda se kSamA yAcanA kii| Ananda apane
ujjavala Atma-pariNAmoM meM uttarottara dRDha aura dRDhatara hotA gyaa| eka mAsa
kI saMlekhanA ke uparAnta usane samAdhi-maraNa prApta kiyaa| deha tyAga kara
vaha saudharma devaloka ke saudharmAvataMsaka mahAvimAna ke IzAnakoNa meM sthita
arUNa vimAna meM devarUpa meM utpanna huaa| prathama adhyayana kA yaha saMkSipta
sArAMza hai|

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study **The Curiosity of Gaathapaati Aanand Jamboo: Sudharma's Answer**
1. **Teṇam kāleṇam teṇam samaeṇam** Champa naam nayari hottha. Vaṇṇao.
Puṇṇabhaddhe cheie. Vaṇṇao.  **Translation:** In that time, in that era, there
was a city named Champa. (It is described in the Aupapatik Sutra). There was a
Chaitya named Puṇṇabhaddhe. (It is also described in the Aupapatik Sutra).
**Explanation:** Here, the words "kaal" (time) and "samay" (era) are used. While
they are often synonyms, in Jain terminology, there is a difference. "Kaal"
refers to general time, while "samay" refers to the smallest unit of time.
However, here, they are not used with this distinction. This is a characteristic
of the descriptive style of Jain Agamas, where the same thing is often said
using many synonyms, synonymous words, or words with similar meanings. This
helps to clearly express the meaning and presents a very clear word-picture of
an event, story, or situation to the readers. Here, "kaal" refers to the end of
the fourth Ara of the present Avasarpini, and "samay" refers to the era or time
when Arya Sudharma existed.  Here, the city of Champa and the Chaitya
Parṇabhaddhe are mentioned. The word "Vaṇṇao" is used after both. In Jain
Agamas, there is an accepted way of describing common subjects like cities,
villages, gardens, etc. For example, the general order of describing a city
applies to all cities. The same is true for others.  Before being written down,
Jain Agamas were memorized through oral tradition. This style was probably
adopted for ease of memorization. Also, cities, gardens, etc., are generally
quite similar.  122. **Teṇam kāleṇam teṇam samaeṇam aj-suhamme samosarie, jaav
jamboo samaṇassa bhagavao mahavirass antevaasi aj-suhamme naam there jaati-
sampanne, kul-sampanne, ruv**  **Translation:** In that time, in that era, Aj-
Suhamme was a Samosari, until Jamboo, the last of the great Tirthankara
Mahavira, Aj-Suhamme was a Thera, born into a noble family, well-born,
handsome...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana gAthApati Ananda jambU kI jijJAsA : sudharmA kA uttara 1.
teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM caMpA nAma nayarI hotthaa| vnnnno| puNNabhadde
ceie| vnnnno| usa kAla - vartamAna avasarpiNI ke cauthe Are ke anta meM, usa
samaya-jaba Arya sudharmA vidyamAna the, campA nAmaka nagarI thI, pUrNabhadra
nAmaka caitya thaa| donoM kA varNana aupapAtikasUtra se jAna lenA caahie|
vivecana yahA~ kAla aura samaya-ye do zabda Aye haiM  /  sAdhAraNatayA ye
paryAyavAcI haiN| jaina pAribhASika dRSTi se inameM antara bhI hai| kAla
vartanA-lakSaNa sAmAnya samaya kA vAcaka hai aura samaya kAla ke sUkSmattama-
sabase choTe bhAga kA sUcaka hai| para, yahA~ ina donoM kA isa bheda-mUlaka
artha ke sAtha prayoga nahIM huA hai| jaina AgamoM kI varNana-zailI kI yaha
vizeSatA hai, vahA~ eka hI bAta prAyaH aneka paryAyavAcI, samAnArthaka yA
milate-julate artha vAle zabdoM dvArA kahI jAtI hai| bhAva ko spaSTa rUpa meM
prakaTa karane meM isase sahAyatA milatI hai| pAThakoM ke sAmane kisI ghaTanA,
vRtta yA sthiti kA eka bahuta sApha zabda-citra upasthita ho jAtA hai| yahA~
kAla kA abhiprAya vartamAna avasarpiNI ke cauthe Are ke anta se hai tathA samaya
usa yuga yA kAla kA sUcaka hai, jaba Arya sudharmA vidyamAna the| yahA~ campA
nagarI tathA parNabhadra caitya kA ullekha haA hai| donoM ke Age 'vaNNao' zabda
AyA hai| jaina AgamoM meM nagara, gA~va, udyAna Adi sAmAnya viSayoM ke varNana
kA eka svIkRta rUpa hai| udAharaNArtha, nagarI ke varNana kA jo sAmAnya krama
hai, vaha sabhI nagariyoM ke lie kAma meM A jAtA hai| auroM ke sAtha bhI aisA hI
hai| likhe jAne se pUrva jaina Agama maukhika paramparA se yAda rakhe jAte the|
yAda rakhane meM suvidhA kI dRSTi se saMbhavataH yaha zailI apanAI gaI ho| vaise
nagara, udyAna Adi sAdhAraNatayA lagabhaga sadRza hote hI haiN| 122. teNaM
kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM aja-suhamme samosarie, jAva jambU samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa aMtevAsI aja-suhamme nAma there jAti-saMpaNNe, kula-saMpaNNe, rUva

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Study: Ganapati Ananda] [7] Accomplished, endowed with discipline,
endowed with knowledge, endowed with faith, endowed with conduct, endowed with
modesty, endowed with lightness, victorious over anger, victorious over pride,
victorious over deceit, victorious over greed, conqueror of passions, conqueror
of sleep, conqueror of the senses, conqueror of adversities, free from the fear
of life and death, engaged in austerities, abandonment of demerits, abandonment
of karmic activities, abandonment of conduct, abandonment of restraint,
abandonment of determination, abandonment of simplicity, abandonment of
gentleness, abandonment of lightness, abandonment of patience, abandonment of
protection, abandonment of liberation, abandonment of knowledge, abandonment of
mantras, abandonment of brahmacharya, abandonment of Vedas, abandonment of
logic, abandonment of rules, abandonment of truth, abandonment of hearing,
abandonment of knowledge, abandonment of faith, abandonment of conduct, gross,
fierce, of fierce qualities, of fierce austerities, of fierce brahmacharya, with
an emaciated body, with a concentrated-expanded-limited-extent of psychic
energy, endowed with the fourteen Purvas, endowed with the four types of
knowledge, surrounded by five hundred ascetics, practicing in due order, going
from village to village, dwelling happily with happiness, he comes to the city
of Campā and then to the Puṇṇabhadda Shrine. Outside the city of Campā, he takes
an appropriate seat in the Puṇṇabhadda Shrine, and after taking it, he dwells,
cultivating himself with restraint and austerity.  At that time and occasion,
the senior disciple of Venerable Sudhamma, Venerable Jambū by name, an ascetic
of the Kāśyapa clan, of a well-proportioned figure, with a diamond-like, bull-
like, and serpent-like physique, with a body of golden hue, engaged in intense
austerities, blazing austerities, scorching austerities, great austerities,
gross, fierce, of fierce qualities, of fierce austerities, of fierce
brahmacharya, with an emaciated body, with a concentrated-expanded-limited-
extent of psychic energy, dwells in close proximity to Venerable Sudhamma, above
the knees, with the head lowered, absorbed in meditation, cultivating himself
with restraint and austerity.  Then, that Venerable Jambū, filled with
curiosity, doubt, and eagerness, rises up, rises, and comes to where Venerable
Sudhamma is. Having come, he thrice circumambulates Venerable Sudhamma, pays
obeisance, and stands before him with joined palms, listening respectfully and
paying obeisance.  While residing there, he speaks thus: "If, Venerable Sir, the
ascetic Lord Mahāvīra, the Tīrthaṅkara, the Self-Enlightened One, the Foremost
of Men, the Lion among Men, the Excellent Lotus among Men, the Excellent
Elephant among Men, the Highest in the World, the Lord of the World, the Refuge
of the World, the Eye of the World, the Path of the World, the Life of the
World, the Enlightenment of the World, the Dharma of the World, the Teacher of
the Dharma, the Leader of the Dharma, the Excellent Charioteer of the Dharma,
the Unobstructed Excellent Universal Monarch..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda ] [ 7 saMpaNNe, viNaya-saMpaNNe, nANa-
saMpaNNe, daMsaNa-saMpaNNe, caritta-saMpaNNe, lajjA- saMpaNNe, lAghava saMpaNNe,
oyesI, teyaMsI, vacchaMsI, jasaMsI, jiya- kohe, jiya-mANe, jiya-mAe, jiya- lohe,
jiya-Nidde, jiiMdie, jiya- parIsahe, jIviyAsa- maraNa-bhaya-vippamukke,
tavaphANe, guNa - ppahANe karaNa-ppahANe, caraNa-ppahANe, niggaha-ppahANe,
nicchaya-ppahANe, ajjava - ppahANe, maddava - ppahANe, lAghava- ppahANe, khaMti-
ppahANe, gutti-ppahANe, muti - ppahANe, vijjA - pahANe, maMta-ppahANe, baMbha-
ppahANe, veya- ppahANe, naya-ppahANe, niyamappahANe, sacca-ppahANe, soya-
ppahANe, nANa-ppahANe, dasaNa-ppahANe, caritta - ppahANe, orAle, ghore, ghora-
guNe, ghora-tavassI, ghora- baMbhaceravAsI, ucchUDha sarIre saMkhitta-viulateu-
lesse, cauddasa - puvvI, caunANovagae, paMcahiM aNagAra-saehiM saddhiM
saMparivuDe, puvvANupuvviM caramANe gAmANugAmaM duijjamANe, suhaM suheNaM
viharamANe jeNeva caMpA nayarI jeNeva puNNabhadde ceie teNeva uvAgacchai  /
caMpAnayarIe bahiyA puNNabhadde ceie ahApaDirUvaM oggahaM ogiNhai, ogiNhittA
saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe viharai  /  teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM
ajja - suhammassa therassa jeTThe aMtevAsI ajja - jaMbU nAmaM aNagAre kAsava-
gotteNaM sattussehe, sama- cauraMsa - saMThANa - saMThie, vaira-risaha - NArAya
saMghayaNe, kaNaga- pulaga - nighasa - pamha - gore, ugga-tave, ditta tave,
tatta tave, mahA-tave, orAle, ghore, ghora-guNe, ghora-tavassI, ghora-
baMbhaceravAsI, ucchUDha - sarIre, saMkhitta - viutela- lesse, ajja - suhammassa
therassa adurasAmaMte uDDhaM jANU, ahosire, jhANa- koTThovagae saMjameNaM tavasA
appANaM bhAvemANe viharai  /  taNaM se ajja - jaMbU nAmaM aNagAre jAya- saDDhe,
jAya-saMsae, jAya- koUhalle, uppaNNa-saDDhe, uppaNNa-saMsae, uppaNNa- koUhalle
saMjAya - saDDhe, saMjAya - saMsae, saMjAyakohalle, samuppaNNa- saDDhe,
samuppaNNa-saMsae, samuppaNNa- koUhalle uTThAe uTThei, uTThetA jeNeva ajja - -
suhamme there teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA ajja - suhammaM theraM tikkhutto
AyAhiNa-payAhiNaM karei, karettA vaMdaI NamaMsai, vaMdittA NamaMsittA NaccAsaNNe
NAidUre sussUsamANe NamaMsamANe abhimuhe viNaeNaM paMjaliuDe  /  ) pajjuvAsamANe
evaM vayAsI - jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM jAva (AigareNaM,
titthagareNaM, sayaMsaMbuddheNaM, purisuttameNaM, purisasIheNaM,
purisavarapuMDarIeNaM, purisavaragaMdhahatthieNaM, loguttameNaM loganAheNaM,
loga paIveNaM, loga pajjoyagareNaM, abhayadapaNaM, saraNadaeNaM cakkhudaeNaM,
maggadaeNaM, jIvadaeNaM, bohidaeNaM dhammadaeNaM, dhammadesaNaM dhamma -
nAyageNaM, dhammasArahiNA, dhamma- vara cAuraMta - cakkavaTTiNA, * appaDihaya-
vara * isase Age kisI-kisI prati meM 'dIvo tANaM saraNagaI paiTThA' yaha pATha
adhika upalabdha hotA hai  /

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
8] (The Upasakadasangasutra, by the Nan-Dasan-Dharena, the Viyadrichoumena, the
Jina, the Janaena, the Buddha, the Bohaena, the Muttena, the Moyagena, the
Tinnaena, the Taraena, the Siva-Mayala-Maruya-Mananta-Makkhaya-Mavvabaham-
Punaravattayam, the Sasayam, the Thanamuva-gaena, the Siddhi-Gai-Namadhenam, the
Thanam) by the Sampattenam. _ Of the sixth Anga, the Nayadhammakahana, this is
the Pannatte, of the seventh, O Venerable! Anga, the Uvasagadasana, by the
Samana, as far as the Sampattenam, what is the Pannatte? Thus, O Jambu! By the
Samana, the Bhagavan Mahavira, as far as the Sampattenam, of the seventh Anga,
the Uvasagadasana, ten Ajjanas are Pannatta. Thus, Anande Kamadeve ya, Gahava-i-
Chulani-piya. Suradeve Chullasaye, Gahava-i-Kundakolie. Saddal-pute Mahasaye,
Nandini-piya Salihi-piya. O Jina, Venerable! By the Samana, as far as the
Sampattenam, of the seventh Anga, the Uvasagadasana, ten Ajjanas are Pannatta,
of the first, O Venerable! By the Samana, as far as the Sampattenam, what is the
Pannatte? At that time, Arya Sudharma (the attendant of the Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavira. Born into a noble family, with a pure maternal lineage, born into a
noble family, with a pure paternal lineage, possessing strength, with excellent
physical strength, possessing beauty, handsome, with a beautiful body,
possessing humility, possessing knowledge, possessing vision, possessing
character, possessing shame, possessing lightness, light, free from the burden
of material things and kshaya, etc., radiant, luminous, eloquent, with a good
voice or powerful, with power or influence, successful, victorious over anger,
victorious over pride, victorious over deceit, victorious over greed, victorious
over sleep, victorious over the senses, victorious over endurance, victorious
over suffering, free from the desire for life and the fear of death, devoted to
austerity, possessing virtues, with special qualities like restraint, etc.,
possessing actions, with special qualities like purity of food, etc., possessing
character, with excellent character, possessing the ten virtues of a Yati,
possessing restraint, a suppressor of enemies like attachment, etc., possessing
certainty, a firm believer in the truth or confident in the certainty of karma-
phala, possessing simplicity, possessing gentleness, possessing lightness, free
from any burden due to self-absorption or spirited, possessing peace, forgiving,
possessing secrecy, a protector of mental, verbal, and physical activities,
using them wisely, possessing liberation, free from desires or progressing
towards liberation, possessing knowledge, a master of various branches of
knowledge, possessing mantras, with true mantras, contemplation or thought,
possessing celibacy, possessing Vedas, a knower of the Vedas and other worldly
and transcendental scriptures, possessing Nayas, a knower of Nayas like Naigama,
etc., possessing rules, a follower of rules, possessing truth, possessing
purity, with spiritual purity or holiness, possessing knowledge, a practitioner
of knowledge, possessing vision, with the special quality of Kshayika Samyaktva,
possessing character, engaged in the observance of character, strong, 1-2-3-4,
in accordance with what has been described in this Sutra).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 8] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra nANa-dasaNadhareNaM viyadRchaumeNaM jiNeNaM, jANaeNaM,
buddheNaM, bohaeNaM, mutteNaM, moyageNaM, tiNNeNaM, tAraeNaM, siva-mayala-
marUya-maNaMta-makkhaya-mavvAbAhamapuNarAvattayaM sAsayaM ThANamuvagaeNaM,
siddhi-gai-nAmadhenaM ThANaM) sNpttennN| _ chaTThassa aMgassa nAyAdhammakahANaM
ayamaDhe paNNatte sattamassa NaM bhaMte! aMgassa uvAsagadasANaM samaNeNaM jAva'
saMpatteNaM ke aDhe paNNatte? evaM khalu jambU ! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM
jAva' saMpatteNaM sattamassa aMgassa uvAsaga dasANaM dasa ajjhayaNA pnnnnttaa|
taM jahA ANaMde kAmadeve ya, gaahaavi-culnniipiyaa| surAdeve cullasayae,
gaahaavi-kuNddkolie| saddAlapute mahAsayae, naMdiNIpiyA saalihiipiyaa|| jaiNaM
bhaMte ! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM sattamassa aMgassa uvAsagadasANaM dasa
ajjhayaNA paNNattA, paDhamassa NaM bhaMte ! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM ke aDhe
paNNatte? usa samaya Arya sudharmA [zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra ke antevAsI.
jAti-sampanna-uttama nirmala mAtRpakSayukta, kula-sampanna-uttama nirmala
pitRpakSayukta, bala-sampanna-uttama daihika zaktiyukta, rUpasampanna-rUpavAn-
sarvAMga sundara, vinaya-sampanna, jJAna-sampanna, darzana-sampanna, cAritra-
sampanna, lajjA-sampanna, lAghava-sampanna-halake-bhautika padArtha aura kaSAya
Adi ke bhAra se rahita, ojasvI, tejasvI, vacasvI- . prazasta bhASI athavA
varcasvI-varcas yA prabhAva yukta, yazasvI. krodhajayI. mAnajayI. mAyAjayI.
lobhajayI. nidrAjayI, indriyajayI, pariSahajayI-kaSTavijetA, jIvana kI icchA
aura mRtyu ke bhaya se rahita, tapapradhAna, guNa-pradhAna-saMyama Adi guNoM kI
vizeSatA se yukta, karaNa-pradhAna-AhAra-vizuddhi Adi vizeSatA sahita, cAritra-
pradhAna-uttama cAritra-sampanna-dazavidha yati-dharmayukta, nigraha-pradhAna-
rAga Adi zatruoM ke nirodhaka, nizcaya-pradhAna-satya tattva ke nizcita vizvAsI
yA karma-phala kI nizcitatA meM Azvasta, Arjava-pradhAna-saralatAyukta, mArdava-
pradhAna-mRdutAyukta, lAghava- pradhAna-AtmalInatA ke kAraNa kisI bhI prakAra ke
bhAra se rahita yA sphUrti-zIla, zAnti-pradhAna-kSamAzIla, gupti-pradhAna-
mAnasika, vAcika tathA kAyika pravRttiyoM ke gopakavivekapUrvaka unakA upayoga
karanevAle, mukti-pradhAna-kAmanAoM se chuTe yA muktatA kI ora agrasara, vidyA-
pradhAna-jJAna kI vividha zAkhAoM ke pAragAmI, maMtra-pradhAna-sata maMtra,
cintanA yA vicAraNAyukta, brahmacarya-pradhAna, veda-pradhAna-veda Adi laukika,
lokottara zAstroM ke jJAtA, naya-pradhAna-naigama Adi nayoM ke jJAtA, niyama-
pradhAnaniyamoM ke pAlaka, satya-pradhAna, zaucapradhAnaAtmika zucitA yA
pavitratAyukta, jJAna-pradhAnajJAna ke anuzIlaka, darzana-pradhAnakSAyika
samyaktvarUpa vizeSatA se yukta, cAritra-pradhAnacAritra kI paripAlanA meM
nirata, urAlaprabala 1-2-3-4 isI sUtra meM pUrva varNita ke anuruup|

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study: The Story of Ananda  [9] Powerful in practice, endowed with
extraordinary power, possessing the highest virtues, requiring extraordinary
power to hold, the holder of such virtues, a great ascetic, a practitioner of
intense austerities, a great celibate, a keeper of strict celibacy, with a body
devoid of physical adornment, possessing vast brilliance within, a holder of
fourteen previous knowledges, a sage, Ary Sudharma, endowed with four kinds of
knowledge: Shruta, Avadhi, and Manahparyaya, surrounded by five hundred
Shramanas, moving forward in a sequential order, from one village to another,
enjoying a pleasant journey, arrived where the city of Champa was, where the
Purnabhadra Chaitya was. The Purnabhadra Chaitya was outside the city of Champa,
where the Lord, in accordance with the appropriate and proper conduct of a sage,
took up residence and stayed, cultivating the soul with restraint and austerity.
At that time, Ary Sudharma's eldest attendant, Ary Jambu, an unmarried man, born
in the Kashyap gotra, whose body was seven hands tall, who possessed a body with
four limbs in perfect harmony, with proportionate limbs, balanced and
coordinated structure, who possessed a unique body structure with strong bone
ligaments like a vajra, a rishabha, and a naraacha, who was golden in color like
a lotus, with the glow of a gold line marked on a touchstone, who was a great
ascetic, who was like fire in burning away intense ascetic deeds, who was a
heated ascetic, whose body bore the intense glow of austerity, who was a great
ascetic, powerful, intense, possessing intense virtues, a great ascetic, a great
celibate, with a body devoid of adornment and possessing vast brilliance, stood
not too far, not too close to the sage Ary Sudharma. He raised his knees,
lowered his head, and stood in a meditative posture, cultivating the soul with
restraint and austerity.  Then, a desire arose in the mind of Ary Jambu, an
unmarried man, with faith, doubt arose in the sense of uncertainty, doubt, and
curiosity. Again, a feeling of faith arose in his mind, doubt arose, curiosity
arose. He got up, went to where the sage Ary Sudharma was, and came. Arriving
there, he circumambulated the sage Ary Sudharma three times, offering
salutations and prostrations. Having done so, he stood not too close, not too
far from the Lord, with a desire to listen, offering salutations, with folded
hands in humility, seeking his guidance, and said, "O Lord! Shraman Bhagwan
Mahavira [who, upon attaining omniscience, first initiated the Shruta-dharma,
the founder of the fourfold dharma-tirtha of Tirthankara-Shraman-Shramani-
Shravaka-Shravika, self-enlightened, attaining enlightenment without any
external cause or help, endowed with unique super-powers, therefore the best of
men, the lion among men due to his abundance of courage, the best of men, like a
white lotus, free from all impurities, like the best of elephants, the best of
the world, the lord of the world, the one who moves against the flow of the
world, on the path of spirituality, or the light of the world, the one who
spreads the light of dharma in the world, the one who gives fearlessness, the
one who gives refuge, the one who opens the inner eye, the one who shows the
path, the one who gives restraint-life and enlightenment, the one who gives
dharma, the one who preaches dharma,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [9 sAdhanA meM sazakta, ghoraadabhuta
zakti-sampanna, ghoraguNaparama uttama, jinheM dhAraNa karane meM adbhuta zakti
cAhie, aise guNoM ke dhAraka, ghora-tapasvIugra tapa karane vAle,
ghorabrahmacaryavAsIkaThora brahmacarya ke pAlaka, utkSipta-zarIradaihika sAra-
saMbhAla yA sajAvaTa Adi se rahita, vizAla tejolezyA apane bhItara sameTe hue,
caturdaza pUrvadharacaudaha pUrva-jJAna ke dhAraka, cAramati, zruta, avadhi
tathA manaHparyAya jJAna se yukta sthavira Arya sudharmA, pAMca sau zramaNoM se
saMparivRtaghire hue pUrvAnupUrva anukrama se Age bar3hate hue, eka gAMva se
dUsare gAMva hote hue, sukhapUrvaka vihAra karate hue, jahA~ campA nagarI thI,
pUrNabhadra caitya thA, pdhaare| pUrNabhadra caitya campA nagarI ke bAhara thA,
vahA~ bhagavAn yathApratirUpa-samucita-sAdhucaryA ke anurUpa AvAsa-sthAna
grahaNa kara Thahare , saMyama evaM tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue rhe| usI
samaya kI bAta hai, Arya sudharmA ke jyeSTha antevAsI Arya jambU nAmaka anagAra,
jo kAzyapa gotra meM utpanna the, jinakI deha kI UMcAI sAta hAtha thI, jo
samacaturastrasaMsthAna-saMsthita-deha ke cAroM aMzoM kI susaMgata, aMgoM ke
paraspara samAnupAtI, santulita aura samanvita racanA-yukta zarIra ke dhAraka
the, jo vajra-RSabha-nArAca-saMhananasudRr3ha asthibaMdhayukta viziSTa deha-
racanAyukta the, kasauTI para aMkita svarNa-rekhA kI AbhA lie hue kamala ke
samAna jo gauravarNa the, jo ugra tapasvI the, dIpta tapasvI-karmoM ko bhasmasAt
karane meM agni ke samAna pradIpta tapa karane vAle the, tapta tapasvI-jinakI
deha para tapazcaryA kI tIvra jhalaka thI, jo mahAtapasvI, prabala, ghora,
ghora-guNa, ghora-tapasvI, ghora-brahmacArI, utkSipta-zarIra evaM saMkSipta-
vipula-tejolezya the, sthavira Arya sudharmA ke na adhika dUra, na adhika nikaTa
saMsthita ho. ghaTane UMce kiye. mastaka nIce kie, dhyAna kI mudrA meM, saMyata
aura tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue avasthita the| taba Arya jambU anagAra
ke mana meM zraddhApUrvaka icchA paidA huI, saMzayaanirdhArita artha meM zaMkA-
jijJAsA evaM kutUhala paidA huaa| punaH unake mana meM zraddhA kA bhAva umar3A,
saMzaya ubharA, kutUhala samutpanna huaa| ve uThe, uThakara jahA~ sthavira Arya
sudharmA the, aae| Akara sthavira Arya sudharmA ko tIna bAra AdakSiNa pradakSiNA
kI, vandana namaskAra kiyaa| vaisA kara bhagavAn ke na adhika samIpa, na adhika
dUra zuzrUSA-sunane kI icchA rakhate hue, praNAma karate hue, vinayapUrvaka
sAmane hAtha jor3e hue, unakI paryupAsanA-abhyarthanA karate hue bolebhagavan!
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne [jo AdikarasarvajJatA prApta hone para pahale
pahala zruta-dharma kA zubhArambha karane vAle, tIrthakara-zramaNa-zramaNI-
zrAvaka-zrAvikA rUpa caturvidha dharma-tIrtha ke saMsthApaka,
svayaMsaMbuddhakisI bAhya nimitta yA sahAyatA ke binA svayaM bodha prApta,
viziSTa atizayoM se sampanna hone ke kAraNa purUSottama, zUratA kI adhikatA ke
kAraNa purUSasiMha, sarva prakAra kI malinatA se rahita hone se
purUSavarapuMDarIkapurUSoM meM zreSTha zveta kamala ke samAna, purUSoM meM
zreSTha gaMdhahastI ke samAna, lokottama, loka-nAthajagat ke prabhu, loka-
pratIpa-loka-pravAha ke pratikUlagAmI-adhyAtma-patha para gatizIla, athavA
lokapradIpa arthAt janasamUha ko prakAza dene vAle, loka-pradyotakaraloka meM
dharma kA udyota phailAne-vAle, abhayaprada, zaraNaprada, cakSuHprada antara-
cakSu kholane vAle, mArgaprada, saMyama-jIvana tathA bodhi pradAna karane vAle,
dharmaprada,dharmopadezaka,

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[10] I have heard the meaning of the sixth Anga, Nayadhammakhao, as explained.
What meaning did the Lord explain in the seventh Anga, Upasakadasha?  Arya
Sudharma said, "Jambhu! The Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira explained ten studies in
the seventh Anga, Upasakadasha, which are as follows:  1. Anand, 2. Kamadeva, 3.
Gathapati Chulnipita, 4. Suradeva, 5. Chullashatak, 6. Gathapati Kundakaulik, 7.
Saddalputra, 8. Mahashatak, 9. Nandinipita, 10. Shalihipita.  Jambhu then asked,
"Bhagwan! What meaning did Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira explain in the first study
of the ten studies he explained in the seventh Anga, Upasakadasha?"  For general
description, Jain Agamas use 'Vannao' to indicate, which takes the required
context mentioned elsewhere to the present place. Similarly, Jain Agamas also
have the practice of indicating with the word 'Jao' for descriptive description,
expansion, etc. The related description is taken from other Agamas where it has
come. Here, the descriptive descriptions of Bhagwan Mahavira, Sudharma and
Jambhu are indicated by the word 'Jao'. These descriptive descriptions have been
estimated here from Jnatridharmkatha, Aupapatik and Rajaprashriya Sutra. As
indicated earlier, this style may have been accepted for the convenience of the
memorized tradition of Jain Agamas.  Anand Gathapati  3. And Jambhu! At that
time, at that time, there was a city named Vanijagama. Vannao. There was a
Cheiya named Duipalasaya in the north-east direction of that Vanijagama. There
was a king named Jiyasattu in that Vanijagama city. Vannao. In that Vanijagama,
there was a Gathapati named Anand, who lived in a house with all the comforts
(given, wealth, scattered-wide-building-bed-seat-knowledge-vehicle, many-wealth-
wife-son-wealth, coming-going-equipped, scattered-city-food-drink, many...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra dharmanAyaka, dharma-sArathi, tIna ora mahAsamudra
tathA eka ora himavAn kI sImA liye vizAla bhUmaNDala ke svAmI cakravartI kI
taraha uttama dharma-sAmrAjya ke samrATa, pratighAta visaMvAda yA avarodha
rahita uttama jJAna va darzana ke dhAraka, ghAtikarmoM se rahita, jina-rAga-
dveSa-vijetA, jJAyaka-rAga Adi bhAvAtmaka sambandhoM ke jJAtA athavA jJApaka-
rAga Adi ko jItane kA patha batAne vAle, buddhabodhayukta, bodhakabodhaprada,
mukta-bAharI tathA bhItarI granthiyAM se chUTe hue, mocaka-muktatA ke preraka,
tIrNa-saMsAra-sAgara ko taira jAne vAle, tArakasaMsAra-sAgara ko taira jAne kI
preraNA dene vAle, ziva-maMgalamaya, acala sthira, arUj roga yA vidhna rahita,
ananta, akSaya, avyAbAdhabAdhA rahita, punarAvartana rahita siddhigati nAmaka
zAzvata sthAna ke samIpa pahuMce hue haiM, use saMprApta karane vAle haiM,]
chaThe aMga nAyAdhammakahAo kA jo artha batalAyA, vaha maiM suna cukA huuN|
bhagavAn ne sAtaveM aMga upAsakadazA kA kyA artha vyAkhyAta kiyA? Arya sudharmA
vole-jambU ! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne sAtaveM aMga upAsakadazA ke dasa
adhyayana prajJapta kiye-batalAe, jo isa prakAra haiM 1. Ananda, 2. kAmadeva, 3.
gAthApati culanIpitA, 4. surAdeva, 5. cullazataka, 6. gAthApati kuMDakaulika, 7.
saddAlaputra, 8. mahAzataka, 9. nandinIpitA, 10. shaalihiipitaa| jambU ne phira
pUchA-bhagavan ! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne sAtaveM aMga upAsakadazA ke jo
dasa adhyayana vyAkhyAta kie, unameM unhoMne pahale adhyayana kA kyA artha-
tAtparya kahA ? vivecana sAmAnya varNana ke lie jaina-AgamoM meM 'vaNNao' dvArA
sUcana kiyA jAtA hai, jisase anyatra varNita apekSita prasaMga ko prastuta
sthAna para le liyA jAtA hai| usI prakAra vizeSaNAtmaka varNana, vistAra Adi ke
lie 'jAva' zabda dvArA saMketa karane kA bhI jaina AgamoM meMpracalana hai|
saMbaMdhita varNana ko dUsare AgamoM se jahAM vaha AyA ho, gRhIta kara liyA jAtA
hai| yahAM bhagavAn mahAvIra aura sudharmA aura jaMbU ke vizeSaNAtmaka varNana
'jAva' zabda se sUcita hue haiM  /  jJAtRdharmakathA, aupapAtika tathA
rAjaprazrIya sUtra se ye vizeSaNamUlaka varNana yahAM Akalita kie gae haiN|
jaisA pahale sUcita kiyA gayA hai, saMbhavataH jaina AgamoM kI kaMThastha
paramparA kI suvidhA ke lie yaha zailI svIkAra kI gaI ho| Ananda gAthApati 3.
evaM khalu jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM vANiyagAme nAmaM nayare
hotthaa|vnnnno| tassa vANiyagAmassa bahiyA uttara-puratthime disI-bhAe
dUipalAsae nAmaM ceie| tattha NaM vANiyagAme nayare jiyasattU rAyA
hotthaa|vnnnno| tattha NaM vANiyagAme ANaMde nAma gAhAvaI parivasai-aDDhe jAva
(ditte, vitte vicchiNNa-viula-bhavaNa-sayaNAsaNa-jANa-vAhaNe, bahu-dhaNa-
jAyarUva-rayae, Aoga-paoga-saMpautte, vicchaDDiya-paura-bhatta-pANe, bahu

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [11 **First Study: The Story of Anand**]  A wealthy householder, Anand, was
highly respected and admired by all.    The wise Sudharma said, "Jambū! In the
fourth Āra of the present Avasarpini, at the time when Lord Mahāvīra was
present, there was a city called Vāṇijyagrāma.  Outside the city, in the north-
east direction - the Iśāna corner - was a shrine called Dūtīpālaśa.  The king of
that place was called Jitasatru.  In Vāṇijyagrāma, there lived a wealthy
householder named Anand.  Anand was a wealthy man, [radiant, brilliant,
influential, prosperous, with a magnificent house, luxurious bedding,
comfortable seating, carts and vehicles for transporting goods, and an abundance
of gold, silver, and coins.  He was engaged in the proper use and application of
wealth, diligently involved in earning money through business and trade.  Even
after his meals, there was always plenty of food and drink left over.  His house
was filled with many servants, maids, cows, bulls, calves, sheep, and goats.  He
was so powerful that no one dared to disrespect or insult him.   **Discussion**
• The term Gāhāvai [Gāthāpati] in this context is particularly noteworthy.  It
is used primarily in Jain literature.  It is formed by combining the two words
Gāhā + Vai.  In Prakrit, 'Gāhā' refers to both the Āryā metre and the meaning of
'house'.  One meaning is also 'praise'.  Due to being worthy of great praise
because of wealth, grain, prosperity, and splendor, commentators have used this
term for a wealthy, prosperous householder.  However, the more appropriate
meaning of Gāhā seems to be 'house'. This passage reveals that agriculture and
cattle-raising were considered highly esteemed activities at that time.  Wealthy
householders embraced them with enthusiasm.   **Splendor** 4.  Tass ṇam Ānandass
Gāhāvaiss Chaṭṭāri Hiraṇṇa-Koḍīo Nihaṇa-Pauṭṭāo, Chaṭṭāri Hiraṇṇa-Koḍīo Vuḍḍi-
Pauṭṭāo; Chaṭṭāri Hiraṇṇa-Koḍīo Pavitthar-Pauṭṭāo, Chaṭṭāri Vaya, Dasagosa-
Hassiēṇam Vaēṇam Hotthā. Anand Gāthāpati had four crore gold coins kept in his
treasury, four crore gold coins invested in business, four crore gold coins
invested in the splendor of his house, grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, and other
resources.  He had four herds of cattle.  Each herd had ten thousand cows.
**Discussion** The term Hiraṇṇa [Hiraṇya] used here refers to the gold coins
that were in circulation at that time.  The use of gold coins in this country
dates back to ancient times.  Lord

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [11 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] dAsI-dAsa-go-mahisa-
gavelagapappabhUe bahu-jaNassa) apribhuue| Arya sudharmA bolejambU! usa
kAlavartamAna avasarpiNI ke cauthe Are ke anta meM, usa samayajaba bhagavAn
mahAvIra vidyamAna the, vANijyagrAma nAmaka nagara thaa| usa nagara ke bAhara
uttara-pUrva dizA meM-IzAna koNa meM dUtIpalAza nAmaka caitya thaa| jitazatru
nAmaka vahAM kA rAjA thaa| vahAM vANijyagrAma meM Ananda nAmaka gAthApati-
sampanna gRhastha rahatA thaa| Ananda dhanADhya, [dIpta-dIptimAn-prabhAvazAlI,
sampanna, bhavana, zayanaor3hane-bichaune ke vastra, AsanabaiThane ke upakaraNa,
yAna-mAla-asabAba Dhone kI gADiyAM evaM vAhanasavAriyAM Adi vipula sAdhana-
sAmagrI tathA sonA, cAMdI, sikke Adi pracura dhana kA svAmI thaa| Ayoga-prayoga-
saMpravRtta-vyAvasAyika dRSTi se dhana ke samyak viniyoga aura prayoga meM
nirata-nItipUrvaka dravya ke upArjana meM saMlagna thaa| usake yahAM bhojana
kara cukane ke bAda bhI khAne pIne ke bahuta padArtha bacate the| usake ghara
meM bahuta se naukara, naukarAniyAM, gAyeM, baila, pAr3e, bher3eM, bakariyAM Adi
thiiN| logoM dvArA aparibhUta-atiraskRta thAitanA raubIlA thA ki koI usakA
tiraskAra yA apamAna karane kA sAhasa nahIM kara pAtA thaa| vivecana * isa
prasaMga meM gAhAvaI [gAthApati] zabda vizeSa rUpa se vicAraNIya hai| yaha
vizeSataH jaina sAhitya meM hI prayukta hai| gAhA+vaI ina do zabdoM ke mela se
yaha banA hai| prAkRta meM 'gAhA' AryA chanda ke lie bhI AtA hai aura ghara ke
artha meM bhI prayukta hai| isakA eka artha prazasti bhI hai  /  dhana, dhAnya,
samRddhi, vaibhava Adi ke kAraNa bar3I prazasti kA adhikArI hone se bhI eka
sampanna, samRddha gRhastha ke lie isa zabda kA prayoga TIkAkAroM ne mAnA hai|
para, gAhA kA adhika saMgata artha ghara hI pratIta hotA hai| isa prasaMga se
aisA prakaTa hotA hai ki khetI tathA go-pAlana kA kArya taba bahuta uttama mAnA
jAtA thaa| samRddha gRhastha ise rUcipUrvaka apanAte the| vaibhava 4. tassa NaM
ANaMdassa gAhAvaissa cattAri hiraNNa-koDIo nihANa-pauttAo, cattAri hiraNNa-koDIo
vuDDi-pauttAo; cattAri hiraNNa-koDIo pavitthara-pauttAo, cattAri vayA, dasagosA-
hassieNaM vaeNaM hotthaa| Ananda gAthApati kA cAra karor3a svarNa khajAne me
rakkhA thA, cAra karor3a svarNa vyApAra meM lagA thA, cAra karor3a svarNa ghara
ke vaibhava-dhana, dhAnya, dvipada, catuSpada Adi sAdhana-sAmagrI meM lagA thA
|uske cAra vrajagokula the| pratyeka gokula meM dasa hajAra gAyeM thIM  /
vivecana yahAM prayukta hiraNNa [hiraNya]svarNa kA abhiprAya una sone ke sikkoM
se hai, jo usa samaya pracalita rahe hoN| sone ke sikkoM kA pracalana isa deza
meM bahuta purAne samaya se calA A rahA hai  /  bhagavAn

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[12] Even after the time of Mahavira, gold coins continued to circulate in
India. The gold coin that foreign rulers introduced in India was called a dinar.
The word 'dinar' was accepted as it is in the Sanskrit language. The gold coin
that was circulated during the reign of Muslim emperors was called a mohar or
asharfi. After that, the circulation of gold coins ceased in India. Social
Prestige 5. Anand was a person who was consulted by many kings, rulers, powerful
and influential men [sword-wielding, respected citizens, landowning landlords,
heads of large families, wealthy and influential merchants, commanders of
armies] and merchants who traveled to distant lands with many small traders. He
was consulted in many matters, causes, deliberations, family problems,
confidential matters, private matters, decisions, and interactions. He was the
center of the family, the standard, the foundation, the support, the eye, the
guide, the foundation [the standard, the foundation, the support, the eye], and
the enhancer of all work. Discussion The words 'sword' etc. used here reveal the
form of the distinguished people of that time. This characteristic was related
to different areas. These words indicate all those economic, commercial,
administrative, practical and public relations characteristics that were
important and respected in the society of that time. This passage clearly
introduces Anand's broad, influential and respectable personality. He was such a
generous, serious and high-minded person that all kinds of distinguished people
considered it appropriate to consult him in their work and seek his advice.
Another important point in this passage is that it sheds light on the unity,
mutual loyalty and harmony of Anand's family life. Anand was the center of the
whole family and was eager for the development and prosperity of the family. The
metaphor of the 'meḍhi' for Anand is very important here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra mahAvIra ke samaya ke pazcAt bhI bhArata meM sone ke
sikke calate rhe| videzI zAsakoM ne bhArata meM jo sone kA sikkA calAyA use
dInAra kahA jAtA thaa| saMskRta bhASA meM 'dInAra' zabda jyoM kA tyoM svIkAra
kara liyA gyaa| musalamAna bAdazAhoM ke zAsana-kAla meM jo sone kA sikkA calA,
vaha mohara yA azaraphI kahA jAtA thaa| usake bAda bhArata meM sone ke sikkoM kA
pracalana banda ho gyaa| sAmAjika pratiSThA 5.se NaM ANaMde gAhAvaI bahUNaM
rAIsara-jAva (talavara-mADaMbiya-koDaMbiya-ibbhaseTThi-seNAvai) satthavAhANaM
bahusu kajesu ya kAraNesu ya maMtesu ya kuTuMbesu ya gujjhesu ya rahassesu ya
nicchaesu ya vavahAresu ya ApucchaNije paDipucchaNije sayassa vi ya NaM
kuTuMbassa meDhI, pamANaM, AhAre, AlaMbaNaM, cakkhU, meDhIbhUe jAva (pamANabhUe,
AhArabhUe, AlaMbaNabhUe, cakkhubhue) savva-kaja-vaDDhAvae yAvi hotthaa| Ananda
gAthApati bahuta se rAjAmAMDalika narapati, IzvaraaizvaryazAlI evaM prabhAvazIla
purUSa [talavararAja-sammAnita viziSTa nAgarika, mAMDavika yA
mADaMbikajAgIradAra bhUsvAmI kauTumbika-bar3e parivAroM ke pramukha,
ibhyavaibhavazAlI, zreSThIsampatti aura suvyavahAra se pratiSThA-prApta seTha,
senApati] tathA sArthavAhaaneka choTe vyApAriyoM ko sAtha lie dezAntara meM
vyavasAya karane vAle samartha vyApArI-ina sabake aneka kAryoM meM, kAraNoM meM,
maMtraNAoM meM, pArivArika samasyAoM meM, gopanIya bAtoM meM, ekAnta meM
vicAraNIyasArvajanika rUpa meM aprakaTanIya viSayoM meM, kie gae nirNayoM meM
tathA paraspara ke vyavahAroM meM pUchane yogya evaM salAha lene yogya vyakti
thaa| vaha sAre parivAra kA meDhimukhyakendra, pramANasthiti sthApakapratIka,
AdhAra, AlaMbana, cakSumArga-darzaka, meDhibhUta [pramANabhUta, AdhArabhUta,
AlaMbanabhUta cakSubhUta] tathA sarva-kArya-vardhApaka-saba prakAra ke kAryoM ko
Age bar3hAne vAlA thaa| vivecana yahAM prayukta 'talavara' Adi zabda usa samaya
ke viziSTa janoM ke rUpa ko prakaTa karate haiM |yh vizeSatA vibhina kSetroM se
sambandhita thii| Arthika, vyApArika, zAsanika, vyAvahArika tathA
lokasaMparkaparaka una sabhI vizeSatAoM kA saMketa ina zabdoM meM prApta hotA
hai, jinakA usa samaya ke samAja meM mahatva aura Adara thaa| Ananda ke vyApaka,
prabhAvazAlI aura AdaraNIya vyaktitva kA isa prasaMga se spaSTa paricaya prApta
hotA hai| vaha itanA udAra, gaMbhIra aura UMce vicAroM kA vyakti thA ki sabhI
prakAra ke viziSTa jana apane kAryoM meM use pUchanA, usase salAha lenA upayAgI
mAnate the| isa prasaMga meM eka dUsarI mahattva kI bAta yaha hai, jo Ananda ke
pArivArika jIvana kI ekatA, pArasparika niSThA aura mela para prakAza DAlatI hai
/  Ananda sAre parivAra kA kendra-bindu thA tathA parivAra ke vikAsa aura
saMvardhana meM tatpara rahatA thaa| Ananda ke lie meDhi kI upamA yahAM kAphI
mahattvapUrNa hai|

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: The Story of Anand  [13] The "medhi" is the wooden post that is
planted in the center of the threshing floor. The oxen are tied to it and made
to go around, separating the grain. The oxen are kept moving by it. This was the
situation of Anand in his family. Shivananda 6. Anand, the story-teller, had a
wife named Shivananda. Her five senses were perfect, complete, and capable in
their respective fields. She had auspicious signs on her hands, like lines, and
marks like moles, which indicated good fortune and beauty. She was also endowed
with good qualities, character, and virtue. She was perfect in her physical
proportions, weight, height, and was beautiful in every way. Her form was as
gentle as the moon, and her appearance was captivating. She was a beautiful
woman. She was the beloved of Anand, the story-teller. She was devoted to him,
full of love, and never became estranged or indifferent, even when he was
against her. She enjoyed the five worldly pleasures with him: sound, touch,
taste, form, and smell. **Discussion** This passage beautifully depicts the
ideal woman, combining beauty and virtue. This is the essence of a woman's
perfection. **Here, the adjective "aviratta" indicates the wife's dedication to
her husband and the noble character of women.** **Kollāka Settlement** 7. To the
north-east of his trading town, there was a settlement called Kollāka. It was
prosperous and stable, with many people, both young and old, and a large
population. It had many houses, cattle, and fields. It was a place of great
wealth and prosperity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [13 meDhi usa kApTha-daMDa ko kahA jAtA
hai, jise khalihAna ke bIcoMbIca gAr3a kara, jisase bAMdhakara bailoM ko anAja
nikAlane ke lie cAroM ora ghumAyA jAtA hai| usake sahAre baila gatizIla rahate
haiN| parivAra meM yahI sthiti Ananda kI thii| zivanandA 6. tassa NaM ANaMdassa
gAhAvaissa sivAnaMdA nAmaM bhAriyA hotthA, ahINa-jAva (paDipuNNa-paMciMdiya-
sarIrA, lakkhaNa-vaMjaNa-guNovaveyA, mANummANappamANa-paDipuNNasujAya-savvaMga-
suMdaraMgI, sasi-somAkAra-kaMta-piya-dasaNA) suruuvaa|aannNdss gAhAvaissa iTThA,
ANaMdeNaM gAhAvaiNA saddhiM aNurattA, avirattA, iDhe jAva (sadda-pharisa-rasa-
rUvagaMdhe) paMcavihe mANussae kAma-bhoe paccaNubhavamANI vihri| _ Ananda
gAthApati kI zivanandA nAmaka patnI thI, [usake zarIra kI pAMcoM indriyAM
ahInapratipUrNaracanA kI dRSTi se akhaMDita, sampUrNa, apane-apane viSayoM meM
sakSama thIM, vaha uttama lakSaNasaubhAgyasUcaka hAtha kI rekhAeM Adi,
vyaMjanautkarSasUcaka tila, masA Adi cihna tathA guNa-zIla, sadAcAra, pAtivratya
Adi se yukta thii| daihika phailAva, vajana, UMcAI, Adi kI dRSTi se vaha
paripUrNa, zreSTha tathA sarvAMgasundarI thii| usakA AkArasvarUpa candra ke
samAna saumya tathA darzana kamanIya thA]  /  aisI vaha rUpavatI thii| Ananda
gAthApati kI vaha iSTa-priya thii| vaha Ananda gAthApati ke prati
anuraktaanurAgayukta-atyanta snehazIla thii| pati ke pratikUla hone para bhI
vaha kabhI viraktaanurAgazUnya rUSTa nahIM hotI thii| vaha apane pati ke sAtha
iSTapriya [zabda, sparza, rasa, rUpa tathA gandhamUlaka] pAMca prakAra ke
sAMsArika kAma-bhoga bhogatI huI rahatI thii| vivecana prastuta prasaMga meM
nArI ke usa prazasta svarUpa kA saMkSepa meM bar3A sundara citraNa haiM, jisameM
saundarya aura zIla donoM kA samAveza hai| isI meM nArI kI paripUrNatA hai| _
yahAM prayukta 'avirakta' vizeSaNa pati ke prati patnI ke samarpaNa-bhAva tathA
nArI ke udAtta vyaktitva kA sUcaka hai| kollAka sanniveza 7. tassa NaM
vANiyagAmassa bahiyA uttarapuratthime disI-bhAe ettha NaM kollAe nAmaM sannivese
hotthaa| riddha-sthimiya jAva (samiddhe, pamuiya-jaNa-jANavaye, AiNNa-
jaNamaNusse, hala-saya-sahassa-saMkiTTha-vikiTTha-laTTha-paNNatta-seusIme,
kukkuDa-saMDeya-gAmapaure, ucchu-java-sAli-kaliye,go-mahisa-gavelaga-ppabhUye,
AyAravanta-ceiya-juvai

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[14] Kollaka, a suburb located in the northeast direction, in the *Ishan*
corner, outside the commercial town, was a prosperous, secure, and wealthy
settlement. The citizens of Kollaka, along with people from other parts of the
region, found joy and entertainment in its abundance of recreational facilities.
The population was dense, with hundreds and thousands of plows tilling the
surrounding land, creating a naturally beautiful boundary. There were numerous
flocks of roosters and young bulls, and the surrounding land was lush with
sugarcane, barley, and rice plants. Cows, buffaloes, and sheep were plentiful.
The area was adorned with beautiful, intricately crafted *chaityas* and various
groups of young women, creating a vibrant atmosphere. It was free from bribe-
takers, extortionists, robbers, thieves, border guards, and toll collectors,
making it peaceful, tranquil, and free from disturbances. Monks received alms
generously, ensuring a comfortable and secure living for everyone. Despite the
dense population of various families and households, the area remained peaceful.
It was frequented by various performers, including actors, dancers, acrobats,
wrestlers, boxers, jesters, storytellers, swimmers, singers of heroic tales and
*rasas*, fortune tellers, performers using bamboo sticks, puppeteers, musicians
playing *tūṇ* instruments, *tumbī* players, and *tālacara* performers. The area
was also adorned with recreational gardens, parks, wells, ponds, and small dams,
resembling a *nandana vana*. It was protected by a deep, wide, and high ditch,
and fortified with various defensive structures like *chakra*, *gada*,
*bhasandi*, *gofia*, *avarodha*, *antaraprakara*, and *shathadhni*. The area was
also surrounded by a strong inner wall, resembling a *parakota*, to prevent
enemy forces from entering. The area was further protected by a circular wall,
built with strong bricks, and adorned with beautiful gates, towers, and arches,
leading to a well-maintained royal road. The area was also protected by strong,
well-maintained *indakila* (a type of defensive structure), and was a hub for
various merchants, artisans, and traders, creating a vibrant commercial
atmosphere. The area was also adorned with *singhaḍaga* (a type of decorative
structure), *tiga* (a type of decorative structure), *chaukka* (a type of
decorative structure), *caccara* (a type of decorative structure), *paṇiyāvaṇa*
(a type of market), and various other commercial establishments, creating a
bustling marketplace. The area was also frequented by gods, humans, and
celestial beings, and was home to numerous forests, horses, intoxicated
elephants, and various other animals, creating a vibrant and diverse ecosystem.
The area was also adorned with beautiful, clear water, reflecting the
surrounding beauty, and was further enhanced by the presence of *pandaravara* (a
type of decorative structure), creating a visually stunning landscape. The area
was a place of joy, beauty, and wonder, attracting visitors from far and wide.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra viviha-saNNiviTTha-bahule, ukkoDiya-gAya-gaMThi-bheya-
bhaDa-takkara-khaMDarakkharahiye, kheme, NirUvaddave, subhikkhe,
vIsatthasuhAvAse, aNega-koDi-kuDuM biyAiNNa-Nivvuya-suhe, naDanaTTaga-jalla-
malla-muTThiya-velaMbaya-kahaga-pavagalAsaga-Aikkhaga-laMkha-maMkha-
tUNaillatuMbavINiya-aNega-tAlAyarANucariye, ArAmujANa-agaDa-talAga-dIhiya-
vappiNiguNovaveye, naMdaNavaNa-sannibha- pyagAse, uvviddha-viula-gaMbhIra-khAya-
phalihe, cakka-gayabhusuMDhi-oroha-sayagdhi-jamala-kavADa-ghaNa-duppavese,
dhaNu-kuDila-vaMka-pAgAraparikkhitte, kavisIsaya-vaTTa-raiya-saMThiya-
virAyamANe, aTTAlayaM-cariya-dAra-gopura-toraNauNNaya-suvibhata-rAyamagge, che
yAyariya-raiya-daDha-iMdakIle, vivaNi-vaNicchettasippiyAiNNa-nivvuyasuhe,
siMghADaga-tiga-caukka-caccara-paNiyAvaNa-viviha-vatthuparimaMDiye,suramme,
naravai-paviiNNa-mahivai-pahe, aNegavana-turaga-mattakuMjara-raha-pahakarasIya-
saMdamANIyAiNNa-jANa-jagge. vimaula-NavaNaliNisobhiyajale,
paMDaravarabhavaNasaNNimahiye uttANaNayaNapecchaNijje,) pAsAdIe, darisaNijje,
abhirUve, pddiruuve| _ vANijayagrAma ke bAhara uttara-pUrva dizAbhAga-IzAna koNa
meM kollAkanAmaka sanniveza-upanagara thaa| vaha vaibhavazAlI, surakSita evaM
samRddha thaa| vahAM ke nAgarika aura janapada ke anya bhAgoM se Ae vyakti vahAM
Amoda-pramoda ke pracura sAdhana hone se pramudita rahate the, logoM kI vahAM
ghanI AbAdI thI, saikar3o, hajAroM haloM se jutI usakI samIpavartI bhUmi
sahajatayA sundara mArga-sImA sI lagatI thI, vahAM murgo aura yuvA sAMDoM ke
bahuta se samUha the, usake AsapAsa kI bhUmi Ikha, jau aura dhAna ke paudhoM se
lahalahAtI thI, vahAM gAyoM, bhaisoM aura bher3oM kI pracuratA thI, vahAM
sundara zilpakalA yukta caityoM aura yuvatiyoM ke vividha sannivezoM-paNya
tarUNiyoM ke pAr3oM-ToloM kA bAhulya thA, vaha rizvatakhoroM, girahakaToM,
baTamAroM, coroM, khaMDa-rakSakoMcuMgI vasUla karanevAloM se rahita, sukha-
zAntimaya evaM upadravazUnya thA, vahAM bhikSukoM ko bhikSA sUkhapUrvaka prApta
hotI thI, isalie vahAM nivAsa karane meM saba sukha mAnate the, Azvasta the|
aneka zreNI ke kauTumbikapArivArika logoM kI ghanI bastI hote hue bhI vaha
zAntimaya thA, naTanATaka dikhAne vAle, nartaka-nAcane vAle, jallakalAbAjarassI
Adi para car3hakara kalA dikhAne vAle, malla- pahalavAna, mauSTika-mukkebAja,
viDaMbaka-vidUSaka-masakhare, kathakakathA kahane vAle, plavakauchalane yA nadI
Adi meM tairane kA pradarzana karane vAle, lAsakavIra rasa kI gAthAeM yA rAsa
gAne vAle, AkhyAyakazubha-azubha batAne vAle, laMkha-bAMsa ke sire para khela
dikhAne vAle, maMkhacitrapaTa dikhA kara AjIvikA calAne vAle, tUNailla-tUNa
nAmaka tantu-vAdya bajAkara AjIvikA karane vAle, tuMba-vINikatuMva-vINA yA pUMgI
bajAne vAle, tAlAcaratAlI bajAkara manovinoda karane vAle Adi aneka janoM se
vaha sevita thaa| ArAmakrIDA-vATikA, udyAnabagIce, kueM, tAlAba bAvar3I jala ke
choTe-choTe bAMdha-inase yukta thA, nandanavana sA lagatA thA, vaha UMcI,
vistIrNa aura gaharI khAI se yukta thA, cakra, gadA, bhasaMDipatthara pheMkane
kA eka vizeSa zastra gophiyA, avarodhaantaraprAkArazatra-senA ko rokane ke lie
parakoTe jaisA bhItarI sadaDha Avaraka sAdhana, zatadhnImahAyaSTi

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study: Gāthāpati Ānanda  [The great city, where hundreds of people would
be crushed to death if the 15th great rock were to fall, and where entry was
difficult due to the absence of door openings, was surrounded by a curved
rampart like a bow. It was adorned with circular crenellations on the rampart.
Its royal roads, the shelters (gumatīs) built on the upper part of the citadel
walls, the eight-hand-wide paths in the middle of the citadel walls, the small
doors (bārīs) and gateways (gopuras) in the walls, the triumphal arches
(toraṇas) at the city gates were well-organized and beautified. The bolts and
door-pins of its gateways were made by skilled artisans, like sharp spearheads.
Due to the markets, trading areas, and the residence of many artisans and
craftsmen, it was comfortable and convenient. It was decorated and delightful
with triangular spaces, crossroads, squares where more than four roads meet,
shops selling utensils and various goods. Due to the constant movement of the
king's procession, its royal roads were always crowded with excellent horses,
intoxicated elephants, groups of chariots, palanquins with curtains, sedan
chairs of human size, vehicles, and the famous two-hand-wide, long Gollas of the
ancient Deccan region. There were water reservoirs adorned with blooming
lotuses. It was beautified with excellent whitewashed buildings, captivating to
the unblinking eyes, pleasing to the mind, delightful to behold, and enchanting
to the heart.]  8. There, in the Kollāka settlement, Ānanda Gāthāpati had many
friends, kinsmen of similar conduct and thought, his own mother, father, sons,
daughters, and other relatives, servants, and attendants, who were prosperous
and happy.  9. At that time and occasion, the ascetic Lord Mahāvīra (who was the
Arhat, the Conqueror, the Omniscient, the Best of Men, the Lion among Men, the
Excellent Lotus among Men, the Excellent Elephant among Men, the Fearless One,
the Eye-opener, the Path-shower, the Refuge-giver, the Life-giver, the Light-
raiser, the Established in Refuge and Guidance, the Universal Monarch of the
Excellent Doctrine, the Bearer of the Excellent, Unobstructed, Supreme Knowledge
and Vision, the Unfolded Umbrella, the Conqueror, the Knower, the Crossed Over,
the Savior, the Released, the Emancipator, the Enlightened, the Awakened, the
Omniscient, the All-seer, the Auspicious, the Spotless, the Infinite, the
Inexhaustible, the Unafflicted, the Non-returning, whose name is Siddhi-gati,
the Worthy One, the Conqueror, the Omniscient) came (there).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [15 yA mahAzilA, jisake girAe jAne para
saikar3oM vyakti daba-kucalakara mara jAeM, aura dvAra ke chidra rahita
kapATayugala ke kAraNa jahAM praveza kara pAnA duSkara thA, dhanuSa jaise TeDhe
parakoTe se vaha ghirA huA thA, usa parakoTe para gola AkAra ke bane hue
kapizIrSakoM se vaha suzobhita thA, usake rAjamArga, aTTAlakaparakoTe ke Upara
nirmita Azraya-sthAnoMgumaTiyoM, carikaparakoTe ke madhya bane hue ATha hAtha
caur3e mArgo, parakoTe meM bane hue choTe dvAroMbAriyoM, gopuroMnagara-dvAroM,
toraNadvAroM se suzobhita aura suvibhakta the, usakI argalA aura indrakIlagopura
ke kivAr3oM ke Age jar3e hue nukIle bhAle jaisI kIleM, suyogya zilpAcAryoM
nipuNa zilpiyoM dvArA nirmita thI, vipaNihATa-mArga, vaNik-kSetra vyApAra-kSetra
bAjAra ke kAraNa tathA bahuta se zilpiyoM, kArIgaroM ke AvAsita hone ke kAraNa
vaha sukhasuvidhApUrNa thA, tikone sthAnoM, tirAhoM, caurAhoM catvaroM-jahAM
cAra se adhika rAste milate hoM, aise sthAnoM, bartana Adi kI dUkAnoM tathA
aneka prakAra kI vastuoM se parimaMDitasuzobhita aura ramaNIya thaa| rAjA kI
savArI nikalate rahane ke kAraNa usake rAjamArgoM para bhIr3a lagI rahatI thI,
vahAM aneka uttama ghor3e, madonmatta hAthI, rathasamUha, zivikA-pardedAra
pAlakhiyAM, syandamAnikApurUSa-pramANa pAlakhiyAM, yAnagAr3iyAM tathA
yugyapurAtana kAlIna golla deza meM suprasiddha do hAtha lambecaur3e DolI jaise
yAnainakA jamaghaTa lagA rahatA thaa| vahAM khile hue kamaloM se zobhita jala
vAle jalAzaya the, saphedI kie hue uttama bhavanoM se vaha suzobhita, atyadhika
sundaratA ke kAraNa nirnimeSa netroM se prekSaNIya,] citta ko prasanna karane
vAlA, darzanIya, abhirUpa-manojJamana ko apane meM ramA lene vAlA tathA
pratirUpa-mana meM basa jAne vAlA thaa| 8. tattha NaM kollAe sannivese ANaMdassa
gAhAvaissa bahue mitta- nAi-niyagasayaNa-saMbaMdhi-parijaNe parivasai, aDDhe
jAva' apribhuue| vahAM kollAka sanniveza meM Ananda gAthApati ke aneka mitra,
jJAtijana-samAna AcAra-vicAra ke svajAtiya loga, nijakamAtA, pitA, putra putrI
Adi, svajana-bandhu-bAndhava Adi, sambandhIzvazura, mAtula Adi, parijanadAsa,
dAsI, Adi nivAsa karate the, jo samRddha evaM sukhI the| bhagavAn mahAvIra kA
samavasaraNa 9. teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre jAvaM
(Aigare, titthagare, sayaMsaMbuddhe, purisuttame, purisa-sIhe, purisa-vara-
puMDarIe, purisa-vara-gaMdhahatthIe, abhayadae, cakkhudae, maggadae, saraNadae,
jIvadae, dIvottANaM, saraNa-gaI-paiTThA, dhamma-vara-cAuraMta-cakkavaTTI
appaDihaya-vara-nANa-dasaNadhare, viaTTa-cchaume, jiNe, jANae, tiNNe, tArae,
mutte, moyae, buddhe, bohae, savvaNNU, savvadarisI,
sivamayalamarUamaNaMtamakkhayamavvAbAhamapuNarAvattayaM, siddhigai-nAmadheyaM
ThANaM saMpAviukAme, arahA, jiNe, kevalI, sattahatthussehe, sama
cauraMsasaMThANasaMThie, vajarisahanArAyasaMghayaNe, aNulomavAuvege, kaMka 1.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 3

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Upāsakadaśāṅgasūtra] Grahane, kavoya pariṇāme, sauṇi posa piṭṭhataroru
pariṇaye, padumuppala gandha-sarisa nissāsa surabhī - vayaṇe - chavi, nirāyaṃka
uttama pasattha - - aisea - nirūvama-pale, jalla - malla kalaṃka sea-raya -
dosa- vajjiya- sarīre, nirūvaleve, chāyā - ujjoirya-gamaṃge, ghaṇa- niciya
subaddha lakkhaṇunnaya - kūḍāgāra - - nibha-piṃḍiyagga-sire, sāmali boṃḍa ghaṇa-
niciya phoḍiya miu-visaya pasattha suhuma lakkhaṇa- sugaṃdha suṃdara bhuyamoaga
bhiṃga - nīla- - kajjala - - pahiṭṭha bhamara - gaṇa niddha nikuraṃba niciya
kuṃciya-payāhiṇāvatta-muddha sire, dāḍima puppha-pakāsa tavaṇijja- sarisa -
nimmala-suṇiddha ke saṃta kesabhūmī, ghaṇa-niciya - chattāgārūtamaṃgadese,
ṇivvaṇa sama laṭṭha maṭṭha caṃdaddha-sama- ṇiḍāle, uḍḍuvai paḍi puṇṇa soma-
vadaṇe, allīṇa pramāṇajutta-savaṇe, susavaṇe, pīṇa maṃsala - - kavola desabhāe,
āṇāmiya cāva rūila-kiṇhabbha- rāi taṇu-kasiṇa- niddha-bhamuhe, avaḍāliya
puṃḍarīya ṇayaṇe, koyāsiya-dhavala pattalachche, garūlāyata - ujju tuṃga ṇāse,
uvaciya-silappaavāla biṃbaphala saṇṇibhādharodṭhe, paṃḍura-sasi-sayala vimala
nimmala - saṃkha- gokkhīra - pheṇa kuṃda daga- raya - muṇāliyā - dhavala daṃta
seḍhī, akhaṃḍa daṃte, apphuḍiya - daṃte, aviravala daṃte, suṇiddha- daṃte,
sujāya daṃte, ega-daṃta seḍhīviva-aṇega daṃte, huyavaha- niddhanta dhoya tatta-
tavaṇijja -rattata-tālu-jīhe, avaṭṭhiya- suvibhatta-citta-maṃsu, maṃsala -
saṃṭhiya-pasattha-saddūla viula haṇue, caurangula suppamaṇa kaṃbu vara sarisa -
ggīve, vara mahisa- varāha sīha saddūla usabha nāga- - vara paḍipuṇṇa - - viula
kkhaṃdhe, juga-sannibha pīṇa raiya- pīvara - - pauṭṭha saṃṭhiya susiliddha -
visiddha- ghaṇa thira subaddha- saṃdhi pura vara-phalih - vaṭṭiya bhue, bhuy -
īsara - viula bhoga ādāna phalihaucchūḍha - dīha bāhū, ratta talova-iya mauya-
maṃsala - sujāya lakkhaṇa pasattha acchiddajāla - pāṇī, pīvara- komala-
varaṃgulī, āyaṃbataṃba - taliṇa- sui - rūila - niddha-nakkhe, caṃdapāṇi lehe,
sūra pāṇi- lehe, saṃkha pāṇi- lehe, cakka pāṇi- lehe, disā-sotthiya pāṇi lehe,
caṃda sūra - saṃkha - - cakka - disā sotthiya-pāṇi lehe, kaṇaga- silā talujjala
pasattha - - samatala - uvaciya vicchiṇṇa pihula-vacche, sirivacchaṃ-kiyavacche,
akaraṃḍuya kaṇaga- rūiya nimmala - - sujāya nirūvahaya dehadhārī, aṭṭhasahassa
paḍipuṇṇa varapurisa - - lakkhaṇadhare, saṇṇaya-pāse, saṃgaya-pāse, suṃdara
-pāse, sujāya-pāse, miya māiya pīṇa raiya pāse, ujjuya- sama-sahiya-jacca taṇu-
kasiṇa- niddha āijja - laḍaha-ramaṇijja - roma - - rāī, jhasavihaga sujāya pīṇa
kucchī, jhasoyare, sui karaṇe, paduma - viyaḍa - ṇābhe, gaṃgāvattaka-
payāhiṇāvatta taraṃga-bhaṃgura - 1. Dekhēṃ sūtra - saṃkhyā 3

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16] [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra ggahaNe, kavoya pariNAme, sauNiposa piTThatarorU
pariNae, paumuppalagaMdha-sarisanissAsasurabhi - vayaNe - chavI, nirAyaMka
uttama pasattha - - aiseya - nirUvama-pale, jalla - malla kalaMka seya-raya -
dosa- vajjiya- sarIre, nirUvaleve, chAyA - ujjoiryagamaMge, ghaNa- niciya
subaddha lakkhaNunnaya - kUDAgAra - - nibha-piMDiyaggasirae, sAmali boMDaghaNa-
niciyaphoDiyamiu-visaya pasattha suhuma lakkhaNa- sugaMdha suMdara bhuyamoyaga
bhiMga - nIla- - kajjala - - pahi TTha bhamara - gaNa niddha nikuraMba niciya
kuMciya-payAhiNAvatta-muddha sirae, dADima puppha-pakAsa tavaNijja- sarisa -
nimmala-suNiddha ke saMta kesabhUmI, ghaNa-niciya - chattAgArUtamaMgadese,
NivvaNasama laTTha maTThacaMdaddha-sama- NiDAle, uDDuvai paDi puNNa soma-vadaNe,
allINa pamANajutta-savaNe, susavaNe, pINa maMsala - - kavola desabhAe,
ANAmiyacAva rUila-kiNhabbha- rAi taNu-kasiNa- Niddha-bhamuhe, avadAliya
puMDarIyaNayaNe, koyAsiya-dhavalapattalacche, garUlAyata - ujjutuMga NAse,
uvaciya-silappavAla biMbaphala saNNibhAdharoThThe, paMDura-sasi-sayala vimala
nimmala - saMkha- gokkhIra - pheNa kuMdadaga- raya - muNAliyA - dhavala
daMtaseDhI, akhaMDa daMte, apphuDiya - daMte, avirala daMte, suNiddha- daMte,
sujAya daMte, ega-daMtaseDhIviva-aNega daMte, huyavaha- NiddhaMtadhoyatatta-
tavaNijja-rattatala-tAlu-jIhe, avaTThiya- suvibhatta-citta-maMsu, maMsala -
saMThiya-pasattha-saddUla viula haNue, cauraMgula suppamANa kaMbu vara sarisa -
ggIve, vara mahisa- varAha sIha saddUlausabha nAga- - vara paDipuNNa - - viula
kkhaMdhe, juga-sannibha pINaraiya- pIvara - - pauThTha saMThiyasusiliTTha -
visiTTha- ghaNathirasubaddha- saMdhipura vara-phaliha - vaTTiya bhue, bhuya -
Isara - viula bhoga AdAna phalihaucchUDha - dIha bAhU, rattatalovaiyamauya-
maMsala - sujAya lakkhaNapasattha acchiddajAla - pANI, pIvara- komala-varaMgulI,
AyaMbataMba - taliNa- sui - rUila - Niddha-Nakkhe, caMdapANi lehe, sUra pANi-
lehe, saMkhapANi- lehe, cakka pANi- lehe, disA-sotthiya pANi lehe, caMda sUra -
saMkha - - cakka - disA sotthiya-pANi lehe, kaNaga- silAtalujjala pasattha - -
samatala - uvaciya vicchiNNa pihula-vacche, sirivacchaM-kiyavacche, akaraMDuya
kaNaga- rUiya nimmala - - sujAya nirUvahaya dehadhArI, aTThasahassa paDipuNNa
varapurisa - - lakkhaNadhare, saNNaya-pAse, saMgaya-pAse, suMdara -pAse, sujAya-
pAse, miya mAiya pINa raiya pAse, ujjuya- sama-sahiya-jaccataNu-kasiNa- Niddha
Aijja - laDaha-ramaNijja - roma - - rAI, jhasavihaga sujAya pINa kucchI,
jhasoyare, sui karaNe, pauma - viyaDa - NAbhe, gaMgAvattaka-
payAhiNAvattataraMga-bhaMgura - 1. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 3

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study: Gāthāpati Ānanda  [17 - The young sun-ray-like Bodhisattva, with a
lotus-like profound navel, the excellent Sāhya Soṇanda, with a golden-colored,
excellent, jewel-like, shining, excellent, diamond-like waist, the excellent,
tiger-like, excellent, buffalo-like, excellent, horse-like, excellent, elephant-
like gait, with a well-proportioned body, with excellent, elephant-like prowess,
shining with excellent, heroic movements, with the excellent, lion-like,
excellent, buffalo-like, excellent, horse-like posture, immersed in the ocean-
like, profound knowledge, with the excellent, elephant-like thighs, with well-
formed, excellent, hidden, profound calves, with beautifully placed, excellent,
delicate, graceful feet, with excellent, gradually tapering fingers, with
raised, slender, reddish-brown, excellent nails, with soft, tender, lotus-petal-
like soles, possessing the characteristics of eight thousand excellent men, with
the excellent, auspicious, elephant-like, lion-like, buffalo-like, horse-like
gait, with a distinguished appearance, shining like a blazing fire, without
impurities, without hatred, without greed, free from sorrow, with a body free
from defilements, devoid of love, hatred, and delusion, the expounder of the
doctrine of the Arhat, the leader of the scriptures, the establisher, the
ascetic, the one who has attained the state of an ascetic, possessing the
thirty-four vows that are completely fulfilled, possessing the thirty-five vows
that are completely fulfilled] approached.  The assembly went out like a king.
In the same way, the victorious one also went out. After going out, he
approached the temple where the two Palāsa trees were. After approaching, he saw
the Tīrthaṅkara, the venerable Mahāvīra, near the parasol. After seeing, he
placed the elephant-like jewel. After placing the elephant-like jewel, he
descended from the elephant-like jewel. After descending from the elephant-like
jewel, he brought the five royal insignia, namely the sword, the parasol, the
fly-whisk, the armor, and the victory banner. He approached the ascetic, the
venerable Mahāvīra. After approaching, he approached the ascetic, the venerable
Mahāvīra, in five ways: by purifying the material substances, by not purifying
the immaterial substances, by covering the upper robe, by the eye-contact with
folded hands, and by focusing the mind on oneness. He thrice invoked and
requested him. After invoking and requesting him thrice, he worships and pays
obeisance. After worshiping and paying obeisance, he dwells in the threefold
abiding, namely physical, verbal, and mental.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [17 -ravi-kiraNa-
tarUNabohiyaakosAyaMtapaumagaMbhIraviyaDa-NAbhe, sAhaya soNaMdamusaladappaNa-
Nikariya-vara-kaNaga-ccharU-sarisa-vara-vaira-valiamajjhe pamuiyavaraturaya-
sIha-vara-vaTTiya-kaDI, varaturaga-sujAya-gujjha-deze, AiNahaucca-
NirUvaleve,vara-vAraNa-tullavikkamavilasiya-gaI,gaya-sasaNa-sujAya-sannibhorU,
samugga-Nimagga-gUDha-jANU, eNIkurUviMdAvattavaTTANupuvvajaMghe,
saMThiyasusiliTThagUDha-gupphe, supaiTThiyakummacArUcalaNe, aNupuvva-
susaMhayaMgulIe, uNNayataNu-taMba-Niddha-Nakkhe, rattuppala-patamauasukumAla
komala-tale, aTTha-sahassa-varapurisa-lakkhaNadhare, naga-nagara-magara-sAgara-
cakkaMkavaraMka-maMgalaMkayacalaNe, visiTTha-rUve, huyavahaniLUmajaliyataDi-
taDiya-tarUNa-ravi-kiraNa-sarisa-tee, aNAsave, amame, akiMcaNe, chinnasoe,
nirUvaleve, vavagaya-pema-rAga-dosa-mohe, niggaMthassa pavayaNassa desae,
sattha-nAyage, paiTThAvae, samaNagapaI, samaNa-viMda-pariaTTae
cauttIsabaddhavayaNAtisesapatte, paNatIsa-sacca-vayaNAtise-sapatte. AgAsa-gaeNaM
cakkeNaM, AgAsa-gaeNaM chatteNaM, AgAsa-gayAhiM seya cAmarAhiM, AgAsa-phaliA-
gaeNaM, sapAyapIDheNaM, sIhAsaNeNaM, dhammajjhaeNaM purao pakaDhijamANeNaM,
cauddasahiMsamaNa sahassIhiM, chatIsAe ajjiyA- sahassIhiM saddhiM saMparivuDe,
puvvANupuvviM caramANe gAmANuggAmaM dUijjamANe suhaMsuheNaM viharamANe )
smosrie| parisA niggayA kUNie rAyA jahA, tahA jiyasattU niggcchi| niggacchittA
jAva (jeNeva dUipalAsae ceie, teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa adUrasAmaMte chattAIe titthayarAtisese pAsai, pAsittA AbhisekkaM
hatthi-rayaNaM Thavei, ThavittA AbhisekkAo hatthi-rayaNAo paccorUhai, AbhisekkAo
hatthi-rayaNAo paccorUhittA avahaTu paMca-rAya-kakuhAiM, taM jahAkhaggaM,
chattaM upphesaM, vAhaNAo, bAlavIyaNaM, jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre, teNeva,
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM paMcaviheNaM abhigameNaM
abhigacchai, taM jahAsaccittANaM davvANaM viusaraNayAe, accittANaM davvANaM
aviusaraNayAe, egasADiyaM uttarAsaMgaM karaNeNaM, cakkhuphAse aMjali-paggaheNaM,
maNaso egattabhAva-karaNeNaM samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM tikkhutto AyAhiNaM
payAhiNaM karei, tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karettA vaMdai NamaMsai, vaMdittA
NamaMsittA tivihAe pajjuvAsaNAe pajjuvAsai, taM jahAkAiAe, vAiAe, maannsiaae|
kAiAe tAva saMkuiyaggahatthapAe, sussUsamANe NamaMsamANe abhimuhe viNaeNaM
paMjaliuDe pajjuvAsai, vAiAejaM jaM bhagavaM vAgarei, taM taM evameyaM bhaMte !
tahameyaM bhaMte ! avitahameyaM bhaMte! asaMdiddhameyaM bhaMte ! icchiyameyaM
bhaMte ! paDicchiyameyaM bhaMte ! icchiya-paDicchiyameyaM bhaMte ! se jaheyaM
tubbhe vadaha, apaDikUlamANe pajjuvAsai, mANasiyAe mahayA saMvegaM jaNaittA
tivva-dhammANurAga-ratte)

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[18] [Upasakadasangasutra Pajjuvasai. At that time, the Shraman, engaged in
intense austerities and practices, the Lord, endowed with spiritual wealth,
Mahavira, was moving steadfastly on the path of practice amidst disturbances and
obstacles, [Adikara, the first propagator of Dharma in his era, the Tirthankara,
the establisher of the fourfold Dharma-Tirtha-Dharma-Sangha, consisting of
Sadhus, Sadhvis, Shravakas, and Shravikas, self-enlightened, self-realized
without any other cause, Purushottama, the best among men, Purusha-Simha, a lion
among men in terms of self-courage, Purushavara-Pundarika, like a lotus,
detached and free from attachment while living among humans, Purushavara-
Gandhasti, the best among men, like a Gandhasti, just as ordinary elephants flee
at the approach of a Gandhasti, similarly, upon his entry into a region,
calamities like famine, epidemics, etc., were dispelled, i.e., possessing an
extraordinary and influential personality, Abhayapradak, providing fearlessness
to all beings, completely non-violent, not causing fear to anyone, Chakshu-
Pradak, bestowing inner vision and true knowledge, Marg-Pradak, the revealer of
the path of practice, consisting of right knowledge, right faith, and right
conduct, Sharanaprad, a refuge for the inquisitive and the liberated,
Jeevanaprad, the strength of spiritual life, Deepak-sadrish, illuminating all
things like a lamp, or an island of refuge for those wandering in the ocean of
existence, a refuge, a guide, and a foundation for beings, like the ruler of the
earth with four boundaries, the Chakravarti of the religious world, Pratighat-
badha, free from obstacles or coverings, possessing supreme knowledge, faith,
etc., Vyavritta-chhadma, free from the coverings of ignorance, etc., Jita,
having conquered past attachments, etc., Jnayak, the knower of emotional
attachments, or Jnapak, the one who shows the path to conquer attachment, Tirna,
having crossed the ocean of existence, Tarak, the one who ferries others across
the ocean of existence, Mukta, free from external and internal bonds, Mochak,
the one who liberates others, Budd, having attained the knowledge of the
knowable, Bodhak, the one who enlightens others, Sarvajña, omniscient,
Sarvadarshi, all-seeing, Shiva, auspicious, Achal, stable, free from
disturbances, Antarhit, vanished, Kshayarhit, free from decay, Aparavartan,
where there is no return to the cycle of birth and death, Sampravritta, inclined
towards attaining the state of Siddha-gati, the state of Siddha, Arhat, worthy
of worship, Ragad-vijeta, the conqueror of attachments, Jin, possessing perfect
knowledge, Kevali, possessing perfect knowledge, seven cubits tall, Sama-
chauras-sansthan-sansthit, with a square body, Vajra-rishabha-naraacha-sanhanan,
with strong bones, Deha-antarvarti-pavan, with the proper speed and movement of
the internal wind, Kank-pakshi, with a flawless anus like a crane, Kabutar, with
the digestive power of a pigeon, his apan-sthan was as pure as a bird's, his
back, sides, and loins were well-developed, beautiful, and well-proportioned,
his mouth was fragrant with the breath of a lotus or a fragrant substance called
padma, and a blue lotus or a fragrant substance called utpala-kustha, his
complexion was excellent, his skin was excellent, he was healthy, excellent,
spacious, with very white flesh, his body was free from dirt, which was
difficult to remove, his body was free from dirt, which was easy to remove, his
body was free from blemishes, spots, sweat, and dirt, therefore, he was
extremely pure, his every limb was radiant, his head was high like the peak of a
mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of
a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak
of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the
peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like
the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high
like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was
high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head
was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his
head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves,
his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected
nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-
connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense,
well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with
dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain,
with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a
mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of
a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak
of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the
peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like
the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high
like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was
high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head
was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his
head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves,
his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected
nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-
connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense,
well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with
dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain,
with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a
mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of
a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak
of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the
peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like
the peak of

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra pjjuvaasi| usa samaya zramaNaghora tapa yA sAdhanA
rUpa zrama meM nirata, bhagavAnAdhyAtmika aizvaryasampanna, mahAvIra upadravoM
tathA vighnoM ke bIca sAdhanA-patha para vIratApUrvaka avicala bhAva se gatimAn
[Adikaraapane yuga meM dharma ke Adya pravartaka, tIrthaMkarasAdhu-sAdhvI-
zrAvaka-zrAvikA rUpa caturvidha dharma-tIrtha-dharmasaMgha ke pratiSThApaka,
svayaM saMbuddhasvayaM-binA kisI anya nimitta ke bodha-prApta, purUSottama-
purUSoM meM uttama, purUSa siMha-Atmazaurya meM purUSoM meM siMha-sadRza,
purUSavara-puMDarIka-manuSyoM meM rahate hue kamala kI taraha
nirlepaAsaktizUnya, purUSavara-gaMdhahastIpurUSoM meM uttama gandhahastI ke
sadRzajisa prakAra gandhahastI ke pahuMcate hI sAmAnya hAthI bhAga jAte haiM,
usI prakAra kSetra meM jinake praveza karate hI durbhikSa, mahAmArI Adi aniSTa
dUra ho jAte the, arthAt atizaya tathA prabhAvapUrNa uttama vyaktitva ke dhanI,
abhayapradAyaka- sabhI prANiyoM ke lie abhayaprada-sampUrNataH ahiMsaka hone ke
kAraNa kisI ke lie bhaya utpanna nahIM karane vAle, cakSu-pradAyaka-Antarika
netrasadjJAna dene vAle, mArga-pradAyaka samyak jJAna, darzana, cAritra rUpa
sAdhanA-patha ke udbodhaka, zaraNapradajijJAsu tathA mumukSu janoM ke lie
AzrayabhUta, jIvanaprada-AdhyAtmika jIvana ke saMbala, dIpaka sadRza samasta
vastuoM ke prakAzaka athavA saMsAra-sAgara meM bhaTakate janoM ke lie dvIpa
samAna AzrayasthAna, prANiyoM ke lie AdhyAtmika udbodhana ke nAte zaraNa, gati
evaM AdhArabhUta cAra anta-sImA yukta pRthvI ke adhipati ke samAna dhArmika
jagat ke cakravartI, pratighAta-bAdhA yA AvaraNa rahita uttama jJAna, darzana
Adi ke dhAraka, vyAvRttachadmAajJAna Adi AvaraNa rUpa chadma se atIta, jina-rAga
Adi ke jetA, jJAyaka-rAga Adi bhAvAtmaka sambandhoM ke jJAtA athavA jJApaka-rAga
ko jItane kA patha batAne vAle tIrNasaMsAra-sAgara ko pAra kara jAnevAle,
tArakasaMsAra-sAgara se pAra utArane vAle, muktabAharI aura bhItarI graMthiyoM
se chUTe hue, mocaka dUsaroM ko chur3Ane vAle, buddhaboddhavya jAnane yogya kA
bodha prApta kiye hue, bodhakaauroM ke lie bodhaprada, sarvajJa, sarvadarzI,
zivakalyANamaya, acalasthira nirUpadrava, antarahita, kSayarahita bAdhArahita,
apunarAvartanajahA~ se phira janma-maraNa rUpa saMsAra meM Agamana nahIM hotA,
aisI siddha-gatisiddhAvasthA nAmaka sthiti pAne ke lie saMpravRtta,
arhatpUjanIya, rAgAdivijetA, jina, kevalIkevalajJAna yukta, sAta hAtha kI
daihika UMcAI se yukta, samacaurasa-saMsthAna-saMsthita, vajra-RSabha-nArAca-
saMhananaasthibandha yukta, deha ke antarvartI pavana ke ucita vega-gatizIlatA
se yukta, kaMka pakSI kI taraha nirdoSa gudAzaya yukta, kabUtara kI taraha
pAcanazakti yukta unakA apAna-sthAna usI taraha nirlepa thA jaise pakSI kA,
pITha aura peTa ke bIca ke donoM pArzva tathA jaMdhAeM supariNata-sundara-
sugaThita thIM, unakA mukha padma kamala athavA padma nAmaka sugandhika dravya
tathA utpalanIla kamala yA utpalakuSTa nAmaka sugandhita dravya jaisI
surabhimaya niHzvAsa se yukta thA, chavi-uttama chavimAn-uttama tvacA yukta,
nIroga, uttama, prazasta, atyanta zveta mAMsa yukta, jallakaThinAI se chUTane
vAlA maila, mallaAsAnI se chuTanevAlA maila, kalaMka dAga, dhabbe, sveda pasInA
tathA raja-doSa miTTI lagane se vikRti-varjita zarIra yukta,ataeva nirUpalepa-
atyanta svaccha, dIpti se udyotita pratyeka aMgayukta, atyadhika saghana,
subaddha snAyubaMdha sahita lakSaNamaya parvata ke zikhara ke samAna unnata
unakA mastaka thA, bArIka rezo se bhare semala ke phala ke hita. uttama

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study: The Story of Anand] [19 Their hair, as soft as threads emerging
from a flower bud, bright, abundant, fine, smooth, fragrant, beautiful, reaching
the shoulders, sapphire blue, indigo blue, and jet black, was like a swarm of
happy, well-nourished bees, shining brightly on their head. The skin on which
their hair grew was radiant like pomegranate blossoms and gold, red, pure, and
smooth. Their upper head, the most excellent part, was dense, full, and
umbrella-shaped. Their forehead was free from any marks of boils, pimples, or
wounds, smooth, beautiful, and pure, resembling a magnificent half-moon. Their
face was gentle like a full moon. Their ears were beautifully joined with their
face, with the proper shape and proportions, making them look very beautiful.
Their cheeks were fleshy and well-nourished. Their eyebrows were beautifully
arched like a slightly drawn bow, thin like a line of black clouds, black, and
smooth. Their eyes were like blooming white lotuses. Their eyes were developed
like lotus petals, white, and adorned with eyelashes. Their nose was long,
straight, and elevated, like the beak of a Garuda. Their lips were like a
polished coral band or a bimba fruit. Their teeth were like pieces of a spotless
moon, purer than the purest conch shell, cow's milk, foam, kunda flower, water
drops, and lotus stalk, white. Their teeth were unbroken, complete, unblemished,
strong, free from cracks, continuous, close together, smooth, shining, well-
formed, and beautiful. Their many teeth appeared as one row of teeth. Their
tongue and palate were red like gold heated in fire and washed with water. Their
beard and mustache were never growing, well-divided, very light, and possessed
an extraordinary beauty. Their chin was fleshy, well-formed, strong, broad, and
wide like a cheetah. Their neck was four finger-breadths wide, with three folds,
and elevated like a fine conch shell. Their shoulders were full and broad, like
those of a strong buffalo, pig, lion, cheetah, bull, and a fine elephant. Their
arms were round and long, strong, pleasing to look at, with strong wrists, well-
joined, harmonious, distinct, thick, solid, stable, properly bound with tendons,
and round like the city gate. Their long arms were like the outstretched body of
a Naga king, ready to obtain the desired object. Their hands, from the wrist
down, were elevated, soft, fleshy, and well-formed. They were marked with
auspicious signs. When their fingers were joined, no gaps were visible. Their
palms were reddish. Their fingers were strong and soft. Their nails were
slightly reddish like copper, thin, white, pleasing to look at, smooth, and
soft. Their palms had auspicious lines of the moon, sun, conch, wheel, and
clockwise swastika. Their chest was bright like the surface of a golden rock,
broad, flat, properly fleshy, wide, and vast. It bore the mark of the Srivatsa
swastika. Due to the fleshiness or fullness of their body, their spine was not
visible. Their body was radiant like gold, pure, beautiful, free from blemishes,
and free from disease and defects. It possessed all 1008 marks of a perfect man.
The sides of their body...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [19 phaTane se nikalate hue rezoM jesI
komala, vizada, prazasta, sUkSma, zlakSNamulAyama, surabhita, sundara,
bhujamocaka, nIlama, bhiMga nIla, kajjala prahRSTasupuSTa bhramaravRnda jaise
camakIle kAle, ghane, ghugharAle, challedAra keza unake mastaka para the, jisa
tvacA para unake bAla uge hue the, vaha anAra ke phUla tathA sone ke samAna
dIptimaya, lAla, nirmala aura cikanI thI, unakA uttamAMga mastaka kA UparI bhAga
saghana, bharA huA aura chatrAkAra thaa| unakA lalATa nivraNa-phor3e-phunsI Adi
ke ghAvacihna se rahita, samatala tathA sundara evaM zuddha arddha candra ke
sadRza bhavya thA, unakA mukha pUrNa candra ke samAna saumya thA, unake kAna
mukha ke sAtha sundara rUpa meM saMyukta aura pramANopetasamucita AkRti ke the,
isalie ve bar3e sundara lagate the, unake kapola mAMsala aura paripuSTa the,
unakI bhauMhe kucha khIMce hue dhanuSa ke samAna sundara-Ter3hI, kAle bAdala kI
rekhA ke samAna kRza patalI, kAlI evaM snigdha thI, unake nayana khile hue
puMDarIka- sapheda kamala ke samAna the, unakI AMkhe padmakamala kI taraha
vikasita dhavala tathA patralabaraunI yukta thI, unakI nAsikA garUr3a kI
tarahagarUr3a kI coMca kI taraha lambI, sIdhI aura unnata thI, saMskArita yA
sughaTita mUMge kI paTTI-jaise yA bimba phala ke sadRza unake hoTha the, unake
dAMtoM kI zreNI niSkalaMka candramA ke Tukar3e, nirmala se bhI nirmala zaMkha,
gAya ke dUdha, phena, kuMda ke phUla, jalakaNa aura kamalanAla ke samAna saphade
thI, dAMta akhaMDa, paripUrNa, asphuTitasudRDha, TUTaphUTa rahita,
aviralaparaspara saTe hue, susnigdhacikaneAbhAmaya sujAtasundarAkAra the, aneka
dAMta eka danta-zreNI kI taraha pratIta hote the, jihvA aura tAlu agni meM
tapAye hue aura jala se dhoye hue svarNa ke samAna lAla the, unakI dAr3hI-mUMcha
avasthita kabhI nahIM bar3hane vAlI, suvibhakta bahuta halakIsI tathA adbhuta
sundaratA lie hue thI, ThuDDI mAMsalasugaThita, supuSTa, prazasta tathA cIte kI
taraha vipula vistIrNa thI, grIvA-gardana-cAra aMgula pramANacAra aMgula caur3I
tathA uttama zaMkha ke samAna tribaliyukta evaM unnata thI, unake kandhe prabala
bhaiMse, sUara, siMha, cIte, sAMDa ke tathA uttama hAthI ke kandhoM jaise
paripUrNa evaM vistIrNa the, unakI bhujAeM yuga-gAr3I ke jue athavA yUpayajJa
stambhakhuMTe kI taraha gola aura lambe, sudRr3ha, dekhane meM Anandaprada,
supuSTa kalAiyoM se yukta, suzliSTasusaMgata, viziSTa, ghanaThosa, sthira,
snAyuoM se yathAvat rUpa meM subaddha tathA nagara kI argalA Agala ke samAna
golAI lie huI thIM, icchita vastu prApta karane ke lie nAgarAja ke phaile hue
vizAla zarIra kI taraha unake dIrgha bAhu the, unake pANikalAI se nIce ke hAtha
ke bhAga unnata, komala, mAMsala tathA sugaThita the, zubha lakSaNoM se yukta
the, aMguliyA~ milAne para unameM chidra dikhAI nahIM dete the, unake
talahatheliyA~ lalAI lie hae thIM, hAthoM kI aMgaliyA~ paSTa aura sakomala thIM.
unake nakha tAMbe kI taraha kacha-kacha lalAI lie hue, patale, ujale,
rUciradekhane meM rUcikara,snigdha, sukomala the, unakI hathelI candra, sUrya,
zaMkha, cakra, dakSiNAvarta svastika kI zubha rekhAeM thIM, unakA
vakSasthalasInA svarNa-zilA ke tala ke samAna ujjavala, prazasta, samatala,
upacitamAMsala, vistIrNacaur3A, pRthula[vizAla] thA, usa para zrIvatsasvastika
kA cihna thA, deha kI mAMsalatA yA paripuSTatA ke kAraNa rIr3ha kI haDDI nahIM
dikhAI detI thI, unakA zarIra svarNa ke samAna kAntimAn, nirmala, sundara
nirUpahataroga-doSavarjita thA, usameM uttama purUSa ke 1008 lakSaNa pUrNatayA
vidyamAna the, unakI deha ke pArzva bhAga

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[20] [Upasakadasangasutra] The ascetics were slender towards the bottom,
gradually narrowing, proportionate to their bodies, beautiful, well-developed,
with a pleasing amount of flesh, their chests and abdomens were straight, even,
joined together, of excellent quality, fine, light, black, smooth, desirable,
excellent, graceful, charming hair, their flanks below the abdomen on both sides
were well-formed, well-developed, beautiful, like fish and birds, their abdomen
was like a fish, their abdominal organ, the group of intestines, was pure,
clean, and clear, their navel was like a lotus, prominent, deep, round like the
whirlpool of the Ganges, swirling like waves on the right side, beautiful,
shining, like a lotus blooming with the rays of the sun, and the middle part of
their body was like the middle part of a trikaṣṭhika, a pestle, and a mirror
handle, like the hilt of a sword, and like a fine vajra, round and thin, their
waist was round, like the waist of a healthy, excellent horse and an excellent
lion, free from diseases, sorrows, etc., their private parts were like the well-
developed private parts of an excellent horse, their bodies were free from the
need to excrete feces and urine, like a horse of the best breed, their gait was
like that of an excellent elephant, with strength and gravity, their thighs were
well-formed, like the trunk of an elephant, their knees were hidden, like the
lid of a box, not protruding due to fleshiness, their shins were round, like the
shins of a deer, ruby grass, and a ball of spun thread, with a gradual slope,
their ankles were beautiful, well-formed, and hidden, their feet were well-
established, beautifully formed, and seemed pleasing because they were raised
like a tortoise, their toes were small and large in proportion, joined together
in a beautiful way, their nails were prominent, thin, red like copper, smooth
and oily, their soles were soft, delicate, and tender, like the petals of a red
lotus, their bodies displayed the 1008 marks of excellent men, their feet were
marked with excellent signs and auspicious swastika marks, in the form of
mountains, cities, crocodiles, oceans, and wheels, their appearance was unique
and extraordinary, their brilliance was like the smokeless flame of fire, vast
electricity, and the rays of the newly risen sun, they were free from violence,
etc., free from attachment, without possessions, they had cut off the flow of
existence, they had transcended birth and death, they were pure in body, free
from impurities, and free from the karma-bond in terms of their mental state,
they had destroyed love, attachment, hatred, and delusion, they were teachers of
the Nirgrantha teachings, leaders, founders, and masters of the Dharma,
surrounded by a group of ascetics, they possessed the thirty-four Buddha-
atiśayas and the thirty-five satya-vacana-atiśayas of the Jinas, a celestial
chariot, three celestial umbrellas, a celestial whisk, a throne made of pure
crystal like the sky, a footstool, and a Dharma flag were moving ahead of them,
they were surrounded by fourteen thousand monks and thirty-six thousand nuns,
they were moving forward, from village to village, enjoying their journey, the
Lord arrived at the Duṭīpālaśa Caitya in the city of Vāṇijyagrāma, they took a
suitable place to stay, they were seated, meditating on the soul through
restraint and austerity, the assembly gathered, King Jitasatru, King Kūṇika.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 20] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra pasavAr3e nIce kI ora kramazaH saMkar3e, deha ke
pramANa ke anurUpa, sundara, suniSpanna, atyanta samucita parimANa meM mAMsalatA
lie hue manohara the, unake vakSa aura udara para sIdhe, samAna, saMhitaeka
dUsare se mile hue, utkRSTa koTi ke, sUkSmahalake, kAle, cikane, upAdeya-uttama,
lAvaNyamaya, ramaNIya bAloM kI paMkti thI, unake kukSi-pradezaudara ke nIce ke
donoM pArzva matsya aura pakSI ke samAna sujAta suniSpannasundara rUpa meM
racita tathA pInaparipuSTa the, unakA udara matsya ke jaisA thA, unake udara kA
karaNaAntra-samUha zuci-svaccha-nirmala thA, unakI nAbhi kamala kI taraha
vikaTagUDha, gaMgA ke bhaMvara kI taraha gola, dAhinI ora cakkara kATatI huI
taraMgoM kI taraha ghumAvadAra, sundara , camakate hue sUrya kI kiraNoM se
vikasita hote kamala ke samAna khilI huI thI tathA unakI deha kA madhya bhAga
trikASThikA, mUsala va darpaNa ke hatthe ke madhya-bhAga ke samAna, talavAra kI
mUTha ke samAna tathA uttama vajra ke samAna gola aura patalA thA,
pramuditaroga, zokAdi rahita svastha, uttama ghor3e tathA uttama siMha kI kamara
ke samAna unakI kamara gola gherAva lie thI, uttama ghor3e ke suniSpanna
guptAMga kI taraha unakA guhya bhAga thA, uttama jAti ke azva kI taraha unakA
zarIra 'malamUtra' visarjana kI apekSA se nirlepa thA, zreSTha hAthI ke tulya
parAkrama aura gambhIratA lie unakI cAla thI, hAthI kI sUMDa kI taraha unakI
donoM jaMghAeM sugaThita thIM, unake ghuTane Dibbe ke Dhakkana kI taraha
nigUr3ha themAMsalatA ke kAraNa anunnata bAhara nahIM nikale hue the, unakI
piNDaliyA~ hariNI kI piNDaliyoM, kurUvinda ghAsa tathA kate hue sUta kI geMDhI
kI taraha kramaza:utAra sahita gola thI, unake Takhane sundara, sugaThita aura
nigUDha the, unake caraNapaira sapratiSThitasandara racanAyakta tathA kachave kI
taraha uThe hae hone se manojJa pratIta hote the.unake pairoM kI aMgaliyA~
kramaza: AnapAtika rUpa meM choTI-baDI evaM sasaMhatasandara rUpa meM eka dUsare
se saTI huIM thIM, pairoM ke nakha unnata, patale, tAMbe kI taraha lAla,
snigdhacikane the, unakI pagathaliyA~ lAla kamala ke patte ke samAna mRdula,
sukumAra tathA komala thIM, unake zarIra meM uttama purUSoM ke 1008 lakSaNa
prakaTa the, unake caraNa parvata, nagara, magara, sAgara tathA cakra rUpa
uttama cihnoM aura svastika maMgalacihnoM se aMkita the, unakA rUpa
viziSTaasAdhAraNa thA, unakA teja agni kI nidhUma jvAlA, vistIrNa vidyuta tathA
abhinava sUrya kI kiraNoM ke samAna thA, ve prANAtipAta Adi Astrava-rahita,
mamatA-rahita the, akiMcana the, bhava-pravAha ko ucchinna kara cuke thejanma-
maraNa se atIta ho cuke the, nirUpalepadravya-dRSTi se nirmala dehadhArI tathA
bhAva-dRSTi se karmabandha ke hetu rUpa upalepa se rahita the, prema, rAga,
dveSa aura moha kA nAza kara cuke the, nirgranthapravacana ke upadeSTA,
dharmazAsana ke nAyakazAstA, pratiSThApaka tathA zramaNa-pati the, zramaNavRnda
se ghire hue the, jinezvaroM ke cautIsa buddha-atizayoM se tathA paiMtIsa satya-
vacanAtizayoM se yukta the, AkAzagata cakra, chatra [tIna], AkAzagata caMvara,
AkAza ke samAna svaccha sphaTika se bane pAdapITha sahita siMhAsana,
dharmadhvajaye unake Age cala rahe the, caudaha hajAra sAdhu tathA chattIsa
hajAra sAdhviyoM se saMparivRtaghire hue the, Age se Age calate hue, eka gAMva
se dUsare gAMva hote hue sukhapUrvaka vihAra karate hue, bhagavAn vANijyagrAma
nagara meM dUtIpalAza caitya meM pdhaare| Thaharane ke lie yathocita sthAna
grahaNa kiyA, saMyama va tapa se AtmA ko anubhAvita karate hue virAjamAna hue-
Tike ,pariSad jur3I, rAjA jitazatru rAjA kUNika

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: The Story of Anand  [21]  Like this, the Lord went out to see
and worship the Lord [He came to the Duitipalasa Caitya]. Arriving, he stopped
at a suitable place, neither too far nor too close to the Lord. Seeing the
umbrellas and other extraordinary things of the Tirthankaras, he stopped his
chief elephant, dismounted, and removed his sword, umbrella, crown, and fly
whisk, the royal insignia. He removed his shoes and went to where the Lord
Mahavira was. Arriving, he performed the five practices: the separation of pure
substances, the non-separation of impure and non-living substances, the wearing
of an unbroken, unsewn garment like a Uttariya on his shoulder, the joining of
his hands upon seeing the Dharma-Nayaka, and the concentration of his mind.
Following these five practices, King Jitasatru went before the Lord. He
circumambulated the Lord three times to the right, bowed, and prostrated. After
bowing and prostrating, he performed physical, verbal, and mental worship. As
physical worship, he sat with his hands and feet contracted, his face turned
towards the Lord, listening attentively, and with joined hands in humility. As
verbal worship, he spoke words of agreement, saying, "Yes, Bhagavan! This is the
truth, Bhagavan! This is the truth, Prabhu! This is without doubt, Swami! This
is desired, Bhagavan! This is accepted, Prabhu! This is desired, Bhagavan! As
you say!" As mental worship, he generated intense devotion and a strong desire
for liberation within himself.  **Anand's Worship**  10. Then Anand, the story-
teller, said, "Like this, the Samana [Mahavira] went out, walking from village
to village, staying here and there, in this town, in this village, or outside
the town of the merchants, in the Duitipalasa Caitya. He stayed there,
controlling himself with restraint and mindfulness. He thought to himself, 'Oh,
Lord! Beloved of the Gods! For the sake of hearing the name of the Arhats, the
Bhagavans, what to speak of approaching, bowing, prostrating, asking questions,
and staying with them! For the sake of hearing one single righteous, virtuous,
and good word, what to speak of grasping the vast meaning! I will go, Lord! I
will go to see the Samana, the Bhagavan Mahavira. I will bow to him, prostrate
to him, honor him, respect him, and stay with him for the sake of good fortune
and auspiciousness.'  Thus, he resolved. Having resolved, he looked around, put
on his pure white clothes, adorned himself with auspicious ornaments, and,
wearing his fine garments and adorned with beautiful jewelry, he left his house.
Having left, he rode in a chariot drawn by strong, powerful horses, with an
umbrella held over him, and surrounded by a group of men. He went through the
town of the merchants, and, having gone through, he went to the Duitipalasa
Caitya, where the Samana, the Bhagavan Mahavira, was. Arriving, he performed the
three prostrations.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda ] [ 21 kI taraha bhagavAn ke darzana
vandana ke lie nikalA, [dUtIpalAza caitya meM AyA  / ] Akara bhagavAn ke na
adhika dUra na adhika nikaTa - - samucita sthAna para rUkA  /  tIrthaMkaroM ke
chatra Adi - atizayoM ko dekha kara apanI savArI ke pramukha uttama hAthI ko
ThaharAyA, hAthI se nIce utarA, utara kara talavAra, chatra, mukuTa, caMvara ina
rAja-cihnoM ko alaga kiyA, jUte utAre  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra jahAM the vahAM
aayaa| Akara, sacitapadArthoM kA vyutsarjana alaga karanA, acittaajIva padArtho
kA avyut-sarjana alaga na karanA akhaNDa anasile vastra kA uttarAsaMga uttarIya
kI taraha kandhe para DAla kara dhAraNa karanA, dharma- nAyaka para dRSTi
par3ate hI hAtha jor3anA, mana ko ekAgra karanAina pAMca niyamoM ke
anupAlanapUrvaka rAjA jitazatru bhagavAn ke sammukha gyaa| bhagavAn ko tIna bAra
AdakSiNa pradakSiNA kara vandanA kI, namaskAra kiyA  /  vandanA, namaskAra kara
kAyika, vAcika, mAnavika rUpa se paryupAsanA kI  /  kAyika paryupAsanA ke rUpa
meM hAtha-pairoM ko saMkucita kie hue - - sikor3e hue, zuzrUSA sunane kI icchA
karate hue bhagavAn kI ora muMha kiye, vinaya se hAtha jor3e hue sthita rahA  /
vAcika purvapAsanA ke rUpa meM jo-jo bhagavAn bolate the, usake lie yaha aisA hI
hai bhante ! yahI tathya hai bhagavan ! yahI satya hai prabho ! yahI sandeha -
rahita hai svAmI ! yahI icchita hai bhante ! yahI pratIcchita svIkRta hai,
prabho! yahI icchita pratIcchita hai bhante ! jaisA Apa kaha rahe haiM ! isa
prakAra anukUla vacana bolatA rahA ! mAnasika paryupAsanA ke rUpa meM apane meM
atyanta saMvega mumukSu bhAva utpanna karatA huA tIvra dharmAnurAga se anurakta
rhaa| Ananda dvArA vandana 10. tae NaM se ANaMde gAhAvaI imIse kahAe laTThe
samANe evaM khalu samaNe jAva (bhagavaM mahAvIre puvvANupuvvi caramANe
gAmANuggAmaM dUijjamANe ihamAgae, iha saMpatte, iha samosaDhe, iheva
vANiyagAmassa nayarassa bahiyA dUipalAsae ceie ahApaDirUvaM oggahaM ogiNhittA
saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe ) viharai, taM mahaphphalaM jAva (khalu bho!
devANuppiyA ! tahArUvANaM arahaMtANaM bhagavaMtANaM NAma- goyassa vi savaNayAe,
kimaMga puNa abhigamaNa-vaMdaNa - NamaMsaNa- paDipucchaNa-pajjuvAsaNayAe !
egassa vi Ariyassa dhammiyassa suvayaNassa savaNayAe, kimaMga puNa viulassa
aThThassa gahaNayAe ? taM gacchAmi gaM devAppA! samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM
vaMdAmi NamaMsAmi sakkAremi sammANemi kallANaM maMgalaM devayaM ceiyaM
pajjuvAsAmi ) - evaM saMpehei, saMpehittA pahAe, suddhappAvesAI maMgalAI
batthAiM pavara-parihie, appamahagdhAbharaNAlaMkiya- sarIre sayAo gihAo
paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA sakoreNTa-malla-dAmeNaM chatteNaM dharijjamANeNaM
maNussa vaggurA-parikkhitte pAya-vihAracAreNaM vANiyaggAmaM nayaraM majjhaM
majjheNaM niggacchar3a, niggacchittA jeNAmeva dUipalAse ceie, jeNeva samaNe
bhagavaM mahAvIre teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM
karei,

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Upāsakadaśāṅgasūtra Karettā Vandai Namasi Jāva' Pajjuvāsai.  Then Ānanda
Gāthāpati, on seeing the chief people of the city going to worship the Lord,
came to know that the Ascetic Lord Mahāvīra [in due order, proceeding from
village to village, touching one village after another, has come here, has
arrived, has assembled, has come] is absorbed in self-contemplation and
austerity in the Dūtīpalāśa Caitya outside the commercial town. Therefore, I
shall obtain the great fruit of his Darśana. [Even to hear the name, gotra of
such a Arhat Lord is a very great thing, then to go in his presence, to pay
obeisance, to ask questions, to do paryupāsanā - what to say of these? Even to
hear one good word full of virtues and Dharma is a very great thing; then what
to say of grasping the vast and extensive meaning? Therefore, it is good that I
go and pay homage to the Ascetic Lord Mahāvīra, honour and respect him. The Lord
is auspicious, is a deity, is a Tīrtha-form, I shall do paryupāsanā of him.]
Thus thinking, Ānanda bathed, put on clean and assembly-worthy auspicious
clothes, adorned his body with a few but precious ornaments, came out of his
house, holding an umbrella decorated with fresh flowers, surrounded by men, and
passed through the middle of the commercial town where the Dūtīpalāśa Caitya
was, where Lord Mahāvīra was. On reaching there, he circumambulated three times,
paid obeisance, worshipped.  Dharmadeśanā  Then the Ascetic Lord Mahāvīra, in
the presence of that great and large assembly of Ānanda the householder, and
others [such as Ṛṣi-parisā, Muni-parisā, Jati-parisā, Deva-parisā, of many
hundreds, of many hundreds of worshippers, of the assembly surrounded by many
hundreds of worshippers, of great power, of great strength, of immense power and
energy, of resplendent beauty, with a sweet, deep, and melodious voice like the
sound of a kettle-drum, with a broad chest, firm and steady gait, fluent speech,
in the Ardhamāgadhī language], expounds the Dharma to them all, both noble and
ignoble, without any fatigue.  That Ardhamāgadhī language becomes the common
language of them all. That is, there are in the world, there are in the non-
world, thus there are jīvas, ajīvas, bandha, mokṣa, puṇya, pāpa, āsrava,
saṃvara, vedanā, nirjarā, arihantās, cakravartins, baladeva, vāsudevas, nāraka,
nāraki, tiryañc-yoni, tiryañc-yonī, māyā, piśācas, devas, devaloka, siddhi,
siddhas, parinirvāṇa, parinirvṛta, there is prāṇātipātā, mṛṣāvādā, adattādānā,
...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra karettA vaMdai namasai jAva' pjjuvaasi| taba Ananda
gAthApati ko isa vArtA se-prasaMga se nagara ke pramukha janoM ko bhagavAn kI
vandanA ke lie jAte dekhakara jJAta huA, zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra [yathAkrama
Age se Age vihAra karate hue, grAmAnugrAma vicaraNa karate hueeka gAMva se
dUsare gAMva kA sparza karate hue yahAM Ae haiM , saMprApta hue haiM, samavasRta
hue haiM,padhAre haiN| yahIM vANijyagrAma nagara ke bAhara dUtIpalAza caitya meM
yathocita sthAna meM Tike hai,] saMyama aura tapapUrvaka Atma-ramaNa meM lIna
haiN| isalie maiM unake darzana kA mahAn phala prApta kruuN| [aise arhat
bhagavAn ke nAma, gotra kA sunanA bhI bahuta bar3I bAta hai, phira
abhigamanasammukha jAnA, vandanA, namana, pratipRcchAjijJAsA karanA-unase
pUchanA, paryupAsanA karanAinakA to kahanA hI kyA? sadguNa-nippanna,
saddharmamaya eka suvacana kA zravaNa bhI bahuta bar3I bAta hai; phira vipula
vistRta artha ke grahaNa kI to bAta hI kyA? isalie acchA ho, maiM jAUM aura
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vandana karUM, satkAra karuM tathA sammAna karUM  /
bhagavAn kalyANa haiM, maMgala haiM, deva haiM ,tIrtha-svarUpa haiM, inako
paryupAsanA kruuN|] Ananda ke mana meM yoM vicAra aayaa| usane snAna kiyA,
zuddha tathA sabhA-yogya mAMgalika vastra acchI taraha phne| thor3e se kintu
bahumUlya AbharaNoM se zarIra ko alaMkRta kiyA, apane ghara se nikalA, nikala
kara kuraMTa-puSpoM kI mAlA se yukta chatra dhAraNa kiye hue, purUSoM se ghirA
huA, paidala calatA huA vANijyagrAma nagara ke bIca meM se gujarA jahAM
dUtIpalAza caitya thA, bhagavAn mahAvIra the, vahAM phuNcaa| pahuMcakara tIna
bAra AdakSiNapradakSiNA kI, vandana kiyA namaskAra kiyA, paryupAsanA kii|.
dharma-dezanA 11. tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre ANaMdassa gAhAvaissa tIse ya
mahai-mahAliyAe parisAe jAva dhamma-kahA (isi-parisAe, muNi-parisAe, jai-
parisAe, deva-parisAe, aNega sayAe, aNega-sayavaMdAe, aNeya-saya-vaMda-
parivArAe, ohabale, aibale, mahabbale, aparimiya-bala-
vIriyateyamAhappakaMtijutte, sArada-navatthaNiya-mahura-gaMbhIra-koMcaNigghosa-
duMdubhissare, ure vitthaDAe, kaThe'vaTThiyAe, sarassaIe, joyaNaNIhAriNA sareNaM
addhamAgahAe bhAsAe bhAsati, arihA dhamma parikahei tesiM savvesiM
AriyamaNAriyANaM agilAe dhmmmaaikkhi| sA viyaNaM addhamAgahA bhAsA tesiM
savvesiM AriyamaNAriyANaM appaNo sabhAsAe prinnmi| taM jahAatthi loe, atthi
aloe, evaM jIvA, ajIvA, baMdhe, mokkhe, puNNe, pAve, Asave, saMvare, veyaNA,
NijarA, arihaMtA, cakkavaTTI, baladevA, vAsudevA, naragA, neraiyA,
tirakkhajoNiyA, tirikhajoNiNIo,mAyA, piyA risayo, devA, devaloyA, siddhI,
siddhA, pariNivvANaM, pariNivvuyA, atthi pANAivAe, musAvAe, adiNNIdANe, 1.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 2

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Study: Gāthāpati Ānanda] . [In the 23 Mehuṇa-pariggahe, there are Kōha
(anger), Māṇa (pride), Māyā (deceit), Lōbha (greed) up to (Pejjā, Dōsa, Kalaha,
Abbhakkhāṇa, Pesunṇa, Paraparivaḍe, Aratiratī, Māyāmōsa,) Micchā-daṃsaṇa-salla
(wrong belief), there is Pāṇātivāya-veramaṇe (abstinence from killing living
beings), Musāvāya-veramaṇe (abstinence from false speech), Adinnādāna-veramaṇe
(abstinence from stealing), Mehuṇa-veramaṇe (abstinence from sexual misconduct),
Pariggaha-veramaṇe (abstinence from attachment) up to Micchādaṃsaṇa-salla-vivēga
(separation from wrong belief). He declares that everything has the nature of
existence, everything has the nature of non-existence, well-performed karmas
bear good fruits, ill-performed karmas bear bad fruits, he experiences merit and
demerit, the souls transmigrate, the auspicious and meritorious are successful.
He expounds the Dharma, this very Nirgranthas' (Jain) teaching, which is true,
unsurpassed, absolute, pure, complete, leading to the goal, sharp-edged, the
path to perfection, the path to liberation, the path to one's own nature, the
path to Nirvāṇa, the path that removes all sufferings without any falsehood or
deception. The living beings here attain, understand, get liberated, and
completely extinguish all sufferings. Some, however, by the residue of their
past karmas, are reborn as deities in other celestial realms, attaining great
powers and great happiness, distant and long-lasting. There, they become deities
with great powers and long-lasting, adorned with garlands and ornaments, shining
brightly, with auspicious and meritorious births, stays, and arrivals. Thus,
living beings perform karmas for rebirth in the hells through four means: great
violence, great attachment, the five senses, and impure food. Similarly, through
this craving, they are reborn in the animal world through deceitfulness,
cunning, false speech, greed, and deception. In the human world, through natural
goodness, natural discipline, tolerance of abuse, and non-possessiveness. In the
celestial realms, through controlled passion, mixed control and non-control,
effortless karmic shedding, and the austerities of childhood. He explains how
beings go to the hells, the hells where they experience birth-related
sufferings, the bodily and mental sufferings of the animal world, the
impermanence, suffering, old age, death, and afflictions of the human world, and
the happiness of the celestial realms. He also describes the hells, the animal
world, the human state, the celestial realms, and the Siddhas' abode, the six
types of living beings. He explains how beings get bound, how they get
liberated, and how some attain the end of sufferings without any obstruction.
The eighty-four-aspected minds through which living beings enter the ocean of
suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] . [23 mehuNe prigghe| atthi kohe, mANe,
mAyA, lobhe jAva (pejje, dose, kalahe, abbhakkhANe, pesunne, paraparivAe
arairaI, mAyAmose,) micchA-dasaNa-salle, atthi pANAivAya-veramaNe, musAvAya-
veramaNe, adiNNAdANa-veramaNe, mehuNa-veramaNe, pariggaha-veramaNe jAva
micchaadNsnn-sll-vivege| savvaM atthibhAvaM atthitti vayati, savvaM Natthi-
bhAvaM Nasthitti vayati, suciNNA kammA suciNNa-phalA bhavaMti, ducciNNA kammA
ducciNNaphalA bhavaMti, phusai puNNa-pAve, paccAyaMti jIvA, saphale kllaann-
paave| dhammamAikkhai-iNameva niggaMthe pAvayaNe sacce, aNuttare, ke valie,
saMsuddhe, paDipuNNe, NeyAue, sallakattaNe, siddhimagge, muttimagge NijANamagge,
NivvANamagge, avitahamavisaMdhi svvdukkh-pphiinn-mgge| ihaTThiyA jIvA sijhaMti
bujjhaMti muccaMti pariNivvAyaMti savvadukkhANamaMtaM kreti| egaccA puNa ege
bhayaMtAro puvva-kammAvaseseNa aNNayaresu devaloesu devattAe uvavattAro
bhavaMti, mahiDDiesu jAva mahAsukkhesu dUraMgaiesa cirtttthiiesu| teNaM tattha
devA bhavaMti mahiDDiyA jAva ciraTThiiyA hAra-virAiyavacchA jAva pabhAsemANA,
kappovagA gatikallANA ThiikallANA Agamesi bhaddA jAva paDirUvA tmaaikkhi| evaM
khalu cauhi ThANehiM jIvA NeraiyattAe kammaM pakareMti, NeraiyattAe kamma
pakarettA raiesu uvavajati, taM jahA mahAraMbhayAe, mahApariggahayAe,
paMciMdiyavaheNaM, kunnimaahaarennN| evaM eeNaM abhilAveNaM tirikkha-joNiesu
mAillayAe, NiyaDillayAe, aliya-vayaNeNaM, ukkaMcaNAe, vNcnnyaae| maNussesu
pagaibhaddayAe, pagaiviNIyayAe, sANukkosayAe amcchriyaae| devesu
sarAgasaMjameNaM, saMjamAsaMjameNa, akAmaNijjarAe, baaltvo-kmmennN| tamAikkhai
jaha NaragA gammaMti, je NaragA jAya-veyaNA nnre| sArIra-mANasAiM, dukkhAiM
tirikkhjonniie|| mANussaMca aNiccaM, vaahi-jraa-mrnn-veynnaa-purN| deve ya
devaloe, devaDhei dev-sokkhaaii|| NaragaM tirikkhajoNiM mANusabhAvaM ca
devalogaM c| siddhe ya siddha-vasahiM , chajjIvaNiyaM parikahe i|| jaha jIvA
bajhaMti, muccaMti jaha ya prikilissNti| jaha dukkhANaM aMtaM, kareMti keI ya
apddibddhaa|| aTTa-duhaTTiya-cittA, jaha jIvA dukkh-saagrmuveNti|

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[24] [Upasakadasangasutra] Just as a seed, when it sprouts, sheds its husk, just
as the fruit of actions is obtained through attachment, just as those who have
abandoned their actions go to the abode of the Siddhas, so too is Dharma of two
kinds, namely, household Dharma and non-household Dharma. Non-household Dharma
is this: one who has renounced the household life, having shaved his head,
renounces the household life, refrains from all killing, refrains from all
falsehood, refrains from all taking what is not given, refrains from all sexual
misconduct, refrains from all attachment, refrains from all royal food. O
friend! This is the Dharma prescribed for the non-household life. One who has
renounced the household life, having received instruction in this Dharma,
becomes a Niggantha, a Niggantha who lives in accordance with the teachings. _
Household Dharma is of twelve kinds, namely, five Anuvvayai, three Gunavvayai,
and four Sikkhavayai. The five Anuvvayai are: refraining from gross killing,
refraining from gross falsehood, refraining from gross taking what is not given,
contentment with little, and moderation in desires. The three Gunavvayai are:
refraining from punishment for wrongdoing, seeing things as they are, and
moderation in enjoyment and consumption. The four Sikkhavayai are: Samaiya,
Desavagasiya, Posho-vavase, Atihi-sanvibhaage, Apchchhima-maranantiya-sanlehana-
jhushana-rahana. O friend! This is the Dharma prescribed for the household life.
One who has renounced the household life, having received instruction in this
Dharma, becomes a Samanovasaya, a Samanovasaya who lives in accordance with the
teachings. Then, that great assembly of people, filled with joy and delight,
with minds full of faith, with hearts filled with peace, with supreme joy, with
hearts overflowing with love and compassion, rose up and, with great reverence,
went to the presence of the Jina, the Great Hero, and, having reached him, bowed
down and prostrated themselves. Having bowed down and prostrated themselves,
they renounced the household life, having shaved their heads, and became
Nigganthas. They renounced the household life, having received instruction in
the five Anuvvayai, the seven Sikkhavayai, and the twelve kinds of household
Dharma. The rest of the assembly bowed down and prostrated themselves before the
Jina, the Great Hero, and, having bowed down and prostrated themselves, said:
"Well done, O Nigganthas! You are worthy of praise! You are well-established,
well-spoken, well-behaved, well-natured, and unsurpassed! You are worthy of
praise, O Nigganthas! You have taught us the Dharma. Having taught us the
Dharma, you have taught us renunciation. Having taught us renunciation, you have
taught us restraint. Having taught us restraint, you have taught us to refrain
from doing actions that lead to suffering. There are no other Samanas or
Brahmanas who have taught such a Dharma. What more can be said? Having said
this, they went in the same direction they had come from." The king also went.
After that, the Jina, the Great Hero, preached Dharma to Ananda Gathapati and
the great assembly.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra jaha veraggamuvagayA, kamma-samuggaM vihADe ti|| jaha
rAgeNa kaDANaM, kammANaM pAvao phl-vivaago| jaha ya parihINakammA, siddhA
siddhaalymuveNti|| tameva dhammaM duvihaM Aikkhai, taM jahA agAra-dhamma
aNagAra-dhammaM c| aNagAradhammo tAva iha khalu savvao savvattAe muMDe bhavittA
agArAo aNagAriyaM pavvayai, savvAo pANAivAyAo veramaNaM, savvAo musA-vAyAo
veramaNaM,savvAo adiNNAdANAo veramaNaM, savvAo mehuNAo veramaNaM, savvAo
pariggahAo veramaNaM, savvAo rAi-bhoyaNAo vermnnN| ayamAuso! aNagAra-sAmAie
dhamme paNNatte, eyassa dhammassa sikkhAe uvaTThie niggaMthe vA niggaMthI
viharamANe ANAe ArAhae bhvi| _ agAradhammaM duvAlasavihaM Aikkhai, taM jahApaMca
aNuvvayAiM, tiNNi guNavvayAI, cattAri sikkhaavyaaii| paMca aNuvvayAiM taM
jahAthUlAo pANAivAyAo veramaNaM, thUlAo musAvAyAo veramaNaM, thUlAo adiNNAdANAo
veramaNaM, sadArasaMtose, icchaaprimaanne| tiNNi guNavvayAiM taM
jahAaNatthadaMDaveramaNaM, disivvayaM, uvbhog-pribhogprimaannN| cattAri
sikkhAvayAI taM jahAsAmAiyaM desAvagAsiyaM, posahovavAse, atihi-saMvibhAge,
apacchimA-mAraNaMtiyA-saMlehaNA-jhUsaNA-rAhaNA, ayamAuso! agAra-sAmAie dhamme
paNNatte eyassa dhammassa sikkhAe uvaTThie samaNovAsae vA samaNovAsiyA vA
viharamANe ANAe ArAhae bhvi| tae NaM sA mahaimahAliyA maNUsaparisA samaNassa
bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie dhamma soccA Nisamma haTTa-taTThA cittamANaMdiyA,
pIimaNA, paramasomaNassiyA, harisavasavisappamANa-hiyayA uThAe, uDhei udvittA
samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karei, karettA vaMdai
NamaMsai, vaMdittA NamaMsittA atthegaiA muMDe bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvie|
atthegaiyA paMcANuvvaiyaM sattasikkhAvaiyaM duvAlasavihaM gihidhamma
pddivnnnnaa| avasesA NaM parisA samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai NamaMsai,
vaMdittA NamaMsitA evaM vayAsI suyakkhAe te bhaMte ! NiggaMthe pAvayaNe, evaM
supaNNatte, subhAsie, suviNIe, subhAvie, aNuttare, te bhaMte ! NiggaMthe
paavynne| dhammaM NaM AikkhamANA tubbhaM uvasamaM Aikkhaha  /  uvasamaM
AikkhamANA vivegaM aaikkhh| vivegaM AikkhamANA veramaNaM aaikkhh| veramaNaM
AikkhamANA akaraNaM pAvANaM kammANaM aaikkhh| Natthi NaM aNNe kei samaNe vA
mAhaNe vA je erisaM dhmmmaaikkhitte|kimNg puNa etto uttarataraM ! evaM vadittA
jAmeva disaM pAubbhUA tAmeva disaM paDigayA) rAyA ya gao tatpazcAt zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne Ananda gAthApati tathA mahatI pariSad ko dharmopadeza

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study: Gathapati Ananda] [25 done. [In the assembly present to listen to
the Dharmadeshana of Bhagwan Mahavira, there were Rishis, Drashta, extremely
knowledgeable Sadhus, Muni Mauni or Vaksyami Sadhu Yati, Shramanas who were very
diligent in their conduct, Devaganas and groups of hundreds and hundreds of
listeners.] Ogh Bali [Holder of uninterrupted or uniform strength, Atibali-
extremely powerful, Mahabali, endowed with abundant strength, unlimited infinite
strength born of self-power, brilliance, importance and radiance, with a sweet,
deep voice like the roar of new clouds in autumn, the cry of the Kronch bird and
the sound of the drum, Bhagwan Mahavira, with the letters spread out in the
heart, residing in the throat and pervading the head, with separate
pronunciations of each letter in its own place, without indistinct pronunciation
or stammering, with a well-defined sequence of letters, a combination of
letters, with completeness and sweetness of voice, in a voice that reached a
yojana, in the Ardhamagadi language, narrated the Dharma. He narrated the Dharma
to all the present Aryas and non-Aryas with an eager mind without getting tired.
The Ardhamagadi language uttered by Bhagwan was transformed into the languages
of all those Aryas and non-Aryas. The Dharmadeshana given by Bhagwan is as
follows: The existence of the world, the existence of the non-world. Similarly,
Jiva, Ajeeva, Bandha, Moksha, Puny, Pap, Asrava, Sanvara, Vedana, Nirjara,
Arhat, Chakravarti Baldev, Vasudev, Narak, Nairyaik, Tiryanchyooni,
Tiryanchyoonik Jiva, Mata, Pita, Rishi, Dev Devalok, Siddhi, Siddha,
Parinirvana, the state of spiritual well-being due to the weakening of karma-
born coverings, supreme peace, the state of Parinivritta Parinirvana, the
existence of such a person. Pranatipat, violence, Mrishvad, falsehood,
Adattadan, theft, Maithun, and Parigraha. Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha, [Love, an
unexpressed Maya and Lobha-born pleasant or interesting feeling, Dvesha, an
unexpressed Mana and Krodha-born unpleasant or unpleasant feeling, Kalha,
fighting-quarrelling, Abhyakhyan, false accusation, Paishunya, gossip or
revealing the faults of someone behind their back, Parparivad, slander, Rati,
enjoying pleasure in the absence of restraint as a result of the rise of
Mohaniya Karma, Ruchi, showing interest, Arati, disinterest in restraint as a
result of the rise of Mohaniya Karma, Mayamrishna, lying deceitfully or
deceptively,] all these are Mithyadarshan Shalya. Pranatipat-viraman, refraining
from violence, Mrishvad-viraman, refraining from falsehood, Adattadan-viraman,
refraining from theft, Maithun-viraman, refraining from Maithun, Parigraha-
viraman, refraining from Parigraha, all these are Mithyadarshan Shalya Vivek,
the true knowledge of the thorn of false belief and its abandonment. All
Astibhav, in relation to their own Dravya, Kshetra, Kala and Bhava, are in the
form of existence, and all Nastibhav, in relation to Dravya, Kshetra, Kala,
Bhava, are in the form of non-existence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [25 kiyaa| [bhagavAn mahAvIra kI
dharmadezanA sunane ko upasthita pariSad meM RSidraSTAatizaya jJAnI sAdhu,
munimaunI yA vAksaMyamI sAdhu yaticAritra ke prati ati yatnazIla zramaNa,
devagaNa tathA saikar3oM-saikar3oM zrotAoM ke samUha upasthita the|] ogha balI
[avyavacchinna yA eka samAna rahane vAle bala ke dhAraka, atibalI-atyadhika
bala-sampanna, mahAbalI,prazasta balayukta, aparimitaasIma vIryaAtmazaktijanita
bala, teja, mahattA tathA kAMtiyukta, zaratkAla ke nUtana megha ke garjana,
kroMca pakSI ke nirghoSa tathA nagAr3e kI dhvani ke samAna madhura gambhIra
svara yukta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne hRdaya meM vistRta hotI huI, kaMTha meM
avasthita hotI huI tathA mUrdhA meM parivyApta hotI suvibhakta akSaroM ko lie
huepRthak-pRthak sva-sva sthAnIya uccAraNayukta akSaroM sahita, aspaSTa uccAraNa
varjita yA hakalAhaTa se rahita, suvyakta akSara-sannipAtavarNa-saMyoga-voM kI
vyavasthita zrRMkhalA lie hue, pUrNatA tathA svaramAdhurIyukta, zrotAoM kI sabhI
bhASAoM meM pariNata hone vAlI vANI dvArA eka yojana taka pahu~cane vAle svara
meM, arddhamAgadhI bhASA meM dharma kA parikathana kiyaa| upasthita sabhI Arya-
anArya jano ko aglAna bhAva sebinA parizrAnta hue dharma kA AkhyAna kiyaa|
bhagavAn dvArA udgIrNa arddhamAgadhI bhASA una sabhI AryoM aura anAryoM kI
bhASAoM meM pariNata ho gii| bhagavAn ne jo dharmadezanA dI, vaha isa prakAra
hai loka kA astitva hai, aloka kA astitva hai| isI prakAra jIva, ajIva, bandha,
mokSa, puNya, pApa, Asrava, saMvara, vedanA, nirjarA, arhata, cakravartI
baladeva, vAsudeva, naraka, nairayika, tiryaMcyoni, tiryaMcayonika jIva, mAtA,
pitA, RSi , deva devaloka, siddhi, siddha, parinirvANakarmajanita AvaraNa ke
kSINa hone se Atmika svasthatAparama zAnti, parinirvRttaparinirvANa yukta
vyaktiinakA astitva hai| prANAtipAtahiMsA, mRSAvAdaasatya, adattAdAnacorI,
maithuna, aura parigraha haiN| krodha, mAna, mAyA, lobha, [premaaprakaTa mAyA va
lobhajanita priya yA rocaka bhAva, dveSa avyakta mAna va krodha janita apriya yA
aprIti rUpa bhAva, kalahalar3AI-jhagar3A, abhyAkhyAnamithyA doSAropaNa,
paizunyacugalI athavA pITha pIche kisI ke hote-anahote doSoM kA prakaTIkaraNa,
paraparivAdanindA, ratimohanIya karma ke udaya ke pariNAma-svarUpa asaMyama meM
sukha mAnanA, rUci dikhAnA, aratimohanIya karma ke udaya ke pariNAma-svarUpa
saMyama meM arUci rakhanA, mAyAmRSA mAyA yA chalapUrvaka jhUTha bolanA,] yAvat
mithyAdarzana zalya hai| prANAtipAta-viramaNahiMsA se virata honA,
mRSAvAdaviramaNaasatya se virata honA, adattAdAnaviramaNacorI se virata honA,
maithunaviramaNamaithuna se virata honA, parigrahaviramaNaparigraha se virata
honA, yAvat mithyAdarzanazalyavivekamithyA vizvAsa rUpa kAMTe kA yathArtha jJAna
honA aura tyAganA yaha saba hai sabhI astibhAvaapane-apane dravya, kSetra, kAla
evaM bhAva kI apekSA se astitva kA asti rUpa se aura sabhI nAstibhAvapara
dravya, kSetra, kAla, bhAva kI apekSA se nAstitva kA nAsti rUpa se

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[26] The Upasakadasanga Sutra expounds.  Well-formed, beautiful, and well-
established acts of giving, good conduct, austerity, etc., are well-formed,
excellent, and yield good results, while poorly formed, ill-established, sinful
acts are inauspicious, sorrowful, and yield bad results.  A being touches and
binds itself to merit and demerit.  Beings are born, there is birth and death
for worldly beings.  Auspicious acts of merit and inauspicious acts of demerit
bear fruit, they are not fruitless.  In another way, the Lord expounds the
Dharma.  This is a discourse free from attachments, a teaching that liberates
the inner attachments of the Jina teachings or of a being, a self-disciplined
teaching, it is true, unsurpassed, the best, unique, or spoken by the Kevali,
the omniscient, pure, very pure, completely free from faults, complete in all
the qualities of a discourse, logical, consistent with reason, unhindered by
evidence, and a remover of the thorns of delusion, etc., it is the path, the
means to attain the state of perfection, the state of liberation, it is the path
to the state of non-attachment, the state of freedom from greed, it is the path
to liberation, the path that does not lead back, that does not fall into the
cycle of birth and death, it is the path to Nirvana, the state of being free
from all suffering, it is real, true, without interruption, and the path to the
complete destruction of all suffering.  Beings who abide in this attain
perfection, or they attain the great perfections like anima, etc., they become
Buddhas, knowers, omniscient, they are liberated, they are free from the karmic
particles that bring about birth and death, they attain Nirvana, they are free
from the suffering caused by karma, they are perfectly peaceful, and they end
all suffering.  Those who have only one human existence left, such as the
Bhadanta, the blessed, or the devotees of the discourse free from attachments,
are born as gods in some of the heavenly realms due to the remaining karmic
residues.  Those heavenly realms are full of great wealth, abundant riches, very
pleasant, with great speed, and long-lasting.  Those beings born as gods there
are very powerful and long-lived.  Their chests are adorned with garlands, they
illuminate the ten directions with their divine radiance.  They are born in the
Kalpopag heavenly realm, in a divine bed, in the form of a youth.  They are
currently the possessors of the excellent divine state, and in the future they
will attain the state of liberation, the state of blessedness, Nirvana, they are
extraordinary in appearance.  The Lord further said that beings bind themselves
to the lifespan of the hellish realm due to four causes, and as a result they
are born in various hells. Those causes are: 1. Mahaarambha, the feeling and
action of extreme violence, 2. Mahaparigraha, the feeling and action of
excessive accumulation, 3. Panchendriya-vadha, the killing of beings with five
senses, such as humans, animals, birds, etc., and 4. Mans-bhakshan, the eating
of meat.  Due to these causes, beings are born in the animal realm: 1. Maya-
purna nikriti, deceitful trickery, 2. Alik vachan, false speech, 3. Utkanchanta,
false praise or flattery, or the hesitation of a wise man near a cunning man who
deceives a fool, or...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra pratipAdana karate haiN| sucIrNasundara rUpa
meMprazasta rUpa meM saMpAdita dAna, zIla, tapa Adi karma sucIrNauttama phala
dene vAle haiM tathA duzcIrNaaprazasta-pApamaya karma azubhaduHkhamaya phala
dene vAle haiN| jIva puNya tathA pApa kA sparza karatA hai, bandha karatA hai|
jIva utpanna hote haisaMsArI jIvoM kA janma-maraNa hai| kalyANazubha karma,
pApaazubha karma phalayukta hai, niSphala nahIM hote  /  /  prakArAntara se
bhagavAn dharma kA AkhyAnapratipAdana karate haiM yaha nirgranthapravacana,
jinazAsana athavA prANI kI antarvartI granthiyoM ko chur3Ane vAlI
AtmAnuzAsanamaya upadeza satya hai, anuttara sarvottama hai, kevalaadvitIya hai
athavA kevalIsarvajJa dvArA bhASita hai, saMzuddhaatyanta zuddha, sarvathA
nirdoSa hai, pratipUrNapravacana-guNoM meM sarvathA paripUrNa hai,
naiyAyikanyAya-saMgata haipramANa se abAdhita hai tathA zalya-kartana mAyA Adi
zalyakAToM kA nivAraka hai, yaha siddhi-kRtArthatA yA siddhAvasthA prApta karane
kA mArga-upAya hai, muktikarma rahita avasthA yA nirlobhatA kA mArgahetu hai,
niryANapunaH nahIM lauTAne vAle janma-maraNa ke cakra meM nahI girAne vAle
gamana kA mArga hai, nirvANasakala saMtAparahita avasthA prApta karane kA patha
hai, avitathasadbhUtArthavAstavika, avisandhivicchedarahita tathA saba duHkhoM
ko prahINasarvathA kSINa karane kA mArga hai| isameM sthita jIva siddhiprApta
karate haiM athavA aNimA Adi mahatI siddhiyoM ko prApta karate haiM, buddha-
jJAnI kevala-jJAnI hote hai, mukta bhavopagrAhIjanma-maraNa meM lAne vAle
karmAMza meM rahita ho jAte hai, parinivRta hote hai karmakRta saMtApa se
rahitaparama zAntimaya ho jAte haiM tathA sabhI duHkhoM kA anta kara dete haiM
/  ekArcAjinake eka hI manuSya-bhava dhAraNa karanA bAkI rahA hai, aise
bhadanta-kalyANAnvita athavA nirgrantha pravacana ke bhakta pUrva karmoM ke bAkI
rahane se kinhI devalokoM meM deva ke rUpa meM utpanna hote haiN| ve devaloka
maharddhika vipula RddhiyoM se paripUrNa, atyanta sukhamaya dUragatikadUra gati
se yukta evaM cirasthitikalambI sthiti vAle hote haiN| vahAM deva rUpa meM
utpanna ve jIva atyanta Rddhi-sampanna tathA cira sthitidIrgha AyuSya yukta hote
haiN| unake vakSasthala hAroM se suzobhita hote haiM, ve apanI divya prabhA se
dasoM dizAoM ko prabhAsita udyotita karate haiN| ve kalpopaga devaloka meM deva-
zayyA se yuvA ke rUpa meM utpanna hote haiN| ve vartamAna meM uttama devagati ke
dhAraka tathA bhaviSya meM bhadrakalyANanirvANa rUpa avasthA ko prApta karane
vAle hote haiM , asAdhAraNa rUpavAn hote haiN| bhagavAn ne Age kahAjIva cAra
sthAnoMkAraNoM senairayikanarakayoni kA AyuSya bandha karate haiM , phalata: ve
vibhinna narakoM meM utpanna hote haiN| ve sthAna yA kAraNa isa prakAra haiM1.
mahAArambhaghora hisA ke bhAva va karma, 2. mahAparigraha-atyadhika saMgraha ke
bhAva va vaisA AcaraNa, 3. paMcendriya-vadhamanuSya, tiryaMcapazu pakSI Adi
pAMca indriyoM vAle prANiyoM kA hanana tathA 4. maaNs-bhkssnn| ina kAraNoM se
jIva tiryaMcayoni meM utpanna hote haiM 1. mAyApUrNa nikRtichalapUrNa jAlasAjI,
2. alIka vacana-asatya bhASaNa, 3. utkaMcanatAjhUThI prazaMsA yA khuzAmada
athavA kisI mUrkha vyakti ko Thagane vAle dhUrta kA samIpavartI vicakSaNa purUSa
ke saMkoca se kucha dera ke lie nizceSTa rahanA yA

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda  **Concealing one's cunning, 4. Deception,
cheating or fraud.** These are the reasons why beings are born in the human
realm: 1. **Praकृति - Bhadrata** - Natural goodness, kindness, where there is no
fear or harm to anyone, 2. **Praकृति - Vineeta** - Natural humility, 3.
**Sanukrosh** - Compassion, mercy, and 4. **Amatsarta** - Absence of envy.
These are the reasons why beings are born in the divine realm: 1. **Sarag-
Samyama** - Restraint with attachment, or conduct before the destruction of
attachment, 2. **Samyama-Samyama - Desh-Virati** - Shravak Dharma, 3. **Akama -
Nirjara** - Enduring hardship without desire for liberation or due to
compulsion, 4. **Bal-Tap** - Austerity in a state of ignorance or falsehood.
[27]  Thereafter, the Lord explains how beings go to hell, experience pain like
the Nairyika in hell, and suffer physical and mental pain like those born in the
animal realm. Human life is impermanent, filled with suffering from disease, old
age, death, and pain. In the divine realm, gods and goddesses attain prosperity
and divine happiness. Thus, the Lord has explained hell, hellish existence, the
animal realm, the human realm, the divine realm, the realm of the liberated, and
the six realms of existence.  The Lord has explained how beings are bound by
karma, become liberated, experience afflictions, how many unattached individuals
end their suffering, how beings with painful, agonizing, and troubled minds
attain the ocean of suffering, how beings who attain detachment destroy the
karmic knot, how the fruits of actions performed with attachment are sinful, how
beings attain the state of liberation by being completely free from karma.
Further, the Lord explained that there are two types of Dharma: Agara-Dharma and
Anagara-Dharma. In Anagara-Dharma, the seeker renounces all harmful actions,
becomes a monk, and leaves the household life for the Anagara state. He
completely refrains from violence, falsehood, stealing, sexual misconduct,
attachment, and eating at night.  The Lord said, "O Auspicious one! This is the
Dharma that is to be followed by the Anagaras." Those who are diligent in the
study, practice, and conduct of this Dharma, and are free from attachment, are
the followers of the Arhat's teachings.  The Lord explained that Agara-Dharma is
of 12 types: 5 Anuvratas, 3 Gunavratas, and 4 Shikshavrata. The 5 Anuvratas are:
1. Refraining from violence, 2. Refraining from falsehood, 3. Refraining from
stealing, 4. **Swadarasantosh** - The limit of sexual intercourse with one's own
wife, 5. **Ichcha** - The limit or restriction of the desire for possessions.
The 3 Gunavratas are: 1. **Anarth-Dand - Viramna** - Refraining from actions
harmful to the soul or detrimental to one's virtues,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda ] apanI dhUrtatA ko chipAe rakhanA, 4.
vaMcanatA pratAraNA yA ThagI  /  ina kAraNoM se jIva manuSyayoni meM utpanna
hote haiM 1. prakRti - bhadratA svAbhAvika bhadratA bhalApana, jisase kisI ko
bhIti yA hAni kI AzaMkA na ho, 2. prakRti - vinItatA svAbhAvika vinamratA, 3.
sAnukrozatA sadayatA, karUNAzIlatA tathA 4. amatsaratA - IrSyA kA abhAva  /  ina
kAraNoM se jIva devayoni meM utpanna hote hai 1. sarAgasaMyamarAga yA
Asaktiyukta cAritra athavA rAga ke kSaya se pUrva kA cAritra, 2. saMyamAsaMmaya-
dezavirati - - zrAvakadharma, 3. akAma - nirjarA mokSa kI abhilASA ke binA yA
vivazatAvaza kaSTa sahanA, 4. bAla-tapa mithyAtvI yA ajJAnayukta avasthA meM
tapasyA  /  [ 27 tatpazcAt - jaise naraka meM jAte haiM, jo naraka haiM aura
vahA~ nairayika jaisI vedanA pAte haiM tathA tiryaMcayoni meM gaye hue jIva
jaisA zArIrika aura mAnasika duHkha prApta karate haiM use bhagavAn batAte haiM
1 manuSya jIvana anitya hai, usameM vyAdhi, vRddhAvasthA mRtyu aura vedanA ke
pracura kaSTa haiM  /  devaloka meM deva devI Rddhi aura devI sukha prApta
karate haiM  /  isa prakAra prabhu ne naraka, narakAvAsa, tiryaJca tiryaJca ke
AvAsa, manuSya, manuSya loka, deva devaloka, siddha, siddhAlaya, evaM chaha
jIvanikAya kA vivecana kiyA  /  jisa prakAra jIva baMdhate haiM- karma-bandha
karate haiM, mukta hote haiM, parikleza pAte haiM, kaI apratibaddhaanAsakta
vyakti duHkhoM kA anta karate haiM, pIr3A, vedanA va AkulatApUrNa cittayukta
jIva duHkha sAgara ko prApta karate haiM, vairAgya prApta jIva karma-dala ko
dhvasta karate haiM, rAgapUrvaka kiye gae karmoM kA phalavipAka pApapUrNa hotA
hai, karmoM se sarvathA rahita hokara jIva siddhAvasthA prApta karate haiM- yaha
saba [ bhagavAn ne ] AkhyAta kiyA  /  Age bhagavAn ne batalAyA-dharma do prakAra
kA hai- agAra-dharma aura anagAra - dharma  /  anagAradharma meM sAdhaka
sarvataH sarvAtmAnA sampUrNa rUpa meM, sarvAtmabhAva se sAvadya kAryoM kA
parityAga karatA huA muMDita hokara, gRhavAsa se anagAra dazA muni-avasthA meM
pravrajita hotA hai| vaha sampUrNata: prANAtipAta, mRSAvAda, adattAdAna,
maithuna, parigraha tathA rAtri - bhojana se virata hotA hai  /  bhagavAn ne
kahA AyuSman ! yaha anagAroM ke lie samAcaraNIya dharma kahA gayA hai  /  isa
dharma kI zikSA - abhyAsa AcaraNa meM upasthita - prayatnazIla rahate hue
nirgrantha sAdhu yA nirgranthIsAdhvI AjJA [arhat-dezanA] ke ArAdhaka hote haiN|
bhagavAn ne agAradharma 12 prakAra kA batalAyA5 aNuvrata, 3 guNavrata tathA 4
zikSAvrata  /  5 aNuvrata isa prakAra haiM 1. sthUlamoTe taura para, apavAda
rakhate hue prANAtipAta se nivRta honA, 2 . sthUla mRSAvAda se nivRta honA, 3.
sthUla adattAdAna se nivRta honA 4. svadArasaMtoSa apanI pariNItA patnItaka
maithuna kI sImA, 5. icchA parigraha kI icchA kA parimANa yA siimaakrnn| 3.
guNavrata isa prakAra haiM 1. anarthadaMDa - viramaNa AtmA ke lie ahitakara yA
AtmaguNaghAtaka

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[28] [Upasakadasangasutra] 1. Renunciation of futile activities, 2. Digvat -
limitations or boundaries in relation to going in different directions, 3.
Upbhog-Paribhog-Pariman - the quantity of consumption, things that can be
consumed many times, such as clothes, etc., and things that can be consumed only
once, such as food, etc., their quantity limitation. 4. Shikshavrata - these are
as follows: 1. Samayik - practice done in a fixed time (minimum one Mahurt 48
minutes) for the attainment of equality or samatva-bhav, 2. Deshavakasik -
practice of increasing the feeling of renunciation in one's activities every
day, 3. Poshadhop-Vas - renunciation of food, celibacy, etc., as per the rules,
for progressing in spiritual practice, and 4. Atithi-Sanvibhag - respectfully
giving a part of one's authorized material to uninvited restrained sadhaks or
sadharmic bandhus, whose arrival date is not known, keeping such a feeling in
mind always that such an opportunity should be obtained. Titikshapurvak - the
final death, Sanlekhana-tapascharya, the worship of Amaran Anashan, the
renunciation of the body, is the culmination of the sadhana of this life of a
Shravak, who keeps the feeling of a Grihi Sadhak. The Bhagwan said, "Ayushman!
This is the conduct-based Dharma of Grihi Sadhaks. While striving to follow this
Dharma, Shramanopasak Shravak or Shramanopasika Shravika become followers of the
commandments." Then that vast assembly of humans, having heard the Dharma from
Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, holding it in their hearts, became very happy,
experienced joy and delight in their minds, were filled with very gentle mental
feelings, and with overflowing joy, rose up, rose up and circumambulated Shraman
Bhagwan Mahavira three times, bowed and prostrated, and bowed and prostrated,
and many of them renounced their household life, got their heads shaved, and
became ordained as Anagar or Shraman. Many accepted the five Anuvratas and the
seven Shikshavrata, a total of twelve types of Gahi-Dharma, Shravak-Dharma. The
rest of the assembly bowed to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, prostrated, bowed and
prostrated, and said, "Bhagavan! What you have said in a beautiful and well-
spoken manner, explained in a well-understood and excellent way, presented in a
well-spoken and heart-touching language, well-invested in well-behaved
disciples, easily accepted by the residents, well-natured, filled with noble
feelings, un-bound, sermon, Dharma-upadesh, is the best of the best. While
explaining the Dharma, you have analyzed the suppression of anger, etc. While
explaining suppression, you have explained the nature of renunciation of
external impurities. While explaining renunciation, you have explained the
nature of renunciation or cessation. While explaining cessation, you have
discussed the non-performance of sinful actions. There is no other Shraman or
Brahmin who can preach such Dharma. Where is the talk of a Dharma-upadesh better
than this? Saying this, that assembly returned to the direction from which it
had come. The king also returned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra nirarthaka pravRtti kA tyAga, 2 digvatavibhinna dizAoM
meM jAne ke sambandha meM maryAdA yA sImAkaraNa, 3. upabhoga-paribhoga-
parimANaupabhoga jinheM aneka bAra bhogA jA sake, aisI vastueMjaise vastra Adi
tathA paribhoga jinheM eka hI bAra bhogA jA sakejaise bhojana AdiinakA
primaannsiimaakrnn| 4 zikSAvrata isa prakAra haiM1. sAmAyikasamatA yA
samatvabhAva kI sAdhanA ke lie eka niyata samaya nyanatama eka maharta48 minaTa]
meM kiyA jAne vAlA abhyAsa, 2. dezAvakAsikanitya prati apanI pravRttiyoM meM
nivRtti-bhAva kI vRddhi kA abhyAsa 3. poSadhopa-vAsaadhyAtma-sAdhanA meM
agrasara hone ke hetu yathAvidhi AhAra, abrahmacarya Adi kA tyAga tathA 4.
atithi-saMvibhAgajinake Ane kI koI tithi nahIM, aise animaMtrita saMyamI sAdhaka
yA sAdharmika bandhuoM ko saMyamopayogI evaM jIvanopayogI apanI adhikRta sAmagrI
kA eka bhAga AdarapUrvaka denA, sadA mana meM aisI bhAvanA banAe rakhanA ki aisA
avasara prApta ho| titikSApUrvaka antima maraNa rUpa saMlekhanA-tapazcaraNa,
AmaraNa anazana kI ArAdhanApUrvaka dehatyAga zrAvaka kI isa jIvana kI sAdhanA kA
paryavasAna hai, jisakI eka gRhI sAdhaka bhAvanA lie rahatA hai| bhagavAn ne
kahAAyuSman ! yaha gRhI sAdhakoM kA AcaraNIya dharma hai| isa dharma ke
anusaraNa meM prayatnazIla hote hue zramaNopAsakazrAvaka yA zramaNopAsikAzrAvikA
AjJA ke ArAdhaka hote haiN| taba vaha vizAla manuSya-pariSad zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra se dharma sunakara, hRdaya meM dhAraNa kara, hRSTa-tuSTaatyanta
prasanna huI, citta meM Ananda evaM prIti kA anubhava kiyA, atyanta saumya
mAnasika bhAvoM se yukta tathA harSAtireka se vikasita-hRdaya hokara uThI,
uThakara zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra ko tIna bAra AdakSiNa-pradakSiNA, vandana-
namaskAra kiyA, vandana-namaskAra kara usameM se kaI gRhastha-jIvana kA
parityAga kara muMDita hokara, anagAra yA zramaNa ke rUpa meM pravrajitadIkSita
hue| kaiyoM ne pAMca aNuvrata tathA sAta zikSAvrata rUpa bAraha prakAra kA gahi-
dharmazrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyaa| zeSa pariSada ne zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra
ko vaMdana kiyA, namaskAra kiyA, vaMdana-namaskAra kara kahAbhagavan ! Apa dvArA
suAkhyAta-sundara rUpa meM kahA gayA, suprajJaptauttama rIti se samajhAyA gayA,
subhASitahRdayasparzI bhASA meM pratipAdita kiyA gayA, suvinItaziSyoM meM suSTha
rUpa meM viniyojitaantevAsiyoM dvArA sahaja rUpa meM aMgIkRta, subhAvitaprazasta
bhAvoM se yukta nirgrantha-pravacanadharmopadeza anuttara-sarvazreSTha hai|
Apane dharma kI vyAkhyA karate hue upazama krodha Adi ke nirodha kA vizleSaNa
kiyaa| upazama kI vyAkhyA karate hue vivekabAhya granthiyoM ke tyAga kA svarUpa
smjhaayaa| viveka kI vyAkhyA karate hue Apane viramaNa-virati yA nivRtti kA
nirUpaNa kiyaa| viramaNa kI vyAkhyA karate hue Apane pApa-karma na karane kI
vivecanA kii| dUsarA koI zramaNa yA brAhmaNa nahIM haiM, jo aise dharma kA
upadeza kara ske| isase zreSTha dharma ke upadeza kI to bAta hI kahAM ? yoM
kahakara vaha pariSad jisa dizA se AI thI, usI ora vApasa lauTa gii| rAjA bhI
lauTa gyaa|

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [29 First Study:  Gathapati Ananda]  Ananda's Response 12. Then Ananda, the
Gathapati, having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, was
filled with joy and satisfaction, and [with a heart filled with joy and
happiness, with a very gentle mind, and with a heart overflowing with joy, he
rose, and rising, he circumambulated the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times,
and bowed and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself] he said,
"Bhagavan! I have faith in the Nirgrantha-Pravachana, I believe in it. Bhagavan!
The Nirgrantha-Pravachana is pleasing to me. Bhagavan! It is such, it is true,
it is real, it is desired, it is accepted, it is desired and accepted. It is
just as you have said. Devanupriya! Just as many kings, wealthy, sword-wielding,
adorned, family-oriented, merchants, generals, and caravan leaders, etc., have
become monks, abandoning their homes and becoming homeless, I am unable to
become a monk in that way [by abandoning my home and becoming homeless].
Therefore, I wish to take the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, and the
twelve types of Griha-Dharma, the Shravaka-Dharma, from you.    Devanupriya!
Please grant me this."    Upon hearing Ananda's words, the Bhagavan said,
"Devanupriya! Do whatever brings you happiness, but do not delay." Vrata-Grahana
(Vow-Taking) Ahimsa Vrata (Vow of Non-Violence) 13. Then Ananda, the Gathapati,
having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, was filled with joy
and satisfaction, and [with a heart filled with joy and happiness, with a very
gentle mind, and with a heart overflowing with joy, he rose, and rising, he
circumambulated the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times, and bowed and
prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself] he said, "Bhagavan! I
have faith in the Nirgrantha-Pravachana, I believe in it. Bhagavan! The
Nirgrantha-Pravachana is pleasing to me. Bhagavan! It is such, it is true, it is
real, it is desired, it is accepted, it is desired and accepted. It is just as
you have said. Devanupriya! Just as many kings, wealthy, sword-wielding,
adorned, family-oriented, merchants, generals, and caravan leaders, etc., have
become monks, abandoning their homes and becoming homeless, I am unable to
become a monk in that way [by abandoning my home and becoming homeless].
Therefore, I wish to take the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, and the
twelve types of Griha-Dharma, the Shravaka-Dharma, from you.    Devanupriya!
Please grant me this."    Upon hearing Ananda's words, the Bhagavan said,
"Devanupriya! Do whatever brings you happiness, but do not delay." Vrata-Grahana
(Vow-Taking) Ahimsa Vrata (Vow of Non-Violence) 13. Then Ananda, the Gathapati,
having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, was filled with joy
and satisfaction, and [with a heart filled with joy and happiness, with a very
gentle mind, and with a heart overflowing with joy, he rose, and rising, he
circumambulated the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times, and bowed and
prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself] he said, "Bhagavan! I
have faith in the Nirgrantha-Pravachana, I believe in it. Bhagavan! The
Nirgrantha-Pravachana is pleasing to me. Bhagavan! It is such, it is true, it is
real, it is desired, it is accepted, it is desired and accepted. It is just as
you have said. Devanupriya! Just as many kings, wealthy, sword-wielding,
adorned, family-oriented, merchants, generals, and caravan leaders, etc., have
become monks, abandoning their homes and becoming homeless, I am unable to
become a monk in that way [by abandoning my home and becoming homeless].
Therefore, I wish to take the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, and the
twelve types of Griha-Dharma, the Shravaka-Dharma, from you.    Devanupriya!
Please grant me this."    Upon hearing Ananda's words, the Bhagavan said,
"Devanupriya! Do whatever brings you happiness, but do not delay." Vrata-Grahana
(Vow-Taking) Ahimsa Vrata (Vow of Non-Violence) 13. Then Ananda, the Gathapati,
having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, was filled with joy
and satisfaction, and [with a heart filled with joy and happiness, with a very
gentle mind, and with a heart overflowing with joy, he rose, and rising, he
circumambulated the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times, and bowed and
prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself] he said, "Bhagavan! I
have faith in the Nirgrantha-Pravachana, I believe in it. Bhagavan! The
Nirgrantha-Pravachana is pleasing to me. Bhagavan! It is such, it is true, it is
real, it is desired, it is accepted, it is desired and accepted. It is just as
you have said. Devanupriya! Just as many kings, wealthy, sword-wielding,
adorned, family-oriented, merchants, generals, and caravan leaders, etc., have
become monks, abandoning their homes and becoming homeless, I am unable to
become a monk in that way [by abandoning my home and becoming homeless].
Therefore, I wish to take the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, and the
twelve types of Griha-Dharma, the Shravaka-Dharma, from you.    Devanupriya!
Please grant me this."    Upon hearing Ananda's words, the Bhagavan said,
"Devanupriya! Do whatever brings you happiness, but do not delay." Vrata-Grahana
(Vow-Taking) Ahimsa Vrata (Vow of Non-Violence) 13. Then Ananda, the Gathapati,
having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, was filled with joy
and satisfaction, and [with a heart filled with joy and happiness, with a very
gentle mind, and with a heart overflowing with joy, he rose, and rising, he
circumambulated the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [29 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] Ananda kI pratikriyA 12. tae NaM se
ANaMde gAhAvaI samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie dhammaM soccA nisamma
haTThatuTTha jAva (cittamANadie pIi-maNe paramasomaNassie
harisavasavisappamANahiyae uThAe uDhei, uDhettA samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM
tikkhutto AyAhiNapayAhiNaM karei, karettA vaMdai NamaMsai, vaMdittA NamaMsittA)
evaM vayAsIsadahAmi NaM bhaMte ! niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM, pattiyAmi NaM, bhaMte !
niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM, roemi NaM, bhaMte! niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM, evameyaM, bhaMte
! tahameyaM, bhaMte ! avitahameyaM, bhaMte ! icchiyameyaM, bhaMte !
paDicchiyameyaM, bhaMte ! icchiya-paDicchiyameyaM, bhaMte ! se jaheyaM tubbhe
vayaha ti kaTu, jahA NaM devANuppiyANaM aMtie bahave rAIsara-talavaramADaMbiya-
koDuMbiya-seTThi-seNAvaI-satthavAhappabhiiA muNDA bhavittA agArAoaNagAriyaM
pavvaiyA, no khalu ahaM tahA saMcAemi muMDe jAva (bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM)
pvvitte| ahaM NaM devANuppiyANaM aMtie paMcANuvvaiyaM satta-sikkhAvaiyaM
duvAlasavihaM gihi-dhamma pddivjjissaami| ahAsuhaM devANuppiyA ! paDibaMdhaM
kreh| * taba Ananda gAthApati zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra se dharma kA zravaNa
kara harSita va parituSTa hotA huA yAvata [citta meM Ananda evaM prasannatA kA
anubhava karatA huA, atyanta saumya mAnasika bhAvoM se yukta tathA harSAtireka
se vikasita hRdaya hokara uThA, uThakara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko tIna bAra
AdakSiNa-pradakSiNA kI, vaMdana-namaskAra kiyaa| vaMdana-namaskAra kara] yoM
bolAbhagavan ! mujhe nirgrantha-pravacana meM zraddhA hai, vizvAsa hai|
nirgrantha-pravacana mujhe rucikara hai| vaha aisA hI hai, tathya hai, satya
hai, icchita hai, pratIcchita [svIkRta] hai, icchita-pratIcchita hai| yaha vaisA
hI hai, jaisA Apane khaa| devAnupriya ! jisa prakAra Apake pAsa aneka rAjA,
aizvaryazAlI, talavara, mADaMbika, kauTumbika, zreSThi, senApati evaM sArthavAha
Adi muMDita hokara, gRha-vAsa kA parityAga kara anagAra ke rUpa meM pravajita
hue, maiM usa prakAra muMDita hokara [gRhastha-jIvana kA parityAga kara
anagAradharma meM] pravrajita hone meM asamartha hUM, isalie Apake pAsa pAMca
aNuvrata, sAta zikSAvrata mUlaka bAraha prakAra kA gRhIdharmazrAvaka-dharma
grahaNa karanA cAhatA huuN| Ananda ke yoM kahane para bhagavAn ne
kahAdevAnupriya ! jisase tumako sukha ho, vaisA hI karo, para vilamba mata kro|
vrata-grahaNa ahiMsA vrata 13. tae NaM se ANaMde gAhAvaI samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa aMtie tappaDhamayAe

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[30] The Upasakadasanga Sutra states that the Thulagana (lay follower) should
renounce all forms of gross violence (Thulagana Pranatipat) for the rest of
their life, both in action and in causing others to act, through the three yogas
(mind, speech, and body).  In other words, I renounce all forms of gross
violence, both in action and in causing others to act, through the three yogas
(mind, speech, and body). I will not commit or cause others to commit gross
violence with my mind, speech, or body.  **Truth Vow** [14] The Upasakadasanga
Sutra states that the Thulagana (lay follower) should renounce all forms of
gross falsehood (Thulagana Musavada) for the rest of their life, both in action
and in causing others to act, through the three yogas (mind, speech, and body).
In other words, I renounce all forms of gross falsehood, both in action and in
causing others to act, through the three yogas (mind, speech, and body). I will
not commit or cause others to commit gross falsehood with my mind, speech, or
body.  **Non-Stealing Vow** [15] The Upasakadasanga Sutra states that the
Thulagana (lay follower) should renounce all forms of gross theft (Thulagana
Adinnadan) for the rest of their life, both in action and in causing others to
act, through the three yogas (mind, speech, and body).  In other words, I
renounce all forms of gross theft, both in action and in causing others to act,
through the three yogas (mind, speech, and body). I will not commit or cause
others to commit gross theft with my mind, speech, or body.  **Contentment with
One's Own Spouse** [16] The Upasakadasanga Sutra states that the Thulagana (lay
follower) should practice self-control in sexual matters (Swadar-Santose).  In
other words, I renounce all forms of sexual activity except with my one wife,
Shivananda.  **Control of Desire** [17] The Upasakadasanga Sutra states that the
Thulagana (lay follower) should practice self-control in their desires (Iccha-
Vihi-Parimana).  In other words, I renounce all forms of desire for gold,
silver, and other material possessions. I will not desire more than four kotis
of gold, four kotis of silver, four kotis of precious stones, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra thUlagaM pANAivAyaM paccakkhAi, jAvajIvAe duvihaM
tiviheNaM, na karemi, na kAravemi, maNasA vayasA kaaysaa| taba Ananda gAthApati
ne zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa prathama yA mukhya sthUla prANAtipAta
sthUla hiMsA kA pratyAkhyAnaparityAga kiyA, ina zabdoM meM maiM jIvana paryanta
do karaNakRta va kArita arthAta karanA, karAnA tathA tIna yogamana, vacana evaM
kAyA se sthUla hiMsA kA parityAga karatA hU~ arthAt maiM mana se, vacana se
tathA zarIra se sthUla hiMsA na karUgAM aura na kraauuNgaa| satya vrata 14.
tayANaMtaraM ca NaM thUlagaM musAvAyaM paccakkhAi, jAvajjIvAe duvihaM tiviheNaM
na karemi na kAravemi, maNasA vayasA kaaysaa| tadantara usane sthUla
mRSAvAdaasatya kA parityAga kiyA, ina zabdoM meM maiM jIvana bhara ke lie do
karaNa aura tIna yoga se sthUla mRSAvAda kA parityAga karatA hU~ arthAt maiM
mana se, vacana se tathA zarIra se na sthUla asatya kA prayoga karUMgA aura na
kraauuNgaa| asteya vrata 15. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM thUlagaM adiNNAdANaM
paccakkhAi, jAvajIvAe duvihaM tiviheNaM, na karemi, na kAravemi, maNasA vayasA
kaaysaa| usake bAda usane sthUla adattAdAnacorI kA parityAga kiyaa| ina zabdoM
meM maiM jIvana bhara ke lie do karaNa aura tIna yoga se sthUla corI kA
parityAga karatA hUM arthAt maiM mana se vacana se tathA zarIra se na sthUla
corI karUMgA na kraauuNgaa| svadAra-saMtoSa 16. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM sadAra-
saMtosie parimANaM karei, nannattha ekkAe sivanaMdAe bhAriyAe, avasesaM savvaM
mehuNavihiM pcckkhaami| phira usane svadArasantoSa vrata ke antargata maithuna
kA parimANa kiyaa| ina zabdoM meM apanI ekamAtra patnI zivanandA ke atirikta
avazeSa samagra maithunavidhi kA parityAga karatA huuN| icchA-parimANa 17.
tayANaMtaraM ca NaM icchA-vihi-parimANaM karemANe hiraNNasuvaNNavihiparimANaM
karei, nannattha cauhiM hiraNNakoDIhiM nihANapauttAhiM, cauhiM vuDiDhpauttAhiM,
cauhiM pavitthara

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study: The Story of Anand ] He then made a limitation regarding the amount
of possessions, in terms of gold coins, as follows: [ 31 In addition to four
crore gold coins kept in treasure, four crore gold coins used in business, and
four crore gold coins used in the house and household equipment, I renounce all
remaining gold coins. 18. Then he made a limitation regarding the amount of
possessions, in terms of four-legged animals, as follows: In addition to four
herds of ten thousand cows each, I renounce all remaining four-legged animals.
19. Then he made a limitation regarding the amount of possessions, in terms of
land and buildings, as follows: In addition to five hundred ploughs, each
consisting of one hundred nivartanas (a specific measure of land), I renounce
all remaining land and buildings. Discussion The word "khet" (field) refers to
land used for farming, i.e., open land. The Prakrit word "vatthu" can be
translated as "vastu" in Sanskrit, meaning "thing" or "building." "Vastu" refers
to land, a place to live, a house, or a dwelling. Here, "vatthu" refers to
Anand's land related to his house, etc. In the context of the amount of land
Anand owned for farming, the term "niyattan-saiyenam" (nivartanashatikena) is
used, where one hundred nivartanas are considered one plough of land, which can
be called a "bigha" in modern language. In ancient times, "nivartana" was used
as a specific measure of land. A land measuring twenty bamboos or two hundred
hands in length and width (200 × 200 = 4000 square hands) was called a
"nivartana." 20. Then he made a limitation regarding the amount of possessions,
in terms of carts, as follows: In addition to five hundred carts used for
transportation and five hundred carts used for carrying goods, I renounce all
remaining carts.  1. Sanskrit - English Dictionary: Sir Monier Williams, page
560

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda ] pauttAhiM, avasesaM savvaM
hiraNNasuvaNavihiM paccakkhAmi  /  taba usane icchAvidhi parigraha kA parimANa
karate hue svarNa mudrAoM ke viSaya meM isa prakAra sImAkaraNa kiyA [ 31
nidhAna-nihita cAra karor3a svarNa mudrAoM, vyApAra prayukta cAra karoDa svarNa
mudrAoM tathA ghara va ghara ke upakaraNoM meM prayukta cAra karor3a svarNa
mudrAoM ke atirikta maiM samasta svarNa mudrAoM kA parityAga karatA hUM  /  18.
tayANaMtaraM caM NaM cauppayavihiparimANaM karei, nannattha cauhiM vaehiM dasa
gosAhassieNaM vaeNaM, avasesaM savvaM cauppayavihiM paccakkhAmi  /  phira usane
catuSpada - vidhi caupAe pazurUpa saMpatti ke saMbaMdha meM parimANa kiyA dasa-
dasa hajAra ke cAra gokuloM ke atirikta maiM bAkI sabhI caupAe pazuoM ke
parigraha kA parityAga karatA hUM  /  19. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM
khettavatthuvihiparimANaM karei, nannatha paMcahiM halasahiM niyattaNasaieNaM
haleNaM avasesaM savvaM khettavatthuvihiM paccakkhAmi  /  phira usane kSetra
vAstu-vidhi kA parimANa kiyA sau nivartana (bhUmi kA eka vizeSa mApa) ke eka
hala ke hisAba se pAMca sau haloM ke atirikta maiM samasta kSetra - - vAstuvidhi
kA parityAga karatA hUM  /  vivecana kheta (kSetra) kA artha kheta yA khetI
karane kI bhUmi arthAt khulI ughAr3I bhUmi hai  /  prAkRta kA vatthu zabda
saMskRta meM vastu bhI ho sakatA hai, vAstu bhI  /  vastu kA artha cIja arthAta
bartana, khATa, Tebala, kursI, kapar3e Adi rojAnA kAma meM AnevAle upakaraNa
haiM  /  vAstu kA artha bhUmi, basane kI jagaha, makAna yA AvAsa hai| yahA~
vatthu kA tAtparya gAthApati Annada kI makAna Adi saMbaMdhI bhUmi se hai  /
Ananda kI khetI kI jamIna ke parimANa ke sandarbha meM yahA~ niyattaNa-saieNaM
(nivartanazatikena) pada kA prayoga karate hue sau nivartanoM kI eka ikAI ko eka
hala kI jamIna kahA gayA hai, jise Aja kI bhASA meM bIghA kahA jA sakatA hai|
prAcIna kAla meM nivartana bhUmi ke eka vizeSa mApa ke artha me prayukta rahA
hai| bIsa bAMsa yA do sau hAtha lambI-caur3I (200 x 200 = 4000 varga hAtha)
bhUmi ko nivartana kahA jAtA thA  /  20. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM sagaDavihiparimANaM
karei, nannattha paMcahiM sagaDasaehiM disAyattiehiM, paJcahiM sagaDa-saehiM
saMvAhaNiehiM, avasesaM savvaM sagaDavihiM pcckkhaami| tatpazcAt usane
zakaTavidhi gAr3iyoM ke parigraha kA parimANa kiyA 1. saMskRta - - iMgaliza
DikzanarI : sara moniyara viliyamsa, pRSTha 560

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 32] [Upasakadasangasutra]  Except for five hundred carts used for travel,
business, etc., and five hundred carts used for transporting household goods, I
renounce all carts.  21. Then he made a determination regarding the category of
vehicles. Except for four vehicles used for travel and four vehicles used for
household purposes, I renounce all vehicles.  Then he made a determination
regarding the category of vehicles. Except for four vehicles used for travel and
four vehicles used for household purposes, I renounce all vehicles.  22. Then,
renouncing the category of consumption, he made a determination regarding the
category of towels. Except for one fragrant and red towel, I renounce all
towels.  Then, renouncing the category of consumption, he made a determination
regarding the category of towels. Except for one fragrant and red towel, I
renounce all towels.  23. Then he made a determination regarding the category of
tooth cleaners. Except for one tooth cleaner made of licorice root, I renounce
all tooth cleaners.  Then he made a determination regarding the category of
tooth cleaners. Except for one tooth cleaner made of licorice root, I renounce
all tooth cleaners.  24. Then he made a determination regarding the category of
fruits. Except for one milk-like amla, I renounce all fruits.  Then he made a
determination regarding the category of fruits. Except for one milk-like amla, I
renounce all fruits.  **Discussion**  Here, the term "fruit" does not refer to
edible fruits, but rather to cleansing fruits used for purifying the eyes, head,
etc. Amla is particularly useful for this purpose. Milk-like amla refers to a
raw, soft amla that does not have a seed and is sweet like milk.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra pAMca sau gAr3iyAM digyAtrikabAhara yAtrA meM, vyApAra
Adi meM prayukta tathA pAMca sau gAr3iyAM ghara saMbaMdhI mAla-asabAva Dhone Adi
meM prayuktake sivAya maiM saba gAr3iyoM ke parigraha kA parityAga karatA huuN|
21. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM vAhaNavihiparimANaM karei, nannattha cauhiM vAhaNehiM
disAyattiehiM, cauhiM vAhaNehiM saMvAhaNiehi, avasesaM savvaM vAhaNavihiM
pcckkhaami| phira usane vAhanavidhijalayAna rUpa parigraha kA parimANa kiyA cAra
vAhana dig-yAtrika tathA cAra gRha-upakaraNa ke saMdarbha meM prayuktake sivAya
maiM saba prakAra ke vAhana rUpa parigraha kA parityAga karatA huuN| upabhoga-
paribhoga-parimANa 22. tayANaMtaraM caNaM uvabhogaparibhogavihiM paccakkhAemANe,
ullaNiyAvihiparimANaM krei| nannattha egAe gaMdha-kAsAIe, avasesaM savvaM
ullaNiyAvihiM pcckkhaami| phira usane upabhoga-paribhoga-vidhi kA pratyAkhyAna
karate hue bhIge hue zarIra ko poMchane meM prayukta hone vAle aMgochetaulie Adi
kA parimANa kiyA maiM sugandhita aura lAla-eka prakAra ke aMgoche ke atirikta
bAkI sabhI aMgoche rUpa parigraha kA parityAga karatA huuN| 23. tayANaMtaraM ca
NaM daMtavaNavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha egeNaM alla-laTaThImahueNaM, avasesaM
daMtavaNavihiM pcckkhaami| tatpazcAt usane datauna ke saMbaMdha meM parimANa
kiyA hari mulahaThI ke atirikta maiM saba prakAra ke dataunoM kA parityAga
karatA huuN| 24. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM phalavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha egeNaM
khIrAmalaeNaM, avasesaM phalavihiM pcckkhaami| tadanantara usane phalavidhi kA
parimANa kiyA maiM kSIra AmalakadUdhiyA AMvale ke sivAya avazeSa phala-vidhi kA
parityAga karatA huuN| vivecana yahA~ phala-vidhi kA prayoga khAne ke phaloM ke
sandarbha meM nahIM hai, pratyuta netra mastaka Adi ke zodhana-prakSAlana ke
kAma meM Ane vAle zuddhikAraka phaloM se haiN| AMvale kI isa kArya meM vizeSa
upayogitA hai  /  kSIra Amalaka yA dUdhiyA AMvale kA tAtparya usa kacce mulAyama
A~vale se hai, jisameM guThalI nahIM par3I ho aura jo dUdha kI taraha mIThA ho|

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gaathapati Anand  [33] Here, the use of the term "fruit" refers
to the use of purifying fruits for cleansing and washing purposes, such as for
hair and scalp. Amla is particularly beneficial for this purpose. It is a tonic
for hair. Amla contains a significant amount of iron. Therefore, it is
especially beneficial for strengthening hair roots and keeping them black. Amla
oil is the main oil used for hair applications.  Here, the mention of "Ksheer
Amla" or milky Amla also has its own special meaning. Ksheer Amla refers to the
soft, unripe Amla, which does not have a seed, is not particularly sour, and has
a milky sweetness. Using excessively sour Amla can cause dryness in the skin.
For those with sensitive skin, contact with excessively sour substances can
cause irritation. This is not a concern with the use of Ksheer Amla.  Here, the
word "fruit" is not used in the context of fruits consumed as food, but rather
in the context of fruits that grow on trees and plants. Amla grows on a tree,
hence it is a fruit, but it is not eaten as a fruit. It is primarily used in
medicines, jams, chutneys, pickles, etc.  Amla holds a prominent position in the
Ayurvedic medicinal category of "Kaasthaadhik" (wood-based) medicines. Ayurvedic
texts classify it under the "Kaasthaadhik" category of medicines, not under the
"Phal" (fruit) category. The "Bhaavaprakash" text describes Amla in the
"Haritkyadhik" category. It states:  "Amla, Dhaatri, Trishvafala, and Amrita are
the names of Amla. The taste, properties, and digestion of Amla are similar to
Haritaki. Amla is particularly effective in eliminating blood disorders,
diabetes, and is aphrodisiac and rejuvenating. Due to its sour taste, it is
beneficial for Vata (air) disorders. Due to its sweetness and coolness, it
pacifies Pitta (bile). Due to its dryness and astringency, it eliminates Kapha
(phlegm)."  The "Charak Samhita" text, in the "Chikitsa Sthan" (therapeutic
section), under the "Abhayamalakiya Rasayana Pad" (chapter on Amla-based
rejuvenating therapies), describes Amla. It states:  [44] "The properties of
Amla are almost the same as those of Haritaki. However, the potency of Amla
is..."  1. Trishvaamalaka maakhyaatam Dhaatri Trishvafala Amrita. Haritaki samam
Dhaatri - phalam kintu visheshatah. Raktapitta pramehanam param vrushyam
rasayanam. Hanti vaatam tadamlataat pittam madhuryashaityatah. Kapham
rookshakashaayatvaat phalam dhaalyastraidoshajit.  Bhaavaprakash Haritkyadhik
varg 37-39

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda ] [ 33 yahA~ phalavidhi kA prayoga bAla,
mastaka Adi ke zodhana - prakSAlana ke kAma meM Ane vAle zuddhikAraka phaloM ke
upayoga ke artha meM hai| AMvale kI isa kArya meM vizeSa upAdeyatA hai| bAloM ke
lie to vaha bahuta hI lAbhaprada hai, eka TaoNnika hai| AMvale meM lohA vizeSa
mAtrA meM hotA hai| ataH bAloM kI jar3a ko majabUta banAe rakhanA, unheM kAlA
rakhanA usakA vizeSa guNa hai| bAloM meM lagAne ke lie jAne vAle tailoM meM
AMvale kA taila mukhya hai 1 banAe yahA~ Avale meM kSIra Amalaka yA dUdhiyA
AMvale kA jo ullekha AyA hai, usakA bhI apanA vizeSa Azaya hai  /  kSIra Amalaka
kA tAtparya usa mulAyama, kacce AMvale se hai, jisameM guThalI nahI par3I ho, jo
vizeSa khaTTA nahI ho, jo dUdha jaisA miThAsa lie ho| adhika khaTTe AMvale ke
prayoga se camar3I meM kucha rUkhApana A sakatA hai| jinakI camar3I adhika
komala hotI hai, vizeSa khaTTe padArtha ke saMsparza se vaha phaTa sakatI  /
kSIra Amalaka ke prayoga meM yaha AzaMkita nahIM hai  /  yahA~ phala zabda khAne
ke rUpa meM kAma meM AnevAle phaloM kI dRSTi se nahIM hai, pratyuta vRkSa,
paudhe Adi para phalane vAle padArtha kI dRSTi se hai| vRkSa para lagatA hai,
isalie AMvalA phala hai, parantu vaha phala ke rUpa meM nahIM khAyA jAtA  /
usakA upayoga vizeSataH auSadhi murabbA, caTanI, acAra Adi meM hotA hai  /
Ayurveda kI kASThAdika auSadhiyoM meM AMvale kA mukhya sthAna hai  /  Ayurveda
ke granthoM meM ise phala-varga meM na lekara kASThAdika auSadhi varga meM liyA
gayA hai| bhAvaprakAza meM haritakyAdi varga meM AMvale kA varNana AyA hai  /
vahA~ likhA hai 'Amalaka, dhAtrI, triSvaphalA aura amRtA - ye AMvale ke nAma
haiN| AMvale ke rasa, guNa evaM vipAka Adi harItakI harar3a ke samAna hote haiN|
AMvalA vizeSataH rakta pitta aura prameha kA nAzaka, zukravardhaka evaM rasAyana
hai| rasa ke khaTTepana ke kAraNa yaha vAtanAzaka hai, madhuratA aura zItalatA
ke kAraNa yaha pitta ko zAnta karatA hai, rUkSatA aura kasailepana ke kAraNa
yaha kapha ko miTAtA hai  /  " carakasaMhitA cikitsAsthAna ke abhayAmalakIya
rasAyanapAda meMAMvale kA varNana hai  /  vahA~ 44 likhA hai " jo guNa harItakI
ke haiM, AMvale ke bhI lagabhaga vaise hI haiM  /  kintu AMvale kA vIrya
harItakI 1. triSvAmalakamAkhyAtaM dhAtrI triSvaphalA'mRtA  /  harItakIsamaM
dhAtrI - phalaM kintu vizeSataH  //  raktapittapramehanaM paraM vRSyaM rasAyanam
/  hanti vAtaM tadamlatvAt pittaM mAdhuryazaityataH  //  kaphaM rUkSakaSAyatvAt
phalaM dhAlyAstridoSajit  //  bhAvaprakAza harItakyAdi varga 37-39

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[34] [This differs from the Upasakadasangasutra. That is, Haritaki is hot in
potency, Amalaki is cold in potency. Seeing the qualities attributed to
Haritaki, Haritaki and Amalaki, which have similar qualities, have been called
Amrita.] The Charaka Samhita mentions Kayakalp therapy in the form of Vatatapika
and Kutipraveshika. Kutipraveshika is described in detail as being more
effective. This therapy uses Haritaki specifically for purification and Amalaki
for nourishment. These are called Rasayana. Acharya Charaka has mentioned that
the consumption of Rasayana leads to long life, memory, intelligence, youthful
age, radiance, complexion, ojas-filled bodily aura, clear voice, bodily
strength, sensory strength, etc. Many lehyas are prepared from Amalaki as
nutritious medicines, such as Chyavanprash, Brahmarasayan, Amalakarasayan, etc.
Thus. If Anand made an exception in the context of fruits, he was a resident of
Bihar, it is very possible that he made an exception for mangoes in fruits, just
as in grains, the best variety of rice is kept in Basmati rice. Mango is
considered the king of fruits and is of the best quality and of many varieties
in Bihar. Or there are even better types of fruits in that region, he may have
kept one of them. In fact, as mentioned above, Anand did not make an exception
for Amalaki from the point of view of eating fruit, he accepted it only for the
purification of the head, eyes, hair, etc. This description is also in the same
context. In the previous twenty-third sutra, Anand abandoned all types of
toothbrushes except for Haritaki. Further, in the twenty-fifth sutra, he made a
rule not to consume all massage oils except Shatapaka and Sahasrapaka oils.
After that, in the twenty-sixth sutra, he abandoned all ubtans except for
fragrant Gandhatak. Here, the context of eating fruit is not relevant. This
whole context is related to the activities related to body purification, such as
tooth brushing, bathing, massage, ubtan, etc. Now a question arises, did Anand
not make an exception for any fruit to eat? Yes 1.  **Taan gunaanstaani karmaani
vidyaadaamalakeshvapi.** **Yaanyuktaani haritakyaa veeryastu tu viparyayah.**
**Atachchaamritakalpaani vidyaatkarmabhiridrishai.** **Haritakinaam shasyani
bhishagaamalakasyacha.** **Charaka Samhita Chikitsaasthan 1. 35-36** **Charaka
Samhita-Chikitsaasthan 1. 16-27** **Deerghamaayu: smriti meghaamaarogyam
taruunaam vayaha.** **Prabhavarna swaroudaryadehendriyabalampuram.**
**Vaaksiiddhim pranati kaantim labhate na rasayanaat.** **Laabhopaayo hi
shastaanaam rasaadeenaam rasayanam.** **Charaka Samhita-Chikitsaasthan 1. 7-8**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra se bhinna hai| arthAt harItakI uSNavIrya hai, AMvalA
zItavIrya  /  harItakI ke jo guNa batAe gae hai, unheM dekhate, harItakI tathA
tatsadRza guNayukta AvaMlA amRta kahe gaye hai|" carakasaMhitA meM vAtatapika
evaM kuTIprAvezika ke rUpa meM kAya-kalpa cikitsA kA ullekha hai| kuTIprAvezika
ko adhika prabhAvazAlI batalAte hue vahA~ vistAra se varNana hai| isa cikitsA
meM zodhana ke lie harItakI tathA poSaNa ke lie AMvale kA vizeSa rUpa se upayoga
hotA hai| inheM rasAyana kahA gayA hai| AcArya caraka ne rasAyana ke sevana se
dIrgha Ayu, smRtibuddhi, tArUNyajavAnI, kAnti, varNaojamaya daihika AbhA,
prazasta svara, zarIra-bala, indriya-bala Adi prApta hone kA ullekha kiyA hai|
AMvale se cyavanaprAza, brAhmarasAyana, AmalakarasAyana Adi pauSTika auSadhiyoM
ke rUpa meM aneka avaleha taiyAra kiye jAte hai| astu| Ananda yadi phaloM ke
sandarbha meM apavAda rakhatA to vaha bihAra kA nivAsI thA, bahuta sambhava hai,
phaloM meM Ama kA apavAda rakhatA, jaise khAdyAnoM meM bAsamatI cAMvaloM meM
uttama kalama jAti ke cAvala rkhe| Ama to phaloMkA rAjA mAnA jAtA hai aura
bihAra meM sarvottama koTi kA tathA aneka jAtiyoM kA hotA hai| athavA usa
pradeza meM to aura bhI uttama prakAra ke phala hote hai, unameM se aura koI
rkhtaa| vastutaH jaisA Upara kahA gayA hai, Ananda ne AMvale ko khAne ke phala
kI dRSTi se apavAda nahIM rakhA, mastaka, netra, bAla Adi kI zuddhi ke lie hI
ise svIkAra kiyaa| yaha varNana bhI aise hI sandarbha meM hai| isase pahale ke
teIsaveM sUtra meM Ananda ne harI mulaiThI ke atirikta saba prakAra ke dataunoM
kA parityAga kiyA, isase Age paccIsave sUtra meM zatapAka tathA sahastrapAka
tailoM ke atirikta mAliza ke sabhI tailoM kA sevana na karane kA niyama kiyaa|
usake bAda chabbIsaveM sUtra meM sugandhita gandhATaka ke sivAya sabhI ubaTanoM
kA parityAga kiyaa| yahA~ khAne ke phala kA praMsaga hI saMgata nahIM hai| yaha
to sArA sandarbha datauna, snAna, mAliza, ubaTana Adi deha-zuddhi se sambaddha
kAryoM se jur3A hai| aba eka prazna uThatA hai, kyA Ananda ne khAne ke kisI bhI
phala kA apavAda nahIM rakhA? ho 1. tAn guNAMstAni karmANi vidyaadaamlkessvpi|
yAnyuktAni harItakyA vIryasta tu vipryyH|| atazcAmRtakalpAni
vidyaatkrmbhiriidRshaiH| harItakInAM zasyAni bhiSagAmalakasya ca  //
carakasaMhitA cikitsAsthAna 1  /  35-36 //  carakasaMhitA-cikitsAsthAna 1  /
16-27 //  dIrghamAyuH smRti meghAmArogyaM tarUNaM vayaH  /
prabhAvarNasvaraudArya dehendriyabalaM prm|| vAksiddhiM praNati kAntiM labhate
nA rsaaynaat| lAbhopAyo hi zastAnAM rasAdInAM rsaaynm|| carakasaMhitA-
cikitsAsthAna 1  /  7-8 //

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study: Gathapati Ananda] [35 It is possible that he did not make any
exceptions. Generally, he may have considered all fruits unacceptable in a
conscious way. Dr. Rudolf Hornle has also discussed this. He has also given a
similar indication. 25. Tayaṇantaraṁ ca ṇaṁ abbhaṅgaṇavihīpariṁāṇaṁ karei.
Nannattha samapāgasahasrapāgehiṁ tallehiṁ avasesaṁ abbhaṅgaṇavihīṁ paccakkhāmi.
After that, he measured the Abhyanga-vidhi. I renounce all other Abhyanga-vidhi
- massage oils, except for the Shatapaka and Sahasrapaka oils. Discussion
Shatapaka or Sahasrapaka oil would have been some special valuable oil, in which
precious medicines were put. According to the indication made by Acharya
Abhaydeva Suri in the Vritti in this regard, it may have been Shatapaka oil, in
which 100 types of substances were put, which was cooked a hundred times or
whose price was one hundred Karshapanas. Karshapan was a coin used in ancient
India. It was of three different types, gold, silver and copper. It was called
Swarna-Karshapan, Rajat-Karshapan or Tamra-Karshapan according to the metal
used. The weight of Swarna-Karshapan was 16 Masas, the weight of Rajat-Karshapan
was 16 Panas [special weight] and the weight of Tamra-Karshapan was 80 Rattis. 2
Where this order comes in thousands instead of hundreds, that oil is called
Sahasrapaka. 26. Tayaṇantaraṁ ca ṇaṁ uvvattanaavihīpariṁāṇaṁ karei. Nannattha
ekeṇaṁ surahiṇaṁ gandhatṭaeṇaṁ, avasesaṁ uvvattanaavihīṁ paccakkhāmi. After
that, he measured the Ubtan-vidhi. I renounce all other Ubtans, except for one
fragrant Gandhataka, a paste prepared by mixing some fragrant substances with
wheat flour etc. 27. Tayaṇantaraṁ ca ṇaṁ majjaṇavihīpariṁāṇaṁ karei. Nannattha
aṭṭahiṁ uṭṭiehiṁ udagasssa ghadehiṁ avasesaṁ majjaṇavihīṁ paccakkhāmi. After
that, he measured the bathing method. I renounce all other bathing water, except
for eight Austric-camel-shaped pots of water, whose mouths are narrow like a
camel, the neck is long and the shape is large. 28. Tayaṇantaraṁ ca ṇaṁ
vaththavihīpariṁāṇaṁ karei. Nannattha egeṇaṁ khom - juyaleṇaṁ, avasesaṁ 1.
Uvasagadasao, Lecture I pages 15, 16 2. Sanskrit-English Dictionary-Sir Monier
Williams, p. 176

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda ] [ 35 sakatA hai, usane apavAda nahIM
rakhA ho  /  sAmAnyataH sacitta rUpa meM sabhI phaloM ko asvIkArya mAnA ho  /
isa sambandha meM DA. rUDolpha hArnale ne bhI carcA kI hai| unhoMne bhI isI
taraha kA saMketa diyA hai| 25. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM abbhaMgaNavihiparimANaM
karei  /  nannattha samapAgasahassapAgehiM tallehiM avasesaM abbhaMgaNavihiM
paccakkhAmi  /  usake bAda usane abhyaMgana-vidhi kA parimANa kiyA zatapAka
tathA sahastrapAka tailoM ke atirikta maiM aura sabhI abhyaMganavidhi - mAliza
ke tailoM kA parityAga karatA huuN| vivecana zatapAka yA sahastrapAka taila koI
viziSTa mUlyAvAn taila rahe hoMge, jinameM bahumUlya auSadhiyAM par3I hoM  /
AcArya abhayadeva sUri dvArA vRtti meM isa saMbaMdha meM kie gae saMketa ke
anusAra zatapAka taila rahA ho, jisameM 100 prakAra ke dravya par3e hoM, jo sau
daphA pakAyA gayA ho athavA jisakA mUlya sau kArSApaNa rahA ho| kArSApaNa
prAcIna bhArata meM prayukta eka sikkA thA  /  vaha sonA, cAMdI va tAMbA inakA
alaga-alaga tIna prakAra kA hotA thA  /  prayukta dhAtu ke anusAra vaha svarNa-
kArSApaNa rajata- kArSApaNa yA tAmra- kArSApaNa kahA jAtA rahA thaa| svarNa-
kArSApaNa kA vajana 16 mAse, rajata- kArSApaNa kA vajana 16 paNa [tola vizeSa ]
aura tAmra- kArSApaNa kA vajana 80 rattI hotA thA  /  2 sau ke sthAna para jahA~
yaha krama sahastra meM A jAtA hai, vahAM vaha taila sahastrapAka kahA jAtA hai|
26. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM uvvaTTaNavihiparimANaM karei  /  nannattha ekeNaM
surahiNA gaMdhaTTaeNaM, avasesaM uvvaTTaNavihiM paccakkhAmi  /  isake bAda usane
ubaTana - vidhi kA parimANa kiyA eka mAtra sugandhita gaMdhATakagehU~ Adi ke ATe
ke sAtha katipaya saugandhika padArthoM ko milAkara taiyAra kI gaI pIThI ke
atirikta anya sabhI ubaTanoM kA maiM parityAga karatA hUM  /  27. tayANaMtaraM
ca NaM majjaNavihiparimANaM karei  /  nannattha aTThahiM uTTiehiM udagassa
ghaDehiM avasesaM majjaNavihiM paccakkhAmi  /  usake bAda usane snAna vidhi kA
parimANa diyA- -pAnI ke ATha auSTrika-UMTa ke AkAra ke ghar3e, jinakA muMha UMTa
kI taraha saMkar3A, gardana lambI aura AkAra bar3A ho, ke atirikta snAnArtha
jala kA parityAga karatA hUM  /  28. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM vatthavihiparimANaM
karei  /  nannattha egeNaM khoma - juyaleNaM, avasesaM 1. Uvasagadasao, Lecture
I pages 15, 16 2. saMskRta-iMgaliza DikzanarI-sara moniyara viliyamsa, pR. 176

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[36] I renounce all clothing except two cotton garments. 29. Then he measured
the anointing method. I renounce all anointing substances except agarwood,
saffron, and sandalwood. 30. Then he measured the flower method. I renounce all
flowers except a single white lotus or a garland of jasmine flowers. 31. Then he
measured the adornment method. I renounce all adornments except plain, unadorned
earrings of pure gold and a ring with my name inscribed on it. 32. Then he
measured the incense method. I renounce all incense except agarwood,
frankincense, and sandalwood. 33. Then he measured the food method, and within
that, the drink method. I renounce all drinks except a single drink made from a
wooden vessel or a special drink made from rice cooked in ghee. 34. Then he
measured the food method. I renounce all food except a single piece of sweetmeat
made with ghee or a piece of dried fruit.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra vatthavihiM pcckkhaami| taba usane vastravidhi kA
parimANa kiyA sUtI do vastroM ke sivAya maiM anya vastroM kA parityAga karatA
huuN| 29. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM vilevaNavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha agarU-
kuMkumacaMdaNamAdiehiM avasesaM vilevaNavihiM pcckkhaami| taba usane vilepana-
vidhi kA parimANa kiyA agara, kuMkuma tathA candana ke atirikta maiM sabhI
vilepana-dravyoM kA parityAga karatA huuN| 30. tayANaraM ca NaM
puSphavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha egeNaM suddha-paumeNaM, mAlaikusuma-dAmeNaM
vA avasesaM puSphavihiM pcckkhaami| isake pazcAt usane puSpa-vidhi kA parimANa
kiyA maiM zveta kamala tathA mAlatI ke phUloM kI mAlA ke sivAya sabhI prakAra ke
phUloM ko dhAraNa karane kA parityAga karatA huuN| 31. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM
AbharaNavihiparimANaM krei|. nannattha maTTha-kaNNejaehiM nAmamuddAe ya,
avasesaM AbharaNavihiM pcckkhaami| taba usane AbharaNa-vidhi kA parimANa kiyA
maiM zuddha sone ke acitrita-sAde kuMDala aura nAmAMkita mudrikAaMgUThI ke
sivAya saba prakAra ke gahanoM kA parityAga karatA huuN| 32. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM
dhUvaNavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha agarUturUkkadhUvamAdiehiM, avasesaM
dhUvaNavihiM pcckkhaami| tadanantara usane dhUpanavidhi kA parimANa kiyAagara,
lobAna tathA dhUpa ke sivAya maiM sabhI dhUpanIya vastuoM kA parityAga karatA
huuN| 33. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM bhoyaNavihiparimANaM karemANe, pejavihiparimANaM
kre|| nannattha egAe kaTThapejjAe, avasesaM pejja-vihiM pcckkhaami| _ tatpazcAt
usane bhojana-vidhi ke parimANa ke antargata peya-vidhi kA parimANa kiyA _ maiM
eka mAtra kASTha peya-mUMga kA rasA athavA ghI meM tale hue cAvaloM ke bane eka
vizeSa peya ke atirikta avaziSTa sabhI peya padArthoM kA parityAga karatA huuN|
34. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM bhakkhavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha egehiM
ghayapuNNehiM khaNDakhajjaehiM vA, avasesaM bhakkhavihiM pcckkhaami|

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda  **37.  **He then made a determination
regarding the method of consuming ghee.  I renounce all types of ghee except for
ghee made from the best cow's milk during the autumn season.  **35. **He then
made a determination regarding the method of consuming rice.  I renounce all
types of rice except for rice made from the Kalma variety of paddy.
**Discussion:** Kalma is likely a specific type of Basmati rice, a superior
variety. Ananda was a resident of Videha, which is in North Bihar. Even then, as
it is today, rice was probably the main food there. This is why only the method
of consuming rice is mentioned in the context of determining the quantity of
food grains. This implies renouncing all types of rice except for a specific
variety. This suggests that wheat and other grains were not common or were
consumed very little at that time.  **36. **He then made a determination
regarding the method of consuming soup.  I renounce all types of lentils except
for those made from peas, mung beans, and black gram.  **37. **He then made a
determination regarding the method of consuming ghee.  I renounce all types of
ghee except for ghee made from the best cow's milk during the autumn season.
**Discussion:** Ananda's renunciation of certain foods, drinks, enjoyments,
consumables, and services, i.e., the things he accepted for his own use, shows
that he was very discerning in his choices. He included only the most useful,
health-promoting, beneficial, and taste-enhancing substances in his consumption.
According to this sutra, Ananda only made an exception for consuming ghee made
from cow's milk during the autumn season.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [37 usake anantara usane bhakSya-vidhi
kA parimANa kiyA maiM ghayapuNya (ghRtapUrNa)ghevara, khaMDakhaja
(khaNDakhAdya)khAje, ina ke sivAya aura sabhI pakavAnoM kA parityAga karatA
huuN| 35. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM odaNavihiparimANaM karei- nannattha kalamasAli-
odaNeNaM, avasesaM odaNa-vihiM pcckkhaami| taba usane odanavidhi kA parimANa
kiyA kalama jAti ke dhAna ke cAvaloM ke sivAya maiM aura sabhI prakAra ke
cAvaloM kA parityAga karatA huuN| vivecana uttama jAti ke bAsamatI cAvaloM kA
saMbhavataH kalama eka vizeSa prakAra hai| Ananda videhauttara bihAra kA nivAsI
yaa| Aja kI taraha taba bhI saMbhavataH vahA~ cAvala hI mukhya bhojana thaa|
yahI kAraNa hai ki khAne ke anAjoM ke parimANa ke sandarbha meM kevala
odanavidhi kA hI ullekha AyA hai, jisakA Azaya hai vibhinna cAvaloM meM eka
vizeSa jAti ke cAvala kA apavAda rakhate hue anyoM kA parityAga krnaa| isase
yaha anumAna hotA hai ki taba vahAM gehU~ Adi kA khAne meM pracalana nahIM thA
yA bahuta hI kama thaa| 36. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM sUvavihiparimANaM krei|
nannattha kalAyasUveNa vA, muggamAsasUveNa vA, avasesaM sUvavihiM pcckkhaami|
tatpazcAt usane sUpavidhi kA parimANadAla ke prayoga kA sImAkaraNa kiyA maTara,
mUMga aura uDada kI dAla ke sivAya maiM sabhI dAloM kA parityAga karatA huuN|
37. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM ghayavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha sAraieNaM
godhayamaMDeNaM. avasesaM ghayavihiM pcckkhaami| usake bAda usane ghRtavidhi kA
parimANa kiyA zaradRtu ke uttama go-ghRta ke sivAya maiM sabhI prakAra ke ghRta
kA parityAga karatA huuN| vivecana Ananda ke khAdya, peya, bhogya, upabhogya
tathA sevyajina-jina vastuoM kA apavAda rakhA, arthAt apane upayoga ke lie jina
vastuoM ko svIkAra kiyA, una-una varNanoM ko dekhane se pratIta hotA hai ki
upAdeyatA, uttamatA, priyatA Adi kI dRSTi se usane bahuta vijJatA se kAma liyaa|
atyanta upayogI, svAsthyavarddhaka, hitAvaha evaM rUci-pariSkAraka padArtha
usane bhogopabhoga meM rkheN| prastuta sUtra ke anusAra Ananda ke ghRtoM meM
kevala zarad Rtu ke go-ghRta sevana kA apavAda rkhaa| isa

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[38] It is natural to ask in the context of the Upasakadasangasutra whether
Anand consumed cow ghee only during the autumn season throughout the year? Why
did he not keep fresh ghee? The truth is, from the perspective of rasa-poshan
(nutritional value), autumn holds exceptional significance among all six
seasons. According to Ayurveda, during autumn, amrita (life essence) drips from
the rays of the moon. This is not an exaggeration. Autumn is the time that lies
between the rainy and winter seasons. During this season, there is a special
rasa-sanchar (flow of essence) in medicinal herbs, plants, trees, shrubs, and
grasses. The plants that bear fruit during this time are strength-enhancing,
beneficial, and delicious. It is highly likely that Anand's motivation behind
consuming cow ghee during autumn was this very sentiment. The ghee from cows
that graze on grass during this time possesses a special quality from the
perspective of its properties. Ayurveda also believes that ghee that is one year
old is mature ghee. It is particularly beneficial for health and easy to digest.
Fresh ghee is heavy to digest. _ In Bhava Prakash, it is written about ghee:
"After one year, ghee is considered ancient. Such ghee destroys the three doshas
- vata, pitta, and kapha - and balances all three. It destroys fainting,
leprosy, poison-related ailments, madness, epilepsy, and timir (darkness before
the eyes). This mention in Bhava Prakash makes it clear that ghee is not
inedible for a year. It is an excellent food. It is both nourishing and dosha-
destroying. If ghee is heated thoroughly and filtered after removing buttermilk,
etc., it does not develop foul odor, bad taste, or other defects for a year. As
a medicine, the older the ghee, the better it is considered. Bhava Prakash
writes: "As ghee becomes older, its qualities increase more and more."
Kalyanakghrit, Mahakalyanakghrit, Lashunadyghrit, Panchgavyghrit,
Mahapanchgavyghrit, Brahmi ghrit, etc., all the ghritas that are prepared in
Ayurveda for the treatment of various diseases, use ancient cow ghee. For
example, in the Charaka Samhita, it is written about Brahmi ghrit: "Brahmi ghrit
is said to be prepared from the juice of Brahmi, vach, kuth, and shankhpushpi,
and ancient cow ghee." 1. वर्षादूर्ध्व भवेदाज्यं पुराणं तत् त्रिदोषनुत्।
मूर्छाकुष्टविषोन्मादापस्मारतिमिरापहम्॥ _ Bhava Prakash, Ghritavarg 15 1. यथा
यथाऽखिलं सर्पिः पुराणमधिकं भवेत्। तथा तथा गुणैः स्वैः स्वैरधिकं तदुदाहृतम् ॥ _
Bhava Prakash, Ghritavarg 16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra sandarbha meM eka prazna uThanA svAbhAvika hai ki kyA
Ananda varSa bhara zarad-Rtu ke hI go-ghRta kA sevana karatA thA? usane tAje ghI
kA apavAda kyoM nahI rakhA? vAstava meM bAta yaha hai, rasa-poSaNa kI dRSTi se
zarad Rtu kA chahoM RtuoM meM asAdhAraNa mahatva hai| Ayurveda ke anusAra zarad
Rtu meM candramA kI kiraNoM se amRta (jIvanarasa) TapakatA hai| isameM
atiraMjana nahIM hai| zarad Rtu vaha samaya hai, jo varSA aura zIta kA
madhyavartI hai| isa Rtu meM vanauSadhiyoM (jar3I-bUTiyoM) meM, vanaspatiyoM
meM, vRkSoM meM, paudhoM meM, ghAsa-pAta meM eka vizeSa rasa-saMcAra hotA hai|
isameM phalane vAlI vanaspatiyAM zakti-varddhaka, upayogI evaM svAdiSTa hotI
haiN| zarad Rtu kA go-ghRta svIkAra karane ke pIche bahuta saMbhava hai, Ananda
kI yahI bhAvanA rahI ho| isa samaya kA ghAsa carane vAlI ke ghRta meM
guNAtmakatA kI dRSTi se vizeSatA rahatI hai| Ayurveda yaha bhI mAnatA hai ki eka
varSa taka kA purAnA ghRta paripakva ghRta hotA hai| yaha svAsthya kI dRSTi se
vizeSa lAbhaprada evaM pAcana meM halkA hotA hai| tAjA ghRta pAcana meM bhArI
hotA hai| _ bhAva-prakAza meM ghRta ke sambandha meM likhA hai- "eka varSa
vyatIta hone para ghRta kI saMjJA prAcIna ho jAtI hai| vaisA ghRta tridoSa
nAzaka hotA hai-vAta, pitta kapha-tInoM doSoM kA samanvAyaka hotA hai  /  vaha
mUrchA, kuSTa, viSa-vikAra, unmAda, apasmAra tathA timira (A~khoM ke Age aMdherI
AnA) ina doSoM kA nAzaka bhAva-prakAza ke isa ullekha se yaha spaSTa hai ki eka
varSa taka ghRta akhAdya nahI hotaa| vaha uttama khAdya hai| poSaka ke sAtha-
sAtha doSanAzaka bhI hai| yadi ghRta ko khUba garma karake chAcha Adi nikAla
kara chAna kara rakhA jAya to eka varSa taka usameM durgandha, duHsvAda Adi
vikAra utpanna nahIM hote| auSadhi ke rUpa meM to ghRta jitanA purAnA hotA hai,
utanA hI acchA mAnA gayA hai| bhAvaprakAza meM likhA hai "ghRta jaise-jaise
adhika purAnA hotA hai, vaise-vaise usake guNa adhika se adhika bar3hate jAte
hai|'' kalyANakaghRta, mahAkalyANakaghRta, lazunAdyaghRta, paMcagavyaghRta,
mahApaMcagavyaghRta, brAmhIghRta, Adi jitane bhI Ayurveda meM vibhinna rogoM kI
cikitsA hetu ghRta siddha kie jAte haiM, una meM prAcIna go-ghRta kA hI prayoga
kiyA jAtA hai, jaise brAhmIghRta ke sambandha meM caraka-saMhitA meM likhA hai
"brAhmI ke rasa, vaca, kUTha aura zaMkhapuSpI dvArA siddha purAtana go-ghRta
brAhmIghRta kahA jAtA hai| 1. varSAdUrdhva bhavedAjyaM purANaM tat tridossnut|
muurchaakussttvissonmaadaapsmaartimiraaphm|| bhAvaprakAza, ghRtavarga 15 1.
yathA yathA'khilaM sarpiH purANamadhikaM bhvet| tathA tathA guNaiH svaiH
svairadhikaM tadudAhRtam  //  _bhAvaprakAza, ghRtavarga 16

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: The Joy of the Verses  **[39]** "This madness, the lack of
Lakshmi's radiance, epilepsy, and the sin of bodily defilement, these diseases
it destroys." [1]  This passage suggests that Anand used only ghee from the
autumn season throughout the year. Even today, those who have an abundance of
cattle keep a store of ghee throughout the year. Notably, ghee from other
seasons like the rainy season is not as durable as autumn ghee. The key reason
for this durability is the cow's diet, which is at its peak ripeness and
richness in the autumn season.  **[38]** "Then he measured the varieties of
greens. I renounce all greens except bathua, bottle gourd, spinach, and okra."
**[39]** "Then he measured the varieties of sweet things. I renounce all sweet
things except the sweet drink made from the gum of the palang madhurak-shallaki
(a specific tree)."  **[40]** "Then he measured the varieties of dishes. I
renounce all dishes except those made with kanji, large beans, and sour mung dal
dumplings."  **[41]** "Then he measured the varieties of drinks. I renounce all
drinks except the drink made from the roots of the antalikkh-odaya, and also
from the brahma-rasa, vacha, kustha, and shankapushpi.  **[Note]** * Ancient
ghee is said to cure madness, lack of Lakshmi's radiance, epilepsy, and sin.
[Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 10.24.1.2] * Some wise people have considered
a specific division of the day as autumn, and the ghee produced in that specific
division as autumn ghee. * In the traditional sense, madhurak-vidhi refers to
the method of fruits, which includes nuts along with fruits, and palang refers
to the mango produced from a vine. Some interpret it as khirni (rayan fruit).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] - [39 yaha unmAda, alakSmIkAnti-
vihInatA, apasmAra tathA pApadeha-kaluSatAina rogoM ko naSTa karatA hai|"1 isa
paripArzva meM cintana karane se yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki Ananda varSa bhara
zarad Rtu ke go-ghRta kA hI upayoga karatA thaa| Aja bhI jinake yahAM go-dhana
kI pracuratA hai, varSabhara ghRta kA saMgraha rakhA jAtA hai| eka vizeSa bAta
aura hai, varSA Adi anya RtuoM kA ghRta TikAU bhI nahI hotA zarad Rtu kA hI
ghRta TikAU hotA hai| isa TikAUpana kA khAsa kAraNa gAya kA AhAra hai,jo zarad
Rtu meM acchI paripakvatA aura rasa-snigdhatA lie rahatA hai| 38. tayANaMtaraM
ca NaM sAgavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha vatthusAeNa vA, tuMbasAeNa vA,
sutthiyasAeNa vA, maMDukkiyasAeNa vA, avasesaM sAvavihiM pcckkhaami| tadanantara
usane zAkavidhi kA parimANa kiyA bathuA, laukI, suApAlaka tathA bhiMDIina sAgoM
ke sivAya aura saba prakAra ke sAgoM kA parityAga karatA huuN| 39. tayANaMtaraM
ca NaM mAhurayavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha egeNaM pAlaMgAmahuraeNaM, avaseseM
mAhurayavihiM pcckkhaami| _ tatpazcAt usane mAdhurakavidhi kA parimANa kiyA maiM
pAlaMga mAdhuraka-zallakI (vRkSa-vizeSa) ke goMda se banAe madhura peya ke
sivAya anya sabhI madhura peyoM kA parityAga karatA huuN|' 40. tayANaMtaraM ca
NaM jemaNavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha sehaMbadAliyaMbehiM, avasesaM
jemaNavihiM pcckkhaami| usake bAda usane vyaMjanavidhi kA parimANa kiyA _ maiM
kAMjI bar3e tathA khaTAI par3e mUMga Adi kI dAla ke pakaur3oM ke sivAya saba
prakAra ke vyaMjanoM-caTakIle padArthoM kA parityAga karatA huuN| 41.
tayANaMtaraM ca NaM pANiyavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha egeNaM aMtalikkhodaeNaM,
brAhmarasavacAkuSThazaGkapuSpIbhireva c| purANaM
ghRtmunmaadaalkssmympsmaarpaapmjit|| carakasaMhitA, cikitsAsthAna 10.24  /  2.
kinhIM manISI ne dina ke vibhAga vizeSa kI zarada mAnA hai aura usa vibhAga
vizeSa meM niSpanna ghI ko zAradika ghRta mAnA hai| 3. paramparAgata-artha kI
apekSA se mAdhurakavidhi kA artha phala vidhi hai jisameM phala ke sAtha meve
bhI garbhita haiM aura pAlaMga kA artha latAjanita Ama hai| kinhIM meM isakA
artha khiraNI (rAyaNa-phala) bhI kiyA hai|

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[40] [Upasakadasangasutra] I renounce all water except for the water that falls
from the sky. [42] Then he renounced all mouthwashes except for those made with
five fragrant substances. Commentary Acharya Abhaydeva Suri, the commentator,
mentions cardamom, cloves, camphor, cinnamon, and nutmeg as the five fragrant
substances. It seems that wealthy people used these in their mouthwashes. They
are beneficial for health as well as being fragrant. [43] Then he renounced the
four types of Anarthadanda: Apadhyanacharita, Pramadacharita, Himstra-pradana,
and Papakarmopadesha. Commentary Violence that is done without any purpose is
included in Anarthadanda. Although violence is violence, there is a big
difference between violence that is done for a worldly purpose or need and
violence that is done without any purpose. When a person is forced to commit
violence for a need or purpose, he can be forgiven from a practical point of
view, but the one who commits violence without any purpose or meaning is
completely inappropriate. Therefore, it is called Anarthadanda. Acharya
Abhaydeva Suri, the commentator, has called the violent acts done without the
purpose of Dharma, Artha, and Kama as Anarthadanda. Apadhyanacharita, which is
included in Anarthadanda, means evil thinking. Evil thinking is also a kind of
violence. It destroys the virtues of the soul. There are two types of evil
thinking: Artadhyan and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 40] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra avasesaM pANiyavihiM pcckkhaami| tatpazcAt usane pIne
ke pAnI kA parimANa kiyA maiM eka mAtra AkAza se girevarSA ke pAnI ke sivAya
anya saba prakAra ke pAnI kA parityAga karatA huuN| 42. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM
muhavAsavihiparimANaM krei| nannattha paMca-sogaMdhieNaM taMboleNaM, avasesaM
muhavAsavihiM pcckkhaami| tatpazcAt usane mukhavAsavidhi kA parimANa kiyA pAMca
sugandhita vastuoM se yukta pAna ke sivAya maiM mukha ko sugandhita karane vAle
bAkI sabhI padArthoM kA parityAga karatA huuN| vivecana vRttikAra AcArya
abhayadeva sUri ne pAMca sugandhita vastuoM meM ilAyacI, lauMga, kapUra,
dAlacInI tathA jAyaphala kA ullekha kiyA hai| aisA pratIta hotA hai, samRddha
jana pAna meM inakA prayoga karate rahe haiN| sugandhita hone ke sAtha sAtha
svAsthya kI dRSTi se bhI ye lAbhakara haiN| anarthadaNDa-viramaNa 43.
tayANaMtaraM ca NaM cauvvihaM aNaTThAdaMDaM pcckkhaai|tN jahA-avajjhANAyariyaM,
pamAyAyariyaM, hiMsappayANaM, paavkmmovese|| tatpazcAta usane cAra prakAra ke
anarthadaNDa-apadhyAnAcarita, pramAdAcarita, hiMstra-pradAna tathA
pApakarmopadeza kA pratyAkhyAna kiyaa| vivecana binA kisI uddezya ke jo hiMsA kI
jAtI hai, usakA samAveza anarthadaNDa meM hotA hai  /  yadyapi hiMsA to hiMsA hI
hai, para jo laukika dRSTi se AvazyakatA yA prayojanavaza kI jAtI hai, usameM
tathA nirarthaka kI jAne vAlI hiMsA meM bar3A bheda hai| AvazyakatA yA
prayojanavaza hiMsA karane ko jaba vyakti bAdhya hotA hai to usakI vivazatA
dekhate use vyAvahArika dRSTi se kSamya bhI mAnA jA sakatA hai para jo prayojana
yA matalaba ke binA hiMsA Adi kA AcaraNa karatA hai, vaha sarvathA anucita hai|
isalie use anarthadaMDa kahA jAtA hai| vRttikAra AcArya abhayadeva sUri ne
dharma, artha tathA kAma rUpa prayojana ke binA kiye jAne vAle hiMsApUrNa kAryoM
kA anarthadaMDa kahA hai| anarthadaMDa ke antargata lie gae apadhyAnAcarita kA
artha haiduzcintana  /  duzcintana bhI eka prakAra se hiMsA hI hai| vaha
AtmaguNoM kA ghAta karatA hai| duzcintana do prakAra kA hai ArttadhyAna tathA

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda  [41] **Roudradhyan:** When desired things like
wealth, progeny, health, etc. are not obtained, and when undesirable situations
like poverty, illness, separation from loved ones, etc. occur, the painful and
distorted thinking that arises in the mind is called **Artadhyan**. Thinking
continuously about harming others due to anger, hatred, and animosity is called
**Roudradhyan**. Both these types of thinking are **Anarthadanda** in the form
of **Apadhyanacharit**.  **Pramadacharit:** Lack of awareness about one's
dharma, responsibilities, and duties is **Pramad**. Such a negligent person
often spends their time criticizing others, gossiping, boasting about their
greatness, and engaging in obscene talk. The mental, verbal, and physical vices
related to these fall under **Pramadacharit**.  **Himstra-Pradan-Hinsa:**
Directly assisting in acts of violence, such as providing weapons, shelter, or
other forms of support to thieves, robbers, and hunters. This encourages and
supports violence, making it **Anarthadanda**.  **Papakarmopadesh:** Inspiring,
advising, or counseling others to engage in sinful acts. For example, telling a
hunter that he will find many animals suitable for hunting in a particular
place, inciting someone to trouble others, or encouraging people to harm
animals. All of these fall under **Papakarmopadesh**.  These four types of evil
acts included in **Anarthadanda** are those that every righteous, cultured, and
civilized citizen should abandon. This is essential not only for spiritual
progress but also for a good and ethical civic life.  **Atichara of Samyaktva**
[44] "O Ananda! The Bhagwan Mahavira told the Shramanopasaka Ananda, 'O Ananda!
The Shramanopasaka who has truly understood the nature of Jiva, Ajeeva, and
other substances (who understands the difference between punya and papa, who is
unwilling to help others, who is unshakeable by the teachings of the Nirgrantha
by the Devas, Asuras, Nagas, Suparna, Yaksha, Rakshasa, Kinnara, Kimpurusha,
Garuda, Gandharva, Mahoraga, and other Devas), should know the five main
**Atichara** of **Samyaktva** and should not practice them. Those **Atichara**
are:  **Bhagava**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [41 raudrdhyaan| abhIpsita vastu, jaise
dhana-sampatti, saMtati, svasthatA Adi prApta na hone para evaM dAridraya,
rUgNatA, priyajana kA viraha Adi aniSTa sthitayoM ke hone para mana meM jo
klezapUrNa vikRta cintana hotA hai, vaha ArtadhyAna hai| krodhAveza, zatru-bhAva
aura vaimanasya Adi se prerita hokara dUsare ko hAni pahu~cAne Adi kI bAta
socate rahanA raudradhyAna hai| ina donoM taraha se hone vAlA dazcintana
apadhyAnAcarita rUpa anarthadaMDa hai| pramAdAcarita-apane dharma, dAyitva va
kartavya ke prati ajAgarUkatA pramAda hai| aisA pramAdI vyakti aksara apanA
samaya dUsaroM kI nindA karane meM, gappa mArane meM, apane bar3appana kI zekhI
badhArate rahane meM, azlIla bAteM karane meM bitAtA hai| inase saMbaMdhita
mana, vacana tathA zarIra ke vikAra pramAdAcarita meM Ate haiN| hiMstra-pradAna-
hiMsA ke kAryoM meM sAkSAt sahayoga karanA jaise cora, DAkU tathA zikArI Adi ko
hathiyAra denA, Azraya denA tathA dUsarI taraha se sahAyatA krnaa| aisA karane
se hiMsA ko protsAhana aura sahArA milatA hai, ataH yaha anarthadaMDa hai|
pApakarmopadezaauroM ko pApa-kArya meM pravRtta hone meM preraNA, upadeza yA
parAmarza denaa| udAharaNArtha, kisI zikArI ko yaha batalAnA ki amuka sthAna
para zikAra-yogya pazu-pakSI use bahuta prApta hoMge, kisI vyakti kI dUsaroM ko
takalIpha dene ke lie uttejita karanA, pazu-pakSiyoM ko pIr3ita karane ke lie
logoM ko duSprerita karanAina sabakA pApa-karmopadeza meM samAveza hai|
anarthadaMDa meM lie gae ye cAroM prakAra ke duSkArya aise haiM, jinakA pratyeka
dharmaniSTha, ziSTa va sabhya nAgarika ko parityAga karanA caahie| adhyAtma-
utkarSa ke sAtha-sAtha uttama aura naitika nAgarika jIvana kI dRSTi se bhI yaha
bahuta hI Avazyaka hai| aticAra samyaktva ke aticAra 44. iha khalu ANaMdA! i
samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre ANaMdaM samaNovAsagaM evaM bayAsI-evaM khalu, ANaMdA!
samaNovAsaeNaM abhigayajIvajIveNaM jAva (uvaladdhapuNNapAveNaM, Asava-saMvara-
nijara-kiriyA-ahigaraNa-baMdha-mokkha-kusaleNaM, asahejeNaM, devAsuraNAga-
suvaNNajakkha-rakkhasa-kiNNara-kiMpurisa-garUla gaMdhavva-mahoragAiehiM
devagaNehiM niggaMthAoM pAvayaNAo aNaikkamaNijjeNaM) sammattassa paMca aiyArA
peyAlA jANiyavvA, na samAyariyavvA  /  taM jahAsaMkA, kaMkhA, viigicchA,
parapAsaMDapasaMsA, prmaasNddsNthve| bhagavAn mahAvIra ne zramaNopAsaka Ananda
se kahA-Ananda ! jisane jIva, ajIva Adi padArtho ke svarUpa ko yathAvat rUpa se
jAnA hai, (puNya aura pApa kA bheda samajhA hai, jo kisI dUsare kI sahAyatA kA
anicchuka hai, deva, asura, nAga, suparNa, yakSa, rAkSasa, kinnara, kiMpurUSa,
garUDa, gandharva, mahoraga Adi devatAoM dvArA nirgrantha pravacana se
anatikramaNIya hai vicalita nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai) usako samyaktva ke pAMca
pradhAna aticAra jAnane cAhie aura unakA AcaraNa nahIM karanA caahie| ve aticAra
bhagavA

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 42:  **The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra is as follows:** Doubt, Desire,
Hesitation, Praise of Other Sects, and Glorification of Other Sects.
**Discussion:**  Accepting vows is not as difficult as adhering to them
steadfastly. Adherence requires constant vigilance. One must remain unwavering
even in the face of obstacles. To ensure stability in the vows taken and to
prevent weakness in the mind of the Upasaka, the Jain practice of Sadhana-
Paddhati provides a beautiful solution in the form of Atichar-Varjan.  Atichar
means any kind of weakness, lapse, or partial defilement in the vow. If the
Upasaka cannot overcome Atichar, it transforms into Anacahar. Anacahar means
breaking the vow. Therefore, it is essential for the Upasaka to understand
Atichars properly and to avoid them with awareness and self-strength.  The most
important thing for an Upasaka is Samyaktava - that is, true faith in the
principles, truth, and right belief. If the Upasaka loses Samyaktava, what else
can they save? When untruth takes the place of truth in faith, it naturally
leads to contradictions in conduct and life. Therefore, Bhagwan Mahavir first
pointed out the Atichars of Samyaktava to the Shraman Upasaka and advised them
not to engage in such conduct.  Here is a brief discussion of the five Atichars
of Samyaktava:  **Doubt:** Doubt is having doubts about the principles spoken by
the omniscient, such as the soul, heaven, hell, merit, demerit, bondage,
liberation, etc. When doubt arises in the mind, faith falters, and belief
wavers, it is called doubt. When doubt arises, the feeling of curiosity
diminishes. Doubt is rooted in curiosity. When a person wants to know more about
a principle or subject for clarity and to strengthen their belief, they ask
questions. This is not called doubt because it strengthens their faith. In the
Jain Agamas, when there is a sequence of questions and answers with Bhagwan
Mahavir, it is said that doubt arises in the mind of the Prashrika. The
questions of Indrabhuti Gautam, a prominent disciple of Bhagwan Mahavir, and the
answers of Bhagwan are scattered throughout the entire Agam literature. Wherever
Gautam asks questions, there is a mention of doubt arising in his mind. At the
same time, he is also called a devout believer. Gautam's doubt was rooted in
curiosity. It is not a fault for a Samyaktavi to have a doubt with faith, but
they should not have a doubt rooted in disbelief.  **Desire:** Generally, this
means to turn or bend one's desire towards something else. In this context, it
means being influenced by external appearances, pomp, or other temptations and
leaning towards another belief. A Samyaktavi should not be influenced by
external displays.  **Hesitation:** The human mind is very fickle. It is filled
with various resolutions and alternatives.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra isa prakAra hai zaMkA, kAMkSA, vicikitsA, para-
pASaMDa-prazaMsA tathA para-pASaMDa sNstv| vivecana vrata svIkAra karanA utanA
kaThina nahI hai, jitanA dRDhatA se pAlana krnaa| pAlana karane meM vyakti ko
kSaNa-kSaNa jAgarUka rahanA hotA hai| bAdhaka sthiti ke utpanna hone para bhI
avicala rahanA hotA hai| liye hue vratoM meM sthiratA banI rahe, upAsaka ke mana
meM kamajorI na Ae, isake lie aticAravarjana ke rUpa meM jaina sAdhanA-paddhati
meM bahuta hI sundara upAya batalAyA gayA hai| aticAra kA artha vrata meM kisI
prakAra kI durbalatA, skhalanA yA AMzika malinatA AnA hai| yadi aticAra ko
upAsaka lAMgha nahI pAtA to vaha aticAra anAcAra meM badala jAtA hai| anAcAra kA
artha hai, vrata kA TUTa jaanaa| isalie upAsaka ke lie Avazyaka hai ki vaha
aticAroM ko yathAvat rUpa se samajhe tathA jAgarUkatA aura Atmabala ke sAtha
unakA varjana kreN| upAsaka ke lie sarvAdhika mahattva kI vastu hai samyakatva-
yarthAta tattvazraddhAnasatya ke prati sahI aasthaa| yadi upAsaka samyaktva ko
kho de to phira Age baca hI kyA pAe? AsthA meM satya kA sthAna jaba asatya le
legA to sahaja hI AcaraNa meM, jIvana meM viparItatA pallavita hogii| isalie
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne zramaNopAsaka Ananda ko sabase pahale samyaktva ke aticAra
batalAe aura unakA AcaraNa na karane kA upadeza diyaa| samyaktva ke pAMca
aticAroM kA saMkSepa meM vivecana isa prakAra hai zaMkAsarvajJa dvArA bhASita
AtmA, svarga, naraka, puNya, pApa, bandha, mokSa Adi tattvoM meM sandeha honA
zaMkA hai| mana meM sandeha utpanna hone para jaba AsthA DagamagA jAtI hai,
vizvAsa hila jAtA hai to use zaMkA kahA jAtA hai| zaMkA hone para jijJAsA kA
bhAva halakA par3a jAtA hai| saMzaya jijJAsAmUlaka hai| vizvAsa yA AsthA ko
dRDha karane ke lie vyakti jaba kisI tattva yA viSaya ke bAre meM spaSTatA hetu
aura adhika jAnanA cAhatA hai, prazna karatA hai, use zaMkA nahI kahA jAtA,
kyoMki usase vaha apanA vizvAsa daDhatara karanA cAhatA hai| jaina AgamoM meM
jaba bhagavAna mahAvIra ke sAtha praznottaroM kA krama calA hai, prAzrika ke
mana meM saMzaya utpanna hone kI bAta kahI gaI hai| bhagavAna mahAvIra ke
pramukha ziSya indabhUti gautama ke prazna tathA bhagavAn ke uttara sAre Agama
vAGmaya meM bikhare par3e haiN| jahA~ gautama prazna karate haiM, vahAM sarvatra
unake mana ke saMzaya utpanna hone kA ullekha hai| sAtha hI sAtha unheM parama
zraddhAvAn bhI kahA gayA hai| gautama kA saMzaya jijJAsA-mUlaka thaa| eka
samyaktvI ke mana meM zraddhApUrNa saMzaya honA doSa nahI hai, para use
azraddhAmUlaka zaMkA nahIM honI caahie| kAMkSAsAdhAraNatayA isakA artha icchA ko
kisI ora mor3a denA yA jhukanA hai| prastuta prasaMga meM isakA artha bAharI
dikhAve yA ADambara yA dUsare pralobhanoM se prabhAvita hokara kisI dUsare mata
kI ora jhukanA hai| bAharI pradarzana se samyaktvI ko prabhAvita nahIM honA
caahie| vicikitsAmanuSya kA mana bar3A caMcala hai| usameM taraha-taraha ke
saMkalpa-vikalpa uThate dada se

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Anand  **[43]** Sometimes, doubts arise in the mind of
a devotee: "Will the fruits of my religious practices, austerities, etc., be
realized?" This doubt is called **vichchikitsa**. When such a doubtful feeling
arises in the mind, the pace of work naturally slows down, and discouragement
increases. This situation is a major obstacle to the success of the work. A
**samyaktvī** should avoid this.  **[Par-Paashand-Prashansa]** According to
linguistics, the meaning of a word can change completely over time in different
circumstances. This is the case with the word **paashand**. The word
**paashand** or **paashandi** used today is a form of this, but the meaning then
and now is completely different. In the time of Lord Mahavira and for centuries
after, the word **paashandi** was used for followers of other faiths. Today, the
word **paashand** has a derogatory meaning. A hypocrite is called a
**paashandi**. In ancient times, the word **paashand** was not associated with
condemnation. In Ashoka's inscriptions, this word has been used for followers of
other faiths in many places.  **Par-Paashand-Prashansa** is the fourth
**atichaar** of **samyaktvī**, which means that a **samyaktvī** should not be an
admirer of followers of other faiths. The word **prashansa** used here does not
mean practical courtesy, but its theoretical meaning. Being an admirer of
followers of other faiths means respecting their religious principles. This
happens only when there is a lack of faith in one's own beliefs. In other words,
it is an indication of a weakening of faith. A person should remain firm in the
faith that they have adopted after careful consideration. Such acts of praise,
etc., certainly hinder the firmness of faith. Therefore, this is not narrow-
mindedness, but a useful measure to strengthen faith.  **[Par-Paashand-
Sanstav]** The meaning of **sanstav** is close contact or intimate acquaintance.
Religious contact or association with followers of other faiths, **paashandis**,
is not beneficial for a devotee. It can lead to deviation in their faith.
**[Ahimsa-Vrat Atichaar]**  **[45]** After this, a **shramanopasaka** should
know the five major **atichaars** of the **sthūla-prāṇātipāta-viramaṇa** vow,
and should not practice them. They are as follows:  * **Bandha** * **Vadha** *
**Chhavi-Chheda** * **Atibhāra** * **Bhakta-Pān-Vyavachheda**  **[Discussion]**
**Bandha** - This means to tie. To tie animals, etc., in such a way that they
suffer, is **bandha**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 LY prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [43 rahate hai| kabhI-kabhI upAsaka
ke mana meM aise bhAva bhI uThate haiM vaha jo dharma kA anuSThAna karatA hai,
tapa Adi kA AcaraNa karatA hai, usakA phala hogA yA nahIM? aisA sandeha
vicikitsA kahA gayA hai| mana meM isa prakAra kA sandehAtmaka bhAva paidA hote
hI kArya-gati meM sahaja hI zithilatA A jAtI hai, anutsAha bar3hane lagatA hai|
kArya-siddhi meM nizcaya hI yaha sthiti bar3I bAdhaka hai| samyaktvI ko isase
bacanA caahie| _para-pASaMDa-prazaMsAbhASA-vijJAna ke anusAra kisI zabda kA eka
samaya jo artha hotA hai, Age calakara bhinna paristhitiyoM meM kabhI-kabhI vaha
sarvathA badala jAtA hai| yahI sthiti pAkhaMDa zabda ke sAtha hai| Aja pracalita
pAkhaMDa yA pAkhaMDI zabda isI kA rUpa hai para taba aura aba ke artha meM
sarvathA bhinnatA hai| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samaya meM aura zatAbdiyoM taka
pAkhaMDI zabda anya mata ke vratadhAraka anuyAyiyoM ke lie prayukta hotA rhaa|
Aja pAkhaMDa zabda nindAmUlaka artha meM hai| DhoMgI ko pAkhaMDI kahA jAtA hai|
prAcIna kAla meM pAkhaMDa zabda ke sAtha nindAvAcakatA nahIM jur3I thii| azoka
ke zilAlekhoM meM bhI aneka sthAnoM para isa zabda kA anya matAvalambiyoM ke lie
prayoga huA hai| para-pASaMDa-prazaMsA samyaktva kA cauthA aticAra hai, jisakA
abhiprAya hai, samyaktvI ko anya matAvalambI kA prazaMsaka nahI honA caahie|
yahA~ prayukta prazaMsA, vyAvahArika ziSTAcAra ke artha meM nahIM hai, tAttvika
artha meM hai| anya matAvalambI ke prazaMsaka hone kA artha hai, usake dhArmika
siddhAntoM kA sammAna  /  yaha tabhI hotA hai, jaba apane abhimata siddhAntoM
meM vizvAsa kI kamI A jaay| ise dUsare zabdoM meM kahA jAya to yaha vizvAsa meM
zithilatA hone kA dyotaka hai| soca samajha kara aMgIkAra kiye gae vizvAsa para
vyakti ko dRDha rahanA hI caahiye| isa prakAra ke prazaMsA Adi kAryoM se nizcaya
hI vizvAsa kI dRr3hatA vyAhata hotI hai| isalie yaha saMkIrNatA nahIM hai, AsthA
kI puSTi kA eka upayogI upAya hai| _ para-pASaMDa-saMstavasaMstava kA artha
ghaniSTha samparka yA nikaTatApUrNa paricaya hai  /  paramatAvalambI pASaMDiyoM
ke sAtha dhArmika dRSTi se vaisA paricaya athavA samparka upAsaka ke lie upAdeya
nahIM hai| isase usakI AsthA meM vicalana paidA hone kI AzaMkA rahatI hai|
ahiMsA-vrata aticAra 45. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM thUlagassa pANAivAyaveramaNassa
samaNovAsaeNaM paMca aiyArA peyAlA jANiyavvA, na saamaayriyvvaa| taM jahA-
baMdhe, vahe, chavi-cchee, aibhAre, bhttpaann-vocchee| isake bAda zramaNopAsaka
kI sthUla-prANAtipAtaviramaNa vrata ke pAMca pramukha aticAroM ko jAnanA cAhie,
unakA AcaraNa nahIM karanA caahie| ve isa prakAra hai bandha, vadha,
chaviccheda, atibhAra, bhkt-paan-vyvcched| vivecana bandha-isakA artha bAMdhanA
hai| pazu Adi ko isa prakAra bAMdhanA, jisase unako kaSTa ho, bandha

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **44]**  [This comes from the Upasakadasangasutra.
Commentators have also discussed the binding of slaves, etc. Binding them in a
way that causes them suffering is also included in this transgression. The
mention of binding slaves, etc., points to the time in India when slaves and
slave girls were bought and sold like animals and unjust materials. The master
had complete authority over them. Like animals, they were forced to serve them
for life.  The scriptures mention two types of binding - one is Artha-bandh and
the other is Anartha-bandh. Binding for a purpose or reason falls under Artha-
bandh, such as binding someone for medical treatment or to protect them from
danger. Binding without purpose or reason is Anartha-bandh. It is completely
violence. This falls under Anartha-danda in the eighth vow called Anartha-danda-
viraman. There should be no contaminated emotions like anger, cruelty, hatred
associated with binding for a purpose. If they are present, it is a
transgression. Commentators have divided Artha-bandh into two categories -
relative and absolute. Relative binding is one from which one can be released,
for example, if a fire breaks out and an animal is tied there, if it is lightly
tied, it can escape from there. Such binding does not fall under transgression.
But the binding from which one cannot be released even after trying in a fearful
situation is absolute binding. It falls under transgression. Because the bound
creature suffers greatly due to not being able to escape, it may even die.  Vadh
- Generally, the meaning of Vadh is to kill someone. But here Vadh is not used
in this sense. Because killing someone would completely violate the vow of non-
violence. It is a sin. Here Vadh is used in the sense of a fatal blow, a blow
that causes harm to the limbs or body parts of the struck person.  Chhavi-chhed
- Chhavi means beauty. It is also used to mean a limb. Chhavi-chhed means to
destroy someone's beauty, splendor, or to mutilate their limbs. Cutting off
someone's limb naturally makes them devoid of beauty. Cutting off someone's limb
in a fit of anger is included in this transgression. Cutting the tails, ears,
etc., of pet animals like dogs for entertainment is also included in this
transgression.  Ati-bhar - Loading more weight on animals, slaves, etc., than
their strength can bear is included in Ati-bhar. In today's language, taking
more work from servants, laborers, authorized employees than their capacity is
Ati-bhar.  Bhakta-pan-vyavchhed - This means to obstruct or hinder food and
drink. For example, not giving your dependent animal sufficient fodder and water
on time, keeping it hungry and thirsty. The same applies to slaves and slave
girls. Creating obstacles or disruptions in their food and drink arrangements is
included in this transgression. In today's language, not providing your servants
and employees, etc., with food and drink on time...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra meM AtA hai| vyAkhyAkAroM ne dAsa Adi ko bAMdhane kI
bhI carcA kI hai| unheM bhI isa prakAra bAMdhanA, jisase unheM kaSTa ho, isa
aticAra meM zAmila hai| dAsa Adi ko bAMdhane kA ullekha bhArata ke usa samaya kI
ora saMketa karatA hai, jaba dAsa aura dAsI pazu tathA anyAya adhikRta sAmagrI
kI taraha kharIde-bece jAte the| svAmI kA una para pUrNa adhikAra hotA thaa|
pazuoM kI taraha ve jIvana bhara ke lie unakI sevA karane ko bAdhya hote the|
zAstroM meM bandha do prakAra ke batalAe gae hai-eka artha-bandha tathA dUsarA
anrth-bndh| kisI prayojana yA hetu se bAMdhanA artha-bandha meM AtA hai, jaise
kisI roga kI cikitsA ke lie bAMdhanA par3e yA kisI Apatti se bacAne ke lie
bAMdhanA pdd'e| prayojana yA kAraNa ke binA bAMdhanA anartha baMdha hai| jo
sarvathA hiMsA hai| yaha anartha-daMDa-viramaNa nAmaka AThaveM vrata ke
antargata anartha-daMDa meM jAtA hai| prayojanavaza kie jAne vAle bandha ke
sAtha krodha, krUratA, dveSa jaise kaluSita bhAva nahIM hone caahie| yadi hote
haiM to vaha aticAra hai| vyAkhyAkAroM ne artha-bandha ko sApekSa aura
nirapekSa-do bhedoM meM bAMTA hai| sApekSabandha vaha hai, jisase chUTA jA sake,
udAharaNArthakahIM Aga laga jAya, vahA~ pazu baMdhA ho, vaha yadi halake rUpa
meM baMdhA hogA to vahA~ se chUTa kara bAhara jA skegaa| aisA bandha aticAra meM
nahI aataa| para vaha bandha, jisase bhayajanaka sthiti utpanna hone para
prayatna karane para bhI chUTA na jA sake, nirapekSa bandha hai| vaha aticAra
meM AtA hai| kyoMki chUTa na pAne para baMdhe hue prANI ko ghora kaSTa hotA hai,
usakA maraNa bhI ho sakatA hai| vadha-sAdhAraNatayA vadha kA artha kisI ko jAna
se mAranA hai| para yahAM vadha isa artha meM prayukta nahIM hai| kyoMki kisI ko
jAna se mArane para to ahiMsA vrata sarvathA khaMDita hI ho jAtA hai| vaha to
anAcAra hai| yahA~ vadha ghAtaka prahAra ke artha meM prayukta huA hai, aisA
prahAra jisase prahRta vyakti ke aMga, upAMga ko hAni phuNce| chaviccheda-chavi
kA artha sundaratA hai| isakA eka artha aMga bhI kiyA jAtA hai| chaviccheda kA
tAtparya kisI kI sundaratA, zobhA miTA dene arthAt aMga-bhaMga kara dene se hai|
kisI kA koI aMga kATa DAlane se vaha sahaja hI chavizUnya ho jAtA hai|
krodhAveza meM kisI kA aMga kATa DAlanA isa aticAra meM zAmila hai| manoraMjana
ke lie kutte Adi pAlatU pazuoM kI pUMcha, kAna Adi kATa denA bhI isa aticAra meM
AtA hai| atibhAra-pazu, dAsa Adi para unakI tAkata se jyAdA bojha lAdanA
atibhAra meM AtA hai| Aja kI bhASA meM naukara, majadUra, adhikRta karmacArI se
itanA jyAdA kAma lenA, jo usakI zakti se bAhara ho, atibhAra hI hai| bhakta-
pAna-vyavacchedaisakA artha khAna-pAna meM bAdhA yA vyavadhAna DAlanA hai| jaise
apane Azrita pazu ko yatheSTa cArA evaM pAnI samaya para nahIM denA, bhUkhA-
pyAsA rkhnaa| yahI bAta dAsa-dAsiyoM para bhI lAgU hotI hai| unakI bhI khAna-
pAna kI vyavasthA meM vyavadhAna yA viccheda paidA karanA, isa aticAra meM
zAmila hai| Aja ke yuga kI bhASA meM apane naukaroM tathA karmacAriyoM Adi ko
samaya para

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda  [45] Not paying wages, unfairly deducting
wages, obstructing someone's livelihood, demanding excessive work from servants
and dependents, but not providing them with adequate and proper food in
proportion to their work, not paying wages - all these are included in this
transgression. Doing such things is a bad deed, it is playing with the lives of
people. The special mention of animals in these transgressions makes it clear
that animal husbandry was an essential part of a householder's life at that
time. Animals were used extensively in household, agricultural and commercial
activities. Today, social conditions have changed. Cruelty, brutality, and
oppression have emerged in many new forms. Therefore, the devotee should
carefully examine his daily life, grasp the essence of these transgressions, and
avoid cruel acts.  ## Transgressions of Satyavrata  [46] Thereafter, one should
know the five transgressions of the vow of refraining from gross falsehood, and
should not engage in them. They are as follows: * Saha-abhyakhyan * Rahasya-
abhyakhyan * Swadaramantra-bhed * Mrish-upadesh * Kood-lekh-karan  ##
Explanation  * **Saha-abhyakhyan:** Accusing someone falsely and abruptly
without thinking. * **Rahasya-abhyakhyan:** Revealing someone's secret or
confidential matter. * **Swadaramantra-bhed:** Revealing the secret of one's
wife. * **Mrish-upadesh:** Giving someone wrong advice or false teachings. *
**Kood-lekh-karan:** Writing a false or forged document, preparing false or
forged documents to cheat or deceive others.  **Saha-abhyakhyan:** Saha means
abruptly. When something is said hastily without thinking, this word is used. In
doing so, emotion works more than reason. Saha-abhyakhyan means accusing someone
falsely and abruptly without thinking. If this accusation is made with malice,
ill-will, and distress, then it is not a transgression, it becomes a sin. There,
the devotee's vow is broken. There is some lightness in doing so without
thinking. However, the devotee should not accuse anyone in this way even out of
anger or emotion. This weakens or loosens the vow.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [45 vetana na denA, vetana meM anucita
rUpa meM kaTautI kara denA, kisI kI AjIvikA meM bAdhA paidA kara denA, sevakoM
tathA AzritoM se khUba kAma lenA, para usake anupAta meM ucita va paryApta
bhojana na denA, vetana na denA isa aticAra meM zAmila hai| aisA karanA burA
kArya hai, janatA ke jIvana ke sAtha khilavAr3a hai| ina aticAroM meM pazuoM kI
vizeSa carcA Ane se spaSTa hai ki taba pazu-pAlana eka gRhastha ke jIvana kA
Avazyaka bhAga thaa| ghara, khetI tathA vyApAra ke kAryoM meM pazu kA vizeSa
upayoga thaa| Aja sAmAjika sthitiyA~ badala gaI hai| nirdayatA, kruratA,
atyAcAra Adi aneka naye rUpoM meM ubhare hai| isalie dharmopAsaka ko apanI
dainandina jIvana-caryA ko bArIkI se dekhate hue ina aticAroM ke mUla bhAva ko
grahaNa karanA cAhie aura nirdayatApUrNa kAryoM kA varjana karanA caahie|
satyavrata ke aticAra 46. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM thUlagassa musAvAyaveramaNassa
paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na smaayriyvvaa| taM jahA-sahasA-abbhakkhANe, rahasA-
abbhakkhANe, sadAramaMtabhee, mosovaese, kuuddlehkrnne|  /  tatpazcAt sthUla
mRSAvAdaviramaNa vrata ke pAMca aticAroM ko jAnanA cAhie, unakA AcaraNa nahIM
karanA caahie| ve isa prakAra hai sahasA-abhyAkhyAna, rahasya-abhyAkhyAna,
svadAramaMtrabheda, mRSopadeza, kuuttlekhkrnn| vivecana sahasA-abhyAkhyAna-kisI
para ekAeka binA soce-samajhe jhUThA Aropa lagA denaa| rahasya-abhyAkhyAna-kisI
ke rahasya-gopanIya bAta ko prakaTa kara denaa| svadAramaMtrabheda-apanI patnI
kI gupta bAta ko bAhara prakaTa kara denaa| mRSopadeza-kisI ko galata rAya yA
asatyamUlaka upadeza denaa| kUTalekhakaraNa-khoTA yA jhUThA lekha likhanA,
dUsare ko Thagane yA dhokhA dene ke lie jhUThe, jAlI kAgajAta taiyAra krnaa|
sahasA abhyAkhyAna-sahasA kA artha ekAeka hai| jaba koI bAta binA soce-vicAre
bhAvukatAvaza jhaTa se kahI jAtI hai, vahA~ isa zabda kA prayoga hotA hai| aisA
karane meM viveka ke bajAya bhAvAveza adhika kAma karatA hai  /  sahasA
abhyAkhyAna kA artha hai kisI para ekAeka binA soce-vicAre doSAropaNa krnaa|
yadi yaha doSAropaNa durbhAvanA, durvicAra aura saMklezapUrvaka hotA hai to
aticAra nahIM rahatA, anAcAra ho jAtA hai| vahA~ upAsaka kA vrata bhagna ho jAtA
hai| sahasA binA vicAre aisA karane meM kucha halakApana hai| para, upAsaka ko
roSa yA bhAvAvezavaza bhI isa prakAra kisI para doSAropaNa nahIM karanA caahie|
isase vrata meM durbalatA yA zithilatA AtI hai|

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 46:  **Rahasya-Abhyakhyan**  The term "Rahasya" means secrecy or a
secret matter. "Rahasya-Abhyakhyan" refers to suddenly revealing a secret
matter. This is not permissible for an Upasaka (Jain practitioner). Doing so
weakens their vows.   Another meaning of "Rahasya-Abhyakhyan" is to accuse
someone of conspiracy or other wrongdoing in secret. For example, if individuals
are privately discussing something, and someone accuses them of plotting without
any evidence, this falls under this transgression.   It's important to note that
this transgression only applies when the accusation is made suddenly, without
thought or consideration. If the accusation is made intentionally and with
malice, it becomes an "Anachaar" (grave transgression) and breaks the vows.
**Swadaramantra-Bhed**  This refers to revealing personal, family, or social
secrets. Some matters are meant to be shared only between two individuals, while
others can be shared with the entire community. The relationship between a
husband and wife is the most intimate. They have their own private conversations
and thoughts. If a husband reveals a secret of his wife that should not be
disclosed, he commits the transgression of "Swadaramantra-Bhed." This is also
ethically wrong. The person whose secret is revealed feels hurt by the breach of
trust and may feel ashamed of their vulnerability.  **Mrish-Upadesh**  This
refers to giving false advice or opinions. It means giving advice about
something whose truth, falsehood, benefit, or harm is unknown to the person
giving the advice, but is actually false. This transgression also includes
encouraging someone to do something that is known to be false or harmful. If
someone intentionally encourages others to do something they know is wrong, it
becomes an "Anachaar" and breaks the vows. However, if someone believes
something to be true or beneficial, even if it is actually false, and encourages
others based on their good intentions, it is not considered a transgression.
**Kood-Lekhakarana**  This refers to creating false documents, forging
signatures, etc. This is a transgression only if the Upasaka does it
unintentionally, out of ignorance, or unwillingly. If someone intentionally
creates a forged document, uses a fake seal or stamp, or forges a signature to
deceive others, it becomes an "Anachaar" and breaks the vows.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra rahasya-abhyAkhyAna-rahas kA artha ekAnta hai usI se
rahasya zabda banA hai, jisakA bhAva ekAnta kI bAta yA gupta bAta hai| rahasya-
abhyAkhyAna kA abhiprAya kisI gupta bAta ko acAnaka prakaTa kara denA hai|
upAsaka ke lie yaha karaNIya nahIM hai| aisA karane se usake vrata meM zithilatA
AtI hai| rahasya-abhyAkhyAna kA eka aura artha bhI kiyA jAtA hai, tadanusAra
kisI para rahasya-gupta rUpa meM SaDayantra Adi karane kA doSAropaNa isakA
tAtparya hai| jaise kucha vyakti ekAnta meM baiThe Apasa meM bAtacIta kara rahe
hoN| koI mana meM sazaMka hokara ekAeka una para Aropa lagA de ki ve amuka
SaDayantra kara rahe haiM  /  isakA bhI isa aticAra meM samAveza hai| yahA~ bhI
yaha dhyAna dene yogya hai ki jaba taka sahasA, acAnaka yA bina vicAre aisA kiyA
jAtA hai tabhI taka yaha aticAra hai| yadi mana meM durbhAvanApUrvaka soca-
vicAra ke sAtha aisA Aropa lagAyA jAtA hai to yaha anAcAra ho jAtA hai, vrata
khaMDita ho jAtA hai| svadAramaMtrabhedavaiyaktikatA, pArivArikatA tathA
sAmAjikatA kI dRSTi se vyakti ke saMbaMdha evaM pArasparika bAteM bhinnatA lie
rahatI haiN| kucha bAteM aisI hotI hai, jo do hI vyaktiyoM taka sImita rahatI
hai; kucha aisI hotI hai, jo sAre samAja meM prasArita kI jA sakatI hai|
vaiyaktika saMbaMdhoM meM pati aura patnI kA saMbaMdha sabase adhika ghaniSTha
/  unakI apanI gupta maMtraNAeM, vicAraNAeM Adi bhI hotI haiN| yadi pati apanI
patnI kI aisI kisI gupta bAta ko, jo prakaTanIya nahIM hai, prakaTa kara de to
vaha svadAramaMtra-bheda aticAra meM AtA hai  /  vyAvahArika dRSTi se bhI aisA
karanA ucita nahIM hai| jisakI bAta prakaTa kI jAtI hai, apanI gopanIyatA ko
udghATita jAna use duHkha hotA hai, athavA apanI durbalatA ko prakaTita jAna use
lajita honA par3atA hai| mRSopadeza-jhUThI rAya denA yA jhUThA upadeza denA
mRSopadeza meM AtA hai| isakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra haieka aisI bAta jisakI
satyatA, asatyatA, hitakaratA, ahitakaratA Adi ke viSaya meM vyakti ko svayaM
jJAna nahIM hai, para vaha hai vAstava meM asty| usakI vaha dUsaroM ko rAya detA
hai, vaisA karane kA upadeza detA hai, yaha isa aticAra meM AtA hai| eka aisA
vyakti hai, jo kisI bAta kI asatyatA yA hAnipradatA jAnatA hai, para usake
bAvajUda vaha auroM ko vaisA karane kI preraNA karatA hai, upadeza detA hai to
yaha anAcAra hai| isameM vrata bhagna ho jAtA hai| kyoMki vahA~ preraNA yA
upadeza karane vAle kI nIyata sarvathA azuddha hai| eka aisI sthiti hotI hai,
jisameM eka vyakti kisI asatya yA ahitakara bAta ko bhI satya yA hitakara mAnatA
hai| hita-buddhi se dUsare ko udhara pravRtta karatA hai| bAta to vastutaH
asatya hai, para usa vyakti kI nIyata azuddha nahIM hai, isalie yaha doSa
aticAra yA anAcAra koTI meM nahI aataa| kUTalekhakaraNajhUThe lekha yA dastAveja
likhanA, jhUThe hastAkSara karanA Adi kUTalekhakaraNa meM Ate hai| aisA karanA
aticAra tabhI hai, yadi upAsaka asAvadhAnI se, ajJAnavaza yA anicchApUrvaka aisA
karatA hai| yadi koI jAna-bUjha kara dUsare ko dhokhA dene ke lie jAlI dastAveja
taiyAra kare, jAlI mohara yA chApa lagAe, jAlI hastAkSara kare to vaha anAcAra
meM calA jAtA hai aura vrata khaMDita ho jAtA hai|

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:  First Study: Gāthāpati Ānanda
Transgressions of the Vow of Non-Stealing (Astēya Vrata) 47. Thereafter, one
should know and not practice the five transgressions of the vow of abstinence
from taking what is not given (Sthūlagasya Adinnādānavēramaṇa). They are:
Stēnāhṛta, Taskara-prayōga, Virūddha-rājyātikrama, Kūṭatulā-kūṭamāna, and Tat-
pratirupaka-vyavahāra.  Explanation: Stēnāhṛta - Acquiring, purchasing, or
possessing an object that has been stolen. Taskara-prayōga - Utilizing the
services of thieves in one's business activities. Virūddha-rājyātikrama -
Transgressing the prescribed limits of entry into other kingdoms, entering other
states. Kūṭatulā-kūṭamāna - Fraudulent use of weights and measures, such as
giving less in sale and taking more in purchase. Tat-pratirupaka-vyavahāra -
Unethical and dishonest practices in trade, such as mixing inferior goods with
superior ones or passing off imitations as genuine.  Transgressions of the Vow
of Contentment with One's Own Wife (Svadāra-santōṣa Vrata) 48. Thereafter, one
should know and not practice the five transgressions of the vow of contentment
with one's own wife. They are: Itvarika-parigṛhītāgamana, Aparigṛhītāgamana,
Ananga-krīḍā, Para-vivāha-karaṇa, and Kāma-bhōga-tīvrābhilāṣa.  Explanation:
Itvarika-parigṛhītāgamana - Visiting a woman who is temporarily under one's
protection. Aparigṛhītāgamana - Visiting an unprotected woman. Ananga-krīḍā -
Engaging in sensual play. Para-vivāha-karaṇa - Performing the marriage of
another person. Kāma-bhōga-tīvrābhilāṣa - Intense desire for sensual pleasures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda ] asteya vrata ke aticAra 47.
tayANaMtaraM ca NaM thUlagassa adiNNAdANaveramaNassa paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na
smaayriyvvaa| taM jahA - teNAhaDe, takkarappaoge, virUddha - rajjAikkame,
kUDatullakUDamANe, tappaDirUvagavavahAre  /  [ 47 tadantara sthUla
adattAdAnaviramaNa - vrata ke pA~ca aticAroM ko jAnanA cAhie, unakA AcaraNa
nahIM karanA caahie| ve isa prakAra hai- stenAhRta, taskaraprayoga,
virUddharAjyAtikrama, kUTatulAkUTamAna, tatpratirUpakavyavahAra  /  vivecana
stenAhRta- stena kA artha cora hotA hai, AhRta kA artha usa dvArA curA kara lAI
huI vastu  /  aisI vastu ko lenA, kharIdanA, rakhanA  /  taskaraprayoga apane
vyAvasAyika kAryoM meM coroM kA upayoga karanA  /  virUddharAjyAtikrama-
virodhavaza apane deza se itara dezoM ke zAsakoM dvArA praveza niSedha kI
nirdhArita sImA lAMghanA, dUsare rAjyoM meM praveza krnaa| isakA eka dUsarA
artha bhI kiyA jAtA hai, jisake anusAra rAjya - virUddha kArya karanA isake
antargata AtA hai  /  kUTatulAkUTamAna tolane aura mApane meM jhUTha kA prayoga
arthAt vyApAra dene meM kama tolanA yA mApanA, lene meM jyAdA tolanA yA mApanA
/  tatpratirUpakavyavahAra isakA zabdArtha kUTa- tulA - kUTamAna jaisA vyavahAra
hai, arthAt vyApAra meM anaitikatA va asatyAcaraNa karanAjaise acchI vastu meM
ghaTiyA vastu milA denA, nakalI ko asalI batalAnA Adi  /  svadArasantoSa vrata
ke aticAra 48. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM sadAra-saMtosie paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA, na
samAyariyavvA  /  taM jahA- ittariyapariggahiyAgamaNe, apariggahiyAgamaNe,
aNaMgakIDA, paravivAhakaraNe, kAmabhogativvAbhilAse  /  tadanantara
svadArasaMtoSa vrata ke pAMca aticAroM ko jAnanA cAhie, unakA AcaraNa nahIM
karanA caahie| ve aticAra isa prakAra haiM itvarika parigRhItAgamana,
aparigRhItAgamana anaMgakrIDA, para vivAha karaNa tathA kAmabhogatIvrAbhilASa  /
vivecana itvarikaparigRhItAgamana itvarika kA artha asthAyI, alpakAlika yA calA
jAne vAlA hai  /

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Upāsakadaśāṅgasūtra]  1. Itvarikā: A woman who lives with a man for some time
and then leaves, but during the time she lives, she is considered his wife, and
there is no sexual relationship with any other man. This is considered living
with a woman temporarily as a wife.  2. Aparigṛhītāgamana: Living with a woman
who is not accepted or recognized as one's wife by anyone, such as a prostitute.
This is the second transgression of this vow.  3. Ananga-krīḍā: Unnatural sexual
activities such as homosexual intercourse, unnatural coitus, and using
artificial means to satisfy sexual desires. This is the third transgression.  4.
Para-vivāha-karaṇa: Arranging the marriages of others. As a householder, one
should avoid activities that are detrimental to the practice of celibacy. This
is considered the fourth transgression.  5. Kāma-bhogativṛābhilāṣa: Excessive
and uncontrolled indulgence in sensual pleasures. This is a transgression
according to the commentary of Ācārya Abhayadeva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 48] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra jo strI kucha samaya ke lie kisI purUSa ke sAtha
rahatI hai aura phira calI jAtI hai, para jitane samaya rahatI hai, usI kI patnI
ke rUpa meM rahatI hai aura kisI purUSa ke sAtha usakA yauna sambandha nahI
rahatA, use itvarikA kahA jAtA thaa| yoM kucha samaya ke lie patnI ke rUpa meM
parigRhIta yA svIkRta strI ke sAtha sahavAsa krnaa| itvarikA kA eka artha
alpavayaskA bhI kiyA gayA hai| tadanusAra choTI Ayu kI patnI ke sAtha sahavAsa
krnaa| ye isa vrata ke aticAra hai| ye hIna kAmukatA ke dyotaka hai| isase
abrahmacarya ko protsAhana milatA hai| aparigRhItAgamanaaparigRhItA kA tAtparya
usa strI se hai, jo kisI ke bhI dvArA patnI rUpa meM parigRhIta yA svIkRta nahIM
hai, athavA jisa para kisI kA adhikAra nahIM hai| isameM vezyA Adi kA samAveza
hotA hai| isa prakAra kI strI ke sAtha sahavAsa karanA isa vrata kA dUsarA
aticAra hai| ye donoM aticAra atikrama Adi kI apekSA se samajhane cAhie, arthAt
amuka sImA taka hI ye aticAra hai| usa sImA kA ullaMghana hone para anAcAra bana
jAte hai| anaMga-kriDAkAmAvezavaza asvAbhAvika kAma-krIr3A krnaa| isake
antargata samalaiMgika saMbhoga, aprAkRtika maithuna, kRtrima kAmopakaraNoM se
viSaya-vAsanA zAnta karanA Adi samAviSTa hai| cAritrika dRSTi se aisA karanA
bar3A hIna kArya hai| isase kutsita kAma aura vyabhicAra kA poSaNa milatA hai|
yaha isa vrata kA tIsarA aticAra hai| para-vivAha-karaNajainadharma ke anusAra
upAsaka kA lakSya brahmacarya-sAdhanA hai| vivAha tatvataH AdhyAtmika dRSTi se
jIvana kI durbalatA hai| kyoMki hara koI saMpUrNa rUpa se brahmacArI raha nahIM
sktaa| gRhI upAsaka kA yaha dhyeya rahatA hai ki vaha abrahmacarya se
uttarottara adhikAdhika mukta hotA jAya aura eka dina aisA Ae ki vaha sampUrNa
rUpa se brahmacarya kA ArAdhaka bana jaay| ataH gRhastha ko aise kAryoM se
bacanA cAhie, jo brahmacarya ke pratigAmI hoN| isa dRSTi se isa aticAra kI
parikalpanA hai| isake anusAra dUsaroM ke vaivAhika saMbaMdha karavAnA isa
aticAra meM AtA hai| eka gRhastha hone ke nAte apane ghara yA parivAra ke
lar3ake-lar3akiyoM ke vivAhoM meM to use sakriya aura preraka rahanA hI hotA hai
aura vaha anivArya bhI hai, para dUsaroM ke vaivAhika saMbaMdha karavAne meM use
utsuka aura prayatnazIla rahanA brahmacarya-sAdhanA kI dRSTi se upayukta nahI
hai| vaisA karanA isa vrata kA cauthA aticAra hai| kinhIkinhI AcAryoM ne apanA
dUsarA vivAha karanA bhI isa aticAra meM hI mAnA hai| vyAvahArika dRSTi se bhI
dUsaroM ke ina kAryoM meM par3anA ThIka nahIM hai| udAharaNArtha, kahIM koI
vyakti kinhIM ke vaivAhika saMbaMdha karavAne meM sahayogI hai, vaha saMbaMdha
ho jaay| saMyogavaza usa saMbaMdha kA nirvAha ThIka nahI ho, athavA ayogya
saMbaMdha ho jAya to saMbaMdha karavAne vAle ko bhI ulAhanA sahanA hotA hai|
saMbaMdhita loga pramukhataH usI ko kosate hai ki isake kAraNa yaha avAMchita
aura du:khada sambandha huaa| vratI zrAvaka ko isase bacanA caahie| _ kAma-
bhogatIvrAbhilASaniyaMtrita aura vyavasthita kAma-sevana mAnava kI Atma-
durbalatA ke 1. aticAratA cAsyAtikramAdibhiH  /  abhydevkRtttiikaa|

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda  **[49]** There are 49 causes. The vow is not
tainted until that need is fulfilled, but it should not be afflicted by intense
desire or unrestrained lust, because it can lead to a violation of the vow, a
breach of decorum, and a tendency towards other excesses and improprieties.  A
person should not indulge in aphrodisiacs, aphrodisiac drugs, intoxicants, etc.,
due to intense sensual desires. This is very important from a moral standpoint.
Doing so is the fifth transgression of this vow, from which the devotee should
completely abstain.  **Transgressions of the Desire-Quantity Vow**  **49.** The
five transgressions of the Desire-Quantity vow should be known by the
Shramanopasaka, and not be practiced. They are as follows:  * **Kshetra-Vastu-
Pramanatikram:** Exceeding the limit of land and property. * **Hiranya-Suvarna-
Pramanatikram:** Exceeding the limit of gold and silver. * **Dvipad-Chatushpad-
Pramanatikram:** Exceeding the limit of bipeds and quadrupeds. * **Dhana-
Dhanaya-Pramanatikram:** Exceeding the limit of wealth and grain. * **Kupy-
Pramanatikram:** Exceeding the limit of anger.  **Discussion:**  Wealth,
affluence, and prosperity are such attractions in worldly life that even wise
and discerning individuals get caught in their allure. The Desire-Quantity vow
is a path to liberation from that allure. The goal of this vow is for the
individual to gradually limit their material possessions. The transgressions
mentioned in this vow, which should be avoided, provide a special motivation for
limiting desires.  **Kshetra-Vastu-Pramanatikram:** Kshetra refers to land used
for cultivation. When taking the vow, the devotee should not exceed the amount
of land they have set aside for themselves. Vastu (Vathu) refers to dwelling
places, gardens, etc. When taking the vow, the Shravaka also sets limits for
these. Crossing these limits is a transgression of this vow.  **Hiranya-Suvarna-
Pramanatikram:** When taking the vow, the devotee sets a limit for themselves
regarding precious metals like gold and silver. Exceeding that limit is a
transgression of this vow. This also includes current coins like mohars and
rupees.  **Dvipad-Chatushpad-Pramanatikram:** Dvipad - two-legged - humans,
slaves, servants, and Chatushpad - four-legged - animals. Exceeding the limits
set regarding these when taking the vow is included in this transgression. As
mentioned earlier, slavery was prevalent in those days.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [49 kAraNa hotA hai| usa AvazyakatA kI
pUrti taka vrata dUSita nahIM hotA hai, parantu use kAma kI tIvra abhilASA yA
uddAma vAsanA se grasta nahI honA cAhie, kyoMki usase vrata kA ullaMghana ho
sakatA hai aura maryAdA bhaMga ho sakatI hai tathA anya aticAroM-anAcAroM meM
pravRtti ho sakatI hai| tIvra vaiSayika vAsanAvaza kAmoddIpaka, bAjIkaraNa
auSadhi, mAdaka dravya Adi ke sevana dvArA vyakti vaisA na kreN| cAritrika dRSTi
se yaha bahuta Avazyaka hai| vaisA karanA isa vrata kA pAMcavAM aticAra hai,
jisase upAsaka ko sarvathA bacate rahanA caahie| icchA-parimANavrata ke aticAra
49. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM icchA-parimANassa samaNovAsaeNaM paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA,
na smaayriyvvaa| taM jahA-khetta-vatthu-pamANAikkame, hiraNNa-
suvaNNapamANAikkame, dupayacauppayapamANAikkame, dhaNa-dhanapamANAikkame,
kuviypmaannaaikkme| zramaNopAsaka ko icchA-parimANa-vrata ke pAMca aticAroM ko
jAnanA cAhie, unakA AcaraNa nahIM karanA chie| ve isa prakAra hai kSetravAstu-
pramANAtikrama, hiraNyasvarNa-pramANAtikrama, dvipada-catuSpada-pramANAtikrama,
dhanadhAnyapramANAtikrama, kupy-prmaannaatikrm| vivecana : dhana, vaibhava,
saMpatti kA sAMsArika jIvana meM eka aisA AkarSaNa hai ki samajhadAra aura
vivekazIla vyakti bhI usakI mohakatA meM phaMsA rahatA hai| icchA-parimANa-vrata
usa mohakatA se chuTakArA dilAne kA mArga hai| vyakti sAMpattika saMbaMdhoM ko
kramazaH sImita karatA jAya, yahI isa vrata kA lakSya hai| isa vrata ke jo
aticAra batalAe gae haiM, unakA sevana na karanA vyakti ko icchAoM ke sImAkaraNa
kI vizeSa preraNA detA hai| kSetra-vAstu-pramANAtikramakSetra kA artha khetI
karane kI bhUmi hai| upAsaka vrata lete samaya jitanI bhUmi apane lie rakhatA
hai, usakA atikramaNa vaha na kre| vAstu (vatthu) kA tAtparya rahane ke makAna,
bagIce Adi haiM  /  vrata lete samaya zrAvaka inakI bhI sImA karatA hai| ina
sImAoM ko lAMgha jAnA isa vrata kA aticAra hai| hiraNya-svarNa-
pramANAtikramavrata lete samaya upAsaka sonA, cAMdI Adi bahumUlya dhAtuoM kA
apane lie sImAkaraNa karatA hai, usa sImAkaraNa ko lAMgha jAnA isa vrata kA
aticAra hai| mohara, rUpayA Adi pracalita sikke bhI isa meM Ate haiN| dvipada-
catuSpada-pramANAtikramadvipada-do paira vAle-manuSya-dAsa-dAsI, naukara-
naukarAniyAM tathA catuSpada-cAra paira vAle-pazu vrata svIkAra karate samaya
inake saMdarbha meM kiye gae sImAkaraNa kA laMghana karanA isa aticAra meM
zAmila hai| jaisA ki pahale sUcita kiyA gayA hai, una dinoM dAsa-prathA kA

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Upasakadasangasutra was prevalent in this country, therefore, like cows,
bulls, buffaloes, etc., slaves and maidservants were also the property of their
masters. Wealth, grain, and their quantities: Jewels like gems, pearls,
diamonds, emeralds, etc., and items bought and sold are called wealth here.
Rice, wheat, barley, chickpeas, etc., are included in grain. Exceeding the
quantity of wealth and grain is a transgression of this vow. Quantity of
household goods: Household goods refer to items like clothes, beds, mats,
bedding, furniture, etc. Exceeding the limit in this regard is a transgression
of this vow. It is noteworthy here that this transgression is considered an
offense only when it is unintentional, i.e., when the vow-taker actually
transgresses but believes that they are not transgressing. Deliberately
exceeding the limit becomes a sin. Transgressions of the Digvrat 50.
Subsequently, one should know the five transgressions of the Digvrat, and not
engage in them. They are as follows: Urdhvadik-pramanatikram, Adhodik-
pramanatikram, Tiryadik-pramanatikram, Kshetra-vridhi, Smrityantardhan.
Discussion Urdhvadik-pramanatikram - Exceeding the limit of going upwards,
Adhodik-pramanatikram - Exceeding the limit of going downwards into wells,
mines, etc., Tiryadik-pramanatikram - Exceeding the limit of going in oblique
directions, Kshetra-vridhi - Exceeding the limit of the area for business,
travel, etc., Smrityantardhan - Not remembering the limits of directions, etc.,
that one has set for oneself - these are the transgressions of this vow.
Although the Digvrat and Shikshavrats are not mentioned in the context of vow-
taking, one should understand that these vows are also taken, because Anand had
previously said, "I will renounce the twelve types of Savayadharma." Further,
the text says, "He renounces the twelve types of Savagadharma." The commentator
clarifies that Anand did not take the Shikshavrats like Samayik, etc., at that
time because they are for a short period and are to be performed at specific
times. The Digvrat was also not taken at that time because it lacks restraint.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [upAsakadazAMgasUtra isa deza meM pracalana thA isalie gAya, baila, bhaiMsa Adi
pazuoM kI taraha dAsa, dAsI bhI svAmI kI sampatti hote the| dhana-
dhAnyapramANAtikramamaNi, motI, hIre, panne Adi ratna tathA kharIdane-becane kI
vastuoM ko yahA~ dhana kahA gayA hai| cAvala, gehU~, jau, cane Adi anAja dhAnya
meM Ate haiN| dhana evaM dhAnya ke parimANa ko lAMghanA isa vrata kA aticAra
hai| kupyapramANAtikramakupya kA tAtparya ghara kA sAmAna hai, jaise kapar3e,
khATa, Asana, bichaune, pharnIcara aadi| isa saMbaMdha meM kI gaI sImA kA
laMghana isa vrata kA aticAra hai| yahA~ yaha smaraNIya hai ki yaha ullaMghana
jaba abuddhipUrvaka hotA hai, arthAt vAstava meM ullaMghana to hotA ho kintu
vratadhAraka aisA samajhatA ho ki ullaMghana nahIM ho rahA hai, tabhI taka vaha
aticAra hai| jAnabUjha kara maryAdA kA atikramaNa karane para anAcAra ho jAtA
hai| digvrata ke aticAra 50. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM disivvayassa paMca aiyArA
jANiyavvA, na smaayriyvvaa| taM jahA-uDDhadisipamANAikkame,
ahodisipamANAikkameM, tiriyadisipamANAikkame, khettavuDDhI, siaNtrddhaa|
tadanantara digvrata ke pAMca aticAroM kA jAnanA caahie| unakA AcaraNa nahIM
karanA caahie| ve isa prakAra hai Urdhvadik-pramANAtikrama, adhodik-
pramANAtikrama, tiryadik-pramANAtikrama, kSetra-vRddhi, smRtyntrdhaan| vivecana
Urdhvadik-pramANAtikrama-Urdhva dizA-UMcAI kI ora jAne kI maryAdA kA atikramaNa,
adhodik-pramANAtikramanIce kI ora kue, khadAna Adi meM jAne kI maryAdA kA
atikramaNa, tiryadikpramANAtikramatirachI dizAoM meM jAne kI maryAdA kA
atikramaNa, kSetra-vRddhi-vyApAra, yAtrA Adi ke lie kI gaI kSetramaryAdA kA
atikramaNa, smRtyantardhAna-apane dvArA kI gaI dizAoM Adi kI maryAdA ko smRti
meM na rakhanA-ye isa vrata ke aticAra hai| _ vratagrahaNa ke prasaMga meM
yadyapi dizAvrata aura zikSAvratoM ke grahaNa karane kA ullekha nahIM hai| taba
bhI ina vratoM kA grahaNa samajha lenA cAhie, kyoMki pUrva meM Ananda ne kahA
haiduvAlasavihaM sAvayadhamma pddivjjissaami| Age bhI duvAlasavihaM sAvagadhamma
paDivajjai aisA pATha AyA hai| TIkAkAra ne spaSTIkaraNa karate hue kahA
haisAmAyika Adi zikSAvrata thor3e kAla ke aura amuka samaya karane yogya hone se
Ananda ne usa samaya grahaNa nahIM kie| digvrata bhI usa samaya grahaNa nahIM
kiyA, kyoMki usakI virati kA abhAva hai|

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda  **[51. Excesses of the Upbhog-Paribhog-
Parimaan Vrat]**  **51.** There are two types of Upbhog-Paribhog, as defined:
one with respect to food, and the other with respect to actions.   With respect
to food, a Shramanopasak should know and avoid five excesses of the Upbhog-
Paribhog Vrat. These are:  * Sachitta Ahar (consuming living beings) * Sachitta-
Pratibandha Ahar (consuming food that has been in contact with living beings) *
Appakva-Oshadhi-Bhakhanata (consuming unripe herbs) * Duspakva-Oshadhi-
Bhakhanata (consuming improperly cooked herbs) * Tuchchha-Oshadhi-Bhakhanata
(consuming inferior herbs)  With respect to actions, a Shramanopasak should know
and avoid fifteen Karmaadanas. These are: * Ingalakarma (working with fire) *
Vanakarma (working in the forest) * Sadikarma (working with carts) * Bhadikarma
(working in a furnace) * Phodikarma (working with explosives) * Dantavaanijya
(trading in teeth) * Lakshavaanijya (trading in lac) * Rasavaanijya (trading in
juices) * Vishavaanijya (trading in poisons) * Keshavaanijya (trading in hair) *
Jantapilana Karma (torturing animals) * Nilanchhana Karma (marking animals) *
Davagnidavan (lighting fires) * Sar-Hrad-Tadaga-Shoshan (drying up lakes and
ponds) * Asati-Jan-Poshan (feeding non-believers)  **Explanation:**  Sachitta
Ahar: Sachitta means "with life" or "living." Uncooked or unboiled vegetables,
plants, fruits, unprocessed grains, water, etc., are all Sachitta substances.
Here, the context is about consuming them.  It should be understood that a
Shramanopasak or Shravak does not completely abstain from Sachitta substances.
It is not mandatory for them to do so. They abstain from Sachitta substances
according to their capacity, setting a limit. They make exceptions for certain
things that they can consume. If, due to carelessness, they violate the limits
they have set, it falls under the excess of Sachitta Ahar. This is about
carelessly violating the rules regarding Sachitta substances. If they knowingly
violate the limits of Sachitta-tyaga, it becomes an act of misconduct, and the
Vrat is broken.  Sachitta-Pratibandha Ahar: Consuming food that has been in
contact with a Sachitta substance is called Sachitta-Pratibandha Ahar. For
example, one can take a large grape or date. Each of them has two parts...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [51 upabhoga-paribhoga-parimANa-vrata ke
aticAra 51. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM uvabhogaparibhoge duvihe paNNatte, taM
jahAbhoyaNao ya, kammao y| tattha NaM bhoyaNao samaNovAsaeNaM paMca aiyArA
jANiyavvA na samAyariyavvA, taM jahAsacittAhAre, sacittapaDi vaddhAhAre,
appauliosahi bhakkhaNayA, duppauliosahibhakkhaNayA, tucchoshibhkkhnnyaa| kammao
NaM samaNovAsaeNaM paNNarasa kammAdANAiM jANiyavvAiM, na samAyarivvAiM, taM
jahA-iMgAlakamme, vaNakamme, sADIkamme, bhADIkamme, phoDIkamme, daMtavANijje
lakkhAvANijje, rasavANije, visavANijje, kesavANije, jaMtapIlaNakamme,
nilaMchaNakamme, davaggidAvaNayA, saradahatalAyasosaNayA, asiijnnposnnyaa|
upabhoga-paribhoga do prakAra kA kahA gayA haibhojana kI apekSA se tathA karma
kI apekSA se| bhojana kI apekSA se zramaNopAsaka ko upabhoga-paribhoga vrata ke
pAMca aticAroM ko jAnanA cAhie, unakA AcaraNa nahIM karanA caahie| ve isa
prakAra hai- sacitta AhAra, sacittapratibaddha AhAra, apakvaoSadhi-bhakSaNatA,
duSpakva-oSadhi-bhakSaNatA tathA tuccha ossdhi-bhkssnntaa| * karma kI apekSA se
zramaNopAsaka ko pandraha karmAdAnoM ko jAnanA cAhie, unakA AcaraNa nahIM karanA
caahie| ve isa prakAra hai aMgArakarma, vanakarma, zakaTakarma, bhATIkarma,
sphoTanakarma, dantavANijya, lAkSAvANijya, rasavANijya, viSavANijya,
kezavANijya, yantrapIDanakarma, ninchanakarma, davAgnidApana, sara-hrada-
taDAgazoSaNa tathA astii-jn-possnn| vivecana sacitta AhArasacitta kA artha
saprANa yA sajIva hai| binA pakAI yA binA ubAlI huI zAka-sabjI. vanaspati.
phala. asaMskArita anna, jala Adi sacitta padArthoM meM hai| yahA~ unake khAne
kA prasaMga hai| jJAtavya hai ki zramaNopAsaka yA zrAvaka sacita vastuoM kA
sarvathA tyAgI nahI hotaa| aisA karanA usake lie anivArya bhI nahIM hai  /  vaha
apanI kSamatA ke anusAra sacita vastuoM kA tyAga karatA hai, eka sImA karatA
hai| kucha kA apavAda rakhatA hai, jinakA vaha sevana kara sakatA hai  /  jo
maryAdA usane kI hai, asAvadhAnI se yadi vaha usakA ullaMghana karatA hai to
yaha sacitta-AhAra aticAra meM A jAtA hai| yaha asAvadhAnI se sacita sambandhI
niyama kA ullaMghana karane kI bAta hai, yadi jAna-bujha kara vaha sacitta-tyAga
sambandhI maryAdA kA khaMDana karatA hai to yaha anAcAra ho jAtA hai, vrata TUTa
jAtA hai| sacitta-pratibaddha AhArasacitta vastu ke sAtha saTI huI yA lagI huI
vastu ko khAnA sacittapratibaddha AhAra hai, udAharaNArtha bar3I dAkha yA
khajUra ko liyA jA sakatA hai| unameM se pratyeka ke do bhAga

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 52] [The Upasakadasanga Sutra]  **Fruit and Pulp:** The seed is *saccitta*
(possessing consciousness), the pulp or juice is *acitta* (lacking
consciousness). However, the *acitta* is bound or attached to the *saccitta*.
This transgression is relative to the person who has observed the limits of
*saccitta* objects. If they consume something attached to the *saccitta*, their
limits are broken, and they fall into transgression.  **Unripe-Medicine-
Consumption:** Eating unripe herbs, fruits, chickpeas, etc. The term "medicine"
can also be replaced with "cooked rice." The meaning of "cooked rice" is cooked
rice, so another meaning would be eating raw or undercooked rice.  **Badly-
Cooked-Medicine-Consumption:** Consuming herbs, fruits, etc., that take a long
time to cook, knowing they are cooked but consuming them in an uncooked state,
or consuming food cooked in a way that involves excessive violence. For example,
roasted corn with the husk on, or boiled peas in their pods, because these
methods of cooking can involve the killing of tiny living beings.  **Trivial-
Medicine-Consumption:** Consuming herbs or fruits where the edible part is
small, the useless or discardable part is large, such as sugarcane, custard
apple, etc. Another meaning is consuming things that involve a lot of violence
in their consumption, such as poppy seeds, sesame seeds, buckwheat, etc.  The
underlying idea behind these transgressions is that the devotee should be very
aware in the context of food. They should always avoid tongue-lust. It is very
difficult to conquer the taste of the tongue, so the devotee should be very
careful in this regard.  **Karma-Adana:** The two words "karma" and "adana"
combine to form "karma-adana." The meaning of "adana" is "to receive." Karma-
adana refers to those tendencies that lead to the strong bondage of karma like
knowledge-obscuration, etc. These actions involve a lot of violence. Therefore,
they are forbidden for the Shravak. These are transgressions related to karma.
The Shravak is encouraged to abandon them at every opportunity. It is said that
they should not do them themselves, nor should they cause others to do them, nor
should they support those who do them.  **Analysis of Karma-Adana:**  **Angar-
Karma:** The meaning of "angar" is coal. The main meaning of "angar-karma" is
the business of making coal. Any work that involves a lot of fire and coal also
falls under this category. For example, brick kilns, lime kilns, cement
factories, etc. These activities involve extreme violence.  **Van-Karma:** Those
businesses that are related to the forest fall under "van-karma." For example,
clearing the forest by cutting down trees, selling wood from forest trees,
taking contracts to cut down forests, etc. These are also extremely violent
activities due to the cutting and piercing of green vegetation and the killing
of animals associated with it. Cutting down trees for livelihood, producing
forest products, and cultivating trees are also "van-karma."  **Shakat-Karma:**
The meaning of "shakat" is a cart. Here, the cart refers to all vehicles used
for transportation or carrying goods.  -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 52] [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra hai guThalI tathA gUdA yA rasa  /  guThalI sacitta
hai, gUdA yA rasa acita hai| para sacita se pratibaddha yA saMlagna hai  /  yaha
aticAra bhI usa vyakti kI apekSA se hai, jisane sacitta vastuoM kI maryAdA kI
hai| yadi vaha sacitta - saMlagna kA sevana karatA hai to usakI maryAdA bhagna
hotI hai aura yaha aticAra meM AtA hai  /  apakva - oSadhi-bhakSaNatA pUrI na
pakI huI oSadhi, phala, canoM ke chole Adi khAnA  /  oSadhi ke sthAna para odana
pATha bhI prApta hotA hai| odana kA artha pakAe hue cAvala haiM, tadanusAra eka
artha hogA kacce yA adhapake cAvala khAnA  /  duSpakva - oSadhi-bhakSaNatA jo
vanauSadhiyA~, phala Adi dera pakane vAle haiM, unheM pake jAna kara pUre na
pake rUpa meM sevana karanA yA burI rIti se atihiMsA se pakAye gaye padArthoM kA
sevana karanA  /  jaise chilake sameta seke hue bhuTTe, chilake sameta bagArI
huI maTara kI phaliyA~ Adi; kyoMki isa DhaMga se pakAye hue padArthoM meM trasa
jIvoM kI hiMsA bhI ho sakatI hai| tuccha-oSadhi-bhakSaNatA jina vanauSadhiyoM yA
phaloM meM khAne yogya bhAga kama ho, nirarthaka yA pheMkane yogya bhAga adhika
ho, jaise gannA, sItAphala Adi, inakA sevana karanA  /  isakA dUsarA artha yaha
bhI hai, jinake khAne meM adhika hiMsA hotI ho, jaise khasa-khasa ke dAne,
zAmaka ke dAne, caulAI Adi kA sevana  /  ina aticAroM kI parikalpanA ke pIche
yahI bhAvanA hai ki upAsaka bhojana ke sandarbha meM bahuta jAgarUka rahe  /
jihvA-lolupatA se sadA bace rahe  /  jihvA ke svAda ko jItanA bar3A kaThina hai,
isIlie usa ora upAsaka ko bahuta sAvadhAna rahanA cAhie  /  karmAdAna karma aura
AdAna, isa do zabdoM meM karmAdAna banA hai| AdAna kA artha grahaNa hai  /
karmAdAna kA Azaya una pravRttiyoM se hai, jinake kAraNa jJAnAvaraNa Adi karmoM
kA prabala bandha hotA hai  /  una kAmoM meM bahuta adhika hiMsA hotI hai  /
isalie zrAvaka ke lie ve varjita hai  /  ye karma sambandhI aticAra hai| zrAvaka
ko inake tyAga kI sthAna-sthAna para preraNA dI gaI hai| kahA gayA hai ki na
vaha svayaM inheM kare, na dUsaroM se karAe aura na karane vAloM kA samarthana
kareM  /  karmAdAnoM kA vizleSaNa isa prakAra hai- aMgAra-karma aMgAra kA artha
koyalA hai  /  aMgAra-karma kA mukhya artha koyale banAne kA dhaMdhA karanA hai
/  jina kAmoM meM agni aura koyaloM kA bahuta jyAdA upayoga ho, ve kAma bhI
isameM Ate hai  /  jaise - IToM kA bhaTTA, cUne kA bhaTTA, sImeMTa kA kArakhAnA
aadi| ina kAryoM meM ghora hiMsA hotI hai| vana - karma ve dhandhe, jinakA
sambandha vana ke sAtha hai, vana-karma meM Ate hai; jaise kaTavA kara jaMgala
sApha karAnA, jaMgala ke vRkSoM ko kATa kara lakar3iyA~ becanA, jaMgala kATane
ke Theke lenA Adi  /  harI vanaspati ke chedana bhedana tathA tatsambaddha
prANi-vadha kI dRSTi se ye bhI atyanta hiMsA ke kArya hai  /  AjIvikA ke lie
vana - utpAdana - saMvardhana karake vRkSoM ko kATanA- kaTavAnA bhI vana karma
haiN| zakaTa-karma zakaTa kA artha gAr3I hai| yahA~ gAr3I se tAtparya savArI yA
mAla Dhone ke sabhI -

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gaathapaati Aananad  [53 types of vehicles exist. Preparing,
selling, etc. of such vehicles, their parts or components is included in
Shaktakarma. In today's situation, factories that manufacture trains, cars,
scooters, bicycles, trucks, tractors, etc. also fall under this category.
Bhaatikarma - Bhaati means fare. The business of renting out bulls, horses,
buffaloes, mules, etc.  Sphotankarma - Sphotan means to break, demolish or dig.
The business of digging mines, breaking stones, digging wells, ponds and bawdis,
etc. falls under Sphotan-karma.  Dantavaanijya - The main meaning is the trade
of ivory. However, the trade of bones, leather, etc. should also be included
here by implication.  Laakshavaanijya - The trade of lac.  Rasavaanijya - The
trade of intoxicating substances like liquor, etc. Although the word 'ras' is
generally used for sugarcane and fruit juices, that is not the meaning here.
Many Acharyas have also included the trade of honey, meat, fat, butter, milk,
curd, ghee, oil, etc. in Rasavaanijya.  Vishvaanijya - The trade of various
types of poisons. The trade of weapons like swords, knives, daggers, guns, bows,
arrows, gunpowder, firecrackers, etc. is also included under Vishvaanijya.
Keshavaanijya - The word 'kesh' used here is metaphorical. Keshavaanijya means
the business of buying and selling living beings like slaves, maids, cows,
buffaloes, goats, sheep, camels, horses, etc. Some Acharyas have also included
the trade of cowtail hair in this. These are used to make chawars. This is not
the case with peacock feathers and wool. The trade of cowtail hair is included
here because of the killing involved.  Yantrapidaankarma - The business of
extracting oil from oilseeds like sesame, mustard, taramira, tori, peanuts, etc.
using a kolhu or ghani.  Nilaanchanakarma - The business of castrating bulls,
buffaloes, etc.  Davaagnidapan - The business of setting fire to forests. This
fire is extremely terrifying and uncontrolled. It causes the horrific
destruction of many mobile and immobile beings in the forest.
Sarhadatadaagshoshan - Drying up of lakes, ponds, etc. water bodies.  Asati-jan-
poshan - Nourishing and employing prostitutes, etc. for adultery. This is truly
a reprehensible act for a Shravak. It spreads immorality in society and
encourages adultery.  ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [53 taraha ke vAhanoM se hai| aise
vAhanoMko, unake bhAgoM yA kala-puoM ko taiyAra karanA, becanA Adi zakaTakarma
meM zAmila hai| Aja kI sthiti meM rela, moTara, skUTara, sAIkila, Traka,
TraikTara Adi banAne ke kArakhAnebhI isameM A jAte hai| bhATIkarma-bhATI kA
artha bhAr3A hai| baila, ghor3A, bhaiMsA, khaccara Adi ko bhAr3e para dene kA
vyaapaar| sphoTanakarmasphoTana kA artha phor3anA, tor3anA yA khodanA hai|
khAneM khodane, patthara phor3ane, kue, tAlAba tathA bAvar3I Adi khodane kA
dhandhA sphoTana-karma meM Ate hai| dantavANijya-hAthI dAMta kA vyApAra isakA
mukhya artha hai  /  vaise haDDI, camar3e Adi kA vyApAra bhI upalakSaNa se yahA~
grahaNa kara liyA jAnA caahie| lAkSAvANijyalAkha kA vyApAra  /
rasavANijyamadirA Adi mAdaka rasoM kA vyApAra  /  vaise rasa zabda sAmAnyataH
Ikha evaM phaloM ke rasa ke lie bhI prayukta hotA hai, kintu yahA~ vaha artha
nahIM hai| zahada, mAMsa, carbI, makkhana, dUdha, dahI, ghI, taila Adi ke
vyApAra ko bhI kaI AcAryoM ne rasavANijya meM grahaNa kiyA hai|
viSavANijyataraha-taraha ke viSoM kA vyApAra  /  talavAra, churA, kaTAra,
bandUka, dhanuSa, bANa, bArUda, paTAkhe Adi hiMsaka va ghAtaka vastuoM kA
vyApAra bhI viSavANijya ke antargata liyA jAtA hai| kezavANijyayahA~ prayukta
keza zabda lAkSaNika hai| keza-vANijya kA artha dAsa, dAsI, gAya, bhaiMsa,
bakarI, bher3a, U~Ta, ghor3e Adi jIvita prANiyoM kI kharIda-bikrI Adi kA dhandhA
hai| kucha AcAryoM ne camarI gAya kI pUMcha ke bAloM ke vyApAra ko bhI isameM
zAmila kiyA hai| inake cavara banate hai| mora-paMkha tathA Una prApta karane
meM aisA nahIM hai| mAre jAne ke kAraNa ko lekara camarI gAya ke bAloM kA
vyApAra isameM liyA gayA hai| yaMtrapIDanakarmatila, sarasoM, tArAmIrA, toriyA,
mUMgaphalI Adi tilahanoM se kolhU yA ghANI dvArA taila nikAlane kA vyvsaay|
nilAMchanakarmabaila, bhaiMse Adi ko napuMsaka banAne kA vyvsaay|
davAgnidApanavana meM Aga lagAne kA dhndhaa| yaha Aga atyanta bhayAnaka aura
aniyaMtrita hotI hai| usase jaMgala ke aneka jaMgama-sthAvara prANiyoM kA
bhISaNa saMhAra hotA hai| sarahadataDAgazoSaNasarovara, jhIla, tAlAba Adi jala-
sthAnoM ko sukhaanaa| asatI-jana-poSaNavyabhicAra ke lie vezyA Adi kA poSaNa
karanA, unheM niyukta krnaa| zrAvaka ke lie vAstava meM nindanIya kArya hai|
isase samAja meM duzcaritratA phailatI hai, vyabhicAra ko bala milatA hai|

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[54] [Upasakadasangasutra] Hunting, keeping hunting dogs, etc., keeping cats for
mice - all these also fall under the category of astijans-poshan. -
Anarthadanda-viraman's excess 52. Tayanantara cha nan ananudandaveeramanassa
samanovasaenam panch aiyara janiyavva, na samaayariyavva, tanjaha kandappe,
kukkudue, moharie, sanjuttahingarne, uvabhogparibhogaireitte. Thereafter, the
Shramanopasak should know the five excesses of the Anarthadanda-viraman vow, he
should not practice them. They are as follows: Kandarpa, Kautkuchya, Moukharya,
Sanjuktaadhikaran and Upbhogparibhogaatirek. Discussion Kandarpa - To make
efforts that incite lust. Kautkuchya - To make ugly and distorted efforts like
the multi-faceted. Moukharya - To boast unnecessarily, to make pointless talk,
to talk nonsense. Sanjuktaadhikaran - To gather weapons, etc., means of
violence. Upbhog-paribhogaatirek - Excess of consumption and consumption -
unnecessary increase - collecting materials and equipment related to consumption
and consumption without need. These are the excesses of this vow. Samayik vow's
excesses 53. Tayanantara cha nan samaayikassa samanovasaenam panch aiyara
janiyavva, na samaayariyavva tanjaha-manaduppanihane, vayaduppanihane,
kayaduppanihane, samaayikassa saiakaranaya, samaayikassa anavatthiassa karanaya.
Thereafter, the Shramanopasak should know the five excesses of the Samayik vow,
he should not practice them. They are as follows: Man-dusprnidhan, Vachan-
dusprnidhan, Kay-dusprnidhan, Samayik-smriti-akaranata, Samayik-anavathit-
karanata. Discussion Man-dusprnidhan - Here, the meaning of prnidhan is
meditation or contemplation. Corrupted thinking is called Man-dusprnidhan.
During Samayik, bringing up things related to raga, dvesha, mamata, asakti in
the mind, being anxious in the worry of domestic problems, this is an excess of
Samayik. The purpose of Samayik is life

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra AkheTa hetu zikArI kutte Adi pAlanA, cUhoM ke lie
billiyA~ pAlanA-ye saba bhI asatIjana-poSaNa ke antargata Ate hai| -
anarthadaNDa-viramaNa ke aticAra 52. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM aNadudaMDaveramaNassa
samaNovAsaeNaM paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA, na samAyariyavvA, taMjahAkaMdappe,
kukkudUe, moharie, saMjuttAhigaraNe, uvbhogpribhogaairitte| usake bAda
zramaNopAsaka ko anarthadaMDa-viramaNa vrata ke pAMca aticAroM ko jAnanA cAhie,
unakA AcaraNa nahIM karanA caahie| ve isa prakAra hai kandarpa, kautkucya,
maukharya, saMyuktAdhikaraNa tathA upbhogpribhogaatirek| vivecana kandarpakAma-
vAsanA ko bhar3akAne vAlI ceSTAe~ krnaa| kautkucyabahurUpiyoM kI taraha bhaddI
va vikRta ceSTAe~ krnaa| maukharyanirarthaka DIMgeM hAMkanA, vyartha bAteM
banAnA, bakavAsa krnaa| saMyuktAdhikaraNazastra Adi hiMsAmUlaka sAdhanoM ko
ikaTThA krnaa| upabhoga-paribhogAtireka upabhoga tathA paribhoga kA atireka-
anAvazyaka vRddhi-upabhogaparibhoga saMbaMdhI sAmagrI tathA upakaraNoM ko binA
AvazyakatA ke saMgRhIta karate jaanaa| ye isa vrata ke aticAra hai| sAmAyika
vrata ke aticAra 53. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM sAmAiyassa samaNovAsaeNaM paMca aiyArA
jANiyavvA, na samAyariyavvA taMjahA-maNaduppaNihANe, vayaduppaNihANe,
kAyaduppaNihANe, sAmAiyassa saiakaraNayA, sAmAiyassa aNavaTThiyassa krnnyaa|
tatpazcAt zramaNopAsaka ko sAmAyika vrata ke pAMca aticAroM ko jAnanA cAhie,
unakA AcaraNa nahIM karanA caahie| ve isa prakAra haiM mana-duSpraNidhAna,
vacana-duSpraNidhAna, kAya-duSpraNidhAna, sAmAyika-smRti-akaraNatA, saamaayik-
anvsthit-krnntaa| vivecana mana-duSpraNidhAna-yahA~ praNidhAna kA artha dhyAna
yA cintana hai| dUSita cintana mana-duSpraNidhAna kahA jAtA hai| sAmAyika karate
samaya rAga, dveSa, mamatA, Asakti saMbaMdhI bAteM mana meM lAnA, gharelu
samasyAoM kI cintA meM vyagra rahanA, yaha sAmAyika kA aticAra hai| sAmAyika kA
uddezya jIvana meM

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda  **[55]** The ultimate goal of Samayik is to
cultivate equanimity and gradually eliminate the inequalities arising from
anger, pride, delusion, and greed. By doing so, one attains complete immersion
in the pure self. Where this objective of Samayik is hindered, Samayik becomes a
mere traditional practice, failing to achieve the desired results in life.
Therefore, it is essential for the seeker to maintain a pure mind, experience
equanimity, and avoid mental anxieties.  **Vachan-Duspraṇidhāna-Samayik:**
During Samayik, misusing speech, engaging in false speech, uttering harsh words
that hurt others' hearts, and engaging in worldly conversations contrary to
spirituality constitute Vachan-Duspraṇidhāna. Just as it is crucial to avoid
mental anxieties during Samayik, it is equally important to refrain from
misusing speech.  **Kay-Duspraṇidhāna:** Similar to the mind and speech, the
body should also remain disciplined, attentive, and controlled during Samayik.
One should avoid actions that could lead to violence or other sins.  **Samayik-
Smriti-Akaraṇatā:** While Samayik is a lifelong practice, a dedicated time of 48
minutes has been set aside for its practice, as previously mentioned. When the
devotee is engaged in Samayik, they should be fully aware and attentive,
remembering that they are in Samayik. This means avoiding any mental, verbal, or
physical actions that are not in accordance with Samayik. These lapses are
transgressions of Samayik, rooted in negligence, unawareness, or carelessness.
**Samayik-Anvasthit-Karaṇatā:** "Avashthit" means being situated appropriately.
Doing otherwise is "Anvasthit." During Samayik, one should never be in an
unstable or disorganized state. Performing Samayik intermittently, not doing it
at all, or leaving before the designated time are indicators of an unstable and
erratic life. Such individuals fail in their Samayik practice and also fail to
progress in their worldly life. Completing the Samayik vow before the designated
time is the main essence of this transgression.  **Transgressions of
Desavakashik Vrat:**  **[54]** The Shramanopasaka should be aware of the five
transgressions of the Desavakashik Vrat and avoid them. These are:  * **Ānayan-
prayoga:** Bringing something for personal use. * **Preshya-prayoga:** Sending
something for personal use. * **Shabdānupāt:** Engaging in unnecessary
conversation. * **Rūpānupāt:** Engaging in unnecessary visual interaction. *
**Bahi:pudgal-prakshepa:** Throwing away external objects.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [55 samatA kA vikAsa karanA hai, krodha,
mAna, mAyA, lobha janita viSamatA ko kramazaH miTAte jAnA hai| yoM karate hue
zuddha AtmasvarUpa meM tanmayatA pAnA sAmAyika kA carama lakSya hai| jahA~
sAmAyika kA yaha uddezya bAdhita hotA hai, vahA~ sAmAyika eka pAramparika vidhi
ke rUpa meM to sadhatI hai, usase jIvana meM jo upalabdhi honI cAhie, ho nahIM
paatii| isalie sAdhaka ke lie yaha apekSita hai ki vaha apane mana ko pavitra
rakhe, samatA kI anubhUti kare, mAnasika duzcintana se bce| vacana-
daSpraNidhAna-sAmAyika karate samaya vANI kA darupayoga yA mithyA bhASaNa karanA
dasare ke hRdaya meM coTa pahu~cAne vAlI kaThora bAta kahanA, adhyAtma ke
pratikUla laukika bAteM karanA vacanaduSpraNidhAna hai| sAmAyika meM jisa
prakAra mAnasika duzcintana se bacanA Avazyaka hai, usI prakAra vacana ke
duSprayoga se bhI bacanA caahie| kAya-duSpraNidhAnamana aura vacana kI taraha
sAmAyika meM deha bhI vyavasthita, sAvadhAna aura susaMyata rahanI caahie| deha
se aisI ceSTAe~ nahIM karanI cAhie, jisase hiMsA Adi pApoM kI AzaMkA ho|
sAmAyika-smRti-akaraNatA-vaise to sAmAyika sAre jIvana kA viSaya hai, jIvana kI
sAdhanA hai, para abhyAsa-vidhi ke antargata usake lie jaisA pahale sUcita huA
hai, 48 miniTa kA eka ikAI kA samaya rakkhA gayA hai| jaba upAsaka sAmAyika meM
baiThe, use pUrI taraha jAgarUka aura sAvadhAna rahanA cAhie, samaya ke sAtha-
sAtha yaha bhI nahIM bhUlanA cAhie ki vaha sAmAyika meM hai| arthAt sAmAyikocita
mAnasika, vAcika, kAyika pravRttiyoM se use dUra nahIM haTanA hai| ye bhUleM
sAmAyika kA aticAra hai, jisake mUla meM pramAda ajAgarUkatA yA asAvadhAnI hai|
sAmAyika-anavasthita-karaNatAavasthita kA artha yathocita rUpa meM sthita rahanA
hai| vaise na karanA anavasthitatA hai| sAmAyika meM kabhI
anavasthitaavyavasthita nahIM rahanA caahie| kabhI sAmAyika kara lenA kabhI
nahIM karanA, kabhI sAmAyika ke samaya se pahale uTha jAnA-yaha vyakti ke
avyavasthita evaM asthira jIvana kA sUcaka hai| aisA vyakti sAmAyika sAdhanA meM
to asaphala rahatA hI hai, apane laukika jIvana meM bhI vikAsa nahIM kara
paataa| sAmAyika ke niyata kAla ke pUrNa hue binA hI sAmAyika vrata pAla lenA-
yaha isa aticAra kA mukhya Azaya hai| dezAvakAzika vrata ke aticAra 54.
tayANaMtaraM ca NaM desAvagAsiyassa samaNovAsaeNaM paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na
samAyariyavvA, taMjahA-ANavaNappaoge, pesavaNappaoge, saddANuvAe, rUvANuvAe,
bahiyA pogglpkkheve| tadantara zramaNopAsaka ko dezAvakAzika vrata ke pAMca
aticAroM ko jAnanA cAhie, unakA AcaraNa nahIM karanA caahie| ve isa prakAra haiM
Anayana-prayoga, preSya-prayoga, zabdAnupAta, rUpAnupAta tathA bhi:pudgl-
prkssep|

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [56] [Upasakadasanga Sutra Discussion]  The word "Deshavakashik" is formed
by combining the words "Desha" and "Avakash". Here, "Desha" means a part or a
region. "Avakash" means to go or to make an effort to do something. To restrict
oneself to a particular region is the "Deshavakashik" vow. In the sixth "Dik"
vow, the direction-related quantity or limit is set for life. Reducing it for a
day and night or for a shorter or longer period is the "Deshavakashik" vow.
"Avakash" also means withdrawal. Therefore, the shortening of other vows for a
specific time every day also falls under this vow. This should be understood
more clearly as follows.  For example, a person observes the vow for twenty-four
hours that they will not consume anything outside their house, will not perform
any work outside, and will not consume the five senses outside the designated
area. If they perform any work outside the designated area through a signal or
by another person, they violate the vow they have taken. This is an excess of
the "Deshavakashik" vow. It indicates the mental restlessness of the devotee and
their instability towards the vow. This weakens the vow-observing attitude. The
purpose of the vow is destroyed.  The explanation of the five excesses of this
vow is as follows:  * **Aayan-Prayog:** Obtaining items from outside the
designated area for use within the designated area through another person. *
**Preshya-Prayog:** Sending a servant, family member, etc., to perform tasks
outside the designated area. * **Shabdanupat:** Performing a task outside the
designated area by signaling through words, such as coughing, sneezing, or
making any other sound, to a neighbor, etc. * **Rupanupat:** Signaling with
hands, fingers, etc., without speaking, to get work done outside the designated
area. * **Bahihpudgal-Prakshep:** Throwing pebbles, etc., to signal others to
get work done outside the designated area.  Although these actions do not hinder
the literal observance of the vow, they certainly hinder the spirit of the vow.
The practice of sadhana does not gain firmness, therefore, it is essential to
avoid them.  The "Deshavakashik" vow is very important in limiting worldly
desires, beginnings, etc., and gradually making life more self-centered. The
ultimate goal of Jain philosophy is to be completely self-centered. It is one
thing for those with very strong and clear self-power, but it is not possible
for everyone to do so suddenly. Therefore, one should gradually reduce desires,
cravings, and wishes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 56] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra vivecana deza aura avakAza ina do zabdoM ke mela se
dezAvakAzika zabda banA hai| deza kA artha yahA~ eka bhAga hai| avakAza kA artha
jAne yA koI kArya karane kI ceSTA hai| eka bhAga taka apane ko sImita rakhanA
dezAvakAzika vrata hai| chaThe dik vrata meM dizA saMbaMdhI parimANa yA maryAdA
jIvana bhara ke lie kI jAtI hai, usakA eka dina-rAta ke samaya ke lie yA
nyUnAdhika samaya ke lie aura adhika kama kara lenA dezAvakAzika vrata hai|
avakAza kA artha nivRtti bhI hotA hai| ata: anya vratoM kA bhI isI prakAra hara
roja samaya-vizeSa ke lie jo saMkSepa kiyA jAtA hai, vaha bhI isa vrata meM A
jAtA hai| isako aura spaSTa yoM samajhA jAnA caahie| jaise eka vyakti caubIsa
ghaMTe ke lie yaha maryAdA karatA hai ki vaha eka makAna se bAhara ke padArthoM
kA upabhoga nahIM karegA, bAhara ke kArya saMpAdita nahIM karegA, vaha maryAdita
bhUmi se bAhara jAkara paMcAstravoM kA sevana nahIM karegA, yadi vaha niyata
kSetra se bAhara ke kArya saMketa se athavA dUsare vyakti dvArA karavAtA hai, to
vaha lI huI maryAdA kA ullaMghana karatA hai| yaha dezAvakAzika vrata kA aticAra
hai| yaha upAsaka kI mAnasika caMcalatA tathA vrata ke prati asthiratA kA
dyotaka hai| isase vrata-pAlana kI vRtti meM kamajorI AtI hai| vrata kA uddezya
naSTa ho jAtA hai| isa vrata ke pAMca aticAroM kA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai
Anayana-prayogajitane kSetra kI maryAdA kI hai, usa kSetra meM upayoga ke lie
maryAdita kSetra ke bAhara kI vastueM anya vyakti se mNgvaanaa| preSya-
prayogamaryAdita kSetra se bAhara ke kSetra ke kAryoM ko saMpAdita karane hetu
sevaka, pArivArika vyakti Adi ko bhejnaa| zabdAnupAtamaryAdita kSetra se bAhara
kA kArya sAmane A jAne para, dhyAna meM A jAne para, chIMka kara, khA~sI lekara
yA koI aura zabda kara par3ausI Adi se saMketa dvArA kArya kraanaa|
rUpAnupAtamaryAdita kSetra se bAhara kA kAma karavAne ke lie muMha se kucha na
bolakara hAtha, aMgulI Adi se saMketa krnaa| bahiHpudgala-prakSepamaryAdita
kSetra se bAhara kA kAma karavAne ke lie kaMkar3a Adi pheMka kara dUsaroM ko
izArA krnaa| ye kArya karane se yadyapi vrata ke zabdAtmaka pratipAlana meM
bAdhA nahIM AtI para vrata kI AtmA nizcaya hI isase vyAhata hotI hai| sAdhanA kA
abhyAsa dRDhatA nahIM pakar3atA, isalie inakA varjana atyanta Avazyaka hai|
laukika eSaNA, Arambha Adi sImita kara jIvana ko uttarottara Atma-nirata banAne
meM dezAvakAzika vrata bahuta mahattvapUrNa hai| jaina darzana kA to antima
lakSya saMpUrNa rUpa se Atma-kendrita honA hai| atyanta tIvra aura prazasta
Atmabala vAloM kI to bAta aura hai, sAmAnyatayA hara kisI ke lie yaha saMbhava
nahIM ki vaha ekAeka aisA kara sake, isalie use zanaiH zanaiH eSaNA, kAmanA aura
icchA kA

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda] [57 Sanvaran is to be done. This vow is very
helpful in this practice. The excesses of the Poshadhopavas vow 55. After that,
the Shramanopasaka should know the five excesses of the Poshadhopavas vow, he
should not practice them. They are as follows: Aapradilehi-Dushpradilehi-
Shayasantharak, Appamargit-Dushpramargitshayasantharak, Aapradilehi-
Dushpradilehi-Ucchaprastavnabhoomi, Appamargit-
Dushpramargitucchaprastavnabhoomi, and Poshadhopavas Samyak Ananupalan Vivechan.
• In Poshadhopavas, there are two words: Poshad and Upavas. The meaning of
Poshad is a special action that nourishes or strengthens Dharma. Upavas is made
up of the prefix "up" and the word "vas". The meaning of "up" is near. The
literal meaning of Upavas is the dwelling or state of being near the soul or the
qualities of the soul. For some time, to achieve the proximity or closeness of
the qualities of the soul, outwardness is negated. The most essential and
important food in outwardness or body-mindedness is food. When the seeker is in
self-absorption, he naturally becomes distant from external activities like
food, etc. This is the theoretical explanation of Upavas. From a practical point
of view, Upavas is the abandonment of food, drink, Khadim, and Swadim food for
twenty-four hours, from sunrise to the next sunrise. The meaning of the combined
practice of Poshad and Upavas is that the fasting devotee, for a limited time -
twenty-four hours - breaks his connection with the house and lives in a certain
place, almost like a Sadhu. He also fixes a place for sleeping, sitting,
defecation, and urination. He keeps the necessary, limited equipment with care
or caution, like a Sadhu, so that violence can be avoided. One of the three
aspirations of a Shravak or Upasaka is "Kya Naham Mude Bhavitta Pavvaissami" -
When will the time come in my life when I will become a monk and be ordained?
This vow is helpful in nourishing and developing this aspiration or high
feeling. This is a practical form of the practice of Shraman-sadhana. Just as a
Shraman is aware and careful in every tendency of his life, so too does the
Upasaka in this vow. Generally, these four things are the main things in the
Poshadhopavas vow:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [57 saMvaraNa karanA hotA hai  /  isa
abhyAsa meM yaha vrata bahuta sahAyaka hai| poSadhopavAsa-vrata ke aticAra 55.
tayANaMtaraM ca NaM posahovavAsassa samaNovAsaeNaM paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA, na
samAyariyavvA, taM jahA-appaDilehiya-duppaDilehiyasijjAsaMthAre,
appamajjiyaduppamajjiyasijjAsaMthAre, appaDilehiya-
duppaDilehiyauccArapAsavaNabhUmI, appamajyiduppamajjiyauccArapAsavaNabhUmi,
posahovavAsassa samma annnnupaalnnyaa| _ tadanantara zramaNopAsaka ko
poSadhopavAsa vrata ke pAMca aticAroM ko jAnanA cAhie, unakA AcaraNa nahIM
karanA caahie| ve isa prakAra haiM apratilekhita-duSpratilekhitazayyA-
saMstAraka, apramArjita-duSpramArjitazayyA-saMstAraka, apratilekhita-
duSpratilekhita-uccAraprastravaNabhUmi, apramArjita-duSpramArjita-
uccAraprastravaNabhUmi tathA poSadhopavAsasamyakaananupAlana vivecana *
poSadhopavAsa meM poSadha evaM upavAsa, ye do zabda hai| poSadha kA artha dharma
ko poSa yA puSTi dene vAlI kriyA-vizeSa hai| upavAsa upa upasarga aura vAsa
zabda se banA hai| upa kA artha samIpa hai| upAvAsa kA zAbdika tAtparya AtmA yA
AtmaguNoM ke samIpa vAsa yA avasthiti hai| AtmaguNoM kA sAmIpya yA sAnnidhya
sAdhane ke kucha samaya ke lie hI sahI, bahirmukhatA nirasta hotI hai  /
bahirmukhatA yA dehonmukhatA meM sabase adhika Avazyaka aura mahattvapUrNa
bhojana hai| sAdhaka jaba Atma-tanmayatA meM hotA hai to bhojana Adi bAhya
vRttiyoM se sahaja hI dUra ho jAtA hai| yaha upavAsa kA tAttvika vivecana hai|
vyAvahArika dRSTi se sUryodaya se agale sUryodaya taka arthAt caubIsa ghaMTe ke
lie azana, pAna, khAdima, svAdima AhAra kA tyAga upavAsa hai| poSadha aura
upavAsa rUpa sammilita sAdhanA kA artha yaha hai ki upavAsI upAsaka eka sImita
samaya-caubIsa ghaMTe ke lie ghara se saMbaMdha tor3a kara-lagabhaga sAdhuvat
hokara eka nizcita sthAna meM nivAsa karatA hai| sone, baiThane, zauca, laghu-
zaMkA Adi ke lie bhI sthAna nizcita kara letA hai  /  Avazyaka, sImita
upakaraNoM ko sAdhu kI taraha yatanA yA sAvadhAnI se rakhatA hai, jisase hiMsA
se bacA jA ske| zrAvaka yA upAsaka ke tIna manorathoM meM eka hai"kayA NamahaM
muDe bhavittA pavvaissAmi"mere jIvana meM vaha avasara kaba AegA, jaba maiM
muMDita hokara pravajita houuNgaa| isa manoratha yA ucca bhAvanA ke paripoSaNa
va vikAsa meM yaha vrata sahAyaka hai| zramaNa-sAdhanA ke abhyAsa kA yaha eka
vyAvahArika rUpa hai| jisa taraha eka zramaNa apane jIvana kI hara pravRtti meM
jAgarUka aura sAvadhAna rahatA hai, upAsaka bhI isa vrata meM vaisA hI karatA
hai| poSadhopavAsa vrata meM sAmAnyataH ye cAra bAteM mukhya hai

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  58] [Upasakadasangasutra (1) Abstinence from food, drink, and other edibles,
(2) Abstinence from adornment of the body, clothing, bathing, etc., (3)
Abstinence from sexual misconduct, (4) Abstinence from all sinful and harmful
actions. While Poshadhopavas can be performed at any time, in the Jain
tradition, the second, fifth, eighth, eleventh, and fourteenth days of the lunar
fortnight are recognized as special days. Among these, the eighth, fourteenth,
and fortnightly days are considered particularly significant. The following are
explanations of the transgressions of Poshadhopavas: A-pratilikhit-dush-
pratilikhit-shayya-sanstar-shayya means the place where Poshad is performed, and
sanstar means a mat, rug, or other common bedding on which one can sleep. Using
an unseen or carelessly seen place and bedding. A-pramarjit-dush-pramarjit-
shayya-sanstar-pramarjit means not cleaned or carelessly cleaned place and
bedding. A-pratilikhit-dush-pratilikhit-uchchar-prastavana-bhoomi-unseen or
carelessly seen places for defecation and urination. Poshadhopavas-samyak-an-
nupalan-not properly observing Poshadhopavas as prescribed. The Upasak should
avoid these transgressions. Yatha-sanvibhag-vrat-atichar 56. Tayanantaram cha
nan ahasanvibhagas sa manovasaena panch aiyara janiyavva, na samariyavva, tan
jaha-sachitt-nikkhevanaya, sachitt-pehanaya, kalaik-kame, paravavase,
machchariya. Thereafter, the Shraman Upasak should know the five transgressions
of the Yatha-sanvibhag-vrat, and should not commit them. They are as follows:
Sachitt-nikkhepanata, Sachitt-pidhan, Kalaatikram, Paravyapadesh, and Matsarita.
Discussion Yatha-sanvibhag means the proper division of food, drink, clothing,
etc., and giving a portion of these authorized items to a Muni or a worthy
recipient of good character. This vrat is also called Atithi-sanvibhag, which
means giving to a virtuous guest or ascetic whose arrival date or day is not
fixed. This is a very noble and essential duty of a householder. It develops
generosity, and brings out one's inner qualities. The five transgressions of
this vrat are based on the idea that the Upasak should give with...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra (1) azana, pAna Adi khAdya-peya-padArthoM kA tyAga,
(2) zarIra kI sajjA, vezabhUSA, snAna Adi kA tyAga, (3) abrahmacarya kA tyAga,
(4) samagra sAvadya-sapApa kArya-kalApa kA tyaag| vaise poSadhopavAsa cAhe jaba
kiyA jA sakatA hai, para jaina paraMparA meM dvitIyA, paMcamI, aSTamI, ekAdazI
evaM caturdazI viziSTa parva-tithiyoM ke rUpa meM svIkRta haiN| unameM bhI
aSTamI, caturdazI aura pAkSika viziSTa mAnA jAtA hai| poSadhopavAsa ke aticAroM
kA spaSTIkaraNa nimnAMkita hai apratilekhita-duSpratilekhita-zayyAsaMstAra-zayyA
kA artha poSadha karane kA sthAna tathA saMstAra kA artha darI, caTAI Adi
sAmAnya bichaunA hai, jisa para soyA jA ske| anadekhe-bhAle va lAparavAhI se
dekhe-bhAle sthAna va bichaune kA upayoga krnaa| apramArjita-duSpramArjita-
zayyA-saMstAra-pramArjita na kiye hue-binA pUMje athavA lAparavAhI se pUMje
sthAna evaM bichaune kA upayoga krnaa| apratilekhita-duSpratilekhita-uccAra-
prastravaNabhUmi-anadekhe-bhAle tathA lAparavAhI se dekhebhAle zauca va
laghuzaMkA ke sthAnoM kA upayoga krnaa| poSadhopavAsa-samyak-ananupAlana-
poSadhopavAsa kA bhalI-bhA~tiyathAvidhi pAlana na krnaa| ina aticAroM se upAsaka
ko bacanA caahie| yathAsaMvibhAga-vrata keaticAra 56. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM
ahAsaMvibhAgassa samaNovAsaeNaM paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA, na samAyariyavvA, taM
jahA-sacitta-nikkhevaNayA, sacittapehaNayA, kAlAikkame, paravavaese, mcchriyaa|
tatpazcAt zramaNopAsaka ko yathAsaMvibhAga-vrata ke pAMca aticAroM ko jAnanA
cAhie, unakA AcaraNa nahIM karanA caahie| ve isa prakAra haiM
sacittanikSepaNatA, sacittapidhAna, kAlAtikrama, paravyapadeza tathA mtsritaa|
vivecana yathA-saMvibhAga kA artha hai, ucita rUpa se anna, pAna, vastra Adi kA
vibhAjanamuni athavA cAritra-sampanna yogya pAtra ko ina svAdhikRta vastuoM meM
se eka bhAga denaa| isa vrata kA nAma atithisaMvibhAga bhI hai, jisakA artha
haijisake Ane kI koI nizcita tithi yA dina nahIM, aise sAdhu yA saMyamI atithi
ko apanI vastuoM meM se denaa| gRhastha kA yaha bahuta hI uttama va Avazyaka
kartavya hai| isase udAratA kI vRtti vikasita hotI hai, Atma-guNa ujAgara hote
haiN| isa vrata ke jo pAMca aticAra mAne gae haiM, unake pIche yahI bhAvanA hai
ki upAsaka kI dene kI

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda  **[59]** The [59] transgressions should always
be avoided with zeal, they should not be diminished. Their explanation is as
follows:  **Saccitta-nikshepana:**  To place objects fit for consumption by an
unattached, inanimate, and restrained person in a place where they are mixed
with attached, animate things like grains, with the intention of not giving them
as charity. Or to mix attached objects with objects fit for consumption. By
doing so, the ascetic cannot accept them. This is a deceitful act of not giving
charity, not by saying it out loud, but by behavior.  **Saccitta-pidhana:** To
cover an unattached object with an attached object with the intention of not
giving it as charity, so that the restrained person cannot accept it.
**Kalatikram:** To transgress or violate time. To show a willingness to give
charity by delaying the time of giving it. The ascetic or guest who arrives
after the time has passed does not take food because their meal has already been
taken. This is false hospitality. The person doing this knows in their heart
that they will not have to give charity or food, their word will also be kept,
and thus they will be able to perform hospitality without actually doing
anything.  **Paravyapadesha:** To claim one's own object as belonging to someone
else with the intention of not giving it.  **Matsarita:** To give food, etc.,
out of envy or jealousy. The meaning of envy here is that when someone sees that
someone else has given such a donation, they think, "I am not much less than
them, I should also give." There is no feeling of charity in this act, but a
feeling of ego. Some have interpreted Matsarita as meaning stinginess or
miserliness. According to this, being stingy in giving charity falls under this
transgression. In some places, Matsarita has also been interpreted as meaning
anger. According to them, giving charity or food out of anger is a
transgression.  **Transgressions of Maranantic-Sanlekhana**  **[57]**  The five
transgressions of the last [57] Maranantic-Sanlekhana-Joushana-Aradhana should
be known and not practiced. They are:  * **Ihaloka-Ashansaprayoga:**  The use of
hope for this world. * **Paraloka-Ashansaprayoga:** The use of hope for the next
world. * **Jiviya-Ashansaprayoga:** The use of hope for life. * **Marana-
Ashansaprayoga:** The use of hope for death. * **Kama-Bhoga-Ashansaprayoga:**
The use of hope for sensual pleasures.  **Discussion**  According to Jain
philosophy, the ultimate goal of life is to attain the true nature of the soul.
The journey of spiritual practice is to progress in this direction by
diminishing the coverings of karma that have come upon it. The body is useful in
this. The worldly activities that are accomplished through the body are
incidental, from a spiritual perspective...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [59 vRtti sadA sotsAha banI rahe, usameM
kSINatA na aae| una aticAroM kA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai sacitta-
nikSepaNatAdAna na dene kI nIyata se acitta-nirjIva-saMyamI ke lene yogya
padArthoM ko sacita-sajIva dhAnya Adi meM rakha denA athavA lene yogya padArthoM
meM sacita padArtha milA denaa| aisA karane se sAdhu unheM grahaNa nahIM kara
sktaa| yaha mukha se bhikSA na dene kI bAta na kaha kara bhikSA na dene kA
vyavahAra se dhUrtatA pUrNa upakrama hai| sacitta-pidhAna-dAna na dene kI
bhAvanA se sacitta vastu se acita vastu ko Dhaka denA, tAki saMyamI use svIkAra
na kara ske| kAlAtikrama-kAla yA samaya kA atikrama-ullaMghana krnaa| bhikSA kA
samaya TAla kara bhikSA dene kI tatparatA dikhAnA samaya Tala jAne se Ane vAlA
sAdhu yA atithi bhojana nahIM letA, kyoMki taba taka usakA bhojana ho cukatA
hai| yaha jhUThA satkAra hai| aisA karane vAlA vyakti mana hI mana yaha jAnatA
hai ki use bhikSA yA bhojana denA nahIM par3egA, usakI bAta bhI raha jAyagI, yoM
kucha lage binA hI satkAra ho jaaygaa| paravyapadeza-na dene kI nIyata se apanI
vastu ko dUsare kI btaanaa| matsaritA-matsara yA IrSyAvaza AhAra Adi denaa|
IrSyA kA artha yahAM yaha hai-jaise koI vyakti dekhatA hai, amuka ne aisA dAna
diyA hai to usake mana meM AtA hai, maiM usase kama thor3A hI hUM maiM bhI duuN|
aisA karane meM dAna kI bhAvanA nahIM hai, aMhakAra kI bhAvanA hai| kinhIM ne
matsaritA kA artha kRpaNatA yA kaMjUsI kiyA hai| tadanusAra dAna dene meM
kaMjUsI karanA isa aticAra meM AtA hai| kahIM kahIM matsaritA kA artha krodha
bhI kiyA gayA hai, unake anusAra krodhapUrvaka bhikSA yA bhojana denA, yaha
aticAra hai| maraNAntika-saMlekhanA ke aticAra 57. tayANaMtaraM ca NaM
apacchima-mAraNaMtiya-saMlehaNA-jhUsaNArAhaNAe paMca aiyArA jANiyavvA na
samAyariyavvA, taM jahA-ihalogAsaMsappaoge, paralogAsaMsappaoge,
jIviyAsaMsappaoge, maraNAsaMsappaoge, kaambhogaasNsppoge| tadantara apazcima-
maraNAMtika-saMleSaNA-joSaNAArAdhanA ke pAMca aticAroM ko jAnanA cAhie, unakA
AcaraNa nahIM karanA caahie| ve isa prakAra hai _ ihaloka-AzaMsAprayoga,
paraloka-AzaMsAprayoga, jIvita-AzaMsAprayoga, maraNa-AzaMsAprayoga tathA kaam-
bhog-aashNsaapryog| vivecana jainadarzana ke anusAra jIvana kA antima lakSya
hai-AtmA ke satya svarUpa kI praapti| usa para karmoM ke jo AvaraNa Ae hue hai,
unheM kSINa karate hue isa dizA meM bar3hate jAnA, sAdhanA kI yAtrA hai| deha
usameM upayogI hai| sAMsArika kArya jo deha se sadhate hai, ve to prAsaMgika
hai, AdhyAtmika dRSTi se

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[60] [Upasakadasangasutra] The true use of the body is to follow the path of
restraint and the root of non-violence. The Upasaka or Sadhaka takes care of his
body because it is an aid in his religious practices. No one remains young
forever, nor healthy, nor robust. The young become old, the healthy become sick,
and the robust become weak. A time comes when the body itself needs the support
of others for its sustenance. Due to illness and weakness, the individual
becomes unable to perform religious activities. In such a situation, enthusiasm
in the mind begins to decrease, weakness sets in, thoughts become impure, and
life becomes a burden. The burden has to be carried. Why should a wise Sadhaka
do this? Jain philosophy provides a path for the Sadhaka. The Sadhaka abandons
the feeling of protecting the body with peace and firmness. For this, he gives
up food and drink and, in solitude or a sacred place, contemplates the self and
ascends to a higher level of emotions. This vow is called Sanleshana. The
commentator Abhaydeva Suri has defined Sanleshana as the thinning of the body
and the passions. Beyond Sanleshana are two more words, Joshana and Aradhana.
Joshana means to consume with pleasure. Aradhana means to follow or to put into
practice, that is, to follow the Sanleshana vow with joy. There are two more
adjectives, Apaschima and Maranantik. Apaschima means final or last, after which
there is nothing left to do in this life. Maranantik means the Aradhana that
continues until death. In this vow, there is not only the renunciation of food
for life, but the Sadhaka also abandons worldly and otherworldly desires. He
becomes so absorbed in self-delight that he rises above the desire for life and
death. He does not desire to live for a while longer, nor does he fear death,
nor does he yearn for it to come quickly so that the body may end and the
suffering may cease. When death comes, he accepts it peacefully, with a natural
feeling. How pure, elevated, and spacious this state of mind is from a spiritual
perspective. The excesses that have been conceived for this vow are based on the
idea that the Sadhaka's virtuous conduct should not be hindered in any way. _
The explanation of the excesses is as follows: Ihalok-Ashansaprayog - Desire for
worldly pleasures or comforts, such as, "I will become a king, wealthy, and
prosperous after death." Paralok-Ashansaprayog - Desire for the pleasures to be
obtained in the otherworldly heaven, such as, "I will attain heaven after death
and enjoy the unparalleled pleasures there." Jivit-Ashansaprayog - Desire to
live due to greed for praise, appreciation, fame, glory, etc., or fear of death.
Maran-Ashansaprayog - Desire to die quickly, considering the hunger, thirst, and
other physical discomforts caused by austerity as suffering, thinking that these
sufferings will soon be over.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra deha kA yathArtha upayoga, saMvara tathA nirjarAmUlaka
dharma kA anusaraNa hai| upAsaka yA sAdhaka apanI deha kI paripAlanA isIlie
karatA hai ki vaha usake dharmAnuSThAna meM sahayogI hai| na koI sadA yuvA
rahatA hai aura na svastha, supuSTa hii| yuvA vRddha ho jAtA hai, svastha rUgNa
ho jAtA hai aura supuSTa durbl| eka aisA samaya A jAtA hai, jaba deha apane
nirvAha ke lie svayaM dUsaroM kA sahArA cAhane lagatI hai| roga aura durbalatA
ke kAraNa vyakti dhArmika kriyAeM karane meM asamartha ho jAtA hai| aisI sthiti
meM mana meM utsAha ghaTane lagatA hai, kamajorI Ane lagatI hai, vicAra malina
hone lagate hai, jIvana eka bhAra lagane lagatA hai| bhAra ko to DhonA par3atA
hai| vivekI sAdhaka aisA kyoM kare? jainadarzana vahAM sAdhaka ko eka mArga detA
hai| sAdhaka zAnti evaM dRr3hatApUrvaka zarIra ke saMrakSaNa kA bhAva chor3a
detA hai| isake lie vaha khAna-pAna kA parityAga kara detA hai aura ekAnta yA
pavitra sthAna meM Atmacintana karatA huA bhAvoM kI ucca bhUmikA para ArUDha ho
jAtA hai| isa vrata ko saMleSaNA kahA jAtA hai| vRttikAra abhayadeva sUri ne
saMleSaNA kA artha zarIra evaM kaSAyoM ko kRza karanA kiyA hai| saMleSaNA ke Age
joSaNA aura ArAdhanA do zabda aura haiN| joSaNA kA artha prItipUrvaka sevana
hai| ArAdhanA kA artha anusaraNa karanA yA jIvana meM utAranA hai arthAt
saMleSaNA-vrata kA prasannatApUrvaka anusaraNa krnaa| do vizeSaNa sAtha meM aura
haiapazcima aura maraNAntika  /  apazcima kA artha hai antima yA AkhirI, jisake
bAda isa jIvana meM aura kucha karanA bAkI na raha jaay| maraNAntika kA artha
hai, maraNa paryanta calane vAlI aaraadhnaa| isa vrata meM jIvana bhara ke lie
AhAra-tyAga to hotA hI hai, sAdhaka laukika, pAralaukika kAmanAoM ko bhI chor3a
detA hai| usameM itanI Atma-rati vyApta ho jAtI hai ki jIvana aura mRtyu kI
kAmanA se vaha UMcA uTha jAtA hai| na use jIvana kI cAha rahatI hai ki vaha
kucha samaya aura jI le aura na matya se DaratA hai tathA na use jaldI pA lene
ke lie Akala-Atara hotA hai ki deha kA anta ho jAya, Aphata mitte| sahaja bhAva
se jaba bhI mauta AtI hai, vaha usakA zAnti se varaNa karatA hai| AdhyAtmika
dRSTi se kitanI pavitra, unnata aura prazasta manaHsthiti yaha hai| isa vrata ke
jo aticAra parikalpita kie gae haiM, unake pIche yahI bhAvanA hai ki sAdhaka kI
yaha punIta vRtti kahIM vyAhata na ho jaay| _ aticAroM kA spaSTIkaraNa isa
prakAra haiihaloka-AzaMsAprayoga-aihika bhogoM yA sukhoM kI kAmanA, jaise maiM
marakara rAjA, samRddhizAlI tathA sukhasaMpanna bnuuN| paraloka-AzaMsAprayoga-
paraloka-svarga meM prApta hone vAle bhogoM kI kAmanA karanA, jaise maiM mara
kara svarga prApta karUM tathA vahAM ke atula sukha bhoguuN| jIvita-
AzaMsAprayogaprazasti, prazaMsA, yaza, kIrti Adi ke lobha se yA mauta ke Dara se
jIne kI kAmanA krnaa| maraNa-AzaMsAprayogatapasyA ke kAraNa honevAlI bhUkha,
pyAsa tathA dUsarI zArIrika pratikUlatAoM ko kaSTa mAna kara zIghra marane kI
kAmanA karanA, yaha soca kara ki jaldI hI ina kaSToM se chuTakArA ho jaay|

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study: Gathapati Ananda] [61 Desire for Enjoyment-Praise-Application: To
desire to enjoy worldly and otherworldly words, forms, tastes, smells, and
touch-based sensory pleasures - to have a feeling that such enjoyable objects
will be obtained by me. In this final period of practice, it is completely
inappropriate for the above thoughts to come to mind. This hinders inner purity.
The purity of the practitioner who has embarked on the path of practice for the
sake of the pure and great goal is diminished by this. Therefore, the
practitioner is expected to be very vigilant in this situation. Thus, to embrace
death itself with a high spirit of renunciation, forbearance, and spirituality
is called death-festival in Jain scriptures. This is truly a very strange and
commendable situation. On the one hand, it is seen that even a man who is worn
out by many diseases, taking his last breath, wants to live, groans to live,
while on the other hand, this practitioner, completely immersed in equanimity,
rises above the desire for life and death. Those who do not understand sometimes
start calling it suicide. Why do they forget that suicide is done by someone who
is driven by violent mental impulses like anger, sorrow, grief, attachment,
etc., who sees no support in life, who sees only darkness everywhere. This is a
disgusting form of weakness of the soul. Sanlekhana-preceded fasting unto death
is not the killing of the soul, but its development, upliftment, and elevation,
where the practitioner rises far above lust, anger, attachment, hatred, and
delusion. Acquisition by Joy 58. Therefore, the Saman, the Bhagavan Mahavira, in
the end, rejects the five poisons, the seven virtues, the twelve kinds of
worldly dharma, and the worldly dharma. The Saman, having rejected the worldly
dharma, bows down to the Bhagavan Mahavira, salutes him. Having bowed down and
saluted him, he says this: _ "O Venerable Sir! It is not fitting for me to
accept food, food-related things, or food-related possessions, or to be honored
or saluted, or to be touched or embraced by someone who is not pure, or to eat,
drink, chew, or suck, or to give or receive anything, or to be involved in any
kind of royal, communal, forceful, divine, or guru-related affairs, or to be
involved in financial matters. It is fitting for me, the Saman, the Niggantha,
the naked one, to live by accepting only what is necessary for my existence,
such as food, drink, chewing, sucking, clothes, blankets, towels, beds, fruits,
vegetables, seeds, and medicines, and to accept only what is necessary for my
existence. He accepts this bitter and painful acquisition, having accepted it,
he asks questions, having asked questions, he clarifies doubts, having clarified
doubts, he bows down to the Bhagavan Mahavira with great respect, having bowed
down, he departs from the two-fold worldly life, having departed from the two-
fold worldly life, he...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [61 kAmabhoga-AzaMsAprayogaaihika tathA
pAralaukika zabda, rUpa, rasa, gandha tathA sparzamUlaka indriyasukhoM ko
bhogane kI kAmanA karanA-aisI bhAvanA rakhanA ki amuka bhogya padArtha mujhe
prApta hoN| isa antima sAdhanA-kAla meM uparyukta vicAroM kA mana meM AnA
sarvathA anucita hai| isase Antarika pavitratA bAdhita hotI hai| jisa punIta
aura mahAn lakSya ko lie sAdhaka sAdhanA-patha para ArUDha hotA hai, isase usa
kI pavitratA ghaTa jAtI hai| isalie sAdhaka ko isa sthiti meM bahuta hI jAgarUka
rahanA apekSita hai| yoM tyAga-titikSA aura adhyAtma kI ucca bhAvanA ke sAtha
svayaM mRtyu ko varaNa karanA jaina zAstroM meM mRtyu-mahotsava kahA gayA hai|
sacamuca yaha bar3I vicitra aura prazaMsanIya sthiti hai| jahAM eka aura dekhA
jAtA hai, aneka rogoM se jarjara, AkhirI sAMsa letA huA bhI manuSya jInA cAhatA
hai, jIne ke lie karAhatA hai, vahAM eka yaha sAdhaka hai, jo pUrNa rUpa se
samabhAva meM lIna hokara jIvana-maraNa kI kAmanA se Upara uTha jAtA hai| .
nahIM samajhane vAle kabhI-kabhI ise AtmahatyA kI saMjJA dene lagate haiN| ve
kyoM bhUla jAte hai, Atma-hatyA krodha, duHkha, zoka, moha Adi ugra mAnasika
AvegoM se koI karatA hai, jise jIvana meM koI sahArA nahIM dIkhatA, saba ora
aMdherA hI aMdherA najara AtA hai| yaha AtmA kI kamajorI kA ghinaunA rUpa hai|
saMlekhanApUrvaka AmaraNa anazana to AtmA kA hanana nahIM, usakA vikAsa,
unnayana aura utthAna hai, jahAM kAma, krodha, rAga, dveSa, moha Adi se sAdhaka
bahuta U~cA uTha jAtA hai| Ananda dvArA abhigraha 58. tae NaM se ANaMde gAhAvaI
samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie paMcANuvvaiyaM sattasikkhAvaiyaM
duvAlasavihaM sAvaya-dhamma paDivajjai, paDivajjitA samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM
vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI _ no khalu me bhaMte! kappai
ajjappabhiI anna-utthie vA anna-utthiyadevayANi vA annautthiyapariggahiyANi
ceiyAiM vA vaMdittae vA namaMsittae vA, puTviM aNAlatteNa Alavittae vA
saMlavittae vA, tesiM asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA dAuM vA aNuppadAuM
vA, nannattha rAyAbhiogeNaM, gaNAbhiogeNaM, balAbhiogeNaM, devayAbhiogeNaM,
gurUniggaheNaM, vittikNtaarennN| kappai meM samaNe niggaMthe phAsueNaM
esaNijjeNaM asaNa-pANa-khAima-sAimeNaM vattha-paDiggaha-kaMbala-pAyapuJchaNeNaM,
pIDha-phalaga-sijjA-saMthAraeNaM, osaha-bhesajjeNa ya paDilAbhemANassa
viharittae tti kaTu imaM eyArUvaM abhiggahaM abhigiNhai, abhigiNhittA pasiNAI
pucchai, pucchittA aTThAI Adiyai, AdittA samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM tikkhutto
vaMdai, vaMdittA samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyAo duipalAsAo ceiyAo
paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[62] a [Upasakadasangasutra] When the merchant went to the city, when he was at
home, he returned. Upon returning, he told his wife Sivananada, "Devanupriya! I
have heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira. That Dharma is dear to
me, very dear to me, and pleasing to me. Devanupriya! You go to Bhagavan
Mahavira, pay your respects to him, (offer salutations, honor him, respect him,
he is auspicious, he is prosperous, he is a Deva, he is the embodiment of
knowledge), perform Paryupasana, and accept the twelve types of householder
Dharma, which are the five Anuvratas and the seven Shikshavrata."  Then Anand,
the head of the family, accepted the twelve types of Shravaka-Dharma, which are
the five Anuvratas and the seven Shikshavrata, from Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira.
After accepting, he bowed to Bhagavan Mahavira and said to him, "Bhagavan! From
today onwards, I will not pay respects to, offer salutations to, or engage in
conversation with men associated with other Sanghas, other than the Anyayuthika-
Nirgrantha Dharma-Sangha, their Devas, or the Chaityas they have adopted and
accepted. I will not offer them food, drink, or other edible items, such as
rice, bread, milk, fruits, nuts, or sweets. I will not offer them anything that
is meant for the mouth, such as betel nut or mouthwash. This is not permissible
for me, according to Dharma. This is not something I will do. However, I will
make exceptions for the orders or requests of kings, communities, or specific
democratic governments, for the sake of my livelihood, or in the face of danger.
It is permissible for me to offer Shramans and Nirgranthas food, drink, edible
items, clothing, bowls, blankets, foot-cloths, mats, beds, lodging, grass for
bedding, herbs, and medicines. This is something I will do.  Anand accepted this
vow of non-attachment. He then asked Bhagavan questions. After asking his
questions, he received their meaning and explanation. After receiving the
explanation, he bowed to Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times. After bowing, he
left from there, from the Chaitya called Duutipalasha. He went to the city of
Vanijyagram, where his home was. Upon arriving, he told his wife Sivananada,
"Devanupriya! I have heard the Dharma from Shraman Bhagavan. That Dharma is dear
to me, very dear to me, and pleasing to me. Devanupriya! You go to Bhagavan
Mahavira, pay your respects to him, (offer salutations, honor him, respect him,
he is auspicious, he is prosperous, he is a Deva, he is the embodiment of
knowledge), perform Paryupasana, and accept the twelve types of householder
Dharma, which are the five Anuvratas and the seven Shikshavrata."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62] a [upAsakadazAMgasUtra jeNeva vANiyaggAme nayare, jeNeva sae gihe teNeva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA sivanandaM bhAriyaM evaM vayAsI evaM khalu devANuppie!
mae samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie dhamme nisNte| se vi ya dhamme me
icchie paDicchie abhiruie, taM gaccha NaM tumaM devANuppie! samaNaM bhagavaM
mahAvIraM vaMdAhi jAva (NamaMsAhi, sakArehi, sammANehi, kallANaM, maMgalaM,
devayaM, ceiyaM) pajuvAsAhi, samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie paMcANuvvaiyaM
sattasikkhAvaiyaM duvAlasavihaM gihidhamma pddivjaahi| phira Ananda gAthApati ne
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa pAMca aNuvrata tathA sAta zikSAvratarUpa
bAraha prakAra kA zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyaa| svIkAra kara bhagavAn mahAvIra
ko vandanA-namaskAra kara vaha bhagavAn se yoM bolA bhagavan ! Ajase
anyayUthika-nirgrantha dharma-saMgha ke atirikta anya saMghoM se sambaddha
purUSa, unake deva, una dvArA parigRhIta-svIkRta caitya-unheM vandanA karanA,
namaskAra karanA, unake pahale bole binA unase AlApa-saMlApa karanA, unheM
dhArmika dRSTi se azana-roTI, bhAta Adi anna-nirmita khAne ke padArtha, pAna-
pAnI, dUdha Adi peya padArtha, khAdima-khAdya-phala, mevA Adi anna-rahita khAne
kI vastueM tathA svAdima-svAdya-pAna, supArI Adi mukhavAsa va mukha-zuddhikaraNa
cIjeM pradAna karanA, anupradAna karanA mere lie kalpanIya-dhArmika dRSTi se
karaNIya nahIM hai arthAt ye kArya maiM nahIM kruuNgaa| rAjA, gaNajana-samudAya
athavA viziSTa janasattAtmaka gaNataMtrIya zAsana, bala-senA yA balI puruSa,
deva va mAtopitA Adi gurUjana kA Adeza yA Agraha tathA apanI AjIvikA ke
saMkaTagrasta hone kI sthiti-mere lie isameM apavAda haiM arthAt ina sthitiyoM
meM ukta kArya mere lie karaNIya haiN| zramaNoM, nirganthoM ko prAsuka-acita,
eSaNIya-una dvArA svIkAra karane yogya-nirdoSa, azana, pAna, khAdya tathA svAdya
AhAra, vastra, pAtra, kambala, pAda-proJchana-rajoharaNa yA paira poMchane kA
vastra, pATa, bAjoTa, Thaharane kA sthAna, bichAne ke lie ghAsa Adi, auSadha-
sUkhI jar3I-bUTI, bheSaja-davA denA mujhe kalpatA hai-mere lie karaNIya hai|
Ananda ne yoM abhigraha-saMkalpa svIkAra kiyaa| vaisA kara bhagavAn se prazna
puuche| prazna pUchakara unakA artha-samAdhAna prApta kiyaa| samAdhAna prApta
kara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko tIna bAra vaMdanA kii| vaMdanA kara bhagavAna
ke pAsa se, dUtIpalAza nAmaka caitya se ravAnA huaa| ravAnA hokara jahAM
vANijyagrAma nagara thA, jahAM apanA ghara thA, vahAM aayaa| Akara apanI patnI
zivanandA ko yoM bolA-devAnupriye! maiMne zramaNa bhagavAn ke pAsa se dharma
sunA hai| vaha dharma mere lie iSTa, atyanta iSTa aura rucikara hai|
devAnupriye! tuma bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa jAo, unheM vaMdanA karo, (namaskAra
karo, unakA satkAra karo, sammAna karo, ve kalyANamaya haiM, maMgalamaya haiM,
deva hai, jJAna-svarUpa haiM,) paryupAsanA karo tathA pAMca aNuvrata aura sAta
zikSAvrata-rUpa bAraha prakAra kA gRhastha-dharma svIkAra kro|

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: The Joy of the Layman  [63 Discussions]  The twelve vows of a
lay person are divided into five anuvratas and seven shikshavrata. Anuvrata is
the fundamental vow. Shikshavrata is for their nourishment, enhancement, and
development. The meaning of shiksha is practice. These vows are particularly
useful in bringing stability to the practice or sadhana of anuvratas.  From a
linguistic perspective, these seven (shiksha) vows have been divided in two
ways. They are all called shikshavrata, as mentioned earlier. The first three -
anarthadandaviramana, digvrata, and upabhog-paribhog-parimana gunavrata - and
the last four - samayaik, deshavakashik, poshadhopavas, and atithisanvibhaga -
are called shikshavrata.  The reason for calling them gunavrata is generally
that they are helpful in the qualitative development of anuvratas or they
increase the character-based qualities of the practitioner. The next four are
mainly practice-oriented, so the word "shiksha" is naturally associated with
them in a descriptive sense.  Generally speaking, both gunavrata and
shikshavrata are helpful in the practice of anuvratas, so it is appropriate to
call all seven shikshavrata in a broad sense.  The order of the seven
shikshavrata, as found in the औपपातिक सूत्र (Aupapatik Sutra) etc., is mentioned
here. The order is slightly different in Acharya Umaswati's Tattvarth Sutra. In
Tattvarth Sutra, the order of these vows is dig, desh, anarth-dand-virati,
samayaik, poshadhopavas, upabhog-paribhog-parimana, and atithi-sanvibhaga.
There, they are not called shikshavrata, but it is only said that the lay person
is also endowed with these vows. However, even with a slight difference in
order, there is no difference in meaning.  After accepting the twelve vows of a
lay person, Anand made a special resolution. Behind this resolution is the
desire to remain strong and stable in the principles of dharma that he had
accepted with understanding and discernment. Therefore, he does not want to
maintain contact with people from other religious groups, so that no such
occasion arises in life that could lead to deviation.  One might ask, if Anand
had accepted the principles of dharma with thought and understanding, why was he
so apprehensive? This seems reasonable on the surface, but let's delve deeper.
The human mind is very emotional. Emotionality sometimes overshadows reason,
causing a person to be swept away by it, which can shake their true faith. This
is the reason for Anand's resolution.  The word chaitya used in this context is
somewhat controversial. The word chaitya is polysemous. The well-known  1.  दिग्
देशानर्थदण्डविरतिसामायिकपोषधोपवासोपभोगपरिभोगपरिमाणाऽतिथिसंविभागव्रतसंपन्नश्च।
Tattvarth Sutra 7.16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [63 vivecana zrAvaka ke bAraha vrata,
pAMca aNuvrata tathA sAta zikSAvrata ke rUpa meM vibhAjita haiM  /  aNuvrata
mUla vrata hai| zikSAvrata unake poSaNa, saMvardhana evaM vikAsa ke lie hai|
zikSA kA artha abhyAsa hai| ye vrata aNuvratoM ke abhyAsa yA sAdhanA meM
sthiratA lAne meM vizeSa upayogI haiN| zAbdika bheda se ina sAta (zikSA) vratoM
kA vibhAjana do prakAra se kiyA jAtA rahA hai| ina sAtoM ko zikSAvrata to kahA
hI jAtA hai, jaisA pahale ullekha huA hai, inameM pahale tIna-
anarthadaNDaviramaNa, digvrata, tathA upabhoga-paribhogaparimANa guNavrata aura
antima cAra-sAmAyika, dezAvakAzika, poSadhopavAsa evaM atithisaMvibhAga,
zikSAvrata kahe gaye haiN| guNavrata kahe jAne ke pIche sAdhAraNatayA yahI bhAva
hai ki ye aNuvratoM ke guNAtmaka vikAsa meM sahAyaka haiM athavA sAdhaka ke
cAritramUlaka guNoM kI vRddhi karate haiN| agale cAra mukhyataH abhyAsaparaka
haiM, isalie unake sAtha "zikSA" zabda vizeSaNAtmaka dRSTi se sahajatayA saMgata
hai| vaise sAmAnya rUpa meM guNavrata tathA zikSAvrata donoM hI aNuvratoM ke
abhyAsa meM sahAyaka haiM, isalie sthUla rUpa meM sAtoM ko jo zikSAvrata kahA
jAtA hai, upayukta hI hai| . sAta zikSAvratoM kA jo krama aupapAtika sUtra Adi
meM hai, usakA yahA~ ullekha kiyA gayA hai| AcArya umAsvAti ke tattvArthasUtra
meM krama kucha bhinna hai| tattvArthasUtra meM ina vratoM kA krama dig, deza,
anartha-daMDa-virati, sAmAyika, poSadhopavAsa, upabhoga-paribhoga-parimANa tathA
atithi-saMvibhAga ke rUpa meM hai vahA~ inheM zikSAvrata na kaha kara kevala
yahI kahA gayA hai ki zrAvaka ina vratoM se bhI saMpanna hotA hai| kintu krama
meM kiMcit antara hone para bhI tAtparya meM koI bheda nahIM hai| Ananda ne
zrAvaka ke bAraha vrata grahaNa karane ke pazcAt jo vizeSa saMkalpa kiyA, usake
pIche apane dvArA viveka aura samajhapUrvaka svIkAra kie gae dharma-siddhAntoM
meM sudRDha evaM susthira bane rahane kI bhAvanA hai| ataeva vaha dhArmika dRSTi
se anya dharma-saMghoM ke vyaktiyoM se apanA samparka rakhanA nahI cAhatA tAki
jIvana meM koI aisA prasaMga hI na Ae, jisase vicalana kI AzaMkA ho| prazna ho
sakatA hai, jaba Ananda ne soca-samajha kara dharma ke siddhAnta svIkAra kiye
the to use yoM zaMkita hone kI kyA AvazyakatA thI? sAdhAraNatayA bAta ThIka
lagatI hai, para jarA gaharAI meM jaaeN| mAnava mana bar3A bhAvuka hai|
bhAvukatA kabhI kabhI viveka ko AvRta kara detI hai, phalataH vyakti usameM baha
jAtA hai, jisase usakI sad AsthA DagamagA sakatI hai isI se bacAva ke lie Ananda
kA yaha abhigraha hai| isa sandarbha meM prayukta caitya zabda kucha vivAdAspada
hai| caitya zabda anekArthavAcI hai| suprasiddha 1. digdeshaanrthdnnddvirtisaama
ayikpossdhopvaasopbhogpribhogprimaannaa'tithisNvibhaagvrtsNpnnshc|
tattvArthasUtra 7. 16

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  [64] Jain Acharya Pujya Shri Jaymalji Maharaj researched one
hundred and twelve meanings of the word "Chaitya". Linguists speculate that in
ancient times, there was a tradition of planting a tree in memory of a deceased
person at the place where their body was cremated. This practice was prevalent
even outside India. The tree planted at the site of the "chiti" or "chita"
(pyre) came to be known as "Chaitya". Over time, this tradition evolved. Instead
of a tree, a structure was built as a memorial. An image of a worldly deity or
Yaksha was installed in this structure. Thus, it took the form of a temple or a
place of worship. It came to be known as "Chaitya". Gradually, the word
"Chaitya" became synonymous with a general temple. [Upasak Dasangasutra]  One
meaning of "Chaitya" is "knowledge". Another meaning is "Yati" or "Sadhu"
(ascetic). Acharya Kundakunda has used the word "Chaitya" in these meanings in
the "Ast-Prabhrit".  The "abhigraha" (vow) that Anand accepted, which prohibits
bowing or saluting other-sect-adopted "Chaityas" and engaging in conversation
with them, should be understood as referring to those Sadhus who have abandoned
their faith in Jainism and embraced another philosophy, and who have been
accepted by the followers of that other philosophy. Another meaning could be
those Sadhus who have faith in another philosophy but have come to believe in
Jainism, but have not abandoned their previous attire, i.e., they are still
associated with another sect or group through their attire. Both these types of
individuals are not worthy of being saluted by a Shravak (lay follower).
Firstly, they are essentially devoid of Sadhutva (qualities of an ascetic).
Secondly, although they are good from a qualitative perspective, it is not
appropriate to salute them from a behavioral perspective. This has a negative
impact on ordinary Shravaks and increases the risk of "mithyatva" (false
belief).  As mentioned above, the prohibition against bowing, saluting, etc., to
Sadhus of other faiths is primarily from a spiritual or religious perspective.
It is not forbidden to do so as a matter of etiquette, good behavior, etc. In
life, individuals have to perform many social duties, which are based on social
norms or traditions.  59. Therefore, that Sivanandi, being pleased with Anand's
conduct as a Samana (ascetic), was happy, her mind filled with joy, drinking in
the supreme bliss, being overwhelmed with happiness, and with folded hands,
bowing her head, said, "Thus, Sami!" Anand, the Samana, listened to this with
humility.  Anand, the Samana, then addressed the people of Kodumbiyapura,
saying: 1. Jayadhwaj, page 573-76 2. "Buddham Jam Bohanto Appaanam Chedayai
Annam Cha. Panchamahavvaayasuddham Naanamaayam Jaan Chediharam."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64 ] jainAcArya pUjya zrI jayamalajI ma. ne caitya zabda ke eka sau bAraha
arthoM kI gaveSaNA kii| caitya zabda ke sandarbha meM bhASA-vaijJAnikoM kA aisA
anumAna hai ki kisI mRta vyakti ke jalAne ke sthAna para usakI smRti meM eka
vRkSa lagAne kI prAcIna kAla meM paramparA rahI hai  /  bhAratavarSa se bAhara
bhI aisA hotA rahA hai  /  citi yA citA ke sthAna para lagAe jAne ke kAraNa vaha
vRkSa caitya kahA jAne lagA ho| Age calakara yaha paramparA kucha badala gaI  /
vRkSa ke sthAna para smAraka ke rUpa meM makAna banAyA jAne lgaa| usa makAna meM
kisI laukika deva yA yakSa Adi kI pratimA sthApita kI jAne lagI  /  yoM usane
eka devasthAna yA mandira kA rUpa le liyA  /  vaha caitya kahA jAne lgaa| aisA
hote-hote caitya zabda sAmAnya mandiravAcI bhI ho gyaa| [ upAsaka dazAMgasUtra
caitya kA eka artha jJAna bhI hai| eka artha yati yA sAdhu bhI hai| AcArya
kuMdakuMda ne aSTa-prAbhRta meM caitya zabda kA ina arthoM meM prayoga kiyA hai|
anya-yUthika-parigRhIta caityoM ko vaMdana, namaskAra na karane kA, unake sAtha
AlApa - sApa na karane kA jo abhigraha Ananda ne svIkAra kiyA, vahA~ caitya kA
artha una sAdhuoM se liyA jAnA cAhie, jinhoMne jainatva kI AsthA chor3akara para
darzana kI AsthA svIkAra kara lI ho aura para - darzana ke anuyAyiyoM ne unheM
parigRhIta yA svIkAra kara liyA ho  /  eka artha yaha bhI ho sakatA hai, dUsare
darzana meM AsthA rakhane vAle ve sAdhu, jo jainatva kI AsthA meM A gae hoM,
para jinhoMne apanA pUrva veza nahIM chor3A ho, arthAt veza dvArA anya yUtha yA
saMgha se saMbaddha hoN| ye donoM hI zrAvaka ke lie vaMdanIya nahIM hote| pahale
to vastutaH sAdhutvazUnya haiM hI, dUsare - guNAtmaka dRSTi se ThIka haiM, para
vyavahAra kI dRSTi se unheM vaMdana karanA samucita nahIM hotaa| isase sAdhAraNa
zrAvakoM para pratikUla asara hotA hai, mithyAtva bar3hane kI AzaMkA banI rahatI
hai  /  jaisA Upara saMketa kiyA gayA hai, anya matAvalambI sAdhuoM ko vandana,
namana Adi na karane kI bAta mUlataH AdhyAtmika yA dhArmika dRSTi se hai|
ziSTAcAra, sadvyavahAra Adi ke rUpa meM vaisA karanA niSiddha nahIM hai| jIvana
meM vyakti ko sAmAjika dRSTi se bhI aneka kArya karane hote haiM, jinakA AdhAra
sAmAjika mAnyatA yA paramparA hotA hai  /  59. tae NaM sA sivanaMdA bhAriyA
ANaMdeNaM samaNovAsaeNaM evaM vRttA samANA tuTThA jAva cittamANaMdiyA, pIimaNA,
parama- somaNassiyA, harisavasavisappamANahiyayA karayalapariggahiyaM
sirasAvattaM matthae aMjaliM kaTTu 'evaM sAmi' ! tti ANaMdassa samaNovAsagassa
eyamaTThaM viNaeNa paDisuNei  /  tase ANaMde samaNovAsae koDuMbiyapurise
saddAvei, saddAvettA evaM vayAsI- 1. jayadhvaja pRSTha 573-76 2. buddhaM jaM
bohaMto appANaM cedayAI aNNaM ca  /  paMcamahavvayasuddhaM NANamayaM jANa
cediharaM  //

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study: The Story of Ananda  [65] "Quickly, O Devānupiya! Bring the chariot
adorned with fine ornaments, with horses of equal height, with hooves like those
of a lion, with horns of many colors, with a golden necklace and a silver bell
hanging from its neck, with a nose ring made of fine gold thread mixed with a
thin string of silk, with a crest made of blue lotuses, with two young bulls
pulling it, with a net of many jewels and golden bells, with a fine wooden yoke,
straight, excellent and beautiful, and with the best signs. Know that this
chariot is for religious purposes. Bring it quickly, and when you have brought
it, inform me that it is ready."  The servants, hearing these words, were filled
with joy and said, "Yes, Master!" They bowed their heads and listened
attentively. Then, quickly, they brought the chariot adorned with fine
ornaments, and when they had brought it, they informed their master that it was
ready.  Then, the wife of the Shramanopasaka Ananda, Shivananda, bathed,
performed her daily rituals, wore her finest clothes and ornaments, and adorned
herself with auspicious markings. She then went to the city, where she met the
Shramanopasaka Ananda, who was sitting on a chariot adorned with many jewels and
surrounded by a circle of disciples. She bowed to him and offered him her
respects. Then, she sat down at a distance, listening attentively and offering
her respects.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [65 khippAmeva bho! devANuppiyA!
lahukaraNajuttajoiyaM, samakhura-vAlihANa-samalihiyasiMgaehiM
jaMbUNayAmayakalAvajutta-paivisiTThaehiM rayayAmayaghaMTa-suttarajjuga-
varakaMcaNakhaciyanatthapaggahoggahiyaehiM nIluppalaka yAmelaehiM
pavaragoNajuvANaehiM nANAmaNikaNagaghaMTiyAjAlaparigayaM, sujAyajugajutta-
ujjugapasattha-suvira iyanimmiyaM, pavaralakkhaNovaveyaM juttAmeva dhammiyaM
jANapvaraM uvaTThaveha, uvaTThavettA mama eyamANattiyaM pccppinnh| tae NaM te
koDuMbiyapurisA ANaMdeNaM samaNovAsaeNaM evaM vuttA samANA haTTatuTThA 'evaM
sAmi!' tti ANAe viNaeNaM vayaNaM paDisuNeti, paDisuNettA khippAmeva
lahukaraNajuttajoiyaM jAva dhammiyaM jANappavaraM uvaTThavettA tamANattiyaM
pccppinnNti| taeNaM sA sivaNaMdA bhAriyA NhAyA, kayabalikammA, kayakouya-
maMgala-pAyacchittA, suddhappAvesAI maMgallAiM vatthAI pavara parihi yA appamaha
gghAbharaNAlaMki yasarIrA ceDiyAcakkavAlaparikiNNA dhammiyaM jANappavaraM
durUhai, durUhittA vANiyagAmaM nayaraM majjhamajheNaM niggacchai, niggacchitA
jeNeva dUipalAsae ceie teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA dhammiyAo jANappavarAo
paccorUhaiM, paccorUhittA ceDiyAcakkavAlaparikiNNA jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM
mahAvIre, teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA tikkhutto AyAhiNapayAhiNaM karei,
karettA vaMdai, NamaMsai; vaMdittA, NamaMsittA paccAsaNNe NAidUre sussUsamANA
NamaMsamANA abhimuhe viNaeNaM paMjaliyaDA) pjjuvaasi| zramaNopAsaka Ananda ne
jaba apanI patnI zivanandA se aisA kahA to usane hRSTa-tuSTa-atyanta prasanna
hote hue (citta meM Ananda evaM prIti kA anubhava karate hue atIva saumya
mAnasika bhAvoM se yukta tathA harSAtireka se vikasita-hRdaya ho,) hAtha jor3e,
sira ke cAroM ora ghumAe tathA aMjali bAMdhe, 'svAmI aisA hI arthAt ApakA
kathana svIkAra hai,' yoM AdarapUrNa zabdoM se pati ko sambodhita-pratyuttarita
karate hue apane pati Ananda kA kathana svIkRtipUrNa bhAva se vinayapUrvaka
sunaa| taba zramaNopAsaka Ananda ne apane sevakoM ko balAyA aura kahA-teja
calane vAle, eka jaise khara, paMcha tathA aneka raMgoM se citrita sIMgavAle,
gale meM sone ke gahane aura jota dhAraNa kiye, gale se laTakatI cAMdI kI
ghaMTiyoM sahita nAka meM uttama sone ke tAroM se mizrita patalI-sI sUta kI
nAtha se jur3I rAsa ke sahAre vAhakoM dvArA samhAle hue, nIle kamaloM se banI
kalaMgI se yukta mastaka vAle, do yuvA bailoM dvArA khIMce jAte, aneka prakAra
kI maNiyoM aura sone kI bahuta sI ghaMTiyoM se yukta, bar3hiyA lakar3I ke
ekadama sIdhe, uttama aura sundara bane jue sahita, zreSTha lakSaNoM se yukta
dhArmika kAryo meM upabhoga meM Ane vAlA yAnapravara-zreSTha ratha zIghra hI
upasthita karoM, upasthita karake merI yaha AjJA vApisa karo arthAt AjJAnusAra
kArya ho jAne kI sUcanA do| zramaNopAsaka Ananda dvArA yoM kahe jAne para
sevakoM ne atyanta prasanna hote hue vinayapUrvaka

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[66] The Upasakadasangasutra, having received the command of its master, was
presented like a chariot of great merit, drawn by swift oxen, for which an order
had been given. Shivananda, the wife of Ananda, bathed, performed her daily
rituals, applied kohl to her eyes for the sake of beauty, adorned her forehead
with a tilak, performed auspicious rites with sandalwood, saffron, yogurt, and
rice grains to remove sins, bad dreams, and other blemishes, wore pure, fine,
auspicious garments, and adorned her body with a few, but precious, ornaments.
Surrounded by a group of maidservants, she mounted the chariot of great merit.
Having mounted, she came to the city of Vanijyagrama, to the place where the
Duutipalasha Chaitya was located, and dismounted from the chariot of great
merit. Having dismounted, surrounded by a group of maidservants, she went to
where the Lord Mahavira was seated. Going there, she circumambulated three
times, paid homage and prostrated, stood facing the Lord, neither too close nor
too far, bowed her head, with a desire to listen, folded her hands in humility,
and began to pay homage. 60. Then the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira preached the
Dharma to Shivananda and the assembled congregation (group of people). 61. Then
Shivananda, having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, and
having held it in her heart, became extremely happy. She accepted the
householder's Dharma (Shravak Dharma). Having accepted it, she mounted the same
chariot of great merit, and having mounted, she went in the same direction from
which she had come. The future of Ananda 62. "Bhanta!" said Gotama, bowing and
prostrating to the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira. Having bowed and prostrated, he
said, "Bhanta! How long will Ananda remain in the Shraman's abode, until he
attains the state of a Deva (god)?" "Gotama," said the Shraman, "Ananda will
remain in the Shraman's abode for a long time, and will attain the state of a
Shraman's abode. Having attained it, he will (for eleven years, he will fast for
a month, cleanse himself, and abstain from food for a period of time, and will
attain the state of Samadhi, and will remain in that state for a period of time)
in the Sohamme Kalpa, in the Arunaabha Vimana, he will be reborn as a Deva
(god). There, he will not... 1. See Sutra number 11. 2. See Sutra number 12. 3.
See Sutra number 12.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra apane svAmI kI AjJA zirodhArya kI aura jaise
zIghragAmI bailoM se yukta yAvat dhArmika uttama ratha ke lie Adeza diyA gayA
thA, upasthita kiyaa| Ananda kI patnI zivanandA ne snAna kiyA, nitya-naimittika
kArya kiye, kautukadehasajjA kI dRSTi se AMkhoM meM kAjala AMjA, lalATa para
tilaka lagAyA, prAyazcitta-duHsvaprAdi doSa-nivAraNa hetu candana, kuMkuma,
dadhi, akSata Adi se maMgala-vidhAna kiyA, zuddha, uttama, mAMgalika vastra
pahane, thor3e se-saMkhyA meM kama para bahumUlya AbhUSaNoM se deha ko alaMkRta
kiyaa| dAsiyoM ke samUha se ghirI vaha dhArmika uttama ratha para savAra hii|
savAra hokara vANijyagrAma nagara ke bIca se gajarI, jahA~ dUtIpalAza caitya
thA, vahA~ AI, Akara dhArmika uttama ratha se nIce utarI, nIce utara kara
dAsiyoM ke samUha se ghirI vahA~ gaI jahA~ bhagavAn mahAvIra virAjita the|
jAkara tIna bAra AdakSiNa-pradakSiNA kI, vandana namaskAra kiyA, bhagavAn ke na
adhika nikaTa, na adhika dUra sammukha avasthita ho, namana karatI huI, sunane
kI utkaMThA lie, vinayapUrvaka hAtha jor3e, paryupAsanA karane lgii| 60. tae NaM
samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre sivanaMdAe tIse ya mahai jAva' dhammaM khei| taba
zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra ne zivanandA ko tathA upasthita pariSad (jana-samUha)
ko dharmadezanA dii| 61. tae NaM sA sivanaMdA samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa
aMtie dhamma soccA nisamma haTTa jAva' gihidhamma paDivajjai, paDivajjittA
tameva dhammiyaM jANappavaraM durUhai durUhittA jAmeva disaM pAubbhUyA tAmeva
disaM pddigyaa| taba zivanandA zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra se dharma sunakara
tathA use hRdaya meM dhAraNa karake atyanta prasanna huii| usane gRhi-dharma
zrAvakadharma svIkAra kiyA, svIkAra kara vaha usI dhArmika uttama ratha para
savAra huI, savAra hokara jisa dizA se AI thI, usI dizA kI ora calI gii| Ananda
kA bhaviSya 62. bhaMte! tti bhagavaM goyame samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai
namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsIpahU NaM bhaMte! ANaMde samaNovAsae
devANuppiyANaM aMtie muMDe jAva pavvaittae? no tiNaDhe samaDhe, goyamA! ANaMde
NaM samaNovAsae bahUI vAsAiM samaNovAsagapariyAyaM pAuNihii, pAuNittA jAva (
ekkArasa ya uvAsagapaDimAoM sammaM kAraNaM phAsittA mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe attANaM
jhUsittA, sarddhi bhattAiM aNasaNAe chedettA, AloiyapaDikaMte samAhipatte
kAlamAse kAlaM kiccA) sohamme kappe arUNAbhe vimANe devattAe uvvjihii| tattha Na
1. dekheM sUtrasaMkhyA 11  /  2. dekheM sUtrasaMkhyA 12 /  3. dekheM
sUtrasaMkhyA 12  /

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: The Story of Ananda  [67. There are four parables established
for the gods who have attained liberation, and there are four parables
established for the happiness of the monk and the attainment of liberation.
Gautama asked the Lord Mahavira, "Bhanta! Is the monk Ananda capable of becoming
a monk and a renunciate?" The Lord said, "Gautama! This is not possible. The
monk Ananda will follow the path of the Shramanopasaka, the Shravaka, and the
Dharma for many years (he will diligently follow the eleven virtues of the
Upasaka, ultimately he will perform a one-month Sanlekhana and sixty meals - a
one-month fast, he will perform Alochana Pratikramana - criticism of known and
unknown faults, and he will leave his body in a state of Samadhi at the
appropriate time). He will be born as a god in the Saudharma-kalpa, in the
Saudharma devlok, in the Arunabha vimana. There, the lifespan of many gods is
four Palyopama (a specific measure of time). The lifespan of the monk Ananda
will also be four Palyopama. Discussion The word 'Palyopama' used here is a
special, very long period of time. It is used extensively in Jain literature. In
the present Agam, it is used to indicate the celestial lifespan of the Shravakas
in each study. The meaning of Paly or Pall is a well or a very large storehouse
of grain. Because of the calculation of time based on it or its comparison, this
period of time is called 'Palyopama'. There are three types of Palyopama: 1.
Uddhar-Palyopama, 2. Adha-Palyopama, 3. Kshetra-Palyopama. Imagine an Uddhar-
Palyopama, a large storehouse of grain or a well that is one yojana (four kos)
long, one yojana wide, and one yojana deep. Take the very small pieces of hair
of a newborn yogalic child who is seven days old, and fill that storehouse or
well tightly with them. The filling should be so dense that fire cannot burn it,
the army of a Chakravarti can pass over it without a single particle moving, and
the flow of the Ganges can pass over it without any effect. From this filled
well, one hair-piece is taken out at a time. The amount of time it takes to
empty the well is called Uddhar-Palyopama. Uddhar means to take out. Because of
the taking out or removal of hair, it is called Uddhar-Palyopama. This is
considered a numerical measure of time. There are two types of Uddhar-Palyopama:
subtle and practical. The above description is of the practical Uddhar-
Palyopama. The subtle Uddhar-Palyopama is as follows: In the practical Uddhar-
Palyopama, the hair of the yogalic child that was used to fill the well, each
piece is divided into countless invisible parts. From these subtle parts, the
previously mentioned well... ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [67 atthegaiyANaM devANaM cattAri
paliovamAiM ThiI paNNattA, tattha NaM ANaMdassa vi samaNovAsagassa cattAri
paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| gautama ne bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vandananamaskAra
kiyA aura pUchA-bhante! kyA zramaNopAsaka Ananda devAnupriya ke-Apake pAsa
muMDita evaM parivrajita hone meM samartha hai? bhagavAn ne kahA-gautama ! aisA
saMbhava nahIM hai| zramaNopAsaka Ananda bahuta varSoM taka
zramaNopAsakaparyAya-zrAvaka-dharma kA pAlana karegA (upAsaka kI gyAraha
pratimAoM kA bhalI-bhAMti sparza-anupAlana karegA, antataH eka mAsa kI
saMlekhanA evaM sATha bhojana kA-eka mAsa kA anazana ArAdhita kara AlocanA
pratikramaNa-jJAta-ajJAta rUpa meM Acarita doSoM kI AlocanA kara samAdhipUrvaka
yathAsamaya deha-tyAga kregaa|) vaha saudharma-kalpa meMsaudharma nAmaka
devaloka meM arUNAbha nAmaka vimAna meM deva ke rUpa meM utpanna hogaa| vahAM
aneka devoM kI Ayu-sthiti cAra palyopama (kAla kA parimANa vizeSa) kI hotI hai|
zramaNopAsaka Ananda kI bhI Ayu-sthiti cAra palyopama kI hogii| vivecana yahA~
prayukta 'palyopama' zabda eka vizeSa, ati dIrgha kAla kA dyotaka hai| jaina
vAGamaya meM isakA bahulatA se prayoga huA hai| prastuta Agama meM pratyeka
adhyayana meM zrAvakoM kI svargika kAla sthiti kA sUcana karane ke lie isakA
prayoga huA hai| palya yA palla kA artha kuA yA anAja kA bahuta bar3A koThA hai|
usake AdhAra para yA usakI upamA se kAla-gaNanA kI jAne ke kAraNa yaha kAlAvadhi
'palyopama' kahI jAtI hai| palyopama ke tIna bheda hai1. uddhAra-palyopama, 2.
addhA-palyopama, 3. kSetra-palyopama  /  uddhArapalyopamakalpanA kareM, eka aisA
anAja kA bar3A koThA yA kuA~ ho, jo eka yojana (cAra kosa) lambA, eka yojana
caur3A aura eka yojana gaharA ho| eka dina se sAta dina kI Ayu vAle navajAta
yaugalika zizu ke bAloM ke atyanta choTe Tukar3e kie jAeM, unase DhUMsa-TUMsa
kara usa koThe yA kueM ko acchI taraha dabA-dabA kara bharA jaay| bharAva itanA
saghana ho ki agni unheM jalA na sake, cakravartI kI senA una para se nikala
jAya to eka bhI kaNa idhara se udhara na ho sake, gaMgA kA pravAha baha jAya to
una para kucha asara na ho ske| yoM bhare hue kueM meM se eka-eka samaya meM
eka-eka bAla-khaMDa nikAlA jaay| yoM nikAlate-nikAlate jitane kAla meM vaha kuA~
khAlI ho, usa kAla-parimANa ko uddhArapalyopama kahA jAtA hai| uddhAra kA artha
nikAlanA hai| bAloM ke uddhAra yA nikAle jAne ke AdhAra para isakI saMjJA
uddhAra palyopama hai| yaha saMkhyAta samaya-pramANa mAnA jAtA hai| uddhAra
palyopama ke do bheda haisUkSma evaM vyaavhaarik| uparyukta varNana vyAvahArika
uddhArapalyopama kA hai  /  sUkSma uddhAra-palyopama isa prakAra hai vyAvahArika
uddhAra-palyopama meM kueM ko bharane meM yaugaliga zizu ke bAloM kI jo carcA AI
hai, unameM se pratyeka Tukar3e ke asaMkhyAta adRzya khaMDa kie jaaeN| una
sUkSma khaMDoM se pUrva-varNita kuA~

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[68] The **Upasakadasangasutra** is filled to the brim, like a well. When it is
filled, one section is removed from the well at a time. The time it takes for
the well to become completely empty is called the **Sukshma Uddharapalyopam**.
This time period is considered to be a countless number of years.  **Adha-
palyopam** is a local term that means time. The **palyopam** mentioned in the
context of the Agam refers to this **Adha-palyopam**. Its calculation is as
follows: A well filled with strands of hair from a **Yogalik** (a being with a
lifespan of countless years) is emptied one strand at a time every hundred
years. The time it takes for the well to become completely empty is called
**Adha-palyopam**. This time period is considered to be a countless number of
years.  **Adha-palyopam** is of two types: **Sukshma** and **Vyavaharik**. The
one described here is the **Vyavaharik Adha-palyopam**. Just as in the **Sukshma
Uddhar-palyopam**, where countless invisible strands of hair from a **Yogalik**
infant are considered, similarly, here too, the well is filled with countless
invisible strands of hair. One strand is removed every hundred years. The time
it takes for the well to become completely empty is considered to be a countless
number of years.  **Kshetra-palyopam**: Even when the well or the large heap of
wealth is filled with strands of hair from a **Yogalik**, there are still spaces
of air between the strands. No matter how small the strands are, they are still
material, while air is immaterial. It is difficult to imagine these spaces of
air between the strands in a gross way, but it is possible to understand it
through a subtle perspective. This can be understood through an example: Imagine
a large granary filled with gourds. It appears to be full, with no space left.
However, if lemons are added, they can fit in because there is space between the
gourds. Even after filling it with lemons, there is still subtle space left,
which is not visible from the outside. If mustard seeds are added, they can also
fit in. Even after filling it with mustard seeds, there is still subtle space
left. If river sand is added, it can also fit in.  Another example is a wall. A
plastered wall appears to have no space, but we can still drive nails and pegs
into it. If there were truly no space in the wall, this would not be possible.
There is space in the wall, but it is not visible in a gross way.  The space
between the strands of hair from a **Yogalik** mentioned in the context of
**Kshetra-palyopam** can be understood in the same way. Imagine removing each of
these spaces of air that touch the strands of hair from a **Yogalik** one at a
time. The time it takes for all the spaces of air to be removed and the well to
become completely empty is called **Kshetra-palyopam**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 68] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra DhUMsa-ThUsa kara bharA jaay| vaisA kara liye jAne
para pratisamaya eka-eka khaMDa kueM meM se nikAlA jAya, yo karate-karate jitane
kAla meM vaha kuA~, bilakula khAlI ho jAya, usa kAla-avadhi ko sUkSma
uddhArapalyopama kahA jAtA hai| isameM saMkhyAta-varSa-koTi parimANa-kAla mAnA
jAtA hai| addhA-palyopamaaddhA dezI zabda hai, jisakA artha kAla yA samaya hai|
Agama ke prastuta prasaMga meM jo palyopama kA jikra AyA hai, usakA Azaya isI
palyopama se hai| isakI gaNanA kA krama isa prakAra haiyaugalika ke bAloM ke
Tukar3oM se bhare hue kueM meM se sau-sau varSa meM eka-eka Tukar3A nikAlA jaay|
isa prakAra nikAlate-nikAlate jitane kAla meM vaha kuA~ bilakula khAlI ho jAya,
usa kAlAvadhi ko addhA-palyopama kahA jAtA hai| isakA parimANa saMkhyAta
varSakoTi hai| _addhA-palyopama bhI do prakAra kA hotA hai-sUkSma aura
vyaavhaarik| yahAM jo varNana kiyA gayA hai, vaha vyAvahArika addhA-palyopama kA
hai| jisa prakAra sUkSma uddhAra-palyopama meM yaugalika zizu ke bAloM ke
Tukar3oM ke asaMkhyAta adRzya khaMDa kie jAne kI bAta hai, tatsadRza yahAM bhI
vaise hI asaMkhyAta adRzya keza-khaMr3oM se vaha kuA~ bharA jaay| prati sau
varSa meM eka khaMDa nikAlA jaae| yoM nikAlate nikAlate jaba kuA~ bilakula khAlI
ho jAya, vaisA hone meM jitanA kAla lage, vaha sUkSma addhApalyopama koTI meM
AtA hai| isakA kAla-parimANa asaMkhyAta varSakoTi mAnA gayA hai| kSetra-
palyopamaUpara jisa kueM yA dhana ke vizAla loThe kI carcA hai, yaugalika ke
bAlakhaMDoM se uparyukta rUpa meM dabA-dabA kara bhara diye jAne para bhI una
khaMDoM ke bIca meM AkAza-pradezarikta sthAna raha jAte haiN| ve khaMDa cAhe
kitane hI choTe hoM, Akhira ve rUpI yA mUrta haiM, AkAza arUpI yA amUrta hai|
sthUla rUpa meM una khaMDoM ke bIca rahe AkAza-pradezoM kI kalpanA nahIM kA jA
sakatI, para sUkSmatA se socane para vaisA nahIM hai| ise eka sthUla udAharaNa
se samajhA jA sakatA haikalpanA kareM, anAja ke eka bahuta bar3e koThe ko
kUSmAMDoM kumhar3oM se bhara diyA gyaa| sAmAnyataH dekhane meM lagatA hai, vaha
koThA bharA huA hai, usameM koI sthAna khAlI nahIM hai, para yadi usameM nIMbU
aura bhare jAe to ve acchI taraha samA sakate haiN| kyoMki saTe hue kumhaDoM ke
bIca meM sthAna khAlI jo hai| yoM nIMbuoM se bhare jAne para bhI sUkSma rUpa meM
aura khAlI sthAna raha jAtA hai, bAhara se vaisA lagatA nhiiN| yadi usa koThe
meM sarasoM bharanA cAheM to ve bhI samA jAeM  /  sarasoM bharane para bhI
sUkSma rUpa meM aura sthAna khAlI rahatA hai| yadi nadI ke rajaHkaNa usameM
bhare jAeM, to ve bhI samA sakate haiN| dUsarA udAharaNa dIvAla kA hai| cunI huI
dIvAla meM hameM koI khAlI sthAna pratIta nahIM hotA para usameM hama aneka
khUTiyA~, kIleM gAr3a sakate haiN| yadi vAstava meM dIvAla meM sthAna khAlI nahI
hotA to yaha kabhI saMbhava nahIM thaa| dIvAla meM sthAna khAlI hai, moTe rUpa
meM hameM mAlUma nahIM pdd'taa| astu| kSetra-palyopama kI carcA ke antargata
yaugalika ke bAloM ke khaMDoM ke bIca-bIca meM jo AkAza-pradeza hone kI bAta
hai, use bhI isI dRSTi se samajhA jA sakatA hai| yogalika ke bAloM ke khaMDoM ko
saMspRSTa karane vAle AkAza-pradezoM meM se pratyeka ko pratisamaya nikAlane kI
kalpanA kI jaay| yoM nikAlate-nikAlate jaba sabhI AkAza-pradeza nikAla liye
jAeM, kuA~ bilakula khAlI ho jAya, vaisA

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Study: Ganapati Ananda] The duration of 69 moments is called a kshetra-
paryapta. Its time duration is of an innumerable uttsarpini-avasarpini. Kshetra-
paryapta is of two types: vyavaharika (practical) and suksma (subtle). The above
discussion is about the vyavaharika kshetra-paryapta. The suksma-kshetra-
paryapta is as follows: If one imagines taking out one space-point at a time
from all the space-points touched and untouched by the hair-fragments in a well,
and continues doing so until the well becomes completely empty of all space-
points, the duration of this process is called the suksma-kshetra-paryapta. Its
time duration is also of an innumerable uttsarpini-avasarpini. The duration of
the suksma-kshetra-paryapta is innumerable times greater than that of the
vyavaharika kshetra-paryapta. The Anuyogadvara Sutra (138-140) and the
Pravachanasaroddhara-dvara (148) discuss the details of the paryapta. 63. Then
the ascetic Lord Mahavira left the Vanijjagama city and the Dutippalasa caitya
and started wandering in other regions. 64. Then the upasaka Ananda, who had
thoroughly understood the nature of jiva and ajiva, who was well-versed in the
knowledge of merit and demerit, of influx, restraint, dissociation, and the
means to achieve them, of bondage and liberation, who was self-reliant and did
not depend on others, who was praised by the devas, asuras, nagas, suparna,
yakshas, rakshasas, kinnaras, kimpurushas, garudas, gandharvas, mahoragas and
other celestial beings for his unbreakable Jain vows, who was firm, unwavering,
and content in his Jain vows, who had attained the state of steadfastness, who
was revered, questioned, approached, examined, and whose love and affection were
firmly established, started living, obtaining his food, drink, chewables, and
edibles through begging, and using clothes, blankets, and footwear as alms, and
medicines as requisites, and resting on low stools and beds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [69 hone meM jitanA kAla lage, use
kSetra-palyopama kahA jAtA hai  /  isakA kAla-parimANa asaMkhyAta
utsarpiNIavasarpiNI hai| kSetra-palyopama do prakAra kA haivyAvahArika evaM
sUkSma  /  uparyukta vivecana vyAvahArika kSetrapalyopama kA hai| sUkSma-kSetra-
palyopama isa prakAra hai :-kueM meM bhare yaugalika ke kezakhaMDoM se spRSTa
tathA aspRSTa sabhI AkAza-pradezoM meM se eka-eka samaya meM eka-eka pradeza
nikAlane kI yadi kalpanA kI jAya tathA yoM nikAlate-nikAlate jitane kAla meM
vaha kuA~ samagra AkAza-pradezoM se rikta ho jAya, vaha kAlaparimANa sUkSma-
kSetra-palyopama hai| isakA bhI kAla-parimANa asaMkhyAta utsarpiNI-avasarpiNI
hai| vyAvahArika kSetra-palyopama se isakA kAla asaMkhyAta gunA adhika hotA hai|
anuyogadvAra sUtra 138-140 tathA pravacana-sAroddhAradvAra 148 meM palyopama kA
vistAra se vivecana hai| 63. tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre annayA kayAi
bahiyA jAva (vANiyagAmAo nayarAo dUipalAsAo ceiyAo paDiNikkhamai,
paDiNikkhamittA bahiyA jaNavayavihAraM) vihri| tadantara zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra vANijyagrAma nagara ke dUtIpalAza caitya se prasthAna kara eka dina
kisI samaya anya janapadoM meM vihAra kara ge| 64. tae NaM se ANaMde samaNovAsae
jAe abhigayajIvAjIve jAva (uvaladdhapuNNapAve Asava-
saMvaranijarakiriyAahigaraNabaMdhamokkhaku sale, asahe je,
devAsuraNAgasuvaNNajakkharakkhasakiNNara kiMpurisagarUlagaMdhavvamahoragAiehiM
devagaNehiM niggaMthAo pAvayaNAo aNaikkamaNijje, niggaMthe pAvayaNe NissaMkie,
NikaMkhie, nivvitigicche, laddhaDhe, gahiyaTe, pucchiyaTe, abhigayaDhe,
viNicchiyaTe, aTThimiMjapemANurAgaratte, ayamAuso! niggaMthe pAvayaNe adve, ayaM
paramaTe; sese aNadve, Usiyaphalihe, avaMguyaduvAre,
ciyattaMteuraparagharadArappavese cAuddasaTThamuddipuNNamAsiNIsu paDipuNNaM
posahaM samma aNupAlettA samaNe niggaMthe phAsu esaNijjeNaM
asaNapANakhAimasAimeNaM vatthapaDiggahakaMbalapAyapuMchaNeNaM osahabhesajjeNaM
pADihArieNa ya pIDhaphalagasejjAsaMthAraeNaM) paDilAbhemANe vihri| taba Ananda
zramaNopAsaka ho gyaa| jisane jIva, ajIva Adi padArthoM ke svarUpa ko acchI
taraha samajha liyA thA, [puNya aura pApa kA bheda jAna liyA thA, Astrava,
saMvara, nirjarA, kriyA, adhikaraNajisake AdhAra se kriyA kI jAe, bandha evaM
mokSa ko jo bhalI-bhAMti avagata kara cukA thA, jo kisI dUsare kI sahAyatA kA
anicchukaAtmanirbhara thA, jo deva, asura, nAga, suparNa, yakSa, rAkSasa,
kinnara, kiMpurUSa, garUr3a, gandharva, mahoraga Adi devatAoM dvArA nirgrantha-
pravacana anatikramaNIya

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
70] [Upasakadasangasutra He was not to be swayed, unshaken in the Nirgrantha
discourse, free from doubt, without any desire other than self-elevation, free
from hesitation and doubt, having attained the true essence of the acquired
Dharma, having accepted it, having established it through inquiry or
questioning, having made it his own, having definitively assimilated it, and
filled with love and devotion for Dharma to the very bone and marrow. He had the
firm conviction that this Nirgrantha discourse was the essence and purpose, the
ultimate truth, and everything else was meaningless and purposeless. 'Usi-
phalihe' refers to a raised platform, with doors that were always open for the
virtuous. 'Avangu duvare' means open doors, signifying that his doors were
always open for charity. 'Chiyatt' means that he had renounced entering the
inner chambers and outer houses of others, or that he was so trustworthy that
even his entry into inner chambers and outer houses was pleasing and did not
arouse suspicion. He was living a righteous life, observing the [joyful]
nourishing fasts on the fourteenth, eighth, new moon, and full moon days,
providing the Shraman Nirgranthas with 'prasauk' - inanimate or lifeless,
'eshniya' - acceptable to them, blameless food, drink, edibles, palatable food,
clothes, vessels, blankets, foot-wear, medicine, remedies, 'pratiharik' - things
to be returned, cloth, 'bajot' - a type of cloth, lodging, grass for bedding,
etc.]  65. Tae nan sa siva-nanda bhariya samanovasia jaya java' padhila bhemani
viharai. Shivananda, the wife of Ananda, became a Shramanopasika. She lived a
righteous life, [having attained true knowledge, providing the Shraman
Nirgranthas with 'prasauk' and 'eshniya' things].  66. Tae nan anandasy
samanovasagass uccava-ehim silavva-yaguna-veraman-pacchakkhana-posaho-vavasehim
appaanam bhavemanasss coddasa samvaccharain vaikkantanai. Panna-rasamass
samvaccharass antara vattamanasss annaya kayahi puvvaratta-avarattakala-
samayansi dhamma-jagariyam jagaramanasss imeyaruve ajjhatthie, cintie, patthie,
manogae sankappe samuppajjiththa - evam khalu aham vaniyagame nayare bahunam
raisar java' san-yass vi nan kudumbass java (medhi, pamanam, ) adhare, tan ae-
enan vakkhevenam aham no sanchaami samanasss bhagava-o mahavirass antiyam
dhamma-pannatti- uvasampadjitanam viharitte. Tan seyam khalu mama-m kallan java
(pa-upphabayae rayanie full-uppalakamal-komal-ummi-liy-ammi aham pandure pahae
ratta-sogappa-gas-kinsu-y-suy-muh-gunjaddhara-gasari-se, kamala-agarasandabohae,
utthi-yammi sure sahasra-rassi-mmi dinayare teyasa) jalate viulan asan-paan-kha-
imasa-im-an jaha purano, java (uvakkha-davetta, mitta-nai-niyagasana- sambandhi-
parijanam amantetta, tan mitta-nai-niyam-sayana- sambandhi-parijanam viulena-m
1. See Sutra - number 64. 2. See Sutra - number 5.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 70 ] [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra na vicalita kiye jAne yogya thA, nigrantha pravacana
meM jo niHzaMka - zaMkA rahita, niSkAMkSaAtmotthAna ke sivAya anya AkAMkSA-
rahita, vicikitsA saMzaya rahita, labdhArtha dharma ke yathArtha tattva ko
prApta kiye hue, gRhItArtha use grahaNa kiye hue, pRSTArtha jijJAsA yA prazna
dvArA use sthira kiye hue, abhigatArthasvAyatta kiye hue, vinizcitArtha nizcita
rUpa se AtmasAt kie hue thA evaM jo asthi aura majjA paryanta dharma ke prati
prema va anurAga se bharA thA, jisakA yaha nizcita vizvAsa thA ki yaha
nirgrantha pravacana hI artha- prayojanabhUta hai, yahI paramArtha hai, isake
sivAya anya anartha - aprayojanabhUta haiM  /  'Usiya-phalihe ' uThI huI argalA
hai jisakI, aise dvAra vAlA arthAt sajjanoM ke liye usake dvAra sadA khule
rahate the  /  avaMgu duvAre - khule dvAra vAlA arthAt dAna ke lie usake dvAra
sadA khule rahate the  /  ciyatta kA artha hai unhoMne kisI ke antaHpura aura
para-ghara meM praveza ko tyAga diyA thA athavA vaha itanA prAmANika thA ki
usakA anta: pura meM aura paraghara meM praveza bhI prIti- janaka thA, avizvAsa
utpanna karane vAlA nahIM thA  /  caturdazI, aSTamI, amAvasyA tathA pUrNimA ko
jo [Ananda ] paripUrNa poSadha kA acchI taraha anupAlana karatA huA, zramaNa
nirgranthoM ko prAsuka acitta yA nirjIva, eSaNIya- una dvArA svIkAra karane
yogya nirdoSa, azana, pAna, khAdya, svAdya AhAra, vastra, pAtra, kambala, pAda -
proJchana, auSadha, bheSaja, prAtihArika-lekara vApasa lauTA dene yogya vastu,
pATa, bAjoTa, Thaharane kA sthAna, bichAne ke lie ghAsa Adi dvArA zramaNa
nirgranthoM ko pratilAbhita karatA huA ] dhArmika jIvana jI rahA thA  /  65. tae
NaM sA sivanaMdA bhAriyA samaNovAsiyA jAyA jAva' paDilA bhemANI viharai  /
Ananda kI patnI zivanandA zramaNopAsikA ho gaI  /  yAvat [ jise tattvajJAna
prApta thA, zramaNanirgranthoM ko prAsuka aura eSaNIya padArthoM dvArA
pratilAbhita karatI huI ] dhArmika jIvana jIne lgiiN| 66. tae NaM ANaMdasya
samaNovAsagassa uccAvaehiM sIlavvayaguNaveramaNapaccakkhANa-posahovavAsehiM
appANaM bhAvemANassa coddasa saMvaccharAiM vaikkaMtAiM  /  paNNarasamassa
saMvaccharassa aMtarA vaTTamANassa annayA kayAi puvvarattAvarattakAlasamayaMsi
dhammajAgariyaM jAgaramANassa imeyArUve ajjhatthie, ciMtie, patthie, maNogae
saMkappe samuppajjitthA evaM khalu ahaM vANiyagAme nayare bahUNaM rAIsara jAva'
saMyassa vi ya NaM kuDuMbassa jAva (meDhI, pamANaM, ) AdhAre, taM eeNaM
vakkheveNaM ahaM no saMcAemi samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM dhamma-
paNNattiM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharittae  /  taM seyaM khalu mamaM kallaM jAva (
pAuppabhAyAe rayaNIe phulluppalakamalakomalummiliyammi aha paMDure pahAe
rattAsogappagAsa- kiMsuya-suyamuhaguMjaddharAgasarise, kamalAgarasaMDabohae,
uTThiyammi sUre sahassarassimmi diNayare teyasA ) jalate viulaM
asaNapANakhAimasAimaM jahA pUraNo, jAva ( uvakkhaDAvettA, mitta-nAi -
niyagasaNa-saMbaMdhi-parijaNaM AmaMtettA, taM mitta-nAi - niyama- sayaNa-
saMbaMdhi-parijaNaM viuleNaM 1. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 64  /  2. dekheM sUtra-
saMkhyA 5 /

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study: The Story of Ananda  He who would honor and respect with food,
drink, and adornments of fragrant flowers and garlands, would place his eldest
son in charge of his family, friends, relatives, and servants, and would then,
after informing his friends, relatives, and servants, go to the assembly of the
Kolla people and stay in the Posahasala, having received the Dharma-Pannatti
from the Bhagavan Mahavira. Thus, he would fulfill his obligations. He would
fulfill his obligations, just as a large field is filled with flowers, and he
would honor and respect with fragrant flowers and garlands. Having honored and
respected, he would place his eldest son in charge of his family, friends,
relatives, and servants, and would then say to his son, "My son, I have many
things to do in the city of Vanijyagrama, and I am not able to follow the
Dharma-Pannatti of the Bhagavan Mahavira. Therefore, I am leaving you in charge
of the family, and I will go to the assembly of the Kolla people and stay in the
Posahasala, having received the Dharma-Pannatti from the Bhagavan Mahavira."
After that, the Shramanopasaka Ananda spent fourteen years cultivating his soul
through various vows, virtues, restraints, renunciations, and fasts. When half
of the fifteenth year had passed, one night after midnight, while engaged in
Dharma-Jagaran, Ananda had a thought, a desire, a feeling, or a resolve: "In the
city of Vanijyagrama, there are many Mandalik Narapatis, wealthy and influential
men, and I have many things to ask them and seek their advice. I am the [head,
leader, and] support of my entire family. Because of these distractions and
obstacles, I am not able to fully follow the Dharma-Pannatti, the Dharma-
teaching, that I have received from the Bhagavan Mahavira. Therefore, it is best
for me to [wait until tomorrow morning, when the blue and other lotuses have
blossomed in their beautiful forms, when the sun has risen, illuminating the
world with its brilliance, and the red Ashoka, Kinshuku, parrot's beak, and
half-Dhungachi-colored red glow has awakened the lotus forest, and the sun, with
its thousand rays, has risen, illuminating the world with its brilliance],
prepare a large amount of food, drink, and delicacies, and invite my friends,
relatives, family members, and servants to eat. I will honor and respect them
with clothes, fragrant substances, garlands, and ornaments, and I will place my
eldest son in charge of the family, friends, relatives, and servants."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] asaNa-pANa-khAima-sAimeNaM
vatthagaMdhamallAlaMkAreNa ya sakkArettA, sammANettA, tasseva
mittanAiniyagasayaNasaMbaMdhi-parijaNassa purao) jeTTa-puttaM kuDuMbe ThavettA,
taM mitta jAva (nAiniyagasayaNasaMbaMdhiparijaNaM )jeThThaputtaM ca ApucchittA,
kollAe sannivese nAyakulaMsi posahasAlaM paDilehittA, samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM dhamma-paNNattiM uvasaMpajjittANaM vihritte| evaM saMpehei,
saMpehettA kallaM viulaM taheva jimiya-bhuttuttarAgae taM mitta jAva' viuleNaM
puSphavatthagaMdhamallAlaMkAreNa ya sakkArei, sammANei, sakkArittA, sammANittA
tasseva mitta jAva (nAiniyagasayaNasaMbaMdhiparijaNassa) purao jeThThaputtaM
saddAvei, saddAvittA evaM vayAsIevaM khalu puttA! ahaM vANiyagAme bahUNaM
rAIsara jahA ciMtiyaM jAva (eeNaM vakkheveNaM ahaM no saMcAemi samaNassa
bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM dhamma-paNNattiM uvasaMpajittANaM) vihritte| taM
seyaM khalu mama idANiM tumaM sayassa kuDumbassa meDhI, pamANaM, AhAre,
AlaMbaNaM ThavettA jAva (taM mitta-nADa-niyaga-sayaNa-saMbaMdhi-parijaNaM tumaM
ca ApucchittA kollAe sannivese nAyakulaMsi posahasAlaM paDilehittA, samaNassa
bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM dhammapaNNattiM uvasaMpajittANaM) vihritte| .
tadantara zramaNopAsaka Ananda ko anekavidha zIlavrata, guNavrata,
viramaNavirati, pratyAkhyAnatyAga, poSadhopavAsa Adi dvArA Atma-bhAvita hote
hueAtmA kA pariSkAra aura parimArjana karate hue caudaha varSa vyatIta ho ge|
jaba pandrahavAM varSa AdhA vyatIta ho cukA thA, eka dina AdhI rAta ke bAda
dharma-jAgaraNa karate hue Ananda ke mana meM aisA antarbhAvacintana, Antarika
mAMga, manobhAva yA saMkalpa utpanna huA-vANijyagrAma nagara meM bahuta se
mAMDalika narapati, aizvaryazAlI evaM prabhAvazIla purUSa Adi ke aneka kAryoM
meM maiM pUchane yogya evaM salAha lene yogya hUM, apane sAre kuTumba kA maiM
[meDhi , pramANa tathA] AdhAra huuN| isa vyAkSepa-kAryabahulatA yA rUkAvaTa ke
kAraNa maiM zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa aMgIkRta dharma-prajJapti-dharma-
zikSA ke anurUpa AcAra kA samyak paripAlana nahIM kara pA rahA huuN| isalie mere
lie yahI zreyaskara hai, maiM kala [rAta bIta jAne para, prabhAta ho jAne para,
nIle tathA anya kamaloM ke suhAvane rUpa meM khila jAne para, ujjavala prabhA
evaM lAla azoka, kiMzaku, tote kI coMca, dhuMghacI ke Adhe bhAga ke raMga se
sadRza lAlimA lie hue, kamala-vana ko udbodhitavikasita karane vAle, sahastra-
kiraNayukta, dina ke prAdurbhAvaka sUrya ke udita hone para, apane teja se
uddIpta hone para] maiM pUraNa kI taraha [bar3e parimANa meM azana, pAna,
khAdya, svAdya-AhAra taiyAra karavA kara mitra-vRnda, svajAtIya loga, apane
pArivArika jana, bandhu-bAndhava, sambandhi-jana, dAsa-dAsiyoM ko Amantrita kara
unheM acchI taraha bhojana karAUMgA, vastra sugandhita padArtha-itra Adi, mAlA
tathA AbhUSaNoM se unakA satkAra karUMgA, sammAna karUMgA evaM unake sAmane]
apane jyeSTha putra ko apane sthAna para niyukta karUMgA-kuTumba kA bhAra
saupUMgA, apane mitra-gaNa [jAtIya jana, pArivArika sadasya, bandhu-bAndhava,
sambandhI, 1. dekheM sUtra-yahI 2. dekhise - bhagavatI sUtra

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[72] [Upasakadasangasutra Parijan] And after asking his eldest son and obtaining
his permission, I will transcribe the Pauṣadha-śālā of the Jñātakul located in
Kolläka-sanniveśa and follow the conduct in accordance with the Dharma-prajñapti
accepted by Bhagavan Mahāvīra. Thus, Ānanda contemplated with Samyak-cintana.
Doing so, on the next day, he fed his friends, caste members, etc. Afterwards,
he honored them with abundant flowers, clothes, fragrant substances, garlands,
and ornaments. Thus, after honoring them, he called his eldest son in front of
them. Calling him, he said to him, explaining everything as he had thought, and
his social status and reputation, etc., "Son! In the city of Vāṇijyagrāma, I am
associated with many Māṇḍalika kings, wealthy men, etc., [due to this
distraction, I am unable to perform proper Dharma-upāsana in accordance with the
Dharma-prajñapti accepted by Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra]. Therefore, it is
auspicious for me at this time that you be established as the foundation, proof,
basis, and support of my family, and I [after asking all of these, my friends,
caste members, family members, relatives, and you, I will transcribe the
Pauṣadha-śālā of the Jñātakul located in Kolläka-sanniveśa, and in accordance
with the Dharma-prajñapti accepted by Bhagavan Mahāvīra] will engage in proper
Dharma-upāsana. 67. Then, the eldest son of Śramaṇa-upāsaka Ānanda accepted his
father's words with great humility, saying, "As you command." 68. Then, Śramaṇa-
upāsaka Ānanda established his eldest son in his place in the family in front of
his friends, caste members, etc., and after establishing him, he said to the
people present, "Great ones! [Devanupriyo] From today, none of you should ask me
anything about various tasks [reasons, deliberations, family problems,
confidential matters, matters to be considered in solitude, decisions made, and
mutual interactions], nor should you give me advice, nor should you prepare or
bring me food, drink, food, or delicacies." 69. Then, Śramaṇa-upāsaka Ānanda
asked his eldest son, and after asking him, he left his house. After leaving, he
went out of the city of Vāṇijyagrāma through the middle. After going out, 1. See
Sutra number 66.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra parijana] tathA jeSTha putra ko pUcha kara-unakI
anumati lekara kollAka-sanniveza meM sthita jJAtakula kI poSadha-zAlA kA
pratilekhana kara bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa aMgIkRta dharma-prajJapti ke anurUpa
AcAra kA paripAlana kruuNgaa| yoM Ananda ne saMprekSaNa-samyak cintana kiyaa|
vaisA kara, dUsare dina apane mitroM, jAtIya janoM Adi ko bhojana kraayaa|
tatpazcAt unakA pracura puSpa, vastra, sugandhita padArtha, mAlA evaM AbhUSaNoM
se satkAra kiyA, sammAna kiyaa| yoM satkAra-sammAna kara, unake samakSa apane
jyeSTha putra ko bulaayaa| bulAkara, jaisA socA thA, vaha saba tathA apanI
sAmAjika sthiti evaM pratiSThA Adi samajhAte hue use kahAputra! vANijyagrAma
nagara meM maiM bahuta se mAMDalika rAjA, aizvaryazAlI purUSoM Adi se sambaddha
hUM, [isa vyAkSepa ke kAraNa zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa aMgIkRta
dharmaprajJapti ke anurUpa] samucita dharmopAsanA kara nahIM paataa| ataH isa
samaya mere lie yahI zreyaskara hai ki tumako apane kuTumba ke meDhi, pramANa,
AdhAra evaM Alambana ke rUpa meM sthApita kara maiM [mitra-vRnda, jAtIya jana,
parivAra ke sadasya, bandhu-bAndhava, sambandhI, parijanaina sabako tathA tuma
ko pUchakara kollAka-sanniveza-sthita jJAtakula kI pauSadha-zAlA kA pratilekhana
kara, bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa aMgIkRta dharma-prajJapti ke anurUpa] samucita
dharmopAsanA meM laga jaauuN| 67. tae NaM jeTTaputte ANaMdassa samaNovAsagassa
'taha ti eyamaDhaM viNaeNaM pddisunnei|' _ taba zramaNopAsaka Ananda ke jyeSTha
putra ne 'jaisI ApakI AjJA' yoM kahate hue atyanta vinayapUrvaka apane pitA kA
kathana svIkAra kiyaa| 68. tae NaM se ANaMde samaNovAsae tasseva mitta jAva'
purao jeTTaputtaM kuDumbe Thavei, ThavittA evaM vayAsImA NaM, devANuppiyA!
tubbhe ajjappabhiI kei mamaM bahusu kajjesu jAva (ya kAraNesu ya maMtesu ya
kuTuMbesu ya gujjhesu ya rahassesu ya nicchaesu ya vavahAresu ya) Apucchau vA,
paDipucchau vA, mamaM aTThAe asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA uvakkhaDeu
vA uvakareu vaa| zramaNopAsaka Ananda ne apane mitra-varga, jAtIya jana Adi ke
samakSa apane jyeSTha putra ko kuTumba meM apane sthAna para sthApita
kiyAuttara-dAyitva use sauNpaa| vaisA kara upasthita janoM se usane
kahAmahAnubhAvoM! [devAnupriyo] Aja se Apa meM se koI bhI mujhe vividha kAryoM
[kAraNoM, maMtraNAoM, pArivArika samasyAoM, gopanIya bAtoM, ekAnta meM
vicAraNIya viSayoM, kie gae nirNayoM tathA paraspara ke vyavahAroM] ke sambandha
meM na kucha pUche aura na parAmarza hI kareM, mere hetu azana, pAna, khAdya,
svAdya Adi AhAra taiyAra na kareM aura na mere pAsa laaeN| 69. tae NaM se ANaMde
samaNovAsae jeTThaputtaM mittanAI Apucchai, ApucchitA sayAo gihAo paDiNikkhamai,
paDiNikkhamittA vANiyagAmaM nayaraM majjha-majheNaM niggacchai, niggacchittA 1.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 66 /

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study:  Gathapati Ananda] [73 When the Kollas were assembled, when the
Nayakulas were present, when the Posha-Sala was available, then he went there,
having gone there, he cleaned the Posha-Sala, having cleaned it, he marked the
place for excretion and urination, having marked it, he spread a bed of Darbha
and Kusha, having spread it, he sat on it, having sat on it, he accepted the
Posha in the Posha-Sala, having accepted the Posha, he practiced the final
Dharma-Pannatti of the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira, having attained it. Then Ananda
took permission from his elder son, friends, caste people, etc. Having taken
permission, he departed from his house. Having departed, he passed through the
middle of the commercial town, where the Kollas were assembled, the known
families and the Posha-Sala of the known families were present, he reached
there. Having reached there, he cleaned the Posha-Sala, having cleaned it, he
marked the place for excretion and urination, having marked it, he spread a bed
of Darbha and Kusha, having spread it, he sat on it, having sat on it, he
accepted the Posha in the Posha-Sala, having accepted the Posha, he practiced
the Dharma-Pannatti, the religious teachings, accepted by the Samana Bhagavan
Mahavira, in accordance with the Dharma-Pannatti, he became engaged in
meditation. 70. Then Ananda, having attained the Upasaka-Pratima, practiced it
in the Samana-Vasaya. He first practiced the Upasaka-Pratima, the Aha-Sutta, the
Aha-Kapa, the Aha-Magga, the Aha-Tacha, the right cause, he embraced it, he
protected it, he adorned it, he crossed it, he praised it, he worshipped it. •
After that, the Samana-Upasaka Ananda accepted the Upasaka-Pratima. He first
practiced the Upasaka-Pratima, the Aha-Sutta, the Aha-Kapa, the Aha-Magga, the
Aha-Tacha, the right cause, he embraced it, he protected it, he adorned it, he
crossed it, he praised it, he worshipped it. 71. Then Ananda, having attained
the Upasaka-Pratima, practiced it in the Samana-Vasaya. He first practiced the
Upasaka-Pratima, the Aha-Sutta, the Aha-Kapa, the Aha-Magga, the Aha-Tacha, the
right cause, he embraced it, he protected it, he adorned it, he crossed it, he
praised it, he worshipped it. • After that, the Samana-Upasaka Ananda accepted
the Upasaka-Pratima. He first practiced the Upasaka-Pratima, the Aha-Sutta, the
Aha-Kapa, the Aha-Magga, the Aha-Tacha, the right cause, he embraced it, he
protected it, he adorned it, he crossed it, he praised it, he worshipped it. The
Samana-Upasaka Ananda then worshipped the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth,
seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh Pratima. [He embraced them,
protected them, purified them, and completed them in a beautiful way, in
accordance with the scriptures, the rules, the path, and the truth. Discussion
The present Sutra mentions the worship of eleven Upasaka-Pratima by Ananda. The
Upasaka-Pratima is a progressive development of the Dharma-aradhana of the
householder, where the worshipper becomes absorbed in the excellent practice of
a specific religious act. The word Pratima, while meaning symbol or reflection,
also means standard or criterion. The practitioner, while being a symbol of
something, is also a standard or criterion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] ' [73 jeNeva kollAe sannivese, jeNeva
nAyakule, jeNeva posaha-sAlA, teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA posahasAlaM
pamajjai, pamajjittA uccArapAsavaNabhUmiM paDilehei, paDilehitA
dabbhasaMthArayaM saMtharai, saMtharettA dabbhasaMthArayaM durUhai, durUhittA
posahasAlAe posahie dabbhasaMthArovagae samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM
dhammapaNNattiM uvasaMpajjittANaM vihri| phira Ananda ne apane jyeSTha putra,
mitra-vRnda, jAtIya jana Adi kI anumati lii| anumati lekara apane ghara se
prasthAna kiyaa| prasthAna kara vANijyagrAma nagara ke bIca se gujarA, jahAM
kollAka sanniveza thA, jJAtakula evaM jJAtakula kI poSadhazAlA thI, vahAM
phuNcaa| pahucakara poSadha-zAlA kA pramArjana kiyAsaphAI kI, zauca evaM
laghuzaMkA ke sthAna kI pratilekhanA kii| vaisA kara darbhakuza kA
saMstArakabichaunA lagAyA, usa para sthita huA, sthita hokara poSadhazAlA meM
poSadha svIkAra kara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa svIkRta dharma-
prajJaptidhArmika zikSA ke anurUpa sAdhanA-nirata ho gyaa| 70. tae NaM se ANaMde
samaNovAsae uvAsagapaDimAo uvasaMpajittANaM vihri| paDhamaM uvAsagapaDimaM
ahAsuttaM, ahAkappaM, ahAmaggaM, ahAtaccaM sammaM kAraNaM phAsei, pAlei, sohei,
tIrei, kittei, aaraahei| * tadantara zramaNopAsaka Annada ke upAsaka-pratimAeM
svIkAra kii| pahalI upAsaka-pratimA usane yathAzrutazAstra ke anusAra,
yathAkalpapratimA ke AcAra yA maryAdA ke anusAra, yathAmArga vidhi yA
kSAyopazamika bhAva ke anusAra, yathAtattvasiddhAnta yA darzana-pratimA ke zabda
ke tAtparya ke anurUpa bhalI-bhAMti sahaja rUpa meM grahaNa kI, usakA pAlana
kiyA, aticAra-rahita anusaraNa kara use zodhita kiyA athavA gurU-bhaktipUrvaka
anupAlana dvArA zobhita kiyA, tIrNa kiyAAdi se anta taka acchI taraha pUrNa
kiyA, kIrtita kiyAsamyak paripAlana dvArA abhinandita kiyA, ArAdhita kiyaa| 71.
tae NaM se ANaMde samaNovAsae doccaM uvAsagapaDimaM, evaM taccaM, cautthaM,
paMcamaM, chaTheM, sattamaM, aTThamaM, navamaM, dasamaM, ekkArasamaM jAva (
ahAsuttaM, ahAkappaM, ahAmaggaM, ahAtaccaM sammaM kAeNaM phAsei, pAlei, sohei,
tIrei, kittei,) aaraahei| zramaNopAsaka Ananda ne tatpazcAt dUsarI, tIsarI,
cauthI, pAMcavI, chaThI, sAtavI, AThavIM, nauvI, dasavIM tathA gyArahavIM
pratimA kI ArAdhanA kii| [unakA yathAzruta, yathAkalpa, yathAmArga evaM
yathAtatva bhalI-bhAMti sparza. pAlana. zodhana tathA prazastatApUrNa samApana
kiyaa| vivecana prastuta sUtra meM Ananda dvArA gyAraha upAsaka-pratimAoM kI
ArAdhanA kA ullekha hai| upAsakapratimA gRhastha sAdhaka ke dharmArAdhana kA eka
uttarottara vikAsonmukha vizeSa krama hai, jahAM ArAdhaka viziSTa dhArmika kriyA
ke utkRSTa anuSThAna meM saMlIna ho jAtA hai| pratimA zabda jahAM pratIka yA
pratibimba Adi kA vAcaka hai, vahA~ isakA eka artha pratimAna yA mApadaNDa bhI
hai| sAdhaka jahA~ kisI eka

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 74] [Upasakdasanga Sutra]  The devotee becomes engrossed in the excellent
observance of the rituals, where the ritual or conduct becomes his main goal.
Its observance takes the form of an ideal example or standard. That is, he
creates a situation through his practice, which others accept as a model of that
conduct. This is the specific vow form.  The practitioner, holding onto his
self-strength, progresses from the first to the second, the second to the third,
the third to the fourth, and so on, in the worship of images. When he completes
one image and accepts the next, he continues to follow the rules of the accepted
image as well as the rules of the previous images. It does not happen that the
rules of the next image are accepted and the previous ones are abandoned. This
sequence continues until the end.  Acharya Abhaydeva Suri has shed light on
these eleven images in his commentary. The relevant verses have also been
quoted.  A brief analysis of the devotee's images is as follows:  1. **Darshan-
Pratima:** Darshan means vision or faith. Vision or faith is the element that is
most essential for the upliftment and development of the soul. If the vision is
pure, there will be faith in truth, only then will the seeker be able to move
successfully on the path of practice. If there is distortion, doubt, or
instability in the vision, then the efforts made for self-development do not
bear fruit.  Although the Shravak is generally of Samyakdrishti, in this image
he worships Darshan or vision specifically. To keep it very stable and
unwavering, he has firm faith in the path laid down by the Vitarag Devas, the
Panchmahavratdhara Guru, and the Vitarag. He is eager in contemplation,
reflection, and practice based on this.  The worshiper of Darshan-Pratima, the
Shraman Upasak, observes the Niratichar of Samyaktva. There is no place for
doubt, desire, etc. in its observance. He is so firm in his faith that even
knowing various opinions and counter-opinions, he is not attracted to them. He
keeps his faith, belief, or devotion very pure. His thinking and behavior are
based on this.  The time for the worship of Darshan-Pratima is considered to be
one month.  2. **Vrat-Pratima:** After the worship of Darshan-Pratima, the
devotee worships Vrat-Pratima. In Vrat-Pratima, he observes the Niratichar of
the five Anuvrats and also the three Ganvrats. He also accepts the four
Shikshavrats, but he is unable to observe the Samayik and Deshavakashik Vrats
properly. He is endowed with qualities like compassion, etc.  The time for the
worship of this image is two months.  3. **Samayik-Pratima:** The seeker who
worships Samyak Darshan and Vrats, worships Samayik...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra anuSThAna ke utkRSTa paripAlana meM laga jAtA hai,
vahA~ vaha anuSThAna yA AcAra usakA mukhya dhyeya ho jAtA hai| usakA paripAlana
eka Adarza udAharaNa yA mApadaNDa kA rUpa le letA hai| arthAt vaha apanI sAdhanA
dvArA eka aisI sthiti upasthita karatA hai, jise anya loga usa AcAra kA
pratimAna svIkAra karate haiN| yaha viziSTa pratijJArUpa hai| sAdhaka apanA
Atma-bala saMjoye pratimAoM kI ArAdhanA meM pahalI se dUsarI, dUsarI se tIsarI,
tIsarI se cauthIyoM kramazaH uttarottara Age bar3hatA jAtA hai| eka pratimA ko
pUrNa kara jaba vaha Age kI pratimA ko svIkAra karatA hai, taba svIkRta pratimA
ke niyamoM ke sAtha sAtha pichalI pratimAoM ke niyama bhI pAlatA rahatA hai|
aisA nahIM hotA, agalI pratimA ke niyama svIkAra kiye, pichalI ke chor3a diye|
yaha krama anta taka calatA hai| AcArya abhayadeva sUri ne apanI vRti meM
saMkSepa meM ina gyAraha pratimAoM para prakAza DAlA hai| etatsaMbaMdhI gAthAeM
bhI uddhRta kI hai| upAsaka kI pratimAoM kA saMkSipta vizleSaNa isa prakAra hai
1. darzanapratimAdarzana kA artha dRSTi yA zraddhA hai| dRSTi yA zraddhA vaha
tattva hai, jo AtmA ke abhyudaya aura vikAsa ke lie sarvAdhika Avazyaka hai|
dRSTi zuddha hogI, satya meM zraddhA hogI, tabhI sAdhanonmukha vyakti sAdhanA-
patha para saphalatA se gatizIla ho skegaa| yadi dRSTi meM vikRti, zaMkA,
asthiratA A jAya to Atma-vikAsa ke hetu kie jAne vAle prayatna sArthaka nahIM
hote| vaise zrAvaka sAdhAraNatayA samyakdRSTi hotA hI hai, para isa pratimA meM
vaha darzana yA dRSTi kI vizeSa ArAdhanA karatA hai| use atyanta sthira tathA
avicala banAe rakhane hetu vItarAga deva, paMcamahAvratadhara gurU tathA
vItarAga dvArA nirUpita mArga para vaha dRDha vizvAsa lie rahatA hai, etanmUlaka
cintana, manana evaM anuzIlana meM tatpara rahatA hai| darzanapratimA kA
ArAdhaka zramaNopAsaka samyaktva kA niraticAra pAlana karatA hai| usake
pratipAlana meM zaMkA, kAMkSA Adi ke lie sthAna nahIM hotaa| vaha apanI AsthA
meM itanA dRDha hotA hai ki vibhinna mata-matAntaroM ko jAnatA huA bhI udhara
AkRSTa nahIM hotaa| vaha apanI AsthA, zraddhA yA niSThA ko atyanta vizuddha
banAe rahatA hai| usakA cintana evaM vyavahAra isI AdhAra para calatA hai|
darzanapratimA kI ArAdhanA kA samaya eka mAsa kA mAnA gayA hai| 2.
vratapratimAdarzana pratimA kI ArAdhanA ke pazcAt upAsaka vrata-pratimA kI
ArAdhanA karatA hai| vrata-pratimA meM vaha pAMca aNavatoM kA niraticAra pAlana
karatA hai aura tIna gaNavratoM kA bhii| cAra zikSAvratoM ko bhI vaha svIkAra
karatA hai, kintu unameM sAmAyika aura dezAvakAzika vrata kA yathAvidhi samyaka
pAlana nahIM kara paataa| vaha anukampA Adi guNoM se yukta hotA hai| isa pratimA
kI ArAdhanA kA kAla-mAna do mAsa kA hai| 3. sAmAyika pratimAsamyak darzana evaM
vratoM kI ArAdhanA karane vAlA sAdhaka sAmAyika

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: The Gathapati Ananda  **[75] The image accepts and regularly
performs Samayika three times a day. In this image, they observe Samayika and
Desavakashika vows in their proper form, but they are unable to properly perform
the Poshadhopavasa on special days like Ashtami, Chaturdashi, Amavasya, and
Purnima.**  **The intention of this image is to worship the Samayika vow with
mindfulness and awareness. The duration of its worship is three months.**  **4.
Poshadapratima:  Moving forward from the first, second, and third images, the
devotee accepts the Poshadapratima and fully observes the Poshadavrata on
festival days like Ashtami and Chaturdashi. The duration of worship for this
image is four months.**  **5. Kayotsargapratima: Kayotsarga means the
renunciation of the body. The body remains with us throughout life, so the
renunciation refers to letting go of attachment or fondness for it. In the
Kayotsargapratima, the devotee detaches themselves from thoughts about the body,
clothes, etc., and focuses on self-reflection. They perform Kayotsarga or
meditation throughout the night on Ashtami and Chaturdashi. The duration of this
image is one, two, or three days, up to a maximum of five months. It involves
the renunciation of nighttime meals. During the day, they observe the
Brahmacharya vow. At night, they engage in Abrahmacharya.**  **6.
Brahmacharyapratima: In this image, Brahmacharya is fully observed. Unnecessary
interaction with women, conversations, observing their adorned gestures, etc.,
are prohibited. The devotee also avoids adorned attire and actions. In this
image, the devotee does not renounce conscious food. They consume conscious food
if necessary. The duration of worship for this image is a minimum of one, two,
or three days, and a maximum of six months.**  **[There is also a provision for
accepting lifelong Brahmacharya in this image.]**  **7.
Sachitaaharvarjanapratima: While following the aforementioned rules and
observing complete Brahmacharya, the devotee in this image completely renounces
conscious food, but they are unable to renounce the initial act of taking food.
The ideal duration of worship for this image is seven months.**  **8. Swayam-
Aarambh-Varjan-Pratima: While following all the aforementioned rules, the
devotee in this image does not initiate or cause any harm. The only exception is
that they do not renounce the act of initiating others for livelihood or
sustenance.**  **The duration of worship for this image is a minimum of one,
two, or three days, and a maximum of eight months.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [75 pratimA svIkAra kara pratidina
niyamataH tIna bAra sAmAyika karatA hai| isa pratimA meM vaha sAmAyika evaM
dezAvakAzika vrata kA samyak rUpa meM pAlana karatA hai, para aSTamI, caturdazI,
amAvasyA tathA pUrNimA Adi viziSTa dinoM meM poSadhopavAsa kI bhalI-bhAMti
ArAdhanA nahIM kara paataa| tanmayatA evaM jAgarukatA ke sAtha sAmAyika vrata kI
upAsanA isa pratimA kA abhipreta hai| isakI ArAdhanA kI avadhi tIna mAsa kI hai|
4. poSadhapratimAprathama, dvitIya tathA tRtIya pratimA se Age bar3hatA huA
ArAdhaka poSadha - pratimA svIkAra kara aSTamI, caturdazI Adi parva-tithiyoM
para poSadha-vrata kA pUrNarUpeNa pAlana karatA hai| isa pratimA kI ArAdhanA kA
samaya cAra mAsa hai| 5. kAyotsargapratimAkAyotsarga kA artha kAya yA zarIra kA
tyAga hai| zarIra to yAvajjIvana sAtha rahatA hai, usake tyAga kA abhiprAya
usake sAtha rahI Asakti yA mamatA ko chor3anA hai| kAyotsargapratimA meM upAsaka
zarIra, vastra Adi kA dhyAna chor3akara apane ko Atma-cintana meM lagAtA hai  /
aSTamI evaM caturdazI ke dina rAta bhara kAyotsarga yA dhyAna kI ArAdhanA karatA
hai| isa pratimA kI avadhi eka dina, do dina athavA tIna dina se lekara adhika
se adhika pAMca mAsa kI hai| isameM rAtri-bhojana kA tyAga rahatA hai| dina meM
brahmacarya vrata rakhA jAtA hai| rAtri meM abrahmacarya kA parimANa kiyA jAtA
hai| 6. brahmacaryapratimAisameM pUrNarUpeNa brahmacarya kA pAlana kiyA jAtA
hai| striyoM se anAvazyaka melajola, bAtacIta, unakI zrRMgArita ceSTAoM kA
avalokana Adi isameM varjita hai| upAsaka svayaM bhI zrRMgArika vezabhUSA va
upakrama se dUra rahatA hai| isa pratimA meM upAsaka sacitta AhAra kA tyAga
nahIM krtaa| kAraNavaza vaha sacitta kA sevana karatA hai| isa pratimA kI
ArAdhanA kA kAla-mAna nyUnatama eka dina, do dina yA tIna dina tathA utkRSTa
chaha mAsa hai| [isameM jIvana-paryanta brahmacarya svIkAra kiye rahane kA bhI
vidhAna hai|] 7. sacitAhAravarjanapratimApUrvokta niyamoM kA paripAlana karatA
huA, paripUrNa brahmacarya kA anusaraNa karatA huA upAsaka isa pratimA meM
sacita AhAra kA sarvathA tyAga kara detA hai, para vaha Arambha kA tyAga nahIM
kara paataa| isa pratimA kI ArAdhanA kA utkRSTa kAla sAta mAsa kA hai| 8.
svayaM-Arambha-varjana-pratimApUrvokta sabhI niyamoM kA pAlana karate hue isa
pratimA meM upAsaka svayaM kisI prakAra kA Arambha yA hiMsA nahIM krtaa| itanA
vikalpa isameM haiAjIvikA yA nirvAha ke lie dUsare se Arambha karAne kA use
tyAga nahIM hotaa| isa pratimA kI ArAdhanA kI avadhi nyUnatama eka dina, do dina
yA tIna dina tathA utkRSTa ATha mAsa hai|

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra  **9. Bhrtak-Preshyarambha-Varjan:** The Upasaka,
following all the rules of the previous pratima, abandons the initiation in this
pratima. That is, he does not initiate himself, nor does he get it done by
others, but he does not abandon the permission to initiate.   He does not
abandon the food prepared for his purpose, he can take it. The minimum duration
of worship for this pratima is one day, two days, or three days, and the best is
nine months.  **10. Uddishta-Bhakta-Varjan:** The Upasaka, following the
aforementioned rules, also abandons the food, etc., prepared for him in this
pratima. He often removes himself from worldly activities. In that context, he
does not give any orders or advice. He can only answer yes or no to the question
of whether he knows something or not.  The worshiper of this pratima shaves his
head with a razor, he also keeps a shikha (tuft of hair).  The duration of
worship for this pratima is a minimum of one, two, or three days, and the best
is ten months.  **11. Shramanabhoot-Pratima:** The practitioner, following all
the aforementioned rules, makes himself almost like a Shraman or Sadhu in this
pratima. All his actions are like a Shraman, with effort and awareness. He wears
the attire of a Sadhu, keeps the same vessels, tools, etc. He shaves his head
with a razor, if he has the tolerance or strength, he can also perform lunchan
(a type of fasting). Like a Sadhu, he earns his livelihood through begging. The
difference is that a Sadhu goes to everyone's house for alms, this Upasaka only
goes to the homes of his relatives, because his attachment to them has not
completely disappeared yet.  The minimum duration of worship for this pratima is
one day, two days, or three days, and the best is eleven months.  It is called
Shramanabhoot because although he is not in the role of a Shraman, he is almost
like a Shraman.  **72. Tae Nan Se Anand Samanovasae Imenam Eyaruvenam Uralean,
Viulean Payattenam, Paggahienam Tavokammenam Sukke Jav (Lukke, Nimmanse,
Atthichammavanaddhe, Kidikidia Bhue, Kise) Dhamanisantae Jae.**  Thus, the
Shraman Upasaka, with the accepted excellent, abundant, resource-appropriate
effort and austerity in the form of Shravaka-Pratima, etc., has dried up his
body of joy, [it has become rough, there is no flesh on it, only bones and skin
remain, the bones clash and make noise], there is so much emaciation or weakness
in the body that the protruding veins are visible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra 9. bhRtaka-preSyArambha-varjana - pratimA pUrvavartI
pratimAoM ke sabhI niyamoM kA pAlana karatA huA upAsaka huA isa pratimA meM
Arambha kA parityAga kara detA hai  /  arthAt vaha svayaM Arambha nahIM karatA,
auroM se nahIM karAtA, kintu Arambha karane kI anumati dene kA use tyAga nahIM
hotA  /  apane uddezya se banAe gae bhojana kA vaha parivarjana nahIM karatA,
use le sakatA hai| isa pratimA kI ArAdhanA kI nyUnatama avadhi eka dina, do dina
yA tIna dina hai tathA utkRSTa nau mAsa hai  /  76 ] 10. uddiSTa-bhakta-varjana
- pratimA pUrvokta niyamoM kA anupAlana karatA huA upAsaka isa pratimA meM
uddiSTa apane lie taiyAra kie gae bhojana Adi kA bhI parityAga kara detA hai  /
vaha apane Apako laukika kAryoM se prAyaH haTA letA hai  /  usa sandarbha meM
vaha koI Adeza yA parAmarza nahIM detA  /  amuka viSaya meM vaha jAnatA hai
athavA nahIM jAnatA kevala itanA sA uttara de sakatA hai| isa pratimA kA
ArAdhaka ustare se sira muMDAtA hai, koI zikhA bhI rakhatA hai| isakI ArAdhanA
kI samayAvadhi nyUnatama eka, do yA tIna dina tathA utkRSTa dasa mAsa I 11.
zramaNabhUta- pratimA pUrvokta sabhI niyamoM kA paripAlana karatA huA sAdhaka
isa pratimA meM apane ko lagabhaga zramaNa yA sAdhu jaisA banA letA hai| usakI
sabhI kriyAeM eka zramaNa kI taraha yatanA aura jAgarUkatApUrvaka hotI haiM  /
vaha sAdhu jaisA veza dhAraNa karatA hai, vaise hI pAtra, upakaraNa Adi rakhatA
hai  /  mastaka ke bAloM ko ustare se muMDavAtA hai, yadi sahiSNutA yA zakti ho
to luMcana bhI kara sakatA hai| sAdhu kI taraha vaha bhikSA-caryA se jIvana-
nirvAha karatA hai  /  itanA antara hai sAdhu hara kisI ke yahA~ se bhikSA hetu
jAtA hai, yaha upAsaka apane sambandhiyoM ke gharoM meM hI jAtA hai, kyoMki taba
taka unake sAtha usakA rAgAtmaka sambandha pUrI taraha miTa nahI pAtA  /  isakI
ArAdhanA kA nyUnatama kAla-parimANa eka dina, do dina yA tIna dina hai tathA
utkRSTa gyAraha mAsa hai  /  ise zramaNabhUta isIlie kahA gayA hai yadyapi vaha
upAsaka zramaNa kI bhUmikA meM to nahIM hotA, para prAya: zramaNa-sadRza hotA
hai  /  72. tae NaM se ANaMde samaNovAsae imeNaM eyArUveNaM urAleNaM, viuleNaM
payatteNaM, paggahieNaM tavokammeNaM sukke jAva (lukkhe, nimmaMse,
aTThicammAvaNaddhe, kiDikiDiyAbhUe, kise ) dhamaNisaMtae jAe  /  isa prakAra
zrAvaka - pratimA Adi ke rUpa meM svIkRta utkRSTa, vipula sAdhanocita prayatna
tathA tapazcaraNa se zramaNopAsaka Ananda kA zarIra sUkha gayA, [ rUkSa ho gayA,
usa para mAMsa nahIM rahA, haDDiyAM aura camar3I mAtra bacI rahI, haDDiyAM Apasa
meM bhir3a-bhir3a kara AvAja karane lagIM,] zarIra meM itanI kRzatA yA kSINatA A
gaI ki usa para ubharI huI nAr3iyAM dIkhane lgii|

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
First Study: The Joy of the Monk Ananda] [77 73. Then, the monk Ananda, while
engaged in religious vigil, had this thought in his mind during the time of his
previous existence: "Thus, I have become emaciated through this (excellent,
abundant, vast, diligent, and strenuous practice of austerities, with a dry,
lean, and thin body, with only bones and skin left, with bones rattling against
each other, like the sound of a dry gourd). I have this strength, vigor, and
courage, and this faith, fortitude, and zeal. As long as I have this strength,
faith, fortitude, and zeal, and as long as my religious teacher, the preacher of
the Dharma, the Jina, the conqueror of passions, the auspicious ascetic, the
Lord Mahavira, is alive, it is auspicious for me to accept the final, death-
inducing Sanlekhana tomorrow at sunrise, to renounce food and drink, and to live
in contemplation without desiring death. Ananda thought thus. Thinking thus, he
accepted the final, death-inducing Sanlekhana the next morning, renounced food
and drink, and lived in contemplation without desiring death. 74. Then, the monk
Ananda, through this auspicious end, auspicious outcome, and the shedding of the
coverings, experienced the destruction of the karmas that obstruct knowledge.
Just as one can see a field of five hundred yojanas in the salty ocean, so too,
in the south 1. See Sutra - number 66. 2. See Sutra - number 66. 3. A special
epithet indicating the excellence of Lord Mahavira.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda ] [ 77 73. tae NaM tassa ANaMdassa
samaNovAsagassa annayA kayAI puvvarattAvarattakAlasamayaMsi dhammajAgariyaM
jAgaramANassa ayaM ajjhatthie - evaM khalu ahaM imeNaM jAva (eyArUveNaM,
urAleNaM, viuleNaM, payatteNaM, paggahieNaM tavokammeNaM sukke, lukkhe,
nimmaMse, aTThi - campAvaNa kiDikiDiyAbhUe, kise, ) dhamaNisaMtae jAe  /  taM
atthitA me uTThANe, kamme, bale, vIrie, purisakkAraparakkame, saddhA, dhiI,
sNvege| taM jAva tA me atthi uTThANe saddhA dhiI saMvege, jAva ya me
dhammAyarie, dhammovaesae, samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre jiNe suhatthI viharar3a,
tAva tA me seyaM kallaM jAva' jalaMte apacchima - mAraNaMtiyasaMlehaNA -
jhUsaNA-jhUsiyassa, bhatta- pANa- paDiyAikkhiyasya kAlaM aNavakaM khamANassa
viharittae  /  evaM saMpehei, saMpehettA kallaM jAva' apacchimamAraNaMtiya jAva
(saMlehaNA-jhUsaNAjhUsie, bhatta - pANa- paDiyAikkhie, ) kAlaM aNavakaMkhamANe
viharai  /  eka dina AdhI rAta ke bAda dharmajAgaraNa karate hue Ananda ke mana
meM aisA antarbhAva yA saMkalpa utpanna huA [ isa prakAra zrAvaka - pratimA Adi
ke rUpa meM svIkRta utkRSTa, vipula sAdhanocita prayatna tathA tapazcaraNa se
merA zarIra sUkha gayA hai, rUkSa ho gayA hai, usa para mAMsa nahI rahA hai,
haDDiyAM aura camar3I mAtra bacI rahI hai, haDDiyAM Apasa meM bhir3a-bhir3a kara
AvAja karane lagI haiM,] zarIra meM itanI kRzatA A gaI hai ki usa para ubharI
huI nAr3iyAM dIkhane lagI haiM  /  mujha meM utthAna - dharmonmukha utsAha,
karma tadanurUpa pravRtti, bala zArIrika zakti - dRDhatA, vIrya-Antarika oja,
purUSAkAra parAkrama purUSocita parAkrama yA antaHzakti, zraddhA dharma ke prati
AsthA, dhRtisahiSNutA, saMvegamumukSubhAva hai| jaba taka mujhameM yaha saba hai
tathA jaba taka mere dharmAcArya, dharmopadezaka, jina rAga-dveSa - vijetA,
suhastI zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra vicaraNa kara rahe haiM, taba taka mere lie
yaha zreyaskara hai ki maiM kala sUryodaya hone para antima mAraNAntika
saMlekhanA svIkAra kara lUM, khAna-pAna kA pratyAkhyAna parityAga kara dUM,
maraNa kI kAmanA na karatA huA, ArAdhanArata ho jAUM zAntipUrvaka apanA antima
kAla vyatIta karUM  /  Ananda ne yoM cintana kiyA  /  cintana kara dUsare dina
savere antima mAraNAntika saMlekhanA svIkAra kI, khAna-pAna kA parityAga kiyA,
mRtyu kI kAmanA na karatA huA vaha ArAdhanA meM lIna ho gyaa| 74. tae NaM tassa
ANaMdasa samaNovAsagassa annayA kayAi subheNaM ajjhavasANeNaM, subheNaM
pariNAmeNaM, lesAhiM visujjhamANIhiM, tadAvaraNijjANaM kammANaM khaovasameNaM
ohinANe smuppnne| puratthime NaM lavaNa-samudde paMca-joyaNasayAiM khettaM jANai
pAsai, evaM dakkhiNe 1. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 66  /  2. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA
66  /  3. bhagavAna mahAvIra kA eka utkarSa-sUcaka vizeSaNa  /

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Upasakadasangasutra 78] He knows and sees the salt ocean in the south, five
hundred yojanas in each direction, and the Chulla Himavan Varshadhara mountain
in the north. He knows and sees the Saudharma Kalpa, the first heaven, in the
upper direction, and the Lolupacyuta hell, which is eighty-four thousand years
old, in the lower direction, in the Ratnaprabha earth. After that, the
Shramanopasaka Ananda, one day, with a good resolve, a good intention, and pure
Leshyas, due to the contact of the Pudgala substance, the karma of Avaradhi-
Jnana Avarana was destroyed, and Avaradhi-Jnana arose. As a result, he began to
know and see the salt ocean in the east, west, and south directions, five
hundred yojanas in each direction, the Chulla Himavan Varshadhara mountain in
the north, the Saudharma Kalpa, the first heaven, in the upper direction, and
the Lolupacyuta hell, which is eighty-four thousand years old, in the lower
direction, in the Ratnaprabha earth. Discussion In this Sutra, the mention of
pure Leshyas along with good resolve and good results in the context of the
Shramanopasaka Ananda's attainment of Avaradhi-Jnana is significant. Leshyas are
a unique element of Jain philosophy, which has been deeply analyzed. Leshyas
refer to the results or thoughts of the soul arising from the contact of the
Pudgala substance. The question may arise, how is it possible for the soul,
which is conscious, to be affected by the Pudgala, which is inert? It is
important to note that although the soul is completely different from the inert,
in the state of Samsara, it has a deep connection with the inert Pudgala.
Therefore, the results generated by the Pudgala cannot remain without affecting
the soul. The Pudgalas that affect the results of the soul are called Dravya-
Leshyas. The results that arise in the soul are called Bhava-Leshyas. Dravya-
Leshyas are Pudgalic in nature, therefore, color, smell, taste, and touch are
accepted in them. The colors of Dravya-Leshyas are considered to be the basis
for naming them. There are six Leshyas: Krishna-Leshya, Neel-Leshya, Kapoth-
Leshya, Tejo-Leshya, Padma-Leshya, and Shukla-Leshya. Krishna-Leshya has a color
like kajal, a taste infinitely bitter than neem, a smell infinitely worse than
the smell of a dead snake, and a touch infinitely rougher than the tongue of a
cow. Neel-Leshya has a color like sapphire, a taste infinitely sharper than
ginger, a smell and touch like Krishna-Leshya. Kapoth-Leshya has a color like
the neck of a pigeon, a taste infinitely bitter than raw mango, a smell and
touch like Krishna and Neel Leshya. Tejo-Leshya has a color like Hingul or
Sindur, a taste infinitely sweeter than ripe mango, a smell and touch like
Krishna and Neel Leshya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra 78] NaM paccatthime Na ya, uttare NaM jAva
cullahimavaMtaM vAsadharapavvayaM jANai, pAsai, uDDhaM jAva sohammaM kappaM
jANai pAsai, ahe jAva imIse rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe loluyaccuyaM narayaM
caurAsIivAsasahassaTThiiyaM jANai pAsai  /  tatpazcAt zramaNopAsaka Ananda ko
eka dina zubha adhyavasAya mana:saMkalpa, zubha pariNAma-antaH pariNati,
vizuddha hotI huI lezyAoM pudgala dravya ke saMsarga se hone vAle Atma-pariNAmoM
yA vicAroM ke kAraNa, avadhi - jJAnAvaraNa karma ke kSayopazama se avadhi- jJAna
utpanna ho gayA  /  phalata: vaha pUrva, pazcima tathA dakSiNa dizA meM pAMca
sau, pAMca sau yojana taka kA lavaNa samudra kA kSetra, uttara dizA meM culla
himavAn varSadhara parvata taka kA kSetra, urdhva dizA meM saudharma kalpa
prathama devaloka taka tathA adhodizA meM prathama nAraka - bhUmi ratnaprabhA
meM caurAsI hajAra varSa kI sthiti yukta, lolupAcyuta nAmaka naraka taka jAnane
lagA, dekhane lagA  /  vivecana lezyAeM prastuta sUtra meM zramaNopAsaka Ananda
kA avadhi- jJAna utpanna hone ke sandarbha meM zubha adhyavasAya tathA zubha
pariNAma ke sAtha-sAtha vizuddha hotI huI lezyAoM kA ullekha hai  /  lezyA jaina
darzana kA eka viziSTa tattva hai, jisa para bar3A gahana vizleSaNa huA hai|
lezyA kA tAtparya pudgala dravya ke saMsarga se hone vAle AtmA ke pariNAma yA
vicAra haiN| prazna ho sakatA hai, AtmA cetana hai, pudgala jar3a hai, phira
jar3a ke saMsarga se cetana meM pariNAma - vizeSa kA udbhava kaise saMbhava hai
? yahA~ jJAtavya hai ki yadyapi AtmA jar3a se sarvathA bhinna hai, para
saMsArAvasthA meM usakA jar3a pudgala ke sAtha gaharA saMsarga hai| ataH
pudgala-janita pariNAmoM kA jIva para prabhAva par3e binA nahIM rhtaa| jina
pudgaloM se AtmA ke pariNAma prabhAvita hote haiM, una pudgaloM ko dravya -
lezyA kahA jAtA hai| AtmA meM jo pariNAma utpanna hote haiM, unheM bhAva - lezyA
kahA jAtA hai| dravya-lezyA pudgalAtmaka hai, isalie usameM varNa, gandha, rasa
aura sparza svIkAra kiyA gayA hai  /  dravya-lezyAoM ke jo varNa mAne gae haiM,
lezyAoM kA nAmakaraNa unake AdhAra para huA hai| lezyAeM chaha haiM : kRSNa-
lezyA, nIla- lezyA, kApota- lezyA, tejo- lezyA, padma- lezyA tathA zukla- lezyA
/  kRSNalezyA kA varNa kAjala ke samAna kAlA, rasa nIma se ananta gunA kaTu,
gandha mare hue sAMpa kI gandha se ananta gunI aniSTa tathA sparza gAya kI jihvA
se ananta gunA karkaza hai| nIlezyA kA varNa nIlama ke samAna nIlA, rasa sauMTha
se ananta gunA tIkSNa, gandha evaM sparza kRSNalezyA jaise hote haiM  /
kApotalezyA kA varNa kapota - kabUtara ke gale ke samAna, rasa kacce Ama ke rasa
se ananta gunA tikta tathA gandha va sparza kRSNa va nIla lezyA jaise hote haiM
/  tejolezyA kA varNa hiMgula yA sindUra ke samAna rakta, rasa pakke Ama ke rasa
se ananta gunA

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda  [79] The fragrance of sweet and fragrant
flowers is infinitely more pleasant than the touch of butter, which is
infinitely more delicate. The color of Padma Leshya is yellow like turmeric, its
taste is infinitely sweeter than honey, and its fragrance and touch are like
Tejo Leshya. The color of Shukla Leshya is white like a conch shell, its taste
is infinitely sweeter than white sugar, and its fragrance and touch are like
Tejo Leshya and Padma Leshya. The color of Leshyas is based on the excellence
and non-excellence of emotions. Krishna Leshya is indicative of extremely
polluted emotions. As the pollution of emotions decreases, there is a difference
in the categories. When the pollution of emotions generated by Krishna Leshya
decreases slightly, the state of Neel Leshya arises, and when it decreases
further, the state of Kapoth Leshya is formed. Krishna, Neel, and Kapoth, these
three colors are indicative of non-excellent emotions. The next three colors are
indicative of excellent emotions. The first three Leshyas are considered
inauspicious and the next three are considered auspicious.  Just as the external
environment, place, food, lifestyle, etc., have different effects on our mind,
in the same way, it is not unnatural for different types of Pudgalas to have
different effects on the soul. This fact is well known in the field of natural
medicine. In the treatment of many mental illnesses, rays of different colors or
water from bottles of different colors are used. Many such large hospitals have
been built. The 'Solarium' in Jamnagar, Gujarat, is a well-known medical center
of this kind in Asia.  Apart from Jainism, other Indian philosophies also have
the concept of different colors in the context of the effects of internal states
on the soul. For example, in Sankhya philosophy, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas are
considered to be the three Gunas. There is also a discussion of the three colors
of these three Gunas in many Sankhya texts. The author of the famous commentary
on the Sankhya Karika, written by Ishwarkrishna, the Sankhya Tattva Kaumudi, has
described the uncreated nature, which is not born from anything else, as a goat,
comparing it to a goat, and has described it as red, white, and black. Red,
white, and black are the colors of the three Gunas, Rajas, Sattva, and Tamas,
accepted in Sankhya philosophy. Rajoguna makes the mind passionate or attached
to desire, therefore it is red, Sattva guna makes the mind pure or free from
impurities, therefore it is white, Tamoguna is in the form of darkness, it casts
a veil over knowledge, therefore it is black. This context of Sankhya philosophy
is comparable to Leshyas. 1. Ajamekan Lohi Tshuklakrishnam Wahvi: Prajah
Srijamanam Namamah. Aja Ye Tam Jushamanam Bhajante, Jahatyenaam Bhuktabhogam
Numstaan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [79 madhura tathA gandha surabhi-kusuma
kI gandha se ananta gunI iSTa evaM sparza makkhana se ananta gunA sukumAra hotA
hai| padmalezyA kA raMga haridrA-haldI ke samAna pIlA, rasa madhu se ananta gunA
miSTa tathA gandha va sparza tejolezyA jaise hote haiN| zukla lezyA kA varNa
zaMkha ke samAna zveta, rasa sitAmizrI se ananta gunA miSTa tathA gandha va
sparza tejolezyA va padmalezyA jaise hote haiN| lezyAoM kA raMga bhAvoM kI
prazastatA tathA aprazastatA para AdhRta hai| kRSNalezyA atyanta kaluSita bhAvoM
kI paricAyaka hai| bhAvoM kA kAluSya jyoM jyoM kama hotA hai, vargoM meM antara
hotA jAtA hai| kRSNalezyA se janita bhAvoM kI kaluSitatA jaba kucha kama hotI
hai to nIlalezyA kI sthiti A jAtI hai, aura kama hotI hai taba kApotalezyA kI
sthiti banatI hai| kRSNa, nIla aura kApota ye tInoM varNa aprazasta bhAva ke
sUcaka haiM  /  inase agale tIna varNa prazasta bhAva ke sUcaka haiN| pahalI
tIna lezyAoM ko azubha tathA agalI tIna ko zubha mAnA gayA hai| jaise bAhya
vAtAvaraNa, sthAna, bhojana, rahana-sahana Adi kA hamAre mana para bhinna-bhinna
prakAra kA asara par3atA hai, usI prakAra bhinna-bhinna prakAra ke pudgaloM kA
AtmA para bhinna-bhinna prakAra kA prabhAva honA asvAbhAvika nahIM hai|
prAkRtika cikitsA-kSetra meM bhI yaha tathya suvidita hai| aneka manorogoM kI
cikitsA meM vibhinna raMgoM kI razmiyoM kA athavA vibhinna raMgoM kI zIziyoM ke
jaloM kA upayoga kiyA jAtA hai  /  kaI aise vizAla cikitsAlaya bhI bane haiN|
gujarAta meM jAmanagara kA 'soleriyama' eziyA kA isa koTi kA suprasiddha
cikitsA-kendra hai| jainadarzana ke atirikta anyAnya bhAratIya darzanoM meM bhI
antarbhAvoM kA Atma-pariNAmoM ke sandarbha meM aneka raMgoM kI parikalpanA hai|
udAharaNArtha, sAMkhyadarzana meM sattva, rajas aura tamas ye tIna guNa mAne gae
haiN| tInoM ke tIna raMgoM kI bhI aneka sAMkhya-granthoM meM carcA hai  /
IzvarakRSNaracita sAMkhyakArikA kI suprasiddha TIkA sAMkhya-tattva-kaumudIke
lekhaka vAcaspati mizra ne apanI TIkA ke prAraMbha meM ajAanya se anutpanna-
prakRti ko ajA-bakarI se upamita karate hue use lohita, zukla tathA kRSNa
batalAyA hai| lohitalAla, zuklasapheda aura kRSNakAlA, ye sAMkhyadarzana meM
svIkRta rajas, sattva, tamastInoM guNoM ke raMga haiM  /  rajoguNa mana ko rAga-
raMjita yA moha-raMjita karatA hai, isalie vaha lohita hai, sattvaguNa mana ko
nirmala yA mala rahita banAtA hai, isalie vaha zukla hai, tamoguNa andhakArarUpa
hai, jJAna para AvaraNa DAlatA hai, isalie vaha kRSNa hai| lezyAoM se
sAMkhyadarzana kA yaha prasaMga tulanIya hai| 1. ajAmekAM lohi tazuklakRSNAM
vahvIH prajAH sRjamAnAM nmaamH| ajA ye tAM juSamANAM bhajante , jahatyenAM
bhuktabhogAM numastAn  //

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[80] The *Upasakadasangasutra* states that Patanjali, in his *Yogasutra*, has
described three types of karma: white, black, and mixed (white-black). These
colors of karma are indicative of their merit and demerit.  The statement made
above about the production of meritorious and demeritorious results in the soul
through the substance-particles (dravya-leshya) needs to be understood in more
depth. From a theoretical perspective, there are two causes for the results
produced in the soul through the substance-particles, i.e., the emergence of
emotion-particles (bhava-leshya): the rise of delusion-karma (moha-karma) or its
subsidence, destruction, or subsidence of destruction. The emotion-particles
that arise from the rise of delusion-karma are inauspicious or demeritorious,
and those that arise from the subsidence, destruction, or subsidence of
destruction of delusion-karma are auspicious or meritorious.  The black-particle
(krishna-leshya), blue-particle (nila-leshya), and pigeon-colored particle
(kapota-leshya) arise from the rise of delusion-karma, and are therefore
demeritorious. The radiant-particle (tejo-leshya), lotus-particle (padma-
leshya), and white-particle (shukla-leshya) arise from subsidence, destruction,
or subsidence of destruction, and are therefore auspicious or meritorious.  On
the one hand, there are emergent, subsiding, destructive, or subsiding of
destruction emotions arising in the soul, and on the other hand, there are
substance-particles or substance-particles arising. Therefore, it is not only
the substance-particles that are the cause of the emotion-particles, nor are the
emotion-particles the cause of the substance-particles alone. They are
interdependent.  The statement made above about the emergence of emotion-
particles or soul-results from substance-particles is from a gross perspective.
The interdependence of substance-particles and emotion-particles can be
understood from an example in Ayurveda. In Ayurveda, there are three humors:
bile (pitta), phlegm (kapha), and wind (vata). When bile is aggravated or has a
special effect on the body, the person becomes angry and agitated. Anger and
agitation further increase bile. When phlegm is strong, it produces lethargy,
drowsiness, and laziness. Lethargy, drowsiness, and laziness further increase
phlegm. The strength of wind produces restlessness, instability, and tremors.
Restlessness and instability further increase wind. Thus, bile, etc., and the
emotions of anger, etc., manifested by them are interdependent. The relationship
between substance-particles and emotion-particles is somewhat similar.  Many
texts in Jain literature have analyzed the particles (leshya) as appropriate.
The 17th chapter of the *Prajnapana Sutra* and the 34th chapter of the
*Uttaradhyayanasutra* contain detailed discussions of the particles, which are
worth reading. This topic of Jain philosophy, along with modern psychology, is
worthy of study from a critical and comparative perspective. Thus.  The
indication in the present sutra of the increasingly meritorious or developing
inner aspects of joy reveals that joy was highly aware in its role of inner
refinement or inner purification. As a result, its particles, soul-results,
became increasingly meritorious, and he attained omniscience. 1. Karma is of
three kinds for yogis, white, black, and mixed, for others. -Patanjali Yogasutra
4.7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 80] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra pataMjali ne yogasUtra meM karmoM kI zukla, kRSNa
tathA zukla-kRSNa (azuklAkRSNa)tIna prakAra kA batalAyA hai| karmoM ke ye varNa,
unakI prazastatA tathA aprazastatA ke sUcaka hai|' Upara pudgalAtmaka dravya-
lezyA se AtmA ke prazasta-aprazasta pariNAma utpanna hone kI jo bAta kahI gaI
hai, ise kucha aura gaharAI se samajhanA hogaa| dravya-lezyA ke sAhAyya se AtmA
meM jo pariNAma utpanna hote haiM, arthAt bhAva-lezyA niSpanna hotI hai, tAtvika
dRSTi se unake do kAraNa haiM moha-karma kA udaya athavA usakA upazama, kSaya yA
kssyopshm| moha-karma ke udaya se jo bhava-lezyAeM niSpanna hotI haiM, ve azubha
yA aprazasta hotI haiM tathA moha-karma ke upazama, kSaya yA kSayopazapa se jo
bhAva-lezyAeM hotI hai, ve zubha yA prazasta hotI haiM  /  kRSNalezyA, nIla
lezyA aura kApota lezyA ye moha karma ke udaya se hotI hai, isalie aprazasta
haiN| tejolezyA, padmalezyA evaM zuklalezyA ye upazama, kSaya yA kSayopazama se
hotI haiM, isalie zubha yA prazasta haiN| AtmA meM eka aura audayika,
aupazamika, kSAyika yA kSAyopazamika bhAva udbhUta hote haiM, dUsarI ora vaise
pudgala yA dravya-lezyAeM niSpanna hotI haiN| isalie ekAnta rUpa se na kevala
dravya-lezyA bhAva-lezyA kA kAraNa hai aura na kevala bhAva-lezyA dravya-lezyA
kA kAraNa hai| ye anyonyAzrita haiN| _ Upara dravya-lezyA se bhAva-lezyA yA
Atma-pariNAma udbhUta hone kI jo bAta kahI gaI hai, vaha sthUla dRSTi se hai|
dravya-lezyA aura bhAva-lezyA kI anyonyAzritatA ko Ayurveda ke eka udAharaNa se
samajhA jA sakatA hai| Ayurveda meM pitta, kapha tathA vAtaye tIna doSa mAne gae
haiM  /  jaba pitta prakupitta hotA hai yA pitta kA deha para vizeSa prabhAva
hotA hai to vyakti kruddha hotA hai, uttejita ho jAtA hai  /  krodha evaM
uttejanA se phira pitta bar3hatA hai| kapha jaba prabala hotA hai to zithilatA,
tandrA evaM Alasya paidA hotA hai| zithilatA, tandrA evaM Alasya se punaH kapha
bar3hatA hai| vAta kI prabalatA cAMcalyaasthiratA va kampana paidA karatI hai|
caMcalatA evaM asthiratA se phira vAta kI vRddhi hotI hai| yoM pitta Adi doSa
tathA inase prakaTita krodha Adi bhAva anyonyAzrita haiN| dravya-lezyA aura
bhAva-lezyA kA kucha isI prakAra kA sambandha hai| jaina vAGmaya ke aneka
granthoM meM lezyA kA yathA-prasaMga vizleSaNa huA hai  /  prajJApanAsUtra ke 17
veM pada meM tathA uttarAdhyayanasUtra ke 34 veM adhyayana meM lezyA kA vistRta
vivecana hai, jo paThanIya hai| Adhunika manovijJAna ke sAtha jainadarzana kA
yaha viSaya samIkSAtmaka evaM tulanAtmaka dRSTi se anuzIlana karane yogya hai|
astu| prastuta sUtra meM Ananda ke uttarottara prazasta hote yA vikAsa pAte
antarbhAvoM kA jo saMketa hai, usase prakaTa hotA hai ki Ananda anta:pariSkAra
yA antarmArjana kI bhUmikA meM atyadhika jAgarUka thaa| phalataH usakI lezyAeM,
Atma-pariNAma prazasta se prazastatara hote gae aura usako avadhi-jJAna utpanna
1. karmAzuklAkRSNaM yoginastrividhamitareSAm -pAtaMjalayogasUtra 4.7

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda  [81] Ananda: Avadhi-Jnana  Infinite knowledge,
infinite perception, infinite happiness, and infinite power of energy are the
nature of the soul. Karma is the covering, according to Jain philosophy, they
are pudgalatmak, concrete. They cover the nature of the soul. The nature of the
soul is covered by them to the extent and in the way it is covered, it remains
unmanifested. As the coverings of karma are removed - erased - by the soul's own
firm determination, excellent results, pure emotions, and austerity, the nature
of the soul is gradually revealed or manifested.  ... The karmas that cover
knowledge are called Jnanaavarana. In Jain philosophy, there are five types of
knowledge: Mati-Jnana, Shruta-Jnana, Avadhi-Jnana, Manah-Paryaya-Jnana, and
Kevala-Jnana.  The karma-pudgalas that cover or obscure them are called Mati-
Jnanaavarana, Shruta-Jnanaavarana, Avadhi-Jnanaavarana, Manah-Paryaya-
Jnanaavarana, and Kevala-Jnanaavarana respectively.  These five types of
knowledge are revealed by the removal of these coverings. There are two
divisions in them, indirect and direct. Direct knowledge is the direct
perception of the object of knowledge by the soul without any other medium.
Indirect knowledge does not have direct access to the object of knowledge. Mati-
Jnana and Shruta-Jnana are indirect, because the cooperation of mind and senses
is required there. In a gross way, we see an object with our eyes, we know it,
it is called direct seeing. But it is only a colloquial language, therefore, in
philosophy, it is called Saavyavaharik Pratyaksha. From the point of view of
certainty, it does not come under Pratyaksha because there is a relationship,
not direct, between the knower soul and the object of knowledge through the
eyes.  Avadhi-Jnana, Manah-Paryaya-Jnana, and Kevala-Jnana do not require the
help of senses and mind. There is direct access of knowledge to the object of
knowledge. Therefore, they come under Pratyaksha-bhed. Among them, Kevala-Jnana
is called Sakal Paramार्थिक Pratyaksha and Avadhi and Manah-Paryaya are called
Vikal or incomplete Paramार्थिक Pratyaksha, they cannot know the complete
Paryaya of the object of knowledge.  Avadhi-Jnana is that extra-sensory
knowledge by which a person knows concrete or similar objects with a limit or
boundary of substance, field, time, and emotion. The extent of Avadhi-Jnana is
according to the intensity of the destruction of Avadhi-Jnanaavarana karma.
There is one more special thing about Avadhi-Jnana, it is innate in the Deva-
Yoni and Naraka-Yoni. It is called Bhav-Pratyay Avadhi-Jnana. In these Yonis, as
soon as the beings take birth, Avadhi-Jnana arises spontaneously through the
appropriate destruction of Avadhi-Jnanaavarana. This means that they do not have
to make efforts based on austerity for the destruction of Avadhi-Jnanaavarana.
It is not even possible there.  By means of austerity, vows, renunciation, etc.,
nirjaramulak rituals, the Avadhi-Jnanaavarana-karma-pudgalas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [81 ho gyaa| Ananda : avadhi-jJAna
ananta jJAna, ananta darzana, ananta sukha tathA ananta vIryazakti AtmA kA
svabhAva hai| karma AvaraNa hai, jainadarzana ke anusAra ve pudgalAtmaka haiM,
mUrta haiN| Atma-svabhAva ko ve AvRta karate haiN| AtmasvabhAva unase jitanA,
jaisA AvRta hotA hai, utanA aprakAzita rahatA hai| karmoM ke AvaraNa AtmA ke
svonmukha prazasta adhyavasAya, uttama pariNAma, pavitra bhAva evaM tapazcaraNa
se jaise-jaise haTate jAte haiM - -miTate jAte haiM, vaise-vaise AtmA kA
svabhAva udbhAsita yA prakaTa hotA jAtA hai| ... jJAna ko AvRta karane vAle
karma jJAnAvaraNa kahe jAte haiN| jainadarzana meM jJAna ke pAMca bheda hai
mati-jJAna, zruta-jJAna, avadhi-jJAna, mana:-paryAya-jJAna, tathA kevl-jnyaan|
inakA AvaraNa yA AcchAdana karane vAle karma-pudgala kramazaH mati-jJAnAvaraNa,
zruta-jJAnAvaraNa, avadhi-jJAnAvaraNa, manaHparyAya-jJAnAvaraNa tathA kevala-
jJAnAvaraNa kahe jAte hai| ina AvaraNoM ke haTane se ye pAMcoM jJAna prakaTa
hote haiM  /  parokSa aura pratyakSa ke rUpa meM inameM do bheda haiN| pratyakSa
jJAna kisI dUsare mAdhyama ke binA AtmA dvArA hI jJeya ko sIdhA grahaNa karatA
hai| parokSajJAna kI jJeya taka sIdhI pahu~ca nahIM hotii| mati-jJAna aura
zruta-jJAna parokSa haiM, kyoMki vahA~ mana aura indriyoM kA sahayoga apekSita
hai| vaise sthUla rUpa meM hama kisI vastu ko A~khoM se dekhate haiM, jAnate
haiM, use pratyakSa dekhanA kahA jAtA hai| para vaha kevala vyavahAra-bhASA hai,
isalie darzana meM usakI saMjJA sAMvyavahArika pratyakSa hai  /  nizcaya-dRSTi
se vaha pratyakSa meM nahIM AtA kyoMki jJAtA AtmA aura jJeya padArtha meM A~khoM
ke mAdhyama se vahA~ sambandha hai, sIdhA nahIM hai| avadhi-jJAna, manaHparyAya-
jJAna, aura kevala-jJAna meM indriya aura mana ke sAhAyya kI AvazyakatA nahIM
hotii| vahA~ jJAna kI jJeya taka sIdhI pahu~ca hotI hai| isalie ye pratyakSa-
bheda meM Ate haiN| inameM kevala-jJAna ko sakala pAramArthika pratyakSa kahA
jAtA hai aura avadhi va manaH paryAya ko vikala yA apUrNa pAramArthika pratyakSa
kahA jAtA hai, inase jJeya ke sampUrNa paryAya nahIM jAne jA skte| avadhi-jJAna
vaha atIndriya jJAna hai, jisake dvArA vyakti, dravya, kSetra, kAla evaM bhAva
kI eka maryAdA yA sImA ke sAtha mUrta yA sarUpa padArthoM ko jAnatA hai  /
avadhi-jJAnAvaraNakarma kA kSayopazama jaisA manda yA tIvra hotA hai, usake
anusAra avadhi-jJAna kI vyApakatA hotI hai| avadhi-jJAna ke sambandha meM eka
vizeSa bAta aura haideva-yonI aura naraka-yonI meM vaha janma-siddha hai| use
bhava-pratyaya avadhi-jJAna kahA jAtA hai| ina yoniyoM meM jIvoM ko janma
dhAraNa karate hI sahaja rUpa meM yogya yA upayukta kSayopazama dvArA avadhi
jJAna utpanna hotA hai  /  isakA Azaya yaha hai ki avadhi jJAnAvaraNa ke
kSayopazama hetu unheM tapomUlaka prayatna nahIM karanA pdd'taa| vaisA vahA~
zakya bhI nahIM hai| tapa, vrata, pratyAkhyAna Adi nirjarAmUlaka anuSThAnoM
dvArA avadhi-jJAnAvaraNa-karma-pudgaloM ke

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 82]  The **avadhi-jnana** (clairvoyance) obtained through the
**kshayopashama** (cessation of karmic obscurations) of the **Upasaka Dasanga
Sutra** is called **guna-pratyaya avadhi-jnana**. It occurs in both humans and
animals.   A key difference between **bhaava-pratyaya avadhi-jnana**
(clairvoyance based on the nature of the being) and **guna-pratyaya avadhi-
jnana** is that **bhaava-pratyaya avadhi-jnana** is experienced by every being
in the **deva-yoni** (heavenly realm) and **naraka-yoni** (hellish realm), while
**guna-pratyaya avadhi-jnana** is not experienced by all humans and animals due
to the **pratyaya** (karmic influence). It is only attained by those who have
developed the necessary **yogyatha** (merit) and whose **avadhi-jnana-avaran**
(karmic obscurations of clairvoyance) have been **kshayopashama** (completely
ceased).  **Ananda**, through his exceptional **atma-bal** (spiritual strength),
pure **bhaava** (attitude), and dedicated **prayatna** (effort), had attained a
state where his **avadhi-jnana-avaran-karma-pudgala** (karmic particles
obscuring clairvoyance) had been **kshayopashama** (completely ceased),
resulting in the manifestation of **avadhi-jnana**.  This sutra discusses the
extent of **avadhi-jnana** attained by the **Shramanopasaka Ananda**, mentioning
the **lavanasamuudra** (salt ocean) in the east, west, and south, and the
**Chullhimanvant** (smaller Himalayas) in the north. These are related to the
**madhyaloka** (middle world). According to Jain geography, the human realm of
the **madhyaloka** extends to two and a half **dvipas** (islands). The
**Jambudvipa** is in the center, a circular island with a diameter of one lakh
**yojanas** (a unit of distance). It is one lakh **yojanas** long and one lakh
**yojanas** wide. Within **Jambudvipa** are seven regions: **Bharatavarsha**,
**Haimvata Varsha**, **Hari Varsha**, **Videha Varsha**, **Ramya Varsha**,
**Hairanya Varsha**, and **Airavata Varsha**. These seven regions are separated
by six mountain ranges: **Himavan**, **Mahahimavan**, **Nishada**, **Neela**,
**Rukmi**, and **Shikhari**. The **lavanasamuudra** surrounds **Jambudvipa**,
with a diameter twice that of **Jambudvipa**. The **Dhataki Khanda** island
surrounds the **lavanasamuudra**, with a diameter twice that of the
**lavanasamuudra**. The **Kalodadhi** ocean surrounds the **Dhataki Khanda**,
with an extent twice that of the **Dhataki Khanda**. The **Pushkara Dvipa**
surrounds the **Kalodadhi** ocean. In the center of this island is the
**Manushottara Parvata** (mountain). This is the limit of human habitation,
meaning humans reside in **Jambudvipa**, **Dhataki Khanda**, and half of
**Pushkara Dvipa** - a total of two and a half **dvipas**.  The **avadhi-jnana**
experienced by **Shramanopasaka Ananda** enabled him to see five hundred
**yojanas** in all three directions - east, west, and south - across the
**lavanasamuudra** surrounding **Jambudvipa**. He could also see as far as the
**Himavan** mountain range in the north.  Within **Jambudvipa**, the first two
mountain ranges are the **Himavan** and **Mahahimavan**. This sutra uses the
term **Chullhimanvant** for **Himavan**, where **Chull** means "smaller". This
epithet is used in comparison to the **Mahahimavan**.  The sutra hints at
**Ananda**'s ability to see up to the **Saudharma Kalpa** in the **Urdhvaloka**
(upper world). The following **devalokas** (heavenly realms) are located in the
**Urdhvaloka**: **Saudharma**, **Aishana**, **Sanatkumara**, **Mahendra**,
**Brahmaloka**, **Lantaka**, **Mahashukra**, **Sahasrar**, **Anata**,
**Pranata**, **Aran**, **Achyuta**, nine **Graiveyaka** realms, and five
**Anuttara Vimana** realms: **Vijay**, **Vaijayanta**, **Jayanta**,
**Aparajita**, and **Sarvarthasiddha**. **Saudharma** is the first of these
**devalokas**.  The following seven **naraka bhumis** (hellish realms) are
located in the **Adholoka** (lower world): **Ratnaprabha**, **Sharkaraprabha**,
**Balukaprabha**, **Panka prabha**,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 82] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra kSayopazama se jo avadhi-jJAna prApta hotA hai, use
guNa-pratyaya avadhi-jJAna kahA jAtA hai| vaha manuSyoM aura tiryaJcoM meM hotA
hai| bhava-pratyaya aura guNa-pratyaya avadhi-jJAna meM eka vizeSa antara yaha
hai bhava-pratyaya avadhi-jJAna deva-yoni aura naraka-yonI ke pratyeka jIva ko
hotA hai; guNa-pratyaya avadhijJAna pratyaya dvArA bhI manuSyoM aura tiryaJcoM
meM sabako nahIM hotA, kinhIM-kinhIM ko hotA haiM, jinhone tadanurUpa yogyatA
prApta kara lI ho, jinakA avadhi-jJAnAvaraNa kA kSayopazama sadhA ho| Ananda
apane utkRSTa Atma-bala ke sahAre, pavitra bhAva tathA prayatnapUrvaka vaisI
sthiti adhigata kara cukA thA, usake avadhi-jJAnAvaraNa-karma-pudgaloM kA
kSayopazama ho gayA thA, jisakI phalaniSpati avadhi-jJAna meM prasphuTita huii|
prastuta sUtra meM zramaNoMpAsaka Ananda dvArA prApta avadhi-jJAna ke vistAra kI
carcA karate hue pUrva, pazcima aura dakSiNa meM lavaNasamudra tathA uttara meM
cullahimavaMta varSadhara kA ullekha AyA hai : inakA madhyaloka se sambandha
hai| jaina bhUgola ke anusAra madhyaloka ke manuSya kSetra DhAI dvIpoM taka
vistRta hai| madhya meM jambUdvIpa hai, jo vRttAkAragola hai, jisakA
viSkambhavyAsa eka lAkha yojana haijo eka lAkha yojana lambA tathA eka lAkha
yojana caur3A hai| jambUdvIpa meM bharatavarSa, haimavatavarSa, harivarSa,
videhavarSa, ramyakavarSa, hairaNyavatavarSa, tathA airAvata varSa-ye sAta
kSetra haiN| ina sAtoM kSetroM ko alaga karane vAle pUrvapazcima lambehimavAn
mahAhimavAn, niSadha, nIla, rUkmI tathA zikharIye chaha varSadhara parvata haiN|
jambUdvIpa ke cAroM ora lavaNasamudra hai| lavaNasamudra kA vyAsa jambUdvIpa se
dugunA hai| lavaNasamudra ke cAroM ora dhAtakIkhaNDa nAmaka dvIpa hai| unakA
vyAsa lavaNasamudra se dugunA hai| dhAtakIkhaNDa ke cAroM ora kAlodadhi nAmaka
samudra hai, jisakA vistAra dhAtakIkhaNDa se dugunA hai| kAlodadhisamudra ke
cAroM tarapha puSkaradvIpa hai| isa dvIpa ke bIca meM mAnuSottara parvata hai|
manuSya kA AvAsa vahIM taka hai arthAt jambUdvIpa, dhAtakIkhaMDa tathA AdhA
puSkaradvIpaina DhAI dvIpoM meM manuSya rahate haiN| zramaNopAsaka Ananda ko jo
avadhi-jJAna utpanna huA thA, usase vaha jambUdvIpa ke cAroM aura phaile
lavaNasamudra meM pUrva, pazcima tathA dakSiNaina tInoM dizAoM meM pAMca sau
yojana kI dUrI taka dekhane laga gayA thaa| uttara meM vaha himavAn varSadhara
parvata taka dekhane laga gayA thaa| jambUdvIpa meM varSadhara parvatoM meM
pahale dohimavAn tathA mahAhimavAn haiN| prastuta sUtra meM himavAn ke lie
cullahimavaMta pada kA prayoga huA hai| culla kA artha choTA hai| mahAhimavAna
kI dRSTi se himavAn ke sAtha yaha vizeSaNa diyA gayA hai Urdhvaloka meM Ananda
dvArA saudharma-kalpa taka dekhe jAne kA saMketa hai| Urdhva loka meM nimnAMkita
devaloka avasthita hai saudharma, aizAna, sAnatkumAra, mAhendra, brahmaloka,
lAntaka, mahAzukra, sahastrAra, Anata, prANata, AraNa, acyuta tathA nau
graiveyaka evaM pAMca anuttara vimAna-vijaya, vaijayanta, jayanta, aparAjita
aura sarvArthasiddha  /  saudharma ina meM prathama devaloka hai| adholoka meM
nimnAMkita sAta naraka bhUmiyAM hairatnaprabhA, zarkarAprabhA, bAlukAprabhA,
paMkaprabhA,

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda  [83 Dhuma Prabha, Tama Prabha and Maha Tama
Prabha. These are situated one below the other. Ratna Prabha is an upper
division of the first hell, Lolupacyuta, in the earth, where the narakas with a
state of eighty-four thousand years reside.]  The third chapter of the
Tattvartha Sutra describes the Adholka and Madhyaloka, and the fourth chapter
describes the Urddhvaloka. The Jambudvipa Prajnapti has a detailed discussion on
this subject.  The extent of the Avadhijnana of the Shramanopasaka Ananda was up
to the above-mentioned limit in all four directions due to the destruction and
cessation of his Avadhi-Jnana-Avarana-Karma-Pudgalas.  75. Tenam Kalena Tenam
Samayena Samane Bhagavan Mahavir Samosarie, Parisa Niggaya Jav Padigaya.  At
that time, at the end of the fourth Ara of the present Avasarpini, Bhagavan
Mahavir arrived. The assembly gathered, listened to the Dharma and returned.
76. Tenam Kalena Tenam Samayena Samanas Bhagavo Mahavirassa Jeththe Antevassi
Indabhui Namam Anagare Goyam-Gottena, Sattusse He, Samachauram Sansthanasanthie,
Vajrisahanarayasanghayane, Kanagapulganighasapamhgore, Uggatave, Ditatave,
Tattatave, Ghoratave, Mahatave, Urale, Ghoragune, Ghoratavassi Ghor-
Bhambacheravasi, Ucchudhasariere, Sankhitta-Viulatteu-Lesse, Chathe-Chathena
Anikkhitteena Tavo-Kammena Sanjamena Tavasa Appaana Bhavamane Viharai.  At that
time, at that time, the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir's elder Antevassi, an Anagara
named Indrabhuiti, belonging to the Gautama Gotra, whose height was seven hands,
who was Samachaturasra-Sansthan-Sansthit, with the four limbs of the body being
harmonious, the limbs being proportional to each other, balanced and
coordinated, the holder of a body with a harmonious structure, who was Vajra-
Rishabha-Naracha-Sanhanan-Sudrdha Asthi-Bandha-Yukta, with a special body
structure, who was like a lotus with the brilliance of a gold line engraved on a
touchstone, who was fair in complexion, who was a fierce ascetic, who was like
fire in burning the ashes of intense ascetic deeds, who was a fervent ascetic
whose body was filled with the intense glow of asceticism, who was a harsh and
abundant ascetic, who was strong in Urala, a powerful practice, who was the
holder of Ghoraguna, the highest virtues, which require extraordinary strength
to possess, who was a fierce ascetic, a powerful ascetic, a fierce Brahmachari,
a strict follower of celibacy, who was devoid of bodily adornment or decoration,
who had a vast Tejo-Leshya contained within his body, who was constantly
performing various austerities, who was cultivating his soul through the
practice of restraint and other austerities rooted in it, was dwelling.  1. See
Sutra number 11.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [83 dhUmaprabhA, tamaH prabhA evaM
mhaatmHprbhaa| ye kramazaH eka dUsare ke nIce avasthita haiN| ratnaprabhA bhUmi
meM lolupAcyuta prathama naraka kA eka UparI vibhAga hai, jahA~ caurAsI hajAra
varSa kI sthiti vAle nAraka rahate tattvArthasUtra ke tIsare adhyAya meM
adholoka aura madhyaloka kA tathA cauthe adhyAya meM urdhvaloka kA varNana hai|
jambUdvIpaprajJapti meM isa sambandha meM vistRta vivecana hai| zramaNopAsaka
Ananda ke avadhijJAna kA vistAra usake avadhi-jJAnAvaraNa-karma-pudgaloM ke
kSayopazama ke kAraNa cAroM dizAoM meM uparyukta sImA taka thaa| 75. teNaM
kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre samosarie, parisA niggayA jAva
pddigyaa| usa kAlavartamAna avasarpiNI ke cauthe Are ke anta meM, usa samaya
bhagavAn mahAvIra samavasRta huepdhaare| pariSad jur3I, dharma sunakara vApisa
lauTa gii| 76. teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa
jeTaThe aMtevAsI iMdabhUI nAmaM aNagAre goyama-gotteNaM, sattusse he ,
samacauraM sasaMThANasaMThie, vajarisahanArAyasaMghayaNe,
kaNagapulaganighasapamhagore, uggatave, ditatave, tattatave, ghoratave,
mahAtave, urAle, ghoraguNe, ghoratavassI ghora-baMbhaceravAsI, ucchUDhasarIre,
saMkhitta-viulateu-lesse, chaTheM-chaTheNaM aNikkhitteNaM tavo-kammeNaM
saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe vihri| usa kAla, usa samaya zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke jyeSTha antevAsI gautama gotrIya indrabhUti nAmaka anagAra, jinakI
deha kI UMcAI sAta hAtha thI, jo samacaturastra-saMsthAna-saMsthita thedeha ke
cAroM aMzoM kI susaMgata, aMgoM ke paraspara samAnupAtI, santulita aura
samanvita racanAmaya zarIra ke dhAraka the, jo vajra-RSabha-nArAca-saMhanana-
sudRDha asthi-bandhayukta viziSTa-deha-racanAyukta the, kasauTI para khacita
svarNa-rekhA kI AbhA lie hue kamala ke samAna jo gaura varNa the, jo ugra
tapasvI the, dIpta tapasvI-karmoM kI bhasmasAt karane meM agni ke samAna
pradIpta tapa karane vAle the, taptatapasvIjinakI deha para tapazcaryA kI tIvra
jhalaka vyApta thI, jo kaThora evaM vipula tapa karane vAle the, jo
urAlaprabalasAdhanA meM sazakta, ghoraguNaparama uttamajinako dhAraNa karane meM
adbhuta zakti cAhieaise guNoM ke dhAraka, ghora tapasvI-prabala tapasvI, ghora
brahmacaryavAsI-kaThora brahmacarya ke pAlaka, utkSiptazarIra-daihika
sArasaMbhAla yA sajAvaTa se rahita the, jo vizAla tejolezyA apane zarIra ke
bhItara sameTe hue the bele-bele nirantara tapa kA anuSThAna karate hue,
saMyamArAdhanA tathA tanmUlaka anyAnya tapazcaraNoM dvArA apanI AtmA ko
bhAvitasaMskArita karate hue vihAra karate the| 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 11 /

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Upasakadasanga Sutra (Chapter 77-79)  **77.**  The Venerable Gotama,
having received permission from the Venerable Mahavira, performed self-study in
the first watch of the day of the Paryushana festival, practiced meditation in
the second watch, and with unwavering focus, free from anxiety and confusion,
meticulously transcribed the Mukhavastraka in the third watch. He then
transcribed and cleaned the bowls and robes, picked them up, and proceeded to
where the Venerable Mahavira was. He bowed and prostrated before him, and then
said, "Venerable Sir, with your permission, I wish to go on a begging round
today, the day of the Paryushana festival, in the city of Vanijyagrama, visiting
homes of all classes, high, low, and middle, without skipping any." The
Venerable Mahavira replied, "Devapriya, do as you please (without any
restrictions or delays)."  **78.**  Having received permission from the
Venerable Mahavira, the Venerable Gotama departed from the Duitipalasa Caitya.
He walked with unwavering focus, free from anxiety and confusion, carefully
observing the path for three and a half hand-spans ahead, and with mindful
steps, reached the city of Vanijyagrama. He then began his begging round,
visiting homes of all classes, high, low, and middle.  **79.**  The Venerable
Gotama, in the city of Vanijyagrama, as per the rules, continued his begging
round, visiting homes of all classes, high, low, and middle, until he had
received enough food and drink. He then left the city of Vanijyagrama. As he was
walking away, not far from the city, he heard the sound of many people, and saw
a large crowd...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra 77. taNaM se bhagavaM goyame chaTThakkhaNa-pAraNagaMsi
paDhamAe porisIe sajjhAyaM karei, biiyAe porisIe jhANaM jhiyAi, taiyAe porisIe
aturiyaM acavalaM asaMbhaMte muhapattiM paDilehei, paDilehittA bhAyaNa -
vatthAiM paDilehei, paDilehittA bhAyaNavatthAI pamajjai, pamajjittA bhAyaNAI
uggAhei, uggAhittA jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre teNeva uvAgacchai,
uvAgacchittA samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdar3a, namaMsai, vaMdittA, namaMsittA
evaM vayAsI - - icchAmi NaM bhaMte! tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe
chaTThakkhamaNapAraNagaMsi vANiyagAme nayare ucca-nIyamajjhimAiM kulAI ghara-
samudANassa bhikkhAyariyAe aDittae  /  ahAsu devANuppiyA ! ( mA paDibaMdhaM
kareha  /  ) bele ke pAraNe kA dina thA, bhagavAn gautama ne pahale pahara meM
svAdhyAya kiyA, dUsare pahara meM dhyAna kiyA, tIsare pahara meM atvarita
jaldabAjI na karate hue, acapala sthiratApUrvaka, asaMbhrAntaanAkula bhAva se
jAgarUkatApUrvaka mukhavastrikA kA pratilekhana kiyA, pAtroM aura vastroM kA
pratilekhana evaM pramArjana kiyA  /  pAtra uThAye, vaisA kara, jahAM zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra the, vahAM aae| unheM vaMdana, namaskAra kiyaa| vaMdana,
namaskAra kara yoM bole bhagavan ! Apase anujJA prApta kara maiM Aja bele ke
pAraNe ke dina vANijyagrAma nagara meM ucca ( sadhana ), nimna (nirdhana),
madhyama sabhI kuloM meM gRhasamudAnI kramAgata kisI bhI ghara ko binA chor3e kI
jAne vAlI bhikSA-caryA ke lie jAnA cAhatA hUM  /  bhagavAn bole-devAnupriya !
jaise tumheM sukha ho, (binA pratibandha - - vilamba kie ) karo  /  84 ] 78. tae
NaM bhagavaM goyame samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM abbhaNuNNAe samANe samaNassa
bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyAo dUipalAsAo ceiyAo paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA
aturiyamacavalamasaMbhaMte jugaMtara- pariloyaNAe diTThIe purao IriyaM sohemANe
jeNeva vANiyagAme nayare teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA vANiyagAme nayare ucca-
nIyamajjhimAiM kulAI ghara-samudANassa bhikkhAyariyAe aDai  /  zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra se abhyanujJAta hokara unakI AjJA prApta kara bhagavAn gautama ne
dUtIpalAza caitya se prasthAna kiyaa| prasthAna kara, binA zIghratA kie,
sthiratApUrvaka anAkula bhAva se yuga-pariNAma-sAr3he tIna hAtha taka mArga kA
parilokana karate hue, IryAsamitipUrvaka - - bhUmi ko bhalI bhAMti dekhakara
calate hue, jahAM vANijyagrAma nagara thA, vahAM aae| Akara vahAM ucca, nimna
evaM madhya kuloM meM samudAnIbhikSA hetu ghUmane lage  /  79. tase bhagavaM
goyame vANiyagAme nayare, jahA paNNattIe tahA, jAva (uccanIya-majjhimAiM kulAI
gharasamudANassa ) bhikkhAyariyAe aDamANe ahA- pajjattaM bhatta-pANaM sammaM
paDiggAhei, paDiggAhettA vANiyagAmAo paDiNiggacchai, paDiNiggacchitA kollAyassa
sannivesassa adUrasAmaMteNaM vIIvayamANe, bahujaNasaddaM nisAmei, bahujaNo

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: The Story of Ananda  [85] Thus it is said, O Devānupriya! The
monk Ānanda, the disciple of the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, was engaged in the last
stages of his life (marana-sanlehana-jhushana-jhushiye, bhattapaanapariyaaikkhie
kaalam) in the posah-sala (monastery).   Bhagavān Gautama, following the rules
of bhikṣācaryā (begging for food) as described in the Vyākhyāprajñapti Sutra (in
high, low, and middle families), had taken as much food and water as he needed.
After taking food, he left the commercial town and city. While passing by the
Kollaraka sannivesa (settlement), not too far or too close, he heard many people
talking. They were saying to each other, "O Devānupriya! The monk Ānanda, the
disciple of the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, is engaged in the last stages of his life
(marana-sanlehana-jhushana-jhushiye, bhattapaanapariyaaikkhie kaalam) in the
posah-sala (monastery), without desiring death."  [80] Hearing this from many
people, Gautama's mind was filled with such a feeling, thought, or intention: "I
will go to the monk Ānanda and see him." Thinking this, he went to the Kollaraka
sannivesa, the posah-sala, and the monk Ānanda.  [81] Seeing Bhagavān Gautama
coming, the monk Ānanda was overwhelmed with joy. He bowed and prostrated
himself before Bhagavān Gautama, and said, "O Bhagavān! I am so weakened by
severe austerities that my veins are visible on my body. Therefore, I am unable
to come to you, O Devānupriya, and bow down to your feet three times. Therefore,
O Master! Please come here of your own free will, without any compulsion, so
that I can bow down to your feet three times and pay my respects to you, O
Devānupriya."  [82] Then Bhagavān Gautama went to the monk Ānanda.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] [85 annamannassa evamAikkhaievaM khalu
devANuppiyA! samaNasya bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtevAsI * ANaMde nAmaM samaNovAsae
posahasAlAe apacchima jAva (mAraNaMtiya-saMlehaNA-jhUsaNAjhUsie,
bhattapANapaDiyAikkhie kAlaM) aNavakaMkhamANe virhi| bhagavAna gautama ne
vyAkhyAprajJapti sUtra meM varNita bhikSAcaryA ke vidhAna ke anurUpa (ucca,
nimna evaM madhya kuloM meM samudAnI bhikSA hetu) ghumate hue yathAparyApta-
jitanA jaisA apekSita thA, utanA AhArapAnI bhalI-bhAMti grahaNa kiyaa| grahaNa
kara vANijyagrAma nagara se cle| calakara jaba kollAka sanniveza ke na adhika
dura, na adhika nikaTa se nikala rahe the, to bahuta se logoM ko bAta karate
sunaa| ve Apasa meM yoM kaha rahe thedevAnupriyo! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
antevAsI-ziSya zramaNopAsaka Ananda poSadhazAlA meM mRtyu kI AkAMkSA na karate
hue antima saMlekhanA, (khAna-pAna kA parityAgaAmaraNa-anazana) svIkAra kie
ArAdhanA-rata haiN| 80. tae NaM tassa goyamassa bahujaNassa aMtie eyamaDhaM
soccA, nisamma ayameyArUve ajjhatthie, ciMtie, patthie, maNogae saMkappe
samuppajjitthAtaM gacchAmi NaM ANaMdaM samaNovAsayaM paasaami| evaM saMpehei,
saMpehettA jeNeva kollAe sannivese jeNeva posaha-sAlA, jeNeva ANaMde
samaNovAsae, teNeva uvaagcchi| aneka logoM se yaha bAta sunakara, gautama ke
mana meM aisA bhAva, cintana, vicAra yA saMkalpa uThAmaiM zramaNopAsaka Ananda
ke pAsa jAUM aura use dekhU  /  aisA socakara ve jahAM kollAka sanniveza thA,
poSadha-zAlA thI, zramaNopAsaka Ananda thA, vahAM ge| 81. tae NaM se ANaMde
samaNovAsae bhagavaM goyamaM ejamANaM pAsai, pAsittA haTTha jAva' hiyae bhagavaM
goyamaM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsIevaM khalu bhaMte! ahaM
imeNaM urAleNaM jAva' dhamaNi-saMtae jAe, no saMcAemi devANuppiyassa aMtiyaM
pAubbhavittA NaM tikkhutto muddhANeNaM pAe abhivaMdittae, tubbhe! icchAkAreNaM
aNabhioeNaM io ceva eha, jA NaM devANuppiyANaM tikkhutto muddhANeNaM pAesu
vaMdAmi nmsaami| zramaNopAsaka Ananda ne bhagavAn gautama ko Ate hue dekhaa|
dekhakara vaha (yAvat) atyanta tra huA, bhagavAn gautama ko vandana-namaskAra
kara bolAbhagavan! maiM ghora tapazcaryA se itanA kSINa ho gayA hUM ki mere
zarIra para ubharI huI nAr3iyA~ dikhane lagI hai| isalie devAnupriya keApake
pAsa Ane tathA tIna bAra mastaka jhukA kara caraNoM me vandanA karane meM
asamartha huuN| ata eva prabho! Apa hI svecchApUrvaka, anabhiyoga sekisI dabAva
ke binA yahAM padhAreM, jisase maiM tIna bAra mastaka jhukAkara devAnupriya
keApake caraNoM meM vandana, namaskAra kara skuu| 82. tae NaM se bhagavaM
goyame, jeNeva ANaMde samaNovAsae, teNeva uvaagcchi| 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 12
2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 73

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 86] [Upasakadasangasutra]  Then the Bhagavan Gautama went to where the
Shramanopasaka Anand was.  83. Then that Anand, the Shramanopasaka, with his
head bowed three times, paid homage and prostrated himself at the feet of the
Bhagavan Gautama. After paying homage and prostrating himself, he said,
"Bhagavan! Does the knowledge of Avadhi arise in a householder who is living in
a household?"  - "Yes, it does."  "Bhagavan! If the knowledge of Avadhi arises
in a householder, then Bhagavan! I, too, have attained the knowledge of Avadhi
while living in a household. I know and see the salt sea, five hundred yojanas
in each direction, east, west, and south, and the Chulla Himavan Varshadhara
mountain in the north, the Saudharma Kalpa in the upper direction, and the
Lolupacyuta Naraka in the lower direction, which is the first Naraka-9-bhoomi
Rattra-Prabha."  The Shramanopasaka Anand bowed his head three times and paid
homage and prostrated himself at the feet of the Bhagavan Gautama. After paying
homage and prostrating himself, he said, "Bhagavan! Does the knowledge of Avadhi
arise in a householder?"  - "Yes, it does."  "Bhagavan! If the knowledge of
Avadhi arises in a householder, then Bhagavan! I, too, have attained the
knowledge of Avadhi while living in a household. I know and see the salt sea,
five hundred yojanas in each direction, east, west, and south, and the Chulla
Himavan Varshadhara mountain in the north, the Saudharma Kalpa in the upper
direction, and the Lolupacyuta Naraka in the lower direction, which is the first
Naraka-9-bhoomi Rattra-Prabha."  84. Then the Bhagavan Gautama said to the
Shramanopasaka Anand, "Anand! The knowledge of Avadhi can arise in a
householder, but not to such a vast extent. Therefore, Anand! You should
criticize, condemn, and censure this situation or tendency of this place,
(perform Pratikramana - return to a pure inner state, condemn this tendency,
censure it, feel inner regret, shatter it - break it or erase it, purify this
non-action or inaction, cleanse the faults arising from it, become ready for
appropriate atonement) and accept the Tapas-Karma for that purpose."  85. Then
that Anand, the Shramanopasaka, said to the Bhagavan Gautama, "Bhagavan! In the
words of the Jina, the truth, the right conduct, the right knowledge, and the
right faith, should be criticized, condemned, and censured, shattered, purified,
cleansed of non-action, and become ready for atonement. See Sutra number 83."
1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86 ] [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra taba bhagavAn gautama, jahAM Ananda zramaNopAsaka
thA, vahAM gaye  /  83. tae NaM se ANaMde samaNovAsae bhagavao goyamassra
tikkhutto muddhANeNaM pAesa vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI -
atthi NaM bhaMte! gihiNo gihamajjhAvasaMtasya ohinANaM samuppajjai ? - haMtA
asthi  /  jai NaM bhaMte! gihiNo jAva (gihamajjhAvasaMtassa ohi - nANaM )
samuppajjai, evaM khalu bhaMte! mamavi gihiNo gihamajjhAvasaMtassa ohi nANe
samuppaNNepuratthime NaM lavaNasamudde paMca joyaNasayAI jAva (khettaM jANAmi
pAsAmi evaM dakkhiNeNaM paccatthimeNaM ya, uttareNaM jAva cullahimavaMtaM
vAsadharapavvayaM jANAmi pAsAmi, uDDuM jAva sohammaM kappaM jANAmi pAsAmi, ahe
jAva imIseM rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe) loluyaccuyaM narayaM jANAmi pAsAmi  /
zramaNopAsaka Ananda ne tIna bAra mastaka jhukAkara bhagavAn gautama ke caraNoM
meM vandana, namaskAra kiyA  /  vandana, namaskAra kara vaha yoM bolA bhagavan !
eka gRhastha kI bhUmikA meM vidyamAna mujhe bhI avadhijJAna huA hai, jisase maiM
pUrva, pazcima tathA dakSiNa dizA meM pAMca- sau, pAMca sau yojana taka kA
lavaNasamudra kA kSetra, uttara dizA meM culla himavAn varSadhara parvata taka
kA kSetra Urdhva dizA meM saudharma kalpa taka tathA adhodizA meM prathama
nAraka- 9 -bhUmi rattra-prabhA meM lolupAcyuta nAmaka naraka taka jAnatA hUM,
dekhatA hUM  /  84. taNaM se bhagavaM goyame ANaMdaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI
atthi NaM, ANaMdA ! gihiNo jAva' samupajjai  /  no ceva NaM emhaale| taM NaM
tumaM, ANaMdA! eyassa ThANassa Aloehi jAva (paDikkamAhi, niMdAhi garihAhi,
viuTTAhi, visohehi akaraNatAe abhuTThAhi ahArihaM pAyacchitaM ) tavo-kammaM
paDivajjAhi  /  " taba bhagavAn gautama ne zramaNopAsaka Ananda se kahAgRhastha
ko avadhi - jJAna utpanna ho sakatA hai, para itanA vizAla nhiiN| isalie Ananda
! tuma isa sthAna kI isa mRSAvAda rUpa sthiti yA pravRtti kI AlocanA karo,
(pratikramaNa karo- punaH zuddha antaHsthiti meM lauTo, isa pravRtti kI nindA
karo, garhA karo Antarika kheda anubhava karo, ise vitroTita karo - vicchinna
karo yA miTAo, isa akaraNatA yA akArya kA vizodhana karo isase janita doSa kA
parimArjana karo, yathocita prAyazcitta ke lie abhyutthita - - udyata ho jAo)
tadartha tapa:karma svIkAra karo  /  85. tae NaM se ANaMde samaNovAsae bhagavaM
goyamaM evaM vayAsI-atthi NaM, bhaMte! jiNa-vayaNe satANaM, taccANaM tahiyANaM,
sabbhUyANaM bhAvANaM Aloijjai jAva paDikkamijja, niMdijjai, garihijjai,
viuTTijjai, visohijjai akaraNayAe, abbhuTThijjai ahArihaM pAracchittaM dekheM
sUtra saMkhyA 83  /  1.

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[87 First Study: Gathapati Ananda]  Tavo-karma) is it to be criticized? No, it
is not. "O Venerable One! In the Jina's teachings, for true, authentic, factual,
and virtuous feelings, criticism (pratikramana, ninda, garha, nivrtti,
akaranata-visuddhi, yathocita prayaschitta, tadanuroopa tapa-kriya) is not to be
accepted." Ananda said, "O Venerable One! If in the Jina's teachings, criticism
(pratikramana, ninda, garha, nivrtti, akaranata-visuddhi, yathocita
prayaschitta, tadanuroopa tapa-kriya) is not to be accepted for true feelings,
then, Venerable One! You yourself should accept criticism (pratikramana, ninda,
garha, nivrtti, akaranata-visuddhi, yathocita prayaschitta, tadanuroopa tapa-
kriya) for this place-conduct." 86. When the Venerable Ananda said this, the
Venerable Gautama, filled with doubt, curiosity, and uncertainty, left Ananda's
presence. Having left, he went to the Venerable Mahavira, the great sage. Having
gone, he stood near the Venerable Mahavira, the great sage, and performed
pratikramana. Having performed pratikramana, he criticized the place-conduct.
Having criticized, he saw the food and drink. Having seen, he bowed and
prostrated to the Venerable Mahavira. Having bowed and prostrated, he said,
"Venerable One! I have told you everything, just as I was filled with doubt,
curiosity, and uncertainty, and left Ananda's presence. Having left, I came
here. Venerable One! Should Ananda's place-conduct be criticized (pratikramana,
ninda, garha, nivrtti, visodha, akaranata, abbhutta, aharita, payaschitta, tavo-
karma) or not? Should I criticize it?" The Venerable Mahavira, the great sage,
said, "O Gautama! You yourself should criticize that place-conduct. And Ananda,
the Shramanopasaka, is just like this."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [87 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda] tavokamma) paDivajijai ? no iNaDhe
smddhe| jar3a NaM bhaMte! jiNa vayaNe saMtANaM jAva (taccANaM, tahiyANaM,
sabbhUyANa) bhAvANaM noAloijjai jAva (no paDikkamijai, no niMdijjai, no
garihijjai, no viuTTijjai, no visohijai akaraNayAe, no abbhuTThijai ahArihaM
pAyacchitaM) tavo-kammaM no paDivajijai, taM NaM bhaMte! tubbhe ceva eyassa
ThANassa Aloeha jAva (paDikkameha, niMdeha, gariheha, viuddeha, visoheha
akaraNayAe, abbhuDheha ahArihaM pAyacchittaM tavokamma) pddivjh| zramaNopAsaka
Ananda bhagavAn gautama se bolAbhagavan ! kyA jina-zAsana meM satya,
tattvapUrNa, tathya-yathArtha, sadbhUta bhAvoM ke lie bhI AlocanA (pratikramaNa,
nindA, garhA, nivRtti, akaraNatAvizuddhi, yathocita prAyazcitta, tadanurUpa
tapaHkriyA) svIkAra karanI hotI hai? gautama ne kahAaisA nahIM hotaa| Ananda
bolAbhagavan ! jina-zAsana meM satya bhAvoM ke lie AlocanA (pratikramaNa, nindA,
gardA, nivRtti, akaraNatA-vizuddhi, yathocita prAyazcitta tathA tadanurUpa
tapaHkriyA) svIkAra nahIM karanI hotI to bhante! isa sthAna-AcaraNa ke lie Apa
hI AlocanA (pratikramaNa, nindA, gardA, nivRtti, akaraNatA-vizuddhi yathocita
prAyazcitta tathA tadanurUpa tapaHkriyA) svIkAra kreN| 86. tae NaM se bhagavaM
goyame ANaMdeNaM samaNovAsaeNaM evaM vutte samANe, saMkie, kaMkhie, viigicchA-
samAvanne, ANaMdassa aMtiyAo paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA jeNeva duipallAse
ceie, jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre, teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA samaNassa
bhagavao mahAvIrassa adUrasAmante gamaNAgamaNAe paDikkamai paDikkamittA
esaNamaNesaNaM Aloei, AloittA bhattapANaM paDidaMsai, paDidaMsittA samaNaM
bhagavaM vaMdai namaMsai, vaMdittA, namaMsittA evaM vayAsI-evaM khalu bhaMte!
ahaM tubbhehiM abbhaNuNNAe taM ceva savvaM kahei, jAva tae NaM ahaM saMkieM,
kaMkhie, viigicchA-samAvanne ANaMdassa samaNovAsagassa aMtiyAo paDiNikkhamAmi,
paDiNikkhamittA jeNeva ihaM teNeva havvamAgae, taM NaM bhaMte! kiM ANaMdeNaM
samaNovAsaeNaM tassa ThANassa AloeyavvaM jAva (paDikkammeyavvaM, niMdeyavvaM,
gariheyavvaM, viuTTeyavvaM visoheyavvaM akaraNayAe, abbhuTTeyavvaM ahArihaM
pAyacchittaM tavo-kamma) paDivajjeyavvaM udAhu mae? goyamA! i samaNe bhagavaM
mahAvIre bhagavaM goyama evaM vayAsIgoyamA! tumaM ceva NaM tassa ThANassa Aloehi
jAva paDivajAhi, ANaMdaM ca samaNovAsayaM eyamaDheM khaamehi| zramaNopAsaka
Ananda ke yoM kahane para bhagavAn gautama ke mana meM zaMkA, kAMkSA,
vicikitsA1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 84

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 88] [Upasakadasangasutra] Doubt arose. They departed from Ananda. Departing,
they came to where the Duutipalasha Chaitya was, where Lord Mahavira was.
Arriving, they performed Pratikraman (atonement) of going and coming not too
far, not too close to the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, and criticized the Eshaniya-
Aneshaniya (things that should be done and things that should not be done).
After criticizing, they showed the food and water to the Bhagwan. Showing it,
they bowed and prostrated, and told everything that had happened after they had
gone for alms with the Bhagwan's permission! Doing so, they said, "After this
incident, I have come to you immediately from Shramanopasak Ananda, being
doubtful, desirous, and uncertain. Bhagwan! Should Shramanopasak Ananda accept
the criticism (Pratikraman, Ninda, Garha, Nivritti, Akaranata-Vishuddhi,
Yathochit Prayashchitta, and the corresponding Tapa-kriya) for this place-
conduct, or should I?" Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira said, "Gautam! You should
perform the criticism for this place-conduct, and also seek forgiveness from
Shramanopasak Ananda for it."  ## 87. Therefore, Bhagwan Gautam, hearing the
words of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, "You are right," said so with humility.
Hearing it, he accepted the criticism (Pratikraman, Ninda, Garha, Nivritti,
Akaranata-Vishuddhi, Yathochit Prayashchitta, and the corresponding Tapa-kriya)
for that place-conduct, and sought forgiveness from Shramanopasak Ananda.  ##
88. Then, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, after that, went to other Janapadas
(regions) for Vihar (wandering).  ## 89. Then, Shramanopasak Ananda, by many
kinds of Sila-vratas (virtuous vows) [Gunavrata, Viraman Virati, Pratyakhyan
Tyag, and Poshadhopavas], cultivated his own self, having attained the
Shramanopasak-Paryaya (stage of a lay follower) for twenty years, having
properly fasted eleven Upasak-Pratima (images of lay followers), having purified
himself by the Sanlehana (purification) of the month, having cut off himself
from food and drink for the sake of the Bhatta (meal), being critical and
performing Pratikraman, being Samahit (collected), having spent time in the
Kalmasa (month) and Kal (time), having attained the Soham (self-realization) in
the Soham-Vadimsa (twenty-second) Maha-Vimana (great celestial palace) in the
Arun (red) Vimana (celestial palace) in the Uttar-Purthima (north-east)
direction, he attained the state of a Devata (divine being). There, four Pali-
ovamas (similes) were established for the Devas (divine beings) who had attained
the state of Arhat (liberated). There, four Pali-ovamas were also established
for Ananda, who had become a Deva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 88] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra saMzaya utpanna huaa| ve Ananda ke pAsa se ravAnA hue|
ravAnA hokara jahAM dUtIpalAza caitya thA, bhagavAn mahAvIra the, vahAM aae|
Akara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke na adhika dUra, na adhika najadIka
gamanaAgamana kA pratikramaNa kiyA, eSaNIya-aneSaNIya kI AlocanA kii| AlocanA
kara AhAra-pAnI bhagavAn ko dikhlaayaa| dikhalAkara vandana-namaskAra kara vaha
saba kahA jo bhagavAn se AjJA lekara bhikSA ke lie jAne ke pazcAt ghaTita huA
thA! vaisA kara ve bolemaiM isa ghaTanA ke bAda zaMkA, kAMkSA aura saMzayayukta
hokara zramaNopAsaka Ananda ke yahAM se calakara Apake pAsa turanta AyA huuN|
bhagavan ! ukta sthAnaAcAraNa ke lie kyA zramaNopAsaka Ananda ko AlocanA
(pratikramaNa nindA, gardA, nivRtti akaraNatA-vizuddhi, yathocita prAyazcitta
tathA tadanurUpa tapaHkriyA) svIkAra karanI cAhie yA mujhe? zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra bolegautama! isa sthAna-AcaraNa ke lie tuma hI AlocanA karo tathA isake
lie zramaNopAsaka Ananda se kSamA yAcanA bhii| 87. tae NaM se bhagavaM goyame,
samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa taha tti eyamaTuM viNaeNaM paDisuNei, paDisuNettA
tassa ThANassa Aloei jAva (paDikkamai, niMdai, garihai viuTTai, visohai,
akaraNayAe, abbhuDhei ahArihaM pAyacchittaM tavokammaM ) paDivajai, ANaMdaM ca
samaNovAsayaM eyamaDheM khaamei|  /  bhagavAn gautama ne zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra kA kathana, 'Apa ThIka pharamAte haiM', yoM kahakara vinayapUrvaka
sunaa| sunakara usa sthAna-AcaraNa ke lie AlocanA, (pratikramaNa, nindA, garhA,
nivRti, akaraNatA-vizuddhi, yathocita prAyazcitta tathA tadanurUpa tapaHkriyA)
svIkAra kI evaM zramaNopAsaka Ananda se kSamA-yAcanA kii| 88. tae NaM samaNe
bhagavaM mahAvIre annayA kayAi bahiyA jaNavaya-vihAraM vihri| tatpazcAt zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra kisI samaya anya janapadoM meM vihAra kara ge| 89. tae NaM se
ANaMde samaNovAsae bahUhiM sIla-vvaehiM jAva (guNaveramaNa paccakkhANa-
posahovavAsehiM) appANaM bhAvetA, vIsaM vAsAI samaNovAsaga-pariyAgaM pAuNittA,
ekkArasa ya uvAsaga-paDimAo sammaM kAeNaM phAsittA, mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe attANaM
jhUsittA, sarddhi bhattAiM aNasaNAe chedettA, Aloiya-paDikkaMte, samAhipate,
kAlamAse kAlaM kiccA, sohamme kappe sohammavaDiMsagassa mahAvimANassa
uttarapurathimeNaM arUNe vimANe devattAe uvvnne| tattha NaM atthe-gaiyANaM
devANaM cattAri paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa| tattha NaM ANaMdasya vi devassa
cattAri paliovamAI ThiI pnnnnttaa| yoM zramaNopAsaka Ananda ne anekabidha
zIlavrata [guNavrata, viramaNavirati, pratyAkhyAna tyAga evaM poSadhopavAsa
dvArA AtmA ko bhAvita kiyA-AtmA kA pariSkAra aura parimArjana kiyaa| bIsa varSa
taka zramaNopAsaka paryAya-zrAvaka-dharma kA pAlana kiyA, gyAraha upAsaka-
pratimAoM kA bhalI-bhAMti

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Study: The Story of Ananda  [89] Following the path, completing a month
of fasting and sixty meals, and after undergoing criticism and repentance,
Ananda, upon the arrival of death, relinquished his body in a state of
meditation. After leaving his body, he was reborn as a god in the Arun-Vimana,
located in the northeast corner of the Saudharma-Avatamsaka Maha-Vimana in the
Saudharma Devaloka. There, the lifespan of many gods is four Palya-Upama. The
lifespan of Shramanopasaka Ananda is also said to be four Palya-Upama.  [90] "O
Ananda, Venerable One! When the lifespan, existence, and state of the gods in
that Devaloka come to an end, where will they go after relinquishing their
divine bodies? Where will they be reborn?"  "O Gotama! They will attain Siddha-
Gati or liberation in the Maha-Videha realm."  ||Nikkhevo|| ||The first study of
the seventh Anga, Upasaka-Dasha, is complete.||  Gotama asked the Bhagavan
Mahavir, "Venerable One! Where will Ananda go after relinquishing his divine
body when his lifespan, existence, and state in that Devaloka come to an end?
Where will he be reborn?"  The Bhagavan said, "O Gotama! Ananda will attain
Siddha-Gati or liberation in the Maha-Videha realm."  ||Nikkhevo|| ||The first
study of the seventh Anga, Upasaka-Dasha, is complete.||  1. "Thus, O Jambu!
This is the meaning of the first study of Upasaka-Dasha as explained by the
Shraman." 2. "The conclusion," said the Arya Sudharma, "O Jambu! This is the
meaning of the first study of Upasaka-Dasha as explained by the Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir, which I have told you."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama adhyayana : gAthApati Ananda ] [89 anusaraNa kiyA, eka mAsa kI
saMlekhanA aura sATha bhojanaeka mAsa kA anazana saMpanna kara, AlocanA,
pratikramaNa kara maraNa-kAla Ane para samAdhipUrvaka deha-tyAga kiyaa| deha
tyAga kara vaha saudharma devaloka meM saudharmAvataMsaka mahAvimAna ke IzAna-
koNa meM sthita arUNa-vimAna meM deva rUpa meM utpanna huaa| vahAM aneka devoM
kI Ayu-sthiti cAra palyopama kI hotI hai| zramaNo-pAsaka Ananda kI Ayu-sthiti
bhI cAra palyopama kI batalAI gaI hai| 90.ANaMde NaM bhaMte! deve tAo devalogAo
AukkhaeNaM, bhavakkhaeNaM, ThiikkhaeNaM aNaMtaraM cayaM caittA, kahiM gacchihii?
kahiM uvavajihii? goyamA! mahAvidehe vAse sijjhhii| nikkhevo' ||sttmss aMgassa
uvAsagadasANaM paDhamaM ajjhayaNaM samattaM  //  gautama ne bhagavAn mahAvIra se
pUchAbhante! Ananda usa devaloka se Ayu, bhava evaM sthiti ke kSaya hone para
deva-zarIra kA tyAga kara kahAM jAyagA? kahAM utpanna hogA? bhagavAn ne
kahAgautama! Ananda mahAvideha kSetra meM siddha-gati yA mukti prApta kregaa|
||nikssep  //   //  sAtaveM aMga upAsakadazA kA prathama adhyayana samApta  /  /
1. evaM khalu jambU! samaNeNaM jAva uvAsagadasANaM paDhamassa ajjhayaNassa
ayamaDhe pnnnnttettibemi| 2. nigamanaArya sudharmA bolejambU! zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA ke prathama adhyayana kA yahIM artha bhAva kahA thA, jo
maiMne tumheM batalAyA hai|

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study Summary  The story takes place during the time of the Shraman
Bhagwan Mahavira, in the city of Champa, located in what is now known as Bihar.
The king of Champa was Jitashatru. The city of Champa was likely located near
present-day Bhagalpur, where some remnants and signs still exist today.  Champa
was a very prosperous city in its time. A Gahapati named Kamdev lived there. His
wife was named Bhadra, who was virtuous and devoted to her husband. Kamdev was a
very wealthy and prosperous householder. His wealth surpassed even that of
Anand. He had six crore gold coins in his treasury as permanent capital, six
crore gold coins invested in trade and business, and six crore gold coins used
for the consumption of luxurious items, decorations, and other household
necessities. He owned six Gokuls, each with ten thousand cows. With such immense
wealth, he must have had a large number of servants, maids, and employees.
Kamdev possessed all that is considered happiness, prosperity, and wealth in
worldly terms.  Kamdev's family life was happy. He was a courteous and sociable
person. He was a leader in society. He was highly respected in the royal court.
The city's prominent and respected citizens sought his advice on important
matters and respected his words. This was because Kamdev was wise.  Like Anand,
a new turn came in Kamdev's life. He had a special opportunity to awaken his
wisdom. Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, preaching the message of non-violence,
equality, and good conduct to the people, arrived in Champa with his followers.
He stayed at the Chaitya called Purnabhadra. Upon hearing of the Bhagwan's
arrival, a throng of devotees gathered to see him. King Jitashatru also went to
see the Bhagwan with his royal pomp and show. Other devout citizens also arrived
there. As soon as Kamdev learned of this, he went to the Bhagwan's service with
a desire to listen to the Dharma. He listened to the Dharma-Deshana. His wisdom
was awakened. The Bhagwan's teachings shook the mind of this supremely wealthy
Gahapati. Like Anand, he accepted the Griha-Dharma from the Bhagwan. Even while
remaining a householder, he tried to avoid indulgence, desires, cravings, and
lust as much as possible, keeping his life disciplined and controlled. The
feeling of attachment was diminishing in his life.  Like Anand, another turning
point came in his life. He left his family and worldly life...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana sAra-saMkSepa zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samaya kI bAta
hai, pUrva bihAra meM campA nAmaka nagarI thii| vahAM ke rAjA kA nAma jitazatru
thaa| sambhavataH campA nagarI kI avasthiti, Aja jahAM bhAgalapura hai, usake
AsapAsa thii| kucha avazeSa, cihna Adi Aja bhI vahAM vidyamAna haiN| campA apane
yuga kI eka atyanta samRddha nagarI thii| vahAM kAmadeva nAmaka eka gAthApati
rahatA thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma bhadrA thA, jo suyogya tathA patiparAyaNa thii|
kAmadeva eka bahuta samRddha evaM sampanna gRhastha thaa| usakI sampatti
gAthApati Ananda se bhI bar3I-caDhI thii| chaha karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM sthAyI
pUMjI ke rUpa meM usake khajAne meM thI, chaha karAr3a svarNa-mudrAeM vyApAra-
vyavasAya meM lagI thIM tathA chaha karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM ghara ke
vaibhavaupakaraNa, sAja-sAmAna Adi ke upabhoga meM A rahI thiiN| dasa-dasa
hajAra gAyoM ke chaha gokula usake vahAM the| itane bar3e vaibhavazAlI purUSa ke
dAsa-dAsiyoM, karmacAriyoM Adi kI saMkhyA bhI bahuta bar3I rahI hogii| laukika
bhASA meM jise sukha, samRddhi tathA sampannatA kahA jAtA hai, vaha saba
kAmadeva ko prApta thaa| kAmadeva kA pArivArika jIvana sukhI thaa| vaha eka
saujanyazIla tathA milanasAra vyakti thaa| vaha samAja meM agragaNya thaa|
rAjakIya kSetra meM usakA bhArI sammAna thaa| nagara ke sambhrAnta aura
pratiSThita jana mahattvapUrNa kAryoM meM usakA parAmarza lete the, usakI bAta
ko Adara dete the, vaha saba isalie thA ki kAmadeva vivekI thaa| Ananda kI
taraha kAmadeva ke jIvana meM bhI eka nayA mor3a aayaa| usake viveka ke jAgRta
hone kA eka vizeSa avasara prApta huaa| jana-jana ko ahiMsA, samatA aura
sadAcAra kA saMdeza dete hue zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra apane pAda-bihAra ke bIca
campA padhAre  /  pUrNabhadra nAmaka caitya meM ruuke| bhagavAn kA padArpaNa
huA, jAnakara darzanArthiyoM kA tAMtA baMdha gyaa| rAjA jitazatru bhI apane
rAjakIya ThATha-bATa ke sAtha bhagavAn ke darzana karane gyaa| anyAnya
dharmAnurAgI nAgarika-jana bhI vahA~ phuNce| jyoM hI kAmadeva ko yaha jJAta huA,
vaha dharma sunane kI utkaMThA lie bhagavAn kI sevA meM phuNcaa| dharma-dezanA
zravaNa kii| usakA viveka udbuddha huaa| usa parama vaibhavazAlI gAthApati ke
mana ko bhagavAn ke upadeza ne ekAeka jhakajhora diyaa| Ananda kI taraha usane
bhagavAn se gRhi-dharma svIkAra kiyaa| gRhastha meM rahate hue bhI bhoga,
vAsanA, lAlasA aura kAmanA kI dRSTi se jitanA ho sake bacA jAya, jIvana ko
saMyamita aura niyaMtrita rakhA jAya, isa bhAvanA ko lie hue kAmadeva apane
sabhI kAma karatA thaa| Asakti kA bhAva usake jIvana meM kama hotA jA rahA thaa|
Ananda kI hI taraha phira jIvana meM dUsarA mor3a aayaa| usane pArivArika tathA
laukika

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva  [91] Kamadeva entrusted his eldest son
with his responsibilities and dedicated himself fully to his spiritual
practices. He immersed himself in the worship of virtue, vows, renunciation, and
non-attachment. While doing so, a time of testing came in his life. He was
seated in the dining hall, taking his meal. To disrupt his practice, a deceitful
deity arrived. He assumed the form of a terrifying, monstrous, and fearsome
demon to frighten and distress Kamadeva. The sight of this demon made one's mind
tremble.  The demon, holding a sharp sword in his hand, threatened and
intimidated Kamadeva, saying, "Abandon your worship, or I will cut you into
pieces with this sword right now." Kamadeva was a wise and courageous man,
steadfast in his faith. The hour of testing is the crucible where a person is
proven true or false. Kamadeva was being tested. When Kamadeva remained
unwavering, the demon became even more enraged. He repeated his threat a second
and third time, but Kamadeva remained firm and steady as before. Then, the demon
did as he had said and tore Kamadeva's body into pieces. Kamadeva endured this
excruciating pain with self-strength and patience, without flinching. This was a
divine illusion, and it happened so quickly that Kamadeva was immediately
restored to his physical form.  The deity, intending to further distract
Kamadeva from his practice, decided to inflict more suffering. He took the form
of a frenzied, untamed elephant. He threatened to toss Kamadeva into the air,
pierce him with his tusks, and trample him underfoot. He did this once, twice,
and three times. Kamadeva remained steadfast and firm. Then, the elephant-shaped
deity inflicted the pain he had threatened, but Kamadeva's steadfastness
remained unshaken.  The deity tried again. He became a fierce, venomous serpent.
In the form of a serpent, he cruelly tormented Kamadeva, wrapping himself three
times around his neck and striking him with his fangs on his chest. But this
attempt also failed. Kamadeva did not waver in the slightest. He passed the test
of the crucible. One who does not waver even in the presence of the causes of
attachment is truly patient. Non-violence triumphed over violence. The violent
deity was defeated by the non-violent Kamadeva. The deity exclaimed, "Kamadeva!
You are truly blessed!" He fell at Kamadeva's feet and begged for forgiveness.
He explained that he had heard Indra praising Kamadeva's religious steadfastness
in the Saudharma heaven, and he could not bear it. That is why he had come to
inflict these hardships.  The devotee Kamadeva's mind was absorbed in his
worship. When he realized that the hardship had ended, he completed the parana
of the accepted image.  By a fortunate coincidence, Lord Mahavira arrived in the
city of Champa during his travels through the countryside. When Kamadeva heard
this, he thought, "How wonderful it would be if I could pay my respects to the
Lord and complete my fast." Accordingly, he went to the Purnabhadra shrine where
the Lord was seated. He saw the Lord and was overjoyed. The Lord was omniscient.
He knew everything that had happened. He said to Kamadeva,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana : gAthApati kAmadeva] [91 dAyitva apane jyeSTha putra ko
saupe aura svayaM apane Apako adhikAdhika sAdhanA meM lagA diyaa| zIla, vrata,
tyAga-pratyAkhyAna Adi kI ArAdhanA meM usane tanmaya bhAva se apane ko ramA
diyaa| aisA karate hue usake jIvana meM eka parIkSA kI ghar3I aaii| vaha
poSadhazAlA meM poSadha lie baiThA thaa| usakI sAdhanA meM vighna karane ke lie
eka mithyAtvI deva aayaa| usane kAmadeva ko bhayabhIta aura saMtrasta karane
hetu eka atyanta bhISaNa, vikarAla, bhayAvaha pizAca kA rUpa dhAraNa kiyA, jise
dekhate hI mana tharrA utthe| pizAca ne tIkSNa khaDga hAtha meM lie hue kAmadeva
ko DarAyA-dhamakAyA aura kahA ki tuma apanI upAsanA chor3a do, nahIM to abhI isa
talavAra se kATa kara Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara duuNgaa| kAmadeva vivekI aura sAhasI
purUSa thA, dRr3haniSTha thaa| parIkSA kI ghar3I hI to vaha kasauTI hai, jaba
vyakti kharA yA khoTA siddha hotA hai| kAmadeva kI parIkSA thii| jaba kAmadeva
avicala rahA to pizAca aura adhika kruddha ho gyaa| usane dUsarI bAra, tIsarI
bAra phira vaise hI khaa| para, kAmadeva pUrvavat dRDha evaM susthira banA rhaa|
taba pizAca ne jaisA kahA thA, kAmadeva kI deha ke Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara ddaale|
kAmadeva Atma-dRDhatA aura dhairya ke sAtha isa ghora vedanA ko saha gayA, cUM
taka nahIM kiyaa| yaha devamAyAjanya thA, itanI tvarA se huA ki tatkAla kAmadeva
daihika dRSTi se yathAvat ho gyaa| usa deva ne kAmadeva ko sAdhanA se vicalita
karane ke lie aura adhika kaSTa dene kA socaa| eka unmatta, durdAnta hAthI kA
rUpa bnaayaa| kAmadeva ko AkAza meM uchAla dene, dAMtoM se bIMdha dene aura
pairoM se rauMda dene kI dhamakI dii| eka bAra, do bAra, tIna bAra yaha kiyaa|
kAmadeva sthira aura dRDha rhaa| taba hAthI-rUpadhArI deva ne kAmadeva ko jaisA
usane kahA thA, ghora kaSTa diyaa| para, kAmadeva kI dRDhatA avicala rhii| deva
ne eka bAra phira prayatna kiyaa| vaha ugra viSadhara sarpa bana gyaa| sarpa ke
rUpa meM usane kAmadeva ko krUratA se utpIDita kiyA, usakI gardana meM tIna
lapeTa lagA kara chAtI para DaMka maaraa| para, usakA yaha prayatna bhI niSphala
gyaa| kAmadeva jarA bhI nahIM ddigaa| parIkSA kI kasauTI para vaha kharA utraa|
vikAra-hetuoM ke vidyamAna rahate hue bhI jo calita nahIM hotA, vAstava meM vahI
dhIra hai| ahiMsA hiMsA para vijayinI huii| ahiMsaka kAmadeva se hiMsaka deva ne
hAra mAna lii| deva ke muMha se nikala par3A'kAmadeva'! nizcaya hI tuma dhanya
ho| vaha deva kAmadeva ke caraNoM meM gira par3A, kSamA mAMgane lgaa| usane vaha
saba batAyA ki saudharma devaloka meM usane indra ke mu~ha se kAmadeva kI
dhArmika dRDhatA kI prazaMsA sunI thI, jise vaha saha nahIM skaa| isIlie vaha
yoM upasarga karane aayaa| upAsaka kAmadeva kA mana upAsanA meM ramA thaa| jaba
usane upasarga ko samApta huA jAnA, to svIkRta pratimA kA pAraNasamApana kiyaa|
zubha saMyoga aisA banA, bhagavAn mahAvIra apane janapada-vihAra ke bIca campA
nagarI meM padhAreM  /  kAmadeva ne yaha sunA to socA, kitanA acchA ho, maiM
bhagavAn ko vandana-namaskAra kara, poSadha kA samApana karUM  /  tadanusAra
vaha pUrNabhadra caitya, jahA~ bhagavAn virAjita the, phuNcaa| bhagavAn ke
darzana kie, atyanta prasanna huaa| bhagavAn to sarvajJa the| jo kucha ghaTita
huA, jAnate hI the| unhoMne kAmadeva ko

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[92] [Upasakadasangasutra] The three afflictions that Kamadeva had endured
fearlessly were mentioned, addressing him. The Lord said to Kamadeva, "Kamadeva!
Did all this happen?" Kamadeva replied humbly, "Bhanta! It happened." Keeping in
mind this incident with Kamadeva, the Lord Mahavira addressed the assembled
monks and nuns, saying, "If a Shramanopasaka can maintain such steadfastness in
Dharma even while living as a householder, then it is your duty to do so. A
seeker should never be afraid of hardships, but should endure them with
fortitude. This makes the practice pure and radiant." In the Lord's view,
Kamadeva's conduct was an inspiring example in terms of religious steadfastness,
so he considered it useful to discuss it publicly. Kamadeva asked the Lord many
questions out of curiosity, received solutions, and returned after paying homage
and salutations. The Poshadh was concluded. Kamadeva increasingly immersed
himself in practice. His results became brighter and brighter, his mind became
absorbed in spirituality. A brief description of his devotional life is as
follows: Kamadeva practiced Shramanopasaka-Dharma for twenty years, worshipped
eleven images, performed the final Sanlekhana for one month, and relinquished
his body through fasting and meditation. He became a god in the Arunaabha
Vimana, located in the northeast corner of the Sodharmavatansaka Maha Vimana in
the Saudharma Kalpa, with a lifespan of four Palyopama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 92] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra sambodhita kara una tInoM upasargoM kA jikra kiyA,
jinheM kAmadeva nirbhaya bhAva se jhela cukA thaa| bhagavAn ne kAmadeva ko
sambodhita kara kahAkAmadeva! kyA yaha saba ghaTita huA? kAmadeva ne vinita
bhAva se uttara diyA-bhante! aisA hI huaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ne kAmadeva ke
sAtha huI isa ghaTanA ko dRSTi meM rakhate hue upasthita sAdhusAdhviyoM ko
sambodhita karate hue kahA-eka zramaNopAsaka gRhasthI meM rahate hue bhI jaba
dharmArAdhanA meM itanI dRDhatA banAe rakha sakatA hai to Apa sabakA to aisA
karanA karttavya hai hii| sAdhaka ko kabhI bhI kaSToM se ghabarAnA nahIM cAhie,
unako dRDhatA se jhelate rahanA caahie| isase sAdhanA nirmala aura ujjavala
banatI hai| bhagavAn kI dRSTi meM kAmadeva kA AcaraNa dhArmika dRDhatA ke
sandarbha meM eka preraka udAharaNa thA, isalie unhoMne sArvajanika rUpa meM
usakI carcA karanA upayogI smjhaa| kAmadeva ne jijJAsA se bhagavAn se aneka
prazna pUche, samAdhAna prApta kiyA, vandana-namaskAra kara vApasa lauTa aayaa|
poSadha kA samApana kiyaa| kAmadeva apane ko uttarottara, adhikAdhika sAdhanA
meM jor3atA gyaa| usake pariNAma ujjavala se ujjvalattara hote gae, bhAvanA
adhyAtma meM ramatI gii| usake upAsanAmaya jIvana kA saMkSipta vivaraNa yoM
kAmadeva ne bIsa varSa taka zramaNopAsaka-dharma kA samyak paripAlana kiyA,
gyAraha pratimAoM kI ArAdhanA kI, eka mAsa kI antima saMlekhanA tathA anazana
dvArA samAdhipUrvaka deha-tyAga kiyaa| vaha saudharma kalpa ke sodharmAvataMsaka
mahAvimAna ke IzAna koNa meM sthita arUNAbha nAmaka vimAna meM cAra palyopama
Ayusthitika deva huaa|

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study  **Kamdeva 91.**  "If, Venerable Sir, the Blessed Lord Mahavira
has explained the meaning of the first study of the Upasakadasa, the seventh
Anga, with the attainment of all the virtues, then, Venerable Sir, what is the
meaning of the second study?"  **Arya Sudharma** asked Jambu.  **Kamdeva 92.**
"Thus, Jambu, at that time, in that era, there was a city called Champa. There
was a Caitya called Punnabhadda. The king's name was Jitasatru. There was a
Gahapati named Kamdeva. His wife's name was Bhadra. Gahapati Kamdeva had six
crore gold coins in his treasury, six crore gold coins in trade, and six crore
gold coins in his household wealth and resources. He had six Gokulas. Each
Gokula had ten thousand cows.   He lived a life of enjoyment and then renounced
the world. He followed the path of right conduct.   He would tell his eldest
son, "Do not ask me for anything. When the Posha-sala is ready, then come to
me." When he came, he would enjoy the Posha-sala. After enjoying it, he would
take possession of the Uccarapasa-vana land. After taking possession of it, he
would build a Dabbha-santhara. After building it, he would make the Dabbha-
santhara inaccessible. After making it inaccessible, he would live in the Posha-
sala, having enjoyed the Dabbha-santhara.   He lived, having attained the
ultimate Dharma-pannatti of the Blessed Lord Mahavira."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana kAmadeva 91. jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM
jAva' saMpatteNaM sattamassa aMgassa uvAsagadasANaM paDhamassa ajjhayaNassa
ayamaDhe paNNatte, doccassa NaM bhaMte! ajjhayaNassa ke aTThe paNNatte? Arya
sudharmA se jambU ne pUchAyAvat siddhi-prApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne sAtaveM aMga
upAsakadazA ke prathama adhyayana kA yadi yaha arthaAzaya pratipAdita kiyA to
bhagavan ! unhoMne dUsare adhyayana kA kyA artha batalAyA hai? zramaNopAsaka
kAmadeva . 92. evaM khalu jambU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM caMpA nAmaM nayarI
hotthaa| puNNabhadde ceie| jiyasattu raayaa| kAmadeve gaahaavii| bhaddA
bhaariyaa| cha hiraNNa-koDIo nihANapauttAo, cha vuDDi-pauttAo, cha pavitthara-
pauttAo, cha vayA, dasa-go-sAhassieNaM vennN| samosaraNaM  /  jahA ANaMdo tahA
niggao, taheva sAvaya-dhamma pddivji| sA ceva vattavvayA jAva' jeTTha-puttaM,
mitta-nAiM ApucchittA, jeNeva posaha-sAlA teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchitA jahA
ANaMdo jAva (posaha-sAlaM pamajai, pamajittA uccArapAsavaNa-bhUmi paDilehei,
paDilehitA dabbha-saMthArayaM saMtharai, saMtharettA dabbha-saMthArayaM durUhai,
durUhittA-posaha-sAlAe posahie daMbbha-saMthArovagae) samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM dhamma-paNNattiM upasaMpajjittANaM vihri| Arya sudharmA
bolejambU! usa kAla-vartamAna avasarpiNI ke cauthe Are ke anta meM, usasamaya
jaba bhagavAn mahAvIra sadeha vidyamAna the, campA nAmaka nagarI thii|
pUrNabhadra nAmaka caitya thaa| vahAM ke rAjA kA nAma jitazatru thaa| vahAM
kAmadeva nAmaka gAthApati thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma bhadrA thaa| gAthApati
kAmadeva kI cha: karor3a svarNa mudrAeM khajAne meM rakhI thIM, chaha karor3a
svarNa-mudrAeM vyApAra meM lagI thIM tathA chaha karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM ghara ke
vaibhava-sAdhana-sAmagrI meM lagI thiiN| usake chaha gokula the| pratyeka gokula
meM dasa hajAra gAyeM thiiN| 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 2 /  2. dekheM sUtra-
saMkhyA 66 /

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[94] [Upasakadasanga Sutra: Bhagwan Mahavira arrives. Samavasaran takes place.
Just like Gathapati Anand, Gathapati Kamadeva also left his home and reached
Bhagwan, accepting the Shravak-Dharma. _ The further event is also the same as
Anand's. After taking permission from his elder son, friends and caste people,
Kamadeva came to the place where the Poshad-Shala was, (and like Anand, he
cleaned the Poshad-Shala, marked the place for defecation and urination, laid a
bed of Kusha grass, and sat on it. After doing so, he accepted the Poshad in the
Poshad-Shala,) and became engrossed in worship, following the Dharma-Pragyapti
and Dharma-Shiksha taught by Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira.   **Attack by a Dev in
the form of a Pisach** 93.  Then, during the time of the night, a deceitful Dev,
with a false view, appeared before Shraman Upasak Kamadeva. _ (After that, at
some time) in the middle of the night, a deceitful Dev, with a false view,
appeared before Shraman Upasak Kamadeva. **Discussion** In Indian literature,
there are many descriptions of obstacles that arise in the context of excellent
penance, practice, and religious observance, which are both fear-inducing and
delusion-inducing. While there are mentions of cruel and brutal acts of demons
and Pisachs to instill fear in the mind of the seeker, there are also characters
who are driven by lust and desire, who try to attract and delude the seeker
towards pleasure and enjoyment. In Vedic literature, there are descriptions in
many Puranas and other literature of demons disturbing and corrupting the
penance and Yajna rituals of the Rishis. On the other hand, there are also
accounts of beautiful celestial beings trying to seduce them and distract them
from their religious practices. In Buddhist literature, too, there are
descriptions of this kind in many incidents like the 'Mar-Vijay' of Bhagwan
Buddha. Jain literature also has its own tradition of such descriptions. There
are vivid and exciting descriptions in many Agam-Granths and other literature of
attacks and disturbances caused by Devas, Pisachs, etc., to disrupt and destroy
excellent and commendable religious practices, where all three emotions -
Raudra, Bhayankar, and Vibhats - appear embodied. The present description is a
vivid example of this. 94. Then, that Dev transformed into a huge Pisach-like
form. That Dev, in the form of a Pisach, had these characteristics: his body was
adorned with these colors and clothes, his head was like a cow's head, and he
was covered in hair.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 94] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra bhagavAn mahAvIra pdhaareN| samavasaraNa huaa|
gAthApati Ananda kI taraha gAthApati kAmadeva bhI apane ghara se calAbhagavAn ke
pAsa pahuMcA, zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyaa| _ Age kI ghaTanA bhI vaisI hI hai,
jaisI Ananda kii| apane bar3e putra, mitroM tathA jAtIya janoM kI anumati lekara
kAmadeva jahAM poSadha-zAlA thI, vahAM AyA, (Akara Ananda kI taraha poSadha-zAlA
kA pramArjana kiyAsaphAI kI, zauca evaM laghuzaMkA ke sthAna kA pratilekhana
kiyA, pratilekhana kara kuza kA bichaunA lagAyA, usa para sthita huaa| vaisA
kara poSadha-zAlA meM poSadha svIkAra kiyA,) zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa
aMgIkRta dharma-prajJaptidharma-zikSA ke anurUpa upAsanA-rata ho gyaa| deva
dvArA pizAca ke rUpa meM upasarga 93. tae NaM tassa kAmadevassa samaNovAsagassa
puvvarattAvaratta-kAla-samayaMsi ege deve mAyIbhicchadiTThI aMtiyaM paaubbhuue|
_ (tatpazcAt kisI samaya) AdhI rAta ke samaya zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ke samakSa
eka mithyAdRSTi, mAyAvI deva prakaTa huaa| vivecana utkRSTa tapazcaraNa, sAdhanA
evaM dharmAnuSThAna ke sandarbha meM bhayotpAdaka tathA mohotpAdaka-donoM
prakAra ke vidhna upasthita hote rahane kA varNana bhAratIya vAGmaya meM
bahulatA se prApta hotA hai| sAdhaka ke mana meM bhaya utpanna karane ke lie
jahAM rAkSasoM tathA pizAcoM ke krUra evaM nRzaMsa karmoM kA ullekha hai, vahAM
kAma va bhoga kI ora AkRSTa karane ke lie, mohita karane ke lie vAsanA-pradhAna
pAtra bhI prayatna karate dekhe jAte haiN| vaidika vAG maya meM RSiyoM ke tapa
evaM yajJAnuSThAna meM vighna DAlane, unheM dUSita karane hetu rAkSasoM dvArA
upadrava kiye jAne ke varNana aneka purANa-granthoM tathA dUsare sAhitya meM
prApta hote haiN| dUsarI ora sundara devAMganAoM dvArA unheM mohita kara
dharmAnuSThAna se vicalita karane ke upakrama bhI milate haiN| bauddha vAG maya
meM bhI bhagavAn buddha ke 'mAra-vijaya' prabhRti aneka prasaMgoM meM isa koTi
ke varNana upalabdha haiN| jaina sAhitya meM bhI aise varNana-krama kI apanI
paramparA hai| uttama, prazasta dharmopAsanA ko khaNDita evaM bhagna karane ke
lie deva, pizAca Adi dvArA kiye gaye upasargoMupadravoM kA bar3A sajIva evaM
romAMcaka varNana aneka Agama-granthoM tathA itara sAhitya meM prApta hotA hai,
jahAM raudra, bhayAnaka evaM vIbhatsatInoM rasa mUrtimAna, pratIta hote haiN|
prastuta varNana isakA jvalanta udAharaNa hai| 94. tae NaM se deve egaM mahaM
pisAya-rUvaM viuvvi| tassa NaM devassa pisAya-rUvassa ime eyArUve vaNNA-vAse
paNNattesIsaM se go-kiliMja-saMThANa-saMThiyaM sAlibhasella

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva  [95]  The demon, a monstrous being, was
described as follows:  His head resembled a basket used for feeding cattle, made
of bamboo. His hair was coarse and thick, like the fibers of rice stalks, brown
in color, and shiny. His forehead was large and prominent, like the lid of a
large earthen pot. His eyebrows were scattered like a squirrel's tail, appearing
distorted, ugly, and repulsive. His eyes, resembling "earthen pots," protruded
from his head, appearing distorted and repulsive. His ears were large and ugly,
like broken soup bowls. His nose was flat, like a frog's nose. His nostrils,
resembling pits, were like two connected ovens. His mustache, like a horse's
tail, was brown, distorted, and repulsive. His lips were long, like a camel's
lips. His teeth were like the iron of a plow. His tongue was like a piece of
soup, appearing distorted and repulsive. His chin protruded like the tip of a
plow. His cheeks, sunken like the inside of a frying pan, appeared pitted,
cracked, brown, hard, and terrifying. His shoulders were like a mridanga (a type
of drum). His chest was wide, like the gate of a city. His arms were like the
earthen ovens used for smelting iron and other metals. His palms were like the
stones used for grinding lentils. His fingers were like the handles of a
grinding stone. His nails were like seashells, sharp and thick. His breasts,
resembling a leather bag used by barbers for holding razors and other tools,
hung from his chest. His belly was round, like an iron chest. His navel was not
like the navel of a human being. His eyes were shaped like a sikka (a type of
coin). His cheeks were like the pits of a fruit. His thighs were like the
earthen ovens used for cooking. His knees were bent and twisted, appearing
distorted and repulsive. His shins and calves were covered with hair. His feet
were like the soles of a shoe. His toes were like the handles of a grinding
stone. His nails were like seashells.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana : gAthApati kAmadeva ] [ 95 sarisA se kesA kavila-teeNaM
dippamANA, mahalla- uTTiyA - kabhalla - saMThANa-saMThiyaM niDAlaM, muguMsa-
pucchaM va tassa bhumagAo phugga-phuggAo vigaya-vIbhaccha - daMsaNAoM, sIsa-
ghar3iviNiggayAiM acchINi vigaya-bIbhaccha- daMsaNAI, kaNNA jaha suppa -
kattaraM ceva vigayabIbhaccha - daMsaNijjA, urabbha-puDa- saMnnibhA se nAsA,
jhusirA - jamala- cullI - saMThANa - saMThiyA do vi tassa nAsA - puDayA,
ghoDaya-pucchaMva tassa maMsUI kavila - kavilAI vigaya-bIbhacchadaMsaNAI, uTThA
uTTassa ceva laMbA, phAla- sarisA se daMtA, jibbhA jaha suppa - kattaraM ceva
vigaya- bIbhaccha - daMsaNijjA, hala- kuddAla-saMThiyA se haNuyA, galla-kaDillaM
va tassa khaDDuM phuTTaM kavilaM pharUsaM mahallaM, muiMgAkArovame se khaMdhe,
puravarakavAr3ovame se vacche, koTThiyA-saMThANasaMThiyA do vi tassa bAhA,
nisApAhANa-saMThANa-saMThiyA do vi tassa aggahatthA, ,nisAloDhasaMThANasaMThiyAo
hatthesu aMgulIo, sippi - puDagasaMThiyA se nakkhA, NhAviya - pasevao vva uraMsi
laMbaMti do vi tassa thaNayA, poTTaM ayakoTThao vva vaTTaM, pANakalaMdasarisA se
nAhI, sikkagasaMThANasaMThie se nette, kiNNapuDa-saMThANa - saMThiyA do vi tassa
vasaNA, jamala - koTThiyAsaMThANa - saMThiyA do vi tassa UrU, ajjuNaguTThaM va
tassa jANUiM kuDilakuDilAI vigayabIbhaccha-daMsaNAI, jaMghAo kakkhaDIo lomehiM
uvaciyAo, aharIsaMThANa - saMThiyA do vi tassa pAyA, aharIloDhasaMThANasaMThiyAo
pAesu aMgulIo, sippipuDasaMThiyA se nakhA  /  usa deva ne eka vizAlakAya pizAca
kA rUpa dhAraNa kiyaa| usakA vistRta varNana isa prakAra hai- usa pizAca kA sira
gAya ko cArA dene kI (auMdhI kI huI) bAMsa kI TokarI jaisA thaa| bAla
dhAnacAvala kI maMjarI ke tantuoM ke samAna rUkhe aura moTe the, bhUre raMga ke
the, camakIle the  /  lalATa bar3e maTake ke khappara yA ThIkare jaisA bar3A
aura ubharA huA thA  /  bhauheM gilaharI kI pUMcha kI taraha bikharI huI thIM,
dekhane meM bar3I vikRta - bhaddI aura bIbhatsa - ghRNotpAdaka thIM 'maTakI"
jaisI A~kheM, sira se bAhara nikalI thIM, dekhane meM vikRta aura bIbhatsa thIM
/  kAna TUTe hue sUpa chAjale ke samAna bar3e bhadde aura kharAba dikhAI dete
the  /  nAka meMDheM kI nAka kI taraha thI - capaTI thii| gaDDhoM jaise donoM
nathune aise the, mAnoM jur3e hue do cUlhe hoM  /  ghor3e kI pUcha jaisI usakI
mUMcheM bhUrI thIM, vikRta aura bIbhatsa lagatI thIM 1 usake hoTha UMTa ke
hoThoM kI taraha lambe the| dAMta hala ke loheM kI kuza jaise the| jIbha sUpa ke
Tukar3e jaisI thI, dekhane meM vikRta tathA bIbhatsa thI  /  ThuDDI hala kI noka
kI taraha Age nikalI thI  /  kar3hAhI kI jyoM bhItara dhaMse usake gAla khaDDoM
jaise lagate the, phaTe hue, bhUre raMga ke, kaThora tathA vikarAla the| usake
kandhe mRdaMga jaise the  /  vakSasthala chAtI nagara ke phATaka ke samAna
caur3I thii| donoM bhujAeM koSThikA - lohA Adi dhAtu galAne meM kAma Ane vAlI
miTTI kI koThI ke samAna thiiN| usakI donoM hatheliyAM mUMga Adi dalane kI cakkI
ke pATa jaisI thiiN| hAthoM kI aMguliyAM loDhI ke samAna thiiN| usake nAkhUna
sIpiyoM jaise the tIkhe aura moTe the| donoM stana nAI kI ustarA Adi rAcha
DAlane kI camar3e kI thailI rachAnI kI taraha chAtI para laTaka rahe the  /
peTa lohe ke koSThaka koThe ke samAna golAkAra thA  /  nAbhi kapar3oM meM I

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[96] The demon's knees were deep like the earthenware pot used by potters to
polish their wares. His eye-jewel hung like a sneeze. His testicles were like
two loose sacks or bags. His thighs were like two identical chambers. His knees
were crooked, deformed, and hideous, like the thick, knotted stems of a
particular type of grass or tree. His shins were hard and covered in hair. His
feet were like stones used for grinding lentils. His toes were like the roots of
a tree. His nails were like shells.  [95] He was adorned with a garland of
lizards, a garland of broken, twisted, and crooked bones, a tongue that was
split and hanging out, a garland of chameleons, a garland of rats that was his
mark, a garland of mongooses in place of earrings, and snakes wrapped around his
body like a shawl. He was pounding his arms, roaring, and laughing terribly. His
body was covered in hair of all five colors.  This demon, holding a sharp sword
that was as blue as a blue lotus, as dark as a buffalo horn, and as bright as a
flax flower, went to the place where the food storehouse was and where the
ascetic, the devotee, Kamadeva, was. Arriving there, he was extremely angry...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 96] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra paoNliza dene hetu julAhoM dvArA prayoga meM liye jAne
vAle mAMDa ke bartana ke samAna gaharI thii| usakA netraliMga chIMke kI taraha
laTaka-rahA thaa| donoM aNDakoSa phaile hue do thailoM yA boriyoM jaise the|
usakI donoM jaMghAeM eka jaisI do koThiyoM ke samAna thiiN| usake ghuTane
arjuna-tRNa-vizeSa yA vRkSa-vizeSa ke guDhe-stamba-gulma yA gAMTha jaise, TeDhe,
dekhane meM vikRta va bIbhatsa the| piMDaliyAM kaThora thIM, bAloM se bharI
thiiN| usake donoM paira dAla Adi pIsane kI zilA ke samAna the| paira kI
aMguliyAM lor3hI jaisI thiiN| aMguliyoM ke nAkhUna sIpiyoM ke sadRza the| 95.
laDahamaDahajANae, vigaya-bhagga-bhugga-bhumae, avadAliya-
vayaNavivaranillAliyagga-jIhe, saraDakayamAliyAe, uMduramAlA-pariNaddhasukaya-
ciMdhe, naulakayakaNNapUre, sappakayavegacche, apphoDate, abhigajaMte,
bhImamukkaTTahAse, nANAvihapaMcavaNNehiM lomehiM uvacie egaM mahaM nIluppala-
gavala-guliya-ayasikusumappagAsaM asiM khura-dhAraM gahAya, jeNeva posahasAlA,
jeNeva kAmadeve samaNovAsae, teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA Asu-ratte, rUThe,
kuvie, caMDikkie, misimisiyamANe kAmadevaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsIhaMbho
kAmadevA! samaNovAsayA! apatthiyapatthiyA! duraMtapaMta lakkhaNA! hINa-puNNa-
cAuddasiyA! hiri-siri-dhii-kitti-parivajjiyA! dhamma-kAmayA! puNNa-kAmayA!
saggakAmayA! mokkhakAmayA! dhammakaM khiyA! puNNakaM khiyA! sagga-kaM khiyA!
mokkhakaM khiyA! dhammapivAsiyA! puNNapivAsiyA! saggapivAsiyA! mokkhapivAsiyA!
no khalu kappai tava devANuppiyA! jaM sIlAiM, vayAiM, veramaNAI, paccakkhANAiM,
posahovavAsAiM cAlittae vA khobhittae vA, khaMDittae vA, bhaMjittae vA,
ujjhittae vA, pariccaittae vaa| taM jai NaM tumaM aja sIlAiM, jAva (vayAiM,
veramaNAI, paccakkhANAiM) posahovavasAiM na chaDDesi, na bhaMjesi, to taM ahaM
aja imeNaM nIluppala-jAva (gavala-guliya-ayasi-kusumappagAseNa, khuradhAreNa)
asiNA khaMDAkhaMDiM karemi, jahA NaM tumaM devANuppiyA! aTTaduhaTTavasaTTe akAle
ceva jIviyAo vvrovijjsi| usa pizAca ke ghuTane moTe evaM oche the, gAr3I ke
pIche DhIle baMdhe kATha kI taraha lar3akhar3A rahe the| usakI bhoheM
vikRtabeDaula, bhagna-khaNDita, bhugnakuTila yA Ter3I thiiN| usane apanA darAra
jaisA muMha phAr3a rakhA thA, jIbha bAhara nikAla rakhI thii| vaha giragiToM kI
mAlA pahane thaa| cUhoM kI mAlA bhI usane dhAraNa kara rakhI thI jo usakI
pahacAna thii| usake kAnoM meM kuNDaloM ke sthAna para nevale laTaka rahe the|
usane apanI deha para sAMpoM ko dupaTTe kI taraha lapeTa rakhA thaa| vaha
bhujAoM para apane hAtha Thoka rahA thA, garaja rahA thA, bhayaMkara aTTahAsa
kara rahA thaa| usakA zarIra pAMcoM raMgoM ke bahuvidha kezoM se vyApta thaa|
vaha pizAca nIle kamala, bhaiMse ke sIMga tathA alasI ke phUloM jaisI gaharI
nIlI, teja dhAra vAlI talavAra liye, jahA~ poSadhazAlA thI, zramaNopAsaka
kAmadeva thA, vahAM aayaa| Akara atyanta kruddha

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva  [97] The enraged, furious, and
terrifying demon, with a fierce breath and a menacing growl, spoke to the
ascetic Kamadeva, "You who desire death, the unwanted, the unwelcomed! You who
were born on an inauspicious day, a day of sorrow and ill omens, when the
auspicious fourteenth day was incomplete and the new moon arrived in the hours!
You who are devoid of shame, beauty, patience, and fame! You who yearn, desire,
and thirst for dharma, merit, heaven, and liberation! You who are beloved of the
gods! It is not fitting for you to be distracted, disturbed, broken, shattered,
abandoned, or to renounce your vows, your restraints, your abstentions, your
rejections, and your fasts. You are bound by your promise to uphold them. But if
you do not abandon, break, or renounce your vows, your restraints, your
abstentions, and your fasts today, then I will cut you to pieces with this
sword, which is as blue as a blue lotus, a buffalo horn, and a flax flower, and
as sharp as a razor. Then, O beloved of the gods, you will be consumed by
anguish and unbearable pain, and you will be prematurely separated from life,
your life force will be extinguished."  [96] Even when the demon spoke thus, the
ascetic Kamadeva remained fearless, undisturbed, unperturbed, unshaken, unmoved,
and tranquil. He remained steadfast in his meditation on dharma.  [97] The
demon, in the form of a demon, saw the ascetic Kamadeva fearless, undisturbed,
unperturbed, unshaken, unmoved, and tranquil, remaining steadfast in his
meditation on dharma. Seeing this, he spoke again, "O Kamadeva, ascetic! You who
desire the undesired! If you do not abandon, break, or renounce your vows, your
restraints, your abstentions, and your fasts today, then I will cut you to
pieces with this sword, which is as blue as a blue lotus, a buffalo horn, and a
flax flower, and as sharp as a razor. Then, O beloved of the gods, you will be
consumed by anguish and unbearable pain, and you will be prematurely separated
from life, your life force will be extinguished."  [98] Even when the demon
spoke thus again and again, the ascetic Kamadeva remained fearless, undisturbed,
unperturbed, unshaken, unmoved, and tranquil.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana : gAthApati kAmadeva ] [ 97 ruSTa, kupita tathA vikarAla hotA
huA, misamisAhaTa karatA huA teja sAMsa chor3atA huA, zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva se
bolA aprArthita jise koI nahIM cAhatA, usa mRtyu ko cAhane vAle ! duHkhada anta
tathA azubha lakSaNavAle, puNyacaturdazI jisa dina hIna - asampUrNa thI
ghaTikAoM meM amAvasyA A gaI thI, usa azubha dina meM janme hue abhAge ! lajjA,
zobhA, dhRti tathA kIrti se parivarjita ! dharma, puNya, svarga aura mokSa kI
kAmanA, icchA evaM pipAsA utkaNThA rakhane vAle ! devAnupriya ! zIla, vrata,
viramaNa, pratyAkhyAna tathA poSadhopavAsa se vicalita honA, vikSubhita honA,
unheM khaNDita karanA, bhagna karanA, 'ujjhita karanAunakA tyAga karanA,
parityAga karanA tumheM nahIM kalpatA hai inakA pAlana karane meM tuma
kRtapratijJa ho  /  para, yadi tuma Aja zIla, ( vrata, viramaNa, pratyAkhyAna )
evaM poSadhopavAsa kA tyAga nahIM karoge, unheM nahIM tor3oge to maiM (nIle
kamala, bhaiMse ke sIMga tathA alasI ke phUla ke samAna gaharI nIlI, teja
dhAravAlI) isa talavAra se tumhAre Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara dUMgA, jisase he
devAnupriya ! tuma ArtadhyAna evaM vikaTa duHkha se pIDita hokara asamaya meM hI
jIvana se pRthak ho jAoge prANoM se hAtha baitthoNge| 96. tae NaM se kAmadeve
samaNovAsae teNaM deveNaM pisAya-rUveNaM evaM vutte samANe, abhIe, aMtatthe,
aNuvvigge, akkhubhie, acalie, asaMbhaMte, tusiNIe dhamma - jjhANovagae viharai
/  usa pizAca dvArA yoM kahe jAne para bhI zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva bhIta, trasta,
udvigna, kSubhita evaM vicalita nahIM huA; ghabarAyA nhiiN| vaha cupacApa zAnta
bhAva se dharma - dhyAna meM sthita rahA  /  97. tae NaM se deve pisAya-rUve
kAmadevaM samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM, jAva (atatthaM, aNuvvigaM, akhubhiyaM,
acaliyaM, asaMbhaMtaM, tusiNIyaM ), dhamma- jjhANovagayaM viharamANaM pAsai,
pAsittA doccaMpi tacchaM pi kAmadevaM evaM vayAsI haM bho ! kAmadevA!
samaNovAsayA ! apatthiyapatthiyA ! jai NaM tumaM ajja jAva (sIlAI, vayAiM,
veramaNAI, paccakkhANAI, posahavAsAiM na chaDDesi, na bhaMjesi, to te ahaM ajja
imeNaM nIluppala - gavala - guliyaayasi - kusuma-ppagAseNa khuradhAreNa asiNA
khaMDAkhaMDiM karemi jahA NaM tumaM devANuppiyA ! aTTa-duhaTTa-vasaTTe akAle
ceva jIviyAo ) vavarovijjasi  /  bAra, pizAca kA rUpa dhAraNa kiye hue deva ne
zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ko yoM nirbhaya (trAsa, udvega tathA kSobha rahita,
avicala, anAkula evaM zAnta) bhAva se dharma - dhyAna meM nirata dekhA  /  taba
usane dUsarI , tIsarI bAra phira kahAmauta ko cAhane vAle zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva
! Aja (yadi tuma zIla, vrata, viramaNa, pratyAkhyAna tathA poSadhopavAsa ko
nahIM chor3oge, nahIM tor3oge to nIle kamala, bhaiMse ke sIMga tathA alasI ke
phUla ke samAna gaharI nIlI teja dhAra vAlI isa talavAra se tumhAre
Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara dUMgA, jisase he devAnupriya ! tuma ArtadhyAna evaM vikaTa
duHkha se pIr3ita hokara asamaya meM hI ) prANoM se hAtha dho baiThoge  /  98.
tae NaM se kAmadeve samaNovAsae teNaM deveNaM doccaMpi ttacvaMpiM evaM vutte
samANe, abhIe jAva ( atatthe, aNuvvigge, akkhubhie, acalie, asaMbhaMte tusiNIe)

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[98] The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra, Dhamma-Jhana, is being practiced. The
Shramanopasaka Kamadeva, even when told by the deva for the second time, the
third time, remained unperturbed, undisturbed, unshaken, unwavering, unagitated,
and peaceful, remaining engaged in his Dharma meditation. [99] Then, that deva,
assuming the form of a Pisaca, saw the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva, still engaged in
his meditation without fear. Seeing this, he became extremely angry, his
forehead furrowed with three lines of anger, he drew his sword and struck
Kamadeva, cutting him into pieces. [100] Then, the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva
endured that intense (immense, excessive, harsh, deep, fierce, painful) and
unbearable pain with patience (forgiveness and forbearance). The Obstacle in the
Form of an Elephant [101] Then, that deva, assuming the form of a Pisaca, saw
the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva, still engaged in his meditation without fear.
Seeing this, he could not make the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva deviate from the
Nirgrantha-Pravachana-Jina-Dharma, nor could he make him agitated, nor could he
change his mind. He was unable to change his mind, so he became exhausted, 1.
See Sutra number 97. 2. See Sutra number 95. 3. See Sutra number 95.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 98] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra dhamma-jjhANovagae vihri| zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva usa
deva dvArA dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra yoM kahe jAne para bhI abhIta (atrasta,
anudvigna, akSubhita, avicalita, anAkula evaM zAnta) rahA, apane dharmadhyAna
meM upagata saMlagna rhaa| 99. tae NaM se deve pisAya-rUve kAmadevaM samaNovAsa
abhIyaM jAva' viharamANaM pAsai, pAsittA Asuratte 4(rUThe kuvie caMDikkie) ti-
vali bhiuDiM niDAle sAhaTu, kAmadevaM samaNovAsayaM nIluppala jAva' asiNA
khaMDAkhaMDiM kre|| _jaba pizAca rUpa dhArI usa deva ne zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva
ko nirbhaya bhAva se upAsanA-rata dekhA to vaha atyanta kruddha huA, usake
lalATa meM tribalikatIna bala car3hI bhRkuTi tana gaI usane talavAra se kAmadeva
para vAra kiyA aura usake Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara ddaale| 100. tae NaM se kAmadeve
samaNovAsae taM ujjalaM, jAva(viulaM, kakkasaM, pagADhaM, caMDaM, dukkhaM)
durahiyAsaM veyaNaM sammaM sahai, jAva (khamai, titikkhai,) ahiyaasei|
zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ne usa tIvra (vipulaatyadhika, karkaza-kaThora, pragADha,
raudra, kaSTaprada) tathA duHsaha vedanA ko sahanazIlatA (kSamA aura titikSA)
pUrvaka jhelaa| hAthI ke rUpa meM upasarga 101. tae NaM se deve pisAya-rUve
kAmadevaM samaNovAsa abhIyaM jAva' viharamANaM pAsai, pAsittA jAhe no saMcAei
kAmadevaM samaNovAsayaM niggaMdhAo pAvayaNAo cAlittae vA, khobhittae vA,
vipariNAmittae vA, tAhe saMte, taMte, parito saNiyaM saNiyaM paccosakkA,
paccosakkittA, posahasAlAo paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA divvaM pisAya-rUvaM
vippajahai, vippajahittA egaM mahaM divvaM hatthi-rUbe viuvvai,sattaMga-
paiTThiyaM, samma saMThiyaM, sujAyaM, purao udaggaM, piTThao varAhaM,
ayAkucchiM, alaMba-kucchiM, palaMba-laMbodarAdharakaraM, abbhuggaya-maula-
malliyA-vimala-dhavala-daMtaM, kaMcaNakosI-paviTTha-daMtaM, ANAmiyacAva-laliya-
saMvalliyagga-soNDaM, kumma-paDipuNNa-calagaM, vIsai-nakkhaM allINapamANa-
juttapucchaM, mattaM mehamiva gulagulentaM maNa-pavaNa-jaiNavegaM divvaM
hatthirUvaM viuvvi| jaba pizAca rUpa dhArI deva ne dekhA, zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva
nirbhIka bhAva se upAsanA meM rata hai, vaha zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ko
nirgrantha-pravacana-jina-dharma se vicalita, kSubhita, vipariNAmitaviparIta
pariNAma yukta nahI kara sakA hai, usake manobhAvoM ko nahIM badala sakA hai, to
vaha zrAnta, 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /  2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 95  /  3.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 95 /

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva  [99] He retreated slowly, weary and
dejected.  He left the food-hall and, upon leaving, abandoned the form of the
demon created by divine illusion.  Having done so, he assumed the form of a
gigantic elephant born of divine illusion.  The elephant was well-built, with
seven limbs (four legs, trunk, genitals, and tail).  His body was beautiful and
well-proportioned.  He was upright and high in the front, and bent like a pig in
the back.  His belly was tight like a goat's.  His lower lip and trunk were
long.  The teeth protruding from his mouth were white and bright like the half-
opened bud of a betel nut.  They were encased in gold, meaning they were covered
with a golden sheath.  The front part of his trunk was beautifully curved like a
drawn bow.  His feet were complete, well-nourished, and flat like a tortoise's.
He had twenty nails.  His tail was beautiful, close to his body, and of
appropriate length and shape.  The elephant was intoxicated with madness.  He
roared like a cloud.  His speed was capable of conquering the speed of mind and
wind.  [102] When the demon, having assumed the form of an elephant, reached the
food-hall where the ascetic Kamadeva was, he spoke to him in the same way as the
demon before: "O Kamadeva! O ascetic! If you do not abandon your vows (of
conduct, vows, restraint, renunciation, and fasting), if you do not break them,
then today I will seize you with my trunk.  I will take you out of the food-
hall.  I will lift you up into the sky.  I will throw you down and crush you
with my sharp, club-like teeth.  I will trample you three times with my feet on
the earth, so that you will be tormented by great pain and anguish, and you will
be separated from life prematurely, you will die."  [103] When the ascetic
Kamadeva heard these words spoken by the demon in the form of an elephant, he
remained fearless and continued his meditation.  1. See Sutra number 98.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana : gAthApati kAmadeva ] [ 99 klAnta aura khinna hokara dhIre-
dhIre pIche httaa| pIche haTakara poSadhazAlA se bAhara niklaa| bAhara nikala
kara devamAyAjanya (vikriyA - vinirmita) pizAca rUpa kA tyAga kiyaa| vaisA kara
eka vizAlakAya, devamAyAprasUta hAthI kA rUpa dhAraNa kiyaa| vaha hAthI supuSTa
sAta aMgoM (cAra paira, sUMDa jananendriya aura pUMcha) se yukta thaa| usakI
deha racanA sundara aura sugaThita thI  /  vaha Age se udagra- UMcA yA ubharA
huA thA, pIche se sUara ke samAna jhukA huA thaa| usakI kukSi jaThara bakarI kI
kukSi kI taraha saTI huI thii| usakA nIce kA hoTha aura sUMDa lambe the| muMha
se bAhara nikale hue dAMta bele kI adhakhilI kalI ke sadRza ujale aura sapheda
the  /  ve sone kI myAna meM praviSTa the arthAt una * para sone kI khola car3hI
thii| usakI sUMDa kA agalA bhAga kucha khIMce hue dhanuSa kI taraha sundara rUpa
mur3A huA thaa| usake paira kachue ke samAna pratipUrNa - paripuSTa aura capaTe
/  usake bIsa nAkhuna the| usakI pUMcha deha se saTI huIsundara tathA
pramANopetasamucita lambAI Adi AkAra lie hue thii| vaha hAthI mada se unmatta
thA  /  bAdala kI taraha garaja rahA thaa| usakA vega mana aura pavana ke vega
ko jItane vAlA thA  /  meM 102. viuvvittA jeNeva posaha -sAlA, jeNeva kAmadeve
samaNovAsae teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA kAmadevaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-
haM bho ! kAmadevA ! samaNovAsayA ! tava bhai jAva (jai NaM tujhaM ajja sIlAiM,
vayAiM veramaNAI, paccakkhANAI posahovavAsAI na chaDDesi, ) na bhaMjesi, to te
ajja ahaM soMDAe giNhAmi, giNhittA posaha - sAlAo nIma, nINittA uDDhaM vehAsaM
uvvihAmi, uvvihittA, tikkhehiM daMta-musalehiM paDicchAmi, paDicchittA, ahe
dharaNi-basi tikkhutto pAesu lolemi, jahA NaM tumaM aTTa duhaTTa - vasaTTe akAle
ceva jIviyAo krovijjasi  /  aise hAthI ke rUpa kI vikriyA karake pUrvokta deva
jahAM poSadhazAlA thI, jahAM zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva thA, vahAM AyA  /  Akara
zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva se pUrvavarNita pizAca kI taraha bolA yadi tuma apane
vratoM ko (zIla, vrata, viramaNa, pratyAkhyAna evaM poSadhopavAsa kA tyAga nahIM
karate ho, ) bhaMga nahIM karate ho to maiM tumako apanI sUMDa se pakar3a
luuNgaa| pakar3a kara poSadhazAlA se bAhara le jAUMgA  /  bAhara le jA kara
Upara AkAza meM uchaaluuNgaa| uchAla kara apane tIkheM aura mUsala jaise dAMtoM
se jhelUMgA  /  jhela kara nIce pRthvI para tIna bAra pairoM se raudUMgA, jisase
tuma ArtadhyAna aura vikaTa duHkha se pIr3ita hote hue asamaya meM hI jIvana se
pRthaka ho jAoge mara jAoge  /  103. tae NaM se kAmadeve samaNovAsae teNaM
deveNaM hatthi-rUveNaM evaM vutte samANe, abhI jAva' biharai  /  hAthI kA rUpa
dhAraNa kie hue deva dvArA yoM kahe jAne para bhI zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva
nirbhaya bhAva se upAsanA-rata rhaa| 1. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 98

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[100] The Deva in the form of an elephant saw the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva
fearless and engaged in his worship. Seeing him, he said to the Shramanopasaka
Kamadeva, "Oh Kamadeva! You are doing well!" and continued to watch him. [105]
The Deva in the form of an elephant saw the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva fearless and
engaged in his worship. Seeing him, he became furious and grabbed the
Shramanopasaka Kamadeva with his trunk. He lifted him up into the sky and then
threw him down, crushing him with his sharp, club-like teeth. He then trampled
him three times with his feet on the ground. [106] The Shramanopasaka Kamadeva
endured the intense, vast, harsh, deep, fierce, and painful suffering (like a
serpent's venom). [107] The Deva in the form of an elephant saw the
Shramanopasaka Kamadeva, who was not shaken (even when he was moved, disturbed,
or transformed by the Nigganthas, the Pavayanas, or the Tantras). He then cursed
the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva and left the feeding hall. He then abandoned his
divine elephant form and transformed into a great, fierce, terrible, and
monstrous serpent. The serpent was black, with a body like a mouse, and had eyes
full of anger and venom. It had a black, smoky, and bright glow, red bloodshot
eyes, a forked, flickering, and restless tongue, and a body like a mountain. It
had sharp, crooked, twisted, and hard fangs, and its roar was like the sound of
thunder. The serpent was full of fierce and terrible anger.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra 104. tae NaM se deve hatthi-rUve kAmadevaM
samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM jAva viharamANaM pAsai, pAsittA doccapi taccapi kAmadevaM
samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsIhaM bho! kAmadevA! taheva jAva' so vi vihri|
hastIrUpadhArI deva ne jaba zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ko nirbhIkatA se apanI
upAsanA meM nirata dekhA to, usane dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra phira zramaNopAsaka
kAmadeva ko vaisA hI kahA, jaisA pahale kahA thaa| para zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva
pUrvavat nirbhIkatA se apanI upAsanA meM nirata rhaa| 105. tae NaM se deve
hatthi-rUve kAmadevaM samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM jAva' viharamANaM pAsai, pAsittA
Asurate 4 kAmadevaM samaNovAsayaM soMDAe giNhei, geNhettA uDDhaM vehAsaM
uvvihai, uvvihittA tikkhehiM daMta-musalehiM paDicchai, paDicchettA ahe dharaNi-
talaMsi tikkhutto pAesu lolei| hastIrUpadhArI usa deva ne jaba zramaNopAsaka
kAmadeva ko nirbhIkatA se upAsanA meM lIna dekhA to atyanta kruddha hokara apanI
sUMDa se usako pkdd'aa| pakar3akara AkAza meM UMcA uchaalaa| uchAlakara phira
nIce girate hue ko tIkhe aura mUsala jaise dAMtoM se jhelA aura jhela kara nIce
jamIna para tIna bAra pairoM se rauNdaa| . 106. tae NaM se kAmadeve samaNovAsae
taM ujjalaM jAva (viuyaM, kakkasaM, pagADhaM, caMDaM, dukkhaM, durahiyAsaM
veyaNaM sammaM, sahai, khamai, titikkhai,) ahiyaasei|  /  zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva
ne (sahanazIlatA, kSamA evaM titikSApUrvaka tIvra, vipula, kaThora, pragADha,
rodra tathA kaSTaprada) vedanA jhelii| sarpa ke rUpa meM upasarga 107. tae NaM
se deve hatthi-rUve kAmadevaM samaNovAsayaM jAhe no saMcAei jAva (niggaMthAo
pAvayaNAo cAlittae vA, khobhittae vA, vipariNAmittae vA, tAhe saMte, taMte,
paritaMte) saNiyaMsaNiyaM paccosakkai, paccosakkittA posaha-sAlAo paDiNikkhamai,
paDiNikkhamittA divvaM hatthirUvaM vippajahai, vippajahittA egaM mahaM divvaM
sappa-rUvaM viuvvai, ugga-visaM, caMDa-visaM, ghora-visaM mahAkAyaM, masI-mUsA-
kAlagaM, nayaNa-visa-rosa-puNNaM, aMjaNa-puMja-nigarappagAsaM, rattacchaM
lohiya-loyaNaM, jamala-juyala-caMcala-jIhaM,dharaNIyalaveNIbhUyaM, ukkaDa-phuDa-
kuDila-jaDila-kakkasa-viyaDa-phuDADova-karaNa-dacchaM, lohAgaradhammamANa-
dhamadhameMtaghosaM, aNAgaliya-tivva-caMDa-rosaM sappa rUvaM viuvvai, viuvvittA
1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /  2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 98 /  3. dekheM sUtra-
saMkhyA 97 /

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva  **[101]** When the god in the form of an
elephant approached the ascetic Kamadeva, he spoke to him. Having spoken, the
god in the form of an elephant said to the ascetic Kamadeva, "O Kamadeva!
Ascetic! As long as you do not abandon (your conduct, your vows, your
renunciation, your rejection, your fasting), as long as you do not break them, I
will immediately rush upon your body. Having rushed upon your body, I will wrap
myself around your neck from behind with my sharp tail. Having wrapped myself
around your neck, I will pierce your chest with my sharp, poisonous fangs. Just
as you have been tormenting and harassing living beings untimely, you will be
tormented and harassed untimely."  When the god in the form of an elephant could
not deter, disturb, or change the ascetic Kamadeva from his meditation, he
retreated slowly, exhausted, weary, and dejected. He retreated and went out of
the fasting hall. Having gone out of the fasting hall, he abandoned his form as
an elephant, which was a result of his actions. Having done so, he assumed the
form of a divine, terrifying serpent.  This serpent was fierce, powerful, and
terrible, with a large body. He was black, like a vessel for melting lead and
tin. His eyes were filled with poison and anger. He looked like a heap of kohl.
His eyes were red. His forked tongue was restless, flickering out. Due to his
blackness, he looked like the braid of the earth (the earth, personified as a
woman). He spread his fierce, blazing, crooked, thick, rough, and terrifying
hood. He hissed like a blacksmith's bellows. His fierce anger could not be
restrained.  The god in the form of a serpent came to the place where the
fasting hall was, where the ascetic Kamadeva was. Having come, he spoke to the
ascetic Kamadeva, "O Kamadeva! If you do not abandon your conduct, your vows
(renunciation, rejection, fasting), if you do not break them, I will immediately
rush upon your body. Having rushed upon your body, I will wrap myself around
your neck from behind with my sharp tail. Having wrapped myself around your
neck, I will pierce your chest with my sharp, poisonous fangs. Just as you have
been tormenting and harassing living beings untimely, you will be tormented and
harassed untimely."  **[108]** When the ascetic Kamadeva heard these words
spoken by the god in the form of a serpent, he remained steadfast in his
meditation. The god spoke again, a second time, and a third time, but Kamadeva
remained steadfast in his meditation.  **[109]** Then the god in the form of a
serpent approached the ascetic Kamadeva, who remained steadfast. Having
approached, he rushed upon Kamadeva's body. Having rushed upon his body, he
wrapped himself around his neck from behind with his sharp tail.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana : gAthApati kAmadeva] - [101 jeNeva posaha-sAlA jeNeva
kAmadeve samaNovAsae, teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA kAmadeve samaNovAsayaM
evaM vayAsIhaM bho! kAmadevA! samaNovAsayA! jAva (sIlAI vayAiM, veramaNAiM,
paccakkhANAiM, posahovavAsAiM na chaDDesi,) na bhaMjesi, to te ajjeva ahaM
sarasarassa kAyaM duruhAmi duruhittA pacchimeNaM bhAeNaM tikkhutto gIvaM,
veDhemi, veDhitA tikkhAhiM visaparigayAhiM dADhAhiM uraMsi ceva nikuTTemi, jahA
NaM tumaM aTTa-duhaTTa-vasaTe akAle ceva jIviyAo vvrovijjsi| jaba hastIrUpadhArI
deva zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ko nirgrantha-pravacana se vicalita, kSubhita tathA
vipariNAmita nahIM kara sakA, to vaha zrAnta, klAnta aura khinna hokara dhIre-
dhIre pIche httaa| pIche haTa kara poSadhazAlA se bAhara niklaa| bAhara nikala
kara vikriyAjanya hasti-rUpa kA tyAga kiyaa| vaisA kara divya, vikarAla sarpa kA
rUpa dhAraNa kiyaa| vaha sarpa ugraviSa, pracaNDaviSa, ghoraviSa aura vizAlakAya
thaa| vaha syAhI aura mUsa-dhAtu galAne ke pAtra jaisA kAlA thaa| usake netroM
meM viSa aura krodha bharA thaa| vaha kAjala ke Dhera jaisA lagatA thaa| usakI
AMkheM lAla-lAla thii| usakI duharI jIbha caMcala thI-bAhara lapalapA rahI thii|
kAlepana ke kAraNa vaha pRthvI (pRthvI rUpI nArI) kI veNIcoTI-jaisI lagatA thaa|
vaha apanA utkaTa-ugra, sphuTa-dedIpyamAna, kuTilaTer3hA, jaTilamoTA,
karkazakaThora, vikaTabhayaMkara phana phailAe hue thaa| luhAra kI dhauMkanI kI
taraha vaha phukAra kara rahA thaa| usakA pracaNDa krodha roke nahIM rUkatA
thaa| vaha sarparUpadhArI deva jahAM poSadhazAlA thI, jahAM zramaNopAsaka
kAmadeva thA, vahAM aayaa| Akara zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva se bolAarekAmadeva! yadi
tuma zIla, vrata (viramaNa, pratyAkhyAna, poSadhopavAsa kA tyAga nahIM karate
hoM,) bhaMga nahIM karate ho, to maiM abhI sarrATa karatA huA tumhAre zarIra
para cddhuuNgaa| car3ha kara pichale bhAga sepUMcha kI ora se tumhAre gale meM
tIna lapeTa lgaauuNgaa| lapeTa lagAkara apane tIkhe, jaharIleM dAtoM se tumhArI
chAtI para DaMka mArUMgA, jisase tuma ArtadhyAna aura vikaTa duHkha se pIDita
hote hue asamaya meM hI jIvana se pRthak ho jAogemara jaaoge| 108. tae NaM se
kAmadeve samaNovAsae teNaM deveNaM sappa-rUveNaM evaM vutte samANe abhIe jAva'
vihri| so vi doccaMpi taccapi bhnni| kAmadevo vi jAva vihri| sarparUpadhArI usa
deva dvArA yoM kahe jAne para bhI kAmadeva nirbhIkatA se upAsanArata rhaa| deva
ne dUsarI bAra phira tIsarI bAra vaisA hI kahA, para kAmadeva pUrvavat upAsanA
meM lagA rhaa| 109. tae NaM se deve sapparUve kAmadevaM samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM
jAva pAsai, pAsittA Asuratte 4 kAmadevassa sarasarassa kAyaM durUhai, durUhittA
pacchima-bhAeNaM tikkhutto gIvaM 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 98 /  2. dekheM sUtra-
saMkhyA 98 //  3. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Upāsakadaśāṅgasūtra] 102. The serpent-formed deity, seeing the fearless
Śramaṇopāsaka Kāmadeva, became extremely enraged and, with a hissing sound,
climbed upon his body. After climbing, it wrapped its three coils around his
neck. Having wrapped the coils, it struck his chest with its sharp, venomous
fangs.  110. Then, the Śramaṇopāsaka Kāmadeva endured that intense pain with
equanimity. The deity's defeat: The victory of ahiṃsā over hiṃsā  111. Then, the
deity in the serpent form, seeing the fearless Śramaṇopāsaka Kāmadeva, does not
attempt to disturb, agitate or transform him from the Nirgranthas' doctrine.
Gradually, he retreats, retreats from the poshada-sālā, sheds the divine serpent
form, and manifests a great divine celestial form.  (Adorned with) a garland, a
necklace, a sacred thread, a crown, ornaments on the arms, ankles, and ears,
various hand ornaments, a beautiful garland, crown, and auspicious garments,
auspicious and excellent sandalwood paste, a radiant forehead, a long garland,
divine complexion, divine fragrance, divine form, divine touch, divine sound,
divine posture, divine powers, divine youth, divine radiance, divine shadow,
divine flames, divine luster, and divine splendor, illuminating and shining in
the ten directions, he manifests the divine celestial form, beautiful and
magnificent to behold. After manifesting it, he enters the poshada-sālā of the
Śramaṇopāsaka Kāmadeva, and standing in the sky, addresses the five-colored
celestial maidens: "Congratulations, O Śramaṇopāsaka Kāmadeva! You are blessed,
O beloved of the gods! You have accomplished the purpose, attained the
characteristics, and obtained the human birth and life, in whose Nirgranthas'
doctrine such attainments have been achieved, obtained, and realized."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 102] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra veDhei, veDhittA tikkhAhiM visaparigayAhiM dADhAhiM
uraMsi ceva nikuttttei| sarparUpadhArI deva ne jaba zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ko
nirbhaya dekhA to vaha atyanta krudha hokara sarrATe ke sAtha usake zarIra para
car3ha gyaa| car3ha kara pichale bhAga se usake gale meM tIna lapeTa lagA die|
lapeTa lagAkara apane tIkhe, jaharIle dAtoM se usakI chAtI para DaMka maaraa|
110. tae NaM se kAmadeve samaNovAsae taM ujjalaM jAva' ahiyaasei| zramaNopAsaka
kAmadeva ne usa tIvra vedanA ko sahanazIlatA ke sAtha jhelaa| deva kA parAbhava
: hiMsA para ahiMsA kI vijaya 111. tae NaM se deve sappa-rUve kAmadevaM
samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM jAva pAsai, pAsittA jAhe no saMcAei kAmadevaM
samaNovAsayaM niggaMthAo pAvayaNAo cAlittae vA khobhittae vA vipariNAmittae vA
tAhe saMte saNiyaM-saNiyaM paccosakkai, paccosakkittA posaha-sAlAo
paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA, divvaM sappa-rUvaM vippajahai, vippajahittA egaM
mahaM divvaM deva-rUvaM viuvvi| hAra-virAiya-vacchaM jAva (kaDaga-tuDiya-
thaMbhiya-bhuyaM, aMgaya-kuMDala-maTThagaMDakaNNapIDha-dhAriM,
vicittahatthAbharaNaM, vicittamAlA-mauli-mauDaM, kalyANaga-
pavaravatthaparihivaM, kallANaga-pavara-mallANulevaNaM, bhAsura-boMdi, palaMbaM-
vaNamAladharaM, divveNaM vaNNeNaM, divveNaM gandheNaM, divveNaM rUveNaM,
divveNaM phAseNaM, divveNaM saMghAeNaM, divveNaM saMThANeNaM, divvAe iDDIe,
divvAe juIe, divvAe pabhAe, divvAe chAyAeM, divvAe accIe, divveNaM teeNaM,
divvAe lesAe) dasa disAo ujjovemANaM pabhAsemANaM, pAsAIyaM darisaNijjaM
abhirUvaM paDirUvaM divva devarUvaM viuvvai, viuvvittA kAmadevassa
samaNovAsayassa posahasAlaM aNuppavisai, aNuppavisittA aMtalikkha-paDivanne
sakhiMkhiNiyAiM paMcavaNNAI vatthAI pavara-parihie kAmadevaM samaNovAsayaM evaM
vayAsIhaM bho! kAmadevA samaNovAsayA! dhannesi NaM tumaM, devANuppiyA! saMpuNNe,
kayatthe, kayalakkhaNe, suladdhe NaM tava devANuppiyA! mANussae
jammajIviyaphale, jassa NaM tava niggaMthe pAvayaNe imeyArUvA paDivattI laddhA,
pattA, abhismnnnnaagyaa| evaM khalu devANuppiyA! sakke, deviMde, deva-rAyA jAva
(vajapANI, puraMdare, sayakkaU, suhassakkhe, maghavaM, pAgasAsaNe,
dAhiNaDDalogAhivaI, battIsa-vimAna-saya-sahassAhivaI, airAvaNavAhaNe, suriMde,
arayaMbara-vatthadhare, Alaiya-mAlamauDe, nava-hema-cArU-citta-caMcalakuMDala-
vilihijamANagaMDe, bhAsuraboMdI, palaMba-vaNamAle, sohamme kappe sohammavaDeMsae
1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 106  /  2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva  [103 In the assembly of the gods, in the
palace of Indra, eighty-four thousand gods, including the thirty-three gods, the
four Lokapalas, the eight chief queens with their families, the three groups of
attendants, the seven Anuyogas, the seven Anuyoga-followers, and the eighty-four
thousand Ayrakhadeva-gods] and many other gods and goddesses gathered together.
They all thought, spoke, understood, and declared, "Oh gods! In the Jambudvipa,
in the Bharata country, in the city of Champa, in the Samanovasa, in the Posha-
sala, the Bhramayari, including the Umukkamani-Suvarna, the Vavgayamala-Vannaga-
Vilevana, the Nikkhitta-Satta-Musala, the Ege, and the Abie, the Dvabha-
Santharo-Vagaya, the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira, the Dharma-Pannatti, the
Uvasampannita, is residing. No god, demon, Yaksha, Rakshasa, Kinnara, Kimpurisa,
Mahoraga, Gandharva, or any other being can move, disturb, or change the
Nirgranthas, the liberated ones."  Therefore, I, Indra, the king of the gods,
came here, not being able to bear, not being able to tolerate, not being able to
endure this. Oh, Dev-Anuppiya! I have obtained, achieved, and realized the
desired, the wealth, the fame, the strength, the energy, and the human-
excellence. Oh, Dev-Anuppiya! I have seen, obtained, and realized the desired,
the wealth, the fame, the strength, the energy, and the human-excellence. Oh,
Dev-Anuppiya! I beg your forgiveness, forgive me, Dev-Anuppiya! Forgive me, Dev-
Anuppiya! I cannot bear this pain, I cannot bear this pain, I cannot bear this
pain. With folded hands, I beg your forgiveness, I beg your forgiveness. I will
go to the same direction, I will go to the same direction.  When the serpent-
form god saw that the Samanovasaka Kamadeva was fearless and could not be moved,
disturbed, or changed by the Nirgrantha teachings, he became tired, exhausted,
and dejected. He slowly retreated, went out of the Posha-sala, and abandoned the
serpent-form created by divine illusion. He then assumed a beautiful, divine
form.  On his chest, a garland adorned him. He wore armlets and arm-guards on
his arms, which kept his arms steady. His cheeks, adorned with saffron, musk,
and other fragrant substances, were adorned with ear-ornaments and earrings. He
wore various types of hand ornaments. On his head, he wore a crown adorned with
various garlands. He wore a blessed, auspicious, unbroken, and excellent
garment. He was adorned with auspicious and excellent garlands and fragrant
substances like sandalwood, saffron, etc. His body was radiant. A garland made
of flowers of all seasons hung from his neck to his knees. He possessed divine,
god-like color, fragrance, form, touch, structure, body structure, body posture,
wealth, flying vehicles, clothes, ornaments, and other divine wealth, radiance,
and brilliance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana : gAthApati kAmadeva] [103 vimANe sabhAe suhammAe) sakkaMsi
sIhAsaNaMsi caurAsIIe sAmANiya-sAhassINaM jAva (tAyattIsAe tAyattIsagANaM,
cauNhaM logapAlANaM, aTThaNhaM aggamahisINaM saparivArANaM, tiNhaM parisANaM,
sattaNhaM aNiyANaM, sattaNha aNiyAhivaINa, cauNhaM caurAsINaM
AyarakkhadevasAhassINaM) annesiM ca bahUNaM devANa ya devINa ya majjhagae
evamAikkhai, evaM bhAsai, evaM paNNavei, evaM parUveievaM khalu devA! jaMbuddIve
dIve bhArahe vAse campAe nayarIe kAmadeve samaNovAsae posaha-sAlAe posahie
baMbhayArI jAva ( ummukka -maNi-suvaNNe, vavagayamAlA-vaNNaga-vilevaNe,
nikkhitta-sattha-musale, ege, abIe) davbha-saMthArovagae samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM dhammapaNNattiM uvasaMpajitANaM vihrdd'| no khalu se sakkA
keNai deveNa vA dANaveNa vA jAva (jakkheNa vA, rakkhaseNa vA, kinnareNa vA,
kiMpuriseNa vA, mahorageNa vA) gaMdhavveNa vA niggaMthAo pAvayaNAo cAlittae vA
khebhittae vA vipariNAmittae vaa| tae NaM ahaM sakkassa deviMdassa deva-raNNo
eyamaDhaM asaddahamANe, apattiyamANe, aroemANe ihaM hvvmaage| taM aho NaM,
devANuppiyA! iDDI, juI, jaso, balaM, vIriyaM, purisakkAra-parakkame laddhe,
patte, abhismnnnnaage| taM diTThA NaM devANuppiyA! iDDI jAva (juI, jaso, balaM,
vIriyaM purisakkAra-parakkame laddhe, patte) abhismnnnnaage| taM khAmemi NaM,
devANuppiyA! khamaMtu majjha devANuppiyA! khaMtumarahaMti NaM devANuppiyA! nAiM
bhujo karaNayAe tti kaTu pAya-vaDie, paMjali-uDe eymno bhujo bhujo khAmei,
khAmittA jAmeva disaM pAubbhUe tAmeva disaM pddige| sarparUpadhArI deva ne jaba
dekhA-zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva nirbhaya hai, vaha use nirgranthapravacana se
vicalita kSubhita evaM vipariNAmita nahIM kara sakA hai to zrAnta, klAnta khinna
hokara vaha dhIre-dhIre pIche httaa| pIche haTakara poSadha-zAlA se bAhara
niklaa| bAhara nikala kara deva-mAyA-janita sarpa-rUpa kA tyAga kiyaa| vaisA
kara usane uttama, divya deva-rUpa dhAraNa kiyaa| usa deva ke vakSasthala para
hAra suzobhita ho rahA thaa| (vaha apanI bhujAoM para kaMkaNa tathA
bAhurakSikAbhujAoM ko susthira banAe rakhane vAlI AbharaNAtmaka paTTI,
aMgadabhujabandha dhAraNa kie thaa| usake mRSTakesara, kastUrI Adi se
maMDitacitrita kapoloM para karNa-bhUSaNa, kuNDala zobhita the| vaha
vicitraviziSTa yA anekavidha hastAbharaNa-hAthoM ke AbhUSaNa dhAraNa kie thaa|
usake mastaka para taraha-taraha kI mAlAoM se yukta mukuTa thaa| vaha
kalyANakRtmAMgalika, anupahata yA akhaDita pravara-uttama pozAka pahane thaa|
vaha mAMgalika tathA uttama mAlAoM evaM anulepana-candana, kesara Adi ke
vilepana se yukta thaa| usakA zarIra dedIpyamAna thaa| sabhI RtuoM ke phUloM se
banI mAlA usake gale se ghaTanoM taka laTakatI thii| usane divya-devocita
varNa,gandha, rUpa, sparza, saMghAtadaihika gaThana, saMsthAnadaihika avasthiti,
Rddhi-vimAna, vastra, AbhUSaNa Adi daivika samRddhi, dyuti-AbhA athavA yukti-
iSTa

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[104] [Upasakadasangasutra] (The Upasaka, adorned with the qualities of family,
etc., brilliance, luster, radiance, brilliance, splendor, and subtle essence,
and with his self-perfection, illuminated the ten directions with his radiant
aura, making them bright, luminous, and beautiful. He possessed a divine form,
captivating and enchanting, a model to be emulated. Thus, he entered the feeding
hall of the Upasaka Kamdeva.) Having entered and taken his place in the sky, the
Upasaka, adorned with five excellent garments adorned with small bells, spoke to
the Upasaka Kamdeva, saying, "Upasaka Kamdeva! Devānupriya, you are blessed,
virtuous, accomplished, and possess auspicious qualities. Devānupriya! You have
attained such understanding, faith, and belief in the Nirgrantha teachings. It
is readily available to you, it is your own, and you have undoubtedly achieved
the fruits of human birth and life. Devānupriya! The story goes that Sakra, the
powerful, the Devendra, the supreme lord of the gods, the most beautiful among
the Devraj, (holding a vajra in his hand, the destroyer of the city of the
Asuras, the protector of the city of Purandara, the one who in a previous birth
as the merchant Kartika, had nurtured a hundred special acquisitions, the one
with a thousand eyes, the controller of the thousand-eyed clouds, the destroyer
of the enemy named Pak, the lord of the southern part of the world, the master
of thirty-two million celestial chariots, the rider of the elephant Airavata,
the lord of the gods, the one with pure garments like the sky, adorned with
garlands, with beautiful, painted, and shimmering earrings adorning his cheeks,
with a radiant body, and wearing a long garland of flowers, Indra, seated on his
throne in the Sudharma assembly, within the Sudharma Kalpa, in the
Sudharmavatansaka celestial chariot) surrounded by eighty-four thousand ordinary
gods (thirty-three Guru-sthaniya Trayastrinsta gods, four Lokapalas, eight
prominent Indra-like beings with their families, three councils, seven armies,
seven army commanders, three hundred and thirty-six thousand guardian gods) and
many other gods and goddesses, declared, spoke, proclaimed, or formulated this:
"Gods! In the Bharat Kshetra, within the Jambudvipa, in the city of Champa, the
Upasaka Kamdeva, accepting nourishment in his feeding hall, observing celibacy
(having renounced jewels, golden garlands, adornments, decorations, and the
application of sandalwood and saffron, free from weapons, staffs, etc.,
solitary, unique, without any other companion), lies on a bed of kusa, engaged
in meditation according to the teachings of the Angikrita Dharma-Prajnapti. No
god, demon (Yaksha, Rakshasa, Kinnara, Kimpurusha, Mahoraga), Gandharva can
cause him to deviate, disturb, or change from the Nirgrantha teachings. I did
not have faith, belief, or conviction in this statement of Sakra, Devendra, the
king of the gods. It seemed distasteful to me. I came here quickly. Devānupriya!
The power, brilliance, fame, strength, vigor, and manly prowess 1. White,
yellow, red, blue, black.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra parivArAdi yoga, prabhA, kAnti, arcidIpti, teja,
lezyAAtma-pariNati-tadanurUpa bhAmaMDala se dasoM dizAoM ko udyotita-
prakAzayukta, prabhAsitaprabhA yA zobhA yukta karate hue, prasAditaprasAda yA
AhlAda yukta, darzanIya, abhirUpamanojJa-mana ko apane meM ramA lene vAlA,
pratirUpamana meM basa jAne vAlA divya devarUpa dhAraNa kiyaa| vaisA kara,)
zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva kI poSadhazAlA meM praviSTa huaa| praviSTa hokara AkAza
meM avasthita ho choTI-choTI ghaNTikAoM se yukta pAMca' vargoM ke uttama vastra
dhAraNa kie hue vaha zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva se yoM bolAzramaNopAsaka kAmadeva!
devaanupriy| tuma dhanya ho, puNyazAlI ho, kRta-kRtya ho, kRtalakSaNa-
zubhalakSaNa vAle ho| devAnupriya! tumheM nirgantha-pravacana meM aisI
pratipatti-vizvAsa-AsthA sulabha hai, suprApta hai, svAyatta hai, nizcaya hI
tumane manuSya-janama aura jIvana kA suphala prApta kara liyaa| devAnupriya!
bAta yoM huI-zakra-zaktizAlI, devendradevoM ke parama Izvara-svAmI,
devarAjadevoM meM suzobhita, (vajrapANi-hAtha meM vajra dhAraNa kie, purandara-
pura-asuroM ke nagaravizeSa ke dArakavidhvaMsaka, zatakratu-pUrvajanma meM
kArtika zreSThI ke bhava meM sau bAra viziSTa abhigrahoM ke paripAlaka,
sahastrAkSa-hajAra AMkhoM vAleapane pAMca sau mantriyoM kI apekSA hajAra AMkhoM
vAle maghavA-meghoMbAdaloM ke niyantA, pAkazAsana-pAka nAmaka zatru ke nAzaka,
dakSiNArddha-lokAdhipati-loka ke dakSiNa bhAga ke svAmI, battIsa lAkha vimAnoM
ke adhipati, airAvata nAmaka hAthI para savArI karane vAle, surendra-devatAoM ke
prabhu, AkAza kI taraha nirmala vastradhArI, mAlAoM se yukta mukuTa dhAraNa kie
hue, ujjavala svarNa ke sundara, citrita, caMcala-hilate hue kuMDaloM se jinake
kapola suzobhita the, dedIpyamAna zarIradhArI, lambI puSpamAlA pahane hue indra
ne saudharma kalpa ke antargata saudharmAvataMsaka vimAna meM, sudharmA sabhA
meM) indrAsana para sthita hote hue caurAsI hajAra sAmAnika devoM (tetIsa
gurUsthAnIya trAyastriMza devoM, cAra lokapAla, parivAra sahita ATha
agramahiSiyo-pramukha idrANiyoM, tIna pariSadoM, sAta anIkoM-senAoM, sAta
anIkAdhipatiyoMsenApatiyoM, tIna lAkha chattIsa hajAra aMgarakSaka devoM) tathA
bahuta se anya devoM aura deviyoM ke bIca yo AkhyAta, bhASita, prajJapta yA
prarUpita kiyAkahA devoM! jambUdvIpa ke antargata bharatakSetra meM, caMpA
nagarI meM zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva poSadhazAlA meM poSadha svIkAra kie,
brahmacarya kA pAlana karatA huA (maNi-ratna, suvarNamAlA, varNakasajjA-hetu
maMDana-Alekhana evaM candana kesara Adi ke vilepana kA tyAga kie hue, zastra,
daNDa Adi se rahita, ekAkI, advitIya-binA kisI dUsare ko sAtha lie) kuza ke
bichaune para avasthita huA zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa aMgIkRta dharma-
prajJapti ke anurUpa upAsanArata hai| koI deva, dAnava (yakSa, rAkSasa, kinnara,
kiMpurUSa, mahoraga), gandharva dvArA nirgrantha-pravacana se vaha vicalita,
kSubhita tathA vipariNAmita nahI kiyA jA sktaa| zakra, devendra, devarAja ke isa
kathana meM mujhe zraddhA, pratIti-vizvAsa nahIM huaa| vaha mujhe arUcikara
lgaa| maiM zIghra yahAM aayaa| devAnupriya! jo Rddhi, dyuti, yaza, bala, vIrya,
purUSocita parAkrama 1. zveta. pIta. rakta. nIla. kRssnn|

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva  [105] "I have seen all that you have
achieved and acquired. Devānupriya! I beg your forgiveness. Devānupriya! Please
forgive me. Devānupriya! You are capable of forgiving. I will never do this
again." Saying this, he fell at his feet and repeatedly begged for forgiveness.
After begging for forgiveness, he went back in the direction from which he had
come.  **Discussion**  In this sūtra, the use of the word "vikūvvai" (reaction
or transformation) in the context of the god assuming the forms of a demon, an
elephant, and a serpent, indicates his divine body, which is a result of his
birth as a god. In this context, it is important to know that Jain philosophy
recognizes five types of bodies: audārika, vaikriya, āhārika, taijasa, and
kārmaṇa. The vaikriya body is of two types: aupapātika and labdhipratyaya. The
aupapātika vaikriya body is obtained from birth in the realm of gods and hell.
There is a combination of past karma that results in birth in this form. The
labdhipratyaya vaikriya body is obtained through special achievements gained
through austerities, etc. This is found in the human realm and the realm of
animals.  The vaikriya body does not contain impure substances like bones,
marrow, flesh, and blood. Instead, these are transformed into desirable,
radiant, mental, pleasant, and superior particles, forming the body. After
death, the vaikriya body does not leave a corpse. Its particles disperse like
camphor. As the word "vaikriya" suggests, this body can perform various
reactions and specific actions, such as assuming multiple forms while being one,
assuming one form while being multiple, making a small body large, making a
large body small, assuming various types of bodies capable of moving on earth
and in the sky, becoming invisible, etc.  The gods of the Saudharma and other
heavenly realms are capable of performing all kinds of reactions or
transformations: one, many, countable, uncountable, similar to themselves,
dissimilar to themselves. They can assume all kinds of forms, from one sense to
five senses, within these transformations.  In this case, the god assumed
various forms to torment the ascetic Kamadeva. These were his "uttaravaikriya"
forms, i.e., vaikriya bodies created based on his original vaikriya body. The
reason why the god caused so much trouble to torment the ascetic Kamadeva is
explained in this sūtra. That god was a "mithyādr̥ṣṭi" (one with false belief).
Despite being a "mithyātvī" (one with false belief), he had attained the realm
of gods due to his austerities in a previous life. However, due to his
"mithyātvī" nature, he remained unfaithful to the "nirgrantha-pravacana" (the
teachings of the liberated ones) or Jainism, even after becoming a god. Hearing
Indra praise Kamadeva and seeing Kamadeva engrossed in intense religious
devotion, he felt a burning hatred. This resulted in him inflicting cruel and
intense suffering on Kamadeva to distract him from the "nirgrantha-pravacana."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana : gAthApati kAmadeva ] [ 105 tumheM upalabdha- prApta tathA
abhisamanvAgata-adhigata hai, vaha saba maiMne dekhA  /  devAnupriya ! maiM
tumase kSamAyAcanA karatA hUM  /  devAnupriya ! mujhe kSamA kro| devAnupriya !
Apa kSamA karane meM samartha haiN| maiM phira kabhI aisA nahIM karUMgA yo
kahakara pairoM meM par3akara, usane hAtha jor3akara bAra-bAra kSamA-yAcanA kI
/  kSamAyAcanA kara jisa dizA se AyA thA, usI dizA kI ora calA gyaa| vivecana
prastuta sUtra meM deva dvArA pizAca, hAthI tathA sarpa kA rUpa dhAraNa karane
ke prasaMga meM 'vikuvvai'vikriyA yA vikurvaNA karanA - kriyA kA prayoga hai jo
usakI deva - janmalabhya vaikriya deha kA sUcaka hai| isa sandarbha meM jJAtavya
hai jaina-darzana meM audArika, vaikriya, AhAraka, taijasa aura kArmaNa ye pAMca
prakAra ke zarIra mAne gae haiN| vaikriya zarIra do prakAra kA hotA hai-
opapAtika aura labdhipratyaya  /  aupapAtika vaikriya zarIra deva-yonI aura
naraka-yoni meM janma se hI prApta hotA hai  /  pUrvasaMcita karmoM kA aisA yoga
vahAM hotA hai, jisakI phala- niSpatti isa rUpa meM janma-jAta hotI hai  /
labdhi - pratyaya vaikriya zarIra tapazcaraNa Adi dvArA prApta labdhi-vizeSa se
milatA hai  /  yaha manuSya yoni evaM tiryaJca yoni meM hotA 1 vaikriya zarIra
meM asthi, majjA, mAMsa, rakta Adi azuci padArtha nahIM hote  /  etadvarjita
iSTa, kAnta, manoja, priya evaM zreSTha pudgala deha ke rUpa meM pariNata hote
hai, mRtyu ke bAda vaikriya- deha kA zava nahIM bctaa| usake pudgala kapUra kI
taraha ur3a jAte haiN| jaisA ki vaikriya zabda se prakaTa hai - isa zarIra dvArA
vividha prakAra kI vikriyAeM viziSTa kriyAeM kI jA sakatI hai, jaise-eka rUpa
hokara aneka rUpa dhAraNa karanA, aneka rUpa hokara eka rUpa dhAraNa karanA,
choTI deha ko bar3I banAnA, bar3I ko choTI banAnA, pRthvI evaM AkAza meM calane
yogya vividha prakAra ke zarIra dhAraNa karanA, adRzya rUpa banAnA ityAdi  /
saudharma Adi devalokoM ke deva eka, aneka, saMkhyAta, asaMkhyAta, sva-sadRza,
visadRza saba prakAra kI vikriyAeM yA vikurvaNAeM karane meM sakSama hote haiN|
ve ina vikurvaNAoM ke antargata ekendriya se paMcendriya taka saba prakAra ke
rUpa dhAraNa kara sakate haiM  /  prastuta prakaraNa meM zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva
ko kaSTa dene ke liye deva ne vibhinna rUpa dhAraNa kie| yaha usake
uttaravaikriya rUpa the, arthAt mUla vaikriya zarIra ke AdhAra para banAe gae
vaikriya zarIra the| zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ko pIr3ita karane ke lie deva ne
kyoM itane upadrava kie, isakA samAdhAna isI sUtra meM hai  /  vaha deva
mithyAdRSTi thA  /  mithyAtvI hote hue bhI pUrva janma meM apane dvArA kie gae
tapazcaraNa se deva - yoni to use prApta ho sakI, para mithyAtva ke kAraNa
nirgrantha-pravacana yA jinadharma ke prati usameM jo azraddhA thI, vaha deva
hone para bhI vidyamAna rahI  /  indra ke mukha kAmadeva kI prazaMsA suna kara
tathA, utkaTa dharmopAsanA meM kAmadeva ko tanmaya dekha usakA vidveSa bhabhaka
uThA, jisakA pariNAma kAmadeva ko nirgrantha-pravacana se vicalita karane ke lie
krUra tathA ugra kaSTa dene ke rUpa meM

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [106]  The *Upasakadasanga Sutra* unfolds.   A deva, disguised as a demon,
tore the body of Kamadeva into pieces with a sharp sword. Yet, Kamadeva did not
waver from his devotion. The deva then assumed the form of a ferocious,
monstrous elephant, tossing Kamadeva into the sky, crushing him with its teeth
and trampling him with its feet. After this, he tormented him as a terrifying
serpent. How was this possible? How could Kamadeva, even after his body was torn
apart, be tossed into the sky, trampled, and crushed? Here is the explanation:
The deva, a *mithyatvi*, wanted to inflict severe pain on Kamadeva to make him
abandon his dharma. Or perhaps he wanted to test his religious steadfastness. He
did not want to kill him. This is a characteristic of *vaikriya-labdhi* bearing
devas: they can sever, cut, and break the *pudgalas* of the body with the same
speed with which they can instantly reassemble them. This happens so quickly
that the afflicted individual experiences intense pain and the feeling of being
cut, but the state of separation or severance of the body's *pudgalas* is
extremely short-lived. Therefore, the body appears to be the same in its gross
form. This is what happened to Kamadeva.  Kamadeva endured the excruciating
pain, but he did not deviate from his dharma. Then, the deva appeared in his
original form and explained the reason for his malicious act of tormenting
Kamadeva. There is a mention of three councils, a family of eight queens, seven
armies, etc., in the description of Indra and his celestial entourage. Their
details are as follows:  **The three councils of Indra, the ruler of the
Saudharma heaven:**  * **Shamitha Abhyantara:** This inner council consists of
twelve thousand devas and seven hundred devis. * **Chanda Madhyama:** This
middle council consists of fourteen thousand devas and six hundred devis. *
**Jata Bahya:** This outer council consists of sixteen thousand devas and five
hundred devis.  **The position of the devas and devis in each council:**  *
**Abhyantara:** Devas are positioned at five *palya* levels, and devis at three
*palya* levels. * **Madhyama:** Devas are positioned at four *palya* levels, and
devis at two *palya* levels. * **Bahya:** Devas are positioned at three *palya*
levels, and devis at one *palya* level.  **The family of each chief queen:**
Each chief queen has a family of five thousand devis. Thus, Indra's inner circle
is considered to have a family of forty thousand devis.  **The armies:**  *
**Five armies for fighting:** Elephants, horses, bulls, chariots, and infantry.
* **Two armies for entertainment:** Gandharvanik (musicians) and Natyanik
(actors) for amusement and boosting morale.  This sutra mentions some names of
Indra, such as Shatakratu and Sahasraksha, which are also famous in the Vedic
tradition. The reason and significance of these names according to the Jain
tradition have been explained earlier. According to the Vedic tradition, the
reason for these names is different. It is as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra prasphuTita huaa| pizAcarUpadhara deva dvArA teja
talavAra se zarIra ke Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara die gae, kAmadeva apanI upAsanA se
nahIM httaa| deva ne durdAnta, vikarAla hAthI kA rUpa dhAraNa kara use AkAza meM
uchAlA, dAtoM se jhelA, pairoM se rauNdaa| usake bAda bhayAvaha sarpa ke rUpa
meM use utpIDita kiyaa| yaha saba kaise saMbhava ho sakA? deha ke
Tukar3e-Tukar3e kara die jAne para kAmadeva isa yogya kaise rahA ki use AkAza
meM phekA jA sake, rauMdA jA sake, kucalA jA ske| yahAM aisI bAta hai-vaha
mithyAtvI deva kAmadeva ko ghora kaSTa denA cAhatA thA tAki kAmadeva apanA
dharma chor3a de| athavA usakI dhArmika dRDhatA kI parIkSA karanA cAhatA thaa|
use mAranA nahIM cAhatA thaa| vaikriya-labdhidhArI devoM kI yaha vizeSatA hotI
hai, ve deha ke pudgaloM ko jisa tvarA se vicchinna karate haiM kATa DAlate haiM
, tor3a-phor3a kara dete haiM, usI tvarA se tatkAla unheM yathAvat saMyojita
kara sakate haiN| yaha saba itanI zIghratA se hotA hai ki AkrAnta vyakti ko
ghora pIDA kA to anubhava hotA hai, yaha bhI anubhava hotA hai ki vaha kATa DAlA
gayA hai, para deha ke pudgaloM kI vicchinntA yA pRthaktA kI dazA atyanta
alpakAlika hotI hai| isalie sthUla rUpa meM zarIra vaisA kA vaisA pratIta hotA
hai| kAmadeva ke sAtha aisA hI ghaTita huaa| kAmadeva ne ghora kaSTa sahe, para
vaha dharma se vicalita nahIM huaa| taba deva apane mUla rUpa meM upasthita huA
aura usane vaha saba kahA, jisase vidveSavaza kAmadeva ko kaSTa dene hetu vaha
duSprerita huA thaa| vahAM indra tathA usake deva-parivAra ke varNana meM tIna
pariSadeM, ATha paTarAniyoM ke parivAra sAta senAeM Adi kA ullekha hai, jinakA
vistAra isa prakAra hai saudharma devaloka ke adhipati zakrendra kI tIna
pariSadeM hotI haizamitAAbhyantara, caNDAmadhyama tathA jAtAbAhya  /  Abhyantara
pariSad meM bAraha hajAra deva aura sAta sau deviyAM, madhyama pariSad meM
caudaha hajAra deva aura chaha sau deviyAM tathA bAhya pariSad meM solaha hajAra
deva aura pAMca sau deviyAM hotI haiN| Abhyantara pariSad meM devoM kI sthiti
pAMca palyopama, deviyoM kI sthiti tIna palyopama, madhyama pariSad meM devoM kI
sthiti cAra palyopama, deviyoM kI sthiti do palyopama tathA bAhya pariSad meM
devoM kI sthiti tIna palyopama, deviyoM kI sthiti eka palyopama hotI hai|
agramahiSI-parivAra-pratyeka agramahiSI-paTarAnI ke parivAra meM pAMca hajAra
deviyAM hotI hai| yoM indra keantaHpara meM cAlIsa hajAra deviyoM kA parivAra
mAnA jAtA hai| senAe~-hAthI, ghor3e, baila, ratha tathA paidala-yeM pA~ca senAe~
lar3ane hetu hotI haiM tathA do senAeM gandharvAnIka-gAne-bajAne vAloM kA dala
aura nATyAnIka-nATaka karane vAloM kA dala-Amoda-pramodapUrvaka tadartha utsAha
bar3hAne hetu hotI haiN| isa sUtra meM zatakratu tathA sahastrAkSa Adi indra ke
kucha aise nAma Ae haiM, jo vaidika paramparA meM bhI vizeSa prasiddha haiM  /
jainaparamparA ke anusAra ina nAmoM kA kAraNa evaM inakI sArthakatA pahale artha
meM batalAyI jA cukI haiM  /  vaidika paramparA ke anusAra ina nAmoM kA kAraNa
dUsarA hai  /  vaha isa prakAra hai:

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Second Study: Kamadeva, the Lord of Desires] - [107] The term 'Shatakritu-Ritu'
means a sacrifice. According to the Vedic tradition, upon the completion of a
hundred sacrifices, one attains the status of Indra. Therefore, 'Shatakritu'
refers to the accomplishment of a hundred sacrifices to attain the position of
Indra.  'Sahasrāṃkṣa' literally means 'the one with a thousand eyes.' There is a
well-known mythological story behind this name of Indra. In the Brahma-vaivarta
Purana, it is mentioned that once Indra went to bathe on the banks of the
Mandakini River. There, he saw the wife of the sage Gautama, Ahalya, bathing.
Indra's mind was corrupted by lust, and he used his divine powers to assume the
form of Gautama and violated Ahalya's chastity. When Gautama arrived, he was
extremely enraged and cursed Indra, saying that his body would be covered with a
thousand vulvas. Immediately, a thousand vulvas appeared on Indra's body. Indra
was terrified and fell at the sage's feet. After much pleading, the sage told
Indra that he would have to bear this abhorrent form for a full year, living in
the foul odor of the vulvas. After that, through the worship of the Sun, the
thousand vulvas would be transformed into eyes, and Indra would become
'Sahasrāṃkṣa,' the one with a thousand eyes.  112. Then the Shramanopasaka (lay
disciple) Kamadeva, realizing that the obstacle (upasarga) was no more,
completed the ritual of the image (pratima).  113. At that time, the Shramana
Bhagavan Mahavira (went to where the city of Champa and the Purnabhadra shrine
were, took the appropriate seat, and engaged in self-contemplation through
restraint and austerity) resided.  114. Then the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva,
reflecting on this story, (thought: 'Indeed, this Shramana Bhagavan Mahavira is
residing here,' and after venerating and saluting the Bhagavan, in order to
observe the Posadha vow, he) dressed in clean white garments (and adorned with
the best ornaments, with a clean and decorated body, and a parasol).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana : gAthApati kAmadeva] - [107 zatakratu-Rtu kA artha yajJa
hai| sau yajJa sampUrNa rUpa meM sampanna kara lene para indra-pada prApta hotA
hai, vaidika paramparA meM aisI mAnyatA hai| ataH zatakratu sau yajJa pUre kara
indra pada pAne ke artha meM pracalita sahastrAMkSaisakA zAbdika artha hajAra
netravAlA hai| indra kA yaha nAma par3ane ke pIche eka paurANika kathA bahuta
prasiddha hai| brahmavaivarta purANa meM ullekha hai-indra eka bAra mandAkinI ke
taTa para snAna karane gyaa| vahA~ usane gautama RSi kI patnI ahalyA ko nahAte
dekhaa| indra kI buddhi kAmAveza se bhraSTa ho gii| usane deva-mAyA se gautama
RSi kA rUpa banA liyA aura ahalyA kA zIla-bhaMga kiyaa| isI bIca gautama vahA~
pahuMca ge| ve indra para atyanta kruddha hue, use phaTakArate hue kahane lage-
tuma to devatAoM meM zreSTha samajhe jAte ho, jJAnI kahe jAte ho| para, vAstava
meM tuma nIca, adhama, patita aura pApI ho, yonilampaTa ho| indra kI nindanIya
yoni-lampaTatA jagat ke samakSa prakaTa rahe, isalie gautama ne usakI deha para
sahastra yoniyAM bana jAne kA zApa de ddaalaa| tatkAla indra kI deha para hajAra
yoniyAM udbhUta ho gii| indra ghabarA gayA, RSi ke caraNoM meM gira pdd'aa|
bahuta anunaya-vinaya karane para RSi ne indra se kahA-pUre eka varSa taka
tumheM isa ghRNita rUpa kA kaSTa jhelanA hI hogaa| tuma pratikSaNa yoni kI
durgandha meM rhoge| tadanantara sUrya kI ArAdhanA se ye sahastra yoniyAM netra
rUpa meM pariNata ho jAyeMgI-tuma sahastrAkSa-hajAra netroM vAle bana jaaoge|
Age cala kara vaisA hI huA, eka varSa taka vaisA jaghanya jIvana bitAne ke bAda
indra sUrya kI ArAdhanA se sahastrAkSa bana gyaa| 112. tae NaM se kAmadeve
samaNovAsae nirUvasaggaM ii kaTTu paDimaM paarei| taba zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ne
yaha jAnakara ki aba upasarga-vighna nahIM rahA hai, apanI pratimA kA
pAraNasamApana kiyaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra kA padArpaNa : kAmadeva dvArA vandana-
namana 113. teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre jAva (jeNeva
caMpA nayarI, jeNeva puNNabhadde ceie, teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA
ahApaDirUvaM oggahaM ogiNhittA saMjameNaM tavasA appANaM bhAvemANe) vihri| _ usa
kAla, usa samaya zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra (jahAM caMpA nagarI thI, pUrNabhadra
caitya thA, padhAre, yathocita sthAna grahaNa kiyA, saMyama evaM tapa se) AtmA
ko bhAvita karate hue avasthita hue| 114. tae NaM se kAmadeve samaNovAsae imIse
kahAe laDhe samANe evaM khalu samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre jAva' vihri| seyaM khalu
mama samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdittA, namaMsittA tao paDiNiyattassa posahaM
pArittae tti kaTu evaM saMpehei, saMpehettA suddhappAvesAiM vatthAI jAva(pavara-
parihie) appamahagdhA-jAva(bharaNAlaMkiya-sarIre sakoreNTa-mala-dAmeNaM
chatteNaM 1. brahmavaivarta purANa 4.4.7. 19-32 2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 113

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[108] (The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra being recited) The man, the head of the family,
having been informed, left his house. Having left, he went out through the
middle of the city of Champa. Having gone out, he came to the Punnabhadda
Cetiya, just as the conch-shell devotee comes to the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira.
Having come, he performed the three-fold circumambulation, bowing and
prostrating. Having bowed and prostrated, he performed the five-fold
Paryupasana. The Shraman Upasaka Kamadeva, upon hearing that Bhagavan Mahavira
had arrived, thought, "It is auspicious for me to bow and prostrate to the
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira and then return to complete the fast." Thinking thus,
he put on pure and assembly-worthy auspicious garments, (adorned his body with a
few precious ornaments, and surrounded by a group of men with umbrellas adorned
with garlands of fragrant flowers) he left his house. He went out and passed
through the middle of the city of Champa, where the Punnabhadda Cetiya was
(where the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira was), like a conch-shell devotee. He came
and (performed three circumambulations, bowed and prostrated. Having bowed and
prostrated, he performed the three-fold bodily, verbal, and mental) Paryupasana.
115. Then the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira gave a Dharma-katha to the Shraman
Upasaka Kamadeva and the assembly. The praise of Kamadeva by the Bhagavan. 116.
Kamadeva! The Samana Bhagavan Mahavira spoke to the Shraman Upasaka Kamadeva in
this way: "Kamadeva! In the time of the past, in the time of the Ratnavara, you
were a god in the Anta-paubbhua. Then that god manifested a great divine Pisaya-
rupa. Having manifested, he took a great blue lotus, (a garland of fragrant
flowers, a sword with a sharp edge) and holding it, he said to you, "O Kamadeva!
As long as you live, you will be victorious. You, having been told this by that
god, have been living accordingly. These three Uvasaggas, adorned with praise,
should be recited in the same way, until the god is satisfied. "Kamadeva! Is
this true?" "Yes, it is true."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 108] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra dharijamANeNaM) maNussa-vaggurA-parikkhitte sayAo
gihAo paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA campaM nayariM majhaM-majjheNaM niggacchai,
niggacchittA jeNeva puNNabhadde ceie jahA saMkho jAva (jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM
mahAvIre, teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karei,
karettA vaMdai, namasai, vaMdittA, namaMsittA tivihAe panjuvAsaNAe) pjjuvaasi|
zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ne jaba yaha sunA ki bhagavAn mahAvIra padhAre haiM, to
socA, mere lie yaha zreyaskara hai, maiM zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vaMdana-
namaskAra kara, vApasa lauTa kara poSadha kA pAraNa samApana kruuN| yoM soca
kara usane zuddha tathA sabhA yogya mAMgalika vastra bhalI-bhA~ti pahane,
(thor3e se bahumUlya AbharaNoM se zarIra ko alaMkRta kiyA, kuraMTa puSpoM kI
mAlA se yukta chatra dhAraNa kie hue purUSasamUha se ghirA huA) apane ghara se
niklaa| nikala kara caMpA nagarI ke bIce se gujarA, jahA~ pUrNabhadra caitya
thA, (jahAM zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra the,) zaMkha zrAvaka kI taraha aayaa|
Akara (tIna bAra AdakSiNA-pradakSiNA kI, vaMdana-namaskAra kiyaa| vaMdana-
namaskAra kara trividha-kAyika, vAcika evaM mAnasika) paryupAsanA kii| 115. tae
NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre kAmadevassa samaNovAsayassa tIse ya jAva'
dhammakahA smttaa| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva tathA
pariSad ko dharma-dezanA dii| bhagavAna dvArA kAmadeva kI vardhApanA 116.
kAmadevA! i samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre kAmadevaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-se
nUNaM kAmadevA! tubbhaM puvva-rattAvarattakAla-samayaMsi ege deve aMtie
paaubbhuue| tae NaM se deve egaM mahaM divvaM pisAya-rUvaM viuvvai, viuvvittA
Asuratte egaM mahaM nIluppala jAva (gavala-guliya-ayasi-kusuma-ppagAsaM,
khuradhAraM ) asiM gahAya tumaM evaM vayAsI-haM bho kAmadevA! jAva jIviyAo vvro-
vijsi| taM tumaM teNaM deveNaM evaM vutte samANe abhIe jAva vihrsi| evaM
vaNNagarahiyA tiNNi vi uvasaggA taheva paDiuccAreyavvA jAva devo pddigo| se
nUNaM kAmadevA! aDhe samaDhe? haMtA, atthi| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
kAmadeva se kahAkAmadeva! AdhI rAta ke samaya eka deva 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA
11 2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 107 3. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 98 /

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva  [109] He appeared before you. That god
took the form of a terrifying demon. Doing so, in great anger, he drew his sword
(with a deep blue sharp edge like a blue lotus, buffalo horn, and flax flower)
and said to you, "Kamadeva! If you do not break your vows of conduct and other
vows, you will be separated from life." Even when spoken to thus by that god,
you remained fearless in your devotion.  The three types of afflictions, with
detailed descriptions, should be mentioned here in the aforementioned form until
the god returns.  Lord Mahavira said, "Kamadeva, is this correct?" Kamadeva
replied, "Lord! It happened just like that."  [117] On that day, the Samana
Bhagavan Mahavira addressed many Samanas and Niganthas, and Niganthis as well,
saying, "Aryas! If the Samana Upasaka, even while living in a household, endures
the afflictions caused by gods, humans, and animals (bears them with patience
and forbearance), then Aryas! It is possible for the Samanas, who study the
twelve-fold Angas, the Ganipitaka, and the twelve Angas, to endure the
afflictions caused by gods, humans, and animals (bear them with patience and
forbearance)."  [118] Then, those many Samanas and Niganthas, and Niganthis as
well, accepted this statement of the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira with humility,
saying, "It is so, Bhagavan!"  [119] Then, the Samana Upasaka Kamadeva, being
very happy, asked questions of the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira and received
clarification. He bowed and prostrated to the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira three
times, and then, from the same direction he had come, he departed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana : gAthApati kAmadeva] [109 tumhAre sAmane prakaTa huA thaa|
usa deva ne eka vikarAla pizAca kA rUpa dhAraNa kiyaa| vaisA kara, atyanta
kruddha ho, usane (nIle kamala, bhaiMse ke sIMga tathA alasI ke phUla jaisI
gaharI nIlI teja dhAra vAlI) talavAra nikAla kara tuma se kahA-kAmadeva! yadi
tama apane zIla Adi' vrata bhagna nahIM karoge to jIvana se pRthak kara die
jaaoge| usa deva dvArA yoM kahe jAne para bhI tuma nirbhaya bhAva se upAsanArata
rhe| tInoM upasarga vistRta varNana sahita, deva ke vApasa lauTa jAne taka
pUrvokta rUpa meM yahA~ kaha lene caahie| bhagavAn mahAvIra ne kahA-kAmadeva kyA
yaha ThIka hai? kAmadeva bolA-bhagavan ! aisA hI huaa| 117. ajjo i samaNe
bhagavaM mahAvIre bahave samaNe niggaMthe ya niggaMthIo ya AmaMtettA evaM
vayAsI-jai tAva, ajo! samaNovAsagA, gihiNogihamajjhAvasaMtA divyamANusa-
tirikkha-joNie uvasagge sammaM sahati jAva (khamaMti, titikkhaMti) ahiyAseMti,
sakkA puNAI, ajjo! samaNehiM niggaMthehiM duvAlasaMga-gaNi-piGaga ahijjamANehiM
divvamANusa-tirikkha-joNie (uksagge) sammaM sahittae jAba (khamittae,
titikkhitae) ahiyaasitte| bhagavAn mahAvIra ne bahuta se zramaNo aura zramaNiyoM
ko saMbodhita kara kahAAryo! yadi zramaNopAsaka 'gRhI ghara meM rahate hue bhI
devakRta, manuSyakRta, tiryaJcakRta-pazu pakSIkRta upasargoM ko bhalI bhA~ti
sahana karate hai (kSamA evaM titikSA bhAva se jhelate haiM) to AryoM!
dvAdazAMga-rUpa gaNipiTaka kAAcAra Adi bAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana karane vAle
zramaNa nirgranthoM dvArA devakRta, manuSyakRta tathA tiryaJcakRta upasargoM ko
sahana karanA (kSamA evaM titikSA-bhAva se jhelanA) zakya hai hii| 118. tao te
bahave samaNA niggaMthA ya niggaMthIo ya samaNasya bhagavao mahAvIrassa taha tti
eyamaTTha viNaeNaM pddisunneti| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra kA yaha kathana una
bahu-saMkhyaka sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ne 'aisA hI hai' bhagavan ! yoM kaha kara
vinayapUrvaka svIkAra kiyaa| 119. tae NaM kAmadeve samaNovAsae haTTha jAva'
samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM pasiNAI pucchai, atttthmaadiyi| samaNaM bhagavaM
mahAvIraM tikkhutto vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA jAmeva disaM pAubbhUe,
tAmeva disaM pddige| zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva atyanta prasanna huA, usane zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra se prazna pUche artha samAdhAna prApta kiyaa| zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ko tIna bAra vaMdana-namaskAra kara, jisa dizA se vaha 1. dekheM sUtra-
saMkhyA 12 /  .

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1 110] [The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra had arrived, it returned in the same
direction. 120. Then the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira departed from Champa on one
day, having departed, he wandered in other Janapadas. Kamadeva: Ascension to
Heaven 121. Then the Samana Upasaka Kamadeva, having accepted the worship of the
first Upasaka-Pratimas, wandered. 122. Then the Samana Upasaka Kamadeva, having
cultivated himself with many (Sila-Vyay-Guna-Veraman-Pachakkhana-Posho-
Upavasas), having attained the Samana Upasaka Paryaya for twenty years, having
followed eleven Upasaka-Pratimas well, having cleansed himself with a month's
Sanlekhana, having cut off food for sixty meals - a month's Anasana, having done
Alochana, Pratikramana, having reached Samadhi at the time of death, he departed
from the body. Having departed from the body, he was born in the Saudharma
Devaloka, in the Arunabha Vimana, situated in the northeast corner of the
Saudharmavatansaka Maha Vimana, in the form of a Deva. There, the lifespan of
many Devas is four Palyopama. The lifespan of Kamadeva is also said to be four
Palyopama in the form of a Deva. 123. Then, Bhante! Kamadeva, having passed
through the Deva-Loka, the Bhava-Kshaya, the Thikka-Kshaya, where will he go,
where will he be born? Gotama! He will be extinguished in the Mahavideha Vasa.
Nikkevo || The second study of the seventh Anga, the Upasaka Dasanga, is
complete || 1. Thus, Jambu! I say that this is the explanation of the second
study of the Samana, up to the attainment of the two.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 110] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra AyA thA, usI dizA kI ora lauTa gyaa| 120. tae NaM
samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre annayA kayAi campAo paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA
bahiyA jaNavaya-vihAraM vihri| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne eka dina campA se
prasthAna kiyaa| prasthAna kara ve anya janapadoM meM vihAra kara ge| kAmadeva :
svargArohaNa 121. tae NaM kAmadeve samaNovAsae paDhama uvAsaga-paDimaM
uvasaMpajittANaM vihri| tatpazcAt zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ne pahalI
upAsakapratimA kI ArAdhanA svIkAra kii| 122. tae NaM se kAmadeve samaNovAsae
bahUhiM jAva (sIla-vvaya-guNa-veramaNapaccakkhANa-posahovavAsehiM appANaM)
bhAvettA vIsaM vAsAiM samaNovAsagapariyAgaM pAuNittA, ekkArasa uvAsaga-paDimAo
samma kAraNaM phAsettA, mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe appANaM jhUsittA, sarddhi bhattAiM
aNasaNAe chedettA, AloiyapaDikkaMte, samAhipatte, kAlamAse kAlaM kiccA, sohamme
kappe sohammavaDiMsayassa mahAvimANassa uttarapurasthimeNaM arUNAbhe vimANe
devattAe uvvnne| tattha NaM atthegaiyANaM devANaM cattAri paliovamAiM ThiI
pnnnnttaa| kAmadevassa vi devassa cattAri paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|
zramaNopAsaka kAmadeva ne aNuvrata (guNavrata, viramaNa, pratyAkhyAna tathA
poSadhopavAsa) dvArA AtmA ko bhAvita kiyA-AtmA kA pariSkAra aura parimArjana
kiyaa| bIsa varSa taka zramaNopAsaka paryAya-zrAvakadharma kA pAlana kiyaa|
gyAraha upAsaka-pratimAoM kA bhalI-bhA~ti anusaraNa kiyaa| eka mAsa kI
saMlekhanA aura sATha bhojana-eka mAsa kA anazana sampanna kara AlocanA,
pratikramaNa kara maraNa-kAla Ane para samAdhipUrvaka deha-tyAga kiyaa| deha-
tyAga kara vaha saudharma devaloka meM saudharmAvataMsaka mahAvimAna ke IzAna-
koNa meM sthita arUNAbha vimAna meM devarUpa meM utpanna huA vahAM aneka devoM
kI Ayu cAra palyopama kI hotI hai| kAmadeva kI Ayu bhI devarUpa meM cAra
palyopama kI batalAI gaI hai| 123. se NaM bhaMte! kAmadeve tAo deva-logAo Au-
kkhaeNaM bhava-kkhaeNaM ThiikkhaeNaM aNaMtaraM cayaM caittA, kahiM gamihii,
kahiM uvavajihii? goyamA! mahAvidehe vAse sijjhihii| nikkhevo ||sttmss aMgassa
uvAsagadasANaM bIyaM ajjhayaNaM samattaM  //  1. evaM khalu jambU! samaNeNa jAva
sampatteNaM doccassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaDhe paNNattetti bemi|

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva  [111] Gautama asked the Lord Mahavira,
"Bhanta! When Kamadeva, from the realm of the gods, sheds his divine body due to
the exhaustion of lifespan, existence, and state, where will he go? Where will
he be born?" The Lord said, "Gautama! Kamadeva will become a Siddha in the
Mahavideha-kshetra and attain liberation."  || Conclusion || || End of the
Second Study of the Upasaka Dasha in the Seventh Anga ||  Inference - The noble
Sudharma said, "Jambu! The Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira had explained the meaning of
the second study of the Upasaka Dasha in this way, which I have told you."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya adhyayana : gAthApati kAmadeva] . [111 gautama ne bhagavAn mahAvIra se
pUchA-bhante! kAmadeva usa deva-loka se Ayu, bhava evaM sthiti ke kSaya hone
para deva-zarIra kA tyAga kara kahAM jAyagA? kahAM utpanna hogA? bhagavAna ne
kahAgautama! kAmadeva mahAvideha-kSetra meM siddha hogAmokSa prApta kregaa|  //
nikssep||  //  sAtaveM aMga upAsaka dazA kA dvitIya adhyayana samApta  //
nigamana-Arya sudharmA bole-jambU! zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA ke
dvitIya adhyayana kA yahI arthabhAva kahA thA, jo maiMne tumheM btlaayaa|

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Study Summary  Varanasi has been a rich and renowned city in India for
millennia. Even today, it holds international significance in the field of
education. During the time of Lord Mahavira, the king of Varanasi was named
Jitasatru. Jitasatru's kingdom was vast. Associated descriptions suggest that
cities like Champa were major cities within his kingdom. In those days, there
used to be "Chaityas" on the outskirts of cities, where Acharyas, Sadhus, and
Sannyasis who came to the city would stay. In Varanasi, there was a Chaitya
called "Kosthak". Even today, there are gardens, temples, and resting places
outside cities.  In Varanasi, a Gahapati named Chulnipita resided. His wife's
name was Shyama. Chulnipita was an extremely wealthy, prosperous householder,
his wealth exceeding even Anand and Kamadeva. He had eight crore gold coins in
his treasury. It seems that in those days, very wealthy people kept some
permanent capital that they did not use for any work. It was a secure fund to be
used in adverse times. While wealth can increase significantly in trade and
business, it can also decrease or even disappear entirely. Therefore, in their
view, it was essential to have some capital that was kept separate and could be
used when needed. This was a good division in the use and investment of their
capital in those days. Chulnipita had invested eight crore gold coins in trade.
His eight crore gold coins were used for household equipment, furnishings, and
splendor. This was a balanced life of the wealthy people of that time; they
invested in trade, kept some secure, and also invested in the grandeur, dignity,
influence, and comfort of their homes in the same proportion. In those days, the
population of the country was less, and there was a lot of land, so cattle
rearing was prevalent in India on a large scale. The mention of Anand and
Kamadeva having four and six Gokuls respectively has been found. There were
eight Gokuls of Chulnipita, each with ten thousand cows. This vast wealth and
movable and immovable property clearly indicate that Chulnipita was a very
affluent man of that time.  When we read ancient literature, one thing becomes
clear. Many men were owners of great wealth and prosperity, they had all kinds
of material or worldly pleasures, but they did not get carried away by the
intoxication of pleasures. They thought about that life in time, which is
separate from wealth, prosperity, splendor, enjoyment, and luxury. But, it is
real and useful.  Upon the arrival of Lord Mahavira, Anand and Kamadeva...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tIsarA adhyayana sAra-saMkSepa sahastrAbdiyoM se vArANasI bhArata kI eka
samRddha aura suprasiddha nagarI rahI hai| Aja bhI zikSA kI dRSTi se yaha
antarrASTrIya mahattva kA sthAna hai| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samaya kI bAta hai,
vahAM ke rAjA kA nAma jitazatru thaa| jitazatru kA rAjya kAphI vistRta thaa|
sambaddha varNanoM se aisA pratIta hotA hai, campA Adi usa samaya ke bar3e-bar3e
nagara usake rAjya meM the| una dinoM nagaroM ke upakaNTha meM caitya huA karate
the, jahAM nagara meM Ane vAle AcArya, sAdhu-sanyAsI Adi rUkate the| vArANasI
meM koSThaka nAmaka caitya thaa| Aja bhI nagaroM ke bAhara aise bagIce
bagIciyAM, devasthAna, vizrAmasthAna Adi hote hI haiN| vArANasI meM culanIpitA
nAmaka eka gAthApati nivAsa karatA thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma zyAmA thaa|
culanIpitA atyanta samRddha, dhanya-dhAnya-sampanna gRhastha thA, usakI sampatti
Ananda tathA kAmadeva se bhI kahIM adhika thii| ATha karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM
usake nidhAna meM thii| aisA pratIta hotA hai, una dinoM bar3e samRddha jana
kucha aisI sthAyI pUMjI rakhate the, jisakA ve kisI kArya meM upayoga nahIM
karate the| pratikUla samaya meM kAma lene ke lie vaha eka surakSita nidhi ke
rUpa meM hotI thii| vyApAra-vyavasAya meM sampatti jahAM khUba bar3ha sakatI
hai, vahAM kama bhI ho sakatI hai, sArI kI sArI samApta bhI ho sakatI hai|
isalie unakI dRSTi meM yaha Avazyaka thA ki kucha aisI pUMjI honI hI cAhie, jo
alaga rakhIM rahe, samaya para kAma aae| yaha acchA vibhAjana una dinoM apane
pUMjI ke upayoga aura viniyoga meM thaa| culanIpitA ne ATha karor3a svarNa-
mudrAeM vyApAra meM lagA rakhI thiiN| usakI ATha karor3a svarNa-mudAeM ghara ke
upakaraNa, sAja-sAmAna tathA vaibhava meM prayukta thiiN| eka aisA santulita
jIvana usa samaya ke samRddha janoM kA thA, ve jisa anupAta meM apanI sampatti
vyApAra meM lagAte, surakSita rakhate, usI anupAta meM ghara kI zAna, garimA,
prabhAva tathA suvidhA hetu bhI lagAte the| una dinoM deza kI AbAdI kama thI,
bhUmi bahuta thI, isalie bhArata meM go-pAlana kA kArya bar3e vyApaka rUpa meM
pracalita thaa| Ananda aura kAmadeva ke cAra aura chaha gokula hone kA varNana
AyA hai| vahAM culanIpitA ke dasa-dasa hajAra gAyoM ke ATha gokula the| isa
sAmpattika vistAra aura cala-acala dhana se yaha spaSTa hai ki culanIpitA usa
samaya kA eka atyanta vaibhavazAlI purUSa thaa| purAne sAhitya ko jaba par3hate
haiM to eka bAta sAmane AtI hai| aneka purUSa bahuta vaibhava aura sampadA ke
svAmI hote the, saba taraha kA bhautika yA laukika sukha unheM prApta thA, para
ve sukhoM ke unmAda meM baha nahIM jAte the| ve samaya para usa jIvana ke
sambandha meM bhI socate the; jo dhana, sampatti, vaibhava, bhoga tathA vilAsa
se pRthak hai| para, hai vAstavika aura upaadey| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke Agamana
para jaisA Ananda aura kAmadeva ko apane jIvana ko naI dizA

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Study: Chulani Pita  [113] Having received the awakening to give, the
same thing happened with Chulani Pita. When Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in Varanasi
during his Janapad-Vihar, Chulani Pita also heard Bhagwan's Dharmadeshana. He
was inspired and accepted the Shravak-Dharma, molding his life into the mold of
vows. He began to strive to continuously engage in his life in worship.  One
day, he had accepted Brahmacharya and Poshad-Vrat and was engaged in worship in
the Poshadshala. It was the middle of the night. A Dev appeared to cause an
upsurge. Holding a sharp sword in his hand, he said to Chulani Pita, "Give up
your vows, otherwise I will bring your eldest son from home. I will cut him into
three pieces in front of you, boil them in a pot filled with boiling water, and
sprinkle his boiling flesh and blood on your body."  A horrific scene was before
Chulani Pita. There was the horror of his son's murder. Among worldly loved
ones, a son holds a special place. It is not hidden from anyone how much
affection a father has for his son. In Indian literature, it is even mentioned,
"Sarvebhyo Jayamanvichchet Putraat Shishyaat Parajayam," meaning a father
desires that his son may achieve such heights, progress so much that he may
defeat him. Similarly, a Guru also desires that his disciple become so capable
that he may overcome him.  In this context, when we think about it, there was a
heart-wrenching horror before Chulani Pita, but he did not let his heart or
emotions overpower his intellect. He remained steadfast in his worship. The
Dev's anger boiled over. He created the same scene in an instant through
Devmaya, as he had said. He sprinkled the boiling flesh and blood of his son on
his body. This was a very terrible and at the same time, disgusting act. Even a
heart of stone would break, but Chulani Pita remained steadfast.  The Dev became
even more ferocious. He threatened again, "I have done what I said to your
eldest son, I will do the same to your middle son. Accept it, abandon your
worship!" But Chulani Pita did not panic. Then the Dev did the same to his
middle son as he had done to his eldest son.  The Dev threatened Chulani Pita
for the third time, "Your two sons have been eliminated, now it is the turn of
the youngest. He will also suffer the same fate. Accept it now." But Chulani
Pita remained steadfast. The Dev also finished off his youngest son and behaved
in the same cruel and brutal manner. Chulani Pita was so engrossed in his
worship that he had overcome the weaknesses of his heart to a great extent.
Therefore, this brutal act of the Dev could not deter him from his path.  When
the Dev saw that despite the brutal murder of his three sons, the Shraman Upasak
Chulani Pita was engaged in Dharma Upasana with unwavering devotion, he thought
of another extremely horrific measure. He said to him in threatening words, "You
will not accept this, now I will bring your mother, Bhadra Sarthavahi here, who
is worshiped by you like a Dev and a Guru, who has endured many hardships in
raising you, who is the ultimate...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya adhyayana : culanIpitA] [113 dene kA pratibodha milA, culanIpitA ke
sAtha bhI aisA hI ghaTita huaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra jaba apane janapada-vihAra ke
bIca vArANasI padhAre to culanIpitA ne bhI bhagavAn kI dharmadezanA sunI, vaha
antaHprerita jIvana ko vratoM ke sAMce meM DhAlA-zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyaa|
vaha apane jIvana ko uttarottara upAsanA meM lagAe rakhane meM prayatnazIla
rahane lgaa| eka dina kI bAta hai, vaha brahmacarya evaM poSadha-vrata svIkAra
kie, poSadhazAlA meM upAsanArata thA, AdhI rAta kA samaya thaa| upasarga karane
ke lie eka deva prakaTa huaa| hAtha meM teja talavAra lie usane culanIpitA ko
kahA-tuma vratoM ko chor3a do, nahIM to maiM tumhAre jyeSTha putra ko ghara se
uThA laauuNgaa| tumhAre hI sAmane usako kATakara tIna Tukar3e kara DAlUMgA,
ubalate pAnI se bharI kar3hAhI meM unheM khaulAUMgA aura tumhAre beTe kA ubalatA
huA mAMsa aura rakta tumhAre zarIra para chidd'kuugaa| culanIpitA ke samakSa eka
bhISaNa dRzya thaa| putra kI hatyA kI vibhISikA thii| sAMsArika priyajanoM meM
putra kA apanA asAdhAraNa sthAna hai| putra ke prati pitA ke mana meM kitanI
mamatA hotI hai, yaha kisI se chipA nahIM hai| bhAratIya sAhitya meM to yahA~
taka ullekha hai-'sarvebhyo jayamanvicchet putrAt ziSyAt parAjayam' arthAt pitA
yaha kAmanA karatA hai, merA putra itanI unnati kare, itanA Age bar3ha jAya ki
mujhe vaha parAjaya de skeN| usI prakAra gurU bhI yaha kAmanA karatA hai ki merA
ziSya itanA yogya ho jAya ki mujhe vaha parAbhUta kara ske| isa paripArzva meM
jaba hama socate haiM to culanIpitA ke sAmane eka hRdaya-drAvaka vibhISikA thI,
para usane hRdaya yA bhAvukatA ko viveka para hAvI nahIM hone diyA, apanI
upAsanA meM avicala bhAva se lagA rhaa| deva kA krodha ubala pdd'aa| usane jaisA
kahA thA, devamAyA se kSaNa bhara meM vaisA hI dRzya upasthita kara diyaa| usI
ke beTe kA ubalatA mAMsa aura rakta usakI deha para chidd'kaa| bahuta bhayAnaka
aura sAtha hI sAtha bIbhatsa karma yaha thaa| patthara kA hRdaya bhI phaTa jAya,
para culanIpitA aDiga rhaa| deva aura vikarAla ho gyaa| usane phira dhamakI dI-
maiMne jaisA tumhAre bar3e beTe ke sAtha kiyA hai, vaisA tumhAre maMjhele beTe
ke sAtha bhI karatA hUM, mAna jAoM, ArAdhanA se haTa jAo! para, culanIpitA phira
bhI ghabarAyA nhiiN| taba deva ne bar3e beTe kI taraha maMjhale beTe ke sAtha
bhI vaisA hI kiyaa| deva ne tIsarI bAra phira culanIpitA ko dhamakI dItumhAre do
beTe samApta kie jA cuke haiM, aba choTe kI bArI hai| usakI bhI yahI hAlata hone
vAlI hai| aba bhI mAna jaao| para, culanI-pitA avicala rhaa| deva ne choTe beTe
kA bhI kAma tamAma kara diyA aura vaisA hI krUra aura nRzaMsa vyavahAra kiyaa|
culanIpitA upAsanA meM itanA rama gayA thA ki hRdaya kI durbalatAeM vaha kAphI
hada taka jIta cukA thaa| isalie, deva kA yaha nRzaMsa karma use apane patha se
DigA nahIM skaa| jaba deva ne dekhA ki tInoM putroM kI nRzaMsa hatyA ke bAvajUda
zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA nizcala bhAva se dharmopAsanA meM lagA hai to usane eka
aura atyanta bhISaNa upAya socaa| usane dhamakI bhare zabdoM meM usase kahAtuma
yoM nahIM mAnoge, aba tumhArI mAtA bhadrA sArthavAhI ko yahA~ lAtA hU~, jo
tumhAre lie deva aura gurU kI taraha pUjanIya hai, jisane tumhAre lAlana-pAlana
meM aneka kaSTa jhele haiM, jo parama

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[114] The Upasakadasanga Sutra is a religious text. I will cut it into three
pieces with this sharp sword in front of you. Just as your sons were boiled in a
cauldron of boiling water, I will boil it too, and in the same way, I will
splash your body with its boiling flesh and blood. At the time of the brutal
murder of his three sons, his heart did not waver even a little, he remained
deeply engrossed in religious meditation with utmost firmness and devotion. When
the question of the murder of his revered and affectionate mother came before
him, his patience broke. He thought to himself, this wicked man will do such a
vile act before my very eyes. This can never happen. I will catch this wicked
man right now. Thus, enraged, Chulani Pita got up to catch him, his hands
outstretched. It was a conspiracy of the gods. That god disappeared into the sky
and the pillar of the Poshadshala came into Chulani Pita's hands, which was in
front of him. Chulani Pita was stunned. He started shouting loudly. When Bhadra
Sarthavahi heard this noise, she came there immediately and said to her son,
what happened, why are you doing this? Chulani Pita told her the whole incident
that had happened. His mother said, son! This was a calamity caused by the gods,
it was all divine illusion. Everyone is safe, no one was killed. You broke your
vow in anger. You made this mistake, you will have to do penance for it, so that
you can be purified. Chulani Pita accepted his mother's words. He accepted
penance. The human mind is very weak. The devotee is expected to be vigilant
every moment. As soon as a little caution is broken, weakness arises in the
heart. The devotee deviates from his path. It is not impossible to make a
mistake with someone, but when the mistake is known, the person should become
aware immediately, he should feel internal regret for that mistake. He should be
determined that it should not happen again. The above incident sheds light on
all these things. Thus. Chulani Pita continued to progress in the worship of
religion. He nurtured his soul through vows and worship, followed the Shravak
Dharma for twenty years, worshipped the eleven Upasak images properly, completed
the final Sanlekhana of one month and fasting of one month, and gave up his body
in Samadhi. He was born as a god in the Arunaprabha Vimana in the Saudharma
Devaloka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 114] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra dhArmika hai  /  maiM tumhAre sAmane isa teja
talavAra se kATakara usake tIna Tukar3e kara ddaaluuNgaa| jaise tumhAre putroM
ko ubalate pAnI kI kar3hAhI meM khaulAyA, use bhI khaulAUMgA tathA usI taraha
usake ubalate hue mAMsa aura rakta se tumhArA zarIra chiittuuNgaa| apane tInoM
beToM kI nRzaMsa hatyA ke samaya jisakA hRdaya jarA bhI vicalita nahIM huA,
atyanta dRDhatA aura tanmayatA ke sAtha dharma-dhyAna meM lagA rahA, jaba usake
samakSa usakI zraddheyA aura mamatAmayI mAtA kI hatyA kA prazna AyA, usake
dhIraja kA bAMdha TUTa gyaa| use mana hI mana lagA, yaha duSTa merI AMkhoM ke
dekhate aisA nIca kArya kregaa| aisA kabhI nahIM ho sktaa| maiM abhI isa duSTa
ko pakar3atA huuN| yoM kruddha hokara culanIpitA use pakar3ane ko uThA, hAtha
phailaae| vaha to deva kA SaDyaMtra thaa| vaha deva AkAza meM antardhAna ho gayA
aura culanIpitA ke hAthoM meM poSadhazAlA kA khaMbhA A gayA, jo usake sAmane
thaa| culanIpitA hakkA-bakkA raha gyaa| vaha jora jora se cillAne lgaa| bhadrA
sArthavAhI ne jaba yaha zora sunA to vaha jhaTa vahA~ AI aura apane putra se
bolIkyA huA, aisA kyoM karate ho? culanIpitA ne vaha sArI ghaTanA batalAI, jo
ghaTita huI thii| usakI mAtA ne kahAbeTA! yaha deva dvArA kiyA gayA upasarga
thA, yaha sArI devamAyA thii| saba surakSita haiM, kisI kI hatyA nahIM huii|
krodha karake tumane apanA vrata tor3a diyaa| tumase yaha bhUla ho gaI, tumheM
isake lie prAyazcita karanA hogA, jisase tuma zuddha ho sko| culanIpitA ne mAM
kA kathana zirodhArya kiyaa| prAyazcita svIkAra kiyaa| mAnava-mana bar3A durbala
hai| upAsaka ko kSaNa-kSaNa sAvadhAna rahanA apekSita hai| thor3I sI sAvadhAnI
TUTate hI hRdaya meM durbalatA ubhara AtI hai| upAsaka apane mArga se calita ho
jAtA hai| kisI se bhUla honA asaMbhava nahI hai, para jaba bhUla mAlUma ho jAya
to vyakti ko tatkSaNa jAgarUka ho jAnA cAhie, usa bhUla ke lie Antarika kheda
anubhava karanA caahie| punaH vaisA na ho, isake lie saMkalpabaddha honA caahie|
ukta ghaTanA inhIM saba bAtoM para prakAza DAlatI hai| astu| culanIpitA dharma
kI upAsanA meM uttarottara agrasara hotA gyaa| usane vratArAdhanA se AtmA ko
bhAvita karate hue bIsa varSa taka zrAvaka-dharma kA pAlana kiyA, gyAraha
upAsaka pratimAoM kI samyak ArAdhanA kI, eka mAsa kI antima saMlekhanA aura eka
mAsa kA anazana sampanna kara, samAdhipUrvaka deha-tyAga kiyaa| saudharma
devaloka meM arUNaprabhA vimAna meM vaha deva rUpa meM utpanna huaa|

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Study  **Chulani Pita 124.**  This is the beginning of the third study,
with an introduction and preface:  Arya Sudharma said, "Jambū! At the end of the
fourth Āra of the present Avasarpini, at that time, when Bhagavan Mahāvīra was
alive, there was a city called Vārāṇasī. There was a shrine called Koṣṭhaka. The
king there was named Jitasatru. The Shraman Upasaka Chulani Pita...  **125.**
...lived in the city of Vārāṇasī. He was very wealthy and influential. His
wife's name was Shyama. He had eight crore gold coins in his treasury as
permanent capital, eight crore gold coins invested in trade and business, and
eight crore gold coins invested in the wealth and splendor of his home,
including grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, and other resources. He had eight...  1.
"If, Venerable Sir, Bhagavan has explained the meaning of the second study of
the Upasaka Dasha, which is about wealth, then, Venerable Sir, what is the
meaning of the third study?"  2. Arya Sudharma asked Jambū, "If Bhagavan
Mahāvīra, who has attained Siddhi, has explained the meaning of the second study
of the Upasaka Dasha, then, Venerable Sir, what meaning did he explain for the
third study?" (Please tell me) 3. See Sutra number 3 4. See Sutra number 5 5.
See Sutra number 92

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya adhyayana culanIpitA 124. ukkhevo taiyassa ajjhayaNassa evaM khalu,
jambU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM vANArasI nAmaM nyrii| koTThae ceie|
jiyasattU raayaa| upakSepa-upodghAtapUrvaka tRtIya adhyayana kA prArambha yoM
hai : Arya-sudharmA ne kahA-jambU! usa kAla-vartamAna avasarpiNI ke cauthe Are
ke anta meM, usa samaya-jaba bhagavAn mahAvIra sadeha vidyamAna the, vArANasI
nAmaka nagarI thii| koSThaka nAmaka caitya thA, vahAM ke rAjA kA nAma jitazatra
thaa| zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA 125. tathya NaM vANArasIe nayarIe culaNIpiyA nAma
gAhAvaI parivasai, aDDhe, jAva apribhuue| sAmA bhaariyaa| aTTha hiraNNa-koDIo
nihANa-pauttAo, aTTha vuDhipauttAo, aTTha pavitthara-pauttAo, aTTha vayA, dasa-
go-sAhassieNaM vennN| jahA ANaMdo rAIsara jAva savva-kaja-vaDDhAvae yAvi
hotthaa| sAmI smosddhe| parisA niggyaa| culaNIpiyA vi, jahA ANaMdo tahA niggo|
taheva gihi-dhamma pddivjji| goym-pucchaa| taheva sesaM jahA kAmadevassa-jAva'
posahasAlAe posahie baMbhayArI samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM dhamma-
paNNatiM uvasaMpajittANaM vihri| vArANasI nagarI meM culanIpitA nAmaka gAthApati
nivAsa karatA thaa| vaha atyanta samRddha evaM prabhAvazAlI thaa| usakI patnI kA
nAma zyAmA thaa| ATha karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM sthAyI pUMjI ke rUpa meM usake
khajAne meM thI, ATha karoDa svarNa mudrAeM vyApAra-vyavasAya meM lagI thIM
tathA ATha karor3a svarNamudrAeM ghara ke vaibhava-dhana, dhAnya, dvipada,
catuSpada Adi sAdhana-sAmagrI meM lagI thiiN| usake ATha 1. jai NaM bhaMte!
samaNeNaM bhagavayA jAva saMpatteNaM uvAsagadasANaM doccassa ajjhayaNassa
ayamaddhe paNNatte taccassa NaM bhaMte! ajjhayaNassa ke aTe paNNate? , 2. Arya
sadharmA se jamba ne pachA-siddhiprApta bhagavAna mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA ke
dvitIya adhyayana kA yadi yaha artha Azaya pratipAdita kiyA, to bhagavan! unhone
tRtIya adhyayana kA kyA artha batalAyA? (kRpayA kaheM) 3. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 3
4. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 5 5. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 92

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [116] The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra was about Gokul. Each Gokul had ten thousand
cows. Like the Gahapati Anand, the king, the wealthy man, and other
distinguished people, he was a promoter, a person who increased all kinds of
activities through good advice and other means. Lord Mahavira arrived, and a
Samavasarana was held. A congregation gathered to listen to the Lord's Dharma-
Deshana. Like Anand, the Chulani-pita also came out of his house and came to
serve the Lord. Like Anand, he also accepted the Shravak Dharma. Just as Gautam
had asked questions of the Lord regarding Anand, he also asked questions about
the future life of Chulani-pita. The Lord gave the solution. The further event
is like the Gahapati Kamadeva. Chulani-pita, accepting the Brahmacharya and
Poshad of the Poshadshala, became devoted to the worship of the Shraman Bhagwan
Mahavira, in accordance with the Angikrit Dharma-Pragyapti-Dharma teachings.  ##
[126] Therefore, at the time of the early morning, during the time of the
Shraman-Upasaka Chulani-pita's residence, a Dev appeared before him.  ##  [127]
Then that Dev, taking out a large blue sword with a sharp edge, said to the
Shraman-Upasaka Chulani-pita, just as the Dev in the form of a Pisach had said
to Kamadeva, "O Chulani-pita! Shraman-Upasaka! If you do not break your vows,
then today I will take your eldest son from your house. I will take him and kill
him in front of you. I will cut his body into three pieces of flesh and boil
them in a cauldron filled with boiling water or oil. I will sprinkle your body
with his flesh and blood, so that you will be tormented by great pain and
suffering and die prematurely."  1. See Sutra number 116. 2. See Sutra number
107.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 116] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra gokula the| pratyeka gokula meM dasa-dasa hajAra gAeM
thiiN| gAthApati Ananda kI taraha vaha rAjA, ezvaryazAlI purUSa Adi viziSTa
janoM ke sabhI prakAra ke kAryoM kA satparAmarza Adi dvArA vardhApaka-Age
bar3hAne vAlA thaa| bhagavAna mahAvIra padhAre - samavasaraNa huaa| bhagavAn kI
dharma-dezanA sunane pariSad judd'ii| Ananda kI taraha culanIpitA bhI ghara se
nikalA - bhagavAna kI sevA meM aayaa| Ananda kI taraha usane bhI zrAvakadharma
svIkAra kiyaa| gautama ne jaise Ananda ke sambandha meM bhagavAn se prazna kie
the, usI prakAra culanIpitA ke bhAvI jIvana ke sambandha meM bhI kie| bhagavAn
ne samAdhAna diyaa| Age kI ghaTanA gAthApati kAmadeva kI taraha hai| culanIpitA
poSadhazAlA ke brahmacarya evaM poSadha svIkAra kara, zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra
ke pAsa aMgIkRta dharma-prajJapti-dharma zikSA ke anurUpa upAsanA-rata huaa|
upasargakArI deva : prAdurbhAva 126. tae NaM tassa culanIpiyassa samaNovAsayassa
puvva-rattAvarattakAla-samayaMsi ege deve aMtiyaM paaubbhuue| AdhI rAta ke
samaya zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA ke samakSa eka deva prakaTa huaa| putra-vadha kI
dhamakI - 127. tae NaM se deve egaM mahaM nIluppala jAva asiM gahAya culaNIpiyaM
samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-haM bho culaNIpiyA! samaNovAsayA! jahA kAmadevo jAvana
bhaMjesi, to te ahaM aja jeTuM puttaM sAo gihAo nINemi, nINettA tava aggao
ghAemi ghAettA tao maMsasolle karemi, karettA AdANa-bhariyasi kaDAhayaMsi
addahemi ahahettA tava gAyaM maMseNa ya soNieNa ya AyaMcAmi, jahA NaM tumaM
aTTa-duhaTTa-vasaTTe akAle ceva jIviyAo vvrovijjsi| usa deva ne eka bar3I nIlI
teja dhAra vAlI talavAra nikAla kara jaise pizAca rUpa dhArI deva ne kAmadeva se
kahA thA, vaise hI zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA ko kahAzramaNopAsaka culanIpitA!
vratoM se haTa jaao| yadi tuma apane vrata nahIM tor3oge, to maiM Aja tumhAre
bar3e putra ko ghara se nikAla laauuNgaa| nikAla kara tumhAre Age use mAra
ddaaluuNgaa| mArakara usake tIna mAMsa-khaMDa karUMgA, ubalate AdrahaNapAnI yA
taila se bharI kar3hAhI meM khaulaauuNgaa| usake mAMsa aura rakta meM tumhAre
zarIra ko sIMcUgA chiittuuNgaa| jisase tuma ArtadhyAna evaM vikaTa duHkha se
pIr3ita hokara asamaya meM hI prANoM se hAtha dho 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 116 /
2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 107 /

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Study: Chulani Pita  [117. Sitting. The Fearlessness of Chulani Pita]
[128. Even when the Dev spoke thus to the Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita, he
remained steadfast in his Dharma-Dhyana.] [129. Seeing the Shramanopasaka
Chulani Pita fearless, the Dev spoke to him again, and then a third time. But
Chulani Pita remained steadfast in his Dharma-Dhyana, saying, "I am here." ]
[130. Seeing the Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita fearless, the Dev became enraged.
He brought Chulani Pita's eldest son from his home, killed him in front of him,
cut his body into three pieces, boiled them in a cauldron of boiling water, and
then sprinkled Chulani Pita's body with his son's flesh and blood.] [131. The
Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita endured this intense pain with equanimity.] [132.
Seeing the Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita fearless, the Dev...  1. See Sutra number
98. 2. See Sutra number 97. 3. See Sutra number 97. 4. See Sutra number 97. 5.
See Sutra number 106. 6. See Sutra number 97.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya adhyayana : culanIpitA] [117 baitthoge| culanIpitA kI nirbhIkatA 128.
tae NaM se culaNIpiyA samaNovAsae teNaM deveNaM evaM vutte samANe abhIe jAva
vihri| . usa deva dvArA yoM kahe jAne para bhI zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA nirbhaya
bhAva se dharma-dhyAna meM sthita rhaa| 129. tae NaM se deve culaNIpiyaM
samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM jAvapAsai pAsittA doccaMpi taccapi culaNIpiyaM
samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-haM bho! culaNIpiyA! samaNovAsayA! taM ceva bhaNai, so
jAva' vihri| jaba usa deva ne zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA ko nirbhaya dekhA, to
usane usase dUsarI bAra aura phira tIsarI bAra vaisA hI khaa| para, culanIpitA
pUrvavat nirbhIkatA ke sAtha dharma-dhyAna meM sthita rhaa| bar3e putra kI hatyA
. 130. tae NaM se deve culaNIpiyaM samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM jAva pAsittA Asuratte 4
culaNIpiyassa samaNovAsayassa jeTuM puttaM gihAo nINei, nINettA aggao ghAei,
ghAettA tao maMsasollae karei, karettA AdANabhariyaMsi kaDAhayaMsi addahei,
ahahetA culaNIpiyassa samaNovAsayassa gAyaM maMseNa ya soNieNa ya aayNci| deva
ne culanIpitA ko isa prakAra nirbhaya dekhA to vaha atyanta kruddha huaa| vaha
culanIpitA ke bar3e putra ko usake ghara se uThA lAyA aura usake sAmane use mAra
ddaalaa| mArakara usake tIna mAMsa-khaMDa kie, ubalate pAnI se bharI kar3hAhI
meM khaulaayaa| usake mAMsa aura rakta se culanIpitA ke zarIra ko siiNcaa-
chiiNttaa| 131. tae NaM se culaNIpiyA samaNovAsae taM ujjalaM jAva' ahiyAseha
culanIpitA ne vaha tIvra vedanA titikSApUrvaka sahana kii| . maMjhale va choTe
putra kI hatyA 132. tae NaM se deve culaNIpiyaM samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM jAva
pAsai, pAsittA 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 98 /  2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /  3.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /  4. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /  5. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA
106  /  6. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
118]  [Upāsakadaśāṅgasūtra] The devata saw the resolute Śramaṇopāsaka Culaṇīpitā
and said to him - "O Culaṇīpitā, Śramaṇopāsaka! You are determined to die! If
you do not break your vow, then today I shall remove your middle son from your
home, and just as I killed your elder son, I shall kill him too before your
eyes. And even then, if you remain unmoved, I shall do the same with your
younger son as well." But the Culaṇīpitā remained unshaken.   133. Then the
devata saw the fearless Śramaṇopāsaka Culaṇīpitā and said to him again - "O
Culaṇīpitā, Śramaṇopāsaka! You are determined to die! If you do not break your
vow, then today I shall bring your mother Bhadrā, the venerable caravan leader,
who is like a deity and preceptor, and who performs extremely difficult
religious practices for your welfare - I shall bring her from your home and kill
her before your eyes. I shall cut her body into three parts, boil them in a
cauldron, and sprinkle your body with her flesh and blood, so that you may die a
painful and untimely death through ārta-dhyāna and severe suffering."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra doccaMpi taccapi culaNIpiyaM samaNovAsayaM evaM
vayAsI - haM bho culaNIpiyA samaNovAsayA! apatthiya-patthiyA! jAva' na bhaMjesI,
to te ahaM aja majjhimaM puttaM sAo gihAo nINemi, nINettA tava aggao ghAemi jahA
jeTuM puttaM taheva bhaNai, taheva krei| evaM taccapi kaNIyasaM jAva ahiyaasei|
deva ne zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA ko jaba yoM nirbhIka dekhA to usane dUsarI-
tIsarI bAra kahAmauta ko cAhanevAle culanIpitA! yadi tuma apane vrata nahIM
tor3oge, to maiM tumhAre maMjhale putra ko ghara se uThA lAUMgA aura tumhAre
sAmane tumhAre bar3e beTe kI taraha usakI bhI hatyA kara ddaaluuNgaa| isa para
bhI culanIpitA jaba avicala rahA to deva ne vaisA hI kiyaa| usane tIsarI bAra
phira choTe lar3ake ke sambandha meM vaisA hI karane ko khaa| culanIpitA nahIM
ghbraayaa| deva ne choTe lar3ake ke sAtha bhI vaisA hI kiyaa| culanIpitA ne vaha
tIvra vedanA titikSApUrvaka sahana kii| mAtR vadha kI dhamakI 133. tae NaM se
deve culaNIpiyaM samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM jAvapAsai, pAsittA cautthaM pi
culaNIpiyaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-haM bho! culaNIpiyA! samaNovAsayA!
apatthiyapatthiyA! jai NaM tumaM jAvana bhaMjesi, tao ahaM ajja jA imA tava mAyA
bhaddA satthavAhI devayagurUjaNaNI, dukkaradukkarakAriyA, taM te sAo gihAo
nINemi, nINettA taba aggao ghAemi, ghAettA tao maMsasollae karemi, karettA
AdANabhariyaMsi kaDAhayaMsi addahemi, ahahettA tava gAyaM maMseNa ya soNieNa ya
AyaMcAmi, jahA NaM tuma aTTa-duhaTTa-vasaTTe akAle ceva jIviyAo vvrovijjsi| deva
ne jaba zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA kA isa prakAra nirbhaya dekhA to usane cauthI
bAra usase kahA-mauta ko cAhane vAle culanIpitA! yadi tuma apane vrata nahIM
tor3ogeM to maiM tumhAre lie deva aura gurU sadRza pUjanIya, tumhAre hitArtha
atyanta duSkara kArya karane vAlI athavA ati kaThina dharma-kriyAeM karane vAlI
tumhArI mAtA bhadrA sArthavAhI ko ghara se yahA~ le aauuNgaa| lAkara tumhAre
sAmane usakI hatyA karUMgA, usake tIna mAMsa-khaMDa karUMgA, ubalate pAnI se
bharI kar3hAhI meM khaulaauuNgaa| usake mAMsa aura rakta se tumhAre zarIra ko
sIMcUMgA-chIMTUMgA, jisase tuma ArtadhyAna evaM vikaTa duHkha se pIr3ita hokara
asamaya meM hI prANoM se hAtha dho baitthoge| vivecana prastuta sUtra meM
zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA kI mAtA bhadrA sArthavAhI kA eka vizeSaNa deva-gurU1.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 107 /  2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /  3. dekheM sUtra-
saMkhyA 107 /

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Study: Chulani Pita  [119] The term "Janani" signifies the respect,
honor, and reverence for mothers in Indian tradition. A mother's service to her
offspring creates a debt that cannot be repaid in any way. Therefore, this term
points to the divine reverence and respect accorded to mothers.  Dr. Rudolf
Hornle, based on an old interpretation, has defined "Dev-Guru" as the Guru of
the Gods - Brihaspati. Thus, according to him, a mother is as worthy of worship
as Brihaspati.  The literature of all Indian traditions acknowledges the
extraordinary importance of a mother. According to the saying "Janani
Janmabhumischa Swargadapi Gariyasi," a mother and one's homeland are considered
greater than heaven. Manu has given even greater glory to a mother. He has
considered a mother a thousand times more important than a father.  The
Taittiriya Upanishad mentions that after completing his studies, when a teacher
instructs his student for future life, he specifically tells him, "Consider your
mother as equal to a deity, consider your father as equal to a deity, consider
your teacher as equal to a deity, consider a guest as equal to a deity, perform
blameless and faultless actions, do not perform blameworthy or faulty actions,
follow the good conduct or excellent character served by your teachers."  Jain
and Buddhist literature also consider a mother to hold a very high position.
This particular adjective used here clearly reflects this aspect of Indian
thought.  [134] Even after being told this by the deity, the Shramanopasaka
Chulani Pita remained fearless and absorbed in his religious meditation.  [135]
The deity then saw the Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita meditating fearlessly. Seeing
him, the deity said, "Oh Chulani Pita! Shramanopasaka! You will continue to live
like this (in the eight states of existence - Attha-Duhatta-Vasatte Akale Cheva
Jiviyao) until you are liberated."  1. The Uvasagadasao Lecture III Page 94
Upadhyayaandasacharya Aacharyananam Shatam Pita. Sahastraam Tu Pitrun Maata
Gauravenaatirichyate. - Manusmriti 2. 145 3. Matrudevo Bhava. Pitrudevo Bhava.
Aaryadevo Bhava. Atithidevo Bhava. Yaanyavadyani Karmaani, Taani Sevitavyani, No
Itrani. Yaanyasmaakam Sucharitani, Taani Twayopasyani. - Taittiriya Upanishad
Valli 1. Anuvaak 11.2 4. See Sutra-Sankhya 98. 5. See Sutra-Sankhya 97. 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya adhyayana : culanIpitA] [119 jananI AyA hai, jo bhAratIya AcAra-
paramparA meM mAtA ke prati rahe sammAna, Adara aura zraddhA kA dyotaka hai|
mAtA kA santati para nizcaya hI apanI sevAoM kA eka aisA RNa hotA haiM, jise
kisI bhI taraha utArA jAnA sambhava nahIM hai| isalie yahAM mAtA kI devatulya
pujanIyatA evaM sammAnanIyatA kI ora saMketa hai| DaoN. rUDolpha haoNrnale ne
eka purAnI vyAkhyA ke AdhAra para deva-gurU kA artha devatAoM ke gurU-bRhaspati
kiyA hai| yoM unake anusAra mAtA bRhaspati ke samAna pUjanIya hai| _ bhArata kI
sabhI paramparAoM ke sAhitya meM mAtA kA asAdhAraNa mahattva svIkAra kiyA gayA
haiN| 'jananI janmabhUmizca svargAdapi garIyasI' ke anusAra mAtA aura mAtRbhUmi
ko svarga se bhI bar3hakara mAnA hai| manu ne to mAtA kA bahuta adhika gaurava
svIkAra kiyA hai| unhoMne mAtA ko pitA se hajAra gunA adhika mahattva diyA hai|
taittirIyopaniSad meM ullekha haiM, adhyayana sampanna karAne ke pazcAt AcArya
jaba ziSya ko bhAvI jIvana ke lie upadeza karatA hai, to vahA~ vaha use vizeSa
rUpa se kahatA hai, tuma apanI mAtA ko devatA ke tulya samajhanA, pitA ko devatA
ke tulya samajhanA, AcArya ko devatA ke tulya samajhanA, atithi ko devatA ke
tulya samajhanA, anavadya-aniMdya yA nirdoSa karma karanA, itara-niMdya yA
sadoSa karma mata karanA, gurUjanoM dvArA sevita zubha AcaraNa yA uttama caritra
kA pAlana krnaa| jaina-sAhitya aura bauddha-sAhitya meM bhI mAtA kA bahuta ucca
sthAna mAnA gayA hai| yahA~ prayukta isa vizeSaNa meM bhAratIya cintanadhArA ke
isa pakSa kI spaSTa jhalaka hai| 134. tae NaM se culaNIpiyA samaNovAsae teNaM
deveNaM evaM vutte samANe abhIe jAva vihri| usa deva dvArA yoM kahe jAne para
bhI zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA nirbhayatA se dharmadhyAna meM sthita rhaa| 135.
tae NaM se deve culaNIpiyaM samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM jAva' viharamANaM pAsai,
pAsittA culaNIpiyaM samaNovAsayaM doccapi taccapi evaM vayAsI-haM bho!
culaNIpiyA! samaNovAsayA! taheva jAva (aTTa-duhaTTa-vasaTTe akAle ceva jIviyAo)
vvrovijsi| 1. The Uvasagadasao Lecture III Page 94 upAdhyAyAndazAcArya AcAryANAM
zataM pitaa| sahastraM tu pitRnmAtA gaurvennaatiricyte|| _ -manusmRti 2. 145 3.
mAtRdevo bhv| pitRdevo bhava  /  AyAryadevo bhava  /  atithidevo bhv|
yAnyanavadyAni karmANi, tAni sevitavyAni, no itarANi  /  yAnyasmAkaM sucaritAni,
tAni tvyopaasyaani| -taittirIyopaniSad vallI 1. anuvAk 11.2 4. dekheM sUtra-
saMkhyA 98 /  5. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /  2.

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[120] The Devata, seeing the Shramanopasaka Chulani-pita fearless, said the same
thing for the second time, and for the third time, "Shramanopasaka Chulani-pita!
You will die prematurely (due to the pain of intense meditation and severe
suffering). The anger of Chulani-pita: uproar [136] Then, the Shramanopasaka
Chulani-pita, being addressed in this way by the Devata, thought, "Oh, these men
are wicked, wicked in their thoughts, wicked in their actions, they are
accumulating evil karma. They brought my eldest son home and killed him in front
of me (cut him into three pieces of flesh, boiled him in a cauldron filled with
boiling water), they sprinkled my body with his flesh and blood. They brought my
middle son home (killed him in front of me, cut him into three pieces of flesh,
boiled him in a cauldron filled with boiling water, sprinkled my body with his
flesh and blood). They brought my youngest son home, and in the same way, they
sprinkled my body with his flesh and blood. They also want to bring my mother,
Bhadra Sathvahi, who is worthy of worship like a Devata and Guru, who performs
very difficult tasks for my benefit, who performs very difficult actions, home
and kill her in front of me. Therefore, it is good that I catch this man."
Thinking this, he ran to catch him. In the meantime, the Devata flew up into the
sky. Chulani-pita's outstretched hands caught the pillar. He began to make a
loud noise. The arrival of the mother: curiosity [137] Then, Bhadra Sathvahi
heard the noise and thought, "What is the reason for this uproar of Chulani-
pita? 1. See Sutra number 136.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 120] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra usa deva ne zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA ko nirbhaya
dekhA to dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra phira vaisA hI kahA-zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA!
tuma (ArtadhyAna evaM vikaTa duHkha se pIr3ita hokara asamaya meM hI) prANoM se
hAtha dho baitthoge| culanIpitA kA kSobhaH kolAhala 136. tae NaM tassa
culaNIpiyassa samaNovAsayassa teNaM deveNaM doccaMpi taccaMpi evaM vuttassa
samANassa imeyArUve ujjhathie 5, aho NaM ime purise aNArie, aNAriyabuddhI,
aNAriyAI, pAvAiM kammAiM samAyarai, jeNaM mamaM jeTuM puttaM sAo gihAo nINei,
nINettA mamaM aggao ghAei, ghAettA jahA kayaM tahA ciMtei jAva (tao maMsasollae
karei, karettA AdANabhariyasi kaDAhayaMsi addahei, addehattA) mamaM gAyaM
maMseNa ya soNieNa ya AyaMcai jeNaM mamaM majjhimaM puttaM sAo gihAo jAva
(nINei, nINettA mamaM aggao ghAei, ghAettA tao maMsa-sollae karei, karettA
AdANa-bhariyaMsi kaDAhayaMsi addahei, ahahettA) mamaM gAyaM maMseNa ya soNieNa
ya AyaMcai, jeNaM mamaM kaNIyasaM puttaM sAo gihAo taheva jAva' AyaMcai, jA vi
ya NaM imA mamaM mAyA bhaddA satthavAhI devaya-gurU-jaNaNI, dukkaradukkara-
kAriyA taM pi ya NaM icchai sAo gihAo nINettA mama aggao ghAettae, taM seyaM
khalu mamaM eyaM purisaM giNhittae tti kaTu udghAie, se vi ya AgAse uppaie,
teNaM ca khaMbhe AsAie, mahayA mahayA saddeNaM kolAhale ke| usa deva ne jaba
dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra aisA kahA, taba zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA ke mana meM
vicAra AyAyaha purUSa bar3A adhama hai, nIca-buddhi hai, nIcatApUrNa pApa-kArya
karane vAlA hai, jisane mere bar3e putra ko ghara se lAkara mere Age mAra DAlA
(usake tIna mAMsa-khaNDa kie, ubalate pAnI se bharI kar3hAhI meM khaulAyA) usake
mAMsa aura rakta se mere zarIra ko sIMcAchIMTA, jo mere maMjhale putra ko ghara
se le AyA, (lAkara mere sAmane usakI hatyA kI, usake tIna mAMsa-khaNDa kie,
ubalate pAnI se bharI kar3hAhI meM khaulAyA, usake mAMsa aura rakta se merA
zarIra sIMcA chIMTA,) jo mere choTe putra ko ghara se le AyA, usI taraha usake
mAMsa aura rakta se merA zarIra sIMcA, jo deva aura gurU sadRza pUjanIya, mere
hitArtha atyanta duSkara kArya karane vAlI, ati kaThina kriyAeM karane vAlI merI
mAtA bhadrA sArthavAhI ko bhI ghara se lAkara mere sAmane mAranA cAhatA hai|
isalie, acchA yahI hai, maiM isa purUSa ko pakar3a luuN| yoM vicAra kara vaha
pakar3ane ke lie daudd'aa| itane meM deva AkAza meM ur3a gyaa| culanIpitA ke
pakar3ane ko phailAe hAthoM meM khambhA A gyaa| vaha jora-jora se zora karane
lgaa| mAtA kA Agamana : jijJAsA 137 taeM NaMsA bhaddA satthavAhI taM kolAhala-
sadaM soccA, nisamma jeNevaculaNIpiyA 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 136  /

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Third Study: The Chulani Pita  [121] When the Samanovasaya heard the
commotion, he went to where the Chulani Pita was and said, "Son! Why are you
shouting so loudly?"  The Chulani Pita's Reply  [138] The Samanovasaya, the
Chulani Pita, said to his mother, the Bhadra Sathvahi, "Mother! I don't know who
that man was, but he was very angry. He drew a large blue sword and said to me,
'O Chulani Pita, the Samanovasaya, the seeker of the path! If you do not abandon
and break your vows today (the vows of Sila, Vrata, Veramanai, Pacchakkhanai,
and Poshadhopavasa), then you will be tormented by great suffering and die
prematurely.'  [139] When that man said this to me, I remained fearless and
continued my meditation.  [140] Seeing me meditating fearlessly, that man came
near me and said to me again, and again, "O Chulani Pita, the Samanovasaya! I
will do as I said, I will drench your body in blood and flesh." And he did just
that.  [141] I endured all the pain, the intense, unbearable, sharp, fierce,
agonizing, and unbearable suffering with equanimity, forgiveness, patience, and
forbearance. I endured it all.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya adhyayana : culanIpitA ] [ 121 samaNovAsae, teNeva uvAgacchai,
uvAgacchittA culaNIpiyaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-kiNaM puttA! tumaM mahayA
mahayA saddeNaM kolAhale kae? bhadrA sArthavAhI ne jaba vaha kolAhala sunA, to
jahA~ zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA thA, vahA~ vaha AI, usase bolI putra ! tuma jora-
jora se yoM kyoM cillAe ? culanIpitA kA uttara - 138. tae NaM se culaNIpiyA
samaNovAsae ammayaM bhaddaM satthavAhiM evaM vayAsI evaM khalu ammo ! na jANAmi
ke vi purise Asuratte4, egaM mahaM nIluppala jAva' asiM gahAya mamaM evaM vayAsI
- haM bho ! culaNIpiyA! samaNovAsayA ! apatthiya patthiyA! 4. jai NaM tumaM jAva
(ajja sIlAi, vayAiM, veramaNAI, paccakkhANAI, posahovavAsAiM nasa char3aDesi, na
bhaMjesi, to jAva tumaM aTTa-duhaTTa - vasaTTe akAle ceva jIviyAo ) vavarovijasi
/  apanI mAtA bhadrA sArthavAhI se zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA ne kahA-mAM ! na
jAne kauna purUSa thA, jisane atyanta kruddha hokara eka bar3I nIlI talavAra
nikAla kara mujhe kahA-mRtyu ko cAhane vAle zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA! yadi tuma
Aja zIla, (vrata, viramaNa, pratyAkhyAna tathA poSadhopavAsa) kA tyAga nahIM
karoge, bhaMga nahIM karoge to tuma ArtadhyAna evaM vikaTa duHkha se pIr3ita
hokara asamaya meM hI prANoM se hAtha dho baiThoge  /  139. tae NaM ahaM teNaM
puriseNaM evaM vutte samANe abhIe jAva' viharAmi  /  usa puruSa dvArA yoM kahe
jAne para bhI maiM nirbhIkatA ke sAtha apanI upAsanA meM nirata rahA  /  140.
tae NaM se purise mamaM abhIyaM jAva' viharamANaM pAsai, pAsittA mamaM docvaMpi
taccapi evaM vayAsI - haM bho ! culaNIpiyA ! samaNovAsayA ! taheva jAva' gAyaM
ayaMcai | jaba usa usa purUSa ne mujhe nirbhayatApUrvaka upAsanArata dekhA to
usane mujhe dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra phira kahA - zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA!
jaisA maiMne tumheM kahA hai, maiM tumhAre zarIra ko mAMsa aura rakta se sIMcatA
hU~ aura usane vaisA hI kiyA  /  141. tae NaM ahaM ujjalaM, jAva (viulaM,
kakkasaM, pagADhaM, caMDaM, dukkhaM, durahiyAsaM veyaNaM sammaM sahAmi, khamAmi,
titikkhAmi, ahiyAsemi  /  evaM taheva uccAreyavvaM savvaM jAva kaNIyasaM jAva'
AyaMcai | ahaM taM ujjalaM jAva' ahiyAsemi  /  1. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 116  /
2. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 98  /  dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 97  /  3. 4. dekheM
sUtra - saMkhyA 136  /  5. sUtra - saMkhyA 136  /  dekheM 6. dekheM sUtra yahI
/

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Upāsakadaśāṅgasūtra] I (with forbearance, forgiveness and patience) endured the
intense, vast, excessive, harsh, profound, fierce, painful and unbearable pain.
The entire incident of drenching my body with the flesh and blood of my young
son occurred in the same manner. I continued to bear that intense pain. 142.
Then that man, seeing me fearless, spoke to me a fourth time - "O Śramaṇopāsaka
Culaṇīpita! You who desire death! As long as you do not break your vow, today I
will bring your mother, who is as revered as a deity and guru, who performs
extremely difficult religious practices for your welfare, from home, kill her in
front of you, cut her into three pieces of flesh, boil her in a cauldron of
boiling water, and drench your body with her flesh and blood, so that you,
afflicted with anguish and severe suffering, will renounce life prematurely."
143. Then, even when spoken to by that man, I remained steadfast in my religious
meditation. 144. Then that man spoke to me a second and third time, "O
Śramaṇopāsaka Culaṇīpita! Today you will renounce life." 145. Then, when that
man had spoken to me a second and third time, I had these thoughts: "Alas, this
man is ignoble (has an ignoble mind, performs ignoble and evil deeds), who in
the same way as my elder son, even my younger son, wishes to drench (me)..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra maine (sahanazIlatA, kSamA aura titikSApUrvaka vaha
tIvra, vipula-atyadhika, karkazakaThora, pragADha, rodra, kaSTaprada tathA
duHsaha) vedanA jhelii| choTe putra ke mAMsa aura rakta se zarIra sIMcane taka
sArI ghaTanA usI rUpa meM ghaTita huii| maiM vaha tIvra vedanA sahatA gyaa| 142.
tae NaM se purise mamaM abhIyaM jAva' pAsai, pAsittA mamaM cautthaM pi evaM
vayAsI-haM bho! culaNIpiyA! samaNovAsayA! apatthiya-patthiyA! jAva' na bhaMjesi,
to te ajja jA imA mAyA garU jAva (jaNaNI dukkara-dukkarakAriyA, taM sAo gihAo
nINemi, nINettA tava aggao ghAemi, ghAetA tao maMsasollae karemi karettA AdANa
bhariyaMsi kaDAhayaMsi addahemi-ahahetA, taba gAyaM maMseNa ya soNieNa ya
AyaMcAmi jahA NaM tuma aTTa-duhaTTa vasaTTe akAle ceva jIviyAo) vvrovijsi| usa
purUSa ne jaba mujhe niDara dekhA to cauthI bAra usane kahA-mauta ko cAhane vAle
zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA! tuma yadi apane vrata bhaMga nahIM karate ho to Aja
(tumhAre lie deva aura gurU sadRza pUjanIya, tumhAre hitArtha atyanta duSkara
kArya karane vAlIati kaThina dharma-kriyAeM karane vAlI tumhArI mAtA ko ghara se
le AUMgA  /  lAkara tumhAre sAmane usakA vadha karUMgA, usake tIna mAMsa-khaNDa
karUMgA, ubalate pAnI se bharI kaDhAhI meM khaulAUMgA. usake mAMsa aura rakta se
tamhAre zarIra ko sIcaMgA. jisase tuma ArtadhyAna evaM vikaTa duHkhoM se pIr3ita
hokara asamaya meM hI) prANoM se hAtha dho baitthoge| 143. tae NaM ahaM teNaM
puriseNaM evaM vutte samANe abhIe jAva vihraami| . usa purUSa dvArA yoM kahe
jAne para bhI maiM nirbhIkatApUrvaka dharma-dhyAna meM sthita rhaa| 144. tae NaM
se purise doccaMpi taccapi mamaM evaM vayAsI-haM bho! culaNIpiyA! samaNovAsayA!
aja jAva' vvrovijjsi| _ usa purUSa ne dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra mujhe phira kahA
zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA! Aja tuma prANoM se hAtha dho baitthoge| 145. tae NaM
teNaM puriseNaM doccaMpi taccapi mamaM evaM vuttassa samANassa imeyArUve
ajjhathie 5, aho NaM! ime purise aNArie jAva (aNAriya-buddhI, aNAriyAI, pAvAI
kammAiM samAyarai), jeNaM mamaM jeTuM puttaM sAo gihAo taheva jAva kaNIyasaM
jAva' AyaMcai, 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /  2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 107 /  3.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 98 /  4. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 135  /  5. dekheM sUtra-
saMkhyA 136  /

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Study: The Chulani Pita  [123] When that man said it for the second
time, the third time, this thought arose in my mind: "Oh! This wicked, low-
minded man has committed such heinous sins. He brought my eldest son, my middle
son, and my youngest son from home, and he killed them, staining my body with
their flesh and blood. Now he wants to bring you (the mother) from home and kill
you in front of me. Therefore, it is best that I capture this man." Thinking
this, I rose to capture him, but he flew into the sky. My outstretched hands
grasped only a pillar. I cried out loudly.  ## Atonement by the Chulani Pita
[146] Then the noble Sāthavāhi, the Shramanopāsaka Chulani Pita, spoke to her:
"Son! There was no man who brought your eldest son from home and killed him in
front of you. There was no man who brought your youngest son from home and
killed him in front of you. This was a divine affliction for you. Therefore, you
saw this terrible sight. Now your vows, rules, and observances are broken,
shattered. Therefore, son! You should criticize this conduct of breaking your
vows, (perform Pratikramaṇa - return to a pure inner state, condemn this
tendency, reproach yourself - feel inner remorse and purify the faults arising
from it, be ready for appropriate atonement) and accept the Tapas Karma for it."
## Discussion  The passage mentions that the Shramanopāsaka Chulani Pita's three
sons were killed in front of her by a sword and boiled in a cauldron of boiling
water. This was not a real event, but a divine affliction. This is explained in
the case of Kāmadeva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya adhyayana : culanIpitA ] [ 123 tubbhe vi ya NaM icchai sAo gihAo nINettA
mamaM aggao ghAettae, taM seyaM khalu mamaM evaM purisaM gihittae tti kaTTu
udghAie  /  se vi ya AgAse uppaie, mae vi ya khaMbhe AsAie, mahA mahayA saddeNaM
kolAhale kae  /  usa puruSa dvArA dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra yoM kahe jAne para
mere mana meM aisA vicAra AyA, are ! isa adhama, nIcabuddhi purUSa ne aise
nIcatApUrNa pApakarma kie, mere jyeSTha putra ko, maMjhale putra ko aura choTe
putra ko ghara se le AyA, unakI hatyA ko, usake mAMsa aura rakta se mere zarIra
ko siiNcaa| aba tumako bhI ( mAtA ko bhI) ghara se lAkara mere sAmane mAra
DAlanA cAhatA hai  /  isalie acchA yahI hai, maiM isa purUSa ko pakar3a lUM  /
yoM vicAra kara maiM use pakar3ane ke lie uThA, itane meM vaha AkAza meM ur3a
gayA  /  use pakar3ane ko phailAye hue mere hAthoM meM khambhA A gyaa| maiMne
jora-jora se zora kiyaa| culanIpitA dvArA prAyazcitta 146. tae NaM sA bhaddA
satthavAhI culaNIpiyaM samaNovAsayaM evaM bayAsI - no khalu kei purise tava jAva
(jeTThaputtaM sAo gihAo nINei, nINettA taba aggao ghAei, no khalu hs purise tava
majjhimaM puttaM sAo gihAo nINei, nINettA tava aggao ghAei, to khalu kei purise
tava ) kaNIyasaM puttaM sAo gihAo nINei, nINettA tava aggao ghAei, esa NaM kei
purise tava uvasaggaM karei, esa NaM tume vidarisaNe diTThe  /  taM gaM tumaM
iyANiM bhagga-vvae bhagga - niyame bhagga-posahe viharasi  /  taM NaM tumaM
puttA ! eyassa ThANassa Aloehi jAva (paDikkamAhi, niMdAhi garihAhi, viuTTAhi,
visohehi akaraNayAe, abbhuTThAhi ahArihaM pAyacchittaM tavo-kammaM ) paDivajjAhi
/  taba bhadrA sArthavAhI zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA se bolI- putra ! aisA koI
purUSa nahIM thA, jo tumhAre jyeSTha putra ko ghara se lAyA ho, tumhAre Age use
mArA ho, tumhAre choTe putra ko ghara se lAyA ho, tumhAre Age usakI hatyA kI ho|
yaha to tumhAre lie koI deva - upasarga thA  /  isalie, tumane yaha bhayaMkara
dRzya dekhaa| aba tumhArA vrata, niyama aura poSadha bhagna ho gayA hai khaNDita
ho gayA hai| isalie putra ! tuma isa sthAna- vrata bhaMga rUpa AcaraNa kI
AlocanA karo, (pratikramaNa karo- punaH zuddha antaHsthiti meM lauTo, isa
pravRtti kI nindA karo, garhA karo - Antarika kheda anubhava karo isase janita
doSa kA parimArjana karo, yathocita prAyazcitta ke lie abhyutthita-: - udyata ho
jAo) tadartha tapaHkarma svIkAra karo  /  vivecana prastuta sUtra meM deva dvArA
zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA ke tInoM putroM ko usakI AMkhoM ke sAmane talavAra se
kATa DAle jAne tathA ubalate pAnI kI kar3hAhI se khaulAe jAne ke sambandha meM
jo ullekha hai vaha koI vAstavika ghaTanA nahIM thI, deva-upasarga thA  /  isakA
spaSTIkaraNa kAmadeva ke prakaraNa meM kiyA

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 124  The Upasakadasanga Sutra has been discussed. The main point is
that Chulani Pita ultimately deviated from his vows. It is essential for a Vrati
or Upasaka to be vigilant at every moment, aware of the proper observance of
their rules. Even so, there are certain human weaknesses, and the Upasaka's
steadfastness sometimes breaks.  Inspired by a Guru, a revered person, or by
self-motivation, the Upasaka suddenly becomes aware and strives to prevent such
an undesirable incident from happening again in life. He remembers his resolve.
He becomes as firm as a mountain. To prevent the breaking of his resolve and
vows, the scriptures prescribe atonement. The Upasaka delves into his inner
self, reflecting on his nature, conduct, vows, and state. In this context, the
words Aalochana, Pratikramana, Ninda, and Garda are used specifically, as they
are used here. While these words are generally synonymous, they have their own
unique characteristics upon closer examination. This self-purifying process in
the Jain tradition has its own special form, behind which lies profound
psychological thinking.  The intention of Aalochana is to confess one's mistake
to the Guru. This is very beneficial. It washes away the inner dirt. The word
Pratikramana also has its own significance. The Upasaka addresses himself,
saying, "Atman! Return to yourself, where have you gone astray?" Then comes the
matter of Ninda. The Upasaka, as a witness to his own soul, silently condemns
his mistake within himself. He reflects on how such a bad act could have been
committed by him. He openly condemns his mistake, either directly or through
feelings, which is called Garda, a very inspiring form of experiencing inner
regret. To completely eradicate the thought process that led to the mistake, the
Upasaka resolves to do so. Ultimately, he accepts some penance as atonement.
From a psychological perspective, this is a beautiful process that prevents such
mistakes from happening again, as far as possible. The weaknesses that led to
such mistakes are eliminated in some form or another.  In the present context,
Chulani Pita's mother told him, "Your vows, rules, and Poshadha have been
broken." The commentator explains the breaking of vows, etc., as follows:
Generally, a Shravaka renounces the killing of innocent beings in the Ahimsa
vow, but in Poshadha, he also renounces the killing of guilty beings. Chulani
Pita, in anger, ran to destroy the tormentor, thereby violating the vow of
abstaining from killing large-bodied beings in thought. This was the reason for
his breaking of the vow. In Poshadha, one also renounces anger, but due to
anger, the rule of Uttaraguna was broken. The breaking of the vow of non-
engagement led to the breaking of Poshadha. Thus, due to the breaking of vows,
rules, and Poshadha, it was necessary to perform Aalochana, etc., for
purification.  ## Chapter 147  Therefore, Chulani Pita, the Samana, went to his
mother, the virtuous and wise Bhaddā, and said, "Thus..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 124] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra jA cukA hai| vizeSatA yaha hai ki antataH culanIpitA
apane vratoM se vicalita ho gyaa| vratI yA upAsaka ke lie yaha Avazyaka hai ki
vaha pratikSaNa sAvadhAna rahe, apane niyamoM ke yathAvat pAlana meM jAgarUka
rahe  /  aisA hote hue bhI kucha aisI mAnavIya durbalatAeM hai, upAsaka kI
dRr3hatA kabhI-kabhI TUTa jAtI hai| gurU, pUjya jana Adi se udbodhita hokara
athavA Atma-prerita hokara upAsaka sahasA sAvadhAna hotA hai, jIvana meM vaisA
avAMchanIya prasaMga phira na aae| vaha apane saMkalpa ko smaraNa karatA hai|
parvavata daDhatA A jAe. vaha (saMkalpa-vrata) Age phira na TUTe, isake lie
zAstroM meM prAyazcita kA vidhAna hai| upAsaka vahAM apane bhItara paiTha kara
apane svarUpa, AcAra, vrata, sthiti kA dhyAna karatA hai| isa sandarbha meM
AlocanA, pratikramaNa, nindA, gardA Adi zabdoM kA vizeSa rUpa se prayoga hai jo
yahAM bhI huA hai| vaise sAdhAraNatayA ye zabda samAnArthaka jaise haiM, parantu
sUkSmatA meM jAeM to pratyeka zabda kI apanI vizeSatA hai| jaina paramparA meM
Atma-zodhanamUlaka isa upakrama kA apanA vizeSa prakAra hai, jisake pIche bar3A
manovaijJAnika cintana hai| AlocanA karane kA Azaya gurU ke sammukha apanI bhUla
nivedita karanA hai| yaha bahuta lAbhaprada hai| isase bhItara kA maila dhula
jAtA hai| pratikramaNa zabda kA bhI apanA mahattva hai| upAsaka apane Apa ko
sambodhita kara kahatA hai-Atman ! vApasa apane Apa meM lauTo, bahirmukha ho
tuma kahAM cale gaye the? phira nindA kI bAta AtI hai, upAsaka AtmA kI sAkSI se
bhItara hI bhItara apanI bhUla kI nindA karatA hai| vicAra karatA hai ki kaisA
burA kArya usase bana par3A ko pratyakSa rUpa meM yA bhAva rUpa meM sAkSya
banAkara vaha apanI bhala kI prakaTa rUpa meM nindA karatA hai, jise gardA kahA
jAtA hai, jo Antarika kheda anubhava karane kA bahuta hI preraNAprada rUpa hai|
jisa vicAradhArA ke kAraNa bhUla banI, usa vicAradhArA ko sarvathA ucchinna kara
dene hetu upAsaka saMkalpabaddha hotA hai| antataH vaha prAyazcitta ke rUpa meM
kucha tapazcaraNa svIkAra karatA hai| . manauvaijJAnika dRSTi se yaha eka aisA
sundara krama hai, jisase punaH vaisI bhUla yathAsambhava nahIM hotii| jina
durbalatAoM ke kAraNa vaisI bhUla banatI hai, ve durbalatAeM kisI na kisI rUpa
meM dUra ho jAtI haiN| prastuta meM culanIpitA kI mAtA ne use kahA hai'tumhArA
vrata, niyama aura poSadha bhagna ho gayA hai|' TIkAkAra ne vratAdi ke bhaMga
hone kA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra kiyA haisAdhAraNatayA zrAvaka ahiMsANuvrata meM
niraparAdha jIva kI hiMsA kA tyAga karatA hai kinta poSadha meM niraparAdha ke
sAtha sAparAdha kI hiMsA kA bhI tyAga hotA hai| culanIpitA ne krodhapUrvaka
upasargakArI ke vinAza ke lie daur3akara bhAvataH sthUlaprANAtipAtaviramaNa
vrata kA ullaMghana kiyaa| yaha usake vratabhaMga kA kAraNa huaa| poSadha meM
krodha karane kA bhI parityAga kiyA jAtA hai, kintu krodha-karane ke kAraNa
uttaraguNarUpa niyama kA bhaMga huaa| avyApAra ke tyAga kA ullaMghana karane ke
kAraNa poSadha-bhaMga huaa| isa prakAra vrata, niyama aura poSadha bhaMga hone
ke kAraNa, punaH vizuddhi ke lie AlocanA Adi karanA anivArya thaa| 147. tae NaM
se culaNIpiyA samaNovAsae ammayAe bhaddAe satthavAhIe 'taha' tti

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Study: The Chulanipita  [125. The Shramanopasaka Chulanipita listened
to his mother, Bhadra Sार्थवाही, saying, "You are right," and respectfully
accepted her words. Upon hearing this, he reflected upon the nature of the
transgression, the violation of vows, the breach of rules, and the transgression
of the dietary restrictions at that place, and accepted the appropriate penance
in the form of austerities. The end of his life was filled with devotion.]  148.
Then, the Shramanopasaka Chulanipita, like Anand, practiced the first, (second,
third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and) eleventh
Upasaka-Pratimas in due order.  149. Then, the Shramanopasaka Chulanipita, like
Kamadeva, (cultivated himself through numerous virtues, good conduct,
restraints, renunciations, and dietary observances, practiced the
Shramanopasaka-Pariyaya for twenty years, properly performed the eleven Upasaka-
Pratimas, underwent a one-month Sanlekhana, observed a one-month fast, reflected
upon his actions, performed Pratikramana, and at the time of death, relinquished
his body in Samadhi, thus, as a result of intense austerities,) was born as a
Deva in the Arunaprabha Vimana, located in the northeast corner of the
Mahavimana of the Saudharma Avtansaka, in the Saudharma Devaloka. His lifespan
there is said to be four Palyopama. He will attain Siddhi in the Mahavideha
realm.  ||Nikkhevo|| ||The third study of the Upasaka-Dasha of the seventh Anga
is complete.||  1. See Sutra number 87. 2. Thus, Jambū! This is the meaning of
the third study of the Upasaka-Dasha, as explained by the Shraman, as I have
told you. 3. Conclusion: The Arya Sudharma said, "Jambū! This is the meaning of
the third study of the Upasaka-Dasha, as explained by the Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavira, which I have told you."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya adhyayana : culanIpitA] . [125 eyamaTTha viNaeNaM paDisuNei, paDisuNettA
tassa ThANassa Aloei jAva pddivjji| zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA ne apanI mAtA
bhadrA sArthavAhI kA kathana 'Apa ThIka kahatI haiM ' yoM kahakara vinayapUrvaka
sunaa| sunakara usa sthAna vrata-bhaMga, niyamabhaMga aura poSadhabhaMga rUpa
AcaraNa kI AlocanA kI, (yAvat) prAyazcitta ke rUpa meM tadanurUpa tapaHkriyA
svIkAra kii| jIvana kA upAsanAmaya anta 148. tae NaM se culaNIpiyA samaNovAsae
paDhamaM uvAsagapaDimaM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharai, paDhamaM upAsaga-paDimaM
ahAsuttaM jahA ANaMdo jAva (doccaM uvAsaga-paDimaM, evaM taccaM, cautthaM,
paMcama, chaTuM, sattamaM, aTThamaM, navamaM, dazamaM,) ekkArasamaM vi|
tatpazcAt zramaNopAsaka culanIpitA ne Ananda kI taraha kramazaH pahalI, (dUsarI,
tIsarI, cauthI, pAMcavIM, chaThI, sAtavIM, AThavIM, nauvI, dasavI tathA)
gyArahavIM upAsaka-pratimA kI yathAvidhi ArAdhanA kii| 149. tae NaM se
culaNIpiyA samaNovAsae teNaM urAleNaM jahA kAmadevo jAva (bahUhiM sIlavvaya-
guNa-veramaNa-paccakkhANa-posahovavAsehiM appANaM bhAvettA, bIsaM vAsAI
samaNovAsaga-pariyAyaM pAuNittA, ekkArasa ya uvAsaga-paDimAo sammaM kAeNaM
phAsittA, mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe attANaM jhUsittA, sarvhi bhattAiM aNasaNAe
chedettA, Aloiya-paDikkaMte, samAhipatte kAlamAse kAlaM kiccA)sohamme kappe
sohammavaDiMsagassa mahAvimANassa uttarapurathimeNaM arUNappabhe vimANe devattAe
uvavanne cattAri paliovamAiM ThiI pnnnnttaa|mhaavidehe vAse sijjhihii| nikkhevo
||sttmss aMgassa uvAsagadasANaM taiyaM ajjhayaNaM smttN|| zramaNopAsaka
culanIpitA (aNuvrata, guNavrata, viramaNa, pratyAkhyAna tathA poSadhopavAsa
dvArA aneka prakAra se AtmA ko bhAvita kara, bIsa varSa taka zrAvakadharma kA
pAlana kara, gyAraha upAsaka-pratimAoM kI bhalI-bhAMti ArAdhanA kara eka mAsa kI
saMlekhanA aura eka mAsa kA anazana sampanna kara, AlocanA, pratikramaNa kara,
maraNa-kAla Ane para samAdhipUrvaka dehatyAga karayoM ugra tapazcaraNa ke phala
svarUpa) saudharma, devaloka meM saudharmAvataMsaka mahAvimAna ke IzAna koNa meM
sthita arUNaprabha vimAna meM deva rUpa meM utpanna huaa| vahA~ usakI Ayu-sthiti
cAra palyopama kI batAI gaI hai| mahAvideha kSetra meM vaha siddha hogA-mokSa
prApta kregaa| ||nikssep||  //  sAtaveM aMga upAsakadazA kA tRtIya adhyayana
samApta  /  1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 87 /  2. evaM khalu jambU ! samaNeNa jAva
saMpateNaM taccassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaThe paNNattetti bemi| 3. nigamana-Arya
sudharmA bolejambU! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA ke tRtIya adhyayana
kA yahI artha bhAva kahA thA, jo maiMne tumheM batalAyA hai|

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study ## Summary  There was a wealthy merchant named Suradev in the
city of Varanasi. He was very prosperous. He had six crore gold coins in his
treasury, six crore in his business, and six crore in his household wealth. His
wife's name was Dhanya.  By a fortunate coincidence, Lord Mahavira arrived in
Varanasi. A Samavasarana was held. Like everyone else, Suradev also embraced the
Shravak Dharma. He progressed further and further in his religious practices.
One day, Suradev was engaged in meditation, observing Brahmacharya and Poshad in
the Poshadshala. It was midnight when a deity appeared before him. He held a
sharp sword in his hand. He threatened and intimidated Suradev to stop his
meditation. When Suradev refused, the deity killed his three sons one by one, in
the same way that the deity had killed the sons of the Chulani father in the
story. Each time, he cut the body of each son into five pieces, boiled them in a
cauldron of boiling water, and sprinkled the boiling flesh and blood on Suradev.
But Suradev's determination did not waver. He continued his meditation with
unwavering courage.  The deity thought, "He is not being swayed by the pain of
losing his sons. So, I must now inflict suffering on his body." Thinking that
nothing is dearer to a human than their body, the deity said to Suradev in harsh
words, "I have killed your sons in front of you, and you didn't care. Now, watch
as I inflict suffering on you. I tell you, abandon your vows, or I will inflict
sixteen terrible diseases on your body at once: asthma, cough, fever, burning
sensation, abdominal pain, fistula, piles, indigestion, eye disease, headache,
loss of appetite, pain in the eyes, pain in the ears, itching, stomach disease,
and leprosy. Your body will rot from these diseases, and you will be consumed by
their unbearable pain."  Suradev, who had not been shaken by witnessing the
murder of his sons, trembled at the mere mention of the diseases that would
befall him. The thought of his body being consumed by these terrible diseases
and becoming like a living corpse filled him with fear. His courage suddenly
broke. The horror of a life afflicted by disease terrified him. He thought, "I
must catch the evil being who wants to make me like this." He stretched out his
hands to catch him. But it was a divine illusion. How could he catch him? The
deity vanished into the sky. The pillar of the Poshadshala that was in front of
Suradev came into his hands. Suradev was stunned. He couldn't understand what
had happened. He cried out loudly...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 cauthA adhyayana sAra-saMkSepa vArANasI nagarI meM surAdeva nAmaka gAthApati
thA  /  vaha bahuta samRddhizAlI thaa| chaha karor3a svarNa mudrAeM usake
nidhAna meM thIM, chaha karor3a vyApAra meM tathA cha: karor3a ghara ke vaibhava
meM  /  usakI patnI kA nAma dhanyA thA  /  zubha saMyogavaza eka bAra bhagavAn
mahAvIra vArANasI meM padhAre samavasaraNa huA  /  Ananda kI taraha surAdeva ne
bhI zrAvaka - dharma svIkAra kiyA  /  vaha dharmArAdhanA meM uttarottara
bar3hatA gayA  /  eka dina kI ghaTanA hai, surAdeva poSadhazAlA meM brahmacarya
evaM poSadha svIkAra kie upAsanArata thaa| AdhI rAta kA samaya huA thA, eka deva
usake sAmane prakaTa huA  /  usake hAtha meM teja talavAra thI  /  usane
surAdeva ko upAsanA se haTa jAne ke lie bahuta DarAyA dhmkaayaa| na mAnane para
usane tInoM putroM kI kramazaH usI prakAra hatyA kara dI, jisa prakAra
culanIpitA ke kathAnaka meM deva ne usake putroM ko mArA thaa| hara bAra hara
putra ke zarIra ko pAMca-pAMca mAMsa khaMDoM meM kATA, ubalate pAnI kI kar3hAhI
meM khaulAyA aura vaha ubalatA mAMsa va rakta surAdeva para chidd'kaa| para,
surAdeva kI dRr3hatA nahIM ttuuttii| yaha nirbhIkatA ke sAtha apanI upAsanA meM
lagA rhaa| deva ne socA, putroM ke prati rahI mamatA para coTa karane se yaha
vicalita nahIM ho rahA hai, isalie. mujhe aba isake zarIra kI hI durdazA karanI
hogii| manuSya ko zarIra se adhika priya kucha bhI nahIM hotA, yaha socakara
deva ne surAdeva ko atyanta kaThora zabdoM meM kahA ki tumhAre sAmane maiMne
tumhAre putroM ko mAra DAlA, tumane paravAha nahIM kii| aba dekheM, maiM tumhArI
khuda kI kaisI burI hAlata karatA huuN| phira kahatA hUM, tuma vratoM kA tyAga
kara do, nahIM to maiM tumhAre zarIra meM eka hI sAtha damA, khAMsI, bukhAra,
jalana, kukSi- zUla, bhagaMdara, bavAsIra, ajIrNa, dRSTi-roga zira:- zUla,
aruci, akSivedanA, karNavedanA, khujalI, udara roga aura kuSTha ye solaha
bhayAnaka bImAriyA~ paidA kie detA huuN| ina bImAriyoM se tumhArA zarIra sar3a
jAyagA, inakI behada pIr3A se tuma jIrNa ho jAoge  /  apanI AMkhoM ke sAmane
beToM kI hatyA dekha, jo surAdeva vicalita nahIM huA thA, apane svayaM para Ane
vAle rogoM kA nAma sunate hI usakA mana kAMpa gayA  /  yaha socate hI ki merA
zarIra ina bhISaNa rogoM se asIma vedanA-pIr3ita hokara jIvita hI mRta jaisA ho
jAyagA, sahasA usakA dhairya TUTa gyaa| vaise rogAkrAnta jIvana kI vibhISikA ne
use dahalA diyaa| usane socA, jo duSTa mujhe aisA banA denA cAhatA hai, use
pakar3a lenA caahie| pakar3ane ke lie usane hAtha phailAe  /  vaha to devamAyA
kA SaDyantra thA, kaise pakar3a pAtA? deva AkAza meM lupta ho gyaa| poSadhazAlA
kA jo khaMbhA surAdeva ke sAmane thA, usake hAthoM meM A gyaa| surAdeva hakkA-
bakkA raha gayA  /  vaha samajha nahIM sakA, yaha kyA huA ? vaha jora-jora se

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fourth Study: Suradeva] [127] He started shouting. When Suradeva's wife Dhanya
heard this shouting, she immediately came to the dining hall and asked her
husband what was wrong? Why are you doing this? To this, Suradeva told Dhanya
the whole incident. Dhanya was very intelligent. She told her husband that this
was a dev-upsarg to make you deviate from your dharma. Your sons are safe. The
talk of causing disease in your body was nothing but a threat. You broke your
vow out of fear, this was a sin, you should purify yourself by doing penance.
Suradeva readily accepted his wife's words. He criticized himself for his
mistake, accepted penance. Suradeva's subsequent life was more and more dynamic
in the worship of dharma like Chulani Pita. He followed the vows properly,
followed the Shravak-dharma for twenty years, worshipped the eleven Upasak-
pratima properly, completed the final Sanlekhana of one month and one month of
fasting, and gave up his body peacefully. He was born in the form of a deva in
the Arunakant Vimana in the Saudharma Devaloka. ★★

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : surAdeva] [127 cillAne lgaa| surAdeva kI patnI dhanyA ne
jaba yaha cillAhaTa sunI to vaha turanta poSadhazAlA meM AI aura apane pati se
pUchane lagIkyA bAta hai? Apa aisA kyoM kara rahe hai? isa para surAdeva ne vaha
sArI ghaTanA dhanyA ko btlaaii| dhanyA bar3I buddhimatI thii| usane apane pati
se kahAApako dharma se DigAne ke lie yaha deva-upasarga thaa| Apake putra
sakuzala haiN| ApakI deha meM roga paidA karane kI bAta dhamakI ke sivAya kucha
nahIM thii| bhayabhIta hokara Apane apanA vrata khaNDita kara diyA, yaha doSa
huA, prAyazcita lekara Apako zuddha honA caahie| surAdeva ne apanI patnI kI bAta
saharSa svIkAra kii| apanI bhUla ke lie AlocanA kI, prAyazcitta grahaNa kiyaa|
surAdeva kA uttaravartI jIvana culanIpitA kI taraha dharmopAsanA meM adhikAdhika
gatizIla rhaa| usane vratoM kA bhalI-bhA~ti anusaraNa karate hue bIsa varSa taka
zrAvaka-dharma kA pAlana kiyA, gyAraha upAsaka-pratimAoM kI samyak ArAdhanA kI,
eka mAsa kI antima saMlekhanA aura eka mAsa kA anazana sampanna kara samAdhi-
pUrvaka deha-tyAga kiyaa| saudharma devaloka meM aruNakAnta vimAna meM vaha
deva-rUpa meM utpanna huaa|

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Study ## Suradeva  **150.** The beginning of the fourth study, with an
introduction. Thus, Jambū! At that time, in that era, there was a city called
Vārāṇasī. There was a shrine called Koṣṭhaka. The king there was named
Jitasatru. There was a householder named Suradeva. He was very wealthy. Six
crore gold coins were in his treasury as permanent capital. (Six crore gold
coins were invested in business, six crore gold coins were invested in the
splendor of his home - wealth, grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, etc. resources. He had
six cow-herds. Each cow-herd had ten thousand cows. His wife's name was Dhanyā.
The Lord Mahāvīra arrived and a Samvasarana took place. Like Ānand, Suradeva
also accepted the lay-disciple dharma. Like Kāmadeva, he became devoted to the
worship of the Lord Mahāvīra, following the Dharma-Prajñapti-Dharma-Shiksha.
**151.** Then, during the time of Suradeva's lay-discipleship, in the early
morning, some gods came to him. Those gods, holding a large blue lotus,
approached Suradeva, the lay-disciple.  1. If, O Venerable One! The Lord, the
Samana, has explained the meaning of the third study of the lay-disciple state,
then what meaning did he explain for the fourth study? (Please tell me.) 2. See
Sutra - Number 92 3. Sudharma asked Jambū - If the Lord Mahāvīra, who has
attained Siddhi, has explained this meaning - the intention of the third study
of the lay-disciple state, then, O Venerable One! What meaning did he explain
for the fourth study? (Please tell me.) 4. See Sutra - Number 116.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana surAdeva 150. ukkhevao' cautthassa ajjhayaNassa  /  evaM
khalu jambu ! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM vANArasI nAmaM nayarI  /  koTThae
ceie  /  jiyasattU raayaa| surAdeve gAhAvaI aDDe  /  cha hiraNNa-koDIo jAva (
nihANa - pauttAo, cha vaDDhi - pauttAo, cha pavitthara - pauttAo  /  ) chavayA,
dasa - go- sAhassieNaM vaeNaM  /  dhannA bhAriyA  /  sAmI samosaDhe  /  jahA
ANaMdo taheva paDivajjae gihi-dhammaM  /  jahA kAmadevo jAva samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa dhamma- paNNattiM uvasaMpajjittANaM viharai  /  upakSepa'-
upodghAtapUrvaka catartha adhyayana kA prArambha yoM hai- Arya sudharmA ne
kahAjambU ! usa kAla - vartamAna avasarpiNI ke cauthe Are ke anta meM, usa
samaya-jaba bhagavAn mahAvIra sadeha vidyamAna the, vArANasI nAmaka nagarI thI
/  koSThaka nAmaka caitya thaa| vahAM ke rAjA kA nAma jitazatru thaa| vahAM
surAdeva nAmaka gAthApati thA  /  vaha atyanta samRddha thaa| chaha karor3a
svarNa-mudrAeM sthAyI pUMjI ke rUpa meM usake khajAne meM thIM, (chaha karor3a
svarNa mudrAeM vyApAravyavasAya meM lagI thIM, cha: karor3a svarNa mudrAeM ghara
ke vaibhava - dhana, dhAnya, dvipada, catuSpada Adi sAdhanasAmagrI meM lagI thI
/  usake chaha gokula the  /  pratyeka gokula meM dasa-dasa hajAra gAyeM thIM  /
usakI patnI kA nAma dhanyA thA  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra padhAre samavasaraNa huA  /
Ananda kI taraha surAdeva bhI zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyA  /  kAmadeva kI taraha
vaha bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa aMgIkRta dharma-prajJapti-dharma-zikSA ke anurUpa
upAsanA-rata huaa| deva dvArA putroM kI hatyA 151. tae NaM tassa surAdevassa
samaNovAsayassa puvva-rattAvarattakAla - samayaMsi ege deve aMtiyaM
paaubbhvitthaa| se deve egaM mahaM nIluppala jAva' asiM gahAya surAdevaM
samaNovAsayaM 1. jai NaM bhaMte ! samaNeNaM bhagavayA jAva saMpatteNaM
uvAsagadasANaM taccasma ajjhayaNassa ayamaTThe paNNatte cautthassa bhatte !
ajjhayaNassa ke aTThe paNNatte ? 2. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 92 3. sudharmA se
jambU ne pUchA- siddhi prApta bhagavAna mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA ke tRtIya
adhyayana kA yadi yaha artha - Azaya pratipAdita kiyA, to bhagavan ! unhoMne
caturtha adhyayana kA kyA artha batalAyA ? (kRpayA kheN|) * 4. dekhe sUtra -
saMkhyA 116  /

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fourth Study: Suradeva  [129] "Alas, O Suradeva, the Sramanopasakal You are bent
on death! If you do not give up your vows and observances, then I shall bring
your eldest son from home, kill him before your eyes, cut his body into five
pieces, boil them in a cauldron of boiling water, and bathe your body with his
flesh and blood, so that you may die an untimely death."  In the same way, he
threatened to kill the middle and the youngest sons, cutting their bodies into
five pieces each. When Suradeva remained unmoved, the deva did the same as he
had done to Culanipita, killing his sons and cutting their bodies into three
pieces each.  [152] Then the deva said to Suradeva, the Sramanopasakal, for the
fourth time, "O Suradeva, the Sramanopasakal! You are bent on death! If you do
not give up your observances, then today I shall inflict upon your body all the
sixteen diseases at once, such as asthma, cough, (fever, burning sensation,
severe abdominal pain, fistula, hemorrhoids, indigestion, eye pain, headache,
loss of appetite, eye disease, ear disease, itching, and leprosy), so that you
may die an untimely and miserable death."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : surAdeva] [129 evaM vayAsIhaM bhoM! surAdevA samaNovAsayA!
apatthiya-patthiyA 4 /  jai NaM tumaM sIlAI jAva' na bhaMjesi, to te jeTuM putaM
sAo gihAo nINemi, nINetA taba aggao ghAemi, ghAettA paMca sollae karemi, karettA
AdANa-bhariyaMsi kaDAhayaMsi ahahemi, ahahettA tava gAyaM maMseNa ya sANieNa ya
AyaMcAmi, jahA NaM tumaM akAle ceva jIviyAo vvrovijjsi| evaM majjhimayaM,
kaNIyasaM; ekkekke paMca sollyaa| taheva karei jahA culaNIpiyassa, navaraM
ekkakke paMca sollyaa| eka dina kI bAta hai, AdhI rAta ke samaya zramaNopAsaka
surAdeva ke samakSa eka deva prakaTa huaa| usane nIlI, teja dhAra vAlI talavAra
nikAlakara zramaNopAsaka surAdeva se kahAmRtyu ko cAhane vAle zramaNopAsaka
surAdeva! yadi tuma Aja zIla, vrata Adi ko bhaMga nahIM karate ho to maiM
tumhAre bar3e beTe ko ghara se uThA laauuNgaa| lAkara tumhAre sAmane use mAra
ddaaluuNgaa| mArakara usake pAMca mAMsa-khaNDa karUMgA, ubalate pAnI se bharI
kar3hAhI meM khaulAUMgA, usake mAMsa aura rakta se tumhAre zarIra ko sIcUMgA,
jisase tuma asamaya meM hI jIvana se hAtha dho baitthoge| isI prakAra usane
maMjhale aura choTe lar3ake ko bhI mAra DAlane, unako pAMca-pAMca mAMsa-khaMDoM
meM kATa DAlane kI dhamakI dii| surAdeva ke avicala rahane para jaisA culanIpitA
ke sAtha deva ne kiyA thA, vaisA hI usane kiyA, usake putroM ko mAra ddaalaa|
itanA bheda rahA, vahA~ deva ne tIna-tIna mAMsa khaMDa kiye the, yahA~ deva ne
pAMca-pAMca mAMsa khaMDa kie| bhISaNa vyAdhiyoM kI dhamakI 152. tae NaM deve
surAdevaM samaNovAsayaM tautthaM pi evaM vayAsI-haM bho! surAdevA samaNovAsayA!
apatthiya-patthiyA 4 ! jAva' na pariccayasi, to te aja sarIraMsi
jamagasamagameva solasa-rogAyaM ke pakkhivAmi, taM jahA-sAse, kAse jAva (jare,
dAhe, kucchisUle, bhagaMdare , arisae, ajIrae, diTThisUre, muddhasUle, akArie,
acchiveyaNA, kaNNaveyaNA kaMDue, udare ) koDhe, jahA NaM tumaM aTTa-duhaTTa jAva
(vasaTTe akAle ceva jIviyAo) vvrovijjsi| taba usa deva ne zramaNopAsaka surAdeva
ko cauthI bAra bhI aisA kahA-mutyu ko cAhane vAle zramaNopAsaka surAdeva! yadi
apane vratoM kA tyAga nahI karoge to Aja maiM tumhAre zarIra meM eka hI sAtha
zvAsa-damA, kAsa-khAMsI, (jvara-bukhAra, dAha-deha meM jalana, kukSi-zUla-peTa
meM tIvra pIr3A, bhagaMdaragudA para phor3A, arza-bavAsIra, ajIrNa-badahajamI,
dRSTizUla-netra meM zUla cubhane jaisI teja pIr3A, mUrddhazUlamastaka-pIr3A,
akAraka-bhojana meM arUci yA bhUkha na laganA, akSi-vedanA-AMkha dukhanA, karNa
1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 107 /  2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 107 /  /

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[130] I will cause sixteen terrible diseases to arise in you, such as pain in
the ears, itching, abdominal diseases, dropsy, and leprosy, which will cause you
to suffer from great pain and anguish, and you will die prematurely. [153] When
the Suradeva said this, the Shramanopasaka remained unmoved, fearless,
undisturbed, calm, and tranquil, absorbed in his meditation. The deva spoke
again, and again, saying, "If you do not abandon your vows of conduct, fasting,
restraint, renunciation, and observance of the fast, I will inflict sixteen
terrible diseases upon your body, and you will die prematurely, suffering from
great pain and anguish." [154] When the Suradeva spoke thus, the Shramanopasaka
thought, "This wicked man (who took my eldest son from home, killed him in front
of me, cut him into five pieces, boiled him in a cauldron filled with boiling
water, and smeared my body with his flesh and blood), and who desires to inflict
these sixteen diseases upon me, I will not be afraid of him." He then became
angry, and his body trembled, and he made a great noise. 1. See Sutra number
145.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130] [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra vedanA-kAna dukhanA, kaNDU-khujalI, udara-roga-
jalodara Adi peTa kI bImArI tathA) kuSTha-kor3ha, ye solaha bhayAnaka roga
utpanna kara dUgAM, jisase tuma ArtadhyAna tathA vikaTa duHkha se pIr3ita hokara
asamaya meM hI jIvana se hAtha dho baitthoge| 153. tae NaM se surAdeve
samaNovAsae jAva (teNaM deveNaM evaM vutte samANe abhIe, atatthe, aNuvvigge,
akkhubhie, acalie, asaMbhaMte, tusiNIe dhammajjhANovagae) viharai, evaM devo
doccaMpi taccaM pi bhaNai jAva (jai NaM tumaM aja sIlAiM, vayAI, veramaNAI,
pacckkhANAi, posahovavAsAiM na chaDDesi, na bhaMjesi, to te ahaM aja sarIraMsi
jamagasamagameva solaha rogAyaMke pakkhivAmi jahA NaM tumaM aTTa-duhaTTa-vasaTTe
akAle ceva jIviyAo) vvrovijjsi| _ zramaNopAsaka surAdeva (usa deva dvArA yoM
kahe jAne para bhI jaba bhayabhIta, trasta, udvigna, kSubhita, calita tathA
Akula nahIM huA, cupacApazAnta-bhAva se) dharma-dhyAna meM lagA rahA to usa deva
ne dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra phira vaisA hI kahA(yadi tuma Aja zIla, vrata,
viramaNa, pratyAkhyAna tathA poSadhopavAsa kA tyAga nahIM karate ho-bhaMga nahI
karate ho to maiM tumhAre zarIra meM eka sAtha solaha bhayAnaka roga paidA kara
dUMgA, jisase tuma ArtadhyAna aura vikaTa du:kha se pIr3ita hokara asamaya meM
hI jIvana se hAtha dho baiThoge) surAdeva kA kSobha 154. tae NaM tassa
surAdevasya samaNovAsayassa teNaM deveNaM doccaM pi taccaM pi evaM vuttassa
samANassa imeyArUve ajjhathie 4-aho NaM ime purise aNArie jAva' samAyarai, jeNaM
mamaM jeThaM puttaM jAva (sAo gihAo nINei, nINettA mama aggao ghAei, ghAettA
paMca maMsa-sollae karei, karettA AdANa-bhariyaMsi kaDAhayaMsi addahei,
addahettA mamaM gAyaM maMseNa ya soNieNa ya AyaMcai, je NaM mamaM majjhimaM
puttaM sAo gihAo nINei, nINettA mama aggao ghAei ghAettA paMca-masa-sollae
karei, karettA AdANa-bhariyaMsi kaDAhayaMsi addahei, addahettA mama gAyaM
maMseNa ya soNieNa ya) AyaMcai, je vi ya ime solasa rogAyaMkA, te vi ya icchai
mama sarIragaMsi pakkhivittae, taM seyaM khalu mamaM eyaM purisaM giNhittae tti
kaTu udghaaie| se vi ya AgAse uppie| teNa ya khaMbhe AsAie, mahayA mahayA
saddeNaM kolAhale ke| usa deva dvArA dUsarI, tIsarI bAra yoM kahe jAne para
zramaNopAsaka surAdeva ke mana meM aisA vicAra AyA, yaha adhama purUSa (jo mere
bar3e lar3ake ko ghara se uThA lAyA, mere Age usakI hatyA kI, usake pAMca mAMsa-
khaMDa kie, ubalate pAnI se bharI kar3hAhI meM khaulAyA, usake mAMsa aura rakta
se mere zarIra ko 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 145 /

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Fourth Study: Suradeva] [131 Sprinkling-sprinkling, my middle son was brought
home, he was beaten in front of me, his five flesh-pieces were made, boiled in a
cauldron filled with boiling water, my body was sprinkled with his flesh and
blood, who brought my younger son home, he was killed in front of me, his five
flesh-pieces were made, boiled in a cauldron filled with boiling water, my body
was sprinkled with his flesh and blood,) wants to cause sixteen terrible
diseases in my body. Therefore, it is best for me, I should catch this man.
Thinking so, he got up to catch. In the meantime, that god flew into the sky. A
pillar came in the outstretched hands of Suradeva to catch. He started shouting
loudly. 155. Then Dhannya, the wife of Suradeva, heard this noise, and went
where Suradeva was. Coming, she said to her husband-Devanupriya! Why did you
shout so loudly? Conclusion of life 156. Then Suradeva, who was in the
Samaṇovās, said to his wife Dhannya-Thus, Devanupriya! No man, he says like the
Chulani father. Dhannya also replies, until the end. No, Devanupriya! No man is
causing sixteen diseases in your body at the same time, this is some kind of
affliction for you. He said everything like the Chulani father. _ Thus,
everything is like the Chulani father, without any difference, until the end, in
the Sohamme Kalpa, in the Arunkanta Vimana, in the Uvavanne. Standing in four
Paliovam. He lives in Mahavideha. Nikkhevo || The fourth study of the seven
limbs of the Uvasagadasanas is complete || The Shramanopasaka Suradeva told his
wife Dhannya the whole incident in the same way as the Chulani father had told.
Dhannya said Devanupriya! No one killed your elder, middle and younger sons. No
man is causing sixteen terrible diseases in your body at the same time. This is
some kind of affliction for you. He said everything else the same way as it was
said to the Chulani father. The whole further incident is like that of the
Chulani father. In the end, Suradeva, after giving up his body, goes to Sodharma
1. See Sutra-number 154. 2. See Sutra-number 149. 3. Thus, Jambū! I know that
this is the end of the fourth study with the Samaṇas and wealth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha adhyayana : surAdeva] [131 sIMcA-chIMTA, mere maMjhale lar3ake ko
ghara se uThA lAyA, mere Age usako mArA, usake pAMca mAMsa-khaMDa kie, ubalate
pAnI se bharI kar3hAhI meM khaulAyA, usake mAMsa aura rakta se mere zarIra ko
sIMcA-chIMTA, jo mere choTe lar3ake ko ghara se uThA lAyA, mere sAmane usakA
vadha kiyA, usake pAMca mAMsa-khaMDa kie, ubalate pAnI se bharI kar3hAhI meM
khaulAyA, usake mAMsa aura rakta se mere zarIra ko sIMcA-chIMTA,) mere zarIra
meM solaha bhayAnaka roga utpanna kara denA cAhatA hai| ata: mere lie yahI
zreyaskara hai, maiM isa purUSa ko pakar3a luuN| yoM socakara vaha pakar3ane ke
lie utthaa| itane meM vaha deva AkAza meM ur3a gyaa| surAdeva ke pakar3ane ko
phailAe hAthoM meM khambhA A gyaa| vaha jora-jora se cillAne lgaa| 155. tae NaM
dhannA bhAriyA kolAhalaM soccA, nisamma, jeNeva surAdeve samaNovAsae, teNeva
uvaagcchi| uvAgacchittA evaM vayAsI-kiNNaM devANuppiyA! tubbhehiM mahayA mahayA
saddeNaM kolAhale kae? surAdeva kI patnI dhanyA ne jaba yaha kolAhala sunA to
jahA~ surAdeva thA, vaha vahA~ aaii| Akara pati se bolI-devAnupriya! Apa jora-
jora se kyoM cillAe? jIvana kA upasaMhAra 156. tae NaM se surAdeve samaNovAsae
dhannaM bhAriyaM evaM vayAsI-evaM khalu devANuppie! ke vi purise, taheva kahei
jahA culnniipiyaa| dhannA vi paDibhaNai, jAva knniiysN| no khalu devANuppiyA!
tubbhaM ke vi purise sarIraMsi jamaga-samagaM solasa rogAyaMke pakkhivai, esa
NaM ke vi purise tubbhaM uvasaggaM krei| sesaM jahA culaNIpiyassa tahA bhnni| _
evaM sesaM jahA culaNIpiyassa niravasesaM jAva' sohamme kappe arUNakaMte vimANe
uvvnne| cattAri paliovamAiM tthiii| mahAvidehe vAse sijjhihii| nikkhevo  //
sattamassa aMgassa uvAsagadasANAM cautthaM ajjhayaNaM samattaM  //
zramaNopAsaka surAdeva ne apane patnI dhanyA se sArI ghaTanA usI prakAra kahI,
jaise culanIpitA ne kahI thii| dhanyA bolIdevAnupriya! kisI ne tumhAre bar3e,
maMjhale aura choTe lar3ake ko nahIM maaraa| na koI purUSa tumhAre zarIra meM
eka hI sAtha solaha bhayAnaka roga hI utpanna kara rahA hai  /  yaha to tumhAre
lie kisI ne upasarga kiyA hai| usane aura saba vaisA hI kahA, jaisA culanIpitA
ko kahA gayA thaa| Age kI sArI ghaTanA culanIpitA kI hI taraha hai| anta meM
surAdeva deha-tyAga kara sodharma 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 154  /  2. dekheM
sUtra-saMkhyA 149  /  3. evaM khalu jambU! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM cautthassa
ajjhayaNassa ayamaThe paNNattetti vemi|

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[132] [Upasakadasangasutra In the Kalpa, he was born in the Arunakant Vimana.
His lifespan is said to be four Palyopama. He will become a Siddha in the
Mahavideha-Kshetra - he will attain liberation. || Nikshepa || || The fourth
study of the seventh Anga, Upasakadasha, is complete || 1. Nigamana Ary Sudharma
said, "Jambhu! The Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira said this meaning and sentiment of
the fourth study of Upasakadasha, which I have told you."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 132] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra kalpa meM arUNakAnta vimAna meM utpanna huaa| usakI
Ayu-sthiti cAra palyopama kI batalAI gaI hai| mahAvideha-kSetra meM vaha siddha
hogA-mokSa prApta kregaa|  //  nikssep||  //  sAtaveM aMga upAsakadazA kA
caturtha adhyayana samApta  //  1. nigamanaArya sudharmA bolejambU! zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA ke cauthe adhyayana kA yahI artha bhAva kahA
thA, jo maine tumheM batalAyA hai|

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Study Summary  There was a city named Alavhika in North India. There
was a garden called Shankhavan in that city. Jitashatru was the king of that
city. In that city, a wealthy merchant named Chullashatak resided. He had six
crore gold coins secured in his treasury, an equal amount engaged in trade, and
an equal amount used for the splendor and equipment of his home. He had six
Gokuls of ten thousand cows each.  Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira once arrived in
Alavhika during his Janapad-Vihar. Like other people, Chullashatak also went to
see him. He was impressed by his Dharma-Deshana and accepted the Grihastha-
Dharma or Shravak-Vrat.  Even while living as a householder, Chullashatak was
very interested in the worship of Vrats and Dharma. There was a beautiful
harmony of the worldly and the spiritual in his life. He continued to perform
Vrat-Sadhana-Abhyas, etc. One day, he was engrossed in Dharma-Upasana, having
accepted Brahmacharya and Poshad-Vrat in the Poshadshala. It was midnight, when
suddenly a Dev appeared before him. He wanted to distract Chullashatak from his
Sadhana. Just as it happened with Chulni-Pita, the same thing happened to
Chullashatak at the hands of this Dev. The Dev killed his three sons in front of
him, cutting them into seven pieces each. He sprinkled their blood and flesh on
him. But Chullashatak was elevated above both affection and anger. Therefore, he
did not deviate from his Vrat. He remained engrossed in Dharma-Dhyan.  The Dev
then thought, "In the world, everyone has a great attachment and affection for
wealth. Humans can bear everything, but the blow of wealth is heavy for them.
Therefore, I should do the same to him now." The Dev spoke to Chullashatak in an
angry and harsh voice, "Accept it, break your Vrats. Look, if you don't break
them, I will take your six crore gold coins from your treasury and scatter them
all over the streets and crossroads of Alavhika city. You will become a beggar
and a pauper. You will become so distressed and sorrowful that you will not be
able to live!" Even after hearing this, Chullashatak remained steadfast in his
Dharma-Sadhana.  The Dev said the same thing again in a thunderous voice, and
then a third time. Chullashatak, who was until now steady in his Upasana,
suddenly trembled. A lightning-like flash ran through his entire body, and the
terrifying vision of impending poverty began to dance before his eyes. He became
frightened. The thought kept coming to his mind, "There is nothing in this world
that cannot be achieved with wealth." The one who has wealth...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavA adhyayana sAra-saMkSepa uttara bhArata meM AlabhikA nAmaka nagarI thii|
zaMkhavana nAmaka vahA~ udyAna thaa| jitazatru vahA~ kA rAjA thaa| usa nagarI
meM cullazataka nAmaka eka samRddhizAlI gAthApati nivAsa karatA thaa| usakI
chaha karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM khajAne meM surakSita thIM, utanI hI vyApAra meM
lagI thIM aura utanI hI ghara ke vaibhava tathA upakaraNoM meM upayoga meM A
rahI thiiN| dasa-dasa hajAra gAyoM ke chaha gokula usake yahAM the| zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra apane janapada-vihAra ke bIca eka bAra AlabhikA pdhaare| anya
logoM kI taraha cullazataka bhI unake darzana hetu phuNcaa| unakI dharma-dezanA
se prabhAvita huA aura usane gRhastha-dharma yA zrAvaka-vrata svIkAra kie|
gRhastha meM rahate hue bhI cullazataka vratoM kI ArAdhanA, dharma kI upAsanA
meM pUrI rUci letA thaa| loka aura adhyAtma kA sandara samanvaya usake jIvana
meM thaa| vrata.sAdhanA. abhyAsa Adi maya karatA rahatA thaa| eka dina vaha
poSadhazAlA meM brahmacarya evaM poSadha-vrata svIkAra kie dharmopAsanA meM
tanmaya thaa| AdhI rAta kA samaya thA, acAnaka eka deva usake sAmane prakaTa
huaa| vaha cullazataka ko sAdhanA se vicalita karanA cAhatA thaa| culanIpitA ke
sAtha jaisA ghaTita huA thA, yahA~ bhI isa deva ke hAthoM cullazataka ke sAtha
ghaTita huaa| deva ne usake tInoM putroM ko usake dekhate-dekhate mAra DAlA,
unake sAta-sAta Tukar3e kara ddaale| usakA rakta aura mAMsa usa para chidd'kaa|
para, mamatA aura krodha donoM se hI cullazataka kAphI UMcA uThA huA thaa|
isalie vaha apane vrata se nahI ddigaa| dharmadhyAna meM tanmaya rhaa| deva ne
taba yaha socakara ki saMsAra meM hara kisI kI dhana ke prati atyanta Asakti
aura mamatA hotI hai| manuSya aura saba saha jAtA hai, para dhana kI coTa usake
lie bhArI par3atI hai isalie mujhe aba isake sAtha aisA hI karanA caahie| deva
krudha aura karkaza svara meM cullazataka se bolA-mAna jAo, apane vratoM ko
tor3a do, dekha lo-yadi nahIM tor3oge to maiM khajAne meM rakhI tumhArI chaha
karor3a svarNa-mudrAoM ko ghara se nikAla lAUMgA aura unheM AlabhikA nagarI kI
sar3akoM aura caurAhoM para cAroM tarapha bikhera duuNgaa| tuma aMkicana aura
daridra bana jaaoge| itane vyAkula aura duHkhI ho jAoge ki jIvita nahIM raha
sakoge! cullazataka aisA kahane para bhI dharma sAdhanA meM sthira rhaa| deva ne
kar3akatI AvAja meM dUsarI bAra aisA kahA, tIsarI bAra aisA khaa| cullazataka,
jo aba taka upAsanA meM sthira thA, sahasA cauMka pdd'aa| usake sArI zarIra meM
bijalI-sI kauMdha gaI aura AzaMkita daridratA kA bhayAnaka dRzya usakI AMkhoM ke
sAmane nAcane lgaa| vaha ghabarA gyaa| usake mana meM bAra-bAra Ane lagAisa
jagat meM aisA kucha nahIM hai, jo dhana se na sadha ske| jisake pAsa dhana hotA

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[134] The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra is the friend, the relative, the human being,
the wise one. The heat of wealth is a strange heat, which keeps a human being
strong, energetic, courageous, everything. When it leaves, the same senses, the
same name, the same intellect, the same speech, with all these remaining, the
human being becomes something else. In his panic, Chullashataka did not realize
that he was in a fast. Therefore, he was furious at the man who was about to
lose his wealth and he lunged to grab him. He got nothing but the pillar
standing in the dining hall. The god disappeared. Chullashataka was bewildered.
He could not understand what had happened. Due to his anxiety, he started
shouting loudly. Hearing his shouts, his wife Bahula came there and when she
heard the whole story from her husband, she said - This was your test. It was a
divine affliction. You were very firm. But, in the end, you slipped. Your fast
is broken. Criticize, repent, accept atonement and purify yourself.
Chullashataka did the same and received inspiration to remain steadfast in the
observance of dharma in the future. Chullashataka's subsequent life was
progressively more and more devoted to fasting like Chulani Pita. He observed
Anuvrata, Gunavrata, Shikshavrata etc. with proper worship and followed the
Shravak dharma for twenty years. He worshipped eleven Shravak images properly.
He gave up his body after a month of final Sanlekhana fasting and meditation. He
was born in the Saudharma Devaloka in the Arun Siddha Vimana in the form of a
god. 1. There is nothing that is not achieved by means. Therefore, one should
strive to achieve one's goal with intelligence. Those who have wealth have
friends, those who have wealth have relatives. He who has wealth is a man in the
world, he who has wealth is wise. Panchatantra 1.2, 3 2. Those senses are
unimpaired, that is the name, That intellect is unimpaired, that is the speech.
A man devoid of the heat of wealth is the same, It is strange that he becomes
another in a moment. Hitopadeśa 1.127

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 134] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra hai, usI ke mitra hote haiM, usI ke bandhu-bAndhava
hote haiM, vahI manuSya mAnA jAtA hai, usI ko saba buddhimAn kahate hai| dhana
kI garmI eka vicitra garmI haiM, jo mAnava ko ojasvI; tejasvI, sAhasI-saba kucha
banAe rakhatI hai, usake nikala jAte hI; vahI indriyAM, vahI nAma, vahI buddhi,
vahI vANIina sabake rahate manuSya aura hI kucha ho jAtA hai| ghabarAhaTa meM
cullazataka ko yaha bhAna nahIM rahA ki vaha vrata meM hai| isalie apanA dhana
naSTa kara dene para utArU usa purUSa para isako bar3A krodha AyA aura vaha
hAtha phailAkara use pakar3ane ke lie jhpttaa| poSadhazAlA meM khar3e khaMbhe ke
sivAya usake hAtha kucha nahIM aayaa| deva antardhAna ho gyaa| cullazataka
kiMkartavyavimUDha-sA bana gyaa| vaha samajha nahIM sakA, yaha kyA ghaTita huaa|
vyAkulatA ke kAraNa vaha jora-jora se cillAne lgaa| cillAhaTa sunakara usakI
patnI bahulA vahA~ AI aura jaba usane apane pati se sArI bAta sunI to bolI-yaha
ApakI parIkSA thI  /  devakRta upasarga thaa| Apa khUba dRDha rhe| para, anta
meM phisala ge| ApakA vrata bhagna ho gyaa| AlocanA, pratikramaNa kara,
prAyazcitta svIkAra kara Atmazodhana kareM  /  cullazataka ne vaisA hI kiyA aura
bhaviSya meM dharmoM-pAsanA meM sadA sudRr3ha bane rahane kI preraNA prApta kii|
cullazataka kA uttaravartI jIvana culanIpitA kI taraha vratArAdhanA meM
uttarottara unnatizIla rhaa| usane aNuvrata, guNavrata, zikSAvrata Adi kI samyak
upAsanA karate hue bIsa varSa taka zrAvakadharma kA pAlana kiyaa| gyAraha
zrAvaka-pratimAoM kI bhalI-bhAMti ArAdhanA kii| eka mAsa kI antima saMlekhanA
anazana aura samAdhipUrvaka deha-tyAga kiyaa| saudharma devaloka meM arUNasiddha
vimAna meM vaha deva-rUpa meM utpanna huaa| 1. na hi tadvidyate kiJcidyadarthena
na siddhyti| yatnena matimAMstasmAdarthamekaM prasAdhayet  //  yalyA'rthAstasya
mitrANi, yasyA'rthAstasya baandhvaaH| yasyA'rthAH sa pumAlloke, yasyA'rthAH sa
ca paNDitaH  //  paMcatantra 1.2, 3 2. tAnIndriyANyavikalAni tadeva nAma, sA
buddhirapratihatA vacanaM tdev| arthoSmaNA virahitaH purUSaH sa eva, anyaH
kSaNena bhavatIti vicitrametat  //  hitopadeza 1.127

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fifth Study Chullaratak Shramanopasak Chullashatak 157. This is the
beginning of the fifth study. Thus, Jambū! At that time, in that era, there was
a city named Ālamikā. There was a garden called Sankhavaṇa. The king there was
named Jitasatru. In that city, there lived a wealthy and influential man named
Chullasataka. (He had six crore gold coins in his treasury, six crore gold coins
in his business, and six crore gold coins in his home for luxury and
furnishings.) He had six herds of cows. Each herd had ten thousand cows. His
wife's name was Bahulā. The Lord Mahāvīra arrived - the Samvasaraṇa took place.
Like Ānanda, Chullasataka also accepted the Shravaka-Dharma. The subsequent
events are like those of Kāmadeva. He, like Kāmadeva, became devoted to the
worship of the Lord Mahāvīra, following the teachings of the Angīkṛta Dharma-
Prajñapti. Obstacles created by the Devas 158. Then, at the time of the early
morning, for that Shramanopasaka Chullasataka, 1. "O Venerable One! The
Venerable Lord Mahāvīra has explained the meaning of the fourth study of the
Upasakadasha, but Venerable One! What is the meaning of the fifth study?" 2. See
Sutra number 33. Ārya Sudharma asked Jambū - "The Siddhi-prapta Lord Mahāvīra
has explained the meaning of the fourth study of the Upasakadasha, but Venerable
One! What is the meaning of the fifth study?" (Please tell me.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavA adhyayana cullarAtaka zramaNopAsaka cullazataka 157. ukkhevo paMcamasta
ajjhynnss| evaM khalu, jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM AlabhiyA nAmaM nyrii|
saMkhavaNe ujaanne| jiyasattU raayaa| cullasae, gAhAvaI aDDhe jAva', cha
hiraNNa-koDIo jAva (nihAla-pauttAo, cha vaDDhi-pauttAo, cha pavitthara-pauttAo)
cha vayA, dasa-go-sAhassieNaM vennN| bahulA bhaariyaa| sAmI smosddhe| jahA
ANaMdo tahA gihi-dhamma pddivji| sesaM jahA kAmadevo jAva' dhammapaNNatiM
uvasaMpajjitANaM vihri| . utkSepa-upodghAtapUrvaka pAMcaveM adhyayana kA Arambha
yoM hai Arya sudharmA ne kahAjambU! usa kAlavartamAna avasarpiNI ke cauthe Are
ke anta meM, usa samaya-jaba bhagavAn mahAvIra sadeha vidyamAna the, AlamikA
nAmaka nagarI thii| vahA~ zaMkhavama udyAna thaa| vahA~ ke rAjA kA nAma
jitazatru thaa| usa nagarI meM cullazataka nAmaka gAthApati nivAsa karatA thaa|
vaha bar3A samRddha evaM prabhAvazAlI thaa| (chaha karor3a svarNa mudrAe~ usake
khajAne meM rakhI thIM, chaha karor3a svarNamudrAe~ vyApAra meM lagI thIM tathA
chaha karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM ghara ke vaibhava evaM sAja-sAmAna meM lagI thiiN|)
usake chaha gokula the| pratyeka gokula meM dasa-dasa hajAra gAyeM thii| usakI
patnI kA nAma bahulA thaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra padhAre - samavasaraNa huaa| Ananda
kI taraha cullazataka ne bhI zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyaa| Age kA ghaTanA-krama
kAmadeva kI taraha hai| vaha usI kI taraha bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa aMgIkRta
dharma-prajJaptidharma-zikSA ke anurUpa upAsanA-rata huaa| deva dvArA vighna
158. tae NaM tassa cullasayagassa zramaNovAsayassa puvva-rattAvarattakAla-
samayaMsi 1. jaiNaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA jAva saMpatteNaM uvAsagadasANaM
cautthassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaThe paNNatte, paMcamassaNaM bhaMte! ajjhayaNassa ke
aTThe paNNatte? 2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 3 3. Arya sudharmA se jambU ne pUchA-
siddhiprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA ke caturtha adhyayana kA yaha
artha-bhAva pratipAdita kiyA to bhagavan! unhoMne paMcama adhyayana kA kyA artha
batalAyA? (kRpayA kheN|)

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[136] [Upasakadasangasutra] A deva appeared before the Chullasaya Samanovasaya
and said, "O Chullasaya Samanovasaya! If you do not abandon your vows, I will
take your eldest son from your home today." Just as it happened with the
Chullani father, the same thing happened here. The deva killed the eldest,
middle, and youngest sons, cutting them into pieces. He splattered the
Chullasaya's body with flesh and blood. The only difference was that the deva
had cut the bodies into five pieces there, but here he cut them into seven
pieces. [159] The Chullasaya Samanovasaya remained steadfast in his vows. Threat
of Wealth Destruction [160] The deva then said to the Chullasaya Samanovasaya
for the fourth time, "O Chullasaya Samanovasaya! If you do not abandon your
vows, I will take your six crore gold coins kept in your treasury, your six
crore gold coins used in your business, and your six crore gold coins used for
your home's wealth and decorations. I will bring them and scatter them all over
the city of Alambika, in the Shringatak (triangular) places, Trik-Tirahas
(three-way intersections), Chatusk-Chaurahas (four-way intersections), Chatvar
(where more than four roads meet), Chaturbhuj (where four roads diverge), and
Mahapath (major roads or highways). I will scatter them everywhere, so that you
will be forced to wander in distress, seeking your wealth. 1. See Sutra - Number
116 2. See Sutra - Number 107 3. See Sutra - Number 154. 4. See Sutra - Number
154. 5. See Sutra - Number 98.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136 ] [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra ege deve aMtiyaM jAva' asiM gahAya evaM vayAsI-haM
bho ! cullasayagA samaNovAsayA  /  jAva' na bhaMjesa tote ajja jeTTaM puttaM sAo
gihAo nINemi  /  evaM jahA culaNIpiyaM, navaraM ekvekve satta maMsasollayA
jAvare kaNIyasaM jAva' AyaMcAmi  /  eka dina kI bAta hai, AdhI rAta ke samaya
cullazataka ke samakSa eka deva prakaTa huA  /  usane talavAra nikAla kara kahA-
are zramaNopAsaka cullazataka ! yadi tuma apane vratoM kA tyAga nahIM karoge to
maiM Aja tumhAre jyeSTha putra ko ghara se uThA lAUMgA  /  culanIpitA ke sAtha
jaisA huA thA, vaisA hI ghaTita huaa| deva ne bar3e, maMjhale tathA choTe tInoM
putroM ko kramazaH mArA, mAMsa khaMDa kie| mAMsa aura rakta se cullazataka kI
deha ko chIMTA  /  itanA hI bheda rahA, vahA~ deva ne pAMca-pAMca mAsa khaMDa
kie the, yahA~ deva ne sAta-sAta mAMsakhaMDa kie  /  159. tae NaM se cullasayae
samaNovAsae jAva' viharai  /  zramaNopAsaka cullazataka nirbhaya bhAva se
upAsanArata rhaa| sampatti vinAza kI dhamakI 160. tae NaM se deve cullasayagaM
samaNovAsayaM cautthaM pi evaM vayAsI - haM bho ! cullasayagA! samaNovAsayA !
jAva na bhaMjesi to te ajja jAo imAo cha hiraNNa- koDIo nihANapauttAo, cha
vuDDhi - pauttAo, cha pavitthara pauttAo, tAo sAo gihAo nINemi, nINettA
AlabhiyAe nayarIe siMghADaya jAva ( tiya- caukka - caccara - caummuha - mahApaha
- ) pahesu savvao samaMtA vippairAmi, jahA NaM tumaM aTTa duhaTTa-vasaTTe akAle
ceva jIviyAo vavarovijjasi  /  - deva ne zramaNopAsaka cullazataka ko cauthI
bAra kahA - are zramaNopAsaka cullazataka ! tuma aba bhI apane vratoM ko bhaMga
nahIM karoge to maiM khajAne meM rakhI tumhArI chaha karor3a svarNa mudrAoM,
vyApAra meM lagI tumhArI chaha karor3a svarNa mudrAoM tathA ghara ke vaibhava
aura sAja-samAna meM lagI chaha karor3a svarNa mudrAoM ko le AUMgA  /  lAkara
AlabhikA nagarI ke zrRMgATaka- tikone sthAnoM, trika-tirAhoM, catuSka-caurAhoM,
catvara - jahA~ cAra se adhika rAste milate hoM aise sthAnoM, caturbhuja - jahA~
se cAra rAste nikalate hoM, aise sthAnoM tathA mahApatha-bar3e rAstoM yA rAja
mArgoM meM saba tarapha - cAroM ora bikhera duuNgaa| jisase tuma ArtadhyAna 1.
dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 116 2. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 107 3. dekheM sUtra -
saMkhyA 154  /  4. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 154 /  5. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 98  /

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[137 Fifth Study: Chullashataka] and you will be afflicted with great suffering
and die prematurely. 161. Even though the Devata said this, the Shramanopasaka
Chullashataka remained fearless in his devotion. 162. When the Devata saw the
Shramanopasaka Chullashataka fearless, he said the same thing to him a second
time, a third time, and threatened him, "You will lose your life!"   163. When
the Devata said this to the Shramanopasaka Chullashataka a second time and a
third time, the Shramanopasaka thought, "Oh, this man is like a Chulani-pita. He
has killed my three sons, the eldest, the middle, and the youngest, and has
soaked the ground with their flesh and blood. Now he wants to take my six crore
gold coins kept in the treasury, six crore gold coins used in business, and six
crore gold coins used in the wealth and ornaments of the house, and scatter them
in the triangular places of the city of Alambika. Therefore, it is better for me
to catch this man." Thinking this, he ran to catch him like a Suradeva. The same
thing happened as happened with Suradeva. Like Suradeva's wife,  1. See Sutra
number 153. 2. See Sutra number 97. 3. See Sutra number 154. 4. See Sutra number
154. 5. See Sutra number 160.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [137 pAMcavAM adhyayana : cullazataka] evaM vikaTa duHkha se pIr3ita hokara
asamaya meM hI jIvana se hAtha dho baitthoge| 161. tae NaM se cullasayae
samaNovAsae teNaM deveNaM evaM vutte samANe abhIe jAva' vihri| _ usa deva dvArA
yoM kahe jAne para bhI zramaNopAsaka cullazataka nirbhIkatApUrvaka apanI upAsanA
meM lagA rhaa| 162. tae NaM se deve cullasayagaM samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM jAva'
pAsai, pAsittA doccaM pi taccaM pi taheva bhaNai, jAva vvrovijjsi| jaba usa deva
ne zramaNopAsaka cullazataka ko yoM nirbhIka dekhA to usase dUsarI bAra, tIsarI
bAra phira vaisA hI kahA aura dhamakAyA-are ! prANa kho baiThoge! vicalanaH
prAyazcitta 163. tae NaM tassa cullasayagassa samaNovAsayassa teNaM deveNaM
doccaMpi taccapi evaM vuttassa samANassa ayameyArUbe ajjhathie 4 aho NaM ime
purise aNArie jahA culaNIpiyA tahA. ciMtei jAva kaNIyasaM jAva AyaMcai, jAo vi
ya NaM imAo mamaM cha hiraNNakoDIo nihANa-pauttAo, cha vaDDha-pauttAo, cha
pavitthara-pauttAo, tAo vi ya NaM icchai mamaM sAo gihAo nINettA AlabhiyAe
nayarIe siMghADaga jAva vippairittae, taM seyaM khalu mamaM eyaM purisaM
giNhittae tti kaTu uddhAie, jahA suraadevo|thev bhAriyA pucchai, taheva khei|
usa deva ne jaba dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra zramaNopAsaka cullazataka ko aisA
kahA, to usake mana meM culanIpitA kI taraha vicAra AyA, isa adhama purUSa ne
mere bar3e , maMjhale aura choTetInoM putroM ko bArI-bArI se mAra kara, unake
mAMsa aura rakta se siiNcaa| aba yaha merI khajAne meM rakhI chaha karor3a
svarNamudrAoM, vyApAra meM lagI chaha karor3a svarNa-mudrAoM tathA ghara kA
vaibhava evaM sAja-sAmAna meM lagI chaha karor3a svarNa-mudrAoM ko nikAla lAnA
cAhatA hai aura unheM AlabhikA nagarI ke tikone Adi sthAnoM meM bikhera denA
cAhatA hai| isalie, mere lie yahI zreyaskara hai ki maiM isa purUSa ko pakar3a
luuN| yoM socakara vaha use pakar3ane ke lie surAdeva kI taraha daudd'aa| Age
vaisA hI ghaTita huA, jaisA surAdeva ke sAtha ghaTita huA thaa| surAdeva kI
patnI kI taraha 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 153  /  2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 /  3.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 154 /  4. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 154 /  5. dekheM sUtra-
saMkhyA 160  /

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[138] His wife also asked him everything. He told her the whole story. Divine -
Motion [Upasakadasangasutra 164. Just as the Chullani-pita went, so he also
attained the Arun-siddh vimāna in the Saudharma devlōka after abandoning his
body. His lifespan there is said to be four palya-upamas. The subsequent events
are also the same. (O Bhagavan! Where will the Chullasataka go after the
exhaustion of his lifespan, existence, and state from that devlōka? Where will
he be born? Gautama!) He will become a Siddha in the Mahavideha-kṣetra - he will
attain liberation. Nikkheva || The fifth study of the seventh anga Upasakadasa
is complete || The subsequent events are like those of the Chullani-pita. After
abandoning his body, the Chullasataka was born as a deva in the Arun-siddh
vimāna in the Saudharma devlōka. His lifespan there is said to be four palya-
upamas. The subsequent events are also the same. (O Bhagavan! Where will the
Chullasataka go after the exhaustion of his lifespan, existence, and state from
that devlōka? Where will he be born? Gautama!) He will become a Siddha in the
Mahavideha-kṣetra - he will attain liberation. || Nikṣepa || || The fifth study
of the seventh anga Upasakadasa is complete || 1. See Sutra - number 149. 2. And
thus, Jambū! I declare that this is the meaning of the fifth study of the
Upasakadasa as explained by the Shraman. 3. Conclusion - - Ārya Sudharma said,
Jambū! The Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira said this meaning of the fifth study of the
Upasakadasa, which I have told you.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 138 ] usakI patnI ne bhI usase saba pUchA  /  usane sArI bAta batalAI  /  divya
- gati [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra 164. sesaM jahA culaNIpiyassa jAva' sohamme kappe
arUNasiddhe vimANe uvavanne  /  cattAri palio mAI ThiI  /  sesaM taheva jAva (
se NaM bhaMte! cullasayae tAo devalogAo AukkhaNaM, bhavakkhaeNaM, ThiikkhaeNaM
anaMtaraM cayaM caittA kahiM gamihii ? kahiM uvavajjihi ? goyamA ! ) mahAvidehe
vAse sijjhihi  /  nikkhevo  //  sattamassa aMgassa uvAsagadasANaM paMcamaM
ajjhayaNaM samattaM  //  Age kI ghaTanA culanIpitA kI taraha hai  /  deha tyAga
kara cullazataka saudharma devaloka meM arUNa-siddha vimAna meM deva ke rUpa meM
utpanna huaa| vahAM usakI Ayusthiti cAra palyopama kI batalAI gaI  /  Age kI
ghaTanA bhI vaisI hI hai| (bhagavan! cullazataka usa devaloka se Ayu, bhava evaM
sthiti kA kSaya hone para deva - zarIra kA tyAga kara kahAM jAyagA ? kahAM
utpanna hogA? gautama !) vaha mahAvidehakSetra meM siddha hogA - mokSa prApta
karegA  /   //  nikSepa  //   //  sAtaveM aMga upAsakadazA kA pAMcavAM adhyayana
samApta  //  1. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 149  /  2. evaM khalu jambU ! samaNeNaM
jAva saMpatteNaM paMcamassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaTThe paNNattetti bemi  /  3.
nigamana - - Arya sudharmA bole jambU ! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA
ke pAMcaveM adhyayana kA yahI arthabhAva kahA thA, jo maiMne tumheM batalAyA hai
/

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Study Summary  Kundakaulika, a wealthy householder, resided in
Kampilya. His wife's name was Pūṣā. Kampilya was an ancient city in India.
During the time of Lord Mahāvīra, it was very prosperous and famous. Today,
there is still a village called Kampil on the banks of the old Ganges between
Badaun and Farrukhabad in Uttar Pradesh, which historians believe is the present
form of Kampilya. Kampilya is mentioned in many places in the Āgama literature
and was in the kingdom of King Jitasatru, a contemporary of Lord Mahāvīra. There
was a garden called Sahasrāmrāvana. It is possible that gardens were named after
the number of mango trees they had.  Kundakaulika was a wealthy and happy
householder. He had eighteen crore gold coins, of which six crore were kept in
the treasury as secure wealth, six crore were invested in business, and six
crore were used for the splendor and furnishings of his home. He had six
Gokulas, each with ten thousand cows.  One day, Lord Mahāvīra arrived in
Kampilya. Like others, Kundakaulika also came into the presence of the Lord,
listened to the Dharmadeshanā, was impressed, and accepted the Shravaka-Dharma.
His life, which was previously filled with worldly desires, now included
spirituality. Kundakaulika lived the life of a good religious householder,
diligently following the accepted vows.  One day, in the afternoon, he went to
the Aśoka grove with a devotional spirit. He took off his ring and upper garment
and placed them on a stone slab, and himself became absorbed in meditation. To
distract his devotion, a deva appeared there. To divert his attention, the deva
picked up the ring and shawl and ascended into the sky. The deva said to
Kundakaulika, "Look, the Dharma-principles of Mankhaliputra Goshalak are very
beautiful. There is no importance of effort, endeavor, or karma there. Whatever
is going to happen is fixed. The religious principles of Lord Mahāvīra are not
good. There, effort, endeavor, and endeavor are all accepted, and whatever
happens is not fixed according to them. Now you see the difference between the
two yourself. According to Goshalak's principles, whatever effort, endeavor,
etc. is done is all useless, there is no need to do it. Because in the end, what
is going to happen will happen."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA adhyayana sAra-saMkSepa kAmpilyapura meM kuMDakaulika nAmaka gAthApati
nivAsa karatA thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma pUSA thaa| kAmpilyapura bhArata kA eka
prAcIna nagara thaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samaya meM vaha bahuta samRddha evaM
prasiddha thaa| uttarapradeza meM bUr3hI gaMgA ke kinAre badAyUM aura
pharrUkhAbAda ke bIca kampila nAmaka Aja bhI eka gAMva hai, jo itihAsakAroM ke
anusAra kAmpilyapura kA vartamAna rUpa hai| kAmpilyapura Agama-vAGmaya meM aneka
sthAnoM para saMketita, bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samasAmayika rAjA jitazatru ke
rAjya meM thaa| vahA~ sahasrAmravana nAmaka udyAna thaa| saMbhavata: Ama ke
hajAra per3a hone ke kAraNa udyAnoM ke aise nAma rakhe jAte rahe hoN| gAthApati
kuMDakaulika eka samRddha evaM sukhI gRhastha thaa| usakI aThAraha karor3a
svarNamudrAoM meM chaha karor3a mudrAeM surakSita dhana ke rUpa meM khajAne meM
rakhI thIM, chaha karor3a vyApAra meM evaM chaha karor3a ghara ke vaibhava tathA
sAja-sAmAna meM lagI thiiN| dasa-dasa hajAra gAyoM ke chaha gokula usake pAsa
the| aisA prasaMga banA, eka samaya bhagavAn mahAvIra kAmpilyapura padhAre  /
anyAnya logoM kI taraha gAthApati kuMDakaulika bhI bhagavAn ke sAnnidhya meM
pahuMcA, dharmadezanA sunI, prabhAvita huA, zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyaa| jahAM
jIvana meM, aba se pUrva laukika bhAva thA, usameM adhyAtma kA samAveza huaa|
kuMDakaulika svIkRta vratoM kA bhalI-bhAMti pAlana karatA huA eka uttama
dhArmika gRhastha kA jIvana jIne lgaa| eka dina kI bAta hai, vaha dopahara ke
samaya dharmopAsanA kI bhAvanA se azokavATikA meM gyaa| vahAM apanI aMgUThI aura
uttarIya utAra kara pRthvIzilApaTTaka para rakhe, svayaM dharma-dhyAna meM
saMlagna ho gyaa| usakI zraddhA ko vicalita karane ke lie eka deva vahAM prakaTa
huaa| usakA dhyAna baMTAne ke lie deva ne vaha aMgUThI aura dupaTTA uThA liyA
aura AkAza meM sthita ho gyaa| deva ne kuMDakaulika se kahAdekho, maMkhaliputra
gozAlaka ke dharma-siddhAnta bahuta sundara haiN| vahAM prayatna, purUSArtha,
karma-inakA koI mahattva nahIM hai  /  jo kucha hone vAlA hai, saba nizcita hai
/  bhagavAn mahAvIra ke dhArmika siddhAnta uttama nahIM haiM  /  vahAM to
udyama, prayatna, purUSArtha-sabakA svIkAra hai, aura jo kucha hotA hai, vaha
saba unake anusAra niyata nahIM hai| aba donoM kA antara tuma svayaM dekha lo|
gauzAlaka ke siddhAnta ke anusAra purUSArtha, prayatna Adi jo kucha kiyA jAtA
hai, saba nirarthaka hai, karane kI koI AvazyakatA nhiiN| kyoMki anta meM hogA
vahI, jo hone vAlA hai|

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[140] Hearing this, Kundakaulik said, "Dev! Tell me one thing. This divine
power, radiance, brilliance, and wealth that you have attained, did you achieve
it through effort and exertion, or without effort and exertion? Did you attain
all this without effort and exertion?" The Dev replied, "Kundakaulik! I attained
this without effort and exertion." Upon this, Kundakaulik said, "Dev! If this is
the case, then tell me, why have other beings who do not exert effort and
exertion not become Devas like you? If you say that you attained this divine
power and wealth through effort and exertion, then how can you call the
principles of Goshalak, which do not accept effort and exertion, beautiful? And
how can you call the principles of Bhagwan Mahavira, which accept effort and
exertion, ugly? Your statement is false." Hearing Kundakaulik's logical and
reasoned statement, the Dev could not find an answer. He was intimidated. He
silently placed the ring and scarf on the stone slab and returned with his head
down. By a fortunate coincidence, Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in Kampilya again
during his Janapad-Vihar. As soon as Kundakaulik came to know, he went to pay
his respects to Bhagwan. He received his presence, listened to the
Dharmadeshana. Bhagwan Mahavira was omniscient and all-seeing. He knew
everything that had happened. He addressed Kundakaulik and told him about the
entire incident that had occurred in the Ashoka Vatika and asked him, "Why? Did
all this happen?" Kundakaulik said with utmost humility and respect, "Prabhu!
You know everything. Exactly as you said, it happened." Bhagwan was pleased with
Kundakaulik's religious faith and knowledge. He praised him, saying,
"Kundakaulik! You are blessed, you have done very well." To inspire the Sadhus
and Sadhvis present there, Bhagwan said to them, "Even while living as a
householder, how capable a knower of truth Kundakaulik is! He silenced another
follower with logic and justice." Bhagwan expressed hope that Sadhus and Sadhvis
who study the twelve Angas are capable of doing this. They should have such
ability. Bhagwan's intention in giving so much importance to Kundakaulik's
incident was that every devotee should be firm in their religious principles,
and also have knowledge of their principles and the ability to present them
before others, so that other followers who engage in religious discussions with
them cannot influence them. Rather, they should be silenced by their logical and
reasoned analysis. In fact, Bhagwan Mahavira encouraged all devotees to remain
active in the knowledge of truth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 140] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra yaha sunakara kuMDakaulika bolA-deva! jarA eka bAta
btlaao| tumane yaha jo divya Rddhi, dyuti, kAnti, vaibhava prApta kiyA hai, vaha
saba kyA purUSArtha evaM prayatna se prApta kiyA athavA apurUSArtha va aprayatna
se? kyA prayatna evaM purUSArtha kie binA hI yaha saba pAyA hai? deva bolA-
kuMDakaulika ! yaha maiMne binA purUSArtha aura binA prayatna hI pAyA hai| isa
para kuMDakaulika ne kahA-deva! yadi aisA huA hai to batalAo, jo anya prANI
purUSArtha evaM prayatna nahIM karate rahe haiM, ve tumhArI taraha deva kyoM
nahIM hue? yadi tuma kaho ki yaha divya Rddhi evaM vaibhava tumheM purUSArtha
evaM prayatna se milA hai, to phira tuma gozAlaka ke siddhAnta ko, jisameM
purUSArtha va prayatna svIkAra nahIM hai, sundara kaise kaha sakate ho? aura
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke siddhAnta ko, jisameM purUSArtha va prayatna ko svIkAra
hai, asundara kaise batalA sakate ho? tumhArA kathana mithyA hai| kuMDakaulika
kA yuktiyukta evaM tarkapUrNa kathana sunakara deva se kucha uttara dete nahIM
bnaa| vaha sahama gyaa| usane vaha aMgUThI evaM dupaTTA cupacApa
pRthvIzilApaTTaka para rakha kara aura apanA-sA mu~ha lie vApasa lauTa gyaa|
zubha saMyogavaza bhagavAn mahAvIra apane janapada-vihAra ke bIca punaH
kAmpilyapura pdhaare| jyoMhI kuMDakaulika ko jJAta huA, vaha bhagavAn ko vaMdana
karane gyaa| unakA sAnnidhya prApta kiyA, dharmadezanA sunii| bhagavAn mahAvIra
to sarvajJa evaM sarvadarzI the| jo kucha ghaTita huA thA, unheM saba jJAta
thaa| unhoMne kuMDakaulika ko sambodhita kara azokavATikA meM ghaTita sArI
ghaTanA batalAI aura usase pUchA-kyoM? kyA yaha saba ghaTita huA? kuMDakaulika
ne atyanta vinaya aura AdarapUrvaka kahAprabho! Apa saba kucha jAnate haiM  /
jaisA Apane kahA-akSarazaH vaisA hI huaa| kuMDakaulika kI dhArmika AsthA aura
tattvajJatA para bhagavAn prasanna the| unhoMne use vardhApita karate hue kahA-
kuMDakaulika! tuma dhanya ho, tumane bahuta acchA kiyaa| vahA~ upasthita sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ko preraNA dene hetu bhagavAn ne unase kahA-gRhastha meM rahate hue
bhI kuMDakaulika kitanA suyogya tatvavettA hai ! isane anya matAnuyAyI ko yukti
aura nyAya se nirUttara kiyaa| bhagavAn ne yaha AzA vyakta kI ki bAraha aMgoM kA
adhyayana karane vAle sAdhu-sAdhvI to aisA karane meM sakSama haiM hii| unameM
to aisI yogyatA honI hI caahie| kuMDakaulika kI ghaTanA ko itanA mahattva dene
kA bhagavAn kA yaha abhiprAya thA, pratyeka dharmopAsaka apane dharma-siddhAntoM
para dRr3ha to rahe hI, sAtha hI sAtha use apane siddhAntoM kA jJAna bhI ho
tathA unheM auroM ke samakSa upasthita karane kI yogyatA bhI, tAki unake sAtha
dhArmika carcA karane vAle anya matAnuyAyI vyakti unheM prabhAvita na kara sakeM
/  pratyuta unake yuktiyukta evaM tarkapUrNa vizleSaNa para ve nirUttara ho jAeM
/  vAstava meM bhagavAn mahAvIra dvArA sabhI dharmopAsakoM ko tattvajJAna meM
gatimAna rahane

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Study: Kundakaulika] [This was the inspiration of 141. Kundakaulika bowed
and paid homage to the Lord and returned to his place. Lord Mahavira went on a
pilgrimage to other regions. Kundakaulika continued to progress on the path of
spiritual practice. Thus fourteen years passed. In the fifteenth year, he
entrusted his eldest son with the responsibility of the household and family and
devoted himself entirely to spiritual practice. His results became increasingly
pure. He worshipped the eleven images of the Shravaka. Finally, he renounced his
body in a state of meditation after a month of Sanlekhana and a month of
fasting. He was born in the Arunadhwaja Vimana in the form of a deity. ★★

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA adhyayana : kuMDakaulika] [141 kI yaha preraNA thii| kuMDakaulika
bhagavAn ko vaMdana, namana kara vApasa apane sthAna para lauTa aayaa| bhagavAn
mahAvIra anya janapadoM meM vihAra kara ge| kuMDakaulika uttarottara sAdhanA-
patha para agrasara hotA rhaa| yoM caudaha varSa vyatIta ho ge| pandraha veM
varSa usane apane bar3e putra ko gRhastha evaM parivAra kA uttaradAyitva sauMpa
kara apane Apako sarvathA sAdhanA meM lagA diyaa| usake pariNAma uttarottara
pavitra hote ge| usane zrAvaka kI gyAraha pratimAoM kI upAsanA kii| antataH eka
mAsa kI saMlekhanA aura eka mAsa ke anazana dvArA samAdhipUrvaka deha-tyAga
kiyaa| vaha arUNadhvaja vimAna meM devarUpa meM utpanna huA hai|

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Study Kundakaulika Shramanopasak Kundakaulika 165. The sixth discourse.
Thus, Jambū! At that time, in that era, in the city of Kampillapur, there was a
garden called Sahasrambavana. Jitasatru was the king there. In that city,
Kundakaulika, a wealthy merchant, resided. His wife's name was Pūṣā. Six crore
gold coins were in his treasury as secure wealth, six crore gold coins were
engaged in trade and business, six crore gold coins were engaged in the splendor
and wealth of the house, grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, and other resources. He had
six cow-herds. Each cow-herd had ten thousand cows. The Lord Mahavir arrived - a
Samvasarana took place. Like Kamadeva, Kundakaulika also accepted the Shravaka
Dharma. The sequence of events, such as giving pure food, water, etc., to the
Shramanas, and being engaged in Dharma-worship, is the same as the previous
description. Thus, Kundakaulika was engaged in the worship of Dharma. 1. If,
Bhante! The Lord Shraman has expounded this meaning of the fifth study of the
Upasakadasa with his wealth, then, Bhante! What meaning did he explain for the
sixth study? What is the meaning of the study? 2. See Sutra number 64. Arya
Sudharma asked Jambū - If the Siddha-obtained Lord Mahavir has expounded this
meaning of the fifth study of the Upasakadasa, then, Bhante! What meaning did he
explain for the sixth study? (Please tell me.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA adhyayana kuMDakaulika zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika 165. chaTThassa
ukkhevo| evaM khalu jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM kampillapure nayare
sahassaMbavaNe ujaanne| jiyasattU raayaa| kuMDakolie gaahaavii| pUsA
bhaariyaa|ch hiraNNakoDIo nihANa-pauttAo, cha vuDDi-pauttAo, cha pavitthara-
pauttAo, cha vayA, dasa-gosAhassieNaM vennN| sAmI smosddhe| jahA kAmadevo tahA
sAvayadhamma pddivjji| sA ceva vattavvayA jAva paDilAbhemANe vihri| _
upakSepa'-upodghAtapUrvaka chaThe adhyayana kA prArambha yoM hai Arya sudharmA
ne kahAjambU! usa kAla-vartamAna avasarpiNI ke cauthe Are ke anta meM, usa
samaya-jaba bhagavAn mahAvIra sadeha vighamAna the, kAmpilyapura nAmaka nagara
thaa| vahA~ sahasrAmravana nAmaka udyAna thaa| jitazatru vahAM kA rAjA thaa| usa
nagara meM kuMDakaulika nAmaka gAthApati nivAsa karatA thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma
pUSA thaa| chaha karor3a svarNa-mudrAe~ surakSita dhana ke rUpa meM usake
khajAne meM thIM, chaha karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM vyApAra-vyavasAya meM lagI thIM,
chaha karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM ghara ke vaibhava-dhana, dhAnya, dvipada, catuSpada
Adi sAdhana-sAmagrI meM lagI thiiN| usake chaha gokula the| pratyeka gokula meM
dasadasa hajAra gAyeM thiiN| bhagavAn mahAvIra padhAre-samavasaraNa huaa|
kAmadeva kI taraha kuMDakaulika ne bhI zrAvaka dharma svIkAra kiyaa| zramaNa
nirgranthoM ko zuddha AhAra-pAnI Adi dete hue dharmArAdhanA meM nirata rahane
taka kA ghaTanAkrama pUrvavartI varNana jaisA hI hai| yoM kuNDakaulika dharma kI
upAsanA meM nirata thaa| 1. jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA jAva saMpatteNaM
uvAsagadasANaM paMcamassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaTTe paNNatte, chaTThassa NaM bhatte!
ajjhayaNassa ke aTe paNNatte? 2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 64 Arya sudharmA ne jambU
se pUchA-siddhiprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA ke pAMcaveM adhyayana kA
yadi yaha arthabhAva pratipAdita kiyA to bhagavan ! unhoMne chaThe adhyayana kA
kyA artha-bhAva batalAyA? (kRpayA kheN|)

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Kundakaulik  **Discussion**  [143] Kampilya was an ancient city
in India. It is mentioned in the Adi Parva (137.73), Udyoga Parva (189.13,
192.14), and Shanti Parva (139.5) of the Mahabharata. According to the Adi Parva
and Udyoga Parva, it was a city in the Dakshin Panchal region at that time. It
was the capital of King Drupada. Draupadi's Swayamvara took place here.  The
Nayadhammakhao (16th Study) also describes the birth of Draupadi in Kampilya,
the capital of King Drupada of the Panchal country.  Currently, it is located as
a village called Kampil on the banks of the old Ganga between Badayun and
Farrukhabad. It was once a major center of Jainism. The indications found in the
Agamas reveal that it was a very prosperous city during the time of Lord
Mahavira.  **Meditation in Ashoka Vatika**  166. Then, the Shramanopasaka
Kundakaulik went to Ashoka Vatika in the afternoon. He reached the place where
the earth-stone slab was. He removed his ring and shawl, which were marked with
his name. He placed them on the earth-stone slab. After placing them, the
Shraman became absorbed in meditation, following the Dharma-Prajnapti-Dharma-
Shiksha, as taught by Lord Mahavira.  **The Devotee's Advocacy of Determinism**
167. Then, a Dev appeared before the Shramanopasaka Kundakaulik.  168. Then,
that Dev took the ring and shawl, marked with Kundakaulik's name, from the
earth-stone slab. Holding them, he spoke to Kundakaulik, the Shramanopasaka, in
a sweet voice: "O Kundakaulik! Shramanopasaka! The teachings of Gosala, the son
of Mankali, are not based on effort, karma, strength, courage, or human
endeavor. They are based on determinism, which encompasses all beings. The
teachings of Lord Mahavira, however, are based on effort, karma, strength,
courage, and human endeavor. They are not based on determinism, which
encompasses all beings."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA adhyayana : kuMDakaulika ] vivecana [ 143 kAmpilyapura bhAratavarSa kA
eka prAcIna nagara thA  /  mahAbhArata Adiparva (137.73), udyoga - parva
(189.13, 192.14), zAntiparva ( 139.5) meM kAmpilya kA ullekha AyA hai| Adiparva
aura udyogaparva anusAra yaha usa samaya ke dakSiNa pAMcAla pradeza kA eka
nagara thA  /  yaha rAjA drupada kI rAjadhAnI thaa| draupadI kA svayaMvara yahIM
huA thA  /  nAyAdhammakahAo (16 veM adhyayana) meM bhI pAMcAla deza ke rAjA
drupada ke yahAM kAmpilyapura meM draupadI ke janma Adi kA varNana hai  /  isa
samaya yaha badAyUM aura pharrukhAbAda ke bIca bUr3hI gaMgA ke kinAre kampila
nAmaka grAma ke rUpa meM avasthita hai  /  kabhI yaha jaina dharma kA pramukha
kendra rahA thA  /  AgamoM meM prApta saMketoM se prakaTa hotA hai, bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke samaya meM yaha bahuta hI samRddha nagara thA  /  azokavATikA meM
dhyAna - nirata 166. tae NaM se kuMDakolie samaNovAsae annayA kayAi puvvAvaraNha
- kAlasamayaMsi jeNeva asogavaNiyA, jeNeva puDhavi-silA-paTTae, teNeva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA nAmamuddagaM ca uttarijjagaM ca puDhavi-silA - paTTae
Thavei, ThavettA samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM dhammapaNattiM
uvasaMpajjittANaM viharai  /  eka dina zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika dopahara ke
samaya azokavATikA meM gayA  /  usameM jahA~ pRthvI - zilApaTTaka thA, vahAM
phuNcaa| apane nAma se aMkita aMgUThI aura dupaTTA utaaraa| unheM
pRthvIzilApaTTaka para rakhA  /  rakhakara, zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa
aMgIkRta dharma - prajJapti - dharma - zikSA ke anurUpa upAsanA-rata huA  /
deva dvArA niyativAda kA pratipAdana 167. tae NaM tassa kuMDakoliyassa
samaNovAsayassa ege deve aMtiyaM pAubbhavitthA  /  zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika ke
samakSa eka deva prakaTa huaa| 168. tae NaM se deve nAma muddaM ca uttarijjaM ca
puDhavi - silA - paTTayAo geves, geNhittA sakhiMkhiNiM aMtalikkha paDivanne
kuMDakoliyaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI - haM bho ! kuMDakoliyA ! samaNovAsayA !
sundarI NaM devANuppiyA ! gosAlassa maMkhalI - puttassa dhammapaNNattI - natthi
uTThANe i vA, kamme i vA, bale i vA, vIrie i vA, purisakkAra- parakkame ivA,
niyayA savva-bhAvA, maMgulI NaM samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa dhamma- paNNattI
- atthi uTThANe i vA, jAva (kamme i vA, bale i vA, purisakkAra - ) parakkame i
vA, aNiyayA savva-bhAvA  /  usa deva ne kuMDakaulika kI nAmAMkita mudrikA aura
dupaTTA pRthvIzilApaTTaka se uThA liyaa|

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[144] [Upasakadasangasutra] With the jingling of small bells attached to his
clothes, he stood in the sky and said to the Shraman Upasak Kundakaulik,
"Kundakaulik! Devanupriya! The Dharma-Prajnapti-Dharma-Shiksha of Mankhaliputra
Goshalak is beautiful. According to him, there is no place for upward striving,
karma, strength, physical power, viriya (internal power), purushkara (pride in
manhood), parakrama (pride in heroism), enthusiasm, and vigorous undertaking,
all in accordance with the attainment of liberation. All actions that are to be
are predetermined. Liberation, (karma, strength, viriya, heroism) parakrama, all
these have their own existence, all actions are not predetermined - this Dharma-
Prajnapti-Dharma-Prarupana of Bhagwan Mahavira is not beautiful or unseemly."
**Discussion** Mankhaliputra Goshalak is described in detail in the 15th Shatak
of the Bhagavati Sutra. In the Agamottara literature, there are also mentions of
events related to him in the necessary Nirukti, etc. In Buddhist literature, he
is described in the Majjhimanikaya, Anguttaranikaya, Samyuttanikaya, etc. In the
Sumangalavilasi commentary on the Digha Nikaya by Buddhaghosa, there is a
detailed discussion of Goshalak's doctrines. Goshalak was one of the six
prominent teachers of the Avaidik tradition contemporary to Bhagwan Mahavira.
The Bhagavati Sutra mentions that there was a person named Mankhal, belonging to
the Mank (Dacoit) caste. His wife's name was Bhadra. Mankhal was a beggar. For
this reason, he used to carry a picture in his hand. While wandering for alms
with his pregnant wife Bhadra, he once reached a village called Sarvan. As there
was no other place, he stayed in the cowshed of a Brahmin named Gobahul to spend
the Chaturmas. When the gestation period was complete, Bhadra gave birth to a
beautiful and delicate child. Because he was born in Gobahul's cowshed, the
child was named Goshal or Goshalak.  Goshalak grew up gradually, became educated
and qualified. He also started earning his livelihood independently by begging
with a picture in his hand.  Once, Bhagwan Mahavira was spending his Chaturmasik
stay in a part of the weavers' workshop in Nalanda outside Rajgriha. By chance,
Goshalak also reached there. As there was no other place, he spent the Chaturmas
in the same weavers' workshop. While staying there, he was particularly
impressed by Bhagwan's unparalleled, extraordinary personality and the divine
events that took place from time to time. He wanted to be initiated by Bhagwan.
Bhagwan did not agree to initiate him. When he continued his efforts and
persisted, Bhagwan accepted him as a disciple. He stayed with Bhagwan for six
years. He received immense Tejo-leshya from him, then he separated from Bhagwan.
He started calling himself Arhat, Tirthankara, Jin, and Kevali.  Later, an
incident occurred, out of hatred and jealousy, he threw Tejo-leshya on Bhagwan.
Being completely non-violent, Bhagwan tolerated him with equanimity. Tejo-
leshya...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 144] [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra vastroM meM lagI choTI-choTI ghaMTiyoM kI
jhanajhanAhaTa ke sAtha vaha AkAza meM avasthita huA, zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika
se bolA- kuMDakaulika ! devAnupriya ! maMkhaliputra gozAlaka kI dharma -
prajJapti-dharma-zikSA sundara hai| usake anusAra utthAna-sAdhya ke anurUpa
UrdhvagAmI prayatna, karma, bala - daihika zakti, vIrya - Antarika zakti,
puruSakAra pauruSa kA abhimAna, parAkrama - pauruSa ke abhimAna ke anurUpa
utsAha evaM ojapUrNa upakrama - inakA koI sthAna nahIM haiN| sabhI bhAva
honevAle kArya niyata nizcita haiN| utthAna, (karma, bala, vIrya, paurUSa)
parAkrama ina sabakA apanA astitva hai, sabhI bhAva niyata nahIM haiM - bhagavAn
mahAvIra kI yaha dharma-prajJapti - dharma - prarUpaNA asundara yA azobhana hai
/  vivecana maMkhaliputra gozAlaka kA bhagavatIsUtra ke 15 veM zataka meM
vistAra se varNana hai  /  Agamottara sAhitya meM bhI Avazyaka niryukti Adi meM
usase sambaddha ghaTanAoM kA ullekha hai| bauddha sAhitya meM majjhimanikAya,
aMguttaranikAya, sayuttanikAya Adi granthoM meM usakA varNana hai| dIghanikAya
para buddhaghoSa dvArA racita sumaMgalavilAsinI TIkA ke
'sAmaJtraphalasuttavaNNana' meM gozAlaka ke siddhAntoM kI vizada carcA hai|
gozAlaka bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samasAmayika avaidika paramparA ke chaha pramukha
AcAryoM meM thA  /  bhagavatIsUtra meM ullekha hai, maMkha (DAkota) jAtIya
maMkhali nAmaka eka vyakti thA  /  usakI patnI kA nAma bhadrA thaa| maMkhali
bhikSopajIvI thaa| vaha isa nimitta eka citrapaTa hAtha meM lie rahatA thaa|
apanI garbhavatI patnI bhadrA ke sAtha bhikSArtha ghUmatA huA vaha eka bAra
saravaNa nAmaka gAMva meM phuNcaa| vahA~ aura sthAna na milane se vaha cAturmAsa
vyatIta karane ke lie gobahulanAmaka brAhmaNa kI gozAlA meM TikA  /  garbhakAla
pUrA hone para bhadrA ne eka sundara evaM sukumAra zizu ko janma diyaa| gobahula
kI gozAlA meM janma lene ke kAraNa zizu kA nAma gozAla yA gozAlaka rakhA gayA  /
gozAlaka kramaza: bar3A huA, par3ha-likhakara yogya huA  /  vaha bhI svatantra
rUpa se citrapaTa hAtha lie bhikSA dvArA apanI AjIvikA calAne lagA  /  eka bAra
bhagavAn mahAvIra rAjagRha ke bAhara nAlandA ke bunakaroM kI tantuvAyazAlA ke
eka bhAga meM apanA cAturmAsika pravAsa kara rahe the| saMyogavaza gauzAlaka bhI
vahA~ pahu~cA  /  anya sthAna na milane para usane usI tantuvAyazAlA meM
cAturmAsa kiyaa| vahA~ rahate vaha bhagavAn ke anupama atizayazAlI vyaktvi tathA
samaya-samaya para ghaTita divya ghaTanAoM se vizeSa prabhAvita huaa| usane
bhagavAn ke pAsa dIkSita honA caahaa| bhagavAn ne use dIkSA denA svIkAra nahIM
kiyaa| jaba usane Age bhI nirantara apanA prayAsa cAlU rakhA aura pIche hI par3a
gayA, taba bhagavAna ne use ziSya ke rUpa meM svIkAra kara liyaa| vaha chaha
varSa taka bhagavAn ke sAtha rhaa| unase vipula tejolezyA prApta kI, phira vaha
bhagavAn se pRthak ho gyaa| svayaM apane ko arhata, tIrthaMkara, jina aura
kevalI kahane lagA  /  Age calakara eka aisA prasaMga banA, dveSa evaM
jalanavaza usane bhagavAn para tejAlezyA kA prakSepa kiyaa| sarvathA sampUrNa
rUpa meM ahiMsaka hone ke kAraNa bhagavAn samabhAva se use saha ge| tejolezyA

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Kundakaulik  [145] The Lord Mahavira could not be defeated. She
returned and entered the body of Gosala. Gosala, afflicted with bilious fever
and intense burning, died after seven days. This is a very brief summary of the
account in Bhagavati. The incident of Kundakaulik in this context occurred when
Gosala was separate from Lord Mahavira and was wandering the country,
proclaiming himself as Arhat, Jin, and Kevali. Kundakaulik's question:  169.
Then the Shramanopasaka Kundakaulik said to the Deva: "Deva! If the Dharma-
pannatti of Gosala, the son of Mankali, is not based on Uththana (effort, karma,
strength, vigor, heroism, and prowess), but on Niyaya (determinism), all beings
are destined, then the Dharma-pannatti of the Bhagavan Mahavira, the Shraman, is
based on Uththana (effort, karma, strength, vigor, heroism, and prowess), and
all beings are not destined. Deva! How did you obtain, acquire, and become self-
possessed of such divine powers, divine radiance, and divine influence? Did you
obtain them through Uththana (effort, karma, strength, vigor, heroism, and
prowess), or through Anuththana (non-effort, non-karma, non-strength, non-vigor,
non-heroism, or non-prowess)? In other words, did you obtain them without using
karma, strength, etc.?"  The Deva's answer:  170. Then the Deva said to the
Shramanopasaka Kundakaulik: "Devanupriya! I have obtained, acquired, and become
self-possessed of such divine powers, divine radiance, and divine influence
without Uththana (effort, karma, strength, vigor, heroism, and prowess), or
through Anuththana (non-effort, non-karma, non-strength, non-vigor, non-heroism,
or non-prowess)."  Kundakaulik's response:  1. See Sutra number 168. 2. See
Sutra number 169.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA adhyayana : kuMDakaulika] [145 bhagavAn mahAvIra ko parAbhUta nahIM kara
skii| vApasa lauTI, gozAlaka kI deha meM praviSTa ho gii| gozAlaka pittajvara
aura ghora dAha se yukta ho sAta dina bAda mara gyaa| bhagavatI meM Ae varNana
kA yaha atisaMkSipta sArAMza hai| prastuta prasaMga meM AI kuMDakaulika kI
ghaTanA taba kI hai, jaba gozAlaka bhagavAn mahAvIra se pRthak thA tathA apane
ko arhat, jina, kevalI kahatA huA janapada vihAra karatA thaa| kuMDakaulika kA
prazna 169. tae NaM se kuMDakolie samaNovAsae taM devaM evaM vayAsI-jai NaM
devA! sundarI gosAlassa maMkhali-puttassa dhamma-paNNattInatthi uTThANe i vA
jAva (kamme i vA, bale i vA, vIrie i vA, purisakkAra-parakkame i vA), niyayA
savva-bhAvA, maMgulI NaM samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa dhammapaNNattI-asthi
uTThANe i vA jAva' aNiyayA svv-bhaavaa| tume NaM devA! imA eyArUvA divvA
deviDDI, divvA deva-jjuI, divve devANubhAve kiNA laddhe, kiNA patte, kiNA
abhisamaNNAgae? ki uTThANeNaM jAva (kammeNaM, baleNaM, vIrieNaM)
purisakkAraparakkameNaM? udAhu aNuTThANeNa jAva (akammeNa, abaleNaM, avIrieNaM)
apurisakkAraparakkameNaM? taba zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika ne deva se
kahAutthAna, (karma, bala, vIrya, paurUSa evaM parAkrama) kA koI astitva nahIM
hai, sabhI bhAva niyata hai -gozAlaka kI yaha dharma-zikSA yadi uttama hai aura
utthAna Adi kA apanA mahattva hai, sabhI bhAva niyata nahIM haibhagavAn mahAvIra
kI yaha dharmaprarUpaNA anuttama haiacchI nahIM hai, to deva! tumheM jo aisI
divya Rddhi, dyuti tathA prabhAva upalabdha, saMprApta aura svAyatta hai, vaha
saba kyA utthAna, (karma, bala, vIrya), paurUSa aura parAkrama se prApta huA hai
athavA anutthAna, akarma, abala, avIrya, apaurUSa yA aparAkrama se? arthAt karma
bala Adi kA upayoga na karane se ye mile hai? deva kA uttara 170. tae NaM se
deve kuMDakoliyaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-evaM khalu devANuppiyA! mae
imeyArUvA divvA deviDDI 3 aNuTThANeNaM jAva' apurisakkAraparakkameNa laddhA,
pattA, abhismnnnnaagyaa| vaha deva zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika se bolA-
devAnupriya! mujhe yaha divya Rddhi, dyuti evaM prabhAva-yaha saba binA utthAna,
paurUSa evaM parAkrama se hI upalabdha huA hai| kuMDakaulika dvArA pratyuttara
1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 168 /  2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 169  /

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[146] The Shramanopasaka Kundakolika said to the Deva, "Deva! If you have
obtained these divine powers without effort, striving, or exertion, then why are
those beings who have no effort, striving, or exertion not Devas? Deva! If you
have obtained these divine powers through effort, striving, and exertion, then
your statement that "the teachings of Gosala Mankhaliputta are not beautiful
because they do not accept effort, striving, and exertion, while the teachings
of the Bhagavan Mahavira are beautiful because they accept effort, striving, and
exertion, and all things are determined by them" is false."  [172] When the Deva
heard this from the Shramanopasaka Kundakolika, he became filled with doubt,
(desire and uncertainty), and was overcome with shame. He could not answer
Kundakolika. He placed the named ring and scarf back on the stone slab and
returned in the direction from which he had come.  [173] At that time, the
Bhagavan Mahavira arrived in Kampilya.  [174] The Shramanopasaka Kundakolika,
having been praised in this way, became firm and resolute, like Kamadeva, and
went forth to live in the forest.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 146] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra 171. tae NaM se kuMDakolie samaNovAsae taM devaM evaM
vayAsI-jai NaM devA! tume imA eyArUvA divvA deviDDI 3 aNuTThANeNaM jAva'
apurisakkAra-parakkameNaM laddhA, pattA, abhisamaNNAgayA, jesiM NaM jIvANaM
natthi uTThANe i vA, parakkame i vA, te kiM na devA? aha NaM devA! tume imA
eyArUvA divvA deviDDI 3 uTThANeNaM jAva parakkameNaM laddhA, pattA,
abhisamaNNAgayA, to jaM vadasi-sundarI NaM gosAlassa maMkhali-puttassa
dhammapaNNattI-natthi uTThANe i vA, jAva niyayA savvabhAvA, maMgulI NaM
samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa dhammapaNNattI-atthi uTThANe i vA, jAva aNiyayA
savvabhAvA, taM te micchaa|| _taba zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika ne usa deva se
kahA-deva! yadi tumheM yaha divya Rddhi prayatna, purUSArtha, parAkrama Adi kie
binA hI prApta ho gaI, to jina jIvoM meM utthAna, parAkrama Adi nahIM hai, ve
deva kyoM nahIM hue? deva! tumane yadi divya Rddhi, utthAna, parAkrama Adi dvArA
prApta kI hai to "utthAna Adi kA jisameM svIkAra hai, sabhI bhAva niyata nahIM
hai, bhagavAn mahAvIra kI yaha zikSA asundara hai" tumhArA yaha kathana asatya
hai| deva kI parAjaya 172. tae NaM se deve kuMDakolieNaM samaNovAsaeNaM evaM
vutte samANe saMkie, jAva (kaMkhie, viigicchA-samAvanne,) kalusa-samAvanne no
saMcAei kuMDakoliyassa samaNovAsayassa kiMci pAmokkhamAikkhittae; nAma-muddayaM
ca uttarijayaM ca puDhavi-silApaTTae Thavei, ThavettA jAmeva disiM pAubbhUe,
tAmeva disiM pddige| zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika dvArA yoM kahe jAne para vaha
deva zaMkA, (kAMkSA va saMzaya) yukta tathA kAluSyayukta-glAniyukta yA
hataprabha ho gayA, kucha uttara nahIM de skaa| usane kuMDakaulika kI nAmAMkita
aMgUThI aura dupaTTA vApasa pRthvIzilApaTTaka para rakha diyA tathA jisa dizA se
AyA thA, vaha usI dizA kI ora lauTa gyaa| bhagavAn dvArA kuMDakaulika kI
prazaMsA : zramaNa-nirgranthoM ko preraNA 173. teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM sAmI
smosddhe| usa kAla aura usa samaya bhagavAn mahAvIra kA kAmpilyapura meM
padArpaNa huaa| 174. tae NaM kuDakolie samaNovAsae imIse kahAe laddhaDhe haTTha
jahA kAmadevo tahA niggacchai jAva' pjjuvaasi| dhmmkhaa| 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA
169  /  2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 169  /  3. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 169  /  4.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 168 /  5. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 114  /

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Kundakaulik  [147] When the Shramanopasaka Kundakaulik heard all
this, he was extremely delighted and went to see the Bhagavan like Kamadeva,
worshipped the Bhagavan, and listened to the Dharma-Deshana.  [175]
'Kundakoliya!' The Bhagavan Mahavira said to the Shramanopasaka Kundakoliya,
'Kundakoliya! Indeed, Kundakoliya! In the past, during the time of the previous
Kalpa, a Deva appeared before you in the Ashoka Vatika. He took your named ring
and shawl and went up into the sky. Then the Bhagavan explained what happened
next. (When that Deva could not give you any answer, he returned your named ring
and shawl and went back in the same direction from which he had come.)
Kundakoliya! Is this correct?' Kundakoliya said, 'Bhagavan! It happened exactly
like that.' Then the Bhagavan said to him, just as he had said to Kamadeva,
'Kundakoliya! You are blessed.'  The Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira addressed the
assembled Shramans and Shramanis, saying, 'Aryas! If householders who live in
the world also refute other followers with meaning, reason, questions, logic,
and answers, then Aryas! Shramans who are Nirgrantha, who study the twelve-fold
Ganipitaka - the twelve limbs of conduct, etc. - are certainly capable of
refuting other followers with meaning, (reason, questions, logic, and analysis).
[176] Then the Shramans and Shramanis, with humility, accepted this statement of
the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, saying, 'It is so, Bhagavan!'  [177] Then the
Shramanopasaka Kundakoliya bowed and prostrated before the Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavira. After bowing and prostrating, he asked questions, and after asking
questions, he attained enlightenment. After attaining enlightenment, he went in
the same direction from which he had come.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA adhyayana : kuMDakaulika] [147 zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika ne jaba yaha
saba sunA to vaha atyanta prasanna huA aura bhagavAn ke darzana ke lie kAmadeva
kI taraha gayA, bhagavAn kI paryupAsanA kI, dharma-dezanA sunii| 175.
'kuMDakoliyA!' i samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre kuMDakoliyaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI
se nUNaM kuMDakoliyA! kallaM tubbhaM puvvAvaraNha-kAla-samayaMsi asoga-vaNiyAe
ege deve aMtiyaM paaubbhvitthaa| tae NaM se deve nAma-mudaM ca taheva jAva (no
saMcAei tubbhe kiMci pAmokkhamAikkhittae, nAmamuddagaM ca uttarijagaM ca
puDhavisilApaTTae Thavei, ThavettA jAmeva disaM pAubbhUe, tAmeva( disaM) pddige|
se nUNaM kuMDakoliyA! aDhe samaThe? hantA atthi| taM dhannesi NaM tuma
kuMDakoliyA! jahA kaamdevo| ajo! i samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre samaNe niggaMthe ya
niggaMthIo ya AmaMtittA evaM vayAsI-jai tAva, ajo! gihiNo gihimajjhAvasaMtA NaM
anna-utthie advehi ya heUhi ya pasiNehi ya kAraNehi ya vAgaraNehi ya nippaTTha
-pasiNavAgaraNe kareMti, sakkA puNAI, ajjo! samaNehiM niggaMthehiM duvAlasaMgaM
gaNi-piDagaM ahijamANehiM anna-utthiyA advehi ya jAva (heUhi ya pasiNehi ya
kAraNehi ya vAgaraNehi ya) nippaTTha-pasiNavAraNA kritte| - bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika se kahA-kuMDakaulika ! kala dopahara ke samaya
azokavATikA meM eka deva tumhAre samakSa prakaTa huaa| vaha tumhArI nAmAMkita
aMgUThI aura dupaTTA lekaraAkAza meM calA gyaa| Age jaisA ghaTita huA thA,
bhagavAn ne btlaayaa| (jaba vaha deva tumako kucha uttara nahIM de sakA to
tumhArI nAmAMkita aMgUThI aura dupaTTA vApasa rakha kara jisa dizA se AyA thA,
usI dizA kI ora lauTa gyaa|) kuMDakaulika! kyA yaha ThIka hai? kuMDakaulika ne
kahA-bhagavan ! aisA hI huaa| taba bhagavan ne jaisA kAmadeva se kahA thA, usI
prakAra usase kahA-kuMDakaulika ! tuma dhanya ho| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
upasthita zramaNoM aura zramaNiyoM ko sambodhita kara kahA-AryoM ! yadi ghara
meM rahane vAle gRhastha bhI anya matAnuyAyiyoM ko artha, hetu, prazna, yukti
tathA uttara dvArA nirUttara kara dete haiM to Aryo! dvAdazAMgarUpa gaNipiTaka
kA-AcAra Adi bAraha aMgoM kA adhyayana karane vAle zramaNa nirgrantha to anya
matAnuyAyiyoM ko artha, (hetu, prazna, yukti tathA vizleSaNa) dvArA nirUttara
karane meM samartha haiM hii| 176. tae NaM samaNA niggaMthA ya niggaMthIo ya
samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa 'taha' tti eyamaDhaM viNaeNaM pddisunneti|
zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra kA yaha kathana una sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ne 'aisA hI hai
bhagavAna !'-yoM kaha kara vinayapUrvaka svIkAra kiyaa| 177. tae NaM se
kuMDakolie samaNovAsae samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA
namaMsittA pasiNAI pucchai, pucchittA aTThamAdiyai, aTThamAdittA jAmeva disiM
pAubbhUe

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[148] The Shramanopasaka Kundakaulika bowed and paid homage to the Shraman
Bhagavan, asked questions, received answers, and returned in the same direction
from which he had come. [178] The Bhagavan Mahavira went to other Janapadas.
Peaceful death. [179] Then, for fourteen years, the Shramanopasaka Kundakaulika,
who was very devoted to the vows, lived in seclusion. When the fifteenth year
was half over, one night at midnight, a thought arose in his mind, just as it
had arisen in the mind of Kamadeva. In the same way, he appointed his eldest son
in his place and, in accordance with the Dharma-Prajnapti, he went to the
Poshadshala to live in devotion near Bhagavan Mahavira. He worshipped eleven
Upasaka-Pratimas. The rest of the story is also like that of Kamadeva. In the
end, he gave up his body and was born in the Arunadhwaja Vimana in the form of a
deva. (Bhagavan! Where will Kundakaulika go from that Devaloka when his
lifespan, existence, and position are exhausted? Where will he be born? Gautama!
He will become a Siddha, Buddha, and Mukta in the Mahavideha region. He will end
(all suffering). ||Nikkhevo|| ||The sixth chapter of the seventh Anga, Upasaka-
Dasha, is complete|| 1. See Sutra-number 122. 2. See Sutra-number 149. 3. See
Sutra-number 92. 4. And thus, Jambu! This is the meaning of the sixth chapter of
the Upasaka-Dasha, as explained by the Shraman, which I have told you.
Conclusion-Arya Sudharma said-Jambu! This is the meaning of the sixth chapter of
the Upasaka-Dasha, as explained by the Siddha-obtained Bhagavan Mahavira, which
I have told you.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 148] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra tAmeva disiM pddige| zramaNopAsaka kuMDakaulika ne
zramaNa bhagavAn ko vaMdana-namaskAra kiyA, prazna pUche, samAdhAna prApta kiyA
tathA jisa dizA se vaha AyA thA, usI dizA kI ora lauTa gyaa| 178. sAmI bahiyA
jaNavaya-vihAraM vihri| bhagavAn mahAvIra anya janapadoM meM vihAra kara ge|
zAntimaya dehAvasAna 179. tae NaM tassa kuMDakoliyassa samaNovAsayassa bahUhiM
sIla jAva bhAvemANassa coisa saMvaccharAiM vikkNtaaii| paNNarasamasya
saMvaccharassa aMtarA vaTTamANassa anayA kayAi jahA kAmadevo tahA jeTThaputtaM
ThavettA tahA posahasAlAe jAva' dhammapaNNatiM uvasaMpajjittANaM vihri| evaM
ekkArasa uvAsaga-paDimAo taheva jAva' sohamme kappe arUNajjhae vimANe jAva (se
NaM bhaMte! kuMDakolie tAo devalogAo AukkhaeNaM bhavakkhaeNaM, ThiikkhaeNaM
aNaMtaraM cayaM caittA kahiM gamihii? kahiM uvavajihii? goyamA! mahAvidehe vAse
sijjhihii, (muccihii, savvadukkhANa) aMtaM kaahii| nikkhevo  //  sattamassa
aMgassa uvAsagadasANaM chaTheM ajjhayaNaM samattaM  //  tadantara zramaNopAsaka
kuMDakaulika ko vratoM kI upAsanA dvArA Atma-bhAvita hote hue caudaha varSa
vyatIta ho ge| jaba pandrahavAM varSa AdhA vyatIta ho cukA thA, eka dina AdhI
rAta ke samaya usake mana meM vicAra AyA, jaisA kAmadeva ke mana meM AyA thaa|
usI kI taraha bar3e putra ko apane sthAna para niyukta kara vaha bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke pAsa aMgIkRta dharma-prajJapti ke anurUpa poSadhazAlA meM
upAsanArata rahane lgaa| usane gyAraha upAsaka-pratimAoM kI ArAdhanA kii| Age kA
vattAnta bhI kAmadeva jaisA hI hai| anta meM deha-tyAga kara vaha arUNadhvaja
vimAna meM devarUpa meM utpanna huA (bhagavan ! kuMDakaulika usa devaloka se
Ayu, bhava evaM sthiti kA kSaya hone para deva-zarIra kA tyAga kara kahA~
jAyagA? kahA~ utpanna hogA? gautama! vaha mahAvideha kSetra meM siddha, buddha
evaM mukta hogA, vaha duHkhoM kA) anta kregaa| ||nikssep  //   //  sAtaveM aMga
upAsakadazA kA chaThA adhyAya samApta  //  1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 122  /  2.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 149  /  3. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 92 /  4. evaM khalu jambU !
samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM chaTThassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaThe paNNatte tti bemi|
nigamana-Arya sudharmA bole-jambU ! siddhiprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
upAsakadazA ke chaThe adhyayana kA yahI artha bhAva kahA thA, jo maiMne tumheM
batalAyA hai|

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Study Summary  The time of Lord Mahavira was filled with various
religious beliefs, diverse sects, and numerous rituals. In North India, there
were many teachers of non-Vedic ideologies who traveled around spreading their
doctrines. Many of them claimed to be Arhat, Jina, Kevali, or Sarvagna. The
Suttanipata Sabhiyasutta mentions 63 such sects. The second Anga of the Jain
scriptures, the Sutra Kritanga Agama, describes four categories of contemporary
thinkers of Lord Mahavira: Kiyaavadi, Akriyaavadi, Vinayaavadi, and Agnanaavadi.
It is said that they discussed their Samvasarana-siddhant or doctrine in
different ways. The Sutra Kritanga Vritti mentions 363 religious beliefs. These
various thinkers were mostly divided into these four doctrines.  Buddhist
literature mainly mentions six Shraman sects, whose leaders or heads are
mentioned as follows:  Their doctrinal beliefs are described as Akriyaavaad,
Niyativaad, Ucchedavaad, Anyonyavaad, Chaturyamasanvaravaad, and Vikshepavaad.
Buddhist literature uses the term 'Niganthanatputta' for Lord Mahavira.
Mankhaliputra Goshalak is described in detail in both Jain and Buddhist
literature as a Niyativadi. The fifth Anga, Vyākhyāprajñapti Sutra, describes
Goshalak in detail in the 15th century.  Goshalak had some knowledge of Ashtaang
Nimitta. He could give correct answers to people about profit, loss, happiness,
sorrow, life, and death. Therefore, whoever came to him, he would tell them such
things. People wanted miracles.  Thus, he had thousands of followers who were
impressed by him. Sakdalaputra, a potter from Polaspur, was one of Goshalak's
prominent followers.  Sakdalaputra was a wealthy and prosperous householder. He
had one crore gold coins in his treasury as secure wealth, one crore gold coins
invested in business, and one crore gold coins invested in his home's splendor
and equipment. He had a herd of ten thousand cows.  1.  "Chattari samosaranani
mani, paavadu ya jaim puḍho vayanti. Kiriyam akiriyam viniyam ti taiyam
annaanamaahansu chautthameva."     Sutra Kritanga 1.12.1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana sAra-saMkSepa bhagavAn mahAvIra kA samaya vibhinna dhArmika
matavAdoM vividha sampradAyoM tathA bahuvidha karmakAMDoM se saMkula thaa|
uttara bhArata meM usa samaya avaidika vicAradhArA ke aneka AcArya the, jo apane
siddhAntoM kA pracAra karate hue ghUmate the| unameM se aneka apane Apako arhat,
jina, kevalI yA sarvajJa kahate the| suttanipAta sabhiyasutta meM vaise 63
sampradAya hone kA ullekha hai  /  jainoM ke dUsare aMga sUtrakRtAMga Agama meM
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samasAmayika saiddhAntikoM ke cAra varga batalAe haiM
kiyAvAdI, akriyAvAdI, vinayavAdI tathA ajnyaanvaadii| kahA gayA hai ki ve apane
samavasaraNa-siddhAnta yA vAda kA bhinna-bhinna prakAra se vivecana karate the|
sutrakRtAMgavRtti meM 363 dhArmika matavAdoM ke hone kA ullekha hai  /  arthAt
ye vibhinna matavAdI prAyaH ina cAra vAdoM meM baMTe hue the| bauddha vAGmaya
meM mukhya rUpa se chaha zramaNa sampradAyoM kA ullekha hai, jinake nimnAMkita
AcArya yA saMcAlaka batAe gae haiM _inake saiddhAntika vAda kramazaH akriyAvAda,
niyativAda, ucchedavAda, anyonyavAda, cAturyAmasaMvaravAda tathA vikSepavAda
batalAe gae haiM  /  bauddha sAhitya meM bhagavAn mahAvIra ke lie
'nigaMThanAtaputta' kA prayoga huA hai| maMkhaliputra gozAlaka kA jaina aura
bauddha donoM sAhityoM meM niyativAdI ke rUpa meM vistAra se varNana huA hai|
pAMcaveM aMga vyAkhyAprajJapti sUtra meM 15ve zataka meM gozAlaka kA vistAra se
varNana hai  /  gozAlaka ko aSTAMga nimitta kA kucha jJAna thaa| usake dvArA
vaha logoM ko lAbha, alAbha, sukha, duHkha, jIvana evaM maraNa ke viSaya meM
sahI uttara de sakatA thaa| ata: jo bhI usake pAsa Ate, vaha unheM usa prakAra
kI bAteM btaataa| logoM ko to camatkAra caahie| yoM prabhAvita ho usake
sahastroM anuyAyI ho gae the| polAsapura se sakaDAlaputra nAmaka eka kuMbhakAra
gozAlaka ke pramukha anuyAyiyoM meM thaa| sakaDAlaputra eka samRddha evaM
sampanna gRhastha thaa| usakI eka karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM surakSita dhana ke rUpa
meM khajAne meM rakhI thI, eka karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM vyApAra meM lagI thIM, eka
karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM ghara ke vaibhava evaM upakaraNoM meM lagI thiiN| usake
dasa hajAra gAyoM kA eka gokula thaa| 1. cattAri samosaraNANimANi, pAvAduyA jAiM
puDho vyNti| kiriyaM akiriyaM viNiyaM ti taiyaM annANamAhaMsu cutthmev||
sUtrakRtAMga 1.12.1

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Story of Sakdalputra  Sakdalputra's primary occupation was making and
selling earthenware. He had five hundred workshops outside the city of Polaspur,
where many paid workers toiled. Every morning, they would arrive and begin
crafting various sizes and types of pots. The sale of these pots was handled
through a separate system. Sakdalputra employed many individuals who would sell
the pots in the city's marketplaces, crossroads, fields, and public spaces.
Sakdalputra's wife was named Agnimitra. She was skilled in household duties and
a partner in her husband's joys and sorrows.  Sakdalputra was deeply devoted to
his religious principles and dedicated time to worship. [It was an era where
individuals lived according to their beliefs, and faith was not merely a matter
of words.]  One day, Sakdalputra went to his Ashoka garden in the afternoon and
engaged in religious devotion according to his beliefs. Shortly after, a
celestial being appeared. The celestial being, residing in the sky, addressed
Sakdalputra, saying, "Tomorrow morning, the Mahamahan, the holder of unhindered
knowledge and vision, the revered one of the three worlds, the Arhat, the Jina,
the Kevali, the omniscient, the all-seeing, will arrive here. You should offer
him your homage and worship, and invite him for a place, a mat, a cushion, etc."
The celestial being departed. Sakdalputra thought, "The celestial being has
given me excellent news. My religious teacher, Mankhaliputra Goshalak, will
arrive here tomorrow. He is the Jina, the Arhat, and the Kevali, so I will
definitely offer him my homage and worship. I will invite him for things he
might need."  The next morning, Lord Mahavira arrived. He stayed in the
Sahasramravan garden. Many devotees went to see him. Sakdalputra, thinking that
his teacher Goshalak had arrived, also went to see him.  Lord Mahavira delivered
his sermon. Sakdalputra, along with others, listened. Lord Mahavira knew that
Sakdalputra was easily enlightened. He should be inspired by the true Dharma.
Therefore, he addressed him, saying, "Yesterday afternoon, the celestial being
who informed you about the arrival in the Ashoka garden was not referring to
Goshalak." Sakdalputra was impressed by Lord Mahavira's direct knowledge and his
mind was filled with joy. He stood up, offered proper homage to Lord Mahavira,
and requested him to visit his workshops and accept the necessary materials.
Lord Mahavira accepted his request and went there.  Sakdalputra was impressed by
Lord Mahavira's personality and his extrasensory knowledge, but Lord Mahavira
knew that his theoretical faith lay with Mankhaliputra Goshalak. Lord Mahavira
wanted to guide him at the right moment. One day, Sakdalputra was having the
pots kept inside his workshop for ventilation, brought out to be placed in the
sun. Lord Mahavira saw this as an opportunity...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra sakaDAlaputra kA pramukha vyavasAya miTTI ke bartana
taiyAra karAnA aura becanA thA  /  polAsapura nagara ke bAhara usakI pAMca sau
karmazAlAeM thIM, jahAM aneka vaitanika karmacArI kAma karate the  /  prAtaH
kAla hote hI ve vahAM A jAte aura aneka prakAra ke choTe-bar3e bartana banAne
meM laga jaate| bartanoM kI bikrI kI dUsarI vyavasthA thii| sakaDAlaputra ne
aneka aise vyakti vetana para niyukta kara rakhe the, jo nagara ke rAjamArgoM,
caurAhoM, maidAnoM tathA sArvajanika sthAnoM meM bartanoM kI bikrI karate the  /
150 ] sakaDAlaputra kI patnI kA nAma agnimitrA thA  /  vaha gRhakArya meM
suyogya tathA apane pati ke sukhaduHkha meM sahabhAgina thI  /  sakaDAlaputra
apane dhArmika siddhAntoM ke prati atyanta niSThAvAn thA, tadanusAra
dharmopAsanA meM bhI apanA samaya lagAtA thA  /  [ vaha yuga hI kucha aisA thA,
jo vyakti jina vicAroM meM AsthA rakhatA, tadanusAra jIvana meM sAdhanA bhI
karatA  /  AsthA kevala kahane kI nahIM hotI  / ] eka dina kI ghaTanA hai,
sakaDAlaputra dopahara ke samaya apanI azokavATikA meM gayA aura vahAM apanI
mAnyatA ke anusAra dharmArAdhanA meM nirata ho gyaa| thor3I hI dera bAda eka
deva vahAM prakaTa huaa| sakaDAlaputra ke sAmane antarikSa- sthita deva ne use
sambodhita kara kahA- kala prAtaH yahAM mahAmAhana, apratihata jJAna-darzana ke
dhAraka, trailokyapUjita, arhat, jina, kevalI, sarvajJa, sarvadarzI aaeNge| tuma
unakI vaMdanA-paryupAsanA karanA aura unheM sthAna, pATa, bAjoTa Adi hetu
Amantrita karanA  /  deva yoM kahakara calA gyaa| sakaDAlaputra ne socA- deva ne
bar3I acchI sUcanA kI  /  mere dharmAcArya maMkhaliputra gozAlaka kala yahAM
aaeNge| ve hI to jina, arhat aura kevalI haiM, isalie maiM avazya hI unakI
vandanA evaM paryupAsanA karUMgA  /  unake upayoga kI vastuoM hetu unheM
Amantrita karUMgA  /  dUsare dina prAta:kAla bhagavAn mahAvIra vahAM pdhaare|
sahastrAmravana udyAna meM Tike  /  aneka zraddhAlu jana unake darzana hetu ge|
sakaDAlaputra bhI yaha soca kara ki usake AcArya gozAlaka padhAre haiM, darzana
hetu gyaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra kA dharmopadeza huA  /  anya logoM ke sAtha
sakaDAlaputra ne bhI sunA  /  bhagavAn jAnate the ki sakaDAlaputra sulabhavodhi
hai  /  use saddharma kI preraNA denI cAhie  /  ataH unhoMne use sambodhita kara
kahA kala dopahara meM azokavATikA meM deva ne tumheM jisake Agamana kI sUcanA
kI thI, vahAM deva kA abhiprAya gozAlaka se nahIM thA  /  sakaDAlaputra bhagavAn
ke aparokSa jJAna se prabhAvita huA aura mana prasanna huaa| vaha uThA, bhagavAn
ko vidhivat vandana kiyA aura apanI karmazAlAoM meM padhArane tathA apekSita
sAmagrI grahaNa kI prArthanA kii| bhagavAn ne usakI prArthanA svIkAra kI aura
vahAM padhAre  /  sakaDAlaputra bhagavAn mahAvIra ke vyaktitva aura unake
atIndriya jJAna prabhAvita to thA, para usakI saiddhAntika AsthA maMkhaliputra
gozAlAka meM thI, yaha bhagavAn jAnate the  /  bhagavAn anukUla avasara dekha
use saddbodha denA cAhate the  /  eka dina kI bAta hai, sakaDAlaputra apanI
karmazAlA ke bhItara havA lagane hetu rakhe hue bartanoM ko dhUpa meM dene ke
lie bAhara rakhavA rahA thA  /  bhagavAn ko yaha avasara

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Study: Summary: In Brief  [151] It seemed agreeable. They asked him,
"How were these pots made?" Sakdalputra said, "O Bhagavan! First, the clay was
collected, soaked, mixed with ash and cow dung, kneaded, and all was combined.
Then it was placed on the potter's wheel and different types of pots were made."
Bhagavan Mahavira said, "Sakdalputra! Tell me one thing. Were these pots made by
effort, human endeavor, and exertion, or by non-effort, non-human endeavor, and
non-exertion?"  Sakdalputra said, "O Bhagavan! By non-effort, non-human
endeavor, and non-exertion. Because effort, human endeavor, and exertion have no
significance. Whatever happens is predetermined."  Bhagavan Mahavira said,
"Sakdalputra! Imagine someone steals your dry, wind-blown pots, scatters them,
breaks them, or commits violence against your wife Agni Mitra. What punishment
would you give him?"  Sakdalputra said, "O Bhagavan! I would scold him, beat him
severely, and what's more, I would kill him."  Bhagavan Mahavira said,
"Sakdalputra! Why so? You do not believe in effort and human endeavor. You
consider all actions as predetermined. Then what is the role of the person who
does such a thing? It is predetermined. How can you consider him guilty? If you
say that he does it intentionally, then your principle of not believing in
effort and human endeavor, and considering everything as predetermined, is
wrong, false."  Sakdalputra was an intelligent and wise man. From this short
conversation, the true essence was understood by him. He attained enlightenment.
His head bowed in reverence at the feet of Bhagavan Mahavira. As the wise men of
that time did, he accepted the twelve types of Shravak Dharma from Bhagavan
Mahavira. Inspired by him, his wife Agni Mitra also did the same. Thus, the
husband and wife attained Sadbhav and started utilizing their time in religious
devotion along with their household life.  Sakdalputra was the chief Shravak of
Mankhaliputra Goshalak. When Goshalak heard this, he did not like it due to
sectarian attachment. He thought to himself, "I should convince Sakdalputra
again and bring him back to my path." For this purpose, he came to Polaspur. He
stayed at the Ajivika's shelter. He kept his utensils, equipment, etc., there
and went to Sakdalputra's place with some of his disciples. Sakdalputra had
already attained the true essence and the true Guru, so he did not show the same
reverence, respect, and honor that he used to show when Goshalak came. He sat
silently. Goshalak was very cunning, he understood immediately. He devised a
strategy. To please Sakdalputra, he praised Bhagavan Mahavira profusely.
Sakdalputra could not understand this cunning behavior of Goshalak. Goshalak's
intention was that if I get another opportunity to have a religious conversation
with Sakdalputra, I will change his mind. Sakdalputra, towards Bhagavan
Mahavira...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sAra : saMkSepa ] [151 anukUla pratIta huaa| unhoMne usase
pUchA-ye bartana kaise bane? sakaDAlaputra bolAbhagavan ! pahale miTTI ekatra
kI, use bhigoyA, usameM rAkha tathA gobara milAyA, gUMdhA, sabako eka kiyA,
phira use cAka para car3hAyA aura bhinna-bhinna prakAra ke bartana bnaae|
bhagavAn mahAvIra-sakaDAlaputra ! eka bAta btaao| tumhAre ye bartana prayatna,
purUSArtha tathA udyama se bane hai yA aprayatna, apUrUSArtha aura anudyama se?
sakaDAlaputra-bhagavan ! aprayatna, apurUSArtha aura anudyama se| kyoMki
prayatna, purUSArtha aura udyama kA koI mahattva nahIM hai  /  jo kucha hotA
hai, saba nizcita hai| bhagavAn mahAvIrasakaDAlaputra! jarA kalpanA karoM koI
purUSa tumhAre havA lage, sUkhe bartanoM ko curA le, unheM bikhera deM, tor3a de
yA tumhArI patnI agnimitrA ke sAtha balAtkAra kare, to tuma use kyA daNDa doge!
sakaDAlaputra-bhagavan ! maiM usako phaTakArUMgA, burI taraha pITUMgA, adhika
kyA, jAna se mAra ddaaluuNgaa| _ bhagavAn mahAvIra-sakaDAlaputra ! aisA kyoM?
tuma to prayatna aura purUSArtha ko nahIM maante| saba bhAvoM ko niyata mAnate
ho| taba phira jo purUSa vaisA karatA hai, usameM usakA kyA kartRtva hai? vaisA
to pahale se hI niyata hai  /  use doSI bhI kaise mAnoge? yadi tuma kaho ki vaha
to prayatnapUrvaka vaisA karatA hai, to prayatna aura purUSArtha ko na mAnane
kA, saba kucha niyata mAnane kA tumhArA siddhAnta galata hai , asatya hai|
sakaDAlaputra eka medhAvI aura samajhadAra purUSa thaa| isa thor3I sI bAtacIta
se yathArtha tattva usakI samajha meM A gyaa| usane saMbodhi prApta kara lii|
usakA mastaka zraddhA se bhagavAn mahAvIra ke caraNoM meM jhuka gyaa| jaisA usa
samaya ke vivekI purUSa karate the, usane bhagavAn mahAvIra se bAraha prakAra kA
zrAvakadharma svIkAra kiyaa| usakI preraNA se usakI patnI agnimitrA ne bhI vaisA
hI kiyaa| yoM patipani saddharbha ko prApta hue tathA apane gRhastha jIvana ke
sAtha-sAtha dhArmika ArAdhanA meM bhI apane samaya kA sadupayoga karane lge|
sakaDAlaputra maMkhaliputra gozAlaka kA pramukha zrAvaka thaa| jaba gozAlaka ne
yaha sunA to sAmpradAyika mohavaza use yaha acchA nahIM lgaa| usane mana hI mana
socA, mujhe sakaDAlaputra ko punaH samajhAnA cAhie aura apane mata meM vApasa
lAnA caahie| isa hetu vaha polAsapura meM aayaa| AjIvikoM ke upAzraya meM rukaa|
apane pAtra, upakaraNa Adi vahAM rakhe tathA apane kucha ziSyoM ke sAtha
sakaDAlaputra ke yahAM phuNcaa| sakaDAlaputra to sat tattva aura sadgurU prApta
kara cukA thA, isalie gozAlaka ke Ane para pahale vaha jo zraddhA, Adara evaM
sammAna dikhAtA thA, usane vaisA nahIM kiyA, cupacApa baiThA rhaa| gozAlaka
khUba cAlAka thA, jhaTa samajha gyaa| usane yukti nikaalii| sakaDAlaputra ko
prasanna karane ke lie usane bhagavAn mahAvIra kI khUba guNa-stavanA kii|
gozAlaka ke isa kaTanItika vyavahAra ko vaha samajha nahIM skaa| gozAlaka kI
maMzA yaha thI ki kisI prakAra punaH mujhe sakaDAlaputra ke sAtha dhArmika
bAtacIta kA avasara mila jAya to maiM isakI mati bdluuN| sakaDAlaputra ne
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke prati

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[152] [Upasakadasangasutra] Due to the respect shown by Goshalak, he politely
requested, "Please stay in my workshop, take the necessary items." Goshalak only
wanted this. He readily agreed and went there. During his stay there, he had
many opportunities to engage in philosophical discussions with Sakdalputra. He
tried very hard to change Sakdalputra, but he was completely unsuccessful.
Sakdalputra had already attained the true principles with great wisdom and
understanding, how could he be swayed? Disheartened, Goshalak left from there.
Sakdalputra continued to engage in religious devotion along with fulfilling his
worldly responsibilities as before. Thus, fourteen years passed. The fifteenth
year was half over. One night, in the middle of the night, Sakdalputra was
engaged in his religious worship. A false deity came to him to make him break
his vow, threatening to kill his sons if he did not give up his vow. Sakdalputra
remained steadfast, then he killed his three sons one after the other in front
of him, cutting each into nine pieces of flesh, boiled them in a cauldron filled
with boiling water, and splattered their flesh and blood on his body. But
Sakdalputra endured it all with self-strength and patience, his faith did not
waver. Still, the deity was not discouraged. He thought that Agni Mitra was of
great importance in Sakdalputra's life, she was not only a devoted wife, but
also a companion in happiness and sorrow, and most importantly, she was the sole
helper of his religious life. Thinking this, he threatened to kill Sakdalputra's
wife Agni Mitra in front of him and inflict the same fate on her. Sakdalputra,
who remained unmoved even after seeing the murder of his three sons before his
own eyes, was disturbed by this threat. Anger arose in him and he thought, I
must catch this wicked one. He immediately got up to catch him, but who can
catch whom in a divine conspiracy? The deity disappeared. The pillar in front of
Sakdalputra's hands came. Seeing all these unnatural events, Sakdalputra was
frightened and made a loud noise. When Agni Mitra heard this, she immediately
came there, listened to her husband's entire story and said, "You have lost in
the final test. That false-sighted deity has finally succeeded in breaking your
vow. Do penance for this mistake." Sakdalputra did the same. Sakdalputra's final
life was also very prosperous. He attained samadhi-death with a month-long final
sanlekhana and fasting. After giving up his body, he became a four-pal-
upamasthitika deva in the Arunabhoot Vimana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra gozAlaka dvArA dikhAe gae Adara-bhAva ke kAraNa
ziSTatAvaza anurodha kiyA-Apa merI karmazAlA meM rUkeM, Avazyaka vastueM leN|
gozAlaka to basa yahI cAhatA thaa| usane jhaTa svIkAra kara liyA aura vahAM
gyaa| vahAM ke pravAsa ke bIca usako sakaDAlaputra ke sAtha tAttvika vArtAlApa
karane kA aneka bAra avasara milaa| vahAM ke pravAsa ke bIca usako sakaDAlaputra
ke sAtha tAttvika vArtAlApa karane kA aneka bAra avasara milaa| usane
sakaDAlaputra ko badalane kA bahuta prayAsa kiyA, para vaha sarvathA viphala
rhaa| sakaDAlaputra to khUba viveka aura samajhadArI ke sAtha yathArtha tattva
prApta kara cukA thA, vaha vicalita kaise hotA? nirAza hokara gozAlaka vahAM se
vihAra kara gyaa| sakaDAlaputra pUrvavat apane sAMsArika uttaradAyitva ke
nirvAha ke sAtha-sAtha dharmopAsanA meM lagA rhaa| yoM caudaha varSa vyatIta ho
ge| pandrahavAM varSa AdhA bIta cukA thaa| eka bAra AdhI rAta ke samaya
sakaDAlapatra apanI dharmArAdhanA meM nirata thA. eka mithyAtvI deva use vrata-
cyata karane ke lie AyA, vrata chor3a dene ke lie usake putroM ko mAra DAlane kI
dhamakI dii| sakaDAlaputra avicala rahA taba usane usIke sAmane kramaza: usake
tInoM beToM ko mAra-mAra kara pratyeka ke nau-nau mAMsa-khaMDa kie, ubalate pAnI
se bharI kar3hAhI meM khaulAyA aura unakA mAMsa va rakta usake zarIra para
chiiNttaa| para, sakaDAlaputra Atma-bala aura dhairya ke sAtha vaha saba saha
gayA, usakI AsthA nahIM ddgmgaaii| phira bhI deva nirAza nahIM huaa| usane socA
ki sakaDAlaputra ke jIvana meM agnimitrA kA bahuta bar3A mahattva hai, vaha
kevala patiparAyaNA patnI hI nahIM hai, sukha duHkha meM sahayoginI hai aura
sabase bar3I bAta yaha hai ki vaha usake dhArmika jIvana kI ananya sahAyikA hai
/  yaha socakara usane sakaDAlaputra ke samakSa usakI patnI agnimitrA ko mAra
DAlane aura vaisI durdazA karane kI dhamakI dii| jo sakaDolaputra tInoM beToM kI
hatyA apanI AMkhoM ke Age dekha avicalita rahA, vaha isa dhamakI se kSubhita ho
gyaa| usameM krodha jAgA aura usane socA, isa daSTa ko mujhe pakar3a lenA
caahie| vaha jhaTa pakar3ane ke lie uThA, para deva-SaDyantra meM kauna kise
pakar3atA? deva lupta ho gyaa| sakaDAlaputra ke hAthoM ke sAmane kA khambhA
aayaa| yaha saba anahonI ghaTanAeM dekha sakaDAlaputra ghabarA gayA aura usane
jora se kolAhala kiyaa| agnimitrA ne jaba yaha sunA to tatkSaNa vahAM AI, pati
kI sArI bAta sunI aura bolI-parIkSA kI antima coTa meM Apa hAra ge| vaha
mithyAdRSTi deva Akhira ApakA vrata bhaMga karane meM saphala ho gyaa| isa bhUla
ke lie Apa prAyazcitta kiijie| sakaDAlaputra ne vaisA hI kiyaa| sakaDAlaputra kA
antima jIvana bhI bahuta hI prazasta rhaa| usane eka mAsa kI antima saMlekhanA
aura anazana ke sAtha samAdhi-maraNa prApta kiyaa| dehatyAga kara vaha
arUNabhUta vimAna meM cAra palyopamasthitika deva huaa|

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Study ## Sakdalputra, the Ajivika  **180.** This is the beginning of
the seventh study, introduced with an opening statement. The noble Sudharma
said: There was a city named Polasapura. There was a garden named Sahasramravan.
Jitasatru was the king there.  **181.** In that city of Polasapura, there lived
a potter named Sakdalputra, who was a follower of the Ajivika doctrine or the
Gosala school of thought. He had attained the true essence of the Ajivika
doctrine through listening to the teachings, accepting them, questioning them,
firmly grasping them, and making them his own. He was filled with love and
devotion for his religion, right down to his bones and marrow. He firmly
believed that the Ajivika doctrine was the only means to achieve the purpose of
life, the ultimate truth. Everything else was meaningless and useless. Thus, he
lived according to the Ajivika doctrine, nurturing his soul.  **Discussion**  In
this sutra, the descriptions of Sakdalputra as having attained the teachings,
accepted them, questioned them, firmly grasped them, and made them his own, are
all qualities that are mentioned in the sixth study of the Upasakadasa.  **2.**
The noble Sudharma asked Jambudvipa: If the enlightened Lord Mahavira has
explained the meaning of the sixth study of the Upasakadasa in this way, then
what meaning did he explain for the seventh study? (Please tell me.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana sakaDAlaputra AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra 180. sattamassa
ukkhevo  /  polAsapure nAmaM nayare  /  sahassaMbavaNe ujaanne| jiyasattU
raayaa| utkSepa'-upodghAtapUrvaka sAtaveM adhyayana kA prArambha yoM hai Arya
sudharmA ne kahA-polAsapura nAmaka nagara thaa| vahAM sahastrAmravana nAmaka
udyAna thaa| jitazatru vahAM kA rAjA thaa| 181. tattha NaM polAsapure nayare
saddAlaputte nAmaM kuMbhakAre AjIviovAsae privsi| AjIviya-samayaMsi laddhaDhe,
gahiyaThe, pucchiyaDhe, viNicchiyaThe, abhigayaDhe advimiMjapemANurAgaratte ya
ayamAuso! AjIviya-samae aDhe, ayaM paramaTThe sese aNaDhe tti AjIviya-samaeNaM
appANaM bhAvemANe vihri| _ polAsapura meM sakaDAlaputra nAmaka kumhAra rahatA
thA, jo AjIvikA-siddhAnta yA gozAlakamata kA anuyAyI thaa| vaha labdhArtha-
zravaNa Adi dvArA AjIvikamata ke yathArtha tattva ko prApta kie hue, gRhItArtha-
use gahaNa kie hue, pRSTArtha-jijJAsA yA prazna dvArA use sthita kie hue,
vinizcitArtha-nizcita rUpa meM AtmasAt kie hue, abhigatArtha-svAyatta kie hue
thaa| vaha asthi aura majjA paryanta apane dharma ke prati prema va anurAga se
bharA thaa| usakA yaha nizcita vizvAsa thA ki AjIvika mata hI
arthaprayojanabhUta hai, yahI paramArtha hai| isake sivAya anya anartha-
aprayojanabhUta haiN| yoM AjIvika mata ke anusAra vaha AtmA ko bhAvita karatA
huA dharmAnurata thaa| vivecana isa sutra meM sakaDAlaputra ke labdhArtha,
gRhItArtha, pRSTArtha, vinizcitArtha tathA abhigatArtha vizeSaNa jai NaM bhaMte!
samaNeNaM bhagavayA jAva saMpatteNaM uvAsagadasANaM chaTThassa ajjhayaNassa
ayamaThe paNNatte sattamassa NaM bhaMte! ajjhayaNassa ke aThe paNNatte? 2. Arya
sudharmA se jambU ne pUchA-siddhiprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA ke
chaThe adhyayana kA yadi yaha artha-bhAva pratipAdita kiyA, to bhagavan! unhoMne
sAtaveM adhyayana kA kyA artha batalAyA (kRpayA kheN|)

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[154] [Upasakadasangasutra] This passage describes a Jain follower named
Sakdalputra, who was deeply devoted to his faith. He had thoroughly studied its
principles and sought to understand its essence through inquiry and questioning.
He believed in the truth and reality of the Ajivika philosophy, as evidenced by
his unwavering faith, which is described as being "bone-marrow-love-desire-
blood-special." This suggests that people in those times were deeply engaged in
both their worldly pursuits and their spiritual and philosophical understanding.
**Wealth and Business**  182. Sakdalputra, the Ajivika follower, had one crore
gold coins stored as reserve wealth, one crore gold coins invested in business,
and one crore gold coins used for household luxuries. He also owned a herd of
ten thousand cows.  183. Sakdalputra, the Ajivika follower, had a wife named
Agnimitra.  184. Sakdalputra, the Ajivika follower, had five hundred potter's
workshops outside the city of Polaspur. Many men worked there, receiving food
and wages. They would start their day making various pottery items like karakas
(small pots), varakas (large pots), pitharas (large earthenware vessels), ghadas
(water pots), ardhaghadas (half-pots), kalasas (large water pots), alijjaras
(large water jars), jambulas (wine jars), and uttriyas (large-bellied vessels
with long necks used for storing oil, ghee, etc.). Other men would also work for
food and wages, selling these pottery items on the road.  **Discussion**  The
mention of Sakdalputra's workshops being located outside the city suggests
that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra Ae haiM, jinase prakaTa hotA hai ki vaha jisa mata
meM vizvAsa karatA thA, usane usake siddhAntoM kA sUkSmatA se adhyayana kiyA
thaa| jijJAsAoM aura praznoM dvArA usane tattva kI gaharAI taka pahuMcane kA
prayAsa kiyA thaa| unake apane vicAroM ke anusAra AjIvikamata satya aura
yathArtha thaa| isIlie vaha usake prati atyanta AsthAvAn thA, jo asthi-majjA-
premAnurAgarakta vizeSaNa se prakaTa hai| isase yaha bhI anumita hotA hai ki usa
samaya ke nAgarika apane vyAvasAyika, laukika jIvana ke saMcAlana ke sAtha-sAtha
tAttvika evaM dhArmika dRSTi se bhI gaharAI meM jAte the| sampatti : vyavasAya
182. tassa NaM saddAlaputtassa AjIviovAsagassa ekkA hiraNNa-koDI nihANapauttA,
ekkA vuDDhi-pauttA, ekkA pavitthara-pauttA, ekke vae, dasa-gosAhassieNaM vennN|
_ AjIvika matAnuyAyI sakaDAlaputra kI eka karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM surakSita dhana
ke rUpa meM khajAne meM rakhI thiiN| eka karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM vyApAra meM lagI
thIM tathA eka karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM ghara ke vaibhava-sAdhana sAmagrI meM lagI
thIM usake eka gokula thA, jisameM dasa hajAra gAyeM thii| 183. tassa NaM
saddAlaputtassa AjIviovAsagassa aggimittA nAmaM bhAriyA hotthaa| AjIvikopAsaka
sakaDAlaputra kI patnI kA nAma agnimitrA thaa| 184. tassa NaM saddAlaputtassa
AjIviovAsagassa polAsapurassa nagarassa bahiyA paMca kuMbhakArAvaNa-sayA
hotthaa| tattha NaM bahave purisA diNNa-bhai-bhatta-veyaNA kallAkalli bahave
karae ya vArae ya pihaDae ya ghaDae ya addha-ghaDae ya kalasae ya aliMjarae ya
jaMbUlae ya uTTiyAo ya kreNti| anne ya se bahave purisA diNNa-bhai-bhatta-veyaNA
kallAkalli tehiM bahUhiM karaehi ya jAva (vAraehi ya pihaDaehi ya ghaDaehi ya
addha-ghaDaehi ya kalasahi ya aliMjaraehi ya jaMbUlaehi ya) uTTiyAhi ya rAya-
maggaMsi vittiM kappemANA vihrNti| polAsapura nagara ke bAhara AjIvikopAsaka
sakaDAlaputra ke kumhAragirI ke pAMca sau ApaNavyavasAya-sthAna-bartana banAne
kI karmazAlAe~ thiiN| vahA~ bhojana tathA majadUrI rUpa vetana para kAma karane
vAle bahuta se purUSa pratidina prabhAta hote hI, karaka-kareve, vAraka-gaDue,
piThara-ATA gUMdhane yA dahI jamAne ke kAma meM Ane vAlI parAteM yA kuMDe,
ghaTaka-tAlAba Adi se pAnI lAne ke kAma meM Ane vAle ghar3e
arddhaghaTakaadhaghar3e-choTe ghar3e, kalazaka-kalase, bar3e ghar3e, aliMjara-
pAnI rakhane ke bar3e maTake, jaMbUlaka-surAhiyA~, uSTrikA-taila, ghI Adi
rakhane meM prayukta lambI gardana aura bar3e peTa vAle bartanakUpe banAne ke
laga jAte the| bhojana va majadUrI para kAma karane vAle dUsare bahuta se purUSa
subaha hote hI bahuta se karave (gaDue, parAteM yA kuMDe, ghar3e, adhaghar3e
maTake, surAhiyA~ ) tathA kupoM ke sAtha sar3aka para avasthita ho, unakI bikrI
meM laga jAte the| vivecana prastuta sUtra ke sakaDAlaputra kI karmazAlAe~
nagara se bAhara hone kA jo ullekha hai, usase yaha

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 7: Sakdalputra  It is revealed that the potters' workshops and kilns
were located outside the cities to avoid air pollution from the smoke and
inconvenience to the city dwellers. Sakdalputra had five hundred workshops, and
a lot of smoke was generated during the baking of the pots, so all the
construction work was done outside the city. The selling was done on the roads
and crossroads. Even today, it is mostly the same. The potters' houses are on
the outskirts of cities and villages, where they make and bake their pots. The
selling of pots is still seen on the roads and crossroads.  **Information by the
Dev**  185. Then, the ascetic Sakdalputra, for his livelihood, went to the Asoka
garden in the early morning, just as the merchants did, and after arriving, he
stayed there, having accepted the Dharma-Prajnapti - Dharma-teaching, near
Mankaliputra Gosala.  186. Then, a Dev appeared before the ascetic Sakdalputra,
who was engaged in his livelihood.  187. That Dev, adorned with small bells and
wearing five-colored fine clothes, standing in the sky, spoke to the ascetic
Sakdalputra, saying: "O Dev-anupriya! Tomorrow morning, here, the great
Mahamahan - the great non-violent, the possessor of unhindered knowledge and
vision, the knower of the past, present, and future, the Arhat - the most worthy
of worship, the most powerful, the Jin - the conqueror of passion and hatred,
the Kevali - the perfect, the pure and infinite knowledge, etc., the omniscient,
the all-seeing, the three worlds are eagerly waiting to see him, they desire his
service and worship, the Dev, the human, and the Asura - all are worthy of
worship, worthy of praise, worthy of bowing down, (worthy of respect, worthy of
honor, auspicious, prosperous, divine, worthy of praise) worthy of being served,
and he has attained the perfection of his karma. You should bow down to him,
(pay homage to him, respect him, honor him, auspicious, prosperous, divine,
worthy of praise) serve him, invite him with offerings, food, fruits, and
flowers." He said this and then disappeared in the same direction from which he
had appeared.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 155 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra ] prakaTa hotA hai ki kumhAroM kI
karmazAlAe~ va alAva nagaroM se bAhara hote the, jisase alAvoM se uThane vAle
dhuMe ke kAraNa vAyu-dUSaNa na ho, nagaravAsiyoM ko asuvidhA na ho| phira
sakaDAlaputra ke to pAMca sau karmazAlAe~ thIM, bartana pakAne meM bahuta dhuMA
uThatA thA, isalie nirmANa kA sArA kArya nagara ke bAhara hotA thA  /  bikrI kA
kArya sar3akoM va caurAhoM para kiyA jAtA thaa| Aja bhI prAyaH aisA hI hai  /
kumhAroM ke ghara zaharoM tathA gA~voM ke eka kinAre hote haiM, jahA~ ve apane
bartana banAte haiM, pakAte haiN| bartana becane kA kAma Aja bhI sar3akoM aura
caurAhoM para dekhA jAtA hai  /  deva dvArA sUcanA 185. tae NaM se saddAlaputte
AjIviovAsae annayA kayAi puvvAvaraNha-kAlasamayaMsi jeNeva asoga- vaNiyA, teNeva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA gosAlassa maMkhali puttassa aMtiyaM dhammapaNNattiM
uvasapajjittANaM viharai  /  eka dina AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra dopahara ke
samaya azokavATikA meM gayA, maMkhaliputra gozAlA ke pAsa aMgIkRta dharma-
prajJapti - dharma - zikSA ke anurUpa vahAM upAsanArata huA  /  186. tae NaM
tassa saddAlaputtassa AjIviovAsagassa ege deve aMtiyaM pAubbhavitthA  /
AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ke samakSa eka deva prakaTa huA  /  187. taNaM se
deve aMtalikkha paDivanne sakhikhiNiyAiM jAva (paMcavaNNAI vatthAiM pavara)
parihie saddAlaputtaM AjIviovAsayaM evaM vayAsI- ehii NaM devANuppiyA ! kallaM
ihaM mahAmAhaNe, uppannaNANa- daMsaNadhare, tIya- paDuppanna - maNAgaya- jANae,
arahA, jiNe, kevalI, savvaNU, savvadarisI telokka- vahiya- mahiya - pUie,
sadevamaNuyAsurassa logassa accaNije, vaMdaNijje nama'saNijje jAva
(sakkAraNijje, sammANaNijje kallANaM, maMgalaM, devayaM, ceiyaM )
pajjuvAsaNijje, tacca-kamma- saMpayA - saMpautte  /  taM NaM tumaM vaMdejjAhi,
jAva ( NamaMsejjAhi, sakkArajjAhi, sammANejjAhi, kallANaM, maMgalaM, devayaM,
ceiyaM ) pajjuvAsejjAhi, pADihArieNaM pIDha-phalaga-sijjA-saMthAraeNaM
uvanimaMtejjAhi  /  doccaM pi taccaM pi evaM vayai, vaittA jAmeva disaM pAubbhUe
tAmeva disaM paDigae  /  choTI-choTI ghaMTiyoM se yukta pAMca varNa ke uttama
vastra pahane hue AkAza meM avasthita usa deva AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra se
kahAdevAnupriya ! kala prAta:kAla yahAM mahAmAhana-mahAn ahiMsaka, apratihata
jJAna, darzana ke dhAraka, atIta, vartamAna evaM bhaviSya tInoM kAla ke jJAtA,
arhat-parama pUjya, parama samartha, jina-rAga-dveSa-vijetA, kevalI - paripUrNa,
zuddha evaM ananta jJAna Adi se yukta, sarvajJa, sarvadarzI, tInoM loka atyanta
harSapUrvaka jinake darzana kI utsukatA lie rahate haiM, jinakI sevA evaM
upAsanA kI vAMchA lie rahate haiM, deva, manuSya tathA asura sabhI dvArA
arcanIya-arcAyoggra-pUjAyogya, vandanIya-stavanayogya, namaskaraNIya, (
satkaraNIya - satkAra yA Adara karane yogya, sammAnanIya - sammAna

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[156] The worthy, auspicious, benevolent, divine, radiant, and powerful,
embodiment of knowledge, worthy of worship, will arrive with the wealth of true
actions, good deeds, and good fortune. Therefore, you should pay homage to them
(offer salutations, respect, and honor). They are auspicious, benevolent,
divine, and embodiments of knowledge. You should worship them. Invite them with
offerings (things that ascetics use and return), a seat, a cushion, a bed, and
bedding. Thus, they returned in the same direction from which they had appeared,
after being invited a second and third time.   **Discussion** In the commentary
on this sutra, Acharya Abhaydeva Suri explains the word "mahamahan" as follows:
A person who resolves, "I will not kill anyone," who refrains from harming all
living beings, both subtle and gross, through mind, speech, and body, and who
advises others not to harm anyone, is called a "mahan." Such a person is great,
therefore he is a "mahamahan," meaning a great non-violent being.  In other
scriptures as well, wherever the word "mahamahan" appears, it is explained in
the same way. There is another interpretation of this word. In Prakrit, the word
"brahman" is also used as "bamhan" and "bambhan" along with "mahan." According
to this, the meaning of "mahamahan" is a great Brahman. The word "brahman" holds
great significance in Indian literature from the perspective of virtue and
excellence. The concept of a Brahman is that of a person who embodies the
virtues of purity, sattva, good conduct, forbearance, austerity, and other
virtues. Literally, its meaning is a knower. In grammar, its derivation is
established by the addition of the suffix "an" to the root "vid" in the chapter
on "kridanta." According to this, its etymology is: one who knows or studies
Brahma-veda or pure consciousness is a Brahman. From a qualitative perspective,
the Veda, which is derived from the root "vid," is a symbol of excellent
knowledge. Thus, a Brahman is presented as a person of high knowledge and
character.  We set aside the caste system based on birth, for it was a social
order. In fact, this high and noble meaning of the word "brahman" is accepted
not only in Vedic literature but also in Jain literature. There is an incident
in the Uttaradhyayanasutra:  Jayghosh Muni, born in a Brahman family, once came
to Varanasi during his travels. He stayed in a beautiful garden called Manorama
outside the city. At that time, a Vedic scholar named Vijayghosh was performing
a yajna. Jayghosh Muni went to Vijayghosh's house for alms to break his one-
month fast. Vijayghosh said, "The food prepared here is for Brahmans." To this,
Jayghosh Muni said, "Vijayghosh! You do not know the true nature of Brahmanhood.
Listen, I will tell you who a Brahman is: 1. "Karmany an." Panini's Ashtadhyayi.
3. 2. 1. 2. "Brahma-vedam, shuddham chaitanyam va vetti adhite va iti
brahmanah."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra karane yogya, kalyANamaya, maMgalamaya, iSTa deva
svarUpa athavA divya teja tathA zaktiyukta, jJAnasvarUpa) paryupAsanIya-upAsanA
karane yogya, tathya karma-sampadA-saMprayukta-satkarma rUpa-sampatti se yukta
bhagavAn pdhaareNge| isalie tuma unheM vandana karanA (namaskAra, satkAra tathA
sammAna krnaa| ve kalyANamaya, maMgalamaya, devasvarUpa tathA jJAnasvarUpa haiN|
unakI paryupAsanA karanA), prAtihArika-aisI vastueM jinheM zramaNa upayoga meM
lekara vApasa kara dete haiM, pIThapATa, phalaka-bAjoTa, zayyA-Thaharane kA
sthAna, saMstAraka-bichAne ke lie ghAsa Adi hetu unheM AmaMtrita karanA  /  yoM
dUsarI bAra va tIsarI bAra kaha kara jisa dizA se prakaTa huA thA, vaha deva usI
dizA kI ora lauTa gyaa| vivecanA prastuta sUtra meM Ae 'mahAmAhaNa' zabda
vyAkhyA karate hue AcArya abhayadeva sUri ne vRtti meM likhA hai-jo vyakti yoM
nizcaya karatA hai, maiM kisI ko nahIM mArUM, arthAta jo mana, vacana evaM kAya
dvArA sUkSma tathA sthUla samasta jIvoM kI hiMsA se nivRtta ho jAtA hai tathA
kisI kI hiMsA mata karoM yoM dUsaroM ko upadeza karatA hai, vaha mAhana kahA
jAtA hai| aisA purUSa mahAn hotA hai, isalie vaha mahAmAhana hai, arthAt mahAn
ahiMsaka hai| anya AgamoM meM bhI jahAM mahAmANa zabda AyA hai, isI rUpa meM
vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| isakI vyAkhyA kA eka rUpa aura bhI hai  /  prAkRta meM
'brAhmaNa' ke lie bamhaNa tathA bambhaNa ke sAtha-sAtha mAhaNa zabda bhI hai  /
isake anusAra mahAmANa kA artha mahAn brAhmaNa hotA hai| brAhmaNa zabda
bhAratIya sAhitya meM guNa-niSpannatA kI dRSTi se atyanta mahattva lie hue hai|
brAhmaNa meM eka aise vyaktitva kI kalpanA hai, jo pavitratA, sAttvikatA,
sadAcAra, titikSA, tapa Adi sadguNoM ke samavAya kA pratIka ho| zAbdika dRSTi se
isakA artha jJAnI hai  /  vyAkaraNa meM kRdanta ke prakaraNa meM aN pratyaya ke
yoga se isakI siddhi hotI hai  /  usake anusAra isakI vyutpatti-jo brahma-veda
yA zuddha caitanya ko jAnatA hai athavA usakA adhyayana karatA hai, vaha
brAhmaNa hai| guNAtmaka dRSTi se veda, jo vida dhAta se banA hai. utkaSTa jJAna
kA pratIka hai| yoM brAhmaNa eka ucca jJAnI aura caritraniSTha vyaktitva ke rUpa
meM prastuta huA hai| _ janmagata jAtIya vyavasthA ko eka bAra hama chor3a dete
haiM, vaha to eka sAmAjika krama thaa| vastutaH isa ucca aura prazasta artha meM
'brAhmaNa' zabda ko kevala vaidika vAGmaya meM hI nahIM, jaina aura vAGmaya meM
bhI svIkAra kiyA gayA hai| uttarAdhyayana sUtra kA eka prasaMga hai brAhmaNa
vaMza meM utpanna jayaghoSa muni eka bAra apane janapada-vihAra ke bIca vArANasI
aae| nagara ke bAhara manorama nAmaka udyAna meM ruuke| usa samaya vijayaghoSa
nAmaka eka vedavettA brAhmaNa yajJa kara rahA thaa| jayaghoSa muni eka mAsa kI
tapasyA ke pAraNe hetu bhikSA ke lie vijayaghoSa ke yahAM phuNce| vijayaghoSa ne
kahA-yahA~ banA bhojana to brAhmaNa ko dene ke lie hai| isa para jayaghoSa muni
ne usase kahAvijayaghoSa! tuma brAhmaNatva kA zuddha svarUpa nahIM jAnate  /
jarA suno, maiM batalAtA hUM, brAhmaNa kauna hotA hai1. karmaNyaN  /  pANinIya
aSTAdhyAyI  /  3  /  2  /  1  /  2. brahma-vedaM, zuddhaM caitanyaM vA vetti
adhIte vA iti braahmnnH|

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[157 Seventh Study: Sakadalputra] We call one a Brahmin who is not attached to
his own people, family members, etc., who does not think too much about becoming
a renunciant, and who delights in the excellent, Dharma-filled words of the
Aryas. Just as gold that has been heated in fire is pure and clear, so too, in
our view, is one who is free from attachment, aversion, and fear a Brahmin. One
who is a conqueror of the senses, engaged in austerity, who has become thin as a
result, whose body has little blood and flesh due to intense practice, who is
mounted on the attainment of Nirvana through excellent vows, is truly a Brahmin.
One who, knowing with subtlety the beings that move and those that are
stationary, does not harm them through the three yogas - mind, speech, and body,
is a Brahmin. One who does not speak falsely out of anger, laughter, greed, and
fear, we call a Brahmin. One who does not take anything, whether animate or
inanimate, small or large, without it being given, is a Brahmin. One who does
not indulge in sexual intercourse with gods, humans, or animals through mind,
speech, and body, is truly a Brahmin. Just as the lotus, though born in water,
is not attached to it, so too, one who is not attached to sensual pleasures is a
Brahmin. One who is not greedy, who lives on alms, who has renounced the home
and possessions, who does not have attachment to householders, is a Brahmin. One
who, abandoning the previous association with caste members and relatives,
adopts a life of renunciation, and does not return to be attached to pleasures,
is a Brahmin in our view. The word-picture of the personality of a Brahmin
presented here makes it clear that, in the words of Jayaghoṣa Muni, a great
renunciant, constantly moving on the path of spiritual practice, a practitioner
who flawlessly observes the vows, is truly a Brahmin. The last section or
chapter of the Buddhist Dhammapada is the Brahmana-vagga, which describes the
nature, qualities, and character of a Brahmin. It is said there: " 'One whose
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind are not attached to the infinite forms
of sound, smell, taste, touch, and the endless 'I' and 'mine', that is, one who
is raised above desires and pleasures, fearless, unattached, is a Brahmin. It is
not less meritorious for a Brahmin to turn his mind away from pleasant
pleasures. Where the mind is freed from violence, there sorrow itself is
pacified. 1. Uttaraadhyayanasutra 25. 20-29.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 157 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra ] jo apane svajana, kuTumbI jana Adi
meM Asakta nahIM hotA, pravrajita hone meM adhika socavicAra nahIM karatA tathA
jo Arya uttama dharmamaya vacanoM meM ramaNa karatA hai, hama usI ko brAhmaNa
kahate haiM  /  jisa prakAra agni meM tapAyA huA sonA zuddha evaM nirmala hotA
he, usI prakAra jo rAga, dveSa tathA bhaya Adi se rahita hai, hamArI dRSTi meM
vahI brAhmaNa hai  /  jo indriya - vijetA hai, tapazcaraNa meM saMlagna hai,
phalataH kRza ho gayA hai, ugra sAdhanA ke ke kAraNa jisake zarIra meM rakta
aura mAMsa thor3A raha gayA haiM, jo uttama vratoM dvArA nirvANa prApta karane
para ArUDha hai, vAstava meM vahI brAhmaNa hai  /  jo trasa - calane phirane
vAle, sthAvara - eka jagaha sthira rahane vAle prANiyoM ko sUkSmatA se jAnakara
tIna yoga - mana, vacana evaM kAyA dvArA unakI hiMsA nahIM karatA, vahI brAhmaNa
hai  /  jo krodha, hAsya, lobha tathA bhaya se asatya bhASaNa nahIM karatA, hama
usI ko brAhmaNa kahate hai  /  sacita yA acitta, thor3I yA bahuta koI bhI vastu
binA dI huI nahIM letA, brAhmaNa vahI hai  /  jo mana, vacana evaM zarIra dvArA
deva, manuSya tathA tiryaMca sambandhI maithuna kA sevana nahIM karatA, vAstava
meM vahI brAhmaNa hai 1 kamala yadyapi jala meM utpanna hotA hai, para usameM
lipta nahIM hotA, usI prakAra jo kAma - bhogoM se alipta rahatA hai, vahI
brAhmaNa hai  /  jo alolupa, bhikSA para nirvAha karane vAlA, gRha - tyAgI tathA
parigraha - tyAgI hotA hai, gRhasthoM ke sAtha Asakti nahIM rakhatA, vahI
brAhmaNa hai  /  jo jAtIya janoM aura bandhujanoM kA pUrva saMyoga chor3akara
tyAgamaya jIvana apanA letA hai, lauTakara phira bhogoM meM Asakta nahIM hotA,
hamArI dRSTi meM vahI brAhmaNa hai  / " yahAM brAhmaNa ke vyaktitva kA jo zabda
- citra upasthita kiyA gayA hai, usase spaSTa hai, jayaghoSa muni ke zabdoM meM
mahAn tyAgI, AdhyAtmika sAdhanA ke patha para satata gatizIla, nirapavAda rUpa
meM vratoM kA paripAlaka sAdhaka hI vastutaH brAhmaNa hotA hai  /  bauddhoM ke
dhammapada kA antima varga yA adhyAya brAhmaNavagga hai, jisameM brAhmaNa ke
svarUpa, guNa, caritra Adi kA varNana hai| vahAM kahA gayA hai " 'jisake pAra -
netra, kAna, nAsikA, jihvA, kAyA tathA mana, apAra-rUpa zabda, gandha, rasa
sparza tathA pArApAra - maiM aura merA ye saba nahIM hai, arthAt jo eSaNAoM aura
bhogoM se UMcA uThA huA hai, nirbhaya hai, anAsakta hai, vaha brAhmaNa hai  /
brAhmaNa ke lie yaha bAta kama zreyaskara nahIM hai ki vaha apanA mana priya
bhogoM se haTA letA hai  /  jahAM mana hiMsA se nivRtta ho jAtA hai, vahAM
duHkha svayaM hI zAnta ho jAtA hai  /  1. uttarAdhyayana sUtra 25  /  20- 29  /

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[158] I call a person a Brahmin who is free from evil deeds, both in thought,
word, and action, and who is restrained and disciplined in all three. I call a
person a Brahmin who wears tattered clothes, is thin, has veins protruding from
their body due to severe austerities, and lives alone in the forest, absorbed in
meditation. I call a person a Brahmin who has severed all attachments and bonds,
who is free from fear, and who is beyond attachment and possessiveness. I call a
person a Brahmin who endures anger, insults, killing, and imprisonment without
any disturbance to their mind, and whose strength lies in forgiveness. I call a
person a Brahmin who is free from anger, virtuous, well-versed in scriptures,
disciplined, and has a final body, meaning they are destined for liberation
after death. I call a person a Brahmin who is not attached to pleasures, like
water on a lotus leaf or a mustard seed on the tip of a saw. I call a person a
Brahmin who is wise, intelligent, and knows the path and the wrong path, and who
has attained the highest truth. I call a person a Brahmin who is free from
violence towards all beings, both mobile and immobile, and who neither kills nor
encourages killing.  Comparing the present discussion of Uttaraadhyayanasutra
and Dhammapada, it appears that both texts share a similar perspective on the
analysis of the virtuous, knowledgeable, and ethical personality of a Brahmin.
We find numerous references to the characteristics of a virtuous Brahmin in
Vedic literature. The Shantiparva of the Mahabharata discusses this in various
contexts.  In one instance, a scholar of Brahmins describes the characteristics
of a Brahmin, stating: A Brahmin should not desire the pleasures of smell,
taste, objects, or ornaments. They should not seek honor, fame, or glory. This
is the conduct of a true Brahmin.  One who considers all beings as their own
family, who knows the truth that is worth knowing, and who is free from desires,
such a Brahmin never dies, meaning they are free from the cycle of birth and
death.  When one does not harbor any negative emotions towards any being through
their mind, speech, or actions, only then does one attain the state of Brahman
or Brahminhood.  Desire is the only bondage in this world, there is no other.
One who is free from the bondage of desire...  1. Dhammapada Brahminvaggo 3, 8,
9, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 158] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra jisake mana, vacana tathA zarIra se duSkRta karma yA
pApa nahIM hote, jo ina tInoM hI sthAnoM se saMvRta-saMyama yukta hai, use maiM
brAhmaNa kahatA huuN| jo phaTe-purAne cithar3oM ko dhAraNa kie rahatA hai, kRza
hai, ugra tapazcaraNa dvArA jisakI deha para nAr3iyAM ubhara AI hai , ekAkI vana
meM dhyAna-nirata rahatA hai, merI dRSTi meM vahI brAhmaNa hai| jo sabhI
saMyojanoM-bandhanoM ko chinna kara DAlatA hai, jo kahIM bhI paritrAsa-bhaya
nahIM pAtA, jo Asakti aura mamatA se atIta hai , maiM usI ko brAhmaNa kahatA
huuN| jo Akroza-krodha yA gAlI-galauca, vadha evaM bandhana ko, mana ko jarA bhI
vikRta kie binA saha jAtA hai, kSamA-bala hI jisakI balavAn senA hai, vAstava
meM vahI brAhmaNa hai| jo krodha-rahita, vratayukta, zIlavAn bahu zruta,
saMyamAnurata tathA antima zarIravAn hai-zarIra tyAga kara nivANagAmI hai, vahI
vAstava meM brAhmaNa hai| jo kamala ke patte para par3e jala aura Are kI noka
para par3I sarasoM kI taraha bhogoM meM lipta nahIM hotA, maiM usI ko brAhmaNa
kahatA huuN| jo gambhIra-prajJAzIla, medhAvI evaM mArga-amArga kA jJAtA hai,
jisane uttama artha-satya ko prApta kara liyA hai, vahI vAstava meM brAhmaNa
hai| jo trasa aura sthAvara-cara-acara sabhI prANiyoM kI hiMsA se virata hai, na
svayaM unheM mAratA hai, na mArane kI preraNA karatA hai, maiM usI ko brAhmaNa
kahatA huuN|'' uttarAdhyayana tathA dhammapada ke prastuta vivecana kI tulanA
karane para aisA pratIta hotA hai ki donoM hI sthAnoM para brAhmaNa ke tapomaya,
jJAnamaya tathA zIlamaya vyaktitva ke vizleSaNa meM dRSTikoNa kI samAnatA rahI
haiN| guNa-nippanna brAhmaNatva ke vivecana meM vaidika vAGmaya meM bhI hameM
aneka sthAnoM para ullekha prApta hote haiM  /  mahAbhArata ke zAntiparva meM
isa sambandha meM bhinna-bhinna prasaMgoM meM vivecana huA hai| brAhmaNavettA
brAhmaNa kA lakSaNa batAte hue eka sthAna para kahA gayA hai brAhmaNa gandha,
rasa viSaya-sukha evaM AbhUSaNoM kI kAmanA na kre| vaha sammAna, kIrti tathA
yaza kI cAha na rkhe| draSTA brAhmaNa kA yahI AcAra hai| jo samasta prANiyoM ko
apane kuTumba kI bhAMti samajhatA hai, jAnane yogya tattva kA jJAtA hotA hai,
kAmanAoM se varjita hotA hai, vaha brAhmaNa kabhI maratA nahIM arthAt janma-
maraNa ke bandhana se chUTa jAtA hai| jaba mana, vANI aura karma dvArA kisI bhI
prANI ke prati vikArayukta bhAva nahIM karatA, tabhI vyakti brahmabhAva yA
brAhmaNatva prApta karatA hai| kAmanA hI isa saMsAra meM ekamAtra bandhana hai,
anya koI bandhana nahIM hai  /  jo kAmanA ke bandhana 1. dhammapada
brAhmaNavaggo 3, 8, 9, 13, 15, 17, 18,19, 21, 23  /

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra] [159 is freed, he is able to attain Brahma-bhava
Brahmanhood. By which a man becomes satiated without food, by which a poor man
also experiences complete satisfaction, where a man experiences unlimited power
without consuming ghee etc. nourishing substances, he who attains such Brahma-
bhava, he is the Veda-knowing Brahman. Those who transgress actions - free from
actions, devoid of worldly desires, having attained the qualities of the self,
Brahmanas are not troubled by old age and death.'5 Similarly, in the 62nd
chapter of this same Parva, in the 73rd chapter and in many other places,
Brahmanhood has been discussed. If we go into the depth of the present
discussion, it will be clear that the voice of the Mahabharata author Vyasa is
no different from the Uttaraadhyayana and the Dhammapada.    Manu, the regulator
of the Indian social system, has mentioned the Brahman as a very virtuous man
and has inspired his character to learn from him. Looking at these discussions,
it can be understood that the basis of the ancient Indian Varna system was Guna,
Karma, not lineage as it is today. The imagination of Sakdalputra 188.
Therefore, when the Ajivika-upasaka Sakdalputra heard this from the Deva, he
thought in this way, he had a desire, thought and resolve - "My Dharma-acharya,
Dharma-upadeshaka, Mahamahan, unparalleled holder of knowledge-vision, (knower
of the past, present and future - all three times, Arhat, Jin, Kevali, Sarvagna,
Sarvadarshi, all three lokas are very eager to see him, they are eager to serve
and worship him, Deva, Manushya and Asura - all are worthy of worship, praise,
respect, honour, auspicious, auspicious, divine, knowledge, worthy of worship,)
Sakarma-sampatti-yukt Mankhaliputra Gosala will come here. Then I will worship
him, (I will honour and respect him. He is auspicious, auspicious, divine and 1.
Mahabharata Shantiparva 251. 1, 3, 6, 7, 18, 22. 2. Manusmriti 2, 20 3. See
Sutra-number 187

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra] [159 se mukta ho jAtA hai, vaha
brahmabhAvabrAhmaNatva prApta karane meM samartha hotA hai| jisase binA bhojana
ke hI manuSya paritRpta ho jAtA hai, jisake hone para dhanahIna purUSa bhI pUrNa
santoSa kA anubhava karatA hai, dhRta Adi snigdha pauSTika padArtha sevana kie
binA jahA~ manuSya apane meM aparimita zakti kA anubhava karatA hai, vaise
brahmabhAva ko jo adhigata kara letA hai, vahI vedavettA brAhmaNa karmoM kA
atikrama kara jAne vAle-karmoM se mukta, viSaya-vAsanAoM se rahita, AtmaguNa ko
prApta kie hue brAhmaNa ko jarA aura mutyu nahIM satAte  / '5 isI prakAra isI
parva ke 62veM adhyAya meM, 73 veM adhyAya meM tathA aura bhI bahuta se sthAnoM
para brAhmaNatva kA vivecana huA hai  /  prastuta vivecana kI gaharAI meM yadi
hama jAeM to spaSTa rUpa meM yaha pratIta hogA ki mahAbhAratakAra vyAsadeva kI
dhvani bhI uttarAdhyayana evaM dhammapada se koI bhinna nahIM hai| bhAratIya
samAja-vyavasthA ke niyAmaka manu ke brAhmaNa kA atyanta uttama caritrazIla
purUSa ke rUpa meM ullekha kiyA tathA usake caritra meM zikSA lene kI preraNA dI
hai| ina vivecanoM ko dekhakara samajhA jA sakatA hai ki purAtana bhAratIya
varNavyavasthA kA AdhAra guNa, karma thA, Aja kI bhAMti vaMzaparamparA nhiiN|
sakaDAlaputra kI kalpanA 188. tae NaM tassa saddAlaputtassa AjIviovAsagassa
teNaM deveNaM evaM vuttassa samANassa imeyArUve ajjhathie 4-ciMtie, patthie
maNogae saMkappe samuppanne-evaM khalu mamaM dhammAyarie dhammovaesae gosAle
maMkhaliputte, se NaM mahAmAhaNe uppanna-NANa-dasaNadhare jAva tacca-kamma-
saMpayA-saMpautte, se NaM kallaM ihaM hvvmaagcchissi| tae NaM taM ahaM
vaMdissAmi jAva (sakkAre ssAmi, sammANessAmi, kalyANaM, maMgalaM, devayaM,
ceiyaM) pajjuvAsissAmi pADihArieNaM jAva (pIDha-phalaga-sejjA-saMthAraeNaM)
uvnimNtissaami| usa deva dvArA yoM kahe jAne para AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ke
mana meM aisA vicAra AyA, manoratha, cintana aura saMkalpa uThA-mere
dharmAcArya, dharmopadezaka, mahAmAhana, apratima jJAna-darzana ke dhAraka,
(atIta, vartamAna evaM bhaviSya-tInoM kAla ke jJAtA, arhat, jina, kevalI,
sarvajJa, sarvadarzI, tInoM loka atyanta harSapUrvaka jinake darzana kI utsukatA
lie rahate haiM, jinakI sevA evaM upAsanA kI vAMchA lie rahate haiM , deva,
manuSya tathA asura-sabhI dvArA arcanIya, vandanIya, satkaraNIya, sammAnanIya,
kalyANamaya, maMgalamaya, devasvarUpa, jJAnasvarUpa, paryupAsanIya,) satkarma-
sampattiyukta maMkhaliputra gozAlaka kala yahAM pdhaareNge| taba maiM unakI
vaMdanA, (satkAra evaM sammAna kruuNgaa| ve kalyANamaya, maMgalamaya,
devasvarUpa tathA 1. mahAbhArata zAntiparva 251. 1, 3, 6, 7, 18, 22  /  2.
manusmRti 2, 20 3. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 187

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[160] I will perform Paryupasana and invite the Pratiharika (seat, platform,
supporter) for this purpose. The presence of Bhagwan Mahavira  189. So, it is
said that while the ascetics were burning with devotion, Bhagwan Mahavira
arrived. The assembly gathered and performed Paryupasana of Bhagwan. 190. Then,
the Upasaka Sadalputtra heard this news. He thought, "Thus, Bhagwan Mahavira,
the ascetic, is staying in the city of Polaspur, in the Sahasrambavana garden,
where he is dwelling, having attained the state of Ahapaddhiruvam, having
conquered the senses, practicing restraint, and cultivating his own being. I
will go to him, I will pay my respects to Bhagwan Mahavira, the ascetic (I will
bow, I will honor, I will respect, I will wish him well, I will wish him
prosperity, I will wish him divine qualities, I will wish him knowledge). I will
perform Paryupasana." Thinking thus, he bathed (performed daily rituals,
performed auspicious rituals to ward off evil dreams and other negative
influences), wore pure, appropriate (auspicious and excellent) clothes, adorned
his body with a few precious ornaments, and accompanied by many people, he left
his house. After leaving his house, he went to the center of the city of
Polaspur. After reaching the city, he went to the Sahasrambavana garden, where
Bhagwan Mahavira, the ascetic, was staying. After reaching there, he performed
the Tikkhutto Ayahin, the Payahin (rituals of approaching and bowing). After
performing these rituals, he bowed and paid his respects. After bowing and
paying his respects (he stood not too close, not too far, facing Bhagwan, with
folded hands, listening attentively, with humility), he performed Paryupasana.
191. Then, Bhagwan Mahavira, the ascetic, saw the Upasaka Sadalputtra. 1. See
Sutra number 66 2. See Sutra number 93 3. See Sutra number 11

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160] . [upAsakadazAMgasUtra jJAnasvarUpa haiM) paryupAsanA karUMgA tathA
prAtihArika (pITha, phalaka, saMstAraka) hetu AmaMtrita kruuNgaa| bhagavAn
mahAvIra kA sAnnidhya 189. tae NaM kallaM jAva' jalaMte samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
jAva' smosrie| parisA niggayA jAva pjjuvaasi| tatpazcAt agale dina prAta:kAla
bhagavAn mahAvIra pdhaare| pariSad jur3I, bhagavAn kI paryu pAsanA kii| 190. tae
NaM se saddAlaputte AjIviovAsae imIse kahAe laddhaDhe samANe-evaM khalu samaMNe
bhagavaM mahAvIre jAva (jeNeva polAsapure nayare, jeNeva sahassaMbavaNe ujANe,
teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchitA ahApaDirUvaM oggahaM ogiNhittA saMjameNaM tavasA
appANaM bhAvemANe ) viharai, taM gacchAmi NaM samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdAmi
jAva (namaMsAmi, sakkAremi, sammANemi kalyANaM, maMgalaM, devayaM, ceiyaM)
panjuvAsAmi evaM saMpehei, saMpehittA NhAe jAva (kayavalikamme ,
kayakouyamaMgala-) pAyacchitte suddha-ppAvesAiM jAva (maMgallAiM vatthAI
pavaraparihie) appamahagdhAbharaNAlaMkiya-sarIre, maNussavaggurA-parigae sAo
gihAo paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA, polAsapuraM nayaraM majhaMmaNaM
niggacchai, niggacchittA jeNeva sahassaMbavaNe ujANe, jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM
mahAvIre , teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA tikkhutto AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karei,
karettA vaMdai, namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA jAva (NaccAsaNNe NAidUre
sussUsamANe NamaMsamANa abhimuhe viNaeNaM paMjaliuDe ) pjjuvaasi| AjIvikopAsaka
sakaDAlaputra ne yaha sunA ki bhagavAn mahAvIra polAsapura nagara meM padhAre
haiN| (sahastrAmravana udyAna meM yathocita sthAna grahaNa kara saMyama evaM
tapa meM AtmA ko bhAvita karate hueavasthita haiN)| usane socA-maiM jAkara
bhagavAn kI vandanA, (namaskAra, satkAra evaM sammAna karUM  /  ve kalyANamaya,
maMgalamaya, devasvarUpa tathA jJAnasvarUpa haiN|) paryupAsanA kruuN| yoM soca
kara usane snAna kiyA, (nitya-naimittika kArya kie, deha-sajjA tathA du:svapna
Adi doSa-nivAraNa hetu candana, kuMkuma, dadhi, akSata Adi dvArA maMgala-vidhAna
kiyA,) zuddha, sabhAyogya (mAMgalika evaM uttama) vastra pahane  /  thor3e se
bahumUlya AbhUSaNoM se deha ko alaMkRta kiyA, aneka logoM ko sAtha lie vaha
apane ghara se aayaa| Akara tIna bAra AdakSiNA-pradakSiNA kI, vandana-namaskAra
kiyA, (vandana-namaskAra kara bhagavAn ke na adhika nikaTa, na adhika dUra,
sammukha avasthita ho, namana karate hue, sunane kI utkaThAM lie vinayapUrvaka
hAtha jor3a,) paryupAsanA kii| 191. tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
saddAlaputtassa AjIviovAsagassa tIse ya 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 66 2. dekheM
sUtra-saMkhyA 9 3. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 11

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra] [161. The Dharma-katha is complete. Then the Shraman
Bhagwan Mahavira gave a Dharma-deshna to the Ajivika-upasaka Sakdalputra and the
vast assembly. 192. Sakdalputra! This Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira said to the
Ajivika-upasaka Sakdalputra: - "Surely, Sakdalputra! When you were wandering in
the Ashoka-vanika in the afternoon, a deva appeared before you. Then that deva,
who was in the sky, said to you: - "Tomorrow morning, the Arhat, the Kevali will
come." Bhagwan told Sakdalputra the whole story, from his bowing and
prostrating, to his determination to perform Paryupasana. Then he asked him: -
"Sakdalputra! Did this happen?" Sakdalputra said: - "It did happen." Then
Bhagwan said: - "Sakdalputra! That deva did not say this to Mankhaliputra
Gosala." Effect on Sakdal _ 193. Then, when the Ajivika-upasaka Sakdalputra was
told this by the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, he thought in this way: - "This
Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira is the Mahamahan, the possessor of born knowledge and
vision, and the one who has attained the perfection of all good deeds. I will
bow to this Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, prostrate to him, and offer him
hospitality, food, and drink (and prepare a comfortable seat for him). 1. See
Sutra-number 11 2. See Sutra-number 185 3. See Sutra-number 188 4. See Sutra-
number 188

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra] [161 mahai jAva' dhammakahA smttaa| taba
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ko tathA vizAla pariSad
ko dharma-dezanA dii| 192. saddAlaputtA! i samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
saddAlaputtaM AjIviovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-se nUNaM, saddAlaputtA! kallaM tumaM
puvvAvaraNha-kAla-samayaMsi jeNeva asoga-vaNiyA jAva vihrsi| tae NaM tubhaM ege
deve aMtiyaM paaunbhvitthaa| tae NaM se deve aMtalikkhapaDivanne evaM vayAsI-haM
bho! saddAlaputtA! taM ceva savvaM jAva pajUvAsissAmi, se nUNaM, saddAlaputtA!
aDhe samaThe? haMtA! atthi| no khalu, saddAlaputtA! teNaM deveNaM gosAlaM
maMkhaliputtaM paNihAya evaM vutte| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne AjIvikopAsaka
sakaDAlaputra se kahA-sakaDAlaputra! kala dopahara ke samaya tuma jaba
azokavATikA meM the jaba eka deva tumhAre samakSa prakaTa huA, AkAzasthita deva
ne tumheM yoM kahA- kala prAta: arhat, kevalI aaeNge| bhagavAn ne sakaDAlaputra
ko usake dvArA vaMdana namana,, paryupAsanA karane ke nizcaya taka kA sArA
vRttAnta khaa| phira usase pUchA-sakaDAlaputra! kyA aisA huA? sakaDAlaputra
bolA-aisA hI huaa| taba bhagavAn ne kahA-sakaDAlaputra! usa deva ne
maMkhaliputra gozAlaka ko lakSita kara vaisA nahIM kahA thaa| sakaDAla para
prabhAva _ 193. tae NaM tassa saddAlaputtassa AjIviovAsayassa samaNeNaM
bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM evaM vuttassa samANassa imeyArUve ajjhathie 4 (ciMtie
patthie maNogae saMkappe)-esa NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre mahAmAhaNe, utpanna-
NANadaMsaNadhare, jAva tcc-kmm-sNpyaa-sNputte| taM seyaM khalu mamaM samaNaM
bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdittA namaMsittA pADihArieNaM pIDha-phalaga jAva (sejjA-
saMthAraeNaM) uvnimNtitte| evaM saMpehei, saMpehittA uTThAe, uDhei, uThettA
samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai, namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI-evaM
khalu bhaMte! mamaM polAsapurassa nayarassa bahiyA paMca kuNbhkaaraavnnsyaa|
tattha NaM tubbhe pADihAriyaM pIDha jAva (phalagasajjA) saMthArayaM ogiNhittA
NaM vihrh| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra dvArA yoM kahe jAne para AjIvikopAsaka
sakaDAlaputra ke mana meM aisA vicAra AyA-zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra hI
mahAmAhana, utpanna jJAna, darzana ke dhAraka tathA satkarma 1. dekheM sUtra-
saMkhyA 11 2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 185 3. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 188 4. dekheM
sUtra-saMkhyA 188

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Upasakadasangasutra 162  [Upasakadasangasutra]  **162** He was endowed with
wealth. Therefore, it was auspicious for me to invite the Venerable Lord
Mahavira by offering prostrations and salutations, and to provide him with a
suitable seat, a platform (bed and bedding). Thinking thus, he got up, offered
prostrations and salutations to the Venerable Lord Mahavira, and said, "O
Bhagavan! Outside the city of Polasapur, I have five hundred potter's workshops.
Please grace them with your presence by accepting a suitable seat, a platform
(bed), and bedding."  **194** The Venerable Lord Mahavira, having heard the
request of the lay follower, Sakdalaputra, accepted it and stayed in his five
hundred potter's workshops, accepting a pure, suitable seat, a platform (bed),
and bedding.  **195** One day, the lay follower, Sakdalaputra, brought out
earthenware vessels from inside the workshop, which were drying in the wind, and
placed them in the sun.  **196** The Venerable Lord Mahavira asked the lay
follower, Sakdalaputra, "Sakdalaputra! How are these earthenware vessels made?"
**197** The lay follower, Sakdalaputra, replied to the Venerable Lord Mahavira,
"O Bhagavan! First, the clay is mixed with water, then it is mixed with ash and
cow dung. After mixing, it is placed on the potter's wheel, and then many pots
(bowls, plates, or jars, half-pots, pitchers, large pots, water-pots), and wells
are made."  1. "Kahan Kato?" Angasutta, p. 405 2. See Sutra 184

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra sampatti-yukta haiM  /  ataH mere lie yaha zreyaskara
hai ki maiM zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vandana-namaskAra kara prAtihArika
pITha, phalaka (zayyA tathA saMstAraka) hetu AmaMtrita karUM  /  yoM vicAra kara
vaha uThA, zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vandana-namaskAra kiyA aura bolA-
bhagavan ! polAsapura nagara ke bAhara merI pAMca-sau kumhAragIrI kI karmazAlAeM
haiN| Apa vahAM prAtihArika pITha, (phalaka, zayyA) saMstAraka grahaNa kara
viraajeN| bhagavAn kA kuMbhakArApaNa meM padArpaNa 194. tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM
mahAvIre saddAlaputtassa AjIviovAsagassa eyamalaiM paDisuNei, paDisuNettA
saddAlaputtassa AjIviovAsagassa paMcakuMbhakArAvaNasaesa phAsuesaNijaM
pADihAriyaM pIDhaphalaga jAva (sejjA) saMthArayaM ogiNhittA NaM vihri| bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra kA yaha nivedana svIkAra kiyA tathA
usakI pAMca sau kumhAragIrI kI karmazAlAoM meM prAsuka, zuddha prAtihArika
pITha, phalaka (zayyA), saMstAraka grahaNa kara bhagavAn avasthita hue| 195. tae
NaM se saddAlaputte AjIviovAsae annayA kayAi vAyAhayayaM kolAlabhaMDaM aMto
sAlAhiMto bahiyA nINei, nINettA, AyavaMsi dlyi| eka dina AjIvikopAsaka
sakaDAlaputra havA lage hue miTTI ke bartana karmazAlA ke bhItara se bAhara lAyA
aura usane unheM dhUpa meM rkhaa| 196. tae NaM se samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
saddAlaputtaM AjIviovAsayaM evaM vavAsIsaddAlaputtA! esa NaM kolAlabhaMDe kao?
bhagavAn mahAvIra ne AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra se kahA-sakaDAlaputra! ye miTTI
ke bartana kaise bane? 197. tae NaM se saddAluputte AjIviovAsae samaNaM bhagavaM
mahAvIraM evaM vayAsIesa NaM bhaMte! puvvi maTTiyA AsI, tao pacchA udaeNaM
nimijai, nimijitA chAreNa ya kariseNa ya egayAo mIsijai, mIsijittA cakke
Arohijjai, tao bahave karagA ya jAva' uTTiyAo ya kjti| AjIvikopAsaka
sakaDAlaputra zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra se bolA-bhagavan ! pahale miTTI ko pAnI
ke sAtha gUMdhA jAtA hai, phira rAkha aura gobara ke sAtha use milAyA jAtA hai ,
yoM milA kara use cAka para rakhA jAtA hai, taba bahuta se karave, (gaDue,
parAteM yA kuMDe, adhaghar3e, kalase, bar3e maTake, surAhiyAM) tathA kUpe banAe
jAte haiN| 1. 'kahaMkato? aMgasuttANi pR. 405 2. dekheM sUtra 184

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra  [163 198. Then the Venerable Lord Mahavira asked the
lay follower Sakdalputra, "Sakdalputra! Are these earthen pots made by effort,
exertion, and endeavor, or are they made without effort, exertion, and
endeavor?" Then the Venerable Lord Mahavira asked the lay follower Sakdalputra,
"Sakdalputra! Are these earthen pots made by effort, exertion, and endeavor, or
are they made without effort, exertion, and endeavor?" 199. Then the lay
follower Sakdalputra replied to the Venerable Lord Mahavira, "Venerable Sir!
They are made without effort, exertion, and endeavor. There is no existence or
place for effort, exertion, and endeavor. All beings are governed by destiny."
Then the lay follower Sakdalputra replied to the Venerable Lord Mahavira,
"Venerable Sir! They are made without effort, exertion, and endeavor. There is
no existence or place for effort, exertion, and endeavor. All beings are
governed by destiny." 200. Then the Venerable Lord Mahavira asked the lay
follower Sakdalputra, "Sakdalputra! If someone were to steal, destroy, break, or
damage an earthen pot, or if someone were to enjoy sensual pleasures with a
woman, what punishment would you give to that person?" Then the Venerable Lord
Mahavira asked the lay follower Sakdalputra, "Sakdalputra! If someone were to
steal, destroy, break, or damage an earthen pot, or if someone were to enjoy
sensual pleasures with a woman, what punishment would you give to that person?"
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or
torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or
torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person."
"Sakdalputra! You would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or
torture that person. You would not prematurely end the life of that person. If
there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by
destiny." "Sakdalputra! You would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon,
beat, or torture that person. You would not prematurely end the life of that
person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of
that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are
governed by destiny." "Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra] [163 198. tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
saddAlaputtaM AjIviovAsayaM evaM vayAsIsaddAlaputtA! esa NaM kolAla-bhaMDe kiM
uThANeNaM jAva' purisakkAra-parakkameNaM kajjati udAhu aNuTThANeNaM jAva'
apurisakkAra-parakkameNaM kajjati? taba zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
AjIvikopAsaka saMkaDAlaputra se pUchA-sakaDAlaputra ! ye miTTI ke bartana kyA
prayatna, purUSArtha evaM udyama dvArA banate haiM, athavA prayatna, purUSArtha
evaM udyama ke binA banate haiM? 199. tae NaM se saddAlaputte AjIviovAsae
samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM evaM vayAsIbhaMte! aNuTThANeNaM jAva apuriskkaar-
prkkmennN| natthi uTThANe i vA jAva parakkame i vA, niyayA svvbhaavaa|
AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ne zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra se kahA-bhagavan !
prayatna, purUSArtha tathA udyama ke binA banate hai| prayatna, purUSArtha evaM
udyama kA koI astitva yA sthAna nahI haiM, sabhI bhAva-hone vAle kArya niyata-
nizcita haiN| 200. tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre saddAlaputtaM AjIviovAsayaM
evaM vayAsIsaddAlaputtA! jai NaM tubbhaM kei purise vAyAhayaM vA pakkellayaM vA
kolAlabhaMDaM avaharejjA vA vikkharejjA vA bhiMdejjA vA acchiMdejA vA
pariTThavejjA vA, aggimittAe vA bhAriyAe saddhiM viulAiM bhogabhogAiM bhuMjamANe
viharejjA, tassa NaM tumaM purisassa kiM daMDaM vattejjAsi? bhaMte! ahaM NaM taM
purisaM nibbhacchejA vA haNejA vA baMdhejA vA mahejA vA tajejA vA tAlejA vA
nicchoDejjA vA nibbhacchejA vA akAle jeva jIviyAo vvrovejaa| saddAlaputtA! no
khalu tubbhaM kei purise vAyAhayaM vA pakkellayaM vA kolAlabhaMDaM avaharai vA
jAva (vikkharai vA bhiMdai vA acchidai vA) pariTThavai vA, aggimittAe vA
bhAriyAe saddhiM viulAI bhogabhogAI bhuMjamANe viharai, no vA tumaM taM purisaM
AAsejasi vA haNejasi vA jAva (baMdhejjasi vA mahejjasi vA tajjejassi vA
tAlejjasi vA nicchoDejjasi vA nibbhacchejjasi vA) akAle ceva jIviyAo
vavarovejjasi; jai natthi uTThANe i vA jAva' parakkame i vA, niyayA svvbhaavaa|
aha NaM tubbhaM kei purise vAyAhayaM jAva (vA pakkellayaM-vA kolAlabhaMDaM
avaharai 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 169 2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 169 3. dekheM
sUtra-saMkhyA 169 4. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 169 5. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 169

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[164] (If a man steals your sun-dried or wind-dried earthenware pots, or
scatters them, or pierces them, or breaks them, or carries them away, or if he
enjoys abundant pleasures with your wife Agni Mitra, what punishment would you
give him?) The Upasaka Sakdalaputra said, "O Bhagavan, I would scold him, or
beat him, or bind him, or trample him, or threaten him, or kill him untimely."
The Bhagavan Mahavira said, "O Sakdalaputra, if there is no effort, no human
endeavor, and all actions are predetermined, then no man would steal your sun-
dried or wind-dried earthenware pots, (or scatter them, or pierce them, or break
them), or carry them away, and no man would enjoy abundant pleasures with your
wife Agni Mitra, and you would not scold him, or beat him, (or bind him, or
trample him, or threaten him, or slap him, or take away his wealth, or denounce
him with harsh words), or kill him untimely (because all this that happened was
predetermined). If you believe that a man actually steals your sun-dried or
wind-dried earthenware pots (or scatters them, or pierces them, or breaks them,
or) carries them away, or enjoys abundant pleasures with your wife Agni Mitra,
and you scold him (or beat him, or bind him, or trample him, or threaten him, or
slap him, or take away his wealth, or denounce him with harsh words) or kill him
untimely, then what you say about the absence of effort, human endeavor, and the
predetermination of all actions is false." Bodhilabha 201. Thus, the Upasaka
Sakdalaputra attained enlightenment. 202. Then, the Upasaka Sakdalaputra bowed
and prostrated before the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, 1. See Sutra number 169.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 164] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra vA vikkharai vA bhiMdai vA acchidaha vA) pariDhuvei
vA, agnimittAe vA jAva (bhAriyAe saddhiM viulAI bhogabhogAiM bhuMjamANe)
viharai, tumaM vA taM purisa Aosesi vA jAva (haNesi vA baMdhesi vA mahesi vA
tajjesi vA tAlesi vA nicchoDesi vA nibbhacchesi vA akAle ceva jIviyAo )
vvrovesi| to jaM vadasinatthi uTThANe i vA jAva' niyayA savvabhAvA, taM te
micchaa| taba zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlapatra se kahA-
sakaDAlapatra! yadi koI purUSa tumhAre havA lage hue yA dhUpa meM sukhAe hue
miTTI ke bartanoM ko curA le yA vikhera de yA unameM cheda kara de yA unheM
phor3a de yA uThAkara bAhara DAla de athavA tumhArI patnI agnimitrA ke sAtha
vipula bhoga bhoge, to usa purUSa ko tuma kyA daMDa doge? sakaDAlaputra bolA-
bhagavan maiM use phaTakArUMgA yA pIlUMgA yA bAMdha dUMgA yA rauMda DAlUMgA yA
tarjita karUMgA-dhamakAUMgA yA asamaya meM hI usake prANa le luuNgaa| bhagavAn
mahAvIra bole-sakaDAlaputra! yadi prayatna, purUSArtha evaM udyama nahIM hai,
sabhI hone vAle kArya nizcita haiM to koI purUSa tumhAre havA lage hue yA dhUpa
meM sUkhAe hue miTTI ke bartanoM ko nahIM curAtA hai, (nahIM bikheratA hai, na
unameM cheda karatA hai, na unheM phor3atA hai), na unheM uThAkara bAhara DAlatA
hai aura na tumhArI patnI agnimitrA ke sAtha vipula bhoga hI bhogatA hai, na
tuma usa purUSa ko phaTakArate ho, na pITate ho, (na bAMdhate ho, na rauMdate
ho, na tarjita karate ho, na thappar3a mArate ho, na usakA dhana chInate ho, na
kaThora vacanoM se usakI bhartsanA karate ho), na asamaya meM hI usake prANa
lete ho (kyoMki yaha saba jo huA, niyata thaa)| _ yadi tuma mAnate ho ki vAstava
meM koI purUSa tumhAre havA lage hue yA dhUpa meM sukhAe hue miTTI ke bartanoM
ko (curAtA hai yA bikheratA hai yA unameM cheda karatA hai yA unheM phor3atA hai
yA) uThAkara bAhara DAla detA hai athavA tumhArI patnI agnimitrA ke sAtha vipula
bhoga bhogatA hai, tuma usa purUSa ko phaTakArate ho (yA pITate ho yA bAMdhate
ho yA rauMdate ho yA tarjita karate ho yA thappar3a-ghuse mArate ho yA usakA
dhana chIna lete ho yA kaThora vacanoM se usakI bhartsanA karate ho) yA asamaya
meM hI usake prANa le lete ho, taba tuma prayatna, purUSArtha Adi ke na hone kI
tathA hone vAle saba kAryoM ke niyata hone kI jo bAta kahate ho, vaha asatya
hai| bodhilAbha 201. ettha NaM se saddAlaputte AjIviovAsae sNbuddhe| isase
AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ko saMbodha prApta huaa| 202. tae NaM se
saddAlaputte AjIviovAsae samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai namasai, 1. dekheM
sUtra-saMkhyA 169

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra  [165] Sakdalputra bowed and prostrated before the
Venerable Lord Mahavira and said, "O Bhagavan! I wish to hear the Dharma from
you."  [203] Then the Venerable Lord Mahavira preached the Dharma to
Sakdalputra, the seeker of livelihood, and the assembly present. Sakdalputra and
Agnimitra accept the vows.  [204] Then, after hearing the Dharma from the
Venerable Lord Mahavira, Sakdalputra, the seeker of livelihood, became extremely
happy and satisfied. His heart was filled with joy, and he accepted the lay-
Dharma. The only difference between his joy and that of others was that
Sakdalputra had one crore gold coins in his treasury as secure wealth, one crore
gold coins invested in business, and one crore gold coins invested in the
splendor, resources, and materials of his home. He had a cattle farm with ten
thousand cows.  Sakdalputra bowed and prostrated before the Venerable Lord
Mahavira. After bowing and prostrating, he left from there, passed through the
middle of the city of Polaspur, and went to his home to his wife Agnimitra. He
said to her, "O Devanupriya! The Venerable Lord Mahavira has arrived. You go and
pay your respects to him, perform paryupaasana,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra] [165 vaMdittA namaMsittA evaM vayAsI-icchAmi
NaM bhaMte! tubbhaM atie dhammaM nisaamette| sakaDAlaputra ne zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra ko vandana-namaskAra kiyA aura unase kahA-bhagavan ! maiM Apase dharma
sunanA cAhatA huuN| 203. tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre saddAlaputtassa
AjIviovAsagassa tIse ya jAva' dhamma prikhei| taba zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ko tathA upasthita pariSad ko dharmopadeza diyaa|
sakaDAlaputra evaM agnimitrA dvArA vrata-grahaNa 204. tae NaM se saddAlaputte
AjIviovAsae samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrasasa aMtie dhamma soccA, nisamma haTTha-
tuTTha jAva' hiyae jahA ANaMdo tahA gihi-dhamma pddivjji| navaraM egA hiraNNa-
koDI nihANa-pauttA, egA hiraNNakoDI vuDvi-pauttA, egA hiraNNa-koDI pavitthara-
pauttA, ege vae, dasa go-sAhassieNaM vaeNaM jAva samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM
vaMdai namaMsai, vaMdittA namaMsittA jeNeva polAsapure nayare, teNeva
uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA polAsapuraM nayaraM majhamajjheNaM jeNeva sae gihe,
jeNeva aggimittA bhAriyA, teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA, aggimittaM evaM
vayAsI-evaM khalu devANuppie! samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre jAva' samosaDhe, taM
gacchAhi NaM tumaM, samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdAhi jAva pajjuvAsAhi ,
samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie paMcANuvvaiyaM sattasikkhAvaiyaM
duvAlasavihaM gihi-dhamma pddivjaahi| AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra se dharma sunakara atyanta prasanna evaM saMtuSTa huA aura
usane Ananda kI taraha zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyaa| Ananda se kevala itanA
antara thA, sakaDAlaputra ke parigraha ke rUpa meM eka karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM
surakSita dhana ke rUpa meM khajAne meM rakhI thI, eka karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM
vyApAra meM lagI thI tathA eka karor3a-mudrAeM ghara ke vaibhava-sAdhana-sAmagrI
meM lagI thiiN| usake eka gokula thA, jisameM dasa hajAra gAyeM thiiN|
sakaDAlaputra ne zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vaMdana-namaskAra kiyaa| vaMdana-
namaskAra kara vaha vahAM se calA, polAsapura nagara ke bIca se gujaratA huA,
apane ghara apanI patnI agnimitrA ke pAsa AyA aura usase bolA-devAnupriye !
zramaNa bhagavAna mahAvIra padhAre haiM , tuma jAo unakI vaMdanA, paryupAsanA 1.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 11 2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 12 3. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 9 4.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 58

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[166] Accept the twelve types of Shravak-Dharma from them, which are the five
Anuvratas and the seven Shikshavrata. [205] Then, Agni Mitra, the wife of the
Shramanopasak Sakdalputra, accepted her husband's statement with humility,
saying, "You are right." [206] Then, the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra called his
servants and said, "Devānupriyās! Prepare a chariot, a superior vehicle for
religious purposes, which is swift-moving, has uniform hooves, tails, and horns
painted in various colors, adorned with golden ornaments and yokes, with silver
bells hanging from its neck, and a thin thread tied to its nose with a fine gold
wire, held by carriers with a rope made of silk, adorned with blue lotus
flowers, drawn by two young bulls, decorated with various gems and many golden
bells, made of fine wood, perfectly straight, excellent, and beautiful, with
superior characteristics. Prepare it quickly and inform me." [207] Then, the
servants, upon hearing the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra's words, (being extremely
delighted, experiencing joy and pleasure in their minds, with extremely gentle
mental states, and hearts overflowing with joy, folded their hands, circled
their heads, and bowed their heads, addressing Sakdalputra with the respectful
word "Swami," and accepting his statement with humility, listened to his words.
Hearing this, they quickly presented the superior vehicle drawn by swift-moving
bulls.) [208] Then, Agni Mitra, his wife, bathed, (performed the rituals of
Kayabalika, Kayakouya,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra karo, unase pAMca aNuvrata tathA sAta zikSAvrata rUpa
bAraha prakAra kA zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kro| 205. tae NaM sA aggimittA bhAriyA
saddAlaputtassa samaNovAsagassa 'taha' tti eyamaDhaM viNaeNa pddisunnei|
zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra kI patnI agnimitrA ne 'Apa ThIka kahate hai ' yoM
kahakara vinayapUrvakaapane pati kA kathana svIkAra kiyaa| 206. tae NaM se
saddAlaputte samaNovAsae koDumbiyapurise saddAvei, saddAvettA evaM vayAsI-
khippAmeva, bho devANuppiyA! lahu karaNa-jutta-joiyaM, samakhura-
bAlihANasamalihiya-siMgaehiM , jaMbUNayA-maya-kalAva-jotta-paivisiTThaehiM,
rayayAmaya-ghaMTasuttarajjuga-varakaMcaNa-khaiya-natthA-paggahoggahiyaehiM,
nIluppala-kayAmelaehiM, pavara-goNajuvANaehiM , nANA-maNi-kaNaga-ghaMTiyA-
jAlaparigayaM, sujAya-juga-jutta, ujjugapasatthasuviraiya-nimmiyaM, pavara-
lakkhaNovaveyaM juttAmeva dhammiyaM jANa-ppavaraM uvaTThaveha, uvaDhevettA mama
eyamANattiyaM pccppinnh| taba zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ne apane sevakoM ko
bulAyA aura kahA-devAnupriyoM! teja calane vAle, eka jaise khUra, pUMcha tathA
aneka raMgoM se citrita sIMga vAle, gale meM sone ke gahane aura jota dhAraNa
kie, gale se laTakatI cA~dI kI ghaMTiyoM sahita nAka meM uttama sone ke tAroM se
mizrita patalI sI sUta kI nAtha se jur3I rAsa ke sahAre vAhakoM dvArA samhAle
hue, nIle kamaloM se bane AbharaNayukta mastaka vAle, do yuvA bailoM dvArA
khIMce jAte, aneka prakAra kI maNiyoM aura sone kI bahuta-sI ghaMTiyoM se yukta,
bar3hiyA lakar3I ke ekadama sIdhe, uttama aura sundara bane hue jue sahita,
zreSTha lakSaNoM se yukta dhArmikadhArmika kAryoM meM upayoga meM Ane vAlA
yAnapravara-zreSTha ratha taiyAra karoM, taiyAra kara zIghra mujhe sUcanA do|
207. tae NaM te koDuMbiya-purisA jAva (saddAlaputteNaM samaNovAsaeNaM evaM vuttA
samANA haTThatuTThacittamANaMdiyA, pIimaNA, paramasomaNassiyA,
harisavasavisappamANahiyayA, karayalapariggahiyaM sirasAvattaM matthae aMjaliM
kaTu 'evaM sAmi!' tti ANAe viNaeNaM vayaNaM paDisuNeti, paDisuNettA khippAmeva
lahukaraNajuttajoiyaM jAva dhammiyaM jANappavaraM uvaTThavettA tamANattiyaM)
pccppinnNti| zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra dvArA yoM kahe jAne para sevakoM ne
(atyanta prasanna hote hue, citta meM Ananda evaM prIti kA anubhava karate hue,
atIva saumya mAnasika bhAvoM se yukta tathA harSAtireka se vikasita hRdaya ho,
hAtha jor3e , sira ke cAroM ora ghumAe tathA aMjali bAMdhe 'svAmI' yoM
AdarapUrNa zabda se sakaDAlaputra ko sambodhita-pratyuttarita karate hue unakA
kathana svIkRtipUrNa bhAva se vinaya-pUrvaka sunA  /  sunakara teja calane vAle
bailoM dvArA khIMce jAte uttama yAna ko zIghra hI upasthita kiyaa| 208. tae NaM
sA aggimittA bhAriyA NhAyA jAva (kayabalikammA, kayakouya

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakadalputra] - [167 Mangal-) Having bathed (performed daily and
occasional duties, adorned the body, performed auspicious rituals to ward off
bad dreams and other defects), wearing pure, assembly-worthy (auspicious,
excellent) clothes, adorned the body with a few precious ornaments, surrounded
by a group of maids, she mounted a religious, excellent chariot, having mounted,
she passed through the middle of the city of Polaspur, having passed, she
reached the Sahasramravan garden, having reached, she descended from the
religious, excellent chariot, surrounded by a group of maids, she went to where
the Lord Mahavira was seated, having gone, she (performed three clockwise and
counterclockwise circumambulations), paid homage and prostrated, having paid
homage and prostrated, she stood with folded hands, not too close nor too far
from the Lord Mahavira, facing him, listening attentively, with humility, she
began to worship. _Then the wife of Sakadalputra, Agni Mitra, bathed, (performed
daily and occasional duties, adorned the body, performed auspicious rituals to
ward off bad dreams and other defects), wore pure, assembly-worthy (auspicious,
excellent) clothes, adorned the body with a few precious ornaments. Surrounded
by a group of maids, she mounted a religious, excellent chariot, having mounted,
she passed through the middle of the city of Polaspur, having passed, she
reached the Sahasramravan garden, having reached, she descended from the
religious, excellent chariot, surrounded by a group of maids, she went to where
the Lord Mahavira was seated, having gone, she (performed three clockwise and
counterclockwise circumambulations), paid homage and prostrated, having paid
homage and prostrated, she stood with folded hands, not too close nor too far
from the Lord Mahavira, facing him, listening attentively, with humility, she
began to worship. 209. Then the Lord Mahavira, the Ascetic, preached the Dharma
to Agni Mitra and the assembly present. The Ascetic Lord Mahavira preached the
Dharma to Agni Mitra and the assembly present. 210. Then that wife, Agni Mitra,
having listened to the Dharma from the Ascetic Lord Mahavira, with joy and
without hesitation, paid homage and prostrated to the Ascetic Lord Mahavira,
having paid homage and prostrated, she said, "I will become a Niggantha, Lord! I
will become a Niggantha, Lord! I will become a Niggantha, Lord! Thus, Lord!" As
you have said. Just as there are many who, in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās,
(kings, Kshatriyas, Mahājanas, Bhāḍas, Jōhas, Pasathāras, Mallās, Lecchās, and
other many kings, sword-wielders, club-wielders, codas, and other envious,
wealthy, army-commanders, and ministers) become monks, leaving their homes, I
will not do so in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās, becoming a monk, leaving my
home. I will renounce the five vows, the seven trainings, and the twelve
householder-dharmas in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās. Alas, Devānupāpiyās!
Do not kill me. The wife of Sakadalputra, Agni Mitra, having listened to the
Dharma from the Ascetic Lord Mahavira, with joy and without hesitation, paid
homage and prostrated to the Ascetic Lord Mahavira, having paid homage and
prostrated, she said, "I will become a Niggantha, Lord! I will become a
Niggantha, Lord! I will become a Niggantha, Lord! Thus, Lord!" As you have said.
Just as there are many who, in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās, (kings,
Kshatriyas, Mahājanas, Bhāḍas, Jōhas, Pasathāras, Mallās, Lecchās, and other
many kings, sword-wielders, club-wielders, codas, and other envious, wealthy,
army-commanders, and ministers) become monks, leaving their homes, I will not do
so in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās, becoming a monk, leaving my home. I
will renounce the five vows, the seven trainings, and the twelve householder-
dharmas in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās. Alas, Devānupāpiyās! Do not kill
me. 1. See Sutra number 11.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra] - [167 maMgala-) pAyacchittA suddhappAvesAiM
jAva (maMgallAiM vatthAi pavara parihiyA) appamahagghAbharaNAlaMkiyasarIrA,
ceDiyA-cakkavAla-parikiNNA dhammiyaM jANappavaraM durUhai, durUhittA polApura
nagaraM majhaMmajjheNaM niggacchai, niggacchittA jeNeva sahassaMbavaNe ujjANe
teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA dhammiyAo jANAo paccoruhai, paccorUhittA
ceDiyAcakkavAla-parivuDA jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre teNeva uvAgacchai,
uvAgacchittA tikkhutto jAva (AyAhiNaM payAhiNaM karei, karettA) vaMdai namasai,
vaMdittA namaMsittA naccAsanne nAidUre jAva (sussUsamANA, namasamANA abhimuhe
viNaeNaM) paMjaliuDA ThiiyA ceva pjjuvaasi| _taba sakaDAlaputra kI patnI
agnimitrA ne snAna kiyA, (nitya-naimittika kArya kie, deha-sajjA kI, duHsvapna
Adi doSa-nivAraNa hetu maMgala-vidhAna kiyA), zuddha, sabhAyogya (mAMgalika,
uttama) vastra pahane, thor3e-se bahumUlya AbhUSaNoM se deha ko alaMkRta kiyaa|
dAsiyoM ke samUha se ghirI vaha dhArmika uttama ratha para savAra huI, savAra
hokara polAsapura nagara ke bIca se gujaratI sahastrAmravana udyAna meM AI,
dhArmika uttama ratha se nIce utarI, dAsiyoM ke samUha se ghirI jahA~ bhagavAn
mahAvIra virAjita the, vahA~ gaI, jAkara (tIna bAra AdakSiNa-pradakSiNA kI),
vaMdana-namaskAra kiyA, bhagavAn mahAvIra ke na adhika nikaTa na adhika dUra
sammukha avasthita ho namana karatI huI, sunane kI utkaMThA lie, vinayapUrvaka
hAtha jor3e paryupAsanA karane lgii| 209. tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
aggimittAe tIse ya jAva' dhammaM khei| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne agnimitrA ko
tathA upasthita pariSad ko dharmopadeza diyaa| 210. tae NaM sA aggimittA bhAriyA
samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie dhamma soccA, nisamma haTTha-tuTThA samaNaM
bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA, namaMsittA evaM vayAsIsadahAmi NaM,
bhaMte! niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM jAva (pattiyAmi NaM, bhaMte! niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM,
roemi NaM bhaMte! niggaMthaM pAvayaNaM, evameyaM, bhaMte!) se jaheyaM tubbhe
vyh| jahA NaM devANuppiyANaM aMtie bahave uggA, bhogA jAva (rAiNNA, khattiyA,
mAhaNA, bhaDA, johA, pasatthAro, mallaI, lecchaI, aNNe ya bahave rAIsara-
talavara-mADaMviya-koDaM biya-ibbha-seTThi-seNAvaisatthavAhappabhiiyA muMDA
bhavittA agArAo aNagAriyaM) pavvaiyA, no khalu ahaM tahA saMcAemi devANuppiyANaM
aMtie muMDA bhavittA jAva ( agArAo aNagAriyaM pvvitte|) ahaM NaM devANuppiyANaM
aMtie paMcANuvvaiyaM satta-sikkhAvaiyaM duvAlasavihaM gihi-dhamma pddivjissaami|
ahAsuhaM , devANuppiyA! mA paDivadhaM kreh| sakaDAlaputra kI patnI agnimitrA
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra se dharma kA zravaNa kara harSita evaM 1. dekheM
sUtra-saMkhyA 11  /

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[168] The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra was pleased. She bowed and paid homage to the
Lord. After bowing and paying homage, she said, "O Bhagavan! I have faith in the
Nirgrantha teachings (I believe in the Nirgrantha teachings, the Nirgrantha
teachings are pleasing to me, O Bhagavan! This is so, this is true, this is the
truth, this is desired, this is accepted, this is desired and accepted), as you
have expounded, so it is. O Devānupriya! Just as many of your fierce guardians,
ministers of the king of enjoyment (members of the council of advisors of the
king of the Rajanya, officials of the Kshatriya dynasty, Brahmanas, Subhatas,
warriors, soldiers, administrators, members of the Mallaki republic, members of
the Lichchhavi republic, and many other kings, powerful, sword-wielding,
arrogant, wealthy, wealthy commanders and merchants) etc. have become monks,
having renounced their household life, I am unable to become a monk (by
renouncing my household life and entering the Anāgāra dharma). Therefore, I wish
to take the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, twelve types of Shravaka
dharma from you.  When Agni Mitra said this, the Lord said, "O Devānupriya! Do
what makes you happy, do not delay."  **Discussion**  The words Mallaki and
Lichchhavi in this Sutra point to a very important period in Indian history.
While today, Europe, especially England, is often called the birthplace of
democracy (mother of democracy), in India, the successful use of a democratic
system of government took place millennia ago. In the time of Bhagavan Mahavira
and Buddha, there were many such states in what is now eastern Uttar Pradesh and
Bihar, where people elected representatives to govern according to their own
special republican system. The word "king" was used for them too, but it did not
denote the owner of a hereditary kingdom. The word "king" is used for both
Bhagavan Mahavira's father Siddhartha and Buddha's father Shuddhodana, but they
were elected kings or members of the council of government of the confederate
states, who were responsible for the governance of a particular area.  These
confederate states are described in many places in ancient Pali and Prakrit
texts. Some confederacies would join together to form a larger confederacy. The
Vajji confederacy was famous, which included mainly the Lichchhavis, Nāyas
(Jñātrikas), and Vajjis. The Shakyas of Kapilavastu, the Mallas of Pava and
Kushinara, the Mauryas of Pippalivan, the Videhas of Mithila, the Lichchhavis of
Vaishali, and the Nāyas were very famous in the confederate states of that time.
The word Mallaki used here is for those associated with the Malla confederate
state, and the word Lichchhavi is for those associated with the Lichchhavi
confederate state. Bhagavan Mahavira's father Siddhartha was associated with the
Lichchhavi and Nāya confederacies. The head of the Lichchhavi confederate state
was Chetaka, whose sister Trishala was married to Siddhartha. That is, Chetaka
was Bhagavan Mahavira's maternal uncle. The Kalpasutra mentions a federal
community consisting of nine Mallakis, nine Lichchhavis, and eighteen republics
of Kashi and Kosala.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 168] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra parituSTa huii| usane bhagavAn ko vaMdana-namaskAra
kiyaa| vaMdana-namaskAra kara vaha bolI-bhagavan ! mujhe nirgrantha-pravacana
meM zraddhA hai, (vizvAsa hai, nirgrantha-pravacana mujhe rUcikara hai, bhagavan
! yaha aisA hI hai, yaha tathya hai, satya hai, icchita hai, pratIcchita hai ,
icchita-pratIcchita hai,) jaisA Apane pratipAdita kiyA, vaisA hI hai|
devAnupriya! jisa prakAra Apake pAsa bahuta se ugra-ArakSaka-adhikArI, bhoga-
rAjA ke mantrImaNDala ke sadasya (rAjanya-rAjA ke parAmarzaka maNDala ke
sadasya, kSatriya-kSatriya vaMza ke rAjakarmacArI, brAhmaNa, subhaTa, yoddhA-
yuddhopajIvI-sainika, prazAstA-prazAsana-adhikArI, mallaki-malla-gaNarAjya ke
sadasya, licchivi-licchivi gaNarAjya ke sadasya tathA anya aneka rAjA,
aizvaryazAlI, talavara, mADaMbika, kauTumbika, dhanI, zreSThI senApati evaM
sArthavAha) Adi muDita hokara, gRhavAsa kA parityAga kara anagAra yA zramaNa ke
rUpa meM pravrajita hue, maiM usa prakAra muMDita hokara (gRhavAsa kA parityAga
kara anagAra-dharma meM) pravrajita hone meM asamartha huuN| isalie Apake pAsa
pAMca aNuvrata, sAta zikSAvrata rUpa bAraha prakAra kA zrAvaka-dharma grahaNa
karanA cAhatI huuN| agnimitrA ke yoM kahane para bhagavAn ne kahA-devAnupriye !
jisase tumako sukha ho, vaisA karoM, vilamba mata kro| vivecana isa sUtra meM Ae
mallaki aura licchivi nAma bhAratIya itihAsa ke eka bar3e mahattvapUrNa samaya
kI ora saMketa karate haiN| vaise Aja bolacAla meM yUropa ko, vizeSata:
iMglaiNDa ko prajAtantra kA janmasthAna (mother of democracy) kaha diyA jAtA
hai, para bhAratavarSa meM prajAtantrAtmaka zAsanapraNAlI kA saphala prayoga
sahastrAbdiyoM pUrva ho cukA thaa| bhagavan mahAvIra evaM buddha ke samaya Aja
ke pUrvI uttarapradeza tathA tathA bihAra meM aneka aise rAjya the, jahA~ usa
samaya kI apanI eka vizeSa gaNatantrAtmaka praNAlI se janatA dvArA cune gae
pratinidhi zAsana karate the| zabda unake lie bhI rAjA thA, para vaha vaMza-
kramAgata rAjya ke svAmI kA dyotaka nahIM thaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pitA
siddhArtha tathA buddha ke pitA zuddhodhana donoM ke lie rAjA zabda AyA hai,
para ve saMgha-rAjyoM ke nirvAcita rAjA yA zAsanapariSad ke sadasya the, jina
para eka kSetra-vizeSa ke zAsana kA uttaradAyitva thaa| prAcIna pAlI tathA
prAkRta granthoM meM ina saMgha-rAjyoM kA aneka sthAnoM para varNana AyA hai|
kucha saMgha mila kara apanA eka vRhat saMgha bhI banA lete the| aise saMghoM
meM vajjisaMgha prasiddha thA, jisameM mukhyataH licchivi, nAya (jJAtRka) tathA
vaji Adi sammilita the| usa samaya ke saMgha-rAjyoM meM kapilavastu ke zAkya,
pAvA tathA kuzInArA ke malla, pippalivana ke maurya, mithilA ke videha, vaizAlI
ke licchivi tathA nAya bahuta prasiddha the| yahAM prayukta mallaki zabda malla
saMgha-rAjya se sambaddha janoM ke lie tathA licchivi zabda licchivi saMgha-
rAjya se sambaddha janoM ke lie hai| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pitA siddhArtha
licchivi aura nAya saMgha se sambaddha the| licchivi saMgha-rAjya ke pradhAna
ceTaka the, jinakI bahina trizalA kA vivAha siddhArtha se huA thaa| arthAt
ceTaka bhagavAn mahAvIra ke mAmA the| kalpasUtra meM eka aise saMghIya-samudAya
kA ullekha hai, jisameM nau mallaki, nau licchivi tathA kAzI, kosala ke 18
gaNarAjya

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Study: Sakdalputra  [169 were gathered. This assembly was led by
Chetak. Its main purpose was to face the attack of Kunik Ajatashatru. _ The
description of the parliaments, systems, administration, etc. of these republics
that we read in Pali and Prakrit texts reveals that our country had thought
deeply about the democratic system thousands of years ago. The republic had an
assembly, which served both as the government and the judiciary. The head of the
republic, who presided, was called the chief king. The republic had a capital,
where assemblies were held. The capital of the Lichchhavis was Vaishali. At that
time, our country was at the peak of wealth, grain and prosperity. Vaishali was
a very prosperous and advanced city during the time of Lord Mahavira and Buddha.
According to a Tibetan account, Vaishali was divided into three parts, which had
seven thousand, fourteen thousand and twenty-one thousand houses respectively.
Vaishali was a metropolis at that time, so these three divisions were probably
Vaishali, Kundapur and Vanijyagram. Lord Mahavira also has a special name,
Vesaliy (associated with Vaishali). Lord Mahavira was associated with the Nay
(known) Sangha under the Lichchhavi Sangha. 211. Then, that Agni Mitra, having
accepted the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, the twelve types of Shravak
Dharma from the Saman Bhagavan Mahavira, bowed and prostrated to the Saman
Bhagavan Mahavira. Having bowed and prostrated, she mounted the same righteous
chariot and returned in the same direction from which she had come. Departure of
the Lord 212. Then, the Saman Bhagavan Mahavira departed from the city of
Polasapura, the Sahasrambavana garden, and spent a day wandering in other
Janapadas. 213. Then, that Sakdalputra became a Shramanopasaka, knowing the
Jiva-Ajiv and other principles. He began to live a religious life. Arrival of
Goshalak 214. Then, that Gosala Mankaliputra, known as the Laddha, the Saman,
said to Sakdalputra: 1. See Sutra number 64.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra] [169 sammilita the| yaha saMgaThana ceTaka
ke netRtva meM huA thaa| isakA mukhya uddezya kuNika ajAtazatru ke AkramaNa kA
sAmanA karanA thaa| _ ina saMgharAjyoM kI saMsadoM, vyavasthA, prazAsana ityAdi
kA jo varNana hama pAlI, prAkRta granthoM meM par3hate haiM, usase prakaTa hotA
hai ki hamAre deza meM janatantrAtmaka praNAlI ke sandarbha meM sahastroM varSa
pUrva bar3I gaharAI se cintana huA thaa| saMgha kI eka sabhA hotI thI, vaha
zAsana aura nyAya donoM kA kAma karatI thii| saMghakA pradhAna, jo adhyakSatA
karatA thA, mukhya rAjA kahalAtA thaa| saMgha kI eka rAjadhAnI hotI thI. jahAM
sabhAoM kA Ayojana hotA thaa| licchiviyoM kI rAjadhAnI vaizAlI thii| usa samaya
hamArA deza dhana, dhAnya aura samRddhi meM carama utkarSa para thaa| bhagavAn
mahAvIra aura buddha ke samaya vaizAlI bar3I samRddha aura unnata nagarI thii|
eka tibbatI ullekha ke anusAra vaizAlI tIna bhAgoM meM vibhakta thI, jinameM
kramazaH sAta hajAra caudaha hajAra tathA ikkIsa hajAra ghara the| vaizAlI usa
samaya kI mahAnagarI thI, isalie ye tIna vibhAga saMbhavataH vaizAlI, kuMDapura
aura vANijyagrAma hoN| bhagavAn mahAvIra kA eka vizeSa nAma vesAliya (vaizAlI se
sambaddha) bhI hai  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra licchivi saMgha ke antargata nAya
(jJAta) saMgha se sambaddha the| 211. tae NaM sA aggimittA bhAriyA samaNassa
bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtie paMcANuvaiyaM sattasikkhAvaiyaM duvAlasa-vihaM
sAvaga-dhamma paDivajjai, paDivajittA saMmaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdaDa
namaMsaDa.vaMdittA namaMsittA tameva dhammiyaM jANa-ppavaraM darUhar3a. darU
jAmeva disiM pAubbhUyA, tAmeva disiM pddigyaa| taba agnimitrA ne zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa pAMca aNuvrata, sAta zikSAvrata rUpa bAraha prakAra kA
zrAvakadharma svIkAra kiyA, zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko vaMdana-namaskAra
kiyaa| vaMdananamaskAra kara usI uttama dhArmika ratha para savAra huI tathA
jisa dizA se AI thI usI kI ora lauTa gii| bhagavAn kA prasthAna 212. tae NaM
samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre annayA kayAi polAsapurAo nayarAo sahassaMbavaNAo
ujjANAo paDiniggacchai, paDiniggacchittA bahiyA jaNavayavihAraM vihri|
tadanantara zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra polAsapura nagara se, sahastrAmravana
udyAna se prasthAna kara eka dina anya janapadoM meM vihAra kara ge| 213. tae
NaM se saddAlaputte samaNovAsae jAe abhigayajIvAjIve jAva' vihri| tatpazcAt
sakaDAlaputra jIva-ajIva Adi tatvoM kA jJAtA zramaNopAsaka ho gyaa| dhArmika
jIvana jIne lgaa| gozAlaka kA Agamana 214. tae NaM se gosAle maMkhaliputte imIse
kahAe laddhaDhe samANe-evaM khalu saddAlaputte 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 64 /

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[170] The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra states that the Ajivika Sadalputra abandoned the
Ajivika doctrine and embraced the teachings of the Shramanas (Jain monks).
Mankhaliputra Gosala, upon hearing this, decided to visit Sadalputra and
persuade him to return to the Ajivika fold. He traveled to the city of
Polasapura with the Ajivika community, entered the Ajivika assembly, and then,
along with some other Ajivikas, went to where Sadalputra was staying.
Sadalputra, upon seeing Mankhaliputra Gosala, ignored him, neither acknowledging
him nor showing him any respect. He remained silent, ignoring Gosala's presence.
[215] Mankhaliputra Gosala, seeing Sadalputra's indifference, began to praise
the virtues of the Shramanas, particularly the great Mahavira, hoping to win him
back. He addressed Sadalputra, saying, "Devānupriya! Did a great Mahamahan come
here?"  [216] Sadalputra responded, "Devānupriya! Who was this Mahamahan?" (He
was asking who Gosala was referring to.)  [217] Mankhaliputra Gosala replied,
"The Shramanas..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra AjIviya-samayaM vamittA samaNANaM niggaMthANaM
diddhiM pddivne| taM gacchAmi NaM saddAlaputtaM AjIviovAsayaM samaNANaM
niggaMthANaM diddhiM vAmettA puNaravi AjIviya-diDhei geNhAvittae tti kaTu evaM
saMpehei, saMpehettA AjIviya-saMghasaMparivuDe jeNeva polAsapure nayare, jeNeva
AjIviyasabhA, teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA AjIviyasabhAe bhaMDaga-nikkhebaM
karei, karettA kaivaehiM AjIviehiM saddhiM jeNeva saddAlaputte samaNovAsae
teNeva uvaagcchi| kucha samaya bAda maMkhaliputra gozAlaka ne yaha sunA ki
sakaDAlaputra AjIvika-siddhAnta ko chor3a kara zramaNa-nigranthoM kI dRSTi-
darzana yA mAnyatA svIkAra kara cukA hai, taba usane vicAra kiyA ki maiM
AjIvikopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ke pAsa jAU~ aura zramaNa nirgranthoM kI mAnyatA
chur3Akara use phira AjIvika-siddhAnta grahaNa krvaauuN| yoM vicAra kara vaha
AjIvika saMgha ke sAtha polAsapura nagara meM AyA, AjIvika-sabhA meM pahuMcA,
vahAM apane pAtra, upakaraNa rakhe katipaya AjIvikoM ke sAtha jahAM
sakaDAlaputra thA, vahAM gyaa| sakaDAlaputra dvArA upekSA 215. tae NaM se
saddAlaputte samaNovAsae gosAlaM maMkhali-puttaM ejamANaM pAsai, pAsittA no
ADhAi, no parijANAi, aNADhAyamANe aparijANamANe tusiNIe sNcitttthi|
zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ne maMkhaliputra gozAlaka ko Ate hue dekhaa|
dekhakara na use Adara diyA aura na paricita jaisA vyavahAra hI kiyaa| Adara na
karatA huA, paricita kA sA vyavahAra na karatA huA, arthAt upekSAbhAvapUrvaka
vaha cupacApa baiThA rhaa| gozAlaka dvArA bhagavAn kA guNa-kIrtana 216. tae NaM
se gosAle maMkhaliputte saddAlaputteNaM samaNovAsaeNaM aNADhAijamANe
aparijANijjamANe pIDha-phalaga-sijjA-saMthAraTThayAe samaNassa bhagavao
mahAvIrassa guNakittaNaM karemANe saddAlaputtaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-Agae
NaM, devANuppiyA! ihaM mahAmAhaNe? zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra se Adara na
prApta kara, usakA upekSA bhAva dekha maMkhaliputra gozAlaka pITha, phalaka,
zayyA tathA saMstAraka Adi prApta karane hetu zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra kA guNa-
kIrtana karatA huA zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra se bolAdevAnupriya! kyA yahAM
mahAmAhana Ae the? 217. tae NaM se saddAlaputte samaNovAsae gosAlaM
maMkhaliputtaM evaM vayAsI-ke NaM, devANuppiyA! mahAmAhaNe? zramaNopAsaka
sakaDAlaputra ne maMkhaliputra gozAlaka se kahA-devAnupriya! kauna mahAmAhana?
(ApakA kisase abhiprAya hai?) 218. tae NaM gosAle maMkhaliputte saddAlaputtaM
samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-samaNe

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sadalputra  The Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror.
Sadalputra, by what name is the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known?
Indeed, Sadalputra, the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, is known as the
one who has attained knowledge and insight, the one who is worthy of great
respect, the one who has attained the complete destruction of karma. Thus,
Sadalputra, by this name is the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.
Did the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, come to this Mahagova? Did the
Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, come to this Mahagova? The Venerable
Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, came to this Mahagova. Thus, Sadalputra, by this
name is the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.  Indeed, Sadalputra,
the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, in this forest of samsara, many
beings are perishing, decaying, being cut, being broken, being destroyed, being
consumed, being extinguished, being guided by the righteous path, being brought
together, and attaining the great liberation. Thus, Sadalputra, by this name is
the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.  Did the Venerable Mahavira,
the Great Conqueror, come to this Mahasatthavaha? Did the Venerable Mahavira,
the Great Conqueror, come to this Mahasatthavaha? The Venerable Mahavira, the
Great Conqueror, came to this Mahasatthavaha. Thus, Sadalputra, by this name is
the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.  Indeed, Sadalputra, the
Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, in this forest of samsara, many beings
are perishing, decaying, being cut, being broken, being destroyed, being
consumed, being extinguished, being guided by the righteous path, being brought
together, and attaining the great liberation. Thus, Sadalputra, by this name is
the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.  Did the Venerable Mahavira,
the Great Conqueror, come to this Maha-dhamma-kahi? Did the Venerable Mahavira,
the Great Conqueror, come to this Maha-dhamma-kahi? The Venerable Mahavira, the
Great Conqueror, came to this Maha-dhamma-kahi. Thus, Sadalputra, by this name
is the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.  1. See Sutra - Number
188. 2. See Sutra - Number 188.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra ] bhagavaM mahAvIre mahAmAhaNe  /
sekeNaTTheNaM, devANuppiyA! evaM vuccai samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre mahAmAhaNe ?
evaM khalu, saddAlaputtA ! samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre mahAmAhaNe uppanna - NANa-
daMsaNadhare jAva' mahiya-pUie jAva' tacca - kamma- saMpayA - saMpautte  /  se
teNaTTheNaM devANuppiyA! evaM vuccai samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre mahAmAhaNe  /
Agae NaM devANuppiyA ! ihaM mahAgove ? ke NaM, devANuppiyA ! mahAgove ? samaNe
bhagavaM mahAvIremahAgove  /  sekeNaTTheNaM, devANuppiyA ! jAva ( evaM vuccai -
samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre ) mahAgove  /  evaM khalu, devANuppiyA ! samaNe
bhagavaM mahAvIre saMsArADavIe bahave jIve nassamANe, viNassamANe, khajjamANe,
chijjamANe, bhijjamANe, luppamANe, viluppamANe, dhammamaeNaM daMDeNaM
sArakkhamANe, saMgovemANe, nivvANa - mahAvADaM sAhatthiM sNpaavei| se
teNaTTheNaM, saddAlaputtA! evaM vuccai samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre mahAgove  /
Agae NaM, devANuppiyA ! ihaM mahAsatthavAhe? ke NaM, devANuppiyA! mahAsatthavAhe
? saddAlaputtA! samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre mahAsatthavAhe  /  sekeNaTTheNaM? [ 171
evaM khalu devANuppiyA ! samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre saMsArADavIe bahave jIve
nassamANe, viNassamANe, jAva (khajjamANe, chijjamANe, bhijjamANe, luppamANe )
viluppamANe dhammamaeNaM paMtheNaM sArakkhamANe nivvANa - mahApaTTaNAbhimuhe
sAhatthiM saMpAvei  /  se teNaTTheNaM, saddAlaputtA ! evaM vuccai samaNe
bhagavaM mahAvIre mahAsatthavAhe  /  Agae NaM, devANuppiyA! ihaM mahAdhammakahI!
ke NaM, devANuppiyA!. mahAdhammakahI ? samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre mahAdhammakahI
/  sekeNaTTheNaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre mahAdhammakahI ? 1. dekheM sUtra -
saMkhyA 188  /  2. dekheM sUtra - saMkhyA 188  /

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[172] And, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great Mahālaya,
in this world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being
eaten, being cut, being pierced, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led
astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of
wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four
hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world.
Therefore, Devānupriyā! Thus is the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra called the Great
Dharma-speaker.  Come now, Devānupriyā! Is there a Great Protector here? Who,
Devānupriyā! is the Great Protector? The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra is the Great
Protector. By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in
this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being
destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled
in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by
the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and
the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?  Thus,
Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world,
saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being
disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions,
overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic
obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four
hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The
Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings
who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led
astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of
wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four
hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world.
By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great
ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being
mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of
passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic
obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four
hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The
Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings
who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led
astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of
wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four
hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world.
By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great
ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being
mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of
passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic
obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four
hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The
Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings
who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led
astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of
wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four
hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world.
By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great
ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being
mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of
passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic
obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four
hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The
Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings
who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led
astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of
wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four
hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world.
By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great
ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being
mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of
passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic
obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four
hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The
Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings
who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led
astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of
wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four
hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world.
By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great
ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being
mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of
passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic
obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four
hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?  Thus, Devānupriyā! The
Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings
who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led
astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of
wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four
hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 172] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra evaM khalu, devANuppiyA! samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
mahai-mahAlayaMsi saMsAraMsi bahave jIve nassamANe, viNassamANe, khajamANe,
chijamANe, bhijamANe, luppamANe, viluppamANe, ummaggapaDivanne, sappaha-
vippaNaThe micchatta-balAbhibhUe, aTThaviha-kamma-tama-paDalapaDocchanne,
bahUhiM aTThehi ya jAva' vAgaraNehi ya cAuraMtAo saMsArakaMtArAo sAhatthiM
nitthaarei| se teNaTThaNaM, devANuppiyA! evaM vuccai samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
mhaadhmmkhii| Agae NaM, devANuppiyA! ihaM mahAnijAmae? ke NaM, devANuppiyA!
mahAnijAmae? samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre mhaanijaame| se keNaDheNaM? evaM khalu,
devANuppiyA! samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre saMsAra-mahA-samudde bahave jIve
nassamANe, viNassamANe jAva' viluppamANe buDDamANe, nibuDDamANe, uppiyamANe
dhammamaIe nAvAe nivvANa-tIrAbhimuhe sAhatthi sNpaavei| teNaDheNaM, devANuppiyA!
evaM vuccai samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre mhaanijaame| maMkhaliputra gozAlaka ne
zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra se kahA-zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra mahAmAhana haiM
sakaDAlaputra-devAnupriya! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko mahAmAhana kisa
abhiprAya se kahate ho? gozAlaka-sakaDAlapatra! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra
apratihata jJAna-darzana ke dhAraka haiM , tInoM lokoM dvArA sevita evaM pUjita
haiM , satkarmasampatti se yukta haiM, isalie maiM unheM mahAmAhana kahatA huuN|
gozAlaka ne phira kahA-kyA yahAM mahAgopa Ae the? sakaDAlaputra-devAnupriya!
kauna mahAgopa? (mahAgopa se ApakA kyA abhiprAya?) gozAlaka-zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra mahAgopa haiN| sakaDAlaputra-devAnupriya! unheM Apa kisa artha meM
mahAgopa kaha rahe haiM? gozAlaka-devAnupriya! isa saMsAra rUpI bhayAnaka vana
meM aneka jIva nazyamAna haiM -sanmArga se cyuta ho rahe haiM , vinazyamAna haiM
-pratikSaNa maraNa prApta kara rahe haiM, khAdyamAna haiM -mRga Adi kI yoni meM
zerabAgha Adi dvArA khAe jA rahe haiM, chidyamAna haiM -manuSya yadi yoni meM
talavAra Adi se kATe jA rahe haiM, bhidyamAna haiM -bhAle Adi dvArA bIMdhe jA
rahe haiM, lupyamAna haiM -jinake kAna, nAsikA Adi kA chedana kiyA jA rahA haiM
, vilupyamAna haiM -jo vikalAMga kie jA rahe haiM, unakA dharma rUpI daMDa se
rakSaNa karate 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 175 2. dekheM sUtra yahI

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra  [173]  Having become, nurturing, protecting,
supporting them and bringing them to the vast enclosure of liberation.
Sakdalputra! Therefore, I call the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira the Mahagopa.
Goshalak said again, Devanupriya! Did the Mahasarthavaha come here? Sakdalputra-
Mahasarthavaha, whom do you call? Goshalak-Sakdalputra! Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira
is the Mahasarthavaha. Sakdalputra-How?  Goshalak-Devanupriya! In this
terrifying forest of the world, many beings are perishing, decaying, (being
consumed, pierced, broken, stolen) and being destroyed, protecting them through
the path of Dharma, leading them on the path of Dharma, supporting them and
bringing them to the great city of liberation. Sakdalputra! With this intention,
I call them the Mahasarthavaha.  Goshalak-Devanupriya! Did the Maha Dharmakathi
come here? Sakdalputra-Devanupriya! Who is the Maha Dharmakathi? (Whom do you
mean?) Goshalak-Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira is the Maha Dharmakathi. Sakdalputra-In
what sense is Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira the Maha Dharmakathi?  Goshalak-
Devanupriya! In this vast world, many beings are perishing, decaying, being
consumed, pierced, stolen, being destroyed, going astray, corrupted from the
righteous path, afflicted by falsehood, covered by the veil of eight types of
karma-like darkness, explaining to them the truth in many ways, analyzing,
supporting them and taking them out of the terrifying forest of the world, which
is the four-devas, humans, animals, and hellish realms. Therefore, Devanupriya!
I call them the Maha Dharmakathi.  Goshalak asked again-Devanupriya! Did the
Mahaniryamka come here? Sakdalputra-Devanupriya! Who is the Mahaniryamka?
Goshalak-Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira is the Mahaniryamka. Sakdalputra-How?
Goshalak-Devanupriya! In the great ocean of the world, many beings are
perishing, decaying, and being destroyed, drowning, diving, flowing, supporting
them and taking them to the shore of liberation by the Dharma-filled boat.
Therefore, I call them the Mahaniryamka-helmsman or the great ferryman.
Discussion  In this sutra, many adjectives have been used to indicate the many
qualities of Bhagwan Mahavira, among them are 'Mahagopa' and 'Mahasarthavaha'.
Both of these are very important.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra] . [173 hue, saMgopana karate hue-bacAte hue,
unheM mokSa rUpI vizAla bAr3e meM sahArA dekara pahuMcAte haiM  /
sakaDAlaputra! isalie zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ko maiM mahAgopa kahatA huuN|
gozAlaka ne phira se kahAdevAnupriya! kyA yahA~ mahAsArthavAha Ae the?
sakaDAlaputra-mahAsArthavAha Apa kise kahate haiM ? gozAlaka-sakaDAlaputra!
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra mahAsArthavAha haiN| sakaDAlaputra-kisa prakAra?
gozAlaka-devAnupriya! isa saMsAra rUpI bhayAnaka vana meM bahuta se jIva
nazyamAna, vinazyamAna, (khAdyamAna, chidyamAna, bhidyamAna, lupyamAna) evaM
vilupyamAna haiM, dharmamaya mArga dvArA unakI surakSA karate hue-dharmamArga
para unheM Age bar3hAte hue, sahArA dekara mokSa rUpI mahAnagara meM pahuMcAte
haiM  /  sakaDAlaputra! isa abhiprAya se maiM unheM mahAsArthavAha kahatA huuN|
gozAlaka-devAnupriya! kyA mahAdharmakathI yahAM Ae the? sakaDAlaputra-
devAnupriya! kauna mahAdharmakathI? (ApakA kinase abhiprAya hai?) gozAlaka-
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra mahAdharmakathI haiN| sakaDAlaputra-zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra mahAdharmakathI kisa artha meM haiM? gozAlaka-devAnupriya! isa atyanta
vizAla saMsAra meM bahuta se prANI nazyamAna, vinazyamAna hai, khAdyamAna,
chidyamAna, lupyamAna haiM , vilupyamAna haiM, unmArgagAmI haiM , satpatha se
bhraSTa haiM , mithyAtva se grasta haiM , ATha prakAra ke karma rUpI andhakAra-
paTala ke parde se Dhake hue haiM , unako aneka prakAra se sat tattva
samajhAkara, vizleSaNa kara, cAra-deva, manuSya, tiryaJca, naraka gatimaya
saMsAra rUpI bhayAvaha vana se sahArA dekara nikAlate haiM, isalie devAnupriya!
maiM unheM mahAdharmakathI kahatA huuN| gozAlaka ne punaH pUchA-devAnupriya! kyA
yahAM mahAniryAmaka Ae the? sakaDAlaputra-devAnupriya! kauna mahAniryAmaka?
gozAlaka-zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra mahAniryAmaka hai| sakaDAlaputra-kisa
prakAra? gozAlaka-devAnupriya! saMsAra rUpI mahAsamudra meM bahuta se jIva
nazyamAna, vinazyamAna evaM vilupyamAna haiM DUba rahe haiM, gote khA rahe haiM,
bahate jA rahe haiM unako sahArA dekara dharmamayI naukA dvArA mokSa rUpI kinAre
para le jAte haiM  /  isalie maiM unako mahAniryAmaka-karNadhAra yA mahAn
khevaiyA kahatA huuN| vivecana isa sUtra meM bhagavAn mahAvIra kI aneka
vizeSatAoM ko sUcita karane vAle kaI vizeSaNa prayukta hue haiM, unameM
'mahAgopa' tathA 'mahAsArthavAha ' bhI haiM  /  ye donoM bar3e mahattvapUrNa
haiN|

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 174] [Upasakadasangasutra]  The time of Lord Mahavira was an era where cattle
herding was prevalent in the country. The wealthy householders of that time kept
thousands of cows. As mentioned earlier, cattle wealth was a symbol of
prosperity, and it was also important for its utility and for providing
employment to a large number of people. In such a cow-centric era, the
importance of the cowherd - the Gop - was not less. The metaphor of Lord
Mahavira as 'Maha Gop' described here hints at the society's cow-herding
culture. The Gop, who controls the cows, does not let them wander in search of
better grass, etc., does not let them get lost, and brings them back to their
enclosure in the evening. Similarly, this metaphor envisions the Lord as a
protector and benefactor of the people, who saves beings from wandering in the
world and guides them safely to the enclosure of liberation.  The term
'Mahasarthavah' is also very significant. In those days, Sarthavah referred to
merchants who traveled long distances for trade, either by land or by water. If
they traveled by land, they would carry many carts and wagons loaded with goods,
selling them where they found profit and loading up with cheaper goods
elsewhere. If these journeys were by sea, they would take ships. The journeys
were quite long, and the ship would carry all the necessary things along with
the goods to be sold, such as drinking water, food, medicines, etc. The
conductor of these journeys was called Sarthavah.  A special feature of such a
Sarthavah was that when he wanted to undertake such a trade journey, he would
announce it openly in the entire city. Anyone who wished to join this journey
for trade could come with their goods in carts, wagons, or ships, and the
Sarthavah would take care of all the arrangements. If they ran short of money,
the Sarthavah would provide it. This was a great convenience for small traders
with limited resources, as they did not have the means to travel alone. There
was also the fear of robbery and plunder on long journeys, which was not a
concern with the Sarthavah, as he would have an armed contingent of guards with
him.  Thus, small traders could rely on their meager resources to trade far and
wide. From a social perspective, this tradition was indeed very useful and
important. Therefore, the Sarthavah enjoyed great social prestige and respect in
those days.  Jain Agamas describe many such Sarthavahs. For example, the 15th
study of Nayadhammakhao describes the Blessed Sarthavah. When he wanted to
undertake a trade journey from Champa to Ahikshatra, he made a similar public
announcement in the city, inviting anyone who wished to join his Sarth to do so
willingly.  Acharya Haribhadra, in the fourth Bhava of Samradityakatha, mentions
a similar journey of a Sarthavahputra named Dhan, when he was traveling from his
residence, Susharmanagar, to Tamralipti. He also made a similar...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 174] [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra bhagavAn mahAvIra kA samaya eka aisA yuga thA,
jisameM gopAlana kA deza meM bahuta pracAra thA  /  usa samaya ke bar3e gRhastha
hajAroM kI saMkhyA meM gAyeM rakhate the  /  jaisA pahale varNita huA hai,
godhana jahAM samRddhi kA dyotaka thA, upayogitA aura adhika se adhika logoM ko
kAma dene kI dRSTi se bhI usakA mahattva thaa| aise go-pradhAna yuga meM gAyoM
kI dekhabhAla karane vAle kA - gopa kA bhI kama mahattva nahIM thA  /  bhagavAn
'mahAgopa' ke rUpaka dvArA yahAM jo varNita hue hai, usake pIche samAja kI
gopAlanapradhAna vRtti kA saMketa haiM  /  gAyoM ko niyaMtrita karane vAlA gopa
unheM uttama ghAsa Adi carane ke lobha meM bhaTakane nahIM detA, khone nahIM
detA, carA kara unheM sAyaMkAla unake bAr3e meM pahuMcA detA hai, usI prakAra
bhagavAn ke bhI aise loka-saMrakSaka evaM kalyANakArI rUpa kI parikalpanA isameM
hai, jo prANiyoM ko saMsAra meM bhaTakane se bacAkara mokSa rUpa bAr3e meM
nivighna pahuMcA dete haiM  /  'mahAsArthavAha' zabda bhI apane Apa meM bar3A
mahattvapUrNa haiM  /  sArthavAha una dinoM una vyApAriyoM ko kahA jAtA thA jo
dUra-dUra bhU-mArga se yA jala-mArga se lambI yAtrAeM karate hue vyApAra karate
the  /  ve yadi bhUmArga se vaisI yAtrAoM para jAte to aneka gAr3e gADiyAM mAla
se bhara kara le jAte, jahAM lAbha milatA beca dete, vahAM dUsarA sastA mAla
bhara lete| yadi ye yAtrAeM samudrI mArga se hotI to jahAja le jAte  /  yAtrAeM
kAphI lambe samaya kI hotI thIM, jahAja meM becane ke mAla ke sAtha-sAtha
upayoga kI sArI cIjeM bhI rakhI jAtIM, jaise pIne kA pAnI, khAne kI cIjeM,
auSadhiyAM Adi  /  ina yAtrAoM kA saMcAlaka sArthavAha kahA jAtA thA  /  aise
sArthavAha kI khAsa vizeSatA yaha hotI, jaba vaha aisI vyApArika yAtrA karanA
cAhatA, , sAre nagara meM khule rUpa meM ghoSita karavAtA, jo bhI vyApAra hetu
isa yAtrA me calanA cAhe, apane sAmAna ke sAtha gAr3e- gAr3iyoM yA jahAja meM A
jAya, usakI saba vyavasthAeM sArthavAha kI ora se hoNgii| Age paise kI kamI
par3a jAya to sArthavAha use pUrI kregaa| isase thor3e mAla vAle choTe
vyApAriyoM ko bar3I suvidhA hotI, kyoMki akele yAtrA karane ke sAdhana unake
pAsa hote nahI the| lambI yAtrAoM meM lUTa-khasoTa kA bhI bhaya thA, ,jo sArtha
meM nahI hotA, kyoMki sArthavAha ArakSakoM kA eka zastra-sajjita dala bhI apane
sAtha lie rahatA thA  /  yoM choTe vyApArI apane alpamata sAdhanoM se bhI dUra-
dUra vyApAra kara pAne meM sahArA pA lete| sAmAjikatA kI dRSTi se vAstava meM
yaha paramparA bar3I upayogI aura mahattvapUrNa thii| isalie una dinoM
sArthavAha kI bar3I sAmAjika pratiSThA aura sammAna thA  /  1 jaina AgamoM meM
aise aneka sArthavAhoM kA varNana hai  /  udAharaNArtha, nAyAdhammakahAo ke
15veM adhyayana meM dhanya sArthavAhaka kA varNana hai| jaba vaha caMpA se
ahicchAtrA kI vyApArika yAtrA karanA cAhatA hai to vaha nagara meM sArvajanika
rUpa meM isI prakAra kI ghoSaNA karAtA hai ki usake sArtha meM jo bhI calanA
cAhe, saharSa cale AcArya haribhadra ne samarAdityakathA ke cauthe bhava meM
dhana nAmaka sArthavAhaputra kI aisI hI yAtrA kI carcA kI hai, jaba vaha apane
nivAsa sthAna suzarmanagara se tAmralipti jA rahA thA  /  usane bhI isI prakAra

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra  [175. He announced his journey. _ The use of the
term "Mahasarthavah" to describe Lord Mahavira is indicative of the social
respect associated with the term. Just as a Mahasarthavah takes ordinary people
with him and brings them to a very large commercial market, so too does Lord
Mahavira help beings wandering in the world to reach liberation, which is the
ultimate goal of life's business. 219. Then, the Shramanopasaka Sakdalputra said
to Gosala Mankaliputra, "Devanupriya! You are so clever, discerning (skilled-
clever-firm-eloquent-possessing a voice), skillful-subtle-sighted, nayavadi-
policy-speaker, upadeshalabdha-obtained from the wise, learned, knowledgeable-
obtained-possessing special knowledge, are you able to debate with my
Dharmacharaya, Dharmaupadeshaka, Bhagavan Mahavira? Gosala - No, that is not
possible. Sakdalputra - Devanupriya! How can you say that you are not able to
debate with my Dharmacharaya (Dharmaupadeshaka Shraman Bhagavan) 1. See the
Sutra itself.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra] [175 se apanI yAtrA kI ghoSaNA krvaaii| _
bhagavAn mahAvIra ko 'mahAsArthavAha' ke rUpaka se varNita karane ke pIche
mahAsArthavAha zabda ke sAtha rahe sAmAjika sammAna kA sUcana hai  /  jaise
mahAsArthavAha sAmAnya janoM ko apane sAtha lie calatA hai, bahuta baDI
vyApArika maMDI para pahuMcA detA hai, vaise hI bhagavAn mahAvIra saMsAra meM
bhaTakate prANiyoM ko mokSa-jo jIvana-vyApAra kA antima lakSya hai, taka
pahuMcane meM sahArA dete haiN| 219. tae NaM se saddAlaputte samaNovAsae gosAlaM
maMkhaliputtaM evaM vayAsI-tubbheNaM devANuppiyA! iyacche yA jAva (iyadacchA,
iyapaTThA,) iyaniuNA, iya-nayavAdI, iyauvaesaladdhA, iya-viNNANa-pattA, pabhU
NaM tubbhe mama dhammAyarieNaM dhammovaesaeNaM bhagavayA mahAvIreNaM saddhiM
vivAdaM karettae? no tiNaThe samaThe! se keNaDheNaM, devANuppiyA! evaM vuccai no
khalu pabhU tubbhe mamaM dhammAyarieNaM jAva (dhammovaesaeNaM, samaNeNaM
bhagavayA) mahAvIreNaM saddhiM vivAdaM karettae? saddAlaputtA! se jahAnAmae kei
purise tarUNe jugavaM jAva (balavaM appAyaMke, thiraggahatthe, paDipuNNapANipAe,
piThaMtarorUsaMghAyapariNae, ghaNaniciyavaTTapAlikhaMdhe, laMghaNa-pavana-jaiNa-
vAyAma-samatthe, cammeTha-dughaNa-muTThiya-samAhaya-niciya-gatte,
urassabalasamannAgae, tAlajamalajuyalabAhU, chee, dakkhe, pattaThe) niuNa-
sippovagae egaM mahaM ayaM vA, elayaM vA, sUyaraM vA, kukkuDaM vA, tittiraM vA,
vaTTayaM vA, lAvayaM vA, kavoyaM vA, kaviMjalaM vA, vAyasaM vA, seNayaM vA
hatthaMsi vA, pAyaMsi vA, khuraMsi vA, pucchaMsi vA, picchaMsi vA, sigaMsi vA,
visANaMsi vA, romaMsi vA jahiM jahiM giNhai, tahiM tahiM niccalaM nippaMdaM
dhrei| evAmeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre mamaM bahUhiM advehi ya heUhi ya
jAva(pasiNehi ya kAraNehi ya) vAgaraNehi ya jahiM jahiM giNhai tahiM tahiM
nippaTTha-pasiNa-vAgaraNaM krei| se teNaDheNaM, saddAlaputtA! evaM vuccai no
khalu pabhU ahaM tava dhammAyarieNaM, jAva' mahAvIreNaM saddhiM vivAdaM krette|
tatpazcAt zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlupatra ne maMkhaliputra gozAlaka se kahA-
devAnupriya! Apa itane cheka, vicakSaNa (dakSa-catura-praSTha-vAgmI-vANI ke
dhanI), nipuNa-sUkSmadarzI, nayavAdI-nIti-vaktA, upadezalabdha-AptajanoM kA
upadeza prApta kie huebahu zruta, vijJAna-prApta-vizeSa bodhayukta haiM, kyA Apa
mere dharmAcArya, dharmopadezaka bhagavAn mahAvIra ke sAtha tattvacarcA karane
meM samartha haiM ? gozAlaka-nahIM, aisA saMbhava nahIM hai| sakaDAlaputra-
devAnupriya! kaise kaha rahe haiM ki Apa mere dharmAcArya (dharmopadezaka
zramaNa bhagavAn) 1. dekheM sUtra yhii|

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[176] [Upasakadasangasutra] Is he not capable of engaging in philosophical
discussions with Mahavira? Goshalak - Sakdalaputra! Just as a strong, healthy,
excellent writer, with steady fingers, perfect and complete, with well-nourished
hands and feet, with well-formed limbs like back, sides, thighs, etc., capable
of enduring, with very dense, round shoulders like the embankment of a pond,
capable of performing exercises like leaping, crossing, jumping long distances,
swimming, jumping high, etc., quickly or speedily, a practitioner of exercises
with leather bags filled with pieces of bricks, maces, etc., whose body is
marked with signs from being struck by round pieces of stone the size of a fist,
strung on a leather rope, while exercising - thus, whose body is strong and
powerful through exercise, internally enthusiastic and powerful, with strong and
long arms like two palm trees, suitable, efficient, quick-acting, proficient in
the work of obtaining, skilled in the art, having reached the subtlety of the
art - such a young man, wherever he grabs the paw, foot, hoof, tail, wing, horn,
hair of a large goat, ram, pig, rooster, partridge, quail, dove, pigeon, cuckoo,
crow, or hawk, he makes it motionless and still, in the same way, the Shraman
Bhagwan Mahavira, wherever he catches me with various philosophical meanings,
questions, reasons, and analyses, he will make me speechless. Sakdalaputra!
Therefore, I say that I am not capable of engaging in philosophical discussions
with your Dharmacharaya Bhagwan Mahavira. Arrival of Goshalak in the Potter's
Quarter 220. Then, Sakdalaputra, the Shraman Upasak, said to Goshalak
Mankhaliputra, "Devanupriya! You are praising the truth, reality, facts, and
true nature of my Dharmacharaya (religious teacher, Shraman Bhagwan) Mahavira.
Therefore, I invite you to a hospitable seat, (platform-bed) and a comfortable
place to stay, not as a matter of religion or penance. You may stay in my
potter's quarter, accepting the hospitable seat, platform, (bed and comfortable
place to stay). 221. Then, Goshalak Mankhaliputra, hearing this from the Shraman
Upasak Sakdalaputra, accepted the hospitable seat, platform, (bed and
comfortable place to stay) in the potter's quarter and stayed there.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 176] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra mahAvIra ke sAtha tattvacarcA karane meM samartha
nahIM hai? gozAlaka-sakaDAlaputra ! jaise koI balavAn, nIroga, uttama lekhaka kI
taraha aMguliyoM kI sthira pakar3avAlA, pratipUrNa-paripUrNa, paripuSTa hAtha-
pairavAlA, pITha, pArzva, jaMghA Adi sugaThita aMgayuktauttama saMhananavAlA,
atyanta saghana, golAkAra tathA tAlAba kI pAla jaise kandhoMvAlA, laMghana-
atikramaNakUda kara lambI dUrI pAra karanA, plavana-U~cAI meM kUdanA Adi
vegapUrvaka yA zIghratA se kie jAne vAle vyAyAmoM meM sakSama, IToM ke Tukar3oM
se bhare hue camar3e ke kUpe, mugdara Adi dvArA vyAyAma kA abhyAsI, mauSTika-
camar3e kI rassI meM piroe hue muTThI ke parimANa vAle golAkAra patthara ke
Tukar3e-vyAyAma karate samaya inase tADita hone se jinake aGga cihnita haiM-yoM
vyAyAma dvArA jisakI deha sudRDha tathA sAmarthyazAlI hai, Antarika utsAha va
zaktiyukta, tAr3a ke do vRkSoM kI taraha sudRr3ha evaM dIrgha bhujAoM vAlA,
suyogya, dakSa-zIghrakArI, prAptArtha-karma-niSNAta, nipuNazilpopagata-zilpa yA
kalA kI sUkSmatA taka pahu~cA huA koI yuvA purUSa eka bar3e bakare, meMDhe,
suara,murge, tItara, baTera, lavA, kabUtara, papIhe, kaue yA bAja ke paMje,
paira khura, pUMcha, paMkha sIMga, roma jahA~ se bhI pakar3a letA hai, use vahIM
nizcalagatizUnya tathA niSpanda-halana-calana rahita kara detA hai, isI prakAra
zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra mujhe aneka prakAra ke tAttvika arthoM, he tuoM
(praznoM, kAraNoM) tathA vizleSaNoM dvArA jahA~-jahA~ pakar3a leMge, vahIMvahIM
mujhe nirUttara kara deNge| sakaDAlaputra ! isIlie kahatA hU~ ki tumhAre
dharmAcArya bhagavAn mahAvIra ke sAtha maiM tattvacarcA karane meM samartha
nahIM huuN| gozAlaka kA kuMbhakArApaNa meM Agamana 220. tae NaM se saddAlaputte
samaNovAsae gosAlaM maMkhali-puttaM evaM vayAsIjamhA NaM devANuppiyA! tubbhe
mama dhammAyariyassa jAva (dhammovaesagassa, samaNassa bhagavao) mahAvIrassa
saMtehiM, taccehiM, sabbhUehiM bhAvehiM guNakittaNaM kareha, tamhA NaM ahaM
tubbhe pADihArieNaM pIDha jAva (phalaga-sejA) saMthAraeNaM uvanimaMtemi, no ceva
NaM dhammotti vA, tavotti vaa| taM gacchaha NaM tubbhe mama kuMbhArAvaNesu
pADihAriyaM pIDha-phalaga jAva (sejAsaMthArayaM) ogiNhittANaM vihrh| taba
zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ne gozAlaka maMkhaliputra se kahA-devAnupriya! Apa
mere dharmAcArya (dharmopadezaka zramaNa bhagavAn) mahAvIra kA satya, yathArtha,
tathya tathA sadbhUta bhAvoM se guNakIrtana kara rahe haiM, isalie maiM Apako
prAtihArika pITha, (phalaka-zayyA) tathA saMstAraka hetu AmaMtrita karatA hUM,
dharma yA tapa mAnakara nhiiN| Apa mere kuMbhakArApaNa-bartanoM kI karmazAlA meM
prAtihArika pITha, phalaka, (zayyA tathA saMstAraka) grahaNa kara nivAsa kreN|
221. tae NaM se gosAle maMkhali-putte saddAlaputtassa samaNovAsayassa eyamalaiM
paDisuNei, paDisuNettA kuMbhArAvaNesu pADihAriyaM pIDha jAva (phalaga-sejjA-
saMthArayaM) ogiNhittANaM vihri|

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra] . [177 Mankhaliputra Goshalak accepted this
statement of the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra and he remained in his workshops,
accepting the sacrificial seat, (plank, bed, stretcher). Disappointed journey
222. Then, that Gosala Mankhali-putra did not convince the Shramanopasak
Sakdalputra in any way, for many Nirgranthas, Pavayanas, were agitated,
disturbed, or changed by him, either by persuasion, instruction, explanation, or
announcement. Being in that state, he left the city of Polasapura, and after
leaving, he wandered in the forest of people. Mankhaliputra Goshalak, by saying
in many ways, by explaining the truth with different types of knowledge, by
explaining it well, and by speaking according to his mind, could not make the
Shramanopasak Sakdalputra deviate from the Nirgrantha-preaching, disturb him, or
make him change - he could not change his feelings. So he left the city of
Polasapura, tired, exhausted, and dejected, and wandered in other regions.
Divine affliction - 223. Then, that Shramanopasak Sakdalputra, being devoted to
the observance of vows, spent fourteen years. While the fifteenth year was
passing, in the middle of the night, he was meditating in the Poshasala,
according to the Dharma-Pannatti adopted by the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira. In
the meantime, the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra, being self-absorbed through the
observance of vows, spent fourteen years. When the fifteenth year was passing,
once in the middle of the night, he was meditating in the Poshasala, according
to the Dharma-Pannatti adopted by the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira. 224. Then, in
the middle of the night, a god appeared before that Shramanopasak Sakdalputra.
In the middle of the night, a god appeared before the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra.
225. Then, that god, holding a large blue lotus, approached the Shramanopasak
Sakdalputra and said to him: Just as the Chulani-piya does, so does the god
afflict. He makes nine offerings of flesh to each son, until he wounds him, and
after wounding him, he heals him. 1. See Sutra-number 122 2. See Sutra-number 92
3. See Sutra-number 116 4. See Sutra-number 136 5. See Sutra-number 136

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra] . [177 maMkhaliputra gozAlaka ne
zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra kA yaha kathana svIkAra kiyA aura vaha usakI karma-
zAlAoM meM prAtihArika pITha, (phalaka, zayyA, saMstAraka) grahaNa kara raha
gyaa| nirAzApUrNa gamana 222. tae NaM se gosAle maMkhali-putte saddAlaputtaM
samaNovAsayaM jAhe no saMcAei bahU hiM AghavaNAhi ya paNNavaNAhi ya saNNavaNAhi
ya viNNavaNAhi ya niggaMthAo pAvayaNAo cAlittae vA khobhittae vA vipariNAmittae
vA, tAhe saMte, taMte, paritaMte polAsapurAo nayarAo paDiNikkhamai,
paDiNikkhamittA bahiyA jaNavaya-vihAraM vihri| maMkhaliputra gozAlaka AkhyApanA-
aneka prakAra se kahakara, prajJApanA-bhedapUrvaka tattva nirUpaNa kara,
saMjJApanA-bhalI bhAMti samajhA kara tathA vijJApanA-usake mana ke anukUla
bhASaNa karake bhI vaha zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ko nirgrantha-pravacana se
vicalita, kSubhita tathA vipariNAmita-viparIta pariNAma yukta nahIM kara sakA-
usake manobhAvoM ko badala nahIM sakA to vaha zrAnta, klAnta aura khinna hokara
polAsapura nagara se prasthAna kara anya janapadoM meM vihAra kara gyaa|
devakRta upasarga - 223. tae NaM tassa saddAlaputtassa samaNovAsayassa bahUhiM
sIla-jAva' bhAvemANassa coisa saMvaccharAiM viktaaii| paNNarasamassa
saMvaccharassa aMtarA vaTTamANassa puvva-rattAvaratta-kAle jAva posahasAlAe
samaNassa bhagavaso mahAvIrassa aMtiyaM dhamma-paNNattiM uvasaMpajittANaM vihri|
tadantara zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ko vratoM kI upAsanA dvArA Atma-bhAvita
hote hue caudaha varSa vyatIta ho ge| jaba pandrahavAM varSa cala rahA thA, taba
eka bAra AdhI rAta ke samaya vaha zramaNa bhagavAn ke pAsa aMgIkRta
dharmaprajJapti ke anurUpa poSadhaSAlA meM upAsanArata thaa| 224. tae NaM tassa
saddAlaputtassa samaNovAsayasya puvvarattAvarattakAle ege deve aMtiyaM
paaubbhvitthaa| arddha-rAtri meM zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ke samakSa eka deva
prakaTa huaa| 225. tae NaM se deve egaM mahaM nIluppala jAva asiM gahAya
saddAlaputtaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-jahA culaNIpiyassa taheva devo uvasaggaM
krei| navaraM ekkekke putte nava maMsasollae karei jAva kanIyasaM ghAei, ghAettA
jAva' aayNci| 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 122 2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 92 3. dekheM
sUtra-saMkhyA 116 4. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 136 5. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 136

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[178] The Devata (divine being) drew out a large, blue sword and spoke to the
Shramanopasaka (Jain lay devotee) Sakdalputra in the same way, inflicting the
same kind of suffering as he had done to Chulani Pita. He killed Sakdalputra's
eldest, middle, and youngest sons, sprinkling their flesh and blood upon him.
The only difference was that here the Devata cut each son into nine pieces of
flesh.  [226] Even so, the Shramanopasaka Sakdalputra remained fearless and
engaged in his Dharma-dhyana (meditation on the principles of Jainism).  [227]
Seeing Sakdalputra fearless, the Devata approached him for the fourth time and
said, "O Sakdalputra! Shramanopasaka! You who desire death! If you do not break
your vows, I will bring your wife Agni Mitra, who is your Dharma-sahayika
(helper in Dharma), Dharma-vijiya (one who heals Dharma), Dharmanuragaratta (one
who is devoted to Dharma), and Sam-sukh-dukkh-sahayika (one who shares your joys
and sorrows), from your home. I will bring her before you and kill her, cut her
into nine pieces of flesh, boil her in a cauldron filled with boiling water, and
then sprinkle your body with her flesh and blood. This will cause you to suffer
from intense pain and anguish, and you will die prematurely."  **Discussion**
In this Sutra, Agni Mitra is described as a "Dhammavijiya," which is also known
as "Dharmavaidya" in Sanskrit. This is a unique and unparalleled epithet in
Indian literature, possibly not used by anyone else. Just as physical life is
subject to ailments, diseases, pain, and suffering, so too can spiritual life
become unhealthy, diseased, and painful. A decline in enthusiasm for Dharma is a
form of spiritual sickness, frustration is a form of spiritual ill-health, and
finding Dharma unpleasant is a form of spiritual pain. Just as there are
remedies for physical ailments, there are also remedies for spiritual ailments.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 178] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra  /  usa deva ne eka bar3I, nIlI talavAra nikAla kara
zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra se usI prakAra kahA, vaisA hI upasarga kiyA, jaisA
culanIpitA ke sAtha deva ne kiyA thaa| sakaDAlaputra ke bar3e, maMjhale va choTe
beTe kI hatyA kI, unakA mAMsa va rakta usa para chidd'kaa| kevala yahI antara
thA ki yahAM deva ne eka-eka putra ke nau-nau mAMsa khaMDa kie| 226. tae Na se
saddAlaputte samaNovAsae abhIe jAva' vihri| aisA hone para bhI zramaNopAsaka
sakaDAlaputra nirbhIkatApUrvaka dharma-dhyAna meM lagA rhaa| 227. tae NaM se
deve saddAlaputtaM samaNovAsayaM abhIyaM jAva pAsittA cautthaM pi saddAlaputtaM
samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-haM bho! saddAlaputtA! samaNovAsayA!
apatthiyapatthiyA! jAva na bhaMjesi tao jA imA aggimittA bhAriyA dhamma-sahAiyA,
dhamma-viijiyA, dhammANurAgarattA, sama-suha-dukkha-sahAiyA, taM te sAo gihAo
nINemi nINettA taba aggao ghAemi, ghAettA nava maMsa-sollae karemi, karettA
AdANa-bhariyaMsi kaDAhayaMsi ahahemi, ahahettA tava gAyaM maMseNa ya soNieNa ya
AyaMcAmi, jahA NaM tumaM aTTa-duhaTTa jAva (vasaTTe akAle ceva jIviyAo)
vvrovijjsi| usa deva ne jaba zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ko nirbhIka dekhA, to
cauthI bAra usako kahA-mauta ko cAhane vAle zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra! yadi
tama apanA vrata nahIM tor3ate ho to tumhArI dharmasahAyikA-dhArmika kAryoM meM
sahayoga karane vAlI, dharmavaidyA jIvana meM zithilatA yA doSa Ane para preraNA
dvArA dhArmika svAsthya pradAna karane vAlI, athavA dharmadvitIyA-dharma kI
saMginI-sAthina, dharmAnurAgaraktAdharma ke anurAga meM raMgI huI,
samasukhaduHkha-sahAyikA-tumhAre sukha aura duHkha meM samAna rUpa se hAtha
baMTAne vAlI patnI agnimitrA ko ghara se le AUMgA, lAkara tumhAre Age usakI
hatyA karUMgA, nau mAMsakhaMDa karUMgA, ubalate pAnI se bharI kaDhAhI meM
khaulAUMgA, khaulAkara usake mAMsa aura rakta se tumhAre zarIra ko sIMcUgA,
jisase tuma ArtadhyAna aura vikaTa duHkha se pIr3ita hokara (asamaya meM hI)
prANoM se hAtha dho baitthogeN| vivecana isa sUtra meM agnimitrA kA eka vizeSaNa
'dhammaviijjiyA' hai, jisakA saMskRtarUpa 'dharmavaidyA' bhI hai| bhAratIya
sAhitya kA apanI koTi kA yaha anupama vizeSaNa hai, sambhavataH kinhIM anyoM
dvArA aprayukta bhii| daihika jIvana meM jaise Adhi, vyAdhi, vedanA, pIr3A, roga
Adi utpanna hote haiM, usI prakAra dhArmika jIvana meM bhI asvasthatA, rUgNatA,
pIr3A A sakatI hai| dharma ke prati utsAha meM zithilatA AnA rUgNatA hai, kuMThA
AnA asvasthatA hai, dharma kI bAta apriya laganA pIDA hai| zarIra ke rogoM ko
miTAne ke 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 89 2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 97 3. dekheM sUtra-
saMkhyA 107

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra  [179 Just as a skilled physician is needed for a
suitable cure, so too is a skilled person needed to provide religious health.
Agni Mitra was such a skilled 'Dharma Vaidya'. From a wife to her husband,
service, love, affection - all these are attainable, but when needed, religious
inspiration, spiritual enthusiasm, the support of practice can be obtained, this
is a unique thing. Very few wives will be able to re-energize the drying
religious source in their husband's life. Agni Mitra had this wonderful quality.
Therefore, the epithet 'Dharma-Vaidya' used for her is very meaningful. This is
the reason why Sakdalputra, who remains unshaken and unmoved at the time of the
merciless, cruel murder of his three sons, trembles at the news of Agni Mitra's
murder, loses his composure, becomes agitated. Perhaps it occurred to
Sakdalputra - Agni Mitra, who is not only the sole companion of my religious
life, but also the unparalleled inspirer who has made me righteous by removing
the religious weaknesses that come to me, will be given such a tragic end? This
will cast a deep darkness on my future life. 228. Therefore, when the Dev said
this to the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra, he remained in meditation. Even after
being told this by the Dev, Sakdalputra remained fearless and engaged in Dharma-
Dhyana. 229. Then that Dev, again and again, said the same thing to the
Shramanopasak Sakdalputra - "O! Sakdalputra! Shramanopasaya! I say this to you."
_Then that Dev, again and again, said the same thing to the Shramanopasak
Sakdalputra. Inner Purity Worship: End 230. Then, when that Dev said this to the
Shramanopasak Sakdalputra, he was in meditation, and this thought arose in his
mind - "Just as the potter thinks, 'My eldest son, my middle son, my youngest
son, all of them are coming, and even my wife Agni Mitra, who shares my joys and
sorrows, she also wants to take me away from this house, and my head will be cut
off.' So, this is what I have to do to this man." He thought with a bitter
heart. Just as the potter thinks, so should everything be said. When Agni Mitra,
his wife, heard the commotion, she said, "The rest is as the potter would say,
and when the red-colored chariot is ready, it will be taken to the Mahavideha."
(Four similes are established in this chapter) 1. See Sutra number 98. 2. See
Sutra number 136.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM adhyayana : sakaDAlaputra] [179 lie suyogya cikitsaka cAhie, usI
prakAra dhArmika Arogya dene ke lie bhI vaise hI kuzala vyakti kI AvazyakatA
hotI haiM  /  agnimitrA vaisI hI kauzala-sampanna 'dharmavaidyA' thii| patnI se
pati ko sevA, pyAra, mamatA-ye saba to prApya haiM, para AvazyakatA hone para
dhArmika preraNA, AdhyAtmika utsAha, sAdhanA kA sambala prApta ho sake, yaha eka
anUThI bAta hotI hai  /  bahuta kama patniyAM aisI hoMgI, jo apane pati ke
jIvana meM sUkhate dhArmika strota ko punaH sajala banA skeN| agnimitrA kI yaha
adbhuta vizeSatA thii| ataeva usake lie prayukta 'dharma-vaidyA' vizeSaNa
atyanta sArthaka hai| yahI kAraNa hai, jo sakaDAlaputra tInoM beToM kI nirmama,
nRzaMsa hatyA ke samaya avicala, aDola rahatA hai, vaha agnimitrA kI hatyA kI
bAta sunate hI kAMpa jAtA hai, dhIraja chor3a detA hai, kSubdha ho jAtA hai|
zAyada sakaDAlaputra ke mana meM AyA ho-agnimitrA kA, jo mere dhArmika jIvana kI
ananya sahayoginI hI nahIM, mujha meM Ane vAlI dhArmika durbalatAoM ko miTAkara
mujhe dharmiSTha banAe rakhane meM anupama preraNAdAyinI hai, yoM duHkhada anta
kara diyA jAegA? mere bhAvI jIvana meM yo ghora andhakAra chA jaaegaa| 228. tae
NaM se saddAluputte samaNovAsae teNaM deveNaM evaM vutte samANe abhIe jAva'
vihri| deva dvArA yoM kahe jAne para bhI sakaDAlaputra nirbhIkatApUrvaka dharma-
dhyAna meM lagA rhaa| 229. tae NaM se deve saddAlaputtaM samaNovAsayaM doccaMpi
taccaMpi evaM vayAsI-haM bho! saddAlaputtA! samaNovAsayA! taM ceva bhnni| _taba
usa deva ne zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ko punaH dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra vaisA
hI khaa| antaHzuddhi ArAdhanA : anta 230. tae NaM tassa saddAlaputtassa
samaNovAsayassa teNaM deveNaM doccaMpi taccapi evaM vutssa samANassa ayaM
ajjhatthie samuppanne 4 evaM jahA culaNIpiyA taheva ciNtei| jeNaM mamaM jeThaM
puttaM mamaM majjhimayaM puttaM, jeNaM mamaM kaNIyasaM puttaM jAva' AyaMcai, jA
vi ya NaM mamaM imA aggimittA bhAriyA sama-suha-dukkhasahAiyA, taM pi ya icchai
sAo gihAo nINettA mamaM aggao ghaaette| taM seyaM khalu mamaM eyaM purisaM
giNhittae tti kaTu udghaaie| jahA culaNIpiyA taheva savvaM bhANiyavvaM  /
navaraM aggimittA bhAriyA kolAhalaM suNittA bhnni| sesaM jahA culaNIpiyA
vattavvayA, navaraM arUNabhUe vimANe uvavanne jAva (cattAri paliovamAiM ThiI
paNNattA) mahAvidehe vAse sijjhihii| 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 98  /  2. dekheM
sUtra-saMkhyA 136  /

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[180] [Upasakadasangasutra Nikkhevo' || The seventh anga of Upasakadasana, the
seventh study is complete ||]  Upon being told the same thing again, for the
second and third time, by the Devadvara, the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra's mind
became like that of the Chulani-pita. He began to think - "The one who killed my
eldest son, my middle son, and my youngest son, and sprinkled their flesh and
blood on my body, now wants to bring my wife Agni Mitra, who is my companion in
happiness and sorrow, home and kill her in front of me. It is in my best
interest to catch this man." Thinking this, he ran.  The subsequent events
should be understood like those of the Chulani-pita.  Sakdalputra's wife Agni
Mitra heard the commotion. The rest of the story is similar to that of the
Chulani-pita. The only difference is that Sakdalputra was born in an Arunabhut
Vimana. (There, his age is said to be four Palyopama.) He will become a Siddha-
Mukta in the Mahavideha Kshetra.  "Nikkhepa"2 The study of the seventh anga,
Upasakadasha, is complete ||  1. Thus, Jambu! I declare that this is the meaning
and essence of the seventh study, as told by the Samana with his attainment. 2.
Nigamana Arya Sudharma said - Jambu! The Siddhi-prapta Bhagavan said this
meaning and essence of the seventh study of Upasakadasha, which I have told you.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 180] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra nikkhevo'  //  sattamassa aMgassa uvAsagadasANaM
sattamaM ajjhayaNaM samattaM  //  usa deva dvArA punaH dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra
vaisA kahe jAne para zramaNopAsaka sakaDAlaputra ke mana meM culanIpitA kI
taraha vicAra utpanna huaa| vaha socane lagA-jisane mere bar3e putra ko,
maMjhale putra ko tathA choTe putra ko mArA, unakA mAMsa aura rakta mere zarIra
para chir3akA, aba merI sukha-du:kha meM sahayoginI patnI agnimitrA ko ghara se
le Akara mere Age mAra denA cAhatA haiM , mere lie yahI zreyaskara hai ki maiM
isa purUSa ko pakar3a luuN| yoM vicAra kara vaha daudd'aa| AgekI ghaTanA
culanIpitA kI taraha kI samajhanI caahie| sakaDAlaputra kI patnI agnimitrA ne
kolAhala sunaa| zeSa ghaTanA culanIpitA kI taraha hI kathanIya hai| kevala itanA
bheda hai, sakaDAlaputra arUNabhUta vimAna meM utpanna huaa| (vahAM usakI Ayu
cAra palyopama kI batalAI gii|) mahAvideha kSetra meM vaha siddha-mukta hogaa|
"nikSepa"2 sAtaveM aMga upAsakadazA kA adhyayana samApta  //  1. evaM khalu
jambU! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM sattamassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaThe paNNatteti
bemi| 2. nigamanaArya sudharmA bole-jambU! siddhi prApta bhagavAn ne upAsakadazA
ke sAtaveM adhyayana kA yahI artha-bhAva kahA thA, jo maiMne tumheM batalAyA
hai|

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Eighth Study Summary: In Brief  _ Rajagriha was a renowned city in North India
during the time of Lord Mahavira. King Shrenik, who is known as Bimbisara in
Buddhist literature, was the ruler of this city, and he is frequently mentioned
in Jain literature. Maha Shataka, a wealthy merchant, resided in Rajagriha. He
held a very high position in the city in terms of wealth, possessions, splendor,
influence, and honor. His treasury contained eight crore bronze vessels filled
with gold coins, an equal amount was invested in trade, and an equal amount was
used for the splendor and furnishings of his home. In the previous seven
studies, the wealth of the Shraman Upasakas was expressed in terms of the number
of coins, while Maha Shataka's wealth is described in terms of the number of
bronze vessels filled with gold coins. Bronze was a measuring vessel. Those who
possessed vast wealth, so much that even counting the coins was considered a
labor, counted the vessels filled with coins instead of the coins themselves.
Maha Shataka was the owner of such vast and immense wealth. He had eight Gokuls,
each containing ten thousand cows.  The practice of polygamy was prevalent among
the wealthy and influential people in the country. It is possible that, along
with worldly pleasures, it also involved a sense of displaying one's grandeur.
Maha Shataka had thirteen wives, among whom Revati was the most prominent. Maha
Shataka's wives were also from wealthy families. Revati received eight crore
gold coins and eight Gokuls, each containing ten thousand cows, as her personal
property from her parents. The remaining twelve wives received one crore gold
coins and one Gokul, each containing ten thousand cows, as their personal
property from their respective parents. It seems that in those days, wealthy
people gave their daughters such property, which, according to the social
customs of the time, remained under their daughters' control. It is possible
that this property and Gokuls remained in the daughters' parental homes, where
they continued to grow. This also gave the daughters of wealthy families
influence and authority in their in-laws' homes. They were also financially
independent.  _ By chance, Shraman Lord Mahavira arrived in Rajagriha, and a
gathering assembled to see him and listen to his teachings. Maha Shataka was so
prosperous and happy in worldly terms, but he was not lost in his wealth and
luxury. Like others, he also reached Lord Mahavira's presence. He listened to
the teachings. His soul was inspired. Like others, he also accepted the Shravaka
vows. He limited his possessions to eight crore bronze vessels filled with gold
coins in his treasury. He resolved to limit his cattle wealth to eight Gokuls.
He practiced celibacy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM adhyayana sAra : saMkSepa _ bhagavAn mahAvIra ke samaya meM rAjagRha
uttara bhArata kA suprasiddha nagara thaa| jaina vAGmaya meM bahucarcita rAjA
zreNika, jo bauddha-sAhitya meM bimbisAra nAma se prasiddha hai, vahAM kA zAsaka
thaa| rAjagRha meM mahAzataka nAma gAthApati nivAsa karatA thaa| dhana,
sampatti, vaibhava, prabhAva, mAna-sammAna Adi meM nagara meM usakA bahuta UMcA
sthAna thaa| ATha karor3a kAMsya-pAtra parimita svarNa-mudrAeM surakSita dhana
ke rUpa meM usake nidhAna meM thI, utanI hI svarNa-mudrAeM vyApAra meM lagI thIM
aura utanI hI ghara ke vaibhava-sAjasAmAna aura upakaraNoM meM lagI thiiN|
pichale sAta adhyayanoM meM zramaNopAsako kA sAmpattika vistAra mudrAoM kI
saMkhyA ke rUpa meM AyA hai, mahAzataka kA sAmpattika vistAra svarNa-mudrAoM se
bhare hue kAMsya-pAtroM kI gaNanA ke rUpa meM varNita huA hai| kAMsya eka mApane
kA pAtra thaa| jinake pAsa vipula sampatti hotI-itanI hotI ki mudrAeM ginane meM
bhI zrama mAnA jAtA, vahAM mudrAoM kI ginatI na kara mudrAoM se bhare pAtroM kI
ginatI kI jaatii| mahAzataka aisI hI vipula, vizAla sampatti kA svAmI thaa|
usake yahA~ dasa-dasa hajAra gAyoM ke ATha gokula the| deza meM bahu-vivAha kI
prathA bhI bar3e aura sampanna logoM meM pracalita thii| sAMsArika viSayasukha
ke sAtha-sAtha saMbhavataH usameM bar3appana ke pradarzana kA bhI bhAva rahA ho
/  mahAzataka ke teraha patniyAM thIM, jinameM revatI pramukha thii| mahAzataka
kI patniyAM bhI bar3e gharoM kI thiiN| revatI ko usake pIhara se ATha karor3a
svarNa-mudrAeM aura dasa-dasa hajAra gAyoM ke ATha gokula-vyaktigata sampatti-
prItidAna ke rUpa meM prApta thii| zeSa bAraha patniyoM ko apane-apane pIhara se
eka-eka karor3a svarNamudrAeM aura dasadasa hajAra gAyoM kA eka-eka gokula
vyaktigata sampatti ke rUpa meM prApta thaa| aisA pratIta hotA hai ki una dinoM
bar3e loga apanI putriyoM ko vizeSa rUpa meM aisI saMpatti dete the, jo taba kI
sAmAjika paramparA ke anusAra unakI putriyoM ke apane adhikAra meM rhtii|
saMbhava hai, vaha sampatti tathA gokula Adi una putriyoM ke pIhara meM hI rakhe
rahate, jahAM unakI aura vRddhi hotI rhtii| isase una bar3e ghara kI putriyoM kA
apane sasurAla meM prabhAva aura rauba bhI rhtaa| Arthika dRSTi se ve svAvalambI
bhI hotiiN| _ saMyogavaza, zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra kA rAjagRha meM padArpaNa
huA, unake darzana evaM upadezazravaNa ke lie pariSad judd'ii| mahAzataka itanA
vaibhavazAlI aura sAMsArika dRSTi se atyanta sukhI thA, para vaha vaibhava evaM
sukha-vilAsa meM khoyA nahIM thaa| anya logoM kI taraha vaha bhI bhagavAn
mahAvIra ke sAnnidhya meM phuNcaa| upadeza sunaa| Atma-preraNA jaagii| Ananda kI
taraha usane bhI zrAvaka-vrata svIkAra kiye| parigraha ke rUpa meM ATha-ATha
karor3a kAMsya-parimita svarNa-mudrAoM kI nidhAna Adi meM rakhane kI maryAdA
kii| godhana ko ATha gokuloM taka sImita rakhane ko saMkalpa-baddha huaa|
abrahmacarya-sevana kI

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Upāsakadaśāṅgasūtra] He had set a limit of thirteen wives. Even in the context
of transactions, he had limited himself to two droṇa-measure bronze - limited
gold coins per day. Revati, the chief wife of Mahāśataka, was also very wealthy
in terms of personal property, but she had an insatiable desire for wealth and
enjoyment. Once, in the middle of the night, the thought came to her mind that
if she were to kill her twelve co-wives, then their personal property would
easily come under her control, and during Mahāśataka's time, she would live a
life of abundant sensual pleasures as a solitary human being. She was the
daughter of a great family, she was in a large family, and she had many means.
Somehow, she fulfilled this wicked desire of hers. She had her co-wives killed.
Her mind became what she wanted. She became engrossed in physical pleasures. In
a person in whom there is such a detestable craving for wealth and enjoyment,
there are also other vices. Revati was greedy and attached to meat and
intoxicants. Revati was so attached to meat that she could not live without it.
Once, it so happened that a royal proclamation was made in Rājagṛha, prohibiting
the killing of living beings. It became a great difficulty for Revati. But she
found a way. Through the servants she had received from her parental home, she
made arrangements for two calves to be killed daily in the cowsheds of her
parental home and brought to her. This began to happen secretly. Revati's
luxurious tendency continued to grow further and further. The life of the
ascetic-devotee Mahāśataka was taking a different turn. He was advancing further
and further in the worship and adoration of vows. Fourteen years passed in this
way. His religious feeling gained more and more momentum. He handed over his
family and social responsibilities to his elder son. He became more and more
engrossed in the worship of dharma. Revati did not like this. One day,
Mahāśataka was engaged in religious worship in the penance hall. Intoxicated
with alcohol, the unsteady Revati came to the penance hall with her hair
disheveled. She tried to distract Mahāśataka from his religious worship. She
repeatedly displayed seductive gestures and said to him - You will only get
heaven from this religious worship! Is there anything better than this sensual
pleasure in heaven? Abandon the worship of dharma, and enjoy the rare pleasures
of human life with me. It was a strange incident, a conflict between
renunciation and enjoyment, detachment and attachment. This is a very critical
situation. Bhartṛhari has said: "There are many brave warriors in the world who
can crush the heads of elephants intoxicated with pride, there are also warriors
who can defeat lions, but rare are the men who can subdue the arrogance of
lust." As long as a person remains on the right path, as long as he can protect
the modesty of the senses, as long as he can maintain decorum and conduct, as
long as the arrows of the eyebrows of the beloved, which shake the patience, do
not pierce the ears.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 182] [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra sImA teraha patniyoM taka rkhii| lena-dena ke
sandarbha meM bhI usane pratidina do droNa-pramANa kAMsya - parimita svarNa
mudrAoM taka apane ko maryAdita kiyA  /  mahAzataka kI pramukha patnI revatI
vyaktigata sampatti ke rUpa meM bhI bahuta dhanADhya thI, para usake mana meM
artha aura bhoga kI adamya lAlasA thii| eka bAra AdhI rAta ke samaya usake mana
meM vicAra AyA ki yadi maiM apanI bAraha sautoM kI hatyA kara dUM to sahaja hI
unakI vyaktigata sampatti para merA adhikAra ho jAya aura mahAzataka ke samaya
maiM ekAkinI manuSya jIvana kA vipula viSaya-sukha bhogatI rhuuN| bar3e ghara kI
beTI thI, bar3e parivAra meM thI, bahuta sAdhana the  /  usane kisI taraha apanI
isa durlAlasA ko pUrA kara liyA  /  apanI sautoM ko maravA ddaalaa| usakA mana
cAhA ho gyaa| vaha bhautika sukhoM meM lipta rahane lgii| jisameM artha aura
bhoga kI itanI ghRNita lipsA hotI hai, vaise vyakti meM aura bhI durvyasana hote
haiN| revatI mAMsa aura madirA meM lolupa aura Asakta rahatI thI  /  revatI
mAMsa meM itanI Asakta thI ki usake binA vaha raha nahIM pAtI thii| eka bAra
aisA saMyoga huA, rAjagRha meM rAjA kI ora se amArighoSaNA karA dI gii| prANi-
vadha niSiddha ho gyaa| revatI ke lie bar3I kaThinAI huI  /  para usane eka
mArga khoja nikaalaa| apane pIhara se prApta naukaroM ke mArphata usane apane
pIhara ke gokuloM se pratidina dodo bachar3e mAra kara apane pAsa pahuMcA dene
kI vyavasthA kii| gupta rUpa se aisA calane lagA  /  revatI kI vilAsI vRtti Age
uttarottara bar3hatI gaI  /  zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka kA jIvana eka dUsarA mor3a
letA jA rahA thA  /  vaha vratoM kI upAsanA, ArAdhanA meM Age se Age bar3ha rahA
thA  /  aisA karate caudaha varSa vyatIta ho ge| usakI dhArmika bhAvanA ne aura
vega pkdd'aa| usane apanA kauTumbika aura sAmAjika uttaradAyitva apane bar3e
putra ko sauMpa diyaa| svayaM dharma kI ArAdhanA meM adhikAdhika nirata rahane
lgaa| revatI ko yaha acchA nahIM lagA  /  eka dina kI bAta hai, mahAzataka
poSadhazAlA meM dharmopAsanA meM lagA thaa| zarAba ke naze meM unmatta banI
revatI lar3akhar3AtI huI, apane bAla bikhere poSadhazAlA meM aaii| usane
zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ko dharmopAsanA se DigAne kI ceSTA kii| bAra-bAra
kAmoddIpaka hAvabhAva dikhAe aura usase kahA- tumheM isa dharmArAdhanA se svarga
hI to milegA ! svarga meM isa viSaya sukha se bar3ha kara kucha hai ? dharma kI
ArAdhanA chor3a do, mere sAtha manuSyajIvana ke durlabha bhoga bhogo| eka
vicitra ghaTanA tyAga aura bhoga, virAga aura rAga kA eka dvandva thA  /  bar3I
vikaTa sthiti yaha hotI hai  /  bhartRhari ne kahA hai 1 "saMsAra meM aise
bahuta se zuravIra haiM, jo mada se unmatta hAthiyoM ke mastaka ko cUra-cUra
kara sakate haiM, aise bhI yoddhA haiM, jo siMhoM ko pachAr3a DAlane meM
samartha haiM, kintu kAma ke darpa kA dalana karane meM virale hI purUSa sakSama
hote haiM  /  tabhI taka manuSya sanmArga para TikA rahatA haiM, tabhI taka
indriyoM kI lajjA ko bacAe rakha pAtA hai, tabhI taka vaha vinaya aura AcAra
banAe rakha sakatA hai, jaba taka kAminiyoM ke bhauhoM rUpI dhanuSa se kAnoM
taka khIMca kara chor3e hue palaka rUpI nIle paMkha vAle, dhairya ko vicalita
kara dene vAle nayana-bANa

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Study: Summary: In Brief] [183 "The arrows do not strike the chest."1
Mahataka was truly a warrior - an unparalleled possessor of self-strength. Even
the amorous situation, the arousing gestures, even those of his own wife, did
not disturb the steady-minded seeker in the least. He remained immovable and
unshakable in his devotion, like the Himalayas. Revati tried to entice him
again, a second time, a third time, but not even a speck of her influence fell
upon Mahataka. He remained absorbed in his religious meditation. This was the
victory of renunciation over indulgence. Revati returned with a dejected face.
Mahataka's path of practice continued to progress and develop. He gradually
worshipped eleven images in the proper manner. Due to intense austerity and
religious practices, his body became very thin. He thought, "It would be best if
the remaining life is used entirely for practice." Accordingly, he accepted the
life-ending Sanlekhana, the fast unto death. He immersed himself in
spirituality. He attained Avadhi-knowledge. On one hand, there was this holy
state, and on the other, the sinful Revati was burning in the fierce flames of
lust. She could not bear it. She again set out to break the vow of the Shraman
Upasaka Mahataka, and came to the Poshadshala. It is a great wonder that it did
not even occur to her, "I am a fallen woman, it is true, but my husband is
engaged in the final, excellent practice of this life, and by trying to break
his vow, am I not doing a most reprehensible and heinous act, the sin of which
will never allow me peace?" The truth is, the intellect of lustful addicts,
sinful humans, who are addicted to meat and alcohol, is destroyed. They fall
lower and lower, getting entangled in more and more heinous sinful acts. This is
why, in Jainism, great emphasis is placed on the renunciation of meat and
alcohol. They are listed among the seven vices, which are completely to be
abandoned by humans. 1. "There are heroes on earth who are strong in drinking
and gambling, Some are skilled even in killing ferocious beasts. But I say in
the presence of the strong, Few are the men who can conquer the pride of Cupid."
"As long as he is on the right path, so long does he prosper, As long as he is
ashamed of his senses, so long does he embrace humility. Those with eyebrows
raised, with loose hair, with blue eyes, As long as the arrows of desire do not
fall upon the hearts of the playful."    Shringar Shataka 75-76 "Meat, alcohol,
prostitutes, hunting, theft, and adultery. These seven vices are great sins, the
wise should abandon them." Padmanandi Panchavimshika 1, 16. Gambling, meat-
eating, alcohol-drinking, prostitution, hunting, theft, and adultery are the
seven vices in the form of great sins. A wise man should abandon them.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM adhyayana : sAra : saMkSepa] [183 Akara chAtI para nahIM lgte|''1
mahAzataka sacamuca eka yoddhA thA-Atma-bala kA apratima dhnii| vaha kAmuka
sthiti, kAmoddIpaka ceSTAeM ve bhI apanI patnI kI, usa sthiracetA sAdhaka ko
jarA bhI vicalita nahIM kara paaii| vaha apanI upAsanA meM himAlaya kI taraha
acala aura aDola rhaa| revatI ne dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra phira use lubhAne kA
prayatna kiyA, kintu mahAzataka para usakA tilamAtra bhI prabhAva nahIM pdd'aa|
vaha dharmadhyAna meM tanmaya rhaa| bhoga para yaha tyAga kI vijaya thii| revatI
apanA-sA muMha lekara vApisa lauTa gii| mahAzataka kA sAdhanA-krama uttarottara
unnata evaM vikasita hotA gyaa| usane kramazaH gyAraha pratimAoM kI samyak rUpa
meM ArAdhanA kii| ugra tapazcaraNa evaM dharmAnuSThAna ke kAraNa usakA zarIra
bahuta kRza ho gyaa| usane socA, aba isa avazeSa jIvana kA upayoga sarvathA
sAdhanA meM ho jAya to bahuta uttama ho| tadanusAra usane mAraNAntika
saMlekhanA, AmaraNa anazana svIkAra kiyA, usane apane Apako adhyAtma meM ramA
diyaa| use avadhi-jJAna utpanna huaa| idhara to yaha pavitra sthiti thI aura
udhara pApinI revatI vAsanA kI bhISaNa jvAlA meM jala rahI thii| usase rahA
nahIM gyaa| vaha phira zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ko vrata se cyuta karane hetu
cala par3I, poSadhazAlA meM aaii| bar3A Azcarya hai, usake mana meM itanA bhI
nahIM AyA, vaha to patitA hai so hai, usakA pati jo isa jIvana kI antima,
utkRSTa sAdhanA meM lagA hai, usako cyuta karane kA prayAsa kara kyA vaha aisA
atyanta nindya evaM jaghanya kArya nahIM kara rahI hai, jisakA pApa use kabhI
zAnti nahIM lene degaa| asala meM bAta yaha hai, mAMsa aura madirA meM lolupa
vyasanI, pApI manuSyoM kA viveka naSTa ho jAtA hai  /  ve nIce girate jAte haiM
, ghora se ghora pApa-kAryoM meM phaMsate jAte haiN| yahI kAraNa hai , jaina
dharma meM mAMsa aura madya ke tyAga para bar3A jora diyA jAtA hai| inheM sAta
kuvyasanoM meM likhA gayA hai, jo mAnava ke lie sarvathA tyAjya haiN| 1. matte
bhakumbhadalane bhUvi santi zUrAH, kecitpracaNDamRgarAjavadhe'pi dkssaaH| kintu
bravImi balinAM purataH prasahya , kandarpadarpadalane viralA manuSyAH  //
sanmArge tAvadAste prabhavati ca narastAvadevendriyANA lajjAM tAvadvidhatte
vinayamapi samAlambate taavdev| bhrU cApAkRSTa muktAH zravaNapathagatA
nIlapakSmANa ete, yAvallIlAvatInAM hRdi na dhRtimuSo dRSTi bANA: patanti  //
zrRGgArazataka 75-76 //  dytmaaNssuraaveshyaa''khettcaurypraanggnaaH| mahApApAni
sapteti vyasanAni tyajed budhH|| padmanandipaMcaviMzatikA 1, 16  /  juA, mAMsa-
bhakSaNa, madya-pAna, vezyA-gamana, zikAra, corI tathA parastrI-gamanaye
mahApApa rUpa sAta kuvyasana haiM  /  buddhimAna purUSa ko inakA tyAga karanA
caahie|

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[184] The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra tells the story of Revati, a woman from a noble
family in Rajgriha, the wife of a respected and honorable Gahapati. However, she
falls prey to vices and forgets her dharma, her reputation, and her noble
lineage. She shamelessly tries to bring down her devoted husband. As the great
poet Kalidasa said, "True heroes are those whose minds remain unperturbed even
in the presence of disturbing situations." Mahataka was indeed a hero. This is
why even such a disturbing situation could not corrupt his mind. He remained
steadfast in his devotion. Revati repeated her attempts, twice, thrice. The
Shraman Upasaka Mahataka, who had been composed until then, was slightly
disturbed. He saw Revati's future through his Avadhijnana and said, "You will be
afflicted by a terrible Alsak disease within seven nights and die in great
sorrow, anguish, pain, and distress. After death, you will be born as a
Nairyaika in the Ratnaprabha Naraka, in the Lolupacyuta Naka, for eighty-four
thousand years." As soon as Revati heard this, she trembled. The woman who had
been intoxicated by alcohol and consumed by sensual pleasures, suddenly saw the
black shadow of death dancing before her eyes. She returned to her home with the
same feet. And it happened exactly as Mahataka had said. Within seven nights,
she was afflicted by the terrible Alsak disease, and died in agony and
unbearable pain, destined for hell. By chance, Lord Mahavira was in Rajgriha at
that time. Being omniscient, he knew everything that had happened with Mahataka.
He informed his chief Antavasi, Gautam, and said, "Gautam! Mahataka has made a
mistake. For an Upasaka who has accepted the final Sanlekhana and Anashan, even
truth, reality, and facts are not to be spoken if they are harmful, unpleasant,
and distressing. He should not speak such truths to anyone that would cause them
fear, terror, or pain. The truth that Mahataka spoke to Revati through his
Avadhijnana was of this nature. Go and tell Mahataka to perform Alochana-
Pratikraman and accept atonement for this." This is how profound and elevated
the Jain philosophy is. It shows that in the life of a self-realized seeker,
there should be complete equality, non-violence, and friendliness. Gautam went
to Mahataka and delivered Lord Mahavira's message. Mahataka humbly accepted it,
performed Alochana-Pratikraman, and became pure. The Shraman Upasaka Mahataka,
with renewed self-strength, continued his devotion with enthusiasm and joy. He
left his body in Samadhi at the appropriate time and was born as a Deva in the
Arunavatansaka Vimana in the Saudharma Kalpa. 2. "Those whose minds remain
unperturbed even in the presence of disturbing situations, they are indeed
heroes." Kumarasambhava, Canto 5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 184] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra revatI eka kulAMganA thI, rAjagRha ke eka sambhrAnta
aura sammAnanIya gAthApati kI patnI thii| para, durvyasanoM meM phaMsakara vaha
dharma, pratiSThA, kulInatA saba bhUla jAtI hai aura nirlajja bhAva se apane
sAdhaka pati ko girAnA cAhatI hai| mahAkavi kAlidAsa ne kahA hai, vAstava meM
dhIra vahI haiM, jinake citta meM vikAraka sthitiyoM kI vidyamAnatA ke bAvajUda
vikAra nahIM aataa|' mahAzataka vAstava meM dhIra thA  /  yahI kAraNa hai, vaisI
vikArotpAdaka sthiti bhI usake mana ko vikRta nahIM kara skii| vaha upAsanA meM
susthira rhaa| revatI ne dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra phira vahI kuceSTA kii|
zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka, jo aba taka Atmastha thA, kucha kSubdha huaa| usane
avadhijJAna dvArA revatI kA bhaviSya dekhA aura bolA-tuma sAta rAta ke andara
bhayAnaka alasaka roga se pIr3ita hokara atyanta duHkha, vyathA, vedanA aura
kleza pUrvaka mara jaaogii| mara kara prathama nAraka bhUmi ratnaprabhA meM
lolupAcyuta nakara meM caurAsI hajAra varSa kI Ayu vAle nairayika ke rUpa meM
utpanna hogii| revatI ne jyoM hI yaha sunA, vaha kAMpa gii| aba taka jo madirA
ke naze meM aura bhoga ke unmAda meM pAgala banI thI, sahasA usakI AMkhoM ke Age
mauta kI kAlI chAyA nAcane lgii| unhIM pairoM vaha vApisa lauTa gii| phira huA
bhI vaisA hI, jaisA mahAzataka ne kahA thaa| vaha sAta rAta meM bhISaNa alasaka
vyAdhi se pIDita hokara ArtadhyAna aura asahya vedanA lie mara gaI, narakagAminI
huii| _ saMyoga se bhagavAn mahAvIra usa samaya rAjagRha meM padhAre  /
bhagavAn to sarvajJa the, mahAzataka ke sAtha jo kucha ghaTita thA, vaha saba
jAnate the| unhoMne apane pramukha antevAsI gautama ko yaha batalAyA aura kahA-
gautama! mahAzataka se bhUla ho gaI hai| antima saMlekhanA aura anazana svIkAra
kie hue upAsaka ke lie satya, yathArtha evaM tathya bhI yadi aniSTa, akAnta,
apriya aura amanojJa ho, to kahanA kalpanIyadharma-vihita nahIM hai  /  vaha
kisI ko aisA satya bhI nahIM kahatA, jisase use bhaya, trAsa ora pIDA ho|
mahAzataka ne avadhijJAna dvArA revatI ke sAmane jo satya bhASita kiyA, vaha
aisA hI thaa| tuma jAkara mahAzataka se kaho, vaha isake lie AlocanA-
pratikramaNa kare, prAyazcitta svIkAra kre| jainadarzana kA kitanA UMcA aura
gaharA cintana yaha hai  /  Atma-ratta sAdhaka ke jIvana meM samatA, ahiMsA evaM
maitrI kA bhAva sarvathA vidyamAna rahe, isase yaha prakaTa hai| gautama
mahAzataka ke pAsa aae| bhagavAn kA sandeza khaa| mahAzataka ne savinaya
zirodhArya kiyA, AlocanA-prAyazcitta kara vaha zuddha huaa| zramaNopAsaka
mahAzataka Atma-bala saMjoye dharmopAsanA meM utsAha evaM ullAsa ke sAtha
tanmaya rhaa| yathAsamaya samAdhipUrvaka deha-tyAga kiyA, saudharmakalpa meM
arUNAvataMsaka vimAna meM vaha deva rUpa se utpanna huaa| 2. vikArahetau sati
vikri yante, yeSAM na cetAMsi ta eva dhiiraaH| kumArasaMbhava sarga5

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Study ## The Great Ratak ## The Shramanopasak Mahatak ### 231. The
Eighth Ukkheva. Thus, Jambū! At that time, in that era, there was a city called
Rajagṛha. Outside the city was a caitya called Guṇasīla. Śreṇika was the king
there. **Utkṣepa** - The beginning of the eighth study with an introduction is
as follows: The Ārya Sudharma said - Jambū! At the end of the fourth Āra of the
present Avasarpini, at that time - when Bhagavan Mahāvīra was alive, there was a
city called Rajagṛha. Outside the city was a caitya called Guṇasīla. Śreṇika was
the king there. ### 232. There, in Rajagṛha, a Gāthāpati named Mahāśataka
resided. He was prosperous, like Ānanda in wealth and splendor. The only
difference was that he had eight crore bronze-limited gold coins kept in his
treasury as secure wealth, eight crore bronze-limited gold coins engaged in
trade, eight crore bronze-limited gold coins engaged in the splendor of his
home. He had eight Brāja-Gokula, each with ten thousand cows. **Each**
**Discussion** In the present sūtra, the extent of Mahāśataka's wealth is
described in terms of bronze-limited gold coins. 1. If, Bhante! Bhagavan the
Śramaṇa has established this meaning of the seventh study of the Upāsakadaśā,
then Bhante! What is the meaning of the eighth study? 2. Ārya Sudharma asked
Jambū - If the Siddhi-prapta Bhagavan Mahāvīra has established this meaning of
the seventh study of the Upāsakadaśā, then Bhagavan! What meaning did he
establish for the eighth study? (Please tell me.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM adhyayana mahArAtaka zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka 231. aTThamassa ukkhevo'|
evaM khalu, jaMbU ! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM rAyaga naya guNasIle ceie|
seNie rAyA  /  utkSepa' - upodghAtapUrvaka AThaveM adhyayana kA prArambha yoM
hai- Arya sudharmA ne kahA- jambU ! usa kAla - vartamAna avasarpiNI ke cauthe
Are ke anta meM, usa samaya-jaba bhagavAn mahAvIra sadeha vidyamAna the,
rAjagRha nAmaka nagara thA  /  nagara ke bAhara guNazIla nAmaka caitya thA  /
zreNika vahA~ kA rAjA thaa| 232. tattha NaM rAyagihe mahAsayae nAmaM gAhAvaI
parivasai, aDDhe, jahA ANaMdo  /  navaraM aTTha hiraNNakoDIo sakaMsAo nihANa -
pauttAo, aTTha hiraNNa- koDIo sakaMsAo vuDDhi - pauttAo, aTTha hiraNNakoDIo
sakaMsAo pavitthara - pauttAo, aTTha vayA, dasa-gosAhassieNaM vaeNaM  /
rAjagRha meM mahAzataka nAmaka gAthApati nivAsa karatA thA  /  vaha samRddhizAlI
thA, vaibhava Adi meM Ananda kI taraha thaa| kevala itanA antara thA, usakI ATha
karor3a kAsya - parimita svarNa mudrAeM surakSita dhana ke rUpa meM khajAne meM
rakhI thIM, ATha karor3a kAMsya - parimita svarNa mudrAeM vyApAra meM lagI thIM,
ATha karor3a kAMsya - parimita svarNa mudrAeM ghara ke vaibhava meM lagI thiiN|
usake ATha braja- gokula gokula meM dasa-dasa hajAra gAyeM thI  /   /  pratyeka
vivecana prastuta sUtra meM mahAzataka kI sampatti kA vistAra kAMsya - parimita
svarNa mudrAoM meM batalAyA 1. jai NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA jAva
saMpatteNaM uvAsagadasANaM sattamassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaTThe paNNatte,
aTThamassa NaM bhaMte! ajjhayaNassa ke aTThe paNatte ? 2. Arya sudharmA se jambU
ne pUchA-siddhiprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA ke sAtaveM adhyayana kA
yadi yaha arthabhAva pratipAdita kiyA to bhagavan ! unhoMne AThaveM adhyayana kA
kyA artha batalAyA ? (kRpayA kheN|)

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[186] The Upasakadasangasutra states that "Kaansya" refers to a specific type of
vessel made of bronze. In ancient times, along with counting and weighing,
measurement was also prevalent. Vessels of a specific size were used for this
purpose, capable of holding a specific quantity of material. Here, "Kaansya"
refers to such a vessel.  The wealth of the MahaShataka was so vast that even
counting the gold coins was difficult. Therefore, such a vessel filled with gold
coins was considered as one unit to express the magnitude of their wealth.
Ancient Ayurvedic texts discuss these ancient measurements. In ancient times,
there were two types of weights and measures: Magadh-maan and Kalinga-maan.
Magadh-maan was more prevalent and accepted. The Bhavaprakash discusses this in
detail. There, based on the teachings of Maharshi Charak, the Magadh-maan is
explained, starting from the Paramanu (atom) and progressively increasing the
units of measurement. It states:  "Thirty Paramanus make one Trasarenu, also
called Vanshi. The tiny particles visible in the rays of sunlight falling
through a sieve, each is called Trasarenu or Vanshi. Six Trasarenu make one
Marichi. Six Marichi make one Rajika or Rai. Three Rai make one Sarso, eight
Sarso make one Jau, four Jau make one Ratti, six Ratti make one Masa. Masa is
also called Hem and Dhanak. Four Masa make one Shaan, also called Dharan and
Tank. Two Shaan make one Kol, also called Kshudrak, Vatak, and Drankshan. Two
Kol make one Karsha. Panimanika, Aksh, Pichu, Panital, Kinchitpani, Tinduk,
Vidalpadak, Shodashika, Karamध्य, Hansapad, Suvarna, Kavlagrah, and Udumbar are
its synonyms. Two Karsha make one Ardhapala (half Pala). It is also called
Shukti or Ashtamika. Two Shukti make one Pala. Musti, Amra, Chaturthika,
Prakunch, Shodashi, and Bilva are its names. Two Pala make one Prasruti, also
called Prasrit. Two Prasruti make one Anjali. Kudav, Ardha Sharavak, and
Ashtaman are also its names. Two Kudav make one Manika. It is also called Sharav
and Ashtapala. Two Sharav make one Prastha, meaning Prastha contains 64 Tola.
Earlier, 64 Tola was considered as one Seer, therefore Prastha is considered as
a synonym of Seer. Four Prastha make one Adhak, which is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 186] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra gayA hai  /  kAMsya kA artha kAMsI se bane eka pAtra-
vizeSa se hai| prAcIna kAla meM vastuoM kI ginatI tathA taula ke sAtha-sAtha
mApa kA bhI vizeSa pracalana thaa| eka vizeSa parimANa kI sAmagrI bhItara samA
sake, vaise mApa ke pAtra isa kAma meM lie jAte the| yahAM kAMsya kA Azaya aise
hI pAtra se hai| mahAzataka kI sampatti itanI adhika thI ki mudrAoM kI ginatI
karanA bhI duHzakya thaa| isalie svarNa-mudrAoM ke bhare hue vaise pAtra ko eka
ikAI mAna kara yahA~ sampatti kA parimANa batalAyA gayA hai| Ayurveda ke prAcIna
granthoM meM ina prAcIna mApa-tauloM ke sambandha meM carcAeM prApta hotI haiN|
prAcIna kAla meM mAgadha-mAna aura kaliMga-mAna-yaha do taraha ke taula-mApa
pracalita the| mAgadhamAna kA adhika pracalana aura mAnyatA thii| bhAvaprakAza
meM isa sandarbha meM vistAra se carcA hai| vahAM maharSi caraka ko AdhAra
mAnakara mAgadhamAna kA vivecana karate hue paramANu se prArambha kara
uttarottara bar3hate hue mAnoM-parimANoM kI carcA kI hai| vahAM batalAyA gayA
hai "tIsa paramANuoM kA eka trasareNu hotA hai  /  use vaMzI bhI kahA jAtA hai
/  jAlI meM par3atI huI sUryakI kiraNoM meM jo choTe-choTe sUkSma rajakaNa
dikhAI dete haiM, unameM se pratyeka kI saMjJA trasareNu yA vaMzI hai  /  chaha
trasareNu kI eka marIci hotI hai  /  chaha marIci kI eka rAjikA yA rAI hotI hai
/  tIna rAI kA eka sarasoM, ATha sarasoM kA eka jau, cAra jau kI eka rattI,
chaha rattI kA eka mAsA hotA hai  /  mAse ke paryAyavAcI hema aura dhAnaka bhI
haiN| cAra mAse kA eka zANa hotA hai, dharaNa aura TaMka isake paryAyavAcI haiM
/  do zANa kA eka kola hotA hai  /  use kSudraka, vaTaka evaM draG kSaNa bhI
kahA jAtA hai  /  dau kola kA eka karSa hotA hai  /  pANimAnikA, akSa, picu,
pANitala, kiMcitpANi, tinduka, viDAlapadaka, SoDazikA, karamadhya, haMsapada,
suvarNa, kavalagraha tathA udumbara isake paryAyavAcI haiN| do karSa kA eka
ardhapala (AdhA pala) hotA hai| use zukti yA aSTamika bhI kahA jAtA hai| do
zukti kA eka pala hotA hai  /  muSTi, Amra, caturthikA, prakuMca, SoDazI tathA
bilva bhI isake nAma haiN| do pala kI eka prasRti hotI hai, use prasRta bhI kahA
jAtA hai  /  do prasRti kI eka aMjali hotI hai  /  kuDava, ardha zarAvaka tathA
aSTamAna bhI use kahA jAtA hai  /  do kuDava kI eka mAnikA hotI hai  /  use
zarAva tathA aSTapala bhI kahA jAtA hai| do zarAva kA eka prastha hotA hai
arthAt prastha meM 64 tole hote haiM  /  pahale 64 tole kA hI sera mAnA jAtA
thA, isalie prastha ko sera kA paryAyavAcI mAnA jAtA hai  /  cAra prastha kA eka
ADhaka hotA hai, usako

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[187 Eighth Study: Maha Shataka] Bhajan, bronze vessel and being of sixty-four
palas, it is also called Chatuh-Shatti-Pala. This means that the vessel in which
256 tolas or 4 seers of material could be contained was called bronze or bronze
vessel. - This was not the only measure of bronze or bronze vessel. It is
believed that bronze vessels were used in many different sizes. The bronze
vessel mentioned in this sutra was larger than the bronze vessel described in
the Bhava Prakash. In the 235th sutra of this chapter, Shramanopasaka Maha
Shataka sets a limit in relation to his daily transactions, according to which
he resolves not to use more than two drona-parimita gold coins in a day. Let's
understand this clearly. The value up to Adhaka has been discussed above. Bhava
Prakash further states that one Drona is equal to four Adhakas. It is also
called Kalash, Nalvana, Arman, Unman, Ghat and Rashi. Two Dronas make one Shurp,
which is also called Kumbha, and being of 64 Sharavas, it is also called Chatuh-
Shatti Sharavaka. This means that the vessel in which two Dronas, i.e. eight
Adhakas or 32 Prasthas, i.e. 64 1. Charak's opinion is considered by the
physicians, because his opinion is considered by them. Discarding all measures,
Magadha measure is called. Trisara Nu is said by the wise to be of three hundred
atoms. Trisara Nu is a synonym, it is called Vanshi. Vanshi is seen by the sun's
rays passing through the net. One Marichi is made of six Vanshis, and one Rajika
is made of six Marichis. One Sarsapa is said by the wise to be made of three
Rajikas. One Yava is said to be made of eight Sarsapas, and one Gunja is made of
four Yavas. One Masha is made of six Raktikas, O wise one. One Shana is made of
four Masha, and one Dharana is said to be that. That is called Tanka, and two of
them are called Kola. Ksudraka, Vataka and Drankshana are also said to be that.
Two Kolas make one Karsha, it is called Panimani. Aksha, Pichhu, Panitala, a
little bit of Pani and Tindaka. Vidala Padaka and sixteen are considered. Kar
Madhya, Hansapada, Suvarnaka, Valagraha. Udumbar is also a synonym, it is called
Karsha. One Ardha Pala is made of two Karshas, and one Shukti is made of eight
Karshas. One Pala is known to be made of two Shuktis, one Musti is made of four
Shuktis, and one Ramra is made of four Shuktis. One Prakuncha is made of
sixteen, one Bilva is called Pala. One Prasruti is made of two Palas, and one
Prasrita is also called that. One Anjali is made of two Prasrutis, one Kudava is
half a Sharavaka. One Mana is known to be made of eight Kudavas, and one Manika
is made of two Kudavas. One Sharava is eight Palas, that is known by the wise.
One Prastha is made of two Sharavas, and one Adhaka is made of four Prasthas.
Bhajan, bronze vessel and sixty-four Palas. Bhava Prakash, First Part, Second
Part, Mana Paribhasha Prakarana 2-4 One Kalasha, Nalvana, Arman, Unman, Ghat and
Rashi are made of four Adhakas. Bhava Prakash, First Part, Second Part, Mana
Paribhasha Prakarana 15, 16 One Droni, Vaho and Goni are made of two Shurpas.
One Shurp Kumbha is made of two Dronas, and one Chatuh-Shatti Sharavaka is made
of sixty-four Sharavas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [187 AThavAM adhyayana : mahAzataka ] bhAjana, kAMsya-pAtra tathA causaTha pala
kA hone se catuHSaSTipala bhI kahA jAtA hai  /  isakA tAtparya yaha huA ki 256
tole yA 4 sera taula kI sAmagrI jisa pAtra meM samA sakatI thI. usako kAMsya yA
kAMsyapAtra kahA jAtA thaa| - kAMsya yA kAMsyapAtra kA yaha eka mAtra mApa nahIM
thaa| aisA anumAna hai ki kAMsyapAtra bhI choTebar3e kaI prakAra ke kAma meM lie
jAte the| isa sUtra meM jisa kAMsya-pAtra kI carcA hai, usakA mApa yahAM varNita
bhAvaprakAza ke kAMsyapAtra meM bar3A thaa| isI adhyAya ke 235 veM sUtra meM
zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka apane dainandina lena-dena ke sambandha meM eka maryAdA
karatA hai, jisake anusAra vaha eka dina meM do droNaparimANa kAMsyaparimita
svarNa-mudrAoM se adhika kA lena-dena meM upayoga na karane ko saMkalpa-baddha
hotA hai  /  ise kucha spaSTa rUpa meM samajha leN| Upara ADhaka taka ke mAna kI
carcA AI hai| bhAvaprakAza meM Age batAyA gayA hai ki cAra ADhaka kA eka droNa
hotA hai  /  usako kalaza, nalvaNa, armaNa,unmAna, ghaTa tathA rAzi bhI kahA
jAtA hai| do droNa kA eka zUrpa hotA hai, usako kuMbha bhI kahA jAtA hai tathA
64 zarAva kA hone se catuHSaSTi zarAvaka bhI kahA jAtA hai| . isakA Azaya yaha
huA, jisa pAtra meM do droNa arthAt ATha ADhaka yA 32 prastha arthAt 64 1.
carakasya mataM vaidyai rAdyai ryasmAnmataM ttH| vihAya sarvamAnAni mAgadhaM
mAnamucyate  //  trasare Nurbudhai : prokta strizatA prmaannubhiH| trasare NustU
paryAyanAmA vaMzI nigadyate  /  /  jAlAntaragatai : sUryakarairvazI vilokyate  /
SaDvaMzIbhirmarIciH syAttAbhiH SaD bhizca rAjikA  //  tisRbhI rAjikAbhizca
sarSapaH procyate budhaiH| yavo'STa sarSapaiH prokto guJjAsyAttaccatuSTa yam  //
SaD bhistu raktikAbhiH syAnmASako he madhAnako  /  mApaizcaturbhiH zANaH
syAddharaNaH sa nigadyate  //  TaGkaH sa eva kathitastadvayaM kola ucyate  /
kSudrako vaTakazcaiva draGkSaNaH sa nigadyate  /  /  koladvayantu karSaH syAtsa
proktaH pANimAnikA  /  akSaH picuH pANitalaM kiJcitpANizca tindukam  //
viDAlapadakaM caiva tathA SoDa zikA mtaa| kara madhyo haMsapadaM suvarNa ka
valagraha H //  udumbaraJca paryAyaiH karSa meva nigadyate  /
syAtkarSAbhyAmarddha palaM zuktiraSTa mikA tathA  //  zuktibhyAJca palaM jJeyaM
muSTi rAmraM cturthikaa| prakuJcaH SoDazI bilvaM palamevAtra kIrtyate  //
palAbhyAM prasUti yA prasRtaJca nigadyate  /  prasRtibhyAmaJjaliH syAtku
ddvo'rddhshraavkH|| aSTa mAnaJca sa jJeyaH kuDavAbhyAJca maanikaa| zarAvo'STa
palaM tadvaNje yamatra vickssnnaiH|| zarAvAbhyAM bhavetprasthazcatuH
prasthastathA'' ddhkH| bhAjanaM kAMsyapAtraMca catu: SaSTi palazca sH||
bhAvaprakAza, pUrvakhaMDa dvitIya bhAga, mAnaparibhASAprakaraNa 2-4
caturbhirADhakoNaH kalazo nlvnno'rmnn| unmAnaJca ghaTo rAzioNaparyAyasaMjJitaH
//  zUrpAbhyAJca bhaved droNI vAho goNI ca sA smRtA  //  droNAbhyAM zUrpakumbhau
ca catuHSaSTi shraavkH| bhAvaprakAza, pUrvakhaNDa, dvitIya bhAga, mAnaparibhASA
prakaraNa 15, 16

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[188] The *Shurpa* or *Kumbha* was a vessel that could hold 32 *ser* (a unit of
weight) of goods. In this sutra, *Kansya* or *Kansyapaatra* is a synonym for
*Shurpa* or *Kumbha*. The *Bhaavaprakash* commentator has used the word *Kansya*
in this sense, because a *Shurpa* or *Kumbha* is equivalent to two *dronas* (a
unit of volume), and the description here refers to a bronze vessel of two
*dronas*. The *Sharangdhara-Samhita* also mentions it in the same way.  Wives:
Their Wealth 233. The great *mahaashataka* had thirteen beautiful wives,
starting with *Revati*. (They were all perfect in their five senses, their
bodies were complete and unbroken, they were skilled in their respective fields,
they had auspicious signs on their hands, and they were virtuous and chaste.
They were also beautiful in every way, with a complexion like the moon, and
their appearance was captivating.)  234. The great *mahaashataka*'s wife
*Revati* had eight crore gold coins and eight *vayas* (a unit of land) as her
personal wealth from her father's house. The remaining twelve wives had one
crore gold coins and one *vaya* of land each as their personal wealth from their
father's houses.  The *mahaashataka*'s Vow and Practice 235. At that time, the
Lord Mahavira arrived in Rajagriha. The assembly gathered. The *mahaashataka*
was overjoyed. He renounced his worldly possessions. He gave away eight crore
gold coins, eight *vayas*, and his thirteen wives, including *Revati*, to the
remaining *mehuna* (a type of ascetic). He gave away everything else in the same
way. He also made this vow: "I will accept this offering, and I will make a
vessel of bronze, weighing one *hirna* (a unit of weight), that can hold two
*dronas*."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 188] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra tole ke sera ke hisAba se 32 sera taula kI vastueM
samA sakatI thIM, vaha zUrpa yA kuMbha kahA jAtA thaa| isa sUtra meM AyA kAMsya
yA kAMsyapAtra isI zUrpa yA kuMbha kA paryAyavAcI hai| bhAvaprakAzakAra ne jise
zUrpa yA kuMbha kahA hai ThIka isa artha meM yahA~ kAMsya zabda prayukta hai,
kyoMki do droNa kA zUrpa yA kuMbha hotA hai aura yahA~ Ae varNana ke anusAra do
droNa kA vaha kAMsya pAtra thaa| zArGgadhara-saMhitA meM bhI isakI isI rUpa meM
carcA AI hai| patniyA~ : unakI sampatti 233. tassa NaM mahAsayagassa revaI
pAmokkhAo terasa bhAriyAo hotthA, ahINa jAva (paDipuNNa-paMciMdiyasarIrAo,
lakkhaNa-vaMjana-guNovaveyAo, mANummANappamANapaDipuNNasujAyasavvaMga-
sundaraMgIo, sasi-somAkAra-kaMta-piya-daMsaNAo) suruuvaao| _ mahAzataka ke
revatI Adi teraha rUpavatI patniyAM thii| (usane zarIra kI pAMcoM indriyAM
ahIna, pratipUrNa-racanA kI dRSTi se akhaMDita, saMpUrNa, apane apane viSayoM
meM sakSama thIM, vaha uttama lakSaNasaubhAgya sUcaka hAtha kI rekhAeM Adi,
vyaMjana-utkarSa sUcaka tila, masa Adi cihna tathA guNa-sadAcAra pAtivratya Adi
se yukta thIM, athavA lakSaNoM aura vyaMjanoM ke guNoM se yukta thiiN| daihika
phailAva, vajana, UMcAI Adi kI dRSTi se ve paripUrNa, zreSTha tathA
sarvAMgasundara thiiN| unakA AkAra-svarUpa candra ke samAna tathA dekhane meM
lubhAvanA thA,) rUpa sundara thaa| _234. tassa NaM mahAsayagassa revaIe bhAriyAe
kola-ghariyAo aTTha hiraNNakoDIo, aTTha vayA, dasa-go-sAhassieNaM vaeNaM
hotthaa| avasesANaM duvAlasaNhaM bhAriyANaM kola-ghariyA egamegA hiraNNa-koDI,
egamege va vae, dasa-go-sAhassieNaM vaeNaM hotthaa| _mahAzataka kI patnI revatI
ke pAsa apane pIhara se prApta ATha karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM tathA dasadasa hajAra
gAyoM ke ATha gokula vyaktigata sampatti ke rUpa meM the| bAkI bAraha patniyoM
ke pAsa unake pIhara se prApta eka-eka karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM tathA dasa-dasa
hajAra gAyoM kA eka-eka gokula vyaktigata sampatti ke rUpa meM thaa| mahAzataka
dvArA vrata-sAdhanA 235. teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM sAmI samosaDhe  /  parisA
niggyaa| jahA ANaMdo tahA niggcchi| taheva sAvaya-dhamma pddivjji| navaraM aTTha
hiraNakoDIo sakaMsAo uccAreI, aTTha vayA, revaipAmokkhAhiM terasahiM bhAriyAhiM
avasesa mehuNavihiM pcckkhaai| sesaM savvaM taheva, imaM ca NaM eyArUvaM
abhiggahaM abhigiNhai-kallAkalli ca NaM kappai me be-doNiyAe kaMsa-pAIe hiraNa-
bhariyAe sNvvhritte| usa samaya bhagavAn mahAvIra kA rAjagRha meM padArpaNa
huaa| pariSad judd'ii| mahAzataka Ananda 1. zAGga dharasaMhitA 1.1.15-29

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Eighth Study: Mahashataka  [Like Bhagavan (189), he too went to serve the Lord.
Similarly, he too accepted the vrata of a Shravaka. The only difference was that
Mahashataka set a limit of eight crore copper-denominated gold coins as his
possession in the form of treasure etc., and also set a limit of eight Gokulas.
Apart from his thirteen wives like Revati, he renounced the rest of the sexual
indulgence. He renounced all other vows like a Ananda. He only took one special
vow - I will limit my daily transactions to two drona-measure copper-denominated
gold coins.]  236. Then that Mahashataka became a Shramanopasakha and started
living (the life of a religious householder).  237. Then the Shramana Bhagavan
Mahavira started wandering in other regions.  238. Then Revati, the housewife,
while awake at some time in the first or last part of the night, had such
thoughts - "Alas! I am not able to enjoy the abundant human pleasures along with
the Shramanopasakha Mahashataka due to the obstacles caused by these twelve co-
wives of mine. Therefore, it would be better for me to destroy the life of these
twelve co-wives by fire, weapon or poison, and then, having acquired their one
crore gold coins and one Gokula each, live enjoying the abundant human pleasures
along with the Shramanopasakha Mahashataka." Thus contemplating, she started
vigilantly observing the gaps and openings in these twelve co-wives.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM adhyayana :mahAzataka ] [189 kI taraha bhagavAn kI sevA meM gyaa| usI
kI taraha usane zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyaa| kevala itanA antara thA,
mahAzataka ne parigraha ke rUpa meM ATha-ATha karor3a kAMsya-parimita svarNa-
mudrAeM nidhAna Adi meM rakhane kI tathA ATha gokula rakhane kI maryAdA kii|
revatI Adi teraha patniyoM ke sivAya avazeSa maithuna-sevana kA parityAga kiyaa|
usane bAkI saba pratyAkhyAna Ananda kI taraha kie| kevala eka vizeSa abhigraha
liyA-eka vizeSa maryAdA aura kI-maiM pratidina lena-dena meM do droNa-parimANa
kAMsya-parimita svarNa-mudrAoM kI sImA rkhuugaa|| 236. tae NaM se mahAsayae
samaNovAsae jAe abhigayajIvAjIve jAva' vihri| taba mahAzataka, jo jIva, ajIva
Adi tattvoM kA jJAna prApta kara cukA thA, zramaNopAsaka ho gyaa| dhArmika
jIvana jIne lgaa| 237. tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre vahiyA jaNavaya-vihAraM
vihri| tadantara zramaNa bhagavAn anya janapadoM meM vihAra kara ge| revatI kI
durlAlasA . 238. taNa NaM revaIe gAhAvaiNIe annayA kayAi puvvarattAvaratta-
kAlasamayaMsi kukumba jAva( jAgariyaM jAgaramANIe) imeyArUve ajjhathie'-evaM
khalu ahaM imAsiM duvAlasaNhaM savattINaM vighAeNaM no saMcAemi mahAsayaeNaM
samaNovAsaeNaM saddhiM urAlAI mANussayAI bhogabhogAiM bhuMjamANI vihritte| taM
seyaM khalu mamaM eyAo duvAlasa vi savattiyAo aggippaogeNaM vA, satthappaogeNaM
vA, visappaogeNaM vA jIviyAo vavarovittA eyAsiM egamegaM hiraNNa-koDiM, egamegaM
vayaM sayameva uvasampajjittA NaM mahAsayaeNaM samaNovAsaeNaM saddhiM urAlAiM
jAva (mANussayAiM bhogabhogAiM bhuMjamANI) vihritte| evaM saMpehei, saMpehettA
tAsiM duvAlasaNhaM savattINaM aMtarANi ya chiddANi ya vivarANi ya paDijAgaramANI
vihri| eka dina AdhIrAta ke samaya gAthApati mahAzataka kI patnI revatI ke mana
meM, jaba vaha apane pArivArika viSayoM kI cintA meM jaga rahI thI, yoM vicAra
uThA-maiM ina apanI bAraha sautoM ke vighna ke kAraNa apane pati zramaNopAsaka
mahAzataka ke sAtha manuSya-jIvana ke vipula viSaya-sukha bhoga nahIM pA rahI
huuN| ataH mere lie yahI acchA hai ki maiM ina bAraha sautoM kI agni-prayoga,
zastra-prayoga yA viSaprayoga dvArA jAna le lUM  /  isase inakI eka-eka karor3a
svarNaM-mudrAe~ aura eka-eka gokula mujhe sahaja hI prApta ho jaaygaa| maiM
zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ke sAtha manuSya-jIvana ke vipula viSaya-sukha bhogatI
rahU~gI- yoM vicAra kara vaha apanI bAraha sautoM ko mArane ke lie anukUla
avasara, sUnApana evaM ekAnta kI Toha meM rahane lgii| 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA
64 /

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[190] The wife of the story-teller, Revati, having found a favorable
opportunity, killed six of her twelve co-wives by the use of weapons and six by
the use of poison. Thus, having killed her co-wives, she acquired one Gokul each
from her paternal home and lived with the great assembly of ascetics, enjoying
abundant pleasures. Revati's fondness for meat and liquor [240] The wife of the
story-teller, Revati, was fond of meat, intoxicated by meat, a vulture, a
glutton, and she enjoyed various kinds of meat, both roasted on iron bars, fried
in ghee, and roasted on fire, as well as liquor, honey, meraka, madya, sidhu,
and prasanna, enjoying, savoring, and consuming them. Discussion This sutra
mentions liquor, honey, meraka, madya, sidhu, and prasanna, which Revati used.
Ayurvedic texts describe asavas and arishta, as well as madya. While asavas and
arishta also contain some amount of alcohol, they are not included in
intoxicating substances or madya. Madya has a different status. It contains a
high amount of intoxicating substance, which causes the drinker to become
insane, lose his judgment, and become degenerate. The main reason for including
madya with asava and arishta in Ayurveda is the similarity in their method of
preparation. Herbs, fruits, roots, essence, flowers, stems, leaves, bark, etc.
are ground and mixed with water to prepare a solution, which is then sealed in a
jar or other container with cloth and mud and buried in the ground or kept in
the sun. While the prescribed time is one month, the solution ferments within a
few days, producing a unique smell, taste, and effect. It takes the form of
asava. A decoction of herbs, etc. with water is prepared and when one-fourth of
the water remains, it is stored in a container and buried in the ground or kept
in the sun. After due processing, it becomes arishta. The liquid buried in the
ground or kept in the sun

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 190] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra 239. tae NaM sA revaI gAhAvaiNI annayA kayAi tAsiM
duvAlasaNhaM savattINaM aMtaraM jANittA cha savattIo satthappaogeNaM uddavei,
uddavettA cha savattIo visappaogeNaM uddavei, uhavettA tAsiM vAlasaNhaM
savattINaM kola-ghariyaM egamegaM hiraNNa-koDiM, emamegaM vayaM sayameva
paDivajai, paDivajittA mahAsayaeNaM samaNovAsaeNaM saddhiM urAlAiM bhogabhogAI
bhujamANI vihri| eka dina gAthApati kI patnI revatI ne anukUla avasara pAkara
apanI bAraha sautoM meM se chaha kA zastra-prayoga dvArA aura chaha ko viSa-
prayoga dvArA mAra ddaalaa| yoM apanI bAhara sautoM ko mAra kara apanI pIhara se
prApta eka-eka gokula svayaM prApta kara liyA aura vaha zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka
ke sAtha vipula bhoga bhogatI huI rahane lgii| revatI kI mAMsa-madya-lolupatA
240. tae NaM sA revaI gAhAvaiNI maMsa-loluyA, maMsesu mucchiyA, giddhA, gaDhiyA,
ajjhova-vannA bahu-vihehiM maMsehi ya sollehi ya taliehi ya bhajiehi ya suraM ca
mahuM ca meragaM ca majaM ca sIdhuM ca pasannaM ca AsAemANI, visAemANI,
paribhAemANI, paribhuMjemANI vihri| gAthApati kI patnI mAMsa-bhakSaNa meM
lolupa, Asakta, kSubdha tathA tatpara rhtii| vaha lohe kI salAkhoM para seke hue
, ghI Adi meM tale hue tathA Aga para bhUne hue bahuta prakAra ke mAMsa evaM
surA, madhu, meraka, madya, sIdhu va prasanna nAmaka madirAoM kA AsvAdana
karatI, majA letI, chaka kara sevana krtii| vivecana prastuta sUtra meM surA,
madhu, meraka, madya, sIdhu tathA prasanna nAmaka madirAoM kA ullekha hai,
jinheM revatI prayoga meM letI thii| Ayurveda ke granthoM meM AsavoM tathA
ariSToM ke sAtha-sAtha madyoM kA bhI varNana haiN| vaise Asava evaM ariSTa meM
bhI kucha mAtrA meM madyAMza hotA haiM , para unakA mAdaka dravyoM yA madyoM meM
samAveza nahIM kiyA jAtA  /  madirA kI bhinna sthiti hai| usameM mAdaka aMza
adhika mAtrA meM hotA hai, jisake kAraNa madirAsevI manuSya unmatta,
vivekabhraSTa aura patita ho jAtA hai| Ayurveda meM madya ko AsavaM evaM ariSTa
ke sAtha lie jAne kA mukhya kAraNa unakI nirmANavidhi kI lagabhaga sadRzatA hai
/  vanauSadhi, phala, mUla, sAra, puSpa, kAMDa, patra, tvacA Adi ko kUTa-pIsa
kara jala ke sAtha milA kara unakA ghola taiyAra kara ghar3e yA dUsare bartana
meM saMdhita kara-kapar3amiTTI se acchI taraha banda kara, jamIna meM gAr3a diyA
jAtA hai yA dhUpa meM rakkhA jAtA hai| vaise eka mahIne kA vidhAna haiM, para
kucha hI dinoM meM bhItara hI bhItara ukaTa kara usa ghola meM vilakSaNa gandha,
rasa, prabhAva utpanna ho jAtA hai  /  vaha Asava kA rUpa le letA hai  /
vanauSadhi Adi kA jala ke sAtha kvAtha taiyAra kara, caturthAMza jalIya bhAga
rahane para, use bartana meM saMcita kara jamIna meM gAr3A jAtA hai yA dhupa meM
rakhA jAtA hai| yathAsamaya saMskAra-niSpanna hokara vaha ariSTa bana jAtA hai
/  jamIna meM gAr3e hue yA dhupa meM die hue drava se

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Eighth Study: Maha Shataka ] [191 When its essence is extracted by the Mayur-
Yantra-Vashpa-Nishkasan-Yantra, it is Madya. It contains a very high amount of
intoxication. It is essential to add jaggery or sugar and Rangajad or similar
root-roots in the preparation of Madya. In the Ayurvedic texts where the types
of Madhira are described, these names have also come in different ways, which
are indicated in this Sutra. Their brief description is as follows: According to
Sura-Bhavprakash, the Madya prepared from the flour of Sali and Saathi grains is
called Sura. Madhu - The Madya in which honey is also added along with other
substances. In Ashtaangahridaya it is called Madhava Madya. In Sushruta Samhita
it is mentioned as Madhvasava. Its preparation with honey and jaggery is
mentioned. Merak - In Ayurvedic texts it is mentioned as Mareya. In Sushruta
Samhita it is called Triyonit, i.e. it is prepared from a mixture of Sura made
from flour, Asava made from jaggery and Madhu. Madya - This Madya is generally
the name of Madhira, but here it is probably related to the Mardik type of
Madhira. According to Sushruta Samhita, it is prepared from grapes or raisins.
Sidhu - In Bhavprakash, the Madya made from sugarcane juice is called Sidhu. It
is prepared separately from both ripe and unripe sugarcane juice. There is a
difference in the intoxication of both.6 Prasanna - According to Sushruta
Samhita, the clear upper part of Sura that has settled down is called Prasanna
or Prasanna. 1. Sali-Shashti Kapishtaadikrut Madyam Sura Smrita. -Bhavprakash
Purva Khand, Pratham Bhag, Sandhan Varga 23. 2. Madhvasavo Maaksikena Sandhiyate
Madhavaakhyo Madyavishesha: -Ashtaangahridaya 5,75 (Arunadattakrut
Sarvangasundara Teeka). 3. Madhvasava Madhugudabhyam Sandhanam.    Sushruta
Samhita Sutra Sthan 45, 188 (Dalhanacharyavirachit Nibandh Sangrah Vyakhya).
Sura Paishti, Asava Cha Gudayo Nih, Madhu Cha Deyamiti Triyonitvam. -Sushruta
Samhita Sutra Sthan 45, 190 (Vyakhya). 5. Mardikam Draakshodbhavam. -Sushruta
Samhita Sutra Sthan 45, 172 (Vyakhya) 6. Ikshoh Pakvai Rasai: Siddhai: Sidhu:
Pakvarasa Cha Sah. Amai: Tai: Reva Yah Sidhu: Sa Cha Shitarasa: Smrit.
_-Bhavprakash Purva Khand, Pratham Bhag, Sandhan Varga 25. 7. Prasanna Suraya
Mand Uparyachcho Bhag:  Sushruta Samhita Sutra Sthan 45.177 (Vyakhya)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM adhyayana : mahAzataka ] [191 mayUra-yaMtra-vASpa-niSkAsana-yantra
dvArA jaba usa kA sAra cuA liyA jAtA hai, vaha madya hai| usameM mAdakatA kI
mAtrA atyadhika tIvratA lie rahatI hai| madya ke nirmANa meM gur3a yA khAMDa
tathA rAMgajar3a yA tatsadRza mUla-jar3a DAlanA Avazyaka hai Ayurveda ke
granthoM meM jahA~ madirA ke bhedoM kA varNana hai, vahAM prakArAntara se ye
nAma bhI Ae haiM, jinakA isa sUtra meM saMketa hai| unakA saMkSipta varNana isa
prakAra hai surA-bhAvaprakAza ke anusAra zAli va sAThI dhAnya kI pIThI se jo
madya taiyAra hotI hai, use surA kahA jAtA hai| madhu-vaha madya jisake nirmANa
meM anya vastuoM ke sAtha zahada bhI milAyA jAtA hai  /  aSTAMgahRdaya maiM ise
mAdhava madya kahA gayA hai  /  suzrutasaMhitA meM isakA madhvAsava ke nAma se
ullekha hai  /  madhu aura gur3a dvArA isakA saMdhAna batalAyA gayA hai| meraka-
Ayurveda ke granthoM meM isakA maireya nAma se ullekha hai  /  suzrutasaMhitA
meM ise triyoni kahA gayA hai arthAt pIThI se banI surA, gur3a se banA Asava
tathA madhu ina tInoM ke mela se yaha taiyAra hotA hai| madya-vaise madya
sAdhAraNatayA madirA kA nAma hai, para yahAM saMbhavataH yaha madirA ke mArdIka
bheda se sambaddha hai| suzrutasaMhitA ke anusAra yaha drAkSA yA munakkA se
taiyAra hotA hai|' sIdhu-bhAvaprakAza meM Ikha ke rasa se banAe jAne vAle madya
ko sIdhu kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha Ikha ke pakke rasa evaM kacce rasa donoM se
alaga-alaga taiyAra hotA hai  /  donoM kI mAdakatA meM antara hotA hai|6
prasannasuzrutasaMhitA ke anusAra surA kA nitarA huA UparI svaccha bhAga
prasanna yA prasannA kahA jAtA hai| 1. zAliSaSTi kapiSTAdikRtaM madyaM surA
smRtaa| -bhAvaprakAza pUrva khaNDa, prathama bhAga, sandhAna varga 23 /  2.
madhvAsavo mAkSikeNa sandhIyate mAdhavAkhyo madyavizeSaH -aSTAMgahRdaya 5,75
(arUNadattakRta sarvAGgasundarA ttiikaa)| 3. madhvAsavA madhuguDAbhyAM sandhAnam
/  suzrutasaMhitA sUtra sthAna 45, 188 (DalhaNAcAryaviracitanibandhasaMgraha
vyaakhyaa)| surA paiSTI, Asavazca guDayo niH, madhu ca deyamiti triyonitvam  /
-suzrutasaMhitA sUtra sthAna 45, 190 (vyaakhyaa)| 5. mArdIkaM draakssodbhvm|
-suzrutasaMhitA sUtra sthAna 45, 172 (vyAkhyA) 6. ikSoH pakvai rasai: siddhaiH
sIdhu : pakvarasazca sH| Amaistaireva yaH sIdha: sa ca zItarasaH smRt||
_-bhAvaprakAza pUrva khaNDa, prathama bhAga, sandhAna varga 25  /  7. prasannA
surAya maNDa uparyaccho bhaagH| suzrutasaMhitA sUtra sthAna 45.177 (vyAkhyA)

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[192] [Upasakadasangasutra In Ashtaangahriday, the synonym of Vaaruni is
Prasanna. According to that, the upper part of Sura is Prasanna. The thick part
below it is called Jagal. The part below Jagal is called Medak. The liquid
extracted by squeezing the remaining Kalk below is called Bakkas. 241.
Therefore, in the city of Rajagriha, a proclamation was made not to kill Amar-
Praani. 242. Then, that Revayi, the wife of Gaathapati, who was fond of meat and
addicted to it, called her father's servants and said to them - You bring me two
calves from my father's Gokuls every day. The wife of Gaathapati, Revati, who
was fond of meat and addicted to it, called her father's servants and said to
them - You bring me two calves from my father's Gokuls every day. 243. Then,
those servants of the father of Revayi, the wife of Gaathapati, accepted her
statement with humility, saying 'as ordered'. And they started bringing two
calves every day from her father's Gokuls. The servants of the father of
Gaathapati, Revati, accepted her statement with humility, saying 'as ordered'.
And they started bringing two calves every day from her father's Gokuls. 244.
Then, that Revayi, the wife of Gaathapati, used to eat the meat of those calves
with great relish, along with six types of Sura and four types of Asaemaani. The
wife of Gaathapati, Revati, used to eat the meat of those calves with great
relish, along with six types of Sura and four types of Asaemaani. 245. Then,
that Mahaasayag, the Shramanopasak, who was filled with various types of Sila
and Bhava, lived for fourteen years. And he used to keep his son in the same
way, until he became a Dharmapannaati in the Posahala. _ Shramanopasak
Mahaashatak, filled with various types of vows and rules, lived for fourteen
years. And he used to keep his son in the same way, until he became a
Dharmapannaati in the Posahala. 1. Vaaruni Prasanna. Vaarunyaadhobhaago ghano
Jagalah. Jagalasyadho bhaago Medakah. Paaniyena madyakalkapidano utpanno
Bakkasah. Ashtaangahriday Sutra Sthaan 5, 68 (Tika). 2. See Sutra-number 112 3.
See Sutra-number 92

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 192] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra aSTAMgahRdaya meM vArUNI kA paryAya prasannA likhA
hai| tadanusAra surA kA UparI bhAga prasanna hai| usake nIce kA gAr3hA bhAga
jagala kahA jAtA hai| jagala ke nIce kA bhAga medaka kahA jAtA hai| nIce bace
kalka ko nicor3ane se nikalA drava bakkasa kahA jAtA hai| 241. tae NaM rAyagihe
nayare annayA kayAi ghuDhe yAvi hotthaa| eka bAra rAjagRha nagara meM amAri-
prANi-vadha na karane ko ghoSaNA huii| 242. tae NaM sA revaI gAhAvaiNI maMsa-
loluyA, maMsesu mucchiyA 4 kola-gharie purise saddAvei, saddAvettA evaM vayAsI-
tubbhe, devANuppiyA! mama kola-ghariehito vaehito kallAkalli duve-duve goNa-
poyae uddaveha, uddavittA mamaM uvnneh| gAthApati kI patnI revatI ne, jo mAMsa
meM lolupa evaM Asakta thI, apane pIhara ke naukaroM ko bulAyA aura unase kahA-
tuma mere pIhara ke gokuloM meM se pratidina do-do bachar3e mArakara mujhe lA
diyA kro| 243. tae NaM te kola-ghariyA purisA revaIe gAhAvaiNIe 'tahatti'
eyamaTuM viNaeNaM paDisuNaMti, paDisuNittA revaIe gAhAvaiNIe kola-ghariehiMto
vaehiMto kallAkalliM duve duve goNa-poyae vaheti, vahettA revaIe gAhAvaiNIe
uvnneti| pIhara ke naukaroM ne gAthApati kI patnI revatI ke kathana ko 'jaisI
AjJA' kahakara vinayapUrvaka svIkAra kiyA tathA ve usake pIhara ke gokuloM meM
se hara roja savere do bachar3e lAne lge| 244. tae NaM sA revaI gAhAvaiNI tehiM
goNa-maMsehiM sollehi ya 4 suraM ca 6 AsAemANI 4 vihri| gAthApati kI patnI
revatI bachar3oM ke mAsa ke zUlaka-salAkheM para seke hue Tukar3oM Adi kA tathA
madirA kA lolupa bhAva se sevana karatI huI rahane lgii| mahAzataka adhyAtma kI
dizA meM 245. tae NaM tassa mahAsayagassa samaNovAsagassa bahUhiM sIla jAva
bhAvemANassa coddasa saMvaccharA vikvNtaa| evaM taheva jeTuM puttaM Thavei jAva
posahasAlAe dhammapaNNatiM uvasaMpajjittANaM vihri| _ zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka
ko vividha prakAra ke vratoM, niyamoM dvArA AtmabhAvita hote hue caudaha 1.
vaaruunniiprsnnaa| vArUNyA adhobhAgo ghano jglH| jagalasyAdho bhAgo medkH|
pAnIyena madyakalkapIDanotpanno bkksH| aSTAMgahRdaya sUtra sthAna 5, 68
(ttiikaa)| 2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 112 3. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 92

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Study: The Great Century  [193 years have passed. Like Anand and
others, he also established his eldest son in his place. He entrusted the family
and social responsibilities to his eldest son and himself remained engaged in
religious worship in the Poshadshala. Revati's sensual attempt to derail the
Great Century]  246. Then that Revati, the wife of the Gahapati, intoxicated,
staggering, repeatedly throwing her Uttariya-Dupatta or Odhna, came to the
Poshadshala where the Shramanopasaka Mahashatak was. Coming, she repeatedly
displayed seductive glances, gestures, and expressions that aroused desire and
madness, and spoke to the Shramanopasaka Mahashatak: "O Shramanopasaka
Mahashatak! You who desire, wish, and are eager for Dharma, Punnya, Heaven, and
Moksha! You who are devoted to Dharma! Why are you not enjoying the abundant
pleasures of human life with me, Devānupriya? What will you gain from Dharma,
Punnya, Heaven, and Moksha? What more will you get from them than what you would
get from me?"  247. Then that Shramanopasaka Mahashatak did not pay any
attention to the words of Revati, the wife of the Gahapati, nor did he consider
them. He remained engaged in Dharma-Dhyana, unmoved and unconcerned.  248. Then
that Revati, the wife of the Gahapati, spoke to the Shramanopasaka Mahashatak
again and again, saying: "O! I am telling you, and you are doing the same, you
are not paying any attention to me, nor are you considering me." He remained
unmoved and unconcerned, engaged in Dharma-Dhyana.  249. Then that Revati, the
wife of the Gahapati, unheeded and unconsidered by the Shramanopasaka
Mahashatak, went back in the same direction from which she had come.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM adhyayana : mahAzataka ] [193 varSa vyatIta ho ge| Ananda Adi kI taraha
usane bhI jyeSTha putra ko apanI jagaha sthApita kiyApArivArika evaM sAmAjika
uttaradAyitva bar3e putra ko sauMpA tathA svayaM poSadhazAlA meM dharmArAdhanA
meM nirata rahane lgaa| mahAzataka ko DigAne hetu revatI kA kAmuka upakrama 246.
tae NaM sA revaI gAhAvaiNI mattA, luliyA, viiNNakesI uttarijayaM vikaDDamANI
vikaDDhamANI jeNeva posahasAlA jeNeva mahAsayae samaNovAsae, teNeva uvAgacchai,
uvAgacchittA mohummAyajaNaNAI, siMgAriyAiM itthibhAvAiM uvadaMsemANI
uvadaMsemANI mahAsayayaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-haM bho! mahAsayayA!
samaNovAsayA! dhammakAmayA! puNNa-kAmayA! sagga-kAmayA! mokkha-kAmayA! dhamma-
kaMkhiyA! 4 dhammapivAsiyA 4, kiNNaM tumbhaM, devANuppiyA! dhammeNa vA puNNeNa
vA saggeNa vA mokkheNa vA? jaM NaM tumaM mae saddhiM urAlAiM jAva (mANassAI
bhogabhogAI) bhuMjamANe no viharasi? _ eka dina gAthApati kI patnI revatI zarAba
ke naze meM unmatta, lar3akhar3AtI huI, bAla bikhere, bAra-bAra apanA uttarIya-
dupaTTA yA oDhanA pheMkatI huI, poSadhazAlA meM jahA~ zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka
thA, aaii| Akara bAra-bAra moha tathA unmAda janaka, kAmoddIpaka kaTAkSa Adi
hAva bhAva pradarzita karatI huI zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka se bolI-dharma, puNya,
svarga tathA mokSa kI kAmanA, icchA evaM utkaMThA rakhanevAle zramaNopAsaka
mahAzataka! tuma mere sAtha manuSya-jIvana ke vipula viSaya-sukha nahI bhogate,
devAnupriya! tuma dharma, puNya, svarga tathA mokSa se kyA pAoge-isase
bar3hakara tumheM unase kyA milegA? 247. tae NaM se mahAsayae samaNovAsae revaIe
gAhAvaiNIe eyamaTuM no ADhAi, no pariyANAi, aNADhAijamANe, apariyANamANe,
tusiNIe dhammajjhANovagae vihri| zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ne apanI patnI revatI
kI isa bAta ko koI Adara nahIM diyA aura na usa para dhyAna hI diyaa| vaha mauna
bhAva se dharmArAdhanA meM lagA rhaa| 248. tae NaM sA revaI gAhAvaiNI
mahAsayayaM samaNovAsayaM doccaMpi taccaMpi evaM vayAsI-haM bho! taM ceva bhaNai
so vi taheva jAva (revaIe gAhAvaNIe eyamaDheM no ADhAi, no pariyANAi)
aNADhAijjamANe apariyANamANe vihri| usakI patnI revatI ne dUsarI bAra tIsarI
bAra phira vaisA khaa| para vaha usI pakAra apanI patnI revatI ke kathana ko
Adara na detA huA, usa para dhyAna na detA huA dharma-dhyAna meM nirata rhaa|
249. tae NaM sA revaI gAhAvaiNI mahAsayaeNaM samaNovAsaeNaM aNADhAijjamANI,
apariyANijamANI jAmeva disaM pAubbhUyA, tAmeva disaM pddigyaa| yoM zramaNopAsaka
mahAzataka dvArA Adara na die jAne para, dhyAna na die jAne para usakI patnI
revatI, jisa dizA se AI thI usI dizA kI ora lauTa gii|

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 194] [The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra, Great Century, Increasingly Growing
Practice]  250. Then, the Great Person, the Shramanopasaka, having accepted the
first Upasaka-Pratimā, practiced the first Ahasutta, up to the eleventh. The
Shramanopasaka, Great Century, accepted the first Upasaka-Pratimā. Thus, he
practiced all the Pratimās from the first to the eleventh, according to the
scriptural method.  251. Then, the Great Person, the Shramanopasaka, due to his
intense austerities, became so emaciated that his veins became visible. Due to
intense austerities, the Shramanopasaka, Great Century, became so emaciated that
his veins became visible.  He practiced Amaran Anashan (fasting unto death).
252. Then, the Great Person, the Shramanopasaka, while remembering the Dharma,
during the time of the previous night, thought to himself, "Thus, I am emaciated
due to these austerities, just like Ananda.  Therefore, I will accept the final
Maranantik Sanlekhanā, and abandon food and drink.  I will practice Anashan, and
without desiring death, I will remain absorbed in worship." One day, at
midnight, while remembering the Dharma, the Shramanopasaka, Great Century,
thought to himself, "Thus, I am emaciated due to these austerities, just like
Ananda.  Therefore, I will accept the final Maranantik Sanlekhanā, and abandon
food and drink.  I will practice Anashan, and without desiring death, I will
remain absorbed in worship."  253. Then, the Great Person, the Shramanopasaka,
due to his auspicious determination, (auspicious outcome, inner transformation,
due to the purified Leshyas), the Avadhijnana Avarana Karma was destroyed, and
Avadhijnana arose.  As a result, he could see and know the salt sea, one
thousand yojanas in each direction, east, west, south, and north, up to the
Chullahimavanta Vasahara mountain.  He could see and know the earth, which is
red due to the radiance of the gems, and the hell, which is eighty-four thousand
yojanas in extent. Then, the Great Person, the Shramanopasaka, due to his
auspicious determination, (auspicious outcome, inner transformation, due to the
purified Leshyas), the Avadhijnana Avarana Karma was destroyed, and Avadhijnana
arose.  As a result, he could see and know the salt sea, one thousand yojanas in
each direction, east, west, south, and north, up to the Chullahimavanta Vasahara
mountain.  He could see and know the earth, which is red due to the radiance of
the gems, and the hell, which is eighty-four thousand yojanas in extent.  1. See
Sutra number 73.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 194] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra mahAzataka kI uttarottara bar3hatI sAdhanA 250. tae
NaM se mahAsayae samaNovAsae paDhamaM uvAsaga-paDimaM uvasaMpajittA NaM viharai
paDhamaM ahAsuttaM jAva ekkaarsvi| zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ne pahalI
upAsakapratimA svIkAra kii| yoM pahalI se lekara kramazaH gyAharavIM taka sabhI
pratimAoM kI zAstrokta vidhi se ArAdhanA kii| 251. tae NaM se mahAsayae
samaNovAsae teNaM urAleNaM jAva' kise dhamaNisaMtae jaae| ugra tapazcaraNa se
zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ke zarIra meM itanI kRzatAkSINatA A gaI ki usa para
ubharI huI nAr3iyAM dIkhane lgii| AmaraNa anazana 252. tae NaM se mahAsayayasya
samaNovAsayasya annayA kayAi puvvarattAvaratta-kAle dhamma-jAgariyaM
jAgaramANassa ayaM ajjhathie 4 -evaM khalu ahaM imeNaM urAleNaM jahA ANaMdo tahe
va apacchima-mAraNaMtiyasaMlehaNAe jhUsiya-sarIre bhatta-pANa-paDiyAikkhie kAlaM
aNavakaMkhamANe vihri| eka dina arddha rAtri ke samaya dharma-jAgaraNa-dharma
smaraNa karate hue Ananda kI taraha zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ke mana meM vicAra
utpanna huA-ugra tapazcaraNa dvArA merA zarIra atyanta kRza ho gayA hai, aadi|
Ananda kI taraha cintana karate hue usane antima mAraNAntika saMlekhanA svIkAra
kI, khAna-pAna kA parityAga kiyA-anazana svIkAra kiyA, mRtyu kI kAmanA na karatA
huA, vaha ArAdhanA meM lIna ho gyaa| avadhijJAna kA prAdurbhAva 253. tae NaM
tassa mahAsayagassa samaNovAsagassa subheNaM ajjhavasANeNaM jAva (subheNaM
pariNAmeNaM, lesAhiM visujjhamANIhiM tadAvaraNijjANaM kammANaM) khaovasameNaM
ohi-NANe samuppanne-puratthiseNaM lavaNasamudde joyaNa-sAhassiyaM khettaM jANai
pAsai, evaM dakkhiNeNaM, paccatthimeNaM, uttareNaM jAva cullahimavaMtaM
vAsaharapavvayaM jANai pAsai, ahe imIse rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe lAluyaccuyaM
narayaM caurAsIi-vAsasahassaTThiiyaM jANai paasi| tatpazcAt zramaNopAsaka
mahAzataka ko zubha adhyavasAya, (zubha pariNAma-antaHpariNati, vizuddha hotI
huI lezyAoM ke kAraNa) avadhijJAnAvaraNa karma ke kSayopazama se avadhijJAna
utpanna ho gyaa| phalataH vaha pUrva, pazcima tathA dakSiNa dizA meM eka-eka
hajAra yojana taka kA lavaNa samudra kA kSetra, 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 73

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Study: The Great Century  [195] He began to know and see the region up
to the Himalayas, the mountain of the year, in the north, and in the
netherworld, the first hell, Ratnaprabha, up to the hell called Lolupacyuta,
which has a lifespan of eighty-four thousand years. Revati's repeated
unsuccessful attempts.  254. Then that Revati, the wife of the poet, intoxicated
with wine, became mad (staggering, with disheveled hair), repeatedly throwing
her upper garment, went to the Poshadshala, where the ascetic Mahaśataka was.
Arriving, she spoke to Mahaśataka as before. (You do not enjoy the abundant
pleasures of human life with me, O beloved of the gods! What will you get from
dharma, merit, heaven, and liberation?) She said it a second time, a third time,
and then the same again.  Mahaśataka's prediction of Revati's unfortunate
future.  255. Then that ascetic Mahaśataka, the great century, became angry when
his wife Revati spoke to him in this way a second time, a third time. He used
his knowledge of the future, used it, and knowing by his knowledge of the
future, he said to his wife Revati: "O Revati, who desires death! You will be
afflicted by the disease called Alasaka within seven nights, and being
tormented, distressed, and helpless, you will die peacefully at the end of your
lifespan, and after death, you will be born in the first hell, Ratnaprabha, in
the netherworld, in the hell called Lolupacyuta, among the hell-dwellers who
have a lifespan of eighty-four thousand years."  This sutra mentions the disease
Alasaka, from which Revati suffered greatly before her death.  Alasaka is a
severe disease of the stomach and intestines. It is described in the
Matrashitiya chapter of the Ashtanga Hridaya. There it is written:  "A person
who is weak, has a slow digestive fire, and who holds back the urge to defecate
and urinate, will have wind that travels through the air passages."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM adhyayana : mahAzataka ] [195 uttara dizA meM himavAn varSadhara
parvata taka kSetra tathA adholoka meM prathama nArakabhUmi ratnaprabhA meM
caurAsI hajAra varSa kI sthiti vAle lolupAcyutanAmaka naraka taka jAnane dekhane
lgaa| revatI dvArA punaH asaphala kuceSTA 254. tae NaM sA revaI gAhAvaiNI annayA
kayAi matta jAva(luliyA, viiNNakesI) uttarijayaM vikaDDamANI 2 jeNeva mahAsayae
samaNovAsae jeNeva posahasAlA teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA mahAsayayaM taheva
bhaNai jAva' doccaMpi taccapi evaM vayAsI-haM bho thev| tatpazcAt eka dina
mahAzataka gAthApati kI patnI revatI zarAba ke naze meM unmatta (lar3akhar3AtI
huI, bAla bikhere) bAra-bAra apanA uttarIya pheMkatI huI poSadhazAlA meM, jahA~
zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka thA, aaii| Akara mahAzataka se pahale kI taraha bolii|
(tuma mere sAtha manuSya-jIvana ke vipula viSayasukha nahIM bhogate,
devAnupriya! tumheM dharma, puNya, svarga tathA mokSa se kyA milegA?) usane
dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra, phira vaisA hI khaa| mahAzataka dvArA revatI kA
durgatimaya bhaviSya-kathana 255. tae NaM se mahAsayae samaNovAsae revaIe
gAhAvaiNIe doccaMpi, taccapi evaM vutte samANe Asuratte 4 ohiM pauMjai,
pauMjittA ohiNA Abhoei, AbhoittA revaI gAhAvaiNiM evaM vayAsI-haM bho revaI!
apatthiya-patthie 4 evaM khalu tumaM aMto satta-rattassa alasaeNaM vAhiNA
abhibhUyA samANI aTTa-duhaTTa-vasaTTA asamAhipattA kAlamAse kAlaM kiccA ahe
isIse rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe loluyaccue narae caurAsIi-vAsasahassaTThiiesu
neraiesu neraiyattAe uvvjihisi| apanI patnI revatI dvArA dUsarI bAra, tIsarI
bAra yoM kahe jAne para zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ko krodha A gyaa| usane
avadhijJAna kA prayoga kiyA, prayoga kara upayoga lgaayaa| avadhijJAna dvArA
jAnakara usane apanI patnI revatI se kahA-mauta ko cAhane vAlI revatI! tU sAta
rAta ke andara alasaka nAmaka roga se pIDita hokara Artta-vyathita, duHkhita
tathA vivaza hotI huI Ayu-kAla pUrA hone para azAntipUrvaka marakara adholoka
meM prathama nArakabhUmi ratnaprabhA meM lolupAcyuta nAmaka naraka meM caurAsI
hajAra varSa ke AyuSyavAle nairayikoM meM utpanna hogii| prastuta sUtra meM
alasaka roga kA ullekha huA hai, jisase pIr3ita hokara atyanta kaSTa ke sAtha
revatI kA maraNa huaa| alasaka AmAzaya tathA udara sambandhI rogoM meM bhISaNa
roga hai| aSTAMgahRdaya meM mAtrAzitIya adhyAya meM isakA varNana hai  /  vahAM
likhA hai "durbala, manda agnivAle, mala-mutra Adi kA vega rokane vAle vyakti kA
vAyu vimArgagAmI ho 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 246  /

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[196] The Upasakadasangasutra states that it also spoils bile and phlegm. When
the air is vitiated, the food eaten gets stuck in the stomach due to phlegm,
becomes sluggish, lethargic, and immobile, causing excruciating pain like a
sharp object piercing, intense, unbearable colic, vomiting and bowel movements
are obstructed, preventing the vitiated food from coming out. In other words,
the stomach gets clogged with phlegm-ridden food. It is called Alasa or Alasaka
disease. ''1 In the same context, there is a discussion of Dandakalasa, which is
the most severe form of Alasaka, it is written "Extremely contaminated or
vitiated doshas, bound by contaminated raw juice, block the body's channels,
become transverse, paralyze the whole body like a stick, the body's expansion
and contraction stops, it is called Dandakalasa. It is incurable, it quickly
ends the patient."2 Madhavanidan also discusses Alasaka in the context of
indigestion. It is written there "In the disease where the abdomen or stomach
remains bound, i.e., there is a feeling of tightness, there is a constant spasm,
the pain is so severe that the person starts groaning, the wind does not move
downwards but rushes upwards towards the stomach, the bowel movements and
apanavayu completely stop, there is thirst, belching occurs, it is called
Alasaka."3 It is clear from the symptoms described in Ashtanga Hriday and
Madhavanidan that Alasaka is a very painful disease. Visheshad durbalasyalpavade
vegavidharinah. Piditam marutena annam shleishmanaruuddhamantara || Alasam
kshobhit doshaih shalyatvenaiva samsthitam. Shulaadinkurute
teevraaschchhadityasara varjitann || So'lasah Due to weakness etc., the food
eaten by the one who has a strong urge to hold back, is particularly affected by
the wind inside the stomach and is blocked by phlegm, becomes sluggish, and is
agitated by the doshas, it is very painful and remains in the form of a sharp
object, it causes intense, unbearable colic, etc., except for diarrhea. This is
the disease called Alasa. A weak person with depleted tissues cannot tolerate
food, and due to weak digestive fire, food does not digest properly. Therefore,
it is specifically mentioned that for those who have a strong urge to hold back,
the obstructed wind moves in the wrong direction, and bile and phlegm also move
in the wrong direction. Ashtanga Hriday 7.10, 11 with commentary 2. ...Atyarth
duṣṭāstu doṣā duṣṭā'mabadhḍakhāḥ. Yāntastir yaktanuṁ sarvāṁ daṇḍavatstam
bhayanti cet || Ashtanga Hriday 8. 12 3. Kukhshirahannyate'tyarthṁ pratāmyet
parikajati. Niruddho marūtaścaiva ku kṣāvupari dhāvti || Vātava) Nirodhaśca
yasya'tyarth bhavedapi. Tasyālasakamacaṣṭe tṛṣṇodgārāu ca yass tu ||
Madhavanidan, Indigestion Diagnosis 17, 18

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 196] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra jAtA hai, vaha pitta aura kapha ko bhI bigAr3a detA
hai  /  vAyu vikRta ho jAne se khAyA huA anna AmAzaya ke bhItara hI kapha se
rUddha ho kara aTaka jAtA haiM, alasIbhUta-Alasyayukta-gatizUnya ho jAtA hai,
jisase zalya cubhane jaisI bhayAnaka pIr3A uThatI hai, tIvra, duHsaha zUla
utpanna ho jAte haiM , vamana aura zauca avarUddha rahate haiM, jisase vikRta
anna bAhara nahIM nikala paataa| arthAt AmAzaya meM kapharUddha annapiNDa jAma
ho jAtA hai  /  use alasa yA alasaka roga kahA jAtA hai|''1 usI prasaMga meM
vahAM daNDakAlasaka kI carcA hai jo alasaka kA bhISaNatama rUpa hai, likhA hai
"atyanta dUSita yA vikRta hue doSa, dUSita Amakacce rasa se baMdhakara deha ke
srotoM ko roka dete haiM, tiryagAmI ho jAte haiM, sAre zarIra ko daMDa kI taraha
staMbhita banA dete haiM deha kA phailanA-sikur3anA banda ho jAtA hai use
daMDakAlasaka kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha asAdhya hai, rogI ko zIghra hI samApta kara
detA hai|"2 mAdhavanidAna meM bhI ajIrNa nidAna ke prasaMga meM alasaka kI carcA
hai| vahAM likhA hai "jisa roga meM kukSi yA Amazaya baMdhA sA rahe arthAt
ApharA A jAya, khiMcAvaTa sI banI rahe, itanI pIr3A ho ki AdamI karAhane lage,
pavana kA vega nIce kI ora na cala kara Upara amAzaya kIora daur3e, zauca va
apAnavAyu bilakula rUka jAya, pyAsa lage, DakAreM AeM, use alasaka kahate hai "3
aSTAMgahRdaya tathA mAdhavanidAna ke batAe lakSaNoM se spaSTa hai ki alasaka
bar3A kaSTakara roga hai| vizeSAd durbalasyA'lpavaDhe vegvidhaarinnH| pIDitaM
mArUtenAnnaM zleSmANA ruddhamantarA  //  alasaM kSobhita doSaiH zalyatvenaiva
sNsthitm| zUlAdInkurUte tIvrAzchadyatIsAravarjitAn  //  so'lasaH
durbalatvAdiyuktasya yanmArUtena vizeSAdannaM pIDitamantarA''mAzayamadhya evaM
zleSmaNA ruddhamalasIbhUtaM, tathA doSaiH kSobhitamAkulitamata
evA'tipIDAkAritvAcchalyarUpata evaM sthitaM, tIvrAn duHsahAn zUlAdIn
chAdivarjitAn kuruute| charghatIsArAbhyAM visUcikoktA  /  so'lasasaMjJo rogH|
durbalo hyAnupacitadhAtuH, sa na kadAcidAhAraM soDhuM zaktaH alpAgnezcAhAraM
samyaG na jiiryti| yato vegadhAraNazIlasya pratihato vAyurvimArgagaH
pittakaphAvapi vimArgagau kurUta ityetadvizeSeNa nirdeshH| aSTAMgahRdaya 7.10,
11 TIkAsahita 2. ...atyartha duSTAstu doSA duSTA'' mbddhkhaaH| yAntastiryaktanuM
sarvAM daNDavatstambhayanti cet  //  aSTAGgahRdaya 8. 12 3.
kukSirAhanyate'tyarthaM pratAmyet parika jti| nirUddho mArUtazcaiva ku kSAvupari
dhAvati  //  vAtava) nirodhazca yasyAtyartha bhvedpi| tasyAlasakamAcaSTe
tRSNodgArau ca yassa tu  //  mAdhavanidAna, ajIrNa nidAna 17, 18

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[197 Eighth Study: MahaaShataka] The Sorrowful End of Revati 256. Then that
Revati, the Gahaavaini, having been spoken to by the MahaaShataka, the
Shramanopasaka, said to herself, "The MahaaShataka, the Shramanopasaka, is angry
with me, he has ill-will towards me, he wants my harm, I don't know by what evil
death I will be killed." Thinking thus, she became fearful, terrified,
distressed, agitated, and trembling with fear, she slowly left from there and
came home. Her mind became filled with sadness, (she was immersed in the ocean
of worry and sorrow, with her face in her palms, lost in deep meditation, her
gaze fixed on the ground) she became distraught and lost in thought. 257. Then
that Revati, the Gahaavaini, overwhelmed by the laziness of the disease, became
afflicted with severe pain and suffering. She spent her time in misery, and
after completing her lifespan, she was born in the Naraka called Loluppaachyuta
in the Ratnaprabha, the first Naraka, among the Naireyikas who have a lifespan
of eighty-four thousand years. The Message of Inspiration from Gautama to the
Lord 258. At that time, the Shraman, Bhagavan Mahavira, arrived in Rajagriha.
The Samavasarana took place. The assembly gathered, listened to the
Dharmadeshana, and then departed. 259. "Gotama! This Shraman, Bhagavan Mahavira,
said, "Gotama! In this city of Rajagriha, there is a Shramanopasaka named
MahaaShataka, who is my devotee, who is staying in a Posha-sala, who is
suffering from a disease that is causing him to lose his body, and who is
spending his time in the last stages of life, waiting for death." 1. See Sutra
number 11.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [197 AThavAM adhyayana : mahAzataka ] revatI kA duHkhamaya anta 256. tae NaM sA
revaI gAhAvaiNI mahAsayaeNaM samaNovAsaeNaM evaM vuttA samANI evaM vayAsI-rUTe
NaM mamaM mahAsayae samaNovAsae hINe NaM mamaM mahAsayae samaNovAsae, avajjhAyA
NaM ahaM mahAsayaeNaM samaNovAsaeNaM, na najai NaM, ahaM keNa vi kumAreNaM
mArijissAmi tti kaTu bhIyA, tatthA, tasiyA, uvviggA, saMjAyabhayA saNiyaM 2
paccosakkai, paccosakkittA jeNeva sae gihe teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA
ohaya-jAva (maNa-saMkappA, ciMtA-soga-sAgara-saMpaviTThA, karayala-
palhatthamuhA, aTTa-jjhANovagayA, bhUmigaya-diTThiyA) jhiyaai| zramaNopAsaka
mahAzataka ke yoM kahane para revatI apane Apa se kahane lagI-zramaNopAsaka
mahAzataka mujha para rUSTa ho gayA, mere prati usameM durbhAvanA utpanna ho gaI
hai, vaha merA burA cAhatA hai, na mAlUma maiM kisa burI mauta se mAra DAlI
jaauuN| yoM socakara vaha bhayabhIta, trasta, vyathita, udvigna hokara , DaratI-
DaratI dhIre-dhIre vahA~ se nikalI, ghara aaii| usake mana meM udAsI chA gaI,
(vaha cintA aura zoka ke sAgara meM DUba gaI, hathelI para muMha rakhe,
ArtadhyAna meM khoI huI, bhUmi para dRSTi gar3Ae) vyAkula hokara soca meM par3a
gii| 257. tae NaM sA revaI gAhAvaiNI aMto sattarattassa alasaeNaM vAhiNA
abhibhUyA aTTaduhaTTha-vasaTTA kAlamAse kAlaM kiccA imIse rayaNappabhAe puDhavIe
lolupaccue narae caurAsIi-vAsa-sahassa-TThiiesu neraiesu neraiyattAe uvvnnaa| _
tatpazcAt revatI sAta rAta ke bhItara alasaka roga se pIr3ita ho gii| vyathita,
du:khita tathA vivaza hotI huI vaha apanA AyuSya pUrA kara prathama nArakabhUmi
ratnaprabhA meM lolupAcyuta nAmaka naraka meM caurAsI hajAra varSa ke AyuSya
vAle nairayikoM meM nAraka rUpa meM utpanna huii| gautama dvArA bhagavAna kA
preraNA-sandeza 258. teNaM kAleNaMteNaM samaeNaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre
samosaraNaM jAva' parisA pddigyaa| usa samaya zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra rAjagRha
meM padhAre  /  samavasaraNa huaa| pariSad jur3I, dharmadezanA suna kara lauTa
gii| 259. goyamA! i samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre evaM vayAsI-evaM khalu goyamA!
iheva rAyagihe nayare mamaM aMtevAsI mahAsayae nAma samaNovAsae posaha-sAlAe
apacchima-mAraNaMtiyasaMlehaNAe jhUsiya-sarIre, bhattapANa-paDiyAikkhie kAlaM
aNavakaMkhamANe vihri| 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 11 /

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[198] The Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira addressed Gautam, saying: "Gautam! Right here
in the city of Rajgriha, my follower, the Shraman Upasak named Mahashatak, is
engaged in the worship of the final, death-inducing Sanlekhana in the
Poshadshala. He has renounced food and water, not desiring death, but is
immersed in Dharma worship. 260. Therefore, his wife, Revati, went to the
Poshadshala in a state of intoxication, (stumbling, with her hair disheveled,
repeatedly throwing her upper garment) and approached Mahashatak. (Repeatedly
displaying seductive gestures, glances, and expressions of desire) She spoke to
the Shraman Upasak Mahashatak about worldly pleasures. She said the same thing a
second time, and a third time. The incident unfolded as follows: Mahashatak's
wife, Revati, went to the Poshadshala in a state of intoxication, (stumbling,
with her hair disheveled, repeatedly throwing her upper garment) and approached
Mahashatak. (Repeatedly displaying seductive gestures, glances, and expressions
of desire) She spoke to the Shraman Upasak Mahashatak about worldly pleasures.
She said the same thing a second time, and a third time. 261. Upon hearing
Revati's words for the second and third time, the Shraman Upasak Mahashatak
became angry. He used his Avadhijnana, and applied it. Knowing through
Avadhijnana, he said to Revati: (O Revati, who desires death! Within seven
nights, you will be afflicted by a disease called Alasak, and you will suffer,
be distressed, and be helpless. When your lifespan is complete, you will die
peacefully, and descend to the lower realms. 1. See Sutra number 254 2. See
Sutra number 255 3. See Sutra number 84

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 198] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne gautama ko sambodhita
kara kahA-gautama! yahIM rAjagRha nagara meM merA antevAsI-anuyAyI mahAzataka
nAmaka zramaNopAsaka poSadhazAlA meM antima mAraNAntika saMlekhanA kI ArAdhanA
meM lagA huA, AhAra-pAnI kA parityAga kie hue mRtyu kI kAmanA na karatA huA,
dharmArAdhanA meM nirata hai| 260. tae NaM tassa mahAsayagassa revaI gAhAvaiNI
mattA jAva (luliyA, viiNNakesI uttarijjayaM) vikaDDhamANI 2 jeNeva posahasAlA,
jeNeva mahAsayae, teNeva uvAgayA, mohummAya jAva (-jaNaNAI, siMgAriyAI
itthibhAvAiM uvadaMsemANI 2 mahAsayayaM samaNovAsayaM) evaM vayAsI, taheva jAva'
doccaMpi, taccapi evaM vyaasii| ghaTanA yoM huI-mahAzataka kI patnI revatI
zarAba ke naze meM unmatta, (lar3akhar3AtI huI, bAla vikhere, bAra-bAra apanA
uttarIya pheMkatI huI) poSadhazAlA meM mahAzataka ke pAsa aaii| (bAra-bAra moha
tathA unmAda janaka kAmoddIpaka, kaTAkSa Adi hAvabhAva pradarzita karatI huI)
zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka se viSaya-sukha sambandhI vacana bolii| usane dUsarI
bAra, tIsarI bAra phira vaisA hI khaa| 261. tae NaM se mahAsayae samaNovAsae
revaIe gAhAvaiNIe doccaMpi taccaMpi evaM vutte samANe Asuratte 4 ohiM pauMjai,
pauMjittA ohiNA Abhoei, AbhoittA revaiM gAhAvaiNiM evaM vayAsI-jAva'
uvavajihisi, no khalu kappai, goyamA! samaNovAsagassa apacchima jAva
(mAraNaMtiya-saMle haNA-jhUsaNA-) jhUsiya-sarIrasya, bhattapANapaDiyAikkhiyassa
paro saMtehiM, taccehiM, tahiehiM, sabbhUehiM, aNidvehiM, akaMtehiM, appiehiM,
amaNuNNehiM, amaNAmehiM vAgaraNehiM vaagritte| taM gaccha NaM, devANuppiyA!
tumaM mahAsayayaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAhi-no khalu devANuppiyA! kappai
samaNovAsagassa apacchima jAva (mAraNaMtiya-saMlehaNA-jhUsaNA-jhUsiyassa,)
bhatta-pANa-paDiyAikkhiyassa paro saMtehiM jAva(taccehi, tahiehiM , sabbhUehiM,
aNituhiM, akaMtehiM, appiehiM, amaNuNNehiM, amaNAmehiM vAgaraNehiM) vaagritte|
tume ya NaM devANuppiyA! revaI gAhAvaiNI saMtehiM 4 aNiTehiM 5 vAgaraNehiM
vaagriyaa| taM NaM tuma eyassa ThANassa Aloehi jAva jahArihaM ca pAyacchittaM
pddivjaahi| _ apanI patnI revatI dvArA dUsarI bAra, tIsarI bAra yoM kahe jAne
para zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ko krodha A gyaa| usane avadhijJAna kA prayoga
kiyA, prayoga kara upayoga lgaayaa| avadhijJAna se jAna kara revatI se
kahA-(mauta ko cAhane vAlI revatI! tU sAta rAta ke andara alasaka nAmaka roga se
pIDita hokara, vyathita, duHkhita tathA vivaza hotI huI, AyukAla pUrA hone para
azAntipUrvaka mara kara nIce 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 254 2. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA
255 3. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 84

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Eighth Study: The Great Century ] [199 The first hell realm, Ratnaprabha, in the
Lolupacyuta hell, will be born among the Nairyakas who have a lifespan of
eighty-four thousand years.) Gautama! Truth, reality in the form of truth or
without remedy, fact without exaggeration or understatement, words spoken by the
true Jinas that are completely present, even if they are undesirable - which are
not desirable, unpalatable - which are unpleasant to hear, unpleasant - which
cause displeasure in the mind, unmindful - which the mind does not want to speak
or hear, unmindful - which the mind does not want to think or accept - if they
are like this, then it is not conceivable - Dharma-prescribed for a
Shramanopasaka who is engaged in the worship of the final, fatal Sanlekhana, who
has accepted fasting. Therefore, Devanupriya! You go to the Shramanopasaka
Mahashataka and tell him that for a Shramanopasaka who is engaged in the worship
of the final, fatal Sanlekhana, who has accepted fasting, even if the words of
truth (truthful, factual, true) are undesirable, unpalatable, unpleasant,
unmindful, unfavorable to the mind, then it is not conceivable to speak.
Devanupriya! You have spoken true but undesirable words to Revati. Therefore,
you criticize this place - the conduct contrary to Dharma, accept the
appropriate atonement. 262. Then, the venerable Gautama heard this statement of
the Shraman, the venerable Mahavira, 'You are right' with humility. Having heard
it, he departed. He entered the city of Rajagriha through the middle, and having
entered, he went to the house of the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka, to the
Shramanopasaka Mahashataka. The venerable Gautama heard this statement of the
Shraman, the venerable Mahavira, 'You are right' with humility. Having heard it,
he departed. He entered the city of Rajagriha through the middle, and having
entered, he went to the house of the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka, to the
Shramanopasaka Mahashataka. 263. Then, the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka saw the
venerable Gautama coming. Having seen him, he was delighted and happy. He bowed
and prostrated to the venerable Gautama. 264. Then, the venerable Gautama said
to the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka, "Indeed, Devanupriya! The Shraman, the
venerable Mahavira, speaks, explains, and does not approve. Devanupriya! It is
not conceivable for a Shramanopasaka to speak (in the last, fatal Sanlekhana,
fasting, fasting, food, drink, and medicine, to others, to those, to those, to
all, to the undesirable, to the unpalatable, to the unpleasant, to the
unmindful, to the unfavorable to the mind).  1. See Sutra number 12

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM adhyayana : mahAzataka ] [199 prathama nAraka bhUmi ratnaprabhA meM
lolupAcyuta nAmaka naraka meM caurAsI hajAra varSa ke AyuSya vAle nairayikoM meM
utpanna hogii|) gautama! satya, tattvarUpa-yathArtha yA upacArahita, tathya-
atizayokti yA nyUnoktirahita, sadbhUtajinameM kahI huI bAta sarvathA vidyamAna
ho, aise vacana bhI yadi aniSTa-jo iSTa na hoM akAnta-jo sunane meM akamanIya yA
asandara ho, apriya-jinheM sanane se mana meM aprIti ho, amanojJa-jinheM mana na
bolanA cAhe, na sunanA cAhe, amana:Apa-jinheM mana na socanA cAhe na svIkAra
karanA cAhe-aise hoM to antima mAraNAntika saMlekhanA kI ArAdhanA meM lage hue,
anazana svIkAra kie hue zramaNopAsaka ke lie unheM bolanA kalpanIya-dharmavihita
nahIM hai| isalie devAnupriya! tuma zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ke pAsa jAo aura
use kaho ki antima mAraNAntika saMlekhanA kI ArAdhanA meM lage hue, anazana
svIkAra kie hue zramaNopAsaka ke lie satya, (tattvarUpa, tathya, sadbhUta)
vacana bhI yadi aniSTa, akAnta, apriya, amanojJa, mana pratikUla hoM to bolanA
kalpanIya nahIM hai  /  devAnupriya! tumane revatI ko satya kintu aniSTa vacana
khe| isalie tuma isa sthAna kI-dharma ke pratikUla AcaraNa kI AlocanA karo,
yathocita prAyazcitta svIkAra kro| 262. tae NaM se bhagavaM goyame samaNasya
bhagavao mahAvIrassa 'tahatti' eyamaTuM viNaeNaM paDisuNei, paDisuNettA tao
paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA rAyagihaM nayaraM majhaMmajjheNaM aNuppavisai,
aNuppavisittA jeNeva mahAsayagassa samaNovAsayassa gihe, jeNeva mahAsayae
samaNovAsae, teNeva uvaagcchi| bhagavAna gautama ne zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra kA
yaha kathana 'Apa ThIka pharamAte hai ' yoM kaha kara vinayapUrvaka sunaa| ve
vahAM se cle| rAjagRha nagara ke bIca se gujare, zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ke
ghara pahuMce, usake pAsa ge| 263. tae NaM se mahAsayae samaNovAsae bhagavaM
goyama ejamANaM pAsai, pAsittA haTTa jAva' hiyae bhagavaM goyasaM vaMdai nmsi| _
zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ne jaba bhagavAn gautama ko Ate dekhA to vaha harSita
evaM prasanna huaa| unheM vaMdana-namaskAra kiyaa| 264. tae NaM se bhagavaM
goyame mahAsayayaM samaNovAsayaM evaM vayAsI-eva khalu devANuppiyA! samaNe
bhagavaM mahAvIre evamAikkhae bhAsai, paNNavei, no khalu kappai, devANuppiyA!
samaNovAsagassa apacchima jAva (mAraNaMtiya-saMlehaNA-jhUsaNA-jhUsiyassa bhatta-
pANa-paDiyAi-kkhiyassa paro saMtehiM , taccehiM , tahiehiM, sabbhUehiM, aNiTe
hiM, akaMtehiM, appiehiM, amaNuNNehiM, amaNAmehiM vAyaraNehiM ) vAgarittae tume
NaM devANuppiyA! 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 12

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[200] [The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra, Revati Gahavaini, said to the Santis, "Go,
Vagariya, you are not a Devana-priya! Go to this place and do penance for your
conduct against Dharma. _Bhagavan Gautama said to the Shramanopasaka
Mahashataka, "Devana-priya! Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira has declared, spoken,
proclaimed, and exemplified - said - (Devana-priya! For a Shramanopasaka engaged
in the final Maranantaik Sanlekhana, accepting Anashan, even if the words are
unfavorable, unpalatable, unpleasant, unpleasing, and contrary to the mind, it
is not appropriate to speak them). Devana-priya! You spoke such words to your
wife Revati, therefore you should do penance for your conduct against Dharma at
this place. Penance by Mahashataka 265. Then the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka
accepted Bhagavan Gautama's words with humility, saying, "You are right," and
did penance for his mistake. Then the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka accepted
Bhagavan Gautama's words with humility, saying, "You are right," and did penance
for his mistake. 266. Then Bhagavan Gautama departed from the Shramanopasaka
Mahashataka, passed through the middle of Rajgriha Nagar, and went to where
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira was. He went there, bowed and prostrated to Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavira, and then, with restraint and austerity, he lived, cultivating
his own self. Then Bhagavan Gautama departed from the Shramanopasaka
Mahashataka, passed through the middle of Rajgriha Nagar, and went to where
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira was. He went there, bowed and prostrated to Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavira, and then, with restraint and austerity, he lived, cultivating
his own self. 267. Then Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira departed from Rajgriha Nagar
at some time and went to other Janapadas. Then Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira
departed from Rajgriha Nagar at some time and went to other Janapadas. 268. Then
the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka, having cultivated many virtues and qualities for
twenty years, having attained the Shramanopasaka-Pariyaya, and having completely
fasted for eleven days, 1. See Sutra-Sukhya 261 2. See Sutra-Sukhya 84 3. See
Sutra-Sukhya 87 4. See Sutra-Sukhya 122

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra revaI gAhAvaiNI saMtehiM jAva' vAgariyA, taM NaM
tumaM devANuppiyA! eyassa ThANassa Aloehi jAva' pddivjaahi| _bhagavAn gautama ne
zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka se kahA-devAnupriya! zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne aisA
AkhyAta, bhASita, prajJapta evaM prarUpita kiyA hai-kahA hai-(devAnupriya!
antima mAraNAntika saMlekhanA kI ArAdhanA meM lage hue, anazana svIkAra kie hue
zramaNopAsaka ke lie satya, tattvarUpa, tathya, sadbhUta vacana bhI yadi aniSTa,
akAnta, apriya, amanojJa tathA mana ke pratikUla hoM to unheM bolanA kalpanIya
nahIM hai) devAnupriya! tuma apanI patnI revatI ke prati aise vacana bole,
isalie tuma isa sthAna kI-dharma ke pratikUla AcaraNa kI AlocanA karo
prAyazcitta svIkAra kro| mahAzataka dvArA prAyazcitta 265. tae NaM se mahAsayae
samaNovAsae bhagavao goyamassa tahatti' eyamaTuM viNaeNaM paDisuNei, paDisuNettA
tassa ThANassa AlAei jAva ahArihaM ca pAyacchitaM pddivjji| taba zramaNopAsaka
mahAzataka ne bhagavAn gautama kA kathana 'Apa ThIka pharamAte hai' kaha kara
vinayapUrvaka svIkAra kiyA, apanI bhUla kI AlocanA kI, yathocita prAyazcita
kiyaa| 266. tae NaM se bhagavaM goyame mahAsayagassa samaNovAsayassa aMtiyAo
paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA rAyagihaM nayaraM majhaM-majheNaM niggacchai,
niggacchittA jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre, teNeva uvAgacchai, uvAgacchittA
samaNaM bhagavaM mahAvIraM vaMdai namasai, vaMdittA namaMsittA saMjameNaM tavasA
appANaM bhAvemANe vihri| tatpazcAt bhagavAn gautama zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ke
pAsa se ravAnA hue, rAjagRha nagara ke bIca se gujare, jahAM zramaNa bhagavAn
mahAvIra the, vahAM aae| bhagavAn ko vaMdana-namaskAra kiyaa| vaMdananamaskAra
kara saMyama evaM tapa se AtmA ko bhAvita karate hue dharmArAdhanA meM laga ge|
267. tae NaM samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre annayA kayAi rAyagihAo nayarAo
paDiNikkhamai, paDiNikkhamittA bahiyA jaNavaya-vihAraM vihri| tadanatara zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra, kisI samaya rAjagRha nagara se prasthAna kara anya janapadoM
meM vihAra kara ge| 268. tae NaM se mahAsayae samaNovAsae bahUhiM sIla jAva
bhAvettA vIsaM vAsAiM samaNovAsaga-pariyAyaM pAuNittA, ekkArasa uvAsagapaDimAo
sammaM kAeNa phAsittA1. dekheM sUtra-sUkhyA 261 2. dekheM sUtra-sUkhyA 84 3.
dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 87 4. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 122

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Eighth Study: The Great Century ] [201  The ascetic, having purified himself
through a month-long Sanlekhana, having fasted for sixty meals, having performed
Alochana-Pratikramana, at the time of death, he relinquished his body in a state
of Samadhi. He was born as a deity in the Arunavatansaka Vimana in the Saudharma
heaven. His lifespan there is four Palyopama. He will become a Siddha-Mukta in
the Mahavideha realm. Nikkhevo || The study of the seventh Anga, Upasakadasa, is
complete ||  This Shramanopasaka, through the Great Century, cultivated his soul
through various vows, rules, etc. He purified himself. For twenty years, he
followed the Shramanopasaka-Shravaka-Dharma. He worshipped eleven Upasaka-images
properly. He performed a month-long Sanlekhana and a sixty-meal fast, a month-
long fast. He performed Alochana-Pratikramana. At the time of death, he
relinquished his body in a state of Samadhi. He was born as a deity in the
Arunavatansaka Vimana in the Saudharma heaven. His lifespan there is four
Palyopama. He will become a Siddha-Mukta in the Mahavideha realm. || Nikkhepa ||
|| The eighth study of the seventh Anga, Upasakadasa, is complete || 1. Thus,
Jambū! This is the meaning of the eighth study, as it was explained by the
Arhat. 2.  The Aryasudharma said, "Jambū! This is the meaning of the eighth
study, as it was explained by the Siddha-obtained Bhagavan Mahavira, which I
have told you."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM adhyayana : mahAzataka ] [201 mAsiyAe saMlehaNAe appANaM jhUsittA,
saDhi bhattAiM aNasaNAe chedettA, Aloiya-paDikkate samAhipatte kAlamAse kAlaM
kiccA sohamme kappe arUNavaDiMsae vimANe devattAe uvvnne| cattAri paliovamAiM
tthiii| mahAvidehe vAse sijjhihii| nikkhevo  //  sattamassa aMgassa
uvAsagadasANaM ajjhayaNaM samattaM  //  yoM zramaNopAsaka mahAzataka ne aneka
vidha vrata, niyama Adi dvArA AtmA ko bhAvita kiyA-Atmazuddhi kii| bIsa varSa
taka zramaNopAsaka-zrAvaka-dharma kA pAlana kiyA  /  gyAraha upAsaka-pratimAoM
kI bhalI bhAMti ArAdhanA kii| eka mAsa kI saMlekhanA aura sATha bhojana-eka mAsa
kA anazana sampanna kara AlocanA pratikramaNa kara, maraNakAla Ane para
samAdhipUrvaka deha-tyAga kiyaa| vaha saudharma devaloka meM aruNAvataMsaka
vimAna meM deva rUpa meM utpanna huaa| vahAM Ayu cAra palyopama kI hai|
mahAvideha kSetra meM vaha siddha-mukta hogaa|  //  nikssep||  //  sAtaveM aMga
upAsakadazA kA AThavA~ adhyayana samApta  //  1. evaM khalu jambU ! samaNeNaM
jAva saMpatteNaM aTramassa ajjhayaNassa ayama> paNNattetti bemi| 2. nigamana-
Arya sudharmA bole-jambU ! siddhi-prApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne AThaveM adhyayana
kA yahI artha bhAva kahA thA, jo maiMne tumheM batalAyA hai|

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ninth Study Summary: In Brief  In the city of Sravasti, there lived a wealthy
merchant named Nandini-pita. His wealth amounted to twelve crore gold coins, of
which one-third was kept as reserve capital, one-third was invested in trade,
and one-third was used for household luxuries and amenities. He owned four
Gokuls, each with ten thousand cows. His wife's name was Ashwini.  Nandini-pita
was living a prosperous and happy householder's life. A beautiful incident
occurred. Lord Mahavira arrived in Sravasti. The devout human community thronged
to have his darshan. Nandini-pita also went. He listened to the Lord's Dharma-
deshana. He was inspired. Like a joyful person, the merchant also accepted the
Shravak Dharma.  Nandini-pita continued to develop his vow-filled life. Thus,
fourteen years passed. His mind became engrossed in Dharma. He considered it
appropriate to free himself from family and social responsibilities. He
appointed his eldest son in his place. He himself became engrossed in the
worship of Dharma. It was a fortunate coincidence that he did not face any
obstacle or hindrance in his worship. He followed the Shravak Dharma perfectly
for twenty years. Thus, living a life of meditation like a joyful person, he
attained Samadhi-maran and was born as a Deva in the Arunagav Vimana in the
Saudharma Kalpa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nauvAM adhyayana sAra : saMkSepa zrAvastI nagarI meM nandinIpitA nAmaka eka
samRddhizAlI gAthApati thaa| usakI sampatti bAraha karor3a svarNa-mudrAoM meM
thI, jinakA tIsarA bhAga surakSita pUMjI ke rUpa meM alaga rakhA huA thA, itanA
hI vyApAra meM lagA thA tathA utanA hI ghara ke vaibhava-sAja-sAmAna Adi meM
lagA huA thaa| usake dasa-dasa hajAra gAyoM ke cAra gokula the| usakI patnI kA
nAma azvinI thaa| nandinIpitA eka sampanna, sukhI gRhastha kA jIvana bitA rahA
thaa| eka sundara prasaMga bnaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra zrAvastI meM padhAre  /
zraddhAlu mAnava-samudAya darzana ke lie umar3a pdd'aa| nandinI-pitA bhI gyaa|
bhagavAn kI dharma-dezanA sunii| antaH prerita huaa| gAthApati Ananda kI taraha
usane bhI zrAvakadharma svIkAra kiyaa| nandinIpitA apane vratamaya jIvana ko
uttarottara vikasita karatA gyaa| yoM caudaha varSa vyatIta ho ge| usakA mana
dharma meM ramatA gyaa| usane pArivArika tathA sAmAjika dAyitvoM se mukti lenA
ucita smjhaa| apane sthAna para jyeSTha putra ko manonIta kiyaa| svayaM dharma
kI ArAdhanA meM juTa gyaa| zubha saMyoga thA, usakI upAsanA meM kisI prakAra kA
upasarga yA vighna nahIM huaa| usane bIsa varSa taka samyak rUpa meM zrAvaka-
dharma kA pAlana kiyaa| yoM Ananda kI taraha sAdhanAmaya jIvana jIte hue anta
meM samAdhi-maraNa prApta kara vaha saudharmakalpa meM arUNagava vimAna meM deva
rUpa meM utpanna huaa|

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Study: Nandi Nipita  **Verse 269:**  Jambū! At that time, in the fourth
Āra of the present Avasarpini, in the city of Śrāvastī, there was a Koṣṭhaka
Caitya. Jitśatru was the king there.  In the city of Śrāvastī, a wealthy
Gāthāpati named Nandi Nipita resided. He had four crore gold coins invested in
his household resources. He had four Gokulas, each containing ten thousand cows.
His wife's name was Aśvini.  **Verse 270:**  The Lord Mahāvīra arrived in
Śrāvastī. A Samvasarana took place. Like Ānand, Nandi Nipita embraced the
Śrāvaka-Dharma. The Lord then went to other Janapadas.  **Question 1:**
"Venerable Sir! If the Siddha-prapta Bhagavan Mahāvīra has explained the meaning
of the eighth study of Upāsaka-Daśā, then what meaning did he explain for the
ninth study, Venerable Sir?"  **Question 2:**  Ārya Sudharma asked Jambū: "If
the Siddha-prapta Bhagavan Mahāvīra has explained the meaning of the eighth
study of Upāsaka-Daśā, then what meaning did he explain for the ninth study,
Venerable Sir?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAthApati nandinIpitA 269. navamassa ukkhevo'| evaM khalu jaMbU ! teNaM kAleNaM
teNaM samaeNaM sAvatthI nayarI  /  age ce  /  jiyasattU rAyA  /  nauvAM
adhyayana nandinIpitA tattha NaM sAvatthIe nayarIe naMdiNIpiyA nAmaM gAhavaI
parivasai, aDDhe  /  cattAri hiraNNakoDIo nihANa - pauttAo, cattAri hiraNNa-
koDIo vuDDi-pauttAo, cattAri hiraNNa- koDIo pavitthara - pauttAo, cattAri vayA,
dasago - sAhassieNaM vaeNaM  /  assiNI bhAriyA  /  utkSepa'-upodghAtapUrvaka
nauveM adhyayana kA prArambha yoM hai jambU ! usa kAla-vartamAna avasarpiNI ke
cauthe Are ke anta meM usa samaya-jaba bhagavAn mahAvIra sadeha vidyamAna the,
zrAvastI nAmaka nagarI thI, koSThaka nAmaka caitya thA  /  jitazatru vahA~ kA
rAjA thA  /  zrAvastI nagarI meM nandinIpitA nAmaka samRddhizAlI gAthApati
nivAsa karatA thaa| usakI cAra karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM ghara kI sAdhana-sAmagrI
meM lagI thii| usake cAra gokula the  /  pratyeka gokula meM dasadasa hajAra
gAyeM thiiN| usake cAra gokula the  /  pratyeka gokula meM dasa-dasa hajAra
gAyeM thiiN| usakI patnI kA nAma azvinI thA  /  vrata : ArAdhanA viharai | 270.
sAmI samosaDhe  /  jahA ANaMdo taheva gihidhammaM paDivajjai  /  sAmI bahiyA
bhagavAn mahAvIra zrAvastI meM pdhaare| samavasaraNa huA  /  Ananda kI taraha
nandinIpitA ne zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyaa| bhagavAn anya janapadoM meM vihAra
kara ge| 1. jaNaM bhaMte! samaNaM bhagavayA jAva saMpatteNaM uvAsagadasANaM
aTThamassa ajjhayaNassa ayama TThe paNNatte, navamassa NaM bhaMte! ajjhayaNassa
ke aTThe paNNatte ? 2. Arya sudharmA se jambU ne pUchA- siddhiprApta bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne upAsakadazA ke AThaveM adhyayana kA yadi yaha artha-bhAva
pratipAdita kiyA to bhagavan ! unhoMne nauveM adhyayana kA kyA artha batalAyA ?
(kRpayA kaheM ) /

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[204] [Upasakadasangasutra 271. Therefore, Nandi Nipita, having accepted the
Shramanopasaka dharma, lived a life devoted to dharma. Life of Sadhana: End 272.
Then, Nandi Nipita, the Shramanopasaka, having cultivated many virtues like
Anuvrata, Gunavrata, etc., spent fourteen years in this way. He entrusted his
eldest son with the family and social responsibilities, just like Anand. He
himself became engrossed in the worship of dharma. Nandi Nipita followed the
Shravaka dharma for twenty years. There is a difference between him and Anand,
etc. - after giving up his body, he was born in the Arunagav Vimana. He will
become a Siddha-Mukta in the Mahavideha region. "Niksepa" - The ninth study of
the seventh Anga, Upasakadasha, is complete. 1. See Sutra number 64 2. See Sutra
number 122 3. And thus, Jambu! This is the meaning of the ninth study, as
explained by the Shramanas, which I have told you. 4. Conclusion - The Arya
Sudharma said - Jambu! This is the meaning of the ninth study, as explained by
the Siddha-obtained Bhagwan Mahavira, which I have told you.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 204] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra 271. tae NaM se naMdiNIpiyA samaNovAsae jAva' vihri|
nandinIpitA zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kara zramaNopAsaka ho gayA,
dharmArAdhanApUrvaka jIvana bitAne lgaa| sAdhanAmaya jIvana : avasAna 272. tae
NaM tassa naMdiNIpiyassa samaNovAsayassa bahUhiM solavvaya-guNa jAva'
bhAvemANassa coddasa saMvaccharAiM vikkNtaaii| taheva jeThaM puttaM tthvei|
dhmm-pnnnntiN| vIsaM vAsAiM priyaagN| nANattaM arUNagave vimANe uvavAo
mahAvidehe vAse sijjhihie| nikkhevao  //  sattamassa aMgassa uvAsagadasANaM
navamaM ajjhayaNaM samattaM  //  tadantara zramaNopAsaka nandinIpitA ko aneka
prakAra se aNuvrata, guNavrata Adi kI ArAdhanA dvArA AtmabhAvita hote hue
caudaha varSa vyatIta ho ge| usane Ananda Adi kI taraha apane jyeSTha putra ko
pArivArika evaM sAmAjika uttaradAyitva sauNpaa| svayaM dharmopAsanA meM nirata
rahane lgaa| nandinIpitA ne bIsa varSa taka zrAvaka-dharma kA pAlana kiyaa|
Ananda Adi se itanA antara hai-deha-tyAga kara vaha arUNagava vimAna meM utpanna
huaa| mahAvideha kSetra meM vaha siddha-mukta hogaa| "nikSepa "sAtaveM aMga
upAsakadazA kA nauvAM adhyayana samApta" 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 64 2. dekheM
sUtra-saMkhyA 122 3. evaM khalu jambU ! samaNeNaM jAva saMpatteNaM navamassa
ajjhayaNassa ayamaTaThe paNNattetti bemi| 4. nigamana-Arya sudharmA bole-jambU !
siddhiprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne nauveM adhyayana kA yahI artha-bhAva kahA thA,
jo maiMne tumheM batalAyA hai|

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Tenth Study Summary: In Brief  In Shravasti, there was a wealthy and influential
Gahapati named Salihipita. His wife's name was Falguni. Like Nandini Pita,
Salihipita's wealth also consisted of twelve crore gold coins, of which one part
was kept as secure capital, and two parts were equally invested in trade and
household splendor, furnishings, etc.  Once, Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in
Shravasti. Enthusiasm filled the hearts of the devotees. They flocked to see and
hear the teachings of Bhagwan. Salihipita also went. He received spiritual
inspiration from Bhagwan's teachings. Like Gahapati Anand, he accepted the
Shravak Dharma. After fourteen years, he entrusted his worldly responsibilities
to his eldest son, so that he could devote himself more and more to Dharma-
aradhana, and he himself engaged in Upasana. He performed the Upasana of the 11
Pratimas of a Shravak as prescribed.  - Salihipita faced no obstacles in his
Aradhana-Upasana. In the end, he attained Samadhi-maran. He was born as a Deva
in the Arunkeel Vimana in the Saudharma Kalpa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dasavAM adhyayana sAra : saMkSepa zrAvastI meM sAlihIpitA nAmaka eka dhanADhya
tathA prabhAvazAlI gAthApati thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma phAlgunI thaa|
nandinIpitA kI taraha sAlihIpitA kI sampatti bhI bAraha karor3a svarNa-mudrAoM
meM thI, jisakA eka bhAga surakSita pUMjI ke rUpa meM rakhA thA tathA do bhAga
barAbara-barAbara vyApAra evaM ghara ke vaibhava-sAja-sAmAna Adi meM lage the|
eka bAra bhagavAn mahAvIra kA zrAvastI meM padArpaNa huaa| zraddhAlu janoM meM
utsAha chA gyaa| bhagavAn ke darzana evaM upadeza-zravaNa hetu ve umar3a pdd'e|
sAlihIpitA bhI gyaa| bhagavAn ke upadeza se use adhyAtma-preraNA milii| usane
gAthApati Ananda kI taraha zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyaa| caudaha varSa ke bAda
usane apane Apako adhikAdhika dharmArAdhanA meM jor3a dene ke lie apanA laukika
uttaradAyitva jyeSTha putra ko saupa diyA, svayaM upAsanA meM laga gyaa| usane
zrAvaka kI 11 pratimAoM kI yathAvidhi upAsanA kii| - sAlihIpitA kI ArAdhanA-
upAsanA meM koI upasarga nahIM aayaa| anta meM usane samAdhimaraNa prApta kiyaa|
saudharma kalpa meM aruNakIla vimAna meM vaha deva rUpa meM utpanna haa|

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Study ## The Story of Salhihipita, the Wealthy Patron  **273.** The
tenth study begins with an introduction. Thus, Jambū! In that time, in that era,
in the city of Sāvatthī, there was a shrine called Koṭṭha. Jitasattu was the
king there.  In the city of Sāvatthī, a wealthy and radiant patron named
Salhihipita resided. He had four crore gold coins in his treasury as secure
wealth, four crore gold coins invested in trade, and four crore gold coins used
for the splendor and resources of his household. He had four cow-herds, each
with ten thousand cows. His wife's name was Phālguni.  **274.** The same is true
for the householder. Just as there is joy, so too is there a decline in worldly
dharma. Just as Kāmadeva, so too, the son of Jetu, having attained the Dharma-
Pannatti of the Blessed Lord Mahāvīra, dwells in the abode of the monk. The
eleven Nirūvasaggā Upāsaka-Paḍimā are also to be spoken of, and they are to be
led by the path of Kāmadeva, until they reach the Arunakīla Vimāna in the
Sohamme Kalpa, where they are to be honored by the Devatta. There are four
parables. The Mahavideha dwells in the Sijjhi.  1. If, Bhante! the Blessed One,
the monk, has explained the ninth study of the Upāsaka-Daśā with all its wealth,
then, Bhante! what is the meaning of the tenth study?  2. Ārya Sudharma asked
Jambū - If the Siddha Mahāvīra has explained the ninth study of the Upāsaka-
Daśā, then, Bhante! what is the meaning of the tenth study? (Please tell me)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dasavAM adhyayana sAlihIpitA gAthApati sAlihIpitA 273. dasamassa ukkhevo'| evaM
khala jaMbU! teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM sAvatthI nyrii| koTThae ceie|
jiyasattU raayaa| tattha NaM sAbatthIe nayarIe sAlihIpiyA nAma gAhAvaI
parivasai, aDDe ditte| cattAri hiraNNa-koDIo nihANa-pauttAo, cattAri hiraNNa-
koDIo vaDDi-pauttAo, cattAri hiraNNakoDIo pavitthara-pauttAo, cattAri vayA,
dasa-go-sAhassieNaM vennN| phagguNI bhaariyaa| utkSepa'-upodghAtapUrvaka dasaveM
adhyayana kA prArambha yoM hai jambU! usa kAla-vartamAna avasarpiNI ke cauthe
Are ke anta meM, usa samaya-jaba bhagavAn mahAvIra sadeha vidyamAna the,
zrAvastI nAmaka nagarI thI, koSThaka nAmaka caitya thaa| jitazatru vahAM kA rAjA
thaa| zrAvastI nagarI meM sAlihIpitA nAmaka eka dhanADhya evaM dIpta-dIptimAn-
prabhAvazAlI gAthApati nivAsa karatA thaa| usakI cAra karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM
surakSita dhana ke rUpa meM khajAne meM rakhI thIM, cAra karor3a svarNa-mudrAeM
vyApAra meM lagI thIM tathA cAra karor3a svarNa mudrAeM ghara ke vaibhava-
sAdhana-sAmagrI meM lagI thiiN| usake cAra gokula the| pratyeka gokula meM dasa-
dasa hajAra gAyeM thiiN| usakI patnI kA nAma phAlgunI thaa| saphala sAdhanA 274.
sAmI smosddhe| jahA ANaMdo taheva gihidhamma pddivjji| jahA kAmadevo tahA jeTuM
puttaM ThavettA posahasAlAe samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa dhamma-paNNattiM
uvasaMpajittANaM vihri| mavaraM nirUvasaggAo ekkArasa vi uvAsaga-paDimAo taheva
bhANiyavvAo, evaM kAmadevagameNaM neyavvaM jAva sohamme kappe arUNakIle vimANe
devattAe uvvnne| cattAri paliovamAiM tthiii| mahAvidehe vAse sijjhihii| 1. jai
NaM bhaMte! samaNeNaM bhagavayA jAva saMpatteNaM uvAsagadasANaM navamassa
ajjhayaNasa ayamaDhe paNNatte, dasamassa NaM bhaMte ! ajjhayaNassa ke aTe
paNNatte? 2. Arya sudharmA se jambU ne pUchA-siddhiprApta mahAvIra ne
upAAsakadazA ke navame adhyayana kA yadi vaha artha-bhAva pratipAdita kiyA, to
bhagavan ! unhoneM dasaveM adhyayana kA kyA artha batalAyA? (kRpayA kaheM)

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Tenth Study: Salihi-pita [207 || The tenth study of the seventh Anga,
Upasakadasa, is complete. ||] The Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in Sravasti. A
congregation was held. Like Ananda, Salihi-pita accepted the Shravak-dharma.
Like Kamadeva, he entrusted his eldest son with family and social
responsibilities. He remained in the Poshadshala, engaged in worship, in
accordance with the teachings of the Angi-krit Dharma. The only difference was
that he did not face any obstacles in his worship. He worshipped the eleven
Shravak-pratima without any hindrance, as described earlier. His life should be
understood like that of Kamadeva. After leaving his body, he was born in the
Saudharma-devaloka, in the Arunakiil Vimana, in the form of a deva. His lifespan
is four Palyopama. He will attain Siddha-mukti in the Mahavideha Kshetra. "The
tenth study of the seventh Anga, Upasakadasa, is complete."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dasavAM adhyayana : sAlihIpitA] [207  //  sattamassa aMgassa uvAsagadasANaM
dasamaM ajjhayaNaM samatta  //  bhagavAn mahAvIra zrAvastI meM padhAre  /
samavasaraNa huaa| Ananda kI taraha sAlihIpitA ne zrAvaka-dharma svIkAra kiyaa|
kAmadeva kI taraha usane apane jyeSTha putra ko pArivArika evaM sAmAjika
uttaradAyitva sauNpaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ke pAsa aMgIkRta dharmazikSA ke anurUpa
svayaM poSadhazAlA meM upAsanAnirata rahane lagA itanA hI antara rahA-use
upAsanA meM koI upasarga nahIM huA, pUrvokta rUpa meM usane gyAraha zrAvaka-
pratimAoM kI nirvighna ArAdhanA kii| usakA jIvana-krama kAmadeva kI taraha
samajhanA caahie| deha-tyAga kara vaha saudharma-devaloka meM arUNakIla vimAna
meM devarUpa meM utpanna huaa| usakI Ayusthiti cAra palyopama kI hai| mahAvideha
kSetra meM vaha siddha-mukta hogaa| "sAtaveM aMga upAsakadazA kA dasavAM
adhyayana samApta"

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Conclusion  **275.**  The thought of being free from family and social
responsibilities and engaging in religious practices arose in the minds of the
ten *Shramanopasakas* in the fifteenth year. The ten followed the *Shravaka-
dharma* for twenty years.  **276.**  O Jambu! This meaning and essence of the
tenth study of the *Upasakadasa*, the seventh *Anga*, was declared by the
Siddha, the Lord Mahavira.  **277.**  The *Upasakadasa*, the seventh *Anga*, has
one *Shruta-skandha*. There are ten studies. They have a uniform style of
recitation, being written in prose. They are recited over ten days. After that,
the *Samuddesa-sutra* is stabilized and familiarized over two days, and
*Anugnyasanmati* is given. Similarly, the *Sumuddesa* and *Anugnyasanmati* of
the *Anga* should be understood.  **"The *Upasakadasa* Sutra is complete."**  1.
See Sutra Number 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upasaMhAra 275. dasaNha vi paNNarasame saMvacchare vaTTamANANaM ciNtaa| dasaNha
vi vIsaM vAsAiM smnnovaasy-priyaao|| upasaMhAra dasoM hI zramaNopAsakoM ko
pandrahaveM varSa meM pArivArika, sAmAjika uttaradAyitva se mukta ho kara
dharma-sAdhanA meM nirata hone kA vicAra huaa| dasoM ne bIsa varSa taka zrAvaka-
dharma kA pAlana kiyaa| 276. evaM khalu jaMbu! samaNeNaM jAva' saMpatteNaM
sattamassa aMgassa uvAsagadasANaM dasamassa ajjhayaNassa ayamaDhe pnnnntte||
Arya sudharmA ne kahA-jambU! siddhiprApta bhagavAn mahAvIra ne sAtaveM aMga
upAsakadazA ke dasaveM adhyayana kA yaha artha-bhAva prajJapta-pratipAdita
kiyaa| 277. uvAsagadasANaMsattamassa aMgassa ego suy-khNdho| dasa ajjhayaNA
ekkasaragA, dasasu ceva divasesu uddissNti| tao suya-khaMdho smuddiss|
aNuNNavijai dosu divasesu aMgaM thev|  //  uvAsagadasAo samattAo  //  sAtaveM
aMga upAsakadazA meM eka zruta-skandha hai  /  dasa adhyayana haiN| unameM eka
sarIkhA svarapATha-zailI hai , gadyAtmaka zailI meM ye grathita haiM  /  isakA
dasa dinoM me uddeza kiyA jAtA hai  /  tatpazcAt do dinoM meM samuddeza-sUtra ko
sthira aura paricita karane kA uddeza kiyA jAtA hai aura anujJAsaMmati dI jAtI
hai| isI prakAra aMga kA sumuddeza aura anumati samajhanA caahie| "upAsakadazA
sUtra samApta huA" 1. dekheM sUtra-saMkhyA 2

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Collection of Verses  **1.**  The merchants of Sangha-Gaha, the two of
Champa, the two of Banaras, the two of Nayari, the two of Purvari, the two of
Kampillapur, all these are to be known.  **2.**  The two of Pola, the two of
Rajagriha, the two of Savatthi, these cities are to be known by the Uvasaga.
**3.**  Sivananda, Bhadda, Sama, Dhan, Bahul, Pusa, Aggimitta, Revai, Assi, and
Faggani, these are the names of the Bhajjana.  **4.**  Ohinna, Pisaya, Maya,
Vahi, Dhan, Uttarizja, these are the names of the Bhajjana, the two of Suvva,
the two of Duvva, the two of Niruvassagga.  **5.**  The six of Aruna, Arunaabha,
Aruna-ppaha, Aruna-kanta, Sita, and Aruna-jjha, these are the names of the great
ones.  **6.**  Forty, sixty, eighty, sixty, sixty, sixty, ten thousand, these
are the names of the thousands.  **7.**  Twelve, eighteen, twenty-four, three
times eighteen, these are the names of the Dhan. Three times twenty-four,
twelve, twelve, these are the names of the Kodi.  **8.**  Ullana, Dantavana,
Phala, Abhiganuvvatta, Sina, Vattha, Vilevana, Putpha, Abharana, Dhuva, Pejja,
these are the names of the things.  **9.**  Bhakhoyana, Suya, Ghae, Sage,
Mahura, Jemana, Annapana, these are the names of the things. These are the
twenty-two names of the Ananda.  **10.**  Uddha, Sohammapura, Lolua, these are
the names of the places in the north of the Himalayas. Five hundred, three
hundred, these are the names of the Ohinna, the ten ganas.  **11.**  Darsana,
Vaya, Sama, Posaha, Padima, Abambha, Sacchitta, Aram, Bha, Pesa, Uddita, Vajja,
these are the names of the Samana.  **12.**  Eleven Padimas, twenty Pariyas,
Anasana, these are the names of the months. Sohamme, Chaupaliya, Mahavideha,
these are the names of the places.  **Note:** These verses are not part of the
original text of the book. They are verses from previous teachers, which provide
a brief introduction to the book.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMgaha-gAhAo vANiyagAme caMpA duve ya bANArasIe nyriie| AlabhiyA ya puravarI
kaMpillapuraM ca boddhavvaM  //  1  //  polAsaM rAyagihaM sAvatthIe purIe donni
bhave  /  ee uvAsagANaM nayarA khalu honti boddhavvA  //  2  //  sivanaMda-
bhadda-sAmA dhanna-bahula-pUsa-aggimittA y| revai-assiNi taha phaggaNI ya
bhajjANa nAmAI  //  3  //  ohiNNANa-pisAe mAyA vAhi-dhaNa-uttarijje y| bhajjA ya
suvvayA duvvayA nirUvasaggayA donni  //  4  //  arUNe arUNAbhe khalu arUNappaha-
arUNakaMta-siTe y| arUNajjhae ya chaThe bhUya vaDiM se gave kIle  //  5  //
cAlI saTThI asII saTThi saTThI ya saTThi dasa shssaa| asiI cattA cattA ee
vaiyANa ya sahassANaM  /  /  6  //  bArasa aTThArasa cauvIsaM tivihaM aTTharasai
neyaM  /  dhannaNa ti-covvIsaM bArasa bArasa ya koDIo  //  7  //  ullaNa-
daMtavaNa-phale abhigaNuvvaTTaNe siNANe y|| vattha-vilevaNa-putphe AbharaNaM
dhUva-pejjAI  //  8  //  bhakkhoyaNa-sUya-ghae sAge mAhura-jemaNa'nnapANe y| taM
bole igavIsaM ANaMdAINa abhiggahA  //  9  //  uDDhaM sohammapure lolUe ahe
uttare himavaMte  /  paMcasae taha tidisiM ohiNNANaM dasagaNassa  //  10  //
dNsnn-vy-saamaaiy-posh-pddimaa-abNbh-sccitte| AraM bha-pesa-uddiT Tha-vajjae
samaNabhUe y|| 11 //  ikkArasa paDimAo vIsaM pariyAo aNasaNaM maase| sohamme
caupaliyA mahAvidehammi sijjhihii  //  12  //  uvAsagadasAo samattAo 1. ye
gAthAeM prastuta grantha ke mula pATha kA bhAga nahIM haiN| ye pUrvAcAryakRta
gAthAeM haiM, jinameM grantha kA saMkSipta paricaya

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The details of the Sangraha-gatha are presented below. The Upasakas mentioned in
this text were from the following cities:  * **Shramanopasaka:** Anand, Kamdev,
Chulnipita, Suradev, Chullashatak, Kundakaul, Sakdalputra, Mahashatak,
Nandinipita, Salihipita * **Cities:** Champ, Varanasi, Varanasi, Alambika,
Kampilyapur, Polaspur, Rajgriha, Sravasti, Sravasti * **Commercial Village:**
Nagar  The names of the wives of the Shramanopasakas were as follows:  *
**Shramanopasaka:** Anand, Kamdev, Chulnipita, Suradev, Chullashatak, Kundakaul,
Sakdalputra, Mahashatak, Nandinipita, Salihipita * **Wives:** Shivananda,
Bhadra, Shyama, Dhanya, Bahula, Pusa, Agni Mitra, Revati (and thirteen others),
Ashwini, Falguni  The special events in the lives of the Shramanopasakas were as
follows:  * **Anand:** Doubt of Gautam Swami regarding the extent of
Avadhijnana, resolved by Bhagwan Mahavira. Devopasarga in the form of Pisachas
etc., the Shramanopasaka's steadfastness till the end. * **Kamdev:**  *
**[210]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMgraha-gAthAoM kA vivaraNa prastuta meM varNita upAsaka nimnAMkita nagaroM
meM hue zramaNopAsaka Ananda kAmadeva culanIpitA surAdeva cullazataka
kuMDakaulika sakaDAlaputra mahAzataka nandinIpitA sAlihIpitA nagara vANijyagrAma
campA vArANasI vArANasI AlabhikA kAmpilyapura polAsapura rAjagRha zrAvastI
zrAvastI zramaNopAsakoM kI bhAryAoM ke nAma nimnAMkita the bhAryA zivanandA
bhadrA zramaNopAsaka Ananda kAmadeva culanIpitA surAdeva cullazataka
kuMDakaulika sakaDAlaputra mahAzataka nandinIpitA sAlihIpitA zyAmA dhanyA bahulA
pUSA zramaNopAsaka Ananda agnimitrA revatI Adi teraha azvinI phAlgunI
zramaNopAsakoM ke jIvana kI vizeSa ghaTanAeM nimnAMkita thI vizeSa ghaTanA
avadhijJAna ke vistAra ke sambandha meM gautama svAmI kA saMzaya, bhagavAn
mahAvIra dvArA smaadhaan| pizAca Adi ke rUpa meM devopasarga, zramaNopAsaka kI
anta taka dRddh'taa| kAmadeva 210]

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Description of the Collected Verses  **[211 Chulani Pita]** * Breaking of the
vow due to the threat of matricide by a deva (god), * Atonement. * **Suradeva**
* Breaking of the vow due to the threat of sixteen terrible diseases being
inflicted by a deva, * Atonement. * **Chullashataka** * Breaking of the vow due
to the threat of a deva scattering gold coins and other wealth, * Atonement. *
**Kundakaulika** * A deva praises the Goshalak doctrine by lifting a garment and
a ring, Kundakaulika's steadfastness, * Refutation of determinism, the deva is
rendered speechless. * **Sakadalputra** * A virtuous wife, Agnimitra, restores
her vow-breaking husband to righteousness. * **Mahashataka** * The affliction of
Revati, who is devoid of vows. * **Kamohipak** * Conduct, the unwavering nature
of the Mahashataka. * **Nandini Pita** * No affliction occurred during the
worship of vows. * **Salihi Pita** * No affliction occurred during the worship
of vows. * **Shramanopasaka** * The Shramanopasaka renounced their bodies and
were born in the following celestial realms: * **Shramanopasaka** * **Celestial
Realm** * **Ananda** * **Arun Kamadeva** * **Arunabha Chulani Pita** * **Arun
Prabha** * **Arunakant Chullashataka** * **Arun Shreshtha Kundakaulika** *
**Arun Dhwaja Sakadalputra** * **Arun Bhut Mahashataka** * **Arunavatans Nandini
Pita** * **Arun Gav Salihi Pita** * **Arun Keel** * The number of cattle owned
by the Shramanopasaka was as follows: * **Shramanopasaka** * **Number of Cows**
* **Ananda** * 40,000 * **Kamadeva** * 60,000 * **Chulani Pita** * 80,000 *
**Suradeva** * 60,000 * **Suradeva**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMgraha-gAthAoM kA vivaraNa] [211 culanIpitA deva dvArA mAtRvadha kI dhamakI
se vrata-bhaMga, praayshcit| surAdeva deva dvArA solaha bhayaMkara roga utpanna
kara dene kI dhamakI se vrata-bhaMga, praayshcitt| cullazataka deva dvArA
svarNa-mudrAeM Adi sampatti bikhera dene kI dhamakI se vrata-bhaMga, prAyazcitta
/  kuMDakaulika deva dvArA uttarIya evaM aMgUThI uThA kara gozAlaka mata kI
prazaMsA, kuMDakaulika kI dRr3hatA, niyativAda kA khaDana, deva kA nirUttara
honaa| sakaDAlaputra vratazIla patnI agnimitrA dvArA bhagna-vrata pati ko punaH
dharmasthita krnaa| mahAzataka vrata-hIna revatI kA upasarga.kAmohIpaka
vyavahAra, mahAzataka kI avicltaa| nandinIpitA vratArAdhanA meM koI upasarga
nahIM huaa| sAlihIpitA vratArAdhanA meM koI upasarga nahIM huaa| zramaNopAsaka
deha tyAga kara nimnAMkita vimAnoM meM utpanna hue zramaNopAsaka vimAna Ananda
arUNa kAmadeva arUNAbha culanIpitA arUNaprabha arUNAkAnta cullazataka
arUNazreSTha kuMDakaulika arUNadhvaja sakaDAlaputra arUNabhUta mahAzataka
arUNAvataMsa nandinIpitA arUNagava sAlihIpitA arUNakIla zramaNopAsakoM ke
godhana kI saMkhyA nimnAMkita rUpa meM thI zramaNopAsaka gAyoM kI saMkhyA Ananda
40 hajAra kAmadeva 60 hajAra culanIpitA 80 hajAra surAdeva 60 hajAra surAdeva

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 212  [Upasakadasangasutra Chullasataka 60,000 Kundakaulika 60,000
Sakadalputra 10,000 Mahasataka 80,000 Nandini-pita 40,000 Salihi-pita 40,000
Shramanopasakas possessed the following gold coins: Shramanopasakas Gold coins
Ananda 12 crore Kamadeva 18 crore Chulni-pita 24 crore Suradeva 18 crore
Chullasataka 18 crore Kundakaulika 18 crore Sakadalputra 3 crore Mahasataka
Bronze-measured 24 crore Nandini-pita 12 crore Salihi-pita 12 crore Ananda etc.
Shramanopasakas observed the following 21 rules: 1. Towel for wiping the body,
2. Datun, 3. Fruit for cleansing hair and body, 4. Massage oil, 5. Ubtan, 6.
Water for bathing, 7. Clothes to wear, 8. Perfume, 9. Flowers, 10. Ornaments,
11. Incense, 12. Drink, 13. Food-sweets, 14. Rice, 15. Soup-lentils, 16. Ghee,
17. Vegetables, 18. Madhurak-honey drink, 19. Dishes-dahi-bade, pakoras etc.,
20. Drinking water, 21. Mouth freshener-paan and fragrant spices to be put in
it. Among these ten Shramanopasakas, Ananda and Mahasataka attained Avadhi-
knowledge, whose extent or range was as follows: Ananda in the east, west and
south directions in the salt sea up to five hundred yojanas, in the north
direction Chullhimalayan mountain, in the upward direction up to Saudharma
Devaloka, in the downward direction in the first Naraka Bhoomi Ratnaprabha in
the place called Lolupacyuta. Mahasataka in the east, west and south directions
in the salt sea up to one thousand yojanas, in the north direction
Chullhimalayan mountain, in the upward direction up to Saudharma Devaloka, in
the downward direction in the first Naraka ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 212] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra cullazataka 60hajAra kuDaMkaulika 60 hajAra
sakaDAlaputra 10 hajAra mahAzataka 80 hajAra nandinIpitA 40 hajAra sAlihIpitA 40
hajAra zramaNopAsakoM kI sampatti nimnAMkita svarNa-mudrAoM meM thI
zramaNopAsaka svarNa-mudrAeM Ananda 12 karor3a kAmadeva 18 karor3a culanIpitA 24
karor3a surAdeva 18 karor3a cullazataka 18 karor3a kuMDakaulika 18 karor3a
sakaDAlaputra 3 karor3a mahAzataka kAMsya-parimita 24 karor3a nandinIpitA 12
karor3a sAlihIpitA 12 karor3a Ananda Adi zramaNopAsakoM ne nimnAMkita 21 bAtoM
meM maryAdA kI thI 1. zarIra poMchane kA tauliyA, 2. datauna, 3. keza evaM deha-
zuddhi ke lie phala-prayoga, 4. mAliza ke taila, 5. ubaTana, 6. snAna ke lie
pAnI, 7. pahanane ke vastra, 8. vilepana, 9. puSpa, 10. AbhUSaNa, 11. dhUpa, 12.
peya, 13. bhakSya-miThAI, 14. odana-cAvala, 15. sUpa-dAleM, 16. ghRta, 17. zAka,
18. mAdhuraka-madhu peya, 19. vyaMjana-dahIbar3e, pakor3e Adi, 20. pIne kA pAnI,
21. mukhavAsa-pAna tathA usameM DAle jAne vAle sugandhita msaale| ina dasa
zramaNopAsakoM meM Ananda tathA mahAzataka ko avadhi-jJAna prApta huA, jisakI
maryAdA yA vistAra nimnAMkita rUpa meM thAAnandapUrva, pazcima tathA dakSiNa
dizA meM lavaNa samudra meM pAMca-pAMca sau yojana taka, uttara dizA meM
cullahimavAn varSadhara parvata taka, Urdhva-dizA meM saudharma devaloka taka,
adhodizA meM prathama nAraka bhUmi ratnaprabhA meM lolupAcyuta nAmaka sthAna tk|
mahAzatakapUrva, pazcima tathA dakSiNa dizA meM lavaNa-samudra meM eka-eka
hajAra yojana taka, uttara dizA cullahimavAn varSadhara parvata taka, Urdhva-
dizA meM saudharma devaloka taka, adhodizA meM prathama nAraka

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Collection - Description of the Verses] From the land of Ratnaprabha to the
place called Lolupacyuta. Each Shramanopasaka had accepted 11-11 images, which
are as follows: [213 1. Darshan - image, 2. Vrat - image, 3. Samayik image, 4.
Poshad - image, 5. Kayotsarga - image, 6. Brahmacharya - image, 7. Sachittahar
Varjan - image, 8. Swayam Aarambh - Varjan - image, 9. Bhritak -
Preshyaarambhavarjan - image, 10. Uddishta - Bhakta - Varjan - image, 11.
Shramanabhoot - image. All these Shramanopasakas followed the Shravak-dharma for
20-20 years, finally renounced their bodies through a month-long Sanlekhana and
fasting, and were born as Devas in the Saudharma Devaloka with a lifespan of
four-four Palyopamas. After the Deva-bhavana, all will be born in the Mahavideha
Kshetra and attain Moksha. || Upashakadasha Sampt || 1. The Maha Shataka does
not mention the extent of the Avadhigyan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMgraha - gAthAoM kA vivaraNa] bhUmi ratnaprabhA meM lolupAcyuta nAmaka sthAna
tk| pratyeka zramaNopAsaka ne 11-11 pratimAeM svIkAra kI thI, jo nimnAMkita
haiM- [ 213 1. darzana - pratimA, 2 . vrata - pratimA, 3. sAmAyika pratimA, 4.
poSadha - pratimA, 5. kAyotsarga-pratimA, 6. brahmacarya-pratimA, 7. sacittAhAra
varjana - pratimA, 8. svayaM Arambha - varjana - pratimA, 9 bhRtaka -
preSyArambhavarjana - pratimA, 10. uddiSTa - bhakta - varjana - pratimA, 11.
zramaNabhUta- pratimA  /  ina sabhI zramaNopAsaka ne 20-20 varSa taka zrAvaka-
dharma kA pAlana kiyA, anta meM eka mahIne kI saMlekhanA tathA anazana dvArA
deha tyAga kiyA, saudharma devaloka meM cAra-cAra palyopama kI Ayu vAle devoM ke
rUpa meM utpanna hue| deva bhava ke anantara sabhI mahAvideha kSetra meM utpanna
hoMge, mokSa-lAbha kreNge|  //  upAzakadazA samApta  //  1. mahAzataka ke
avadhijJAna ke vistAra kA gAthA meM ullekha nahIM haiN|

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Jain Terms:  **Word** | **English Translation** | **Sutra
References** ------- | -------- | -------- अइक्कम | aikkama | 47, 49, 50, 53
अइदूर | aidur | 59, 208 अइभार | aibhar | 45 अइयार | aiyar | 44-57 अइरित्त |
airitt | 52 अइवाय | aiway | 13, 45 अकंत | akant | 261 अकरणया | akaranaya | 53
अकाल | akal | 95, 102, 107, 127, 133, 160 अक्खुभिय | akkhubhiy | 96 अगरू | agaru
| 29, 32 अग्ग | agg | 94, 95, 101 अग्गओ | aggao | 130, 132, 133, 136, 227, 230
अग्गहत्थ | agghatth | 94 अग्गजीह | aggjiha | 94 अग्गि | aggi | 238 अग्गिमित्ता |
aggimitta | 183, 200, 204, 205, 208 अंग (देह का भाग) | ang (part of the body) |
210, 211, 227, 230 अंग (जैन आगम) | ang (Jain Agam) | 101 अंगुली | anguli | 2,
117, 175, 277 अचलिय | achaliy | 94 अचवल | achval | 96 अच्चणिज्ज | accanijja |
77, 78 अच्चासन्न | accasanna | 187 अच्छ | achch | 208 ● अच्छि | achchi |
अच्छिंद | achchind |  अजीव | ajiva |  अज्ज (अद्य) | ajja (today) |  अज्ज (आर्य)
| ajja (Aarya) |  अज्जुण | ajjun |  अज्झत्थिय | ajjhatthiya |  अज्झयण | ajjhayan
|  अज्झवसाण | ajjhavasan |  अज्झोववन्न | ajjhovavanna |  अंजण | anjan |  अट्ट |
atta |  अट्टहास | attahas |  अट्टय | attay |  अट्ठ (अर्थ) | attha (meaning) |
अट्ठ (अष्ट) | attha (eight) |  अट्ठम | attham |  अट्ठ | attha |  अड | ad |  अडवी
| adavi |  अड्ढ | addha |  अणणुपालणया | ananupalanaya |  अणतर | anantar |
अणभिओअ | anabhiyoa |  अणगार | anagar |  अणगारिय | anagariya |  अणंग | anang |
अणवकखमाण | anavakkhaman |  अणवट्ठिय | anavatthiya |  अणसण | anasan |  अणागय |
anagay |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zabda aikkama aidUra aibhAra aiyAra airitta aivAya akaMta akaraNayA akAla
akkhubhiya agarU agga aggao aggahattha aggajIha aggi aggimittA aMga (deha kA
bhAga) aMga (jaina Agama) aMgulI acaliya acavala accaNijja accAsanna accha *
acchi acchiMda ajIva ajja (adya) pariziSTa 1 : zabda sUcI sutra zabda 47, 49,
50, 53 ajja (Arya) 59, 208 45 44-57 ajjuNa ajjhatthiya 52 ajjhayaNa 13, 45 261
53 95, 102, 107, 127, 133, 160 96 29, 32 94, 95, 101 130, 132, 133, 136, 227,
230 94 94 238 183, 200, 204, 205, 208 210, 211, 227, 230 101 2,117, 175, 277 94
96 77, 78 187 208 aNaNupAlaNayA 107 aNatara 94 aNabhioa 200 44, 64, 213, 236 58,
68, 95, 97, 102, 107, 127, 132, 133 ajjhavasANa ajjhovavanna aMjaNa aTTa
aTTahAsa aTTaya aTTha (artha) aTTha (aSTa) aTThama aTTha aDa aDavI aDDha aNagAra
aNagAriya aNaMga aTTha sutra 117 94 66, 73, 80, 136, 154, 163, 188, 193, 230,
238, 252 124, 150, 157, 276, 277, 74, 253 240 107 95, 102, 107, 127133, 160,
227, 255, 257 95 26 67, 86, 87, 218, 221, 243, 247 27, 125, 232, 234, 235 71,
231 181 77, 78, 79 218 3, 8, 125, 150, 157, 232, 273 76 12 48 aNavakakhamANa
aNavaTThiya aNasaNa aNAgaya 43, 52 55 14- 57, 90 81 73, 79, 259 53 89, 122, 268
187

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary] [215 101 Word Anagalia Anadhaijjaman Anadhayamaana Anaria
Analatta Anikkhitta Ani? Aniya Anutthana Anuppada / Anuppavisa Anubhava Anuratta
Anuraga Anuwaya Anuvvigga Anesana Anh Atattha Anta Antara Atanradha Antalikkha
Antiya Sutra Word Sutra 107 Adhara 216, 249 Anna 58,111,175, 184 215 Annattha
16-42,58 136, 145, 163 Annamna 79 58 Annaya 63,66,73,74,88,120, 76 166, 185,
195, 241, 267 261 Apacchima 73,79, 252, 259, 261 168,169,171, Apathiya
95,97,132,133, 142 169, 170,171 Apariggahiya 48 Aparijaanamaana 215 111, 262
Aparijaanijjaman 216 169 Aparibhuya 3,8,125 Pariyana 247, 248 181, 227
Apurisakkara 169, 170, 171, 198, 199 54 Appa 10,114, 190, 208 96 Appauliya 51 86
Appadilehia 175, 185,192 Appamajjia 96 Appaana 66,76,89, 181 179 Appiya 261
66,223 Apphodant 50 Abbakkhaana 41,111,168,187,192 ।। Abhangana
12,13,58,61,78,86 Abbanunnaaya 77,78,86 192, 202, 204, 211, 223 Abbhuggaaya
77,78 Abhioga 79, 259 Abhiggajjata 195, 255, 257 Abhigaya 44,64,181,213
73,83,84,85,168,169 Abhigginha 58, 235 169, 171,192 / Abhiggha 58, 235 62,89,
122 Abhibhuya 218, 255, 257 15, 47 Abhimukha 218 79,86 Abhirūiya 58 127,130,133,
227 Abhirūva 111 184 Abhilasa 101 95 Atūriya Antevaasi Anto Aththi Atthagaiya
Adinnaadaana Adūra / Addaha Addha 48

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 1: zabdasUcI] [215 101 zabda aNAgaliya aNADhAijjamANa aNADhAyamANa
aNAriya aNAlatta aNikkhitta aNi? aNiyaya aNuTThANa aNuppadA / aNuppavisa
aNubhAva aNuratta aNurAga aNuvAya aNuvvigga aNesaNa aNha atattha aMta aMtarA
ataMraddhA aMtalikkha aMtiya sUtra zabda sUtra 107 adhara 216, 249 anna
58,111,175, 184 215 annattha 16-42,58 136, 145, 163 annamanna 79 58 annayA
63,66,73,74,88,120, 76 166, 185, 195, 241, 267 261 apacchima 73,79, 252, 259,
261 168,169,171, apatthiya 95,97,132,133, 142 169, 170,171 apariggahiya 48
aparijANamANa 215 111, 262 aparijANijjamANa 216 169 aparibhUya 3,8,125 apariyANa
247, 248 181, 227 apurisakkAra 169, 170, 171, 198, 199 54 appa 10,114, 190, 208
96 appaulia 51 86 appaDilehia 175, 185,192 appamajjiya 96 appANa 66,76,89, 181
179 appiya 261 66,223 apphoDaMta 50 abbhakkhANa 41,111,168,187,192  /  /
abbhaMgaNa 12,13,58,61,78,86 abbhaNuNNAya 77,78,86 192, 202, 204, 211, 223
abbhuggaya 77,78 abhioga 79, 259 abhigajjata 195, 255, 257 abhigaya
44,64,181,213 73,83,84,85,168,169 abhigiNha 58, 235 169, 171,192 / abhiggaha 58,
235 62,89, 122 abhibhUya 218, 255, 257 15, 47 abhimuha 218 79,86 abhirUiya 58
127,130,133, 227 abhirUva 111 184 abhilAsa 101 95 aturiya aMtevAsi aMto atthi
atthegaiya adiNNAdANa adUra / addaha addha 48

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 216] [Upasakadasangasutra Word / Abhivanda Abhisamannnaagaya Abhiiya 5 200
Amanam Amanunna Amaagaya Ammaga Ammaya Amma Ay (Ayas) Ay (Aj) Ayam Sutra Word
Sutra 81 Avajjhaya 256 111,169,170,171 Avadalya 96,98,103, 108, 116 Avar 66,93,
126, 166, 175, 185, 139,226,228 192, 223, 224, 238, 252 261 Avasesa 16-42, 234,
235 261 / Avahara 241 Avi 147 Avitah 138 Aviraat 138 Asai 94 Asan 58,66,68 219
Asaddhaman 111 2,73,80,91,181, 230 Asambhanta 77,78,96 252, 276 Asamahipatta 255
95 Asi 95, 99, 116, 127, 138, 151 101 Asur 187 187 Asog 166, 175, 185, 192 89
Assini 269 156 Aham 12,66,73, 81, 86,95, 102 274 107, 111, 127, 132, 133, 139
272 Ahad 179 Ahari 94 149 Aha 12,56,70,77,79,210,250 230 Ahigarn 52 238
Ahijjamana 164 / Ahiyaas (Abhi-vasay) 100,106,141 62 Ahiyaas (Adhivas) 100 59,
190, 208 Aheen 6,233 101 Ahe 74, 102,105, 253 255, 257 Aho (Adhah, Samas mein)
50 184 Aho(Aamantaran ke arth mein) . 111,136,163 23 / Aikkha 79,111,264 101
Aukkhaya 90, 123 54 Auso 43 / Aaos 200 Ayasi Aya Araha Arun Arunakant Arunakeel
Arunagav Arunajjhaya Arunappbha Arunabhuya Arunavadinsay Arunasittha Arunabha
Alankiya Alamba Alasaya Alinjaraya Alla Allina Avgaasiya Avajjhana 47 117

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 216] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra zabda / abhivaMda abhisamaNNAgaya abhIya 5 200
amaNAma amaNuNNa amAghAya ammagA ammayA ammA aya (ayas) aya (aja) ayaM sUtra
zabda sUtra 81 avajjhAya 256 111,169,170,171 avadAliya 96,98,103, 108, 116 avara
66,93, 126, 166, 175, 185, 139,226,228 192, 223, 224, 238, 252 261 avasesa
16-42, 234, 235 261 / avahara 241 avi 147 avitaha 138 aviratta 138 asaI 94 asaNa
58,66,68 219 asaddahamANa 111 2,73,80,91,181, 230 asaMbhaMta 77,78,96 252, 276
asamAhipatta 255 95 asi 95, 99, 116, 127, 138, 151 101 asura 187 187 asoga 166,
175, 185, 192 89 assiNI 269 156 ahaM 12,66,73, 81, 86,95, 102 274 107, 111, 127,
132, 133, 139 272 ahaDa 179 aharI 94 149 ahA 12,56,70,77,79,210,250 230
ahigaraNa 52 238 ahijjamANa 164 / ahiyAsa (abhi-vAsay) 100,106,141 62 ahiyAsa
(adhivAsa) 100 59, 190, 208 ahINa 6,233 101 ahe 74, 102,105, 253 255, 257 aho
(adhaH, samAsa meM) 50 184 aho(AmantraNa ke artha meM) . 111,136,163 23 / Aikkha
79,111,264 101 Aukkhaya 90, 123 54 Auso 43 / Aosa 200 ayasI ayA arahA arUNa
arUNakaMta arUNakIla arUNagava arUNajjhaya arUNappabha arUNabhUya arUNavaDiMsaya
arUNasiTTha arUNAbha alaMkiya alaMba alasaya aliMjaraya alla allINa avagAsiya
avajjhANa 47 117

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary] [217 57 Agar 74 Word Sutra Word Sutra Shape 94 Rectangle
195 / Aagachch 188 Aayahiṇ 10,190 Aagamana /Araah 70,71 Aagay 86,216,218
Araahana 107 /Aroha 197 Aagaar 12 Aalambana 5,66 Aagaas 136, 145, 154 Aalabhiya
157, 160,163 Aaghavana 222 / Aalaav Aajiviyovaasag 182,183,184,186 / Aaloay
84-87,89,261,264,265 188,191,194,203 Aavana 184,193,194,220,211 Aajiviyovaasay
181,185, 187,190, Aavaranijj 192, 193, 195-202, 204 Aasaanasa Aajiiviy 181, 214
Aasana 111 Aadov 107 Asaiy 145,154 / Aada 215,247 Aasaemaani 240, 244 Aanattiy
206 Aasi 197 Aanand 2,3,5,10,12,58,62, 204, Aasuratt 95,99, 105, 109, 116 232,
252,270,274 130,138,255,261 Aanavana 54 Ahay Aanamiy 101 Ahayay 195 Aanad
(Aadaan) 15, 47,51 Aahaar (Aadaar) Aadaan (Aardrahan) 127,130,133 Aahaar
(Aahaar) / Aadiy (A-da) 58, 119, 177 I (Iti)  44,86, 117, 168, 169, Aadiy
(Aadik) 29,32 175, 192, 199, 200, 251 Aadaar 66 I (Api, Chitt) 63,66,73,74,88, /
Aapucch 5, 68,69, 62 120,185, 195,112, Aabharan 10,31, 190,208 238, 241 252,
254, 267 / Aabhiiy 255, 231 Iii / Aamant 117,175 Ingaal Aamlay 24 / Icch
77,136,154,163, 202 Aayank 152,154,156 Icchha / Ayanch 127,130, 133,136,
140,151, Icchhiy 12,58 154, 158,163, 225, 227, 230 Itth Aayariy (Acharit) 43
Idddi 111,169,170,171 Aayariy (Aayary) 73,188,219, 220 Ittariy 200 112 17

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 1:zabdasUcI] [217 57 Agara 74 zabda sUtra zabda sUtra AkAra 94 Ayava
195 / Agaccha 188 AyAhiNa 10,190 AgamaNa /ArAha 70,71 Agaya 86,216,218 ArAhaNA
107 /Aroha 197 AgAra 12 AlaMbaNa 5,66 AgAsa 136, 145, 154 AlabhiyA 157, 160,163
AghavaNA 222 / Alava AjIviovAsaga 182,183,184,186 / Aloya 84-87,89,261,264,265
188,191,194,203 AvaNa 184,193,194,220,211 AjIviovAsaya 181,185, 187,190,
AvaraNijja 192, 193, 195-202, 204 AsaMsA AjIviya 181, 214 AsaNa 111 ADova 107
asAiya 145,154 / ADhA 215,247 AsAemANI 240, 244 ANattiya 206 AsI 197 ANaMda
2,3,5,10,12,58,62, 204, Asuratta 95,99, 105, 109, 116 232, 252,270,274
130,138,255,261 ANavaNa 54 Ahaya ANAmiya 101 Ahayaya 195 ANada (AdAna) 15, 47,51
AhAra (AdhAra) AdANa (ArdrahaNa) 127,130,133 AhAra (AhAra) / Adiya (A-dA) 58,
119, 177 i (iti) 44,86, 117, 168, 169, Adiya (Adika) 29,32 175, 192, 199, 200,
251 AdhAra 66 i (api, citta) 63,66,73,74,88, / Apuccha 5, 68,69, 62 120,185,
195,112, AbharaNa 10,31, 190,208 238, 241 252, 254, 267 / AbhIya 255, 231 ii /
AmaMta 117,175 iMgAla Amalaya 24 / iccha 77,136,154,163, 202 AyaMka 152,154,156
icchA / AyaMca 127,130, 133,136, 140,151, icchiya 12,58 154, 158,163, 225, 227,
230 iTTha Ayariya (Acarita) 43 iDDi 111,169,170,171 Ayariya (AyArya) 73,188,219,
220 ittariya 200 112 17

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 218] [Upasakadasangasutra Sutra 3,7,74, 253 168 166 172, 246,254 58,175 27
This 101 41, 197 - 101 239,242 86,169,198 136,145,154 187, 188,193
95,99,116,127,238, 206 218 218 Word Sutra word now 66 Answer Indabhui 76
Uttarijj 58,94, 133, 136, 142, Uttarijjag 154, 163, 169, 230, 235 Uttarijjay
Imeyaruv 66,136, 188,193 Utthiya Iv 102 Udaga 44,57,86, 188,216,259 Udagg Ihalok
57 Uday Iriya 78 Udar Isar 5,12,66 / Uddav Ukkad 107 Udaahu Ukkhev 124, 157,269,
273 Uppaiya Ukkhev 150,165,231 Uppanna Ugg (Ugra) 76, 107 Uppal Ugg (Arashak
Adhikari) 210 Uppiyaman / Uggah 77 Ummagg Ucch 78 Ummay / Uccar (Uccar-Uccaran)
141, 235 Ur Uccar (Uccar) 55,69 Urabbh Uccavay 66 Ural Ucchud 76 Ullaniya Ujjal
100,106,141 Uvaes Ujjan 157,165, 180,190,208 Uvaesay Ujjug 206 / Uvakar
Ujjovamana 111 / Uvakkhad / Ujjh 95 Uvagay 94 Uvchiya Uttiyam 27 / Uvatthav
Uttiya 94,184,197 /Uvan U8 (Osth) 94 / Uvadansemana / Utt (Uttha ) 193 /
Uvanimant Uttan 73, 168, 169, 171, Uvabhog 198, 199, 200 Uvma Ud 111,208 /
Uvavjj 50,74, 102,105 Uvavann 246 94,107,109 -94 72,76,81, 238,239, 246 22
43,46, 219 76, 219 68 68 Utt 69,96,97,98,219, 249 94,95 206 243 246 187,188,193,
220 22,51,52 62,94, 255 62,90, 255 89, 122, 156, 164 Ud

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 218] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra sUtra 3,7,74, 253 168 166 172, 246,254 58,175 27 iha
101 41, 197 - 101 239,242 86,169,198 136,145,154 187, 188,193 95,99,116,127,238,
206 218 218 zabda sutra zabda idANiM 66 uttara iMdabhUI 76 uttarijja 58,94, 133,
136, 142, uttarijjaga 154, 163, 169, 230, 235 uttarijjaya imeyArUva 66,136,
188,193 utthiya iva 102 udaga 44,57,86, 188,216,259 udagga ihaloka 57 udaya
IriyA 78 udara Isara 5,12,66 / uddava ukkaDa 107 udAhu ukkheva 124, 157,269, 273
uppaiya ukkhevaa 150,165,231 uppanna ugga (ugra) 76, 107 uppala ugga (ArakSaka
adhikArI) 210 uppiyamANa / uggAha 77 ummagga ucca 78 ummAya / uccAra (uccara-
uccAraNa) 141, 235 ura uccAra (uccAra) 55,69 urabbha uccAvaya 66 urAla ucchUDha
76 ullaNiyA ujjala 100,106,141 uvaesa ujjANa 157,165, 180,190,208 uvaesaya
ujjuga 206 / uvakara ujjovemANa 111 / uvakkhaDa / ujjha 95 uvagaya 94 uvaciya
uTTiyaM 27 / uvaTThava uTTiyA 94,184,197 /uvaNa u8 (oSTha) 94 / uvadaMsemANa /
uTTha (utthA ) 193 / uvanimaMta uTTANa 73, 168, 169, 171, uvabhoga 198, 199, 200
uvamA uDa 111,208 / uvavajja 50,74, 102,105 uvavanna 246 94,107,109 -94
72,76,81, 238,239, 246 22 43,46, 219 76, 219 68 68 uTTa 69,96,97,98,219, 249
94,95 206 243 246 187,188,193, 220 22,51,52 62,94, 255 62,90, 255 89, 122, 156,
164 uDa

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary] [219 Sutra 214 44 Word Sutra word 230, 257, 268, 274 84,
85, 86, 92 Uvva'a 272 Esan Uvvaas 55, 66, 95 Esanijj 58 Uvvey 206 Ogghahiy 206
Uvasagg 112, 116, 117, 146, 156, 225 / Oginh 220, 221 / Uvasampjj 66, 69, 70,
92, 121, Odan 125, 148 Osah 58 Uvvatta'n 26 Osah / Uvagacch 10, 58, 69, 77, 78,
80, 82 Ohay 256 86, 92, 95, 102, 107, 137, 256 Ohi 74, 83, 253, 255, 261 Uvaasag
70, 71, 121, 250, 268 K 2, 86, 90, 91, 123, 164, 169 Uvaasagadsa 2, 276, 277
196, 198, 200, 217 Uvvigg 256 218, 219, 256 / Uvvih 102, 105 Kaiva'y Usseh 76
Kakkas 107 Uru 94 Kankha / E (Iyat Athava Evam Samas Mein) 84 Kankhiy 86, 95,
246 E (I) 81, 187 Kjj 5, 68, 125 Ekk 16, 182 Kancan 101, 206 Ekkasarag 277 Katth
Ekkaras 89, 122, 179, 250, 268, 274 Kadahay 127, 130, 133, 227 Ekkarasam 71, 148
Kadil  Ekkek 225 Kanag 76, 206 22, 23, 24, 93, 126 Kan'iyasan 132, 136, 145,
151, 163 186, 192, 204 225, 230 Egmeg 234, 238, 239 Kan'n Egayao 187 Kan'npur
215, 263 Kan'nej E'th 7, 201 Kattar E'y 67, 86, 87, 111, 118, 194 Kantar 58, 218
E'yaruv 72, 80, 94, 163, 169 Kandapp E'lay 219 Kapp (Kalp-vidhi Ya Maryada) 70
219 Kapp (Kalp-Devalok) 62, 74, 89, 122 2, 10, 12, 44, 58, 59, 62, 66 149, 156,
179, 268, 274 68, 73, 74, 77, 79, 80, 81, 83 / Kalp (Klup) 58, 95, 235, 261, 264
X 52 Ev

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 1: zabdasUcI] [219 sUtra 214 44 zabda sUtra zabda 230, 257,268,274
84,85,86,92 uvavAa 272 esaNa uvavAsa 55,66,95 esaNijja 58 uvaveya 206 oggahiyaya
206 uvasagga 112,116,117,146,156,225 / ogiNha 220, 221 /uvasaMpajja
66,69,70,92,121, odaNa 125,148 osaha 58 uvvaTTaNa 26 osahi / uvAgaccha 10,58,
69,77, 78,80, 82 ohaya 256 86,92, 95, 102, 107,137, 256 ohi 74,83,253, 255, 261
uvAsaga 70,71, 121, 250, 268 ka 2,86, 90, 91,123, 164,169 uvAsagadasA 2, 276,
277 196,198,200,217 uvvigga 256 218, 219, 256 / uvviha 102, 105 kaivaya usseha
76 kakkasa 107 urU 94 kaMkhA / e (iyat athavA evam samAsa meM) 84 kaMkhiya
86,95,246 e (i) 81, 187 kajja 5, 68,125 ekka 16, 182 kaMcaNa 101,206 ekkasaraga
277 kaTTha ekkArasa 89,122,179,250,268,274 kaDAhaya 127, 130,133,227 ekkArasama
71,148 kaDilla ekkeka 225 kaNaga 76,206 22, 23, 24,93,126 kaNIyasaM 132,136,145,
151,163 186, 192, 204 225, 230 egamega 234, 238,239 kaNNa egayAo 187 kaNNapura
215, 263 kaNNejaya ettha 7,201 kattara eya 67,86,87,111,118,194 kaMtAra 58,218
eyArUva 72,80,94,163,169 kaMdappa elaya 219 kappa (kalpa-vidhi yA mAryAdA) 70
219 kappa (kalpa-devaloka) 62,74,89, 122 2,10,12,44,58,59,62, 66 149, 156, 179,
268, 274 68,73, 74,77,79, 80, 81, 83 / kalpa (klRp) 58,95, 235, 261, 264 X 52
eva

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 220] [Upasakadasangasutra Word Index Karma 81 Kampillapur 175 Kambal 107 22
94 137 Kay Kayath / Kar (Kri) Kar (Kar) Karag Karan Karanya Karay Karis Kaland
Kalam Kalasay Kalay Kalav Kalus Kallan Kallakalin Kavad Kavil Kavijal Kavoy
Kansapai / Kah Kaha Kahi Kam Kamadeva Sutra Word Sutra 94 Kayam 95,246
46,51,72,73,74,76,84 Kay 53,70, 107, 109 85, 193, 218 Kar 165 Karan 78 Kariya
133, 136 95,111,136 Kal 1, 2, 3,9,56,66,73,75,76, 111 89, 116, 122, 126, 173,
10,16-42,99, 132, 225 252, 255, 257,268 101 Kalag 197 Kas 152 46, 48,59, 107,206
Kasai 111 Kinchi 172 184 Kinn (Kinva) 197 Kinn (Kin Nam) 94 /Kitt 70 35 Kittan
216, 184 Kitti 36 Kiliinj 206 Kis 172 Kida 48 66,76,175, 189,192 Kukud 219 184,
235,242,243 Kukkuy 94 Kunkuma 94 Kucchi 219 Kudil 219 Kudumb 5,66,68,238 235
Kundakoliy 2,165-172,174, 175, 60,86, 156, 209 177, 179 10,114,115, 174,190,214
Kudal 218 Kumar 256 48 Kumbhakar 181, 184, 193, 194, 92,93,95-112,114,115,
200,221 116,119,121,122,123 Kumbha 101 125,174 Kul 66,69,77,78 . 57 Kuviy
(Kupya) 251 1 94 94 Kamabhog ,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 220] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra zabda kabhalla kamma 81 kampillapura 175 kaMbala 107
22 94 137 kaya kayattha / kara (kR) kara (kara) karaga karaNa karaNayA karaya
karisa kalaMda kalama kalasaya kalAya kalAva kalusa kallaM kallAkaliM kavADa
kavila kavijala kavoya kaMsapAI / kaha kahA kahi kAma kAmadeva sUtra zabda sUtra
94 kAyama 95,246 46,51,72,73,74,76,84 kAya 53,70, 107, 109 85, 193, 218 kAra 165
kAraNa 78 kAriyA 133, 136 95,111,136 kAla 1, 2, 3,9,56,66,73,75,76, 111 89, 116,
122, 126, 173, 10,16-42,99, 132, 225 252, 255, 257,268 101 kAlaga 197 kAsa 152
46, 48,59, 107,206 kAsAI 111 kiMci 172 184 kiNNa (kiNva) 197 kiNNa (kiM nam) 94
/kitta 70 35 kittaNa 216, 184 kitti 36 kiliMja 206 kisa 172 kIDA 48 66,76,175,
189,192 kukuDa 219 184, 235,242,243 kukkuya 94 kuMkuma 94 kucchi 219 kuDila 219
kuDuMba 5,66,68,238 235 kuMDakoliya 2,165-172,174, 175, 60,86, 156, 209 177, 179
10,114,115, 174,190,214 kudAla 218 kumAra 256 48 kuMbhakAra 181, 184, 193, 194,
92,93,95-112,114,115, 200,221 116,119,121,122,123 kumbha 101 125,174 kula
66,69,77,78 . 57 kuviya (kupya) 251 1 94 94 kAmabhoga ,

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary] [221 Case 24 Kesi 92 Word Sutra Word Sutra Kuviya (Kupi)
95 Khay 74,90,253 Kusum 30,95 Khalu 2,3,10,12,44,58,66,73, 46,47 79,81,83,86,92,
95, 111, Kuniya 114, 124 Kei 68,200 Khaim 58 Kenai 111 Khinkhinia 111, 187
Kevali 187 Khinkhini 168 Kevi 138 Khipp 59,206 51 Khir 246 /Khubham
95,101,107,111,222 Kohay 94,124 Khur (Kshur) Kotthia 94 Khur (Khur) 206, 219,
Kodi 4,17,92, 125, 150, 157, Khet 19,49,50,74,253 160,163,165,182, 204 Khom 28
232, 234,238,239,269, 273 / Gachchha 10,58,80,90,204, 214,220 Koḍubia 12,59,206,
207 Gan Kodha 152 Gani 117,175 Korent 10 Gandha 22, 26 Kolgharīya 234,
239,242,243 Gandhavva 111 Kolal 195, 196,198,200 /Gam (Gam) Kolahal 136,137,145
Gam (Gam-Jivanakram) 274 Kollay 8,66,69,79,80 Gaman Kosi 101 Gay 11, 111 Khaya
206 Gall 94 Khaovasam 74, 253 Gavala Khajjaman 218 Gahiya Khajjaya 34 Gay 127,
130,133,136, 227 94 Gahavaī 2-6,8,10,11,12,13, / Khand (Khandha Dhatu) 58, 92,
125, 150, 157, 165, Khand (Khandha) 232, 269, 273 Khandakhanḍin 95,99 Gahavaīni
238,239, 240, 242,243, Khandha 244, 246, 248, 249, 254, Khambh 136, 145,154 255,
256, 257, 260, 261 /Kham 86,87,111 Ginha (Genha) 127,168,219, 225 Khaman - 77
Giha 10,58,69,114 123 181 95 34 94

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 1: zabdasUcI] [221 kesa 24 kesI 92 zabda sUtra zabda sutra kuviya
(kupita) 95 khaya 74,90,253 kusuma 30,95 khalu 2,3,10,12,44,58,66,73, 46,47
79,81,83,86,92, 95, 111, kUNiya 114, 124 kei 68,200 khAima 58 keNai 111
khiMkhiNiya 111, 187 kevalI 187 khiMkhiNI 168 kevi 138 khippa 59,206 51 khIra
246 /khubhaM 95,101,107,111,222 kohaya 94,124 khura (kSura) koTThiyA 94 khura
(khura) 206, 219, koDI 4,17,92, 125, 150, 157, khetta 19,49,50,74,253
160,163,165,182, 204 khoma 28 232, 234,238,239,269, 273 / gaccha
10,58,80,90,204, 214,220 koDubiya 12,59,206, 207 gaNa koDha 152 gaNi 117,175
koreNTa 10 gaMdha 22, 26 kolaghariya 234, 239,242,243 gaMdhavva 111 kolAla 195,
196,198,200 /gama (gam) kolAhala 136,137,145 gama (gama-jIvanakrama) 274 kollAya
8,66,69,79,80 gamaNa kosI 101 gaya 11, 111 khaiya 206 galla 94 khaovasama 74,
253 gavala khajjamANa 218 gahiya khajjaya 34 gAya 127, 130,133,136, 227 94
gAhAvai 2-6,8,10,11,12,13, / khaMDa (khaNDa dhAtu) 58, 92, 125, 150, 157, 165,
khaMDa (khaNDa) 232, 269, 273 khaMDAkhaMDiM 95,99 gAhAvaiNI 238,239, 240,
242,243, khaMdha 244, 246, 248, 249, 254, khaMbha 136, 145,154 255, 256, 257,
260, 261 /khama 86,87,111 giNha (geNha) 127,168,219, 225 khamaNa - 77 giha
10,58,69,114 123 181 95 34 94

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Upasakadasangasutra]  **Gotra** 101 Goyam 95 218 Gosal  **Shabda**
Sutrashabda Gihi 12, 58, 61, 83, 204, 274 Chauvviha Giva 107, 109 Chakk Guttha
94 Chakkaval Guna 66, 76, 216, 220, 272 Chakkhu Gunasil 231 Chanchal Guru 58,
142 Chand Gulgul 101 Chandikiya Gulia 95 Chandan 4, 18, 37, 92, 94, 150, 157
Champa 1, 92 165, 182, 232, 234, 269, 273 Chaya (Chy) 123 Gona 206, 242, 243,
244 Chaya (Chyav, Chyavan) 90, 123 76 Chalan 62, 76, 87, 123, 259, 261, 266
Chaudasya Gor _76 Chaurant 168, 169, 185, 215-222 Char 10 Ghad 27 /Chal 95, 101,
111 Dhadya 184 Chav 101 Ghadi 94 Chindh 95 206 /Chint 136, 163, 230 Ghantika 206
Chinta 34, 37 Chintiya Ghar 77, 78, Chulani Piya 125-138, 140, 142, 244 Ghaye
127, 130, 132, 133, 136, 145, 146 146, 147, 148, 149, 156, Ghay 241 163, 164,
225 . 241 Chull 74, 253 Ghodaya 94 Chullasayag 158, 160, 162, 163 76, 107
Chullasayay 2, 157, 159, 161, Ch 14-43, 54-57, 84, 94 Chulli 94 4, 17, 18, 21,
43, 49, 62 Cheiya 1, 6, 10, 86, 92, 124, 231 89, 122, 141, 156, 164, 268 269,
273 274 Chedia 208 Chauth 71, 142 Chev 81, 84, 83, 95, 102, 109, Chauppaya 18,
49 129, 133, 200, 248 Chaurans 76 Choddas 66, 179, 223, 245, 272 Chaurasiya 94,
253, 255, 257 Chha 92, 150, 157, 160, 163, 239 Ghanta 275 Ghay Guttha Ghor Chau

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 222] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra gotta 101 goyama 95 218 gosAla zabda sUtra zabda gihi
12,58,61,83, 204, 274 cauvviha gIvA 107,109 cakka guTTha 94 cakkavAla guNa
66,76, 216, 220, 272 cakkhu guNasIla 231 caMcala gurU 58,142 caMda gulagula 101
caMDikiya guliyA 95 caMdaNa 4,18,37,92,94,150,157 caMpA 1,92 165, 182,
232,234,269, 273 caya (cyu) 123 goNa 206, 242, 243, 244 caya (cyava, cyavana)
90, 123 76 calaNa 62,76, 87, 123, 259, 261, 266 cAuddasiya gora _76 cAuraMta
168,169, 185, 215-222 cAra 10 ghaDa 27 /cAla 95,101,111 dhaDaya 184 cAva 101
ghaDI 94 ciMdha 95 206 /ciMta 136, 163, 230 ghaMTikA 206 ciMtA 34,37 ciMtiya
ghara 77,78, culaNIpiya 125-138,140,142, 244 ghAe 127,130, 132, 133, 136,
145,146 146,147,148,149,156, ghAya 241 163, 164, 225 . 241 culla 74, 253 ghoDaya
94 cullasayaga 158,160,162,163 76,107 cullasayaya 2,157,159,161, ca
14-43,54-57,84,94 cullI 94 4,17,18,21,43,49,62 ceiya 1,6, 10,86,92, 124, 231 89,
122, 141, 156, 164, 268 269, 273 274 ceDiyA 208 cauttha 71, 142 ceva
81,84,83,95,102,109, cauppaya 18,49 129,133,200, 248 cauraMsa 76 coddasa 66,
179, 223, 245, 272 caurAsIya 94,253, 255, 257 cha 92,150,157,160,163, 239 ghaMTA
275 ghaya ghuTTha ghora cau

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
10. Janga Appendix 1: Glossary] [ 223 words Sutra words Sutra 71,77 Jagariy
66,73, 252 95 / Jan (Jna) 44-57,74,83,138, Chhat 239,253 Chhavi 45 Jan (Yan)
59,61, 206, 208, 211 Chhar 197 Janay 187 Chhijjaman 218 Janu Chidd 238 Januy 95
/ Chind 89,122, 268 Jay 64,65,72,73, 81, 101, Chey (Chek) 219 206 213, 236, 251,
271 Chey (Chhed) 45 Jal 59,206 : 10,58,78,114,187,211 Jav 2,6,5-12,44, 58-66,68,
Jai 2,83,85,91, 138, 200 71,72,73,75,79,81, 94 83-87,89, 253 Jadil 107 Jin
73,85, 187 Jan 51,79,80,88,120, 178 Jibba 94 212,222, 237,267 Jimi Janan 246
Jiyasattu 3,9,92, 124, 150, 157, Janani 133,136 165,180, 269, 273 Janvay 88,120,
178,212, 22, 237, 267 Jiv 13,14,15,44,64,171, Jant 213, 218, 263 Jamga-Samaga -
152 Jiviy 57,95,102,107,111,116, Jamal 94,107 127, 133, 151, 200, 238 Jambuddiv
- 111 Jih 95,107 2,92,124,231,269,273,276 Jui 111, 169 Jambunay 206 Jug (Yug-
Manavishesha) Jambulya । 184 Jug (Yug-Yupa) 206 Jamm 111 Jugavant 219 / Jal
66,73,189 Jutt 101, 206 Jah 94 Juyal 28,107 2,9,12,43-57,66,79,92, Juvanay 206
95, 102, 127 Je? 66-69,76,92,127,130, Jaharih 261 136,145,151,154,230,245,
Jaheyam 12, 210 272, 294 81 Jemana 66,73, 252 Joiya 206 Jamboo 78 Jaha Ja 40 /
Jagar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10. jaMghA pariziSTha 1 : zabdasUcI] [ 223 zabda sUtra zabda sUtra 71,77
jAgariya 66,73, 252 95 / jANa (jJA) 44-57,74,83,138, chatta 239,253 chavi 45
jANa (yAna) 59,61, 206, 208, 211 chAra 197 jANaya 187 chijjamANa 218 jANu chidda
238 jANuya 95 / chinda 89,122, 268 jAya 64,65,72,73, 81, 101, cheya (cheka) 219
206 213, 236, 251, 271 cheya (cheda) 45 jAla 59,206 : 10,58,78,114,187,211 jAva
2,6,5-12,44, 58-66,68, jai 2,83,85,91, 138, 200 71,72,73,75,79,81, 94 83-87,89,
253 jaDila 107 jiNa 73,85, 187 jaNa 51,79,80,88,120, 178 jibbhA 94 212,222,
237,267 jimiya jaNaNa 246 jiyasattu 3,9,92, 124, 150, 157, jaNaNI 133,136
165,180, 269, 273 jaNavaya 88,120, 178,212, 22, 237, 267 jIva
13,14,15,44,64,171, jaMta 213, 218, 263 jamaga-samaga - 152 jIviya
57,95,102,107,111,116, jamala 94,107 127, 133, 151, 200, 238 jaMbuddIva - 111
jIha 95,107 2,92,124,231,269,273,276 jui 111, 169 jaMbUNaya 206 juga (yuga-
mAnavizeSa) jaMbUlaya  /  184 juga (yuga-yUpa) 206 jamma 111 jugavaMta 219 /
jala 66,73,189 jutta 101, 206 jaha 94 juyala 28,107 2,9,12,43-57,66,79,92,
juvANaya 206 95, 102, 127 je? 66-69,76,92,127,130, jahAriha 261
136,145,151,154,230,245, jaheyaM 12, 210 272, 294 81 jemaNa 66,73, 252 joiya 206
jaMbU 78 jahA jA 40 / jAgara

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **224]** Word Joṇiya Jott Joyaṇ Jhāṇ Jhiyā Jhūsir Jhūs
Jhūsaṇ Jhūsiy Ṭhav Ṭhāṇ Ṭhi'i Ṭhiy Ṇaṁ Taṁ Ṇāṇ Ṇhāy Hāviy Taiy Tao (tataḥ) Tao
(tray) Takkar Tacch (tathya) Tacch (trutiya) Tajja Tatt Taththa (trasta) Taththa
(tatra) Tant Tam Tambol Sūtra Śabda 117 Tayā 206 74, 83, 253 77, 96, 97, 98
Tarūṇ Tal Talavar 77 Talāya 94 Taliy 89, 122, 268 57, 73 252, 259 66, 68, 172,
245, 272 84, 85, 86, 87, 146, 261, 264 62, 89, 122, 149, 156 164, 268, 274 74,
208, 253, 255, 257 2-8, 10-43, 45-74, 77-90 187, 188, 193, 218, 253 10, 190, 208
94 10, 12, 13, 47-57, 74, 109, 187, 227 77, 124 Tav Tavassī Tasiy Tah 8, 51, 62,
122, 125, 181 184, 193, 232, 273 101, 222 Tahṁ Tahā Tahiy Tā Tāl Tāv Ti Tikkh
Tikkhutto 118 127, 130, 133 Tiṇṭṭhe 47 Tittīr Tirikkh 70, 85, 188, 218, 220 71,
97, 98, 104, 129, 132 135, 136, 140, 229, 230 Tiriy Tivāliya 200 Tivīh 76 Tivva
256 Tīya Tīra (tīra) Tīra (tīra) Tuccha 218 Tuṭṭha 42 Tumṁ [ Upāsakadaśāṅgasūtra
Sūtra 14-43, 45-57 219 102, 105 12 51 240 72, 76, 84, 85, 266 76 256 66, 67, 87,
118, 135, 141, 176, 260, 265 12 9, 12, 79, 92, 125, 136 85, 220, 261 73 200 73,
117, 175 10, 58, 81, 83, 99, 102, 105, 107, 109, 119, 190, 208 102, 105, 107,
109 10, 58, 81, 83, 102, 105 107, 109, 119, 190, 208 62 219 117 50 99 13, 14, 15
48 187 70 218 51 12 58, 95, 107, 133, 171, 200, 255

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 224] zabda joNiya jotta joyaNa jhANa jhiyA jhusira jhUsa jhUsaNa jhUsiya Thava
ThANa Thii Thiya NaM taM NANa NhAya hAviya taiya tao (tataH) tao (traya) takkara
tacca (tathya ) tacca (tRtiya ) tajja tatta tattha ( trasta ) tattha (tatra)
taMta tama taMbola sUtra zabda 117 tayA 206 74, 83, 253 77,96, 97, 98 tarUNa
tala talavara 77 talAya 94 taliya 89, 122, 268 57, 73 252, 259 66, 68, 172, 245,
272 84, 85, 86, 87, 146, 261, 264 62, 89, 122, 149, 156 164, 268, 274 74, 208,
253, 255, 257 2-8, 10-43, 45-74, 77-90 187, 188, 193, 218, 253 10, 190, 208 94
10, 12, 13, 47-57, 74, 109, 187, 227 77, 124 tava tavassi tasiya taha 8,51, 62,
122, 125, 181 184, 193, 232, 273 101, 222 tahaM tahA tahiya tA tAla tAva ti
tikkha tikkhutto 118 127, 130, 133 tiNaTThe 47 tittira tirikkha 70, 85, 188,
218, 220 71, 97, 98, 104, 129, 132 135, 136, 140, 229, 230 tiriya tivaliya 200
tiviha 76 tivva 256 tIya tIra (tIra) tIra (tIra) tuccha 218 tuTTha 42 tumaM [
upAsakadazAMgasUtra sUtra 14-43, 45-57 219 102, 105 12 51 240 72, 76, 84, 85,
266 76 256 66, 67, 87, 118, 135, 141, 176, 260, 265 12 9, 12, 79, 92, 125, 136
85, 220, 261 73 200 73, 117, 175 10, 58, 81, 83, 99, 102, 105, 107, 109, 119,
190, 208 102, 105, 107, 109 10, 58, 81, 83, 102, 105 107, 109, 119, 190, 208 62
219 117 50 99 13, 14, 15 48 187 70 218 51 12 58, 95, 107, 133, 171, 200, 255

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Word List ] Word Turakk Tull Sani Ten Tey Teras Telokk Tell Thanay
Thimiy Thulga Dakkhin Dacch Dand Dant Dantavanam Dabbh Darisanijj Darisi Dalay
Davaggi Das Dansan Dansanijj Dasam Dah Da Daada Danav Dam Dar Davanaya Daliya
Ditth Ditth Suttra Shabd 32 Dinna 47 Ditt 96, 215, 247 Dippaman 47 Divas 94
Divva Disa 233, 235 187 Disi 25 Disi 94 Div 7 Du Dukkar 74, 253 Dukkh 107 Dupay
13, 14, 15, 45, 46, 47 43, 52, 200, 218 23, 51, 94, 101 23 69, 111 51 2, 4, 18,
92 187, 188, 193, 218 111 187 195 Duh 273, 276 Duppouliya Durant Durahiyas
Duruha Duvalas Duvih Dev 94 Devatt Devay 51 40 11, 146, 78, 93, 214 Duipalas
Duipalasay 51 Devanuppiy 58 Deviddi 107, 109 111 Devind 10, 30 Devi 16, 46, 48
Des Docch Doniy Dhann (Dhanya) Dhann (Dhanya) [ 225 Suttra 184 76, 273 94 277
101, 107, 111, 169 20, 21, 61, 119 50 3, 7 111 13, 14, 15, 49, 51 133, 136 227,
230 49 51 95 100 61, 69, 109, 211 12, 58, 211, 234, 238, 239 13, 14, 15, 51 95,
102, 108, 127 58, 78, 86 3, 10 90, 111, 116, 123, 128 62, 89, 122, 149, 268, 274
58, 133, 136 12, 68, 77, 79, 95. 156, 204 169, 171 111 111 54 71, 97, 104, 108
235 49 111

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 1 : zabdasUcI ] zabda turakka tulla saNI teNa teya terasa telokka
tella thaNaya thimiya thUlaga dakkhiNa daccha daMDa daMta daMtavaNaM dabbha
darisaNijja darisi dalaya davaggi dasa daMsaNa daMsaNijja dasama daha dA dADhA
dANava dAma dAra dAvaNayA dAliyA diTTha diTTha sUtra zabda 32 diNNa 47 ditta 96,
215, 247 dippamANa 47 divasa 94 divva disA 233, 235 187 disi 25 disI 94 dIva 7
du dukkara 74, 253 dukkha 107 dupaya 13, 14, 15, 45, 46, 47 43,52,200, 218
23,51, 94, 101 23 69, 111 51 2, 4, 18, 92 187, 188, 193, 218 111 187 195 duha
273, 276 duppauliya duraMta durahiyAsa durUha duvAlasa duviha deva 94 devatta
devaya 51 40 11, 146, 78, 93, 214 dUipalAsa dUipalAsaya 51 devANuppiya 58
deviDDI 107, 109 111 deviMda 10, 30 devI 16, 46, 48 desa docca doNiya dhanna
(dhAnya) dhanna ( dhanya ) [ 225 sUtra 184 76, 273 94 277 101, 107, 111, 169 20,
21, 61, 119 50 3, 7 111 13, 14, 15, 49, 51 133, 136 227, 230 49 51 95 100 61,
69, 109, 211 12, 58, 211, 234, 238, 239 13, 14, 15, 51 95, 102, 108, 127 58, 78,
86 3, 10 90, 111, 116, 123, 128 62, 89, 122, 149, 268, 274 58, 133, 136 12, 68,
77, 79, 95. 156, 204 169, 171 111 111 54 71, 97, 104, 108 235 49 111

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:  [Upāsakadaśāṅgasūtra] 218 Sūtra
Sūtra Dhannā 150, 155, 156 Nava 204, 225, 230, 232, 235, 274 Dharmī 72, 73, 81,
251 Nassamāṇa 218 / Dhammadhame 107 Nāī (Jñāti) 8, 69, 92 / Dhamma (Dhyā) 107
Nāiṃ (Anarthaka) 111 Dhamma (Dharma) 66, 69, 73, 92, 157, 209 Nāṇa 74, 83
Dhammakahā 11, 115, 191 Nāṇatta 272 Dhammakahī 218 Nāṇā 95, 206 Dhammamaya 218
Nāma 1, 3, 6, 7, 31, 76, 92 Dhammāyariya 73, 188, 219, 220 Nātha 66, 69 Dhammiya
61, 206, 208, 211 Nāyadhammakahā Dhammovaesakya 73, 188 Nārāya 76 / Dhara (Dhṛ)
219 Nāvā Dhara (Dhara) 187, 188, 193, 218 Nāsā Dharaṇi 102, 105 Nāhī 94 Dharaṇī
107 Niuṇa 219 Dhavala 101 / Nikuṭṭa 107, 109 95 Nikkheva 90, 123, 149, 156, 164
93, 95 179, 230, 268 32 Nikkhevaṇayā Naula 95 Nigara 107 Nakha 94, 101 /
Niggaccha 9, 10, 69, 114 Nagara 184, 208 Niggaya 9, 75, 94, 189, 235 Natthā 206
Natthi Niggaṃtha (Nirgrantha) 58, 117, 118, 175 Nandīṇīpiya 2, 269, 271
Niggaṃtha (Nirgrantha) 12, 101, 111, 210, 222 / Namaṃsa 58, 62, 77, 81, 83, 86,
119, 177 Niggaṃthī 117, 118, 175, 176 Naya 219 Niggaha 58 Nayaṇa 107 Nigghasa
Nayara 165, 180, 222, 231 Nicchala 219 Nayarī 1, 92, 114, 124, 150, 157 Nicchaya
218, 269, 273 /Nicchoda 200 Naraya 74, 83, 253, 255, 257 Niḍāla 94, 99 Nava 225,
227 Nittthāra 218 Navama 71, 269 / Nippaṭṭha 175, 219

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 226] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra 218 zabda sUtra zabda sUtra dhannA 150, 155,156
navara 204,225, 230,232, 235, 274 dhamaNi 72,73,81, 251 nassamANa 218 /
dhamadhame 107 nAI (jJAti) 8,69, 92 / dhamma (dhmA) 107 nAiM (natrarthaka) 111
dhamma (dharma) 66,69,73,92, 157,209 nANa 74,83 dhammakahA 11,115,191 nANatta
272 dhammakahI 218 nANA 95, 206 dhammamaya 218 nAma 1,3,6,7,31,76, 92
dhammAyariya 73, 188, 219, 220 nAtha 66,69 dhammiya 61, 206, 208, 211
nAyAdhammakahA dhammovaesaya 73, 188 nArAya 76 / dhara (dhR) 219 nAvA dhara
(dhara) 187,188,193,218 nAsA dharaNi 102, 105 nAhI 94 dharaNI 107 niuNa 219
dhavala 101 / nikuTTa 107,109 95 nikkheva 90, 123, 149, 156, 164 93,95 179, 230,
268 32 nikkheva 272 dhUvaNa 32 nikkhevaNayA naula 95 nigara 107 nakkha 94,101 /
niggaccha 9,10,69,114 nagara 184,208 niggaya 9,75,94, 189, 235 natthA 206
niggaMtha (nirgrantha) 58,117, 118, 175 natthi 168,169,171,199, 200 176,214
naMdiNIpiya 2, 269, 271 niggaMtha (nairgrantha) 12, 101, 111, 210, 222 / namaMsa
58,62,77,81,83,86, 119, 177 niggaMthI 117,118,175,176 naya 219 niggaha 58 nayaNa
107 nighasa nayara 165,180,222,231 niccala 219 nayarI 1,92,114,124,150, 157
nicchaya 218, 269,273 /nicchoDa 200 naraya 74,83,253, 255, 257 niDAla 94,99 nava
225,227 nitthAra 218 navama 71, 269 / nippaTTha 175, 219 dhArA dhii dhUva

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary of Terms ] Word nipfanda nibbachcha nimijja nimmiya niyaga
niyattaṇa niyaya niravasesa nillancchana nillaliya nivuddaṇa nivvana nisanta
nissamma nisa nisama nihana niṇe niya nila nuṇam t neyavva neraiya neraiyatta no
paitthiya ivisiya paunja pautta pauma pauliya paoga suttra word 219 pakkelaya
200 197 pakkheva 206 pagasa 8 19 168, 169, 171, 199, 200 218 218 58 156
pacchakkhaṇa 51 paccanubhavamaṇi 95 pacchatthima 12, 61, 80, 137, 155, 204, 210
94 79 4, 17, 12, 125, 160, 165 182, 204, 232, 269, 273 102, 136, 160, 163, 195,
230 77, 78 95, 99, 116, 127, 138 116, 175, 192 pakkhiva 101 206 paggha
pagghahiya 255, 261 4, 17, 92, 125, 160 pacchakkha ~ pacchappina / paccoroha
pacossakka paccha pacchima pajjatta pajjuvaasa panca pancama pattaṇa 94 pattaya
274 padala 255 255, 257 12, 58, 62, 84, 85, 95, 101 pancanuvvaiya panjali
paḍiucchareyaavva paḍikkant paḍikkamma paḍigaya paḍiggaha paḍiggaha paḍiccha [
227 suttra 30 paḍicchhiya 51 paḍijagaramaṇi 47 ● paḍinikkhamma 200 152, 154, 156
54 95, 107 106 72 13, 43, 235 66, 95 6 74, 253 206, 207 208 101, 107, 111, 256
197 57, 73, 79, 109, 252, 259,261 79 9, 10, 59, 114, 174 6, 19, 20, 42, 44-57,
74, 83 71, 157 12, 58, 204, 210, 211 111, 208 218 166, 172 218 116 89, 122, 268
86 61, 75, 111, 119, 172 58 79 102, 105 12,58 238 10, 58, 69, 78, 86

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 1 : zabdasUcI ] zabda nipphaMda nibbhaccha nimijja nimmiya niyaga
niyattaNa niyaya niravasesa nillaMchaNa nillAliya nivuDDANa nivvANa nisaMta
nisamma nisA nisAma nihANa nINe nIya nIla nUNaM t neyavva neraiya neraiyatta no
paiTThiya ivisiya pauMja pautta pauma pauliya paoga sutra zabda 219 pakkelaya
200 197 pakkheva 206 pagAsa 8 19 168, 169, 171, 199, 200 218 218 58 156
paccakkhANa 51 paccaNubhavamANI 95 paccatthima 12, 61, 80, 137, 155, 204, 210 94
79 4, 17, 12, 125, 160, 165 182, 204, 232, 269, 273 102, 136, 160, 163, 195, 230
77, 78 95, 99, 116, 127, 138 116, 175, 192 pakkhiva 101 206 paggaha paggahiya
255, 261 4, 17, 92, 125, 160 paccakkhA ~ paccappiNa / paccorUha pacosakka pacchA
pacchima pajjatta pajjuvAsa paMca paMcama paTTaNa 94 paTTaya 274 paDala 255 255,
257 12, 58, 62, 84, 85, 95, 101 paMcANuvvaiya paMjali paDiuccAreyavva paDikkaMta
paDikkama paDigaya paDiggaha paDiggAha paDiccha [ 227 sUtra 30 paDicchiya 51
paDijAgaramANI 47 * paDiNikkhama 200 152, 154, 156 54 95, 107 106 72 13, 43, 235
66, 95 6 74, 253 206, 207 208 101, 107, 111, 256 197 57, 73, 79, 109, 252,
259,261 79 9, 10, 59, 114, 174 6, 19, 20, 42, 44-57, 74, 83 71, 157 12, 58, 204,
210, 211 111, 208 218 166, 172 218 116 89, 122, 268 86 61, 75, 111, 119, 172 58
79 102, 105 12,58 238 10, 58, 69, 78, 86

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [228] [Upasakadasangasutra Words Sutra 95, 97, 132, 133, 138 218 74, 253,
255 111 12, 58, 68 219 69, 77 55 5, 49, 101 43 Sutra Word Padiniggaccha 79
Patthiya Padiniyatta 114 Panth / Padidamse 86 Pabha / Padiniggaccha 12
Pabhasemana / Padipuccha 68 Pabhii Padipunna 01 Pabhu Padibanddha 51 / Pamajya
Padibandha 12, 77, 210 Pamajjiya / Padibhaṇa 156 Pamana Padima 70, 71, 112, 148,
179 Pamaya Padiayakkhiya 47, 252, 259 Pamha Padirūva 111 Payatta Padirūvag 47
Payana Padilaabhemana 58, 64, 65 Payahina / Padilehe 66, 69, 77 Par Padilehiya
55 Parakkama / Padivajja 12, 58, 61, 86, 87 Padivatti 111 Param Padivanna 111,
168, 187, 192, 218 Paraloka / Padisuṇa 87, 118, 176, 194, 205 / Parikaha
Paduppanna 187 Parikkhitta Padocchana 218 Parikinna Padhama 70, 77, 91, 121, 250
Parigaya Padhamaya 13 Pariggahiya Panarasama 75 / Pariccaya / Paniha 192
Parijana Panihana 53 / Parijana Panṇatta 2, 51, 62, 89, 91 / Paritthave Panṇatti
66, 69, 92, 141 Parinaddha Panṇaras 51 Parinama Panṇarasama 66, 179, 223
Paritant Panṇavana 222 Paribhoga / Panṇava 264 Parimana 89, 121, 122, 169, 170,
171 Pariyaga / Pattiya 12 Pariyaya 43 10, 190 44, 48, 56, 57 73, 168, 169, 170,
198, 199, 200 181 57 203 10, 114 208 107, 109, 190, 206 48, 58 95, 152 215 200
101, 222 22, 51, 52 16-42, 49 89, 122, 272 62, 275 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 228] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra zabda sutra 95,97,132, 133, 138 218 74, 253, 255 111
12,58,68 219 69,77 55 5,49, 101 43 sutra zabda paDiNiggaccha 79 patthiya
paDiNiyatta 114 paMtha / paDidaMse 86 pabhA / paDiniggaccha 12 pabhAsemANa /
paDipuccha 68 pabhii paDipuNNa 01 pabhu paDibaddha 51 / pamajya paDibaMdha
12,77, 210 pamajjiya / paDibhaNa 156 pamANa paDimA 70,71,112,148,179 pamAya
paDiyAikkhiya 47,252, 259 pamha paDirUva 111 payatta paDirUvaga 47 payANa
paDilAbhemANa 58,64,65 payAhiNa / paDilehe 66,69,77 para paDilehiya 55 parakkama
/ paDivajja 12,58,61,86,87 paDivattI 111 parama paDivanna 111,168,187,192,218
paraloka / paDisuNa 87,118,176,194,205 / parikaha paDuppanna 187 parikkhitta
paDocchanna 218 parikiNNa paDhama 70,77,91,121,250 parigaya paDhamayA 13
pariggahiya paNarasama 75 / pariccaya / paNihA 192 parijaNa paNihANa 53 /
parijANa paNNatta 2,51, 62,89,91 / pariTThave paNNatti 66,69,92,141 pariNaddha
paNNarasa 51 pariNAma paNNarasama 66,179,223 paritaMta paNNavaNA 222 paribhoga /
paNNava 264 parimANa 89, 121, 122, 169, 170, 171 pariyAga /pattiya 12 pariyAya
43 10,190 44,48,56,57 73,168,169,170, 198, 199,200 181 57 203 10,114 208
107,109,190,206 48,58 95, 152 215 200 101,222 22,51,52 16-42, 49 89,122, 272
62,275

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary] [229 58 114 43 44 Pavitttha Sutra word Sutra / Pariyana
247 Pamokkha 172, 233, 235 Pariloyana 78 Pay 10, 81, 94, 102 Piravvajiya 95
Paychchitta 261, 265 / Parivasa 3, 8, 125, 181 Paypunchan Parivuda 208 / Pare
Parisa 9, 11, 75, 125, 189, 235 Paranagh 258 Palanga Parihiya 111, 187 / Pale /
Paruva 264 Pav Paro 261 Pavayana 12, 101, 111, 210, 222 Palanva 101 Pavesa 10,
114, 190, 208 Paliovam 62, 89, 122, 149, 156, / Pas 74, 80, 81, 83, 97, 99, 101,
164, 268, 274 104, 105, 109, 111 Pavana 101 Pasanda Pavar 61, 111, 206, 208, 211
Pasavana 55, 69 101 Pasaaiya 111 Pavitthar 4, 17, 92, 125 Pasadhiya Pavvaiya 12,
210 Paahana / Pavvay (Pra-vraj) 12, 62 Pi 98, 104, 108, 129, 132 Pavvay (Parvat)
74, 253 Picchha 219 Pasattha 206 Pitttha 101 Pasanna 240 Pidaga 117, 175 Pasansa
44 Pivaasiya 95, 246 Pasina 58, 119, 175, 177, 219 Pisaya 94, 96, 97, 99, 101,
116 Pasevaa 94 Pidhaya 184 Pah 160 Pida 58, 187, 193, 194, 216, 220, 62 / Pauna
62, 89, 122, 268 Pilana / Paubhava 81, 167, 186, 192, 224 Puccha (Puccha) 101,
219 Paubbhūya 61, 93, 111, 119 / Puccha (Pracchh) 50, 119, 163, 177 Padihariya
187, 188, 193, 194, 220, Puccha 125 221 Pucchiya 181 Pana (Pana) 58, 73, 79, 86,
252, 259 Puncha 94 Pana (Prana) 13, 45 Punchan Paniya 41 Punja Pahu 221 58

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 1 : zabdasUcI] [229 58 114 43 44 paviTTha sUtra zabda sUtra /
pariyANa 247 pAmokkha 172, 233, 235 pariloyaNa 78 pAya 10,81,94,102 piravajjiya
95 pAyacchitta 261,265 / parivasa 3,8,125,181 pAyapuJchaNa parivuDa 208 / pAre
parisA 9,11,75, 125, 189, 235 pAraNaga oo 258 pAlaMgA parihiya 111, 187 / pAle /
parUva 264 pAva paro 261 pAvayaNa 12, 101, 111, 210, 222 palaMva 101 pAvesa
10,114,190,208 paliovama 62,89, 122,149,156, / pAsa 74,80,81,83,97,99,101, 164,
268,274 104, 105, 109,111 pavaNa 101 pAsaMDa pavara 61, 111, 206, 208, 211
pAsavaNa 55,69 101 pAsAIya 111 pavitthara 4, 17,92, 125 pAsAdIya pavvaiya 12,
210 pAhANa / pavvaya (pra-vraj) 12,62 pi 98,104,108,129,132 pavvaya (parvata)
74, 253 piccha 219 pasattha 206 piTTha 101 pasanna 240 piDaga 117, 175 pasaMsA
44 pivAsiya 95, 246 pasiNa 58, 119, 175, 177, 219 pisAya 94,96, 97, 99, 101, 116
pasevaa 94 piDahaya 184 paha 160 pIDha 58,187, 193, 194,216,220, 62 / pAuNa
62,89, 122, 268 pIlaNa / pAubbhava 81,167, 186, 192, 224 puccha (puccha) 101,219
pAubbhUya 61,93,111,119 / puccha (pracch) 50,119, 163, 177 paDihAriya
187,188,193,194,220, pucchA 125 221 pucchiya 181 pANa (pAna) 58,73, 79, 86, 252,
259 puMcha 94 pANa (prANa) 13, 45 puJchaNa pANiya 41 puMja pahu 221 58

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[230] [Upasakadasangasutra Word Pud Pudga Pudhavi 273 94 Punai Punna (Punya)
Punna (Purna) Punnabhadda Puppha Pura Puro  Puratthima Purvara Purisa
Purissakkara Sutra Word Sutra 94 Posanaya 94 Posah 55, 66,69,79,80,92, 95
94,166,168,253,255 Posahya 69,111, 125 214 Phagguni 117, 175 Farus 95, 246 Phala
24, 111 34,107 Phalga 58, 187, 193, 194, 216, 220 1,92 Phala 94 66,67,130,136
/Phas 70,89, 122, 268 30,66 Phasuessanijja 94 Phasuya 66,68,78, 101 Phugga
Phugga  _74,83,89, 122, 149, 253 Phutta 94 Phud 59, 136, 138,139, 146, 154 Phodi
163 Bandha 73, 168, 169, 170, 171, Bhambhayari 111, 125 198,199 Bhambche 76 76
Bala 18,73,168,218 66,73,93, 116, 126 Bahiya 3,7,54, 63,88 58,197 Bahu
4,12,62,68,89 187,218 Bahuya 66 Bahula 165 Bah 94 33 Biya 77 181 Bibhaccha 44,45
Buddaman 54 Buddhi 136 56 Be 54 Bhai 94 Bhakkha 242, 243 Bhakkhanaya 51 77
Bhagavan 1,10,11,44,60,62,63,73 180, 181, 184, 190, 193 204, 208,212,214, 222
Bhagga 95, 146 Pulga Puvva Puvvin Puya 8 Purana 157 94 218 Pusa Pejja Pem Peyala
Pesavana Pehanaya Poggala Potta Poyaya Porisi Polasapura 235 184 34

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 230] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra zabda puDa puDaga puDhavI 273 94 puNAI puNNa (puNya)
puNNa (pUrNa) puNNabhadda puppha pura purao puratthima puravara purisa
purisakkAra sUtra zabda sUtra 94 posaNayA 94 posaha 55, 66,69,79,80,92, 95
94,166,168,253,255 posahiya 69,111, 125 214 phagguNI 117, 175 pharUsa 95, 246
phala 24, 111 34,107 phalaga 58, 187, 193, 194, 216, 220 1,92 phAla 94
66,67,130,136 /phAsa 70,89, 122, 268 30,66 phAsuesaNijja 94 phAsuya 66,68,78,
101 phuggaphuggA _74,83,89, 122, 149, 253 phuTTa 94 phuDa 59, 136, 138,139, 146,
154 phoDI 163 baMdha 73, 168, 169, 170, 171, baMbhayAri 111, 125 198,199
baMbhacera 76 76 bala 18,73,168,218 66,73,93, 116, 126 bahiyA 3,7,54, 63,88
58,197 bahu 4,12,62,68,89 187,218 bahuya 66 bahulA 165 bAha 94 33 biiya 77 181
bIbhaccha 44,45 buDDamANa 54 buddhi 136 56 be 54 bhaI 94 bhakkha 242, 243
bhakkhaNayA 51 77 bhagavaM 1,10,11,44,60,62,63,73 180, 181, 184, 190, 193 204,
208,212,214, 222 bhagga 95, 146 pulaga puvva puvviM pUiya 8 pUraNa 157 94 218
pUsA pejja pema peyAla pesavaNa pehaNayA poggala poTTa poyaya porisI polAsapura
235 184 34

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Word List ] Word / Page Number Bhajjia Bhaṇ Bhaṇḍ Bhaṇḍaga Bhaya
Bharia Bhatta Bhadda (name of Kamadeva's wife) Bhadda (name of the mother of the
Chulani father) Bhava Bhava Bhavakkhaya Bhasell Bhaḍi Bhaṇiyavva Bhaya Bhayaṇ
Bharah Bharia Bhaava Bhaavemaṇ Bhaas Bhiuḍi Bhikkha Bhikkhayariya Bhijjaman
Bhind Bhima Bhiy Bhugga Sutra Word Bhujjo 142 Bhuñjamaṇ 240 95, 102, 107, 127,
132, 133 102, 153, 229, 230, 248, 254 195, 196, 198, 200 214 45, 73, 79, 86, 122
92 133, 136, 137, 138 256 127, 130, 133, 227, 235 12, 89, 122, 210, 266 90, 123
90, 123 Sajja Bhoga (member of the king's council) Bhoga (worldly pleasures)
Bhoyaṇ M (amh) Maula Magga 94 Mankhaliputra 51 Bhuṭṭa Bhumga Bhumay Bhumi 230
Mangala 3, 7, 107, 109 Bhuy Bheya Manguli 77 Macchariya 111 6, 59, 65, 92, 125,
163 138, 169, 19, 200, 220, 246 66, 76, 179, 181, 223, 245, 266, 272 77, 78, 89
77, 78, 79 118 200 95 228, 256 Majja Majjaṇ Majjha Majjhima Majjhimay Maṭṭia 264
Maṭṭha 99 Maḍaha Maṇḍ Maṇḍukkia Maṇ Maṇi [ 231 Sutra 111 200, 238, 239, 246 66
94 95 55, 69 5, 107 46 58 210 200, 238, 239 33, 51 58, 66, 73, 83, 136, 140, 170
101 70 Maṇuy Maṇuss 95 Maṇogaya 168, 169, 171, 188, 192, 214, 216, 218, 221, 222
10 168, 169, 171 56 240 27 10, 69, 111, 114, 190, 208 77, 78, 132, 136 230 197
31 95 37 38 13, 14, 15, 53, 66, 101 206 187 10, 117, 190 66

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 1 : zabdasUcI ] zabda / bhaMja bhajjiya bhaNa bhaMDa bhaMDaga bhaya
bhariya bhatta bhaddA (kAmadeva kI patnI kA nAma) bhaddA (culanIpitA kI mAtA kA
nAma) bhava bhava bhavakkhaya bhasella bhADI bhANiyavva bhAya bhAyaNa bhAraha
bhAriyA bhAva bhAvemANa bhAsa bhiuDi bhikkhA bhikkhAyariyA bhijjamANa bhiMda
bhIma bhIya bhugga sUtra zabda bhujjo 142 bhuMjamANa 240 95, 102, 107, 127, 132,
133 102, 153, 229, 230, 248, 254 195, 196, 198, 200 214 45, 73, 79, 86, 122 92
133, 136, 137, 138 256 127, 130, 133, 227, 235 12, 89, 122, 210, 266 90, 123 90,
123 sajja bhoga (rAjA ke maMtrImaMDala ke sadasya ) bhoga (sAMsArika sukha )
bhoyaNa ma (amha) maula magga 94 maMkhaliputra 51 bhutta bhumagA bhumaya bhUmi
230 maMgala 3, 7, 107, 109 bhUya bheya maMgulI 77 macchariyA 111 6, 59, 65, 92,
125, 163 138, 169, 19, 200, 220, 246 66, 76, 179, 181, 223, 245, 266, 272 77,
78, 89 77, 78, 79 118 200 95 228, 256 majja majjaNa majjha majjhima majjhimaya
maTTiyA 264 maTTha 99 maDaha maMDa maMDukkiyA maNa maNi [ 231 sUtra 111 200,
238, 239, 246 66 94 95 55, 69 5, 107 46 58 210 200, 238, 239 33, 51 58, 66, 73,
83, 136, 140, 170 101 70 maNuya maNussa 95 maNogaya 168, 169, 171, 188, 192,
214, 216, 218, 221, 222 10 168, 169, 171 56 240 27 10, 69, 111, 114, 190, 208
77, 78, 132, 136 230 197 31 95 37 38 13, 14, 15, 53, 66, 101 206 187 10, 117,
190 66

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Upasakadasanga Sutra] **Sutra 187, 218, 240**  **Matt** 23, 12, 68, 77,
210, 12 **Mans** 117, 6, 111, 238, 136, 142 **Mahei** 57, 73, 242, 259, 256, 30
**Shabda** Sutra Shabda Mant 46 **Mahiy** 101, 246, 254, 260 **Mahuy** Maran 57
**Mahuy** Mall 10 **Ma** Malliya 101 **Madambhiya** 127, 130, 133, 158, 225,
227, Man 240, 244 **Manusa** Massi 107 **Manussaya** Mansu 94 **Maya / Mah
(Math)** 200 **Mayi Mah (Mahat)** 101, 107, 111, 138, 151 **Maranantiya** 11,
60, 191, 218 / Mare  **Mahggh** 10, 114, 190, 208 **Malai** Mahpphal 10 **Mala**
Mahall 94 **Maliyaay** Mahakaay 107 **Mas (Masha)** Mahagov 218 **Mas (Mas)**
Mahatav 76 **Massiya** Mahaddhammakhi 218 **Mahurya** Mahanijjamay 218
**Micchat** Mahapatta 218 **Miccha** Mahamahan 189, 188, 193, 216, Minj 217, 218
**Mitt** Mahalay 84, 218 **Misimisiyaman** Mahaliya 11 **Mees** Mahavad 218
**Muing** Mahavideh 90, 123, 149, 156, 164, Mukk 179, 230, 268, 272, 274
**Muguns** Mahavima 89, 122, 149 **Mugga** Mahavir 9, 10, 11, 44, 58, 60, 61,
Muchchiya 62, 63, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78 **Mund** Mahasatthavaha 218 **Mund**
Mahasamudd 218 **Muddagga** Mahasayag 233, 234, 253, 260, 266 **Muddaya**
Mahasayaya 2, 232, 236, 246-252 **Mudda** 89, 122, 257, 268 **89, 122, 168**
**39** **218** **93, 171, 200** **181** **8, 66, 68, 69, 92** **95** **197**
**94** **95** **94** **36** **240, 242** **12** **12, 62, 210** **166** **172**
**31, 168, 175**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 232] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra sUtra 187, 218 240 matta 23 12,68,77, 210 12 maMsa
117 6,111, 238 136,142 mahai 57,73, 242,259 256 30 zabda sUtra zabda maMta 46
mahiya 101,246,254,260 mahu maraNa 57 mahuya malla 10 mA malliyA 101 mADaMbiya
127,130,133,158, 225, 227, mANa 240,244 mANusa masI 107 mANussaya maMsu 94 mAyA
/ maha (math) 200 mAyI maha (mahat) 101,107,111,138,151 mAraNaMtiya 11,60, 191,
218 / mAre mahaggha 10,114,190,208 mAlai mahapphala 10 mAlA mahalla 94 mAliyAya
mahAkAya 107 mAsa (mASa) mahAgova 218 mAsa (mAsa) mahAtava 76 mAsiya
mahAdhammakahI 218 mAhuraya mahAnijjAmaya 218 micchata mahApaTTaNa 218 micchA
mahAmAhaNa 189, 188, 193, 216, miMja 217,218 mitta mahAlaya 84,218
misimisIyamANa mahAliyA 11 mIsa mahAvADa 218 muiMga mahAvideha 90,123,
149,156,164, mukka 179, 230,268,272, 274 muguMsa mahAvimANa 89, 122, 149 mugga
mahAvIra 9, 10, 11, 44, 58, 60,61, mucchiya 62, 63,73,75,76,77,78 muNDa
mahAsatthavAha 218 muMDa mahAsamudda 218 muddagA mahAsayaga 233, 234, 253, 260,
266 muddayA mahAsayaya 2,232, 236, 246-252 muddA 89,122, 257,268 89,122,168 39
218 93, 171, 200 181 8,66, 68,69,92 95 197 94 95 94 36 240, 242 12 12,62, 210
166 172 31,168,175

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary of Terms [233 Word Muddaana Musala Musa Muha Muhapattī 12
Mūsa Meḍhī Meraga Meh Mehuṇa Mokkha EE SEEEEEEEEE: Mōsa 23 Mōha Mōhariya Yattiya
Sūtra Word Sūtra 81,83 Ruṭṭha 95, 256 102,105 Rūva 54, 66,80, 94, 96, 97, 99,
14,46 101,103 42,77 Revaī 233,234,235,238,239,240, 77 242, 243, 244, 246, 247,
248, 249 107 / Roe 5 Rog 152, 154, 156 240 Roma 219 101 Rōsa 107 16,235 Lakṣaṇa
95, 111, 206 95,246 Lakkhā 46 Laṭṭhi 246, 260 Laḍaha 52 Ladḍha
10,114,169,170,171,174, 2,5,11,31,51,58,60,66,73 181, 190, 219 20,21 Laṭṭha 10,
114, 174 107 / Lamb (Lamb) 5, 125, 241 Lamb (Lamb) 94,101 47 Lambōdara 101 206
Laliya 101 107, 227 Lavaṇa 74,83, 253 66,73,93, 116, 126 Laghu 59, 206 74, 253,
255 Lāvaiya 219 74, 253, 255 Lihiya 206 206 Luppamāṇa 218 206 Luliya 246 51 Lesa
74 46 Lessā 116 Leh 125 Log 57,90, 123, 187 3, 9, 11, 58,111, 124, 150 Lōḍha 94
231, 232, 241, 259, 262, Lōma 94,95 266, 267 Lōyaṇa 107 7 Lōluyaccuya 74,83,
253, 255, 257 76 Lōluya 240, 242 Yala Yāvi Rajja Rajjug Ratta (Rakta) Ratta
(Rātra) Rayaṇa Rayaṇappabhā Rayaya Rayayāmaya Rasa Rahiya Rāisara Rāya Rāyagiha
Ridḍha Risaha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 1 : zabdasUcI [233 zabda muddhANa musala musA muha muhapattI 12 mUsA
meDhI meraga meha mehuNa mokkha EE SEEEEEEEEE: mosA 23 moha mohariya yattiya
sUtra zabda sUtra 81,83 ruTTha 95, 256 102,105 rUva 54, 66,80, 94, 96, 97, 99,
14,46 101,103 42,77 revaI 233,234,235,238,239,240, 77 242, 243, 244, 246, 247,
248, 249 107 / roe 5 roga 152, 154, 156 240 roma 219 101 rosa 107 16,235 lakSaNa
95, 111, 206 95,246 lakkhA 46 laTThi 246, 260 laDaha 52 laddha
10,114,169,170,171,174, 2,5,11,31,51,58,60,66,73 181, 190, 219 20,21 laTTha 10,
114, 174 107 / laMba (lamb) 5, 125, 241 laMba (lamba) 94,101 47 laMbodara 101
206 laliya 101 107, 227 lavaNa 74,83, 253 66,73,93, 116, 126 lahu 59, 206 74,
253, 255 lAvaya 219 74, 253, 255 lihiya 206 206 luppamANa 218 206 luliya 246 51
lesA 74 46 lessA 116 leha 125 loga 57,90, 123, 187 3, 9, 11, 58,111, 124, 150
loDha 94 231, 232, 241, 259, 262, loma 94,95 266, 267 loyaNa 107 7 loluyaccuya
74,83, 253, 255, 257 76 loluyA 240, 242 yala yAvi rajja rajjuga ratta (rakta)
ratta (rAtra) rayaNa rayaNappabhA rayaya rayayAmaya rasa rahiya rAIsara rAya
rAyagiha riddha risaha

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[234] [Upasakadasangasutra Sutra 45 Vatta Vattyay Vadi Shabda Sutra Shabda Lole
102,105 Vayan (Vachan) Loh 107 Vayan (Vadan) Lohiy 107 Var 94,206 94 Varaha 101
Vaikkanta 66, 179, 223, 245, 272 Vavsaes 56 Vaiy 12,58,204,210, 211 / Vavroyay
95,97,102,107,116 Vakkhev 66 Vavhar 5,47 Vaggura 10, 114, 190 Vas 95, 102, 107,
127, 160, 255, 257 Vachch 94, 111 Vasan 94 Vajj 76 Vasant 117,175 Vajjiy 95 Vah
94 Vahiy 187 Vattaman 179,223,275 /Vhay 243 219 Va 30,34,36,38,58 Vadiy 111 /
Vagar 261, 264 Vaddhavay 5,125 Vagaran 175, 261 92, 273 Vanarasi 124, 125, 150
Van 51,157,165,180 Vanijj 51 Vaniya 164, 175,185,192 Vaniggam 3,7,10,66,77,
78,79 Vann 95, Vanigggam 58 Vanno 1,3 Vadi Vanniga 116 Vay (Vat) 195,200
Vannavas 94 Vay (Vad) Vattavvay 92,165,230 Vayas 219 Vath 28,58,77,114 Varay 184
Vathu (Shakvishesh) 38 Vas (Varsha) 62,89,90,111,123 Vathu (Vastu) 19,49 Vas
(Vas) /Vand 10,58,62,77,81,83,86 Vasadhar 74 /Vam 214 Vasahar Vay (Pad) 88, 120,
178, 212, 222,237,267 Vasi Vay (Vrat) 66,89,95, 272 Vahan Vay (Vraj)
4,18,92,125,150, 157, Vahi 255, 257 165,182, 232,269, 273 Vi
5,58,66,84,89,94,104,105 Vay (Vachas) 13, 14, 15,53 Viigichchha / Vay (Vad)
2,12,44,58,59 Viinn 246 219 253 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 234] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra sUtra 45 vaTTa vaTTaya vaDi zabda sUtra zabda lole
102,105 vayaNa (vacana) loha 107 vayaNa (vadana) lohiya 107 vara 94,206 94
varAha 101 vaikkaMta 66, 179, 223, 245, 272 vavaesa 56 vaiya 12,58,204,210, 211
/ vavaroye 95,97,102,107,116 vakkheva 66 vavahAra 5,47 vaggurA 10, 114, 190 vasa
95, 102, 107, 127, 160, 255, 257 vaccha 94, 111 vasaNa 94 vajja 76 vasaMta
117,175 vajjiya 95 vaha 94 vahiya 187 vaTTamANa 179,223,275 /vahe 243 219 vA
30,34,36,38,58 vaDiya 111 / vAgara 261, 264 vaDDhAvaya 5,125 vAgaraNa 175, 261
92, 273 vANArasI 124, 125, 150 vaNa 51,157,165,180 vANijja 51 vaNiyA 164,
175,185,192 vANiyagAma 3,7,10,66,77, 78,79 vaNNa 95, vANiyaggAma 58 vaNNao 1,3
vAdi vaNNaga 116 vAya (vAta) 195,200 vaNNAvAsa 94 vAya (vAda) vattavvaya
92,165,230 vAyasa 219 vattha 28,58,77,114 vAraya 184 vatthu (zAkavizeSa) 38 vAsa
(varSa) 62,89,90,111,123 vatthu (vAstu) 19,49 vAsa (vAsa) /vaMd
10,58,62,77,81,83,86 vAsadhara 74 /vama 214 vAsahara vaya (pada) 88, 120, 178,
212, 222,237,267 vAsi vaya (vrata) 66,89,95, 272 vAhaNa vaya (vraja)
4,18,92,125,150, 157, vAhi 255, 257 165,182, 232,269, 273 vi
5,58,66,84,89,94,104,105 vaya (vacas) 13, 14, 15,53 viigicchA / vaya (vad)
2,12,44,58,59 viiNNa 246 219 253

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[235 Appendix 1: Glossary] Word Sutra Word Vijjiya 227 / Vihar Viul 66,72,76,200
/ Viuvva 94, 101, 107, 111, 116 Vihar Vikadman 246, 254,260 / Vikkhir 200 Vihi
Vigay 94,95 Viriy Vidhay 238 Vis Vinay 67,87,118, 176, 205, 262 Visai Vinassaman
218 / Vucch Viniggay . 94 Vuddi Vinicchiy 181 Vinnavana 222 Vutt Vinnaan 219 Veg
Vitti 58, 184 Vegachch Viderisan 146 / Vedhe Videh 90,123, 149, 156,164 Veni /
Viparinaame 101,111, 222 Veyan / Vipper 160, 163 Veyana / Vippajah 101, 107, 111
Veraman Vippan? Vimala 101 Vehas Vimaan 62,89, 122, 149, 156, 164, Vocchey
179,230, 268,272, 274 Sai Viyad 107 Saiy 206 Sakans Viraiy 111 Sakk Viruddha 47
Sakka Viluppaman 218 / Sakkare Vilevan 29 Sagad Vivar 238 Sagg Vivaad 219
Sankapp 48 Sankha Vis 51,107,109, 238,239 Sankiy Visan 219 Sankh Visujjaman 74
Sankhavan Sutra 6,10,63, 64, 65, 69,70 73,76,79,88, 92, 96 10,88,120,178,212,222
237, 267 16-42, 235 73 89,122, 168,272 101 218,219 4, 17, 125, 160, 165, 182,
204, 232, 269 86,96,98,103,108 101 95 107,109 107 184 100 EFREE
EEPREEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE 45,46, 47,52, 66,95 10,114, 190, 208 102,105 50,53
Viraiy 232, 235 111 111,117,175 Vivah 86,172 114 157

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [235 pariziSTha 1 : zabdasUcI] zabda sUtra zabda viijjiyA 227 / vihara viula
66,72,76,200 / viuvva 94, 101, 107, 111, 116 vihAra vikaDamANa 246, 254,260 /
vikkhira 200 vihi vigaya 94,95 vIriya vidhAya 238 vIsa viNaya 67,87,118, 176,
205, 262 vIsai viNassamANa 218 / vucca viNiggaya . 94 vuDDi viNicchiya 181
viNNavaNA 222 vutta viNNANa 219 vega vitti 58, 184 vegaccha vidarisaNa 146 /
veDhe videha 90,123, 149, 156,164 veNi / vipariNAme 101,111, 222 veyaNa /
vippaira 160, 163 veyaNA / vippajaha 101, 107, 111 veramaNa vippaNa? vimala 101
vehAsa vimANa 62,89, 122, 149, 156, 164, voccheya 179,230, 268,272, 274 sai
viyaDa 107 saiya 206 sakaMsa virAiya 111 sakka viruddha 47 sakkA viluppamANa 218
/ sakkAre vilevaNa 29 sagaDa vivara 238 sagga vivAda 219 saMkappa 48 saMkA visa
51,107,109, 238,239 saMkiya visANa 219 saMkha visujjhamANa 74 saMkhavaNa sUtra
6,10,63, 64, 65, 69,70 73,76,79,88, 92, 96 10,88,120,178,212,222 237, 267 16-42,
235 73 89,122, 168,272 101 218,219 4, 17, 125, 160, 165, 182, 204, 232, 269
86,96,98,103,108 101 95 107,109 107 184 100 EFREE EEPREEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE
45,46, 47,52, 66,95 10,114, 190, 208 102,105 50,53 viraiya 232, 235 111
111,117,175 vivAha 86,172 114 157

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **236]**  **Word** | **Abbreviated** | **Meaning** |
**Sutra Reference** ------- | -------- | -------- | -------- शब्द | संखित्त |
Concise | 76 संगोवेमाण | संगो | Together | 218, 214, 238, 239 संघ | संघ | Group
| 12, 66, 81, 107, 111, 172, 210, 222, 238 संघयण | संघ | Group | 215 संचाय | संच
| Accumulation | 51, 56 चिट्ठ | चिट्ठ | To remain | 76, 266 सचित्त | सचित्त |
With mind | 256 संजम | संजम | Restraint | 77 संजाय | संजाय | To be born | 52
सज्झाय | सज्झाय | To understand | 76, 94 सं | सं | With | 76, 94, 101, 89, 122,
268 संठाण | संठाण | Structure | 101, 107, 111, 256 संठिय | संठिय | Constructed |
222 सट्ठि | सट्ठि | Sixty | 101, 111, 222 सणियं | सणियं | To be adorned | 85,
220, 261, 264 सण्णवणा | सण्णवणा | To be adorned | 72, 73, 81, 251 संत ( श्रान्त)
| संत | Exhausted | 16, 48 संत (सत्) | संत | Good | 12, 58, 76, 101 संतय | संतय
| Restraint | 2, 71, 91 संतोसिए | संतोसिए | To be satisfied | 76 सत्त | सत्त |
Truth | 238, 239 सत्तम सेह | सत्तम सेह | Best friend | 5, 12 सत्थ | सत्थ | Skill
| 133, 136, 137, 138, 146, 147 सत्थवाह | सत्थवाह | Skilled person | 69 सत्थवाही
| सत्थवाही | Skilled person | 44 / संथर | संथर | Gentle | 55, 69, 111, 216 संथव
| संथव | Gentle | 69 संथार | संथार | Gentle | 54, 79, 136, 137, 145, 154, 155
संथारय | संथारय | To make gentle | 12, 210 सद्द | सद्द | Sound | 2, 181, 182,
183, 184, 185, 186, 188, 190 सद्दह | सद्दह | To hear | 59, 66, 206, 242
सद्दालपुत्त | सद्दालपुत्त | Son of the sound | 200, 214, 219, 238, 239, 246
सद्दावे | सद्दावे | To hear | 94 सूत्र | सूत्र | Thread | 7, 8, 66, 69, 79, 80
शब्द | शब्द | Word | 95, 107, 108, 109, 111 सप्प | सप्प | Snake | 218 सप्पह |
सप्पह | Snake | 214 सभा | सभा | Assembly | 85, 220, 261 सब्भूय | सब्भूय |
Together | 76, 206, 227, 230 सम | सम | Equal | 62, 85, 116, 175, 192, 219 समट्ठ
| समट्ठ | Strong | 9, 10, 11, 44, 60, 62, 63, 73, 75, 77, 78 समण | समण | Ascetic
| 44, 66, 67, 73, 74 समणोवासग | समणोवासग | Ascetic's follower | 45, 49, 51-56,
59, 62, 68, 69, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85 समणोवासय | समणोवासय | Ascetic's follower
| 65 समणोवासिया | समणोवासिया | Ascetic's follower | 90, 123, 149, 156, 164, 179,
230, 268, 272, 274, 277 समत्त | समत्त | Complete | 160 समंता | समंता | All
around | 1, 2, 3, 9, 66, 75, 76, 92, 113 समय | समय | Time | 10, 59, 78, 86, 96,
98, 103 समाण | समान | Equal | 136, 154 समायर | समायर | To be absorbed | 44-57
समायरियव्व | समायरियव्व | To be absorbed | 83, 172 समावन्न | समावन्न |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 236 ] zabda saMkhitta saMgovemANa saMgha saMghayaNa saMcAya ciTTha sacitta
saMjama saMjAya sajjhAya saM saMThANa saMThiya saTThi saNiyaM saNNavaNA saMta (
zrAnta) saMta (sat) saMtaya saMtosie satta sattama seha sattha satthavAha
satthavAhI / saMthara saMthava saMthAra saMthAraya sadda saddaha saddAlaputta
saddAve sUtra zabda 76 saddhA 218 saddhiM 214 sannibha 76 sannivesa 12, 66, 81,
107, 111, 172, 210, 222, 238 215 51,56 76, 266 256 77 52 76, 94 76, 94, 101 89,
122, 268 101, 107, 111, 256 222 101,111, 222 85, 220, 261, 264 72, 73, 81, 251
16, 48 12, 58, 76, 101 2, 71,91 76 238, 239 5, 12 133, 136, 137, 138, 146, 147
69 44 55, 69, 111, 216 69 54, 79, 136, 137, 145, 154, 155 12, 210 2, 181, 182,
183, 184, 185, 186, 188, 190 59, 66, 206, 242 sappa sappaha sabhA sabbhUya sama
samaTTha samaNa samaNovAsaga samaNovAsaya samaNovAsiyA samatta samaMtA samaya
samANa samAyara samAyariyavva samAvanna samAhi samudda samudANa samuddisa
samuppajja samuppanna samosa samosaraNa samosariya saMpautta sapatta [
upAsakadazAMgasUtra sUtra 73 200, 214, 219, 238, 239, 246 94 7, 8, 66, 69, 79,
80 95, 107, 108, 109, 111 218 214 85, 220, 261 76, 206, 227, 230 62, 85, 116,
175, 192, 219 9, 10, 11, 44, 60, 62, 63, 73, 75, 77, 78 44, 66, 67, 73, 74 45,
49, 51-56, 59, 62, 68, 69, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85 65 90, 123, 149, 156, 164,
179, 230, 268, 272, 274, 277 160 1, 2, 3, 9, 66, 75, 76, 92, 113 10, 59, 78, 86,
96, 98, 103 136, 154 44-57 83, 172 89, 122, 255, 268 74, 83, 253 75, 77, 78 277
66, 83, 84 4, 83, 188, 231, 253 125, 150, 157, 165, 173, 204, 235, 270, 274 92,
258 2,9, 65, 189 187, 188, 193, 218 2,91, 276

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary] [237 160 187 79,86 125 Word Sutra Word Sutra Sampāya
187,188,193,218 Savva 5,16-22,86,125,141, Samparivud 214 168,169, 171, 187, 192,
/ Sampave 218 199, 200, 230, 235 Sampunna 111 Savvo Sampeha 10,66,80, 114, 190,
Savvannu 193, 214, 238 Sansara 218 Sambandhi 8 / Saha (Saha) 100, 117 Sambuddha
201 Sahasa Samma 55,70,79,89, 100, 101,117, /Sanhara 122, 268 Sahassapaga
Sammatta 44 Sahassambavana 165,180,190,208,212 / Sammane 66 Sahaaiya Saya (Shat)
19,20, 25,74,83, Saim 184,193,194 Saga Saya (Swak) 1,10,58,66,69,114, Sadi
204,256 Samant Sayam (Swayam) 238, 239 Sama Saya 8 Samaaiya Sayapaga 85 Samaniy
Sar 51 Sami 127,150,157,165,173, Sarad 178, 235,270, 274 Sarasaras 107,109 Saya
Saris 94 Saraiya Sarira 10,76,152,190,208,252,259 Sarakkhamana 218 Sariraga 154
Sala 66,69,79,92,101,107,111 / Sanlava 58 Sali 35,94 Sanlehana 57,73,89,122,
252, 259 Salihipiya 2,273 Samvachchar 66, 179, 223, 245, 272 Savaga 211
Savattiya 238 Savatthi 269, 273 Savatti 238, 239 Savaya 58,92, 165, 235
Samvavahar 235 Sas Samvahaniya 20,21 Sahatthi 218 Samvibhaga 56 Sahassiya
4,18,92,125, 150,157, Samvalliya 101 165, 182, 232, 234,269, 273 Sanvega 73
Sahassi 111 111  _38 37 152

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 1:zabdasUcI] [237 160 187 79,86 125 zabda sUtra zabda sUtra saMpayA
187,188,193,218 savva 5,16-22,86,125,141, saMparivuDa 214 168,169, 171, 187,
192, / saMpAve 218 199, 200, 230, 235 saMpuNNa 111 savvo saMpeha 10,66,80, 114,
190, savvaNNu 193, 214, 238 saMsAra 218 saMbaMdhi 8 / saha (saha) 100, 117
saMbuddha 201 sahasA samma 55,70,79,89, 100, 101,117, /saMhara 122, 268
sahassapAga sammatta 44 sahassaMbavaNa 165,180,190,208,212 / sammANe 66 sahAiyA
saya (zata) 19,20, 25,74,83, sAima 184,193,194 sAga saya (svaka)
1,10,58,66,69,114, sADI 204,256 sAmaMta sayaM (svayam) 238, 239 sAmA sayaNa 8
sAmAiya sayapAga 85 sAmANiya sara 51 sAmi 127,150,157,165,173, saraDa 178,
235,270, 274 sarasarassa 107,109 sAya sarisa 94 sAraiya sarIra
10,76,152,190,208,252,259 sArakkhamANa 218 sarIraga 154 sAlA
66,69,79,92,101,107,111 / saMlava 58 sAli 35,94 saMlehaNA 57,73,89,122, 252, 259
sAlihIpiya 2,273 saMvacchara 66, 179, 223, 245, 272 sAvaga 211 savattiyA 238
sAvatthI 269, 273 savattI 238, 239 sAvaya 58,92, 165, 235 saMvavahara 235 sAsa
saMvAhaNiya 20,21 sAhatthi 218 saMvibhAga 56 sAhassiya 4,18,92,125, 150,157,
saMvalliya 101 165, 182, 232, 234,269, 273 saMvega 73 sAhassI 111 111 _38 37 152

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[238] [Upasakadasangasutra Sutra 17,49 12,77, 210, 227,230 73 Shabda Si Sikkag
Sikkha Sing Singay Singariy Singhadag Singhaday Sijja / Sijjha 219 12 219 231
66,73,136,154,163, 193, 230,238 40 42 Sipp Sippi Siri Sila Sivananda Sutra
Shabda 111, 175 Suvanna 94 Suha 12,58,204, 210, 211 Suhatthi 219 Suham 206 Suyar
246 Suva 163 Setthi 160 Senay 55,58,187,216 Seniy 90,123, 149,156,164, Sey
230,268,272,274 219 Seh 94 Sogandhiy 5 Soniy 166,168,172 Sonda 6, 16,58,59, 60,
61, 65 Solas 240 Soll 66, 89, 95, 151, 179, 223, Sollay 245, 268, 272 Sosanaya
94 Soham 111 72 / Sohe 101,206 Soheman 12,61,80,137, 155, 204, 210 Han 70, 148,
206, 250 10,30,114, 190, 208 168,169, 171 / Hattha 127,130,133,136,151,227
101,102, 105 152, 154, 156 127, 240, 244 130, 133, 151, 158, 225, 227 Sidhu Sil
Sis Siha Sukka Sujay / Sun 62,74,89, 122, 149, 156, 164,179,268,274 70 78 Sutta
Suddha 95,97,102,104,107,111, 113, 127, 129, 132,133, 135,138,140,144
12,59,61,81, 119, 174, 204, 210, 263 Sundari Supp 64 Subha 200 Suy Surahi Sura
Suradev Suruv Sulddha 74, 253 /Han 277 Hanuy 26 Hanta 240,244 Hattha 150-156,163
Hatthi 6,133 Hal 111 Havvam 83,116, 175, 192 94, 219 101, 103, 104, 105, 107
19,94 86,111,188

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 238] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra sUtra 17,49 12,77, 210, 227,230 73 zabda si sikkaga
sikkhA siMga siMgaya siMgAriya siMghADaga siMghADaya sijjA / sijjha 219 12 219
231 66,73,136,154,163, 193, 230,238 40 42 sippa sippi sirI silA sivanaMdA sUtra
zabda 111, 175 suvaNNa 94 suha 12,58,204, 210, 211 suhatthi 219 suhamma 206
sUyara 246 sUva 163 seTThi 160 seNAya 55,58,187,216 seNiya 90,123, 149,156,164,
seya 230,268,272,274 219 seha 94 sogaMdhiya 5 soNiya 166,168,172 soMDA 6,
16,58,59, 60, 61, 65 solasa 240 solla 66, 89, 95, 151, 179, 223, sollaya 245,
268, 272 sosaNayA 94 sohamma 111 72 / sohe 101,206 sohemANa 12,61,80,137, 155,
204, 210 haM 70, 148, 206, 250 10,30,114, 190, 208 168,169, 171 / haTTha
127,130,133,136,151,227 101,102, 105 152, 154, 156 127, 240, 244 130, 133, 151,
158, 225, 227 sIdhu sIla sIsa sIha sukka sujAya / suNa 62,74,89, 122, 149, 156,
164,179,268,274 70 78 sutta suddha 95,97,102,104,107,111, 113, 127, 129,
132,133, 135,138,140,144 12,59,61,81, 119, 174, 204, 210, 263 sundarI suppa 64
subha 200 suya surahi surA surAdeva surUva suladdha 74, 253 /haNa 277 haNuya 26
haMta 240,244 hattha 150-156,163 hatthi 6,133 hala 111 havvaM 83,116, 175, 192
94, 219 101, 103, 104, 105, 107 19,94 86,111,188

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary] [239 HET Word  Haar Haas Himavant Hiyay Hirann Sutra Word
111  Hiri 95  Hinsa 74, 253  Hiin 81, 204, 263  Heu 4,17, 49, 92, 125, 150, 157,
/ Ho 160,163, 165, 182, 204, 232, 234,235, 238,239,269,273 95, 256 175, 219
1,3-7,92, 125, 183, 184, 233, 234,241

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 1: zabdasUcI] [239 HET zabda hAra hAsa himavaMta hiyaya hiraNNa
sUtra zabda 111 hirI 95 hiMsA 74, 253 hINa 81, 204, 263 heu 4,17, 49, 92, 125,
150, 157, / ho 160,163, 165, 182, 204, 232, 234,235, 238,239,269,273 95, 256
175, 219 1,3-7,92, 125, 183, 184, 233, 234,241

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 2: List of Books Used in the Context of Translation, Commentary,
Introduction, etc. Anuyogadwar Sutra Abhidhanarājendra Kośa Aṣṭa Prābhṛta: Śrī
Kundakunda Acārya Aṣṭāṅgahṛdayam, Saṭīkam [Ṛṣikalpaśrīvāgbhaṭa Praṇītam,
Vidvadvara Śrīmadaruṇadatta Kṛtā Sarvāṅgasundarākhyā Ṭīkā, Śrīmadācāryamaudgalya
Kṛtā Maudgalyaṭippanī Ca, Prakāśaka: Motilal Banarsi Das, Punjab Sanskrit Book
Depot, Saidmitha Street, Lahore, San 1933 E.] Angasuttāṇi 3 [Sampādaka: Muni Śrī
Nathmalajī] Prakāśaka: Jain Viśvabhārati, Lāḍanū Vikramaābda 2031]
Anguttaranikāya Āgama and Tripitaka: Ek Anuśīlana Khaṇḍa 1: Itihāsa and
Paramparā [Lekhaka: Muni Śrī Nagarājajī D. Lit. Prakāśana: Jain Śvetāmbara
Terāpanthī Mahāsabhā, 1, Portuguese Church Street, Kolkata-1 Prathama
Saṃskaraṇa: San 1969 E.] Acārāṅga-Cūrṇi Āvśyaka-Niyukti THE UTTARADHYAYANA SUTRA
[Translated from Prakrit by Hermann Jacobi] OXFORD, at the CLARENDON PRESS,
1895]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 2 : prayukta-grantha-sUcI anuvAda, vivecana, prastAvanA Adi ke
sandarbha meM vyavahRta granthoM kI sUcI anuyogadvArasUtra abhidhAnarAjendra
koSa aSTa prAbhRta : zrI kundakundAcArya aSTAGgahRdayam, saTIkam
[RSikalpazrIvAgbhaTa praNItam vidvadvara zrImadarUNadattakRtA
sarvAGgasundarAkhyA TIkA, zrImadAcAryamaudgalyakRtA maudgalyaTippaNI ca,
prakAzaka : motIlAla banArasIdAsa, paMjAba saMskRta buka Dipo, saidamiTThA
sTrITa, lAhaura, san 1933 I0] aMgasuttANi 3 [saMpAdaka : muni zrI nathamalajI]
prakAzaka : jaina vizvabhAratI, lADanU vikramAbda 2031] aMguttaranikAya Agama
aura tripiTaka : eka anuzIlana khaNDa 1 : itihAsa aura paramparA [lekhaka : muni
zrI nagarAjajI DI. liTa. prakAzana : jaina zvetAmbara terApaMthI mahAsabhA, 1,
porcugIja carca sTrITa, kalakattA-1 prathama saMskaraNa : san 1969 I.] AcArAMga-
cUrNi Avazyaka-niyukti THE UTTARADHYAYANA SUTRA [Translated from Prakrit by
Hermann Jacobi] OXFORD, at the CLARENDON PRESS, 1895]

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[241 Appendix 2: Bibliography] Uttaradhyayanasutra, Sanskrit Shadow-Word
Meaning-Original Meaning, [Translator: Jain Dharmadiwakar, Jain Agamaratnakar
Upadhyay Shri Atmaramji Maharaj Publisher: Jain Shastramala Office, Saidmittha
Bazaar, Lahore, VS 1996] Upasakadashasutra [Editor: Dr. A.F. Rudolf Hornle
Publisher: Bengal Asiatic Society, Calcutta, First Edition: 1890 AD]
Upasakadashasutra [Editor, Translator: Balbrahmachari Pandit Muni Shri Amolka
Rishiji Maharaj Publisher: Raja Bahadur Lala Sukhdevsahay Jwalaprasad Johri,
Hyderabad-Secunderabad Jain Sangh, Hyderabad (South) Virabd 2442-2446] [Shrimud
Upasakadashang, Shrimud Abhaydevacharya Vihitavivaranyutam. Publisher: Agamoday
Committee, Mehsana, First Edition: 1929 AD] Upasakadashangasutra Sanskrit-Hindi-
Gujarati-Commentary [Writer: Jain Shastracharya Pujya Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj
Publisher: Shri Shwetamber Stanakwasi Jain Sangh, Karachi, First Edition: 1936
AD] Shri Upasakadashangasutra Sanskrit Shadow-Word Meaning-Meaning with Hindi
Language Commentary [Translator: Jain Dharmadiwakar, Jain Agamaratnakar Acharya
Shri Atmaramji Maharaj Publisher: Acharya Shri Atmaram Jain Prakashan Samiti,
Ludhiana First Edition: 1964 AD] Upasakadashang [Translator: Editor: Dr. Jivraj
Ghela Bhai Doshi Ahmedabad Devanagari Script, Gujarati Language] Shri
Upasakadashangasutra [Translator: V. Ghisulal Pitlia Publisher: Shri Akhil
Bharatiya Sadhumarg Jain Sanskriti Rakshak Sangh, Sailana (M.P.) First Edition:
Vikram Samvat 2034]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [241 pariziSTha 2 : prayukta-grantha-sUcI] uttarAdhyayayanasUtram,
saMskRtacchAyA-padarthAnvaya-mUlArthopetam, [anuvAdaka : jainadharmadivAkara,
jainAgamaratnAkara upAdhyAya zrI AtmArAmajI mahArAja prakAzaka : jaina
zAstramAlA kAryAlaya, saidamiTThA bAjAra, lAhaura, vi. 1996] upAsakadazAsUtram
[saMpAdaka : DaoN. e. epha. rUDolpha hArnale prakAzaka : baMgAla eziyATika
sosAyaTI, kalakattA, prathama saMskaraNaH 1890 I.] upAsakadazAsUtra [saMpAdaka,
anuvAdaka : bAlabrahmacArI paM. muni zrI amolaka RSijI mahArAja prakAzaka :
rAjAbahAdura lAlA sukhadevasahAya jvAlAprasAda jauharI, haidarAbAda-
sikaMdarAbAda jaina saMgha, haidarAbAda (dakSiNa) vIrAbda 2442-2446] [zrImad
upAsakadazAMgam, zrImad abhayadevAcArya vihitavivaraNayutam  /  prakAzaka :
Agamodaya samiti mahesANA, prathama saMskaraNa : 1929 I.] upAsakadazAMgasUtram
saMskRta-hindI-gujarAtI-TIkAsametam [vRttiracayitA : jaina zAstrAcArya pUjya zrI
ghAsIlAlajI mahArAja prakAzaka : zrI zvetAmbara sthAnakavAsI jaina saMgha,
karAMcI, prathama saMskaraNa : 1936 I.] zrIupAsakadazAMgasUtram saMskRtacchAyA-
zabdArtha-bhAvArthopetam hindIbhASATIkAsahitaM ca [anuvAdaka :
jainadharmadivAkara, jainAgamaratnAkara AcAryazrI AtmArAjI mahArAja prakAzaka :
AcArya zrI AtmArAma jaina prakAzana samiti, ludhiyAnA prathama saMskaraNa : 1964
I.] upAsakadazAMga [anuvAdaka : saMpAdaka : DaoN. jIvarAja ghelA bhAI doSI
ahamadAbAda devanAgarI lipi, gujarAtI bhASA] zrI upAsakadazAMgasUtra [anuvAdaka
: vI. ghIsUlAla pitaliyA prakAzaka : zrI akhila bhAratIya sAdhumArgI jaina
saMskRti rakSaka saMgha, sailAnA (ma. pra.) prathama saMskaraNa : vikrama saMvat
2034]

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 242] [Upasakadasangasutra Uvvaisuutra [Editor, Translator: Balabrahmachari
Pt. Muni Shri Amolak Rishiji Maharaj Publisher: Raja Bahadur Lala Sukhdevsahay
Jwalaprasad Jauhari, Hyderabad, Secunderabad Jain Sangh, Hyderabad (South)
Virabhad 2442-2446] . Shri Uvvaisuutra, Shri Abhaydev Suri Krit Tika and Shri
Amritchand Suri Krit Balavabodh Sahit [Publisher: Shriyukt Rai Dhanpatisingh
Bahadur, Jain Book Society, Calcutta] Uvvaiy Sutta [Translator: Atmarthi Pt.
Muni Shri Umeshchandraji Maharaj 'Anu' Publisher: Shri Akhil Bharatiya Sadhumarg
Jain Sanskriti Rakshak Sangh, Sailana (Madhya Pradesh), First Edition: 1962 AD]
Uvasgadasaao Mool Ane Shri Abhaydevsuri Virachit Tikanana Anuvaad Sahit
[Translator and Publisher: Pt. Bhagavadas Harshchandra, Jainanand Pustakalaya,
Gopipura, Surat First Edition: Vikram Samvat 1992] Devanagari Lipi, Gujarati
Bhasha Kalp Sutra Kumarsambhav Mahakaavya [Mahakavi Kalidas Virachit] Charak
Samhita Chandogya Upanishad Jayadhvaj [Author: Gulabchand Nanakchand Seth,
Publisher: Shri Jayadhvaj Prakashan Samiti, 98 Mint Street, Madras-1]
Jambudvipaprajnapti Sutra Jivajivabhigam Sutra Jain Agam [Author: Pt. Shri
Dalsukh Malvaniya Publisher: Jain Sanskriti Sanshodhan Mandal, Parshvanath
Vidyashram, Hindu Vishvavidyalaya, Varanasi-5] Jain Agam Sahitya Mein Bharatiya
Samaj [Author: Dr. Jagdishchandra Jain, M.A., Ph.D.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 242] [upAsakadazAMgasUtra uvavAIsUtra [saMpAdaka, anuvAdaka : bAlabrahmacArI
paM. muni zrI amolaka RSijI mahArAja prakAzaka : rAjAbahAdura lAlA
sukhadevasahAya jvAlAprasAda jauharI, haidarAbAda, sikaMdarAbAda jaina saMgha,
haidarAbAda (dakSiNa) vIrAbda 2442-2446]  /  zrI uvavAIsUtra, zrI abhayadeva
sUrikRta TIkA tathA zrI amRtacanda sUrikRta bAlAvabodha sahita [prakAzaka :
zrIyukta rAya dhanapatisiMha bahAdura, jaina buka sosAyaTI, kalakattA] uvavAiya
sutta [anuvAdaka : AtmArthI paM. muni zrI umezacandrajI mahArAja 'aNu' prakAzaka
: zrI akhila bhAratIya sAdhumArgI jaina saMskRti rakSaka saMgha, sailAnA (madhya
pradeza), prathama saMskaraNa : 1962 IsavI] uvAsagadasAo mUla ane zrI
abhayadevasUri viracita TIkAnA anuvAda sahita [anuvAdaka ane prakAzaka : paM.
bhagavAdAsa harSacandra, jainAnanda pustakAlaya, gopIpurA, sUrata prathama
saMskaraNa : vikrama saMvat 1992] devanAgarI lipi, gujarAtI bhASA kalpa sUtra
kumArasaMbhava mahAkAvya [mahAkavi kAlidAsa viracita] carakasaMhitA
chAndogyopaniSad jayadhvaja [lekhaka : gulAbacanda nAnakacanda seTha, prakAzaka
: zrI jayadhvaja prakAzana samiti, 98 miNTa sTrITa, madrAsa-1]
jambUdvIpaprajJapti sUtra jIvAjIvAbhigama sUtra jaina Agama [lekhaka : paM. zrI
dalasukha mAlavaNiyA prakAzaka : jaina saMskRti saMzodhana maNDala, pArzvanAtha
vidyAzrama, hindU vizvavidyAlaya, vArANasI-5] jaina Agama sAhitya meM bhAratIya
samAja [lekhaka : DaoN. jagadIzacandra jaina, ema. e., pI-eca. DI.

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 2: Bibliography ] Publisher: Chowkhamba Vidya Bhavan, Varanasi - 1,
1965 ] Jain Philosophy [ Author: Prof. Mahendra Kumar Jain Nyayacharya
Publisher: Shri Ganesh Prasad Varni Jain Granthamala Kashi, First Edition: 1955
AD] Fundamental Principles of Jain Philosophy, Part One [ Author: Muni Shri
Nathmalji Publisher: Motilal Bengani Charitable Trust, 1/4 C, Khagendra
Chatterjee Road, Kashipur, Calcutta - 2, First Edition: VS 2017] The Original
History of Jainism, Part One [ Author and Director: Acharya Shri Hastimalji
Maharaj, Publisher: Jain History Committee, Jaipur (Rajasthan) First Edition:
1971 AD] Jainendra Siddhanta [ Ksullak Jainendra Varni Publisher, Indian
Knowledge House, 3620/21 Netaji Subhash Marg, Delhi - 6, First Edition: 1970-73]
Tattvartha Sutra: With Commentary [ Commentator: Pt. Sukhlalji Sanghvi
Publisher: Jain Culture Research Institute, Taittiriya Upanishad Dashavaikalika
- Vritti Digha Nikaya [ Sumangalavilasini Commentary ] Dhammapada Nayadhammakhao
Padmanandipanchavinshatika Parsvanath Vidya Ashram, Hindi University, Banaras
-5, Second Edition: 1952 AD] Panchatantra Prajnapan Sutra Pramananyatattvaloka
Pravachansaro Dwar Paiasaddamahannavo Paniniya Ashtadhyayi [ 243

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 2 : prayukta-grantha-sUcI ] prakAzaka : cokhambA vidyAbhavana,
vArANasI - 1, san 1965 ] jaina darzana [ lekhaka : pro. mahendrakumAra jaina
nyAyAcArya prakAzaka : zrI gaNezaprasAda varNI jaina granthamAlA kAzI, prathama
saMskaraNa : san 1955 I.] jaina darzana ke maulika tattva, pahalA bhAga [
lekhaka : muni zrI nathamalajI prakAzaka : motIlAla beMgAnI ceriTebala TrasTa,
1/4 sI, khagendra caTarjI roDa, kAzIpura, kalakattA - 2, prathama saMskaraNa :
vi. saM. 2017] jainadharma kA maulika itihAsa, prathama bhAMga [lekhaka eva
nirdezaka : AcArya zrI hastImalajI mahArAja, prakAzaka : jaina itihAsa samiti,
jayapura (rAjasthAna) prathama saMskaraNa : san 1971 I.] jainendrasiddhAntako [
kSullaka jainendra varNI prakAzaka, bhAratIya jJAnapITha, 3620/21 netAjI subhASa
mArga, dillI - 6, prathama saMskaraNa : 1970-73] tattvArthasUtra : vivecanA
sahita [vivecanakartA : paM. sukhalAlajI saMghavI prakAzaka : jaina saMskRti
saMzodhana maNDala, taittirIyopaniSad dazavaikAlika - vRtti dIghanikAya [
sumaMgalavilAsinI TIkA ] dhammapada nAyAdhammakahAo padmanandipaJcaviMzatikA
pArzvanAtha vidyAzrama, hindI vizvavidyAlaya, banArasa -5, dvitIya saMskaraNa :
1952 I.] paMcatantra prajJApanA sUtra pramANanayatattvAloka pravacanasArodvAra
pAiasaddamahaNNavo pANinIya aSTAdhyAyI [ 243

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 244] **Patanjali Yogasutra Prakrit-Sarvasva: Markandeya Prakrit Sahitya**
(Dr. Hiralal Jain) **History of Prakrit Literature** [Author: Dr. Jagdishchandra
Jain M.A., Ph.D. Publisher: Chaukhambha Vidya Bhavan, Varanasi-1, 1961]
**Brahmavaivarta Puranam, Second Part** [Publisher: Radhakrishna More, 5, Clive
Road, Calcutta, 1955] **Bhagavati Sutra** **Bhagavati Sutra: Acharya Abhaydeva
Suri-krit Tika** **Bhavaprakash: Bhava Mishra** **Bhasha-Vigyan** [Author: Dr.
Bholanath Tiwari Publisher: Kitab Mahal, Allahabad Third Edition: 1961]
**Majjhimanikaya** **Manusmriti** **Mahabharata: First Part (Adi Parva, Sabha
Parva)** **Mahabharata: Third Part (Udyoga Parva, Bhishma Parva)**
**Mahabharata: Fifth Part (Shanti Parva)** [Translator: Pandit Ramnarayan Dutt
Shastri Pandey 'Ram' Publisher: Gita Press, Gorakhpur] **Madhavanidan**
**Raghuvamsha Mahakavya (Written by Mahakavi Kalidas)** **Sharangadhar Samhita**
**Shringar Shatak: Bhartrihari** **Sakadalputra: Shravak** [Explainer: Shrimaj
Jainacharya Pujya Shri Jawaharlalji Maharaj Publisher: Pujya Shri Hukmichandji
Maharaj's Sampraday's Shri Hitechchhu Shravak Mandal, Ratlam, Third Edition:
Vikram Samvat 2005] **Samavayanga: With Translation, With Appendix** [Editor:
Munishri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' 1 [Upasakadasangasutra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 244 ] pAtaMjala yogasUtra prAkRta-sarvasva : mArkaNDeya prAkRta sAhitya (DaoN.
hIrAlAla jaina) prAkRta sAhitya kA itihAsa [ lekhaka : DaoN. jagadIzacandra
jaina ema. e., pI-eca. DI. prakAzaka : caukhambA vidyA bhavana, vArANasI-1, san
1961] brahmAvaivartapurANam dvitIyo bhAgaH [prakAzaka : rAdhAkRSNa mora 5,
klAiba roDa, kalakattA, sana 1955 I. ] bhagavatIsUtra bhagavatI sUtra : AcArya
abhayadeva sUrikRta TIkA bhAvaprakAza : bhAva mizra bhASA - vijJAna [ lekhaka :
DaoN. bholAnAtha tivArI prakAzaka : kitAba mahala, ilAhAbAda tRtIya saMskaraNa :
san 1961 I.] majjhimanikAya manusmRti mahAbhArata : prathama khaNDa (Adi parva,
sabhA parva ) mahAbhArata : tRtIya khaNDa ( udyoga parva, bhISma parva)
mahAbhArata : paJcama khaNDa (zAnti parva ) [ anuvAdaka paM. rAmanArAyaNadatta
zAstrI pANDeya 'rAma' prakAzaka : gItA presa, gorakhapura ] mAdhavanidAna
raghuvaMzamahAkAvya ( mahAkavi kAlidAsa viracita) zArGgadharasaMhitA
zrRGgArazataka : bhartRhari sakaDAlaputra : zrAvaka [ vyAkhyAtA :
zrImajjainAcArya pUjya zrI javAharalAlajI mahArAja prakAzaka : pUjya zrI
hukmIcandajI mahArAja ke sampradAya kA zrI hitecchu zrAvaka maNDala, ratalAma,
tRtIya saMskaraNa : vikrama saMvat 2005] samavAyAGga : sAnuvAda, sapariziSTa [
saMpAdaka : munizrI kanhaiyAlAla jI 'kamala' 1 [ upAsakadazAMgasUtra

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 2: Bibliography [245 Publisher: Agam Anuyog Prakashan, Post Box No.
1141 Delhi-7 First Edition: 1966 AD]  Brief Expansion: Kramdishwar Sanskshipt
Hindi Shabd Sagar [Editor: Ramchandra Verma Publisher: Nagari Pracharini Sabha,
Kashi Sixth Edition: 1958 AD] Samyuttanikaya SANSKRIT ENGLISH DICTIONARY [Sir
Monier Monier-Williams, M.A.; K.C.I.E., OXFORD, at the CLARENDON PRESS) SANSKRIT
ENGLISH DICTONARY [Vaman Shivram Apte, M. A.] Sanskrit-Prakrit Jain Grammar and
Lexicon Tradition [Editor: Muni Shri Dulharajji, Dr. Chaganlalji Shastri, Dr.
Premsuman Jain Publisher: Kalugani Birth Centenary Celebration Committee, Chapar
(Rajasthan), 1977 AD] Sanskrit-Hindi Dictionary [Author: Vaman Shivram Apte
Publisher: Motilal Banarsidass, Bangla Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi-7, 1966 AD]
Sankhyatattvakaumudi Siddhemashabdanusasan Suttanipata Sushruta Samhita
[Composed by Maharshi Sushruta, with commentary Nibandhasangraha by Shri
Dalhanaacharya, with commentary Nyayachandrika by Shri Gayadasacharya on
Nidanasthana, published by Pandurang Javji, Nirnayasagar Mudranalaya, 26-28
Kalba Devi Street, Mumbai-2, Shaka Samvat 1860] Sutra Kritanga Sutra Sutra
Kritanga Vritti Note - Only the details of editing, publication, etc. of the
books used have been given, which seemed necessary. -Editor

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTha 2: prayukta-grantha-sUcI] [245 prakAzaka : Agama anuyoga prakAzana,
posTa baoNksa naM. 1141 dillI-7 prathama saMskaraNa : san 1966 I.] saMkSipta
prasAra : kramadIzvara saMkSipta hindI zabdasAgara [saMpAdaka : rAmacandra varmA
prakAzaka : nAgarI pracAriNI sabhA, kAzI SaSTha saMskaraNa : san 1958 IsvI]
saMyuttanikAya SANSKRIT ENGLISH DICTIONARY [Sir Monier Monier-Williams, M.A.;
K.C.I.E., OXFORD, at the CLARENDON PRESS) SANSKRIT ENGLISH DICTONARY [Vaman
Shivram Apte, M. A.] saMskRta-prAkRta jaina vyAkaraNa aura koza kI paramparA
[saMpAdaka : muni zrI dulaharAjajI, DaoN. chaganalAlajI zAstrI, DaoN.
premasumana jaina prakAzaka : kAlUgaNI janma-zatAbdI samAroha samiti, chApara
(rAjasthAna), san 1977 I.] saMskRta-hindI koza [lekhaka : vAmana zivarAma ApTe
prakAzaka : motIlAla banArasIdAsa, baMgalA roDa, javAhara nagara, dillI-7, san
1966 I.] sAMkhyatattvakaumudI siddhahemazabdAnuzAsana suttanipAta suzrutasaMhitA
[maharSiNA suzrutena viracitA, zrI DalhaNAcAryaviraciyatA
nibandhasaMgrahAkhyavyAkhyayA, nidAnasthAnasya zrI gayadAsAcAryaviraciyatA
nyAyacandrikAkhyapaJjikAvyAkhyayA ca samullasitA prakAzaka : pANDuraGga jAvajI,
nirNayasAgara mudraNAlaya, 26-28 kAlabA devI sTrITa, bambaI-2, zaka saMvat 1860]
sUtrakRtAMgasUtra sUtrakRtAMga vRtti noTa - vyavahRta granthoM meM kevala unhIM
ke saMpAdana, prakAzana Adi kA vivaraNa diyA gayA hai, jo Avazyaka pratIta huaa|
-sampAdaka

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar **List of Benefactor Members**  **Maha
Stambh** 1. Shri Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Chennai 2. Shri Gulabchandji
Mangilalji Surana, Secunderabad 3. Shri Pukharajji Shishodia, Byawar 4. Shri
Sayermalji Jethamalji Chordia, Bangalore 5. Shri Premrajji Bhanwarlalji
Shrisrimal, Durg 6. Shri S. Kishanchandji Chordia, Chennai 7. Shri Kanwarlalji
Baitala, Guwahati 8. Shri Seth Khivrajji Chordia, Chennai 9. Shri Gumanmalji
Chordia, Chennai 10. Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia, Chennai 11. Shri J.
Doolichandji Chordia, Chennai 12. Shri S. Ratanchandji Chordia, Chennai 13. Shri
J. Annarajji Chordia, Chennai 14. Shri S. Sayerchandji Chordia, Chennai 15. Shri
R. Shanti Lalji Uttamchandji Chordia, Chennai 16. Shri Siremalji Hirachandji
Chordia, Chennai 17. Shri J. Hukumchandji Chordia, Chennai  **Stambh Members**
1. Shri Agarchandji Fatechandji Parkh, Jodhpur 2. Shri Jasrajji Ganeshmalji
Sancheti, Jodhpur 3. Shri Tilakchandji Sagarmalji Sancheti, Chennai 4. Shri
Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana, Katangi 5. Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia,
Chennai 6. Shri Deepchandji Chordia, Chennai 7. Shri Moolchandji Chordia,
Katangi 8. Shri Vardhman Industries, Kanpur 9. Shri Mangilalji Mishrilalji
Sancheti, Durg  **Patron** 1. Shri Birdichadji Prakashchandji Telesara, Pali 2.
Shri Gyanrajji Kevalchandji Motha, Pali 3. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta,
Medta City 4. Shri Sh. Jadawmalji Manakchandji Baitala, Bagalkot 5. Shri
Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Byawar 6. Shri Mohanlalji Nemichandji Lalwani,
Changatola 7. Shri Deepchandji Chandanmalji Chordia, Chennai 8. Shri Pannalalji
Bhagchandji Bothra, Changatola 9. Shrimati Sirekunwar Bai, Wife of Late Shri
Suganchandji Jhamar, Madurantakam 10. Shri Bastimalji Mohanlalji Bohra (KGF)
**Jadan** 11. Shri Thanchandji Mehta, Jodhpur 12. Shri Bhairudanji Labhchandji
Surana, Nagaur 13. Shri Khubchandji Gadiya, Byawar 14. Shri Mishrilalji
Dhanrajji Vinaykia, Byawar 15. Shri Indrachandji Baid, Rajnandgaon 16. Shri
Ravatmalji Bhikmachandji Pagaria, Balaghat 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Dharmichadji
Kankaria, Tangla 18. Shri Suganchandji Bokdia, Indore 19. Shri Harkachandji
Sagarmalji Baitala, Indore 20. Shri Raghunathmalji Likhmichandji Lodha,
Changatola 21. Shri Sidhkarannji Shikharchandji Baid, Changatola 22. Shri
Sagarmalji Nortmalji Pincha, Chennai 23. Shri Mohanrajji Mukanchandji Baliya,
Ahmedabad 24. Shri Kesharimalji Janwarilalji Telesara, Pali 25. Shri
Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi, Byawar 26. Shri Dharmichadji Bhagchandji Bohra,
Jhutha 27. Shri Chhogmalji Hemrajji Lodha, Dondi Lohara 28. Shri Gunachandji
Dalichandji Kataria, Bellary 29. Shri Moolchandji Sujanmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur
30. Shri C. Amarchandji Bothra, Chennai 31. Shri Bhanwarlalji Moolchandji
Surana, Chennai 32. Shri Badalchandji Jugrajji Mehta, Indore 33. Shri
Badalchandji Mohanlalji Kothari, Gothan 34. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra,
Ajmer 35. Shri Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria, Bangalore 36. Shri Bhanwarimalji
Chordia, Chennai 37. Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi, Chennai

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara arthasahayogI sadasyoM kI zubha nAmAvalI
mahAstambha 1. zrI seTha mohanamalajI corar3iyA, cennaI 2. zrI gulAbacandajI
mAMgIlAlajI surANA, sikandarAbAda 3. zrI pukharAjajI zizodiyA, byAvara 4. zrI
sAyaramalajI jeThamalajI corar3iyA, baiMgalora 5. zrI premarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI
zrIzrImAla, durga 6. zrI esa. kizanacandajI corar3iyA, cennaI 7. zrI
kaMvaralAlajI baitAlA, gohATI 8. zrI seTha khIMvarAjajI corar3iyA cennaI 9. zrI
gumAnamalajI corar3iyA, cennaI 10. zrI esa. bAdalacandajI corar3iyA, cennaI 11.
zrI je. dulIcandajI corar3iyA, cennaI 12. zrI esa. ratanacandajI corar3iyA,
cennaI 13. zrI je. annarAjajI corar3iyA, cennaI 14. zrI esa. sAyaracandajI
corar3iyA, cennaI 15. zrI Ara. zAntilAlajI uttamacandajI corar3iyA, cennaI 16.
zrI siremalajI hIrAcandajI corar3iyA, cennaI 17. zrI je. hukmIcandajI corar3iyA,
cennaI stambha sadasya 1. zrI agaracandajI phatecandajI pArakha, jodhapura 2.
zrI jasarAjajI gaNezamalajI saMcetI, jodhapura 3. zrI tilokacaMdajI,
sAgaramalajI saMcetI, cennaI 4. zrI pUsAlAlajI kistUracaMdajI surANA, kaTaMgI 5.
zrI Ara. prasannacandajI corar3iyA, cennaI 6. zrI dIpacandajI corar3iyA, cennaI
7. zrI mUlacandajI corar3iyA, kaTaMgI 8. zrI varddhamAna iNDasTrIja, kAnapura 9.
zrI mAMgIlAlajI mizrIlAlajI saMcetI, durga saMrakSaka 1. zrI biradIcaMdajI
prakAzacaMdajI talesarA, pAlI 2. zrI jJAnarAjajI kevalacandajI mUthA, pAlI 3.
zrI premarAjajI jatanarAjajI mehatA, mer3atA siTI 4. zrI za. jar3AvamalajI
mANakacandajI betAlA, bAgalakoTa 5. zrI hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, byAvara
7. 8. 6. zrI mohanalAlajI nemIcandajI lalavANI, cAMgATolA zrI dIpacaMdajI
candanamalajI corar3iyA, cennaI zrI pannAlAlajI bhAgacandajI botharA, cAMgATolA
zrImatI sireku~vara bAI dharmapatnI sva. zrI suganacandajI jhAmar3a,
madurAntakam 9. 10. zrI bastImalajI mohanalAlajI boharA (KGF ) jAr3ana 11. zrI
thAnacandajI mehatA, jodhapura 12. zrI bhairUdAnajI lAbhacandajI surANA, nAgaura
13. zrI khUbacandajI gadiyA, byAvara 14. zrI mizrIlAlajI dhanarAjajI vinAyakiyA,
byAvara zrI indracandajI baida, rAjanAMdagAMva zrI rAvatamalajI bhIkamacandajI
pagAriyA, bAlAghATa 17. zrI gaNezamalajI dharmIcandajI kAMkariyA, TaMgalA 18.
zrI suganacandajI bokar3iyA, indaura 19. zrI harakacandajI sAgaramalajI betAlA,
indaura 20. zrI raghunAthamalajI likhamIcandajI lor3hA, cAMgATolA 21. zrI
siddhakaraNajI zikharacandajI baida, cAMgATolA 22. zrI sAgaramalajI noratamalajI
pIMcA, cennaI 23. zrI mohanarAjajI mukanacandajI bAliyA, ahamadAbAda 15. 16. 24.
zrI kezarImalajI jaMvarIlAlajI talesarA, pAlI 25. zrI ratanacandajI
uttamacandajI modI, byAvara 26. zrI dharmIcandajI bhAgacandajI boharA, jhUThA
27. zrI chogAmalajI hemarAjajI lor3hA, DoMDIlohArA 28. zrI guNacaMdajI
dalIcaMdajI kaTAriyA, bellArI 29. zrI mUlacandajI sujAnamalajI saMcetI,
jodhapura 30. zrI sI. amaracandajI botharA, cennaI 31. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
mUlacandajI surANA, cennaI 32. zrI bAdalacaMdajI jugarAjajI mehatA, indaura 33.
zrI bAdalacaMdajI mohanalAlajI koThArI, goThana 34. zrI hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI
caupar3A, ajamera 35. zrI mohanalAlajI pArasamalajI pagAriyA, baiMgalora zrI
bhaMvarImalajI corar3iyA, cennaI 36. 37. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI goThI, cennaI

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Member List] 38. Shri Jalmachandji Rikhabchandji Bafna, Agra 39. Shri
Ghevarchandji Pukharajji Bhurt, Guwahati 40. Shri Jabarchandji Gelda, Chennai
41. Shri Jadavmalji Suganchandji, Chennai 42. Shri Pukharajji Vijayrajji,
Chennai 43. Shri Chenmalji Surana Trust, Chennai 44. Shri Loonkaranji
Rikhabchandji Lodha, Chennai 45. Shri Surajmalji Sajjanrajji Mehta, Koppal
Associate Members 1. Shri Devkaranji Shrichandji Dosi, Medtacity 2. Smt.
Chaganibai Vinaykia, Byaver 3. Shri Poonamchandji Nahta, Jodhpur 4. Shri
Bhanwarlalji Vijayrajji Kankaria, Villipuuram 5. Shri Bhanwarlalji Chopra,
Byaver 6. Shri Vijayrajji Ratnalalji Chatar, Byaver 7. Shri B. Gajrajji Bokdia,
Salem 8. Shri Phoolchandji Gautamchandji Kanted, Pali 9. Shri K. Pukharajji
Bafna, Chennai 10. Shri Rooparajji Jodharajji Mootha, Delhi 11. Shri Mohanlalji
Mangalchandji Pagaria, Raipur. 12. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji Loonia, Chandawal
13. Shri Bhanwarlalji Gautamchandji Pagaria, Kushalpura 14. Shri Uttamchandji
Mangilalji, Jodhpur 15. Shri Moolchandji Parkh, Jodhpur. 16. Shri Sumermalji
Medtia, Jodhpur 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Nemichandji Tantia, Jodhpur 18. Shri
Udayrajji Pukharajji Sancheti, Jodhpur 19. Shri Badarmalji Pukharajji Bant,
Kanpur 20. Smt. Sundarbai Gothi Dharm Patni Shri Tarachandji Gothi, Jodhpur 21.
Shri Raychandji Mohanlalji, Jodhpur 22. Shri Ghevarchandji Rooparajji, Jodhpur
23. Shri Bhanwarlalji Amarchandji Surana, Chennai 24. Shri Janvarilalji
Amarchandji Kothari, Byaver 25. Shri Manakchandji Kishnalalji, Medtacity 26.
Shri Mohanlalji Gulabchandji Chatar, Byaver 27. Shri Jasrajji Janvarilalji
Dhariawal, Jodhpur 28. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur . [247 29.
Shri Nemichandji Daklia Mehta, Jodhpur 30. Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji
Karnavat, Jodhpur 31. Shri Asumal & Co., Jodhpur 32. Shri Pukharajji Lodha,
Jodhpur 33. Shri Suganibai Dharm Patni Shri Mishrilalji Sand, Jodhpur 34. Shri
Bachhrajji Surana, Jodhpur 35. Shri Harkachandji Mehta, Jodhpur 36. Shri
Devrajji Labhchandji Medtia, Jodhpur 37. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji Golia,
Jodhpur 38. Shri Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur 39. Shri Mangilalji
Chordia, Kuchera 40. Shri Sardarmalji Surana, Bhilai 41. Shri Okachandji
Hemrajji Soni, Durg 42. Shri Surajkaranji Surana, Chennai 43. Shri Ghisulalji
Lalchandji Parkh, Durg 44. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, (Jain Transport Co.) Jodhpur
45. Shri Champalalji Saklecha, Jalna 46. Shri Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar,
Bangalore 47. Shri Bhanwarlalji Mootha & Sons, Jaipur 48. Shri Lalchandji
Motilalji Gadia, Bangalore 49. Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratanmalji Sankhla,
Metupalium 50. Shri Pukharajji Chhallani, Karanguli 51. Shri Asakaranji Jasrajji
Parkh, Durg 52. Shri Ganeshmalji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai 53. Shri Amritrajji
Jaswantrajji Mehta, Medtacity 54. Shri Ghevarchandji Kishoramalji Parkh, Jodhpur
55. Shri Mangilalji Rekchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 56. Shri Munnilalji Moolchandji
Gulechha, Jodhpur 57. Shri Ratnalalji Lakhpatirajji, Jodhpur 58. Shri Jivrajji
Parsamalji Kothari, Medtacity 59. Shri Bhanwarlalji Rikhabchandji Nahta, Nagaur
60. Shri Mangilalji Prakashchandji Runwal, Mysore 61. Shri Pukharajji Bohra,
Piplia Kalan 62. Shri Harkachandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore 63. Shri
Chandanmalji Premchandji Modi, Bhilai 64. Shri Bheevrajji Baghmar, Kuchera

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sadasya nAmAvalI] 38. zrI jAlamacaMdajI rikhabacaMdajI bAphanA, AgarA 39. zrI
ghevaracaMdajI pukharAjajI bhuraTa, gohATI 40. zrI jabaracandajI gelar3A, cennaI
41. zrI jar3AvamalajI suganacandajI, cennaI 42. zrI pukharAjajI vijayarAjajI,
cennaI 43. zrI cenamalajI surANA TrasTa, cennaI 44. zrI lUNakaraNajI
rikhabacaMdajI lor3hA, cennaI 45. zrI sUrajamalajI sajjanarAjajI mehatA, koppala
sahayogI sadasya 1. zrI devakaraNajI zrIcandajI DosI, meDatAsiTI 2. zrImatI
chaganIbAI vinAyakiyA, byAvara 3. zrI pUnamacandajI nAhaTA, jodhapura 4. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI vijayarAjajI kAMkariyA, villIpuram 5. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
caupar3A, byAvara 6. zrI vijayarAjajI ratanalAlajI catara, byAvara 7. zrI bI.
gajarAjajI bokaDiyA, selama 8. zrI phUlacandajI gautamacandajI kAMTheDa, pAlI 9.
zrI ke. pukharAjajI bAphaNA, cennaI 10. zrI rUparAjajI jodharAjajI mUthA, dillI
11. zrI mohanalAlajI maMgalacaMdajI pagAriyA, rAyapura  /  12. zrI nathamalajI
mohanalAlajI lUNiyA, caNDAvala 13. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI gautamacandajI pagAriyA,
kuzAlapurA 14. zrI uttamacaMdajI mAMgIlAlajI, jodhapura 15. zrI mUlacandajI
pArakha, jodhapura  /  16. zrI sumeramalajI mer3atiyA, jodhapura 17. zrI
gaNezamalajI nemIcandajI TAMTiyA, jodhapura 18. zrI udayarAjajI pukharAjajI
saMcetI, jodhapura 19. zrI bAdaramalajI pukharAjajI baMTa, kAnapura 20. zrImatI
sundarabAI goThI dharmapatnI zrI tArAcaMdajI goThI, jodhapura 21. zrI
rAyacandajI mohanalAlajI, jodhapura 22. zrI ghevaracandajI rUparAjajI, jodhapura
23. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI amaracandajI surANA, cennaI 24. zrI jaMvarIlAlajI
amaracandajI koThArI, byAvara 25. zrI mANakacaMdajI kizanalAlajI, mer3atAsiTI
26. zrI mohanalAlajI gulAbacandajI catara, byAvara 27. zrI jasarAjajI
jaMvarIlAlajI dhArIvAla, jodhapura 28. zrI mohanalAlajI campAlAlajI goThI,
jodhapura  /  [247 29. zrI nemIcaMdajI DAkaliyA mehatA, jodhapura 30. zrI
tArAcaMdajI kevalacaMdajI karNAvaTa, jodhapura 31. zrI AsUmala eNDa kaM.,
jodhapura 32. zrI pukharAjajI loDhA, jodhapura 33. zrI suganIbAI dharmapatnI zrI
mizrIlAlajI sAMDa, jodhapura 34. zrI baccharAjajI surANA, jodhapura 35. zrI
harakacandajI mehatA, jodhapura 36. zrI devarAjajI lAbhacaMdajI mer3atiyA,
jodhapura 37. zrI kanakarAjajI madanarAjajI goliyA, jodhapura 38. zrI
ghevaracandajI pArasamalajI TAMTiyA, jodhapura 39. zrI mAMgIlAlajI corar3iyA,
kucerA 40. zrI saradAramalajI surANA, bhilAI 41. zrI okacaMdajI hemarAjajI sonI,
durga 42. zrI sUrajakaraNajI surANA, cennaI 43. zrI ghIsUlAlajI lAlacaMdajI
pArakha, durga 44. zrI pukharAjajI boharA, (jaina TrAnsapArTa kaM.) jodhapura
45. zrI campAlAlajI sakalecA, jAlanA 46. zrI premarAjajI mIThAlAlajI kAmadAra,
baiMgalora 47. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mUthA eNDa sansa, jayapura 48. zrI lAlacaMdajI
motIlAlajI gAdiyA, baiMgalora 49. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI navaratnamalajI sAMkhalA,
meTUpAliyama 50. zrI pukharAjajI challANI, karaNagullI 51. zrI AsakaraNajI
jasarAjajI pArakha, durga 52. zrI gaNezamalajI hemarAjajI sonI, bhilAI 53. zrI
amRtarAjajI jasavantarAjajI mehatA, mer3atAsiTI 54. zrI ghevaracaMdajI
kizoramalajI pArakha, jodhapura 55. zrI mAMgIlAlajI rekhacaMdajI pArakha,
jodhapura 56. zrI munnIlAlajI mUlacaMdajI gulecchA, jodhapura 57. zrI
ratanalAlajI lakhapatarAjajI, jodhapura 58. zrI jIvarAjajI pArasamalajI koThArI,
mer3atAsiTI 59. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI rikhabacaMdajI nAhaTA, nAgaura 60. zrI
mAMgIlAlajI prakAzacandajI rUNavAla, maisUra 61. zrI pukharAjajI boharA,
pIpaliyA kalAM 62. zrI harakacaMdajI jugarAjajI bAphanA, baiMgalora 63. zrI
candanamalajI premacaMdajI modI, bhilAI 64. zrI bhIvarAjajI bAghamAra, kucerA

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Member List 65. Shri Tilokchandji Prem Prakashji, Ajmer 101. Shri Guddarmalji
Champalalji, Gothan 66. Shri Vijaylalji Premchandji Gulechha Rajnandgaon 102.
Shri Tejarajji Kothari, Mangliyawas 67. Shri Ravatmalji Chajed, Bhilai 103. Shri
Sampatrajji Chordia, Chennai 68. Shri Bhanwarlalji Dungarmalji Kankaria, Bhilai
104. Shri Amarchandji Chajed, Padu Bari 69. Shri Hiralalji Hastimalji Deshlhara,
Bhilai 105. Shri Jugrajji Dhanrajji Barmecha, Chennai 70. Shri Vardhaman
Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, 106. Shri Pukharajji Naharmalji Lalwani, Chennai
Dalli-Rajhara 107. Smt. Kanchandevi and Nirmala Devi, Chennai 71. Shri
Champalalji Buddharajji Bafna, Byawar 108. Shri Dulerajji Bhanwarlalji Kothari,
Kushalpura 72. Shri Gangaramji Indrachandji Bohra, Kuchera 109. Shri
Bhanwarlalji Mangilalji Betala, Deh. 73. Shri Fatehrajji Nemichandji Karnavat,
Kolkata 110. Shri Jivrajji Bhanwarlalji Chordia, Bhairunda 74. Shri Balchandji
Thanchandji Bhurt, Kolkata 111. Shri Mangilalji Shanti Lalji Runwal, Harsolav
75. Shri Sampatrajji Kataria, Jodhpur 112. Shri Chandmalji Dhanrajji Modi, Ajmer
76. Shri Javrilalji Shanti Lal Surana, Bolaram 113. Shri Ramprasann Gyanprasar
Kendra, Chandrapur 77. Shri Kanmalji Kothari, Dadia 114. Shri Bhurmalji
Dulichandji Bokardia, Medtacity 78. Shri Pannalalji Motilalji Surana, Pali 115.
Shri Mohanlalji Dhariawal, Pali. 79. Shri Manakchandji Ratnalalji Munot, Tangla
116. Smt. Ramkunwarbai Dharm Patni Shri Chandmalji Lodha, 80. Shri Chimman
Singhji Mohansinghji Lodha, Byawar Bombay 81. Shri Riddhakaranji Ravatmalji
Bhurt, Guwahati 117. Shri Mangilalji Uttamchandji Bafna, Bangalore 82. Shri
Parsamalji Mahavirchandji Bafna, Gothan 118. Shri Sanchalalji Bafna, Aurangabad
83. Shri Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrisrimal, Kuchera 119. Shri Bhikhamchandji
Manakchandji Khabia, 84. Shri Mangilalji Madanlalji Chordia, Bhairunda
(Kudalore) Chennai 85. Shri Sohनलालजी लूणकरणजी सुराणा, कुचेरा 120. Smt.
Anopkunwar Dharm Patni Shri Champalalji 86. Shri Ghisulalji, Parsamalji,
Janvrilalji Sanghvi, Kuchera Kothari, Gothan 121. Shri Sohनलालजी सोजतिया, थांवला
87. Shri Sardarmalji & Company, Jodhpur 122. Shri Champalalji Bhandari, Kolkata
88. Shri Champalal Hiralalji Bagrecha, Jodhpur 123. Shri Bhikhamchandji
Ganeshmalji Choudhary, Dhullia 89. Shri Pukharajji Kataria, Jodhpur 124. Shri
Pukharaji Kishनलालजी तातेड़, सिकन्दराबाद 90. Shri Indrachandji Mukanchandji,
Indore 125. Shri Mishrilalji Sajनलालजी कटारिया, 91. Shri Bhanwarlalji Bafna,
Indore Sikandarabad 92. Shri Jethmalji Modi, Indore 126. Shri Vardhaman
Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, 93. Shri Amarchandji Balchandji Modi, Byawar
Bagar Nagar 94. Shri Kundanmalji Parsamalji Bhandari, Bangalore 127. Shri
Pukharajji Parsamalji Lalwani, Bilada 95. Smt. Kamalakunwar Lalwani Dharm Patni
Sw. Shri 128. Shri T. Parsamalji Chordia, Chennai Parsamalji Lalwani, Gothan
129. Shri Motilalji Asulalji Bohra & Co., 96. Shri Akhechandji Lunकरणजी भण्डारी,
कोलकाता Bangalore 97. Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon 130. Shri
Sampatrajji Surana, Manmad 98. Shri Prakashchandji Jain, Nagaur 99. Shri
Kushalchandji Rikhbachandji Surana, Bolaram 100. Shri Laxmichandji Ashok Kumarji
Shrisrimal, Kuchera ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 248] [sadasyanAmAvalI 65. zrI tilokacaMdajI premaprakAzajI, ajamera 101. zrI
gUdar3amalajI campAlAlajI, goThana 66. zrI vijayalAlajI premacaMdajI gulecchA
rAjanAMdagA~va 102. zrI tejarAjajI koThArI, mAMgaliyAvAsa 67. zrI rAvatamalajI
chAjer3a, bhilAI 103. zrI sampatarAjajI corar3iyA, cennaI 68. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
DUMgaramalajI kAMkariyA, bhilAI 104. zrI amaracaMdajI chAjer3a, pAdu bar3I 69.
zrI hIrAlAlajI hastImalajI dezalaharA, bhilAI 105. zrI jugarAjajI dhanarAjajI
baramecA, cennaI 70. zrI vardhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvakasaMgha, 106. zrI
pukharAjajI nAharamalajI lalavANI, cennaI dallI-rAjaharA 107. zrImatI
kaMcanadevI va nirmalA devI, cennaI 71. zrI campAlAlajI buddharAjajI bAphaNA,
byAvara 108. zrI dulerAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI koThArI, kuzAlapurA 72. zrI
gaMgArAmajI indracaMdajI boharA, kucerA 109. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mAMgIlAlajI
betAlA, Deha  /  73. zrI phateharAjajI nemIcaMdajI karNAvaTa, kolakAtA 110. zrI
jIvarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI corar3iyA, bhairUMdA 74. zrI bAlacaMdajI thAnacandajI
bhuraTa, kolakAtA 111. zrI mAMgIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI rUNavAla, harasolAva 75. zrI
sampatarAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 112. zrI cAMdamalajI dhanarAjajI modI, ajamera
76. zrI javarIlAlajI zAMtilAla surANA, bolArama 113. zrI rAmaprasanna
jJAnaprasAra kendra, candrapura 77. zrI kAnamalajI koThArI, dAdiyA 114. zrI
bhUramalajI dulIcaMdajI bokar3iyA, mer3atAsiTI 78. zrI pannAlAlajI motIlAlajI
surANA, pAlI 115. zrI mohanalAlajI dhArIvAla, pAlI  /  79. zrI mANakacaMdajI
ratanalAlajI muNota, TaMgalA 116. zrImatI rAmakuMvarabAI dharmapatnI zrI
cAMdamalajI loDhA, 80. zrI cimmanasiMhajI mohanasiMhajI loDhA, byAvara bambaI
81. zrI riddhakaraNajI rAvatamalajI bhuraTa, gohATI 117. zrI mA~gIlAlajI
uttamacaMdajI bAphaNA, baiMgalora 82. zrI pArasamalajI mahAvIracaMdajI bAphanA,
goThana 118. zrI sAMcAlAlajI bAphaNA, auraMgAbAda 83. zrI phakIracaMdajI
kamalacaMdajI zrIzrImAla, kucerA 119. zrI bhIkhamacandajI mANakacandajI khAbiyA,
84. zrI mAMgIlAlajI madanalAlajI corar3iyA, bhairUMdA (kuDAlora) cennaI 85. zrI
sohanalAlajI lUNakaraNajI surANA, kucerA 120. zrImatI anopakuMvara dharmapatnI
zrI campAlAlajI 86. zrI ghIsUlAlajI, pArasamalajI, jaMvarIlAlajI saMghavI,
kucerA koThArI, goThana 121. zrI sohanalAlajI sojatiyA, thAMvalA 87. zrI
saradAramalajI eNDa kampanI, jodhapura 122. zrI campAlAlajI bhaNDArI, kolakAtA
88. zrI campAlAla hIrAlAlajI bAgarecA, jodhapura 123. zrI bhIkhamacandajI
gaNezamalajI caudharI, dhuliyA 89. zrI pukharAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 124. zrI
pukharAjI kizanalAlajI tAter3a, sikandarAbAda 90. zrI indracandajI
mukanacandajI, indaura 125. zrI mizrIlAlajI sajanalAlajI kaTAriyA, 91. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI bAphanA, indaura sikandarAbAda 92. zrI jeThamalajI modI, indaura
126. zrI varddhamAna sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvaka saMgha, 93. zrI amaracandajI
bAlacandajI modI, byAvara bagar3Inagara 94. zrI kundanamalajI pArasamalajI
bhaMDArI, baiMgalora 127. zrI pukharAjajI pArasamalajI lalavANI, bilAr3A 95.
zrImatI kamalAkaMvara lalavANI dharmapatnI sva. zrI 128. zrI TI. pArasamalajI
corar3iyA, cennaI pArasamalajI lalavANI, goThana 129. zrI motIlAlajI AsUlAlajI
boharA eNDa kaM., 96. zrI akhecandajI lUNakaraNajI bhaNDArI, kolakAtA baiMgalora
97. zrI suganacandajI saMcetI, rAjanAMdagA~va 130. zrI sampatarAjajI surANA,
manamAr3a 98. zrI prakAzacaMdajI jaina, nAgaura 99. zrI kuzAlacaMdajI
rikhabacandajI surANA, bolArama 100. zrI lakSmIcaMdajI azokakumArajI zrIzrImAla,
kucerA

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar published Agam-Sutras:**  * **Acharang Sutra**
[Two Parts] * **Upasakadasang Sutra** * **Jnatadharmakathang Sutra** *
**Antakriddasang Sutra** * **Anuttaraupapatik Sutra** * **Sthanang Sutra** *
**Samavayang Sutra** * **Sutrakritang Sutra** * **Vipaksutra** * **Nandi Sutra**
* **Aupapatik Sutra** * **Vyakhyaprajnapti Sutra** [Four Parts] * **Rajprashniya
Sutra** * **Prajnapana Sutra** [Three Parts] * **Prashnavyakaran Sutra**
**Translators and Editors:**  * **Shri Chand Surana 'Saras'** * **Dr. Chaganlal
Shastri (M.A., Ph.D.)** * **Pandit Shobhachand Bharill** * **Sadhvi Divyaprabha
(M.A., Ph.D.)** * **Sadhvi Muktiprabha (M.A., Ph.D.)** * **Pandit Hiralal
Shastri** * **Pandit Hiralal Shastri** * **Shri Chand Surana 'Saras'** *
**Translation: Pandit Roshanlal Shastri** * **Editing: Pandit Shobhachand
Bharill** * **Translation: Sadhvi Umravkunwar 'Archana'** * **Editing: Kamala
Jain 'Gigi' M.A.** * **Dr. Chaganlal Shastri** * **Shri Amarmuni Vanibhushan** *
**Ratnamuni, San. Devkumar Jain** * **Jainbhushan Gyanmuni** * **Translation:
Muni Pravin Rishi** * **Editing: Pandit Shobhachand Bharill** * **Shri
Rajendramuni Shastri** * **Shri Devkumar Jain** * **Mahasati Pushpavati** *
**Mahasati Suprabha (M.A., Ph.D.)** * **Dr. Chaganlal Shastri** * **Upadhyay
Shri Kevalmuni, San. Devkumar Jain** * **Editing: Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji
'Kamal'** * **Shri Rajendra Muni** * **Munishri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal', Shri
Tilokmuni** * **Munishri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal', Shri Tilokmuni** * **Upadhyay
Muni Shri Pyarchandji Maharaj** * **Upadhyay Muni Shri Pyarchandji Maharaj**
**Other Agam Sutras:**  * **Uttaraadhyayanasutra** * **Niryavalikasutra** *
**Dashavaikalikasutra** * **Aavashyakasutra** * **Jambudeep Prajnapti Sutra** *
**Anuyogdwar Sutra** * **Surya Prajnapti, Chandra Prajnapti Sutra** *
**Jivajivaabhigam Sutra** [Two Parts] * **Nishit Sutra** * **Trini Chhed
Sutras** * **Shri Kalpasutra (Patrakar)** * **Shri Antakriddasang Sutra
(Patrakar)**  **For more information, contact:**  **Agam Prakashan Samiti**
**Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan, Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar-305901**  **Mehta
Offset, Byawar - 01462 - 253990, 9829251990**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara dvArA prakAzita Agama-sUtra nAma AcArAMgasUtra
[do bhAga] upAsakadazAMgasUtra jJAtAdharmakathAMgasUtra antakRddazAMgasUtra
anuttaraupapAtikasUtra sthAnAMgasUtra samavAyAMgasUtra sUtrakRtAMgasUtra
vipAkasUtra nandIsUtra aupapAtikasUtra vyAkhyAprajJaptisUtra [cAra bhAga]
rAjapraznIyasUtra prajJApanAsUtra [tIna bhAga] praznavyAkaraNasUtra anuvAdaka-
sampAdaka zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa' DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI (ema. e. pI-eca.
DI.) paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla sAdhvI divyaprabhA (ema. e., pI-eca. DI) sAdhvI
muktiprabhA (ema. e., pI-eca. DI) paM. hIrAlAla zAstrI paM. hIrAlAla zAstrI
zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa' anu. paM. rozanalAla zAstrI sampA. paM. zobhAcandra
bhArilla anu. sAdhvI umarAvakuMvara 'arcanA' sampA. kamalA jaina 'jIjI' ema. e.
DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI zrI amaramuni vANIbhUSaNa ratanamuni, saM. devakumAra
jaina jainabhUSaNa jJAnamuni anu. muni pravINaRSi sampA. paM. zobhAcandra
bhArilla zrI rAjendramuni zAstrI zrI devakumAra jaina mahAsatI puSpavatI
mahAsatI suprabhA (ema. e. pIeca. DI.) DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI upAdhyAya zrI
kevalamuni, saM. devakumAra jaina sampA. muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala' zrI
rAjendra muni munizrI kanhaiyAlAla jI 'kamala', zrI tilokamuni munizrI
kanhaiyAlAla jI 'kamala', zrI tilokamuni upAdhyAya muni zrI pyAracaMda jI
mahArAja upAdhyAya muni zrI pyAracaMdajI mahArAja uttarAdhyayanasUtra
nirayAvalikAsUtra dazavaikAlikasUtra AvazyakasUtra jambUdvIpaprajJaptisUtra
anuyogadvArasUtra sUryaprajJapti, candraprajJaptisUtra jIvAjIvAbhigamasUtra [do
bhAga] nizIthasUtra trINichedasUtrANi zrI kalpasUtra (patrAkAra) zrI
antakRddazAMgasUtra (patrAkAra) vizeSa jAnakArI ke liye samparkasUtra Agama
prakAzana samiti zrI braja-madhukara smRti bhavana, pIpaliyA bAjAra,
byAvara-305901 mehatA AphaeNseTa, byAvara - 01462 - 253990, 9829251990

