Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/006821/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Namo Namo Nimmal-Dansanass Shree Anand-Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-SudharmaSagar
Guroobhyo Namah VIPAK-SHRUT [Aagam sootra- 11, Ang sootra- 11] Meaning with
Commentary Compiled by JAIN MUNI DEEPRATNASAGAR [M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Namo Namo Nimmal-Dansanass Shree Anand-Kshama-Lalit-Sushil-SudharmaSagar
Guroobhyo Namah VIPAK-SHRUT [Aagam sootra- 11, Ang sootra- 11] Meaning with
Commentary Compiled by JAIN MUNI DEEPRATNASAGAR [M.Com. M.Ed. Ph.D.]

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Obeisance to the celibate Lord Neminaath. Obeisance, obeisance to the
illustrious, compassionate, gentle, refined, and righteous Gurus of the
Neminaath tradition.  **VIPAK-SHRUT** [Aagam Sutra-44, Chulikaa Sutra-11 VIPAK-
SHRU Meaning with Commentary Compiled by → MUNI DEEPRATNASAGAR [M.Com. M.Ed.,
Ph.D] It's a net Publication Jain Aagam (English) OnLine Series Publication
Date: 6/08/2013 Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [1]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Baal brahmchaari shree Neminaathaay namah Namo Namo Nimmal-Dansanass Shree
Anand-Kshma-Lalit-Sushil-SudharmaSagar Guroobhyo Namah VIPAK-SHRUT [Aagam
Sootra-44, Chulikaa Sootra-11 VIPAK-SHRU Meaning with Commentary Compiled by -
MUNI DEEPRATNASAGAR [M.Com. M.Ed., Ph.D] It's a net Publication Jain Aagam
(English) OnLine Series Publication Date: 6/08/2013 Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [1]

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vipak-Shrut No. Anukkam Page   - 01 03 04 05 06 07 08 Chapter -[Ajjhayanam]
Shrutskandh-1 Chaptar-01- Mrugaputra Chaptar-02- Ujjhitak Chaptar-03- Abhagnasen
Chaptar-04 Shakat Chaptar-05- Bruhaspatidatt Chaptar-06- Nandivardhan
Chaptar-07- Umbardatt Chaptar-07- Umbardatt Chaptar-08- Shaurikadatt Chaptar-
09-Devadattaa Chaptar- 10- Anju Shrutskandh-2 Chaptar- 01- Subahu Chaptar-02-
Bhadranandi Chaptar-03- Sujat Chaptar-04- Suvasav Chaptar-05- Jinadas Chaptar-
06- Dhanapati Chaptar-07- Mahabal Chaptar-08- Bhadranandi Chaptar-09-
Mahachandra Chaptar- 10- Vardatt 01-1004 11-17 13 18-23 21 24-2629 27-28 32
29-30 | 35 31 - 39 32- - 45 33 - 48 34-   54 10 58 65 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
35-37 38 - 39 - 40 - 41 - 42-   43-   44-   45- 46-47 66 67 67 68 68 69 69 19 20
Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [2]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Vipak-Shrut No. Anukkam Page - 01 03 04 05 06 07 08 Chapter -[Ajjhayanam]
Shrutskandh-1 Chaptar-01-Mrugaputra Chaptar-02- Ujjhitak Chaptar-03- Abhagnasen
Chaptar-04 Shakat Chaptar-05- Bruhaspatidatt Chaptar-06- Nandivardhan
Chaptar-07- Umbardatt Chaptar-07- Umbardatt Chaptar-08- Shaurikadatt Chaptar-
09-Devadattaa Chaptar- 10- Anju Shrutskandh-2 Chaptar- 01- Subahu Chaptar-02-
Bhadranandi Chaptar-03- Sujat Chaptar-04- Suvasav Chaptar-05- Jinadas Chaptar-
06- Dhanapati Chaptar-07- Mahabal Chaptar-08- Bhadranandi Chaptar-09-
Mahachandra Chaptar- 10- Vardatt 01-1004 11-17 13 18-23 21 24-2629 27-28 32
29-30 | 35 31- 39 32- - 45 33- 48 34- 54 10 58 65 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 35-37
38- 39- 40- 41- 42- 43- 44- 45- 46-47 66 67 67 68 68 69 69 19 20 Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [2]

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Something about This Publication  We have already published 45 Aagams in four
languages: Prakrit, Sanskrit (Satik), Hindi, and Gujarati. Today, for the new
generation and people living abroad, English translation has become a necessity.
So, we have planned to translate or compile Jain Aagams in English. We gave
priority to 'Nandi Sootra', and after that, we have worked on 'Niryaavalika
panchak'. Thus, six Aagams have been completed.  During the translation work of
"Nirayaavalika-panchak", one thing came before me: all the characters in these
stories have either gone to hell or heaven. To get rebirth in hell or heaven is
a result of their own good or bad deeds. By good deeds, people achieve happiness
(SUKH), and by bad deeds, people achieve miseries (DUKH). The descriptions
contain Dukh-Vipaak or Sukh-Vipaak, in which Canonical literature is an Ang
Aagam-Sootra named "VIPAK-SHRUT".  Vipak-Shrut is an "Ang-Pavitth" Aagam. Nandi
Sootra, Suyagadang Sootra, etc., narrate 'Vipak Sootra' as an eleventh Ang-
Sootra of Aagam. Abhaydev Suri has written Vrutti (commentary) on this Sootra.
Here, we have compiled the translation done by Surendra Bothara, which is
originally edited into Hindi by Shree Amar-Muni & Shree Chandra Surana. We have
two motives for publishing this book: [1] To provide Aagam literature in
English, and [2] It should be given in Microsoft Word format so people can do
Cut, Paste, and Editing by themselves.  At present, this book is published as a
Net-Publication with the help of the organization of America. In the future, we
may publish it as a book also. We are also planning to put more Aagams in
English before you.  We also invite learned persons to translate more and more
authentic Jain literature in English for kids and youths, so the ignorant people
of regional languages can also read or learn our "Shashtra & Granth".  We are
very much thankful to Shree Pravinbhai, Sudeshbhai, Late Mr. Krupal Shah, and
all other known-unknown persons who helped us for this project directly or
indirectly.  Dharm-Labh Muni deepratnasagar (01/11/2013) Aagam - 11 - Vipak-
Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [3]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Something about This Publication o We have already published 45 Aagams in Four
languages Prakrut, Sanskrut (Satik), Hindi and Gujarati. Now a day for new
generation & abroad living people, English translation has become a necessity.
So we have planned to translate or compile Jain-Aagam in English. We gave
priority to 'Nandi Sootra', after that we have worked for 'Niryaavalika
panchak'. Thus six Aagam have been completed. During the Translation-work of
"Nirayaavalika-panchak" one thing came before me, all the character of these
stories have either gone in hell or in heaven. To get rebirth in hell or heaven
is a result of their own good or bad deeds. By good deeds people achieves
happiness-[SUKH and by bad deeds people achieves miseries-[Dukh). The
descriptions contain Dukh-Vipaak or Sukh-Vipaak in which Canonical literature is
an Ang Aagam-Sootra named "VIPAK-SHRUT. Vipak-Shrut is an "Ang-Pavitth" Aagam,
Nandi Sootra, Suyagadang Sootra etc. Narrates Vipak sootra' as an eleventh Ang-
Sootra of Aagam. Abhaydev Suri has written Vrutti [commentary on this sootr.
Here, we have compiled Translation done by Surendra Bothara, which is originally
edited in to Hindi by Shree Am ar-Muni & Shree Chandra Surana, We have two
motives for publishing this book.[1] To provide Aagam literature in English &
[2] It should be given in Microsoft Word format so people can do Cut, Paste &
Editing by themselves also. At present this Book is published as a Net-
Publication with the help of the organization of America. In future we may
publish it as a Book also. We are also planning to put more Aagams in English
before you. We also invite learned persons to translate more & more authentic
Jain literature in English for kids and youths, so the ignorant people of
regional languages can also read or learn our "Shashtra & Granth". We are very
much thankful to Shree Pravinbhai, Sudeshbhai, Late Mr. Krupal Shah and all
other known-unknown persons who helpd us for this project directly or indirectly
Dharm-Labh Muni deepratnasagar (01/11/2013) Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by
- Deepratnasagar [3]

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VIPAK-SHRUT (Meaning with Commentary)  **Introduction:**  This eleventh Anga
(The primary canons or the main corpus of the Jain canonical texts. This
consists of twelve treatises, eleven of which are extant according to the
Shvetambar tradition.) is popularly known as Vipaak Shrut. Vipaak means the
fruits of the good and bad karmas acquired by a soul. The scripture where these
are described is called Vipaak Shrut. It has two Shrutskandhs (parts). The first
Shrutskandh describes the bitter fruits of bad karmas. Accordingly, it is
popularly known as Duhkha-vipaak (fruits of bad or ignoble karmas).  As the
second Shrutskandh describes the fruits of good or noble karmas, it is known as
Sukha-vipaak. Each of these parts contains ten chapters. The first chapter of
the first part is titled Mrigaputra. This is an elaborate chapter and all the
following chapters are brief.  The first chapter contains the story of the son
of Vijaya Kshatriya and Mrigarani of Mrigagram. This story is so heart-rending
that mere reading or listening to it makes one shiver. Thinking about the
consequences of violence and other bad and cruel deeds makes one detest and
abhor sinful activity. What to say of an ordinary human being when a great sage
like Gautam - Swami was touched by the horrible and pathetic condition of
Mrugaputra.  Man loves pleasure and detests pain. Whether he gets pleasure or
not, he certainly does not desire pain. Therefore, his first priority is to be
rid of pain. Based on this psychological fact, this scripture initially throws
light on sorrow and its root causes in a lucid style in its first part, Duhkha-
vipaak.  **- SHRUTSKANDH-1** **Chapter (Adhyayan) -1- Mrugaputra**  [1] Meaning
- During that period (end of the fourth section of the current descending cycle
of time) of time (when Arya Sudharma was narrating this text) there was a city
called Champa. Description of Champa city should be read as in Aupapatik Sutra.
(Outside the city, in the north-eastern direction) their was a Purnabhadra
Chaitya. Description of Purnabhadra Chaitya should also be read as in Aupapatik
Sutra.  During that period of time Arya Sudharma, a disciple of Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir, was living. He belonged to a prominent family and caste (born of an
able and virtuous mother). Besides being strong, handsome, and humble, he was
also endowed with the loftiest of virtues. He had the complete knowledge of all
the fourteen Purvas (subtle canon) and possessed all the four branches of
knowledge, namely mati, shrut, avadhi and manahparyav jnana (sensory knowledge,
scriptural knowledge, extrasensory perception of the physical dimension, and
extrasensory perception and knowledge of thought process and thought-forms of
other beings). Wandering from one village to another, along with his five
hundred disciples, Sudharma Swami arrived at the Purnabhadra Chaitya in the town
of Champa. After seeking formal permission, he camped there. Throngs of people
came to attend his discourse. Sudharma Swami gave a discourse and then the
masses returned home.  **Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut** **Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VIPAK-SHRUT (Meaning with Commentary) Introduction: This eleventh Anga (The
primary can ons or the main corpus of the Jain canonical texts. This consists of
twelve treatises, eleven of which are extant according to the Shvetambar
tradition.) is popularly known as Vipaak Shrut. Vipaak means the fruits of the
good and bad karmas acquired by a soul. The scripture where these are described
is called Vipaak Shrut. It has two Shrutskandhs (parts). The first Shrutskandh
describes the bitter fruits of bad karmas. Accordingly it is popularly known as
Duhkha-vipaak (fruits of bad or ignoble karmas). As the second Shrutskandh
describes the fruits of good or noble karmas it is known as Sukha-vipaak. Each
of these parts contains ten chapters. The first chapter of the first part is
titled Mrigaputra. This is an elaborate chapter and all the following chapters
are brief. The first chapter contains the story of the son of Vijaya Kshatriya
and Mrigarani of Mrigagram. This story is so heart-rending that mere reading or
listening to it makes one shiver. Thinking about the consequences of violence
and other bad and cruel deeds makes one detest and abhor sinful activity. What
to say of an ordinary human being when a great sage like Gautam - Swami was
touched by horrible and pathetic condition of Mrugaputra. Man loves pleasure and
detests pain. Whether he gets pleasure or not, he certainly does not desire
pain. Therefore, his first priority is to be rid of pain. Based on this
psychological fact, this scripture initially throws light on sorrow and its root
causes in a lucid style in its first part, Duhkha-vipaak. - SHRUTSKANDH-1
Chapter (Adhyayan) -1- Mrugaputra [1] Meaning - During that period (end of the
fourth section of the current descending cycle of time) of time (when Arya
Sudharma was narrating this text) there was a city called Champa. Description of
Champa city should be read as in Aupapatik Sutra. (Outside the city, in the
north-eastern direction) their was a Purnabhadra Chaitya Description of
Purnabhadra Chaitya should also be read as in Aupapatik Sutra. During that
period of time Arya Sudharma, a disciple of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, was
living. He belonged to a prominent family and caste (born of an able and
virtuous mother). Besides being strong, handsome, and humble he was also endowed
with loftiest of virtues. He had the complete knowledge of all the fourteen
Purvas (subtle canon) and possessed all the four branches of knowledge, namely
mati, shrut, avadhi and manahparyav jnana (sensory knowledge, scriptural
knowledge, extrasensory perception of the physical dimension, and extrasensory
perception and knowledge of thought process and thought-forms of other beings).
Wandering from one village to another, along with his five hundred disciples,
Sudharma Swami arrived at the Purnabhadra Chaitya in the town of Champa. After
seeking formal permission he camped there. Throngs of people came to attend his
discourse. Sudharma Swami gave a discourse and then the masses returned home.
Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1  **Of Arya Sudharma Swamel or
breadth of ting his virtues sho**  During that period of time, Arya Jambu was
the senior most among the disciples of Arya Sudharma Swami. He was seven cubits
tall (in Utsedhangul units or standard of fragmentary units of angel or breadth
of finger; for details refer to Anuyogadvar), very handsome and radiant. The
description of his virtues should be read as those of Sudharma Swami mentioned
in Jnata Dharma Kathanga.  He was sitting near and absorbed in worship of Arya
Sudharma Swami. At that time a curiosity sparked in his mind. He got up and
approached Sudharma Swami. He circumambulated Sudharma Swami three times
clockwise, and bowed before him. He sat down neither very far nor very near
Sudharma Swami and humbly and respectfully spoke:  **2]** "Bhante! If this is
the text and meaning of the tenth Anga named PrashnaVyakaran as given by Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained Siddhastate, what is text and meaning of
eleventh Anga, VipaakShrut, as given by him?"  Sudharma Swami said to ascetic
Jambu—' Jambu! Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained liberation, has
preached the eleventh Anga in two parts-(1) Duhkha-vipaak (fruits of bad or
ignoble karmas) and (2) Sukha-vipaak (fruits of good or noble karmas).  Jambu-
"Bhante! When Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained liberation, has
preached the eleventh Anga in two parts, Duhkha-vipaak and Sukha-vipaak, then
according to him how many chapters are there in the first part titled Duhkha-
vipaak?"  "Jambu ! Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who is the first propagates of
dharma (Aaigare or Aadikar), the religious ford-maker (Titthagare or
Tirthankar),... and so on up to... who has attained liberation has preached ten
chapters of Duhkha-vipaak. They are:  **[3]** (1) Mrigaputra, (2) Ujjhitak, (3)
Abhagnasen, (4) Shakat, (5) Brihaspati, (6) Nandivardhan, (7) Umbardatt, (8)
Shaurik Datt, (9) Devadatta, and (10) Anju".  **[4]** "Bhante ! When Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir, the first propagater of dharma, the Tirthankar, and who has
attained liberation, has preached ten chapters of Duhkha-vipaak from Mrigaputra
to Anju, then what is the text and meaning of the first chapter of Duhkha-
vipaak?"  Arya Sudharma replied-Jambu! During that period of time there was a
town named Mrugagram (the details should be read from the description of city
mentioned in Aupapatik Sutra). In north-eastern direction (Ishan Kone) outside
this town, was a garden named Chandanapadap having trees bearing all season
flowers and fruits. In that garden there was an ancient temple of Sudharma
Yaksh. The details of this should be read from the description of Purnabhadra
Yaksh temple (Aupapatik Sutra).  **Commentary—**in this Agam the word 'Wannao'
has been mainly used in four instances—with description of a city, garden, king,
and queen. This is a style traditionally accepted in Jain Agams that when
complete details of some garden, city, king, queen, or practicing ascetic have
been narrated in one particular Agam, it is not generally repeated elsewhere.
Instead, using the term 'Tannao' (varnan or description) it is advised to read
the description from that specific Agam. Thus wherever 'Wannao' is mentioned it
should taken as an indication to read the description of a city, garden, king,
and queen from Aupapatik Sutra. Like 'Wannao' the term 'Java' is also used to
indicate to read description from some other place. In place of 'Wannao' we will
use the word description in parenthesis.  **Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut**
**Compiled by - Deepratnasagar** **[5]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1 of Arya Sudharma Swamel or breadth
of ting his virtues sho During that period of time Arya Jambu was the senior
most among the disciples of Arya Sudharma Swami. He was seven cubits tall (in
Utsedhangul units or standard of fragmentary units of angel or breadth of
finger; for details refer to Anuyogadvar), very handsome and radiant. The
description of his virtues should be read as those of Sudharma Swami mentioned
in Jnata Dharma Kathanga. He was sitting near and absorbed in worship of Arya
Sudharma Swami. At that time a curiosity sparked in his mind. He got up and
approached Sudharma Swami. He circumambulated Sudharma Swami three times
clockwise, and bowed before him. He sat down neither very far nor very near
Sudharma Swami and humbly and respectfully spoke 2] Meaning - "Bhante! If this
is the text and meaning of the tenth Anga named PrashnaVyakaran as given by
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained Siddhastate, what is text and meaning
of eleventh Anga, VipaakShrut, as given by him?" Sudharma Swami said to ascetic
Jambu--' Jambu! Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained liberation, has
preached the eleventh Anga in two parts-(1) Duhkha-vipaak (fruits of bad or
ignoble karmas) and (2) Sukha-vipaak (fruits of good or noble karmas). Jambu-
"Bhante! When Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained liberation, has
preached the eleventh Anga in two parts, Duhkha-vipaak and Sukha-vipaak, then
according to him how many chapters are there in the first part titled Duhkha-
vipaak?" "Jambu ! Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who is the first propagates of
dharma (Aaigare or Aadikar), the religious ford-maker (Titthagare or
Tirthankar),... and so on up to... who has attained liberation has preached ten
chapters of Duhkha-vipaak. They are [3] Meaning- (1) Mrigaputra, (2) Ujjhitak,
(3) Abhagnasen, (4) Shakat, (5) Brihaspati, (6) Nandivardhan, (7) Umbardatt, (8)
Shaurik Datt, (9) Devadatta, and (10) Anju". [4] Meaning- Bhante ! When Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir, the first propagater of dharma, the Tirthankar, and who has
attained liberation, has preached ten chapters of Duhkha-vipaak from Mrigaputra
to Anju, then what is the text and meaning of the first chapter of Duhkha-
vipaak? Arya Sudharma replied-Jambu! During that period of time there was a town
named Mrugagram (the details should be read from the description of city
mentioned in Aupapatik Sutra). In north-eastern direction (Ishan Kone) outside
this towr, was a garden named Chandanapadap having trees bearing all season
flowers and fruits. In that garden there was an ancient temple of Sudharma
Yaksh. The details of this should be read from the description of Purnabhadra
Yaksh temple (Aupapatik Sutra). Commentary--in this Agam the word Wannao' has
been mainly used in four instances--with description of a city, garden, king,
and queen. This is a style traditionally accepted in Jain Agams that when
complete details of some garden, city, king, queen, or practicing ascetic have
been narrated in one particular Agam, it is not generally repeated elsewhere.
Instead, using the term Tannao' (varnan or description) it is advised to read
the description from that specific Agam. Thus wherever Vannao' is mentioned it
should taken as an indication to read the description of a city, garden, king,
and queen from Aupapatik Sutra. Like Vannao' the term 'Java' is also used to
indicate to read description from some other place. In place of Vannao we will
use the word description in parenthesis. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [5]

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1 Meaning. In that Mrugagram lived a
Kshatriya King named Vijaya (description as in Aupapatik Sutra). That Kshatriya
King named Vijaya had a queen named Mruga. She was perfectly beautiful and had
fully developed sense organs (description as in Aupapatik Sutra). That Vijaya
Kshatriya and Mruga had a son named Mrugaputra. Since his birth that child was
blind, dumb and deaf, crippled and was with hund-samsthan (crookedconstitution;
a body constitution where almost every part of body is deformed and disfigured).
He suffered from congenital rheumatism (vaat-roag). That child had no hands,
feet, ears or nose. He only had mere outlines of these parts and those too for
namesake. Therefore, that Mruga Devi was feeding and bringing up that child
under wraps in a secret cellar. Commentary-According to Charak Samhita ,there
are 80 kinds of diseases caused due to disturbed vaat (one of the body humours).
Some of these are stiff back, bent neck, and parts of body going numb.
Rheumatism and gout are also caused by disturbed vaat. These are highly
disturbing and chronic ailments. [5] Meaning. In that Mrugagram city lived a
congenital blind. A person with normal vision always guided him holding his
stick. Only with the help of this person he moved around in the city. His hair
was shriveled and disheveled. Swarms of houseflies hovered around him (so dirty
and repulsive was he). That blind person earned his livelihood by humbly and
pitifully seeking alms door to door in Mrugagram city. During that period of
time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived (in Chandanapadap garden outside the
city). Getting the news of Bhagavan's arrival people came to pay homage. Like
king Kunik the Kshatriya king Vijaya also came out to pay homage. Going to the
Samavaaran he commenced Bhagavan's worship. At that time the person who was
blind by birth listened to the commotion and asked his guide "Beloved of gods!
Is their some divine festival or celebration in Mrigagram city? Or there is some
procession going to a garden or a hill? Why all these people are going out of
the city in the same direction?" That person replied to the blind man—"Beloved
of gods! There is nothing like a divine festival in city but Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir has arrived in Chandanapadap garden outside the city. These people are
going there to pay homage." The blind man said to his guide"Beloved of gods!
Come, let us go as well and worship Bhagavan." Then the guide holding the stick
of the blind man led him to the place where Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir was seated.
The blind man circumambulated Bhaga van three times and paid homage and
obeisance. He then commenced Bhagavan's worship. Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir gave
his discourse to king Vijaya and the people of the city, after which the king
and the people returned home. [6] Meaning- During that period of time Indrabhuti
Anagar (Gautam Swami), the chief disciple of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, was also
sitting there. When Bhagavan Gautam Swami saw the man who was blind by birth he
became curious. He asked—"Bhante! Is there some other) person who is blind by
birth (like him), absolutely blind." Bhagavan said"Yes! There is such a person."
Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [6]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1 Meaning. In that Mrugagram lived a
Kshatriya King named Vijaya (description as in Aupapatik Sutra). That Kshatriya
King named Vijaya had a queen named Mruga. She was perfectly beautiful and had
fully developed sense organs (description as in Aupapatik Sutra). That Vijaya
Kshatriya and Mruga had a son named Mrugaputra. Since his birth that child was
blind, dumb and deaf, crippled and was with hund-samsthan (crookedconstitution;
a body constitution where almost every part of body is deformed and disfigured).
He suffered from congenital rheumatism (vaat-roag). That child had no hands,
feet, ears or nose. He only had mere outlines of these parts and those too for
namesake. Therefore, that Mruga Devi was feeding and bringing up that child
under wraps in a secret cellar. Commentary-According to Charak Samhita ,there
are 80 kinds of diseases caused due to disturbed vaat (one of the body humours).
Some of these are stiff back, bent neck, and parts of body going numb.
Rheumatism and gout are also caused by disturbed vaat. These are highly
disturbing and chronic ailments. [5] Meaning. In that Mrugagram city lived a
congenital blind. A person with normal vision always guided him holding his
stick. Only with the help of this person he moved around in the city. His hair
was shriveled and disheveled. Swarms of houseflies hovered around him (so dirty
and repulsive was he). That blind person earned his livelihood by humbly and
pitifully seeking alms door to door in Mrugagram city. During that period of
time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived (in Chandanapadap garden outside the
city). Getting the news of Bhagavan's arrival people came to pay homage. Like
king Kunik the Kshatriya king Vijaya also came out to pay homage. Going to the
Samavaaran he commenced Bhagavan's worship. At that time the person who was
blind by birth listened to the commotion and asked his guide "Beloved of gods!
Is their some divine festival or celebration in Mrigagram city? Or there is some
procession going to a garden or a hill? Why all these people are going out of
the city in the same direction?" That person replied to the blind man--"Beloved
of gods! There is nothing like a divine festival in city but Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir has arrived in Chandanapadap garden outside the city. These people are
going there to pay homage." The blind man said to his guide"Beloved of gods!
Come, let us go as well and worship Bhagavan." Then the guide holding the stick
of the blind man led him to the place where Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir was seated.
The blind man circumambulated Bhaga van three times and paid homage and
obeisance. He then commenced Bhagavan's worship. Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir gave
his discourse to king Vijaya and the people of the city, after which the king
and the people returned home. [6] Meaning- During that period of time Indrabhuti
Anagar (Gautam Swami), the chief disciple of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, was also
sitting there. When Bhagavan Gautam Swami saw the man who was blind by birth he
became curious. He asked--"Bhante! Is there some other) person who is blind by
birth (like him), absolutely blind." Bhagavan said"Yes! There is such a person."
Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [6]

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1  Gautam Swami asked, "Where is
that person who is blind by birth (like him), absolutely blind?"  Bhagavan said,
"Gautam! In this very Mrigagram city, child Mrigaputra, the son of Vijaya
Kshatriya and Mriga, is blind by birth (like him), absolutely blind. He does not
even have hands and feet and other parts of the body. He only has mere outlines
of these parts. His mother Mriga Devi feeds and brings up that child carefully
and furtively."  Bhagavan Gautam then paid homage and obeisance to Bhagavan and
requested, "Bhante! If you give permission I would like to see that child
Mrigaputra." Bhagavan said, "Do as you please, Gautam."  On getting permission
from Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, Gautam Swami was pleased and contented. He left
Bhagavan to go and see Mrigaputra. Observing irya samiti (care of movement) he
moved without any haste and came to Mrigagram city. He entered the city from the
main road and came to the house of Mriga Devi.  When Mruga Devi saw Gautam Swami
coming she was pleased and delighted. After paying homage and obeisance she
asked, "Beloved of gods! What gives me the honour of your visit?"  Bhagavan
Gautam responded, "Beloved of gods! I have straightway come to see your son." At
this Mruga Devi adorned her four sons born after Mrigaputra and made them touch
Gautam Swami's feet. She said, "Bhante ! Look here please, these are my sons."
Bhagavan Gautam told Mruga Devi, "Beloved of gods! I have not come here to see
your these sons but to see your eldest son, Mrugaputra, who is blind by birth,
absolutely blind. You have kept this son in an isolated cellar and are feeding
and bringing him up carefully, under wraps. I have come here only to see him."
Mruga Devi was taken aback at these words. She asked, "O Gautam! Who is that
great sage and ascetic that has revealed my well kept secret so explicitly and
enabled you to be aware of my secret without any effort?"  Bhagavan Gautam Swami
said, "Lady! It is my religious leader (who is one such omniscient) who has told
me this secret."  While Mruga Devi was talking to Bhagavan Gautam Swami thus, it
was time to feed child Mrugaputra. Mriga Devi said to Gautam Swami, "Bhante !
Please wait here, I will soon show you child Mrigaputra. Having said so she went
to the kitchen, changed her dress and took a wooden trolley. She placed enough
quantity of staple food, liquids, general food, and savoury food (ashan, paan,
khadya, svadya) in the trolley. Pushing this trolley she came where Bhagavan
Gautam Swami was waiting and said, "Bhante! Please follow me. I will show you
child Mrigaputra." Gautam Swami followed Mriga Devi (on being requested).
Pushing the trolley, Mriga Devi came to the cellar and covered her mouth with a
piece of cloth folded four times. She requested Bhagavan Gautam Swami, "Bhante!
Please cover your mouth with a folded piece of cloth." Bhagavan Gautam Swami
followed the advise and covered his mouth with a folded piece of cloth.
**Commentary:** The purpose of covering the mouth, this includes the nose as
well, with four folds of cloth is to minimize the offensive stench pervading
that place. It is the nose and not the mouth that is the receptor of smell.
Mriga Devi had also covered her nose because only that could...  **Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut** **Compiled by - Deepratnasagar** [7]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1 Gautam Swami asked "Where is that
person who is blind by birth (like him), absolutely blind?" Bhagavan said
"Gautam! In this very Mrigagram city child Mrigaputra, the son of Vijaya
Kshatriya and Mriga, is blind by birth (like him), absolutely blind. He does not
even have hands and feet and other parts of the body. He only has mere outlines
of these parts. His mother Mriga Devi feeds and brings up that child carefully
and furtively." Bhagavan Gautam then paid homage and obeisance to Bhagavan and
requested Bhante! If you give permission I would like to see that child
Mrigaputra." Bhagavan said "Do as you please, Gautam. On getting permission from
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, Gautam Swami was pleased and contented. He left
Bhagavan to go and see Mrigaputra. Observing irya samiti (care of movement) he
moved without any haste and came to Mrigagram city. He entered the city from the
main road and came to the house of Mriga Devi. When Mruga Devi saw Gautam Swami
coming she was pleased and delighted. After paying homage and obeisance she
asked-"Beloved of gods! What gives me the honour of your visit?" Bhagavan Gautam
responded-"Beloved of gods! I have straightway come to see your son." At this
Mruga Devi adorned her four sons born after Mrigaputra and made them touch
Gautam Swami's feet. She said "Bhante ! Look here please, these are my sons."
Bhagavan Gautam told Mruga Devi-"Beloved of gods! I have not come here to see
your these sons but to see your eldest son, Mrugaputra, who is blind by birth,
absolutely blind. You have kept this son in an isolated cellar and are feeding
and bringing him up carefully. under wraps. I have come here only to see him."
Mruga Devi was taken aback at these words. She asked "O Gautam! Who is that
great sage and ascetic that has revealed my well kept secret so explicitly and
enabled you to be aware of my secret without any effort?" Bhagavan Gautam Swami
said-"Lady! It is my religious leader (who is one such omniscient) who has told
me this secret. While Mruga Devi was talking to Bhagavan Gautam Swami thus, it
was time to feed child Mrugaputra. Mriga Devi said to Gautam Swami-"Bhante !
Please wait here, I will soon show you child Mrigaputra. Having said so she went
to the kitchen, changed her dress and took a wooden trolley. She placed enough
quantity of staple food, liquids, general food, and savoury food (ashan, paan,
khadya, svadya) in the trolley. Pushing this trolley she came where Bhagavan
Gautam Swami was waiting and saidBhante! Please follow me. I will show you child
Mrigaputra." Gautam Swami followed Mriga Devi (on being requested). Pushing the
trolley, Mriga Devi came to the cellar and covered her mouth with a peace of
cloth folded four times. She requested Bhagavan Gautam Swami Bhante! Please
cover your mouth with a folded piece of cloth." Bhagavan Gautam Swami followed
the advise and covered his mouth with a folded piece of cloth. Commentary-The
purpose of covering mouth, this includes nose as well, with four folds of cloth
is to minimize the offensive stench pervading that place. It is nose and not
mouth that is receptor of smell. Mriga Devi had also covered her nose because
only that could Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [7]

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1 Minimize the stench. As far as
covering only the mouth is concerned, it was an essential part of Gautam Swami's
code. Meaning- Mruga Devi then opened the gate of the cellar with her face
turned away. A whiff of stench came from the cellar. This stench was much more
obnoxious, repulsive and intolerable than that of a dead snake (or a decayed
carcass of cow, dog, cat, or rat). Attracted and mesmerized by the aroma of the
staple food, liquids, general food, and savoury food (ashan, paan, khadya,
svadya), Mrugaputra swallowed food through his mouth. He at once digested that
food and it transformed into pus and blood. Mrugaputra soon vomited what he ate
in the form of pus and blood and licked back the whole thing. Looking at this
horrible (repulsive and pathetic) condition Bhagavan Gautam Swami thoughtfully
contemplated—"Oh! This child is suffering the fruits of sin as a consequence of
the sinful karmas he acquired due to intentionally committed evil deeds
(dushchirna) during his earlier births, and which are not easily destroyed
(dushpratikrant). I have not seen hell or infernal beings in person but here I
can see that this Mrigaputra is, indeed, suffering infernal miseries." With
these thoughts Bhagavan Gautam Swami said to Mriga Devi—"Now I am going." And he
left that house. Crossing Mrugagram city he came where Bhagavan Mahavir was
seated. After going around Bhagavan and paying him homage and obeisance he said
"Bhante! On getting your permission I crossed Mrigagram city and reached the
house of Mriga Devi, who was pleased to see me coming... and so on up to... When
I saw Mrigaputra licking pus and blood I thought-Oh! This child leads a
miserable life suffering the fruits of intense sinful karmas he acquired during
his earlier births. [7] Meaning- "Bhante ! Who was this Mrugaputra in his
earlier birth? What was his name and family ? In which village or city he lived
? He leads this miserable life as a consequence of what karmas he acquired,
which activities he indulged in, and what deeds he committed?" Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir said to Bhagavan Gautam—"Gautam! During that period of time there was a
prosperous city called Shatadvar in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu continent. A king
named Dhanapati was the ruler of that city. On its south-east direction (Agni
Kone) was a grand and prosperous khet (a settlement surrounded by a temporary
mud wall; borough). There were five hundred villages under that borough called
Vijayavardhaman. In that borough there was a governor (rashtrakoot) named Ekadi
(Ikkai) who was irreligious and dushprtyanandi (a person who enjoys evil deeds
or who is so discontented that it is difficult to please him). That governor
Ekadi ruled and protected the five hundred villages of Vijayavardhaman borough.
That governor Ekadi loaded the five hundred villages of Vijayavardhaman borough
with taxes. He would take back twice of whatever grains he gave to farmers. He
took bribe and tortured the people ruthlessly. He charged excessive interest
from them and charged them of murder and other crimes. He extorted money from
people and appointed agents at various places for collecting such funds. He
nurtured and protected thieves and other rogues. He would set fire to villages,
torment and rob travelers. This way he continued to exploit and torment people.
He had imposed his tortuous rule by whipping people, impoverishing them and
forcing them to go against religion. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [8]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1 minimize the stench. As far as
covering only the mouth is concerned, it was an essential part of Gautam Swami's
code. Meaning- Mruga Devi then opened the gate of cellar with her face turned
away. A whiff of stench came from cellar. This stench was much more obnoxious,
repulsive and intolerable than that of a dead snake (or a decayed carcass of
cow, dog, cat, or rat). Attracted and mesmerized by the aroma of the staple
food, liquids, general food, and savoury food (ashan, paan, khadya, svadya),
Mrugaputra swallowed food through his mouth. He at once digested that food and
it transformed into pus and blood. Mrugaputra soon vomited what he ate in the
form of pus and blood and licked back the whole thing. Looking at this horrible
(repulsive and pathetic) condition Bhagavan Gautam Swami thoughtfully
contemplated--"Oh! This child is suffering the fruits of sin as a consequence of
the sinful karmas he acquired due to intentionally committed evil deeds
(dushchirna) during his earlier births, and which are not easily destroyed
(dushpratikrant). I have not seen hell or infernal beings in person but here I
can see that this Mrigaputra is, indeed, suffering infernal miseries." With
these thoughts Bhagavan Gautam Swami said to Mriga Devi--"Now I am going." And
he left that house. Crossing Mrugagram city he came where Bhagavan Mahavir was
seated. After going around Bhagavan and paying him homage and obeisance he said
"Bhante! On getting your permission I crossed Mrigagram city and reached the
house of Mriga Devi, who was pleased to see me coming... and so on up to... When
I saw Mrigaputra licking pus and blood I thought-Oh! This child leads a
miserable life suffering the fruits of intense sinful karmas he acquired during
his earlier births. [7] Meaning- "Bhante ! Who was this Mrugaputra in his
earlier birth? What was his name and family ? In which village or city he lived
? He leads this miserable life as a consequence of what karmas he acquired,
which activities he indulged in, and what deeds he committed?" Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir said to Bhagavan Gautam--"Gautam! During that period of time there was a
prosperous city called Shatadvar in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu continent. A king
named Dhanapati was the ruler of that city. On its south-east direction (Agni
Kone) was a grand and prosperous khet (a settlement surrounded by a temporary
mud wall; borough). There were five hundred villages under that borough called
Vijayavardhaman. In that borough there was a governor (rashtrakoot) named Ekadi
(Ikkai) who was irreligious and dushprtyanandi (a person who enjoys evil deeds
or who is so discontented that it is difficult to please him). That governor
Ekadi ruled and protected the five hundred villages of Vijayavardhaman borough.
That governor Ekadi loaded the five hundred villages of Vijayavardhaman borough
with taxes. He would take back twice of whatever grains he gave to farmers. He
took bribe and tortured the people ruthlessly. He charged excessive interest
from them and charged them of murder and other crimes. He extorted money from
people and appointed agents at various places for collecting such funds. He
nurtured and protected thieves and other rogues. He would set fire to villages,
torment and rob travelers. This way he continued to exploit and torment people.
He had imposed his tortuous rule by whipping people, impoverishing them and
forcing them to go against religion. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [8]

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1  Even after hearing the opinions
of people like regional kings (raja), influential and rich persons (ishvar),
knights of honour (talavar), landlords (mandavik), heads of large families
(kautumbik), established merchants (shreshti), caravan chiefs (sarthavaha) and
other villagers during their activities, deliberations, secret consultations,
decisions, controversies and social interactions, that governor Ekadi would say,
"I have not heard." When he had not heard anything he would say, "I have heard."
In the same way he would say, "I have not seen, not spoken, not accepted, and
not understood" for things he had seen, spoken, accepted, and understood. Thus
indulging in such wicked and cruel deeds (eyakamme), considering deceitful
activities to be his prime duty (eyappahane), gaining expertise in tormenting
people (eyavije), and accepting willful action to be good conduct (eyasamayare),
that governor Ekadi led an extremely ignoble life acquiring highly demeritorious
karmas.  (Note: Using four adjectives like `eyakamme' the aphorism conveys that
the governor was immersed up to his neck in such extremely wicked activities.)
After some time that governor Ekadi suffered from sixteen different chronic
ailments simultaneously. They are:  (1) asthma (shvas), (2) bronchitis (kaas),
(3) fever (jvar), (4) burning sensation (daaha), (5) stomach ache (kukshi
shool), (6) fistula of the anus (bhagandar), (7) bleeding piles (arsh or
bavasir), (8) indigestion (ajeern), (9) Glaucoma (drishti shoal), (10) headache
(mastak shool), (11) loss of appetite (bhojan-aruchi), (12) pain in the eyes
(akshi vedana), (13) pain in the ears (karna vedana), (14) eczema (khujali),
(15) dropsy (jalodar), and (16) leprosy (kusht roag).  When he suffered from
these ailments governor Ekadi called his servants and instructed, "Beloved of
gods! Go and make this announcement loudly at every corner, crossings where
three, four or more roads meet, main road and streets in the Vijayavardhaman
borough:  'Beloved of gods! Governor Ekadi is suffering from the pain of sixteen
different ailments including asthma, bronchitis,... and so on up to... leprosy.
Any Vaidya (qualified Ayurvedic doctors) and junior Vaidya, or senior and junior
Jnayak (those who learned and practiced the art of healing through their own
experience), or senior and junior Chikitsak (those who practiced medicine and
surgery) who is able to cure even one of these diseases will be amply and richly
rewarded by the governor.' Make this announcement two or three times and report
back to me.  The servants did as told and reported back.  Hearing and
understanding this announcement in Vijayavardhaman borough many healers (etc.)
collected their instrument boxes and left their homes. They passed through the
streets of Vijayavardhaman borough and came to the residence of Governor Ekadi.
They thoroughly examined and questioned the patient. After diagnosis they
selected different methods and regimens of treatment and tried to cure just one
of the said ailments. The methods and processes employed are:  (1) Abhyangan or
application of medicinal pastes, (2) Udvartan or rubbing with medicinal pastes,
(3) Snehapan or giving medicated oils, (4) Vaman or emesis, (5) Virechan

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1 Even after hearing the opinions of
people like regional kings (raja), influential and rich persons (ishvar),
knights of honour (talavar), landlords (mandavik), heads of large families
(kautumbik), established merchants (shreshti), caravan chiefs (sarthavaha) and
other villagers during their activities, deliberations, secret consultations,
decisions, controversies and social interactions, that governor Ekadi would
say-4 have not heard.' When he had not heard anything he would sayi have heard.'
In the same way he would say 'I have not seen, not spoken, not accepted, and not
understood" for things he had seen, spoken, accepted, and understood. Thus
indulging in such wicked and cruel deeds (eyakamme), considering deceitful
activities to be his prime duty (eyappahane), gaining expertise in tormenting
people (eyavije), and accepting willful action to be good conduct (eyasamayare),
that governor Ekadi led an extremely ignoble life acquiring highly demeritorious
karmas. (Note: Using four adjectives like `eyakamme' the aphorism conveys that
the governor was immersed up to his neck in such extremely wicked activities.)
After some time that governor Ekadi suffered from sixteen different chronic
ailments simultaneously. They are [8] Meaning- (1) asthma (shvas), (2)
bronchitis (kaas), (3) fever (jvar), (4) burning sensation (daaha), (5) stomach
ache (kukshi shool), (6) fistula of the anus (bhagandar), (7) bleeding piles
(arsh or bavasir), (8) indigestion (ajeern), (9) Glaucoma (drishti shoal), (10)
headache (mastak shool), (11) loss of appetite (bhojan-aruchi), (12) pain in the
eyes (akshi vedana), (13) pain in the ears (karna vedana), (14) eczema
(khujali), (15) dropsy (jalodar), and (16) leprosy (kusht roag). [9] Meaning-
When he suffered from these ailments governor Ekadi called his servants and
instructed, "Beloved of gods! Go and make this announcement loudly at every
corner, crossings where three, four or more roads meet, main road and streets in
the Vijayavardhaman borough '0 Beloved of gods! Governor Ekadi is suffering from
the pain of sixteen different ailments including asthma, bronchitis,... and so
on up to... leprosy. Any Vaidya (qualified Ayurvedic doctors) and junior Vaidya,
or senior and junior Jnayak (those who learned and practiced the art of healing
through their own experience), or senior and junior Chikitsak (those who
practiced medicine and surgery) who is able to cure even one of these diseases
will be amply and richly rewarded by the governor.' Make this announcement two
or three times and report back to me. The servants did as told and reported
back. Hearing and understanding this announcement in Vijayavardhaman borough
many healers (etc.) collected their instrument boxes and left their homes. They
passed through the streets of Vijayavardhaman borough and came to the residence
of Governor Ekadi. They thoroughly examined and questioned the patient. After
diagnosis they selected different methods and regimens of treatment and tried to
cure just one of the said ailments. The methods and processes employed are (1)
Abhyangan or application of medicinal pastes, (2) Udvartan or rubbing with
medicinalpastes,(3) Snehapan or giving medicatedoils, (4) Vaman or emesis, (5)
Virechan Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [9]

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1  or purgation, (6) Swedan or
perspiring, (7) Avadahan or cauterizing with hot metal, (8) Apasnan or washing
with medicated water, (9) Anuvasana or enema of medicated oils, (10) Niruha or
to cause sweating by applying medicated oil, (11) Vastikarrna or common enema,
(12) Shiravedh or bleeding toxic blood by cutting nerve-end, (13) Takshan or
scraping of the epidermis with knife or other such instrument, (14) Pravakshan
or cutting of the epidermis using special micro-instruments, (15) Shirovasti or
covering head with leather bag filled with medicated oil or other such liquid,
(16) Tarpan or pouring of medicated oils, (17) Putpaak or use of cooked
medicines, (18) Chhaal or medicinal use of bark of trees, (19) Mool kand or use
of radish, carrot, potato and other roots, (20) Shilika or herbal medicines like
chirayata, (21) Gitika or use of pills or tablets, (22) Aushadh or medicines of
vegetable origin and single ingredient, and (23) Bhaishajya or other medicines
with many ingredients including those of metallic and mineral origin. However,
in spite of all these methods of treatment they could not cure even one single
ailment. When these healers got exhausted (shraant), confused or mentally tired
(tant), and disappointed (paritant) they returned from where they came.  When
the dejected healers expressed their inability to treat, the nursing staff also
left him alone. He got tired and dejected of taking medicines. Tired of the
sufferings of the sixteen ailments and in a state of deep attachment and craving
for kingdom, state, and his harem; mentally tormented (artt), physically
tortured (duhkhart), and enslaved by sense organs (vashart), that governor Ekadi
lived this agonizing life for 250 years. He then died and was reborn as an
infernal being among the infernal beings of the Ratnaprabha Prithvi (the first
hell) having a maximum life-span of one Sagaropam.  After completing the life-
span as an infernal being, the soul that was Ekadi at once took birth as son
from the womb of Mriga Devi, the wife of Vijaya Kshatriya.  When that soul
descended into the womb of Mriga Devi her body suffered acute and excruciating
pain. Since the day child Mrigaputra was conceived she became unpleasant,
loathsome, detestable, and repugnant to Vijaya Kshatriya (her husband).  Some
days later one midnight when she was awake and worrying about the family, Mriga
Devi thought-"Earlier I appeared pleasant, beautiful, lovable, adorable highly
desirable to Vijaya Kshatriya. I was cherished and trusted by him. But since
this soul has come in my womb as a fetus I have become unpleasant... and so on
up to... repugnant to Vijaya Kshatriya. What to say of seeing and sharing
moments of enjoyment with me when Vijaya Kshatriya does not want to hear and
remember even my name and family now. Therefore, it would be good for me to get
rid of this fetus by process of shaatana (to disintegrate and throw out in
pieces), paatana (to abort in one piece), gaalana (to dissolve and throw out),
and maarana (to kill). Thus she decided to get rid of the fetus by shaatana...
and so on up to... maarana and in order to do so she started taking salty or
alkaline, bitter and astringent medicines with a desire to be rid of the fetus.
But all these efforts failed to destroy the fetus. When Mriga Devi failed to get
rid of the fetus, she became tired, exhausted, disappointed, dejected, and sad.
Out of compulsion and in a distressed state of mind, she carried the fetus.
That child in the womb had eight arteries flowing inward and eight veins flowing
outward. Of these sixteen tubular vessels two pairs each were intermittently
emitting pus and blood through holes of ears, eyes, nose, and heart. That boy
suffered from a disease Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar
[10]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1 or purgation, (6) Swedan or
perspiring, (7) Avadahan or cauterizing with hot metal, (8) Apasnan or washing
with medicated water, (9) Anuvasana or enema of medicated oils, (10) Niruha or
to cause sweating by applying medicated oil, (11) Vastikarrna or common enema,
(12) Shiravedh or bleeding toxic blood by cutting nerve-end, (13) Takshan or
scraping of the epidermis with knife or other such instrument, (14) Pravakshan
or cutting of the epidermis using special micro-instruments, (15) Shirovasti or
covering head with leather bag filled with medicated oil or other such liquid,
(16) Tarpan or pouring of medicated oils, (17) Putpaak or use of cooked
medicines, (18) Chhaal or medicinal use of bark of trees, (19) Mool kand or use
of radish, carrot,potato and other roots, (20) Shilika or herbal medicines like
chirayata, (21) Gitika or use of pills or tablets, (22) Aushadh or medicines of
vegetable origin and single ingredient, and (23) Bhaishajya or other medicines
with many ingredients including those of metallic and mineral origin. However,
in spite of all these methods of treatment they could not cure even one single
ailment. When these healers got exhausted (shraant), confused or mentally tired
(tant), and disappointed (paritant) they returned from where they came. When the
dejected healers expressed their inability to treat, the nursing staff also left
him alone. He got tired and dejected of taking medicines. Tired of the
sufferings of the sixteen ailments and in a state ofdeep attachment and craving
for kingdom, state, and his harem; mentally tormented (artt), physically
tortured (duhkhart), and enslaved by sense organs (vashart), that governor Ekadi
lived this agonizing life for 250 years. He then died and was reborn as an
infernal being among the infernal beings of the Ratnaprabha Prithvi (the first
hell) having a maximum life-span of one Sagaropam. After completing the life-
span as an infernal being, the soul that was Ekadi at once took birth as son
from the womb of Mriga Devi, the wife of Vijaya Kshatriya. When that soul
descended into the womb of Mriga Devi her body suffered acute and excruciating
pain. Since the day child Mrigaputra was conceived she became unpleasant,
loathsome, detestable, and repugnant to Vijaya Kshatriya (her husband). Some
days later one midnight when she was awake and worrying about the family, Mriga
Devi thought-"Earlier I appeared pleasant, beautiful, lovable, adorable highly
desirable to Vijaya Kshatriya. I was cherished and trusted by him. But since
this soul has come in my womb as a fetus I have become unpleasant... and so on
up to... repugnant to Vijaya Kshatriya. What to say of seeing and sharing
moments of enjoyment with me when Vijaya Kshatriya does not want to hear and
remember even my name and family now. Therefore, it would be good for me to get
rid of this fetus by process of shaatana (to disintegrate and throw out in
pieces), paatana (to abort in one piece), gaalana (to dissolve and throw out),
and maarana (to kill). Thus she decided to get rid of the fetus by shaatana...
and so on up to... maarana and in order to do so she started taking salty or
alkaline, bitter and astringent medicines with a desire to be rid of the fetus.
But all these efforts failed to destroy the fetus. When Mriga Devi failed to get
rid of the fetus, she became tired, exhausted, disappointed, dejected, and sad.
Out of compulsion and in a distressed state of mind, she carried the fetus. That
child in the womb had eight arteries flowing inward and eight veins flowing
outward. Of these sixteen tubular vessels two pairs each were intermittently
emitting pus and blood through holes of ears, eyes, nose, and heart. That boy
suffered from a disease Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar
[10]

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vipak Shrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1  A man named Mrugaputra suffered
from a disease called **bhasmak**, where food was quickly digested and turned
into pus and blood.   After nine months of pregnancy, Mriga Devi gave birth to a
child who was congenitally blind, deaf, dumb, crippled, deformed, and
disfigured.  Mriga Devi was terrified, horrified, disgusted, and disturbed by
the sight of her child. She trembled with fear and called the nursemaid, saying,
"Beloved of gods! Go and throw this infant on a heap of trash in isolation."
The nursemaid agreed and went to Vijaya Kshatriya, saying, "Master! After nine
months of pregnancy, Mriga Devi gave birth to a child who is congenitally
blind... and so on up to... and has mere outlines of bodyparts. When Mriga Devi
saw this deformed and blind child, she was terrified and called me. She said to
me, 'Beloved of gods! Go and throw this infant on a heap of trash in isolation.'
So, master! Please tell me if I should throw this infant in isolation or not?"
On hearing this, Vijaya Kshatriya was disturbed and stood up. He went to Mriga
Devi and said, "Beloved of gods! This is your firstborn, and if you throw him on
a heap of trash in isolation, your future offspring will not be firm. In other
words, they will be harmed. Therefore, (instead of throwing him) you should feed
and rear up this child under wraps in a secret cellar. This would make your
future offspring firm and stable." Mriga Devi humbly accepted Vijaya Kshatriya's
advice, saying, "As you say." And she started feeding and bringing up that child
under wraps in a secret cellar.  Bhagavan Mahavir added, "Gautam! Thus, child
Mrugaputra is biding his time visibly suffering the fruits of demeritorious
karmas he acquired during his earlier birth."  Gautam asked, "Bhante! Where will
this child Mrigaputra go after his death? Where will he reincarnate?"  Bhagavan
Mahavir replied, "Gautam! He will die at the (ordained) moment of death at the
conclusion of his predestined life-span of twenty-six years and will be born as
a lion in a pride of lions in the valley of the Vaitadhya Mountain. That lion
will be extremely impious and, indulging in grave sinful activities, he will
accumulate excessive bad karmas. After death, that lion will take birth as an
infernal being among the infernal beings of Ratnaprabha Prithvi, the first hell,
having a maximum life-span of one Sagaropam. From the first hell, he will get
reborn in the genus of reptiles and from there he will reincarnate in the second
hell having a maximum life span of three Sagaropam.  Coming out from there after
death, he will get reborn as a bird and from there in the third hell having a
maximum life span of seven Sagaropam.  Ending his life as an infernal being, he
will get reborn as a lion and from there in the fourth hell. After leaving the
fourth hell, he will take rebirth as a snake and from there in the fifth hell.
After the fifth hell, he will take birth as a woman and then in the sixth hell.
After the sixth hell, he will take birth as a man and then in the seventh hell.
Coming out of the seventh hell, he will enter the genus of jalachar-panchendriya
tiryanch-yonik (aquatic five-sensed animal) that includes 1.25 million species
including fish, tortoise, crocodile, alligator, and Sunsumar. In each different
species, he will take birth and die millions of times."  **Codi** Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Vipak Shrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1 called bhasmak (a disease in which
food is digested quickly). As a consequence whatever he consumed was quickly
digested and at once turned into pus and blood. After nine months of pregnancy
Mruga Devi gave birth to a child who was congenitally blind (dumb, deaf,
crippled, deformed and disfigured) and had mere outlines of body-parts. The
moment Mriga Devi saw such deformed, disfigured and blind child she was
terrified, horrified, disgusted and disturbed. She started trembling with fear.)
She at once called the nursemaid and said "Beloved of gods! Go and throw this
infant on a heap of trash in isolation." The nursemaid accepted Mriga Devi's
order by uttering--"All right." After that she went to Vijaya Kshatriya and said
"Master! After nine months of pregnancy Mriga Devi gave birth to a child who is
congenitally blind... and so on up to... and has mere outlines of bodyparts.
When Mriga Devi saw this deformed and blind child she was terrified and called
me. She said to me Beloved of gods! Go and throw this infant on a heap of trash
in isolation.' So, master! Please tell me if I should throw this infant in
isolation or not?" On hearing all this from the nursemaid Vijaya Kshatriya got
disturbed and stood up. He then came to Mriga Devi and said--"Beloved of gods!
This is your first born and if you throw him on a heap of trash in isolation
your future offspring will not be firm. In other words, they will be harmed.
Therefore, (instead of throwing him) you should feed and rear up this child
under wraps in a secret cellar. This would make your future offspring firm and
stable." Mriga Devi humbly accepted Vijaya Kshatriya's advise by uttering--"As
you say." And she started feeding and bringing up that child under wraps in a
secret cellar. Bhagavan Mahavir added--"Gautam ! Thus child Mrugaputra is biding
his time visibly suffering the fruits of demeritorious karmas he acquired during
his earlier birth." [10] Meaning- "Bhante ! Where will this child Mrigaputra go
after his death? Where will he reincarnate?" (Gautam asked) (Replying to Gautam
Swami's question Bhagavan Mahavir said-) Gautam! He will die at the (ordained)
moment of death at the conclusion of his predestined) life-span of twenty six
years and will be born as a lion in a pride of lions in the valley of the
Vaitadhya Mountain. That lion will be extremely impious and, indulging in grave
sinful activities, he will accumulate excessive bad karmas. After death that
lion will take birth as an infernal being among the infernal beings of
Ratnaprabha Prithvi, the first hell, having a maximum life-span of one
Sagaropam. From the first hell he will get reborn in the genus of reptiles and
from there he will reincarnate in second hell having a maximum life span of
three Sagaropam. Coming out from there after death he will get reborn as a bird
and from there in the third hell having a maximum life span of seven Sagaropam.
Ending his life as an infernal being he will get reborn as a lion and from there
in the fourth hell. After leaving fourth hell he will take rebirth as a snake
and from there in the fifth hell. After fifth hell he will take birth as a woman
and then in the sixth hell. After the sixth hell he will take birth as a man and
then in the seventh hell. Coming out of the seventh hell he will enter the genus
of jalachar-panchendriya tiryanch-yonik (aquatic five-sensed animal) that
includes 1.25 million species including fish, tortoise, crocodile, alligator,
and Sunsumar. In each different species he will take birth and die millions of
times Codi Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [11]

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter 1  After this, he will be born and
die millions of times in numerous different species, including animals such as
ur-parisarp (non-limbed reptilian), bhuj-parisarp (limbed reptilian), khechar
(aerial beings); four, three, and two sensed beings; plant-bodied beings such as
trees with bitter fruits and milk, and air, fire, water, and earth-bodied
beings.  After that, he will be born as a bull in Supratishthapur city. When
this bull matures, one day at the beginning of the monsoon season while digging
earth on the banks of the Ganges, the bank will collapse. He will be swept away
in the currents of the river and die a painful death. He will then reincarnate
in the very same Supratishthapur city in the house of a merchant as his son.  On
completing his adolescence and attaining youth, he will listen to the sermon of
worthy senior ascetics. He will ponder over it and get initiated as an ascetic
after tonsuring his head. He will observe the codes of Irya sarniti (care of
movement)... and so on up to... he will become completely celibate. Leading an
ascetic life observing the ascetic codes properly, he will embrace meditational
death after purifying his soul with critical review and expiation
(pratikrarnan). He will then reincarnate as a god in the first heaven called
Saudharma Devlok.  On completing the life-span in the divine realm, he will
descend and be reborn in an affluent family in Mahavideh area. There his
education, initiation, and other information up to getting liberated should be
read as in the story of Dridhapratijna.  Sudharma Swami concluded, "Jambu!
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained nirvana, has narrated this text and
meaning of the first chapter of Duhkha-vipaak. (So I have heard from him and so
I state.)"  **Commentary-Explaining the meanings of the phrases like 'unmukka
baal bhaavarn' Acharyashri writes—baal bhaava means childhood. Vinnaya means one
who can differentiate between good and bad; sagacious. Jovvanaganupatte means to
attain youth.**  In this story, yoni, jati, and kulakoti words have been used.
While interpreting these terms, Acharya Shri Atmaram ji M. has provided the
following explanation:  "Pondering over the terms yoni, jati, and kulakoti will
be helpful in properly understanding the aforesaid statement. This goes as
follows:  Jati—It has many meanings, but in this context, it means one, two,
three, four, and five sensed beings. The statement under reference is discussing
aquatic five sensed beings. Therefore, here the term jati specifically means
aquatic five sensed beings.  Kulakoti-a group of beings is called kula
(species), and different subgroups of these kulas are called koti. The beings
having the same attributes are believed to belong to one kula, and those having
different attributes are believed to belong to different groups.  In spite of
the place of origin or the genus being the same, there can be different groups
(kulas) of beings depending upon their attributes. For a better general
understanding, a good example is cowdung.  A variety of insects, such as
scorpion, worms, and other insects, originate from a lump of cowdung during the
monsoon season. Although the place of origin is the same, the insects belong to
different groups (kulas).  Yoni- place of origin (genus). A soul carries along
it's taijas and karman shariras."  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [12]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter 1 After this he will take birth and
die millions of times in numerous different species including animals such as
ur-parisarp (non-limbedreptilian), bhuj-parisarp (limbed reptilian), khechar
(aerial beings); four, three, and two sensed beings; plant-bodied beings such as
trees with bitter fruits and milk, and air, fire, water and earth-bodied beinas.
After that he will take birth as a bull in Supratishthapur city. When this bull
will mature, one day at the beginning of the monsoon season while digging earth
on the banks of the Ganges the bank will collapse. He will be swept away in the
currents of the river and die a painful death. He will then reincarnate in the
very same Supratishthapur city in the house of a merchant as his son. On
completing his adolescence and attaining youth he will listen to the sermon of
worthy senior ascetics. He will ponder over it and get initiated as an ascetic
after tonsuring his head. He will observe the codes of Irya sarniti (care of
movement)... and so on up to... he will become completely celibate. Leading an
ascetic life observing the ascetic codes properly he will embrace meditational
death after purifying his soul with critical review and expiation
(pratikrarnan). He will then reincarnate as a god in the first heaven called
Saudharma Devlok. On completing the life-span in the divine realm he will
descend and be reborn in an affluent family in Mahavideh area. There his
education, initiation and other information up to getting liberated should be
read as in the story of Dridhapratijna. Sudharma Swami concluded, "Jambu!
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained nirvana, has narrated this text and
meaning of the first chapter of Duhkha-vipaak. (So I have heard from him and so
I state.)" Commentary-Explaining the meanings of the phrases like 'unmukka baal
bhaavarn' Acharyashri writes--baal bhaava means childhood. Vinnaya means one who
can differentiate between good and bad; sagacious. Jovvanaganupatte means to
attain youth. In this story yoni, jati and kulakoti words have been used. While
interpreting these terms Acharya Shri Atmaram ji M. has provided following
explanation "Pondering over the terms yoni, jati and kulakoti will be helpful in
properly understanding the aforesaid statement. This goes as follows Jati--It
has many meanings but in this context it means one, two, three, four and five
sensed beings. The statement under reference is discussing aquatic five sensed
beings. Therefore, here the term jati specifically means aquatic five sensed
beings. Kulakoti-a group of beings is called kula (species), and different
subgroups of these kulas are called koti. The beings having same attributes
arebelieved to belong to one hula and those having different attributes are
believed to belong to different groups. In spite of the place of origin or the
genus being the same there can be different groups (kulas) of beings depending
upon their attributes. For a better general understanding a good example is
cowdung A variety of insects, such as scorpion, worms and other insects,
originate from a lump of cowdung during the monsoon season. Although the place
of origin is same the insects belong to different groups (kulas). Yoni- place of
origin (genus). A soul carries along it's taijas and karman shariras Aagam - 11
- Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [12]

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(Preserving Jain terms)  The place where it acquires the particles suitable for
forming audarik (gross physical) and vaikriya (transmutable) bodies and forms
those bodies is called yoni.  The number of yonis is not fixed, it is infinite.
However the yonis that have same attributes of appearance, smell, taste, and
touch are counted in a single group (jati). Based on variation of the said
attributes the total number of yonis is believed to be 8.4 million. These
details are mentioned in Prajnapana Sutra Vrutti.  The second chapter of Duhkha-
vipaak is titled "Ujjhitak'. The first chapter, Mrugaputra, describes the bitter
consequences of tormenting and torturing people and indulging in cruel violent
deeds. This second chapter contains the story of Ujjhitak Kumar describing the
grave consequences of sinful deeds like cruel, tortuous, and violent treatment
of animals; extreme lust and adultery. These stories also reveal that when such
sinful being is conceived, the mother has equally base and violent dohad
(desires of a pregnant mother). Such dohad is said to be the indicator of the
eventual attitude of the being to be born.  In Vanijyagram city lived a
courtesan named Kamadhvaja. She was endowed with a beautiful body having five
fully developed sense organs. She was proficient in seventy two arts (kalaa),
endowed with the sixty four qualities of a courtesan, an exponent of all the
twenty nine types of entertainments, an expert of twenty one styles of sex
plays, and accomplished in thirty two styles of interactions with males
(mentioned in the compendium of sexology or Kamashastra). Her nine latent sense
organs were animated. She had good command over eighteen indigenous languages.
She dressed in style and was the embodiment of adornment. She was primarily
romantic and excelledi. Singing and music (geet), sex play (rati), dance drama
(gandharva) and dance (nritya). She was a charming and artful mover in the
social and physical dimensions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-1 (fiery and karmic bodies). The
place where it acquires the particles suitable for forming audarik (gross
physical) and vaikriya (transmutable) bodies and forms those bodies is called
yoni. The number of yonis is not fixed, it is infinite. However the yonis that
have same attributes of appearance, smell, taste, and touch are counted in a
single group (jati). Based on variation of the said attributes the total number
of yonis is believed to be 8.4 million. These details are mentioned in
Prajnapana Sutra Vrutti Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -1- Mrugaputra
Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is Finished O-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-O Chapter
(Adhyayan) - 2 - Ujjhitak INTRODUCTION:- The second chapter of Duhkha-vipaak is
titled "Ujjhitak'. The first chapter, Mrugaputra, describes the bitter
consequences of tormenting and torturing people and indulging in cruel violent
deeds. This second chapter contains the story of Ujjhitak Kumar describing the
grave consequences of sinful deeds like cruel, tortuous, and violent treatment
of animals; extreme lust and adultery. These stories also reveal that when such
sinful being is conceived, the mother has equally base and violent dohad
(desires of a pregnant mother). Such dohad is said to be the indicator of the
eventual attitude of the being to be born. This chapter has the story of
Ujjhitak. [11] Meaning- Bhante! When Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained
liberation, has preached the aforesaid text and meaning of the first chapter of
Duhkha-vipaak, then what is text and meaning of the second chapter of Duhkha-
vipaak as preached by him? Jambul During that period of time there was a city
named Vanijyagram, which was prosperous in all respects. In the northeastern
direction (Ishan Kone) outside this town was a garden named Dutipalash. In that
Dutipalash garden there was a temple of Sudharma Yaksh. In that; Vanijyagram
city lived King Mitra. That King named Mitra had a queen named Shri. The
detailed description of all these should be read as aforesaid. In Vanijyagram
city lived a courtesan named Kamadhvaja. She was endowed with a beautiful body
having five fully developed sense organs. She was proficient in seventy two arts
(kalaa), endowed with the sixty four qualities of a courtesan, an exponent of
all the twenty nine types of entertainments, an expert of twenty one styles of
sex plays, and accomplished in thirty two styles of interactions with males
(mentioned in the compendium of sexology or Kamashastra). Her nine latent sense
organs were animated. She had good command over eighteen indigenous languages.
She dressed in style and was the embodiment of adornment. She was primarily
romantic and excelledi. Singing and music (geet), sex play (rati), dance drama
(gandharva) and dance (nritya). She was a charming and artful mover in the
social and physical dimensions. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [13]

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2 She had voluptuous breasts. Her
charges for a night's entertainment were one thousand coins. A flag was hoisted
high on her residence. The king had honoured her with an umbrella, whisks and
fans. The palanquin she used for commuting was named Karnirath. Having one
thousand courtesans under her command, she lived happily. Commentary—The
detailed description of courtesan Kamadhvaja in the beginning of the chapter may
astonish the reader and invoke a curiosity as to why such detailed description
of a courtesan? "This provides a glimpse of the art and culture of that period.
Kamadhvaja was not just an ordinary courtesan or a state dancer, she was an
accomplished artist. The purpose of mentioning her qualities and qualifications
in the field of arts and showing her to be an accomplished artist, intelligent
individual, adept socialite and expert of numerous subjects is to reveal that
women of that period were highly qualified in various subjects and skilled in
performing arts even when they belonged to a lower caste or subsisting on some
mean or lowly profession. The author of the work informs about the highly
advanced state of art and culture in that period by mentioning about the
expertise of eighteen languages, music, singing, dance and other performing
arts. Detailed description of the 64 qualities of a courtesan is available in
Kama Sutra of Vatsyayan. Navangasuttapadibohiya- Her nine latent sense organs
were animated. The nine sense organs are two ears, two eyes, two nose-holes, one
tongue, one skin (organ of touch) and one mind. In context of sexual sensitivity
these nine organs are latent or free of perversions during childhood. When the
sexual sensitivity is activated or animated it is accepted as the beginning of
youth or marriageable age. [12] Meaning- In that Vanijyagram city lived a rich
caravan chief (sarthavaha) named Vijayamitra who had a wife named Subhadra
having beautiful body with five fully developed sense organs. Vijayamitra and
Subhadra had a perfect and beautiful son named Ujjhitak. During that period of
time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived at Dutipalash Chaitya in Vanijyagram city.
People came to pay homage. Like king Kunik the king of the city also came to pay
homage. Bhagavan gave his discourse to all, after which the king and the people
returned home. During that period of time the senior disciple of Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir was ascetic Indrabhuti (Gautam Swami). He had ingested
Tejoleshya (firepower) after toning it down. He was observing a series of two
day fasts interspersed with a day of meals. He used to spend first quarter of
the day in studies and so on as mentioned in Bhagavati Sutra. He sauntered to
Bhagavan Mahavir and asked "Bhante! Seeking your permission I want to go to
Vanijyagram city and visit low, medium, and high caste families to collect alms
from all for breaking my two day fast (shashtakhaman tap)." Bhagavan
replied—"Gautam ! Do as you please." On getting permission from Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir, Bhagavan Gautam left Dutipalash garden and after collecting alms from
low, medium and high caste families came to the main road. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-
Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [14]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2 She had voluptuous breasts. Her
charges for a night's entertainment were one thousand coins. A flag was hoisted
high on her residence. The king had honoured her with an umbrella, whisks and
fans. The palanquin she usedfor commuting was named Karnirath. Having one
thousand courtesans under her command, she lived happily. Commentary--The
detailed description of courtesan Kamadhvaja in the beginning of the chapter may
astonish the reader and invoke a curiosity as to why such detailed description
of a courtesan? "This provides a glimpse of the art and culture of that period.
Kamadhvaja was not just an ordinary courtesan or a state dancer, she was an
accomplished artist. The purpose of mentioning her qualities and qualifications
in the field of arts and showing her to be an accomplished artist, intelligent
individual, adept socialite and expert of numerous subjects is to reveal that
women of that period were highly qualified in various subjects and skilled in
performing arts even when they belonged to a lower caste or subsisting on some
mean or lowly profession. The author of the work informs about the highly
advanced state of art and culture in that period by mentioning about the
expertise of eighteen languages, music, singing, dance and other performing
arts. Detailed description of the 64 qualities of a courtesan is available in
Kama Sutra of Vatsyayan. Navangasuttapadibohiya- Her nine latent sense organs
were animated. The nine sense organs are two ears, two eyes, two nose-holes, one
tongue, one skin (organ of touch) and one mind. In context of sexua! Sensitivity
these nine organs are latent or free of perversions during childhood. When the
sexual sensitivity is activated or animated it is accepted as the beginning of
youth or marriageable age. [12] Meaning- In that Vanijyagram city lived a rich
caravan chief (sarthavaha) named Vijayamitra who had a wife named Subhadra
having beautiful body with five fully developed sense organs. Vijayamitra and
Subhadra had a perfect and beautiful son named Ujjhitak. During that period of
time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived at Dutipalash Chaitya in Vanijyagram city.
People came to pay homage. Like king Kunik the king of the city also came to pay
homage. Bhagavan gave his discourse to all, after which the king and the people
returned home. During that period of time the senior disciple of Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir was ascetic Indrabhuti (Gautam Swami). He had ingested
Tejoleshya (firepower) after toning it down. He was observing a series of two
day fasts interspersed with a day of meals. He used to spend first quarter of
the day in studies and so on as mentioned in Bhagavati Sutra. He sauntered to
Bhagavan Mahavir and asked "Bhante! Seeking your permission I want to go to
Vanijyagram city and visit low, medium, and high caste families to collect alms
from all for breaking my two day fast (shashtakhaman tap)." Bhagavan
replied--"Gautam ! Do as you please." On getting permission from Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir, Bhagavan Gautam left Dutipalash garden and after collecting
alms from low, medium and high caste families came to the main road. Aagam - 11
- Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [14]

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2  On that main road he saw many
elephants. These elephants were battle-ready. They were adorned with armour
plates and other protective coverings like caparisons (hool). Their bellies were
tightened with belts. Large bells were hanging on both sides of the caparisons.
These bells were studded with a variety of gems and beads. These elephants were
further embellished with ornaments including necklaces. They were also wearing
Uttar Kanchuk (a special additional armour plate) and other armour plates and
embellishments. They were also adorned with three kinds of flags (with emblems
of eagle and other motifs), two kinds of streamers (without any markings), and
five kinds of head-ornaments. Mahouts carrying weapons including ayudhs (hand-
held like sword) and praharans (weapons that can be launched or thrown like
arrow).  He also saw many battle-ready horses equipped with armour plates and
other protective coverings. These horses were covered with golden caparisons
with hanging chains. They were harnessed with bridles and driving reins. They
were gnashing their teeth in anger. Their middle was strapped with plumed belly-
band and other ornaments (sthasak). The horsemen riding them carried weapons
including ayudhs and praharans.  He also saw many men (soldiers) who were
wearing stoutly strapped armours with pointed projections. They had tightly
strapped their arms with protective leather straps needed when drawing bow-
string. Their necks were adorned with necklaces. They were also wearing
identifying emblems and strips made of cloth. Equipped with ayudhs and
praharans, they were battle-ready.  Amongst these soldiers Bhagavan Gautam saw a
person whose shackled hands were tied at his back with a rope. His nose and
earlobes had been severed. His body was smeared with oil. His waist and hands
were covered with rags fit for a man condemned to death. On his neck dangled a
garland of red flowers. His whole body was covered with red chalk.  That man was
trembling with fear. Although he dearly loved his life and wanted to live, he
was being cut piece by piece. His body was being chopped into small pieces of
the size of Kakini (a small coin). Surrounded by many men and women, that sinful
person was being hit by hundreds of stones and whips. At every crossing a broken
drum was being beaten and an announcement made "Listen gentlemen! It is no king
or prince who inflicts this punishment to this boy Ujjhitak. It is only his
sinful deeds that are responsible for his miserable condition.  [13] Meaning-On
seeing that person on the main road Bhagavan Gautam thought and pondered- "Oh !
How much infernal torture this man is suffering!" With this thought Bhagavan
Gautam collected required alms from houses in Vanijyagram city and returned to
Bhagavan Mahavir. He placed the alms before Bhagavan and after paying him homage
and obeisance said "Bhante! On getting your permission I went to Vanijyagram
city to seek alms. There I saw a person suffering infernal torture. Bhante! In
his earlier birth who was this person that now suffers such infernal torture?
(Narrating the story of previous birth of that person Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir
said-) "Gautam! During that period of time there was a prosperous city called
Hastinapur in Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [15]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2 On that main road he saw many
elephants. These elephants were battle-ready. They were adorned with armour
plates and other protective coverings like caparisons (hool). Their bellies were
tightened with belts. Large bells were hanging on both sides of the caparisons.
These bells werestudded with a variety of gems and beads. These elephants were
further embellished with ornaments including necklaces. They were also wearing
Uttar Kanchuk (a special additional armour plate) and other armour plates and
embellishments. They were also adorned with three kinds of flags (with emblems
of eagle and other motifs), two kinds of streamers (without any markings), and
five kinds of head-ornaments. Mahouts carrying weapons including ayudhs (hand-
held like sword) and praharans (weapons that can be launched or thrown like
arrow). He also saw many battle-ready horses equipped with armour plates and
other protective coverings. These horses were covered with golden caparisons
with hanging chains. They were harnessed with bridles and driving reins. They
were gnashing their teeth in anger. Their middle was strapped with plumed belly-
band and other ornaments (sthasak). The horsemen riding them carried weapons
including ayudhs and praharans. He also saw many men (soldiers) who were wearing
stoutly strapped armours with pointed projections. They had tightly strapped
their arms with protective leather straps needed when drawing bow-string. Their
necks were adomed with necklaces. They were also wearing identifying emblems and
strips made of cloth. Equipped with ayudhs and praharans, they were battle-
ready. Amongst these soldiers Bhagavan Gautam saw a person whose shackled hands
were tied at his back with a rope. His nose and earlobes had been severed. His
body was smeared with oil. His waist and hands were covered with rags fit for a
man condemned to death. On his neck dangled a garland of red flowers. His whole
body was covered with red chalk. That man was trembling with fear. Although he
dearly loved his life and wanted to live, he was being cut piece by piece. His
body was being chopped into small pieces of the size of Kakini (a small coin).
Surrounded by many men and women, that sinful person was being hit by hundreds
of stones and whips. At every crossing a broken drum was being beaten and an
announcement made "Listen gentlemen! It is no king or prince who inflicts this
punishment to this boy Ujjhitak. It is only his sinful deeds that are
responsible for his miserable condition. [13] Meaning-On seeing that person on
the main road Bhagavan Gautam thought and pondered- "Oh ! How much infernal
torture this man is suffering!" With this thought Bhagavan Gautam collected
required alms from houses in Vanijyagram city and returned to Bhagavan Mahavir.
He placed the alms before Bhagavan and after paying him homage and obeisance
said "Bhante! On getting your permission I went to Vanijyagram city to seek
alms. There I saw a person suffering infernal torture. Bhante! In his earlier
birth who was this person that now suffers such infernal torture? (Narrating the
story of previous birth of that person Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir said-) "Gautam!
During that period of time there was a prosperous city called Hastinapur in
Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [15]

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2 Bharatvarsh area in Jambu
continent. A king named Sunand was the ruler of that city. He was as majestic as
the Himalayas. In the central part of Hastinapur city there was a large and
beautiful cow-shed made up of hundreds of pillars. There dwelt numerous cows,
oxen, small cows (calves), bulls and other cattle belonging to some one or
belonging to no one. They got abundant grass (feed) and water and lived in
comfort and without any fear or pain. In that Hastinapur city lived a kootagraha
(trapper) named Bheem. He was by nature irreligious and derived pleasure in
sinful deeds. Name of that Bheem trapper's wife was Utpalaa, who was well-
proportioned. Once Utpalaa became pregnant. After three months of pregnancy she
had a dohad (pregnancy desire). "Blessed, fortunate, and contented are those
mothers who brown, fry, roast, dry and salt the meat from the udders (oodhas),
breasts, testicles (vrishan), tails, humps (kukud), shoulders, ears, eyes,
noses, tongues, lips, and dewlaps (kambal) of cows,... and so on up to ...and
other cattle belonging to some one or belonging to no one. And then they enjoy
tasting and eating, distributing (paribhajan) and sharing with their friends
(paribhog) a little or more with a variety of wines (sura), namely madhu (made
from flowers or honey), merak (made from palm-fruit), madya (a kind of white
wine), seedhu (made from mixture of jaggery and grains), and prasanna (made from
grapes). And thus fulfill their dohad. I wish I too fulfilled my dohad in the
same way." After these thoughts and because the dohad (desires of a pregnant
mother) was not fulfilled, Utpalaa, the wife of the trapper, became anemic,
emaciated, and weak like a famished person. Her skeleton showed as she lost her
fat. Like a sick person she lost the natural freshness and glow, and the healthy
pink of her face was replaced by a sick gloom. Her body became dull and pale.
Her eyes and face withered. She became apathetic to any and all sorts of
cosmetics and adornments including flowers, perfumes, garlands, and ornaments.
Wilted like a crushed garland of lotus flowers and devoid of rationality, she
plunged into the sea of grief and misery. At that time Bheem trapper came where
Utpalaa was sitting and found her sad and gloomy. He asked—"Beloved of gods! Why
are you so gloomy (sitting with your chin in your palms)? Utpalaa responded— "My
lord ! After three months of pregnancy I am filled with this dohad (pregnancy
desire) Blessed are those mothers who brown, fry, roast, dry and salt the meat
from the udders (oodhas),... and so on up to... And thus fulfill their dohad.'
Because the dohad has not been fulfilled I have become anemic,... and so on up
to... and plunged into the sea of grief and misery." (At these words) Bheem
trapper said to his wife Utpalaa "Beloved of gods! Don't be sad and gloomy. I
will do all what is required to fulfill this dohad." Thus he gave assurance to
Utpalaa in sweet agreeable words. Later, dressed in strong armour and carrying
bow, arrows, and sword, Bheem trapper left his house alone during the night.
Crossing the city he came to the cow-shed and cut off the udders, dewlaps and
other parts of some cows, calves, and other animals. Having done that he brought
these parts home and gave them to his wife Utpalaa. Then Utpalaa sated her dohad
by consuming these pieces of beef with a variety of wines. Thus her dohad was
fulfilled, honoured, complied with, and removed. Having attained thisshe bore
the fetus happily. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [16]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2 Bharatvarsh area in Jambu
continent. A king named Sunand was the ruler of that city. He was as majestic as
the Himalayas. In the central part of Hastinapur city there was a large and
beautiful cow-shed made up of hundreds of pillars. There dwelt numerous cows,
oxen, small cows (calves), bulls and other cattle belonging to some one or
belonging to no one. They got abundant grass (feed) and water and lived in
comfort and without any fear or pain. In that Hastinapur city lived a kootagraha
(trapper) named Bheem. He was by nature irreligious and derived pleasure in
sinful deeds. Name of that Bheem trapper's wife was Utpalaa, who was well-
proportioned. Once Utpalaa became pregnant. After three months of pregnancy she
had a dohad (pregnancy desire). "Blessed, fortunate, and contented are those
mothers who brown, fry, roast, dry and salt the meat from the udders (oodhas),
breasts, testicles (vrishan), tails, humps (kukud), shoulders, ears, eyes,
noses, tongues, lips, and dewlaps (kambal) of cows,... and so on up to ...and
other cattle belonging to some one or belonging to no one. And then they enjoy
tasting and eating, distributing (paribhajan) and sharing with their friends
(paribhog) a little or more with a variety of wines (sura), namely madhu (made
from flowers or honey), merak (made from palm-fruit), madya (a kind of white
wine), seedhu (made from mixture of jaggery and grains), and prasanna (made from
grapes). And thus fulfill their dohad. I wish I too fulfilled my dohad in the
same way." After these thoughts and because the dohad (desires of a pregnant
mother) was not fulfilled, Utpalaa, the wife of the trapper, became anemic,
emaciated, and weak like a famished person. Her skeleton showed as she lost her
fat. Like a sick person she lost the natural freshness and glow, and the healthy
pink of her face was replaced by a sick gloom. Her body became dull and pale.
Her eyes and face withered. She became apathetic to any and all sorts of
cosmetics and adornments including flowers, perfumes, garlands, and ornaments.
Wilted like a crushed garland of lotus flowers and devoid of rationality, she
plunged into the sea of grief and misery. At that time Bheem trapper came where
Utpalaa was sitting and found her sad and gloomy. He asked--"Beloved of gods!
Why are you so gloomy (sitting with your chin in your palms)? Utpalaa
responded-- "My lord ! After three months of pregnancy I am filled with this
dohad (pregnancy desire) Blessed are those mothers who brown, fry, roast, dry
and salt the meat from the udders (oodhas),... and so on up to... And thus
fulfill their dohad.' Because the dohad has not been fulfilled I have become
anemic,... and so on up to... and plunged into the sea of grief and misery." (At
these words) Bheem trapper said to his wife Utpalaa "Beloved of gods! Don't be
sad and gloomy. I will do all what is required to fulfill this dohad." Thus he
gave assurance to Utpalaa in sweet agreeable words. Later, dressed in strong
armour and carrying bow, arrows, and sword, Bheem trapper left his house alone
during the night. Crossing the city he came to the cow-shed and cut off the
udders, dewlaps and other parts of some cows, calves, and other animals. Having
done that he brought these parts home and gave them to his wife Utpalaa. Then
Utpalaa sated her dohad by consuming these pieces of beef with a variety of
wines. Thus her dohad was fulfilled, honoured, complied with, and removed.
Having attained thisshe bore the fetus happily. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [16]

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2 [14]  **Meaning:** After nine
months of pregnancy, Utpalaa gave birth to a male child. The moment the child
was born, he produced a piercing fiendish shriek and wailed. Hearing this harsh
shriek and wail, many cows, calves, and bulls in Hastinapur ran helter-skelter
with fear and anxiety.  Observing this, his parents, during his naming ceremony,
announced that the moment this child was born, he produced a piercing shriek and
wailed. Hearing this harsh shriek and wail, many cows, calves, and bulls in
Hastinapur ran helter-skelter with fear and anxiety. Therefore, they gave this
child the name "Gotras" (one who terrifies cows).  **Commentary:** Explaining
terms 'bhiya, 'tattha; etc. Abhayadev Suri, commentator mentions- "Hearing the
fearful and ear-piercing fiendish shriek and wail of that newborn, cattle in the
city became apprehensive and afraid. Filled with the apprehension that someone
who will deprive us of our life has arrived, they were terrified and restless.
They were in an agitated state of mind, their bodies trembled with fear, and
they ran around in disorder.  **Meaning:** (After Gotras became mature, one day)
Bheem kootagraha died. Young Gotras cremated his father, Bheem kootagraha,
crying, weeping, and sobbing in the company of his friends, Kinfolk, family
members, relatives, and other people. He performed the formal last rites as
well.  Some time later, King Sunand appointed young Gotras at the post of
Kootagraha. Gotras (like his father) was also by nature irreligious, derived
pleasure in sinful deeds.  Then every night, that Gotras trapper would leave his
house alone dressed in strong armor like a soldier and equipped with a bow,
arrows, and a sword. He would come to the Cow-shed and cut off the body-parts of
some cows and other cattle. Doing that, he would bring these parts home. He
would then spend his time enjoying consuming these pieces of beef, duly cooked
various ways, with a variety of wines.  Considering this kind of cruel act to be
his duty, giving importance to, being well versed in, and being engrossed in
such deeds, that Gotras Kootagraha continued to accumulate intense bad karmas.
Completing his life span of five hundred years, he died in anxiety and misery
and took rebirth as an infernal being in the second hell having a maximum life
span of three Sagaropam.  ## [15]  **Meaning:** Subhadra, the wife of
Vijayamitra Sarthavaha (a resident of that Vanijyagram), was a jatunandika (a
woman whose offspring die at birth). On leaving the second hell, the soul of
that Gotras K'ootagraha was conceived as a son in the womb of Subhadra, the wife
of Vijayamitra Sarthavaha in Vanijyagram. On completion of nine months, Subhadra
Sarthavahi gave birth to a son.  Subhadra Sarthavahi got the newborn thrown on a
heap of trash and then got it back. After that, she fed, protected, and
gradually brought up the child. The parents performed ritual ceremonies,
including distribution of gifts, connected with the birth of a son. They
performed the ritual adorational beholding of the sun and the moon with great
fanfare. When eleven days passed, on the twelfth day they performed the naming
ceremony—"When this son of ours was born, he was thrown on a heap of trash, as
such, he should be popularly known by the name Ujjhitak' (the discarded one)."
**Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut** **Compiled by - Deepratnasagar** **[17]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2 [14] Meaning- After nine months of
pregnancy, Utpalaa gave birth to a male child. The moment the child was born he
produced a piercing fiendish shriek and wailed. Hearing this harsh shriek and
wail many cows, calves, and bulls in Hastinapur ran helter-skelter with fear and
anxiety. Observing this his parents, during his naming ceremony, announced the
moment this child was born he produced a piercing shriek and wailed. Hearing
this harsh shriek and wail many cows, calves, and bulls in Hastinapur ran
helter-skelter with fear and anxiety. Therefore we give this child the name
"Gotras" (one who terrifies cows). Commentary- explaining terms 'bhiya, 'tattha;
etc. Abhayadev Suri, commentator mentions- "Hearing the fearful and ear-piercing
fiendish shriek and wail of that new born, cattle in city became apprehensive
and afraid. Filled with the apprehension that someone who will deprive us of our
life has arrived, they were terrified and restless. They were in an agitated
state of mind, their bodies trembled with fear and they ran around in disorder.
O Meaning- (After Gotras became mature, oneday) Bheem kootagraha died. Young
Gotras cremated his father, Bheem kootagraha, crying, weeping, and sobbing in
the company of his friends, Kinfolk, family members, relatives and other people.
He performed the formal last rites as well. Some time later king Sunand
appointed young Gotras at the post of Kootagraha. Gotras (like his father) was
also by nature irreligious, derived pleasure in sinful deeds. Then every night
that Gotras trapper would leave his house alone dressed in strong armour like a
soldier and equipped with a bow, arrows, and a sword. He would come to the Cow-
shed and cut off the body-parts of some cows and other cattle. Doing that he
would bring these parts home. He would then spend his time enjoying consuming
these pieces of beef, duly cooked various ways, with a variety of wines.
Considering this kind of cruel acts to be his duty, giving importance to, being
well versed in, and being engrossed in such deeds, that Gotras Kootagraha
continued to accumulate intense bad karmas. Completing his life span of five
hundred years, he died in anxiety and misery and took rebirth as an infernal
being in the second hell having a maximum life span of three Sagaropam. [15]
Meaning- Subhadra, the wife of Vijayamitra Sarthavaha (a resident of that
Vanijyagram), was a jatunandika (a woman whose offspring die at birth). On
leaving the second hell, the soul of that Gotras K'ootagraha was conceived as a
son in the womb of Subhadra, the wife of Vijayamitra Sarthavaha in Vanijyagram.
On completion of nine months Subhadra Sarthavahi gave birth to a son. Subhadra
Sarthavahi got the newborn thrown on a heap of trash and then got it back. After
that she fed, protected and gradually brought up the child. The parents
performed ritual ceremonies, including distribution of gifts, connected with the
birth of a son. They performed the ritual adorational beholding of the sun and
the moon with great fanfare. When eleven days passed, on the twelfth day they
performed the naming ceremony--"When this son of ours was born he was thrown on
a heap of trash, as such, he should be popularly known by the name Ujjhitak'
(the discarded one)." Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [17]

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2  **Boy Ujjhitak was brought up
under the care of five nurse-maids.** They were (1) **Kshir Dhatri** or milk-
nurse-maid—the one who took charge of feeding; (2) **Majjan Dhatri** or bath-
nurse-maid—the one who took charge of giving a bath; (3) **Mandan Dhatri** or
dress-nurse-maid—the one who took charge of putting on dress and ornaments; (4)
**Kridayan Dhatri** or play-nurse-maid—the one who took charge of playing with
the baby; (5) **Anka Dhatri** or lap-nurse-maid—the one who took charge of
keeping the baby in her lap. Under the care of these nursemaids, like
Dridhapratijna, he grew happily as a Champa tree grows in a mountain cave
undisturbed by the blowing winds.  **Commentary.** In this connection the
commentator (Tikakaar) informs that during that period there was a general
belief that when more than one offspring died on birth, a mother performed
rituals like throwing the next infant on a heap of trash, placing it on a
winnowing basket, etc. That was the reason Subhadra threw the new born on a heap
of trash and brought him back.  **Meaning.** One day Vijayamitra Sarthavaha set
out for a sea voyage in the Lavan Samudra. He filled the holds of his ship with
a variety of merchandise. This included the four categories of goods- **Ganim**
or the goods that are sold in numbers, such as coconut. **Dharim** or the goods
that are sold by weight, such as sugar, butter, oil, etc. **Meya** or the goods
that are sold by measurement, such as cloth, tape etc. **Paaricchedya** or the
goods that are sold in pieces after testing, such as diamond, emerald, etc.
After loading, the ship sailed. But the ship capsized in the Lavan Samudra and
all the valuable merchandise belonging to Vijayamitra drowned in the sea. In
absence of any protection or refuge, he himself died helplessly.  When numerous
influential and rich persons (ishvar), knights of honour (talavar), landlords
(mandavik), heads of large families (kautumbik), affluent people (ibhya),
established merchants (shreshti), and caravan chiefs (sarthavaha) living in
Vanijyagram got the news that Vijayamitra's ship had capsized in the Lavan
Samudra, all the valuable merchandise belonging to Vijayamitra was swept away in
the sea, and he himself had died, they eloped from Vanijyagram with
**hastnikshep** (deposits without any witness) and **bahya bhaandasar**
(deposits made in presence of a witness) belonging to Vijayamitra.  When
Subhadra Sarthavahi got the news that Vijayamitra's ship had capsized in the
Lavan Samudra, all the valuable merchandise belonging to Vijayamitra was swept
away in the sea, and he himself had died, she was overwhelmed with the grief of
loosing her husband. She fell prostrate on the ground like a cut Champak
creeper. After some time she regained consciousness. Then surrounded by her
friends and relatives she performed the last rites of Vijayamitra crying,
weeping and wailing.  Brooding about her husband's sea voyage, ship wreck, loss
of wealth and husband, that grief stricken Subhadra Sarthavahi also met her end
soon.  **(16) Meaning-** On getting the news of the demise of Subhadra
Sarthavahi the city guards and officers expelled young Ujjhitak from his house
and handed over the house to some other person who was a creditor of Ujjhitak's
father, house was given to him, Uttamarn, in exchange of the due amount). On
being expelled from his house, young Ujjhitak started roaming around the
trisections, crossings, roads, streets, gambling dens, whorehouses and bars.
Thus leading an unrestricted, freewheeling and unbridled life he got addicted
**Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut** Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [18]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2 Boy Ujjhitak was brought up under
the care of five nurse-maids. They were (1) Kshir Dhatri or milk-nurse-maid--the
one who took charge of feeding; (2) Majjan Dhatri or bathnurse-maid--the one who
took charge of giving a bath; (3) Mandan Dhatri or dress-nursemaidthe one who
took charge of putting on dress and ornaments; (4) Kridayan Dhatri or play-
nurse- maid the one who took charge of playing with the baby; (5) Anka Dhatri or
lapnurse-maid--the one who took charge of keeping the baby in her lap. Under the
care of these nursemaids, like Dridhapratijna, he grew happily as a Champa tree
grows in a mountain cave undisturbed by the blowing winds. Commentary. In this
connection the commentator (Tikakaar) informs that during that period there was
a general belief that when more than one offspring died on birth, a mother
performed rituals like throwing the nextinfant on a heap of trash, placing it on
a winnowing basket, etc. That wasthe reason Subhadra threw the new born on a
heap of trash and brought him back. O Meaning. One day Vijayamitra Sarthavaha
set out for a sea voyage in the Lavan Samudra. He filled the holds of his ship
with a variety of merchandise. This included the four categories of goods-Ganim
or the goods that are sold in numbers, such as coconut. Dharim or the goods that
are sold by weight, such as sugar, butter, oil, etc. Meya or the goods that are
sold by measurement, such as cloth, tape etc. Paaricchedya or the goods that are
sold in pieces after testing, such as diamond, emerald, etc. After loading, the
ship sailed. But the ship capsized in the Lavan Samudra andall the valuable
merchandise belonging to Vijayamitra drowned in the sea. In absence of any
protection or refuge, he himself died helplessly. When numerous influential and
rich persons (ishvar), knights of honour (talavar), landlords (mandavik), heads
of large families (kautumbik), affluent people (ibhya), established merchants
(shreshti), and caravan chiefs (sarthavaha) living in Vanijyagram got the news
that Vijayamitra's ship had capsized in the Lavan Samudra, all the valuable
merchandise belonging to Vijayamitra was swept away in the sea, and he himself
had died, they eloped from Vanijyagram with hastnikshep (deposits without any
witness) and bahya bhaandasar (deposits made in presence of a witness) belonging
to Vijayamitra. When Subhadra Sarthavahi got the news that Vijayamitra's ship
had capsized in the Lavan Samudra, all the valuable merchandise belonging to
Vijayamitra was swept away in the sea, and he himself had died, she was
overwhelmed with the grief of loosing her husband. She fell prostrate on the
ground like a cut Champak creeper. After some time she regained consciousness.
Then surrounded by her friends and relatives she performed the last rites of
Vijayamitra crying, weeping and wailing. Brooding about her husband's sea
voyage, ship wreck, loss of wealth and husband, that grief stricken Subhadra
Sarthavahi also met her end soon. (16) Meaning- On getting the news of the
demise of Subhadra Sarthavahi the city guards and officers expelled young
Ujjhitak from his house and handed over the house to some other person who was a
creditor of Ujjhitak's father, house was given to him, Uttamarn, in exchange of
the due amount). On being expelled from his house, young Ujjhitak started
roaming around the trisections, crossings, roads, streets, gambling dens,
whorehouses and bars. Thus leading an unrestricted, freewheeling and unbridled
life he got addicted Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [18]

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2  The young man became addicted to
vices like stealing, gambling, visiting whorehouses and womanizing. Once he
visited courtesan Kamadhvaja and got infatuated with her. He started passing his
time enjoying all human comforts and carnal pleasures.  Once queen ShriDevi,
consort of king Vijayamitra of that city, got some vaginal ailment. As a result
she became unfit for enjoying conjugal pleasures with the king. At some point of
time, king Vijayamitra got young Ujjhitak expelled from the house of Kamadhvaja
courtesan and started enjoying all human comforts and carnal pleasures with the
courtesan.   On getting expelled from the house of Kamadhvaja courtesan, that
young Ujjhitak, being madly attached (murcchit) with Kamadhvaja courtesan,
infatuated (gruddha) with her, entrapped in her love (grathit), and lost in her
thoughts (adyupapanna), could not think of loving any other person or thing and
deriving mental peace. Always thinking about her, making efforts to possess her,
devoting his mind, speech and body to her, driven by his desire for her, he got
himself involved in seeking an opportunity when the king did not come to
courtesan Kamadhvaja's house, when no other royal person was there and when even
an ordinary person was also not there.  At some point of time, as soon as that
young Ujjhitak got such an opportunity, he stealthily entered the house of
Kamadhvaja courtesan and started enjoying all human comforts and carnal
pleasures with her.  Commentary - This aphorism contains numerous synonyms that
indicate that so many words have been used to convey just a single idea. But the
commentator opines that in the sermon of the Detached, no word is either
meaningless or repeated. There is a subtle difference in the meanings of each of
these synonyms defining the minute variations in his mental state. For example:
Muchchhiye-murchchhit; irrational state of mind. Giddhe gruddha; a licentious
person; one who pounces like a vulture.  Gadhiye grathit; entrapped in bonds of
love. Ajjhovavanne adhypapanna; obsessive involvement in possessing something.
Tachchitte-tadchitta; obsessed state of psyche.  Tammane tadman; obsessed state
of mind; Tallese-tadleshya; obsessed state of soul TadAjjavasane tadadhyavasaya;
engaged in owning something. Tadatthovautte tadarthopayukt; carefully engaged in
fulfilling one's desires Tadappiyakarane tadarpit karan; devoting all physical
efforts to a goal. Tabbhavanabhaviye-tadbhaavana bhaavit; devoting all mental
efforts to a goal.  Meaning - Then one day, king Vijayamitra, after taking his
bath, applying auspicious mark on his forehead, embellished fully with
ornaments, and accompanied by a throng of people, went to the house of
Kamadhvaja courtesan. There he came across young Ujjhitak enjoying all human
comforts and carnal pleasures with Kamadhvaja courtesan. As soon as he saw this,
he turned red with anger and became violent. Raising his eyebrows, he got young
Ujjhitak caught by his guards. After that, he gave Ujjhitak a thorough beating
by hammering and tossing his body with blows of stick, fist, knee, and elbow.
Having done that, the king got him tied in the avakotak bond (bending the neck
and tying it with hands already tied at the back) and sentenced him to death.
Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [19]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2 to vices like stealing, gambling,
visiting whorehouses and womanizing. Once he visited courtesan Kamadhvaja and
got infatuated with her. He started passing his time enjoying all human comforts
and carnal pleasures. Once queen ShriDevi, consort of king Vijayamitra of that
city, got some vaginal ailment. As a result she became unfit for enjoying
conjugal pleasures with king. At some point of time king Vijayamitra got young
Ujjhitak expelled from the house of Kamadhvaja courtesan and started enjoying
all human comforts and carnal pleasures with courtesan. On getting expelled from
the house of Kamadhvaja courtesan, that young Ujjhitak being madly attached
(murchhit) with Kamadhvaja courtesan, infatuated (gruddha) with her, entrapped
in her love (grathit), and lost in her thoughts (adyupapanna), could not think
of loving any other person or thing and deriving mental peace. Always thinking
about her, making efforts to possess her, devoting his mind speech and body to
her, driven by his desire for her, he got himself involved in seeking an
opportunity when the king did not come to courtesan Kamadhvaja's house, when no
other royal person was there and when even an ordinary person was also not
there. At some point of time as soon as that young Ujjhitak got such an
opportunity he stealthily entered the house of Kamadhvaja courtesan and started
enjoying all human comforts and camal pleasures with her. Commentary-This
aphorism contains numerous synonyms that indicate that so many words have been
used to convey just a single idea. But the commentator opines that in the sermon
of the Detached no word is either meaningless or repeated. There is a subtle
difference in the meanings ofeach of these synonyms defining the minute
variations in his mental state. For example Muchchhiye-murchchhit; irrational
state of mind. Giddhe gruddha; a licentious person; one who pounces like a
vulture. Gadhiye grathit; entrapped in bonds of love. Ajjhovavanneadhypapanna;
obsessive involvement in possessing some thing. Tachchitte-tadchitta; obsessed
state of psyche. Tammane tadman; obsessed state of mind; Tallese-tadleshya;
obsessed state of soul TadAjjavasane tadadhyavasaya; engaged in owning some
thing. Tadatthovautte tadarthopayukt; carefully engaged in fulfilling one's
desires Tadappiyakaranetadarpit karan; devoting all physical efforts to a goal.
Tabbhavanabhaviye-tadbhaavana bhaavit; devoting all mental efforts to a goal.
Meaning- Then one day king Vijayamitra, after taking his bath, applying
auspicious mark on his forehead, embellished fully with ornaments, and
accompanied by a throng of people, went to the house of Kamadhvaja courtesan.
There he came across young Ujjhitak enjoying all human comforts and carnal
pleasures with Kamadhvaja courtesan. As soon as he saw this he turned red with
anger and became violent. Raising his eyebrows he got young Ujjhitak caught by
his guards. After that he gave Ujjhitak a thorough beating by hammering and
tossing his body with blows of stick, fist, knee, and elbow. Having done that
the king got him tied in the avakotak bond (bending the neck and tying it with
hands already tied at the back) and sentenced him to death. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-
Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [19]

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vipak Shrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2 Gautam! This way that young
Ujjhitak is suffering for the sinful deeds he committed in the past. [17]
Meaning- Gautam Swami asked- "Bhante! After his death where will this young
Ujjhitak go? Where will he be reborn?" Bhagavan replied- Gautam! After
completing his life-span of twenty five years, this young Ujjhitak will die in
the gallows this afternoon and will reincarnate as an infernal being in the
first hell named Ratnaprabha. Getting out from there, he will take rebirth as a
monkey in a monkey family at the foot of the Vaitadhya Mountain. On maturing he
will turn to be an animal involved and infatuated with and entrapped in carnal
pleasures. He will keep on killing newborn monkeys. Involved in such atrocious
deeds he will complete his life-span and will be reborn as a son in the house of
a courtesan in the city of Indrapur in this Jambu continent. On birth his
parents will castrate him and train him as a eunuch. On the twelfth day after
his birth they will name him as Priyasen. That Priyasen eunuch will have
beautiful, youthful, charming and attractive body. Eunuch Priyasen will bring
various kings, rich merchants, and other such people of Indrapur city under his
control with the help of a variety of magical powers, mantra-charged powders and
ash, and other methods of mesmerizing, hypnotizing, enticing and captivating,
and spend his time enjoying all human comforts and carnal pleasures. Thus that
Priyasen eunuch will aim only at such sinful activities and consider them to be
his only duty and lofty conduct. As a consequence of these evil deeds he will
acquire abundant demeritorious karmas. Having completed his life-span of one
hundred twenty one years, at the time of death he will die and take rebirth as
an infernal being in the first hell named Ratnaprabha. From there he will
reincarnate in the genuses of non-limbed reptilians and other such beings. From
there he will follow the cycles of rebirth as mentioned in context of Mrugaputra
in the first chapter... and so on up to... will be born as earth-bodied and
other such beings. Coming out from there he will be born as a buffalo in Champa
city in Bharatvarsh area in this Jambu continent. After being killed by other
buffaloes he will reincarnate as a son in a merchant family of the same city. On
crossing adolescence and attaining youth, he will gain unambiguous and faultless
righteousness (samyaktva) in the company of disciplined ascetics and get
initiated as an ascetic. From there he will reincarnate in the first heaven
named Saudharm Devlok... and so on up to... Like Mrugaputra he will shed all his
karmas. Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -2- Ujjhitak Compiled by Muni
DeepratnaSagar is Finished O-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-O Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [20]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Vipak Shrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-2 Gautam! This way that young
Ujjhitak is suffering for the sinful deeds he committed in the past. [17]
Meaning- Gautam Swami asked- "Bhante ! After his death where will this young
Ujjhitak go? Where will he be reborn?" Bhagavan replied- Gautam! After
completing his life-span of twenty five years, this young Ujjhitak will die in
the gallows this afternoon and will reincarnate as an infernal being in the
first hell named Ratnaprabha. Getting out from there, he will take rebirth as a
monkey in a monkey family at the foot of the Vaitadhya Mountain. On maturing he
will turn to be an animal involved and infatuated with and entrapped in carnal
pleasures. He will keep on killing newborn monkeys. Involved in such atrocious
deeds he will complete his life-span and will be reborn as a son in the house of
a courtesan in the city of Indrapur in this Jambu continent. On birth his
parents will castrate him and train him as a eunuch. On the twelfth day after
his birth they will name him as Priyasen. That Priyasen eunuch will have
beautiful, youthful, charming and attractive body. Eunuch Priyasen will bring
various kings, rich merchants, and other such people of Indrapur city under his
control with the help of a variety of magical powers, mantra-charged powders and
ash, and other methods of mesmerizing, hypnotizing, enticing and captivating,
and spend his time enjoying all human comforts and carnal pleasures. Thus that
Priyasen eunuch will aim only at such sinful activities and consider them to be
his only duty and lofty conduct. As a consequence of these evil deeds he will
acquire abundant demeritorious karmas. Having completed his life-span of one
hundred twenty one years, at the time of death he will die and take rebirth as
an infernal being in the first hell named Ratnaprabha. From there he will
reincarnate in the genuses of non-limbed reptilians and other such beings. From
there he will follow the cycles of rebirth as mentioned in context of Mrugaputra
in the first chapter... and so on up to... will be born as earth-bodied and
other such beings. Coming out from there he will be born as a buffalo in Champa
city in Bharatvarsh area in this Jambu continent. After being killed by other
buffaloes he will reincarnate as a son in a merchant family of the same city. On
crossing adolescence and attaining youth, he will gain unambiguous and faultless
righteousness (samyaktva) in the company of disciplined ascetics and get
initiated as an ascetic. From there he will reincarnate in the first heaven
named Saudharm Devlok... and so on up to... Like Mrugaputra he will shed all his
karmas. Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -2- Ujjhitak Compiled by Muni
DeepratnaSagar is Finished O-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-O Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [20]

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 **Chapter (Adhyayan) - 3 -
Abhagnasen**  **O INTRODUCTION:**  This third chapter narrates the consequences
or fruits of stealing, looting, violence, murder, and other cruel and criminal
acts committed by Abhagnasen, the villainous leader of thieves. It is noteworthy
that in his previous birth he was a prominent trader of eggs. He was a gourmand
and in order to satiate his taste buds, he killed animals and ate meat besides
trading in eggs, meat, and wine. When such a sinner was conceived, his mother
too had a desire to kill animals and consume meat and wine during her pregnancy.
This vivid dreadful description of Abhagnasen's plight, followed by the details
of his passage through base genuses like hell and animal for numerous cycles of
rebirth, gives inspiration to avoid evil deeds.  **[18] Meaning -** The foreword
of the third chapter should be read as before.  During that period of time there
was a city named Purimtal, which was prosperous in all respects including
business, wealth, and agriculture, and was well protected. In the northeastern
direction (Ishan Kone) outside this town was a garden named Amoghadarshan. In
that garden there was a temple of Amoghadarshi Yaksh. A king named Mahabal ruled
that Purimtal City.  In the outskirts of Purimtal city, in the northeastern
direction, there was a dense jungle. In that jungle was a hideout of thieves
known as Shalatavi. It was located at an impregnable spot in a tedious hilly
terrain at the edge of dangerous caves. A parapet-like network of bamboo
thickets surrounded it. Around it there were large boulders, natural gorges, and
high-low streams and waterfalls forming natural trenches. There was no source of
water in the general area except the hideout proper. It had many small and
concealed passages for entry and escape but only the acquainted could use them.
It was difficult even for armed guards and trained detectives, coming in search
of stolen goods, to reach this hideout and defeat the bandits.  In Shalatavi
lived the bandit leader Vijaya. He was absolutely corrupt... and so on up to...
his hands were always red with blood. His notoriety had reached numerous towns.
He was brave, ruthless, courageous, an expert marksman, and an accomplished
swordsman and stick fighter. He was the undisputed leader of the five hundred
thieves of Shalatavi.  **Commentary:** This aphorism contains some of the
adjectives used to indicate the extreme cruelty of bandit Vijaya but there are
some more as indicated by the phrase ahammiye java' (irreligious and so on).
Abhayadev Suri, commentator state as follows:  * Adharrni - evil doer. *
Adharmisht - one who loves evil or irreligious activity. * Adhramakhyayi - one
who preaches others to indulge in irreligious conduct. * Adharmanujna - one who
supports activities devoid of or against religiosity. * Adharm praloki - one who
always concentrates on evil activities. * Adharmapraranjan - one whose only
entertainment is evil deeds. * Adharmasheel samudachar - one whose morality,
style, attitude, and behaviour merge with evil doing. * Adharma-vritti - one who
subsists only on evil doing.  **Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut** **Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar**  **[21]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 Chapter (Adhyayan) - 3 - Abhagnasen
O INTRODUCTION: In this third chapter the consequences or fruits of stealing,
looting, violence, murder and other such cruel and criminal acts committed by
Abhagnasen, the villainous leader of thieves, are narrated. It is noteworthy
that in his previous birth he was a prominent trader of eggs. He was a gourmand
and in order to satiate his taste buds he killed animals and ate meat besides
trading in eggs, meat and wine. When such sinner was conceived, his mother too
had desire of killing animals and consuming meat and wine during her pregnancy.
This vivid dreadful description of Abhagnasen's plight, followed by the details
of his passage through base genuses like hell and animal for numerous cycles of
rebirth, gives inspiration to avoid evil deeds. [18] Meaning- The foreword of
the third chapter should be read as before. During that period of time there was
a city named Purimtal, which was prosperous in all respects including business,
wealth and agriculture, and was well protected. In the northeastern direction
(Ishan Kone) outside this town was a garden named Amoghadarshan. In that garden
there was a temple of Amoghadarshi Yaksh. A king named Mahabal ruled that
Purimtal City. In the outskirts of Purimtal city, in the northeastern direction
there was a dense jungle. In that jungle was a hideout of thieves known as
Shalatavi. It was located at an impregnable spot in a tedious hilly terrain at
the edge of dangerous caves. A parapet-like network of bamboo thickets
surrounded it. Around it there were large boulders, natural gorges, and high-low
streams and waterfalls forming natural trenches. There was no source of water in
the general area except the hideout proper. It had many small and concealed
passages for entry and escape but only the acquainted could use them. It was
difficult even for armed guards and trained detectives, coming in search of
stolen goods, to reach this hideout and defeat the bandits. In Shalatavi lived
the bandit leader Vijaya. He was absolutely corrupt... and so on up to... his
hands were always red with blood. His notoriety had reached numerous towns. He
was brave, ruthless, courageous, an expert marksman and an accomplished
swordsman and stick fighter. He was the undisputed leader of the five hundred
thieves of Shalatavi. Commentary. This aphorism contains some of the adjectives
used to indicate the extreme cruelty of bandit Vijaya but there are some more as
indicated by the phrase ahammiye java' (irreligious and so on). Abhayadev Suri,
commentator state as follows Adharrni evil doer. Adharmisht-one who loves evil
or irreligious activity. Adhramakhyayi-one who preaches others to indulge in
irreligious conduct. Adharmanujna-one who supports activities devoid of or
against religiosity. Adharm praloki-one who always concentrates on evil
activities. Adharmapraranjan--one whose only entertainment is evil deeds.
Adharmasheel samudachar-one whose morality, style, attitude, and behaviour merge
with evil doing. 8. Adharma-vritti--one who subsists only on evil doing. aici LO
CON Adbarn Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [21]

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 9.** Hun chhind-bhind-vikartak -
one who utters such dreadful words like 'cut to pieces', 'tear apart', and
'slaughter'. These adjectives reveal his extremely cruel, harsh, and violent
conduct and behaviour.  **[19] Meaning** - Like a bamboo thicket bandit, Vijaya
provided protection and refuge in that bamboo forest to all sorts of branded and
escaped criminals. These included thieves, womanizers (paardariks), bamboozlers
(granthibhedak), housebreakers (sandhicchedak), wallbreakers (kshatrakhanak),
gamblers, transgressors, destitute, deformed, disabled, and all sorts of
outcasts. In and around Purimtal city, that leader of bandits, Vijay, habitually
indulged in activities like raiding villages, raiding towns, driving away
cattle, kidnapping prisoners, looting and beating wayfarers, and house breaking.
With these activities he tormented, wrecked, terrorized, thrashed people and
deprived citizens of their wealth, means of subsistence and peaceful living. He
also habitually looted and collected the taxes due to king Mahabal.  That
bandit-chief Vijaya had a beautiful wife named Skandashri. Bandit-chief Vijaya
and Skandashri had a son named Abhagnasen who was a young man with a beautiful
and well-proportioned body as well as a mature mind.  During that period of time
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived at Purimtal City. People came to pay homage.
The king of the city also came to pay homage. Bhagavan gave his discourse to
all, after which the king and the people returned home.  During that period of
time, while returning after collecting alms in the city, Gautam Swami, the
senior disciple of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, came to the main road. There he saw
many elephants, horses and foot soldiers duly equipped with armours and weapons.
Amongst them he saw a man tied in the avakotak bond (bending the neck and tying
it with Already tied at the back). Announcement was being made about him.  Those
soldiers forced that prisoner to sit at the first road crossing (of many roads)
and before his eyes killed his eight chachas (father's younger brothers, uncles,
chullapiuye). After that they thrashed him with whips and, in this miserable
condition, made him eat small pieces of his own flesh and drink his own blood.
Then those soldiers brought him on the second road crossing (of many roads),
before his eyes killed his eight chachis (wives of father's younger brothers;
aunts; chullamauyao), thrashed him and fed him his own flesh and blood. In the
same way they killed his six taus (father's elder brothers, uncles; mahapiuye)
on the third crossing, his six tais (wives of father's elder brothers, aunts;
mahamauyao) on the fourth crossing, sons (of his father excluding himself, his
brothers) on the fifth crossing, daughters-in-law (of his father, wives of his
brothers) on the sixth crossing, sons-in-law (of his father, husbands of his
sisters) on the seventh crossing, daughters (of his father, his sisters) on the
eighth crossing, grandsons (of his father; his nephews) on the ninth crossing,
granddaughters (of his father, his nieces) on the tenth crossing, husbands of
granddaughters (of his father on the eleventh crossing, wives of grandsons (of
his father) on the twelfth crossing, husbands of his father's sisters (his
uncles) on the thirteenth crossing, father's sisters (his aunts) on the
fourteenth crossing, husbands of his mother's sisters (his maternal uncles) on
the fifteenth crossing, mother's sisters (his aunts) on the sixteenth crossing,
wives of mother's brothers on the seventeenth crossing, and other friends,
Kinfolk, and close and distant relatives on the eighteenth crossing before his
eyes. After each of these instances the soldiers thrashed him and, in this
miserable condition, made him eat small pieces of his own flesh and drink his
own blood.  **Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut** Compiled by - Deepratnasagar **[22]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 9. Hun chhind-bhind-vikartak-one
who utters such dreadful wordslike'cut to pieces', 'tear apart', and
'slaughter'. These adjectives reveal his extremely cruel, harsh, and violent
conduct and behaviour. [19] Meaning- Like a bamboo thicket bandit Vijaya
provided protection and refuge in that bamboo forest to all sorts of branded and
escaped criminals. These included thieves, womanizers (paardariks), bamboozlers
(granthibhedak), housebreakers (sandhicchedak), wallbreakers (kshatrakhanak),
gamblers, transgressors, destitute, deformed, disabled, and all sorts of
outcasts. In and around Purimtal city, that leader of bandits, Vijay, habitually
indulged in activities like raiding villages, raiding towns, driving away
cattle, kidnapping prisoners, looting and beating wayfarers, and house breaking.
With these activities he tormented, wrecked, terrorized, thrashed people and
deprived citizens of their wealth, means of subsistence and peaceful living. He
also habitually looted and collected the taxes due to king Mahabal. That bandit-
chief Vijaya had a beautiful wife named Skandashri. Bandit-chief Vijaya and
Skandashri had a son named Abhagnasen who was a young man with a beautiful and
well-proportioned body as well as a mature mind. During that period of time
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived at Purimtal City. People came to pay homage.
The king of the city also came to pay homage. Bhagavan gave his discourse to
all, after which the king and the people returned home. During that period of
time, while returning after collecting alms in the city, Gautam Swami, the
senior disciple of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, came to the main road. There he saw
many elephants, horses and foot soldiers duly equipped with armours and weapons.
Amongst them he saw a man tied in the avakotak bond (bending the neck and tying
it with Already tied at the back). Announcement was being made about him. Those
soldiers forced that prisoner to sit at the first road crossing (of many roads)
and before his eyes killed his eight chachas (father's younger brothers, uncles,
chullapiuye). After that they thrashed him with whips and, in this miserable
condition, made him eat small pieces of his own flash and drink his own blood.
Then those soldiers brought him on the second road crossing (of many roads),
before his eyes killed his eight chachis (wives of father's younger brothers;
aunts; chullamauyao), thrashed him and fed him his own flash and blood. In the
same way they killed his six taus (father's elder brothers, uncles; mahapiuye)
on the third crossing, his six tais (wives of father's elder brothers, aunts;
mahamauyao) on the fourth crossing, sons (of his father excluding himself, his
brothers) on the fifth crossing, daughters-in-law (of his father, wives of his
brothers) on the sixth crossing, sons-in-law (of his father, husbands of his
sisters) on the seventh crossing, daughters (of his father, his sisters) on the
eighth crossing, grandsons (of his father; his nephews) on the ninth crossing,
granddaughters (of his father, his nieces) on the tenth crossing, husbands of
granddaughters (of his father on the eleventh crossing, wives of grandsons (of
his father) on the twelfth crossing, husbands of his father's sisters (his
uncles) on the thirteenth crossing, father's sisters (his aunts) on the
fourteenth crossing, husbands of his mother's sisters (his maternal uncles) on
the fifteenth crossing, mother's sisters (his aunts) on the sixteenth crossing,
wives of mother's brothers on the seventeenth crossing, and other friends,
Kinfolk, and close and distant relatives on the eighteenth crossing before his
eyes. After each of these instances the soldiers thrashed him and, in this
miserable condition, made him eat small pieces of his own flash and drink his
own blood. crossin materna S sisters crossing, Sfather) Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [22]

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 [20] Meaning- Bhagavan Gautam was
thoughtful (on seeing all this). He came out of the city, went to Bhagavan
Mahavir and said "Bhant ! On getting your permission I went into the city to
seek alms. There I saw a person in pathetic condition (as aforesaid). Bhante !
In his earlier birth, who was this person that now suffers such grave fruits of
his karmas?" (Narrating the story of previous birth of that person Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir said) "Gautam! During that period of time there was a
prosperous city called Purimtal in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu continent. A king
named Udit was the ruler of that city. In that Purimtal city lived an egg trader
named Nirnaya. He was very rich but irreligious and extremely discontented. He
derived pleasure only in sinful deeds. Nirnaya egg-trader had many servants who
were given food and cash as daily wages (dattabhritibhaktavetan). Every day they
would go out of Purimtal City in all directions. They would collect eggs of
crows, owls, pigeons, Titodis (sandpipers), Bagulas (herons), peacocks, hen, and
many other aquatic, terrestrial and aerial beings. After filling the baskets
with these eggs they would return to Nirnaya egg-trader and hand over the egg
filled baskets to him. Many such servants of Nirnaya egg-trader fried, roasted
and cooked large numbers of eggs of crows... and so on up to... hen, and many
other aquatic, terrestrial and aerial beings on cooking-plates, frying-pans,
ovens, and grills. They earned their living by grilling, frying, roasting and
choking as well as selling eggs in shops and stalls on the main roads and
markets in the streets. That Nirnaya egg-trader too ate such grilled, fried,
roasted and cooked eggs of crows... and so on up to... hen and drank a variety
of wines (sura), namely madhu (made from flowers or honey), merak (made from
palm-fruit), madya (a kind of white wine), seedhu (made from mixture of jaggery
and grains) etc. Involved in these kinds of cruel acts that Nirnaya egg-trader
accumulated intense demeritorious karrnas. Completing his life span of one
thousand years, he died at the destined moment of death and took rebirth as an
infernal being in the third hell with a maximum life span of seven Sagaropam. On
completing the life span in hell the soul that was Nirnaya eggtrader came in the
womb of Skandashri, the wife of bandit-chief Vijaya. [21] Meaning- At some point
of time, when about three months of the pregnancy period had passed, Skandashri
had a dohad (pregnancy desire) —"Blessed are those mothers who, after bathing
and embellishing themselves with all kinds of ornaments, enjoy tasting and
eating, distributing and sharing with female friends, Kinfolk, close and distant
relatives and other women of the hideout, a variety of ashan, paan, khadya,
svadya (staple food, liquids, general food, and savory food) and wines (sura),
namely madhu etc. After this feast they dress themselves as males and tightly
strap iron armours and equip themselves with swords, arrows, and other hand-
wielding and launchable weapons. They move carrying shields in their left hands,
brandishing drawn swords, quivers on their shoulders, raised nets, and bows with
arrows drawn on strings. Bells fixed on their thighs ring. Kshipraturya trumpets
keep blowing. Filling the sky with such exhilarating tumult, matching the
thunder of the sea, they move all around the hideout viewing everything. And
thus they fulfill their dohad (desires of a pregnant mother). How pleasurable it
would be if I am also able to fulfill my dohad - in the same way?" With this
thought and not being able to fulfill her dohad she turned gloomy. In due Course
Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [23]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 [20] Meaning- Bhagavan Gautam was
thoughtful (on seeing all this). He came out of the city, went to Bhagavan
Mahavir and said "Bhant ! On getting your permission I went into the city to
seek alms. There I saw a person in pathetic condition (as aforesaid). Bhante !
In his earlier birth, who was this person that now suffers such grave fruits of
his karmas?" (Narrating the story of previous birth of that person Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir said) "Gautam! During that period of time there was a
prosperous city called Purimtal in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu continent. A king
named Udit was the ruler of that city. In that Purimtal city lived an egg trader
named Nirnaya. He was very rich but irreligious and extremely discontented. He
derived pleasure only in sinful deeds. Nirnaya egg-trader had many servants who
were given food and cash as daily wages (dattabhritibhaktavetan). Every day they
would go out of Purimtal City in all directions. They would collect eggs of
crows, owls, pigeons, Titodis (sandpipers), Bagulas (herons), peacocks, hen, and
many other aquatic, terrestrial and aerial beings. After filling the baskets
with these eggs they would return to Nirnaya egg-trader and hand over the egg
filled baskets to him. Many such servants of Nirnaya egg-trader fried, roasted
and cooked large numbers of eggs of crows... and so on up to... hen, and many
other aquatic, terrestrial and aerial beings on cooking-plates, frying-pans,
ovens, and grills. They earned their living by grilling, frying, roasting and
choking as well as selling eggs in shops and stalls on the main roads and
markets in the streets. That Nirnaya egg-trader too ate such grilled, fried,
roasted and cooked eggs of crows... and so on up to... hen and drank a variety
of wines (sura), namely madhu (made from flowers or honey), merak (made from
palm-fruit), madya (a kind of white wine), seedhu (made from mixture of jaggery
and grains) etc. Involved in these kinds of cruel acts that Nirnaya egg-trader
accumulated intense demeritorious karrnas. Completing his life span of one
thousand years, he died at the destined moment of death and took rebirth as an
infernal being in the third hell with a maximum life span of seven Sagaropam. On
completing the life span in hell the soul tliat was Nirnaya eggtrader came in
the womb of Skandashri, the wife of bandit-chief Vijaya. [21] Meaning- At some
point of time, when about three months of the pregnancy period had passed,
Skandashri had a dohad (pregnancy desire) --"Blessed are those mothers who,
after bathing and embellishing themselves with all kinds of ornaments, enjoy
tasting and eating, distributing and sharing with female friends, Kinfolk, close
and distant relatives and other women of the hideout, a variety of ashan, paan,
khadya, svadya (staple food, liquids, general food, and savory food) and wines
(sura), namely madhu etc. After this feast they dress themselves as males and
tightly strap iron armours and equip themselves with swords, arrows, and other
hand-wielding and launchable weapons. They move carrying shields in their left
hands, brandishing drawn swords, quivers on their shouldeis, raised nets, and
bows with arrows drawn on strings. Bells fixed on their thighs ring.
Kshipraturya trumpets keep blowing. Filling the sky with such exhilarating
tumult, matching the thunder of the sea, they move all around the hideout
viewing everything. And thus they fulfill their dohad (desires of a pregnant
mother). How pleasurable it would be if I am also able to fulfill my dohad - in
the same way?" With this thought and not being able to fulfill her dohad she
turned gloomy. In due Course Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [23]

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3  Skandashri became emaciated and
habitually sat staring at the ground and brooding. When bandit-chief Vijaya saw
brooding and worrying Skandashri he asked-"Beloved of gods! What makes you sad
and brooding'?" Skandashri replied to bandit-chief Vijaya-"Beloved of gods!
Three months are past since I conceived. I had the aforesaid dohad. As I am
unable to fulfill it, I am sad and brooding." Bandit-chief Vijaya heard and
understood the aforesaid statement of his wife Skandashri and said -"Beloved of
gods! Don't worry. You can fulfill your said dohad precisely as you wish."
Skandashri was pleased and contented to hear these words of her husband. Later
she took her female friends, kinfolk, close and distant relatives and other
women of the hideout, along. After bathing and embellishing themselves with all
kinds of ornaments she started enjoying ample food and wines as much as she
liked. After this feast they gathered at a suitable place, dressed up as males,
and equipped themselves with armours and other aforesaid things. In their
company she moved all around fulfilling her dohad (desires of pregnant mother).
Then having her dohad fulfilled and satiated she carried fetus happily.
**Commentary-** in this aphorism some special terms have been used in context of
fulfillment of dohad. The five terms used have specific meanings and nuances. On
the basis of the commentary (Tikakaar) by Abhayadev Surias follows **Sampunna
dohala**-one whose pregnancy-desire has been fulfilled.  **Sammaniya
dohala**-whose pregnancy-desire has been respected by providing the desired
thing. **Viniya dohala**-who has become free of her pregnancy-desire
**Vochchhinna dohala**-the craving for the desired thing has disappeared
**Sampanna dohala**-her mind is contented as a consequence of satiation of
pregnancy-desire.  These five terms convey the gradual changes in the state of
mind of a woman with pregnancy-desire 1.  2.  3.  4.  5.   Meaning- Then after
nine months of pregnancy Skandashri, the wife of bandit, chief Vijaya, gave
birth to a son. For ten days bandit-chief Vijaya performed the birth ceremonies,
following his family tradition, by offering feasts and, gifts to invitees and
honouring the elders. On the eleventh day after the birth he arranged for ample
food (etc.) and invited his friends and relatives. After the feast he announced
"When this child was conceived his mother had a dohad. That dohad was fulfilled
without any problem. Therefore, I give this boy the name Abhagriaserf (Abhagna
means unbroken. As the dohad was fulfilled and not shattered, the boy was named
Abhagna.)"  Gradually that boy Abhagnasen grew in the care of five nursemaids
including the milk-nursemaid.  [22] Meaning-In due course boy Abhagnasen crossed
adolescence and attained youth. He was married to eight young women. His parents
gave him eight sets of things as marriage gifts. He lived happily in lofty
mansions enjoying all these gifts.  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [24]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 she became emaciated and habitually
sat staring at the ground and brooding. When bandit-chief Vijaya saw brooding
and worrying Skandashri he asked-"Beloved of gods! What makes you sad and
brooding'?" Skandashri replied to bandit-chief Vijaya-"Beloved of gods! Three
months are past since I conceived. I had the aforesaid dohad. As I am unable to
fulfill it, I am sad and brooding." Bandit-chief Vijaya heard and understood the
aforesaid statement of his wife Skandashri and said-"Beloved of gods! Don't
worry. You can fulfill your said dohad precisely as you wish." Skandashri was
pleased and contented to hear these words of her husband. Later she took her
female friends, kinfolk, close and distant relatives and other women of the
hideout, along. After bathing and embellishing themselves with all kinds of
ornaments she started enjoying ample food and wines as much as she liked. After
this feast they gathered at a suitable place, dressed up as males, and equipped
themselves with armours and other aforesaid things. In their company she moved
all around fulfilling her dohad (desires of pregnant mother). Then having her
dohad fulfilled and satiated she carried fetus happily. Commentary-in this
aphorism some special terms have been used in context of fulfillment of dohad.
The five terms used have specific meanings and nuances. On the basis of the
commentary (Tikakaar) by Abhayadev Surias follows Sampunna dohala-one whose
pregnancy-desire has been fulfilled. Sammaniya dohala-whose pregnancy-desire has
been respected by providing the desired thing. Viniya dohala-who has become free
of her pregnancy-desire Vochchhinna dohala-the craving for the desired thing has
disappeared Sampanna dohala-her mind is contented as a consequence of satiation
of pregnancy-desire. These five terms convey the gradual changes in the state of
mind of a woman with pregnancy-desire 1. 2. 3. 4. from her mind. 5. Meaning-
Then after nine months of pregnancy Skandashri, the wife of bandit, chief
Vijaya, gave birth to a son. For ten days bandit-chief Vijaya performed the
birth ceremonies, following his family tradition, by offering feasts and, gifts
to invitees and honouring the elders. On the eleventh day after the birth he
arranged for ample food (etc.) and invited his friends and relatives. After the
feast he announced "When this child was conceived his motherhad a dohad. That
dohad was fulfilled without any problem. Therefore, I give this boy the name
Abhagriaserf (Abhagna means unbroken. As the dohad was fulfilled and not
shattered, the boy was named Abhagna.)" Gradually that boy Abhagnasen grew in
the care of five nursemaids including the milk-nursemaid. [22] Meaning-In due
course boy Abhagnasen crossed adolescence and attained youth. He was married to
eight young women. His parents gave him eight sets of things as marriage gifts.
He lived happily in lofty mansions enjoying all these gifts. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-
Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [24]

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11 - ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3  **The Congregation of King
Mahabah and the Grai**  Then, at some point in time, bandit-chief Vijaya died.
On his death, young Abhagnasen, crying, weeping, and wailing, performed the
cremation rites of bandit-chief Vijaya with honour, respect, and great pomp and
show in the presence of five hundred bandits. He also performed the worldly last
rites for his deceased father, including charity and offering food. As time
passed, he emerged out of the grief of the loss of his father.  Some time later,
those five hundred bandits ceremoniously conferred the title and position of
bandit-chief on Abhagnasen. On being appointed bandit-chief, Abhagnasen
commenced extorting from people the taxes due to the king.  Tortured and
tormented by the destruction of many villages by bandit-chief Abhagnasen, the
people called a meeting and deliberated: "Beloved of gods! Bandit-chief
Abhagnasen is destroying many villages north of Purimtal City and making them
destitute by looting their wealth and grains. Therefore, O beloved of gods! We
should give this information to king Mahabal of Purimtal City."  After these
deliberations, the congregation of citizens accepted this proposal. They
collected impressive (maharth) and valuable gifts suitable for a king and went
into Purimtal City where king Mahabal resided. Touching their foreheads with
joined palms (a gesture of offering respect), they presented the valuable gifts
to the king. After that, they submitted: "O lord! Bandit-chief Abhagnasen of
Shalatavi hideout is plundering villages and cities, depriving us of our wealth
and making us poor. Sire! We wish to live happily, fearlessly, and free from
troubles in the protection and shelter of your arms." With these words, those
citizens emphasized their plight by joining their palms and falling at king
Mahabal's feet.  Listening to the said details from those citizens, king Mahabal
got angry... and so on up to... red with rage. Gnashing his teeth in rage and
raising his eyebrows (in other words, becoming an embodiment of anger), he
called the police chief and said: "Beloved of gods! Go, raid that Shalatavi
hideout, destroy it, and after capturing that bandit-chief Abhagnasen alive,
present him before me."  The police chief humbly accepted this order by king
Mahabal. Then he tightly strapped iron armours with sharp projections. He
decided to take along many soldiers equipped with hand-wielding and launchable
weapons and shields tied to their hands and pass through the middle of Purimtal
city blowing Kshipraturya trumpets, filling the sky with tremendous tumult
matching the thunder of the sea. He resolved to cross the city thus and go to
that Shalatavi hideout of bandits.  At that time, the spies of bandit-chief
Abhagnasen came to know of this development. They approached bandit-chief
Abhagnasen of Shalatavi hideout; touched their foreheads with joined palms, and
submitted—"Beloved of gods! In Purimtal city, king Mahabal has called the police
chief and brave soldiers and given this order - 'Beloved of gods! Go, raid that
Shalatavi hideout, destroy it, and present before me that bandit-chief
Abhagnasen after capturing him alive.' Accepting the order of the king, the
police chief has left for Shalatavi hideout along with many brave soldiers."  On
hearing the news given by his spies, bandit-chief Abhagnasen called five hundred
bandits of his gang and said: "On getting the order from king Mahabal, the
police chief of...  **Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut** **Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar** [25]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11 - ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 gregation of king Mahabah and
grai Then at some point of time bandit-chief Vijaya died. On his death, young
Abhagnasen, crying, weeping and wailing performed the cremation rites of bandit-
chief Vijaya with honour, respect and great pomp and show in presence of five
hundred bandits. He also performed the worldly last rites for his deceased
father, including charity and offering food. As time passed he emerged out of
the grief of the loss of his father. Some time later, those five hundred bandits
ceremoniously conferred the title and position of bandit-chief on Abhagnasen. On
being appointed bandit-chief, Abhagnasen commenced extorting from people the
taxes due to the king. Tortured and tormented by destruction of many villages by
bandit-chief Abhagnasen, the people called a meeting and deliberated "Beloved of
gods! Bandit-chief Abhagnasen is destroying many villages north of Purimtal City
and making them destitute by looting their wealth and grains. Therefore, O
beloved of gods! We should give this information to king Mahabal of Purimtal
City." After these deliberations the congregation of citizens accepted this
proposal. They collected impressive (maharth) and valuable gifts suitable for a
king and went into Purimtal City where king Mahabal resided. Touching their
foreheads with joined palms (a gesture of offering respect) they presented the
valuable gifts to the king. After that they submitted "O lord! Bandit-chief
Abhagnasen of Shalatavi hideout is plundering villages and cities, depriving us
of our wealth and making us poor. Sire! We wish to live happily, fearlessly and
free from troubles in the protection and shelter of your arms." With these words
those citizens emphasized their plight by joining their palms and falling at
king Mahabal's feet. Listening to the said details from those citizens king
Mahabal got angry... and so on up to... red with rage. Gnashing his teeth in
rage and raising his eyebrows (in other words, becoming embodiment of anger) he
called the police chief and said "Beloved of gods! Go, raid that Shalatavi
hideout, destroy it and after capturing that bandit-chief Abhagnasen alive,
present him before me." The police chief humbly accepted this order by king
Mahabal. Then he tightly strapped iron armours with sharp projections. He
decided to take along many soldiers equipped with hand-wielding and launchable
weapons and shields tied to their hands and pass through the middle of Purimtal
city blowing Kshipraturya trumpets filling the sky with tremendous tumult
matching the thunder of the sea. He resolved to cross the city thus and go to
that Shalatavi hideout of bandits. At that time the spies of bandit-chief
Abhagnasen came to know of this development. They approached bandit-chief
Abhagnasen of Shalatavi hideout; touched their foreheads with joined palms, and
submitted--"Beloved of gods ! In Purimtal city king Mahabal has called the
police chief and brave soldiers and given this order - Beloved of gods ! Go,
raid that Shalatavi hideout, destroy it and present before me that bandit-chief
Abhagnasen after capturing him alive.' Accepting the order of the king the
police chief has left for Shalatavi hideout along with many brave soldiers." On
hearing the news given by his spies, bandit-chief Abhagnasen called five hundred
bandits of his gang and said "On getting the order from king. Mahabal the police
chief of Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [25]

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3  The city of Purimtal has decided to
attack this hideout and capture me alive. Therefore, it would be to our benefit
to stop that police chief on the way before he reaches the Shalatavi hideout."
500 bandits accepted bandit-chief Abhagnasen's order by uttering- "Yes! We
should do that."  After that, bandit-chief Abhagnasen arranged for abundant
ashan, paan, and khadya, svadya (staple food, liquids, general food, and savory
food). All five hundred bandits bathed and performed auspicious rituals
including putting marks on their foreheads for the success of their mission.
After that they started enjoying ample food and wines as much as they liked.
After meals they went to an allotted spot and washed and wiped their mouths
clean of any bits and pieces of food. After cleansing they performed the ritual
of Ardracharm arohan (riding over wet leather). Then they tightly strapped iron
armours with sharp projections, equipped themselves with hand-wielding and
launchable weapons and shields tied to their hands. Then filling the sky with
tremendous roar and loud war cry, they left the Shalatavi hideout around noon.
Carrying large quantities of food, they stopped at a fortified area in the dense
jungle and awaited the arrival of the police chief.  (1) Commentary-Ardracharm
arohan (riding over wet leather)-What is the purport of this term? "There are
three different popularly accepted beliefs in this context. According to Acharya
Shri Abhayadev Suri this Ardracharm arohan (riding over wet leather) was an
auspicious ritual of bandits and thieves. Before launching their mission of
waylaying the police chief, Abhagnasen and members of his gang performed this
auspicious ritual with the wish of removing all possible hurdles.  (2) The
second and traditional belief is that the ritual of riding over wet leather
signifies and symbolizes the resolve of embracing death instead of retreating in
face of any favourable or unfavourable situation, no matter how tough or complex
it is. This ritual riding over wet leather conveys the bond of the unwavering
resolve- We will accomplish our mission no matter what it takes, otherwise we
will abandon this body.'  (3) The third belief is that as wet leather expands,
likewise one who rides over it achieves the enhancement of his wealth and power.
With this wish of enhancing his wealth and power bandit-chief Abhagnasen and his
five hundred companions performed the ritual.  Meaning- Then that police chief
came where bandit-chief Abhagnasen was waiting and engaged him in a battle. But
soon bandit-chief Abhagnasen defeated the police chief, in other words the army
lead by the police chief was trounced, its warriors were killed and its flag was
destroyed. The police chief was subdued, wounded and beaten up and his company
was made to run helter-skelter.  On being wounded and made to retreat by bandit-
chief Abhagnasen, that police chief lost his confidence (akaam), he became
physically weak (abal), he lost his courage (avirya), his pride that he was
brave shattered and he was drained of the energy of even lifting his weapons.
Thinking that it was impossible to defeat the bandit-chief, he returned to king
Mahabal in Purimtal City and joining his palms submitted humbly "O Lord! Bandit-
chief Abhagnasen camps in a dense forest in a difficult terrain with complex
fortification and abundance of food and water. Therefore, he cannot be captured
alive by an army of horse riders or elephant riders or charioteers or foot
soldiers, not even by all these four combined."  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut [26]
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 Purimtal city has resolved to
attack this hideout and capture me alive. Therefore, it would be to our benefit
to stop that police chief on the way before he reaches Shalatavi hideout." 500
bandits accepted bandit-chief Abhagnasen's order by uttering- "Yes! We should do
that." After that, bandit-chief Abhagnasen arranged for abundant ashan, paan,
and khadya, svadya (staple food, liquids, general food, and savory food). All
five hundred bandits bathed and performed auspicious rituals including putting
marks on their foreheads for the success of their mission. After that they
started enjoying ample food and wines as much as they liked. After meals they
went to an allotted spot and washed and wiped their mouths clean of any bits and
pieces of food. After cleansing they performed the ritual of Ardracharm arohan
(riding over wet leather). Then they tightly strapped iron armours with sharp
projections, equipped themselves with hand-wielding and launchable weapons and
shields tied to their hands. Then filling the sky with tremendous roar and loud
war cry, they left the Shalatavi hideout around noon. Carrying large quantities
of food, they stopped at a fortified area in the dense jungle and awaited the
arrival of the police chief. (1) Commentary-Ardracharm arohan (riding over wet
leather)-What is the purport of this term? "There are three different popularly
accepted beliefs in this contextAccording to Acharya Shri Abhayadev Suri this
Ardracharm arohan (riding over wet leather) was an auspicious ritual of bandits
and thieves. Before launching their mission of waylaying the police chief,
Abhagnasen and members of his gang performed this auspicious ritual with the
wish of removing all possible hurdles. (2) The second and traditional belief is
that the ritual of riding over wet leather signifies and symbolizes the resolve
of embracing death instead of retreating in face of any favourable or
unfavourable situation, no matter how tough or complex it is. This ritual riding
over wet leather conveys the bond of the unwavering resolve- We will accomplish
our mission no matter what it takes, otherwise we will abandon this body.' (3)
The third belief is that as wet leather expands, likewise one who rides over it
achieves the enhancement of his wealth and power. With this wish of enhancing
his wealth and power bandit-chief Abhagnasen and his five hundred companions
performed the ritual. Meaning- Then that police chief came where bandit-chief
Abhagnasen was waiting and engaged him in a battle. But soon bandit-chief
Abhagnasen defeated the police chief, in other words the army lead by the police
chief was trounced, its warriors were killed and its flag was destroyed. The
police chief was subdued, wounded and beaten up and his company was made to run
helter-skelter. On being wounded and made to retreat by bandit-chief Abhagnasen,
that police chief lost his confidence (akaam), he became physically weak (abal),
he lost his courage (avirya), his pride that he was brave shattered and he was
drained of the energy of even lifting his weapons. Thinking that it was
impossible to defeat the bandit-chief, he returned to king Mahabal in Purimtal
City and joining his palms submitted humbly "O Lord! Bandit-chief Abhagnasen
camps in a dense forest in a difficult terrain with complex fortification and
abundance of food and water. Therefore, he cannot be captured alive by an army
of horse riders or elephant riders or charioteers or foot soldiers, not even by
all these four combined." Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut [26] Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3  Upon receiving this report from
the police chief, King Mahabal began working on apprehending the bandit-chief by
gaining his trust through negotiations, diplomacy, and enticement. With this
intention, he started working on inspiring dissension among the bandit-chief's
personal companions, guards, and followers, as well as his friends, kinfolk,
relatives, and family members by generously distributing cash, gold, gems, and
other valuables. He also began sending beautiful, impressive, and valuable gifts
suitable for people of high status, including kings. By sending a variety of
such gifts, he was able to gain the bandit-chief Abhagnasen's trust.  [23]
Meaning - Some time later, King Mahabal had a beautiful and huge Kootakarashala
(a camouflaged house) constructed, with hundreds of pillars. It was very
attractive and pleasing to look at. After that, he announced a ten-day fete,
free of any admission fees, in that Kootakarashala, specially designed for
intrigues. He then called his servants and instructed, "Gentlemen! Go to
Shalatavi hideout and with joined palms convey this to bandit-chief Abhagnasen:
'Beloved of gods! King Mahabal has announced a ten-day fete with many facilities
and free of any admission fees in Purimtal City. Should we bring here for you
the festive food and drinks, as well as flowers, dresses, garlands, ornaments,
and other gifts, or would you be kind enough to present yourself there on this
occasion?'"  Commentary - Kootakarashala (a camouflaged house) is a mansion
built on a hilltop. It is closed from all sides and has just a single passage
for entry and exit. It has a dome-like top.  Abhayadev Suri, the commentator
(Tikakaar), has quoted an ancient verse in the context of the term `utsukkam
Java'. This verse details twelve special conditions related to this fete or
festival. These facilities were provided to make the fete popular. It provides a
perfect example of the festivity-loving ancient Indian culture, as well as its
management system. These conditions are given here in brief for the benefit of
our readers:  1. Uchchhulk - festival where no state tax, levy, or fees are
charged on anything. 2. Utkar - festival where no tax or rent is charged on the
land taken for shops and stalls. Also, where no tax is levied on the cattle
brought for sale. 3. Abhat pravesh - festival where state officers are not
allowed to search or frisk anyone or enter any premises. 4. Adandim-kudandim -
festival that is free of any punitive measures. Dand is punishment awarded
exactly according to the law. Kudand is less or more than the legally specified
punishment. 5. Adharim - festival where no one can be pressurized or forced for
old dues. 6. Adharaniya - festival where a king provides establishment subsidy
for stalls and other such things. 7. Anudhrit mridang - festival where mridang,
tabla, and other musical instruments are carried and placed properly and played
continuously. 8. Amlaan maalyadaam - festival where there is proper and
elaborate arrangement and decoration of blooming flowers and garlands. 9. Ganika
natakiya kalit - festival where prominent courtesans and theatre artists give
regular performances for entertainment.  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [27]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 On getting this report from the
police chief, king Mahabal started working on apprehending the bandit-chief by
taking him into confidence through negotiations, diplomacy, and enticement. With
this intent he started working on inspiring dissention among the personal
companions, guards and followers as well as the friends, kinfolk, relatives, and
family members of the bandit-chief by generously distributing cash, gold, gems
and other valuables. He also started sending beautiful, impressive and valuable
gifts suited for people of high status including kings. By sending a variety of
such gifts he was able to take banditchief Abhagnasen in his confidence. [23]
Meaning- Some time later king Mahabal got a beautiful and huge Kootakarashala (a
camouflaged house), with hundreds of pillars, constructed. It was very
attractive and pleasing to look at. After that he announced a ten-day fete, free
of any admission, fees, in that Kootakarashala specially designed for intrigues.
He then called his servants and instructed-Gentlemen! Go to Shalatavi hideout
and with joined palms convey this to bandit-chief Abhagnasen "Beloved of gods!
King Mahabal has announced a ten-day fete with many facilities and free of any
admission fees in Purimtal City. Should we bring here for you the festive food
and drinks as also flowers, dresses, garlands, ornaments and other gifts or
would you be kind enough to present yourself there on this occasion?"
Commentary-Kootakarashala (a camouflaged house) is a mansion builton a hilltop.
It is closed from all sides and has just a single passage for << entry and exit.
It has a dome like top. Abhayadev Suri, the commentator (Tikakaar ), has quoted
an ancient verse in context of the term `utsukkam Java'. This verse details
twelve special conditions related to this fete or festival. These facilities
were provided to make the fete popular. It provides a perfect example of the
festivity loving ancient Indian culture as well as its management system. These
conditions are given here in brief for the benefit of our readers: 1. Uchchhulk-
festival where no state tax, levy or fees is charged on anything. 2. Utkar-
festival where no tax or rent is charged on the land taken for shops and stalls.
Also where no tax is levied on the cattle brought for sale. Abhat pravesh-
festival where state officers are not allowed to search or frisk anyone or enter
any premises. 4. Adandim-kudandim-festival that is free of any punitive
measures. Dand is punishment awarded exactly according to the law. Kudand is
less or more than the legally specified punishment. 5. 6. Adharim-festival where
no one can be pressurized or forced for old dues. Adharaniya-festival where a
king provides establishment subsidy for stalls and other such things. Anudhrit
mridang festival wheremridang, tabla and other musical instruments are carried
and placed properly and played continuously. 8. Amlaan maalyadaam-festival where
there is proper and elaborate arrangement and decoration of blooming flowers and
garlands. Ganika natakiya kalit-festival where prominent courtesans and theatre
artists give regular performances for entertainment. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [27]

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3  10 Anek taalacharanucharit -
festival where many dancers give dance performances on drum beats. 11 Pramudit
prakeeditabhiram - festival where acrobats and other performances draw crowds.
12 Yatharha - festival that has all facilities and is well managed. In other
words, an ideal and unique festival.  **Meaning:** Joining their palms, the
servants humbly accepted king Mahabal's order uttering—"As you say, sire!" They
came out of Purimtal City and came to Shalatavi hideout in short jaunts taking
breakfasts and meals at comfortable resting places. On reaching there, raising
their joined palms to their heads they submitted before bandit-chief Abhagnasen,
"Beloved of gods! King Mahabal has announced a ten-day fete with many facilities
and free of any admission fees in Purimtal City. Should we bring here for you
the festive food and drinks as also flowers, dresses, garlands, ornaments and
other gifts or would you be kind enough to grace the occasion?" Bandit-chief
Abhagnasen replied—"Gentlemen! I will certainly come to Purimtal City for this
fete." And he dismissed them with due honour and greetings.  Then that bandit-
chief Abhagnasen got ready after his bath, performing auspicious rites including
putting mark on his forehead, and embellishing himself with a variety of
ornaments. He came out of the Shalatavi hideout along with his friends, Kinfolk,
relatives and family members and came to king Mahabal in Purimtal City. On
arriving there, raising his joined palms to his head he greeted king Mahabal
with hails of victory and presented rich gifts. King Mahabal accepted bandit-
chief Abhagnasen's gifts and bid him farewell with honour and greetings and with
a request to stay at the Kootakarshala. After this, bandit-chief Abhagnasen went
and stayed in the Kootakarshala.  Then king Mahabal called his servants and
said-Get large quantities of ashan, paan, khadya, svadya (staple food, liquids,
general food, and savory food), flowers, dresses, fragrant garlands, and
ornaments; and five kinds of wines ready and take these to Kootakarashala for
bandit-chief Abhagnasen.  According to the king's order the servants took all
these things there.  Then that bandit-chief Abhagnasen took his bath embellished
himself with all his ornaments and along with his friends, Kinfolk, etc. started
enjoying that abundant food and five kinds of wines again-again. Thus he spent
his time getting intoxicated on them.  (After winning bandit-chief Abhagnasen's
confidence, making him stay in Kootakarashala and offering him food and wines)
King Mahabal called his servants and said "Beloved of gods! You all go and close
all gates of Purimtal City. Then capture bandit-chief Abhagnasen alive and
present him before me."  The servants joined their palms and accepted the king's
order. They captured bandit-chief Abhagnasen alive and brought him to king
Mahabal. On getting Abhagnasen captured thus as an offender, King Mahabal
ordered him to the gallows (as you witnessed).  Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir
added—"Gautam ! In this way that bandit-chief Abhagnasen is suffering extreme
pain and agony, like that in hell, due to the fruition of demeritorious karmas
acquired as a consequence of sinful deeds committed in the past.  Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [28]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 10 Anek taalacharanucharit-festival
where many dancers give dance performances on drum beats. 11 Pramudit
prakeeditabhiram-festival where acrobats and other performances draw crowds. 12
Yatharha-festival that has all facilities and is well managed. In other words,
an ideal and unique festival O Meaning- Joining their palms, the servants humbly
accepted king Mahabal's order uttering--"As you say, sire!" They came out of
Purimtal City and came to Shalatavi hideout in short jaunts taking breakfasts
and meals at comfortable resting places. On reaching there, raising their joined
palms to their heads they submitted before bandit-chief Abhagnasen "Beloved of
gods! King mahabal has announced a ten-day fete with many facilities and free of
any admission fees in Purimtal City. Should we bring here for you the festive
food and drinks as also flowers, dresses, garlands, ornaments and other gifts or
would you be kind enough to grace the occasion?" Bandit-chief Abhagnasen
replied--"Gentlemen! I will certainly come to Purimtal City for this fete." And
he dismissed them with due honour and greetings. Then that bandit-chief
Abhagnasen got ready after his bath, performing auspicious rites including
putting mark on his forehead, and embellishing himself with a variety of
ornaments. He came out of the Shalatavi hideout along with his friends, Kinfolk,
relatives and family members and came to king Mahabal in Purimtal City. On
arriving there, raising his joined palms to his head he greeted king Mahabal
with hails of victory and presented rich gifts. King Mahabal accepted bandit-
chief Abhagnasen's gifts and bid him farewell with honour and greetings and with
a request to stay at the Kootakarshala. After this, banditchief Abhagnasen went
and stayed in the Kootakarshala. Then king Mahabal called his servants and said-
Get large quantities of ashan, paan, khadya, svadya (staple food, liquids,
general food, and savory food), flowers, dresses, fragrant garlands, and
ornaments;and five kinds of wines ready and take these to Kootakarashala for
bandit-chief Abhagnasen. According to the king's order the servants took all
these things there. Then that bandit-chief Abhagnasen took his bath embellished
himself with all his ornaments and along with his friends, Kinfolk, etc. started
enjoying that abundant food and five kinds of wines again-again. Thus he spent
his time getting intoxicated on them. (After winning bandit-chief Abhagnasen's
confidence, making him stay in Kootakarashala and offering him food and wines)
King Mahabal called his servants and said "Beloved of gods! You all go and close
all gates of Purimtal City. Then capture banditchief Abhagnasen alive and
present him before me." The servants joined their palms and accepted the king's
order. They captured bandit-chief Abhagnasen alive and brought him to king
Mahabal. On getting Abhagnasen captured thus as an offender, King Mahabal
ordered him to the gallows (as you witnessed). Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir
added--"Gautam ! In this way that bandit-chief Abhagnasen is suffering extreme
pain and agony, like that in hell, due to the fruition of demeritorious karmas
acquired as a consequence of sinful deeds committed in the past. Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [28]

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3  Gautam Swami asked, "Bhagavan!
Where will the bandit-chief Abhagnasen go after death? Where will he be born?"
Bhagavan replied, "Gautam! After completing his life span of thirty-seven years,
this bandit-chief Abhagnasen will die on the gallows this afternoon and will
reincarnate as an infernal being in the first hell named Ratnaprabha. His
maximum life span there will be one Sagaropam. Getting out from the first hell,
he will continue to go around in cycles of rebirth like Mrigaputra, as mentioned
in the first chapter... and so on up to... will be born millions of times as
earth-bodied, water-bodied, air-bodied, and fire-bodied beings.  Coming out from
there, he will be born as a boar in Varanasi City. After being killed by
hunters, he will reincarnate as a son in a merchant family of the same city. On
crossing adolescence and attaining youth, he will get initiated as an ascetic...
and so on up to... he will shed all his karmas, attain nirvana and end the
cycles of death and rebirth.  Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -3- Ujjhitak
Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is Finished  O-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-O  ##
Chapter (Adhyayan) - 4 - Shakat  **-INTRODUCTION:-** This story lucidly details
the agonizing consequences of cruelty to animals and non-vegetarianism. Although
a butcher by profession, Chhannik enjoys killing animals and eating meat. He
also indulges in lascivious activities and adultery. He gravely suffers the
consequences for many births.  [24] Meaning-The foreword of the third chapter
should be read as before. Jambu Swami asked, "Bhante! When Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir, who has attained liberation, has preached the aforesaid "text and
meaning of the third chapter, then what is the text and meaning of the fourth
chapter as preached by him?"  Sudharma Swami replied, "Jambu! During that period
of time there was a city named Saahanjani which was beautiful, prosperous in all
respects, and well secured. In the northeastern direction (Ishan Kone) outside
this town was a garden named Devaraman. In that Devaraman garden there was an
ancient temple of Amogh Yaksh. In that Saahanjani city ruled King Mahachandra.
He was as majestic as the Himalayas. That King named Mahachandra had a minister
named Sushen, who was well versed in four prongs of politics, namely saam
(incantation), bhed, (guile), dand (threat), and upapradan (daam or bribery) as
well as implementation of law. He was proficient in controlling anti-social
elements. In Saahanjani city lived a courtesan named Sudarshana. Her description
(should be read as that of Kamadhvaja courtesan as mentioned in chapter two.)
In Saahanjani city lived a caravan chief (sarthavaha) named Subhadra. The name
of Subhadra Sarthavaha's wife was Bhadraa. She was beautiful and perfect in
every way.  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [29]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-3 Gautam Swami asked-"Bhagavan!
Where will that bandit-chief Abhagnasen go after death? Where will he be born?"
Bhagavan replied "Gautam! After completing his life span of thirty-seven years
this bandit-chief Abhagnasen will die in the gallows this afternoon and will
reincarnate as an infernal being in the first hell named Ratnaprabha. His
maximum life span there will be one Sagaropam. Getting out from the first hell
he will continue to go around in cycles of rebirth like Mrigaputra, as mentioned
in the first chapter... and so on up to... will be born millions of times as
earth-bodied, water bodied, air-bodied, and fire-bodied beings. Coming out from
there he will be bom as a boar in Varanasi City. After being killed by hunters
he will reincarnate as a son in a merchant family of the same city. On crossing
adolescence and attaining youth he will get initiated as an ascetic... and so on
up to... he will shed all his karmas, attain nirvana and end the cycles of death
and rebirth. Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -3- Ujjhitak Compiled by Muni
DeepratnaSagar is Finished O-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-O Chapter (Adhyayan) - 4 -
Shakat -INTRODUCTION:- This story lucidly details the agonising consequences of
cruelty to animals and non-vegetarianism. Although a butcher by profession,
Chhannik enjoys killing animals and eating meat. He also indulges in lascivious
activities and adultery. He gravely suffers the consequences for many births.
[24] Meaning-The foreword of the third chapter should be read as before. Jambu
Swami asked "Bhante! When Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained liberation,
has preached the aforesaid "text and meaning of the third chapter, then what is
the text and meaning of the fourth chapter as preached by him?" Sudharma Swami
replied Jambu! During that period of time there was a city named Saahanjani
which was beautiful, prosperous in all respects, and well secured. In the
northeastern direction (Ishan Kone) outside this town was a garden named
Devaraman. In that Devaraman garden there was an ancient temple of Amogh Yaksh.
In that Saahanjani city ruled King Mahachandra. He was as majestic as the
Himalayas. That King named Mahachandra had a minister named Sushen, who was well
versed in four prongs of politics, namely saam (incantation), bhed, (guile),
dand (threat), and upapradan (daam or bribery) as well as implementation of law.
He was proficient in controlling anti-social elements. In Saahanjani city lived
a courtesan named Sudarshana. Her description (should be read as that of
Kamadhvaja courtesan as mentioned in chapter two.) In Saahanjani city lived a
caravan chief (sarthavaha) named Subhadra. The name of Subhadra Sarthavaha's
wife was Bhadraa. She was beautiful and perfect in every way. Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [29]

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-4  Subhadra Sarthavaha and Bhadraa
had a son named Shakat who was also endowed with a perfect and beautiful body.
During that time, Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived at Devaraman garden outside
Saahanjani city. People and the king came to pay homage. Bhagavan gave his
discourse to all, after which the king and the people returned home.  During
that time, while returning after collecting alms in the city, Gautam Swami, the
senior disciple of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, came to the main road. There he saw
many elephants, horses, and foot soldiers duly equipped with armours and
weapons. Amongst them, he saw a man, accompanied by a woman, with his ears and
nose cut off, tied in the avakotak bond (bending the neck and tying it with
hands already tied at the back). An announcement was being made about him.
Gautam Swami was thoughtful (on hearing the announcement, seeing all this, and
the person in pathetic condition). He came to Bhagavan Mahavir and asked about
it. In reply, Bhagavan said:  "Gautam! During that time, there was a prosperous
city called Chhagalpur in the Bharatvarsh area in Jambu continent. A king named
Simhagiri was the ruler of that city. He was as majestic as the Himalayas. In
that city lived a chhagalik (a butcher selling goat meat) named Chhannik who was
rich, irreligious, and evil, and he derived enjoyment in sinful deeds only.
That Chhanik Chhagalik had many cattle-corrals which could accommodate hundreds
and thousands of animals like goats, sheep, Rojhas (Neelagaya or black-buck),
bulls, hares, young deer, pigs, lions, deer, peacocks, and buffaloes. Such
animals were stocked there. Numerous men were employed there on wages and food.
They used to look after and protect these animals including goats... and so on
up to... buffaloes.  Those numerous men, employed on wages and food, used to
butcher thousands of these animals including goats... and so on up to...
buffaloes, cut and chop their meat with knives and shears, and give it to
Chhanik Chhagalik.  His many other servants earned their living by frying,
baking, and roasting meat of those goats and other animals on metal and earthen
plates, pans, and a variety of other cooking pots as well as with sticks on
burning charcoal.  That Chhanik too spent his life enjoying aforesaid dishes of
meat of goats (etc.) with five kinds of wine. Chhanik Chhagalik had made it his
daily duty to sell and eat meat of goats (etc.) and drink five kinds of wine. He
was ever involved in these sinful activities. These activities had become his
way and ideal of life, and he had accepted all these sinful activities to be the
best of conduct. As a consequence, he acquired extremely malevolent and pain-
causing karmas in abundance. After completing his life-span of seven hundred
years, he died and reincarnated as an infernal being in the fourth hell where
the maximum life span is ten Sagaropam.  [25] Meaning- Bhadraa, the wife of
Subhadra Sarthavaha was a jatunandika (a woman whose offspring die at birth). On
leaving the fourth hell, the soul of that Chhanik Chhagalik was conceived as a
son in the womb of Bhadraa, the wife of Subhadra Sarthavaha in Saahanjani city.
In due course, on completion of nine months, Bhadraa Sarthavahi gave birth to a
son. Immediately after his birth, the parents placed the child under a shakat
(bullock cart).  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [30]"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-4 Subhadra Sarthavaha and Bhadraa
had a son named Shakat who was also endowed with perfect and beautiful body.
During that period of time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived at Devaraman garden
outside Saahanjani city. People and the king came to pay homage. Bhagavan gave
his discourse to all after which the king and the people returned home. During
that period of time, while returning after collecting alms in the city, Gautam
Swami, the senior disciple of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, came to the main road.
There he saw many elephants, horses and foot soldiers duly equipped with armours
and weapons. Amongst them he saw a man, accompanied by a woman, with his ears
and nose cut off, tied in the avakotak bond (bending the neck and tying it with
hands already tied at the back). Announcement was being made about him. Gautam
Swami was thoughtful (on hearing the announcement, seeing all this, and the
person in pathetic condition). He came to Bhagavan Mahavir and asked about it.
In reply Bhagavan said Gautam! During that period of time there was a prosperous
city, called Chhagalpur in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu continent. A king named
Simhagiri was the ruler of that city. He was as majestic as the Himalayas:, In
that city lived a chhagalik (a butcher selling goat meat) named Chhannik who was
rich, irreligious and evil, and he derived enjoyment in sinful deeds only. That
Chhanik Chhagalik had many cattle-corrals which could accommodate hundreds and
thousands of animals like goats, sheep, Rojhas (Neelagaya or black-buck), bulls,
hares, young deer, pigs, lions, deer, peacocks and buffaloes. Such animals were
stocked there. Numerous men were employed there on wages and food. They used to
look after and protect these animals including goats... and so on up to...
buffaloes. Those numerous men, employed on wages and food, used to butcher
thousands of these animals including goats... and so on up to... buffaloes, cut
and chop their meat with knives and shears, and give it to Chhanik Chhagalik.
His many other servants earned their living by frying, baking, and roasting meat
of those goats and other animals on metal and earthen plates, pans, and a
variety of other cooking pots as well as with sticks on burning charcoal. That
Chhanik too spent his life enjoying aforesaid dishes of meat of goats (etc.)
with five kinds of wine.Chhanik Chhagalik had made it his daily duty to sell and
eat meat of goats (etc.) and drink five kinds of wine. He was ever involved in
these sinful activities. These activities had become his way and ideal of life
and he had accepted all these sinful activities to be the best of conduct. As a
consequence he acquired extremely malevolent and pain causing karmas in
abundance. After completing his life-span of seven hundred years, he died and
reincarnated as an infernal being in the fourth hell where the maximum life span
is ten Sagaropam. [25] Meaning- Bhadraa, the wife of Subhadra Sarthavaha was a
jatunandika (a woman whose offspring die at birth). On leaving the fourth hell,
the soul of that Chhanik Chhagalik was conceived as a son in the womb of
Bhadraa, the wife of Subhadra Sarthavaha in Saahanjani city. In due course, on
completion of nine months, Bhadraa Sarthavahi gave birth to a son. Immediately
after his birth the parents placed the child under a shakat (bullock cart) Aagam
- 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [30]

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-4  When this son of ours was born, he
was placed under a cart (shakat). As such, he should be popularly known by the
name "Shake." The rest of the story should be read as that of Ujjhitak.
Subhadra Sarthavaha met his death during a sea voyage in the Lavan Samudra.
Soon, grief-stricken Bhadraa Sarthavahi also met her end. The city guards
expelled young Shakat from his house. (They auctioned the house to repay loans
to creditors, and Shakat had to abandon his house). On being expelled from his
house, young Shakat started roaming around the trisections, (etc.) in Saahanjani
city and frequenting gambling houses (and bars). At one point of time, he fell
in love with courtesan Sudarshana. (As Ujhit fell for Kamadhvaja.)  Later, at
some point of time, king Mahachandra's minister Sushen got young Shakat expelled
from the house of Kamadhvaja courtesan and kept her as his mistress in an
independent house. He started enjoying all human comforts and carnal pleasures
with the courtesan kept as his mistress.  On getting expelled from the house of
Sudarshana courtesan, that young Shakat, being madly attached (rnurchhit) with
Sudarshana courtesan, infatuated (griddha) with her, entrapped in her love
(grathit), lost in her thoughts (adyupapanna), could not think of, love and
derive mental peace in any other person or thing. Always thinking about her,
making efforts to possess her, devoting his mind, speech, and body to her,
impelled by his desire for her, he got himself involved in seeking an
opportunity when the king did not come to courtesan Sudarshana's house, when no
other royal person was there, and when even an ordinary person was also not
there. Once he got such an opportunity, he stealthily entered the house of
Sudarshana courtesan. He then started enjoying all human comforts and carnal
pleasures with her.  Then, one day, minister Sushen, after taking his bath,
embellished fully with ornaments, and accompanied by a throng of people, went to
the house of Sudarshana courtesan. There, he came across young Shakat enjoying
all human comforts and carnal pleasures with Sudarshana courtesan. When he saw
this, he turned red with anger and raised his eyebrows. He got young Shakat
caught by his guards and gave him a thorough beating by hammering and tossing
the body of Shakat with blows of stick, fist, and so on, and got him tied in the
avakotak bond (bending the neck and tying it with hands already tied at the
back). He took Shakat to king Mahachandra and submitted, "Sire, this young
Shakat has committed the crime of entering my private quarters (where women of
the house live)."  The king replied, "You are allowed to punish him as you
like."  On getting permission from king Mahachandra, minister Sushen sentenced
young Shakat and courtesan Sudarshana to death by the aforementioned method (As
you saw, Gautam!). Gautam! This way, that young Shakat is suffering for the
sinful deeds he committed in the past.  [26] Meaning-Knowing the cause of
Shakat's misery, Gautam Swami asked, "Bhante! After his death, where will this
young Shakat go? Where will he be reborn?" Bhagavan replied, "Gautam! After
completing his life-span of fifty-seven years, this afternoon, young Shakat will
be forced to embrace a large and fire-like red hot female statue."  Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [31]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-4 and then lifted it back. After
that they fed, protected and gradually brought up the child. In due course the
parents named the child-"When this son of ours was born he was placed under a
cart (shakat). As such, he should be popularly known by the name "Shake." Rest
of the story should be read as that of Ujjhitak. Subhadra Sarthavaha met his
death during a sea voyage in the Lavan Samudra. Soon grief stricken Bhadraa
Sarthavahi also met her end. The city guards expelled young Shakat from his
house. (They auctioned the house to repay loans to creditors and Shakat had to
abandon his house). On being expelled from his house, young Shakat started
roaming around the trisections, (etc.) in Saahanjani city and frequenting
gambling houses (and bars). At one point of time he fell in love with courtesan
Sudarshana. (As Ujhit fell for Kamadhvaja.) Later at some point of time king
Mahachandra's minister Sushen got young Shakat expelled from the house of
Kamadhvaja courtesan and kept her as mistress in an independent house. He
started enjoying all human comforts and carnal pleasures with the courtesan kept
as his mistress. On getting expelled from the house of Sudarshana courtesan,
that young Shakat, being madly attached (rnurchhit) with Sudarshana courtesan,
infatuated (griddha) with her, entrapped in her love (grathit), lost in her
thoughts (adyupapanna), could not think of, love and derive mental peace in any
other person or thing. Always thinking about her, making efforts to possess her,
devoting his mind speech and body to her, impelled by his desire for her, he got
himself involved in seeking an opportunity when ttie king did not come to
courtesan Sudarshana's house, when no other royal person was there and when even
an ordinary person was also not there. Once he got such an opportunity and he
stealthily entered the house of Sudarshana courtesan. He then started enjoying
all human comforts and carnal pleasures with her. Then one day minister Sushen,
after taking his bath,... and so on up to... embellished fully with omaments,
and accompanied by a throng of people went to the house of Sudarshana courtesan.
There he came across young Shakat enjoying all human comforts and carnal
pleasures with Sudarshana courtesan. When he saw this he turned red with anger
and raised his eyebrows. He got young Shakat caught by his guards and gave a
thorough beating by hammering and tossing the body of Shakat with blows of
stick, fist,... and so on up to... got him tied in the avakotak bond (bending
the neck and tying it with hands already tied at the back). He took Shakat to
king Mahachandra and submitted-"Sire this young Shakat has committed the crime
of entering my private quarters (where women of the house live)." The king
replied "You are allowed to punish him as you like." On getting permission from
king Mahachandra, minister Sushen sentenced young Shakat and courtesan
Sudarshana to death by aforesaid method (As you saw, Gautam!). Gautam! This way
that young Shakat is suffering for the sinful deeds he committed in the past.
[26] Meaning-Knowing the cause of Shakat's misery, Gautam Swami asked"Bhante !
After his death where will this young Shakat go? Where will he be reborn?
Bhagavan replied-Gautam ! After completing his life-span of fifty seven years,
this afternoon young Shakat will be forced to embrace a large and fire-like red
hot female statue Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [31]

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-4 made of iron. On embracing that
fire-like statue he will die and will reincarnate as an infernal being in the
first hell named Ratnaprabha.  Getting out of the hell them (the souls that are
Shakat and Sudarshana) will take rebirth as twins in a Chandal (a low caste)
family in Rajagriha city. The parents of the twins will name them as Shakat
Kumar and Sudarshana.  In due course Shakat Kumar will cross his adolescence and
attain youth. Sudarshana Kumari will also acquire exceptional wisdom and
maturity while attaining youth. She will have exquisitely beautiful, charming,
and youthful body.  Falling for the beauty, youth and charm of his own sister,
Shakat Kumar will start passing his time enjoying all human comforts and carnal
pleasures with Sudarshana.  At some point of time that Shakat Kumar will enter
the profession of catching and killing animals. As a kootagraha that Shakat
Kumar will become extremely irreligious and derive contentment in sinful deeds.
As a consequence of these evil deeds he will acquire abundant demeritorious
karmas. Having completed his life-span, at the time of death, he will die and
take rebirth as an infernal being in the first hell named Ratnaprabha. From
there he will follow the cycles of rebirths as mentioned in context of Ekadi,
Ujjhitak, and others... and so on up to... will be born millions of times as
earth-bodied and other such beings.  Coming out from there he will be born as a
fish in Varanasi city. After being killed by fishermen he will reincarnate as a
son in a merchant family of the same Varanasi city. There he will gain
righteousness (samyaktva) and get initiated as an ascetic. From there he will
reincarnate in the first heaven named Saudharm Devlok. Descending from there he
will take birth in Mahavideh area and follow ascetic conduct immaculately. At
last he will get enlightened and attain the status of Siddha shedding all his
karmas and ending all misery.  Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -4- Ujjhitak
Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is Finished  Chapter (Adhyayan) - 5 -
Bruhaspatidatt  INTRODUCTION:- Like the preceding chapters this fifth chapter
too informs about the grave consequences and bitter fruits of cruelty, sinful
activity, and adultery. Even though Brihaspatidatt was the state priest, he
deceived his friend, the king, and indulged in adultery with the queen. He not
only got harsh punishment for this evil deed during the same life time but he
had to suffer the consequences of many other violent and sinful deeds, committed
during this and many past births, for millions of rebirths. This chapter
contains hair-raising description of that.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-4 made of iron. On embracing that
fire-like statue he will die and will reincarnate as an infernal being in the
first hell named Ratnaprabha. Getting out of the hell them (the souls that are
Shakat and Sudarshana) will take rebirth as twins in a Chandal (a low caste)
family in Rajagriha city. The parents of the twins will name them as Shakat
Kumar and Sudarshana. In due course Shakat Kumar will cross his adolescence and
attain youth. Sudarshana Kumari will also acquire exceptional wisdom and
maturity while attaining youth. She will have exquisitely beautiful, charming,
and youthful body. Falling for the beauty, youth and charm of his own sister,
Shakat Kumar will start passing his time enjoying all human comforts and carnal
pleasures with Sudarshana. At some point of time that Shakat Kumar will enter
the profession of catching and killing animals. As a kootagraha that Shakat
Kumar will become extremely irreligious and derive contentment in sinful deeds.
As a consequence of these evil deeds he will acquire abundant demeritorious
karmas. Having completed his life-span, at the time of death, he will die and
take rebirth as an infernal being in the first hell named Ratnaprabha. From
there he will follow the cycles of rebirths as mentioned in context of Ekadi,
Ujjhitak, and others... and so on up to... will be born millions of times as
earth-bodied and other such beings. Coming out from there he will be born as a
fish in Varanasi city. After being killed by fishermen he will reincarnate as a
son in a merchant family of the same Varanasi city. There he will gain
righteousness (samyaktva) and get initiated as an ascetic. From there he will
reincarnate in the first heaven named Saudharm Devlok. Descending from there he
will take birth in Mahavideh area and follow ascetic conduct immaculately. At
last he will get enlightened and attain the status of Siddha shedding all his
karmas and ending all misery. Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -4- Ujjhitak
Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is Finished 0-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-O Chapter
(Adhyayan) - 5 - Bruhaspatidatt O INTRODUCTION:- Like the preceding chapters
this fifth chapter too informs about the grave consequences and bitter fruits of
cruelty, sinful activity, and adultery. Even though Brihaspatidatt was the state
priest, he deceived his friend, the king, and indulged in adultery with the
queen. He not only got harsh punishment for this evil deed during the same life
time but he had to suffer the consequences of many other violent and sinful
deeds, committed during this and many past births, for millions of rebirths.
This chapter contains hair-raising description of that. [27] Meaning- The
foreword of the fifth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu -Swami
asked"Bhante! What is the text and meaning of the fifth chapter of fifth chapter
of Duhkha-vipaak as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir ?) Sudharma Swami
replied Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [32]

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-5**  Jambu! During that period of
time there was a city named Kaushambi which was beautiful and prosperous in all
respects. Outside this town was a garden named Chandravataran in which was a
temple of Shvetabhadra Yaksh.  In that Kaushambi city ruled a majestic king
named Shataneek. The name of his queen was Mrigadevi who was the daughter of
king Chetak.  Shataneek and Mrigadevi had a son named Udayan who was perfectly
proportioned and handsome. He was the crown prince of the kingdom. The name of
prince Udayan's wife was Padmavati.  The name of the state priest of king
Shataneek was Somadatt. He had mastery over Rigveda, Yajurveda, Saamaveda,
Atharvaveda. Priest Somadatt's wife was Vasudatta. Sornadatt and Vasudatta had a
perfect and handsome son named Brihaspatidatt.  During that period of time
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived at Chandravataran garden outside Kaushambi
city. During that period of time while returning after collecting alms in
Kaushambi city Bhagavan Gautam came to the main road as mentioned earlier. There
he saw many elephants, horses and foot soldiers duly equipped with armours and
weapons. Amongst them he saw a prisoner being taken to the gallows. Gautam Swami
was thoughtful (on hearing the announcement, seeing all this and the person in
pathetic condition). He came to Bhagavan Mahavir and asked about it. In reply
Bhagavan said:  Gautam, during that period of time there was a prosperous city
called Sarvatobhadra in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu continent. A king named
Jitashatru was the ruler of that city. King Jitashatru had a priest named
Maheshvardatt who had mastery over Rigveda, Yajurveda, Saamaveda, and
Atharvaveda.  Everyday priest Maheshvardatt would get a boy each from a Brahmin
family, a Kshatriya family, a Vaishya family, and a Shudra family captured and
brought to him. He would then get the hearts out from their live bodies and
perform sacrificial peace-offerings for the well-being of king Jitashatru. The
commentator (Tikakaar) has interpreted shanti-home (peace offerings) as: to
throw butter, oil, barley etc. or lumps of human or animal flesh in sacrificial
fire accompanied by chanting of mantras as offerings to some violence loving
deity. It is hard to conceive what relationship the victory or well-being of a
king can have with such a violent act.  Besides this, that priest would also
perform the ritual peace-offerings of lumps of flesh from hearts of two sets of
boys every eighth and fourteenth day of a fortnight, of four sets of boys every
four months, of eight sets of boys every six months, and of sixteen sets of boys
every year.  Whenever king Jitashatru fought a battle with some adversary, that
priest Maheshvardatt would get one hundred eight boys each from Brahmin
families, Kshatriya families, Vaishya families, and Shudra families captured and
brought to him. He would then get the hearts out from their live bodies and
perform sacrificial peace-offerings for the victory of king Jitashatru. This
helped king Jitashatru destroy or trounce his enemy in the battle.  [28]
Meaning- Ever involved in these sinful activities, accepting these activities to
be ideal of his life and the best of conduct, Priest Maheshvardatt acquired
extremely malevolent and pain causing karmas in abundance. After completing his
life-span of three thousand years, he died and reincarnated as an infernal being
in the fifth hell where the maximum life span is seventeen Sagaropam (a
metaphoric unit of time). Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut  Compiled by - Deepratnasagar
[33]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-5 jambu! During that period of time
there was a city named Kaushambi which was beautiful and prosperous in all
respects. Outside this town was a garden named Chandravataran in which was a
temple of Shvetabhadra Yaksh. In that Kaushambi city ruled a majestic king named
Shataneek. The name of his queen was Mrigadevi who was the daughter of king
Chetak. Shataneek and Mrigadevi had a son named Udayan who was perfectly
proportioned and handsome. He was the crown prince of the kingdom. The name of
prince Udayan's wife was Padmavati. The name of state priest of king Shataneek
was Somadatt. He had mastery over Rigveda, Yajurveda, Saamaveda, Atharvaveda.
Priest Somadatt's wife was Vasudatta. Sornadatt and Vasudatta had a perfect and
handsome son named Brihaspatidatt. During that period of time Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir arrived at Chandravataran garden outside Kaushambi city. During that
period of time while returning after collecting alms in Kaushambi city Bhagavan
Gautam came to the main road as mentioned earlier. There he saw many elephants,
horses and foot soldiers duly equipped with armours and weapons. Amongst them he
saw a prisoner being taken to the gallows. Gautam Swami was thoughtful (on
hearing the announcement, seeing all this and the person in pathetic condition).
He came to Bhagavan Mahavir and asked about it. In reply Bhagavan said Gautam
During that period of time there was a prosperous city called Sarvatobhadra in
Bharatvarsh area in Jambu continent. A king named Jitashatru was the ruler of
that city. King Jitashatru had a priest named Maheshvardatt who had mastery over
Rigveda, Yajurveda, Saamaveda, and Atharvaveda. Everyday priest Maheshvardatt
would get a boy each from a Brahmin family, a Kshatriya family, a Vaishya
family, and a Shudra family captured and brought to him. He would then get the
hearts out from their live bodies and perform sacrificial peace-offerings for
the well-being of king Jitashatru. The commentator (Tikakaar) has interpreted
shanti-home (peace offerings) as: to throw butter, oil, barley etc. or lumps of
human or animal flesh in sacrificial fire accompanied by chanting of mantras as
offerings to some violence loving deity. It is hard to conceive what
relationship the victory or well-being of a king can have with such violent act.
Besides this that priest would also perform the ritual peace-offerings of lumps
of flesh from hearts of two sets of boys every eighth and fourteenth day of a
fortnight, of four sets of boys every four months, of eight sets of boys every
six months, and of sixteen sets of boys every year. Whenever king Jitashatru
fought a battle with some adversary, that priest Maheshvardatt would get one
hundred eight boys each from Brahmin families, Kshatriya families, Vaishya
families, and Shudra families captured and brought to him. He would then get the
hearts out from their live bodies and perform sacrificial peace-offerings for
the victory of king Jitashatru. This helped king Jitashatru destroy or trounce
his enemy in the battle. [28] Meaning- Ever involved in these sinful activities,
accepting these activities to be ideal of his life and the best of conduct,
Priest Maheshvardatt acquired extremely malevolent and pain causing karmas in
abundance. After completing his life-span of three thousand years, he died and
reincarnated as an infernal being in the fifth hell where the maximum life span
is seventeen Sagaropam (a metaphoric unit of time). Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [33]

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-5  On leaving the fifth hell, the evil
soul of that Priest Maheshvardatt was conceived as a son in the womb of
Vasudatta, the wife of priest Somadatt in this Kaushambi city. On the twelfth
day after his birth the parents named the child—"As the father of this boy is
named Somadatt and the mother is named Vasudatta he should be popularly known by
the name Brihaspatidatt'."  He was brought up under the care of five nursemaids.
In due course he crossed adolescence and attained youth. While maturing in
intelligence and wisdom he became a close friend of prince Udayan right since
his childhood. This was because they were born at the same time and grew up
playing together.  At a certain time King Shataneek died. Crying, weeping, and
sobbing, Prince Udayan performed the formal last rites and cremated his father,
King Shataneek, with state honour and grandeur in presence of numerous kings,
influential and rich persons (ishvar), knights of honour (talavar), landlords
(mandavik), heads of large families (kautumbik), affluent people (ibhya),
established merchants (shreshti), and caravan chiefs (sarthavaha) and other
people.  After that those numerous kings, influential and rich persons
(ishvar),... and so on up to... caravan chiefs (sarthavaha) and other people
joined the grand coronation ceremony and crowned prince Udayan.  Prince Udayan
became a king as majestic as the Himalayas.  Then young Brihaspatidatt became
king Udayan's priest and performing his duties as a priest started unrestricted
movement at every place (bed chamber, dining hall, etc.) and getting involved in
all activities (deliberations, meetings, state receipts including taxes, etc.)
to the extant that he visited the private quarters of the king unchecked and at
will.  Then that Brihaspatidatt priest started frequenting at will the inner
quarters of king Udayan's palace timely and untimely, at suitable or odd hours
including morning, noon, evening, and night. Gradually he developed illicit
relationship with Padmavati Devi and consequently started enjoying all human
comforts and carnal pleasures with her.  Then one day king Udayan, after taking
his bath,... and so on up to... embellished fully with ornaments came to queen
Padmavati Devi's palace. There he came across priest Brihaspatidatt enjoying all
human comforts and carnal pleasures with Padmavati Devi. When he saw this he
turned red with anger and raised his eyebrows. He got priest Brihaspatidatt
caught by his guards and... and so on up to... (he gave a thorough beating and
got his hands tied at the back) sentenced him to death. He sentenced him to
harsh punishment as you have seen on the road.  Gautam! This way that priest
Brihaspatidatt is suffering for the sinful deeds he committed in the past.
Gautam Swami asked—"Bhante! After his death where will this priest
Brihaspatidatt go? Where will he be reborn?  Bhagavan replied—Gautam! After
completing his life-span of sixty four years, this afternoon priest
Brihaspatidatt will die at the gallows and will reincarnate as an infernal being
in the first hell named Ratnaprabha having a maximum life-span of one Sagaropam
(a metaphoric unit of time). From there he will follow the cycles of rebirths as
mentioned in the first chapter in context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to...
will be born millions of times in all hells, as all animals, and as all one
sensed beings.  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [34]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-5 On leaving the fifth hell, the evil
soul of that Priest Maheshvardatt was conceived as a son in the womb of
Vasudatta, the wife of priest Somadatt in this Kaushambi city. On the twelfth
day after his birth the parents named the child--"As the father of this boy is
named Somadatt and the mother is named Vasudatta he should be popularly known by
the name Brihaspatidatt'." He was brought up under the care of five nursemaids.
In due course he crossed adolescence and attained youth. While maturing in
intelligence and wisdom he became a close friend of prince Udayan right since
his childhood. This was because they were born at the same time and grew up
playing together. At a certain time King Shataneek died. Crying, weeping, and
sobbing, Prince Udayan performed the formal last rites and cremated his father,
King Shataneek, with state honour and grandeur in presence of numerous kings,
influential and rich persons (ishvar), knights of honour (talavar), landlords
(mandavik), heads of large families (kautumbik), affluent people (ibhya),
established merchants (shreshti), and caravan chiefs (sarthavaha) and other
people. After that those numerous kings, influential and rich persons
(ishvar),... and so on up to... caravan chiefs (sarthavaha) and other people
joined the grand coronation ceremony and crowned prince Udayan. Prince Udayan
became a king as majestic as the Himalayas. Then young Brihaspatidatt became
king Udayan's priest and performing his duties as a priest started unrestricted
movement at every place (bed chamber, dining hall, etc.) and getting involved in
all activities (deliberations, meetings, state receipts including taxes, etc.)
to the extant that he visited the private quarters of the king unchecked and at
will. Then that Brihaspatidatt priest started frequenting at will the inner
quarters of king Udayan's palace timely and untimely, at suitable or odd hours
including morning, noon, evening, and night. Gradually he developed illicit
relationship with Padmavati Devi and consequently started enjoying all human
comforts and carnal pleasures with her. Then one day king Udayan, after taking
his bath,... and so on up to... embellished fully with ornaments came to queen
Padmavati Devi's palace. There he came across priest Brihaspatidatt enjoying all
human comforts and carnal pleasures with Padmavati Devi. When he saw this he
turned red with anger and raised his eyebrows. He got priest Brihaspatidatt
caught by his guards and... and so on up to... (he gave a thorough beating and
got his hands tied at the back) sentenced him to death. He sentenced him to
harsh punishment as you have seen on the road. Gautam! This way that priest
Brihaspatidatt is suffering for the sinful deeds he committed in the past.
Gautam Swami asked--"Bhante! After his death where will this priest
Brihaspatidatt go? Where will he be reborn? Bhagavan replied--Gautam! After
completing his life-span of sixty four years, this afternoon priest
Brihaspatidatt will die at the gallows and will reincarnate as an infernal being
in the first hell named Ratnaprabha having a maximum life-span of one Sagaropam
(a metaphoric unit of time). From there he will follow the cycles of rebirths as
mentioned in the first chapter in context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to...
will be born millions of times in all hells, as all animals, and as all one
sensed beings. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [34]

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-5  Coming out from there he will
be born as a deer in Hastinapur city. After being killed by animal trappers he
will reincarnate as a son in a merchant family of the same Hastinapur city.
There he will gain righteousness (samyaktva) and get initiated as an ascetic.
From there he will reincarnate in the first heaven named Saudharm Devlok.
Descending from there he will take birth in Mahavideh area and follow ascetic
conduct immaculately. At last he will get enlightened and attain the status of
Siddha shedding all his karmas and ending all misery.  **Conclusion should be
read as before.**  **Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -5- Bruhaspatidatt**
Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is Finished 0-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-o  ##
Chapter (Adhyayan) - 6 - Nandivardhan  **O INTRODUCTION:**  The sixth chapter
contains the heart-rending description of the pathetic and horrific condition of
prince Nandivardhan (Nandishen). Even a great sage like Gautam Swami was touched
when he saw the infernal tortures suffered by him.  Drawing the attention of
Gautam Swami on the karmic cause of this torture Bhagavan says-"During this
birth Nandivardhan goes against his father and wants to gain the kingdom by
killing his father. He is being punished by the guards for this only. But at the
root of this entire are the bad karmas acquired during the past birth, when he
was Duryodhan, the jailer. The duty of a jailer is to protect people from rogues
and tyrants and subdue evil. But when that protector, bereft of humanity,
transforms into a demon and employs a ruthless and pitiless punitive policy that
puts even demons to shame, he disgraces his post as well as humanity." The
extremely harsh system of punishment adopted by Duryodhan has been described in
details in a hair-raising style by the author of this Agam. Shivers go through
the spine while reading or listening to it.  This story describes the fruits of
these cruel and ruthless evil acts. This description reveals the meanest point
of the harsh ancient system of punishment.  At the beginning the title of this
chapter is mentioned as Nandi, in aphorism 2 it as Nandivardhan, and in aphorism
10 as Nandishen. This appears to be a mistake committed by transcribes.  **[29]
Meaning- Jambu Swami asked—"Bhante! When Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has
attained liberation, has preached the aforesaid text and meaning of the fifth
chapter, then what is the text and meaning of the sixth chapter as preached by
him?"**  Sudharma Swami replied to Jambu Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [35]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-5 Coming out from there he will be
born as a deer in Hastinapur city. After being killed by animal trappers he will
reincarnate as a son in a merchant family of the same Hastinapur city. There he
will gain righteousness (samyaktva) and get initiated as an ascetic. From there
he will reincarnate in the first heaven named Saudharm Devlok. Descending from
there he will take birth in Mahavideh area and follow ascetic conduct
immaculately. At last he will get enlightened and attain the status of Siddha
shedding all his karmas and ending all misery. Conclusion should be read as
before. Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -5- Bruhaspatidatt Compiled by Muni
DeepratnaSagar is Finished 0-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-o Chapter (Adhyayan) - 6 -
Nandivardhan O INTRODUCTION: The sixth chapter contains the heart-rending
description of the pathetic and horrific condition of prince Nandivardhan
(Nandishen). Even a great sage like Gautam Swami was touched when he saw the
infernal tortures suffered by him. Drawing the attention of Gautam Swami on the
karmic cause of this torture Bhagavan says-"During this birth Nandivardhan goes
against his father and wants to gain the kingdom by killing his father. He is
being punished by the guards for this only. But at the root of this entire are
the bad karmas acquired during the past birth, when he was Duryodhan, the
jailer. The duty of a jailer is to protect people from rogues and tyrants and
subdue evil. But when that protector, bereft of humanity, transforms into a
demon and employs a ruthless and pitiless punitive policy that puts even demons
to shame, he disgraces his post as well as humanity." The extremely harsh system
of punishment adopted by Duryodhan has been described in details in a hair-
raising style by the author of this Agam. Shivers go through the spine while
reading or listening to it. This story describes the fruits of these cruel and
ruthless evil acts. This description reveals the meanest point of the harsh
ancient system of punishment. At the beginning the title of this chapter is
mentioned as Nandi, in aphorism 2 it as Nandivardhan, and in aphorism 10 as
Nandishen. This appears to be a mistake committed by transcribes. [29] Meaning-
Jambu Swami asked--"Bhante! When Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained
liberation, has preached the aforesaid text and meaning of the fifth chapter,
then what is the text and meaning of the sixth chapter as preached by him?"
Sudharma Swami replied to Jambu Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [35]

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-6 Jambu! During that period of time
there was a city named Mathura which was beautiful and prosperous in all
respects. Outside this town was a garden named Bhandir in which was a temple of
Sudarshan Yaksh. In that Mathura city ruled a majestic king named Shridaam. The
name of his queen was Bandhushri. Shridaam and Bandhushri had a son named
Nandivardhan who was perfectly proportioned and handsome. He was the crown
prince of the kingdom. King Shridaam had a minister named Subandhu, who was well
versed in four prongs of politics, namely saam (incantation), bhed (guile), dand
(threat), and upapradan (daam or bribery). The minister had a perfect and
handsome son named Bahumitraputra. King Shridaam had a barber (alankarik or
hair-styler). Besides performing all his duties as a beautician he was a
confidante of the king. On king's order he had unrestricted access at every
place and involvement in all activities to the extant that he visited the
private quarters of the king's palace unchecked and at will. During that period
of time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived in Mathura city. The king and the
people came out of the city to attend his discourse. After the discourse they
returned home. During that period of time Bhagavan Mahavir's senior disciple
Ganadhar Gautam came to the city to seek alms. While returning after collecting
alms he came to the main road. There he saw many elephants, horses and foot
soldiers duly equipped with armours and weapons. Amongst them he saw a prisoner
surrounded by many men and women. In the middle of the crossing the state guards
made him sit on a red hot throne made of iron. After making him sit on the
throne, as if lavishly anointing him for coronation, they poured on him, from
red hot urns, a variety of bubbling and scalding liquids including molten iron,
molten copper, molten zinc, molten lead and boiling water. After that they
embellished him with red hot eighteen and nine string necklaces on the neck,
tied a red hot metal strap on his forehead and placed a crown and other
ornaments of red hot iron on his head. Gautam Swami was touched at this
horrifying scene. He was thoughtful- This man is, indeed suffering infernal
torture and pain... and so on up to... He came to Bhagavan Mahavir and asked
about past birth of that person. In reply Bhagavan said  Gautam! During that
period of time there was a prosperous city called Simhapur in Bharatvarsh area
in Jambu continent. A king named Simharath was the ruler of that city. King
Simharath had a jailer (charak-paal) named Duryodhan who was irreligious... and
so on up to... enjoyed evil deeds only. Jailer Duryodhan had numerous prison
instruments (charak bhaand) for third degree torture of prisoners (listed as
follows)  A variety of iron pots (kundi) placed on fire always. Many of these
were filled with copper, many with zinc (trapu), many with lead, and many others
with alkaline or acidic water and oil (that gives burning sensation on touch).
That Jailer Duryodhan had many large pitcher-like pots shaped like hump of a
camel (ushtrika). Some of these were filled with urine of horses, others with
that of elephants, camels, cows, buffaloes, goats, and sheep. Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [36]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-6 Jambu! During that period of time
there was a city named Mathura which was beautiful and prosperous in all
respects. Outside this town was a garden named Bhandir in which was a temple of
Sudarshan Yaksh. In that Mathura city ruled a majestic king named Shridaam. The
name of his queen was Bandhushri. Shridaam and Bandhushri had a son named
Nandivardhan who was perfectly proportioned and handsome. He was the crown
prince of the kingdom. King Shridaam had a minister named Subandhu, who was well
versed in four prongs of politics, namely saam incantation), bhed, (guile), dand
(threat), and upapradan (daam or bribery). The 'minister had a perfect and
handsome son named Bahumitraputra. King Shridaam had a barber (alankarik or
hair-styler). Besides performing all his duties as a beautician he was a
confidante of the king. On king's order he had unrestricted access at every
place and involvement in all activities to the extant that he visited the
private quarters of the king's palace unchecked and at will. During that period
of time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived in Mathura city. The king and the
people came out of the city to attend his discourse. After the discourse they
returned home. During that period of time Bhagavan Mahavir's senior disciple
Ganadhar Gautam came to the city to seek alms. While returning after collecting
alms he came to the main road. There he saw many elephants, horses and foot
soldiers duly equipped with armours and weapons. Amongst them he saw a prisoner
surrounded by many men and women. In the middle of the crossing the state guards
made him sit on a red hot throne made of iron. After making him sit on the
throne, as if lavishly anointing him for coronation, they poured on him, from
red hot urns, a variety of bubbling and scalding liquids including molten iron,
molten copper, molten zinc, molten lead and boiling water. After that they
embellished him with red hot eighteen and nine string necklaces on the neck,
tied a red hot metal strap on his forehead and placed a crown and other
ornaments of red hot iron on his head. Gautam Swami was touched at this
horrifying scene. He was thoughtful- This man is, indeed suffering infernal
torture and pain... and so on up to... He came to Bhagavan Mahavir and asked
about past birth of that person. In reply Bhagavan said Gautam! During that
period of time there was a prosperous city called Simhapur in Bharatvarsh area
in Jambu continent. A king named Simharath was the ruler of that city. King
Simharath had a jailer (charak-paal) named Duryodhan who was irreligious... and
so on up to... enjoyed evil deeds only. Jailer Duryodhan had numerous prison
instruments (charak bhaand) for third degree torture of prisoners (listed as
follows) A variety of iron pots (kundi) placed on fire always. Many of these
were filled with copper, many with zinc (trapu), many with lead, and many others
with alkaline or acidic water and oil (that gives burning sensation on touch).
That Jailer Duryodhan had many large pitcher-like pots shaped like hump of a
camel (ushtrika). Some of these were filled with urine of horses, others with
that of elephants, camels, cows, buffaloes, goats, and sheep. Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [36]

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-6  That Jailer Duryodhan had many
wooden hand-cuffs (hastanduk), fetters for feet (padanduk), wooden shackles
(had), iron shackles (nigad), and iron chains (shrinkhala). They were stored in
stacks (punj) and bunches (nikar).  That Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks (punj)
and bunches (nika) of a variety of whips made of bamboo creepers, cane creepers,
tamarind creepers,  That Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks (punj) and bunches
(nikar) of stone slabs, sticks, clubs or maces, and anchors (kanangar).  That
Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks (punj) and bunches (nikar) of ordinary ropes
and those made of leather, hessian or other barks, woolen yarn, and cotton yarn.
That Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks (punj) and bunches (nikar) of weapons like
swords (asipatra), saw blades (karapatra), razor blades (kshurapatra), and
kadambachirapatra (a kind of blade).  That Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks
(punj) and bunches (nikar) of iron nails, bamboo-pegs, leather straps, and hooks
(allapatt).  That Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks (punj) and bunches (nikar) of
needles, rods (meant for hot piercing), and small maces.  That Jailer Duryodhan
had many stacks (punj) and bunches (nikar) of small weapons, small knives, axes,
small chisels (nail-cutters), and other small tools with edges as sharp as a
blade of grass.  That Jailer Duryodhan would get captured, by king's police,
different types of criminals including-thieves, adulterers, pick-pockets
(granthibhedak), king's enemies, defaulters, killers of children, traitors,
gamblers, and villains. He would then torture them many ways as follows:  (1)
Making them lie on their back, face upward (urahvamukh), and opening mouths with
iron bars, he would force some of them to swallow molten copper, molten zinc,
lead, hot and alkaline or acidic water and oil. And some he would force to take
bath with these scalding liquids.  (2) Making many of them lie on their back,
face upward, he would force some of them swallow urine of horses, elephants,...
and so on up to... sheep.  (3) Making many of them lie on their belly, face
downward, he would force some of them to vomit with sounds of `chhad-chhad'
(like sound of a whiplash), and some he would torment by forcing them swallow
their own vomit.  (4) Many of them he would shackle with wooden hand-cuffs,
fetters for feet, wooden shackles (hadi), and iron shackles (nigad). Some he
would torture by squeezing and twisting. Some he would tie with iron chains.
(5) He would cut off hands of some. He would pierce and slit others with
different types of weapons.  (6) He would get some of them beaten with whips
made of bamboo creepers,... and so on up to... hemp and other barks.  (7) He
would get some lie down on their backs and place heavy stone slabs or wooden
logs on their chests. Having done that he would make policemen to heave the
weights up and down in order to break the bones of the culprits.  Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut [37]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-6 That Jailer Duryodhan had many1
wooden hand-cuffs (hastanduk), fetters for feet (padanduk), wooden shackles
(had), iron shackles (nigad), and iron chains (shrinkhala). They were stored in
stacks (punj) and bunches (nikar). That Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks (punj)
and bunches (nika) of a variety of whips made of bamboo creepers, cane creepers,
tamarind creepers, That Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks (punj) and bunches
(nikar) of stone slabs, sticks, clubs or maces, and anchors (kanangar). That
Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks (punj) and bunches (nikar) of ordinary ropes
and those made of leather, hessian or other barks, woolen yarn, and cotton yarn.
That Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks (punj) and bunches (nikar) of weapons like
swords (asipatra), saw blades (karapatra), razor blades (kshurapatra), and
kadambachirapatra (a kind of blade). That Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks
(punj) and bunches (nikar) of iron nails, bamboo-pegs, leather straps, and hooks
(allapatt). That Jailer Duryodhan had many stacks (punj) and bunches (nikar) of
needles, rods (meant for hot piercing), and small maces. That Jailer Duryodhan
had many stacks (punj) and bunches (nikar) of small weapons, small knives, axes,
small chisels (nail-cutters), and other small tools with edges as sharp as a
blade of grass. That Jailer Duryodhan would get captured, by king's police,
different types of criminals including-thieves, adulterers, pick-pockets
(granthibhedak), king's enemies, defaulters, killers of children, traitors,
gamblers, and villains. He would then torture them many ways as follows (1)
Making them lie on their back, face upward (urahvamukh), and opening mouths with
iron bars, he would force some of them to swallow molten copper, molten zinc,
lead, hot and alkaline or acidic water and oil. And some he would force to take
bath with these scalding liquids. (2) Making many of them lie on their back,
face upward, he would force some of them swallow urine of horses, elephants,...
and so on up to... sheep. (3) Making many of them lie on their belly, face
downward, he would force some of them to vomit with sounds of `chhad-chhad'
(like sound of a whiplash), and some he would torment by forcing them swallow
their own vomit. (4) Many of them he would shackle with wooden hand-cuffs,
fetters for feet, wooden shackles (hadi), and iron shackles (nigad). Some he
would torture by squeezing and twisting. Some he would tie with iron chains. (5)
He would cut off hands of some. He would pierce and slit others with different
types of weapons. (6) He would get some of them beaten with whips made of bamboo
creepers,... and so on up to... hemp and other barks. (7) He would get some lie
down on their backs and place heavy stone slabs or wooden logs on their chests.
Having done that he would make policemen to heave the weights up and down in
order to break the bones of the culprits. Compiled by - Deepratnasagar Aagam -
11 - Vipak-Shrut [37]

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-6 (8)** He would get hands and feet
of some tied with ropes made of leather,... and so on up to... cotton yarn,
suspend them upside down in a well, dip them in water. **(9)** He would get many
pierced and slit with swords... and so on up to.. and kadambachirapatra and get
alkaline oil rubbed in. **(10)** He would get nails and bamboo pegs hammered in
heads, Adam's apples, elbows, knees, and heels of some and get hooks inserted in
some. **(11)** Using small clubs he would get needles and other pointed
instruments thrust in fingers and toes of some and force them to dig earth with
these hands and feet. **(12)** With numerous chisel-like instruments he would
get various parts of the bodies of some scraped and get these parts wrapped with
darbh (grass with roots), kusha (grass without roots) and wet leather. After
that he would prostrate them in sun and pull out the wrappings when dry, in
order to make the skin peal off with chad-chad' sound.  Ever involved in these
sinful activities, accepting these activities to be ideal of his life and the
best conduct, Jailer Duryodhan acquired extremely malevolent and pain causing
karmas in abundance. After completing his life-span of three thousand one
hundred years, he died and reincarnated in the sixth hell among the infernal
beings having a maximum life span of twenty two Sagaropam (a metaphoric unit of
time). **[30]** Meaning-On leaving the sixth hell, the evil soul of that Jailer
Duryodhan was conceived as a son in the womb of Bandhushri, the wife of king
Shridaam in this Mathura city. On the twelfth day after his birth the parents
named the child as Nandishen.  He was brought up under the care of five
nursemaids. In due course he crossed adolescence and attained youth and was made
the crown prince.  Having excessive craving for the kingdom and the harem,
prince Nandishen was obsessed with the desire to kill king Shridaam and enjoy
the royal wealth and power. Therefore, prince Nandishen got himself involved in
seeking an opportunity when king Shridaam was alone, when no other royal person
was there and when even an ordinary person was also not there.  When he did not
get any such opportunity to kill king Shridaam, one day he called Chitra barber
and said "Beloved of gods! You have unrestricted access at every place,
involvement in all activities, and you can visit even the private quarters of
the king unchecked and at will you are his close confidante). You regularly give
him haircut and shave. As such, if while shaving king Shridaam you cut his
throat and consequently the king dies, I will give you half the kingdom. Then,
along with me, you will also be able to enjoy all the desirable and best of the
pleasures and comforts and live happily ever after.  Chitra barber remained
silent at this statement from prince Nandishen.  However, a little later Chitra
barber was plagued with a doubt and apprehension—"If somehow king Shridaam comes
to know of this conspiracy, I do not know what ghastly death he will deal me."
Terrified bythis thought he furtively went to the king when alone, and joining
his palms submitted humbly "My lord! I know it for a fact that, overwhelmed by
his greed for thekingdom, princeNandishen is eager to possess kingdom and enjoy
the royal wealth by killing you."  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar **[38]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-6 (8) He would get hands and feet of
some tied with ropes made of leather,... and so on up to... cotton yarn, suspend
them upside down in a well, dip them in water. (9) He would get many pierced and
slit with swords... and so on up to.. and kadambachirapatra and get alkaline oil
rubbed in. (10) He would get nails and bamboo pegs hammered in heads, Adam's
apples, elbows, knees, and heels of some and get hooks inserted in some. (11)
Using small clubs he would get needles and other pointed instruments thrust in
fingers and toes of some and force them to dig earth with these hands and feet.
(12) With numerous chisel-like instruments he would get various parts of the
bodies of some scraped and get these parts wrapped with darbh (grass with
roots), kusha (grass without roots) and wet leather. After that he would
prostrate them in sun and pull out the wrappings when dry, in order to make the
skin peal off with chad-chad' sound. Ever involved in these sinful activities,
accepting these activities to be ideal of his life and the best conduct, Jailer
Duryodhan acquired extremely malevolent and pain causing karmas in abundance.
After completing his life-span of three thousand one hundred years, he died and
reincarnated in the sixth hell among the infernal beings having a maximum life
span of twenty two Sagaropam (a metaphoric unit of time). [30] Meaning-On
leaving the sixth hell, the evil soul of that Jailer Duryodhan was conceived as
a son in the womb of Bandhushri, the wife of king Shridaam in this Mathura city.
On the twelfth day after his birth the parents named the child as Nandishen. He
was brought up under the care of five nursemaids. In due course he crossed
adolescence and attained youth and was made the crown prince. Having excessive
craving for the kingdom and the harem, prince Nandishen was obsessed with the
desire to kill king Shridaam and enjoy the royal wealth and power. Therefore,
prince Nandishen got himself involved in seeking an opportunity when king
Shridaam was alone, when no other royal person was there and when even an
ordinary person was also not there. When he did not get any such opportunity to
kill king Shridaam, one day he called Chitra barber and said "Beloved of gods!
You have unrestricted access at every place, involvement in all activities, and
you can visit even the private quarters of the king unchecked and at will you
are his close confidante). You regularly give him haircut and shave. As such, if
while shaving king Shridaam you cut his throat and consequently the king dies, I
will give you half the kingdom. Then, along with me, you will also be able to
enjoy all the desirable and best of the pleasures and comforts and live happily
ever after. Chitra barber remained silent at this statement from prince
Nandishen. However, a little later Chitra barber was plagued with a doubt and
apprehension--"If somehow king Shridaam comes to know of this conspiracy, I do
not know what ghastly death he will deal me." Terrified bythis thought he
furtively went to the king when alone, and joining his palms submitted humbly
"My lord! I know it for a fact that, overwhelmed by his greed for thekingdom,
princeNandishen is eager to possess kingdom and enjoy the royal wealth by
killing you." Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [38]

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-6  King Shridaam, after hearing the
barber's words, contemplated and had Nandishen captured by his guards and
sentenced to death as mentioned earlier.  Gautam! This prince Nandishen is
suffering for the sinful deeds he committed in the past.  Gautam Swami
asked—"Bhante! After his death, where will this prince Nandishen go? Where will
he be reborn?"  Bhagavan replied, "Gautam! After completing his life-span of
sixty years, prince Nandishen will die and will reincarnate as an infernal being
in the first hell named Ratnaprabha, having a maximum life-span of one Sagaropam
(a metaphoric unit of time). From there, he will follow the cycles of rebirths
as mentioned in the first chapter in context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to...
will be born millions of times in all hells, as all animals, and as all one-
sensed beings.  Coming out from there, he will be born as a fish in Hastinapur
city. After being killed by fishermen, he will reincarnate as a son in a
merchant family of the same Hastinapur city. There, he will get initiated as an
ascetic. From there, he will reincarnate in the first heaven named Saudharm
Devlok. Descending from there, he will take birth in Mahavideh area and follow
ascetic conduct immaculately. At last, he will get enlightened and attain the
status of Siddha, shedding all his karmas and ending all misery.  The conclusion
should be read as before.  Chapter -6- Compiled by Muni Deepratna Sagar is
finished. 0-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-0  ## Chapter (Adhyayan) -7- Umbardatt
**Introduction:**  This seventh chapter also informs about the grave
consequences and bitter fruits of violent and cruel deeds committed during the
past birth. However, there is a variation in the theme of this story.
Dhanvantari is a renowned Vaidya (an Ayurvedic doctor who is so proficient in
his subject of Ashtanga Chikitsa (the eight-limbed science of healing) that he
cures patients by mere touch). The profession of a Vaidya is a profession of
beneficence. A healer can acquire meritorious karmas by removing misery and pain
of masses with the help of his knowledge and expertise. But devoid of the
feelings of altruism and compassion while practicing his profession of healing,
when a doctor starts advising his patients to consume meat and alcohol, and
encouraging them to indulge in violence besides consuming meat and wine himself,
he transgresses the ethics of his profession. Besides this, he also acquires
highly demeritorious karmas through such cruel and violent activity. He suffers
the grave consequences of the same for many rebirths. This is what has been
conveyed in this chapter.  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar
[39]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-6 King Shridaam listened to what the
barber said, thought over it, gotNandishen captured by his guards and sentenced
him to death as stated above. Gautam! This way that prince Nandishen is
suffering for the sinful deeds he committed in the past. Gautam Swami
asked--"Bhante! After his death where will this prince Nandishen go? Where will
he be reborn? Bhagavan replied Gautam! After completing his life-span of sixty
years, prince Nandishen will die and will reincarnate as an infernal being in
the first hell named Ratnaprabha having a maximum life-span of one Sagaropam (a
metaphoric unit of time). From there he will follow the cycles of rebirths as
mentioned in the first chapter in context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to...
will be born millions of times in all hells, as all animals, and as all one
sensed beings. Coming out from there he will be born as a fish in Hastinapur
city. After being killed by fishermen he will reincarnate as a son in a merchant
family of the same Hastinapur city. There he will get initiated as an ascetic.
From there he will reincarnate in the first heaven named Saudharm Devlok.
Descending from there he will take birth in Mahavideh area and follow ascetic
conduct immaculately. At last he will get enlightened and attain the status of
Siddha shedding all his karmas and ending all misery. Conclusion should be read
as before. Chapter -6- Compiled by Muni Deepratna Sagar is finished 0-X-X-X-X-X-
X-X-0 Chapter (Adhyayan) -7- Umbardatt O INTRODUCTION: This seventh chapter too
informs about the grave consequences and bitter fruits of violent and cruel
deeds committed during the past birth. However, there is a variation in the
theme of this story Dhanvantari is a renowned Vaidya (an Ayurvedic doctor who is
so proficient in his subject of Ashtanga Chikitsa (the eight limbed science of
healing) that he cures patients by mere touch. The profession of a Vaidya is a
profession of beneficence. A healer can acquire meritorious karmas by removing
misery and pain of masses with the help of his knowledge and expertise. But
devoid of the feelings of altruism and compassion while practicing his
profession of healing, when a doctor starts advising his patients to consume
meat and alcohol, and encouraging them to indulge in violence besides consuming
meat and wine himself, he transgresses the ethics of his profession. Besides
this he also acquires highly demeritorious karmas through such cruel and violent
activity. He suffers the grave consequences of same for many rebirths. This is
what has been conveyed in this chapter. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [39]

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7  **[31] Meaning.** The foreword
of the seventh chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked—"Bhante!
When this is the text and meaning of the sixth chapter of Duhkha-vipaak as
preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, what is the text and meaning of the
seventh chapter? Jambu! During that period of time there was a city named
Patalikhand. Outside this town was a garden named Vanakhand in which was a
temple of Umbaradatt Yaksh. In Patalikhand city lived a rich caravan chief
(sarthavaha) named Sagardatt who had a wife named Gangadatta. Sagardatt and
Gangadatta had a perfect and beautiful son named Umbaradatt. He was fully
endowed, well proportioned and handsome. During that period of time Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir arrived in the city. People came to pay homage. Bhagavan gave
his discourse after which the king and the people returned home. During that
period of time Bhagavan Gautam Swami went into Patalikhand city in the afternoon
to seek alms for breaking his two-day fast. He entered the city from the eastern
gate. There he saw a man described as follows He was suffering from Kandu or
khaaj (Eczema) as well as Kodh (Leprosy), Jalodar (Dropsy), Bhagandar (fistula
of the antis), and Bavaseer (bleeding piles). He was also suffering from
diseases like Khansi (Bronchitis), Shvas (Asthma) and tumescence. His face was
swollen and so were his hands and legs. His fingers, toes, nose and ears were in
a state of decay. Dirty water and pus was oozing from the pulsating sores on his
body. He was tormented by slithering worms in his wounds that were dripping
blood and pus. His nose and ears had decayed into fibrous ooze. He was vomiting
and the vomit contained shreds of coagulated pus, blood and worms. He was
uttering piercing, pathetic, and plaintive sounds and words. Swarms of flies
were following him. His hairs were disheveled. He was wearing rags. Carrying
broken pitcher and broken earthen-cup in his extended hands, he was seeking alms
from every house. Seeking and collecting required alms from high, medium, and
low caste families Bhagavan Gautam Swami left Patalikhand city and came to
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir. After critical review (pratikraman) of his movement
for alms collection he showed the food to Bhagavan. On getting permission, he
ate his food without enjoying its taste and only for sustenance, like a snake
entering its hole. He then spent his time enkindling his soul with discipline
and austerities. Then on a second occasion on the day of breaking his two-day
fast Bhagavan Gautam Swami did studies during the first quarter of the day and
meditation during the second quarter of the day. During the third quarter he
moved out and entered Patalikhand city from the southern gate. There also he saw
the same person suffering from Eczema and other ailments in the same condition.
He returned after collecting alms... and soon up to... He then spent his time
enkindling his soul with discipline and austerities. Then on a third occasion on
the day of breaking his two-day fast Bhagavan Gautam Swami entered Patalikhand
city from the western gate. There also he saw the same person seeking alms in
the same condition. In the same way on a fourth occasion on the day of breaking
his two-day fast Bhagavan Gautam Swami entered Patalikhand city from the
northern gate. There also he saw the same person seeking alms in the same
condition. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [40]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7 [31] Meaning. The foreword of the
seventh chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked--"Bhante! When this
is the text and meaning of the sixth chapter of Duhkha-vipaak as preached by
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, what is the text and meaning of the seventh chapter?
Jambu! During that period of time there was a city named Patalikhand. Outside
this town was a garden named Vanakhand in which was a temple of Umbaradatt
Yaksh. In Patalikhand city lived a rich caravan chief (sarthavaha) named
Sagardatt who had a wife named Gangadatta. Sagardatt and Gangadatta had a
perfect and beautiful son named Umbaradatt. He was fully endowed, well
proportioned and handsome. During that period of time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir
arrived in the city. People came to pay homage. Bhagavan gave his discourse
after which the king and the people returned home. During that period of time
Bhagavan Gautam Swami went into Patalikhand city in the afternoon to seek alms
for breaking his two-day fast. He entered the city from the eastern gate. There
he saw a man described as follows He was suffering from Kandu or khaaj (Eczema)
as well as Kodh (Leprosy), Jalodar (Dropsy), Bhagandar (fistula of the antis),
and Bavaseer (bleeding piles). He was also suffering from diseases like Khansi
(Bronchitis), Shvas (Asthma) and tumescence. His face was swollen and so were
his hands and legs. His fingers, toes, nose and ears were in a state of decay.
Dirty water and pus was oozing from the pulsating sores on his body. He was
tormented by slithering worms in his wounds that were dripping blood and pus.
His nose and ears had decayed into fibrous ooze. He was vomiting and the vomit
contained shreds of coagulated pus, blood and worms. He was uttering piercing,
pathetic, and plaintive sounds and words. Swarms of flies were following him.
His hairs were disheveled. He was wearing rags. Carrying broken pitcher and
broken earthen-cup in his extended hands, he was seeking alms from every house.
Seeking and collecting required alms from high, medium, and low caste families
Bhagavan Gautam Swami left Patalikhand city and came to Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir. After critical review (pratikraman) of his movement for alms collection
he showed the food to Bhagavan. On getting permission, he ate his food without
enjoying its taste and only for sustenance, like a snake entering its hole. He
then spent his time enkindling his soul with discipline and austerities. Then on
a second occasion on the day of breaking his two-day fast Bhagavan Gautam Swami
did studies during the first quarter of the day and meditation during the second
quarter of the day. During the third quarter he moved out and entered
Patalikhand city from the southern gate. There also he saw the same person
suffering from Eczema and other ailments in the same condition. He returned
after collecting alms... and soon up to... He then spent his time enkindling his
soul with discipline and austerities. Then on a third occasion on the day of
breaking his two-day fast Bhagavan Gautam Swami entered Patalikhand city from
the western gate. There also he saw the same person seeking alms in the same
condition. In the same way on a fourth occasion on the day of breaking his two-
day fast Bhagavan Gautam Swami entered Patalikhand city from the northern gate.
There also he saw the same person seeking alms in the same condition. Aagam - 11
- Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [40]

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7  Looking at his condition,
Bhagavan Gautam Swami thoughtfully contemplated, "Oh! This man leads a miserable
life suffering the fruits of sin as a consequence of the sinful karmas he
acquired due to evil deeds committed in the past." With these thoughts, he
returned and asked Bhagavan,  "Bhagavan, I went to Patalikhand city to collect
alms. I entered the city from the eastern gate and saw a man suffering from
Eczema and many other diseases. He was living on alms. Then on a second
occasion, on the day of breaking my two-day fast, I entered the city from the
southern gate. There also I saw the same person in the same condition. Then on a
third occasion, on the day of breaking my fast, I entered the city from the
western gate and again saw the same person in the same condition. Finally, on a
fourth occasion, on the day of breaking my fast, I entered the city from the
northern gate and once again saw the same person in the same condition. On
seeing him, I thought, 'Oh! This man leads a miserable life suffering the fruits
of sin as a consequence of the sinful karmas he acquired in the past.'" (Etc.)
"Bhante! Who was this person, suffering the agony of such terrible ailments, in
his past birth?" Bhagavan Mahavir replied as follows. "Jambu! During that period
of time, there was a prosperous city named Vijayapur in Bharatvarsh area in
Jambu continent. In that Vijayapur city ruled a king named Kanakarath. King
Kanakarath had a Vaidya (Ayurvedic doctor) named Dhanvantari who was a scholar
of all the eight limbs of Ayurveda (Indian Science of medicine and surgery). The
names of these eight limbs of Ayurveda are as follows: * Kaumarabhritya - The
part of Ayurveda that deals with nursing, nutrition and cure of ailments of
infants (Paediatrics). * Shalakya - The part of Ayurveda that deals with the
cure of diseases of eyes, nose and other parts of the upper half of the body. *
Shalyahatya - The part of Ayurveda that deals with the removal of thorns, cysts
etc. or surgery. * Kayachikitsa - The part of Ayurveda that deals with the
symptoms and cure of diseases in general. * Jangul - The part of Ayurveda that
deals with the cure for poisons or toxicity. * Bhoot-vidya - The part of
Ayurveda that deals with warding off evil spirits and pacifying them. * Rasayan
- The part of Ayurveda that deals with the elixirs of life and other medicines.
* Baajikaran - The part of Ayurveda that deals with the medicines and tonics for
maintaining and toning up sexual performance.  That Dhanvantari Vaidya had a
healing touch (shivahast). He had a pious and lucky touch (shubhahast). He had a
skilled touch (laghuhast). In other words, he cured his patients to their entire
satisfaction with his skilled handling and treatment.  That Dhanvantari Vaidya
used to provide treatment to the queens residing in the inner quarters of king
Kanakarath's palace. His patients included many kings, rich merchants, ... and
so on up to... caravan chiefs; many other weak, mentally disturbed and ailing
persons with or without guardians; Shramans, Brahmins, Bhikshuks, Karotiks."
Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [41]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7 Looking at his condition Bhagavan
Gautam Swami thoughtfully contemplated"Oh! This man leads a miserable life
suffering the fruits of sin as a consequence of the sinful karmas he acquired
due to evil deeds committed in the past." With these thoughts he returned and
asked Bhagavan "Bhagavan I went to Patalikhand city to collect alms. I entered
the city from the eastern gate and saw a man suffering from Eczema and many
other diseases. He was living on alms. Then on a second occasion on the day of
breaking my two-day fast I entered the city from the southern gate. There also I
saw the same person in the same condition. Then on a third occasion on the day
of breaking my fast I entered the city from the western gate and again saw the
same person in the same condition. Finally on a fourth occasion on the day of
breaking my fast I entered the city from the northern gate and once again saw
the same person in the same condition. On seeing him I thought 'Oh! This man
leads a miserable life suffering the fruits of sin as a consequence of the
sinful karmas he acquired in the past." (Etc.) "Bhante! Who was this person,
suffering the agony of such terrible ailments, in his past birth?" Bhagavan
Mahavir replied as follows. Jambu! During that period of time there was a
prosperous city named Vijayapur in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu continent. In that
Vijayapur city ruled a king named Kanakarath. King Kanakarath had a Vaidya
(Ayurvedic doctor) named Dhanvantari who was a scholar of all the eight limbs of
Ayurveda (Indian Science of medicine and surgery). The names of these eight
limbs of Ayurveda are as follows Kaumarabhritya- The part of Ayurveda that deals
with nursing, nutrition and cure of ailments of infants (Paediatrics). Shalakya-
The part of Ayurveda that deals with the cure of diseases of eyes, nose and
other parts of the upper half of the body. Shalyahatya- The part of Ayurveda
that deals with the removal of thorns, cysts etc. or surgery. Kayachikitsa- The
part of Ayurveda that deals with the symptoms and cure of diseases in general.
Jangul- The part of Ayurveda that deals with the cure for poisons or toxicity.
Bhoot-vidya- The part of Ayurveda that deals with warding off evil spirits and
pacifying them. Rasayan The part of Ayurveda that deals with the elixirs of life
and other medicines. Baajikaran. The part of Ayurveda that deals with the
medicines and tonics for maintaining and toning up sexual performance. That
Dhanvantari Vaidya had a healing touch (shivahast). He had a pious and lucky
touch (shubhahast). He had a skilled touch (laghuhast). In other words he cured
his patients to their entire satisfaction with his skilled handling and
treatment. That Dhanvantari Vaidya used to provide treatment to the queens
residing in the inner quarters of king Kanakarath's palace. His patients
included many kings, rich merchants, ... and so on up to... caravan chiefs; many
other weak, mentally disturbed and ailing persons with or without guardians;
Shramans, Brahmins, Bhikshuks, Karotiks Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [41]

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7  (Kapalik or the mendicants who
carried skull), Karpatiks (mendicants in rags), beggars, and critically sick
persons. To some of these he prescribed fish-meat, to some tortoise-meat, to
some alligator-meat, to some crocodile-meat, to some sumsumar-meat, and to some
goat-meat. In the same way he also prescribed flesh of sheep, black-bucks, pigs,
deer, rabbits, cows, and buffaloes. To many he prescribed meat of partridge,
quail (lavak), pigeon, hen, and peacock. In the same way he advised for flesh
from a variety of aquatic, terrestrial, and avian beings.  Not only this, that-
Dhanvantari Vaidya himself spent his time tasting (asvadan), eating in larger
quantity or enjoying (visvadan) and sharing (paribhojan) habitually a variety of
cooked, fried, and roasted meat of fish, peacocks... and so on up to... aquatic,
terrestrial, and avian beings. He did that with five kinds of wines.  Ever
involved in these sinful activities, accepting these activities to be ideal of
his life and the best of conduct, Dhanvantari Vaidya acquired extremely
malevolent and pain causing karmas in abundance. After completing his life-span
of three thousand two hundred years, he died and reincarnated as an infernal
being in the sixth hell where the maximum life span is twenty two Sagaropam (a
metaphoric unit of time).  Gangadatta, the wife of Sagaradatt, was a jatunandika
(a woman whose offspring die at birth). One day while Gangadatta was thinking
about family matters around midnight, an aspiration surfaced "I have been
enjoying my married life with Sagaradatt Sarthavaha. However, I have not been
lucky enough to have given birth even to a single surviving boy or girl.
Fulfilled is the life as humans of those mothers and blessed, fortunate, and
meritorious are those mothers who have surviving children born to them. Who
breast-feed their own children that are eager to suckle, sweetly stutter, and in
stupor shift from the base of the breasts toward the armpit; and who have lifted
the baby with their lotus-like tender and loving hands, put it in the lap and
enjoyed sweet and loving talk with the baby.  "I am, indeed, the wretched, ill-
fated and unhappy one that has been deprived of any of these pleasures with even
a single such offspring. Therefore it would be good for me that tomorrow at dawn
after seeking permission from Sagaradatt Sarthavaha and, taking along numerous
kinfolk, friends, near and far relatives and family members, I go to the temple
of Umbaradatt Yaksh in the garden outside Patalikhand city carrying a variety of
flowers, dresses, perfumes, garlands and ornaments. Arriving there I offer
flowers and other things to Umbaradatt Yaksh, bow at his feet, and beg his
favour thus "Beloved of gods! If I give birth to a child who survives I will
offer worship (yaag) and enhance your non-diminishing treasure (akshayanidhi) by
gifts on auspicious days (daan), and share in profit (bhaag)." "She resolved
thus to pray for the desired boon. Acting upon her resolve she went to
Sagaradatt Sarthavaha at dawn and said to him—"My lord! I have been enjoying my
married life with you. However, I have not given birth even to a single
surviving boy or girl. Therefore, I want that if you give permission will take
along numerous Kinfolk, friends, near and far relatives and family members, and
go to the temple of Umbaradatt Yaksh in the garden outside Patalikhand city...
and so on up to... perform highly beneficent flower-worship to get a son as
boon."  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [42]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7 (Kapalik or the mendicants who
carried skull), Karpatiks (mendicants in rags), beggars, and critically sick
persons. To some of these he prescribed fish-meat, to some tortoise-meat, to
some alligatormeat, to some crocodile-meat, to some sumsumar-meat, and to some
goat-meat. In the same way he also prescribed flesh of sheep, black-bucks, pigs,
deer, rabbits, cows, and buffaloes. To many he prescribed meat of partridge,
quail (lavak), pigeon, hen, and peacock. In the same way he advised for flesh
from a variety of aquatic, terrestrial, and avian beings. Not only this, that-
Dhanvantari Vaidya himself spent his time tasting (asvadan), eating in larger
quantity or enjoying (visvadan) and sharing (paribhojan) habitually a variety of
cooked, fried, and roasted meat of fish, peacocks... and so on up to... aquatic,
terrestrial, and avian beings. He did that with five kinds of wines. Ever
involved in these sinful activities, accepting these activities to be ideal of
his life and the best of conduct, Dhanvantari Vaidya acquired extremely
malevolent and pain causing karmas in abundance. After completing his life-span
of three thousand two hundred years, he died and reincarnated as an infernal
being in the sixth hell where the maximum life span is twenty two Sagaropam (a
metaphoric unit of time). Gangadatta, the wife of Sagaradatt, was a jatunandika
(a woman whose offspring die at birth). One day while Gangadatta was thinking
about family matters around midnight, an aspiration surfaced "I have been
enjoying my married life with Sagaradatt Sarthavaha. However, I have not been
lucky enough to have given birth even to a single surviving boy or girl.
Fulfilled is the life as humans of those mothers and blessed, fortunate, and
meritorious are those mothers who have surviving children born to them. Who
breast-feed their own children that are eager to suckle, sweetly stutter, and in
stupor shift from the base of the breasts toward the armpit; and who have lifted
the baby with their lotus-like tender and loving hands, put it in the lap and
enjoyed sweet and loving talk with the baby. "I am, indeed, the wretched, ill-
fated and unhappy one that has been deprived of any of these pleasures with even
a single such offspring. Therefore it would be good for me that tomorrow at dawn
after seeking permission from Sagaradatt Sarthavaha and, taking along numerous
kinfolk, friends, near and far relatives and family members, I go to the temple
of Umbaradatt Yaksh in the garden outside Patalikhand city carrying a variety of
flowers, dresses, perfumes, garlands and ornaments. Arriving there I offer
flowers and other things to Umbaradatt Yaksh, bow at his feet, and beg his
favour thus "Beloved of gods! If I give birth to a child who survives I will
offer worship (yaag) and enhance your non-diminishing treasure (akshayanidhi) by
gifts on auspicious days (daan), and share in profit (bhaag)." "She resolved
thus to pray for the desired boon. Acting upon her resolve she went to
Sagaradatt Sarthavaha at dawn and said to him--"My lord! I have been enjoying my
married life with you. However, I have not given birth even to a single
surviving boy or girl. Therefore, I want that if you give permission will take
along numerous Kinfolk, friends, near and far relatives and family members, and
go to the temple of Umbaradatt Yaksh in the garden outside Patalikhand city...
and so on up to... perform highly beneficent flower-worship to get a son as
boon." Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [42]

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7  Sagaradatt Sarthavaha
replied—"Lady! I also desire that somehow you give birth to a surviving son or a
daughter." With these words he supported Gangadatta's proposal and gave her
permission.  On getting permission from Sagaradatt Sarthavaha, Gangadatta took
along numerous kinfolk, friends, near and far relatives and family members and
left her house carrying a variety of flowers, dresses, perfumes, garlands and
ornaments. Crossing Patalikhand city she came near a pushkarini (bavadi; a deep
and elaborate masonry tank or well with steps down to the water level). She
placed the flowers, dresses, perfumes, garlands and ornaments at one side on the
bank and entered the bavadi. After dipping and playing around in the water she
performed auspicious rituals like putting mark on her forehead. She came out of
the pushkarini in wet sari (Indian female dress) and went to the temple of
Umbaradatt Yaksh with flowers and other worship material. As soon as she saw the
Yaksh image she paid homage and cleansed the Yaksh image with a peacock feather
broom. Then she anointed the image with water and wiped it dry with a saffron
coloured perfumed soft cloth. After that she dressed the image in white garb and
offered costly flowers, dresses, perfumes, garlands, incense powders suitable
for deities. She then burned incense and with her knees on the ground bowed at
the feet of the image. In this posture she submitted—"O divine Yaksh! If I give
birth to a child who survives I will offer worship (yaag) and enhance your non-
diminishing treasure (akshayanidhi) by gifts on auspicious days (dawn), and
share in profit (bhaag)." With these words she begged the deity's favour and
returned home.  The soul that was Dhanvantari Vaidya, coming out of the hell,
was conceived as a son in the womb of Gangadatta in this patalikhand city. After
three months of pregnancy Gangadatta had a dohad (pregnancy-desire).  "Fulfilled
is the life as humans of those mothers and blessed... and so on up to... are
those mothers who get ample staple food, liquids, general food, and savoury food
(ashan, paan, khadya, svadya) prepared; take along numerous kinfolk, friends,
near and far relatives and family members and, crossing Patalikhand city, go to
a pushkarini (bavadi; a deep and elaborate masonry tank or well with steps down
to the water level). They enter the bavadi. After dipping in the water and
performing auspicious rituals like putting mark on forehead, they enjoy the food
they brought along. And thus they fulfill their dohad."  Thinking thus, in the
morning when the brilliant sun dawned, she came to Sagaradatt Sarthavaha and
informed him about her dohad—"My lord ! Blessed are those mothers who satisfy
their pregnancy-desire (dohad) (as aforesaid). I also want to satisfy my
pregnancy-desire."  Then Sagaradatt Sarthavaha gave permission to wife
Gangadatta to satisfy her dohad.  On getting permission from Sagaradatt
Sarthavaha, Gangadatta gets ample staple food, liquids, general food, and
savoury food (ashan, paan, khadya, svadya) prepared. She then collects the food
so prepared, Wines (etc.), flowers and other things needed for worship. Taking
along numerous female kinfolk, friends, (etc.) and many other women she goes to
a pushkarini (bavadi, a deep and elaborate masonry tank or well with steps down
to the water level and takes a dip. Performing auspicious rituals like putting
mark on   Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [43]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7 Sagaradatt Sarthavaha
replied--"Lady! I also desire that somehow you give birth to a surviving son or
a daughter." With these words he supported Gangadatta's proposal and gave her
permission. On getting permission from Sagaradatt Sarthavaha, Gangadatta took
along numerous kinfolk, friends, near and far relatives and family members and
left her house carrying a variety of flowers, dresses, perfumes, garlands and
ornaments. Crossing Patalikhand city she came near a pushkarini (bavadi; a deep
and elaborate masonry tank or well with steps down to the water level). She
placed the flowers, dresses, perfumes, garlands and ornaments at one side on the
bank and entered the bavadi. After dipping and playing around in the water she
performed auspicious rituals like putting mark on her forehead. She came out of
the pushkarini in wet sari (Indian female dress) and went to the temple. of
Umbaradatt Yaksh with flowers and other worship material. As soon as she saw the
Yaksh image she paid homage and cleansed the Yaksh image with a peacock feather
broom. Then she anointed the image with water and wiped it dry with a saffron
coloured perfumed soft cloth. After that she dressed the image in white garb and
offered costly flowers, dresses, perfumes, garlands, incense powders suitable
for deities. She then burned incense and with her knees on the ground bowed at
the feet of the image. In this posture she submitted--"O divine Yaksh! If I give
birth to a child who survives I will offer worship (yaag) and enhance your non-
diminishing treasure (akshayanidhi) by gifts on auspicious days (dawn), and
share in profit (bhaag)." With these words she begged the deity's favour and
returned home. The soul that was Dhanvantari Vaidya, coming out of the hell, was
conceived as a son in the womb of Gangadatta in this patalikhand city. After
three months of pregnancy Gangadatta had a dohad (pregnancy-desire). "Fulfilled
is the life as humans of those mothers and blessed... and so on up to... are
those mothers who get ample staple food, liquids, general food, and savoury food
(ashan, paan, khadya, svadya) prepared; take along numerous kinfolk, friends,
near and far relatives and family members and, crossing Patalikhand city, go to
a pushkarini (bavadi; a deep and elaborate masonry tank or well with steps down
to the water level). They enter the bavadi. After dipping in the water and
performing auspicious rituals like putting mark on forehead, they enjoy the food
they brought along. And thus they fulfill their dohad." Thinking thus, in the
morning when the brilliant sun dawned, she came to Sagaradatt Sarthavaha and
informed him about her dohad--"My lord ! Blessed are those mothers who satisfy
their pregnancy-desire (dohad) (as aforesaid). I also want to satisfy my
pregnancy-desire." Then Sagaradatt Sarthavaha gave permission to wife Gangadatta
to satisfy her dohad. On getting permission from Sagaradatt Sarthavaha,
Gangadatta gets ample staple food, liquids, general food, and savoury food
(ashan, paan, khadya, svadya) prepared. She then collects the food so prepared,
Wines (etc.), flowers and other things needed for worship. Taking along numerous
female kinfolk, friends, (etc.) and many other women she goes to a pushkarini
(bavadi, a deep and elaborate masonry tank or well with steps down to the water
level and takes a dip. Performing auspicious rituals like putting mark on Aagam
- 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [43]

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7  Gangadatta, with her forehead
adorned, enters the temple of Umbaradatt Yaksh. She performs worship as before
and burns incense. Once done, she returns to the pushkarini.  At the pushkarini,
her companions embellish Gangadatta with various ornaments. She then enjoys the
food and six kinds of wine they brought, satisfying her dohad. Once her dohad is
satisfied, she returns home. Pleased by the fulfillment of her dohad, Gangadatta
carries the fetus happily.  After nine months of pregnancy, Gangadatta gives
birth to a son. Following their family tradition, the parents celebrate the
birth of their son. They perform the naming ceremony, deciding to name the child
Umbaradatt, as he was born through the favor of Umbaradatt Yaksh. Young
Umbaradatt grows up under the care of five nursemaids.  Some time later,
Sagaradatt Sarthavaha dies (like Vijayamitra during a sea voyage). In due
course, Gangadatta also dies. Like Ujjhitak, Umbaradatt is expelled from his
house by state guards, and his house is given to someone else. (Helpless,
Umbaradatt starts living on alms.) At some point, Umbaradatt is afflicted by
sixteen diseases, namely Asthma, Bronchitis,... and so on up to... Leprosy.
Suffering from these sixteen deadly diseases and with decayed limbs, Umbaradatt
leads a miserable life.  Bhagavan added, "Gautam! This way, young Umbaradatt is
biding his time in excruciating pain, suffering horribly for the sinful deeds he
committed in the past. That is what you just saw."  Commentary- almost all
stories in this book describe a common situation where the son is expelled from
the house by state officials upon the death of his parents. The commentator
(Tika) surmises that at the time of going on a sea voyage for trading, the
seafaring merchant must have taken loans from other merchants. When the ship
capsized, he lost all his merchandise and wealth. The creditors must have
appealed to the king for realization of their dues, and the king must have
ordered the auction of the property after expelling the heirs. This could be the
prevalent practice at that time. That must have been the reason for the sons of
defaulters to go begging house to house for living.  Meaning- Gautam Swami
asked, "Bhante! After his death, where will this Umbaradatt go? Where will he be
reborn?"  Bhagavan replied, "Gautam! After completing his lifespan of seventy-
two years, Umbaradatt will die and reincarnate as an infernal being in the first
hell named Ratnaprabha. From there, he will follow the cycles of rebirths as
mentioned in the first chapter in context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to...
will be born millions of times in all hells, as all animals, and as all one-
sensed beings.  Coming out from there, he will be born as a cock in Hastinapur
city. After being killed by some evil persons, he will reincarnate as a son in a
merchant family of the same Hastinapur city. There, he will gain righteousness
(samyaktva). From there, he will reincarnate in the first heaven named Saudharm
Devlok. Descending from there, he will take birth in Mahavideh area and follow
ascetic conduct immaculately. At last, he will get enlightened and attain the
status of Siddha, shedding all his karmas and ending all misery."  Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [44]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7 her forehead, she enters the
temple of Umbaradatt Yaksh. There she performs worship as before and burns
incense. Once that is done she returns to the pushkarini. At the pushkarini the
accompanying ladies embellish Gangadatta with all kinds of ornaments. Then
Gangadatta enjoys the food and six kinds of wine they brought along and
satisfies her dohad. She returns home once her dohad is satisfied. Pleased by
the fulfillment of her dohad, Gangadatta carries the fetus happily. After nine
months of pregnancy, that Gangadatta gave birth to a son. Following their family
tradition, the parents celebrated the birth of their son. Then they performed
the naming ceremony-"As this child was born through the favour of Umbaradatt
Yaksh he should be named Umbaradatt." And child Umbaradatt began to grow up in
care of five nursemaids. Some time later Sagaradatt Sarthavaha died (like
Vijayamitra during a sea voyage). In due course Gangadatta also died. Like
Ujjhitak Umbaradatt was also expelled from his house by state guards and his
house was given to some other person. (Helpless Umbaradatt starts living on
alms.) At some point of time Umbaradatt was inflicted by sixteen diseases,
namely Asthma, Bronchitis,... and so on up to... Leprosy. Suffering from these
sixteen deadly diseases and with decayed limbs Umbaradatt leads a miserable
life. Bhagavan added-"Gautam! This way that young Umbaradatt is biding his time
in excruciating pain, suffering horribly for the sinful deeds he committed in
the past. That is what you just saw." Commentary-almost all stories in this book
describe a common situation that the son is expelled from the house by state
officials on death of his parents. The commentator (Tika) surmises that at the
time of going on asea voyage for trading, the seafaring merchant must have taken
loans from other merchants. When the ship capsized he lost all his merchandise
and wealth. The creditors must have appealed to the king for realization of
their dues and the king must have ordered to auction the property after
expelling the heirs. This could be the prevalent practice at that time. That
must have been the reason for the sons of defaulters to go begging house to
house for living. Meaning-.Gautam Swami asked-"Bhante! After his death where
will this Umbaradatt go? Where will he be reborn? Bhagavan replied-Gautam! After
completing his life-span of seventy two years, Umbaradatt will die and
reincarnate as an infernal being in the first hell named Ratnaprabha. From there
he will follow the cycles of rebirths as mentioned in the first chapter in
context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to... will be born millions of times in
all hells, as all animals, and as all one sensed beings. Coming out from there,
he will be born as a cock in Hastinapur city. After being killed by some evil
persons, he will reincarnate as a son in a merchant family of the same
Hastinapur city. There he will gain righteousness (samyaktva). From there he
will reincarnate in the first heaven named Saudharm Devlok. Descending from
there he will take birth in Mahavideh area and follow ascetic conduct
immaculately. At last he will get enlightened and attain status of Siddha
shedding all his karmas and ending all misery. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled
by - Deepratnasagar [44]

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7 Conclusion should be read as
before. Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -7- Umberdatt Compiled by Muni
DeepratnaSagar is Finished 0-X-X-X-X-X-X-X- 0 Chapter (Adhyayan) -8-
Shaurikadatt  **INTRODUCTION:**  This eighth chapter describes a particular
violent profession and its bitter fruits. It is more relevant in modern times.
The central theme of this chapter is to describe the bitter fruits of sale and
consumption of meat. Shriyak the cook killed or arranged to get killed a variety
of animals and birds and prepared food for his master, the king. He too ate that
food. As a result of this violence inspiring karma-programming he takes rebirth
as Shaurikadatt Fisherman. He becomes a big fish-merchant. In order to catch
fish he even poisons and dries ponds and lakes.  This way, employing extremely
cruel means, he indulges in fish-trading. He develops an insatiable craving for
non-vegetarian diet. He suffers bitter fruits of this act during this life and
continues to suffer miserable consequences for many future births. This
explicates that not only the meat eater but also the cook, the seller, and the
provider of meat is equally responsible for the violence involved.  [32]
Meaning- The foreword of the eighth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu
Swami asked "Bhante / what is the text and meaning of the eighth chapter of
Duhkhavipaak as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?) Sudharma Swami Replied
Jambu l During that period of time there was a city named Shaurikapur. Outside
this town was a garden named Shaurikavatansak, in which was a temple of Shaurik
Yaksh. In that city ruled a king named Shaurikadatt.  There was a settlement of
fishermen in the northeastern direction outside Shaurikapur City. A fisherman
named Samudradatt lived there. He was irreligious... and so on up to... enjoyed
evil deeds only. He had a wife named Samudradatta. They had a son named
Shaurikadatt whose body was fully and perfectly endowed.  During that period of
time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrived (at Shaurika vatansak garden). People and
the king came to attend his discourse. They returned home after the discourse.
During that period of time, while returning after collecting alms from houses of
high, low and medium castes in Shaurikapur city, for breaking his two-day fast,
Bhagavan Gautam, the chief disciple of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, came to the
main road (as mentioned earlier). While passing by that settlement of fishermen
he saw in the middle of a crowd a hungry, emaciated and lean skeleton-like
person clad in blue. His bones crackled  Aagam – 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [45]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-7 Conclusion should be read as
before. Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -7- Umberdatt Compiled by Muni
DeepratnaSagar is Finished 0-X-X-X-X-X-X-X- 0 Chapter (Adhyayan) -8-
Shaurikadatt O INTRODUCTION: This eighth chapter describes a particular violent
profession and its bitter fruits. It is more relevant in modern times. The
central theme of this chapter is to describe the bitter fruits of sale and
consumption of meat. Shriyak the cook killed or arranged to get killed a variety
of animals and birds and prepared food for his master, the king. He too ate that
food. As a result of this violence inspiring karma-programming he takes rebirth
as Shaurikadatt Fisherman. He becomes a big fish-merchant. In order to catch
fish he even poisons and dries ponds and lakes. This way, employing extremely
cruel means, he indulges in fish-trading. He develops an insatiable craving for
non-vegetarian diet. He suffers bitter fruits of this act during this life and
continues to suffer miserable consequences for many future births. This
explicates that not only the meat eater but also the cook, the seller, and the
provider of meat is equally responsible for the violence involved. [32] Meaning-
The foreword of the eighth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked
"Bhante / what is the text and meaning of the eighth chapter of Duhkhavipaak as
preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?) Sudharma Swami Replied Jambu l During
that period of time there was a city named Shaurikapur. Outside this town was a
garden named Shaurikavatansak, in which was a temple of Shaurik Yaksh. In that
city ruled a king named Shaurikadatt. There was a settlement of fishermen in the
northeastern direction outside Shaurikapur City. A fisherman named Samudradatt
lived there. He was irreligious... and so on up to... enjoyed evil deeds only.
He had a wife named Samudradatta. They had a son named Shaurikadatt whose body
was fully and perfectly endowed. During that period of time Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir arrived (at Shaurika vatansak garden). People and the king came to
attend his discourse. They returned home after the discourse. During that period
of time, while returning after collecting alms from houses of high, low and
medium castes in Shaurikapur city, for breaking his two-day fast, Bhagavan
Gautam, the chief disciple of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, came to the main road
(as mentioned earlier). While passing by that settlement of fishermen he saw in
the middle of a crowd a hungry, emaciated and lean skeleton-like person clad in
blue. His bones crackled Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar
[45]

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-8  When he sat or stood up, he was
uttering piercing, pathetic, and plaintive sounds and words due to a fish-bone
being stuck in his throat. He was vomiting, and the vomit contained shreds of
coagulated pus, blood, and worms. Looking at his pathetic condition, Bhagavan
Gautam Swami thoughtfully contemplated, "Oh! This man is suffering infernal
agony due to the sinful karmas he acquired due to evil deeds committed in the
past." With these thoughts, he returned and asked Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir about
the past birth of that person. In reply, Bhagavan said:  "Gautam, during that
period of time, there was a city called Nandipur in the Bharatvarsh area in the
Jambu continent. A king named Mitra was the ruler of that city. King Mitra had a
cook named Shriyak who was irreligious... and so on up to... He enjoyed evil
deeds only.  That Shriyak cook had many assistants, including matsyiks
(fishermen), vaguriks (animal trappers), and shakuniks (bird catchers). They
used to kill small and soft as well as larger fish; goats... and so on up to...
buffaloes; and partridges... and so on up to... peacocks and bring them to
Shriyak cook. Many more partridges... and so on up to... peacocks were kept in
cages. Shriyak cook also had many other employees, working on wages and food,
who used to pluck out feathers of live partridges... and so on up to... peacocks
and give him the bare bodies.  Then that Shriyak cook used to chop the meat of
numerous terrestrial, aquatic, and avian beings into small pieces, round pieces,
long pieces, and short pieces. Some of these he cooked with ice; some he just
stored separately to get seasoned naturally; some he left in the sun; and some
he cooked in hot air or steam. Some of these pieces he cooked black and others
brown. Some of these pieces he seasoned with buttermilk, some with hog-plum
juice, some with grape juice, some with wood-apple juice, some with pomegranate
juice, and some with fish juice. After this, he fried some in oil, roasted some
in fire, and grilled some on sticks (shulaprot).  In the same way, he also
prepared soups from meat of fish, deer, partridge,... and so on up to...
peacock. He also prepared salad of a variety of vegetables. After arranging all
these dishes properly, he took them to the dining place of king Mitra and
offered them to the king. Shriyak cook too frequently enjoyed the so cooked,
roasted, and grilled meat and soup of numerous terrestrial, aquatic, and avian
beings with vegetables and six kinds of wine.  That Shriyak cook was ever
involved in these sinful activities. These activities had become his way and
ideal of life, and he had accepted all these sinful activities to be the best
conduct. As a consequence, he acquired extremely malevolent and pain-causing
karmas in abundance. After completing his lifespan of thirty-three hundred
years, he died and reincarnated as an infernal being in the sixth hell.
Samudradatta (wife of fisherman) was a jatunandika. Her offspring died at birth.
Like Gangadatta, she also had an idea while thinking about 'family matters'
around midnight. After seeking permission from her husband, she sought a boon
from Shaurik Yaksh and got pregnant. After satisfying her dohad (pregnancy-
desire), she gave birth to a son. In due course, the parents named the child,
"As this child was born as a favour by Shaurik Yaksh, he should be named
Shaurikadatt." And child Shaurikadatt began to grow up in the care of five
nursemaids. Crossing his adolescence, he attained youth and maturity.  Aagam -
11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [46]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-8 when he sat or stood up. On account
of a fish-bone being stuck in his throat he was uttering piercing, pathetic, and
plaintive sounds and words. He was vomiting and the vomit contained shreds of
coagulated pus, blood and worms. Looking at his pathetic condition Bhagavan
Gautam Swami thoughtfully contemplated--"Oh! This man is suffering infernal
agony due to the sinful karmas he acquired due to evil deeds committed in the
past." With these thoughts he returned and asked Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir about
the past birth of that person. In reply Bhagavan said Gautam During that period
of time there was a city called Nandipur in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu continent.
A king named Mitra was the ruler of that city. King Mitra had a cook named
Shriyak who was irreligious... and so on up to!.. Enjoyed evil deeds only. That
Shriyak cook had many assistants including matsyiks (fishermen), vaguriks
(animal trappers), and shakuniks (bird catchers). They used to kill small and
soft as well as larger fish; goats... and so on up to... buffaloes; and
partridges... and so on up to... peacocks and bring them to Shriyak cook. Many
more partridges... and so on up to... peacocks were kept in cages. Shriyak cook
also had many other employees, working on wages and food, who used to pluck out
feathers of live partridges... and so on up to... peacocks and give him the bare
bodies. Then that Shriyak cook used to chop the meat of numerous terrestrial,
aquatic, and avian beings into small pieces, round pieces, long pieces, and
short pieces. Some of these he cooked with ice; some he just stored separately
to get seasoned naturally; some he left in the sun; and some he cooked in hot
air or steam. Some of these pieces he cooked black and others brown. Some of
these pieces he seasoned with buttermilk, some with hog-plum juice, some with
grape juice, some with wood-apple juice, some with pomegranate juice, and some
with fish juice. After this he fried some in oil, roasted some in fire, and
grilled some on sticks (shulaprot). In the same way he also prepared soups froin
meat of fish, deer, partridge,... and so on up to... peacock. He also prepared
salad of a variety of vegetables. After arranging all these dishes properly he
took them to the dining place of king Mitra and offered to the king. Shriyak
cook too frequently enjoyed the so cooked, roasted and grilled meat and soup of
numerous terrestrial, aquatic, and avian beings with vegetables and six kinds of
wine. That Shriyak cook was ever involved in these sinful activities. These
activities had become his way and ideal of life and he had accepted all these
sinful activities to be the best conduct. As a consequence he acquired extremely
malevolent and pain causing karmas in abundance. After completing his life-span
of thirty three hundred years he died and reincarnated as an infernal being in
the sixth hell. Samudradatta (wife of fisherman) was a jatunandika. Her
offspring died at birth. Like Gangadatta, she also had idea while thinking about
'familymatters around midnight. After seeking permission from her husband she
sought boon from Shaurik Yaksh and got pregnant. After satisfying her dohad
(pregnancy-desire) she gave birth to a son. In due course the parents named the
child--"As this child was born as a favour by Shaurik Yaksh he should be named
Shaurikadatt." And child Shaurikadatt began to grow up in care of five
nursemaids. Crossing his adolescence he attained youth and maturity. Aagam - 11
- Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [46]

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-8  Some time later, Samudradatt
Fisherman died. Crying, wailing and weeping, Shaurikadatt took the dead body to
the cremation ground in a funeral procession joined by many friends, kinfolk,
and family members. There, last rites and other formal rituals were performed.
After this, Shaurikadatt became the chief of the fishermen. Now he was a
fisherman who had become irreligious... and so on up to... enjoyed evil deeds
only.  That Shriyak cook had employed many assistants, working on wages and
food, which used to enter the great river Yamuna in small boats. They used to
move around, scoop (hrid-galan), contaminate (hrid-malan), agitate (hrid-
mardan), churn (hrid-manthan), drain (hrid-vahan) and discharge (hrid-pravahan)
the river water in order to terrify and displace fish to facilitate hauling the
same. Besides this, they used a variety of means and equipment including
prapanchul, prapampul, and matsyapuchchha. jrimbha, trisara, bhisara, visara,
dvisara, hilliri, jhilliri, lalliri, jaal, gal, kootapash, valkal-bandh,
sutrabandh, and baal-bandh (these are names of different types and designs of
fishing nets). Thus they caught small and soft... and so on up to... large and
stout fish and filled their boats. With the haul, they returned to the river-
bank, unloaded it in a heap, and left it to dry in the sun.  Many other
employees, working on wages and food, fried, roasted, grilled this sun-dried
fish-meat in order to earn their living by selling the same on the roadside.
Shaurika datt too frequently enjoyed cooked roasted and grilled fish-meat with
six kinds of wine.  At a certain time while eating the cooked roasted and
grilled fish-meat, a fish bone got stuck in Shaurikadatt Fisherman's throat
causing excruciating pain to him. Tormented by this, Shaurikadatt called his
servants and instructed, "Beloved of gods! Go and make this announcement loudly
at every corner, crossings where three, four or more roads meet, main road and
streets in Shaurikapur City-0 Beloved of gods! Shaurikadatt has a fish bone
stuck in his throat. Any Vaidya (qualified Ayurvedic doctor) and junior Vaidya,
senior and junior Jnayak (those who learned and practiced the art of healing
through their own experience), and senior and junior Chikitsak (those who
practiced medicine and surgery) who is able to remove this fish bone will be
amply and richly rewarded by Shaurikadatt." The servants made the announcement
as told.  Hearing and understanding this announcement, many healers (etc.) came
to the residence of Shaurikadatt. They did the diagnosis by employing their four
kinds of wisdom, namely-autpattiki buddhi (intuitive wisdom), vainayiki buddhi
(acquired wisdom), karmaja buddhi (practical wisdom), and parinamiki buddhi
(deductive wisdom). Then they tried their best to give relief to Shaurikadatt by
making efforts to remove the fish bone by using various procedures, such as-
making him vomit, by giving him expectorants (chhardan), by giving massage or
compression (avapidan), by placing wooden pieces between molars to force open
the mouth (kavalagraha), by using surgical instruments (shalyoddhar), and by
applying medicines. But they failed to remove the fish bone from Shaurikadatt's
throat and stop the flow of blood and pus. When these healers got exhausted
(shraant), confused or mentally tired (cant), and disappointed (paritant), they
returned from where they came.  Disappointed with the treatment given by the
healers and suffering excruciating and intolerable pain, Shaurikadatt has become
emaciated and has been reduced to a mere skeleton. He spends his time in misery.
Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut [47] Compiled by - Deepratnasagar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-8 Some time later Samudradatt
Fisherman died. Crying, wailing and weeping Shaurikadatt took the dead body to
cremation ground in a funeral procession joined by many friends, kinfolk, and
family members. There last rites and other formal rituals were performed. After
this Shaurikadatt became the chief of the fishermen. Now he was a fisherman who
had become irreligious... and so on up to... enjoyed evil deeds only. That
Shriyak cook had employed many assistants, working on wages and food, which used
to enter the great river Yamuna in small boats. They used to move around, scoop
(hrid-galan), contaminate (hrid-malan), agitate (hrid-mardan), churn (hrid-
manthan), drain (hrid-vahan) and discharge (hrid-pravahan) the river water in
order to terrify and displace fish to facilitate hauling the same. Besides this
they used a variety of means and equipment including prapanchul, prapampul, and
matsyapuchchha. jrimbha, trisara, bhisara, visara, dvisara, hilliri, jhilliri,
lalliri, jaal, gal, kootapash, valkal-bandh, sutrabandh, and baal-bandh (these
are names of different types and designs of fishing nets). Thus they caught
small and soft... and so on up to... large and stout fish and filled their
boats. With haul they returned to the river-bank, unloaded it in a heap, and
left it to dry in sun. Many other employees, working on wages and food, fried,
roasted, grilled this sun-dried fish-meat in order to earn their living by
selling same on roadside. Shaurika datt too frequently enjoyed cooked roasted
and grilled fish-meat with six kinds of wine. At a certain time while eating the
cooked roasted and grilled fish-meat, a fish bone got stuck in Shaurikadatt
Fisherman's throat causing excruciating pain to him. Tormented by this,
Shaurikadatt called his servants and instructed, "Beloved of gods! Go and make
this announcement loudly at every corner, crossings where three, four or more
roads meet, main road and streets in Shaurikapur City-0 Beloved of gods!
Shaurikadatt has a fish bone stuck in his throat. Any Vaidya (qualified
Ayurvedic doctor) and junior Vaidya, senior and junior Jnayak (those who learned
and practiced the art of healing through their own experience), and senior and
junior Chikitsak (those who practiced medicine and surgery) who is able to
remove this fish bone will be amply and richly rewarded by Shaurikadatt.' The
servants made the announcement as told. Hearing and understanding this
announcement many healers (etc.) came to the residence of Shaurikadatt. They did
the diagnosis by employing their four kinds of wisdom, namely-autpattiki buddhi
(intuitive wisdom), vainayiki buddhi (acquired wisdom), karmaja buddhi
(practical wisdom), and parinamiki buddhi (deductive wisdom). Then they tried
their best to give relief to Shaurikadatt by making efforts to remove the fish
bone by using various procedures, such as-making him vomit, by giving him
expectorants (chhardan), by giving massage or compression (avapidan), by placing
wooden pieces between molars to force open the mouth (kavalagraha), by using
surgical instruments (shalyoddhar), and by applying medicines. But they failed
to remove the fish bone from Shaurikadatt's throat and stop the flow of blood
and pus. When these healers got exhausted (shraant), confused or mentally tired
(cant), and disappointed (paritant) they returned from where they came.
Disappointed with the treatment given by the healers and suffering excruciating
and intolerable pain, Shaurikadatt has become emaciated and has been reduced to
a mere skeleton. He spends his time in misery. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut [47]
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-8  The Bhagavan said, "Gautam!
Thus, Shaurikadatt is suffering the fruits of extremely bad karmas acquired in
the past."  Gautam Swami asked, "Bhante! After his death, where will this
Shaurikadatt Fisherman go? Where will he be reborn?"  The Bhagavan replied,
"Gautam! After completing his lifespan of seventy years, Shaurikadatt Fisherman
will die at the destined time of his death and will reincarnate as an infernal
being in the first hell named Ratnaprabha, having a maximum lifespan of one
Sagaropam. From there, he will follow the cycles of rebirths as mentioned in the
first chapter in context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to... will be born
millions of times in all hells, as all animals, and as all one-sensed beings.
Coming out from there, he will be born as a fish in Hastinapur city. After being
killed by fishermen, he will reincarnate as a son in a merchant family of the
same Hastinapur city. There, he will gain righteousness (samyaktva) and get
initiated as an ascetic. From there, he will reincarnate in the first heaven
named Saudharm De Aok. Descending from there, he will take birth in Mahavideh
area and follow ascetic conduct immaculately. At last, he will get enlightened
and attain the status of Siddha, shedding all his karmas and ending all misery."
**Conclusion should be read as before.**  **Chapter -8- Compiled by Muni
Deepratna Sagar is finished**  **0-X-X-X-X-X-X-X- 0**  **Chapter (Adhyayan) - 9-
Devadattaa**  **O INTRODUCTION:**  This ninth chapter contains the horrifying
story of a cruel woman. The preceding chapter contained the description of
callous male characters who killed and tortured animals, birds, and fish; but
this chapter describes a female character who mercilessly kills her own mother-
in-law. In her earlier birth, she was King Simhasen, a male. Instigated by his
chief queen, he imprisons the mothers of his other four hundred wives in a
camouflaged house through deception and then burns them alive while they were
asleep. The perpetrator of such a cruel deed dies with a cruel attitude and
reincarnates as the girl Devadatta. Although endowed with physical beauty,
Devadatta had a perverted, ugly, and despicable mind. For her unrestricted
enjoyment of mundane pleasures, she mercilessly killed the mother of her
husband, a devotee of his mother.  Reading or listening to the grave
consequences of such cruel deeds makes one shiver and abhor violence.  **[33]
Meaning- The foreword of the eighth chapter should be read as before.** (Jambu
Swami asked—"Bhante ! When this is the text and meaning of the eighth chapter,
what...)  **Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut**  **Compiled by - Deepratnasagar**
**[48]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-8 Bhagavan added--"Gautam ! Thus
that Shaurikadatt is suffering (as you have seen) the fruits of the extremely
bad karmas acquired in the past." Gautam Swami asked--"Bhante ! After his death
where will this Shaurikadatt Fisherman go? Where will he be reborn?" Bhagavan
replied Gautam ! After completing his life-span of seventy years, Shaurikadatt
Fisherman will die at the destined time of his death and will reincarnate as an
infernal being in the first hell named Ratnaprabha having a maximum life-span of
one Sagaropam. From there he will follow the cycles of rebirths as mentioned in
the first chapter in context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to... will be born
millions of times in all hells, as all animals, and as all one sensed beings.
Coming out from there he will be born as a fish in Hastinapur city. After being
killed by fishermen he will reincarnate as a son in a merchant family of the
same Hastinapur city. There he will gain righteousness (samyaktva) and get
initiated as an ascetic. From there he will reincarnate in the first heaven
named Saudharm De Aok. Descending from there he will take birth in Mahavideh
area and follow ascetic conduct immaculately. At last he will get enlightened
and attain the status of Siddha, shedding all his karmas and ending all misery.
Conclusion should be read as before. Conduct immaculding from there he will
reinca Chapter -8- Compiled by Muni Deepratna Sagar is finished 0-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-
0 Chapter (Adhyayan) - 9- Devadattaa O INTRODUCTION: This ninth chapter contains
the horrifying story of a cruel woman. The preceding chapter contained the
description of a callous male characters who killed and tortured animals, birds,
and fish; but this chapter describes a female character who mercilessly kills
her own mother-in-law. In her earlier birth she was king Simhasen, a male.
Instigated by his chief queen he imprisons the mothers of his other four hundred
wives in a camouflaged house through deception and then burns them alive while
they were asleep. The perpetrator of such cruel deed dies with cruel attitude
and reincarnates as girl Devadatta. Although endowed with physical beauty,
Devadatta had a perverted, ugly, and despicable mind. For her unrestricted
enjoyment of mundane pleasures she mercilessly killed the mother of his husband,
a devotee of his mother. Reading or listening to the grave consequences of such
cruel deeds makes one shiver, and abhor violence. [33] Meaning- The foreword of
the eighth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked--"Bhante ! When
this is the text and meaning of the eighth i chapter, what Aagam - 11 - Vipak-
Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [48]

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-9  This is the text and meaning of
the ninth chapter of Duhkha? Vipaak as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?
Sudharma Swami Replied:  During that period of time there was a city named
Rohitak. Outside this town was a garden named Prithvi-avatansak in which there
was a temple of Dharan Yaksh. In that city ruled a king named Vaishramanadatt.
The name of his queen was Shridevi and that of his son, who was the crown
prince, was Pushpanandi.  In that Rohitak city lived a merchant named Datt
Gathapati who was very rich and respected. The name of his wife was Krishnashri.
Datt Gathapati and Krishnashri had a daughter named Devadatta who was perfectly
endowed and beautiful.  During that period of time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir
arrived at Prithvi-avatansak garden. Bhagavan gave his discourse to all, after
which the king and the people returned home. During that period of time, while
returning after collecting alms in the city, Gautam Swami, the senior disciple
of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, came to the main road. There he saw many elephants,
horses and foot soldiers duly equipped with armours and weapons. Amongst them he
saw a woman, with her ears and nose cut off, tied in the avakotak bond (bending
the neck and tying it with hands already tied at the back) and impaled on the
gallows. (Oil was smeared on her body. On her hands and waist she wore the garb
of a person sentenced to death. She was handcuffed and wore garland of red
flowers on her neck. Her body was also smeared with chalk.) Gautam Swami thought
that this woman was, indeed, suffering infernal agony.  After collecting alms he
left the city, came to Bhagavan Mahavir and asked "Bhante! Who was this woman in
her last birth?" In reply Bhaga van said:  Gautam! During that period of time
there was a prosperous city called Supratishth in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu
continent. A majestic king named Mahasen was the ruler of that city. He had one
thousand queens including Dharini in the inner quarters of his palace. King
Mahasen and queen Dharini had a perfectly endowed and handsome son named
Simhasen who was made the crown prince.  At a certain time the parents got
constructed five hundred large and exclusive mansions for prince Simhasen (when
he attained youth). After this prince Simhasen was married to five hundred
beautiful princesses including Shyama in a single day. Each of these brides were
given sets of five hundred things in gold, silver (etc.) in dowry. He lived
happily in lofty mansions enjoying all these gifts with the five hundred
princesses including Shyama.  After some time king Mahasen died. Prince Simhasen
performed the last rites including cremation and ascended the throne.  Then that
king Simhasen, highly enamoured of Shyama Devi, spent his time madly engrossed
in her thoughts and without caring for or honouring other queens. On the
contrary he spent his time happily neglecting and forgetting them all.  Then the
mothers of these four hundred ninety nine queens came to know of the fact that—
King Simhasen, highly enamoured of Shyama Devi, spent his time madly engrossed
in her thoughts without caring or honouring their daughters. On the contrary he
spent his time happily neglecting and forgetting them all.' On getting aware of
this, they jointly decided that it would be to their benefit to somehow kill
Shyama Devi by...  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [49]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-9 is the text and meaning of the
ninth chapter of Duhkha? Vipaak as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?)
Sudharma Swami Replied Jambu During that period of time there was a city named
Rohitak. Outside this town was a garden named Prithvi-avatansak in which there
was a temple of Dharan Yaksh. In that city ruled a king named Vaishramanadatt.
The name of his queen was Shridevi and that of his son, who was the crown
prince, was Pushpanandi. In that Rohitak city lived a merchant named Datt
Gathapati who was very rich and respected. The name of his wife was Krishnashri.
Datt Gathapati and Krishnashri had a daughter named Devadatta who was perfectly
endowed and beautiful. During that period of time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir
arrived at Prithvi-avatansak garden. Bhagavan gave his discourse to all, after
which the king and the people returned home. During that period of time, while
returning after collecting alms in the city, Gautam Swami, the senior disciple
of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, came to the main road. There he saw many elephants,
horses and foot soldiers duly equipped with armours and weapons. Amongst them he
saw a woman, with her ears and nose cut off, tied in the avakotak bond (bending
the neck and tying it with hands already tied at the back) and impaled on the
gallows. (Oil was smeared on her body. On her hands and waist she wore the garb
of a person sentenced to death. She was handcuffed and wore garland of red
flowers on her neck. Her body was also smeared with chalk.) Gautam Swami thought
that this woman was, indeed, suffering infernal agony. After collecting alms he
left the city, came to Bhagavan Mahavir and asked "Bhante! Who was this woman in
her last birth? In reply Bhaga van said Gautam! During that period of time there
was a prosperous city called Supratishth in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu continent.
A majestic king named Mahasen was the ruler of that city. He had one thousand
queens including Dharini in the inner quarters of his palace. King Mahasen and
queen Dharini had a perfectly endowed and handsome son named Simhasen who was
made the crown prince. At a certain time the parents got constructed five
hundred large and exclusive mansions for prince Simhasen (when he attained
youth). After this prince Simhasen was married to five hundred beautiful
princesses including Shyama in a single day. Each of these brides were given
sets of five hundred things in gold, silver (etc.) in dowry. He lived happily in
lofty mansions enjoying all these gifts with the five hundred princesses
including Shyama. After some time king Mahasen died. Prince Simhasen performed
the last rites including cremation and ascended the throne. Then that king
Simhasen, highly enamoured of Shyama Devi, spent his time madly engrossed in her
thoughts and without caring for orhonouring other queens. On the contrary he
spent his time happily neglecting and forgetting them all. Then the mothers of
these four hundred ninety nine queens came to know of the fact that-- King
Simhasen, highly enamoured of Shyama Devi, spent his time madly engrossed in her
thoughts without caring or honouring their daughters. On the contrary he spent
his time happily neglecting and forgetting them all.' On getting aware of this,
they jointly decided that it would be to their benefit to somehow kill Shyama
Devi by Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [49]

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-9  They planned to kill her using
fire, poison, or weapons. With this thought, they waited for the opportunity to
find her alone and murder her. Somehow Shyama Devi learned of this conspiracy.
When she became aware of all this, she thought—"The mothers of my four hundred
ninety nine co-wives have come to know of the fact that King Simhasen, highly
enamoured of Shyama Devi, spent his time madly engrossed in her thoughts without
caring for our daughters. On the contrary, he completely neglects them all.
Therefore, it would be to our benefit to somehow kill Shyama Devi by means of
fire, poison, or weapons. With this thought, they look forward to an opportunity
to find me alone and murder me. In this situation, I do not know when, how and
what wretched death they will deal me." These thoughts made her afraid,
terrified, and agitated. Every part of her body trembled with fear and she came
to copebhavan (the room where an angry and displeased person spends time). There
she spent her time brooding gloomily in a state of mental turmoil swinging
between hope and despair. When King Simhasen got the information about Shyama
Devi's condition, he at once came to Shyama Devi in the copebhavan. Seeing her
hapless and brooding gloomily in a state of mental turmoil swinging between hope
and despair, he asked "Beloved of gods! Why are you so worried and heart-
broken?" Seething in anger, like boiling milk, Shyama Devi responded with angry
words "My lord! On being aware of the fact that you are infatuated with me), the
mothers of my four hundred ninety nine co-wives met at a place and
deliberated—Infatuated with Shyama Devi, king Simhasen does not respect our
daughters. On the contrary, he completely neglects them all. Therefore, it would
be to our benefit to somehow kill Shyama Devi by means of fire, poison, or
weapons. Accordingly, they await the opportunity to find me alone when you are
not present and I am without any protection. My lord! I do not know what
wretched death they will deal me. Terrified by this I came to the copebhavan
(the room where an angry and displeased person spends time) and started brooding
gloomily." King Simhasen reassured Shyama Devi-"Beloved of gods! Stop brooding
gloomily in a hapless state of despair. I will certainly make arrangements to
the effect that you are not caused even the slightest of physical discomfort,
pain or harm. Consoling and reassuring Shyama Devi thus, with loving and sweet
words, king Simhasen returned. He then called his servants and instructed—"Go
outside Supratishth city and construct a large kootakarashala (camouflaged
house) with hundreds of pillars, which is very beautiful, charming, attractive
and fit to be a queen's residence. Those servants left after raising their
joined palms to their heads and humbly accepting the king's order. Going in the
northeastern direction outside Supratishth city, they constructed a large and
beautiful kootakarashala with hundreds of pillars. Once that was done they
informed king Simhasen about the desired kootakarashala being ready. Then at an
opportune moment king Simhasen invited the mothers of those four hundred ninety
nine queens. Getting king Simhasen's invitation, those mothers of the queens got
ready embellished fully with dresses and ornaments according to their respective
status and came to king Simhasen in Supratishth city. King Simhasen provided
them lodging in the said kootakarashala. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [50]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-9 means of fire, poison, or weapons.
With this thought they awaited the opportunity to find her alone and murder her.
Somehow Shyama Devi got to know of this conspiracy. When aware of all this, she
thought--"The mothers of my four hundred ninety nine co-wives have come to know
of the fact that King Simhasen, highly enamoured of Shyama Devi, spent his time
madly engrossed in her thoughts without caring for our daughters. On the
contrary he completely neglects them all. Therefore, it would be to our benefit
to somehow kill Shyama Devi by means of fire, poison, or weapons. With this
thought they look forward to an opportunity to find me alone and murder me. In
this situation I do not know when, how and what wretched death they will deal
me." These thoughts made her afraid, terrified, and agitated. Every part of her
body trembled with fear and she came to copebhavan (the roon where an angry and
displeased person spends time). There she spent her time brooding gloomily in a
state of mental turmoil swinging between hop and despair. When King Simhasen got
the information about Shyama Devi's condition, he at once came to Shyama Devi in
the copebhavan. Seeing her hapless and brooding gloomily in a state of mental
turmoil swinging between hope and despair, he asked"Beloved of gods ! Why are
you so worried and heart-broken?" Seething in anger, like boiling milk, Shyama
Devi responded with angry words "My lord! On being aware of the fact that you
are infatuated with me), the mothers of my four hundred ninety nine co-wives met
at a place and deliberated--Infatuated with Shyama Devi, king Simhasen does not
respect our daughters. On the contrary he completely neglects them all.
Therefore, it would be to our benefit to somehow kill Shyama Devi by means of
fire, poison, or weapons. Accordingly they await the opportunity to find me
alone when you are not present and I am without any protection. My lord! I do
not know what wretched death they will deal me. Terrified by this I came to the
copebhavan (the room where an angry and displeased person spends time) and
started brooding gloomily." King Simhasen reassured Shyama Devi-"Beloved of gods
! Stop brooding gloomily in a hapless state of despair. I will certainly make
arrangements to the effect that you are not caused even slightest of physical
discomfort, pain or harm. Consoling and reassuring Shyama Devi thus, with loving
and sweat words, king Simhasen returned. He then called his servants and
instructed--"Go outside Supratishth city and construct a large kootakarashala
(camouflaged house) with hundreds of pillars, which is very beautiful, charming,
attractive and fit to be a queen's residence. Those servants left after raising
their joined palms to their heads and humbly accepting the king's order. Going
in the northeastern direction outside Supratishth city, they constructed a large
and beautiful kootakarashala with hundreds of pillars. Once that was done they
informed king Simhasen about desired kootakarashala being ready. Then at an
opportune moment king Simhasen invited the mothers of those four hundred ninety
nine queens. Getting king Simhasen's invitation, those mothers of the queens got
ready embellished fully with dresses and ornaments according to their respective
status and came to king Simhasen in Supratishth city. King Simhasen provided
them lodging in the said kootakarashala. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [50]

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-9  Then King Simhasen called his
servants and said, "Take large quantities of ashan, paan, khadya, svadya (staple
food, liquids, general food, and savoury food), flowers, dresses, fragrant
garlands, and ornaments to the Kootakarashala."  According to the king's order,
the servants took all these things there.  Then those four hundred ninety-nine
mothers of queens embellished themselves with all kinds of ornaments and started
enjoying that abundant food and wines as well as music and dance (by musicians
and dancers). In other words, they got engrossed in enjoying food, wines, dance,
and music.  Around midnight, King Simhasen came to the kootakarashala with many
attendants. He got all the gates of the kootakarashala closed and then set it
ablaze from all directions.  Set afire by King Simhasen, those four hundred
ninety-nine mothers of queens failed to find any shelter or protection. They
died crying, wailing, and sobbing in despair.  Ever involved in such sinful
activities, accepting these activities to be the ideal of life and the best
conduct, King Simhasen acquired extremely malevolent and pain-causing karmas in
abundance. After completing his lifespan of three thousand four hundred years,
he died and reincarnated as an infernal being in the sixth hell where the
maximum lifespan is twenty-two Sagaropam. The soul that was King Simhasen,
coming out of the hell, was conceived as a daughter in the womb of Krishnashri,
the wife of Datt Sarthavaha in this Rohitak city.  After nine months of
pregnancy, Krishnashri gave birth to a daughter. That girl was very delicate and
beautiful. On the twelfth day after birth, the parents arranged for abundant
food and invited their friends, relatives, and kinfolk. After the feast, they
performed the naming ceremony - "Our daughter is hereby named Devadatta." And
girl Devadatta began to grow up in the care of five nursemaids.  In due course,
girl Devadatta crossed her adolescence and became a beautiful, charming, and
well-proportioned young woman.  One day, after taking her bath and adorning
herself with a variety of ornaments, Devadatta, surrounded by numerous maids
including hunchbacks, was playing on the rooftop of her mansion with a golden
ball.  Around that time, after taking his bath, adorning himself with ornaments
(etc.), surrounded by many attendants, and mounted on a horse, King
Vaishramanadatt was going for horse-riding. He passed in the vicinity of Datt
Gathapati's mansion. All of a sudden, King Vaishramanadatt saw Devadatta playing
with a golden ball. He was astonished at the beauty, charm, and youth of
Devadatta. He summoned his attendants and asked, "Beloved of gods! Whose
daughter is this? What is her name?"  The attendants joined their palms and
informed, "Sire! This beautiful, charming, and well-proportioned young woman is
Devadatta, the daughter of Datt Gathapati and Krishnashri."  On his return from
horse-riding, King Vaishramanadatt summoned his officials of confidence and
said, "Beloved of gods! Please go and seek the hand of Devadatta, the daughter
of...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-9 Then king Simhasen called his
servants and said-Take large quantities of ashan, paan, khadya, svadya (staple
food, liquids, general food, and savoury food), flowers, dresses, fragrant
garlands, and ornaments to the Kootakarashala. According to the king's order the
servants took all these things there. Then those four hundred ninety nine
mothers of queens embellished themselves with all kinds of ornaments and started
enjoying that abundant food and wines as well as music and dance (by musicians
and dancers). In other words, got engrossed in enjoying food, wines, dance and
music. Around midnight king Simhasen came to the kootakarashala with many
attendants. He got all the gates of the kootakarashala closed and then set it
ablaze from all directions. Set afire by king Simhasen those four hundred ninety
nine mothers of queens failed to find any shelter or protection. They died
crying, wailing, and sobbing in despair. Ever involved in such sinful
activities, accepting these activities to be ideal of life and the best conduct,
king Simhasen acquired extremely malevolent and pain causing karmas in
abundance. After completing his life-span of three thousand four hundred years,
he died and reincarnated as an infernal being in the sixth hell where the
maximum life span is twenty two Sagaropam. The soul that was king Simhasen,
coming out of the hell, was conceived as a daughter in the womb of Krishnashri,
the wife of Datt Sarthavaha in this Rohitak city. After nine months of
pregnancy, that Krishnashri gave birth to a daughter. That girl was very
delicate and beautiful. On the twelfth day after birth, the parents arranged for
abundant food and invited their friends, relatives and kinfolk. After the feast
they performed the naming ceremony-"Our daughter is hereby named Devadatta." And
girl Devadatta began to grow up in care of five nursemaids. In due course girl
Devadatta crossed her adolescence and became a beautiful, charming, and well
proportioned young woman. One day, after taking her bath and adorning herself
with a variety of ornaments, Devadatta, surrounded by numerous maids including
hunchbacks, was playing on the rooftop of her mansion with a golden ball. Around
that time, after taking his bath, adorning himself with ornaments (etc.),
surrounded by many attendants, and mounted on a horse, king Vaishramanadatt was
going for horse-riding. He passed in the vicinity of Datt Gathapati's mansion.
All of a sudden king Vaishramanadatt saw Devadatta playing with a golden ball.
He was astonished at the beauty, charm and youth of Devadatta. He summoned his
attendants and asked"Beloved of gods! Whose daughter is this? What is her name?"
The attendants joined their palms and informed "Sire! This beautiful, charming,
and well proportioned young woman is Devadatta, the daughter of Datt Gathapati
and Krishnashri." On his return from horse-riding, king Vaishramanadatt summoned
his officials of confidence and said "Beloved of gods! Please go and seek the
hand of Devadatta, the daughter of efter birth, the per the feastnd girl Aagam -
11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [51]

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-9  Datt Gathapati and Krishnashri, in
marriage for crown prince Pushyanandi. She is worth getting even in exchange of
our kingdom. (In other words, she is acceptable even if she wants to be the
chief queen of the kingdom.) The officials formally joined their palms and
humbly and happily accepted king Vaishramanadatt's order. After taking their
bath and putting on their best court dresses they went to Datt Sarthavaha's
mansion. Datt Sarthavaha was pleased to see them coming. He got up from his seat
and went ahead seven-eight steps to welcome them. After greeting them he offered
them suitable seats. When the officials took there seats and made themselves
comfortable Datt Sarthavaha asked, "Beloved of gods ! Tell me what gives me the
honour of your visit?" On being asked thus by Datt Sarthavaha the king's
officials said, "Beloved of gods ! We have come to seek the hand of your and
Krishnashri's daughter Devadatta in marriage for our crown prince. Beloved of
gods! If you feel that the match is seemly, appropriate, desirable, commendable
and worth a union, please give your consent to marry Krishnashri to crown prince
Pushyanandi. If you agree to our proposal please tell us the desired dowry?" On
hearing the proposal from the king's officials Datt Sarthavaha replied, "Beloved
of gods ! By asking the hand of my daughter kingVaishramanadatt has bestowed
honour on me and, that is more than any dowry." After this he sent them away
after offering them food and honouring them with flowers, apparels, perfumes,
garlands, and ornaments. messengers returned to king Vaishramanadatt and
informed him aforesaid details (about the acceptance of proposal). (After
getting this information from the king's officials) On an auspicious tithi (date
of the lunar calendar), karan (a division of the day, there being eleven in
number including balav), divas (auspicious day), nakshatra (lunar mansion), and
muhurta (moment) Datt Sarthavaha got plenty of ashan, paan, khadya, svadya
(staple food, liquids, general food, and savoury food) ready. He then invited
his friends, Kinfolk, family members, near and far relatives and other people.
After performing auspicious rituals including putting mark on his forehead, he
took a comfortable seat and enjoyed that food with the guests. Having done that
he sat at a place to wash his mouth and face clean. He then honoured friends,
kin folk, family members, near and far relatives and other people with liberal
gifts of flowers, garlands, perfumes, dresses, ornaments (etc.). After this he
got his daughter adorned with a variety of ornaments, when she had taken her
bath, and seated her in a palanquin lifted by one thousand persons. Carrying all
kinds of gifts and accompanied by all his friends and relatives, he moved in a
procession with all pomp and show including dance and music. Crossing Rohitak
City he arrived at king Vaishramanadatt's palace and greeted him by joining his
palms. There he presented his daughter before king Vaishramanadatt. When King
Vaishramanadatt saw Devadatta as a bride he was very pleased. Then he got plenty
of ashan, paan, khadya, svadya (staple food, liquids, general food, and savoury
food) ready. He then invited his friends, Kinfolk, family members, near and far
relatives and other people and offered them food. After the feast he honoured
them with liberal gifts of flowers, garlands, perfumes, dresses, ornaments
(etc.). Having done that he seated prince Pushyanandi and bride Devadatta on a
platform anointing them with water Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [52]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-9 Datt Gathapati and Krishnashri, in
marriage for crown prince Pushyanandi. She is worth getting even in exchange of
our kingdom. (In other words, she is acceptable even if she wants to be the
chief queen of the kingdom.) The officials formally joined their palms and
humbly and happily accepted king Vaishramanadatt's order. After taking their
bath and putting on their best court dresses they went to Datt Sarthavaha's
mansion. Datt Sarthavaha was pleased to see them coming. He got up from his seat
and went ahead seven-eight steps to welcome them. After greeting them he offered
them suitable seats. When the officials took there seats and made themselves
comfortable Datt Sarthavaha asked, "Beloved of gods ! Tell me what gives me the
honour of your visit?" On being asked thus by Datt Sarthavaha the king's
officials said, "Beloved of gods ! We have come to seek the hand of your and
Krishnashri's daughter Devadatta in marriage for our crown prince. Beloved of
gods! If you feel that the match is seemly, appropriate, desirable, commendable
and worth a union, please give your consent to marry Krishnashri to crown prince
Pushyanandi. If you agree to our proposal please tell us the desired dowry?" On
hearing the proposal from the king's officials Datt Sarthavaha replied, "Beloved
of gods ! By asking the hand of my daughter kingVaishramanadatt has bestowed
honour on me and, that is more than any dowry." After this he sent them away
after offering them food and honouring them with flowers, apparels, perfumes,
garlands, and ornaments. messengers returned to king Vaishramanadatt and
informed him aforesaid details (about the acceptance of proposal). (After
getting this information from the king's officials) On an auspicious tithi (date
of the lunar calendar), karan (a division of the day, there being eleven in
number including balav), divas (auspicious day), nakshatra (lunar mansion), and
muhurta (moment) Datt Sarthavaha got plenty of ashan, paan, khadya, svadya
(staple food, liquids, general food, and savoury food) ready. He then invited
his friends, Kinfolk, family members, near and far relatives and other people.
After performing auspicious rituals including putting mark on his forehead, he
took a comfortable seat and enjoyed that food with the guests. Having done that
he sat at a place to wash his mouth and face clean. He then honoured friends,
kin folk, family members, near and far relatives and other people with liberal
gifts of flowers, garlands, perfumes, dresses, ornaments (etc.). After this he
got his daughter adorned with a variety of ornaments, when she had taken her
bath, and seated her in a palanquin lifted by one thousand persons. Carrying all
kinds of gifts and accompanied by all his friends and relatives, he moved in a
procession with all pomp and show including dance and music. Crossing Rohitak
City he arrived at king Vaishramanadatt's palace and greeted him by joining his
palms. There he presented his daughter before king Vaishramanadatt. When King
Vaishramanadatt saw Devadatta as a bride he was very pleased. Then he got plenty
of ashan, paan, khadya, svadya (staple food, liquids, general food, and savoury
food) ready. He then invited his friends, Kinfolk, family members, near and far
relatives and other people and offered them food. After the feast he honoured
them with liberal gifts of flowers, garlands, perfumes, dresses, ornaments
(etc.). Having done that he seated prince Pushyanandi and bride Devadatta on a
platform anointing them with water Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [52]

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vipak Shrut-Ang-11- Shrut Skandh-1, Chapter-9  The marriage ritual of prince
Pushyanandi and Devadatta was ceremoniously performed with all grandeur, music
and dance, rich gifts (dresses and ornaments) and exchange of greetings. After
the marriage ceremony, king Vaishramanadatt liberally offered food and gifts
(dresses, perfumes, garlands, ornaments etc.) to Devadatta's parents and their
family members, relatives and friends and bade them farewell.  Then, prince
Pushyanandi along with merchant's daughter Devadatta passed his time seeing,
listening to, and enjoying sweet music of a variety of musical instruments
including drums, thirty-two kinds of dramas, other such performances and all
other human comforts and pleasures in his exclusive palace.  After some time,
king Vaishramanadatt died. On his death, grief-stricken Pushyanandi performed
his last rites and other formal rituals with state honor. After the mourning,
Pushyanandi ascended the throne and became the king.  King Pushyanandi was
greatly devoted to his mother Shridevi. Every morning, he would go to her,
wherever she was, and touch her feet. He would then get her body massaged with
shatpaak and sahasrapaak medicated and perfumed oils and pastes, and provide her
comfort and relaxation through four types of body-massage. After that, he would
get her body cleansed by applying and rubbing perfumed powders, and let her
bathe with three kinds of water - lukewarm, cold, and fragrant. He would offer
her enough food of four kinds and then take his own bath and food.  Once around
midnight, Devadatta, engrossed in family problems, thought of killing Shridevi
to fully enjoy human comforts and conjugal pleasures with King Pushyanandi.
Availing the opportunity when Shridevi was sleeping alone and in solitude,
Devadatta went to the kitchen, picked up a red-hot iron rod, and thrust it into
Shridevi's anus, causing her a terrible, pathetic death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-9 poured from gold and silver urns.
The bridal couple was then adorned with beautiful dresses and ornaments.
Offerings were made into the sacred fire and the ritual of the bridegroom
accepting the hand of the bride (panigrahan) was performed. At last with all
grandeur, music and dance, rich gifts (dresses and ornaments) and exchange of
greetings the marriage-ritual of prince Pushyanandi and Devadatta was
ceremoniouslyperformed. After the marriage ceremony king Vaishramanadatt
liberally offered food and gifts (dresses, perfumes, garlands, ornaments etc.)
to Devadatta's parents and their family members, relatives and friends and bade
themfarewell. Then in his exclusive palace prince Pushyanandi along with
merchant's daughter Devadatta passed his time seeing, listening to, and enjoying
sweet music of a variety of musical instruments including drums, thirtytwo kinds
of dramas, other such performances and all other human comforts and pleasures.
After some time king Vaishramanadatt died. On his death grief stricken
Pushyanandi performed his last rites and other formal ritual with state honour.
After the mourning Pushyanandi ascended the throw From crown prince he became
the king. King Pushyanandi was greatly devoted to his mother Shridevi Every
morning he would go to mother Shridevi, wherever she was, any touch her feet.
Then he would get her body massaged with shatpaak and sahasrapaak medicated and
perfumed oils and pastes (made with mixtures of one hundred and one thousand
herbs). He would also give her comfort and relaxation through four types of
body-massagebone stimulating, muscle stimulating, skin stimulating, and hair
stimulating. After that he would get her body cleansed by applying and rubbing
perfumed powders. Then he would let her bathe with three kinds of water-ukewarm,
cold, and fragrant. Once all this was done he would offer her enough food of
four kinds. He would take his bath and food only after Shridevi had taken her
bath, performed auspicious rituals, eaten her food, washed her mouth and face
and reclined on her seat. Then he would commence his other daily activities
including enjoying human comforts and pleasures. Once around midnight, engrossed
in family problems, Devadatta thought"King Pushyanandi is very much devoted to
his mother Shridevi and spends all his time taking her care. This distraction
does not allow me to enjoy human comforts and conjugal pleasures with king
Pushyanandi fully and to the desired extant. Therefore, it is better that I kill
Shridevi somehow by means of fire, weapon, poison, or mantra and enjoy human
comforts and conjugal pleasures with king Pushyanandi fully and to my entire
satisfaction." With these thoughts she looked forward to an opportunity to kill
Shridevi when the king did not visit, when no other royal person was there and
when even an ordinary person was also not there she was absolutely alone). Once
after her bath Shridevi was sleeping comfortably in her bed alone and in
solitude. Availing the opportunity, Devadatta came to the room and found
Shridevi sleeping comfortably in her bed. She looked around to ensure that no
one was there to see her. Then she went to the kitchen, picked up an iron rod
and heated it. When it was red hot like Kirnshuk flower (Butea frondosa) and
fire she picked it with a pair of tongs and came where Shridevi was sleeping.
Here she thrust the red hot iron rod into Shridevi's anus. With a terrible
pathetic shriek Shridevi died. handelt, and framed pondemulating. A Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [53]

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Vipak Shrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter 9  Hearing the terrible shriek,
Shridevi's maids rushed to her room and saw Devadatta leaving. The maids came to
Shridevi's bed and found her lifeless, still and dead. After seeing this they
went to king Pushyanandi crying and wailing, and sobbing—"Oh! Oh! Alas ! Great
misfortune has befallen us." They informed king Pushyanandi—"Sire ! Queen
Devadatta has killed mother Shridevi."  Hearing and understanding what the maids
told him, king Pushyanandi, grief stricken due to the loss of his mother, fell
on the ground like an axed Champak tree.  After some time king Pushyanandi
regained his consciousness and composure. In the company of many kings... and so
on up to... caravan chiefs, friends and relatives he wept, wailed and sobbed
loudly. Sobbing thus he performed the last rites of Shridevi with all state
honour. Having done all this his anger surfaced with great intensity, giving him
a terrifying look. Gnashing his teeth he got Devadatta caught by guards. He then
sentenced her to death"She is to be taken to gallows and killed." (As you have
seen.)  Thus, Gautam! Devadatta! Suffers the fruits of the extremely bad karmas
acquired in the past.  (Hearing these details) Gautam Swami asked—"Bhante! After
her death where will this Devadatta go? Where will she be reborn?  Bhagavan
replied—Gautam! After completing her life-span of eighty years, Devadatta will
die and reincarnate as an infernal being in the first hell named Ratnaprabha.
From there she will follow the cycles of rebirths as mentioned in the first
chapter in context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to... will be born millions of
times in all hells, as all animals, and as all plants including the bitter ones.
Coming out from there she will be born as a swan in Gangapur city. After being
killed by some bird catchers she will reincarnate as a son in a merchant family
of the same Gangapur city. There he will gain righteousness (samyaktva). From
there he will reincarnate in the first heaven named Saudharm Devlok. Descending
from there he will take birth in Mahavideh area and follow ascetic conduct
immaculately. At last he will get enlightened and attain the status of Siddha,
shedding all his karmas and ending all misery.  Conclusion should be read as
before.  Chapter - 9- Compiled by Muni Deepratna Sagar is finished 0-X-X-X-X-X-
X-X- 0  Chapter (Adhyayan) -10- Anjoo  O INTRODUCTION:  This chapter narrates
the bitter fruits of unchecked licentious activities of a corrupt woman. This is
a brief but effective story providing inspiration to avoid lechery.  Aagam - 11
- Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [54]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Vipak Shrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter 9 Hearing the terrible shriek
Shridevi's maids rushed to her room and saw Devadatta leaving. The maids came to
Shridevi's bed and found her lifeless, still and dead. After seeing this they
went to king Pushyanandi crying and wailing, and sobbing--"Oh! Oh! Alas ! Great
misfortune has befallen us." They informed king Pushyanandi--"Sire ! Queen
Devadatta has killed mother Shridevi." Hearing and understanding what the maids
told him, king Pushyanandi, grief stricken due to the loss of his mother, fell
on the ground like an axed Champak tree. After some time king Pushyanandi
regained his consciousness and composure. In the company of many kings... and so
on up to... caravan chiefs, friends and relatives he wept, wailed and sobbed
loudly. Sobbing thus he performed the last rites of Shridevi with all state
honour. Having done all this his anger surfaced with great intensity, giving him
a terrifying look. Gnashing his teeth he got Devadatta caught by guards. He
thensentenced her to death"She is to be taken to gallows and killed." (As you
have seen.) Thus, Gautam! Devadatta! Suffers the fruits of the extremely bad
karmas acquired in the past. (Hearing these details) Gautam Swami
asked--"Bhante! After her death where will this Devadatta go? Where will she be
reborn? Bhagavan replied--Gautam! After completing her life-span of eighty
years, Devadatta will die and reincarnate as an infernal being in the first hell
named Ratnaprabha. From there she will follow the cycles of rebirths as
mentioned in the first chapter in context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to...
will be born millions of times in all hells, as all animals, and as all plants
including the bitter ones. Coming out from there shewill be born as a swan in
Gangapur city. After being killed by some bird catchers she will reincarnate as
a son in a merchant family of the same Gangapur city. There he will gain
righteousness (samyaktva). From there he will reincarnate in the first heaven
named Saudharm Devlok. Descending from there he will take birth in Mahavideh
area and follow ascetic conduct immaculately. At last he will get enlightened
and attain the status of Siddha, shedding all his karmas and ending all misery.
Conclusion should be read as before. Chapter - 9- Compiled by Muni Deepratna
Sagar is finished 0-X-X-X-X-X-X-X- 0 Chapter (Adhyayan) -10- Anjoo O
INTRODUCTION: This chapter narrates the bitter fruits of unchecked licentious
activities of a corrupt woman. This is a brief but effective story providing
inspiration to avoid lechery. Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [54]

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-10 [34] Meaning- The foreword of the
eighth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked-"Bhante! When this
is the text and meaning of the ninth chapter, what is the text and meaning of
the tenth chapter of Duhkha-vipaak as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?)
Sudharma Swami Replied Jambu! During that period of time there was a city named
Vardhamanapur. Outside this town was a garden named Vijayavardhan in which was a
temple of Manibhadra Yaksh. In that city ruled a king named Vijayamitra. In
Vardhamanapur city lived a merchant named Dhanadev Gathapati who was very rich
and respected. The name of his wife was Priyangu. They had a daughter named Anju
who was perfectly endowed and beautiful. During that period of time Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir arrived at Vijayavardhan garden. People came and Bhagavan gave
his discourse to all after which the masses returned home. During that period of
time, while going to collect alms, Gautam Swami, the senior disciple of Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir, was passing in the vicinity of the garden outside the palace
of king Vijayamitra. There he saw a woman who was lean, famished, emaciated
(devoid of flesh), producing rattling sound (having rattling skeleton), and so
weak and cadaverous that her bones appeared to be covered with skin alone. She
wore a blue dress and was uttering distressful, pathetic and plaintive sounds
and words. Seeing this pathetic scene Gautam Swami thought-"Why she is suffering
such infernal agony?" He came to Bhagavan Mahavir and asked-"Bhante! Who was
this woman in her last birth? In reply Bhagavan said Gautam! During that period
of time there was a prosperous city called Indrapur in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu
continent. A king named Indradatt was ruler of that city. In that city lived a
courtesan named Prithvishri (description to be read as that of Kamadhvaja
courtesan). In Indrapur city that Prithvishri courtesan enticed many kings...
and so on up to... caravan chiefs by means of her beauty, gestures, display of
body-parts, and her art. Where she failed, she used magical powers and powders
for seduction. She spent her time enjoying all human and carnal pleasures fully
and as she desired. Considering this kind of acts to be her duty, giving
importance to, being well versed in, and being engrossed in such deeds that
Prithvishri courtesan (due to lechery) continued to accumulate intense
malevolent karmas. Completing her life span of three thousand five hundred years
she died and took rebirth as an infernal being in the sixth hell with a maximum
life span of twenty two Sagaropam. On leaving the second hell, her soul was
conceived as a daughter in the womb of Priyangu, the wife of Dhanadev Sarthavaha
in this Vardhamanapur city. On completion of nine months Priyangu gave birth to
a daughter who was named Anjushri. All other details should be read as in case
of Devadatta. Once while king Vijayamitra was going for horse-riding he saw the
beauty and charm of Anjushri. He was attracted to her like king Vaishramanadatt.
He then sought her hand in marriage like minister Tetaliputra (JnataDharmaKatha
Sutra)... and so on up to... He married Anjushri and lived happily in his
palace. Once queen Anjushri was afflicted with acute vaginal pain. When king
Vijaya came to know of this he called his attendants and said—"Beloved of gods!
Go and make this announcement loudly at every corner, crossings where three,
four or more roads meet, Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar
[55]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-10 [34] Meaning- The foreword of the
eighth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked-"Bhante! When this
is the text and meaning of the ninth chapter, what is the text and meaning of
the tenth chapter of Duhkha-vipaak as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?)
Sudharma Swami Replied Jambu! During that period of time there was a city named
Vardhamanapur. Outside this town was a garden named Vijayavardhan in which was a
temple of Manibhadra Yaksh. In that city ruled a king named Vijayamitra. In
Vardhamanapur city lived a merchant named Dhanadev Gathapati who was very rich
and respected. The name of his wife was Priyangu. They had a daughter named Anju
who was perfectly endowed and beautiful. During that period of time Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir arrived at Vijayavardhan garden. People came and Bhagavan gave
his discourse to all after which the masses returned home. During that period of
time, while going to collect alms, Gautam Swami, the senior disciple of Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir, was passing in the vicinity of the garden outside the palace
of king Vijayamitra. There he saw a woman who was lean, famished, emaciated
(devoid of flesh), producing rattling sound (having rattling skeleton), and so
weak and cadaverous that her bones appeared to be covered with skin alone. She
wore a blue dress and was uttering distressful, pathetic and plaintive sounds
and words. Seeing this pathetic scene Gautam Swami thought-"Why she is suffering
such infernal agony?" He came to Bhagavan Mahavir and asked-"Bhante! Who was
this woman in her last birth? In reply Bhagavan said Gautam! During that period
of time there was a prosperous city called Indrapur in Bharatvarsh area in Jambu
continent. A king named Indradatt was ruler of that city. In that city lived a
courtesan named Prithvishri (description to be read as that of Kamadhvaja
courtesan). In Indrapur city that Prithvishri courtesan enticed many kings...
and so on up to... caravan chiefs by means of her beauty, gestures, display of
body-parts, and her art. Where she failed, she used magical powers and powders
for seduction. She spent her time enjoying all human and carnal pleasures fully
and as she desired. Considering this kind of acts to be her duty, giving
importance to, being well versed in, and being engrossed in such deeds that
Prithvishri courtesan (due to lechery) continued to accumulate intense
malevolent karmas. Completing her life span of three thousand five hundred years
she died and took rebirth as an infernal being in the sixth hell with a maximum
life span of twenty two Sagaropam. On leaving the second hell, her soul was
conceived as a daughter in the womb of Priyangu, the wife of Dhanadev Sarthavaha
in this Vardhamanapur city. On completion of nine months Priyangu gave birth to
a daughter who was named Anjushri. All other details should be read as in case
of Devadatta. Once while king Vijayamitra was going for horse-riding he saw the
beauty and charm of Anjushri. He was attracted to her like king Vaishramanadatt.
He then sought her hand in marriage like minister Tetaliputra (JnataDharmaKatha
Sutra)... and so on up to... He married Anjushri and lived happily in his
palace. Once queen Anjushri was afflicted with acute vaginal pain. When king
Vijaya came to know of this he called his attendants and said--"Beloved of gods!
Go and make this announcement loudly at every corner, crossings where three,
four or more roads meet, Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar
[55]

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-10  In Vardhamanapur City, Queen
Anjushri was suffering from severe vaginal pain. King Vijayamitra announced a
generous reward for any Vaidya (qualified Ayurvedic doctor), junior Vaidya,
senior and junior Jnayak (those who learned and practiced the art of healing
through their own experience), and senior and junior Chikitsak (those who
practiced medicine and surgery) who could cure her.  Many healers came to King
Vijayamitra, employing their four kinds of wisdom: autpattiki buddhi (intuitive
wisdom), vainayiki buddhi (acquired wisdom), karmaja buddhi (practical wisdom),
and parinamiki buddhi (deductive wisdom). They tried various procedures but
failed to cure Anjushri. Exhausted, confused, and disappointed, they returned.
Queen Anjushri, suffering from excruciating pain, became lean, famished,
emaciated, and cadaverous. She spent her time uttering distressful, pathetic,
and plaintive sounds and words.  Bhagavan added, "Thus, Gautam! Anju! Suffers
the fruits of the extremely bad karmas acquired in the past (as you have seen)."
Gautam Swami asked, "Bhante! After her death, where will this Anju go? Where
will she be reborn?"  Bhagavan replied, "Gautam! After completing her life-span
of ninety years, Anju will die and reincarnate as an infernal being in the first
hell named Ratnaprabha. From there she will follow the cycles of rebirth as
mentioned in the first chapter in context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to...
will be born millions of times in all hells, as all animals, and as all plants.
Coming out from there she will be born as a peacock in Sarvatobhadra city. After
being killed by some hunters, she will reincarnate as a son in a merchant family
of the same Sarvatobhadra city. There he will gain righteousness (samyaktva).
From there he will reincarnate in the first heaven named Saudharm Devlok."
Gautam, "Bhante! After completing the life and state of Devlok, where will that
soul go? Where will he be born?"  Jambu! Descending from there, he will take
birth in Mahavideh area and follow ascetic conduct immaculately. At last, he
will get enlightened and attain the status of Siddha, shedding all his karmas
and ending all misery.  Sudharma Swami concluded, "Jambu Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir, who has attained nirvana, has narrated this text and meaning of the
tenth chapter of Duhkhavipaak. So I state."  Jambu- "Bhante! What you say is,
indeed, true. What you said is a fact."  Chapter -10- Compiled by Muni
DeepratnaSagar is finished Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut [56] Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-10 main road and streets in
Vardhamanapur City that queen Anjushri is suffering from acute vaginal pain. Any
Vaidya (qualified Ayurvedic doctor) and junior Vaidya, senior and junior Jnayak
(those who learned and practiced the art of healing through their own
experience), and senior and junior Chikitsak (those who practiced medicine and
surgery) who is able to cure that diseases will be amply and richly rewarded by
king Vijayamitra. The servants made the announcement as told. Hearing this
announcement by the state officials many healers (etc.) came to king
Vijayamitra. They did the diagnosis by employing their four kinds of wisdom,
namely autpattiki buddhi (intuitive wisdom), vainayiki buddhi (acquired wisdom),
karmaja buddhi (practical wisdom), and parinamiki buddhi (deductive wisdom).
Then they tried their best to cure ailing Anjushri by using various procedures.
However, they failed to do so. When these healers got exhausted (shraant),
confused or mentally tired (taut), and disappointed (paritant) they returned
from where they came. Suffering from that excruciating vaginal pain, queen
Anjushri went lean, famished, emaciated (devoid of flesh), and cadaverous. She
spent her time in this state uttering distressful, pathetic and plaintive sounds
and words. Bhagavan added- Thus, Gautam! Anju! Suffers the fruits of the
extremely bad karmas acquired in the past (as you have seen). (Hearing these
details) Gautam Swami asked- "Bhante! After his death where will this Anju go?
Where will she be reborn?" Bhagavan replied-Gautam! After completing her life-
span of ninety years, Anju will die and reincarnate as an infernal being in the
first hell named Ratnaprabha. From there she will follow the cycles of rebirth
as mentioned in the first chapter in context of Mrigaputra... and so on up to...
will be born millions of times in all hells, as all animals, and as all plants.
Coming out from there she will be born as a peacock in Sarvatobhadra city. After
being killed by some hunters she will reincarnate as a son in a merchant family
of the same Sarvatobhadra city. There he will gain righteousness (samyaktva).
From there he will reincarnate in the first heaven named Saudharm Devlok. Gautam
"Bhante! After completing the life and state of Devlok where will that soul go?
Where will he be born?" Jambu! Descending from there he will take birth in
Mahavideh area and follow ascetic conduct immaculately. At last he will get
enlightened and attain the status of Siddha shedding all his karmas and ending
all misery. Sudharma Swami concluded, "Jambu Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has
attained nirvana, has narrated this text and meaning of the tenth chapter of
Duhkhavipaak. So I state." Jambu- "Bhante! What you say is, indeed, true. What
you said is a fact." Chapter -10- Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished
Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut [56] Compiled by - Deepratnasagar

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-10 There is an all pervading truth in
Bhagavan Mahavir's sermon-All good or bad karmas acquired by beings, essentially
bear fruits. Bad karmas acquired through violence, falsity, stealing, lechery,
greed, and other base attitudes and indulgences always bear bad and painful
fruits. Austerities, detachment, discipline (self-control), charity, service and
other noble attitudes and indulgences cause acquisition of good karmas that
always bear good and happiness causing fruits. In the two parts of this Agam
Vipaak Shrut-Duhkha-vipaak and Sukha-vipaakBhagavan Mahavir has established the
aforesaid statement and elaborated it with, examples. In this world darkness
emphasizes the importance of light. In the same way sorrow emphasizes the
importance of happiness. Because sorrow exists, a being gets afraid of it and
desires for happiness, endeavours for availing happiness. Because death exists,
a being searches for immortality to avoid death. That is the reason that in this
Agam, Vipaak Shrut, the fruits of good and bad karmas have been revealed. It
first of all states hair raising description of the bitter fruits of bad karmas.
It sends shivers through the spine while reading or listening to it. The
narration of Duhkha-vipaak concludes here. Now the second part Sukha-vipaak
details the fruits of good karmas. 0 -X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-O-XX-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-0 END
OF DUHKHA-VIPAAK, THE FIRST SHRUTSKANDH Shrutskndh-1- Compiled by Muni
DeepratnaSagar is finished Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut [57] Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-1, Chapter-10 There is an all pervading truth
in Bhagavan Mahavir's sermon-All good or bad karmas acquired by beings,
essentially bear fruits. Bad karmas acquired through violence, falsity,
stealing, lechery, greed, and other base attitudes and indulgences always bear
bad and painful fruits. Austerities, detachment, discipline (self-control),
charity, service and other noble attitudes and indulgences cause acquisition of
good karmas that always bear good and happiness causing fruits. In the two parts
of this Agam Vipaak Shrut-Duhkha-vipaak and Sukha-vipaakBhagavan Mahavir has
established the aforesaid statement and elaborated it with, examples. In this
world darkness emphasizes the importance of light. In the same way sorrow
emphasizes the importance of happiness. Because sorrow exists, a being gets
afraid of it and desires for happiness, endeavours for availing happiness.
Because death exists, a being searches for immortality to avoid death. That is
the reason that in this Agam, Vipaak Shrut, the fruits of good and bad karmas
have been revealed. It first of all states hair raising description of the
bitter fruits of bad karmas. It sends shivers through the spine while reading or
listening to it. The narration of Duhkha-vipaak concludes here. Now the second
part Sukha-vipaak details the fruits of good karmas. 0 -X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-X-O-XX-
X-X-X-X-X-X-X-0 END OF DUHKHA-VIPAAK, THE FIRST SHRUTSKANDH Shrutskndh-1-
Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut [57]
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## SHRUTSKANDH - 2  The ten chapters of Duhkha-vipaak contain stories that
inspire us to avoid violence, falsity, corruption, and other such evil
activities by vividly describing their terrible consequences. The desire for
happiness is inherent within the wish to be rid of sorrows. The basic source of
happiness is the acquisition of good karmas, which in turn is done through
dharma (righteousness and piety). That is the reason for the belief that dharma
is the source of happiness.  Four kinds of dharma have been mentioned in the
scriptures: daan (charity), sheel (morality), tap (austerity), and bhaavana
(pious attitude). Of these, the first path is charity. Most important among the
ten kinds of charity is dharma-daan (pious charity). One of the limbs of pious
charity is supatra dawn (charity to the deserving). This specifically means "to
offer pure things or services with noble feelings to the lofty individuals who
have renounced the world and are practicing austerities." The greatness of this
charity is unparalleled. As a result of such charity, many people have gained
happiness, good fortune, and wealth, as well as an opportunity to lead a pious
and righteous life. In the ten chapters of this Sukha-vipaak, the glory of pious
charity has been elaborated. These ten chapters present lively examples of the
extent of happiness and good fortune gained through charity.  Of these, the
first chapter is titled Subahu Kumar. This person gained so much beauty, charm,
popularity, wealth, happiness, and good luck in life that it astonished even a
great sage and spiritualist like Ganadhar Gautam. So much so that he asked about
its reason from Bhagavan Mahavir. Throwing light on the source of Subahu Kumar's
happiness and good luck, Bhagavan provided inspiration for every pious soul to
follow the path of dharma. This, indeed, is the message of Sukha-vipaak Shrut.
Chapter (Adhyayan) -1- Subahu [35] Meaning- During that period of time, there
was a city called Rajagriha near which was a chaitya named Gunasheelak. Ganadhar
Arya Sudharma Swami arrived there. Jambu Swami, involved in his service,
asked-"Bhante! When Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained liberation, has
preached the aforesaid text and meaning of Duhkha-vipaak, then what according to
him is the text and meaning of Sukha-vipaak?"  In reply, Sudharma Swami said,
"Jambu Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir has preached ten chapters of Sukha-vipaak. They
are: [36] Meaning- (1) Subahu, (2) Bhadranandi, (3) Sujaat, (4) Suvasava, (5)
Jinadas, (6) Dhanapati, (7) Mahabal, (8) Bhadranandi, (9) Mahachandra, and (10)
Varadatt."  [37] Meaning- Bhante! When Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir has preached ten
chapters of Sukha-vipaak, including Subahu Kumar, then what is the text and
meaning of the first chapter?  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut [58] Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SHRUTSKANDH - 2 The ten chapters of Duhkha-vipaak have stories that inspire us
to avoid violence, falsity, corruption and other such evil activities by vividly
describing their terrible consequences. The desire for happiness is inherent
within the wish to be rid of sorrows. The basic source of happiness is
acquisition of good karmas which in turn is done through dharma (righteousness
and piety). That is the reason for the belief that dharma is the source of
happiness. Four kinds of dharma have been mentioned in the scriptures-daan
(charity), sheel (morality), tap (austerity), and bhaavana (pious attitude). Of
these the first path is charity. Most important among the ten kinds of charity
is dharma-daan (pious charity). One of the limbs of pious charity is supatra
dawn (charity to the deserving). This specifically means 'to offer pure things
or services with noble feelings to the lofty individuals who have renounced the
world and are practicing austerities'. The greatness of this charity is
unparalleled. As a result of such charity many people have gained happiness,
good fortune, and wealth as well as an opportunity to lead a pious and righteous
life. In the ten chapters of this Sukha-vipaak the glory of pious charity been
elaborated. These ten chapters present lively examples of the extant of
happiness and good fortune gained through charity. Of these the first chapter is
titled Subahu Kumar. This person gained so much beauty, charm, popularity,
wealth, happiness and good luck in life that astonished even a great sage and
spiritualist like Ganadhar Gautam. So much so that he asked about its reason
from Bhagavan Mahavir. Throwing light on the source of Subahu Kumar's happiness
and good luck, Bhagavan provided inspiration for every pious soul to follow the
path of dharma. This, indeed, is the message of Sukha-vipaak Shrut. Chapter
(Adhyayan) -1- Subahu [35] Meaning- During that period of time there was a city
called Rajagriha near which was a chaitya named Gunasheelak. Ganadhar Arya
Sudharma Swami arrived there. Jambu Swami, involved in his service,
asked-"Bhante! When Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, who has attained liberation, has
preached the aforesaid text and meaning of Duhkha-vipaak then what according to
him is the text and meaning of Sukha-vipaak?" In reply Sudharma Swami said
"Jambu Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir has preached ten chapters of Sukha-vipaak. They
are [36] Meaning- (1) Subahu, (2) Bhadranandi, (3) Sujaat, (4) Suvasava, (5)
Jinadas, (6) Dhanapati, (7) Mahabal, (8) Bhadranandi, (9) Mahachandra, and (10)
Varadatt." [37] Meaning- Bhante! When Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir has preached ten
chapters of Sukha-vipaak, including Subahu Kumar, then what is the text and
meaning of the first chapter? Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut [58] Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1  Arya Sudharma replied - Jambu!
During that period of time there was a large city named Hastishirsha. It was
rich, prosperous and secured with respect to buildings, wealth, trade and
governance. In the north-eastern direction (Ishan Kone) outside this city was a
garden named Pushpakarandak having trees bearing all season flowers and fruits.
In that garden there was a temple of Kritavanamalapriya Yaksh. It was beautiful
and very popular. That city was ruled by king Adeenashatru who was highly
influential among kings. He had one thousand queens in his inner palace. Chief
among them was queen Dharini Devi. Once while sleeping in her regal palace,
Dharini Devi saw a lion in her dream. The story of the birth, of Subahu should
be read as that of Meghakumar mentioned in Jnatadharmakathanga Sutra. (So should
be read the. description of his birth ceremony, education, etc.). Subahu Kumar
attained youth and became capable of enjoying worldly and carnal pleasures. When
his parents realized that Subahu Kumar had become proficient in seventy two arts
and had attained desired maturity to enjoy all the pleasures of life, they got
constructed five hundred Prasadavatamsak (most exclusive, as the crown is among
omaments) palaces, which were lofty, grand, and beautiful. In the middle of
these palaces he got constructed a gigantic palace. Like Mahabala, Subahu Kumar
was also married. The unique thing about Subahu Kumar's marriage was that he was
married to five hundred very beautiful princesses in one day. Following the same
tradition, the parents gave five hundred sets of things as dowry. (These gifts
included exclusive ornaments, garments, and other large and small household
things.) Subahu Kumar resided in these beautiful palaces that reverberated with
sound of drums and music as well as dramas. He lived happily enjoying all human
pleasures and comforts. During that period of time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir
arrived in Hastishirsha city. People of the city came to attend his discourse.
Like king Kunik, king Adeenashatru also came out to pay homage and attend the
discourse with great pomp and show. Like Jamali Kumar, Subahu Kumar also went to
pay homage to Bhaga van riding a chariot. Bhagavan gave his sermon, after which
the king and the people dispersed. Listening to and contemplating on the
discourse of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, that Subahu Kumar was very happy. Subahu
Kumar stood up and, after paying homage and obeisance, said "Bhante! I have
faith in the word of the Nirgranth (one who is free of all knots, inner and
outer). At your pious feet many kings, influential and rich persons (ishvar)...
and so on up to... and caravan chiefs (sarthavaha) have been initiated into the
Anagar Dharma (the religion of the homeless ascetics;Jain religion) after
renouncing their households and tonsuring their heads. In other words, they have
accepted the code of five great vows (PanchMahaurat). But I am not capable
enough to renounce my household, tonsure my head and embrace asceticism.
Therefore I want to accept the householder's code (Grihasth Dharma) of twelve
vows including five minor vows (Anuvrats) and seven instructive or complimentary
vows of spiritual discipline (Shikshavrats). Bhagavan said "Beloved of gods! Do
as you please and avoid languor when doing a good deed." Aagam - 11 - Vipak-
Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [59]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1 Arya Sudharma replied- Jambu!
During that period of time there was a large city named Hastishirsha. It was
rich, prosperous and secured with respect to buildings, wealth, trade and
governance. In the north-eastern direction (Ishan Kone) outside this city was a
garden named Pushpakarandak having trees bearing all season flowers and fruits.
In that garden there was a temple of Kritavanamalapriya Yaksh. It was beautiful
and very popular. That city was ruled by king Adeenashatru who was highly
influential among kings. He had one thousand queens in his inner palace. Chief
among them was queen Dharini Devi. Once while sleeping in her regal palace,
Dharini Devi saw a lion in her dream. The story of the birth, of Subahu should
be read as that of Meghakumar mentioned in Jnatadharmakathanga Sutra. (So should
be read the. description of his birth ceremony, education, etc.). Subahu Kumar
attained youth and became capable of enjoying worldly and carnal pleasures. When
his parents realized that Subahu Kumar had become proficient in seventy two arts
and had attained desired maturity to enjoy all the pleasures of life, they got
constructed five hundred Prasadavatamsak (most exclusive, as the crown is among
omaments) palaces, which were lofty, grand, and beautiful. In the middle of
these palaces he got constructed a gigantic palace. Like Mahabala, Subahu Kumar
was also married. The unique thing about Subahu Kumar's marriage was that he was
married to five hundred very beautiful princesses in one day. Following the same
tradition, the parents gave five hundred sets of things as dowry. (These gifts
included exclusive ornaments, garments, and other large and small household
things.) Subahu Kumar resided in these beautiful palaces that reverberated with
sound of drums and music as well as dramas. He lived happily enjoying all human
pleasures and comforts. During that period of time Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir
arrived in Hastishirsha city. People of the city came to attend his discourse.
Like king Kunik, king Adeenashatru also came out to pay homage and attend the
discourse with great pomp and show. Like Jamali Kumar, Subahu Kumar also went to
pay homage to Bhaga van riding a chariot. Bhagavan gave his sermon, after which
the king and the people dispersed. Listening to and contemplating on the
discourse of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, that Subahu Kumar was very happy. Subahu
Kumar stood up and, after paying homage and obeisance, said "Bhante! I have
faith in the word of the Nirgranth (one who is free of all knots, inner and
outer). At your pious feet many kings, influential and rich persons (ishvar)...
and so on up to... and caravan chiefs (sarthavaha) have been initiated into the
Anagar Dharma (the religion of the homeless ascetics;Jain religion) after
renouncing their households and tonsuring their heads. In other words, they have
accepted the code of five great vows (PanchMahaurat). But I am not capable
enough to renounce my household, tonsure my head and embrace asceticism.
Therefore I want to accept the householder's code (Grihasth Dharma) of twelve
vows including five minor vows (Anuvrats) and seven instructive or complimentary
vows of spiritual discipline (Shikshavrats). Bhagavan said "Beloved of gods! Do
as you please and avoid languor when doing a good deed." Aagam - 11 - Vipak-
Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [59]

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11 - ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1  Then Subahu Kumar accepted the
householder's code (Grihasth Dharma) of twelve vows including five minor vows
(Anuvrats) and seven instructive or complimentary vows of spiritual discipline
(Shikshavrats) before Bhagavan. After that he returned home riding his chariot.
During that period of time Indrabhuti Gautam Anagar, the senior disciple of
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir asked—"Bhante! This Subahu Kumar is beloved (of all)
having lovable appearance, attractive having attractive appearance, adorable
having adorable appearance, enchanting having enchanting appearance, serene
having serene appearance, good-looking, and pretty. Bhante! To many people and
even ascetics he appears to be beloved... and so on up to... and pretty.
"Bhante! How did this Prince Subahu Kumar obtain and avail this human opulence?
How did it appear before him? What was his name and caste? In which village or
settlement was he born? What charity, indulgence, blend and dry food, conduct
(ascetic or householder's) and the sermon of which Shraman or Brahmin has helped
him attain this opulence? Has he been blessed with this or acquired it himself?
What is the cause of his acquiring and enjoying this?]  **Commentary:** The
author of this Agam has used fourteen adjectives including *isht* and
*ishtaroop* to describe Subahu Kumar. He has mentioned further that to many
people and even ascetics he appears to be beloved... and so on up to... and
pretty.' This last statement emphasizes his proficiency in the art of living.
Some people gain popularity through their social service, charity and congenial
speech and behavior. Their morality and social behaviour are excellent but they
are not so successful in their religious and spiritual life. They lag behind in
the practice of detachment, austerities, vows and self-control. Some people have
ideal religious life but they are inept in their social life. Only a person with
equal excellence and lofty ideals in every facet of life including religion and
ethics, service of the self and others, detachment and indulgence is popular
among masses as well as sages. A great sage, hermit, and yogi like Gautam Swami
was so pleased and impressed with the social behaviour and religious conduct of
Subahu Kumar that he presented his curiosity before Bhagavan. This indicates
that Subahu Kumar must have had a unique personality. The aphorism under
reference states fourteen adjectives in this regard. These words appear to be
synonyms but, in fact, they vary in their nuances and connotations. On the basis
of the elaborations by AbhayadevSuri, commentator (Tikakaar) explained these
terms as follows:  - *Isht* (adorable)-One whose behaviour and action is
congenial for all, who is liked and adored by all is called *isht*. - *Isht-
roop*-Adoration may be due to some specific work or accomplishment of a person.
But *isht-roop* is a person having adorable appearance. - *Kaant*-Adorable
appearance could also be for many reasons. But at the same time, he was
desirable (*kaant*) as well. - *Kaant roop*—He was good natured. (By good nature
of Subahu, he was adorable.) - *Priya*-In spite of loving nature a person can
fail in invoking love. But one who inspires love is *priya* (beloved). *Priya
roop*—one whose appearance inspires love is *priya roop* (lovable).  Aagam - 11
- Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [60]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11 - ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1 Then Subahu Kumar accepted the
householder's code (Grihasth Dharma) of twelve vows including five minor vows
(Anuvrats) and seven instructive or complimentary vows of spiritual discipline
(Shikshavrats) before Bhagavan. After that he returned home riding his chariot.
During that period of time Indrabhuti Gautam Anagar, the senior disciple of
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir asked--"Bhante ! This Subahu Kumar is beloved (of all)
having lovable appearance, attractive having attractive appearance, adorable
having adorable appearance, enchanting having enchanting appearance, serene
having serene appearance, good-looking, and pretty. Bhante ! To many people and
even ascetics he appears to be beloved... and so on up to... and pretty.
"Bhante! How this Prince Subahu Kumar got and availed this human opulence? How
it appeared before him? What was his name and caste? In which village or
settlement was he born? What charity, indulgence, blend and dry food, conduct
(ascetic or householder's) and the sermon of which Shraman or Brahmin has helped
him attain this opulence? Has he been blessed with this or acquired himself?
What is the cause of his acquiring and enjoying this?] Commentary- The author of
this Agam has used fourteen adjectives including isht and ishtaroop to describe
Subahu Kumar. He has mentioned further that to many people and even ascetics he
-ppears to be beloved... and so on up to... and pretty.' This last statement
emphasizes his proficiency in art of living. Some people gain popularity through
their social service, charity and congenial speech and behavior. Their morality
and social behaviour are excellent but they are not so successful in their
religious and spiritual life. They lag behind in the practice of detachment,
austerities, vows and self-control. Some people have ideal religious life but
they are inept in their social life. Only a person with equal excellence and
lofty ideals in every facet of life including religion and ethics, service of
the self and others, detachment and indulgence is popular among masses as well
as sages. A great sage, hermit, and yogi like Gautam Swami was so pleased and
impressed with the social behaviour and religious conduct of Subahu Kumar that
he presented his curiosity before Bhagavan. This indicates that Subahu Kumar
must have had a unique personality. The aphorism under reference states fourteen
adjectives in this regard. These words appear to be synonyms but, in fact, they
vary in their nuances and connotations. On the basis of the elaborations by
AbhayadevSuri, commentator (Tikakaar) explained these terms as follows - Isht
(adorable)-One whose behaviour and action is congenial for all, who is liked and
adored by all is called isht. -Isht-roop-Adoration may be due to some specific
work oraccomplishment of a person. But isht-roop is a person having adorable
appearance. -Kaant-Adorable appearance could also be for many reasons. But at
the same time, he was desirable (kaant) as well. -Kaant roop--He was good
natured. (By good nature of Subahu, he was adorable.) -Priya-In spite of loving
nature a person can fail in invoking love. But one who inspires love is priya
(beloved). Priya roop--one whose appearance inspires love is priya roop
(lovable). Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [60]

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1  **Manojna and manojna roop** -
One whose inner feelings or attitudes make him appear beautiful is called
manojna (beautiful). One having that appearance is manojna roop.  **Manom and
manom roop** - The quality of being manojna (beautiful) could be momentary and
transitory. The adjective manom indicates its permanence. The quality that
inspires a profound and memorable experience of beauty makes a person manom.
What leaves a lasting imprint of beautiful appearance is manom roop.  **Soma** -
A person devoid of rage or anger, whose face and eyes are serene and happy, and
whose looks inspire peace in others is soma. One with serene nature is soma
roop.  **Subhag** - auspicious; beholding whom enhances good luck.   **Suroop**
- whose appearance is pretty and nature is friendly.   **Priyadarshan** - love
inspiring; one whose mere look invokes love.  **Laddha, patta, and
abhisamannagaya** - explaining the difference in the meaning and purport of
these three terms it has been mentioned that—to inherit wealth earned by
ancestors is labdh (laddha); to earn wealth through one's own efforts is prapt
(patta); and to enjoy the labdh I prapt wealth is abhisamnvagat
(abhisamannagaya). These adjectives subtly convey the kshayopasham (extinction-
cum-pacification) of labhantaraya (gain hindering) and bhogantaraya (enjoyment
hindering) karmas.  **Meaning** - (On being asked by Gautam, narrating the story
of previous birth of Subahu Kumar Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir said "Gautam! During
that period of time there was a prosperous city called Hastinapur in Bharatvarsh
area in Jambu continent. A rich merchant named Sumukh lived there.  During that
period of time Dharmaghosh Sthavir (senior ascetic) was living. He belonged to a
prominent jati (maternal caste) and kula (paternal caste). Wandering from one
village to another, along with his five hundred disciples, he arrived at the
Sahasramravan garden in Hastinapur city. After seeking formal permission he
camped there and commenced enkindling his soul with discipline and austerities.
During that period of time Dharmaghosh Sthavir had a disciple named Sudatt
ascetic. He observed noble conduct. He had ingested Tejoleshya after toning it
down (Tejoleshya being the firepower acquired through rigorous austerities and
having intensity to burn things in a wide range of many Yojans within a moment).
He was observing a series of month-long fasts interspersed with a day of meals.
On the day of fast-breaking, that Sudatt ascetic spent first quarter of the day
in studies and second quarter of the day in meditation. During the third
quarter, like Gautam Swami had sought Bhagavan Mahavir's permission to go to
seek alms, he sought Dharmaghosh Sthavir's permission to go to seek alms. After
that, wandering around he entered the house of Sumukh Gathapati to seek alms.
When Sumukh Gathapati saw Sudatt ascetic approaching, he was pleased and
delighted. He rose from his seat, stepped on the foot-rest and got down. He then
put off his slippers and took an ekashatika (a long scarf-like non-stitched
piece of cloth, also called uttariya). He placed this uttariya on his shoulders
(for covering his mouth). As a mark of respect, he took seven to eight steps
ahead to greet Sudatt ascetic. He then went around the ascetic three times
clockwise and paid him homage and obeisance. After

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1 -Manojna and manojna roop--whose
inner feelings or attitudesmake him appear beautiful is called manojna
(beautiful). One having that appearance is manojna roop. -Manom and manom roop--
the quality of being manojna (beautiful) could be momentary and transitory. The
adjective manom indicates its permanence. The quality that inspires a profound
and memorable experience of beauty makes a person manom. What leaves a lasting
imprint of beautiful appearance is manom roop. -Soma-A person devoid of rage or
anger, whose face and eyes are serene and happy, and whose looks inspire peace
in others is soma. One with serene nature is soma coop. -Subhag-auspicious;
beholding whom enhances good luck. -Suroop--whose appearance is pretty and
nature is friendly. -Priyadarshan-love inspiring; one whose mere look invokes
love. Laddha, patta, and abhisamannagaya-explaining the difference in the
meaning and purport of these three terms it has been mentioned that--to inherit
wealth earned by ancestors is labdh (laddha); to earn wealth through one's own
efforts is prapt (patta); and to enjoy the labdh I prapt wealth is abhisamnvagat
(abhisamannagaya). These adjectives subtly convey the kshayopasham (extinction-
cum-pacification) of labhantaraya (gain hindering) and bhogantaraya (enjoyment
hindering) karmas. Meaning- (On being asked by Gautam, narrating the story of
previous birth of Subahu Kumar Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir said "Gautam! During
that period of time there was a prosperous city called Hastinapur in Bharatvarsh
area in Jambu continent. A rich merchant named Sumukh lived there. During that
period of time Dharmaghosh Sthavir (senior ascetic) was living. He belonged to a
prominent jati (maternal caste) and kula (paternal caste). Wandering from one
village to another, along with his five hundred disciples, he arrived at the
Sahasramravan garden in Hastinapur city. After seeking formal permission he
camped there and commenced enkindling his soul with discipline and austerities.
During that period of time Dharmaghosh Sthavir had a disciple named Sudatt
ascetic. He observed noble conduct. He had ingested Tejoleshya after toning it
down (Tejoleshya being the firepower acquired through rigorous austerities and
having intensity to burn things in a wide range of many Yojans within a moment).
He was observing a series of month-long fasts interspersed with a day of meals.
On the day of fast-breaking, that Sudatt ascetic spent first quarter of the day
in studies and second quarter of the day in meditation. During the third
quarter, like Gautam Swami had sought Bhagavan Mahavir's permission to go to
seek alms, he sought Dharmaghosh Sthavir's permission to go to seek alms. After
that, wandering around he entered the house of Sumukh Gathapati to seek alms.
When Sumukh Gathapati saw Sudatt ascetic approaching, he was pleased and
delighted. He rose from his seat, stepped on the foot-rest and got down. He then
put off his slippers and took an ekashatika (a long scarf-like non-stitched
piece of cloth, also called uttariya). He placed this uttariya on his shoulders
(for covering his mouth). As a mark of respect, he took seven to eight steps
ahead to greet Sudatt ascetic. He then went around the ascetic three times
clockwise and paid him homage and obeisance. After Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [61]

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sumukh Gathapati, upon hearing that an ascetic was visiting, went to his
kitchen, overjoyed at the opportunity to give ample food as alms. He was pleased
both during and after giving charity.   By giving three-way-pure charity (pure
food, pure seeker, pure donor) through three-way-pure means (natural altruism,
simplicity, and purity of mind, speech and body) to Sudatt ascetic (in other
words, by giving pure food as alms with pious feelings to Suddatt ascetic),
Sumukh Gathapati was overwhelmed with joy. Through this pious deed, he
considerably reduced the extent of the cycles of rebirth and acquired the
bondage of karrnas responsible for a birth as a human being. Five divine things
appeared in his house: (1) Shower of gold, (2) shower of flowers of five
colours, (3) falling of clothes, (4) sounding of divine drums, and (5) divine
pronouncement of Ahodanam' (great charity).  On the crossing of three roads...
and so on up to... and streets, people gathered and talked to each
other—"Beloved of gods! Blessed is Sumukh Gathapati! His life has become
meaningful."  Commentary—while donating, a sentimental and guileless donor
experiences joy three times—(1) the first instance of joy comes with the
thought, 'I will donate today. I am fortunate to get the golden opportunity of
giving charity today.' (2) The second instance is when every pore of his body is
filled with joy during the act of giving. (3) And the third instance is when his
joy and contentment continue to enhance with the remembrance of the act of
donating.  Trividh-shuddhi (three-way-purity)-(1) Deya shuddha-pure food or
alms. (2) Data shuddha-pure donor; sincere and guileless donor. (3) Patra
shuddha-pure seeker, such as a detached Shraman. When a donation has such three-
way-purity or triple purity, it becomes the cause of breaking bonds of karmas
and reducing the extent of the cycles of rebirth.  The appearance of five divine
things indicates that the charity was so ideal and lofty that gods effected
showers of gold (etc.) in order to commend and popularize the act. (1) Divine
shower of gold is called vasudhara. (2) Shower of flowers of five colours—black,
blue or green, yellow, white and red. As these divine flowers are created
through the power of transmutation or transformation, they are lifeless (achit).
(3) Chelotkshepchela means clothes and uileshep means throwing. There is a
shower of clothes from the sky, (4) Sounding of divine drums. (5) Divine
pronouncement of Ahodanam' (great charity). An astonishing charity is called
Ahodanam. When a charity attracts gods and forces them to exclaim-Ahodanam'
(Great charity!), it is, indeed, a great charity.  Meaning- Then that Sumukh
Gathapati enjoyed a long life of hundreds of years. After his death at the
destined moment, he descended as a son into the womb of Dharini Devi, the
consort of king Adeenashatru of Hastishirsha city. Queen Dharini Devi saw a lion
in her dream in her state of partial slumber. Other details have already been
stated. This way he is fully enjoying the human pleasures and comforts in his
lofty mansions.  Bhagavan added—Gautam! As a consequence of the aforesaid great
charity, Subahu Kumar availed and acquired this human opulence.  After listening
to the story of the past birth of Subahu Kumar, Gautam Swami asked—"Bhante! Is
Subahu Kumar capable of getting initiated by you into ascetic religion by
renouncing his household and tonsuring his head?”  Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [62]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1 this he proceeded to his kitchen.
He was overjoyed with the idea of getting the opportunity to give ample food as
alms to the visiting ascetic. He was pleased at the time of giving charity as
well as after giving charity. By giving three-way-pure charity (pure food, pure
seeker, pure donor) through threeway-pure means (natural altruism, simplicity,
and purity of mind, speech and body) to Sudatt ascetic (in other words, by
giving pure food as alms with pious feelings to Suddatt ascetic) Sumukh
Gathapati was overwhelmed with joy. Through this pious deed he considerably
reduced the extant of the cycles of rebirth and acquired the bondage of karrnas
responsible for a birth as a human being. Five divine things appeared in his
house (1) Shower of gold, (2) shower of flowers of five colours, (3) falling of
clothes, (4) sounding of divine drums, and (5) divine pronouncement of Ahodanam'
(great charity). On the crossing of three roads... and so on up to... and
streets people gathered and talked to each other--"Beloved of gods ! Blessed is
Sumukh Gathapati! His life has become meaningful." Commentary--while donating, a
sentimental and guileless donor experiences joy three times--(1) the first
instance of joy comes with the thought, 'I will donate today. I am fortunate to
get the golden opportunity of giving charity today.' (2) The second instance is
when every pore of his body is filled with joy during the act of giving. (3) And
the third instance is when his joy and contentment continues to enhance with the
remembrance of the act of donating. Trividh-shuddhi (three-way-purity)-(1) Deya
shuddha-pure food or alms. (2) Data shuddha-pure donor; sincere and guileless
donor. (3) Patra shuddha-pure seeker, such as a detached Shraman. When a
donation has such three-way-purity or triple purity it becomes cause of breaking
bonds of karmas and reducing extant of the cycles of rebirth. Appearance of five
divine things indicates that the charity was so ideal and lofty that gods
effected showers of gold (etc.) in order to commend and popularize the act. (1)
Divine shower of gold is called vasudhara. (2) Shower of flowers of five colours
--black, blue or green, yellow, white and red. As these divine flowers are
created through the power of transmutation or transformation, they are lifeless
(achit). (3) Chelotkshepchela means clothes and uileshep means throwing. There
is a shower of clothes from the sky, (4) Sounding of divine drums. (5) Divine
pronouncement of Ahodanam' (great charity). An astonishing charity is called
Ahodanam. When a charityattracts gods and forces them to exdaim-Ahodanam' (Great
charity!), it is, indeed, a great charity. Meaning- Then that Sumukh Gathapati
enjoyed a long life of hundreds of years. After his death at the destined moment
he descended as a son into the womb of Dharini Devi, the consort of king
Adeenashatru of Hastishirsha city. Queen Dharini Devi saw a lion in her dream in
her state of partial slumber. Other details have already been stated. This way
he is fully enjoying the human pleasures and comforts in his lofty mansions.
Bhagavan added--Gautam! As a consequence of the aforesaid great charity Subahu
Kumar availed and acquired this human opulence. After listening to the story of
the past birth of Subahu Kumar Gautam Swami asked--"Bhante! Is Subahu Kumar
capable of getting initiated by you into ascetic religion by renouncing his
household and tonsuring his head?" Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [62]

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1  **Bhagavan:** "Yes, Gautam! He
is capable of getting initiated."  Bhagavan Gautam paid homage and obeisance and
resumed enkindling his soul with discipline and austerities.  Some time later,
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir left the temple Kritavanamalapriya Yaksh in
Pushpakarandak garden in Hastishirsha city and resumed his wanderings in other
states.  Here, Subahu Kumar became a Shramanopasak (a devotee of ascetics). He
acquired the knowledge of fundamentals including being (soul) and non-being
(matter). He spent his time availing every opportunity of donation to the
deserving.  Observing the vows of a shravak (Jain layman), Subahu Kumar used to
go to the paushadhashala (place for observing partial ascetic vow or paushadh-
vrat) on every auspicious day of a fortnight-fourteenth, eighth, fifteenth (both
dark or amavasya and bright or purnima). There he would properly inspect and
clean (pramarjan) the paushadhashala and inspect the place for disposing
excreta. He would then make a bed of hay, sit on it and take the vow of a three
day fast (avoiding eight meals or ashtam-bhakt). Having taken the partial
ascetic vow (paushadh-vrat) and observing a three day fast he would remain awake
and alert absorbed in spiritual contemplation.  Once while absorbed in spiritual
contemplation during his partial ascetic vow a thought surfaced in his mind:
"Blessed are those villages, cities, and settlements where Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir visits.  Also blessed are those kings, nobles (etc.) who, in presence of
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, get initiated after tonsuring their heads.  Also
blessed are those kings, nobles (etc.) who, in presence of Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir, accept the householder's code (Grihasth Dharma) of twelve vows
including five minor vows (Anuvrats) and seven instructive or complimentary vows
of spiritual discipline (Shikshavrats).  Also blessed are those kings, nobles
(etc.) who listen to the sermon of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir.  Therefore, in
case, wandering from one village to another, Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrives
here; I will also renounce my home and get initiated in his presence after
tonsuring my head."  **Commentary:** The number of adjectives used with Subahu
Kumar's contemplation is six. They are (1) Ajjhatthiye-surfacing of thoughts
from the depths of soul. (2) Kappiye-to reach the heights of imagination. (3)
Chintiye-repeated surfacing of the same idea in mind. (4) Patthiye-to wish and
pray again and again for a specific thing. (5) Manogaye-the idea that is still
in mind and not expressed in words. (6) Sankappe crystallization of an idea into
a resolve.  According to Yogashastra when a person fully concentrates on his
thoughts, his breath, feelings, and life force flows through the Sushumna (the
channel of the spinal cord). In that state the thought or resolve materializes
soon.  **Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut** Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [63]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1 Bhagavan- "Yes, Gautam! He is
capable of getting initiated." Bhagavan Gautam paid homage and obeisance and
resumed enkindling his soul with discipline and austerities. of Some time later
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir left the temple Kritavanamalapriya Yaksh in
Pushpakarandak garden in Hastishirsha city and resumed his wanderings in other
states. Here that Subahu Kumar became a Shramanopasak (a devotee of ascetics).
He acquired the knowledge of fundamentals including being (soul) and non-being
(matter). He spent his time availing every opportunity of donation to the
deserving. Observing the vows of a shravak (Jain layman), Subahu Kumar used to
go to the paushadhashala (place for observing partial ascetic vow or paushadh-
vrat) on every auspicious day of a fortnight-fourteenth, eighth, fifteenth (both
dark or amavasya and bright or purnima). There he would properly inspect and
clean (pramarjan) the paushadhashala and inspect the place for disposing
excreta. He would then make a bed of hay, sit on it and take the vow of a three
day fast (avoiding eight meals or ashtam-bhakt). Having taken the partial
ascetic vow (paushadh-vrat) and observing a three day fast he would remain awake
and alert absorbed in spiritual contemplation. Once while absorbed in spiritual
contemplation during his partial ascetic vow a thought surfaced in his mind
Blessed are those villages, cities, and settlements where Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir visits. Also blessed are those kings, nobles (etc.) who, in presence of
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, get initiated after tonsuring their heads. Also
blessed are those kings, nobles (etc.) who, in presence of Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir, accept the householder's code (Grihasth Dharma) of twelve vows
including five minor vows (Anuvrats) and seven instructive or complimentary vows
of spiritual discipline (Shikshavrats). Also blessed are those kings, nobles
(etc.) who listen to the sermon of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir. Therefore, in case,
wandering from one village to another, Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir arrives here; I
will also renounce my home and get initiated in his presence after tonsuring my
head. Commentary-the number of adjectives used with Subahu Kumar's contemplation
is six. They are (1) Ajjhatthiye-surfacing of thoughts from the depths of soul.
(2) Kappiye-to reach the heights of imagination. (3) Chintiye-repeated surfacing
of the same idea in mind. (4) Patthiye-to wish and pray again and again for a
specific thing. (5) Manogaye-the idea that is still in mind and not expressed in
words. (6) Sankappecrystallization of an idea into a resolve. According to
Yogashastra when a person fully concentrates on his thoughts, his breath,
feelings, and life force flows through the Sushumna (the channel of the spinal
cord). In that state the thought or resolve materializes soon. Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [63]

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1  **Meaning:** Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir became aware of Subahu Kumar's resolve. Wandering from one village to
another, he arrived at the temple of Kritavanamalapriya Yaksh in Pushpakarandak
garden in Hastishirsha city. Following the ascetic norms, he sought a suitable
place of stay and commenced enkindling his soul with discipline and austerities.
Upon receiving news of Bhagavan's arrival, the people of the city and the king
came to pay their homage. Subahu Kumar also came ceremoniously to Bhagavan (like
Jamal). Bhagavan gave his sermon to the large gathering and Subahu Kumar. After
which the king and the people dispersed.  Subahu Kumar listened to the sermon by
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir. While contemplating over it, he got detached and
sought permission from his parents to get initiated as an ascetic, as Megh
Kumar, King Shrenik's son, did. On getting permission, his pre-renouncing
lustration was performed like that of Megh Kumar... and so on up to... He became
an ascetic, observed the codes of Irya samiti (care of movement)... and so on up
to... he became completely celibate.  He studied all the eleven Angas (canons)
including Samayik from the senior ascetics of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir's order.
Enkindling his soul by observing numerous austerities including fasting for one,
two, three, and more days, he immaculately followed the ascetic code for many
years. In the end, he took the ultimate vow (sallekhana) of one month duration.
At the conclusion of the month-long fast (avoiding sixty meals) at the destined
moment of death, he embraced meditational death after doing critical review
(pratikraman). He reincarnated as a god in the Saudharma kalp (a dimension of
gods).  Completing the age, state, and life by ayukshaya (shedding the life span
determining karma particles), bhavakshaya (shedding the divine state determining
karma particles), and sthitikshaya (shedding the karma particles determining the
extant of life span), the soul that was Subahu Kumar will abandon his divine
body and reincarnate as a human being. He will get enlightened. Then after
tonsuring his head, will get initiated as an ascetic by sthavirs (senior
ascetics). Following the ascetic code for many years, he will embrace
meditational death after doing critical review (pratikraman). He will
reincarnate as a god in the Sanatkumar kalp (the third heaven).  From there he
will again reincarnate as a human being. After getting initiated (etc.) he will
reincarnate in the Mahashukra Devlok (divine dimension). Descending from there,
he will again take birth as a human being and get initiated as before. Then he
will reincarnate in the ninth Devlok called Anat. Completing the state and life
there, he will again take birth as a human being and get initiated as before.
Then he will reincarnate in the eleventh Devlok called Aran. Descending from
there, he will once again reincarnate as a human being, get initiated and after
death reincarnate in the Sarvarthsiddha Viman. Descending from there, the soul
that is Subahu Kumar will at once take rebirth as a human being in one of the
wealthy families in Mahavideh area. He will get initiated like Dridhapratijna
Kumar and attain the status of a Siddha.  **CONCLUSION:** SudharmaSwami
concluded Jambu! Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [64]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1 Meaning- Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir
became aware of Subahu Kumar's resolve. Wandering from one village to another he
arrived at the temple of Kritavanamalapriya Yaksh in Pushpakarandak garden in
Hastishirsha city. Following the ascetic norms he sought for a suitable place of
stay and commenced enkindling his soul with discipline and austerities. On
getting the news of Bhagavan's arrival people of the city and the king came to
pay their homage. Subahu Kumar also came ceremoniously to Bhagavan (like Jamal).
Bhagavan gave his sermon to the large gathering and Subahu Kumar. After which
the king and the people dispersed. Subahu Kumar listened to the sermon by
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir. While contemplating over it he got detached and sought
permission from his parents to get initiated as an ascetic, as Megh Kumar, King
Shrenik's son, did. On getting permission his pre-renouncing lustration was
performed like that of Megh Kumar... and so on up to... He became an ascetic,
observed the codes of Irya samiti (care of movement)... and so on up to... he
became completely celibate. He studied all the eleven Angas (canons) including
Samayik from the senior ascetics of Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir's order. Enkindling
his soul by observing numerous austerities including fasting for one, two,
three, and more days, he immaculately followed the ascetic code for many years.
In the end he took the ultimate vow (sallekhana) of one month duration. At the
conclusion of the month long fast (avoiding sixty meals) at the destined moment
of death he embraced meditational death after doing critical review
(pratikraman). He reincarnated as a god in the Saudharma kalp (a dimension of
gods). Completing the age, state and life by ayukshaya (shedding the life span
determining karma particles), bhavakshaya (shedding the divine state determining
karma particles), and sthitikshaya (shedding the karma particles determining the
extant of life span), the soul that was Subahu Kumar will abandon his divine
body and reincarnate as a human being. He will get enlightened. Then after
tonsuring his head, will get initiated as an ascetic by sthavirs (senior
ascetics). Following the ascetic code for many years he will embrace
meditational death after doing critical review (pratikraman). He will
reincarnate as a god in the Sanatkumar kalp (the third heaven). From there he
will again reincarnate as a human being. After getting initiated (etc.) he will
reincarnate in the Mahashukra Devlok (divine dimension). Descending from there
.he will again take birth as a human being and get initiated as before. Then he
will reincarnate in the ninth Devlok called Anat. Completing the state and life
there, he will again take birth as a human being and get initiated as before.
Then he will reincarnate in the eleventh Devlok called Aran. Descending from
there he will once again reincarnate as a human being, get initiated and after
death reincarnate in the Sarvarthsiddha Viman. Descending from there the soul
that is Subahu Kumar will at once take rebirth as a human being in one of the
wealthy families in Mahavideh area. He will get initiated like Dridhapratijna
Kumar and attain the status of a Siddha. CONCLUSION- SudharmaSwami concluded
Jambu! Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar [64]

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1**  This text and the meaning of
the first chapter of Sukhavipaak has been narrated by one who has attained
nirvana. So I state.  **Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -1 - Subahu**
Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is Finished  **Chapter (Adhyayan) -2-
Bhandranadi**  [38] Meaning- The foreword of the second chapter should be read
as before. (Jambu Swami asked "Bhante ! What is the text and meaning of the
second chapter as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir ?" Sudharma Swami
replied-)  Jambu! During that period of time there was a city named Rishabhapur.
It had a garden named Stupakarandak. In it was a temple of Dhanya Yaksh. That
city was ruled by king Dhanaavaha. His queen was named Saraswati Devi. The dream
of the queen, telling the king about the dream, birth of a son, growing of the
child, education, maturing, marriage, dowry, and enjoying pleasures in lofty
mansions, all these details should be read as those about Subahu Kumar
(Chapter-1).  The only difference being that the name is Bhadranandi Kumar
instead of Subahu Kumar and he was married to five hundred girls, chief among
them being Shridevi. Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Bhadranandi accepted Shravak
Dharma (householder's code). On being asked by Gautam about his past birth,
Bhagavan Mahavir replied (In past birth) He was a prince named Vijaya in
Pundarikini city in Mahavideh area. Vijaya gave alms donation to Tirthankar
Yugabahu and as a consequence acquired Ayushya karma (life span determining
karma) to be a human being. Completing his life span there, he has reincarnated
as Bhadranandi. All these details should be read as those about Subahu Kumar...
and so on up to... He will take rebirth in Mahavideh area and at last will
become Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened), Mukta (liberated) and attain
nirvana ending all misery.  Conclusion should be read as before.  **Chapter -2-
Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished**  **Chapter (Adhyayan) - 3 -
Sujat**  [39] Meaning- The foreword of the third chapter should be read as
before. (Jambu Swami asked  Bhante! What is the text and meaning of the third
chapter as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?" Sudharma Swami replied )
**Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut** Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [65]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-1 Who has attained nirvana, has
narrated this text and meaning of first Chapter of Sukhavipaak. So I state."
Meaning with Commentary of Chapter -1 - Subahu Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar
is Finished 0 -X-X-X-X-X-X-X- 0 Chapter (Adhyayan) -2- Bhandranadi [38] Meaning-
The foreword of the second chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked
"Bhante ! What is the text and meaning of the second chapter as preached by
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir ?" Sudharma Swami replied-) Jambu! During that period
of time there was a city named Rishabhapur. It had a garden named Stupakarandak.
In it was a temple of Dhanya Yaksh. That city was ruled by king Dhanaavaha. His
queen was named Saraswati Devi. The dream of the queen, telling the king about
the dream, birth of a son, growing of the child, education, maturing, marriage,
dowry, and enjoying pleasures in lofty mansions, all these details should be
read as those about Subahu Kumar (Chapter-1). The only difference being that the
name is Bhadranandi Kumar instead of Subahu Kumar and he was married to five
hundred girls, chief among them being Shridevi. Bhagavan Mahavir arrived.
Bhadranandi accepted Shravak Dharma (householder's code). On being asked by
Gautam about his past birth, Bhagavan Mahavir replied (In past birth) He was a
prince named Vijaya in Pundarikini city in Mahavideh area. Vijaya gave alms
donation to Tirthankar Yugabahu and as a consequence acquired Ayushya karma
(life span determining karma) to be a human being. Completing his life span
there, he has reincarnated as Bhadranandi. All these details should be read as
those about Subahu Kumar... and so on up to... He will take rebirth in Mahavideh
area and at last will become Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened), Mukta
(liberated) and attain nirvana ending all misery. Conclusion should be read as
before. Chapter -2- Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished Chapter
(Adhyayan) - 3 - Sujat [39] Meaning- The foreword of the third chapter should be
read as before. (Jambu Swami asked Bhante! What is the text and meaning of the
third chapter as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?" Sudharma Swami replied)
Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [65]

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-3  **(The story in brief is)**
There was a city named Virapur. It had a garden named Manoram. That city was
ruled by king Virakrishnamitra. His queen was named Shridevi. They had a son
named Sujat Kumar. He was married to five hundred girls, chief among them being
Balashri. Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Sujat accepted Shravak Dharma (householder's
code). On being asked by Gautam Swami about his past birth, Bhagavan Mahavir
replied  **(In past birth)** There was a city named Ikshusara. Rishabhdatt
Gathapati lived there. He gave faultless food as alms to ascetic Pushpadatt and
as a consequence acquired Ayushya karma (life span determining karma) to be a
human being: Completing his life span there, he has " reincarnated as Sujat
Kumar... and so on up to... He will take rebirth in Mahavideh area, get
initiated and at last will become Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened) and
Mukta (liberated) and attain nirvana ending all misery.  **Commentary** The
details of the third chapter are same as those in the second chapter. The only
difference is in name and place. Therefore all the. Details should be read as
those about Subahu Kumar. **Conclusion** should be read as before.  **Chapter
-3- Compiled by Muni Deepratna Sagar is finished**  **Chapter (Adhyayan) - 4-
Suvasav** **[40]** **Meaning**- The foreword of the fourth chapter should be
read as before. (Jambu Swami asked—"Bhante ! What is the text and meaning of the
fourth chapter as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir ?" Sudharma Swami replied
)  **(The story in brief is)** There was a city named Vijayapur. It had a garden
named Nandanavan. In that garden was a temple of Ashoka Yaksh. That city was
ruled by king Vasavadatt. His queen was named Krishnadevi. They had a son named
Suvasav Kumar. He was married to five hundred girls, chief among them being
Bhadraa. Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Suvasav accepted Shravak Dharma
(householder's code). On being asked by Gautam about his past birth, Bhagavan
Mahavir replied  **(In past birth)** There was a city named Kaushambi. King
Dhanapal ruled there. He gave faultless food as alms to ascetic
Vaishramanabhadra and as a consequence acquired Ayushya karma (life span
determining karma) to be a human being. Completing his life span there, he has
reincarnated as Suvasav Kumar... and so on up to... At last at the end of this
very life he will become Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened), and Mukta
(liberated) and attain nirvana ending all misery.  **Conclusion** should be read
as before.  **Chapter -4- Compiled by Muni Deepratna Sagar is finished**
**Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut** **Compiled by - Deepratnasagar** **[66]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-3 (The story in brief is) There was a
city named Virapur. It had a garden named Manoram. That city was ruled by king
Virakrishnamitra. His queen was named Shridevi. They had a son named Sujat
Kumar. He was married to five hundred girls, chief among them being Balashri.
Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Sujat accepted Shravak Dharma (householder's code). On
being asked by Gautam Swami about his past birth, Bhagavan Mahavir replied (In
past birth) There was a city named Ikshusara. Rishabhdatt Gathapati lived there.
He gave faultless food as alms to ascetic Pushpadatt and as a consequence
acquired Ayushya karma (life span determining karma) to be a human being:
Completing his life span there, he has " reincarnated as Sujat Kumar... and so
on up to... He will take rebirth in Mahavideh area, get initiated and at last
will become Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened) and Mukta (liberated) and
attain nirvana ending allmisery. Commentary The details of the third chapter are
same as those in the second chapter. The only difference is in name and place.
Therefore all the. Details should be read as those about Subahu Kumar.
Conclusion should be read as before. Chapter -3- Compiled by Muni Deepratna
Sagar is finished Chapter (Adhyayan) - 4- Suvasav [40] Meaning- The foreword of
the fourth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked--"Bhante ! What
is the text and meaning of the fourth chapter as preached by Shraman Bhagavan
Mahavir ?" Sudharma Swami replied) (The story in brief is) There was a city
named Vijayapur. It had a garden named Nandanavan. In that garden was a temple
ofAshoka Yaksh. That city was ruled by king Vasavadatt. His queen was named
Krishnadevi. They had a son named Suvasav Kumar. He was married to five hundred
girls, chief among them being Bhadraa. Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Suvasav
accepted Shravak Dharma (householder's code). On being asked by Gautam about his
past birth, Bhagavan Mahavir replied (In past birth) There was a city named
Kaushambi. King Dhanapal ruled there. He gave faultless food as alms to ascetic
Vaishramanabhadra and as a consequence acquired Ayushya karma (life span
determining karma) to be a human being. Completing his life span there, he has
reincarnated as Suvasav Kumar... and so on up to... At last at the end of this
very life he will become Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened), and Mukta
(liberated) and attain nirvana ending all misery. Conclusion should be read as
before. Chapter -4- Compiled by Muni Deepratna Sagar is finished Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [66]

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-5 **Chapter (Adhyayan) -5-
Jinadas**  [41] **Meaning:** The foreword of the fifth chapter should be read as
before. (Jambu Swami asked  "Bhante! What is the text and meaning of the fifth
chapter as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?" Sudharma Swami replied )
**(The story in brief is )** There was a city named Saugandhika. It had a garden
named Nilashoka. In that garden was a temple of Sukaal Yaksh. That city was
ruled by king Apratihat. His queen was named Sukrishna. They had a son named
Mahachandra Kumar. The name of his wife was Arhadatta. Mahachandra had a son
named Jinadas. Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Jinadas accepted Shravak Dharma
(householder's code). On being asked by Gautam about his past birth, Bhagavan
Mahavir replied-  **(In past birth)** There was a city named Madhyamika. King
Megharath ruled there. He gave faultless food as alms to ascetic Sudharma and as
a consequence acquired Ayushya karma (life span determining karma) to be a human
being. Completing his life span there, he has reincarnated as Jinadas... and so
on up to... At last at the end of this very life he will become Siddha
(perfect), Buddha (enlightened), Mukta (liberated) and attain nirvana ending all
misery.  **Commentary:** In this chapter, the only unusual thing in the story of
Jinadas is that it has the mention of his grandparents Apratihat and Sukrishna.
Almost all other stories do not mention that. All other details should be read
as those about Subahu Kumar. The only other variation being that Jinadas will
get liberated at the end of this life only.  **Conclusion:** should be read as
before.  **Chapter -5- Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished**  ## Chapter
(Adhyayan)-6-Dhanapati [42] **Meaning:** The foreword of the sixth chapter
should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked-"Bhante! What is the text and
meaning of the sixth chapter as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?" Sudharma
Swami replied )  **(The story in brief is )** There was a city named Kanakapur.
It had a garden named Shvetashoka. In that garden was a temple of Virabhadra
Yaksh. That city was ruled by king Priyachandra. His queen was named
Subhadraadevi. They had a son named Vaishraman Kumar, who was the crown prince.
He was married to five hundred girls, chief among them being Shridevi. Bhagavan
Mahavir arrived. Dhanapati, the son of the crown prince, accepted Shravak Dharma
(householder's code). On being asked by Gautam about his past birth, Bhagavan
Mahavir replied-  **(In past birth)** There was a city named Manipada. King
Mitra ruled there. He gave faultless food as alms to ascetic Sambhutivijaya and
as a consequence acquired...  **Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut** **Compiled by -
Deepratnasagar** [67]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-5 Chapter (Adhyayan) -5- Jinadas
[41] Meaning-The foreword of the fifth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu
Swami asked "Bhante! What is the text and meaning of the fifth chapter as
preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?" Sudharma Swami replied) (The story in
brief is) There was a city named Saugandhika. It had a garden named Nilashoka.
In that garden was a temple of Sukaal Yaksh. That city was ruled by king
Apratihat. His queen was named Sukrishna. They had a son named Mahachandra
Kumar. The name of his wife was Arhadatta. Mahachandra had a son named Jinadas.
Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Jinadas accepted Shravak Dharma (householder's code).
On being asked by Gautam about his past birth, Bhagavan Mahavir replied- (In
past birth) There was a city named Madhyamika. King Megharath ruled there. He
gave faultless food as alms to ascetic Sudharma and as a consequence acquired
Ayushya karma (life span determining karma) to be a human being. Completing his
life span there, he has reincarnated as Jinadas... and so on up to... At last at
the end of this very life he will become Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened),
Mukta (liberated) and attain nirvana ending all misery. CommentaryIn this
chapter only unusual thing in the story of Jinadas is that it has the mention of
his grand parents Apratihat and Sukrishna. Almost all other stories do not
mention that. All other details should be read as those about Subahu Kumar. The
only other variation being that Jinadas will get liberated at the end of this
life only. Conclusion should be read as before. Chapter -5- Compiled by Muni
DeepratnaSagar is finished Chapter (Adhyayan)-6-Dhanapati [42] Meaning- The
foreword of the sixth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami
asked-"Bhante! What is the text and meaning of the sixth chapter as preached by
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?" Sudharma Swami replied) (The story in brief is) There
was a city named Kanakapur. It had a garden named Shvetashoka. In that garden
was a temple of Virabhadra Yaksh. That city was ruled by king Priyachandra. His
queen was named Subhadraadevi. They had a son named Vaishraman Kumar, who was
the crown prince. He was married to five hundred girls, chief among them being
Shridevi. Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Dhanapati, the son of thecrown prince,
accepted Shravak Dharma (householder's code). On being asked by Gautam about his
past birth, Bhagavan Mahavir replied- (In past birth) There was a city named
Manipada. King Mitra ruled there. He gave faultless food as alms to ascetic
Sambhutivijaya and as a consequence acquired Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled
by - Deepratnasagar [67]

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-6  **Ayushya karma** (life span
determining karma) to be a human being. Completing his life span there, he has
reincarnated as Dhanapati... and so on up to... At last at the end of this very
life he will become **Siddha** (perfect), **Buddha** (enlightened), and
**Mukta** (liberated) and attain nirvana ending all misery.  **Commentary:** All
other details should be read as those about Subahu Kumar. The only variation
being that whereas Subahu Kumar will reincarnate in divine realms before taking
birth as a human being in Mahavideh area and getting liberated, Dhanapati will
get liberated at the end of this life only.  **Conclusion:** should be read as
before.  **Chapter -6- Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished**  ## Chapter
(Adhyayan)-7-Mahaball  **[43] Meaning:** The foreword of the seventh chapter
should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked "Bhante! What is the text and
meaning of the seventh chapter as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?"
Sudharma Swami replied )  **(The story in brief is )** There was a city named
Mahapur. It had a garden named Raktashoka. In that garden was a temple of
Raktapad Yaksh. That city was ruled by king Bala. His queen was named
Subhadraadevi. They had a son named Mahabal Kumar. He was married to five
hundred girls, chief among them being Raktavati.  Bhagavan Mahavir arrived.
Prince Mahabal accepted **Shravak Dharma** (householder's code). On being asked
by Gautam Swami about his past birth, Bhagavan Mahavir replied   **(In past
birth)** There was a city named Manipur. Naagdev Gathapati lived there. He gave
faultless food as alms to ascetic Indradatt and as a consequence acquired
**Ayushya karma** (life span determining karma) to be a human being. Completing
his life span there, he has reincarnated as Mahabal... and so on up to... At
last at the end of this very life he will become **Siddha** (perfect),
**Buddha** (enlightened), and **Mukta** (liberated) and attain nirvana ending
all misery.  **Conclusion:** should be read as before.  **Chapter -7- Compiled
by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished**  ## Chapter (Adhyayan)-8-Bhadranandi
**[44] Meaning:** The foreword of the eighth chapter should be read as before.
(Jambu Swami asked"Bhante! What is the text and meaning of the eighth chapter as
preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?" Sudharma Swami replied )  **Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut** **Compiled by - Deepratnasagar** **[68]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut-Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-6 Ayushya karma (life span
determining karma) to be a human being. Completing his life span there, he has
reincarnated as Dhanapati... and so on up to... At last at the end of this very
life he will become Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened), and Mukta
(liberated) and attain nirvana ending all misery. Commentary-All other details
should be read as those about Subahu Kumar. The only variation being that
whereas Subahu Kumar will reincarnate in divine realms before taking birth as a
human being in Mahavideh area and getting liberated, Dhanapati will get
liberated at the end of this life only. Conclusion should be read as before.
Chapter -6- Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished Chapter
(Adhyayan)-7-Mahaball [43] Meaning- The foreword of the seventh chapter should
be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked "Bhante! What is the text and meaning of
the seventh chapter as preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?" Sudharma Swami
replied) (The story in brief is) There was a city named Mahapur. It had a garden
named Raktashoka. In that garden was a temple of Raktapad Yaksh. That city was
ruled by king Bala. His queen was namedSubhadraadevi. They had a son named
Mahabal Kumar. He was married to five hundred girls, chief among them being
Raktavati. Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Prince Mahabal accepted Shravak Dharma
(householder's code). On being asked by Gautam Swami about his past birth,
Bhagavan Mahavir replied (In past birth) There was a city named Manipur. Naagdev
Gathapati lived there. He gave faultless food as alms to ascetic Indradatt and
as a consequence acquired Ayushya karma (life span determining karma) to be a
human being. Completing his life span there, he has reincarnated as Mahabal...
and so on up to... At last at the end of this very life he will become Siddha
(perfect), Buddha (enlightened), Mukta (liberated) and attain nirvana ending all
misery. Conclusion should be read as before. Chapter -7- Compiled by Muni
DeepratnaSagar is finished Chapter (Adhyayan)-8-Bhadranandi [44] Meaning- The
foreword of the eighth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami
asked"Bhante! What is the text and meaning of the eighth chapter as preached by
Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?" Sudharma Swami replied) Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut
Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [68]

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-8  **(The story in brief is-)**
There was a city named Sughosh. It had a garden named Devaraman. In that garden
was a temple of Virasen Yaksh. That city was ruled by king Arjun. His queen was
named Tattvavati. They had a son named Bhadranandi Kumar. He was married to five
hundred girls, chief among them being Shridevi.  Bhagavan Mahavir arrived.
Prince Bhadranandi accepted Shravak Dharma (householder's code) on being asked
by Gautam about his past birth, Bhagavan replied:  **(In past birth)** There was
a city named Mahaghosh. Dharmaghosh Gathapati lived there. He gave faultless
food as alms to ascetic Dharmasimha and as a consequence acquired Ayushya karma
(life span determining karma) to be a human being. Completing his life span
there, he has reincarnated as Bhadranandi... and so on up to... At last he will
immaculately follow the ascetic code and at the end of this very life become
Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened) and Mukta (liberated) and attain nirvana
ending all misery. Conclusion should be read as before.  **Chapter -8- Compiled
by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished**  ## Chapter (Adhvavan) 9-Mahachandra
**[45] Meaning-** The foreword of the ninth chapter should be read as before.
(Jambu Swami asked "Bhante what is the text and meaning of the ninth chapter as
preached by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?" Sudharma Swami replied-)  **(The story in
brief is)** There was a city named Champa. It had a garden named Purnabhadra. In
that garden was a temple of Purnabhadra Yaksh. That city was ruled by king Datt.
His queen was named Raktavati. They had a son named Mahachandra Kumar, who was
the crown prince. He was married to five hundred girls, chief among them being
Shrikanta.  Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Prince Mahachandra accepted Shravak-
Dharma. On being asked by Gautam about his past birth, Bhagavan Mahavir replied:
**(In past birth)** There was a city named Chikitsika. King Jitashatru ruled
there. He gave faultless food as alms to ascetic Dharmavirya and as a
consequence acquired Ayushya karma (life span determining karma) to be a human
being. Completing his life span there, he has reincarnated as Mahachandra. ...
And so on up to... At last he will immaculately follow the ascetic code and at
the end of this very life become Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened) and
Mukta (liberated) and attain nirvana ending all misery.  **Conclusion should be
read as before.**  **Chapter -9- Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished**
## Chapter (Adhyayan)-10-Varadatt  **[46] Meaning-** foreword of the tenth
chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked "Bhante! What the text and
meaning of the tenth chapter is as preached...  **Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut**
**Compiled by - Deepratnasagar** **[69]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter-8 (The story in brief is-) There was
a city named Sughosh. It had a garden named Devaraman. In that garden was a
temple of Virasen Yaksh. That city was ruled by king Arjun. His queen was named
Tattvavati. Theyhad a son named Bhadranandi Kumar. He was married to five
hundred girls, chief among them being Shridevi. Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Prince
Bhadranandi accepted Shravak Dharma (householder's code) on being asked by
Gautam about his past birth, Bhagavan replied (In past birth) There was a city
named Mahaghosh. Dharmaghosh Gathapati lived there. He gave faultless food as
alms to ascetic Dharmasimha and as a consequence acquired Ayushya karma (life
span determining karma) to be a human being. Completing his life span there, he
has reincarnated as Bhadranandi... and so on up to... At last he will
immaculately follow the ascetic code and at the end of this very life become
Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened) and Mukta (liberated) and attain nirvana
ending all misery. Conclusion should be read as before. Chapter -8- Compiled by
Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished Chapter (Adhvavan)9-Mahachandra [45] Meaning-
The foreword of the ninth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu Swami asked
"Bhante what is the text and meaning of the ninth chapter as preached by Shraman
Bhagavan Mahavir?" Sudharma Swami replied-) (The story in brief is) There was a
city named Champa. It had a garden named Purnabhadra. In that garden was a
temple of Purnabhadra Yaksh. That city was ruled by king Datt. His queen was
named Raktavati. They had a son named Mahachandra Kumar, who was the crown
prince. He was married to five hundred girls, chief among them being Shrikanta.
Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Prince Mahachandra accepted Shravak-Dharma. On being
asked by Gautam about his past birth, Bhagavan Mahavir replied (In past birth)
There was a city named Chikitsika. King Jitashatru ruled there. He gave
faultless food as alms to ascetic Dharmavirya and as a consequence acquired
Ayushya karma (life span determining karma) to be a human being. Completing his
life span there, he has reincarnated as Mahachandra. ... And so on up to... At
last he will immaculately follow the ascetic code and at the end of this very
life become Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened) and Mukta (liberated) and
attain nirvana ending all misery. Conclusion should be read as before. Chapter
-9- Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished Chapter (Adhyayan)-10-Varadatt
[46] Meaning-foreword of the tenth chapter should be read as before. (Jambu
Swami asked "Bhante! What the text and meaning of the tenth chapter is as
preached Aagam - 11 - Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar [69]

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter 10 by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir?"
Sudharma Swami replied, "Jambu! During that time there was a city named Saket.
It had a garden named Uttarakuru. In that garden was a temple of Paashamriga
Yaksh. That city was ruled by king Mitranandi. His queen was Shrikanta. They had
a son named Varadatt Kumar. He was married to five hundred girls, chief among
them being Varasena. Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Prince Varadatt accepted Shravak
Dharma (householder's code). On being asked by Gautam about his past birth,
Bhagavan Mahavir replied, "(In past birth) There was a city named Shatadvar.
King Vimalavahan ruled there. He saw ascetic Dharmaruchi coming and with great
devotion he offered faultless food as alms to the ascetic. As a consequence, he
acquired Ayushya karma (life span determining karma) to be a human being.
Completing his life span there, he has reincarnated as Varadatt, the son of King
Mitranandi and queen Shrikanta. Remaining details should be read as those about
Subahu Kumar. Like-After Bhagavan's departure, he went to paushadhashala and
observed fasts. He considered those who got initiated in the presence of
Bhagavan to be lucky. He resolved to get initiated when Bhagavan visited again.
All these details are similar both for Subahu Kumar and Varadatt Kumar. Then
after getting initiated and observing ascetic code, he will move alternatively
from human dimension to divine dimension and so on. Then like Subahu Kumar, he
will take rebirth in Mahavideh area and at last will become Siddha (perfect),
Buddha (enlightened), Mukta (liberated) and attain nirvana ending all misery
like Dradhpratijna. Sudharma Swami concluded, "Jambu, Bhagavan Mahavir, who has
attained nirvana, has narrated this text and meaning of the tenth chapter of
Sukha-vipaak. So I state." Jambu-"Bhante! What you say is, indeed, true. What
you said is a fact." Chapter -10- Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is finished. O
Meaning- Duhkha-vipaak has ten chapters that are to be finished in ten days.
Same is true for Sukha-vipaak; remaining details should be read as in
AcharangaSutra. END OF SUHKHA-VIPAAK, THE SECOND SHRUTSKANDH. End of Aagam
Sootra -11 - Vipak-Shrut [Ang-11] Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar. Aagam - 11 -
Vipak-Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar 170]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
VipakShrut- Ang-11- ShrutSkandh-2, Chapter 10 by Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir ?"
Sudharma Swami replied) Jambu! During that period of time there was a city named
Saket. It had a garden named Uttarakuru. In that garden was a temple of
Paashamriga Yaksh. That city was ruled by king Mitranandi. His queen was
Shrikanta. They had a son named Varadatt Kumar. He was married to five hundred
girls, chief among them being Varasena. Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. Prince
Varadatt accepted Shravak Dharma (householder's code). On being asked by Gautam
about his past birth, Bhagavan Mahavir replied (In past birth) There was a city
named Shatadvar. King Vimalavahan ruled there. He saw ascetic Dharmaruchi coming
and with great devotion he offered faultless food as alms to the ascetic. As a
consequence acquired Ayushya karma (life span determining karma) to be a human
being. Completing his life span there, he has reincarnated as Varadatt the son
of King Mitranandi and queen Shrikanta. Remaining details should be read as
those about Subahu Kumar. Like-After Bhagavan's departure he went to
paushadhashala and observed fasts. Considered those who got initiated in
presence of Bhagavan to be lucky. Resolved to get initiated when Bhagavan
visited again. All thesedetails are similar both for Subahu Kumar and Varadatt
Kumar. Then after getting initiated and observing ascetic code he will move
alternatively from human dimension to divine dimension and so on. Then like
Subahu Kumar he will take rebirth in Mahavideh area and at last will become
Siddha (perfect), Buddha (enlightened), Mukta (liberated) and attain nirvana
ending all misery like Dradhpratijna. Sudharma Swami concluded, Jambu Bhagavan
Mahavir, who has attained nirvana, has narrated this text and meaning of tenth
chapter of Sukha-vipaak. So I state. Jambu-"Bhante! What you say is, indeed,
true. What you said is a fact." Chapter -10- Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar is
finished O Meaning- Duhkha-vipaak has ten chapters that are to be finished in
ten days. Same is true for Sukha-vipaak; remaining details should be read as in
AcharangaSutra. END OF SUHKHA-VIPAAK, THE SECOND SHRUTSKANDH End of Aagam Sootra
-11 - Vipak-Shrut [Ang-11] Compiled by Muni DeepratnaSagar Aagam - 11 - Vipak-
Shrut Compiled by - Deepratnasagar 170]

